The Face of the Earth, Vol. 4 (Eduard Suess (W. J. Sollas, trans.), 1909)
==========================================================
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/faceofearthdasan04sues_0). Staged for the Tower of Babel library.

UNIVE  RS  I  T  E 


UNIVERSITY 


LIBRARIES! 


THE  FACE  OF  THE  EARTH 
(DAS  ANTLITZ  DEE  EEDE) 


HENRY  FROWDE,  M.A. 

PUBLISHER  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD 
LONDON,  EDINBURGH,  NEW  YORK 
TORONTO  AND  MELBOURNE 


ACE  OF  THE  EART 

(DAS  ANTLITZ  DER  EBDE) 


BY 

EDUARD  SJJESS 


TRANSIATED  BY 

HERTHA  B.  C.  SOLLAS 

UNDER  THE  DIRECTION  OF 

W.  J.  SOLLAS 


VOL.  IV 


OXFORD 
AT  THE  CLARENDON  PRESS 
1909 


OXFORD 

PRINTED  AT  THE  CLARENDON  PRESS 
BY  HORACE  HART,  M.A. 
PRINTER  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY 


V 


CONTENTS 

PART  V 

The  Face  of  the  Earth  (continued) 

PAGE 

Chapter  I.  Entry  of  the  Altaides  into  Europe.  The  European  Altaides.  The 
horst  of  Azov.  Prolongation  of  the  Caucasus.  The  Crimea  and  Bulgarian 
platform.  Balkans  and  Carpathians.  The  Cimmerian  mountains.  Summaiy. 
Alien  fractures  in  the  Variscan  arc   1 

Chapter  II.  Armorica  and  the  American  Altaides.  The  western  border  of 
the  Central  Plateau.  Brittany.  Younger  folding.  Extension  of  the  London 
basin.  Transatlantic  Altaides.  Relations  in  the  pre-Carboniferous  period. 
Stratified  series  in  the  Carboniferous  system.  Appalachians  as  far  as  the 
Mississippi.  Atlantic  and  Pacific  characters.  Appalachians  beyond  the  Mis- 
sissippi.   The  North  Atlantic  Ocean  

Chapter  III.  The  African  Altaides.  The  inland  sea  of  Africa.  The  Central 
Sahara.   The  Altaides  of  the  Sahara.   The  Great  Atlas  

Chapter  IV.  The  Alps.  I.  Western  Part.  Situation  of  the  Alps.  Progress  of 
investigation.  Division  of  the  Alps.  Zone  of  mont  Blanc.  The  Carboniferous 
fan  and  the  Brian§onnais.  Recumbent  sheets.  The  Glarus.  The  Simplon  and 
Tessin.  Ivrea.  From  the  Dora  Baltea  to  the  Gesso.  From  the  Gesso  to  the 
sea.   The  Alps  in  Corsica.   Relations  to  the  Apennines  104 

Chapter  V.  The  East  Alps.  Southern  boundary  of  the  East  Alps.  The  Lepontine 
sheets.  Selvretta.  Alps  on  the  Mur.  Oetz,  Ortler.  Disgrazia,  Bernina.  Laas. 
Tauern.   East  Limestone  Alps.   Flysch  and  Lepontine  belt      ....  148 

Chapter  VI.  Posthumous  Altaides.  1.  The  Alps.  Their  continuation  to  the 
north-east  and  east.  Their  continuation  to  the  south  and  south-west.  2.  The 
folds  of  Provence.    3.  The  Pyrenees  194 

Chapter  VII.  Laurentia  and  the  Northern  Islands.  1.  The  United  States  chain. 
2.  Laurentia.    Greenland.    3.  Islands  of  the  north  Atlantic.   Iceland      .      .  249 

Chapter  VIII.  African  Fractures.  Cape  mountains.  1.  African  fractures. 
East  Africa  to  lake  Rudolf.  Lake  Rudolf  to  Syria.  Summary.  Cameroons. 
Plan  of  the  African  fractures.   2.  Cape  mountains  268 

Chapter  IX.  The  Oceanldes.  Relations  of  the  Oceanides  to  the  south.  Fore- 
deeps  forming  the  boundaries  of  Asia.  The  line  of  Ruahine,  Kermadec,  and 
Tonga.  The  first  Australian  arc.  New  Guinea  to  New  Caledonia.  Second 
Australian  arc.  The  Carolines,  Fiji.  Third  Australian  arc.  Virgation  coming 
from  New  Zealand.    Polynesia.    Paumotu,  Raroia,  Samoa.    Summary.    Atolls.  291 


vi 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

Chapter  X.  Entry  of  the  Asiatic  Island  Festoons  into  America.  Intro- 
duction. Taimyr.  1.  Anadyrides.  Arc  of  Verkhoiansk.  Delta  of  the  Lena. 
Yana,  Indigirka,  Kolyma.  Penshina  and  Anadyr.  2.  Alashides.  Romanzof 
range.  Seward  and  Chuchken  peninsulas.  Alaska  range.  Peninsula  of  Alaska. 
Aleutian  islands.    Kenai  range.    Summary  328 

Chapter  XI.  The  End  of  the  Island  Festoons.  Introduction.  1.  Rocky  moun- 
tains, south  and  south-east.  Wyoming  and  Montana.  Mackenzie  river.  Entry 
of  the  Rocky  mountains  into  the  syntaxis.  2.  Beginning  of  the  Intermediate 
range.  Wrangell  volcanos.  The  Columbian  granodiorite.  3.  Elias  range. 
Alexander  archipelago.  4.  Continuation  of  the  Intermediate  range.  Van- 
couver.   Transverse  section  in  lat.  49°  N.    Cascade  range      ....  879 

Chapter  XII.  The  Appearance  of  the  Andes.  Klamath.  Californian  Coast 
ranges.    Lower  California.    South  border  of  the  Colorado  plateau.  Mexico. 


Stratified  succession  of  the  Intermediate  range  419 

Chapter  XIII.  The  System  of  the  Andes;  its  twofold  advance.  Chiapas, 
Guatemala,  Honduras.  The  volcanos.  Panama.  First  advance.  Backward 
bend  towards  South  America.  Ecuador,  Peru.  Cordillera  Real,  Argentine 
Chains.  Cordillera  de  los  Andes  and  Cordillera  de  la  Costa.  Sierra  de  la 
Ventana.    Patagonia.    Second  advance.    Summary   ......  448 

Chapter  XIV.  Analyses.  Analysis  of  the  plan.  Linking  and  syntaxis.  Signifi- 
cance of  the  foredeeps.  Folding.  Backfolding  and  disappearance  of  the  folds 
in  the  Asiatic  structure.  Analysis  of  the  arcs.  Analysis  of  certain  transverse 
sections  498 

Chapter  XV.  The  Depths.  Classification  of  the  depths.  Emission  of  gas,  batho- 
lites,  ores.  Intrusion  by  melting  through.  Passive  lateral  injection.  Green 
stones  543 

Chapter  XVI.  Origin  and  Arrangement  of  Volcanos.  Phreatic  explosions. 
Association  with  dykes.  South  African  funnels.  Distribution  of  the  volcanos. 
Volcanic  lines.    Atlantic  and  Pacific  lavas  568 

Chapter  XVII.  The  Moon.  Hypotheses.  Retrospect.  The  moon.  Lunar 
and  terrestrial  sea  basins.  Separation  of  the  moon  and  its  consequences.  Iso- 
static  compensation  of  mountains.  Compensation  of  continents.  Compensation, 
in  general.    Contraction  of  the  earth's  body.    Retrospect  591 

Chapter  XVIII.  Life.  Introduction.  The  strand.  History  of  the  Caspian  sea. 
Appearance  of  placental  mammals.    Asylums  637 


Vll 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 


FIG.  PAGE 

1.  The  Strait  of  Kertch   13 

2.  The  spur  of  Valeni   21 

3.  The  Coal  basin  of  Dohlen  near  Dresden    40 

4.  The  western  border  of  the  Central  Plateau  near  Brive   44 

5.  The  Armorican  peninsula   46 

6.  The  syncline  of  Menez-Belair  cut  through  by  the  anticline  of  Dinan  ...  47 

7.  Malvern  hills   52 

8.  Abberley  hills   53 

9.  The  fractures  of  Lorraine  and  Luxembourg   54 

10.  Overthrusts  on  the  concave  curve  of  the  Appalachians       .....  72 

11.  The  Atlantic  belt  between  Washington  and  Baltimore   75 

12.  The  Cretaceous  platforms  of  Texas   79 

13.  The  Schleifstein  range   83 

14.  Sierra  Comanche  and  Davis  mountains   86 

15.  The  Recumbent  Folds  of  Sulens  and  les  Annes   116 

16.  Folds  of  Mont  Joly   117 

17.  The  Simplon  Tunnel   124 

18.  The  Cottian  Alps  ,       .  136 

19.  Section  taken  from  east  and  west  through  the  Vicentine  Tertiary  region  .       .  150 

20.  The  Valley  of  the  Aude   235 

21.  Gavarnie  and  the  French  frontier  near  Mont  Perdu   242 

22.  Pebbles  from  the  mainland  on  the  basalt  cliff  of  Dun  Beag       ....  262 

23.  The  north-west  peninsula  of  Iceland   265 

24.  Earthquakes  in  Iceland       .       ,                                                            .  266 

25.  Faults  on  lake  Nyassa   269 

26.  The  delta  of  the  Lena  .      .   334 

27.  The  mountains  of  Verkhoiansk   338 

28.  Sketch  of  the  upper  course  of  the  Indigirka  and  Kolyma   339 

29.  The  Colorado  Plateau   381 

30.  Rocky  mountains,  East  of  Leadville   384 

31.  '  Folds  en  echelon  '  on  the  outer  edge  of  the  Colorado  range      ....  385 

32.  Outer  border  of  the  Rocky  mountains  on  the  Ghost  River,  South  Canada  .       .  391 

33.  The  Plateau  of  the  Copper  river   398 

34.  The  Klamath  mountains   420 

35.  Mouth  of  the  Colorado  river   426 

36.  Trend  lines  of  the  Sierra  de  la  Ventana   483 

37.  Deep  borings  at  Boryslav   525 

38.  The  Rhine  valley  near  Bale   526 

39.  Fractured  area  in  the  Tafel-Jura   527 

40.  Rotated  Fold  of  Ben  More,  Assynt   530 

41.  Structure  of  the  coalfield  near  Denain  and  Anzin   531 


viii  LIST  OF  ILLUSTEATIONS 

FIG.  PAGE 

42,  43.  Recumbent  flakes  of  Fontaine  I'^veque   532 

44.  Section  of  the  coalfield  from  Saint  ;^loi  to  Saint  Leon   534 

45.  Recumbent  fold  of  Glarus   535 

46.  Section  through  a  part  of  the  pre-Alps  of  Freiburg   536 

47.  The  Mattstock  between  Thun  and  the  "Walensee       .      .       .       .      .      .  538 

48.  Diagrammatic  section  of  the  Hohe  Tatra   541 

49.  Roof  of  the  granite  of  Markersdorf   553 

50.  Mesa  of  mount  Taylor  and  Prieta  Mesa   570 

51.  End  of  a  basalt  dyke   572 

52.  Dyke  near  Makomereng      .      *   574 

53.  Interrupted  dyke  in  Matatiele   575 

54.  Intrusion  of  Mellilite  Basalt  near  Sutherland   576 

55.  Saint  Augustine  mine,  near  Kimberley      .   577 


NOTE 


The  plates  to  which  reference  is  made  in  Vol.  IV  will  be  published 
in  Vol.  V,  together  with  an  Index  to  the  complete  work. 


PAET  V 
THE  FACE  OF  THE  EAKTH 

(CONTINUED) 
CHAPTER  I 
ENTRY  OP  THE  ALTAIDES  INTO  EUROPE 

The  European  Altaides.  The  horst  of  Azov.  Prolongation  of  the  Caucasus.  The 
Crimea  and  Bulgarian  platform.  Balkans  and  Carpathians.  The  Cimmerian  mountains. 
Summary.    Alien  fractures  in  the  Variscan  arc. 

The  European  Altaides.  Almost  the  whole  of  Europe  must  be  assigned 
to  the  Asiatic  system.  The  boundary  is  the  Caledonian  disturbance  (II, 
p.  51 ;  III,  388).  Beyond  it  lie  the  outer  Hebrides  appertaining,  together 
with  the  several  peninsulas  of  the  mainland,  to  another  system — the  Atlantic 
(III,  386).  The  volcanic  region  of  Iceland,  with  Jan  Mayen,  the  Faeroes, 
St.  Kilda,  and  an  offshoot  extending  to  the  north-east  of  Ireland,  lies  partly 
in  the  Atlantic  region,  partly  in  the  zone  of  the  Caledonian  disturbance. 
Save  for  these  exceptions,  the  whole  of  Europe  is  morphologically  a  part 
of  Asia. 

We  have  already  called  attention  to  the  presence  of  two  Asiatic  elements 
in  Europe,  namely,  the  Dinarides  (III,  316)  and  the  Russian  platform  with 
the  Uralides  (III,  358). 

The  Dinarides  are  a  part  of  the  marginal  arcs  of  the  periphery,  and  the 
Russian  platform  may  be  regarded  as  a  fragment  of  the  Sayan  portion 
of  the  ancient  vertex.  Between  these  two  lie  the  chains  of  the  western 
Altaides ;  extending  through  western  Asia  they  advance  to  the  boundary 
of  Europe,  and  are  represented  in  Europe  itself  by  a  vast  mountain  system, 
which  may  also  be  recognized  outside  this  continent,  even  beyond  the 
Atlantic  Ocean  and  the  Mediterranean  Sea.  The  relations,  disposition,  and 
other  characteristics  of  this  system  lead  us  to  regard  it  as  the  natural 
continuation  of  the  Altaides  of  Asia,  and  we  shall  designate  it  by  the  same 
name  ^. 

1  The  term  '  Altaides '  is  not  synonymous  with  '  Hercynian,'  now  so  much  in  use. 
Marcel  Bertrand  writes :  '  The  term  Hercynian  chain  which  I  have  proposed  for  the  whole 
of  the  Carboniferous  folds  of  northern  Europe  has  been  criticized,  not  without  reason, 
since  the  meaning  I  have  attached  to  it  is  an  extension  of  its  original  application,  and 
consequently  a  departure  from  it.  I  shall  continue  to  use  it  without  defending  it,  but 
in  the  hope  that  some  one  will  propose  a  better '  (Bull.  Soc.  geol.  de  Fr.,  1892,  3^  ser.,  XX, 

SOLLAS  IV  B 


2     ENTEY  OP  THE  ALTAIDES  INTO  EUEOPE  [party 

We  may  commence  by  recalling  the  evidence  already  adduced  to  show 
the  original  continuity  of  the  pre-Permian  horsts  of  Europe  (II,  p.  129) ; 
the  sketch-map  (PI.  V,  I,  p.  463)  representing  the  relations  of  the  Asiatic 
to  the  European  chains,  so  far  as  we  could  determine  them ;  the  diagram  of 
the  Alpine  trend-lines  (I,  p.  232,  fig.  26),  in  which  the  Dinarides  are  dis- 
tinguished from  the  Alps  (I,  p.  497) ;  and  the  sketch  (I,  p.  480,  fig.  47),  which 
includes  the  Balkans  and  the  Carpathians  of  Roumania. 

In  western  Asia  a  marked  divergence  in  direction  gradually  arises 
between  the  trend-lines  which  strike  to  the  north-west  and  remain  true  to 
the  vertex,  and  those,  proceeding  chiefly  from  the  Thian-shan,  which  run 
more  to  the  west-north-west.  This  divergence  becomes  at  last  so  consider- 
able that  the  Yergeni  mountains,  the  last  formed  of  the  Uralides,  meet  the 
Caucasus,  which  is  a  branch  of  the  Altaides,  almost  at  right  angles 
(III,  361). 

In  Asia,  as  in  Europe,  there  are  some  folds  which  are  older  and  others 
which  are  younger  than  the  upper  Carboniferous  or  the  Permian.  This 
distinction  is  often  emphasized  by  unconformity,  but  in  Asia  the  younger 
folds  are  incorporated  with  the  older  in  the  same  mountain  system,  and 
are  not  sharply  separated  from  them  in  space.  An  example  is  furnished  by 
the  observations  of  Merzbacher  and  Keidel  on  the  river  Kok-shal  in  the 
south  Thian-shan,  where  the  unconformity  at  the  base  of  the  lower  Carboni- 
ferous is  as  clearly  marked  as  in  Brittany  or  Silesia,  and  that  at  the  base 
of  the  upper  Carboniferous  is  no  less  evident.  The  folding  has  not  pro- 
ceeded without  interruption,  but  on  the  whole  it  has  been  repeated  along 
the  same  lines,  and  the  common  outer  border  has  been  driven  southwards 
over  the  Gobi  beds  ^.  A  similar  example  is  afforded  by  the  marginal  arc  of 
the  Himalaya  as  represented  by  the  Siwalik  zone ;  and  many  other  instances 
might  be  cited. 

In  Europe  the  case  is  different. 

In  that  southern  part  of  the  Russian  platform  known  to  Russian 
geologists  as  the  horst  of  Azov  two  great  tectonic  changes  set  in. 

In  the  first  place  the  chains  of  the  Altaides,  hitherto  folded  towards  the 
south,  now  become  folded  towards  the  north,  and  this  reversal  is  the  more 

p.  119,  note).  The  name  has  subsequently  been  extended  to  pre-Permian  chains  in  many 
other  parts  of  the  world.  It  was  used  by  the  great  master  in  contradistinction  to 
the  Alps.  The  important  point  for  L.  von  Buch,  when  he  created  the  '  Hercynian 
system was  the  (orographical)  north-westerly  direction,  for  Marcel  Bertrand  it  was 
the  tectonic  age  ;  in  this  work,  where  we  are  seeking  to  determine  the  main  lines  of 
the  structure,  it  is  the  connexion  with  the  Altai  (III,  pp.  196,  197),  and  there  are  very 
many  pre-Permian  chains  which  do  not  belong  to  the  Altaides,  such,  for  example,  as  the 
Camic  sub-structure  of  the  Dinarides.  It  would,  besides,  have  been  difficult  to  employ 
a  tei-m  which  is  used  at  the  same  time  both  in  its  original  and  in  a  different  sense 
(cf.  Lepsius,  Geologic  von  Deutschland). 

*  H.  Keidel,  Geologische  Untersuchungen  in  Sud-Tian-Schan  etc.,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1906, 
Beilage-Band  XXII,  pp.  266-384,  map  ;  in  particular  p.  277. 


OH.  I]  STIFFENING  OF  THE  FEAME  3 

remarkable  since  in  the  south  of  Europe  the  Dinarides,  and  in  the  north 
the  continuations  of  the  Timan-Kanin  chain,  still  retain  the  Asiatic  folding 
towards  the  south.  Thus  the  intervening  Altaides  present  themselves  as  an 
exception. 

In  the  next  place  those  chains  of  the  Altaides  which  are  younger  than 
the  upper  Carboniferous  and  the  Permian  are  separated  sharply  in  space. 
They  lie  almost  wholly  within  subsided  areas  of  the  Altaides,  framed  in  by 
lines  which  frequently  cut  across  the  strike  of  these  mountains.  We  may 
regard  the  chains  thus  framed  in  as  posthumous  Altaides.  The  Alpine 
chains  (Alpides)  are  their  most  important  member. 

The  Alpides  are  bordered  by  a  Tertiary  zone.  Nothing  analogous  to 
this  is  to  be  seen  in  the  outer  margin  of  the  Variscan  arc,  i.  e.  outside  the 
Belgian  coal-fields.  Indeed  the  younger  folding  occurs  but  seldom  in  the 
horsts  of  the  European  Altaides,  and  is  then  only  feebly  developed.  It  is 
as  though  the  frame  had  become  rigid,  and  the  folding,  from  the  upper 
Carboniferous  onwards,  had  been  confined  to  the  downthrown  areas. 

Nowhere  else  on  the  face  of  the  earth  has  a  like  case  yet  been  observed, 
unless  perhaps  in  Manchuria,  where  older  fragments  are  said  to  occur  with 
alien  folding  within  the  younger  folds. 

Each  of  these  tectonic  changes  stands  in  need  of  explanation. 

The  long  range  of  the  Adak  mountains  (III,  p.  370),  as  it  proceeds 
through  the  Grosslands  tundra,  follows,  even  north  of  the  Ussa,  the  direction 
of  the  principal  chain  of  the  Urals,  which  here  runs  about  north-east  ^. 
The  Uralides  give  off  first  a  branch  to  the  north-west,  which  passes  through 
Waigatz  to  Nova  Zembla,  and  then  a  second  in  the  direction  of  the  Timan- 
Kanin  range  (III,  p.  374).  In  1891  Reusch  observed  that  brown  and  grey 
sandstone  and  slate  are  thrown  into  folds  on  the  Varanger  fjord  and  the 
Tana  fjord,  and  that  they  form  the  continuation  of  certain  rocks  met  with 
by  Bothlingk  in  Fisher  peninsula,  off  the  north  coast  of  Kola.  They 
contain  intercalated  beds  with  glaciated  boulders  2.  At  the  time  these 
observations  were  made  the  sandstone  was  regarded  as  faulted  down 
against  the  Archaean  complex  lying  to  the  south.  But  Ramsay,  in  a 
study  of  the  north  coast  of  Kola,  has  since  shown  that  this  sandstone 
belongs  to  the  border  of  a  folded  range  driven  towards  the  south,  and 
represents,  indeed,  the  continuation  of  the  Timan  chain. 

The  island  of  Kildin  is  the  first  indication  of  this  mountain  border ; 

^  T.  N.  Tschernyschew,  Additional  observations  on  tlie  Bolschesemelskaja  Tundra; 
Izviestija  Acad.  Imp.  Sci.  Saint-Petersb.,  1907,  pp.  205-208.  Pytkov  (not  Rutkov) 
Kamen,  east  of  the  mouth  of  the  Petchora(ni,  p.  370),  is  composed,  like  Kanin,  of  sericite 
schists. 

2  H.  Reusch,  Det  Nordlige  Norges  Geologi,  Norg.  Geol.  Undersog.,  No.  4, 1892,  pp.  22- 
51  (also  op.  cit.,  No.  1,  1891,  pp.  78-85)  ;  A.  Strahan,  On  Glacial  Phenomena  of  Palaeozoic 
Age  in  the  Varanger  Fiord,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1897,  LIII,  pp.  137-146. 

B  2 


4     ENTEY  OP  THE  ALTAIDES  INTO  EUEOPE  [part  v 


Fisher  peninsula  is  the  second;  in  the  constriction  which  separates  the 
Srednij-Puostrov  (middle  peninsula)  from  the  mainland  lies  the  boundary 
of  the  Archaean  complex.  The  strike  is  north-north- west ;  the  dip  of  the 
beds  is  to  the  north-west,  and  indicates  an  overthrusting  of  the  mountain 
border  ^. 

Dai's  investigations  show  that  the  folds  strike  across  the  whole  breadth 
of  the  Varanger  peninsula  into  the  Tana  fjord  ^. 

The  age  of  the  sandstone  is  unknown ;  it  is  supposed  to  be  Devonian ; 
but  in  any  case  it  must  be  later  than  the  Caledonian  dislocations  of  north 
Norway,  since  its  folds  cross  the  direction  of  these  dislocations. 

In  the  north  of  Europe,  therefore,  the  dominant  movement  is  towards 
the  south.  That  this  is  also  the  case  with  the  Dinarides,  in  the  south,  has 
already  been  shown.  The  folding  directed  to  the  north,  which  characterizes 
the  Altai  des  lying  west  of  the  horst  of  the  Azov,  is  thus  obviously  excep- 
tional ;  but  it  persists  even  across  the  Atlantic  Ocean  and  beyond. 

We  must  now  consider  the  downthrown  areas  of  the  Altaides,  and  the 
horsts  surrounded  by  them  which  form  the  outer  frame. 

We  are  already  familiar  with  the  horsts  of  the  Variscan  and  the 
Armoriean  arcs  (II,  pp.  97  and  86). 

Another  important  part  of  the  Altaides  is  the  Iberian  Meseta  (II,  p.  122). 
The  basin  of  Asturias  (fig.  14,  II,  p.  125)  has  been  explained  as  the  inner- 
most part  of  an  ancient  region  of  torsion,  a  region  like  the  bend  of 
Gibraltar.  Termier  believes  that  the  overthrusting  of  recumbent  sheets 
affords  a  better  explanation  of  the  structure.  Further  observations  are 
necessary  to  decide  this  question.  A  long  straight  line  running  from  Oporto 
to  the  south-south-east  marks  the  western  boundary  between  the  Meseta 
and  the  Mesozoic  sediments;  but  beyond  this  line  some  little  islands  of 
granite  and  gneiss,  the  Berlengas,  rise  from  the  sea  off  cape  Carvoeiro, 
as  though  the  ancient  rocks  were  continued  beneath  the  ocean. 

The  Montagne  Noire  is  an  independent  branch  of  the  Altaides,  sharing 
a  common  outline  with  the  southern  part  of  the  Central  Plateau,  but 
distinguished  from  it  by  a  divergent  strike  to  the  west-south-west  and  by 
well-marked  overthrusts.  The  Cevennes  form  its  continuation  to  the  east- 
north-east.  The  hills  of  Barcelona,  beyond  the  Pyrenees,  possess  a  similar 
structure.  The  Montagne  Noire  will  be  discussed  in  greater  detail  in 
connexion  with  the  Pyrenees. 

The  Cor  Sardinian  branch,  like  all  the  horsts  so  far  described,  reveals 

^  W.  Ramsay,  Neue  Beitriige  zur  Geologie  der  Halbinsel  Kola,  Fennia,  1899,  XV, 
No.  4,  pp.  6-11. 

^  Adolf  Dal,  Geologiske  jagttagelser  omkring  Varanger  fjorden,  Norg.  Geol.  Undersog., 
No.  28,  Aarbog  f.  1896  til  1899,  Kristiania  1900,  No.  5,  16  pp.,  map;  H.  Reusch,  Ein 
Theil  des  timan'schen  Gebirgssy stems  innerhalb  Norwegens,  Geogr.  Zeitschr.  von 
Hettncr,  1900,  VI,  pp.  391,  392. 


CH.I]  FOLDING  WITHIN  THE  FKAME  5 

itself  as  part  of  the  Altaides  by  the  unconformable  superposition  of  the 
upper  Carboniferous.  It  includes  the  greater  part  of  Corsica  and  the  whole 
of  Sardinia,  strikes  to  the  south-south-east,  and  may  be  traced  through 
3|  degrees  of  latitude.  It  is  distinguished  by  peculiar  Mesozoic  trans- 
gressions, which  we  shall  refer  to  when  describing  the  northern  Apennines. 

A  divergent  mass  is  formed  by  Calabria  and  the  Peloritan  mountains  in 
the  north-east  of  Sicily ;  above  the  ancient  rocks  it  exhibits  a  Cenomanian 
transgression  of  African  type,  indications  of  which  have  also  been  observed 
in  Sardinia.  Great  overthrusts  affecting  whole  regions  have  been  recognized 
in  Sicily ;  it  is  not  known  whether,  or  to  what  extent,  they  make  them- 
selves felt  in  this  mass. 

In  addition  to  the  examples  mentioned  above,  ancient  fragments  are  to 
be  seen  rising  out  of  the  younger  folded  ranges.  This  is  the  case  par- 
ticularly in  the  Pyrenees,  but  also  in  the  Pelvoux,  the  Todi,  and  elsewhere. 
In  the  Styrian  alps  the  fossiliferous  series  beginning  with  the  plant-bearing 
beds  of  the  middle  or  upper  Carboniferous  is  sometimes  met  with. 

Under  these  circumstances  it  is  very  difficult  to  picture  to  ourselves  the 
original  plan  of  the  western  Altaides,  but  the  configuration  of  the  Appa- 
lachians, the  relation  of  the  Montague  Noire  to  the  Central  Plateau, 
and  the  course  of  the  Altaides  in  Africa,  might  lead  us  to  suppose  that  it 
formed  a  great  virgation  open  towards  the  south-west  and  south. 

In  some  cases  the  subsidences  suffered  by  this  great  system  did  not 
afford  sufficient  room  for  the  younger  chains  which  came  crowding  in  upon 
them  ;  in  others,  as  in  South  Germany,  vacant  spaces  were  left  between  the 
irregular  outer  frame  and  the  great  curves  swept  out  by  the  chains.  Even 
the  southern  scarp  of  the  Meseta  extends  to  the  west  far  beyond  the  arc  of 
Gibraltar^.  The  new  folds,  however,  occasionally  strike  right  across 
the  ancient  folds,  as,  for  instance,  when  they  meet  the  Sudetes  or  the 
Great  Atlas. 

The  most  striking  example,  however,  is  afforded  by  the  Alps.  After 
the  first  mighty  bends  at  the  Iron  gate  and  in  the  south-east  of  Transylvania? 
the  Carpathians  swell  out  in  a  broad  arc  over  the  southern  part  of  the 
Russian  platform  and  overwhelm  the  Sudetes.  Then  Bohemia  forces  the  folds 
into  the  frame  formed  by  the  Variscan  horsts  as  into  a  funnel.  Not  being 
able,  like  the  Carpathians,  to  surmount  the  foreland  or  to  disburden  them- 
selves by  thrusting  out  an  unimpeded  branchy  they  achieve  the  most 
stupendous  overthrusts. 

The  Alps  terminate  in  the  Balearic  islands,  but  to  the  north  lies  another 
downthrown  area  within  which  the  folds  of  Provence  arise;  these  enter 
into  connexion  with  the  Pyrenees  under  peculiar  circumstances.  The 

1  T.  Fischer,  Orographie  der  Iberischen  Halbinsel,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1894,  pp.  249-256 
and  277-285,  map.  Chffoat  thinks  that  a  connexion  with  the  border  in  Algarve  is  not 
proved. 


6     ENTEY  OP  THE  ALTAIDES  INTO  EUEOPE  [part  v 


Meseta  does  not  reach  the  sea  across  Santander;  but  is  divided  from  it 
by  a  range  of  younger  folds,  which  probably  form  the  border  of  another 
subsidence. 

In  the  subsidence  of  western  Portugal  younger  folding  likewise  occurs. 
There  the  Culm,  the  unconformity  of  which  is  the  earliest  precursor  of  the 
formation  of  the  Altaides,  plays  an  important  part  in  the  structure  of  the 
Meseta.  A  number  of  granitic  intrusions  confuse  the  picture,  and  con- 
clusions drawn  from  the  configuration  of  the  surface  must  be  received  with 
more  than  usual  reserve.  From  Choffat's  accounts  it  appears  that  here,  as 
in  the  northern  part  of  the  East  Alps,  the  younger  folded  series  begins 
with  the  Trias ;  the  folds  are  on  the  whole  gentle  and  not  very  long,  but  in 
the  Aralida  chain,  which  reaches  the  sea  in  cape  Espichel,  strongly  marked 
imbricate  structure  occurs,  with  movement  to  the  south-south-east.  Unfor- 
tunately, this  chain  is  so  short  that  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  form  any 
decided  opinion  as  to  the  nature  of  this  exceptional  movement  to  the 
south  ^. 

The  subsided  area  of  London  and  Paris  likewise  exhibits  younger 
folds  (the  Weald  among  others). 

The  occurrence  of  younger  posthumous  folds  in  the  more  important 
subsidences  of  the  Altaides,  and  especially  in  regions  where  there  is  no 
direct  connexion  with  Asia,  points  to  the  existence  of  a  very  general 
folding  force,  which  only  finds  expression  within  the  frame. 

Subsidences  of  a  similar  kind  have  also  occurred  outside  the  Altaides. 
That  of  Venice,  and  the  Aegaean  inbreak,  lie  in  the  Dinarides.  Beneath 
the  south-eastern  part  of  the  Mediterranean  a  fragment  of  the  desert  plat- 
form of  Africa  has  been  let  down.  But  none  of  these  subsidences  which  lie 
outside  the  Altaides  shows  signs  of  younger  folding. 

The  Alpine  foldings  have  been  preceded  or  accompanied  by  subsidence, 
which,  judging  from  the  evidence  afforded  by  Radiolarian  rocks,  must  have 
amounted  during  the  Jurassic  epoch  to  at  least  4,000  meters.  But  subsi- 
dences have  also  followed  the  folding.  As  instances,  we  may  cite  the 
Vienna  basin  with  its  belt  of  thermal  springs,  Hungary  with  its  arc  of 
Tertiary  volcanos,  and  the  clearly  defined  downthrown  area  of  western 
Italy,  also  with  its  volcanos.  We  have  already  suggested  the  possibility 
that  the  subsidence  of  the  Tyrrhenian  Sea  may  be  on  the  verge  of  extend- 
ing itself  even  at  the  present  day  (I,  p.  86).  Caldron  fractures  have 
occurred  at  a  very  late  period,  as,  for  instance,  in  the  Roussillon.  There  are 
however  several  isolated  windows  in  the  midst  of  the  Alps  which  do  not 
owe  their  origin  to  subsidence,  and  these  suggest  the  question  whether 
there  may  not  exist  a  secondary  folding  of  the  frame  within  the  Alps. 

^  P.  Choffat,  Pli-faille  et  chevauchements  horizontaux  dans  le  Mesozoique  du  Portugal, 
C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  31  Juill.  1905,  pp.  335-337,  and,  in  particular,  Notice  sur  la  Carte 
hypsometrique  du  Portugal,  Comm.  serv.  geol.  Portugal,  1907,  VII,  71  pp.,  map. 


CH.I]  THE  HOEST  OF  AZOV  7 

It  will  appear  from  the  preceding  remarks  that  there  is  no  part  of  the 
face  of  the  earth  which  presents  greater  difficulties  to  an  exact  analysis 
than  that  part  of  the  Altaides  which  lies  west  of  the  horst  of  Azov.  Such 
an  analysis  is  the  task  reserved  for  the  following  chapters.  The  Pontic 
region,  the  immediate  link  with  Asia,  is  of  such  importance  that  it  must  be 
given  precedence.  But  it  is  not  only  in  the  form  of  great  folded  ranges 
that  Asia  advances  towards  Europe.  There  are  many  reasons  for  regarding 
certain  long  lines  of  fracture  (Karpinsky's  lines),  which  strike  to  the  west- 
north- west  or  north-west,  as  of  Asiatic  origin. 

We  may  first  consider  Karpinsky's  lines  and  the  regions  surrounding 
the  Black  Sea. 

Then  we  will  proceed  to  the  Altaides  in  Europe,  with  their  continuations 
in  North  America  and  North  Africa,  and  conclude  with  a  discussion  of  the 
younger  chains  within  the  frame. 

The  horst  of  Azov.  From  the  south  of  the  Russian  platform  we  may 
mark  off  a  horst  (III,  p.  383).  Its  boundaries  have  been  precisely  determined 
by  Teisseyre  ^  and  Laskarew  ^.  It  is  known  as  the  Podolian  horst  or  the 
Podolian  platform. 

The  border  of  the  Carpathians  reveals  great  overthrusts.  Nothing, 
indeed,  could  be  more  manifest  than  the  overriding  of  the  Sudetes  across 
their  whole  breadth  (I,  p.  186,  fig.  24).  For  the  region  which  lies  next  to 
the  east,  the  course  of  two  rivers,  the  Weichsel  and  San,  appears  to  possess 
particular  significance. 

The  towns  of  Cracow,  Sandomir,  and  Przemysl  mark  out  a  triangle, 
covered  by  recent  sediments,  which  includes  these  two  rivers  and  the  border  of 
the  Carpathians  (I,  pp.  184, 469).  At  its  apex,  near  the  mouth  of  the  San,  the 
Sandomir  range  makes  its  appearance.  From  here  on  towards  the  south-west 
a  fault  is  supposed  to  accompany  the  course  of  the  Weichsel,  along  which  the 
Sudetes  are  thrown  down.  In  any  case  the  Sandomir  mountains  represent 
a  frontal  chain  of  the  Sudetes,  comparable  in  some  degree  with  the  Jura. 

The  course  of  the  San,  however,  corresponds  approximately  with  a  line 
continuing  the  direction  of  the  north-east  border  of  this  frontal  chain. 
Near  Przemysl  the  river  issues  from  the  Carpathians,  and  along  the  whole 
sweep  of  the  Carpathians,  from  the  west  up  to  this  point,  boulders  are 
found  which  belong  to  the  Sudetes  or  the  Sandomir  mountains.  Wojcik 
has  shown  in  particular  that  all  the  stages  of  the  foreland,  from  the 
Devonian  to  the  Kimeridge,  are  represented  in  the  boulders  which  occur 

^  W.  Teisseyre,  Versuch  einer  Tektonik  des  Vorlandes  der  Karpathen,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol. 
Reichsanst.,  1903,  pp.  289-308 ;  Der  palaeozoische  Horst  von  Podolien  und  die  ihn 
umgebenden  Senkungsfelder,  Beitr.  Palaont.  Oesterr.-Ung.,  1903,  XV,  pp.  101-126,  maps. 

^  V.  Laskarew,  Geological  Investigations  in  the  Districts  Ostrog  and  Dubno,  Volhynia, 
Bull.  Com.  geol.  Russie,  1904,  XXIII,  pp.  425-461,  and  Observations  on  the  Tectonic 
Structure  of  tbe  Crystalline  Platform  of  South  Russia,  op.  cit.,  1905,  XXIV,  pp.  235-295, 
map. 


8     ENTRY  OF  THE  ALTAIDES  INTO  EUEOPE  [party 


in  the  neighbourhood  of  Przemysl.  They  lie  in  Oligocene  Flysch,  either 
loose  or  as  conglomerate,  and  W6jcik  explains  them  as  parts  of  the  faulted- 
down  foreland  carried  up  to  the  surface  from  below  ^. 

They  are  intra-telluric  erratics,  and  indicate  that  as  far  as  Przemysl — 
that  is,  up  to  the  river  San — the  foreland  still  belongs  to  the  Yariscan 
system,  the  boundary  of  which  is  reached  by  the  border  of  the  Carpathians, 
200  kilometers  east  of  Cracow.  Indeed  even  the  great  fragments  of  ancient 
Coal-measures — sometimes  erroneously  regarded  as  workable — which  have 
long  been  known  in  the  Flysch  of  the  East  Carpathians,  are  met  with,  as 
Professor  Niedzwiezki  informs  me,  as  far  as  Delatyn  on  the  Pruth  (long. 
22"  20'  E.). 

We  will  now  leave  the  border  of  the  Carpathians. 

A  boring  at  Lemberg  failed  to  reach  the  base  of  the  Senonian  at  a  depth 
of  501  meters. 

On  the  Dniestr,  near  Nizniov  (east  of  Stanislau),  a  gradual  transgression 
of  the  uppermost  part  of  the  Jurassic  occurs,  and  probably  extends  from  the 
north-east  side  of  the  Sandomir  mountains  as  far  as  this  point  ^. 

More  to  the  north,  on  the  Zlota  Lipa  (left  tributary  of  the  Dniestr), 
coralliferous  Devonian  dolomite,  resembling  that  of  the  Sandomir  range, 
occurs  above  the  Devonian  sandstone  ^. 

Then  the  western  characters  disappear,  and  on  the  Dniestr  the  Palaeozoic 
series  of  the  horst  is  exposed.  It  dips  gently  towards  the  Carpathians,  but 
is  separated  from  them  by  the  broad  valley  of  the  Pruth.  In  Moldavia  the 
distance  between  the  horst  and  the  Carpathians  increases  rapidly.  The 
Pruth  makes  a  bend  to  the  east,  and  near  Radautzi  enters  a  Cretaceous 
plateau.  This  has  led  Simionescu  to  conclude  that  the  horst  also  extends 
across  the  Pruth  The  southern  boundary  of  the  horst  reaches  the  sea  of 
Azov  near  Berdiansk.  North  of  this  town  it  terminates,  appearing  in  the 
landscape  as  an  extensive  hilly  land  rising  from  amidst  a  flat  country. 
Morozewicz  has  given  a  map  of  this  region  ^  (III,  p.  385). 

This  hilly  land  is  the  horst  of  Azov ;  it  is  a  part  of  the  Podolian  horst. 

Let  us  again  turn  our  attention  to  its  north-western  extremity.  Here 
according  to  Laskarew,  in  the  districts  of  Dubno  and  Ostrog,  indications  of 
two  subsidences  may  be  found.  The  first,  that  of  Peltcha,  is  bordered  by 
the  marine  upper  Devonian  of  the  western  mountains;  the  second  is 
associated  near  Rovno  with  some  completely  isolated  exposures  of  basaltic 

^  K.  Wojcik,  Exotische  Blocke  im  Flysch  von  Krubel  Wielki  bei  Przemysl,  Bull.  Acad. 
Sci.  Cracov,  1907,  pp.  499-527. 

^  J.  V.  Siemiradzki,  tiber  die  Gliederung  und  Verbreitung  der  Jura  in  Polen,  Jahrb. 
k.k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1889,  XXXIX,  pp.  45-54,  in  particular  p.  46. 

3  A.  Alth  i.  Fr.  Bieniasz,  Atlas  geol.  Galicyi,  Bl.  8,  XIII,  Monasterzyska,  Krakau,  1887, 
Text,  p.  49. 

*  J.  Simionescu,  Erreicht  die  russische  Tafel  Rumanien  ?    Centralbl.  f.  Min.,  1901, 
pp.  193,  194,  also  Ann.  Sci.  Univ.  Jassy,  1902,  pp.  4-6. 
»  Morozewicz,  Bull.  Com.  geol.  Russie,  1901,  XX,  p.  574,  tab.  vi. 


CH.I]  ENTEY  OP  THE  TEEND-LINES 


9 


rock.  The  boundary  of  the  Podolian  horst  then  turns  towards  the  north, 
and  afterwards  pursues  a  course  to  the  south-east,  following  at  some  dis- 
tance the  right  bank  of  the  Dniepr.  It  crosses  the  river  near  Krementchug, 
and  finally  reaches  the  north  side  of  the  horst  of  Azov. 

This  fragment  of  an  ancient  mountain  system  has  played  an  important 
part  in  determining  the  configuration  of  Europe. 

Karpinsky  has  expressed  the  opinion  that  the  deflexion  of  the  Caucasus 
towards  the  Crimea  is  to  be  attributed  to  it  (III,  p.  386).  It  is  a  remarkable 
fact  that  the  behaviour  of  the  trend-lines  as  they  enter  this  region  from 
Asia  differs  according  as  they  pass  south  or  north  of  the  horst. 

The  Caucasus  maintains  its  direct  course  to  the  west-north- west  or 
north-west,  a  trend  so  characteristic  of  the  great  branches  of  the  Asiatic 
virgations,  till  they  approach  the  Crimea.  At  this  spot  the  conditions 
suddenly  change. 

The  Carpathians  cannot  unite  with  the  Asiatic  lines  except  on  the 
south  of  the  horst;  the  Russian  platform  leaves  us  in  no  doubt  on  this 
point.  From  the  horst  onwards  the  folding  turns  to  the  north;  and  in 
place  of  the  straight  lines  of  the  Caucasus  we  have  the  winding  trend-lines 
of  Central  Europe. 

The  case  is  altogether  different  on  the  north  of  the  horst.  The  direct 
course  to  the  west-north-west  or  north-west,  and,  so  far  as  can  be  made  out, 
the  Asiatic  movement  to  the  south  also,  are  maintained  unchanged.  It  is 
here  that  Karpinsky 's  lines  begin.    (I,  PI.  V,  mm). 

The  fold  of  Kulandy  at  the  north-west  extremity  of  the  Sea  of  Aral 
and  the  scattered  occurrences  in  the  Astrachan  steppe  are  isolated 
phenomena  which  for  the  present  we  may  leave  out  of  account. 

Of  much  greater  importance  is  the  line  of  the  Alai  (I,  p.  468).  The 
Alai  mountains,  the  Turkestan  range — the  Malgusar — the  Nuratau  (PI.  Ill, 
III,  p.  281), the  Scheich  Djeli — Mangishlak — the  Coal-measures  on  the  Donetz 
(6  on  PI.  V,  I,  p.  463) — such  is  the  series  of  coulisses  which,  striking  at 
first  in  an  arc  slightly  convex  to  the  south  and  then  in  a  straight  line  to 
the  west-north- west,  starts  from  the  north  border  of  the  Pamir,  and  runs 
along  the  north  side  of  the  horst  of  Azov. 

In  confirmation  of  Karpinsky 's  conjectures,  Bogatschew  has  found 
fragments  of  fossiliferous  upper  Carboniferous  rocks  in  Tertiary  sands  on 
the  southern  slope  of  the  Sal-Many tch  watershed  (close  to  lat.  42°  30'  E.), 
and  in  such  abundance  that  we  must  suppose  a  reef  of  this  limestone  to 
exist  a  little  below  the  surface.  The  direction  of  the  watershed  if  produced 
beyond  Novo-Tcherkarsh  will  be  found  to  meet  the  axis  of  the  principal 
anticline  which  runs  through  the  Carboniferous  of  the  Donetz  ^. 

^  W.  Bogatschew,  The  Steppes  of  the  Fluvial  Region  of  the  Manytsch,  Bull.  Com.  geol. 
Russie,  1903,  XXII,  pp.  13-162,  map,  in  particular  pp.  105,  153  et  seq.  Folds  of  the 
Ural  group  appear  far  to  the  west ;  cf.  A.  W.  Pawlow,  Some  new  facts  concerning  the 


10   ENTRY  OF  THE  ALTAIDES  INTO  EUEOPE  [part  v 


The  coal-bearing  Carboniferous  beds  crop  out  no  further  away  than 
a  point  north-east  of  Konstantinovskaia  on  the  Don ;  and  in  the  south 
near  Taganrog  the  upper  Devonian  has  been  reached  by  boring ;  it  occurs 
as  a  band  between  the  south  side  of  the  Carboniferous  and  the  ancient 
crystalline  horst.  This  Carboniferous  area,  which  forms  the  coal-field  of 
the  Donetz,  is  already  known  to  extend  in  a  north-westerly  or  west-north- 
westerly direction  for  about  370  kilometers,  with  a  maximum  breadth 
of  160  kilometers.  An  admirable  account  of  it  has  been  given  by 
Tschernyschew  and  Lutugin.  From  the  upper  Devonian,  with  which  the 
great  series  begins,  up  to  the  base  of  the  horizontally  bedded  Tertiary, 
there  is  a  complete  absence  of  unconformity.  Nevertheless  certain 
members,  as,  for  example,  the  Trias  and  lower  Cretaceous,  are  without 
definite  representatives.  Even  at  the  base  of  the  upper  Carboniferous 
or  the  Permian,  so  frequently  characterized  by  unconformity,  no  sign  of 
disturbance  is  to  be  found  in  this  area.  The  more  southerly  parts  of  the 
coal-field  consist,  at  least  in  the  basin  of  the  Kalmjuss,  of  older  sediments, 
such  as  the  upper  Devonian  and  the  lower  divisions  of  the  Carboniferous, 
and  are  characterized  by  comparatively  horizontal  bedding,  strike  faults, 
and  troughs.  It  is  only  towards  the  middle  of  the  region  that  folding 
sets  in,  and  there  a  so-called  master  anticline  occurs,  as  well  as  elliptical 
dome-shaped  saddles  (brachy-anticlines),  saddles  with  a  steeper  south  limb, 
and  finally  close  and  crushed  folds  which  owe  their  character  to  repeated 
alternations  of  rocks  of  very  difierent  degrees  of  resistance,  and  to  the 
formation  of  thrust-planes  and  fractures^. 

Borissjak  has  described  the  manner  in  which  these  close  folds  disappear 
to  the  north-west  in  the  direction  of  Ussjum.  They  are  completely  worn 
down  to  a  plain,  on  the  surface  of  which  the  anticlines  appear  as  isolated 
ellipses  striking  to  the  north-west,  and  presenting  a  more  or  less  concentric 
structure,  generally  with  a  steeper  south  limb.  The  older  sediments  are 
more  intensely  folded,  the  younger — at  any  rate  the  Cretaceous — less  so. 
Finally  the  whole  system  descends  below  the  surrounding  Oligocene  ^, 

structure  of  the  basin  of  the  River  Medwjeditza  and  the  Lower  Volga,  Bull.  Soc.  Imp. 
Nat.  Moscou,  1901,  pp.  221-231 ;  Traces  of  mountain-forming  processes  on  the  Don, 
between  the  plains  of  Kljetzkaia  and  near  the  Three  Islands,  Izviestija  Imp.  Obsch.  Luhet. 
Estest.  Antrop.  Etnogr.  Moskwa,  1901,  pp.  1-5,  Bull.  Com.  geol.  Russie,  1903,  XXII,  p.  250. 
The  meeting-place  of  the  Yergeni  mountains  and  the  Manytch  probably  lies  in  about 
lat.  44°  50' E.  (Ill,  p.  361). 

*  T.  Tschernyschew  et  L.  Loutougin,  Le  Bassin  du  Donetz,  Guide  des  Excurs.  du  VIP 
Congres  Geol.,  1897,  XVI,  55  pp.,  maps.  It  is  true  that  in  some  places  in  the  south  the 
Cretaceous  rests  directly  upon  the  Carboniferous,  although  it  there  presents  steep  angles 
of  inclination.  P.  P.  Piatnitzky,  Observations  on  the  Cretaceous  Beds  of  the  Don  and 
the  left  bank  of  the  Dnjepr,  Report  of  the  University  of  Charkow,  1889,  III,  178  pp.,  in 
particular  p.  145.  In  the  interior  of  European  Russia,  Karpinsky  suspects  the  presence 
of  similar  traces,  Bull.  Acad.  Imp.  Sci.  Saint-Petersb.,  1907,  pp.  243-246.  I  did  not  think 
that  the  Sandomir  mountains  should  be  referred  here. 

2  A.  Borissjak,  Ueber  die  Tektonik  des  Donez-Hdhenzuges  in  seinen  nordwestlichen 


CH.I]        PROLONGATION  OF  THE  CAUCASUS  11 


The  Dniepr  follows  the  south  margin  of  the  coal-field,  and  even  as  far 
up  this  river  as  Kanev  disturbances  have  been  observed  in  the  Jurassic 
and  Cretaceous^. 

Here,  according  to  existing  data,  between  lats.  31°  and  32°  E.,  the  zone 
of  dislocations  which  starts  from  the  Manytch  comes  to  an  end. 

Prolongation  of  the  Caucasus.  Let  us  turn  next  to  the  south  side  of 
the  horst  of  Azov. 

In  our  first  attempt  to  determine  the  course  taken  by  the  Asiatic 
trend-lines,  as  they  proceed  towards  the  west,  we  marked  one  of  them  as 
extending  from  the  Caucasus  towards  Kertch,  with  a  bend  in  the  Crimea 
from  north-west  to  south-west  (I,  p.  463,  PI.  V).  At  the  same  time  we 
called  attention  to  the  greater  age  of  the  Crimean  fragment  as  compared 
with  the  later  movements  of  the  Caucasus.  The  mountains  of  Matchin  in 
the  Dobrudja  were  left  as  an  unsolved  problem  (I,  pp.  472,  476). 

The  Caucasus  is  distinguished  from  other  chains  by  many  peculiarities 
of  structure.  Its  rectilinear  course  seems,  as  previously  pointed  out,  to 
mark  it  as  a  branch  of  the  Thian-shan.  Sarmatian  beds  have  been  carried 
up  with  the  chain  to  a  height  of  2,200  meters.  Its  middle  part  may  be 
described  as  a  great  fold,  overturned  to  the  south-west.  In  the  south-east 
the  southern  part  disappears  below  the  valley  of  the  Eiom. 

Recent  observations — in  particular  the  discovery  of  Pseudomonotis 
ochotica  and  the  Rhaetic  stage — have  added  many  details  to  our  knowledge 
of  this  range  2,  but  they  have  scarcely  modified  the  general  description 
which  we  owe  to  Abich,  at  least  as  regards  its  leading  features.  Yet  with 
such  a  structure  it  is  still  perplexing  to  find  the  Mesozoic  sediments  of  the 
south  so  difierent  in  character  from  those  of  the  north.  Probably  the 
amount  of  the  overthrusting  towards  the  south  is  very  considerable. 

Folds  of  Sarmatian  age,  and  even  of  more  recent  date,  are  present  on 
both  sides  of  the  mountains.  In  the  south  they  are  overfolded  from  the 
north  along  with  the  older  sediments.  They  follow  the  north  border  of 
the  mountains  with  considerable  regularity,  as  may  be  seen,  for  instance, 
near  Derbent^  and  Stavropol.    Abich  was  aware  that  the  folds  of  the 

Auslaufern,  Centralbl.  f.  Min.,  1903,  pp.  644-649,  map,  and  Geologische  Skizze  des  Kreises 
Isjum,  Mem.  Com.  geol.  Russie,  Nouv.  ser.,  Livre  3,  1905,  423  pp.,  map.  Some  of  these 
domes  form  an  exception  and  are  steeper  towards  the  north  ;  the  last,  lying  furthest  to 
the  north-west,  is  cut  through  transversely  by  a  meridional  flaw,  which  is  later  than 
a  part  of  the  Tertiary  series, 

^  I,  p.  468 ;  Karitzky  thought  he  only  perceived  local  downslips.  Rep.  Univ.  Charkow, 
1888,  IX,  pp.  381-394.  Laskarew  seems  to  include  them  in  the  marginal  disturbances 
of  the  Podolian  horst. 

2  T.  Tschernyschew,  Discovery  of  the  Upper  Trias  in  the  North  Caucasus,  Izviestija  Acad. 
Imp.  Sci.  Saint-Petersb.,  1907,  pp.  277-280.  The  occurrence  of  Spirigera  Manzovinii 
and  other  species  which  belong  to  Asia  Minor  is  remarkable. 

^  A  steep  isolated  fold  of  Sarmatian  rocks  which  is  overturned  above  Derbent  in  the 


12    ENTRY  OP  THE  ALTAIDES  INTO  EUROPE  [paet  v 


north  side  are  continued  in  an  arc  slightly  convex  to  the  north  across  the 
north-western  extremity  of  the  range,  and  the  trend-line  on  PI.  V  is  based 
on  this  observation. 

The  Caucasus  terminates  near  Anapa  in  ranges  of  Cretaceous  Flysch 
with  a  north-west  strike^.  North  of  this  locality  we  enter  the  region 
investigated  by  Andrussow^. 

Parallel  to  the  Caucasus  runs  a  northern  group  of  late  Tertiary  folds 
which  passes  through  Temriuk  into  the  northern  half  of  the  Taman 
peninsula,  assuming  at  the  same  time  an  east  and  west  strike ;  with  this 
direction  it  crosses  the  strait  of  Kertch,  forms  the  northern  half  of  the 
peninsula,  and  bends  in  a  gentle  arc  to  the  west-south-west ;  it  then  loses 
in  importance,  and  terminates  on  reaching  the  Crimean  steppe. 

A  southern  group  of  folds  adapts  itself  at  first  to  the  northern  group 
and  fills  the  interval  between  this  and  the  north  foot  of  the  Caucasus.  It 
strikes  into  the  southern  half  of  Taman,  gradually  diverges  from  the 
direction  of  the  northern  folds,  and,  assuming  a  south-westerly  direction 
along  the  south-west  coast  of  Taman,  proceeds  into  the  south-east  part  of 
the  peninsula  of  Kertch,  to  disappear  beneath  the  Black  Sea. 

The  angle  between  these  divergent  groups  of  folds  is  occupied  by 
a  plain  which  forms  the  south-west  of  Kertch,  and  is  separated  from  the 
folds  by  the  Parpatsh  scarp.  This  plain  may  be  regarded  as  a  sort  of 
apron  or  as  a  glacis  of  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  Crimean  mountains. 
Near  Theodosia  this  eastern  extremity  shows  an  outcrop  of  Tithonian 
rocks. 

Andrussow  originally  supposed  that  the  folds  were  formed  during  the 
interval  between  the  Sarmatian  and  the  Maeotic  stages.  Subsequently 
unconformities  observed  at  different  horizons  led  him  to  conclude  that  the 
folding  and  denudation  might  have  been  to  some  extent  simultaneous,  and 
might  perhaps  have  continued  even  into  post-Pontic  times.  Overfolding 
has  taken  place  in  the  direction  of  the  principal  chain,  i.  e.  in  the  Asiatic 
direction  towards  the  south  or  south-east. 

Here  nature  ofiers  us  an  instructive  illustration  of  the  way  in  which 
recent  folds  are  divided  into  divergent  fascicles,  instead  of  being  dammed 

opposite  direction  to  tlie  north-west  suggests  by  its  curious  structure  the  gliding  back 
of  inclined  beds.  D.  W.  Golubiatnikow,  Geological  observations  in  the  Naphtha  regions 
of  the  district  of  Kaitago-Tabasaran,  Bull.  Com.  geol.  Russie,  1902,  XXI,  pp.  697- 
754. 

^  S.  Nikitin,  Geological  structure  of  the  district  of  Noworossiisk,  Bull.  Com.  geol. 
Russie,  1902,  XXI,  pp.  653-670. 

2  N.  Andrussow,  Geotectonics  of  the  Peninsula  of  Kertsch,  Mater.  Geol.  Russie,  1893, 
XVI,  pp.  1-272,  map;  Environs  de  Kertsch,  Guide  du  Congr.  geol.,  1897,  XXX  (map  of 
the  trend-lines) ;  Geological  investigations  in  the  Kuban  region,  Travaux  Soc.  Nat.  Saint- 
Petersb.,  1899,  XXVIII,  pp.  179-214  ;  Geological  observations  on  the  Peninsula  of 
Taman,  Mater.  Geol.  Russie,  1904,  XXI,  pp.  257-381,  map  et  passim. 


THE  CRIMEA 


13 


back,  by  an  alien  ancient  range  (Theodosia).     The  northern  fascicle 

terminates  in  free  ends,  the  southern  descends  beneath  the  sea. 

At  Opuk,  off  the  south  coast  of  Kertch,  close  to  where  the  Parpatsh 

scarp  reaches  the  sea,  there  emerge  a  number  of  small  and  difficultly 
I  accessible  '  Klippen the  Korabli  (caravels,  ships).  Dubois  was  already 
'    aware  that  they  consist  of  a  crystalline  rock,  foreign  to  the  neighbourhood. 

Andrussow  mentions  loose  fragments  of  amygdaloidal  rock  with  zeolites, 

phyllites,  &c.,  as  occurring  on  the  adjacent  coast ;  von  Vogdt  regards  the 

Korabli  as  a  remnant  of  the  Crimean  mountains, 
j         Crimea  and  the  Bulgarian  platform.    The  bifurcation  of  the  younger 

folds  of  the  Caucasus  has  been  caused  by  the  fragment  of  a  larger  chain. 

If,  in  proceeding  to  the  south,  we  approach  this  fragment  from  the 


Fig.  1.    The  Strait  of  Kertch  (after  Andrussow).    The  strong  lines  indicate 
late  Tertiary  anticlines. 


Crimean  steppe,  we  shall  pass  over  Miocene  beds,  Nummulitic  limestone 
and  the  entire  Cretaceous  system,  including  the  lower  Neocomian,  all 
dipping  very  gently  to  the  north.  The  Caprotina  limestone  (lower 
Cretaceous)  rises  in  steep  basset  edges,  which  face  towards  the  south — 
that  is,  in  the  direction  of  the  mountains. 

The  Neocomian  lies  unconformable  and  fairly  flat  on  folded  Lias  and 
Oolites  (I,  p.  474).  These  beds,  together  with  some  remarkable  laccolites, 
look  as  though  they  formed  the  whole  folded  range  of  the  Crimea,  but  this 
is  not  the  case,  since  von  Vogdt  has  discovered  at  Simpheropol  and  east 
of  this  town  an  older  series.  This  includes  upper  Carboniferous  limestone 
with  Schwagerina,  conglomerate  and  sandstone  with  land  plants,  shales 


U   ENTEY  OF  THE  ALTAIDES  INTO  EUROPE  [paet  v 


with  Pseudomonotis  ochotica,  and  lower  Lias  of  the  Hierlatz  type  (East 
Alps).  Then  follows  the  widely  extended  Jurassic  system^.  Patches  of 
Lias  rest  unconformably  upon  Trias.  Von  Yogdt  compares  the  mountains 
of  the  Crimea  with  those  of  Matchin  (Dobrudja) ;  both  are  of  a  relatively 
great  age,  and  present  a  similar  succession  of  strata.  In  the  south-western  I 
extremity  of  the  coast,  near  Phoros,  Borissjak  still  observed  Pseudomonotis 
ochotica  ^.  To  the  east,  near  Theodosia,  the  strike  of  the  folds  is  east  and 
west,  near  Simpheropol  it  is  N.  75°  E.,  and  towards  the  south-west  of  the 
peninsula  it  becomes  north-east.  The  folds  form  an  arc  slightly  convex 
to  the  north-west.  At  the  same  time  two  considerable  disturbances  of 
different  date  may  be  recognized,  one  between  the  Trias  and  Lias,  the  other 
between  the  Jurassic  and  Neocomian.  Unconformities  have  been  observed 
in  even  younger  beds.  Their  number  is  surprisingly  great;  it  looks  as 
though  the  folding  had  been  repeatedly  renewed  under  different  conditions. 

At  several  places  in  Bulgaria  the  upper  Jurassic,  which  is  unknown  at 
the  base  of  the  Crimean  steppe,  has  been  observed  by  Peters  and  Athanasiu 
at  the  base  of  the  limestone  plateau  which  joins  on  to  the  mountains  of 
Matchin  on  the  south  ^.  Above  the  upper  Jurassic  there  is  a  remarkable 
correspondence  between  the  stratified  series  of  the  Crimean  steppe  and  of 
the  Bulgarian  platform. 

The  Requiena  limestone  (lower  Cretaceous)  has  been  mentioned  above 
as  cropping  out  on  the  south  side  of  the  steppe ;  Toula  recognized  it  near 
Tchernavoda,  and  yet  further  away,  extending  over  a  very  wide  area. 

Near  Inkermann  and  Sebastopol,  Senonian  of  the  northern  type  overlies 
lower  Cretaceous  of  the  southern  type ;  it  also  extends  over  the  Bulgarian 
platform 

The  Nummulitic  limestone  of  Varna  has  been  described  by  Favre  as 

1  K.  K.  von  Vogdt,Travaux  See.  Nat.  Saint-Petersb.,  1901,  XXXII,  Protocol,  pp.  302-304 
(sitting  of  Nov.  3,  1901).  Crystalline  rocks  mentioned  as  coming  from  the  Crimea  appear 
to  be  inclusions  in  the  Neocomian.  I  am  indebted  to  Herr  von  Vogdt  for  valuable  letters 
and  sketches. 

2  Borissjak,  Bull.  Com.  geol.  Russie,  1904,  XXIII,  p.  20. 

^  Michel  was  probably  the  first  to  recognize  Neocomian  in  this  region  (Bull.  Soc.  geol. 
France,  1855-1856,  XIII,  pp.  539-542),  and  his  view  has  been  adopted  by  Toula;  Peters 
thought  he  identified  upper  Jurassic.  V.  Paquier  (Bull.  Soc.  geol.  de  Fr.,  1901,  4®  ser.,  I, 
pp.  473  and  541),  and  Douville  (tom.  cit.  p.  474),  have  gone  into  this  question.  Both 
formations  are  present.  Athanasiu  has  recognized  Rauracian,  Sequanian,  and  Kimeridge 
beneath  the  limestone  with  Monopleura  (op.  cit.,  1896,  3«  ser.,  XXIV,  pp.  595-601),  also 
upper  Jurassic  near  Costanza  (Guide  du  Congr.  de  Petrole,  1907,  V,  p.  248).  See  in  par- 
ticular Simionescu,  Stud.  geol.  si  pal.  din  Dobrogea  I,  Acad.  Bucur.,  1907,  No.  XXI, 
97  pp.  (in  the  Roumanian  language). 

E.  Favre,  ^tude  stratigraphique  de  la  partie  sud-ouest  de  la  Crimee,  4°,  Geneve,  1877, 
p.  30  ;  Hebert,  La  craie  de  la  Crimee  comparee  a  celle  de  Meudon  et  a  celle  de  I'Aqui- 
taine,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  Russie,  1876,  3«  ser.,  V,  pp.  99-102  ;  F.  Toula,  Geologische  Unter- 
Buchungen  im  Ost-Balkan,  Denkschr.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1890,  LVII,  p.  381,  section 
of  the  table  mountain  at  Provadia. 


CH.  I]  THE  EASTERN  BALKANS  15 

the  direct  continuation  of  the  Nummulitic  limestone  of  the  south-western 
part  of  the  Crimea  \ 

Toula  has  shown  the  identity  of  the  Miocene  series  of  Varna  with  that 
of  Sebastopol  (Helix-beds,  Pecten-oolite,  Spaniodon  beds,  Sarmatian)  (I, 
p.  489)2. 

Up  the  Danube,  as  at  Silistria  and  Kustchuk,  Toula  still  met  with  the 
Kequiena  limestone.  At  Sistov,  Zlatarski  and  Toula  collected  fossils  of  the 
Aptian  stage.  At  Nikopoli,  Senonian  occurs  on  the  river  with  Belemnitella 
mucTonata  and  Ostrea  vesicularis. 

The  lower  divisions  of  the  Tertiary  are  not  visible,  and  at  Plevna  the 
second  Mediterranean  stage  rests  on  Senonian  and  Turonian^. 

Following  the  Danube  towards  the  interior,  we  meet  with  beds  of 
increasingly  recent  age.  The  enclosed  low-lying  land  to  the  west,  from 
about  Crajova  onwards,  is  termed  by  Mrazec  the  Getan  depression. 

The  Balkans  and  Carpathians,  The  Bulgarian  platform,  traversed  in 
its  western  part  by  only  very  gentle  folds  with  an  east  and  west  strike, 
represents  the  foreland  of  the  Balkans,  bounded  on  the  west  by  the  great 
region  of  torsion  which  proceeds  from  the  Balkans  to  the  Carpathians. 

This  vast  structure,  marvellously  clear  as  regards  its  principal  features 
(fig.  48, 1,  p.  482),  has  recently  been  made  the  subject  of  three  comprehensive 
memoirs  which  mutually  supplement  each  other.  The  first  is  by  Cvijic,  and 
refers  chiefly  to  the  Balkans  and  the  region  south  of  the  Danube.  The 
second  is  the  work  of  Schafarzik ;  it  describes  in  detail  the  middle  part 
of  the  region  of  torsion.  Finally  there  is  the  somewhat  earlier  treatise 
by  Inkey  which  links  on  with  the  excellent  work  of  the  Roumanian 
geologists 

'  E.  Favre,  op.  cit.,  p.  34. 

2  Toula  in  several  places,  in  particular  Geologische  Untersuchungen  im  Ost-Balkan, 
Denkschr.  K.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1890,  LVII,  p.  369,  and  op.  cit.,  1896,  LXIII,  p.  280. 

'  G.  N.  Zlatarski,  Beitrage  zur  Geologic  des  Nord-Balkan-Vorlandes  zwischen  den 
Flussen  Isker  und  Jantra,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1886,  XCIII,  I.  Abth.,  pp.  249-341, 
in  particular  pp.  292  and  307 ;  F.  Toula,  Denkschr.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1889,  LV, 
pp.  1-108,  map,  in  particular  pp.  2  and  91,  and  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1904,  LIV, 
pp.  1-46  ;  Zlatarski,  Die  Oberkreide-Serie  im  Central-  und  West-Balkan,  Jahrb.  Univ. 
Sophia,  1904,  1905,  21  pp.,  and  Das  Senon  in  Ost-Bulgarien,  im  Norden  des  Balkan,  und 
seine  Theilungim  Emscher  und  Aturien,  op.  cit.  (1905, 1906),  1907, 21  pp.  In  East  Bulgaria, 
Central  European  Senonian  (Belemnitella  mucronata)  almost  exclusively  north  of  the 
Balkans ;  and,  in  the  Balkans,  Mediterranean  Senonian  {Orbitoides,  Hippurites)  with  a 
gradual  transition  to  the  former.   (In  the  Bulgarian  language.) 

*  J.  Cvijic,  Die  tektonischenVorgange  in  der  Rhodope-Masse,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.Wiss.Wien, 
1901,  CX,  pp.  409-432,  map  ;  Die  Tektonik  der  Balkanhalbinsel,  C.  R.  Congr.  geol.,  1903, 
Wien,  1904,  pp.  347-370,  map  ;  F.  Schafarzik,  Kurze  Skizze  der  geologischen  Verhaltnisse 
und  Geschichte  des  Gebirges  am  Eisernen  Tore,  Foldt.  KozL,  1903,  XXXIII,  44  pp.,  maps ; 
B.  von  Inkey,  Die  Transsylvanischen  Alpen  vom  Rothenthurmpasse  bis  zum  Eisernen 
Thor,  Math.  u.  naturw.  Ber.  aus  Ungarn,  1891,  IX,  pp.  20-54.  For  all  subsequent  publi- 
cations we  may  refer  to  F.  Toula,  Der  gegenwartige  Stand  der  geologischen  Erforschung 
der  Balkanhalbinsel  und  des  Orientes,  C.  R.  IX.  Congr.  Intern.,  Wien,  1904,  pp.  175-330. 


16    ENTRY  OF  THE  ALTAIDES  INTO  EUEOPE  [part  v 


The  older  range  in  the  middle  of  the  Balkan  peninsula  approaches  from 
the  south  through  Servia ;  at  Nish  it  meets  the  west  border  of  the  region 
of  torsion  which  is  overfolded  towards  the  west ;  then  the  boundary  is 
formed  approximately  by  the  Morava ;  finally  it  crosses  the  Danube  and 
disappears  beneath  the  Hungarian  plain. 

In  the  south  this  ancient  range  is  distinguished  from  all  the  more 
recent  deposits  by  an  unconformable  mantle  which  begins  with  the 
Priabona  stage.  The  Strandcha  range,  near  the  Black  Sea^,  is  also  partly 
covered,  according  to  SchafFer's  accounts,  by  patches  of  this  mantle.  It  is 
separated  from  the  Balkans  by  the  wedge-shaped  eruptive  mass  of  Burgas. 

In  the  eastern  Balkans  the  folding,  as  already  shown  by  Toula's  surveys, 
is  recent  and  open.  No  beds  older  than  the  Jurassic  occur  in  the  anticlines, 
and  even  these  but  seldom.  Broad  undisturbed  plains  intervene  between 
the  folds  (aptygmatic  valleys,  Cvijic);  and  as  late  as  the  Levantine  period 
the  folding  was  still  in  progress.  These  are  indications  of  an  adjacent  free 
extremity.  At  the  same  time  the  northern  border  is  sharply  defined 
against  the  Bulgarian  platform  and  in  places  it  is  overfolded  towards  the 
north. 

Further  to  the  west  the  folding  becomes  closer,  and  Mesozoic  anticlines 
are  more  numerous.  Elongated  cores,  evidently  of  pre-Permian  age, 
are  included  within  the  Mesozoic  folds.  This  may  be  seen  from  Toula's 
section  on  the  Kom  and  his  observations  in  the  gorge  of  the  Isker.  The 
data  furnished  by  Zlatarski  ^  and  Bontscheff  ^  are  also  of  importance. 

BontschefF's  observations  show  that  in  the  Balkans,  north-east  of  Sophia, 
slates,  including  upper  Silurian  graptolite  beds,  and  steeply  overfolded  to 
the  north,  are  covered  unconformably  by  Culm  with  characteristic  plant 
remains,  and  the  Culm  is  succeeded,  also  unconformably,  by  Verrucano  and 
the  Mesozoic  series.  Both  the  unconformities,  which  are  characteristic  of 
the  Altaides,  thus  occur  in  precisely  the  same  manner  as  they  do  in  Asia, 
in  the  south  Thian-shan,  for  example  (p.  2) ;  and  we  might  therefore  ask 
whether  the  older  Altaides  have  already  attained  their  separation  from  the 
Alpine  chains  at  this  place,  or  whether  both  are  still  united  in  the  Asiatic 
direction.  The  European  folding  to  the  north-east  is  opposed  to  the  latter 
supposition. 

The  north-westerly  strike  now  becomes  increasingly  manifest ;  at  Belo- 
gradchik  Sarmatian  beds,  vertically  upturned,  occur  on  the  concave  border. 

^  F.  SchafFer,  Die  geologischen  Ergebnisse  einer  Reise  in  Thrakien  im  Herbste  1902, 
Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1904,  CXIII,  pp.  104-118,  map. 

^  Zlatarski,  Contributions  to  the  geology  of  the  gorge  of  the  Isker,  from  Sophia  to 
Roman  and  the  surrounding  district,  Trud.  Bulg,  Naturf.  Ges.,  1904,  II,  93  pp.,  map.  (In 
the  Bulgarian  language.) 

^  St.  Bontscheff,  Geology  of  the  West  Balkans :  I.  The  Silurian  Formation  in  the  defile 
of  the  Isker  and  its  neighbourhood,  Trud.  Bulg.  Naturf.  Ges.,  1906,  III,  pp.  34-65,  map. 
(In  the  Bulgarian  language.) 


THE  IRON  GATES 


17 


This  is  occasionally  overthrust  towards  the  east,  as  the  west  border  is 
t  towards  the  west. 

At  the  same  time  an  independent  range  of  Mesozoic  folds  runs  to 
,    the  north-north- west  from  the  region  between  KUstendjil  and  the  Vitosh. 

This  is  separated  at  first  from  the  main  range  of  the  Balkan  folds  by  the 
;  younger  eruptive  mass  of  the  Visker,  as  well  as  by  the  Vitosh,  but  afterwards 
!  joins  it  at  an  acute  angle  between  Pirot  and  Nish.  After  this  encounter 
'   the  main  range  continues  on  its  course  with  many  subordinate  deflexions 

and  reaches  the  Danube  with  a  north  and  south  strike. 
I        Meanwhile,  north-east  of  the  volcanic  mass  of  Zajcar,  on  the  Timok,  a 
;   series  of  fresh  coulisses  make  their  advance ;  these  represent  the  beginning 
I  of  the  Carpathians  of  Roumania. 

I  We  now  take  Schafarzik  as  our  guide,  though  there  is  but  little  here  of 
I  importance. 

I        The  western  coulisses,  which  according  to  our  nomenclature  might  still, 
•   perhaps,  be  included  in  the  Balkans,  are  wedged  in,  north  of  the  Danube, 
'   between  the  ancient  masses  in  the  west  (Lokva,  Bogsan)  and  the  eastern 
I   ranges  which  accompany  them  from  Timok,  but  they  do  not  reach  the  river 
Temes.    Of  the  eastern  ranges,  the  first  is  the  most  important ;  it  is  the 
I  range  of  the  Almas  (I,  p.  484)  and  the  Krass<5-Szorenye  mountains ;  it  con- 
f  sists  of  crystalline  schist,  and  forms  a  broad  arc  which  extends  from  Timok 
to  the  north  side  of  the  Retyezat  range,  and  perhaps  even  into  the  north 
part  of  the  transverse  valley  of  the  river  Alt^.    This  arc  embraces,  first 
several  ancient  fragments,  such  as  the  Retyezat  range,  then  the  gabbro 
boss  of  the  Jdcz  on  the  Danube,  and  further  away  all  the  remaining  arcs 
from  the  Timok  and  Mehadia  out  into  the  plain. 

Inkey,  in  1891,  pointed  out  that  some  of  the  western  coulisses  occur  in 
H,  the  valley  of  the  Alt,  but  he  also  perceived  that  within  the  mountains  (in 
the  upper  Latoritza  valley,  right  tributary  of  the  Lotru)  a  bend  occurs  in 
the  strike,  accompanied  by  an  overthrust  of  older  beds  on  to  younger  2. 
Subsequently  Mrazec  showed  that  no  small  part  of  the  rocks  assigned  to 
the  crystalline  schists  are  of  Carboniferous  or  Permo-Carboniferous  age; 

I he  observed  pinched-in  beds,  and  conjectured  the  presence  of  overthrust 
I  flakes  ^.    Next  Murgoci  described  the  great  mountains  of  Roumania  in  the 
I  region  of  the  Paring^.    In  1903  Mrazec  brought  before  the  Geological 
I     1  F.  Schafarzik,  Die  geologischen  Verhaltnisse  der  Umgebung  von  Borlova  und 
I  Pojana-Morul,  Jahresb.  k.  uiig.  geol.  R.-Anst.,  1898,  pp.  120-156,  map ;  and  Ueber  die 
I  geologischen  Verbaltnisse  der  siidwestlichen  Umgebung  von  Klopotiva  und  Malomviz, 
I  op.  cit.,  1901,  pp.  120-155,  map,  et  passim, 
i     ^  B.  V.  Inkey,  Die  Transsylvanischen  Alpen  vom  Rotbenthurmpasse  bis  zum  Eisernen 
I  Thor,  Math.  u.  naturw.  Ber.  aus  Ungarn,  p.  33. 
i    ^  L.  Mrazec,  Uber  die  Anthracitbildungen  des  Siid-Ablianges  der  Siid-Karpathen,  Anzeig. 
|f  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  Dec.  19,  1895,  pp.  278-281. 
*  G.  Munteanu-Murgoci,  Dare  de  seama  de  Cere,  geol.,  1898 ;  V.  Grupul  sup.  al 

SOIiLAS  IV  Q 


18  ENTRY  OP  THE  ALTAIDES  INTO  EUROPE  [paetv 


Congress  at  Vienna  the  general  conclusions  to  which  he  had  been  led  ^ ;  and 
finally  Murgoci  arrived  at  a  synthesis  which  embraces  the  western  half  of 
the  Carpathians  of  Roumania  2. 

The  area  under  consideration  includes  the  mountains  which  extend  from 
the  Danube  to  within  about  30  kilometers  of  the  transverse  valley  of  the 
Alt  (fig.  48,  I,  p.  482),  and  from  the  valley  of  the  Cema  and  the  Zsil  to 
the  southern  foot  of  the  range.  It  will  facilitate  our  attempt  to  explain 
Murgoci's  synthesis  if  we  make  use  of  symbols. 

In  the  region  just  defined  an  ancient  pre-Permian  schist,  II,  occurs,  and 
in  autochthonous  superposition  a  sedimentary  series,  B  (chiefly  Jurassic 
and  lower  Cretaceous  limestone).  There  is  also  another  series  of  ancient 
schists,  I,  and  in  autochthonous  superposition  a  second  sedimentary  series 
A  (Yerrucano,  traces  of  Lias  and  Oolites ;  with  the  Barremian  stage  as 
the  last  member). 

Series  A  is  penetrated  by  frequent  intrusions  of  serpentine  and  other 
basic  rocks ;  we  will  indicate  this  fact  by  the  sign  o-. 

Altogether,  therefore,  there  are  two  tectonic  units  or  sheets,  namely 
I  +  A(T  and  II  +  B. 

An  extensive  area  north-west,  north,  and  north-east  of  this  region  is 
covered  by  II.  On  the  north  side,  starting  from  the  upper  Cerna,  and  then 
proceeding  north  of  the  Paring  range  and  up  to  the  east  side,  i.  e.  to  within 
about  30  kilometers  of  the  Alt,  II  rests  upon  A  a.  This  is  also  the  case  on 
the  east  side  up  to  the  margin  of  the  plain.  In  this  way  an  elongated  oval 
space  is  enclosed.  Below  Ao;  in  the  interior  of  this  space,  its  autochthonous 
foundation  I  is  exposed.  In  many  places  patches  of  II,  owing  to  the  sub- 
sequent folding  of  A  a-,  have  been  preserved  in  synclines.  Thus  II  (and  B 
also)  must  once  have  extended  over  the  whole  region ;  the  succession  from 
above  downwards  is  therefore  jB  +  II,  Act -hi,  and  the  whole  area  must  be 
regarded  as  a  window,  110  to  130  kilometers  in  length  and  more  than  30 
kilometers  in  breadth. 

In  other  words,  north  of  the  Danube,  where  the  great  squeezing-in  due  to 
torsion  ceases,  the  coulisse  II  +  B,  becoming  free,  has  completely  blanketed 
over  the  coulisse  I  +  A,  which  lies  in  front  of  it  towards  the  south,  and  the 
latter  has  been  exposed  by  erosion  in  a  window.  How  far  this  overblanket- 
ing  extends  to  the  north-west  is  at  present  uncertain. 

Cristianul.  in  Masiv.  Parmgu,  Bui.  soc.  ing.  de  mines,  Bukarest,  1899,  III,  28  pp.,  and,  in 
particular,  Les  Serpentines  d'Urde,  Muntin.  et  Gauri  (Massif  du  Paringu),  Ann.  Mus. 
Geol.  Bucuresci,  1898,  69  pp.,  map. 

*  L.  Mrazec,  Sur  les  schistes  ciystallines  des  Carpathes  meridionaux  (Versant  roumain), 
Congr.  geol.  intern.,  C.  R.  IX«  Sess.,  Vienne,  1903,  pp.  631-648,  map. 

^  G.  M.  Murgoci,  La  grande  nappe  de  charriage  des  Carpathes  meridionaux,  C.  R.  3  et 
31  Juillet  et  4  Sept.  1905.  Mrazec's  map  mentioned  in  the  preceding  note  gives  all  the 
necessary  information. 


CH.I]  THE  WINDOW  OF  THE  PAEING 


19 


In  this  case  we  may  regard  o-  as  an  accessory.  The  fact  that  it  was 
injected  beneath  the  thrust-plane  is  instructive  in  its  bearing  on  the  Alps  ^. 
The  injection  has  produced  contact  metamorphosis.  A  later  intrusion  of 
granite,  which  forms  the  ridge  of  Suschita,  and  is  associated  with  I,  reaches 
a  length  of  about  100  kilometers,  with  a  breadth  of  only  8-10  kilometers. 

The  thrust-plane  lies  between  the  Barremian  stage  and  the  Cenomanian ; 
the  intrusion  extends  into  the  Barremian  beds.  The  Cenomanian  is  preceded 
by  so  thoroughgoing  an  unconformity  that  we  may  speak,  in  accordance 
with  Uhlig's  observations  in  other  parts  of  the  Carpathians,  of  an  older 
pre-Cenomanian  structure  and  a  younger  structure ;  the  trend-lines,  however, 
have  on  the  whole  remained  the  same. 

We  may  term  this  region  the  window  of  the  Paring. 

After  the  torsion,  the  bend  to  the  great  Carpathian  arc  follows  on  the 
east.  The  long  gneiss  range  of  the  Cozia,  which  proceeds  from  the  south 
side  of  the  mountains  and  strikes  obliquely  to  the  east-north-east,  marks 
the  transition  (I,  p.  615).  Reinhardt  has  recently  investigated  it  ^.  To  the 
east  ancient  schistose  mountains  follow  once  again. 

An  inbreak,  already  recognized  by  Toula,  marks  off  Monte  Leota,  south 
of  the  Torzburg  pass,  as  an  eastern  fragment.  The  inbreak  itself,  described 
by  Popovici-Hatzeg  and  Simionescu,  is  a  fault-trough  containing  down- 
thrown  Jurassic  and  Cretaceous  beds^.  Monte  Leota  is  the  south-east 
corner-stone  of  the  Carpathians. 

The  border  of  the  south-east  Carpathians.  We  will  begin  our  description 
in  the  north.  The  town  of  Czernowitz  stands  on  Sarmatian  beds  which 
are  underlain  by  bhe  second  Mediterranean  stage.  These  sediments  are 
horizontally  stratified  and  form  a  hilly  country,  which  is  separated  on  the 
south  from  the  folded  Flysch  of  the  Carpathians  by  a  somewhat  narrow 
belt  of  the  salt-bearing  Schlier 

In  northern  Moldavia  the  border  of  the  Carpathians  is  defined  more 
sharply.  According  to  Athanasiu,  a  Sarmatian  platform  extends  from  the 
east  and  north-east  across  the  river  Sereth  to  the  Moldova.    Then  towards 

^  An  enumeration  of  the  earlier  observations  made  by  Szabo,  Hussak,  Roth.  v.  Telegd, 
Tietze,  and  Schafarzik  on  the  occurrence  of  similar  rocks  is  given  by  Mrazec  and  Murgoci 
in  their  description  of  the  Wehrlit  from  M.  Ursu ;  Bull.  Soc.  Sci.  Bucarest,  1897,  no.  3. 

2  M.  Reinhardt,  Der  Cosia-Gneisszug  in  den  Rumanischen  Karpathen,  Bull.  Soc.  Sci. 
Bucarest,  1906,  XVI,  103  pp.,  map. 

^  M.  V.  Popovici-Hatzeg,  Note  preliminaire  sur  les  calcaires  tithoniens  et  neocomiens 
des  districts  de  Muscel,  Dimbovitza  et  Prahova,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  de  Fr.,  1897,  3^  ser.,  XXV, 
pp.  549-553  ;  Sur  I'age  des  Conglomerats  de  Bucegi,  tom.  cit.,  pp.  669-675  ;  and  Etude 
geologique  des  environs  de  Campulung  et  de  Sinaia,  8vo,  Paris,  1898,  220  pp.,  map; 
J.  Simionescu,  Ueber  die  Geologie  des  Quellgebietes  des  Dimboviciora,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol. 
Reichsanst.,  1898,  XLVIII,  pp.  9-51  ;  Ammonites  jurassiques  de  Bucegi,  Ann.  Sci.  Univ. 
Jassy,  1905,  29  pp.,  et  passim. 

*  K.  M.  Paul,  Grundziige  der  Geologie  der  Bukowina,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst., 
1876,  XXVI,  pp.  263-330,  map. 

C  2 


20    ENTEY  OF  THE  ALTAIDES  INTO  EUEOPE  [party  | 

the  south-west  follows  the  '  pre-Carpathian  hilly  land  '  of  the  salt-bearing  j 
Schlier,  increasing  rapidly  in  breadth,  so  that  close  to  the  Neamtzu  brook  j 
(lat.  47°  13'  N.)  it  is  already  20  kilometers  across.  The  Flysch  is  overfolded  | 
to  the  east  over  its  edge  \  I 

Here  we  enter  the  region  which  has  been  investigated  by  Mrazec  and  | 
Teissey re ;  it  embraces  the  whole  of  the  south-eastern  part  of  the  Carpathians  ^.  j 

The  Sarmatian  platform  of  the  foreland  is  here  separated  by  a  fault  I 
from  the  salt-bearing  beds.  This  fracture  becomes  so  important  that  even 
south  of  Bakau  (south  of  the  confluence  of  the  Bystritza  with  the  Sereth) 
the  Flysch  crops  out  along  it  at  two  places  far  outside  the  border  of  the 
Carpathians  ^.  The  salt-bearing  beds  lie,  broadly  speaking,  in  a  syncline 
with  many  subsidiary  folds,  for  the  most  part  overturned. 

Still  further  south  (south  of  the  river  Trotus)  the  pressure  from  the 
side  of  the  Carpathians  becomes  yet  stronger;  even  the  Sarmatian  beds 
on  the  margin  of  the  platform  are  steeply  upturned.  The  salt-bearing 
beds  lie  closely  folded  between  the  Sarmatian  border  in  the  east  and  the 
flakes  of  Flysch  in  the  west. 

Still  further  south  again,  near  the  bend  of  the  Carpathians,  in  the 
region  of  Rimnik-Sarat,  the  scene  once  more  changes.  Here  we  look 
towards  the  end  of  the  Matchin  range  (Dobrudja),  about  100  kilometers 
distant.  The  range  of  Sarmatian  hills  which  has  marked  the  west  border 
of  the  platform  disappears ;  a  fresh  Sarmatian  range  rises  to  the  north-east 
of  it.  For  a  long  distance  this  follows,  in  correspondence  with  the  bend, 
a  direction  to  the  south-west.  At  the  same  time  synclines  of  Sarmatian 
rest  directly  upon  the  salt-bearing  beds;  here  then  the  folding  is  post- 
Sarmatian. 

At  the  bend  of  the  range  the  following  facts  may  be  observed : — 
On  the  upper  course  of  the  Buseu  a  strip  of  Flysch  becomes  gradually 
detached  from  the  outer  margin  of  the  main  mass,  and  proceeds  as  the 
spur  of  Valeni  in  a  gentle  arc,  following  the  bend  of  the  strike  until  it 
finally  breaks  up  into  little  islands  of  Flysch,  which  extend  across  the 
river  Prahova.    In  this  way  a  long  independent  tongue  of  salt-bearing 

'  S.  Athanasiu,  Morphologische  Skizze  der  Nord-Moldauischen  Karpathen,  Bull.  Soc. 
Sci.  Bucarest,  1899,  48  pp.,  map  ;  also  Geologische  Studien,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst., 
1899,  XLIX,  pp.  429-492. 

2  L.  Mrazec  et  W.  Teisseyre,  Aperfu  geologique  sur  les  formations  saliferes  et  les  gise- 
ments  de  sel  en  Roumanie,  Bibl.  du  Moniteur  des  inter.  Petrolif.  Roum.,  4to,  Bucarest, 
1902,  55  pp.,  map  ;  Mrazec,  Das  Salzvorkommen  in  Rumanien,  Oesterr.  Zeitschr.  f.  Berg- 
Huttenw.,  1903,  LI,  19  pp.,  map;  Arbeiten  der  mit  dem  Studium  der  Petrol-Regionen 
betrauten  Commission  (Published  by  the  Royal  Roumanian  Ministry  of  Public  Works), 
4to,  Bukarest,  1904, 104  pp.,  map  (the  authors  are  C.  Alimanestianu,  L.  Mrazec,  and  V.J. 
Bratianu  ;  here  the  younger  anticlines  stand  out  clearly). 

^  Mrazec  and  Teisseyre,  Ueber  oligocane  Klippen  am  Randeder  Karpathen  bei  Bacau, 
Jahrb.  k.k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1901,  LI,  pp.  235-246. 


CH.I]  BOEINGS  FOE  PETEOLEUM  21 

deposits  is  delimited,  forming  the  gulf  of  Slanitza.  Its  northern  boundary 
is  a  fault;  wherever  salt  is  met  with  further  to  the  west  it  belongs  to 
a  prolongation  of  the  gulf  of  Slanitza,  as  though  a  new  fault-trough  had 
originated. 

The  continuation  of  the  spur  to  the  south-west  and  west-south-west 
is  rich  in  petroleum,  consequently  many  borings  have  been  put  down,  and 
it  is  probable  that  the  spur  is  better  known,  thanks  to  the  study  of  these 
by  Mrazec  and  Teisseyre,  than  any  other  free  termination. 

The  axes  of  all  the  folds  which  occur  in  the  spur  descend  beneath  the 
surface,  first  towards  the  south-west  and  then  towards  the  west-south- west. 
During  the  formation  of  the  Miocene  salt  deposits,  a  part  of  the  spur  rose 
above  the  sea  as  a  peninsula.    The  island  of  Cosmina  is  an  anticline  of 


Fig.  2,  The  spur  of  Valeni  after  a  sketch  kindly  communicated  by  Professor  Mrazec 
(Eoc.  u.  Olig.,  Eocene  and  Oligocene  ;  Bucht  von  Slanic,  gulf  of  Slanitza). 

Oligocene  overfolded  to  the  south,  and  overlain  by  Miocene  salt  deposits 
and  gently  folded  Maeotic  beds.  In  the  valley  of  the  Doftana  post- Pontic 
overfolding  occurs.  At  Moreni  even  the  most  recent  Levantine  beds  form 
part  of  an  anticline.  Mrazec  and  Teisseyre  assert  that  the  folding 
extends  into  Quaternary  times.  The  Loess  lies  undisturbed.  As  the 
folds  begin  to  die  out,  i.  e.  towards  the  west-south- west,  beds  of  increasingly 
recent  age  are  included  in  them ;  the  investigators  term  these  *  plis 
mourants';  perhaps  'plis  naissants'  would  be  more  appropriate^.  They 
bear  witness  to  the  persistence  and  constancy  of  the  movement. 

^  The  continuation  of  the  spur  as  an  anticline  slightly  overturned  to  the  south  has 
been  established  by  borings,  Mrazec  and  Teisseyre,  Communic.  prel.  asupra  Structur 
Geol.  a  Reg.  Campina-Bustenari,  Acad.  Bucur.,  1906,  XXVIII,  no.  19,  20  pp.,  map ;  and 


22    ENTEY  OF  THE  ALTAIDES  INTO  EUEOPE  [partv 

As  we  proceed  from  Bukovina  towards  this  point  the  folding  becomes 
more  and  more  recent. 

A  boring  sunk  near  the  bend  of  the  Danube  in  the  district  of  Baragan 
(west-north- west  of  Tchernavoda,  south  of  the  lower  Jalomitza)  reached 
the  base  of  the  Pontic  series  at  a  depth  of  178  meters,  and  of  the  Sarmatian 
at  318  meters;  then,  after  four  meters  of  variegated  clay,  it  entered  what 
appears  to  have  been  upper  Chalk  with  flints  and  continued  in  this  down  to 
783  meters.  No  mention  is  made  of  Eocene  beds  or  of  the  Mediterranean 
stages. 

A  boring  in  Bucharest  revealed  a  great  thickness  of  stratified  sand  and 
clay  containing  Paludina  and  Unio ;  the  first  certain  indication  of  the 
Sarmatian  was  encountered  at  a  depth  of  800  meters,  and  the  boring 
terminated  at  a  depth  of  1,008  meters  in  beds  of  this  stage  ^. 

These  observations  have  led  to  renewed  consideration  of  a  view 
previously  expressed  by  Cobalescu  to  the  effect  that  the  curvilinear  cliff 
on  the  right  bank  of  the  Danube  marks  a  fracture.  Draghic^nu  was  of 
opinion  that  this  hypothetical  line  of  fracture,  supposed  to  extend  from 
Galatz  through  Tchernavoda  to  Sistov,  possibly  even  to  Kalaf at,  '  belongs 
to  the  same  system  as  the  fracture  of  Slanitza'".  Murgoci,  however, 
observes  that  near  Rustchuk  the  Cretaceous  limestone  occurs  on  the  left 
bank  also ;  he  denies  the  existence  of  the  fracture,  and  ascribes  the  cliff 
to  the  action  of  the  river. 

In  any  case  there  is  a  considerable  depression  between  the  Danube  and 
the  Carpathians,  and  below  Hirschova  the  whole  range  of  Matchin  certainly 
descends  in  the  direction  of  this  depression. 

Recent  investigations  in  the  mountains  of  Matchin  have  been  directed 
to  stratigraphical  problems  ^.  A  new  map  has  been  published  by  Pascu  \ 
With  regard  to  their  structure  we  can  only  say  that  they  are  a  fragment 
with  a  strike  passing  from  west  to  west-north- west  near  the  Black  Sea,  and 
becoming  more  and  more  north-west  towards  the  interior.  In  the  south- 
west, greenstone  (according  to  Peters,  diabase-pelite)  is  widely  distributed ; 

Mrazec,  Contribution  a  la  geologic  de  Gura  Ocmtzei-Moreni,Monit. Petrol.  Roum., 20  Sept., 
1905,  pp.  785-789 ;  also  Arbeiten  der  mit  dem  Studium  der  Petrol-Regionen  betrauten 
Commission,  p.  90,  and  in  the  Guide  Congr.  Petrol.,  1907.  Mrazec  observes  that  in  the 
case  of  overthrust  anticlines  the  salt  beds  frequently  break  through  the  saddles  of  the 
upper  beds  and  are  visible  on  the  surface  like  *  Klippen '  (*  transpierced  anticlines '). 

*  Communication  by  Professor  Mrazec  in  the  Acad.  Bucur.,  Feb.  16,  1907  ;  Murgoci, 
Guide  Congr.  Petrol.,  1907,  V,  p.  227. 

'  M.  M.  Draghicenu,  Studii  as  Idrologiei  subterrane  din  Punctul  de  vedere  al  Alimen- 
tarei  Oraselor,  etc.,  4to,  Bukarest,  1895,  181  pp. ;  map,  in  particular  pp.  52  and  54. 

^  K.  A.  Redlich,  Geologische  Studien  in  Rumanien,  II,  Verh.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst., 
1896,  pp.  495-502  ;  V.  Anastasiu,  Le  Trias  de  la  Dobrogea,  Bull.  Soc.  Geol.  de  Fr.,  1897, 
3®  s6r.,  XXV,  pp.  890-894.  A  general  survey  is  given  by  F.Toula,  Fine  geologische  Reise 
in  der  Dobrudscha,  Vortr.  Vereins  naturvsr.  Kenntn.  Wien,  1893,  XXXIII,  62  pp. 

*  R.  Pascu,  Stud.  geol.  si  min.  in  Jud.  Tulcea,  Servic  Minelor,  8vo,  Bucar.,  1904,  50  pp. 


OH.  I]  THE  CIMMERIAN  MOUNTAINS 


23 


in  the  north-east  an  older  series  (phyllites  and  Verrucano  at  Tultcha)  is 
also  present,  and,  in  the  north-west,  gneiss,  which  is  regarded  as  forming 
the  base.  Between  these  rocks  Mesozoic  sediments,  in  bands  of  various 
length,  as  well  as  sheets  of  porphyry  and  melaphyre,  extend  right  out  into 
the  delta.  The  Trias  is  differentiated  into  numerous  zones.  The  upper 
Cretaceous  occurs  in  transgression. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  these  mountains  are  a  fragment  of  a  greater 
complex.  Their  lie  and  their  pre-Cretaceous  age  point  to  a  connexion  with 
the  Crimea.  Following  the  suggestion  of  Mrazec,  we  will  call  this  complex, 
which  embraces  the  Crimean  mountains,  Serpent  island,  and  the  mountains 
of  Matchin  the  Cimmerian  mountains. 

They  are  united  with  the  Bulgarian  platform  and  the  Crimean  steppe. 

In  accordance  with  the  views  of  previous  writers  we  have  regarded 
(I,  p.  475)  the  steep  submarine  slope  between  cape  Emineh  and  cape  Staritch, 
by  which  the  bottom  of  the  Black  Sea  descends  from  —70  or  80  meters 
to  — 1,000  or  1,800  meters,  as  suggesting  an  original  connexion  between  the 
Crimea  and  the  Balkans.  It  does  not  correspond,  however,' with  the  strike ; 
Draghicenu  regards  it  as  the  border  of  a  subsidence,  and  this  view  must 
be  regarded  as  correct. 

In  this  %oay  an  area  is  defined  in  which  all  the  folding  is  older  than 
the  Neocomlan.  It  is  a  fragment  of  Mesozoic  foreland  inserted  between 
the  horst  of  Azov  and  the  younger  folds  of  the  Balkans  and  Carpathians. 
No  other  example  of  such  an  inserted  fragment  has  yet  been  described. 
The  mouths  of  the  Danube  lie  within  it. 

There  is  only  one  structure  which  can  be  regarded  as  the  possible 
continuation  of  the  Cimmerian  mountains:  this  is  the  Mesozoic  ranges 
within  the  Carpathians,  those,  for  instance,  on  the  eastern  side  of  the 
Moldavian  gneiss  mass  and  the  Persany  mountains  in  Transylvania. 

Uhlig  has  shown  that  the  Mesozoic  zone  of  south  Bukovina  and  the 
Moldavian  mass  does  not  possess  the  unilateral  structure  inclined  to  the 
north-east  hitherto  attributed  to  it,  but  that  an  opposed  limb  dipping  to 
the  south-west  exists  on  the  north-east.  Consequently  the  zone  becomes 
a  basin ;  it  loses  its  tectonic  independence,  and  proves  to  be  part  of  a  larger 
structure.  The  Trias  and  Jurassic  systems  are  represented  here  as  in  the 
Cimmerian  mountains.  As  in  the  Crimea,  unconformities  occur  within  the 
series,  and  the  same  transgression  of  the  upper  Cretaceous  is  met  with. 
fcThe  Caprotina  limestone  rests  sometimes  immediately  upon  crystalline 
[schists,  sometimes  upon  Trias  ^. 

I     The  unconformity  between  the  Trias  and  the  Neocomian  (Caprotina 

I  ^  V.  Uhlig,  Vorlaufiger  Bericht  liber  eine  geologische  Reise  in  das  Gebiet  der  goldenen 
[Bistritz,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1889,  XCVIII,  pp.  728-743  ;  and  Ueber  die  Bezie- 
Ihungen  der  siidliclien  Klippenzone  zu  den  Ost-Karpathen,  op.  cit.,  1897,  CVI,  pp.  188- 
1 206,  maps. 


24    ENTEY  OF  THE  ALT  AIDES  INTO  EUEOPE  [party 


limestone),  to  be  seen  in  the  plateau  of  the  Rareu  in  the  Carpathians  of 
Bukovina,  tells  the  same  tale  as  the  upper  Carboniferous  transgression 
on  the  Variscan  cores  of  the  Alps;  both  mark  the  reappearance  of  the 
characters  of  the  foreland. 

We  now  come  to  the  occurrence  of  Cimmerian  rocks  in  the  belt  of  the 
east  Carpathians.  They  have  been  discussed  by  many  investigators ;  last 
of  all  by  Zuber^ 

Uhlig  distinguished  two  zones  of  conglomerates  and  boulders  in  the 
Flysch — an  inner  of  Carpathian  origin,  and  an  outer,  the  boulders  of 
which  are  derived,  according  to  a  unanimous  verdict,  chiefly  from  extra- 
Carpathian  sources. 

White  limestone,  for  the  most  part  no  doubt  Jurassic,  occurs  along  the 
whole  course  of  the  Carpathian  border.  This  is  associated  in  the  west 
with  Sudetic  rocks,  in  the  east  with  a  curious  green  rock,  which  sometimes 
resembles  a  lustrous  phyllite,  and  at  others  is  of  a  harder  and  more  resistant 
nature.  Zuber  regards  it  as  a  dynamically  altered  form  of  the  diabase 
tuff  which  forms  a  broad  zone  in  the  south-west  of  the  Matchin  mountains ; 
he  has,  indeed,  published  a  series  of  sections,  showing  how  these  mountains 
descend  beneath  the  border  of  the  Carpathians  ^, 

Near  Krasna,  in  Bukovina,  Alth  and  Paul  found  on  the  outer  margin 
of  the  Carpathians  a  completely  isolated  patch  of  white  limestone  four 
kilometers  in  length,  and  scarcely  200  meters  in  breadth ;  it  is  sometimes 
breccia-like,  and  rests  on  schist.  The  schist  may  possibly  be  part  of  an 
adjacent  green  agglomerate  which  is  composed  of  angular  fragments  of 
a  schist  precisely  similar  to  it  in  character^. 

Uhlig  describes  the  rock  in  north  Moldavia  as  a  dark  green  chloritic 
schist.  '  We  discover  with  surprise he  says, '  that  whole  mountain  zones 
are  wholly  composed  of  blocks  of  this  rock,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  others. 
This  is  the  case,  for  example,  in  the  zone — about  10  kilometers  in  length, 
and  admirably  exposed — which  lies  between  the  town  and  the  monastery 
of  Niamtz  .  . 

Various  theories  have  been  advanced  in  explanation  of  this  problem. 
Generally  a  '  coastal  bar '  has  been  postulated,  but  it  has  at  length  become 

'  R.  Zuber,  Neue  Karpathenstudien,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1902,  LII,  pp.  245- 
258  ;  here  the  earlier  data  are  enumerated. 

Neminar  described  the  rock  in  1877  as  green  schist  with  many  flakes  of  hornblende, 
becoming  dense  and  massive  as  the  hornblende  increases ;  Paul  and  Tietze  regarded  it 
even  at  that  time  as  quite  alien,  perhaps  in  situ  at  Krasna  in  Bukovina,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol. 
Reichsanat.,  1877,  XXVII,  p.  123 ;  Mrazec  confirms  the  correspondence  of  the  rocks  of 
the  Dobrudja. 

'  Paul,  K.  M.,  Grundziige  der  Geologie  der  Bukowina,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst., 
1876,  XXVI,  p.  318. 

*  V.  Uhlig,  Vorlaufiger  Bericht  iiber  eine  geologische  Reise  in  das  Gebiet  der  goldenen 
BiBtritz,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1889,  XCVIII,  p.  741. 


SUMMAEY 


25 


abundantly  clear  that  we  have  here  the  veritable  remains  of  a  range  which 
belongs  neither  to  the  Carpathians  nor  to  the  Podolian  horst.  Zuber  has 
expounded  this  view,  and  he  terms  the  mountains  of  the  Dobrudja  '  a  third 
fragment  lying  in  front  of  the  Carpathians.' 

Indeed,  the  thrusting  forth  of  intra-telluric  erratics  from  the  buried 
Cimmerian  mountains  would  alone  furnish  an  adequate  explanation. 

Summary.  Of  all  the  branches  which  make  their  appearance  north  of  the 
horst  of  Azov  none  are  continuous  except  the  line  of  the  Alai.  This  retains 
the  rectilinear  course  of  the  Asiatic  chains,  and  also  the  Asiatic  movement 
to  the  south,  so  far  as  this  can  be  inferred  from  the  steeper  dip  of  the 
southern  limb  in  the  anticlines  of  the  coal-measures  on  the  Donetz. 

To  the  south  of  the  horst  of  Azov,  also,  there  is  only  one  line,  that  of  the 
Hindu-kush,  which  can  be  followed  further  with  any  degree  of  clearness. 
The  Caucasus  approaches  with  rectilinear  Asiatic  strike,  and  Asiatic  folding 
to  the  south,  and  plunges  beneath  the  Black  Sea.  Younger  Tertiary  folds, 
thrust  against  it  from  the  north,  divide  into  two  groups  in  front  of  a 
fragment  of  the  Cimmerian  mountains. 

The  Cimmerian  range  lies  up  against  the  horst  of  Azov,  and  narrows 
the  passage  through  which  the  younger  folds  advance. 

The  Balkans  begin  in  the  east  with  feeble  recent  folding  as  though 
approaching  a  free  end ;  further  west,  especially  on  the  Isker,  they  exhibit 
in  enclosed  ancient  cores  the  typical  unconformities  of  the  Altaides ;  they 
surround  the  horst  of  the  Danube  in  the  region  of  torsion,  and  so  pass 
into  the  Carpathians  of  Roumania. 

After  the  squeezing-in  produced  by  the  torsion,  the  coulisses  are  over- 
thrust  towards  the  south,  and  the  window  of  the  Paring  is  formed.  The 
arc  of  the  Carpathians  overwhelms  in  succession  the  Cimmerian  mountains, 
the  Podolian  horst,  the  faulted-down  continuations  of  the  Variscan  fore- 
chains  (Sandomir  mountains),  and  the  Sudetes,  and  then  at  last  turns  to 
the  Alps. 

The  story  of  the  entrance  of  the  Altaides  into  Europe  is  full  of  variety. 
The  pre-Permian  structure  is  certainly  represented  in  the  western  Balkans. 
The  repeated  unconformities  in  the  Mesozoic  Cimmerian  range  may  be 
regarded  as  later  phases  of  this  story.  At  the  present  day  we  have  the 
strange  spectacle  of  the  pre-Permian  and  Mesozoic  chains  (Cimmerian 
range)  broken  up  and  buried  out  of  sight,  while  from  both  sides  the  free 
ends  of  the  younger  chains  stream  towards  the  Pontic  region ;  this  is  the 
case  in  the  Carpathians,  where,  as  we  approach  the  spur  of  Valeni  from  the 
Bukovina,  the  folding  becomes  increasingly  recent ;  it  is  also  the  case  in 
the  east  Balkans,  and  again  on  the  Asiatic  side,  in  the  younger  bifurcate 
folds  of  the  north-west  Caucasus. 

It  seems  almost  as  though  the  ancient  connexion  had  been  interrupted 
d  were  to  be  restored  on  new  lines. 


26    ENTKY  OF  THE  ALTAIDES  INTO  EUEOPE  [party 

Variscan  fractures.  The  Variscan  arc — the  first  part  of  the  European 
Altaides — was  not  a  homogeneous  structure  even  before  it  broke  up  into 
horsts.  It  included  Caledonian  intercalations,  and  it  was  profoundly 
affected  by  a  larger  pre-Cambrian  body  situated  on  its  southern  margin — 
the  Bohemian  basement.  We  have  previously  described  this  as  an  alien 
and  unexplained  fragment  (II,  p.  122).  Since  then  Franz  E.  Suess  has 
determined  its  boundaries  on  the  Variscan  side,  and  has  named  the  most 
ancient  western  part  the  Moldanubian  mass,  and  the  eastern  part,  rich  in 
graphite,  and  also  of  pre-Cambrian  age,  the  Moravian  zone  ^. 

The  Moldanubian  mass  includes  eastern  Bavaria  and  western  and 
southern  Bohemia,  western  Moravia,  the  north  of  Upper  Austria,  and  the 
north-west  of  Lower  Austria.  It  crosses  the  Danube  as  a  broad  highland 
of  gneiss  and  descends  to  a  great  depth  in  front  of  the  Alps.  Near  Wels, 
in  upper  Austria,  17  kilometers  south  of  the  line  where  its  southern  edge 
becomes  visible,  and  26  kilometers  from  the  foot  of  the  Alps,  middle  Tertiary 
sediments  were  bored  through  for  1,037  meters ;  immediately  beneath  them, 
722  meters  below  the  sea  level,  the  cordierite  gneiss  of  Bohemia  was  met 
with,  but  there  were  no  signs  of  the  stratified  series  of  the  Alps  ^. 

A  sudden  change  of  strike,  which  occurs  south  of  the  Marienbad  Spa 
and  may  be  traced  across  the  mountains  towards  Bavaria,  marks  the 
western  boundary  between  this  highland  and  the  Variscan  Fichtelgebirge ; 
it  has  already  been  observed  by  Hochstetter.  In  the  east,  towards  the 
Sudetes,  Bukowsky  has  observed  an  equally  sharp  boundary  in  the  upper 
March  valley ;  but  towards  the  middle  of  Bohemia  the  Cretaceous  mantle 
renders  the  situation  less  clear  ^. 

Caledonian  intercalations  are  known  at  several  places.  Liebe  has  described 
them  in  Thuringia  The  masses  of  Kocroi,  Serpent,  and  the  Hohe  Venn 
(Massif  de  Stavelot)  in  Belgium  afford  an  illustration  on  the  largest  scale 
known  to  us.  Gosselet  has  shown  that  the  horizon  of  the  Llandovery  shares 
their  divergent  strike,  while  the  Devonian  is  unconformably  superposed  ^ 

*  Franz  E.  Suess,  Bau  und  Bild  Oesterreichs,  pp.  39,  275,  314. 

^  R.  J.  Schubert,  Ergebnisse  der  mikroskopischen  Untersuchung  der  bei  der  arar.  Tief- 
bohrung  zu  Wels  durchteuften  Schichten,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1903,  LIII, 
pp.  385-422. 

'  Bukowsky,  Verb.  k.k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1890,  p.  198  et  passim.  The  lower  Palaeozoic 
series  of  western  Bohemia  disappears  not  far  from  Prague  beneath  the  sheet  of  Cretaceous. 
Jahn  established  the  fact  that  it  describes  a  subterranean  arc,  reappears  on  the  west 
border  of  the  Eisengebirge,  and  that  near  Pardubitz  it  has  been  carried  up  in  fragments 
by  the  basalt ;  J.  J.  Jahn,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1898,  XLVIII,  pp.  207-230 ; 
earlier  observations  by  Krejci  suggest  the  same  thing. 

*  K.  T.  Liebe,  Uebersicht  iiber  den  Schichtenauf  bau  Ost-Thiiringens,  Abh.  geol.  Special- 
karte  von  Preussen,  1884,  V,  pp.  401-530,  map,  in  particular  pp.  434  and  441 ;  also 
Zimmermann,  Jahrb.  k.  preuss.  geol.  Landesanst.,  1895,  XV,  p.  Iviii.  Liebe's  so-called 
Frankenwald  system  seems  to  be  explained  by  the  direction  of  the  Franconian  fractures. 

°  J.  Gosselet,  Remarques  sur  la  discordance  du  Devonien  sur  le  Cambrien  dans  le 
massif  de  Stavelot,  Ann.  Soc.  geol.  Nord,  1888,  XV,  pp.  158-161  ;  also  op.  cit.,  1886,  XIII, 


STEIKE  FAULTS 


27 


This  heterogeneous  Variscan  system  is  traversed  by  fractures,  by  far 
the  greater  number  of  which  have  been  produced  within  the  system  itself, 
but  besides  these  there  are  two  groups  of  long  fractures,  which  are  of 
extraneous  and  independent  origin.  One  of  these  groups  strikes  to  the 
north  or  north-north-east,  the  other  to  the  north-west  or  west-north- west. 

Of  the  indigenous  fractures  we  will  cite  only  a  few  instances. 

True  strike  faults  occur  but  seldom,  and  appear  to  be  restricted  to 
the  west. 

The  most  important  example  of  such  faults  is  furnished  by  the  Saar- 
Nake  troughs.  Mining  operations  and  several  excellent  investigations  have 
rendered  it  familiar.  Its  history,  according  to  Lepple,  is  as  follows: — 
After  the  uplift  of  the  folded  Variscan  range,  a  longitudinal  trough  was 
formed  in  which  the  upper  Carboniferous  and  the  Rothliegende  coal- 
measures  accumulated  along  with  sediments  of  local  origin  and  intrusive 
rocks.  Then,  during  the  deposition  of  the  upper  Rothliegende,  a  longitudinal 
anticline,  the  Pfalzer  saddle,  was  formed.  Next,  but  still  before  the  deposi- 
tion of  the  Bunter  sandstone,  the  southern  part  of  the  saddle  sank  along 
a  fault  to  a  depth  of  about  3,000  meters.  After  the  Bunter  sandstone,  and 
perhaps  not  before  the  early  part  of  the  Tertiary  aera,  further  subsidences 
occurred  to  the  extent  of  50  or  100  meters.  Thus  faults  with  a  north-east 
strike  are  known  to  have  been  formed  before  the  upper  Carboniferous  and 
after  the  upper  Rothliegende,  as  well  as  before  and  after  the  Bunter 
sandstone  ^. 

The  trough  strikes  north-east  to  the  Rhine  and  south-west  towards 
France.  Borings  made  in  the  department  of  the  Meurthe-and-Moselle 
reached  the  upper  Carboniferous  at  a  depth  of  between  700  and  800  meters, 
as  Nickles,  guided  by  the  Variscan  strike,  had  predicted  ^. 

p.  288,  and  in  particular  L'Ardenne,  Memoire  pour  servir  a  I'explication  de  la  Carte 
geologique  detaillee  de  la  France,  4to,  1888,  p.  705  et  seq. ;  details  also  in  A.  Dumont, 
Memoire  sur  les  terrains  Ardennais  et  Rhenan,  partie,  Mem.  Acad.  Roy.  Belg.,  1846,  XX, 
pp.  45-92  ;  for  the  Condroz,  G.  Simoens,  De  Findependance  en  Belgique  des  chaines  cale- 
doniennes  et  hercyniennes,  Bull.  Soc.  beige  Geol.  Brux.,  1906,  Proces-Verbaux,  pp.  100-102. 
P.  Foumarier  supposes  that  a  complete  overthrusting  of  the  northern  margin  of  the 
Hoke  Venn  has  taken  place  later  ;  La  structure  du  Massif  de  Theux,  Ann.  Soc.  geol.  Belg. 
Liege,  1906,  XXXIII,  Mem.,  pp.  109-138,  maps;  also  Tectonique  de  I'Ardenne,  op.  cit., 
1907,  XXXIV,  Mem.,  pp.  15-123,  maps,  in  particular  p.  113.  G.  Simoens  describes  indi- 
cations of  the  Caledonian  disturbance  west-north-west  of  Nivelles  outside  the  Variscan 
border ;  Exemple  de  failles  bordieres  du  massif  du  Brabant,  Bull.  Soc.  beige  Geol.  Brux., 
1907,  XXI,  Proc.-verb.  p.  71.  It  does  not  seem  to  be  quite  certain  that  these  accidents 
do  not  belong  to  the  Saharides,  which  will  be  described  later. 

^  A.  Leppla,  Geologische  Skizze  des  Saarbriicker  Steinkohlengebirges,  aus  der  Fest- 
schrift 2  zum  IX.  AUg.  deutsch.  Bergmannstage,  8vo,  Berlin,  1904,  57  pp. 

^  R.  Nickles,  De  1' existence  possible  de  la  Houille  en  Meurthe-et-Moselle,  8vo,  Nancy, 
1902,  24  pp. ;  C.  Cavallier,  Sur  la  decouverte  de  la  Houille  en  Meurthe-et-Moselle,  C.  R., 
March  27,  1905 ;  Nickles,  Sur  la  decouverte  de  la  Houille  a  Abaucourt  (Meurthe-et- 
Moselle),  op.  cit.  and  July  3,  1905  ;  also  Bergeron,  Laur,  and  others. 


28    ENTEY  OP  THE  ALTAIDES  INTO  EUROPE  [paet  v 


If  we  follow  this  direction  further  it  does  not  lead  us  to  the  Central 
Plateau ;  yet  the  long  lines  of  coal-seams,  often  bordered  by  faults,  some- 
times described  as  canals,  sometimes  as  synclines,  which  occur  in  this 
plateau,  strongly  resemble  those  on  the  Saar,  with  which  they  may  have 
characters  in  common.  The  studies  by  Michel  L^vy,  de  Launay,  and  others 
on  the  structure  of  these  features,  and  by  Fayol  and  Grand'Eury  on  their 
contents  (II,  p.  244),  scarcely  permit  us  to  doubt  that  the  included  beds 
were  deposited  in  narrowly  restricted  spaces.  Here,  also,  there  are  some 
faults  which  are  older  than  the  upper  Carboniferous,  others  which  are  only 
older  than  the  Trias,  and  yet  others  of  still  more  recent  date  ^.  The  long 
line  of  coal-measures  extending  from  Savigny  to  Pl^aux  marks  a  Variscan 
fold  on  the  north  and  south  borders  of  the  Central  Plateau  only,  elsewhere 
it  is  a  fracture  or  trough,  and  thus  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  true  trend-line 
of  the  folding  2  (II,  p.  115). 

Another  example  of  an  indigenous  fracture  is  afforded  by  the  south  scarp 
of  the  Erzgehirge.  Laube  has  shown  that  it  does  not  follow  the  strike,  but 
cuts  through  the  series  of  petrographical  zones  obliquely  It  terminates 
in  the  east  in  front  of  the  Elbe  fracture,  and  may  therefore  be  younger. 
At  the  same  time  a  Cretaceous  platform  descends  from  the  summits  of  the 
Erzgebirge  towards  the  Elbe  fracture.  The  lignite  basin  at  the  foot  of  the 
range  is  traversed  by  parallel  fractures.  Between  the  basalts  of  northern 
iJohemia  and  the  scarp  of  the  Erzgebirge  there  is  only  a  remote  connexion. 
These  basalts  begin  in  Bavaria,  are  continued  to  the  east  across  the  Riesen- 
gebirge  to  Ostrau,  and  break  out  at  isolated  localities  far  to  the  south  and 
also  to  the  north  of  the  Erzgebirge.  They  are  most  widely  distributed, 
however,  in  the  subsided  region. 

An  example  of  another  kind  is  furnished  by  the  fault  of  the  Danube 
between  Ratisbon  and  Passau  (I,  pp.  193,  197).  It  lies  for  the  whole  of  its 
course,  which  is  slightly  concave,  in  upper  Jurassic.  It  can  be  described  as 
a  fault  only  in  certain  parts  of  its  course ;  in  others  the  beds,  like  a  heavy 
carpet;  sink  towards  the  plain  in  a  flexure.  Above  the  line  of  the  fault  lie 
the  well-known  eruptive  centres  of  the  Ries,  Hohgau,  and  others.  The 
fault  is  younger  than  the  upper  Cretaceous  and  older  than  the  lower  fresh- 
water Molasse.  The  extent  of  the  subsidence  is  considerable.  At  Ochsen- 
hausen,  south  of  Ulm,  30  kilometers  from  the  fault,  a  boring  failed  to  reach 

^  e.  g.  Michel-Levy,  Roches  eruptives  cambriennes  du  Maconnais,  Bull.  See,  geol.  de 
Fr.,  1883,  3®  ser.j  XI,  p.  278  ;  fractures  of  the  upper  Permian  period. 

L.  de  Launay,  Le  Massif  de  Saint-Saulge,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.  France,  1896,  VII, 
pp.  183-205,  map  ;  in  particular  p.  193.  Bergeron  has  raised  the  question  whether 
this  long  line  is  not  a  boundary  line  of  the  Armorican  fractures ;  Bergeron,  De  I'exten- 
sion  possible  des  differents  bassins  houillers  en  France,  Mem.  Soc.  Ing.  Civ.,  1896,  5®  ser., 
XIII,  p.  13,  pi.  169. 

^  G.  Laube,  Geologic  des  bohmischen  Erzgebirges,  II,  Arch,  naturw.  Landesd.  Bohmen, 
1887,  VI,  pp.  1-159  passim. 


CH.I]  MAEGINS  OF  HOESTS  29 

the  base  of  the  Molasse  at  a  depth  of  738  meters  (141  meters  beneath  the 
sea).  The  existence  of  some  connexion  between  this  fault  and  the  formation 
of  the  Alps  has  often  been  conjectured. 

In  like  manner  a  number  of  arcuate  faults  in  the  eastern  part  of  the 
Central  Plateau  have  been  described  by  M.  L^vy  as  so  many  subsided  anti- 
clines running  parallel  to  the  Alps.  He  cites  them  as  evidence  that  at  this 
place  the  horst  must  have  been  less  rigid. 

Here  it  is  a  question  of  the  influence  of  the  Alps  on  the  horst,  while  the 
influence  of  the  horsts  on  the  Alps,  which  has  been  conjectured  by  other 
observers,  only  manifests  itself  in  the  deflexions  of  that  chain  ^ 

The  manner  in  which  the  horsts  may  be  framed  in  is  no  less  various. 

It  often  happens  that  a  fracture  remains  invisible  within  the  older 
rocks,  and  suddenly  reveals  itself  for  the  first  time  when  it  emerges  into 
the  sedimentary  mantle.  Some  characteristic  rock,  such  as  an  intrusive 
sheet  or  a  bed  of  chert,  may  serve  to  reveal  many  fractures  which  would 
not  otherwise  be  recognized,  and  mining  operations  have  frequently  shown 
that  the  formations  are  broken  up  in  a  mosaic  of  polygonal  fragments. 
The  further  observation  is  pushed — and  its  limit  is  reached  in  thin  slices 
under  the  microscope — the  more  the  broader  effects  disappear,  and  local 
crushing,  displacement,  and  adaptation  become  all-important.  Analysis 
then  becomes  a  comparatively  unfruitful  task. 

If  subsidence  attacks  a  land  thus  broken  up,  horsts  originate,  bounded 
by  faults,  showing  extreme  diversity  in  length  and  direction,  all  of  them 
completely  independent  of  the  strike ;  sometimes  they  are  affected  by 
parallel  planes  of  compression,  but  they  never  sink  in  flexures,  such  as 
occur  on  the  Danube. 

This  independence  of  the  marginal  fractures  finds  an  excellent  illustra- 
tion in  Denkmann's  instructive  description  of  the  Kellerwald  horst  which 
stands  between  Cassel  and  Marburg  2. 

In  an  area  about  18  kilometers  square,  Langdorff  s  map  of  the  western 
Harz  marks  some  44  lines  of  disturbance,  which  strike  approximately  east- 
south-east  ;  several  of  them,  however,  cut  the  others  at  an  acute  angle,  but 
all  run  directly  across  the  strike  of  the  folds  ^.  Here  surfaces  of  com- 
pression are  probably  indicated. 

^  W.  Branco,  Schwabens  hundert  fiinf  und  zwanzig  Vulcan-Embryonen,  8vo  (aus 
Jahresh.  Ver.  Naturk.  Wtirtt.,  1894  and  1895),  p.  15  ;  M.  Levy,  Environs  du  Mont-Blanc, 
Bull,  serv.  Carte  geol.  France,  1890, 1,  pp.  24  et  se(j.  j  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  de  Fr.,  1890, 3®  ser., 
XVIII,  p.  691. 

^  A.  Denckmann,  Der  geologische  Bau  des  Kellerwaldes,  Jahrb.  k.  preuss.  geol.  Landes- 
anst.,  1901,  neue  Folge,  Heft  34,  88  pp.,  maps. 

^  W.  LangsdorfF,  Gang-  und  Scbichten-Studien  aus  dem  West-Oberharz,  8vo,  Claustbal, 
1885, 47  pp.,  map ;  Geologische  Karte  des  West-Harzes,  1 : 25,000,  Clausthal,  fol. ;  Beitrage 
zur  Kenntnis  der  Schicht folge  und  Tektonik  im  nordwestlichen  Oberharz,  8vo,  op.  cit., 
1898,  29  pp.,  sections.    Prinz  gives  a  good  idea  of  this  region  in  a  generalized  sketch 


30    ENTEY  OF  THE  ALTAIDES  INTO  EUEOPE  [partv 


On  the  margin  of  the  horsts  slightly  longer  lines  sometimes  occur,  the 
origin  of  which  is  unknown.  These  include,  for  example,  the  marginal 
fractures,  trending  more  or  less  north  and  south,  of  the  western  Morvan 
and  the  small  adjacent  horst  of  St.  Saulx,  which  have  been  studied  by 
M.  Levy.  They  advance  through  the  younger  sediments  northwards  to 
Auxerre  and  beyond,  and  DoUfuss  was  able  to  show  that  they  are  younger 
than  the  Calcaire  de  Beauce  and  older  than  the  sands  of  the  Sologne,  which 
lie  beneath  the  second  Mediterranean  stage,  approximately  on  the  horizon 
of  the  Austrian  Schlier  ^. 

The  variety  of  the  marginal  fractures  cannot  be  exhaustively  illustrated 
here ;  as  a  rule,  anything  that  is  concealed  from  view  is  probably  part  of 
a  network  of  mosaic-joints  which  has  been  made  use  of  and  rendered 
visible  by  the  subsidence,  but  has  not  been  ^produced  by  it.  Here  and  there 
an  alien  line  makes  its  appearance,  and  may  be  recognized  by  its  length 
and  specific  direction. 

Faults  striking  north  and  north-north-east  {Rhine  faults  or  African 
faults).  The  Variscan  strike  to  the  north-east  is  maintained  in  the  Vosges 
from  Eonchamp  and  Belfort  to  the  Saar.  Faults  with  a  trifling  throw 
also  occur  in  the  broad  Trias  basin  of  the  Haardt-Wald  and  strike  obliquely 
from  the  south  edge  of  this  basin  into  the  direction  of  Berg-Zabern.  As 
they  reach  the  Rhine  valley  they  form  the  fault- trough  of  Langenbriicken. 
This  group  also  includes  the  Odenwald  faults  (I,  p.  195). 

The  Rhine  trough  has  been  regarded  (I,  p.  201)  as  a  sunken  strip  of 
land  let  down  between  two  horsts — the  Vosges  and  the  Schwarzwald.  That 
which  still  remains  visible  is  certainly  only  a  remnant,  since  at  Alpers- 
bach  (east-south-east  of  Freiburg,  994  meters)  Steinmann  has  found  frag- 
ments of  Mesozoic  sediments  in  basaltic  tufF,  from  which  it  would  appear 
that  the  Schwarzwald  has  been  denuded  to  the  extent  of  from  600  to  750 
meters;  in  lower  Alsatia  also,  according  to  Schumacher,  borings  for 
petroleum  show  that  the  included  Tertiary  beds  must  be  at  least  780 
meters  thick  ^. 

On  the  west  the  general  course  of  the  faults  is  no  longer  straight,  but 
slightly  curved.    Benecke  has  given  an  admirable  account  of  the  way  in 

from  the  English  maps  of  the  coal-measures  in  the  district  between  Preston,  Halifax,  and 
Manchester.  The  north-westerly  direction  is  prevalent  here  ;  transverse  fractures  give 
rise  to  a  mosaic,  Bull.  Soc.  beige  Geol.  Brux.,  1904,  XVIII,  pp.  144,  145. 
1  Dollfuss,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  de  Fr.,  1904,  4^  ser.,  IV,  p.  568. 
G.  Steinmann,  Die  Nagelfluth  von  Alpersbach  im  Schwarzwald,  Ber.  Naturf.  Ges. 
Freiburg  i.  Breisgau,  1894,  IV,  pp.  1-32  ;  Die  Neuaufschliessung  des  Alpersbacher  Stollens, 
Ber.  oberrhein.  geol.  Ver.  Marburg,  1902,  35.  Versammlung,  Benecke,  Bucking,  Schu- 
macher und  van  Werveke  ;  Geologischer  Fiihrer  durch  Elsass,  12mo,  Berlin,  1900,  p.  142. 
A  survey  of  all  the  Rhine  fractures  from  Bale  to  Darmstadt  is  given  in  G.  Regelmann's 
Gcologische  Uebersichtskarte  von  Wiirttemberg  und  Baden,  fol.,  6.  Aufl.,  1906  ;  also  Die 
wichtigsten  Strukturlinien  Siidwest-Deutschlands,  Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1905, 
pp.  299-318. 


CH.I]     NOETH  TO  NOETH-NOETH-EAST  FAULTS  81 


which  the  long  dissevered  parts  of  the  mountains  are  sometimes  faulted 
down  to  great  depths,  and  thus  create  a  landscape  distinguished  by  an  imme- 
diate contrast  between  mountain  and  valley-plain ;  and  how  in  other  regions 
they  are  left  suspended,  as  it  were,  in  steps  which  now  form  transitional 
foothills.  Finally,  he  shows  how  long  faults  may  be  recognized  even  far 
within  the  ancient  mountains  ^.  Near  Dambach  and  Barr  a  gradual  widen- 
ing of  the  trough  occurs,  and  is  maintained  through  Strassburg  to  Worth. 
The  normal  direction  of  the  boundary  faults  is  not  lost,  but  they  have 
no  effect  on  the  relief  of  the  country ;  to  the  west  of  them  a  recess  has  been 
formed  in  the  mountains — the  fault  region  of  Zabern.  The  marginal 
fractures,  according  to  Benecke,  hade  steeply  to  the  east,  while  in  the 
shattered  region  of  Zabern  the  faults  present  the  most  diverse  inclinations. 
At  Worth  the  border  resumes  its  former  character ;  it  becomes  as  broad  as  at 
Worms,  and  is  continued  somewhat  more  to  the  east  in  the  direction  of  Mainz. 

The  stiff  curves  of  the  east  border  recall  those  of  the  west,  and,  in  spite 
of  the  deviations  from  the  rectilinear,  the  breadth  of  the  trough,  exclusive 
of  the  inbreak  of  Zabern,  is  fairly  persistent,  measuring  about  32-34  kilo- 
meters throughout  the  whole  southern  region.  From  somewhere  about 
Bruchsal  onwards  the  trough  bends  out  of  the  north-north-east  somewhat 
more  to  the  north,  and  with  this  direction  it  reaches  Frankfort  2. 

But  the  Rhine  trough  does  not  terminate  on  the  Main. 

Its  faults  are  known  to  extend  beneath  the  western  part  of  the  Vogels- 
berg  basalt  ^. 

Its  continuations  to  the  north  have  been  made  the  subject  of  special 
study  by  A.  v.  Koenen  ^.  Following  this  observer,  we  recognize  a  part  of 
the  subsidence  in  the  elongated  Tertiary  region  of  Ziegenhain,  Fritzlar, 
and  Cassel,  which  runs  to  the  north>north-east  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Vogelsberg. 

At  the  same  time  another  narrower  trough  makes  its  appearance  nearly 
east  of  this  region,  with  the  same  direction  to  the  north  or  north-north-east. 
It  extends,  according  to  Moesta  and  von  Koenen,  from  Wichte  on  the  Fulda 
(north-west  of  Rotenburg)  across  the  Werra,  and  reaches  the  valley  of  the 
Leine  at  Witzenhausen.  This  valley  is  itself  a  trough.  The  downthrown 
strip  extends  far  beyond  Gottingen  to  Kreiensen,  north  of  Northeim.  At 

^  Benecke,  loc.  cit.,  p.  66. 

2  F.  Kinkelin,  Senkungen  im  Gebiete  des  Unter-Main-Thales  unterlialb  Frankfurt,  Ber. 
senckenb.  naturf.  Ges.,  1885,  pp.  235-258  et  passim. 

^  C.  Chelius,  Der  Zecbstein  von  Rabertshausen,  Zeitschr.  f.  prakt.  GeoL,  1904,  XII, 
pp.  399-402. 

*  A.  von  Koenen,  in  Jahrb.  k.  preuss.  geol.  Landesanst.  for  1883,  pp.  187-198,  for  1884, 
pp.  44-55,  for  1885,  pp.  53-83  ;  and  in  particular  Ueber  die  Dislocationen  westlich  und 
siidwestlicli  vom  Harz  und  deren  Zusammenhang  mit  denen  des  Harzes,  op.  cit.  for  1893, 
pp.  68-82  ;  also  Otto  Lang,  Die  Bildung  des  Harzgebirges,  8vo,  Hamburg,  1896,  p.  31, 
note  5,  et  passim. 


32    ENTEY  OF  THE  ALTAIDES  INTO  EUROPE  [partv 


Gottingen  itself  both  borders  are  flexed  upwards,  and  the  trough  is  divided 
lengthwise  down  the  middle  by  a  saddle. 

East  of  Kreiensen,  as  von  Koenen  has  shown,  other  faults  exist,  running 
north  and  south  as  far  as  Hildesheim. 

From  Rustenberg,  near  the  bend  of  the  Leine,  a  new  trough  makes  its 
appearance ;  it  has  been  traced  by  E.  Kaiser  and  Siegert  for  60  kilometers 
to  the  north-north- east  as  far  as  Seesen,  on  the  north-west  border  of  the 
Harz ;  it  cuts  off  the  Harz  towards  the  north-west.  Parts  of  the  post- 
Variscan  mantle  are  let  down  into  it,  but  some  of  the  north-westerly  faults 
of  the  Harz  may  be  recognized  within  it,  and  reveal  themselves  in  the 
irregularities  of  its  border  ^. 

In  this  way  the  group  of  the  Rhine  faults  extends  from  the  Jura  moun- 
tains for  about  500  kilometers  to  the  north-north-east  or  north.  In  the 
north  they  exhibit  a  tendency  to  veer  towards  the  east.  The  trough  which  ! 
they  enclose  in  the  south  is,  as  we  have  seen,  32  to  34  kilometers  in  breadth.  | 
At  Mannheim  the  breadth  is  almost  unchanged.  The  trough,  in  the 
meridional  part  of  the  Leine,  measures  only  7  to  8  kilometers  across ;  that 
which  runs  to  the  north-west  border  of  the  Harz  still  less,  only  one  to 
4  or  5  kilometers. 

The  Rhine  faults  are  an  independent  group,  distinguished  from  the 
other  faults  of  the  Variscan  range  by  their  direction  and  the  trough  which 
they  enclose.    Two  attempts  have  been  made  to  explain  them. 

The  first  of  these,  following  an  older  conception  of  Elie  de  Beau- 
mont's, assumed  a  previously  existent  uplift,  and  saw  in  the  trough  a 
broken-in  anticline.  The  divergent  strike  of  the  Variscan  folds  and  the 
great  length  of  the  fault -lines  are  opposed  to  this  view  2.  In  the  second 
explanation  it  was  assumed  that  the  fault-planes  diverge  in  a  downward 
direction — that  is,  that  in  the  west  they  are  inclined  towards  the  west,  and 
in  the  east  towards  the  east  ^.  Apart  from  the  fact  that,  according  to 
Benecke,  the  main  fractures  in  the  west  dip  steeply  to  the  east,  this  theory 

*  E.  Kaiser  and  L.  Siegert,  Beitrage  zur  Stratigraphie  des  Perms  und  zur  Tektonik  am 
West-Harzrande,  Jahrb.  k.  Preuss.  geol.  Landesanst.  (1905),  1906,  XXVI,  pp.  353-369. 

^  A.  de  Lapparent,  Conference  sur  le  sens  des  mouvements  de  I'ecorce  terrestre.  Bull. 
Soc.  geol.  de  Fr.,  1887,  3®  ser.,  XV,  pp.  215-238 ;  Note  sur  le  mode  de  formation  des 
Vosges,  op.  cit.,  1888,  3®  ser.,  XVI,  pp.  181-184 ;  also  Note  sur  I'histoire  geologique  des 
Vosges,  op.  cit.,  1897,  3^  ser.,  XXV,  pp.  727-730. 

3  A.  Andreae,  Eine  theoretische  Reflexion  liber  die  Richtung  der  Rheinthalspalte,  Verh.  | 
nat.-med.  Ver.  Heidelberg,  1887,  neue  Folge,  IV,  pp.  16-24 ;  Beitrag  zur  Kenntniss  des 
Rheinthalspaltensystems,  tom.  cit.,  47-55 ;  W.  Salomon,  Ueber  eine  eigenthiimliche 
Grabenversenkung  bei  Eberbach  im  Odenwald,  Mitth.  badisch.  geol.  Landesanst.,  1901, 
IV,  pp.  211-252  ;  Ueber  die  Stellung  der  Randspalten  des  Eberbacher  und  des  Rhein- 
thalgrabens,  Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1903,  LV,  pp.  405-418.  This  work  is  based  on 
the  law  of  Schmidt-Zimmermann  ;  practical  miners  have  often  pointed  out  that  it  is  not 
trustworthy,  e.  g.  H.  Hoefer,  Die  Ausrichtung  der  Verwerfungen,  Oesterr.  Zeitschr.  f.  Berg- 
u.  Huttenw.,  1881,  XIX,  op  cit.,  1886,  XXXIV. 


CH.  I]  W.N.W.  TO  N.W.  FAULTS 


33 


fails  to  recognize  sufficiently  the  momentum  with  which  such  subsidences 
take  place,  and  the  fact  that  the  movement  is  independent  of  the  lie  of 
the  plane  along  which  it  occurs.  This  independence  is  so  great  that  subsi- 
dences, as  shown  by  the  reversed  dragging,  may  take  place  alternately  on 
each  side  of  one  and  the  same  plane,  in  whatever  direction  it  may  be 
inclined.  Again,  the  final  throw  of  the  fault  does  not  give  the  full  extent 
of  the  subsidence,  but  only  the  difierence  in  the  amount  of  the  movements  on 
each  side,  so  far  as  they  have  not  counterbalanced  each  other.  Such  two- 
sided  movements  are  known  also  to  have  occurred  on  the  border  of  the 
Rhine  trough  \ 

When  Oskar  Fraas  first  looked  upon  the  Red  Sea  it  reminded  him  of 
the  Rhine  trough  (I,  p.  374).  Reyer  and  von  Koenen  have  attributed  the 
formation  of  this  trough  to  tension.  Its  resemblance  to  the  fractures  of 
East  Africa  is,  indeed,  so  great  that  this  must  be  accepted  as  the  most  natural 
explanation.  Possibly  it  also  shows  to  how  great  an  extent,  even  as  early 
as  the  middle  of  the  Tertiary  aera,  this  part  of  the  Altaides  had  already 
become  rigid. 

The  position  of  the  Kaiserstuhl  at  the  bottom  of  the  trough  is  homo- 
logous with  that  of  the  little  volcanos  which  occur  south  of  lake  Rudolf 
(volcano  of  Teleki,  Luttur,  and  others)  2. 

Fractures  striJdng  west-north-west  or  north-west  {Hercynian  or  Asiatic 
fractures ;  Karpinsky's  lines).  Central  Germany  is  traversed  by  a  number 
of  long  straight  fractures,  which  do  not  run  quite  parallel,  but  diverge  a 
little  from  one  another,  striking  in  the  south  more  to  the  west-north- west 
and  in  the  north  to  the  north- wesb.  The  south-west  limb  is  frequently 
downthrown  and  the  north-east  limb  thrust  over  the  subsidence.  Move- 
ments in  the  opposite  direction,  however,  are  not  wholly  wanting.  Well- 
marked  indications  of  the  north-west  direction  may  be  traced  as  far  as 
Scania.  One  set  of  these  fractures  lies  north  of  the  Bohemian  basement ; 
another  proceeds  from  its  west  side. 

These  fractures  produce  elongated  horsts,  such  as  the  Thiiringer  Wald  and 
the  Teutoburger  Wald.  They  determine  L.  von  Buch's  '  Hercynian  system,' 
which  embraces  all  the  mountains  striking  to  the  north-west ;  many 
eminent  German  geologists  still  describe  these  long  lines  as  Hercynian. 

Von  Koenen  conjectured  as  early  as  1886  that  these  Hercynian 

*  Andreae,  p.  52,  fig.  3,  subsidence  of  the  border ;  Huene,  Verb,  naturf.  Ges.  Basel-, 
1900,  XII,  p.  343  :  '  It  is  a  most  curious  circumstance  that  where  we  find  this  two-period 
displacement  the  motion  of  the  fault  is  often  reversed — the  lift  of  the  first  period  is  the 
throw  of  the  second.    It  is  not  always  so  .  . . ' ;  Button,  High  Plateaus  of  Utah,  p.  48. 

2  F, Graeff,  Zur  Geologie  des  Kaiserstuhlgebirges, Mitth.  badisch.  geol.  Landesanst.,  1891, 
II,  no.  14,  pp.  403-496,  map ;  K.  Gruss,  Beitrag  zur  Kenntniss  der  Gesteine  des  Kaiser- 
stuhlgebirges, op.  cit.,  1900,  No.  IV,  2,  pp.  83-144 ;  Steinmann  and  Graefi",  Geologischer 
Fuhrer  durch  Umgebung  von  Freiburg,  8vo,  Freiburg,  1890,  141  pp.,  map.  The  Kaiser- 
stuhl is  still  the  centre  of  frequent  earthquake  shocks. 

801XA8 IV  D 


34   ENTEY  OP  THE  ALTAIDES  INTO  EUROPE   [paet  v 


lines  must  bear  some  relation  to  Karpinsky's  lines  which  proceed  from  Asia 
into  Europe  with  the  same  direction  ^  (I,  p.  463 :  PI.  V,  m,  m).  To  this 
question  we  will  now  turn  our  attention. 

We  will  first  consider  the  southern  group.  Most  of  these  faults  have 
been  previously  described,  and  a  brief  enumeration  will  now  suffice. 

(a)  The  fault  which  proceeds  from  the  south-east  through  Deggendorf 
to  Ratishon  (I,  pp.  138,  210).  Jurassic  and  middle  Cretaceous  are  overthrust 
from  the  north-east  and  bent  in,  near  Voglarn,  under  the  gneiss. 

(6)  The  next  line  is  marked  within  the  ancient  rocks  by  the  Great  Pfahl^ 
and  near  Amberg  enters  the  Mesozoic  region  (I,  p.  208).  Its  length,  measured 
from  upper  Austria  to  this  point,  is  about  200  kilometers.  In  the  interval 
extending  from  Ratisbon  towards  the  north,  and  connecting  this  second  line 
with  the  first,  subsidence  also  occurs,  and  near  Donaustauf,  according  to 
Brunnhuber,  the  Jurassic  dips  beneath  the  ancient  mountains  ^. 

(c)  The  third  line  (I,  pp.  193,  206  ;  II,  p.  106)  begins  south  of  Weiden  and 
hounds  the  Fichtelgebirge  and  the  Thilringer  Wald  on  the  west.  A  number 
of  parallel  lines  proceed  from  it  and  form  together  a  group  of  great  length. 
Towards  the  west,  Ammon  and  Thiirach  have  observed  a  number  of  parallel 
faults  which  cut  through  the  Franconian  Alb  and  the  Mesozoic  country 
as  far  as  Schweinf urt,  Kissingen  and  beyond  ^.  In  front  of  the  mountain 
border,  near  Alten-Palkstein,  gneiss  steps  over  the  Rothliegende  ^.  The  faults 
proceed  into  the  Rhone  valley  and  extend  as  far  as  the  similar  lines,  which 
have  been  traced  by  Bucking  and  Proescholdt  along  the  Thliringer  Wald. 
At  Schmalkalden  the  Zechstein  meets  the  Muschelkalk  or  Bunter  sandstone 
along  several  lines,  and  at  one  place  granite  lies  upon  Bunter  sandstone  ^. 

The  Ringgau  (Trias)  is  a  horst  according  to  Moesta,  and  at  the  same  time 
the  continuation  of  the  Thuringer  Wald  ^.  Its  southern  border,  in  some 
places  faulted  into  a  trough,  has  been  traced  to  WoUhei,  west  of  Waldkappel ; 

*  A.  von  Koenen,  Ueber  die  Storungen,  welche  den  Gebirgsbau  im  nordwestlichen  und 
westlichen  Deutschland  bedingen,  Nachr.  Ges.  Wiss.  Gottingen,  1886,  p.  197 ;  (C.  Regel- 
mann)  Tektonische  Karte  (Schollenkarte)  Siidwest-Deutschlands,  herausgegeben  vom 
Oberrhein.  geol.  Verein,  4  sheets,  fol.  1898,  is  an  excellent  guide  to  the  south-west,  but  on 
account  of  the  position  of  the  fractures  it  only  shows  a  part  of  them  ;  Lepsius,  Geologische 
Karte  des  Deutschen  Reiches,  27  sheets,  1894-1897,  where  they  may  be  clearly  followed. 

*  Brunnhuber,  Ueber  die  geotektonischen  Verhaltnisse  der  Umgebung  von  Regens- 
burg,  Ber.  naturw.  Ver.  Regensburg,  1894,  IV,  pp.  237-252  ;  F.  E.  Suess,  Bau  und  Bild, 
pp.  8,  215  ;  for  the  continuation  of  the  disturbances  into  the  Mesozoic  region,  E.  Kohler, 
Die  Amberger  Erzlagerstatten,  Geogr.  Jahresh.,  1902,  XV,  pp.  11-56. 

'  Ammon  and  Thiirach,  Uebersicht  der  Verwerfungen  in  Nord-Bayern,  in  Giimbel, 
Geognostische  Beschreibung  des  Konigreiches  Bayern,  IV,  Kassel,  1891,  pp.  610-640,  map. 

*  Thiirach,  ibid.,  p.  611. 

*  H.  Biicking,  Gebirgsstorungen  siidwestlich  vom  Thiiringer  Walde,  Jahrb.  k.  preuss. 
geol.  Landesanst.  for  1884,  pp.  546-555,  map  ;  op.  cit.  for  1886,  pp.  41-44  et  passim ; 
E.  Naumann,  Tektonische  StSrungen  der  triadischen  Schichten  von  Kahla,  op.  cit.  for 
1897,  pp.  130-159  et  passim. 

*  F.  Moesta,  Das  Lias-Vorkommen  bei  Eichenberg  in  Hessen  in  Beziehung  auf  allge- 


CH.I]  TEUTOBUEGEE  WALD  35 

a  new  north-west  line  makes  its  appearance  between  the  two  fractures  of 
the  trough,  and  near  Lichtenau  encounters  a  third,  which  runs  to  the  north- 
north-east  ;  this  is  one  of  the  Rhine  faults.  A  little  further  north,  at  Gross 
Almerode,  a  wedge-shaped  fragment  is  faulted  down  ;  the  zone  of  fracture 
then  runs  more  to  the  west-north- west ;  it  passes  beyond  Cassel  and  then 
turns  again  suddenly  to  the  north-north- west,  reaching  the  western  scarp  of 
the  Erzgebirge  after  passing  through  Volksmarssen.  According  to  Stille's 
account  it  is  a  veritable  crowd  of  north-westerly  fractures  which,  with 
local  deviations  to  the  north-north-west,  now  makes  its  appearance  near 
Horn,  south  of  Detmold  ^.  The  southern  border  of  the  Teutoburger  Wald, 
with  its  well-known  overthrusts  to  the  south-west,  represents  their  further 
continuation.  They  terminate  at  a  distance  of  about  440  kilometers  from 
these  fractures,  that  is  from  the  west  border  of  the  Bavarian  forest,  which 
forms  their  starting-point. 

A  number  of  similar  fault-lines  approach  from  the  north-west ;  of  these 
we  will  only  mention  those  on  the  south  side  of  the  Finne,  which  are 
visible  as  the  boundaries  of  a  long  narrow  band  of  Muschelkalk  2.  The 
whole  plan  of  the  country,  however,  as  shown,  for  instance,  on  Sheet  XIII  of 
Lepsius's  map,  is  extremely  peculiar.  The  folds  of  the  Harz  present  the 
Variscan  strike  to  the  north-east.  At  the  same  time  a  structure  appears  in 
the  post- Variscan  mantle,  north-west  of  the  Harz,  which  resembles  a  series 
of  synclines  striking  to  the  north-west,  as,  for  example,  the  basin  of  Einbeck, 
that  of  Hils,  Alfeld,  and  others  ^.  In  these  basins  the  Mesozoic  stages,  and 
sometimes  the  Tertiary  also,  appear  in  more  or  less  concentric  zones. 
Detailed  investigations  show  us,  however,  that  all  these  basins  are  bordered 
by  north-westerly  fractures,  that  they  are  not  synclines  produced  by 
folding,  but,  to  use  von  Koenen's  expression,  subsidence  basins. 

Fissures,  which  within  the  Harz  are  known  as  metalliferous  veins,  are 
continued  outside  it,  and  cut  through  the  post- Variscan  mantle  as  they 
proceed  to  the  north-west.    They  meet  first  with  the  outrunners  of  the 

meine  Verhaltnisse  des  Gebirgsbaues  im  Nordwesten  des  Thiiringer  Waldes,  op.  cit.  for 
1883,  pp.  57-80,  maps. 

^  H.  Stille,  Der  Gebirgsbau  des  Teutoburger  Waldes  zwiscben  Altenbeken  und  Detmold, 
Jahrb.  k.  preuss.  geol.  Landesanst.,  1899,  pp.  1-42,  map,  and  Ueber  pracretacische 
Schichtenverschiebungen  im  alteren  Mesozoischen  des  Egge-Gebirges,  op.  cit.  for  1902, 
pp.  296-322,  maps.  For  details  of  the  deflexion  A.  Mestwerdt,  Storungen  am  Falken- 
hagner  Liasgraben,  Festschrift  fiir  A.  von  Eoenen,  8vo,  1907,  pp.  221-230. 

2  J.  H.  Kloos,  XI.  Jabresb.  Ver.  Naturw.  Braunschweig,  1899,  pp.  114-116  ;  E.  Schutze, 
Tektoniscbe  Storungen  der  triadischen  Schicbten  bei  Eckartsberga,  Suiza  und  Camburg, 
Jahrb.  k.  preuss.  geol.  Landesanst.  for  1898,  pp.  65-98,  map. 

^  H.  Dubbus,  Der  obere  Jura  auf  dem  Nordost-Fliigel  der  Hilsmulde,  Inaugural- 
Dissertation,  4to,  Gottingen,  1888,  43  pp. ;  H.  Monke,  Die  Liasmulde  von  Herford  in 
Westphalen,  Verb.  Naturf.  Ver.  preuss.  Rheinl.,  1889,  XXXV,  114  pp.,  map  ;  M.  Schmidt, 
Der  Gebirgsbau  des  Einbeck-Markoldendorfer  Beckens,  Jahrb.  k.  preuss.  geol.  Landes- 
anst. for  1893,  32  pp.,  map ;  also  E.  Harkort,  Die  Schaumburg-Lippe'sche  Kreidemulde 
(Inaugural-Dissertation,  ^Gottingen),  8vo,  Stuttgart,  1903. 

Da 


36   ENTRY  OF  THE  ALTAIDES  INTO  EUEOPE  [partv 


Rhine  faults.  Some  local  inbreaks  make  their  appearance,  such  as  the  Kahl- 
berg  at  Echte  ^ ;  and  the  fault-lines  then  extend  so  far  to  the  north-west 
that  von  Koenen  succeeded  in  tracing  one  of  them  from  the  north  side  of 
the  Harz  through  Gronau  into  the  neighbourhood  of  Hameln  on  the  Weser 
mountains^.  Thus  we  are  led  to  conclude  that  the  whole  of  the  Teutoburger 
Wald  from  Detmold  to  beyond  Ibbenbiihren,  along  with  the  Wiehern  and 
Weser  mountains,  and  the  Siintel,  has  been  shaped  out  of  the  post-Variscan 
mantle  by  faults  and  flexures.  All  these  hills  may  be  regarded  as  forming  I 
a  common  horst,  not  unlike  that  of  the  Thiiringer  Wald  and  the  Ringgau,  or 
more  precisely  a  double  horst,  since  the  upper  Carboniferous  occurs  at 
Osnabriick  along  two  parallel  lines. 

(d)  It  has  been  shown  by  borings  that  only  a  part  of  the  existing 
fractures  are  exposed  to  view.  Stille  states  that  a  subterranean  fault  with 
a  downthrow  to  the  north  runs  from  the  Erzgebirge,  near  Paderborn  and 
north  of  Miinster,  along  the  entire  length  of  the  Teutoburger  Wald  and 
parallel  to  it,  so  that  the  Teutoburger  Wald  is  bordered  on  the  south  by  a 
fault- trough.    The  throw  is  believed  to  amount  to  at  least  1,000  meters  ^. 

The  observations  made  by  O.  von  Linstow  are  of  scarcely  less  importance. 
A  notable  subterranean  cliff  runs  west-north- west  from  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Spremberg  (on  the  Spree)  as  far  as  Wolmirstedt,  on  the  Elbe  (north 
of  Magdeburg) — a  distance  of  200  kilometers.    It  divides  the  Palaeozoic  i 
formations  of  the  south  from  the  Trias  in  the  north.    It  would  appear  that  \ 
a  sharp  drop  of  the  beds,  not  a  fracture,  runs  parallel  to  this  line,  from 
Magdeburg  to  Dessau,  and  thus  forms  a  horst  or  demi-horst.    The  Roth- 
liegende  and  the  Palaeozoic  patches,  once  known  as  the  coastal  fringe  of 
Magdeburg,  which  strongly  recall  the  Harz,  are  now  seen,  along  wiikL  the  j 
Palaeozoic  exposures  of  Bitterfeld,  Torgau,  and  elsewhere,  to  be  parts  of  j 
this  subterranean  ridge.  I 

Another  parallel  fracture  runs  past  Cothen.    The  lower  Tertiary  areas 
of  Egelen,  Aschersleben,  and  elsewhere  are  possibly  subsidence  basins 

Borings  seem  to  show  that  on  the  other  side  of  the  Rhine,  from  Aix  to 
beyond  the  Meuse,  the  Coal-measures  are  traversed  by  a  number  of  north- 
westerly faults ;  it  is  believed  that  they  take  their  origin  far  to  the  east  of 
the  Rhine  ^. 

^  J.  Perrin  Smith,  Die  Jurabildungen  des  Kalkberges  bei  Echte,  Jahrb.  k.  preuss.  geol.  , 
Landesanst.  for  1891,  pp.  1-71,  map.  !i 

^  Von  Koenen,  Jahrb.  k.  preuss.  geol.  Landesanst.  for  1885,  p.  80. 

^  Stille,  Schichtenabtragung  und  Transgression,  etc.,  Jahrb.  k.  preuss.  geol.  Landesanst. 
for  1905,  XXVI,  pp.  103-125. 

*  0.  von  Linstow,  Beitrage  zur  Geologie  von  Anhalt,  Festschrift  fiir  Koenen,  1907,  i 
pp.  19-64,  map,  in  particular  p.  51  et  seq. ;  F.  Klockmann,  Der  geologische  Aufbau  des  j 
BOgenannten  Magdeburger  Uferrandes,  Jahrb.  k.  preuss.  geol.  Landesanst.,  1892,  XI,  i 
pp.  118-256,  maps.  >f 

'  Forir,  Habest,  and  Lohest,  Ann.  Soc.  g^ol.  Belg.  Liege,  1902-1906,  XXX,  Mem., 
pp.  607-621,  also  p.  626  et  seq.,  maps. 


CH.I]  FAULTS  OF  THE  SUDETES  37 

North-west  to  west-north-west  fractures  also  traverse  the  islands  of 
Rugen  ^  and  Bornholm.  It  has  already  been  pointed  out  that  Scania  is 
completely  broken  up  by  them  (II,  p.  47,  fig.  5) ;  and  that  there  they  are  of 
different  ages.  The  border  of  the  Teutoburger  Wald  is  overthrust  to  the 
south-west ;  the  north  border  of  the  KyfFhaus,  on  the  other  hand,  to  the 
north-east.  It  is  a  striking  fact  that  a  similar  movement,  restricted,  how- 
ever, to  a  comparatively  narrow  space,  marks  the  northern  border  of  the 
Harz.  The  view  has  often  been  expressed  that  this  fracture  on  the  north 
border  of  the  Harz  is  a  continuation  of  the  distant  fracture  of  the  Elbe  in 
-Saxony  2. 

Let  us  now  turn  our  attention  to  this  disturbance  and  to  the  northern 
group  of  fractures  (I,  p.  138;  II,  p.  109). 

A  great  pencil  of  these  lines  of  disturbance  traverses  the  north-east  of 
Bohemia  and  the  Sudetes.  The  most  easterly  of  them  forms  the  straight, 
sharply- defined  slope  of  the  Eulen  range  which  overlooks  the  Silesian  plain. 

The  most  southerly  members  of  the  group  present  a  direction — not  to 
the  north-west,  but  to  the  north.  To  all  appearance  they  proceed  from  the 
cleft  between  the  Sudetes  and  the  Moravian  gneiss,  north  of  Briinn  (I,  p.  186, 
fig.  24),  which,  as  recent  investigations  show,  was  already  sketched  out  in 
Permian  times  ^.  It  is  in  the  latter  part  of  their  course  that  the  fractures 
turn  to  the  north-west.  The  series  of  fractures  which  make  up  the  curvi- 
linear outline  of  the  south-west  foot  of  the  Sudetes,  together  with  the  just 
mentioned  boundary  fracture  of  the  Eulen  range,  give  to  the  Sudetes, 
regarded  as  a  whole  and  including  the  Riesengebirge,  the  characters  of 
a  horst ;  within  this  horst  the  disposition  of  the  Cretaceous  beds  indicates 
the  presence  of  many  other  fractures  running  more,  or  less  parallel  to  the 
boundaries  of  the  horst.  Leppla,  Freeh  and  his  colleagues,  and  Petraschek 
also,  have  given  sketch-maps  of  this  region.  These  show  a  horst  at  Lands- 
kroner  and  at  Mense,  and  troughs  at  Neisse 

The  scarp  of  the  Sudetes  starts,  far  away  in  the  south,  at  Neustadt  and 
Ziegenhals,  and  approaches  the  northern  plain.  Isolated  bosses  of  the  sunken 

^  W.  Deecke,  Der  Strelasund  und  Riigen,  Sitzb.  k.  preuss.  Akad.  Wiss.  Berlin,  1906, 
XXXVI,  pp.  618-627,  and  in  particular  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1906,  Beilage-Band  XXII,  pp.  114- 
138  ;  E.  Geinitz,  Geologischer  Fiihrer  durch  Mecklenburg,  12mo,  1899,  p.  5. 

^  e.  g.  0.  Lang,  Die  Bildung  des  Harzgebirges,  Samml.  gemeinverst.  wiss.  Vortrage, 
Hefte  236-237,  8vo,  Hamburg,  1896,  32  pp.,  maps,  in  particular  p.  13. 

'  F.  E.  Suess,  Bau  und  Bild,  p.  297. 

*  A.  Leppla,  Geologisch-hydrograpliisclie  Beschreibung  des  Niederscblagsgebietes  der 
Glatzer  Neisse,  Abh.  k.  preuss.  geol.  Landesanst.,  1900,  neue  Folge,  Heft  32,  368  pp.  and 
atlas,  in  particular  p.  37 ;  F.  Freeh,  Ueber  den  Bau  der  scblesischen  Gebirge,  Hettner's 
Geogr.  Zeitschr.,  1902,  VIII,  pp.  553-570 ;  W.  Petraschek,  Das  Bruchgebiet  des  bohmi- 
schen  Antheils  der  Mittelsudeten  westlich  des  Neisse-Grabens,  Zeitscbr.  deutsch.  geol. 
Ges.,  1904,  pp.  210-222,  pi.  XXXV  ;  A.  Schmidt,  J.  Herbing,  and  K.  Flegel,  Zur  Geologic 
des  bohmisch-schlesischen  Grenzgebirges"(dargebracht  der  deutschen  geologischen  Gesell- 
schaft  aus  Anlass  ihrer  Tagung  in  Breslau,  1904),  8vo,  158  pp.,  Tektonische  Skizze  auf 


38    ENTRY  OP  THE  ALTAIDES  INTO  EUEOPE  [party 


mountains  rise  from  the  depression ;  Cretaceous  troughs  enable  us  to  trace 
the  faults  far  to  the  north-west,  and  even  beyond  Naumburg  up  to  Wehrau 
on  the  Queiss.    Here  this  group  of  the  north-westerly  fractures  disappears. 

On  the  west  border  of  the  mountains,  at  Hronow  on  the  Mettau,  the 
mines  show  us  that  the  Coal-measures  are  traversed  by  a  great  disturb- 
ance, and  thrust  over  the  margin  of  the  Cretaceous  towards  the  south-west^. 
From  this  point  onwards  the  fractures  become  continuous.  Near  Liebenau 
a  great  flexure  forms  the  border  of  the  J eschken  mountains.  Then  follows 
fracture  and  overthrusting.  At  Wolf sberg,  not  far  from  Khaa,  on  the  Saxon 
frontier,  the  border  of  the  overthrust  granite  recedes  in  an  arc  :  then  it  runs 
in  a  north-west  or  north-north- west  direction,  just  east  oE  Dresden  and  close 
to  the  right  bank  of  the  Elbe,  up  to  Oberau  near  Meissen.  This  great  and 
remarkable  dislocation  is  called  the  fracture  of  the  Elbe  or  the  main  fault 
of  Lausitz. 

Only  two  of  the  features  which  distinguish  this  dislocation  need  be 
mentioned  here,  namely,  the  peculiar  overthrusting  and  a  Permian  dis- 
turbance below  the  Cretaceous  at  Dohlen,  not  far  from  Dresden. 

The  Cretaceous  formation  spreads  over  the  valley  of  the  Elbe ;  its  most 
important  member  is  the  Quader  sandstone  (Turonian).  It  forms  a  platform 
sloping  from  the  Erzgebirge  towards  the  north-east  at  an  angle  of  from  less 
than  two  up  to  eight  degrees  at  the  most :  all  the  table-mountains,  pillars 
and  columns  of  Saxon  Switzerland  have  been  carved  out  of  it.  It  \i 
cut  through  by  several  north-westerly  faults.  In  the  west,  at  Windisch- 
Cardorf ,  the  downthrow  of  the  south-west  limb  along  one  of  these  faults 
amounts  to  300  meters.  On  the  left  bank  of  the  Elbe  at  Cosselbaude 
below  Dresden,  a  short  fault  occurs  which,  as  an  exception,  shows  a  down^ 
throw  to  the  east  ^. 

The  superposition  of  granite  on  Cretaceous,  which  occurs  at  Hohnstein 
has  from  an  early  time  excited  great  interest  in  the  minds  of  observers 
Coming  from  the  west,  we  approach  this  spot  through  the  valleys  of  th( 
gently  sloping  Cretaceous  platform.  The  castle  of  Hohnstein  stands  or 
almost  horizontal  beds  of  upper  Quader  sandstone,  which  are  traversed  bj 
a  slanting  cleft,  as  though  the  upper  part  of  the  mountain  had  been  forcec 
obliquely  upwards  over  the  lower.  The  crushed  Cretaceous  is  overlain  bj 
Jurassic,  and  this  by  the  granite  ^. 

PI.  Ill ;  Ueber  das  jiingere  Palaeozoicum,  etc.,  Jahrb.  k.  preuss.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1905 
LV,  pp.  217-242. 

*  K.  A.  Weithofer,  Der  Schatzlar-Scwadowitzer  Muldenfliigel  des  niederschlesisch 
behmiachen  Steinkohlenbeckens,  Jahrb.  k.  preuss.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1897,  XLVII,  pp.  455 
478,  map,  in  particular  p.  475. 

'  K.  Dalmer  and  R.  Beck,  Geologische  Special-Karte  des  KSnigreiches  Sachsen,  Bl.  65 
Wilsdruff-Potschappel,  1894,  Erlauterung,  pp.  54-56. 

'  R.  Beck,  op.  cit.,  Bl.  84,  KSnigstein-Hohenstein,  1893.  A  general  survey  of  th 
sunken  area  is  given  by  Beck  in  Tschermak,  Min.  petr.  Mitth.,  1893,  XIII,  pp.  290-341. 


CH.  I]  FAULT  OF  THE  ELBE  39 

The  Jurassic  is  continued  into  the  north  of  Bohemia,  but  only  as  a  band 
pinched  into  the  dislocation,  and  it  is  absent  throughout  all  the  rest  of 
Saxony  and  Bohemia. 

The  embayment  in  the  side  of  the  granite  on  the  Saxon  frontier  was 
probably  produced  by  denudation  ;  it  extends  onwards  for  about  four  kilo- 
meters. Within  it  we  see  a  flake  of  Rothliegende  more  than  a  kilometer  in 
length,  lying  over  the  Cretaceous  and  below  the  granite.  It  is  an  intra- 
telluric  erratic  which  has  been  carried  up  to  the  surface.^  We  cannot  apply 
the  same  explanation  to  the  Jurassic ;  its  character  and  distribution  are  not 
in  harmony  with  such  a  view.  The  inverted  series — Cretaceous,  Jurassic, 
granite — indicates,  in  fact,  overf olding  to  the  south-west.  At  this  place  the 
extent  of  the  overfolding  amounts  to  at  least  four  kilometers. 

The  expression  '  backfolding '  has  been  applied  (I,  p.  138)  to  this  disloca- 
tion, but  inappropriately ;  the  term  should  be  restricted  to  that  process 
which  is  the  reverse  of  foref olding  (as  it  occurs,  for  instance,  in  the  interior 
of  the  Asiatic  vertex). 

A  little  to  the  west  of  the  outskirts  of  Dresden  we  reach  the  coal-field 
of  Ddhlen.  It  appears  on  the  map  as  an  ellipse  of  Rothliegende,  20  kilo- 
meters long  and  7  kilometers  broad,  resting  unconformably  on  Silurian, 
granite,  and  syenite.  Its  structure  has  been  elucidated  by  mining  opera- 
tions. The  ellipse  is  cut  through  by  a  series  of  faults  with  a  north-west 
strike.  The  beds  of  Rothliegende  dip  for  the  most  part  to  the  north-west ; 
the  faces  of  the  faults  hade,  almost  without  exception,  steeply  to  the  north- 
east. A  small  horst  runs  through  this  basin.  The  most  important  disloca- 
tion extends  along  its  north  border  as  a  series  of  step-faults  known  as  the 
Rothe  Ochse.  The  sum  of  the  several  throws  gives  a  subsidence  of  360 
meters  ^. 

These  subsidences  are  produced  by  the  local  common  increase  in  down- 
throw of  a  number  of  parallel  strips — a  sagging  along  fracture.  The 
elliptical  outline  is  due  to  denudation.  We  have  thus  additional  examples 
of  the  same  structure  as  that  presented  by  the  subsidence-basins  north-west 
of  the  Harz,  though  the  latter  are  much  younger  ;  the  faults  of  Dohlen  are 
older  than  the  Cenomanian,  and  consequently  also  older  than  the  neigh- 
bouring fracture  of  the  Elbe,  which  runs  parallel  to  them. 

What  kind  of  relation  may  exist  between  these  fractures,  which  proceed 
from  the  Sudetes,  and  the  long  subterranean  fracture  of  Wolmirstedt- 
Spremberg  is  not  known.  But  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  all  these  lines 
of  dislocation,  possessing  so  many  characters  in  common,  must  have  a  common 
origin  independent  of  the  Variscan  folding.    They  are  not  of  the  same  age, 

^  0.  Herrmann  and  R.  Beck,  op.  cit.,  Bl.  86,  Hinterhermsdorf-Daubitz,  1897,  Erl&uterung, 
p.  34. 

-  R.  Hausse,  ProfiliB  durch  das  Steinkohlenbecken  des  Plauen'schen  Grundes,  op.  cit., 
1892,  pi.  I-III ;  Beck  in  Erlauterung  zu  Blatt  66,  Dresden,  1893,  p.  43. 


40   ENTRY  OF  THE  ALTAIDES  INTO  EUROPE  [party 


but  they  are  all  later  than  the  Permian,  and  the  great  majority  are  later 
than  the  Cretaceous. 

They  resemble  the  Asiatic  type  presented  by  the  coal-basin  on  the 
Donetz,  i.e.  the  continuation  of  the  line  of  the  Alai,  in  the  following  points : 
(1)  their  strike  to  west-north-west  or  north-west;  (2)  the  decrease  in  intensity 
which  they  so  frequently  exhibit  in  this  direction ;  (3)  their  rectilinear  course,  | 
which  may  be  maintained  for  a  distance  of  440  kilometers  ;  and  (4)  the  over- 
thrusting,  directed  almost  exclusively  to  the  south-west,  by  which  the 


Fig.  3.    The  Coal  basin  of  DoMen  near  Dresden  (after  Hausse). 


overthrust  part  may  be  carried  to  a  distance  of  perhaps  four  kilometers. 
Concurrently  with  this,  the  south-west  limb  almost  always  sinks  down. 

A  deviation  of  these  lines  from  the  Asiatic  type  is  shown  by  the  curved 
deflexion  of  the  Elbe  fractures  into  the  clefts  at  Brlinn. 

Their  characters  are  just  as  opposed  to  those  of  the  European  Altaides 
as  to  those  of  the  Rhine  faults,  but  they  present  this  feature  in  common, 
that  not  a  trace  of  them  can  be  discovered  in  the  Alpine  region.  They 
cannot  be  attributed  to  any  movement  coming  suddenly  from  Asia,  for  they 
are  of  different  ages.    The  contrast  they  present  to  folds  corresponds  in 


CH.I]  EEVIEW  OF  THE  FAULTS  41 

a  striking  manner  with  the  contrast  which  reveals  itself  in  the  east  betiveen 
the  north  and  south  sides  of  the  horst  of  Azov. 

We  will  now  only  recall  the  manner  in  which  the  line  of  the  Alai  is  con- 
tinued into  the  coal-field  on  the  Donetz.  If  we  look  for  rectilinear  horsts 
striking  to  the  north-west,  like  that  of  the  Thiiringer  Wald,  with  the  Ringgau 
or  the  Teutoburger  Wald,  we  shall  find  them  again,  on  a  very  large  scale, 
south  of  lake  Saissan,  where  the  DzUngarian  disjunctive  lines  advance  to 
the  north-west,  and,  according  to  the  recent  observations  of  Obrutschew, 
convert  the  Saur,  Maurak,  Tarbagatai,  Barlyk^  Maili,  and  other  mountain 
ranges  into  so  many  long  horsts,  which  cut  the  strike  of  the  folds  at  an 
acute  angle  ^  (III,  p.  163). 

The  hypothesis  advanced  by  von  Koenen,  that  this  group  of  dislocations 
corresponds  with  Karpinsky's  lines,  affords,  according  to  existing  observa- 
tions, the  most  natural  explanation.  We  have  no  grounds  for  connecting 
the  fracture  of  the  Elbe  with  the  border  of  the  Harz. 

We  shall  return  to  these  lines  when  discussing  the  Pyrenees. 

^  W.  A.  Obrutschew,  Expedition  zum  Barlyk  und  Tarbagatai  im  Jahre  1905,  Vorlaufiger 
Bericht,  8vo,  Tomsk,  1907,  21  pp. 


CHAPTER  II 

I 

AEMORICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  ALTAIDES  | 

The  western  border  of  the  Central  Plateau.  Brittany.  Younger  folding.  Extension  ot  I 
the  London  basin.    Transatlantic  Altaides.    Relations  in  the  pre-Carboniferous  period.  I 
Stratified  series  in  the  Carboniferous  system.    Appalachians  as  far  as  the  Mississippi. 
Atlantic  and  Pacific  characters.    Appalachians  beyond  the  Mississippi.    The  North  j 
Atlantic  Ocean.  i 

The  western  border  of  the  Central  Plateau.    The  subsidence  of  the  | 
Central  Plateau  takes  place  in  the  west,  as  in  the  Variscan  region,  along 
marginal  fractures  which  run  in  the  most  diverse  directions.    Here,  also,  the 
subsiding  mantle  begins  with  the  upper  Carboniferous,  as  in  Moravia  and 
Franconia ;  the  Trias  lies  unconf ormably,  as  in  certain  places  in  west  1 
Germany,  but  does  not  begin  until  the  Rhaetic  stage,  and  is  completely  absent  ! 
further  north,  where  consequently  the  unconformity  begins  with  the  Lias. 

Let  us  take  the  coal-fields  of  Decazeville  as  our  starting-point.  Great  f  rac-  { 
tures  approach  from  the  east-south- east,  and  the  Jurassic  Causse  du  Comtal 
is  let  down  along  them.  West  of  Decazeville  the  fault  of  Villef ranche  enters  j 
the  region  from  the  south-south- west ;  it  is  a  great  rectilinear  marginal  i 
fracture,  which  cuts  off  the  south-west  of  the  Central  Plateau  for  a  distance  j 
of  50  kilometers.  In  front  of  it  lie  step-faults  and  repeated  short  folds 
with  a  different  strike,  which  are  sometimes  bordered  on  each  side  by  i 
a  fault,  so  that  they  possibly  represent  the  secondary  results  of  subsidence^.  ' 

Further  north,  towards  the  Dordogne,  fractures  running  to  west-north-  \ 
west  or  north-west  make  their  appearance.    Fig.  4  represents  the  granite  | 
platform  of  the  Haute  Correze  as  worked  out  by  Mouret  in  the  east. 
Following  the  margin  of  the  granite  on  the  west  is  the  Faille  d'Argentat  j 
which  strikes  to  the  north,  and  is  bordered  by  small  seams  of  coal.  West 
of  this  fault  lies  the  anticline  of  Roche-de-Vic,  80  kilometers  in  length, 
which  may  be  regarded,  perhaps,  as  a  normal  Armorican  fold.  The 
boundary  faults,  striking  somewhat  more  to  the  west,  cut  across  the  outer  I 
zones  of  the  Central  Plateau.    In  front  of  the  plateau  lies  the  upper 
Carboniferous  and  Permian  coal-field  of  Brive,  faulted  down  in  a  trough. 
A  fault  running  parallel  to  the  boundary  faults  divides  it  from  the  isolated 
horst  of  Terrason  which  descends  towards  the  west  beneath  the  Mesozoic 

*  The  most  important  of  these  must  probably  be  regarded  as  a  bent  anticline  lying 
between  two  bent  faults.  E.  Fournier,  Le  Dome  de  la  Gresigne,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol. 
France,  1898,  X,  pp.  331-339  ;  A.  Thevenin,  Etude  geologique  de  la  Bordure  sud-ouest 
du  Massif  Central,  op.  cit.,  1903,  XIV,  pp.  353-554,  map,  in  particular  fig.  34,  p.  484. 


CH.  II]  WESTEEN  MAEGIN  OF  CENTEAL  PLATEAU  43 


mantle.  At  Meyssac,  16  kilometers  south-east  of  Brive,  the  Faille  du 
Meyssac  leaves  the  border  of  the  plateau  and  cuts  off  on  the  south  the 
Carboniferous  and  Permian  deposits  of  Brive,  as  well  as  a  very  small  horst 
at  Lissac  and  the  larger  one  of  Terrason,  and  then  strikes  away  into  the 
Mesozoic  region  \ 

Manes  and  d'Archiac  early  recognized  the  long  lines  of  dislocation  which 
run  towards  the  south-east  from  the  island  of  Oleron  through  the  lower 
Charente.  Next,  Arnaud  described  folds  in  the  Cretaceous  between 
Angouleme  and  the  Dordogne,  and  Fallot  afterwards  compared  the  folds 
of  Aquitania  with  those  of  the  Paris  basin  ^  Then  Glangeaud  marked  out 
three  long  anticlinal  axes  and  two  basins  in  a  tract  of  country  250  kilo- 
meters in  length  and  50  kilometers  in  breadth,  which  extends  from  Oleron 
and  Rochefort  to  the  Lot.  These  lines  were  believed  to  be  the  outcome  of 
the  folding  of  the  Pyrenees.  It  was  also  assumed  that  they  are  continued 
into  the  ancient  horsts  ^. 

The  only  one  of  these  lines  which  has  been  traced  in  the  south-east  up 
to  the  ancient  horst  is  the  Faille  de  Meyssac.  In  its  course  from  the  border 
of  the  Central  Plateau,  through  a  distance  of  80  kilometers  to  the  west- 
north- west,  till  it  reaches  the  other  side  of  the  river  Isle  above  Pdrigueux, 
this  line,  as  Mouret  has  shown,  is  a  fault  with  a  downthrow  to  the  south. 
That  it  has  been  regarded  as  a  broken  anticline  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
horsts  of  Lissac  and  Terrason  disappear  along  it,  and  with  this  disappear- 
ance the  beds,  in  some  localities,  dip  away  from  it  on  each  side 

A  fracture  with  a  throw  to  the  south  is  visible  for  a  long  distance,  the 
strike  passing  from  west-north- west  to  north-west ;  then  follows  a  flexure 
which  extends  for  a  comparatively  short  distance,  as  may  be  seen  from 
Glangeaud's  detailed  description ;  its  drop  decreases,  and  before  the  Drome 
is  reached  a  neutral  region  makes  its  appearance  in  the  form  of  a  flat 
saddle.  Soon  a  flexure  again  sets  in,  but  this  time  it  is  the  north  limb 
which  is  dropped.   The  so-called  '  Dom '  of  Mareuil  is  a  part  of  this  flexure, 

*  G.  Mouret,  Bassin  houiller  et  permien  de  Brive  (in  Etudes  des  Gites  mineraux,  publiees 
sous  les  auspices  de  M.  le  Ministre  des  Travaux  Publics),  4to,  1891,  444  pp.,  maps. 
A  comprehensive  survey  is  given  by  G.  Mouret  in  Remarques  sur  la  geologic  des  terrains 
anciens  du  Plateau  central  de  la  France,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  de  Fr.,  1898,  3^  ser.,  XXVI, 
pp.  601-612,  map,  and  in  Aper^u  sur  la  geologic  de  la  partie  sud-ouest  du  Plateau  central 
de  la  France,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.  France,  1899,  XI,  pp.  51-88,  maps ;  also  in  Les 
Regions  naturelles  du  Departement  de  la  Correze,  Bull.  Soc.  scient.,  hist,  et  archeol.  de  la 
Correze,  Brive,  1896,  XVIII,  11  pp.,  map. 

*  E.  Fallot,  Sur  la  disposition  des  assises  cretacees  dans  I'interieur  de  I'Aquitaine,  C.  R., 
Febr.  6,  1893. 

'  P.  Glangeaud,  Un  plissement  remarquable  a  Touest  du  Massif  central  de  la  France, 
C.  R.,  June  13,  1898,  map  ;  Les  plissements  des  terrains  cretaces  du  bassin  de  I'Aqui- 
taine, op.  cit.,  Dec.  26,  1898 ;  ^tude  sur  les  plissements  du  Cretace  du  bassin  de  I'Aqui- 
taine, Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.  de  Fr.,  1899,  XI,  pp.  1-48,  map. 

*  Mouret,  Bassin  de  Brive,  p.  146. 


44  AEMOEICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  ALTAIDES  [party 


along  which  some  upper  Jurassic  is  exposed;  and  flexure  or  fracture 
continues  as  far  as  the  Charente^. 

The  existence  of  the  other  two  anticlinal  lines  in  north  Aquitania  is 
inferred  from  similar  observations.  The  faults  emerge  from  the  ancient 
horsts  and  enter  the  Mesozoic  covering  under  conditions  similar  to  those 
which  obtain  in  Bavaria,  except  that  here  they  more  frequently  pass  into 
flexures. 

Towards  the  north,  near  Limoges,  and  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Con- 
folens,  the  resemblance  between  this  region  and  Bavaria  increases,  owing 
to  the  occurrence  of  long  quartz  veins,  some  of  which  are  clearly  associated 


Fig.  4.  The  western  "border  of  the  Central  Plateau  near  Brive  (after  Mouret). 
7  Granite  and  granulite  ;  x  gneiss  and  phyllite ;  X  leptynite ;  c  Carboniferous  sandstone 
and  conglomerate  ;  p  Permian  deposits ;  a  the  horst  of  Lissac. 


with  faults.  Further  east,  west  of  the  Cher,  the  contour  of  the  Central 
Plateau,  as  it  diverges  more  and  more  from  the  Armorican  strike,  presents 

'  For  a  more  detailed  account  of  these  relations,  cf.  Glangeaud,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.  de 
France,  1899,  XI,  the  sections  in  the  following  order  from  north-west  to  south-east :  p.  8, 
fig.  3,  section  of  Rochebeaucourt,  flexure  to  the  north-east ;  p.  6,  fig.  2,  Dom  de  Mareuil, 
continuation  of  the  flexure  to  the  north-east ;  p.  10,  fig.  5,  Verneuil,  the  same,  but  feebler  ; 
p.  10,  fig.  6,  neutral  place  on  the  Cole;  p.  11,  fig.  7,  on  the  Beauronne,  beginning  of  the 
flexure  to  the  west ;  p.  12,  fig.  8,  Puyrina:  here  we  already  have  the  fracture  towards 
the  west,  extending  to  the  Central  Plateau.  Fig.  4,  section  between  La  Couronne  and 
Mouthiers,  is  copied  from  Arnaud  ;  I  disregard  it  for  the  present  on  account  of  its  exag- 
gerated vertical  scale.  It  would  besides  only  show  that  a  transition  from  flexure  to  fault 
occurs  again  further  to  the  north-west.  Cf.  H.  Arnaud,  ^Itudes  pratiques  sur  la  Craie  du 
Bud-ouest ;  Profils  geologiques  des  chemins  de  fer,  Actes  Soc.  min.  Bordeaux,  1876, 1877, 
1878,  1883,  1892,  etc. 


CH,  II] 


BEITTANY 


45 


in  some  localities,  as  De  Launay  points  out,  a  serrated  appearance,  owing 
to  the  occurrence  of  fractures,  just  as  may  be  seen  on  a  large  scale  in 
Franconia  ^. 

These  examples  have  been  cited  to  show  how  difficult  it  may  be  to 
distinguish  between  faults,  which  emerge  from  horsts,  and  posthumous 
folds,  when  they  follow  nearly  the  same  direction.  The  problem  solves 
itself  as  soon  as  the  directions  diverge  from  one  another. 

The  strait  of  Poitiers  is  completely  cut  through  by  north-westerly 
trending  lines  of  dislocation ;  these  have  been  mapped  by  Welsch.  Certain 
parts  of  lines,  or  even  entire  lines,  have  been  interpreted  sometimes  as 
faults,  sometimes  as  folds,  and  attributed  to  the  influence  of  the  Pyrenees. 
In  the  strait  itself  they  strike  from  horst  to  horst,  and  quartz  veins  are 
continued  beyond  the  horsts,  in  much  the  same  way  as  the  Bohemian 
Pfahl  is  continued  beyond  the  Tertiary  land  of  Eger  to  reappear  in  the 
Erzgebirge  2. 

Brittany.  In  Devonshire,  the  Devonian  and  Culm  enter  into  the 
mountain  structure  as  broad  zones,  but  this  is  not  the  case  with  the 
Palaeozoic  rocks  of  Brittany,  for  the  zones  they  originally  formed  have 
been  reduced  by  denudation  to  long  pinched-in  strips,  often  very  narrow, 
which  strike  through  the  mountains  as  the  trend-lines  of  vanished  synclines 
(II,  pp.  89,  113).  We  may,  perhaps,  infer  that  the  chains  of  Brittany  were 
once  higher  than  those  of  Devonshire.  In  many  of  its  features  the  plan 
of  the  mountain  structure  is  more  clearly  exposed  in  this  denuded  area 
than  in  younger  mountains  of  greater  relief ;  it  has  been  worked  out  by 
Barrois  in  several  masterly  memoirs^. 


*  De  Launay,  Les  dislocations  du  terrain  primitif  dans  le  Nord  du  Plateau  Central,  Bull. 
Soc.  geol.  de  Fr.,  1888,  3«  ser.,  XVI,  pp.  1045-1063  ;  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.  France,  1894, 
IV,  p.  318,  and  1898,  X,  pp.  89,  90  ;  also  Les  sources  thermales  de  Neris  et  d'^vaux,  Ann. 
des  Mines,  1895,  9®  ser.,  VII,  pp.  563-623,  map  ;  Recherche,  captage  et  amenagement  des 
sources  thermo-minerales,  8vo,  Paris,  1899,  p.  251  et  seq.  For  the  sheet  with  Limoges, 
Mouret,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.  France,  1899,  XI,  p.  82  ;  cf.  also  Glangeaud,  tom.  cit.,  p.  44 
et  passim. 

^  J.  Welsch,  Les  plissements  des  terrains  secondaires  dans  les  environs  de  Poitiers, 
C.  R.,  June  13, 1892,  and  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  de  Fr.,  1893,  3«  ser.,  XX,  pp.  440-456,  map  ;  in 
particular  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.  France,  1896,  IX,  p.  311,  and  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  de  Fr., 
1905,  4e  ser..  Ill,  p.  941. 

'  Here  we  will  only  mention  C.  Barrois,  Legende  de  la  feuille  de  Plouguerneau  et 
Ouessant,  Ann.  Soc.  geol.  du  Nord,  1893,  XXI,  p.  390,  on  account  of  the  important 
observations  on  the  connexion  between  these  mountain  fragments,  also  Le  Bassin  du 
Menez-Belair,  op.  cit.,  1895,  XXII,  pp.  181-350,  maps,  showing  the  crossing  of  older 
trend-lines  by  younger  folds ;  also  Feuilles  de  Belle-Ile  et  de  Quiberon,  Bull.  serv.  Carte 
geol.  France,  1897,  IX,  pp.  315-318,  showing  the  junction  with  the  secondary  folds  in  the 
south  ;  and  Des  divisions  geographiques  de  la  Bretagne,  Ann.  de  Geogr.,  1897,  pp.  23-64, 
and  map  (cf.  II,  p.  89,  note  2) ;  also  sketch  of  the  Geology  of  Central  Brittany  in  Proc. 
Geol.  Assoc.,  London,  1899,  pp.  101-132,  and  '  Bretagne '  in  the  Livret-Guide  of  the  Eighth 
Geological  Congress,  1900. 


46  AEMOEICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  ALTAIDES  [party 

As  we  have  already  pointed  out,  there  are  three  principal  lines  of  dis- 
location. These  are :  (1)  a  long  anticline  of  ancient  gneiss,  which  is  deflected, 
at  its  extreme  western  end,  slightly  to  the  west-south- west ;  it  follows 
a  rectilinear  course  from  the  region  south  of  Quimper  along  the  south 
coast  through  Vannes  and  Nantes  on  the  east  side  of  the  horst  (II,  p.  90) ; 


Fig.  5.   The  Armorican  peninsula  (after  Barrois"). 
a,  h,  c  border  of  the  horst  of  Brittany  ;  d,  e  border  of  the  Central  Plateau, 

this  line  is  the  axis  of  Cornouailles ;  (2)  a  second  anticlinal  band  of  gneiss 
runs  from  the  coast  near  the  island  of  Ouessant  along  the  north  coast  to 
the  north-east ;  this  is  the  axis  of  Lion ;  if  it  were  prolonged  into  the  sea 
it  would  meet  the  first  line  to  the  south-west  of  Ouessant;  (3)  between 
these  two  bands  of  gneiss  is  a  long  pinched-in  zone  of  Silurian,  Devonian, 


CH.  Il] 


INTERSECTION  OF  THE  FOLDS 


47 


and  Carboniferous,  forming  on  the  west  the  coal-basin  of  Chdteaulin,  on 
the  east  that  of  Laval;  these  basins  are  connected  by  a  still  narrower 
pinched-in  band,  the  basin  of  Belair,  This  pinched-in  zone  has  been 
traced  for  a  distance  of  340  kilometers ;  and  neither  to  the  east  nor  to  the 
west  is  its  natural  termination  to  be  seen. 

North  of  the  axis  of  Cornouailles,  the  long  straight  syncline  of  Saint 
Julien  de  Vouvantes  strikes  from  the  islands  off  Pointe  du  Raz,  through 
this  promontory,  and  past  Quimper  towards  the  east-south-east,  till  it  passes 
slightly  beyond  St.  Barthelemy,  north  of  Angers.  This  syncline,  however, 
does  not  run  parallel  to  the  band  of  gneiss,  but  diverges  from  it  more  and 
more  towards  the  east.  Shorter  anticlines  and  synclines  insert  themselves 
in  the  interval,  among  them  the  coal-basin  of  Ancenis;  and,  since  they 
remain  parallel  to  the  syncline  of  Saint  Julien  de  Vouvantes,  their  position 


I         Fig.  6.  The  syncline  of  Menes-B4lair  cut  through  "by  the  anticline  of  Dinan  (after  Barrois). 

with  regard  to  the  gneiss  band  of  the  axis  of  Cornouailles  recalls,  to  use 
Barrois's  expression,  the  '  barbs  of  a  feather.' 

Other  synclines  follow  towards  the  north  in  the  direction  of  Rennes, 
and  seem  to  form  a  gradual  passage  from  the  south-easterly  direction  of  the 
axis  of  Cornouailles  into  that  of  the  pinched-in  zone  of  Chateaulin,  Belair, 
and  Laval,  which  forms  a  gentle  arc  striking  east  and  west  or  west-north- 
west. 

In  the  middle  of  this  zone  we  have  the  rare  opportunity  of  observing 
how  an  ancient  folded  system  is  cut  through  by  a  younger.  To  obtain 
a  clear  conception  of  the  facts  we  must  start  from  the  band  of  gneiss  in 
the  north-west,  the  axis  of  L^on.  It  is  followed  towards  the  east  by  other 
anticlines  and  synclines,  striking  eastwards  in  a  gentle  arc,  and  reaching 
the  coast  at  the  bay  of  St.  Brieuc,  or  still  further  to  the  east.  The  margin 
of  the  basin  of  Chateaulin  is  sometimes  caught  in  by  these  east-north- 
easterly synclines. 

Still  further  east  the  pinched-in  zone  is  actually  cut  across  slantwise  by 
anticlines  striking  to  east-north-east  or  north-east.  For  instance,  the  syncline 


4:8  AEMOEICA  AND  THE  AMEEICAN  ALTAIDES  [party 

of  Menez-B^lair  is  thus  cut  across  by  the  anticline  of  Dinan,  and  further  east 
by  that  of  Fougeres.  Concurrently  the  pinched-in  zone  is  forced  upwards 
in  a  saddle,  bent  in  azimuth,  and  diminished  in  breadth  ^. 

From  this  Barrois  concludes  that  the  folds  trending  east-north-east  or 
north-east  are  younger  than  the  folding  which  has  pinched  in  the  long 
strip  of  Chateaulin-B^lair-Laval,  and  that  the  folding  of  Ldon  is  younger 
than  that  of  Cornouailles.  The  fact  that  the  Palaeozoic  beds  are  caught 
in  by  the  synclines  striking  east-north- east  shows  that  the  Palaeozoic  basin 
must  at  one  time  have  possessed  a  greater  breadth. 

Fig.  5  marks  the  course  of  some  of  these  younger  lines.  We  see  that 
as  they  approach  the  bay  of  Saint  Malo  they  turn  somewhat  more  to  the 
north-east,  and  flatten  out  south  of  the  bay  of  Saint  Michel  as  they  proceed 
to  the  east-south-east  ^. 

To  the  south  a  syncline  with  a  north-east  strike  meets  the  south-west 
coast  of  the  bay  of  Saint  Michel,  reappears  near  Avranches,  then  forms  an 
arc  slightly  convex  to  the  north,  and  turns  towards  the  east-south-east  ^. 

Lecornu  has  described  another  similar  arc  as  the  '  zone  bocaine ' ;  this 
has  its  vertex  south  of  Saint  Lo  Michel  Levy  has  given  a  brief  account 
of  the  various  lines  which  reach  the  peninsula  through  Jersey  and 
Guernsey;  some  of  them  cross  the  Cotentin,  others  are  heaved  out  in 
Palaeozoic  synclines^.  The  northernmost  extremity  of  the  district  near 
cape  La  Hague  is  formed,  according  to  Bigot,  of  pre-Cambrian  and  Silurian 
rocks,  which  are  affected  by  fractures  and  influenced  by  adjacent  eruptive 
rocks  ^. 

We  are  thus  introduced  to  a  very  peculiar  structure. 

The  folds  which  make  their  appearance  in  the  west,  south  of  the  axis 
of  Ldon,  present,  as  far  as  the  bay  of  St.  Brieuc,  a  curved  strike,  convex 
towards  the  north.  Then  their  course  becomes  concave,  they  turn  to  the 
north-north-east  and  north-east,  and  in  the  northern  part  of  the  Cotentin 
form  the  outer  lines  of  a  second  and  more  important  arc. 

If  we  take  into  account  the  observations  of  Oehlert  and  Bigot,  made 
near  Mayenne  and  Alen^on,  then  we  seem  to  have  indications  of  the 

^  C.  Barrois,  Le  Bassin  du  Menez-Belair,  Ann.  Soc.  geol.  du  Nord,  1895,  XXII,  p.  273, 
fig.  13  ;  its  north-east  end  disappears  in  a  mass  of  granite.  For  offshoots  from  the  basin 
of  Laval,  Oehlert,  Feuille  de  Mayenne,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.  France,  1896,  VIII,  no.  53, 
pp.  57-61. 

2  C.  Barrois,  Feuille  de  Dinan ;  Ann.  Soc.  geol.  du  Nord,  1893,  XXI,  p.  39. 

8  We  must  thus  correct  the  remarks  made  in  II,  p.  90,  on  the  continuation  to  cape 
Frehel,  which  were  based  on  older  statements. 

*  L.  Lecornu,  Sur  les  plissements  siluriens  dans  la  region  du  Cotentin,  BulL  serv.  Carte 
geol.  France,  1893,  IV,  pp.  395-414,  little  map. 

^  Michel  Levy,  Contributions  a  Tetude  du  Granit  de  Flamanville,  Bull.  serv.  Carte 
geol.  France,  1894,  V.  pp.  317-357,  in  particular  p.  318,  fig.  1.  j 

«  A.  Bigot,  Feuille  des  Pieux,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.  France,  1898,  X,  pp.  106-109. 


cH.li]  THE  LONDON  BASIN  49 

beginning  of  a  third  arc.  The  north  border  of  the  basin  of  Laval  forms 
the  starting-point  both  of  a  number  of  folded  ranges,  completely  homologous 
with  the  anticline  of  Dinan,  which  strike  between  east-north-east  and 
north-east,  and  of  a  syncline  which  strikes  through  Mayenne  and  Villaines 
into  the  neighbourhood  of  Alen9on^. 

In  the  arc  of  the  Sarthe,  near  Alen^on,  the  anticline  which  approaches 
from  the  south-west  divides,  on  the  border  of  the  ancient  mountains,  into 
two  branches,  one  directed  to  the  north-north-east,  the  other  to  the  east- 
north-east  2.  In  the  southern  part  of  the  great  basin  of  Coevrons,  however, 
which  lies  south  of  this  point  and  reaches  the  border  at  Fresnay,  the  strike 
turns  to  the  south-east.  This  is  the  commencement  of  the  third  arc.  We 
see  the  same  direction  in  the  little  remnant  of  the  older  series  which  crops 
out,  north-west  of  Le  Mans  for  example,  from  beneath  the  J urassic  covering. 

From  these  observations  we  conclude  that  the  very  generally  accepted 
view  which  regards  the  arcs  of  a  great  folded  system  as  arising  in  regular  suc- 
cession one  behind  the  other,  and  shoved,  as  it  were,  one  against  the  other,  does 
not  apply  to  this  region.  The  basin  of  Chateaulin,  which  even  includes  the 
Culm,  is  just  as  much  the  outcome  of  the  great  inter-Carboniferous  move- 
ments of  the  Armorican  folding  as  the  saddles  which  cut  through  this 
basin,  and  in  the  interior  of  the  mountains  several  arcs  exist.  Thus  it 
would  appear  that  the  intercalation  of  ancient  cores  must  be  taken  into 
account  ^. 

The  gneiss  range  of  Cornouailles  is  bordered  on  the  east  by  a  quartz 
vein  140  kilometers  in  length,  which  recalls  the  Great  Pfahl,  and  marks 
this  feature  as  one  of  great  stability. 

The  axis  of  the  coal-basin  of  Ancenis  is  regarded  by  M.  L^vy  as  a 
trend-line  which  continues  into  the  Central  Plateau*. 

Extension  of  the  London  basin.  The  Armorican  arc  is  interrupted  by 
a  gap  which  extends  from  the  Mendips  to  Boulogne.  The  basin  is  open 
for  the  whole  of  this  long  distance,  and  it  is  precisely  here  that  the  Weald 
the  most  important  of  the  younger  folded  regions,  makes  its  appearance. 
Consistently  with  the  views  of  Godwin  Austen  and  many  other  authorities, 
it  was  originally  supposed  (II,  p.  92)  that  the  overfolded  Coal-measures  of 
the  Mendips  were  continued  beneath  the  Mesozoic  mantle,  past  Exeter,  to 
the  overfolded  Coal-measures  in  the  north-east  of  France.    But  the  case 

1  Cf.  the  little  map  in  Oehlert,  Feuille  de  Mayenne,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.  France,  1896, 
VIII,  p.  60,  and  p.  58  for  the  bend  of  the  strike. 

^  D.  P.  Oehlert  and  A.  Bigot,  Note  sur  le  massif  silurien  d'Hesloup,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  de 
France,  1898,  3®  ser.,  XXVI,  pp.  82-103,  map. 

^  A.  Bigot,  Le  massif  ancien  de  la  Basse-Normandie,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  de  France,  1904, 
4®  ser.,  IV,  pp.  909-953,  map  ;  in  particular  p.  944. 

*  Michel  Levy,  Situation  stratigraphique  des  regions  volcaniques  de  I'Auvergne,  Bull. 
SoG.  geol.  de  Fr.,  1890,  3«  sen,  XVIII,  pp.  688-952  ;  in  particular  p.  690,  and  pl.  XXIT, 
fig.l. 

SOMiAS  IV  E 


50  ARMOEICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  ALTAIDES  [part^?  . 


is  not  so  simple.    A  combination  of  earlier  and  later  observations  now  (, 
enables  us  to  perceive  that  to  the  east  of  the  Caledonian  zone  of  Wales  j 
movements  of  Armorican  age  have  proceeded  across  the  supposed  outer 
border  for  a  considerable  distance  to  the  north. 

In  south-west  Wales,  as  far  as  Carmarthen  bay,  the  Coal-measures  are 
pinched  in,  and  form  an  extremely  narrow  zone ;  further  east,  they  expand 
into  the  great  coal-field  of  Glamorganshire,  broadening  out  widely  towards: 
the  north;  this  is  traversed  by  three  anticlines  running  south-west  andj 
north-east,  which  bend  round  towards  the  south-west  into  other  anticlines! 
with  an  east  and  west  strike.  The  anticlines  running  north-east  andj 
south-west  were  interpreted  (II,  p.  85)  as  representing  a  bend  into  thei 
Caledonian  direction ;  but  it  would  now  seem  that  they  are  the  beginning! 
of  a  sigmoidal  advance  of  the  Armorican  trend-lines. 

Towards  the  east  the  great  coal-basin  is  followed  by  an  anticline! 
striking  to  the  north-east,  which  brings  up  the  Silurian  at  Usk  from 
under  the  Old  Red  sandstone.    This  anticline  separates  the  coal-field  of^ 
Glamorganshire  from  a  long  syncline  of  Carboniferous  limestone  striking: 
to  the  north-east,  which  includes  towards  the  north  the  coal-basin  of  the  1 
Forest  of  Dean.    In  the  bed  of  the  Severn  itself  lies  another  coal-field,  and  | 
beyond  it,  on  the  east  side  of  the  river,  extends  the  longest  of  the  Armorican  j 
branches.    Much  lies  concealed  from  view  beneath  the  Bunter  sandstone ;  1 
nevertheless,  it  is  evident  that  the  Bristol  coal-field,  stretching  to  the  north-  j 
north-east,  is  enclosed  at  its  northern  extremity  between  two  anticlines 
which  meet  in  a  fork  at  an  acute  angle,  and  these,  conjoined  from  Tortworth 
onwards,  continue  further  towards  the  north.    A  little  clifi"  of  upper 
Silurian  on  the  south  bank  of  the  Severn  marks  the  place  where  they  cross 
the  river.    Then,  yet  further  north,  they  crop  out  again  in  May  hill,  and, 
separating  from  each  other,  form  a  fork  open  to  the  north.    The  western 
branch  runs  to  the  north-west  and  forms,  north  of  the  coal-field  of  the 
Forest  of  Dean,  the  elongated  pear-shaped  anticline  of  Woolhope;  while 
the  other  branch  maintains  a  direct  course  to  the  north.    After  some 
interruption  it  forms  the  meridional  range  of  the  Malvern  and  Ahherley 
hills,  and  here  at  last,  south-west  of  Kidderminster,  about  70  kilometers 
north  of  the  end  of  the  Bristol  coal-field,  and  about  100  or  110  kilometers 
north  of  the  foot  of  the  Mendips,  it  disappears  from  view  with  a  bend  to 
the  east-north-east.    A  meridional  fault,  which  cuts  ofi"  all  the  older  rocks 
from  the  Permian  and  Bunter  sandstone,  borders  its  east  side  ^. 

The  significance  of  the  Malverns  was  first  made  clear  by  the  admirable 
work  of  Groom  2.    On  the  east  side  they  present  throughout  their  length 

1  J.  PhiUips,  The  Malvern  Hills,  compared  with  the  Palaeozoic  Districts  of  Abberley, 
&c.,  Mem.  Geol.  Surv.,  1848,  II,  Part  I,  maps.  The  advance  of  the  Malverns  is  seen  very 
clearly  on  Strahan's  sketch-map  in  Rep.  Brit.  Assoc.,  Cambridge,  1904. 

*  T.  T.  Groom,  The  geological  structure  of  the  South  Malverns  and  of  the  adjacent 
district  to  the  west,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1899,  LV,  pp.  129-1C9,  and  On  the  geological 


€H.  Il] 


THE  MALVEEN  HILLS 


51 


from  south  to  north  a  narrow  Archaean  band,  which  is  overfolded  towards 
the  west  on  to  Cambrian  and  Silurian  beds.  Further  north  the  Archaean 
rocks  disappear.  In  the  little  horst  of  Hartley,  Archaean  rocks  still  rest 
upon  the  Cambrian.  The  structure  of  the  northern  part  of  the  Abberley 
hills  is  shown  in  fig.  8.  On  the  east  we  see  the  fault  next  the  Bunter 
sandstone,  then  to  the  west  the  Silurian  folds  beginning  to  bend  round  to 
the  east-north-east ;  next,  the  Old  Red  folded  with  the  Silurian ;  and  last, 
in  a  syncline  of  the  Old  Red,  the  south  end  of  the  Forest  of  Wyre  coal-field. 
On  Woodbury  hill  the  folded  Silurian  is  overlain  unconformably  by  a  flat- 
bedded  patch  of  Permian  and  some  upper  Carboniferous ;  a  proof  that  this 
range  forms  part  of  the  Armorican  system. 

W.  G.  Clarke  has  shown  that  at  the  bottom  of  the  Forest  of  Wyre  basin, 
.as  well  as  in  some  adjacent  coal-fields,  the  folds  of  the  middle  Coal-measures 
are  cut  off  by  a  plain  of  denudation  upon  which  the  upper  Coal-measures 
Test  unconformably^.  This  plain,  the  so-called  Symon  fault,  may  well 
represent  an  extension  of  the  Armorican  unconformity. 

We  must  leave  it  to  observers  better  acquainted  with  the  district  to 
judge  \y'hether  this  advance  of  the  outer  border  of  the  Armorican  system 
has  affected  the  subterranean  strike  of  the  Coal-measures,  which  have  been 
revealed  by  borings  near  Boulogne  and  the  region  between  Dover  and 
Canterbury. 

Among  posthumously-folded  regions  we  have  mentioned,  as  of  especial 
importance,  the  Weald  and  the  broken  anticline  of  the  Pays  de  Bray 
(II,  p.  95).  These  led  us  to  conclude  that  within  the  boundary  of  the 
subsidence  younger  folding  had  occurred  in  the  ancient  Armorican 
direction. 

In  the  south  of  England  the  direction  of  these  younger  folds  is  almost 
-east  and  west.  Strahan's  observations  are,  briefly,  as  follows :  three 
important  synclines  (London,  Chichester,  Solent)  and  three  anticlines 
(Guildford,  Portsdown,  Isle  of  Wight)  are  present,  arranged  in  coulisses; 
the  anticlines  are  always  steeper  towards  the  north;  from  the  Isle  of 
Wight  onwards  they  proceed  as  two  lines  of  disturbance,  of  which  the  first 
cuts  through  the  peninsula  of  Purbeck,  and  the  second  runs  only  a  little 
more  to  the  north,  south  of  Dorchester,  almost  to  the  east  coast,  near 
Lyme  Regis.  These  disturbances  may  attain  considerable  intensity. 
Strahan   cites  an  instance  in  which  a  less  resistant  series,  normally 

structure  of  portions  of  the  Malvern  and  Abberley  Hills,  op.  cit.,  1900,  LVI,  pp.  138-197, 
maps.  An  overthrow  observed  further  north,  in  the  Isle  of  Man,  only  affects  the  volcanic 
rocks  of  the  Carboniferous,  F.  W.  Lamplugh,  torn,  cit.,  pp.  11-25. 

^  W.  J.  Clarke,  The  Unconformity  in  the  Coal-Measures  of  the  Shropshire  Coal-Fields, 
■Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1901,  LVII,  pp.  86-95  ;  for  the  more  northerly  regions,  W.  Gibson, 
tom.  cit.,  p.  251  et  seq.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  great  disturbance  of  Orlau  may  be 
explained  in  the  same  way  as  the  Symon  Fault ;  the  detailed  investigation  by  R.  Michael, 
Honatsber.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1907,  no.  2,  supports  this  view. 

E  2 


52  AEMOEICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  ALTAIDES  [partv 


1,100  feet  thick,  is  compressed  in 
a  vertical  direction  to  270  feet. 
A  black  flint  nodule  in  the  chalk 
has  been  crushed  to  powder  and 
drawn  out  into  a  black  streak  like 
coal-dust  ^. 

It  is  more  difficult  to  follow  the 
trend-lines  in  France,  where  they  are, 
to  all  appearance,  more  numerous,  but 
in  part,  at  least,  less  clearly  marked. 
In  a  sketch  given  by  Dollfus,  a  very 
^  general  direction  to  the  south-east  is 
o^Maivern  sccu  to  predominate  in  the  western 
half  of  the  Paris  basin.  This  is  also 
the  Armorican  direction  ^,     In  the 

^  A.  Strahan,  On  Overtlirusts  of  Tertiary 
Date  in  Dorset,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1895 
LI,  pp.  549-562,  map ;  The  Geology  of  the 
Isle  of  Purbeck  and  Weymouth,  Mem.  Geol. 
Surv.  England  and  Wales,  1898,  278pp., 
maps  ;  Guide  to  the  geological  model  of 
the  Isle  of  Purbeck,  8vo,  1906.  A  more 
comprehensive  survey  of  the  post-Carboni 
ferous  disturbances  was  given  by  Strahan  in 
his  presidential  address  to  Section  C  of  the 
British  Association,  1904  (Rep.  Brit.  Ass. 
1904,  pp.  532-541,  pi.).  From  this  very  in- 
structive description  it  appears  that  a  numbei 
of  long  fractures  with  a  more  or  less  Gale 
donian  strike  were  formed  in  the  west  of  Eng- 
land before  the  deposition  of  the  Trias  andr 
Permian.  If  the  comparison  is  to  be  carried; 
further,  upturning,  and  isolated  anticlines— 
secondaiy  phenomena  accompanying  faults 
— must  be  more  clearly  distinguished  from 
folded  systems ;  the  question  arises,  for  in 
stance,  whether  the  Lake  District  is  a  horst., 
G.  F.  Dollfus,  Relations  entre  la  structure 
geologique  du  Bassin  de  Paris  et  son  hydro 
graphic,  Ann.  de  Geogr.,  1900,  IX,  pp.  313- 
339  and  413-433,  map,  and  Bull.  serv.  Cart( 
geol.  France  (1904),  1905,  XV,  pp.  3-5,  map 
and  (1905),  1906,  XVI,  pp.  31-35,  map  ;  als. 


Fig.  7.  Malvern  hills  (after  Phillips). 
^r  =  Archaean;  Si,  5,  =  Cambrian  and  Sihi 
rian  ;  01?^  Old  Red  sandstone;  C6i  =  Carbonif 
ferous  limestone;  Cbj  =  coal-bearing  Carboni 
ferous ;  P,Tr  =  Permian  and  Bunter  sandstone 


CH.  Il] 


THE  ABBEELEY  HILLS 


53 


south  these  folds  are  cut  through  by  meridional  faults,  which  proceed  from 
the  Central  Plateau.  Lemoine  and  Rouyer  thought  they  could  recognize 
in  the  south  a  deflexion  of  the  lines  in  the  direction  of  the  syntaxis 
towards  the  Variscan  trend  ^. 

Many  years  ago  some  eminent  observers,  and  among  them  Godwin 
Austen,  held  the  opinion  that  the 
folding  is  repeated  always  and 
everywhere  along  the  same 
lines.  The  first  observations 
made  by  Marcel  Bertrand  on 
these  younger  folds,  in  the  west 
of  the  Paris  basin,  referred  to 
a  region  in  which  their  trend  is 
no  doubt  fairly  parallel  to  the 
Armorican  strike  presented  by 
the  horsts.  He  concluded,  in 
accordance  with  Godwin  Austen's 
views,  that  there  was  continuity 
of  folding,  i.  e.  he  believed  that 
the  folding  of  the  horsts  them- 
selves had  been  renewed  ^.  From 
the  horsts,  however,  proceed 
fractures — not  folds.  This  is 
shown  most  clearly  by  the 
changed  direction  of  the  folds 
in  England. 

The  posthumous  folds  of  the 
London  and  Paris  basin  stand  in 
the  same  relation  to  the  horsts 
surrounding  them  as  the  Alps  to 
their  frame.  They  are  a  similar 
hut  more  open  structure  on  a 
smaller  scale. 

Here  we  may  learn  much  that  is  instructive  in  its  bearing  on  the  Alps. 
The  eastern,  Variscan  border  of  the  Paris  basin  shows  that  the  Rhine 
mountains  have  been  let  down  by  strike  faults  into  two  gulfs  which  open 

Bull.  Soc.  geol.  de  Fr.,  4^  ser.,  Ill,  pp.  7-18 ;  for  the  Pays  de  Bray  the  detailed  monograph 
by  A.  de  Lapparent,  in  the  Memoire  pour  servir  a  I'explication  de  la  carte  geologique, 
4to,  1879. 

^  P.  Lemoine  et  C,  Rouyer,  Sur  I'allure  des  plis  et  des  failles  dans  la  Basse  Bourgogne, 
Bull.  Soc.  geol.  de  Fr.,  1905,  4«  ser.,  IV,  pp.  561-568,  map. 

^  M.  Bertrand,  Sur  la  continuite  du  phenomene  de  plissement  dans  le  Bassin  de  Paris, 
Bull.  Soc.  geol.  de  Fr.,  1892,  3^  ser.,  XX,  pp.  118-165,  maps ;  also  Lignes  directrices  de  la 
Oeologie  de  la  France,  C.  R.,  Jan.  29,  1894,  map. 


ISloiQjeter 


Si: 


Fig.  8.  Ahberley  hills  (after  Grroom). 
Wenlock  and  Ludlow  shales  with  bands 
of  Aymestry  limestone  ;  OR  =  Old  Red  sandstone ; 
Ca  =  Carboniferous  ;  p  =  Haffield  breccia,  Permian  ; 
Tr  =  Bunter  sandstone. 


54  AEMOEICA  AND  THE  AMEEICAN  ALTAIDES  [paetv 


Fio.  9.  The  fractures  of  Lorraine  and  Luocemhourg  (after  L.  van  Werveke). 
2Vtas  vnd  Jwra  =  Trias  and  Jurassic  ;  P^m.  =  Permian  ;  Carbon.  =  Carboniferous. 


CH.li]  TRANSATLANTIC  ALTAIDES 


55 


towards  Luxembourg  and  Metz.  These  faults  belong  to  the  Variscan 
system,  and  run  fairly  parallel  to  the  fractures  of  the  Saar.  The  surveys 
of  L.  van  Werveke  (fig.  9)  also  show  that  by  this  process  the  two  gulfs 
became  troughs,  separated  by  an  elongated  horst,  which  still  remains 
visible  as  far  as  Sierck  on  the  Mosel  ^.  The  resemblance  of  this  long  horst 
to  the  horsts  of  Lissac  and  Terrason  shown  in  fig.  4,  and  to  those  of 
Alen^on  and  Argentan  in  fig.  5,  is  unmistakable.  The  little  bit  of  granite 
and  Silurian  south-west  of  Alen9on  (massif  d'Hesloup)  possesses  a  truly 
complicated  structure,  not  at  all  suggestive  of  the  axis  of  an  independent 
anticline  ^. 

If  now  we  picture  to  ourselves  this  posthumous  folding  as  growing 
stronger  towards  the  north,  a  direction  so  clearly  expressed  in  the  south 
of  England,  incorporating  in  its  progress  smaller  horsts  with  itself  and 
rising  against  the  obstacle  presented  by  the  Malverns  and  their  downthrown 
continuation  to  the  north-east — then  we  have,  in  this  incomplete  range  of 
great  mountains,  a  scene  from  the  development  of  the  Alps  themselves. 

Transatlantic  Altaides.  From  the  southern  shore  of  lake  Maggiore  to 
the  outer  border  of  the  Jura  mountains,  south  of  Basel,  the  distance  is 
210  to  220  kilometers.  If  we  exclude  the  Jura  mountains  and  the  basin 
of  the  Molasse,  then  the  breadth  from  Como  to  the  anticline  of  the  Molasse 
near  Lucerne  amounts  to  190  to  200  kilometers ;  from  Bergamo  to  Bregenz 
is  about  200  kilometers ;  and  this  includes  a  strip  of  the  Dinaric  system. 

A  line  drawn  straight  across  the  Armorican  arc  in  the  meridian  of 
3°  30'  W.  from  the  glaucophane  rocks  of  the  He  de  Groix  to  the  overthrust 
southern  border  of  the  Glamorganshire  coal-basin,  west  of  Cardiff,  measures 
430  to  440  kilometers — that  is,  twice  as  much  as  the  breadth  we  have  just 
found  for  the  Alps.  Yet  along  this  line  the  southern  border  of  the  Armori- 
can system  is  nowhere  known.  The  bend  of  the  strike  in  the  syntaxis  at 
Valenciennes  is  separated  from  the  corresponding  bend  in  the  syntactic 
lines  south  of  the  Cantal  by  a  distance  of  scarcely  less  than  600  kilometers. 

For  the  Variscan  system  the  figures  would  doubtless  be  equally  high, 
but  owing  to  its  more  complete  resolution  into  horsts  an  exact  estimate  is 
hardly  possible. 

A  straight  line  starting  from  the  outer  border  of  the  Siwaliks,  south- 
east of  Jumno,  and  drawn  across  the  Tertiary  foot-hills,  through  the  con- 
tinuation of  the  Dhauladhar  and  still  on  through  Zanskar  and  the  chains  of 
Ladakh,  close  to  the  pass  of  Karakorum,  as  far  as  Shahidula,  measures 

^  L.  van  Werveke,  Uebersichtskarte  der  Verwerfungen  des  mesozoischen  Gebirges  in 
Lothringen,  Luxemburg,  u.s.w.,  in  Schumacher,  Steinmann,  and  Werveke,  Erlauterung 
zur  geologischen  Uebersichtskarte  des  West-Deutsch-Lothringen,  1887,  PL  II ;  op.  cit., 
p.  10 :  '  The  Trias  and  Jurassic  .  .  .  are  let  down  around  the  ancient  mountains.' 

^  Oehlert  et  Bigot,  Note  sur  le  massif  silurien  d'Hesloup,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  de  Fr.,  1898, 
3e  ser.,  XXVI,  pp.  82-103,  map. 


56    AEMOEICA  AND  THE  AMEEICAN  ALTAIDES  [party 


about  500  kilometers,  and  thence  across  the  Yarkand  arc  to  the  edge  of  the 
desert  is  about  100  kilometers  more. 

These  figures  show  us  how  prone  the  eye  is  to  underestimate  the  magni- 
tudes of  the  past.  They  also  show  us  that  that  part  of  the  Armorican  base 
which  remains  visible  at  the  present  day  would  afford  room  for  one  of  the 
greatest  folded  systems  of  the  globe.  If  we  assume  that  the  rias  coast 
between  Dingle  bay  and  La  Rochelle  is  the  natural  termination  of  this 
mighty  structure,  we  do  so  in  opposition  to  all  observations  made  in  other 
parts  of  the  world.  We  must  look  for  its  termination  beneath  the  Atlantic 
Ocean  and  on  the  opposite  shore. 

Our  eyes  naturally  turn  to  the  rias  coast  of  Newfoundland  and  Nova 
Scotia. 

As  early  as  1871,  J.  W.  Dawson  concluded,  on  the  evidence  afforded  by 
the  flora  of  the  Carboniferous  period,  that  a  connexion  extended  across  the 
Atlantic  ^.    The  structure  of  the  mountains  tells  the  same  tale. 

In  Newfoundland  the  anticlines  strike  to  the  north-north-east  and 
north-east ;  we  have  already  seen  that  in  Nova  Scotia  the  easterly  direction 
becomes  manifest  towards  the  ocean  and  that  the  Coal-measures  rest  in 
transgression  on  an  older  folded  system  (I,  p.  554).  It  was  Marcel  Bertrand 
who,  with  bold  hand,  traced  the  connecting  trend-lines  across  the  ocean. 
He  laid  his  results  before  the  French  Geological  Society  on  March  21,  1887, 
and  an  important  step  was  thus  taken  towards  a  knowledge  of  the  plan  of 
the  northern  hemisphere  ^. 

On  the  Charente,  the  freshwater  deposits  of  the  Weald  reach  the 
Atlantic  coast,  and  here  we  must  look  for  the  continuation  of  the  con- 
tinent. 

An  indication  is  afforded  in  the  north  by  the  Porcupine  bank.  It  rises 
to  a  height  of  — 154  meters ;  its  isobaths  extend  far  to  the  south-south- west ; 
judging  from  the  nature  of  the  sea- bottom,  it  should  consist  of  similar 
rocks  to  those  of  the  adjacent  mainland  ^.  Towards  the  south,  depths  of 
4,000  meters  have  been  sounded,  but  in  about  the  latitude  of  the  English 
Channel  the  200  meters  line  lies  in  about  long.  11°  W.  From  this  point  it 
turns  rapidly  to  the  south-east  and  runs  back  to  the  great  depths  of  the 
bay  of  Biscay. 

This  advance  of  the  isobaths,  which  corresponds  with  the  lie  of  the 
Scilly  isles,  the  islands  off  Ouessant,  and,  further  out  to  sea,  Cockburn  bank, 

^  J.  W.  Dawson,  The  Fossil  Plants  of  the  Devonian  and  upper  Silurian  Formations  of 
Canada,  Geol.  Surv.  Can.,  8vo,  1871,  92  pp.,  and  Part  II,  1882,  47  pp. ;  in  particular  I, 
p.  82. 

^  Marcel  Bertrand,  La  chaine  des  Alpes  et  la  formation  du  continent  europeen,  Bull.  Soc. 
g^ol.  de  Fr.,  1877,  8«  ser.,  XV,  pp.  423  -447 ;  in  particular  map  on  p.  442. 

'  G.  A.  J.  Cole  and  T.  Crook,  On  Rock  Specimens  dredged  from  the  Floor  of  the  Atlantic 
off  the  Coasts  of  Ireland  ;  Report  on  the  Sea  and  Inland  Fisheries  of  Ireland  (for  1901) 
1903,  IX,  Part  II,  App.,  9  pp. 


CH.  Il] 


FLOOE  OP  THE  ATLANTIC  OCEAN 


57 


Parson's  bank,  &c.,  is  the  only  indication — and  that  but  slight — afforded  by- 
soundings  on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic  of  a  continuation  of  the  continent. 
Further  out  in  the  ocean,  depths  occur  of  over  4,000  meters. 

Gwyn  Jeffreys  states  that  when  laying  cables  in  mid-ocean  a  rocky  ridge 
was  encountered  between  long.  33°  50'  and  36°  30'  W.  in  about  lat.  51°  20'  N. 
Its  length  is  about  160  kilometers,  and  its  highest  point  lies  at  a  level  of 
—  2,502  meters  ;  thence  the  bottom  sinks  along  the  line  of  sounding,  at  first 
very  rapidly  (about  420  meters  in  a  distance  of  800  meters),  then  more 
gently,  so  that  at  a  distance  of  12-8  kilometers  it  lies  at  a  level  of  —4,078 
meters — that  is,  about  1,576  meters  below  the  highest  point.  This  ridge 
lies  on  the  hypothetical  trend-line  of  Marcel  Bertrand 

About  880  kilometers  off  the  coast  of  Newfoundland  lie  the  Laura 
Ethel  bank  (—65  meters)  and  the  Milne  bank  (  —  147  meters) ;  at  a  distance 
of  only  380-400  kilometers  from  the  coast  lie  the  Newfoundland  banks 
within  the  isobath  of  —100  meters,  and  then  we  reach  one  of  the  most 
characteristic  rias  coasts  on  the  globe. 

Belle  Isle  strait  cannot  rightly  be  regarded  as  the  boundary  between  the 
Canadian  shield  and  the  folded  mountains.  The  outer  narrower  part  of  this 
strait  is  a  fault- trough,  in  which  flat-lying  Cambrian  beds  are  let  down  ^. 
The  broad  range  of  hills,  which  forms  the  north-west  coast  of  Newfoundland 
from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Bay  of  Islands  (not  far  from  lat.  49°  N.)  to 
the  northern  extremity  of  the  north-west  coast,  is  a  fragment  of  the 
Canadian  shield,  and  therefore  cannot  be  included  in  the  rias  coast.  The 
west  coast  of  White  bay,  along  with  the  northern  and  most  important  part 
of  Long  Range,  is  formed  of  gneiss.  Yet,  even  after  excluding  this  range 
of  gneiss,  the  folded  mountains  of  Newfoundland,  measured  across  their 
strike,  attain  a  breadth  of  more  than  380  kilometers.  But  the  other  folds 
of  the  mountain  chain,  of  which  Newfoundland  is  a  part,  are  cut  off  by  the 
ocean  along  so  oblique  a  line,  and  the  disturbances  which  this  chain  under- 
goes in  its  further  course  are  of  so  peculiar  a  character,  that  it  is  impossible 
to  estimate  the  true  breadth  of  the  entire  structure  (II,  p.  36). 

Relations  in  the  pre-Garboniferous  period.  Dawson  has  repeatedly 
pointed  out  that  the  Acadian  series  more  closely  resembles  that  of  Europe 
than  of  many  parts  of  America,  and  Walcott  has  described  the  Cambrian 
series  of  the  Atlantic  region  of  North  America  as  a  part  of  the  European 
series.  Ami  has  laid  emphasis  on  the  correspondence  between  the  lower 
Silurian  of  Acadia  and  that  of  Britain  ^. 

1  J.  Gr.  Jeffreys,  Nature,  Feb.  3,  1881,  p.  325.    The  mature  of  the  rock  is  not  known. 

2  This  is  expressly  stated  by  Hyatt  in  Proc.  Boston  Soc.  Nat.  Hist.,  1888,  XXIII, 
pp.  315-319. 

3  Walcott,  Bull.  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv,  1891,  no.  81,  p.  376.  H.  M.  Ami,  Synopsis  of  the 
Geology  of  Canada,  Proc.  and  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  Canada,  1900,  2nd  ser.,  VI,  p.  200,  points 
out  in  particular  the  resemblance  between  the  Skiddaw  and  Arenig  stage,  and  the  Hart- 


58  AEMOEICA  AND  THE  AMEBIC  AN  ALTAIDES  [paktv 


Salter  long  ago  recognized  the  fauna  of  the  Tilestones  in  Nova  Scotia, 
and  Williams  cites  traces  of  the  same  fauna  in  the  Chapman  sandstone  on 
the  Aroostook  river  (most  easterly  part  of  the  Maine).  This  sandstone  may 
also  include  a  higher  horizon,  at  least  J.  M.  Clarke  observes  that  in  this 
same  district  species  of  the  Rhenish  Devonian  have  wandered  into  the 
Chapman  sandstone.  All  these  cases  bear  witness  to  relations  with 
Europe  ^. 

In  Gaspe  the  series  is  continued  by  thick  sandstone  with  Devonian 
plants.  It  belongs  to  a  very  extensive  North  Atlantic  continent  (II,  p.  220), 
which  probably  existed,  with  changing  contours,  during  the  whole  of  the 
Devonian  period.  The  remains  of  this  continent,  consisting  for  the  most 
part  of  sandstone,  are  to  be  seen  in  Galicia,  on  the  coasts  of  the  Baltic,  in 
Scotland,  and  further  away  in  northern  Russia,  in  the  Orkneys,  Shetlands, 
Bear  island,  Spitzbergen,  east  Greenland,  Ellesmere  island,  and  then  in 
Acadia  and  the  north-east  of  the  United  States.  These  sandstones,  however, 
indicate  a  part  only  of  its  extent.  Archaean  hill-ranges  of  considerable 
importance  must  have  existed  to  give  rise  to  the  sand.  It  may  have 
included  the  greater  part  of  northern  Laurentia,  the  region  of  the  Caledonian 
disturbance,  and  the  Baltic  buckler.  The  continent  was  a  desert  land, 
diversified  with  stretches  of  inland  water,  many  of  them  fresh,  and  con- 
sequently possessing  an  outflow,  while  others  were  salt. 

Geikie  long  ago  attempted  to  define  the  boundaries  of  the  Devonian 
lakes  of  Great  Britain  and  to  picture  the  physical  conditions  of  the  area  as 
it  existed  in  Devonian  times.  Nathorst  has  shown  that  Archaeopteris 
archetypus  occurs  on  the  Donetz  and  also  far  to  the  north  in  Ellesmere 
island,  and  similarly  Bothriodendron  Kiltorkense  is  found  in  Ireland  on 
the  one  hand,  and  Bear  island  on  the  other  ^.  Plants  and  fishes  were  carried 
out  into  the  Devonian  seas ;  Dinicihys  puustulosus,  Dipterus  flabelliformis, 
and  other  species  occur,  according  to  Lohest,  in  the  upper  psammites  of 
Condroz,  Belgium,  and  in  the  upper  Devonian  of  America ;  in  both  cases 
associated  with  Spirifer  disjunctus  ^. 

J.  W.  Dawson,  with  great  insight,  arrived  at  true  conclusions  in  1871, 
when  only  a  small  number  of  facts  was  known.    The  centre  of  origin  of 

fell  and  Llandeilo  beds  of  the  lower  Silurian  of  Britain,  on  the  one  hand,  and  Acadian 
beds  on  the  other. 

1  H.  S.  Williams,  The  Palaeozoic  Faunas  of  Maine,  Bull.  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1900,  no.  165, 
pp.  21-92,  in  particular  p.  80  et  seq. ;  J.  M.  Clarke,  Evidences  of  a  Coblenzian  invasion 
in  the  Devonian  of  East  America,  Festschrift  fiir  von  Koenen,  8vo,  Stuttgart,  1907, 
pp.  359-368. 

*  A.  G.  Nathorst,  Zur  Fossil-Flora  der  Polarliinder :  1, 3,  Zur  Ober-Devon-Flora  der  Baren- 
Insel,  4to,  Svensk.  Vet.  Akad.  Handl.,  1902,  XXXVI,  no.  3,  60  pp.,  and  Die  Ober-Devon- 
Flora  des  KUesmere-Landes,  in  Report  of  the  2nd  Norwegian  Arctic  Expedition,  no.  1,  8vo, 
Kristiania,  1904,  22  pp. 

»  Lohest,  Ann.  Soc.  geol.  Belg.,  1888-1889,  XVI,  p.  Ivii. 


CH.  Il] 


ERIA 


59 


the  older  sediments  of  the  Appalachians  must  have  lain  somewhere  to  the 
north-east.  In  the  Carboniferous  epoch  this  centre  furnished  connecting 
links  in  the  Atlantic  region  between  the  floras  of  Europe  and  America. 
In  the  Devonian  such  connecting  links  could  only  have  existed  far  to  the 
north-east.  The  most  ancient  flora  of  America  must  thus  be  sought  in 
Newfoundland,  Labrador,  and  Greenland,  and  that  of  Europe  on  the  margin 
of  the  ancient  Scandinavian  nucleus.  That  the  Appalachians  may  have 
formed  the  connexion  with  Europe,  at  least  within  the  Devonian  epoch, 
was,  as  observed  above,  already  suggested  by  Dawson^. 

The  flora  just  mentioned  was  termed  by  Dawson  the  Erian  flora,  and 
the  corresponding  deposits  the  Erian  group,  since  they  also  occur  on  lake 
Erie,  where  they  had  been  distinguished  as  the  Erie  division.  To  the  great 
Devonian  continent  we  will  give  the  name  of  Eria. 

The  upper  division  of  the  Erian  flora  coincides  with  Heer's  Ursa-flora, 
from  which,  as  Nathorst  has  shown,  the  Culm  flora  of  Spitzbergen  must 
be  separated  as  distinct  ^. 

In  the  north-eastern  part  of  the  United  States  we  have  to  consider, 
besides  the  continent  of  Eria,  three  seas,  each  of  which  played  an  important 
part  in  the  period  preceding  the  Carboniferous ;  these  were  :  the  Eurasiatic- 
Arctic  on  the  north-west,  the  Atlantic  on  the  east,  and  the  Mississippi 
sea  on  the  south. 

The  first  may  be  recognized  by  the  middle  Devonian  transgression 
which  extends  from  Asia  past  Manitoba,  and  even  still  further  to  the 
south.  Stringocephalus  Burtini  has  been  found  by  Stoliczka  on  the  south 
side  of  the  Thian-shan,  and  by  McConnell  in  the  Ramparts  of  the  lower 
Mackenzie  ^.  The  ancient  Atlantic  sea  of  the  Cambrian  and  Silurian 
epochs  has  already  been  mentioned.  The  presence  of  the  third  southern  sea 
has  given  rise  to  very  complicated,  but,  at  the  same  time,  very  instructive, 
relations.  Within  the  last  few  years  a  general  survey  of  these  relations 
has  been  rendered  possible  by  the  publication  of  a  number  of  special 
stratigraphical  memoirs,  such  as  those  by  Williams,  Prosser,  and  Kindle 

^  J.  W.  Dawson,  The  Fossil  Plants  of  the  Devonian  and  upper  Silurian  Formations  of 
Canada,  Geol.  Surv.  Can.,  1871,  92  pp.,  I,  p.  82. 

^  A.  G.  Nathorst,  Zur  Fossil-Flora  der  Polarlander,  I,  Zur  palaeozoischen  Flora  der 
arktischen  Zone,  Svensk.  Yet.  Akad.  Handl.,  1894,  XXVI,  no-  4  ;  in  particular  p.  74.  Stur 
perceived  that  a  Culm  flora  was  present  in  Spitzbergen,  Verh.  Geol.  Reichsanst.,  1877. 
p.  80. 

*  J.  F.  Whiteaves,  The  Fossils  of  the  Devonian  Rocks  of  the  Mackenzie  River  Basin, 
Geol.  Surv.,  Canada ;  Contribution  to  Canadian  Palaeontology,  1891,  III,  pp.  197-253  ; 
in  particular,  p.  235. 

*  H.  S.  Williams,  The  Correlation  of  geological  Faunas,  a  Contribution  to  Devonian 
Palaeontology,  Bull.  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1903,  no.  210,  147  pp.  ;  also  C.  S.  Prosser,  The 
Upper  Hamilton  and  Portage  Stages  of  Central  and  East  New  York,  Am.  Journ.  Sci., 
1893,  XLVI,  pp.  212-230 ;  E.  Kindle,  The  Devonian  Fossils  and  Stratigraphy  of  Indiana, 


60  AEMOKICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  ALTAIDES  [partv 


and  by  attempts  at  synthesis  by  Ulrich  and  Schuchert,  and  later  by  Schuchert 
alone  ^. 

In  tracing  the  transgression  which  starts  from  the  Mackenzie  we  observed 
that  the  Marcellus  slate,  Hamilton  group,  and  Genessee  slate  form  the  middle 
Devonian  of  the  State  of  New  York.  The  slates  above  and  below  the 
Hamilton  group  resemble  each  other  so  closely  that  Williams  regards  the 
Genessee  as  a  repetition  of  the  Marcellus  stage.  The  Hamilton  group 
contains  a  rich  marine  fauna,  and  towards  its  upper  part  a  bed  with 
special  characters,  the  Tully  limestone,  containing  Rhynconella  cuboideSy 
sets  in  (II,  p.  231). 

It  was  an  important  step  in  advance  when  Williams  showed  that  the 
European  types  (or  Asiatic — in  this  case  an  equivalent  term)  are  restricted 
to  the  Tully  limestone,  and  that  the  Hamilton  group  contains  a  foreign 
fauna,  which  has  since  been  named  the  Tropidoleptus  carinatus  fauna  ^. 

The  succession  is  thus  as  follows :  Slates  (Marcellus) ;  beds  with  a 
foreign  fauna  (Hamilton,  Tropidoleptus);  limestone  with  the  European 
fauna  (Tully  limestone,  Rhynconella  cuboides) ;  then  again  slates  (Genessee). 
Above  these  follow  beds  with  faunulae  which  possess  either  ill-defined 
characters  or  characters  varying  in  a  peculiar  manner,  but  which 
are  connected  with  Europe  by  vicarious  species  at  least;  with  these  are 
also  intermingled  some  species  of  the  Tropidoleptus  fauna,  also  trunks  of 
trees  which  have  been  floated  in,  and  remains  of  great  fishes  (Productella 
fauna  or  Ithaca  formation  ;  Cardiola  fauna  or  Portage  stage) ;  they  extend 
up  to  the  highest  marine  member  of  the  American  Devonian,  the  Spirifer 
disjunctus  fauna  (Chemung  stage).  This  characteristic  fossil  is  itself  a 
typical  European  form,  yet  even  in  the  midst  of  the  Chemung  stage  Williams 
has  observed  an  intercalation,  like  a  colony,  of  the  pure  Tropidoleptus  fauna. 

Then  follows  the  Catskill  stage,  i.e.  the  Erian  sandstone  with  terrestrial 
plants  and  fishes. 

There  is  thus  an  interdigitation  of  two  marine  faunas,  and  with 
this  an  interspersion  in  the  Chemung  stage  of  littoral  forms  derived  from 
the  Erian  shore.  The  uppermost  part  of  the  marine  Devonian  as  known 
in  Europe  does  not  seem  to  be  represented.  About  this  time  the  Erian 
sand  gained  the  supremacy.  Freeh  mentions  a  number  of  sand-loving 
bivalves  from  the  middle  Devonian  of  America,  which  may  be  regarded  as 
vicarious  with  European  forms ;  also  five  species  of  Avicula  (Leptodesma) 

25th  Ann.  Rep.  of  the  Department  of  the  Geology  of  India,  1900,  pp.  529-758,  and  an 
abundant  litemture  besides. 

'  E.  0.  Uh-ich  and  T.  Schuchert,  Palaeozoic  Seas  and  Barriers  in  East  North  America, 
Rep.  N.  York  State  Palaeontology,  1901,  pp.  633-663;  Schuchert,  On  the  Faunal 
Provinces  of  th(^  Middle  Devonian  of  America  and  the  Devonian  Coral-Sub-Provinces  of 
Russia,  Am.  Geol.,  1903,  XXXII,  pp.  187-162,  maps  et  passim. 

2  H.  S.  Williams,  The  Cuboides-Zone  and  its  Fauna,  Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Am.,  1889,  I, 
pp.  481-500. 


CH.  Il] 


HYPOTHESES 


61 


which  the  Chemung  stage  possesses  in  common  with  the  Famennian  of 
Belgium^.    These  may  be  traces  of  the  littoral  fauna. 
These  observations  lead  to  two  suppositions. 

The  Old  Red  sandstone  enters  the  anticline  of  the  Mendips  (II,  p.  87), 
and  on  the  west  coast  of  Ireland  its  saddles  advance  into  the  sea  as  the  spurs 
of  the  rias  coast  between  Dingle  bay  and  Crook  bay  (II,  p.  83).  It  does  not 
extend  farther  south  than  these  Armorican  folds,  but  the  Erian  fishes  and 
plants  extend  as  far  as  Thuringia,  Bohemia,  and  the  Donetz.  A  similar 
distribution  is  to  be  seen  in  America.  The  Erian  sediments  belong  to  the 
foreland,  but  they  are  also  involved  in  some  of  the  outer  folds.  This  leads 
us  then  to  suspect,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  north  border  of  the  Altaides 
is  continued  beneath  the  ocean  not  very  far  from  the  southern  border  of 
the  foreland  of  Eria. 

The  second  supposition  admits  of  more  definite  proof ;  it  concerns  the 
seas.  The  Eurasiatic-Arctic  sea  appears  to  have  extended  southwards  to 
Iowa  and  Missouri.  The  alien  Tropidoleptus  (Hamilton)  fauna  may  be 
traced  from  the  east  of  New  York  State  to  Wisconsin,  through  many  of  the 
central  States,  and  beyond  the  Ozark  mountains  to  the  south.  To  the  west, 
in  Iowa,  it  is  not  known  (with  the  exception  of  Phacops  rana).  In  many 
places  a  transgression  already  begins  with  the  subjacent  Onondaga  stage ; 
a  similar  transgression  is  also  said  to  occur  in  Europe.  The  Onondaga 
(Oriskany)  fauna  of  the  central  States  is  also  cited  as  the  fauna  of  Lepto- 
coelia  (Anoplotheca)  flahellites  (A.  Ulrich's  Ida  slates),  and  the  Hamilton 
(Tropidoleptus)  fauna  is  described  as  the  fauna  of  Vitulina  pustulosa 
(which  also  occurs  in  the  Hamilton  stage  of  New  York).  Under  these 
names  both  these  stages  are  mentioned  as  occurring  at  many  places  in  South 
America,  the  former  also  in  the  Falkland  islands  and  Cape  Colony.  The 
Tropidoleptus  stage  even  reaches  the  central  Sahara. 

The  Hamilton  stage  represents  the  course  taken  by  this  broad  southern 
ocean  in  approaching  the  continent  of  Eria  over  north  America. 

Series  of  strata  in  the  Carboniferous.  A  long  line  of  Coal-measures, 
present  in  Cracow  and  lower  Silesia,  on  the  Ruhr,  in  Belgium,  the  south  of 
England  and  south  Wales,  corresponds  to  the  coal-fields  of  the  Appalachians 
on  the  other  side  of  the  ocean  (II,  p.  233).  In  the  European  region  lower 
Carboniferous  limestone  of  marine  origin,  and  marine  intercalations  of  the 
Culm,  occur  at  the  base  of  the  Coal-measures ;  and  then  over  the  whole 
tract  between  the  border  of  the  Carpathians  and  England  isolated  marine 
intercalations  occur  within  the  Coal-measures  of  the  Ostrau  stage.  These 
intercalations,  at  least  in  the  region  extending  from  lower  Silesia  to  Belgium, 
assume  characters  which  become  increasingly  littoral  as  they  ascend  in  the 
series;  they  have  left  their  last  trace  in  isolated  bivalves,  and  it  seems 

1  F.  Freeh,  Lethaea  palaeozoica,  I,  8vo,  Stuttgart,  1901,  p.  253  ;  Williams,  Bull.  U.  S. 
Geol.  Surv.,  1900,  no.  165,  p.  80. 


62  ARMORICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  ALTAIDES  [paetv 


probable  that  on  the  horizon  of  Schatzlar  they  have  ceased  to  exist.  Upper 
Carboniferous  of  marine  origin  is  absent,  not  only  in  these  coal-fields,  but  in 
all  that  part  of  the  continent  of  Europe  which  lies  to  the  north  of  them. 

It  seems  as  though  the  advance  of  the  Variscan  and  Armorican  folds  had 
driven  back  the  upper  Carboniferous  sea  from  Central  Europe.  The  process 
recalls  the  way  in  which  the  Mediterranean  sea  was  driven  back  from  the 
same  region  by  the  advance  of  the  Alps.  Just  as  marine  sediments  of  the 
third  Mediterranean  stage  are  absent  north  of  the  Alps,  and  we  must  descend 
into  the  lower  Rhone  valley  in  order  to  discover  them,  so  the  marine  upper 
Carboniferous  is  absent  north  of  the  Variscan  and  Armorican  arcs,  and  to 
observe  it  we  must  go  to  Asturias,  the  Carnic  mountains,  or  Russia. 

In  North  America  the  process  finds  still  clearer  expression.  The  marine 
limestone  of  the  lower  Carboniferous  is  widely  distributed  even  as  far  as 
New  Brunswick  and  Newfoundland,  but  no  marine  intercalations  occur 
between  the  Coal-measures  with  the  exception  of  beds  containing  so-called 
Najadites  in  the  north-east.  They  begin  in  west  Virginia  and  Ohio,  and 
upper  Carboniferous  of  distinctly  marine  origin  is  not  to  be  seen  till  we 
proceed  still  further  to  the  west  and  south-west,  into  Iowa  and  Illinois, 
Kansas  and  Oklahoma,  Arkansas  and  Texas. 

J.  P.  Smith  has  drawn  attention  to  the  correspondence  between  the  upper 
Carboniferous  fossils  of  Arkansas  and  those  of  Lo-ping,  and  describes  them 
as  indications  of  a  Carboniferous  Pacific  Ocean.  The  waters  of  this  ocean 
are  known  to  have  extended  over  British  Columbia,  Alaska,  Japan,  south 
Ussuri,  and  far  away  into  the  interior  of  Asia.  According  to  Tschernyschew 
it  is  represented  by  deposits  on  the  north  border  of  the  Parry  Archipelago, 
and  as  far  as  cape  Feilden  (lat.  82°  44'  N.) ;  hence  we  may  conclude  that 
marine  upper  Carboniferous  extends  around  Greenland  to  Spitzbergen  and 
Bear  island  ^. 

In  Europe  it  was  only  the  upper  Carboniferous  sea  which  was  driven  back 
by  the  folding,  and  in  the  Permian  the  poverty-stricken  fauna  of  the  Zech- 
stein  already  presents  itself  as  the  forerunner  of  the  succeeding  marine 
faunas ;  but  in  the  north-eastern  part  of  the  United  States  and  the  adjacent 
part  of  Canada  all  the  region  lying  outside  the  folds,  that  is,  the  land  to 
the  north-west  and  west,  was  completely  separated  from  the  sea  during 
the  long  interval  which  elapsed  between  this  period  and  the  post-glacial 
transgression.  Even  the  marine  upper  Cretaceous  reaches  only  the  inner 
side  of  the  folds. 

Thus  any  further  comparison  with  the  formations  of  Europe  must  be 
based  on  the  terrestrial  floras. 

The  distribution  of  the  coal-bearing  Carboniferous  is  not  uniform.  New- 

*  J.  Perrin  Smith,  Marine  Fossils  from  the  Coal  Measures  of  Arkansas,  Proc.  Am.  Phil. 
Soc,  1897,  XXXV,  no.  152,  72  pp.  ;  for  the  distribution  in  particular,  H.  Yabe,  A  Contri- 
bution to  the  Genus  Fusulina,  Journ.  Coll.  Sci.  Tokyo,  1906,  XXI,  Art.  5,  36  pp. 


€H.  II]        CAEBONIFEEOUS  OF  NOETH  AMEEICA  63 


foundland,  Nova  Scotia,  and  New  Brunswick  may  be  regarded  as  forming 
the  first  of  the  coal-bearing  regions,  and  in  this  the  series  is  distinguished 
by  the  variety  of  its  development.  In  the  second  region,  which  includes 
Oaspe  and  Maine,  and  extends  as  far  as  Connecticut,  it  is  but  very  poorly 
represented.  The  richest  and  most  extensive  Coal-measures  occur  on  the 
west  side  of  the  Appalachians  between  Pennsylvania  and  Alabama,  and  even 
on  the  other  side  of  the  Mississippi,  extending  to  Arkansas  and  beyond. 
Another  region,  closely  connected  with  the  preceding,  comprises  the  rich 
coal-bearing  series,  of  no  great  thickness,  which  extends  to  the  west  in  hori- 
zontal beds  unconformably  superposed  upon  the  Laurentian  foreland — that 
is,  over  parts  of  Michigan,  Illinois,  Iowa,  and  Missouri. 

The  detailed  work  of  the  Geological  Survey  of  Pennsylvania,  the  strati- 
graphical  descriptions  of  J.  J.  Stevenson,  and  the  phyto-palaeontological 
studies  of  David  White  are  our  most  important  sources  of  information  on 
this  system.  Generally  speaking,  the  upper  Carboniferous  sediments  are 
thicker  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Appalachians,  and  thin  out  towards  the 
west.  But  since  their  decrease  in  thickness  is  not  uniform,  and  the  lower 
members  of  the  several  stages  thin  out  more  rapidly  than  the  upper,  it 
happens  that  in  different  districts  different  horizons  form  the  base,  and  the 
term  '  lower  Coal-measures '  becomes  indefinite  and  often  misleading. 

But  it  is  not  only  towards  the  west  that  the  lower  members  thin  out. 
A  map  given  by  D.  White  shows  that  in  front  of  the  Appalachians  a  long 
depression  was  formed  which  attained  its  greatest  depth  in  the  south-east 
of  west  Virginia,  and  there  the  thickest  deposits  were  formed;  while 
towards  the  north-east,  in  south-west  and  central  Pennsylvania,  there  was 
a  ridge  above  which  several  of  the  lower  members  are  absent^.  In  the 
following  survey,  therefore,  we  shall  give  preference  to  the  neutral  nomen- 
clature afforded  by  local  terms. 

1.  The  Pocono  series.  Stevenson  has  described  the  conditions  which 
immediately  preceded  the  Carboniferous  in  Pennsylvania  and  Virginia — the 
great  thickness  of  the  Erian  sands  in  the  north-east,  their  rapid  thinning 
out  towards  the  south-west,  the  retreat  of  marine  life  before  them,  and  the 
unequal  surface  which  they  left  behind — and  under  the  circumstances  we 
may  readily  understand  how  difficult  it  is  to  classify  the  sediments  which 
have  been  produced  by  the  working  up  or  rearrangement  of  these  sands  ^. 

At  the  same  time  we  are  reminded  of  the  masses  of  sand  which  are 
driven  by  storms  at  the  present  day  out  of  the  Sahara  into  the  Atlantic 
Ocean. 

1  D.  White,  Deposition  of  the  Appalachian  Pottsville,  Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Am.,  1904,  XV, 
pp.  267-282  ;  in  particular  PI.  II. 

2  J.  J.  Stevenson,  Lower  Carboniferous  of  the  Appalachian  Basin,  Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Am., 
1903,  XIV,  pp.  15-96,  in  particular  pp.  42  and  86  ;  Carboniferous  of  the  Appalachian 
Basin,  op.  cit.,  1906,  XYII,  pp.  65-228. 


64  AEMOEICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  ALTAIDES  [partv 


Above  the  lower  beds  we  can  distinguish  an  horizon  which  corresponds 
with  the  European  Culm.  In  Newfoundland  it  is  a  coarse  conglomeratej 
and  in  Nova  Scotia  it  forms  Dawson's  Horton  series^  which  is  correlated  by 
this  observer  with  the  Tuidian  of  the  north  of  England.  It  contains  a 
flora  with  species  characteristic  of  the  Culm,  such  as  Cyclopteris  (Aneimites) 
Acadica'^.  Indications  of  this  horizon  are  not  absent  elsewhere;  in 
Worcester  (Massachusetts)  Lepidodendron  acuminatum,  Gopp.  of  the 
Silesian  Culm  has  been  met  with  in  a  bed  of  graphite  in  the  mica- 
schist^.  In  Virginia  and  west  Virginia  the  plants  which  Fontaine 
mentions  as  occurring  in  the  Vespertine  series  must  also  be  assigned  to 
the  Culm^ 

2.  The  Mauch  Chunk  group.  This  corresponds  with  the  Carboniferous 
limestone  (II,  p.  233) :  it  forms  an  easily  recognizable  marine  member  which 
may  be  traced  from  Newfoundland  to  the  end  of  the  Appalachians,  and  it 
is  absent  only  in  Pennsylvania  and  parts  of  Virginia. 

3.  The  Pottsville  group  (Millstone  grit)  in  some  places  lies  unconform- 
ably  upon  the  Carboniferous  limestone.  Near  Pottsville,  Pennsylvania, 
where  there  is  no  such  unconformity,  D.  White  mentions  plants,  such  as 
Aneimites  and  others,  which  probably  belong  to  the  Culm,  as  occurring 
near  the  upper  limit  of  the  Mauch  Chunk  group.  The  lower  Pottsville 
measures  (lower  Lykens  in  Pennsylvania)  contain  the  flora  of  Ostrau,  while 
in  the  upper  Lykens  the  species  representative  of  the  flora  of  Schatzlar 
(lower  Westphalian  stage)  make  their  appearance.  To  this  upper  group 
must  be  assigned  the  flora  of  St.  John,  in  New  Brunswick,  which  Dawson 
at  one  time  regarded  as  Erian.  The  Millstone  grit  of  Canada  must  also  be 
assigned  to  this  horizon.    It  may  be  traced  to  Alabama 

4.  The  Alleghany  group  (lower  Coal-measures,  Rogers).  In  the  west, 
for  example  in  Missouri  and  Iowa,  this  important  stage  lies  in  transgression 
upon  denuded  Carboniferous  limestone  or  still  older  rocks.  Its  flora  appears 
in  the  northern  anthracite  region  (Coal-measures,  C  and  D),  the  bituminous 
district  of  Pennsylvania  (Cannelton),  Virginia  (parts  of  the  Kanawha 
measures),  and  then  further  west  in  Illinois  (Mazon  Creek),  Missouri  (Henry 

*  J.  W.  Dawson,  Fossil  Plants,  II,  p.  128 ;  H.  Fletcher,  Geological  Nomenclature  in 
Nova  Scotia,  Proc.  and  Trans.  N.  S.  Inst.  Sci.,  Halifax,  1900,  X,  pp.  235-244.  The  term 
*  Culm  '  is  employed  below  in  its  usual  sense  ;  the  question  whether  the  typical  Culm  of 
England  really  possesses  so  great  an  age  has  not  been  considered  here ;  a  reference  may 
suffice  to  E.  A.  Newell  Arber,  The  Fossil  Flora  of  the  Culm-Measures  of  North-west  Devon, 
Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  1904,  LXXIV,  pp.  95-99. 

2  J.  Perry,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1885,  3rd  ser.,  XXIX,  p.  157. 

^  W.  M.  Fontaine,  Notes  on  the  Vespertine  Strata  of  Virginia  and  West  Virginia,  Am. 
Journ.  Sci.,  1877,  3rd  ser.,  XIII,  pp.  37-48  and  115-123. 

*  D.  White,  The  stratigraphical  succession  of  the  fossil  Floras  of  the  Pottsville  Forma- 
tion in  the  South  Anthracite  Coalfield,  Pennsylvania,  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.  Ann.  Rep.,  1900, 
XX,  2,  pp.  749-918  ;  in  particular  p.  911  et  seq. 


CH.II]      NOETH  AMEEICAN  COAL  MEASUEES  65 


County)  ^,  Kansas  (Lansing  Coal-measures)  2,  and  the  Indian  Territories 
(Grady  coal)  ^.  It  corresponds  to  the  Schatzlar  (Westphalian)  flora  of 
Europe,  and  it  would  appear,  indeed,  that  it  can  even  be  correlated  with  the 
several  subdivisions  of  this  flora.  Thus  D.  White  has  shown  the  corre- 
spondence in  Henry  County  with  Zeiller's  middle  and  upper  Westphalian, 
in  particular  with  the  zone  de  Bullygrenay  of  the  Coal-measures  of 
Valenciennes,  while  the  coal  of  the  northern  anthracite  region,  would 
seem  to  correspond  to  the  horizon  of  Geistlautern,  and  G  to  the  Ottweil 
beds.  The  Grady  coal  should  be  the  equivalent  of  the  lower  part  of  the 
Schatzlar  series.  We  have  every  reason  to  share  White's  astonishment  at 
the  uniformity  which  prevailed  in  the  external  conditions  of  life  during 
this  epoch  on  both  sides  of  the  ocean. 

5.  The  Gonemaugh  group  (lower  barren  measures)  and  6,  the  Monon- 
ghela  (upper  productive  measures)  represent  the  upper  Carboniferous  of 
Europe  (Stefanian  stage,  Ottweil  beds).  A  bed  of  Crinoidal  limestone  in 
Conemaugh  may  be  regarded  as  the  last  trace  left  by  the  advance  of  the  sea 
from  the  south-west.  This  is  the  period  in  which  the  sea  was  constricted 
off*.  In  the  north-east  the  marine  intercalations  terminate  with  the  close 
of  the  Mauch  Chunk  stage;  in  the  south-west  they  persist,  chiefly  as  Fusulina 
limestone  rich  in  Brachiopods.  The  flora  of  the  Mononghela  stage  is  known 
in  Nova  Scotia  (Joggins)  and  also  in  Kansas  (Le  Roy  shales),  and  the  Indian 
Territories  of  the  south  (McAlester  measures). 

7.  The  Dunkard  group  (upper  barren  measures)  is  Permian.  The  coarse 
red  New  Glasgow  conglomerate,  which  occurs  in  transgression  in  Nova 
Scotia,  is  associated  with  thin  coal-seams,  and  continued  along  with  red 
sandstone  across  Northumberland  strait  into  the  large  and  level  Prince 
Edward  island ;  it  is  described  by  Poole  as  Permian  \  In  Prince  Edward 
island  the  sandstone,  which  was  formerly  regarded  as  belonging  to  the 
Trias,  has  yielded  Ulmannia,  Walchia,  and  other  plants  of  the  Rothliegende. 
In  the  typical  Dunkard  beds,  which  occur  in  south-west  Pennsylvania, 
east  Ohio,  and  parts  of  west  Virginia,  D.  White  observed  among  plants 
common  to  Europe  and  America  only  those  of  the  lower  Rothliegende 

^  D.  White,  Fossil  Flora  of  the  Lower  Coal  Measures  of  Missouri,  op.  cit.,  Monograph 
XXXVII,  1899,  307  pp. ;  in  particular  p.  298  et  seq. 

^  G.  J.  Adams,  Gr.  H.  Girty,  and  D.  White,  Stratigraphy  and  Palaeontology  of  the  upper 
Carboniferous  Rocks  of  the  Kansas  Section,  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.  Bull.,  no.  211, 1903, 123  pp. ; 
in  particular  p.  110  et  seq. 

3  J.  A.  TafP,  D.  White,  and  G.  H.  Girty:  Geology  of  the  McAlester  coal-field  by  Taff, 
Report  on  fossil  Plants  by  D.  White,  Report  on  Palaeozoic  invertebrates  by  Girty ;  U.  S. 
Geol.  Surv.  Ann.  Rep.,  XIX,  3,  1899,  pp.  423-593  ;  in  particular  p.  457  et  seq. 

*  H.  S.  Poole,  The  Pictou  Coal  Field,  Proc.  and  Trans.  N.  S.  Inst.  Sci.,  Halifax,  1895, 
VIII,  pp.  228-243,  map.  As  regards  the  age  of  the  sediments  on  Prince  Edward  island, 
see  Russell  and  Knowlton,  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.  Bull.,  no.  58,  pp.  25-31.  They  were  formerly 
believed  to  be  Trias. 


66  ARMOEICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  ALTAIDES  [paetv 


(Kusel  beds)  ^.  Marine  intercalations  do  not  occur  until  we  reach  Texas. 
One  of  the  most  remarkable  genera,  Cope's  Naosaurus  from  the  red  Permian 
of  Texas,  was  found  by  A.  Fritsch,  though  represented  by  a  much  smaller 
form,  in  the  Permian  gas-coal  of  Bohemia  ^.  Handlirsch  has  likewise 
shown  that  the  insects  of  the  Carboniferous  from  the  lower  Lykens  to  the 
uppermost  limit  of  the  system  present  a  striking  correspondence  in  Europe 
and  America,  both  as  regards  their  general  course  of  evolution  and  the 
taxonomic  characters  of  their  several  subdivisions^. 

The  Appalachians  as  far  as  the  Mississippi.  This  great  range  reveals 
itself  as  part  of  the  Altaides  by  its  course  and  disposition ;  by  the  rias  coasts, 
which  must  form  a  junction  somewhere  in  the  north-east ;  by  the  free 
ends  in  which  it  terminates  in  the  south-west;  by  the  contemporaneous 
discordance  at  the  base  of  the  Culm,  and  by  the  completion  of  its  growth 
before  the  entrance  of  the  Ottweil  flora  or  the  Permian. 

The  range  consists  of  several  parts  or  coulisses.  Towards  the  end  of 
the  peninsula  of  Gasp^  the  strike  bends  completely  round  out  of  the  normal 
south-west  into  an  east-south-east  direction ;  this  has  been  demonstrated 
by  borings  for  petroleum  made  in  the  Devonian  *.  The  island  of  Anticosti 
belongs  to  the  border  of  the  Canadian  shield.  The  same  is  true  of  the 
northern  half  of  Long  Range  in  Newfoundland.  In  this  way  the  gulf  of 
St.  Lawrence  is  framed-in  in  a  peculiar  manner. 

On  the  east  of  Long  Range,  Newfoundland  is  formed  of  closely-crowded 
folds  which  include  rocks  extending  from  pre-Cambrian  to  Carboniferous, 
often  altered  by  pressure.  The  rias  coasts  in  the  north  and  south  of  the 
great  island  are  the  expression  of  this  folding. 

The  Carboniferous,  here  including  the  conglomerate  of  the  Horton 
stage  (Culm),  the  marine  Carboniferous  limestone  with  associated  gypsum, 
the  Millstone  grit,  and  the  coal-bearing  series,  occurs  in  the  south-west 
around  St.  George  bay  and  Port-^-Port  bay.  The  plants  which  Dawson 
mentions  as  occurring  at  St.  George  bay  are  for  the  most  part  well-known 
European  types  belonging  to  the  flora  of  Schatzlar  (Sphenopteris  Hoening- 
hausi,  Pecopteris  abhreviata,  Alethopteris  lonchitica  and  others)  ^  These 

'  D.  White,  Permian  Elements  in  the  Dunkard  Flora,  Bull.  Soc.Geol.  Am.,  1903,  XIV, 
pp.  538-542. 

^  E.  D.  Cope,  Systematic  Catalogue  of  Vertebrates  found  in  the  Beds  of  the  Permian 
Epoch  in  North  America,  Trans.  Am.  Phil.  Soc.  (1886),  1890,  XVI,  pp.  285-297;  in  par- 
ticular p.  293 ;  A.  Fritsch,  Fauna  der  Gaskohle  und  der  Kalksteine  der  Permformation 
Bohmens,  4to,  Prague,  1895,  III,  p.  121,  and  1901,  IV,  p.  87. 

^  A.  Handlirsch,  Revision  of  American  Palaeozoic  Insects,  Proc.  U.  S.  Nat.  Mus., 
Washington,  1906,  XXIX,  pp.  661-820. 

*  R.  W.  Ellis,  The  Oil  Fields  of  Gaspe,  Geol.  Surv.,  Canada  (1902-3),  1906,  XV,  A, 
pp.  31(^363,  map. 

*  J.  W.  Dawson,  Carboniferous  Fossils  from  Newfoundland,  Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Am.,  1891, 
II,  pp.  529-540. 


CH.  Il] 


NEWFOUNDLAND 


Carboniferous  beds  are  continued  into  the  interior  towards  the  north- 
north-east  along  the  east  side  of  Long  Range,  and  they  certainly  extend 
nearly  to  the  northern  edge  end  of  the  Grand  Pond  (lat.  49°  N.).  It  may 
be  inferred  also  from  Murray's  statements  that  traces  of  them  may  be 
recognized  even  much  further  still,  in  the  same  direction,  up  to  Cap  Rouge 
and  Fox  cape  on  the  west  coast  of  White  bay  (about  lat.  51°  N.)  ^ 

Thus  it  would  seem  that  a  band  of  coal-bearing  Carboniferous  lies  in 
front  of  the  boundary  of  the  foreland ;  and,  if  so,  White  bay  would  corre- 
spond to  the  place  where  the  Coal-measures  of  the  Armorican  belt  might  be 
expected  to  again  emerge  from  the  ocean. 

According  to  Dana's  view,  which  has  been  confirmed  on  many  sides, 
the  folds  of  Newfoundland  proceed  towards  cape  Breton  2.  This  leads  to 
the  following  conception  of  the  facts  as  a  whole. 

The  innermost  range  is  probably  represented  in  part  by  Sable  island 
(long.  60°  W.,  lat.  44°  N.),  which  is  said  to  consist  of  lower  Carboniferous. 

The  first  visible  fragment  of  a  continuous  coulisse  is  formed  by  the 
lower  Palaeozoic  sediments  which  strike  obliquely  across  Nova  Scotia  from 
St.  Mary  bay  to  Chedabucto  bay  in  the  north-east.  In  the  south  the  form 
of  the  rias  coast  is  deceptive.  It  might  lead  us  to  assume  a  strike  to  the 
south;  but  Bailey  found  that  the  folds  strike  away  to  the  south-west  and 
west-south-west.  This  misleading  appearance  is  produced  by  intrusive 
granites,  which  cut  through  the  folds,  and  by  transverse  valleys  resembling 
fjords  ^.  In  the  north,  near  Chedabucto  bay,  the  strike  turns  more  and 
more  to  the  east-north-east  (I,  p.  554).  Towards  Fundy  bay,  beds  contain- 
ing Dictyonema  are  immediately  overlain  by  the  Horton  series,  which  here 
already  indicates  the  unconformable  transgression  of  the  Culm,  and  this  is 
followed  by  a  belt  of  horizontally  stratified  Trias,  along  with  a  belt  of 
Trias  trap,  which  forms  for  a  long  distance  the  south-east  shore  of  Fundy 
bay.  Further  to  the  north,  in  cape  Breton,  we  see,  on  looking  northwards 
— that  is,  towards  Newfoundland — folds  which  diverge  from  one  another ; 
and  here,  too,  the  first  traces  of  Coal-measures  make  their  appearance.  The 
richest  coal-field,  that  of  Pictou,  lies  on  the  north-west  side  of  Nova 

^  A.  Murray  and  J.  P.  Howley,  Geological  Survey  of  Newfoundland,  8vo,  London,  1881, 
p.  41  (as  Devonian),  pp.  67  and  309. 

*  J.  D.  Dana,  Archaean  Axes  of  East  North-America,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1890,  XXXIX, 
pp.  378-383. 

^  L.  W.  Bailey,  Report  on  the  Geology  of  South-west  Nova  Scotia,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Surv. 
Canada,  IX,  1898,  M,  151  pp.,  map.  Something  similar  is  to  be  seen  in  the  Fox  islands, 
Penobscot  bay,  Maine ;  they  consist  of  an  eruptive  rock,  the  contour  of  which  is  indepen- 
dent of  the  folds  striking  to  the  south-west ;  G.  Otis  Smith,  The  Geology  of  the  Fox 
islands,  Dissertation,  8vo,  Skowhegan,  Maine,  1896,  map;  H.  Fletcher,  King's  and 
Hants  Counties,  Ann.  Rep.  (1901),  1902,  XIV,  A,  p.  210  et  seq. ;  A.  Keith,  Geology 
of  the  Catoctin  Belt  (where  the  commencement  of  the  virgation  is  particularly  clear), 
Ann.  Rep.,  XIV,  2,  pp.  285-395,  maps. 


68  AEMORICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  ALTAIDES  [partv 


Scotia,  where  the  constriction  of  the  country  begins.  The  Coal-measures 
are  folded :  they  lie  upon  the  Millstone  grit,  which  belongs  to  the  Pottsville 
stage.  We  may  therefore  assign  them,  like  those  of  St.  George  bay 
(Newfoundland)  and  St.  John  (beyond  Fundy  bay),  to  the  horizon  of 
Schatzlar  (upper  Lykens).  The  synclines  of  Pictou  seem,  as  a  whole,  to  have 
been  so  severely  denuded  that,  in  place  of  a  continuous  band  of  Coal- 
measures,  we  find  only  isolated  basins.  On  their  north  border,  according  to 
Fletcher,  a  dislocation  brings  the  Coal-measures  of  Pictou  into  juxtaposition 
with  coal-measures  of  the  Rothliegende  conglomerate,  which  rests  uncon- 
formably  on  the  Carboniferous. 

The  constriction  in  the  south  of  Northumberland  strait,  across  which 
the  beds  strike,  is  evidently  of  fundamental  importance  in  a  study  of  the 
structure  of  this  region.  It  is  here  that  we  must  look  for  the  outer  border 
of  the  folds  of  Nova  Scotia ;  and  here,  on  the  north-east  side  of  Chignecto 
bay  (north-east  Fundy  bay),  the  great  Joggins  series,  described  by  Dana, 
contains  the  flora  of  Ottweil,  and  lies  flat — a  very  remarkable  fact  ^. 

The  bedding  becomes  flat  therefore  on  the  same  horizon  as  in  the  Altaides. 

The  land  situated  further  towards  the  north-west  presents,  in  fact, 
a  totally  different  structure.  The  clearest  general  description  has  been 
given  by  Poole  \ 

The  coast  of  New  Brunswick,  from  the  north  coast  of  Chaleurs  bay 
onwards,  almost  up  to  the  eastern  end  of  Northumberland  strait,  is  formed 
of  flat-lying  beds  only.  In  the  north,  lower  Carboniferous  rests  uncon- 
f ormably  upon  the  folds  of  Gasp^ ;  at  the  same  time  it  extends  in  a  broad 
angulated  range  through  Fredericton  into  the  interior,  and  again  reaches 
the  sea  at  the  Verte  bay,  thus  enclosing  a  basin-like  area,  the  north  side  of 
which  forms  the  above-mentioned  flat  north  coast  of  New  Brunswick. 

The  whole  of  this  area  is  filled  by  a  *  grey  series '  of  trifling  thickness, 
containing  a  few  insignificant  coal-seams,  and  succeeded  by  the  Rothliegende 
with  Walchia  and  other  plants.  The  Rothliegende  is  continued  into  Prince 
Edward  island ;  the  sea  is  here  very  shallow,  and  the  island  itself  is  only 
a  fragment  of  the  flat  northern  part  of  New  Brunswick.  It  presents  some 
gentle  undulations  with  an  east-north-east  strike. 

In  the  south  the  grey  series  lies  conformably  on  the  Ottweil  beds  of  the 
J oggins  series ;  it  represents  a  zone  of  transition  between  the  Permian  and 
Carboniferous. 

Gasp^  and  Maine  belong  to  another  mountain  complex.  New  Bruns- 
wick represents  to  a  certain  extent  the  foreland  of  Newfoundland  and 

»  H.  Fletcher,  Geol.  Surv.,  Canada  (1882-1884),  1885,  H ;  Geology  of  North  Cape  Breton, 
98  pp.  For  the  Horton  unconformity  in  Nova  Scotia,  op.  cit.  (1901),  1905,  XIV,  A,  p.  214 ; 
for  the  Joggins  unconformity,  tom.  cit.,  A,  p.  208  et  passim. 

'  H.  S.  Poole,  Report  on  the  Coal  Prospects  of  New  Brunswick,  Geol.  Surv.,  Canada 
(1900),  1903,  XIV,  MM,  17  pp.,  in  particular  p.  9  et  seq. ;  also  Bailey,  op.  cit.,  M,  26  pp. 


CH.  Il] 


SYNCHKONOUS  FOLDING 


69 


Nova  Scotia.  We  may  assume  that  near  the  outer  border  of  the  folds  an 
interrupted  band  of  folded  Coal-measures  of  the  Schatzlar  stage  strikes 
from  St.  George  bay  (Newfoundland)  towards  Pictou  (west  Nova  Scotia) 
and  possibly  towards  St.  John  (New  Brunswick).  Culm  (Horton  series) 
and  Carboniferous  limestone  lie  unconformably  in  Newfoundland,  Nova 
Scotia,  and  New  Brunswick.  This  unconformity  at  the  base  of  the  Car- 
boniferous is  the  same  as  that  of  which  we  cited  an  example  from  the 
Thian-shan  (p.  2) ;  it  is  repeated  in  the  Sudetes  and  in  Brittany.  Near 
Joggins  the  Coal-measures  of  the  Ottweil  stage  lie  undisturbed;  the 
Rothliegende  is  only  traversed  by  gentle  anticlines.  With  the  exception 
of  these  last  trifling  undulations,  the  mountain  building  is  thus  of  pre- 
Permian  age.  This  synchronism  shows  that  the  movements  luhich  gave  rise 
to  the  Altaides  have  been  propagated  across  the  Ocean, 

The  independent  position  of  the  Gasp^-Connecticut  fragment  has 
already  been  mentioned.  A  great  dislocation,  the  '  Lawrence  Champlain- 
fault,'  forms  the  boundary  between  this  fragment  and  the  Laurentian 
foreland.  The  advance  of  a  part  of  the  foreland,  to  which  the  Adirondacks 
belong,  determines  the  deflexion  of  this  boundary  towards  the  south  ^. 

To  all  appearance  a  fairly  uniform  anticline  of  lower  Palaeozoic  beds 
starts  from  Gasp^  and  runs  fairly  parallel  to  the  boundary  through  the 
Shickshock  mountains  ^.  The  European  character  of  some  of  the  faunulae 
of  north-east  Maine  has  already  been  referred  to;  here,  also,  there  is 
a  prevalent  north-easterly  strike,  yet  at  several  places  towards  the  middle 
of  Maine  isolated  groups  of  volcanic  rocks  (andesite,  rhyolite,  and  others) 
crop  out  ^.    The  interior  of  this  region  is  little  known. 

As  the  boundary  between  the  folded  mountains  and  the  foreland  enters 
the  interior  below  Quebec,  the  folds  bend  more  and  more  to  the  south. 
The  compressed  rocks  run  past  the  east  side  of  lake  Champlain,  then  turn 
from  New  York  through  Vermont  and  Massachusetts  to  Connecticut :  their 
course  was  traced  by  Walcott  on  a  sketch-map  in  1888  The  most  violent 
damming  back  probably  occurs  on  lake  Champlain  and  a  little  south  of  it. 
Then  the  several  coulisses  turn  more  and  more  to  the  south-south-west  and 
cross  the  Hudson  obliquely. 

The  ranges  of  gneiss,  which  run  on  both  sides  of  Connecticut  river  with 
a  north  and  south  strike,  form  Dana's  New  Hampshire  range ;  they  also 
form  the  Green  mountains.    For  west  Massachusetts,  in  particular,  we 

^  For  the  boundary  see  H.  P.  Gushing,  Geology  of  the  North  Adirondack  Region,  New 
York  State  Museum,  1905,  Bull.,  no.  95,  pp.  271-453,  maps. 

2  Ells,  Geol.  Surv.,  Canada,  Ann.  Rep.  (1882-1884),  1885,  F,  p.  31  ;  Low,  torn,  cit., 
pp.  16-20. 

^  H.  S.  Williams,  see  previous  notes ;  H.  E.  Gregory,  Geology  of  the  Aroostook  volcanic 
area  of  Maine,  ibid.,  pp.  93-188,  map. 

*  C.  D.  Walcott,  The  Taconic  System  of  Emmons,  and  the  Use  of  the  Name  Taconic  in 
geological  Nomenclature,  Am.  .Toum.  Sci.,  1888,  XXXV,  pp.  229-327,  394-401,  map. 


70   ARMOEICA  AND  THE  AMEEICAN  ALTAIDES  [paetv 

have  a  number  of  admirable  descriptions  of  these  long  ranges,  exemplary- 
studies  of  chains  highly  altered  by  pressure.  Emerson,  in  his  account  of 
north-west  Hampshire,  describes  the  occurrence,  in  the  midst  of  these  com- 
pressed meridional  ranges,  of  the  trough  of  the  Connecticut  river,  in  which 
Trias  beds  have  been  let  down  to  a  depth  of  1,600  meters  ^. 

The  mountain  waves,  after  they  have  surrounded  the  Adirondacks  and 
the  projecting  part  of  the  foreland,  press  forwards  and  at  the  same  time 
diverge  from  one  another,  somewhat  as  they  do  in  the  Urals,  south  of  the 
Ufa  plateau  (III,  p.  365).    Here  also  we  may  assume  compulsory  virgation. 

The  deflexion  is  least  apparent  in  the  eastern  ranges,  among  which  we 
must  include  the  folds  of  the  Piedmont  plateau.  This  plateau  was  formerly 
regarded  as  Archaean ;  we  may  now  assume  that  it  was  not  folded  until 
after  the  deposition  of  the  Culm.  Even  in  Massachusetts,  plants  of  the 
Culm  are  said  to  occur^  associated  with  graphite,  in  mica-schist ;  and  to  the 
south,  in  Alabama,  E.  Smith  has  met  with  Lepidostrobus  in  semi-crystalline 
graphitic  schists  2. 

The  Piedmont  plateau  in  Maryland  has  been  described  by  Mathews,  and 
in  Pennsylvania  by  Bascom^.  A  long  range  of  gabbro  runs  within  the 
plateau,  from  New  York  through  Delaware,  Maryland,  and  south-east 
Pennsylvania  to  Virginia  :  it  is  very  much  ramified,  and  forces  its  way 
from  the  gneiss  into  the  lower  Silurian.  Where  it  has  undergone  pressure, 
green  hornblende  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  biotite  take  the  place  of  the 
pyroxene  in  this  rock 

The  deflexion  is  most  considerable  in  the  outer  folds.  It  is  very  clearly 
seen  in  the  south-west  of  New  York  State  and  as  far  as  the  anthracite 
coal-fields  of  north-east  Pennsylvania.  It  produces  many  wonderful  over- 
thrusts,  and  the  compulsory  virgation  gives  rise  to  the  broad  sigmoid 
flexure  of  the  Pennsylvanian  coal-fields  ^. 

Bailey  Willis  has  made  the  structure  of  the  main  range  of  the  Appa- 
lachians the  subject  of  studies,  from  which  we  derive  the  following^: — 

1  R.  Pumpelly,  J.  E.  Wolff,  and  T.  Nelson  Dale,  Geology  of  the  Green  Mountains, 
Mass.,  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.  Monograph,  XXIII,  1894 ;  B.  K.  Emerson,  The  Geology  of  East 
Berkshire  City,  Mass.,  op.  cit.,  Bull.,  no.  159,  1899.  For  the  region  adjoining  this  on  the 
south,  and  a  little  further  to  the  east:  Geology  of  Old  Hampshire  City,  Mass.,  op.  cit., 
Monogr.,  XXIX,  1898,  as  well  as  the  corresponding  folios  of  the  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv. ;  also 
W.  H.  Hobbs,  On  the  geological  Structure  of  the  Mt.  Washington  Mass  of  the  Taconic 
Range,  Journ.  Geol.,  Chicago,  1893, 1,  pp.  717-736,  and  many  other  detailed  descriptions. 

2  E.  Smith,  Science,  21  Aug.,  1903,  pp.  244-246. 

'  E.  B.  Mathews,  The  structure  of  the  Piedmont  Plateau  as  shown  in  Maryland,  Am. 
Journ.  Sci.,  1904,  XVII,  pp.  141-159  ;  F.  Bascom,  Piedmont  District  of  Pennsylvania, 
Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Am.,  1905,  XVI,  pp.  289-338. 

♦  Bascom,  Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Am.,  1905,  XVI,  p.  311  et  seq. 

»  e.  g.  N.  F.  Darton,Two  overthrusts  in  New  York,  Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Am.,  1893,  IV,  p.  438. 

•  Bailey  Willis,  The  Mechanics  of  the  Appalachian  Structure,  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.  Ann. 
Rep.,  XIII,  2,  1893,  pp.  211-281,  maps. 


CH.  Il] 


APPALACHIAN  FOLDS 


71 


The  folds  and  thrust-planes  extend  here  for  a  distance  of  more  than 
720  kilometers;  the  several  structural  lines  are  remarkably  parallel  and 
very  long  ;  one  of  them  attains  a  length  of  600  kilometers.  The  anticlines 
present  a  steep  dip  on  the  north-west  side  and  a  gentle  dip  on  the  south- 
east ;  on  their  north-west  side  thrust-planes  occur.  Although  considerable 
displacements  exist,  yet  no  rocks  of  greater  age  than  the  Cambrian  are 
exposed.  The  thickness  of  the  sediments,  and  particularly  of  the  Devonian, 
decreases  rather  rapidly  towards  the  south-west.  Four  types  of  structure 
may  be  distinguished :  (1)  open  folds  (in  Pennsylvania  and  east  Virginia, 
i.  e.  the  region  of  the  compulsory  virgation) ;  (2)  close  folds  (in  the  so-called 
valley  of  the  Appalachians,  i.  e.,  broadly  speaking,  a  zone  of  older  sediments 
preceding  the  pre-Cambrian  zone) ;  (3)  folding  and  movement  along  thrust- 
planes,  giving  rise  to  imbricate  j&akes  (south  Virginia,  Tennessee,  Georgia) ; 
(4)  folding  with  foliation,  i.e.  powerful  dynamic  effects  (this  zone  is 
scarcely  to  be  distinguished  from  the  Piedmont  zone). 

Of  particular  interest  are  the  circumstances  under  which  the  folding 
of  the  outer  zones  (1  and  3)  passes  into  imbricate  structure  towards  the 
south-west. 

In  the  same  section  of  the  outer  zones  we  may  observe  as  many  as  ten 
of  these  imbricate  flakes  in  succession.  On  the  Coosa  river,  however,  south 
of  the  boundary  of  Georgia  and  Alabama,  the  borders  of  the  two  eastern- 
most flakes  bend  round  almost  at  right  angles  and  step  over  the  western 
flakes  lying  in  front  of  them,  which  retain  the  normal  strike  to  the  south- 
west with  a  slightly  concave  curve. 

From  the  description  given  by  W.  Hayes  we  may  discern  the  following : 
The  first  thrust-plane  (Rome  fault)  is  part  of  a  line  which  has  been  traced 
for  a  distance  of  440  kilometers ;  the  distance  to  which  the  overthrust  part 
has  been  carried  is  4  kilometers.  At  Resaca  a  window  occurs,  3  kilometers 
in  length,  which  exposes  Carboniferous  beneath  Cambrian  beds.  A  few 
patches  advance  beyond  the  edge  of  the  flake  and  lie  in  short  synciines 
between  secondarily  produced  anticlines,  which  are  common  to  both  the 
flakes  and  more  recent  than  the  overthrusting.  The  extent  of  the  over- 
thrust  on  the  second  thrust-plane  (Cartersville  fault)  is  at  least  17  kilo- 
meters ;  the  overthrusting  has  perhaps  been  preceded  by  denudation  ^. 

The  Cahaba  coal-region,  which  lies  to  the  north-west,  has  been  studied 
by  Squire,  and  its  neighbourhood  by  Eugene  Smith ;  their  results,  together 
with  Mc  Galley's  description  of  the  Coosa  district,  show  that  there  is  a  very 
large  number  of  similar  thrust-planes,  succeeding  each  other,  and  that  the 
extent  of  the  dislocation  is  very  considerable  ^. 

^  0.  Willard  Hayes,  The  Overthrust  Faults  of  the  South  Appalachians,  Bull.  Geol.  See. 
Am.,  1891,  II,  pp.  141-154,  map;  C.  W.  Hayes  and  M.  R.  Campbell,  Geomorphology  of 
the  South  Appalachians,  Nat.  Geogr.  Mag.,  Washington,  1894,  IV,  pp.  63-126,  maps. 

^  J.  Squire,  Report  on  the  Cahaba  Coal  Field,  with  an  Appendix  on  the  Geology  of  the 


72  AEMOEICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  ALTAIDES  [party 

From  this  point  onwards  the  strike  turns  to  the  west-south-west,  and 
soon  all  the  folds  disappear  beneath  the  Cretaceous  mantle  of  the  Mississippi 
valley. 

We  have  already  mentioned  (I,  p.  557)  the  Cincinnati  uplift,  a  long 
gentle  anticline  which  we  compared  to  the  Parmas  of  the  Ural  mountains. 
South-east  of  Nashville,  Tennessee,  the  lower  Silurian  Trenton  limestone, 
which  forms  the  basement  of  the  low  country,  is  exposed  over  a  very  wide 


Fig.  10.    Overthrusts  on  the  concave  curve  of  the  Appalachians  (after  W,  Hayes). 


area.  Further  exposures  occur  towards  the  north-east,  extending  through 
Kentucky  and  up  to  the  boundary  of  Ohio.  The  angle  of  dip  is  everywhere 
small.  The  presence  of  oil  in  the  Trenton  limestone  has  led  to  extensive 
boring,  and  we  now  know  that  the  natural  exposures  afford  only  an 

Valley  Regions  adjacent  by  E.  A.  Smith,  Alabama  Geol.  Surv.,  1890,  map ;  in  particular 
Smith,  p.  139  et  eeq.  ;  E.  Smith,  Underthrust  Folds  and  Faults,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1893, 
XLV,  pp.  305,  306 ;  H.  McCalley,  Report  on  the  Valley  Regions  of  Alabama,  Part  II,  The 
Coosa  Valley  Region,  Geol.  Surv.,  Alabama,  1897  ;  in  particular  p.  27  et  seq. 


cH.ii]  COMPAKISON  WITH  EUEOPE 


73 


imperfect  idea  of  the  configuration  of  the  long  subterranean  ridge.  The 
principal  range  runs  from  Nashville  towards  the  north-east.  In  the  north 
it  lies  in  several  broad  saddles,  which  slope  gradually  downwards,  so  that 
between  Sandusky  and  Toledo,  even  before  reaching  the  west  end  of  Lake 
Erie,  they  have  descended  to  great  depths.  West  of  these  saddles  and  parallel 
to  them  a  somewhat  more  strongly  marked  subterranean  anticline,  the 
Limes  or  Findlay  axis,  runs  towards  Sylvania  on  the  boundary  of  Michigan  ^ 
Finally  a  broad  ridge  runs  from  Cincinnati  towards  Indiana,  and  in  the 
north  of  this  state  some  brachy-anticlines  crop  out,  which  are  remarkably 
sharp  and  dome-shaped  2. 

Atlantic  and  Pacific  characters.  The  east  coast  of  North  America  may 
be  resolved  into  several  parts.  The  first  includes  the  bare  coasts  of  the 
gulf  of  St.  Lawrence  and  extends  as  far  as  White  bay  in  Newfoundland 
(lat.  51°  N.)  The  second  includes  those  parts  of  the  Appalachians  which 
emerge  from  the  ocean;  it  extends  nearly  down  to  Martha's  Vineyard 
(between  lats.  42°  and  41°  N.).  The  third  is  represented  by  a  flat-lying  belt 
of  Mesozoic  and  Tertiary  sediments  which  rests  unconformably  against  the 
inner  side  of  the  Appalachians.  In  Georgia  and  Alabama  this  belt  con- 
tinually recedes  towards  the  interior  and  makes  way  for  the  deposits  of 
Florida  and  Louisiana,  which  are  of  upper  Tertiary  or  even  more  recent 
date. 

(a)  Near  the  northern  end  of  this  belt,  to  the  west  and  south-west  of 
Boston,  patches  of  coal-bearing  Carboniferous  beds  are  let  down  by  trough- 
faults  into  the  rocks  of  the  Piedmont  plateau.  The  largest  of  these  forms 
the  elbow-shaped  Narragansett  basin ;  its  southern  part  strikes  meridionally 
through  Rhode  island  and  into  the  sea.  The  Coal-measures  of  this  trough 
correspond  to  the  upper  part  of  the  Schatzlar  stage  ^. 

In  Europe  limnic  transgressions  of  considerable  extent  occurred  at  this 
time  affecting  the  previously  denuded  inner  side  of  the  Variscan  arc,  as,  for 
example,  in  Bohemia  (II,  p.  249). 

In  the  basin  of  the  Saar,  as  in  that  of  Narragansett,  subsidence  took 
place  in  a  fault-trough. 

(b)  The  Newark  system  is  formed  of  extensive  patches  of  plant-bearing 
beds.  Basing  his  conclusions  on  Fontaine's  investigations,  Stur  showed  the 
correspondence  of  its  flora  with  that  of  the  German  Lettenkohle,  particularly 

1  E.  Orton,  First  Annual  Report  of  the  Geol.  Surv.,  Ohio,  3rd  org.,  Columbus,  1890, 
pp.  45-54. 

2  A.  J.  Phinney,  The  Natural  Gas  Field  of  Indiana,  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.  Ann.  Rep.,  XI,  I, 
1891,  pp.  643-653;  E.  M.  Kindle,  The  Niagara  Domes  of  North  Indiana,  Am.  Journ.  Sci., 
1903,  XV,  pp.  459-468. 

5  Shaler,  Woodworth,  and  Foerste,  Geology  of  Narragansett  Basin,  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv. 
Monogr.,  XXXIII,  1899,  maps.  The  Carboniferous  of  the  north  half  of  the  trough  is 
folded,  but  the  section  on  p.  27  shows  that  the  folding  is  a  secondary  effect  of  the  subsi- 
dence ;  for  the  age  see  D.  White,  Monogr.,  XXXVII,  p.  285. 


74  AKMOEICA  AND  THE  AMEEICAN  ALTAIDES  [paktv 


as  developed  at  Lunz  in  the  eastern  Alps  ^.  This  accords  with  the  occurrence 
in  the  Newark  beds  of  the  crocodilian  genus  Belodon,  which  belongs  to  the 
upper  Keuper  of  Germany.  The  presence  of  fishes  (Catopterus)  allied  to 
Semionotus  also  points  rather  to  the  upper  Keuper. 

The  Newark  system  starts  from  the  head  of  Fundy  bay  as  a  long  series 
of  patches,  for  the  greater  part  elongated  towards  the  south-west ;  it  follows 
approximately  the  strike  of  the  Appalachians  for  a  distance  of  960  kilo- 
meters, and  reaches  the  boundary  of  north  and  south  Carolina.  Davis, 
Darton,  Russell,  Hobbs,  and  other  investigators  have  made  it  the  subject 
of  investigation,  and  Russell  has  collated  all  the  older  results  ^.  The  patch, 
170  kilometers  in  length,  and  elongated  from  north  to  south,  which  contains 
part  of  the  course  of  the  Connecticut  river,  and  reaches  the  sea  near  New- 
haven,  is,  as  we  have  seen,  let  down  in  a  fault-trough.  This  is  also  true  of 
the  Richmond  patch,  rich  in  coal,  and  50  kilometers  in  length ;  and  many 
other  patches  are  bounded  or  cut  through  by  faults.  The  Newark  system 
is  associated  with  basic  eruptive  rocks,  which  appear  sometimes  as  steep 
veins,  sometimes  as  intrusive  layers,  and  again  as  effusive  mantles.  The 
border  of  one  of  these  mantles,  dipping  to  the  north-west,  forms,  for  a 
breadth  of  8-16  kilometers  and  a  length  of  190  kilometers,  the  east  shore  of 
Fundy  bay  and  also  Digby  Neck,  a  narrow  strip  which  bounds  St.  Mary  bay 
like  a  lido.  An  intrusive  flat-lying  dyke,  cutting  through  the  beds  obliquely, 
forms  the  Palisades  on  the  left  bank  of  the  lower  Hudson ;  near  New  York 
it  is  260  meters  in  thickness.  Lewis  has  traced  a  dyke  through  Pennsyl- 
vania for  a  distance  of  144  kilometers ;  according  to  Williams  it  is  continued 
for  another  48  kilometers  into  Maryland  ^.  In  the  south,  where  the  Newark 
sediments  are  absent,  these  dykes  may  be  traced  even  as  far  as  Alabama, 
where  they  conform  more  and  more  to  the  general  direction  of  the  folding. 
The  southernmost  limit  to  which  they  are  visible  is  given  by  the  Cretaceous 
covering;  it  is  1,600  kilometers  distant  from  the  most  northerly  exposure 
in  Fundy  bay ;  the  breadth  of  the  zone  occupied  by  these  basic  dykes  and 
superficial  sheets  is  estimated  by  Russell  at  about  320  kilometers. 

(c)  Potomac  zone.    The  Carboniferous  and  Newark  areas,  mentioned 

^  W.  M.  Fontaine,  The  older  Mesozoic  Flora  of  Virginia,  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.  Monogr.,  VI, 
1883 ;  D.  Stur,  Die  Lunzer  (Lettenkolalen-)Florainden '  Old  Mesozoic  beds  of  the  Coal-Field 
of  East  Virginia',  Verh.  k.k.  geol.  Reichs.,  1888,  pp.  203-217  ;  Lester  Ward,  Status  of 
the  Mesozoic  Floras  of  the  United  States,  Ann.  Rep.,  XX,  2,  1900,  pp.  211-315. 

2  I.  Cook  Russell,  Correlation  Papers.  The  Newark  System,  Bull.  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv., 
no.  85,  1892, 344  pp.,  maps  ;  N.  S.  Shaler  and  J.  B.  Woodworth,  Geology  of  the  Richmond 
Basin,  Virginia,  op.  cit.  Ann.  Rep.,  XIX,  2,  1899,  pp.  385-519,  maps ;  W.  H.  Hobbs,  The 
Newark  System  of  Pomperaug  Valley,  Connecticut,  op.  cit.,  XXI,  3,  1901,  pp.  17-162, 
maps.  The  list  of  works  referring  to  the  Newark  System  given  by  Russell  in  1892  fills  no 
less  than  199  pages. 

^  H.  C.  Lewis,  A  great  Trap  Dyke  across  south-east  Pennsylvania,  Proc.  Am.  Phil.  Soc, 
Philadelphia,  1885,  XII,  pp.  438-456,  map. 


CH.li]  THE  ATLANTIC  BELT  75 

above,  contain  no  marine  fossils,  and  rest  on  the  rocks  of  the  Piedmont 
plateau.  It  is  outside  the  patches  that  the  flat-lying  Atlantic  belt  begins. 
Its  principal  members  are:  the  Potomac  group,  the  Raritan  formation 


Fig.  11.    The  Atlantic  belt  between  Washington  and  Baltimore. 
(After  the  map  of  the  Geological  Survey  of  Maryland.) 
Gw  =  gneiss  and  mica-schist ;  Ph,  P/iZ  =  phyllite  and  limestone  (altered  Palaeozoic  rocks) ; 
if  =  marble;  6^  =  granite;  G6  =  gabbro;  P  =  peridotite  and  serpentine  ;  Ce  =  lower 
Cretaceous  =  Potomac ;  Cm  =  marine  Senonian  ;  E  =  Eocene. 


(Amboy  clays),  the  beds  representing  the  marine  transgression  of  the 
Senonian,  and  the  marine  Tertiary  beds.  No  doubt  many  displacements  of 
the  strand  occurred  after  the  deposition  of  this  belt,  but  on  the  whole 


76  AEMOEICA  AND  THE  AMEEICAN  ALTAIDES  [party 

it  corresponds  with  the  existing  outline  of  the  continent,  until,  in  the 
south,  it  recedes  towards  the  west  ^. 

It  consists  of  lower  and  higher  members,  the  former  (Potomac  and 
Raritan)  have  only  furnished  terrestrial  plants  and  a  few  remains  of 
reptiles ;  they  are  often  grouped  together  as  the  Potomac  zone ;  the  latter 
are  purely  marine. 

At  the  boundary  between  the  Jurassic  and  Cretaceous  of  Central 
Europe  a  negative  phase  occurs  (II,  p.  277).  Even  in  Poland,  near  Thorn, 
close  to  the  German  frontier,  Michalski  has  found  the  Cyrena  marl  of  the 
Weald  ^.  In  the  north  of  France,  and  the  greater  part  of  England,  the  lower 
Neocomian  is  nowhere  represented  by  marine  deposits.  On  the  Charente 
and  in  Portugal  the  Weald  reaches  the  ocean.  Observations  show  that  the 
boundary  between  the  Jurassic  and  the  Cretaceous  must  be  drawn  above 
the  brackish -water  beds  of  the  Purbeck  and  below  the  Hastings  sand  and 
Weald,  which  represent  the  lower  and  part  of  the  middle  Neocomian. 

The  deposition  of  the  Potomac  zone  began  during  this  negative  phase. 
In  Maryland,  arkose  occurs  at  the  base  and  is  followed  by  clays.  The 
lower  beds  contain  a  flora  belonging  to  the  Weald  and  Neocomian.  Above 
lies  the  Earitan  formation.  After  visiting  the  Cretaceous  deposits  of 
Portugal  which  Choffat  and  Saporta  had  shown  to  contain  a  combination 
of  terrestrial  floras  and  marine  faunas.  Ward  came  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  Raritan  flora  corresponds  with  the  Vraconnien,  i.e.  it  lies  on  the 
boundary  between  the  Gault  and  Cenomanian  ^ 

The  Potomac  flora  is  known  over  a  region  extending  from  Philadelphia 
southwards  through  Maryland  to  north  Virginia.  It  also  occurs  in  several 
places  much  further  south,  as  will  be  mentioned  later.  The  Raritan  flora 
extends  from  Martha's  Vineyard  to  Maryland.  Ward  has  shown  that  it  is 
identical  with  the  flora  of  the  Tuscalosa  formation  in  Alabama,  which 
occurs  under  similar  conditions. 

{d)  Overstepping  this  inner,  non-marine  belt,  comes  the  marine  trans- 

1  W.  J.  McGee,  The  Lafayette  Formation,  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.  Ann.  Rep.,  XII,  1,  1891, 
pp.  347-521,  maps ;  N.  H.  Darton,  Outline  of  the  Cenozoic  History  of  a  Portion  of  the 
Middle  Atlantic  Slope,  Journ.  GeoL,  Chicago,  1894,  II,  pp.  568-587  ;  W.  B.  Clarke,  The 
Eocene  Deposits  of  the  Middle  Atlantic  Slope,  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.  Bull.,  141,  1896,  and 
Maryland  Geol.  Surv.  vol.  Eocene,  8vo.,  Baltimore,  1901,  map. 

^  A.  Michalski,  Ueber  das  Vorkommen  von  Wealden  und  Neocom  im  nordwest.  Polen, 
Bull.  Com.  geol.  Russie,  1903,  XXII,  pp.  339-364,  r. 

'  Lester  Frank  Ward,  The  Potomac  Formation,  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.  Ann.  Rep.,  XV, 
1895,  pp.  309-397  ;  Some  Analogies  in  the  lower  Cretaceous  of  Europe  and  America, 
op.  cit.,  XVI,  1896,  pp.  463-540;  Status  of  the  Mesozoic  Floras  of  the  United  States, 
op.  cit.,  Monogr.  XLVIII,  in  particular  p.  574  et  seq. ;  0.  C.  Marsh,  The  Jurassic  Forma- 
tion on  the  Atlantic  Coast,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1896,  II,  pp.  433-447,  and  1898,  VI,  pp.  105- 
115  ;  W.  B.  Clarke  and  A.  Bibbins,  The  Stratigraphy  of  the  Potomac  Group  in  Maryland, 
Journ.  Geol.,  Chicago,  1897,  V,  ppw  479-506 ;  Geology  of  the  Potomac  Group  in  the  Middle 
Atlantic  Slope,  op.  cit,  1902,  XIII,  pp.  187-214,  map. 


qH.  ii] 


TEXAS 


77 


gression  of  the  upper  Senonian.  Starting  from  Martha's  Vineyard  it  runs 
through  north  and  south  Carolina,  Georgia  and  Alabama,  and  then 
swerves  across  the  strike  of  the  Appalachians  into  the  valley  of  the 
Mississippi  (I,  p.  284,  fig.  37  ;  II,  p.  303). 

Then  the  inner  part  of  the  belt  bends  to  the  north,  crosses  the  mouth  of 
the  Ohio,  and,  north  of  lat.  37°  N.,  turns  to  the  south-south-west,  thus 
including  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi.  In  these  regions,  i.  e.  south-east 
Missouri  and  north-east  Arkansas,  we  only  see  the  continuous  scarp  of  the 
older  formations.  It  runs  south-west  to  Little  Rock  (Arkansas)  and  beyond ; 
then,  somewhat  north  of  lat.  34°  W.,  a  change  sets  in.  The  Tertiary  girdle 
runs  south-west  across  the  Rio  Grande  to  Mexico,  but  the  inner  border  of 
the  Cretaceous  formation  pursues  a  fairly  rectilinear  course  to  the  west. 
It  strikes  along  the  south  foot  of  the  Ouachita  range,  nearly  parallel  to  the 
Red  river,  through  the  territories  of  the  Chocktaw  and  Chickasaw  Indians, 
and  Oklahoma,  to  the  other  side  of  the  meridian  of  100°  W.  Within  this 
vast  region,  which  extends  as  far  as  the  cordilleras  of  New  Mexico,  rise  the 
Cretaceous  table  mountains  of  Texas. 

The  investigations  of  R.  Hill  and  his  colleague  Vaughan  enable  us  to 
form  a  clear  conception  of  this  region  ^.  Texas  (688,340  square  kilometers) 
is  larger  than  Austria-Hungary  (625,557  square  kilometers),  the  German 
Empire  (540,484  kilometers),  or  France  (536,408  square  kilometers).  The 
flat-lying  Cretaceous  alone — if  we  include  a  strip  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Red  river — occupies  an  area  of  440,000  square  kilometers.  In  the  east  it 
dips  normally  beneath  the  Tertiary  belt.  In  the  west  it  is  seized  by  the 
folds  of  the  Cordillera,  and  but  slightly  changed  in  character  continues  into 
Mexico.  Towards  the  north  it  spreads  in  isolated  patches  over  Kansas  and 
Oklahoma.  Since,  however,  the  Neocomian  flora  of  Potomac  occurs  in  the 
Trinity  sands  ^,  which  form  its  lowest  member,  and  its  highest  beds  are 
correlated  with  the  upper  Senonian  of  Maryland,  it  follows  that  the  whole 
of  the  great  Cretaceous  series  of  Texas  must  have  been  deposited  during 
a  period  which  corresponds  with  the  formation  of  the  Atlantic  belt  of 
Maryland  and  New  Jersey,  and  that  it  is  simply  a  broadening  out  and 
swelling  up  of  this  belt.  Intercalations  of  Aptian  occur,  and  of  Cenomanian 
which  attain  a  considerable  thickness  ^. 

1  R.  T.  Hill,  Geography  and  Geology  of  the  Black  and  Grand  Prairies,  Texas,  U.  S.  Geol. 
Surv.  Ann.  Rep.,  XXI,  7,  1901,  666  pp.,  maps  ;  Topograpical  Atlas  of  the  United  States, 
Physical  Geography  of  the  Texas  Region,  fol.  1900  ;  R.  T.  Hill  and  T.  Wayland  Vaughan, 
Geology  of  the  Edwards  Plateau  and  Rio  Grande  Plain,  &:c.,  Ann.  Rep.,  XVIII,  2,  1898, 
pp.  193-321,  maps ;  also  Hill,  Outlying  Areas  of  the  Comanche  Series  in  Kansas,  Okla- 
homa,  and  New  Mexico,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1895,  L,  pp.  205-234  ;  and  Vaughan,  Additional 
Notes,  &c.,  op.  cit.,  1897,  LIV,  pp.  43-50. 

^  R.  T.  Hill,  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.  Ann.  Rep.,  XXI,  7,  p.  165  ;  W.  M.  Fontaine,  Notes  on 
some  fossil  plants  from  the  Trinity  division  of  the  Comanche  Series,  Texas,  Proc.  U.  S. 
Nat.  Mus.,  Washington,  1893,  XVI,  pp.  261-282  ;  L.  Ward,  Monogr.,  XLVIII,  p.  326. 

^  According  to  Hill  the  Trinity  Sands  are  transgressive  sands  and  clays.    They  contain 


78  AEMORICA  AND  THE  AMEEICAN  ALTAIDES  [party 


The  Cretaceous  limestones  of  Texas  have  been  broken  up  by  erosion 
into  table -mountains.  These  are :  (a)  the  Llano  Estacado,  bounded  in 
the  north  by  the  Canadian  river,  in  the  west  by  the  Pecos ;  (b)  its  south- 
easterly continuation,  the  Edwards  plateau,  bounded  on  the  south  by  the 
Balcones  escarpment,  and  corresponding  to  a  zone  of  faults  which  may  be 
traced  far  across  the  Colorado  river  to  the  north-north-east;  (c)  west 
of  the  Pecos  the  little  Stockton  plateau,  which  extends  up  to  the  Cordilleras ; 
finally  (d)  the  continuous  masses  of  the  Lampasas  Gut  plain,  and  the  Grand 
prairie,  which  includes  the  northern  boundary  zone  on  the  Red  river,  and 
the  Black  prairie  marked  off  by  a  long  scarp.  In  addition,  there  are  some 
isolated  patches  in  the  north  and  north-west,  in  part  steeply  upturned  and 
lying  at  a  considerable  altitude ;  these  are  connected  with  the  Cordilleras. 

The  denuded  edges  of  the  great  plateaux  a,  h,  and  d  bound  a  broad 
area  situated  in  the  middle  of  Texas,  within  which  the  base  of  the  Creta- 
ceous is  exposed.  In  Burnet  county,  above  Austin  on  the  Colorado,  ancient 
rocks  crop  out.    According  to  Comstock*s  account,  Archaean  gneiss  and 

the  flora  of  the  Neocomian  and  marine  fossils  of  the  Aptian  stage  (Douville,  Bull.  Soc. 
geol.  de  Fr.,  1898, 3«  ser.,  XXVI,  p.  387 ;  Kilian,  op.  cit.,  1902,  4^  ser.,  II,  p.  357  {HopUtes 
furcatus).  Above  them  lie  the  limestone  platforms,  first  the  Fredericksburg  division, 
described  by  Hill  as  the  most  important  transgressive  member,  over  200  meters  thick  in 
the  direction  of  the  Rio  Grande,  but  decreasing  towards  the  interior.  Its  uppermost 
member,  Edtvards  Limestone  (Rudistes  limestone),  was  assigned  by  Douville  to  the  upper 
Gault,  or  rather  to  the  lower  Cenomanian,  whereas  G.  Bohm  showed  its  correspondence 
with  the  Schiosi  limestone  of  the  Dinarides — that  is,  the  upper  Cenomanian  (Zeitschr. 
deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1898,  L,  p.  331).  Hill  mentions  Sphenodiscus  pedernalis  (according  to 
Douville  in  Grossouvre,  Craie  superieure,  p.  140,  certainly  upper  Cenomanian)  and  Ostrea 
Munsoni,  which  I  regard,  in  agreement  with  Choffat,  as  identical  with  Chondrodont  Joannae 
ChofFat,  of  the  Portuguese  Rudistes  limestone  and  the  Schiosi  beds  (Hoernes,  Sitzb.  k. 
Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1902,  CXI,  p.  667).  The  Washita  stage,  which  rests  upon  the  Edwards 
horizon,  also  shows  the  ascent  of  many  indigenous  species,  while  the  few  European 
species,  such  as  Alectryonia  carinata,  point  to  the  Cenomanian.  Above  this  follows  the 
Dakota  sandstone,  Hill's  Woodhim  stage,  thinning  out  towards  the  south,  on  the  Brazos, 
in  lat.  31°  30'  W.,  and  towards  the  north  opening  up  the  transgression  far  and  wide. 
The  few  sea-shells  which  occur  still  seem  to  be  of  Cenomanian  type  (De  Lapparent,  Traits 
de  Geologic,  3^  ed.,  p.  1205).  They  represent  the  stratum  of  the  well-known  dicotyledonous 
flora.  South  of  the  Brazos  the  sediments  are  still  calcareous  ;  a  little  above  them  in  the 
Austin  limestone  follow  species  of  the  upper  part  of  the  lower  Senonian  {Mortoniceras 
Texanum  associated,  as  in  Europe,  with  Placenticeras  Syrtale),  then  the  upper  Senonian 
Navarro  beds  with  Gryphaea  vesicularis  and  Ostrea  larva,  and  finally,  as  the  highest 
member,  the  Arkadelphia  beds  exposed  beneath  the  Tertiary  by  erosion.  In  Colorado 
and  fui-ther  north  the  place  of  the  upper  limestones  of  Texas  is  taken  by  clayey  and 
sandy  beds  resting  on  Dakota  sandstone  ;  they  present  the  facies  which  begins  with  the 
Benton  stage.  Among  numerous  American  memoirs  we  will  only  mention  C.  A.  White, 
The  lower  Cretaceous  of  the  south-west  and  its  relation,  &c.,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1889, 
XXXVIII,  pp.  440-445  ;  Hill,  Palaeontology  of  the  Cretaceous  formation  of  Texas,  Proc. 
Biol.  Soc,  Washington,  1893,  VIII,  pp.  9-40  and  pp.  97-108 ;  Hill  and  Vaughan,  The 
lower  Cretaceous  Gryphaeas  of  the  Texas  Region,  Bull.  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.,  no.  151,  1898, 
66  pp. ;  and  A.  Heilprin,  The  Geology  and  Palaeontology  of  the  Cretaceous  deposits 
of  Mexico,  Proc.  Acad.  Nat.  Sci.  Phil.,  1890,  pp.  445-469. 


CEETACEOUS  PLATEAU  OF  TEXAS 


79 


CH.  Il] 

gneissose  granite  are  met  with,  striking  N.  75°  W.,  as  well  as  steeply  up- 
turned pre-Cambrian  schists,  with  a  predominant  strike  of  N.  36°  W.^ 
Borings  made  on  the  summit  of  the  Edwards  plateau,  south-west  of 
Fredericksburg,  reached  the  granite  beneath  the  Cretaceous  at  a  depth  of 
only  55  meters  (457  meters  above  the  sea),  and  even  at  Kerville,  85  kilometers 
south-west  of  the  Colorado  river,  it  was  reached  at  a  depth  of  381  meters 
(about  152  meters  above  the  sea)  2. 

In  the  valley  of  the  Colorado  this  ancient  mass  is  covered  by  horizontal 
and  unconformable  Potsdam  sandstone  (Cambrian)  ^    The  Burnet  mass 


lOQo  ■w-esUJi.v.Greeiiw. 
Fig.  12.    The  Cretaceous  platforms  of  Texas  (after  K.  Hill). 

is  not  a  continuation  of  the  Appalachians,  but  a  monadnock,  i.e. 
a  surviving  ridge  of  the  basement  rocks,  the  remains  of  an  older  range, 
left  by  denudation,  which,  in  this  case,  as  in  that  of  the  denudation  of  the 
Canadian  shield,  took  place  before  the  deposition  of  the  Potsdam  sandstone. 

This  sandstone  is  followed  by  Silurian  and  then  by  lower  Carboniferous. 
Upper  Carboniferous  surrounds  a  part  of  the  ancient  mass,  and  spreads  out 
towards  the  north*.  It  lies  flatly  bedded  along  the  west  foot  of  the 
Lampasas  Cut  plain  and  the  Grand  prairie,  extending  from  lat.  31°  30'  to 

1  T.  B.  Comstock,  Report  on  the  Geology  and  Mineral  Resources  of  the  Central  Mineral 
Region  of  Texas,  II,  Ann.  Rep.  Texan  Geol.  Surv.,  1891,  pp.  553-664,  map.  The  western 
half  of  the  region  is  shown  on  Hill's  beautiful  geological  map  in  Ann.  Rep.,  XXI,  7,  PI.  LXVI. 

2  Hill  and  Vaughan,  Edwards  Plateau,  pp.  217,  271,  273. 

3  Walcott,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1884,  3rd  ser.,  XXVII,  p.  431. 
*  Hill,  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.  Ann.  Rep.,  XXI,  7,  p.  91. 


80   AEMOEICA  AND  THE  AMEBIC  AN  ALTAIDES  [party 


33°  30'  N. ;  in  the  Grand  prairie  it  underlies  the  Cretaceous,  and  has  been 
revealed  by  boring  at  a  distance  of  as  much  as  64  kilometers  from  the 
border  {Oh,  fig.  12). 

To  the  west  of  the  Carboniferous  zone  we  encounter  beds  of  increas- 
ingly recent  age,  which  all  dip  gently  to  the  west.  First  we  meet  with  the 
upper  members  of  the  Carboniferous,  then  red  Permian  sandstone  and 
marls.  At  various  horizons  in  the  marls  the  remarkable  reptiles  described 
by  Cope  occur,  and  in  one  of  the  upper  members  a  marine  fauna,  which  is 
foreign  to  the  east  of  America  (Popanoceras,  Medlicottia  and  other  genera), 
makes  its  appearance  ^.  Still  higher,  red  clay  with  gypsum  follows,  the 
presence  of  Pleurophorus  betraying  its  Permian  age.  The  Red  beds  form  no 
small  part  of  the  basins  both  of  the  upper  Colorado  river  and  the  upper  Pted 
river;  to  this  fact  both  rivers  owe  their  names.  The  highest  and  most 
westerly  beds  are  assigned  to  the  Trias  solely  on  the  evidence  of  included 
pieces  of  fossil  wood  (P,  fig.  12). 

Texas  thus  exhibits,  beneath  a  Cretaceous  series  dipping  gently  to  the 
east  or  south-east,  another  and  older  series  which  is  slightly  inclined  towards 
the  west.  The  inclination,  everywhere  trifling,  is  original,  and,  with  the 
exception  of  a  few  faults,  there  are  no  signs  of  tectonic  disturbance  since 
the  deposition  of  the  Potsdam  sandstone.  Tilting  movements  of  the  whole 
continent  have  been  assumed,  but  a  simpler  explanation  accords  better  with 
the  facts. 

Le  Conte,  Dana,  and  others  long  ago  recognized  that  certain  Pacific 
characters  are  met  with  on  the  east  side  of  the  Cordillera.  Indeed  Perrin 
Smith  speaks  of  a  Pacific  sea  as  existing  in  Arkansas  in  Carboniferous  and 
Permian  times  ^. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  whole  of  the  Texan  Cretaceous  is  inserted  into 
the  narrow  Atlantic  belt  of  the  north,  and  this  is  an  Atlantic  formation. 
The  plain  in  the  interior  of  Texas,  between  the  Llano  Estacado  and  the 
Grand  prairie,  is,  as  it  luere^  a  window,  in  which  the  Pacific  series  dipping 
to  the  tvest  is  exposed  beneath  the  Atlantic  series  dipping  to  the  east. 

The  Pacific  sediments  are  continued  further  towards  the  north,  up  to 
Oklahoma  and  Kansas,  but  characteristic  Pacific  fossils  are  afforded  by  the 
marine  fauna  only.  In  Kansas  we  find  close  below  the  typical  Red  beds 
the  species  Gallipteris  conferta^  distinctive  of  the  Permian  Dunkard  flora, 
which  in  west  Virginia,  south-west  Pennsylvania,  and  as  far  as  New 
Brunswick  represents  the  lower  Rothliegende  of  Europe.    If  this  series 

^  C.  A.  White,  The  Texan  Permian  and  its  Mesozoic  Types  of  Fossils,  Bull.  U.  S.  Geol. 
Surv.,  no.  77,  1891,  39  pp. ;  F.  Cummins,  Report  on  the  Geology  of  north-west  Texas,  II, 
Ann.  Rep.  Tex.  Geol.  Surv.,  1891,  pp.  394-430,  map.  A  survey  of  recent  works  on  the 
subject  is  given  by  Prosser,  Notes  on  the  Permian  Formation  of  Kansas,  Am.  Geol.,  1905, 
XXXVI,  pp.  142-161. 

^  J.  Perrin  Smith,  Marine  Fossils  from  the  Coal-measures  of  Arkansas,  Proc.  Am.  Phil. 
Soc,  1897,  XXXV,  no.  152,  72  pp. ;  in  particular  p.  18  et  seq. 


CH.  Il] 


EEOSION  OF  LAKOTA 


81 


i  occurred  in  Germany  we  should  describe  it  as  the  post-Variscan  mantle. 
North  of  the  Red  river  it  surrounds  the  Ouachita  mountains  unconform- 
ably,  thus  indicating  the  Permian  age  of  this  range. 

We  must  now  proceed  8  to  10  degrees  of  latitude  further  north,  and  enter 
Minnesota,  where,  between  lats.  43°  and  45°  N.,  the  western  border  of  the 
Canadian  shield  is  concealed  from  view  by  glacial  deposits. 

In  long.  96°  30'  W.,  on  the  boundary  between  Minnesota  and  south  Da- 
kota, ancient  quartzite  crops  out  on  the  great  Sioux  river  beneath  the  glacial 

I -debris  and  patches  of  Cretaceous,  and,  at  a  more  northerly  locality,  granite 
bIso.  Even  further  west,  at  least  as  far  as  long.  98°  30'  W.,  borings  reveal 
ancient  quartzite  or  granite  beneath  the  water-bearing  Dakota  sandstone  ^. 
,  Still  further  west,  between  the  meridians  of  103°  and  104°,  we  reach  the 
Black  hills  (I,  p.  559) ;  of  these  we  possess  recent  descriptions  by  Ward 
s,nd  Darton  ^.  Upon  ancient  granite  and  schists  Cambrian  sandstone  lies 
unconformably,  as  in  the  Burnet  mass.  Carboniferous  limestone  follows,  and 
then  a  red  series  with  gypsum  and  species  of  Bakevellia,  completely  resem- 
bling the  Permian  of  Kansas  and  Texas.  On  this  rests  a  characteristically 
Pacific  formation,  the  Jurassic  sandstone  with  Cardioceras  (Sundance 
stage).  Then  comes  unfossiliferous  sandstone,  succeeded  by  the  marly  shales 
of  the  Atlantosaurus  beds,  which  have  furnished  the  well-known  gigantic 
reptiles,  described  by  Marsh  as  Jurassic. 

The  deposition  of  the  Atlantosaurus  beds  was  followed  by  an  interval 
of  erosion,  and  valleys  were  excavated  of  such  magnitude  that  workable 
Coal-measures,  with  the  flora  of  the  lower  Potomac  (Lakota  stage),  were  laid 
down  in  them.  With  these  begins  the  series  of  the  Atlantic  belt;  but 
in  this  case  also  the  contrast  between  the  Pacific  and  Atlantic  formations  is 
confined  to  the  marine  deposits.  We  have  now  entered  the  epoch  of  the 
Weald  and  Neocomian,  and  recognize  the  negative  phase  between  the 
Jurassic  and  the  Cretaceous,  which  is  quite  as  clearly  expressed  here  as  in 
the  isle  of  Purbeck. 

Here  also  forests  of  Cycads  have  left  behind  their  traces.  Higher  up,  in 
the  Dakota  sandstone,  the  remains  of  dicotyledonous  plants  lie  buried.  Then 
follows,  here  as  elsewhere,  the  transgression  of  the  marine  upper  Cretaceous. 

^  N.  H.  Darton,  Preliminary  Report  on  Artesian  Waters  of  a  Portion  of  the  Dakotas, 
U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.  Ann.  Rep.,  XVII,  2,  pp.  603-694 ;  in  particular  map  C,  p.  672,  and  Pre- 
liminary Report  on  the  Geology  and  Underground  Water  Resources  of  the  Central  Great 
Plains,  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.  Prof.  Pap.  no.  32,  1905,  433  pp.,  maps ;  also  S.  W.  Beyer,  The 
Sioux  Quartzite,  &c.,  Iowa  Geol.  Surv.,  1896,  VI,  pp.  68-112,  map. 

2  Lester  F.  Ward,  The  Cretaceous  Formation  of  the  Black  Hills  as  indicated  by  the 
Fossil  Plants,  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.  Ann.  Rep.,  XIX,  2,  1899,  pp.  521-712,  and  Wieland,  in 
Monogr.,  LXVIII,  p.  317  et  seq.  ;  Darton,  Preliminary  Description  of  the  Geology  and 
Water  Resources  of  the  Black  Hills,  &c.,  op.  cit.,  Ann.  Rep.,  XXI,  4,  1901,  pp.  489-599, 
maps;  also  in  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1899,  X,  pp.  383-396,  and  op.  cit.,  1904,  XV,  pp. 
379-448. 

SOLIiAS  IV  Q- 


82  AEMOEIOA  AND  THE  AMEBIC  AN  ALTAIDES  [partv 

For  the  present  we  will  proceed  no  farther.  Our  object  in  comparing^ 
the  Atlantic  belt  in  the  east  with  the  window  in  Texas,  and  the  Lakota 
stage  with  the  Potomac  flora  now  filling  erosions  in  the  Black  hills,  was 
simply  to  recall  once  more  the  extraordinary  extent  and  uniformity  of  the 
phenomena  which  define  the  limits  of  formations. 

The  Appalachians  on  the  other  side  of  the  Mississippi.  When  the  first 
Report  of  the  Geological  Survey  of  Arkansas  appeared  in  1888  it  announced 
the  existence  of  a  range  of  hills,  600-700  meters  high,  which  begins  south 
of  Little  Rock,  and,  extending  from  about  long.  92°  to  100°  W.,  forms  the 
watershed  between  the  Arkansas  river  (Canada)  in  the  north  and  the  Red 
river  in  the  south.  Branner  named  it  the  Ouachita  range.  Earlier  maps 
had  not  given  an  even  approximately  correct  idea  of  this  range.  At  most 
they  marked  mount  Scott,  situated  far  to  the  west  in  Oklahoma,  and 
already  made  known  by  earlier  expeditions.  The  geologists  who  visited 
this  range,  Branner,  Hill,  and  Griswold,  were  astonished  at  its  resemblance 
to  the  Appalachians.  They  observed  the  folding  directed  to  the  north, 
corresponding  to  the  bend  in  the  Appalachians ;  the  folded  Carboniferous 
traversed  by  thrust-planes,  and  beside  it  the  not-folded  red  Permian.  On 
one  point  only  was  there  a  difference  of  opinion  :  should  the  Ouachita  range 
be  regarded  as  a  continuation  of  the  principal  chain  of  the  Appalachians, 
or,  as  its  somewhat  more  northerly  position  might  suggest,  as  a  more 
strongly  marked  expression  of  the  folds  of  the  Cincinnati  uplift  ?  ^ 

The  range  strikes  first  to  the  west  and  then  turns  to  N.  70°  W.  In  the 
east  it  is  thickly  wooded ;  in  the  west  absolutely  treeless,  and  covered  with 
deep  grass.  It  consists  of  three  coulisses.  The  first  and  most  extensive  is 
the  Ouachita  range  in  the  narrower  sense,  the  Massern  range  of  Hill ;  the 
second  forms  the  ArhucMe  mountains,  which,  orographically,  are  connected 
fairly  closely  with  the  first;  the  third,  separated  by  an  interval  40-50 
kilometers  wide  which  is  occupied  by  horizontal  red  Permian  beds,  forms 
the  Wichita  mountains,  to  which  mount  Scott  belongs. 

The  core  of  the  eastern  coulisse  or  the  Massern  range  forms  the 
Schleifstein  mountains  (Novaculite  range).  South  of  Little  Rock  it  is  cut 
through  obliquely  by  the  mountain  border,  of  which  it  includes  about 
45  kilometers.  Thence  it  runs,  expanding  like  a  wedge,  for  a  distance  of 
more  than  160  kilometers  towards  the  west,  accompanied  by  numerous 
subsidiary  folds  of  less  importance.  It  consists  of  comparatively  yielding 
lower  Silurian  rocks,  accompanied  by  steeply  upturned  beds  of  siliceous 

^  R.  T.  Hill,  Notes  of  a  Reconnaissance  of  the  Ouachita  Mountain  System,  Am.  Journ. 
Sci.,  1891,  XLII,  pp.  111-124,  map  ;  L.  S.  Griswold,  Origin  of  the  lower  Mississippi,  Proc. 
Boston  Soc.  Nat.  Hist.,  1895,  XXVI,  pp.  474-479 ;  J.  C.  Branner,  The  former  Extension 
of  the  Appalachians  across  Mississippi,  Louisiana,  and  Texas,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1897,  IV, 
pp.  357-371. 


cH.li]  THE  SCHLEIFSTEIN  MOUNTAINS  83 

hornstone,  which  causes  each  of  the  numerous  folds  to  stand  out  in  sharp 
zig-zag  lines.    Griswold  has  given  a  map  of  the  range  \ 

In  the  north  and  south  the  Schleifstein  range  is  bordered  by  a  thick 
mantle  of  Carboniferous  beds,  and  near  Atoka,  in  the  region  of  the  Choctaw 
Indians,  this  surrounds  its  western  end.  The  Carboniferous  mantle  also  is 
folded,  and  overfolding  occurs  to  the  north.  The  productiveness  of  the 
Coal-measures  has  led  to  a  careful  investigation  of  the  range;  the  north 


Fig.  13.    The  Schleifstein  range  (after  Griswold). 
The  black  patches  mark  ancient  intrusive  masses. 


side  has  been  described  by  Winslow,  Drake,  and  in  great  detail  by  TafF; 
the  south  side  by  Ashley.  The  floras  of  Schatzlar  and  Ottweil  have  been 
recognized  beneath  marine  deposits  of  lower  and  upper  Carboniferous  ^ 

(a«,fig.i3). 

A  transverse  section  from  north  to  south  shows  the  following : — 
North  of  the  Arkansas  river  rise  the  Boston  mountains,  formed  of 

^  L.  S.  Griswold,  The  Whetstones  and  Novaculites  of  Arkansas,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Surv. 
Arkansas,  III  (1890),  1892,  443  pp.,  maps. 

^  A.  Winslow,  The  geotectonic  and  physiographic al  Geology  of  West  Arkansas,  Bull. 
Geol.  Soc.  Am.,  1891,  II,  pp.  225-242,  map  ;  N.  F.  Drake,  A  Geological  Reconnaissance  of 
the  Coal  Fields  of  the  Indian  Territories,  Am.  Philos.  Soc,  Philadelphia,  1897,  XXXVI, 
pp.  326-420,  maps  ;  G.  H.  Ashley,  Geology  of  the  Paleozoic  Area  of  Arkansas  South  of 
the  Novaculite  Region,  with  an  introduction  by  J.  C.  Branner,  tom.  cit.,  pp.  217-318,  maps. 
The  south  border  also  appears  on  Map  LXVI,in  Hill's  Texas,  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.  Ann.  Rep., 
XXI,  7 ;  J.  A.  TaiF,  Geology  of  the  McAlester-Lehigh  Coal  Field,  Indian  Territories, 
op.  cit.,  1899,  XIX,  3  (accompanied  by  a  Report  on  the  Fossil  Plants  by  D.  White,  and 
a  Report  on  the  Palaeozoic  Invertebrate  Fossils  by  Girty),  pp.  423-593,  maps  ;  J.  A.  Taff 
and  G.  J.  Adams,  Geology  of  the  East  Choctau  Coal  Field,  Indian  Territories,  op.  cit., 
1900,  XXI,  2,  pp.  257-311,  maps ;  G.^  J.  Adams,  Stratigraphical  Relations  of  the  Red 
Beds  to  the  Carboniferous  and  Permian  in  North  Texas,  Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Am.,  1903,  XIV, 
pp.  191-200,  maps. 

G  2 


84   ARMOEICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  ALTAIDES  [party 


Carboniferous  limestone ;  they  are  a  continuation  of  the  horizontal  series  of 
south  Missouri.  According  to  Winslow's  sections  they  drop  in  a  gentle 
flexure  to  the  river.  South  of  the  river  follow  the  wooded  ridges  of  the 
Carboniferous,  folded  towards  the  north,  next  the  zig-zag  lines  of  the  north 
border  of  the  Schleifstein  range,  then  its  middle  part  of  less  resistent  lower 
Silurian ;  on  the  other  side  of  this  come  the  zig-zag  lines  of  the  south  border, 
then  the  wooded  south  zone  of  the  Carboniferous,  and  against  this,  a  little 
north  of  the  Red  river,  rest  the  Trinity  sands,  which  i^epresent  the  beginning 
of  the  Cretaceous. 

Close  to  the  south  foot  of  the  Schleifstein  range,  between  Hot  Springs 
and  Malvern,  but  still  north  of  a  secondary  range  of  the  Schleifstein  crests, 
rises  the  mass  of  Magnet  cove,  the  latest  description  of  which  we  owe 
to  Washington;  it  consists  of  a  varied  series  of  eruptive  rocks  becoming 
more  basic  towards  the  centre,  which  is  occupied  by  a  mass  of  magnetite  ^. 

South  and  south-west  of  Little  Rock  two  bosses  of  Elaeolite-syenite  rise 
from  the  Tertiary  plain,  and  form  Fourche  mountain  and  Bryant ;  their 
richness  in  Bauxite  has  led  to  their  investigation  by  Hayes  ^. 

The  Arbuckle  mountains  are  united  by  the  Carboniferous  with  the 
Massern  range.  They  consist,  according  to  Taff,  of  several  horsts  bounded 
by  strike-faults  and  composed  of  pre-Cambrian  granite  with  a  Palaeozoic 
border.  These  horsts  are  the  remains  of  a  range  which  was  folded  in  the 
interval  between  the  lower  Carboniferous  and  the  Schatzlar  stage.  Con- 
glomerates are  superposed  unconformably,  and,  at  the  close  of  the  upper 
Carboniferous  (Ottweil  flora),  considerable  folding  once  more  occurred. 
The  Permian  and  Cretaceous  are  undisturbed. 

The  total  length  of  the  range  amounts  to  over  90  kilometers^. 

Still  further  to  the  north-west  lie  the  Wichita  mountains,  which  are 
also  over  90  kilometers  in  length,  and  trend  towards  N.  70°  W.  *  They 
consist  of  a  great  number  of  steep  isolated  ridges  and  bosses :  Taff"  has 
counted  250.  The  north-westerly  groups  are  known  as  the  Raggedy 
mountains.    The  principal  range,  beginning  at  Fort  Sill,  presents  only 

1  H.  S.  Washington,  Igneous  Complex  of  Magnet  Cove,  Arkansas,  Bull.  Geol.  Soc. 
Am.,  1900,  XI,  pp.  389^16,  map. 

^  C.  W.  Hayes,  Geology  of  the  Bauxite  Region  of  Georgia  and  Alabama,  U.  S.  Geol. 
Surv.  Ann.  Kep.,  1895,  XVI,  3,  pp.  551-597,  map,  and  op.  cit.,  1901,  XXI,  3,  pp.  435-472, 
maps. 

'  R.  T.  Hill,  Notes  on  a  Reconnaissance  of  the  Ouachita  Mountain  System,  Am.  Journ. 
Sci.,  1891,  XLII,  p.  121 ;  T.  W.  Vaughan,  Geological  Notes  of  the  Wichita  Mountains, 
Oklahoma,  and  the  Arbuckle  Hills,  Indian  Territories,  Amer.  Geol.,  1899,  XXIV,  pp.  44- 
55,  map  ;  and  in  particular,  J.  A.  Taff,  Preliminary  Report  on  the  Geology  of  the  Arbuckle 
and  Wichita  Mountains,  U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.  Prof.  Paper  no.  31,  1904,  93  pp.,  maps. 

*  H.  Foster  Bain,  Geology  of  the  Wichita  Mountains,  Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Am ,  1900,  XI, 
pp.  127-144,  map.  With  regard  to  the  relative  age  of  the  gabbro  and  granite,  opinions 
are  not  concordant ;  I  have  followed  the  observations  made  on  the  eruptive  masses  of 
the  east,  which  have  been  closely  studied. 


CH.  Il] 


SIERRA  COMANCHE 


85 


pre-Cambrian  granite  and  gabbro ;  the  latter  is  the  older  member.  Towards 
the  north-east  rises  a  parallel  range  which  continues  the  Palaeozoic 
sediments  of  the  Arbuckle  mountains.  Red  Permian  lies  unconfoimably 
over  isolated  ridges. 

In  lat.  35°  N.,  long.  99°  28'  W.,  9  kilometers  west  of  the  north  fork  of 
the  Red  river,  TafF  marks  the  last  granite  boss.  One  of  the  last  branches 
of  the  western  Altaides  here  sinks  beneath  the  arid  plain,  but  not  before 
the  unconformities  characteristic  of  the  Altaides,  and  the  long  zone  of 
Coal-measures,  have  again  made  their  appearance  in  the  Arbuckle 
mountains. 

A  second  branch  may  be  seen  further  south. 

Elongated  sierras  run  down  between  the  Rio  Grande  and  the  Pecos. 
In  the  north  their  direction  is  north  and  south,  then  south-south-east  and 
finally  south-east.  Between  lat.  31°  and  30°  30'  N.  the  Davis  mountains 
rise  near  the  east  border  to  a  height  of  2,500  meters ;  they  consist  of  recent 
volcanic  rock  and  terminate  on  the  south  in  a  steep  declivity.  Then  follows 
the  Sierra  Santjago;  formed  of  Cretaceous  limestone,  and  running  south- 
east, it  nearly  reaches  the  Rio  Grande.  The  river  Pecos  flows  for  a 
considerable  distance  in  the  red  Permian  clay ;  further  south,  on  its  west 
side,  rises  the  Stockton  plateau,  which  has  already  been  mentioned  as  a 
continuation  of  the  Edwards  plateau.  Here,  a  little  west  of  the  Pecos, 
the  horizontal  Cretaceous  of  Texas  meets  the  folded  Cretaceous  of  the 
Cordilleras. 

Hill  distinguishes  two  mountain  fragments  as  foreign  elements,  the 
Sierra  Comanche,  and  the  less  important  Sierra  Caballos.  They  lie  to  the 
east  of  the  Cordillera,  and  should  therefore  be  included  in  the  region  of  the 
Cretaceous  platforms.  The  Sierra  Comanche,  striking  to  the  south-west, 
encounters  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Marathon  the  folded  Sierra  Santjago 
which  strikes  to  the  south-east.  The  Sierra  Comanche  consists  of  Palaeo- 
zoic limestone  and  sandstone  dipping  to  the  north,  on  which  some  flat 
patches  of  Cretaceous  limestone  still  possibly  rest.  The  Sierra  Caballos 
lies  to  the  south  ;  its  beds  stand  vertical  with  a  parallel  strike,  and  probably 
belong  to  the  lower  Helderberg  stage.  Towards  the  south  they  are  bordered 
by  a  belt  of  flat-lying  Cretaceous  ^. 

These  sierras  do  not  belong  to  the  great  Cordillera,  since  they  are 
opposed  in  direction  and  are  older  than  the  Cretaceous.  Neither  do  they 
belong  to  the  Burnet  mass,  in  which  Cambrian  sediments  lie  horizontal. 
Their  strike  passes  north  of  this  mass  and  beyond  it. 

Robert  Hill  recognizes  in  the  Sierra  Comanche  and  the  Sierra  Caballos 
the  type  of  the  A  ppalachians,  which  here,  close  to  the  foot  of  the  Cordillera 
of  New  Mexico,  is  yet  once  more  visible.  A  similar  correlation  has  been 
hazarded  with  regard  to  the  Diablo  plateau,  a  great  area  of  lower  Carboni- 
1  R.  T.  Hill,  Topographical  Atlas,  fol.,  p.  4. 


86   AEMOEICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  ALTAIDES  [paef 

ferous  limestone  situated  actually  within  the  Cordillera  and  beyond 
Davis  mountains.  But  in  this  case  the  facts  are  less  convincing,  and 
the  present  we  shall  regard  the  Sierra  Comanche  as  the  last  trace  of  i 
Appalachians  to  be  seen  on  the  west.  The  point  at  which  it  meets  t 
Mexican  Cordilleras  lies  in  lat.  30°  15'  N.  and  long.  103°  15'  W. 

On  the  north,  above  Burnet,  and  in  the  direction  of  the  Oza: 
mountains,  lies  a  broad  area  in  which  the  Palaeozoic  sediments  probab] 
attain  a  greater  thickness.  Within  this  region  the  Appalachians  divi( 
into  two  diverging  branches,  and  further  west  these  great  mountains  d 
away  in  isolated  fragments  of  coulisses.  These  are  the  free  ends  of  t) 
longest  branch  of  the  western  Alt  aides. 

The  inter- Carboniferous  movements  of  central  Asia  have  travelled  wes 
as  far  as  this  point.    The  bend  of  the  Altaides  towards  the  north  whici 


The 


In  Ml 


iS)±°  wpsti.L.v.GreeiLw. 
Fig.  14.    Sierra  Comanche  and  Davis  mountains  (after  R.  Hill). 

occurs  in  the  horst  of  Azov  has  remained  of  fundamental  importance  as 
far  as  the  Cordilleras  of  New  Mexico. 

Summary.  The  preceding  observations  throw  some  light  on  the 
history  of  the  North  Atlantic  Ocean. 

An  extensive  Devonian  continent,  Eria,  occupied  the  north.  South  and 
east  of  where  it  stood,  a  rias  coast  now  extends  between  Dingle  bay  and 
la  Rochelle,  and  the  folded  Armorican  system  sinks  beneath  the  sea.  On 
the  west  a  similar  rias  coast  is  presented  by  Newfoundland,  where  the 
Appalachians  make  their  advance.  The  Wichita  mountains  and  the  Sierra 
Comanche  are  their  free  ends. 


CH.li]  NOETH  ATLANTIC  OCEAN 


87 


The  Armorican  range  and  the  Appalachians  are  both  folded  towards 
the  north.  In  Europe,  as  the  Armorican  together  with  the  Variscan  folds 
advanced  against  the  foreland,  the  Carboniferous  sea  was  driven  back ;  the 
Zechstein  marks  the  first  re-entry  of  the  sea  into  the  northern  regions. 
In  America,  as  the  folds  of  the  Appalachians  approached  their  Laurentian 
foreland,  they  continued,  from  the  time  of  the  Carboniferous  limestone 
onwards,  to  drive  the  sea  of  Newfoundland  far  towards  the  south.  Marine 
sediments  of  Mesozoic  and  Tertiary  age  are  absent  on  the  north  and  west 
sides  of  the  Appalachians. 

If  we  compare  the  works  of  Stur  on  the  Carboniferous  floras  of  Moravia 
and  Silesia,  of  Zeiller  on  those  of  northern  France,  of  Kidstone  on  those  of 
Britain,  and  of  David  White  on  those  of  North  America,  we  find  in  all  cases  an 
Astonishing  resemblance  between  these  floras,  both  in  their  composition  and 
the  order  of  their  succession,  whether  traced  upwards  from  the  Culm  to  the 
^  Rothliegende  or  horizontally  from  the  Weichsel  to  Oklahoma.  This 
correspondence  enables  us  to  affirm  that  a  discordance  at  the  base  of  the 
Culm  exists  in  Europe,  and  that  it  reappears  in  Newfoundland,  New 
Brunswick,  and  Nova  Scotia.  In  the  whole  of  this  region  the  folding  had 
come  to  an  end  before  the  deposition  of  the  Permian.  This  formation 
rests  undisturbed  upon  some  gentle  anticlines  which  extend  from  New 
Brunswick  into  Prince  Edward  island. 

There  are  intervening  movements  on  the  two  sides  of  the  ocean,  which 
may  also  be  correlated.  It  is  clear  that  limnic  transgressions  of  the 
Schatzlar  stage  stepped  over  already  denuded  parts  of  the  inner  side  of 
the  mountains,  as,  for  example,  in  Bohemia,  on  the  Saar,  in  the  Central 
plateau,  and  at  the  same  time  on  to  the  equivalents  of  the  Piedmont 
plateau  in  the  Narragansett  basin.  In  the  extreme  east,  near  Ostrau,  the 
series  of  coal -bearing  beds  terminates  with  the  Schatzlar  stage.  The 
Devonian  boss  of  Debnik,  which  rises  outside  the  coal-region,  near  Cracow, 
is  covered  unconformably  by  the  alien  plant-bearing  limestone  of  Karnio- 
vice.  According  to  Raciborski  it  contains  the  Ottweil  flora  ^,  which  is  here 
separated  by  physical  changes  from  the  flora  of  Schatzlar.  In  the  extreme 
west  we  meet  in  the  Indian  territories  with  the  Mc  Alester  Coal-measures, 
which  contain  the  Ottweil  flora  ;  these  are  folded  along  with  the  rest  of  the 
coal-bearing  series  (Grady  Coal,  Schatzlar),  and  flat-lying  beds  do  not 
occur  till  we  reach  the  Permian.  Further  observations  must  decide 
whether  this  affbrds  additional  confirmation  of  a  fact  established  elsewhere, 
that  the  folding  persists  longer  in  the  direction  of  the  free  ends. 

We  now  reach  a  more  recent  phase  in  the  history  of  the  Atlantic. 
South  of  lat.  41°  N.,  i.e.  south  of  the  trend-line  which  once  united  America 
with  Europe,  the  nature  of  the  coast  is  no  longer  the  same  as  that  in  the 

^  M. Raciborski,  Permo-carboniferous  Flora  of  the  limestone  of  Karmowice,Rozpr.Akad. 
Umiej.,  Krakow,  1891,  XXI,  pp.  353-394  (in  the  Pohsh  language). 


88   ARMORICA  AND  THE  AMERICAN  ALTAIDES  [part 


north.    On  the  inner  (east)  side  of  the  Appalachians  we  meet  with  tl 
terrestrial  floras  of  Schatzlar  (Narragansett),  the  Keuper  (Newark),  tl 
Neocomian  (Potomac),  and  the  Vraconian  (Raritan)  ;  marine  deposits  fir; 
make  their  appearance  with  the  Senonian.    With  the  Potomac  stage 
more  continuous  belt  begins,  and  this  has  been  termed  the  Atlantic  belt. 

The  table-mountains  of  Texas  are  the  extended  continuation  of  thi 
belt,  although  they  reach  greater  heights,  and  although  some  marin 
indications  occur  even  in  the  Potomac  stage  (Trinity  sands). 

The  negative  phase  of  the  Weald  is  revealed  over  a  wide  area  on  botl 
sides  of  the  ocean,  from  the  Weichsel  to  Dakota.     It  was  followed  by  { 
positive  movement.    In  the  north  of  France  the  gradual  advance  of  th( 
Gault  is  very  obvious.    In  Texas  the  first  signs  of  it  are  afibrded  by  th( 
Trinity  sands.    Next  the  great  Cenomanian  transgression  set  in,  and  with 
it  the  limestone  formations  of  the  Karst  of  Syria,  Arabia,  the  Sahara, 
Texas,  and  Mexico  were  built  up.    The  Senonian  has  everywhere  advanced 
beyond  the  periphery  of  this  transgression,  in  the  north  to  Disko,  in  the 
south  into  the  Antarctic  region,  in  the  east  to  the  Aral,  and  it  has  left  its 
traces  even  on  the  Pacific  coasts.    The  Senonian  of  Maryland  represents  a 
part  of  its  advance. 

In  addition,  we  have  the  completely  undisturbed  position  of  the  Creta- 
ceous extending  from  Greenland  down  to  the  extreme  south,  and,  with  the 
exception  of  the  Antilles,  only  interrupted  by  occasional  subsidence  (Balconeis 
escarpment). 


89 


CHAPTER  III 
THE  AFEICAN  ALTAIDES 

The  inland  sea  of  Africa.  The  Central  Sahara.  The  Altaides  of  the  Sahara.  The 
Great  Atlas. 

The  inland  sea  of  Africa.  We  were  unable  to  give  more  than  a  very- 
fragmentary  account  of  the  Sahara  in  the  first  volume  of  this  work 
(I,  p.  360,  fig.  41).  The  journey  of  Lenz  was  almost  our  only  source  of 
information  for  the  whole  of  the  vast  region  in  the  west,  and  as  regards 
the  east  our  knowledge  was  confined  to  the  barest  outlines;  such  as  the 
existence  of  the  Archaean  rocks  of  Khartum,  which  extend  towards  Bardu, 
crop  out  again  in  Ahaggar,  and  are  accompanied  by  the  volcanos  of  Bardai 
and  Air ;  the  presence,  north  of  this  range,  of  the  important  Palaeozoic  tract 
which  extends  towards  Mursuk ;  of  a  great  transgressive  series  of  middle 
and  upper  Cretaceous,  which  reaches  the  Nile  below  and  above  Assuan ;  of 
a  tract  of  Eocene  within  the  Cretaceous,  and  within  this  again,,  nearer  the 
mouths  of  the  Nile,  a  Miocene  region. 

The  maps  published  by  Rolland  in  1890  indicated  with  additional  clear- 
ness the  relations  of  the  Cretaceous  to  the  underlying  Palaeozoic  in  the 
region  south  of  In  Salah  and  the  Hamada  el  Homra,  but  in  the  western 
region  no  progress  of  any  account  had  been  made  even  at  that  date  ^. 

The  most  important  of  the  many  discoveries  which  followed  later  is  that 
of  a  marine  Tertiary  series  in  a  region  lying  between  lats.  14°  and  15°  N. 
and  long.  5°  20'  to  6°  20'  E.  The  Eocene  was  recognized  simultaneously 
by  De  Lapparent  and  Bather,  and  subsequently  additional  fossils  enabled 
De  Lapparent  to  show  that  younger  sediments  also  are  present  ^. 

According  to  De  Lapparent,  the  Lutetian  stage  of  the  Eocene  is  known 
to  occur  in  the  same  region  at  Tamask^;  at  a  neighbouring  locality  a 
Cerithium  resembling  G,  concinnum  of  the  Barton  stage  was  found ;  and 
at  a  third  Ostraea  longirostris,  with  bones  of  Halitherium.  Near  Bututu, 
in  the  south-east  corner  of  the  region,  iron  sand  occurs  with  impressions 

^  G.  Rolland  (Chemin  de  Fer  Transsaharien),  Geologie  du  Sahara  Algerien,  2  vols,  4to, 
Paris,  1890,  I,  pi.  IV,  and  p.  252. 

^  A.  de  Lapparent,  Sur  une  formation  marine  d'age  tertiaire  an  Soudan  frangais.  La 
Geographie,  1903,  VII,  pp.  417-420,  and  Sur  des  nouvelles  trouvailles  geologiques  au 
Soudan,  op.  cit.,  1905,  XI,  pp.  1-6 ;  also  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  26  dec.  1904.  Speci- 
mens from  this  region  were  collected  by  French  and  English  officers  simultaneously  in 
1903  ;  Bather  recognized  the  presence  of  the  Eocene  at  the  same  time  as  De  Lapparent. 
P.  S.  Lelean,  An  Eocene  Outcrop  in  Central  Africa,  and  F.  A.  Bather,  Eocene  Echinoids 
from  Sokoto,  Geol.  Mag.,  1904,  5th  ser.,  I,  pp.  290-304. 


90 


THE  AFEICAN  ALTAIDES 


[PAET  V 


suggesting  Protorotifera,  above  it  a  bed  containing  plant  remains,  and 
above  this  the  skeleton  of  a  lumachella  with  impressions  of  a  Cardita,  which 
point,  according  to  Douvill^  to  the  upper  Miocene. 

Here,  as  in  the  Libyan  desert,  a  horizontal  mantle,  beginning  with  the 
middle  or  upper  Cretaceous,  rests  unconformably  on  much  older  rocks.  It 
extends  upwards,  as  we  now  know,  into  the  Miocene,  and  we  may  suppose 
that  here,  as  in  the  Libyan  desert  (I,  p.  362),  the  contours  of  the  several 
sedimentary  series  become  successively  constricted  about  some  particular 
locality  on  the  existing  sea-coast. 

As  regards  the  shore-line  of  the  inland  sea  thus  indicated,  we  may 
arrive  at  some  notion  of  its  course  from  a  consideration  of  the  data 
furnished  by  De  Lapparent,  taken  in  connexion  with  the  latest  general 
account  by  Chudeau  ^. 

The  transgressive  Cretaceous  sea  certainly  extended  to  long.  10°  15'  E., 
lat.  14"  30'  N.  (hill  of  Damergou) ;  from  long.  8°  E.  onwards  the  Cretaceous 
deposits  are  probably  covered  by  Eocene ;  from  lat.  14°  30'  N.  by  Miocene. 
From  the  south-east  (Sokhoto)  a  bay  opened  into  the  sea.  Cretaceous  and 
Eocene  reach  the  Niger,  and  in  the  south,  between  Goa  and  Tosaye,  rest  in 
transgressive  patches  upon  older  rocks  which  terminate  at  Tosaye  (south  of 
lat.  17°  N.). 

So  far  for  the  southern  shore. 

In  the  east  the  Eocene  extends  at  least  400  kilometers  to  the  north,  and 
reaches  lat.  17°  50'  N.  about  (Tamarlakat,  75  kilometers  north  of  Agad^s, 
60  kilometers  west  of  Aonderas).  Here  we  are  near  the  meridional  volcanic  j  mi 
range  of  Air,  and  even  far  to  the  north,  in  lat.  21°  15'  N.  (west  Tagrira  and  dr 
In  Azua),  similar  sediments  are  mentioned,  but  without  fossils.  Doubtful 
traces  of  the  Cretaceous  are  also  known  far  to  the  east  in  long.  13°  E.,  lat. 
18°  40'  N.  (Bilma;  I,  p.  363):  it  is  possible  that  a  connexion  with  the 
Libyan  desert  existed  here. 

To  the  west  of  Air  the  Cretaceous  and  Eocene  waters  very  possibly! 
broadened  out  over  a  wide  area,  yet  between  longs.  2°  and  4°  E.  the  ancient  j  soiii 
rocks  of  the  Adrar  are  found  to  extend  very  far  towards  the  south. I  Tlie 
Villatte  followed  them  in  long.  2°  E.  down  to  lat.  20°  N.^,  and  Gautier's  mapl  irat 
marks  them  in  long.  1°  E.  as  far  as  lat.  18°  N.  (on  the  Eguerrer).  Never- 
theless Cretaceous  fossils  are  known  to  occur  in  long.  1°  E.,  lat.  17°  50'  N, 
(Tabankort)  and  in  long.  1°  W.,  lat.  20°  N.  (Mabruk).  ' 


'  A.  de  Lapparent,  Sur  I'extension  des  mers  cretacees  en  Afrique,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci 
Paris,  6  fevr.  1905,  p.  349,  and  R.  Chudeau,  Le  Lutetien  au  Soudan  et  au  Sahara,  op.  cit. 
15  avril  1907,  pp.  811-813.  Cf.  also  Chudeau's  hypsometric  map  of  the  Sahara  in  Ann 
de  Geogr.,  1908,  XVII,  PI.  I,  and  J.  Chautard,  Materiel  pour  la  Geologic  et  la  Minera 
logic  de  TAfrique  occidentalc  fran9aise,  I,  Etat  actuel  de  nos  connaissances  sur  lei 
formes  sedimentaires  de  lAfrique  occidentalc  tropicale,  8vo,  Goree,  1906,  15  pp. 

2  N.  Villatte,  De  Tidikelt  vers  Tombouctou,  La  Geographic,  1905,  XII,  pp.  209-230 
map. 


la 

H 
bet 


It 


V 


CH.  Ill] 


LAKES  OP  TIMBUKTU 


91 


d        Let  us  now  direct  our  steps  due  west. 

h  Between  cape  Bojador  and  Punta  Durnford,  Quiroga  observed  a  bed 
with  Ostraea,  Tellina,  and  other  fossils,  followed  by  25-30  meters  of 
e  quartzose  sand  with  silicified  tree-trunks,  and  beneath  this  blue  marls, 
t  Towards  the  interior  loose  sands  with  Helix  set  in,  and  then  follows  a  broad 
e  tract  of  ancient  rocks  accompanied  by  a  narrow  belt  of  Palaeozoic  which 
I  extends  into  the  Asfat,  i.  e.  into  the  latitude  of  cape  Blanco  ^. 
r  For  a  long  distance  in  the  south  the  coast  is  unknown.  On  the  lower 
Senegal  river  the  upper  Cretaceous  makes  its  appearance.  Middle  Eocene 
I  limestone  was  met  with  in  a  boring  near  St.  Louis ;  and  likewise  at  several 
I  localities  extending  to  about  200  kilometers  east  and  south-east  of  cape 
1  Verde  2. 

In  the  interior  of  the  continent  lies  the  boundless  depression  of  the 
,  Juf ;  on  its  west  border  lie  the  salt  beds  of  Tichit,  on  its  east  border 
i  those  of  Taouden  and  Trasas. 

Near  Timbuktu,  Chevalier  found  two  species,  which  now  live  on  the 
1  coast  of  Senegambia,  Marginella  Egonen  and  Golumbella  mercatoria  ;  they 
1  occur  in  great  numbers,  but  in  a  dwarfed  state  ^.    Gautier  states  that 
'   E.  Dupuis  obtained  the  same  species  to  the  west  of  lake  Horo,  and  also 
that  A.  Dereims  brought  back  representatives  of  a  Pleistocene  marine  fauna 
from  Mauritania,  where  they  were  found  150  kilometers  from  the  sea  and 
at  a  height  of  60  meters. 

I Timbuktu  lies  at  a  level  of  240  meters :  the  lowest  point  which  Lenz 
met  with  on  the  east  side  of  the  Juf  lies  at  120-150  meters  only.  Gautier 
draws  a  truly  instructive  picture  of  the  time,  perhaps  not  very  remote,  when 
a  great  river  represented  by  the  existing  Wady  Messaud  brought  down 
the  waters  of  the  Great  Atlas  from  the  north-east  into  these  depressions,  a 
task  now  vainly  attempted  by  a  part  of  its  upper  course,  the  Wady  Saura ; 
at  the  time  in  question  the  lakes  of  Timbuktu  formed  part  of  a  sheet  of  water, 
which  extended  eastwards  to  the  rocky  gate  of  Tosaye  on  the  Niger,  and 
southwards  into  the  district  of  Massina,  thus  covering  the  bend  of  the  Niger. 
The  existing  upper  Niger  discharged  as  an  independent  river  into  these 
waters  ^. 

^  F.  Quiroga,  Apuntes  de  un  Viaje  por  el  Sahara  occidental,  An.  Soc.  Espan.  Hist. 
Nat.,  1886,  XY,  pp.  495-523  ;  Observaciones  geoldgicas  en  el  Sahara  occidental,  op.  cit., 
1889,  XYIII,  pp.  313,  393,  map,  and  Observaciones  al  mapa  geologico  del  Sahara  de 
M.  Rolland,  op.  cit.,  1892,  ser.  2,  I  (XXI),  2,  pp.  29-32. 

^  Repeated  accounts  of  it  have  been  given  by  S.  Meunier ;  the  facts  are  collated  in 
J.  Chautard,  Note  sur  les  formes  eocenes  du  Senegal,  Bull.  Soc.  geol,  1905,  4®  ser.,  V, 
;  pp.  141-153. 

^  A.  Chevalier,  Sur  I'existence  probable  d'une  mer  recente  dans  la  region  de  Tom- 
;    bouctou,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  15  avril  1901,  pp.  926-928. 

^  E.  F.  Gautier,  ^Itudes  Sahariennes,  Ann.  de  Geogr.,  1907,  XVI,  pp.  46-69,  and  pp.  117- 
188,  in  particular  p.  129  et  seq.,  map  ;  also  A  travers  le  Sahara  fran9ais,  La  Geographie, 
1907,  XV,  pp.  1-28,  103  et  seq.,  map.    The  bed  of  marine  Tertiary  fossils  found  by 


92 


THE  AFEICAN  ALTAIDES 


[part  V 


This  Tertiary  inland  sea, — which  included  the  lakes  of  Timbuktu  and 
the  Juf,  and  received  from  the  south-east  the  waters  of  the  existing  upper 
Niger,  and  from  the  north-east  those  of  the  Messaud, — extended  in  the 
Miocene  period  to  long.  6°  20'  E.  (Tamaski,  Bututu) ;  if  we  may  suppose 
that  the  case  of  the  Libyan  desert  was  repeated  here,  then  we  may  conclude 
that  a  communication  with  the  Ocean  extended  across  the  lower  Senegal. 

It  is  a  surprising  fact  that  the  Mediterranean  deposits  of  Austria 
furnish  so  many  species  of  shells  which  are  still  to  be  found  living  in  the 
Senegal,  as,  for  instance,  Adamson's  Vagal  (Tellina  strigosa),  Tugon  (Tugonia 
anatina),  three  species  of  Dosinia,  and  others,  although  no  direct  com- 
munication is  so  far  known  to  have  existed  between  the  Mediterranean  and 
the  Senegal.  Hoernes  thinks  that  the  strait  of  Gibraltar  was  closed  during 
the  Miocene  period  ^. 

De  Lapparent  supposes  that  the  eastern  Cretaceous  sea  communicated  in 
the  south  with  the  existing  ocean.  This  view  is  based  on  the  fact  that 
Bullen  Newton  has  found  middle  Cretaceous  Ammonites  at  Gongola 
(province  of  Biauchi,  about  lat.  11°  N.,  long.  11°  E.)^,  and  also  on  the 
presence  of  Cretaceous  and  Tertiary  fossils  in  south  Cameroon.  Ammonites 
obtained  from  the  river  Mungo  are  described  by  Solger  as  Turonian  or 
lower  Senonian;  Oppenheim  thinks  that  shells  from  an  adjacent  locality 
are  probably  Eocene,  and  some  fish  remains  seem,  according  to  Jaekel,  to 
indicate  upper  Tertiary  3. 

From  various  considerations — -such  as  the  extensive  development  of 
the  Cretaceous  deposits  from  this  point  southwards  along  the  coast ;  the 
fact  that  a  large  part  of  western  Cameroon  is  occupied  by  recent  volcanic 
rock;  and  that  on  the  west  side  of  the  basalts,  in  the  direction  of  Old 
Calabar,  Dus^n  still  saw  the  Cretaceous  cropping  out  from  beneath  them  *  — 

Dereims  in  Mauritania  is  probably  identical  with  El  Hafeira  in  the  western  Adr'ar,  here 
stated  to  be  300  kilometers  from  the  sea. 

^  On  the  original  connexion  between  North  Africa  and  South  Europe,  Jahrb.  k.k.  geol. 
Reichs.  1863,  XIII,  pp.  26-30;  R.  Hoernes,  Untersuchung  der  jungeren  Tertiarabla- 
gerungen  des  westlichen  Mittelmeergebietes,  Sitz.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1905,  CXIV, 
pp.  467,  637,  737,  in  particular  p.  655 ;  cf.  also  chapter  V. 

2  R.  Bullen  Newton,  A  notice  of  some  marine  fossils  from  north  Nigeria,  collected  by 
Col.  Elliot  and  Capt.  Lelain,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1904,  XXIV,  pp.  522-524. 

'  A.  V.  Koenen,  Die  Fossilien  der  Unter-Kreide  am  Ufer  des  Mungo  in  Kamerun,  Abh. 
Ges.  Wiss.  Gottingen,  1897-1898,  new  ser.,  I,  65  pp.  ;  F.  Solger,  Die  Fossilien  der  Mungo- 
Kreide  in  Kamerun,  in  E.  Esch,  F.  Solger,  M.  Oppenheim,  and  0.  Jaekel,  Beitrag  zur 
Geologic  von  Kamerun,  8vo,  Stuttgart,  1904,  pp.  83-242  ;  P.  Oppenheim,  Uber  Tertiar- 
fossilien  wahrscheinlich  eocanen  Alters,  von  Kamerun,  op.  cit.,  pp.  243-285,  and  0.  Jaekel, 
liber  einen  Torpeniden  und  andere  Fischreste  aus  dem  Tertiar  von  Kamerun,  op.  cit., 
pp.  289-291,  and  Grossouvre,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1904,  4«  ser.,  IV,  p.  839.  In  the 
plain  of  South  Nigeria,  J.  Parkinson  found  lignites,  but  no  fossils,  On  the  Post-cretaceous 
Stratigraphy  of  South  Nigeria,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1907,  LXIII,  pp.  308-312,  map. 

*  P.  Dusen,  Om  NW,  Kamerun  omradets  geologi,  Geol.  Foren.  Forh,,  1894,  XVI,  pp.  29- 
63,  map. 


CH.  Ill] 


THE  CENTEAL  SAHAEA 


93 


we  are  led  to  ask  whether  the  middle  of  the  Cretaceous  gulf  should  not  be 
placed  nearer  the  mouths  of  the  Niger. 

However  this  may  be,  De  Lapparent's  investigations  show  that  the 
transgression  of  the  middle  Cretaceous  probably  separated  a  large  fragment, 
formed  of  ancient  rocks,  from  the  main  body  of  Africa.  The  boundary  of 
this  fragment  is  given  approximately  by  the  courses  of  the  Senegal  and 
the  Niger. 

The  Central  Sahara.  The  little  sketch  in  vol.  i,  p.  360^  fig.  41,  may 
once  more  serve  as  our  starting-point.  In  addition  to  the  meridional 
line  from  Mursuk  to  lake  Chad,  explored  by  Barth,  Vogel,  Rohlfs,  and 
Nachtigal,  we  are  now  acquainted,  thanks  to  the  successful  expedition  of 
Foureau-Lamy,  with  another  meridional  line  4  to  5  degrees  further  west. 
It  extends  from  Temassanim  to  Zinder,  and  its  connexion  with  lake  Chad  is 
also  known  ^.  North-west  and  west  of  this  point  lie  regions  in  which  many 
most  valuable  observations  have  been  made.  In  our  previous  description 
(I,  p.  356)  we  divided  the  desert  into  an  Archaean,  a  Palaeozoic,  and  a 
Cretaceous-Tertiary  zone,  succeeding  each  other  towards  the  north  and 
north-east  (Libyan  desert),  and  this  division  still  holds  good ;  in  the  south 
also,  as  we  have  just  shown,  the  zone  of  older  rocks  is  succeeded  by 
a  Cretaceous-Tertiary  zone  (Juf-Niger-Senegal). 

The  boundary  of  the  older,  and  in  particular  the  crystalline,  rocks  is 
indicated  on  the  south  in  a  very  indefinite  manner  owing  to  the  denudation 
of  the  Cretaceous  and  the  breaking  up  of  its  border  into  patches.  It  may 
be  drawn  for  the  present  from  In  Azua  to  the  west-south- west,  and  it  meets 
lat.  20°  in  long.  1°  W.  On  the  north,  this  region  is  bounded  clearly  enough 
by  a  long  glint  of  transgressive  Devonian  sandstone.  It  probably  begins  in 
the  Tumno  mountains  (lats.  14°-15°  E.),  and  proceeds  as  the  south  slope  of 
the  Tazili  of  the  Asjer  far  to  the  west-north- west ;  then  it  crosses  the 
southern  slopes  of  the  remarkable  hill  groups,  Muydir  and  Ahenet,  and 
probably  disappears  a  little  beyond  long.  2°  E.  From  this  point  on,  the 
Devonian  retreats  far  to  the  north. 

North  of  the  Devonian  zone  we  encounter  at  places  fairly  well  known, 
as,  for  instance,  in  the  Wady  Issawam  (south-east  of  Temassanim),  and  then 
north  of  the  Muydir  and  the  Ahenet,  a  zone  of  Carboniferous  which  is  not 
bounded  by  a  glint.  Further  north  it  has  been  observed  at  several  localities, 
as,  for  instance,  in  Gurara,  and  as  far  as  the  Atlas. 

A  second  line  of  glint,  very  much  cut  up,  is  formed  by  the  Cretaceous. 
It  is  very  clearly  marked  at  Temassanim  (about  long.  7°  E.,  lat.  28°  N.),  in 
the  Tinghert,  and  the  neighbourhood  of  In  Salah.  We  know  that  the 
Palaeozoic  region  spreads  out  in  the  east,  and  the  Cretaceous  recedes 
towards  the  Hamada  el  Homra. 

^  F.  Foureau,  Documents  scientifiques  de  la  Mission  Saharienne,  Mission  Foureau- 
Lamj^,  2  vols.  4to,  and  Atlas,  Paris,  1905. 


94 


THE  AFRICAN  ALTAIDES  [party 


Let  us  retrace  our  steps  to  obtain  a  better  acquaintance  with  certain 
details. 

The  Archaean  zone,  formed  of  gneiss,  crystalline  schists,  phyllite,  cipolin^ 
and  granite,  is  steeply  folded;  its  prevalent  north  and  south  strike  is  a 
noteworthy  feature.  Patches  of  Devonian  sandstone  extend  far  to  the 
north,  even  into  the  Air.  They  lie  unconformably,  and  show  how  very 
large  an  area  this  mantle  must  once  have  covered.  Quartzites  are  known, 
extending  from  the  far  west  into  the  Fezzan ;  they  may  be  recognized  by 
their  dark,  often  indeed  black,  crust,  beneath  which  fracture  reveals  a  pale- 
coloured,  often  white,  rock.  Graptolites  have  been  found  in  slate  at  two 
localities,  and  indicate  the  lower  part  of  the  upper  Silurian.  One  of  these 
localities  lies  in  the  Tazili  of  the  Asjer,  on  Foureau's  route  (long.  T  8'  E., 
lat.  25°  50'  N.) ;  it  has  been  described  by  Foureau  and  Haug ;  the  second 
lies  remote  from  the  first,  at  a  place  called  Hassi-el-Khenig,  north  of  the 
Muydir,  which  will  be  described  later  in  greater  detail ;  this  discovery  was 
first  made  known  by  Flamand  ^. 

The  north  and  south  strike,  interrupted  at  most  by  local  deflexions, 
which  is  observed  in  the  Archaean  basement  and  the  beds  folded  in  with 
it,  dominates  all  the  central  part  of  the  Sahara  from  the  Tidikelt  (lat. 
27°  N.)  onwards,  and  neither  to  east,  south,  nor  west  are  its  boundaries  to  be 
found.  The  beautiful  maps  of  Gautier  and  Chudeau  mark  this  strike 
between  long.  1°  and  3°  E.  from  lat.  22°  15'  to  19°  30'  N.,  and,  with  deviations 
to  the  south-south- west,  even  in  lat.  18°  N. ;  Chudeau  mentions  the  meri- 
dional direction  even  at  Hombori  in  the  bend  of  the  Niger  (about  lat.  15° N.)^. 
The  distribution  of  the  rocks,  however,  is  even  wider.  Hubert  observed 
the  same  gneisses  and  amphibolites,  associated  as  in  the  north  with  included 
synclines  of  quartzite,  phyllite  and  marble,  throughout  Dahomey  up  to  the 
limestones  (possibly  Cretaceous)  of  the  coast  region. 

They  are  known  on  the  Niger  between  lats.  15°  30'  and  10°  30'  N.,  and 
their  numerous  short  ridges  of  gneiss  form  the  hill  range  of  Atacopa. 
Their  strike  is  strictly  north  and  south  to  about  lat.  10°  N.,  then  they 
bend  into  a  south-south-west  direction  and  so  continue  down  to  Abomay 
and  beyond.  The  same  structure  may  also  be  seen  in  a  great  part  of  Togo. 
On  the  Niger  and  in  the  district  of  Gurma  there  is  an  unconformable  super- 
position of  quartzite  of  unknown  age  ^.    Haug,  contrasting  these  folds  with 

1  F.  Foureau,  op.  cit.,  II,  p.  585  ;  Haug,  torn,  cit.,  p.  753.  The  first  reference  occurs  in 
Munier-Chalmas,  Travaux  scientifiques,  4to,  Lille,  1903,  p.  94  (cf.  also  note,  p.  22) ;  G.  B. 
M.  Flamand,  Sur  I'existence  de  schistes  a  graptolitlies  a  Haci-el-Khenig,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci., 
Paris,  8  avril  1905,  pp.  954-957. 

2  E.  F.  Gautier,  A  t ravers  le  Sahara  fran^ais.  La  Geographic,  1907,  XV,  pi.  1 ;  Chudeau, 
L'Air  et  la  region  de  Zinder,  op.  cit.,  pp.  321-336,  pi.  IV,  and  D'ln  Zize  a  In  Azoua, 
op.  cit.,  pp.  401-420,  pi.  V. 

'  H.  Hubert,  Esquisse  preliminaire  de  la  geologic  du  Dahomey,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris, 
21  oct.  1907,  pp.  692-695. 


CH.  Ill] 


THE  SAHAEIDES 


95 


the  comparatively  undisturbed  position  of  the  transgressive  Devonian,  has 
compared  them  with  the  Caledonian  system  of  Europe,  at  the  same 
time  remarking  that,  as  far  as  existing  observations  extend,  the  transgression 
begins  with  the  graptolite  shales  ^. 

The  basement  has  indeed  two  characters  in  common  with  the  Caledonides 
of  Europe ;  the  first  is  seen  in  the  prolonged  submeridional  strike  (north  of 
Norway  to  the  Mendips,  18  to  19  degrees  of  latitude,  exclusive  of  the 
traces  in  Spitzbergen ;  Tidikelt  to  South  Dahomey,  19  to  20  degrees  of 
latitude),  manifested  in  long,  often  rectilinear  ranges  which  do  not  exhibit 
the  curved  trend-lines  of  later  mountains,  and  scarcely  seem  to  combine  into 
one  principal  chain.  The  second  character  they  have  in  common  is  their 
age ;  in  Europe,  pre-Devonian,  in  Africa,  pre-upper-Silurian.  The  slightly 
earlier  date  of  the  African  ranges  seems  to  place  them  in  the  same  relation 
to  the  Caledonides  as  the  folds  produced  at  the  time  of  the  Culm  bear  to 
those  of  the  Altaides,  which  followed  the  same  plan  in  late  Carboniferous 
and  pre-Permian  times.  In  accordance  with  the  principles  of  tectonic 
classification  we  have  hitherto  adopted,  we  may  assign  them  to  the  sub- 
meridional,  sublinear  system  which  was  completed  in  Europe  before  the 
deposition  of  the  Devonian,  and  in  Africa  even  before  that  of  the  upper 
Silurian.  It  may,  however,  be  objected  that  the  unconformity  at  the 
base  of  the  African  ranges  may  be  much  older  than  the  graptolite 
shales  ;  we  shall  therefore  term  them,  following  a  suggestion  in  an  in- 
structive letter  from  M.  Chudeau,  the  Caledonides  of  the  Sahara  or  the 
Saharides. 

To  Haug,  also,  we  owe  the  recognition  of  the  transverse  trend  of  the 
pre-Permian  chains  and  the  gradual  constriction  of  the  space  from  north  to 
south  in  the  direction  of  the  Alpine  chains.  As  related  to  Europe,  Africa 
is  only  a  southern  continent ;  as  related  to  the  globe,  it  is  an  equatorial 
continent. 

As  we  proceed  from  north  to  south  in  the  eastern  hemisphere  we 
encounter  first  a  Caledonian  structure  which  (apart  from  the  indications  in 
Spitzbergen)  extends  from  the  north  of  Norway  to  the  Mendips ;  then 
we  cross  the  Altaides  of  France  and  Germany,  next  the  Alpides  and  the 
Mediterranean  Altaides  extending  to  Tunis  and  Algiers,  then  again  another 
belt  of  Altaides,  which  will  be  described  directly,  and  finally,  to  the  south 
of  these,  we  discover  the  Saharides.  Much  further  south,  however,  in  Cape 
Colony,  there  exist  the  remains  of  another  folded  system  turned  towards 
the  north,  which  recalls  in  many  respects  the  Asiatic  chains. 

The  Devonian  will  doubtless  prove,  on  closer  investigation,  to  present 
just  as  varied  a  development  in  the  Sahara  as  in  the  Fezzan.    Flamand  has 

1  Haug,  La  structure  geologique  du  Sahara  central,  La  Geographie,  1905,  XII,  pp.  297- 
304  et  passim ;  for  the  constriction  see  also  R.  Chudeau,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  2  oct. 
1905,  p.  566. 


96 


THE  AFEICAN  ALTAIDES  [paetv 


found  Galceola  sandalina  in  the  Gurara^,  and  Gautier  mentions  upper 
Devonian  with  Clymenia  and  Goniatites  retrorsus.  Particularly  note- 
worthy is  the  occurrence  of  American  forms  in  South  Africa,  and  especially 
Haug's  discovery  of  the  Tropidoleptus  carinatus  fauna  (Hamilton  stage 
of  North  America)  in  the  desert  situated  to  the  west  of  the  Ahenet^. 

The  Carboniferous  found  at  Igli  belongs  to  the  lower  division  of  that 
system.  From  the  Erg  d'Issawan  a  number  of  species  characteristic  of  the 
Carboniferous  of  Moscow  and  the  Urals  are  cited,  but  so  far  neither 
Fusulina  nor  Schwagerina  has  been  met  with.  Some  doubt  exists  with 
regard  to  the  highest  stages  of  the  upper  Carboniferous. 

Permian,  Trias,  Lias,  Oolites,  and  Neocomian  are  absent  from  the 
Central  Sahara.  A  stage  represented  by  variegated  clay  and  gypsum,  with 
associated  remains  of  fishes  and  Dinosaurs,  occurs  at  the  base  of  the 
Cretaceous  glint  below  the  typical  Cenomanian.  Haug  has  described  it  as 
the  Ceratodus  stage  ^.  It  has  been  assigned  to  the  Albian  because  it  occurs 
beneath  the  Cenomanian  ;  but  it  contains  no  fossils  characteristic  either  of 
the  Albian  or  the  Cenomanian,  and  on  account  of  its  lagoon-like  characters 
it  must  be  regarded  as  introducing  the  transgression,  thus  recalling  the 
plant-bearing  Perutz  beds  of  Bohemia,  or  the  phosphorite  beds  which  occur 
in  England,  e.  g.  near  Cambridge,  beneath  the  transgressive  upper  Green- 
sand.  It  corresponds  to  Chudeau's  Tegama  stage,  which  occurs  between 
Zinder  and  Agades  in  the  south. 

North  of  In  Salah  the  Cretaceous  glint  changes  its  character.  The 
plateau  of  Tademait  is  a  platform  of  Turonian  dolomite  which  ends  in  a 
steep  slope  towards  the  south-east  (Jebel  el  Abiodh)  and  north-west  (el 
Baten),  and  assumes  in  an  orographical  sense  the  role  of  the  glint.  The 
Cenomanian  is  but  feebly  represented.  Beneath  it  lies  sandstone  with 
gypsum,  concretions  and  fossil  wood  on  the  horizon  of  the  Ceratodus  beds ; 
it  covers  a  large  area  and  is  water-bearing.  Still  further  north,  in  the 
direction  of  the  Great  Atlas,  the  same  horizon  exhibits  sandstone  with 
included  tree-trunks  which  have  been  described  as  Neocomian. 

At  many  points  extinct  volcanos  occur ;  reference  has  already  been  made 
to  mount  Tarso  in  the  Tibesti,  and  mount  Tekinduhir  in  the  Air.  The  latter 
lies  at  the  south  foot  of  mount  Baghsem,  but,  although  crystalline  rocks  are 
alone  mentioned  as  occurring  in  this  mountain  and  those  following  it  towards 
the  north,  yet  the  basaltic  sheets  and  the  scoriae  which  all  travellers 
describe  on  the  road  in  the  west  leading  to  Agades  show  that  this  is  an 

'  G.  B.  M.  Flamand,  Sur  la  presence  du  devonien  Calceola  sandalina  dans  le  Sahara 
occidental,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  l^-^  juillet  1901,  pp.  62-64. 

2  Haug,  Sur  les  fossiles  devoniens  de  TAhenet  occidental  recueillis  par  M.  N.  Villatte, 
C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  4  dec.  1905,  pp.  970-972,  and  Nouvelles  donnees  paleontologiques 
Bur  le  D6vonien  de  TAhenet  occidental  (Mission  de  MM.  Chudeau  et  Gautier),  op.  cit., 
19  mars  1906,  pp.  732-734. 

^  Haug  in  Foureau,  Documents  scientifiques  de  la  Mission  Saharienne,  II,  p.  814. 


CH.  Ill] 


ALTAIDES  NEAE  FIGIG 


97 


important  eruptive  region.  Chudeau's  map  marks  the  whole  chain  from 
the  Baghsem  mountains  onwards  (Baghazam,  lat.  17°  45'  to  20°  N.)  as  a 
meridional  series  formed  of  Tertiary  eruptive  rock.  Foureau  speaks  of  the 
peaks  of  Aggatene  and  Diguallane  in  particular  as  volcanos.  Similar 
centres  of  eruption  have  been  pointed  out  by  Bartholomew  Barth,  whose 
observations,  together  with  those  of  Duveyrier  made  in  the  Ahaggar,  and 
others  still  later,  have  been  collated  by  Gentil  ^.  In  the  Ahaggar  especially 
the  eruptive  centres  appear  to  be  extremely  numerous.  Further  west 
attention  has  often  been  called  to  the  isolated  In  Ziza  (south  of  the  Ahenet). 
The  volcano  Tekout  already  described  by  Overweg  lies  below  the 
Devonian  glint  of  the  Tazili  of  the  Asjer ;  its  lava  flows  consist  of  olivine 
tephrite.  The  Wady  Igharghar,  once  the  principal  river  of  these  regions, 
flows  to  the  north  and  has  carried  out  scoriae  and  lavas  even  into  the 
great  Erg. 

Altaides  of  the  Sahara.  In  1900  Flamand  reported  that  indications  of 
pre-Permian  (Hercynian)  folding  exist  in  the  Sahara.  In  particular  he 
pointed  to  a  little  chain,  Ain  Kahla  (or  Jebel  Asas),  almost  meridional, 
and  to  the  locality  El  Khenig  situated  within  the  chain.  This  little 
chain  emerges  from  the  flat-lying  Cretaceous  between  lats.  27°  and  28°  N., 
near  long.  3°  14/  E.,  and  runs  south-south-east  to  disappear  in  the  mass  of 
the  Muydir.  It  is  certainly  younger  than  the  lower  Carboniferous  and 
older  than  the  Ceratodus  stage  at  the  base  of  the  Cenomanian^. 

Let  us  leave  this  place  and  seek  for  information  much  further  north. 

Near  long.  1°  30'  W.  and  lat.  32°  N.  lie  the  localities  of  Figig  and 
Bechar ;  this  region  has  been  described  by  Gautier  and  Flamand  ^. 

1  L.  Gentil,  in  Foureau,  Documents,  &c.,  II,  p.  724  et  seq. 

^  G.  B.  M.  Flamand,  Une  Mission  d'exploration  scientifique  au  Tidikelt,  Ann.  de  Geogr., 
1900,  IX,  pp.  233-242,  map.  Flamand  marks  as  El  Khenig  pome  '  aretes  rocheuses 
vives '  and  a  little  incision  in  the  chain  of  Ain  Kahla  ( =  Jebel  Asas)  (Ann.  de  Geogr., 
1900,  IX,  p.  241),  while  Haci  el  Khenig  is  marked  on  Gautier's  map  far  to  the  south-west 
of  this  point  on  the  Wady  Botha  (La  Geographic,  1904,  X,  pi.  I).  This  place  probably 
corresponds  to  the  confluence  of  the  Wady  el  Khenig,  which  descends  from  the  Jebel 
Asas  (taken  from  Flamand's  map  and  Pelet's  Atlas  des  Colonies  frangaises)  along  with 
the  Wady  Botha.  Thus  this  point  would  lie  in  the  midst  of  the  Carboniferous.  The 
folding  and  the  discovery  of  Graptolites  certainly  correspond  with  its  upper  course, 
which  is  60-80  kilometers  distant. 

^  G.  B.  M.  Flamand,  Apergu  general  sur  la  geologie,  etc.,  du  Bassin  de  TOued  Saoura 
(from  the  Documents  pour  servir  a  I'etude  du  Nord-Ouest  Africain),  8vo,  Alger,  1897, 
166  pp.,  map  ;  E.  F.  Gautier,  Rapport  sur  une  Mission  geologique  et  geographique  dans 
la  region  du  Figuig,  Ann.  de  Geogr.,  1905,  XIY,  pp.  144-166,  map  ;  for  the  region  succeed- 
ing on  the  south,  Sahara  Oranais,  op.  cit.,  1903,  XII,  pp.  235-259,  map  ;  also  Etudes 
Sahariennes,  op.  cit.,  1907,  XVI,  pp.  46-69,  map,  and  Flamand,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris, 
16  juillet  1907,  pp.  211-213  ;  also  Ficheur,  Sur  I'existence  du  terrain  carbonifere  dans 
la  region  d'Igli,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  23  juillet  1900,  p.  288  ;  A.  Thevenin,  Note  sur 
les  Fossiles  du  Carbonifere  inferieur  du  Djebel  Bechar,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1904,  4®  ser., 
IV,  pp.  818-822. 

SOLX.AS  IV  £[ 


98 


THE  AFEICAN  ALTAIDES  [paktv 


Jebel  Grouz  (1,800  meters),  near  Figig,  is  a  steep  east  and  west  anticline 
of  Lias  and  Oolite,  which,  continuing  the  lofty  chain  of  Ksour  to  the  west, 
forms  part  of  the  Mediterranean  Atlas.  A  smaller  Jurassic  chain,  the 
J ebel  Melias,  lies  on  its  south  side ;  the  J urassic  limestone  is  here  overturned 
towards  the  south  on  to  the  Cenomanian  (i.  e.  over  the  sands  of  its  foreland). 
TJiis  locality  marks  the  boundary  between  the  Mediterranean  Atlas  and 
its  foreland. 

From  this  point  onwards,  as  Gautier  remarks,  we  enter  another  world. 
Instead  of  broad  stretches  of  sandy  desert  or  Cenomanian,  as  on  the  whole 
of  the  south  side  of  the  Mediterranean  Atlas,  we  now  see  great  mountains 
running  to  the  south-west. 

A  longitudinal  valley,  130  kilometers  in  length  and  900  meters  in 
height,  runs  between  these  mountains  to  the  south-west,  from  Figig  to 
Bechar.  Jebel  Antar  (1800  meters)  in  the  north  is  formed  of  Carboniferous 
limestone.  The  valley  is  occupied  by  Cenomanian,  the  military  station  of 
Ben  Zireg  stands  on  steeply  upturned  Devonian.  Jebel  Bechar  (1,400 
meters)  on  the  south  side  of  the  valley  is  a  very  long  and  broad  ridge 
of  Carboniferous  limestone,  which  dips  to  the  north-west ;  this  is  joined,  in 
a  manner  not  clearly  defined,  by  marine  middle  Carboniferous,  then  follows 
green  sandstone  containing  the  upper  Westphalian  (Schatzlar)  flora,  as 
shown  by  Neuropteris  gigantea  and  other  species,  and  lastly  the  uncon- 
formable Cenomanian. 

This  range  is  followed  by  others  parallel  to  it,  in  particular  by  the 
Jebel  Mezarif,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Wady  Susfana,  which  flows  in 
a  second  longitudinal  valley. 

This  zone  of  parallel  chains,  together  with  the  two  longitudinal  valleys, 
dates  from  a  period  of  folding  more  recent  than  the  lower  Carboniferous 
and  older  than  the  Cenomanian.  It  differs  in  direction  and  stratigraphical 
sequence  from  the  Mediterranean  Atlas,  although  scarcely  12  or  15  kilo- 
meters of  flat-lying  Cenomanian  beds  separate  the  Devonian  of  Ben  Zireg 
from  the  Jurassic  limestone  of  the  Atlas. 

Although  the  gap  between  the  lower  Carboniferous  and  the  Cenomanian 
renders  it  impossible  to  precisely  determine  the  age  of  these  chains,  yet  the 
French  investigators  are  probably  correct  in  assigning  them  to  the  pre- 
Permian  (Hercynian)  assemblage,  that  is  to  the  Altaides. 

Jebel  Bechar  is  the  longest  and  most  important  of  the  group.  It  bends 
in  an  arc  out  of  the  south-west  into  the  south-south-west  direction,  and 
reaches  Igli  along  with  the  Wady  Susfana.  Just  above  this  place  the 
Wady  Susfana  and  the  Wady  Gir  unite  to  form  the  Wady  Saura,  and  from 
this  point  onwards  the  chain  decreases  constantly  in  height.  Near  lat. 
30°  N.  upper  Devonian  advances  with  a  somewhat  divergent  south-east 
strike  to  the  line  of  the  Wady  Saura,  and  Devonian  rocks  with  a  south- 
south-easterly  direction  accompany  the  Wady  Saura  down  nearly  to  Buda 


CH.  Ill] 


THE  GEEAT  ATLAS 


99 


in  Tuat  (about  lat.  28°  5'  N.,  long.  0°  15'  W.).  Thus  for  four  degrees  of 
latitude  the  line  of  the  Susfana  and  Saura  marks  the  course  of  the  older 
folding.  In  front  of  this  line  there  lie,  however,  especially  near  lat.  29°  N., 
repeated  traces  of  completely  denuded  folds  of  middle  and  upper  Devonian, 
which  finally  disappear  beneath  the  sandstone  of  the  great  Cretaceous 
platform  of  the  Tadmait  and  the  Turonian  glint  of  the  Baten. 

Between  lats.  26°  30'  and  27°  N.  the  Wady  is  interrupted,  and  nothing 
is  known  of  the  substructure ;  further  south,  however,  the  Wady  Susfana 
reappears  as  the  Wady  Msaud,  and  turns,  as  stated  by  Gautier,  in  contra- 
diction to  previous  observers,  to  the  south-west,  i.  e.  towards  the  Juf .  Then, 
slightly  further  to  the  east,  traces  of  the  ancient  folding  again  make  their 
appearance,  becoming  less  and  less  distinct,  until  they  once  more  become 
clear  north  of  the  Ahenet  and  the  Muydir. 

Here  we  again  follow  a  description  by  Gautier  ^. 

Near  In  R'Ar  (about  lat.  27°  N.,  long.  2°  15'  E.)  a  steep,  almost  meri- 
dional, anticline  of  Carboniferous  crops  out.  Whether  or  not  it  is  repeated 
in  mount  Ahenet  is  an  open  question.  The  broader  folds  of  the  eastern 
Ahenet  and  the  western  Muydir  also  demand  further  study.  In  about 
long.  3°  20'  E.  a  sharp  anticline  rises  out  of  the  Cretaceous.  This  is  Flamand's 
Ain  Kahla  or  Jebel  Asas;  the  Graptolites  of  el  Khenig  probably  come 
from  it.  At  first  it  strikes  south-south-east,  then  follow  two  long  hills 
directed  almost  to  the  south,  until,  after  a  course  of  about  80  kilometers, 
the  anticline  enters  the  most  northerly  part  of  the  Muydir. 

The  separate  course  of  the  several  folds,  as  well  as  their  general  dis- 
position, indicate  a  virgation  which,  near  Figig,  advances  as  an  arc  in 
front  of  the  much  younger  folds  of  the  Mediterranean  Atlas  {in  lat. 
32°  15'  N.) ;  its  branches  turn  out  of  the  south-west  into  the  south,  then  into 
the  south-south-east,  and  finally  again  into  the  south  direction.  It  is  noiv 
known  to  extend  nearly  as  far  south  as  lat  26°  N. 

The  Great  Atlas.  The  Mediterranean  Atlas  belongs  to  the  Alpine 
chains.  It  is  formed  to  no  small  extent  of  folded  Mesozoic  beds ;  its  inner 
side  faces  towards  the  north ;  it  bends  in  an  arc  in  the  Rif ,  crosses  the  sea 
in  the  Pillars  of  Hercules,  and  is  continued  in  the  Betic  Cordillera  (I,  p.  221). 
To  the  south  of  it  the  maps  mark  radiating  branches  or  coulisses  striking 
to  the  south-west  beyond  Fez,  and  then  a  broad  wedge-shaped  strip  of  land, 
interrupted  in  an  irregular  fashion  by  shorter  chains,  which  occupies  the 
whole  of  the  coast  between  cape  Spartel  and  cape  Ghir,  a  distance  of  more 
than  5  degrees  of  latitude. 

1  E.  F.  Gautier,  Le  Mouidir-Ahnet,  La  Geographie,  1904,  X,  pp.  1-18,  and  pp.  85-102, 
map.  While  this  volume  was  in  the  press  the  following  works  have  appeared ;  Gautier  et 
Chudeau,  Esquisse  geologique  du  Tidikelt  et  du  Mouidir-Ahnet,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France, 
1907, 4®  ser.,  VII,  pp.  195-218,  map ;  and  Chudeau,  Excursion  geologique  au  Sahara  et  au 
Soudan,  torn,  cit.,  pp.  319-346. 

II  2 


100 


THE  AFEICAN  ALTAIDES  [party 


This  wedge-shaped  strip  is  often,  but  incorrectly,  described  as  the  fore- 
land of  the  Great  Atlas ;  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  Great  Atlas  does  not  even 
reach  cape  Ghir.  On  the  south  side  of  this  supposed  foreland  rises  the  long 
ridge  of  el  Jebilet  (the  Little  Atlas;  el  Jebel  is  the  Great  Atlas).  This 
slopes  away  on  the  south  to  the  plain  of  the  Hauz,  i.  e.  to  the  Wady  Tensift, 
and  the  town  of  Marrakesh.  Then  further  south  the  land  rises  rapidly 
until  the  Great  Atlas  is  reached.  Many  of  its  peaks  exceed  3,000  meters  in 
height ;  and  one  of  them  attains  4,500  meters.  On  the  south  the  great 
range  descends  to  the  Wady  Sus. 

North-east  of  the  sources  of  the  Wady  Sus,  still  among  the  slopes  of  the 
Great  Atlas,  lie  the  sources  of  the  Wady  Draa.  Between  them  rises  a 
remarkable  part  of  the  range,  which  bears  the  Jebel  Sirua  and  unites  the 
Great  Atlas  with  the  Anti- Atlas  situated  to  the  south  of  the  Wady  Sus. 
The  Wady  Draa  turns  to  the  south-west,  surrounds  the  hills  of  the  Jebel 
Sirua,  and  thus  reaches  the  south  side  of  the  Anti- Atlas. 

Joseph  Thomson  found  that  the  J ebilet  is  formed  of  ancient  (meta- 
morphic)  folded  rocks,  which  strike  north-north-east  transversely  to  the 
direction  of  the  hilly  ridge,  and  he  suggested  that  this  strike  might  be 
continued  across  the  Wady  Tensift  and  through  Marrakesh  into  the  foot- 
hills of  the  Great  Atlas.  The  blunted  outlines  of  the  great  ranges  attracted 
his  attention;  he  also  succeeded  in  showing  that  the  western  end  of  the 
range  sinks  in  a  rapid  slope  and  does  not  reach  the  sea.  In  fact  we  may 
place  its  termination  about  60-70  kilometers  inland  from  cape  Ghir  ^. 

According  to  T.  Fischer,  the  covering  formations  of  the  so-called  foreland 
rest  upon  the  same  folded  basement  rock  as  that  described  by  Thomson  in 
the  Jebilet,  and  this  crops  out  even  on  the  coast  between  Casablanca  and 
Kabat.  Fischer  was  reminded  of  the  Variscan  arc  and  the  Spanish 
Meseta  ^. 

This  comparison  has  been  confirmed  by  the  work  of  French  investi- 
gators ;  Brives  and  Lemoine  have  made  us  familiar  with  the  north  of  the 
Great  Atlas;  L.  Gentil  has  crossed  it  four  times  at  frequent  peril  of 
his  life^.    Many  questions  must  still  remain  open,  but  as  regards  the 

*  J.  Thomson,  The  Geology  of  South  Morocco  and  the  Atlas  Mountains,  Quart.  Journ. 
Geol.  Soc,  1899,  LV,  pp.  190-213. 

^  T.  Fischer,  Wissenschaftliche  Ergebnisse  einer  Reise  im  Atlas-Vorlande  von  Marokko, 
Peterm.  Mitt.,  Erganzungsheft  no.  133,  1900,  165  pp.,  maps,  in  particular  p.  152  et  seq. 
The  appearance  of  Schnell's  map  of  the  Moroccan  Atlas  range  soon  after  this  work  must 
also  be  regarded  as  an  important  step  in  advance,  ibid.  no.  103,  1892,  119  pp.,  map. 

^  Here  we  will  only  mention  the  latest  and  most  comprehensive  works  on  this  region. 
A.  Brives,  Les  terrains  cretaces  du  Maroc  occidental.  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1905,  4^Ber., 
V,  pp.  81-96,  map  ;  and  Contributions  a  I'etude  geologique  de  I'Atlas  Marocain,  tom.  cit., 
pp.  379  398,  map;  also  L.  Gentil,  Observations  geologiques  dans  le  Sud-Maroc,  tom.  cit., 
pp.  521-523  ;  Contributions  a  la  geologic  et  la  geographic  physique  du  Maroc,  Ann.  de 
Geogr.,  1906,  XV,  pp.  133-151  ;  and  Note  sur  I'esquisse  geologique  du  Haut  Atlas  occi- 
dental, op.  cit.,  1907,  XVI,  pp.  70-77,  map ;  Mission  de  Segonzac,  Exploration  au  Maroc, 


CH.  Ill] 


JEBILET  AND  JEBEL  SIEUA 


101 


region  extending  from  the  sea  to  the  meridian  of  Demnat  (long.  6**  W.)  we 
possess  the  following  observations : — 

Two  systems  of  folds  are  present  in  Morocco.  The  first  is  of  pre- 
Permian  age  and  strikes  N.  20°  E. ;  further  east  it  strikes  more  to  the  north 
or  even  north  and  a  little  east.  The  second  is  of  Tertiary  age  with  a  strike 
to  north-east  or  east-north- east ;  this  forms  the  Mediterranean  (Alpine) 
chains. 

The  difference  both  in  the  strike  and  the  age  of  the  folds  is  just  as 
clearly  marked  in  these  two  systems  as  it  is  in  the  Atlas  of  Oran  and  the 
Jebel  Bechar,  or  in  the  Betic  Cordillera  and  the  Meseta. 

The  pre-Permian  folds,  as  already  stated,  crop  out  on  the  coast  between 
Casabianca  and  Rabat ;  they  form  a  large  part  of  the  J ebilet,  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Marrakesh,  and  the  Great  Atlas.  Gneiss,  granite  and  ancient 
schists,  Silurian  (Graptolite  slates  and  Orthoceras  limestone),  Devonian  and 
lower  Carboniferous  are  known  to  occur  in  them.  The  Permian,  very  often 
associated  with  eruptive  rocks,  is  either  invariably  cut  off  by  a  dislocation, 
or  unconformably  superposed,  as  in  the  case  of  the  cap  of  red  sandstone 
resting  upon  ancient  schist  near  the  pass  of  Tizi  n  Teluet  (Glaui)^.  Not 
infrequently  unconformable  superposition  is  only  mentioned  in  connexion 
with  the  Permian  and  Cretaceous,  as  in  the  Pyrenees  and  Bohemia. 

In  the  west^  the  pass  of  Bibaun,  through  which  Oskar  Lenz  began  his 
famous  journey,  and  the  line  of  the  Wady  Mussa,  which  joins  the  Wady  Sus 
between  Tarudant  and  the  sea,  mark  the  region  where  the  pre-Permian 
chain  of  the  Great  Atlas  descends  beneath  the  younger  rocks. 

Of  the  more  diversified  tract  to  the  east  it  is  much  more  difficult  to 
obtain  a  general  idea.  Rohlfs  has  touched  upon  the  southern  part,  and 
some  light  is  obtained  from  Gentil's  discoveries. 

It  has  already  been  stated  that  the  sources  of  the  Wady  Draa  lie  within 
the  region  of  the  Great  Atlas,  and  to  the  north-east  of  those  of  the  Wady 
Sus.  The  two  Wadys  are  separated  at  their  source  by  a  broad  ridge, 
formed  of  granite,  gneiss  and  crystalline  schist,  which  runs  north-east 
from  the  Anti- Atlas  into  the  Great  Atlas.  It  descends  to  the  plain  of  the 
upper  Draa,  and  there  we  find,  near  Tikirt,  horizontal  chalk  marl  apparently 
surrounding  its  foot.  Ancient  rocks  identical  with  those  of  this  ridge  form 
the  high  plateau  of  Ait  Khzama  (2,000  meters),  and  are  known  within  the 
Great  Atlas  up  to  the  summit  of  the  pass  of  Tiz  n  Tar  rar  (about 
3,500  meters). 

Between  the  Wady  Draa  and  the  Wady  Sus  this  ancient  foundation, 
chiefly  granitic,  supports  the  wide  recent  volcanic  region  of  the  Jehel  Sirua 
with  its  ruined  craters,  trachytic  flows,  scoriae  and  ashes.    North  of  this 

8vo,  Paris,  1906,  364  pp. ;  P.  Lemoine,  Mission  dans  le  Maroc  occidental,  Rapport  an 
Comite  du  Maroc,  12o,  Paris,  1905,  233  pp.,  map. 
*  Lemoine,  Mission,  etc.,  p.  191,  fig.  50. 


102 


THE  AFEICAN  ALTAIDES  [party 


region  it  also  forms  a  great  part  of  the  district  of  Tameldu,  and  still  further 
north  the  same  foundation  bears  a  vast  mass  of  Permian  eruptive  rocks, 
including  the  lofty  peaks  of  Jehel  Tamjurt  and  Jehel  Likumt  (both  about 
4,500  meters). 

To  the  east  of  this  tract,  as  we  proceed  from  Tikirt  to  the  north,  we 
come  first  on  the  already -mentioned  horizontal  Cretaceous  of  the  Wady 
Draa,  which  here,  as  in  the  north,  contains  gypsum.  In  the  Asif  Imar'  ren 
the  road  runs  upwards  through  Cretaceous,  beneath  which  the  red  Permian 
is  visible.  This  younger  covering  persists  as  far  as  the  pass  in  Glaui, 
which  lies  in  ancient  schist. 

Thence  the  road  turns  towards  the  east,  skirting  the  Jebel  An'rmer. 
Richly  fossiliferous  lower  Carboniferous  now  crops  out,  and  Gentil  thinks 
it  not  impossible  that  this  may  prove  to  continue  along  the  south  side  of  the 
range  as  far  as  the  lower  Carboniferous  of  the  Jebel  Bechar,  i.e.  that  the 
pre-Fermian  mountains  surround  the  Mediterranean  folding  on  the  south 
even  in  the  Tafilet  and  to  the  east  of  it. 

The  great  Jebel  An'rmer  consists,  like  the  other  high  peaks,  of  Permian 
eruptive  rock,  here  resting  on  the  lower  Carboniferous.  Once  more  we 
come  upon  red  Permian  ;  Jurassic  limestone  is  also  mentioned.  Near  Ait 
Mdual,  south  of  Demnat,  black  Graptolite  slate  crops  out  from  beneath  the 
unconformable  Permian.  Before  reaching  Demnat  we  are  already  sur- 
rounded by  the  Mediterranean  folds  with  their  characteristic  strike  to  the 
east-north-east.  These  form  for  some  distance,  certainly  as  far  as  Rabat, 
and  even  beyond,  the  south  border  of  the  plain  of  Marrakesh.  Possibly 
they  border  the  whole  north  side  of  the  Great  Atlas ;  but  there  seems  to  be 
some  difference  of  opinion  on  this  point  ^. 

Between  the  pre-Permian  outcrops  of  the  west  coast  and  the  Jebilet 
several  younger  shorter  anticlines  extend  through  the  so-called  foreland  to 
the  south-west  or  west-south-west.  The  strata  exposed  in  these  anti- 
clines were  not  deposited  in  deep  water.  The  red  Permian  can  only  with 
difficulty  be  distinguished  from  the  red  Trias,  which  contains  gypsum  and 
salt,  and,  as  in  the  Pyrenees,  ophite  also;  the  Jurassic,  especially  in  the 
west,  is  either  but  feebly  developed  or  entirely  absent ;  the  lower  Cretaceous 
is  present ;  the  Cenomanian  occurs  in  transgression,  and,  as  in  the  Sahara, 
frequently  begins  with  deposits  of  gypsum. 

One  of  the  most  important  of  the  anticlines  is  the  Jebel  el  Hadid  (the 
iron  mountain,  666  meters,  strike  south-west),  between  the  Wady  Tensift 
and  Mogador.    According  to  Lemoine,  vertical  Trias  is  exposed  along  its 

*  Lemoine,  Mission,  etc.,  pp.  183-197.  From  the  section  of  the  Wady  Reraja  given 
here  it  appears  as  though  the  Cretaceous  beds  of  the  Hauz  had  subsided  from  the  north 
border  of  the  Great  Atlas.  Such  a  subsidence  is  clearly  indicated  by  Brives  et  Braly,  Sur 
la  constitution  geologique  de  la  Plaine  de  Marrakech,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1906, 
4"  s^r.,  VI,  pp.  50-66. 


CH.  Ill]  EXTENSION  OF  ALTAIDES  TO  THE  SOUTH  108 


axis  ^.  Further  anticlines  follow ;  they  are  less  sharply  defined,  but  reveal 
Trias  or  even  Permian  beneath  the  Cretaceous,  and  all  decrease  in  height 
towards  the  sea.  One  of  these  anticlines  reaches  cape  Tafetneh,  a  second, 
cape  Ghir,  and  a  third,  Agadir  n  Irir. 

Thus  from  the  south-west  of  Europe  a  great  branch  of  the  Altaides, 
sometimes,  it  is  true,  interrupted  and  concealed  from  sight,  but  still  clearly 
recognizable,  extends  with  a  strike  to  N.  20°  E.  (in  the  east  with  a  north  and 
south  strike)  through  Casabianca,  the  Jebilet,  Marrakesh  and  the  Great 
Atlas  at  least  as  far  as  the  Wady  Sus  and  the  sources  of  the  Draa  till  it 
reaches  the  meridian  of  Demnat.  Numerous  patches  of  Permian  and 
Cretaceous  rest  on  the  Great  Atlas ;  its  highest  summits  are  of  secondary 
and  eruptive  origin,  in  part  of  Permian  (e.  g.  Likumt),  and  in  part  of  much 
more  recent  age  (Sirua). 

The  range  situated  further  to  the  east  is  almost  unknown,  although  it 
presents  some  lofty  peaks  (e.g.  Jebel  Uriul,  4,250  meters).  Information 
concerning  the  Anti- Atlas  in  the  south  is  also  extremely  scanty.  Gentil  saw  it 
from  the  north-east  and  believed  it  to  be  a  folded  range.  The  descriptions 
and  sketches  furnished  by  Lenz  seem  to  suggest  that  the  structure  of  the 
Great  Atlas  finds  its  prolongation  in  the  western  and  southern  portion  of 
this  chain.  At  Fum-el-Hossan  (lat.  28°  30'  N.)  vertical  beds  of  quartzose 
sandstone  of  unknown  age  occur.  The  lower  Carboniferous  was  traced  by 
Lenz  down  to  lat.  26°  at  least  2.  According  to  Flamand  the  Hammada 
el  Aricha,  north  of  Taudeni  (lat.  21°  30'  N.),  also  consists  of  lower 
Carboniferous  ^,  which  there  lies  horizontal. 

Gentil  states  that,  according  to  the  accounts  of  Dereims,  sandy  Devonian, 
folded  and  with  a  strike  slightly  east  of  north,  occurs  in  the  northern 
Tagant ;  that,  according  to  the  observations  of  Gerard,  it  also  makes  its 
appearance  at  Tijikja  (Tagant;  lat.  19°  N.,  long.  9°  30'  W.) ;  and  further, 
that,  according  to  the  observations  of  Gruwel,  it  occurs  beneath  the  dunes 
of  the  Baja  del  Galgo  (within  cape  Blanco,  lat.  21°  N.)  ^.  For  the  sake  of 
completeness  we  may  add  that  Dumont  also  met  with  folded  schists  and 
limestones,  the  latter  containing  Stromatopora,  on  the  Congo,  between  lat. 
5°  15'  and  lat.  4°  45'  S.  about 

We  cannot  arrive  at  any  definite  conclusions  from  the  observations  made 
at  these  points,  so  far  remote  from  one  another,  yet  it  seems  probable  that, 
as  a  pre-Permian  virgation  extends  far  to  the  south  in  the  central  Sahara, 
so  pre-Permian  off-shoots  may  also  exist  in  Mauritania. 

^  P.  Lemoine,  Sur  la  constitution  du  Djebel  Hadid,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  6  fevr.  1905, 
pp.  393,  394. 

^  0.  Lenz,  Timbuktu,  8vo,  Leipzig,  1884,  II,  pp.  3,  16,  21,  49  et  passim. 
'  G.  B.  M.  Flamand,  Sur  la  presence  du  terrain  carbonifere  aux  environs  de  Taoudeni 
(Sahara,  SE.),  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  17  juin  1907,  pp.  1387-1390. 
4  Gentil,  Ann.  de  Geogr.,  1907,  XYI,  p.  74. 

°  E.  Dupont,  Lettres  sur  le  Congo,  8vo,  Paris,  1889,  724  pp.,  map,  pp.  385,  504. 


104 


CHAPTER  IV 
THE  ALPS 
I.    Western  Part 

Situation  of  the  Alps.  Progress  of  investigation.  Division  of  the  Alps.  Zone  of  mont 
Blanc.  The  Carboniferous  fan  and  the  Brianfonnais.  Recumbent  sheets.  The  Glarus. 
The  Simplon  and  Tessin.  Ivrea.  From  the  Dora  Baltea  to  the  Gesso.  From  the  Gesso 
to  the  sea.    The  Alps  in  Corsica.    Relations  to  the  Apennines. 

The  peculiar  lie  of  the  Alpine  chains  follows  from  the  facts  presented 
by  north  Africa,  as  described  in  the  last  chapter.  It  will  conduce  to  clear- 
ness if  we  give  a  collective  name  to  these  chains,  the  middlemost  of  which 
are  the  Alps  themselves,  and  we  shall  therefore  term  them  the  Alpides. 

The  Alpides  belong  to  the  posthumous  Altaides.  They  extend  from  the 
Black  sea  to  Gibraltar.  To  the  north  of  them  lie  the  pre-Devonian  Caledonides 
with  a  submeridional  strike,  and  to  the  south,  with  a  similar  strike,  the 
slightly  older  Saharides.  Between  the  Caledonides  and  the  Saharides,  with 
a  transverse  strike  indicating  a  new  phase  of  mountain  formation,  lie  the 
remains  of  the  pre-Permian  Altaides,  broken  up  into  horsts  and  extending 
in  an  arc  from  Silesia  through  Germany,  France,  Spain,  and  Morocco  to  the 
Jebel  Bechar  near  Figig.  The  pre-Permian  Altaides  form  the  frame 
within  which  the  Alpides  have  been  built  up. 

A  glance  at  the  terrestrial  meridian  which  runs  through  Spitzbergen 
^ind  the  cape  of  Good  Hope  shows  that  so  far  as  it  is  accessible  to  investiga- 
tion this  outer  frame  encloses  the  only  area  in  which,  from  the  extreme 
north  to  the  extreme  south,  post-Permian  folding  has  taken  place  on  a  large 
scale.  The  mountains  at  the  cape  are  at  latest  of  Permian  age.  The  post- 
humous folds  of  the  London  and  Paris  basin  and  the  other  posthumous 
Altaides  attain  only  a  trifling  development.  We  may  assert  without 
exaggeration  that  almost  the  whole  of  the  contraction  which  has  occurred 
■since  the  Carboniferous  epoch  in  a  great  meridional  section  of  the  globe 
has  found  expression  within  this  frame.  This,  in  substance,  has  already 
been  recognized  by  Haug. 

At  the  same  time  the  Alpides  are  not  so  independent  of  the  Altaides,  as 
the  Altaides  are  of  the  Caledonides  and  Saharides.  It  is  thus  easier  to 
comprehend  why,  in  spite  of  the  close  relations  existing  with  Asia,  free 
€nds  should  yet  appear  both  at  the  eastern  and  western  extremities  of  the 


CH.  IV] 


THE  PEAME  OF  THE  ALPS 


105 


Alpides ;  at  the  western  extremity  they  are  seen  in  the  Balearic  isles,  and 
at  the  eastern  extremity  in  the  east  Balkans,  the  spur  of  Valeni  and  the 
most  easterly  and  most  interior  fold  of  the  Jura  mountains  (Gisli-fluh- 
Kistenberg,  continued  in  an  anticline  of  the  Molasse)\ 

The  frame,  however,  is  open  to  the  east  and  south-east.  It  is  sur- 
mounted by  the  Alpides,  where  the  Sudetes  disappear  beneath  the  Carpa- 
thians, and  where  the  border  of  the  Russian  platform  as  well  as  the 
Cimmerian  mountains  are  overwhelmed,  but  further  south  a  large  area  lies 
open  between  the  Crimea  and  Figig.  This  belongs  to  the  Sahara  and  the 
marginal  arc  of  the  Dinarides.  In  that  arc,  as  we  have  seen,  an  inter- 
Carboniferous  basement  is  present,  but  the  foldings  have  been  continued  on 
the  same  plan  into  the  Tertiary  aera,  and  they  are  directed  towards  the 
south.    Here,  therefore,  Asiatic  characters  are  predominant  (III,  p.  422). 

This  fragment  of  the  peripheral  Asiatic  structure,  although  folded  to 
the  south,  is,  as  a  whole,  intruded  on  the  north-west  into  the  frame  of  the 
Alpides,  and  has  so  deeply  influenced  their  development  that  the  breadth  of 
the  Alps  in  the  meridian  of  Innsbruck  is  reduced  to  about  100  kilometers. 
Thus  the  contraction  of  the  planet  is  expressed  in  this  area  in  two  ways : 
(1)  by  that  collective  movement  of  the  Dinarides,  which  does  not  proceed 
from  folding,  and  (2)  by  the  accumulated  dislocations  of  various  kinds, 
to  which  the  Alpides  owe  their  origin.  During  this  process  a  constriction 
•of  the  frame  has  taken  place  from  the  south-east,  and  it  is  a  remarkable 
fact  that  the  Dinarides,  unlike  the  Altaides,  never  become  a  passive  resistent 
foreland,  but  they  rather  assume,  as  for  instance  in  the  Brenner,  the  character 
of  a  backland,  and  exert  a  certain  amount  of  thrusting  action. 

Let  us  first  consider  the  Alps  themselves. 

Progress  of  investigation.  Five  states,  Italy,  France,  Switzerland, 
Bavaria,  and  Austria,  claim  a  share  in  this  noble  mountain  range.  This 
fact,  in  itself,  had  created  a  certain  local  inequality  in  scientific  work  at  a 
time  when  neither  the  means  of  communication  as  a  whole,  nor  the  means 
of  access  to  the  mountains  in  particular,  nor  again  the  topographical  maps, 
were  at  all  comparable  to  those  of  the  present  day. 

The  work  has  proceeded  in  the  order  prescribed  by  the  inductive  method 
and  the  nature  of  the  subject. 

First  came  the  analytical,  descriptive  stage.  Escher  and  Studer's  map 
of  Switzerland  and  Franz  von  Hauer's  map  of  Austria  may  serve  as  monu- 
ments of  this  period. 

These  were  soon  supplemented  by  attempts  at  local  synthesis.  We  may 
mention  Escher's  first  sections  of  the  so-called  double  fold  of  Glarus,  Desor's 
attempt  in  1865  to  arrange  the  central  masses  of  Switzerland  in  concentric 
arcs,  and  Lory's  proposal  in  the  following  year,  1866,  to  attribute  the  struc- 

1  Miililberg,  Arch.  Sci.  phys.  et  nat.  Geneve,  1904,  p.  37  (Ber.  Schweiz.  Naturf.  Ges. 
Winterthur). 


106 


THE  ALPS 


[part  V 


ture  of  the  French  Alps  to  fractures  :  a  careful  perusal  of  Gerlach's  works, 
also  written  during  this  period,  will  discover  many  ideas  which  anticipate 
research  of  a  much  later  date.  Then  by  degrees,  as  the  area  taken  into 
consideration  extended  its  bounds,  the  unity  of  the  whole  Alpine  system, 
the  passive  character  of  the  central  masses,  the  unilateral  structure,  the 
general  movement  to  the  north,  and  the  dam-like  action  of  the  foreland 
were  brought  into  relief.  As  early  as  1877,  F.  Teller  observed  that  the 
calc-phyllites  dipped  beneath  the  south-east  side  of  the  gneiss  mountains  of 
Oetz  and  Stubai,  as  though  the  calc-phyllites  were  inserted  in  a  mighty  fold 
of  gneiss,  inclined  obliquely  to  the  north-north-west  ^. 

Trend-lines  were  determined  for  the  Alps;  the  Carpathians  and  the 
Apennines  were  brought  into  connexion  with  them ;  the  Dinarides  separated 
off.  As  the  ground  plan  gradually  disclosed  itself,  a  great  advance  was 
made  in  the  interpretation  of  the  inner  structure  through  Marcel  Bertrand's 
comparison  with  the  Belgian  coalfield  set  forth  in  1884,  and  the  demonstra- 
tion this  afforded  that  great  masses  may  be  transported  by  a  horizontal 
movement  (charriage)  ^.  The  resemblance  was  recognized  between  Desor's 
first  zone  of  the  central  masses  of  Switzerland  (Mercantour,  Pelvoux  to 
mont  Blanc  and  the  Rhine)  and  the  Variscan  foreland. 

This  resemblance  was  established  in  1880  by  C.  Schmidt^;  in  1890 
Michel  Levy  went  a  step  further  and  compared  the  structure  of  mont 
Blanc  with  that  of  the  Central  plateau^;  and,  in  1891,  Kilian  definitely 
asserted  that  these  central  masses  are  parts  of  the  foreland^. 

Meanwhile  the  East  became  alive  to  the  necessity  of  comparison  with 
the  West :  the  result  was  Noes  general  map  of  the  entire  range  of  the  Alps^ 
published  in  1890,  and  Diener's  work  on  the  west  Alps,  published  in  1891, 
which  led  to  the  establishment  of  the  zone  of  the  Brian9onnais 

A  difierence  of  opinion  acted  as  a  check  on  the  works  of  French  and 
Italian  investigators.  In  Italy  the  lustrous  schists  (schistes  lustres)  were 
regarded,  in  accordance  with  the  views  of  Gastaldi,  as  Palaeozoic  or  pre- 
Palaeozoic  rocks,  and  this  hypothesis  found  an  able  advocate  in  Zaccagna. 
Lory  believed  them  to  be  Mesozoic.  Opinions  wavered  until  Marcel 
Bertrand,  in  1894,  finally  assigned  them  to  the  Mesozoic  aera,  except  in 

1  F.  Teller,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1877,  p.  233. 

2  M.  Bertrand,  Rapports  de  structure  des  Alpes  de  Glaris  et  d'un  bassin  houiller  du 
Nord,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1884,  3«  ser.,  XII,  pp.  318-330,  map. 

^  C.  Schmidt,  Zur  Geologie  der  Schweizer  Alpen,  8vo,  Basel,  1889,  52  pp. 

■*  Michel  Levy,  ^Itude  sur  les  roches  crystallines  et  eruptives  des  environs  du  Mont 
Blanc,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.  France,  1890,  no.  9. 

^  W.  Kilian,  Notes  sur  Thistoire  et  la  structure  des  chaines  alpines  de  la  Maurienno, 
etc..  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1891,  3°  ser.,  XIX,  pp.  571-661,  e.  g.  p.  642  :  '  Fragments  re- 
manies  de  I'ancienne  chaine  hercynienne 

•  Franz  Noe,  Geologische  tlbersichtskarte  der  Alpen,  1  : 1,000,000,  2  sheets,  Vienna, 
1890. 

'  Carl  Diener,  Der  Gebirgsbau  der  Westalpen,  8vo,  Vienna,  1891,  243  pp.,  map. 


CH.  IV] 


PROGEESS  OF  INVESTIGATION 


107 


SO  far  as  Tertiary  formations  might  be  involved  ^.  Not  long  afterwards 
Franehi  and  Stella  confirmed  this  conclusion  by  the  discovery  of  Mesozoic 
fossils  2. 

Marcel  Bertrand's  views  on  overthrusts  had  by  this  time  been  further 
developed.  In  the  west,  Kilian  and  Haug  described  recumbent  sheets 
outside  the  limits  of  mount  Mercantour  and  mount  Pelvoux.  Schardt,  an 
early  pioneer,  drew  instructive  sections  showing  great  horizontal  movements 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  lake  Geneva.  In  1901,  Lugeon  was  able  to  show 
that  not  only  the  Helvetian  Alps  which  lie  outside,  or  north  and  west  of, 
the  zone  of  mont  Blanc,  are  overfolded  for  a  great  distance  and  thrown  into 
flakes,  but  also  that  great  parts  of  the  range  lying  on  the  inside,  and  south 
and  east  of  this  zone,  have  been  carried  out  over  it  on  to  the  outer  chains. 
The  whole  of  the  Chablais  and  the  Freiburg  Alps  are  transported  masses 
of  this  kind  ^. 

Further  east  the  long  and  laborious  investigations  of  Heim  in  the 
region  of  the  double  fold  of  Glarus  have  led  him  to  accept  the  view  held  by 
Marcel  Bertrand  and  others,  that  the  true  explanation  of  this  structure  is 
afforded  by  a  single  great  overfold.  In  the  region  of  the  upper  Inn,  Lugeon 
and  Termier  found  that  older  sheets  were  exposed  in  a  window  beneath  the 
sheet  of  the  East  Alps.  Steinmann,  who  originally  held  another  opinion, 
eventually  arrived  at  the  same  conclusion. 

Rothpletz  was  one  of  the  first  to  maintain  the  existence  of  such  over- 
thrusts  in  the  western  part  of  the  East  Alps.  At  a  later  time,  and  particu- 
larly at  the  congress  of  1903,  Lugeon,  Termier,  and  Haug  attempted  to  show 
that  a  similar  structure  was  presented  by  other  parts  of  the  East  Alps.  It 
was  even  maintained  that  the  whole  zone  of  the  eastern  limestone  Alps,  480 
kilometers  in  length,  floated  upon  an  alien  basement. 

At  the  same  time  two  new  groups  of  facts  were  observed  at  points 
remote  from  one  another.  The  first  was  the  result  of  still  uncompleted 
studies  by  Becke  and  his  colleagues  on  the  central  gneiss  of  the  Tauern ;  the 
second  followed  on  a  knowledge  of  the  structure  of  the  Simplon  tunnel, 
which  afforded  a  basis  for  the  discrimination  of  the  inner  zones  of  the  West 
Alps. 

These  unexpected  discoveries  have  stimulated  the  efforts  of  investigators, 
and  the  following  attempt  at  a  summary  is  made  at  a  time  when  fresh 
results  flow  in  without  pause,  and  while  our  knowledge  of  the  several  parts 
of  the  Alps  is  still  most  unequal.    Theories  as  to  the  process  by  which  the 

^  M.  Bertrand,  Etudes  dans  les  Alpes  franjaises,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1894,  3®  ser., 
XXII,  pp.  69-162,  maps. 

'  S.  Franehi,  Sull'  eta  mesozoica  della  zona  delle  pietre  verdi  nelle  Alpi  occidentali, 
Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  Ital.,  1898,  3®  ser.,  IX,  pp.  325-482,  map,  and  several  later  works. 

'  M.  Lugeon,  Les  grandes  nappes  de  recouvrement  des  Alpes  du  Chablais  et  de  la 
Suisse,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1901,  4«  ser.,  I,  pp.  723-825,  maps  ;  cf.  note,  p.  117. 


108 


THE  ALPS 


[PAKT  V 


mountains  were  built  up  can  only  be  made  with  a  high  degree  of  reserve, 
and  they  must  be  based  on  that  broader  foundation  which  is  afforded  by  a 
comparison  with  other  great  mountain  ranges.  For  this  reason  they  will 
be  left  to  find  a  place  in  later  chapters. 

Subdivision  of  the  Aljjs.  Disregarding  the  Jura  mountains  and  the 
Molasse,  three  boundaries  of  different  kinds  enable  us  to  subdivide  the  Alps 
into  several  regions,  a  step  which  will  facilitate  our  attempt  to  obtain  a 
broad  and  general  survey. 

The  first  of  these  is  the  sharply  defined  southern  or  Binaric  boundary. 
It  runs  almost  in  a  straight  line  from  the  south  side  of  the  Bacher  mountains 
in  Styria  for  a  long  distance  to  the  west-north-west,  crosses  the  Brenner 
between  Brixen  and  Sterzing,  then  turns  to  the  south-south-west,  next  to 
the  south-west  and  west-south-west,  reaches  the  Adda,  and  finally,  striking 
across  the  northern  part  of  lake  Como  and  the  Lago  Maggiore,  extends  in 
an  arc  west  of  lake  Orta  to  the  plain  of  Lombardy.  It  is  a  line  of  com- 
pression and  intrusion. 

The  second  boundary  is  that  betiveen  the  East  and  West  Alps.  It  does 
not  hold  good  for  the  Flysch  zone.  It  is  most  clearly  marked  on  the  west 
side  of  the  Ehaeticon,  and  is  continued  through  Oberhalbstein  into  the 
north-east  of  the  Disgrazia  group.  It  marks  the  superposition  of  an  upper 
eastern  mountain  complex  on  lower  western  complexes. 

The  third  line  is  the  least  clearly  marked,  or,  more  correctly,  has  been 
most  altered  by  later  events.  It  separates  within  the  western  Alps  the 
Piedmontese  from  the  Helvetian  Alj^s.  Disregarding  deviations  to  be  men- 
tioned presently,  it  runs  from  the  east  side  of  the  Mercantour,  close  to  the 
east  side  of  the  Pelvoux  and  mont  Blanc,  eastwards  to  the  Rhone  valley,  then 
across  val  Bedretto  and  through  Airolo  to  the  south  side  of  the  Gotthard. 
This  boundary  is  very  nearly  followed  by  a  band  of  Oligocene,  Haug's  zone 
of  the  Aiguilles  d'Arves,  which  we  shall  designate  with  Termier  the  inner 
Flysch  zone.  It  first  makes  its  appearance  on  the  sea  coast,  and  has  been 
recognized  by  Kilian  even  on  the  east  side  of  mont  Blanc. 

The  separation  of  these  branches  of  the  Alps  may  be  observed  also  on 
the  outer  border.  The  Jura  mountains  merge  with  the  Helvetian  Alps  in 
a  bend  directed  inwards  towards  Chamb^ry.  The  Helvetian  (or  Delphinian) 
Alps  describe  a  similar  bend,  corresponding  to  the  Pelvoux  and  directed 
inwards  to  the  upper  Durance,  and  a  second  bend  in  the  direction  of  the 
Var.  On  the  Var  they  terminate,  while  the  Piedmontese  Alps  strike  away 
to  the  sea  and  reappear  in  the  north-east  of  Corsica. 

In  this  subdivision  the  oft-mentioned  zone  of  the  Brian9onnais  must  be 
assigned  for  the  most  part  to  the  outer  parts  of  the  Piedmontese  Alps. 

Zone  of  mont  Blanc.  This  zone  of  ancient  rocks  extends  from  the 
Mercantour  across  the  Pelvoux,  Grandes  Rousses,  Belle  Donne  and  mont 
Blanc  to  the  Gotthard  and  the  mass  of  the  Aar.    The  lie  of  the  arc  appears 


CH.  IV] 


ZONE  OF  MONT  BLANC 


109 


to  correspond  on  the  whole  with  the  Variscan  strike  in  the  foreland.  But 
closer  observation  shows  that  this  correspondence  exists  only  in  the  east ; 
in  the  Belle  Donne  a  considerable  deviation  makes  its  appearance  ;  in  their 
southern  part,  as  in  the  Grandes  Rousses,  the  dominant  direction,  in  contrast 
to  the  general  outline  of  the  mountains,  is  north  and  south,  and  in  the 
south-west  part  of  the  Mercantour  the  direction  is  east  and  west  ^. 

In  addition  to  this  divergence  between  the  strike  of  the  rocks  and  the 
direction  of  the  mountains,  the  arrangement  of  the  branches  in  an  alter- 
nating series  claims  attention.  Michel  Ldvy  and  Ritter  have  found  that 
the  southern  branch  of  the  Belle  Donne,  which  follows  the  outer  side  of  the 
Grandes  Rousses,  strikes  obliquely  through  Beaufort  and  across  the  Prairion 
to  the  Aiguilles  Rouges — that  is,  towards  the  north  of  mont  Blanc.  The 
continuation  of  the  northern  branch  of  the  Belle  Donne  runs  still  further  to 
the  north,  through  Fleuret  to  M^geve  ^.  The  case  is  similar  with  regard  to 
the  oblique  line  of  the  Rhone-Furca-Urseren-Andermatt-Vorder  Rhine 
which  separates  the  St.  Gotthard  from  the  mass  of  the  Aar. 

These  oblique  lines  of  demarcation  strike  somewhat  more  towards  the 
north-east  than  the  inner  side  of  the  arc.  Connexions  existed  not  only 
along  these  lines,  but  also  above  the  level  of  at  least  a  part  of  the  zone  of 
mont  Blanc.  This  is  shown  by  the  patch  of  Jurassic  described  by  Favre  on 
one  of  the  peaks  of  the  Aiguilles  Rouges  and  the  presence  of  Mesozoic 
synclines  in  the  gneiss  masses  themselves.  In  the  Grandes  Rousses  and  the 
Pelvoux,  Termier  has  distinguished  older,  pre-Triassic,  and  younger  or 
Alpine  synclines.  The  older  are  crossed  by  the  younger  at  various  angles 
which  are  generally  acute  But  where  Alpine  folds  swerve  around  the  foot 
of  an  ancient  mass,  as  on  the  south  of  the  Mercantour,  they  move  like 
a  fluid  on  the  border  of  a  weir,  and  the  deviation  from  the  direction  of  the 
older  folds  may  amount  to  a  right  angle. 

The  ends  of  the  several  masses  resolve  themselves  sometimes  into  two 
or  three,  or  even,  as  in  the  south  end  of  mont  Blanc,  into  six  or  eight 
separate  anticlines  of  gneiss,  between  which  sedimentary  synclines  are 
included.  Towards  the  interior  of  the  masses  these  synclines  disappear 
and  the  mass  appears  to  be  uniform,  but  we  are  able  to  perceive  that  if 
the  great  mountain  core  were  less  profoundly  eroded  it  would  present 

^  Franchi,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  Ital.,  1894,  p.  240,  gives  the  strike  for  the  Italian  part 
as  still  south-east ;  for  the  south-west  see  L.  Bertrand,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1897,  IX, 
p.  121  et  seq. 

Michel  Levy,  Note  sur  la  prolongation  vers  le  sud  de  la  chaine  des  Aiguilles 
Rouges,  Montagues  de  Pormenaz  et  du  Prairion,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1892,  no.  27, 
pp.  393-452,  map ;  E.  Ritter,  op.  cit.,  1896,  no.  44,  pp.  144-146  ;  La  Bordure  Sud-Ouest 
du  Mont-Blanc,  op.  cit.,  1897,  no.  60,  pp.  445-676,  map,  et  passim. 

^  P.  Termier,  Le  Massif  des  Grandes  Rousses,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1894,  VI,  no.  40, 
pp.  169-287,  map,  in  particular  p.  104 ;  Sur  la  tectonique  du  Massif  du  Pelvoux,  Bull. 
Soc.  geol.  France,  1896,  3^  ser.,  XXIV,  pp.  734-758,  map. 


110 


THE  ALPS 


[part  V 


several  parallel  folds  much  further  towards  its  interior,  resembling  those 
which  are  preserved  in  the  Pelvoux,  for  example.  This  interdigitation  of 
the  folds  was  described  many  years  ago  by  Heim  in  the  St.  Gotthard 
and  at  the  east  end  of  the  Aar  mass,  and  afterwards  by  Lugeon  at  its 
south-west  end.  Heim  terms  the  phenomenon  '  Verf altung '  (folding 
pushed  to  an  extreme  ^) :  in  the  last  example  the  flat-folded  tongues  of 
gneiss  dwindle  down  to  a  thickness  of  from  2  to  4  metres  ^, 

Too  much  importance  has  been  attached  to  the  fan-shaped  structure 
of  mont  Blanc.  It  is  true  that  this  structure  is  seen  in  the  section  of 
Chamounix-Courmayer,  but  the  mass  of  the  mountains  consists  of  crowded 
folds  overturned  to  the  north-west,  as  shown  by  Duparc  and  Mrazec,  and 
confirmed  by  Ritter  and  other  observers.  We  must  conceive  the  ancient 
basement  of  mont  Blanc  as  a  basin  of  crystalline  schists,  on  each  side 
of  which,  on  the  north-west  and  south-east,  lies  a  zone  of  fairly  ancient 
schists,  out  of  which  rise  rocks  of  granite  and  protogine  ^.  Pebbles  of 
protogine  have  been  met  with  in  Carboniferous  conglomerate 

Three  granitic  intrusions  have  been  described  by  Baltzer  in  the  Aar 
mass.  They  belong  to  the  group  of  the  Variscan  granites  of  the 
Erzgebirge,  the  Harz,  and  other  ranges  ^.  Although  the  members  of  the 
mont  Blanc  zone  exhibit  characters  which  are  clearly  Variscan,  e.  g.  in  the 
transgression  of  the  limnic  beds  of  middle  and  upper  Carboniferous,  yet 
we  cannot  describe  them  as  Variscan  horsts.  They  are  resurgent  parts 
of  the  basement  of  the  Alps,  which  was  folded  together  with  the  over- 
lying rocks,  and  they  consist  of  repeated  parallel  folds.  They  are 
exposed  at  the  surface,  because  the  longitudinal  axes  of  the  several  fascicles 
of  folds  rise  upwards  and  sink  downwards  together  (sur^ldvation  des  axes). 

The  Carboniferous  fan  and  the  Brianconnais.  A  long  arc  of  Carboni- 
ferous and  Permian  sediments  extends  from  the  Rhone  valley  above  Sion, 
down  to  the  sea- coast  near  Savona.  Running  at  first  parallel  with  the 
inner  border  of  the  zone  of  mont  Blanc,  it  crosses  the  Great  and  Little 
St.  Bernard,  extends  east  of  Moutiers  to  Briancourt,  is  interrupted  by  the 
valley  of  the  Guil,  reappears  on  Italian  soil,  passes  to  the  south  of  Santo 
Dalmazzo,  and  finally,  with  an  almost  east  and  west  direction,  reaches  the 

^  That  is,  folded  flat,  hence  as  an  English  equivalent  we  may  speak  of  flatfolding. — 
Note  by  Editor. 

^  A.  Heim,  Hochalpen  zwischen  Reuss  und  Rhein,  p.  246 ;  Lugeon,  Seconde  communi- 
cation preliminaire  sur  la  geologie  de  la  region  comprise  entre  le  Sanetsch  et  le  Kander, 
Eclogae  Geol.  Helv.,  1905,  VIII,  pp.  421-433. 

'  L.  Duparc  et  L.  Mrazec,  Recherches  geologiques  et  petrographiques  sur  le  Massif  du 
Mont-Blanc,  Mem.  Soc.  Phys.  Hist.  Nat.  Geneve,  1898,  XXXIII,  pp.  1-227  ;  in  particular 
p.  194  et  seq. 

*  M.  Levy,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1890,  no.  9,  pp.  22. 

^  A.  Baltzer,  Die  granitischen  Intrusiv-Massen  des  Aar-Massivs,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1903, 
Beil.-Band  XVI,  pp.  292-324,  International  Congress,  Vienna,  1903,  pp.  787-798. 


CH.iv]  THE  CARBONIFEROUS  FAN 


111 


sea  near  Savona^.  The  rocks  are  often  altered  into  semi-crystalline  or 
even  gneissose  schists.  Plant  remains,  compressed  anthracite  seams,  and 
graphite,  bear  witness  to  their  age.  The  arc  does  not  form  a  strati- 
graphical  boundary.  This  is  obvious  from  Kilian's  observations.  For  the 
greater  part  of  its  course  it  possesses  a  fan-like  structure  which  is  most 
clearly  expressed  south  of  the  Great  St.  Bernard.  The  west  side  is  over- 
turned towards  the  west,  in  the  direction  of  mont  Blanc  and  the  Pelvoux, 
and  the  east  side  is  overturned  towards  Italy.  In  like  manner  the  whole 
of  the  next  succeeding  range  is  overturned  on  the  one  side  as  far  as  the 
older  rocks  of  the  Pelvoux,  on  the  other,  as  far  as  the  Italian  plain. 
Earlier  descriptions  might  easily  give  rise  to  the  notion  that  this  long 
fan  is  an  independent  axis  of  elevation.    It  is  a  zone  of  stowing  2. 

Let  us  first  consider  its  relations  to  the  younger  sediments  between 
Brian^on  and  the  east  side  of  mont  Blanc.  In  our  study  of  this  region 
we  will  take  Kilian's  comprehensive  works  as  our  guide  ^.  With  regard 
to  its  southern  portion  we  have  in  addition  Termier's  investigations  north 
and  south  of  the  town  of  Brian^on 

In  this  elongated,  and  not  very  broad  tract,  the  inner  Flysch  zone 
makes  its  appearance.  This  shows  that  the  sea  still  lingered  here  even 
at  the  time  of  the  upper  Oligocene.  On  the  east  side  of  the  Pelvoux, 
Kilian  encountered  Flysch  normally  superposed  on  the  gneiss.  It  also 
lies  in  transgression  on  folded  Mesozoic  beds,  but  is  itself  folded,  and  in 
the  Aiguilles  d'Arves,  a  little  to  the  north  of  the  Pelvoux,  it  reaches 
a  height  of  3,514  meters. 

In  the  Mesozoic  beds  of  the  Swiss  Alps  we  are  accustomed  to  dis- 
tinguish three  facies,  a  Helvetian,  a  Brian^onnais,  and  a  Piedmontese  facies. 

The  Piedmontese  facies  is  distinguished  by  the  preponderance  of  lus- 

1  M.  Bertrand,  Etudes  dans  les  Alpes  fran^aises,  Bull.  See.  geol.  France,  1894,  3«  ser., 
XXII,  pp.  69-162,  maps.  A  summary  of  the  wliole  range  is  given  by  Pellati  in  Giaci- 
menti  di  Antracite  nelle  Alpi  occidentali  italiane,  Mem.  Carta  geol.  dltal.,  1903,  XII, 
tav.  I. 

^  The  temptation  to  render  '  Stauung  '  by  '  stowing '  in  the  preceding  volumes  was 
great,  it  is  now  too  strong  to  be  resisted.  The  Anglo-Saxon  '  stow  '  meant  to  stop,  and 
is  still  sometimes  used  in  that  sense.  A  moving  mass  arrested  or  stowed  by  a  dam 
rises  up  against  the  obstacle,  and  the  whole  effect  of  the  dam  is  expressed  by  the 
term  *  stowing '. — Note  by  Editor. 

*  W.  Kilian  et  J.  Revil,  ^Itudes  geologiques  dans  les  Alpes  occidentales,  Contributions 
a  la  geologic  des  chaines  interieures  des  Alpes  fran9aises,  I ;  Memoire  pour  servir  a 
I'explication  de  la  carte  geologique  detaillee,  4to,  1904,  627  pp.,  maps,  and  a  number  of 
smaller  works. 

*  P.  Termier,  Les  Montagues  entre  Brianfon  et  Vallouise  ;  Memoire  pour  servir  a 
I'explication  de  la  carte  geologique  detaillee,  4to,  1903,  184  pp.,  map,  and  Sur  la  neces- 
site  d'une  nouvelle  interpretation  de  la  tectonique  des  Alpes  Franco-italiennes,  Bull.  Soc. 
geol.  France,  1907,  4®  ser.,  VII,  pp.  174-189.  Compare  also  Franchi's  observations  on 
the  'facies  mista'  in  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  Ital.,  1906,  p.  89  et  seq.,  which  are  useful  as 
a  study  of  accessory  characters. 


112 


THE  ALPS 


[part  V 


trous  schists,  and  the  presence  of  basic  green  rocks.  The  Trias  is 
represented  by  quartzites,  gypsum,  and  marble.  The  lustrous  schists, 
which  belong  in  great  part  to  the  Lias  and  Oolites,  also  occur  in  the 
west  of  the  Carboniferous  fan,  e.  g.  on  the  Col  de  Seigne,  and  the  green 
rocks  are  also  to  be  found  at  this  and  other  localities.  An  opportunity 
will  be  afforded  later  of  mentioning  the  remains  of  recumbent  sheets 
situated  further  to  the  north,  which  have  been  carried  from  the  south- 
east over  the  Brian9onnais,  or  onwards  out  of  the  Brian9onnais  towards 
the  west.  It  will  also  be  necessary,  before  discussing  the  East  Alps,  to 
obtain  a  more  definite  idea  of  the  meaning  of  the  term  ^  facies We  shall 
then  see  that  the  characters  of  the  Piedmontese  facies,  namely,  the  presence 
of  the  green  rocks  and  the  marked  alteration  of  all  the  rocks,  are  merely 
accessory  features.  They  have  been  added  later  and  are  foreign  to  the 
original  facies.  Termier  long  ago  perceived  that  they  increase  as  we 
proceed  towards  the  plain  of  Lombardy. 

The  town  of  Briangon  itself  lies  in  the  Carboniferous  zone.  Mesozoic 
synclines  are  inserted  in  the  fan. 

As  representatives  of  the  Trias  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Brian9on, 
Termier  mentions  quartzite,  succeeded  first  by  greenish  schist  with  beds 
of  dolomite  and  limestone,  as  well  as  rauchwacke,  gypsum,  and  phyllitic 
marble,  and  then  by  limestone,  up  to  300  meters  in  thickness,  containing 
Gyroporella  and  Crinoids.  The  Lias  presents  itself  as  a  breccia  (Breche 
du  T^legraphe)  but  with  a  variety  of  development,  in  particular  as  dark 
platy  limestone  with  Pentacrinus ;  and  since  the  occurrence  of  black  cal- 
careous shales  with  Avicula  contorta  is  mentioned,  the  Rhaetic  stage  must 
also  be  present;  then  comes  Jurassic  (Calcaire  de  Guillestre)  often  as 
Globigerina  limestone,  with  Phylloceras,  Aptychus,  and  other  fossils.  The 
whole  of  the  upper  part  of  this  series  is  metamorphosed  in  places  into 
platy  marble  (marbre  en  plaquettes) ;  this,  which  may  include  the 
Cretaceous  also,  reaches  a  thickness  of  700  meters. 

This  series  differs  from  the  Helvetian.  Gyroporella  limestone  and 
Aptychus  limestone  are  far  more  suggestive  of  parts  of  the  East  Alps.  But 
in  the  crowded  series  of  folds  and  flakes  between  the  Carboniferous  fan 
and  the  zone  of  mont  Blanc  the  divergent  horizons  do  not,  as  far  as  we  can 
judge,  appear  simultaneously  at  a  particular  limit,  so  that  series  with 
a  mixture  of  characters  become  possible. 

If  an  example  of  the  typical  outer  Helvetian  series  is  compared  with 
a  typical  series  of  the  Brian9onnais,  e.  g.  with  a  recumbent  segment  trans- 
ported from  a  distance,  a  considerable  difference  will  be  apparent,  but  in 
the  broad  and  now  compressed  area  across  which  the  overriding  has  taken 
place  the  two  series  are  connected  by  transitions. 

The  interpretation  of  the  alternating  series  of  the  gneiss  masses  in  the 
zone  of  mont  Blanc  now  becomes  apparent. 


CH.  IV] 


BRIANgONNAIS 


113 


As  a  final  result  the  Belle  Donne  disappear  towards  the  north-east  on 
Helvetian  territory,  and  the  Grandes  Rousses,  along  with  their  associated 
synclines,  strike  away  to  the  north  side  of  mont  Blanc,  and  even  into  its 
flat  synclinal  folds.  The  Mesozoic  folds  between  the  Belle  Donne  and  the 
Grandes  Rousses  become  the  lofty  limestone  mountains  of  the  Diablerets, 
Wildhorn,  &c.,  and  it  seems  as  though  the  Grandes  Rousses,  and  perhaps 
-also  a  part  of  the  Pelvoux,  together  with  mont  Blanc,  had  been  aflfected  by 
a  subsequent  arching  up  of  the  mountains. 

We  now  perceive  that  the  term  '  Brian^onnais '  has  been  used  some- 
times in  a  narrower,  sometimes  in  a  wider  sense.  The  facts  so  luminously 
presented  by  Kilian  lead  indeed  to  the  following  transverse  section : 
1.  Outer  Helvetian  folds.  2.  Older  rocks  of  the  Belle  Donne.  3.  Several 
fascicles  of  Mesozoic  folds,  between  which  mont  Blanc,  the  little  mass  of 
Rocheray  on  the  Arc  and  the  Grandes  Rousses,  with  perhaps  the  Pelvoux  also, 
appear  as  though  resting  on  a  common  anticline.  4.  The  inner  Flysch  zone 
(zone  of  the  Aiguilles  d'Arves).  5.  Another  Mesozoic  zone  (faisceau  du 
Galibier,  Kilian).  6.  The  Carboniferous  fan,  with  infolded  Mesozoic  bands 
(so  far  the  overfolding  is  to  the  west ;  beyond  this  point  it  is  to  the  east). 
7.  Another  Mesozoic  zone  (faisceau  du  Chaberton).  8.  Lustrous  schists 
find  Piedmontese  Alps. 

The  gneiss  chains  are  thus  encountered  twice  over  (Belle  Donne  and 
mont  Blanc).  We  may  take  as  the  boundary  of  the  inner  Alpine  zone 
either  the  chain  of  mont  Blanc,  or  the  inner  Flysch  zone,  or  again  the 
Carboniferous  fan.  Kilian  makes  his  zone  du  Brian^onnais  begin  with  the 
Flysch ;  thus  interpreted  it  also  includes  the  ranges  of  the  Galibier  (5),  but 
gives  a  sharper  boundary  between  7  and  8. 

As  already  stated,  we  regard  the  Flysch  zone  (4)  as  the  outer  boundary  of 
the  inner  or  Piedmontese  chain,  although  it  has  been  subsequently  broken 
up ;  but  we  must  repeat  that  this  boundary  is  not  of  the  same  nature  or 
value  as  the  Dinaric  boundary  or  that  of  the  East  Alps. 

The  Piedmontese  Alps  attain  a  great  development  towards  the  north- 
east and  east.  As  an  example  we  may  mention  the  series  of  Trias,  green 
schists,  serpentine,  and  Bundner  schists,  met  with  by  Preiswerk  between 
Visp  and  Brieg  in  the  Rhone  valley.  The  serpentine  which  invades  the 
Trias  and  Bundner  schists  was  intruded  as  diabase  and  gabbro,  and  has 
produced  in  places  contact  metamorphosis.  Later  injections  have  consolidated 
as  wehrlite  and  dunite  ^.  These  are  the  representatives  of  the  green  rocks 
of  Piedmont.    The  Bundner  schists  represent  the  lustrous  schists. 

This  zone  also  includes  the  great  band  of  Verrucano,  Trias,  lustrous 
schists  and  calc-mica-schists,  which  Heim  observed  near  Olivone,  between 

^  H.  Preiswerk,  Die  metamorpliisclien  Peridotite  und  Gabbrogesteine  in  dem 
Bundner  Schiefer  zwischen  Visp  und  Brieg,  Verh.  naturf.  Ges.  Basel,  1904,  XV,  pp.  293- 
316. 


SOLL.AS  TV 


I 


114 


THE  ALPS 


[part  V 


the  gneiss  of  the  Adula  and  the  south  side  of  the  Gotthard  ^.  The  whole 
breadth  of  the  Wallis  Alps  as  far  as  the  Adda  also  belongs  to  this  zone. 

Recumbent  sheets.  While  the  synclines  described  above  strike  obliquely 
through  the  zone  of  mont  Blanc,  and  may  develop  outside  the  zone  into 
mighty  limestone  ranges,  the  situation  in  the  south  is  quite  different. 

Between  the  Mercantour  and  the  Pelvoux,  the  zone  of  mont  Blanc 
presents  a  great  gap,  and  through  this,  as  through  a  gateway,  the  impelled 
mountains  make  their  exit  to  the  west,  just  as  water  or  ice,  furrowing 
away  the  ground  beneath  it,  forces  its  way  through  a  constricted  passage 
(II,  p.  343,  fig.  35,  and  p.  344,  fig.  36). 

We  will  begin  our  study  of  this  process  in  the  south-west.  For  the 
French  part  of  the  region  we  will  follow  the  accounts  of  Leon  Bertrand  ^» 
and  for  the  mountains  north  of  Mentone  and  Bordighera  those  of  Franchi  ^ 

The  Var  bends  in  a  right  angle  out  of  an  east  and  west  into  a  north 
and  south  direction,  and  reaches  the  sea  at  Nice  ;  it  receives  two  tributaries 
from  the  Mercantour,  the  Tinea  coming  from  the  north-north- west  and  the 
V^subie  from  the  north. 

The  mass  of  the  Mercantour  has  turned  round  in  its  southern  part 
towards  the  Col  di  Tenda,  i.  e.  to  the  south-east,  but  Leon  Bertrand  found 
that  its  stratified  border  of  Permian  and  Trias  gives  off  a  long  spur  which 
starts  from  the  Vesubie — that  is,  far  to  the  west  of  the  Col  di  Tenda — and 
proceeds  towards  the  south.  This  is  an  important  boundary.  The  folds 
of  the  east  and  south-east  side  of  the  Mercantour  engirdle  its  southern 
end,  and  reach  this  spur.  Here,  as  far  as  the  upper  Jurassic  and  lower 
Cretaceous  are  concerned,  the  facies  of  the  Brian9onnais  suddenly  ends, 
and  the  Helvetian  facies  takes  its  place.  The  beds  on  the  east  side  of  the 
spur  are  overthrust  and  overfolded  to  the  west,  and  this  direction  persists 
in  the  region  of  the  lower  Var  as  far  as  Nice,  where  the  strike  is  east  and 
west  and  the  overfolding  towards  the  south.  Between  Mentone  and 
Bordighera  the  strike  has  again  become  more  north  and  south,  and  the 
movement  is  directed  towards  the  west. 

In  the  region  east  of  the  spur  of  the  Vesubie  and  the  plain  of  the 
lower  Var,  the  folds  stowed  by  the  Mercantour  broaden  out.  The  inner 
Flysch  zone  (zone  of  the  Aiguilles  d'Arves)  then  assumes  so  great  a  part 
that  we  seem  to  meet  over  considerable  tracts  with  nothing  but  an  extension 
of  this  zone. 

West  of  the  Vesubie  we  find  ourselves  in  the  midst  of  the  outer 

*  A.  Heim,  Geologische  Begutachtung  der  Greina-Bahn :  Geologische  Nachlese,  no.  16, 
Vierteljahrschrift  nat.  Ges.  Zurich,  1906,  LI,  pp.  378-396. 

*  L.  Bertrand,  ^tude  geologique  du  Nord  des  Alpes  Maritimes,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol., 
1897,  IX,  no.  56,  214  pp.,  maps,  and  Sur  les  grandes  lignes  de  la  geologie  de  la  partie 
alpine  des  Alpes  maritimes,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1904,  4«  ser.,  II,  p.  688  et  seq.,  maps. 

^  S.  Franchi,  Contribuzione  alio  studio  del  Titonico  e  del  Cretaceo  nelle  Alpi  Maritime 
italiane,  Bol.  Com.  geol.  Ital.,  1894,  XXV,  pp.  31-83,  map. 


CH.iv]       EECUMBENT  FOLDS  OF  DAUPHIN^]  115 


Helvetian  (Delphinian)  folds  overthrust  to  the  south,  and  within  the  bend 
of  the  Var  these  encounter  the  folds  of  Provence  moved  in  the  opposite 
direction.  These  we  do  not  regard  as  forming  part  of  the  Alps.  They 
surround  the  Hyeres  and  the  Esterel,  the  crystalline  schists  of  which  are 
still  visible  between  Cannes  and  Antibes. 

On  the  coast  of  Monaco  traces  of  recent  volcanic  breccia  have  been 
observed  ^. 

And  it  is  in  this  manner  that  the  Helvetian  coulisse,  bent  inwards, 
terminates  on  the  Var  and  the  Yesubie. 

The  folds  of  Provence,  on  the  west  bank  of  the  lower  Var,  have  been 
exposed  to  movements  of  a  very  late  date,  as  shown  by  Ziircher's  discovery 
near  Vence  (north-west  of  Nice),  where  a  sheet  of  Trias  and  Jurassic  has 
been  thrust  over  marine  Miocene,  and  probably  over  Pontic  sediments  also, 
and  afterwards  folded  in  with  them,  so  that  Trias  occurs  in  a  syncline  of 
Miocene,  and  Miocene  beneath  an  anticline  of  Trias.  Gu^bhard  has  observed 
marine  Pliocene  at  this  locality,  inclined  at  an  angle  of  20°,  and  at  a  height 
of  350  meters  above  the  sea  ^. 

Let  us  next  turn  our  attention  to  the  north. 

The  folds  advancing  from  the  interior  surround,  as  we  have  seen,  the 
south-east  end  of  the  Mercantour.  The  point  of  contact  is  exposed  in  the 
tunnel  of  the  Col  di  Tenda  ^.  From  Tenda  towards  Limone,  on  the  inner 
side  of  the  Mercantour,  a  very  rapid  narrowing  down  affects  all  the  inner 
folded  ranges,  and  persists  as  far  as  its  north-western  end.  Here  the  broad 
portal  between  the  Mercantour  and  the  Pelvoux  occurs,  and  here  the  inner 
parts  of  the  mountains  move  forwards  for  the  second  time. 

Broad  patches  of  recumbent  folds  are  to  be  seen  here.  C.  Lory  regarded 
them  as  islands  of  the  Eocene  epoch,  Goret  as  horsts.  Haug  and  Kilian 
recognized  their  true  nature  as  early  as  1892.  Haug  gives  the  distance, 
directly  measurable,  over  which  they  have  been  carried  as  25  kilometers. 
Kilian  estimates  the  whole  extent  of  the  movement  as  30  to  40  kilometers. 
These  advancing  masses  probably  passed  over  the  north-west  end  of  the 
Mercantour,  but  not  over  the  end  of  mont  Pelvoux.  The  Helvetian  folds 
striking  to  the  south-west  are  surmounted  by  the  lower  side  of  the  inner 
Flysch  zone,  which  comes  from  the  east  in  great  development,  accompanied 
by  basement  patches  of  the  Helvetian  Trias  swept  away  with  it  in 

1  They  are  the  continuation  of  the  more  extensive  outcrops  of  Antibes  and  Villeneuve, 
and  perhaps  younger  than  these ;  Issel  regards  them  as  the  remains  of  a  submarine 
centre  of  eruption,  at  most  5  or  6  kilometers  distant :  Issel,  Terremoto  del  1887,  Suppl. 
al  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  Ital.,  1888,  XVIII,  p.  44 ;  L.  Bertrand,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France, 
1901,  4«  ser.,  I,  p.  96. 

2  Ziircher,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1905,  XYI,  p.  140 ;  A.  Guebhard,  Bull.  Soc.  geol. 
France,  1904,  4^  ser.,  IV,  p.  168. 

^  L.  Baldacci  e  S.  Franchi,  Studio  geologico  della  galleria  del  Colle  di  Tenda,  Boll.  R 
Com.  geol.  Ital.,  XXXI,  1900,  pp.  33-87,  map. 

I  2 


116 


THE  ALPS 


[part  V 


its  course.  These  are  signs  indicating  that  the  base  of  the  portal  has  been 
scooped  out  in  a  scape  colk.  Upon  the  Flysch  rest  the  Mesozoic  recumbent 
sheets  of  the  Ubaye,  which  also  come  from  the  east.  The  whole  Flysch  of 
the  Embrunais  has  been  transported  from  the  east  ^. 

On  the  east  side  of  the  Pelvoux  the  inner  zones  are  again  constricted, 
and  at  its  foot  the  Flysch  runs  as  a  narrow  belt  towards  Le  Monetier.  On 
the  other  side  of  the  Meige  the  outline  of  the  ancient  rocks  recedes  to  the 
west;  simultaneously  the  Flysch  broadens  out,  and  there  rise,  high 
upstowed,  the  Aiguilles  d'Arves.    There  is  no  portal  towards  the  exterior; 


Fig.  15.  The  Recumbent  Folds  of  Sulens  and  les  Annes  (after  Lugeon). 

on  the  contrary,  the  Belle  Donne  form  a  continuous  rampart,  and  where 
they  cast  their  shadow,  as  towards  Grenoble,  there  are  no  recumbent 
sheets.  It  is  not  till  we  reach  the  other  side  of  the  Tarentaise  that  this 
rampart  decreases  in  height,  and  beyond  the  mass  of  Beaufort  and  the 
window  of  M^geve  (in  which  crystalline  rock  is  visible  beneath  the  sedi- 
ments) an  orographical  gap  occurs.  Here  the  transplacements  begin  anew, 
l)ut  between  them  and  the  gap  no  close  connexion  can  be  perceiv^ed.  A 

*  All  the  facts  will  be  found  in  W.  Kilian,  Les  phenomenes  de  charriage  dans  les 
Alpes  delphinoproven9ale8,  C.  R.  IX®  Congres  International,  1903,  pp.  455-476;  and 
E.  Haug,  Les  grands  charriages  de  I'Embrunais  et  de  FUbaye,  torn,  cit.,  pp.  493-506 ; 
also  many  older  works,  and  in  particular  the  survey  of  the  two  sheets  Gap  and  Digne  of 
the  map,  1  :  80,000. 


CH.  IV] 


MONT  JOLY 


117 


long  series  of  fragmentary  recumbent  sheets  now  extends  north  of  the 
zone  of  mont  Blanc  over  the  Helvetian  Alps. 

They  begin  south-east  of  Annecy  with  the  little  fragments  of  Sulens 
and  les  Annes.  These  are  succeeded,  south  of  the  lake  of  Geneva,  by  the 
great  sheet  of  the  Chablais,  next  by  that  of  the  Freiburg  Alps ;  then,  further 
towards  the  east,  by  a  long  series  of  smaller  examples,  extending  as  far  as 
Iberg,  and  finally  by  the  Berglitten- Stein,  near  Buchs,  in  the  Rhine  valley. 
Renevier,  Marcel  Bertrand,  Schardt,  and  other  experienced  observers  have 
described  these  exotic  masses ;  the  problem  they  present  has  been  happily 
solved  by  Lugeon^. 

The  facts  are  not  easily  discerned  in  the  external  configuration  of  the 
country,  since  outside  the  zone  of  mont  Blanc,  that  is  in  this  case  to  the 


Fig.  16.  Folds  of  Mont  Joly  (after  Ritter).  1,  Carboniferous  ;  2,  Quartzite  ;  8,  Rauchwacke  ; 
4,  Rhsetic  stage  ;  5,  Lias  limestone  ;  6,  Lias  shales. 

north  of  it,  and  north  of  the  gap  between  mont  Blanc  and  the  Finster- 
Aarhorn,  there  rises  a  series  of  lofty  limestone  mountains  (les  hautes 
chaines,  die  Hochketten) :  Aravis,  Dent  du  Midi,  Morcles,  Diablerets,  Wild- 
horn,  Wildstrubel,  Faulhorn,  and  others,  which  are  themselves  thrown  into 
great  flakes,  as,  for  instance,  between  Morcles  and  Wildstrubel,  and 
violently  overthrust  to  the  north ;  while  yet,  in  spite  of  their  height,  they 
form  part  of  the  Helvetian  zone.    The  diagram  (fig.  15),  representing  the 

1  The  fundamental  idea  of  explaining  the  structure  of  the  northern  part  of  the  Swiss 
Alps  by  great  overthrusts  is  due  to  Marcel  Bertrand,  and  dates  from  the  year  1884.  In 
1893  Schardt  came  forward  in  defence  of  the  theory  of  great  overthrusts.  In  1898  he 
drew  sections  which  explained  the  Chablais  by  '  two  great  paths  of  overthrusting ' 
extending  from  the  far  south  over  a  great  part  of  the  Alps  ;  his  map  even  shows  a  dotted 
northern  boundary  to  the  overthrusts,  and  this  extends  on  the  east  to  the  other  side  of 
the  Rhaeticon  (Les  regions  exotiques  du  versant  nord  des  Alpes  Suisses,  Bull.  Soc.  Vaud. 
Sci.  Nat.,  1898,  XXXIV,  pp.  113-219,  map  ;  also  Eclogae  Geol.  Helv.,  1898,  V,  pp.  283- 
258,  map).  In  1901  M.  Lugeon  published  his  interpretation  of  the  facts  which  forms  the 
basis  of  our  description. 


118 


THE  ALPS 


[PABT  V 


most  westerly  recumbent  sheets,  throws  light  on  the  nature  of  mountain 
formation  in  more  ways  than  one ;  it  is  taken  from  one  of  the  early  works 
of  Lugeon  ^. 

In  the  lower  corner,  on  the  left  of  fig.  15,  the  northern  end  of  the 
Belle  Donne  is  shown.  Near  Sallanches,  as  we  have  seen,  the  ancient 
rocks  decrease  in  height  to  the  south-west  of  mont  Blanc  and  the  Prarion 
(Aiguilles  Rouges).  According  to  the  sections  of  Marcel  Bertrand  and 
Ritter  (fig.  16),  mont  Joly  is  traversed,  outside  Sallanches  and  from  the 
end  of  the  Belle  Donne  onwards,  by  a  number  of  synclines  or  '  roots which 
rise  steeply  from  the  crystalline  schists,  and  then  bend  sharply  round, 
sometimes  almost  at  a  right  angle  ^. 

A  similar  feature  in  mount  Pelvoux  has  been  described  by  Termier  as 
'  stricture In  the  Himalaya  it  has  been  observed,  not  infrequently,  that 
the  beds  are  more  steeply  upturned  in  the  valleys  than  on  the  heights. 
For  the  present  we  will  only  point  out  that  all  recumbent  sheets,  however 
widely  extended,  which  are  derived  from  roots  of  this  kind,  are,  in  their 
origin,  folds  (synclines  or  anticlines),  and  they  are  generally  regarded  as 
recumbent  folds.  A  discussion  of  this  subject  will  follow  on  a  later  page, 
when  it  can  be  based  on  a  larger  number  of  facts. 

The  'roots'  of  mont  Joly  are  inserted  in  rocks  which  belong  to  the 
outer  border  of  the  Beaufort  mass.  They  must  be  assigned  to  the  outer 
end  of  one  of  the  fascicles  of  synclines  which  strike  through  it  transversely. 

Beyond  mont  Joly,  the  end  of  one  of  the  anticlines  which  have  moved 
forwards  between  the  '  roots '  is  actually  seen  enclosed  in  the  malm  [upper 
Jurassic]  (fig.  15).  We  have  now  reached  the  peaks  of  Aravis,  and  with 
them  the  great  Helvetian  chains  (hautes  chaines). 

They  help  to  form  the  border  of  a  Flysch  basin  (syncline  du  Reposoir), 
on  which  rest  the  exotic  patches  of  Sulens  and  les  Annes.  These  have  not 
come  from  mont  Joly.  The  outer  border  of  the  Flysch  basin  includes  the 
Jurassic  and  Cretaceous  Helvetian  chains  of  the  Gdnevois  (I  to  VII), 
which  extend  in  concentric  arcs  from  lake  Annecy  to  the  Arve.  On  the 
other  side  of  the  Arve  lies  the  border  of  the  great  recumbent  complex  of 
the  Chablais  (Pr^-Alpes),  and  the  Helvetian  arcs  of  the  Gdnevois  reach  the 
Arve  between  this  border  and  the  patch  of  les  Annes  ^.  A  short  anticline 
strikes  through  the  midst  of  the  Flysch  between  Sulens  and  les  Annes. 

From  this  disposition  we  may  fairly  infer  that  the  overthrusting  of  Sulens 
and  les  Annes  was  followed  by  important  movements,  which  are  probably 

^  M.  Lugeon,  Les  Dislocations  des  Bauges  (Savoie),  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1900,  XI, 
no.  77,  pp.  359-474,  map.    This  region  forms  the  subject  of  an  abundant  literature. 

*  M.  Bertrand  and  E.  Ritter,  Sur  la  structure  du  Mt.  Joly  pres  S.  Gervais  (Haute-Savoie), 
C.  R.,  10  fevr.  1896,  and  Ritter,  La  Bordure  sud-est  du  Mont-Blanc,  p.  167  et  seq., 
p.  221,  Plate  I. 

'  This  phenomenon  is  also  clearly  described  by  Haug,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1895,  VII, 
p.  271  et  seq. 


CH.  IV] 


GLAEUS 


119 


younger  than  that  which  separated  the  Chablais  from  les  Annes,  and  in 
part  also  than  that  which  separated  les  Annes  and  Sulens.  These  folds 
were  impeded  by  the  exotic  masses  which  load  down  the  Flysch  basin  of 
the  Reposoir. 

We  now  encounter  one  of  the  greatest  difficulties  of  this  problem,  and 
it  is  not  explained  by  fig.  15. 

The  site  of  the  Chablais  and  the  Freiburg  Alps  corresponds  approxi- 
mately to  the  gap  between  the  Belle  Donne  and  mont  Blanc.  We  have 
seen  that  folds  can  be  traced  from  the  south  side  of  the  Belle  Donne  to  the 
north  side  of  mont  Blanc.  The  same  oblique  disposition  is  repeated  in  the 
great  chains.  Lugeon  states  that  the  Morcles  dip  beneath  the  Diablerets, 
these  beneath  the  Wildhorn,  and  this  again  beneath  the  WildstrubeP. 
Proceeding  to  the  north-east,  we  ascend  as  it  were  a  tectonic  ladder,  passing- 
over  flakeS;  each  of  which  lies  higher  than  its  predecessor. 

This  overthrusting  of  the  recumbent  sheets  of  Sulens  and  the  others 
is  more  recent  than  the  deposition  of  the  Oligocene  Flysch  upon  which 
they  rest,  but  the  movements  of  the  great  chains,  mentioned  above,  are  still 
more  recent',  fragments  of  the  exotic  stratified  series  of  the  recumbent 
sheets  are  folded  into  the  synclines  of  the  great  chains.  We  have  already 
pointed  out  that  the  ancient  masses  of  the  zone  of  mont  Blanc  probably 
suffered  posthumous  elevation  at  the  time  when  the  great  chains  were 
folded  for  the  last  time,  and  this  diminishes  to  some  extent  the  difficulty 
of  conceiving  how  this  now  lofty  zone  should  have  been  surmounted  by  the 
recumbent  sheets. 

We  shall  return  to  these  fragments  of  recumbent  folds  when  we  treat 
of  the  region  more  to  the  east. 

Glarus.  That  part  of  the  Alps  which  lies  between  the  eastern  part  of 
the  Aar  mass  and  the  Santis  was  regarded  by  Escher  as  formed  of  two 
great  folds  facing  each  other  from  north  and  south.  This  conception  of 
the  double  fold  of  Glarus  was  a  bold  one,  especially  for  that  early  period. 
Later,  when  the  general  movement  of  the  Alps  towards  the  north  was 
recognized,  the  existence  of  such  an  opposed  movement  was  regarded  with 
doubt,  and  in  1884  Marcel  Bertrand  definitely  expressed  his  belief  that 
there  is  only  a  single  fold  in  the  Glarus,  and  that  it  comes  from  the  south  ^. 

The  facts  are  clearly  displayed  in  the  classic  works  of  Albrecht  Heim  ^. 

^  M.  Lugeon,  Rapport  Congres  geologique,  1903,  p.  482.  Lugeon  does  not  think  that 
the  Wildhorn  was  thrust  over  the  Wildstrubel,  but  that  the  Diablerets  and  Wildstmbel 
emerged  from  beneath  the  Wildhorn. 

'  M.  Bertrand,  Rapports  de  structure  des  Alpes  de  Glaris  et  du  bassin  houiller  du  Nord, 
Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1884,  3^  ser.,  XII.  In  Vol.  I  (1883)  I  also  hesitated  to  cite  the 
north  fold  as  an  example  of  backfolding. 

^  In  particular  Albrecht  Heim,  Geologic  der  Hochalpen  zwischen  Reuss  und  Rhein, 
mit  einem  Anhang  von  petrographischen  Beitragen  von  C.  Schmidt ;  Beitrag  zur  Geolo- 
gischen  Karte  der  Schweiz  (sheet  XIV),  1891,  XXV,  503  pp.  and  76  pp.    Among  other 


120 


THE  ALPS 


[part  V 


We  will  follow  his  results  as  represented  on  a  section  drawn  from  north  ta 
south,  and  for  that  purpose  we  may  proceed  to  the  vorder  Rhine  valley 
above  Ilanz. 

The  vorder  Rhine  valley  is  not  the  continuation  of  the  Rhone  valley ; 
that  lies  south  of  the  St.  Gotthard  (Airolo,  Scopi),  while  we  are  now  in  the 
midst  of  those  infolded  sediments  which  branch  off  from  the  Rhine  line 
above  Brieg  and  strike  across  the  Furca  through  Andermatt  to  Disentis. 
The  St.  Gotthard  mass  disappears  towards  the  east.  The  rocks  of  the 
Aar  mass  are  still  visible  much  further  east  in  the  valley  of  Vattis,  and 
near  Felsberg,  only  six  kilometers  from  the  Rhine.  If  the  Gotthard  mass 
had  not  already  been  faulted  down  before  reaching  Trons,  we  should  be 
standing  in  one  of  the  oblique  divisions  of  the  zone  of  mont  Blanc  with  its 
included  Helvetian  synclines. 

From  this  point  onwards  the  Yerrucano  attains  a  considerable  breadth 
on  the  south  side  of  the  Aar  mass.  Above  Ilanz  it  rises  higher  and  higher 
above  the  vorder  Rhine  valley,  till  it  finally  reaches  a  height  of  over  3,000 
meters.  Broadly  speaking,  the  slope  of  the  Verrucano  corresponds  with 
a  bedding  plane  rising  towards  the  north.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
Todi,  e.  g.  in  the  val  Frisal,  where  the  pre -Carboniferous  rocks  of  the  Aar 
mass  are  still  visible,  we  perceive  that  this  bedding  plane  of  the  Verrucana 
belongs  to  the  upper  limb  of  a  syncline,  which  is  open  towards  the  north, 
and  includes  the  pinched-in  Mesozoic  series.  Further  east  the  elevated 
border  of  the  sheet  of  Verrucano  is  broken  up  into  several  patches,  some  of 
which  extend  far  towards  the  north  (Vorab,  3,025  meters  ;  Piz  Segnes,  3,102 
meters  ;  the  isolated  Ringelspitz,  3,206  meters,  and  others),  and  beneath 
these  patches  of  Verrucano  there  are  visible,  in  inverted  sequence,  Trias, 
Jurassic,  Cretaceous  (in  places),  and  finally,  extending  down  into  the  valley 
bottoms,  a  great  thickness  of  Tertiary  Flysch.  It  is  this  border  of  Verru- 
cano, resting  on  the  inverted  series,  which  was  formerly  termed  the  south 
limb  of  the  double-fold  of  Glarus. 

The  destructibility  of  the  Flysch  down  below  has  caused  the  roof  of 
the  overfold  to  break  off  and  produced  this  high-lying  cliff*  of  the  Verrucano 
border ;  but  isolated  remains  show  that  the  Verrucano  once  extended  further 
to  the  north.  An  indication  of  this  kind  is  the  Hausstock  (3,156  meters), 
scarcely  four  kilometers  distant  from  the  border  of  the  Vorab,  and  it  is 
united  by  similar  remnants  (Muttlestock,  Kalkstockli)  with  a  similar  cliff  of 
Verrucano,  ragged  in  outline,  and  facing  south  (Karpfstock,  2,798  meters ; 
Ruche,  2,613  meters;  Graue  Horner,  2,817  meters).  This  second  border 
marks  the  beginning  of  the  north  limb  of  what  was  once  regarded  as  the 
double-fold.    It  is  actually  the  continuation  of  the  south  limb,  and  both, 

subjects,  A.  Heim,  Geologisclie  Nachlese :  Die  vermeintliche  '  GewSlbeumbiegung  des 
Nord-Fliigels  der  Glarner  Doppelfalte '  S.  vom  Klausenpass,  eiue  Selbstcorrectur,  Viertel- 
jahrschrift  naturf.  Ges.  Zurich,  1906,  LT,  pp.  403-431. 


CH.  IV] 


THE  HAUSSTOCK 


121 


united,  once  formed  a  great  dome  which  arched  high  over  the  Flysch 
masses  of  the  Linththal  and  the  Sernfthal. 

The  Graue  Horner  just  mentioned,  which  form  part  of  this  second  cliff, 
lie  to  the  north  above  Vattis,  and  as  we  descend  to  the  bottom  of  the 
Calf eus  valley  we  cross  over  the  whole  syncline ;  beneath  the  high-lying 
roof  of  Verrucano  we  first  meet  with  the  Jurassic,  then  the  whole  thickness 
of  the  pinched -in  Flysch,  and  beneath  this,  in  normal  succession,  the 
Cretaceous,  Jurassic,  and  Trias,  until  the  ancient  schist  of  the  Aar  mass  is 
reached  at  the  bottom. 

We  now  return  to  the  north  limb  on  the  Karpfstock. 

The  uppermost  part  of  the  arch  lies  behind  us.  The  sheet  of  Verrucano 
begins  to  descend  towards  the  north,  but  we  can  continue  our  walk  upon 
it  up  to  the  shores  of  the  Walensee,  35  kilometers  distant  from  our 
starting-point  on  the  vorder  Rhine.  The  Jurassic,  underlying  the  Verru- 
cano, has  been  rolled  out  to  a  thin  strip  of  white  marble,  and  against  this 
the  crests  of  the  Flysch  folds  are  overturned  to  the  north.  Meanwhile,  the 
height  of  the  sheet  of  Verrucano  above  the  sea  having  decreased  by  about 
2,600  meters,  concordant  patches  of  the  normal  succession,  Trias,  Lias,  and 
Oolites,  have  set  in  above  it.  Towards  the  west,  however,  in  the  direction 
of  the  Miirtschenstock,  this  series  is  traversed  by  a  zone  of  Flysch  which 
separates  an  overthrust  and  still  higher  sheet  (MUrtschendecke,  Arnold 
Heim^)  from  Jurassic  and  Cretaceous  (Kerenzenberg).  To  the  east  near 
Walenstadt,  the  same  feature  is  met  with. 

Yet  another  band  of  Flysch  coming  far  away  from  the  south-west 
draws  near ;  it  reaches  the  Walensee  at  Weesen,  and  dips  beneath  the  steep 
cliffs  of  the  Churfirsten.  It  follows  a  third  glide-plane  and  bears  the 
mighty  Cretaceous  formations  of  the  Churfirsten  and  the  closely  folded 
Santis  (Santisdecke).  This  Cretaceous  differs  in  its  development  from  the 
underlying  Mlirtschen  sheet. 

Then  for  the  last  time  the  most  northerly  folds,  or  even  torn-off  frag- 
ments of  them,  are  heaved  up  and  overturned  against  the  outer  band  of 
Flysch  and  the  Molasse.  We  thus  reach  the  front  of  the  great  overfolding, 
45  kilometers  from  the  vorder  Rhine  valley. 

Albrecht  Heim  recounts  the  serious  doubts  with  which  Escher  was 
beset  before  he  ventured  to  publish  his  views  on  the  double- fold.  To-day 
still  greater  generalizations  force  themselves  upon  us ;  the  Hausstock,  that 
key-stone  which  crowned  the  arch,  and  remains  to  demonstrate  its 
existence,  is  a  monument  to  the  conscientious  labours  with  which  these  two 
men  have  opened  up  a  new  road  to  knowledge. 

The  Flysch  which  we  observed  deep  down,  beneath  the  great  arch, 
proceeds  from  the  Linththal  towards  the  west.    It  ascends  beneath  the 

^  Arnold  Heim,  Zur  Kenntniss  der  Glarner  Ueberfaltungsdecken,  Zeitschr.  deutsch. 
geol.  Ges.,  1905,  pp.  90-118  ;  in  particular  p.  94. 


122 


THE  ALPS 


[part  V 


Clariden  glacier  to  a  considerable  height,  and  its  northern  edge  reaches  the 
border  of  the  lake  of  Lucerne  at  Fliielen.  The  whole  of  the  south  limb 
above  it  has  been  removed  by  erosion.  Traces  of  Verrucano  present  them- 
selves in  a  long  band  beneath  the  northern  cliff,  and  from  here  onwards  we 
again  see  the  overfolding  towards  the  north.  The  Jurassic  wedges  out 
near  Fliielen,  and  all  the  northern  chains  belong  to  the  Cretaceous,  which 
here  also  is  split  up  by  bands  of  Flysch,  indicating  so  many  glide-planes. 
Here,  east  of  the  lake  of  Lucerne,  the  Cretaceous  sheets  assume  rather  the 
character  of  plunging  folds,  since  they  turn  the  front  of  their  anticlines 
downwards. 

Near  Iberg,  patches  of  the  Chablais  sheets  rest  upon  the  foremost  bands 
of  Flysch  to  the  north  of  the  Glarus  overfold.  On  the  Rhine  between 
Buchs  and  Grabs,  a  Flysch  zone  is  inserted  between  the  Churfirsten  and  the 
Santis  ;  it  is  probably  the  same  as  that  which  separates  the  Santis  sheet 
from  the  Miirtschen  sheet.  It  becomes  very  broad;  the  Berglittenstein 
rests  upon  it.  Towards  the  east  the  continuations  of  the  Churfirsten  sink 
beneath  the  Falkniss. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  great  zone  of  exotic  sheets  rests  in  isolated 
fragments  upon  formations  which  belong  to  the  old  of  Glarus. 

While  the  Churfirsten  swerve  to  the  south-east,  the  Santis  proceeds  in 
a  north-easterly  direction,  and  between  Feldkirch  and  Dornbirn  it  enters 
the  Flysch  zone  of  the  East  Alps  as  a  broad  series  of  Cretaceous  folds.  Our 
knowledge  regarding  the  details  of  the  sigmoid  connexion  on  the  left  side 
of  the  Rhine  is  chiefly  due  to  Blumer  ^. 

The  Simplon  and  Tessin.  Between  the  zone  of  mont  Blanc  and  the 
Dinaric  boundary  the  rocks  are  altered  to  a  high  degree.  Highly  calcareous 
Mesozoic  sediments  are  transformed  into  marble  and  lustrous  schists ; 
Permian  and  Carboniferous  into  graphitic  schists;  diabase,  gabbro,  and 
peridotite  into  green  schists  and  amphibolite;  and  it  is  often  extremely 
difficult  to  determine  the  boundary  between  the  normal  Carboniferous 
sediment  and  the  gneiss.  It  is  evident  that  there  once  lay,  conformably 
beneath  the  Trias,  a  great  series  of  argillaceous  and  sandy  deposits  be- 
longing to  the  Permian  and  Carboniferous,  and  these  in  some  places,  and 
especially  in  the  Carboniferous  fan,  may  still  be  recognized  by  plant 
remains,  &c.,  but  in  others,  owing  to  their  being  the  most  yielding  of  all 
the  rocks  in  the  series,  they  have  absorbed  the  greater  part  of  the  dynamic 
action  and  have  been  transformed  into  Casanna  schists,  micaceous  phyllites, 
and  talcose  gneiss.  Upon  this  series  rests,  still  recognizable  and  con- 
formable, the  lower  Trias,  but  it  is  difficult  or  impossible  to  discover  the 
boundary  of  the  underlying  Carboniferous. 

^  Albrecht  Heim,  Das  Santisgebirge,  Beitr.  geol.  Karte  der  Schweiz,  1905,  new  ser., 
XVI,  054  pp.,  maps,  Part  III ;  E.  Blumer,  Geologische  Monographie  des  Ostendes  der 
Santis-Gruppe,  op.  cit.,  pp.  518-638. 


CH.IV]  THE  SIMPLON  123 

For  this  reason  the  French  general  maps  (1 : 1,000,000)  mark  all  the 
great  masses  situated  within  the  zone  of  mont  Blanc,  from  the  Simplon 
down  to  the  south  (monte  Rosa,  Dent  Blanche,  Gran  Paradiso,  &c.),  not  as 
gneiss,  but  as  Carboniferous  and  Permian,  thus  contrasting  them  with 
mont  Blanc  and  the  Pelvoux.  Granitic  rocks  also  occur;  they  are 
regarded  as  Carboniferous  in  part.  Whether  the  rocks  have  been  exposed 
to  any  other  influences,  such  as  elevation  of  temperature,  in  addition  to 
such  as  are  mechanical,  may  remain  an  open  question  ^. 

The  tunnel  of  the  Simplon,  19-7  kilometers  in  length,  705  meters  above 
the  sea  at  its  maximum  height,  traverses  monte  Leone,  3,558  meters  in 
height,  at  right  angles  to  the  strike.  We  might  well  expect  important 
revelations  from  this  excavation ;  it  has  not  failed  in  them.  Schardt  has 
given  a  concise  account  of  the  various  opinions  expressed  on  the  subject 
and  the  final  result.  His  section  of  1907  is  reproduced,  with  his  kind 
permission,  on  a  reduced  scale  in  fig.  17^. 

Various  kinds  of  gneiss  (Antigorio,  monte  Leone  gneiss,  and  others) 
and  Mesozoic  beds  are  present.  The  latter  consist  of  Trias  (gneiss-like 
arkoses,  quartzite,  gypsum,  dolomite,  marble)  and  Jurassic  (lustrous 
schists,  grey  clay-slates,  calc-graphite  with  granular  limestone,  garneti- 
ferous  phyllite).  Traces  of  green  schists  also  occur.  These  Mesozoic  beds 
force  their  way  from  the  north,  in  the  form  of  a  compressed  syncline, 
between  the  gneisses  through  almost  the  whole  length  of  the  tunnel,  i.e., 
for  a  distance  of  more  than  19  kilometers,  and  since,  at  about  the  middle, 
they  send  off  a  strong  branch  southwards  and  upwards  (Vall^)  they 
completely  separate  the  upper  gneiss  masses,  along  with  the  summit  of 
monte  Leone,  from  the  lower  (Antigorio)  gneiss.  This  upper  supernatant 
part  is  again  divided  by  an  intervening  Mesozoic  layer.  Into  the  northern 
half  of  the  long  syncline  the  superposed  gneisses  penetrate  from  above 
in  repeated  anticlines,  like  the  heads  of  so  many  plunging  folds.  From 
the  south  a  thick  wedge  of  Antigorio  gneiss,  4  to  5  kilometers  in  length, 
inserts  itself  between  the  end  of  the  long  syncline  and  the  branch  of 
Valid 

In  other  words,  the  Antigorio  gneiss  is  first  folded  from  the  south 
into  the  Mesozoic,  then  over  this  folded  mass  the  gneiss  of  monte  Leone 

^  For  opposed  views  we  may  refer  to  T.  Gr.  Bonney,  On  the  Crystalline  Schists  and 
their  Relations  to  the  Mesozoic  Rocks  in  the  Lepontine  Alps,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc, 
1890,  XLVI,  pp.  187-240,  and  Geol.  Mag.,  1901,  Dec.  4,  VIII,  pp.  161-166  ;  also  On  the 
Southern  Origin  attributed  to  the  Northern  zone  in  the  Savoy  and  Swiss  Alps,  Quart. 
Journ.  GeoL  Soc,  1907,  LXIII,  pp.  294-307. 

2  Also  H.  Schardt,  Note  sur  le  profil  geologique  et  la  tectonique  du  Massif  du  Simplon, 
Eclogae  geol.  Helv.,  1904,  VIII,  pp.  173-200,  and  Die  wissenschaftlichen  Ergebnisse  des 
Simplondurchstiches,  Vortr.  Schweiz.  naturf.  Ges.,  Winterthur,  8vo,  Winterthur,  1904, 
40  pp.  With  admirable  insight  Gerlach  recognized  the  horizontal  insertion  of  the  gneiss 
anticline  of  Antigorio  as  early  as  1869. 


124 


THE  ALPS 


[PAET  V 


Portal  NiW.essm 


Unter  Berisal  13Z0 


Monte  LeOTis 

\    3558  \ 


has  been  carried  up,  also  from  the 
south,  and  monte  Leone  itself  has  been 
formed  of  two  parts,  that  is  by  two 
similarly  directed  pushes.  But  the 
whole  has  arisen  from  the  common  fold- 
ing of  gneiss  and  Mesozoic  sediments. 

Other  sections  have  been  con- 
structed from  the  existing  observa- 
tions by  C.  Schmidt  and  A.  Stella. 
But  they  all  have  in  common  the  deep 
infolding  of  the  Mesozoic  sediments, 
between  the  gneisses,  and  this  pro- 
vides a  new  key  to  the  classification 
of  the  gneiss  masses.  We  must  first  re- 
call the  fact  that  the  sedimentary  belt 
entering  the  tunnel  from  the  north, 
that  is  from  the  Rhone  valley,  is  simply 
a  part  of  the  Mesozoic  girdle  which 
extends  from  Brieg  towards  Airolo 
along  the  south  side  of  the  St.Gotthard, 
and  represents  the  tectonic  continua- 
tion of  the  inner  Flysch  zone  and  the 
Brian9onnais  (in  the  restricted  sense). 
On  the  south  side  of  the  St.  Gotthard 
tunnel  clearly  marked  backfolding  sets 
in  ^.  The  movements  revealed  in  the 
Simplon  tunnel  correspond  with  the 
forefolding  of  the  southern,  Pied- 
montese  Alps. 

1  The  basin  of  Tessin  near  Stapf  (Greolo- 
gisches  Profil  des  St.  Gotthard,  Beilage 
Bericlit  des  Bundesrathes,  small  folio,  Bern, 
1880)  has  been  produced  by  this  backfold- 
ing ;  it  is  of  Mesozoic  age,  and  also  contains 
amphibolites. 

Fig.  17.  The  Simplon  Tunnel  (reduced  from  a  draw- 
ing kindly  communicated  by  Herr  Schardt). 
1,  Jurassic  (lustrous  schists,  garnet-bearing 
sericite  schists,  calc-schists,  and  micaceous 
limestone)  ;  2,  Trias  (black  ;  dolomitic  lime- 
stone, crystalline  marble,  gypsum,  sericite 
schists)  ;  a.  gneiss  of  the  Massa  (greywacke)  ; 
h,  gneiss  of  the  Aar-mass ;  c,  mica-schists  in 
gneiss ;  schistose  gneiss,  often  micaceous 
and  hornblendic  ;  e,  bedded  gneiss  of  monte 
Leone  ;  /,  massive  granitoid  gneiss,  of  Anti- 
gorio  type. 


CH.  IV] 


DOWN  TO  THE  DORA  BALTEA 


125 


We  will  now  proceed  further  to  the  east.  To  the  south  of  the  line 
of  Andermatt  the  St.  Gotthard  has  disappeared  and  the  country  opens  up. 
This  is  also  the  case  south  of  the  line  of  Airolo,  and  the  inner  sedimentary 
zones  enter  the  vast  tract  covered  with  Biindner  schist,  which  extends 
through  Lugnetz,  Safien,  and  Chur  into  the  Prattigau.  From  the  line  of 
Airolo  tongues  of  Mesozoic  rock  force  their  way  southwards  between  the 
gneisses.    They  have  been  described  by  Heim  ^. 

The  gneiss  masses  are  here  divided  into  recumbent  folds,  which  proceed 
northwards  ;  at  the  same  time  each  eastern  tract  rests  upon  the  next 
following  on  the  west.  The  strike  of  the  folds  remains  that  of  the  Alps, 
but  each  part  sinks  along  the  strike  towards  the  east.  The  Bundner  schist 
approaches  from  the  east  in  the  Aversa-thal,  and  lies  against  or  upon  the 
gneiss  of  the  Sureta.  This  lies  upon  a  strip  of  Mesozoic  which  can  be 
traced  onwards  in  the  valley  of  the  Liro  for  a  distance  of  20  kilometers. 
This  is  the  line  of  the  Spliigen  pass.  The  gneiss  of  the  Tambo  mass  sinks 
beneath  this  strip  ;  and  the  Tambo  mass  itself  is  underlain  in  the  west  by 
the  Mesozoic  band  of  the  Misox  valley,  which  can  also  be  traced  for 
a  distance  of  20  kilometers.  This  is  the  line  of  the  Bernadino  pass. 
Beneath  this  band  the  Adula  mountains  dip  from  the  west;  the  several 
gneiss  masses  have  advanced  step  by  step  towards  the  north,  and  with  the 
Adula  the  constriction  of  the  chief  syncline,  i.  e,  the  Airolo  line,  begins. 
The  Mesozoic  band  of  the  Blennio  valley  sinks  from  the  west  beneath  the 
Adula,  and  beneath  this  sinks  the  gneiss  of  the  Molare  2.  Thus  we  reach 
val  Leventina  and  Airolo.  These  gneisses,  which,  from  Aversa  and  the 
Septim  pass,  advance  step  by  step  towards  the  north  and  overlap  one 
another  stage  by  stage  towards  the  west,  may  be  regarded  as  parts  of  the 
Piedmontese  Alps.  They  rise  out  from  the  Bundner  schists  between  Ober- 
halbstein  and  the  line  of  Airolo,  and  form,  precisely  like  the  great  Helvetian 
chains  of  the  Bernese  Alps,  a  series  of  tectonic  steps  facing  towards  the 
west. 

Down  to  the  Dora  Baltea.  The  Carboniferous  fan  is  shown  to  the  west 
in  the  Swiss  geological  maps  (sheets  XVIII,  XXII,  XXIII),  and  it  is 
accompanied  as  far  as  the  Great  St.  Bernhard  by  long  Mesozoic  folds,  which 
extend  as  far  as  the  transverse  valley  of  the  Dora  Baltea.  Between  the 
St.  Bernhard  and  the  Dinaric  boundary  rise  some  of  the  loftiest  peaks  of 
the  Alps  (monte  Rosa,  Grand  Combin,  Dent  Blanche,  and  others).  Here 
the  long  continuous  strike-lines  are  replaced  on  these  older  maps  by 
irregular,  interrupted,  and  sometimes  labyrinthine  windings  of  marble  and 

^  Albrecht  Heim,  Die  Nordost-Lappen  des  Tessiner  Massives  :  Geol.  Nachlese,  no.  17, 
Vierteljahrsclirift  naturf.  Ges.  Zurich,  1906,  LI,  pp.  397-402. 

^  Wilckens  has  observed  Mesozoic  rocks  in  the  Zapport  (uppei*most  Rheinwald),  and 
conjectures  that  the  Rheinwaldhorn  is  a  floating  mass  ;  this  would  point  to  a  deeper 
penetration  of  the  Blennio  intercalation,  Centralbl.  f.  Min.,  1907,  pp.  341-348. 


126 


THE  ALPS 


[part  V 


broad  tracts  of  sedimentary  schists  which  insert  themselves  between  the 
gneisses. 

As  early  as  1902,  before  the  results  furnished  by  the  Simplon  tunnel 
had  been  completely  made  known,  Lugeon  had  attempted  to  analyse  the 
structure  of  the  region ;  in  1905  he  succeeded  in  distinguishing  seven 
successive  sheets  of  gneiss  separated  by  Mesozoic  intercalations  ^.  This  bold 
conception  was  not  received  with  unqualified  approval  by  Italian  investiga- 
tors. Stella,  Franchi,  and  Novarese  raised  objections,  which  were  based 
chiefly  on  the  structure  of  the  more  southerly  tracts  At  the  same  time 
the  most  striking  of  his  results,  namely,  the  conception  of  the  mighty  mass 
of  the  Dent  Blanche  as  the  remnant  of  a  recumbent  sheet,  was  acknowledged 
on  all  sides  as  correct.  The  origin  of  this  remnant  will  be  dealt  with  after 
we  have  discussed  the  rocks  of  Ivrea. 

The  Simplon  is  extremely  instructive,  because  deep-lying  tectonic  hori- 
zons are  exposed  in  it.  In  the  Tessin,  i.  e.  towards  the  east,  the  step- 
like structure,  inclined  away  from  the  Simplon,  has  already  been  mentioned : 
something  similar  may  be  seen  towards  the  west  and  south-west  ^. 

In  accordance  with  Schardt's  description  of  the  tunnel  and  Lugeon's 
analysis  of  the  high  mountains,  we  have  here  sheets  and  fragments  of 
sheets,  all  derived  from  recumbent  folds.  The  mass  of  the  St.  Bernhard,  or 
at  least  part  of  it,  must  perhaps  be  excluded. 

Lugeon's  sheet  I  (gneiss  of  Antigorio),  exposed  in  the  south  of  the  tunnel, 
is  the  lowest  member,  with  the  exception  of  a  mass  which  crops  out  near 
Crodo,  and  is  here  regarded  as  the  lowest  gneiss  visible  in  this  region 
(/,  fig.  17).  It  is  the  sheets  II  (Lebendun)  and  III  (monte  Leone) 
(e,  fig.  17)  which  enter  the  tunnel  from  above  as  plunging  sheets,  bury- 
ing the  front  of  their  anticlines  in  the  long  Mesozoic  syncline.  Their 
extension  in  space  is  not  so  great  as  that  of  the  other  sheets.  Sheet  IV 
(St.  Bernhard)  lies  in  the  west,  and  extends  far  along  the  side  of  the  Car- 
boniferous band  towards  the  south  ;  as  it  nears  the  Dora  Balfcea  it  acquires 
a  marked  twist,  so  that  the  gneiss  first  dips  in  the  direction  of  the  successive 

^  M.  Lugeon,  Sur  la  coupe  geologique  du  Massif  du  Simplon,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris, 
March  24, 1904  ;  Sur  les  grandes  nappes  de  recouvrement  de  la  zone  du  Piemont,  op.  cit., 
May  15, 1905  ;  and  Lugeon  et  M.  Argand,  Sur  les  homologies  dans  les  nappes  de  recouvre- 
ment de  la  zone  du  Piemont,  op.  cit..  May  29,  1905. 

The  most  important  of  these  works  are  :  A.  Stella,  II  Problema  geo-tettonico  del- 
rOssola  e  del  Sempione,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1905,  4«  ser.,  VI,  pp.  1-41,  map,  and 
S.  Franchi,  Sulla  tettonica  della  zona  del  Piemonte,  op.  cit.,  1906,  4^  ser.,  VII,  pp.  118- 
144  ;  H.  Schardt,  Die  moderne  Anschauung  liber  den  Bau  und  die  Entstehung  des  Alpen- 
gebietes.  Verb.  Schweiz.  naturf.  Ges.  St.  Gallen  (1906),  1907,  37  pp.,  map  of  the  gneiss 
sheets  ;  C.  Schmidt,  Bild  und  Bau  der  Schweizer  Alpen,  Beilage  z.  Jahrb.  d.  Schweiz. 
Alp.-Club,  XLIl,  Basel,  1907,  p.  44,  map  of  the  gneiss  sheet,  also  in  Fiihr.  Deutsch.  Geol. 
Ges.  Basel,  1907,  p.  47. 

"  H.  Schardt,  op.  cit.,  p.  13. 


CH.  IVJ 


IVEEA 


127 


sheets  or  towards  the  east,  and  then  in  the  south  towards  the  west,  i.e.  beneath 
the  Carboniferous  band.  This  feature,  established  by  Italian  geologists, 
marks  the  beginning  of  the  fan-like  structure,  which  becomes  increasingly- 
clear  towards  the  south. 

Sheet  V  (monte  Rosa)  rises  towards  the  north-east  and  inserts  itself 
beneath  the  succeeding  sheets.  The  Dent  Blanche  (sheet  VII)  is  a  fragment 
of  a  sheet  which  advances  over  the  broad  Mesozoic  region  of  Zermatt- 
Chatillon.  The  elongated  range  of  the  Sesia-gneiss  (sheet  VI)  may  be 
equally  well  regarded  as  the  inrooted  eastern  part  of  VII ;  we  shall  see  that 
it  is  still  further  subdivided. 

This  conception,  as  applied  to  the  western  parts,  is  due  to  Lugeon  and 
Argand. 

The  facts  we  have  been  observing  are  evidence  of  the  great  general 
movement  towards  the  exterior,  which  here,  in  consequence  of  the  bend  of 
the  Alps  out  of  the  south  to  north  direction,  becomes  increasingly  south- 
east to  north-west.  One  recumbent  fold  towers  above  another.  But  the 
fan-shaped  structure  has  already  begun  to  manifest  itself  in  the  St.  Bernhard. 
A  broad  fragment  is  bent  by  backfolding  in  the  direction  of  the  Pied- 
montese  plain,  i.  e.  towards  the  east. 

Ivrea  and  Dent  Blanche.  The  Mesozoic  sediments  of  the  western 
Dinarides  surround  the  Italian  lakes.  They  rest,  together  with  the  Permian 
porphyry  of  val  Trompia  and  the  limnic  Carboniferous  of  Marmo,  either 
normally  or  as  downthrown  patches  on  a  crust  which  consists  first  of 
phyllites,  then  of  mica-schists  with  muscovite  gneiss,  and  finally  of  biotite 
Strona  gneiss. 

Close  to  the  western  edge  of  the  Strona  gneiss  an  interrupted  band  of 
limestone  makes  its  appearance,  about  100  kilometers  in  length.  It  crosses 
the  Toca  near  Ornavasso,  where  its  presence  is  marked  by  marble  quarries. 
No  such  band  of  limestone  is  known  in  any  other  part  of  the  Dinarides. 
It  presents  all  the  characters  of  the  Mesozoic  marble  ranges  of  the  Alps.  To 
the  west  of  it  we  reach  a  broad  band  of  basic  rocks,  which  is  sometimes 
known  as  the  amphibolite  band,  sometimes  as  the  diorite  band  of  Ivrea.  Its 
breadth  is  variable ;  as  shown  on  Gerlach's  map,  it  may  amount  to  as  much 
as  9  kilometers.  Near  Pavone,  south  of  Ivrea,  it  emerges  from  the  plain  of 
Lombardy,  and  strikes  in  a  broad  arc  to  the  north  end  of  the  lago  Maggiore 
and  even  beyond  it.  It  follows  the  Dinaric  boundary,  and  an  almost  identical 
arcuate  strike  dominates  here  both  the  Alps  and  the  Dinarides. 

The  principal  features  of  the  structure  have  been  clearly  described,  first 
by  Gerlach  and  later  by  Artini  and  Melzi  ^.    The  latter  observers  regarded 

^  H.  Gerlach,  Die  Penniner  Alpen,  Beitr.  z.  geol.  Karte  der  Schweiz,  1883,  XXYII, 
159  pp.,  and  Die  Bergwerke  des  Kantons  WalHs,  79  pp.  and  sheet  XXII  of  the  Geol. 
Karte  der  Schweiz;  E.  Artini  e  G.  Melzi,  Ricerche  petrografiche  e  geologiche  sulla 
■Valsesia,  Mem.  R.  1st.  Lomb.,  1900,  XVIII,  pp.  219-392,  map. 


128 


THE  ALPS 


[PAET  V 


the  band  of  Ivrea  as  occupying  a  great  rent  in  the  earth's  crust.  As  a 
deduction  from  a  similar  hypothesis  it  was  interpreted  as  a  flat-lying  dyke, 
and  it  was  supposed  to  stand  in  some  connexion  with  the  green  rocks  of  the 
Piedmontese  Alps,  a  conjecture  which  had  already  been  put  forward  at  an 
earlier  date.  An  attempt  was  also  made  to  find  some  causal  connexion  with 
the  orographic  movements.  Objections  have  been  raised  to  these  views  by 
Italian  investigators,  in  particular  by  Franchi  and  Novarese  ^. 

According  to  these  distinguished  observers,  the  order  in  which  the  rocks 
succeed  one  another  from  east  to  west  is  first  Strona  gneiss,  next  the 
diorite  band,  and  then  Trias.  The  Strona  gneiss  (together  with  the  so-called 
Stronalites)  passes  through  kinzigite  gneiss  into  the  closest  connexion  with 
the  diorite,  from  which  it  cannot  be  distinguished  ;  it  must  therefore  be  of 
great  age.  To  the  north  of  Varallo  a  strip  of  kinzigite  gneiss  may  even  be 
traced  right  across  the  diorite  band.  On  the  other  hand  a  great  dislocation 
separates  the  diorite  from  the  Trias  in  the  west. 

To  arrive  at  a  conclusion  we  must  first  consider  the  following 
observations  : — 

The  first  limestone  band,  namely,  that  of  Ornavasso,  mentioned  above, 
occurs  east  of  the  diorite  band.  The  kinzigite  gneiss  (gneiss  with  garnets, 
sillimanite,  biotite,  graphite,  and  in  places  cordierite)  is  probably,  as  in  the 
Kinzig  valley,  gneiss  altered  by  contact  metamorphism.  This  can  only 
have  been  produced  by  the  diorite,  and  it  remains  an  open  question  whether 
the  diorite  itself  is  not  a  mixed  product  due  to  the  assimilation  of  gneiss  by 
a  more  basic  magma  ^.  These  facts,  as  well  as  the  transverse  strike  of  the 
band  of  kinzigite  north  of  Varallo,  show  that  the  zone  of  Ivrea  is  not  a 
flow,  but  an  intrusive  sill. 

1  S.  Franchi,  Appunti  geologici  sulla  zona  diorito-kinzigitica  Ivrea-Verbano  e  sulle 
formazioni  adiacenti,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital,  1905,  XXXVI,  pp.  270-298  ;  V  Novarese, 
A  proposito  di  un  trattato  di  petrografia  di  E.  Weinschenk  e  sul  preteso  rapporto  fra  le 
rocce  della  Zona  d'lvrea  e  le  '  Pietre  verdi '  della  Zona  del  Calcescisti,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol. 
ital.,  1905,  XXXVI,  pp.  181-191  ;  La  Zona  d'lvrea,  Boll.  soc.  geol.  ital.,  XXV,  1906,  pp. 
176-180.  For  this  reason  additional  details  are  cited  here.  The  opinion  in  question  is 
expressed  in  E.  Suess,  Sur  la  nature  des  charriages,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  Nov.  7,  1904, 
with  which  Argand's  results  are  in  accord  as  a  whole,  op.  cit.,  Feb.  26,  March  12, 
March  26,  1906. 

2  H.  Preiswerk,  Malchite  und  Vintlite  im  '  Strona-'  und  im  '  Sesia  '-gneiss,  Festschrift 
H.  Rosenbusch  gewidmet,  8vo,  Stuttgart,  1906,  pp.  322-334  ;  Franchi  (Boll.  R.  Com.  geol. 
Ital.,  1906,  part.  ufF.,  p.  30)  cites  a  case  in  which  the  Strona  gneiss  has  undergone  cata- 
clastic  change,  but  the  Sillimanite  schist  which  belongs  to  the  kinzigite  has  escaped. 
Kinzigite  was  the  name  given  by  H.  Fischer  (N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1860,  p.  796,  and  1861,  p.  641) 
to  the  garnet  gneiss  of  the  Kinzig  valley  ;  Heberstreit  determined  the  amount  of  graphite 
contained  (Inaugural-Dissertation,  Wiirzburg,  1877,  8vo,  74  pp.) ;  Sauer  introduced  the 
name  '  kinzigite  gneiss '  in  the  detailed  geological  map  of  Baden  (Erlauterung  zum  Blatt 
Oberwolfach-Schenkenzell,  1895,  p.  18).  This  garnet  graphite  gneiss  has  arisen  by  the 
action  of  granitite  on  a  para-gneiss  (H.  Thurach,  Beziehungen  der  Granitit-Giinge  zum 
Nordracher  Turmalingranat  und  zu  dem  Kinzigitgneiss,  Mitth.  badisch.  geol.  Landesanst., 
1899,  III,  p.  637  et  seq.). 


cH.iv]  THE  ADDA.    BELLINZONA  129 

Kinzigite  rocks  occur  not  seldom  in  these  parts  of  the  Alps ;  Hammer 
mentions  them  at  Ulten  in  west  Tyrol  ^.  South  of  Bormio,  the  upper 
Adda  traverses  the  batholite  of  the  Serra  di  Morignone,  the  component 
rocks  of  which,  according  to  Stache,  range  from  tonalite  to  gabbro ;  its 
connexion  with  the  Adamello  mass  had  already  been  suggested  by  Theobald. 
The  similar  but  smaller  batholite  of  Brusio  is  crossed  by  the  Poschiavino 
above  Tirano.  Stella  states  that  rocks  occur  in  the  zone  of  contact  which 
resemble  the  kinzigites  and  stronalites  of  Ivrea  ^. 

These  localities  lie  to  the  north  of  the  Dinarides.  The  boundary  of  the 
Dinarides  follows  the  Judicaria  line  as  far  as  Dimaro,  south  of  Mal^,  and 
then  turns  to  the  west-south-west  and  finally  to  the  west.  It  runs,  accord- 
ing to  Salomon's  observations,  north  of  the  Tonale  pass,  and  reaches  the 
Adda  at  Stazzone  below  Tirano^.  At  Monte  Padrio  (between  Oglio  and 
Adda),  a  zone  of  marble  is  mentioned  as  marking  the  probable  starting- 
point  of  a  long  band  of  Trias,  which  strikes  through  the  Tessin  valley  ;  its 
traces  have  been  followed  by  Theobald,  Rolle,  and  Melzi ;  RoUe  mentions  it 
as  still  occurring  in  the  pass  of  lorio  ^. 

This  long  but  interrupted  band  of  Trias  belongs  to  the  Alps.  The  val 
Morobbia,  which  starts  from  the  pass  of  lorio,  follows  the  same  east  and 
west  direction ;  it  reaches  the  Tessin  a  little  south  of  Bellinzona,  and 
coincides  with  the  Dinaric  boundary. 

In  addition  to  the  batholites  of  the  Serra  and  Brusio  mentioned  above, 
a  third  lies  in  the  same  line,  north  of  Ponte ;  a  fourth,  north  of  lake  Mezzola ; 
and  yet  another  of  these  late  intrusions  at  Bellinzona.  They  all  lie  within 
the  Alps,  and  in  the  east  they  are,  perhaps,  connected  with  dykes  of  various 
kinds  (Ortlerite,  Suldenite,  &c.),  which  are  known  to  extend  far  beyond  the 
Ortler,  thus  showing  over  how  large  an  area  such  processes  as  gave  rise  to 
them  were  at  one  time  active. 

At  Bellinzona,  Klemm,  coming  from  the  north,  encountered  comparatively 
recent  granite,  enclosing  patches  of  schist,  then  steeply  upturned  sediments, 
amphibolite  schists,,  and  calc-silicate-hornfels^  marble  with  garnets  and 

1  W.  Hammer,  Jahrb.  k.k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1902,  LII,  p.  114. 

2  Stache,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reiclisanst.,  1876,  p.  357 ;  Linck,  Pegmatite  des  oberen 
Veltlin,  Zeitscbr.  f.  Naturw.,  Jena,  1899,  XXXII,  pp.  345-360;  0.  Hecker,  Gabbro- 
Gesteine  des  oberen  Veltlin,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1902,  Beilage-Band  XVII,  pp.  313-354  ;  Stella, 
Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1907,  Atti  uff.,  p.  35  ;  for  these  batholites, in  particular,  Salomon, 
Periadriatische  Massen,  p.  137  et  seq. 

'  W.  Salomon,  Die  alpino-dinarische  Grenze,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1905,  pp.  341- 
348 ;  the  locality  may  be  seen  on  Vacek  and  Hammer's  Kartenblatt  Cles  (Oesterreich. 
Special-Karte,  Zone  20,  Col.  iv). 

*  The  best-known  locality  is  Dubino,  near  to  the  mouth  of  the  Adda ;  RoUe,  Beitr. 
geol.  Karte  der  Schweiz,  1881,  XXII,  p.  18  et  seq. ;  G.  Melzi,  Ricerche  microscopiche  suUe 
rocce  del  versante  Valtellina  della  catena  Orobica  occidentale,  Giorn.  di  Min.,  1891, 
II,  pp.  1-34 ;  Ricerche  geologiche  e  petrografiche  sulla  Valle  di  Masino,  op.  cit.,  1893, 
IV,  pp.  89-134,  maps ;  Salomon,  Sitzb.  k.  preuss.  Akad.  Wiss.  Berlin,  1899,  p.  27. 

SOIiLAS  IV  K 


130 


THE  ALPS 


[PAET  V 


other  rocks  penetrated  by  occasional  veins  of  pegmatite.  Serpentine  and 
peridotites  are  associated  with  the  amphibolite,  and  Klemm  regards  these 
rocks  as  forming  part  of  the  zone  of  Ivrea.  Near  Arbedo  (north  of  Bellin- 
zona)  numerous  slickensides  already  make  their  appearance  in  this  band ; 
these  increase  in  number  towards  the  south,  and  in  val  Morobbia,  which 
has  already  been  mentioned  as  the  boundary,  the  rocks  of  Ivrea  are  com- 
pletely mylonitized.  The  normal  basement  of  the  Dinarides  follows  on  the 
south  ^. 

Here,  therefore,  the  dislocation  lies  not  without,  but  within  the  zone 
of  Ivrea,  i.  e.  to  the  south  of  it.  Hence  Mattirolo  concludes  that  it  is 
erroneous  to  regard  the  rocks  of  Bellinzona,  which  are  in  fact  intrusive,  as 
the  continuation  of  the  zone  of  Ivrea  ^.  But  these  dislocations  are 
younger  than  the  intrusion  of  the  rocks  which  have  been  mylonitized 
along  them. 

To  the  west  the  rocks  are  now  concealed  by  the  broad  valley  of  the 
Tessin,  which  extends  along  the  strike  for  a  distance  of  12  kilometers,  up  to 
the  north  end  of  lake  Maggiore,  but  when  8  kilometers  further,  on  the  other 
side  of  the  lake,  near  Ascona,  rocks  reappear,  they  are  again  amphibolites 
with  granitic  intrusions,  and  these  are  continued  without  interruption  into 
the  principal  band  of  Ivrea. 

To  this  band  we  will  now  turn  our  attention.  Its  constitution  is  more 
various  than  the  term  diorite  would  imply.  In  the  south,  near  Pavone 
and  Ivrea,  norite,  hornblende-gabbro,  and  quartz-hypersthene-diorite  are 
enumerated  as  the  dominant  rocks  ^.  At  Biela,  within  the  diorite  band, 
so  called  by  Franchi,  rocks  are  cited  which  range  from  granite  to  tonalite, 
from  mica-diorite  to  rocks  rich  in  amphibole  and  pyroxene  It  is  stated 
that  highly  basic  rocks,  such  as  peridotites,  collect  together  towards  the 
west,  while  in  the  east  diorites  predominate,  and  this  is  particularly  the 
case  north  of  the  Sesia^.    Gerlach  names  seven  localities  along  a  tract 

*  G.  Klemm,  Bericlit  tiber  Untersuchungen  an  den  sogenannten  '  Gneissen '  u.  s.  w. 
der  Tessiner  Alpen,  III,  IV,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Berlin,  1906,  p.  429,  and  1907,  pp.  251- 
258.  It  is  true  that  these  isolated  batholites  do  not  afford  ground  for  inferring  the 
recent  intrusive  character  of  the  whole  of  the  Tessina  gneisses. 

2  Mattirolo,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1907,  parte  uff.,  p.  29. 

'  Frank,  R.  van  Horn,  Petrographische  Untersuchungen  iiber  die  noritischen  Gesteine 
der  Umgegend  von  Ivrea;  Tschermak  (Becke),  Min.  Mitth.,  1898,  XVII,  pp.  391-420,  map. 

*  Franchi,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1901,  XXXII,  Atti  uff.,  p.  39. 

'  The  most  important  works  are  by  Artini  e  Melzi,  Sulla  Lherzolite  di  Balmuccia  in 
Val  Sesia,  Rend.  Acc.  Line,  1895,  5*  ser.,  IV  b,  pp.  87-92  ;  R.  W.  Schaefer,  Der  basische 
Gesteinszug  von  Ivrea  im  Gebiete  des  Mastallone-Thales,  Tschermak  (Becke),  Min.  Mitth., 
1898,  XVII,  pp.  495-577  ;  C.  Porro,  Geognostische  Skizze  der  Umgegend  von  Finero, 
Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1895,  XLVII,  pp.  377-422,  map,  and  the  already  mentioned 
works  of  Franchi,  Stella,  and  Novarese.  Schaefer  compares  the  diorite  schists  with  the 
green  schists  of  Wallis ;  he  believes  that  all  the  rocks  from  the  peridotite  to  the  diorite 
were  produced  from  a  common  magma,  and  mentions  the  impression  made  by  a  longitu- 


CH.  IV] 


IVEEA  II 


131 


25  kilometers  in  length  at  which  nickel-bearing  pyrrhotine  is  mined  in 
peridotite  ^. 

The  diorite  band,  or  at  least  the  middle  part  of  it,  is  followed  on  the 
west  by  a  profound  dislocation,  then  by  a  band  of  Trias  limestone.  This  is 
likewise  of  great  length,  and  is  followed  on  the  west  by  the  supposed  Permo- 
Carboniferous  schists  of  Rimella.  They  are  known  to  accompany  the 
diorite  band  towards  the  north-east,  as  far  as  the  Swiss  frontier,  where  it 
crosses  the  Cento  Valli.  Then  towards  the  west  we  again  reach  the 
gneiss  ^. 

Along  the  dislocation  itself,  Franchi  mentions  prasinite  with  glaucophane, 
produced  by  the  dynamic  metamorphism  of  diorite  ^.  In  the  south  a  zone 
of  eclogite  and  mica-schists  sets  in  here,  and  near  Traversella  (west  of 
Ivrea)  this  is  associated  with  a  diorite  containing  a  little  quartz,  which 
reaches  the  band  of  Trias  limestone,  produces  contact  alteration,  and  gives 
rise  to  ore-deposits  *. 

The  gneiss  to  the  west  of  the  Rimella  schists  decreases  in  breadth  north 
of  the  Sesia,  and  soon  terminates  near  the  upper  Mastallone.  Towards  the 
south-west,  however,  it  widens  out  again  and  forms  the  great  gneiss  mass 
of  the  Sesia  and  the  val  di  Lanzo,  of  which  the  southern  wedge-shaped  end, 
accompanied  by  Mesozoic  calc-schists,  reaches  the  Stura  near  Viu,  and 
disappears  between  two  vast  regions  of  green  rocks. 

In  the  north,  between  the  Sesia  and  the  Toce,  a  second  diorite  hand 
(Ivrea  II)  crops  out ;  it  presents  the  same  characters  as  the  principal  band 
(kinzigite,  diorite,  gabbro).  Gerlach  marks  it  as  striking  from  the  other 
side  of  the  Toce  for  more  than  30  kilometers  to  the  south-west,  with 
a  maximum  breadth  of  2  or  3  kilometers.  To  Franchi  is  due  the  merit  of 
having  shown  that  this  second  band,  accompanied  in  its  course  by  Rimella 
schists,  extends  still  further  to  the  south-west,  thus  wandering  further  and 
further  away  from  the  main  band ;  it  may  be  finally  traced  as  isolated 
outcrops  of  diorite  and  kinzigite  gneiss  into  the  valley  of  Loo  (above  Gaby) 
in  the  Gressoney  ^. 

dinal  Alpine  fissure  (as  do  also  Artini  and  Melzi).  According  to  Novarese  (Boll.  R.  Com. 
geol.  ital.,  1905,  Atti  ufF.,  p.  32)  the  nickel  ores  ascend  in  great  veins.  Smaller  outcrops 
of  peridotite  are  mentioned  in  tlie  east  of  the  range. 

^  G.Tschermak,  Min.  Mitth.,1874,  p.  285;  Stelzner,  Zeitschr.  f.  Berg-,  Hiitt.-u.Salinenw., 
1877,  p.  86 ;  Gerlach,  Die  Penniner  Alpen,  Beitr.  z.  geol.  Karte  d.  Schweiz,  1883,  XXVII, 
p.  134  ;  J.  H.  L.  Vogt,  Zeitschr.  f.  prakt.  Geol.,  1893,  p.  257. 

^  For  details  regarding  the  west  border,  see  Franchi,  Boll.  R  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1905, 
pp.  273  et  seq. 

3  Franchi,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1904,  pp.  242-247. 

^  V.  Novarese  is  inclined  to  regard  this  diorite  as  of  middle  Tertiary  age,  since  it  is 
not  dynamically  altered  ;  L'origine  dei  giacimenti  metalliferi  di  Brozzo  e  Traversella  in 
Piemonte,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1901,  XXXII,  pp.  75-93,  and  in  Zeitschr.  f.  prakt. 
Geol.,  1902,  X,  pp.  179-187. 

^  Franchi,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1907,  Atti  ufif.,  p.  30.  Possibly  the  Vintlite  of  Gaby 
in  the  Gressoney,  mentioned  by  Preiswerk,  should  be  referred  here. 

K  2 


132 


THE  ALPS 


[part  V 


In  proportion  as  the  band  of  Ivrea  II  leaves  the  main  band  the  Sesia 
and  val  di  Lanzo  gneiss  lying  between  them  increases  in  breadth.  Still 
further  to  the  south-west  we  come  to  the  town  of  Traversella,  already 
mentioned,  which  is  situated  on  the  eclogite  of  the  main  band.  These 
rocks  now  reach  the  great  zone  of  Pietre  verdi,  which,  striking  south- 
west, passes  through  Chialamberto  and  reaches  the  south  side  of  the  Gran 
Paradiso ;  the  rocks  of  these  bands  are  so  very  similar  that  a  few  years  ago 
they  were  not  distinguished  on  the  maps.  Here,  in  fact,  the  rocks  of  Ivrea 
appear  to  unite  with  that  great  region  of  diversified  basic  rocks  which 
crosses  the  Stura  towards  the  south,  and  the  French  frontier  towards  the 
west.  Where  this  region  is  represented  by  serpentine,  it  carries  garnet-rock 
and  magnetite ;  it  includes  the  well-known  mineral  locality  of  Ala  ^.  It  is 
probable  that  we  must  also  connect  with  the  main  band  of  Ivrea  itself  the 
many  outcrops  of  green  rocks  which,  following  the  margin  of  the  plain  of 
Lombardy  beyond  Ivrea,  border  the  east  side  of  the  gneiss  of  the  Sesia  and 
the  val  di  Lanzo,  and  extend  up  to  the  serpentine  and  peridotite  mountains 
situated  to  the  south  of  Lanzo. 

Towards  the  west  lies  a  large  area  of  Mesozoic  sediments  and  green 
rocks.  Lugeon  has  named  it  the  Chatillon-Zermatt  window.  It  extends 
to  the  south  beyond  the  Dora  Baltea,  and  includes  on  the  north  the  val 
Challant,  val  Tournanche,  and  the  val  de  St.  Barthelemy.  On  the  north  its 
rocks  plunge  below  the  gneiss  of  monte  Rosa.  Whether  these  great  gneiss 
mountains  are  composed  of  four  or  six  or  even  more  sheets  is  a  question  of 
only  secondary  importance,  and  the  greater  or  less  frequency  with  which 
the  green  rocks  are  infolded  with  them  depends  merely  on  the  degree  of 
local  folding. 

One  of  these  infoldings  strikes  from  the  upper  Gressoney  through 
Alagna  eastwards  into  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  band  Ivrea  II 
(near  Rima,  upper  Sermenza).  Another  was  traced  by  Gerlach  and 
Tra verso  from  the  val  Anzasca  to  Bognanco  (west  of  the  Domo  d'Ossola)  ^. 
If  we  cross  the  window  we  encounter,  on  the  summit  of  the  gneiss  of  monte 
Mary  (monte  Chatalaizena),  a  patch  of  basic  rocks,  and  then,  on  the  other 
side  of  a  tract  formed  of  a  long  strip  of  Trias  and  the  gneiss  band  of  monte 
Farona,  we  find,  within  reach  of  the  Dent  Blanche,  a  band  of  diorite  and 
kinzigite,  which  extends  through  the  val  Pellina ;  it  is  accompanied  by 
Trias  limestone  ^ 

We  have  here  the  same  association  of  Trias  limestone  with  an  igneous 

*  Cf.  E.  Mattirolo,  Su  di  una  carta  geo-litologica  della  Valle  di  Lanzo,  Boll.  R.  Com. 
geol.  ital.,  1905,  pp.  191-211,  map. 

^  Traverse,  Geologia  dell'  Ossola,  8vo,  Genoa,  1895,  275  pp.,  map  ;  on  p.  148  a  descrip- 
tion of  the  main  range. 

'  Mattirolo,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1902,  Atti  uff.,  p.  20  et  seq. ;  Novarese,  op.  cit., 
1901,  p.  34,  1902,  p.  32  ;  Franclii,  op.  cit.,  1903,  p.  30,  1905,  p.  293  et  passim. 


CH.  IV] 


DENT  BLANCHE 


133 


band  as  in  the  case  of  the  two  bands  of  Ivrea,  and  there  seems  to  be  no 
reason  to  separate  the  peridotite  of  the  main  band  of  Ivrea,  for  example, 
from  the  considerable  masses  of  peridotite  which  occur  above  Gressoney, 
and,  extending  across  the  Breithorn  towards  Zermatt,  separate  monte  Rosa 
from  the  Dent  Blanche  ^. 

Argand  points  out  that  the  basic  rocks  in  the  secondary  synclines  of  the 
Dent  Blanche  are  precisely  the  same  as  those  of  Ivrea,  the  Dent  Blanche 
itself  is  a  part  of  a  great  syncline,  and  the  '  tail '  (la  queue)  of  the  syncline 
is  nothing  else  than  the  zone  of  Ivrea  itself.  To  the  north-west  of  the 
Dent  Blanche  at  fivolene  (val  d'H^rens)  Argand  believes  he  has  found  the 
end  of  the  recumbent  fold.  If  we  adopt  this  interpretation  we  obtain  the 
following  section  from  south-east  to  north-west:  (Trias)  marble  zone  of 
Ornavasso-Ivrea  I — (Trias  and  Permian  ?)  zone  of  Rimella — Sesia  gneiss — 
Ivrea  II  (probably  a  syncline) — gneiss — green  rocks  of  the  window  of 
Chatillon — then  a  small  piece  of  the  sheet  of  mont  Pillonet  (gneiss) — again 
the  green  rocks  of  Chatillon  with  Trias — then  the  remains  of  the  great 
sheet  of  the  Dent  Blanche — and  upon  this  once  more  green  rocks.  Thereby 
these  repeated  layers  of  green  rocks  and  Trias  are  regarded  as  so  many 
repetitions  of  the  band  of  Ivrea. 

Ivrea  II  and  the  Pillonet  would  be  connecting  links. 

While  Argand  infers  from  these  facts  that  a  connexion  exists  between 
the  Pietre  verdi  and  Ivrea,  C.  Schmidt  admits  that  the  Dent  Blanche  is  a 
part  of  Ivrea,  but  he  agrees  with  Italian  geologists  in  regarding  Ivrea 
itself  as  different  from  the  Pietre  verdi  and  much  older ;  and  he  interprets 
the  Dent  Blanche  as  an  encroachment  of  the  Dinarides  ^. 

For  my  own  part  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  marble  zone  of  Orna- 
vasso  is  a  true  component  of  the  Alps.  Similar  zones  of  marble  occur 
repeatedly  in  the  Alps,  but  not  in  the  Dinarides.  Ivrea  is  really  a  part  of 
the  compressed  and  injected  marginal  cicatrice  (III,  p.  337),  and  the  green 
rocks  are  continued  into  the  Alps,  but  not  into  the  Dinarides. 

The  Dent  Blanche,  along  with  monte  Mary  and  monte  Emilius  near 

1  E.  Argand,  Sur  la  tectonique  du  massif  de  la  Dent  Blanche,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris, 
Feb.  26,  1906  ;  and  Sur  la  tectonique  de  la  zone  d'lvree  et  de  la  zone  du  Strona,  op.  cit., 
March  12,  1906. 

^  C.  Schmidt,  Ueber  die  Geologic  des  Simplongebietes  und  die  Tektonik  der  Schweizer 
Alpen,  Eclogae  geol.  Helv.,  1907,  IX,  pp.  484-584,  map ;  also  Schmidt  and  Preiswerk, 
Geologische  Karte  des  Simplongebietes,  1 : 50,000, 1907.  C.  Schmidt  distinguishes  the  zone 
of  Ivrea  from  the  Mesozoic  rocks  of  the  Pietre  verdi,  but  thinks  that  they  are  continued  on 
the  Adda ;  he  assigns  them  to  the  Dinarides,  but  admits  that  a  genetic  relation  appears  to 
exist  between  Ivrea  and  the  Ophiolites  of  the  Biinden  schists,  since  wherever  gabbro 
appears  in  the  Biinden  schists  basic  rocks  also  occur  in  the  adjacent  basement  forma- 
tions (p.  547,  note) ;  L.  Milch  (Ueber  den  Granitgneiss  vom  Roc  noir,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1901, 
I,  pp.  49-88)  believes  that  this  rock  is  a  primary  eruptive  hornblende  granite,  in  places 
approaching  quartz  diorite ;  it  has  been  subsequently  altered  by  dynamic  action  and  is 
probably  of  Carboniferous  age. 


134: 


THE  ALPS 


[part  V 


Aosta,  and  the  region  extending  thence  to  the  Matterhorn  and  the  Weiss- 
horn  (north-west  of  Zermatt),  is  thus  the  remnant  of  a  sheet  derived  from 
the  outermost  and  easternmost  boundary  region  of  the  Alps,  and  at  the 
same  time  it  is  the  element  which  in  a  tectonic  sense  lies  highest  in  all  this 
part  of  the  Alps. 

The  basic  intrusions  also  occur  to  the  north-east  of  the  Simplon  tunnel. 
As  soon  as  they  had  reached  the  upper  limit  of  the  gneiss  they  discovered 
the  places  of  least  resistance  in  the  Trias  limestone  or  Jurassic  calc-schists, 
generally  the  bedding  planes,  and  spread  out  in  them.  This  affords  an 
explanation  of  Preiswerk's  detailed  descriptions  of  the  green  schists  of  the 
Simplon  region.  For  this  reason  they  are  so  often  intercalated  in  the 
Mesozoic  sediments  one  above  the  other ;  this,  too,  is  the  reason  why  the 
zone  of  contact  of  the  gabbro  lenses  with  the  Jurassic  calc-schists  is 
associated  in  the  Binnenthal  with  rocks  which  contain  garnet,  titanite,  and 
zircon.  The  green  schists  have  been  produced  by  the  mechanical  alteration 
of  a  series  of  rocks,  which,  according  to  Preiswerk,  ranges  from  gabbro  and 
diorite  to  dunite  and  picrite  ^. 

In  the  case  of  the  green  rocks  we  obtain  finally  the  following 
results : — 

No  ashes  or  tuffs  of  these  rocks  are  certainly  known,  unless  we  regard 
as  such  the  diabase  tuffs  which  are  scattered  through  the  Flysch  of  Tavey- 
annaz.  Vesicular  lavas  or  scoriae  are  unknown.  Pebbles  of  the  green  rocks 
first  make  their  appearance  in  the  Oligocene  Flysch.  The  green  rocks 
form  sills;  ascending  dykes  such  as  occur  in  mont  Genevre  are  rare^. 
Hornfels  occurs  in  the  zone  of  contact,  but  not  often ;  garnets,  especially 
in  the  calc-schists,  must  be  regarded  as  the  direct  products  of  contact 
alteration. 

With  great  penetration  Franchi  has  distinguished  the  piled-up  folds  of 
the  Simplon  type  from  the  structures  produced  by  the  flat  movements 
of  one  sheet  over  the  other — such,  for  instance,  as  make  their  appearance  in 
the  Engadine.  But  the  conception  of  an  '  ultrapiega  '  or  fold-fault  does  not 
explain  the  facts.  Movements,  such  as  that  of  the  whole  of  the  Dinarides 
towards  the  north,  do  not  proceed  from  folding,  and  Termier  is  right  in 
separating  this  movement  in  mass  from  that  which  produced  the  recumbent 
folds  of  the  plunging  sheets  ^. 

^  H.  Preiswerk,  Die  Gninschiefer  in  Jura  und  Trias  des  Simplongebietes,  Beitr.  geol. 
Karte  d.  Schweiz,  1907,  XXVI,  Part;  I,  42  pp. 

2  M.  Bertrand,  "Etudes  dans  les  Alpes  fran^aises,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1894,  3^  ser , 
XXII,  p.  160;  here  a  comparison  is  suggested  with  the  tuffs  of  the  Wengen  shales  in 
the  Dinarides.  Preiswerk  points  to  the  melaphyres  of  south  Tyrol.  In  like  manner 
Kilian  and  Termier,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1901,  p.  394  et  seq. ;  Cole  and  Gregory  also 
mention  dykes  of  dolerite  and  augite-andesite  on  Mt.  Genevre,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc, 
1890,  XLVI,  pp.  295-332. 

^  Especially  in  Necessite  d'une  nouvelle  interpretation,  etc.  (see  note  4,  p.  135),  p.  188. 


CH.  IV] 


DOWN  TO  THE  GESSO 


185 


Even  far  to  the  west  in  the  val  Savaranche  (west  of  the  Gran  Paradiso) 
a  zone  occurs  which  Novarese  has  described  as  consisting  of  quartz  diorite 
towards  the  east,  and  of  normal  diorite  towards  the  west:  Rosenbusch 
associates  it  with  the  tonalites^.  The  zone  of  Ivrea  evidently  stands  in 
very  close  relations  with  the  tonalite  zone  of  the  east.  Granite,  quartz 
diorite,  and  tonalite,  the  gabbro-like  rocks  which  range  up  to  the  nickel- 
bearing  peridotite,  together  with  serpentine  and  prasinite,  are  probably  of 
common  origin,  though  not  perhaps  contemporaneous.  And  this  assem- 
blage of  rocks  extends  throughout  the  entire  Alps,  forming  what  is 
collectively  designated  in  North  America  as  a  zone  of  granodiorite. 

From  the  Dora  Baltea  to  the  Gesso.  This  tract  is  bounded  on  the  west 
by  the  Belle  Donne,  the  Grandes  Rousses,  and  the  Pelvoux ;  on  the  south 
by  the  Mercantour.  Between  the  Mercantour  and  the  Pelvoux  there  is 
a  wide  gap,  traversed  by  the  Guil,  through  which  the  inner  Flysch  zone  has 
moved  forwards  in  a  recumbent  sheet  over  the  Helvetian  Alps  ^.  The  Gran 
Paradiso  is  a  broad  dome :  Lugeon  regards  it  as  the  carapace  of  a  recum- 
bent fold  It  is  probably  due  to  the  arching  up  of  the  same  gneiss  as  that 
which  forms  mont  Pourri  on  the  west,  the  core  of  the  Vanoise  on  the  south- 
west, and  the  mass  of  Ambin  (petit  mont  Cenis)  on  the  south.  It  is  in  this 
region  that  the  lustrous  schists  meet  the  formations  of  the  Brian9onnais. 
They  are  thrown  together  into  piled-up  folds;  at  the  same  time  lateral 
transitions  are  said  to  occur.  In  particular,  a  vast  lobe  of  lustrous  schists 
extends  from  the  val  Savaranche  to  the  Grande  Sassi^re  (east  of  mont 
Pourri),  and  it  seems  as  though  these  piled-up  folds  had  overridden  all  the 
gneiss  masses  mentioned  above 

On  the  west  comes  the  Carboniferous  fan.  It  extends  towards  the  south 

^  Rosenbuscli,  Mikroskopische  Physiographie,  4th  ed.,  1907,  II,  p.  282. 

^  In  addition  to  the  works  of  Marcel  Bertrand,  Kilian,  Termier  and  Haug  mentioned 
above,  see,  in  particular,  Kilian,  Nouvelles  observations  geologiques  dans  les  Alpes  Delphin. 
Proven9ales,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1900,  XI,  no.  75,  pp.  259-277,  and  Notice  expli- 
catoire  de  la  feuille  de  Larche,  Ann.  de  TUniv.  de  Grrenoble,  1905,  XVII,  pp.  1-12  ;  Kilian 
and  Termier,  Nouveaux  documents  relatifs  a  la  geologie  des  Alpes  frangaises,  Bull.  Soc. 
geol.  France,  1901,4®  ser.,  I,  pp.  385-420 ;  and  Termier,  Quatre  coupes  a  travers  les  Alpes 
franco-italiennes,  op.  cit.,  1903,  4®  ser,,  II,  pp.  411-482.  For  the  Italian  region  of  the 
Schistes  lustres :  D.  Zaccagna,  Sulla  geologia  delle  Alpi  occidentali,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol. 
ital.,  1887,  XVIII,  pp.  346-417,  map  ;  and  Riassunto  d.  osserv.  geologiche,  op.  cit.,  1892, 
XXIII,  pp.  175-244,  311-404,  map,  and  op.  cit.,  1901,  XXXII,  p.  4  and  following  volumes  ; 
also  besides  the  works  already  cited,  S.  Franchi,  Ancora  sull'  eta  mesozoica  della  zona 
delle  Pietre  verdi  nelle  Alpi  occidentali,  op.  cit.,  1904,  XXXV,  pp.  125-178,  map,  and, 
in  particular,  Sulla  tettonica  della  zona  del  Piemonte,  op.  cit.,  1906,  XXXVII, 
pp.  118-144. 

^  The  different  opinions  are  compared  by  Gr.  Rovereto,  Geomorfologia  del  Gruppo  del 
Gran  Paradiso,  75  pp.  (reprinted  from  Boll.  Club.  Alp.  ital.,  p.  1906,  XXXVIII). 

*  Termier,  Sur  la  necessite  d'une  nouvelle  interpretation  de  la  tectonique  des  Alpes 
franco-italiennes,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1907,  4«  ser.,  VII,  pp.  174-189 ;  M.  Bertrand's 
sketches  may  serve  as  maps  to  this  work,  op.  cit.,  1894,  3®  ser.,  XXII,  PI.  IV- VII. 


136 


THE  ALPS 


[part  V 


beyond  Brian^on,  and  even  beyond  Argentiere.  In  the  gap  of  the  Guil  it 
disappears,  and  strangely  enough  it  is  precisely  in  this  gap,  near  mont 
Dauphin  on  the  Durance,  that  a  little  fragment  of  the  Pelvoux  granite, 
probably  the  remains  of  a  flat  fold,  comes  to  light.  It  is  not  till  we  go 
further  south  that  the  fan  reappears,  extending  from  the  col  de  Longet 
onwards;  two  comparatively  small  bands  unite  near  Acceglio  to  form 
a  single  one  composed  of  Permo-Carboniferous  sediments,  and  this  con- 
tinues onwards  along  the  north-east  side  of  the  Mercantour. 

The  fact  that  the  fan  thus  becomes  extinct  at  the  place  where  the 


Fig.  18.  The  Cottian  Alps  (after  Franchi).    The  part  left  white  on  the  West  represents 
the  Fan,  on  the  East  the  Dora-Maira  gneiss. 


resistance  on  the  west  ceases  to  exist  shows  that  it  is  nothing  else  than 
a  zone  of  stowing.  Fig.  18,  taken  from  a  somewhat  early  work  of 
Franchi 's,  shows  in  a  very  instructive  manner  the  bending  of  the  several 
zones  and  the  way  they  die  out  along  the  strike.  On  French  territory 
Kilian's  map  (sheet  Larche)  does  not  mark  the  Carboniferous  (white  in 
fig.  18)  on  the  other  side  of  the  Tete  de  Cialancion,  but  the  main  boundary 
between  the  Brian^onnais  and  the  lustrous  schists  is  certainly  continued 
along  this  line.  The  lustrous  schists  extend  as  far  as  the  col  de  Longet. 
The  whole  of  the  middle  zone  of  gneiss,  approaching  from  the  Gran 


CH.IV] 


DOEA-MAIEA 


137 


Paradise,  terminates,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  traces  in  the  south,  in 
the  mass  of  Ambin  above  Susa.  On  the  east  the  Sesia  gneiss,  as  we  have 
seen,  reaches  the  Stura  through  the  val  di  Lanzo.  Towards  the  plain  it  is 
followed,  as  in  a  belt,  by  green  rocks,  which  are  probably  the  continuation 
of  the  main  band  of  Ivrea.  Between  the  Sesia  gneiss  and  that  of  the 
Dora-Maira  mass  (eastern  part  of  the  Cottian  Alps)  a  gap  is  left.  Passing 
mainly  through  this  gap,  but  partly  across  the  Dora-Maira  mass,  the  green 
rocks  enter  the  zone  of  monte  Viso,  contributing  considerably  to  its 
breadth;  monte  Viso  itself  is  a  great  pyramid  of  serpentine.  The  zone 
of  monte  Viso,  taken  as  a  whole,  is  a  belt  of  Trias,  lustrous  schists,  and 
green  rocks  overturned  towards  the  east.  It  presents,  like  the  whole 
region,  a  curvilinear  strike,  and  between  the  Maira  and  the  Gesso  it  sinks 
beneath  the  plain. 

So  far  we  have  been  following  Franchi;  we  now  take  Stella  as  our 
guide  ^. 

North  of  the  Po,  near  Eevello,  a  spur  of  the  Dora-Maira  gneiss  proceeds 
towards  the  plain  (left  white  in  fig.  18).  A  curved  strip  of  graphite-bearing 
Permo-Carboniferous  here  borders  the  south  side  of  the  valley  of  the  Po ; 
it  is  probably  the  continuation  of  a  similar  strip,  which  more  to  the  north 
has  already  reached  the  plain,  near  Pinerolo,  and  on  the  river  Pellice.  It 
is  united  with  a  second  spur  of  gneiss,  which  projects  between  the  Po  and 
the  Varaita  (gneiss  of  Venasca).  A  fairly  large  arc  of  Trias,  with  some 
green  rocks,  surrounds  its  south  foot,  enters  the  plain,  and,  striking  to  the 
north-north-east,  even  reaches  the  neighbourhood  of  Saluzzo.  A  third 
spur  of  gneiss  (mont  St.  Bernardo,  gneiss  of  Dronero)  succeeds.  It  sinks 
beneath  the  surface  along  the  Maira.  Then  follow  the  lustrous  schists  and 
green  rocks  of  the  zone  of  monte  Viso.  This,  however,  splits  up.  One 
part  disappears  along  the  strike  in  the  direction  of  the  plain  of  Cuneo; 
another,  maintaining  the  normal  strike  of  the  Permo-Carboniferous,  passes 
along  the  Mercantour  to  the  Ligurian  Alps.  All  these  rocks,  extending 
from  Revello  to  within  the  zone  of  monte  Viso,  are  isoclinal  towards  the 
west,  south-west,  and  south,  and  only  in  the  outermost  folds  do  they  dip  to 
the  south-east. 

Kilian  believes  that  the  general  inclination  of  the  Piedmontese  Alps, 
which  persists  up  to  the  Carboniferous  fan,  is  the  result  of  backfolding. 
In  this  case  the  spurs  of  Revello,  Venasca,  and  Dronero  are  free  ends  of 
the  backfolds,  and  have  been  separated  off  like  so  many  coulisses. 

Termier  has  described  a  section  across  the  fan,  extending  from  the 
Pelvoux  down  to  the  plain ^.    Kilian  points  out  its  want  of  symmetry; 

^  A.  Stella,  Calcari  fossiliferi  e  scisti  cristallini  dei  Monti  del  Saluzzese  nel  cosidetto 
Elissoide  gneissico  Dora-Maira,  Boll.  R.  Com.  gaol,  ital.,  1899,  XXX,  pp.  129-160,  map. 

^  In  particular  in  his  Quatre  coupes  a  travers  les  Alpes  franco-italiennes ;  also  in 
Necessite  d'une  nouvelle  interpretation,  etc. 


138 


THE  ALPS  '  [party 


the  western  part  is  steeply  upturned,  and  gives  off  recumbent  sheets,  which 
enter  the  Helvetian  region;  the  eastern  part  consists  of  much  broader 
segments  with  a  gentler  slope.  On  the  col  d'Eychauda,  west  of  the  town  of 
Brian9on,  and  separated  from  the  Pelvoux  only  by  the  valley  of  a  mountain 
brook,  the  Eychauda,  lies  a  fragment  of  a  recumbent  sheet.  This,  in 
apparent  contradiction  to  the  preceding  structure,  seems  to  have  been 
derived  from  the  east.  Termier  finds  that  such  is  in  fact  the  case,  but  that  it 
has  not  come  from  any  great  distance,  and  that  it  was  already  in  place  before 
the  fan  had  assumed  its  final  form^.  Kilian  suggests  that  all  the  Pied- 
montese  folds  were  originally  moved  towards  the  west,  and  that  the  back- 
stowing  is  a  later  process,  connected  perhaps  with  the  subsidence  of  the 
Lombard  plain  ^. 

We  may  gather  from  Kilian's  hypothesis  how  difficult  are  the  problems 
presented  by  the  Alps. 

From  the  Gesso  doiun  to  the  sea.  The  Ligurian  Alps  are  a  fairly  narrow 
arc-like  mountain  range,  which  runs  from  the  Var  past  Genoa,  and  connects 
the  Alps  with  the  Apennines.  It  is  composed  of  Alpine  rocks ;  their  strike 
cuts  across  the  direction  of  the  range.  Towards  the  north  they  dip  beneath 
an  unconformable  Tertiary  sheet ;  on  the  south  they  are  cut  ofi"  across  the 
strike  by  the  sea. 

We  have  already  mentioned  the  encounter  of  Proven9al,  Helvetian,  and 
Piedmontese  folds  along  the  Vesubie  and  the  lower  Yar.  In  the  Ligurian 
Alps  we  can  only  expect  to  find  Piedmontese  folds  of  the  Brian9onnais  or 
Piedmontese  facies.  The  whole  coast  between  Nice  and  Albenga,  along 
with  a  triangle  situated  in  the  interior,  having  its  apex  near  Tenda  or 
Limone,  is  formed,  as  we  have  already  seen,  by  a  vast  extension  of  the 
rocks  coming  from  the  north-east  side  of  the  Mercantour,  and  in  particular 
of  the  inner  Flysch  zone.  The  Mesozoic  beds  swerve  round  the  end  of  the 
Mercantour,  and  become  the  northern  border  of  this  region.  They  also 
crop  out  repeatedly  from  beneath  the  Flysch.  Then  their  folds,  retaining 
the  persistent  south-east  trend  of  the  inner  side  of  the  Mercantour,  stream 
down  to  the  sea,  almost  in  straight  lines,  or  with  but  slight  deflexions. 
A  considerable  band  of  Trias  limestone,  in  particular,  reaches  the  coast 
nearly  north  of  Albenga,  and  similar  outcrops  occur  as  far  as  Bergeggi, 
south  of  Savona.  As  the  zone  becomes  broader,  bands  of  semi-crystalline, 
and  sometimes  even  gneiss-like,  rocks  (Besimaudites)  belonging  to  the 
Permian  series  make  their  appearance  here  and  there,  and  beneath  these, 
exposed  at  Viozene,  on  the  watershed  of  the  Tanaro,  lies  the  anthracite- 
bearing  Carboniferous.  Rovereto  has  given  a  very  instructive  map  of  the 
trend-lines  ^. 

^  This  is  Termier's  '  Quatrieme  ecaille '  (Les  Montagnes  entre  Brian9on  et  Vallouise, 
pp.  110-127  and  167-182) ;  in  particular  pp.  127  and  173. 
2  Kilian,  C.  R.  IX^  Congres,  etc.,  1903,  p.  473. 

*  G.  Rovereto,  Carta  tettonica  dei  Monti  Liguri,  in  his  Geomorfologia  dalle  Valli 


CH.  IV]  ANTHRACITE  OF  BOEMIDA  139 

In  this  case^  as  in  the  French  and  the  Piedmontese  Alps,  a  long  zone  of 
Permo-Carboniferous  follows  on  the  west.  The  separated  Permian  anti- 
clines of  the  Cottian  Alps  (fig.  18)  unite  in  a  zone  of  variable  width,  which 
enters  the  Ligurian  Alps,  with  an  east-south-easterly  strike,  between 
Demonte  and  San  Dalmazzo,  close  to  the  border  of  the  plain  lying  south- 
west of  Cuneo^.  Outcrops  of  anthracite  extend  for  a  distance  of  about 
30  kilometers,  striking  across  the  upper  tributaries  of  the  Bormida.  North 
of  Calizzano,  on  the  Bormida  di  Millesimo,  Zaccagna  marks  a  fan,  like  that 
of  the  French  Alps^.  This  is  all  the  more  striking  since,  south  of  this 
point,  near  Calizzano  itself,  Issel  and  Eovereto  have  described  a  small 
independent  mass  of  gneiss^.  It  would,  therefore,  seem  as  though  the 
state  of  things  in  the  north  were  completely  reproduced. 

The  anthracite  of  the  Bormida  terminates  as  a  continuous  band  near 
Mallare,  14  kilometers  west  of  Savona,  but  traces  of  it  are  still  visible 
beneath  the  Permian  rocks  at  Quiliano,  5  kilometers  only  from  Savona. 
To  the  north  of  Mallare  and  Quiliano,  a  far  larger  mass  of  gneiss  crops  out. 
Its  outline,  if  we  include  a  small  mass  of  granite,  is  wedge-shaped.  The 
point  of  the  wedge  lies  16  kilometers  west-north-west  of  Savona,  and  on 
both  sides  of  this  town  these  ancient  rocks,  12  kilometers  in  breadth,  reach 
the  coast.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  they  are  part  of  a  larger  mass, 
lying  beneath  the  sea.  Their  strike,  determined  from  intercalated  sheets 
of  amphibolite,  is  given  by  Franchi  and  Rovereto  as  N.  60°  E. ;  the  southern 
boundary  is  sharp,  possibly  a  fracture 

Both  masses,  that  of  Calizzano  and  that  of  Savona,  consist  of  rocks 
which  do  not  resemble  those  of  the  Dora-Maira  mass  and  the  Piedmontese 
Alps,  but  do  resemble  those  of  the  Mercantour  and  mont  Blanc.  We 
should  term  them  Variscan,  if  the  strike  were  not  divergent.  The  relation 
of  the  Carboniferous  to  both  masses  is  discordant.    But  there  is  this 

Liguri,  Atti  R.  Univ.  Geneva,  1904,  XVIII,  226  pp. ;  also  Arcaico  e  Paleozoico  nel  Savo- 
nese,  Boll.  See.  geol.  ital.,  1895,  XIV,  pp.  37-75,  maps,  in  particular  PI.  II ;  E.  Israel  e 
S.  Squinabol,  Carta  geologica  della  Liguria,  2  sheets,  Genoa,  1891,  and  Issel  e  Traverse, 
Nota  sul  litorale  tra  Vado  e  Spotorno,  Atti  Soc.  ligust.,  1894,  V,  20  pp.  The  Trias  fossils 
and  the  stratified  succession  at  Noli,  not  far  from  Spotorno,  are  described  by  Rovereto  in 
Boll.  Soc.  geol.  ital.,  1897,  XVI,  p.  83,  and  by  Tornquist  in  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1900,  I,  p.  176. 

^  F.  Sacco,  I  Monti  di  Cuneo,  tra  il  gruppo  della  Besimauda  e  quelle  dell'  Argentera, 
Atti  R.  Acc.  Sci.  Torino,  1907,  XLII,  pp.  61-78,  map. 

^  T.  Zaccagna,  Studio  geologico  sugli  terreni  carboniferi  della  Liguria  eccidentale, 
Mem.  Carta  geol.  ital.,  1903,  XII,  pp.  147-161,  map.  A  map  of  the  region  which  serves 
as  a  connecting  link  north  of  the  Vallone  dell'Arma  (cf.  south-west  part  of  fig.  18,  p.  149; 
is  also  given  by  Franchi  and  Decastro,  op.  cit.,  PI.  XII,  and  Zaccagna  in  Bell.  R.  Com. 
geol.  ital.,  1903,  XXXIV,  PI.  V. 

^  A.  Issel,  Note  spiccate,  II,  Valle  di  Pallizano,  con  App.  di  G.  Rovereto,  Atti  Soc.  lig., 
1904,  XV,  30  pp. 

*  S.  Franchi,  Nota  preliminare  sulla  formaziene  gneissica  e  sulle  roccie  granitiche  del 
massiccio  cristallino  ligure,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1893,  XXIV,  pp.  43-96;  Rovereto, 
Arcaico  e  Paleozoico  nel  Savonese,  Boll.  Soc.  geol.  ital.,  1895,  XIV. 


140 


THE  ALPS 


[PAKT  V 


difference,  that  the  gneiss  mass  of  Savona  does  not  lie  outside  of,  but 
within  the  principal  zone  of  anthracite  (on  the  upper  Bormida),  i.  e.  it  lies 
to  the  north-east,  not  to  the  south-west  of  it.  Carboniferous,  and  more 
especially  Permian,  rocks  are  also  known  at  several  other  places.  The 
Carboniferous  of  Quiliano,  and  all  the  folds  to  the  south  of  the  gneiss 
mass  of  Savona,  are  overturned  towards  the  south  ^.  At  monte  Moro,  near 
Cadibona,  quite  close  to  the  sharply  defined  southern  border  of  the  gneiss, 
I  have  observed  not  only  limestone  (probably  the  same  as  that  from  which 
de  Stefani  cites  Dactylopora  and  Gyroporella),  but  also  serpentine,  and  it 
remains  to  be  shown  by  further  investigation  whether  this  southern  border 
does  not  correspond  to  a  profound  dislocation,  the  overthrust  of  the 
Carboniferous  directed  to  the  south  ^. 

East  of  the  gneiss  the  green  rocks  associate  themselves  in  continually 
increasing  quantities  with  the  Permian  and  Trias,  and  at  the  same  time  the 
strike  changes. 

Approaching  from  monte  Viso,  the  green  rocks  and  the  lustrous  schists 
run  to  the  east-south-east;  in  some  places  they  make  their  appearance 
along  the  mountain  foot ;  they  enter  the  Ligurian  mountains,  and  extend 
through  these  as  far  as  Sestri  Ponente,  a  little  west  of  Genoa.  Following 
the  coast  from  the  gneiss  mass  onward,  we  encounter,  at  the  ruined  castle 
of  Donegale,  near  Cogoleto,  Trias  limestone  vertically  upturned,  with 
a  south-west  strike;  further  on,  near  Avezzano,  we  find  great  sheets  of 
schist,  with  a  south-south- west  strike ;  then,  towards  Voltri,  the  rocks,  now 
associated  with  serpentine,  pass  into  a  north  and  south  direction,  and  this 
is  maintained  as  far  as  the  Sestri  Ponente.  There,  along  the  Torre 
Chiaravagna,  the  whole  zone  of  lustrous  schists  and  green  rocks  suddenly 
terminates  against  a  band  of  Trias  limestone,  running  north  and  south,  and 
more  than  20  kilometers  in  length;  their  place  is  taken  by  the  great 
Cretaceous  and  Tertiary  zone  of  the  Apennines,  with  which  green  rocks, 
of  a  precisely  similar  character  to  those  which  have  just  disappeared,  are 
associated  ^.  These  most  easterly  bands  are  probably  the  reappearance  in 
part  of  those  which  were  lost  to  sight  west  of  Cuneo.  Among  the  indica- 
tions which  serve  to  connect  the  two  are  the  Radiolarian  rocks  which  occur 
at  Montenotte,  not  far  from  Cairo 

^  C.  de  Stefani,  L'Appennino  fra  il  Colle  dell'  Altare  e  la  Polcevera,  Boll.  Soc.  geol.  ital., 
1887,  VI,  pp.  225-263. 

2  My  own  wanderings  in  these  districts  were  made  in  1872,  with  a  view  to  ascertaining 
whether  the  continuation  of  the  Alps  lies  in  the  Tyrrhenian  subsidence,  Ueber  den  Bau 
der  italienischen  Halbinsel,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1872,  LXV,  pp.  217-221. 

^  L.  Mazzuoli  ed  A.  Issel,  Nota  suUa  zona  di  coincidenza  delle  formazioni  ofiolitiche 
eocenica  e  triasica  della  Liguria  occidentale,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol,  ital.,  1884,  XV,  pp.  2-23, 
map. 

*  C.  F.  Parona  e  G.  Rovereto,  Diaspri  permiani  di  Montenotta  (Lig.  or.),  Atti  R.  Acc.  Sci. 
Torino,  1895,  XXXI,  pp.  167-181.  These  rocks  are  Mesozoic  and  associated  with  Pietre 
verdi ;  for  this  whole  region  see  in  particular  Franchi,  II  Trias  a  facies  mista  con  calce- 


CH.  IV] 


THE  ALPS  m  COESICA 


141 


If  then  we  follow  the  arc  of  the  Ligurian  coast,  as  it  cuts  across  the 
strike  of  the  Alps,  we  shall  observe  the  following :  On  the  south-west  is 
a  region  belonging  to  the  Brian^onnais  and  the  inner  Flysch  zone  (Aiguilles 
d'Arves).  From  Porto  Maurizio  onwards  the  strike  is  south-east,  then 
east-south-east.  About  5  to  15  kilometers  south-west  of  Savona,  traces  of 
the  chief  band  of  Carboniferous  should  approach  the  sea  (through  Quiliano). 
Then  follows  for  a  distance  of  12  kilometers  the  gneiss  of  Savona,  with 
a  strike  of  S.  60°  W.  On  the  other  side  of  this  we  meet  with  Permian 
shales,  Trias,  green  rocks,  and  lustrous  schists.  Then  the  strike  gradually 
turns  out  of  the  south-west  into  the  south,  and  with  this  direction  the  zone 
terminates  at  Sestri  Ponente. 

The  Alps  in  Corsica.  Sardinia  and  Corsica  must  be  regarded  as  parts 
of  a  single  structure.  The  foundations  of  our  knowledge  of  Sardinia  were 
laid  by  La  Marmora.  He  showed  that  from  the  bay  of  Cagliari  onwards 
an  elongated  plain  of  recent  date,  the  Campidano,  runs  north-west  up  to 
the  bay  of  Oristano,  and  cuts  off  a  group  of  heights  in  the  south-west  of 
the  island  (Iglesias  and  Sulcis).  Out  of  this  plain,  in  its  most  northerly 
continuation  beyond  the  bay  of  Oristano,  rises  the  volcano  of  Ferro,  described 
by  Doelter,  and  this  is  followed  close  to  the  coast  by  a  series  of  recent 
eruptive  centres^.  Then  still  further  to  the  north  a  similar  plain,  of 
slightly  less  breadth,  sets  in,  which  extends  to  the  gulf  of  Asinara,  and  in 
like  manner  cuts  off  a  group  of  hills,  the  Nurra,  situated  to  the  west  of  it. 
On  the  east  lies  the  volcanic  region  of  Anglona.  Tornquist  thinks  that 
western  Sardinia  is  cut  through  by  a  fault-trough,  which  extends  from  the 
gulf  of  Cagliari  to  the  gulf  of  Asinara  ^. 

Bomemann  long  ago  observed  that  the  Trias  in  the  south-west  of 
Sardinia  resembles  the  German  Trias  (I,  p.  305),  and  Tornquist  recognized 
the  same  resemblance  in  the  Nurra  of  the  north-west.  Since  a  different 
type  of  Trias  is  met  with  in  the  north-east  of  Corsica,  on  the  other  side  of 
the  ancient  Corsardinian  mass,  it  was  suggested  that  this  mass  forms  part 
of  an  extensive  barrier,  separating  the  German  from  the  Alpine  Trias  ^. 

sciste  e  pietre  verdi  nel  versante  padano  delle  Alpi  liguri ;  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  ital.,  1906, 
XXV,  pp.  128-132. 

^  C.  Doelter,  Der  Vulcan  Mt.  Ferru  auf  Sardinien,  Denkschr.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien, 
1877,  XXXVIII,  pp.  193-214,  map,  and  1878,  XXXIX,  pp.  41-96;  A.  Dannenberg,  Die 
Deckenbasalte  Sardiniens,  Centralbl.  f.  Min.,  1902,  pp.  331-342  ;  G.  Deprat,  Las  Volcans 
du  Loudgoro  et  du  Campo  d'Ozieri,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  May  27,  1907,  pp.  1182-1185. 

^  A.  Tornquist,  Ergebnisse  einer  Bereisung  der  Insel  Sardinien,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss. 
Berlin,  1902,  XXXV,  pp.  808-829,  in  particular  p.  828 ;  and  Deprat,  Sur  les  rapports 
entre  les  terrains  tertiaires  et  les  roches  volcaniques  dans  I'Aglona,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris, 
Jan.  14,  1907,  pp.  107-109. 

'  A.  Tornquist,  Die  Gliederung  und  Fossilfiihrung  des  ausseralpinen  Trias  auf  Sardinien, 
Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Berlin,  1904,  XXXVIII,  pp.  1098-1117  ;  also  E.  Philippi,  Centralbl. 
f.  Min.,  1901,  pp.  551-557  ;  Dom  Lovisato,  Rendic.  R.  1st.  Lomb.,  1903,  ser.  2,  XXXVI, 
pp.  216-228  ;  C.  de  Stefani,  Rendic.  R.  Accad.  Lincei,  1891,  VII,  pp.  427-431 ;  Tornquist, 


142 


THE  ALPS 


[PAETV 


This  theory  has  given  rise  to  an  instructive  discussion.  It  is  certain 
that  the  middle  Oolites  of  Sardinia  are  different  from  those  of  the  Italian 
mainland,  and  contain  fossils  which,  in  England  and  France,  are  character- 
istic of  the  Bathonian.  This  has  been  established  by  Fucini  and  Dainelli, 
but  it  appears  from  their  works  that  this  same  stage  also  occurs  in  trans- 
gression upon  the  ancient  mass  on  the  other  side  of  the  Campidano  ^.  In 
addition,  Bassani  has  shown,  from  fossils  found  by  Lorisato,  that  the  fish 
fauna  of  Glarus  (Palaeorhynchus  glarisianus  and  others)  occurs  in  the 
north  part  of  the  Campidano  ^. 

South-west  and  north-west  Sardinia  thus  presents  a  stratified  succession 
in  which  the  distinctive  faunistic  characters  are  commingled.  In  the  Igle- 
siente,  a  part  of  the  south-west  region,  the  series  rests  on  pre-Cambrian, 
Cambrian,  and  Silurian  rocks.  The  discordant  superposition  begins  with 
the  upper  Carboniferous.  Both  the  older  substructure  and  the  series 
superposed  upon  it  have  suffered  a  common  folding,  at  some  late  period, 
probably  one  of  the  earlier  epochs  of  the  Tertiary  aera.  The  strike  of  the 
folds  in  the  Iglesiente  corresponds  with  the  general  course  of  the  western 
zone  of  Sardinia. 

The  region  on  the  other  side  of  the  Campidano  is  regarded  by  Tornquist 
as  the  foreland  of  the  folded  range  just  mentioned.  The  whole  of  the 
central  and  eastern  part  of  Sardinia  is  in  fact  a  region  which  presents 
a  precisely  similar  stratigraphical  succession  to  that  forming  the  sub- 
structure of  the  Iglesiente,  but  it  has  not  been  disturbed  by  the  later 
folding.  Coal  of  lower  Permian  date  exists  in  this  region,  but  transgres- 
sions of  the  several  Mesozoic  stages  also  occur,  and  these,  beginning  with 
the  Bathonian,  are  not  folded ;  thus,  in  the  south  part  of  the  island,  the 
ancient  basement  is  surrounded  by  upper  Jurassic  table-mountains  with 
a  karst-like  surface,  as  in  the  Causses  of  South  France.  In  the  Gerrei, 
north  of  the  Sarrabus,  there  is  a  transgressive  patch  of  Cretaceous  also, 

Die  carbonische  Granitbarre  zwischen  dem  oceanischen  Triasmeer  und  dem  europaisclien 
Triasbinnenmeer,  Die  Entwicklung  der  Trias  auf  Corsica,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1905,  Beil.- 
Band  XX,  pp.  466-507  ;  K.  Deninger,  Die  mesozoische  Formation  auf  Sardinien,  N.  J.  f. 
Min.,  1907,  Beil.-Bd.  XXTII,  pp.  435-473,  map.  Trachyceras,  Pinacoceras,  and  other 
fossils  occur  on  the  lower  Ebro  (E.  von  Mojsisovics,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1881, 
pp.  105-107).  It  certainly  seems  as  though  the  Tethys  had  been  cut  off  from  the  existing 
Atlantic  region  during  a  part  of  the  Trias  epoch.  "Whether  a  temporary  connexion 
existed  with  Mexico  is  unknown ;  cf.  The  Balearic  Islands,  chapter  V,  p.  255. 

^  A.  Fucini,  Sopra  alcuni  fossili  oolitici  di  Monte  Timoleone  in  Sardegna,  Boll.  Soc. 
Malacol.  ital.,  1897,  XX,  pp.  150-160 ;  G.  Dainelli,  FossiH  batoniani  della  Sardegna, 
Boll.  Soc.  geol.  ital.,  1903,  XXII,  pp.  253-347 ;  A.  Tornquist,  Pflanzen  des  mitteljuras- 
sischen  Sandsteins  Ost-Sardiniens,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1904,  XX,  pp.  149-158.  We  may  recall 
the  fact  that  this  stage  is  repeated  in  thefacies  of  Normandy  far  to  the  east  in  the  south- 
cast  Carpathians,  Verb.  k.  k.  Geol.  Reichsanst.,  1867,  pp.  28-31. 

'  F.  Bassani,  Avanzi  di  Clupea  (Meletta)  crenata  nelle  Marne  di  Ales  in  Sardegna,  Rendio^ 
Accad.  Nap.,  1900,  VI,  pp.  156-158  and  191-194. 


CH.  IV] 


GENNARGENTU 


143 


which  seems  to  bear  an  African  stamp,  as  in  Sicily  and  Calabria  ^.  A  good 
description  of  the  neighbourhood  of  Seui,  situated  south  of  the  Gennargentu 
(1,793  meters),  the  highest  point  of  Sardinia,  has  been  given  by  Pampaloni. 
Anthracite,  with  Cyathocarpus  arborescens  and  Walchia  piniformis,  rests 
upon  the  ancient  formations.  This  is  followed  by  sheets  of  Jurassic  lime- 
stone, with  Geromya  concentrica,  Modiola  imbricata,  and  other  species, 
particularly  such  as  correspond  with  those  of  the  Mytilus  beds  of  the 
Helvetian  Alps  ^. 

Still  further  towards  the  north,  data  as  to  the  Mesozoic  transgressions 
are  wanting.  The  ancient  substructure,  maintaining  its  full  breadth,  is 
continued  towards  Corsica;  it  forms  the  whole  of  this  island  up  to  an 
almost  straight  line,  which  runs  from  the  mouth  of  the  Solenzara  on  the 
east  coast,  towards  the  north-north-west,  into  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
Isles  Rousses  on  the  north  coast.  On  the  west  coast,  deposits,  both  of 
marine  and  coal-bearing  Carboniferous,  are  superposed  on  the  ancient 
substructure^.  The  middle  and  west  of  Corsica,  along  with  the  middle 
and  east  of  Sardinia,  thus  belong  to  a  mighty  branch  of  the  Altaides  which 
strikes  to  the  south-south-east.    This  is  the  Gorsardinian  branch. 

The  north-east  of  Corsica,  as  far  as  cape  Corse,  consists  of  Alpine  rocks 
of  the  same  facies  as  the  Brian9onnais  and  the  Piedmontese  Alps ;  the 
strike  on  the  coast  of  Liguria,  and  the  prevalent  direction  to  the  south  or 
south-south-east  in  Corsica,  as  well  as  the  correspondence  of  the  rocks, 
show  that  the  mountains  which  reappear  at  cape  Corse  are  the  Piedmontese 
Alps. 

Comparatively  ancient  schists,  possibly  Permian,  occur  at  the  base  in 
this  region;  with  regard  to  the  series  above  the  quartzite  of  the  lower 
Trias,  we  need  only  remark  that  Rovereto  found  traces  of  Gyroporella  in 
it^  and  Rhaetic  fossils  have  long  been  known  (I,  p.  305).  At  a  higher 
horizon  lustrous  schists  occur,  then  transgressive  Nummulitic  beds  and 
Flysch.  Even  the  older  map  by  Hollande  marks  isolated  patches  of  these 
transgressive  beds^,  and  Nentien's  more  recent  survey  shows  that  the 
boundary  line  of  the  Alpine  part  of  Corsica,  from  the  north  coast  to  the 
east  coast,  i.  e.  for  a  distance  of  about  100  kilometers,  is  accompanied  by 
a  similar  zone  of  Nummulitic  limestone  and  Flysch;  at  one  point  it  is 
interrupted,  at  others  it  broadens  out  to  a  considerable  extent^. 

1  St.  Traverso,  Calcare  fossilifero  nel  Gerrei,  Sardegna,  21  pp.,  8vo,  Turin,  1891. 
^  L.  Pampaloni,  I  Terreni  carboniferi  di  Seui  ed  oolitici  della  Perdaliana  in  Sardegna, 
Rendic.  R.  Accad.  Lincei,  1900,  IX,  pp.  345-349. 

^  e.g.  Maury's  find  of  Productus  semireticulatus,  near  Galeria,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol. 

1905,  XVI,  p.  185. 

•  G.  Rovereto,  Sull'  eta  degli  scisti  cristallini  della  Corsica,  Atti  R.  Acc.  Sci.  Torino, 

1906,  XLI,  pp.  72-86. 

^  Hollande,  Geologie  de  la  Corse,  Ann.  sci.  geol.,  1877,  IX,  no.  2, 114  pp.,  map. 

*  Nentien,  ^tude  sur  la  constitution  [geologique  de  la  Corse,  Mem.  pour  servir 


THE  ALPS 


[part  V 


The  idea  naturally  suggests  itself  that  these  rocks  represent  the  inner 
Flysch  zone,  which  has  here  become  an  outer  Flysch  zone.  Sometimes  it 
rests  directly  on  the  granite,  like  the  Flysch  on  the  east  side  of  the  Pelvoux. 
The  beds  are  steeply  upturned,  and  extend  along  the  east  coast,  from  Port 
de  Favone  southwards  to  the  mouth  of  the  Solenzara  and  beyond.  A  few 
uncertain  data  seem  to  show  that  traces  of  them  occur  even  as  far  as  the 
gulf  of  Orosi,  in  the  middle  of  the  Sardinian  coast,  but  we  have  no  detailed 
information  on  this  point  ^. 

The  green  rocks  occur  just  as  they  do  in  the  Alps,  and  with  the  same 
diversity,  namely  as  peridotite,  norite,  gabbro,  diabase,  and  in  particular 
serpentine.  According  to  Maury,  they  penetrate  as  far  up  as  the  Oligocene 
Flysch,  and  are  overlain  by  the  first  Mediterranean  stage  ^. 

The  island  of  Gorgona  has  the  same  structure  as  the  north-west  of 
Corsica ;  Ugolino  describes  gneiss  with  a  strike  to  N.  50°  W.  ^  It  is  the 
last  indication  of  the  Corsardinian  branch.  Gapraja  consists,  according  to 
Emmons,  of  andesite  Pianosa  is  a  platform  of  Pliocene.  All  the  other 
islands  are  of  much  the  same  nature  as  the  island  of  Elba ;  they  are  thus 
fragments  of  the  Alpine  system. 

Relations  with  the  Apennines.  Elba  has  often  been  described ;  but  it 
will  suffice  to  mention  Lotti's  comprehensive  monograph  ^.  The  island  falls 
into  three  parts,  as  is  clearly  indicated  by  its  outline.  The  eastern  and 
middle  parts  consist  of  Alpine  sediments,  green  rocks,  and  granitic 
intrusions.  The  strike  is  north  and  south.  Out  of  this  basement  rises 
the  granite  dome  of  monte  Capane,  which  forms  the  western  part  of  the 
island.  This  granite  is  more  recent  than  the  green  rocks.  A  similar 
recent  granite  also  forms  the  island  of  Monte  Cristo,  40  kilometers  south 
of  Elba,  and  the  island  of  Giglio,  situated  50  kilometers  towards  the 
south-east  (with  a  fragment  of  limestone  clinging  to  it,  probably  Rhaetic, 
such  as  also  occurs  on  the  island  of  Giannutri) ;  it  further  occurs  as  a 
mighty  dyke  near  Gavorrano  (province  of  Grosseto),  36  kilometers  east 
of  Elba. 

These  are  all  remnants  of  the  Piedmontese  Alps. 

a  rexplication  de  la  carte  geol.  de  la  France,  1897,  4to,  224  pp.,  map,  in  particular 
p.  205. 

1  Hollande,  Geologic  de  la  Corse,  Ann.  sci.  geol.  1877,  IX,  no.  2,  p.  80,  note ;  C.  de 
Stefani,  Rendic.  R.  Acc.  Lincei,  1891,  VII,  p.  465. 

2  E.  Maury,  Feuille  de  Bastia,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1903,  XIII,  pp.  666-669;  for  the 
Flysch  of  S.  Flourent,  ibid.,  1904,  XV,  pp.  273-276,  and  1905,  XVI,  p.  181 ;  for  the  age, 
1907,  XVII,  p.  269. 

^  R.  Ugolino,  Appunti  della  costituzione  di  Gorgona,  Atti  Soc.  tosc.  sci.  nat.,  Pisa, 
1902,  XVIII,  pp.  197-213,  map. 

*  H.  Emmons,  The  petrography  of  the  island  of  Capraja,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc, 
1893,  XLIX,  pp.  129-144,  map. 

"  B.  Lotti,  Descrizione  geologica  dell'  Isola  d'Elba,  Mem.  descr.  carta  geol.  dltal.,  1886, 
II,  254  pp.,  map. 


CH.  IV] 


TYEEHENIAN  TEEND  LINES 


145 


The  Tyrrhenian  subsidence  is  not  confined  within  the  limits  of  this  sea, 
but  extends  far  into  the  Apennines  (I,  pp.  136,  276).  It  includes  Florence, 
Rome,  and  finally  the  whole  of  the  volcanic  region  as  far  down  as  Vesuvius. 
It  is  not  till  we  pass  beyond  this  downthrown  area  that  the  Apennines 
become  continuous. 

In  1892,  Stefani  published  a  map  of  the  trend-lines  between  Genoa  and 
Florence  ^.  In  the  same  year,  Lotti  described  the  trend-lines  of  Tuscany 
starting  from  the  Catena  metallifera  ^.  General  summaries  have  been 
published  by  T.  Fischer  and  Novarese  \ 

The  following  main  features  may  be  recognized : — 

In  the  north-east  of  Corsica  the  Alpine  folds,  closely  pressed  together, 
strike  towards  the  south  and  south-south-east.  In  Elba  and  Cerboli  ^  the 
strike  is  strictly  north  and  south.  In  the  northern  region  the  north  and 
south  strike  is  continued,  with  many  secondary  deviations,  from  Sestri 
Ponente  into  the  Cretaceous  and  Eocene  of  the  Apennines.  Then  the  lines 
situated  to  the  east  pass  into  a  south-south-easterly  direction,  and  with  this 
strike,  long  anticlines,  revealing  older  beds,  reach  the  gulf  of  Spezia.  The 
south-south-east,  or  nearly  south-east,  strike  dominates  as  far  as  Florence, 
and  then  becomes  due  south-east  on  the  other  side  of  Pistoja. 

In  the  island  of  Gorgona,  belonging  to  the  Apuan  Alps,  the  strike  is  to 
south-east;  near  Lucca  and  onwards  past  Volterra,  to  south-south-east: 
in  the  Catena  metallifera,  more  to  the  south;  but  beyond  Grosseto,  to 
south-south-east ;  and  on  the  Argentario,  as  well  as  inland  to  the  volcanic 
cone  of  Bolsena,  to  the  south-east.  On  the  other  side  of  the  Catena 
metallifera,  and  of  the  volcano,  the  strike  of  the  folds,  which  is  south-east 
throughout,  coincides  with  the  direction  of  the  mountains. 

A  general  conception  of  the  structure  can  only  be  obtained  if  we  take 
into  account  the  whole  region  from  the  Ligurian  Alps  to  the  Corsardinian 
mass,  and  as  far  as  the  uniform  outer  border  which  the  Apennines  turn 
towards  the  plain  of  the  Po  and  the  Adriatic  sea.  In  the  north,  between 
Genoa  and  the  plain  of  Lombardy,  this  region  is  narrow,  but  it  rapidly 
increases  in  breadth  towards  the  south,  and  finally  occupies  the  entire 
space  between  the  east  coast  of  central  Corsica  and  the  eastern  outer  border 
of  the  Apennines.    The  triangular  form,  partly  open  towards  the  south, 

^  C.  de  Stefani,  Le  pieghe  dell'  Apennino  fra  Geneva  e  Firenze,  Cosmos  (d.  Gr,  Cora), 
1892-1893,  XI,  pp.  129-151,  map. 

^  B.  Lotti,  Considerazioni  sintetiche  sulla  orografia  e  sulla  geologia  della  catena  metal- 
lifera in  Toscana,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1892,  XXIII,  pp.  55-71.  At  that  time  Signor 
Lotti  was  so  kind  as  to  send  me  a  sketch  of  the  trend-lines  of  Tuscany.  One  of  these 
delineations  may  also  be  found  in  T.  Fischer. 

^  T.  Fischer,  La  Penisola  Italiana :  saggio  di  corografia  scientifica  ;  Italian  translation 
by  Novarese,  Pasanisi  e  Rodizza,  8vo.,  Turin,  1902,  p.  212. 

*  P.  Fossen,  Sulla  costa  geologica  dell'  isola  di  Cerboli,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1885, 
TI,  pp.  13-17. 

SOLLAS  IV  L 


146 


THE  ALPS 


[part  V 


corresponds  to  the  divergence  of  the  folds,  which  in  the  west  strike  chiefly 
to  the  south,  and  in  the  east  to  the  south-east. 

Such  is  the  arrangement  of  the  trend-lines,  but  it  remains  an  open 
question  whether  or  not  they  reveal  the  true  secret  of  the  structure.  The 
very  first  spur  which  reaches  the  sea  at  Spezia  is  overfolded  at  its  extremity 
towards  the  interior  of  the  land,  and  for  the  whole  of  the  range  which 
succeeds  towards  the  east,  Steinmann  assumes  a  disposition  in  recumbent 
sheets.  Two  sheets  are  to  be  distinguished  here  :  an  upper,  with  basic 
intrusive  rocks,  which,  like  those  in  Elba,  are  correlated  with  the  green- 
rocks  of  the  Alps,  and  a  second  lower-lying  sheet  (limestone  chain  of 
Spezia,  Apuan  Alps,  Catena  metallifera,  and  others),  which  is  never  broken 
through  by  the  green-rocks  ^. 

The  Ligurian  Alps  are  a  horst-like  segment  of  the  Piedmontese  Alps, 
bounded  by  the  Tyrrhenian  subsidence  on  the  south,  on  the  north  by  the 
Tertiary  beds,  beneath  which  it  dips.  These  beds  form  a  complete  series 
from  the  Oligocene  to  the  most  recent,  and  contribute  to  fill  up  the  Lombard 
subsidence ;  they  extend  northwards  to  beyond  Turin  and  Casale.  On  the 
west  they  are  separated  from  the  Alps  by  the  plains  of  Cuneo  and  Mondovi : 
on  the  east  they  extend  to  the  plain  of  Alessandria  and  Tortona. 

Between  Alessandria  and  Valenza,  an  anticline,  or  more  correctly, 
according  to  Sacco's  detailed  description,  a  zone  of  anticlines,  crops  out 
from  the  plain  with  a  west- north-westerly  strike.  Further  away  it  forms 
three  parallel  anticlines,  the  most  important  of  them  reaching  its  northern- 
most limit  at  Chivasso.  From  this  point  the  strike  turns  to  the  south- west 
so  that  an  arc,  convex  to  the  north,  results ;  the  folding  terminates  at 
Turin.  Sacco,  however,  has  shown  that  the  same  anticlinal  formation 
which  makes  its  appearance  between  Alessandria  and  Valenza,  is  already 
visible  further  to  the  east  on  the  other  side  of  the  plain  of  Tortona,  which 
is  here  only  15  kilometers  broad ;  in  other  words,  that  the  recent  folds  of 
Turin  are  the  deflected  continuation  of  the  folds  of  the  outer  border  of  the 
Apennines  themselves^. 

It  was  not  a  local  movement,  but  the  younger  general  movements  of 

*  G.  Steinmann,  Alpen  unci  Apennin,  Monatsber.  Deutsch.  Geol.  Ges.,  1907,  LIX, 
pp.  177-183. 

2  F.  Sacco,  La  Geo-tectonique  de  la  haute  Italia  occidentals,  Bull.  Soc.  beige  Geol. 
Brux.,  1890,  IV,  pp.  3-28,  in  particular  p.  18  et  seq. ;  Les  Rapports  geo-tectoniques  entre 
les  Alpes  et  les  Apennines,  op.  cit.,  1895,  pp.  33-49,  map,  et  passim :  in  particular  his 
map  on  the  scale  of  100,000  to  II  Bacino  terziario  e  quaternario  del  Piemonte,  8vo,  1889- 
1890,634  pp.  Rovereto  also  recognizes  their  connexion  with  the  Apennines,  Geomorfologia^ 
p.  44.  Virgilio  attempts  to  explain  these  folds  by  Reyer's  hypothesis  of  gliding,  and 
Bombicci  previously  attempted  to  explain  the  whole  of  the  Apennines  in  this  way. 
F.  Virgilio,  La  CoUina  di  Torino,  8vo,  Turin,  1895,  159  pp. ;  also  Atti  R.  Acc.  Sci.  Torino, 
1895,  XXX,  pp.  589-606,  and  Boll.  Soc.  geol.  ital.,  1896,  XV,  pp.  36-70  ;  also  L.  Bombicci- 
Porta,  Rivendicamento  della  priorita,  Rendic.  Accad.  Bologna,  April  30,  1893. 


cH.iv]  SUMMARY  147 

the  Apennines  which  caused  this  late  folding  to  enter  the  region  of 
subsidence.    It  is  in  this  way  that  recurrent  free  ends  are  formed. 

In  the  Apennines  the  green-rocks  of  the  Alps  are  repeated,  chiefly  in 
Cretaceous,  Eocene,  and  Oligocene  (or  upper  Eocene)  beds,  as  in  Corsica. 
In  the  north  they  are  frequent,  in  the  south  they  become  less  and  less 
important. 

On  the  middle  Trebbia,  where  they  are  not  older  than  the  Oligocene, 
Traverso  distinguishes  a  series  of  igneous  rocks,  which  has  arisen  from  the 
differentiation  of  a  common  magma.  The  first  products  gave  rise  to 
Iherzolite  and  serpentine,  the  second  to  gabbro  and  diabase,  the  most  recent 
to  granite.   The  granite  only  occurs  in  limited  areas,  generally  as  veins  ^. 

Vinassa  de  Regny  has  described  the  projecting  bosses  of  Iherzolite, 
norite,  and  serpentine  in  the  Apennines  of  Bologna ;  nickel-bearing 
magnesite  is  also  said  to  occur  there  ^. 

In  Elba,  as  we  have  observed,  the  granite  makes  its  appearance  in 
greater  mass;  and  there,  too,  it  represents  a  comparatively  late  product. 
The  green-rocks  are  transformed,  by  contact  with  it,  into  alternating  layers 
of  hornblende  schist  and  enstatite-serpentine.  This  granite  is  younger 
than  the  folding  of  the  Apennines^. 

Here  too,  as  in  the  West  Alps,  we  recognize  rocks  which  have  solidified 
beneath  the  surface.    The  age  of  a  large  part  admits  of  no  doubt. 

Earlier  observers,  Gastaldi  for  instance,  regarded  the  Pietre  verdi  of 
the  Apennines  as  identical  with  the  Pietre  verdi  of  the  Alps  *.  And  even 
at  a  later  time,  when  the  grea.ter  age  of  the  Alpine  rocks  was  generally 
accepted,  a  few  individuals,  Traverso  among  them,  were  impressed  with  the 
possibility  of  establishing  their  parallelism  ^. 

The  twist  in  the  curve  of  the  Alps  probably  begins  in  the  Great  St. 
Bernhard.  In  the  course  of  the  bend  a  small  part  of  the  coulisse  detaches 
itself,  becomes  free,  and  curves  outwards  towards  Saluzzo.  The  remaining 
part  reaches  the  sea  as  the  Ligurian  Alps.  The  meridional  dislocation  near 
Sestri  Ponente  (Chiaravagna)  is  merely  the  boundary  of  the  coulisses. 
The  Piedmontese  Alps  reappear  in  the  north-east  of  Corsica.  Elba  shows 
the  connexion  between  the  Alps  and  the  Apennines. 

1  St.  Traverso,  Le  Roccie  della  Valle  di  Trebbia,  8vo,  Genoa,  1896,  83  pp.  Sacco  is  in 
favour  of  Cretaceous  age,  perhaps  with  Eocene  affinities  ;  Les  formations  ophitiferes  du 
Cretace,  Bull.  Soc.  beige  Geol.,  1895,  XIX,  Mem.,  pp.  247-265. 

^  P.  E.  Vinassa  de  Regny,  Studii  geologici  sulle  roccie  dell'  Appennino  Bolognese,  Boll 
Soc.  geol.  ital.,  1899,  XVIII,  pp.  15-32. 
3  Lotti,  Elba,  pp.  110,  119,  179. 

*  Gastaldi,  Studii  geologici  sulle  Alpi  Occidentali,  Mem.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1871, 1,  p.  32. 

^  Traverso,  Roccie  della  Valle  di  Trebbia,  p.  65.  The  whole  difficulty  reveals  itself 
most  clearly  in  the  two  works  of  Novarese,  Nomenclatura  e  sistematica  delle  Roccie 
verdi  nelle  Alpi  Occidentali,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1895,  XXVI,  pp.  164-181,  and 
S.  Franchi,  Notizie  sopra  alcuna  metamorfosia  di  Eufotide  e  Diabasi  nelle  Alpi  Occi- 
dentali, tom.cit.,  pp.  181-204.  Kalkowsky  shows  that  Ligurian  serpentine  passes  under 
dynamic  influence  into  nephrite,  Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1907,  LVIII,  pp.  307-378. 

L  % 


148 


CHAPTER  V 
THE  EAST  ALPS 

Southern  boundary  of  the  East  Alps.  The  Lepontine  sheets.  Selvretta.  Alps  on 
the  Mur.  Oetz,  Ortler.  Disgrazia,  Bernina.  Laas.  Tauern,  East  Limestone  Alps. 
Flysch  and  Lepontine  belt. 

The  problems  presented  by  the  Alps  east  of  the  Rhine  differ  in  many 
respects  from  those  of  the  west.  The  East  Alps  extend  over  a  much  greater 
distance.  The  manner  in  which  they  are  connected  with  the  Carpathians 
is  altogether  different  from  that  in  which  the  West  Alps  are  connected 
with  the  Apennines,  and  it  is  unaccompanied  by  the  great  back- stowing 
which  occurs  in  the  latter  case.  The  basic  sills,  such  as  that  of  Ivrea  in 
the  south-west,  give  place  to  intrusions  of  tonalite  and  granite,  rocks  which 
so  closely  recall  the  grano-diorites  of  America  as  to  suggest  that  the 
andesites  at  the  easternmost  end  of  the  tonalite  zone  (III,  p.  354,  fig.  17)  may 
also  form  part  of  the  intrusive  girdle,  and  may  present  similar  relations  to 
it,  as  those  existing  on  a  larger  scale  between  the  andesites  of  the  Cascade 
Range  and  the  southern  spurs  of  the  grano-diorite  of  Columbia.  The  tuffs 
and  breccias  derived  from  them  are  interbedded  with  the  lower  Miocene, 
and  the  adjacent  hot  springs  now  existing  are  possibly  a  lingering 
inheritance  of  the  past  activity  ^. 

The  ancient  division  of  the  East  Alps  into  the  Central  Alps,  the  grey- 
wacke  zone,  limestone  zone  and  sandstone  (Flysch)  zone,  which  arrests 
attention  on  the  map,  seems  to  point  to  simple  relations ;  but  the  fact, 
already  mentioned,  that  the  recumbent  sheets  of  the  Chablais  reach  the 
Rhaeticon  across  the  Glarus  fold  and,  as  we  shall  see  directly,  insert  them- 
selves in  the  basement  of  the  East  Alps  beneath  the  Rhaeticon,  shows  that 
this  apparent  simplicity  is  deceptive. 

On  the  east  the  Dinarides  advance  much  further  northwards  than  on 
the  west.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  no  natural  boundary  exists 
between  the  Dinarides  of  Greece,  Albania,  Dalmatia,  South  Tyrol  and 
Lombardy.  Continuous  trend-lines  approach  from  the  far  south.  The 
folds  follow  each  other,  either  without  interruption,  or  in  alternating 
replacement.  They  form,  in  correspondence  with  the  concave  bend  south 
of  Idria,  the  overthrusts  described  by  Kossmat,  which  precisely  resemble 

*  F.  Teller,  Eiiauterungen  zu  Blatt  Prassberg  (Oest.  Special-Karte,  Zone  20,  Col.  XII), 
pp.  101-158,  164. 


cH.v]       THE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  DINAKIDES  149 


those  to  be  discussed  later  in  the  concave  bend  of  the  Appalachians  ^.  In 
the  Vellach  valley  (Carinthia)  the  whole  of  the  Alpine  Trias  has  been 
overturned  under  the  influence  of  the  Dinarides,  towards  the  north ;  and 
south  of  Waidisch,  18  kilometers  west  of  the  Villach  valley,  the  Dinarides, 
according  to  Teller,  pass  for  a  short  interval  far  over  the  Alps.  Dinaric 
upper  Carboniferous  rests  upon  Alpine  Trias  2.  Here  Termier's  hypothesis 
that  the  Alps  have  been  overridden  by  the  Dinarides  is  visibly  realized  on 
a  small  scale.  It  must  be  admitted  that  the  Alps  plunge  beneath  the 
Dinarides,  but  it  cannot  be  shown  that  the  Dinaric  boundary  was  ever 
situated  much  further  to  the  north. 

Proceeding  further  to  the  west-north-west,  we  find  ourselves  in  the 
region  of  the  long  fractures  of  the  Drave  and  Gail  (I,  p.  261).  A  move- 
ment to  the  north  dominates  the  Alps  near  the  boundary  as  far  as  the 
mountains  of  Lienz  ;  thence  the  movement  turns  towards  the  south  ;  Geyer 
ascribes  this  effect  to  back-stowing  2.  Pressure  and  denudation  are  then 
carried  to  such  an  extreme  that  of  the  Alpine  Trias  nothing  remains  but 
narrow  roots ;  one  of  these  reaches  the  Brenner  at  Mauls  (I,  p.  264 ;  III, 
p.  341).  This  band  also  surrounds  the  front  of  the  Dinarides,  and,  over- 
turned towards  the  south,  extends  yet  20  kilometers  further  to  the  south- 
west, in  the  direction  of  Meran  (I,  pp.  247,  248,  figs.  30,  31). 

The  front  itself,  i.  e.  the  northernmost  part  of  the  advancing  Dinarides, 
is  accompanied  by  the  granite  zone  of  Brixen.  Its  broader  central  part 
is  cut  through  by  the  Brenner  road,  north  of  Franzensfeste. 

The  granite  lies  between  the  Dinaric  quartz-phyllite  and  the  phyllitic 
gneiss  of  the  Alps.  Sander's  observations  show  that  the  granite  cuts 
through  the  Dinaric  rocks  along  their  strike  and  alters  them  laterally  and 
above,  after  the  manner  of  a  batholite.  On  the  other  hand  it  follows  the 
strike  of  the  Alpine  rocks,  and  is  accompanied  on  this  side  by  a  girdle  of 
tonalite  gneiss      In  its  relations  to  surrounding  rocks,  and  particularly  in 

^  F.  Kossmat,  Ueberschiebungen  im.  Randgebiete  des  Laibacber  Moores,  Ber.  internat. 
geol.  Cong.,  1903,  pp.  505-520,  map  ;  Das  Gebiet  zwischen  dem  Karst  und  dem  Zuge  der 
Julianer  Alpen,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reicbsanst.,  1906,  LVI,  pp.  259-276  efc  passim  ;  Palaeo- 
zoiscbe  Scbiefer  von  Eisnern,  <fec.,  op.  cit.,  1904,  LIV,  p.  96.  In  tbe  last-named  work  we 
may  remark  tbe  unconformity  of  tbe  upper  Carboniferous  in  tbe  Altaides  and  tbe  con- 
tinued growth  of  tbese  mountains  on  tbe  old  plan,  a  pbenomenon  characteristic  of 
Asiatic  ranges  and  repeated  in  Carintbia. 

2  F.  Teller,  Erlauterungen  zu  Blatt  Eisenkappel  (Zone  20,  Col.  XI),  pp.  18,  19  ;  diabase 
and  green  schists,  wbicb  occur  at  several  points  on  tbe  boundary,  are  regarded  as  Palaeo- 
zoic. Tbe  question  is  not  definitely  settled :  V.  Graber,  Jabrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reicbsanst., 
1897,  XLVII,  p.  231.  Teller  observed  soutb  of  Villacb  a  previously  unknown  intrusion 
of  tonalite,  1  kilometer  in  lengtb,  representing  a  connecting  link  between  tbe  tonalite 
of  Eisenkappel  and  tbat  of  tbe  Isel  valley. 

3  V.  Geyer,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reicbsanst.,  1903,  p.  195. 

*  B.  Sander,  Geologiscbe  Bescbreibung  des  Brixner  Granits,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reicbs- 
anst., 1906,  LVI,  pp.  707-744,  maps. 


consolidation  it  has  been  involved  in  crust  movements,  and  these  acting 
along  inclined  planes  have  completed  the  mylonitisation  of  the  rock. 

The  boundary  next  turns  into  a  north-north-east  and  south -south-west 
direction ;  it  runs  parallel  to  the  Dinarides,  but  not  quite  parallel  to  the 
Alps;  instructive  relations  now  present  themselves  which  have  been 
described  by  Stache,  Lepsius,  and  Salomon,  and,  in  the  Alpine  part,  by 
Hammer. 

The  strike  of  the  Alps  becomes  confused  in  the  vicinity  of  the  boundary 
(here  the  Judicarian  line),  and  is  also  dragged  towards  the  north-north- 


FiG.  19.  Section  taken  from  east  and  loest  through  the  Vicentine  Tertiary  region.  The  folds  run  at 
right  angles  to  the  Dinaric  strike.  General  subsidence  towards  the  fracture  of  Sehio  (f,f). 
c,  c  Carbonaceous  bed  in  the  Eocene  ;  near  S.  Libera  a  downthrown  patch  of  the  Schio  beds. 

east.  At  the  same  time  the  inclination  along  the  boundary  is  sometimes 
very  steep ;  at  some  points,  where  there  are  good  exposures,  the  Alps  are 
seen  to  bend  over  the  Dinarides.  The  Alpine  gneiss  contains  peculiar, 
conformable,  lenticular  intercalations  of  platey  olivine.  They  owe  their 
form,  as  Hammer  remarks,  to  the  same  distorting  force  as  that  which  has 
determined  the  structure  of  the  gneiss^. 

The  Dinarides  include  a  long  basin  of  sediments  which  runs  parallel  to 
the  Judicarian  line,  and  presses  forward,  or  rather  has  been  carried  forward, 
to  within  14  kilometers  of  Meran,  without  undergoing  any  important 
dynamic  metamorphism.  The  stratified  series  ranges,  according  to  Vacek's 
investigations,  from  the  Permian  to  the  Oligocene ;  further  south,  it  also 
includes  the  Schio  beds  ^.  At  the  same  time  the  radiating  lines  of  the  Save 
and  Etsch  (III,  p.  341)  bear  witness  to  the  persistence  of  the  great  general 

*  W.  Hammer,  Olivingesteine  aus  dem  Nonsberg,  Sulzberg  und  Ultenthal,  Zeitschr.  f. 
Naturw.,  Stuttgart,  1899, vol.  72,  pp.  1-48, map ;  Die  krystallinischen  Alpen  des  Ultenthales, 
Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1902,  LII,  pp.  105-134  :  an  instructive  description  of  part 
of  the  boundary  striking  to  the  Tonale  pass  is  given  by  G.  B.  Trener,  op.  cit.,  1906,  LVI, 
p.  410. 

*  M.  Vacek,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1894,  p.  443,  and  sheets  Rovereto,  Trient, 
Cles  (Oest.  Special-Karte,  Zones  20,  21,  22,  Col.  IV). 


Pur|a 


CH.  V] 


LEPONTHSTE  SHEETS 


151 


movement  up  to  very  recent  times.  Between  the  Judicaria  and  the  fault 
of  Schio  the  lines  of  the  Etsch  give  rise  to  a  submeridional  folding,  which 
crosses  the  normal  strike  of  the  Dinarides.  Within  these  lines  lies  the 
northern  part  of  lake  Garda. 

A  broad  region  in  the  southern  part  of  the  Alps  swarms  with  dykes  of 
porphyrite,  diorite,  kersantite,  and  other  rocks.  Whether  they  are  con- 
nected with  the  intrusions  along  the  boundary  is  not  yet  certainly  known, 
but  in  many  cases  it  seems  probable.  As  a  rule  they  are  not  sills,  like  the 
green-rocks,  but  ascending  fissure  dykes  and  possibly  outrunners  of  the 
batholites  of  the  Adda,  which  we  have  now  approached  ^. 

Lepontine  sheets.  The  marly  facies,  with  abundant  bivalves,  dis- 
tinguished by  Gressly  in  the  Jurassic,  corresponds  to  a  contemporaneous 
sediment  in  another  locality  which  differs  lithologically,  being  purely 
calcareous,  and  palaeontologically,  since  it  contains  a  different  fauna. 
According  to  the  terminology  of  Mojsisovics,  the  two  facies  are  at  the 
same  time  both  heteropic  and  heterotopic  ^.  It  was  the  unexpected  appear- 
ance of  heteropic  formations  which  first  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
Carpathians  had  been  carried  from  a  great  distance  over  the  Sudetes,  and 
the  same  clue  led  to  the  interpretation  of  the  fragmentary  sheets  of 
Dauphind 

Purely  heteropic  heterotopy,  i.  e.  a  difference  between  contemporaneous 
formations  at  places  remote  from  one  another,  always  implies  the  existence 
of  transitions.  Such  formations  should  only  be  described  as  pure  when 
accessory  characters  are  absent.  While  Mojsisovics  was  careful  to  point 
out  that '  chance  admixtures ',  such  for  instance  as  volcanic  ash,  must  not 
be  regarded  as  indications  of  heteropy,  yet  it  is  impossible  in  the  study  of 
the  Alps  to  avoid  making  use  of  such  accessory  characters,  the  occurrence 
of  the  green-rocks,  for  example.  In  such  cases  it  is  obvious  that  we  cannot 
draw  the  same  inferences  as  regards  connecting  transitions,  delimitation, 
and  so  on. 

The  stratified  rocks  of  the  Helvetian  and  the  East  Alps  form  two 
clearly  defined  and  fairly  pure  heteropic  series.  They  are  not  uniform 
in  themselves,  and  in  the  Trias  and  Lias  of  the  Salzkammergut,  for 
example,  a  well-marked  secondary  heteropy  makes  its  appearance. 
Eroadly  speaking,  they  may  be  regarded  for  the  present  as  stratigraphical 
units. 

Between  these  two  series  lie  sheets  which  are  distinguished  in  places 

1  W.  Hammer,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1906,  p.  175  ;  C.  Riva  describes  similar 
rocks  from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Adamello,  e.g.  Suldenite  from  the  Passo  della 
Rossola ;  Nuove  osservazioni  sulla  rocce  filon.  del  Gruppo  dell' Adamello,  8vo,  Milan, 
1897,  p.  11. 

.  ^  E.  von  Mojsisovics,  Die  Dolomitriffe  von  Siid-Tirol  und  Venetien,  8vo,  Vienna, 
1879,  p.  7. 


152 


THE  EAST  ALPS 


[part  V 


by  accessory  characters  and  which  have  been  very  much  altered  by 
dynamic  or  other  influences.  In  many  cases  their  fossils,  and  sometimes 
even  their  original  mineral  constituents,  are  scarcely  recognizable;  whereas 
that  part  of  the  Helvetian  series  situated  to  the  north  of  the  great  move- 
ments, and  the  east  Alpine  series  lying  high  above  the  planes  of  movement, 
are  exempt  from  such  alterations.  For  the  present  we  shall  term  the 
whole  of  these  intervening  sheets  the  Lepontine  group.  This  name  is 
destined  to  disappear  as  our  knowledge  increases.  The  Piedmontese  facies 
and  that  of  the  Brian9onnais  are  referred  to  this  group,  and  we  may 
venture  to  conjecture  that  transitional  connecting  links  between  the 
heteropic  facies  of  the  Helvetian  and  the  East  Alps  will  be  found 
within  it. 

In  Switzerland  we  meet  with  the  following  fragments  of  Lepontine 
sheets  overlying  the  Helvetian  sheet,  as  we  proceed  from  west  to  east : 
Sulens,  Les  Annes,  the  larger  masses  of  the  Chablais  and  the  Freiburg 
Alps,  the  smaller  masses  of  Giswyl,  Stanz,  the  Mythen,  Iberg,  and  finally, 
the  Berglittenstein,  near  Buchs,  in  the  Rhine  valley.  On  the  other  side  of 
the  Rhine,  the  series  is  continued  into  the  Falkniss.  Thence  it  extends 
along  the  west  border  of  the  Rhaeticon  and  still  further  south. 

Investigation  is  sufficiently  far  advanced  in  this  region  to  enable  us 
to  distinguish  three  sheets  within  the  Lepontine  series.    These  are  : 

1.  The  lowermost  sheet,  or  the  sheet  of  the  central  Pre-Alps  (Nappe  des 
Pr^alpes  m^dianes,  Lugeon ;  Klippendecke,  Steinmann).  This  is  known  to 
extend  from  the  Chablais  to  the  Rhaeticon.  Its  most  striking  characters 
are  white  Tithonian  limestones  associated  with  red  Senonian  (couches 
rouges).  As  shown  in  the  more  complete  sections,  to  the  west  of  the  lake 
of  Lucerne  for  example,  it  comprises,  according  to  Tobler  and  Buntorf, 
Trias  gypsum,  dolomitic  limestone  of  the  Spielgerten,  the  Rhaetic,  and 
several  stages  of  the  Jurassic,  Senonian,  and  Flysch  ^. 

2.  The  breccia  sheet  {Nappe  de  la  Breche,  Lugeon),  also  ranging  from  the 
Trias  into  the  red  Senonian  and  the  Flysch.  In  this  sheet  the  Lias  exhibits 
that  peculiar  breccia-like  development  which  reappears  in  the  roots  between 
the  zone  of  Mont  Blanc  and  the  Carboniferous  fan  2.  Beds  with  Fentacrinus 
tuherculatus  in  the  Lias  breccia  deserve  mention  on  account  of  similar 
occurrences  in  the  east. 

The  investigations  of  Steinmann  and  his  colleagues  scarcely  leave  room 

^  A.  Tobler  and  A.  Buxtorf,  Excursions- Programm,  Eclogae  Geol.  Helv.,  1905,  IX, 
pp.  1-53. 

^  For  classification  see,  in  addition  to  the  works  already  mentioned,  F.  Jaccard,  La 
region  de  la  breche  de  la  Hornfluh,  Bull.  lab.  geol.  Lausanne,  1904,  Y,  205  pp.,  map  j 
for  roots  extending  over  considerable  distances  into  the  Maurienne  and  Tarentaise,  see 
Kilian  and  Lory,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  Feb.  3,  1906,  et  passim  ;  this  is  the  Breche  du 
Telegraphe  ;  Kilian  has  shown  that  it  is  of  Liassic  age. 


CH.  V] 


LEPONTIJSTE  SHEETS 


15B 


for  doubt  that  in  the  Rhaeticon  this  sheet  is  covered  by  the  next  succeeding^ 
sheet,  that  of  the  green-rocks.  This  series  was  observed  by  Lorenz  in  the 
Falkniss  ^,  and  the  observation  was  confirmed  by  Seidlitz,  who  traced 
the  series  over  a  long  distance  ^.  Further  south,  in  the  Plessur  range, 
according  to  Hoek,  the  breccia  sheet  gradually  disappears  ^. 

3.  The  sheet  of  the  green-rocks  (Ophiolitic,  Rhaetic,  Vindelician  sheet ; 
Steinmann).  This  is  not  entirely  absent  in  the  west,  but  in  the  east  it 
attains  a  much  greater  importance.  Steinmann  has  devoted  much  attention 
to  it.  The  green-rocks  (gabbro,  serpentine,  diabase),  are  frequently  asso- 
ciated with  deep-sea  Radiolarian  chert  of  middle  or  upper  Jurassic  age: 
in  addition  Aptychus  limestone,  Cretaceous  breccias,  as  well  as  red  Senonian, 
and  a  peculiar  form  of  Flysch  are  met  with.  The  green- rocks  are  often 
broken  up  into  great  blocks  near  the  overthrusts,  or  converted  into  green 
schists.  The  Aptychus  limestones  may  be  regarded  as  indications  of 
comparatively  deep  sea. 

According  to  Kilian  and  Lory,  the  Lepontine  sheets  are  sometimes 
accompanied  by  very  large  fragments  of  gneiss,  or  granite,  torn  from 
the  basement 

The  facts  seem  to  stand  in  accordance  with  the  view  that  the  breccia 
sheet  has  been  derived  from  the  Brian9onnais,  on  the  east  side  of  the 
Mont  Blanc  zone,  and  that  as  a  rule  the  higher-lying  sheet  has  been  carried 
furthest.  This  is  true  of  the  third  sheet,  in  so  far  as  the  Piedmontese 
green-rocks  occur  in  it.  The  oft-repeated  view,  supported  in  particular  by 
Lugeon  and  Argand,  that  they  must  be  connected  with  the  outermost 
Dinaric  boundary,  that  is  with  the  limestone  which  runs  along  the  zone  of 
Ivrea,  may  be  compared  with  the  theory  advanced  on  an  earlier  page  as  to 
the  derivation  of  the  Dent  Blanche  from  this  zone.    It  is  possible  that  this 

1  T.  Lorenz  in  Steinmann,  Ber.  naturf.  Ges.  Freiburg,  1906,  XVI,  p.  37,  note. 

^  W.  V.  Seidlitz,  Geologische  Untersuchungen  im  Ost-Rliatikon :  Ber.  naturf.  Ges. 
Freiburg,  1906,  XVI,  pp.  232-366. 

^  H.  Hoek,  Das  zentralische  Plessurgebiet ;  Ber.  naturf.  Ges.  Freiburg,  1906,  XVI,^ 
pp.  367-448,  map.  Here  there  appears  a  Klippen  sheet ;  breccia  sheet  only  indicated  ; 
sheet  of  green-rocks :  then  an  '  intermediate  fragment  of  Parpan '  consisting  of  East 
Alpine  beds  from  the  Raibl  stage  upwards,  and  closing  with  radiolarian  beds  (but  above 
are  green-rocks),  and  over  this  the  normal  East  Alpine  series.  Jaccard  (Bull.  lab.  geol. 
Lausanne,  1906,  VII,  15  pp.)  states  that  in  the  Freiburg  Alps  the  green  boulders  occur 
beneath  the  breccia  sheet.  According  to  Hoek  this  is  also  the  case  near  Iberg  (Centralbl. 
f.  Min.,  1906,  pp.  461-465).  It  is  impossible  to  discover  whether  elongated  folds  are 
present. 

*  G.  Steinmann,  Die  geologische  Bedeutung  der  Tiefseebildungen  und  der  ophio- 
lithischen  Eruptiva ;  Ber.  naturf.  Ges.  Freiburg,  1905,  XVI,  pp.  44-65.  The  objection, 
that  the  Ammonites  were  bottom-dwelling  animals,  does  not  seem  to  me  quite  convinc- 
ing ;  cf.  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1859,  X,  Verh.,  p.  5  ;  for  the  frequent  occurrence  of 
Radiolaria  in  Aptychus  limestone,  H.  Rust,  Radiolarien  des  Jura,  Palaeontographica, 
1885,  XXXI,  p.  274 ;  W.  Kilian  and  P.  Lory,  C.  R.  des  Collaborateurs,  Bull.  serv.  carte 
geoL  (1905),  1906,  pp.  452-456. 


154 


THE  EAST  ALPS 


[PAKT  V 


question  can  never  be  settled  by  direct  observation.  The  connexion  with 
the  south  is  destroyed,  yet  some  connexion  must  certainly  have  once 
existed  between  the  green-rocks.  And  since  the  remains  of  the  sheets  form 
a  chain  extending  from  the  lake  of  Geneva  to  the  Rhaeticon,  the  connecting 
rocks  must  once  have  covered  a  large  part  of  Switzerland ;  even  although 
a  part  of  the  sheets  may  have  been  carried  further  towards  the  exterior  by 
later  movements  of  the  great  chain. 

Thus,  the  whole  interval  extending  from  the  Piedmontese  Alps  up 
to  the  sheets  and  the  Rhaeticon  becomes  a  window,  disturbed  by  later 
movements. 

We  now  enter  the  East  Alps. 

^elvretta.  The  Prattigau  is  a  green  land  of  mountains  and  hills,  bounded 
on  the  north  by  the  steep  walls  of  the  Rhaeticon,  and  on  the  east  by  the 
outermost  edge  of  the  Selvretta.  We  have  already  briefly  referred  to  this 
region  (I,  p.  139,  lig.  15).  The  following  description  will  show  what  a  great 
advance  has  since  been  made,  thanks  to  the  labours  of  contemporary 
geologists,  in  our  knowledge  and  interpretation  of  the  facts. 

Starting  from  the  Rhone  Valley,  near  Sion  and  Visp,  that  important 
trend-line  which  is  marked  in  the  west  by  the  inner  Flysch  zone,  extends 
across  the  Nufenen  pass,  the  Bedretto  Valley,  Airolo  and  Scopi.  Between 
the  St.  Gotthard  and  the  Adula  it  reaches,  as  an  open  syncline  or  root,  the 
mountain-land  which  separates  the  vorder  Rhine  from  the  upper  Rhine. 
This  mountain-land  joins  on  to  the  Prattigau  above  Chur. 

It  is  a  vast  region  of  Biindner  schists,  a  diversified  formation  which  here 
closely  resembles  the  Flysch.  Nearly  all  the  fossils  obtained  from  it  in 
the  Prattigau  point  to  the  lower  Cretaceous. 

As  we  approach  the  foot  of  the  Rhaeticon,  or  the  Selvretta,  we  come  at 
once  on  to  the  Lepontine  sheets.  At  Partnum,  in  the  reentrant  angle 
between  the  slopes  running  to  west  and  south,  we  see,  even  from  a  distance, 
the  white  walls  of  the  Tithonian,  which  dip  beneath  the  crystalline  rocks 
of  the  East  Alps  ^.  Far  away,  near  Arosa,  on  the  west  side  of  the  Julier 
pass,  in  Oberhalbstein,  then  below  Gravesalvas  on  the  Silser  See,  and  as  far 
as  Silva  plana,  or  even  beyond,  we  may  trace  larger  or  smaller  parts  of  the 
Lepontine  series,  or  at  least  its  uppermost  member,  represented  by  a  band 
of  serpentine,  and  at  the  same  time  we  observe  the  plunge  of  the  sheets 
beneath  the  East  Alps. 

Starting  from  Partnum  we  will  continue  on  our  way  eastwards  towards 
the  interior  of  the  Selvretta.    The  mountains  increase  in  height,  many 

^  There  are  two  divergent  descriptions  of  this  region,  one  by  W.  v.  Seidlitz  (see  note  2, 
p.  153),  and  the  other  by  0.  Ampferer  in  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1907,  pp.  192-200. 
Ampferer's  section  also  marks  the  Tithonian,  Verrucano,  Fucoidal  Flysch  and  other  rocks 
dipping  beneath  the  crystalline  rocks  of  the  East  Alps.  Tithonian  and  red  Senonian 
also  occur  in  Gargellen  exposed  in  a  window  beneath  gneiss. 


CH.  V] 


WINDOW  OF  THE  INN 


155 


summits  exceeding  3,000  meters ;  ice-fields  broaden  out  before  us ;  we  are 
surrounded  by  hornblende  schist  and  gneiss  with  a  nearly  east-and-west 
strike.  At  last,  when  we  have  travelled  from  20  to  25  kilometers  and 
crossed  the  narrowest  and  highest  part  of  the  Selvretta,  the  valley  of  the 
upper  Inn  opens  up  before  us,  and  here  again,  on  the  east  of  the  Selvretta, 
as  near  Patnum,  on  the  west,  the  Lepontine  sheets  crop  out  from  beneath 
the  gneiss. 

From  Ardetz  downwards  to  below  Prutz,  a  distance  of  54  kilometers, 
the  Inn  flows  in  the  Blindner  schists.  These  are  covered  in  the  south  part 
of  this  tract  by  the  other  Lepontine  sheets.  Traces  of  them  extend  to 
Prutz.  Above  them  in  the  east  lies  the  gneiss  of  the  Oetzthal  Alps,  corre- 
sponding to  the  gneiss  of  the  Selvretta  on  the  west.  Both  surround  a  great 
window.  Owing  to  the  presence  of  the  green-rocks  the  whole  structure  pre- 
sents a  remarkable  resemblance  to  the  window  of  the  Paring  (Ao-,  p.  18)  ^. 

Near  the  frontier  of  Tyrol  a  very  remarkable  phenomenon  occurs.  The 
Bundner  schists  at  the  bottom  of  the  window  begin  to  arch  up  in  a  great 
anticline.  The  green-rocks  are  carried  high  up  by  the  anticline ;  a  great 
group  of  mountains,  chiefly  formed  of  Biindner  schists,  cut  through  by  the 
canon  of  Finstermiinz  and  crowned  by  the  green-rocks,  now  fills  the 
window,  and  high  above  its  margin  on  the  summit  of  the  Stammer  Spitz 
(3,256  meters),  Paulcke  was  still  able  to  perceive,  overlying  the  green-rocks, 
a  patch  of  East  Alpine  Trias. 

This  anticline  does  not  follow  the  strike  of  the  Alps,  but  that  of  the 
window,  as  though  a  late  and  general  movement  of  the  mountains  had 
attained  expression  in  that  part  of  the  Alps  which  is  least  heavily 
burdened  ^.  Theobald  mentions  two  or  three  of  these  saddles  as  occurring 
side  by  side  in  the  south.  To  the  north  also,  in  the  Kaunser  valley, 
near  Prutz,  an  anticline  occurs  in  the  Biindner  schists. 

The  window  is  closed  on  the  south  and  north.  In  the  south  the  gneiss 
of  the  Selvretta  crosses  the  Inn,  through  the  Piz  Nuna,  and  continues  across 
a  great  thrust-plane  to  the  spurs  of  the  Oetz  gneiss  ^.  In  the  north,  above 
Landeck,  the  ancient  rocks  coming  from  the  Arlberg  join  those  of  Oetz 
without  any  perceptible  line  of  demarcation. 

^  The  works  of  Steinmann,  Lorenz,  and  Rothpletz  relating  to  the  window  are  enume- 
rated in  E.  Suess,  Ueber  das  Innthal  bei  Nauders,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1905,  CXIV, 
pp.  699-735.  To  these  may  be  added  :  W.  Schiller,  Geologische  Untersuchungen  in 
Unter-Engadin,  II,  Piz  Lad  Gruppe  ;  Ber.  naturf.  Ges.  Freiburg,  1906,XYI,pp.  108-163, 
map  ;  and  K.  Zoeppritz,  Geologische  Untersuchungen  in  Ober-Engadin  zwischen  Albula- 
Pass  und  Livigno,  tom.  cit.,  pp.  164-231,  map  ;  for  the  green-rocks  see  G.  Steinmann, 
op.  cit.,  1905,  XVI,  pp.  44-65. 

2  Das  Innthal  bei  Nauders,  p.  725. 

^  W.  Schiller,  Lischannagruppe,  Ber.  naturf,  Ges.  Freiburg,  1904,  XIV,  pp.  107-180, 
map  ;  and  Piz  Lad,  op.  cit.,  1906,  XVI,  pp.  108-163,  maps  ;  A,  Spitz  and  G.  Dyrenfurth, 
Anzeiger  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  Nov,  7,  1907,  pp.  424-427. 


156 


THE  EAST  ALPS 


[part  V 


Proceeding  towards  the  north  we  reach  the  broad  limestone  zone  of  the 
East  Alps ;  we  cross  it  and  see  before  us  the  Flysch  zone,  which  forms  the 
continuation  of  the  Helvetian  zone.  In  the  basin  of  the  Iller,  however, 
near  Hindelang,  Oberstdorf,  and  other  localities,  unexpected  relations  make 
their  appearance  along  the  boundary  between  the  limestone  zone  and  the 
Flysch.  Mica-schist,  diorite,  and  quartzite  occur  in  such  development  that 
Giimbel  had  no  doubt  as  to  actual  occurrence  in  this  region  of  ancient 
crystalline  schists^.  The  green-rocks  are  also  present  here,  and  Lorenz 
has  observed  the  red  Senonian  {conches  rouges)  ^.  A  map  published  by 
Steinmann,  showing  the  distribution  of  the  green-rocks,  marks  them  on 
the  Iller  to  the  north,  in  the  Rhaeticon  to  the  west,  and  as  far  as  the  upper- 
most part  of  the  Engadine  to  the  south,  as  well  as  on  both  sides  of  the 
window  ^. 

All  within  the  enclosed  space,  comprising  Davos,  Selvretta,  Arlberg,  and 
the  Limestone  Alps,  floats  ujjon  Lepontine  sheets.  This  is  a  western  frag- 
ment of  the  East  Alpine  sheet.  The  distance  from  the  Silser  lake  in  the 
Engadine,  to  Oberstdorf  in  Bavaria,  amounts  to  more  than  120  kilometers. 
At  Oberstdorf,  the  East  Alpine  sheet  rests  on  the  Lepontine  belt,  and  below 
this  the  Flysch  represents  the  Helvetian  series. 

Rothpletz,  who  has  done  zealous  service  by  his  constant  endeavour 
towards  enlarged  conceptions,  concludes  that  the  entire  north  border  of  the 
East  Alps  must  have  shifted  its  position  (*  sich  verlagert ')  during  the 
over-thrusting 

In  the  Chablais,  the  Freiburg  Alps,  and  the  whole  region  of  the  Lepon- 
tine sheets  so  far  described,  we  have  been  dealing  only  with  sedimentary 
series  of  trifling  thickness,  and  accompanied  at  most  by  fragments  of  the 
ancient  crystalline  basement ;  in  the  present  case,  however,  the  thrust- 
plane  reaches  far  deeper,  and  whole  mountains  of  gneiss  and  granite  have 
been  moved  towards  the  north.  In  the  north,  however,  the  gneiss  is 
absent  from  the  basement,  probably  because  the  thrust-plane  was  directed 
obliquely  upwards. 

The  Alps  on  the  Mur.  The  window  of  the  Inn  is  one  of  the  great 
interruptions  which  divide  up  the  vast  sheet  of  the  East  Alps.  The  Tauern 
appears  as  a  second  and  still  larger  window.  Even  in  the  infancy  of 
systematic  investigation,  more  than  fifty  years  ago,  and  long  before  the 
idea  of  the  symmetrical  structure  of  the  Alps  had  been  abandoned,  it  was 
observed  that  the  so-called  Central  chain  comprised  two  distinct  parts,  the 

^  W.  Giimbel,  Das  Auftreten  krystallinischer  Schiefer  im  Rettenschwanger  Thale  bei 
Hindelang,  Geogn.  Jahresh.,  Miinchen,  1888,  I,  pp.  170-172 ;  for  a  petrographical 
description,  Reiser  in  Tschcrmak,  Min.  Mitth.,  1889,  X,  pp.  500-548. 

^  T.  Lorenz,  in  Steinmann,  Ber.  naturf.  Ges.  Freiburg,  1906,  XVI,  p.  71. 

^  G.  Steinmann,  Ber.  naturf.  Ges.  Freiburg,  1900,  X,  p.  258,  pi.  I. 

*  A.  Rothpletz,  Geologische  Alpenforschungen,  8vo,  Miinchen,  I,  1900,  p.  163. 


CH.  V] 


THE  MUE  ALPS 


157 


lofty  Tauern,  formed  of  a  mass  of  central  gneiss  with  a  mantle  of  schist, 
and  in  contrast  to  these,  a  broad  region,  especially  extensive  in  Styria, 
which  contains  no  central  gneiss  and  does  not  present  a  clear,  or  to  any 
extent  concentric  structure. 

The  rocks  of  the  Tauern  are  repeated,  however,  towards  the  east ;  they 
are  still  clearly  visible  on  the  Semmering,  and  south-west  of  the  Tauern  we 
are  called  on  to  decide,  not  only  as  to  the  age  of  the  marble  range  of  Laas, 
but  also  as  to  a  possible  sub-division  of  the  great  East  Alpine  sheet.  It  is 
supposed  to  be  divided  obliquely  along  its  whole  length  from  south-west 
to  north-east,  as  far  as  the  Adda,  into  two  moieties,  more  or  less  clearly 
defined. 

It  will  be  easier  to  form  a  general  conception  of  the  details  enumerated 
if  we  call  attention  to  the  following  fact.  All  the  parts  hitherto  mentioned 
— the  Selvretta,  Arlberg,  Limestone  Alps,  and  Oetz,  belong  to  the  northern 
moiety,  which  is  broadest  in  the  west.  The  southern  moiety  attains  its 
greatest  breadth  in  the  east:  we  will  approach  it  from  the  Hungarian 
plain. — 

At  a  considerable  distance  from  the  mountains,  islands  of  ancient  for- 
mations rise  from  the  plain.  They  begin  in  the  south,  east  of  Gleichenberg, 
and  are  continued  north-north- east  to  the  Gunser  Berg,  and  then  north  to 
the  western  shore  of  the  Neusiedler  See  ^.  They  are  accompanied  by  recent 
eruptive  rocks  and  a  chain  of  carbonated  springs,  which  likewise  extend 
to  the  west  side  of  the  lake. 

The  rock  which  forms  these  islands  is  mica-schist,  with  a  little  gneiss. 
A  long  band  of  phyllite  sometimes  graphitic,  calcareous  mica-schist,  chlorite 
schist,  and  serpentine,  striking  to  the  north,  enters  the  Alps  near  Bernstein, 
and  may  be  followed  into  the  Rosalien  range.  K.  Hofmann  has  found 
fossils  near  Khofidis  (west  of  Steinamanger)  which  Toula  recognized  as 
Devonian  ^. 

The  contour  of  the  mountains  does  not  correspond  with  the  strike,  but 
is  produced  by  bay-like  subsidences  (I,  135,  313,  351). 

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  mountains  as  they  present  themselves  near 
Gratz. 

We  find  ourselves  surrounded  by  wooded  mountains  of  moderate  height. 
They  are  separated  by  broad,  well-populated  valleys,  of  a  fairly  gentle 
slope,  and  we  might  almost  imagine  we  were  in  a  Variscan  region.  Similar 

1  F.  Stoliczka,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1862,  XII,  p.  114,  and  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol. 
Reichsanst.,  1863,  XIII,  pp.  1-25  ;  F.  von  Hauer's  Uebersiclitskarte  der  osteneicbischen 
Monarchie  (1:576,000)  represents  the  greater  part  of  this  section.  Diener  (Bau  und 
Bild,  pp.  410-474)  has  combined  the  observations  so  far  made  on  the  Mur  Alps  in  an 
admirable  summary. 

^  Corals  and  Crinoid  stalks,  K.  Hofmann,  Verh.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1877,  p.  16  ; 
Toula,  op.  cit.,  1878,  pp.  47-52.  I  have  observed  a  small  boss  of  dark  Crinoidal  limestone 
east  of  Rechnitz. 


158 


THE  EAST  ALPS 


[part  V 


mountains  extend  far  to  the  west.  They  form  the  fluvial  region  of  the 
Mur,  and  for  this  reason  we  have  named  them  the  Mur  Alps. 

Hoernes,  Penecke,  and  Heritsch  have  shown  that  Silurian,  of  a  very 
homogeneous  character,  is  present  near  Gratz,  and  above  it  lies  the  Devonian 
in  a  rich  and  almost  uninterrupted  development,  extending  up  to  and 
including  the  Clymenia  limestone.  This  series  rests  unconformably  on 
older  rocks;  the  lowest  member  (Grenzphyllite)  has  furnished  Crinoids. 
The  series  is  thrown  into  several  broad  folds,  striking  north-east,  and  cut 
through  by  faults  ^.  The  resemblance  of  this  Devonian  to  that  which 
occurs  outside  the  Alps  is  so  great  that  Stur  inferred  the  existence  of  some 
connexion  with  the  Devonian  of  the  Sudetes  ^. 

In  addition,  a  transgression  of  upper  Cretaceous  occurs  in  the  Kainach, 
west  of  Gratz.  It  presents  the  southern  (Gosau)  facies,  and  its  beds,  like 
the  preceding,  are  thrown  into  gentle  folds  with  a  north-east  strike. 

Further  west,  as  the  mountains  grow  higher,  mica-schist  and  gneiss 
make  their  appearance ;  the  folds  become  closer,  and  sericitic  rocks  and 
marmorized  limestones  are  more  frequent,  but  nevertheless  we  are  still  in 
the  same  tectonic  branch  of  the  Alps.  Some  rocks  characteristic  of  the 
neighbourhood  of  Gratz,  such  as  the  green  Semriach  schist  (Silurian,  lower 
than  the  horizon  of  Pentamerus  pelagicus,  Barr.),  are  known  to  occur  far 
to  the  west.  Toula  had  the  good  fortune  to  find  traces  of  still  recognizable 
middle  Devonian  on  the  Grebenze  (between  Murau  and  Neumarkt,  upper 
Mur  valley) ;  and  from  Geyer's  works  we  may  infer  that  the  same  deposits 
occur  to  the  north,  as  far  as  Ober-Wolz ;  to  the  west,  a  little  beyond  Murau; 
and  to  the  south,  as  far  as  the  neighbourhood  of  Friesach  ^.  This  indicates 
a  prolongation  of  the  Devonian  to  within  about  100  kilometers  west 
of  Gratz. 

On  the  Stangalp,  south-west  of  the  Devonian  mountains  just  mentioned, 
the  Palaeozoic  series  is  differently  represented,  the  existence  of  another 
tectonic  element  being  thus  indicated.  Mica-schist,  some  gneiss,  and  then 
limestone  of  unknown  age  are  covered  by  anthracite,  containing  the  flora 
of  the  middle  or  upper  Carboniferous 

^  K.  A.  Penecke,  Das  Grazer  Devon,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1893,  XLIII, 
pp.  567-616  ;  F.  Heritsch,  Studien  liber  die  Tektonik  der  palaeozoischen  Ablagerungen 
des  Grazer  Beckens,  Mitth.  naturw.  Ver.  fur  Steiermark,  1905,  pp.  170-224,  and  Bemer- 
kungen  zur  Geologie  des  Grazer  Beckens,  op.  cit.,  1906,  pp.  96-184  ;  Vacek,  Verb.  k.  k  . 
geol.  Reicbsanst.,  1906,  pp.  203-238,  arrives  at  different  conclusions. 

2  D.  Stur,  Geologie  der  Steiermark,  8vo,  Gratz,  1871,  p.  122  et  passim. 

3  F.  Toula,  Die  Kalke  der  Grebenze,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1893,  II,  pp.  169-173.  G.  Geyer 
regards  these  limestones  as  Silurian,  because  tbey  lie  beneath  tbe  schists  of  Semriach  ; 
Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1893,  pp.  406-415  :  Toula's  palaeontological  arguments  seem 
to  me  conclusive. 

"  V.  Pichler,  Die  Umgebung  von  Turrach  in  Ober-Steyermark,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  Reichsanst., 
1858,  IX,  pp.  185-228 ;  D.  Stur,  op.  cit.,  1883,  XXXIII,  p.  194  ;  F.  v.  Kerner,  Verb.  k.  k. 
geol.  Reichsanst.,  1895,  p.  324  ;  W.  A.  Humphrey,  Ueber  einige  Erzlagerstatten  in  der 
Umgebung  der  Stangalpe,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1905,  LV,  pp.  349-368,  map. 


cH.v]     TRANSGRESSIONS  IN  THE  GURKTHAL  159 

Let  us  next  direct  our  steps  to  the  south. 

The  fact  which  first  attracts  our  attention  is  the  occurrence  of  fossili- 
ferous  marine  beds  of  the  second  Mediterranean  stage  in  the  Lavant  valley, 
which  they  occupy  as  far  as  the  west  side  of  the  Kor  Alp,  so  that  this 
broad  valley  must  be  of  great  age  ^. 

West  of  this  locality  and  to  the  north  of  Volkermarkt  and  Klagenfurt 
we  come  upon  patches  of  North  Alpine  Trias,  let  down  into  the  ancient 
formations ;  these  are  parts  of  the  long  Trias  band  of  the  Drau  ^.  Over 
the  Trias  lie  the  Gosau  beds,  and  over  these  again,  encroaching  on  the  older 
rocks  towards  the  north,  the  Eocene.  This  consists  of  variegated  clay,  coal 
accompanied  by  Ostrea  Roncana,  Natica  Vulcanic  &c.,  correlated  by 
Oppenheim  with  the  beds  of  Ai  Pulli  near  Valdagno,  and  finally  Nummu- 
litic  beds.    The  whole  series  is  fairly  well  folded. 

These  diversified  fossiliferous  transgressive  beds  render  it  improbable 
that  any  other  great  mountain  fragment,  such  as  the  Dinarides,  has  been 
thrust  over  the  middle  part  of  the  Mur  Alps,  which  are  here  more  than  100 
kilometers  broad.  They  also  show  that  the  long  zone  of  North  Alpine 
Trias,  which  follows  the  Dinaric  boundary  in  the  north  and  occurs  in  the 
valley  of  the  Gurk,  47  kilometers  north  of  this  boundary,  also  belongs  to 
the  Mur  Alps.  In  the  Gail  valley  a  long  dome  of  mica-schist  and  gneiss 
crops  out  between  the  Trias  and  the  Dinarides ;  this  also  belongs  to  the 
Mur  Alps.  But  the  lofty  mountains  which  rise  to  the  north  of  the  Trias 
of  the  Gail  valley,  such  as  the  Kreuzech  to  the  south  of  the  Tauern,  were 
recognized  many  years  ago  as  different  from  the  rocks  of  the  Tauern ;  they 
are  a  western  continuation  of  the  Mur  Alps.  The  subsidences  of  the  Trias 
near  the  Lienz  repeat  on  a  large  scale  the  subsidences  on  the  Gurk. 

This  southern  part  of  the  East  Alpine  sheet  thus  comprises : — the 
Devonian  mountains  of  Gratz  and  the  whole  region  from  the  Bacher  range 
to  the  Semmering,  the  Mur  Alps,  Kreuzeck,  the  Trias  on  the  Drau,  ex- 
tending to  Lienz  and  beyond,  also  the  narrow  range  of  ancient  rocks 
between  this  Trias  and  the  Dinarides.  One  might  suppose  that  the  Palaeo- 
zoic beds  of  the  Mur  Alps  are  directly  connected  with  those  on  which  the 
northern  Limestone  Alps  are  superposed,  and  that  the  Trias  patches  of  the 
south  with  their  northern  facies  are  directly  continued  into  the  north 
Limestone  Alps.    But  this  is  not  the  case. 

Let  us  once  more  begin  our  survey  in  the  east. 

1  Examples  of  this  abundant  fauna  are  given  by  H.  Hofer,  Das  Miocan  von  Mulildorf, 
Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1892,  XLIII,  pp.  311-324. 

2  H.  Hofer,  Die  geologischen  Verhaltnisse  der  St.  Pauler  Berge,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss. 
Wien,  1894,  CIII,  pp.  467-487  ;  K.  A.  Redlich,  Geologie  des  Gurk-  und  Gortschitzthales, 
Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1905,  LV,  pp.  329-348,  map ;  for  the  correspondence  with 
the  north  in  particular,  A.  Bittner,  Die  Trias  von  Eberstein  und  Polling,  op.  cit..  1889, 
XXXIX,  pp.  483-488. 


160  THE  EAST  ALPS  [party 

On  the  Semmering  unexpected  relations  already  make  their  appearance. 
In  the  zone  traversed  by  the  railway  there  is  a  general  dip  to  the  north. 
Approaching  from  the  south  we  first  encounter  crystalline  rocks,  and  then 
a  zone  of  Trias,  the  development  of  which  is  different  from  that  of  the 
adjacent  Limestone  Alps  of  the  north ;  the  Trias  dips  to  the  north  beneath 
a  zone  of  graphite-bearing  schists  and  quartzite,  in  which  Toula  has 
discovered  a  Carboniferous  flora ;  these  dip  in  turn  beneath  a  zone  of  schist 
of  undetermined  age,  and  this  finally  forms  the  basement  of  the  Trias  of 
the  northern  Limestone  Alps.  Thus  two  zones  of  Trias  are  present,  the 
Trias  of  the  Semmering  and  the  typical  East  Alpine  Trias  of  the  Limestone 
Alps ;  they  are  separated  from  one  another  by  limnic  Carboniferous  and 
various  schists.  Since  all  the  beds  dip  to  the  north,  the  exotic  Trias  is 
inclined  beneath  the  normal  Trias  of  the  Limestone  Alps.  In  the  exotic 
Trias,  Toula 's  investigations  enable  us  to  distinguish  the  following: — 
quartzite  and  sericite  schists  with  gypsum,  thick  light-coloured  Gyroporella 
limestone,  the  Swabian  facies  of  the  Rhaetic  stage,  and  dark  limestone  with 
abundant  Pentacrinus  ^. 

The  exotic  Trias  disappears  towards  the  west,  while  the  limnic  Carboni- 
ferous, which  according  to  Stur  contains  the  flora  of  Schatzlar,  still 
persists. 

It  has  been  shown  by  Stur,  and  in  still  greater  detail  by  Vacek,  that 
a  iDand  of  graphite-bearing  schists,  similar  to  that  just  mentioned,  and 
sometimes  containing  similar  plant-remains,  proceeds  from  the  Semmering 
and  extends  towards  the  south-west  to  St.  Michael,  near  Leoben,  and 
thence  to  the  north-west,  through  the  valleys  of  the  Liesing  and  the  Palten 
to  Irdning  on  the  Enns,  i.e.  for  a  distance  of  150  kilometers  2.  To  the 
south  its  basement  is  formed  of  gneiss  and  ancient  schists.  The  beds 
where  they  have  been  observed  in  detail  are  seen  to  dip  to  the  north-east 
and  north-west  beneath  the  older  zone  of  rocks  which  follows  on  the 
north  ^ ;  but  to  Heritsch  is  due  the  merit  of  having  shown  that  in  the  Sunk 

^  F.  Toula,  Geologisclie  Untersuchungen  in  der  *  Grauwackenzone '  der  nordostlichen 
Alpen,  Denkschr.  k.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1885,  L,  pp.  121-184,  map ;  Die  Semmering- 
kalke,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1899,  II,  pp.  153-163,  and  Fiihrer  zum  Congress,  1893,  Exkursion  auf 
dem  Semmering,  50  i^p.,  map. 

2  D.  Stur,  Funde  von  untercarbonisclien  Pflanzen  der  Schatzlar- Schichten  am  Nord- 
Rande  der  Centralkette,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  Reichsanst.,  1883,  XXXIII,  pp.  189-206;  H.  Baron 
von  Foullon,  Ueber  die  petrographische  BeschafFenbeit,  &c.,  tom.  cit.,  pp.  207-252  ; 
M.  Vacek  in  many  places,  and  in  particular  in  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reicbsanst.,  1884,  p.  390, 
1886,  p.  71,  and  1893,  p.  403  ;  furtber  in  C.  von  Jobn,  Ueber  steiriscbe  Grapbite,  op.  cit., 
1892,  pp.  413  418  ;  also  R.  Hoernes,  Metamorpbismus  der  obersteierischen  Grapbitlager, 
Mittb.  naturw.  Ver.  Steiermark,  1905,  pp.  90-131.  Tbe  frequently  mentioned  Blaseneck- 
jpieiss  is  shown  by  recent  research  to  be  sericitic  quartzite  witb  a  little  felspar. 

3  For  example,  M.  Vacek,  map  in  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reicbsanst.,  1895,  p.  299;  Erz- 
lagerstiltto  von  Kallwang  ;  K.  A.Redlicb,  Berg-  und  Hiittenm.  Jabrb.  d.  Montanlebranst. 
Leobon  und  Przibram,  pi.  I,  map  and  sections  of  tbe  Radmer  Coppermine. 


CH.V]  THE  SEMMEEING  161 

(upper  Styria)  this  graphite-bearing  zone  is  overlain  by  the  lower  Carboni- 
ferous with  Froductus  giganteus'^.  The  East  Alpine  series — Silurian, 
Devonian,  lower  Carboniferous,  and  Trias — rests  upon  the  limnic  middle 
or  upper  Carboniferous.  This  is  an  important  step  in  the  analysis  of  the 
East  Alps. 

The  lower  Palaeozoic  series  crops  out  as  far  as  eastern  Tyrol  at  the 
south  foot  of  the  north  Limestone  Alps.  It  forms  the  basement  of  the 
north  Limestone  Alps  which  rest  upon  it  unconformably,  although  to 
l)egin  with  they  are  in  intimate  association  with  Verrucano  or  Werfen 
shales.  It  is  absent  from  the  Semmering  section  and  in  western  Tyrol. 
But  throughout  the  whole  tract  from  the  Rhine  to  Gloggnitz,  a  distance  of 
480  kilometers,  no  trace  of  graphite  or  limnic  Carboniferous  has  ever  been 
observed  beneath  the  Trias. 

The  limnic  Carboniferous  is  everywhere  distinguished  from  the  typical 
East  Alpine  series.  On  the  Semmering  it  rests  upon  (or  at  least  north  of) 
the  exotic  Trias ;  on  the  Brenner  we  again  find  it  associated  with  exotic 
Trias ;  in  the  long  band  of  upper  Styria  it  is  not  accompanied  by  Mesozoic 
beds.  In  the  south,  beneath  the  Trias  of  the  Drau  range,  no  Palaeozoic 
formations  whatever  are  to  be  seen,  although  they  are  so  largely  developed 
in  the  adjacent  Carnic  mountains  (Dinarides). 

In  this  way  two  complexes  may  be  distinguished:  I,  the  crystalline 
basement,  marine  Silurian — Devonian — lower  Carboniferous,  and  the  whole 
of  the  East  Alpine  Trias ;  and  II,  crystalline  basement  and  limnic  Carboni- 
ferous of  the  Schatzlar  stage  (according  to  another  determination,  Ottweil 
flora). 

The  distribution  of  I  and  II  is  very  remarkable.  The  whole  of  the 
north  is  occupied  by  I  (north  Limestone  Alps,  and  their  southern  lower 
Palaeozoic  belt  =  the  northern  moiety  of  the  East  Alpine  sheet).  South  of 
this  follows  II  (Semmering,  upper  Styrian  graphite  band,  Turrach,  and  the 
Brenner).  South  of  this  again  follow  the  representatives  of  I  (Silurian  and 
Devonian  of  Gratz,  extending  down  to  the  Grebenze),  then  the  north  Alpine 
Trias  of  the  Drau  range  from  the  Bacher  to  the  Brenner  (  =  southern  moiety 
of  the  East  Alpine  sheet). 

Oetz  Ortler.  On  the  Enns,  above  Irdming,  the  belt  of  lower  Palaeozoic 
is  present,  though  but  little  developed  ;  then  above  Schladming  a  narrow 
band  of  Trias  limestone  makes  its  appearance  with  a  divergent  strike  to 
the  east-north-east ;  this  proceeds  from  the  Limestone  Alps  and  seems  to  be 
let  down  into  the  ancient  schist.  It  crosses  almost  the  whole  of  the  schist 
zone ;  Mojsisovics  named  it  the  Handling  band. 

Overlying  this  band  of  Trias,  GUmbel  discovered  quartz  sandstone  with 
Nummulites.    The  band  is  cut  through  by  the  Enns.    South  of  Radstatt. 


1  F.  Heritsch,  Anzeig.  k.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  March  21,  1907. 

SOLLAS  IV  M 


162 


THE  EAST  ALPS 


[PAKT  V 


clay  sets  in,  containing  splinters  and  thin  seams  of  lustrous  coal  (Glanz- 
kohle),  which  dips  towards  the  north-west  beneath  the  high  mountains; 
a  little  remnant  of  these  coal-bearing  beds,  continuing  the  strike  to  the 
east-north-east,  has  been  preserved,  900  meters  higher  up,  on  the  Stoder 
Alpe  (1,700  meters)  which  is  a  foothill  of  the  neighbouring  Dachstein  range. 
It  seems  as  though  the  southern  border  of  the  Limestone  zone,  elsewhere  so 
continuous,  is  here  cut  through  by  an  oblique  dislocation  ^. 

These  Tertiary  outliers  are  quite  isolated.  The  Eocene  on  the  north 
border  of  the  Alps  is  55  to  60  kilometers  distant,  that  of  the  Gurk  valley 
almost  100  kilometers ;  nowhere  but  on  the  Gurk  are  they  accompanied  by 
coal-bearing  beds,  and  there,  as  on  the  Enns,  they  rest  on  East  Alpine,  not 
exotic,  Trias. 

Close  to  the  south  foot  of  the  Steinerne  Meer  (Trias),  upper  Silurian 
fossils  are  found  in  slate;  then  come  thick  limestones  and  dolomites  in 
which,  near  Kitzbuhel,  Ohnesorge  found  upper  Silurian  and  Devonian 
fossils.  Here  we  have  a  continuation  of  the  Silurian-Devonian  band  of  north 
Styria.  It  grows  narrower,  the  beds  become  steeply  upturned,  and  finally 
it  disappears  near  Schwaz,  on  the  Inn,  24  kilometers  below  Innsbruck  ^. 

This  band  is  bordered  on  the  south  by  ancient  phyllite,  upon  which  it 
rests  directly.  Through  the  phyllite  there  runs  across  the  Brennerstrasse 
a  tongue  of  gneiss  mica-schist,  14  kilometers  in  length,  which  is  an  eastern 
prolongation  of  the  ancient  range  of  Stubai.  In  this  way  the  ancient 
rocks  of  the  Mur  Alps,  east  of  the  Tauern,  are  connected,  south  of  Innsbruck, 
with  those  of  Stubai  in  the  west. 

The  large  and  ancient  mass  of  Stubai  and  Oetz  is  thus  older  than  the 
Silurian.  It  surrounds  the  west  of  the  Tauern,  and  just  as  it  is  connected 
south  of  Innsbruck  with  the  Mur  Alps  in  the  east,  so  south  of  Landeck  it 
is  connected  with  the  Selvretta  in  the  west,  and  thus  forms  the  frame  of 
the  window  on  the  Inn. 

As  the  ancient  rocks  of  Oetz  are  covered  by  the  Limestone  zone  in  the 
north,  so  in  the  south  they  are  overlain  by  the  Braulio  range,  an  extensive 
fragment  of  East  Alpine  Mesozoic  limestone.  Its  southernmost  extremity 
forms  the  Ortler  (3,902  meters).  This  range  extends  to  the  south-east 
border  of  the  window  of  the  Inn,  and  is  traversed  by  disturbances  which 
reveal  in  numerous  places  the  phyllite  basement  beneath  the  Trias.  A 
patch  of  upper  Trias  and  Lias  inclined  towards  the  north  with  an  east- 

'  W.  V.  Gumbel,  Sitzb.  k.  bayr.  Akad.,  Miinchen,  1889,  XIX,  p.  383  ;  E.  v.  Mojsiso- 
vics,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1897,  p.  215,  1898,  p.  14,  and  1900,  p.  8  ;  F.  Trauth 
in  Becke  und  Uhlig,  Geotektonische  Untersuchungen,  Sitzb.  k.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1906, 
(JXV,  p.  1730. 

2  T.  Ohnesorge,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1905,  pp.  373-377  ;  for  Schwaz,  Jahrb. 
k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1903,  LIII,  p.  377 :  for  the  eastern  part  near  Dienten,  A.  Till, 
Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1906,  pp.  323-335  ;  a  good  summary  with  a  small  map  is 
given  by  Diener,  Ban  und  Bild,  pp.  433  et  seq. 


€H.v]  THE  OETLEE  '  168 

south-east  strike  has  been  followed  by  Schlagintweit  from  the  sources 
of  the  Adda  into  the  limestone  masses  of  the  Ortler  ^. 

On  Swiss  territory,  phyllite  resting  on  Trias,  was  described  by  Theobald 
a,t  several  localities  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  Ortler,  and 
Termier  has  expressed  the  opinion  that  the  Ortler  consists  of  several  sheets 
originating  in  recumbent  folds  and  thrust  one  over  the  other  to  the  north 
On  Monte  Scorluzzo  (3,094  meters),  about  which  the  Stilfser  Joch  Strasse 
describes  an  arc,  Freeh  even  encountered  Trias  limestone,  in  a  window, 
beneath  the  phyllite.  Further  north  the  intercalations  of  the  limestones 
in  the  ancient  schists  are  repeated  In  the  mighty  limestone  walls  of  the 
'Ortler  the  phyllite  is  not  to  be  found.  The  traveller  along  the  highroad 
regards  their  foldings  with  amazement.  Freeh  found  that  the  beds  were 
repeated  five  times  in  the  Konigswand  (3,875  meters),  and  seven  to  eight 
times  in  the  Trafoier  Eiswand. 

On  the  east,  below  the  Konigspit,  Hammer  found  that  the  Trias,  as 
well  as  the  phyllites  which  join  it  on  the  south,  are  steeply  upturned.  He 
regards  the  southern  border  as  a  fault 

It  is  possible  that  the  whole  mass  of  the  Ortler  will  have  to  be 
interpreted  as  a  syncline,  open  towards  the  north,  and  complicated  within 
by  secondary  folds  and  thrust-planes. 

We  may  regard  all  the  orographic  elements  mentioned  above,  from  the 
phyllite  of  Radstatt  to  the  Silurian  and  Devonian  of  Kitzbiihel,  and  from 
the  phyllite  south  of  Innsbruck  which  extends  to  Stubai  and  the  Ortler, 
.  as  members  of  the  northern  moiety  of  the  East  Alpine  sheet.  This  classi- 
fication also  applies  to  the  formations  of  Oetz,  as  already  pointed  out. 

1  A.  Spitz  und  G.  Dyrenfurth,  Anzeig.  k.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  Nov.  7,  1907,  pp.  424- 
427  ;  K.  Zoeppritz,  Geologische  Untersuchungen  in  Ober-Engadin  zwischen  Albulapass 
und  Livigno,Ber.  naturf.  Ges.  Freibarg,  1906,  XVI,  pp.  164-231,  map  ;  0.  Schlagintweit, 
Die  tektonischen  Verhaltnisse  in  den  Bergen  zwischen  Livigno,  Bormio  und  Miinsterthal, 
Inaugural-Dissertation,  8vo,  Miinchen,  1907,  29  pp. 

^  P.  Termier,  Les  Nappes  des  Alpes  orientales  et  la  Synthese  des  Alpes,  Bull.  Soc. 
geol.  France,  1903,4®  ser.,  Ill,  pp.  711-765,  map,  in  particular  p.  750  ;  Sur  les  Nappes  de 
la  region  de  I'Ortler,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  Oct.  17,  1904. 

^  The  infolded  beds  on  the  Hochleitenspitz  described  by  Hammer  must  probably  be 
regarded  as  forming  a  syncline  open  towards  the  north.  Hammer  has  himself  inter- 
^preted  the  disturbance  of  Kleinbrod-Uebergrimm  in  this  way.  For  these  occurrences  see 
.A.  Rothpletz,  Geologische  Alpenforschungen,  1905,  II,  261  pp.,  map,  in  particular  p.  142 
et  seq. ;  P.  Freeh,  Ueber  den  Gebirgsbau  der  Tiroler  Central-Alpen  mit  besonderer 
Riicksicht  auf  den  Brenner,  Wiss.  Erganz.-Hefte  z.  Zeitschr.  d.  Alpenvereines,  1905,  II, 
98  pp.,  map  of  the  Brenner,  in  particular  p.  70  et  seq. ;  P.  Termier,  Les  Alpes  entre  le 
Brenner  et  la  Valteline,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1905,  4«  ser.,  V,  pp.  209-289,  map,  in 
particular  p.  286  et  seq.,  also  op.  cit.,  Compte  rend,  somm.,  pp.  159-161 ;  W.  Hammer,  Vor- 
-laufige  Mittheilungen  iiber  Neu-Aufnahme  der  Ortlergruppe,  Verb.  k.k.  geol.  Reichsanst., 
1906,  pp.  174-188. 

^  W.  Hammer,  Val  Furva  und  Val  Zebru,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1902,  pp.  320- 
:.330,  and  op.  cit.,  1907,  p.  234. 

M  2 


164 


THE  EAST  ALPS 


[part  V 


Disgrazia  and  Bernina,  The  western  limit  of  the  East  Alpine 
development  is  clearly  apparent  in  the  Rhaeticon  and  at  the  western 
margin  of  the  Selvretta.  Its  presence  is  marked  by  the  belt  of  Lepontine 
sheets  which  dips  beneath  the  East  Alpine  gneiss,  and  in  particular  by 
a  strip  of  green-rocks,  which  increases  in  breadth  as  it  proceeds  through 
Oberhalbstein  towards  the  south. 

Close  to  the  limit  rise  the  limestone  mountains  of  SplUgen ;  Diener 
interprets  them  as  the  most  westerly  representatives  of  the  East  Alpine 
development.  Piz  Curv^r,  the  eastern  limestone  mountain,  is  the  last  of 
a  chain  of  limestone  mountains  (Weissberg  and  others)  running  to  the 
east-south-east,  in  which  dolomite,  traces  of  Rhaetic,  Belemnites  in  red 
limestone,  and  other  indications,  point  to  the  East  Alps.  Towards  the  west, 
however,  i.  e.  in  the  direction  of  Avers,  they  present  steep  bassett  edges, 
are  inclined  towards  the  east,  unite  with  the  green-rocks  of  Oberhalbstein 
and  dip  together  with  these  beneath  the  East  Alpine  sheet  (Piz  d'Err, 
Cima  da  Flix  and  other  peaks).  Concerning  the  Weissberg,  Theobald 
writes  that  '  the  limestone  becomes  marble  towards  the  east,  while  towards 
the  west,  in  the  same  mountain  and  in  the  same  beds,  little  or  no  alteration 
occurs '  ^.  Further  away,  in  the  direction  of  the  Septimer  pass,  we  find 
in  fact  only  sheets  and  strips  of  white  marble  within  the  green-rocks. 

The  gneiss  chains  of  Tessin,  as  we  have  seen,  are  arranged  in  such 
a  way  that  each  of  them  sinks  beneath  the  succeeding  chain  on  the  east, 
and  is  separated  from  it  by  a  Mesozoic  intercalation.  Suretta-Stella  has 
been  mentioned  as  the  most  easterly,  and  the  sedimentary  strip  from 
Avers  to  the  Septimer  pass  has  been  described  as  resting  upon  it  in  the 
east.  But  this  sinks  again  towards  the  east  beneath  the  East  Alpine  sheets 
which  now  occupies  a  similar  position  to  that  of  the  gneiss  chains  of 
Tessin. 

The  Weissberg  cannot  therefore  be  part  of  the  typical  East  Alpine 
sheet  (Braulio).  It  dips  along  with  the  green-rocks  beneath  this  sheet, 
and  is  in  fact  Lepontine.  Possibly  its  sediments  may  be  correlated  with 
the  Brian9onnais,  which  resembles  the  East  Alps  in  so  many  respects. 

On  the  other  side  of  the  Septimer  pass  the  boundaries  become  more 
irregular.  Green-rocks  and  a  sedimentary  zone  then  run  plainly  soutli- 
wai'ds  to  the  Piz  Tremoggia,  underlying  the  gneisses  and  granites  of  the 
Bernina  in  the  Val  di  Fex,  and  separating  them  from  the  ancient  rocks 
to  the  west.  Diener  has  described  this  belt  in  detail.  To  the  south,  in  the 
Val  Malenco,  the  green-rocks  are  widely  extended.    The  summit  of  Monte 

'  G.  Thoo])akl,  Beit  rag  z.  geologischen  Karte  der  Schweiz,  1866,  III,  p.  157.  Theobald 
writes  Weisshorn ;  on  sheet  XX  of  his  map  we  find  a  representation  of  the  region  now 
about  to  be  discussed.  Theobald,  who  was  an  admirable  observer,  was  so  far  influenced 
by  the  conceptions  of  his  time  that  he  has  interpreted  almost  every  pinched-in  band  of 
Trias  as  part  of  a  concentric  syncline.    The  text  gives  the  facts  observed. 


CH.  V] 


BERNINA 


165 


della  Disgrazia  itself  (3,676  meters)  consists,  according  to  Melzi,  not  of 
granite  but  serpentine  ^ ;  and  although  these  Pietre  verdi  recall  in  so  strik- 
ing a  manner  the  Piedmontese  Alps,  yet  at  the  same  time  the  gneiss  of  the 
Disgrazia  displays  a  particular  resemblance  to  that  of  the  Gran  Paradiso 

The  belt  of  the  Val  di  Fex  is  not  the  only  one ;  the  green-rocks  advance 
in  particular  towards  the  Val  Bregaglia,  where  on  the  south  slope  of  the 
Marcio  they  are  also  accompanied  by  gypsum,  a  certain  indication  of  Trias. 
We  will  now,  however,  turn  to  the  east. 

From  Pontresina  onwards  we  observe,  on  the  east  side  of  the  Bernina, 
Trias  and  Lias  forming  a  series  of  wedged-in  synclines.  One  of  these 
strikes  along  the  south  side  of  the  Piz  Languard ;  a  second,  the  Piz  Alv, 
runs  in  an  arc,  slightly  twisted  north  of  the  pass,  across  the  road ;  a  third, 
striking  north  and  south,  lies  east  of  Poschiavo.  Between  them  lie  smaller 
fragments,  chiefly  of  gypsum.  Here  we  have  the  profoundly  denuded 
remains  of  a  system  of  folds.  On  the  Piz  Alv,  Diener  distinguished 
quartzite,  lower  Trias  C?),  Main  dolomite,  Rhaetic  beds,  and  Lias  ^.  At  other 
places  porphyry  makes  its  appearance  beneath  the  quartzite.  A  few  beds 
show  the  beginning  of  marmorization.  Green-rocks  are  not  known  in 
this  series. 

As  early  as  1884,  Diener  observed  the  close  resemblance  of  the  dark 
Pentacrinus  beds  to  those  of  the  Semmering.  It  is  still  doubtful  whether 
this  group  must  be  assigned  to  the  Spliigen  mountains  and  the  Brian- 
^onnais  or  whether  it  already  belongs  to  the  East  Alpine  cover  itself. 

South  of  Poschiavo  a  change  occurs.  Serpentine  and  several  bands 
of  Trias  crop  out ;  according  to  Brockmann,  the  latter  are  five  in  number. 
The  strike,  hitherto  mainly  north  and  south,  becomes  north-west  and  due 
west ;  the  dip  is  to  the  north-east,  that  is  beneath  the  Bernina.  On  the 
south  a  band  strikes  westwards  across  the  Piz  Canciano  to  the  Disgrazia  ^  ; 
another,  more  to  the  north,  runs  towards  the  north-west,  and  according 
to  older  observations  green-rocks  strike  from  this  locality  beneath  the 
southern  glaciers  of  the  Bernina  towards  the  Piz  Tremoggia.  Thus  the 
lake  of  Silva  Plana,  Val  Fex,  Piz  Tremoggia  and  Poschiavo  would  form 
the  south-western  boundary  between  the  East  Alpine  sheet  and  the  region 

1  G.  Melzi,  loc.  cit.,  Giorn.  di  Min.,  1893,  IV,  p.  103. 

^  A.  BoUa,  II  Gneiss  centrale  nella  Valtellina,  Rendic.  Acc.  Lincei,  1891,  VII  b, 
pp.  101-105. 

^  C.  Diener,  Die  Kalkfalte  des  Piz  Alv  in  Graubiinden,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst., 
1884,  XXXIV,  pp.  313-320. 

*  C.  Tarnuzzer,  Die  Asbestlager  der  Alp  Quadrata  bei  Poschiavo.  Jahresber.  naturf. 
Ges.  Graubiinden,  1902,  XLV,  14  pp.,  map  ;  H.  Brockmann- Jarosch,  Die  Flora  des 
Puschlav,  8vo,  Leipzig,  1907,  pp.  9-13.  Brockmann's  investigations  show  that  indications 
exist  for  prolongation  both  of  Piz  Alv  and  Sassalbo  still  further  towards  the  south,  and 
the  east  and  west  strike,  west  of  Poschiavo,  appears  in  still  clearer  contrast.  I  am 
indebted  to  Herr  Tarnuzzer  for  some  valuable  suggestions. 


166  THE  EAST  ALPS  [partv 

of  the  green-rocks.  Where  we  shall  place  the  Piz  Alv  remains  an  open 
question. 

South  of  this  line,  as  far  as  the  Dinaric  boundary,  i.  e.  down  to  the 
Adda,  we  meet  with  an  east-and-west  strike ;  at  Sondrio  green-rocks  still 
occur.    This  southern  fragment  is  a  continuation  of  the  Disgrazia. 

Coming  from  the  Piz  Languard  we  find  a  prevailing  dip  to  the 
north-east  and  north  throughout  the  Bernina,  and  also  to  the  south  of 
it  in  the  continuation  of  the  Disgrazia  mentioned  above ;  it  cannot  be 
certainly  determined  whether  or  not  this  persists  down  to  the  Dinaric 
boundary. 

On  the  other  side  of  the  Etsch  similar  bands  of  marble  lie  high  up  in 
the  Texel  mountains,  but  on  the  river  gneiss  prevails.  Stache  assumed 
the  existence  of  a  fault,  but  we  have  no  recent  observations  on  this  point. 
On  the  east,  however.  Hammer's  investigations  reveal  the  connexion.  The 
gneisses  which,  as  we  have  stated,  cross  the  Etsch  at  its  elbow  and  strike 
on  into  the  Passeyr,  reach  the  Brennerstrasse ;  on  their  northern  margin 
stands  the  ruin  of  Sprechenstein.  East  of  the  Brennerstrasse  they  con- 
stantly increase  in  breadth.  Becke  and  Lowl  mark  them  there  as  ancient 
mica-schist  and  schistose  gneiss. 

This  zone  of  ancient  rocks  follows  the  tonalite  belt  and  the  Dinaric 
boundary;  on  the  north,  starting  from  the  Plattenspitz,  north-east  of 
Meran,  it  is  accompanied  by  the  ridge  of  Trias  limestone,  which  crosses 
the  Brennerstrasse  near  Mauls,  and  has  been  mentioned  above  as  the 
western  continuation  of  the  Trias  of  Lienz,  the  Drave,  and  the  Gurk.  It 
may  be  traced  with  certainty  from  the  Bacher  range  up  to  the  Plattenspitz, 
i.  e.  for  a  distance  of  335  kilometers  (III,  341). 

Thus  we  see  that  the  ancient  rocks  coming  from  the  Kreuzeck  are 
continued  towards  the  south-west  across  the  Brenner  (Sprechenstein), 
Passeyr,  the  bend  of  the  Etsch,  Ulten  and  Hasenohr,  always  following 
the  boundary  of  the  Dinarides ;  and  again  that  it  is  the  Trias  of  the  Drave 
range,  which  reaches  the  neighbourhood  of  Meran  as  a  long,  wedged-in 
band.  These  elements  belong  to  the  southern  moiety  of  the  East  Alps. 
Between  them  and  the  northern  moiety  (Ortler,  Oetz,  and  other  summits) 
extends  the  marble  of  Laas. 

At  the  Kreuzeck  we  again  reach  the  Mur  Alps.  All  the  beds  now  dip 
towards  the  south  and  are  present  in  great  thickness  east  of  the  Kreuzeck. 

At  the  lake  of  Millstatt  garnet-mica-schist  and  gneiss  bend  round 
towards  the  north;  they  dip  towards  the  east^.  Their  relation  to  the 
limnic  Carboniferous  of  the  Konigsstuhl  has  not  been  determined,  and 
towards  the  north-east,  i.  e.  in  the  direction  of  the  Schladming  gneiss-mass, 
the  structure  becomes  extremely  complicated,  and  is  by  no  means  fully 


»  G.  Geyer,  Verb.  k.  k.  ^eol.  Reichsanst.,  1892,  pp.  319-327.  and  1893,  pp.  49-60. 


LAAS 


167 


explained^.  A  zone  of  Trias  and  Jurassic  surrounds  the  north-east  of 
the  Tauern.  From  Tweng  onwards  up  to  just  below  the  Seekar-Spitz 
(Radstatter  Tauern),  a  distance  of  11  kilometers,  we  may  trace  step  by 
step  the  easterly  dip  of  the  Trias  beneath  the  older  rocks,  and  the  summit 
of  the  Seekar  Spitz  itself  consists  of  gneiss  resting  on  Trias  ^. 

Here  the  lie  of  the  Trias  is  extremely  complicated.  On  the  north, 
towards  Radstatt,  Uhlig  observed  a  recumbent  sheet  of  sericitic  quartzite 
belonging  to  the  Permian  or  lower  Trias;  Trias  limestone  and  Jurassic 
occur  beneath  this,  in  some  places  exposed  in  windows,  while  in  others 
they  overlie  it.  These  occurrences  continue  south  of  Radstatt  to  within 
3  kilometers  of  the  normal  basement  of  the  Handling  range  (East  Alpine 
with  patches  of  Eocene),  and  as  towards  the  east  they  dip  beneath  the 
ancient  rocks,  so  towards  the  north  they  dip  beneath  the  Trias  of  the 
East  Alps^. 

So  far,  therefore,  our  examination  shows  that  the  Tauern  are  sur- 
rounded on  the  west  (Stubai)  and  north  (Pinzgau,  Radstatt)  by  the 
northern  moiety  of  the  East  Alps,  and  on  the  south  (Sprechenstein, 
Kreuzeck)  and  east  (Mur  Alps)  by  the  southern  moiety,  and  that  they 
dip,  in  those  places  where  the  lie  of  the  beds  has  already  been  described 
(Kreuzeck  on  the  south,  Tweng  in  the  north-east,  Radstatt  on  the  north), 
beneath  the  frame. 

Laas.  From  the  accounts  at  my  disposal,  I  have  not  been  able  to 
discover  at  what  point  between  Poschiavo  and  Sondalo  the  boundary 
of  the  East  Alpine  segment  may  lie.  South  of  Bormio  on  the  Adda,  which 
flows  from  north  to  south  above  Sondalo,  lies  the  batholite  of  Ceppina 
(Serra  di  Morignone),  to  which  we  have  already  referred.  At  the  same 
time  thick  intercalations  of  marble  make  their  appearance  in  the  schist. 
The  dip  to  north-east  and  north  has  disappeared,  and  far  and  wide  a  strike 
to  east-north-east  and  then  to  north-east  prevails,  with  a  dip  to  south  and 
south-east.  Stache,  and  in  particular  Hammer,  have  made  us  familiar  with 
this  range  as  far  as  the  bend  of  the  Etsch  near  Meran  (Marlinger  Joch) 

^  An  example  of  the  difficulties  encountered  is  given  by  Vacek's  little  map  in  Verb, 
k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1901,  p.  372. 

^  E.  Freeh  has  published  a  view  of  the  G-urpetschegg  near  Tweng  in  Sitzb.  k,  preuss. 
Akad.  Wiss.  Berlin,  1896,  p.  1274,  and  in  Koken,  Geologische  und  palaeontologische 
Abhandlungen,  1901,  IX,  p.  30. 

'  F.  Becke  and  V.  Uhlig,  Erster  Bericht  iiber  petrographische  und  geotektonische 
Untersuchungen  im  Hochalmmassiv  und  in  den  Radstatter  Tauern,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss. 
Wien,  1906,  CXV,  pp.  1695-1739,  in  particular  p.  1731. 

*  G.  Stache,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1876,  pp.  314-318,  1877,  pp.  205-207,  1880, 
pp.  127-131  ;  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1877,  XXVII,  p.  143  et  seq.  W.  Hammer, 
Die  krystallinischen  Alpen  des  Ultenthales,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1902,  LII, 
pp.  105-133,  and  1904,  LIV,  pp.  541-576  ;  Geologische  Aufnahme  des  Blattes  Bormio- 
Tonale,  op.  cit.,  1905,  LV,  pp.  1-26,  map,  and  Geologische  Beschreibung  der  Laaser 
Gruppe,  op.  cit.,  1906,  LVI,  pp.  497-538,  map. 


168 


THE  EAST  ALPS 


[part  V 


Towards  the  Dinarides,  as  we  have  mentioned  above,  inclusions  of 
platey  olivine  occur  in  gneiss ;  and  gneiss  and  ancient  phyllites  form  a 
series  of  saddles  and  basins,  which  towards  the  north-east  are  more  closely 
pressed  one  against  the  other,  in  correspondence  with  the  compression 
of  all  the  inner  zones  of  the  Alps,  which  begins  at  the  head  of  the  Dinarides. 
It  is  these  ancient  rocks,  and  in  particular  pegmatite- bearing  gneisses, 
which  strike,  near  the  bend  of  the  Etsch,  across  the  river  into  the  Passeyr. 

Proceeding  towards  the  north-west,  across  the  strike,  we  find  that  the 
quartz-phyllite  predominates.  It  forms  a  wide  syncline  upon  the  heights 
(Hasenohr,  3,257  meters)  and  then  sinks  on  the  west,  maintaining  a  great 
breadth,  towards  the  south :  this  is  the  upper  limb  of  a  syncline  overturned 
towards  the  north  (or  north-north-west) ;  and  beneath  it  Hammer's  beds 
of  Laas  crop  out.  These  consist  of  mica-schist  and  staurolite  mica-schist, 
and  the  marble  of  Laas  is  intercalated  in  them.  This  marble  does  not 
reach  the  Ortler  towards  the  west,  but  the  staurolite  mica-schist  extends 
as  isolated  patches  into  the  neighbourhood  of  Sulden.  Similarly  the 
intercalations  of  marble  in  phyllite, "  south  of  Bormio,  and  the  marble 
of  Monte  Sobretto,  are  not  directly  connected  with  Laas;  yet  they  may 
well  be  of  equal  age. 

In  the  marble  of  the  Laas  band  the  stems  of  Crinoids  have  been  found, 
thus  showing  that  the  marble  is  an  altered  normal  sediment,  and  that  no 
other  agencies  are  involved  in  the  marmorization  of  a  J urassic  or  Cretaceous 
limestone  than  in  the  marmorization  of  a  Silurian  limestone.  Two  kinds 
of  injections  occur,  one  predominantly  pegmatitic,  usually  in  steeply 
ascending  dykes,  the  other  basic  in  sills.  The  latter  form  bands  of 
amphibolite  welded  with  the  marble,  and  Weinschenk  thinks  that  they 
may  have  been  produced  from  a  gabbro-like  rock  ^. 

Here  and  there,  in  the  zone  of  transition  between  marble  and  schist. 
Hammer  has  observed  quartzites.  We  may  therefore  regard  the  marble 
of  Laas  as  having  been  originally  a  crinoidal  limestone,  associated  with 
quartzite  and  sill-like  injections  of  a  rock  allied  to  gabbro. 

Stache  regards  the  marble  as  very  ancient ;  Hammer  assigns  it  to  the 
pre-Cambrian ;  Termier  has  expressed  his  belief  (1905)  that  it  is  of 
Mesozoic  age.  In  Switzerland  a  complete  change  of  opinion  has  taken 
place  during  the  last  twenty  years  as  to  the  age  of  the  numerous  marble 
bands  of  the  Alps ;  with  good  reason  they  are  regarded  almost  without 
exception  as  Mesozoic  ^.  Here  we  have  the  additional  fact  that  Mojsisovics 
has  discovered  a  bed  of  gypsum  in  the  ancient  phyllite — at  an  isolated 

^  E.  Weinschenk,  Die  Tiroler  Marmorlager,  Zeitschr.  f.  prakt.  Geol.,  1903,  XI,  pp.  131- 
147.  A  precisely  similar  result  was  arrived  at  by  Julien,  for  example,  in  New  York: 
Genesis  of  the  Amphibole  Schists  and  Serpentines  of  Manhattan  Island,  New  York, 
Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Am.,  1903,  XIV,  pp.  421-494. 

=  For  example,  C.  Schmidt,  Eclogae  Geol.  Helv.,  1907,  XIX,  p.  505. 


cH.v]  THE  TAUERN  169 

locality  it  is  true — beneath  the  north  slope  of  the  Marteller  Vertainen,  out- 
side and  to  the  east  of  the  Ortler  region.  Hammer  has  confirmed  this 
observation  and  has  found,  not  far  from  the  same  place,  a  lenticular  mass 
of  serpentine,  conformably  intercalated  in  quartz  phyllite.  It  occurs  on  the 
inner  Pederspitz.  Hammer's  description  of  the  gypsum  hardly  leaves  room 
for  doubt  that  in  this  case  Trias  is  kneaded  in  with  the  quartz  phyllite  ^. 

Thus  the  observations  so  far  made  tend  to  show  that  the  marble  band  of 
Laas  is  the  completely  marmorized  representative  of  the  Lepontine  Trias, 
visible  beneath  the  East  Alpine  (Ortler)  segment,  together  with  its  green- 
rocks,  which  here  take  the  form  of  amphibolite. 

The  marble  cliff  of  Laas  (Jenewand)  is,  according  to  Hammer,  a  syncline 
open  towards  the  north,  and  in  part  overfolded  ;  upon  it,  completely  fitting 
together  with  it,  rests  an  anticline  folded  in  the  same  direction. 

The  east-north-easterly  extremity  of  the  marble  beds  of  Laas  reaches 
the  Etsch  ;  to  the  west  of  them  a  narrow  zone  of  phyllite  gneiss  sets  in. — 

The  Tauern  are  a  well-defined  range  which  afibrds  a  marked  feature  to 
the  landscape  by  the  height  of  its  peaks,  and  the  great  extent  of  its  snow- 
fields.  It  describes  an  arc,  slightly  convex  to  the  north,  which  extends  for 
a  distance  of  165  kilometers,  from  the  Lieser  on  the  east  to  the  Tribulaun 
range,  a  little  west  of  the  Brennerstrasse.  Its  breadth  on  the  east  is  45  kilo- 
meters, but  diminishes  towards  the  west ;  on  the  Brennerstrasse,  where  the 
Dinarides  advance,  it  hardly  amounts  to  half  so  much. 

F.  von  Hauer,  Stache,  Peters,  Stur,  and  many  other  observers  have 
recognized  more  or  less  clearly  the  independence  of  the  Tauern.  They 
distinguished  the  central  gneiss  in  the  middle  of  the  range  and  a  mantle  of 
schist  sloping  away  from  it  on  all  sides.  Thus  this  group  of  mountains 
came  to  be  regarded  as  the  type  of  an  axis  of  elevation ;  their  structure,  as 
well  as  that  of  the  ancient  schist  and  gneiss  mountains  which  slope  away 
from  them  to  north  and  south,  and  of  the  Dinarides  which  dip  to  the 
south,  have  furnished  the  principal  argument  in  support  of  the  supposed 
symmetrical  structure  of  the  Alps. 

The  important,  but  not  yet  completed,  investigations  of  Becke  show 
that  the  so-called  central  gneiss  is  an  intrusive  rock,  with  variable  characters, 
which  stands  about  midway  between  tonalite  and  the  older  granite  of  other 
parts  of  the  Alps.  Its  varieties  are  thus  described  sometimes  as  granite, 
sometimes  as  tonalite  gneiss,  and  sometimes  even  as  tonalite. 

Five  cores  of  this  gneiss  have  been  distinguished ;  of  these  the  western 
(Gross-Venediger  3,660  meters)  and  the  eastern  (Hochalm-Spitz  3,350  meters) 
are  the  most  extensive.    The  covering  of  schist  forces  its  way  between  the 

^  E.  V.  Mojsisovics,  Mitth.  Alpenvereins,  1866,  II,  p.  377  ;  W.  Hammer,  Laaser  Gruppe, 
p.  518  et  seq.  Hammer  found  that  the  bed  of  gypsum  is  100  meters  long,  30  meters 
thick ;  it  is  highly  crystalline,  and  rests  conformably  beneath  quartz-phyllite  ;  he  believes 
the  gypsum  to  be  primary  and  syngenetic. 


170 


THE  EAST  ALPS 


[part  V 


cores ;  it  forms,  as  Stur  was  already  aware,  the  Gross  Glockner  (3,798- 
meters),  the  highest  summit  of  the  Tauern  ^. 

Outside  the  schist  mantle,  the  Tauern  are  surrounded  by  a  belt  of  Trias, 
Lias,  and  Oolites,  and  this,  though  interrupted  in  places,  separates  them 
from  the  East  Alps.  On  the  whole  it  is  narrow  towards  the  west,  as  in  the 
Tribulaun  range  (Great  Tribulaun,  3,102  meters),  but  towards  the  north- 
east it  becomes  broader,  as  in  the  Radstatter  Tauern  (Weisseck,  2,709 
meters),  and  attains  orographic  importance. 

The  Tauern,  as  we  have  already  mentioned,  were  once  regarded  as  the  type 
of  an  axis  of  elevation ;  yet  it  is  precisely  these  mountains,  and  in  particular 
their  western  part  along  with  the  south-western  region  as  far  as  the  Adda, 
which  form  the  subject  of  the  works  of  Termier,  distinguished  by  their 
broad  generalizations,  and  by  the  endeavour  to  prove  that  this  part  of  the 
Alps  consists  of  several  sheets  lying  one  over  the  other  ^. 

In  the  forefront  of  this  question  stands  one  decisive  fact :  the  Trias  of 
the  frame  of  the  Tauern  is  not  the  Trias  of  the  adjacent  limestone  zone  of  the 
East  Alps.  It  is  the  Trias  of  the  Semmering.  Toula  had  long  ago  pointed 
this  out  in  the  case  of  the  Radstatter  Tauern,  and  Uhlig  sought  its  equiva- 
lent in  the  zone  of  the  Brian9onnais  ^.  Termier  was  astonished  at  the 
resemblance  of  the  Trias  of  the  Semmering  to  that  of  the  Vanoise  * ;  in  the 
Tauern  its  correspondence  with  the  western  type  is  increased  by  the  appear- 
ance of  serpentine  in  the  Trias.  In  accordance  with  its  position  this  Trias 
must  be  placed  in  the  Lepontine  group  of  sheets  which  lie  above  the  Helve- 
tian and  below  the  East  Alpine  sheets. 

The  Tauern  are  a  mass  which  emerges^  with  a  Lepontine  frame,  from 
beneath  the  East  Alps. 

The  sketch  on  p.  130  shows  a  small  anticline  of  Flysch  which  has 
arisen  between  the  two  areas  weighted  down  by  the  sheets  of  Annes  and 

*  F.  Becke,  F.  Berwerth,  and  U.  Grubenmann,  provisional  reports  in  Anzeig.  k.  k.  Akad. 
Wiss.  Wien,  1895,  pp.  45-49,  1896,  pp.  15-22,  1897,  pp.  8-14,  1898,  pp.  12-19,  1899, 
pp.  5-10 ;  F.  Lowl,  Der  Granatspitz-Kern,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1895,  XLV, 
pp.  615-640,  map  ;  F.  Becke  and  F.  Ldwl,  WestHcher  und  mittlerer  Abschnitt  der 
Hohen  Tauern,  in  Fiihrer  z.  internat.  Congress,  1903,  VIII  and  IX,  48  and  27  pp. ;  Becke 
(in  Becke  und  Uhlig,  Erster  Bericht,  &c.),  Sitzb.  k.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1906,  CXV, 
pp.  1693-1719  et  passim. 

^  P.  Termier,  Les  Nappes  des  Alpes  orientales  et  la  Synthese  des  Alpes,  Bull.  Soc. 
geol.  France,  1903,  3'-  ser.,  Ill,  pp.  711-765,  map  ;  Les  Alpes  entre  le  Brenner  et  la  Val- 
teline,  op.  cit.,  1905,  4®  ser.,  V,  pp.  209-289,  map;  La  Synthese  geologique  des  Alpes, 
Conference,  Liege,  1906,  29  pp. 

•'  V.  Uhlig,  Erster  Bericht  iiber  petrographische  und  geotektonische  Untersuchungen 
im  Hochalmmassiv  und  in  den  Radstatter  Tauern  ;  Sitzb.  k.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1906, 
CXV,  p.  1732. 

*  P.  Termier,  Sur  quelques  analogies  de  facies  geologique  entre  la  zone  centrale  des 
Alpes  orientales  et  la  zone  interne  des  Alpes  occidentales  ;  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  Nov.  16, 
1903,  p.  807. 


CH.V]  SUPERNATANT  FORELAND 


171 


Sulens.  An  illustration  on  an  incomparably  larger  scale  is  afforded  by 
the  anticline  of  Biindner  schists  which  rises  from  the  window  of  the  Inn 
and  carries  the  green-rocks  and  a  fragment  of  the  East  Alpine  sheet  up  to 
a  height  of  more  than  3,000  meters  above  the  sea.  In  the  present  case  also 
we  may  assume  that  the  Selvretta  in  the  west  and  the  Oetz  in  the  east 
restrained  the  folding  by  their  weight,  so  that  it  could  only  take  place  in 
the  window,  and  there  only  in  a  north-north-easterly  direction. 

The  window  in  the  Tauern  is  too  large  to  have  been  produced  by  erosion, 
but  a  frame  is  present,  and  as  soon  as  the  Mesozoic  girdle  reaches  this,  the 
girdle  becomes  a  foreland,  yet  at  the  same  time  a  supernatant  foreland. 

In  the  west  we  have  the  gneiss  of  the  Oetz  and  the  Stubai.  According 
to  Teller's  accounts,  a  band  of  isolated  outcrops  of  marble  approaches  from 
the  high  mountains  of  Gurgl,  far  away  in  the  south-west,  and  strikes 
close  to  the  southern  margin  of  the  Oetz  gneiss  towards  the  north-east, 
to  the  zinc  mine  of  Schneeberg.  It  marks  the  boundary  between  the 
gneiss  and  the  phyllite  which  follows  on  the  south.  Some  distance  away 
the  gneiss  stands  vertical,  then  it  dips  more  gently  in  the  direction 
of  the  phyllite  boundary,  which  it  finally  overlies  ^.  Nearer  to  the 
Schneeberg  garnet-bearing  mica-schist  takes  the  place  of  the  phyllite. 
In  the  Schneeberg  the  mica-schist  is  followed  along  this  boundary  by  a 
zone  rich  in  amphibolite,  then  comes  quartzite,  highly  calcareous  schists, 
and  finally  the  dolomite  of  the  Karlweissen,  containing  Crinoids  and 
dipping  to  the  north-west  at  an  angle  of  60°-80°  beneath  the  gneiss^. 

This  locality  lies  10  kilometers  west  of  the  Telfer  Weissen,  the  most 
southerly  extremity  of  the  Trihulann  range,  which  is  about  30  kilometers 
long,  runs  north  and  south,  and  forms  the  western  frame  of  the  Tauern. 
In  addition  to  the  earlier  works  of  Stache  and  Teller  we  have  now  at 
our  disposal  the  investigations  of  Freeh  ^. 

The  relations  of  the  Schneeberg  to  the  Telfer  Weissen  and  the 
Gschleyer  Wand  which  is  connected  with  it  are  of  some  importance. 
This  connexion  is  indicated  by  a  small  outcrop  of  dolomite,  dipping  to 
the  north,  which  was  discovered  by  Freeh  on  the  Geringer  Alpe.  Our 
conception  of  the  Telfer  Weissen  differs  from  that  of  Freeh.  It  presents 
the  same  succession  of  rocks  as  the  Schneeberg,  but  in  the  reverse  order. 
The  gneiss  lies  below,  then  follows  the  Trias,  and  above  this  the  mica- 
schist.    At  the  same  time  the  strike  turns  out  of  the  east  towards  the 

»  F.  Teller,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1878,  p.  66. 

^  A.  V.  Elterlein,  Beitrag  zur  Kenntniss  der  Erzlagerstatte  des  Schneebergs  bei  Mayrn, 
Jabrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1891,  XLI,  pp.  289-348,  map;  E.  Weinsclienk,  Die  Erz- 
lagerstatte des  Scbneebergs  in  Tirol,  Zeitscbr.  f.  prakt.  Geol.,  1903,  XI,  pp.  231-237  ; 
a  detailed  description  also  in  Frecb,  op.  cit.  (see  next  note).  Crinoids  were  also  found  in 
tbe  neigbbouring  Moarer  Weissen. 

^  F,  Frecb,  TJeber  den  Gebirgsbau  der  Tiroler  Centralalpen,  Wiss.  Erganz.-Hefte  d. 
deutscb-osterr.  Alpenvereins,  Innsbruck,  1905,  II.  Bd.,  98  pp.,  witb  map  of  the  Brenner. 


172 


THE  EAST  ALPS 


[part  V 


north.  A  screw-twist  is  produced.  It  seems  as  though  ^ve  had  reached 
here  the  end  of  the  siiiJernatant  foreland,  that  is  the  corner  of  the  gneiss 
sheet  of  the  Stubai,  and  as  if  the  Trias  and  mica-schist  were  about  to  step 
over  its  edge  ^ 

The  whole  of  the  Tribulaun  range  from  the  Tauern  onwards  is  thrust 
up  on  to  the  border  of  the  Stubai  gneiss.  This  is  the  way  in  which  E-oth- 
pletz  interprets  it^.  It  consists  not  of  the  denuded  remains  of  a  trans- 
gTessive  sheet  of  Trias,  but  of  the  overthrust  belt.  For  this  reason  there 
are  no  denuded  remains  to  be  found  anywhere  else  in  the  Sfcubai.  Nowhere 
along  the  whole  of  the  western  edge  is  the  superposition  of  the  Trias  on  the 
gneiss  normal :  its  lower  members  are  absent.  The  total  height  of  the 
limestone  cliffs  above  the  gneiss  amounts  in  the  west  to  1,100  or  1,200  meters, 
but  the  beds  are  repeated  by  folding.  Over  these  repetitions,  which  include 
infolded  micaceous  limestone  and  pyritous  schist,  said  to  be  Khaetic,  Freeh 
found  on  the  peak  of  the  Kesselspitz  (2,722  meters)  a  small  patch  of  Lias 
with  Arietites. 

The  lofty  cliffs  of  the  west  give  a  false  idea  of  the  thickness  of  the  forma- 
tion. The  transverse  section  of  the  Trias  is  in  fact  that  of  a  wedge,  and  so 
considerable  is  the  decrease  in  thickness  towards  the  east  (as  may  be  seen 
in  the  transverse  valleys  of  the  Tribulaun)  that  along  the  Brennerstrasse, 
8  kilometers  east  of  the  Hohe  Tribulaun  there  is  in  places  only  a  narrow 
belt  of  dolomite,  often  concealed  by  debris  and  now  accompanied  by  the 
lower  members,  quartzite  and  serpentine,  which  are  absent  in  the  west. 
At  the  same  time  the  gneiss  of  Stubai  disappears  in  the  transverse  valleys. 
In  the  north,  owing  to  the  denudation  of  the  Trias,  it  is  still  seen  as  far  as 
the  Brennerstrasse,  near  Matrei,  but  it  does  not  enter  the  interior  of  the 
Tauern. 

In  the  south,  along  the  Gschleyer  Wand,  the  mica-schist  of  the  Schnee- 
berg  rests  on  Trias ;  to  the  north  of  it,  however,  ascending  the  wedge  from 
the  east,  lies  a  vast  mass  of  schist  containing  upper  Carboniferous  plant- 
remains  2.  According  to  Freeh,  infoldings  of  upper  Carboniferous  occur  in 
the  Trias. 

In  the  north,  from  about  Matrei  onwards,  the  Trias  and  upper  Carboni- 
ferous, which  engirdle  the  Tauern,  again  bend  in  their  strike  almost  at  a 

^  F.  Freeh  separates  the  Gschleyer  Wand  (with  the  Telfer  Weisse)  along  with  the  dolo- 
mite of  Pflersch  from  the  Tribulaun  group,  and  regards  it  as  a  fold  overturned  to  the 
south  ;  Termier  beHeves  that  it  is  a  part  of  the  Tribulaun  group,  he  also  thinks  that 
it  is  possibly  connected  towards  the  south  with  the  range  of  Sprechenstein  (Ratschings), 
Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1905,  p.  231. 

^  A.  Rothpletz,  Geologische  Alpenfoi-schungen,  II,  p.  208  et  seq. 

^  It  was  discovered  by  Pichler;  F.  v.  Kerner,  Die  Carbonflora  des  Steinacher  Joches, 
Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1897,  XLVII,  pp.  365-386,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst., 
1906,  pp.  130,  131.  Walking  over  this  part  in  1865,  when  the  railway  was  in  course  of 
construction,  I  was  shown  graphite  from  the  Jodok  tunnel. 


CH.V]  TAENTHALEE  KOPFE  17S 

right  angle,  just  as  in  the  south  they  made  a  bend  about  the  Telfer  Weisse. 
The  strike  is  now  east  and  west,  and  the  foreland  consists  no  longer  of 
Stubai  gneiss  but  of  the  ancient  phyllite  of  the  Pinzgau,  which  cannot 
easily  be  distinguished  from  the  upper  Carboniferous,  here  present  over 
a  wide  area.  According  to  Franz  E.  Suess  the  Trias  is  folded  into  the 
Carboniferous,  and  at  the  same  time,  especially  on  the  Tarnthaler  Kopfe 
(2,891  meters),  is  markedly  overfolded  towards  the  north,  although  lower 
down  there  is  a  steep  northerly  dip.  This  apparent  contradiction  indicates 
a  knee-like  bend  of  the  beds  against  the  foreland.  Rothpletz  mentions 
Rhaetic  fossils  in  the  neighbourhood. 

The  synclines  on  the  heights  open  towards  the  north ;  the  dolomite 
cliffs  face  towards  the  north,  as  in  the  Tribulaun  range  they  face  towards 
the  west :  in  both  cases  they  are  turned  away  from  the  Hohe  Tauern  ^. 

The  Tarnthaler  Kopfe  form  the  beginning  of  a  band  of  isolated  Trias 
outcrops  ,  in  one  of  them,  near  Krimml,  Diener  has  found  Diplopora.  Lowl 
and  Diener's  sections  of  this  part  show  steeply  upturned  beds  in  the  valleys, 
and  higher  up  a  knee-like  bend  as  before  to  the  north  2. 

Between  these  two  points  a  gentle  dip  towards  the  north  predominates, 
as  observed  by  Becke,  near  Mayrhof en ;  possibly  a  greater  thickness  of 
material  has  been  removed  here  by  denudation.  Further  east,  near  Lind, 
Trias  with  serpentine  again  makes  its  appearance ;  and  finally  we  reach 
the  already  mentioned  Radstdtter  Tauern. 

These  mountains  have  been  described  by  Vacek  and  Freeh ;  a  more 
recent  and  different  interpretation  has  been  given  by  Uhlig,  whose  account 
we  will  follow^.  Upon  sericitic  quartzite  rests  dolomite  with  Diplopora, 
dark  Rhaetic  pyritous  shales  with  shelly  limestone  made  up  of  bivalves, 
Lithodendron  limestone,  and  then  as  much  as  200  meters  of  Jurassic  lime- 
stone and  Belemnites.  Three  sheets  are  present  dipping  towards  the  north 
(in  Tweng  towards  the  east).    Their  bassett  edges  face  towards  the  south 

1  Franz  E.  Suess,  Das  Gebiet  der  Triasfalten  im  Nordosten  der  Brenneiiinie,  Jahrb. 
k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1894,  XLIV,  pp.  589-670,  map  ;  Rothpletz  has  also  found  Rhaetic 
fossils  in  this  region. 

^  C.  Diener,  Einige  Bemerkungen  iiber  die  stratigraphische  Stellung  der  Krimmler 
Schichten  und  iiber  den  Tauerngraben  in  Oberpinzgau,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst., 
1900,  L,  pp.  383-394,  section  on  p.  385  ;  also  Lowl,  op.  cit.,  1894,  XLIV,  p.  519,  and 
Fiihrer  z.  internat.  Congress,  1903,  IX,  p.  11. 

^  F.  Freeh,  Ueber  den  Gebirgsbau  der  Radstatter  Tauern,  Sitzb.  k.  preuss.  Akad.  Wiss. 
Berlin,  1896,  pp.  1255-1277,  and  Geologie  der  Radstatter  Tauern,  Geologischer  und 
palaeozoischer  Anhang,  edited  by  Koken,  1901,  new  ser.,  V,  pp.  1-66,  map ;  V.  Uhlig  (in 
Becke  and  Uhlig,  Erster  Bericht,  &c.),  Sitzb.  k.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1906,  CXV,  pp.  1719- 
1737.  From  the  older  works  :  M.  Vacek,  Beitrag  zur  Geologie  der  Radstatter  Tauern, 
Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1884,  XXXIV,  pp.  609-634  ;  in  connexion  with  this,  Verb, 
k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1893,  p.  386  et  seq.  No  small  part  of  the  Trias  is  converted  into 
calc-mica-schist ;  Pentacrinus  occurs  in  this  schist.  I  have  found  most  of  the  fossils 
near  the  Mittereck-Alpe  ;  cf.  Anzeig.  k.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  Nov.  20,  1890. 


174 


THE  EAST  ALPS 


[part  V 


and  south-west.  The  calc-phyllite  of  the  inner  part  of  the  Tauern  follows 
them  in  a  similar  tectonic  attitude  as  though  it  were  a  fourth  sheet  and  the 
lowest.  We  have  already  seen  that  these  sheets  approach  to  within  3  kilo- 
meters of  the  East  Alps  and  sink  beneath  them.  Here  there  is  no  over- 
bending  against  the  foreland. 

Nor  is  there  any  such  over-bending  on  the  south  side  of  the  Tauern. 
Let  us  begin  our  study  in  the  south-west  of  this  region. 

In  the  Texel  range,  which  slopes  away  to  the  Etsch  above  Meran, 
Teller  has  discovered  another  band  of  limestone  and  marble.  It  makes 
its  appearance  in  the  hollow  below  the  peak  of  the  Texel  (3,320  meters) ; 
the  Loder  (3,268  meters)  and  the  Hohe  Weiss  (3,282  meters)  belong 
to  it.  Striking  to  the  north-east,  it  describes  an  arc  slightly  convex 
to  the  north-west^  extends  through  the  Pfeldersthal  across  the  Weisse 
Wand  to  the  valley  of  Batschings,  where  it  is  revealed  in  a  series  of 
marble  quarries,  and  finally,  after  a  very  broken  course  of  34  kilometers, 
reaches  the  Brennerstrasse  ^. 

Its  continuation  probably  includes  the  fragment  which  Termier  observed 
below  Thuins  near  Sterzing,  and  in  its  further  extension,  a  little  to  the 
north  of  the  gneiss  of  the  Sprechenstein,  limestone  occurs  associated  with 
serpentine.  Here  begins  a  zone  of  Trias  which  extends  beyond  Windisch- 
Matrei  to  the  east;  this  zone,  at  first  interrupted  but  afterwards  con- 
tinuous, forms  the  southern  boundary  of  the  western  half  of  the  Tauern. 
It  has  been  described  in  detail  by  Lowl,  who  mentions  quartzite,  dolomite, 
calc-mica-schist,  lustrous  schist,  gypsum  and  serpentine  as  entering  into 
its  composition.    In  the  parts  best  known  the  beds  are  steeply  inclined  ^. 

Further  east,  where  the  southern  boundary  of  the  Tauern  begins  to 
strike  to  the  south-east,  very  little  is  known  about  it.  Granigg's  surveys 
in  the  Moll  valley  seem,  however,  to  suggest  that  Trias  accompanied  by 
serpentine  strikes  out  of  the  heart  of  the  Hohe  Tauern  itself  and  proceeds 
along  the  south  side  of  the  Hochalmkern  to  the  border,  and  near  Dollach 
the  border  is  apparently  formed  by  it 

We  have  now  concluded  our  study  of  the  border  of  the  Tauern,  and 
may  turn  our  attention  once  more  to  the  Brennerstrasse ;  starting  from  the 
tonalite  on  the  Dinaric  border  we  will  proceed  towards  the  north.  First 
we  cross  the  granite  of  Brixen ;  then  a  zone  of  gneiss  and  gneiss-phyllite. 
It  proceeds  from  Passeyr  and  extends  to  the  Mur  Alps.  Accompanying 
it  is  a  band  of  Trias  which  extends  to  the  mountains  of  Lienz;  this 

^  F.  Teller,  Verh.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1877,  pp.  231-235,  1878,  pp.  64-66  and 
pp.  392-396. 

'  Lowl  in  several  places;  in  particular  Fiihrer  z.  internat.  Congress,  1903,  IX, 
pp.  20,21. 

^  B.  Granigg,  Geologische  und  petrographische  Untersuchungen  im  Ober-Mollthal, 
.Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1906,  LVI,  pp.  367-404,  map. 


€H.  V] 


THE  BEENNER 


175 


presents  the  East  Alpine  facies.  Thus  far,  that  is  up  to  the  Sprechenstein, 
we  may  regard  the  region  as  a  part  of  the  southern  development  of  the 
East  Alps. 

Proceeding  from  the  Texel  range  through  Ratschings,  a  band  of  marble, 
perhaps  altered  Trias,  sets  in  north  of  the  Sprechenstein.  If  this  were 
continued  it  would  become  the  belt  of  Trias  which  runs  from  the  Brenner 
to  Windisch-Matrei  as  the  south  border  of  the  Tauern. 

Five  kilometers  further  north  lies  the  south  end  of  the  Tribulaun 
range.  Here  a  fresh  band  of  marble  sets  in,  crossing  the  Schneeberg.  It 
appears  to  unite  in  the  Telfer  Weissen  with  the  Tribulaun  range.  This 
range  turns  towards  the  north  and  forms  along  the  Brennerstrasse  the 
west  border  of  the  Tauern,  which  is  thrust  out  over  the  Stubai  gneiss 
towards  the  west. 

Near  Matrei  the  Mesozoic  belt  turns  out  of  the  north  and  south  into 
^in  east-and-west  direction,  and  extends  as  the  northern  border  to  the 
Radstatter  Tauern. 

Beyond  Matrei,  on  the  other  side  of  a  band  of  Carboniferous  (?)  schist, 
we  reach  the  ancient  quartz  phyllites  of  the  Pinzgau  and  the  tongue  of 
gneiss  and  mica-schist  which  strikes  hither  from  Stubai.  These  strike 
to  the  Mur  Alps ;  near  Innsbruck  they  form  the  normal  base  of  the  East 
Alpine  limestone  zone  and  belong  with  the  Mur  Alps  to  the  northern 
moiety  of  the  East  Alps^ 

Termier  believed  that  the  window  of  the  Tauern  was  completely  closed 
on  all  sides.  The  description  given  above  suggests  the  existence  of  a  small 
opening  on  the  south-west.  Two  bands  of  marble,  one  of  which  runs 
towards  Gurgl  in  Oetz,  and  the  other  to  the  Texel  range,  point  to  a  possible 
continuation  of  the  window  towards  the  south-west.  In  fact  Teller  assigns 
this  space  between  the  gneiss  of  the  Passeyr  in  the  south-west  and  that  of 
Oetz  in  the  north-west  to  the  calc-phyllite ;  but  the  work  of  Teller,  though 
extremely  valuable,  belongs  to  a  period  in  which  the  questions  at  present 
under  discussion  had  not  yet  arisen ;  whether  such  a  prolongation  of  the 
window  exists  or  not  can  only  be  decided  by  a  fresh  investigation.  All 
the  questions  which  remained  unanswered  in  the  case  of  the  marble  of 
Laas  thus  confront  us  once  more. 

Whatever  may  prove  to  be  the  truth  regarding  the  prolongation  to  the 
south-west,  the  most  important  tectonic  problem  has  been  solved  by  the 
structure  of  the  frame  of  the  Tauern,  and  Termier's  views  have  been 
confirmed. 

We  shall  devote  only  a  brief  space  to  that  part  of  this  region  which  is 

1  Freeh  (Tiroler  Centralalpen,  p.  20)  mentions  a  patch  of  Trias  embedded  in  ancient 
phyUite  on  the  railway  near  Aniras  ;  I  have  visited  the  locality  and  do  not  agree  with 
Ihe  doubts  raised  by  this  statement.  Judging  from  its  position,  the  patch  must  be 
regarded  as  East  Alpine. 


176 


THE  EAST  ALPS 


[part  V 


framed  in  by  the  Trias,  i.  e.  the  calc-phyllite  and  the  central  gneiss,  since 
much  difference  of  opinion  exists  as  to  the  calc-phyllite,  and  the  central 
gneiss  is  the  special  study  of  Becke,  whose  work  is  not  yet  published. 

When  we  see  the  Biindner  schist  sink  beneath  the  gneiss  of  Oetz  in  the 
window  of  the  Inn,  as  at  Nauders  or  in  the  Kaunser  Thai  near  Prutz,  we 
naturally  ask  whether  it  does  not  reappear  anywhere  in  the  east.  Indeed 
Stache,  who  devoted  many  years  of  his  laborious  life  to  a  study  of  the 
Alpine  schists,  observed  as  early  as  1873  that  the  calc-schists  between 
Nauders  and  the  Kaunser  Thai  have  '  very  close  equivalents '  in  the  Ziller 
valley,  and  particularly  on  the  Brenner  between  Steinach,  and  Gries  and 
Gossensass  ^  Termier  ventured  to  assert  that  they  reappear  in  the  schist 
mantle  of  the  Tauern.  This  would  correspond  with  the  way  they  lie,  and 
also  with  an  observation  of  Uhlig's  in  the  Radstatter  Tauern,  where, 
beneath  three  Trias  sheets  inclined  to  the  north,  beds  of  calc-phyllite 
occur,  occupying  a  position  which  is  precisely  that  which  would  be  taken 
by  an  additional  sheet.  But  in  this  range,  so  highly  altered  by  pressure, 
no  direct  proof  is  to  be  found :  in  the  beds  which  form  its  border  a  large 
part  of  the  indubitable,  fossiliferous  Trias  is  converted  into  platey  marble, 
seamed  with  mica  flakes  and  streaky  calc-mica- schists.  Becke  and  Lowl 
distinguish  two  members  in  this  schist  mantle,  an  older  and  a  younger^ 
but  the  age  of  each  is  based  on  conjectures  which  vary  as  greatly  as  in  the 
case  of  the  '  calcaire  phylliteux '  of  Vanoise  ^. 

Apart  from  the  original  structure  of  the  granitic  or  more  or  less 
tonalitic  cores  (the  so-called  central  gneiss),  and  whatever  their  age  may 
be,  it  is  certain  that  the  more  important  of  them  were  exposed  to  a 
considerable  subsequent  pressure  which  was  directed  perpendicularly  to 
the  strike  of  the  Alps.  This  is  clearly  shown  by  the  digitations  of  the 
Venetian  core,  which  run  to  the  south-west  and  north-east^.  These 
digitations  are  identical  with  the  flat  folds  at  the  extremities  of  Mont 
Blanc  and  the  Aarhorn.  They  must  be  regarded  as  so  many  anticlines, 
separated  by  synclines,  of  which  the  Grein  lobe  is  the  best  known.  These 
synclines  are  places  of  especially  intense  dynamic  alteration.  They  show 
that  here,  as  in  the  Swiss  mountains  just  mentioned,  the  existing  con- 
figuration has  been  determined  not  so  much  by  original  dome  formation 
as  by  simultaneous  arching  up,  under  lateral  pressure,  of  the  axes  of 
several  parallel  folds  (surelevation  des  axes);  as  a  consequence,  the 
synclines  as  a  rule  die  away  towards  the  middle  of  the  arch. 

The  cores f  just  as  in  the  case  of  Mont  Blanc,  are  of  intrusive  origin, 
hut  they  have  been  brought  passively  into  their  existing  position. 

'  G.  Stache,  Verb.  k.  k.  geoL  Reichsanst.,  1873,  pp.  222,  223. 
2  For  example,  the  discussion  in  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1906,  4*^  ser.,  VI,  p.  431. 
F.  Becke  and  Lowl,  Geologische  Uebersichtskarte  des  West-Abschnittes  der  Hohen 
Tauern,  Fuhrer  z.  internat.  Congress,  1903,  VIII  and  IX. 


OH.  V] 


EAST  LIMESTONE  ALPS 


177 


The  Tauern  thus  represent  a  window  between  the  northern  and 
southern  moieties  of  the  East  Alps.  Whilst  the  central  gneiss — long 
previously  a  consolidated  rock — was  being  passively  forced  upwards  into 
this  window,  by  a  lateral  force  acting  from  south  and  south-east,  it  carried 
along  with  it  a  belt  of  Trias  and  Jurassic;  this  it  forced  outwards  over 
the  frame  towards  the  west  and  north-west,  and  thus  gave  rise  to  overfold- 
ing.  Where  it  is  not  overfolded,  the  frame  itself  bends  from  the  Tauern 
towards  the  exterior. 

It  might  perhaps  be  suggested  as  a  simpler  explanation  that  the  East 
Alpine  sheet  once  arched  over  the  Tauern  as  a  great  dome  and  was 
removed  from  the  summit  by  denudation ;  but  the  forcing  outwards  of  the 
Lepontine  belt  is  opposed  to  this  view,  so  that  we  are  led  to  assume 
a  subsequent  folding-up,  very  much  as  in  the  Mont  Blanc  zone  (p.  119),  but 
in  the  present  case  restricted  by  the  frame.  The  Carpathians  lead  to 
similar  results. 

The  Trias  of  the  Semmering,  as  opposed  to  that  of  the  East  Alps,  has 
been  termed  an  exotic  Trias.  In  the  Tauern,  where  the  relations  are 
clearer  and  displayed  on  a  much  larger  scale,  the  Trias  may  more  justly 
he  termed  indigenous  than  the  East  Alpine  Trias  itself. 

The  lower  horizons — limnic  Carboniferous,  which  can  scarcely  be 
distinguished  from  the  semicrystalline  or  crystalline  schists,  quartzite 
in  lower  Trias,  and  green-rocks — are  indications  of  the  Piedmontese  type ; 
Gyroporella^  dolomite  and  Lithodendron  limestone  are  common  to  the 
Brian^onnais  and  the  East  Alps;  the  Pentacrinus  beds  recall  the 
Brian9onnais.  The  Rhaetic  and  Arietites  beds  and  the  Jurassic  with 
Belemnites  may  be  assigned  just  as  well  to  the  Brian9onnais  as  to  the 
East  Alps. 

The  East  Limestone  Alps.  These  form  a  long  parallelogram  of  remark- 
ably uniform  breadth  which  extends  from  the  Rhine  to  Vienna,  a  distance 
of  480  kilometers.  On  the  extreme  west,  in  Vorarlberg,  its  breadth  is 
only  from  12  to  15  kilometers,  but  as  we  proceed  to  the  east,  it  already 
amounts  to  45  kilometers  just  before  reaching  Fussen  in  Bavaria,  in  the 
meridian  of  Innsbruck  to  40,  of  Salzburg  to  43,  of  Gmunden  to  48,  of  the 
Schneeberg  near  Vienna,  where  the  bend  towards  the  Carpathians  is  very 
obvious,  to  37  kilometers.  The  constriction  of  the  inner  zones  of  the  Alps 
on  the  Brenner  nowhere  affects  the  breadth  of  the  Limestone  zone. 

This  zone  consists  almost  exclusively  of  Mesozoic  sediments.  Since  the 
East  Alpine  sheet  forms  that  part  of  the  Alps  which  is  tectonically  the 
highest,  these  supernatant  beds  have  been  carried  forwards  without,  as 
a  rule,  suffering  any  alteration  from  pressure,  and  such  alteration  as  does 
occur  is  restricted  to  the  neighbourhood  of  friction  surfaces  along  disloca- 
tions, as  for  example  in  the  Salz-Gebirge.    The  dynamic  effect  of  heavy 

SOLLAS  IV  N 


178 


THE  EAST  ALPS 


[part  V 


superposed  masses  is  absent.  Nevertheless  there  are  folds,  overthrusts, 
recumbent  sheets  and  allied  heteropy  of  the  most  varied  nature. 

Two  features  of  a  peculiar  kind  make  their  appearance  in  this  part 
of  the  Alps. 

The  first  is  the  rectilinear  boundary  both  in  the  north  and  south.  In 
the  north  this  is  due  to  a  dislocation  along  the  Flysch,  and  indeed,  for  long 
intervals,  to  an  overthrust.  In  the  south  it  is  marked  by  lofty  limestone 
cliffs  which  resemble  a  true  scarp. 

The  highest  summits  occur  in  this  part  of  the  Alps,  and  the  sediments 
are  purely  pelagic.  We  see  no  natural  boundary,  no  trace  of  a  shore,  and 
on  the  southern  mountains  as  far  as  the  Gurk  there  are  with  trifling 
exceptions  (the  Handling  range  or  the  Gaisberg  in  East  Tyrol)  no  fore- 
lying  or  transgressive  patches.  Along  the  southern  boundary  a  not 
inconsiderable  portion  of  the  sediments  rest  unconformably  and  auto- 
chthonously  upon  rocks  extending  from  the  Silurian  to  the  lower 
Carboniferous;  the  other  portion  rests  on  still  older  rocks.  The  disloca- 
tions within  the  Limestone  zone  appear  to  be  quite  independent  of  the  two 
boundary  lines,  especially  of  the  northern  one,  and  of  greater  age ;  they  are 
frequently  cut  through  by  the  boundaries. 

The  second  peculiarity  consists  in  this,  that  the  basement  of  the 
Werfen  shales,  i.e.  the  base  of  the  Trias,  is  nowhere  visible,  except 
at  the  southern  extremity.  It  seems  as  though  all  the  dislocations 
occurring  within  the  Limestone  zone  must  come  to  an  end  within  the 
Werfen  shales  and  the  salt-formations,  which  also  belong  to  the  lower 
Trias ;  this  may  be  due  perhaps  to  a  horizontal  dragging  away  of  the  base 
or  some  other  cause.  In  like  manner  the  basement  of  the  anhydrite  group 
of  the  Trias  is  nowhere  visible  within  the  whole  breadth  of  the  Jura 
mountains.  Buxtorf  concludes  that  the  sedimentary  sheet  of  the  Jura 
has  been  detached  from  its  basement,  and  that  it  is  a  '  sheared-off '  sheet 
(Abscherungs-Decke)  ^  The  tangential  movements  in  the  Limestone  zone 
are  much  more  considerable  than  in  the  Jura  mountains,  but  this  feature 
of  their  structure  is  the  same. 

The  movements  have  occurred  at  different  times.  At  certain  places,  as 
for  instance  in  East  Tyrol  and  especially  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
northern  boundary,  unconformable  marine  transgressions  show  that  parts 
of  the  structure  are  of  pre-Cenomanian  age,  as  in  the  Carpathians.  In 
other  places  the  Gosau  deposits  begin  with  conglomerate,  and  lignite 
measures  containing  fresh- water  gasteropods  and  land  reptiles ;  they 
extend  over  different  stages  of  the  Trias  and  are  violently  disturbed  by 
the  younger  movements. 

*  A.  Buxtorf,  Zur  Tektonik  des  Kettenjura,  Ber.  XXX.  Versamml.  Oberrhein.  geol. 
Ver.  zu  Lindau,  1907, 10  pp. ;  Geologische  Beschreibung  des  Weissenstein-Tunnels,  Beitr. 
geol.  Karte  d.  Schweiz,  1907,  new  ser.,  XXI,  125  pp.,  map,  in  particular  p.  103. 


cH.v]  DEAGGING  OUT  OF  THE  BASE 


179 


The  movements  are  also,  however^  of  very  various  kinds.  Owing  to  this 
diversity  and  the  still  defective  state  of  our  knowledge,  we  can  only  add  to 
what  has  already  been  said  with  regard  to  the  imbricate  structure  of  Lower 
Austria  (I,  p.  112)  by  giving  a  few  more  examples,  and  we  are  not  in  a 
position  to  attempt  a  general  summary. 

We  must  first  return  to  the  dragging  away  of  the  base  mentioned  above. 
The  mobile  salt  clay,  in  the  Salzkammergut,  for  instance,  has  had  a  profound 
effect  on  the  Limestone  Alps,  which  load  it  down,  and  it  has  itself  been 
affected  in  turn.  By  the  force  of  the  movements  long  streaks  of  pure  rock- 
salt  have  been  separated  from  the  clay,  and  a  structure  has  been  produced 
which  Kohler  explains  by  borrowing  Becke's  account  of  the  formation  of 
crystalline  schists  ^.  By  the  same  movements  alien  patches  have  been 
dragged  along.  The  Lias,  which  was  encountered  at  a  depth  of  125  meters 
in  the  salt-boring  at  Berchtesgaden,  must  owe  its  position  to  a  thrust-plane. 
It  is  an  erratic  fragment,  like  the  boulders  of  Tithonian,  which  occur  at 
Hallstadt  in  the  midst  of  the  salt-formations,  at  a  depth  of  260  meters 
below  the  surface  ^.  These  transported  fragments,  like  the  streaks  of  pure 
salt,  point  to  the  dragging  away  of  the  base  of  the  stratified  succession  ^. 

It  is  not  so  easy  to  explain  the  fact  that,  in  spite  of  the  apparently 
horizontal  dragging  away,  intrusive  rocks  still  occur. 

The  isolated  occurrences  of  these  fragments  have  not  as  yet  received 
suflGlcient  attention.  They  lie  in  the  Werf en  shales  and  the  salt-formations,  or 
in  the  Gosau  beds,  which  so  often  rest  directly  on  the  Werf  en  shales  and  are 
pinched  in  with  them  in  the  dislocations.  On  the  south  side  of  the  Wolf- 
gang See,  between  the  sheet  of  the  Osterhorn  and  that  of  the  Schafberg, 
gabbro  with  serpentine  crops  out,  and  on  the  other  shore,  not  far  from 
St.  Gilgen,  boulders  of  tonalite,  as  big  as  houses,  lie  in  the  region  of  the 
Gosau  beds  which  belong  to  the  same  boundary.  At  several  localities 
gabbro  and  diabase  occur  as  boulders  in  the  salt-formation.  In  the  salt 
mine  of  Hallstatt  diabase  porphyrite  occurs ;  as  early  as  1879  Hauer 
described  it  as  exposed  for  a  distance  of  49  meters,  and  in  places  so 
thoroughly  broken  up  into  breccia  that  no  boundary  can  be  drawn  between 

^  E.  Kohler,  Ueber  die  sogenannten  Steinsalzziige  des  Salzstockes  von  Berchtesgaden, 
Geogn.  Jahresh.  Miinchen,  1903,  XVI,  pp.  105-124.  These  occurrences  are  very  different 
from  the  salt  masses  of  Roumania,  which  project  from  the  Miocene  clays  as  rigid  bodies 
and  control  the  folding.  It  is  possible  that  here,  on  the  border  of  the  mountains,  the 
loading  down  was  less.    Wieliczka  exhibits  a  transition  from  folding  to  milling  out. 

^  A.  R.  Schmidt,  Ueber  den  Aufschluss  des  Salzlagers  zu  Hallstatt,  Oestr.  Zeitschr. 
f  Berg-  u.  Huttenw.,  1873,  XXI,  pp.  81,  82. 

*  Aigner's  general  sections  show  clearly  the  peculiar  succession  of  strata,  according  to 
which  the  salt-formations  of  Hallstein  and  Berchtesgaden  form  a  recumbent  fold.  Der 
Salzbergbau  in  den  ostlichen  Alpen,  Jahrb.  f.  Berg-  u.  Hiittenw.,  1892,  XL,  pp.  202-380, 
in  particular  p.  211,  PI.  III. 

N  2 


180 


THE  EAST  ALPS 


[part  V 


it  and  the  salt-formation  ^.  Mojsisovics  thinks  that  fragments  of  eruptive 
rocks  occur  in  almost  all  the  exposures  of  the  salif erous  beds  2. 

These  fragments  recall  the  southern  parts  of  the  Alps.  They  are  the 
remains  of  intrusions  crushed  by  tectonic  movements  and  probably  trans- 
ported from  afar,  together  with  the  surrounding  rock.  They  are  never 
accompanied  by  Archaean  basement  fragments  and  must  not  be  confused 
with  the  Lepontine  outcrops  on  the  north  border  of  the  Limestone  Alps. 
The  occurrences  on  the  Wolfgang  See  are  particularly  remarkable  in 
this  connexion. 

To  these  occurrences  in  the  autochthonous  but  dragged- away  base  of  the 
limestone,  a  complete  contrast  is  presented  by  the  rare  but  very  clearly 
marked  phenomenon  of  peak  folding. 

On  the  east  of  the  Achen  See  (East  Tyrol),  rises  the  Sonnwend  mountain. 
It  is  formed  of  a  stratified  series  which  extends  from  the  Main  dolomite  to 
the  Cretaceous,  and  the  lower  beds,  of  great  thickness,  are  thrown  into 
broad  gentle  folds.  Wahner,  however,  as  the  result  of  studies  extending 
over  many  years,  has  succeeded  in  showing  that  violent  folding  occurs  in 
the  upper  parts  of  the  mountain,  a  discovery  to  which  he  was  led  by  the 
glaring  contrast  in  the  nature  of  the  rocks  (red  Lias,  Radiolarian  beds,  and 
hornstein  breccia  folded  in  with  white  reef-limestone).  Flakes,  or  flat  folds, 
lie  one  above  the  other  as  many  as  four  times,  or  even  oftener.  On  the 
Sonnwend  Joch  the  continuous  anticlinal  arches  are  preserved  in  such  a 
pack  of  flat  folds.  They  can  only  have  arisen  by  detachment  from  the 
thick  underlying  dolomite.  Wahner's  descriptions  recall  the  simile  applied 
by  Termier  to  another  locality — that  of  the  gale,  sweeping  over  the  summits 
of  the  forest  ^. 

Recumbent  sheets  also  occur. 

Rothpletz  long  ago  distinguished  two  sheets  in  the  Bavarian  part  of  the 
Limestone  zone. 

Ampferer  gives  an  instructive  description  from  North  Tyrol  of  the 
passage  of  long,  east-and-west  folds  into  an  equally  long  sheet  thrust 
towards  the  north  (Hindelang-Vomp  slab).  The  slab  terminates  on  the 
north  in  high  cliffs  of  Trias  limestone.  Below  them  a  younger  series  crops 
out,  which  ranges  up  to  the  Jurassic.    This  forms  the  roof  of  an  arch 

*  Most  of  the  facts  will  be  found  in  C.  v.  John,  Ueber  Eruptivgesteiue  aus  dem  Salz- 
kammergute,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reicbsanst.,  1899,  XLIX,  pp.  247-258 ;  rocks  resembling 
glaucopbane  and  green  scliists  are  also  mentioned.  Under  these  circumstances  it  is 
doubtful  whether  the  Wehrlite  of  the  Traun  terrace  at  Gmiinden  has  really  been  trans- 
ported from  the  Bohemian  mass.  Even  far  to  the  east  at  Wiirflach  (not  far  from  Wiener 
Neustadt)  a  serpentine  mass  occurs  in  the  Werfen  shales. 

'  E.  V.  Mojsisovics,  Erlauterung  zur  Special-Karte,  Zone  15,  Col.  IX  (Ischl  and  Hall- 
statt),  1905,  p.  7. 

'  F.  Wahner,  Das  Sonnwendgebirge  im  unteren  Innthal,  I,  4to,  Leipzig  and  Vienna, 
1903,  356  pp.,  map ;  for  the  underlying  beds  of  the  Sonnwendjoch,  see,  in  particular, 
PI.  1;  also  Ampferer,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1902,  p.  108. 


CH.V]  SHEETS  OF  THE  EAST  LIMESTONE  ALPS  181 


(Stanser  Joch),  which  was  once  surmounted  by  the  slab ;  on  its  further 
(northern)  side  the  slab  has  left  behind  patches,  which  are  8  to  10  kilometers 
distant  from  its  existing  edge  ^. 

We  have  stated  that  the  slab  (Hinterau-Vomp)  surmounted  the  arch 
(Stanser  Joch),  but  it  is  not  impossible  that  the  arching  up  of  the  Joch  is 
later  than  the  over- thrusting,  i.  e.  that  the  relation  of  the  high  Swiss  chains 
(Morcles,  Diablerets,  and  others)  to  the  recumbent  sheets  of  the  Chablais 
and  elsewhere  is  repeated  here 

Two  sheets  at  least  play  a  very  important  part  in  the  structure  of  the 
Salzkammergut.  The  situation  has  not  yet  been  explained  in  detail,  but 
in  these  fossiliferous  regions  the  heteropy  is  particularly  instructive. 

In  the  Alps  two  extreme  types  of  marine  sediment  may  be  observed, 
that  of  the  lagoon — the  salt  and  gypsum  facies  (in  the  lower  Trias),  and 
that  of  the  deep  sea — Radiolarian  rocks  (chiefly,  no  doubt,  Jurassic),  and  the 
Aptychus  limestones,  which  range  up  into  the  Neocomian.  The  great 
masses  of  limestone  and  dolomite  between  these  two  extremes  correspond 
to  more  moderate  but  still  considerable  depths. 

In  all  formations,  and  in  parts  of  the  earth  most  remote  from  one 
another,  we  encounter  stratified  limestones ;  and  from  what  is  known 
regarding  the  partings  (II,  p.  264),  it  would  appear  that  the  stratification 
is  very  often,  and  perhaps  always,  effected  by  terrigenous  intercalations. 
This,  however,  throws  no  light  on  the  origin  of  the  fine  stratification  or 
lamination,  apart  from  the  terrigenous  supply,  displayed  by  the  Radiolarian 
rocks ;  and  hence  arises  another  question :  whether  this  supply  is  rhythmically 
controlled, 

A  photograph  of  the  Dent  de  Mezdi  (2,888  meters ;  Dinarides)  shows 
235  bedding-planes,  one  above  the  other ;  and  neither  in  the  ragged  peaks 
nor  at  the  bottom  of  the  picture  does  the  series  terminate.  We  are  acquainted 
also  with  stratified  dolomites  (II,  p.  263,  note  3).  Most  East  Alpine  lime- 
stones are  stratified,  and  the  compact  reef-limestone  (in  the  Tithonian,  for 
instance),  is  an  exception. 

According  to  the  observations  of  SoUas  and  his  colleagues  in  Funafuti 
the  dolomites  may  be  regarded  as  formed  by  subsequent  submarine  altera- 
tion of  the  limestone  ^.    The  limestone  itself  is  of  organic  origin,  and  has, 

^  0.  Ampferer  andW.  Hammer,  Geologische  Beschreibung  des  Siid-Theiles  des  Karwendel- 
gebirges,  Jahrb.  k.k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1898,  XLVIII,  pp.  289-374,  map;  0.  Ampferer, 
Geologische  Beschreibung  des  Nord-Theiles,  &c.,  op.  cit.,  1903,  LIII,  pp.  169-252,  with 
tectonic  stereogram  by  Hammer,  and,  in  particular,  Verh.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1906, 
p.  272  ;  also  A.  Rothpletz,  Alpenforschungen,  II,  pp.  187-204. 

*  This  is  also  indicated  by  Ampferer ;  at  the  same  time  he  describes  the  recumbent 
sheets  with  caution  and  reserve.  The  evidence  of  the  basement  patches  (Rappenspitz) 
removes  all  doubt ;  cf.  A.  Rothpletz,  Geologische  Alpenforschungen,  II,  p.  202,  fig.  86. 

^  The  Atoll  of  Funafuti  (published  by  the  Royal  Society),  London,  1904,  4to,  and 
Atlas;  in  particular  Judd,  p.  373  et  seq. 


182 


THE  EAST  ALPS 


[part  V 


no  doubt,  been  produced  chiefly  by  foraminifera ;  the  calcareous  algae  and 
the  corals  play  only  a  secondary  part.  The  terrigenous  supply  occurs  not 
only  in  partings,  but  also  as  a  colouring  admixture,  which  may  either  be 
inorganic  (red  and  yellow)  or  organic  (black).  The  terrigenous  origin  of  the 
red  and  yellow  element  (chiefly  iron)  is  not  so  certain  as  that  of  the  black, 
but  Funafuti  has  shown  us  that  even  on  atolls  remarkable  bituminous 
deposits  may  occur. 

Too  great  importance  has  been  assigned  to  nodules  of  manganese  ;  they 
may  have  been  produced,  as  in  the  Tertiary  deposits  of  Russia,  by  Fucoids. 

In  the  Salzkammergut  it  is  plainly  evident  that  pure  white  limestones 
and  dolomites  predominate  in  the  southern  part  of  the  Limestone  Alps,  and 
that  towards  the  north  the  terrigenous  element  increases  in  the  form  of 
partings,  and  the  limestones  acquire  a  more  variegated  coloration.  This 
change  is  carried  so  far  that  Mojsisovics  was  led  to  conclude  that  the  thick 
light-coloured  limestones,  classed  together  as  the  Dachstein-kalk,  correspond 
to  at  least  seven  palaeontological  zones  of  the  Trias  and  six  of  the  Lias  ^ 
According  to  this  view  these  zones  are  only  intercalations  in  a  common 
pelagic  formation ;  Diener  arrived  at  a  similar  conclusion  with  regard  to 
the  relations  of  the  Trias  to  the  Lias  in  the  Himalaya  ^. 

At  the  same  time  it  must  be  observed  that  in  many  great  limestone- 
formations  perfectly  white  sediments  occur  devoid  of  the  terrigenous 
element,  and  these  are  distinguished  by  an  unusual  abundance  of  organic 
remains  (perhaps  owing  to  the  trifling  amount  of  sediment).  Examples  of 
these  white  sediments  are  afforded  by  the  Permian  beds  of  the  Tibetan 
recumbent  sheets,  the  Gasteropod-bearing  limestones  of  the  Marmolata  in 
the  Dinarides  (Trias),  and  the  Brachiopod  beds  of  the  Hierlatz  stage  (upper 
Lias),  and  of  Vils  and  Windischgarsten  (Kelloway  stage)  in  the  East  Alps. 

A  lithological  and  a  faunal  facies  must  be  distinguished.  In  most 
cases,  it  is  true,  the  sediment  and  the  fauna  change  simultaneously,  and  it  is 
this  holisopy  which  facilitates  the  delimitation  of  the  stages  in  nature. 
The  holisopy  may  be  repeated  at  places  extremely  remote  from  one  another ; 
G.  Boehm  has  shown  that  vicarious  isopy  occurs  in  several  stages  of  the 
Jurassic,  between  Europe  and  the  Sunda  Islands.  Diener  has  recognized 
the  pure  holisopy  of  several  stages  of  the  Trias,  and  especially  of  the  very 
characteristic  red  Lias  (beds  of  Adnet)  in  the  north-east  Limestone  Alps 
and  the  Tibetan  sheet,  and  he  justly  points  out  how  striking  is  the  contrast 
presented  by  the  heterotypy  of  the  adjacent  sediments  in  the  Alps  ^ 

^  E.  V.  Mojsisovics,  Ueber  den  chronologischen  Umfang  des  Dachsteinkalkes,  Sitzb.  k. 
Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1896,  CV,  pp.  5-40,  in  particular  p.  34.  One  of  the  most  serious 
attempts  to  distinguish  regions  characterized  by  different  facies  in  the  East  Alpine  Trias 
has  been  made  by  Bose,  Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1898,  pp.  695-761. 

C.  Diener,  Beitrag  zur  Kenntniss  der  mittel-  und  obertriadischen  Faunen  von  Spiti, 
Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1906,  CXV,  pp.  757-778,  in  particular  p.  773. 

»  C.  Diener,  op.  cit,  1907,  CXVI,  p.  608  et  seq. 


CH.  V] 


WHITE  LIMESTONE 


183 


With  the  view  of  giving  an  example  we  will  now  proceed  from  the 
Dachstein  mountains  into  the  Salzkammergut,  i.  e.  from  south  to  north. 

In  the  Dachstein  mountains  indications  of  a  clearly  terrigenous  intercala- 
tion (Cardita  beds)  of  trifling  thickness,  and  often  scarcely  discoverable,  rest 
upon  the  Wetterstein  limestone  which  is  about  1,000  meters  thick  ;  upon  this 
follows  about  1,000  meters  of  dolomite  and  stratified  Dachstein  limestone,  con- 
taining towards  the  summit  some  intercalated  reddish  beds,  then  in  irregular 
superposition  the  white  crinoidal  and  Brachiopod  limestone  of  the  Hierlatz 
stage  (zone  of  Ammonites  oxynotus)  without  terrigenous  indications. 

To  the  north  follows  the  not  very  broad  zone  of  the  Hallstatt  Salt- 
formation,  which  is  of  completely  different  composition.  North  of  this  zone 
rises  the  Hohe  Kallenherg ;  it  repeats  the  f  acies  of  the  Dachstein.  Along  the 
upper  boundary  of  the  thick  Wetterstein  limestone  follows,  as  in  the  Dach- 
stein, the  dark,  and  in  this  place  oolitic,  band  of  the  Cardita  beds  which,  in 
the  mountains  situated  still  further  to  the  north-east,  contains  the  fauna  of 
Raibl ;  it  is  accompanied  by  a  thin  layer  of  grey  sandstone,  which  swells 
out  towards  the  north-east  and  furnishes  the  terrestrial  flora  of  Lunz  (lower 
Keuper,  Newark  system  of  the  eastern  United  States).  The  higher  cliffs  of 
the  Kallenberg  consist  of  dolomite  and  stratified  Dachstein  limestone. 

North-west  of  the  Kallenberg  lies  the  broad  and  regularly  stratified 
mass  of  the  Osterhorn.  Here  we  see  feeble,  argillaceous  partings,  with 
terrestrial  plants  and  fishes,  intercalated  between  the  bedding  planes  of  the 
Dachstein  limestone ;  they  increase  in  importance  towards  the  summit,  pass 
into  dark  limestone  beds  with  a  littoral  Rhaetic  fauna,  until  finally  the  light 
Dachstein  limestone  disappears,  and  the  Rhaetic  stage  entirely  fills  its  place 
(II,  p.  269).  Then  follows,  not  the  light  Trias  of  the  Hierlatz  stage,  but 
dark  limestone  with  Psiloceras,  and  the  whole  series  of  the  brown,  yellow, 
red,  and  grey  Lias  up  to  the  iron-bearing  beds  with  Stephanoceras  Sauzei  ; 
and  last  comes  the  upper  Jurassic. 

The  argillaceous  terrigenous  element,  and  the  bright  colours  of  the 
limestones  clearly  indicate  an  unmistakable  approach  to  the  f acies  of  the  fore- 
land. For  this  reason  the  argillaceous  partings  with  Avicula  contorta  and 
the  Raibl  beds  with  Myophoria  Kiefersteini  afforded,  many  years  ago,  the 
first  annectant  threads  with  the  f acies  of  the  foreland.  Wahner  has  gathered 
the  details  together  in  the  case  of  the  Lias,  and  has  shown  that  the  sediment 
may  be  so  thin  in  places  that  a  stage,  that  of  Schlotheimia  marmorea,  for 
example,  is  only  represented  by  a  frequently  interrupted  crust  of  brown 
iron  ore  ^. 

^  F.  Wahner,  Zur  heteropischen  Differenzierung  der  alpinen  Lias,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol. 
Reichsanst.,  1886,  pp.  168,  190;  in  addition  detailed  palaeontological  treatises  in  Mojsi- 
sovics  and  Neumayr,  Beitrage  zur  Palaeontologie,  &c.,  1882  and  later ;  also  Pompecki, 
Palaeozoische  Beziehungen  zwischen  den  untersten  Liaszonen  der  Alpen  und  Schwabens, 
Yortrag  im  Yer.  f.  vaterl.  Naturk.  Wiirttemberg,  1892,  pp.  xlii-liv. 


184 


THE  EAST  ALPS 


[part  V 


Three  successive  and  important  parts  of  the  range — the  Dachstein, 
Kallenberg,  and  Osterhorn — have  now  been  cited  ;  they  are  to  some  extent 
comparable  and  present  distinct  connecting  links,  although  not  indeed  com- 
plete isopy.  East  of  the  Kallenberg,  on  the  right  side  of  the  Traun  valley,  the 
completely  divergent  facies  of  Hallstatt  prevails  along  the  Raschberg.  Little 
is  to  be  seen  of  the  pelagic  limestones  and  dolomites  of  the  Kallenberg, 
which  are  at  least  1,300  meters  thick.  The  characteristic  members  are  the 
Salt- deposits  and  the  typical  Hallstatt  beds.  Mojsisovics  has  marked  them 
along  two  elongated  bands  (Berchtesgaden  to  Hallstatt,  St.  Wolfgang 
nearly  as  far  as  Lietzen)  ^.  The  second  band  bounds  on  the  north  the  mass 
of  the  Osterhorn,  on  this  boundary  lie  the  above-mentioned  occurrences  of 
gabbro  and  tonalite  on  the  Wolfgang  See,  and  north  of  the  lake  lies  the 
Schafberg,  the  rocks  of  which  are  intensely  folded  and  present  a  facies 
altogether  different  from  that  of  the  Osterhorn,  particularly  in  the  case  of 
the  Lias. 

Thus,  two  facies  at  least  occur  in  the  Salzkammergut,  that  of  the  Dach- 
stein, Kallenberg,  and  Osterhorn,  and  that  of  Hallstatt,  Raschberg,  and 
Wolfgang.  Of  the  first,  that  of  the  Osterhorn  would  correspond  to  the 
development  which  is  often  described  as  the  Bajuvarian,  but  this,  according 
to  Rothpletz,  separates  into  at  least  two  sheets  in  Bavaria  itself.  The 
second,  or  Hallstatt  sheet,  if  it  lay  on  the  western  border  of  the  Alps,  would 
probably  be  correlated,  owing  to  traces  of  intrusions,  with  the  sheet  of 
green-rocks,  that  is  the  uppermost  horizon  of  the  Lepontine  group.  It 
certainly  lies  lower  than  this  group  ^. 

This  example  illustrates  the  difficulties  with  which  we  are  confronted. 

The  Flysch  and  the  Lepontine  belt  ^.    If  we  enter  the  East  Alps  from 

^  E.  V.  Mojsisovics  in  Diener,  Bau  und  Bild  Oesterreichs,  p.  387,  fig.  2,  and  Erlautemng 
zur  geologischen  Special-Karte,  Zone  15,  Col.  IX,  1:75,000,  1905.  This  gives  detailed 
information  on  the  stratigraphical  series. 

^  That  the  Salzkammergut  is  divided  into  three  regions,  characterized  by  different 
facies,  was  asserted  by  Mojsisovics  as  early  as  1879  in  his  DolomitrifFe  von  Siidtirol,  Svo, 
p.  87  ;  in  the  south  and  north  the  pelagic  Dachstein  facies  prevails,  and  between  these 
the  Osterhorn  facies.  For  the  disposition  of  the  Hallstatter  facies,  Bittner's  description 
of  the  Lamm  district  is  important,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1884,  pp.  79,  99,  858  ; 
Rothpletz,  Geologische  Alpenforschungen,  II,  p.  183,  shows  the  presence  of  pelagic 
beside  Bunter  facies,  separated  only  by  a  dislocation  in  the  Eldernbach  near  Vils ;  Bose 
describee  Dachstein  limestone  above  Jurassic  Aptychus  limestone  on  the  Hohe  Gdll.  Haug, 
Les  Nappes  de  charriage  des  Alpes  calcaires  septentrionales,  et  2®  parties, Bull.  Soc.  geol. 
France,  1906,  4®  ser.,  VI,  pp.  359-422,  contains  an  attempt  at  a  general  survey.  Four 
sheets  are  distinguished  in  this  important  work,  namely  the  Bavarian  sheet  (B),  the  Salt 
sheet  (S),  the  Hallstatt  sheet  (H),  and  the  Dachstein  sheet  (D) ;  of  these  (D)  corresponds 
to  the  pelagic,  (B)  to  the  Bunter  (Osterhorn),  (S)  and  (H)  to  the  Hallstatt  facies.  Diener 
raises  the  objection  that,  according  to  Haug,  (S)  and  (H)  should  be  intermediate  between 
(B)  and  (D),  whereas  in  fact  (B)  and  (D)  lie  nearer  one  another ;  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1907. 
Haug's  publication  is  not  yet  complete. 

'  Most  of  the  localities  mentioned  in  the  west  may  be  seen  on  Giimbel's  Geologische 
Karte  von  Bayem,  sheets  I-IV. 


CH.V]  THE  FLYSCH  185 

the  north  we  encounter,  south  of  the  Molasse,  the  Flysch  zone— almost 
exclusively  Cretaceous  and  lower  Tertiary — then  a  Lepontine  belt  which  is 
particularly  well-marked  in  the  east,  and  not  till  we  pass  to  the  other  side 
of  this  belt  do  we  reach  the  Trias  of  the  Limestone  zone.  At  the  same  time 
the  folds  of  the  Limestone  zone  are  overlain  from  east  to  west  in  unconform- 
able transgression  by  Cretaceous  patches  of  two  kinds,  one  of  the  Flysch 
and  the  other  of  the  Gosau  facies. 

Let  us  return  to  the  northern  shore  of  the  Walen  See  in  Switzerland. 
Arnold  Heim  observes  that  the  Mattstock,  formed  of  Cretaceous  limestone, 
rears  itself  up  squeezed  into  the  nagelflue  of  the  Molasse.  Wherever 
Eocene  Flysch  lies  between,  it  is  crushed,  and  the  Mattstock  itself  is  a 
fragment  of  a  sheet  ^.  Gulmen,  Stock,  and  Goggeien  are  similar  crushed 
limestone  rocks,  and  all  of  them,  along  with  the  Churfirsten  and  the 
Santis,  are  parts  of  a  sheet  without  roots  2.  They  are  continued  towards 
the  east-north- east  across  the  Rhine.  At  the  same  time  there  are  signs  of 
diminished  pressure,  and  with  this  one  Flysch  zone  makes  its  appearance 
to  the  north  and  another  to  the  south  of  the  broad  range  of  Cretaceous 
limestone  which  runs  through  Vorarlberg.  Vacek,  many  years  ago,  gave  a 
detailed  description  of  its  several  folds,  and  of  its  stratified  series,  which 
resembles  that  of  the  Santis  ^. 

The  Cretaceous  range  and  the  two  Flysch  bands  reach  the  Iller.  Here 
a  great  transverse  dislocation  sets  in  towards  the  north ;  the  northern 
Flysch  band  disappears ;  the  Cretaceous  range,  much  diminished  in  breadth, 
comes  in  again  on  the  Griinten,  north  of  Sonthof en,  and  now  forms  the  outer 
border  of  the  Flysch  zone ;  the  southern  Flysch  zone  is  continued  further. 

The  Griinten  still  belongs  to  the  Cretaceous  facies  of  the  Santis,  the 
characteristic  members  of  which  are  here  Gault-Greensand,  Seewen  lime- 
stone, and  the  Senonian  Seewen  marl.  This  Santis  facies  runs  as  a  narrow 
belt  along  the  north  border  of  the  Flysch.  Traces  of  it  are  known  even  in 
the  vicinity  of  the  Isar,  and  Giimbel  marks  them  still  further  to  the  east. 
We  regard  this  belt,  like  the  Santis  itself,  as  the  border  of  a  sheet,  sometimes 
completely  crushed,  which  crops  out  from  the  south  from  beneath  the  Flysch 
zone. 

At  the  same  time  the  Cenomanian  occurs  in  transgression  over  parts  of 
the  Limestone  zone  in  long  bands  of  fine  grained  sandstone  with  Orhitulina 

1  Arnold  Heim,  Die  Brandung  der  Alpen  am  Nagelfluhgebirge,  and  Die  Erscheinungen 
der  Langszerreissung  und  Abquetscbung  am  Nordschweizer  Alpenrande,  Vierteljahrschr. 
Naturf.  Ges.  Zurich,  1906,  LI,  pp.  441-472,  map. 

*  Albrecht  Heim,  Das  Santisgebirge,  Beitrag  geol.  Karte  d.  Schweiz,  new  ser.,  XVI, 
4to,  1905, 654  pp.,  atlas,  passim ;  in  particular  Arnold  Heim,  op.  cit.,  p.  450,  and  E.  Blumer, 
op.  cit.,  map  on  p.  599. 

^  F.  Freiberr  v.  Richthofen,  Die  Kalkalpen  von  Vorarlberg  und  Nord-Tirol,  Jabrb.  k.  k. 
Reichsanst.,  1859,  X,  pp.  72-137,  and  1861-1865,  XII,  pp.  87-206 ;  M.  Vacek,  Ueber 
die  Vorarlberger  Kreide,  op.  cit.,  1879,  XXIX,  pp.  659-758. 


186 


THE  EAST  ALPS 


[PAKT  V 


eoncava.  A  particularly  long  band  of  this  kind  lies  close  to  the  north 
border  of  the  Limestone  zone,  only  separated  in  places  from  the  Flysch  by 
a  narrow  band  of  Trias.  It  probably  begins  at  Hindelang,  and  attains  its 
greatest  degree  of  continuity  in  the  Ammergau  and  thence  onwards  east 
of  the  Isar,  and  probably  yet  further  towards  the  east.  In  this  band  we 
observ^e,  above  the  transgressive  Cenomanian,  the  first  remains  of  the  Gosau 
beds  with  their  completely  southern  character,  the  Hippurites  and  corals. 
Sohle  justly  emphasizes  the  difference  between  this  facies  and  that  of  the 
Santis  ^. 

The  Gosau  beds  of  the  East  Alps  comprise  several  members  extending 
into  the  Senonian  ;  as  to  their  order  there  is  still  some  difference  of  opinion  ^. 
But  all  observers  are  agreed  that  the  Inoceramus  marl  with  Pachydiscus 
Neiibergiciis  is  the  highest  member.  Grossouvre  places  it  in  the  Cam- 
panian  ^. 

This  uppermost  member  corresponds  in  many  of  its  characters  with  the 
Bavarian  Flysch.  Inoceramus  has  been  found  in  the  Flysch ;  Pachydiscus 
Neuhergicus  is  common  to  the  Flysch  and  the  Inoceramus  marls  of  the 
Gosau.  But  the  species  of  Inoceramus,  as  far  as  comparison  has  been 
made,  are  different  from  those  of  the  Gosau  The  thickness  of  the  Flysch 
is  also  incomparably  greater.  The  lower  and  typical  members  of  the  Gosau 
with  their  corals,  Rudistes,  Actaeonellas,  Omphalias  and  other  forms,  have 
never  yet  been  found  in  the  Flysch  zone  ^. 

The  Bavarian  Flysch  is  overlain  by  marly  shales,  greyish-green  in 
colour,  and  towards  their  upper  part  variegated  or  red.  In  these  beds  a 
fauna  makes  its  appearance  which  contains  an  obvious  admixture  of 
northern  J  extra- Alpine^  upper  Senonian  forms ;  and  they  include^  in 
common  with  the  Flysch^  the  Fucoids  and  the  great  thin-shelled  Inoceramus 
{Inoceramus  Salishurgensis).  Here,  and  indeed,  according  to  Reis,  chiefly 
in  the  upper  horizons,  Belemnitella  mucronata  occurs  in  abundance,  and  at 
the  same  time  Gryphaea  vesicularis,  Ostraea  ungulata,  0.  curvirostris,  and 
other  well-known  upper  Cretaceous  species.    Above  these,  still  other  stages 

^  U.  Sohle,  Geologische  Aufnahme  des  Labergebirges  near  Ober-Ammergau,  Geogn. 
Jahresh.  Munchen,  18(96)97,  IX,  pp.  1-66,  map,  and  Das  Ammer-Gebirge,  op.  cit., 
18(98)99,  XI,  pp.  39-87,  map. 

^  In  particular  there  seems  to  me  gooS  reason  for  doubt  as  to  the  high  position  assigned 
to  the  coal  of  Grunbach. 

^  A.  de  Grossouvre,  Recherches  sur  la  Craie  Superieure  (Memoire  pour  servir  a  I'expli- 
cation  de  la  Carte  geologique),  II,  4to,  Paris,  1901  ;  La  Craie  dans  les  Alpes  orientales, 
pp.  597-646. 

*  W.  Petrascheck,  Ueber  Inocei-amen  an  dem  Gosau  und  dem  Flysch  der  Nordalpen, 
.Tahrb,  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1906,  LVI,  pp.  155-168.  We  must  also  mention  the  great 
Inoceramus  Salishurgensis  from  North  Africa. 

^  The  sphaerulite  found  at  Liebenstein  in  Bavaria  belongs  to  the  zone  of  the  Silntis 
facies.    Rothpletz,  Geologische  Alpenforschungen,  II,  pp.  215-219. 


cH.v]  FLYSCH  IN  UPPEE  AUSTKIA  187 


(Pattenau,  Gerhartsreuter,  Hachau  beds)  are  distinguished,  which  are  of 
trifling  thickness,  and  have  little  importance  for  the  questions  treated  here  ^. 

In  the  Pattenau  beds  we  still  find  associated  together  Belemnitella 
mucronata  of  the  white  chalk,  and  Inoceramus  Scdishurgensis  of  the 
Flysch,  and  Fackydiscus  Neuhergicus  of  the  uppermost  Gosau  beds. 

The  whole  breadth  of  the  Flysch  zone  is  overfolded  to  the  north  as  far 
as  Salzburg  and  far  beyond  it. 

There  is  a  universal  dip  to  the  south.  On  the  north  border  the 
Nierenthal  beds,  and  still  higher  beds  of  the  Cretaceous,  crop  out  from 
beneath  the  Flysch,  and  from  beneath  these  the  Eocene.  The  investigations 
of  J.  Bohm,  and  particularly  the  studies  which  Reis  has  made  of  the  structure 
of  the  Eocene  iron-ores,  show  that  the  Eocene  and  the  highest  part  of  the 
Cretaceous  are  repeated  by  thrust-planes  dipping  to  the  south  and  broken 
up  into  scales  or  flakes  at  the  base  of  the  Flysch,  which  is  here  very  thick  ^. 
Again  in  the  beautiful  section  of  Mattsee  (Upper  Austria)  we  see  Flysch 
resting  upon  Nierenthal  beds  with  Belemnitella  and  these  upon  Eocene. 

On  the  south  border  of  the  Flysch  zone  the  case  is  different.  While  in 
the  north  the  uppermost  Cretaceous  and  the  Eocene  are  sometimes  exposed 
over  broad,  irregular  surfaces,  as  for  instance  south  of  Teisendorf ,  or  the 
Eocene  at  least  remains  visible  in  an  easily  recognizable  belt,  as  to  the 
north  of  Salzburg  ;  in  the  south,  on  the  other  hand,  the  southern  dip  carries 
the  Flysch  straight  under  the  Trias,  or  under  a  zone  of  Aptychus  limestone, 
which  lies  in  front  of  the  Trias,  and  in  striking  independence  of  it ;  only 
rarely  indeed  are  Eocene  and  Nierenthal  beds  visible  at  all  on  the  south 
boundary.  A  pinched-in  patch  of  these  beds  does,  however,  occur  in  the 
Gschliefgraben  near  Gmunden ;  according  to  Fugger's  description  it  dips  to 
the  south  beneath  the  Trias,  so  that  the  Eocene  dips  beneath  the  Trias 
This  circumstance  shows  that  the  Flysch  zone  must  be  regarded  in  fact 
as  an  independent  formation  concealed  in  part  by  the  Limestone  zone 
which  comes  up  from  the  south. 

A  series  of  Tertiary  patches,  lying  transversely  across  the  strike  of  the 
Limestone  range,  extends  along  the  north-west  slopes  of  the  Untersberg 
beyond  Salzburg  towards  Reichenhall,  proceeds  south-west  to  near  Reit  im 
Winkel,  and  thence  onwards  through  north-east  Tyrol  in  an  almost 
unbroken  band  into  the  Innthal;  it  continues  in  this  valley  still  further 
towards  the  south-west  into  the  neighbourhood  of  Worgl,  and  according  to 

^  J.  Bohm,  Die  Kreidebildungen  des  Fiirberg's  und  Sulzberg's  bei  Siegsdorf  in  Ober- 
Bayern,  Palaeontograpbica,  1891-92,  XXXVIII,  pp.  1-106,  map  ;  0.  Reis,  Erlauterung  zu 
der  geologiscben  Karte  der  Vorderalpenzone  zwischen  Bergen  und  Teisendorf,  Geogn. 
Jahresh.,  18(95)96,  VIII,  pp.  1-155,  map;  Fauna  der  Hachauer  Scliicbten,  op.  cit., 
18(96)97,  IX,  pp.  67-104. 

^  0.  Reis,  Zur  Geologie  der  Eisenoolithe  fuhrenden  Eocanschichten  am  Kressenberg  in 
Bayern,  Geogn.  Jahresh.,  18(97)98,  X,  pp.  24-49,  PI.  I,  fig.  1. 

*  E.  Fugger,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1904,  LIII,  p.  338. 


188  THE  EAST  ALPS  [party 

certain  statements  even  further  up  the  river.  It  includes  the  lignite  forma- 
tions of  Haring,  and  belongs  to  the  Vicentine  series  of  Laverda  and  Gom- 
berto  ^.    It  bears  a  southern  stamp. 

In  the  region  occupied  by  these  patches  some  remains  of  Cenomanian 
are  also  preserved,  and  in  the  Innthal  below  Kuf stein  Schlosser  has  discovered 
the  Nierenthal  beds ;  here,  too,  they  contain  the  great  flat  Inoceramus  Salis- 
burgensis  of  the  Flysch  which,  while  separated  from  the  Gosau  beds,  is  thus 
present  in  the  Limestone  Alps  ^. 

According  to  Giimbel's  account  we  must  conclude  that  these  patches 
are  the  remains  of  beds  which  were  deposited  unconformably  on  the  Lime- 
stone mountains,  and  were  then,  at  least  near  Reit  im  Winkel,  let  down  in 
more  or  less  trough-like  faults.  Gumbel  justly  infers  that  the  later  disloca- 
tions of  the  high  mountains  were  movements  in  mass,  and  not  isolated 
foldings  ;  this  would  explain  the  fact  that  the  Molasse  mountains  lying  in 
front  of  the  great  range  were  laterally  compressed,  while  in  these  patches 
no  signs  of  lateral  pressure  can  be  perceived  ^.  The  Limestone  zone  was 
carried  forwards  as  a  whole  after  it  was  folded,  and  this  part  of  the  folding 
was  older  than  the  Cenomanian,  but  the  general  movement  was  more 
recent  than  some  stages  of  the  Tertiary. 

Having  gained  this  information,  and  particularly  the  fact  that  the 
Cenomanian  transgression  extends  unconformably  over  part  of  the  Lime- 
stone Alps,  and  that  the  upper  Senonian,  including  the  Nierenthal  beds, 
may  follow  it,  let  us  turn  our  attention  to  the  east. 

Here,  too,  even  up  to  the  most  easterly  extremity  of  the  Limestone  zone, 
the  same  transgression  is  known,  characterized  in  the  same  way  by  Orbi- 
tulina  concava,  and  again  followed,  by  the  Senonian  up  to  the  Inoceramus 
marls.  These  facts  have  been  admirably  set  forth  by  Geyer  in  a  study  of 
the  lower  Enns  valley*.  But  we  must  not  conclude  that  the  southern 
boundary  of  the  Flysch  is  marked  only  by  overfoldings  of  such  limited 
extent.    It  is  a  boundary  of  the  first  order,  and  from  the  Rhine  to  the 

^  0.  Reis,  Die  Korallen  der  Reiter  Scliicliten,  Geol.  Jahresh.,  1889,  II,  pp.  91-162 ; 
K.  Deninger,  Molluskenfauna  von  Reit  im  Winkel  und  Reichenhall,  op.  cit.,  1901,  XIV, 
pp.  221-245 ;  J.  Dreger,  Gastropoden  von  Haring,  Ann.  k.  k.  naturhist.  Hofmus.  Wien, 
1892,  VII,  pp.  11-34  ;  and  Lamellibranchae  von  Haring,  .Tahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reiclisanst., 
1903,  LIII,  pp.  253-284  (p.  262,  bore-holes  in  the  Muschelkalk  filled  with  Tertiary  marls, 
therefore  hardly  overthrust  segments).  According  to  older  statements  an  Eocene  stage 
also  seemed  to  be  represented  at  Reichenhall ;  cf.  T.  Fuchs,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst., 
1874,  p.  132.  Remnants  of  a  Cenomanian  basement  occur  in  places,  e.  g.  M.  Schlosser, 
op.  cit.,  1893,  p.  195.  For  the  south-western  localities,  Leusch,  Kaisergebirge,  Zeitschr. 
d.  Ferdinandeum,  Innsbruck,  1907,  3rd  ser.,  LI,  pp.  53-137,  map. 

2  M.  Schlosser,  Centralblatt  f.  Min.,  &c.,  1904,  p.  657. 

'  C.  W.  v.  Gumbel,  Die  geologische  Stellung  der  Tertiarschichten  von  Reit  im  Winkel, 
Geogn.  Jahresh.  Miinchen,  1889,  II,  pp.  163-175,  in  particular  p.  169. 

*  G.  Geyer,  Ueber  die  Gosaubildungen  des  unteren  Ennsthales  und  ihre  Beziehungen 
zum  Kreideflysch,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1907,  pp.  55-76. 


CH.v]  THE  LEPONTINE  BELT  189 

Danube  separates  the  Flysch  zone  from  the  Limestone  zone  as  an  indepen- 
dent tectonic  element.  It  is,  as  Bittner  says,  'one  of  the  most  sharply 
marked  features  in  the  structure  of  the  north-east  Alps.  ^ ' 

The  line  stands  out  very  clearly  on  the  map.  Sometimes  the  Limestone 
lies  more  nearly  horizontal  on  the  Flysch,  at  others  it  is  more  steeply 
inclined.  The  Flysch  is  in  part  Cretaceous,  and  in  part  lower  Tertiary. 
The  strike  of  its  folds  is  independent  of  the  direction  of  its  boundary,  as 
has  been  shown  by  Paul  in  particular  ^.  The  transgression  shovsrs  us  that 
some  very  important  movements  occurred  before  the  Cenomanian  and  others 
much  later,  as  was  also  the  case  in  the  window  of  the  Paring,  for  example, 
and  over  a  large  part  of  the  Carpathians. 

It  is  along  this  dislocation  also  that  the  Lepontine  belt  crops  out.  In 
Bavaria  it  is  only  represented  by  the  basement  patches  in  the  region  of 
Oberstdorf  and  Ritterschwang.  Besides  the  great  boulders  of  Archaean, 
we  find  diabase  porphyry,  and  limestone  with  chert,  as  well  as  other  rocks. 
The  great  block  of  granite,  10  meters  in  length,  on  the  summit  of  the 
Bolgen  is  also  assigned  to  this  belt.  Above  the  Flysch  zone  isolated  masses 
of  Aptychus  limestone  are  to  be  seen;  Rothpletz  suggests  that  they  are 
remnants  of  fragments  let  down  from  above  ^. 

In  the  east  the  traces  of  the  Lepontine  belt  are  more  considerable. 

As  early  as  1853,  when  the  Alpine  Brachiopods  formed  the  subject  of 
investigation,  the  necessity  was  recognized  of  separating  from  the  Kossen 
beds  a  particular  group,  the  Gresten  beds,  characterized  by  their  black 
colour  and  by  particular  species  (Spirifer  Haueri,  Rhynchonella  austriaca 
and  others).  A  little  later  F.  von  Hauer  described  the  fauna  of  the  Lias 
and  explained  its  connexion  with  the  so-called  Alpine  coal.  Subsequently 
when  Lipoid  was  entrusted  with  the  investigation  of  this  Alpine  coal,  and 
Stur  at  the  same  time  made  a  study  of  its  flora,  it  was  seen  that  two  series 
of  lignite  beds  occur  in  the  Alps  of  Lower  Austria,  namely  that  containing 
the  flora  of  Lunz  (lower  Keuper)  and  that  containing  the  flora  of  Gresten 
(Rhaetic  and  Lias).  It  was  also  shown  that  the  black  marine  Lias  of  Gresten, 
along  with  the  lignite  series  of  the  same  locality,  both  of  which  present  a 
facies  different  from  that  of  all  other  Alpine  exposures,  occur  only  on  the 
boundary  between  the  Limestone  and  the  Flysch^. 

^  A.  Bittner,  Die  Grenze  zwischen  der  Flyschzone  und  den  Kalkalpen  bei  Wien,  Jahrb. 
geol.  Reichsanst.,  1900,  L,  pp.  51-58,  in  particular  p.  57. 

2  C.  M.  Paul,  Der  Wiener  Wald,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1898,  XLVIII,  pp.  53- 
178,  map,  e.  g.  p.  171. 

^  Similar  views  in  Tornquist,  Sitzb.  k.-preuss.  Akad.  Wiss.,  Berlin,  1907,  pp.  591-599. 
Flat  overthrusting  of  Main  dolomite  upon  Flysch  in  Rothpletz,  Alpenforschungen,  II, 
e.  g.  p.  14,  fig.  6. 

*  Ueber  die  Brachiopoden  der  Kossener  Schichten,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1853, 
X,  p.  286,  Denkschr.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1854,  VII,  36  pp. ;  F.  v.  Hauer,  Jahrb.  k.  k. 
geol.  Reichsanst.,  1853,  IV,  p.  739  ;  M.  L.  Lipoid,  op.  cit.,  1865,  XV,  p.  30  et  seq. 


190 


THE  EAST  ALPS 


[party 


Observations  now  multiplied  rapidly ;  the  beds  of  Gresten,  for  example, 
were  discovered  in  the  Balkans,  and  the  same  facies  of  the  Lias  appears  to 
extend  to  Persia,  but  nowhere  within  the  East  Alps  are  they  known  outside 
the  above  boundary.  Finally  Trauth  united  all  the  outcrops  of  these  and 
the  accompanying  strata  which  extend  from  the  Gschliefgraben  near 
Gmunden  as  far  as  Vienna  in  a  single  ^East  Alpine  Klippenzone '  ^. 

This  zone  presents  a  mixed  series.  It  contains  representatives  of  the 
foreland  and  of  the  East  Alpine  sheet,  as  well  as  traces  of  Lepontine  and,  as 
Uhlig  long  ago  pointed  out,  also  of  Carpathian  character.  The  best-known 
of  these  outcrops  lies  near  St.  Veit  in  the  city  of  Vienna  itself.  Many 
descriptions  of  it  exist,  the  latest  is  by  E.  v.  Hochstetter  2.  The  visible 
part  of  the  series  begins  with  the  Swabian  (litoral)  facies  of  the  Rhaetic 
stage,  presenting  a  development  which  may  be  compared  with  that  of  the 
foreland.  Then  follow  the  Gresten  beds,  the  spotted  marls  of  the  upper 
Lias  (hitherto  without  fossils),  many  subdivisions  of  the  middle  Jurassic 
(very  different  from  that  of  the  neighbouring  limestone  zone),  and  red 
Jurassic  Radiolarian  chert  with  Aptychus ;  in  the  region  occupied  by  this 
chert  loose  blocks  of  a  Brocken  tuff  were  found  (plagioclase  basalt, 
according  to  Pelikan).  Then  follows  white  platey  limestone  with  A'ptychus 
Didayi. 

The  association  of  litoral  (Rhaetic)  and  of  abyssal  (Radiolarian)  beds  in 
this  series  is  remarkable.  Every  attempt  to  minimize  the  importance  of 
these  facts  is  frustrated  by  the  circumstance  that  here,  outside  the  existing 
north  border  of  the  Limestone  zone,  sediments  occur  which  indicate  a  sea 
4,000  to  5,000  meters  deep. 

At  other  localities  some  additional  horizons  occur,  as,  for  instance,  the 
Tithonian  limestone  near  Waidhofen. 

The  Limestone  zone  here  represents  the  East  Alpine  series :  the  Flysch, 
the  Helvetian  ;  the  Gresten  zone  lies  between  the  two.  It  must  thus  be 
placed  for  the  present  in  the  Lepontine  group,  as  has  been  suggested  by 
Trauth  ^.  The  tectonic  horizon  is  very  near  to  that  on  which  patches  of 
Archaean  rocks  crop  out  in  Western  Bavaria  (Oberstdorf  and  other  places), 

^  F.  Trauth,  Ueber  die  Grestener  Schichten  der  esterreichisclien  Voralpen,  Anz.  k. 
Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1906,  pp.  308-310. 

^  W.  Ritter  v.  Hochstetter,  Die  Klippe  von  St.  Veit  bei  Wien,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichs- 
anst.,  1897,  XLVII,  pp.  95-156 ;  F.  Trauth,  Neuer  Aufschluss  im  Klippengebirge  von 
St.  Veit,  Verh.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1907,  pp.  241-245. 

'  Paul  believed  that  the  Neocomian  of  St.  Veit  adhered  normally  to  the  lowest  mem- 
bers of  the  Flysch  ;  in  that  case  the  Gresten  series  would  form  part  of  the  Flysch  zone. 
The  fact  that  the  strike  of  the  Flysch,  as  Paul  himself  shows,  frequently  diverges  from 
the  boundary  line,  while  that  of  the  Gresten  series  follows  it,  does  not  favour  this  hypo- 
thesis (Paul,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1898,  XLVIII,  p.  137),  but  the  question  must 
remain  open.  Haug  compares  the  series  with  the  Pre-Alpes,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France, 
1906,  4«  ser.,  VI,  p.  366. 


CH.V]    VICENTINE  FACIES  OF  THE  TEKTIARY  191 


and  here  as  there  the  same  phenomenon  occurs,  beginning  at  lake  Traun. 
A  hill,  near  Weyer,  Leopold  von  Buch's  monument,  about  150  meters  long 
and  40  meters  high,  formed  of  granite  blocks  all  of  the  same  kind,  has 
frequently  been  regarded  as  standing  in  place,  a  belief  shared  by  Gumbel 
with  regard  to  similar  occurrences  in  Bavaria.  Geyer  has  described  it  as  a 
litoral  fragment  of  the  Gresten  formation  ^.  The  structure  of  the  Flysch, 
north  of  this  locality,  would  be  hard  to  understand  if  the  foreland  cropped 
out  here.  Further  these  Lepontine  patches  cannot  be  compared  with  the 
isolated  granite  boss  of  the  Waschberg  near  Stockerau,  which  does  in  fact 
belong  to  the  foreland,  but  lies  outside  the  Flysch  zone  2. 

This  very  remarkable  part  of  the  outer  border  of  the  Flysch,  situated 
north-north-west  of  Vienna,  already  begins  there  its  course  to  the  Carpa- 
thians, but  unfortunately  it  is  very  imperfectly  exposed.  Abel  has  described 
Tithonian  from  it.  This  on  account  of  its  position  on  the  outer  border 
cannot  be  assigned  to  the  Gresten  zone  ^.  Marl  with  Belemnitella  mucronata 
occurs  and  represents  the  Nierenthal  beds  of  Bavaria.  The  Vacentine  type, 
which  prevails  in  the  older  Tertiary  along  the  whole  north  border  of  the 
East  Alps,  also  makes  its  appearance.  In  the  Carpathians  of  Moravia  the 
occurrence  of  Bhynconella  polymorpha  Maas  shows  a  correspondence  with 
the  stage  of  Spilecco ;  the  beds  with  Eckinolampus  conoideus  of  Mattsee 
(Upper  Austria)  represent  the  Gichelina ;  north  of  Stockerau  we  meet  with 
the  Priabona  stage  and  the  corals  of  Gomberto. — 

We  will  now  pass  the  facts  in  review. 

In  the  Gosau  beds,  within  the  Limestone  Alps,  the  southern  facies 
predominates  up  to  the  lower  limit  of  the  Inoceramus  marls  (Campanian), 
as  it  does  in  the  south  of  France,  Transylvania,  Armenia,  and  elsewhere. 
These  southern  representatives  are  never  encountered  in  the  Flysch  zone. 

In  the  Flysch  zone  very  thick  deposits  occur  which  contain,  in  common 
with  the  Inoceramus  marls  of  Gosau,  Pachydiscus  Neuhergicus  and  some 
other  Ammonites,  but  they  are  distinguished  by  other  species  of  Inoceramus 
(in  particular  Inoceramus  Salishurgensis).  Towards  the  summit  they  are 
associated  with  the  Nierenthal  beds,  in  which  a  northern  influence  makes 
its  appearance. 

^  G.  Geyer,  Ueber  die  Granitklippe  mit  dem  L.  v.  Buch-Denkmal  im  Pecbgraben  bei 
Weyer,  Verh.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1904,  pp.  363-390  ;  also  Hochstetter  and  Toula, 
op.  cit.,  1870,  p.  91,  and  Toula,  1905,  p.  89  ;  Mojsisovics,  op.  cit.,  1893,  p.  14.  In  the 
Flysch  boulders  occur  resembling  those  of  the  foreland,  along  with  quite  alien  rocks, 
e.  g.  augite  porphyry ;  Berwerth,  Min.  petr.  Mitth.  Wien,  1907,  p.  12  (also  in  Becke,  Min. 
petr.  Mitth.,  1907). 

^  This  is  Sudetic  granite  surrounded  by  horizontal  beds  of  an  Eocene  or  lower  Oligo- 
cene  litoral  conglomerate,  the  only  visible  sign  of  a  shore  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
East  Alps;  Stur,  Geologische  Karte  der  Umgebung  Wien's,  6  sheets,  fol.,  1891. 

3  0.  Abel,  Verh.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1897,  pp.  343-362,  and  1899,  pp.  284-287,  374- 
381,  et  passim. 


192  THE  EAST  ALPS  [party 

Near  Salzburg  this  series  approaches  close  to  the  typical  Rudistes  beds 
of  the  Gosau  ^.  In  north-east  Tyrol  a  patch  of  it  rests  upon  transgressive 
Cenomanian,  and  both  lie  unconformably  upon  the  folded  Limestone  zone :  a 
thrust- plane  separates  this  part  of  the  Limestone  zone  from  the  Flysch 
zone. 

The  accumulations  of  Belemnitella  mucronata  which  distinguish  the 
upper  Senonian  of  Central  Europe  have  never  been  met  with  in  the  Lime- 
stone zone  2.  They  are  again  seen  on  the  outer  border  of  the  Flysch  up  to 
Mattsee  and  Stockerau  ^. 

Precisely  similar  relations  are  presented  by  the  Flysch  zone  of  the 
Carpathians.  The  lower  Cretaceous  bears  a  predominant  southern  stamp, 
though  the  northern  influence  already  sets  in  with  the  Exogyras  of  the 
Cenomanian  Wisniowski  mentions  Adinocamax  verus  as  a  representative 
of  the  lower  Senonian,  also  the  occurrence  of  Fachydiscus  Neuhergicus  and 
iTWceramus  Salishurgensis,  that  is  the  typical  representatives  of  the 
Nierenthal  beds  of  Bavaria^. 

In  Bavaria  the  beds  overlying  these  contain  a  very  large  number  of 
species  which  correspond  with  those  of  Maestricht.  With  the  Eocene,  the 
southern  Vicentine  type  makes  its  appearance,  particularly  in  Austria. 

We  may  therefore  conclude  that  in  the  Flysch  zone  of  the  East  Alps 
and  the  Carpathians  a  southern  influence  prevailed  up  to  the  Cenomanian, 
from  that  time  to  the  close  of  the  Cretaceous  a  northern  influence  prevailed, 
and  after  that  a  southern  influence  which  continued  up  to  and  into 
Mediterranean  times.  These  phases  coincide  with  the  positive  movement 
of  the  middle  and  upper  Cretaceous,  and  with  the  negative  movement  at 
the  close  of  the  latter.  In  other  words  : — The  general  transgression  that 
occurred  during  upper  and  middle  Cretaceous  times  introduced  northern 
elements  into  the  Alpine  sediments,  which,  luith  this  exception,  are 
characterized  throughout  by  southern  and  Mediterranean  types. 

In  like  manner  the  southern  lower  Cretaceous  of  Roumania  and  the 

^  E.  Fugger,  Fiihrer  z.  internat.  Congress,  1903,  No.  4,  Salzburg  und  Umgebung,  also  Die 
Gaisberggruppe,  Jahrb.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1906,  LVI,  pp.  213-258,  and,  in  particular, 
Erlauterung  z.  Specialkarte,  Zone  14,  Col.  VIII,  Salzburg. 

^  The  occurrence  of  the  rare  species  Belemnitella  Hoeferi,  Sclilonb.  in  the  Gosau  beds 
of  the  New  World,  or  of  a  rare  Belemnitella  in  the  Scaglia  of  the  Brianza  (Dinarides), 
does  not  affect  this  view.  A  different  explanation  is  held  by  M.  Grossouvre,  who  has  done 
valuable  work  on  the  homotaxis  of  the  Gosau.  Sur  les  couches  de  Gosau,  considerees 
dans  leurs  rapports  avec  la  theorie  du  charriage,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1904,  4®  ser., 
IV,  pp.  7G5-776. 

3  0.  Abel,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1897,  p.  361. 

*  V.  Uhlig,  Tatra-Gebirge,  Denkschr.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1897,  LXIV,  p.  684  et 
paasim. 

"  T.  Wisniowski,  Inoceramus-Schichten  in  den  Karpathen,  Anz.  Akad.  Wiss.  Krakau, 
1905,  pp.  352  359,  and  Fauna  der  Spasser  Schichten,  op.  cit.,  1906,  pp.  240-254. 


CH.V]  SUMMAEY  193 

Crimean  steppe  is  overlain  by  northern  Senonian,  and  this  by  southern 
Nummulitic  limestone. 

Finally  there  are  certain  facts  of  general  significance  which  cannot 
be  passed  without  mention.  These  are :  the  very  great  thickness  of  the 
Flysch,  the  complete  absence  of  Cretaceous  ingressions  and  transgressions 
from  the  great  longitudinal  valleys  on  the  south  border  of  the  Limestone 
zone,  and  the  occurrence  of  isolated  patches  of  limestone,  chiefly  no  doubt 
Neocomian,  within  the  Austrian  Flysch,  and  at  one  locality  the  association 
of  serpentine  with  this  limestone  ^. 

1  0.  Abel,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1903,  LIII,  p.  108. 


SOIjLAS  IV 


0 


194 


CHAPTER  VI 
POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES 

1.  The  Alps.  Their  continuation  to  the  north-east  and  east.  Their  continuation  to 
the  south  and  south-west.   2.  The  folds  of  Provence.   3.  The  Pyrenees. 

Aftek  the  Eastern  Altaides  had  been  built  up,  and  the  Altaides  had 
been  converted  into  horsts,  mountain  ranges  arose  in  the  areas  faulted 
down  between  the  horsts,  and  it  is  these  which  we  designate  *  posthumous 
Altaides All  these  posthumous  chains  have  undergone  folding  in  Tertiary 
or  even  later  times.  All,  with  the  exception  of  the  Mediterranean  Atlas, 
form  part  of  Europe. 

The  most  important  member  is  the  Alpine  system,  or  the  Alpides.  In 
studying  these  mountains  on  the  basis  of  the  two  preceding  chapters  we 
shall  first  consider  the  Alps  themselves  and  particularly  their  subdivision 
into  sheets.  Following  their  continuation  to  the  north-east  we  shall  discuss 
the  part  played  by  overthrust  sheets  in  the  structure  of  the  Carpathians. 
In  the  south-west  the  very  peculiar  relations  of  Calabria  to  Sicily,  and 
of  Sicily  to  Tunis,  will  have  to  be  considered.  The  divergent  development 
of  the  Trias  in  different  parts  of  the  western  Mediterranean  will  throw 
some  additional  light  on  that  part  of  the  Tethys. 

The  second  member  of  the  Altaides  comprises  the  folds  of  Provence, 
the  Pyrenees  and  the  mountains  of  northern  Spain.  In  this  case  the  chief 
points  which  call  for  mention  are  the  relation  of  a  fragment  of  the 
Altaides — the  mass  of  Mouthoumet,  situated  in  the  bend  of  the  Proven9al 
folds — to  the  Pyrenees,  the  large  part  played  by  the  Altaides  in  the 
composition  of  the  Pyrenees,  and  their  movement  towards  the  south,  as 
well  as  many  unusual  features  which  occur  in  the  structure  of  these 
mountains. 

There  are  also  posthumous  Altaides  in  the  London  and  Paris  basin,  and 
in  western  Portugal,  but  these  have  already  been  dealt  with,  and  will  not 
be  discussed  again. 

L   The  Alps, 

The  East  Alpine  sheet.  From  what  has  already  preceded  it  will  be 
seen  how  great  are  the  gaps  in  our  knowledge  of  the  Alps,  and  how  recent 
are  the  attempts  to  explain  the  problems  they  present,  especially  on  the 


CH.  Vl] 


EAST  ALPINE  SHEETS 


195 


east,  in  the  light  of  modern  discoveries.  Under  these  circumstances  the 
most  valuable  service  which  can  be  rendered  by  a  synthetic  research  is  to 
point  out  the  problems  which  most  press  for  solution. 

We  must  never  lose  sight  of  the  different  nature  and  value  of  the  three 
principal  boundaries:  namely,  first,  the  Dinaric  boundary,  of  profound 
significance  as  a  line  along  which  a  foreign  element  approaches  the  Alps ; 
next,  the  line  through  the  Rhaetikon,  Oberhalbstein,  and  Piz  Tremoggia, 
important  as  forming  the  western  boundary  of  the  superposed  East  Alpine 
sheet;  and  finally  the  inner  Flysch  zone,  instructive  in  itself,  but 
not  entering  so  deeply  into  the  structure.  The  East  Alpine  sheet  is 
divided  into  two  halves  along  its  length.  The  Semmering,  the  graphite 
zone  of  north  Styria,  and  the  Tauern  are  anomalous  elements  which  mark 
the  division.  In  all  likelihood  the  marble  ranges  of  Schneeberg  and 
Ratschings,  and  the  probable  continuation  of  the  latter  to  Laas  and  south 
of  the  Ortler,  will  one  day  prove  to  be  the  continuation  of  the  Mesozoic 
limestones  of  the  Tauern,  and  thus  prolong  the  separation  towards  the 
south-west ;  but  at  present  the  proQf  of  this  is  lacking. 

Its  southern  half,  where  it  emerges  from  the  Hungarian  plain  on  the 
east,  is  very  broad.  It  includes  the  greater  part  of  the  basin  of  the  Mur 
above  Gratz,  the  Palaeozoic  mountains  of  Gratz,  and  the  mountains  formerly 
known  as  the  Central  Alps  of  Styria.  In  the  south  this  half  of  the  sheet 
is  adjoined  by  a  long  strip  of  Mesozoic  accompanying  the  Dinaric  boundary? 
which  to  the  east  in  the  Karawanken,  and  to  the  west  in  the  mountains 
of  Lienz,  is  violently  folded,  and  includes  the  Drau  range.  Large  elongated 
parts  of  it  are  let  down  in  troughs.  In  the  Gurk  valley  these  Mesozoic 
sediments  accompanied  by  upper  Cretaceous  and  Eocene  encroach  in  a  flat 
transgression  far  to  the  north  over  the  ancient  rocks  of  the  Mur  Alps. 
They  present  the  character  of  the  northern  Limestone  Alps. 

Throughout  the  west  they  are  separated  from  the  Dinarides  by  a  strip 
of  gneiss  and  mica-schist.  On  the  Brenner,  over  the  narrow  zone  between 
Sprechenstein  and  the  granite  of  Brixen,  this  strip  and  a  pinched-in  band 
of  Trias  alone  represent  the  southern  half  of  the  East  Alps.  They  surround 
the  head  of  the  Dinarides,  and  the  older  rocks  may  be  followed  west  of  the 
Judicaria  line  into  the  region  north  of  the  Tonale  pass. 

The  southern  and  western  part  of  this  great  piece  of  the  Alps  appears 
to  have  stood  passive  under  the  influence  of  the  advancing  Dinarides.  In 
the  Kreuzeck  group  there  is  the  added  influence  of  the  Tauern.  The  Mur 
Alps  present  in  no  small  degree,  both  as  regards  their  scenery  and  the 
manner  in  which  they  emerge  from  the  broad  plain,  the  characters  of  an 
older  autochthonous  region.  It  is  here  that  doubts  as  to  the  sheet-like 
structure  of  the  Alps  find  their  greatest  justification.  It  is  possible  that 
with  the  progress  of  discovery  we  shall  be  able  to  eliminate  here  a  foreign 
fragment  from  the  Alps. 

0  2 


196 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES  [paetv 


Throughout  this  region,  from  Hungary  to  the  Brenner,  there  is  a 
complete  absence  of  glaciers. 

The  northern  half  of  the  East  Alps  differs  from  the  southern  in  many 
respects.  It  consists  in  the  south  of  a  strip  of  ancient  rocks,  which  is 
regarded  as  a  continuation  of  the  Mur  Alps.  It  adjoins  on  the  west  the 
ancient  quartz  phyllite  of  the  Pinzgau,  crosses  the  Brenner  south  of 
Innsbruck,  and  west  of  the  pass  attains  a  great  breadth,  forming  the 
Stubai,  Oetz,  and  Selvretta.  The  same  rocks  bear  in  the  south  the  whole 
of  the  Mesozoic  Braulio  range,  together  with  the  Ortler. 

In  the  north,  throughout  North  Styria,  the  ancient  rocks  are  overlain 
by  a  zone  of  Silurian,  Devonian,  and  Carboniferous  limestone,  which 
disappears  in  East  Tyrol.  Resting  upon  this,  and  in  the  west  directly 
upon  the  ancient  older  rocks,  is  the  East  Alpine  Limestone  zone.  Towards 
the  north  it  is  thrust  over  on  to  the  Flysch  zone  or  bounded  by  a  steep 
dislocation. 

The  Limestone  zone  exhibits  all  the  characters  of  a  '  supernatant ' 
segment.  Along  the  whole  western  boundary,  from  Poschiavo  to  lake  Sils, 
and  through  Oberhalbstein,  on  the  Rhaeticon  and  as  far  as  the  Falkniss, 
the  mountains  of  the  west  dip  beneath  the  East  Alps.  Their  relation  to 
the  Flysch  has  already  been  mentioned.  On  the  east,  where  the  northern 
part  of  the  East  Alps  is  but  narrow,  it  proceeds  towards  the  Carpathians, 
but  on  the  south  border  it  again  presents  itself  as  supernatant,  since  all  the 
foreign  separative  elements,  such  as  the  Semmering,  the  graphitic  range  of 
North  Styria,  the  eastern  part  of  the  Tauern,  and  the  marble  zone  of  the 
Schneeberg,  dip  beneath  this  border  towards  the  north-west.  North-west 
and  west  of  the  Tauern,  overthrusts  of  the  foreign  elements  towards  the 
west  and  north  occur  under  peculiar  conditions.  Many  indications  combine 
to  show  that  the  mass  of  the  Ortler  is  a  syncline  open  towards  the  north. 

The  inclination  of  the  Flysch,  directed  almost  exclusively  to  the  south, 
gives  to  all  the  sheets  of  the  northern  East  Alps,  and  in  particular  the 
northern  Limestone  zone,  the  form  of  a  basin.  At  the  same  time  the 
Limestone  zone  is  broken  up  into  several  sheets  overthrust  towards  the 
north.  The  contours  of  many  of  these  appear  to  be  determined  by  the  out- 
line of  the  Bohemian  mass  and  the  encroachment  of  the  Carpathian  strike ; 
all  of  them  have  been  moved  upon  the  Werfen  shales  and  the  salt  beds, 
without  working  down  into  the  deeper  substratum.  One  set  of  movements 
is  older  than  the  Cenomanian,  the  other  is  younger. 

At  the  lowest  level  affected  by  these  movements,  and  particularly  in  the 
Salzkammergut,  intrusive  rocks  occur.  They  also  make  their  appearance, 
perhaps  as  kneaded-in  rather  than  intruded  rocks,  in  the  Cretaceous,  which 
rests  unconformably  on  the  Werfen  shales. 

The  scenery  also  of  the  northern  Alps  is  extremely  different  from  that 
of  the  southern.    No  comparison  can  be  made  between  the  great  snow- 


CH.  Vl] 


LEPONTINE  SHEETS 


197 


fields  of  west  Tyrol,  or  the  group  of  the  Piz  Buin  in  the  Selvretta,  and  the 
mountains  of  Central  Styria  with  their  soft  outlines  and  green  mantle 
of  vegetation :  the  Mesozoic  region  of  the  south  gives  rise  in  the  Ortler  to 
the  highest  mountain  of  Germany.  The  Limestone  zone  bears  all  its 
highest  peaks,  such  as  the  Scesaplana,  the  Zugspitz  and  the  Dachstein,  on 
its  steep  southern  slope. — 

The  Lepontine  group  includes  all  those  sheets  which  occupy  a  lower 
tectonic  position  than  the  East  Alpine,  and  a  higher  tectonic  position  than 
the  Helvetian  sheet.  They  are  distinguished,  as  a  consequence  of  their 
position,  by  considerable  dynamic  alteration,  and  in  many  parts  by  basic 
injections — the  Pietre  verdi.  In  this  group,  Trias  and  Jurassic  sediments 
are  frequently  converted  into  sericitic  quartzite  and  white  marble. 

The  Lepontine  sheets  extend  on  the  south  to  the  plain  of  Lombardy 
and  the  Dinaric  boundary ;  on  the  east  they  dip  beneath  the  East  Alpine 
sheet ;  on  the  north  and  west  we  shall  find  the  line  of  the  inner  Flysch 
zone  useful  as  a  means  of  distinguishing  the  various  members  of  the 
Lepontine  group ;  it  will  afford  assistance  in  the  correlation  of  the  Corsican 
fragment  of  the  Alps.  The  Lepontine  sheets,  however,  in  so  far  as  they  do 
not  proceed  directly  from  this  line,  overlap,  in  a  long  series  of  recumbent 
patches,  not  only  the  line  itself  but  even  the  outer  border  of  the  Helvetian 
sheet  which  lies  in  front  of  it. 

As  a  consequence  involved  in  the  general  structure  of  the  Alps,  this 
group  of  sheets  appears  on  the  tvest  as  a  broad  open  range  or  in  the  form 
of  recumbent  sheets,  on  the  east  on  the  other  hand  it  is  revealed  in  great 
luindows. 

(a)  The  sheet  of  the  Dent  Blanche  is  a  Lepontine  sheet  resting  on 
Lepontine  rocks.  It  has  its  origin  in  the  zone  of  Ivrea,  which  is  strongly 
injected  with  basic  rock  and  accompanied  on  both  sides  by  Mesozoic 
marble ;  it  owes  its  separation  from  this  zone  to  erosion.  It  extends  from 
Monte  Emilius,  south  of  Aosta,  to  the  Turtman  glacier,  north  of  Zermatt. 

(b)  The  Piedmontese  Alps  form  so  large  a  part  of  the  whole  of  the  high 
mountain  region  that  we  might  be  inclined  to  include  them,  as  a  sub-division, 
in  a  group  of  a  higher  order.  It  is  the  difficult  questions  which  arise  as  to 
the  origin  of  their  representatives  in  the  north  and  east  that  have  prevented 
the  application  of  the  name  Piedmontese  to  the  Lepontine  group  as  a  whole. 

The  Piedmontese  Alps  include  all  the  mountains  from  the  border  of  the 
plain  of  Lombardy  to  the  compressed  fascicles  of  sedimentary  folds  on  the 
inner  side  of  the  Mercantour,  the  Pelvoux,  Mont  Blanc,  the  Rhone  valley  as 
far  up  as  Sion,  the  val  Bedretto,  Airolo,  and  the  Luckmanier  pass.  This 
vast  region  is  characterized  by  great  masses  of  gneiss,  by  a  high  degree  of 
dynamic  alteration  in  the  sediments,  and,  more  especially  in  the  south,  by 
the  importance  of  the  basic  injections.  A  great  arc  of  Carboniferous, 
extending  from  the  Rhone  valley  a  long  way  to  the  south,  borders  the  west 


198 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES  [paktv 


of  this  region  and  points  to  the  unity  of  the  movement  as  a  whole.  Traces 
of  it  occur  in  the  Ligurian  Alps,  even  in  the  vicinity  of  the  sea.  Within 
this  part  of  the  Alps  the  recurvation  towards  the  Apennines  is  effected. 

Thus,  the  Piedmontese  Alps  include  the  range  of  the  Pietre  Verdi  of 
Monte  Viso,  the  possibly  autochthonous  gneisses  of  the  Dora  Maira  range 
and  the  Gran  Paradiso ;  further,  the  elongated  zone  of  the  Great  Saint 
Bernard,  in  which  the  recurvation  begins ;  Monte  Rosa  and,  with  it,  all 
the  folds  of  gneiss  characterized  by  Mesozoic  intercalations  as  far  as  the 
Simplon ;  all  the  gneiss  zones  dipping  towards  the  east  as  far  as  the  Lime- 
stone mountains  of  Splugen  and  the  green-rocks  of  Oberhalbstein ;  further, 
the  region  in  the  south,  extending  up  to  the  Dinaric  boundary  on  the  Adda 
(except  where  a  narrow  East  Alpine  belt  is  inserted  in  front  of  it) ;  and 
then,  finally,  the  Disgrazia  and  the  lower  half  of  the  Poschiavino  valley. 

(c)  The  recumbent  folds,  which  proceed  from  the  Piedmontese  Alps  over 
Helvetian  territory,  and  attain  a  considerable  extension  as  they  advance 
to  the  south  and  north  of  the  Mercantour.  The  part  played  by  the  Flysch 
in  the  Dauphin^  shows  that  in  that  region  they  originate  in  the  inner 
Flysch  zone.  In  the  north  the  largest  recumbent  folds  lie  in  the  Chablais 
and  the  Freiburg  Alps.  Their  fragmentary  remains  extend  through  Giswyl, 
the  Stanzer  Horn,  and  the  Mythen,  near  Schwyz,  the  Berglittenstein  in  the 
Rhine  valley,  to  the  Falkniss  beyond  the  Rhine,  and,  with  this,  the  Lepon- 
tine  rocks,  which  underlie  the  whole  of  the  western  boundary  of  the 
northern  half  of  the  East  Alps. 

The  Piedmontese  Alps  make  their  appearance  to  the  north  of  the 
Carboniferous  zone  with  a  change  of  character  ;  green-rocks  only  appear  at 
isolated  spots,  and  the  Mesozoic  series  presents  a  certain  resemblance  to 
that  of  the  East  Alps.  The  facies  is  the  Brianyonnais.  It  forms  compressed 
fascicles  of  folds,  and  some  of  these  are  inserted  obliquely  between  the 
alternately  arranged  gneiss-cores  of  the  Mont  Blanc  zone.  At  the  same  time 
there  seems  to  be  some  approach  to  the  Helvetian  facies.  The  close  resem- 
blance of  the  sediments  has  attracted  attention  to  the  val  Ferret,  on  the  east 
gide  of  Mont  Blanc,  as  a  region  of  roots.  The  extension  of  these  sediments 
far  beyond  the  Rhine,  and  the  constant  occurrence  of  green-rocks  in  the  top- 
most fold,  lead  us  to  suppose  that  the  little  patches  preserved  here  and  there 
are  the  remnants  of  a  once  colossal  structure,  composed  of  crowded  recum- 
bent folds,  which  is  now  destroyed  and  for  ever  withdrawn  from  our  eyes. 

It  must  be  added  that  the  basement,  that  is,  the  Helvetian  region, 
together  with  a  part  of  the  gneiss-cores  of  the  Mont  Blanc  zone,  have 
undergone  still  later  movements. 

(d)  In  the  East  Alps  the  place  of  the  Lepontine  sheets  is  taken  by  the 
Lepontine  windows. 

On  the  upper  Inn,  the  Lepontine  sediments  are  visible,  for  a  distance  of 
54  kilometers,  beneath  the  East  Alpine  gneiss-masses  of  the  Selvretta  on 


CH.  Vl] 


LEPONTINE  WINDOWS 


199 


the  west,  and  of  Oetz  on  the  east.  From  the  midst  of  the  window,  which 
is  elongated  towards  the  north- north -east,  rises  the  anticline  of  the 
Stammerspitz. 

It  seems  probable,  although  we  have  no  direct  proof,  that  we  must 
assign  to  the  Lepontine  formations  a  chain  of  marble  outcrops  which  makes 
its  appearance  south  of  the  Ortler,  and  then,  with  frequent  interrup- 
tions, runs  past  Laas  and  the  Texel  range  towards  Ratschings  on  the 
Brenner.  A  second  and  similar  chain  of  marble  comes  from  Gurgl  in  Oetz, 
and,  crossing  the  Schneeberg,  reaches  a  point  on  the  Brenner  not  very 
far  from  the  first  chain.  Existing  observations,  so  far  as  they  go,  lead  us 
to  conclude  that  these  two  marble  zones  unite  in  the  Mesozoic  frame  of  the 
window  of  the  Tauern,  the  length  of  which  is  165  kilometers.  This  frame 
is  Lepontine ;  the  Tribulaun  range  forms  part  of  it.  It  presents  limnic 
Carboniferous,  Trias,  Lias,  and  Jurassic.  Towards  the  interior  lie  the 
schist  mantle  and  the  central  gneiss  of  the  Tauern.  They  have  been 
exposed  to  tangential  pressure,  and  part  at  least  of  the  schist  mantle  is 
Trias.  The  larger  cores  of  the  central  gneiss  are  folded  flat,  along  with  the 
schist  mantle,  at  their  ends. 

The  Lepontine  frame  of  the  Tauern  dips  beneath  the  East  Alpine  rocks 
which  surround  it,  or  is  steeply  upturned ;  to  the  north-west  and  west  it  is 
folded  outwards  over  the  frame  of  the  window. 

On  the  east  of  the  Tauern,  south  of  Schladming  lies  a  region  as  yet 
scarcely  understood,  and  then  comes  a  band  extending  through  North  Styria 
for  150  kilometers,  which  is  formed  of  limnic,  upper,  or  middle  Carboniferous, 
and  dips  towards  the  north  beneath  the  northern  half  of  the  East  Alpine 
sheet.  This  long  band  leads  to  the  Semmering  where,  along  with  the 
limnic  Carboniferous,  the  Mesozoic  rocks  of  the  Tauern  reappear.  These 
also  are  inclined  to  the  north. 

Here  many  questions  await  solution.  The  existing  state  of  observation 
shows,  however,  that  the  marble  band  of  Laas  and  Ratschings,  the  window 
of  the  Tauern,  the  Carboniferous  band  of  North  Styria,  and  the  Semmering 
are  features  which  represent  in  the  better-known  regions  a  lower-lying 
member  of  the  mountains.  There  are  long  stretches  along  which  the 
boundary  between  these  and  the  East  Alpine  rocks  is  not  yet  marked  on 
the  map,  and  the  position  of  the  limnic  Carboniferous  with  regard  to  the 
Lepontine  Trias  is  not  clear. 

These  features  are  described  as  exotic  because  they  occupy  less  space 
than  the  East  Alpine  sheet,  hut  they  have  actually  a  better  claim  than  this 
sheet  to  he  regarded  as  indigenous  and  autochthonous. 

(e)  The  Lepontine  belt.  Between  the  northern  border  of  the  East  Alpine 
sheet  and  the  Flysch  elements  of  an  anomalous  character  crop  out.  They 
begin  as  basement  patches  on  the  Iller  in  western  Bavaria.  On  the  east, 
in  upper  and  lower  Austria,  the  basement  patches  are  associated  with 


200 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES  [party 


an  independent  succession  of  strata  which  is  elsewhere  unknown  in  the 
Alps.  Its  characteristic  sub-divisions  are  a  black  Lias  (Gresfcen  beds), 
accompanied  by  lignite  seams,  and  a  middle  Jurassic  series  which  most 
nearly  recalls  that  of  Switzerland.  In  the  upper  Jurassic,  red  Radiolarian 
shales  with  Aptychus  also  occur.  This  succession  extends  into  the  suburbs 
of  Vienna  and  is  continued  into  the  Pienines  (Carpathians). 

The  Helvetian  sheet  forms  the  outer  border  of  the  Alps  from  the  Var 
to  the  Carpathians.  Although  the  very  general  inclination  of  the  beds 
towards  the  interior  of  the  range,  and  the  division  into  subordinate  sheets, 
which  is  particularly  clear  in  the  east  of  Switzerland,  indicate  the  force 
of  the  general  movement,  yet  there  are  some  signs,  at  least  in  the  west, 
which  point  to  a  trifling  amount  of  horizontal  displacement.  In  many  of 
its  characters  the  facies  resembles  that  of  the  foreland. 

The  zone  of  Mont  Blanc,  which  is  orographically  the  most  prominent 
part,  may  be  regarded  as  the  remains  of  the  foreland,  lying  in  an  obliquely 
arranged  series.  It  includes  the  great  gneiss-cores  which  extend  from  the 
Mercantour  across  the  Pelvoux,  Belle  Donne,  Mont  Blanc,  the  Aiguilles 
Rouges,  the  mass  of  the  Aar,  and  the  St.  Gotthard.  It  terminates  on  the 
Rhine;  to  the  south  the  little  gneiss  masses  of  Liguria  may  perhaps  be 
referred  to  it. 

Between  these  alternating  cores,  and  at  one  time  extending  in  part 
beyond  them,  Helvetian  sediments  unite  with  those  of  the  Brian9onnais- 
These  sediments,  chiefly  limestones,  which  advance  to  the  outer  border  of 
the  Mont  Blanc  zone,  gave  rise,  by  their  folding  and  piling  up,  to  the 
high  chains  of  the  Bernese  Alps,  such  as  the  Dents  du  Midi,  Wildstrubel, 
Faulhorn,  and  others.  They  reveal  a  movement  which  is  later  than  the 
transport  of  the  Lepontine  sheets. 

In  eastern  Switzerland  the  Helvetian  zone  includes  the  overfold  of  the 
Glarus,  together  with  the  Churfirsten  and  Santis.  Here  too,  however,  an 
oblique  arrangement  occurs,  which  does  not  completely  correspond  with 
the  principal  strike  of  the  Alps,  for  while,  just  east  of  the  Rhine,  the 
limestone  range  of  the  Santis  is  accompanied  by  Flysch  on  the  north  and 
south,  the  northern  range  disappears  in  Bavaria.  Traces  of  the  Santis 
range  accompany  the  north  border  of  the  mountains  to  beyond  the  Isar, 
and  only  the  Flysch  that  lies  south  of  the  Santis  reaches  the  Danube,  as 
the  Austrian  Flysch  zone,  near  Vienna.  This  part  of  the  mountains  is 
chiefly  formed  of  the  uppermost  part  of  the  Cretaceous,  with  northern 
characters,  and  lower  Tertiary,  with  southern  characters. 

The  Gosau  beds  rest  in  transgression  upon  the  Limestone  zone.  They 
have  a  well-marked  southern  character.  Their  uppermost  member,  the 
Inoceramus  marl,  approximates  by  its  Ammonites  to  an  horizon  of  the 
Flysch.  The  Cenomanian  with  Orbitulina  is  also  common  to  both  zones ; 
it  often  rests  in  transgression  on  the  folded  Trias  of  the  Limestone  zone  ;  in 


€H.vi]  GENEEAL  OBSERVATIONS 


201 


East  Tyrol,  Flysch- Cretaceous  of  northern  type  and  lower  Tertiary  of 
southern  type  transgress  over  parts  of  the  Limestone  zone.  But  the  typical 
Gosau  beds  of  southern  character  have  never  so  far  been  encountered  in  the 
Flysch  zone. 

General  observations.  As  a  conclusion  to  this  brief  survey  of  the  Alps 
some  disconnected  observations  of  a  general  nature  may  find  a  place. 

1.  The  series  Silurian,  Devonian,  lower  Carboniferous  is  only  represented 
on  that  part  of  the  Alps  which  is  tectonically  the  highest,  namely  the  East 
Alps,  where  it  occurs  both  in  the  northern  and  southern  moieties.  It  is  not 
known  either  in  the  Lepontine  or  the  Helvetian  mountains ;  in  place  of  it 
the  fossiliferous  series  everywhere  begins  with  limnic  Carboniferous  (flora 
of  Schatzlar,  or  according  to  some  observers  of  Ottweil).  This  is  the  case 
on  the  Semmering,  in  northern  Styria  and  the  Tauern,  in  the  great  Carbo- 
niferous fan  which  extends  along  the  west  side  of  the  Great  St.  Bernhard 
to  the  Ligurian  Alps,  also  in  the  Helvetian  region  on  the  Tddi  and  else- 
where. All  these  parts  of  the  Alps  thus  bear  a  close  resemblance  to  the 
Altaides.  No  marine  representative  of  the  upper  Carboniferous  or  Permian 
occurs  anywhere  in  the  Alps.  This  is  the  more  remarkable  since  such 
deposits  are  very  evidently  present  just  beyond  the  boundary,  in  the  Carnic 
mountains,  the  independent  basement  of  the  Dinarides.  There  in  the  east, 
Silurian,  Devonian,  and  lower  Carboniferous  are  followed  by  the  typical  un- 
conformity at  the  base  of  the  Ottweil  stage,  which  is  accompanied  by  marine 
beds ;  but  in  the  western  part  of  the  Dinarides,  as  in  Lombardy,  fossiliferous 
deposits  again  begin  with  limnic  middle  or  upper  Carboniferous  (Manno). 

2.  The  pre-Permian  gneisses  and  granites  of  the  Alps  have  assumed 
a  great  variety  of  tectonic  forms.  There  are  some  profoundly  denuded 
which  completely  resemble  autochthonous  masses  (South  Styria,  Bacher 
mountains,  Sau  Alps  and  Kor  Alps ;  or,  occurring  as  the  lowest  member  in 
the  midst  of  violently  disturbed  mountains,  may  be  regarded  as  autochtho- 
nous (Dora  Maira) ;  or  again,  may  be  either  autochthonous  or  a  very  deep- 
lying  vault  (Gran  Paradiso).  Others  have  offered  resistance  to  the  lateral 
pressure  and  are  divided  into  parallel  anticlines,  which  betray  their  presence 
by  indentation  (flat-folding)  at  the  ends  where  they  run  with  the  strike 
(Mont  Blanc,  mass  of  the  Aar,  core  of  the  Hochalm  in  the  Tauern).  Yet 
others  are  the  cores  of  anticlines  (gneiss  of  Antigorio  and  Monte  Leone  on 
the  Simplon).  The  Dent  Blanche  again,  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  flat  recum- 
bent fold.  Finally,  we  have  great  sheets  completely  severed  from  their 
original  basement  by  a  thrust-plane.  Such  is  the  Selvretta.  It  is  pheno- 
mena of  this  kind  which,  as  we  shall  see  later,  play  an  important  part  in 
the  Tatra  mountains  and  the  eastern  Pyrenees.  The  great  height  to  which 
the  overthrust  masses  have  been  carried  up  and  their  mode  of  occurrence 
may  even  lead  us  to  inquire  whether  the  chief  features  in  the  relief  may 
not  be  older  than  the  overthrusts. 


202 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES 


[part  V 


While  the  progress  of  investigation  shows  more  and  more  that  the  sheets 
of  Switzerland  are  elongated  recumbent  folds,  yet  no  sign  of  such  folding 
or  of  a  plunging  sheet  have  so  far  been  recognized  in  the  East  Alps. 

3.  The  Bohemian  mass  and  the  pre-Permian  foreland  disappear  in  face 
of  the  Alps.  The  only  explanation  possible  is  that  their  continuation  lies 
beneath  the  Alps.  The  gneiss  of  Stockerau,  which  lies  just  outside  the 
border  of  the  Flysch,  the  character  of  many  Lepontine  basement  patches  on 
the  south  border  of  the  eastern  Flysch  zone,  and  the  character  of  the  Mont 
Blanc  zone  all  speak  in  favour  of  this  explanation.  On  the  south  side  of 
the  Alps,  opposite  the  Dinarides,  precisely  the  same  question  arises,  and  the 
only  answer  is  that  the  continuation  of  the  Alps  lies  beneath  the  Carnic 
range  and  the  Dinarides.  The  Carnic  basement,  however,  seems  to 
disappear  rapidly,  towards  the  west  and  south-west,  at  the  base  of  the 
Dinarides ;  it  is  absent  in  the  window  of  Recoaro  (III,  p.  352),  and  also 
from  the  pre-Permian  gneiss  of  the  Cima  d'Asta;  but  at  none  of  these 
localities  are  traces  of  Alpine  formations  visible  beneath  the  Dinarides. 

At  the  head  of  the  Dinarides,  on  the  Brenner  road,  the  strike  of 
the  Alpine  ranges  follows  the  outline  of  this  head,  and  of  the  intercalated 
granite  of  Brixen,  as  though  these  ranges  had  been  moved  irresistibly 
forwards,  but  the  effect  of  this  thrusting  can  hardly  have  extended  far 
beyond  Sprechenstein.  As  we  have  already  pointed  out,  the  tonalite  girdle 
indicates  that  the  Dinarides  never  extended  very  far  to  the  north  beyond 
their  present  limits,  and  this  is  confirmed  by  all  the  other  evidence ;  but 
we  cannot  conclude  from  this  that  wide-reaching  subterranean  overthrusts 
do  not  exist. 

Extension  of  the  Alps  to  the  North-north-east  (/,  pp.  187,  216). 

The  Limestone  Alps  disappear  on  the  Baden  line  of  hot  springs.  The 
inner  zones  of  the  Alps  and  with  them,  to  all  appearance,  the  Lepontine 
Limestone  zone  of  the  Semmering,  strike  away,  like  the  Flysch,  to  the 
north-east ;  but  they  soon  lose  themselves  in  the  Rosalien  range.  This 
range  is  now  no  longer  bordered  by  a  continuous  crystalline  zone,  but  by  a 
series  of  isolated  cores.  The  Flysch  zone  in  the  north  of  the  Carpathians, 
which  extends  with  great  uniformity  over  diversified  foreland,  lies  opposite 
an  extremely  irregular  boundary  in  the  south,  the  irregularities  of  which 
would  be  yet  more  striking  if  it  were  not  for  the  apparent  continuity 
established  by  flows  of  trachyte  and  accumulations  of  ash.  The  irregularity 
is  more  especially  connected  with  the  upper  basin  of  the  Theiss,  which 
encroaches  from  the  south  so  far  into  the  Carpathians,  that  these  mountains 
are  represented  almost  wholly  by  the  Flysch  zone. 

A  little  to  the  west  of  this  line  of  division  lies  the  eastern  end  of  the 
mountains  of  upper  Hungary ^  which  extend  for  140  kilometers  from  west 


CH.  Vl] 


HOHE  TATKA 


208 


to  east  between  the  rivers  Gran  and  Hernad.  The  towns  of  Neusohl  and 
Kaschau  mark  the  two  extremities  of  the  range.  It  is  the  only  fragment 
of  the  eastern  Carpathians  which  is  comparable  in  its  extent  with  a  part  of 
the  crystalline  inner  zone.  As  regards  its  structure  we  are  almost  wholly 
restricted  to  older  observations,  in  particular  to  those  of  Stur ;  such  facts  as 
are  known  have  been  collated  by  Uhlig.  It  will  suffice  to  mention  that  a 
Palaeozoic  range,  in  which  Carboniferous  is  represented,  runs  with  a  north- 
easterly strike  and  cuts  off  that  part  of  the  crystalline  rocks  situated  east 
of  Dobschau ;  that  the  whole  of  the  north  border  of  the  mountains  is 
accompanied  by  Trias  and  Jurassic  in  their  Alpine  development ;  that  these 
with  strikingly  flat  bedding  (Murany  plateau)  penetrate  deep  into  the 
region  of  the  ancient  rock,  and  are  present  with  equally  flat  bedding  in 
the  south  (Biik  range)  ^. 

To  the  north  and  west  of  the  mountains  of  upper  Hungary  rise  isolated 
cores  of  gneiss  and  granite,  generally  extending  along  the  strike,  accom- 
panied by  Trias  and  Jurassic,  and  surrounded  by  Tertiary  beds.  The 
Leitha  mountains  and  the  Little  Carpathians  are  the  first  of  these.  They 
are  succeeded  by  the  Inowec  (left  bank  of  the  river  Waag),  the  Tribec  (left 
bank  of  the  Neutra),  the  Sucha  and  Mala  Magura,  the  Zjar  (the  water-shed 
between  the  rivers  Neutra  and  Dunajec),  and  other  heights.  The  most 
considerable  of  these  isolated  masses  is  the  Hohe  Tatra,  north  of  the 
mountains  of  upper  Hungary.  It  is  elongated  from  east  to  west,  50  kilo- 
meters in  length,  about  15  kilometers  in  breadth,  and  some  of  its  summits 
exceed  2,600  meters.    This  is  the  highest  part  of  the  Carpathians. 

The  history  of  the  tectonic  interpretation  of  the  Tatra  resembles  that 
of  the  fold  of  Glarus;  both  are  the  result  of  the  comparative  method. 
First  of  all,  the  actual  facts  were  established  with  all  the  precision  possible. 
So  exact  was  the  description  that  a  geologist  personally  unfamiliar  with 
the  country  was  able  to  suggest  new  ideas  and  new  transverse  sections. 
The  first  observer  then  confirmed  the  new  theory  from  the  abundance  of 
his  local  knowledge. 

The  first  phase  of  this  process  is  illustrated  by  Uhlig  s  monograph,  which 
represents  the  Hohe  Tatra  as  a  block  of  gneiss  and  ancient  granite,  bearing 
on  the  upper  parts  of  its  northern  side  an  incomplete  series,  known  as  the 
high  Tatrian  series.  This  is  of  Alpine  character,  with  some  indications  of 
sublitoral  origin  ;  and  it  is  folded  towards  the  north.  On  the  lower  parts 
of  the  northern  slope,  the  high  Tatrian  series  is  adjoined  by  a  second  and 
much  more  complete  succession  of  Alpine  sediments,  the  sub-Tatrian  series. 
Its  folds  dip  steeply  to  the  north. 

The  same  contrast  between  the  less  complete  high  Tatrian  and  the  more 
complete  sub-Tatrian  series  was  observed  by  Uhlig  in  other  isolated 


1  V.  Uhlig,  Bau  und  Bild,  pp.  690-708. 


204  POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES  [paetv 

mountain  masses.  The  conclusion  he  drew  was  that  each  of  these  masses 
is  an  ancient  island,  that  the  high  Tatrian  series  was  its  natural  covering, 
that  the  sub-Tatrian  series  was  formed  at  greater  depths  in  the  sea,  and, 
further,  that  the  sub-Tatrian  folds  dipping  to  the  north  on  the  northern 
side  of  the  Tatra  had  been  forced  up  against  this  mountain  from  north 
to  south  ^. 

So  complete  was  the  work  accomplished  in  the  first  phase,  that  in 
the  second  phase  M.  Lugeon,  without  having  seen  the  Carpathians,  and 
basing  his  conclusions  on  observations  made  in  the  Western  Alps,  ventured 
on  the  bold  assertion  that  the  sub-Tatrian  folds,  inclined  to  the  north  on 
the  northern  side  of  the  Tatra,  had  not  been  urged  against  it  from  the 
north,  but  were  carried  from  the  south,  over  the  mass  of  the  Tatra,  as 
an  independent  sheet.  Thus,  the  islands  become  windows,  and  a  uniform 
movement  to  the  north  dominates  the  whole  range  ^. 

This  view  was  adopted  by  Limanowski,  who,  however,  added  the  state- 
ment that  a  Flysch  sheet  of  Dinaric  origin  had  crossed  the  Tatra  from  the 
south,  along  with  the  Klippen  lying  in  front  of  it  in  the  north  ^. 

Finally,  the  third  phase  is  distinguished  by  Uhlig's  later  descriptions* 
which  cover  the  greater  part  of  the  Carpathians.  Here  Lugeon' s  theory  as 
to  the  overthrusting  of  the  sub-Tatrian  sheet  is  adopted;  the  claim  of 
Dinaric  influence  in  this  region  is  dismissed,  but  traces  of  the  Dinaric  facies 
as  revealed  by  Loczy's  and  Arthaber's  studies  are  admitted  to  exist  in  a 
more  southerly  region,  the  Mittelgebirge  of  Hungary.  Lugeon  left  the 
position  of  the  gneiss  and  granite  mass  of  the  Tatra  an  open  question ; 
Uhlig  regards  it  as  supernatant 

Taking  these  results  as  our  basis,  we  will  now  start  from  the  south  side 
of  the  Tatra,  and,  gradually  extending  our  field  of  view,  attempt  to  give  a 
general  survey  of  the  Carpathian  region. 

The  Niedere  Tatra,  a  range  of  hills  striking  east  and  west,  which  is 
regarded  as  a  western  part  of  the  range  of  upper  Hungary,  is  bordered  on 

^  V.  Uhlig,  Geologie  des  Tatra-Gebirges,  Denkschr.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1897,  LXIV, 
pp.  643-684,  and  1899,  LXVIII,  pp.  43-130,  maps  ;  in  the  west,  Beitrag  zur  Geologie  des 
Tatra-Kriwan  Gebirges,  op.  cit.,  1902,  LXXII,  pp.  519-561,  map. 

'  M.  Lugeon,  Analogie  entre  les  Carpathes  et  les  Alpes,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  Nov.  17, 
1902,  and  Les  Nappes  de  recouvrement  de  la  Tatra  et  I'origine  des  Klippes  des  Carpathes, 
BulL  Lab.  Geol.  Univ.  Lausanne,  1903,  no.  4,  51  pp. 

^  M.  Limanowski,  Sur  la  dc^couverte  d'un  lambeau  de  recouvrement  subtatrien  dans 
la  region  hauttatrienne  de  Gladkie  (M.  Tatra),  Bull.  Intern.  Acad.  Sci.  Cracovie,  Mar.  7, 
1904,  pp.  197-199  (also  in  the  PoHsh  language) ;  Blick  auf  den  Bau  der  Karpathen, 
Kosmos  (Lemberg),  1905,  XXX,  pp.  253-340  (Polish);  Sur  la  genese  des  Klippes  des 
Carpathes,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1906,  4«  ser.,  VI,  pp.  151-164. 

*  V.  Uhlig,  Ueber  die  Tektonik  der  Karpathen,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1907,  CXVI, 
pp.  871-981,  map  ;  for  Dinaric  traces  in  the  Hungarian  Mittelgebirge,  G.  von  Arthaber, 
Die  Alpine  Trias  des  mediterranen  Gebietes  (Freeh,  Lethaea  Geognostica,  II,  I),  8vo, 
Stuttgart,  1906,  pp.  432-434. 


cH.vi]    DISTEIBUTION  OF  SUBTATKIAN  SHEET  205 


its  north  side  by  the  sub-Tatrian  series ;  this  is  followed  by  sub-Tatrian 
Flysch,  which  forms  the  broad  plain,  covered  far  and  wide  with  glacier 
ddbris  and  extending  up  to  the  south  foot  of  the  Hohe  Tatra. 

The  south  slope  and  all  the  summits  of  the  Hohe  Tatra  are  formed  of 
crystalline  rocks.  On  the  north  side  these  are  covered  at  considerable 
heights  by  the  high  Tatrian  series.  They  share  a  common  folding  towards 
the  north.    Upper  Cretaceous  marl  occurs  wedged  in. 

These  rocks  are,  in  fact,  overridden  from  the  south  by  the  sub-Tatrian 
sheet,  which,  inclined  to  the  north,  now  forms  the  lower  parts  of  the 
northern  slope.  Precisely  similar  relations  are  repeated  in  many  others 
of  the  isolated  mountain  cores,  so  that  the  sub-Tatrian  series  forms  a  sheet 
widely  extended  over  the  inner  parts  of  the  western  Carpathians,  inter- 
rupted and  broken  through  by  the  frequent  outcropping  of  the  high  Tatrian 
sheet,  which  is  tectonically  lower,  but  as  a  rule  orographically  higher. 
For  this  reason  Uhlig  compares  the  high  Tatrian  sheet  with  that  of  the 
Tauern,  and  the  sub-Tatrian  sheet  with  the  East  Alpine  sheet  in  the  Alps. 

North  of  the  Tatra  we  cross  lower  Tertiary  of  moderate  breadth, 
dipping  to  the  south,  and  reach'  that  remarkable  series  of  Klippen  which 
forms  the  Pienine  zone.  It  appears  in  the  landscape  as  a  chain  of  rocky 
fantastic  isolated  hills,  which  emerge  in  long  stretches  from  the  verdant 
land  of  Flysch  or  Cretaceous  soil.  Coming  from  Moravia  it  surrounds  the 
west  Carpathians  in  a  broad  arc,  rises  from  the  midst  of  the  trachytes  north 
of  the  Theiss,  and  extends  far  into  the  east  Carpathians.  Its  length 
amounts  to  at  least  560  kilometers.  In  the  south-west  it  probably  extends 
into  the  city  of  Vienna  and  into  the  Alps  ^. 

The  stratified  succession  ranges  from  Trias  dolomite  through  an 
extremely  diversified  series  into  the  Neocomian;  but  throughout  this 
central  region  the  beds,  instead  of  forming  regular  sheets  one  over  the 
other,  are  disposed  in  numerous  flakes,  from  10  kilometers  and  more,  down 
to  a  few  meters  in  length,  generally  elongated  in  the  direction  of  the  strike, 
and  probably  also  arranged  in  groups ;  two  different  f acies  of  the  Jurassic 
seem  to  occur  side  by  side.  One  of  these  includes  many  stages  and  is  rich 
in  fossils ;  the  other  consists  of  shales  with  Posidonia  alpina  and  cherty 
limestone  with  Radiolaria,  as  well  as  Aptychus  and  Tithonian  fossils  in 
some  places,  and  in  others  Neocomian  fossils. 

These  flakes  are  enclosed  in  upper  Cretaceous  beds  of  sandy  marl,  over 
which  the  movement  took  place.  Vast  and  general  it  must  have  been,  and 
Europe  can  offer  few  landscapes  more  surprising  than  this  chain  of  rugged 
rocks,  extending  to  right  and  to  left  far  beyond  the  range  of  vision,  and 

^  A  catalogue  of  the  abundant  Hterature  on  this  subject  is  to  be  found  in  V.  Uhlig, 
Der  pieninische  Klippenzug,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1890,  XL,  pp.  559-824  ;  for 
the  more  recent  theory  in  particular,  Tektonik  der  Karpathen,  p.  913. 


206 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES  [paetv 


facing  the  traveller  who  approaches  the  Hohe  Tatra  from  the  north  like  a 
gigantic  fence. 

The  general  inclination  in  the  Klippen  is  towards  the  south,  i.  e.,  towards 
the  high  mountains.  Lugeon  regarded  them,  in  Uhlig's  words,  as  a  *  surging 
frontal  region and  left  it  an  open  question  whether  they  were  connected 
with  the  sheets  of  the  Tatra  or  were  the  advancing  heads  of  one  or  more 
independent  sheets.  Uhlig  holds  the  latter  view.  Consequently  his  trans- 
verse section  shows  the  Pienine  (fossiliferous  Jurassic  and  Neocomian)  and 
sub-Pienine  (chert)  sheet  cropping  out  from  beneath  the  Hohe  Tatra,  and 
thus  the  mountain  itself  becomes  a  supernatant  fragment. 

Throughout  the  region  of  the  Alps  the  black  Gresten  beds,  with  their 
characteristic  Brachiopods,  are  confined  to  the  narrow  belt  between  the 
Limestone  zone  and  the  Flysch.  In  the  Carpathians,  traces  of  these  beds 
are  found  on  various  tectonic  horizons.  They  are  associated  with  Jurassic 
Radiolarian  rocks  only  in  the  Pienine  zone,  and  this  fact,  along  with  their 
similar  disposition,  justifies  Uhlig's  correlation  of  the  Carpathian  Klippen 
with  the  outcrops  of  St.  Veit  in  Vienna. 

The  broad  Flysch  zone  makes  its  appearance  here  outside  the  Pienine, 
just  as  it  does  outside  the  East  Alps.  The  work  of  the  Imperial  Geological 
Institute  of  Vienna,  and  that  of  the  local  geologists  in  Galicia,  have 
provided  us  with  a  mass  of  observations.  But  the  vast  extent  and  densely 
wooded  character  of  the  region,  the  rarity  of  fossils,  and  the  similarity  of 
the  sediments  rendered  it  impossible  to  arrive  at  any  general  conception 
of  the  structure  till  after  laborious  investigation  and  many  fluctuations 
of  opinion.    Here  again  we  follow  Uhlig  ^. 

Two  zones  may  be  distinguished,  formed  in  part  of  sediments  of  the 
same  age,  but  with  a  different  facies ;  both  dip  towards  the  south.  The 
inner  zone  is  Uhlig's  Beskidian  zone,  the  Magura  sandstone  is  its  most 
important  member.  Proceeding  towards  the  north  we  cross  Tertiary  beds, 
beneath  these  upper  Cretaceous  and  then  lower  Cretaceous,  which  rest  on 
Tertiary  beds  of  the  outer  zone.  The  lower  Cretaceous  does  not  occur  over 
any  considerable  area  except  in  the  north-west,  chiefly  in  Silesia.  It  is 
traversed  by  sills  of  Teschenite,  which  are,  however,  older  than  the  over- 
thrust,  and  are  not  exposed  on  the  thrust-plane  itself.  Along  with  the  lower 
Cretaceous  great  boulders  of  its  Jurassic  basement  also  occur ;  here  too  we 
must  refer  the  rocks  of  Stramberg.  The  Jurassic  is  difierent  from  that  of 
the  Tatra  and  the  Pienine :  many  characters  appear  here  which  recall  the 
foreland.  To  this  zone  we  must  also  assign  loose  fragments  of  Carboni- 
ferous, blocks  of  granite  and  gneiss  and,  with  them,  the  oft-mentioned 
gigantic  Carboniferous  fragment  of  Hustopetsch  ^. 

^  V.  Uhlig,  Tektonik  der  Karpathen,  pp.  877  et  seq. 

2  D.  Stur,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1891,  XLI,  pp.  1-10. 


CH.  Vl] 


BESKIDIAN  ZONE 


207 


The  northern  margin  of  this  lower  Cretaceous  exposure  is  the  northern 
margin  of  the  Beskidian  zone.  Owing  to  its  superposition  on  the  Tertiary 
of  the  outer  zone  it  is  broken  up  into  patches  by  erosion,  and  close  to  its 
edge  the  coal-bearing  Carboniferous  has  been  reached  by  borings  made 
through  the  outer  zone  ^  (I,  p.  187).  In  Moravia  the  Beskidian  zone  comes 
into  contact  by  its  foothills  with  the  offshoots  of  the  Flysch  zone  of  lower 
Austria,  and  it  may  be  regarded  as  the  direct  continuation  of  the  Helvetian 
Alps  towards  Roumania. 

Outside  of  this  zone  lies  Uhlig's  suh-Beskidian  zone.  Upper  Cretaceous 
and  lower  Tertiary  occur,  but  the  characteristic  beds  are  the  menelite 
shales.  Here,  beside  numerous  blocks  of  Tithonian  beds,  the  previously-men- 
tioned basement  patches  crop  out,  along  with  other  remains  of  the  Variscan^ 
Russian,  and  Cimmerian  foreland.  The  numerous  borings  for  petroleum, 
often  sunk  to  a  depth  of  900  or  1,000  meters,  give  full  information  as  to  the 
lie  of  the  beds ;  in  fact,  we  could  hardly  find  in  the  whole  of  Europe  a 
clearer  description  of  an  outer  border,  undisturbed  by  a  foreland,  than  that 
given  by  Grzybowski  and  Miaczynski  of  the  ozokerite  district  of  Boryslav  ^. 
A  mass  of  upper  Cretaceous,  dipping  to  the  south,  has  been  carried  along  a 
thrust-plane,  with  a  maximum  inclination  of  45°  to  the  south,  over  a  packet 
of  middle  (and  perhaps  lower)  Tertiary  beds,  which  dips  in  folds  steeply  to 
the  south  and  ascends  along  a  second  gentler  thrust-plane  on  to  the  thick 
Oligocene  beds  of  Dobrotov  (sandstone  and  shales)  and  the  overlying 
Miocene  saliferous  clay. 

Three  flakes  are  thus  present,  of  which  that  situated  towards  the  north 
is  the  lowest-lying,  though  formed  of  the  youngest  beds.  The  convergence 
of  the  thrust-planes  shows  that  the  middle  flake  must  terminate  downwards 
-and  towards  the  south  in  a  wedge-like  form ;  as  a  consequence  of  the  pres- 
sure exerted  on  the  foremost  and  most  northerly  flake  a  broad  anticline  of 
saliferous  clay  and  Dobrotov  beds  has  been  formed  within  it.  A  boring 
through  the  Dobrotov  beds  did  not  reach  their  base  at  a  depth  of 
1,000  meters.  They  dip  beneath  the  higher  flakes,  and  the  anticline 
they  form  is  not  followed  by  a  syncline  (cf.  Chap.  IV). 

These  results  are  in  complete  accord  with  those  obtained  from  a  study 
of  the  anticline  of  the  Swiss  Molasse.  That  anticline  also  is  the  result  of  a 
general  lateral  pressure  coming  from  the  high  ranges,  and  again,  according 
to  Arnold  Heim's  observations  and  in  opposition  to  older  views,  no  syncline 

^  I  have  visited  such  a  locality  near  Paskau,  south  of  Mahringen-Ostrau.  A  large,  thinly 
wooded  ridge  of  lower  Cretaceous  stands  out,  and  only  a  few  hundred  paces  from  its  slope, 
covered  with  teschenite  debris,  lies  the  borehole.  Petraschek  states  that  the  coal- 
bearing  Carboniferous  was  reached  after  boring  through  a  thickness  of  400  meters  of 
(Tertiary)  beds,  Verh.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1906,  p.  362. 

^  Geologischer  Atlas  Galiziens,  published  by  the  Physiographical  commission  of  the 
Academy  of  Cracow.  Text  to  sheet  Drohobycz  by  W.  Szajnocha,  J.  Grzybowski,  and 
P.  Miaczynski,  1906  ;  in  particular  the  sections  by  Grzybowski  and  Miaczynski  on  sheet  6. 


208 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES  [party 


follows  the  anticline  towards  the  mountains,  but  the  south  limb  of  the 
anticline  (as  far  as  it  is  possible  to  judge)  passes  straight  beneath  the  first 
Alpine  chains  ^. 

Uhlig  supposes  that  the  movements  in  the  Carpathians  were  directed 
obliquely  from  below ;  he  mentions  laminated  sheets,  the  splitting  up  of 
gently  ascending  thrust-planes,  and  the  absence  of  roots.  All  these  state- 
ments agree  with  the  facts  revealed  by  the  borings  in  Boryslav. 

The  Carpathians,  like  the  Alps,  are  built  up  of  sheets ;  but,  as  in  the 
Alps,  and  especially  the  Tauern,  many  facts  seem  to  indicate  that  a 
secondary  folding  up  of  the  several  masses,  such  as  Tatra,  Tatra-Krivan, 
and  others  must  have  taken  place. 

The  Helvetian  sheet  extends  from  the  Alps  into  the  region  of  the 
Carpathians,  the  middle  and  upper  Cretaceous  alike  indicate  a  northern 
influence,  and  this  extends  even  into  the  Tatra ;  typical  Gosau  beds  do  not 
make  their  appearance  till  we  proceed  further  towards  the  south. 

The  Lepontine  group  undergoes  modifications,  in  particular  by  the 
introduction  of  a  new  member,  the  Pienine,  which  is  already  visible  in  the 
East  Alps.  In  respect  to  its  tectonic  position,  the  high  Tatrian  zone 
resembles  the  beds  of  the  Tauern. 

The  same  is  true  of  the  sub-Tatrian  zone  and  the  East  Alpine  sheet. 
Each  of  these  is  the  highest  tectonic  member  in  its  own  region.  There  are 
also  a  number  of  accessory  characters  by  which  they  are  united ;  thus,  in 
the  eastern  parts  of  the  East  Alps  several  smaller  outcrops  of  augite 
melaphyre  occur ;  these  are  repeated  in  the  little  Carpathians  and  more 
to  the  east. 

The  diversity  of  the  East  Alpine  sheet  itself  demands  further  study. 
But  we  already  perceive  that,  in  spite  of  such  striking  and  remote  isopy, 
several  sheets  undergo  alteration  in  the  region  between  the  West  Alps  and 
the  Carpathians,  and  that  when  we  come  to  subdivide  the  Lepontine  group 
it  will  be  necessary  to  avoid  limits  of  too  strict  a  nature. 

The  trend-line  of  the  East  Carpathians  is  clearly  marked  by  the  curve 
of  its  outer  border  and  by  the  strike  of  the  long  gneiss-mass  of  Moldavia. 
There  is  abundant  evidence  to  show  that  the  structure  of  this  mass 
resembles  that  of  the  East  Carpathians,  but  we  will  not  enter  into  further 
details  here,  since  so  many  have  already  been  given  in  Chapter  I,  as,  for 
instance,  the  occurrence  of  increasingly  younger  folds  on  the  outer  border, 
the  window  of  the  Paring,  the  torsion,  the  pre-Permian  patches  within  the 
Balkans,  and  the  open  recent  folding  of  the  eastern  Balkan  which  recalls  a 
free  end. 

^  Arnold  Heim,  Brandung  der  Alpen  am  Nagelfluh-Gebirge,  Vierteljahrssclir.  nat.  Ges. 
Zurich,  1906,  LI,  pp.  441  et  seq. 


CH.  Vl] 


THE  APENNINES 


209 


Continuation  of  the  Alps  towards  the  south  and  south-west. 

(I,  p.  219.) 

The  existence  of  subsidences  in  Tuscany,  and  at  the  same  time  the 
original  continuity  of  the  Tyrrhenian  islands  off  its  coast,  was  long  ago 
discovered  by  the  insight  of  Italian  observers  such  as  Brocchi,  and  particu- 
larly Savi  and  Cocchi.  In  their  time  this  view  was  based  chiefly  on  the 
occurrence  of  the  Pliocene.  In  1872  a  conjecture  was  hazarded  that  the 
whole  of  the  Tyrrhenian  sea  was  a  subsidence,  and  that  within  it  lay 
the  tectonic  continuation  of  the  Alps  ^.  At  a  later  time  the  seismic 
phenomena  in  Calabria  were  regarded  as  indicating  a  continuation  of  the 
process  of  subsidence  (I,  p.  232,  fig.  26). 

Many  facts  have  already  been  mentioned  with  regard  to  the  region 
in  question,  for  instance,  the  reappearance  of  the  Piedmontese  Alps  in 
north-east  Corsica,  the  north-and-south  strike  in  Elba,  and  Steinmann's 
theory  of  a  great  overthrust.  At  Spezia  the  meridional  direction  of  Genoa 
is  already  replaced  by  the  general  south-easterly  direction  of  the  Apennines. 
This  is  also  the  prevalent  direction  in  the  intensely  folded  Apuan  Alps. 
Xotti  has  shown  that  their  south-easterly  continuation,  Monte  Pisano, 
4  kilometers  in  breadth,  consists  of  a  flat  anticline  of  Lias,  over  the  whole 
breadth  of  which  there  rests,  with  the  same  curvature,  a  sheet  of  upper 
Trias,  Rhaetic,  Lias,  Oolites,  and  Neocomian,  so  that  throughout  the  moun- 
tain Trias  is  found  resting  on  Lias  ^.  Lotti  has  also  shown  that  the  green 
rocks  of  Monte  Argentario  belong  to  the  Trias,  as  De  Stefani  had  previously 
aflarmed,  and  that  the  rocks  of  the  Apuan  Alps,  of  the  Montagnuola  of 
Siena,  of  Monte  Argentario,  and  the  island  of  Giglio  show  indeed  complete 
correspondence  ^. 

Thus,  a  range  of  rocks  of  Alpine  character  occupies  the  whole  breadth 
of  the  sea  from  Corsica  to  Orbetello.  It  is,  nevertheless,  separated  from 
the  main  range  of  the  Apennines  by  the  ancient  rocks  which  make  their 
appearance  in  the  so-called  Catena  metallifera,  near  Gavorrano,  Campiglia, 
and  other  localities. 

In  the  east  of  the  Apennines  the  normal  direction  to  the  south-east  is 
not  always  maintained.  Between  Spoleto  and  Rieti  a  north-and-south 
strike  prevails,  with  overfolding  towards  the  east.  Near  Spoleto,  according 
to  Lotti's  statements,  a  platform  of  lower  Lias,  about  250  meters  thick, 
7  kilometers  long,  and  5  kilometers  broad,  rests  on  the  Senonian  Scaglia 

^  Ueber  den  Bau  der  italienischen  Halbinsel,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1872,  LXV, 
pp.  217-221. 

2  R.  Lotti,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1905,  XXXVI,  p.  50. 

^  R.  Lotti,  Sulla  eta  delle  roccie  ofiolitiche  del  Capo  Argentario,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol. 
ital.,  1905,  XXXVI,  pp.  177-181. 

*  R.  Lotti,  Di  un  caso  di  rieuoprimento  presso  Spoleto,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1905, 
XXXVI,  pp.  42  et  seq.,  1906,  XXXVII,  pp.  34  et  seq.  and  280  et  seq. 

SOLLAS  IV  P 


210 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES 


[part  V 


This  meridional  strike  in  Umbria,  and  certain  features  in  the  structure  of 
Tunis  led  Haug  to  draw  trend-lines  from  the  Sabine  mountains  obliquely 
across  the  Tyrrhenian  sea  towards  Cape  Bon  and  Biserta,  thereby  excluding- 
the  Basilicata,  Calabria,  and  Sicily^.  Although  the  meridional  direction 
can  be  traced  towards  the  south,  almost  down  to  Tivoli,  yet  it  can  only  be 
regarded  as  exceptional,  for  normal  south-easterly  chains  occur  both  on  the 
west  and  on  the  east,  and  further  south  the  Monti  Lepini  strike  to  the 
south-east  across  Haug's  hypothetical  trend-lines. 

It  is  possible  that  the  older  rocks  of  the  Catena  Metallifera  have  not 
been  without  some  effect  in  producing  the  deflexion  in  the  Sabine  range. 
They  do  not  behave,  however,  as  an  obstructing  foreland,  for  the  easterly- 
lying  Umbrian  chains  are  folded  towards  the  east,  and  Lotti  even  believes 
that  the  Catena  Metallifera  affords  evidence  of  a  strike  which  was  originally 
more  meridional,  and  has  since  been  affected  by  the  general  strike  to  the 
south-east  2. 

Let  us  now  proceed  a  good  way  further  south. 

On  the  west  side  of  the  gulf  of  Tarento  the  lower  course  of  the  river 
Crati  broadens  out  into  the  wide  plain  of  Sybaris.  It  thus  separates  the 
bold  Trias  range  of  Lagonegro,  together  with  the  Cretaceous  and  Eocene 
zone,  which  lies  in  front  of  it  on  the  east,  from  the  crystalline  mountains 
of  Calabria.  The  river  Sinni  cuts  through  the  Cretaceous  and  Eocene 
zone.  Not  very  far  from  Latronico  it  receives  the  Frida  rivulet,  and  here 
Viola  has  found  in  the  midst  of  the  folded  formations  a  considerable 
exposure  of  crystalline  schist,  including  amphibolites.  A  distance  of  at 
least  50  kilometers  separates  this  locality  from  the  crystalline  rocks  of 
the  Sila  ^ 

Between  the  locality  just  mentioned  and  the  Tyrrhenian  sea  rise  the 
Trias  mountains  of  Lagonegro.  The  lower  Trias  is  absent.  According  to 
De  Lorenzo  the  range  is  closely  folded,  and  in  part  overturned  to  the  east ; 
possibly  it  is  dammed  back  by  the  crystalline  rocks  of  the  Frida.  The 
strike  is  north  and  south.  Lias  rests  unconformably  against  the  Main 
dolomite.  The  Cretaceous  and  Eocene  extend  in  a  second  unconformity 
over  the  whole  structure.  De  Lorenzo  points  out  that  the  upper  beds  do 
not  present  the  north- and-south  strike  of  the  Trias,  but  the  normal  south- 
east strike  of  the  Apennines,  so  that  a  twofold  strike  exists  here. 

Baldacci  and  Viola  have  published  an  instructive  account  of  the  manner 
in  which  these  Trias  limestones  and  dolomites,  according  to  their  estimate 

^  E.  Haug,  Sur  quelques  points  theoretiques  relatifs  a  la  geologie  de  la  Tunisie,  Assoc. 
Franf.  pour  rAvancement  des  Sciences,  Congres  de  Saint-fcenne,  1897,  pp.  866-376. 

^  R.  Lotti,  Considerazioni  sintetiche  sulla  orografia  e  sulla  geologia  della  Catena 
metallifera.  Boll.  R.  Cora.  geol.  ital.,  1892,  XXIII,  pp.  55-71. 

^  C.  Viola,  Coraunicazione  preliminare  sopra  un  terreno  cristallino  in  Basilicata^ 
Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1892,  XXIII,  pp.  244-246. 


CH.  Vl] 


TEIAS  OF  THE  SOUTH 


211 


some  3,000  meters  thick,  are  inserted  into  the  structure  of  the  Apennines. 
The  Trias  runs  to  the  north  through  Paterno,  Padula,  and  Marsiconuovo, 
then  through  the  province  of  Potenza,  diverging  only  a  little  to  the  north- 
north- west,  and  reaches  the  mountains  of  San  Fele,  not  far  from  the  outer 
border  of  the  Apennines,  south  of  Monte  Vulture.  Towards  the  north  the 
direction  becomes  north-west,  then  turns  almost  due  west,  and  the  Trias 
reaches  the  proximal  end  of  the  peninsula  of  Sorrento,  north  of  Salerno, 
and  in  the  direction  of  Amalfi,  the  innermost  part  of  the  gulf  also.  A 
curvilinear  trend-line  is  thus  revealed,  which  runs  approximately  from 
Castrovillari  on  the  Crati  towards  San  Fele  and  thence  to  Salerno.  Baldacci 
and  Viola  speak  of  it  as  the  Tyrrhenian  semicircle  ^. 

The  most  northerly  part  has  been  described  by  De  Lorenzo.  Long 
before  this  is  reached,  and  while  still  within  the  region  of  the  north- 
westerly strike,  the  south  side  of  the  Trias  is  affected  by  great  longitudinal 
dislocations,  which  throw  down  the  inner  side  of  the  arc  in  step  faults, 
while  its  outer  surface  is  inclined  towards  Monte  Vulture,  i.  e.  towards  the 
north-east.  Within  the  folded  Eocene  Flysch  rises  the  volcano  ;  the  Flysch 
is  affected  by  the  step  faults.  Similar  step  faults  appear  to  accompany  the 
whole  western  half  of  the  Semicircle  on  its  southern  side,  and  have  been 
recognized  in  particular  to  the  north  of  Salerno  and  in  the  peninsula  of 
Sorrento.  Rovereto  disputes  their  presence  in  Capri  (and  in  part  also 
in  the  peninsula)  and  suggests  another  structure — in  the  case  of  Capri, 
successive  overthrust  sheets  ^. 

^  Of  the  numerous  works  on  this  subject  we  will  only  mention :  for  the  north,  P.  Bas- 
sani,  Sui  fossili  e  sull'  eta  degli  schisti  bituminosi  di  Monte  Pettine,  Mem.  Soc.  Ital.  Sci. 
(Napoli),  1892,  XL,  27  pp.,  and  Fossili  nella  Dolomite  triasica  del  dintorno  di 
Mercato  San  Severino,  Atti  Accad.  Nap.,  1893,  2*  ser.,  V,  no.  9,  15  pp. ;  Bassani  e  de 
Lorenzo,  Per  la  geologia  della  peninsula  di  Sorrento,  Atti  R.  Acc.  Lincei,  Rendic,  1893, 
5^  ser.,  II,  pp.  202, 203  ;  A.  Galdieri,  Osservazioni  geologiche  sui  Monti  Picentini,  op.  cit., 
1907,  5*  ser.,  V,  pp.  529-534 ;  for  the  south,  G.  de  Lorenzo,  Trias  del  Dintorno  di  Lago- 
negro,  Atti  R.  Acc.  Lincei,  1892,  2^  ser.,  V,  no.  8,  48  pp. ;  I  Monti  mesozoici  di  Lago- 
negro,  op.  cit.,  1894,  2*  ser.,  VI,  no.  15,  125  pp.,  map  ;  Osservazioni  geologiche  nel- 
I'Appennino  della  Basilicata  meridionale,  op.  cit.,  1895,  2^  ser.,  VII,  no.  8,  31  pp. ;  and  in 
particular  Guida  geologica  in  Boll.  Soc.  geol.  ital.,  1898,  XVII,  pp.  170-195,  map,  and 
Studio  di  geologia  nell'  Appennino  meridionale,  op.  cit.,  1896,  2^  ser.,  VIII,  no.  7, 128  pp., 
and  Geologia  e  geografia  fisica  dell'  Italia  meridionale,  1904,  8vo,  Bari,  241  pp. ;  Bittner, 
Brachiopoden  der  Trias  von  Lagonegro,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichs.,  1894,  XLIV,  pp.  583- 
588,  and  Bose  and  Lorenzo,  Geologische  Beobachtungen  in  der  siidlichen  Basilicata  und 
dem  nordwestlichen  Calabrien,  op.  cit.,  1896,  XLVI,  pp.  235-268.  For  the  whole  region 
Baldacci  e  Viola,  SuU'  estensione  del  Trias  in  Basilicata  e  sulla  tettonica  generale  del- 
I'Appennino  meridionale,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1894,  pp.  372-390 ;  E.  Cortese, 
Descrizione  geologica  della  Calabria,  Mem.  descr.  Carta  geol.  Italia,  1895,  IX,  310  pp., 
map,  and  G.  Di-Stefani,  Osservazioni  geologiche  nella  Calabria  settentrionale  e  nel 
circondario  di  Rossano,  1904,  op.  cit.,  appendix  to  vol.  IX,  119  pp. ;  also  the  geological 
map  on  the  scale  1 : 100,000. 

G.  de  Lorenzo,  Studio  geologico  del  Monte  Vulture,  Mem.  Acc.  Nap.,  1900,  2*  ser.,  X, 
no.  1,  207  pp.,  map,  in  particular  p.  37  et  seq. ;  further,  E.  Bose,  Contribuzioni  alia 

P  2 


212 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES 


[part  V 


It  is  not  certain  whether  the  Trias  range  terminates  with  the  Semicircle. 
The  next  trace  of  the  Apennines,  revealed  beyond  the  volcanos  of  Naples, 
is  the  isolated  Monte  Massico  in  the  plain  of  Volturno.  It  consists  of 
Cretaceous  limestone  and  beneath  it  lies  the  Main  dolomite  with  Gervillia 
exilis'^.  The  substructure  of  the  volcanic  Ponza  islands  is  visible  on  the 
north  side  of  Zannone,  the  most  northerly  of  the  group  ;  the  Main  dolo- 
mite with  Gervillia  exilis  again  makes  its  appearance,  and  at  the  same 
time  sericitic  shales,  which  belong  to  the  Trias,  and  some  Eocene  ^.  In  the 
Lepini  mountains  Cretaceous  limestone  predominates  ;  the  very  prominent 
cape  of  Circe  is  an  isolated  rock  of  Lias  with  a  patch  of  Eocene  ^. 

Calabria  (I,  p.  219).  South  of  the  lower  course  of  the  Crati  lies  a 
land  which  in  its  outer  configuration  differs  greatly  from  the  Apennines. 
Broad  valleys  filled  with  comparatively  recent  marine  deposits  separate  the 
hills,  which  thus  present  an  appearance  of  great  independence.  The  upper 
Crati  divides  the  broad  mass  of  the  Sila  in  the  east  from  the  long  and 
narrow  mass  of  the  Catena  litorale  (Monte  Cocuzzo)  in  the  west.  Beyond 
the  sources  of  the  Crati,  near  Martirano  and  Nicastro,  the  east  and  west 
unite.  The  neck  of  land  between  the  gulfs  of  Squillace  and  of  Santa 
Eufemia  separates  northern  from  southern  Calabria.  In  the  south  the 
elongated  Serra  runs  to  the  south-south-west  and  unites  with  the  Aspro- 
monte.  The  valley  of  the  Mesima  cuts  it  ofi"  on  the  west  from  the  little 
Vaticano  mass  (Monte  Poro),  and  the  strait  of  Messina  separates  the 
Aspromonte  from  its  natural  continuation,  the  Peloritan  range  in  Sicily. 

Cortese  distinguishes  the  following  sub-divisions  in  the  crystalline 
series.  Ancient  hornblende  gneiss  and  mica-schist  form  the  Aspromonte 
and  the  adjacent  part  of  the  Peloritan  mountains  and  are  restricted 
to  this  region.  These  are  followed  by  a  thick  mass  of  various  phyllites, 
which  towards  the  summit  sometimes  present  intercalations  of  augen- 
gneiss  or  transitions  to  sericitic  or  talcose  schist.  Over  these  lies  an 
extensive  mass  of  garnet-bearing  gneiss,  for  the  most  part  true  kinzigite, 
quite  similar  to  that  of  Ivrea ;  associated  with  it  is  a  garnet- bearing  schist. 
Finally  a  large  quantity  of  granite  is  exposed.  It  breaks  through  the 
lower  rocks  in  numerous  dykes  and  spreads  out  over  the  surface.  At  two 
localities  tonalite  makes  its  appearance  and  occupies  a  slightly  larger  area ; 

geologia  della  Peninsula  di  Sorrento,  op.  cit.,  1896,  2*  ser.,  VIII,  no.  8,  18  pp.,  and  Bose 
and  de  Lorenzo,  Zur  Geologie  der  Monti  Picentini  bei  Neapel,  Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol. 
Ges.,  1896,  XLVIII,  pp.  202-215  ;  G.  Rovereto,  L'Isola  di  Capri,  Atti  Soc.  Hgust.  Genova, 
1907,  XVIII,  pp.  22-25  ;  on  the  other  hand,  de  Lorenzo,  Atti  R.  Acc.  Lincei,  Rendic,  1907, 
XVI,  pp.  853-857. 

^  M.  Caesetti,  Osservazionigeologiche  sulMt.  Massico  presso  Sessa  Aurunca,  Boll.  Com. 
geol.  ital.,  1894,  XXV,  pp.  160-166. 

-  A.  Galdieri,  Osservazioni  sui  terreni  sedimentarii  di  Zannone,  Rendic.  R.  Acc.  Sci. 
Napoli,  Feb.  18,  1905,  8  pp.,  map. 

'  C.  Viola,  II  Monte  Circeo,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital.  1896,  XXVII,  pp.  161-171,  map. 


CH.  Vl] 


CALABRIA 


213 


diorite  and  dykes  of  porphyry  occur.  The  granite  covers  almost  the  whole 
Serra  and  a  considerable  part  of  the  Vatican  mass  ^.  Mention  is  also 
made  of  the  Sila,  but  according  to  Fucini's  observations  the  foregoing  sub- 
division does  not  apply  to  it.  The  oldest  rock  is  granite ;  this  is  covered 
by  phyllite  and  some  gneiss;  then  follows  a  schist  which  resembles  the 
Carboniferous  of  Monte  Pisano  and  the  Alps  2. 

In  the  north,  where  the  garnet  gneiss  of  the  Catena  litorale  dips  beneath 
the  Trias,  there  lies,  beneath  it  and  above  the  phyllite,  a  green  schist  which 
has  been  produced  from  diabase.  Serpentines  make  their  appearance  in 
several  places,  and  in  some  isolated  localities  their  resemblance  to  the  Pietre 
verdi  of  the  Alps  is  so  striking  that  Lovisato  regarded  them  as  a  continuation 
of  the  green-rocks  of  the  Alps  ^. 

The  difference  between  this  substructure  and  other  parts  of  the 
Apennines,  though  remarkable,  is  not  more  so  than  the  difference  in  the 
distribution  of  the  sediments. 

Phyllite,  kinzigite,  and  green  schists  form  the  greater  part  of  the  Catena 
litorale ;  this  range,  as  we  have  seen  above,  extends  as  far  as  the  Trias 
mountains  to  the  north,  which  it  reaches  near  Santa  Agata  on  the  Esaro. 
A  fragment  of  black  limestone,  completely  separated  from  these  ranges, 
occurs  on  the  coast  near  Cetraro.  A  much  larger  fragment,  about  8  kilo- 
meters in  length,  very  narrow,  consisting,  as  it  would  appear,  of  horizontal 
beds,  and  probably  over  200  meters  thick,  crowns  the  whole  crest  of  Monte 
Cocuzzo  (1,542  meters)  and  dominates  the  country  far  and  wide.  Other 
smaller  patches  extend  southwards  to  Mali  to  (west-south- west  of  Rogliano), 
56  kilometers  from  Santa  Agata ;  this  limestone  is  characterized  by  the 
presence  of  Megalodon  and  Diplopora 

The  great  southern  slope  of  the  Trias  recedes  from  Santa  Agata  towards 
the  north-east  as  far  as  Castrovillari,  and  then  disappears  beneath  the 
Cretaceous.  In  front  of  the  slope  the  plain  becomes  broader,  and  10  kilo- 
meters to  the  south-east  of  Castrovillari  two  isolated  bosses  of  Trias  rise 
out  of  it ;  for  a  distance  of  10  kilometers  along  the  southern  border  of  the 
plain  the  ancient  phyllites,  forming  the  foothills  of  the  Sila,  crop  out. 

^  E.  Cortese,  Descrizione  geologica  della  Calabria,  Mem.  descr.  Carta  geol.  Italia, 
p.  63  et  seq. 

^  A.  Fucini,  Studio  geologico  sul  circondario  di  Rossano,Atti  Acc.  Gioen.  Catania,  1896, 
IX,  No.  17,  87  pp.,  map  ;  in  particular  p.  5  et  seq.  On  the  schist  which  is  assigned  to  the 
kinzigite  in  the  north-western  part  of  the  Sila  :  L.  Busatti,  Atti  Soc.  tosc.  sci.  nat.  Pisa, 
Proc.-verb.,  1891-1893,  VIII,  March  5,  1893,  pp.  202-208. 

^  D.  Lovisato,  Cenni  geognostici  e  geologici  sulla  Calabria  settentrionale,  Boll.  K.  Com. 
geol.  ital.,  1878,  IX,  p.  155  and  continuations,  in  particular  1879,  X,  pp.  39  and  137 ; 
precisely  the  same  views  in  Novarese,  Boll.  Soc.  geol.  ital.,  1906,  XXV,  p.  179. 

*  G.  V.  Rath,  Geognostisch-geographische  Bemerkungen  iiber  Calabrien,  Zeitschr. 
deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1873,  XXV,  pp.  150-209,  in  particular  p.  159  ;  E.  Cortese,  Descri- 
zione geologica  della  Calabria,  Mem.  descr.  Carta  geol.  Italia,  p.  219. 


214  POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES  [paetv 

Here  the  Crati,  as  it  makes  its  bend  between  Terranova  and  Spezzano- 
Albanese,  cuts  through  another  patch  of  limestone.  In  1871  I  visited 
this  spot  in  the  company  of  my  deceased  friend  G.  von  Kath.  We  found 
Crinoids,  which  left  us  in  no  doubt  that  this  patch  was  an  outlier 
of  the  great  limestone  cliffs  which  rise  in  full  Alpine  splendour  on  the 
north  side  of  the  Crati  valley.  Lovisato  and  Fucini  have  expressed  the 
same  opinion.  The  former  adds  that  the  limestone  of  Terranova  rests  on 
mica  schist  or  green  schist,  but  is  not  defined  from  them  by  any  sharp 
boundary.  Repeated  alternation  occurs ;  then  come  beds  of  cippoline  and 
other  rocks.    A  very  similar  account  is  given  by  Fucini  ^. 

As  far  as  existing  observations  extend  this  is  the  last  trace  of  Trias  on 
the  Crati. 

We  have  already  mentioned  that  the  granite  of  the  Sila  is  regarded  as 
older  than  the  associated  schists.  These  rocks  are  overlain,  south  of 
Rossano,  on  the  Ionian  slope,  by  several  patches  of  fossiliferous  Mesozoic 
strata.    They  have  been  described  by  Fucini,  Greco,  and  di  Stef  ano  ^. 

The  most  important  of  them  is  a  long  patch  of  Lias,  17-18  kilometers 
in  length,  resting  partly  on  granite,  partly  on  schist,  and  elongated  towards 
the  south-east.  On  its  west  border  lies  Longobuco.  On  the  east  it  rests, 
according  to  the  map  (1  :  100,000),  on  granite  at  the  bottom  of  the  Trionto 
valley,  at  a  height  of  300  meters  above  the  sea,  and  at  its  western  border 
it  attains  a  height  of  1,481  meters  on  Monte  Palepito ;  not  far  away  the 
granite  reaches  a  height  of  1,431  meters.  As  it  ascends  the  Lias  exhibits 
folding.  Taken  as  a  whole  it  would  seem  to  form  a  syncline  open  towards 
the  east.  Its  lowest  subdivision  consists  of  an  accumulation  of  boulders 
and  pebbles,  with  beds  of  sand  and  traces  of  plants  ^.  It  passes  upwards 
into  lower  Lias  limestones ;  the  middle  Lias  is  but  poorly  represented,  the 
upper  Lias,  on  the  other  hand,  is  of  very  wide  extent,  and  in  places 
overlaps  on  to  granite. 

To  the  north,  as  far  as  the  neighbourhood  of  the  town  of  Rossano, 
a  series  of  different  and  smaller,  sometimes  indeed  very  small  patches,  set 
in.  At  one  place  the  remains  of  a  bed  containing  Rhynconella  Glesiana 
rests  on  ancient  schist.   There  are  three  small  patches  of  reddish  limestone, 

^  G.  V.  Rath,  op.  cit.,  p.  167,  D.  Lovisato,  Boll.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1879,  X,  p.  33  et  seq. ; 
A.  Fucini,  Atti  Acc.  Gioen.  Catania,  1896,  IX,  No.  17,  pp.  18-21.  On  the  map,  1 : 100,000, 
this  limestone  is  represented  as  Archaean. 

2  A.  Fucini,  op.  cit.  ;  Greco,  in  particular  Lias  inferiore  nel  circondario  di  Rossano, 
8vo,  Pisa,  1893,  128  pp.  ;  Sulla  presenza  della  oolite  inferiore  nelle  vicinanze  di  Rossano 
Calabro,  Atti  Soc.  tosc.  sci.  nat.,  Proc.-verb.,  1895,  IX,  March  3,  6  pp.  ;  and  II  Lias  supe- 
riore  nel  circondario  di  Rossano  Calabro,  Boll.  Soc.  gaol,  ital.,  1896,  XV,  pp.  92-121  ; 
the  results  are  combined  in  Di-Stefano,  Osservazioni  geologiche,  etc.,  Mem.  descr.  Carta 
geol.  Italia,  1904,  pp.  93-119. 

'  M.  Canavari,  Conglomerati  arenarii  e  quartziti  liasiche  di  Puntadura,  Atti  Soc.  tosc. 
Pisa,  Proc.-verb.,  1891-1893,  VIII,  15  Nov.  1891,  pp.  13,  14. 


CH.  Vl] 


THE  SUCCESSION  AT  KOSSANO 


215 


likewise  resting  on  schist  and  containing  the  fauna  of  the  stage  of  San 
Vigilio  with  intermingled  fragments  of  the  basement  rocks.  Two  small 
patches  of  Aptychus  limestone  (Tithonian)  rest  partly  on  this  reddish 
limestone  and  partly  on  granite. 

The  middle  Eocene  Nummulitic  beds  lie  on  the  various  stages  men- 
tioned above.  Following  the  coast  they  form  a  fairly  long  but  interrupted 
zone  striking  to  the  south-east.  These  beds  also  begin  with  a  basement 
conglomerate  ^. 

Thus  we  reach  the  following  conclusions : — the  Trias  is  absent.  All  the 
other  stages  are  autochthonous,  as  is  shown  by  the  repeated  basement  con- 
glomerates. Sila  was  a  rocky  shallow  or  island  from  the  time  of  the  lower 
Lias,  but  it  has  nevertheless  been  affected  by  folding. 

There  is  no  evidence  that  the  Trias  patches  of  the  Catena  litorale  and 
Terranova  are  autochthonous. 

The  Eocene  belt  on  the  Ionian  coast  disappears,  becomes  visible  again 
from  Ciro  onwards,  and  disappears  again  beneath  the  broad  plain  of 
Catrone,  which  extends  to  the  gulf  of  Squillace  and  the  constricted  part  of 
the  peninsula.  Here,  near  Catanzaro,  in  the  so-called  little  Sila,  and  as  far 
as  the  west  coast,  there  is  scarcely  anything  more  striking  than  the  diver- 
sity of  the  crystalline  limestones  which  occur  in  intimate  association  with 
diorite,  granite,  or  kinzigite.  The  penetration  of  eruptive  rock  into  the 
stratified  and  intensely  folded  limestone  or  calc  schist  may  be  seen  beauti- 
fully illustrated  on  the  road  from  Catanzaro  to  Tiriolo.  Strings  of  garnets 
accompany  the  bedding  planes. 

All  these  limestones  are  generally  regarded  as  Archaean,  but  we  con- 
tinually meet  with  expressions  of  doubt.  Lovisato  says  that  he  could 
neither  assert  nor  deny  that  the  upper  beds  belong  to  the  Trias.  Cortese 
admits  that  he  had  believed  them  to  be  younger,  possibly  Permian,  and 
has  only  assigned  them  to  the  Archaean  on  account  of  their  crystalline 
grain  and  intimate  association  with  garnetif erous  schist  ^. 

Coming  from  the  west  coast  near  Amantea  the  groups  of  rocks  which 
include  the  crystalline  limestones  are  surmounted  by  a  number  of  scattered 
crags  of  white  limestone,  among  them  the  well-known  rock  of  Tiriolo  on 
the  summit  of  the  pass  of  Catanzaro.  Ellipsactineae  and  corals  are  found 
in  their  further  continuation  to  the  south,  likewise  Nerineae.  They  have 
been  assigned  to  the  upper  Jurassic,  more  recently  to  the  Cretaceous, 
and  thus  enable  us  to  fix  at  least  an  upper  limit  to  the  age  of  the 
crystalline  limestones. 

^  Di-Stefano,  Osservazioni  geologiclie,  etc.,  Mem.  descr.  Carta  geol  Italia,  1904,  p.  114. 

2  D.  Lovisato,  Cenni  geognostichi,  etc.,  Boll.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1878,  IX,  pp.  226,  228 ; 
E.  Cortese,  Descrizione  geologica  della  Calabria,  Mem.  descr.  Carta  geol.  Italia,  1895,  IX, 
p.  223 ;  Fucini,  Studio  geologico,  etc.,  Atti  Acc.  Gioen.  Catania,  1896,  IX,  No.  17,  p.  20  ; 
for  the  minerals  of  the  limestone  in  the  kinzigite,  V.  Novarese,  Calcari  cristallini  e  calcefiri 
deir  Arcaico  calabrese.  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1893,  XXIV,  pp.  17-43. 


216  POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES  [party 

These  younger  limestones  unite  to  form  isolated  and  fairly  long  ranges, 
and  they  surround  in  a  girdle,  one  evidently  continuous,  the  east  of  the 
Aspromonte.  Along  with  some  Cenomanian  of  African  type,  and  Flysch 
of  upper  Eocene  and  Oligocene  age,  they  form  a  belt  from  Stilo  onwards ; 
its  beds  in  several  places  dip  steeply  towards  the  Ionian  sea,  and  are 
probably  folded  also.  The  white  limestones  of  Jurassic  or  Cretaceous  age 
extend  nearly  up  to  cape  Spartivento,  while  the  Flysch  surrounds 
the  whole  southern  part  of  the  peninsula  as  far  as  cape  dArmi  and 
beyond  it^. 

Sicily.  In  considering  the  north-east  part  of  the  island  we  will  follow 
Di  Stefano  and  Cortese^.  The  ancient  formations  which  strike  across 
from  Calabria  are  covered  unconf ormably  by  the  '  Strati  di  Ali a  series 
comprising  quartzite,  violet  schist,  and  jasper  alternating  with  brown 
limestone ;  cellular  limestone  with  gypsum  is  also  mentioned  ;  grey,  thinly 
stratified  limestone  forms  the  capo  di  Ali.  The  relations  of  this  series 
to  the  next  cannot  be  determined. 

The  second  and  more  southerly  series  begins  with  a  deep  red  con- 
glomerate very  similar  in  character  to  the  Rothliegende,  which,  also,  rests 
unconformably  upon  the  ancient  formations.  Towards  its  upper  part 
it  passes  through  sandy  marls  into  beds  of  limestone  and  some  dolomite, 
which  contain  in  abundance  Gastropods  characteristic  of  the  lower  Lias 
of  Palermo.  Above,  dolomite  occurs  in  rocky  masses  and  this  series  may 
reach  a  thickness  of  200  meters ;  over  this  follow  beds  with  a  rich  marine 
fauna  which  still  belongs  to  the  lower  Lias. 

The  middle  Lias,  but  little  developed,  consists  of  grey  Crinoidal  lime- 
stone with  species  of  the  Hierlatz  facies. 

The  upper  Lias  may  attain  a  thickness  of  300  meters  or  more;  the 
lower  part  is  formed  of  Leptaena  beds,  the  upper  of  stratified  limestone 
and  fluhen  marl  with  Hildoceras  bifrons.  The  Middle  Jurassic  is  repre- 
sented by  the  stage  of  San  Vigilio,  and  beds  containing  Bhynconella 
Clesiana  and  Rhynconella  Vigilii ;  locally  a  bed  with  HariJoceras  opalinum 

^  Erdbeben  cles  siidlichen  Italien,  Denkschr.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1875,  XXXIV, 
pp.  1-32 ;  L.  Burgerstein  und  F.  Noe,  Geologische  Beobachtungen  im  sudlichen  Calabrien, 
Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1880,  LXXXI,  pp.  154-173,  map  ;  Bassani  e  de  Lorenzo,  II 
Monte  Consolino  di  Stilo,  Atti  Acc.  Napoli,  1894,  2*  ser.,  VI,  No.  8,  6  pp.  Also  the  recent 
studies  of  Coiiese  and  Di-Stefano  mentioned  above. 

^  Di-Stefano  e  Cortese,  Guida  geologica  dei  dintorni  di  Taormina,  Boll.  Soc.  geol, 
ital.,  1891,  X,  pp.  197-246.  This  series  differs  considerably  from  that  which  I  have 
myself  described  (e.  g.  ICrdbeben  des  sudlichen  Italien,  p.  6,  also  in  this  work,  I,  p.  219)  in 
accordance  with  the  older  views  of  Sicilian  geologists  ;  on  these  views  Baldacci's  more 
detailed  Descrizione  geologica  dell'  Isola  di  Sicilia  (Mem.  descr.  Carta  geol.  Italia,  1886, 1, 
403  pp.)  and  the  special  map,  1: 100,000,  are  based.  The  changed  standpoint  is  chiefly 
due  to  Di-Stefano.  The  dolomite  is  now  assigned  to  the  lower  Lias.  It  is  true  that  there 
are  still  serious  tectonic  difficulties  (Guida  geologica  in  Boll.  Soc.  geol.  ital.,  1898,  XVII, 
p.  46). 


CH.  Vl] 


SICILY 


217 


or  Posidonia  alpina  may  be  met  with.  Then  follow  the  Alpine  Klaus 
beds  with  Rhynconella  Berchta,  various  stages  of  the  upper  Jurassic  up  to 
the  Tithonian  and  finally  Cretaceous  and  Tertiary. 

This  series  is  generally  admitted  to  correspond  in  a  very  striking 
manner  with  that  of  Rossano  on  the  north-east  side  of  the  Sila.  The 
intercalation  of  dolomite  in  the  lower  Lias  forms  the  most  important 
difference,  but  here  as  there  the  whole  of  the  Trias  is  absent,  except  in 
so  far  as  the  beds  of  the  Ali  may  represent  some  trace  of  it.  Here  as 
there  also  transgressions  of  the  upper  Lias  occur,  and  the  Tithonian 
encroaches  in  like  manner  upon  a  variety  of  underlying  formations. 
Cretaceous  and  Tertiary  also  overlap  on  to  the  ancient  rocks.  We  must 
point  out  that  on  the  northern  slope,  near  Castroreale  above  Barcelona, 
Seguenza  discovered  another  fragment  of  the  African  Cenomanian  with 
Ostraea  scyphax  lying  between  the  lower  Tertiary  and  gneiss. 

Towards  the  middle  of  the  island  the  Trias,  divisible  into  numerous 
zones,  makes  its  appearance  from  beneath  the  Lias,  and  at  one  locality 
on  the  river  Sosio,  in  the  south  part  of  the  province  of  Palermo,  marine 
Permian  also  occurs.  The  comprehensive  studies  of  G.  G.  Gemmelaro  show 
that  there  is  no  boundary  in  Sicily  between  the  Dinaric  and  Alpine 
facies.  The  marine  Permian  (Trogkofel  beds.  III,  p.  349)  is  a  very 
characteristic  member  of  the  Dinarides  and  approaches  close  to  the 
boundary  of  the  Alps,  but  has  never  yet  been  encountered  in  those  moun- 
tains. In  Sicily  it  appears  beside  the  typical  Hallstatt  beds  of  the  Alps,  as 
represented,  for  example,  by  the  fauna  of  the  zone  of  Trachyceras  aonoides^. 

The  beds  of  Sosio  are  the  oldest  rock  outside  the  Peloritan  belt,  but  the 
whole  island  is  underlain  by  Mesozoic  beds.  Trias  also  makes  its  appear- 
ance to  the  south-west  of  Aetna,  and  Harpoceras  opalinum  occurs  in  the 
extreme  west  near  Trapani.  The  Trias  strikes  out  from  the  Madonian 
islands  along  the  north  coast  towards  the  west ;  a  second  branch  crosses 
the  middle  of  the  province  of  Palermo  and  extends  in  a  number  of  isolated 
outcrops  as  far  as  Monte  San  Calogero  di  Sciacca  on  the  south  coast.  With 
regard  to  the  structure  there  is  a  difference  of  opinion.  Lugeon  and 
Argand  assume  a  great  overthrust,  extending  from  the  north  across  the 
west  of  Sicily  to  the  south  coast,  and  they  conjecture  that  the  crystalline 
masses  of  Calabria  have  also  been  overthrust.  Di-Stefano  disputes  the 
existence  of  such  great  movements.  A  decision  can  only  be  reached  as  the 
result  of  further  investigations  ^. 

^  G.  G.  Gemmelaro,  La  fauna  dei  Calcari  con  Fusulina  della  Valle  del  fiume  Sosio,  4to, 
Palermo,  1887,  338  pp. ;  I  Cefalopodi  del  Trias  superiore  della  regione  occidentale  della 
,  Sicilia,  Giorn.  Soc.  Sci.  nat.  e  econom.  Palermo,  1904,  XXXIV,  pp.  1-319;  in  particular 
note  to  p.  25. 

'  M.  Lugeon  et  E.  Argand,  Sur  de  grands  phenomenes  de  charriage  en  Sicile  ;  Sur  la 
grande  nappe  de  recouvrement  en  Sicile ;  La  racine  de  la  nappe  sicilienne  et  Tare  de 


218 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES 


[PAKTV 


Indications  exist  which  point  to  the  existence  of  a  down-thrown 
granitic  country.  It  was  long  since  observed  that  blocks  of  granite, 
syenite,  porphyry,  and  other  rocks  are  scattered  in  great  numbers  over  the 
Apennines,  and  Capellini  supposed  that  the  subsided  Tyrrhenius  was  their 
original  home.  In  Umbria  they  are  small  where  they  occur  in  the  Ftysch, 
their  head  quarters  are  the  middle  Miocene.  In  isolated  localities  they  are 
also  accompanied  by  Trias  and  green-rocks,  and  by  rocks  which  range  up 
to  the  Eocene.  A.  d'Ossat  concluded  that  the  boulders  on  Monte  Deruto 
(not  far  from  Foligno)  were  derived  from  the  Catena  metallifera — that  is, 
from  localities  60  to  100  kilometers  away,  and  in  1900  he  suggested  that 
they  might  be  the  remains  of  sheets  like  the  foreign  pebbles  of  the  Swiss 
Molasse  ^. 

Deecke,  who  had  become  familiar  with  them  further  south,  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Monte  Vulture,  did  not  doubt  that  they  had  been  derived 
from  the  west.  Baldacci  and  Viola  encountered  these  erratics  in  so  great  a 
quantity  to  the  north  of  the  bay  of  Policastro,  and  also  on  the  opposite 
side  of  the  great  Trias  range  of  Lagonegro,  that  they  inferred  the  existence 
of  two  branches  of  crystalline  rocks  proceeding  from  Calabria ;  the  existence 
of  the  eastern  branch  seems  to  be  confirmed  by  the  outcrops  on  the  Frida  ^. 

At  Fuscaldo  (north  of  Paolo)  G.  von  Rath  has  described  a  conglomerate 
about  100  meters  thick,  lying  beneath  inclined  Tertiary  beds ;  it  consists 
of  blocks  of  a  foreign  granitite  sometimes  over  a  meter  in  diameter ;  this 
again  recalls  the  Nagelflue  of  the  Rigi  ^. 

Worthy  of  note  is  the  instance  described  by  Cortese  of  pebbles  beneath 
the  Miocene  gypsum,  e.  g.  near  Gerace  in  east  Calabria  and  near  Garistoppa 
(north  of  Caltanisetta)  in  the  middle  of  Sicily*.  A  number  of  similar 
accumulations  which  occur  in  east  Calabria  are  doubtless  only  ancient  and 
local  torrent  deposits.  The  examples  we  have  cited  are  sufficient  for  our 
purpose,  and  lend  support  to  the  view  that  a  great  mountain  range,  in  part 
granitic,  at  one  time  existed  in  the  west  of  the  peninsula  ^. 

charriage  de  la  Calabre,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  23  avr.,  30  avr.,  14  mai  1906;  G.  Di- 
Stefano,  I  pretesi  grandi  fenomeni  di  carreggiamento  in  Sicilia,  Atti  R.  Acc.  Lincei, 
Rendic,  3  e  14  marzo  1907,  pp.  258-271,  375-381. 

^  A.  d'Ossat,  I  Ciottoli  esotici  nel  Miocene  del  Monte  Derutta,  Atti  R.  Acc.  Lincei, 
Rendic,  1900,  IX,  pp.  384-391,  X,  pp.  40-44  ;  Roccati  records  similar  facts  in  the  Apen- 
nines of  Bologna,  Boll.  Soc.  geol.  ital.,  1904,  XXIII,  pp.  409-418. 

2  W.  Deecke,  Die  sogenannten  *  erratischen  Granite '  in  Apulien  und  der  Basilicata,  N.  J. 
f.  Min.,  1891,  II,  pp.  49-61,  Baldacci  e  Viola,  Boll.  R.  Com.  geol.  ital.,  1894,  pp.  372-390. 

^  G.  V.  Rath,  Geognostisch-geologische  Bemerkungen  iiber  Calabrien,  p.  162. 

*  Baldacci,  Descrizione  geologica  dell'  Isola  di  Sicilia  (Mem.  descr.  Carta  geol.  Italia, 
1886,  I),  p.  266. 

De  Stefani,  de  Lorenzo,  and  Di-Stefano  deny  the  presence  of  a  subsidence  in  the  Tyr- 
rhenian sea,  and  in  part  also  the  unilateral  structure  of  the  Apennines  ;  the  last-named 
author  writes  in  great  detail  in  Mem.  descr.  Carta  geol.  Italia,  1904,  App.  to  vol.  IX, 
pp.  83-92.    On  the  other  hand  Nicotra  attempts  to  determine  the  details  in  connexion 


CH.  Vl] 


MEDITERRANEAN  ATLAS 


219 


Thus  we  seem  to  have  evidence  of  the  existence  of  two  distinct 
elements. 

The  first  is  an  Alpine  range,  the  manifold  continuation  of  the  Alps, 
striking  down  from  north-east  Corsica,  Elba,  and  the  Argentario ;  its 
eastern  part  is  the  Apennines.  To  this  the  foreign  granites  belong,  the 
Trias  of  Lagonegro  and  Sicily,  and  the  Trias  of  the  Catena  litorale  which 
takes  the  form  of  outrunners  or  is  thrust  forward  in  recumbent  sheets. 

The  second  element  is  represented  by  Calabria,  along  with  the  north- 
east of  Sicily.  This  is  not  a  true  foreland,  but  seems  to  occupy  a  similar 
position  in  the  Apennines,  though  on  a  grand  scale,  to  that  of  the  Catena 
metallifera,  or  that  of  the  Mouthoumet  mass  in  front  of  the  Pyrenees,  which 
will  be  described  later.  This  element  is  certainly  surrounded  by  a  part  of 
the  Apennine  folds. 

In  Sicily  itself  two  regions  may  be  distinguished,  one  in  the  north-east 
corresponding  with  Rossano,  in  which  the  fossiliferous  series  begins  with 
autochthonous  lower  Lias,  and  a  second,  comprising  all  the  rest  of  the 
island,  in  which  the  series  is  probably  complete  from  the  marine  Permian 
upwards. 

The  Mediterranean  Atlas.  This  range,  turned  towards  the  south, 
repeats  the  structure  of  the  Apennines  (I,  p.  221).  The  first  zone  is 
volcanic,  and  lies  partly  on  islands ;  the  second  is  characterized  by  masses 
of  gneiss  and  ancient  schist,  it  forms  peninsulas  and  follows  the  coast ;  to 
the  south  of  it  we  encounter  long  folds  of  sedimentary  formations  which 
extend  as  far  as  the  Sahara. 

Such  are  the  parts  viewed  as  a  whole.  But  if  we  enter  into  details  we 
perceive  a  number  of  divergent  and  very  important  features.  In  particular 
the  gneiss  masses  have  already  disappeared  on  the  east  before  reaching 
Bona,  and  inner  folded  ranges  strike  in  long  gentle  arcs  east -north-east  and 
north-east  to  the  sea.  Finally  a  complete  bend  is  made  in  Tunis,  whereby 
all  the  coulisses  passing  through  Ferriana  turn  gradually  out  of  the  east- 
north-east  into  the  north-east  direction;  they  form  series  of  brachyanti- 
clines,  accompanied  by  longitudinal  fractures  which  strike  to  the  north- 
north-east  through  Zagonan  and  reach  the  bay  of  Tunis.  This  is  shown 
in  particular  by  Pervinquiere's  sketch  of  the  trend-lines  of  Tunis  ^ 

We  will  choose  the  Tell  of  Oran,  of  which  we  have  a  clear  account  by 

witli  subsidence  in  fragments,  Come  siasi  fatta  I'ltalia,  Mem.  Acc.  Zelant.,  Aci  Reale,  1905, 
3^  ser.,  IV,  pp.  51-72.  The  literature  on  zoological  distribution  which  deals  with  this 
subject  cannot  be  discussed  here. 

1  L.  Pervinquiere,  J^tude  geologique  de  la  Tunisie  centrale,  4to,  Paris,  1903,  359  pp., 
maps  ;  in  particular  p.  336.  Baltzer  also  perceived  that  the  chains  strike  in  the  direction 
of  the  gulf  of  Tunis ;  Beitrag  zur  Kenntniss  des  tunesischen  Atlas,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1893,  II, 
p.  27  and  1895,  I,  p.  105. 


220 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES 


[part  V 


Gentil  ^,  as  illustrating  in  a  particularly  instructive  manner  the  questions 
we  are  dealing  with  here.  The  Tell  of  Oran  begins  in  the  region  of  the 
Traras,  west  of  the  river  Tafna,  strikes,  with  frequent  interruptions, 
towards  the  north-east,  is  separated  by  the  Sebcha  from  the  interior  of 
the  country,  and  sinks  beneath  the  sea  between  the  town  of  Oran  and 
cape  Falcon. 

The  Traras  mountains  are  a  mass  of  ancient  schist  elongated  towards 
the  north-east  and  broken  through  by  a  granite  boss  (granite  of  Nedroma). 
On  this  schist  a  ferruginous  conglomerate  rests  unconformably,  and  upon 
this  the  thick  limestone  of  the  Lias,  then  other  stages  of  the  Lias  up  to  the 
zone  of  Hildoceras  bifrons,  next  shales  with  Posidonia  alpina,  and  finally 
the  Oxfordian.  Thus  far  the  resemblance  with  the  series  of  Taormina  and 
Rossano  is  unmistakeable. 

In  the  J ebel  Skouna  the  same  series  crops  out  from  beneath  basalts ; 
further  to  the  north-east  it  forms  isolated  hills,  becomes  visible  beneath 
the  lavas  and  breccias  of  the  recent  volcano  of  Tifaronin,  and  finally  reaches 
the  gulf  of  Oran  in  the  long  folds  of  the  Sahel  d'Oran. 

The  total  length  of  the  Tell  of  Oran  amounts  to  120  kilometers.  In 
isolated  localities  we  find  between  the  Lias  and  the  ancient  schist  a  gypsi- 
ferous  variegated  marl  with  platey  limestone.  It  represents  the  Trias. 
Again  on  the  south-west  side  of  the  Traras,  resting  for  the  greater  part  on 
the  granite  of  Nedroma,  is  an  accumulation  of  blocks  over  200  meters  in 
thickness;  the  blocks  are  imbedded  in  dark  red  sandstone,  and  some 
beds  of  similar  sandstone  occur  without  blocks ;  this  is  the  puddingstone 
of  the  Beni  Menir.  To  the  north-east  of  the  Traras,  on  the  other  side  of 
the  river  Tafna,  near  Kef  el  Gol^a,  Gentil  encountered  this  red  deposit  of 
Beni  Menir  beneath  the  gypsiferous  Trias.  Thus  it  actually  represents  the 
Rothliegende,  and  must  be  distinguished  from  the  basement  conglomerate 
of  the  Lias.  Probably  the  red  conglomerates  associated  with  violet  shales, 
which  occur  at  cape  Falcon  and  the  Lowenberg  near  Oran,  are  also  of 
Permian  age  (I,  p.  225).  It  seems  likely  that  a  further  continuation  of 
the  Tell  occurs  in  cape  Ferrat. 

Much  further  to  the  north-north-east,  in  the  mountain  mass  of  Milianah 
(south  of  Cherchel)  Gentil  has  observed,  not  only  the  deposit  of  Ben  Menir, 
the  violet  shales  of  cape  Falcon,  and  above  them  the  gypsiferous  Trias,  but 
porphyrites  also  ^.  The  ancient  schists  are  also  present,  and  in  the  mountain 
range  of  Blidah,  which  forms  the  eastern  continuation  of  the  mass  of 
Milianah,  the  Lias  limestone  rests,  according  to  Ficheur,  directly  upon  them  ^. 

^  L.  Gentil,  Esquisse  stratigraphique  et  petrographique  du  Bassin  de  la  Tafna,  8vo, 
Alger,  1902,  536  pp.,  maps. 

L.  Gentil,  op.  cit.,  pp.  84,  97. 

^  E.  Ficheur,  Les  Plissements  au  Massif  de  Blide,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1896,  3«  ser., 
XXIV,  pp.  982-1041,  in  particular  p.  985.     It  is  certainly  remarkable  that  organic 


CH.VI]         TEIAS  IN  TUNIS  AND  ALGERIA 


221 


From  these  facts — the  nature  of  the  deposit  of  Beni  Menir,  the  presence 
of  the  porphy rites,  the  discordant  superposition  upon  ancient  schist,  and 
the  covering  of  Trias  gypsum — it  is  clear  that  in  this  region  we  again  are 
in  presence  of  the  Kothliegende  of  the  Great  Atlas,  the  highest  summits  of 
which  consist  in  part  of  Permian  porphyrite.  The  ancient  schists  of  the 
Tell  of  Oran,  of  Milianah  and  Blidah  are  thus,  along  with  the  granite  of 
Nedroma,  parts  of  the  Altaides,  and  are  incorporated  with  the  younger 
folds  like  the  zone  of  mont  Blanc  with  the  Alps. 

This  again  raises  the  question  of  the  significance  of  the  violet  shales 
and  the  traces  of  gypsum,  trifling  though  these  are,  which  in  north-east 
Sicily  rest  directly  upon  the  Peloritan  mountains  and  are  known  as  the 
'  beds  of  Ali How  difficult  it  often  is  to  establish  the  presence  of  Trias 
is  shown  by  the  fact  that  many  experienced  observers  either  barely 
admitted  or  wholly  failed  to  recognize  the  existence  of  Trias  in  Algeria, 
even  as  late  as  the  year  1890,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  it  is 
spread  out  over  the  whole  land,  and  even  the  great  shotts  derive  their 
salt  from  it  ^. 

The  Trias  of  this  region  consists,  as  we  have  seen,  of  variegated  marl 
with  gypsum,  anhydrite,  and  salt,  also  of  rauchwacke  and  platey  limestone. 
In  the  latter  Myoporia  vulgaris  and  Gervillia  socialis  of  the  German 
Muschelkalk  were  found  near  Constantine,  and  M.  Bertrand  pointed  out 
its  complete  identity  with  the  Trias  of  Provence  From  another  locality 
Mytilus  psilonoti  is  mentioned.  In  central  Tunis  Pervinquiere  found 
Myophoria  Goldfussi  and  Ostrea  Montis  caprilis.  The  gypsiferous  marls, 
however,  like  the  Trias  of  the  Jura  mountains  and  the  Salt  range  of  the 
eastern  Limestone  Alps,  have  been  involved  to  so  great  an  extent  in 
mountain  movement  that  they  are  frequently  rolled  out  or  mylonitized, 
and  the  Platten  limestone  can  only  be  recognized  as  kneaded-in  sherds. 
They  also  seem  to  possess  a  tendency,  as  the  result  either  of  the  welling-up 
of  the  anhydrite,  or  perhaps  of  lateral  pressure,  to  force  their  way  upwards 
in  isolated  dislocations  and  to  drag  their  surroundings  up  with  them. 

remains  have  never  been  found  in  these  shales,  while  lower  Carboniferous  is  known  right 
into  the  south-westerly  continuation  of  the  mountains  of  Tlemcen,  and,  according  to 
Gentil,  possibly  as  the  northern  continuation  of  the  Jebel  Bechar  ;  Gentil,  C.  R.  Acad. 
Sci.  Paris,  24  fevr.  1908,  p.  428. 

^  As,  for  example,  A.  Pomel's  otherwise  admirable  Explication  de  la  seconde  edition 
de  la  Carte  geologique  provisionnelle  de  I'Algerie  au  1:800,000,  4to,  Alger,  1890,  217  pp.  ; 
appended  :  J.  Curie  et  G.  Flamand,  ^Itude  succincte  sur  les  roches  eruptives,  101  pp. 
No  details  are  known  with  regard  to  the  traces  of  Ammonitides  and  Walchia,  or  the 
trunks  of  conifers,  which  Jordan,  Coquand,  and  other  older  observers  mention  as  occurring 
on  the  coast  of  Oran,  and  especially  the  Lowenberg  ;  cf.  Pomel,  op.  cit.,  pp.  11-14. 

2  M.  Bertrand,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1896,  3«  ser.,  XXIV,  p.  1184;  J.  Blayac  et 
L.  Gentil,  Le  Trias  dans  la  Region  de  Souk-Ahras,  op.  cit.,  1897,  3^  ser.,  XXV,  pp.  523- 
548. 


222 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES 


[part  V 


Perhaps  this  is  the  reason  why  massive  salt  deposits  and  many  masses  of 
gypsum  were  long  regarded  as  eruptive  ^. 

In  the  distorted  gypsiferous  marls  are  alien  blocks  which  may  be 
some  meters  in  size.  Sillimanite  and  garnet-bearing  gneisses,  granulites 
and  mica-syenites  are  also  known  to  occur  in  situ  in  the  substructure,  and 
may  be  transported  basement  patches.  At  the  same  time,  however,  a  great 
variety  of  intrusive  rocks  make  their  appearance.  Gentil,  who  paid 
particular  attention  to  this  subject,  mentions  ophite  (chiefly  diabase  with 
ophitic  structure),  diorite,  quartz  diorite,  dipyre  diorite  and  gabbro,  and 
believes  that  they  are  all  derived  from  a  common  source.  They  are  in 
every  instance  intrusive,  almost  without  exception  broken  up  by  tectonic 
movements,  and  often  kneaded  up  with  the  gypsiferous  bed  into  a  breccia. 
Since  they  have  produced  contact  alteration,  giving  rise  for  example  to 
albite,  tourmaline  and,  in  the  limestone,  to  dipyre,  they  are  more  recent 
than  the  Trias,  and  according  to  Gentil  are  either  Jurassic  or  Cretaceous 
The  ophites  have  been  met  with  from  Morocco  to  Tunis  throughout  the 
whole  of  the  Mediterranean  Atlas. 

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  point  out  the  correspondence  of  these  blocks 
with  those  in  the  saline  beds  of  the  eastern  Limestone  Alps,  or  to  the 
connexion  between  diorite,  quartz  diorite,  and  gabbro  in  Ivrea.  The 
sillimanite  gneiss,  garnet  gneiss,  and  cordierite  gneiss,  which  belong  in 
Gran  to  the  basement  formations,  appear  to  play  there  a  part  similar  to 
that  of  the  kinzigite  in  Calabria  and  the  neighbourhood  of  Ivrea. — 

If  we  travel  from  England  to  the  Alps  in  a  south-easterly  direction, 
we  start  from  a  region  in  which  the  whole  of  the  Trias  is  represented 
by  a  salt-bearing  series  of  sandstones  and  clays,  not  easily  divided  into 
horizons.  It  is  not  till  we  reach  the  horsts  on  the  Khine  that  the  Muschel- 
kalk  is  intercalated  and  we  reach  the  Germanic  type  of  the  Trias  (II,  p.  258). 
In  the  Rhaetic  period  a  positive  movement  began ;  it  persisted  with  oscilla- 
tions during  the  Lias ;  a  long  way  to  the  north,  as  in  Skye,  far  beyond  the 
region  of  the  Trias,  the  Lias  still  maintains  its  marine  character  (II,  p.  270). 
The  whole  western  region  of  the  Mediterranean,  from  the  Var  and  all 
around  as  far  as  Tunis,  is  occupied,  with  the  exception  of  the  Balearic  isles 
and  the  lower  Ebro,  by  the  Germanic  development  of  the  Trias,  more  or 
less  impoverished.  Traces  of  it  have  also  been  observed  in  Sardinia,  where 
it  is  chiefly  represented  by  lagoon  clays  with  gypsum,  and  limestone  with 

^  Termier  supposes  that  in  Tunis  great  overthrusts  occurred  over  the  Trias ;  there  is 
some  difference  of  opinion  as  to  their  extent ;  Sur  les  phenomenes  de  recouvrement  du 
Bjebel  Ouenza  (Constantine)  et  sur  I'existence  de  nappes  charriees  en  Tunisie,  C.  R. 
Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  9  juill.  1906,  also  in  de  Launay,  Les  richesses  minerales  d'Afrique,  8vo, 
1903,  p.  341. 

^  L.  Gentil,  Esquisse  stratigraphique  et  petrographique  du  Bassin  de  la  Tafna,  8vo, 
Alger,  1902,  p.  210  et  seq.,  pp.  274,  275  ;  also  Curie  et  Flamand,  ^tude  succincte  sur  les 
roches  eruptives. 


cH.vi]  THE  BORDER  OF  THE  DESERT 


223 


Myophoria.  The  positive  movement,  persisting  since  the  Rhaetic  age,  has 
however  led  to  the  deposition  of  the  Lias  upon  it  all  around  the  area.  The 
gradual  advance  of  the  Trias  with  the  Rhaetic  stage,  followed  by  that 
of  the  Lias  along  the  west  side  of  the  Central  plateau,  has  already  been 
mentioned  on  p.  42. 

It  is  not  till  we  arrive  at  the  other  side  of  this  broad  margin,  and  the 
other  side  of  the  Jura  mountains  and  the  Helvetian  Alps,  that  we  reach 
the  pure  pelagic  sediments  of  the  Tethys  in  the  Piedmontese  and  Eastern 
Alps,  the  Dinarides  and  Sicily. 

With  these  results  the  remains  of  the  Altaides  in  the  Tell  of  Gran  near 
Milianah  and  elsewhere,  and  the  superposition  of  the  Lias,  are  in  complete 
accordance.  But  this  is  also  true  of  the  occurrences  in  north-east  Sicily 
and  the  north-east  Sila.  A  fragment  of  the  Altaides,  or  at  least  a  broad 
elevated  mass,  is  inserted  in  Calabria  between  the  southern  Apennines  and 
the  Dinarides. 

This  enclosure  of  the  western  Mediterranean  by  the  Germanic  Trias 
renders  completely  untenable  the  ancient  notion  that  in  Germany  the 
Germanic  Trias  was  cut  off  from  the  Alpine  Trias  by  a  long  range  of 
(Vindelician)  mountains. — 

From  the  termination  of  the  Peloritan  mountains  near  Taormina  to  the 
emergence  of  the  African  Altaides  near  Figig  there  is  no  sharply  marked 
frame,  and  the  platform  of  the  Sahara  forms  the  foreland  of  the  Medi- 
terranean Atlas  in  a  manner  which  recalls  the  Russian  platform  between 
the  downthrown  Cimmerian  fragments  and  the  first  of  the  Sudetic  remnants 
on  the  river  San. 

This  fact  affects  the  arrangement  of  the  folds  of  the  Mediterranean  Atlas. 

These  folds  are  not  parallel.  The  Tell  of  Gran  strikes  almost  to  the 
east-north-east,  and  its  probable  continuations  in  cape  Ferrat  and  in  the 
masses  of  Milianah  and  Blidah  maintain  the  same  direction  into  the  moun- 
tains to  the  south  of  the  town  of  Algiers.  They  extend  to  the  south  of  the 
gneisses  of  the  coast.  In  the  much  broader  range  which  succeeds  on 
the  south  no  rocks  are  exposed,  according  to  existing  observations,  of 
greater  age  than  the  Trias.  The  Cretaceous  predominates.  It  forms  broad 
folded  ranges,  separated  by  the  depressions  of  the  shotts.  They  begin  in 
the  south  with  a  direction  more  nearly  east  and  west,  and  proceed  in  a  very 
broad  arc  to  E.  30°  N.,  or  emerge  direct  from  the  desert  with  a  strike 
of  E.  30°  N. 

The  most  southerly  parts  of  the  range  are  often  termed  the  Sahara 
Atlas ;  they  are  not,  however,  a  continuous  range,  but  consist  of  the  ends 
of  alternating  coulisses,  comparable  in  some  degree  with  the  east  border  of 
the  Rocky  mountains. 

Near  Figig  the  southern  boundary  of  the  Mediterranean  Atlas  is 
marked  by  the  Jebel  Melias  (p.  98)  overfolded  towards  the  south.    It  is 


224 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES 


[PABT  V 


true  that  from  this  point  onwards  the  range  of  the  Ksour,  and  then  the 
Jebel  Amour,  rise  above  the  broad  desert  as  a  steep  straight  wall  (I,  p.  226), 
but  near  Laghouat  they  recede  from  the  desert  with  a  strike  to  E.  30''  N. 
towards  the  interior  of  the  mountains.  Beyond  Laghouat  a  continuous 
south  border  occurs  only  in  places.  One  after  another  the  parallel  coulisses 
leave  the  desert  with  a  strike  to  E.  30°  N.  and  enter  the  mountains.  The 
best  known  is  the  Jebel  bou  Kahil.  A  number  of  them  unite  within  the 
mountains  to  form  the  mighty  Jebel  Aoures.  The  desert  now  extends 
more  towards  the  north ;  and  between  the  ends  of  the  coulisses,  fairly  far 
to  the  north,  lies  Biskra.  From  this  place  onwards  it  becomes  increasingly 
clear  that  the  several  coulisses  start  in  a  west-and-east  direction  before 
they  assume  the  strike  to  E.  30""  N.  From  the  Jebel  Chechan  onwards  the 
desert  gradually  recedes  again  towards  the  south,  and  in  southern  Tunis 
the  east-and-west  direction  becomes  more  prominent.  In  particular  a  con- 
tinuous Cretaceous  anticline  runs  from  Negrine  towards  Gaf sa :  Cretaceous 
chains  striking  east  and  west  accompany  the  shott  Djerid  and  Fedjedj,  and 
may  still  be  recognized  in  Gabes  (II,  p.  365)  ^. 

In  many  of  the  coulisses  from  Figig  to  the  shott-el- Fedjedj,  the  gypsi- 
ferous  marls,  and  with  them  the  ophites,  crop  out  beneath  Cretaceous  or 
Jurassic^. 

In  fact  the  folding  of  the  Mediterranean  Atlas  was  bounded  by  the 
frame  which  extends  as  far  as  Figig.  The  Jebel  Amour  is  the  last  great 
coulisse  which  emerges  from  the  frame ;  all  the  coulisses  which  succeed  to 
the  east  of  Laghouat  lie  outside  the  Jebel  Amour  and  are  not  continued 
towards  the  west.  The  outermost  and  last  coulisses  are  those  which  strike 
due  east  towards  Gabes.  It  is  a  group  lying  more  towards  the  interior 
which  reaches  Tunis  with  a  strike  to  north-north-east.  Hence  we  perceive 
that  the  whole  of  the  east  coast  of  Tunis  as  far  as  Gabes  is  occupied  by  the 
spurs  of  the  Atlas. 

We  are  now  confronted  by  a  problem  which  cannot  at  present  be 
definitely  solved,  partly  in  consequence  of  the  vast  regions  covered  by  the 
sea,  and  partly  on  account  of  the  inadequate  results  as  yet  furnished  by 
investigation. 

That  the  trend  lines  run  as  a  whole  from  the  Apennines  to  the  Atlas 
is  universally  admitted.  Haug,  however,  points  out  that  the  facies  of  the 
sediments  is  not  the  same  in  Africa  as  in  Sicily,  and  also  that  the  north- 

^  In  connexion  with  the  earlier  description  we  have  here  made  use  of  the  more  recent 
account  by  RoUand,  Chemin  de  Fer  Transsaharien,  Geologic  du  Sahara  Algerien,  4to, 
PariK,  1890,  pp.  14-29,  PI.  IV,  and  the  map  of  the  Geological  Survey  1:800,000.  Much 
repetition  was  found  necessary  in  order  to  make  the  connexion  clear.  The  several  chains, 
which  bear  the  general  name  of  Jebel  Tebaga,  run  from  Gabes  towards  the  west  and  enter 
the  Shott-el- Djerid,  forming  a  peninsula,  Idoux,  Ann.  geogr.,  1902,  XI,  p.  439. 

2  In  particular  P.  Thomas,  Recherches  sur  quelques  roches  ophitiques  du  Sud  de  la 
Tunisie,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1891,  3^  ser.,  XIX,  pp.  430-472. 


OH.vi]  DIFFEEENCE  IN  FACIES  225 

north-easterly  direction  characteristic  of  Tunis  is  opposed  to  that  which 
predominates  in  Sicily.  The  difference  of  the  facies  may  be  explained  by 
supposing  that  the  overthrust  sheet  of  Sicily,  assumed  by  Lugeon  and 
Argand,  did  not  reach  Africa.  The  difference  in  direction  is  said  to  be 
caused  by  a  syntaxis  between  Sicily  and  Africa,  with  the  reentrant  angle 
situated  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  volcanic  islands  of  Pantellaria  and 
Linosa  ^. 

These  hypotheses  are  correct  as  far  as  the  facts  are  concerned,  but  the 
problem  is  scarcely  so  simple. 

The  contrast  between  the  facies  of  Sicily  and  Africa  certainly  exists, 
but  a  well-marked  African  facies  also  occurs  in  Rossano,  and  both  facies 
are  met  with  in  Sicily  itself.  Further,  the  distinction  is  confined  to  the 
marine  Permian  and  the  Trias.  In  the  Lias  it  has  already  almost  com- 
pletely disappeared.  Thus  it  happens  that  Zittel,  for  instance,  was  able  to 
point  to  the  existence  near  Constantine  of  the  particular  horizon  of  the 
'  grey  limestones '  of  South  Tyrol,  which  is  also  of  frequent  occurrence  in 
the  Apennines;  attention  may  also  be  drawn  to  the  remarkable  resem- 
blance of  the  Tithonian  as  met  with  in  Jebel  Ressars,  near  Tunis,  to  that  of 
Sicily ;  near  Constantine  the  great  Inoceramus  Salishurgensis  (here  up  to 
50  cm.),  which  in  the  East  Alps  is  associated  with  the  northern  sediments, 
makes  its  appearance  in  the  Flysch,  along  with  Tnocemmus  Crispi  and 
other  species  ^. 

The  strike  in  the  northern  part  of  Tunis  would  be  consistent  with  the 
presence  of  a  syntaxis,  but  not  so  the  open  character  of  the  folds,  and 
in  southern  Tunis  even  the  strike  is  scarcely  concordant.  As  regards  the 
western  part  of  Sicily  it  is  difficult  to  discover  any  definite  direction  ^.  The 
direction  of  the  autochthonous  beds  concealed  by  the  overthrust  sheet 
would  be  decisive  on  this  point,  but  such  beds  are  wholly  unknown. 

On  the  other  hand  the  diversified  form  of  the  foreland  has  evidently 
helped  to  determine  the  structure.  The  more  elevated  position  of  the  sub- 
structure has  caused  either  the  complete  absence  of  Trias  or  its  development 
in  lagoons.  On  the  plateau  of  the  Sahara  the  folding  of  the  Atlas  becomes 

^  E.  Haug,  Sur  les  relations  tectoniques  et  stratigraphiques  de  la  Sicile  et  de  la  Tunisie, 
C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  14  mai  1906;  also  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1906,  4®  ser.,  VI, 
pp.  355,  356. 

2  K.  A.  Zittel,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1896,  3«  ser.,  XXIV,  pp.  1175,  1181  et  seq. 

'  In  the  extreme  west  of  Sicily,  near  Trapani,  a  strike  to  the  north-east  prevails  in  the 
Trias  and  Jurassic,  and  also  in  the  Aegaean  isles,  Levanzo  and  Marittimo  (?) ;  south  of 
these  localities,  however,  an  east-and-west  strike  sets  in  from  Corleone  onwards,  and  this 
direction  is  maintained  in  Favignana,  the  largest  of  the  Aegaean  isles  (Baldacci,  G.,  De- 
scrizione  geologica  dell'  Isola  di  Sicilia,  p.  185  et  seq.).  A  series  of  shallows  (Sylvia, 
—  13  m.,  Hecate  -  7  meters,  and  others)  appears  to  continue  the  direction  to  the  west  and 
a  little  south  towards  Galita ;  but  the  accounts  of  this  island  are  contradictory  (I,  p.  221, 
and  note  3). 

SOLLAS  lY  Q 


226 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES  [paetv 


gentler,  spreads  out  and  dies  away,  and  the  connexions  are  concealed  by  the 
sea.  Above  all,  it  is  necessary  to  determine  whether  the  pelagic  Trias  of 
Sicily  does  in  fact  occur  only  as  a  sheet.  Further,  what  is  the  significance 
of  the  Trias  on  Monte  Cocuzzo  and  near  Terranova,  and  finally,  whether  the 
Trias  of  Lagonegro  breaks  off  in  the  south  or  swerves  towards  the  west. 
At  present  we  are  able  to  distinguish — 

1.  Regions  in  which  the  substructure  is  unknown,  and  the  series  begins 
with  'pelagic  Permian,  followed  by  pelagic  Trias  (west  and  centre  of  Sicily 
as  far  as  Monte  Judica,  south  of  Aetna). 

2.  Regions  in  which  the  substructure  is  known  or  unknown,  and  the 
series  begins  with  Rothliegende  or  gypsif  erous  Trias  and  Germanic  Muschel- 
kalk,  or  with  a  basement  conglomerate  of  the  lower  Lias  (Mediterranean 
Atlas,  north-east  Sicily,  north-east  Sila). 

3.  Regions  in  which  the  marine  series  begins  with  the  middle  Jurassic 
and  rests  on  extra-marine  Upper  Carboniferous,  and  this  again  on  a  known 
substructure  (Corsardinia). 

4.  Regions  in  which  a  known  substructure  bears  a  series  beginning 
with  the  Cenomanian  (Sahara,  Peloritan  gneiss  in  part). 

At  the  same  time  the  first  marine  horizon  in  any  given  case  (perhaps 
with  the  exception  of  the  Muschelkalk)  extends  over  all  the  preceding 
regions,  thus  the  Lias  of  2  also  extends  over  1,  the  Dogger  of  3  over  1  and 
2,  the  Cenomanian  of  4  over  1,  2,  and  3. 

It  is  not  impossible  that  in  this  arrangement  some  signs  of  the  ancient 
isohypses  may  be  perceived.  In  proportion  as  we  succeed  in  increasing 
the  area  over  which  such  comparisons  can  be  made  we  may  be  able  to 
render  them  more  independent  of  tectonic  changes. 

The  Betic  Cordillera.  There  is  no  difierence  of  opinion  as  regards  the 
further  course  of  the  trend  lines.  All  travellers,  who  of  late  years  have 
visited  the  Rif  and  the  surrounding  regions,  have  remarked  on  the  regu- 
larity of  the  arc  described  by  the  Mediterranean  Atlas  in  its  course  to 
Gibraltar.  The  rock  of  Gibraltar,  hitherto  believed  to  belong  to  the 
Oolites,  is  now  regarded  as  Lias  ^. 

With  respect  to  the  Betic  Cordillera  we  may  refer  to  Vol.  I,  p.  247. 
The  direction  of  the  folding  force  has  once  more  completely  changed ;  it 
is  now  directed  towards  the  north ;  the  foreland,  represented  by  the  Sierra 
Morena,  lies  to  the  north ;  the  volcanos  on  the  south.  The  comprehensive 
accounts  of  French  investigators,  published  after  the  earthquake  of  1884  2, 
show  that  the  lofty  masses  of  the  south,  from  the  Sierra  de  Ronta  to 
the  Sierra  Nevada,  possess  the  same  constitution  as  the  Tell  of  Oran. 
These,  too,  are  mighty  ridges  of  ancient  schist,  on  which  here  and  there 

^  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1892,     ser.,  XX,  p.  9. 

'  Mission  d'Andalousie.  Etudes  relatives  au  tremblement  de  terre  du  25  dec.  1884, 
4to,  Paris,  1889,  772  pp.,  maps. 


CH.  VlJ 


THE  BETIC  COKMLLEKA 


227 


a  patch  of  Kothliegende  is  preserved.  They  are  thus  parts  of  the 
Altaides. 

On  their  north  side  the  Germanic  Trias  broadens  out  and  here  its 
subdivisions  appear  to  be  most  clearly  distinguished ;  the  Bunter  sand- 
stone, is  present,  Muschelkalk  with  Gervillia  socialis  and  other  charac- 
teristic fossils,  and  Keuper,  represented  by  variegated  gypsiferous  clay 
with  Myophoria  vestita.  On  their  south  side  thick  dolomitic  limestones 
make  their  appearance,  and  in  the  Sierra  Almijera  Barrois  found  in  them 
some  beds  filled  with  the  smaller  forms  of  Megalodonta  ^.  This  fact  has 
led  to  the  suggestion  that  the  great  schist  mountains  actually  mark  the 
boundary  between  the  pelagic  and  the  lagoon  facies  of  the  Trias. 

These  investigations  have  also  given  rise  to  the  theory  that  the 
inner  zones  of  the  Cordilleras  are  traversed  by  three  great  flaw-like 
dislocations,  striking  to  the  north-west.  The  first  is  supposed  to  pass 
through  Malaga ;  the  second  through  Motril  and  the  maximum  point  of 
the  seismic  area,  near  Zaf arraya  ;  and  the  third  from  cabo  di  Gata  towards 
Guadix  ^. 

Many  instructive  facts  are  afforded  by  the  north  side,  and  particularly 
by  the  so-called  sub-Betic  Cordillera. 

Nickles  found  that  the  folds  of  Jaen  are  continued  without  inter- 
ruption as  far  as  cabo  de  la  Nao,  a  distance  of  more  than  350  kilometers, 
and  that  overthrusts  towards  the  north  may  be  recognized  over  at  least 
the  half  of  this  tract  ^. 

We  will  now  attempt  to  follow  the  description  given  by  R.  Douvill^ 
of  a  tract,  about  60  kilometers  in  length,  situated  between  Marto,  Jaen, 
and  the  Sierra  Sagra 

The  country  south  of  the  Guadalquivir  may  be  divided  into  a  lowland 
and  an  upland.  The  former,  which  adjoins  the  river,  is  covered  along  its 
banks  by  a  fertile  belt  of  upper  Miocene  and  Pliocene;  this  is  followed 
towards  the  south  by  very  barren  stretches  of  folded  gypsiferous  Keuper, 
upon  which  rest  scattered  patches  of  lower  Cretaceous.  Then  we  come  to 
the  foot  of  the  highland. 

This  side  of  the  highland  is  formed  by  the  brow  of  a  great  recumbent 
fold,  broken  up  by  erosion  into  several  fragments;  of  these  the  most 
easterly  is  the  largest ;  it  is  20  kilometers  in  length,  over  2,000  meters  in 
height,  and  rises  between  1,300  and  1,400  meters  above  the  plain.  The 

^  Barrois,  Mission  d'Andalousie,p.  84 ;  Bertrand  and  Kilian,  op.  cit.,  pp.406  and  573 ;  the 
older  statements  of  GronzaloyTarin  with  regard  to  the  fossils  of  the  limestone  of  the  Sierra, 
de  Gador  merit  fresh  investigation  (Bol.  Com.  Mapa  geol.  Espana,  1882,  IX,  p.  104). 

2  Bol.  Com.  Mapa  geol.  Espana,  1882,  IX,  p.  117. 

^  R.  Nickles,  Sur  I'existence  de  phenomenes  de  charriage  en  Espagne,  Bull.  Soc. 
geol.  France,  1904,  4«  ser.,  IV,  pp.  223-247  (also  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  24:fevr.  1902). 

*  R.  Douville,  Esquisse  geologique  des  Prealpes  subbetiques,  8vo,  Paris,  1906,  222  pp., 
maps. 

Q  2 


228 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES  [party 


rocks  which  form  the  brow  of  this  fold  are  chiefly  Jurassic  limestone, 
differing  in  its  dark  colour  and  dearth  of  fossils  from  the  light-coloured 
autochthonous  limestone  of  the  same  system.  The  brow  bends  in  an  arc 
downwards  and  inwards,  so  that  at  its  foot  we  discover  the  overthrown, 
wedged-in,  and  in  large  part  crushed  remains  of  the  Cretaceous  and 
Eocene  beds,  which  were  originally  superposed  on  the  Jurassic.  These 
deposits  once  formed  the  roof  of  the  fold.  R.  Douvill^  states,  however, 
that  a  surface  of  separation  was  formed  in  the  upper  limb  on  the  horizon 
of  the  Cenomanian,  probably  after  the  great  movement  had  ceased,  and 
that  then  the  middle  and  upper  Cretaceous  accomplished  an  independent 
movement  over  parts  of  the  plain. 

The  original  home  of  this  dark  Jurassic  limestone  is  unknown,  and 
with  regard  to  the  origin  of  the  fold  we  can  only  say  that  it  has  been 
thrust  from  the  south. 

The  foregoing  facts  are  instructive,  in  so  far  as  they  afford  a  fairly 
simple  example  by  which  the  form  of  the  recumbent  fold  is  placed  beyond 
doubt.  But  there  are  other  circumstances  which  are  also  important.  The 
earlier  statements  as  to  the  rather  recent  date  of  the  fracture  on  the 
south  side  of  the  mountains,  and  of  the  strait  of  Gibraltar  as  well,  are 
confirmed  in  detail.^  Here  also  the  ophitic  intrusions  accompany  the 
Trias  and  in  a  few  cases  even  extend  into  the  upper  Lias,  if  not  fur- 
ther 2.  The  masses  of  blocks  associated  with  gypsum,  belonging  to  the 
Second  Mediterranean  stage,  which  occur  in  Calabria  and  Sicily,  seem  to 
be  repeated  in  the  basin  of  Granada,  where  they  form  Drasche's  '  Miocene 
block  formation  '.^ 

The  same  structure  and  the  same  succession  of  strata  strike  towards 
the  north-east  as  far  as  the  Cabo  de  la  Nao,  and  even  in  the  Sierra 

^  Mission  d'Andalousie,  p.  576  ;  R.  Douville,  p.  108.  According  to  the  later  accounts  of 
M.  Gentil,  which  have  arrived  while  this  volume  is  in  the  press,  the  facts  are  as  follows : 
during  the  deposition  of  the  upper  Miocene  (II  Mediterranean  stage)  communication 
existed  along  the  north  side  of  the  Betic  Cordillera ;  during  the  period  of  the  lower  Plio- 
cene (III  Mediterranean  stage)  communication  through  Fez  ;  during  the  upper  Pliocene 
(IV  Mediterranean  stage)  the  straits  of  Gibraltar  must  have  been  already  open,  since  the 
upper  Pliocene  does  not  occur  above  120  meters  ;  with  this  height  it  could  not  cross  the 
mountain  arc,  and  yet  it  occurs  in  Tetuan  in  the  same  form  as  on  the  Atlantic  coast. 
Renseignements  coloniaux  supplementaires  au  Bulletin  du  Comite  de  TAfrique  frangaise, 
fevr.  1908  :  Gentil,  Report  from  Tangiers,  p.  34. 

Mission  d  Andalousie,  pp.  527-532  ;  with  a  diminution  in  the  size  of  the  felspars, 
diabase  passes  into  porphyrites,  and  these,  through  the  occurrence  of  peridotite  into  mela- 
phyre  (spilite),  op.  cit.,  pp.  220-223. 

^  Mission  dAndalousie,  pp.  489  et  seq.,  in  particular  p.  507.  Drasche  distinguishes 
the  more  recent  Guadix  formation  from  the  Miocene  accumulation  of  blocks  (Jahrb. 
k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1879,  XXIX,  pp.  112  et  seq.) ;  on  these  peculiar  occurrences  see  also 
L.  Siegert,  Das  Becken  von  Guadix  und  Baza,  Zeitschr.  Ges.  Erdk.,  Berlin,  1905,  pp.  528- 
554  and  586-614;  further,  W.  H.  Hobbs,  Guadix  Formation  of  Granada,  Bull.  Geol.  Soc. 
Am.,  1906,  XVII,  pp.  285-294. 


CH.vi]  THE  BALEAKIC  ISLANDS 


229 


Mariola,  north  of  Alcoy,  Nickles  came  upon  a  great  fold,  overturned 
towards  the  north,  which  may  be  compared  with  the  fold  of  Jaen.^ 

The  doubts  entertained  with  regard  to  the  Balearic  islands  (I,  p.  231) 
seem  about  to  be  dispelled  in  a  somewhat  unexpected  manner  as  the  result 
of  the  observations  made  by  Hermite  and  Nolan.'-^  Two  mountain  systems 
are  represented  in  this  little  group  of  islands. 

Iviza,  Formentera,  Majorca,  and  Cabrera  belong  to  the  Betic  Cordillera. 
The  whole  of  the  north-west  of  Majorca  in  particular  is  formed  by  a  frag- 
ment of  a  chain  80  kilometers  in  length  and  1,571  meters  in  height.  It  is 
formed  of  flakes  overdriven  towards  the  north,  exhibits  the  Betic  strike  and 
is  evidently  a  continuation  of  the  Betic  structure.  Lacustrine  deposits  with 
Anthracotherium  are  a  continuation  of  similar  beds  in  eastern  Spain.  They 
show  that  a  lake  extended  to  the  island  of  Majorca,  which  in  the  Oligocene 
period  formed  part  of  the  mainland.^  Then  came  an  invasion  of  the  sea. 
Even  as  early  as  the  time  of  Natica  crassatina  the  existing  south  border 
formed  part  of  the  coast  line.  Horizontal  beds  of  Miocene  limestone  cover 
a  great  part  of  the  centre  of  the  island. 

In  Minorca  the  situation  is  different.  A  fault  cuts  through  the  island 
from  north-west  (Gulf  of  Algairens)  to  south-east  (Port  Mahon).  Its 
southern  half  is  a  flat  platform  of  Miocene  limestone,  which  lies  uncon- 
formably  over  the  fault.  In  the  higher-lying  northern  half,  middle 
Devonian  limestone  is  the  oldest  rock,  which,  according  to  its  fossils,  cor- 
responds approximately  to  the  Eif  elian.  Nothing  similar  has  hitherto  been 
observed  anywhere  in  the  younger  folded  ranges  which  surround  the 
western  Mediterranean.  Hermite  mentions  also  plant-remains,  possibly 
belonging  to  the  Culm.  According  to  Nolan's  description  these  beds  occur 
in  three  anticlines,  the  one  in  the  middle,  which  is  by  far  the  most 
important,  strikes  N.  5°  E. 

Although  Majorca  throughout  its  breadth  strikes  towards  Minorca  yet 
we  are  precluded  from  assuming  the  continuity  of  these  islands  owing  to 

^  R.  Nickles,  Recherches  geologiques  sur  les  terrains  secondaires  et  tertiaires  de  la 
province  d' Alicante  et  du  Sud  de  la  province  de  Valence ;  Annales  Hebert,  1892,  1, 219  pp. ; 
maps,  in  particular  p.  151. 

^  H.  Hermite,  ^Itudes  geologiques  sur  les  iles  Baleares  :  I.  Majorque  et  Minorque,  8vo, 
Paris,  1879,  357  pp.,  maps;  H.  Nolan,  Sur  le  Trias  des  Baleares,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France, 
1887,  8®  ser.,  XV,  p.  593,  and  Sur  les  terrains  triassiques  et  jurassiques  des  iles  Baleares, 
C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  4  dec.  1893 ;  Structure  geologique  d'ensemble  de  TArchipel  Baleare, 
Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1895, 3®  ser.,  XXIII,  pp.  76-91,  maps  ;  and  Notice  preliminaire  sur 
Tile  de  Cabrera,  op.  cit.,  1897, 3®  ser.,  XXV,  pp.  303-305  ;  Nolan  distinguishes  in  the  upper 
Trias:  1.  zone  of  Trachyceras  Curionii  and  Trachyceras  Vilanovae;  2.  zone  of  Vaonella 
Lommeli;  3.  zone  oi  Hoernesia  pseudosocialis  and  Monotis  salinaria.  Then  follows  the 
general  series  of  Lias  and  Oolites ;  in  Majorca  it  is  traversed  by  numerous  dykes  of 
melaphyre. 

^  L.  M.  Vidal,  Note  sur  TOligocene  de  Majorque,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1905,  4^  ser., 
V,  pp.  651-654. 


230 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES  [partv 


the  completely  different  direction  of  the  anticlines  and  the  occurrence  of 
Devonian.  This  seems  doubly  strange  since  in  Minorca  the  folding 
certainly  extends  far  into  the  Mesozoic  aera,  and  the  Mesozoic  sediments 
are  similar  in  both  islands. 

On  the  mainland  the  Betic  division  of  the  Trias  has  been  recognized  as 
far  as  Alcoy  and  beyond ;  as  we  proceed  further  we  meet,  first  in  Iviza  and 
then  in  Majorca,  with  thick  Bunter  sandstone,  and  then  Muschelkalk  as  on 
the  mainland,  but  instead  of  the  variegated  Keuper  marl,  thin  platey  lime- 
stones occur  with  Daonella  Lommeli  and  Trachyceras.  Here  we  have 
reached  the  limit  of  the  Germanic  facies  of  the  Keuper,  and  the  outliers  of 
the  pelagic  Trias,  as  it  occurs  on  the  lower  Ebro,  make  their  appearance. 
Since  this  facies  is  mentioned  as  occurring  already  in  Iviza  it  is  apparent 
that  in  this  region  the  boundary  of  the  facies  does  not  coincide  with  the 
tectonic  boundary. 

The  Trias  here,  as  Nolan  observes,  show  less  resemblance  to  that  of  the 
mainland,  notwithstanding  its  proximity,  than  to  that  of  Sicily. 

The  Alpides  terminate,  not  in  the  Balearic  isles,  but  to  all  appearance  in 
Majorca.  We  must  mention,  however,  that  the  indications  of  particularly 
recent  folding,  which  elsewhere  make  their  appearance  at  free  terminations, 
do  not  occur  in  this  case.  The  horizontal  platforms  of  Miocene  limestone 
rather  suggest  that  the  movements  which  have  occurred  further  to  the  west 
have  not  extended  thus  far. 

2.  The  folds  of  Provence. 

The  eastern  parts  of  the  folds  of  Provence,  which  have  been  driven 
towards  the  east  and  north,  meet  the  Piedmontese  and  the  Helvetian  Alps  on 
the  Var.  Mention  has  already  been  made  of  the  comparatively  late  date  of 
the  Proven9al  folding  over  this  tract.  Concealed  by  recent  deposits  for  a 
great  distance  along  the  Durance,  indications  of  these  folds  occur  still  further 
in  the  north,  on  the  other  side  of  the  fractures-area  of  Banon,  where  they 
run  east  and  west  as  far  as  the  neighbourhood  of  Sisteron,  there  presenting 
a  contrast  with  the  adjacent  recumbent  sheets  of  the  Alps. 

They  occupy  a  large  area,  yet  although  built  on  a  uniform  plan,  they  do 
not  form  a  uniform  chain,  but  on  the  north  and  west  only  isolated  fascicles 
of  folds.  On  the  south  they  are  bounded  by  the  sea.  Towards  the  south- 
west they  are  connected  in  a  peculiar  manner  with  the  outer  chains  of  the 
Pyrenees. 

It  will  be  convenient  to  commence  with  a  brief  account  of  the  foreland 
on  the  north-west.  This  is  formed  by  the  Montague  Noire  and  the 
Cevennes ;  the  Catalonian  mountains  to  the  south  of  the  Pyrenees  exhibit 
a  particular  resemblance. 

On  the  map  the  Montagne  Noire  looks  like  an  adjunct  to  the  south-west 
part  of  the  Central  Plateau.    It  extends  from  Castel  Naudary  to  Lodeve, 


CH.VI]  CATALONIAN  MOUNTAINS 


231 


and  slopes  away  southwards  towards  the  plain  of  Bdzi^rs.  But  while  the 
gneiss  of  the  Rouergue  (south  and  south-east  of  Rodez)  strikes  in  the 
Armorican  direction  to  the  north-west  and  belongs  to  the  Central  Plateau, 
the  rocks  of  the  Montague  Noire  strike  N.  60°  E.  Bergeron,  to  whom  we 
owe  a  great  part  of  our  knowledge  of  this  region,  has  shown  that  three 
great  lobes  of  Silurian  and  Devonian  coming  from  the  south-east  are 
thrust  up  on  to  the  Montague  Noire.  To  the  east  of  the  point  at  which  the 
river  Orb  issues  from  the  mountains,  Silurian  and  Devonian  extend  almost 
horizontally  for  a  distance  of  nearly  5  kilometers  over  the  bassett  edges 
of  the  folded  lower  Carboniferous  ^. 

The  older  rocks  of  the  Montague  Noire  are  covered  obliquely  and 
unconformably  by  the  Coal  measures  and  Graissesac  [lower  zone  of  Stepha- 
nian]  ;  they  show  that  the  Montague  Noire  belongs  to  the  Altaides  ^. 

The  manner  in  which  the  Cambrian  rocks  and  the  several  folded  ranges 
of  the  east  border  of  the  Montague  Noire  reappear  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Causses  in  the  Gevennes,  and  particularly  the  way  in  which  they  dip 
beneath  the  Mesozoic  sheet  near  Saint  Afrique  and  re-emerge  near  Yigan, 
shows  that  the  structure  of  the  Montague  Noire  is  continued  to  this  point. 
Hence  its  independence  in  respect  to  the  Variscan  system  also  becomes 
manifest  ^. 

The  Gatalonian  mountains  have  been  described  by  Almera  and 
Bergeron.  On  the  coast  between  cape  Dagur  and  the  mouth  of  the 
Llobregat  lies  a  range  of  hills  with  a  coincident  direction  and  tectonic 
strike  of  N.  60°  E.  as  in  the  Montague  Noire.  Towards  the  sea  this  range 
terminates  along  a  strike  fault.  Overthrusting  occurs  towards  the  north- 
west and  the  sub-divisions  of  the  lower  Palaeozoic  series,  which  extends 
upwards  into  the  lower  Carboniferous,  coincide  with  those  of  the  Montague 
Noire 

^  J.  Bergeron,  ^Itude  geologique  du  massif  ancien  situe  au  Sud  du  Plateau  central, 
Ann.  sc.  g6ol.,  1889,  XII,  pp.  1-361,  map  ;  l^tude  du  versant  meridional  de  la  Montague 
Noire,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1898,  XXVI,  pp.  472-487  ;  Note  surla  base  du  Carbonifere 
dans  la  Montague  Noire,  op.  cit.,  1899,  XXVII,  pp.  36-43 ;  and  Sur  les  nappes  de  re- 
couvrement  du  versant  meridional  de  la  Montague  Noire,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  8  fevr. 
1904,  p.  394  ;  and  in  particular  the  report  of  the  annual  meeting  of  the  French  Geo- 
logical Society  in  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1898,  pp.  661-900,  also  1899,  pp.  605-790.  To 
the  east  of  the  disturbed  region  belongs  the  frequently  mentioned  lower  Devonian  of 
Cabrieres  :  C.  Barrois,  Sur  le  Calcaire  a  Polypiers  de  Cabrieres  (Herault),  Ann.  Soc.  geol. 
du  Nord,  1886,  XII,  pp.  74-97 ;  F.  Freeh,  Die  palaeozoischen  Bildungen  von  Cabrieres, 
Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1887,  pp.  380-487,  map,  &c. 

^  The  same  fact  is  suggested  by  the  superposition  of  the  Stephanian  and  Permian  beds 
between  Albi  and  Castres ;  A.  Dereims,  Feuille  d'Albi,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1898,  X, 
pp.  118-120. 

'  J.  Bergeron,  Feuille  de  Bedarieux,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1899,  X,  p.  125,  and 
Feuilles  de  S.  Afrique  et  du  Vigan,  op.  cit.,  1903,  XIII,  p.  577  et  seq. 

*  J.  Bergeron,  Note  sur  les  terrains  paleozoiques  des  environs  de  Barcelone  et  Com- 
paraison  avec  ceux  de  la  Montague  Noire,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1898,  3^  ser.,  XXVI, 


232 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES  [party 


Very  thick  lower  Tertiary  conglomerates,  crowned  by  the  monastery  of 
Montserrat,  occur  on  the  north  slopes  of  the  Catalonian  mountains.  They 
may  be  regarded  as  an  indication  that  the  mountains  still  possessed,  even 
in  the  Tertiary  aera,  a  greater  extension  in  the  direction  of  the  existing 
sea.  Deperet  observes  that  the  conglomerates  of  Castel  Naudary  at  the 
south  end  of  the  Montague  Noire  completely  resemble  those  of  Montserrat 
and  are  of  the  same  age.  Near  Montserrat  they  extend  from  the  lower  into 
the  upper  Eocene  and  the  higher  members  are  the  '  Poudingue  de  Palassou ' 
of  the  Pyrenees.  Eocene,  lying  almost  flat,  surrounds  the  basin  of  the  Ebro 
in  the  direction  of  the  Meseta ;  it  is  filled  by  Oligocene  sediments  (gypsum, 
beds  with  Gyrena  semistriata  and  other  characteristic  fossils)  ^. 

The  Montague  Noire  thus  forms  along  with  the  Cevennes  a  branch  of 
the  Altaides  striking  N.  60°  E.  and  overthrust  towards  the  north-west ; 
they  are  separated  by  the  Pyrenees  from  the  Catalonian  mountains, 
which  form  a  similar  fragment. 

Let  us  now  turn  our  attention  to  the  more  recent  folds. 

To  the  south-east  of  the  area,  enclosed  on  the  one  side  by  the  Alps  and 
on  the  other  by  the  Montague  Noire  and  the  Cevennes,  gneiss,  mica-schist 
and  phyllite  make  their  appearance.  Upper  Carboniferous  and  Permian, 
unconformably  superposed,  show  that  here  too  a  part  of  the  Altaides  is 
visible.  It  consists  of  several  adjacent  fragments  which  together  occupy 
a  space  elongated  towards  the  south-west.  The  first  fragment  is  the 
Esterel,  between  Cannes  and  the  valley  of  the  Argens ;  the  second,  and 
largest,  is  the  hill  range  of  the  Maures,  situated  between  this  point  and  the 
neighbourhood  of  Toulon,  and  continued  to  cape  Sici^ ;  as  a  third  fragment 
we  may  regard  the  islands  of  Hy^res.  All  these  fragments  are  included 
under  the  name  of  the  Maures  ^.  A  continuous  furrow  lying  in  Permian 
sediments  (Depression  de  Cuers)  bounds  the  Maures  towards  the  interior ; 
on  the  other  side  of  this  furrow  we  reach  the  complicated  structure  of  the 
Proven9al  folds. 

Just  here,  extending  from  the  depression  of  Cuers  to  Marseilles  and  the 
Durance,  lies  the  scene  of  the  classic  labours  of  Marcel  Bertrand,  which  have 
inspired  so  many  of  our  modern  views  on  the  structure  of  the  younger 
ranges  of  Europe 

pp.  867-875  ;  J.  Almera  et  Bergeron,  Sur  les  nappes  de  recouvrement  des  environs  de 
Barcelona,  op.  cit.  1905,  4^  ser.,  IV,  pp.  706-721. 

1  Deperet,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  26  mars  1906,  pp.  752-755. 

^  I  have  referred  to  this  range  at  the  beginning  of  these  studies  as  a  fragment  of  the 
foreland  of  the  Alps,  and  have  termed  it  the  '  mass  of  Hyeres '. 

Some  of  the  most  important  are :  M,  Bertrand,  Coupes  de  la  chame  de  S,  Baume,  Bull. 
Soc.  geol.  France,  1884,  3®  ser.,  XIII,  pp.  115-130,  and  Nouvelles  etudes  sur  la  chaine  de 
8.  Baume,  op.  cit.,  1888,  3®  ser.,  XVI,  pp.  748-778,  map ;  Plis  couches  de  la  region  de 
Draguignan,  op.  cit.,  1889,  8«  ser.,  XVII,  pp.  234-246 ;  Le  Massif  d'Allauch,  Bull.  serv. 
Carte  geol.,  1891,  no.  24,  III,  pp.  283-333,  map;  La  Basse  Provence,  relief  et  lignes 


cH.vi]       MONTAGNE  NOIEE  AS  FOEELAND  233 


These  investigations,  combined  with  those  of  Ziircher  and  the  studies  of 
Fournier  and  others,  which  are  based  in  part  on  different  conceptions, 
show  that  this  region  is  built  up  of  recumbent  folds  piled  one  upon 
another.  They  form  circumscribed  masses  (Massif  du  Beausset,  de  la 
Sainte-Baume,  d'AUauch,  de  I'fitoile  and  others).  It  is  not  till  we  proceed  to 
the  north  that  they  are  succeeded  by  comparatively  longer  folds  striking 
east  and  west  ^. 

This  second  sketch  receives  important  confirmation  from  Kilian's 
observation  that  the  east-and-west  direction  is  already  prevalent  in  the 
recumbent  sheets  of  the  south,  in  contrast  to  the  south-westerly  course  of 
the  furrow  of  Cuers,  which  forms  the  natural  boundary  of  the  Maures. 
From  this  it  has  been  concluded,  and  probably  with  justice,  that  the 
Maures,  notwithstanding  certain  Mesozoic  patches  which  occur  upon  them, 
do  not  stand  in  such  an  intimate,,  and  as  it  were  organic,  connexion  with 
the  Provencal  folds  as  Mont  Blanc,  for  example,  with  the  Helvetian  Alps. 
They  present  rather  the  characters  of  a  fragment  of  foreland  overwhelmed 
by  recumbent  sheets  but  now  exposed  by  denudation ;  of  a  window,  in  fact, 
and  the  roots  of  the  sheets  may  have  belonged  to  the  denuded  covering,  or 
they  may  lie  in  the  Tyrrhenian  subsidence  ^. 

The  folds  now  advance,  but  in  diminished  strength,  towards  the  west 
and  north  with  an  east-and-west  strike ;  west  of  Marseilles  they  separate 
the  great  lagoon  of  Martigues  from  the  sea,  they  disappear  below  the 
Rhone  delta,  but  reach  the  river  above  Aries  and  still  farther  to  the  north, 
a  fold  being  mentioned  as  crossing  it  near  Montelimar. 

In  the  foreland  deflexion  occurs.  Near  Alais,  in  the  coalfield  of  the 
Gard,  the  Carboniferous  itself  is  overthrust  in  the  direction  of  the  Cevennes. 
An  important  scarp  formed  by  the  Jurassic  limestone  of  the  Gausses,  the 
Montague  de  la  Seranne,  which  runs  north-west  from  the  Montague  Noire 
to  the  Gevennes,  causes  stowing  on  the  upper  Herault  and  becomes 

directrices,  in  Ann.  de  Geogr.,  1897,  VI,  pp.  212-229,  and  1898,  VII,  pp.  14-33,  maps; 
Le  Bassin  cretace  de  Fuveau  et  le  Bassin  houiller  du  Nord,  Ann.  d.  Mines,  Paris,  1898, 
9®  ser.,  XIV,  pp.  5-85,  maps ;  La  grande  nappe  de  recouvrement  de  la  Basse  Provence, 
Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1899,  no.  68,  X,  pp.  397-467,  maps. 

^  The  drainage  adit-14'5  kilometers  in  length  beneath  the  mass  of  I'^ltoile  has  since 
been  completed.  In  the  '  Lambeau  charrie  de  Gardanne,'  north  of  the  !^toile,  the  out- 
cropping Trias,  as  M.  Bertrand  foresaw,  has  not  been  encountered  in  the  adit ;  the  adit 
is  cut  in  the  Aptian.  Thus  the  presence  of  the  overthrusts  of  the  north  is  confirmed. 
Beneath  the  Etoile  itself  the  adit  lay  too  high  in  the  Jurassic  for  a  decision  to  be  possible. 
A.  Boistel,  Resultats  geologiques  du  percement  de  la  Galerie  de  Gardanne  a  la  Mer, 
Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  4«  ser.,  V,  1905,  pp.  724-740,  map. 

^  Kilian,  Remarques  sur  la  tectonique  de  la  Basse  Provence,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol., 
1906,  no.  110,  XVI,  pp.  449-451 ;  Vasseur  and  Fournier  mention  that  from  cape  Sicie, 
where  the  Maures  and  the  furrow  of  Cuers  sink  beneath  the  sea,  there  is  a  submarine 
cliff  which  runs  south  of  Marseilles,  while  at  Pointe  Rouge  a  little  south  of  the  same 
town  a  conglomerate  with  Permian  pebbles  occurs.  Both  these  facts  are  regarded  as  indi- 
cating a  continuation  of  the  Maures  :  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  27  janv.  1896,  map. 


234 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES  [paetv 


a  boundary  of  the  foreland.  From  the  south  the  Trias  and  Lias  have 
surged  up  towards  this  barrier  in  six  successive  flakes  ^. 

This  is  the  beginning  of  a  long  belt  of  dammed-up  folds  on  the  south 
border  of  the  Montague  Noire.  It  extends  to  St.  Chinian  and  has  been 
described  by  Nickles  2. 

Isolated  fragments,  extending  from  Montpellier  onwards,  between  this 
belt  and  the  sea  indicate  the  continuation  of  the  Provengal  folds  as  far  as 
the  Montague  de  la  Clape,  near  Narbonne;  near  St.  Chinian,  however, 
circumstances  occur  which  have  an  important  bearing  on  the  interpretation 
of  the  Pyrenees. 

The  illustration  (fig.  20)  is  taken  from  a  tectonic  map  published  by  de 
Margerie  in  1890.  Many  additional  details  have  been  discovered  since  the 
continuity  of  the  folds  has  become  more  apparent,  but  the  less  complicated 
representation  given  in  the  figure  shows  the  various  trend  lines  in  a  very 
clear  manner  ^. 

The  folded  region  of  St.  Chinian  leaves  the  Montague  Noire  while 
describing  an  arc.  Dep^ret  distinguishes  several  concentric  folds.  The 
most  northerly  anticline  reveals  beneath  Trias  and  Infra-Lias  the  Eocene 
stage  of  Rognac ;  beneath  this,  Nummulitic  beds  extending  as  far  as  Bize, 
and  beneath  these,  limestone  with  Planorhis  pseudoammonius.  Between 
this  overturned  fold  and  the  Palaeozoic  beds  of  the  Montague  Noire  lies 
one  end  of  the  basin  of  Minervois,  which  widens  out  rapidly  towards  the 
west,  i.  e.  in  the  direction  of  Carcassone.  Near  Bize,'  a  small  dome  of 
Eocene  is  separated  off  towards  the  south-south- west ;  it  represents  the 
free  end  of  the  first  anticline. 

The  next  anticline  presents  the  same  succession  of  strata  as  the  first 
In  the  Minervois,  to  the  west,  the  Eocene  broadens  out ;  north  of  the 
Aude  no  further  folds  occur ;  the  foot  of  the  Montague  Noire  is  free  and 
lies  as  it  were  in  a  dead  angle.  North  of  the  Pyrenees  rises  the  Palaeozoic 
mass  of  Mouthoumet.  It  is  45  kilometers  in  length  and  attains  a  breadth 
of  15  kilometers.    The  stratified  sequence  is  the  same  as  that  of  the 

^  R.  Nickles,  Sur  les  plis  couches  de  S.  Jean-de-Bueges  (Herault),  C.  R.Acad.  Sci.  Paris, 
30  janv.  1905.  Here  the  obstacle  (upper  Jurassic)  consists  of  more  recent  rocks  than 
the  sediments  stowed  by  it. 

2  R.  Nickles,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1899,  3«  ser.,  XXVII,  p.  715  et  seq. ;  in  particular 
pp.  719,  743,  773  et  seq.  to  787. 

'  E.  de  Margerie,  Notes  sur  la  structure  des  Corbieres,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1890, 
no.  17,  II,  pp.  283-318,  map  ;  also  an  older  work  by  d'Arcbiac,  Les  Corbieres,  Mem.  Soc. 
geol.  France,  1859,  2«  ser.,  VI,  pp.  209-446,  map;  among  recent  works  in  particular, 
L.  Carez,  Composition  et  structure  des  Corbieres  et  de  la  region  adjacente  des  Pyrenees, 
Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1892,  3«  ser.,  XX,  pp.  470-506 ;  L.  Doncieux,  Monographie 
geologique  et  paleontologique  des  Corbieres  orientales,  Ann.  Univ.  Lyon,  1903,  new  ser.  I, 
fasc.  II,  377  pp.,  map  ;  0.  Mengel,  Observations  geologiques  sur  la  partie  sud-est  des 
Corbieres,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1904,  4«  ser.,  IV,  pp.  256-281,  map. 

*  C.  Deperet,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1896,  VII,  pp.  86-88,  and  1899,  X,  pp.  515-517. 


CH.  VI  MOUTHOUMET  235 

Montagne  Noire.  Its  north  border  is  bent  over  towards  the  north ;  Mesozoic 
folds  encroach  from  the  west.  There  is  no  doubt  that  this  mass  was  affected 
by  the  folding  of  the  Pyrenees.  Nevertheless  it  has  caused  a  deflexion  of 
the  Mesozoic  folds.  The  north-east  corner  near  Durban  leaves  no  doubt  on 
this  point.  The  Provencal  folds  composed  of  Trias,  Jurassic,  and  Cretaceous, 
but  without  Eocene,  approach  from  the  subsidence  of  Narbonne,  bend 
gradually  between  the  eastern  border  of  Mouthoumet  and  cape  Leucate 


Fig.  20.    The  valley  of  the  Aude.   (After  E.  de  Margerie.) 


into  a  due  east-and-west  direction,  as  a  consequence  of  overthrusts  towards 
their  concave  side  ^ ;  they  unite  south  of  the  Mouthoumet  mass  luith  the 
folds  of  the  Pyremes, 

Near  Jonquieres  (8  kilometers  north-west  of  Durban)  the  Trias  and 
Jurassic  disappear.  All  the  folds  west  of  a  line  joining  Jonquieres  and  Bize, 
i.  e.  the  folds  between  Mouthoumet  and  the  Aude,  consist  solely  of  Danian 
and  Eocene,  thus  offering  a  marked  contrast  to  the  deflected  folds  of  Provence. 
They  are  thrust  towards  the  north,  frequently  cut  through  by  faults,  and 

^  C.  Deperet,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1906,  XVI,  p.  402,  window  of  Vingrau  (north-west 
of  Rives  Altes). 


236 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES  [paet  v 


near  Moux  and  Lagrasse  reveal  the  Devonian,  lying  beneath  the  Danian ; 
the  folds  die  away  towards  the  west  ^. 

Thus  between  the  Montagne  Noire  and  Mouthoumet  a  connexion  exists, 
beneath  the  Danian,  between  the  Palaeozoic  foreland  and  the  core  of 
Mouthoumet.  At  the  same  time  we  have  here  an  instructive  example  of 
folds  exhibiting  two  different  fades  (Devonian,  Danian,  Eocene ;  and  Trias, 
Jurassic,  and  Cretaceous)  which  have  developed  together  side  by  side. 

3.  The  Pyrenees. 

The  study  of  this  great  mountain  range  has  made  considerable  progress 
in  the  last  few  decades.  A  catalogue  drawn  up  by  Carez  in  1903  contains 
the  names  of  more  than  2,000  works  of  a  geological  nature.  In  this  period 
of  progress  three  phases  may  be  distinguished.  The  first  centres  round  the 
works  of  d'Archiac  and  Leymerie^;  the  second  is  marked  by  the  publication 
of  the  map  by  Carez  in  1892  ^  and  the  almost  contemporaneous  sketch  of 
the  structure  as  a  whole  by  E.  de  Margerie  and  F.  Schrader  ^.  As  regards 
the  third  period  it  will  sufl&ce  for  the  present  to  mention  the  monograph  by 
Carez  (subsequent  to  1903)  ^,  Bresson's  study  of  the  ancient  formations 
(1903)  ^,  and  the  investigations  of  Leon  Bertrand  in  the  east.  Important 
results  as  regards  some  of  the  principal  questions  were  furnished  by  the 
excursion  of  the  French  Geological  Society  in  the  West  Pyrenees  in  1906 
The  writings  of  Mallada  and  other  investigators,  such  as  Stuart-Menteath, 
Roussel,  Caralp,  Seunes.  Mengel,  Yarza,  and  in  particular  Lacroix,  con- 
tribute in  many  directions  to  the  completion  of  our  knowledge. 

The  substructure  of  the  Pyrenees  is  formed  by  a  series  which  begins 
with  gneiss,  and  from  the  lower  Silurian  up  to  and  including  the  Car- 
boniferous is  characterized  by  fossils.  Bresson  has  shown  that  the  same 
subdivisions  of  the  Palaeozoic  series  may  be  recognized  here  as  in  the  mass 
of  Mouthoumet,  the  Montagne  Noire  and  the  Catalonian  mountains.  In  this 
respect  there  is  no  difference  between  the  mountains  and  the  foreland. 
This  ancient  series  is  invaded  by  granite  batholites.    They  are  of  pre- 

1  For  example,  E.  de  Margerie,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1890,  no.  17,  II,  pp.  283-318 ; 
A.  Bresson,  op.  cit.,  1897,  IX,  pp.  349-352  et  passim. 

^  D'Archiac's  above-mentioned  work  on  the  Corbieres  ;  A.  Leymerie,  Description  geolo- 
gique  et  paleontologique  des  Pyrenees  de  la  Haute-Garonne,  8vo,  Toulouse,  1881,  and 
atlas,  et  passim. 

^  L.  Carez  et  Vasseur,  Carte  geologique  de  la  France,  1:500,000. 

*  E.  de  Margerie  et  F.  Schrader,  Aper9u  de  la  structure  geologique  des  Pyrenees,  Ann. 
Club  alp.  fran9.  (1891),  1892,  XVIII,  65  pp.,  map. 

^  L.  Carez,  La  Geologie  des  Pyrenees  fran9aises,  Memoire  pour  servir  a  I'explication 
de  la  Carte  geologique  detaillee  de  la  France,  3  vols,  4to,  1903-1905,  1917  pp.,  maps. 

^  A.  Bresson,  Etudes  sur  les  formations  anciennes  des  Hautes  et  Basses  Pyrenees,  Bull, 
serv.  Carte  geol.,  XIV,  1903,  pp.  45-322,  map. 

'  Reunion  extraordinaire  dans  les  Pyrenees  occidentales,  1906,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France, 
4«  ser.,  VI. 


CH.VI]  SHEETS  OF  THE  NOETH-EAST  PYEENEES  237 


Permian  age.  They  do  not  occur  in  the  mass  of  Mouthoumet.  The 
investigations  of  these  batholites  by  Lacroix  have  an  important  bearing  on 
the  question  as  to  granites  when  the  surrounding  rock  is  consumed  ^. 

The  Altaides  enter  largely  into  the  structure  of  the  Pyrenees  and  are 
termed  here  the  '  primary  series Within  the  mass  of  Mouthoumet  folds 
occur  running  to  the  south-west  and  almost  east  and  west  ^.  In  the  midst 
of  the  Pyrenees  tracts  occur  in  which  these  ancient  folds  are  covered  by 
transgressive  red  Permian  and  pale-coloured  upper  Cretaceous;  it  is  the 
same  succession  as  in  Bohemia,  for  example,  or  in  parts  of  the  Great  Atlas. 
Outside  these  older  regions,  both  on  the  north  and  south,  lie  the  younger 
folds.  The  Mesozoic  series  extends  upwards  into  the  Cretaceous  without 
any  sign  of  pelagic  characters.  Marine  Permian  fossils  have  been  found  by 
Caralp  in  one  of  the  northern  foot  ranges The  Trias  is  represented  by 
gypsum,  salt-bearing  marls,  and  Rauchwacke. 

Ttte  North.  The  folds  of  Provence  advance  behind  the  mass  of 
Mouthoumet.  When,  having  made  a  bend  almost  at  right  angles,  they 
reappear  in  the  west  as  the  northern  part  of  the  Pyrenees,  we  see  how 
tremendous  must  have  been  the  pressure  to  which  they  were  subjected 
from  the  south.  Mouthoumet  now  assumes  a  position  similar  to  that  of 
Ufa  in  front  of  the  Urals,  and  the  Adirondacks  in  front  of  the  Appalachians. 
The  northern  border  of  the  Pyrenees  breaks  up  towards  the  west  in  a 
compulsory  virgation,  which  in  the  Petites  Pyr(^n^es  gives  rise  to  a  north- 
westerly strike,  divergent  from  that  of  the  principal  chain. 

The  structure  of  the  great  range  running  to  the  north-east  has  been 
made  known  nearly  as  far  as  Tarbes  by  L.  Bertrand^.  In  the  north  an 
autochthonous  foreland  (I.  Region  Sous-pyr^neenne)  lies  here  in  front  of 
the  Pyrenees.  To  this,  as  a  basement,  Mouthoumet  also  belongs.  It  is 
followed  by  a  sheet  (I  a.  Nappe  Pr^-pyr^neenne,  L.  Bertrand,  Zone  ceno- 
manienne,  Carez)  which,  although  separated  from  the  foreland  by  a 
thrust-plane,  still  possesses  its  stratified  succession  with  an  important 

1  A  Lacroix,  Le  Granite  des  Pyrenees  et  ses  phenomenes  de  contact,  I,  Bull.  serv. 
Carte  geoL,  1898,  X,  pp.  241-808,  and  II,  op.  cit.,  1900,  XI,  pp.  50-68. 

L.  Bertrand,  Sur  Tallure  des  plis  anciens  dans  les  Pyrenees  centrales  et  orientales, 
C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  4  fevr.  1907,  pp.  289-292  ;  L.  Bertrand  compares  the  encounter 
with  the  syntaxis  in  the  Central  Plateau. 

^  Caralp,  Le  Permien  de  I'Ariege,  ses  divers  facies,  sa  faune  marine,  Bull.  Soc.  geol. 
France,  1903,  4®  ser.,  Ill,  pp.  635-650.  In  the  north  of  Europe,  also,  a  marine  Permian 
stage,  the  Zechstein,  is  present ;  in  the  Alps,  however,  marine  Permian  is  unknown,  and 
the  outcrops  discovered  by  Caralp  correspond  to  those  of  south  Europe  and  the  Dinarides ; 
according  to  Haug  they  contain  species  from  Sicily  and  the  Urals. 

^  L.  Bertrand,  Sur  les  nappes  de  charriage  Pyreneennes  et  Pre-Pyreneennes  a  I'Est 
de  la  Nesle,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  18  nov.  1907  ;  and  Contributions  a  I'histoire  strati- 
graphique  et  tectonique  des  Pyrenees  orientales  et  centrales,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1907, 
XVII,  pp.  281-315. 


238 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES  [paetv 


development  of  transgressive  Cenomanian.  It  is  within  this  that  we  first 
encounter  the  frontal  overthrusting  of  the  Pyrenees  themselves. 

L.  Bertrand  distinguishes  three  sheets  transported  from  the  south,  any- 
one of  which  may  conceal  that  preceding  it.  Large  patches  of  the  primary 
series  (gneiss  to  Lower  Carboniferous)  form  part  of  these  sheets.  In  some 
places  they  rise  up  to  a  great  height,  at  others  they  are  ground  down  and 
milled  out  into  narrow  strips.  They  are  separated  by  long  pinched-in 
Mesozoic  zones  or  strips. 

Sheet  A  makes  its  appearance  from  beneath  the  other  sheets,  and  is 
visible  at  intervals  in  the  south,  in  autochthonous  association  with  the 
primary  principal  chain. 

Sheet  B  comprises  the  primary  mass  of  Agly  (west  of  Perpignan),  is 
represented  further  west  by  a  Mesozoic  zone,  and  includes  (in  the  west)  the 
masses  of  the  Trois  Seigneurs,  Castillon  and  Milhas. 

South  and  east  of  the  Trois  Seigneurs  a  belt  of  marble  with  intrusions 
of  Lherzolite  makes  its  appearance;  towards  the  west  the  Mesozoic  zone 
becomes  broader  and  the  basic  intrusions  come  to  an  end.  In  two  erosion- 
windows  in  sheet  B,  situated  north-east  and  north-west  of  the  Trois 
Seigneurs,  the  pre-Pyrenean  foreland,  and  in  part  the  Cretaceous  also,  may 
be  seen  in  the  midst  of  the  great  range ;  rolled-out  fragments  of  A  may  be 
recognized  round  about  these  windows,  lying  beneath  B  and  upon  the 
denuded  foreland. 

The  highest  sheet,  C,  consists  principally  of  primary  masses,  those  of 
S.  Barthelemy,  the  Arize  (north  of  the  Trois  Seigneurs);  possibly  the 
Barousse  also  must  be  referred  to  it. 

These  instructive  results,  which  have  been  made  clear  to  me  by  the 
kindness  of  M.  Bertrand,  who  has  lent  me  his  unpublished  map,  recall  the 
Alps,  on  account  both  of  the  overthrusting  of  great  masses  of  the  ancient 
substructure,  and  of  the  presence  of  marble  bands  and  basic  intrusions. 
The  Trois  Seigneurs  and  sheet  A  occupy  the  same  position  as  the  Hohe 
Tatra  in  the  Carpathians.  L.  Bertrand  regards  the  sheets  as  folds  (replis) 
of  the  primary  principal  chain  of  the  south,  and  states  that  the  sheets  are 
clearly  bounded  by  Mesozoic  zones  in  the  south,  while  in  the  north  they 
are  united  by  a  common  covering  formed  of  the  marls  of  the  Albian  stage, 
in  which  the  saddles  of  the  anticlines  are  preserved,  and  play  a  part 
somewhat  similar  to  that  of  the  Alpine  Flysch. 

East  of  the  exit  of  the  Ariege  from  the  mountains,  rise  some  folds  of 
Cretaceous  and  Eocene  striking  west-north-west ;  they  depart  further  and 
further  from  the  direction  of  the  Pyrenees  and  soon  form  the  fairly  inde- 
pendent chain  of  the  Fetites  FyrSnees.  West  of  the  middle  course  of  the 
Garonne  there  lies  a  flat  cone  of  debris  easily  recognizable  on  the  map  by 
a  radiate  arrangement  of  numerous  river  courses.  Its  summit  forms  the 
Plateau  of  Lannemezan.   Beneath  this  cone  the  Petites  Pyrenees  disappear, 


CH.  Vl] 


LABOUED 


239 


but  to  the  south  of  them,  as  far  as  the  foot  of  the  cone,  we  see  that  other 
zones  of  the  Pyrenees  insert  themselves  and  form  a  transition.  Traces  of 
the  Cenomanian  occur  beneath  the  cone.  Independent  bands  of  salt- 
bearing  Trias  with  smaller  occurrences  of  mylonitized  granite  make  their 
appearance  ^.  An  almost  continuous  series  of  small  exposures  runs  south 
of  Salies  in  front  of  the  Pyrenees  into  the  neighbourhood  of  Lannemezan, 
and  has  been  traced  still  farther,  up  to  Lourdes  and  beyond.  Further  north 
a  larger  series  of  dislocations,  striking  more  or  less  to  the  north-west, 
makes  its  appearance  on  the  west  side  of  the  cone.  The  land  is  concealed, 
however,  to  a  large  extent,  and  the  exposures  are  seldom  connected ;  there 
is  room  therefore  for  difference  of  opinion.  It  will  suffice  to  compare  the 
plan  of  the  lines  made  by  Seunes  in  1890^  with  that  by  Carez  in  1903^. 
The  studies  of  Seunes  refer  chiefly  to  the  southern  lines  as  far  as  Dax. 
Repeated  anticlines,  bent  in  irregular  arcs,  convex  towards  the  north,  are 
said  to  occur ;  hence  the  folding  force  has  acted  from  the  south.  One  line 
on  the  map  is  particularly  conspicuous;  it  runs  from  Clarac  towards  the 
west-north-west,  passes  north  of  Oleron  on  the  way  to  Peyrehorade,  there 
changes  its  direction  and  reaches  the  sea  near  Bidart. 

Carez  agrees  with  earlier  observers  in  his  plan  of  the  anticlines,  the 
most  northerly  of  which  runs  28  kilometers  south  of  Bordeaux.  They  are 
regarded  as  parallel  to  the  Pyrenees  (consequently  not  arranged  in  virgation), 
and  are  compared  with  the  parallel  lines  trending  to  the  north-west,  which 
further  north  extend  from  the  Central  Plateau  towards  southern  Armorica. 
One  of  the  synclines,  however,  which  strikes  from  Pau  towards  Gaas  (north 
of  Peyrehorade)  is  said  to  also  possess  the  bend  observed  by  Seunes. 

It  is  certain  that  the  dislocations  may  still  be  recognized  at  a  quite 
unexpected  distance  from  the  Pyrenees ;  and  ophites  also  accompany  them 
as  far  as  the  neighbourhood  of  Dax. 

The  bend  as  perceived  by  Seunes  is  governed  by  a  foreign  body,  which 
it  surrounds.  This  is  the  broad  and  low  mass  of  Lahourd,  formed  of 
granite  and  gneiss,  which  is  exposed  south  of  Hasparren ;  some  20  kilo- 
meters away,  situated  on  the  Spanish  frontier  and  cut  through  in  its 
northern  part  by  the  Bidassoa,  lies  the  granite  mass  of  Aja  (or  Haja) 
12  kilometers  in  length ;  it  is  a  continuation  of  the  mass  of  Labourd. 

^  L,  Carez,  Feuille  de  Tarbes,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1898,  X,  p.  102.  In  the  valley- 
furrow  in  the  direction  of  Tarbes,  granite  still  crops  out  on  the  west  side  of  the  cone ; 
for  the  force  of  the  movement :  P.  Termier,  Les  Breches  de  Friction  dans  le  Granite  et 
dans  le  Calcaire  crystallin  a  Moine-Menda,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  4®  ser.,  IV,  pp.  833- 
838. 

2  J.  Seunes,  Recherches  sur  les  terrains  secondaires  et  I'^ocene  inferieure  de  la 
region  sous-pyreneenne  du  sud-est  de  la  France,  Ann.  Mines,  1890, 8®  ser.,  XVIII,  pp.  209- 
458,  map  ;  in  particular  p.  412  et  seq. 

^  L.  Carez,  La  Geologie  des  Pyrenees  frangaises,  I,  p.  671  et  seq.,  pi.  ii.  A  sketch  of 
the  crossing  of  these  lines  by  the  Garonne  (differing  from  the  older  description  by 
Leymerie)  is  given  by  Carez  in  the  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1902,  4^  ser.,  II,  pi.  xvii. 


240 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES  [party 


The  situation  is  rendered  still  more  remarkable  by  a  series  of  rocks 
striking  to  the  south- south-west,  which  rise  from  the  sea  a  little  south  of 
Biarritz ;  these  present  a  wonderful  diversity  in  kind ;  and  their  direction 
corresponds  approximately  to  that  which  would  be  followed  by  a  similar 
line  surrounding  the  mass  of  Labourd  at  a  greater  distance  ;  it  is  also 
nearly  parallel  to  the  zone  of  Flysch  which  borders  the  gneiss  of  Labourd, 
extending  along  the  coast  to  St.  Sebastian  and  beyond  ^. 

Hautes  Pyrenees.  On  the  east  the  space  allotted  to  this  group  of 
mountains  is  reduced  by  the  encroachment  of  the  recent  subsidence  of  the 
Roussillon,  which  also  cuts  through  a  part  of  the  Provencal  folds,  as  they 
strike  by  from  cape  Leucate ;  on  the  south  border  of  these  folds,  where  the 
Tech  emerges  from  the  mountains,  extremely  complicated  relations  set  in. 
Immediately  to  the  west,  however,  the  great  range  becomes  continuous. 
Its  breadth  in  the  meridian  of  Andorra,  from  the  south  side  of  the  granite 
of  Foix  to  somewhere  near  the  exit  of  the  Segre  from  the  mountains, 
amounts  to  about  72  kilometers.  From  here  onwards  the  northern  border 
strikes  east  and  west  towards  the  Mesozoic  belt,  while  in  the  interior  of  the 
range  a  strike  of  W.  30°  N.  prevails,  and  the  south  border  runs  almost 
north-west. 

In  this  way  the  breadth  decreases  towards  the  west.  Near  Urdos 
it  amounts  to  only  about  22  kilometers;  a  little  further  west,  at  the 
Pic  d'Anie,  it  is  a  great  deal  less.  From  this  point  onwards  the  Basses 
Pyrenees  take  the  place  of  the  principal  chain.  The  primary  rocks,  which 
form  by  far  the  greater  part  of  the  Hautes  Pyrenees,  appear  in  these 
mountains  only  as  recumbent  sheets  or  as  pinched-in  strips.  Some  distance 
away,  on  the  other  side  of  the  plain  of  Maul^on,  the  gneiss  of  Labourd 
crops  out  on  the  north,  and  the  structure  of  the  mountains  undergoes 
a  change. 

We  have  mentioned  above  that  the  relations  become  complicated  on  the 
Tech.  According  to  Mengel's  very  instructive  description,  the  situation  on 
the  east  of  this  region  is  as  follows : — 

The  primary  rocks  form  a  broad  mass,  which  is  called  after  its  most 
northerly  point  the  Eoc  de  France  (1,449  meters  south  of  Ceret).  Its 
boundary  runs  from  the  upper  Ter  towards  the  north-east,  crosses  the 
Spanish  frontier  north-east  of  Camprodon,  runs  parallel  to  the  Tech  as  far 
as  Am^lie-les-Bains  and  beyond,  and  bends  between  Ceret  and  the  Roc  de 
France  towards  the  south-east.  Maintaining  this  direction,  it  passes 
Massarach  and  reaches  the  plain  which  surrounds  the  gulf  of  Rosas.  Only 
a  few  remnants  of  Mesozoic  occur  on  its  margin.    The  whole  of  the  mass 

^  Maps  of  these  *  Klippen '  are  given  by  L.  Bertrand,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1902, 4^  ser., 
II,  pi.  i ;  and  Douville,  op.  cifc.,  1905,  4«  ser.,  V.  The  following  occur  in  the  '  Klippen' : 
Trias  and  ophite,  altered  Jurassic  limestone,  Cenomanian,  Senonian,  Danian,  and  several 
divisions  of  the  Eocene.    All  the  dislocations  are  older  than  the  Aquitanian. 


CH.  VlJ 


LINE  OF  THE  TECH 


241 


of  the  Roc  de  France,  inserted  in  the  mountains  like  an  obtuse  wedge, 
pointing  away  from  Spain,  has  been  moved  towards  the  north. 

West  of  the  Tech  and  the  frontier  from  Camprodon  to  Am^lie-les- 
Bains,  which  marks  a  pinched-in  belt  of  Devonian  and  Carboniferous,  lies 
the  broad  primary  mass  of  the  Canigou  ;  this  has  been  driven  towards  the 
south,  so  that  the  line  of  the  upper  Tech  may  be  regarded  as  the  boundary 
between  the  two  movements  ^. 

From  this  point  onwards  the  whole  of  the  southern  side  of  the  Hautes 
Pyr^n^es  shows  a  movement  towards  the  south,  and  a  considerable  part  of 
it  has  been  resolved  into  flakes  which  face  in  the  same  direction.  Thus, 
for  example,  the  Spanish  mountains  situated  to  the  south  of  the  granite 
mass,  which  bears  the  Maladetta  (3,404  meters),  are  formed  of  folds  or 
flakes  of  Palaeozoic  beds  overturned  towards  the  south.  The  Trias  consists 
here,  as  in  the  north,  of  gypsum  and  ophite ;  it  appears  as  a  narrow  belt 
surrounding  the  Mesozoic  beds  ^. 

Thanks  to  the  zeal  of  French  investigators,  foremost  among  whom 
stand  Bresson  and  Carez,  we  are  able  to  obtain  a  clear  insight  into  the 
structure  of  the  range  both  in  the  valley  of  the  Gave  de  Pau,  which  leaves 
the  mountains  near  Lourdes,  and  also  in  the  valley  of  the  Gave  d'Ossau, 
which  adjoins  the  former  on  the  west^.  South  of  Lourdes  the  Mesozoic 
belt  strikes  east  and  west ;  it  consists  of  lower  Cretaceous,  with  Jurassic 
and  a  little  Trias ;  the  folds  are  overturned  towards  the  north.  Below 
Argeles  they  terminate  suddenly  along  a  steep  dislocation  striking  east  and 
west.  Aptian  marls  are  steeply  upturned,  and  south  of  the  dislocation 
lower  Devonian  dips  steeply  to  the  south.  The  Palaeozoic  formation  which 
begins  here  is  at  first  folded  towards  the  north,  but  below  Luz  the  beds  are 
steeply  upturned;  dipping  first  in  one  direction  and  then  another  they 
yield  finally  to  the  southern  movement  which  now  dominates  as  far  as  the 
Spanish  frontier.    The  strike  is  W.  30°  N.  in  this  region. 

Let  us  follow  this  direction  towards  Laruns  on  the  neighbouring  Gave 
d'Ossau. 

Here  Turonian  and  Senonian  crop  out  over  a  considerable  area  from 
beneath  the  Devonian ;  in  the  south-west,  towards  Eaux  Chaudes  they 
rest  in  autochthonous  superposition  upon  hornblendic  granite.  Basement 
segments  of  ophite  and  Trias,  as  well  as  Flysch  with  Fucoids,  rest  upon  the 
Cretaceous.    The  mighty  sheet  of  Devonian  and  Carboniferous  which  was 

^  0.  Mengel,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.  (1905),  1906,  XVI,  pp.  414-422,  and  op.  cit. 
(1906),  1907,  XVII,  pp.  217-225,  map. 
2  L.  Bertrand,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  XVI,  p.  388. 

^  The  chief  sources  of  information  are  Bresson's  above-mentioned  work  in  Bull.  serv. 
Carte  geol.,  XIV;  Carez,  Geologic  des  Pyrenees  frangaises,  and,  in  particular,  Report  on 
the  meeting  of  tl\e  French  Geological  Society  in  the  western  Pyrenees,  in  the  Bull.  Soc. 
geol.  France,  1907,  4«  ser.,  VII,  pp.  81-110. 

SOLIiAS  IV  K 


242 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES  [party 


thrust  here  from  the  west-south-west  over  the  Cretaceous  has  left  behind 
these  relics. 

The  exposures  on  the  Gave  de  Pau  are  no  less  instructive.  Its  highest 
affluents,  the  Gave  de  Gavarnie  and  the  Gave  d'H^as,  are  separated  by 
a  mass  which  projects  to  the  north  (Pic  de  Pimen^,  2,803  meters ;  Mont 
Herran,  2,789  meters),  and  consists  of  sediments  extending  from  the 
upper  Silurian  to  the  lower  Carboniferous.  The  rivers  unite  near  Gedre. 
They  have  both  eaten  their  way  through  the  overthrust  sheet  (S  +  D  +  H, 
fig.  21)  and  the  Cretaceous  (C),  and  together  form  a  crescent-shaped 


Fig.  21 .    Gavarnie  and  the  French  frontier  near  Mont  Perdu. 

Sj„3,  Silurian,  altered  by  granite  ;  S4  +  D  +  H,  upper  Silurian,  Devonian  and  Carboniferous  ; 
C,  upper  Cretaceous  ;  7,  granite  ;  m,  contact  zone  of  the  granite. 

window,  which  terminates  on  the  west  in  the  Cirque  de  Gavarnie,  and  on 
the  east  in  the  Cirque  de  Troumousse.  At  the  bottom  of  the  window,  the 
basement,  formed  of  lower  Silurian  altered  by  granite  (Si_3,  fig.  21),  is 
laid  bare ;  overlying  this,  in  autochthonous  association  with  it,  comes  the 
Campanian  with  Rudistes,  aiid  above  this,  extending  up  to  the  lofty  peaks 
of  the  Pimen^,  Mont  Herran  and  the  Pic  de  la  Munia  (3,150  meters),  that 
part  of  the  overthrust  sheet  which  lies  in  the  bend  of  the  window.  Bresson 
conjectures  that  the  great  movement  towards  the  south  took  place  along 
the  thick  graptolite  slates.  Hence  it  follows,  since  the  substructure  is 
lower  Silurian,  that  an  apparently  normal  succession  might  occur  wherever 
the  Cretaceous  has  completely  disappeared  in  consequence  of  rolling  out. 


CH.  Vl] 


BASSES  PYEENEES 


243 


In  any  case  the  autochthonous  superposition  of  the  Cretaceous  proves  that 
Si_3  must  have  been  exposed  before  the  deposition  of  that  formation. 

The  Cirque  de  Gavarnie  ends  in  a  mighty  wall  formed  of  steeply  folded 
Campanian  and  Danian.  The  Palaeozoic  sheet  does  not  extend  so  far.  On 
the  ascent  to  the  pass  of  Gavarnie  the  boundary  between  the  sheet  and  the 
Cretaceous  is  quite  steep  ^. 

Since  the  ascending  Cretaceous  is  continuous  with  that  exposed  in 
the  window,  this  boundary  cannot  be  a  fault.  The  piled-up  folds  of  the 
Cretaceous  limestones  now  form,  on  the  Spanish  frontier,  a  series  of  peaks 
over  3,000  meters  in  height  (Marbor^,  3,253  meters),  and  on  the  other  side 
of  the  frontier  they  form  Mont  Perdu  (3,352  meters).  Nummulites  have 
been  found  both  on  the  Marbore  and  about  the  peaks  of  Mont  Perdu. 

Thus  it  appears  that  the  substructure  S^.g  was  overlain  by  an  auto- 
chthonous series  extending  from  the  Campanian  to  the  Eocene,  and  that  the 
whole  of  this  overlying  series  was  seized  by  the  overthrust  sheet,  down  to 
its  lowest  member,  in  which  Hippurites  are  transformed  into  plate-shaped 
discs,  and  was  carried  along  with  the  sheet  and  rolled  out.  Its  sudden  ascent 
and  swelling  out  in  the  Cirque  de  Gavarnie  and  on  the  Spanish  frontier 
indicate  perhaps  nothing  more  than  a  great  bulging  up  at  the  margin, 
where  it  was  relieved  from  the  load  of  the  overlying  sheet.  This  accords 
with  the  occurrence  of  piled-up  Cretaceous  synclines,  open  towards  the 
south,  which  de  Margerie  described  so  far  back  as  1886  as  occurring  in  the 
Cylindre  (3,327  meters),  between  Marbor^  and  Mont  Perdu  ^. 

Basses  Pyrenees.  It  has  been  mentioned  above  that  fragments  of 
Flysch  with  Fucoids  rest  upon  the  Cretaceous  of  Eaux  Chaudes.  According 
to  Bresson's  observations,  this  Flysch  is  continued  a  good  30  kilometers 
further  towards  the  west,  enclosed  between  the  substructure  and  the 
Palaeozoic  sheet  which  has  been  thrust  from  the  north  ^.  Then,  north  of  the 
Pic  d'Anie  (2,504  meters),  this  caught-in  strip  grows  continually  broader, 
till  finally,  where  the  Hautes  Pyrenees  have  terminated  on  the  Pic  dAnie, 
it  forms  in  their  place  the  imposing  Flysch  range  which  runs  out  from 
Sainte  Engrace  north  of  Pampelona. 

This  Flysch  is  upper  Senonian;  towards  the  summit  fossils  of  the 
Danian  are  found,  and  it  thus  corresponds  in  age  with  the  Bavarian  Flysch. 

^  L.  Carez,  Geologie  des  Pyrenees  fran9aises,  II,  pi.  IX,  fig.  2.  In  Port  Bieil  on  the 
south-east  side  of  the  Pimene  we  see  still  more  clearly  the  superposition  of  Campanian 
and  Danian,  op.  cit.,  pi.  VIII,  fig.  2  ;  Barrois,  Mission  d'Andalousie,  pp.  292  and  298  et 
passim  for  the  relation  of  the  Cretaceous  to  the  superposition.  Pimene  is  not  included 
in  fig.  21  ;  it  lies  near  the  north  end  of  S4  + D  +  Hj,  to  the  south  of  Gedre. 

2  E.  de  Margerie,  Notes  geologiques  sur  la  region  du  Mont  Perdu,  Ann.  Club  alp. 
fran9.,  1886,  XIII,  pp.  609-625  ;  Douville  and  Bertrand  also  ascribe  these  folds  merely 
to  a '  refoulement Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1907,  4®  ser.,  IV,  Meeting  in  the  west  Pyrenees, 
pp.  98,  99. 

3  A.  Bresson,  Feuille  d'Urdos,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1906,  XVI,  pp.  385-392,  map. 

E  2 


244 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES  [party 


It  is  distinguished  as  Spanish  Flysch,  in  opposition  to  that  on  the  north 
side,  which  is  regarded  as  Cenomanian. 

The  following  transverse  section  across  the  Basses  Pyrenees  is  derived 
from  the  works  of  E.  Fournier  ^ : — 

On  the  north  lies  the  Cretaceous  plain  of  Mauldon.  Then  follows 
a  long  anticline.  Its  north  side  consists  of  a  normal  series  ranging  down 
into  the  Trias,  dipping  towards  the  north  or  slightly  bent  over  in  that 
direction.  In  the  axis  lower  Carboniferous  occurs,  or  a  thick  Rothliegend- 
conglomerate  (Poudingue  de  Mendibelza).  The  south  side  is  always  strongly 
overfolded  towards  the  south,  but  the  southern  limb  is  but  slightly  repre- 
sented, and  generally  only  by  Trias.  This  is  separated  from  the  Flysch 
by  a  thrust-plane  which  runs  through  the  whole  area,  and  dips  towards  the 
north.  Then  follows  the  Flysch  and  Cretaceous  limestone  range,  which  is 
much  higher  than  the  preceding,  and  here  forms  the  orographic  axis  of  the 
Pyrenees  (Pic  d'Orhy,  2,017  meters). 

On  the  boundary  plain  between  the  Trias  and  the  north  border  of  the 
Flysch  some  lower  Silurian  crops  out  near  Sainte  Engrace  in  a  cleft ;  and  in 
accordance  with  the  movement  directed  towards  the  south,  a  recumbent 
sheet  of  Permian,  Cenomanian,  and  Silurian  lies  upon  the  Flysch  2. 

The  West  and  South.  A  general  map  of  the  neighbourhood  of  Labourd, 
followed  by  a  more  detailed  map  of  the  northern  district,  has  been  published 
by  Stuart-Menteath.  A  map  of  the  south-west  region  has  been  furnished 
by  de  Yarza,  of  the  south-east  by  Mallada.  Termier  has  described  the 
granite  of  Aja  ^. 

In  the  extreme  north-east  of  the  mass,  near  Hasparren,  lies  granitic 
gneiss  forming  Mont  d'Ursouia  (678  meters)  and  scarcely  rising  above  the 
plain  in  front  of  it.  It  is  adjoined  by  an  area  of  Palaeozoic  rocks  forming 
an  irregular  ellipse,  about  60  kilometers  long  towards  the  south-west ;  close 
to  the  border  of  this  the  granite  of  the  Pena  de  Aja  (816  meters)  makes  its 
appearance.   In  isolated  localities  upper  Cretaceous  occurs  in  transgression. 

The  map  by  Stuart-Menteath  leaves  no  room  to  doubt  that  the  anticline 
of  Trias  and  Jurassic  which  approaches  from  Sainte  Engrace  and  forms  the 

*  E.  Fournier,  ^Itude  geologique  sur  la  partie  occidentale  de  la  Chaine  des  Pyrenees 
entre  la  Vallee  d'Aspe  et  celle  de  la  Nive,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1906,  4®  ser.,  V, 
pp.  699-723. 

2  Map  and  section  are  given  by  Bresson,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  XVI,  pp.  390-391. 

^  P.  W.  Stuart-Menteath,  Sur  la  geologie  des  Pyrenees  de  la  Navarre,  du  Guipuzcoa  et  du 
Labourd,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1881,  3®  ser.,  IX,  pp.  304-333,  map ;  Note  sur  une  carte 
geologique  de  la  haute  et  de  la  basse  Navarre,  op.  cit.,  1891,  3®  ser.,  XIX,  pp.  917-921, 
map  ;  R.  Adan  de  Yarza,  Descripcidn  fi'sica  y  geologica  de  la  Provincia  de  Guipuzcoa, 
Mem.  Com.  Mapa  geol.  Espana,  1884, 175  pp.,  map,  and  Provincia  Guipuzcoa,  Geol.  agric, 
Bosquejo  petrogr.,  4to,  S,  Sebastian,  1900,  26  pp.,  map  ;  Mallada,  Reconocimiento  geo- 
logico  de  la  Provincia  de  Navarra,  Bol.  Com.  Mapa  geol.  Espana,  1882,  IX,  pp.  1-64,  map  ; 
Termier,  Le  Granite  de  la  Haja  ou  des  Trois  Couronnes,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1907,  4® 
86r.,VII,  pp.  9-17. 


CH.VI]  GUIPUZCOA  245 

north  side  of  the  Basses  Pyrenees  rests  against  the  east  side  of  the  mass  of 
Labourd  and  strikes  to  the  north-west  towards  Hasparren.  From  there  on, 
the  same  zone  makes  a  bend  towards  the  west,  and  the  observations  of 
de  Yarza  and  Mallada  show  that  almost  all  the  rest  of  the  mass  as  far  as 
Roncevalle  is  girdled  round  by  similar  deposits.  Upon  these  rests  a  broad 
mantle  of  Cretaceous  limestone  and  Flysch  which  extends  along  the  coast 
through  Fuenterrabia,  is  continued  through  Guipuzcoa  and  unites  north  of 
Pampelona  with  the  Flysch  of  the  principal  chain  of  the  Pyrenees. 

From  this  it  appears  that  the  Pyrenees  are  separated  from  the  sea^  along 
the  Bidassoa  and  near  San  Sebastian,  by  a  continuous  zone  of  Flysch.  In 
this  region,  according  to  de  Yarza,  they  are  folded  towards  the  north,  and 
in  places  even  overfolded.  The  Flysch  of  Guipuzcoa  is  also  folded  towards 
the  north.  Rising  out  of  it  is  a  mass  of  ophite,  16  kilometers  in  length, 
6-8  kilometers  in  breadth. 

The  *  Klippen '  of  Biarritz  run  parallel  to  the  strike  of  the  Flysch,  along 
the  lower  course  of  the  Bidassoa,  but  in  Biscaya  where  the  land  is  equally 
covered  with  Flysch  a  strike  to  the  north-west  is  evident.  It  finds 
expression  in  a  long  ridge  of  ophite,  possibly  the  continuation  of  similar 
masses  previously  mentioned ;  then  in  a  long  anticline  of  lower  Cretaceous, 
striking  through  Bilbao ;  and  finally  in  the  long  syncline  of  Eocene,  which 
for  a  part  of  its  course  follows  the  upper  Ebro  and  runs  from  Alava  to 
Burgos.  The  folding  in  Biscaya  is  intense  and  directed  towards  the  sea ; 
i.  e.  towards  the  north-east  ^. 

Near  Entrambasaguas,  close  to  Santander,  not  far  west  of  the  region 
where  the  anticline  of  Bilbao  approaches  the  sea,  and  thence  onwards  to 
beyond  the  Picos  d'Europa  (Pena  de  Cerredo,  2,642  meters),  Termier 
followed  a  range  consisting  of  overthrust  sheets  (Trias  to  Eocene)  and 
further  south  of  Palaeozoic  beds;  from  its  general  attitude  we  must 
assume  that  this  complex  emerges  south  of  the  Flysch  range  ^.  Its 
termination,  with  folding  towards  the  north,  lies  at  Oviedo  (II,  p.  126). 

Hence  we  may  conclude  that  this  range  cannot  be  assigned  to  the 
Pyrenees  ^. — 

Only  a  few  words  are  necessary  with  regard  to  the  southern  flanks. 

^  A.  de  Yarza,  Descripcion  fisica  y  geologica  de  la  Provincia  de  Alava,  Mem.  Com.  Mapa 
geol.  Espaiia,  1885,  175  pp.,  map ;  and  Provincia  de  Vizcaya,  op.  cit.,  1892,  192  pp.,  map. 

^  P.  Termier,  Sur  la  structure  geologique  de  la  Cordillere  cantabrique  dans  la  province 
de  Santander,  0.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  27  nov.  1905. 

3  This  view  has  also  been  expressed  by  Penck  (Die  Picos  d'Europa  und  das  Kanta- 
brische  Gebirge,  Hettner,  Geogr.  Zeitschr.,  1897,  III,  pp.  278-281);  he  believes  that  the 
tectonic  continuation  lies  in  the  Sierras  de  la  Demanda,  de  Urbion,  and  de  Moncaya.  In 
the  first  of  these  the  strike  is  east  and  west  (Larrazet,  Recherches  geologiques  sur  la 
region  orientale  de  la  province  de  Burgos,  &c.,  Paris,  1895,  transl.  in  Bol.  Com.  Mapa 
Espana,  1895,  XXII,  pp.  121-143),  while  to  the  south  towards  Soria  and  Moncaya 
the  south-easterly  direction  of  the  Ebro  makes  its  appearance  (R.  Chudeau,  Contri- 
bution a  I'etude  geologique  de  la  Vieille-Castille :  Thesis,  8vo.  Paris,  1896,  92  pp.,  map). 


246 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES  [part  v 


Scarcely  anything  need  be  added  to  the  earlier  descriptions  by  de  Margerie 
and  Schrader,  and  of  Mallada  ^. 

The  south  foot  of  the  high  mountains  is  bordered  by  a  Mesozoic  zone, 
chiefly  Cretaceous  and  of  no  great  breadth,  which  comes  from  the  north- 
west ;  to  this  the  Cretaceous  Flysch  of  Sainte  Engrace  belongs.  It  is  followed 
by  a  broad  zone  of  moderately  folded  Eocene,  striking  from  Pampelona 
through  Jaca  and  onwards  (Zone  de  I'Aragon).  This  again  is  bounded  on 
the  south  by  a  fresh  outcrop  of  Trias  with  ophite,  and  Cretaceous,  which 
begins  as  a  long  and  narrow  strip  between  R.  Aragon  and  R.  Gallego,  then 
proceeding  north-east  of  Huesca  it  recedes  irregularly  towards  the  north, 
and  next  increasing  in  breadth  and  extent,  once  more  reaches  the  Pyrenees 
on  the  upper  Segra  (Zone  des  Sierras).  In  this  last  part  of  its  course  it  is 
formed  of  repeated  arc-like  fragments  (Sierra  del  Monsech,  1,693  meters). 
In  this  way  the  '  Zone  de  I'Aragon '  is  closed  in  towards  the  south-east. 
This  outcrop  occurs  in  the  north-west  in  the  form  of  an  anticline  or 
a  fracture,  and  some  movement  towards  the  south  is  still  perceptible. 

The  valley  of  the  Ebro  is  occupied  by  Miocene  deposits. 

Summary.  In  front  of  the  Pyrenees  lie  two  alien  masses,  that  of 
Mouthoumet,  which  is  evidently  a  part  of  the  Montague  Noire,  and  that 
of  Labourd.  It  is  surrounded  by  folds  which  are  connected  with  those  of 
the  Pyrenees.  Were  it  not  for  this  fact  we  might  easily  assert  that  the 
Pyrenees  terminate  east  of  the  Labourd  and  that  this  mass  lies  outside  the 
Pyrenees. 

In  contrast  to  the  other  younger  European  chains  the  Pyrenees  clearly 
exhibit  one  movement  directed  towards  the  north  and  another  towards  the 
south.  Where  these  movements  meet,  a  steep  or  more  or  less  fan-shaped 
arrangement  arises,  and  probably  sharp  dislocation  also,  which,  as  we  saw 
in  the  Gave  de  Pau,  brings  lower  Devonian  against  Albian. 

The  effects  of  the  movement  towards  the  north  may  be  traced  from  the 
Var  through  the  whole  of  Provence ;  they  are  seen  around  the  Mouthoumet 
and  within  its  west  border  exhibiting  flatfolding  with  Mesozoic  sediments. 
They  are  manifest  in  the  mass  of  the  Roc  de  France  through  its  course 
from  the  south-east  of  the  Tech  to  the  south  foot  of  the  Pyrenees.  The 
great  overthrusts  of  the  north  side  of  the  Pyrenees  (Trois  Seigneurs, 
S.  Barth^lemy,  &c.),  the  Petites  Pyrenees,  all  the  folds  striking  towards  the 
north-west  as  far  as  Dax,  and  still  further  out  beneath  the  plain  the  outer 
border  of  the  Basses  Pyrenees,  which  also  surrounds  the  gneiss  of  Labourd, 
the  Flysch  zone  of  the  Bidassoa,  the  mountains  of  Biscaya  and  the  north  of 
Spain  as  far  as  the  Picos  d'Europa — all  these  also  belong  to  the  movement 

^  E.  de  Margerie  et  Schrader,  Aper9U  de  la  structure  geologique  des  Pyrenees,  Ann. 
Club  alp.  fran^.  (1891),  1892,  XVIII,  65  pp.,  map,  pp.  605  et  seq.  One  of  the  principal 
sources  of  information  is  still  L.  Mallada,  Descripcion  fi'sica  y  geoldgica  de  la  Provincia  de 
Huesca,  Mem.  Com.  Mapa  geol.  Espaiia,  1878,  439  pp.,  map. 


CH.vi]      MOVEMENT  TOWAEDS  THE  SOUTH  247 


towards  the  north.  It  was  felt  from  Cannes  to  Oviedo.  It  was  a  general 
movement,  perhaps  associated  with  a  syntaxis  in  west  Guipuzcoa.  Not 
only  Mouthoumet  but  Labourd  also  was  set  floating  towards  the  north,  and 
along  with  them,  apparently,  the  whole  of  that  part  at  present  overthrust 
towards  the  south. 

The  movement  towards  the  south  is  very  powerful  but  limited  in 
extent.  According  to  existing  observations  it  begins  on  the  Tech,  at  the 
south-east  side  of  the  Canigou ;  soon  penetrates  deeply  into  the  Pyrenees, 
then  includes  the  whole  breadth  of  the  Hautes  Pyr^n^es,  flattens  out  on 
the  other  side  of  Urdos,  opens  up  the  pinched-in  syncline  of  Flysch  in  the 
direction  of  the  Basses  Pyr^n^es,  and  dominates  it  up  to  its  termination, 
with  the  exception  of  the  northern  border.  Towards  the  south,  in  the 
forelying  Cretaceous  and  Tertiary  sierras,  folding  towards  the  south  is  also 
present ;  it  flattens  out^  however,  before  reaching  the  Ebro. 

This  local  limitation  points  to  subsidence.  This  is  also  suggested  by  the 
fact  that,  at  the  bottom  of  the  window  near  Gavarnie,  Cretaceous  lies  in 
autochthonous  superposition  on  the  lower  Silurian,  and  thus  afforded 
a  denuded  surface  upon  which  a  series  ranging  from  the  Campanian  to  the 
Eocene  was  deposited. 

It  is  easy  to  imagine  that  a  mass  undergoing  movement  towards  the 
north  and  consequently  at  the  same  time  in  a  state  of  stress  would,  if 
interrupted  by  a  subsidence,  resolve  this  stress  in  the  opposite  direction, 
that  is  towards  the  south.  This  supposition  would  be  in  accord  with  the 
steep,  fan-like  disposition  of  the  beds,  otherwise  hard  to  reconcile  with 
the  adjacent  overthrusts  towards  the  north. 

At  the  same  time  a  truly  puzzling  fact  must  be  taken  into  account. 

The  Pyrenees  lie  more  deeply  within  the  pre-Permian  structure  of  the 
Altaides  than  any  other  of  the  younger  chains  of  Europe.  Their  so-called 
primary  series  consists  simply  of  fragments  of  the  Altaides.  The  strike 
(W.  30°  N.)  of  the  part  moved  towards  the  south  coincides  with  the  strike 
of  Karpinsky's  lines  (W.N.W.  to  N.W.).  As  in  the  case  of  these  lines  the 
intensity  decreases  towards  the  west-north- west,  the  south  limb  is  let  down, 
and  the  movement,  in  contrast  to  the  general  northerly  movement,  is 
directed  towards  the  south.  These  characters  we  term  Asiatic,  whether 
their  occurrence  in  the  Pyrenees  is  accidental  or  has  a  deeper  significance 
can  only  be  determined  when  the  nature  of  these  lines  is  known  in  greater 
detail.  The  fact  that  the  movement  towards  the  south  terminates  in  front 
of  the  mass  of  the  Roc  de  France  does  not  support  the  theory  of  relations 
with  Asia. — 

The  younger  basic  intrusions  of  the  Pyrenees  are  instructive  with 
regard  to  other  mountains.  That  they  have  altered  the  adjacent  rocks  in 
the  zone  of  contact  has  been  demonstrated  beyond  doubt  by  Lacroix  ^. 

1  A.  Lacroix,  Les  Phenomenes  de  contact  de  la  Lherzolite  et  de  quelques  Ophites  des 


248 


POSTHUMOUS  ALTAIDES  [pakt  v 


They  occur  here  sometimes  as  rounded  masses,  at  others  as  parts  of 
dykes,  and  again  as  intercalations  which  may  reach  a  length  of  from  one 
to  four  kilometers.  According  to  the  detailed  accounts  of  Carez,  two 
groups  of  intrusions  may  be  distinguished.  One  belongs  to  the  lower  Lias 
and  contains  ophites  only.  The  second  ranges  into  the  Gault  and  presents, 
in  addition  to  ophite,  Iherzolite,  serpentine,  diorite,  peridotite,  and  anor- 
thosite  (the  latter  as  a  dyke  in  peridotite 

Here  then  we  find  repeated  the  series  of  green-rocks  which  at  various 
horizons  occurs  at  Ivrea  and  in  the  Piedmontese  Alps,  in  the  salt-bearing 
Trias  of  the  East  Limestone  Alps,  in  the  Lepontine  sheets,  in  the 
Apennines,  and  in  north-east  Corsica,  and  in  Elba,  as  well  as  throughout 
the  whole  course  of  the  Mediterranean  Atlas  and  the  Betic  Cordillera,  from 
Tunis  to  Gibraltar,  and  thence  to  the  Balearic  isles.  Lacroix  has  shown 
that  in  the  Pyrenees  biotite-granite  by  absorption  of  limestone  passes  into 
peridotite  with  hornblende.  In  this  work  we  start  from  the  theory  that 
by  far  the  greater  part  of  these  green-rocks,  along  with  the  peridotites, 
were  originally  deep-seated  rocks.  This  view  is  supported  by  the  presence 
of  nickel  ores. 

Steinmann  has  drawn  attention  to  the  frequent  association  of  these 
intrusions  with  the  Radiolarian  shales  of  the  deep  sea,  and  has  sought 
to  discover  some  causal  connexion  between  the  green-rocks  and  the  deep 
sea^.  The  association  is  no  doubt  not  uncommon,  and  may  be  observed  at 
localities  remote  from  one  another;  and  we  shall  have  occasion  later  to 
mention  also  the  frequent  occurrence  of  highly  basic  rocks  in  the  middle  of 
the  Oceans.  In  the  Pyrenees,  the  south  of  Spain,  and  the  north-west 
of  Africa,  however,  they  occur  in  sediments  of  a  kind  which  is  not  known 
in  the  deep  sea,  and  in  these  cases  the  facts  are  not  favourable  to  such 
a  generalization. 

In  Europe  these  green  intrusions,  or  fragmentary  traces  of  them,  are  to 
be  seen  at  hundreds  of  localities  within  the  regions  of  great  dislocation 
which  extend  from  the  Wolfgang-See  to  the  margin  of  the  Sahara.  We  do 
not  find  them  in  the  foreland  either  in  the  north  or  the  south,  and  in 
Europe  we  regard  them  therefore  as  accompaniments  of  the  tectonic 
movements. 

Pyrenees,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1895, 3^  ser.,VI,pp.  307-446;  Etude  minerale  de  la  Lher- 
zolite  des  Pyrenees  et  de  ses  phenomenes  de  contact,  Nouv.  Arch.  Mus.  hist.  nat.  Paris, 
1894,  3«  ser.,  VI,  pp.  209-308,  and  Livret  Guide,  Congres  internat.  Paris,  1900,  no.  Ill, 
34  pp.,  in  particular  p.  16.  In  a  particular  case,  Lacroix  shows  that  ejections  of  labra- 
dorite  and  andesite  lavas  made  their  appearance  within  the  Rhaetic  period  :  Les  Tufs 
volcaniques  de  Segalas  (Ariege),  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  20  janv.  1896. 

^  Carez,  Geologic  des  Pyrenees  franfaises.  III,  pp.  1694  et  seq.,  in  particular  p.  1702. 

-  G.  Steinmann,  Die  geologische  Bedeutung  der  Tiefseebildungen  und  der  ophio- 
litischen  Eruptiva,  Ber.  naturf.  Ges.  Freiburg  i.  B.,  1905,  XVI,  pp.  44-46. 


249 


CHAPTER  VII 
LAUEENTIA  AND  THE  NOETHEEN  ISLANDS 

1.  The  United  States  chain.  2.  Laurentia.  Greenland.  3.  Islands  of  the  north 
Atlantic.  Iceland. 

1.  The  United  States  Chain. 

Fak  to  the  north,  in  Kennedy  channel  and  Grant  Land,  Feilden  and 
de  Ranee  encountered  a  folded  mountain  range  (II,  p.  42).  Much  new  light 
has  been  thrown  upon  it  by  the  discoveries  of  Sverdrup  and  Schei  in 
Eureka  sound  and  Ellesmere  Land  \  Low  has  combined  these  observations 
with  older  ones,  and  has  attempted  a  fresh  sketch  of  the  geological  map  of 
Arctic  North  America^.  The  range  has  been  named  the  United  States 
chain.  We  will  now  describe  its  principal  characters,  proceeding  from  the 
extreme  north  southwards. 

Aldrich  advanced  as  far  as  the  north  coast  of  Grant  Land ;  mica-schists 
and  metamorphic  rocks  are  marked  there  on  the  map;  the  Challenger 
range  borders  this  coast. 

The  north-east  of  Grant  Land  is  a  rias  coast.  Between  Markham  fjord 
and  Feilden  peninsula  (cape  Joseph  Henry,  lat.  82°  42'  N.)  mountains  of 
considerable  size  strike  out  to  sea  in  an  east-north-east  direction.  They 
consist  of  upper  Carboniferous  (and  Devonian  ?).  Fairly  high  mountains, 
such  as  mount  Grant  (4,900  feet  =  1,500  meters),  mount  Cheops  and  others, 
join  them  towards  the  interior,  and  it  is  doubtless  here  that  the  greatest 
heights  of  this  northern  chain  occur.  It  is  not  impossible  that  the  rocks 
of  the  north  and  of  Heiberg  island  (long.  93°  W.,  lat.  81°  22'  N.),  which  are 
probably  Carboniferous  and  are  traversed  by  intrusive  rocks,  correspond  to 
the  south-westerly  continuation  of  this  chain  ^. 

In  the  north-east  of  Grant  Land,  Feilden's  Rawson  beds  make  their 
appearance,  a  thick  series  of  sediments  which  in  all  likelihood  must  be 

1  A.  G.  Nathorst,  Sverdrup's  Polar  Expedition,  1898-1902 ;  Ymer,  1902,  pp.  529-534, 
map ;  0.  Sverdrup,  The  second  Norwegian  Polar  Expedition  of  the  Fram,  and  P.  Schei, 
Summary  of  Geological  Results,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1903,  pp.  38-69,  and  map ;  further, 
P.  Schei,  Preliminary  Report  of  the  Geological  Observations  made  during  the  second 
Norwegian  Polar  Expedition  of  the  Fram^  op.  cit.  tom.  cit. 

^  A.  P.  Low.  Report  on  the  Dominion's  Government  Expedition  to  Hudson  Bay  and  the 
Arctic  Islands  on  board  the  D.  G.  S.  Neptune,  1903-1904,  8vo,  Ottawa,  1906,  355  pp., 
map.  Here  we  may  also  refer  to  the  beautiful  map  by  Peary  in  Bull.  Am.  Geogr.  Soc, 
1903,  XXXV  (to  p.  496). 

3  E.  Etheridge,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1878,  XXIV,  pp.  612-635.  Also  the  observa- 
tions by  Tschernyschew  in  Mem.  Com.  geol.  Russie,  1902,  XVI,  p.  690  et  seq. 


250       LAUEENTIA  AND  NOETHEEN  ISLANDS  [party 


correlated  with  the  Trias  of  the  south-west,  as  Schei  also  conjectures.  They 
strike  across  from  cape  Bryant  in  north  Greenland,  and  extend  along  the 
east  side  of  Kobeson  channel  to  Polaris  bay.  West  of  the  channel  they 
crop  out  again  in  steeply  upturned  folds,  and  form  cape  Kawson,  Black  cape, 
&c.,  as  well  as  the  whole  of  the  west  coast  as  far  as  Scoresby  bay,  where 
they  meet  the  foreland,  that  is,  the  Palaeozoic  belt  of  the  Canadian  shield. 
The  boundary  evidently  runs  obliquely  through  the  channel  from  Polaris 
bay  to  Scoresby  bay. 

Lady  Franklin  sound  with  Archer  fjord,  and  next  Hazen  lake  and 
Greeley  fjord,  which  opens  towards  the  west,  probably  lie  in  the  strike 
of  the  mountains. 

Schei  describes  folded  formations  from  the  north  side  of  Greeley  fjord, 
where  species  of  Daonella  and  Halobia  have  been  met  with.  The  Trias 
extends  on  both  sides  of  Eureka  sound ;  Kittl  describes  Trachyceras  from 
Schei's  collections  made  in  Bay  fjord,  and  Protrachyceras  and  Halobia 
from  Bear  peninsula  ^.  On  the  south  side  of  this  peninsula  upper  Carboni- 
ferous crops  out.  As  we  proceed  further  towards  the  west  the  accounts 
become  less  definite.  Little  is  known  of  Sverdrup  archipelago.  The 
country  lies  lower,  and  Schei  believes  that  the  folding  is  not  continued  into 
Heiberg  island.   We  know  nothing  of  the  interior,  however. 

The  Trias  of  Eureka  sound  is  an  alternation  of  limestone  and  shales, 
with  numerous  sills,  as  is  so  commonly  the  case  in  regions  towards  the 
north,  as  for  instance  in  Verkhoiansk. 

As  affording  some  support  to  the  notion  that  Sverdrup  archipelago 
belongs  for  the  greater  part  to  the  Trias,  we  may  adduce  the  fact  that 
McClintock  observed  isolated  patches  of  Jurassic  deposits  on  the  opposite 
coast  of  Parry  archipelago  (as  shown  for  example  by  Harpoceras  found  at 
Wilkie  point,  Prince  Patrick  Land,  lat.  76°  20'  N.).  Trias,  however,  has 
never  been  observed  there,  and  the  substructure  appears  to  be  the  flatly 
bedded  Carboniferous  of  the  Shield  (II,  40,  figs.  4  and  42)  2. 

While  all  these  questions  remain  open,  there  is  at  the  same  time  no 
doubt  that  here  in  the  north  the  Shield  encounters  a  Mesozoic  series  other- 
wise foreign  to  it,  and  beneath  this  it  plunges  out  of  sight.  In  like 
manner  the  existence  has  been  established  of  a  fragment  of  folded  moun- 
tains which  extends  with  a  south-west  to  west-south-west  strike  at  least 
as  far  as  Greeley  fjord,  and  over  Kennedy  channel  down  to  Scoresby  bay, 
and  this,  judging  from  the  arrangement  of  its  rocks  (mica-schist  in  the 
Challenger  mountains)  is  folded  towards  the  south,  so  that  the  Shield  plays 
the  part  of  foreland. 

^  E.  Kittl,  Die  TriasfossiHen  von  Heureka  Sund,  Report  of  the  second  Norwegian 
Expedition  of  the  Fram,  1898-1902,  no.  7,  8vo,  Kristiania,  1907,  48  pp. 

^  Salter,  in  Belcher's  travels.  Tschernyschew  conjectures  upper  Carboniferous. 
According  to  the  lists  upper  and  lower  Carboniferous  may  well  be  present. 


CH.  VIlJ 


LAUEENTIA 


251 


This  folded  range  presents  the  characters  of  the  Asiatic  arcs,  and  may 
be  regarded  as  a  terminal  part  of  the  Asiatic  structure  extending  across  the 
North  Pole. 

Miocene  beds  containing  leaves  are  met  with  here  and  there ;  they  lie 
horizontal. 

2.  Laurentia. 

That  vast  region  of  North  America  which  is  formed  of  ancient  rocks 
overlain  by  horizontal  Cambrian  sediments  has  received  the  name  of 
Laurentia.  It  comprises  the  whole  of  the  Canadian  shield ;  but  if  we  are 
to  regard  it  as  a  tectonic  unit,  we  must  include  the  whole  of  the  flat- 
bedded  superstructure  up  to  some  natural  boundary^.  Such  a  boundary 
is  presented  by  the  Rocky  mountains,  the  United  States  chain,  and,  for 
nearly  their  whole  length,  the  Appalachians  also.  The  Colorado  plateau, 
a  fragment  of  table  land,  bounded  on  the  east  by  the  southern  branches  of  the 
Rocky  mountains,  ought  also,  perhaps,  to  be  regarded  as  a  part  of  Laurentia. 

In  the  south,  Laurentian  rocks  crop  out  in  the  Ozark  mountains.  Then 
they  reappear  outside  the  Appalachians  in  Burnet  county  (Texas) ,  and  in 
these,  as  in  the  north,  the  gneiss  is  overlain  by  horizontal  Potsdam  sand- 
stone. Still  further  towards  the  south-west,  borings  have  revealed  granite 
beneath  the  Cretaceous  of  the  Plateau  (IV,  p.  79).  Thus  Laurentia,  grow- 
ing gradually  narrower  as  it  proceeds  southwards,  extends  as  far  as  lat.  30°  N. 
and  even  still  further  south. 

In  the  north,  the  lower  Silurian  Trenton  limestone  extends  in  isolated 
patches  across  the  broadest  part  of  the  Shield  in  a  flat  transgression. 

In  Minnesota  the  lower  horizons  of  the  Silurian  are  seen  to  disappear. 
In  Manitoba,  according  to  Bowling's  observations  made  on  the  south  border 
of  lake  Winnipeg,  the  abraded  pre- Cambrian  folds  are  directly  overlain  by 
a  light-coloured  sandstone,  with  obvious  false  bedding,  and  upon  this  rests 
the  thick  Trenton  limestone,  followed  by  the  Utica  beds.  Only  these  two 
members  of  the  lower  Silurian  are  represented  here  ^.  Much  further  north, 
on  the  river  Talzoa,  south  of  lake  Doobaunt  (lat.  62-63°  N.),  about  500  kilo- 
meters west  of  the  north-west  shore  of  Hudson  bay,  Burr  Tyrrell  found  an 
isolated  patch  of  Trenton  limestone  in  the  midst  of  the  ancient  rocks  of  the 
Shield  ^.    Another  great  patch  of  the  same  kind  is  mentioned  by  Bell  on 

^  Lawson,  Note  on  the  Pre-Palaeozoic  Surface  of  the  Archaean  Terrane  of  Canada,  Bull. 
Geol.  Soc.  Am.,  1890,  I,  pp.  163-173  ;  A.  G.  Wilson  (The  Laurentian  Peneplain,  Journ. 
Geol.  Chicago,  1903,  XI,  pp.  615-669)  gives  a  list  of  the  works  dealing  with  this  subject. 
For  details  concerning  the  dipping  beneath  the  Potsdam  Sandstone  :  S.  Weidman,  The 
Pre-Potsdam  Peneplain  of  the  Pre-Cambrian  of  North  Central  Wisconsin,  op.  cit.  tom. 
cit.,  pp.  289-313. 

^  D.  B.  Dowling,  Report  on  the  Geology  of  the  West  Shore  and  Islands  of  Lake 
Winnipeg,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol  Surv.  Canada,  new  ser.,  XI  (1898),  1901,  F,pp.  34,  63  et  seq., 
map. 

'  Burr  Tyrrell,  Expedition  through  the  Barren  Lands  of  North  Canada,  Geogr.  Journ., 
1894,  IV,  p.  443,  map. 


252      LAUEENTIA  AND  NORTHEEN  ISLANDS  [paetv 


the  lower  course  of  the  Nelson  river  as  it  approaches  the  south-west  side  of 
Hudson  bay  ^.  In  this  southern  region  of  the  Shield,  where  the  Potsdam 
sandstone  marks  the  beginning  of  deposition,  the  Trenton  limestone  starting 
from  the  north  of  the  St.  Lawrence  above  Quebec,  encroaches  upon  all  the 
older  horizons  for  a  long  distance  towards  the  north,  till  it  rests  directly 
upon  the  pre-Cambrian  rocks  ^.  These  sediments  lie  horizontal,  in  so  far  as 
they  are  not  disturbed  by  faults. 
In  the  east  the  case  is  similar. 

The  island  of  Akpatok,  situated  in  the  bay  of  Ungawa,  which  is  sur- 
rounded by  Archaean  rocks,  consists  of  Trenton  limestone ;  Whiteaves  has 
investigated  the  fossils  and  pointed  out  their  resemblance  to  those  of 
Manitoba  ^.  An  important  contribution  to  our  knowledge  of  the  Silurian 
has  been  furnished  by  Schuchert's  studies  At  the  head  of  Frobisher  bay 
(in  lat.  63°  44'  N.,  long.  68°  56'  W.)  lies  'Silliman's  fossil  mount*  dis- 
tinguished by  the  abundant  presence  of  Trenton  fossils.  It  is  an  insignifi- 
cant horizontal  patch  resting  on  dark  mica-schist.  Then  these  same  beds 
broaden  out  over  the  vast  lake-basins  of  south  Baffin  Land,  where  Boas 
collected  fossils  from  them,  and  they  surround  a  large  part  of  Fox  channel. 
Now  we  approach  the  border  of  the  Shield.  In  north  Somerset  finely 
stratified  sandstone  is  seen  beneath  the  Trenton  limestone ;  in  other  parts 
of  this  region  the  Trenton  stage  rests  directly  on  the  Archaean  rocks. 

In  the  north  the  border  is  more  complex  than  was  once  supposed.  It 
attains  a  considerable  breadth  on  the  west  in  its  course  from  Prince  Albert 
Land  through  Melville  island.  The  Parry  islands,  as  is  well  known,  con- 
sist chiefiy  of  sandstone  with  Coal  measures  (II,  p.  41),  and  this  is  followed 
towards  the  north  by  Carboniferous  limestone  containing  abundant  fossils. 
On  the  north  the  Carboniferous  limestone  is  overlain  by  patches  of  Jurassic. 
Towards  the  east,  in  north  Devon,  the  belt  becomes  narrower.  The  pre- 
Cambrian  substructure  advances  towards  the  north  across  Jones  sound,  and 
also  forms  the  whole  of  the  south-east  part  of  Ellesmere  Land  as  far  as  lat. 
79°  N.  The  southern  part  to  about  long.  84°  W.  also  belongs  to  it.  As  the  belt 
becomes  narrower,  the  formations  which  occur  on  its  outer  or  northern  side 
disappear.  On  Jones  sound  Schei  distinguishes  lower  Silurian,  upper 
Silurian,  marine  Devonian,  and  finally  Devonian  sandstone,  from  which 
Nathorst  described  magnificent  fronds  of  Archaeopteris  ^.  The  Erian 
armoured  fish  (Ostracoderms)  are  also  present.  The  Carboniferous  of  the 

^  R.  Bell,  Rep.  Geol.  Surv.  Canada,  new  ser.,  XI,  1901  (1898),  M,  p.  16. 

2  Explanation  of  the  sheet  Three  Rivers  (Eastern  Townships  Map)  by  R.  W.  Ells,  Supple- 
ment to  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Surv.  Canada,  new  ser.,  XI  (1898),  1901. 

3  R.  Bell,  Sumra.  Rep.  Geol.  Surv.  Canada,  1897-1898,  p.  82. 

*  C.  Schuchert,  On  the  lower  Silurian  (Trenton)  Fauna  of  Baffin  Land,  Proc.  Nat.  Mus. 
U.S.A.,  1900,  XXII,  pp.  143-177. 

^  A.  G.  Nathorst,  Die  oberdevonische  Flora  des  EUesmere-Landes,  Report  of  the  second 
Norwegian  Arctic  Expedition,  no.  1,  22  pp.,  map. 


CH.  VIl] 


GEEENLAND 


253 


Parry  islands  has  disappeared,  unless  we  may  regard  the  upper  Carboni- 
ferous limestone  on  Bear  island  as  its  last  representative.  Further  north 
the  pre-Cambrian  of  the  Shield  advances  so  far  that  at  the  bottom  of  Bay 
fjord  (lat.  79°  N.)  it  actually  reaches  the  waters  of  Eureka  sound  on  the 
west  side  of  EUesmere  Land. 

On  the  east  side,  in  the  Kane  basin,  Schei  came  upon  Cambrian  beds 
with  Anomocare  and  several  subdivisions  of  the  lower  Silurian ;  they  occur 
in  Bache  peninsula,  Norman  Lockyer  island,  and  as  far  as  cape  Prescott 
(lat.  79°  10'  to  79°  30'  N.).  Further  north,  collections  were  made  by 
Feilden;  they  have  been  described  by  Etheridge.  We  will  only  mention 
that  abundant  upper  Silurian  fossils  were  collected  as  far  north  as  Offley 
island  (lat.  81°  16'  N).  In  lat.  81°  6'  N.,  Bessels  bay,  Bronteus  flahellifer 
was  found ;  in  lat.  81°  40'  N.  a  graptolite  was  obtained  from  the  Drift,  and 
in  lat.  82°  30'  N.  a  Pentamerus  was  found. 

These  latter  finds  were  all  made  in  Greenland.  The  broad  Palaeozoic 
belt  which  completely  surrounds  the  Shield  in  the  south  and  west,  and 
with  the  same  flat  bedding  borders  it  on  the  north  from  Banks  Land 
onwards,  passing  in  Ellesmere  Land  into  the  north-east  direction,  advances 
across  Kennedy  channel  and  Hall  Land  without  any  doubt  further  and 
further  into  Greenland  (II,  pp.  44,  72).  Thence  onwards  it  is  accom- 
panied for  some  distance  in  the  north  by  marginal  fragments  of  the 
United  States  chain;  on  the  other  side  of  cape  Bryant  such  fragments 
are  not  known,  and  the  coasts  of  Nares  Land  and  Hazen  Land,  with  their 
numerous  fjords,  up  to  the  extreme  north  of  the  adjacent  islands,  that  is  as 
far  as  Peary's  cape  Morris  Jesup  (lat.  83°  50'  N.),  probably  belong  to  the 
border  or  to  the  pre-Cambrian  rocks  of  the  Shield  itself. 

The  east  side  of  Kennedy  channel  is  alone  sufficient  to  show  that 
Greenland  is  a  part  of  Laurentia. — 

We  must  not  fail  to  observe  the  extraordinary  breadth  maintained  by 
the  pre-Cambrian  range  within  this  common  boundary  as  it  makes  its 
advance  to  the  sea. 

On  the  north  side  of  the  Belle-Isle  strait  a  strip  of  Cambrian,  crossing 
over  from  Newfoundland,  rests  horizontally  upon  the  gneiss.  It  belongs  to 
an  older  stage  than  the  Potsdam  sandstone,  with  which  the  border  of  the 
Shield  begins  elsewhere  in  the  south  ^.  It  extends  into  the  neighbourhood 
of  cape  Charles,  in  about  lat.  52°  N. ;  cape  Camperdown,  part  of  Bache 
peninsula,  where  Schei  found  beds  containing  Cambrian  Tribolites  above 
the  granite,  marks  the  inner  margin  of  the  northern  belt,  and  lies  in 
lat.  79°  6'  N.  The  distance  between  cape  Charles  and  cape  Camperdoiun 
thus  amounts  to  more  than  27  degrees  of  latitude. 

The  sixtieth  parallel  runs  nearly  through  cape  Chudley  in  north 


'  Walcott,  Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Suit.,  1891,  no.  81,  pp.  50  and  253. 


254       LAUEENTIA  AND  NOETHERN  ISLANDS  [partv 


Labrador  and  cape  Farewell  in  south  Greenland.  In  Labrador  the  ancient 
formations  face  the  Atlantic  Ocean  for  eight  degrees  of  latitude.  Thence 
onwards  the  coasts  of  Greenland  lie  opposite  to  them;  but  although 
Hudson  bay  is  scarcely  more  than  200  meters  deep,  no  bottom  was 
reached  in  the  middle  of  Baffin  bay  at  a  depth  of  5,250  meters.  For  this 
reason  Boas  explains  Baffin  bay  as  a  true  inbreak.  Daly  has  published  an 
excellent  summary  on  the  coast  of  Labrador  ^,  and  from  this  we  may  extract 
the  following  observations  to  complete  the  account  we  have  already  given 
of  Hudson  bay  (II,  pp.  30,  31). 

On  the  south  gneiss  makes  its  appearance.  In  lat.  55°  N.,  on  the 
promontory  of  Pomiadhik,  the  gneiss  is  covered  by  an  extremely  thick 
mass  of  pre-Cambrian  conglomerate,  with  a  quartzose  cement;  this  is 
involved  in  the  pre-Cambrian  folding  of  the  gneiss,  and  somewhat  further 
north,  in  Aillik  bay,  we  meet  with  quartzites  showing  similar  relations. 
Still  further  north  we  reach  the  great  mass  of  gabbro  which  surrounds  the 
bay  of  Nain  and  furnishes  the  iridescent  crystals  of  labradorite  to  our 
collections.  From  this  point  the  Kiglapait  range  advances  towards  the 
sea ;  its  direction  is  east  and  west — that  is,  opposed  to  the  general  strike  ; 
it  probably  consists  of  basic  eruptive  rock,  possibly  corresponding,  along 
with  the  mass  of  Nain,  to  the  great  masses  of  gabbro,  situated  much  further 
to  the  west  on  the  upper  branches  of  the  Koksoah  river,  which  have  been 
made  familiar  to  us  by  the  descriptions  of  Low.  Then  we  reach  the  moun- 
tain group  of  Kaumajet  (1,200  meters)  with  precipitous  cliffs  descending 
to  Mugford  harbour  (about  lat.  59°  N.);  only  the  lowest  part  of  these, 
however,  consists  of  gneiss.  Above  this  follows  a  flat  intrusive  dyke  of 
diabase,  and  then,  alternating  with  basic  rocks,  come  schist,  quartzite, 
and  limestone.  The  upper  part  of  the  cliff  is  formed  of  basalt,  and  bombs 
lie  on  the  slopes;  here  we  are  already  in  the  region  of  the  Greenland 
basalts.  We  now  reach  the  highest  range  of  the  east  coast  of  North 
America,  Torngat,  the  range  of  evil  spirits  (2,200-2,300  meters — according 
to  other  estimates  as  much  as  3,000  meters).  It  is  extremely  wild,  broken 
up  into  jagged  peaks;  on  the  coast  only  biotite  gneiss  and  crystalline 
schists  have  been  observed ;  towards  the  interior  Adams  has  also  found 
table  mountains  formed  of  ancient  sediments  like  those  of  Mugford 
harbour.  Cape  Chudley  is  an  outlier  of  this  ancient  range.  These  heights, 
as  already  pointed  out,  are  of  particular  interest,  since  they  are  the  remains 
of  a  relief  which  is  older  than  the  Cambrian  period.  It  is  possible  that 
the  sediments  of  Mugford  harbour  will  some  clav  be  correlated  with 

1  Boas,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  Ergiinzungsheft  no.  30,  1885,  p.  39 ;  R.  A.  Daly,  The  Geology 
of  the  north-east  coast  of  Labrador,  Bull.  Mus.  Comp.  Zool.,  1902,  XXXVIII  (Geological 
Series,  V,  no.  5),  pp.  205-270,  maps  ;  also  A.  S.  Packard,  The  Labrador  Coast,  8vo,  New 
York,  1891,  514  pp.,  maps.  On  p.  504  this  author  puts  forward  the  theory  that  the 
fjords  are  troughs. 


CH.  VIl] 


HUDSON  STEAIT 


255 


the  Torridon  sandstone  of  the  western  Hebrides,  which  lies  almost  in  the 
same  latitude. 

Both  coasts  of  Hudson  strait  are  described  in  the  works  of  Low  and 
Bell  ^.  There  are  no  hills  of  any  considerable  height,  and  in  general  the 
dominant  characters  are  those  of  the  Shield.  The  flat  Silurian  island  of 
Akpatok  has  already  been  mentioned.  The  north  coast  of  the  strait  is 
distinguished  by  thick  beds  of  crystalline  limestone,  in  which  dark 
graphitic  gneiss  is  intercalated.  In  the  region  between  lats.  62°  45'  and 
64°  N.  Bell  counted  twelve  of  these  beds  with  an  average  thickness  of 
660  meters ;  the  limestone  contains  garnet,  pyrites  and  white  felspar  2. 

Greenland.  Archaean  rocks  and  basalts  with  intercalated  plant-bearing 
beds,  which  range  from  the  lower  Cretaceous  into  the  Tertiary,  make  their 
appearance  on  the  west  coast.  Between  lats.  70°  15'  and  70°  45'  N.  a 
marine  intercalation  of  Senonian  also  occurs  (II,  73)  ^. 

On  the  east  coast,  between  lats.  72°  and  74°  N.  (II,  72),  Nathorst 
has  succeeded  in  showing  the  presence  of  a  superposed  Palaeozoic  series, 
which,  although  cut  through  by  faults,  resembles  a  fragment  of  the  border 
of  Laurentia 

Cape  Dalton  (lat.  69°  24'  N.)  has  afforded  a  surprising  discovery. 
O.  Nordenskjold  found  there  marine  fossils,  in  which  Rawn  recognized 
Tertiary  species  of  West  European  type.  They  probably  correspond  with 
those  of  Hochstetter  foreland  and  Spitzbergen  ^. 

^  A.  F.  Low,  Report  on  an  Exploration  of  part  of  the  South  Shore  of  Hudson  Strait 
and  of  Ungawa  Bay,  and  R.  Bell,  Report  of  an  Exploration  on  the  North  side  of  Hudson 
Strait,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Surv.  Canada,  new  ser.,  XI,  1898,  L  and  M,  47  and  38  pp.  ; 
further.  Low,  op.  cit.,  1900,  XIII,  D,  84  pp.,  and  DD  31  pp.,  maps ;  also  Steinmann  and 
Bucking,  Zur  Geologie  des  Cumberlandgolfes,  in  Ergebniss  der  deutschen  Polar-Expedi- 
tion, AUgemeiner  Theil,  II,  no.  6,  11  pp.  (according  to  collections  by  Dr.  Boas). 

2  For  the  west  coast  of  Bafl&n  Bay  also,  Steinmann  and  B  ticking,  Zur  Geologie  des 
Cumberlandgolfes,  Ergebniss  der  deutschen  Polar-Expedition,  II,  no.  6,  11  pp.  The  data 
referring  to  the  east  coast  between  latitudes  69°  and  73°  were  collected  by  M.  Belowsky, 
Beitrage  zur  Petrographie  des  westlichen  Nord-Gronland,  Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges., 
1905,  LVIII,  pp.  15-92. 

^  Stanton,  in  David  White  and  C.  Schuchert,  Cretaceous  series  of  the  west  coast  of 
Greenland,  Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Am.,  1898,  IX,  pp.  356  and  360,  confirms  the  Senonian  age 
and  sees  a  resemblance  to  certain  species  of  the  Fort  Pierre  stage  of  the  United  States, 

^  A.  G.  Nathorst,  Bidrag  till  nordostragronlands  Geologi,  Geol.  Foren.  Stockh.  Forh., 
1901,  XXIII,  pp.  275-306,  map ;  also  Tv§,  Somrar  i  Norra  Ishafvet,  2  vols.,  8vo,  Stockholm, 
1900  ;  and  A.  Smith- Woodward,  Notes  on  some  upper  Devonian  Fish-remains  discovered 
by  Professor  Nathorst  in  East  Greenland,  Bihang  k.  Vet.  Akad.  Handl.  Stockholm, 
1900,  XXVI,  iv,  no.  10 ;  for  the  Jurassic,  also  B.  Lundgren,  Meddel.  Gronland,  1895,  XIX, 
pp.  191-214 ;  further,  Madsen,  op.  cit.,  1904,  XXIX,  pp.  157-210,  map,  and  Freeh,  op.  cit., 
tom.  cit.,  pp.  279-285.  According  to  I'rech,  Caryocistis  granatum,  a  fossil  of  the  lower 
Silurian  of  Russia,  was  found  on  drift-ice  in  East  Greenland,  Lethaea  Geognostica,  1897, 
II,  p.  89,  note  2. 

^  J.  P.  J.  Ravn,  The  Tertiary  Fauna  at  Kap  Dalton  in  East  Greenland,  Meddel.  Gron- 
land, 1904,  XXIX,  pp.  93-104. 


256       LAUEENTIA  AND  NOETHEEN  ISLANDS  [partv 

The  south  side  of  Scoresby  sound  (lat.  70°  20'  N.)  consists  of  gneiss, 
covered  by  basalt,  and  in  the  inner  ramifications  of  this  sound  Ryder 
encountered  only  Archaean  rocks,  with  here  and  there  sandstone  of  un- 
determined age^.  The  same  ancient  rocks,  chiefly  gneiss,  also  form  the 
shores  of  the  inner  arms  of  all  the  fjords  far  up  to  the  north,  and  probably 
the  greater  part  of  the  substructure  of  the  whole  of  Greenland.  On  the 
north  shore  of  Scoresby  sound,  however,  between  long.  32°  and  23°  W., 
lies  Hurry  inlet,  a  long  narrow  bay  running  to  the  north ;  cape  Stewart 
marks  the  west  side  of  the  entrance.  From  this  locality  E.  Bay  describes 
sandstone  with  Rhaetic  plant-remains,  Jurassic  with  marine  shells,  shales, 
basalt,  and  sandstone.  The  same  series  forms  the  whole  of  the  west  side ; 
the  east  side  consists  of  gneiss  (lat.  70°  30'  to  71°  30'  N.),  which  appears  to 
be  separated  from  the  gneiss  masses  of  the  interior.  Nathorst  regards 
Hurry  inlet  as  a  meridional  fault  with  a  downthrow  to  the  west ;  on  one 
of  the  Fame  islands  (lat.  70°  50'  N.,  at  the  head  of  Hurry  inlet)  he  met 
with  an  eruptive  rock,  which,  according  to  Backstrbm's  determination,  is 
Monchiquite.  The  Jurassic  of  Hurry  inlet  seems  to  make  its  appearance 
again  much  further  to  the  north,  at  the  entrance  to  Oscar's  fjord  (lat.  72°  N.). 

We  now  reach  the  Palaeozoic  rocks  which  strike  across  most  of  the 
fjords  as  far  as  lat.  74°  N.  The  west,  i.  e.  all  the  inner  arms  of  Oscar's 
fjord  and  Franz- Josef  fjord,  is  formed  of  pre-Cambrian  rock  striking 
north  and  south.  The  Silurian,  which  follows  it  towards  the  east,  shows 
some  folding,  though  it  is  not  certain  that  this  may  not  have  been  produced 
by  dragging^. 

To  the  north,  a  fault  running  north  and  south  separates  the  Silurian 
from  a  zone  of  Devonian  which  follows  it  on  the  east.  To  the  east  of  this 
again,  in  the  narrow  belt  which  separates  it  from  the  open  sea,  a  long  zone 
of  basalt  sets  in.  On  cape  Parry  (lat.  72°  30'  N.)  Dusdn  observed  rocks  in 
which  Backstrom  recognized  Aegyrine-syenite  and  a  rock  (Solvsbergite) 
resembling  Tinguaite ;  he  assigns  these  to  the  same  petrographical  province 
as  the  Fame  islands.  On  cape  Franklin  (lat.  73°  15'  N.,  at  the  entrance  to 
Franz-Josef  fjord)  and  at  the  head  of  Musk  Oxen  fjord  (lat.  73°  42'  N.) 
granite  was  met  with.  Since  the  thick  Silurian  does  not  reappear  to  the 
east  of  the  Devonian  at  these  two  localities,  we  must  suppose  that  the 
Devonian  is  cut  off  on  the  east  by  a  meridional  fault.  All  the  points 
mentioned  above,  however,  the  eruptive  rocks  of  the  Fame  islands  and 
cape  Parry,  and  the  ancient  granites  of  cape  Franklin  and  the  Musk  Oxen 
fjord,  although  distributed  over  no  less  than  three  degrees  of  latitude,  lie 
on  the  same  meridional  line  between  long.  22°  and  22°  30'  W.  Nathorst 

^  C.  Ryder,  Den  ostgronlandske  Expedition  udf.  1891-1892,  3  del,  Meddel.  Gronland, 
1896,  XIX,  E.  Bay,  Geologi,  pp.  145-187,  map. 

'  Probably  folding  in  a  trough.'  The  Devonian,  however,  exhibits  no  folding,  and 
that  of  the  Silurian  may  be  pre-Devonian. 


CH.  VIl] 


EAST  GEEENLAND 


257 


conjectures  that  the  Jurassic  outcrops  of  Kuhn  island  (lat.  74°  45'  N.)  are  also 
let  down  in  the  gneiss.  The  same  observer  draws  attention  to  the  distribu- 
tion of  the  basalts  over  a  long  zone  following  the  coast,  and  from  this  fact 
we  may  conclude  that  the  structure  of  this  coast  also  must  have  been 
affected  by  meridional  subsidences.  Cape  Broer  Buys  (lat.  73°  30'  N.)  is 
regarded  as  an  ancient  centre  of  eruption. 

Here  for  the  first  time,  on  the  east  coast  of  Greenland,  the  characters 
which  may  be  regarded  as  distinctive  of  Laurentia  vanish  beneath  the 
Ocean.  Laurentia  extends  from  south  Texas  to  the  Arctic  Ocean  through 
53  or  54  degrees  of  latitude,  and  from  the  mouth  of  the  Mackenzie 
to  the  east  coast  of  Greenland  through  more  than  110  degrees  of  longitude. 
It  is  not  known,  however,  whether  the  Palaeozoic  sediments  of  eastern 
Greenland  are  really  part  of  the  marginal  belt,  or  a  downthrown  fragment 
of  the  '  roof or  a  Caledonian  fragment.  Nor  do  we  know  how  far  the 
ancient  rocks  of  south  Greenland  and  Labrador  extend  beneath  the 
Atlantic  Ocean. 

Laurentia  is  a  very  ancient  unit.  It  behaves  toivards  all  the  younger 
folds  as  a  foreland. 

Nevertheless,  the  structure  of  Laurentia  is  by  no  means  uniform. 
In  those  places  where  the  pre-Cambrian  basement  has  been  studied  in 
detail,  as,  thanks  to  the  abundant  presence  of  metalliferous  ores,  is  the 
case,  for  example,  in  the  regions  around  lake  Superior,  a  diversified  series 
of  sedimentary  rocks  with  various  foldings,  unconformities,  and  trans- 
gressions has  been  revealed  lying  above  the  oldest  gneiss  and  granite  and 
beneath  the  Cambrian  beds.  The  work  already  accomplished  in  this 
region,  as  well  as  the  magnitude  of  the  problems  which  still  remain 
unsolved,  may  be  seen  from  the  writings  of  Van  Hise,  Shirley  Bailey,  and 
Lloyd  Smith  on  the  mineral  region  of  Marquette  in  Michigan  ^. 

Amidst  so  much  that  is  unknown,  it  remains  in  any  case  certain  that  the 
folds  of  Laurentia  were  for  the  greater  part  already  worn  down  before 
the  Cambrian  period,  or  at  least  before  the  Potsdam  sandstone,  and  that 
their  strike  is  as  completely  independent  of  the  strike  of  the  Appalachians 
as  it  is  of  the  western  Cordilleras. 

In  the  Marquette  region,  mentioned  above,  an  east-and-west  strike 
prevails  ;  and  the  question  arises  as  to  whether  irregularities  in  the  surface 
of  the  oldest  gneisses  may  not  be  the  cause  of  broad  transverse  folds.  The 
peninsula  of  Keweenaw  advances  towards  the  middle  of  lake  Superior  in 
the  direction  of  Michipicoten  island  in  the  form  of  an  arc.  It  is  probably 
part  of  a  trend  line,  for  the  whole  region  surrounding  the  lake  on  the  west 
is  characterized  by  a  south-west  strike  corresponding  to  the  course  of  the 

*  C.  R.  van  Hise  and  W.  Shirley  Bailey,  The  Marquette  Iron-bearing  District  of 
Michigan,  including  a  chapter  on  the  Republic  Trough  by  H.  Lloyd  Smith,  Monogr. 
U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1897,  XXVIII,  608  pp.,  Atlas. 

80LLAS  IV  S 


258      LAUEENTIA  AND  NOETHEEN  ISLANDS  [party 


arc,  and  it  seems  as  though  the  same  arc  might  dominate  all  the  land 
between  lake  Winnipeg  and  Hudson  bay. 

In  Labrador  the  prevalent  pre- Cambrian  strike  is  north-west  or  north- 
north- west,  it  is  the  same  in  Hudson  strait ;  in  western  Greenland,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  strike  is  said  to  be  north-east,  and  about  the  great  fjords 
of  eastern  Greenland  it  is  north  and  south.  But  much  work  remains  to  be 
done  before  a  correlation  of  the  data  can  be  attempted. 

Greenland  is  a  horst  standing  between  subsidences  of  different  age. 
The  Mesozoic  seas  are  represented  in  the  east  by  Trias  and  Jurassic  sedi- 
ments of  Arctic  character,  in  the  west  by  the  upper  Senonian  transgression 
(II,  p.  294).  At  the  same  time  the  horst  is  a  fragment  of  Laurentia.  How 
far  its  Laurentian  rocks  are  continued  beneath  the  Ocean  is,  as  we  have 
seen,  not  known,  but  it  is  not  impossible  that  they  may  reach  the  western 
Hebrides  which  lie  in  the  latitude  of  Labrador. 

3.  Islands  of  the  North  Atlantic. 

Having  obtained  some  knowledge  of  Laurentia,  let  us  now  consider 
Nansen's  beautiful  bathymetrical  chart  of  the  north  Polar  sea,  or 
Hudleston's  description  of  the  coasts  of  western  Europe^.  Towards  the 
north,  near  lat.  80°,  the  sea  is  narrowed  by  a  plateau  advancing  from  the 
east.  Except  in  a  few  localities  this  maintains  a  height  of  200  meters.  It 
includes  Spitzbergen  along  with  King  Charles  Land,  Franz- Josef  Land, 
Hope  island  and  Bear  island  (II,  p.  66).  All  the  islands  have  a  tabular 
structure,  except  where  they  are  formed  of  pre-Devonian  rocks ;  they  lie 
between  the  branches  of  the  Uralides,  and  we  may  justly  regard  the  plateau 
as  a  continuation  of  the  plain  of  the  Petchora^.    From  the  base  of 

1  F.  Nansen,  The  Norwegian  Nortli  Polar  Expedition,  Scientific  Results,  1904,  vol.  IV, 
pi.  I ;  W.  H.  Hudleston,  On  the  East  Margin  of  the  North  Atlantic  Basin,  Geol.  Mag., 
1899,  dec.  IV,  vol.  VI,  pp.  97-105  and  145-157,  maps. 

2  For  the  stratigraphy,  E.  T.  Newton  and  J.  J.  H.  Teall,  Rocks  and  Fossils  from  Franz- 
Josef  Land,  collected  by  the  Jackson- Harmsworth  Expedition,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc, 

1897,  LIII,  pp.  477-519  and  646-661 ;  R.  Koettlitz,  Geology  of  Franz-Josef  Land,  op.  cit., 

1898,  LIV,  pp.  620-645  ;  F.  Nansen,  The  Norwegian  North-Polar  Expedition,  1893-1896, 
Scientific  Results,  II ;  J.  F.  Pompecki,  Jurassic  Fauna  of  Cape  Flora,  Franz-Jozef  Land, 
with  a  geological  sketch  by  F.  Nansen,  and  op.  cit.,  Ill,  A.  G.  Nathorst,  Fossil  Plants 
from  Franz-Josef  Land ;  further,  Bidrag  till  Kung  Karls  Lands  Geologi,  Geol.  Foren. 
Stock.  Forh.,  1901,  pp.  341-378  ;  Pompecki,  Marine  Mesozoic  of  King  Charles  Land, 
K.  Svenska  Vet.  Ak.  Forh.,  1899,  pp.  449-464 ;  G.  de  Geer,  Rapp.  om  d.  Svenska  Geolo- 
giske  Expedition  till  Isfjorden,  Ymer,  1896,  pp.  259-266;  A.  Smith-Woodward,  Fish- 
remains  collected  in  Spitzbergen,  Bihang  Svensk.  Vet.  Ak.  Handl.,  1900,  XXV,  afd.  IV. 
no.  5,  pp.  1-5  ;  J.  G.  Andersson,  Stratigraphie  und  Tektonik  der  Baren-Insel,  Bull.  Geol. 
Inst.  Univ.  Upsala,  1899,  IV,  pp.  243-280,  map ;  Nathorst,  N5,gra  Upplysningar  till  den 
nya  Karten  cJfver  Beeren  Eiland,  Ymer,  1899,  pp.  171-185,  maps;  Nathorst,  Zur  fossilen 
Flora  der  Polarlander,  4to,  1894-1902.  De  Geer  thought  he  observed  folding  on  the  Eis- 
fjord  in  Spitzbergen  (op.  cit.,  p.  263).    Nathorst  ascribes  these  movements  to  dragging 


CH.VII]         NOETH  ATLANTIC  FKACTUEES  259 

the  Mesozoic  onwards  the  stratified  succession  resembles  not  that  of  the 
north  Atlantic,  but  of  the  polar  regions  and  the  north  Pacific  Ocean  ^. 
The  most  surprising  fact,  however,  is  the  occurrence  of  marine  shells  of 
Miocene  type  both  in  Spitzbergen  and  east  Greenland  (I,  p.  288 ;  II,  p.  73). 

This  plateau  is  a  fractured  area;  the  islands  which  are  known  in 
greatest  detail  are  cut  through  by  faults  with  a  prevalent  north-and-south 
direction.  The  dislocation  of  Wijde  Bai  in  Spitzbergen  (II,  p.  68,  fig.  8)  is 
older  than  the  upper  Devonian.  Traces  of  the  Caledonian  system  possibly 
exist.  Two  faults,  one  with  a  strike  to  north-north-west  on  Swedish 
promontory,  and  another  with  a  strike  to  north-north-east  in  King  Charles 
Land,  are,  according  to  Nathorst,  younger  than  the  Neocomian  and  older 
than  the  flora  with  Ginko  digitata.  Other  faults  are  later  than  the  Tertiary 
flora.  The  subsidences  have  thus  occurred  at  different  periods.  The  entire 
plateau,  however,  seems  to  break  off  along  an  almost  straight  line  which 
runs  from  about  lat.  80*  N.  towards  the  south-south-east.  This  fracture 
lies  not  far  west  of  Spitzbergen,  and  only  terminates  a  little  south  of 
lat.  70°  N.,  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  Norwegian  coast,  i.  e. 
north  of  the  Lofoden  islands,  where  the  last  remains  of  the  polar  sediments 
are  let  down  along  a  fault,  with  a  throw,  as  estimated  by  Vogt,  of 
400  meters  at  least.  This  fault  strikes  north-north-east  in  accordance  with 
the  direction  of  a  considerable  submarine  cliff  which  has  been  traced 
between  lats.  64"  and  68°  N.  ^.  Similar  facts  are  afforded  by  the  coast  of 
Greenland.  In  that  region  we  have  become  familiar  with  meridional 
fractures  which  cut  through  the  crust  from  lat.  70°  30'  to  73  or  74"  N.; 
there  also  a  steep  submarine  cliff  occurs,  which  strikes  to  the  south-south- 
west, nearly  parallel  to  the  coast.  Off  Franz- Josef  fjord  and  cape  Broer 
Ruys  in  particular,  the  sea  bottom  sinks  rapidly  from  an  edge  at  400  meters 
down  to  2,400  meters.  Between  the  east-and-west  slope  there  are  long 
intervals,  situated  in  the  meridian  of  Greenwich  and  west  of  it,  which  lie 
below  3,000  meters. 

To  the  south-west  and  south-south- west  of  these  abysses  lie  the  volcanic 
islands,  first  Jan  May  en,  next  Iceland  and  the  Faroes,  then  further  away 

along  faults,  Fossile  Flora,  I,  pp.  9,  10.  The  lowest  stage  on  Bear  island  is  upper  lower 
Silurian  (Lindstrom,  Ofvers.  K.  Vet.  Akad.  F.  Handl.,  1899,  pp.  41-47) ;  this  is  covered 
unconformably  by  upper  Devonian  with  Holoptychius  and  Archaeopteris  hibernica. 
The  lower  Carboniferous  is  absent.  A  stage  with  Athyris  amhigua  is  assigned  to  the 
middle  Carboniferous;  this  is  followed  by  several  stages  of  the  upper  Carboniferous, 
which  also  contain  indications  of  intervening  transgressions  (Tschernyschew,  Mem.  Com. 
geol.  Russie,  XVI,  2,  p.  687),  and  above  this  marine  Trias  (J.  Bohm,  Zeitschr.  deutsch. 
geol.  Ges.,  1899,  p.  325). 

^  J.  F.  Pompecki  has  attempted  to  determine  the  outlines  of  this  sea,  Aucellen  und 
Aucellen  ahnliche  Formen,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  Beil.-Band  XIV,  1901,  pp.  319-368,  map  ;  also 
Aucellen  im  frankischen  Jura,  op.  cit.,  1901,  I,  pp.  18-36. 

2  J.  H.  L.  Vogt,  Sondre  Helgeland,  Norges  Geol.  Undersog.,  no.  29,  1900,  178  pp.,  and 
maps,  in  particular  pp.  4-8. 

S  2 


260      LAURENTIA  AND  NORTHERN  ISLANDS  [party 

St.  Kilda  and  Rockall  ^,  and  finally,  in  a  peculiar  trough,  the  islands  of  the 
inner  Hebrides.  Towards  the  east  and  south  lies  the  mainland  with  its 
islands,  the  Lofoden,  Shetlands,  Orkneys,  and  others. 

The  steep  descents  to  great  depths  which  occur  in  the  north  have  been 
regarded  by  Hudleston  and  Vogt  as  due  to  tectonic  causes.  Although  an 
exaggerated  impression  of  this  steepness  is  given  by  the  usual  methods  of 
representation,  yet  in  places  it  is  really  considerable.  The  generally  flat 
bedding  and  the  concordant  character  of  the  sediments  in  east  Greenland 
and  Spitzbergen,  as  well  as  the  frequent  occurrence  of  more  or  less 
meridional  faults,  and  the  corresponding  direction  of  the  great  abyssal 
depths,  lend  probability  to  this  view. 

The  extreme  north  is  characterized  far  and  wide  by  tabular  flows 
of  basic  lavas.  In  Siberia  they  make  their  appearance  far  to  the  south  of 
the  amphitheatre.  They  approach  from  Mongolia,  rest  on  the  summits 
of  the  Tunkin  Alps,  in  the  depressions  of  Nishni  Udinsk  and  Kansk,  and 
at  numerous  localities  in  the  tableland,  from  the  Yenisei  in  the  west  to  the 
meridian  of  110°  in  the  east.  Sometimes  they  form  the  summits  of  the 
Goltzi,  and  are  older  than  the  valleys ;  at  others  they  have  flowed  down 
into  the  valleys.  On  the  Angara  they  probably  date  back  to  the  age  of 
the  Tungusian  flora  (lower  Gondwdna). 

From  the  lowermost  part  of  the  Yenisei,  and  from  Dickson's  harbour, 
these  flows  are  continued  to  Franz-Josef  Land,  where  at  least  a  part 
of  them  is  of  Jurassic  or  lower  Cretaceous  age.  The  lavas  and  dykes  in 
Swedish  promontory  are  to  be  referred  to  the  same  period,  and  probably 
also  the  closely  related  diabases  of  Stans  promontory,  Hinlopen  strait,  and 
other  parts  of  the  archipelago  of  Spitzbergen^.  It  would  seem  that  in 
these  tabular  islands  no  flows  of  Tertiary  or  later  date  have  as  yet  been 
certainly  recognized.  The  case  is  different  in  the  west ;  basalts  associated 
with  Tertiary  plants  are  mentioned  as  occurring  at  several  localities  along 
the  coast  of  east  Greenland.  The  Tertiary  beds  of  cape  Dal  ton  contain 
basaltic  detritus.  In  the  extreme  north-east,  at  the  entrance  to  Peary 
channel,  there  stands,  like  a  mighty  corner  stone,  the  basalt  rock  of  Navy 

*  St.  Kilda  is  formed  of  gabbro  with  dykes  of  granophyre,  outcrops  resembling  others 
in  Ireland  ;  W.  J.  Sollas,  Volcanic  district  of  Carlingford  and  Slieve  Gallion,  I,  Relation 
of  the  Granite  to  the  Gabbro  of  Barnave,  Trans.  Roy.  Irish  Acad.,  1894,  XXX,  pp.  477- 
511 ;  A.  J.  Cole,  Geology  of  Slieve  GalHon,  Sci.  Trans.  R.  DubHn  Soc,  1897,  VI,  pp.  213- 
248.  The  island  of  Rockall,  along  with  Helen's  Reef  (lat.  57°  36'  N.,  long.  13°  42'  W.), 
consists,  according  to  the  few  fragments  obtained  from  this  almost  inaccessible  reef,  of  an 
Aegirine-quartz-albite  rock  (Rockallite) ;  the  sea  bottom  is  strewn  with  basalt :  W.  Spotts- 
wood  Green,  Brown,  and  Barrington,  Rockall  Island  and  Bank,  Trans.  Roy.  Irish  Acad., 
1897,  XXXI,  pp.  39-48,  maps. 

*  A.  Hamberg,  Ueber  die  Basalte  des  Kung  Karl-Landes,  Geol.  Foren.  Stockh.  Forh., 
1899,  XXI,  pp.  509-532  ;  H.  Backlund,  Diabases  du  Spitzberg  oriental.  Mission  scienti- 
fique  pour  la  mesure  d'un  arc  de  meridien,  Mission  Russe,  1907,  II,  29  pp.,  map ;  in  this 
work  these  diabases  are  regarded  as  more  recent  than  the  upper  Jurassic  (p.  10). 


cH.vii]  NOETHEEN  BASALTS  261 

cliff,  with  a  precipitous  fall  of  1,100  to  1,200  meters^.  At  the  entrance  to 
Robeson  channel,  and  extending  up  to  lat.  81°  45'  N.,  leaf -bearing  beds  and 
basalts  are  again  associated  (I,  p.  287) ;  in  Disko  island,  on  the  west  coast, 
Cretaceous  basalts  lie  beneath  them.  In  west  EUesmere  Land  the  Tertiary- 
beds  occur  without  basalts;  thence,. in  association  with  basalts,  they  are 
found  at  several  points  nearly  as  far  as  the  mouth  of  the  Mackenzie ;  the 
leaf-bearing  beds  are  steeply  upturned  in  New  Siberia,  and  basaltic  lavas 
occur  in  the  northernmost  part  of  the  neighbouring  continent.  Then  follow 
the  isolated  outliers  of  the  basic  lavas  of  Siberia,  until  finally  those  of 
Dickson's  harbour  are  once  more  reached. 

At  a  distance  of  129  kilometers  west-south- west  of  Suderoe,  the  most 
southerly  of  the  Faeroes,  lies  the  middle  of  the  Faeroe  bank,  which  extends 
from  north-north- east  to  south-south- west  for  a  distance  of  90  kilometers. 
Post  thinks  that  it  marks  the  site  of  a  volcano  ^.  From  this  point  onwards 
the  basaltic  flows  may  once  have  extended  in  an  unbroken  course  over 
the  inner  Hebrides  and  considerable  parts  of  Scotland  and  Ireland.  Their 
remains  must  be  assigned  to  the  Tertiary  aera  (I,  pp.  156,  288)  ^.  The 
existing  state  of  the  Faeroes  leaves  no  room  for  doubt  that  they  are  the 
remains  of  a  once  much  larger  area. 

The  investigations  of  Archibald  Geikie  in  this  region  have  furnished 
results  of  great  value  for  the  study  of  volcanic  activity. 

The  whole  of  that  part  of  the  sea  to  the  north  of  the  basaltic  plateau  of 
Antrim  presents  the  characters  of  an  irregular  fault-trough.  These  are 
produced  by  the  inclination  of  the  intercalated  plant-bearing  beds,  which 
even  on  the  Faroe  islands  is  considerable.  Fig.  22  shows  a  small  reef  of 
basalt  rising  from  the  sea,  on  which  the  bed  of  a  stream  has  been  preserved 
with  pebbles  from  the  mainland. 

Nothing,  however,  is  more  significant  than  the  vast  extent  of  the 
injections.  The  Whin  sill  (I,  p.  154),  120-130  kilometers  in  length,  may 
serve  as  an  example.    Steeply  ascending  dykes  run  in  large  numbers  from 

1  Peary,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1893,  II,  p.  310. 

2  H.  V.  Post,  Cm  Faroarnes  uppkommst,  Geol.  Foren.  Stockh.  Forh.,  1902,  XXIV, 
pp.  274  to  282  ;  in  particular  p.  280. 

'  Geikie's  description  differs  from  that  given  in  this  work  (I,  p.  155)  which  follows 
Judd  •  according  to  Geikie's  results  the  gabbros  are  masses  which  have  penetrated  into 
the  basalts,  while  the  granophyres  and  granites  are  still  later  intrusions.  The  History 
of  Volcanic  Action  during  the  Tertiary  Period  in  the  British  Isles,  Trans.  Roy.  Soc, 
Edinburgh,  1888,  XXXV,  pp.  21-184,  maps  ;  Relation  of  the  Basic  and  Acid  Rocks  of  the 
Tertiary  Series  of  the  Inner  Hebrides,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1894,  L,  pp.  212-229  ; 
The  Tertiary  Basalt-Plateaux  of  north-west  Europe,  op.  cit.,  1896,  LIII,  pp.  331-405  ; 
and,  in  particular,  The  Ancient  Volcanos  of  Great  Britain,  8vo,  1897,  II,  pp.  107-478  ; 
on  the  other  hand,  Judd,  The  Tertiary  Volcanos  of  the  Western  Isles  of  Scotland,  Quart. 
Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1889,  XLV,  pp.  187-218 ;  The  Propylites  of  the  Western  Isles  of  Scot- 
land, &c,  1890,  XLVI,  pp.  341-384,  and  On  Intrusions  of  Tertiary  Granite,  &c.,  op.  cit., 
1893,  XLIX,  pp.  175-195  et  passim. 


262      LAUEENTIA  AND  NOETHEEN  ISLANDS  [paetv 


the  east  coast  of  Yorkshire  to  Donegal  bay  on  the  Irish  coast,  and  to 
the  island  of  Lewes  in  the  western  Hebrides.  Their  course  is,  almost 
always  rectilinear,  and  is  completely  independent  of  the  structure  of  the 
land.  They  cut  through  the  great  fault  which  bounds  the  Scottish  fault- 
trough  on  the  south  (II,  p.  78,  fig.  10).  Their  prevalent  direction  is  north- 
west to  west-north- west,  whence  some  approach  is  made  on  the  north  to 
a  radiate  arrangement.  At  many  localities  these  dykes  occur  so  closely 
crowded  together  that  we  must  assume  extensive  fissuring  of  the  sub- 
structure.   The  longest  of  them  is  Cleveland  Dyke,  which  has  been  traced 

from  the  east  coast  of  Yorkshire  across 
the  whole  kingdom  towards  the  west- 
north- west  as  far  as  Sol  way  firth,  a  dis- 
tance of  177  kilometers;  and  if  some 
considerable  outcrops  in  Ayrshire  may 
be  regarded  as  its  continuation,  it 
reaches  a  length  of  300  kilometers^. 

Geikie  concludes  that  during  the 
Tertiary  aera  a  vast  reservoir  of  lava 
or  a  series  of  such  reservoirs  must  have 
existed  beneath  the  whole  of  this 
region*^.  The  thickness  of  the  sedi- 
ments cut  through  by  the  dykes,  from 
the  base  of  the  Silurian  upwards,  is 
estimated  at  5,300  meters,  but  the 
magma  basin  must  have  lain  much  deeper. 

The  Eriboll  zone  of  Caledonian  disturbance,  which  includes  some  of  the 
most  remarkable  dislocations  known  anywhere  in  the  earth's  crust,  afibrds 
no  boundary  to  the  reservoir,  and  we  are  led  to  the  conception  of  lava 
basins,  the  outlines  of  which  are  independent  of  the  structure  of  previously 
existing  mountain  ranges. 

Iceland.  These  observations  also  lead  us  to  a  different  interpretation 
of  the  significance  of  the  active  volcanos  of  Iceland  and  Jan  May  en. 

A  large  number  of  the  middle  Tertiary  species  of  Europe,  such  as 
Sequoia  Sternhergi^  Fagus  Deucalionis,  and  Liriodendron  Procaccinii 
occur  in  the  Surturbrand,  i.  e.  the  plant-bearing  beds  intercalated  with  the 
basalts  of  Iceland.  This  flora  is  the  same  as  that  which  is  found,  for 
example,  at  cape  Lyell  in  Spitzbergen,  where  it  is  not  associated  with 
basalts,  and  in  the  island  of  Mull,  where  it  is  interbedded  with  basaltic 
flows.    For  this  reason  Nathorst  has  long  been  of  opinion  that  the 

^  For  the  petrology,  J.  H.  Teall,  Petrological  Notes  on  some  North  of  England  Dykes, 
Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1884,  XL,  pp.  209-246. 
^  A.  Geikie,  Ancient  Volcanos,  II,  p.  178  et  passim. 


Fig.  22.  Pebbles  from  the  mainland 
on  the  basalt  cliff  of  Dun  Beag  (Sandry 
island,  between  Runn  and  Canna) 
(after  A.  Geikie).  a,  amygdaloid 
basalt ;  b,  tuff ;  c,  shaley  ash  ;  d,  car- 
bonaceous shale;  e,  amygdaloid  basalt; 
/,  pebbles. 


CH.  VIl] 


ICELAND 


263 


American  species  in  the  European  floras  must  have  migrated  across  a 
continuous  tract  of  land,  which  led  from  Greenland  to  Iceland  and  on- 
wards^. Judd  maintains  that  Antrim,  the  Hebrides,  the  Faroes,  and 
Iceland  form  one  and  the  same  petrographical  province  2.  Possibly,  says 
Geikie,  the  present  active  vents  of  Iceland  and  Jan  May  en  are  the  descen- 
dants  in  uninterrupted  succession  of  those  that  supplied  the  materials  of 
the  Tertiary  basaltic  plateaux^  the  volcanic  fires  slowly  dying  out  from 
south  to  north  ^.  As  regards  the  nature  of  the  igneous  rocks,  Backstrom  has 
shown  that  there  is  complete  correspondence  between  those  of  Scotland  and 
Iceland,  extending  down  even  to  their  respective  batholites,  with  the  single 
exception  that  in  Iceland  granophyres  form  the  terminal  member  of  the 
series,  while  in  Scotland  granites  also  occur 

When  we  first  referred  to  the  island  of  Iceland  (II,  p.  131),  Theodor 
Thoroddsen  had  just  entered  on  those  important  investigations  which  have 
since  afforded  us  a  clearer  insight  into  the  connexion  existing  between 
fractures  of  the  crust,  volcanic  eruptions,  and  hot  springs,  than  is  to  be 
obtained,  perhaps,  from  any  other  locality  in  the  world  ^.  But  even 
previously  to  Thoroddsen's  work  it  was  evident  that  the  outline  of  the 
island  had  been  partly  determined  by  subsidences,  and  it  is  these  alone 
which  we  propose  to  consider  now. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  island  consists  of  a  thick  tabular  mass  of 
successive  basaltic  sheets  which  is  traversed  by  a  number  of  recent 
volcanic  products. 

Let  us  begin  our  study  in  the  north-west  peninsula.  Here  the  lie  of 
the  Surturbrand  has  revealed  the  unexpected  fact  that  the  basaltic  base- 
ment is  traversed  by  concentric  arcuate  caldron  fractures^  and  large 
fragments  having  the  form  of  circular  strips  or  segments  have  been  let 
down  along  these  fractures  ®. 

^  A.  G.  Nathorst,  Polarforskningar,  Bidrag  till  Forntidens  Vaxtgeografi,  in  Norden- 
skjfJld,  Studier  och  Forskningar  foranl.  af  min  Resor  i  hoga  Norden,  8vo,  Stockholm,  1883, 
p.  258  et  passim.  A  remarkable  fact  is  the  occurrence  of  marine  deposits  which  are  not 
more  recent  than  the  English  Red  Crag  (II,  p.  132) ;  Jeffries  and  S.  Wood,  Quart.  Journ, 
Geol.  Soc,  1885,  XLI,  p.  96,  and  Pjetrusson,  op.  cit.,  1906,  LXII,  pp.  712-715.  Accord- 
ing to  Pjetrusson  the  so-called  Palagonite  formation  was  produced  by  ice ; 
Morsener  in  den  Islandske  Palagonitformation,  Overs.  K.  danske  Vid.  Selsk.  Forh. 
Kopenhagen,  1901,  pp.  147-170 ;  also  Geogr.  Mag.  Edinb.,  1900,  pp.  265-293 ;  on  a  shelly 
Boulder-Clay  in  the  so-called  Palagonite  Formation  of  Iceland,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc, 
1903,  LIX,  pp.  356-361. 

2  J.  W.  Judd,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1886,  XLII,  p.  54 

3  A.  Geikie,  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  Edinb.,  1888,  XXXV,  p.  75. 

*  H.  Backstrom,  Beitrag  zur  Kenntniss  der  islandischen  Liparite,  Geol.  Foren.  Stockh. 
Forh.,  1891,  XIII,  pp.  637-682,  in  particular  p.  671  et  seq.  For  the  union  of  Norway 
with  Spitzbergen,  and  Pettersen's  Arktis  (II,  p.  67). 

®  In  particular,  T.  Thoroddsen,  Island,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1906,  Erganzungsheffce  nos.  152 
and  153,  358  pp.,  maps. 

®  T.  Thoroddsen,  Nogle  lagttagelser  over  Surtarbrandens  geologiske  Forhold  i  det 


264      LAUEENTIA  AND  NOETHERN  ISLANDS  [part  y 


Breidi  fjord  on  the  west  coast  and  Huna  Floi  on  the  north  coast  are 
subsidences  cutting  into  the  basalt,  and  almost  separating  the  laciniated 
peninsula  from  the  rest  of  Iceland,  to  which  it  is  joined  by  an  isthmus  not 
more  than  7  or  8  kilometers  broad.  Several  (apparently  four)  concentric 
caldron  fractures  cut  through  the  peninsula,  they  are  accompanied  in 
places  by  hot  springs.  The  first  of  these  is  the  most  important ;  it  runs 
from  the  Isar  fjord  to  the  Talkna  fjord,  each  of  the  segments  formed  by 
the  fractures  present  a  steep  fall  towards  the  interior,  and  a  gentle  slope 
towards  the  exterior  (fig.  23). 

In  the  state  of  Kansas,  U.S.A.,  caldron  fractures  were  produced  in  1879  as 
a  result  of  the  extraction  of  salt,  and  gave  rise  to  a  salt  pool  near  Pearlette 
but  in  this  case  the  steep  faces  of  the  circular  strips  were  turned  towards 
the  exterior'^.  In  1895  a  bed  of  quicksand  beneath  a  part  of  the  town  of 
Briix  discharged  itself  laterally  into  some  lignite  mines ;  in  this  case  it  was 
observed  that  the  sinking  of  the  ground  began  along  the  periphery,  and 
advanced  gradually  towards  the  spot  at  which  the  subterranean  discharge 
occurred.  When  at  a  later  time  the  phenomenon  was  repeated,  fissures 
originated  at  some  distance  outside  the  periphery  formed  during  the  first 
catastrophe,  and  the  subsidence  passed  on  as  before  towards  the  centre  of 
discharge  ^. 

As  an  illustration,  the  discharge  below  Briix  affords  a  better  example 
than  the  pumping  out  of  the  salt  near  Pearlette.  When  the  consolidation 
of  a  great  casting  proceeds  unequally,  some  of  the  metal  remaining  molten 
at  one  spot  may  find  its  way  out  at  the  side,  leaving  a  hollow  cavity,  which 
the  foundry  master  calls  a  '  Lunker '.  So  with  regard  to  the  north-west  of 
Iceland,  we  might  say  that  a  '  Lunker '  had  broken  in. 

Faxa  fjord  is  a  regular  caldron  fracture  on  the  western  coast,  accom- 
panied by  volcanos  and  hot  springs.  The  long  basaltic  horst,  which 
separates  it  from  Breidi  fjord,  bears  at  its  extremity  the  volcano  Sneffels- 
Jokel.  On  the  south  the  boundary  of  the  fjord  is  formed  by  the  volcanic 
peninsula  of  Reykjanes^. 

On  the  northern  fjords  arcuate  inbreaks  do  not  occur  till  we  reach 
long.  17°  30'  W.    Then  we  find  a  broad  trough-like  inbreak,  which  runs 

nordvestlige  Island,  Geol.  Foren.  Stockh.  FOrh.,  1896,  XVIII,  pp.  114-154,  in  particular 
p.  147  ;  Islandske  Fjorde  og  Bugter,  Geogr.  Tidsskr.,  1902,  XVI,  pp.  58-82  ;  for  the 
isthmus,  Hojlandet  ved  Langjokull,  op.  cit.,  1900,  XV,  pp.  3-14,  map. 

1  W.  Johnson,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1901,  XXI,  4,  p.  708  et  seq.,  in  particular 
pi.  CXXXVIII. 

2  F.  E.  Suess,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1898,  XLVIII,  p.  491  et  seq. 

'  T.  Thoroddsen,  Snsefellsnes  i  Island,  Ymer,  1890,  pp.  144-188,  map;  Geologiske 
lagttagelser  paa  Snsefellsnes  og  i  Omegn  at"  Faxebugten,  Bihang  Vet.  Ak.  Handl. 
Stockholm,  1891,  XVII,  afd.  II,  p.  95;  also  Verh.  Ges.  Erdkunde,  BerHn,  1893,  Geogra- 
fiske  og  geologiske  Undersogelser  ved  den  sydlige  Del  af  Faxa  floi,  Geogr.  Tidsskr.,  1903, 
XVII,  56  pp.,  map  et  passim. 


cH.viiJ        '        AEC-LIKE  FEACTUEES  265 

through  the  whole  of  Iceland,  first  towards  the  south  and  then  in  an  arc 
towards  the  south-west,  so  that  the  peninsula  of  Reykjanes,  to  the  south, 
becomes  its  northern  boundary.  This  fault-trough,  which  is  sharply 
defined  in  the  north,  includes  the  largest  and  most  remarkable  of  the 
recent  volcanos  of  Iceland.  It  also  includes  within  its  arc  all  the  caldron 
fractures  mentioned  above. 

Its  western  edge  is  continued  from  the  north  along  the  western  border 
of  the  Skalfandi  fjord,  and  thence  for  a  distance  of  150  kilometers  towards 
the  south  as  a  steep  basaltic  cliff  rising  500-600  meters  above  the  bottom 
of  the  trough.  The  eastern  edge  runs  along  the  base  of  the  peninsula  of 
Langenes.    Skalfandi  fjord,  Husavik,  Tjornes,  Axar  fjord,  and  Thistil  fjord 


Fig.  23.    The  north-west  peninsula  of  Iceland.    (After  Thoroddsen.) 


lie  within  the  subsidence.  In  this  region  earthquakes  are  of  frequent 
occurrence.  The  downthrown  band  is  traversed  as  far  as  My vatn  and 
beyond  by  numerous  fissures,  which  strike  north  and  south,  parallel  to  the 
margins  of  the  fault-trough.  They  separate  lofty  horsts  from  deep  fault- 
troughs  ;  hot  springs  and  volcanos  accompany  their  course  like  beads  on 
a  thread ;  great  lava  floods  have  proceeded  from  them  \ 

From  about  lat.  65°  15'  N.  onwards  the  fissures  turn  towards  the  south- 

^  T.  Thoroddsen,  Vulkaner  i  det  N.  0.  Island,  Bihang  k.  Handl.  K.  Svensk.  Vet.  Ak., 
1888,  XIV,  Afd.  II,  no.  5,  71  pp.,  map ;  also  Mitth.  Geogr.  Ges.  Wien,  1891,  XXXIV, 
pp.  117  and  245;  Fra  det  N.  0.  Island,  Geogr.  Tidsskr.,  1896,  XIII,  24  pp.,  map,  and 
1898,  xiv,  pp.  7-28,  map,  and  in  particular  Die  Bruclilinien  Islands  und  ihre  Beziehungen 
zu  den  Vulkanen,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1905,  pp.  49-53,  map. 


266      LAUEENTIA  AND  NOETHERN  ISLANDS  [party 

south-west,  and  afterwards  more  towards  the  south-west ;  maintaining  this 
direction  they  reach  the  north  side  of  the  Vatna  Jokull  with  its  ice  mass, 
which,  entering  from  the  east,  overflows  a  large  part  of  the  downthrown 
region.  On  its  south-west  side  the  long  fissures  striking  to  the  south-west 
set  in,  among  them  the  Eld-gja  cleft,  30  kilometers  in  length,  the  equally 
long  Laki  cleft,  on  which  about  a  hundred  eruptive  centres  occur  ^.  In 
this  way  the  principal  zone  with  its  numerous  volcanos,  while  still  of 
considerable  breadth,  reaches  the  south  coast  in  numerous  south-westerly 
lines,  and  is  still  further  prolonged  in  the  chain  of  the  Vestmanna  islands 
and  the  Fuglasker  beyond  Reykjanes  into  the  sea.  On  the  peninsula  of 


Fig.  24.    Earthquakes  in  Iceland.    (After  Thoroddsen.) 


Reykjanes.  Thoroddsen  counted  at  least  30  volcanos  and  over  700  craters. 
The  soundings  made  by  the  Ingolf  expedition  show  that  a  submarine  ridge 
is  continued  beyond  the  Fuglasker  very  far  out  in  the  same  direction 
to  the  south-west  ^. 

*  A.  Helland,  Lakis  kratere  og  lavastromme,  Universitatsprogramm  for  2  Sem.,  1885, 
Kristiania,  1886  ;  Thoroddsen,  Fra  Island  indre  Hojland,  Geogr.  Tidsskr.,  1889,  24  pp., 
map;  and  Rejse  i  Vester-Skaptafells  Syssel,  op.  cit.,  1894,  XII,  pp.  167-234,  map  et 
passim. 

'  T.  Thoroddsen,  Geografiske  og  geologiske  Undersogelser  ved  den  sydlige  Del  af  Faxa 
fl6i,  Geogr.  Tidsskr.,  Ill,  pp.  11  and  21  ;  Islandske  Fjorde  og  Bugter,  op.  cit.,  1902,  XI, 
p.  7.  The  submarine  ridge,  as  it  is  represented  on  the  map  of  the  Ingolf  expedition,  is  so 
extremely  loBg  and  narrow  that  it  suggests  a  dragging  of  the  ashes  through  the  sea,  such 
as  occurred  in  the  Kuriles,  Geogr.  Tidsskr.,  1898,  XIV. 


CH.  VIl] 


EAETHQUAKES 


267 


In  the  region  south-west  and  west  of  Hecla  is  a  low-lying  strip  of  land 
bordering  on  the  sea  and  separated  rather  sharply  from  the  higher  land  in 
the  north.  Here  violent  earthquakes  occur ;  in  the  case  of  one  which  was 
felt  in  1896,  it  seemed  as  though  more  or  less  polygonal  areas  or  fragments 
of  the  Crust  could  be  distinguished  which  were  disturbed  on  different  days. 
This  also  is  a  downthrown  area ;  in  1896  the  shocks  always  proceeded  from 
the  boundary  towards  the  higher  land.  In  spite  of  their  violence  the 
adjacent  volcano  of  Hecla  showed  no  signs  of  activity  ^. 

These  events  mark  the  continuation  of  that  great  process  by  which  the 
great  basaltic  plateau  of  the  north  has  been  broken  up  and  let  down  into 
the  deep  Atlantic.  Notwithstanding  the  enormous  thickness  of  the  basalt 
substructure,  which  is  estimated  at  3,000  meters,  we  can  hardly  regard 
these  movements  as  deep-seated  tectonic  dislocations;  they  all  move  in 
a  *  panzer  * ;  Iceland  is  a  'panzer '  horst  ^, 

*  T.  Thoroddsen,  Jordskjselv  i  Islandske  sydlige  Lavland,  Geogr.  Tidsskr.,  1898,  XIV, 
pp.  93-113,  XV,  pp.  1-29 ;  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1901,  pp.  53-56,  map. 

^  [Panzer,  literally  a  coat  of  mail ;  an  armadillo  is  a  Panzerthier,  an  ostracoderm 
a  Panzerfisch.  We  might  translate  *  carapace  *,  but  it  seems  better,  for  several  reasons, 
to  retain  the  German  word  in  connexion  with  the  equally  German  '  horst '. — Note  by  Ed.] 


268 


CHAPTER  VIII 
AFEICAN  FKACTURES.    CAPE  MOUNTAINS 

1.  African  fractures.  East  Africa  to  lake  Rudolf.  Lake  Rudolf  to  Syria.  Sum- 
mary.   Cameroons.    Plan  of  the  African  fractures.    2.  Cape  mountains. 

1.  African  Fractures. 

East  Africa  to  lake  Rudolf ,  In  1881  Joseph  Thompson  wrote :  'There 
seems  to  be  sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  in  some  earlier  period  a  great 
line  of  volcanic  activity  extended  from  the  Cape  through  lake  Nyassa, 
Ugogo,  and  Mount  Kilima  Njaro  to  Abyssinia,  running  parallel  to  the 
Ocean  and  at  no  great  distance  from  it^.'  Douville  in  1886  expressed  a 
similar  view  and  even  suggested  that  the  Abyssinian  escarpment  and  the 
Dead  Sea  as  far  as  Lebanon  might  be  the  further  continuation  of  this 
line  2.  It  was  not  until  1887-88,  when  Count  Teleki  and  von  Hohnel, 
travelling  from  the  south,  had  succeeded  in  reaching  lat.  5°  N.  that  light 
was  thrown  on  the  real  state  of  affairs  ^ 

A  great  fracture  of  the  earth's  crust  proceeding  from  the  far  south 
extends  through  East  Africa.  It  does  not  terminate  until  after  traversing 
Syria  it  has  splintered  up  within  the  outer  arcs  of  the  folded  ranges  of  the 
Taurus.  For  long  distances  it  runs  with  the  meridian,  then  suddenly 
diverges  every  now  and  again  in  an  oblique  direction  to  the  north-west  or 
north-east,  but  always  returns  to  the  north-and-south  line;  it  generally 
adheres  to  the  neighbourhood  of  long.  36°  E.  The  geological  map  of 
Cape  Colony  marks  a  meridional  fault  between  lat.  29°  49'  and  28°  13'  S. 
in  long.  23°  E.,  which  cuts  through  very  ancient  sediments 

The  Karoo  ends  on  the  east  in  a  subsidence  (I,  p.  393).  At  its  foot, 
towards  the  sea,  lie  the  remains  of  the  Pondo  range,  which  will  be  discussed 
below.  At  about  lat.  27°  30'  S.  a  considerable  meridional  fault  sets  in, 
which  runs  through  almost  4  degrees  of  latitude  near  to  the  meridian 
of  27°  E. ;  this  is  Molengraaff's  '  grande  faille  de  I'Est  *.  It  cuts  off  the 
ancient  granites  of  Swaziland  on  the  east,  and  brings  next  to  them  a  long 

*  J.  Thomson,  Notes  on  the  Geology  of  East  Africa,  in  To  the  Central  African  Lakes  and 
back,  8vo,  London,  1881,  II,  p.  304. 

2  H.  Douville,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1885-1886,  3«  ser.,  XIV,  p.  240. 
L.  R.  V.  Hdhnel,  A.  Rosiwal,  F.  Toula,  and  E.  Suess,  Beitrag  zur  Kenntniss  des 
ostlichen  Africa,  Denkschr.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1891,  LVIII,  pp.  447-584,  maps. 

*  A.  Rogers,  Geological  map  of  the  Colony  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  sheet  XLV, 
1907. 


CH.  VIIl] 


NYASSA 


269 


downthrown  strip  of  Karoo  sandstone,  which  is  followed  towards  the  east 
by  an  equally  long  strip  of  diabase  and  amygdaloidal  melaphyre.  The 
latter  is  marked  on  the  maps  as  the  Lebomho  mountains.  In  Zululand  and 
Mozambique  it  forms  the  boundary  between  the  Mesozoic  sediments  and  the 
plain  of  the  east  coast  ^ 

MolengraafF  regards  the  Lebombo  fault  as  forming  part  of  the  East 
African  system  of  fractures. 

Trough  faults  first  make  their  appearance  in  their  typical  form  a 
little  south  of  lat.  15°  S.  The  east  border  of  lake  Shirwa  appears  to  be 
a  fracture ;  the  surface  of  the  lake  is  said  to  lie  at  a  level  of  500  meters ; 
soundings  have  revealed  depths  of  785  meters^.  The  lower  part  of  the 
Shire  river  lies  between  two  parallel  marginal  faults,  which  further  to  the 


Fig.  25.  Faults  on  lake  Nyassa  (after  Bornhardt)  ;  the  vertical  scale  is  ten  times  the 
horizontal.  Archaean  rocks  and  sandstone. 


north  bound  lake  Nyassa  (504  meters).  East  of  this  lake,  on  the  high-level 
gneiss,  Bornhardt  observed  repeated  meridional  faults  and  also  Karoo  beds 
with  remains  of  the  Gondwana  flora  let  down  in  fault-troughs.  The 
fault-trough  of  lake  Nyassa,  the  axis  of  which  in  its  southern  part  lies  in 
long.  34''  30'  E.,  runs  from  about  lat.  10°  15'  S.  onwards  towards  the  north- 
west. Its  breadth,  at  first  from  40-50  kilometers,  has  here  diminished  to 
30  kilometers  ^. 

We  will  now  supplement  the  accounts  of  Bornhardt  by  those  of 
Dantz*. 

Beyond  the  north  end  of  lake  Nyassa,  in  Awa-Nkond  Land,  we 
first  enter  on  a  strip  of  alluvium.    Then  follows  a  conspicuous  group 

^  G.  A.  F.  MolengraafF,  Geologie  de  la  Republique  Sud-Africaine  du  Transvaal,  Bulk 
Soc.  geol.  France,  1901,  4®  ser.,  I,  pp.  13-92,  maps,  in  particular  p.  86. 
2  Geogr.  Journ.  London,  1899,  XIV,  p.  319. 

^  W.  Bornhardt,  Zur  Oberflachengestaltung  und  Geologie  Deutsch-Ost-Africa's  (in 
Deutsch-Ost-Africa,  Wissenschaftliche  Forschungsresultate,  veroffentlicht  im  Auftrage 
der  Colonial-Abtheilung  des  auswartigen  Amtes),  8vo,  Berlin,  595  pp.,  maps ;  in  parti- 
cular pp.  161,  193,  197,  434 ;  also  Potonie,  op.  cit.,  p.  495  et  seq.  For  a  general  survey, 
E.  Freiherr  Stromer  von  Reichenbach,  Die  Geologie  der  deutschen  Schutzgebiete  in  Ost- 
Africa,  1896,  8vo,  Miinchen,  pp.  1-110,  maps. 

^  Dantz,Reisen  in  Deutsch-Ost-Africa  in  den  Jahren  1898,  1899,  1900,  Mitth.  deutsch. 
Schutzgebiete,  1902,  XV,  p.  34  and  continuation,  maps;  in  particular  1903,  XVI, 
pp.  127,  136,  188  ;  also  op.  cit.,  1900,  XIII,  p.  41. 


270 


APEICAN  FEACTUEES 


[part  V 


of  volcanos  with  several  craters  (Rungwe,  3,170  meters) ;  these  lie  in  the 
fault-trough  itself.  The  trough  then  divides.  One  branch,  the  Ilua  trough, 
runs  towards  the  north-east ;  the  eastern  border  is  not  so  well  marked  as 
the  western.  The  latter  unites  further  on  with  the  eastern  border  of  the 
great  East  African  fault-trough.  The  other  branch  of  the  Nyassa  trough 
runs  far  to  the  north-west,  nearly  following  the  strike  of  the  gneiss ;  it 
includes  lake  Rukwa^  which  has  no  outflow. 

The  Rukwa  trough  disappears  in  lat.  7°  S.,  but  to  the  west  of  it,  from 
lat.  8°  45'  S.  onwards,  the  long  trough  of  Tanganyika  sets  in,  running  to 
north-north-west.  Sprigade  has  shown  that  the  river  M'Kamba  turns 
in  the  north  round  the  end  of  the  western  border  of  the  Eukwa  trough  and 
enters  lake  Tanganyika  north  of  Karema  ^.  This  is  one  of  those  remark- 
able signs  of  irresolution  in  the  behaviour  of  the  watersheds  of  the  oldest 
districts,  which  have  been  pointed  out  by  Livingstone,  Cameron,  and  in 
particular  Cornet  ^»  The  fractures  and  subsidences  pass  over  towards  the 
west  into  the  region  of  the  Congo.  Lakes  Bangweolo  and  Moero  are 
certainly  described  as  shallow  lake-swamps,  but  Cameron  and  Stanley 
mention  a  hot  spring  on  the  way  to  the  Lualaba.  L.  A.  Wallace  observed 
hot  springs  between  lakes  Tanganyika  and  Moero,  on  the  east  border  of 
the  restricted  and  fairly  independent  marshy  depression  of  Wantipa,  which 
lies  at  the  foot  of  a  cliff  over  240  meters  in  height  ^ 

P.  Reichard  mentions  the  small  volcanic  cone  of  Sambululu,  and  at  no 
great  distance  from  it  hot  springs,  situated  east  of  lakeUpemba,  one  of  the 
lagoons  which  accompany  the  course  of  the  Lualaba  Finally,  Cornet  has 
shown  that  the  Lualaba,  from  lat.  9°  15'  S.  to  lat.  7°  45'  S.;  lies,  with  its 
lagoons,  in  a  fault-trough.  This  is  Cornet's  trough  of  Upemba ;  it  runs 
south-west  and  north-east,  with  a  length  of  200  kilometers  and  a  breadth 
of  30-45  kilometers.  On  the  north-west  it  is  bounded  by  the  Hakansson 
mountains,  in  the  south-east  by  the  Manika  range.  Hot  springs  accompany 
its  eastern  margin,  but  they  also  occur  on  the  Lufila,  on  the  other  side  of 
the  Manika  range  ^. 

The  fact  that  lake  Tanganyika  lies  in  an  inbreak  of  the  earth's  crust 

*  P.  Sprigade,  Begleitworte  zu  der  Karte  der  Gebiete  am  S.  Tanganjika  und  Rukwa- 
See,  Mitth.  deutsch.  Schutzgebiete,  1904,  XVII,  pp.  97,  98,  map. 

^  J.  Cornet,  Observations  sur  les  terrains  anciens  du  Katanga,  Ann.  Soc.  geol.  Beige, 
1897,  XXIV,  mem.,  pp.  25-190,  maps,  in  particular  p.  108. 

2  L.  A.  Wallace,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1899,  XIII,  p.  614  et  seq.,  map ;  Buttgenbach's  geolo- 
gical surveys  refer  to  a  line  somewhat  further  to  the  north :  Ann.  Soc.  geol.  Beige,  1906, 
XXXII,  mem.,  pp.  315-327,  map. 

*  P.  Reichard,  Mittheilungen  der  Africanischen  Gesellschaft,  1883-1885,  IV,  p.  304. 
It  was  here  that  Dr.  Reichard's  companion.  Dr.  Bohm,  succumbed  to  fever  on  March  27, 
1884. 

"  J.  Cornet,  Les  Dislocations  du  bassin  du  Congo,  I,  Le  Graben  de  1' Upemba,  Ann. 
Soc.  geol.  Beige,  1905,  XXXII,  mem.,  pp.  205-234,  map  ;  Sur  la  distribution  des  sources 
thermales  au  Katanga,  op.  cit.,  1906,  XXXIII,  mem.,  pp.  41-48. 


CH.  VIIl] 


KIVU 


271 


was  already  recognized  by  Stanley.  Sprigade's  map  shows  that  it 
maintains  a  very  uniform  breadth  of  about  35  kilometers  in  its  course 
from  south  to  north,  until  in  lat.  7°  30'  S.  the  east  coast  recedes  a  little ; 
then  between  lats.  7°  20'  and  T  S.  it  recedes  still  further,  so  that  from  this 
point  onwards  the  breadth  is  somewhat  over  50  kilometers.  It  is  possible 
that  parallel  fractures  advance  towards  the  lake.  At  the  same  time  the 
sides  of  the  trough  rise  high  above  the  lake,  which  lies  at  a  level  of 
899  meters,  while  at  its  north  end  the  east  side  rises  to  a  height  of  over 
2,500  meters,  and  the  west  side  to  3,290  metres.  The  highlands  on  both 
sides  consist  of  steeply  folded  mica -schists,  talc -schists,  and  quartzite. 
East  of  lake  Tanganyika  these  are  covered  by  sandstone,  which  probably 
belongs  to  the  Karoo. 

North  of  the  lake  the  fault-trough  maintains  the  same  breadth;  its 
direction  turns  gradually  out  of  the  north  into  the  north-north-east,  and 
within  it,  between  lats.  T  30'  and  1°  40'  S.,  lies  lake  Kivu,  discovered  by 
Van  Gotzen  in  1894. 

Herrmann  gives  the  following  account  of  it : — About  70  kilometers  from 
the  north  end  of  lake  Tanganyika,  which  is  marked  by  a  hot  sulphur 
spring,  the  trough  is  crossed  obliquely  by  a  ridge  formed  by  a  broad  block 
of  mica-schist,  only  partially  faulted  down ;  on  the  south  side  it  is  traversed 
by  basalts,  and  accompanied  by  hot  springs.  The  south  foot  of  the  ridge 
lies  at  a  height  of  980  meters;  on  its  north  side  is  lake  Kivu,  with  its 
surface  at  1,455  meters,  the  Rueizi  cuts  through  the  ridge  with  a  fall  of 
475  meters,  thus  affording  a  passage  from  lake  Kivu  into  lake  Tanganyika. 
On  the  west  side  of  lake  Kivu  the  edge  of  the  highland  lies  at  a  height  of 
3,500  meters,  on  the  east  at  a  height  of  2,800  meters.  At  the  north-east 
of  the  lake  the  eastern  side  forms  a  recess  like  a  caldron.  Close  by  rises 
the  great  volcanic  group  of  the  Kirunga  (Mfumhiro).  Herrmann  counted 
eight  lofty  mountains  bearing  craters  (Kari-simbi,  4,475  meters).  Their 
united  lava-flows,  chiefly  leucitic,  are  dammed  up  by  the  west  side  of  the 
trough ;  on  the  south-east  they  lie  up  against  the  border  of  the  caldron 
like  extensions,  but  with  interruptions,  so  that  a  chain  of  small  lakes  is 
formed.    Smaller  craters  occur  down  to  lake  Kivu  ^. 

North  of  the  Kirunga  volcanos,  the  trough  returns  to  its  usual  form. 
As  we  pass  beyond  lat.  1°  S.  a  broad  lake  bottom  shows  that  we  are 
approaching  lake  Albert  Edward  ;  we  are  now  in  the  fluvial  region  of  the 
Nile ;  the  Kirunga  volcanos  form  the  watershed  in  the  trough  between  the 
Nile  and  the  Congo. 

^  Herrmann,  Das  Vulkangebiet  des  centralafrikanischen  Grabens,  Mitth.  deutsch. 
Scbutzgebiete,  1904,  XVII,  pp.  42-64,  map ;  v.  Beringe,  Reisen  im  Gebiete  der  Kirunga- 
Vulkane,  op.  cit.,  1901,  XIV,  pp.  20-39,  map.  The  active  volcano  of  Namilagira  is 
described  by  G.  A.  Graf  v.  Gotzen,  Durch  Africa  von  Ost  nachWest,  8vo,  Berlin,  1895,  et 
passim ;  in  particular  Kersting,  op.  cit.,  p.  233  et  seq. 


272 


AFRICAN  FEACTUEES 


[part  V 


Lake  Albert  Edward  (915  meters)  is  overshadowed  towards  the  north- 
east by  the  highest  non-volcanic  mountain  of  Africa,  mount  Ruiuenzori. 
Stanley  first  saw  it  from  a  distance  in  1888 ;  Stairs  reached  it  in  1889,  and 
regarded  it  as  a  volcano ;  Stuhlmann  showed  in  1891  that  it  was  a  frag- 
ment of  the  ancient  crust  standing  between  two  dislocations ;  Scott  Elliot 
has  crossed  the  mountain  several  times.  Grauer  climbed  one  of  its  outlying 
peaks,  and  the  Duke  of  the  Abruzzi,  the  highest  peak  of  all  (Monte  Mar- 
gherita,  5,064  meters)  ^.  Kuwenzori  is  a  horst,  about  80  kilometers  in  length, 
which  stands  within  the  trough  next  its  eastern  side.  Its  steeper  slope  is 
towards  the  west,  and  its  highest  parts  are  probably  formed  of  granitic 
gneiss.  Small  crater-bearing  mountains  occur  at  its  eastern  and  southern 
foot  2. 

It  is  a  remarkable  fact  in  connexion  with  this  horst  that  it  rises  about 
2,000  meters  higher  than  the  neighbouring  highland,  of  which,  nevertheless, 
it  forms  a  part. 

The  trough,  still  maintaining  the  parallelism  of  its  walls,  and  with 
scarcely  diminished  breadth,  extends  beyond  lake  Albert  Edward  and 
includes  lake  AlheH  (590  meters),  then  the  waters  of  this  lake  plunge  over 
the  Murchison  falls,  and  there  the  trough  comes  to  an  end  ^. 

Lake  Victoria  Kyanza,  owing  to  its  very  different  and  more  circular 
outline,  the  character  of  its  shores,  which  are  for  the  most  part  flat,  and 
its  independent  central  position,  was  originally  regarded  as  a  shallow  basin 
lying  between  the  inbreaks,  though  Stuhlmann  held  from  the  first  that  its 
western  shore  is  a  fracture  In  Ankole,  that  is  towards  lake  Albert  Edward, 
numerous  small  craters  are  said  to  occur  ^.  Herrmann  recognized  a  number 
of  fractures  between  the  Victoria  Nyanza  and  lake  Tanganyika.  Dantz, 
after  an  investigation  of  the  southern  districts,  came  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  lake  had  been  produced  by  a  shallow  caldron  subsidence,  and  he  marked 
a  fracture  on  the  north  side  of  Speke  gulf  ^.  Thus  it  seems  possible  that  all 

»  Duke  of  the  Abruzzi,  The  Snows  of  the  Nile,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1907,  XXIX,  pp.  121- 
147,  map. 

'  G.  F.  Scott  Elliot,  The  Geology  of  Mt.  Ruwenzori  and  some  adjoining  regions  of 
Equatorial  Africa,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1895,  LI,  pp.  669-680,  map. 

'  In  travelling  to  the  north  of  the  Ruwenzori  from  the  south-east,  we  must  follow 
a  steep  descent  of  500  feet  to  a  plain  ;  this  is  obviously  alluvial,  and  to  reach  the  Semliki 
we  descend  another  400  feet  over  terraces;  A.  B.  Fisher,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1904,  XXIV, 
p.  256,  map. 

*  F.  Stuhlmann,  Mit  Emin  Pascha  ins  Herz  von  Africa,  8vo,  Berlin,  1894,  p.  728 ; 
on  p.  834  we  read  that  the  whole  of  the  intermediate  lake  region  is  traversed  by  meri- 
dional fissures. 

^  Geogr.  Journ.,  1902,  XIX,  p.  24. 

^  Herrmann,  Der  geologische  Aufbau  des  deutschen  West-Ufers  der  Victoria  Niansa, 
Mitth.  deutsch.  Schutzgebiete,  1899,  XII,  pp.  168-173,  map;  Dantz,  op.  cit.,  1902,  XV, 
pp.  63,  164,  198 ;  also  Gedge,  Proc.  Geogr.  Soc,  1892,  p.  322,  and  Capt.  H.  G.  Lyons,  On 
the  Variation  of  Level  of  Lake  Victoria  (W.  Garstin,  Report  upon  the  Basin  of  the 
Upper  Nile),  4to,  Cairo,  1904,  App.  Ill,  p.  1. 


CH.  VIIl] 


THE  EAST  AFKICAN  TROUGH 


273 


the  vast  region  lying  between  the  troughs  may  one  day  prove  to  be  a 
fractured  area. 

It  is  not  until  we  reach  the  south-east  of  the  Unyamwesi  tableland  that 
the  arrangement  of  the  several  fractures  again  becomes  clear.  They  have 
been  determined  chiefly  by  0.  Baumann,  H.  Meyer,  and  C.  Uhlig.  Dantz 
has  indicated  them  on  a  sketch-map  ^.  On  the  whole  a  tendency  towards 
a  radiate  arrangement  seems  to  exist  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Kilima  Njaro 
and  the  commencement  of  the  East  African  trough.  The  trough  of  the 
Wembere  steppe  strikes  to  the  north-east ;  the  outrunners  of  the  western 
side  of  the  Eua  depression,  which  proceed  from  the  north  of  lake  Nyassa, 
strike  to  the  north-north-east.  In  front  of  the  main  fault,  in  lat.  4°  28'  S., 
rises  the  volcano  of  Guru^  (3,100  meters).  The  main  fault  (Uhlig's  zone  of 
fracture)  unites  on  the  Natron  lake  with  the  western  fracture  of  the  East 
African  trough.  A  broad  horst  probably  extends  from  the  south  up  to  the 
north  border  of  the  Lettima  mountains,  south  of  Kilima  Njaro.  The 
trough  of  the  Pangani  strikes  to  the  north-north-west;  its  east  side  is 
formed  by  the  Par^  mountains  and  the  western  slopes  of  Usambara  ^, 

The  down-thrown  steppe  of  Wembere  deserves  some  attention.  At 
a  distance  of  70  kilometers  from  its  commencement,  the  bottom  of  this 
trough,  according  to  Baumann,  lies  at  1,120  meters.  Its  sides,  though 
not  high,  are  clearly  marked.  Towards  the  north-east  the  tableland  rises 
gradually  to  a  height  of  2,020  meters,  while  at  the  same  time  the  bottom 
of  the  trough  sinks  lower.  The  trough  terminates  in  the  salt  lake  of 
Eyassi  (1,050  meters)  which,  according  to  Jaeger's  accounts,  is  shut  off 
on  the  north-east  by  two  volcanos.  Beyond  these,  towards  the  north-east, 
is  the  great  Ngorongoro  crater,  situated  close  to  the  west  edge  of  the  East 
African  trough.  East  of  lake  Eyassi  lies  another  trough,  with  lake  Hohen- 
lohe,  discovered  by  Werther.  Wembere  lies  chiefly  in  granite  and  gneiss  ; 
its  north-eastern  part,  along  with  lake  Eyassi,  in  lavas  ^. 

The  Bast  African  trough, i.e.  the  stretch  of  land  which  extends  through 
eight  degrees  of  latitude,  from  Kilima  Njaro  (lat.  3°  S.)  to  the  north  end  of 
lake  Kudolf  (lat.  5"  N.)  has  been  investigated  of  late  years  by  numerous 
observers  ;  the  whole  of  its  southern  part  in  particular,  as  far  as  lat.  1°  30'  S. 

*  0.  Baumann,  Durch  Massailand  zur  Nilquelle,  8vo,  BerHn,  1894,  maps,  in  particular 
p.  133  et  seq. ;  H.  Meyer,  Kilimandjaro,  8vo,  BerHn,  1900,  maps,  in  particular  pp.  288- 
342  ;  Dantz,  Mitth.  d.  deutschen  Schutzgebiete,  1903,  XVI,  pi.  II. 

^  I  have  not  sufficient  data  to  form  an  opinion  as  to  the  significance  of  the  occurrence 
of  eruptive  rock  on  the  mountain  of  Jombo  (lat.  4°  26'  S.,  long.  39°  3'  E.,  nepheline 
syenite  with  dykes  of  camptonite)  and  on  the  adjacent  island  of  Wasin.  J.  W.  Gregory, 
Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1900,  LVI,  pp.  223-229  ;  both  localities  lie  near  the  German- 
English  frontier. 

'  0.  Baumann,  Durch  Massailand  zur  Nilquelle,  p.  139  ;  Stromer  y.  Reichenbach,  Die 
Geologic  der  deutschen  Schutzgebiete  in  Ost-Afrika,  p.  66  et  passim  ;  F.  Jaeger  (Zeitschr. 
f.  Erdk.,  1908,  p.  264)  describes  Ngorongoro  as  formed  not  by  explosion  but  '  probably 
by  the  after- sinking  of  the  imperfectly  solidified  magma  into  the  funnel'. 

SOLLAS  IV  T 


274 


APEICAN  FEACTUKES 


[part  V 


has  been  studied  by  Uhlig  and  Jaeger,  Kilima  Njaro  by  H.  Meyer,  and 
mount  Kenya  by  Gregory ;  but  the  main  features  of  the  structure  as  they 
were  determined  by  L.  v.  Hohnel  and  mapped  out  by  Toula  have  not  been 
seriously  altered  \  Of  chief  importance  is  the  fact  that  the  existence  of 
long  trough-like  subsidences  has  been  confirmed.  The  lines  of  fracture 
sometimes  cut  through  the  ancient  crust,  sometimes  the  superposed  lavas, 
so  that  within  the  subsidence  horsts  formed  of  the  ancient  crust  stand 
beside  those  formed  of  lava.  Even  recent  volcanos  have  been  cut  through. 
C.  Uhlig  found  that  the  side  of  the  trough  south-west  of  the  Natron  lake 
is  formed  by  successive  cliffs ;  the  western  side  belongs  to  the  ancient 
crust.  The  middle  part  of  the  border  cuts  through  three  great  volcanos, 
so  that  their  lava  streams  end  on  its  slope,  which  is  about  1,000  meters  in 
height  ^. 

The  western  side  is  more  nearly  continuous  than  the  eastern.  It  begins 
as  far  south  as  lat.  6°  S.,  with  a  north-north-easterly  direction.  The  scarp 
of  Mau  begins  in  lat.  3°  15'  S.  and  runs  without  interruption  at  least  as  far 
as  lat.  1°  N.  It  consists  chiefly,  though  not  exclusively,  of  lavas.  In  the 
north  the  narrow  horst  of  Kamassia,  formed  of  Archaean  rock,  lies  in  front 
of  it.  The  scarp  of  Suk,  a  continuation  of  Mau,  runs  off  to  the  north- 
north-west,  and  does  not  turn  back  to  the  west  side  till  it  has  reached  the 
middle  of  lake  Rudolf,  Thus  an  independent  fractured  area  arises  to  the 
south-west  of  the  lake  between  the  rivers  Trrguel  and  Kerio. 

The  eastern  side  only  becomes  continuous  on  reaching  lat.  T  30'  S.  It 
is  affected  by  the  interlocking  of  extensive  sheets  of  lava  in  which  step 
subsidences  occur,  as,  for  instance,  in  Kikuyu,  to  the  south-west  of  mount 
Kenya,  and  in  Leikipia  to  the  north-west  of  that  mountain.  Then  come 
the  great  volcanos  themselves :  Kilima  Njaro  with  Kimawensi  (5,148  meters), 
Kibo  (5,888  meters),  and  Mweru  (4,558  meters),  which  appear  to  stand  over 
a  transverse  fissure ;  it  is  more  probable,  however,  that  they  surmount  the 
radial  troughs  which  converge  from  south  to  north ;  then  follow  Doenyo 
Ngai  (active),  Gelei,  and  many  others,  such  as  mounts  Suswa,  Longonot, 
and  Chibcharanjani.  Further  towards  the  west  is  mount  Elgon  (4,558 
meters) ;  to  the  east,  mounts  Kenya  (5,138  meters),  Andrews  (active,  on  the 

^  C.  Uhlig,  Der  sogenannte  Grosse  ostafricanische  Graben  zwischen  Magad  und  Laua 
ya  Mueri,  Hettner,  Geogr.  Zeitschr.,  1907,  XIII,  pp.  478-505,  map  ;  H.  Meyer,  Kilimand- 
jaro;  J.  W.  Gregory,  The  great  Rift  Valley,  8vo,  London,  1896,  413  pp.,  maps  ;  The  Geo- 
logy of  Mount  Kenya,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1900,  LVI,  pp.  205-222,  map  et  passim  ; 
F.  Toula,  Geologische  Uebersichtskarte,  op.  cit.,  Tektonische  Skizze,  op.  cit.,  p.  576. 

^  C.  Uhlig,  Zeitschr.  Ges.  Erdk.,  1905,  p.  121.  This  distinguished  explorer  mentions 
(Geogr.  Zeitschr.,  1907,  pp.  489,  501)  that  he  has  observed  lavas  overlain  by  quartzite 
mica-schist  north-west  of  lake  Natron  (Magab),  and  conjectures,  but  w^ith  considerable 
reserve,  that  the  trough  may  have  arisen  by  overthrusting.  It  would  be  interesting  to 
know  whether  intercalation  in  sills  occurs.  I  know  of  no  case  of  overthrusting  in  any 
other  part  of  the  African  fractures. 


CH.VIII]  THE  ABYSSINIAN  TROUGH  275 

border  of  the  steppe  Sukuta),  Teleki  (active),  and  the  volcanos  of  Hohnel 
island,  Kulall,  and  Lubur  on  the  north-west  shore  of  lake  Eudolf  ^. 
Finally,  we  may  mention  the  crater  of  Ngorongoro  (between  lats.  3°  and 
3°  30'  S.),  which  is  20  kilometers  in  diameter.  Between  these  marginal 
fractures,  horsts,  and  volcanic  mountains  the  waters  collect  in  a  long 
chain  of  lakes  without  outflow.  The  water  level  stands  at  1,010  meters  in 
lake  Manyara,  at  608  meters  in  the  Natron  lake ;  then  it  rises  in  the 
several  lakes  until  it  reaches  1,869  meters  in  lake  Naivasha,  and  falls  again 
in  lake  Rudolf  to  400  meters. 

Numerous  hot  springs  are  associated  with  the  trough  ;  in  the  middle  of 
it,  on  an  island  in  the  Baringo,  intermittent  hot  springs  occur.  There  are 
many  other  features  also  connected  with  the  East  African  trough  which 
seem  likely  to  afford  fresh  information  as  to  the  nature  of  volcanic  pheno- 
mena. Mount  Kenya,  for  instance,  is  regarded  by  Gregory  as  a  volcano 
so  completely  dismantled  that  a  core  of  coarsely  crystalline  rock  (kenyte) 
is  now  exposed,  and  Mackinder,  who  succeeded  in  ascending  its  highest 
peak,  obtained  from  it  a  specimen  which,  as  Sollas  confirms,  actually 
resembles  this  rock  ^. 

In  any  case,  a  fairly  large  mass  of  ancient  rock  occurs  to  the  north- 
west of  lake  Rudolf  (Lamarr,  near  Hohnel) ;  but  it  is  possible  that 
a  subsidence  may  extend  directly  up  to  lake  Stefanie.  Max  Weber  has 
given  a  sketch-map  showing  the  course  of  the  trough  from  lake  Rudolf 
to  Danakil ;  it  is  based  chiefly  on  the  results  obtained  by  Neumann  and  by 
Italian  investigators.  In  accordance  with  the  observations  of  K.  Schmidt, 
the  trough  of  lake  Rudolf  is  represented  as  flattening  out  towards  the 
north,  and  from  the  northern  third  of  the  lake  a  branch  is  sent  off  in  a 
north-easterly  direction  to  lake  Stefanie.  This  agrees  fairly  well  with 
earlier  observations  \  ■ 

The  trough  now  turns  towards  the  north-east  and  runs  between  the 
Abyssinian  highland  in  the  north  and  the  Somali  segment  (Diddi,  highland 
of  the  Arussi)  in  the  south,  as  far  as  Adis-Abeba  and  Ankober. 

^  As  late  as  July,  1895,  the  volcano  of  Teleki  was  observed  by  Donaldson  Smith  (from 
some  distance,  it  is  true)  to  be  smoking  violently,  and  glowing  at  night  (Geogr.  Journ., 
1896,  VIII,  p.  230).  In  May,  1897,  it  was  visited  by  Cavendish  ;  he  states  that  according 
to  the  accounts  of  the  inhabitants  the  lake  had  risen  six  months  previously,  until  it 
reached  the  volcano,  and  a  violent  explosion  had  occurred.  At  the  time  of  his  visit  a 
sheet  of  lava  only  was  to  be  seen.  On  the  other  hand,  4-5  kilometers  further  south  a  new 
volcano,  that  of  Luttur,  had  arisen,  130  feet  in  height.  About  80  kilometers  south  of  the 
lake,  Cavendish  discovered  the  active  volcano  of  Sugobo  (or  Andrews,  op.  cit.,  1898,  XI, 
p.  390  et  seq.),  300  feet  in  height.  Welby's  account  of  1899  leaves  it  doubtful  whether 
he  had  not  mistaken  Luttur  for  Teleki  (op.  cit.,  1899,  XIV,  p.  318,  and  1900,  XVI,  p.  298). 
The  whole  matter  needs  explanation. 

2  H.  J.  Mackinder,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1900,  XV,  p.  481.  Here  the  mountain  was  assigned 
a  somewhat  less  height. 

^  Max  Weber,  Petrographische  Ausbeute  der  Expedition  Neumann-Erlanger  nach  Ost- 
Afrika  und  Abessynien,  1900-1901, Zeitschr.  Geogr.  Ges.Munchen,  1906, 1,  pp. 637-660, map. 

T  2 


276 


APEICAN  FEACTUEES 


[PAKT  V 


The  region  which  succeeds  lake  Stefanie  has  been  made  known  by  the 
travels  of  Bottego  and  the  collections  made  by  the  greatly  lamented  Sacchi, 
which  have  been  worked  out  by  A.  d'Ossat  and  Millosevich  ^.  Volcanic 
rock  forms  not  only  the  east  side  and  the  north  of  lake  Stefanie  but  also 
all  the  mountains  from  the  lower  Omo  in  lat.  5°  30'  N.  to  Queen  Margherita 
lake  (Abbaya  or  Pagade) ;  the  east  side  of  this  lake  consists  of  basalt,  the 
west  of  rhyolitic  rocks.  In  fact,  we  conclude  from  the  accounts  of  Erlanger 
and  Neumann  that  the  long  chain  of  lakes  which  marks  the  trough  from 
lake  Stefanie  through  Ciamo  (Gandjule),  Queen  Margherita  lake,  and  others 
up  to  lat.  8°  N.  lies  wholly,  or  almost  wholly,  in  recent  volcanic  rock. 
At  the  same  time  there  are  separations  and  connexions  of  the  most  various 
kinds. 

Neumann  found  that  lakes  Ciamo  and  Queen  Margherita  are  .without 
outflow  during  low  water,  but  at  high  water  are  connected  with  lake 
Stefanie  by  the  river  Sagan.  The  group  of  lakes  situated  north  of 
lat.  7°  N.  (Schale,  Lamina,  Korre)  is  separated  from  the  preceding  by 
the  volcano  of  Fike,  and  from  lake  Zuaj  by  the  volcano  of  Alutu  ^. 

Between  lake  Zuaj  and  Adis-Abeba  rises  the  mountain  of  Zukualay 
which  bears  a  sacred  crater  lake.  Here  the  Abyssinian  trough  terminates, 
and  we  now  enter  the  vast  volcanic  region  of  Afar  (Danakil).  It  is 
bounded  on  the  west  by  the  meridional  scarp  of  the  Abyssinian  highland, 
which  consists  of  gneiss  and  a  Mesozoic  series,  and  on  the  south  of  the 
northern  border  (running  east  and  west)  of  the  Somali  segment,  which  is 
formed  of  flatly-bedded  Mesozoic  sediments.  Further  on,  this  same  northern 
border  forms  the  south  coast  of  the  Arabian  gulf.  Towards  the  north-east 
Afar  extends  to  the  Red  Sea  ^.  It  is  an  inhospitable  land,  strewn  over 
with  volcanos,  lava  fields,  and  hot  springs.  It  contains  several  tracts 
within  it  which  lie  below  the  level  of  the  sea.  The  surface  of  lake  Assal, 
near  Tajura  lies  at  —170  meters.  Volcanic  eruptions  are  not  infrequent; 
in  June,  1907,  the  volcano  Afdera  (near  the  coast,  north  of  lat.  13°  N.) 

*  G.  de  Angelis  d'Ossat  e  F.  Millosevich,  Seconda  spedizione  Bottega,  Studio  geologico 
sul  materiale  raccolto  da  M.  Sacchi  (publ.  by  the  Soc.  Geogr.  Ital.),  8vo,  Rome,  1900, 
212  pp.,  map. 

^  In  particular  C.  Freiherr  von  Erlanger,  Verb.  Ges.  Erdk.  Berlin,  1901,  p.  240,  map, 
pi.  VIII ;  and  0.  Neumann,  Von  der  Somali-Kiiste  durch  Siid-Ethiopien  zum 
Sudan,  Zeitscbr.  Ges.  Erdk.  Berlin,  1902,  I,  pp.  1-32,  map  ;  in  particular  Neumann, 
pp.  17,  30  ;  Graf  E.Wickenburg,  Von  Dscbibuti  bis  Lamu,  Peterm.  Mittb.,  1903,  pp.  193- 
198,  maps ;  also  P.  Maud,  Explorations  in  tbe  South  Borderland  of  Abyssinia,  Geogr. 
Journ.,  1904,  XXIII,  pp.  522-579,  map. 

^  Denkschr.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1891,  LVIII,  p.  567  et  seq. ;  Vicomte  E.  de  Poncins, 
Bull.  Soc.  geogr.  Paris,  1898,  XIX,  p.  454  et  seq. ;  Fritscbe,  Peterm.  Mittb.,  1890,  p.  113, 
pi.  9 ;  U.  Grubenmann,  Beitrage  zur  Geologie  von  Abessynien,  Mittb.  Tburgau.  Natf. 
Ges.  Frauenfeld,  1896,  XII,  20  pp. ;  and  many  otber  vs^orks,  enumerated  in  Dainelli,  Mari- 
nelli  e  Mori,  Bibliografia  Geografica  d.  Col.  Erythr.,  Riv.  geogr.  ital.,  1907,  XIV, 
pp.  1-72. 


CH.  VIIl] 


AKABAH 


277 


formed  a  new  crater,  and  poured  forth  a  great  stream  of  lava.  Detailed 
information  on  special  areas  has  been  furnished  by  Dainelli  and  Marinelli. 
According  to  these  investigators,  lake  Alel  Bad  in  North  Afar,  lies  in 
a  region  stretching  north-west  and  south-east,  of  which  about  5,000 
square  kilometers  lie  below  the  sea-level,  and  of  this  area  a  half  lies  below 
—  100  meters.  The  deepest  place  lies  at  —120  meters.  It  is  a  salt  plain  ; 
at  its  north-west  end  rises  the  extinct  volcano  of  Marah^,  and  at  its  south- 
east end  the  volcano  of  Erto-Ald,  an  eruption  of  which  is  recorded  in  older 
accounts.  Further  to  the  north-west  a  similar  region  borders  the  east  foot 
of  the  Abyssinian  tableland  up  to  the  spot  where  it  reaches  the  west  side 
of  the  gulf  of  Zula  (Massaua) ;  within  this  region  rises  the  volcano  of  Alid 
and  a  great  number  of  small  eruptive  centres  extend  as  far  as  the  remains 
of  the  volcano  of  Jalua,  which  lies  near  the  gulf  ^. 

The  precipitous  boundaries  of  the  Abyssinian  and  Somali  highlands 
meet  near  Ankober  almost  at  a  right  angle.  If  we  imagine  the  low-lying 
country  of  Afar  to  be  submerged  beneath  the  sea,  these  boundaries  become 
coasts,  and  the  new  outline  corresponds  in  a  truly  striking  manner  with 
that  of  the  Arabian  coast,  which  lies  opposite.  That  the  Red  Sea  is  itself 
a  fault- trough  has  been  mentioned  previously  (I,  p.  374).  Soundings 
made  by  the  'Pola'  have  shown  that  the  greatest  depth,  2,190  meters, 
occurs  in  lat.  22°  7'  N.^.  A  number  of  volcanic  islands  rise  from  the  sea. 
At  Mount  Sinai  the  trough  divides  in  a  fork ;  or,  more  correctly,  its  western 
part  is  continued  as  the  Gvlf  of  Suez,  while  the  Gulf  of  Ahabah  represents 
a  new  trough  which  arises  with  a  divergent  direction  close  to  the  meridian 
of  35°  E.,  and  running  to  the  north-north-east  approaches  the  meridian  of 
36°  E.  In  Jubal  strait,  near  the  entrance  to  the  gulf  of  Suez,  the  bottom 
ascends  almost  immediately  from  —1,000  meters  to  —80  meters,  and  does 
not  sink  again  below  —82  meters  throughout  the  rest  of  its  course  to 
Suez.  The  gulf  of  Akabah  is  separated  from  the  sea  by  a  block  which  lies 
at  a  level  of  —141  meters  west  of  the  island  of  Tiran,  and  east  of  this 
island  rises  to  —16  meters,  but  beyond  this  block  considerable  areas  lie 
below  —1,000  meters;  the  greatest  depth  is  1,287  meters,  and  the  coasts 
are  very  steep  ^. 

The  Cretaceous  and  Eocene  beds  which  overlie  the  Archaean  formations, 

1  G.  Dainelli  e  0.  Marinelli,  Delia  condizione  altimetTica  e  dei  limiti  della  grande 
depressione  Dancala,  Riv.  geogr.  Ital.,  1896,  XIII,  fasc.  7,  19  pp.,  map,  op.  cit.,  1906  and 
1907,  several  ijassages  on  the  volcanos  of  Danakil,  in  particular  Erto-Ale  and  Marahd ; 
also  Escursione  al  Vulcano  Alid,  op.  cit.,  1907,  XIV,  20  pp.,  map.  Maps  of  Afar,  e.  g. 
Fritsche  (Zeila  to  Ankober),  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1890,  pi.  9,  and  K.  Schmidt  (Galla  lands), 
op.  cit.,  1905,  pi.  XVII. 

*  J.  Luksch,  Expedition  auf  S.M.  Schiff  '  Pola '  in  das  Eothe  Meer,  VI,  Physikalische 
Untersuchungen,  Denschr.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1898,  LXV,  pp.  351-422,  maps,  in 
particular  p.  354. 

^  J.  Luksch,  ibid.,  p.  358. 


278  AFEICAN  FEACTUKES  [paetv 

once  extended  without  interruption  across  the  whole  breadth  of  the  Red 
Sea  to  Arabia ;  this  is  shown  by  the  long  step-faults,  running  parallel 
to  the  shore  of  the  Red  Sea,  which  were  observed  by  E.  Fraas  near 
Kosseir,  and  by  Barron  and  Hume  in  the  same  locality,  and  also  two 
degrees  further  north  on  the  Gebel  Zeit,  actually  in  the  region  of  the 
gulf  of  Suez^  Jebel  Ataka,  near  Suez,  is  cut  through  by  a  fault, 
with  a  downthrow  towards  the  sea  (I,  p.  371) ;  Beyrich  believed  that 
the  Miocene  of  Suez  is  also  occasionally  faulted  down  into  troughs 
(I,  p.  379). 

Isolated  fractures  and  the  occurrence  of  basalt  show  that  inbreak  and 
subsidence  have  left  their  traces  as  far  west  as  the  Nile  and  even  beyond. 
It  seems  to  be  generally  admitted  that  a  long  trough,  like  an  inbreak,  or 
a  series  of  fractures,  borders  the  Nile  from  Cairo  to  Keneh,  i.e.  for  a  distance 
of  4  degrees  of  latitude  ^.  The  true  state  of  affairs  is  not  yet  fully  under- 
stood. The  whole  of  the  Syrian  coast  is  likewise  a  comparatively  recent 
dislocation  (I,  p.  373). 

On  an  earlier  page  (I,  p.  380)  we  have  mentioned  the  occasional  incur- 
sion of  Mediterranean  waters  into  the  Erythraean  region,  and  of  Erythraean 
waters  into  the  existing  region  of  the  Nile ;  this  subject  has  been  treated 
in  detail  by  Blanckenhorn.  Hume  has  since  shown  that  Mediterranean 
deposits,  easily  recognized  by  the  presence  of  the  great  Ostrea  giengensis, 
reach  the  east  side  of  southern  Sinai,  where  they  are  steeply  upturned 
along  faults.  Mount  Sinai  is  cut  through  in  places  by  a  number  of  sub- 
meridional  faults.  It  is  evident  that  some  of  the  fractures  at  least  are 
more  recent  than  Ostrea  giengensis  ^. 

The  gulf  of  Akabah  is  continued  as  a  trough  into  the  Wady  Arabah,  at 
the  bottom  of  which  P.  Musil,  as  he  kindly  informs  me,  observed  an  isolated 
occurrence  of  dark  lava.  On  the  other  side  of  a  Cretaceous  threshold, 
-h  230  to  240  meters  in  height,  we  reach  the  deep  asymmetrical  trough  of 
the  Dead  Sea  which  is  continued  in  the  valley  of  the  J ordan  (I,  p.  373) 

*  E.  Fraas,  Geognostisches  Profil  vom  Nil  zum  Rothen  Meer,  Zeitsclir.  deutsch.  geol. 
Ges.,  1900,  LII,  pp.  1-50,  map ;  T.  Barron  and  W.  F.  Hume,  La  Geologie  du  Desert 
oriental  de  T^lgypte,  C.  R.  VIII®  Congres  geol.  Paris,  1900,  33  pp.,  map. 

^  e.  g.  T.  Barron  and  W.  F.  Hume,  op.  cit. ;  also  H.  J.  L.  Beadnell,  op.  cit.,  and  Geol. 
Mag.,  1901,  new  ser.,  Dec.  IV,  vol.  VIII,  p.  28  ;  and,  in  particular,  M.  Blanckenhorn,  Die 
Geschichte  des  Nilstroms  in  der  Tertiar-  und  Quartarperiode,  sowie  des  palaolithischen 
Menschen  in  Aegypten,  Zeitschr.  Ges.  Erdk.  Berlin,  1902,  pp.  694-762,  maps.  Deperet 
and  Fourtau  have  shown  (C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  13  aout  1900)  that  near  Suez,  the  first 
Mediterranean  stage,  a  representative  of  the  Schlier  and  the  second  Mediterranean  stage 
may  be  recognized  ;  also  Blanckenhorn,  Centralbl.  f.  Min.,  1900,  pp.  209-216. 

^  W.  F.  Hume,  The  Topography  and  Geology  of  the  Peninsula  of  Sinai  (South-east 
portion),  Survey  Department,  Egypt,  8vo,  Cairo,  1906,  280  pp.,  maps,  in  particular 
p.  145. 

*  These  more  northerly  stretches  were  described  in  greater  detail  in  Denkschr.  k. 
Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1891,  LVIII,  p.  572  et  seq. 


cH.viiiJ  DESERT  OF  PALMYEA 


279 


It  extends  to  lake  Huleh ;  then  a  change  occurs,  of  which  Diener  has  given 
the  first  detailed  description  ^ 

The  trough  turns  off  to  the  north-north-east  and  forms,  between  Lebanon 
and  Anti-Lebanon,  the  long  valley  of  the  BeJcda,  which  contains  the  ruins  of 
Baalbek.  At  the  same  time  a  divergent  branching  or  virgation  of  fissures 
occurs,  extending  obliquely  across  Anti-Lebanon  and  far  to  the  north-east 
beyond  Palmyra.  Here,  in  the  desert  of  Palmyra,  Diener  has  discovered 
marine  Pliocene  beds  at  a  level  of  +  650  meters.  This  bulging  up  of  the 
ground  and  splitting  up  of  the  fractures  has  been  caused  either  by  a 
deformation  of  the  earth  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  folded  arc  of  the 
Taurus,  or,  as  Blanckenhorn  believes,  by  the  lava-covered  subsidence  of 
the  Damascene  which  lies  towards  the  south  and  south-east. 

On  the  other  side  of  the  Bekaa,  that  is  beyond  lat.  34°  30'  N., 
Blanckenhorn  has  studied  the  country  as  far  as  the  Amanus,  that  is,  into 
the  region  of  the  Tauric  folds ;  he  has  also  given  an  admirable  survey  of  the 
structural  lines  of  the  whole  of  Syria  ^.  The  trough  returns  again  to  the  meri- 
dional direction,  cuts  through  the  basalt  of  Homs,  thereby  forming  the  little 
Bekaa,  and  extends  through  the  plain  of  el-Ghab  along  the  east  side  of  the 
Ansarieh-range,  which  is  faulted  down  in  steps,  as  far  north  as  lat.  35°  50'  N., 
where  the  range  sinks  beneath  the  sediments  of  the  second  Mediterranean 
stage.  In  this  northern  tract  traces  also  exist  of  a  virgation  directed  to 
the  north-north-east  or  north-east. 

We  have  now  reached  the  depression  of  el-Amk  (lake  el-Bahra,  140 
meters),  north-east  of  Antioch.  Blanckenhorn  conjectures  that  the  fractures 
do  not  end  here,  and  that  their  continuation  is  directed  towards  the  north- 
east, that  is,  it  lies  in  the  strike  of  the  Tauric  folds  between  the  Drusen 
range  and  the  Amanus.  In  fact  F.  Schaffer  has  since  traced  a  trough  for 
a  distance  of  150  kilometers  in  the  valley  of  the  Kara-Su,  and  into  the 
neighbourhood  of  Marash ;  it  is  accompanied  by  flows  of  basaltic  and 
doleritic  lava  (III,  p.  319)  ^ 

Survey  of  the  East  African  troughs.  The  area  traversed  by  the  frac- 
tures (disregarding  that  of  the  Lebombo  mountains)  extends  from  lat.  15°  S. 
to  lat.  37°  30'  N. ;  its  length  amounts  to  52§  degrees  of  latitude.  At  the 
same  time  the  frequent  divergence  from  a  definite  meridional  zone,  and 

^  C.  Diener,  Libanonische  Grundlinien  der  physischen  Geographic  und  Geologie  von 
Mittel-Syrien,  8vo,  Wien,  1886,  412  pp.,  maps.  Here  a  doubtful  dome  of  basalt,  Tell-el- 
Rurab,  is  marked  south  of  Palmyra  within  the  virgation.  Further  vs^est  (in  about 
long.  37°  40'  E.)  von  Oppenheim  mentions  the  twin  volcanos  of  Abd  and  Abde  (slave  and 
slave-girl),  Verb.  Ges.  Erdk.,  1894,  XXI,  p.  209. 

*  M.  Blanckenhorn,  Die  Strukturlinien  Syriens  und  des  Rothen  Meeres,  in  Festschrift 
fiir  Freiherr  von  Richthofen  zum  60.  Geburtstag,  8vo,  Berlin,  1893,  pp.  113-180,  maps. 

^  F.  Schaffer,  Geologische  Studien  im  siidostlichen  Kleinasien,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss. 
Wien,  1900,  CIX,  pp.  498-525,  in  particular  p.  524  ;  and  op.  cit.,  1901,  CX,  pp.  5-18,  in 
particular  p.  16  ;  also  Feterm.  Mitth.,  1901,  p.  133. 


280 


AFKICAN  FRACTURES 


[PAET  V 


the  equally  frequent  return  to  it,  deserves  attention.  The  axis  of  lake 
Nyassa  lies  in  long.  34°  30'  E.,  the  more  northerly  axis  of  lake  Rudolf  in 
long.  36°  E.,  and  far  to  the  north  the  axis  of  the  Dead  Sea  and  the  valley 
of  the  Jordan  lies  in  long.  35°  30'  E. 

It  cannot  be  shown  that  all  parts  of  this  great  system  of  fractures  and 
inbreaks  are  of  the  same  age.  Kohlschiitter,  in  particular,  believed  that 
older  troughs  have  been  cut  through  by  more  recent,  thus  he  supposed 
that  the  Rukwa  trough  is  continued  across  lake  Tanganyika  to  the  Lukuga, 
thus  cutting  through  Tanganyika,  and  similarly  that  a  trough  which  follows 
the  Wembere  is  cut  off  near  the  crater  of  Ngorongoro,  north  of  lake 
Manjara,  by  the  meridional  trough  of  East  Africa  ^  On  these  points  we 
must  await  more  detailed  information.  Lake  Tanganyika  is  frequently 
spoken  of  as  one  of  the  older  members  of  the  system.  Its  strange  fauna 
is  regarded  as  a  marine  relic;  yet  a  medusa,  which  is  one  of  its  most 
characteristic  forms,  has  also  been  discovered  in  lake  Victoria. 

Issel  justly  lays  stress  on  the  fact  that  the  sea  did  not  enter  the 
Erythraean  trough  until  a  late  period^.  The  series  of  middle  and  upper 
Tertiary  sediments,  as  it  is  presented  by  the  greater  part  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean coasts,  as  it  is  still  to  be  seen  in  Suez,  and  in  part  even  near  Scherm 
on  the  south  of  Mount  Sinai,  is  here  absent,  with  the  exception  of  some 
recent  deposits,  possibly  corresponding  to  those  Erythraean  beds  which 
extend  at  a  level  of  +  67  meters  as  far  as  the  pyramids  of  Ghizeh  into  the 
lower  valley  of  the  Nile  (I,  p.  379).  These  beds  possibly  indicate  the  first 
filling  of  the  Red  Sea.  All  the  other  downthrown  areas,  with  the  exception 
of  the  Syrian  coast  line,  present  no  trace  whatever  of  an  ingress  of  the  sea. 
The  terraces  of  lake  Rudolf,  the  lower  Omo,  lake  Stefanie,  and  Afar 
contain  shells  of  the  existing  Nilotic  fauna.  The  terraces  of  the  Dead  Sea 
and  the  Jordan  contain  existing  freshwater  shells ;  in  the  lake  of  Tiberias 
fishes  of  the  Nile  live  even  at  the  present  day  (I,  p.  385).  The  recent 
Melanopsides  beds  were  followed  by  lava-flows  ^  and  in  the  north  the 
movements  appear  to  have  been  so  recent  that  similar  sediments  are  found 
faulted  down  in  troughs  of  still  more  recent  date. 

It  is  not  until  we  reach  the  north  that  we  find  the  deposits  of  the 

^  E.  Kohlschiitter,  Die  kartographischen  und  geophy sischen  Arbeiten  der  Pend el-Expedi- 
tion der  Koniglichen  Gesellschaft  der  Wissenschaften  zu  Gottingen  in  Ost-Afrika,  Verli. 
XIII.  deutsch.  Geographen-Tags  zu  Breslau,  1901,  pp.  133-153,  map.  For  the  latter 
place,  C.  Uhlig's  map,  Hettner,  Geogr.  Zeitschr.,  1907,  XIII,  and  F.  Jaeger's  map,  Zeitschr. 
f.  Erdk.,  1908. 

^  A.  Issel,  Morfologia  e  genesi  del  Mar  Rosso,  III^  Congr.  geograf.  ital.,  Firenze,  1899, 
17  pp.,  map;  also  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  Beige,  1899,  XIII,  Mem.,  pp.  65-84. 

'  F.  Noetling,  Die  Lagerungsverhaltnisse  einer  quartaren  Fauna  im  Gebiete  des 
Jordanthales,  Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1886,  XXXVIII,  pp.  807-823,  map ;  and  Geo- 
logische  Beschreibung  der  Umgebung  von  el-Hammi,  Zeitschr.  deutsch.  Palastina-Ver., 
1886,  X,  pp.  59-88,  map. 


CH.VIII]    SUMMARY  TO  AFEICAN  FRACTURES  281 


third  and  fourth  Mediterranean  stage  making  their  appearance  on  the 
coast;  as  already  mentioned,  marine  sediments  reach  the  desert  of 
Palmyra. — 

Three  independent  processes  may  be  distinguished  here :  first,  the 
rending  open  of  the  ground ;  second,  the  subsidence  of  the  walls  of  the 
fissure ;  third,  the  welling  up  of  lava.  Not  that  these  processes  are  strictly 
separated  in  point  of  time ;  the  trough-faults  in  lavas,  like  that  of  Mau, 
show  that,  in  some  districts,  great  flows  have  been  followed  by  great 
inbreaks.  But  the  rending  open  is  evidently  the  primary,  and  the  appear- 
ance of  lavas  the  secondary  or  accompanying  phenomenon. 

We  must  not  form  too  rigid  a  conception  of  such  troughs,  as  though 
they  were  strips  of  land  let  down  between  two  parallel  faults.  Step  faults 
are  to  be  seen  on  lake  Tanganyika  and  in  the  lava  fields  which  lie  before 
mount  Kenya,  on  the  west  coast  of  the  Red  Sea  also,  and  more  to  the  north 
on  mount  Lebanon  and  the  slopes  of  the  Jebel  Ansarieh.  We  shall  form 
a  more  correct  picture  if  we  think  of  these  step  faults  as  repeated  on  both 
sides,  down  to  the  middle  of  the  valley  bottom — many  long  strips,  which 
become  wedge-shaped  below,  being  let  down  along  them  to  unequal  depths. 
In  this  way  horsts  have  been  left  standing  within  the  field  of  subsidence, 
for  example,  Kamassia,  west  of  lake  Baringo,  and  the  threshold  to  the 
south  of  lake  Albert  Edward.  The  decrease  in  the  formation  of  fissures 
is  clearly  seen  in  North  Syria,  where  the  virgation  and  many  other  circum- 
stances point  to  the  advance  of  the  process  from  the  south  towards  the 
north. 

Any  attempt  to  explain  the  situation  from  local  causes,  such  as  a  parti- 
cular position  of  the  fault-planes,  which  have  been  supposed  to  diverge 
downwards,  is  seen  to  be  impossible  in  view  of  the  vast  extent  of  the  area 
involved.  A  process  which  finds  expression  over  more  than  52  degrees 
of  latitude,  must  have  its  origin  in  the  structure  of  the  planet  itself.  For 
this  great  region  we  are  led  to  assume  the  existence  of  tensions  in  the 
outer  crust  of  the  earth  which  have  acted  in  a  direction  perpendicular  to 
that  of  the  fissures,  and,  in  this  case,  as  it  happens,  perpendicular  to  the 
meridian. 

The  phenomenon  is  a  rending  asunder  caused  by  contraction;  the 
fissures  have  opened  from  above  downwards. 

This  fact  has  an  important  bearing  on  the  origin  of  volcanos. 

There  are  some  great  segments  of  troughs,  e.g.  lake  Tanganyika,  700 
kilometers  in  length,  in  which  hot  springs  occur,  but  no  volcanos.  On  the 
other  hand,  there  are  some  very  insignificant  fissures  in  Syria  which  are 
bordered  by  chains  of  small  volcanic  outbursts.  If  we  restrict  our  atten- 
tion to  mount  Kenya  or  tlie  group  of  the  Kirunga  volcanos  on  lake  Kiwu, 
we  shall  seek  in  vain  for  dykes  or  chains  of  volcanos  which  might  indicate 
a  connexion  with  other  volcanos.    Yet  a  survey  of  the  whole  shows  us 


282 


AFEICAN  FEACTUKES 


[part  V 


that  they  form  part  of  a  common  scheme  in  dependence  on  the  great 
system  of  fissures. 

The  clefts  rent  open  from  above  downwards,  and  the  clefts  between 
subsided  blocks,  have  in  some  places  rendered  volcanic  outbreaks  possible, 
in  others  not ;  in  many  places  the  eruptions  still  continue  at  the  present 
day.  Whether  large  or  small  crater  mountains  should  arise  has  probably 
been  determined  by  quite  secondary  movements.  Along  the  axis  of  the 
East  African  trough  there  is  evidently  great  volcanic  activity.  In  the 
trough  itself  there  are  only  a  very  few  great  volcanic  cones ;  this  is 
probably  owing  to  the  fact  that  it  is  within  this  trough  that  the  greater 
part  of  the  tectonic  changes  is  effected,  so  that  no  funnel  has  time  to  grow 
old,  and  new  ones  are  continually  arising. 

Kamerun.  Anno  Bom,  St.  Thomas,  Princes  Island,  and  Fernando  Po 
form  a  series  of  volcanos  running  in  a  straight  line  between  north-north-east 
and  north-east.  St.  Helena  is  also  frequently  included  in  this  series. 
On  the  mainland  this  corresponds  first  with  the  great  volcanic  Kamerun 
range.  According  to  the  description  of  the  south-west  Kamerun  given  by 
Esch,  all  the  rest  of  the  land  to  a  little  beyond  lat.  5°  N.  consists,  with  the 
exception  of  a  less-elevated  belt  of  Tertiary  and  Cretaceous  sediments  near 
the  sea,  of  ancient  crystalline  rocks  with  superposed  recent  volcanos  ^. 

Esch  terms  it  a  fractured  region ;  this  description  is  supported  by  the 
above-mentioned  Kamerun  range  with  its  numerous  craters  (3,665  meters), 
by  the  ancient  crystalline  horst  of  Rumpi  in  the  north-west  (rising  to 
2,000  meters,  40  kilometers  long),  the  Bakundu  subsidence,  the  fractured 
district  of  Nkosi,  with  its  numerous  small  eruptive  centres  ^,  the  trough  of 
Kidde,  the  horst  Kope,  with  the  volcanos  crowning  it  (2,050  meters),  and 
finally,  the  transverse  range  of  Manenjuba,  with  the  great  crater  of  Ebogga 
(2,110  meters). 

South-west  Kamerun  thus  presents  a  structure  which  resembles  that 
of  the  south-west  half  of  the  East  African  trough,  with  the  following 
points  of  difference  :  in  Kamerun  the  fractures  do  not  bound  a  continuous 
trough,  the  general  strike  of  its  fractures  is  not  north  and  south  but  north- 
north-east,  corresponding  to  the  line  running  from  Anno  Bom  to  Fernando 
Po,  and  finally,  that  its  waters  flow  freely  to  the  sea. 

From  the  valuable  investigations  of  Passarge  in  Adamaua,  we  know  that 
precisely  similar  relations  prevail  fromlat.  7°  30'  N.  to  lat.  10°30'N.  where  we 

*  E.  Esch,  in  Esch,  Solger,  Oppenheim  and  Jaekel,  Beitrag  zur  Geologie  von  Kamerun, 
8vo,  Stuttgart,  1904,  298  pp.,  map,  in  particular  pp.  1-43;  Der  Vulcan  Etinde  in 
Kamerun  und  seine  Gesteine,  Sitz.  k.  preuss.  Akad.  Wiss.  Berlin,  1901,  pp.  277-299  and 
400-417. 

'  '  Their  activity  seems  to  have  been  continued  for  a  short  period  only,  and  with  a  few 
exceptions  they  seem  to  have  served  as  funnels  for  the  common  centre  of  eruption,  by 
which  it  was  able  to  relieve  itself  of  excessive  gas  pressure,'  Esch,  op.  cit.,  p.  35.  Other 
volcanos  are  described  by  P.  Rohrbach,  Zeitschr.  Ges.  Erdk.,  1907,  pp.  254-256. 


CH.  VIIl] 


KAMERUN 


283 


approach  the  region  of  lake  Chad,  which  is  without  outflow.  The  resemblance 
in  structure  is  so  great  that  the  designation  '  Kamerun  line  '  arose,  not  in  the 
south,  but  here  in  the  north,  and  was  indeed  given  by  Passarge  ^. 

Here,  too,  the  land  consists  of  ancient  crystalline  and  recent  volcanic 
rocks.  Here,  too,  the  prevalent  direction  is  N.  30°-35°  E. ;  the  east-and- 
west  direction  seldom  occurs.  The  Tschebtsche  range,  a  ridge  of  granite 
and  gneiss,  1,400-2,000  meters  in  height,  extending  to  the  north -north- east, 
is  probably  a  horst,  according  to  Passarge ;  it  lies  in  the  continuation  of 
the  horsts  of  south-west  Kamerun.  It  bears  a  sheet  of  basalt,  upon  which 
stand  isolated  rocky  cones;  on  both  sides  of  the  Walles  augite-andesite 
makes  its  appearance.  In  the  north,  where  the  outrunners  of  the 
Tschebtsche  mountains  meet  the  Benue,  and  slightly  east  thereof  (between 
long.  12°  and  13°  E.),  small  volcanic  hills  (Gabriel,  Elizabeth,  Maduju)  border 
this  river.  The  rectilinear  east  border  of  the  Atlantica  range,  and  that 
of  the  Mandara  range,  which  lies  in  its  continuation,  follow  the  direction 
to  N.  35°  E.,  as  likewise  does  the  valley  of  the  Faro  ^. 

The  lines  of  fracture  which  characterize  the  structure  of  Kamerun  from 
the  very  margin  of  the  ocean,  extend  to  lat.  10°  30'  N.  and  beyond.  Then 
commence  the  vast  alluvial  plains  of  lake  Chad  and  lake  Schari,  and  in 
addition  to  the  problem  of  the  continuation  of  the  Kamerun  line,  we  meet 
with  a  hydrographic  phenomenon  of  a  peculiar  kind.  Barth  was  already 
aware  that  a  connexion  exists  between  lake  Chad  and  the  Niger.  Lenfant 
has  thrown  light  upon  the  situation  ^. 

The  river  Kabi  discharges  itself  above  Garoua  into  the  Benue.  About 
120  kilometers  above  this  confluence  it  forms  a  cataract  50  meters  high, 
then  follow  other  rapids,  and  finally,  the  very  long  and  narrow  lake  of 
Tuburi,  which  is  connected  by  a  small  watercourse,  only  filled  at  high 
water,  with  the  Logone,  and  consequently  through  lake  Schari  with  lake 
Chad.  In  other  words,  during  high  water  in  the  Logone  its  overflow 
passes  over  the  rapids  of  the  Kabi  to  the  Niger  and  the  Ocean. 

A  vast  alluvial  tract,  perfectly  horizontal  to  the  eye,  borders  the  Logone 
and  is  continued  to  lake  Chad.  The  rocky  rapids  of  the  Kabi  reveal  the 
basement  of  this  alluvial  land.  At  a  distance  of  360  kilometers  from 
the  rapids,  on  the  south-east  border  of  lake  Chad,  a  little  group  of  rocks 
again  emerges  from  the  plain  ;  it  is  called  Hadjer-el-Hamis  (the  five  stones) 
and  is  only  100  meters  high.  It  has  been  described  by  Lacoin  ^.  Accord- 
ing to  Gentil  it  is  formed  of  a  rhyolite  with  aegyrine  and  riebeckite, 

^  S.  Passarge,  Adamaua,  8vo,  Berlin,  1895,  573  pp.,  maps,  in  particular  p.  387. 

2  Further  west,  in  about  lat.  9°  N.,  long.  10°  E.,  Boyd  Alexander  mentions  Mount  Wase 
as  probably  a  volcanic  neck,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1907,  XXX,  p,  121. 

^  Lenfant,  De  I'Atlantique  au  Tchad  par  le  Niger  et  le  Benoue,  La  Geographie,  1904, 
IX,  pp.  321-342,  map. 

*  L.  Lacoin,  Sur  la  geologic  du  pays  de  I'Oubangui  au  Tchad,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France, 
1903,  4«  ser..  Ill,  pp.  484-496. 


284: 


AFEICAN  FKACTURES 


[part  V 


which  was  exposed  as  it  cooled  to  the  direct  influence  of  water  vapour  and 
acid  fumaroles,  such  as  Lacroix  assumes  in  the  case  of  rhyolites  of  Somali- 
land  ^.  The  same  rock  was  observed  by  Foureau  in  the  bed  of  the  Logone, 
near  Kusser  (a  little  above  Fort  Lamy),  and  there  possibly  disturbed  by 
slipping.  Lenf ant  obtained  precisely  the  same  rock  from  near  the  cataracts 
of  the  Kafi. 

Further  study  will  show  whether  or  not  these  outcrops  belong  to  the 
volcanic  zone  of  fracture  of  the  Kamerun,  and  whether  this  zone  reaches 
lake  Chad  in  the  rhyolites  of  the  Kabi,  the  Logone  and  the  Hadjer-el- 
Hamis.  At  present  it  is  known  to  extend  as  far  as  lat.  10°  30'  N.^,  that  is, 
through  tivelve  degrees  of  latitude  starting  from  A  nno  Bom, 

Flan  of  the  African  fractures.  Proceeding  from  west  to  east  the  map 
shows  us  first  the  Kamerun  line  as  a  zone  of  fracture  and  inbreak  extend- 
ing into  the  mainland  at  least  as  far  as  lat.  10°  30'  N.  Its  continuation  to 
lake  Chad  is  uncertain.  It  is  also  difficult  to  perceive,  from  existing 
observations,  whether  any  relations  exist  with  the  volcanic  occurrences 
which  run  north  and  south  through  Air  and  far  to  the  north  through 
Ahaggar. 

The  short  trough  of  Upemba  is  the  most  westerly  member  known  of 
the  long  East  African  troughs.  Towards  the  north  these  fractures  extend 
through  the  Red  Sea  and  Syria  to  the  Taurus ;  towards  the  west  lie  the 
fractures  on  the  Nile  and  the  but  little  known  fractures  of  the  east  Sahara. 
In  the  midst  of  Europe  lies  the  Rhine  trough. 

It  is  an  undeniable  fact  that  lines  make  their  appearance  on  the  borders 
of  the  Indian  ocean  which  indicate  a  relationship  with  the  African  fractures. 
The  scarp  of  the  Quathlamba  in  South  Africa  and  that  of  the  Sahyadri  in 
East  India  have  already  been  brought  into  comparison  (I,  p.  418).  We  must 
now  add  the  Lebombo  fracture,  which  runs  in  South  Africa  from 
lat.  27°  30'  S.  through  four  degrees  of  latitude  towards  the  north.  While 
Madagascar  has  hitherto  only  been  recognized  as  a  horst  in  a  general  way 
(I,  p.  414),  Lemoine's  investigations  now  show  that  a  long  and  rectilinear 
fracture,  in  addition  to  others  of  less  importance,  extends  along  the  whole 
of  the  east  side,  and  has  been  the  determining  factor  in  the  outline.  It 
extends  from  Fort  Dauphin  to  the  north-north-east  across  the  island  of 
Ste  Marie  to  Cape  Maroala,  a  distance  of  ten  degrees  of  latitude,  and  is 
possibly  continued  in  the  islands  which  follow  on  the  north  ^.   As  regards 

*  L.  Gentil  in  Foureau,  Documents,  II,  p.  728  et  seq.  Similar  rocks  are  met  with  at 
great  distances  from  one  another,  for  example,  on  the  Mouny  between  lake  Chad  and 
Zinder,  near  Zinder  itself  and  in  Air ;  Chudeau,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1907,  4«  ser., 
VII,  p.  341  ;  Lacroix,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  2  janv.  1905  (for  Zinder)  et  passim. 

2  P.  Lemoine,  Etudes  geologiques  dans  le  Nord  de  Madagascar,  Contribution  a  I'histoire 
geologique  de  I'Gcean  Indien,  8vo,Paris,  1906, 520  pp.,  map,  in  particular  pp.  235, 457  et  seq. 
From  earlier  surveys  we  might  conjecture  that  lake  Alaotra  in  Madagascar,  situated 
between  Antananarivo  and  the  east  coast,  belonged  to  a  trough  parallel  to  the  fracture  of 


CH.  VIIl] 


PLAN  OF  THE  FEACTUEES 


285 


the  Sahyadri  fracture  we  know  that  it  cuts  through  the  gneiss  from  lat.  8'  N. 
to  16°  N.,  and  thence  to  lat.  20°  N.,  through  the  lavas  of  the  Deccan.  In  front 
of  it  lies,  still  unexplained,  and  with  a  divergent,  more  north- and-south 
direction,  the  line  of  the  Laccadive,  Maldive,  and  Chagos  islands  ^. 

The  position  of  these  lines  has  helped  to  determine  the  contours  of  the 
Ocean.  Not  that  they  can  be  held  responsible  for  the  subsidence  of  its 
bottom  ;  it  would  be  more  correct  to  suppose,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Variscan 
fractures,  that  they  have  been  produced  by  other  causes,  but  have  been 
made  use  of  by  the  subsidence  and  have  formed  its  boundary. 

All  the  fractures  and  troughs  mentioned  above,  with  the  exception  of 
the  Ehine  trough,  lie  in  a  tableland,  which  was  denuded,  perhaps  over  its 
whole  extent,  certainly  over  India  and  Africa,  before  the  deposition  of  the 
lower  Gondwana,  and  since  then  it  has  not  been  subjected  to  folding. 

Many  of  these  fractures  are  distinguished  by  their  great  length,  and, 
with  the  exception  of  the  slightly  bent  Tanganyika  trough,  by  their 
rectilinear  course.  Many  of  them  show  a  striking  preference  for  a  course 
approaching  the  meridional.  They  are  nearly  always  accompanied  by 
volcanos.  But  the  most  remarkable  fact  is  that  they  are  confined  to 
a  restricted  part  of  the  earth's  surface.  Nothing  similar  is  to  be  observed 
in  Asia  (with  the  exception  of  Syria  and  the  Indian  peninsula)  or  in 
America.  It  is  true  that  fissures  produced  by  tension  (disjunctive  lines) 
and  bordered  by  volcanos  are  known  in  folded  regions  of  these  continents, 
but  their  course  is  always  arcuate  in  accordance  with  the  strike  of  the 
folds.  The  Rhine  trough  is  the  only  one  of  these  fractures  which  enters 
the  region  of  the  Altaides 

The  repetition  of  meridional  fractures  in  the  most  northerly  part  of  the 
Atlantic  region  (Greenland  to  the  Lofoden  islands)  is  the  only  feature 
which  affords  some  ground  for  comparison  between  this  region  and  the 
Indian  Ocean.  We  hesitate  for  the  present  to  class  the  volcanic  line 
of  the  inner  Hebrides  and  the  ancient  trough  of  Christiania  with  these 
fractures. 

Where  these  lines  correspond  to  a  sea-coast,  as  in  Syria,  Madagascar, 
and  other  localities,  no  trough,  and,  as  a  rule,  no  volcanos  are  to  be  seen. 
When  the  troughs  possess  clearly  defined  boundaries,  and  are  fairly  broad 
for  long  distances  we  observe  a  striking  uniformity  of  breadth.  In  the 
Upemba  trough  the  breadth  has  been  estimated  at  30-45  kilometers,  in 
the  Tanganyika  trough  at  35  or  40 — and  in  the  broadest  parts  at  50  kilo- 

the  coast ;  later  observations  throw  some  doubt  on  this ;  Baron,  Geology  of  Madagascar, 
Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1889,  XLIV,  p.  306,  pi.  XIII,  and  1895,  LI,  p.  58. 

'  A  very  good  description  of  it  is  given  by  A.  Agassiz,  Coral  Reefs  of  the  Maldives,  Mus. 
Comp.  Zool.  Harvard  Coll.,  1903,  XXIX,  pi.  7. 

^  It  must  be  remembered  that  in  contrast  to  this  the  ancient  troughs  of  India,  formed 
before  the  deposition  of  the  upper  Gondwana,  approach  more  closely  to  the  east-and-west 
direction. 


286 


CAPE  MOUNTAINS 


[part  V 


meters,  in  the  Nyassa  trough  at  30-50,  in  the  south  part  of  the  Rhine 
trough  at  32-34  kilometers.  The  great  East  African  trough  is  very 
irregular,  terraces  occur,  then  follow  secondary  troughs  and  horsts,  so 
that  it  is  difficult  to  arrive  at  a  definite  estimate.  At  a  very  narrow  part 
in  lat.  2"  S.  it  is  possibly  only  20  kilometers  broad.  The  Red  Sea  is  much 
broader  than  all  these  troughs,  but  its  breadth  is  very  equable.  Luksch 
gives  the  maximum  for  the  northern  half  as  334  kilometers.  The  southern 
and  very  deep  part  of  the  gulf  of  Akabah  possesses  a  breadth  of  water 
amounting  to  27*8  kilometers,  so  that  the  distance  between  its  shores  must 
be  very  nearly  30  kilometers,  or  perhaps  more.  A  trustworthy  determi- 
nation of  further  figures  is  to  be  desired. 

In  the  foregoing  description  no  mention  has  been  made  of  a  common 
feature  of  the  volcanic  rocks  which  have  made  their  appearance  along  the 
African  fractures,  namely,  the  large  amount  of  alkalies  they  contain  and 
the  comparatively  small  amount  of  magnesia  and  lime.  The  fact  only 
attains  its  full  significance  when  we  make  a  comparison  with  other  regions. 

2.  The  Cape  Mountains. 

As  opposed  to  Laurentia  and  Northern  Asia  we  are  accustomed  to 
describe  Brasil,  Africa,  and  the  Indian  peninsula  as  southern  masses.  As 
a  matter  of  comparison  we  do  so  with  justice.  But  Brasil  and  Africa  are 
crossed  by  the  Equator,  the  Indian  peninsula  lies  to  the  north  of  it,  and  we 
see  from  the  map  that  as  soon  as  we  consider  the  earth  as  a  whole  they 
form  a  central  rather  than  a  southern  girdle.  This  mode  of  expression  has 
given  rise  to  a  certain  preconceived  opinion  with  regard  to  the  connexion 
between  these  masses  of  land  and  the  true  south,  or  Antarctic. 

In  South  Africa,  however,  unquestionable  traces  of  independent  folding 
occur  south  of  the  equator,  and  scarcely  more  remote  from  it  than  is  the 
Great  Atlas  on  the  north.  The  ancient  mass  of  Africa  does  not  reach 
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  has  no  continuous  connexion  with  any  ancient 
masses  of  land  in  the  Antarctic  region. 

South  Africa  has  been  described  as  a  tableland  of  Karoo  beds  framed  in 
by  folded  ranges  on  the  west  and  south.  Towards  the  south-east  this 
frame  is  interrupted  and  the  tableland  lies  open  towards  the  sea ;  on  the 
east  and  north-east,  traces  of  the  frame  again  appear  (I,  p.  387).  At  the  time 
when  the  description  given  in  the  first  volume  of  this  work  was  written  it 
was  not  possible  to  determine  the  relations  existing  between  the  tableland 
and  the  ranges  bordering  it.  Subsequent  observations  have  shown  that 
the  folding  of  the  bordering  ranges  of  the  west  and  south  extended  into 
the  time  of  the  Variscan  and  Armorican  foldings  of  Europe,  and  perhaps 
even  persisted  beyond  the  close  of  the  Permian  period  ;  it  is  also  clear  that 
the  Karoo  is  a  true  foreland.  This  fact  becomes  particularly  striking 
when  we  compare  this  region  with  India.  There  the  marginal  arcs  advance 


CH.  VIIl] 


SYNTAXIS 


287 


towards  the  foreland  of  the  peninsula  from  north,  west,  and  east ;  here 
they  advance  towards  the  Karoo  from  south,  west,  and  apparently  from 
the  east  also. 

I  take  this  opportunity  of  gratefully  acknowledging  the  detailed  infor- 
mation which  I  received  many  years  ago  from  the  late  Herr  Schenck, 
directing  my  attention  to  this  result ;  the  facts  asserted  by  him  have  since 
been  confirmed  by  the  work  of  the  geological  survey  of  Cape  Colony. 

Eogers  has  shown  that  the  folded  range  of  the  west  meets  that  of  the 
south  in  true  syn taxis  ^.  He  suggests  in  a  letter  that  the  whole  of  the  wes- 
tern folds  shall  be  called  the  Cedar  mountains,  and  the  southern  folds  the 
Zwarte  mountains.  The  angle  of  syntaxis  lies  near  Karoo  Poort,  and  the 
bend  of  the  folds  is  continued  inland  across  Worcester  towards  the  south- 
west corner  of  the  coast. 

The  stratified  succession  is  the  same  in  both  chains,  and  supplemented  by 
what  has  already  been  said,  is  as  follows  :  1,  ancient  phyllites  (Malmesbury 
beds),  penetrated  by  granite,  which  is  often  altered  into  gneiss ;  2,  purple- 
coloured  slates  and  sandstones  with  worm  tracks  (Ibiqua  beds ;  incident- 
ally the  doubtful  Cango  beds  may  also  be  referred  here) ;  3,  unconformity ; 
Table-mountain  sandstone  ;  4,  sandstone  and  shales  with  Homalonotus, 
Leptocardia,  and  other  species  (Bokkeveld  beds).  This  is  the  Devonian  of 
the  Falkland  islands  and  of  Matto  grosso,  the  Ida  shales  of  the  Bolivian 
Andes,  and  the  upper  Helderberg  of  the  United  States  2;  5,  shales  with 
Spirophyton,  and  Cyclostigma  ( Witteberg  beds) ;  6,  unconformity  ;  then 
the  series  of  the  Karoo  from  the  Dwyka  conglomerate,  which  has  been 
shown  to  be  of  glacial  origin,  up  to  the  Stormberg  beds  of  the  Trias  ; 
7,  unconformity  and  summit  of  the  high-lying,  plant-bearing  beds.  At 
a  lower  level  there  follow,  in  the  south  and  east  only,  liuviatile  gravels, 
towards  the  upper  part  sands  and  shales,  with  Palaeozamia  and  other 
plants ;  also  beds  with  Psammobia  and  Ostrea  (Enon  conglomerates  and 
Wood  bed)^;  then  marine  sediments,  namely,  8,  Neocomian  (Uitenhage 
beds) ;  9,  the  Aptian  stage,  according  to  Kilian,  found  further  north,  in 
Algoa  bay  *  ;  finally,  10,  the  Cretaceous  beds  of  Natal,  which,  according  to 
Kossmat,  are  not  older  than  the  lower  Senonian  ^. 

The  Cedar  mountains  run  to  the  north-north- west,  and  the  folding 

1  A.  Rogers,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Comm.  Cape  of  Good  Hope  (1903),  1904,  p.  13;  the 
violent  movements  which  occur  in  the  direction  of  Worcester  in  the  syntactic  chains  are 
described  by  E.  Schwarz,  op.  cit.  (1905),  1906,  p.  261  et  seq. 

*  E.  Schwarz,  Detailed  Description  of  the  Bokkeveld  Beds  at  the  Gamka  Poort, 
Prince  Albert,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Comm.  Cape  of  Good  Hope  (1899),  1900,  pp.  38-49. 

^  A.  Rogers  and  E.  Schwarz,  Report  on  the  Survey  of  Parts  of  the  Uitenhage  and  Port 
Elizabeth  Divisions,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Comm.  Cape  of  Good  Hope  (1900),  1901,  pp.  3-18. 

*  W.  Kilian,  Ueber  Aptien  in  Siid-Africa,  Centralbl.  f.  Min.,  1902,  pp.  465-468. 

°  F.  Kossmat,  Die  Bedeutung  der  siidindischen  Kreideform,  &c.,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol. 
Reichsanst.,  1894,  XLIV,  pp.  459-478,  in  particular  p.  463. 


288  CAPE  MOUNTAINS  [paet  v 

is  directed  from  west  to  east.  The  Oliphant  river  runs  for  the  most  part 
in  a  longitudinal  valley.  The  older  rocks,  that  is  the  Malmesbury  beds, 
make  their  appearance  in  the  west ;  granite  occurs  in  them,  as  for  example 
in  Table  mountain ;  they  are  sometimes  covered  by  Table-mountain  sand- 
stone. Piquet  Berg  is  a  syncline  of  this  sheet  of  transgressive  Table- 
mountain  sandstone.  The  Malmesbury  beds  are  not  so  intensely  folded  as 
the  Bokkeveld  and  Witteberg  beds  which  succeed  them  on  the  east  and 
attain  a  height  of  1,932  meters;  the  height  of  the  ancient  rocks  is  much 
less.  The  south  part  of  the  range  appears  to  be  overlain  conformably  by 
the  Dwyka  conglomerate;  and  the  folding  is  continued  into  the  lower 
horizons  of  the  Karoo  series,  in  which  overthrust  flakes  occur.  Further 
north,  however,  the  situation  is  different.  The  advance  folds  flatten  out ; 
first  the  Witteberg  and  then  the  Bokkeveld  beds  gradually  disappear — 
owing  to  excessive  denudation,  which  must  have  preceded  the  deposition 
of  the  Dwyka  conglomerate — and  the  conglomerate  then  extends  gradually 
not  only  over  the  remains  of  these  beds,  but  also  over  the  Malmesbury 
slates.  In  lat.  31°  30'  S.  the  range  has  wholly  disappeared.  Granite  and 
gneiss  now  set  in  and  extend  beyond  the  Orange  river.  The  Langeberg  is 
a  long  strip  of  Dwyka  conglomerate  resting  on  gneiss.  The  strike  to  the 
north-north-west  persists  in  the  gneiss  far  to  the  north,  but  it  is  not 
certain  that  this  gneiss  is  a  continuation  of  the  granite  and  gneiss  of  the 
Cedar  mountains^.  Thus  the  Cedar  mountains  must  be  older  than  the 
Dwyka  conglomerate ;  they  have  been  affected  by  posthumous  movement 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  syntaxis,  and  exposed  to  very  great  denudation 
before  the  beginning  of  the  Dwyka. 

The  Zwarte  range  runs  almost  at  right  angles  to  the  Cedar  mountains 
as  it  joins  them  in  syntaxis ;  it  possesses  a  similar  structure,  but  the  folding 
is  directed  from  south  to  north.  The  syntaxis  presents  a  number  of  peculiari- 
ties which  may  possibly  throw  some  light  on  the  manner  in  which  great  folded 
ranges  are  stowed  reciprocally  one  against  the  other;  we  shall  return 
to  this  point  later.  Near  Worcester,  in  the  midst  of  the  region  of  syntaxis, 
Schwarz  observed  a  great  fault ;  it  strikes  in  a  horse-shoe,  corresponding 
with  the  bend  of  the  syntactic  folds.  On  the  east  it  is  continued,  with 
a  gradual  decrease  in  throw,  along  the  south  side  of  the  Langeberge  for 
a  distance  of  more  than  140  kilometers.  It  brings  a  long  strip  of  the 
lower  subdivisions  of  the  Karoo  series  alongside  of  the  Malmesbury 
phyllites;  this  corresponds  to  a  vertical  throw  of  12,000-15,000  feet. 

^  A.  W.  Rogers  and  A.  L.  Du  Toit,  Geological  Survey  of  Parts  of  the  Division  of 
Ceres,  Southerland,  and  Calvinia,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Comm.  Cape  of  Good  Hope  (1903), 
1904,  pp.  9-70  maps  ;  A.  Rogers,  Geological  Survey  of  Parts  of  the  Division  of  Piquetberg, 
Clan  William  and  Van  Rhyn's  Dorp,  tom.cit.,pp.  139-167 ;  for  the  north,  A.  Rogers  and 
¥j.  Schwarz,  Report  on  the  Survey  of  Parts  of  the  Clanwilliam,  Van  Rhyn's  Dorp,  and 
Calvinia  Division,  op.  cit.  (1900),  1901,  pp.  19-54  et  passim. 


CH.VIII]  THE  ZWAETE  EANGE 


289 


To  the  south  of  this  fracture  three  or  four  bands  of  Table -mountain 
sandstone  which  form  the  summits  of  the  folds  and  perhaps  also  the  edges 
of  flakes  strike  nearly  east  or  east-south-east,  and  contribute  the  most 
conspicuous  element  to  the  mountain  structure.  In  the  direction  of  the 
syntaxis,  i.  e.  towards  the  west,  their  strike  bends  back  in  an  arc,  and  as 
they  unite  they  form  in  this  way,  in  the  midst  of  the  syntaxis  itself,  a  zone 
of  Table-mountain  sandstone  striking  to  the  south-west,  which  proceeds 
from  the  neighbourhood  of  Worcester  and  reaches  the  sea  in  the  peninsula 
east  of  False  bay,  that  is  in  cape  Hangklip  ^. 

On  the  outer  border  of  the  range  the  folding  is  continued  as  a  number 
of  long  anticlines  and  flakes  into  the  lower  members  of  the  Karoo  series, 
which  appear  on  the  map  as  a  sort  of  indentation  thrust  in  between  the 
Witteberg  beds.  Towards  the  north  the  folds  gradually  die  away,  but 
a  few  indications  of  the  movement  are  still  to  be  seen  20-30  kilometers 
further  north,  in  the  outrunners  of  Klein-Eoggeveld.  These  folds  of  the  outer 
border  have  one  feature  in  common,  they  all  dwindle  away  towards  the 
east.  In  this  way  the  fact  that  the  more  recent  folding,  which  occurred 
after  the  deposition  of  the  Dwyka^  increases  in  the  direction  of  the  angle 
of  syntaxis,  is  expressed  here  also. 

Further  east,  on  the  other  side  of  the  river  Gouritz  and  east  of  lake 
Prince  Albert,  the  northern  chain  of  the  Zwarte  range  runs  from  west  to 
east,  and  the  parallel  valley  of  the  Zwart  river  separates  it  from  the 
equally  parallel  chain  of  the  Tyger  mountains.  North  of  these  mountains 
lies  the  Karoo  ^. 

Still  further  east  the  strike  turns  more  and  more  out  of  the  east  into 
the  east-south-east.  The  range,  as  it  sinks  beneath  the  sea,  forms  an 
oblique  rias  coast  in  St.  Francis  bay,  and  Algoa  bay,  and  on  the  Great 
Fish  river. 

Throughout  the  length  of  the  Zwarte  range  from  Worcester  eastwards 
down  to  the  sea  we  observe  the  now  isolated  traces  of  an  ancient  longi- 
tudinal valley,  indicated  by  patches  of  the  Enon  conglomerate.  The 
conglomerate  presents  a  close  resemblance  to  the  existing  alluvial  deposits, 
but  contains  partings  with  Estheria.  Near  Swellendam  a  boring  failed  to 
reach  the  lower  limit  of  one  of  these  patches  at  a  depth  of  800  feet.  This 
conglomerate,  which  is  of  very  nearly  the  same  age  as  the  European  Weald, 
has  not  been  folded,  but  presents  here  and  there  steeply  upturned  beds. 

^  Corstorphine,  Rogers,  and  Schwarz,  in  Ann.  Rep.  for  1897  and  1898  ;  and,  in  particular, 
E.  Schwarz,  Geological  Survey  of  the  Divisions  of  Tulbagh,  Ceres,  and  Worcester,  op.  cit., 
(1905)  1906,  pp.  259-290. 

^  C.  Sandberg  (Tectonic  Remarks  on  the  probable  Big  Tygerberg  inverted  Fold, 
Trans.  Geol.  Soc.  S.  A.,  1906,  IX,  pp.  82-89)  regards  the  Tygerberge  as  the  brow  of  a 
plunging  sheet ;  this  view  is  contested  by  Schwarz  (The  Tygerberg  Anticline,  Geol.  Mag., 
1907,  no.  5,  IV,  pp.  487-490). 

SOLLAS  IV  XJ 


290 


CAPE  MOUNTAINS 


[part  V 


Rogers  observes  that  the  existing  rivers  of  the  Zwarte  range  flow  from  the 
north  hither  as  though  they  would  enter  the  mountains,  cross  the  ancient 
longitudinal  valley,  and  then  reach  the  sea  across  the  older  rocks  of  the 
inner  zones  ^.  The  situation  is  the  same  as  in  Chili,  where  the  transverse 
valleys  coming  from  the  Andes  cut  through  first  the  longitudinal  valley 
and  then  the  coastal  ranges. 

In  the  south-east  the  tableland  of  the  Karoo  meets  the  sea  J  a  fragment 
of  the  African  structure  is  missing  (fig.  44;  I,  p.  388).  From  the  St.  John's 
river  onwards,  however,  the  rocks  of  the  Zwarte  range  crop  out  again,  now 
more  gently  folded  and  with  a  north-north-east  strike.  The  same  structure 
seems  to  be  continued  into  Natal,  but  there  is  a  lack  of  recent  observations 
(I,  p.  393).  These  are  the  remains,  as  yet  but  little  known,  of  a  third  range, 
the  Pondo  mountains.  Dr.  Rogers  has  kindly  communicated  to  me  by 
letter  his  conjecture  that  in  the  south-east  a  second  syntaxis,  similar  to 
that  of  Worcester,  exists  beneath  the  sea  ^. 

Thus  this  region  seems  to  present  the  advance  of  three  great  folded 
ranges,  such  as  we  have  seen  in  the  Indian  peninsula  and  towards  the 
north  of  the  Pacific  Ocean.  In  this  way  Africa  is  shown  to  possess,  even 
more  clearly  than  before,  the  characters  not  of  a  southern  but  an  equatorial 
foreland,  and  the  southern  hemisphere  here  presents  unmistakable  traces  of 
a  repetition  of  the  Asiatic  structure,  but  with  a  movement  towards  the 
north. 

At  the  same  time,  however,  we  perceive  the  remarkable  fact  that  the 
Indian  chains  with  which  we  have  instituted  a  comparison  were  still  in 
course  of  formation  even  after  the  Miocene  period,  while  in  Africa  the 
mountain  formation  ceases  in  the  Permian,  at  latest  in  the  lower  Trias.  In 
this  respect  South  Africa  presents  a  much  stronger  resemblance  to  the 
pre-Permian  part  of  the  western  Altaides,  which  lies  in  the  corresponding 
meridians,  than  to  any  other  part  of  the  periphery  of  Asia.  At  the  same 
time  the  Cape  mountains  are  not  formed  by  back-folding,  and  the  Zwarte 
range,  at  least,  is  not  a  free  branch. 

*  A.  Rogers,  The  geological  history  of  the  Gouritz  River  System,  Trans.  S.  A.  Phil.  Soc, 
1903,  XIV,  pp.  375-384,  map. 

2  This  theory  is  also  indicated  in  Rogers's  Introduction  to  the  Geology  of  Cape  Colony, 
8vo,  1905,  463  pp.,  map,  in  particular  p.  27,  fig.  3,  and  p.  96 ;  also  D.  Draper,  Marble 
Beds  of  Natal,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1895,  LI,  pp.  51-56. 


291 


CHAPTER  IX 
THE  OCEANIDES 

Relations  of  the  Oceanides  to  the  south.  Fore-deeps  forming  the  boundaries  of  Asia. 
The  line  of  Ruahine,  Kermadec,  and  Tonga.  The  first  Australian  arc.  New  Guinea  to 
New  Caledonia.  Second  Australian  arc.  The  Carolines,  Fiji.  Third  Australian  arc. 
Virgation  coming  from  New  Zealand.  Polynesia.  Paumotu,  Raroia,  Samoa.  Summary. 
Atolls. 

Relations  of  the  Oceanides  to  the  south  (II,  p.  149).  Van  Diemen's  Land 
is  a  fragment  of  Australia.  The  east  coast,  common  to  both,  extends 
through  more  than  34  degrees  of  latitude  up  to  the  south  of  New  Guinea. 
Tertiary  sediments,  which  elsewhere  in  Australia  extend  into  the  interior, 
especially  from  the  south  coast,  are  absent  on  the  east  coast.  It  is 
therefore  regarded  as  a  recent  fracture.  On  the  west  coast  of  York 
peninsula,  in  the  gulf  of  Carpentaria,  apposed  limestones  are  described  as 
occurring  in  terraces.  These  are  absent  from  the  whole  of  the  east  coast, 
and,  extended  along  its  northern  half,  lies  the  great  Barrier  Eeef .  Agassiz 
has  pointed  out  how  the  mountains  which  accompany  this  coast  again  and 
again  project  towards  the  north  in  high  and  narrow  rocky  promontories, 
and  in  islands,  scarcely  separated  from  the  mainland,  such  for  example  as 
Hinchinbrook  island,  which  rises  to  over  900  meters.  In  front  of  this 
rocky  coast  lies  a  broad  submarine  plain  descending  gently  as  it  passes 
out  to  sea,  and  rising  into  smaller  islands  which  sometimes  attain  a  height 
of  over  300  meters.  Here  lie  the  lifeless  remains  of  an  ancient  reef,  and 
the  living  reef  follows  next  its  margin.  Between  lats.  18°  30'  and  15°  30'  S. 
a  broad  plain,  to  all  appearance  but  slightly  submerged,  extends  in  front  of 
the  reef,  and  is  separated  from  it  by  depths  of  1,100  to  2,300  meters  \ 

The  outlines  of  the  coast  might  lead  us  to  suppose  that  the  seaward 
face  of  Australia  is  formed  by  a  series  of  more  or  less  parallel  fractures. 

The  whole  of  the  east  coast  is  accompanied  by  the  alternating  ranges  of 
the  Australian  Cordillera,  in  which  the  folding  is  at  least  older  than  a  part 
of  the  Carboniferous.  The  seaward  face,  or  zone  of  fracture,  may  therefore 
be  regarded  as  a  longitudinal  fault,  and  for  this  reason  J.  W.  Gregory 
describes  the  east  coast  as  belonging  to  the  Pacific  type,  the  south  coast  to 
the  Atlantic  type  ^. 

^  A.  Agassiz,  Visit  to  the  Great  Barrier  Reef  of  Australia,  Bull.  Mus.  Comp.  Zool., 
1898,  XXVIII,  pp.  95-148,  maps. 
2  J.  W.  Gregory,  Geography  of  Victoria,  8vo,  Melbourne,  1903,  p.  32  et  seq. 

U  2 


292 


THE  OCEANIDES 


[part  V 


The  Cordillera  is  continued,  according  to  Haddon,  SoUas,  and  Cole,  in 
islands,  formed  chiefly  of  granite,  from  York  Peninsula  across  Torres  Strait, 
and  it  terminates  on  the  margin  of  the  great  southern  plain  of  New  Guinea 
in  the  granite  hill  of  Mabudauan  ^. 

The  succession  of  marine  strata  in  Australia  presents  many  more  gaps 
in  the  Mesozoic  series  than  that  of  Timor,  New  Caledonia,  or  New  Zealand. 
The  Cretaceous  system,  which  often  begins  with  the  Aptian  stage,  extends 
over  broad  Archaean  regions ;  according  to  recent  observations  the  desert 
sandstone  is  assigned  to  it.  In  the  west  a  transgression  of  the  Jurassic 
zone  of  Stephanoceras  Hum2Jhresianum  is  known  (II,  p.  160).  This  trans- 
gression has  an  important  bearing  on  comparisons  to  be  drawn  later. 

"We  have  already  seen  that  Auckland  consists  of  granite,  Tertiary  sand- 
stone, and  volcanic  rocks.  Macquarie  is  formed,  according  to  Ferrar  and 
Prior,  of  a  dolerite,  which  shows  signs  of  dynamic  action  (slickensides,  &c.) ; 
from  Campbell  island  doubtful  Mesozoic,  Cretaceous  and  volcanic  rocks 
are  known ;  from  the  Antipodes  dolerite  and  phonolite ;  from  Bounty 
island,  granite ;  and  from  Chatham  island,  mica-schist,  Miocene  limestone, 
and  volcanic  rock  are  mentioned  (II,  p.  149).  These  islands  are  not 
arranged  on  perceptible  lines,  and  their  characters  afford  no  definite  answer 
to  the  question  whether  the  Australian  mass  is  continued  towards  the 
south.  It  is  only  beyond  lat.  66°  S.,  and  particularly  lat.  70"  S.,  that 
observations  begin  to  present  continuity. 

The  Balleny  islands  extend  towards  the  south-east ;  they  are  volcanic ; 
in  1839  Captain  Balleny  discovered  an  active  volcano  among  them. 

Scott  island  (long.  179**  55'  W.,  lat.  67°  24'  S.)  is  formed,  according  to 
Prior,  of  phonolitic  trachyte. 

In  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Antarctic  circle  there  are  indications  of 
a  great  continent.  These  begin  west  of  the  Gauss  mountain  (lat.  66°  48'  S., 
long.  89°  30'  E.)  which  consists  of  leucite  basalt  ^.  Wilkes  Land  belongs  to 
this  continent,  and  probably  the  whole  of  South  Victoria  Land  up  to 
long.  180°  or  even  further.  Dumont  d'Urville,  judging  from  ice-borne 
boulders,  had  already  conjectured  that  it  was  formed  largely  of  granite  and 
gneiss.  Philippi  mentions  red  quartzite  obtained  from  the  crops  of  pen- 
guins. Borchgrevinck  obtained  garnet-bearing  aplite  and  mica-schist  from 
cape  Ad  are,  where  widely  distributed  lavas  also  occur  ^. 

^  A.  C.  Haddon,  W.  J.  Sollas,  and  G.  A.  J.  Cole,  Geology  of  Torres  Straits,  Trans.  Roy. 
Dub.  Soc,  1894,  XXX,  pp.  419-476,  map.  The  Murray  Islands,  Uga,  and  Erub,  consist 
of  recent  lavas. 

'  E.  Philippi,  Geologische  Beschreibung  des  Gaussberges,  in  Deutsche  Sudpolar- 
Expedition,  1901-1903,  edited  by  E.  von  Drygalski,  II,  pp.  49-71. 

"  David,  Smith,  and  Schofield,  Notes  on  Antarctic  Rocks,  collected  by  Mr.  C.  E. 
Borchgrevink,  Journ.  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  N.S.W.,  1895,  XXIX,  pp.  461-492;  G.  T.  Prior, 
Petrographical  Notes  on  the  Rock  specimens  collected  in  Antarctic  Regions  during  the 
voyage  of  H.M.S.  Erehus  and  Terror  under  Sir  J.  C.  Ross,  Min.  Mag.,  1900,  XII,  pp.  69-91. 


CH.  IX] 


EREBUS  AND  TERROR 


293 


We  now  follow  the  accounts  furnished  by  the  Discovery  under  Captain 
R.  Scott,  and  in  particular  the  geological  observations  of  his  companion 
Ferrar  ^.  Indications  of  the  presence  of  land  extend  in  an  almost  easterly 
direction  as  far  as  the  meridian  of  the  Balleny  islands,  and  south  of  these 
islands,  a  coast  which  is  known  in  greater  detail  begins  near  cape  North, 
in  lat.  70°  30'  S.,  long.  166°  E.  It  runs  along  South  Victoria  Land  almost 
to  long.  171°  E.  and  then  turns  nearly  due  south.  Ross  travelled  along 
this  coast  as  far  as  the  volcanos  of  Erebus  and  Terror,  which  lie  off  it 
between  lats.  77°  and  78°  S.  Scott,  in  a  journey  which  tried  his  powers  of 
endurance  to  the  utmost,  explored  it  as  far  as  lat.  83°  S.  From  lat.  79° 
or  80^*  S.  onwards  it  trends  more  to  the  south-south-east.  It  corresponds 
to  the  lofty  east  border  of  a  great  elevated  plateau  of  dolerite  and 
sandstone,  which  extends  through  13  degrees  of  latitude.  On  its  ice- 
covered  surface,  between  lats.  77°  and  78°  S.,  Scott  travelled  westward 
into  the  interior  for  a  distance  of  more  than  300  kilometers  and  at 
a  uniform  height  of  9,000  feet. 

At  the  east  foot  of  this  plateau  four  or  five  volcanic  cones  rise  along 
the  coast.  The  little  ofF-lying  islands  have  only  furnished  volcanic  rock 
as  far  as  Ross  island,  which  bears  the  four  great  volcanos,  Erebus  (3,998 
meters,  active),  Bird,  Terra  Nova,  and  Terror.  Crater  mountains,  both 
large  and  small,  occur  between  Ross  island  and  the  border  of  the  plateau, 
particularly  towards  the  south-west.  At  the  base  gneiss  occurs,  and  with 
it  steeply  upturned  beds  of  white  granular  limestone.  These  are  followed 
by  granite  at  greater  heights. 

The  edge  of  the  plateau  is  visible  near  long.  161°  E.,  lat.  77°  45'  S., 
beneath  the  inland  ice.  Here  Ferrar  observed  a  sheet  of  dolerite  as  much 
as  700  feet  in  thickness  extending  from  a  height  of  8,000  feet  downwards, 
beneath  this  came  horizontally  stratified  sandstone  (Beacon  sandstone)  with 
Carbonaceous  matter,  traversed  by  sills  and  some  pipes  of  dolerite.  It  is 
visible  for  a  thickness  of  2,000  feet.  The  whole  series  rests  on  granite  and 
gneiss.  The  regions  which  lie  further  south  are  unknown  except  as  to 
their  contours.  In  lat.  80°  S.  Barne  obtained  a  fragment  of  schist,  and 
horizontal  bedding  is  mentioned,  but  this  may  only  indicate  flows  of  basalt. 
In  lat.  83°  S.  mount  Markham  rises  to  a  height  of  15,100  feet  (4,612  meters) 
as  estimated  by  Scott. — 

These  characters,  notwithstanding  the  number  of  recent  volcanos,  do 
not  indicate  a  Pacific  structure.  The  horizontal  position  of  the  sandstones, 
the  wide  distribution  of  gneiss  and  granite,  and  all  the  contours  show  that 
this  plateau  belongs  to  the  Atlantic  type.  As  regards  South  Victoria,  we 
must  agree  with  Ferrar  that  the  coast  is  broken  off".    It  recalls  the  fractures 

^  Captain  R.  F.  Scott,  Voyage  of  the  Discovenj,  2  vols.,  8vo,  maps,  London,  1905,  in 
particular  H.  T.  Ferrar,  Summary  of  Geological  Observations,  II,  pp.  437-468,  and  Nat. 
Antarctic  Expedition,  1901-1904,  Natural  History,  I,  Geology,  4to,  1907,  160  pp.,  maps 
(published  by  the  British  Museum). 


294 


THE  OCEANIDES 


[part  V 


of  East  Africa  rather  than  a  Pacific  arc,  and  this  comparison  is  in  complete 
accordance  with  the  conclusions  of  Prior  based  on  the  nature  of  the  rocks. 
Whether  or  not  King  Edward  VII  Land,  which  is  situated  further  east 
(lat.  76'-78°  S.,  long.  100-150°  W.),  and  has  furnished  loose  fragments  of 
ancient  rocks,  must  be  referred  to  the  same  type,  can  hardly  be  determined 
at  present.  It  is  certain  that  the  regions  lying  still  further  east,  such  as 
Graham's  Land,  possess  a  different  structure. 

Philippi  believes  that  the  Gaussberg  also  exhibits  the  Atlantic  type,  since 
the  nature  of  the  eruptive  rock  in  South  Victoria  Land  is  the  same  as  that 
which  characterizes  the  Atlantic  regions.  The  significance  of  this  character 
will  be  discussed  later.  Professor  Gregory,  who  is  well  acquainted  with 
Australia,  also  assigns  South  Victoria  Land  to  the  Atlantic  type. 

This  view  is  well  founded.  The  Gaussberg,  Wilkes  Land,  and  South 
Victoria  are  to  be  regarded  as  a  continent  of  Atlantic  structure ;  we  may 
name  it  Antarctis. 

In  connexion  with  this  discussion,  it  must  not  be  overlooked  that  the 
structure  of  the  Cape  mountains  suggests  the  existence  of  a  wide  extension 
of  folded  mountains  both  to  the  east  and  the  west.  But  of  this  there  are 
no  visible  indications.  It  must  also  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  south  of 
New  Zealand  presents  a  range  of  divergent  structure  which  strikes  out  to 
sea  through  Stewart  island,  and  the  continuation  of  this  is  also  quite 
unknown  (II,  p.  147). 

Fore-deeps  forming  the  boundaries  of  Asia.  The  island  world  of  the 
Pacific,  although  it  only  appears  as  isolated  peaks  and  fragments  rising 
out  of  the  vast  expanse  of  Ocean,  yet  claims  on  account  of  its  wide  dis- 
tribution a  prominent  place  in  the  plan  of  the  earth's  surface.  The  parts 
exposed  to  view  are  arranged  in  long  and  often  arcuate  lines ;  and  it  is 
becoming  increasingly  clear  that  most  of  these  are  the  trendlines  of 
recent  mountain  chains.  We  have  already  seen  that  in  Java  the  beds  with 
Lepidocyclina  are  folded,  and  Verbeek's  description  of  Leitimor  shows  that 
in  this  island  also  very  recent  coral  beds  are  carried  up  to  a  considerable 
height,  inclined,  and  occasionally  folded  ^. 

Recent  folds  of  similar  character  are  met  with  at  several  localities  in 
Oceania,  in  a  striking  form,  for  instance,  in  the  New  Hebrides. 

The  grouping  and  classification  of  the  whole  swarm  of  islands  would, 
however,  hardly  be  possible  if  the  investigations  of  recent  years  had  not 
revealed  the  instructive  fact  that  the  greatest  abyssal  depths,  having  the 
form  of  elongated  furrows,  lie  in  front  of  the  outer  border  of  the  arcs  of 
Pacific  type. 

These  deeps  were  first  described  as  'channels'.  Supan  suggested  in 
1899  that  they  should  be  called  '  troughs  ',  but  with  the  express  reservation 

*  R.  D.  M.  Verbeek,  Description  geologique  de  Tile  d'Arabon,  Jaarb.  Mijnw.  Ned. 
O.-Ind.,  1905,  XXXIV,  323  pp.,  atlas. 


CH.  IX] 


PACIFIC  FOEE-DEEPS 


295 


that  the  term  should  be  taken  to  apply  only  to  their  form  and  not  to  their 
mode  of  origin.  As  fresh  facts  were  brought  to  light  Supan  conjectured 
that  the  troughs  were  connected  with  foldings  ^.  It  is  indeed  obvious  that 
this  is  the  case. 

We  have  frequently  pointed  out  that  elongated  deeps  or  depressions  lie 
in  front  of  the  more  recent  folded  ranges.  Examples  are  afforded  by  the 
valley  of  the  Guadalquivir,  the  Persian  Gulf,  and  the  thick  alluvial  deposits 
of  the  Ganges.  These  depressions  are  frequently  masked  by  sediments 
which  fill  them  up,  as,  for  instance,  the  delta  of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates, 
and  that  of  the  Ganges  and  Brahmaputra.  The  obliteration  is  even  more 
complete  when  brought  about  by  marine  Tertiary  deposits.  In  Central 
Europe  the  special  question  of  frame-folding  has  to  be  taken  into  account, 
yet  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  Tertiary  marls  fill  great  depressions 
in  front  of  the  brow  of  the  Carpathians  as  well  as  of  the  Alps. 

These  depressions  mark  the  subsidence  of  the  foreland  beneath  the  recent 
folds.  They  have  received  the  name  of  '  fore-troughs  *.  But  they  are  not 
troughs  in  the  usual  sense  of  the  term  ;  their  two  sides  are  of  different 
structure,  and  it  therefore  seems  advisable  to  call  them  *  fore-deeps With 
one  or  two  exceptions,  all  marine  abysses  which  sink  below  a  depth  of 
7,000  meters  are  fore-deeps  in  a  tectonic  sense  and  indicate  the  subsidence 
of  the  foreland  beneath  the  folded  mountains.  Thus  we  are  brought  back 
to  the  question,  whether  the  greatest  deeps,  like  the  highest  mountains,  are 
not  the  most  recent  2.  For  the  present,  however,  we  will  consider  only  the 
distribution  of  these  deeps  in  the  south-western  or  western  part  of  the 
Pacific  Ocean,  and  not  their  connexion  with  the  structure  of  the  mountains. 

With  this  object  we  must  first  examine  the  map  of  the  Oceanic  depths 
between  the  Marianne  islands  and  Celebes,  which  has  been  published  by 
Schott  and  Perlewitz^.  In  addition  to  the  more  remote  fore-deep  of  the 
Liu-Kiu  islands,  which  sinks  over  an  elongated  tract  below  a  depth  of 
7,000  meters,  this  map  marks  an  abyss,  which  runs  from  the  east  side 
of  the  Marianne  islands  around  Guam,  and  then  to  the  south-west ;  a  second 
shorter  depression,  east  of  Yap,  with  a  south-south- westerly  direction; 
a  third  east  of  the  Pelew  islands,  running  at  first  almost  north  and  south, 
and  then  further  south  towards  the  south-west  ;  and  a  fourth,  lying  east 
of  the  Talur  islands,  which  starts  a  long  way  off  from  the  east  side  of  the 
Philippines. 

These  several  fore-deeps  are  thus  arranged  in  a  series  of  oblique 

^  A.  Supan,  Die  Bodenformen  des  Weltmeeres,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1899,  pp.  177-196,  map, 
in  particular  p.  180  ;  Die  Sundagraben  des  Malaischen  Archipels,  op.  cit.,  1907,  pp.  70-71, 
map. 

2  Are  Ocean  Depths  Permanent?  Nat.  Science,  March,  1893,  pp.  180-187,  in  particular 
p.  181. 

*  G.  Schott  and  P.  Perlewitz,  Lotungen  J.N. M.S.  'Edi'  und  des  Kabeldampfers 
'  Stephan    Arch,  deutsch.  Seewarte,  1906,  XXIX,  no.  2,  38  pp.,  maps. 


296 


THE  OCEANIDES 


[part  V 


coulisses  which  all  strike,  at  least  in  their  southern  half,  towards  the 
south-west  or  south- south-west.  They  mark  the  eastern  boundary  of  the 
Asiatic  system. 

The  Marianne  islands,  Yap,  the  Pelew,  Philippine,  and  Talur  islands  are 
to  be  included,  therefore,  in  Asia.    To  the  east  of  them  lie  the  Oceanides. 
We  will  now  consider  certain  details. 

In  the  Bonin  islands  Nummulitic  limestone  is  said  to  occur  (III,  p.  146). 
According  to  later  investigations  by  Yoshiwara  the  islands  are  arranged  in 
two  series.  One  of  them,  the  Ogasawara  chain,  lies  in  the  east  between 
lat.  27°  40'  and  26°  38'  N.  (Plymouth  island  or  Muko-shima,  the  Parry 
group  or  Chichi-shima,  Barley  islands  or  Haha-shima,  and  many  smaller 
islands).  This  series  is  formed  of  Eocene  limestone  with  Nummulites, 
alternating  with  older  eruptive  rocks  and  rising  to  a  height  of  over 
600  feet ;  horizontal  Lepidocyclina  limestone  rests  against  it  unconformably. 
In  the  northernmost  island,  Stapleton  or  Ototo-shima,  serpentine  is  said  to 
occur  ^.  The  second  series  of  the  group  runs  west  of  the  first  from  Lott's 
Wife  to  the  Sulphur  islands ;  this  is  marked  by  active  volcanos,  and  it 
forms  the  continuation  of  the  line  of  the  Fuji  volcanos  which  cuts  through 
Honshiu.  Near  Sulphur  island  or  Iwo-shima  a  new  island,  Neo-shima, 
arose  in  the  winter  of  1904-5  ^. 

The  Ogasawara  chain  must  thus  be  regarded  as  the  remains  of  one  of 
the  younger  Cordilleras. 

The  Marianne  islands  form  an  arc  slightly  convex  to  the  east ;  no 
Cordillera  is  visible.  Fritz  states  that  all  the  islands  of  this  arc  lying 
north  of  lat.  16°  N.  are  young  volcanos  of  regular  form ;  at  their  foot 
is  coral  limestone  which  scarcely  rises  above  the  sea  level,  while  the  six 
islands  situated  south  of  lat.  16°  N.  are  covered  with  limestone  up  to  their 
very  summits  and  are  clearly  broken  up  into  terraces  ^. 

Alexander  Agassiz  enumerates  twelve  active  volcanos  as  occurring  in 
the  northern  Marianne  islands  which  extend  up  to  the  Farallon  de  Pajaros ; 
he  recognized  a  connexion  extending  through  20  degrees  of  latitude  from 
Guam  to  Japan.  Rota  is  about  800  feet  (243  meters)  in  height  and 
is  a  typical  limestone  plateau.  Mau  presents  five  terraces  in  the  north 
and  seven  in  the  south,  and  traces  of  two  recent  negative  movements  of 
not  more  than  3  to  4  feet  each.  Guam  likewise  shows  limestone  terraces  ; 
the  lower  sometimes  deeply  incised ;  in  places  the  limestone  rises  in  vertical 
cliffs  as  much  as  150  meters  in  height,  and  rows  of  caves  are  to  be  seen  in 

^  S.  Yoshiwara,  Geological  Age  of  the  Bonin  Islands,  Geol.  Mag.,  1902,  Dec,  IV, 
vol.  IX.  pp.  296-303,  map. 

^  Zeitschr.  Ges.  Erdk.,  1905,  p.  382  ;  on  the  2nd  January,  1905,  it  was  about  150  meters 
high. 

^  Fritz,  Bericht  liber  die  Insel  Rota  (Mariannen)  14°  7'  30"  N.,  Mitth.  deutsch. 
Schutzgeb.,  1901,  XIV,  pp.  194-204  ;  and  Reise  nach  den  nordlichen  Mariannen,  op.  cit., 
1902,  XV,  pp.  96-118. 


CH.  IX] 


GUAM 


297 


their  face,  corresponding  to  the  heights  of  former  terraces  which  have  been 
destroyed  by  land  slips.  This  is  no  doubt  a  consequence  of  interruptions  in 
the  negative  movement,  for  the  action  of  rain  would  have  been  to  produce, 
not  a  line  of  caves,  but  vertical  funnels.  On  the  east  side  the  coral  lime- 
stones are  stratified  and  dip  towards  the  sea.  Considerable  disturbances 
have  been  observed  in  the  limestone ;  Agassiz  regards  them  as  connected 
with  the  eruption  of  volcanic  rock,  which  has  altered  the  limestone  in 
contact;  we  should  be  inclined  rather  to  regard  them  as  produced  by 
tectonic  folding.  The  west  coast  of  Guam,  like  the  island  of  Rota  is 
marked  by  a  very  recent  negative  movement  of       to  4  feet^. 

The  fore-deep  of  Guam  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  existing.  It 
bends  in  an  arc  around  the  south  side  of  the  island.  Flint  has  collected 
the  most  important  numerical  data  concerning  it^.  South-east  of  Guam, 
about  40  kilometers  from  the  shore,  —  2,07  9  meters  was  sounded,  at  about 
80  kilometers  from  the  shore,  of  —4,090  meters.  At  a  distance  of  about  130 
kilometers  (lat.  12°  51' N.,  long.  145°  46'  E.)  the  Albatross  found  -8,802 
meters,  and  not  far  from  this  spot  the  Ifero  sounded  —  9,636  meters,  the 
greatest  depth  which  has  as  yet  been  discovered.  Then  the  sea  bottom 
rises  in  the  direction  of  the  Ocean.  From  —8,985  meters  we  soon  pass 
to  an  isolated  summit  lying  at  only  —4,592  meters ;  Schott  and  Perlewitz 
describe  it  as  a  horst ;  then  the  Ocean  extends  far  and  wide  with  a  depth 
of  about  5,700  meters. — 

Volckens  and  E.  Kaiser  state  that  the  island  of  Yap  together  with 
Rumong  and  Map  consist  of  amphibolite  and  actinolite  schist.  In  Map 
a  breccia  is  said  to  occur  which  contains  boulders  up  to  a  meter  in  diameter 
formed  of  fresh  gabbro  and  pyroxenite,  as  well  as  amphibolite  and  horn- 
blende, syenite  ^  This  recalls  the  association  of  gabbro  and  amphibolite 
in  Mentawei  and  Java  (III,  p.  236),  where  these  rocks  are  not  older  than 
the  middle  Cretaceous. 

According  to  Schott  and  Perlewitz  an  almost  level  sea  bottom  extends 
west  of  Yap  at  -3,000  to  -4,000  meters  ;  then  it  rises  very  rapidly 
up  to  the  island.  To  the  east  the  submarine  slope  to  about  the  same 
depth  is  gentler,  and  then  the  bottom  suddenly  sinks  to  —7,538  meters. 

^  A.  Agassiz,  Coral  Reefs  of  the  tropical  Pacific  (Reports  on  the  Scientific  Results  of 
the  Expedition  by  the  steamer  Albatross,  IV),  Mem.  Mus.  Comp.  Zool.,  1903,  XXVIII, 
410  pp.,  maps,  in  particular  p.  365  et  seq.  From  the  Farallon  de  Pajaros,  E.  Kaiser 
mentions  augite-andesite,  and  from  Saipan  andesite-obsidian,  Jahrb.  k.-preuss.  geol. 
Landesanst.,  1903,  XXIV,  p.  114  et  seq. 

2  G.  Volkens,  Ueber  die  Karolinen-Insel  Yap,  Verb.  Ges.  Erdk.,  1901,  XXVIII,  pp,  62- 
76,  map  ;  E.  Kaiser,  Beitrag  zur  Petrographie  und  Geologie  der  deutschen  Sudsee- 
Inseln,  Jahrb.  k.  preuss.  geol.  Landesanst.,  1903,  XXIV,  pp.  91-121,  map,  in  particular 
p.  114  et  seq. 

^  J.  M.  Flint.  Contributions  to  the  Oceanography  of  the  Pacific,  Bull.  U.S.  Nat.  Mus. 
Washington,  1905,  no.  55,  62  pp.,  maps. 


298 


THE  OCEANIDES 


[part  V 


On  the  other  side  of  the  fore-deep,  towards  the  east,  there  is  a  broad 
ascent  to  —4,000  meters.  The  fore-deep  itself  mounts  rapidly  along 
its  longitudinal  axis,  that  is  towards  the  north-east  and  south-west,  to 
—  6,000  meters. 

The  Feleiu  islands  consist,  according  to  Kubary  and  Wichmann,  of 
augite-andesite  and  tuff,  which  form  the  great  island  of  Babelthuap,  and 
a  group  adjoining  it  on  the  south  ;  superposed  on  this  is  limestone.  Semper 
mentions  domes  of  limestone  reaching  a  height  of  200  feet ;  according  to 
Kubary  it  forms  on  the  southern  island  of  Angaur  a  steep  rock,  500  feet 
in  height.  It  is  described  as  coarse  grained,  compact,  crystalline,  well- 
stratified  and  fossiliferous. 

Rolled  pebbles  of  syenitic  granite  occur  on  the  coast ;  but  on  the  island 
of  Malakal  they  also  occur  up  to  a  height  of  500  meters  \ 

Some  shallows  on  the  north  give  to  this  chain  of  islands  the  form  of  an 
arc  convex  towards  the  south-east.  On  the  west  the  sea  bottom  does  not 
sink  much  below  —4,000  meters ;  on  the  east  the  fore-deep  consists  of 
a  northern  half  lying  at  —8,138  meters  and  a  southern  half  below  —7,000 
meters.    The  boundary  between  the  two  halves  rises  up  to  —6,254  meters. 

The  Tulur  islands  are  almost  entirely  sedimentary  (III,  p.  262). 

The  soundings  of  the  'Planet'  show,  according  to  Brennecke's 
account,  an  elongated  fore-deep  lying  ofi*  the  Philippines  at  a  distance 
of  about  25  or  45  knots  east  of  the  coast.  In  lat.  12°  23'  N.,  only  25  knots 
from  Samar,  the  bottom  was  not  reached  at  —  8,900  meters ;  east  of 
Mindanao  -  8,500  was  sounded  in  lat.  8°  35'  N.,  and  in  lat.  7°  5'  N.  the 
bottom  was  not  reached  at  —  8,554  meters.  From  this  point  the  fore-deep 
turns  towards  the  south-south-east,  arrives  east  of  the  Tulur  islands  with 
soundings  of  —  7,243  meters,  and  is  continued  as  a  furrow  of  —  5,100  meters 
along  the  east  side  of  Morotai  ^.  Thus  confirmation  is  given  to  the  con- 
jecture that  Almahera  belongs  to  the  Philippines,  and  at  the  same  time  the 
eastern  boundary  is  determined  by  the  great  virgation  of  which  Borneo 
forms  part  (III,  pp.  261,  265). 

The  Carolines  and  New  Guinea  belong  to  quite  another  system. 

We  have  already  seen  that  no  limit  is  known  to  the  arc-producing 
force  of  Asia  in  the  direction  of  the  Ocean  (III,  p.  146).  Towards  the 
south-east  this  boundary  extends  along  the  east  side  of  the  Marianne 
islands,  from  Yap,  through  Pelew,  to  Almahera. 

The  line  of  Ruahine^  Kermadec,  and  Tonga.  Many  years  ago  Dana 
attempted  to  determine  the  trend-lines  of  Oceania.    He  was  able  to  dis- 

*  J.  Kubary,  Die  Palau-Inseln  in  der  Siidsee,  Journ.  Mus.  GodefFroy,  1873,  IV,  pp.  177- 
238 ;  A.  Wichmann,  Zur  geologischen  Kenntniss  der  Palau-Inseln,  op.  cit.,  1875,  VIII, 
255-259  ;  map  of  these  islands  by  L.  Friederichsen,  op.  cit.,  IV,  pi.  1  ;  K.  Oebbeke, 
N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1881  ;  E.  Kaiser,  Jahrb.  k.-preuss.  geol.  Landesanst.,  1903,  XXIV,  p.  113. 
W.  Brennecke,  Forschungsreise  S.M.S.  '  Planet Ann.  d.  Hydrogr.,  1907,  pp.  193-198. 


CH.IX]       SOUTH-EAST  BOUNDARY  OF  ASIA  299 


tinguish  :  (1)  Hawaii  (with  Fanning  and  Marquesas) ;  (2)  the  Polynesian 
chain  (Ralik  and  Radak,  Gilbert,  EUice,  Samoa  as  far  as  Tubnai  and 
Paumotu).  He  found  that  Samoa  lay  in  an  embayment  caused  by  a 
bending  of  the  strike  out  of  the  south-east  into  the  east- south-east  direc- 
tion ;  (3)  the  Australian  chain  (on  the  other  side  of  the  Caroline  islands, 
which  may  be  regarded  as  a  connecting  link,  all  the  islands  from  the  zone 
of  the  Admiralty  islands  to  the  New  Hebrides,  as  far  as  Australia) ;  this 
group  is  arranged  more  nearly  in  the  form  of  an  arc ;  (4)  the  New  Zealand 
chain  (Macquarie,  New  Zealand,  as  far  as  the  north  end  of  the  Tonga 
islands).  This  chain  strikes  to  the  north-north-east  almost  perpendicular 
to  the  generally  prevalent  north-west  direction  ^. 

This  conception  of  the  facts  reveals  much  insight;  Dana's  transverse 
line  of  New  Zealand  is  in  fact  a  main  boundary.  Following  Dana  as  to 
the  essential  points  we  shall  here  name  the  western  region  the  Australian ; 
the  eastern  region,  however,  we  shall  speak  of,  in  correspondence  with 
general  usage,  as  the  Polynesian.    Hawaii  will  be  considered  later. 

In  the  south  island  of  New  Zealand  (II,  p.  143)  two  ranges,  now  visible 
only  in  fragments,  encounter  one  another.  One  of  these,  but  little  known, 
strikes  to  the  south-east  across  Stewart  island.  The  other,  folded  towards 
the  east-south-east,  strikes  to  the  north-north-east.  Its  western  and  older 
zones  disappear  on  Tasman  bay ;  the  eastern  zones,  which  are  Palaeozoic 
and  Mesozoic,  form  the  Ruahine  range  on  the  east  side  of  North  island. 
Where  the  older  western  zone  of  the  south,  consisting  chiefly  of  gneiss  and 
ancient  schist  should  make  its  appearance  in  North  island,  we  encounter 
instead  a  zone  of  subsidence,  Hochstetter's  Taupo  zone,  situated  to  the  west 
of  the  Ruahine  zone.  This  zone,  beset  with  numerous  smaller  eruptive 
centres,  includes  the  great  volcanos  Ruapehu  and  Tongariro,  and  the 
fissure  of  the  volcano  Tarawera,  which,  previously  regarded  as  extinct, 
opened  up  on  June  10,  1886,  with  disastrous  consequences. 

In  the  bay  of  Plenty,  situated  on  the  continuation  of  the  Taupo  zone, 
lies  the  volcano  of  White  island,  and  P.  Smith  has  shown  that  the  same 
volcanic  line  is  continued  to  the  very  active  volcanic  islands  of  the 
Kermadec  group  which  also  run  towards  the  north-north-east  ^.  In  Raoul 
(Sunday  island)  boulders  of  hornblende  granite  are  met  with^. 

^  J.  D.  Dana,  Manual  of  Geology,  2nd  ed.,  1875,  p,  29  et  seq.,  et  passim.  Among  later 
attempts  we  may  mention  T.  Arldt,  Parallelismus  der  Inselketten  Oceaniens,  Zeitschr. 
Ges.  Erdk.,  1906,  pp.  323-346,  and  385-404,  map. 

^  Percy  Smith,  Geological  Notes  on  the  Kermadec  Group,  Trans.  N.Z.  Inst.,  1887,  XX, 
pp.  333-344. 

'  A.  P.  W.  Thomas,  Notes  on  the  Rocks  of  the  Kermadec  Islands,  Trans.  N.Z.  Inst., 
1887,  XX,  pp.  311-315.  The  boulders  appear  to  have  been  cast  up  by  eruption ;  it  is 
doubtful  whether  they  are  of  great  age,  or  have  been  produced  from  the  base  of  the 
funnel.  Speight  mentions  tachylite  from  Macaulay  island  ;  elsewhere  andesites  prevail, 
op.  cit.,  1895,  XXVIII,  pp.  625-627. 


300 


THE  OCEANIDES 


[PAKT  V 


Both  Smith  and  Lister  regard  the  Tonga  islands  as  a  still  further 
continuation  of  the  same  line,  as  indicated  by  the  Minerva  bank  and  a  sub- 
marine ridge.  These  islands  also  run  towards  the  north-north-east.  They 
consist  of  an  eastern  and  a  western  zone ;  the  western  is  formed  by  a  series 
of  volcanos.  Falcon  volcano  was  a  slightly  submerged  reef  in  1867,  emitted 
smoke  in  1877,  once  broke  into  eruption  in  1885,  stood  at  a  height  of 
slightly  over  60  meters  in  1887,  and  in  1889  was  again  almost  entirely 
washed  away.  Metis  likewise  arose  in  quite  recent  times.  Several  others 
of  these  volcanos  have  been  seen  sending  forth  steam. 

The  eastern  zone  consists  of  terraced  limestone.  On  Eua^  the  most 
southerly  island,  a  block  of  uralitised  gabbro  has  been  found,  either  in 
place,  or  brought  up  by  volcanic  agency ;  loose  crystals  of  garnet  and 
tourmaline  also  occur.  The  core  of  the  island  was  formed  by  an  ancient 
eruption,  which  carried  up  torn-off  limestone  fragments  to  a  great  height. 
This  core  is  mantled  by  limestone  which  is  divided  into  terraces,  and 
these  are  higher  on  the  outer,  and  lower  on  the  inner  side,  as  though  there 
had  been  a  sufficient  interval  between  the  negative  movements  for  the 
growth  of  an  atoll.  The  highest  step  in  the  limestone  occurs  at  a  level  of 
500  feet  (152  meters).    The  limestone  is  invaded  by  volcanic  dykes. 

The  other  islands  of  the  eastern  zone,  Tonga  Tabu,  the  Hapai  and  the 
Vavau  group  show  no  volcanic  basement ;  the  terracing  is  particularly 
well  marked  in  the  Vavau  islands ;  Lister  distinguishes  among  them,  some 
with  one  terrace,  some  with  two  terraces,  and  some  with  three.  In  this 
respect  they  resemble  the  Loyalty  islands  (II,  p.  315).  The  highest  platform 
reaches  a  level  of  520  feet  (158  meters). 

Lister  believes  that  these  islands  have  formed  on  volcanic  banks, 
perhaps  like  that  of  the  Falcon^. 

We  might  hesitate  to  suppose  that  a  connexion,  passing  through  the 
Kermadec  group,  should  exist  between  New  Zealand  and  the  Tonga  islands, 
which  are  16-17  degrees  of  latitude  distant  from  it,  but  the  Tonga  islands 
themselves  follow  the  same  strike  through  3 J  degrees  of  latitude  as  far 
as  Amargura,  and  a  very  considerable  fore-deep  lying  on  the  east  side 
confirms  the  supposition. 

Even  in  lat.  35°  S.  (east  of  the  northern  extremity  of  New  Zealand) 
the  sea  bottom  lies  at  —  8,000  meters ;  in  lat.  30**  27'  S.  (east  of  Kermadec) 

*  J.  J.  Lister,  Notes  on  the  Geology  of  the  Tonga  Islands,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc, 
1891,  XLIV,  pp.  590-617,  map ;  Geogr.  Journ.,  1890,  XII,  p.  157 ;  numerous  details  are 
given  by  C.  Phillips,  The  Volcanos  of  the  Pacific,  Trans,  and  Proc.  N.Z.  Inst.,  1898,  XXXI, 
pp.  510-551,  1899,  XXXII,  pp.  188-212  ;  according  to  a  note  in  this  work  communicated 
by  Hector  (XXXI,  p.  514)  Falcon  was  produced  by  an  eruption  of  rhyolite,  a  rock  rare 
in  these  regions  and  recalling  New  Zealand.  A  chart  of  the  depths  is  given  by 
0.  Kriimmel,  Die  tiefste  Depression  des  Meeresbodens,  Hettner's  Geogr.  Zeitschr.,  1899, 
V,  pp.  509-512,  pi.  10  ;  also  A.  Agassiz,  Coral  Reefs,  pp.  175-203,  pi.  213, 214.  The  last- 
named  map  shows  the  contrast  between  the  two  series  of  islands. 


CH.IX]  FIRST  AUSTEALIAN  ARC 


301 


the  Penguin  sounded  —9,428  meters,  in  lat.  28°  44'  S.  (north-east 
of  Raoul)  -9,413  meters,  in  lat.  23°  29'  S.  -9,193  meters;  on  the  south- 
east of  Eua  (Tonga  islands)  —8,700  meters  is  still  met  with,  and  south-east 
of  Keppel  (North  Tonga)  —8,280  meters.  The  three  points  with  a  greater 
depth  than  9,000  meters  lie  600  kilometers  distant  from  one  another.  They 
are  separated  by  intervals  of  —  7,000-8,000  meters. 

These  depths  are  the  more  remarkable  since  the  whole  of  the  sea 
situated  towards  the  west  seldom  reaches  —4,000  meters,  and  that  on 
the  east  sinks  at  most  to  —5,000  meters.  Towards  Samoa  the  depths 
rapidly  decrease,  and  the  volcanic  mountains  of  Samoa  are  evidently 
alined  in  another  direction — east-south-east.  The  boundary  must  be  drawn 
west  of  Samoa.  In  this  way  the  archipelago  is  divided  into  the  Australian 
portion  and  the  Polynesian  portion.  That  the  depression  is  a  true  tectonic 
fore-deep  is  shown  by  its  position  in  front  of  the  mountains  of  northern 
New  Zealand  (Ruahine)  which  are  folded  towards  the  east. 

Jensen,  who  described  an  eruption  which  occurred  in  1906  in  Tofua 
(Tonga  group),  would  extend  the  line  from  New  Zealand  even  as  far  as 
Samoa ;  he  regards  the  depths  as  true  fore- deeps,  and  the  whole  line  as 
possibly  produced  by  overfolding  from  the  west-north -west  ^. 

First  Australian  arc.  The  Australian  archipelago,  bounded  on  the 
north-west  and  east  by  the  greatest  depths  so  far  known,  is  divided  into 
three  arcs.  The  first  and  innermost  runs  from  New  Guinea  into  the  north- 
north- west  peninsula  of  New  Zealand.  It  falls  into  two  adjacent  arcs ; 
New  Guinea,  Louisiade,  New  Caledonia,  New  Zealand,  form  one,  and 
North  Mecklenburg,  Solomon  islands.  New  Hebrides,  the  other.  In  both 
ancient  rocks  are  exposed.  The  second  arc  is  formed  by  the  Caroline, 
Radak,  Gilbert,  Ellice,  and  Fiji  islands.  The  third  arc,  almost  a  straight 
line,  includes  Tonga,  Kermadec,  and  north-east  New  Zealand. 

New  Guinea  (II,  p.  165 ;  III,  p.  243).  Our  previous  descriptions  of 
this  great  island  were  very  bare,  and  even  now  we  can  scarcely  offer  more 
than  isolated  and  disconnected  data.  Yet  New  Guinea  measures  thrice  the 
length  of  the  Alps  between  Lyons  and  Vienna,  and  it  is  traversed  by  a  long 
and  lofty  mountain  range. 

The  contrast  between  New  Guinea  and  the  ancient  mass  of  Australia 
would  be  still  sharper  were  it  not  for  a  vast  stretch  of  hilly  country  and 
plain  which  adjoins  the  south  side  of  the  mountains,  and  probably  occupies 
the  whole  of  the  southern  part  of  New  Guinea,  from  the  gulf  of  Papua 

^  A  submarine  eruption  situated  outside  the  southern  continuation  (Taupo  zone),  yet 
within  the  conjectured  continuation  of  the  great  depths,  took  place  outside  Open  bay. 
New  Zealand,  on  Dec.  18,  1877,  Ann.  Hydrogr.,  1878,  VI,  p.  370;  also  Rudolph,  Sub- 
marine Erdbeben  und  Eruptionen,  Gerland,  Beitrage  zur  Geophysik,  1887,  I,  p.  359  ; 
J.  Jensen,  Geology  of  Samoa  and  Eruptions  in  Savaii,  Proc.  Linn.  Soc.  N.S.W.,  1906, 
XXXI,  pp.  641-672,  in  particular  p.  661  et  seq. 


302 


THE  OCEANIDES 


[part  V 


nearly  up  to  the  western  end  of  the  Charles  Louis  range.  On  the  south 
margin  of  this  lower  lying  land  rises  the  granite  hill  of  Mabudauan, 
which  belongs  to  Australia.  A  considerable  area  is  drained  by  the  Fly 
river.  D'Albertis,  M'Gregor,  and  others  have  explored  this  region ;  the 
data  which  are  of  most  value  to  us  were  collected  by  the  expedition  of 
Edelfelt  and  Bevan,  who  explored  the  Strickland  river  (left  tributary  of 
the  Fly)  in  1855.  In  the  first  hill  ranges  on  the  upper  Strickland  marine 
Tertiary  beds  were  observed,  and  further  up  the  river  in  lat.  6°  35'  S.  a  fossil 
shell  (Inoceramus  or  Aucella)  was  found ;  middle  Jurassic  Ammonites  occur 
enclosed  in  nodules.  They  are  compared  with  Stephanoceras  calloviensey 
S.  Blagdeni,  and  S.  coronatum^  and  point  to  an  horizon  not  far  removed 
from  the  middle  Jurassic  transgression  of  western  Australia  ^. 

Still  further  north,  finally,  in  lat.  5°  30'  S.,  on  the  Palmerston  river, 
3f  degrees  of  latitude  from  the  hill  of  Mabudauan  and  the  coast,  we  reach 
the  foot  of  mount  Bliicher  and  mount  Donaldson,  which  are  foothills  of  the 
principal  chain.  Ten  Brink  recalls  the  fact  that  in  the  year  1623  Jan 
Carstens,  sailing  along  the  south-west  coast  in  lat.  5°  14'  S.,  saw  a  snow- 
covered  range  in  the  interior  of  the  island,  and  that  these  snowy  peaks 
were  not  seen  again  until  the  year  1881.  These  highest  summits,  probably 
reaching  as  much  as  5,000  meters,  are  shown  on  a  sketch  map  by  Ijzermann 
as  the  eastern  continuation  of  the  Charles  Louis  range,  in  long.  137°  11'  E., 
lat.  4°  14'  S.2 

The  presence  of  middle  Jurassic  beds  leads  us  to  suppose  that  the  south 
of  New  Guinea  must  stand  in  some  tectonic  relation  to  Australia. 

1.  British  New  Guinea,  For  a  study  of  the  south  slope  of  the  eastern 
part  of  New  Guinea,  Maitland's  account  of  1891  is  the  most  important 
source  of  information;  it  includes  all  the  observations  previously  made, 
particularly  those  of  M'Gregor^. 

Three  elements  contribute  to  the  formation  of  the  range,  namely, 
a  broad  zone  of  ancient  schist,  which  includes  the  uppermost  parts  in  the 
interior,  then  a  steeply  upturned  and  folded  zone  of  limestone  extending 
along  part  of  the  south  coast,  and  finally  recent  volcanos. 

From  long.  146°  15'  E.  to  about  148  °  30'  E.  the  limestone  zone  (Mait- 
land's Moresby  beds)  has  been  thoroughly  investigated.  It  is  formed  of 
light-coloured  limestones  with  bands  of  chert  striking  N.  30°  W.    In  Hall 

^  R.  Jack  and  R.  Etheridge,  jun..  Geology  and  Palaeontology  of  Queensland  and  New 
Guinea,  8vo,  Brisbane,  1892,  with  map  and  atlas,  p.  696  et  seq. 

'  A.  J.  Ten  Brink,  Het  *  Sneeuwegebergte  '  op  Nieuw  Guinea,  Natuurk.  Tijdschr.  v. 
Nederl.  Indie,  1893,  LII,  pp.  41-75;  J.  W.  Ijzerman,  Report  in  Tijdschr.  Nederl. 
Aardrijksk.  Genootsch.,  1904,  XXI,  pp.  339-354,  map. 

A.  Gibb  Maitland,  Geological  Observations  in  British  New  Guinea  in  1891,  Blue 
Book,  Queensland,  1892,  30  pp.,  maps;  also  Salient  geological  Features  of  British  New 
Guinea,  W.  Austr.  Nat.  Hist.  Soc,  April  11, 1905,  26  pp.  A  copy  of  Maitland's  geological 
map  of  this  region  is  given  by  Haddon,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1900,  XVI,  p.  268. 


CH.  IX] 


BRITISH  NEW  GUINEA 


303 


sound  (long.  146°  35'  E.)  they  have  afforded  foraminifera  and  Tertiary 
shells,  but  the  latter  are  different  from  those  which  occur  in  the  Tertiary 
beds  of  Australia  ^  It  is  possible  that  the  so-called  Boioro  limestone  of 
the  south  coast  (long.  149°  30'  E.)  belongs  to  this  limestone  zone,  which 
apparently  includes  sediments  of  various  age.  Perhaps  the  hard,  shell- 
bearing  limestone  of  Tumu  (long.  144°  15'  E.),  which  occurs  in  the  north- 
west near  the  head  of  the  gulf  of  Papua,  must  also  be  referred  here. 

The  folding  of  the  limestone  zone  preceded  the  eruption  of  the  lavas. 
A  broad  mass  of  lava  advances  in  cape  Suckling  (long.  146°  45'  E.)  towards 
the  sea.  It  descends  from  mount  Yule  (Kovio),  a  fairly  independent  mass 
which  rises  in  the  south  of  the  principal  chain.  JuUien  and  de  Rycke 
estimate  its  height  at  3,400  meters,  and  that  of  mount  Marie,  which  belongs 
to  the  principal  chain,  at  4,500  meters  ^. 

M'Gregor  crossed  the  principal  chain  or  Oiuen  Stanley  range^  through 
the  valley  of  the  Vanapa  river,  east  of  cape  Suckling.  It  consists  of  steeply- 
folded  schists ;  on  mount  Victoria  (4,000  meters)  the  schist  resembles  gneiss  ; 
towards  the  north  it  is  followed  by  clay  slate.  Mount  Skertchley  (3,733 
meters)  on  the  north  side  has  frequently  been  visited  by  gold  diggers  ^. 
The  schists  of  the  principal  chain  extend  in  long.  147°  15'  E.  nearly  down  to 
the  south  coast ;  there  they  include  a  granitic  mass,  against  which  the 
limestone  zone  rests.  Then  a  region  of  recent  volcanic  activity  attaches  itself 
to  the  south  side  of  the  principal  chain,  near  the  headwaters  of  the  Laloki, 
and  great  platforms  of  volcanic  breccia,  such  as  the  Astrolabe  plateau,  step 
unconformably  over  the  upturned  limestone.  Mount  Obree,  in  the  prin- 
cipal chain  (long.  148°  5'  E.)  appears  to  be  an  outlier  of  this  volcanic  region. 
East  of  this  the  principal  chain  again  rises  and  reaches  a  height  of  3,422 
meters  in  mount  Suckling,  situated  on  its  north  side  and  formed  of  greenish 
quartzite. 

Mount  Dayman  (2,812  meters)  rises  like  mount  Obree  within  the 
principal  chain,  bears  a  crater,  and  sends  off  a  lava  stream  towards  the 
north-east.  Then  the  range  decreases  in  height.  In  long.  149°  30'  E.  the 
above-mentioned  limestone  of  Boioro,  folded  and  traversed  by  diorite,  makes 
its  appearance  on  the  south-coast.  From  long.  149°  45'  E.  onwards  a  series 
of  crater  mountains  begins  with  the  island  of  Mugula  (Dufaure)  and  joining 
New  Guinea,  forms  the  harbour  of  Pouro  (Mullen's  Harbour) ;  volcanic 
rocks  prevail  from  this  point  as  far  as  Milne  bay. — 

Let  us  turn  our  attention  to  the  north  side. 

With  the  exception  of  the  promontory  situated  between  Goodenough 
^  Tenison  Woods,  Proc.  Linn.  Soc.  N.S.W.,  1883,  VII,  p.  381. 

^  P.  P.  Jullien  et  de  Rycke,  Deux  voyages  d'explo ration,  C.  R.  Soc.  Geogr.  Paris,  1898, 
pp.  206-209,  map. 

^  W.  Macgregor,  Journey  to  the  Summit  of  the  Owen  Stanley  Range,  New  Guinea, 
Proc.  R.  Geogr.  Soc,  1890,  new  ser.,  XII,  pp.  193-223,  map. 


804: 


THE  OCEANIDES 


[part  V 


and  Collingwood  bays,  which  is  formed  of  coral  limestone,  nothing  but 
volcanic  rock  is  known  on  the  north  coast  as  far  as  long.  148''  E.,  i.e.  up  to 
the  German  frontier.  Part  of  the  lava  seems  to  have  come  down  from  the 
great  mountains.  Cape  Trafalgar  (long.  149°  15'  E.)  proceeding  in  isola- 
tion into  the  sea,  bears  the  smoking  volcano  of  mount  Victory. 

Beneath  the  lavas  lie  the  ancient  schists  of  the  principal  chain ;  miners 
prospecting  for  gold  have  followed  them  from  the  Owen  Stanley  range  up 
to  the  German  frontier  and  towards  the  sources  of  the  Hercules  river. 

As  the  recent  volcanos  of  the  south-east  are  continued  into  the  sea, 
and  at  the  same  time  the  height  of  the  range  decreases,  these  gold-bearing 
schists  reappear,  according  to  Jack  and  Maitland,  in  all  the  larger  islands 
of  the  Entrecastreaux  group,  where  they  are  associated  with  granitic 
gneiss.  Further  to  the  north-east  also,  in  Murua  (Woodlark),  Maguire 
mentions  schists  with  gold-bearing  quartz  veins  ^. 

The  Louisade  islands  were  long  ago  recognized  by  McGillivray  and 
Dana  as  parts  of  New  Guinea.  The  gold-bearing  quartz  occurs,  according 
to  Maitland,  in  Tagula  (Sudest),  in  vertical  clay  slates.  This  slate  has  been 
observed  as  far  as  Rossel  island  (long,  154°  15'  E.)  ^. 

2.  German  Ne%v  Guinea,  At  the  mouth  of  the  Hercules  river,  near 
Adolf shaf en,  Rudiger  found  a  rocky  prominence  of  schistose  rock. 
Schleinitz  noticed  that  ancient  rocks  advance  nearly  to  the  coast  on  the 
south  side  of  Hiion  gulf  ^.  According  to  Riidiger  the  Francisca  river  flows 
over  fragments  of  quartz  and  granite  and  the  Parsee  peninsula  consists 
of  granite 

Coral  limestone  forms  the  neighbourhood  of  Finschhafen;  limestone 
seems  to  occur  all  round  about  the  Sattelberg,  970  meters  in  height,  and 
also  upon  it  ^. 

A  region  which  extends  from  the  mouth  of  the  Markham  river  towards 
the  north-west,  and  then  through  the  broad  valley  of  the  Ramu  (Ottilien) 
river  as  far  as  lat.  4°  S.,  seems  to  be  separated  from  the  main  range  as 
a  fairly  independent  mass,  or  it  may  be  that  the  range  itself  swerves  in 
a  gentle  curve.    This  region  is  divided  into  two  parts  by  Astrolabe  bay  ; 

1  W.  Macgregor,  Proc.  R.  Geogr.  Soc,  1892,  p.  327 ;  H.  R.  Maguire,  Impressions  of  a 
Year's  Sojourn  in  British  New  Guinea,  Queensland  Geogr.  Journ.,  1901-1902,  new  ser., 
XVII,  pp.  117-143,  in  particular  p.  135  et  seq. 

'  A.  G.  Maitland,  Salient  Features  of  British  New  Guinea,  W.  Austr.  Nat.  Hist.  Soc, 
April  11,  1905,  p.  22  et  seq. 

'  Freiherr  von  Schleinitz,  Beschreibung  der  Nordkiiste  von  Kaiser  Wilhelms-Land  von 
Cap  Cretin  bis  zu  den  Legoarant-Inseln,  Nachrichten  iiber  Kaiser  Wilhelms-Land  und 
den  Bismarck-Archipel,  publ.  by  the  New  Guinea  Company  of  Berlin,  1889,  V,  pp.  48-87, 
ma]),  in  particular  p.  55. 

*  H.  Rudiger,  Der  Hiion-Golf  im  Sudosten  von  Kaiser  Wilhelms-Land,  Verb.  Ges.  Erdk. 
Berlin,  1897,  XXIV,  pp.  280-295,  map,  in  particular  pp.  288  and  293. 

Schneider,  Nachrichten  von  Kaiser  Wilhelms-Land,  1886,  II,  p.  85  et  seq.  ;  Warburg, 
op.  cit.,  1890,  VI,  p.  20,  map  in  1889,  V. 


CH.  IX] 


GERMAN  NEW  GUINEA 


305 


its  southern  part,  or  the  Maklai  coast,  is  dominated  by  the  Finisterre 
range. 

Winter  and  Hell  wig,  who  accompanied  the  Zoller  expedition,  travelled 
up  the  river  Kabenau,  which  flows  into  Astrolabe  bay.  On  this  journey 
they  first  crossed  a  chain  formed  of  sedimentary  rock  ;  then  conglomerates 
and  tuffs  with  fossils,  and  finally  came  upon  porphyry.  At  that  point  the 
river  turns  towards  the  east. 

The  Finisterre  range  consists  for  the  greater  part  of  recent  volcanic 
rocks ;  its  highest  point,  mount  Gladstone  (2,390  meters),  appears  to  be 
formed  of  augite-andesite.  It  is  bounded  on  the  south  by  the  Kabenau,  and 
south  of  the  river  valley  we  meet  with  porphyry.  From  this  point  two 
great  ranges  may  be  seen,  on  the  south,  the  Kraethe  range,  running  to  the 
east-south-east,  and  on  the  west  the  still  loftier  Bismarck  range,  running 
to  the  south-east.  The  latter  forms  part  of  the  principal  chain  of  New 
Guinea  ^ 

The  Oertzen  range  (Tajomanna,  about  1,100  meters)  may  be  regarded  as 
a  north-westerly  continuation  of  the  foothills  of  Finisterre.  Lauterbach 
observed  on  its  crest  steeply  upturned  conglomerates  composed  of  gigantic 
boulders  of  diorite,  gabbro,  hornblende-andesite,  altered  clay  slate,  and 
limestone,  embedded  in  a  hard  blackish-green  matrix  ^. 

This  conglomerate  also  occurs  further  north  on  the  Nuru  river.  Travel- 
ling up  stream  Lauterbach  reached  the  Ssigauu  mountains^  formed  of  dark 
clay  slate,  tuff,  and  sandstone,  and  then  on  the  other  side  of  the  watershed, 
between  the  Nuru  and  Ramu,  soft  laminated  clay,  steeply  upturned,  with 
small  seams  of  coal.  The  great  longitudinal  valley  of  the  Ramu  begins 
behind  the  Finisterre  range  and  there  reaches  the  average  breadth  of 
30  kilometers.  It  follows  the  north-east  foot  of  the  Bismarck  range,  the 
summits  of  which  are  here  4,300  meters  in  height,  and  separates  it  from 
the  mountain  ranges  situated  near  the  coast.  One  of  the  foothills  (990 
meters)  has  been  ascended ;  it  consists  of  gabbro  and  peridotite ;  the 
streams  carry  diorite,  gneiss,  and  quartz  boulders  ^. 

Dutch  New  Guinea.  Our  knowledge  of  the  north-western  part  of  this 
country  was  considerably  increased  by  Wichmann's  journeys,  made  in 
1903^;  and  the  studies  of  G.  Boehm  and  Wanner  enable  us  to  again 

^  Winter  und  Hellwig,  Finisterre-G-ebirge,  Nachrichten  von  Kaiser- Wilhelms-Land, 
1889,  V,  pp.  3-15,  map. 

^  K.  Lauterbach,  ibid.,  1896,  p.  39,  and  Bericht  iiber  die  Kaiser- Wilhelms-Land- 
Expedition  im  Jahre  1896,  Verh.  Ges.  Erdk.  Berlin,  1897,  XXIV,  pp.  51-69,  map,  in 
particular  p.  53,  and  Die  geographischen  Ergebnisse  der  Kaiser- Wilhelms-Land-Expedi- 
tion,  Zeitschr.  Ges.  Erdk.,  1898,  XXXIII,  pp.  141-175,  maps. 

^  The  identity  of  the  Ramu  and  Ottilia  rivers  was  subsequently  established  by  Tappen- 
beck,  Nachr.  v.  K.-Wilh.-Land,  1898,  pp.  51-59,  map. 

"  A.  Wichmann's  reports  in  Bull.  nos.  43,  44,  and  46  of  the  Maatsch.  van  het  Natuur- 
kund.  Onderzoek  d.  Nederland.  Kolon.  (Neu-Guinea-Expedition,  1903,  Bull.  nos.  3,  4, 
and  6),  8vo,  Leiden. 

SOLLAS  IV  X 


306 


THE  OCEANIDES 


[part  V 


approach  the  question  as  to  whether  New  Guinea  is  continued  towards 
the  west  into  the  region  of  the  Sunda  islands  (III,  p.  243).  We  will  first 
follow  the  accounts  of  Wichmann. 

Green  eruptive  rocks  (gabbro,  serpentine,  and  others),  extend  from 
the  south-east  of  Halmahera  to  the  islands  which  lie  off  the  north-west 
end  of  New  Guinea  (III,  p.  262).  No  continuation  is  known  here,  and  not 
until  we  reach  long.  140°  18'  E.  is  gabbro  again  mentioned ;  it  occurs  in  an 
island  in  the  gulf  of  Tanah  Merah ;  the  island  of  Misotti  in  Humboldt 
bay  (long.  140°  43'  E.)  consists  of  serpentine.  I  do  not  know  whether  the 
chloromelanite,  which  occurs  between  these  two  localities  on  the  Tarare 
river  and  furnishes  material  for  the  well-known  stone  clubs  of  Humboldt 
bay  should  be  referred  here.  According  to  Wichmann  it  forms  beds  in  the 
clay  slate.  The  gabbro  pebbles  of  the  Tami  river  (long.  140°  55'  E.)  are 
possibly  derived  from  the  higher  mountains  of  the  range. 

Ancient  crystalline  rocks  and  phyllites  occur  not  only  in  the  island 
chain  of  Peling-Misol,  which  strikes  east  and  west,  but  also  in  the  peninsula 
of  Beru.  In  the  south-east  clay  slate  and  a  folded  red  conglomerate 
occur. 

On  the  south-west  shore  of  Geelvinck  bay  ancient  rocks  and  folded 
quartzites  occur  in  places ;  the  island  of  Roon  is  formed  of  gneiss  ;  in  the 
northern  islands  of  the  bay  ancient  schists  and  diabase  predominate. 
Further  east  pebbles  of  crystalline  schist  come  from  the  Cyclops  range, 
and  in  Tarare  bay  marble,  gneiss,  and  schorlaceous  quartz  crop  out 
(long.  140°  32'  E.).  Mesozoic  sediments,  of  which  we  shall  speak  later, 
are  known  at  several  localities,  and  extend  indeed  far  towards  the  east. 
They  occur  on  the  river  Papar6,  not  far  from  the  isthmus  which  unites 
Beru  with  the  mainland,  then  further  towards  the  south-east,  on  lake 
Jamur,  and  again  in  long.  139°  50'  E.  on  the  Tawarin  river  (Walckenaer  bay). 

The  next  series  mentioned  by  Wichmann  is  formed  of  steeply  upturned 
Miocene  clays  and  sandstones  ;  they  are  coal-bearing  and  contain  Area 
and  Ostrea.  On  the  eastern  side  of  the  area  a  bed  containing  Melania 
is  included  with  them.  They  were  met  with  from  long.  139°  45°  E. 
onwards  along  the  sides  of  rivers  flowing  into  Walckenaer  bay,  and  also  at 
several  other  localities  as  far  as  long.  140°  55'  E.  So  far  as  we  can 
judge  from  the  accounts  they  always  lie  towards  the  interior.  Possibly 
they  form  the  outer  boundary  of  the  folded  chain  which  immediately 
succeeds  them. — 

The  north  coast  of  M'Cluer  inlet  is  flat,  while  the  south  coast  with  its 
off-lying  islands  is  a  rias  coast  of  steeply-folded  Alveolina  limestone,  with 
a  north-west  strike  ^.    It  extends  in  the  south  to  lat.  4°  S.    On  the  east 

^  C.  Schlumberger  has  shown  that  a  so-called  Alveolina  limestone  from  north-west 
New  Guinea  does  not  contain  Alveolina,  but  a  new  species  of  the  genus  Lacazina 
(L.  Wichmanni) ;  and  that  the  Eocene  age  must  therefore  be  based  on  other  contempo- 


CH.  IX] 


BUEU 


307 


side  pebbles  of  Alveolina  limestone,  granite,  diabase,  and  other  rocks  are 
brought  down  from  the  higher  mountains  and  carried  northwards  by  the 
river  Tawarin. 

Dark  Crinoidal  limestone  (Carboniferous  or  Permian)  occurs  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Belangkat  river,  south  of  the  Alveolina  limestone.  The  locality 
cannot  lie  very  far  from  the  western  end  of  the  Charles  Louis  range. — 

Let  us  again  turn  our  attention  to  the  Mesozoic  sediments. 

In  the  Sunda  islands — Taliabu,  Mangoli,  and  Misol  in  the  north,  and 
Buru  and  Ceram  in  the  south,  G.  Boehm  has  observed  a  series  of  f ossiliferous 
beds  ranging  from  the  Trias  up  to  the  middle  Cretaceous,  and  containing 
faunas  which  show  a  striking  resemblance  to  those  of  Europe.  To  this 
series  the  Mesozoic  patches  met  with  by  Wichmann  in  the  north  of  New 
Guinea  must  be  assigned.  Phylloceras  strigile  of  the  Spiti  fauna  occurs  in 
the  island  of  Taliabu,  and  also  at  a  distance  from  this  island,  but  in  similar 
nodules,  on  the  above-mentioned  river  of  Tawarin  (long.  139°  45^  E.)  \ 

At  the  same  time,  however,  there  is  this  important  difference  that  in 
the  northern  series  of  islands  the  later  deposits  rest  undisturbed  on  the 
ancient  rocks,  while  in  the  southern  they  are  folded.  Wanner  found  that 
the  folding  in  the  west  of  Buru  affects  even  the  Cretaceous  containing 
Tissotia,  and  it  is  particularly  intense  over  the  east  of  Ceram.  Indeed,  in 
the  latter  locality  great  boulders  make  their  appearance,  which  seem  to 
be  basement  fragments,  and  Radiolaria  occur  in  association  with  a  basic 
eruptive  rock.  From  the  south-east  coast  of  eastern  Ceram  also  the  Bate 
range  runs  to  the  north-east,  and  north  of  this  is  a  second  range  extending 
first  east  and  west  and  then  north-west  and  north  till  it  reaches  the  north 
coast  2. 

In  Taliabu  the  Jurassic  beds  are  horizontal  or  inclined,  but  never 
folded,  and  Misol  is  a  field  of  fracture,  while  the  southern  line  of  islands 
resembles  Timor,  both  as  regards  its  structure  and  the  succession  of  its 
strata. 

It  has  been  already  suggested  (III,  p.  243)  that  Buru  and  Ceram 
might  represent  the  continuation  of  the  southern  peninsula  of  New  Guinea ; 
a  view  that  has  been  adopted  by  G.  Boehm  ^. 

raneouB  fossils.  Martin  mentions  as  such  Orbitoides  and  Cycloclypeus,  Bull.  Soc.  geol. 
France,  1894,  3«  ser.,  XXII,  pp.  295-298. 

^  G.  Boehm,  Beitrag  zur  Geologic  vom  Niederlandischen  Indien,  I.  Div.,  South  coast  of 
the  Sula  islands  Taliabu  and  Mangoli ;  I.  section,  Boundary  beds  between  the  Jurassic 
and  Cretaceous  ;  Palaeontographica,  1904,  supplement  IV,  46  pp. ;  Geologische  Mitthei- 
lungen  aus  dem  Indo-Australischen  Archipel,  I,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1906,  Beil.  Bd.  XXII, 
pp.  385-412,  map,  et  passim. 

^  J.  Wanner,  Geologische  Mittheilungen  aus  dem  Indo-Australischen  Archipel,  III,  Zur 
Geologie  und  Geographie  von  West-Buru,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1907,  Beil.  Bd.  XXIV,  pp.  133-160, 
and  IV,  Triaspetrographie  der  Molukken  und  des  Timorarchipels,  torn,  cit.,  pp.  161-175 

^  G.  Boehm,  Geologische  Mittheilungen  aus  dem  Indo-Australischen  Archipel,  I, 
p.  404. 

X  2 


308 


THE  OCEANIDES 


[PAKT  V 


We  may  assume,  pending  further  information,  that  the  principal 
Cordillera  of  New  Guinea  extends  to  Buru.  The  northern  islands  from 
Taliabu  to  Misol,  together  with  the  peninsula  of  Beru  and  the  north  coast 
of  New  Guinea  (inland  from  Walckenaer  bay  to  the  folded  band  of 
Miocene),  will  then  represent  the  foreland. 

Survey  of  New  Guinea.  When  we  consider  how  great  is  the  distance 
which  intervenes  between  the  Celebes  and  Rossel  island  (Louisiade),  and 
how  deficient  is  our  information  we  shall  readily  understand  that  definite 
conclusions  as  to  the  structure  of  this  region  are  at  present  beyond  our 
reach.  M'Gregor  has  certainly  crossed  the  south-eastern  part  of  the  great 
range,  and  a  regular  postal  service  has  now  been  established  which  runs 
from  Port  Moresby  over  a  pass  2,000  meters  above  the  sea  and  puts  the 
north  into  communication  with  the  south  ^.  But  beyond  this,  towards  the 
north-west,  the  great  range  of  the  interior  (Bismarck,  Victor  Emmanuel, 
and  Charles  Louis  range)  has  never  yet  been  trodden  by  a  white  man's 
foot.  Consequently,  we  can  only  offer  the  following  views  as  conjectures 
which,  subject  to  correction,  may  help  us  to  comprehend  the  general  plan 
of  this  important  part  of  the  globe. 

1.  Halmahera  must  be  assigned  to  Asia. 

2.  Asiatic  directions  of  strike,  which  are  chiefly  meridional,  meet  a  series 
of  islands  (Taliabu  to  Misol)  running  east  and  west,  and  forthwith  the 
active  volcanos  come  to  an  end.  Ancient  formations  occur  in  these  islands, 
and  superposed  upon  them  are  undisturbed  Mesozoic  beds.  These  strati- 
graphical  relations  are  continued  across  the  peninsula  of  Beru,  the  islands 
of  Geelvinck  bay,  and  at  least  as  far  as  Walckenaer  bay.  Their  evidence, 
more  particularly  in  Beru  (Arfak  range),  points  to  the  presence,  not  of 
a  recent  Cordillera,  but  of  older  mountains. 

3.  On  the  coast  between  long.  140°  18'  and  140°  43'  E.,  that  is,  north  of 
the  supposed  continuation  of  the  rocks  of  Beru,  isolated  exposures  of  gabbro 
and  serpentine  occur.  They  are  followed  on  the  east  by  a  long  interval 
not  yet  explored,  and  then  great  boulders  of  similar  rocks  are  encountered 
in  a  steeply-folded  conglomerate  of  the  Oertzen  range,  which  may  possibly 
be  connected  with  the  sharply-folded  beds  of  the  Kabenau  river.  These 
features,  which  recall  Halmahera  and  the  Philippines,  appear,  along  with 
the  andesite  range  of  Finisterre,  to  stand  more  or  less  in  independence 
of  the  rest.  The  longitudinal  valley  of  the  upper  Ramu  marks  their 
boundary. 

4.  In  association  with  these  rocks  we  find  along  the  north  coast  from 
long.  140°  7'  to  140°  14'  E.  (between  Walckenaer  and  Humboldt  bay) 
isolated  outcrops  of  basalt  and  andesite,  the  beginning,  probably,  of  a  series 
of  volcanic  reefs,  and  further  on  of  recent  volcanos,  which  first  follow  the 
coast  and  then,  as  we  shall  see  directly,  depart  from  it  and  run  towards 

»  R.  Pfich,  Zeitschr.  Ges.  Eidk.,  1907,  p.  163. 


CH.IX]  SURVEY  OF  NEW  GUINEA 


309 


New  Britain.  The  position  of  the  limestone  on  the  Sattelberg  (Finsch- 
hafen,  forming  part  of  Finisterre)  is  quite  uncertain. 

5.  South  of  the  island  of  Ramu  our  knowledge  is  confined  to  the 
altitudes  of  the  great  range,  and  does  not  extend  to  its  structure.  In 
Hiion  gulf,  granite  and  ancient  rocks  reach  the  sea.  In  all  probability  they 
belong  to  the  great  range  which  extends  from  this  point  through  the 
Owen  Stanley  chain  to  the  extreme  south-east.  This  range  consists  of 
schist  with  gold-bearing  quartz,  gneissose  in  places,  penetrated  by  isolated 
granite  masses.  Here  and  there  it  bears  a  volcano.  Towards  the  south- 
east recent  volcanos  become  more  frequent.  The  Entrecasteaux  islands 
and  the  Louisiade  archipelago  are  its  continuations. 

6.  The  islands  of  Burn  and  Ceram,  in  the  northern  part  of  this  region, 
present  the  characters  of  a  folded  cordillera,  and  the  rias  coast  which  forms 
the  beginning  of  the  Charles  Louis  range,  south  of  M'Clure  inlet,  represents 
their  continuation.  Its  age  is  post-Miocene ;  its  northern  outer  border 
extends  through  the  region  south  of  Walckenaer  bay.  How  far  it  runs 
to  the  south-east,  or  whether  the  southern  mountains,  such  as  the  Owen 
Stanley  range,  belong  to  it  is  quite  uncertain. 

7.  The  only  indication  of  a  recent  cordillera  in  the  south-east  of  the 
region  makes  its  appearance  on  the  south  side  of  the  great  mountains  as 
a  range  of  folded  limestone.  It  lies  on  the  north-east  side  of  the  gulf  of 
Papua,  and  borders  the  south  coast  with  a  strike  of  N.  30°  W.  A  part 
of  it  (Moresby  beds)  is  regarded  as  Tertiary. 

8.  The  south  of  New  Guinea  is  formed  of  low-lying  and  hilly  land. 
The  granite  boss  of  Mabudauan  belongs  to  Australia.  The  Tertiary  and 
Jurassic  beds — the  Jurassic  extending  to  lat.  6°  35'  S.  on  the  upper  course 
of  the  Strickland — have  as  yet  thrown  no  light  on  the  structure.  Hence  it 
appears  that  between  the  Philippines  (Halmahera)  and  the  supposed  con- 
tinuation of  the  cordillera  of  New  Guinea  (Ceram,  Buru)  another  inde- 
pendent and  older  element  makes  its  appearance,  of  which  the  most  con- 
spicuous part  is  the  peninsula  of  Beru.  It  follows  from  this,  however,  that 
the  cordillera  of  Timor  and  its  possible  relation  to  Australia  call  for  renewed 
investigation  (III,  p.  241).  Meanwhile,  Hirschi  has  afforded  us  further 
information  as  to  the  variety  of  the  folded  Mesozoic  deposits  of  that  island  ^. 

The  islands  to  the  north-east  of  New  Guinea.  Just  off  the  north  coast 
of  New  Guinea  begins  a  long  series  of  volcanos,  in  great  part  active, 
and,  after  running  for  some  distance  parallel  to  the  coast,  turns  off  in  an 
arc  towards  New  Britain.  There  is  no  reason,  as  we  have  seen,  why 
the  isolated  andesites  and  basalts  which  Wichmann  met  with  between 
Walckenaer  bay  and  Humboldt  bay  should  not  be  referred  to  this  series. 
To  the  east  lie  the  reefs  and  islands  of  Bertrand,  Guilbert,  and  d'Urville ; 

^  H.  Hirschi,  Geologische  Mittheilungen,  etc.,  V,  Zur  Geologie  und  Geographie  von 
Portugiesischem  Timor,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1907,  Beil.  Bd.  XXIV,  pp.  460-474,  maps. 


310 


THE  OCEANIDES 


[part  V 


Roissy  island  (long.  144°  E.)  brings  us  already  into  the  series  of  the 
Le  Maire  islands,  the  connexion  of  which  with  the  arc  running  towards 
New  Britain  has  already  been  described  by  W.  Powell  and  Karnbach.^ 
After  Roissy  island  comes  Volcano  island,  then  Dampier,  Rich,  Crown, 
Long,  Lattin,  Tupinier,  and  Ritter  islands,  all  beset  with  volcanos ;  the 
curve  they  describe  finally  reaches  New  Britain  in  the  volcanos  of 
Below  (2,100  meters)  and  Hunstein.  The  discoveries  of  Freiherr  von 
Schleinitz  show  that  the  concave  north  coast  of  the  elongated  island  of 
New  Britain  is  formed  by  a  series  of  volcanos  and  isolated  mountains, 
which  are  also  probably  volcanic,  connected  by  low-lying  land.  The  line 
of  Below  and  Hunstein  and  the  crater  mountain  of  cape  Gloucester  is 
continued  through  this  series  as  far  as  mount  Raoul  (lat.  5°  11'  S.). 

It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  this  series  leading  to  mount  Raoul  indicates 
an  advance  of  the  whole  arc  towards  the  north-east,  that  is,  towards  cape 
HoUmann,  while  a  new  series  of  volcanos  advances  behind  it ;  or  whether 
this  new  series  itself  is  a  continuation  of  the  first.  On  the  peninsula  to  which 
mount  Raoul  belongs  other  volcanos  occur  (Credner,  Engler,  and  others,  as 
far  as  Duportail  and  Nord-Sohn),  and  these  extend  towards  the  great  group 
of  active  volcanos  which  rises  along  Blanche  bay  on  the  north  border  of 
Gazelle  peninsula^. 

Running  in  an  arc  from  Le  Maire  islands  across  Dampier  strait  and 
along  the  north  coast  of  New  Britain  is  a  very  active  line  of  volcanos, 
the  position  of  which  in  the  general  tectonic  plan  is  still  unsolved.  The 
only  indication  we  possess  as  to  the  inner  structure  of  New  Britain  is 
the  conjecture  of  Graf  Pfeil  that  the  mountain  ranges  of  the  interior  run 
transverse  to  the  course  of  the  island  and  parallel  to  New  Guinea  ^. 

This  conjecture  is  supported  by  the  structure  of  New  Ireland. 
Here  Liversidge  mentions  porphyry,  diorite,  and  dark  limestone,  different 
from  the  coral  limestone,  and  also  some  grey  crystalline  limestone  at  a  height 
of  760  meters  (II,  p.  164)      This  agrees  with  the  statement  of  Graf  Pfeil 

^  W.  Powell,  Proc.  R.  Geogr.  Soc,  1883,  new  ser.,  IV,  p.  511 ;  Karnbach,  Nachrichten 
von  Kaiser-Wilhelms-Land,  1898,  IX,  p.  43. 

Freiherr  von  Schleinitz,  Beg-leitworte  zur  Karte  der  Nordkiiste  des  westlichen 
Theiles  der  Insel  Neu-Pommern,  Zeitschr.  Ges.  Erdk.,  1896,  XXXI,  pp.  137-154,  map ; 
Begleitworte  zur  Karte  des  ostlichen  Theiles,  op.  cit.,  1897,  XXXII,  pp.  349-359,  map  ; 
also  Nachrichten  von  Kaiser-Wilhelms-Land,  1889,  V,  p.  81.  It  is  possible,  but  not 
definitely  established,  that  two  cone-shaped  peaks  2,000  meters  high  in  the  south-east  of 
Rook  island  are  volcanos.  The  catastrophe  of  the  13th  Feb.,  1888,  is  said  to  have 
originated  in  this  island  ;  it  gave  rise  to  a  great  sea  wave  which  reached  the  coast  of 
New  Britain  and  swept  away  the  travellers  von  Below  and  Hunstein  and  their  whole 
expedition. 

^  J.  Graf  Pfeil,  Studien  und  Beobachtungen  aus  der  Siidsee,  8vo,  Braunschweig,  1899, 
p.  190. 

^  A.  Liversidge,  Rocks  from  New  Britain  and  New  Ireland,  Journ.  Proc.  R.  Soc. 
N.S.W.,  1882,  XVI,  pp.  47-51. 


CH.  IX] 


GUADALCANAE 


311 


that  the  southern  part  of  the  island  is  volcanic,  while  the  elongated  part 
extending  to  the  norfch-west  is  a  ridge  formed  of  sedimentary  rocks, 
possibly  resting  on  an  older  substructure ;  the  slope  of  this  ridge  is  steep 
towards  the  south-west,  and  gentle  towards  the  north-east;  it  represents 
the  most  easterly  of  the  folds  which  run  parallel  to  New  Guinea.  We 
shall  regard  New  Ireland  as  the  continuation  of  the  Solomon  islands, 
where  a  similar  limestone,  in  all  probability  Mesozoic,  is  stated  to 
occur. 

The  islands  of  the  Bismarck  [archipelago  as  far  as  the  Admiralty 
islands  have  as  yet  furnished  only  volcanic  rocks  and  recent  coral 
limestone  ^. 

Neiv  Ireland  to  Hunter  island.  This  long  chain  of  islands  includes 
as  its  principal  members,  New  Ireland,  the  Solomon  and  Santa  Cruz 
islands,  and  the  New  Hebrides.  It  is  characterized  by  one  principal 
direction  of  strike,  which  forms,  according  to  the  form  and  position  of  the 
islands,  an  arc  slightly  convex  to  the  north-east.  The  islands  have  also 
many  other  characters  in  common. 

We  may  begin  with  Guadalcanar,  one  of  Solomon  islands.  This  great 
island  was  visited  by  Foullon.  who  was  killed  by  the  natives  when 
attempting  to  penetrate  into  the  interior ;  his  name  must  be  added  to  the 
long  list  of  victims  whose  discoveries  we  cannot  mention  without  a  word 
of  reverent  gratitude.  His  observations  on  this  island  have  not  been 
published.  The  volcanic  rocks  alone  have  been  described  by  Hansel.^ 
Through  the  kindness  of  Professor  Berwerth  the  whole  of  the  collections 
have  been  placed  at  my  disposal. 

Andesite,  dolerite,  and  porphyry  have  been  met  with  in  Guadalcanar, 
besides  recent  volcanic  rocks.  Peridotite,  gabbro,  and  serpentine  occur  in 
numerous  fragments,  but  a  light  grey  limestone  has  also  been  observed, 
precisely  resembling  one  of  the  Mesozoic  limestones  of  the  Apennines  or 
the  Alps.  It  is  traversed  by  striated  slickensides  which  indicate  powerful 
dynamic  action  ^.  A  rolled-out  green  rock  with  serpentine  on  the  fibrous 
surfaces  also  occurs  in  the  collection.  Guadalcanar  must  thus  be  regarded 
as  the  fragment  of  a  cordillera,  in  the  structure  of  which  green  intrusive 

1  A.  Hahl,  Bismarck-Arcliipel  und  Salomons-Inseln,  Mitth.  deutsch.  Schutzgebiete, 
1899,  XII,  pp.  Ill,  112;  G.  Thilenius,  Geologische  Notiz  aus  dem  Bismarck-Archipel, 
Globus,  1900,  pp.  201-203  ;  Pfliiger,  Geologische  Bemerkungen  iiber  den  Bismarck- 
Archipel,  Mitth.  deutsch;  Schutzgebiete,  1901,  XIV,  pp.  131-138  ;  in  this  work  it  is 
stated  that  augite  granite  and  syenite  are  brought  down  from  the  Baining  range  (New 
Britain). 

^  H.  Freiherr  von  Foullon,  Reiseskizzen  aus  Australien,  Verb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst., 
1894,  p.  164;  Hansel,  Ueber  einige  Eruptivgesteine  von  der  Inselgruppe  der  Neu- 
Hebriden,  in  Jahresberichte  Staats-Ober-Realschule  XVIII,  Bez.  Wien,  1901,  56  pp. 

^  Foullon  writes  of  this  limestone,  'in  place  between  two  streams  which  flow  into 
Wanderer's  bay '  (south-west  coast). 


812  THE  OCEANIDES  [partv 

rocks  play  a  similar  part  as  in  the  cordillera  of  New  Caledonia,  Cuba,  or 
the  Apennines. 

Guppy,  who  has  made  valuable  observations  on  the  Solomon  islands, 
has  not  visited  Guadalcanar,  but  his  results  are  in  complete  accord  with 
the  preceding.  The  Florida  islands,  a  little  north  of  Guadalcanar  have 
afforded  specimens  among  which  Judd  recognized  a  rock  allied  to  granulite, 
another  allied  to  so-called  trap-granulite  (hornblende,  enstatite,  and  plagio- 
clase),  and  diallage  serpentine  ^.  Guppy  says  of  the  latter  that  it  is 
generally  somewhat  schistose,  and  at  one  locality  inclined  at  an  angle  of 
from  60°  to  70°.  Serpentine  is  mentioned  as  occurring  in  San  Cristoval 
and  Ysabel ;  gabbro  in  Santa  Anna,  the  most  southerly  island  of  the  group  ; 
quartz  porphyry  and  quartz  diorite  at  several  localities.  One  of  the  most 
remarkable  finds,  and  worthy  of  closer  investigation,  is  a  hard  grey  lime- 
stone, containing  numerous  shells  of  a  Rhynconella ;  it  forms  the  island  of 
Poperang  in  the  Shortland  group  (south  of  Bougainville)  ^. 

The  active  volcanos  of  the  Solomon  islands  are  not  arranged  in  an 
independent  series,  but  stand,  so  far  as  can  be  seen,  between  the  isolated 
remains  of  the  cordillera.  A  lofty,  smoking  cone  rises  in  Bougainville ; 
Simbo  (Eddystone,  Narovo,  west  of  New  Georgia)  and  Saro  (north  of 
Guadalcanar)  are  active  centres  of  eruption. 

The  Solomon  islands  are  surrounded  in  many  places  by  recent  limestone 
in  terraces,  extending  up  to  a  height,  according  to  Guppy,  of  about  500  feet ; 
in  addition,  marine  tuffs  of  fairly  recent  age  occur.  Guppy  observed  a 
uniformity  in  the  displacements  of  the  strand  for  a  distance  of  more  than 
600  kilometers. 

The  islands  to  the  north,  Outong-Java,  Simpson,  and  others,  are  low 
coral  reefs  ^. 

Our  knowledge  of  the  structure  of  the  New  Hebrides  has  been  greatly 
increased  by  Mawson's  investigations  The  asserted  presence  of  older 
rocks  in  the  larger  islands  has  not  been  confirmed,  and  the  existence  of 

^  H.  B.  Gupp7,  Solomon  Islands,  their  Geology,  &c.,  8vo,  London,  1887,  maps; 
Observations  on  the  Recent  Calcareous  Formations  of  the  Solomon  Group,  Trans.  R. 
Soc.  Edinb.,  1887,  XXXII,  pp.  545-581 ;  W.  W.  Watts  and  E.  T.  Newton,  Notes  on  the 
Rocks  from  the  Solomon  Islands,  Geol.  Mag.,  1896,  jDp.  358-365  (relates  to  volcanic  rocks 
from  New  Georgia) ;  Judd  in  Guppy,  p.  30.  D'Urville  brought  back  serpentine  from 
Ysabel. 

Davidson  regarded  the  species  as  identical  with  Rhynconella  Grayi  hitherto  known 
only  from  a  single  example  found  living  in  Fiji ;  Guppy  doubts  this,  Solomon  Islands, 
pp.  82, 120.    Recent  Calcareous  Formations  of  the  Solomon  Group,  Trans.  R.  Soc. 
Edinb.,  1887,  XXXII,  p.  565.    It  might  well  be  a  Mesozoic  limestone. 
^  Hochstetter,  Reise  der  Novara,  II,  p.  153. 

*  D.  Mawson,  Geology  of  the  New  Hebrides,  Proc.  Linn.  Soc.  N.S.W.,  1905,  pp.  400- 
485,  maps.  As  early  as  the  summer  of  1901  a  number  of  enterprising  French  colonists, 
coming  from  Vate  and  other  islands  of  the  New  Hebrides,  crossed  Espiritu  Santo  along 
two  lines,  Bol.  Soc.  Geogr.  Lisboa,  1903,  pp.  389-392,  map. 


CH.  ix] 


NEW  HEBRIDES 


318 


serpentine  in  Aneityum  remains  doubtful,  but  it  has  been  definitely  ascer- 
tained that  a  steeply  upturned  and  folded  zone  of  Tertiary  Lepidocyclina 
limestone  strikes  through  these  islands.  Thus,  in  this  case  also,  there 
is  no  doubt  that  parts  of  a  more  recent  folded  range  rise  from  the  Ocean. 
Mawson  believes  there  is  overfolding  towards  the  west,  but  since  this 
opinion  is  founded  on  a  single  section  to  the  south-west  of  Espiritu  Santo 
the  question  as  to  the  direction  of  the  movement  must  for  the  present 
remain  open. 

The  whole  arrangement  resembles  a  virgation  open  towards  the  north- 
north-west.  A  long  single  series  of  islands,  with  only  a  few  volcanic 
stacks  lying  off  them  to  the  east,  extends  from  Hunter  island  in  the  south, 
through  Mathew,  Aneityum,  Tanna,  and  Eromango,  to  Efate  in  the  north. 
The  trend  of  this  series  is  to  the  north-north-west,  and  its  principal 
continuation  is  to  be  found  in  the  two  great  islands  of  Malekula  and 
Espiritu  Santo.  This  branch  corresponds  with  the  Tertiary  folded  range 
mentioned  above.  From  Efate  a  second  branch  strikes  almost  due  north 
through  Epi,  Ambrym,  and  the  elongated  islands  of  Aragh-Aragh  (Pente- 
cost) and  Aurora.  Between  these  two  branches,  or  more  exactly  between 
the  islands  of  Espiritu  Santo  and  Aurora  lies  the  island  of  Aoba,  and 
further  north  the  islands  of  the  Torres  group  and  the  Banks  group  also  lie 
between  the  directions  (if  produced)  of  the  two  islands  just  mentioned,  and 
they  strike  between  north-north-west  and  north.  The  maps  of  the  British 
Admiralty  show  this  arrangement  very  clearly. 

According  to  Mawson  the  deposition  of  the  Tertiary  beds  in  Espiritu 
Santo  was  accompanied  by  intrusions  of  andesite  ;  these  were  followed 
by  an  extensive  subsidence  along  the  whole  eastern  side,  and  on  the  sub- 
sided area  volcanic  eruptions  then  commenced,  which  however  brought  to 
the  surface  not  andesitic  but  basaltic  rocks,  and  these  still  continue  to 
the  present  day.  Upon  the  whole  of  this  series  rests  a  coating  of  recent 
coral  limestone.  The  limestone  is  terraced,  but  in  the  west  the  terraces 
reach  a  height  of  2,000  feet  (609  meters),  while  towards  the  east  their 
height  is  considerably  less.  Mawson  concludes  that  the  greater  elevation 
in  the  west  is  connected  with  the  persistence  of  mountain-building  move- 
ments, and  that  the  depression  towards  the  east  has  been  produced  by 
subsidence  in  the  direction  of  the  more  recent  basaltic  eruptions.  At 
the  same  time  smaller  elevations  may  be  among  the  immediate  effects  of 
volcanic  action,  as  the  result,  for  instance,  of  the  intrusion  of  sills. 

Purey-Cust  has  drawn  attention  to  the  significance  and  continuity  of 
this  volcanic  zone.  Apart  from  many  ruins  of  volcanic  cones  we  may  enu- 
merate the  following,  taken  in  order  from  north  to  south  :  Tinakula  (active  ; 
north  of  Santa  Cruz) ;  Vanikoro  (crater),  Vanua  lava  (hot  springs)  ;  Gaua 
(crater,  south  of  Vanua  lava) ;  Merlay  (crater,  east  of  preceding  island)  ; 
Ambrym  (great  eruption,  1874) ;  Lopevi  (active,  ]^449  meters,  south  of  the 


314 


THE  OCEANIDES 


[PAET  V 


preceding)  ;  Tongoa  (hot  springs,  south  of  Api) ;  Hinchinbrook  (crater, 
north  of  Ef  ate) ;  Eromango  (submarine  eruption  near  the  east  coast) ;  Tanna 
(active) ;  Mathew  (active)  ;  and  Hunter  island  ^. 

Outside  this  line,  which  runs  through  twelve  degrees  of  latitude,  no 
fore-deep  is  known.  The  line  clearly  separates  the  great  western  sub- 
division of  the  Australian  arcs  into  an  inner  (Solomon  islands  to  New 
Hebrides)  and  an  outer  arc  (Caroline,  Fiji  islands),  which  converge  in  the 
direction  of  New  Zealand. 

Neiv  Caledonia  (II,  p.  162).  This  great  island  has  already  been  repre- 
sented as  part  of  a  mountain  chain  which  strikes  to  the  north-west.  In 
the  north-west  and  over  a  good  part  of  its  eastern  side  it  consists  of  ancient 
crystalline  rock,  part  of  which  presents  a  divergent  strike.  This  is  followed 
towards  the  west  and  south-west  by  a  sedimentary  series,  which  includes 
Trias  and  a  coal-bearing  series.  A  great  band  of  serpentine  also,  of 
unknown  age,  occurs  in  the  south-east,  but  isolated  bosses  of  it  are 
found  throughout  New  Caledonia  up  to  its  north-west  extremity,  as 
well  as  in  the  outlying  islands  still  further  to  the  north-west.  Since  this 
description  was  written^  investigation  has  made  unexpected  progress.  The 
coal-bearing  beds,  previously  referred  to  the  Lias,  belong  to  the  Cretaceous. 
Pelatan  has  discovered  that  these  Cretaceous  beds  are  overlain  by  serpen- 
tine. Piroutet  has  observed  a  similar  relation,  and  Glasser  is  of  opinion 
that  the  whole  sheet  of  serpentine  and  peridotite,  about  1,000  meters  in 
thickness  and  recognizable  over  an  area  of  520  kilometers  in  length  and 
50  kilometers  in  breadth,  is  thrust  up  over  the  Cretaceous  along  an  almost 
even  plane  ^. 

The  facts,  however,  appear  to  go  much  further.  Deprat  and  Piroutet 
have  shown  that  a  stratified  series  occurring  along  the  south-west  coast 
of  Numea  for  a  distance  of  150  kilometers  is  of  Eocene  age,  and  lies  below 
the  Trias  with  Monotis.  This  latter  fact  caused  it  to  be  regarded  as 
Carboniferous,  and  a  nummulite  (N%immulites  pristina)  which  is  found  in 
it  was  explained  as  a  Carboniferous  precursor  of  the  genus.   We  now  know 

1  H.  E.  Purey-Cust,  Eruption  of  Ambiym  Island,  1894:  Geogr.  Journ.,  1896,  VIII, 
pp.  585-602.  Some  of  these  islands  have  been  described  by  C.  C.  Frederick,  Geological 
Notes  on  certain  Islands  in  the  New  Hebrides,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1893,  XLIV, 
pp.  227-232  (with  appendices  by  Teall  and  Hinde).  For  further  eruptions  Ann.  Hydrogr., 
1878,  VI,  pp.  370-374. 

2  A.  Bertrand,  L'Archipel  de  la  Nouvelle  Caledonie,  8vo,  Paris,  1895,  458  pp.,  maps. 
Here  Pelatan's  geological  map  is  reproduced  ;  on  the  geological  structure,  pp.  54-96,  in 
particular  pp.  73,  80.  Pelatan  regards  the  serpentine  as  a  flow.  Piroutet,  Note  preli- 
minaire  sur  la  geologie  d'une  partie  de  la  Nouvelle  Caledonie,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France, 
4®  ser.,  Ill,  pp.  155-177,  map,  in  particular  p.  173  et  seq. ;  E.  Glasser,  Richesses  minerales 
de  la  Nouvelle  Caledonie,  Ann.  Mines,  Mem.,  1903,  10^  ser.,  IV,  pp.  299-392,  397-536, 
and  V,  pp.  29-154,  503-701,  maps,  in  particular  IV,  p.  352  et  seq.  ;  M.  Levy,  C.  R.  Acad. 
Sci.  Paris,  Nov.  7,  1904,  p.  716. 


CH.  IX] 


NEW  CALEDONIA 


315 


a  number  of  species  from  this  locality  which  closely  resemble  those  found 
in  the  Eocene  of  the  Sunda  islands  ^. 

Towards  the  interior  of  the  island,  overlying  the  Eocene,  come  Trias, 
Lias,  some  additional  Jurassic,  Cretaceous,  and  then  serpentine.  These 
formations  are  regarded  as  overthrust,  and  it  is  supposed  that  the  crystal- 
line rocks  of  the  east  coast  and  of  the  north-west  belong  to  a  second  flake. 
It  is  stated  that  the  Mesozoic  beds  are  upturned  against  these  crystalline 
rocks  and  overthrown  towards  the  south-west. 

This  latter  point  should  be  decisive  in  judging  of  the  direction  of 
the  movement.  If  we  accept  the  views  of  the  distinguished  observers  we 
have  cited,  then  it  follows,  as  Glasser  also  supposed,  that  the  movement  was 
directed  towards  the  south-west.  The  mighty  layer  of  serpentine  will  then 
lie  on  the  boundary  between  two  overthrust  sheets,  and  the  movement,  as 
we  shall  see  later,  will  probably  correspond  to  a  backfolding  on  the  inner 
side  of  the  inner  arc  of  a  virgation.  As  opposed  to  these  far-reaching 
conclusions,  however,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  great  patches  of  serpentine 
are  also  known  to  occur  upon  the  ancient  crystalline  rocks,  as  for  example, 
in  mount  Tchingou.  Leaving  details  for  further  investigation,  we  will 
therefore  confine  ourselves  for  the  present  to  the  observation  that  in  the 
midst  of  the  Pacific  Ocean  tectonic  movements  may  be  recognized  which 
do  not  yield  in  importance  to  those  of  the  Alps. 

It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  Kilian  and  Piroutet  mention  Holcostephanus 
and  Virgatites  as  occurring  in  New  Caledonia,  genera  which  are  usually 
regarded  as  boreal  2.  Virgatites  also  occurs  in  the  South  American  Andes  ; 
it  thus  appears  as  though  the  remarkable  extension  of  Arctic  forms  to  the 
south  along  the  west  coast  of  America  were  continued  into  the  midst  of 
the  Ocean. 

The  Second  Australian  Arc.  Nowhere  over  the  whole  of  the  long 
stretch  from  Yap  towards  the  east,  and  south-east  as  far  as  Fiji,  do  we  meet 
with  ancient  rocks  or  considerable  heights.  The  further  we  advance  out 
into  the  Ocean  the  more  sockle  and  substructure  disappear.  The  Marshall 
islands  (Radak  and  Ralik),  Gilbert  and  Ellice  islands  are  simply  atolls,  and 
this  is  true  of  by  far  the  greater  part  of  the  Caroline  islands.  The  group 
of  Truk,  Ponape,  and  Kusaie  is  volcanic  ;  Feys  (Tromelin,  West  Carolines), 
a  few  islands  in  the  group  of  Oroluk  (32  meters,  middle  Carolines),  the 
isolated  island  of  Nauru  (about  80  meters)  lying  west  of  the  Gilbert 
islands  and  Paanopa  (67  meters),  are  formed  of  terraced  limestone,  possibly 
of  Tertiary  age. 

The  divergent  arrangement  of  Radak,  Ralik,  and  the  Carolines  is  clearly 
^  Deprat  et  Piroutet,  Sur  I'existence  et  la  situation  tectonique  anormale  de  depots 
eocenes  en  Nouvelle  Caledonie,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  16  janv.  1905,  pp.  158-160 ; 
J.  Deprat,  Les  Depots  eocenes  Neo-Caledoniens,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1905,  4«  ser., 
V,  pp.  485-516. 

2  Kilian  et  Piroutet,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1905,  4^  ser.,  V,  p.  113. 


816 


THE  OCEANIDES 


[PAKT  V 


seen  on  the  map ;  the  elongation  of  the  larger  atolls  in  the  direction  of  the 
principal  trend  is  well  shown,  and  is  particularly  obvious  in  the  Gilbert 
group. 

The  Caroline  islands  appear  to  consist  of  several  parallel  zones,  separated 
by  considerable  depths.  These  facts  suggest  that  in  this  case  also  the 
lower  part  of  the  sockle  is  formed  of  folded  ranges  ^. 

None  of  these  islands,  however,  afford  much  that  bears  directly  on  the 
problem  before  us,  beyond  their  long  drawn  out  curves. 

The  Fiji  islands  lie  between  the  volcanic  line  of  the  New  Hebrides  and 
the  volcanic  line  of  Tonga.  Their  eastern  part,  the  Lau  islands,  is  a  long 
zone  of  low  coral  islands  running  almost  north  and  south.  Towards  the 
west  volcanic  rocks  rise  from  isolated  islands  ;  a  few  craters  (Thombia  in 
the  Ringgold  islands,  Totoya)  also  occur.  Still  further  towards  the  west 
and  north-west  the  rocks  increase,  and  the  islands  become  larger  until  we 
reach  the  two  great  islands  of  Viti  Levu  and  Vanua  Levu. 

A  large  part  of  Viti  Levu  was  investigated  by  Kleinschmidt,  in  1876. 
His  collections  enabled  A.  Wichmann  to  establish  the  existence  of  ancient 
rocks  in  these  islands  ^.  About  the  same  time  the  occurrence  of  Tertiary 
fossils  was  made  known  by  Tenison  Woods  (II,  p.  164).  A  second  series  of 
investigations  begins  with  the  visit  of  A.  Agassiz  to  Fiji  in  the  years 
1897-8  ;  to  him  we  owe  an  admirable  survey  of  the  smaller  islands  and 
the  recent  reef  formations,  as  well  as  the  discovery  of  upturned  older  lime- 
stone in  the  south-west  of  Viti  Levu.  This  limestone  has  been  closely 
investigated  by  E.  C.  Andrews  ^.  In  1903  Woolnough  published  the  first 
attempt  at  a  geological  map  of  Vitu  Levu;  after  a  second  visit  to  the 
island  he  supplemented  the  map  by  an  exhaustive  description,  published 
in  1907  \ 

Viti  Levu  is  a  mountainous  island  of  irregular  elliptical  form,  150  kilo- 
meters in  length  and  112  kilometers  in  breadth.  Horizontal  masses  of 
tuff,  talcose  or  soapy  to  the  touch  (soapstone),  cover  the  greater  part  of  the 

^  A.  KirchhofF,  Umrisse  zueiiier  Landeskunde  der  Carolinen,  Hettner's  Geogr.  Zeitschr., 
1899,  V,  pp.  545-562 ;  A.  Kramer,  Nauru,  Globus,  1898,  LXXIV,  pp.  153-158  et  passim  ; 
F.  W.  Christian,  Exploration  of  the  Caroline  islands,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1899,  XIII,  pp.  105- 
136,  and  Scot.  Geogr.  Mag.,  1899,  XV,  pp.  169-178 ;  M.  Friedrichsen,  Carolinen,  Mitth. 
geogr.  Ges.  Hamburg,  1901,  XVII,  pp.  1-27  et  passim. 

^  T.  Kleinschmidt's  Reisen  auf  den  Viti-Inseln,  Journ.  des  Museums  GodefFroy,  XIV, 
1879,  pp.  249-283 ;  A.  Wichmann,  Beitrag  zur  Petrographie  des  Viti-Archipels, 
Tschermak,  Min.  Mitth.,  1883,  V,  pp.  2-60. 

3  A.  Agassiz,  Islands  and  Coral  Reefs  of  Fiji,  Bull.  Mus.  Comp.  Zool.,  1899,  XXXIII, 
167  pp.,  maps ;  E.  C.  Andrews,  Notes  on  the  Limestones  and  general  Geology  of  the  Fiji 
islands,  with  special  Reference  to  the  Lau  Group,  &c.,  op.  cit.,  1900,  XXXVITI,  GeoL 
Ser.  V,  no.  1,  50  pp.,  map. 

'  W.  G.  Woolnough,  Continental  Origin  of  Fiji,  Proc.  Linn.  Soc.  N.S.W.,  1903,  XXVIII, 
pp.  457-496  and  500-540,  map;  A  Contribution  to  the  Geology  of  Viti  Levu,  op.  cit., 
1907,  XXXII,  pp.  431-474,  map. 


CH.  ix] 


FIJI 


317 


island.  The  tuff  is  associated  with  limburgite  lavas,  and  along  with  these 
forms  the  highest  point  of  the  island  (Tama-na-ivi,  1,387  meters).  It 
includes  badly-preserved  marine  shells;  beds  of  Tertiary  limestone  are 
intercalated  with  it. 

The  next  older  member  is  a  rock  previously  regarded  as  ancient  schist, 
but  now  recognized  by  Woolnough  as  a  trachytic  tuff  rendered  schistose  by 
pressure.  It  strikes  to  the  north-north-east,  and  is  covered  unconformably 
by  lavas. 

Somewhat  to  the  south-east  of  the  centre  of  the  island  rises  the  con- 
siderable ridge  of  Medrausucu,  and  west  of  this  lies  a  granitic  plateau, 
probably  a  horst,  bounded  by  two  faults  running  west-north-west.  The 
granite  is  also  visible  in  many  places  in  the  river  courses,  and  is  said 
to  extend,  along  with  other  ancient  rocks,  over  a  distance  of  from  32  to 
64  kilometers. 

In  the  south-west  of  the  island  we  come  upon  older  limestone  (according 
to  Andrews,  dolomite  also) ;  it  is  hard,  bluish-yellow  in  colour,  and  dips  at 
an  angle  of  50°.  Woolnough  compares  it  with  pebbles  obtained  from 
Guadalcanar  and  Ysabel.  It  is  overlain  by  a  thick  regularly  stratified 
limestone  containing  shells,  which  dips  at  an  angle  of  15°.  This  limestone 
reappears  as  the  substructure  of  the  great  atoll  of  Vanua  Mbalavu  in  the 
Lau  islands.  It  is,  no  doubt,  the  same  as  that  which  Dall  regarded  as 
middle  or  upper  Tertiary  ^. 

Still  more  recent  is  the  limestone  of  the  south-east  coast  containing 
great  teeth  of  Carcharodon ;  it  occurs  alternately  with  the  beds  of  tuff. 

On  the  whole,  the  characters  of  a  folded  range  do  not  seem  to  me 
to  be  completely  established  here.  The  central  granitic  part  of  Viti  Levu 
might  belong  to  an  ancient  mass  rising  between  folded  ranges,  as  happens 
in  South  Borneo. 

A  monograph  on  Vanua  Levu  has  been  published  by  Guppy  ^.  The 
island  is  150  kilometers  in  length,  on  an  average  only  30  kilometers  in 
breadth,  and  elongated  towards  the  east-north-east.  It  stands  on  a  sub- 
marine sheet  of  basalt,  which  also  occurs  outside  Viti  Levu,  and  is  formed 
entirely  by  the  coalescence  of  a  considerable  number  of  volcanic  mountains, 
some  of  them  attaining  a  height  of  1,000  meters.  In  the  south  rises  the 
wide- spreading  mountain  of  Seatura  (798  meters) ;  it  is  built  up  in  the 
same  fashion  as  Mauna  Loa.  The  south  and  centime  of  the  island  consist 
of  basic  rocks ;  only  occasional  bosses  of  acid  rocks  rise  out  of  them  here 
and  there.  Acid  rocks,  however,  form  the  north  of  the  island  ;  this  gives 
off  the  peninsula  of  Undu,  which  is  directed  towards  the  north-east  and 

^  A.  Agassiz,  Tertiary  elevated  Limestone  Reefs  of  Fiji,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1898,  4tii  ser., 
V,  pp.  165-167. 

^  H.  B.  Gruppy,  Observations  of  a  naturalist  in  the  Pacific  :  I.  Vanua  Levu,  A  Descrip- 
tion of  its  leading  Physical  and  Geological  characters,  8vo,  London,  1903,  392  pp.,  map. 


318 


THE  OCEANIDES 


[PAKT  V 


presents  a  series  of  heights,  22  kilometers  in  length,  formed  of  ash  and 
pumice;  dykes  of  quartz  porphyry  and  oligoclase-trachyte,  and  volcanic 
necks  are  visible,  but  no  craters. 
Numerous  hot  springs  occur. 

Third  Australian  Arc,  and  Summary.  The  principal  members  of  this 
arc,  Tonga,  Kermadec,  and  the  Ruahine  range  of  New  Zealand,  as  well  as 
its  volcanic  line  and  the  foredeep  situated  on  the  east,  have  already  been 
discussed.  The  account  of  J^^ew  Zealand  previously  given  (II,  p.  146)  may 
now  be  supplemented  by  some  remarks  on  the  structure  of  the  north- 
west peninsula. 

The  curvilinear  course  of  the  west  coast  of  New  Zealand  was  ascribed 
to  the  presence  of  recent  littoral  bars.  The  peninsula  itself  consists  of 
isolated  outcrops  of  Palaeozoic  rocks,  united  by  recent  lavas  and  sediments ; 
thus,  its  direction  does  not  represent  the  direction  of  the  strike,  and  the 
Ruahine,  running  towards  the  north-east,  is  the  only  continuous  folded 
range. 

These  isolated  Palaeozoic  outcrops,  but  little  marked  in  the  relief,  contain 
gold-bearing  quartz  veins,  and  consequently  have  been  closely  investigated. 
The  accounts  we  have  of  them,  and  particularly  those  given  by  Cox,  show 
that  the  beds,  both  on  the  east  and  west  of  Hauraki  bay,  strike  towards 
the  north,  with  deviations  towards  the  north-west,  and  much  more  rarely 
towards  the  north-east.  This  has  also  been  observed  by  C.  Eraser,  and  on 
the  east  in  Coromandel  by  J.  H.  Adams  ^.  The  northerly  direction  corre- 
sponds neither  to  that  of  Ruahine  range  nor  to  that  of  the  north-west 
peninsula,  but  it  seems  to  show  that  a  ramification  is  in  preparation.  In 
the  west,  indeed,  on  the  south  side  of  Kawhia  harbour  (south  of  lat.  38°  S.), 
an  anticline  of  Mesozoic  beds  rises  from  the  sea  and  strikes  towards  the 
north-north-west  ^. — 

In  order  to  obtain  a  general  idea  of  the  whole  we  must  first  consider 
those  features  which  are  most  pronounced,  and  then  proceed  from  these  to 
those  which  are  not  so  obvious. 

The  western  limit  is  given  by  the  great  foredeeps,  which  extend  from 
Guam  to  the  termination  of  the  Philippine  deeps  near  the  Tulur  islands. 
Similarly  the  eastern  limit  is  marked  by  volcanos  and  the  foredeep  east 
of  the  Tonga — Kermadec — New  Zealand  line.    Thus  Samoa  is  excluded. 

^  S.  H.  Cox,  Geology  of  the  Rodney  and  Marsden  Counties,  Rep.  Geol.  Explor.,  1879- 
1880,  pp.  13-38,  map,  in  particular  23 ;  Gold  Fields  of  the  Cape  Coleville  Peninsula, 
op.  cit.,  1882,  pp.  4-51,  map,  in  particular  pp.  6,  11,  13  et  passim  ;  C.  Fraser  and  J.  H. 
Adams,  The  Geology  of  the  Coromandel  Subdivisions :  Bull.  Geol.  Surv.  New  Zealand, 
no.  4,  1907,  154  pp.,  maps,  in  particular  p.  26. 

*  A.  M'Kay,  Geology  of  the  Kawhia  District,  Bull.  Geol.  Surv.  New  Zealand,  1883- 
1884,  pp.  140-148,  map.  In  the  Cretaceous  of  the  upper  Waipa  (east  of  Kawhia)  boulders 
of  granite  and  gneiss  occur,  although  these  rocks  are  not  known  in  place  in  the  whole  of 
the  north  island;  J.  Park,  Trans,  and  Proc.  New  Zeal.  Inst.,  1892,  XXV,  pp.  353-362. 


CH.  IX] 


POLYNESIA 


819 


Another  line  of  volcanos,  and  an  extremely  long  one,  strikes  east  of  the 
New  Hebrides.  New  Guinea  with  Entrecasteaux  and  the  Louisiades  form 
a  unit.  New  Ireland,  the  Solomon  group,  and  the  New  Hebrides  form 
another  unit,  and  describe  an  arc  convex  towards  the  north-east. 

All  the  arcs  and  fragments  of  arcs  are  so  arranged  within  the  Kermadec 
line  that  they  seem  to  whirl  towards  the  bifurcation  of  northern  New 
Zealand. 

Thus  the  plan  assumes  the  form  of  a  virgation  proceeding  from  New 
Zealand  and  opening  out  towards  the  north-west  and  west.  Secondary 
virgations  open  out  in  the  New  Hebrides  from  Efate  towards  Espiritu 
Santo  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  towards  Aurora ;  and  there  is  also 
the  far  more  considerable  radiation  which  starts  from  the  Ellice  and  Gilbert 
islands  and  is  directed  towards  Rodak,  Ralik,  and  the  Carolines. 

It  is  possible  that  recurvature  sets  in  towards  the  Asiatic  boundary. 

At  the  same  time  there  are  many  doubtful  points.  First  among  these  is 
the  question  whether  the  Australian  cordillera  along  with  the  recent  down- 
break  on  the  east  coast  may  be  regarded  as  an  inner  arc.  If  so,  the  whole 
structure  would  be  concentric  about  an  ancient  vertex.  But  the  manner  in 
which  the  cordillera  is  continued  across  Torres  strait  scarcely  favours  this 
view.  We  may  entertain  the  theory  that  compensation  by  an  oblique 
strike  occurs  in  the  principal  chain  of  New  Guinea,  or  that  another  coulisse 
exists,  extending,  for  instance,  through  Chesterfield,  Kelso,  and  Lord  Howe 
islands,  and  we  might  find  support  for  such  views  by  an  appeal  to  zoological 
distribution,  but  it  is  better  for  the  present  to  avoid  such  conjectures. 

A  second  doubtful  point  is  raised  by  the  direction  of  the  volcanic  range 
of  New  Britain ;  a  third  by  the  lie  of  the  beds  in  New  Caledonia ;  yet 
another  by  our  ignorance  of  the  relations  between  the  Charles  Louis  chain 
in  New  Guinea  and  the  band  of  Moresby  beds  in  the  south,  and  so  on. 
In  the  hope  of  solving  old  problems,  we  create  new  ones. 

The  repeated  occurrence  of  the  group  of  green  rocks  in  so  many  of 
these  islands  need  not  at  present  be  discussed. 

Polynesia.  A  complete  contrast  to  the  adjacent  group  of  the  Marquesas 
is  presented  by  the  chain  of  the  Paumotu  or  Loiu  islands,  which  is  more 
than  1,500  kilometers  in  length,  strikes  to  the  north-west  and  consists 
of  atolls.  In  this  group  Agassiz  has  sought  to  obtain  special  confirmation 
of  the  view  that  the  atolls  are  simply  built  up  on  peaks  and  ridges,  in  this 
case  consisting  of  Tertiary  limestone,  denuded  down  to  the  sea  level ;  that 
is,  that  they  rest  without  a  substructure  on  an  abraded  sockle.  The 
following  account  is  derived  from  his  description  ^ 

The  western  part  of  this  extensive  archipelago  rests  on  a  common  ridge 
at  —14)  to  —1,500  meters.  Towards  the  south-west,  especially  from  long. 
140°  30'  W.  onwards  the  depths  increase ;  they  soon  exceed  4,000  meters ; 
^  A.  Agassiz,  Coral  Reefs  of  Tropical  Pacific,  7-134,  maps,  201-207. 


320 


THE  OCEANIDES 


[part  V 


at  the  same  time  the  islands  become  smaller  and  fewer  in  number  and 
finally  cease.  Not  a  few  of  the  atolls  are  as  much  as  70  kilometers  in 
length,  and  they  are  very  much  elongated  towards  the  north-wesC^  the 
whole  archipelago  presents,  in  consequence,  a  clearly-marked  strike  in  the 
same  direction.  But  the  north  side  of  this  north-westerly  trending  main 
range  meets  time  after  time  with  rows  of  atolls  having  a  divergent  strike 
to  the  north-east.  These  divergent  rows  appear  indeed  to  be  given  off 
like  spurs  from  the  main  range.  As  examples  we  may  cite  Ahe  and 
Manihi  (long.  146°  W.),  Takapolo  and  Takaroa  (long.  145°  W.),  further 
Raroia  (Barclay  de  Tolly)  and  Takume  (Wolchonsky),  the  two  together 
over  60  kilometers  in  length  (long.  142°  15'  W.),  Amanu  (long.  140°  45'  W.), 
and  other  smaller  atolls. 

This  singular  fact,  pointed  out  by  Agassiz  and  clearly  seen  on  any  large 
map,  leads  us  to  suppose  that  the  gently-curved  main  range  of  the  Paumotu 
islands  is  in  fact  the  eastern  outer  border  of  another  system  of  east 
Polynesian  arcs  now  visible  in  these  few  fragments  only,  and  that  the 
atolls  striking  to  the  north-east  mark  the  beginning  of  a  third  arcuate 
system. 

This  third  arcuate  system,  which  we  may  call  after  its  largest  atoll 
Raroia^  can  only  be  traced  by  a  series  of  coral  islands,  and  its  further 
continuation,  if  it  has  any,  is  purely  hypothetical.  Its  existence  is  founded 
on  the  presumption  that  in  this  case  also  the  arcs  cut  into  one  another, 
in  other  words  that  this  part  of  Polynesia  is  built  up  on  the  same  plan 
as  the  island  festoons  of  East  Asia.  The  boundary  should  run  through 
lat.  14°  45'  S.  and  long.  146°  30'  W.,  lat.  16°  25'  S.  and  long.  142°  30'  W., 
lat.  18°  S.  and  long.  140°  55'  W. 

Beneath  the  great  atoll  of  Rangiroa,  in  the  north-west  of  the  Paumotu 
group,  lies,  according  to  Agassiz,  a  belt  of  Tertiary  limestone,  4  or  4 J  meters 
in  height ;  this  seems  to  be  part  of  the  sockle,  still  exposed  to  view,  it  is 
exposed  up  to  a  slightly  greater  height  in  Niau,  and  may  be  recognized  in 
yet  other  atolls  by  rolled  fragments  in  the  reef.  But  towards  the  south- 
west margin  of  the  Paumotu  group  a  few  terraced  limestone  islands  occur 
which  are  of  greater  height,  such  as  Makatea  (Metia,  of  Dana ;  II,  p.  317) 
70  meters  high  and  affording  Tertiary  fossils,  like  those  of  Viti  Levu ;  and 
further  to  the  south-east,  Henderson  island,  with  limestone  which  is  possibly 
Mesozoic  (II,  p.  315). 

These  higher  limestone  islands,  Makatea,  Niau,  and  Henderson,  lie  on 
the  south-west  (inner)  border  of  the  main  range  of  Paumotu. 

The  lofty  Tahiti  or  Society  islands  are  separated  from  the  Paumotu 
group  by  an  ocean  tract  more  than  200  kilometers  broad  and  more  than 
4,300  meters  deep.  While  the  Paumotu  islands  scarcely  rise  above  the 
surface  of  the  sea,  the  principal  island  of  Tahiti  reaches  a  height  of  2,231 
meters,  and  there   are  several  others  of  these   islands  which  exceed 


CH.  IXJ 


SAMOA 


321 


1,000  meters.  They  are  of  purely  volcanic  origin.  In  spite  of  these 
contrasted  characters  they  run  so  strikingly  parallel  to  the  Paumotu  islands 
that  the  existence  of  some  connexion  between  these  otherwise  dissimilar 
island-chains  has  frequently  been  conjectured.  The  Society  islands  lie  on 
the  inner  side  of  the  limestone  islands  of  Paumotu,  just  as  in  Tonga  where 
the  volcanic  series  lies  on  the  inner  side  of  the  limestone  plateaux  situated 
more  to  the  east.  They  terminate  near  long.  152°  30'  W. ;  Mehetia,  close 
to  long.  149°  W.,  is  also  a  crater  ;  in  the  same  direction,  towards  the  south- 
west, follows  a  long  interval  with  depths  of  over  4,400  meters,  and  then, 
where  we  might  expect  to  find  the  line  from  Mehetia  continued,  we  come 
to  Hereheretue  (St.  Paul,  long.  145°  W.).  This,  though  separated  from 
them  by  another  abyss  no  less  deep  than  the  preceding,  forms  the  first  of 
a  chain  of  atolls — the  Gloucester  group — which  continue  in  the  same  direc- 
tion. This  group  possesses  a  calcareous  substructure ;  it  occupies,  however, 
the  same  position  with  regard  to  the  Paumotu  as  Tahiti.  It  lies  on  a 
narrow  ridge  surrounded  by  depths  of  over  4,000  meters. 

A  further  enumeration  of  the  islands  to  the  south-west,  such  as 
Gambier  island,  the  isolated  volcanos  of  the  Cook  group,  and  numerous 
atolls  would  be  scarcely  profitable,  since  no  connexion  can  be  made  out 
among  them. 

The  Samoa  or  Navigator  islands  strike  to  the  west-north-west,  in 
correspondence  with  the  curvature  of  the  arc  trending  hither  from  the 
Paumotu  and  Tahiti  islands.  Dana  perceived  that  the  volcanic  activity 
has  shifted  along  the  line  of  the  Samoa  islands  from  east  to  west^;  all  later 
observers  are  in  accord  on  this  point.  On  the  east  all  traces  of  craters 
have  been  obliterated ;  in  Upolu,  lying  in  the  middle  of  the  series,  they 
may  be  recognized  as  a  long  train  corresponding  with  the  general  strike. 
Sawaii,  the  great  island  in  the  north-west,  bears  quite  recent  eruptive 
€ones. 

On  October  29,  1902,  an  eruption  of  long  duration  began  in  Sawaii; 
the  locality,  however,  does  not  lie  at  the  extreme  north-western  end  of  the 
series,  and  the  eruption  has  therefore  been  regarded  as  indicating  a  back- 
ward movement  to  the  east  ^.  There  are  also  data  referring  to  a  submarine 
eruption  which  is  said  to  have  taken  place  in  1866  in  the  extreme  south- 
east within  the  island  group  of  Manua. 

If  our  view  of  the  relation  of  the  Paumotu  group  to  the  Kermadec  line 
is  correct  then  the  Polynesian  arc  is  cut  through  at  this  point  by  the 
Australian  arc. 

*  J.  D.  Dana,  A  dissected  volcanic  mountain— some  of  its  revelations,  Am.  Journ. 
Sci.,  1886,  3rd  ser.,  XXXII,  pp.  247-255. 

2  G.  Wegener,  Die  vulcanischen  Ausbriiclie  auf  Sawaii,  Zeitschr.  Ges.  Erdk.,  1903, 
pp.  208-219;  Reinecke,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1906,  pp.  86-88;  Manavanu-Ausbnich,  Zeitschr. 
Ges.  Erdk.,  1906,  pp.  686-709,  map.  Jensen  conjectures  that  the  volcanic  lines  of  Tonga 
and  Samoa  intersect  each  other  (cf.  note  1,  p.  301). 

SOLLAS  IV  Y 


322 


THE  OCEANIDES 


[part  V 


Hawaii.  In  the  midst  of  the  Pacific  Ocean,  rising  from  depths  of 
4,300  to  over  5,000  meters,  lies  an  extremely  long  series  of  islands  extending 
in  a  west-north-west  to  east-south-east  direction,  from  long  ISO*"  to  155"  W. 
In  the  west-north-west  these  islands  are  small  and  low,  some  of  them 
presenting  extremely  steep  submarine  declivities  ^.  Towards  the  east-south- 
east the  volcanic  substructure  beneath  the  limestone  covering  becomes  more 
and  more  exposed  to  view,  and  the  islands  increase  in  height  and  extent, 
until  Hawaii,  the  largest  of  all,  concludes  the  series.  On  Hawaii  stand  the 
mighty  volcanos  of  Mauna  Kea  and  Mauna  Loa,  which  mount  from  their 
broad  base  to  a  height  of  more  than  4,000  meters  above  the  surface  of  the 
Ocean. 

The  glowing  lava  lake  which  lies  in  Kilauea,  as  well  as  the  similar 
lake  on  the  summit  of  Mauna  Loa,  have  attracted  so  much  attention  that 
the  peculiar  arrangement  of  the  volcanos  in  plan  has  been  comparatively 
neglected. 

The  clear  insight  of  J.  D.  Dana  enabled  him  to  recognize  this  arrange- 
ment at  his  first  visit  ^.  He  pointed  out  that  a  volcanic  zone  proceeding  from 
Kauai  (lat.  22°  N.)  separates  into  two  divergent  lines  in  Oahu,  one  of  which 
runs  through  the  east  of  Molokai  and  Maui  to  the  volcanos  of  Kohala  and 
Mauna  Kea  in  Hawaii,  while  the  other  and  more  southerly  extends  from 
the  west  of  Molokai  through  Lanai  and  Kahoolawe  to  Hawaii,  where  it  in- 
cludes the  volcanos  of  Hualalai  and  Mauna  Loa.  The  position  of  Kilauea  in 
this  system  was  doubtful,  but  Dana  finally  assigned  it  to  the  northern  line. 
At  the  same  time  he  pointed  out  that  the  volcanos  situated  to  the  west- 
north -west  are  the  older  and  more  profoundly  denuded,  those  in  the  middle, 
as  in  Maui,  better  preserved,  but  only  those  situated  at  the  end  of  the  series 
are  still  active.  These  all  lie  in  Hawaii,  and  include  Hualalai,  which  as 
late  as  1805  and  1811  discharged  lava  from  openings  on  its  flanks,  but  has 
since  been  dormant,  and  Mauna  Loa  and  Kilauea,  which  are  still  in  full 
activity. 

These  facts  indicate  a  general  displacement  of  the  volcanic  activity 
towards  the  east- south-east.  It  is  not  confined  to  a  single  arc  as  in  the 
Aleutian  islands,  nor  does  it  wander  along  transverse  lines,  as  in  Central 
America,  but  it  extends  along  a  definite  line,  or  stagnates  for  a  considerable 
period  at  one  end  of  this  line  or  this  pair  of  lines. 

As  early  as  1888,  when  the  volcano  in  Sawaii  (Samoa)  was  already 
regarded  as  extinct,  Dana  called  my  attention,  in  a  long  letter,  to  the  fact 
that  in  this  island  also  the  largest  volcano  stands  at  the  end  of  the  island- 
chain. 

'  A  submarine  reef  south-west  of  Midway  island  descends  at  a  distance  of  about  2,88(> 
meters  to  the  extent  of  2,320  meters  (from  -249  meters  to  -2,469  meters);  Flint 
(note  3,  p.  297),  p.  5. 

'  J.  D.  Dana,  History  of  the  Changes  in  the  Mauna  Loa  Craters,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1888, 
XXXVI,  pp.  167-172. 


CH.  IX] 


HAWAII 


323 


We  have  already  pointed  out  that  an  account  referring  to  a  submarine 
eruption  off  the  south-east  of  Samoa,  in  1866,  is  opposed  to  the  view  that 
a  migration  of  activity  takes  place  in  a  constant  direction.  In  the  islands 
of  Hawaii  also  there  are  not  a  few  of  the  smaller  and  secondary  craters 
in  the  central  islands  which  do  not  accord  with  Dana's  generalization. 
Hitchcock  has  described  secondary  craters  well  preserved  and  evidently 
recent  along  the  south  coast  of  Oahu  ^.  Of  these  the  best  known  is 
Diamond  Head  (Leahi),  near  Honolulu.  There,  as  in  several  other  similar 
eruptive  centres,  numerous  corals  and  fragments  of  shells  were  ejected  with 
the  ashes ;  thus,  the  temperature  cannot  have  been  very  high.  A  compara- 
tively small  extraneous  basaltic  flow  which  approaches  Diamond  Head  is 
even  more  recent  than  this  crater.  The  corals  and  shell-bearing  beds  which 
alternate  on  Diamond  Head  with  beds  of  land  shells,  were  regarded  by 
Dall  as  of  Tertiary  age,  and  as  indicating  a  subsidence  followed  by  eleva- 
tion. The  beds  dip  toward  the  sea ;  Bishop  and  Branner  regard  the  whole 
deposit  as  of  aeolian  origin  ;  it  is  a  dune  formation  of  coral  sand  2. 

Molokai,  like  Maui,  consists  of  two  large  and  ancient  volcanos.  In 
Molokai  the  western  volcano  is  profoundly  denuded,  and  the  eastern  is 
for  the  greater  part  sunk  beneath  the  sea  along  a  mighty  fault.  Dana 
had  already  recognized  the  presence  of  the  fault ;  it  has  been  described  by 
Lindgren.  It  strikes  east  and  west,  and  forms  a  great  cliff  1,000  meters 
in  height  along  almost  the  whole  north  coast  of  the  island.  Beneath  the 
cliff,  towards  the  north,  lies  Kalaupapa,  the  peninsula  of  the  lepers.  On 
this  downthrown  part  there  is  a  smaller  secondary  crater  ^. 

We  may  fairly  conclude  that  Dana's  view  is  correct  as  regards  the  great 
volcanos,  but  that  when  the  principal  craters  became  extinct  sporadic 
smaller  eruptions  occurred  on  the  flanks  and  at  the  foot  of  the  ancient 
giants.    This  is  in  harmony  with  Dutton*s  views  on  the  subject 

The  lavas  of  the  Hawaii  islands  have  been  described  as  mainly  felspar- 
basalts,  or  as  olivine-basalts,  according  to  the  locality  where  they  were 
found.  Dalton  points  out  the  entire  absence  of  acid  rocks  and  the  '  phe- 
nomenal' quantity  of  olivine  and  augite,  especially  the  former,  in  most 
of  the  more  recent  flows  from  Mauna  Loa.    From  one  point  in  the  great 

1  C.  H.  Hitchcock,  Geology  of  Oahu,  Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Am.,  1900,  XI,  pp.  15-57  ;  and 
W.  H.  Dall,  Notes  on  the  Tertiary  Geology  of  Oahu,  torn,  cit.,  pp.  57-60,  maps. 

2  S.  E.  Bishop,  Brevity  of  Tuff-Cone  Eruptions,  Am.  Geol.,  1901,  XXVII,  pp.  1-5 ; 
J.  C.  Branner,  Notes  on  the  Geology  of  the  Hawaiian  islands,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1903, 
4th  ser.,  XVI,  pp.  301-316.  On  the  other  hand,  Hitchcock,  Bull.  Geol.  Soc.  Am.,  1906, 
XVII,  pp.  469-484,  map. 

^  W.  Lindgren,  Water  Resources  of  Molokai,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Water  Supply  and 
Irrigation  Papers,  1903,  no.  77,  62  pp.,  map,  in  particular  pp.  12-15  ;  also  H.  Schauins- 
land,  Ein  Besuch  auf  Molokai,  der  Insel  der  Aussatzigen,  Abh.  Naturw.  Ver.  Bremen^ 
1900,  XVI,  pp.  513-543. 

*  C.  E.  Button,  Hawaiian  Volcanos,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  IV,  Ann.  Rep.,  1884,  pp.  81-219^ 
maps,  in  particular  p.  217. 

Y  2 


324  THE   OCEANIDES  [paetv 

cliff  of  Molokai  Lindgren  mentions  very  coarse-grained  olivine-diabase 
as  an  uncommon  variety :  it  is  also  said  to  occur  in  Kauai.  Mohle 
describes  olivine  gabbro  from  Molokai,  and  olivine  bombs  from  the  more 
recent  secondary  centres  of  eruption  in  Oahu  ^. 

Summary.  With  the  Paumotu  arc  and  the  indications  given  by  the 
Raroia  group  in  the  south,  and  the  Hawaiian  zone  in  the  north,  the  trend- 
lines  of  Oceania — so  far  as  we  can  discern  them  at  all — come  to  an  end. 
Beyond  their  limits  lie  isolated  islands  or  groups  which  do  not  follow 
a  linear  arrangement. 

As  regards  the  Marquesas  this  distinction  is  doubtful.  They  form 
a  series  of  islands  350  kilometers  in  length,  arranged  in  four  groups  from 
north-west  to  south-east.  With  the  exception  of  a  small  island  in  the 
extreme  north-west  and  some  smaller  and  isolated  occurrences,  no  coral 
beds  are  known  in  the  Marquesas,  scarcely  even  a  coastal  belt.  The  islands 
are  high  and  rocky  and  descend  in  steep  cliffs  to  the  sea.  They  are  regarded 
as  basaltic,  but  an  early  account  by  Jardin  records  the  existence  of  a  great 
variety  of  other  rocks.  In  particular  peridotite  is  mentioned  from  Nuka- 
hiva,  and  a  rock  probably  resembling  gabbro,  and  along  with  these  a  fine- 
grained leptynite  with  microscopic  garnets  ^ 

Neither  in  the  Marquesas  nor  in  any  other  of  the  more  remote  and  scat- 
tered islands  as  far  as  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  American  coast 
is  any  trace  known  of  rocks  other  than  volcanic,  and  these  are  only  rarely 
accompanied  by  recent  coral  or  Lithothamnium  limestone. 

Easter  island,  though  it  possesses  a  uniform  outline,  except  for  two 
little  reefs  in  the  south-west,  actually  consists  of  a  group  of  crater  moun- 
tains 2.  The  Galaj^agos  islands  are  an  archipelago  of  crater  mountains  and 
present  no  signs  of  a  linear  arrangement  *. 

1  F.  MoHe,  Beitrage  zur  Petrographie  der  Sandwich-  und  Samoa-Inseln,  N.  J.  f.  Min., 
1902,  Beilage-Bd.  XV,  pp.  66-104,  in  particular  pp.  80  and  84. 

2  E.  Jardin,  Essai  sur  I'histoire  naturelle  de  I'Archipel  de  Mendana  ou  des  Marquises, 
Mem.  Soc.  Sci.  Nat.  de  Cherbourg,  1856,  IV,  pp.  49-64,  in  particular  p.  58.  The  deter- 
mination of  the  rocks  was  made  by  C.  d'Orbigny  ;  here,  too,  a  conglomerate  is  mentioned 
'  of  fragments  of  scoria,  and  micaceous  trachytic  fragments  with  a  matrix  of  cinerite,  and 
piled  up  around  them  blocks  of  porphyroid  peridotite,  with  crystals  of  pyroxene  and  peri- 
dote  '.  Similar  rocks  are  mentioned  by  Grange  (Dumont  d'Urville),  Voyage  au  Pole  Sud, 
Geologie,  1854,  II,  p.  210. 

^  C.  Velain,  Roches  volcaniques  de  I'ile  de  Piques,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1889, 
3 '  ser.,  VII,  pp.  415-429,  small  map  ;  Vere  Barclay,  Mission  a  Tile  de  Paques,  C.  R.  Soc. 
Geogr.  Paris,  1899  (1900),  pp.  169-176,  map.  A  series  of  other  works  by  Geissel, 
Cooke,  Agassiz,  and  others  is  concerned  with  the  gigantic  statues  on  this  island.  That 
these  are  all  overturned  in  rows  in  the  same  direction  seems  to  confirm  the  general 
assumption  that  the  island  was  visited  by  a  catastrophe  ;  cf.  Agassiz,  General  Report  of 
Albatross  Expedition,  Mem.  Mus.  Comp.  Zool.,  1906,  XXXIII,  pi.  29.  I  once  thought 
I  observed  in  the  cave  at  Adelsberg  that  a  number  of  old  stalactites  were  overturned  in 
the  same  direction. 

^  T.  Wolf,  Besuch  der  GalapagoB-Iuseln,  Sammlung  von  Vortragen  herausgegeben  von 


CH.  IX] 


SUMMAEY.  SOCKLES 


325 


These  islands  recall  the  group-lihe  arrangement  of  the  Atlantic  islands, 
and  the  serial  arrangement  which  prevails  in  Polynesia  does  not  extend  so 
far  as  the  neighbourhood  of  the  western  coast  of  America. 

The  arc  of  the  Aleutian  islands  is  convex  towards  the  south,  the  arc  of 
the  Kuriles  and  the  succeeding  Asiatic  arcs  towards  the  east,  and  the 
Oceanic  arcs  as  far  as  Hawaii  towards  the  north-east.  All  the  arcs  seem 
to  strive  towards  that  part  of  the  Ocean  in  which  the  linear  arrangement 
is  absent,  and  where  islands  either  do  not  occur  or  are  arranged  in  groups 
as  in  the  Atlantic. 

The  greater  the  distance  from  Australia  the  rarer  are  the  traces  of 
ancient  continental  land;  till  at  last  only  volcanos  and  atolls  are  left, 
which  scarcely  rise  above  the  ocean  level.  Yet  these,  in  so  far  as  they 
present  themselves  in  series,  are  the  projections  of  submarine  trendlines  on 
the  surface  of  the  sea  (II,  p.  320). 

The  investigations  of  the  last  twenty  years  enable  us  to  distinguish  two 
parts  in  an  atoll ;  the  sockle  and  the  crown.  Sometimes  we  can  also  see 
a  foundation  to  the  sockle,  formed  by  a  fragment  of  ancient  crust,  as  in 
Entrecasteaux ;  or  this  ancient  foundation  may  be  covered  with  sediments 
of  various  age,  ranging  up  into  the  Tertiary  aera,  and  forming  the  sockle, 
as  in  Viti  Levu;  or  there  may  be  only  a  Tertiary  plateau,  such  as  in 
Makatea  (West  Paumotu),  or  finally,  only  volcanic  rock  or  an  active 
volcano  remains  visible. 

New  Guinea  and  Espiritu  Santo  show  that  post-Miocene  folding  is  by 
no  means  excluded.  A  chain  which  has  been  folded  up  in  the  quiet  abysses 
of  the  ocean  is  protected  from  the  destructive  action  of  the  atmosphere. 
But  when  it  reaches  the  region  where  the  waves  can  act  upon  it  the  case 
is  altered.  Whatever  rises  above  the  sea-level  is  exposed  to  the  eroding 
breakers,  to  rain  and  storms ;  deep  channels  are  excavated  in  it ;  dolinas 
and  karst  features  are  produced  in  the  limestone.  Frequently  the  limestone 
succumbs  altogether  and  is  denuded  away,  until  it  forms  a  plateau  only 
just  awash. 

The  volcano,  also,  may  pile  up  its  cone  in  the  abysses  undisturbed ;  if 
the  eruptive  activity  is  sufficient  it  will  rise  above  the  line  of  the  waves, 
but  the  ashes,  less  resistant  than  other  formations,  will  be  more  rapidly 
swept  away.  This  was  the  case  with  Graham  island  (Julia)  (II,  p.  319), 
and  Lister  has  described  the  same  process  in  Falcon  island  (Tonga). 

Surfaces  of  this  kind,  produced  by  denudation  of  the  sockle,  whether 
they  consist  of  limestone  or  volcanic  rock,  often  bear  the  crown  seated 
directly  upon  them.    This  fact  has  been  established  by  Agassiz  in  many 

Frommel  und  Pfaff,  8vo,  Heidelberg,  1879,  pp.  259-300,  map ;  G.  Baur,  New  Observa- 
tions on  the  Origin  of  the  Galapagos  Islands  with  remarks  on  the  Geological  Age  of  the 
Pacific  Ocean,  Am.  Nat.,  1897,  XXXI,  pp.  661-680  and  864-896. 


326 


THE  OCEANIDES 


[party 


cases,  and  Voeltzkow  has  observed  similar  relations  in  the  coral  islands  of 
the  Indian  Ocean. 

The  steepness  of  the  outer  slopes  of  such  islands  is  to  some  extent 
comprehensible  when  we  are  dealing  with  a  denuded  volcano,  but  it  is 
scarcely  likely  that  all  these  islands  rest  on  volcanos,  and  the  depths 
surrounding  them  are  very  great.  Agassiz  states  that  the  western 
islands  of  the  Paumotu  group  are  probably  surrounded  by  the  isobath 
of  800  fathoms  (1,403  meters);  towards  the  south-west,  however,  about 
midway  towards  Tahiti,  depths  of  over  5,000  meters  have  been  sounded, 
and  about  the  same  distance  towards  the  north-east  a  depth  of  5,751 
meters  ^. 

We  will  now  give  a  little  more  attention  than  has  hitherto  been  possible 
(II,  p.  318)  to  the  valuable  observations  of  the  Challenger  and  the  descrip- 
tions of  Murray.  We  may  conceive  that  little  calcareous  shells  sink  to  the 
bottom  in  great  quantity.  They  are  dissolved  at  great  depths,  but  accumu- 
late in  moderate  or  lesser  depths.  In  the  abysses  red  clay  is  deposited  only 
in  trifling  quantity,  but  on  those  submarine  elevations  which  rise  above 
the  level  at  which  carbonates  are  dissolved,  accumulation  occurs.  The 
result  is  an  exaggeration  of  the  relief.  Thus,  the  depths  persist,  while  the 
ridges  increase  in  height  and  may  even  grow  into  peaks. 

Thus,  during  a  long  period  of  rest  not  only  may  a  great  sockle  of  lime- 
stone arise,  but  at  some  remote  period,  when  the  level  of  the  ocean  was 
higher,  the  deposit  of  limestone  may  even  have  grown  up  to  a  height  above 
the  sea-level  as  it  now  exists.  It  has  then  been  denuded  in  terraces,  owing 
to  intermittent  negative  movement,  and  successive  stages,  three,  two,  or  one 
in  number,  have  been  left  behind,  or  perhaps,  only  the  platform  to  which 
the  crown  adheres.    In  most  cases  even  this  is  invisible. 

It  is  easy  to  understand  how  at  first  sight  of  an  atoll  the  comprehensive 
mind  of  Charles  Darwin  should  have  received  the  impression  of  general 
subsidence.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  equally  easy  to  understand  that  the 
terraced  islands,  such  as  Lifu  (Loyalty  islands,  II,  p.  316,  fig.  31)  should 
have  been  regarded  as  proofs  of  elevation,  and  that  maps  should  have 
been  produced  which  represent  the  Ocean  as  a  region  of  irregularty  alter- 
nating elevation  and  subsidence. 

The  regular  terraces  must,  before  all,  be  distinguished  from  the  recent 
folds :  folding  is  certainly  able  to  transform  terraces  already  present,  as  in 
Espiritu  Santo,  but  could  never  give  rise  to  terraces  which  run  horizontal 
through  several  degrees  of  latitudes.  In  cases  where  determinable  fossils 
occur,  as  in  the  terraced  limestone  of  Christmas  island,  south  of  Java,  or  in 
the  remains  of  the  Vicksburg  stage,  frequently  mentioned  by  Agassiz  and 
of  about  the  same  age,  all  uncertainty  vanishes,  and  we  see  that  the  build - 


'  A.  Agassiz,  Coral  Reefs  of  the  Tropical  Pacific,  p.  25  et  seq. 


CH.  ix] 


SUMMARY.  LAGOONS 


327 


ing  up  of  the  sockle  must  have  begun  since  the  Aquitanian  period  at  least. 
In  those  places  where  the  Tertiary  limestones  have  reached  their  existing 
height  as  a  consequence  of  tectonic  folding,  the  atolls  also  exhibit  a  definite 
strike,  as  in  the  Paumotu  islands. 

The  highest  level  at  which  a  clearly  marked  terrace  occurs  was  formerly 
believed  to  be  100  meters.  Recent  observations  place  it  at  about  500  feet 
(152*4  meters). 

The  case  is  similar  for  the  volcanic  sockle.  When  Graham  island 
(Julia,  Ferdinandea),  made  its  appearance,  in  the  summer  of  1831,  it  was 
believed  that  a  new  mountain  range  was  about  to  unite  Sicily  and  Tunis, 
that  Malta  would  lose  its  military  importance,  and  the  strait  of  Messina 
acquire  the  significance  of  the  strait  of  Gibraltar ;  the  political  movement 
of  those  days  is  even  expressed  in  the  struggle  over  the  name  of  the  new 
island^.  There  are  distinguished  investigators,  even  at  the  present  day, 
who  overrate  the  elevating  activity  of  volcanos.  This  is  certainly  able  to 
raise  isolated  loose  blocks  or  fragments  to  a  considerable  height,  as  is 
shown  by  a  great  mass  of  Goniastraea,  which  has  been  found  in  volcanic 
tuff  in  Viti  Levu  at  a  height  of  393  meters.  They  are  also  able  by  the 
lateral  intrusion  of  sills,  or  in  some  other  way,  to  cause  smaller  local 
elevations,  as  in  the  case  of  the  temple  of  Serapis.  They  do  not,  however, 
produce  such  extensive  and  uniform  movements  as  occur  in  terraced  islands, 
and  similar  terraces  are  seen  on  islands  and  coasts  which  are  quite  remote 
from  volcanos.  Yet,  notwithstanding  the  valuable  investigations  quite 
recently  made,  and  notwithstanding  the  objections  which  such  distinguished 
investigators  as  Semper,  Murray,  Agassiz,  and  so  many  others  have  raised 
to  the  views  of  Darwin  and  Dana,  it  must  still  be  admitted  that  the  depth 
of  the  enclosed  lagoon  has  not  yet  been  completely  explained.  Thus,  the 
view  that  the  crown  has  been  built  up  by  corals  during  positive  movement 
has  still  some  foundation  (II,  p.  321).  The  existing  state  of  observations 
seems  to  afford  most  support  to  the  view  that  the  strand  is  affected  by  two 
kinds  of  movement,  a  slight  positive  movement  of  considerable  duration, 
interrupted  from  time  to  time  by  a  transitory  negative  episode  which 
produces  a  new  terrace.  The  presence  of  terraced  islands  shows  that  in 
Oceania  the  total  negative  movement  is  greater  than  the  positive. 

^  J.  Gosselet,  Constant  Prevost,  Coup  d'cBil  retrospectif,  Ann.  Soc.  geol.  du  Nord,  1896, 
XXV,  pp.  211,229. 

Addendum.  Mr.  Speight,  of  Canterbury  College,  New  Zealand,  has  kindly  sent  me 
a  paper  announcing  the  successful  return  of  a  scientific  expedition  which  had  been  sent 
to  the  southern  islands  ;  it  also  states  that  the  Snares,  Campbell,  and  Auckland  islands 
contain  ancient  rocks,  and  must  certainly  be  regarded  as  parts  of  an  ancient  continent. 


328 


CHAPTER  X 

ENTKY  OF  THE  ASIATIC  ISLAND  FESTOONS  INTO 

AMERICA 

Introduction.  Taimyr.  1.  Anadyrides.  Arc  of  Verkhoiansk.  Delta  of  the  Lena.  Yana, 
Indigirka,  Kolyma.  Penshina  and  Anadyr.  2.  Alaskides.  Romanzof  range.  Seward 
and  Chuchken  peninsulas.  Alaska  range.  Peninsula  of  Alaska.  Aleutian  islands. 
Kenai  range.  Summary. 

In  the  following  pages  we  will  first  consider  in  greater  detail  the  north- 
east of  Asia,  in  conjunction  with  what  has  already  been  said  concerning 
island  festoons,  and  we  will  then  trace  its  relations  with  America. 

Long  and  narrow  foredeeps  sunk  much  below  the  general  level  of  the 
sea-floor,  which  lies  at  —4,000  to  —5,000  meters,  surround  the  Asiatic 
system  both  on  the  north  and  south  of  the  Pacific  Ocean.  The  depth 
outside  the  Liu-Kiu  islands  sinks  below  —7,500  meters,  outside  the  Kuriles 
—  8,513  meters  was  sounded,  and  south  of  the  Aleutian  islands  more 
than  —  7,000  meters.  The  island  festoons  are  marked  by  long  rows  of 
volcanos ;  nohvithstanding  their  parallel  course  these  are  independent  of 
the  foredeeps.  Not  infrequently  they  are  separated  from  the  foredeep  by 
a  Cordillera  or  by  fragments  of  a  cordillera. 

A  series  of  long  chains  converges  from  the  south  towards  the  middle  of  the 
sea  of  Okhotsk  (III,  p.  122).  The  most  important  of  these  are  :  the  Aldan 
range  along  the  west  coast  (Djugdjur,  Nemerikan,  Primorskii-Khrebet),  the 
Bureya  range  (Little  Khingan)  which,  attended  by  many  secondary  chains, 
reaches  the  south -coast,  then  the  Sikhota  Alin,  and  finally,  Saghalien,  with 
a  great  part  of  Hokkaido.  It  was  observed  by  Bogdanowitsch  that  the 
granite  and  porphyry  of  the  Djugdjur  are  younger  than  the  Jurassic  coal 
beds,  while  the  rocks  composing  the  chains  between  the  Djugdjur  and  the 
sea  are  of  much  greater  age.  Towards  the  north,  i.e.,  towards  the  town  of 
Okhotsk  and  for  a  short  distance  beyond  it,  the  folding  of  these  mountains 
becomes  less  intense.  Its  place  is  taken  by  longitudinal  fractures.  On  the 
Marekanka,  where  marekanite  occurs  (III,  p.  124)  rhyolites  also  are  now 
known;  andesite  is  more  widely  distributed  than  was  previously  sup- 
posed ^. 

The  whole  of  the  wedge-shaped  fascicle  of  chains,  from  the  Djugdjur  to 
Saghalien,  may  be  termed  the  Ochotldes.    On  the  south  its  lines  proceed 

*  K.  J.  Bogdanowitsch,  Beschreibung  der  Lagerung  des  Marekanites  in  der  Nahe  der 
Stadt  Ochotsk,  und  Geologische  Skizze  der  West-Kiiste  des  Ochot'schen  Meeres,  64  pp., 
maps. 


cH.x]  ANADYEIDES  AND  ALASKIDES  329 

far  into  Manchuria,  thus  showing  its  close  connexion  with  the  eastern 
Altaides  of  inner  Asia.  North  of  Okhotsk  it  meets  a  second  fascicle,  which 
extends  from  the  arc  of  Kamchatka  and  the  Kuriles  into  the  delta  of  the 
Lena.  This  comprises,  in  addition  to  the  Kamchatka  and  the  Kuriles, 
the  chains  of  Yishiga  to  the  north  of  the  sea  of  Okhotsk  and  the  short 
chains  on  its  north-west  side,  as  well  as  the  great  arc  of  Verkhoiansk. 
They  converge,  as  far  as  can  be  seen  from  existing  accounts,  towards  the 
region  of  the  Anadyr ;  we  shall  term  them  the  Anadyrides. 

Another  group  is  formed  by  the  Alaskides,  These  include  all  the 
mountain  ranges  situated  between  the  Aleutian  islands  and  the  Arctic 
chains  of  Alaska.  They  converge  towards  the  east,  and  in  the  meridian 
of  the  gulf  of  Chugatsk  (Prince  William,  long.  146°-148°  E.),  their  several 
arcs  enter  into  syntaxis  with  the  American  chains  (II,  p.  196).  Towards 
the  west  the  line  of  the  Aleutian  islands  meets  that  of  Kamchatka  in 
a  manner  which  shows  an  independence  just  as  great  as  that  of  the  Kuriles 
with  regard  to  the  line  of  Saghalien-Hokkaido  (III,  p.  141). 

We  may,  therefore,  describe  these  three  fascicles  as  so  many  virgations, 
which  are  all  open  towards  the  south  or  west,  converge  towards  the  north 
or  east,  and  are  convex  towards  the  east  or  south;  their  volcanos  and 
foredeeps  lie  to  the  east  or  south,  i.e.,  on  the  Pacific  side. 

A  few  words  concerning  an  isolated  and  little-known  fragment  of  a 
folded  range,  which  is  visible  near  cape  Tsheljuskin,  may  precede  our 
description  of  these  groups. 

Tolmatschew  and  Backlund  have  shown  that  the  east  Siberian  table- 
land, consisting  of  a  sheet  of  diabase  resting  on  horizontal  Palaeozoic  beds. 
(Ill,  p.  29)  reaches  lat.  68°  N.  between  the  affluents  of  the  Chatanga  and 
the  Yenisei,  and  then  breaks  up  towards  the  east  into  separate  tabular 
fragments.  Flat-lying  Cambrian  beds  surround  lake  Eche  (Esse,  also 
Jessei),  the  lower  Monero,  and  a  considerable  part  of  the  Chatanga :  they 
contain  Anomocare  and  Archaeocyathus.  At  one  locality  upper  Silurian 
corals  were  met  with. 

Beneath  this  disintegrating  platform  gneiss  is  visible.  Tolmatschew 
states  that  the  Cambrian  rocks  on  the  upper  Anabar  resemble  gneiss,  and 
recalls  the  fact  that  Tschekanowski  found  pebbles  of  granite  on  the  Olenek 
and  Argasala.  Tolmatschew  has  also  observed  gneiss  on  the  upper  Chat- 
anga. According  to  Backlund's  description  this  structure  extends  between 
the  Chatanga  and  Anabar  to  about  lat.  72°  N.  and  then  terminates  in  step- 
faults.  Along  one  of  these  faults  the  Mesozoic  transgression  with  Aucella 
and  Belemnites  must  also  come  to  an  end  ^.  Nordenskjold  has  also  observed 

^  J.  P.  Tolmatschew,  Sixth  Report  of  the  Chatanga  Expedition,  Izvestija  Imp.  ross. 
Geogr.  Obsch.,  1906,  XLII,  p.  792  et  seq.  (i^  Russian) ;  general  map,  op.  cit.,  1905,  XLI, 
p.  620 ;  H.  Backlund,  On  a  Gneiss  mass  in  the  north  of  Siberia,  Bull.  Acad.  Imp.  Sci. 
Saint-Petersb.,1907,pp.797,798  (in  Russian),  and  Trudi  geol.  Mus.  Peter  der  Grosse,1907, 


830       THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMERICA  [paetv 


gneiss  and  mica-schist  in  the  west  of  the  island  of  Taimyr  (Actinia  harbour, 
to  the  west,  outside  Taimyr  bay)  ^. 

This  extensive  outcrop  of  gneiss  from  beneath  horizontal  Cambrian  beds 
forcibly  recalls  the  Canadian  and  Baltic  shields.  A  fact  worthy  of  attention 
but  difficult  to  explain  is  the  wide  distribution  of  salt.  Palaeozoic  salt  has 
been  mentioned  as  occurring  up  to  lake  Ubsa-Nor,  in  the  valley  of  the 
lakes  (III,  p.  86),  and  as  far  as  Minusinsk  (III,  p.  78),  where  it  lies  between 
marine  Devonian  and  beds  containing  the  Culm  flora.  Here  in  the 
north  we  have  probably  before  us  the  continuation  of  the  gypsum  and  salt 
deposits  of  the  Vilyui,  which  are  there  regarded  as  part  of  the  red  lower 
Silurian  (III,  p.  33).  Backlund  mentions  gypsum  and  salt  of  Palaeozoic 
age  on  the  middle  course  of  the  Monero,  and  again,  but  far  to  the  north, 
between  the  mouths  of  the  Anabar  and  Chatanga,  the  salt  mountain  of 
Ueriintumus,  which  is  supposed  to  be  Mesozoic.  Belemnites  have  been 
obtained  from  the  island  of  Preobrashenskij,  which  lies  off  the  coast  ^. 

This  is  the  structure  of  the  land  through  which  Middendorff,  starting 
from  Turuchansk,  travelled  towards  the  north  under  the  greatest  difficul- 
ties. In  lat.  69''  30'  N.  he  reached  the  lakes  of  the  uppermost  part  of  the 
Paisina  and  the  Sywerma  range.  There  he  was  still  in  the  region  of 
the  basic  eruptive  rocks  of  the  lower  Yenisei.  He  travelled  up  the 
Dudypta  towards  the  north-east  and  then  reached  the  upper  Taimyr 
through  the  tundra.  This  river  flows  for  some  distance  along  the  south 
foot  of  the  low  range  of  Byrranga,  and  expands  in  lat.  74°  N.  to  form 
a  lake.  Before  this  occurs  it  carries  with  it  pebbles  containing  Belemnites 
Panderi,  Aucella  and  other  fossils  ^. 

The  lake  now  gives  off  a  broad  process  elongated  towards  the  north, 
which  crosses  the  Byrranga  range.  On  the  sides  of  this  passage  amygdaloid 
lava  is  to  be  seen ;  the  range  itself  consists  of  folded  clay  slate  and  grey- 
wacke.  The  steeply  inclined  beds  are  exposed  at  several  places  on  the 
lower  Taimyr.  The  island  of  Baer  (lat.  75°  30'  N.)  consists  of  diorite  and 
diorite  schist. 

From  the  hills  near  the  mouth  of  the  Taimyr  Middendorff  saw  the 
Byrranga  range  extending  towards  the  north-east  as  far  as  the  eye  could 
reach.    The  coasts  in  this  direction  were  rocky,  as  at  the  mouth  of  the 

I,  pp.  91-170 ;  Travaux  et  resultats  de  I'Expedition  de  la  Khatanga,  La  Geographie, 
1908,  XVII,  pp.  117-124,  map. 

^  A.  E.  Freiherr  von  Nordenskjold,  Die  Umseglung  Asiens  und  Europas,  Ger.  ed.,  I, 
Leipzig,  1882,  p.  289  ;  Vega-Expedition,  vet.  jakt.,  1882,  I,  p.  14.  As  regards  Lonely 
island  situated  far  to  the  north,  I  only  know  that  it  is  high  and  rocky,  Mohn,  Peterm. 
Mitth.,  1879,  p.  57.  Toll  has  made  important  alterations  in  the  map  of  the  east  coast  of 
Taimyr  Bay,  Bull.  Acad.  Imp.  Sci.  Saint-Petersb.,  1902,  V  ser.  XVI,  p.  195  et  seq.,  maps. 

2  B.  Lundgren,  Ofv.  k.  Vet.-Akad.  FOrh.  Stockholm,  1881,  no.  7,  pp.  3-7. 

'  A.  T.  von  Middendorfl's  Reise  in  den  iiussersten  Norden  und  Osten  Sibiriens,  1848, 
I,  1,  pp.  195-215  (Geognostische  Betrachtungen  bearbeitet  von  G.  v.  Helmersen)  ;  also 
1867,  vol.  IV,  passim  ;  Keyserling,  Jura-Versteinerungen  vom  Taimyr,  op.  cit.,  I,  p.  253. 


CH.  x]  AEC  OF  VEEKHOIANSK  331 

river  itself.  From  the  accounts  published  by  Pronschischtschew  and  Laptew 
in  the  eighteenth  century,  MiddendorfF  obtained  the  information  that  the 
east  coasts  of  Taimyr  peninsula  towards  Saint  Thaddeus  bay  are  precipitous, 
and  that  snow-covered  mountains  lie  north  of  this  bay  and  surround  it 
with  their  steep  declivities.  MiddendorfF  concluded  that  the  Byrranga 
range  sends  off  a  branch  into  the  point  of  Taimyr  peninsula,  and  Helmersen 
also  was  of  opinion  that  cape  Tsheljuskin  belongs  to  it  ^.  Indeed  Norden- 
skjold  has  actually  seen  mountain  chains  on  this  peninsula,  and  on  cape 
Tsheljuskin  he  came  upon  vertically  upturned  phyllites  and  clay  slates,  but 
with  a  strike  from  west-north-west  to  east-south-e^st  ^. 

This  is  the  only  existing  observation  on  the  true  strike.  It  is  possible 
that  the  diabase  of  the  Yenisei  forms  a  large  part  of  the  Byrranga  range 
and  its  continuation  towards  Taimyr. — 

Arc  of  Verkhoiansk.  An  arcuate  range,  forming  a  watershed,  runs 
towards  the  south-west  between  the  Anadyr  and  Omolon.  Its  eastern 
slopes  approach  the  sea  of  Okhotsk,  but  it  is  separated  from  this  sea  by 
a  long  strip  of  land  on  which  a  narrow  ridge,  the  Kava  range,  inserts 
itself.  Towards  the  sources  of  the  Okhota  it  recedes  from  the  sea  ;  includes, 
besides  the  sources  of  the  Kolyma,  those  of  the  Indigirka  and  Yana ;  is 
accompanied  along  its  south  foot  first  by  the  river  Aldan,  and  then  for 
a  long  way  on  the  west  side  by  the  Lena:  finally  it  accomplishes 
a  slight  bend  at  its  north-western  extremity  by  which  its  outermost 
offshoots,  striking  to  the  west-north-west,  reach  the  delta  of  the  Lena  and 
even  the  mouth  of  the  Olenek.  The  manner  in  which  the  hydrographic 
system  is  shut  out  is  remarkable. 

Maydell  has  clearly  shown  that  two  different  ranges  meet  together 
near  the  Okhota.    The  northern  range,  which  we  assign  to  the  arc  of 
.Verkhoiansk,  he  terms  the  Kolyma  range.    Its  direction  and  structure 
are  different  from  those  of  the  Aldan  range  (Djugdjur)  ^. 

The  region  of  encounter  lies  above  the  Okhota  and  above  its  great 
tributary  the  Arka.  A  large  part  of  the  arc  of  Verkhoiansk  is  here  known 
by  the  inhabitants  as  the  OiineJcon  plateau.  The  Kolyma  and  Indigirka 
flow  from  this  point  towards  the  north.    On  the  east,  the  ridge  which 

^  A.  T.  V.  MiddendorfF,  op.  cit.  I,  p.  215,  and  IV,  p.  205,  note.  Two  of  the  specimens 
obtained  by  Middendorff  have  been  examined  by  Chrustschow ;  one  is  of  trachytic  type 
(Taimyrite),  the  other  is  a  granitic  rock,  Bull.  Acad.  Imp.  Sci.,  Saint-Pete rsb.,  1893,  III, 
pp.  421-431. 

2  A.  E.  Tornebohm,  Under  Vega-Expeditionen  insamlade  bergarter  in  Nordenskjold 
Vega-Expedition  vet.  jakt.,  8vo,  Stockholm,  1887,  IV,  p.  119. 

^  Baron  Gr.  Maydell,  Reisen  und  Forschungen  im  Jakutskischen  Gebiete  Ost-Sibiriens, 
II,  in  Schrenk  und  Schmidt,  Beitrage  zur  Kenntniss  des  russischen  Reiches,  1896,  4.  Ser., 
vol.  II,  pp.  219,  223  et  seq.,  map.  The  ethnographer  Jochelson  arrived  very  near  to  the 
almost  unknown  western  side  of  the  Kolyma  range  :  Jochelson,  An  den  Fliissen  Jassat- 
schna  und  Korkodon,  Izvestija  Imp.  ross.  Geogr.  Obsch.,  1898,  XXXIV,  pp.  255-290, 
map,  in  particular  p.  278. 


332        THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMEEICA  [partv 

forms  a  watershed  is  termed,  as  already  mentioned,  the  Kolyma  range. 
Towards  the  west  it  bears  the  name  of  Sordoginskij-Khrebet,  then  for  a  long 
distance  onwards  it  is  known  as  the  ridge  of  VerkhoiansJc,  a  little  later  it 
becomes  the  Ondgan,  and  finally,  as  it  extends  towards  the  Arctic  Ocean, 
the  Khara  Ulach. 

This  great  arc  consists  of  folded  strata.  Nowhere  throughout  its  whole 
extent,  from  the  watershed  of  the  Anadyr  to  the  mouth  of  the  Lena,  have 
gneisses  or  pre-Palaeozoic  rocks  as  yet  been  discovered.  The  Aldan  and 
the  Lena  separate  it  sharply  from  the  east  Siberian  tableland,  the  Cambrian 
sediments  of  which  are  to  be  seen  within  a  short  distance  lying  undisturbed. 

For  the  extreme  north-west  and  the  west  of  this  region  we  have  the 
accounts  of  two  admirable  observers.  The  first  is  Tschekanowski,  who 
has  described  the  structure  at  the  confluences  of  the  rivers  and  in  parts  of 
the  western  arc\  The  journeys  of  Baron  von  Toll  have  given  us  detailed 
information  of  the  same  regions,  and  especially  of  the  structure  of  the 
valley  of  the  Yana  and  the  New  Siberian  islands,  which  lie  off"  the  north 
coast  ^. 

In  1850  Meglitzky  described  a  transverse  section  of  the  region,  starting 
from  the  mouth  of  the  Aldan  ^.  In  1891  Tscherski  investigated  the  regions 
further  to  the  east ;  he  also  started  from  the  Aldan,  crossed  the  Yerkhoiansk 
range  in  lat.  62°  40'  N.,  traversed  the  upper  basin  of  the  Indigirka  and 
reached  Yerkhne  Kolymsk.  Shortly  afterwards  he  fell  a  victim  in  the 
deserts  of  the  Kolyma  to  the  hardships  imposed  upon  him  by  his  enthusiasm 
for  our  science 

As  regards  the  regions  which  follow  to  the  east,  and  particularly  for 
the  fragment  of  arc  to  the  east  of  the  Omolon  there  is  a  dearth  of  exact 
information.  We  are  thus  forced  to  rely  almost  wholly  on  the  configuration 
of  the  surface,  until  we  again  reach  the  far  north  where  the  travels  of 
Ferdinand  v.  Wrangell  and  his  companion  Matjuschkin,  performed  under 

^  Diaries  of  the  Expedition  of  A.  L.  Tschekanowski  to  the  rivers  Lower  Tunguska, 
Olenek,  and  Lena,  publ.  by  the  Imp.  Russian  Geographical  Society,  8vo,  St.  Petersb.,  1896, 
maps,  pp.  195-275  r. 

2  Schrenk,  Bunge,  and  Toll,  Expedition  nach  den  Neu-Sibirischen  Inseln  und  dem 
Jana-Lande,  Beitrage  zur  Kenntniss  des  russischen  Reiches,  3.  ser.,  vol.  Ill,  maps; 
Baron  E.  von  Toll,  Wissenschaftliche  Resultate  der  von  der  kaiserlichen  Akademie 
zur  Erforschung  des  Jana-Landes  und  der  Neu-Sibirischen  Inseln  in  den  Jahren  1885- 
1886  ausgesandten  Expedition,  I,  The  Palaeozoic  Fossils  of  the  island  of  Kotelny, 
Mem.  Acad.  Imp.  Sci.  Saint-Petersb.,  1889,  XXXVIII,  no.  2,  and  II,  Tertiary  Plants  of  the 
Islands  of  New  Siberia,  by  J.  Schmalhausen,  with  an  introduction  by  Baron  von  Toll, 
op.  cit.  XXVII,  no.  5  ;  Baron  E.  von  Toll,  Geological  Sketch  of  the  New  Siberian 
islands,  op.  cit.,  1899,  VIII,  ser.  IX,  no.  1,  maps,  r. 

3  N.  Meglitzky,  Geognostische  Beobachtungen  auf  einer  Reise  in  Ost-Sibirien  im 
Jahr  1850,  Verb.  russ.  k.  min.  Ges.,  1850-1851,  pp.  118-162,  map. 

*  J.  D.  Tscherski,  Report  on  the  exploration  of  the  region  of  the  rivers  Kolyma,  Indi- 
girka, and  Jana,  Mem.  Acad.  Imp.  Sci.  Saint-Petersb.,  1893,  vol.  LXXIII,  no.  5,  35  pp., 
maps  (in  Russian). 


CH.  X] 


DELTA  OF  THE  LENA 


333 


great  difficulties  in  the  years  1820  to  1840,  make  it  possible  to  establish  some 
connexion  with  the  east  and  north-east,  described  in  more  recent  works  ^. 

The  delta  of  the  Lena.  Let  us  follow  Tschekanowski  down  this  river. 
The  western  border  of  the  neighbouring  range  of  Verkhoiansk  shows 
plant-bearing  sandstone,  often  white  and  containing  geodes ;  north  of 
lat.  69°  N.  the  course  of  the  river  approaches  closer  and  closer  to  the 
mountains.  The  folds  become  more  distinct,  the  banks  rocky  and  steeper. 
Near  Ajakit  (a,  Fig.  26)  the  Khara  Ulach  advances  close  to  the  river  as 
a  range  of  snow  mountains;  the  left  bank  also  has  now  become  higher. 
It  consists  of  the  same  plant-bearing  sandstone,  and  we  can  already  make 
out  that  the  beds  of  the  mountains  on  the  right  are  inclined,  not  only  more 
steeply,  but  in  an  opposite  direction  to  those  of  the  sandstone  on  the  left. 
The  banks  become  steadily  higher  and  the  strata  in  place  of  undulating 
curves  present  violent  dislocations.  The  Lena  now  flows  within  a  folded 
range  ^. 

Tschekanowski  left  the  Lena  near  Ajakit,  and  turned  north-west  to  the 
Olenek.  There  also  the  plant-bearing  sandstone  forms  the  foundation ; 
it  is  accompanied  by  the  Inoceramus  beds  of  the  Volga  stage  and  both  are 
thrown  into  broad  folds  ^. 

The  lower  course  of  the  Olenek,  running  north-west,  is  accompanied  on 
its  right  side  by  a  short  ridge  of  Trias  limestone ;  this  begins  at  the  rock 
of  Mengilach  (6,  Fig.  26),  famous  as  a  rich  locality  for  lower  Trias  fossils 
(zone  of  Ceratites  subrohustus),  and  extends  like  a  spur  right  down  to  the 
mouth  of  the  river 

Toll's  description  of  the  rocks  of  the  delta  of  the  Lena  provides  us  with 
the  following :  Below  Ajakit  and  north  of  lat.  71°  N.,  before  we  reach  the 
head  of  the  delta,  precipitous  limestone  clifis  rise  on  the  right  shore  to 
a  height  of  760  meters.  At  the  extreme  point  of  the  right  shore,  which 
advances  into  the  alluvial  land,  upper  Carboniferous  fossils  occur,  among 
them  Spirifer  Mosquensis.  Immediately  to  the  west  of  this  range  Trias  crops 
out.  It  forms  a  small  part  of  the  right  shore  and  several  of  the  adjacent 
islands,  from  the  island  of  Tass-Ari  (c,  Fig.  26)  down  to  the  head  of  the 
delta  5. 

To  the  east  of  this  range  of  hills  lies  the  Borchaya  bay  in  the  Arctic 

*  F.  von  Wrangell,  Reise  langs  der  Nord-Kiiste  von  Sibirien  und  auf  dem  Eismeere  in 
den  Jahren  1820  bis  1824,  ed.  by  Engelbardt,  8vo,  Berlin,  1839. 

^  A.  L.  Tschekanowski,  Diaries  of  the  Expedition  to  the  rivers  Lower  Tunguska,  Olenek, 
and  Lena,  publ.  by  the  Imp.  Russian  Geographical  Society,  8vo,  St.  Petersburg,  1896, 
maps,  p.  229. 

*  J.  Lahusen,  Inoceramen-Schichten  an  der  Olenek  und  der  Lena,  Mem.  Acad.  Imp. 
Sci.  Saint-Petersb.,  1886,  7«  ser.,  XXXIII,  no.  7. 

*  Tschekanowski's  description  of  the  rock  of  Mengilach,  published  as  a  translation  by 
F.  Schmidt  in  E.  von  Mojsisovics,  Arktische  Trias-Faunen,  Mem.  Acad.  Imp.  Sci. 
Saint-Petersb.,  1886,  7^  ser.,  XXXIII,  no.  6,  p.  4. 

^  Toll  in  Mojsisovics,  Ueber  einige  arktische  Trias-Ammoniten,  Mem.  Acad.  Imp.  Sci. 


334      THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMERICA  [party 


Ocean ;  on  the  peninsula  which  projects  from  the  range  where  it  forms  the 
east  coast,  south  of  lat.  72°  N.,  a  mammoth  was  found  in  1799. 

The  extreme  end  of  the  folded  range,  however,  is  not  reached  on  the 
Olenek.  The  spur  which  separates  the  Lena  and  Olenek  has  been  named 
the  TshekanovsJci-Khrebet  by  von  Toll,  and  on  the  other  side  of  it  he  has 
observed  another  range  of  hills  accompanying  the  sea  coast  as  far  as  the 


Fig.  26.  TJie  delta  of  the  Lena.  (Observations  of  the  Russian  Polar  station  at  the  mouth  of 
the  Lena,  prepared  by  Eigner,  published  by  the  Royal  Geographical  Society,  4:to,  St.  Petersburg, 
1886.)  a,  Ajakit ;  b,  Mengilach ;  c,  Tass  Ari ;  d,  Kegyl  Chaja;  e,  Tumul  Chaja  ;  /,  Khara 
Ulach  bay  in  the  bay  of  Borchaya  ;  g,  Meteorological  Station  of  Bulun  Ketach  (Ssagastyr). 


Anabar.  This  is  only  separated  from  the  sea  by  a  narrow  tundra,  and 
consists  chiefly  of  Mesozoic  beds  dipping  to  the  south-west.  Along  the 
lower  course  of  the  Anabar  the  following  succession  is  exposed,  going  from 

Saint-Petersb.,  1888,  7®  ser.,  XXXVI,  no.  5,  p.  13  et  seq. ;  Mojsisovics,  Waagen,und  Diener, 
Entwurf  einer  Gliederung  der  pelagischen  Sedimente  des  Trias-Systems,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad. 
Wisa.  Wien,  1895,  CIV,  pp.  1288  and  1295,  note  9;  Noetling,  Lethaea  mesozoica,  I, 
p.  200,  Diener,  Alter  der  Olenek-Schichten,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1908,  pp.  233-237. 


CH.x]  THE  YANA  335 

north  to  south :  Lias  (with  Amaltheus  margaritatus),  Volga  stage,  Neo- 
comian,  Oxfordian  Lias.  Von  Toll  calls  this  range  Prontshishtshev-Khrehet 
Here  the  foreland  begins,  namely,  the  region  of  the  basic  eruptive  rocks 
and  the  Palaeozoic  platform  (III,  p  31). 

These  are  the  free  ends,  divided  into  coulisses,  of  the  arc  of  Verkhoiansk. 

Sad  memories  attach  to  these  localities.  In  1735,  Lieutenant  Lasinius 
with  thirty-five  companions  succumbed,  in  the  Khara  Ulach  inlet  of 
Borchaya  bay  (/),  to  scurvy  and  the  hardships  they  had  undergone.  At  the 
extreme  point  of  the  Trias  spur  (e)  on  the  Olenek  the  daring  explorer 
Prontschischtschew  and  his  wife  lost  their  lives  in  1736.  On  the  island  of 
Kegyl  Khaja  (cZ,  at  the  end  of  the  Trias  islands  of  the  Lena)  Lieutenant 
De  Long  and  almost  the  whole  crew  of  the  Jeannette  died  of  starvation 
while  endeavouring  to  make  their  way  back  from  the  discovery  of  Bennett 
Land,  where  the  admirable  investigator  Baron  von  Toll  passed  away  in 
1902.    Even  amidst  the  ice  the  laurel  flourishes. 

The  Yana.  Plant-bearing  beds  and  the  Volga  stage  border  the  left 
bank  of  the  Lena  from  the  north  to  Yakutsk.  On  the  right  bank  Bunge 
observed  upper  Devonian  shales  and  sandstone  in  lat.  67°  N. ;  the  same 
rocks  were  encountered  by  von  Toll  on  the  summit  of  the  watershed  which 
runs  north  and  south  of  lat.  65°  N.,  near  the  sources  of  the  Dulgalach,  and 
were  there  covered  by  glauconitic  sandstone  of  the  Volga  stage  with 
Inoceramus  ^.  Meglitzky,  travelling  across  the  range  from  the  mouth  of 
the  Aldan  towards  the  north-east,  observed  undulating  plant-  and  coal- 
bearing  beds  which  extend  up  to  a  considerable  height,  and  then  as  far 
as  the  summit  of  the  pass  steeply  upturned  beds  of  Carboniferous  with 
Froductus  mesolohus  and  other  fossils  ^. 

Within  this  arc  three  rivers  flow  fairly  parallel  to  the  north-north-east, 
first  the  great  Omoloi,  which  reaches  Borchaya  bay  by  a  bend  to  the  north- 
north- west,  then  Butantai  and  Dulgalach,  which  are  the  left  tributaries 
of  the  Yana.  The  Omoloi  and  Butantai  are  separated  by  the  range  of 
Kular;  it  extends  towards  the  north-east  and  its  last  spur  reaches  the 
left  bank  of  the  Yana  in  lat.  70°  23'  N.  Here  rises  the  rock  of  Magyl  ^,  noted 
for  its  lower  Trias  fossils.  While,  as  we  have  already  seen,  Devonian,  Car- 
boniferous, and  the  Volga  stage  surround  the  watershed  in  the  south ;  in  the 
north,  on  the  other  hand,  Toll  and  Bunge  have  observed  Trias  with  Pseudo- 
monotis  Ochotica  distributed  over  a  remarkably  wide  area,  as  at  many 

1  E.  von  Toll,  Geological  Sketch  of  tlie  New  Siberian  islands,  Beitrage  zur  Kenntniss 
des  russischen  Reiclies,  1899,  VIIT,  ser.  IX,  no.  1,  maps,  p.  9  (in  Russian). 

^  N.  Meglitzky,  Geognostisclie  Beobachtungen  auf  einer  Reise  in  Ost-Sibirien  im  Jahre 
1850,  Verb.  Russ.  k.  min.  Ges.,  1850-1851,  p.  140. 

^  Mojsisovics,  Aiktische  Trias- Ammoniten,  Mem.  Acad.  Imp.  Sci.  Saint-Pete rsb.,  1888, 
7®  ser.,  XXXVI,  no.  5,  p.  13  et  seq.  Bunge  found  a  fossil  resembling  Gnjphaea  dilatata 
in  lat.  67°  30'  N.,  so  that  doubtless  recent  deposits  are  also  present :  Toll,  Geological 
Sketch,  &c.,  p.  8. 


336      THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMEEICA  [partv 


points  on  the  Butantai,  the  Dulgalach,  and  the  Yana.  It  is  thrown  into 
folds  and  extends  through  six  degrees  of  latitude  ^.  In  this  vast  region  of 
shales  and  sandstone  rise  isolated  mountains  of  eruptive  rock.  Quartz 
porphyry  occurs  above  the  town  of  Verkhoiansk.  On  the  Adytsha  (right 
tributary  of  the  Yana)  granite  crops  out  (Yninach-chaja,  1,625  meters). 

The  watershed  between  the  Yana  and  the  Indigirka  is  formed  by 
the  imposing  range  of  Koch  TasSy  the  northern  part  of  which  directed 
towards  the  north-north-west  bears  the  name  of  Tass  Hajachtach. 
Wrangell  has  crossed  this  part  between  lat.  67°  and  68"  N.  Both  on 
the  summit  of  the  watershed  and  on  the  banks  of  the  Indigirka  black 
schists  are  encountered  striking  from  west  to  north,  that  is,  at  right 
angles  to  the  mountains,  and  in  accordance  with  the  general  structure  of 
the  arc  of  Verkhoiansk  2.  Near  lat.  70°  N.  the  Tass  Hajachtach  reaches 
the  Yana.  On  its  extreme  northern  border,  already  beyond  lat.  70°  N. 
von  Toll's  map  marks  the  Trias.  Then  follows  on  the  north  a  broad 
tundra  from  which  rises  a  series  of  four  domes  of  basic  eruptive  rock. 
The  fourth  dome  is  somewhat  broader  than  the  others ;  it  includes  the 
promontory  of  Swjatoi  ifoss;  here  von  Toll  mentions  olivine  basalt. 
Surak-tass  near  the  promontory  has  the  form  of  a  volcano  with  a  crater. 

The  Indigirka.  The  watershed  between  the  Ochota  and  Indigirka  is 
of  primary  importance  in  a  study  of  north-eastern  Asia.  Fortunately  we 
have  a  valuable  description  of  this  region  by  Tscherski  ^. 

In  long.  136°  E.  Tscherski  left  the  Aldan ;  he  travelled  obliquely  across 
the  mountains  to  Oimekon  on  the  upper  Indigirka  and  thence  to  the 
Kolyma  (PI.  II).  The  scenery  is  alpine,  with  steep  descents  and  sharp 
peaks.  A  considerable  mountain  mass,  the  Suantar-Chayata,  rises  on  the 
threefold  watershed  between  the  AUach-yuna  (Aldan-Lena),  Okhota,  and 
Suantar  flowing  to  the  Indigirka.  Its  highest  part,  situated  between  the 
uppermost  branches  of  the  Suantar,  is  always,  according  to  the  natives, 
covered  with  snow,  but  in  the  whole  of  the  remaining  region  as  far  as  the 
Kolyma  none  of  the  peaks  reach  the  snow-line,  although  some  attain 
a  height  of  2,300  meters  above  the  sea.  We  only  meet  with  '  Aufeis ' 
(naledei,  or  in  Yakut,  taryn),  namely,  strips  of  ice  in  the  valley  bottom, 
only  a  few  meters  in  thickness,  but  sometimes  reaching  a  length  of  12  kilo- 

^  E.  von  Toll,  Beitrage  zur  Kenntniss  des  russischen  Reiclies,  3.  ser..  Ill,  pp.  317-319 ; 
Schraalhausen,  op.  cit.,  II,  p.  3  et  seq. ;  Toll,  Geological  Sketch,  p.  11  et  seq. 

^  F.  von  Wrangell,  Reise  langs  der  Nord-Kiiste  von  Sibirien  und  auf  dem  Eismeere  in 
den  Jahren  1820  bis  1824,  Svo,  Berhn,  1839,  I,  pp.  170,  173. 

^  Tscherski's  account  was  written  in  Verkhne-Kolymsk  not  long  before  his  death  ;  the 
heights  given  are  not  relative  to  the  sea-level,  but  to  the  Lena  near  Yakutsk  (65  meters, 
the  town  90  meters) ;  they  have  been  given  unaltered  in  fig.  27.  The  figures  in  the  text 
have  been  converted  into  heights  above  sea-level.  The  statement  that  Yakutsk  lies  at 
a  level  of  500  feet  is  due  to  some  error ;  cf.  Maydell,  Reisen  und  Forschungen,  &c.,  I, 
Beitrage  zur  Kenntniss  des  russischen  Reiches,  II,  p.  423. 


CH.  X] 


SUANTAE-CHAYATA 


337 


meters.  In  the  south,  near  the  Aldan,  they  occur  at  a  height  of  900  meters 
above  the  sea,  but  in  the  north,  on  the  Kolyma,  they  are  not  found  below 
1,480-1,490  meters.  This  is  the  form  taken  by  the  glaciation  of  the  coldest 
part  of  Asia^. 

The  mountainous  region  falls  into  four  great  ranges  which  may  be  seen 
on  plate  II.  The  first  of  these  is  the  great  range  of  the  watershed, 
which  Tscherski  terms  the  ridge  of  VerkhoiansJc  (7,700  feet,  about  2,340 
meters) ;  it  extends  to  that  uppermost  branch  of  the  Indigirka,  flowing  from 
the  east-south-east,  to  which  the  maps  have  often  erroneously  assigned  the 
name  of  Oimekon.  On  the  other  side  of  the  Indigirka  follows  the  range 
of  Tass  Kystabyt  (6,800  feet,  2,075  meters) ;  it  is  continued  towards  the 
north-west  in  a  flat  ridge  about  1,580-1,600  meters  in  height ;  the  north 
slope  is  almost  rectilinear  and  descends  steeply  to  the  Nera.  The  third 
range  is  the  Ulachan  Tshistai  (over  7,200  feet,  2,200  meters)  ;  it  is  about 
100  versts  broad,  and  at  a  height  of  as  much  as  6,200  feet  (1,828  meters) 
presents  a  valley  7  kilometers  in  breadth  surrounded  by  lofty  summits. 
From  this  valley  the  upper  course  of  the  Nera  flows  towards  the  south- 
south-west  until  it  meets  the  Kven  Ulach  coming  in  the  same  direction 
from  the  Tass- Kystabyt,  and,  uniting  with  this  stream  it  turns  towards  the 
north-west.  The  range  reaches  its  greatest  height  in  its  north-eastern  part ; 
it  terminates  on  the  Moma,  the  Boroll  Ulach,  a  tributary  of  the  Moma,  and 
the  rocky  valley  of  the  Kygyl-Balyktach.  On  the  other  side  of  these  rivers 
follows  the  Tomus-Chaya  (7,900  feet,  2,411  meters,  90  kilometers  in  breadth); 
its  northern  end  turns  round  to  the  north-east ;  in  lat.  65°  50'  N.  its  height 
suddenly  decreases.  On  the  other  side  of  the  Tomus-Chaya  the  valley  of 
the  Kolyma  broadens  out ;  and  where  it  does  so  lies  Verkhne-Kolymsk. 

The  form  of  these  ranges  does  not  accord  with  the  strike  of  the  rocks. 
The  rocks  fall  into  two  principal  series ;  the  first  includes  Palaeozoic  lime- 
stone, slate,  and  greywacke  ;  the  next,  sandstone  and  shales  containing 
Pseudomonotis  ochotica,  often  plant-remains  as  well ;  it  is  accompanied  and 
invaded  by  great  bands  of  eruptive  rock. 

From  the  Aldan  onwards  the  outer  border  of  the  mountains  presents 
plant-bearing  beds  (N?  fig.  27),  either  Neogene  or  belonging  to  the  Volga 
stage,  folded  with  a  strike  to  the  north-north- east,  that  is,  at  right  angles 
to  the  watershed.  Then  follows  a  great  oblique  syncline  striking  N.  10°- 
15°  E.,  and  composed  of  limestone  with  Favosites  and  Halysites ;  it  is 
steeply  upturned  towards  the  east,  and  there  reveals  a  lower-lying  Palaeo- 
zoic slate.  Upon  this  rests  in  discordance  a  great  thickness  of  Trias  (a,  fig.  27) 
striking  N.  10°-20°  E.  The  watershed  between  the  Dyby  and  Kerachtach, 
that  is  between  the  Lena  and  Indigirka,  is  formed  by  a  range  of  eruptive 
rock  (1,878  meters)  rising  from  the  Trias  shales.    The  strike  of  the  Trias  to 


1  Cf.  Maydell,  Ueber  die  Taryne,  Reisen  und  Forschungen,  II,  pp.  1-33. 

SOLliAO  IV  Z 


338      THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMEEICA  [party 


West 


the  north-north-east  is  maintained  throughout  the  course  of  the  upper 

Suantar  as  far  as  the  little  river  of  Oemi, 
which  flows  into  the  Tomskaia,  another 
branch  of  the  Suantar.  Here  (6,  fig.  27)  an 
opposite  inclination  of  the  beds  sets  in ;  the 
strike  becomes  east-north-east,  and  this  direc- 
tion is  maintained  as  far  as  the  Indigirka. 

The  strike  of  the  folds  from  the  Aldan 
to  the  Suantar  is  thus  north-north-east,  and 
thence  onwards  east-north- east,  or  in  other 
words  :  the  strike  of  the  Aldan  range  is  con- 
tinued up  to  the  Suantar,  where  it  encounters 
the  strike  of  the  arc  of  Verkhoiansk. 

Tass-Kystabyt  lies  wholly  within  the 
Trias,  and  in  its  neighbourhood  the  greatest 
intrusions  of  eruptive  rock  occur.  One  of 
these  was  followed  by  the  travellers  along  the 
upper  tributaries  of  the  Indigirka  for  a  dis- 
tance of  42  kilometers,  and  an  equally  im- 
portant ridge  occurs  on  the  slope  turned 
towards  the  Nera.  Parallel  folds  of  Trias 
shales  form  the  next  succeeding  slope  of  the 
Ulachan  Tshistai;  the  strike  is  still  east- 
north-east;  after  a  short  diversion  to  the 
north  it  becomes  east  and  west  on  the  upper 
Artyk,  and  then  regularly  west-north-west  in 
the  Boroll  Ulach ;  the  dip  is  generally  towards 
the  north.  Intrusions  of  granite  occur.  A 
second  Palaeozoic  band  of  greater  thickness 
now  makes  its  appearance,  forming  the  high 
peaks  of  the  Boroll  Ulach,  and  of  the  Kygyl- 
Balyktach;  it  strikes,  like  the  Trias,  to  the 
west-north-west,  and  occupies  the  whole  of 
the  south-west  half  of  the  Tomus  Chaya. 
In  general,  the  structure  is  that  of  a  saddle, 
about  90  kilometers  broad,  but  here,  too,  an 
intercalation  of  eruptive  rock,  24  kilometers 


East 


Fig.  27.  The  mountains  of  Verkhoiansk  between  the 
Aldan  and  Indigirka  (section  from  west  to  east).  (After 
Tscherski.)  Pal  =-=  Silurian  ;  T  =  Trias;  E  =  eruptive 
rock  ;  N  =  leaf-bearing  Neogene  ?  or  Volga  stage  ;  Q  =  re- 
cent alluvial  land.  a,  unconformable  bedding  of  T  on 
Pal ;  b,  change  of  strike  in  T.  The  heights  (English  feet) 
refer  to  the  Lena  above  Yakutsk  (  =  214  feet  above  sea 
level). 


CH.X]  INDIGIEKA  AND  KOLYMA  339 

in  breadth,  sets  in  on  the  north-east  side.  Further  away,  but  always 
with  the  same  strike  to  the  west-north- west,  Palaeozoic  folds  rise  out  of  the 
Trias.  Trias  also  forms  the  mountains  at  a  still  greater  distance,  until 
finally,  as  we  approach  Verkhne-Kolymsk,  more  recent  sediments  appear 
with  leaves  of  dicotyledonous  plants  and  beds  of  lignite. 

Tscherski  started  with  the  older  view  that  the  Aldan  range  and  the 
Kolyma  range  were  continuations  of  the  Stanovoi,  bent  in  an  elbow  near 
the  sources  of  the  Okhota.  He  perceived,  however,  that  the  two  Palaeozoic 
zones  striking  in  opposite  directions,  north-north-east  on  the  Chandyga 
and  west-north-west  on  the  Kygyl-Balyktach,  follow  the  same  directions 
as  the  two  limbs  of  the  elbow  on  the  upper  Okhota,  and  he  regarded  them 


Fig.  28.  Sketch  of  the  upper  course  of  the  Indigirka  and  Kolyma.   (After  Tscherski.) 

{K.B.  =  Kygyl-Balyktach.) 


as  horsts  of  an  older  mountain  system.  The  situation  is  more  simply 
explained  by  supposing,  as  suggested  above,  that  those  parts  of  the  moun- 
tains which  strike  to  the  north-north-east  still  belong  to  the  Aldan  range. 
This  range  would  then  also  include  the  Suantar  Chayata.  In  any  case, 
the  region  from  Suantar  to  Verkhne-Kolymsk  follows  the  normal  strike 
of  the  arc  of  Verkhoiansk.  The  unconformity  at  the  base  of  the  Trias 
which  occurs  both  in  the  north  and  south  reveals  a  similar,  older  plan ;  the 
younger  folding  is  continued,  as  on  the  lower  Lena,  at  least  into  the  Volga 
stage ;  in  this  region  also  no  gneiss  nor  pre-Palaeozoic  schists  have  been 
met  with. 


340      THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMEEICA  [party 


We  have  already  pointed  out  (III,  p.  125)  that  a  bend  made  by  the 
mountains  near  Okhotsk  from  a  north-north-east  into  a  north  direction, 
such  as  is  shown  on  the  maps^  cannot  be  inferred  from  the  strike  of  the 
rocks.  Erman  crossed  the  mountains,  travelling  from  the  Furth  along 
the  Aldan  (Aldanskij  Perewoss)  to  Okhotsk,  and  in  this  region  and  as  far 
as  the  Marekanka  (east  of  Okhotsk)  encountered  rocks  striking  constantly 
to  the  north-north-east.  In  order  to  compare  his  observations  (III,  p.  124) 
with  those  of  Tscherski,  the  data  given  in  Maydell's  map  have  been  trans- 
ferred to  Tscherski's  map  (pi.  II),  on  which  Erman's  route  has  also  been 
marked  ^. 

On  the  Aldan  Erman  saw  sandstone  and  clay,  the  same,  he  supposed,  as 
that  in  which  Sauer,  Billing's  companion,  observed  fossil  tree-trunks ;  it  is 
probably  the  continuation  of  the  beds  marked  N  ?  on  fig.  27.  Up  the  Bielaya 
through  Gastarnach  to  the  Sem  Khrebti  the  range  is  formed  of  limestone ; 
its  north-north-easterly  strike  shows  its  correspondence  with  Tscherski's 
Palaeozoic  limestone  on  the  Chandyga  and  the  upper  Dyby.  The  Sem 
Khrebti  consist,  as  far  as  Allach-junsk,  of  light  grey  clay  slates  with 
a  talcose  lustre,  dipping  steeply  to  the  south-west ;  the  lie  would  correspond 
with  that  of  the  lower  Palaeozoic  slates  west  of  a.  Some  dark  clay  slates 
on  the  east  side  of  the  Allach-juna,  pthanites  with  traces  of  Equisetum 
above  Antsha,  and  a  craggy  eruptive  rock,  believed  to  be  phonolite,  may 
then  represent  the  Trias  zone  with  its  plant-remains  and  eruptive  rock  up 
to  the  change  in  strike  between  the  rivers  Suantar  and  Oemi;  here  the 
north-north- easterly  strike  of  the  Aldan  mountains  terminates  on  the  line 
followed  by  Tscherski  {h,  fig.  27).  On  Erman's  route,  however,  other  zones 
succeed,  striking  to  the  north-north-east :  the  first  of  these  is  composed  of 
sandstone,  conglomerate,  and  greywacke.  This  zone  includes  the  Kapitans- 
berg,  and  extends  across  the  sources  of  the  Judoma  to  the  upper  Ketanda, 
where  Erman  reached  a  broad  zone  of  porphyry,  which  comprises  the  greater 
part  of  the  Ketanda,  and  also  a  large  part  of  the  Arka,  Okhota,  and  Kuchtui. 
We  have  already  seen  that  Bogdanowitsch  came  upon  more  recent  rocks 
and  also  andesitic  rocks  in  these  regions. 

Since  the  strike  to  the  north-north-east  prevails  in  all  the  mountains  to 
the  south  and  west  of  the  watershed  between  the  Suantar  and  the  Oemi,  and 
also  as  far  as  the  great  Marekanka,  this  region  must  be  assigned,  in  a  tectonic 
sense,  to  the  Aldan  range, 

Kolyma.  From  the  mouth  of  the  Indigirka  to  that  of  the  Kolyma  no 
hard  rocks  are  known  on  the  coast  of  the  Arctic  Ocean  ;  a  few  promontories 
reach  a  height  of  over  20  meters ;  according  to  Kosmin  they  consist  only 
of  grey  loam.  It  is  not  until  we  reach  the  Bear  islands,  outside  the 
Kolyma,  that  the  conditions  change^. 

*  Erman,  Reise  urn  die  Erde,  III,  p.  89. 

>  Kosmin  in  Wrangell,  Reise  langs  der  Nordkiiste,  &c„  II,  p.  32  et  seq. 


CH.  x]  KOLYMA  341 

The  west  bank  of  this  river  is  formed  by  a  broad  plain  as  far  as 
Sredne-Kolymsk  and  beyond ;  the  right  bank  is  rocky.  On  this  side  the 
Kolyma  receives,  between  lats.  68°  and  69°  N.,  first  the  Omolon,  and  then, 
after  a  great  bend,  the  Great  and  Little  Anuj.  Between  the  latter  and  the 
Arctic  Ocean  lies  a  considerable  group  of  mountains.  Its  south-west  part 
is  the  most  important;  in  the  White  mountains  it  reaches,  according  to 
Wrangell,  a  height  of  764  meters.  The  river  Poginden,  flowing  from  the 
north  into  the  Little  Anuj,  bounds  the  White  mountains  on  the  east.  Its 
spurs  extend  across  the  great  Baranycha  as  far  as  Chaun  bay. 

As  early  as  1797  Billings  observed  heights  formed  of  schist  and  quartz 
north  of  Nishne-Kolymsk  on  the  margin  of  the  Arctic  Ocean,  and  Wrangell 
mentions  similar  outcrops  along  the  lower  Kolyma.  On  the  Little  Anuj 
and  lower  Poginden,  between  about  lats.  68°  and  68°  36^  N.,  and  long.  165°- 
166°  E.,  these  rocks  strike  between  N.E.  and  N.  80°  E.;  they  are  here 
accompanied  by  conglomerate,  as  is  the  case  with  the  Trias  shales  near  the 
sources  of  the  Kolyma.  On  the  lower  Baranycha,  on  the  other  hand, 
between  about  lat.  68°  S4f  and  69°  9'  N.,  similar  shales  with  beds  of  con- 
glomerate strike  N.  30°  W.  According  to  these  ancient  observations  the 
normal  strike  of  Verkhoiansk  appears  to  terminate  at  the  sources  of  the 
Poginden.  The  watershed  is  formed  of  conglomerate.  These  two  regions 
furnish  an  identical '  transition  greenstone '.  The  promontorj^  of  the  Great 
Baranow,  corresponding  to  the  prolongation  of  the  outcrops  on  the  lower 
Baranycha,  is  formed  by  two  rocky  ridges  of  schist  and  light-coloured 
granite  striking  to  the  west-north-west ;  the  Little  Baranow  and  the  Bear 
islands  consist  of  similar  rock^. 

We  receive  the  impression  that  the  advance  of  the  rocky  hank  on  the  east 
side  of  the  lower  Kolyma,  that  is  of  the  two  promontories  of  Baranow  along 
with  the  Bear  islands,  really  corresponds  to  the  rias  coast  of  a  mountain 
range  striking  to  the  north-west  or  west-north-west,  and  cut  off  obliquely 
by  the  arc  of  Verkhoiansk  We  shall  see  directly  that  Bogdanowitsch 
arrived  at  a  similar  result. 

On  the  Beresovka,  which  flows  into  the  Kolyma  below  Sredne-Kolymsk, 
porphyry  and  diabase  are  recorded  by  Tolmatschew  ^. 

This  is  all  the  information  we  possess  concerning  the  structure  of  the 
arc  of  Verkhoiansk.  It  confirms  the  statement  that  no  pre-Palaeozoic  rock 
has  hitherto  been  met  with,  and  that  the  heights  between  the  mouths  of 
the  Lena  and  Olenek  are  the  free  ends  of  the  arc.  On  the  other  hand,  an 
important  point  is  left  undecided.    In  1898  I  assumed,  on  the  analogy  of 

^  M.  Sauer,  Billing's  Reise  nach  Sibirien,  &c.,  8vo,  Berlin  and  Hamburg,  1803,  p.  79  ; 
Wrangell's  Reise,  II,  pp.  122-124,  Poginden,  II,  pp.  118-119  ;  Baranicha,  II,  pp.  102-107, 
Baranow  Mountains,  I,  p.  302  ;  Bear  islands,  II,  p.  143  ;  Transition  greenstone. 

^  J.  P.  Tolmatschew,  Bodeneis  am  Flusse  Beresowka,  Berichte  der  kaiserlich- 
russischen  Akademie  der  Wissenschaften  zur  Ausgrabung  eines  am  Flusse  Beresowka 
gefundenen  Mammuths,  4to,  St.  Petersburg,  1903. 


342      THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMERICA  [party 


the  structure  of  many  Asiatic  arcs,  that  the  folding  of  this  arc  is  directed 
towards  the  exterior,  that  is  towards  the  convex  side ;  shortly  afterwards 
Baron  von  Toll  expressed  the  opinion  that  the  lie  of  the  folds  suggests  a 
movement  towards  the  interior,  that  is  towards  the  concave  side.  Although 
Emerson  and  Bogdanowitsch  regard  my  first  opinion  as  correct,  I  now 
adopt  the  conclusion  of  this  experienced  investigator  who  has  crossed  the 
range  by  several  different  routes  ^. 

Penshina.  Of  the  little-known  ranges  which  border  the  sea  of  Okhotsk 
on  the  north  some  account  is  furnished  by  Sljunin.  It  appears,  in  the  first 
place,  that  in  front  of  the  Kolyma  range,  that  is,  the  watershed  of  the 
Kolyma,  an  independent  range  extends  towards  the  sea,  which  Sljunin 
describes  as  the  Morskij  Khrebet  (the  Lake  mountains) ;  it  will  be  termed 
here,  in  order  to  avoid  confusion,  the  Kava  range^. 

The  Kolyma  range  is,  as  we  have  seen,  distinct  from  the  Aldan  range, 
which  is  divided  into  long  rocky  ridges,  and  it  is  more  like  the  border 
of  an  extensive  plateau.  The  rivers,  which  flow  towards  the  south  and 
south-east,  have  excavated  deep  and  narrow  valleys;  but  if  we  ascend  one 
of  these  valleys  to  the  summit,  we  find  ourselves  on  a  high-lying  tundra- 
like region,  and  observe  that  many  of  these  rivers  arise  in  lakes  or 
marshes. 

Some  of  the  marshes  drain  on  one  side  to  the  sea  of  Okhotsk,  and  on 
the  other  to  the  Kolyma  ^.  Sljunin  describes  the  heights  as  a  continuation 
of  the  plateau  of  Oimekon ;  to  the  east,  towards  Ghishiga,  he  came  upon 
diorite  and  diabase  in  its  spurs.  So  far  as  it  is  permissible  to  draw  conclu- 
sions from  such  observations,  we  may  conjecture  that  the  Trias  clay-slates 
with  diabase,  which  occupy  the  space,  400  kilometers  in  breadth,  between 
the  Suantar  and  Boroll  Ulach,  and  are  so  widely  distributed  along  the 
Kolyma,  also  play  the  most  important  part  in  the  formation  of  the  Kolyma 
range. 

To  the  east  of  Okhotsk  and  the  river  Inja  the  little  cape  of  Shilkan 
makes  its  approach  near  long.  145°  30'  E. ;  it  marks  the  beginning  of  the 
Kava  range  (pi.  II).  To  the  east  of  this  point  the  river  Kava  flows  down 
from  the  Kolyma  range  in  a  north-and-south  direction ;  bends,  at  a  right 
angle,  to  the  east,  and  separates  the  Kolyma  from  the  forelying  Kava  range 
by  a  considerable  longitudinal  valley  which  extends  as  far  as  the  point 
where  the  river  enters  the  bay  of  Taun.    The  Kava  range  is  continued  with 

1  Asymmetrie  der  nordlichen  Halbkugel,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1898,  VII,  p.  90 ; 
E.  von  Toll,  Geological  Sketch,  p.  16  ;  Suess  in  B.  C.  Emerson,  The  tetrahedral  Earth, 
Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1900,  XI,  note  to  p.  97  ;  Bogdanowitsch,  Skizze  der  Tschutschken- 
Halbinsel,  1901,  p.  142,  note. 

2  H.  W.  Sljunin,  The  Land  of  Okhotsk  and  Kamchatka,  2  vols.,  8vo,  St.  Petersb.,  1900, 
map,  in  particular  I,  p.  169  et  seq.  (in  Russian). 

'  Maydell,  Reisen  und  Forschungen,  II,  p.  368  et  seq. ;  also  K.  Hikisch,  Orographische 
Skizze  von  Neu-Sibirien,  Sapiski  Imp.  ross.  Geogr.  Obsch.,  1897,  XXXI,  p.  38  et  seq. 


CH.  X] 


KAVA  EANGE:  GHISHIGA  BAY 


343 


an  easterly  direction  in  several  islands  through  the  bay  of  Taun,  and  it 
forms  the  promontory  which  plunges  beneath  the  sea  towards  the  east, 
j  in  the  Jam  islands.  On  the  south  side  of  this  peninsula  Sljunin  met  with 
petroleum  ^,  elsewhere  he  came  across  a  hot  spring,  some  beds  with  lignite, 
and  others  with  impressions  of  fish  and  shells ;  on  cape  Iret  (about 
long.  155°  30^  E.)  he  found  graphite,  and  on  the  east  end  of  the  peninsula 
loose  nodules  of  chalcedony,  such  as  are  scattered  on  the  opposite  coast 
of  Kamchatka,  indicating  far  and  wide  the  presence  of  disintegrated 
amygdaloid  basalt. 

Finally,  further  to  the  north-east  outside  the  Kava  range,  where  the 
Kolyma  range  recedes  further  from  the  sea  than  is  shown  on  the  maps, 
Sljunin  describes  a  group  of  recent  volcanic  centres  near  the  sources  of  the 
stream  of  Kalalagi  (long.  157°  30'  E.).  Pumice  and  sulphur  are  mentioned 
as  occurring  in  the  neighbouring  valleys^. 

None  of  these  occurrences  are  known  in  the  Oimekon  plateau  or  the 
Kolyma  range ;  they  indicate  a  correspondence  with  the  coast  of  Kamchatka 
and  parts  of  the  peninsula  of  Taigonoss  to  be  mentioned  directly,  and  in  a 
less  degree  also  with  the  andesitic  features  which  Bogdanowitsch  mentions 
on  the  Marekanka  near  Okhotsk.  On  the  promontory  of  Warchalam  (lat. 
61°  36'  N.)  in  the  interior  of  Ghishiga  bay  we  reach  rocks  of  another 
kind.  Here,  in  the  north-eastern  arm  of  the  sea  of  Okhotsk,  a  number 
of  hilly  ranges  occur  of  no  considerable  height  or  length,  and  all  directed 
to  the  north-north-east,  in  which  granite,  syenite,  gneiss,  mica — schist,  and 
clay  slates  are  said  to  occur  ^.  The  Russian  range  situated  west  of 
Penshina  bay  is  the  first  of  these ;  it  consists  of  low  hills  and  terminates 
at  cape  Barchalam.  The  second  is  the  Taigonoss  range,  which  runs  down 
the  peninsula  on  its  eastern  side.  The  next  is  the  Innaichat  range,  it 
strikes  for  some  distance  towards  the  interior,  west  of  the  lower  course 
of  the  Penshina.  Finally,  there  is  the  Mametshi  range,  which  borders  the 
east  side  of  Penshina  bay,  and  thus  separates  the  tributaries  of  the  Great 
lake  (Bolshoe  Osero)  from  the  sea.  The  lake  discharges  to  the  north  of 
this  range  through  the  Talofka.  The  interval  between  these  ranges  and 
the  sea  is  occupied  by  the  tundra,  and  wherever  the  foundation  of  the  peat 
moss  is  exposed,  either  on  the  sea  coast  or  along  the  rivers,  Tertiary  beds 
are  revealed,  characterized  sometimes  by  sea-shells  and  sometimes  by  brown 
coal.    In  most  places  they  are  accompanied  by  basaltic  tuff",  and  by  inter- 

1  This  is  the  only  way  in  which  I  can  explain  a  passage  in  I,  p.  120. 

2  H.  W.  Sljunin,  The  Land  of  Okhotsk  and  Kamchatka,  I,  p.  114. 
^  C.  von  Ditmar,  Ein  paar  erlauternde  Worte  zur  geognostischen  Karte  Kamtschatka's, 

Bull.  phys.  math.  Acad.  Imp.  Sci.  Saint-Petersb.,1856,  XIV,  pp.  241-250,  map  ;  Reisen  und 
Aufenthalt  in  Kamtschatka,  Beitrage  zur  Kenntniss  des  russischen  Reiches,  1890,  3.  ser., 
VII,  pp.  466-676,  in  particular  p.  515  ;  Sljunin,  I,  p.  121  et  seq. ;  Bogdanowitsch,  Geolo- 
gische  Skizze  von  Kamtschatka,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1904,  p.  59  et  seq.,  maps. 


344     THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMEEICA  [party 


calations  of  basalt  and  trachyte.  This  is  the  case  at  Mametsha,  along  the 
Talofka  on  the  east  side  of  Penshina  bay,  and  on  both  sides  of  Ghishiga 
bay.  Dall  has  referred  the  shells  of  Coal  bay  (lat.  60°  17'  N.,  long.  161°  55'  E.) 
to  the  Miocene ;  they  present  sub-tropical  characters  ^. 

Kamchatka  and  the  Kuriles.  We  now  return  to  our  previous  account 
of  this  region  {II,  p.  170)  with  the  object  of  tracing  out  such  indications  as 
exist  of  a  continuation  towards  the  Anadyr,  and  also  in  order  to  insert 
a  general  observation  arising  out  of  a  new  and  important  description  of 
Kamchatka  by  Bogdanowitsch  ^. 

On  the  coasts  of  the  island  of  Karaga  (lat.  58°  30'  to  59°  12'  N.)  inclined 
Tertiary  beds  occur  which  strike  to  the  north-east.  The  interior  of  the 
island,  over  600  meters  in  height,  is  unknown  ^. 

Although  mount  Shevelutsh  (lat.  56°  40'  N.)  is  the  most  northerly  peak 
of  the  principal  zone  of  volcanos,  yet  traces  of  volcanic  activity  are  to  be 
seen  much  further  north,  and  hot  springs  reveal  their  presence  amidst  the 
snow  even  in  those  places  where  the  marshes  render  travelling  impracticable 
in  summer,  and  a  covering  of  snow  conceals  the  land  in  winter.  Sljunin 
gives  a  list  of  these  springs  which  carries  them  as  far  north  as  lat.  59°  N. ; 
they  are  also  known  on  the  Tamlat  (lat.  59°  25'  N.).  The  same  observer 
mentions  sulphur  as  occurring  in  beds  in  Jaigwyn  bay  (west  of  KorfF  bay, 
lat.  60°  N.),  and  Ditmar  obtained  accounts  of  hot  springs  in  the  peninsula 
of  Olutor  (lat.  60°  to  60°  30'  N.)  \ 

Beyond  lat.  60°  N.  Kamchatka  loses  its  mountains  and  a  broad  tundra 
forms  the  land.  The  inhabitants  of  Olutor  state  that  it  extends  from 
Kultushnoje  (at  the  head  of  KorfF  bay)  across  level  country  up  to  the  Talofka 
and  the  sea  of  Okhotsk  ^. 

^  W.  H.  Dall,  Subtropical  Miocene  Fauna  in  Arctic  Siberia,  Proc.  U.S.  Nat.  Mus.,  1893, 
XVI,  pp.  471-478  ;  also  Krahmer,  Russland  in  Asien,  8vo,  Berlin,  1902,  V,  p.  73,  map. 

K.  Bogdanowitsch,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1904,  p.  59  et  seq. ;  for  the  volcanos  of  the  west, 
W.  N.  Tjuschow,  The  West  Coast  of  Kamchatka,  Izvestija  Imp.  ross.  Geogr.  Obsch.,  1906, 
XXXVII,  520  pp.,  map  (in  Russian),  and  Bogdanowitsch,  ibid.,  Preface,  p.  ix. 

'  Postels  in  Liitke,  III,  pp.  91-94 ;  a  map  of  the  island  is  given  by  Barrett-Hamilton 
and  Jones,  A  Visit  to  Karaginski  Island,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1898,  XII,  p.  281. 

*  H.  W.  Sljunin,  The  Land  of  Okhotsk  and  Kamchatka  (in  Russian),  I,  pp.  184,  209; 
C.v.  Ditmar,  Reisen  undAufenthalt  in  Kamtschatka,  Beitrage  zur  Kenntniss  des  russischen 
Reiches,  1890,  3.  Ser.,  VII,  pp.  670,  795  ;  Erman,  Reise  urn  die  Erde,  I,  3,  p.  376.  The 
latter  mentions  sulphur,  as  a  sublimation,  on  the  river  Tamlat,  and  to  the  north  of  it 
on  the  mountain  of  Olotur.  An  illustration  of  the  outcrops  on  Korlf  bay,  or  rather  of 
the  snow  covering  upon  them,  is  given  in  Vanderlipp-Hulbert,  In  Search  of  a  Siberian 
Klondyke,  8vo,  New  York,  1903,  p.  244.  From  the  description  we  should  suppose  that 
the  crater  of  a  flat  volcanic  cone  occurs  here. 

^  Ditmar,  Reisen  und  Aufenthalt  in  Kamtschatka,  Beitrage  zur  Kenntniss  des  russischen 
Reiches,  1890,  3.  Ser.,  VII,  p.  670.  Sljunin  certainly  marks  several  mountain  ranges 
north  of  lat.  60"  N.,  but  since  he  has  carefully  marked  the  routes  followed  by  himself, 
we  see  that  it  can  only  be  a  question  of  watersheds,  which  were  entered  on  the  old 
maps  in  the  usual  diagrammatic  fashion. 


cH.x]  PARAPOLSKI  DOL  345 

This  brings  us  to  the  plain  of  the  FarapolsJci  Dol.  It  begins  in  about 
lat.  60°  N.,  close  to  the  west  coast  of  Kamchatka,  is  bounded  there  on  the 
east  by  the  most  northerly  part  of  the  mountains,  includes  the  Great  lake, 
is  separated  on  the  west  by  the  ridge  of  Mametshi  from  Penshina  bay,  and 
then  broadens  out  and  reaches  as  far  as  Bering  sea.  This  is  the  'Peat-sea  \ 
May  dell,  travelling  from  Markovo  (Anadyrsk)  towards  Ghishiga,  crossed 
only  low  spurs  of  the  Kolyma  range;  Kennan  found  nothing  but  a  low 
watershed  between  the  Penshina  and  the  Main,  the  great  tributary  of  the 
right  side  of  the  Anadyr^.  From  this  line  eastwards  as  far  as  the  sea 
no  continuous  mountain  range  is  known  to  exist — at  least  there  are  no 
trustworthy  accounts  of  any  such  range  known  to  me.  It  is  true  that  the 
promontories  of  Navarin  and  St.  Thaddeus  are  rocky  and  of  considerable 
height,  but  it  is  possible  that  they  are  of  the  same  nature  as  those  isolated 
volcanic  hills  of  the  Tertiary  land,  which  are  of  frequent  occurrence  in 
these  northern  regions. 

A  single  exception  is  presented  by  the  hilly  range  of  Palpal,  which  has 
scarcely  been  visited  as  yet  by  any  investigator.  It  is  surrounded  by  a  broad 
bend  of  the  river  Main.  The  glaciated  boulders,  which  come  down  from  its 
northern  slope  into  the  plain  of  the  Anadyr,  consist,  according  to  Bogda- 
nowitsch,  of  microcline  granite,  quartz  porphyry,  syenite,  augite  porphyry, 
and  other  rocks.  The  plain,  in  this  case  also,  is  formed  of  Tertiary  beds 
with  brown  coal.  On  both  sides  of  the  liman^  of  the  Anadyr  rise  hills 
of  basalt  and  andesite.  Similar  rocks  form  the  island  of  Aljumka  (sarco- 
phagus).   On  the  south  of  the  liman  clay- slates  are  visible  ^. 

Whether  or  not  the  mountains  on  Holy  Cross  bay  must  also  be  assigned 
to  this  zone  will  be  discussed  later. 

The  Tertiary  deposits,  interspersed  in  many  places  with  volcanic 
products,  extend,  probably  without  interruption,  from  the  sea  of  Okhotsk 
to  the  Palpal  hills  and  the  Anadyr.  A  broad  connecting  region  extends 
between  the  sea  of  Okhotsk  and  Bering  sea.  These  Tertiary  deposits, 
where  they  occur  in  Coal  bay,  are,  as  already  mentioned,  regarded  by  Dall 
as  Miocene;  a  later  date  is  assigned  by  Schmidt  and  Bogdanowitsch  to 
similar  sediments  on  the  west  coast  of  Kamchatka.  In  many  localities 
the  occurrence  of  folding  is  recorded. 

Let  us  now  return  to  Kamchatka. 

The  important  additions  made  by  Bogdanowitsch  to  our  knowledge  of 
this  peninsula  indicate  in  general  the  same  main  features  as  those  described 

^  Baron  G.  Maydell,  Reisen  und  Forschungen  im  Jakutskischen  Gebiete  Ost-Sibirien's, 
II,  in  Beitrage  zur  Kenntniss  des  russischen  Reiches,  1896,  4.  Ser.,  vol.  II,  p.  374  ; 
G.  Kennan,  Zeltleben  in  Sibirien,  Ger.  ed.,  p.  258.  According  to  this  work  it  should  be 
possible  to  obtain  a  waterway  for  almost  the  whole  distance  between  Bering  sea  and 
the  sea  of  Okhotsk. 

^  [A  '  liman  '  is  the  lagoon  or  bay  behind  a  coastal  bar.] 

^  Bogdanowitsch,  Skizze  der  Tschutschken-Halbinsel,  pp.  139,  140,  note. 


346      THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMERICA  [party 


previously  on  the  basis  of  Erman  and  Ditmar's  observations,  but  a  much 
greater  importance  is  assigned  to  the  volcanos  in  the  interior,  so  that  the  short 
volcanic  line  on  the  west  coast  (II,  p.  184)  becomes  relatively  insignificant,  as 
indeed  was  shown  by  Tjuschow's  account.  Looked  at  broadly,  Kamchatka 
presents  us  first  with  an  ancient  cordillera,  traversed  by  granite  and  porphyry 
and  crowned  by  numerous  volcanos ;  the  cordillera  and  the  volcanos  alike 
adapt  themselves  to  the  north-east  or  north-north-east  strike,  wherever  any 
definite  direction  is  to  be  discovered;  then,  along  the  east  coast,  comes 
a  main  line  of  volcanos,  in  front  of  which  lie  some  fragments  of  the 
cordillera  next  the  sea.  The  volcanos  in  the  interior  are  frequently 
characterized  by  crater  lakes,  but  at  the  present  day  all  volcanic  activity, 
apart  from  the  hot  springs  of  the  interior,  is  confined  exclusively  to  the 
principal  line  of  the  east.  It  is  this  line  alone  which  is  continued  into  the 
Kuriles.  From  mount  Shevelutsh  (lat.  56°  40'  N.)  to  Hokkaido,  that  is 
over  a  distance  of  more  than  13  degrees  of  latitude,  there  are  28  smoking 
cones  as  counted  by  the  older  observers.  This  list  is  incomplete,  especially 
as  regards  the  Kuriles.  Bogdanowitsch  regards  the  volcanos  of  this 
principal  line  in  Kamchatka  as  more  recent  on  the  whole  than  those  of 
the  interior,  and  points  to  the  lower  hypsometric  position  of  their  eruptive 
centres.  Be  this  as  it  may,  there  is  an  unmistakable  shifting  of  the  volcanic 
activity  outwards,  towards  this  arcuate  principal  line. 

We  shall  see  that  a  similar  displacement  is  in  progress  in  the  Alaskides. 
But  at  the  same  time  we  may  observe  that  the  arc  of  Verkhoiansk  possesses 
no  volcanic  mountains  with  the  exception  of  some  basalt  bosses  on  the 
Arctic  Ocean,  and  that  this  great  volcanic  line  includes  all  the  volcanos 
situated  near  the  outer  border  of  the  great  virgation  of  the  Anadyrides, 
and  at  the  same  time  all  the  active  volcanos  of  the  entire  region. 

A  long  f  oredeep  bounds  the  arc.  Outside  the  Kuriles  it  sinks,  as  already 
mentioned,  to  —8,513  meters. 

2.  Alaskides. 

The  long  folded  ranges,  which  border  the  Pacific  coast  of  America,  are 
joined  on  the  north-west  by  the  group  of  the  Alaskides  in  a  sharply-marked 
syntaxis  (II,  p.  196)  ^. 

^  Grewingk,  in  the  first  connected  description  of  this  region  (II,  p.  196,  note  1),  termed 
the  peninsula  Alaeska  ;  later  Russian  investigators  wrote  Aljdska ;  under  American  influ- 
ence the  form  Alaska  has  been  exclusively  adopted.  Such  alterations  do  not  give  rise 
to  any  difficulty ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  name  of  Chugatsk  bay,  i.  e.  bay  of  Chug,  has 
been  retained  in  this  work,  although  English  and  American  maps  use  the  name  Prince 
William  Sound  and  only  use  that  of  Chugatch  for  the  lofty  mountains  to  the  north  of 
the  sound  and  an  island  at  the  south-west  end  of  Kenai.  The  name  has  been  transferred 
by  mistake  to  the  bay  of  Katshemak  on  the  south-west  coast  of  Kenai ;  cf.  Dall.  U.S. 
GeoL  Surv.  Ann.  Rep.,  XVII,  I,  p.  789.  Kakat  means  river,  thus  we  do  not  write  the  river 
Melozikakat,  but  river  Melozi ;  M.  Baker,  Alaskan  Geographical  Names,  Ann.  Rep.,  XXI, 
2,  p.  497. 


CH.X]  ALASKIDES  347 

The  syntaxis  is  completed  within  a  zone  which  extends  between  the 
meridians  of  146°  and  147°  W.,  from  the  region  of  Chugatsk  bay  and  the 
adjacent  Copper  river  as  far  as  the  Arctic  Ocean.  The  folded  ranges  of 
the  Alaskides  on  the  west  of  this  zone  strike  towards  the  north-east,  and 
those  of  northern  Canada,  situated  on  the  east,  strike  towards  the  north- 
west. This  contrast  in  direction  was  already  observed  by  Grewingk.  The 
tectonic  homology  between  the  Indian  tableland  and  the  northern  part  of 
the  Pacific  Ocean,  which  both  play  the  part  of  forelands,  has  already  been 
mentioned  (I,  p.  462).  A  similar  homology  is  presented  by  the  Karoo 
(IV,  p.  286).  Thanks  to  the  arduous  labours  of  American  geologists  we 
are  now  in  possession  of  much  more  precise  information  as  regards  the 
syntaxis.  Brooks  at  once  perceived  that  all  the  more  important  chains  of 
the  interior  undergo  the  same  change  of  direction  as  is  seen  on  the  south 
coast,  where  it  amounts  to  nearly  a  right  angle.  Four  degrees  of  latitude 
north  of  this  point  Peters  and  Brooks  observed  the  encounter,  on  the  Chena, 
of  the  great  Alaska  range,  striking  north-east,  with  the  Canadian  gneiss 
ranges  striking  north-west^. 

When  the  syntaxis  on  the  Jhelam  was  first  described,  distinguished 
Indian  geologists  admitted  the  correctness  of  the  facts,  for  the  most  part 
determined  by  themselves,  but  they  refused  to  regard  the  bend  in  the 
strike  as  a  principal  boundary,  in  this  case  the  boundary  between  the 
Himalaya  and  the  Iranian  arc.  They  pointed  to  the  complete  corre- 
spondence of  the  outer.  Tertiary  chains  (I,  pi.  IV),  and  the  resemblance 
between  the  structure  of  the  chains  of  Hazara  and  Kabul  and  that  of  the 
chains  situated  to  the  east  of  the  Jhelam.  This  difference  of  opinion  is 
fundamental.  If  we  regard  the  stratified  succession  and  nature  of  the 
rocks  as  determining  the  co-ordination  of  mountain  chains,  then  the  second 
interpretation  may  frequently  be  maintained.  But  when  it  is  a  question 
of  determining  the  forces  which  have  built  up  the  mountains,  then  these 
characters  take  the  second  place,  and  the  direction  in  which  the  tectonic 
forces  have  found  expression  will  be  decisive.  Every  syntaxis  reveals 
a  local  opposition  between  two  dynamic  influences.  It  is  for  that  reason 
that  it  forms  a  boundary.  For  that  reason  also  no  name  given  to 
a  mountain  chain  should  be  carried  on  beyond  a  syntaxis. 

In  the  syntaxis  of  Chugatsk,  on  its  southern  side,  the  mutual  corre- 
spondence in  the  structure  of  the  syntactic  chains  is  just  as  great  as  on  the 
Jhelam.  Many  a  zone  may  be  clearly  traced  from  one  side  of  the  re-entrant 
angle  to  the  other,  and  a  train  of  recent  volcanos  follows  the  bend,  a  unique 
phenomenon,  not  to  be  found  anywhere  else  on  the  face  of  the  globe. 
Under  these  circumstances  it  is  easy  to  see  why  the  classification  afi'orded  by 

^  A.  H.  Brooks,  Maps  and  Descriptions  of  Routes  of  Exploration  in  Alaska  in  1898, 
U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1899,  8vo,  maps,  p.  85 ;  J.  Peter  and  A.  H.  Brooks,  Report  on  the  White 
River -Tanana  Expedition,  torn,  cit.,  p.  69. 


348    THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMEEICA  [paetv 


a  study  of  the  United  States  and  west  Canada,  and  with  it  the  names  of  the 
orographic  subdivisions,  should  have  been  transferred  to  the  Alaskides. 

In  the  masterly  account  of  the  physical  features  of  Alaska  with  which 
Brooks  has  enriched  our  science,  the  term  ' Rochy -mountain  system'  is 
applied,  not  only  to  the  Rocky  mountains  of  Canada  and  the  Mackenzie, 
but  to  the  whole  of  the  Arctic  branch  of  the  Alaskides  which  possess 
a  different  direction  and  reach  the  Arctic  Ocean  north  of  Bering  strait.  In 
the  same  way  the  ^Central  Plateau  region'  is  made  to  include  the  whole 
basin  of  the  Yukon  and  the  Kuskokvim  as  far  as  Bristol  bay,  and  the 
'  Pacific  mountain-system '  embraces  not  only  the  west  coast  of  Canada  and 
Chugatsk  bay,  but  also  the  great  Alaska  range  and  the  Aleutian  islands  ^. 

For  us  the  Alaskides  form  a  tectonic  unit,  which  is  continued  from  the 
syntaxis  across  the  Bering  sea  to  Asia.  Amatignak,  the  most  southerly  island 
of  the  Aleutian  group,  lies  in  lat.  51°  25'  N.,  and  cape  Barrow  in  lat.  71°  18'  N. 
For  the  whole  of  this  distance,  or  at  least  as  far  as  cape  Lisburne  and  beyond 
lat.  69°  N.,  the  coast  of  Bering  sea  presents  the  appearance  of  a  submerged 
virgation.  Shelikof  strait,  with  Cook  inlet,  Bristol  bay,  Norton  sound, 
and  Kotzebue  sound  are  the  characteristic  embayments  of  this  coast,  and 
their  divergent  directions  reveal  some  of  the  trend-lines  of  the  virgation. 
Cook  inlet  opens  towards  the  south-west,  and  Kotzebue  sound,  although 
not  in  accordance  with  the  structure  of  those  parts,  towards  the  north-west. 
The  first  mountain  arc  extends  from  Chugatsk  bay  through  eastern 
Kenai,  Kadiak,  and  some  islands  off  the  coast.  The  Alaska  range,  bearing 
the  highest  summits  of  North  America,  begins  on  the  Tanana,  and  finds  its 
tectonic  continuation  in  the  peninsula  of  Alaska.  North  of  Bristol  bay 
the  end  of  the  Kuskokvim  range  advances  in  cape  Newenham.  Between 
lat.  61°  30'  and  62°  N.  older  rocks  reach  the  sea.  This  is  also  the  case 
north  of  lat.  63°,  where  they  probably  represent  the  end  of  the  Kaiyub 
mountains.  Then  the  broad  Seward  peninsula  advances,  recalling  by 
its  form  the  Chukcham  peninsula,  which  is  also  of  great  breadth,  but 
distinguished  by  many  characters  from  the  long  branches  of  the  virgation, 
and  rather  resembling  a  foreign  body  inserted  between  them.  North  of 
Kotzebue  sound  the  outrunners  of  the  Arctic  branch  of  the  Alaskides  reach 
the  coast ;  they  also  form  cape  Lisburne. 

All  these  arcs  have  a  similar  orientation,  which  is  most  sharply  marked 
in  the  volcanic  line  of  the  Aleutian  islands.  All  begin  in  the  east  and 
decrease  in  height  towards  the  west.  As  in  the  Anadyrides  the  active 
volcanos  are  confined  to  a  single  line. 

^  A.  H.  Brooks,  The  Geography  and  Geology  of  Alaska,  with  a  Section  on  Climate  by 
C.  Abbe,  jr.,  and  a  topographical  Map  and  Description  thereof  by  R.  U.  Goode,  U.S. 
Geol.  Surv.  Professional  Papers,  no.  45,  1906,  327  pp.,  maps.  For  certain  trend-lines, 
compare  also  A.  Spencer,  Mountain  System  of  British  Columbia  and  Alaska,  Bull.  Am. 
Geol.  Soc,  1904,  XV,  pp.  117-132,  map. 


BEEING  SEA 


349 


In  front  of  the  Aleutian  islands  and  the  arc  of  Kenai  there  lies  a  fore- 
deep  in  which  —7,319  meters,  and  in  the  extreme  west  —7,383  meters 
have  been  sounded.  Towards  the  north,  however,  from  Bristol  bay  to 
about  long.  165°  W.  the  sea  is  quite  shallow.  At  the  pass  of  Unimak  or 
the  island  of  Akutan  a  declivity  begins  which  runs  obliquely  across  Bering 
sea  towards  the  north-west ;  gentle  at  first,  it  becomes  steep  as  it  passes 
south  of  the  Pribilof  islands.  South-west  of  this  group  of  islands,  in 
long.  172°  W.,  and  scarcely  20  kilometers  distant  from  them,  the  depth 
increases  from  —128  meters  to  —2,972  meters.  This  declivity  runs  in  the 
direction  of  cape  Navarin,  but  does  not  reach  it ;  it  appears  to  flatten  out 
on  the  Asiatic  coast,  which  it  accompanies  for  some  distance.  The  deepest 
place  in  the  communication  of  Bering  sea  with  the  Pacific  Ocean  lies  east 
of  the  Commander  islands. 

Bering  sea  is  in  fact  divided  into  two  sharply-separated  parts,  one  lying 
to  the  south-west,  in  which  depths  of  3,900  meters  occur,  the  other  to  the 
north-east  in  which  depths  of  130  to  140  meters  are  only  reached  near  the 
margin,  but  elsewhere  depths  of  less  than  70  meters,  or  even  less  than 
30  meters,  prevail.  A  great  plateau,  covered  by  these  comparatively 
shallow  waters,  extends  from  the  boundary  mentioned  above,  that  is,  the 
pass  of  Unimak,  south  of  the  Pribilof  islands,  and  off  cape  Navarin,  far 
northwards  into  the  Arctic  Ocean.  Even  in  the  latitude  between  cape 
Barrow  and  Wrangell  Land  (lat.  71°  30'  N.)  the  deepest  of  the  numerous 
soundings  gives  only  —58-4  meters. 

The  Aleutian  islands  to  the  west  of  the  pass  of  Unimak  must  thus  be 
regarded  as  the  summits  of  a  long,  fairly  narrow,  and  extremely  steep  ridge, 
but  those  to  the  east  of  Unimak  as  the  elevated  border  of  a  plateau  which 
descends  on  the  south  to  great  depths.  This  plateau  is  the  continuation 
of  the  substructure  of  the  adjacent  Arctic  Ocean. 

A  considerable  part  of  the  west  coast  of  Alaska,  particularly  between 
lats.  64°  30'  and  59°  30'  N.,  is  formed  either  by  Tertiary  beds,  often 
accompanied  by  basalt,  or  by  the  vast  alluvial  land  of  the  Yukon,  which 
extends  down  to  the  sea.  The  great  island  of  Nunivak  (lat.  60°  N.)  consists, 
according  to  Dall,  of  almost  horizontal  Tertiary  sandstone,  covered  by 
basaltic  lavas  ^.  The  neighbouring  coast  presents  the  same  structure  and 
composition,  according  to  Dawson,  although  cape  Vancouver  probably 
reaches  a  height  of  300  to  450  meters  ^.  The  Pribilof  group  also,  accord- 
ing to  Stanley-Brown,  is  basaltic,  with  traces  of  marine  Tertiary  beds  ^. 

^  W.  H.  Dall  and  G.  D.  Harris,  Correlation  Papers,  Neocene,  Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv., 
no.  84,  1892,  p.  245. 

J.  M.  Dawson,  Geological  Notes  on  some  of  the  Coasts  and  Islands  of  Bering  Sea  and 
Vicinity,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1894,  V,  p.  134  ;  ibid.  Nunivak,  p.  133. 

'  J.  M.  Dawson,  Geological  Notes,  pp.  135-138  ;  Emerson  in  Harriman,  Alaska  Expedi- 
tion, IV,  1904,  pp.  32-38. 


350      THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMERICA  [paetv 


Hall  and  St,  Mattheiu  islands,  consist  of  lavas  of  different  age ;  in  St. 
Matthew  porphyrites,  tonalite,  and  aplite  are  said  to  occur,  and  porphyritic 
rocks  form  Pinnacle  island,  which  rises  close  by  to  a  great  height  and  has 
been  erroneously  regarded  as  a  volcano  ^. 

In  the  south-east  part  of  Bering  sea  no  submarine  continuation  is 
known,  such  as  might  be  formed  by  the  Kuskokvim  chain  for  example ; 
beyond  cape  Newenham  everything  is  buried  beneath  the  sediments  of 
the  plateau,  and  in  the  Pribilof  islands  the  Tertiary  beds  with  their 
basalts  extend  nearly  to  the  edge  of  the  declivity. 

The  range  presents  two  striking  interruptions.  One  of  these  is  the 
plateau  of  the  Coj)per  river ^  situated  on  the  zone  of  syn taxis  between 
lats.  62°  and  63°  N. ;  it  is  a  low-lying,  more  or  less  circular  fragment 
of  land,  which  is  surmounted  on  the  east  by  the  great  recent  volcanos  of 
the  Wrangell  group.  The  western  border  of  this  group  is  bounded  in 
a  regular  arc  by  the  Copper  river,  and  on  the  other  side  of  the  river  the 
plateau  is  covered  up  to  the  foot  of  the  surrounding  mountain  range  by 
the  ashes  and  scoria  of  the  Wrangell  volcanos  (fig.  33).  The  second  break 
in  the  range  is  of  another  kind  ;  it  is  caused  by  the  Yukon  Flats,  a  vast 
and  ancient  lake  bottom,  which  includes  the  lower  Porcupine  river  and  the 
bend  of  the  Yukon ;  near  Circle  City  (not  far  from  lat.  65°  30'  N.),  the 
Yukon,  and  in  about  lat.  67°  N.,  the  Porcupine  river,  enter  this  plain  ; 
near  Fort  Hamlin  (long.  149°  W.)  the  Yukon  emerges  from  it.  Its  form  is 
that  of  an  irregular  triangle  with  an  enlargement  towards  the  south-east. 
On  its  southern  borders  lie  rich  gold-placers.  Spurr  has  given  a  faithful 
description  of  it  ^. 

All  accounts  agree  in  affirming  that  the  land  about  the  Yukon  has  not 
been  subjected  to  a  general  glaciation.  The  northern  limit  of  the  con- 
tinuous ice  sheet  may  perhaps  be  taken  as  about  lat.  61°  50'  N.  on  the 
Lewes  river,  just  above  the  mouth  of  the  Big  Salmon  river,  and  lat.  62° 
30'  N.,  to  the  north  of  the  Alaska  range  (long.  150°  W.).  From  this  point 
onwards  the  valleys  are  narrower  and  terraced,  until  further  north  an 
independent  region  of  local  glaciation  surrounds  the  Arctic  branch  of  the 
virgation. 

The  Romanzov  range.  In  1826  Franklin  observed  between  long.  140° 
and  146°  W.  several  mountains  near  the  Arctic  coast,  to  which  the  names 
Buckland,  Richardson,  Romanzov,  and  Franklin  mountains  have  been  given. 
At  that  time  it  was  supposed  that  these  mountains,  striking  to  the  north- 
west, rose  in  coulisses  one  behind  the  other,  so  that  the  Franklin  mountains 

1  Stanley-Brown,  Note  on  PribilofF-Islands,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1892,  III,  pp.  496- 
500 ;  B.  K.  Emerson,  Alaska  Expedition,  IV,  1904,  p.  31. 

'  J.  E.  Spurr,  Geology  of  the  Yukon  Gold  District,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1898, 
XVIII,  3,  pp.  83-392,  maps,  in  particular  p.  200  et  seq. 


CH.x]    FRANKLIN  AND  ROMANZOV  MOUNTAINS  351 

were  the  most  westerly  and,  at  the  same,  the  most  northerly.  In  more 
recent  times  Turner  crossed  a  range  in  long.  141°  W.  and  between  lats.  68** 
and  69°  N.,  which,  according  to  his  estimate,  reaches  a  height  of  6,000- 
8,000  feet  (1,800-2,400  meters)  ^.  The  most  detailed  accounts  are  those  of 
S.  J.  Marsh,  who  spent  almost  two  years  (1901-3)  in  these  inhospitable 
regions,  where  he  endured  great  hardships  ^.  He  is  our  authority  for  the 
following  observations  : — 

A  continuous  mountain -chain  directed  east  and  a  little  north  forms  the 
watershed  and  runs  towards  the  Mackenzie.  A  chain  in  front  of  it, 
marked  on  the  maps  as  the  Franklin  mountains,  rises  in  about  lat.  69°  N. 
On  the  Carter  pass  it  is  4,000  feet  high ;  some  peaks  may  even  reach 
a  height  of  5,000-8,000  feet.  Its  foot  lies  20-54  kilometers  distant  from 
the  sea.  Sandstone,  conglomerate,  and  crinoidal  limestone  were  met  with 
in  the  range,  and  on  the  coast  boulders  of  granite  and  diorite. 

The  region  extending  south  of  the  Franklin  mountains  to  the  principal 
chain  is  occupied  by  dark  folded  schists,  which  strike  nearly  east  and  west. 
Higher  mountains  as  far  as  lat.  68°  10'  N.  are  crowned  by  limestone,  with 
Crinoids  and  other  fossils. 

Near  long.  146°  W.  the  Kooguru  river  (Canning)  marks  the  western  end 
of  the  Franklin  mountains ;  here  the  plain  which  extends  in  front  of  the 
principal  chain  to  the  sea  attains  a  breadth  of  from  66  to  220  kilometers. 
The  southern  and  eastern  branches  of  the  Kooguru  are  derived  from 
glaciers  of  the  principal  chain.  The  most  obvious  feature  in  this  chain 
is  a  great  anticline  of  schist  and  sandstone,  and  to  the  south  of  this 
chloritic  schist.  West  of  the  Kooguru  the  widely  distributed  limestone 
rests  also  upon  the  hills.  Further  towards  the  south-west,  the  prevailing 
rock,  west  of  the  Chandlar  river  and  between  lats.  68°  and  67°  N.  is  mica- 
schist  with  some  crystalline  limestone. 

So  far  S.  J.  Marsh.  According  to  common  usage,  this  principal  chain, 
situated  south  of  the  Franklin  mountains,  has  hitherto  been  termed  the 
Romanzov  chain. 

Two  journeys,  to  which  we  are  greatly  indebted  for  knowledge  of  this 
region,  have  been  made  by  Schrader,  who  started  from  the  Yukon  Flats, 
in  the  south.  Where  the  Yukon  makes  its  bend  the  Chandlar  flows  into 
it  from  the  north;  Schrader  followed  this  river  on  his  first  journey. 
Beyond  lat.  67°  N.  and  between  longs.  147°  and  148°  W.  he  reached  the 
margin  of  the  Flats,  which  is  covered  by  basalt,  and  at  the  same  time 
Archaean  mountains,  striking  to  the  north-east,  which  he  at  once  named 
the  Eomanzov  mountains,  and  regarded  as  the  continuation  of  the  Arctic 
ranges.    From  this  point  he  advanced  as  far  as  lat.  68°  N.  and  then  as  he 

*  J.  H.Turner,  The  Boundary  North  of  Fort  Yukon,  Nat.  Geogr.  Mag.  Washington, 
1892,  IV,  pp.  196,  197. 
^  A  communication  in  Brooks,  Geography  and  Geology  of  Alaska,  pp.  260-262. 


352      THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMERICA  [party 


returned  explored  the  upper  course  of  the  Koyukuk.  On  his  second  journey 
Schrader  started  from  lat.  66°  N.  on  the  Koyukuk,  and  following  approxi- 
mately the  152nd  meridian  reached  the  Arctic  Ocean  on  the  other  side  of 
lat.  70°  20'  N.  in  the  basin  of  the  Colville  river  K 

An  arcuate  folded  range,  slightly  concave  towards  the  north,  at  least 
125-130  kilometers  broad,  and  on  an  average  1,800  meters  in  height, 
extends  past  the  Yukon  Flats  on  their  north  side  ;  this  has  received 
the  name  of  Endicott  range.  One  part  of  it  probably  lies  beneath  the 
Flats  ;  it  seems  to  be  marked  by  the  Archaean  rocks  on  the  northern 
border  of  the  Flats.  It  crosses  the  meridian  of  152°  between  lats.  67°  10' 
and  68°  25'  N.  Beyond  the  northern  border,  that  is  beyond  lat.  68**  25'  N. 
in  the  Endicott  range,  Schrader  came  upon  a  platform,  the  Anaktuvuk 
plateau,  which  extends  to  lat.  69°  25'  N. ;  beginning  with  a  height  of 
760  meters  it  slopes  downwards  on  the  north  to  240  meters,  and  is  then 
followed  by  almost  level  country,  which  continues  as  far  as  the  Arctic 
Ocean. 

The  most  ancient  rocks  in  this  range,  situated  on  the  margin  of  the 
Flats,  in  long.  147°  to  148°  W.  strike  to  the  south-west.  They  are  followed 
on  the  north  by  a  gold-bearing  zone  of  highly-altered  rocks.  In  long.  152°  W. 
the  strike  runs  east  and  west.  Here  Schrader  observed  a  zone  of  biotite 
and  amphibolite  schist,  10  kilometers  broad,  dipping  to  the  south  (Totsen 
series)  and  a  second  zone  24-32  kilometers  broad,  including  highly-altered 
limestone  with  doubtful  traces  of  upper  Silurian  fossils  and  mica-schist.  Then 
follows  an  unconformable  series  of  alternating  sandstone,  conglomerate,  slate, 
and  limestone,  extending  over  a  breadth  of  80  kilometers  and  dipping  to 
the  south-east  or  south-west ;  in  this  zone  lower  Carboniferous  fossils  only 
have  been  found.  A  disturbance,  not  known  in  detail,  exposes  middle 
Devonian  limestone  on  the  east ;  the  fauna  recalls  the  Devonian  of  the 
Mackenzie.  The  presence  of  Spirifer  disjunctus  points  to  upper  Devonian. 
A  hard  quartz  conglomerate  crops  out  from  beneath  the  Devonian  and 
divides  it  into  a  northern  and  a  southern  zone. 

Thus  we  reach  the  northern  border  of  the  Endicott  range ;  towards  the 
west  this  border  is  probably  formed  by  the  Devonian,  towards  the  east  by 
the  lower  Carboniferous  or  some  later  stage.  In  front  of  the  border  lies 
a  belt  of  talus.  The  southern  and  larger  part  of  the  Anaktuvuk  plateau 
consists  of  slightly  folded  limestone  with  Aucella  crassicollis.  It  is  covered 
towards  the  north  (perhaps  unconformably)  by  upper  Cretaceous  with 
Scaphites  and  large  Inoceramus  shells. 

The  plain  is  formed  of  two  Tertiary  stages,  one  of  which  is  described  as 

1  F.  C.  Schrader,  Preliminary  Report  on  a  Reconnaissance  along  the  Chandlar  and 
Koyukuk  Rivers  in  1899,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1901,  XXI,  2,  pp.  441-486,  maps ; 
Geological  Section  of  the  Rocky  Mountains  in  North  Alaska,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1902, 
XIII,  pp.  233-252;  A  Reconnaissance  in  North  Alaska,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Professional 
Papers,  no.  20,  1904,  139  pp.,  maps. 


CH.  X] 


WAINWEIGHT  INLET 


353 


Oligocene,  the  other  as  Pliocene.  A  remarkable  sheet  of  unstratified  sand 
(Goobie  sands)  extends  over  the  Tertiary  beds. 

Finally,  we  reach  the  tundra.  Schrader  justly  observes  that  the  name 
Alaska  range,  if  it  had  not  been  conferred  elsewhere,  should  be  assigned  to 
this  great  watershed  lying  next  the  Arctic  Ocean.  When  the  first  indica- 
tions of  the  watershed  were  observed  by  Schrader  on  the  border  of  the 
Flats  he  described  them,  as  we  have  seen,  as  parts  of  the  Romanzov  range. 
After  he  had  crossed  from  side  to  side  he  chose  for  them  the  name  of 
Endicott  mountains,,  by  which  this  part  of  the  range  had  been  already 
indicated  on  Allen's  map  since  the  year  1885.  The  entire  range  as  far 
as  the  west  coast  was  regarded  as  belonging  to  the  Rocky  mountains,  and 
consequently  the  Cretaceous  plateau  of  Anaktuvuk  and  the  tundra  were 
compared  to  the  prairie-land  of  the  United  States. 

It  would  seem  most  satisfactory  to  retain  for  the  whole  chain,  from  its 
syntaxis  in  the  east  up  to  its  western  end,  the  name  of  the  Russian  states- 
man Romanzov,  who  almost  a  century  ago  equipped  Kotzebue's  expedition 
from  his  own  private  means,  and  to  reserve  the  name  Endicott  for  that 
middle  region  which  cuts  through  the  meridian  of  152",  on  the  same  prin- 
ciple as  further  west  other  parts  of  the  Romanzov  range  bear  the  names  of 
De  Long,  Schwatka,  and  Baird  mountains. 

Thus,  by  Schrader 's  journeys  we  are  furnished,  for  the  first  time,  with 
exact  information  on  an  important  mountain  range. 

The  north  border  of  this  range  reaches  the  coast  at  cape  Lishurne; 
here  a  broad,  rich,  coal-bearing  region  lies  in  front  of  it,  which  is  not  yet 
known  in  front  of  the  Endicott  range.  The  most  detailed  account  has 
been  furnished  by  Collier  ^ 

The  northernmost  point  at  which  coal-beds  occur  is  Wainwright  inlet 
(lat.  70"  37'  N.,  long.  159°  45'  W.) ;  where  Nageiopsis  longifolia  and  Podo- 
zamites  distantinervis  of  the  older  Potomac  of  Virginia  (Wealden)  and 
Baiera  gracilis  of  the  Yorkshire  Oolites  have  been  obtained.  Knowlton 
calls  attention  to  the  great  resemblance  between  floras  of  these  beds  and 
the  Jurassic  floras  of  Siberia  ^. 

^  A.  J.  Collier,  Geology  and  Coal  Eesources  of  the  Cape  Lisburne  Region,  Al.,  Bull. 
U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  no.  278,  1906,  54  pp.,  map. 

2  Grewingk  (II,  p.  196,  note  1),  p.  90  ;  Captain  Hooker's  Report  of  the  Cruise  of  the 
U.S.  Revenue-Steamer  Corvin  in  the  Arctic  Ocean,  8vo,  Washington,  1881,  pp.  29  and 
48 ;  Lesquereux,  Proc.  U.S.  Nat.  Mus.,  1887,  X,  pp.  35-38,  and  1888,  XI,  pp.  31-33 ; 
Lester  Ward,  Geographical  Distribution  of  Fossil  Plants,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Ann.  Rep., 
1889,  VIII,  2,  p.  926 ;  Knowlton,  op.  cit.,  1896,  XVII,  1,  p.  827  et  seq. ;  W.  H.  Dall, 
Report  on  Coal  and  Lignite  of  Alaska,  torn,  cit.,  in  particular  p.  820.  Woolfe  in  Schrader, 
Preliminary  Report  on  a  Reconnaissance  along  the  Chandlar  and  Koyukuk  Rivers  in 
1899,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Ann.  Rep.,  1901,  XXI,  2,  p.  111.  Possibly  the  Mesozoic  coal-field  is 
not  quite  continuous  ;  this  is  suggested  by  the  presence  of  gold  at  Icy  cape,  north  of 
lat.  70°,  Rep.  Min.  Prod,  for  1903,  p.  49.  Knowlton,  in  Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1906, 
no.  278,  p.  29. 


SOLLAS  IV 


A  a 


354     THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMEEICA  [paetv 

From  Wain  Wright  inlet  onwards  the  ice  at  many  points  thrusts  frag- 
ments of  coal  up  against  the  coast,  until  near  cape  Beaufort  (lat.  69°  10'  N.) 
better  exposures  are  reached  showing  a  strike  N.  25°  W.,  and  from  this 
point  onwards  coal-beds  are  known  as  far  as  the  Corwin  mines  (strike 
N.  75°  W.)  and  the  adjacent  rivulet  Thetis,  east  of  cape  Lisburne.  Here, 
too,  Mesozoic  plants  have  been  found.  All  these  coal-beds  strike  to  the 
north-west ;  they  are  folded  and  traversed  by  thrust-planes. 

Near  cape  Lisburne  (lat.  68°  50'  N.,  see  II,  p.  196)  the  Palaeozoic  rocks 
crop  out  and  form  the  end  of  the  northern  part  of  the  Romanzov  range, 
which  extends  through  cape  Thompson  (iBi.  68°  6' N.).  They  are  thrust 
towards  the  north  over  the  Mesozoic  coal-beds.  The  stratified  succession 
from  above  downwards  is  as  follows :  thick  white  limestone  with  corals 
and  Polyzoa,  thinly  stratified  shales  and  limestone  with  brachiopods,  trilo- 
bites,  and  other  fossils,  amongst  these  beds  black  shales  and  limestone  with 
brachiopods,  also  Coal-measures  with  a  lower  Carboniferous  flora  (Lepido- 
dendron,  Stigmaria,  and  others),  and  finally,  calcareous  sandstone  and  shales, 
perhaps  of  Devonian  age.  Productus  is  known  even  at  cape  Thompson ; 
Schu chert  also  mentions  the  upper  Carboniferous  Spirifer  condor  ^. 

The  Palaeozoic  range,  like  its  northern  border,  is  overthrust  in  flakes 
towards  the  north ;  the  lower  Carboniferous  coal-measures  are  repeated  on 
the  coast. 

In  the  interior  of  the  country,  probably  more  than  300  kilometers  east 
of  cape  Lisburne,  fragments  of  coal  have  been  obtained  on  the  Chipp  river 
(Ikpikpuk,  long.  155°  W.),  and  on  the  Colville  river.  Thus,  although  the 
coal  series  to  the  north  of  the  Endicott  range  is  no  longer  visible,  it  is  pos- 
sible that  coals,  the  Mesozoic  coals  in  particular,  lie  beneath  the  Cretaceous 
plateau  of  Anaktuvuk. 

Grewingk  states,  on  the  faith  of  Fischer's  observations,  that  lavas  and 
hardened  clay  occur  along  the  coast  between  mount  Mulgrave  (lat.  67°  40'  N.) 
and  cape  Krusenstern  (lat.  67°  5'  N.). 

Mendenhall  furnishes  information  on  the  regions  lying  further  south  2. 
He  travelled  westwards  from  the  Flats  to  the  sea  and  observed  highly 
altered  rocks  with  a  westerly  strike  in  the  southern  part  of  the  Endicott 
range.  Near  Dall  City  (lat.  66°  15'  to  66°  30'  N.,  about  long.  150°  W.) 
they  are  traversed  by  many  granitic  intrusions ;  near  long.  151°  W.  in  the 

*  C.  Schuchert,  Report  on  Palaeozoic  Fossils  from  Alaska,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Ann.  Rep., 
1896,  XVII,  1,  p.  899,  and  in  Schrader  (see  previous  note),  p.  66  ;  A.  Hyatt,  Report 
on  the  Mesozoic  Fossils,  &c.,  torn,  cit.,  p.  907  ;  Brooks,  Geology  and  Geography  of 
Alaska,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Professional  Papers,  no.  45,  1906,  p.  242 ;  A.  J.  Collier,  Coal 
Fields  of  the  Cape  Lisburne  Region,  in  Brooks,  and  Other  Mineral  Resources  of  Alaska, 
U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Bull.,  no.  259,  pp.  172-185.  The  presence  of  Trias  has  not  been  confirmed, 
Stanton,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1905,  XVI,  p.  396. 

2  W.  C.  Mendenhall,  Reconnaissance  from  Fort  Hamlin  to  Kotzebue  Sound,  Al.,  U.S. 
Geol.  Surv.  Professional  Papers,  no.  10,  1902,  68  pp.,  maps. 


CH.  x]  ESCHSCHOLTZ  BAY  355 

same  latitude,  a  mass  of  gabbro  and  serpentine  succeeds,  then  to  beyond 
long.  152''  W.  more  recent  andesitic  rock  is  met  with.  A  patch  of  Mesozoic 
(?  Aucella)  beds  extends  past  Bergmann  on  the  upper  Kowak  (Kobuk)  and 
then  this  river,  apparently  flowing  in  a  longitudinal  valley,  is  bordered 
down  to  the  sea  by  the  so-called  metamorphic  series  (mica  schist,  quartzite, 
and  some  limestone). 

The  peninsula  of  Choris  at  the  entrance  to  Eschscholtz  hay  consists  of 
similar  schists;  Chamisso  and  Puffin  island,  in  its  vicinity,  are  formed 
of  gneiss-like  granite.  The  resemblance  of  the  rocks  to  those  of  St.  Lawrence 
bay  on  the  other  side  of  Bering  strait  led  Engelhardt  so  early  as  1821  to 
conclude  that  Asia  and  America  were  once  united  ^. 

To  the  south  of  Kotzebue  sound  graphitic  schist  and  mica-schist  again 
crop  out,  and  also  serpentine  and  hornblende  schists.  Then  they  dis- 
appear ;  the  shore  is  strewn  with  boulders  of  olivine-bearing  lava ; 
near  cape  Espenberg  is  volcanic  sand  containing  marine  Tertiary  shells. 
The  Teufelsberg,  situated  to  the  south-west  further  inland,  is  of  volcanic 
origin,  according  to  Beechey;  a  lava  stream  proceeds  from  this  point  to 
the  sea.    Towards  the  gulf  of  Shishmaref  the  shores  are  flat. 

The  west  thus  presents  itself  to  us  as  follows.  The  Komanzov  range 
is  continued  to  the  coast.  A  northern  branch,  overthrust  towards  the 
north  and  containing  lower  Carboniferous  coal-measures,  disappears  between 
cape  Lisburne  and  cape  Thompson.  I  presume  that  the  name  De  Long 
range  properly  belongs  to  this  branch.  A  second  branch,  consisting  of 
older  rocks  and  situated  further  towards  the  interior,  comes  from  the 
Endicott  range  and  separates  the  rivers  Noatak  and  Kowak;  this  is  the 
Baird  range.  Still  further  south,  at  several  points  in  Eschscholtz  bay, 
the  deepest-lying,  gneissose  rocks  make  their  appearance,  and  may  perhaps 
be  compared  with  the  rocks  observed  by  Schrader  on  the  north  border  of 
the  Flats.  But  from  the  Mulgrave  mountains  onwards  and  round  about 
a  large  part  of  Kotzebue  sound,  lying  transversely  across  the  ends  of  the 
ranges,  is  a  girdle  of  recent  sediments,  together  with  recent  volcanic 
formations,  and  to  this  girdle  belongs  the  whole  northern  part  of  Seward 
peninsula  as  far  as  Shishmaref  bay  and  some  distance  beyond. 

Seward  peninsula.  The  ends  of  the  mountain  ranges  cut  off  across 
their  strike,  and  the  volcanic  formations  near  the  border  give  to 
Kotzebue  sound,  along  with  the  plain  of  cape  Espenberg,  the  characters 
of  a  subsidence.  Into  the  inner  part  of  the  sound,  formed  by  Eschscholtz 
and  Spafarief  bay,  two  rivers  are  discharged,  the  Kiwalik  and  the  Buck- 
land,  which  come  from  the  south  and  flow  parallel  to  one  another.  They 
are  separated  by  a  long  meridional  ridge  rising  high  above  the  country  on 

^  M.  V.  Engelhardt  (and  Weiss)  in  0.  von  Kotzebue's  Entdeckungsreise  in  die  Siidsee 
und  nach  der  Bering-Strasse,  4to,  Weimar,  1821,  III  (by  A.  von  Chamisso),  p.  191 ;  a 
summary  of  all  accounts  in  Grewingk,  p.  70  et  seq. 

A  a  2 


856      THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMERICA  [party 

the  east  and  west,  and  reaching  in  the  south  the  valley  of  the  Koyuk  river 
which  flows  into  Norton  bay.  This  dividing  ridge  consists,  according  to 
Moffit,  of  isolated  hills  of  granite,  monzonite  and  quartz-diorite,  in  the 
south  possibly  of  malignite  also,  surrounded  by  a  great  deal  of  andesite 
and  here  and  there  accompanied  by  more  recent  basalts  ^. 

An  extensive  region  of  very  recent  lavas  surrounds  lake  Imuruk  (lat. 
65°  40'  N.,  long.  163°  10'  W.),  and  from  this  locality  the  basaltic  lavas 
observed  by  Mendenhall  in  the  valley  of  the  Koyuk  are  possibly  derived. 
Many  of  these  lavas  have  flowed  through  the  existing  valleys. 

Norton  bay  is  surrounded  by  low-lying  land  formed  of  coal-bearing 
beds,  marine  upper  Cretaceous  and  coal-bearing  Oligocene  or  Kenai  beds  ^. 
Tertiary,  or  even  more  recent,  volcanic  ejectamenta  are  met  with,  up  to 
the  shores  of  Bering  sea,  first  near  St.  Michael,  and  then  on  as  far  as  the 
Koyukuk.  The  region  between  Kotzebue  sound  and  Norton  bay  is  indeed 
a  continuation  of  the  country  on  the  lower  Yukon,  and  separates  Seward 
peninsula  from  the  interior  of  Alaska. 

The  peninsula  itself  presents  none  of  the  elongated  chains  which 
distinguish  other  parts  of  Alaska. 

The  abundance  of  gold  in  Nome  led  to  a  preliminary  report  on  this 
locality  by  Schrader.  Bogdanowitsch  visited  Nome  before  setting  out  on 
his  journey  into  Chuchki  land.  Subsequently  Brooks  and  his  colleagues 
described  the  southern  part  of  the  district,  and  Collier  thenorth-  western 
part  ^. 

The  broad  depression  which  runs  from  Port  Clarence  to  Golofnin  bay  is 
not  determined  by  the  structure  of  the  country.  The  most  important 
ranges  follow  a  direction  transverse  to  it ;  these  are  the  Kigluaik  mountains 
to  the  south  of  this  valley  (Mount  Osborne  4,700  feet,  1,432  meters),  and 
the  Bendelehen  mountains  to  the  north  of  it.  Both  run  to  the  west-south- 
west, but  the  Bendeleben  mountains  do  not  lie  exactly  in  the  continuation 
of  the  Kigluaik  mountains,  although  their  structure  is  similar.  Towards 
Bering  strait  a  considerable  area  is  occupied  by  the  York  mountains. 

Near  cape  Nome,  in  the  most  southerly  part  of  the  peninsula, 

1  F.  H.  Moffit,  The  Fairhaven  Gold-Placers,  Seward  Peninsula,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Bull., 
no.  247,  1905,  85  pp.,  maps. 

^  At  several  places,  especially  in  the  Aleutian  islands,  marine  beds  rest  upon  the  Kenai 
deposits,  but  the  name  Nulato  stage,  hitherto  employed  for  them,  cannot  be  retained 
since  it  has  been  discovered  that  the  typical  locality,  Nulato  on  the  Yukon,  is  of  upper 
Cretaceous  age.  Brooks,  Geography  and  Geology,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Prof.  Papers,  no.  45, 
1906,  p.  236. 

^  F.  A.  Schrader,  Preliminary  Report  on  the  Cape  Nome  Gold  Region,  U.S.  Geol. 
Surv.,  8vo,  1900, 56  pp.,  map ;  K.  J.  Bogdanowitsch,  Sketch  of  Nome,  Svo,  1901,  St.  Petersb., 
116  pp.,  map  (in  Russian) ;  A.  H.  Brooks,  J.  B.  Richardson,  A.  J.  Collier,  and  W.  C.  Men- 
denhall, Reconnaissance  in  the  Cape  Nome  and  Norton  Bay  Regions,  Al.,  in  1900,  U.S. 
Geol.  Surv.,  Svo,  1901,  222  pp.,  maps ;  Collier,  A  Reconnaissance  of  the  north-western 
portion  of  Seward  Peninsula,  Al.,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Profess.  Papers,  no.  2, 1902, 70  pp.,  maps. 


CH.X]  PENINSULA  OF  THE  CHUCHKI 


367 


Bogdanowitsch  observed  ancient  augen-gneiss,  which  occurs  as  boulders 
in  Anvil  creek,  and  he  points  out  its  resemblance  with  the  gneiss  of 
cape  Novosiltzev  (Kreulgun)  on  the  coast  of  Asia.  The  American 
investigators  make  no  mention  of  this  occurrence,  owing,  perhaps,  to  the 
wider  or  narrower  sense  in  which  they  use  the  term  gneiss.  Brooks 
mentions,  first,  white  crystalline  limestone  with  mica  schist  (Kigluaik 
series) ;  this  forms  the  greater  part  of  the  Kigluaik  range,  and,  in  association 
with  granite  intrusions,  of  the  Bendeleben  mountains  also.  Then  follows 
graphite-bearing  quartzite  schist  (Kuzitrin  series),  and,  finally,  a  thick 
mass  of  the  Port-Clarence  limestone,  in  which  Collier  found  Silurian 
fossils. 

Greenstone  and  green  schists,  produced  from  gabbro  or  diabase,  appear 
as  sills  in  both  the  oldest  stages.  Granite,  more  recent  than  the  greenstones, 
occurs  at  not  a  few  places,  either  in  bosses  or  dykes,  and  generally  within 
the  crystalline  limestone  of  the  Kigluaik  stage.  In  lat.  65°  50'  N.,  long. 
164°  10'  W.,  hot  springs  occur  within  one  of  these  granite  bosses  ;  to  the 
west  of  this  locality  another  boss  forms  the  conspicuous  mass  of  the  Ear 
mountains,  and  yet  another  forms  Cape  mountain  (792  meters)  which 
projects  into  Bering  strait.  The  presence  of  tin  has  directed  attention  to 
these  granite  bosses.  On  Cape  mountain,  and  the  neighbouring  part  of 
York  mountains,  the  tin  ores  occur  close  to  the  contact  between  granite  and 
limestone,  and  in  veins  which  proceed  from  the  granite.  On  the  east  side 
of  Cape  mountain  Collier  discovered  Devonian  or  Carboniferous  fossils  in 
the  limestone  ^. 

Speaking  generally,  we  may  say  that  a  considerable  range  of  these 
granite  mountains  extends  from  Cape  mountain  towards  the  east-north-east, 
into  the  region  south  of  Eschscholtz  bay;  some  of  them  have  furnished 
traces  of  tin,  others  of  fluor  spar,  but  others  again,  although  included  with 
the  rest,  are  probably  of  much  greater  age.  This  is  true  in  particular  of 
the  Kiwalik  mountain  (lat.  65°  30'N.,  long.  162°  10'  W.),  which,  according 
to  Moffit's  description,  must  doubtless  be  regarded  as  true  gneiss. 

Seward  peninsula  is  a  land  bearing  some  fairly  high  mountains,  formed 
of  Palaeozoic  and  older  systems,  penetrated  here  and  there  by  eruptive 
rocks  of  very  various  age.  Data  as  to  the  strike  are  not  concordant :  in 
the  north-western  portion  it  is  mainly  east-and-west,  in  the  southern  more 
generally  west-south-west.  On  the  Kugruk  (lat.  65°  55'  N.,  long.  162°  25'  W.) 
a  bed  of  coal,  probably  upper  Cretaceous,  is  mentioned ;  it  is  folded  and 
strikes  north  and  south. 

The  peninsula  of  the  Chuchhi.  To  the  north  of  the  plain  of  the  Anadyr, 
Holy  Cross  bay  cuts  deep  into  the  mainland.    It  is  prolonged  towards  the 

*  Collier,  Tin  Deposits  of  the  York  Region,  Al.,  Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  no.  229,  1904, 
57  pp.,  map,  and  no.  259,  1905,  pp.  120-127. 


358    THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMERICA  [partv 


north,  that  is  into  the  interior,  in  two  arms,  Engaugyn  bay  and  Etelkujum 
bay,  and  above  these  rises  the  mountain  of  Matatshingai  (2,797  meters) 
which  is,  far  and  wide,  the  highest  mountain  in  the  land.  Postels,  the 
companion  of  Liitke,  succeeded  in  reaching  as  far  as  Etelkujum  bay ;  the 
rocks  he  obtained  include,  according  to  Jankowsky,  trachytic  taxite,  augite 
andesite,  and  Jiparite.  It  may  well  be  that  the  eruptive  rocks  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Amadyr  are  continued  up  to  this  point  ^. 

The  south-east  coast  of  Chuchki  peninsula,  which  forms  the  Asiatic 
coast  of  Bering  strait,  is  for  the  most  part  rocky.  Metshigma  bay  and, 
north  of  this,  St.  Lawrence  bay  break  up  the  hills.  St.  Lawrence  bay 
appears  to  be  separated  only  by  a  low  watershed  from  the  great  Koljutshin 
bay,  which  opens  into  the  Arctic  Ocean,  and  perhaps  this  is  also  true  of 
Metshigma  bay,  so  that  the  hills  in  the  interior  are  broken  up  into  irregular 
groups,  as  frequently  happens  in  high  latitudes  ^. 

The  isolated  observations  of  Dawson,  Nordenskjold,  and  the  older 
investigators  have  been  brought  into  connexion  by  the  detailed  studies  of 
Bogdanowitsch.    His  descriptions  furnish  us  with  the  following  facts  ^. 

The  south-east  part  of  the  peninsula  is  rocky,  high  (up  to  884  meters), 
and  deeply  divided  by  fjords.  One  of  these  fjords  extends  from  the  south- 
south-west  into  the  mountainous  land  (Providence  or  Plover  bay),  a  second 
comes  from  the  south  (Iskagan),  and  on  the  east  side  is  a  group  of  three 
fjords  (the  most  northerly  is  the  gulf  of  Konjam)  separated  from  the  open 
sea  by  two  high  rocky  islands.  These  islands  are  called  Ittygran  (or 
Schirluk,  561  meters)  and  Arakam  (or  Kaine,  554  meters).  The  strait  of 
Senjavin  extends  between  the  north  coast  of  the  island  of  Arakam  and  the 
mainland. 

The  bluff  mountains  and  islands,  between  Providence  and  Senjavin 
bays,  are  formed  (apart  from  their  summits,  which  are  possibly  andesite) 
of  a  very  varied  series  of  rocks.  From  the  debris  on  the  slopes  of  the 
rocky  shores  of  Iskagan  bay  Washington  mentions  comendite,  quartz- 
porphyry,  rhyolite,  obsidian,  and  monzonite*. 

From  cape  Mertens  onwards,  which  lies  south  of  Ittygran  and  marks 
the  entrance  to  the  inner  fjords,  clay  slates  and  white  schistose  limestone 
are  continued  onwards,  according  to  Bogdanowitsch,  beneath  this  mass  of 

1  F.  Liitke,  Voyage  autour  du  monde,  8vo,  Paris,  1836,  III,  p.  48.  Postels  thought  he 
observed  porphyry  with  glassy  feldspar,  &c. ;  W.  Jankowsky,  Material  zur  Petrographie 
von  Kamtschatka  und  der  Heiligen  Kreuz-Bucht,  Trudi  Naturf.  Ges.  St.  Petersb.,  XXIII, 
pp.  61-70.  Professor  Lowinson-Lessing  is  kind  enough  to  inform  me  that  Jankowsky's 
specimens  were  collected  by  Postels. 

^  On  this  point  see  Bove  in  Nordenskjold,  Die  TJmseglung  Asiens,  IT,  pp.  32. 

^  K.  Bogdanowitsch,  Sketch  of  the  Chuchki  Peninsula,  8vo,  St.  Petersburg,  1901, 
238  pp.,  maps  (in  Russian). 

*  H.  S.  Washington,  Igneous  Rocks  from  East  Siberia,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1902,  4th  ser., 
XIII,  pp.  175-184. 


CH.  X] 


STRAIT  OF  SENJAVIN 


359 


eruptive  rocks.  The  same  sedimentary  rocks  also  occur  at  the  base  of  the 
two  islands  Ittygran  and  Arakam,  and  in  the  inner  fjords  as  far  as  Konjam 
and  Senjavin.  The  clay  slates  soon  pass  into  biotite  schists;  then  the 
whole  series  is  seen  only  at  sea  level;  in  some  places  it  is  traversed  by 
granite  dykes,  but  everywhere  it  is  covered  by  the  recent  eruptive  rocks 
and  steeply  folded,  with  a  north-westerly  strike,  varying  between  N.  30°  W. 
and  N.  65°  W.i 

This  strike  to  the  north-west  indicates  the  presence  of  an  arc  coming 
from  Alaska,  and  Dawson's  statement,  that  the  grey  granite  which  forms 
the  adjacent  part  of  the  elongated  St.  Lawrence  island  coincides  with  that 
of  the  Asiatic  peninsula,  confirms  this  view  ^. 

To  the  north  of  the  strait  of  Senjavin  the  situation  alters.  On  the 
north  coast  the  Maritsh  rivulet  enters  the  strait ;  towards  its  mouth 
the  strike  of  the  limestone  and  schist  becomes  north-and-south,  and 
only  4  versts  up  the  stream  it  is  N.  40°  E. ;  maintaining  this  direction  it 
probably  reaches  the  inner  parts  of  Konjam.  It  seems  as  though  an 
American  and  an  Asiatic  (Anadyr)  direction  were  about  to  encounter  each 
other.  Cape  Nigitshan  is  formed  of  porphyries,  and  still  further  north 
the  tundra  extends  to  Metshigma  bay.  Near  this  bay  we  meet  with  low 
hills  of  folded  limestone  striking  N.  40°  W. ;  brown  coal  is  present.  On 
both  sides  of  the  bay  rise  bosses  of  andesite  and  dacite ;  in  some  of  these 
the  original  form  of  the  crater  has  been  preserved,  as,  for  instance,  in  the 
conical  mountain  of  Nelpynja  on  the  north  side  of  the  bay,  from  which 
a  flow  of  dacite  has  poured  forth. 

North  of  this  point  a  higher  range  occurs  (741  meters),  which  reaches 
the  sea  in  cape  Novosiltzev  (Krleugun).  From  this  range  gneiss  comes  down 
in  boulders  towards  the  south  to  Metshigma  bay ;  granite,  often  assuming 
the  structure  of  gneiss,  forms  the  promontory.  A  boss-like  mass  of  olivine 
diabase  appears  on  its  summit.  Gneiss-like  granite  also  forms  part  of  the 
south  shore  of  St.  Lawrence  bay  ;  in  the  interior  of  this  bay,  however,  on 
its  north  side,  and  also  near  cape  Nunjam  and  as  far  as  cape  Liitke,  we 
again  perceive  the  more  recent  eruptive  granites  of  Senjavin  and  the 
sediments  of  these  more  southerly  mountains,  altered  by  contact  2.  On 
the  other  side  of  cape  Liitke  eruptive  rocks  of  this  kind  have  not  yet  been 

1  Bogdanowitsch,  Sketch  of  the  Chuchki  Peninsula,  pp.  112-124.  Postels  has  already 
described  the  rocks  of  Arakam  and  recognized  the  prevailing  north-west  strike ;  see 
Postels  in  Liitke,  Voyage  III,  pp.  32  and  44  ;  a  description  of  Konjam  and  its  rocks  is 
given  by  Nordenskjold,  Umseglung  Asiens,  II,  p.  240. 

2  Gr.  M.  Dawson,  Geological  Notes  on  some  of  the  Coasts  and  Islands  of  Bering  Sea  and 
Vicinity,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1894,  V,  pp.  117-146,  in  particular  p.  138  et  seq. 

^  Specimens  of  white  granular  limestone  with  white  mica  and  foliated  graphite  were 
collected  by  Eschscholtz  on  the  gulf  of  St.  Lawrence,  Kotzebue,  Entdeckungsreise  in  die 
Siidsee  und  nach  der  Bering-Strasse,  4to,  Weimar,  1821  ;  Chamisso,  op.  cit.,  Ill,  p.  169  ; 
Engelhardt  (und  Weiss),  op.  cit.,  Ill,  p.  191. 


360      THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMERICA  [paetv 


observed.  The  gneisses  can  be  traced  as  loose  boulders  from  the  mountains 
lying  further  towards  the  interior,  but  with  the  exception  of  some  loose 
boulders  of  granite  on  cape  Deshnev,  the  only  rocks  seen  by  Bogdanowitsch 
near  cape  Kuntugelen,  and  as  far  as  cape  Deshnev  were  schists,  dark 
siliceous  limestone  and  limestone  breccia,  that  is,  a  normal  sedimentary 
series,  striking  apparently  east  and  west^. 

Disregarding  the  strike,  we  may  therefore  distinguish  the  following 
parts  in  the  west  coast  of  Bering  strait :  (1)  a  tract  extending  from 
Providence  to  Senjavin  and  beyond,  formed  of  altered  and  folded  sedi- 
ments, penetrated  and  overlain  by  granite,  syenite,  and  the  like,  and  also 
by  andesitic  rocks ;  (2)  a  fiat  land  of  Tertiary  sediments  and  recent 
eruptive  rocks  extending  to  Metshigma  bay  and  beyond;  (3)  a  doubtful 
range  of  gneiss  and  granite,  which  reaches  the  sea  in  cape  Novosiltzev 
and  is  there  penetrated  by  olivine-diabase ;  (4)  the  series  of  rocks  on 
the  south  (Providence  to  Senjavin)  which  are  repeated  as  far  as 
cape  Liitke ;  (5)  normal  sediments  (slate  and  limestone)  up  to  the  Arctic 
Ocean. 

We  will  now  follow  the  range  which  includes  cape  Novosiltzev.  It 
forms  the  watershed.  Bogdanowitsch  observes  that  he  was  struck  by  the 
resemblance  in  detail  between  the  rocks  of  this  range  and  the  boulders  he 
had  seen  in  America,  on  the  shore  of  Anvil  creek,  not  far  from  Nome.  So 
far  as  can  be  made  out  from  the  indications  furnished  by  this  indefatigable 
observer  in  respect  to  the  north  coast,  the  series  of  unaltered  sediments 
continues  from  cape  Deshnev  for  some  distance  towards  the  west ;  then 
follows  a  vast  tundra,  interrupted  by  isolated  eruptive  hills  of  recent 
date.  Sheets  of  trachyte  and  melaphyre  enter  into  the  vicinity  of  the 
Serdze  Kamen  promontory,  which  is  itself  formed  of  granite.  Bogdano- 
witsch, however,  observes  that  this  granite  of  the  Arctic  coast  is  different, 
both  in  its  nature  and  its  general  mode  of  occurrence  from  the  recent 
granite  of  cape  Liitke  and  the  strait  of  Senjavin,  and  it  extends  in  bosses  to 
the  coast  of  Koljutshin  bay.  Here  we  reach  the  neighbourhood  of  Pitlekaj, 
the  place  at  which  Nordenskj old's  ship,  the  Vega,  passed  the  winter,  so  that 
the  accounts  at  our  disposal  are  fortunately  continuous.  Tornebohm's 
description  shows  that  in  the  tract  extending  from  Idlidlja  (west  of  the 
Serdze  Kamen)  through  Pitlekaj  to  the  island  of  Koljutshin,  exposures  of 
gneiss  are  met  with,  also  a  granulitic  rock,  and  on  the  east  side  of  Koljut- 
shin bay  granular  limestone  occurs  in  association  with  these  rocks  ^. 

^  H.  S.  WaBhiington  mentions  Foyait  with  the  description  :  south  of  Whalen  or  Itshan, 
East  cape  ;  surely  this  can  only  refer  to  the  settlement  yanem.  on  the  north  side  of 
Deshnev  ? 

^  Tornebohm,  Vega-Expedition,  in  Nordenskiold  Vega-Expedition  Vetensk.  jaktag., 
1887,  IV,  p.  122.  A  loose  boulder  of  granite  from  the  lagoon  of  Pitlekaj  was  recognized 
as  distinct  from  these  rocks  and  identical  with  that  of  cape  Nunjam  (a  little  south  of 
cape  Liitke) ;  so  clear  is  the  distinction  between  the  recent  granites. 


CH.  X]  KOLJUTSHIN.    BAEANOV  361 

It  is,  therefore,  not  improbable  that  a  range  of  ancient  granite  and  gneiss 
extends  from  Novosiltzev  and  the  great  mountains  between  Metshigma  bay 
and  St.  Lawrence  bay  to  the  Arctic  Ocean,  east  of  Koljutshin  bay,  and  to 
the  island  of  Koljutshin.  Bogdanowitsch  states  that  south  of  this  bay 
great  mountains  are  to  be  seen  running  first  to  the  west-north-west,  then 
north-north- west,  and  finally  north -north- east  to  the  west  of  the  bay, 
and  probably  as  far  as  cape  Onman  (about  long.  175°  W.)  ^. 

On  cape  Irkaipi  (long.  180°)  and  the  neighbouring  mountain  of  Hammong 
Omang,  Nordenskjold  observed  olivine-diabase  resting  on  black  shales 
with  plant-remains,  and  perhaps  belonging  to  the  Permo-Carboniferous  ^. 
Cape  Jakan  (about  long.  176°  E.)  presented  breccia,  sandstone,  and  porphyry 
tuff  (strike  north-and-south  in  a  small  exposure).  In  this  neighbourhood 
the  series  of  rocks  begins  which  extends  to  cape  Shelagskoi  (Erri)  on 
Chaun  bay. 

Bogdanowitsch  points  out  that  all  the  mountain  ridges  of  this  region 
are  directed  to  the  west-north- west,  and  conjectures  the  existence  of  a 
connexion  between  the  rocks  of  Chuchki  land,  and  those  of  Chaun  bay. 
Here  we  must  recall  the  fact  that  on  the  Poginden  (right  tributary  of  the 
little  Anuj)  the  strike  is  still  north-east  to  east-north-east,  while  on  the 
lower  Baranycha  (long.  165°  E.)  it  is  N.  30°  W.  This  is  a  similar  contrast 
to  that  which  occurs  at  the  entrance  to  the  strait  of  Senjavin,  and  these 
facts  support  Bogdanowitsch  in  supposing  that  two  arcs  are  present ;  that 
which  we  call  the  American  arc  would  thus  extend  to  the  Baranycha. 

The  promontory  of  Baranov  also  shows  the  elongation  to  the  west- 
north-west,  and  consists,  like  the  islands  off  its  coasts,  of  schist  and 
granite. 

This  west-north- west  strike,  oblique  to  the  shore  line,  gives  the 
character  of  a  rias  coast  to  the  region  of  Pitlekaj  and  Koljutshin  island, 
cape  Shelagskoj  and  the  rocky  island  of  Kantan  at  the  entrance  to  Chaun 
bay,  and  the  promontories  of  Great  and  Little  Baranov  together  with  the 
Baranov  islands  ^. 

^  Bogdanowitsch,  Sketch  of  the  Chuchki  Peninsula,  p.  104  ;  Cape  Onman  is  described 
by  Wrangell,  Reise  langs  der  Nord-Kiiste  von  Sibirien,  etc.,  II,  p.  214.  To  the  west  of  this 
locality,  in  the  direction  of  cape  Wankarem,  Wrangell  observed  lofty  cliffs  of  granite 
porphyry.  Wankarem  is  said  to  consist,  like  Irkaipi  and  cape  Schelagskoi,  of  very  fine- 
grained syenite  with  da-rk  green  hornblende. 

*  Tornebohm,  Vega-Expedition,  Vet.  Arb.,  IV,  p.  121. 

^  Bogdanowitsch  saw  reason  to  doubt  the  assumption  that  so  large  a  part  of  the  land 
should  possess  a  structure  striking  to  the  west-north-west,  owing  to  the  repeated  occur- 
rence of  beds  striking  to  the  north-east.  On  the  whole,  however,  we  see  that  the  north- 
easterly strike  prevails  in  the  regions  situated  more  to  the  south  and  west,  the  west- 
north-westerly  strike  in  those  more  to  the  north.  This  is  the  case  not  only  on  the  Anuj 
(Poginden),  but  also  in  the  southern  part  of  the  Chuchki  Peninsula.  It  is  only  at  the  head 
of  the  gulf  of  Konjam  and  on  the  Maritsh  river  that  a  north-easterly  strike  again  occurs 
in  places,  but  passing  through  a  north-and-south  direction.  The  north-easterly  direction 
reappears  in  St.  Lawrence  Bay. 


362      THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMEEICA  [paktv 

The  relation  of  Asia  to  America,  An  attempt  to  determine  the  rela- 
tion of  Asia  to  America  was  made  by  Bogdanowitsch  ^.  The  subsequent 
works  of  American  investigators  have  cleared  up  many  doubtful  points, 
but  they  also  enable  us  to  recognize  the  special  difficulty  of  the  problem. 
It  lies  in  the  fact  that  Seward  peninsula  is  not  so  much  a  region  of  clearly- 
marked  trend-lines  as  of  locally  limited  intrusions  of  different  ages.  It  is 
true  that  these  intrusions  are  repeated  on  the  Asiatic  side.  The  Romanzov 
range  strikes  in  full  breadth  out  to  sea.  Kotzebue  sound,  with  the  low- 
lying  land  extending  to  Shishmaref,  looks  like  a  subsidence  of  the 
Romanzov  range.  The  small  fragment  of  sediments,  near  cape  Deshnev, 
striking  in  the  normal  west  direction,  may  possibly  correspond  with  the 
Silurian,  also  striking  to  the  west,  in  the  northern  hill-ranges  of  Seward 
peninsula. 

The  York  mountains,  about  600  meters  high,  are  surrounded  at  a  height 
of  600  feet  (183  meters)  by  a  sharply-defined  terrace.  On  the  other  side 
of  the  tin- bearing  granite  of  Cape  mountain,  the  steep  Fairway  Rock  rises 
from  Bering  strait;  according  to  Lopp  this  also  consists  of  granite.  At 
a  height  of  600  feet  it  presents  a  flat  summit,  as  though  the  terrace 
surrounding  the  York  mountains  were  about  to  be  continued  across  the 
sea  ^.  The  great  Diomedes  island  consists,  according  to  Dall,  of  syenite  ^. 
Tin  has  been  obtained  from  it.  Thus  we  may  conclude  that  Cape  mountain, 
with  its  crystalline  limestone,  altered  by  contact  with  the  granite,  along 
with  Fairbank  and  Diomedes  is  the  continuation  of  the  intrusive  rocks  and 
the  altered  sediments  which  Bogdanowitsch  encountered,  extending  from 
cape  Liitke  and  Nunjam  to  St.  Lawrence  bay. 

It  is  much  more  difficult  to  form  an  opinion  as  regards  the  region  which 
follows  to  the  south.  Several  circumstances  tend  to  show  that  the  range 
of  granite  and  gneiss,  which  has  been  followed  from  Novosiltzev  towards 
Pitlekaj  and  Kolyutshin  and  then  to  Chaun  bay  is  really  of  considerable 
age.  If  so,  it  must  be  regarded  as  the  most  important  line  of  the  Chukchi 
country.  Its  direction  to  the  north-west  or  west-north-west  would  corre- 
spond with  the  strike  to  N.  40°  W.  in  the  folds  of  the  Tertiary  land  to  the 
south  of  the  neighbouring  Metshigma  bay,  and  would  accord  with  the  view 
that  it  forms  a  part  of  an  arc  of  the  Alaskides.  But  in  Alaska  itself  the 
only  indications  of  a  continuation  are  afforded  by  Chamisso  and  Puffin 
islands  in  Eschscholtz  bay  and  the  Kiwalik  mountain. 

It  might  certainly  be  supposed  that  these  latter  localities,  continuing 
the  north  border  of  the  Flats,  correspond  to  the  innermost  and  southern- 

*  Bogdanowitsch,  Sketch  of  the  Chuchki  Peninsula,  p.  142  et  seq. 

^  Brooks  and  others.  Reconnaissance  in  the  Cape  Nome  and  Norton  Bay  Regions,  Al., 
in  1900,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1901,  pp.  34,  52,  59,  132,  pi.  XIII,  map  of  York  Region  by 
Brooks. 

"  W.  H.  Dall,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  XVII,  1,  p.  835. 


cH.x]  NEW  SIBERIAN  ISLANDS 


363 


most  part  of  the  Romanzov  range ;  yet  this  view  is  without  adequate 
confirmation  ^. 

In  the  substructure  of  Ittygran  and  Arakam,  and  as  far  as  Senjavin, 
the  direction  to  north-west  or  west-north-west  is  repeated.  The  grey 
granite  of  Providence  and  Senjavin  corresponds,  according  to  Dawson,  with 
the  granite  on  the  west  side  of  St.  Lawrence  island,  which  extends  for 
a  distance  of  130  kilometers  towards  the  west-north -west.  On  the  summit 
of  the  island  lie  volcanic  tuffs ;  cones  of  no  great  size  are  also  said  to  be 
present.  In  the  south  of  the  island,  Chamisso  mentions  granite  in  addition. 
Collin  obtained  a  Carboniferous  fossil  from  St.  Lawrence  ^.  These  facts, 
however,  lead  us  no  further  than  the  conjecture  that,  buried  beneath  the 
flat  land  of  the  lower  Yukon  there  lies  a  region  which  is  traversed  in  the 
same  way  as  Seward  peninsula  by  granitic  intrusions. 

King's  island,  which  is  small  but  lofty,  is  formed,  according  to  Hooker, 
of  basalt  ^. 

As  the  sea  becomes  broader  towards  the  south,  the  difficulty  in  linking 
the  facts  together  becomes  greater.  Towards  the  west,  from  Holy  Cross 
bay  onwards,  the  character  of  the  coast  seems  to  alter.  The  height  of 
Matatshingai  (2,797  meters),  which  is  extremely  great  for  these  regions, 
with  the  andesite  and  liparite  rocks  known  near  its  foot,  even  suggests  the 
question  whether,  in  spite  of  the  great  interval,  a  trace  of  the  volcanic  arc 
of  Kamchatka  may  not  be  visible  here.  But  the  intervening  area  is,  as  we 
have  seen,  almost  entirely  unknown. 

Let  us  return  to  the  doubtful  range  of  granite  and  gneiss  extending 
from  Novosiltzev  to  Kolyutshin. 

We  have  seen  that  even  on  the  Baranycha,  west  of  Chaun  bay 
(long.  167°  E.,  lat.  68°  34'  to  69°  9'  N.),  a  strike  to  N.  30°  W.  occurs,  and  cuts 
off  the  north-easterly  strike  of  the  Kolyma,  and  with  it  the  Anadyrides 
(IV,  p.  341).  We  should  suppose  that  if  any  connexion  existed  between 
this  range  and  the  Alaskides,  north-westerly  and  north-north-westerly 
directions  would  gradually  make  their  appearance  in  the  west.  According 
to  Toll's  investigations  in  the  JS'ew  Siberian  islands  this  is  in  fact  the 
case 

North  of  lat.  70°  N.,  and  east  of  the  lower  Jana,  at  the  extreme  end 
of  the  Tass  Hajachtach,  Trias  crops  out  (IV,  p.  336).    Then  follows  a  broad 

^  A.  J.  Collier,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Bull.,  no.  229,  p.  28,  seems  to  suggest  that  the  more 
recent  tin-bearing  granites  follow  the  strike  like  those  of  Cornwall. 

^  J.  M.  Dawson,  Geological  Notes  on  some  of  the  Coasts  and  Islands  of  Bering  Sea  and 
Vicinity,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1894,  V,  pp.  138-148  ;  Chamisso,  in  Kotzebue,  Entdeck- 
ungsreise  in  die  Siidsee  und  nach  der  Bering-Strasse,  4to,  Weimar,  1821,  III,  p.  170. 

^  Captain  Hooker,  Report  of  the  Cruise  of  the  U.S.  Revenue  Steamer  Corvin  in  the 
Arctic  Ocean,  8vo,  Washington,  1881,  p.  15. 

^  Baron  E.  von  Toll,  Geological  Sketch  of  the  New  Siberian  islands,  Mem.  Acad.  Imp. 
Sci.  Saint-Petersb. ,  1899,  8^  ser.,  IX,  no.  1,  20  pp.,  map,  in  particular  p.  16  (in  Russian). 


364      THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMEEICA  [party 


tundra,  out  of  which,  as  we  proceed  towards  Swiatoj  Noss,  basic  eruptive 
rocks  protrude ;  on  the  south  side  of  this  Noss  we  reach  the  Laptew  strait. 
On  the  south  side  of  Ljdchow  island,  three  degrees  of  latitude  north  of  the 
Trias  of  the  Tass  Hajachtach,  a  formation  is  visible  which  is  alien  to  the 
arc  of  Verkhoiansk.  In  this  island  four  isolated  granite  bosses  rise  out  of 
the  flat  frozen  ground,  which  contains  numerous  remains  of  elephants. 
'  One  cannot  help  thinking,'  says  Bunge,  '  that  if  the  temperature  of  the 
ground  were  to  rise  above  zero  even  for  a  short  period,  that  island  would 
be  converted  into  liquid  mud  and  flow  away^.  Then  only  the  granite 
bosses  would  remain,  and  possibly  a  continuous  granite  zone.  It  would  be 
at  least  70  kilometers  broad. 

Kotelny^  the  largest  island  of  this  archipelago,  extends,  in  the  vicinity 
of  meridian  140°,  for  a  distance  of  about  170  kilometers.  In  the  south.  Toll 
found  Trias  with  Pseudomonotis  ochotica ;  for  the  rest  the  island  consists, 
apart  from  some  basic  eruptive  rocks,  of  a  hilly  range  formed  of  upper 
Devonian,  with  a  strike  to  the  north-north-west,  on  its  west  side,  and 
another  range  formed  of  upper  Silurian,  the  Schmidt  mountains  of  Toll, 
with  the  same  strike,  on  its  east  side. 

The  flat  tract  known  as  Bunge  Land,  which  adjoins  it  on  the  east,  and 
the  extensive  island  of  Fadejeff*  are  only  patches  of  frozen  soil. 

In  the  western  part  of  Ifew  Siberia,  which  is  the  most  easterly  island,  lie 
the  much-discussed  *wood  mountains'  (II,  p.  487).  They  present  trunks 
of  trees  embedded  in  a  Tertiary  lignitif erous  deposit,  with  leaves  of  Sequoia 
Langsdorfi,  Populus  arctica,  and  other  species.  The  deposit  is  thrown 
into  steep  folds  with  a  strike  to  north-north- west,  and  terminates  in  steeply 
upturned  beds  at  cape  Wyssoki,  the  extreme  point  of  the  island  ^. 

Thus  we  have  evidence  of  the  existence  of  Miocene  or  post-Miocene 
folding  between  lats.  75°  and  75°  30'  N.  It  is  impossible  to  resist  the 
conjecture  that  the  New  Siberian  islands  also  form  part  of  the  system  of 
the  Alaskides.  The  raiost  recent  folds  occur  in  the  east ;  that  is,  on  the 
inner  side,  as  in  the  Romanzov  range. 

In  Bennett  Land  De  Long  met  with  eruptive  rocks.  Baron  von  Toll 
arrived  off*  the  island  in  August  of  1901.  The  ice  pack  prevented  his 
approach,  but  for  a  brief  period  the  mist  opened  up  and  revealed  the 
promontory  of  Emma,  2,000-3,000  feet  high,  and  completely  covered  with 
snow.    Fragments  of  volcanic  rock,  brought  down  by  glaciers,  were  picked 

^  Bunge,  Expedition  nach  den  Neu-Sibirischen  Inseln  und  dem  Jana-Land,  Beitrage 
zur  Kenntniss  des  russischen  Reiches,  3.  Ser.,  vol.  Ill,  maps,  p.  256. 

-  E.  von  Toll  in  J.  Schmalhausen,  Tertiare  Pflanzen  der  Insel  Neu-Sibirien  (Wissen- 
Bchaftliche  Resultate  der  von  der  kaiserlichen  Akademie  zur  Erforschung  des  Jana-Landes 
u.s.w.  ausgesandten  Expedition,  II),  Mem.  Acad.  Imp.  Sci.  Saint-Petersb.,  1890,  7«  ser., 
XXXVIl,  no.  5,  p.  1  et  seq. 


CH.X]  LOWER  YUKON  365 

up  on  the  ice  ^.  But  this  did  not  satisfy  the  intrepid  explorer.  He  con- 
tinued the  exploration  and  paid  for  it  with  his  life.  The  last  record  he 
made  informs  us  that  Bennett  island  repeats  the  structure  of  the  ancient 
tableland  of  East  Siberia;  from  the  collections  he  made,  Schmidt  has 
described  Anomocare  excavata  and  graptolite  slates,  and  Nathorst,  plants 
belonging  to  the  Trias  and  Jurassic  2. 

Mountains  on  the  lower  Yukon.  All  the  mountains  which  rise  from 
the  broad  plain  of  the  lower  Yukon  strike  to  the  south-west. 

The  Koyukuk  emerges  from  the  older  rocks  south  of  lat.  67°  N.,  but 
the  long  and  not  very  high  range  of  the  Yukon  mountains,  directed  to 
the  south-west,  which  separates  the  Koyukuk  from  the  Melozi,  is  either 
a  continuation  of  the  southern  rocks  of  the  Romanzov  range,  or  a  new 
divergent  branch  of  the  virgation.  Its  south-western  end  has  not  been 
explored. 

The  canon,  probably  about  150  kilometers  in  length,  by  which  the 
the  Yukon  leaves  the  Flats  at  their  south-western  end,  near  Fort  Hamlin, 
is  cut  for  the  greater  part  in  Devonian  diabases  and  green  schists ;  here  lie 
the  Ramparts  of  the  Yukon  ^.  Similar  rocks  and  older  schists  form  the 
long  ridge  of  the  Gold  mountains  between  the  Yukon  and  Melozi,  and  still 
further  to  the  south-west,  south  of  the  Yukon,  the  Kaiyuh  mountains, 
also  directed  to  the  south-west,  which  extend  through  the  plain  of  the 
lower  Yukon  nearly  to  lat.  63°  N.  There  they  appear  to  bend  in  an  arc 
toward  the  west,  and  it  is  probable  that  their  continuation  forms  the 
promontories  to  the  south  of  lat.  62°  N.  But  with  regard  to  the  latter 
we  have  only  short  accounts  by  Dall. 

The  Kuskokvim  mountains,  lying  still  further  towards  the  south,  have 
been  made  known  to  us  by  Spurr  Presenting  a  trifling  elevation  in  the 
north,  they  continually  increase  in  height  towards  the  south-south- west. 
In  about  long.  154°  20'  W.,  north  of  lat.  63°  N.,  the  Kuskokvim  river, 
coming  from  the  Alaska  range,  enters  these  heights.  It  cuts  through 
them  in  a  long  canon,  then  turns  towards  the  west,  leaves  the  mountains, 
and  flows  towards  the  sea  to  the  north  of  their  continuations.  The 
mountains  are  continued  in  the  south-south-westerly  direction,  first  as 

1  E.  von  Toll,  Vorlaufiger  Bericht,  Bull.  Acad.  Imp.  Sci.  Saint-Petersb.,  1902,  5^  ser., 
XVI,  p.  203. 

2  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1904,  p.  105  (from  the  Petersburger  Zeitung),  and  p.  273 ;  A.  Kolt- 
schak.  The  last  expedition  to  Bennett  island,  &c.,  Izviestija  Imp.  ross.  Geogr.  Obsch., 
1906,  XLII,  pp.  487-519  (in  Russian) ;  Schmidt,  Protok.  Petersb.  Naturf.  Ges.,  Nov. 
1904,  p.  434 ;  Nathorst,  Ueber  Trias-  und  Jurapflanzen  der  Insel  Kotelnj,  Mem.  Acad. 
Imp.  Sci.  Saint-Petersbourg.,  1907,  XXI,  no.  2,  13  pp. 

^  L.  M.  Prindle  and  F.  L.  Hess,  The  Rampart  Gold  Placer  Region,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv. 
Bull.,  no.  280,  1906,  54  pp.,  map. 

*  J.  E.  Spurr,  A  Reconnaissance  in  South-West  Alaska,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Ann.  Rep., 
1900,  XX,  7,  pp.  43-264,  maps. 


366    THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMEEICA  [party 


isolated  masses,  and  then  as  the  Oklune  range  (Ahklun),  on  the  north 
border  of  which  (lat.  60°  N.,  long.  160°  W.)  mount  Gratia  is  believed  to 
rise  to  a  height  of  7,300  feet  (2,225  meters) ;  this  range  projects  into 
Bering  sea,  and  forms  cape  Newenham. 

In  its  northernmost  part,  the  canon  of  the  Kuskokvim  is  cut  through 
limestone  containing  middle  Devonian  corals ;  then  follows,  for  a  long 
distance  down  stream,  a  granite  arkose,  with  plant-remains  and  Inoceramus, 
cut  through  by  long  and  steeply-protruding  porphyry  dykes  of  a  deep 
yellow  hue.  This  is  followed  from  about  Kolmakof  onwards  (west  of 
long.  159°  W.)  by  dark  andesite  tuff.  The  Oklune  mountains  consist  of  an 
ancient  tuff  and  calcareous  shales  with  Aucella.  Here,  too,  we  see  long  and 
steeply-rising  eruptive  dykes.  Towards  the  south-west  much  basalt 
occurs. 

The  folds  in  the  canon  of  Kuskokvim  show  great  irregularities  of  strike ; 
they  maintain,  however,  as  far  as  the  sea,  the  principal  direction  to  the 
south-south-west,  and  although  they  advance  towards  the  sea,  they  possess, 
on  the  whole,  according  to  Spurr,  a  synclinal  structure. 

The  Alaska  range  contains  the  highest  peak  of  North  America,  and 
forms  the  northern  part  of  the  largest  arc  of  the  Alaskides,  that  of  the 
Aleutian  islands.  Spurr  has  established  the  continuity  of  this  arc.  It 
advances  to  a  point  a  little  south  of  the  Tanana  (lat.  64°  N.),  and  its  most 
southerly  part  reaches  lat.  51°  25'  N.  In  order  to  describe  the  structure, 
we  will  divide  it  into  three  parts,  the  Alaska  range,  the  peninsula  of 
Alaska,  and  the  Aleutian  islands. 

A  number  of  rivers,  radiately  converging,  are  discharged  at  the  head  of 
Cook's  inlet ;  their  valleys  correspond  only  in  part  with  the  strike,  but  they 
determine  the  form  of  the  surface.  From  the  west  comes  the  river 
Skwentna,  which  receives  the  Yentna ;  at  a  little  distance  from  the  sea  it 
joins  the  Sushi tna,  which  flows  down  from  the  north.  From  the  north- 
east comes  the  Matanuska  ;  it  is  discharged  into  Knik  bay  ;  finally  we  may 
mention  the  Turnagain  fjord,  or  arm  of  the  sea,  coming  from  the  east ;  this 
is  more  correctly  part  of  an  eyde,  which,  with  the  exception  of  a  low  tract 
of  land,  18  kilometers  in  breadth,  and  covered  in  part  by  a  glacier,  would 
separate  the  peninsula  of  Kenai  from  the  mainland. 

All  the  land  between  these  rivers  is  occupied  by  lofty  mountain  ranges, 
which  bear  numerous  glaciers.  The  part  situated  to  the  south  of  the 
Skwentna  is  the  Tordrillo  range.  In  the  region  north  of  the  Skwentna,  and 
extending  to  the  Sushitna,  rises  the  Alaska  range,  the  highest  and  wildest 
of  all.  The  interval  between  the  Sushitna  and  Matanuska  is  occupied  by 
the  Talkeetna  range,  which  descends  on  the  east  to  the  plateau  of  the 
Copper  river.  The  range  situated  to  the  south  of  the  Matanuska  is  not 
to  be  included  in  the  Alaska  arc. 

Let  us  now  turn  our  attention  to  the  region  of  syntaxis. 


CH.  x]   ENCOUNTER  OF  THE  EOCKY  MOUNTAINS  367 

On  the  north  side  of  the  Tanana,  the  end  of  the  principal  range  of 
the  rocky  mountains  is  formed  by  a  gneiss  range  known  as  the  'Yukon 
geanticline  '  of  Canadian  geologists.  The  termination  is  placed  by  Brooks 
in  lat.  64°  20'  N.,  long.  147°  W.  While  this  gneiss  of  the  Rocky  mountains 
strikes  away,  first  to  the  east  and  then  to  the  south-east,  a  southern  chain 
begins  south  of  the  Tanana,  and  quite  close  to  the  river,  in  about  lat.  63°  N., 
and  long.  143°  W.  Its  ancient  schists  form  the  north-east  side  of  the 
Mentasta  range,  the  south  side  of  which  consists  of  upper  Carboniferous 
and  Permian  limestone,  and  slopes  away  towards  the  volcanos  of  the 
Wrangell  group.  The  schists  gain  very  rapidly  in  height  towards  the 
west.  The  peaks  of  the  Rocky  mountains  to  the  north  of  the  Tanana 
reach  a  height  of  1,800  meters,  but  in  this  gneiss  range  mount  Kimball 
rises  above  3,000  meters,  and  west  of  it,  in  long.  147°  W.,  mount  Hayes 
exceeds  4,400  meters  (fig.  33).  These  great  heights  form  at  the  same  time 
the  north  border  of  the  plateau  of  the  Copper  river.  The  south  side  of 
mount  Kimball  is  traversed  on  this  side  by  a  great  trough-like  subsidence 
in  which  lie  Carboniferous  and  Permian  limestones.  To  the  south  of  it  the 
ancient  rocks  crop  out  once  more  on  the  border  of  the  plateau  of  the 
Copper  river.  Mendenhall  and  Schrader  state  that  the  dislocation  is  so 
recent  that  patches  of  coal-bearing  Tertiary  are  wedged  into  it  ^. 

Brooks  formed  the  impression  that  the  axes  of  the  great  chains  do  not 
come  together,  but  pass  each  other  by  2.  The  Rocky  mountains  do  not 
enter  into  direct  syntaxis  with  the  Alaska  range,  like  the  southern  zones 
in  Chugatsk  bay.  The  Alaska  range  seems  rather,  by  means  of  an 
elongation  extending  across  the  meridian  of  syntaxis,  to  join  the  south  side 
of  the  Rocky  mountains,  which  terminate  in  long.  147°  W.  in  the  meridian 
of  mount  Hayes. 

Mount  Chisana,  the  last  spur  of  the  Alaska  range,  consists  of  highly 
contorted  crystalline  schists.  Mendenhall  crossed  the  chain  situated  to  the 
east  of  mount  Hayes,  as  he  came  from  the  south,  that  is,  from  the  plateau 
of  the  Copper  river.  He  observed  at  its  south  foot  a  comparatively  recent 
granite,  not  dynamically  altered,  and  then  deformed  gabbro  and  diabase,  but 
within  the  chain  only  the  same  schists  (here  termed  Tanana  schists)  as  those 
which  surround  the  gneiss  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  and  form  many  of 
the  south-westerly  striking  chains  of  the  west  (Kaiyuh  and  others)  ^.  Accord- 
ing to  Eldridge's  observations,  the  same  schists  extend  in  a  broad  zone  to 

1  W.  C.  Mendenhall  and  F.  Schrader,  The  Mineral  Resources  of  the  Mount  Wrangell 
District,  Al.,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Prof.  Papers,  no.  15, 1903, 71  pp.,  maps,  in  particular  pp.  46 
and  66. 

A.  H.  Brooks,  A  Reconnaissance  in  the  Tanana  and  White  River  Basins,  U.S.  Geol. 
Surv.  Ann.  Rep.,  1900,  XX,  7,  pp.  425-509,  maps,  in  particular  p.  452. 

^  W.  C.  Mendenhall,  A  Reconnaissance  from  Resurrection  Bay  to  the  Tanana  River, 
Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1900,  XX,  7,  pp.  271-340,  maps,  in  particular  p.  313. 


368      THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMEEICA  [partv 


the  west-south-west  of  this  point  (in  long.  149°  W.),  where  they  reach  the 
principal  range,  on  the  west  side  of  which  lies  mount  McKinley.  They 
also  include,  to  the  east  of  this  mountain,  the  valley  of  the  Sushitna,  and 
on  the  right  bank  of  this  river  a  long  granite  ridge  rises  out  of  them  ^. 

The  structure  of  mount  McKinley  (20,300  feet  =  6,187  meters),  and 
of  mount  Foraker  (17,100  feet  =  5,212  meters),  which  lies  24  kilometers 
more  to  the  south,  is  described  by  Brooks  as  follows. 

The  lowest  member  occurs  on  the  north  side,  and  is  probably  a  true 
Archaean  gneiss.  We  again  encounter  a  metamorphic,  often  gneiss-like, 
conglomerate.  Above  these  follows  a  series  of  schist  and  phyllite,  above 
these  again  limestones,  slates,  and  sandy  beds  with  lower  Silurian  fossils, 
then  Devonian  limestone,  which  is  widely  distributed.  Finally,  a  thick 
series  of  sandstone  and  shale,  with  Mesozoic  fossils,  follows  on  in  the  south. 
This  last-named  series  completely  wedges  out  towards  the  north-east.  The 
highest  peaks  of  mount  McKinley  and  mount  Foraker  are  probably  formed 
by  a  band  of  comparatively  recent  intrusive  granite  or  grano-diorite.  We 
have  already  mentioned  a  second  and  similar  granite  range  in  the  Sushitna 
valley  ^. 

Thus  the  sediments  succeed  one  another  in  the  order  of  their  age,  from 
north  to  south,  while  in  the  Romanzov  range  the  succession  is  from  south 
to  north. — 

The  principal  range  of  the  Alaska  mountains  rises  in  lat.  62°  N.  to  heights 
of  10,000  feet,  and  reaches  lake  Clark  with  a  height  of  5,000  to  6,000  feet. 
To  the  east  of  the  lake  the  valley  of  the  Sushitna  opens  out  to  a  breadth 
of  140  kilometers  above  Cook  inlet.  The  ancient  schist  range  disappears 
beneath  a  belt  of  Kenai  sediments,  and  we  reach  a  broad,  low-lying 
alluvial  land  which  extends  to  Cook  inlet. 

To  the  west  of  this  flat  tract,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  lower  Yentna, 
rises  the  lonely  peak  of  Yenlo  mountain  (lat.  62°  8'  N.,  long.  151°  15'  W., 
3,000  to  4,000  feet).  Pumice  occurs  at  its  foot ;  according  to  Spurr  it  is 
the  most  northerly  of  the  Aleutian  volcanos. 

The  interior  of  the  wild  Talkeetna  range  is  unknown.  On  the  west  it 
is  bounded  by  the  valley  of  the  Sushitna,  to  the  south-east  by  the  Matanuska 
valley.  The  river  Matanuska  rises  on  the  summit  of  the  Copper  river 
plateau,  and,  following  a  south-westerly  course,  reaches  Knik  bay.  It 
seemed  to  Martin  to  lie  in  a  trough,  11-13  kilometers  broad,  bounded  by 
fairly  straight  and  parallel  fractures.  But  it  is  possible  that  the  trough- 
like appearance  is  due  to  the  greater  resistance  of  the  bordering  rocks. 

'  G.  H.  Eldridge,  A  Reconnaissance  in  the  Sushitna  Basin  and  adjacent  Territory, 
ibid.,  pp.  7-29,  maps. 

2  A.  H.  Brooke  and  D.  L.  Reaburn,  Plan  for  Climbing  Mount  McKinley,  Nat.  Geogr. 
Mag.,  1903,  XIV,  pp.  30-35,  map  ;  Brooks,  Preliminary  Report  in  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1902- 
1903,  XIV,  pp.  94-102  ;  Geography  and  Geology,  p.  34  et  seq.,  map,  pi.  XI. 


cH.x]  PENINSULA  OF  ALASKA  369 

Mendenhall  found  Aucella  crassicollis  and  Belemnites.  Brown  coal  and 
anthracite  coal-measures,  which  are  probably  Mesozoic,  are  also  present  ^. 

The  Tordrillo  range,  which  has  been  crossed  by  Spurr,  is  a  secondary 
ridge  of  the  Alaska  range  with  ill-defined  boundaries.  All  its  rocks  are 
late  Mesozoic.  These  are — basic  lavas  or  tuffs,  alternating  with  granitic 
arkose,  upon  these  lie  black  shales,  impure  limestone,  and  arkose  with  plant- 
remains,  the  whole  forming  a  syncline  and  traversed  by  numerous  and 
diversified  dykes  (aplite  to  gabbro).  Most  of  them  run  parallel  with  the 
strike.  The  middle  crest  of  the  range  (Cathedral  Peak,  5,500  feet,  1,676 
meters)  is  a  dyke  of  this  kind,  formed  of  quartziferous  syenite,  and  some 
meters  in  breadth^. 

We  must  once  more  make  a  hasty  survey  of  the  fiat  country  at  the 
head  of  Cook  inlet.  The  volcanic  mountain  of  Yenlo  has  been  mentioned 
already.  The  solitary  mount  Sushitna,  rising  to  the  west  of  the  mouth  of 
the  Sushitna,  consists  of  granite  of  unknown  age.  Although  the  valley 
of  the  Sushitna  is  the  most  important  elongation  of  the  flat  land,  yet  we 
shall  see  directly  that  the  valleys  of  the  Knik  and  Matanuska  form  the 
tectonic  continuation  of  Cook  inlet. 

The  Alaskan  peninsula  (II,  p.  196).  Scarcely  any  part  of  the  Pacific 
festoon  is  so  well  known  as  this  peninsula,  together  with  Shelikof  strait 
and  Cook  inlet.  Since  the  facts  concerning  this  region  are  of  an  unexpected 
nature  they  demand  close  consideration. 

The  lofty  chain  of  Alaska,  as  we  have  already  seen,  reaches  lake  Clark 
(between  lats.  61°  and  60°  N.)  on  the  south.  A  series  of  other  great  lakes — 
Iliamna,  Kukaklek,  Naknek,  Besharof — extends  down  through  the  penin- 
sula to  the  lakes  of  Ugashik,  which  reach  lat.  57°  15'  N.  They  all 
discharge  to  the  west,  through  a  belt  of  flat  land  into  Bristol  bay. 

A  very  long  and  narrow  zone  of  granite,  marked  in  places  as  syenite, 
extends  through  the  peninsula,  generally  keeping  close  to  the  zone  of  the 
lakes.  That  it  is  the  direct  continuation  of  the  Alaska  range  cannot  be 
shown.  It  probably  represents  a  coulisse  situated  a  little  further  east, 
and  the  isolated  granite  mountain  Sushitna  may  perhaps  belong  to  it.  In 
any  case  it  makes  its  appearance  as  a  continuous  zone  in  lat.  60°  N. ; 
it  becomes  somewhat  broader  in  mount  Johnson,  south  of  lake  Naknek, 
strikes  across  the  western  ends  of  the  succeeding  lakes,  and,  according  to  the 
accounts  by  Purington  (in  Dall),  extends  along  the  west  side  of  the  peninsula 
into  the  neighbourhood  of  Port  Moller  (lat.  56°  N.).  Grewingk  marks 
it  at  some  points  even  further  to  the  south. 

Spurr  was  the  first  to  show  that  this  granite  range,  extending  through 

1  W.  C.  Mendenhall,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Surv.,  XX,  7,  p.  307  et  seq.  ;  G.  C.  Martin, 
A  Reconnaissance  of  the  Matanuska  Coal  Field,  U.S.  Geo].  Surv.  Bull.,  no.  289,  1906, 
36  pp.,  map,  in  particular  p.  17. 

2  E.  J.  Spurr,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  XX,  7,  pp.  149,  225,  et  passim. 

SOLLAS  IV^  B  b 


370       THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMERICA    [part  v 


four  degrees  of  latitude,  is  of  pre- Jurassic  age  ^.  This  is  apparent  from  the 
presence  of  Jurassic  granite-conglomerate  and  Jurassic  arkose. 

Apart  from  the  upturned  schists  in  Woody  island  (Kadiak),  the  oldest 
sediments  are  the  Trias  beds  with  Pseudomonotis  siibcircularis  at  the 
entrance  to  Cold  bay,  lat.  57°  40'  N.,  and  on  a  promontory  situated  further 
north  2.  Pompecki  assigns  the  fossils  of  Kialagvit  bay  (lat.  57°  30'  N.)  to 
the  upper  Lias  ^. 

The  classification  of  the  upper  beds  has  been  made  by  Martin  and 
Stanton 

According  to  these  investigators  the  oldest  and  most  certainly  known 
member  of  the  Jurassic  presents  the  following  characters  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  lat.  60°  N.  It  begins  with  a  bed  of  granitic  conglomerate,  followed 
by  about  3,000  feet  of  dark  sandy  shales,  with  bands  of  limestone  and 
many  fossils.  In  the  lower  beds  bivalves  chiefly  occur;  in  the  upper, 
Cadoceras,  Macrocephalites,  Stephanoceras,  Phylloceras,  and  other  genera ; 
also  numerous  examples  of  Inoceramus,  and  isolated  plant-remains,  such  as 
Sagenopteris  Goeppertiana  and  others. 

This  is  Martin's  Enochkin  (Inosskin)  stage ;  according  to  Stanton  it  is 
equivalent  to  the  Kelloway.  Petroleum  has  been  found  in  it,  and  borings 
have  been  made  to  a  depth  of  over  1,000  feet.  It  corresponds  to  the  beds 
of  Katmai  (lat.  58°  N.),  previously  assigned  by  Pompecki  to  the  Kelloway, 
and  is  known  far  towards  the  south  at  many  localities  on  the  east  side  of 
the  granite  range.  It  is  also  visible  at  Anchor  point  (Kenai)  on  the  opposite 
shore  of  Cook  inlet. 

It  is  covered  by  Spurr's  Nakneh  stage.  According  to  Martin's  account  there 
are  first  290  feet  of  a  granite-conglomerate  and  ancient  schist  with  andesitic 
ash  in  the  matrix,  and  then  frequently  repeated  layers  of  sandstone  and 
andesite.  On  the  coast  of  Chinitna  bay  (west  side  of  Cook  inlet)  this 
alternating  series  reaches  a  thickness  of  over  5,000  feet.  This  is  the 
horizon  of  Aucella  Pallasi.  Stanton  also  mentions  forms  allied  to  Gardio- 
ceras  alternans  and  Cardioceras  cordatum,  and  correlates  the  Naknek 

^  E.  J.  Spurr,  ibid.,  pp.  145-147,  232,  map.  A  list  of  the  older  works  in  Grewingk, 
p.  193. 

^  In  vol.  II,  p.  197,  the  locality  mentioned  by  Pinart  is  given  as  cape  Nunakhalkak, 
situated  about  lat.  58°  20'  N.  According  to  Dall  (Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  XVII, 
1,  p.  870)  the  point  lies  in  Cold  bay  in  lat.  57°  40'  N. ;  Martin  (Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv., 
no.  250,  p.  53)  calls  the  same  cape  on  the  north-east  side  of  Cold  bay  cape  Kekurnoi. 

^  J.  F.  Pompecki,  Jura-FossilieH  aus  Alaska,  Verb.  Russ.  k.  Min.  Ges.  St.  Petersb., 
1900,  2.  Ser.,  XXXVIII,  pp.  239-280;  Hyatt  (Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  XVII,  1,  p.  906) 
mentions  doubtful  Lias  in  Kamishak  bay  (lat.  59'  -  59°  30'  N.) ;  Dall  (ibid.)  assigns 
Kialagvit  to  the  lower  Oolite. 

*  G.  C.  Martin,  The  Petroleum  Fields  of  the  Pacific  Coast  of  Alaska,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv. 
Bull.,  no.  250,  1905,  pp.  37-59,  maps;  T.  W.  Stanton  and  Martin,  Mesozoic  Section  on 
Cook  Inlet  and  Alaska  Peninsula,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1904,  XVI,  pp.  391-410,  maps. 


CH.  x]  THE  NAKNEK  STAGE  371 

stage  with  the  Volga  stage  of  Eussia.  The  Ammonites  mentioned  above 
suggest  that  somewhat  lower  stages  are  also  present. 

The  two  members  of  the  Jurassic,  Enochkin  and  Naknek,  extend  from 
61°  N.  through  at  least  five  degrees  of  latitude.  At  a  few  localities  they 
are  associated  with  Neocomian  containing  Aucella  crassicoUis ;  near  Port 
MoUer  (lat.  56°  N.)  the  peninsula  is  only  9  kilometers  broad,  and  consists 
only  of  the  two  Aucella  beds. 

The  middle  and  upper  Cretaceous  are  known  at  a  few  localities,  both  as 
plant-bearing  beds  and  as  beds  containing  Inoceramus. 

The  Tertiary  series  begins  with  the  typical  Eocene  containing  Veneri- 
cardia  planicosta,  which  Palache  discovered  in  Stepovak  bay  (nearly 
opposite  Port  Moller)^ 

The  coal-bearing  Kenai  stage  occurs  with  regular  bedding  north  of 
Cook  inlet  on  the  lower  course  of  the  Sushitna  and  in  Knik  bay,  and  attains 
a  considerable  development  in  its  course  through  west  Kenai  down  to 
Kachemak  bay.  It  also  occurs  near  Tyonek  (north  of  lat.  61°  N.)  on  the 
west  coast  of  the  inlet.  Andesitic  ashes  and  tuffs  are  often  interbedded 
with  it.    Isolated  patches  are  encountered  far  to  the  south. 

The  Kenai  stage  is  followed  on  the  south  by  conglomerates  with  drift- 
wood, the  Unga  stage  of  Dall,  which  is  well  known  to  the  inhabitants  on 
account  of  the  amber  it  contains.  It  is  covered  by  marine  beds,  charac- 
terized by  a  great  Crepidula^. 

The  Enochkin  (Kelloway)  and  Naknek  (Volga)  stage  thus  comprise 
a  very  considerable  part  of  the  east  coast  of  the  peninsula.  On  the  west 
side  of  the  Kenai  peninsula,  and  probably  of  Kadiak  island  also,  there  are 
indications  that  these  stages  strike  on  beneath  Cook  inlet,  and  probably 
beneath  Shelikof  strait.  As  far  as  we  can  judge,  all  the  lofty  and  recent 
volcanos  are  seated  upon  them,  from  Ujakushatsh  (Burnt  mountain  or 
Redoubt  volcano,  lat.  60°  30'  N.)  onwards.  The  period  of  the  andesitic 
eruptions  here  dates  hack  at  least  as  far  as  the  Volga  stage  or  the  upper 
Jurassic.  We  have  already  seen  that  in  east  Hokkaido  the  southern 
part  of  the  volcanic  zone  of  the  Kuriles  dates  at  least  from  the  upper 
Cretaceous. 

Proceeding  from  west  to  east  in  that  part  of  the  peninsula  which  lies 
south  of  lat.  60°  N.,  we  first  meet,  according  to  Martin's  account,  with  the 
granite  range;  it  forms  here  Grewingk's  Chigmit  mountains,  of  rugged 
aspect  and  with  an  average  height  of  3,500  feet  (1,067  meters).  Then 
follows,  to  all  appearance,  a  considerable  fault,  and  next  to  this  a  badly- 
crushed  and  narrow  anticline  of  the  Enochkin  stage,  then  comes  a  narrow 
syncline,  and  finally  a  broad  flat  saddle  (2,200  feet,  670  meters)  of  the  same 

^  C.  Palache,  Geology  about  Chichagof  Cove,  Stepovak  Bay,  with  Notes  on  Popof  and 
Unga  Islands,  in  Harriman,  Alaska,  IV,  pp.  69-98 ;  Dall,  torn,  cit.,  pp.  99-111. 
^  These  were  formerly  known  as  the  Nulato  beds  (II,  p.  197). 

B  b  2 


372       THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMERICA  [party 


stage ;  on  its  seaward  flank  this  is  vaulted  over  conformably  by  the  Naknek 
stage  ^. 

From  Naknek  lake,  Spurr  travelled  south-east  to  Katmai  (lat.  58°  N.) 
on  the  east  coast.  Here  the  peninsula  is  135  kilometers  broad.  In  the 
west  the  land  is  flat ;  then  we  reach  the  broad,  lower  part  of  the  lake ;  its 
shores  are  formed  of  syenite  and  hornblende  granite.  Towards  the  east 
the  lake  becomes  narrower.  Then  follows  a  green  granitic  arkose,  in 
almost  horizontal  beds,  with  Jurassic  fossils,  and  an  augite-andesite  which 
is  probably  contemporaneous.  The  arkose  follows  the  ascent  to  a  pass, 
3,500  feet  in  height,  which  lies  between  two  great  volcanos ;  on  the  right 
glaciers  descend.  Below  the  pass  quantities  of  very  hot  water  break 
forth  and  form  a  rapidly  flowing  stream.  Towards  the  east  we  now 
look  down  a  broad  valley  in  the  direction  of  Shelikof  strait.  The 
arkose  continues  beyond  the  volcanos,  and  its  bedding  retains  its  almost 
horizontal  position,  only  becoming  slightly  upturned  in  the  direction  of  one 
of  the  volcanos.  It  is  not  until  we  reach  the  vicinity  of  the  sea,  near 
Katmai,  that  it  again  shows  slight  upturning.  From  this  locality  the 
specimens  of  Cadoceras  and'  other  fossils  described  by  Pompecki  are 
derived.  Just  to  the  north  of  it,  in  Amalik  harbour,  Ball  observed  coarse 
sandstone  with  some  poor  coal  seams,  dipping  30°  N.E. ;  a  little  further 
north,  near  cape  Douglas,  this  sandstone  lies  horizontal,  alternating  with 
flows  of  andesite,  and  here  it  contains  Sequoia  Langsdorfi  ^. 

Not  far  south  of  Katmai  lies  Cold  bay.  The  section  has  been  described 
by  Martin.  Here  also  the  land  to  the  west  is  flat.  The  granite  range 
strikes  past  lake  Besharof  and  the  Ugashik  lakes  on  the  west ;  it 
includes  the  most  westerly  part  of  lake  Besharof.  Then  come  the 
Jurassic  arkoses  and  sandstones.  Upon  these  rises  the  volcano  of  Feulik 
(5,000  feet),  separating  the  lakes.  The  Enochkin  stage  is  thrown  into 
broad  folds  parallel  to  the  east  coast ;  in  the  axis  of  an  anticline  which  is 
incomplete  in  the  direction  of  the  sea,  or,  according  to  another  account,  in 
consequence  of  an  over  thrust,  the  Trias  is  exposed  to  the  north-east  of 
Cold  bay.  The  Naknek  stage  prevails  to  the  south-west  of  this  bay, 
towards  the  interior  and  also  in  the  direction  of  Katmai^. 

Let  us  now  cross  Cook  inlet. 

The  eastern  side  of  the  Kenai  peninsula  is  occupied  by  inhospitable 
ancient  mountains,  which  we  shall  presently  describe  as  the  Kenai  range. 
The  greater  part  of  the  western  side  is  formed  by  an  extensive  plateau  of 
Kenai  beds,  unconformably  superposed,  partly  on  the  ancient  range 
mentioned  above,  and  partly  on  the  Mesozoic  beds,  as  is   shown  by 

'  Martin,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Bull.,  no.  250,  1905,  p.  46,  map. 
E.  J.  Spurr,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  XX,  7  ;  Dall,  Report  on  Coal  and  Lignite  of 
Alaska,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Ann.  Rep.,  1896,  VII,  1,  pp.  763-908,  maps,  in  particular  p.  798. 
3  G.  C.  Martin,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Bull.,  no.  250,  1905,  p.  50,  map. 


CH.X]  PENINSULA  OF  KENAI  373 

indications  on  the  shore.  We  have  already  pointed  out  that  it  may  be 
regarded  as  the  continuation  of  the  Kenai  beds  of  the  low -lying  tract 
at  the  head  of  Cook  inlet. 

Furuhjelm  and  Oswald  Heer  have  shown  that  in  the  south  of  the  Kenai 
peninsula,  lat.  59°  21'  N.,  the  leaf -bearing  beds  rest  unconformably  on  the 
irregular  surface  of  crystalline  rocks,  and  that  they  are  characterized  as 
a  true  freshwater  deposit  by  Trapa,  Unio,  and  Paludina^.  From  lat. 
59°  30'  N.  onwards,  Kachemak  bay,  running  towards  the  north-east,  cuts 
deep  into  the  main  body  of  the  peninsula.  Its  north  side  is  formed  by 
a  declivity,  as  much  as  550  meters  in  height,  which  exposes  numerous  coal 
seams  lying  undisturbed  one  above  the  other.  As  early  as  the  eighteenth 
century  this  remarkable  series  was  mentioned  by  Portlock  and  by  Russian 
investigators.    It  has  been  described  by  Dall  and  Stone  ^. 

The  declivity  in  the  direction  of  Kachemak  is  the  south  side  of  a  table- 
land, almost  130  kilometers  in  length  and  40  kilometers  in  breadth,  which 
sinks  gradually  on  the  north  towards  the  Turnagain  arm  (lat.  61°  N.). 
The  bedding  lies  in  broad  and  gentle  undulations.  Near  cape  Kussilof 
(lat.  60°  22f  N.)  the  coal-measures  sink  beneath  the  sea.  On  Turnagain 
creek  the  tableland  is  only  15  meters  high,  but  north  of  Turnagain  it 
reappears,  and  from  this  point,  as  we  have  seen,  its  continuations  penetrate 
into  the  lower  part  of  the  river  valleys. 

Let  us  now  return  to  Kachemak  bay. 

Beneath  the  Kenai  beds  folded  tuff  and  sandstone  containing  Jurassic 
fossils  occur,  and  beneath  these  Palache  observed  at  several  localities, 
notably  in  Halibut  cove,  red  and  green  Radiolarian  rocks,  thinly  bedded, 
intensely  folded,  and  associated  with  diabase,  or  at  one  locality  with  gabbro. 
Emerson  thinks  they  may  correspond  with  the  '  Franciscan  series '  of 
California.    They  rest  on  the  ancient  schist  of  the  Kenai  range  ^. 

In  the  Shumagin  group  (lat.  55°  30'  to  54°  30'  N.)  the  eastern  islands 
are  granitic ;  further  west,  metamorphic  schists  and  quartzites  prevail. 
The  largest  island,  Ungay  lies  farthest  west,  and  nearest  to  the  east  coast 
of  the  peninsula  where,  in  the  neighbouring  bay  of  Stepovak,  Eocene  with 
Venericardia  planicosta  is  said  to  occur.  Unga,  like  the  island  of  Popof 
which  lies  close  to  it,  consists  of  gently  undulating,  coal-bearing  Kenai 
beds,  covered  by  the  Unga  conglomerates,  upon  which  rest  marine  beds 
with  Crepidula*. 

1  0.  Heer,  Flora  Foss.  Alaskana,  K.  svenska  Vet.  Akad.  Handl.,  1869,  VIII,  no.  4. 

2  Dall,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  XVII,  1,  p.  787  et  seq. ;  R.  W.  Stone,  Coal  Fields 
of  the  Kachemak  Bay  Region,  Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1906,  no.  277,  pp.  53-73,  maps. 

^  Emerson,  in  Harriman,  Alaska,  IV,  p.  26 ;  F.  H.  Moffit,  Gold  Fields  of  the  Turnagain 
Arm  Region,  Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1906,  no.  277,  pp.  1-52,  map  ;  in  particular  p.  16 
et  seq. 

*  Dall,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  XVII,  1,  p.  867  et  seq.,  map. 


374       THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMERICA  [party 

The  following  is  a  generalized  section  of  Cook  inlet :  (1)  granite ; 
(2)  Kelloway  and  Volga  beds,  and  andesitic  rocks,  which  were  erupted 
during  the  deposition  of  a  part  of  these  beds ;  zone  of  the  existing 
volcanos  ;  (3)  Cook  inlet ;  (4)  platform  of  the  Kenai  beds,  resting  first  on 
(5)  lower  Jurassic  and  Kadiolarian  beds,  and  then  on  (6)  the  ancient 
Kenai  range;  (7)  the  foredeep;  and  (8)  the  Ocean. 

The  Kenai  plateau  shows  that  this  region  was  once  covered  with  fresh 
water  for  a  great  distance  towards  the  south.  A  comparison  with  other 
regions,  and  in  particular  the  disposition  of  the  Kenai  beds  themselves, 
enable  us  to  recognize  the  existence  here  of  a  trough  produced  by  repeated  sub- 
sidences along  strike  faults.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  the  group  of 
the  Wrangell  volcanos  certainly  lies  in  a  trough,  as  we  shall  be  able  to  show 
later,  and  that  Mesozoic  beds  strike  away  in  the  direction  of  Cook  inlet 
through  Matanuska  towards  the  plateau  of  the  Copper  river  and  towards 
Wrangell  Land.  We  have  already  seen  that  the  valley  of  the  Matanuska 
also  gave  Martin  the  impression  of  a  trough. 

The  Aleutian  islands.  In  spite  of  the  general  descriptions  by  Grewingk, 
Dall,  and  Becker,  it  is  difficult  to  form  any  definite  opinion  as  to  the 
basement  rock  of  the  Aleutian  islands.  As  yet  it  is  known  to  us  only  at 
isolated  localities,  remote  from  one  another.  Diorite,  resembling  that  of 
cape  Karluk  (north-west  Kadiak),  is  mentioned  as  occurring  in  North 
Unalaska ;  the  horneblende-andesite  of  the  volcanos  Bogosslovsk  and 
Grewingk,  which  were  newly  formed  to  the  north  of  Unalaska  in  1790 
and  1883,  is  said  to  contain  boulders  of  a  similar  diorite  ^.  Attn,  far  to 
the  west,  consists  of  ancient  rocks,  such  as  quartzite,  diorite,  and  others. 

Tertiary  sediments  frequently  occur ;  both  the  Kenai  beds  and  the 
marine  stage  are  represented.  Basaltic  or  andesitic  lavas  are  often  inter- 
calated in  them  2. 

The  great  volcanic  cones,  with  their  broad  base,  play  by  far  the  most 
important  part  in  the  structure  of  the  long  arc.  Not  a  few  of  them  reach 
a  height  of  3,000  meters.  The  number  of  volcanos  which  have  been  active, 
or  at  least  smoking,  since  the  last  century  may  be  placed  at  forty-two, 
according  to  Becker's  critical  list,  which  includes  all  those  situated  between 
the  Ujakushatsh  in  Cook  inlet  (long.  152°  45'  W.)  and  Little  Sitkin  (long. 
178°  30'  E.).  Yenlo  rises  on  the  other  side  of  Ujakushatsh;  Kiska,  on  the 
other  side  of  Little  Sitkin  (long.  177°  30'  E.),  consists  of  hornblende- 
andesite,  and  Buldir  (long.  176°  E.)  is  an  ancient  cone. 

We  cannot  look  through  Grewingk's  and  Becker's  lists  without  a  feeling 
of  astonishment  at  the  uniform  manner  in  which  the  smoking  craters  are 

^  Becker  has  described  both  the  new  volcanos  in  Reconnaissance  of  the  Gold  Fields  of 
South  Alaska,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  (1896-1897),  1898,  XVIII,  3,  p.  25  et  seq. 

2  Dall  and  Harris,  Correlation  Papers,  Neocene,  Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1892,  no.  84, 
pi.  TTI,  p.  268. 


CH.X]     ALEUTIAN  AND  COMMANDEK  ISLANDS  375 


distributed  over  this  long  tract.  A  considerable  gap  occurs  only  between  the 
volcanos  St.  Augustine  (long.  153°  dV  W.)  and  Venjaminov  (long.  159°  W.), 
that  is,  to  just  beyond  the  middle  of  the  peninsula  of  Alaska;  but  from 
Pavlov  (long.  161°  W.)  to  Little  Sitkin  (long.  178°  30'  E.)  there  is  scarcely 
any  interval  greater  than  IJ  to  at  most  2  degrees  of  longitude.  Between 
these  smoking  volcanos  lie  a  great  number  of  hot  springs ;  Venjaminov 
observed  one  of  them  (volcano  of  Sevidovski,  long.  168°  12'  E.,  on  Unimak) 
in  the  rhythmically  active  or  geyser  state  ^.  Transverse  fissures  are  not 
mentioned ;  the  new  volcanos  of  Bogosslovsk  and  Grewingk  stand  slightly 
inside  the  arc. 

The  volcano  of  Bogosslovsk  (lat.  53°  56'  N.,long.  167°  57'  W.)  was  formed, 
as  already  mentioned,  in  the  year  1790.  In  the  spring  of  1883  volcanic 
phenomena  were  observed  in  its  neighbourhood ;  a  second  new  volcano, 
to  which  Dall  has  given  the  name  of  Grewingk,  began  to  rise  out  of  the 
sea.  In  October,  1883,  it  reached  its  maximum  activity,  and  at  the  same 
time,  far  away  from  this  locality,  the  volcano  of  St.  Augustine,  in  Cook 
inlet  (lat.  59°  23'  N.,  long.  153°  51'  W.),  burst  into  eruption  for  the  first 
time  since  it  was  known,  that  is  for  at  least  a  century.  Direct  communi- 
cation at  so  great  a  distance  can  scarcely  be  proved,  but,  quite  apart  from 
this  occurrence,  the  Aleutian  arc  shows  a  degree  of  unity  and  continuity  in 
the  distribution  of  its  eruptive  centres  which  is  hardly  rivalled  b}^  any 
other  volcanic  series. 

The  Commander  islands,  situated  far  to  the  west,  consist  of  two  strips 
of  land  directed  to  the  north-west,  that  is  in  the  direction  continuing  the 
Aleutian  arc.  Bering  island,  the  larger  of  the  two  (about  80  kilometers  in 
length),  is  not  so  elevated  as  the  other.  Copper  island.  The  presence  of 
native  copper  on  the  latter  has  led  to  the  conjecture  that  older  rocks  exist 
here  in  place.  But  we  now  know  that  the  copper  is  cast  up  by  the  sea. 
Grebnitzky  and  Dawson  have  shown  that  these  islands,  or  at  least  the 
greater  part  of  them,  are  formed  of  basalt  and  Tertiary  beds.  Lignite  is 
known  in  Bering  island,  and  the  table-mountains  (Stolovoi)  contain  marine 
fossils.  At  one  locality  in  Copper  island  beds  are  known  standing  almost 
vertical.  Earthquakes  are  of  frequent  occurrence.  In  clear  weather  the 
summits  of  the  volcanos  of  Kamchatka  are  visible  ^. 

Many  problems  present  themselves  in  connexion  with  the  foregoing 
facts.  In  the  islands  the  line  of  active  volcanos,  according  to  Becker, 
produces  andesitic  lavas  exclusively.    In  the  Tertiary  beds  basalts  pre- 

^  Grewingk,  p.  132.  A  description  of  Unimak  is  given  by  F.  Westdahl,  Mountains  on 
Unimak  island,  Nat.  Geogr.  Mag.,  1903,  XIV,  pp.  92-99. 

2  N.  A.  Grebnitzky,  Commander  Islands,  published  by  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and 
Dominions,  8vo,  St.  Petersburgh,  1902,  47  pp.,  in  particular  pp.  3-5  ;  Dawson,  Geological 
Notes,  &c.,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1894,  V,  pp.  123-127  ;  and  Nordenskjold,  Die  Umseglung 
Asians,  p.  276. 


376       THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMERICA   [pakt  v 


dominate.  In  general,  the  Tertiary  eruptive  rocks  are  distributed,  not  only 
here  but  over  the  whole  of  the  lower  course  of  the  Yukon,  and  in  the 
islands  of  Bering  sea  down  to  the  Asiatic  coasts,  in  such  a  way  that 
the  existing  volcanic  arc  appears,  exactly  as  in  Kamchatka,  to  represent 
the  restricted  remains  of  an  eruptive  activity  luhich  was  originally  much 
more  extensive. 

Equally  surprising  is  the  lie  of  the  Tertiary  sediments.  On  the  lower 
Yukon  their  folding  is  so  considerable  that  Spurr  described  the '  Post-Kenai- 
Re volution'  as  one  of  the  most  important  phases  of  mountain  formation. 
In  the  peninsula  of  Kenai  itself  they  form,  on  the  other  hand,  in  face  of 
the  great  volcanos,  a  vast,  downthrown,  but  scarcely  folded  platform. 
It  is  easy  to  see  that  the  marine  stage  is  continued  far  towards  the  west, 
and  forms  table-mountains,  even  in  Bering  island.  But  it  is  much  harder 
to  understand  how  the  leaf -bearing  Kenai  stage  could  find  the  conditions 
necessary  for  its  formation  on  the  other  side  of  Cook  inlet.  It  is  true 
that  in  the  more  westerly  parts  of  the  archipelago  the  presence  of  this 
stage  is  only  based  on  the  occurrence  of  driftwood  and  amber,  but  we  have 
already  mentioned  that  near  Port  Moller,  on  the  west  side  of  the  peninsula, 
beds  of  coal  are  present  next  the  open  water  of  Bering  sea  (long.  160°  45' W.), 
and  this  is  also  the  case  in  Makushkin  bay,  Unalaska  (long.  167°  W.). 

The  Kenai  range.  Ancient  rocks  crop  out  in  several  of  the  Shumagin 
islands  ;  we  may  leave  it  an  open  question  whether  or  not  they  belong  to 
the  zone  which  we  are  about  to  discuss.  Dark  shales  and  sandstone,  and 
more  widely  distributed  older  rocks  which  are  not  so  exactly  known,  form 
Kadiak  and  Apognak,  and  the  mountains  of  eastern  and  southern  Kenai, 
3,000  to  4,000  feet  in  height ;  at  the  end  of  Cook  inlet  they  are  separated 
from  the  Chugatsk  range  only  by  the  Eyd  of  Turnagain.  At  the  same 
time  an  archipelago  here  emerges  from  the  sea  next  Chugatsk  bay  (Prince 
William  sound),  which  is  composed  of  not  less  than  fifty  rocky  islands,  of 
greater  or  less  size,  some  as  much  as  3,000  feet  in  height,  and  generally 
elongated  towards  the  north-west  in  the  direction  of  the  strike,  like  the 
island  of  Montague,  72  kilometers  in  length.  The  bay  itself  is  surrounded 
by  the  Chugatsk  range,  deeply  incised  by  a  number  of  fjords,  and  the 
promontories  between  the  fjords,  5,000  to  6,000  feet  in  height,  partly 
correspond  in  position  to  the  islands  mentioned  above.  The  range  is  here 
about  80  kilometers  in  breadth,  and  a  few  peaks  exceed  8,000  feet.  It  is 
strongly  glaciated  and  difficult  of  access. 

The  chief  features  in  the  structure  of  this  great  range  have  been  deter- 
mined by  Schrader  and  his  colleagues,  whose  self-sacrificing  devotion  to 
the  task  cannot  be  sufficiently  acknowledged.  The  range  surrounds  the  bay, 
and  the  strike  is  west-south-west  to  east  and  west.  All  the  rocks  are 
intensely  folded,  and  inclined,  as  a  rule,  towards  the  north ;  but,  since  the 
oldest  strata  lie  towards  the  interior,  it  follows  that  the  range  is  overfolded 


CH.  X] 


SUEVEY  OF  THE  ALASKIDES 


877 


towards  the  south.  On  its  sharply  defined  northern  border  mica-schist, 
quartz-schist,  and  crystalline  limestone  (Klutina  series)  occur ;  they  are 
followed  towards  the  south  by  a  thick  series  of  altered,  bluish-green 
quartzite,  graphitic  clay-slates,  also  drawn-out  conglomerate  (Valdes  series) ; 
nearer  to  the  sea  a  massive  arkose  predominates,  with  a  great  quantity  of 
black  schist  and  isolated  beds  of  limestone  (Orca  series).  In  the  lower  part 
of  the  Orca  series  thick  sheets  of  copper-bearing  diabase  are  intercalated, 
especially  in  the  islands  of  Chugatsk  sound  \ 

The  Orca  series  is  correlated  by  Emerson  with  the  Yakutat  series, 
distinguished  by  Eussell  in  the  region  of  the  Elias  range  ^.  Fossils  and 
other  traces  of  organisms — which  have  been  described  by  Ulrich  from 
islands  near  the  village  of  Kadiak — among  them  Inoceromya  (very  similar 
to  Inoceramus),  Chondrites  divaricatus  and  others,  bear  a  striking  resem- 
blance to  the  fauna  of  the  upper  Cretaceous  Flysch  of  the  Alps.  In 
Europe  we  should  simply  describe  these  rocks  as  a  Flysch  zone  on  the 
outer  border  of  the  mountains. 

Survey  of  the  Alaskides.  Three  principal  branches  play  the  most 
important  part  in  the  structure  pf  the  virgation  of  the  Alaskides,  which 
opens  out  towards  the  west.  These  are:  the  Romanzov,  Alaska,  and 
Kenai  mountains. 

The  Romanzov  range  makes  its  appearance  in  long.  147°  W.  on  the  shore 
of  the  Arctic  Ocean,  and  thence  its  northern  border  extends  in  an  arc  to  cape 
Lisburne.  Where  it  is  best  known,  a  little  to  the  west  of  the  Flats,  it  is 
called  the  Endicott  range,  and  consists  of  ancient  gold-bearing  schists,  and 
further  on,  up  to  the  north  border,  of  Palaeozoic  beds.  On  the  other  side 
of  this  region  lies  a  Cretaceous  and  Tertiary  belt  which  extends  to  the 
tundra.  The  ancient  rocks  of  the  south  side  reach  Bering  sea  in  Kotzebue 
sound. 

The  intrusive  rocks  of  Seward  peninsula  extend  across  the  Diomedes 
islands  to  Asia,  and  are  repeated  elsewhere  in  the  Chukchi  peninsula. 
A  long  range  of  granite  and  gneiss  strikes  apparently  to  the  west-north- 
west, from  cape  Novosiltzev  to  Kolyutshin  and  Chaun  bay.  Chukchi 
peninsula  is  the  continuation  of  Seward  peninsula  and  of  a  part  of  the 
Romanzov  range,  but  the  great  arc,  concave  to  the  north,  which  first  trends 
south-south- west  in  the  east,  then  west  from  long.  152°  W.  onwards,  and 
still  almost  west  at  cape  Lisburne,  turns  probably  in  Kotzebue  sound 
to  the  west-north- west  in  Asia  and  to  the  north-north- west  in  the  New 
Siberian  islands. 

^  F.  C.  Schrader  and  A.  C.  Spencer,  The  Geology  and  Mineral  Resources  of  a  portion 
of  the  Copper  River  District,  publ.  by  the  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  8vo,  1901,  94  pp.,  maps  ; 
also  Schrader,  A  Reconnaissance  of  a  part  of  Prince  William  Sound  and  the  Copper 
River  District,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  (1898),  1900,  XX,  7,  pp.  347-423,  maps. 

2  Emerson,  in  Harriman,  Alaska,  IV,  p.  46 ;  E.  0.  Ulrich,  Fossils  and  Age  of  the 
Yakutat  formation,  torn,  cit.,  pp.  125-144. 


378      THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  AND  AMERICA   [paet  v 

The  Yukon  hills,  the  Gold  mountains,  as  well  as  the  Kaiyuh 
mountains,  to  the  south  of  the  Yukon,  which  reach  the  sea  north  of 
lat.  63°  N.,  are  intercalated  secondary  branches  of  the  great  virgation. 
The  Kuskokwim  mountains,  terminating  in  cape  Newenham,  are,  in  all 
essential  features,  a  Mesozoic  syncline,  and  cannot  be  regarded  as  a 
secondary  branch. 

The  Alaska  range  begins  on  the  south  side  of  the  Tanana,  and  for 
a  short  distance  it  runs  in  contact  with  the  south  side  of  the  gneiss  range 
of  the  Rocky  mountains.  It  ascends  rapidly  to  great  heights,  forms 
McKinley  peak,  loses  again  in  height,  and  reaches  lake  Clark. 

In  the  Alaska  range  the  zones  of  rock  are  arranged  in  an  opposite 
manner  to  those  of  the  Romanzov  range.  Gneiss  appears  as  the  foundation 
on  the  north  side ;  schists  form  the  main  range ;  an  intrusive  ridge  of 
granite  probably  forms  the  highest  peaks ;  a  second  granite  range  occurs  ! 
in  the  Sushitna  valley.  Palaeozoic  sediments  succeed,  and  an  outer  zone  | 
of  Mesozoic  slopes  away  towards  the  plateau  of  the  Copper  river.  ! 

The  long  Mesozoic  range,  which  bears  the  great  volcanos  in  the  Aleutian 
archipelago  and  the  peninsula  of  Alaska,  is  continued  through  the  Matanuska  > 
valley  into  the  western  border  of  the  plateau  of  the  Copper  river,  and  at  i 
the  same  time  into  the  Mesozoic  outer  border  of  the  Alaska  range.  Knik 
bay  becomes  the  tectonic  continuation  of  Cook  inlet,  and  this  inlet,  along 
with  Shelikof  strait,  assumes  the  characters  of  a  fault-trough,  owing  to  the 
presence  of  the  Tertiary  platform  in  Kenai. 

Although  traces  of  Tertiary,  and  even  more  recent,  volcanic  activity  are  j 
scattered  throughout  the  basin  of  the  lower  Yukon,  and  far  and  wide 
through  Alaska,  the  islands  of  Bering  sea  and  Chukchi  land,  yet  no  cone 
of  any  height,  nor  any  active  volcano,  is  anywhere  to  be  seen,  except  along 
the  arc  of  the  Aleutian  islands. 

The  rugged  Kenai  range  includes  east  Kenai  and,  at  the  least,  Kadiak 
also.  It  consists,  so  far  as  it  is  yet  known,  of  ancient  altered  sediments, 
and  a  Flysch-like  outer  zone  on  the  south ;  the  order  of  the  zones  of  rock 
corresponds  with  that  of  the  Alaska  range,  that  is,  the  younger  belt  lies  in 
the  south. 

Then  follows  the  foredeep. 

In  all  essential  characters  the  Alaskides  correspond  with  the  marginal  \ 
arcs  of  Asia,    They  are  a  member  of  the  same  series.    They  enter  into 
syntaxis  with  the  Rocky  mountains  and  the  Elias  range.    To  these  we 
shall  now  turn  our  attention.  j 


379 


CHAPTER  XI 
THE  END  OF  THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS 

Introduction.  1.  Rocky  mountains,  south  and  south-east.  Wyoming  and  Montana. 
Mackenzie  river.  Entry  of  the  Rocky  mountains  into  the  syntaxis.  2.  Beginning  of 
the  Intermediate  range.  Wrangell  volcanos.  The  Columbian  grano-diorite.  3.  Elias 
range.  Alexander  archipelago.  4.  Continuation  of  the  Intermediate  range.  Vancouver. 
Transverse  section  in  lat.  49°  N.    Cascade  range. 

When  we  previously  attempted  to  give  a  general  survey  of  North 
America  (I,  p.  553),  scarcely  anything  was  known  of  the  structure  of 
the  Alaskides  and  of  Mexico.  The  syntaxis  of  Chugatsk  and  the  con- 
nexion of  the  Antilles  with  the  mainland  were,  it  is  true,  correctly  conceived, 
as  is  shown  by  subsequent  investigation,  but  of  Central  America  our 
knowledge  was  so  slight,  that,  following  Humboldt,  we  still  assumed 
a  separation  of  the  chains  near  Tehuantepec,  while  in  fact  no  such  separa- 
tion exists. 

Our  studies  in  the  north  have  now  clearly  exposed  the  Asiatic  structure 
of  the  Alaskides. 

In  the  preceding  chapter  we  showed  that  the  same  structural  plan  and 
the  same  elements  are  repeated  in  the  Okhotides,  the  Anadyrides,  and  the 
Alaskides,  and  that  they  are  very  nearly  the  same  in  all  the  peripheral 
structures  of  Asia.  While,  however,  the  Alaskides,  though  not  situated  on 
the  periphery  of  Asia,  reproduce  these  characters,  yet  in  the  syntaxis  on  the 
east  they  so  closely  resemble  the  south-easterly  trending  chains  of  western 
America  that,  as  we  have  already  seen,  Brooks  applied  the  names  Kocky 
Mountains,  Central  Plateau  Region,  and  Pacific  Mountains  System,  on  both 
sides  of  the  syntaxis,  thus  following  in  the  main  the  division  into  Rocky 
Mountains,  Interior  Plateau,  and  Coast  Ranges,  which  Dawson  has  suggested 
for  Canada  in  1879. 

We  have  already  explained  our  reasons  for  making  a  change  of  name 
in  passing  from  one  side  of  a  syntaxis  to  the  other ;  but  with  the  exception 
of  the  altered  strike  there  is  much  resemblance  on  the  two  sides  even  with 
regard  to  the  structure.  For  example,  the  Alaskides  consist  of  an  outer 
part  folded  towards  the  Pacific  Ocean  (Kenai,  Alaska  range),  and  an  inner 
part,  turned  away  from  the  Ocean  and  folded  in  the  opposite  direction 
(Romanzov) ;  and  in  the  chains  running  to  the  south-east  the  same  opposi- 
tion is  to  be  found  between  a  part  turned  towards  the  Ocean  and  folded  in 
the  same  direction  (Elias  range),  and  another  part  (the  Rocky  mountains) 
folded  towards  the  east. 


380       THE  END  OF  THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS   [paet  v 


The  Asiatic  elements  are  present,  but  they  do  not  achieve  the  formation 
of  another  arc.  To  what  extent  this  has  been  prevented  by  the  position  of 
Laurentia  is  difficult  to  determine.  A  peculiar,  oblique  division  into 
coulisses,  which  distinguishes  the  whole  range  of  the  Rocky  mountains, 
is  repeated  in  New  Mexico.  The  free  ends  of  the  Rocky  mountains, 
resolved  into  coulisses,  lie  on  the  south-east  side  of  the  Colorado  Plateau 
(Sangre  de  Cristo,  among  other  ranges,  I,  pi.  VI).  They  form  the  eastern 
extremity  of  the  Asiatic  structure. 

The  second  element,  the  Interior  Plateau  Region,  is  not  very  clearly 
defined  in  Alaska,  and  there  includes  many  intermediate  members.  The 
Central  Plateau  of  Dawson,  however,  owes  its  name  to  a  Tertiary  platform 
beneath  which  folded  chains  continue  their  course.  Orographically,  it  is 
a  very  striking  part  of  the  system,  but  its  distinction  rests  on  a  secondary 
phenomenon  only.  Dawson  himself  subsequently  recognized  only  the 
Rocky  mountains  and  Coast  ranges  ^.  We  shall  adopt  a  slightly  different 
conception  of  this  part  of  the  system.  We  will  term  it  for  the  present  the 
Intermediate  range.  The  third,  and  western,  elements  will  then  be  repre- 
sented by  the  Elias  range.  It  terminates  fairly  far  in  the  north,  while  the 
Intermediate  range,  or  features  closely  allied  to  it,  are  continued  much 
further  south. 

In  the  south  the  rigid  Colorado  Plateau  (I,  p.  569),  which  extends  from 
lat.  33°-34°  to  lat.  40°  N.,  and  from  long.  114°  to  106°  W.,  stands  opposed 
to  the  long  chains  which  come  from  the  syntaxis.  The  Colorado  river  has 
cut  through  the  whole  stratified  succession  down  to  the  Archaean  gneiss. 
This  is  covered  unconformably  by  the  Algonkian  series.  This  series  has 
also  been  folded  and  worn  down.  It  is  covered,  also  unconformably,  by  a 
flat-bedded  series,  which  dates,  according  to  Walcott,  from  the  middle  Cam- 
brian period  at  least.  Since  that  period  the  plateau  has  been  subjected  to 
fracture  and  flexure,  but,  in  contrast  to  its  surroundings,  has  remained 
exempt  from  folding  2. 

Near  long.  104°  W.  and  lat.  36°  50'  N.  lies  the  town  of  Folsom ;  9  kilo- 
meters to  the  south  of  this  locality  the  slender  cone  of  mount  Capulin 
(9,000  feet,  2,743  meters)  rises  837  meters  above  a  lava  field  with  many 
small  volcanos.  North  of  Folsom  the  broad  basaltic  Mesa  de  Majo  rises  to 
a  far  greater  height  than  the  base  of  mount  Capulin.  Towards  the  west 
it  lies  up  against  the  slopes  of  Sangre  de  Cristo.  This  chain  terminates 
rather  suddenly  near  lat.  35°  30'  N.    The  basalt  platform,  here  known  as 

^  G.  M.  Dawson,  Physical  Geography  and  Geology  of  Canada,  reprinted  from  the 
Handbook  of  Canada  issued  by  the  British  Association,  8vo,  Toronto,  1897,  48  pp.,  in 
particular  p.  38. 

2  C.  D.  Walcott,  Pre-Cambrian  Igneous  Rocks  of  the  Unkar  Terrane,  Grand  Canyon, 
■with  Notes  on  the  petrographical  character  of  the  Lavas,  by  J.  P.  Iddings,  Rep.  U.S.  Geol. 
Surv.,  1890,  XIV,  pp.  497-524,  maps  ;  also  Davis,  Bull.  Mus.  Comp.  Zool.  Harvard  College, 
1901,  V. 


CH.  Xl] 


COLOEADO  PLATEAU 


881 


the  Mesa  de  Raton,  and  further  away  as  the  Plateau  de  las  Vegas  (1,800 
meters),  forms  a  belt  around  the  southern  end  of  Sangre  de  Cristo.  The 
basalt  covering  is  here  600  meters  thick,  and  rests  chiefly  on  folded 
Cretaceous,  lying  in  front  of  the  coulisses.    It  presents  a  long  and  narrow 


Fig.  29.  Tfie  Cclorado  Plateau  (after  Button). 
The  darker  parts  are  volcanic  rocks.    The  Uinta  mountains  are  included  on  the  north. 

continuation  to  the  south,  the  Glorieta  plateau  (east  of  Santa  Fe ;  further 
away,  Galisteo  Divide).  Still  further  south,  another  long  series  of  shorter 
horsts  (Sandia,  Manzano,  Serra  Oscura,  Serra  Andreas,  and  others)  succeeds, 
cut  up  by  more  or  less  meridional  faults.    Since  folding  and  overthrusting 


382       THE  END  OF  THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  [party 

are  still  to  be  seen  in  the  south  (Caballos  mountains,  lat.  33°  N.)  the  struc- 
ture presents  no  small  resemblance  to  that  of  the  Basin  Ranges.  Volcanos, 
some  of  very  recent  date,  accompany  this  system,  the  fractures  of  which 
are  in  part  post-Tertiary.  The  stratified  succession  approaches  that  of 
Texas ;  crystalline  rock  is  overlain  by  Carboniferous  limestone,  the  Red 
series,  and  the  Cretaceous  from  the  Dakota  stage  upwards. 

The  troughs  between  the  horsts  are  filled  high  with  debris  and  pebbles. 
The  largest  and  most  southerly  of  these  troughs,  the  once  ill-famed  Jornada 
del  Muerto  (Death  ride),  extends  for  a  distance  of  320  kilometers,  to  lat.  32°  N. 
and  beyond ;  it  is  a  true  '  bolson '  [closed  basin]. 

The  course  of  the  Rio  Grande  marks  approximately  the  western  border 
of  this  structure  from  lat.  35°  30'  onwards.  Here  we  have  the  free  ends 
of  the  Rocky  mountains  ^. 

In  our  brief  survey  of  the  structure  of  the  Rocky  mountains  we  will 
start  from  these  southern  latitudes.  Having  reached  the  syntaxis  in  the 
extreme  north,  we  will  again  turn  to  the  south  and  consider  the  western 
chains.  We  take  the  chains  in  this  unusual  order  because  we  are  thus 
enabled  to  discuss  the  syntaxis  as  a  whole,  and  also  its  relations  to  the 
Alaskides. 

1.  The  Rocky  Mountains  (I,  p.  561,  pi.  VI). 

The  south.  The  description  already  given  of  this  part  of  the  mountains 
enables  us  to  deal  briefly  Avith  it  here.  The  Rocky  mountains,  approaching 
the  Colorado  plateau  from  the  north  like  so  many  waves,  are  stowed 
against  its  northern  border  and  propagated  along  its  eastern  side  in  the 
direction  of  their  free  ends. 

The  stowing  of  the  first  wave  gives  rise  to  the  Uinta  range,  with  its 
westerly  trend.  On  the  north-east  border  of  the  plateau  this  wave 
turns  right  round  to  the  south,  forming  the  Elk  mountains,  the  great 
Sawatch  and  the  southerly-trending  Sangre  de  Cristo  with  its  smaller  out- 
runners. The  second  coulisse,  dammed  back  at  a  considerable  distance 
from  the  first,  forms  Park  range  and  South  park,  and  terminates  in  the 
Wet  mountains  (east  of  Sangre  de  Cristo).  The  third  forms  Medicine 
Bow  range  and  Front  range.  On  the  continuation  to  the  north-west  of 
this  or  the  preceding  coulisse,  lies  Wind  River  range,  which  forms,  together 
with  the  Grand  Teton,  the  north-east  side  of  the  triangular  area  draining 

^  R.  Hill,  Volcanic  Areas  of  Eastern  New  Mexico,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1892,  III, 
p.  98  et  passim ;  for  the  foundation  of  the  basalt,  Sangre  de  Cristo,  P.  H.  van  Diest, 
Plication  of  the  Coal  Measures  in  south-eastern  Colorado  and  north-eastern  New  Mexico, 
Proc.  Colorado  Sci.  Soc,  1888-1890,  III,  pp.  185-190 ;  for  the  south,  W.  T.  Lee,  Water 
Resources  of  the  Rio  Grande  Valley  in  New  Mexico,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Water  Supply  and 
Irrigation  Papers,  1907,  no.  188,  59  pp.,  map  ;  further,  C.  R.  Keyes,  Geology  and  Under- 
ground Water  Conditions  of  the  Jornado  del  Muerto,  New  Mexico,  op.  cit.,  1905,  no.  123, 
42  pp.,  map. 


CH.  Xl] 


COULISSES 


383 


into  the  upper  course  of  the  Green  river.  The  south  side  is  formed  by  the 
Uinta  mountains,  and  the  west  side  by  the  chains,  striking  north  and 
south,  which  do  not  belong  to  the  Rocky  mountains.  The  fourth  and  last 
coulisse  is  the  Laramie  mountains,  and  in  this  the  deflexion  to  the  west  is 
lost ;  it  runs  almost  due  north-north-west. 

The  free  end  of  each  of  these  coulisses  is  directed  to  the  south  or  south- 
south-east  and  lies  further  to  the  north  and  east  than  the  end  preceding 
it.  This  arrangement  gives  rise  to  the  re-entrant  angles  (parks  or  embay- 
ments)  which  open  towards  the  south-south-east  on  the  eastern  border  of 
the  range. 

The  sedimentary  covering  of  the  great  Archaean  gneiss-masses  not  only 
forms  a  belt  with  upturned  basset  edges  following  these  embayments  of 
the  mountain  border,  but  it  also  runs  deep  into  the  high  range,  in  the  form 
of  pinched-in  coulisse-boundaries. 

Thus,  we  have  a  plan  resembling  that  produced  by  the  fiat-foldings 
at  the  ends  of  Mont  Blanc  and  the  Aar  mass.  But  since  great  faults 
are  present,  which  cut  through  the  folds  at  an  acute  angle,  we  are  left  in 
doubt  as  to  whether  we  are  dealing  with  true  horsts  or  a  common  arching- 
up  of  the  longitudinal  axes  of  anticlines,  as  in  the  Alps. 

From  Huerfano  park  onwards,  a  continuous  strip  of  sediments  separates 
the  first  from  the  second  coulisse  as  far  as  the  mines  of  Leadville  and  Ten 
Mile.  Fig.  30  gives  the  plan  of  the  range  east  of  Leadville,  according 
to  Emmons.  Emmons  perceived  that,  later  disturbances  apart,  these 
regions  are  dominated  by  a  general  folding  which  strikes  N.  30°-40°  W., 
that  is,  obliquely  to  this  part  of  the  range.  At  the  point  where  the 
Mosquito  fault  reaches  the  north  edge  of  the  map  its  throw  is  estimated  at 
1,500  meters.  Towards  the  north  the  throw  becomes  still  greater  and  the 
fault  turns  towards  the  north-west,  following  the  direction  of  the  Sawatch 
range. 

On  the  south  follow  the  London  and  Weston  faults ;  along  all  these 
lines  the  downthrow  is  to  the  west ;  the  several  fragments  of  the  range 
thus  cut  up  show  traces  of  the  ancient  folding.  A  syncline  has  been 
preserved  extending  almost  across  the  whole  breadth  of  the  Mosquito  range, 
and  the  upper  Carboniferous  on  Mosquito  peak  still  reaches  a  height  of 
4,199  meters  1(1,  p.  565). 

The  same  phenomenon,  namely,  the  division  of  the  great  range  into 
a  number  of  oblique  coulisses  running  across  its  main  strike,  occurs  under 
the  most  diverse  circumstances.    To  the  north  of  lat.  40°  N.,  where  for 

^  F.  S.  Emmons,  Geology  and  Mining  Industry  of  Leadville,  Colorado,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv., 
Monograph  XII,  atlas,  1886,  and  Ten-Mile  District,  Colorado,  Special-Folio,  U.S.  Geol. 
Surv.,  atlas,  1898.  Another  admirable  example  is  afforded  by  Manitou-Embayment : 
W.  0.  Crosby,  Archaean-Cambrian  Contact  near  Manitou,  Colorado,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc, 
1899,  X,  pp.  141-164,  maps. 


Fio.  30.  Rocky  mountains,  East  of  Leadville  (after  Emmons). 
A,  Archaean  ;  CS,  Cambrian  and  Silurian  ;  Ci\^,  Lower  Carboniferous  ;  Cb^,  Upper 
Carboniferous  ;  tt,  Porphyry  ;  Q,  Khyolite.    Heights  in  meters. 


BIG  HOEN  BASIN 


885 


CH.  Xl] 

a  certain  distance  no  Palaeozoic  sediments  are  visible,  a  number  of  embay- 
ments  occur  on  the  east  border.  Emmons  and  his  colleagues  interpret  the 
ridges  between  them  as  true  anti- 
clines ^. 

The  strangest  form  on  the  outer 
border  of  the  Rocky  mountains  is  the 
almost  circular  range  which  cuts  off 
the  Big  Horn  basin  from  the  prairie 
(lat.  43°  10' to  45°  30'  N.,  Cloud  Peak, 
4,100  meters).  But  if  we  examine 
the  map  published  by  Eldridge,  and 
the  later  map  by  Darton,  we  see  that, 
although  the  flexures  which  bound 
the  horsts  have  the  most  decided 
influence  on  the  existing  configura- 
tion, yet  this  structure  also  consists 
of  oblique  folds,  separated  by  embay- 
ments.  The  Owl  mountains,  which 
complete  the  ring  in  the  south,  have 
the  orographic  direction  N.  70°  W., 
they  consist,  however,  of  at  least  four 
anticlines,  ranged  one  after  the  other, 
with  a  strike  of  N.  50°  to  60°  W.  2. 

Even  the  Black  Hills  of  Dakota, 
which  are  cited  as  the  type  of  an 
isolated  dome-shaped  elevation,  are 
elongated  in  the  same  direction,  and 
smaller  secondary  folds,  which  occur 
towards  the  west,  lead  us  to  conjecture 
a  similar  origin  in  this  case  also 
(I,  p.  559). 

In  none  of  these  regions  is  the 
folding  markedly  inclined  either  to- 
wards the  east  or  towards  the  west, 
and  the  numerous  oblique  anticlines 
which  follow  one  after  the  other  are 
all  fairly  symmetrical. 

North  Wyoming  and  South  Montana,  We  have  now  reached  the 
latitude  of  the  Yellowstone  park.    In  the  valley  of  the  Snake  river  floods 


Fig.  31.  ^ Folds  en  echelon'  (Whitney)  on 
the  outer  edge  of  the  Colorado  range  (after  Em- 
monds,  Cross,  and  Eldridge).  A,  Archaean  ; 
r,  Trias  ;  J",  Jurassic  ;  D,  Dakota  Sandstone 
(Cenomanian) ;  c.  Higher  stages  of  the 
Cretaceous.  Heights  in  feet,  some  in  round 
numbers. 


^  Emmons,  Cross,  and  Eldridge,  Geology  of  Denver  Basin,  Colorado,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv., 
Monograph  XXVII,  1896,  p.  80,  pi.  IX. 

2  G.  H.  Eldridge,  Geological  Reconnaissance  in  north-west  Wyoming,  Bull.  U.S.  Geol. 
Surv.,  no.  119,  1894,  72  pp.,  map,  in  particular  pp.  16  and  37 ;  N.  H.  Darton,  Geology  of 

aoLiiAs  IV  CO 


386       THE  END  OP  THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS    [part  v 


of  lava  extend  far  towards  the  west ;  isolated  ash  cones  rise  above  them. 
Between  longs.  116°  and  117°  W.,  where  the  lavas  diminish,  a  Tertiary 
lake-bottom  occurs.  In  the  east,  about  lat.  111°  W.,  these  lavas,  which 
are  chiefly  basic,  end  close  to  the  Yellowstone  park,  in  which  acid  eruptive 
rocks  predominate.  A  great  volcanic  zone  thus  cuts  through  both  the 
western  cordilleras  and  the  Rocky  mountains. 

The  folded  chains,  proceeding  from  the  south,  which  form  the  west 
border  of  the  plain  of  the  upper  Green  river,  disappear  beneath  these  flows 
and  ejectamenta  on  reaching  the  upper  Snake  river  east  and  west  of 
long.  111°  W.  East  of  this  locality  the  situation  is  made  clear  by  the 
instructive  descriptions  of  the  Yellowstone  Park  by  Hague,  Iddings, 
and  Weed^. 

The  Grand  Teton  trends  north  and  south,  and  is  thrown  down  on  its 
east  side,  along  a  north  and  south  fault,  against  Jackson  lake.  Its  northern 
part  penetrates  like  a  spur  into  the  volcanic  ejectamenta  of  the  Yellowstone 
park.  It  is  accompanied  by  several  meridional  faults ;  one  of  these,  on  its 
west  side,  brings  Cretaceous  against  Carboniferous,  the  next  Carboniferous 
against  Archaean  gneiss ;  and  another,  on  the  east  side,  brings  Cretaceous 
against  Carboniferous.  This  last-named  strip  of  Cretaceous  reaches  the 
south  shore  of  the  Yellowstone  lake.  It  is  thrown  into  folds,  broken  up, 
and  partly  buried  beneath  plateaux  of  effusive  rocks  (Huckleberry  moun- 
tains. Big  Game  ridge,  and  others).  Regarded  as  a  whole,  however,  the 
north  end  of  the  Teton  is  a  horst  sinking  on  the  north  beneath  the  ashes 
and  lavas. 

Such  is  the  situation  in  the  south  of  the  Yellowstone  park.  In  the 
north-west  it  is  very  similar.  Archaean  rocks  crop  out  from  beneath  the 
lavas  between  long.  110°  40'  and  110°  58'  W.,  almost  in  the  meridian  of 
the  Archaean  rocks  of  the  Teton,  the  western  scarp  of  which  lies  in 
long.  110°  49'  W.  The  rocks  are  also  traversed  by  faults  along  which  the 
sediments  are  downthrown.  This  is  the  beginning  of  the  Gallatin  range, 
which  runs  towards  the  north,  and,  owing  to  the  volcanic  accumulations 
piled  upon  it,  attains  a  considerable  height  and  breadth. 

If  we  now  join  to  the  maps  of  the  Yellowstone  park  those  of  the 
adjacent  areas  on  the  east  and  north,  which  we  owe  to  Hague,  we  shall 
find  on  the  north  border,  and  adjoining  the  rocks  of  the  Gallatin  range, 
another  Archaean  formation  traversed  by  faults,  the  Buffalo  plateau,  upon 

the  Bighorn  Mountains,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Professional  Papers,  no.  51,  1906, 129  pp.,  map. 
In  particular  Sheep  Mountain  Anticline  and  North  and  South  Fork  of  the  Powder  River 
Syncline,  Dry  Fork  Anticline,  and  others ;  also,  for  the  breaking  up  of  the  coulisses, 
C.  A.  Fisher,  Geology  and  Water  Resources  of  the  Bighorn  Basin,  op.  cit.,  no.  53,  1906, 
72  pp.,  map. 

^  A.  Hague,  Iddings,  and  Weed,  Geology  of  the  Yellowstone  National  Park,  Part  II, 
U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Monograph  no.  XXXII,  1899,  p.  149  et  seq.,  Geol.  atlas,  fol.  no.  30. 


CH.XI]  THE  YELLOWSTONE  PARK 


387 


which  patches  of  Cambrian  sediments  are  horizontally  superposed ;  still 
further  towards  the  east  and  north-east  rises  an  inhospitable  and  lofty- 
Archaean  mass,  which  is  known  as  Snowy  range,  and  more  to  the  east  as 
Beartooth.  It  projects  across  the  border  of  the  Rocky  mountains  like  an 
alien  body,  and  is  surrounded  towards  the  south-west,  that  is,  towards 
the  Absaroka  range  (formed  of  volcanic  ejectamenta)  and  the  Yellowstone 
park,  by  a  very  long  Palaeozoic  border,  which  slopes  regularly  towards 
the  south  and  south-west.  The  Cambrian  sediments  form  a  girdle  of 
basset  edges.^ 

The  Yellowstone  park  is  thus  seen  to  be  a  region  of  subsidence  or 
inbreak.  In  the  south  and  north-west  the  faults  run  mostly  north  and 
south ;  several  of  them  present  a  throw  of  over  1,000  meters.  In  the 
north-east,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Beartooth  mass  slopes  with  a  gently 
inclined,  regular  surface  beneath  the  lavas. 

This  mass  marks  the  beginning  of  a  mountainous  region  which  starts 
south  of  lat.  45°  N.  and  extends  beyond  lat.  47°  N.,  thus  including  the 
boundary  of  Wyoming  and  Montana ;  it  differs  in  structure  from  the  rest 
of  the  Rocky  mountains,  and,  owing  to  the  comparatively  trifling  thickness 
of  its  volcanic  covering,  it  exhibits  even  more  clearly  the  signs  of  subsidence. 
The  several  parts  of  this  range  are  horsts  of  gneiss,  covered  here  and  there 
with  patches  of  flat-lying  Cambrian  or  pre-Cambrian  sediments,  and  broken 
up  by  fractures  and  troughs  running  in  the  most  diverse  directions,  in 
which  the  sedimentary  series  up  to  and  including  the  Laramie  stage  is  let 
down  in  a  shattered  condition. 

The  most  important  of  these  horsts  are:  Beartooth  (together  with 
Snowy  range) ;  to  the  north-west  of  this  and  in  continuation  of  the 
Gallatin  mountains,  Bridger  range ;  to  the  west  and  north-west  of  this  the 
Great  Belt  mountains^  and  to  the  east  and  north-east  of  these  the  Little 
Belt  mountains,  which  extend  across  the  common  mountain  border  for 
a  great  distance  towards  the  east  and  away  in  the  prairie,  still  fairly  far  to 
the  east,  find  an  isolated  continuation  known  as  the  Snoivy  mountains 
(not  Snowy  range).  Within  this  region,  west  of  the  narrow  Bridger  range, 
and  surrounded  by  these  horsts,  there  lies  a  piece  of  level  country  in 
which  (near  lat.  45°  55'  N.,  long.  111°  30'  W.)  the  Missouri  is  formed  by 
the  confluence,  near  the  Three  Forks,  of  three  rivers,  the  Jefferson,  the 
Madison,  and  the  Gallatin.  In  this  region,  also,  the  Palaeozoic  series  is 
completed  by  the  occurrence  of  the  Belt  stage.  Weed  describes  this  stage 
as  12,000  feet  thick,  formed  of  quartzite  and  sandstone  below  (Neihart 
quartzite),  and  then  of  shales  and  limestone  in  repeated  alternation. 
According  to  Walcott,  it  is  covered  unconformably  by  the  lowest  beds  of 
the  middle  Cambrian,  rests  unconformably  on  Archaean  rock,  and  contains 
organic  remains,  which  occur  somewhere  near  the  middle  in  the  Grayson 

^  A.  Hague,  Absaroka,  fol.  no.  52,  1899,  and  Livingston,  fol.  no.  1,  1894. 

CO  2 


388       THE  END  OF  THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS   [paet  v 


shales.  Some  of  these  fossils  are  supposed  to  be  traces  of  Merostomes. 
The  Belt  stage  is  often  regarded  as  a  part  of  the  Algonkian  ^. 

On  the  north  side  of  the  Beartooth  mass,  traces  of  the  oblique  coulisse 
folding  may  be  seen  in  the  narrow  outer  border  which  adjoins  the  prairie. 
The  east  border  of  the  Bridger  range  is  partly  overfolded  in  the  direction 
of  the  prairie.  The  fascicle  of  folds,  distorted  along  the  strike,  which  occurs 
at  the  Three  Forks,  and  thus  right  between  the  horsts,  is  overfolded 
towards  the  south-east.    It  has  been  described  by  Peall  2. 

Castle  mountains,  the  southern  foothills  of  the  Belt  mountains,  are, 
according  to  Weed  and  Pirsson,  a  fragment  of  the  Belt  stage,  broken 
through  by  a  now  denuded  volcano  ^. 

The  Little  Belt  mountains  resemble  in  many  respects  the  Beartooth 
mass.  According  to  Weed's  description,  they  form  a  very  flat  boss  of 
gneiss,  regularly  surrounded  by  a  border  of  stratified  rocks  ranging  from 
the  Belt  stage  into  the  Cretaceous,  which  flattens  out  as  it  passes  into 
the  Cretaceous  of  the  prairie.  From  Yogo  'peak  onwards,  on  the  east 
side  of  these  mountains,  a  syenite  cicatrix  of  irregular  outline,  from 
22  to  24  kilometers  in  length,  and  as  much  as  one  to  six  kilometers  in 
breadth,  extends  towards  the  north-east.  To  all  appearance  it  stands  in 
some  connexion,  beneath  the  surface,  with  the  numerous  large  laccolites 
which  occur  in  the  north  and  north-east  part  of  the  Little  Belt  mountains ; 
these  have  forced  their  way  for  the  most  part  through  the  least  resistant 
Cambrian  shales,  and  have  given  rise  to  boil-like  intumescences 

Outside  this  region  isolated  volcanic  intrusions  are  scattered  far  over 
the  prairie,  sometimes  surrounded  by  arched  beds,  sometimes  by  flat-lying 
beds,  and  very  often  by  a  broad  girdle  of  radiating  dykes.  Striking 
examples  are  furnished  by  the  Highwood  (lat.  44°  30'  N.,long.  110°  30'  W.), 
Crazy  (lat.  46°  N.,  long.  110°  15'  W.),  and  Judith  mountains  (lat.  47°  3'  to 
47°  18'  N.,  and  long.  108°  57'  to  109°  25'  W.)  \ 

It  seems  that  a  region  exists  in  the  north  of  the  Yellowstone  park  in 
which  the  scarcely  perceptible  oblique  folding  is  replaced  by  a  general 

*  C.  D.  Walcott,  Pre-Cambrian  fossiliferous  Formations,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1899,  X, 
pp.  199-244. 

*  A.  C.  Peale,  Palaeozoic  Section  in  the  Vicinity  of  Three  Forks,  Montana,  Bull.  U.S. 
Geol.  Surv.,  no.  110,  1893,  56  pp.,  map  ;  and  Three  Forks,  fol.  no.  24,  1896. 

3  W.  H.  Weed  and  L.  V.  Pirsson,  Geology  of  the  Castle  Mountain  Mining  District, 
Montana,  Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  no.  139,  1896,  164  pp.,  maps. 

*  W.  H.  Weed,  Geology  of  the  Little  Belt  Mountains,  Montana,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol. 
Surv.,  XX,  3,  1900,  pp.  271-581,  maps  ;  Weed  and  Pirsson,  Little  Belt  Mountains,  fol. 
no.  56,  1899. 

^  W.  H.  Weed  and  L.  V.  Pirsson,  Highwood  Mountains,  Montana,  Bull.  Am.  Geol. 
Soc,  1895,  VI,  pp.  389-422  ;  J.  E.  Wolff,  Geology  of  the  Crazy  Mountains,  Montana, 
op.  cit.,  1892,  III,  pp.  445-452,  map  ;  Weed  and  Pirsson,  Geology  and  Mining  Resources 
of  the  Judith  Mountains,  Montana,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  XVIII,  3,  1898,  pp.  437- 
621,  maps. 


CH.XI]         NOETHEEN  EOCKY  MOUNTAINS 


389 


subsidence  of  the  mountains  along  great  faults  striking  in  different  direc- 
tions ;  it  resembles  a  fragment  of  foreland  broken  down  and  divided  into 
horsts  rather  than  the  fragment  of  a  mountain  chain.  If,  however,  we 
look  further  west  for  a  possible  continuation  of  the  Rocky  mountains,  we 
reach,  on  the  other  side  of  long.  112°  W.,  south  of  Helena,  a  granite  mass 
about  64  kilometers  in  breadth  and  112  kilometers  in  length,  which 
includes  the  rich  mining  district  of  Butte,  This  granite  is  not  old ;  it 
alters  the  Carboniferous  limestone  in  contact  with  it,  and  is  therefore 
younger  than  the  Carboniferous,  possibly  very  much  younger  ^. 

The  investigations  of  Weed  on  the  north  of  the  region  in  question  have 
shown  beyond  dispute  that  the  volcanic  intrusions,  especially  the  laccolites 
of  the  Little  Belt  mountains,  have  arisen  simultaneously  with  the  dislocations. 

We  thus  arrive  at  the  following  results :  from  the  middle  Cambrian 
onwards,  up  to  and  including  the  Laramie  stage,  the  beds^  notwithstanding 
some  gaps,  lie  to  all  appearance  conformably.  Towards  the  conclusion  of 
the  Laramie  stage  very  great  disturbances  set  in,  the  results  of  which  are 
seen  along  the  whole  eastern  border  of  the  Rocky  mountains,  but  from  the 
Yellowstone  park  to  a  little  beyond  lat.  47°  N.  the  sinking  movement  was 
so  preponderant  that  folding  is  scarcely  perceptible  except  in  local  pinched-in 
strips  along  faults. 

The  North.  North  of  the  Belt  mountains  the  structure  of  the  mountain 
border  changes.  Here  again  the  strike  is  similar  to  that  in  the  south, 
N.  10°-20°  W. ;  coulisses  also  occur  here,  but  as  a  rule  they  are  very  long  and 
bulky ;  further  to  the  north  an  isolated  coulisse  may  occasionally  extend  in 
front  of  the  mountains.  Here  commences  a  great  overthrusting  to  the  east 
upon  the  Cretaceous  of  the  prairie,  which  is  likewise  folded. 

The  region  between  lat.  48°  and  49°  N.  has  been  rendered  familiar  by 
Bailey  Willis  2. 

The  border  is  formed  by  Lewis  range,  but  this  coulisse  dies  away 
a  little  north  of  lat.  49°  N.  The  Livingston  range,  which  follows  towards 
the  west,  does  not  emerge  to  the  south  of  it,  as  is  the  rule,  but  comes  up 
further  to  the  north  and  is  again  lost  to  view  in  lat.  48°  45'  N.  Both  these 
great  ranges  are  formed  by  the  Belt  stage,  and  together  they  enclose  a  great 
syncline,  from  which  rises  a  feeble  anticline  bearing  the  highest  peak 
(mount  Cleveland,  3,263  meters).  Livingston  range  is  cut  off  on^the  west 
by  a  strike  fault,  on  the  other  side  of  which  Carboniferous  limestone  makes 
its  appearance.  Lewis  range  terminates  on  the  east,  next  the  prairie, 
along  an  irregular  line  of  steep  cliffs,  often  more  than  1,300  meters  in 

^  S.  R  Emmons  and  G.  W.  Tower,  Butte,  special  fol.,  no.  38,  1897. 

^  Bailey  Willis,  Stratigraphy  and  Structure,  Lewis  and  Livingston  Ranges,  Montana, 
Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1902,  XIII,  pp.  305-352,  map  ;  for  the  intermediate  region  to  the 
south,  R.  H.  Chapman,  Structure  of  the  Rocky  Mountains  in  the  Lewis  and  Clarke  Timber 
Reserve,  Montana,  Trans.  Am.  Inst.  M.E.,  1899,  4  pp.,  map.  For  the  region  to  the  west 
of  116%  B.  Willis,  in  Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  no.  40,  1887,  pi.  L 


390       THE  END  OF  THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS   [part  v 


height,  and  composed  for  the  most  part  of  limestone  belonging  to  the  Belt 
stage.  These  cliffs  form  the  border  of  the  Palaeozoic  formations,  which  are 
thrust  over  the  Cretaceous;  the  inclination  of  the  thrust-plane  is  very 
gentle,  usually  ranging  from  below  3°  to  7°  45',  and  directed  towards  the 
south-west ;  its  breadth  amounts  to  at  least  11  kilometers.  The  irregularity 
and  the  steepness  of  the  border  are  caused  by  the  giving  way  of  rocky 
masses  of  the  Belt  beds,  which  lie  above  the  more  destructible  Cretaceous  ; 
Chief  mountain,  which  stands  isolated  in  front  of  the  border  in  lat.  48°  56'  N., 
bears  witness  to  this  process ;  it  consists  in  its  upper  part  of  Cambrian  or 
pre-Cambrian  Belt  limestone,  in  its  lower  part  of  Cretaceous  belonging  to 
the  Benton  stage  (pi.  III). 

To  the  west  of  these  great  overthrusts  the  Belt  stage  extends  far  into 
the  range.  It  certainly  reaches  long.  117°  W.  Lindgren  here  distinguishes 
a  chain,  under  the  name  of  the  Gmur  d'Alene  mountains,  which  extends 
from  the  Lolo  pass  (lat.  46°  35'  N.,  long.  114°  20'  W.)  towards  the  north- 
west across  the  lake  of  Coeur  d'Alene,  and  consists  of  the  same  rocks. 
Walcott  has  shown  that  the  beds  of  the  eastern  border  extend  up  to  this 
point ;  their  thickness  here  is  surprisingly  great,  they  are  unconformably 
overlain  by  middle  Cambrian  sediments,  and  at  the  same  time  present 
astonishingly  few  signs  of  disturbance^. 

Near  the  Canadian  frontier  an  extremely  long  and  almost  rectilinear 
furrow  commences  its  course.  It  strikes  to  the  north-north-east,  parallel 
to  the  outer  border,  and  crosses  the  49th  parallel  near  long.  115°  W. 
Here  it  serves  for  some  distance  as  the  bed  of  the  Kootenay  river  ^;  then 
it  takes  in  part  of  Columbia  river,  and  afterwards  Canoe  river  and  the 
upper  course  of  the  Fraser  to  some  distance  beyond  lat.  54°  N.  Up  to  this 
point  its  waters  discharge  into  the  Pacific  Ocean.  In  lat.  54°  30'  N.  it 
forms  the  valley  of  the  Parsnip,  and  then  of  the  Finlay  river  as  far  as 
lat.  58°  N.  and  beyond,  but  from  the  Parsnip  river  onwards  the  waters 
flow  to  the  Arctic  Ocean. 

Daly  has  devoted  particular  attention  to  this  line ;  he  believed  that  it 
was  continued  as  far  as  the  Liard,  and  named  it  the  *  Rocky-mountain  I 
Trench '3.  The  significance  of  this  line  of  depression,  which  may  be  \ 
recognized  through  at  least  9  degrees  of  latitude,  is  not  known. — 

^  W.  Lindgren,  A  geological  Reconnaissance  across  the  Bitterroot  Range  and  Clear- 
water Mountains,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Professional  Papers,  no.  27,  1904,  123  pp.,  maps,  in 
particular  pp.  16  and  81 ;  Walcott,  Algonkian  Formation  of  north-western  Montana,  i 
Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1906,  XVII,  pp.  1-28,  map. 

^  J.  McEvoy,  Summary  Report,  in  Geol.  Surv.  Canada,  Ann.  Rep.  (new  ser.),  XII, 
1902,  p.  87  A. 

^  R.  A.  Daly,  Nomenclature  of  the  North  American  Cordillera  between  the  47th  and 
53rd  Parallels  of  Latitude,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1906,  pp.  586-606,  map  on  p.  588.  The 
only  features  which  might  possibly  be  compared  to  these  are  the  Scandinavian  lines 
(III,  p.  393). 


CH.XI]         SECTION  ON  THE  GHOST  EIVER 


391 


We  will  first  trace  the  outer  border  of  the  range.  It  is  characterized 
by  violent  overthrusting  towards  the  east,  by  a  number  of  long  coulisses 
which  lie  in  front  of  it,  and,  above  all,  by  the  fact  that  towards  the  north 
the  folding  encroaches  more  and  more  on  the  stratified  series  of  the  foreland, 
which  is  formed  exclusively  of  Devonian,  middle  and  upper  Cretaceous,  and 
Tertiary. 

Even  in  the  south  the  Cretaceous  of  the  foreland  is  included  in  the 
folding  to  a  considerable  extent.  The  overthrusting  of  Chief  mountain 
near  lat.  49°  N.  is  followed  towards  the  north,  at  least  as  far  as  lat.  53°  N., 
by  a  zone  in  which  the  eastern  part  of  the  range  is  at  first  broken  up  into 
long  flakes  of  Palaeozoic  and  Cretaceous  beds,  with  a  general  dip  towards 
the  west  and  a  strike  to  the  north-north-west  (Livingstone,  High  Rock 
Range,  and  others)  ^.  Towards  the  west,  that  is,  towards  the  interior  of  the 
range,  the  Cretaceous  disappears. 

A  section  has  been  drawn  by  G.  M.  Dawson  from  Revelstoke  on  the 
Columbia  (lat.  51°  N.)  north-eastwards  to  Donald  (lat.  51°  30'  N.),  and 


Fig.  32.  Outer  border  of  the  Rocky  mountains  on  the  Ghost  River,  South  Canada  (after  McConnell). 
C,  Castle  mountain  group,  Cambro-Silurian  ;  F,  Devonian  ;  G,  Banff  limestone,  Permo-Car- 
boniferous ;  cr,  Cretaceous. 

McConnell  has  continued  it  in  an  easterly  direction  from  this  point  to  the 
outer  border  ^,  Let  us  follow  this  completed  section.  To  the  west,  in  the 
Selkirk  range,  and  even  still  further  west,  gneiss  predominates,  then  come 
ancient  schists,  next  the  equivalents  of  the  Castle-mountain  group  (Cambro- 
Silurian),  along  with  the  older  Bow-river  series,  and  finally  a  great  over- 
thrust  directed  to  the  east.    The  succeeding  rocks  are  probably  Silurian. 

Near  Donald,  on  the  Columbia  river,  a  Cambrian  anticline  makes  its 
appearance.  From  this  point  to  the  Sawback  range,  a  distance  of  60  kilo- 
meters, there  extends  a  fairly  regular  succession  of  Cambrian  and  Silurian 
anticlines  and  synclines,  the  first  of  the  synclines  being,  perhaps,  overfolded 
towards  the  west.    From  the  Sawhack  range  onwards,  36  kilometers  from 

^  Here  we  may  mention  the  map  by  Leach  in  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Surv.  Can.  (1902-1903) 
1906,  XV,  and  the  sections  by  Bowling,  torn,  cit.,  AA,  p.  86  et  seq. ;  then  D.  D.  Caimes, 
Moose  Mountain  District,  op.  cit.,  1907,  55  pp.,  maps.  All  the  Cretaceous  coal-measures 
are  folded. 

^  G.  M.  Dawson,  Geological  Structure  of  the  Selkirk  Region,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc, 
1891,  II,  pp.  165-176  ;  R.  G.  McConnell,  Geological  Structure  of  a  portion  of  the  Rocky 
Mountains,  accompanied  by  a  section  measured  near  lat.  51°  N.,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Surv. 
Canada,  1887,  part  D,  41  pp.  The  same  Archaean  mass  is  described  by  A.  Bowman  in 
lat.  52°  50',  tom.  cit.,  part  C,  49  pp.,  map. 


392       THE  END  OF  THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS   [paet  v 


the  eastern  border  of  the  Rocky  mountains,  we  meet  with  the  Castle- 
mountain  group,  Devonian,  Carboniferous,  and  finally  Cretaceous.  From 
this  point  onwards  the  Palaeozoic  series  is  divided  into  seven  flakes,  over- 
riding each  other  towards  the  east.  On  the  outer  border  the  Castle- 
mountain  group  overlies  the  Cretaceous  for  a  distance  of  3  kilometers. 
McConnell  estimates  the  extent  of  this  almost  horizontal  overthrusting  at 
about  10-5  kilometers.  In  the  interior  of  the  range  some  of  the  flakes 
pass  into  overfolded  anticlines. 

On  the  upper  Athabasca,  north  of  lat.  52°  30'  N.,  McEvoy  met  with 
folded  Archaean  and  Cambrian  rocks,  then,  after  a  great  fault,  Devonian 
and  Carboniferous,  steeply  upturned  on  the  border  of  the  range,  but  not 
overlying  the  Cretaceous  ^. 

Further  north  the  flakes  set  in  again. 

In  lat.  56°  N.,  on  the  Peace  river,  McConnell  marks  six  flakes  of 
Palaeozoic  beds  overthrust  towards  the  east,  and  the  more  easterly  of  these 
include  pinched-in  Trias  ;  the  dip  is  invariably  to  the  west.  This  section 
is  followed  on  the  west  by  Archaean  rocks,  which  have  been  traced  as  far 
as  lat.  57°  40'  N.  along  the  Parsnip  and  Finlay  rivers.  In  this  region  the 
great  longitudinal  furrow  lies  in  the  strike  of  a  strip  of  Palaeozoic,  which 
is  pinched-in  between  two  Archaean  flakes  2. 

A  little  north  of  lat.  56°  N.  the  lower  Palaeozoic  beds  disappear  in  the 
foreland;  on  the  border  of  the  Canadian  shield  Middle  Devonian  rests 
directly  on  the  Laurentian  gneiss^  and  is  followed  by  the  Dakota  stage 
(Cenomanian)  (II,  p.  232). 

Let  us  follow  further  the  guidance  of  McConnell  along  the  border  of  the 
Rocky  mountains  ^. 

The  strike  to  north-north-west  or  north-west  is  maintained,  and  in 
lat.  59°  30'  N.,  long.  126°  W.,  the  outer  border  of  the  range,  presenting 
peaks  of  from  900  to  1,200  meters  in  height,  reaches  the  river  Liard,  close 
beneath  what  was  once  Fort  Halkett.  To  the  east  of  this  point  shorter 
ranges  of  Palaeozoic  crinoidal-limestone  and  Trias  are  cut  through  by  the 
Liard.  In  long.  124°  40'  W.  these  ranges  terminate,  and  the  river  cuts  its 
bed  as  much  as  300  meters  deep  in  horizontal  Cretaceous  beds.  On  the 
other  side  of  lat.  60°  N.,  between  longs.  124°  and  123°  30'  W.,  fresh  Cambrian 
coulisses,  striking  to  the  north-north-west,  crop  out  near  Fort  Liard,  on  the 
left  bank  of  the  river.  Here  there  is  still  a  distinct  contrast  between  the 
foreland,  in  which  the  Liard  exposes  horizontal  beds  of  Devonian  and 

'  J.  McEvoy,  Geology  and  Natural  Resources  of  the  country  traversed  by  the  Yellow 
Head  Pass,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Soc.  Can.,  1901,  new  ser.,  XI,  part  D,  41  pp.,  map. 

R.  G.  McConnell,  Report  on  an  Exploration  of  the  Rivers  Finlay  and  Omenica,  Ann. 
Rep.  Geol.  Surv.  Can.,  1894,  new  ser.,  VII,  part  C,  45  pp.,  map. 

^  R.  G.  McConnell,  Exploration  of  the  Basin  of  the  Yukon  and  Mackenzie,  Ann.  Rep. 
Geol.  Surv,  Can.,  1890,  new  ser.,  IV,  part  D,  maps. 


CH.  Xl] 


MACKENZIE  COULISSE 


393 


Cretaceous,  and  the  bluff  parallel  ranges,  which  at  once  reach  a  height 
of  1,200  meters.  While  these  ranges  diverge  from  the  meridian  towards 
the  north-north- west,  a  new  coulisse,  formed  of  Cambrian  and  Silurian,  of 
equal  height  and  equally  striking  in  appearance,  emerges  beyond  lat.  61°  N. 
in  long.  121°  30'  W.  on  the  Nahanni  butte,  close  to  the  left  bank  of  the 
Liard ;  this  coulisse  strikes  to  the  north,  leaves  the  Liard,  and  in  lat.  62°  15'N. 
forms  the  left  bank  of  the  Mackenzie.  Then  it  also  turns  towards  the  north- 
north-west. 

In  lat.  62°  45'  N.  a  very  long  coulisse,  1,200  meters  in  height,  rises  on 
the  right  bank  of  the  Mackenzie,  and  from  this  point  onwards  this  river 
flows  in  a  coulisse  valley  of  the  Kocky  mountains.  At  the  same  time  the 
coulisse  on  its  left  bank  diverges  further  and  further  from  the  river ;  the 
valley  becomes  90  to  100  kilometers  broad,  and  the  river  frequently  exposes 
Devonian,  lying  as  a  rule  horizontally,  though  here  and  there  it  is  folded. 
Whiteaves  assigns  it  to  the  Cuboides  zone  ^.  From  lat.  64°  N.  onwards,  the 
Cretaceous  with  Inoceramus  makes  its  appearance  in  the  valley,  and  the 
Devonian  bears  salt  springs,  which  are  also  distributed  far  and  wide  in  the 
foreland.  Nevertheless,  the  coulisse  on  the  right  bank,  which  had  begun 
in  lat.  62°  45'  N.,  continues  on  and  is  cut  through  by  the  Great  Bear  river 
in  lat.  65°  10'  N.  ;  here  Bell  observed  folded  Silurian  in  the  rapids.  Mount 
Charles  (1,500  feet)  belongs  to  this  range  2. 

The  isolated  Bear  Rock  (1,400  feet),  at  the  point  where  the  Great  Bear 
river  enters  the  Mackenzie,  is  a  Devonian  anticline;  even  leaf -bearing 
Tertiary  beds  appear  here  to  share  in  the  folding. 

From  this  point  onwards  the  mountains  diminish  in  height ;  their 
direction  is  north-west.  The  river  flows  through  Devonian  and  Cretaceous. 
The  rock  of  Carcajou  (lat.  64°  40'  N.,  long.  128°  20'  W.)  is  an  anticline 
formed  of  the  same  beds,  and  is  regarded  by  McConnell  as  a  continuation 
of  the  coulisse  which  begins  in  about  lat.  61°  N.,  long.  123°  30'  W. 

At  the  rapids  of  Bans-Bault  (lat.  63°  40'  N.,  long.  129°  10'  W.)  the 
Mackenzie  again  cuts  its  way  through  an  anticline  of  Devonian  and 
Cretaceous;  now,  however,  the  coulisses  disappear,  and  flat  bedding  pre- 
vails as  far  as  the  delta.  This  is  also  the  case  near  the  rapids  of  the 
Ramparts  (lat.  66°  15'  N.),  where  Stringocephalus  Rurtini  has  been  found. 
In  lat.  67°  25'  N.  the  Devonian  with  Atrypa  reticularis  yields  oil ;  a  little 
further  on,  in  long.  131°  40' W.,  it  disappears  beneath  the  Cretaceous,  which 
persists  to  the  head  of  the  delta.  The  lower  course  of  the  Mackenzie  thus 
lies  outside  the  chief  range  in  the  series  of  the  foreland ;  the  foreland, 

^  J.  F.  Whiteaves,  Contribution  to  Canadian  Palaeontology,  1891,  I,  pp.  197-253, 
part  3,  The  Fossils  of  the  Devonian  Rocks  of  the  Mackenzie  River  Basin,  in  particular 
p.  249. 

^  J.  Macintosh  Bell,  Report  on  the  Topography  and  Geology  of  Great  Bear  Lake,  Ann. 
Rep.  Geol.  Surv.  Can.,  new  ser.,  XII,  1902,  part  C,  p.  25. 


394       THE  END  OF  THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  [party 


however,  is  traversed  by  long  coulisses,  which  run  parallel  with  the  chief 
range.    This  is  a  very  exceptional  case  ^. 

McConnell's  account  is  supplemented  in  an  instructive  manner  by  that 
of  Camsell  2. 

Let  us  return  to  the  rapids  of  Sans-Sault.  We  have  already  mentioned 
that  the  Mackenzie  leaves  the  mountains  at  this  point  (near  lat.  63°  40'  N.) 
and  enters  a  region  in  which  the  bedding  is  horizontal.  The  border  of  the 
mountains  is  fairly  well  marked,  and  follows  an  almost  rectilinear  course 
to  the  west-north- west,  as  far  as  the  upper  Wind  river  (right  tributary  of 
the  Peel  river)  and  beyond.  Here,  in  about  lat.  65°  15'  N.,  and  not  very 
far  from  long.  136°  W.,  the  mountain  border  describes  a  bend,  and  runs 
almost  due  north  into  the  neighbourhood  of  Fort  McPherson.  Thus,  not 
only  the  Mackenzie  in  its  course  below  Sans-Sault,  but  almost  the  whole  of 
the  Peel  river,  remains  outside  the  Rocky  mountains.  Both  these  rivers 
flow  through  a  platform  of  horizontal  or  but  slightly-folded  Cretaceous  and 
lignitif erous  Tertiary  beds.  The  Peel,  in  many  parts  of  its  course,  has  cut 
for  itself  a  deep  valley.  The  platform  is  1,700  feet  high  in  its  southern- 
most part,  is  interrupted  by  short  coulisses  which  lie  in  front  of  the  range 
(Illtyd,  4,200  feet)  and  terminates  on  the  Satah  (right  tributary  of  the 
Peel,  lat.  66°  50'  N.)  in  a  long  and  steep  declivity.  At  the  foot  of  this 
begins  the  plain  of  the  Mackenzie  in  the  last  part  of  its  course. 

Below  Fort  McPherson,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Mackenzie,  the  platform  | 
meets  the  mountains,  which  here  renew  their  advance.  Mount  Goodenough, 
3,000  feet  in  height,  in  about  lat.  68°  N.,  ends  on  the  east  in  a  very  steep 
slope  only  3  kilometers  away  from  one  of  the  arms  into  which  the  river 
divides.  This  mountain  consists  of  horizontal  or  only  very  gently  folded 
beds.  At  its  base  lie  black  shales,  then  comes  clay  ironstone  weathering 
red  and  containing  ammonites,  and  over  this  sandstone.  Towards  the 
north  and  north-west  the  height  decreases,  and  west  of  the  mouth  of 
the  Mackenzie  the  mountain  finally  slopes  beneath  the  sea.  This  concludes 
CamselFs  account. 

Somewhat  to  the  west  of  this  point  the  maps  mark  two  hilly  ranges 
trending  north-west,  and  possibly  connected,  these  are  the  Richardson  and 
Buckland  mountains.    They  probably  reach  the  sea  near  long.  139°  30'  W.,    i  j 
east  of  the  Malcolm  river.    They  are  the  most  northerly  ranges  with  which 

1  The  delta  is  described  by  E.  de  Sainville,  Bull.  Soc.  geogr.  Paris,  1898,  p.  291,  map. 
The  most  detailed  geological  accounts  are  still  those  of  Kennicott  (II,  pp.  38,  232,  and 
37,  note  2).  The  Rev.  Kirby  appears  to  have  collected  Devonian  fossils  on  the  Porcupine 
river  at  a  very  early  date. 

^  C.  Camsell,  Peel  River  and  Tributaries,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Surv.  Can.,  1906,  XVI,  CC, 
49  pp.  I  must  express  my  gratitude  to  Messrs.  Camsell  and  Daly  for  giving  me  access  to 
this  valuable  report  before  the  appearance  of  this  volume.  The  geology  of  north-west 
Canada  is  shown  in  the  map  of  the  Yukon  Territories,  no.  917  (compiled  by  J.  Keele)  in 
the  Summary  Report  (1905)  1906. 


GH.XI]      NOETHERNMOST  ROCKY  MOUNTAINS  395 


the  Rocky  mountains  enter  into  syntaxis.  To  the  south  of  them  lies  the 
watershed ;  in  this  region,  between  lats.  69°  and  68^  N.,  long.  141°  W., 
Turner,  as  already  mentioned,  encountered  a  lofty  range  ;  this  must  be  the 
east-and-west-trending  main  chain  of  S.  J.  Marsh,  which  is  sometimes 
named  Davidson  mountains  on  the  maps ;  it  is  no  doubt  the  veritable  end 
of  the  Romanzov  range.  This  range  certainly  terminates  within  a  short 
distance.  McConnell  and  Camsell  both  travelled  from  the  Mackenzie, 
across  the  Rat  river  (lat.  67°  45'  N.),  to  the  Porcupine  river,  and  did  not 
find  any  continuation  of  it. 

McConnell  has  drawn  two  sections,  30-35  kilometers  apart,  from  the 
head  of  the  delta  towards  the  west.  The  northern  section,  on  the  Rat, 
crosses  mountains  2,800  feet  in  height,  formed  of  Cretaceous  sandstone 
with  ammonites;  the  strike  is  northerly.  The  second  section,  near 
lat.  67°  26'  N.,  extends  from  the  portage  on  the  Peel  river  to  the  Lapierre 
house  on  the  Bell  river.  The  mountains  are  as  much  as  4,000  feet  high, 
and  appear  to  form  a  broad  anticline  striking  to  the  north,  but  here  also 
only  Cretaceous  has  been  met  with :  it  seems  to  be  of  great  thickness. 

On  the  Bell  river  an  exposure  was  seen  at  only  one  locality,  it  showed 
inclined  Cretaceous  strata,  apparently  with  a  north-north-west  strike. 
On  the  Porcupine,  where  the  great  bend  of  the  river  begins,  beds  with 
Aucella  crop  out  from  beneath  the  Cretaceous  sandstone  (lat.  67°  30'  N., 
long.  137°  30'  W.),  and  beneath  them  lie  Palaeozoic  rocks.  Further  away. 
Tertiary  beds  occur  on  the  Porcupine  river;  the  Old  Grow  mountains 
(long.  140°  W.)  are  Cretaceous.  The  Upper  Ramparts  of  the  Porcupine  are 
rapids  in  a  canon  of  basalt,  beneath  which  steeply  upturned,  probably 
Devonian,  beds  are  visible  ;  they  strike  almost  north.  The  basalts  continue 
on ;  near  the  Lower  Ramparts  (near  lat.  67°  N.,  long.  142°  30'  W.)  Silurian 
crops  out  from  beneath  them^.  Then  comes  Cretaceous  once  more.  The 
Porcupine  now  enters  the  Yukon  Flats. 

All  the  land  so  far  described,  from  the  Mackenzie  to  the  syntaxis,  thus 
belongs  to  the  coulisses  lying  in  front  of  the  Rocky  mountain  s,  in  which 
a  bend  of  the  strike  to  the  north  is  perceptible.  We  should  not  expect  to 
find  the  continuation  of  the  principal  chain  of  the  Rocky  mountains  before 
reaching  the  region  situated  to  the  south  of  the  plain  of  the  Peel. 

In  order  to  search  for  it  let  us  return  to  the  south. 

It  is  true  that  large  tracts  of  unknown  land  extend  between  the  coulisses 
lying  in  front  of  the  Rocky  mountains  and  the  series  of  gneiss  masses 
which,  with  contours  elongated  in  the  direction  of  the  strike,  mark  the 
western  border  of  the  range.  But  the  zeal  of  Canadian  geologists,  supple- 
mented by  that  of  prospectors  for  gold,  enables  us  to  determine  approxi- 
mately the  main  features  of  this  region.  Our  knowledge  is  based  chiefly 
on  G.  M.  Dawson's  journey  from  the  Stikine  and  the  upper  Liard  across 

^  Kindle,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1908,  4  ser.,  XXV,  p.  125,  Niagara  stage. 


896       THE  END  OF  THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS   [pakt  v 


Frances  river  to  the  upper  Pelly,  then  to  the  ruins  of  Fort  Selkirk  on  the 
Yukon,  and  his  return  journey  across  Lewis  river  towards  the  south  ^. 
His  account,  together  with  a  number  of  more  recent  works,  furnishes  us 
with  the  following  facts. 

Archaean  rock  has  already  been  mentioned  as  occurring  on  the  Tochieca 
as  far  as  lat.  57°  40'  N.  The  gneisses  and  ancient  granites,  which  begin 
far  to  the  south,  are  accompanied  by  highly  altered  schist,  in  places  also 
by  quartzite,  marble,  and  serpentine.  The  schist  is  the  principal  source  of 
the  gold  found  here.  It  is  sometimes  interrupted  by  masses  of  granite  or 
gneiss,  and  sometimes  covered  by  Cretaceous  or  Tertiary  beds,  but  it  is 
continually  cropping  out  along  its  course.  It  is  regarded  as  pre-Cambrian ; 
the  prospector  finds  no  gold  in  the  Cambro-Silurian  lying  further  to  the 
east,  and  the  completely  divergent  series  of  the  intermediate  range  situated 
to  the  west  is  equally  unproductive. 

Dawson  perceived  that  the  biotite  granites  of  these  inner  ranges  of  the 
Rocky  mountains,  with  their  not  infrequent  transitions  into  gneiss,  are 
much  older  than  the  grey  hornblende  granites  of  the  west  coast,  which  we 
shall  discuss  directly.  He  thought  they  might  form  an  alternating  series 
of  masses,  arranged  very  much  after  the  fashion  of  the  coulisses  of  the 
Palaeozoic  range. 

We  may  mention,  without  entering  into  details,  that  in  lat.  59°  N.  the 
Dease  river  cuts  through  a  band  of  these  ancient  granite  and  *  granitoid ' 
rocks,  20  kilometers  in  breadth,  with  a  north-west  trend,  that  a  great  part 
of  the  Cassiar  range  is  formed  of  the  same  rocks,  and  that  the  Pelly  river 
crosses  the  strike  at  an  acute  angle,  somewhat  north  of  the  mass  of  the 
Glenlyon  mountains.  These  mountains  consist  of  a  granite  of  a  slightly 
difierent  nature,  the  apophyses  of  which  cross  the  river  obliquely  in 
a  west-north-westerly  direction. 

The  Pelly  river  flows,  however,  for  the  greater  part  of  its  course,  in 
schist,  with  beds  of  hornstone.  Near  the  mouth  of  the  Macmillan, 
McConnell  mentions  sericitic  schist  with  some  gneiss,  and  then  granite 
gneiss,  which  is  a  true  ortho-gneiss,  often  described  as  the  Pelly  gneiss. 

The  ancient  rocks,  striking  from  the  Pelly  across  the  Stewart  river,  now 
reach  the  river  Klondike,  and  their  northern  border  crosses  the  Yukon 
a  little  below  the  town  of  Dawson.  As  they  strike  to  the  north-west  their 
breadth  decreases;  towards  the  south  they  present  a  sharp  boundary^. 
They  next  strike,  north  of  the  Tanana,  further  to  the  west-north-west. 
In  this  region  Spurr  named  them  many  years  ago  the  Yukon- geanticline ; 

^  G.  M.  Dawson,  Report  on  an  Exploration  in  the  Yukon  District,  N.W.T.,  Ann.  Rep. 
Geol.  Sui-v.  Can.,  1888,  III.  A  new  edition  of  this  valuable  report  was  prepared  in  1898, 
with  part  of  McConnell's  report  appended,  244  pp.,  maps. 

R.  G.  McConnell,  Yukon,  Preliminary  Report,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Surv.  Can.,  1902,  new 
ser.,  XII,  A,  pp.  16-52,  map. 


CH.  Xl] 


INTEEMEDIATE  EANGE 


397 


this  anticline  terminates,  as  we  have  already  seen,  in  lat.  64°  20'  N., 
long.  147°  W.^ 

At  this  point,  however,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  syntaxis,  we  can 
hardly  speak  of  a  true  gneiss  range.  McConnell  shows  that  by  far  the 
greater  part  of  the  range  on  the  Klondike,  and  even  further  towards  the 
south-east,  is  dynamically  transformed  into  a  pale-coloured  sericite  schist, 
which  betrays  its  derivation  from  granite  or  porphyry  only  under  the 
microscope,  or  by  scattered,  ill -defined  masses  of  Pelly  gneiss.  This 
completely  crushed,  intrusive  rock  is  regarded  by  McConnell  as  the  true 
home  of  the  gold  2. 

In  this  fashion  the  range  of  gneiss-masses  which  commenced  to  the 
south  of  lat.  49°  N.  on  the  west  side  of  the  Cambro-Silurian  zone  comes  to 
an  end.  From  Kootenay  on  the  south,  through  Cariboo,  the  valley  of  the 
Finlay,  the  upper  Stikine,  the  upper  Liard,  the  Cassiar  range,  and  a  number 
of  other  features  as  far  as  Klondike  and  beyond,  these  masses  are  literally 
united  by  a  golden  girdle. 

To  the  east  and  north  of  this  zone,  even  up  to  the  vicinity  of  the 
syntaxis,  a  peculiar  and  lofty  zone  of  Palaeozoic  limestone  and  slate  may  be 
distinguished.  In  places  Aucella  beds  are  associated  with  it.  On  the  north 
it  forms  the  watershed  next  the  Arctic  Ocean.  It  probably  includes  Selwyn 
range  (very  little  known),  and  Ogilvie  range,  the  north  border  of  which 
reaches  the  plain  of  the  Peel  between  long.  135°  and  136°  W.  and  beyond 
lat.  65°  N.  To  this  range  belong  also  the  lofty  Palaeozoic  mountains 
which  meet  the  Yukon,  below  the  British  boundary,  near  Eagle  and  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Tatundock ;  likewise  the  Ketchumstock  mountains,  north  of 
the  Tanana. 

The  manner  in  which  the  extreme  north-easterly  end  of  the  Alaska 
range  meets  this  extreme  north-westerly  end  of  the  Rocky  mountains  in 
the  valley  of  the  Tanana  has  already  been  described. 

.  2.  The  beginning  of  the  Intermediate  range. 

i  The  Wrangell  volcanos.  Between  lat.  62°  and  63°  N.,  lying  on  the  zone  of 
Jyn taxis,  is  the  downthrown  plateau  of  the  Copper  river,  which  bears  in  the 
east  the  group  of  the  Wrangell  volcanos.  Its  length  from  north-west  to 
south-east  measures  about  220  kilometers ;  its  breadth,  taken  at  right 
angles,  somewhat  less.  The  Copper  river  rises  on  the  north  side  of  the 
volcanos,  curves  round  their  western  border  and  separates  them  from  the 

1  J.  E.  Spurr,  Geology  of  the  Yukon  Gold  District,  AL,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1898,  Xllf, 
3,  392  pp.,  maps. 

2  R  G.  McConnell,  Klondike  Gold  Fields,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Surv.  Can.  (1901),  1905,  XIV, 
B,  71  pp.,  maps ;  p.  19  description  of  the  sericitic  schist  by  Barlow.  MacMillan  and 
Peele,  op.  cit.  (1902-1903),  1906,  XV,  A,  p.  22  et  seq.,  map. 


398       THE  END  OF  THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  [party 

tundra  which  covers  the  surface  of  the  plateau  towards  the  north-west 
and  west,  up  to  the  foot  of  the  Alaska  range.  Having  passed  the  volcanos 
the  river  enters,  near  Taral,  on  the  south,  a  long  and  narrow  transverse 
valley,  90  kilometers  in  length,  which  cuts  from  north  to  south  right  across 


i  :  2,500.000 

0  30  100  150  200Km 
1  I  I  I   i 


Fig.  33.  The  Plateau  of  the  Copper  river  (after  the  map  of  R.  U.  Goode,  in  Brooks,  Alaska ; 
geological  data  according  to  Mendenhall,  Schrader  and  Spencer;  heights  in  English  feet). 
The  encroachment  of  the  horst,  which  is  in  part  mesozoic,  is  visible  on  the  south  slope  of 
mount  Blackburn.  Mounts  Hayes  and  Kimball  belong  to  the  Alaska  range  ;  Mentasta  pass 
corresponds  with  the  fault  which  strikes  to  the  north-west  beneath  Mount  Kimball,  and  the 
southern,  downthrown  mountains  are  formed  of  ancient  eruptive  rocks,  upper  Carboniferous, 
and  Tertiary  sediments.  Tanana  river  is  the  boundary  between  these  mountains  and  the 
Rocky  mountains.  The  southern  mountains  surround  the  gulf  of  Chugatsk  and  strike 
south-east  to  mount  Saint  Elias. 

the  Chugatsk  range.  Before  entering  the  first  canon  it  receives  from  the 
east-south-east  the  important  river  Chettyna,  which  flows  in  a  broad 


CH.  Xl] 


WEANGELL  VOLCANOS 


399 


valley,  surrounding  the  south  foot  of  the  volcanos.  The  Rocky  mountains 
do  not  enter  the  region  which  borders  the  plateau  of  the  Copper  river. 
The  southern  side  is  formed  by  the  precipitous  northern  slope  of  the 
Chugatsk  range,  which  is  continued  towards  the  south-east  without  inter- 
ruption into  the  Saint  Elias  range.  In  the  north-west  of  the  plateau  rises 
mount  Hayes,  which  has  already  been  mentioned  as  one  of  the  most  easterly 
peaks  of  the  Alaska  range.  Its  strike  is  east-north-east,  and  it  is  joined 
with  an  east-south-easterly  strike  (corresponding  to  the  angle  of  syntaxis) 
by  the  Mentasta  range  and  its  continuation,  the  Nutzotin  range,  which  runs 
past  the  volcanos  on  the  north.  The  Nutzotin  range  itself  is  separated 
on  the  north  from  the  gneiss  of  the  Rocky  mountains,  which  also  strikes  to 
the  east-south-east,  only  by  the  broad  and  marshy  valley  of  the  Tanana. 

The  group  of  the  Wrangell  volcanos  is  a  single  mass  of  ash  and  lava, 
bearing  several  very  lofty  volcanos,  but  in  the  south,  north  of  the  river 
Chettyna,  it  includes  older  lavas  and  sedimentary  beds.  On  the  west  also 
the  basement  of  the  volcanic  structure  is  occasionally  visible. 

The  broad  cone  of  Wrangell  volcano  (4,269  meters,  almost  exactly  in 
lat.  62°  N.,  long.  144°  W.)  forms  the  centre  of  the  mass  ;  towards  the  north 
a  lofty  ridge  connects  it  with  mount  Sanford  (4,940  meters),  the  highest  of 
these  mountains;  to  the  south-south-east  of  mount  Wrangell,  advancing 
a  little  in  the  direction  of  the  Chettyna,  rises  mount  Blackburn  (4,919 
meters).  On  the  west  mount  Drum  (over  3,600  meters)  rises  near  the 
middle  of  the  curve  of  the  Copper  river.  The  height  of  mount  Drum  is 
attained  or  exceeded,  according  to  Mendenhall,  by  at  least  ten  other  peaks. 
Of  late  years  mount  Wrangell  was  the  only  one  of  these  peaks  over  which 
a  smoke  cloud  hung,  but  in  the  spring  of  1907  violent  eruptive  activity 
occurred,  in  which  mounts  Wrangell,  Blackburn,  and  Sanford  seem  to  have 
shared 

This  great  assemblage  of  mountains,  measured  from  the  west-north- 
west, where  it  slopes  down  to  the  plateau  of  the  Copper  river,  to  the  east- 
south-east,  where  it  joins  the  Skolai  range,  is  160  kilometers  across,  and  in 
a  direction  perpendicular  to  this  110  kilometers.  On  the  heights  of  the 
Skolai  range  there  is  also  a  long  series  of  accumulations  of  more  recent 
ashes,  lavas,  and  pumice.  The  glaciers  carry  this  material  down  into  the 
valleys,  and  fragments  of  it  are  known  even  as  far  as  the  Chilkat  pass 
above  the  Lynn  canal.  Above  the  Klutlau  glacier  rises  the  mountain  of 
Na-taz-hat  (about  lat.  61°  30'  N.,  long.  141°  30'  W.),  the  probable  point 
of  discharge  of  a  white  ash,  which  may  be  recognized  over  a  wide  area  as 
an  intercalated  layer  in  the  soil  ^. 

^  A.  Porter,  Zeitschr.  Ges.  Erdk.,  1907,  p.  628  (from  Science). 

'  C.  W.  Hayes,  An  Expedition  through  the  Yukon  District,  Nat.  Geogr.  Mag. 
Washington,  1892,  IV,  pp.  117-152,  maps;  Brooks,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  XXI, 
2,  p.  365. 


400       THE  END  OP  THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  [paetv 


The  Wrangell  group  itself  lies  a  little  to  the  east  of  the  syntaxis; 
observations  in  the  Skolai  range  show  that  the  volcanic  chain  is  continued 
from  the  Aleutian  islands,  through  Cook  inlet  across  the  plateau  of  the 
Copper  river,  and  through  mounts  Wrangell  and  Na-taz-hat  further  towards 
the  east-south- east.  No  other  case  is  known  in  which  a  line  of  active 
volcanos  follows  a  syntaxis,  and  we  will  therefore  enter  somewhat  into 
detail  ^. 

Mendenhall  and  Brooks  have  concordantly  arrived  at  the  conclusion 
that  the  Wrangell  volcanos  are  situated  upon  a  downthrown  region,  which 
is  bounded  on  the  north,  next  the  Nutzotin  range,  by  faults,  and  on  the 
south,  in  the  valley  of  the  Chettyna,  next  the  north  border  of  the  Chugatsk 
range,  by  flexures  or  fractures,  that  is,  these  volcanos  are  situated  upon 
a  strike  trough'^. 

To  the  north  the  principal  chain  of  the  Mentasta  and  Nutzotin  range 
consists  of  schistose  greywacke  with  numerous  quartz  veins  (Tahana 
schist),  cut  off  from  the  southern  foothills  by  a  great  strike  fault.  South 
of  the  Wrangell  volcanos  highly  altered  amphibolite  and  mica  schists, 
together  with  crystalline  limestone  (Klutina  series),  occur  and  represent 
the  most  northerly  and  ancient  formation  of  the  Chugatsk  (Elias)  moun- 
tains ;  they  are  covered  by  a  thick  series  of  schist  and  greywacke  (Valdez 
series),  which  forms  the  greater  part  of  these  mountains. 

In  the  meridian  of  the  Wrangell  volcanos  the  fault-trough  is  at  least 
170  to  180  kilometers  broad. 

The  downthrown  series  thus  comprises  the  following  groups : — 

1.  Nikolai  diabase]  repeated  flows,  piled  up  to  a  height  of  4,000  feet; 
the  uppermost  part  copper-bearing. 

2.  Upper  Carboniferous  limestone  with  Fusulina  and  Productus  cora ; 
Schuchert  remarks  on  its  affinity  with  rocks  of  the  same  age  in  Asia  ^. 

3.  A  thick  series  of  Permian  shales  and  limestone 

*  The  principal  sources  of  information  are,  for  the  west,  W.  C.  Mendenhall,  Geology  of 
the  Central  Copper  River  Region,  Alaska,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Prof.  Papers,  no.  41,  1905, 
133  pp.,  maps  (also  Mendenhall  and  Schrader,  op.  cit.,  no.  15) ;  for  the  east  and  the 
Skolai  range,  A.  H.  Brooks,  A  Reconnaissance  from  Pyramid  Harbour  to  Eagle  City, 
Alaska,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Ann.  Rep.,  XXI,  2,  1900,  pp.  331-391,  maps;  and  0.  Rohn, 
A  Reconnaissance  of  the  Chetina  River  and  the  Skolai  Mountains,  tom.  cit.,  pp.  393-440, 
maps  ;  further,  for  the  whole  region,  Schrader  and  Spencer,  Geology  and  Mining  Re- 
sources of  the  Copper  River  District,  8vo,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1901,  94  pp.,  maps;  and 
Brooks,  Geology  and  Geography,  passim. 

2  W.  C.  Mendenhall,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Prof.  Papers,  no.  41,  pp.  82-88 ;  and  almost 
identical  as  regards  the  facts,  Brooks,  Geology  and  Geography,  p.  256. 

'  Schuchert,  in  Schrader  and  Spencer,  Copper  River  District,  p.  44,  and  in  Ann.  Rep. 
Geol.  Surv.,  XXI,  2,  pp.  359. 

*  Schuchert,  in  Mendenhall,  Prof.  Papers,  no.  41,  p.  42  et  seq.  Among  other  species 
Spirifers  were  found  from  the  group  of  Spirifer  stn'atus,  arcticus,  and  sttprainosquensis, 
Froductiis  Ivesemhliiig  semireticidatits,  cora,  Hiimboldti  and  others,  then  Goniocladia,  Ortho- 


CH.XI]  SUCCESSION  BELOW  MOUNT  BLACKBUEN  401 

4.  Trias ;  dark  limestone,  above  it  some  3,000  feet  of  shales  with 
Monotis  subcircularis  and  Daonella. 

All  these  subdivisions  lie  conformably,  and  are  folded  with  a  strike  to 
the  north-west ;  their  worn-down  folds  are  covered  unconformably  by 
5.  Neocomian  (Kennicott  formation ;  Aucella  crassicollis)  corresponding 
to  the  Knoxville  stage  of  California  ^ 

6.  Isolated  patches  of  plant-bearing  Tertiary  on  the  north  border. 

The  middle  Jurassic,  so  largely  represented  on  the  peninsula  of  Alaska, 
has  not  yet  been  met  with.  The  most  recent  sediment  is  the  Neocomian, 
which  is  covered  by  the  lavas  of  Wrangell. 

Coming  from  the  Nutzotin  range,  i.  e.  from  the  north,  and  crossing  the 
trough,  we  encounter,  according  to  Mendenhall's  map,  first  a  fragment  of 
dioritic  rock  wedged  into  the  marginal  fault,  and  then  the  thick  Permian 
series,  which  along  the  fault  is  steeply  upturned  and  traversed  by  basic 
sills,  but  further  south  lies  flat  and  is  without  sills.  Then  we  reach  a  broad 
boss  of  diorite,  older  andesite,  and  diabase.  These  rocks  plunge  beneath 
the  alluvial  land  of  the  Copper  river;  and  out  of  this  rise  the  mighty 
volcanos.  On  their  west  side,  emerging  from  the  lava,  are  highly  altered 
rocks,  which  possibly  belong  to  the  Klutina  series  of  the  adjacent  Chugatsk 
range ;  further  away  we  see  diorite  like  that  already  mentioned.  Finally, 
on  the  south  side  of  the  volcanos  and  beneath  their  ejectamenta,  the  whole 
series  is  exposed  from  the  Nikolai  diabase  to  the  Neocomian.  It  extends 
up  to  considerable  heights ;  the  southern  part  of  the  volcanic  accumulations 
thus  rests  on  a  horst,  which  once  rose  out  of  the  trough. 

This  southern,  sedimentary  part  of  the  Wrangell  mass  is  simply  the 
western  end  of  the  Skolai  range,  and  this,  along  with  its  volcanos,  is 
probably  nothing  else  than  a  part  of  the  trough,  let  down  a  little  less 
deeply. 

Brooks  and  Peters  have  travelled  from  the  Lynn  canal  to  the  Nutzotin 
range,  and  thence  to  the  Yukon.  Rohn  crossed  the  Skolai  mountains,  and 
reached  the  north  side  of  the  volcanos.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  upper 
Palaeozoic  and  Mesozoic  sediments  of  the  trough  extend  from  the  volcanos 
in  an  unbroken  range,  and  with  increasing  breadth  as  far  as  British 
Columbia. 

Brooks  thinks  that  the  volcanos  of  the  Aleutian  islands  may  be  regarded 

tichia  and  other  genera ;  the  most  characteristic  genera,  such  as  Enteletes  and  all  the 
Cephalopods,  are  absent. 

^  In  California  as  in  Russia  two  horizons  have  been  distinguished  in  the  Aucella- 
bearing  beds.  The  Jurassic  beds  are  termed  the  Mariposa,  the  Neocomian,  the  Knox- 
ville stage  ;  both  in  Russia  and  in  this  part  of  Alaska  an  unconformity  occurs  at  the  base 
of  the  Knoxville  stage  ;  P.  Smith,  Age  of  the  Auriferous  Slates  of  the  Sierra  Nevada, 
Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1894,  V,  pp.  243-258  ;  A.  Hyatt,  Trias  and  Jura  in  the  Western 
States,  tom.  cit.,  pp.  395-434  ;  J.  S.  Diller  and  T.  W.  Stanton,  The  Shasta-Chico  Series, 
tom.  cit.,  pp.  435-464.  In  Alaska  this  distinction  has  not  everywhere  been  carried  out. 
SOL.LAS  IV  D  d. 


402       THE  END  OF  THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  [partv 


as  a  south-westerly  continuation  of  the  Wrangell  volcanos,  although  they 
are  not  geographically  connected  ^  If  we  compare  what  has  been  said 
above  with  regard  to  the  structure  of  Cook  inlet  and  Shelikof  strait,  which 
is  probably  that  of  a  trough,  as  well  as  the  description  of  Matanuska,  we 
find  this  point  of  view  confirmed.  We  may  conclude  that  a  strike  trough 
or  troughlike  inbreak  follows  both  directions  of  the  syntaxis,  extending 
between  the  Alaska  and  Nutzotin  ranges  in  the  north,  and  the  Kenai  and 
Elias  (Chugatsk)  range  in  the  south. 

The  grano-diorite  of  Columbia,  North  of  the  volcanos  lies  the  Nutzotin 
range.  On  the  north  border  of  this  range,  between  it  and  the  plain  of  the 
Tanana,  where  it  is  traversed  by  the  river  Nabesna,  between  longs.  143°  and 
and  142°  W.,  Brooks  observed  a  small  outcrop  of  grey  granite  ^,  Hayes 
and  Brooks  again  met  with  the  same  granite  on  the  upper  White  river,  on 
lake  Kluane,  and  on  lake  Dezadeash  (long.  137°  W.),  i.e.  in  a  zone  striking 
to  the  south-east.  In  this  direction  it  increases  rapidly  in  breadth,  assumes 
in  places  dioritic  characters,  and  is  also  described  as  grano-diorite.  Above 
the  gold  placers  of  the  Porcupine  river  (long.  136°  15'  W.,  north-west  of 
Chilkat  inlet,  Lynn  canal),  C.  W.  Wright  describes  it  as  a  dioritic  range, 
more  than  120  kilometers  in  breadth,  in  front  of  which,  and  at  a  distance 
of  12-13  kilometers  further  south,  lies  a  second  dioritic  range  only  3*2  to 
6-4  kilometers  in  breadth.  The  sediments,  which  are  penetrated  by  the 
diorite,  contain,  on  the  south  side,  lower  Carboniferous  fossils,  and  are 
thrown  into  narrow  folds,  with  a  strike  of  N.  60°  W.,  dip  N.E.  They 
are  altered  by  contact;  in  places  the  diorite  follows  the  bedding  planes, 
and  in  others  it  cuts  across  the  strike^. 

This  marks  the  beginning  of  an  intrusive  mass,  which  is  more  recent 
than  the  Trias,  according  to  Spencer  and  C.  W.  Wright  even  more  recent 
than  the  Aucella  beds,  and  older  than  the  Cenomanian ;  it  is  of  unsur- 
passed magnificence.  Its  most  important  features  were  first  recognized  by 
Dawson  *. 

The  western  margin  reaches  the  head  of  Lynn  canal,  and  a  very  long, 
narrow  belt  of  sediments,  for  the  most  part  the  contact  zone,  separates  it 
from  the  sea  for  several  degrees  of  latitude.  The  grano-diorite  rises  in 
steep  cliffs  above  this  zone ;  on  an  average  it  is  80  kilometers  broad,  but 

*  Brooks,  Geography  and  Geology,  p.  250. 

2  Brooks,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  XXI,  2,  p.  361,  map. 
C.  W.  Wright,  The  Porcupine  Placer  District,  Al.,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Bull.,  no.  236, 
1904,  35  pp.,  maps. 

*  G.  M.  Dawson,  Exploration  in  the  Yukon  District  and  adjacent  Northern  Portion  of 
British  Columbia,  1887,  with  Extracts  relating  to  the  Yukon  District,  from  Report  on  an 
Exploration  in  the  Yukon  and  Mackenzie  Basins,  1887-8,  by  R.  G.  McConnell,  new 
ed.,  Geol.  Surv.  Can.,  1898,  244  pp.,  maps,  p.  28.  The  general  map  on  the  western  half 
of  the  country  published  by  the  Geological  Survey  of  Canada  in  1901  marks  the  whole 
of  the  granite  range  along  with  the  northern  parts  as  far  as  the  frontier  in  long.  141°. 


cH.xi]      THE  GEANODIOEITE  OP  COLUMBIA  403 


on  the  Stikine  over  100  kilometers ;  it  is  cut  through  by  fjords,  and  reaches 
the  mouth  of  the  Fraser.  At  this  point  it  recedes  from  the  sea,  and,  growing 
narrower,  comes  to  an  end  in  the  United  States,  beyond  lat.  49''  N. 
Throughout  its  length  of  almost  fourteen  degrees  of  latitude  it  is  a  lofty, 
rugged,  and  rocky  range ;  it  bears  a  large  number  of  peaks  over  7,000  feet 
in  height,  some  even  attain  a  height  of  8,000-9,000  feet. 

The  expression  '  grano-diorite '  is  employed  in  accordance  with  American 
usage.  In  general  we  associate  this  term  with  a  rock  allied  to  tonalite  or 
monzonite.  Sometimes  the  expression  granite,  quartz-diorite,  or  diorite  is 
preferred.  E.  Wright  states  that  the  great  intrusive  mass  includes  the 
most  diverse  rocks,  seldom  granite,  more  frequently  grano-diorite,  and 
transitions  to  diorite  or  gabbro.  Observations  along  the  Behm  canal  and 
the  Unuk  river  (lat.  55°  10'  to  56°  45'  N.)  show  on  the  west  side  alteration 
into  mica  schist,  more  rarely  into  hornfels  and  spotted  schists,  as  well  as 
the  presence  of  numerous  veins  of  pegmatite  and  aplite ;  on  the  east  side,  on 
the  other  hand,  there  is  a  sharply  defined  boundary  at  the  zone  of  contact. 

On  the  east  Dawson  met  with  upper  Carboniferous  at  various  points 
over  a  distance  of  800  kilometers,  and  at  isolated  localities,  as  on  the 
Stikine,  Trias.  This  is  the  succession  in  the  Skolai  range.  As  early  as 
1887  Dawson  concluded  that  the  great  igneous  mass  could  only  have 
acquired  its  present  position  by  absorption  of  the  adjacent  rock  ^.  On  the 
Unuk  a  recent  flow  of  lavas  is  to  be  seen  close  to  the  contact  ^. 

This  batholite  is  known  in  Canada  as  the  Coast  range.  It  must  not  be 
confused  with  the  Californian  coast  ranges.  Its  oblique  course  in  the 
north  has  given  rise  to  the  statement  that  north  of  the  Lynn  canal  the 
Coast  range  enters  the  interior  of  the  country. 

Brooks  conjectures  that  a  rock  from  the  peaks  of  McKinlay  must  be 
referred  to  the  grano-diorite  ^. 

To  gain  an  acquaintance  with  the  west  side  of  the  batholite  we  must 
once  more  turn  our  attention  to  the  north. 

3.  The  Elias  range. 

This  great  range,  1,800  to  2,400  meters  in  height  and  difficult  of 
access,  is  cut  through  by  the  Copper  river  below  Taral,  and  strikes  away 
between  the  Chettyna  river  and  the  sea  towards  the  south-east.    It  is  the 

^  G.  M.  Dawson,  Geological  Examination  of  the  North  part  of  Vancouver  island,  Ann. 
Rep.  Geol.  Surv.  Canada,  1887,  new  ser.,  II,  B,  129  pp.,  map,  in  particular  p.  11.  I  men- 
tion with  gratitude  that  the  late  Mr.  G.  M.  Dawson  has  frequently  given  me  by  letter 
detailed  information  with  regard  to  the  granite  range  and  especially  its  continuation 
towards  the  north-west. 

2  F.  E.  Wright,  Unuk  Mining  River  Region,  Summ.  Rep.  Geol.  Surv.  Canada  (1905) 
1906,  pp.  46-53. 

'  A.  H.  Brooks,  Geography  and  Geology,  pp.  204,  250. 

D  d  !Z 


404        THE  END  OF  THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  [paet  v 

continuation  of  the  Chugatsk  range.  Like  that  range  it  presents  to  view 
both  the  Valdez  and  the  Orca  series ;  in  each  case  the  younger  rocks  lie 
next  the  sea,  and  in  each  the  tangential  movement  has  been  directed 
seawards,  giving  rise  to  unilateral  folds.  The  outer  border  next  the  sea 
recalls  in  many  respects  the  outer  borders  of  the  Eurasiatic  region.  A  little 
to  the  east  of  the  mouth  of  the  Copper  river^  in  Controller  bay,  and  on  the 
Continental  coast  of  Bering  sea,  Martin  has  described  variegated  shales, 
possibly  belonging  to  the  Orca  series,  then  dark  carboniferous  shales  with 
petroleum  and  marine  Tertiary  shells  (Katalla  formation,  Eocene),  then 
the  coal-bearing  Kenai  stage,  and  above  this  marine  Miocene,  corresponding 
with  the  Unga  stage  of  the  Aleutian  islands. 

All  these  sediments  are  folded,  but  an  exact  survey  of  the  folds  made 
for  the  purpose  of  tracing  the  petroleum  shows  that  between  longs.  144°  30' 
and  143°  W.,  that  is,  fairly  far  to  the  east  of  the  syntaxis,  a  north-easterly 
strike  still  prevails  in  this  belt  of  the  mountains,  only  interrupted  in  places 
by  the  normal  strike  to  the  north-west,  as  though  the  movement  west  of 
the  syntaxis  had  lasted  longer  than  on  the  east  ^.  At  cape  Yaktag 
(long.  142°  W.)  marine  Miocene  beds  form,  according  to  Eldridge,  an 
anticline  striking  to  east  and  west  2. 

Up  to  this  point  the  height  of  the  range  increases.  It  attains  5,514 
meters  in  mount  St.  Elias,  north  of  cape  Yaktag,  and  5,855  north-east  of 
this  in  mount  Logan.  It  reaches  Cross  sound  as  mount  Fairweather 
(4,700  meters)  and  mount  Crillon,  and  there  separates  Lynn  canal  from 
the  Ocean,  but  it  is  divided  into  two  parts  by  Glacier  bay,  which  receives 
the  great  Muir  glacier. 

Our  knowledge  of  St.  Elias  is  chiefly  derived  from  three  sources— two 
expeditions  by  Israel  Russell^  and  one  by  Prince  Amadeus  of  Savoy*. 
The  slopes  and  foothills  are  described  in  the  first  two ;  to  the  third  we  owe 
some  knowledge  of  the  summit. 

This  peak  is  formed  of  diorite,  but  at  its  very  summit  of  hornblende 

1  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1898,  XIX,  6  contin.,  p.  110;  G.  C.  Martin,  Petroleum 
Fields  of  the  Pacific  Coast  of  Alaska,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Bull.,  no.  250, 1905,  pp.  1-36,  maps. 
At  the  southernmost  extremity  of  Kayak  island  a  rock  of  trachyte  rises  suddenly  from 
the  sea. 

^  Maps  and  Descriptions  of  Routes  of  Exploration  in  Alaska,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1899, 8vo, 
G.  H.  Eldridge,  The  Coast  from  Lynn  Canal  to  Prince  William  Sound,  p.  104.  The  little 
island  of  Middleton,  which  lies  88  kilometers  from  the  land  opposite  the  mouth  of  the 
Copper  River,  is  probably  an  accumulation  of  boulder  clay  thrust  out  from  the  land  ; 
Dawson,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1893,  IV,  pp.  427-431. 

'  I.  C.  Russell,  Expedition  to  Mount  St.  Elias,  Alaska,  Nat.  Geogr.  Mag.,  Washington, 
1891,  III,  pp.  53-204,  maps,  in  particular  p.  167  et  seq.  ;  Second  Expedition  to  Mount 
St.  Elias  in  1891,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Ann.  Rep.,  1892,  XIII,  2,  pp.  1-91,  maps. 

*  Filippo  de  Filippi,  Spedizione  di  S.  A.R.  il  Principe  Luigi  Amadeo  di  Savoja,  Duca  di 
Abruzzi,  al  Monte  S.  Elia  (Al.),  1897,  large  8vo,  Milano,  1900,  284  pp.,  majjs,  in  particular 
App.  E  :  V.  Novarese,  Roccie  e  minerali  dell'  Alaska  meridionale,  op.  cit.,  pp.  261-268. 


CH.  Xl] 


SAINT  ELIAS  EANGE 


405 


rock.  These  high-lying  regions  are  covered  with  snow  and  ice;  their 
rocks  are  only  known  from  the  moraines.  Gabbro  has  been  obtained  from 
mount  Cook  ^.  In  Disenchantment  bay  Russell  observed  white  limestone 
and  green  schists,  with  great  dykes  of  quartz  mica  diorite.  Still  further 
to  the  south-east,  on  the  shores  of  Glacier  bay  and  on  the  Muir  glacier, 
Reid  mentions  widely  distributed  diorite  and  quartz-diorite,  cutting  through 
folded  Palaeozoic  rocks.  These  rocks  cross  over  into  the  island  of 
Tshitshagov,  and  are  probably  apophyses  of  the  great  batholite^.  In 
Drake  island  (middle  of  Glacier  bay,  lat.  58°  40'  N.)  the  upper  Silurian 
Leperditia  haltica  has  been  obtained,  and,  on  the  Dirt  glacier  (extreme 
south-east  of  the  Muir  glacier),  a  Palaeozoic  coral  ^. 

Let  us  return  to  the  precipitous  southern  cliff  of  the  pyramid  of 
St.  Elias.  It  probably  represents  the  basset  edges  of  the  principal  range  of 
Palaeozoic  rocks.  Its  beds  dip  gently  towards  the  north-east.  Beneath  the 
projecting  spur  of  the  cliff,  brown  sandstone  and  black  shales  crop  out, 
Russell's  Yakutat  system,  the  resemblance  of  which  to  the  Cretaceous 
Flysch  has  already  been  pointed  out  when  discussing  Kadiak  (Aleutian 
islands).  The  Yakutat  beds,  violently  folded  and  crushed,  plunge  beneath 
the  mass  of  St.  Elias.  In  fact,  we  must  assume  that  the  principal 
Palaeozoic  range  is  pushed  up  from  the  north-east  over  the  Yakutat 
system,  in  much  the  same  way  as  the  limestone  zone  of  the  Eastern  Alps  is 
pushed  up  over  the  Flysch  zone. 

Further  away  the  Yakutat  system  occurs  with  the  same  north-easterly 
inclination  on  the  southern  slopes  of  mount  St.  Elias,  beneath  the  peaks 
named  Newton  and  Augusta.  This  is  the  only  rock  encountered  as  far  as 
Yakutat  bay  (long.  140°  W.).  On  the  other  side  of  the  bay,  the  gentle 
inclination  to  the  north-east  still  prevails,  but  in  the  most  southerly  belt 
(Blossom  on  the  north-east  side  of  the  Malaspina  glacier,  Knight  island  in 
Yakutat  bay)  the  beds  are  steeply  upturned. 

The  Yakutat  system  is  succeeded  towards  the  south-west  of  the  Elias 
range  by  the  Pinnacle  system.  In  his  first  account,  Russell  described  on 
the  Pinnacle  pass  a  series  of  sandstone  beds,  1,800  feet  in  thickness,  with 
insignificant  coal  seams  in  its  lowest  part,  and  repeated  intercalations  of 
conglomerate,  together  with  boulders  of  ancient  rocks.  The  upper  part  of 
the  series  includes  a  dense  grey  limestone  with  great  Pectens.  So  far  this 
system  might  well  be  regarded  as  Tertiary ;  it  occurs  in  a  similar  form 

1  Williams,  Some  Eruptive  Rocks  from  Alaska,  Nat.  Geogr.  Mag.,  1892,  IV,  p.  68.  The 
specimen  is  compared  to  the  Forellenstein  of  Neurode  (Silesia). 

2  H.  F.  Reid,  Glacier  Bay  and  its  Glaciers,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  XVI,  1895, 
pp.  415-461,  maps,  in  particular  p.  433  ;  also  Williams,  op.  cit. ;  Reid,  Muir  Glacier, 
Nat.  Geogr.  Mag.,  1892,  IV,  pp.  19-55,  maps  ;  H.  P.  Gushing,  Geology  of  the  Vicinity  of 
Muir  Glacier,  tom.  cit.,  pp.  56-62  ;  and  Notes  on  the  areal  Geology  of  Glacier  Bay, 
Trans.  N.Y.  Acad.  Sci.,  1896,  XV,  pp.  24-84. 

^  Schuchert,  in  the  report  of  Brooks  on  the  Ketchikan  District  cited  below,  p.  19. 


406        THE  END  OF  THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  [part  v 


between  the  Chaix  hills  and  the  Yakutat  beds  beneath  mount  St.  Elias. 
Perhaps  we  may  even  venture  the  conjecture  that  it  is  on  the  same  horizon 
as  the  beds  further  to  the  south-east  in  Lituya  bay  (at  the  foot  of  mount 
Fair  weather),  about  400  meters  above  the  sea,  which  contain  the  great 
Pectens  that  aroused,  many  years  ago,  the  astonishment  of  La  Peyrouse. 
The  beds  of  Lituya  bay  dip  15°  to  75°  to  the  N.W.,  according  to  Dall;  the 
little  island  Cenotaph  is  Miocene  ^. 

Russell  also  mentions  deposits  of  more  recent  age.  On  the  crest  of 
Pinnacle  pass,  at  a  height  of  5,000  feet  (about  1,500  meters),  Mya  arenaria, 
Cardium  islandicum,  and  other  still-existing  Arctic  species  were  found  in 
sandstone  and  shales  ^. 

The  Chaix  hills,  900  to  1,000  meters  high,  and  12  to  16  kilometers  in 
length,  extend  towards  the  south-east ;  they  descend  precipitously  to  the 
south,  and  their  beds  dip  10°  to  15°  to  the  north-east.  They  consist 
entirely  of  stratified  morainic  material  with  glaciated  boulders.  Cardium 
islandimm,  Panopaea  arctica,  and  other  species  occur  in  intercalated  beds 
of  fine  clay.  The  foothills  of  the  Elias  range,  like  the  Samovar  mountains, 
and  probably  the  Robinson  mountains  also,  present  a  similar  structure ;  in 
these  the  beds  dip  towards  the  north  '\ 

These  data  show  that  fairly  long  rock-zones  strike  from  the  heights  of 
St.  Elias  down  to  Yakutat  bay ;  some  are  continued  still  further  in  a  more 
or  less  south-easterly  direction.  Hornblende  rock  and  diorite  of  un- 
known age  form  the  summits  ;  the  Flysch-like  Yakutat  system  dips  gently 
beneath  it ;  this  is  followed,  with  the  same  inclination,  by  the  Pinnacle 
system,  probably  middle  Tertiary,  and  this  is  followed  towards  the  sea  by 
glacial  silt,  which  extends  downwards  from  1,500  meters.  Further  north 
(long.  145°  W.),  horizontal  marine  deposits  of  recent  age  occur  at  isolated 
localities  up  to  a  level  of  30  feet  above  the  strand. 

The  recent  movement  of  the  mountains,  which  carried  glacial  deposits 
up  to  such  considerable  heights,  seems  to  have  attained  its  maximum, 
according  to  the  imperfect  data  so  far  at  our  disposal,  somewhere  near  the 
origin  of  the  great  Malaspina  glacier,  which  reaches  the  sea  with  a  breadth 
of  100  kilometers  west  of  Yakutat  bay.  The  explanation  at  once  suggests 
itself,  that  the  whole  of  the  principal  range  of  the  Elias  mountains  was 
pushed  up  from  the  north-east,  in  post-glacial  times,  over  the  Flysch-like 
Tertiary  and  glacial  beds. 

From  an  account  given  by  Tarr  and  Martin  it  appears  that  this  range 
is  still  in  process  of  formation, 

^  Dall,  Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  no.  84,  1892,  p.  235 ;  Ann.  Rep.,  XVII,  1,  p.  783. 
Russell,  in  spite  of  grave  doubts,  has  described  the  Pinnacle  system  as  older  than 
Yakutat ;  Novarese  has  pointed  out  this  uncertainty.  The  statement  is  possibly  based 
on  the  lie  of  the  beds,  which  is  to  all  appearance  reversed. 

2  Russell,  Nat.  Geogr.  Mag.  Washington,  1891,  III,  first  report,  p.  170  et  seq. 

'  Russell,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1892,  XIII,  2,  second  report,  p.  24  et  seq. 


CH.XI]  ALEXANDER  ARCHIPELAGO 


407 


There  is  evidence  to  show  that  during  repeated  earthquake  shocks  in 
September,  1899,  an  elevation  of  the  land  took  place,  about  Yakutat  bay, 
to  an  extent  which  exhibited  great  local  variation.  The  greatest  displace- 
ment affected  the  west  coast  of  Disenchantment  bay,  and  is  not  less  than 
14*4  meters.  This  case,  and  that  of  San  Francisco,  are  probably  the  most 
thoroughly  investigated  cases  of  true  tectonic  movement  in  our  own  times  ^ 
In  their  irregularity  they  offer  an  instructive  contrast  to  the  eustatic 
strandlines. 

The  Alexander  archipelago.  As  the  great  batholite  approaches  the  sea 
the  Elias  range  rapidly  diminishes  in  height.  In  the  archipelago,  which 
lies  on  the  same  strike,  Baranov  island  alone  reaches  a  height  of  1,000  to 
1,200  meters.  In  Kreuzov  island,  west  of  Baranov  island,  rises  the  isolated 
volcano  of  Edgecumbe  ^ ;  all  the  rest  of  the  archipelago  follows,  in  long 
lines,  the  south-easterly  strike,  which  corresponds  nearly,  if  not  exactly, 
with  the  western  boundary  of  the  batholite.  In  the  north,  down  to 
lat.  57°  N.jOur  knowledge  of  the  batholite  has  been  considerably  advanced 
by  Spencer's  investigations  of  the  gold  region  of  Juneau,  and  by  those  of 
C.  W.  Wright  in  the  Admiralty  islands ;  in  the  south,  from  about  lat.  56°  to 
55°  N.,  by  the  description  of  the  Ketchikan  district,  in  Revillagigedo  island, 
by  Brooks  ^.  The  following  conclusions  may  be  regarded  as  making  some 
approximation  to  the  truth. 

The  batholite  is  believed  by  Spencer  to  have  arisen  by  the  coalescence  of 
several  bodies;  its  rocks  are  described  by  him  sometimes  as  granite,  sometimes 
as  diorite  (quartz-diorite  and  other  species).  Its  western  border  is  accom- 
panied by  contact  phenomena  and  ore  deposits.  This  zone  is  often  traversed 
by  sills,  and  some  of  these  intercalations  pass  into  bands  of  pure  hornblende. 
In  the  north,  still  within  this  zone,  Carboniferous  fossils  occur,  very  prob- 
ably indeed  upper  Carboniferous     The  entire  zone  dips  towards  the  north- 

1  R.  S.  Tarr  and  L.  Martin,  Recent  Change  of  Level  in  Alaska,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1906, 
XXVIII,  pp.  30-43  ;  and  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1906,  XVII,  pp.  29-64,  maps.  Tarr  made 
an  attempt  to  reach  Russell's  high-lying  glacial  beds,  but  was  prevented  by  remarkable 
changes  which  had  taken  place  in  the  glaciers  in  the  summer  of  1906,  Bull.  Geogr.  Soc. 
Phil.,  Jan.  1907. 

^  Notwithstanding  statements  to  the  contrary,  activity  in  the  historic  period  (here 
very  short)  is  not  established.  G.  F.  Becker,  Reconnaissance  of  the  Gold  Fields  of  South 
Alaska,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  XVIII,  3,  pp.  1-86,  maps,  in  particular  p.  12.  The 
lavas  of  Mount  Edgecumbe  are  described  by  Szachno,  Trav.  Soc.  Nat.  St.  Petersbourg, 
1895,  XXIII,  pp.  97-100  (in  Russian). 

'  A.  C.  Spencer,  The  Juneau  Gold  Belt,  Alaska,  and  C.  W.  Wright,  A  Reconnaissance 
of  Admiralty  Island,  Al.,  Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  no.  287,  1906,  154  pp.,  maps ;  A.  H. 
Brooks,  Preliminary  Report  on  the  Ketchikan  Mining  District,  Alaska,  U,S.  Geol.  Surv. 
Profess.  Papers,  no.  1,  1902,  120  pp.,  maps,  in  particular  p.  14  et  seq. 

*  On  the  existence  of  a  basic  marginal  zone,  cf.  F.  E.  Wright,  Lode  Mining  in  South- 
East  Alaska ;  in  Brooks'  and  other  reports  on  the  progress  of  the  investigation  of  the 
mineral  resources  of  Alaska  in  1905,  Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1906,  no.  284,  pp.  80-54, 


4:08        THE  END  OP  THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  [party 


east  beneath  the  grano-diorite,  and  the  same  is  true  of  all  the  sediments  in 
the  north  for  a  breadth  of  16  to  22  kilometers ;  then,  at  a  greater  distance, 
folding  occurs.   In  the  folds  of  the  southern  part  of  Admiralty  island  upper 
or  Permo-Carbonif erous  fossils  have  been  found,  and  in  several  places  lower 
Carboniferous  also,  while  more  to  the  west,  along  the  west  shore  of  Chatham 
strait,  upper  Silurian  fossils  as  well  as  lower  Carboniferous  occur.    Some  m 
limestones  in  the  west  of  Baranov  island  also  are  believed  to  be  Silurian.  I 
They  probably  represent  the  continuation  of  the  Palaeozoic  beds  in  Glacier  W 
bay  (lat.  58°  40'  N.).    Intrusive  rocks  traverse  the  islands  in  many  long  M 
strips,  and  are  particularly  evident  in  Tshitshagov  island,  and  some  of  the  W 
islands  to  the  south.  I 

This  folded  series,  which  strikes  with  great  regularity  to  the  south-east, 
is  unconformably  overlain  by  Neocomian  with  Aucella.  The  Neocomian 
is  also  folded  into  the  older  series,  and  a  strip  thus  folded  in  occurs  to  the 
north-west  of  Juneau ;  it  has  been  traced  down  to  the  south  of  Admiralty 
island. 

The  great  constancy  of  the  strike,  notwithstanding  all  the  differences 
in  relief,  shows  that  all  the  mountain-land  from  the  lower  course  of  the 
Copper  river  across  the  Elias  range  and  down  past  lat.  55°  N.  must  be 
regarded  as  a  single  element. 

The  overthrusting  to  the  south-west,  which  characterizes  the  Elias 
range,  is  also  to  be  seen  in  the  batholite,  at  least  in  its  northern  part.  This 
also  explains  the  fact  that  it  assumes  in  places  a  gneiss-like  structure.  ' 
But  the  Cenomanian  here  lies  horizontal,  and  the  folded,  petroleum-bearing 
Tertiary  outer  border  of  the  Elias  range  is  so  far  unknown  outside  the 
Archipelago.  This  may  indicate  that  the  true  continuation  of  the  Elias 
range  must  be  sought  for  out  to  the  sea. 

In  the  fault  trough  of  Wrangell  we  found  a  definite  series,  beginning 
with  the  Nikolai  greenstone  and  upper  Carboniferous,  followed  by  Mesozoic, 
with  an  unconformity  at  the  base  of  the  Neocomian,  and  completed  by  the 
volcanos  and  granodiorite.  This  we  regarded  as  the  succession  of  the  Interme- 
diate range.  It  is  continued  through  the  Skolai  range  into  the  Alexander 
archipelago,  but  the  Elias  range,  its  companion  on  the  west,  disappears, 
and  it  attains  a  very  great  breadth,  while  the  Rocky  mountains  are  con- 
tinued much  further  to  the  south,  and  are  folded  towards  the  east,  that 
is,  in  the  opposite  direction. 

Thus,  the  last  traces  of  Asiatic  influence  disappear  in  the  west,  and 
from  the  Queen  Charlotte  islands  onwards  we  see  that  oblique  arrange- 
ment of  the  chains  in  coulisses  which  gives  its  characteristic  outline  to 
the  west  coast  of  America. 

map.    For  the  distribution  of  Palaeozoic  faunas,  E.  M.  Kindle,  Geol.  Journ.,  1907,  XV, 
pp.  314-337.    The  European  character  is  a  striking  feature. 


CH.  Xl] 


VANCOUVEK 


409 


4.  Continuation  of  the  Intermediate  range. 

The  Vancouver  range.  Here  Dawson's  observations  enable  us  to 
distinguish  three  regions  which  succeed  each  other  towards  the  south. 
The  first  of  these  is  Graham  island,  in  the  Queen  Charlotte  archipelago ; 
the  second  is  a  very  long  zone  of  Cretaceous  beds,  which  starts  from  Skide- 
gate  inlet ;  the  third  comprises  the  whole  of  the  south  of  the  archipelago, 
along  with  Vancouver,  and  forms  a  peculiar  mountain  system,  known  as 
the  Vancouver  range. 

Some  reefs  of  trachyte  porphyry,  accompanied  by  a  Cretaceous  belt 
with  Inoceramus,  form  the  north-western  extremity  of  Graham  island. 
Then  follows  a  broad  plain  of  Tertiary  and  still  more  recent  sediments, 
with  peaks  of  some  elevation  formed  of  Tertiary  eruptive  rock.  On  the 
north  coast,  as  at  so  many  points  on  the  border  of  the  North  Pacific,  we 
see  marine  Tertiary  resting  on  lignitiferous  beds. 

This  plain  is  bounded  on  the  south  by  a  strip  of  Cretaceous,  which 
strikes  obliquely  through  the  archipelago  towards  the  south-east,  bounds 
the  greater  part  of  Skidegate  inlet,  and  near  lat.  53°  N.  reaches  by  its 
southern  border  the  east  coast.  It  forms  the  beginning  of  a  long  series  of 
Cretaceous  fragments  which  extend  sometimes  closely  in-folded,  sometimes 
let  down  into  fault-troughs,  with  an  almost  constant  strike  to  the  south- 
east ;  they  are  known  on  the  east  coast  of  Vancouver,  in  Queen  Charlotte 
sound,  in  the  strait  of  Georgia,  Juan  de  Fuca  strait,  and  still  further 
towards  the  south-east,  or,  altogether,  through  more  than  6  degrees  of 
latitude.    Coal-seams  frequently  occur  ^ 

To  the  north,  in  Queen  Charlotte  archipelago,  the  series  begins  with 
the  Knoxville  stage  (Neocomian) ;  as  in  Alaska,  it  is  separated  from  its 
basement  by  an  unconformity.  It  reaches  Vancouver,  and  traces  of  it  have 
even  been  met  with  in  Seattle  (Washington).  Further  south,  the  younger 
stages  of  the  Cretaceous  occur  in  transgression,  and  exhibit  litoral,  and 
finally  brackish- water  characters.  The  coal-bearing  series  of  Puget  sound, 
part  of  which  at  least  is  of  Laramie  age,  is  much  younger  than  that  of  the 
Queen  Charlotte  islands.  As  the  transgression  increases,  Indian  and  Euro- 
pean species  make  their  appearance  in  the  fossil  faunas.  The  Knoxville 
stage,  with  Aucella,  still  bears  a  northern  stamp.  The  Horsetown  stage, 
which  follows  next,  contains  in  its  upper  beds  Schloenhachia  injiata  and 
Lytoceras  Sacya ;  it  is  covered  by  the  Nanaimo  stage,  which,  according  to 

^  G.  M.  Dawson,  Queen  Charlotte  Islands,  Geol.  Surv.  Can.  Report  of  Progress  (1878- 
1879)  1880,  B,  239  pp.,  maps  ;  Geological  Examination  of  the  North  part  of  Vancouver 
Island  and  adjacent  coasts,  op.  cit.,  new  ser.,  II,  1887,  B,  129  pp.,  maps  ;  for  Puget  Sound, 
J.  P.  Kimball,  Physiographical  Geology  of  the  Puget  Sound  Basin,  Am.  Geol.,  1897,  XIX, 
pp.  225-237,  304-322  ;  Bailey  Willis,  Some  Coal  Fields  of  Puget  Sound,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S. 
Geol.  Surv.,  XVIII,  3,  1898,  pp.  399-444,  map. 


410        THE  END  OF  THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  [party 


Whiteaves  and  Kossmat,  contains  species  of  the  Indian  Ariayalur  group 
and  the  Senonian  of  Sachalin  ^. 

In  the  Queen  Charlotte  islands  the  beds  containing  Schloenhachia 
inflata  are  overlain  by  a  thick  conglomerate,  followed  by  marl  and  sand- 
stone with  Inoceramus  labiatus. 

As  the  Cretaceous  advances  step  by  step  from  the  north,  so  manifestly 
the  marine  Eocene  enters  Puget  sound  from  the  south,  and  there  invades 
the  region  of  the  brackish  upper  Cretaceous.  A  similar  example  on  a 
smaller  scale  occurs  in  Europe,  where  the  strait  of  Briinn  is  first  entered 
by  the  Bohemian  Cretaceous  coming  from  the  north  and  then  by  the 
Viennese  Second  Mediterranean  stage  coming  from  the  south. 

To  the  south-west  of  the  Cretaceous  lies  the  Vancouver  range.  The 
southern  part  of  the  Queen  Charlotte  archipelago  is  mountainous  (1,500 
meters)  like  Vancouver.  Here  as  there,  only  Trias  fossils  have  so  far  been 
found,  if  we  except  some  doubtful  traces  of  Carboniferous.  The  mountains 
are  formed  of  shales  with  layers  of  limestone,  and  accompanied  by  thick 
sheets  of  diabase  or  diorite.  Thus  this  Trias  presents  the  same  composition 
as  that  which  occurs  far  to  the  north,  near  the  sources  of  the  Indigirka. 
The  Trias  range  seems  to  extend  from  Juan  de  Fuca  strait  as  far  as  the 
latitude  of  Skidegate  inlet,  i.  e.  from  lat.  48°  30'  N.  nearly  to  53°  30'  N. ; 
it  strikes  regularly  to  N.  35°  W.,  and  then  in  the  north  somewhat  more  to 
the  west.  Indeed,  in  Skidegate  inlet  a  strike  to  N.  67°  W.  prevails  over 
a  considerable  distance,  and  it  seems  almost  as  though  the  bend  of  Chugatsk 
were  about  to  be  repeated  thus  far  in  the  south. 

The  islands  in  the  strait  of  Georgia,  such  as  that  of  Texada  and  others, 
show  that  a  close  connexion  exists  between  the  border  of  the  great  batholite 
and  rocks  which  are  correlated,  though  with  some  uncertainty,  with  those 
of  Vancouver.  But  even  in  the  east  of  Vancouver  itself  Dawson  observed 
a  broad  intrusive  belt,  which  included  innumerable  fragments  of  the  neigh- 
bouring rock,  and,  both  to  the  south  and  along  the  west  coast,  comparatively 
recent  intrusions  of  granitic  rocks  occur  \  The  interior  of  the  great  island 
is  unknown. 

If  any  conclusion  is  possible,  it  would  seem  that  the  Vancouver  range  is 
not  a  continuation  of  the  Alexander  archipelago,  but  a  range  lying  to  the 
west  of  the  great  batholite,  similar  to  the  Intermediate  range.  The  only 
feature  it  has  in  common  with  the  islands  of  the  Alexander  archipelago  is 
the  unconformable  transgression  of  the  Neocomian. 

•  F.  Kossmat,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1895,  XLIV,  pp.  471  et  sqq. ;  and  J.  F. 
Whiteaves,  On  some  additional  Fossils  from  the  Vancouver  Cretaceous,  Geol.  Surv.  Canada, 
Mesozoic  Fossils,  I,  pt.  5,  1903,  pp.  309-415. 

"  A.  Webster,  Geology  of  the  West  Coast  of  Vancouver  Island,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Surv. 
Canada  (1902-1903)  1906,  XV,  A,  pp.  54-76,  and  E.  Haycock,  torn,  cit.,  pp.  76-92,  in 
particular  p.  84. 


CH.  Xl] 


INTERIOR  PLATEAU 


411 


The  Interior  Plateau,  This  region,  lying  to  the  east  of  the  great 
batholite,  extends,  according  to  G.  M.  Dawson,  for  a  distance  of  800  kilo- 
meters towards  the  north-west ;  it  possesses  a  mean  breadth  of  160  kilo- 
meters, and  a  mean  height  of  3,500  feet;  it  is  higher  in  the  south  than 
in  the  north.  In  its  middle  part  and  almost  up  to  both  its  borders  it 
consists  of  broad  fragments  of  tableland,  separated  by  deep  denudation 
valleys,  and  built  up  of  two  thick  sheets  of  lava  and  ashes.  In  its  southern 
part,  up  to  some  distance  beyond  lat.  51°  15'  N.,  where  investigation  has 
been  carried  furthest,  Dawson  distinguishes  the  upper  volcanic  platform, 
presenting  a  vast  horizontal  surface,  from  which  rise,  strewn  far  apart, 
isolated  hills,  the  remnants  of  eruptive  cones — beneath  this  a  Miocene  fresh- 
water deposit — resting  in  turn  on  the  lower  volcanic  platform,  and  beneath 
this  again  a  freshwater  deposit  which  is  probably  Oligocene  ^. 

This  Tertiary  structure  rests  as  a  flat  and  even  covering  on  the  folded 
series  of  the  Intermediate  range,  which  strikes  to  the  north-north-west. 
On  the  west  side,  next  the  batholite,  we  meet,  as  already  mentioned,  with 
upper  Carboniferous  and  Trias,  as  well  as  the  unconformable  Knoxville 
stage ;  on  the  east  side,  next  the  gneiss  of  the  Golden  ranges  (Rocky  moun- 
tains), only  Trias  is  so  far  known;  the  lists  of  fossils  leave  it  an  open 
question  as  to  whether  Lias  is  also  present.  Very  thick  masses  of  volcanic 
rock,  chiefly  diabase,  accompany  the  upper  Carboniferous  and  Trias. 

In  this  tableland,  also,  large  areas  remain  unexplored,  and  the  east 
boundary  of  the  batholite  in  particular  may  have  many  unexpected  facts 
to  reveal.  In  the  Telkwa  valley  (lat.  55°  N.)  Leach  observed  in  the 
eastern  part  of  the  batholite  very  thick  volcanic  masses  (Cretaceous  Vj 
overlain  by  coal-bearing  beds;  they  are  themselves  traversed  by  dykes, 
and  the  whole,  in  contrast  to  the  tableland,  is  intensely  folded^. 

Transverse  section  in  lat.  49°  K  This  line,  the  boundary  of  the  United 
States  and  Canada,  has  been  made  the  subject  of  special  investigation  by 
the  geologists  of  both  countries,  with  a  view  to  determining  the  degree  of 
correspondence  between  the  north  and  south.  Although  the  tectonic  unity 
of  the  chief  subdivisions  has  been  placed  beyond  doubt,  yet  it  is  clearly 
apparent  that  the  orographic  and  the  tectonic  classification  frequently  fail 
to  correspond. 

In  Washington  and  Oregon  the  expression  '  Coast  range '  has  come  into 
use  for  the  recent  volcanic  Cascade  range ;  it  is  as  distinct  from  the  Coast 
range  of  Columbia  as  from  that  of  California.  If  we  inquire  into  the 
application  of  the  name  ^Cascade  range'  we  find  that  in  following  the 

*  G.  M.  Dawson,  Presidential  Address,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1901,  XII,  pp.  57-92 ;  for 
details,  Camloops  Sheet,  Geol.  Surv.  Can.  Report  of  Progress  for  1894,  new  ser.,  VII, 
1897,  B,  451  pp.,  map. 

^  M.  W.  Leach,  Telkwa  Mining  District,  Geol.  Surv.  Canada  Summ.  Rep.,  1906, 
pp.  35-42. 


412       THE  END  OF  THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  [party 


orographic  range  to  the  north  this  has  been  extended  to  ranges  of  the  most 
diverse  kind.  The  Hozomeen  mountains,  which  in  long.  121°  4'  W.  form 
one  side  of  the  valley  of  the  Skagit,  are  regarded  in  the  north  as  the  main 
body  of  the  Cascade  range,  and  the  Okanagan  mountains,  situated  to  the 
east  of  it,  as  a  secondary  range.  The  former  of  these  is  a  steeply-upturned 
series  of  Mesozoic  beds,  striking  north  and  south;  the  second  consists  of 
a  heterogeneous  intrusive  rock  ^. 

This  is  followed  on  the  east  by  a  region  which  is  known  as  the  Interior 
plateau;  it  is  the  natural  continuation  of  the  highland  discussed  above 
under  this  name,  but  Daly,  who  is  best  acquainted  with  these  mountains, 
points  out  that  no  plateau  exists  here,  and  the  designation  is  therefore 
incorrect. 

The  most  important  tectonic  boundary,  that  of  the  Rocky  mountains, 
has  the  least  effect  on  the  relief.  — 

From  a  tectonic  point  of  view  two  chief  groups  may  be  distinguished, 
namely,  the  Intermediate  range — characterized  by  a  series  ranging  from  the 
upper  Carboniferous  upwards,  through  grano-diorites  and  volcanos — and 
the  Rocky  mountains,  with  gneiss  and  a  thick  lower  Palaeozoic  series. 
According  to  Daly's  orographic  classification  ^  we  must  include  in  the 
Intermediate  range  Vancouver,  the  Coast  range,  the  Cascade  range,  the 
Interior  plateau,  and  a  part  of  the  Columbian  system ;  in  the  Rocky  moun- 
tains, the  remaining  part  of  the  Columbian  system,  Selkirk  mountains, 
Coeur  d'Alene  mountains,  Purcell  range,  and  the  Rocky  mountains  proper. 

At  this  point,  where  the  so-called  Coast  range  crosses  lat.  49°  south  of 
the  bend  of  the  Fraser  river,  Daly's  accounts^  describe  its  basement  as 
formed  of  thick,  folded,  Crinoidal  limestone  and  highly  altered  rocks.  In 
the  region  extending  from  this  point  to  the  Similkameen  river  and  the 
Hozomeen  range,  both  Daly  and  Camsell*  mention  altered  rocks,  which 
sometimes  present  an  appearance  of  great  age,  and  then  grano-diorites 
accompanied  by  patches  of  lower  Cretaceous,  younger  lavas,  and  Tertiary 
beds.  The  Hozomeen  mountains,  which  we  have  already  described  as 
a  range  of  steeply-upturned  Mesozoic  beds  striking  north  and  south,  rise 
to  their  highest  point  (9,000  feet)  immediately  above  the  place  where  the 
Skagit  crosses  the  boundary. 

On  the  river  Pasayten  (right  tributary  of  the  Similkameen)  a  diversified 
group  of  intrusive  rocks  is  visible  beneath  an  unconformable  covering  of 

'  G.  0.  Smith  and  F.  C.  Calkins,  Geological  Reconnaissance  across  the  Cascade  Range 
near  the  49th  parallel,  Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  no.  235,  1904,  103  pp.,  maps. 

2  R.  D.  Daly,  Nomenclature  of  the  North  American  Cordillera  between  47th  and  53rd 
Parallels  of  Latitude,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1906,  pp.  586-606,  map  ;  and  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc, 
1906,  XVII,  p.  332. 

'  R.  D.  Daly,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Surv.  Canada  (1 901")  1905,  XIV,  A,  pp.  39-51 ;  op.  cit. 
(1902-1903)  1906,  XV,  A,  pp.  139-149,  and  AA,  pp.  91-100. 
*  C.  Camsell,  Similkameen  District,  Summ.  Rep.  Geol.  Surv.  Canada,  1906,  pp.  43-55. 


CH.XI]  OKANAGAN  MOUNTAINS  418 

lower  Cretaceous.  From  this  point  it  follows  the  49th  parallel  towards 
the  east  as  far  as  lake  Ossoyous  (long.  119°  30'  W.),  that  is,  for  a  distance 
of  90  to  100  kilometers.  It  belongs  to  the  Okanagan  mountains.  Daly 
has  made  it  the  subject  of  an  instructive  paper.  Seven  intrusions  suc- 
ceeding each  other,  from  the  Carboniferous  (?)  into  a  late  stage  of  the 
Tertiary,  have  here  formed  a  composite  batholite ;  they  decrease  in  density 
and  increase  in  silica  contents  in  seriaV  order  from  below  upwards  (gabbro 
2-959,  and  dunite  3-173,  to  granite  2-608).  The  intrusion  was  accomplished 
by  absorption  of  the  adjacent  rock  ^ 

This  gives  us  a  clear  insight  into  the  nature  of  one  of  those  great  masses 
which  are  at  present  known  under  the  general  name  of  grano-diorite.  The 
mining  districts,  which  lie  towards  the  east,  on  the  Kettle  river,  and  no 
doubt  those  near  Rossland  also,  have  been  studied  by  Brock,  and  show  that 
similar  intrusions  are  repeated  as  far  as  Columbia  2.  At  the  same  time, 
rocks  which  we  may  regard  as  Archaean  begin  to  make  their  appearance 
in  this  region,  and  acquire  more  and  more  importance.  They  are  not 
unknown  further  to  the  west,  but  observers  express  doubts  as  to  whether 
they  may  not  be  sediments  altered  by  contact.  From  about  Christina  lake 
onwards  (long.  118°  15'  W.),  granite  of  apparently  greater  age  is  associated 
with  them,  and  then,  according  to  our  present  knowledge  of  the  facts,  they 
give  place  on  the  north  to  a  vast  extent  of  gneiss,  biotite  schist,  and  the 
like.  The  range  is  of  great  height  (mount  Gladsheim  in  the  Valhalla  range, 
lat.  49°  46'  N.,  long.  117°  36'  W.,  2,826  meters) ;  it  is  known  as  the  Gold 
range,  and  we  may  regard  it  as  forming  part  of  the  Rocky  mountains.  It 
is  not  separated  by  any  important  fracture  from  the  Intermediate  range. 
We  have  already  observed  that  intrusions  are  not  absent,  but  masses  of 
andesite  also  occur,  and  at  some  localities,  as  about  the  sources  of  the  north 
fork  of  the  Kettle  river  (lat.  49°  36'  N.,  long.  118°  20'  W.),  they  rest  on 
sandstone  and  river  pebbles,  apparently  of  Tertiary  age.  Here,  where  they 
rest  on  the  Gold  range,  they  may  be  regarded  as  outliers  of  the  Interior 
plateau.  Whiteaves  has  shown  that  remains  of  Amyzon,  a  genus  of  fishes, 
described  by  Cope  from  Nevada  and  Colorado,  also  occur  up  to  lat.  52°  N. 
and  beyond  (Horsefly  beds),  and  reveal  the  presence  of  an  extensive  fresh- 
water region  of  Oligocene  age  ^. 

Between  long.  117°  30'  and  117°  15'  W.,  lat.  49°  N.,  we  encounter  those 
thick  sediments  of  pre-Cambrian  and  Cambrian  age,  which  in  these  latitudes 
form  the  greater  part  of  the  Rocky  mountains.    These  mountains  are  here 

^  R.  D.  Daly,  Okanagan  composite  Batholith  of  the  Cascade  Mountain  System,  Bull. 
Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1906,  XVII,  pp.  329-376. 

2  R.  W.  Brock,  Preliminary  Report  on  the  Boundary  Creek  District,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol. 
Surv.  Canada  (1902-1903)  1906,  XV,  A,  pp.  92-138  ;  Operations  in  the  Rossland  Mining 
District,  Summ.  Rep.,  1906,  pp.  56-65. 

2  Whiteaves,  Age  of  the  Horsefly,  Similkameen  and  Tranquille  Tertiary  Beds,  Summ. 
Rep.  Geol.  Surv.  Canada  (1905)  1906,  pp.  137-138. 


414        THE  END  OF  THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  [paktv 


generally  more  than  2,000  meters  high,  and  of  sharp,  jagged  outline ;  they 
are  known  as  the  SelJcirk  range  ^. 

The  first  zone  crossed  by  Daly  consisted  of  coarse  conglomerate,  arkose, 
volcanic  breccias  and  flows,  quartzites,  sandstones,  and  slates,  with  a  few 
thin  intercalations  of  crystalline  limestone.  This  zone  forms  the  Quartzite 
range,  and  is  completely  overturned  towards  the  west,  with  a  north  and 
south  strike,  and  a  dip  to  the  east  of  70°  to  85°.  The  beds,  of  great  thick- 
ness, are  traversed  by  flaws  and  thrust-planes.  On  the  Priest  river 
(long.  116°  56'  W.)  they  rest  unconformably  on  crystalline  schist,  with 
thick  intercalations  of  amphibolite,  and  include  a  granite  batholite.  This 
older  zone  extends  into  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Kootenay  river.  It  is 
cut  off  on  the  east  by  a  fracture,  along  which  another  quartzite  series,  of 
great  thickness  and  composed  of  gray,  heavily-bedded  quartzites,  is  let 
down. 

This  quartzite  series  forms  the  beginning  of  that  stratified  successioii, 
described  in  the  section  (fig.  32)  between  lat.  51°  and  51°  30'  N.,  which,  after 
forming  a  syncline  probably  overfolded  towards  the  west,  passes  into  the 
great  overfoldings  turned  towards  the  east,  and  dominating  the  whole 
eastern  part  of  the  Rocky  mountains. 

The  fracture  of  Kootenay  led  Daly  to  inquire  whether  the  elongated 
Kootenay  lake  is  a  fault-trough  or  the  result  of  river  excavation.  Its 
depth  (533  meters)  renders  the  former  supposition  probable.  Several  others 
of  the  long,  narrow  lakes,  lying  more  or  less  in  the  strike  and  running 
for  the  most  part  north  and  south,  show  similar  depths  (Locan  lake,  536 
meters ;  Lower  Arrow  lake,  420  meters ;  and  others). 

The  Cascade  range  (I,  p.  587).  A  part  of  the  range  known  in  the  north 
under  this  name,  the  Okanagan  mountains  for  example,  is  the  exposed 
basement  of  a  considerable  chain  of  recent  volcanos,  which  is  designated 
in  the  south  by  the  same  name. 

The  Olympian  mountains,  with  cape  Flattery,  in  the  west,  are  but 
little  known.  The  reports  of  foresters  on  this  thickly -wooded  region 
assign  a  height  of  2,484  meters  to  mount  Olympus.  Granite  has  only  been 
observed  in  boulders,  and  neither  schist  nor  porphyry  is  known  to  occur. 
But  since  gold  and  copper  have  been  mined  here,  we  may  suppose  that 
rocks  are  present  of  greater  age  than  those  revealed  by  Arnold's  investiga- 
tion along  the  coast,  where  only  Jurassic  (?),  a  thick  Cretaceous  sandstone, 
and  Tertiary  are  mentioned  as  occurring^. 

^  See  on  this  subject  Daly's  Report  of  1906,  AA,  pp.  91  et  sqq. ;  and  McConnell  and 
Brock's  map  of  West  Kootenay,  1904. 

^  A.  Dodwell  and  T.  F.  Rixon,  Forest  Conditions  in  the  Olympian  Forest  Reserve, 
U.S.  GeoL  Surv.,  1902,  Profess.  Papers,  no.  7,  110  pp.,  map;  R.  Arnold,  Geological 
Reconnaissance  of  the  Coast  of  the  Olympian  Peninsula,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1906, 
XVII,  pp.  451-468. 


cH.xi]     VOLCANOS  OF  THE  CASCADE  RANGE  415 

Let  us  return  to  the  point  at  which  the  Skagit  river,  following  the 
western  face  of  the  Hozomeen  range,  crosses  lat.  49°  N.  West  of  the  river 
lie  the  Skagit  mountains.  This  range  broadens  out  south  of  lat.  49°,  and 
is  then  cut  across  by  the  river  Skagit.  On  the  west  it  terminates  suddenly 
in  the  direction  of  the  plain  near  long.  122°  W.  It  is  diversified  in  form 
and  composition.  Granite,  andesite,  and  Jurassic  (Stephanoceras,  Aucella)  are 
known.  On  the  north  the  strike  is  N.  30°  W. ;  north  of  mount  Shuksan  it 
becomes  N.  40°  W.,  and  in  the  south  due  north  and  south.  At  the  place  where 
the  Columbia  river  again  turns  towards  the  south,  near  long.  120°  W.,  and 
at  the  same  time  marks  the  boundary  between  the  southern  spurs  of  the 
Skagit  range  and  the  lava  floods  B.  Willis  and  Otis  Smith  observed  very 
recent  folds  which  involve  the  young  basaltic  sheets  ;  these  are  cut  through 
by  several  rivers,  of  which  the  Yakima  is  one. 

A  little  to  the  west,  crossing  a  range  which  is  still  part  of  the  Skagit 
mountains,  begin  the  great  volcanos  of  the  Cascade  mountains.  They 
extend  through  nine  degrees  of  latitude,  from  mount  Baker  in  the  north  to 
Lassen  peak  in  California.  The  principal  direction  is  north  and  south  ;  in 
the  south  it  becomes  south-south-east.  Intercalated  sediments  lead  us  to 
suppose  that  some  of  the  flows  are  of  Eocene  age.  In  the  Miocene  period 
there  was  great  activity,  and  isolated  craters  are  still  smoking  at  the 
present  day  ^. 

Many  of  the  northern  volcanos  are  seated  on  granite.  Mount  Baker 
(3,299  meters),  mentioned  above,  which  rises  north  of  the  Skagit  river,  is  an 
andesitic  volcano  seated  on  light-coloured  granite.  South-east  of  this  lies 
Glacier  peak  (3,172  meters),  the  remains  of  an  andesite  volcano,  also  on 
granite ;  mount  Stuart  (2,886  meters)  is  not  a  volcano,  but  is  formed  of 
granite.  Further  south,  according  to  Russell  and  O.  Smith,  the  cone 
of  mount  Rainier  (4,327  meters)  consists  of  white  granite  up  to  a  height 
of  8,000  feet  (2,438  meters)  \ 

We  may  safely  assert  that  this  granite  is  not  all  of  great  age.  Of 
the  great  batholite,  which  includes  mount  Stuart  and  forms  the  rugged 
Wenache  range,  it  can  only  be  said  that  it  is  older  than  the  Eocene,  but  to 
the  west  of  this  batholite,  on  Snoqualmie  pass,  a  little  north  of  the  point 

*  Bailey  Willis,  Changes  in  River  Courses  in  Washington  Territory  due  to  Glaciation, 
Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  no.  40,  1887,  VI,  pp.  477-480,  maps ;  and  in  particular  G.  Otis 
Smith  and  B.  Willis,  Contribution  to  the  Geology  of  Washington,  Profess.  Papers,  no.  19, 
1903,  101  pp.,  maps,  and  G.  0.  Smith,  in  Journ.  Geol.  Chicago,  1903,  XI,  pp.  166-177. 
I.  C.  Russell,  Geological  Reconnaissance  in  Central  Washington,  op.  cit.  Bull.,  no.  108, 
1893,  regards  the  hill  ranges  in  question  as  segments  unilaterally  let  down  ;  Prelimi- 
nary Paper  on  the  Geology  of  the  Cascade  Mountains  in  Northern  Washington,  Ann. 
Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  XX,  2,  1900,  pp.  89-210,  maps  ;  J.  E.  Spurr,  Ore  Deposits  of  Monte 
Cristo,  Washington,  op.  cit.,  XXII,  2,  1901,  pp.  785-865,  maps. 

^  I.  C.  Russell,  Glaciers  of  Mount  Rainier,  with  a  paper  on  the  Rocks  of  Mount 
Rainier,  by  G.  Otis  Smith,  op.  cit.,  XVIII,  2,  pp.  349-423,  maps. 


416        THE  END  OF  THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  [paetv 


where  the  railway  running  to  Seattle  crosses  the  Cascade  range,  Otis 
Smith  and  W.  Mendenhall  came  on  a  great  batholite  of  Miocene  age. 
Shales  with  leaves  of  Acer,  Platanus,  and  Cinnamomum  are  converted  into 
a  hornf els-like  rock  in  the  zone  of  contact.  Epidote,  garnet,  and  turmaline 
occur  in  this  zone.  The  intrusive  rock  resembles  granite,  but  diorite  also 
occurs  and  cannot  be  separated  from  it.  Granite  veins,  very  rich  in  quartz, 
penetrate  the  adjacent  rock,  and  one  of  them  invades  an  overlying  andesitic 
lava  ^. 

In  the  face  of  these  facts  the  distinction  between  the  granite  or  grano- 
diorite  hatholites  and  the  andesite  volcanos  disappears.  The  great  batholite 
of  Columbia  becomes  a  cicatrix  which  may  once  have  borne  volcanic  cones. 

Towards  the  south,  first  the  continuations  of  the  Skagit  range,  and  then 
the  granites  disappear.  To  the  south  of  the  Columbia  river  the  high  and 
continuous  chain  of  lavas  and  ejectamenta  extends  throughout  Oregon 
unbroken  by  a  single  transverse  valley.  Near  lat.  43°  N.  it  bears  on  its 
surface  Crater  lake  (1,901  meters)  9'9  kilometers  in  length  and  6*8  kilometers 
in  breadth ;  this  has  been  produced  by  the  collapse  of  the  volcano  Mazama, 
the  ruins  of  which  still  rise  600  meters  above  the  lake  ^. 

Far  away  in  the  east,  a  vast  region  of  effusion,  one  of  the  most  extensive 
in  the  world,  starts  from  the  Yellowstone,  and  proceeding  to  the  west 
extends  right  across  the  mountain  land.  At  first  it  follows  the  Snake 
river,  but  soon  spreads  out,  includes  on  the  north  the  lava-fields  of  the 
Columbia  river,  on  the  south  covers  the  greater  part  of  Oregon  and  con- 
siderable areas  in  Idaho,  and  encroaches  to  the  south  on  the  extensive 
desert  region  of  the  Basin  ranges  (I,  p.  577). 

Russell's  descriptions  of  the  lava  fields  of  Oregon  are  instructive  in 
more  respects  than  one.  The  Stein  mountains  (lat.  42°  to  43°  N.,  long.  118° 
to  119°  W.,  9,000  feet),  situated  in  south-east  Oregon,  on  the  east  boundary 
of  the  desert  basin,  form  an  oblique-lying  block  which  extends  for  a  distance 
of  160  kilometers  towards  the  north-north-east,  and  exposes  in  a  steep 
escarpment  on  its  east  side,  5,000  feet  high,  numerous  lava-flows,  separated 
by  17  intervening  beds  of  sandstone.  In  some  tracts  volcanic  centres 
are  so  numerous  that  we  may  count  as  many  as  fifty  from  one  point  of 
outlook  ^ 

^  G.  0.  Smith  and  W.  C.  Mendenhall,  Tertiary  Granite  in  the  North  Cascades,  Bull. 
Am.  Geol.  See,  1900,  XI,  pp.  223-230. 

2  J.  S.  Diller  and  H.  B.  Patten,  Geology  and  Petrography  of  Crater  Lake,  National 
Park,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  Profess.  Papers,  no.  3, 1902, 167  pp.,  maps ;  for  Miocene  intercala- 
tions, Diller,  Bohemia  Mining  Region  of  West  Oregon,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  XX, 
3,  1900,  pp.  1-52,  in  particular  Knowlton,  ibid.,  p.  47  et  seq. ;  also  the  works  on  the  John 
Day  and  Payette  Formations. 

*  I.  C.  Russell,  Notes  on  the  Geology  of  south-west  Idaho  and  south-east  Oregon,  Bull. 
U.S.  Geol.  Survey,  no.  217,  1903,  83  pp.,  maps;  Preliminary  Report  on  the  Water 
Resources  of  Central  Oregon,  op.  cit..  no.  252,  1905,  133  pp.,  maps. 


CH.  Xl] 


CANON  OP  THE  SNAKE  RIVEE 


417 


Idaho.  In  north-east  Oregon  the  Blue  mountains,  with  their  irregular 
contours,  rise  out  of  the  lavas.  According  to  Lindgren's  description  they 
are  not  a  chain  lying  in  the  bend  of  the  Snake  river,  as  they  are  repre- 
sented on  some  maps,  but  a  part  of  the  mountains  of  West  Idaho,  cut 
off  from  them  by  the  long  canon  of  the  Snake  river,  but  not  tectonically 
distinct.  They  consist  of  several  ranges  which  are  united  orographically 
by  lavas.  The  most  important  are  the  Elkhorn  and  Greenhorn  mountains, 
west  of  Baker  city ;  further  to  the  north-east  rise  the  Eagle  Creek  moun- 
tains. The  last-named  possess  rounded  contours,  attain  a  height  of  9,000  feet, 
and  are  enveloped  by  lava  up  to  a  height  of  4,000  or  5,000  feet.  The  heights 
of  the  Elkhorn  and  Greenhorn  mountains  present  similar  features.  Smaller 
hills  rise  like  islands  out  of  the  lava  ^. 

Within  these  folded  ranges  doubtful  upper  Carboniferous,  marine  Trias, 
in  the  west  a  trace  of  Lias  also  ^,  and  on  the  John  Day  river  Cretaceous, 
have  been  determined  on  the  evidence  of  fossils.  At  one  locality  in  the 
Elkhorn  mountains  Lindgren  believes  he  has  recognized  Archaean  gneiss. 
The  gloomy  canon  of  the  Snake  river  is  5,000  feet  deep.  The  upper  half 
of  the  ravine  consists  of  basalt,  and  the  lower  of  dark  Halobia  shales,  which, 
as  usual,  are  accompanied  by  basic  intercalations.  On  the  west  side  of  the 
river  there  are  points  at  which  the  shore  line  of  the  lava  floods  reaches 
a  height  of  7,000  feet  (2,133  meters).  The  height  of  the  river  above  the 
canon,  near  Weiser,  is  646  meters. 

The  most  remarkable  of  Lindgren's  results  is  the  evidence  that  in  West 
Idaho  the  range  is  cut  through  by  an  intrusive  batholite  of  granodiorite, 
which  repeats  the  characters  of  the  Columbian  batholite ;  it  runs  to  the  north, 
is  of  post-Trias  age,  and  attains  in  places  a  breadth  of  over«150  kilometers^. 

On  the  south  this  batholite  first  makes  its  appearance  in  the  South 
mountain  (8,000  feet,  near  lat.  42°  45'  N.).  It  is  continued  towards  the 
north  through  Silver  City  into  the  Owyhee  mountains,  and  its  western  border 
is  crossed  by  the  Snake  river,  near  Boise  (west  of  long.  116°  W.)  The  east 
border  lies  at  a  great  distance  from  the  west,  and  its  outskirts  extend 
to  Hailey  (west  of  long.  114°  W.)  and  beyond.  Further  north  its  eastern 
part  forms  the  whole  range  of  the  Bitterroot  mountains,  as  far  as  Lolo 
pass  (lat.  46°  35'  N.),  where  it  encounters  the  ancient  sediments  of  the 
Coeur  d'Alene  mountains,  which  are  included  in  the  Rocky  mountains.  It 
has  thus  been  traced  through  nearly  four  degrees  of  latitude.  Towards 
the  west  its  northern  part  disappears  beneath  the  lavas  of  the  Clearwater. 

*  W.  Lindgren,  Gold  Belt  of  the  Blue  Mountains  of  Oregon,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  XXII, 
2,  1901,  pp.  551-782,  maps. 
2  A.  Hyatt,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1894,  V,  p.  400. 

^  W.  Lindgren,  Gold  and  Silver  Veins  of  Silver  City,  de  Lamar  and  other  Mining 
Districts  in  Idaho,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  XX,  3,  1900,  pp.  65-256,  maps  ;  A  Geo- 
logical Reconnaissance  across  the  Bitterroot  Range  and  Clearwater  Mountains,  Profess. 
Papers,  no.  27,  1904,  123  pp.,  maps  ;  for  the  disturbance,  pp.  26,  47,  51. 

SOLLAS  IV  E  0 


418      THE  END  OF  THE  ISLAND  FESTOONS  [party 


Wherever  its  boundaries  can  be  seen  this  granodiorite  proves  to  be 
intrusive.  At  Hailey,  Carboniferous  fossils  have  been  found  near  the  zone 
of  contact.  The  canon  of  the  Salmon  river  cuts  across  its  breadth.  It 
includes  several  great  fragments  of  gneiss. 

On  the  east  side  of  the  Bitterroot  mountains,  which  is  also  the  east 
border  of  the  Mesozoic  granodiorite,  Lindgren  describes  a  fault,  striking  north 
and  south,  over  90  kilometers  in  length,  of  great  vertical  throw,  yet  out- 
cropping on  a  fairly  level  plain.  Over  the  whole  of  this  area  the  granodiorite 
slopes  uniformly  towards  the  east  at  an  angle  of  15°  to  26°;  in  the  south  it 
slopes  to  the  south-east,  and  on  this  descent  it  has  been  transformed  into 
gneiss  by  a  shearing  movement.  This  younger  gneiss  is  distinguished  from  the 
ancient  gneiss  by  its  nature  and  the  absence  of  folding.  Lindgren  believes 
that  either  the  whole  of  the  eastern  range  has  subsided  with  a  slight 
inclination  (the  slope  just  mentioned),  or  else  the  western  (lying)  limb  has 
been  elevated.  Phenomena  in  an  adjacent  mine  have  even  led  to  the  con- 
jecture that  the  movement  still  persists  at  the  present  day.  Some  small 
eruptions  of  rhyolite  accompany  the  line  of  disturbance. 

The  resemblance  between  the  mountain-group  of  north-east  Oregon  and 
West  Idaho  (Blue  mountains  to  Bitterroot)  and  those  parts  of  the  Inter- 
mediate range  mentioned  above  is  thus  very  great.  At  the  same  time,  the 
petrographical  succession  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  Basin  ranges,  the 
northern  part  of  which  we  have  already  examined.  Over  a  tract  marked 
out  by  the  continuations  of  the  Canadian  part  of  the  Intermediate  range  in 
the  west,  which  disappear  between  lake  Chelan  and  the  Yakima  (east  of 
mount  Stuart  and  mount  Kainier),  and  next  by  the  place  where  the  Blue 
mountains  disappear  in  the  east  and  where  the  granodiorite  range  of  Idaho 
disappears  in  the  northern  part  of  the  Basin  ranges,  down  to  the  place  of 
disappearance  of  the  Californian  mountains  to  be  discussed  below,  there 
exists,  as  we  believe,  a  broad  depression,  an  interruption  of  the  Intermediate 
range,  now  concealed  by  lavas. 


419 


CHAPTER  XII 
THE  APPEAEANCE  OF  THE  ANDES 

Klamath.    Californian  Coast  ranges.    Lower  California.    South  border  of  the  Colorado 
plateau.    Mexico.    Stratified  succession  of  the  Intermediate  range. 

Klamath.  The  Intermediate  chain,  broken  up  into  a  sea  of  sub- 
meridional  ranges,  is  represented  in  the  United  States  chiefly  by  the  Basin 
ranges,  which  occupy  the  region,  600-700  kilometers  in  breadth,  between 
the  western  slope  of  the  Wasatch  and  the  eastern  slope  of  the  Sierra 
Nevada  (I,  p.  577).  The  Sierra  Nevada  may  even  be  included  in  them. 
With  the  longitudinal  valley  of  the  Sacramento,  however,  a  great  change 
sets  in,  and  we  may  regard  the  Californian  Coast  ranges  on  the  western  side 
of  this  valley  as  the  beginning  of  the  mighty  structure  of  the  Andes. 
It  is  impossible,  it  is  true,  to  draw  a  perfectly  sharp  boundary;  some 
members  of  the  sedimentary  series  extend  from  one  region  to  the  other,  and 
in  the  north  observers  are  not  completely  in  accord. 

The  sketch  map  by  Diller  (fig.  34)  represents  the  topographical  distribu- 
tion of  the  most  important  tectonic  members  ^. 

The  most  southerly  volcanos  of  the  Cascade  range,  mount  Shasta 
(4,384  meters)  and  Lassen  peak  (3,181  meters),  are  included  in  this  map. 
Beyond  them  the  country  descends  to  the  Sacramento,  and  in  lat.  39°  15'  N. 
the  great  longitudinal  valley  lies  only  30-45  meters  above  the  sea.  From  • 
this  depression  rises  the  little  volcano  of  Marysville ;  whether  or  not  it  is 
to  be  included  in  the  Cascade  range  may  remain  an  open  question  ^. 

The  lavas  reach  the  Sierra  Nevada  on  the  south-east ;  to  the  west  of 
them  lies  a  group  of  mountains  which  appears  on  the  maps  under  several 
distinct  names  (Siskiyou,  Salmon,  Trinity  mountains,  and  others);  it  is 
known  by  American  geologists  as  the  Klamath  range.  On  the  north,  in 
south-west  Oregon,  it  emerges  from  a  girdle  of  younger  deposits;  in 
lat.  41°  30'  N.  it  becomes  detached  from  the  Californian  Coast  ranges. 
Thus  we  have  here  an  encounter  of  the  Sierra  Nevada,  the  Cascade, 
Klamath,  and  Coast  ranges.  The  position  of  the  beds  and  the  strike  show 
that  the  Klamath  range  is  the  continuation  of  the  Sierra  Nevada. 

1  J.  S.  Diller,  Topographical  Development  of  Klamath  Mountains,  Bull.  U.S.  Geol. 
Surv.,  1902,  no.  196,  69  pp.,  map;  also  Geology  of  Lassen's  Peak  District,  op.  cit.,  Ann. 
Rep.,  1889,  VIII,  pp.  395-432,  maps  ;  also  map,  op.  cit.,  XIV,  2,  p. 414,  pi.  XLV,  et  passim. 
Turner  and  Lindgren,  Marysville  folio,  1895. 

E  e 


420  THE  APPEAEANCE  OF  THE  ANDES  [party 


On  the  north,  in  south-west  Oregon,  the  Klamath  mountains  are 
surrounded  by  a  broad  Jurassic  belt,  characterized  by  Aucella  Urringtoni. 
Starting  not  far  from  where  the  boundary  of  California  reaches  the  sea,  it 
strikes  far  away  to  the  north-east,  and  dips  to  the  south-east,  that  is,  beneath 
the  older  rocks  of  Klamath.  Its  most  remarkable  member  is  Diller's 
Dothan  stage,  composed  of  grey  shales,  which  contain  beds  and  lenticular 


Fig.  34.  The  Klamath  mountains  (after  Diller). 


masses  of  red  or  green  radiolarian  chert  ^.  Associated  with  these  is  the 
nickel -bearing  peridotite  ridge  of  Riddles,  as  well  as  many  other  intrusive 

^  J.  S.  Diller,  Mesozoic  Sediments  of  south-west  Oregon,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1907,  4  ser., 
XXIII,  pp.  402-421  ;  a  somewhat  divergent  description  by  Louderback,  Journ.  Geol. 
Chicago,  1905,  XIII,  pp.  514-555.  Plantbearing  middle  Jurassic  also  occurs;  L.  Ward, 
Status  of  Mesozoic  Floras  of  the  United  States,  1905,  Monograph  XXXVIII,  pp.  47-151. 
They  are  repeated  near  Oroville,  California.    As  regards  the  lie  I  have  no  recent  data. 


CH.  XIl] 


EADIOLAEIAN  SHALES 


421 


ridges.  Gold,  platinum,  and  chromite  occur  in  the  basic  intercalations ; 
awaruite  (nickel  iron)  has  also  been  met  with,  as  at  Biella  (near  the  range 
of  Ivrea)  ^.  The  Jurassic  rocks  are  folded,  and  the  Neocomian  (Knoxville 
stage)  extends  over  them  unconf ormably.  There  can  scarcely  be  any  doubt 
that  this  upper  Jurassic  belt,  now  interrupted  by  the  sea,  once  surrounded 
the  western  side  of  the  Klamath  range. 

Various  accounts  have  been  given  of  the  Klamath  range  itself.  Diller, 
starting  from  Redding  in  the  south,  observed  a  series  extending  to  the 
Trinity  river  in  the  west,  and  for  a  great  distance  to  the  north  and  east, 
which  consists  of  a  pre-Devonian  plutonic  rock,  Devonian  and  Carboni- 
ferous; to  the  east  of  this,  with  a  more  northerly  strike,  a  pre-Trias 
intrusive  zone,  then,  on  the  upper  Pit  river,  Trias,  followed  by  Jurassic. 
Hershey,  coming  from  the  west,  divides  the  Klamath  range  into  four  flakes, 
dipping  to  the  east  and  to  some  extent  imbricate.  The  first  line  of  over- 
thrust  would  correspond  with  the  western  boundary  of  the  Klamath 
mountains  marked  on  fig.  34;  here  the  radiolarian  shales  dip  to  the  east 
beneath  the  older  rocks  of  the  Klamath  mountains.  The  second  line  crosses 
the  Klamath  river  (Orleans  fault)  near  the  mouth  of  the  Salmon  river ;  the 
third  and  fourth  follow  on  as  far  as  the  Scott  river.  We  will  confine 
ourselves  to  the  fact  that  the  radiolarian  series  occurs  on  the  Orleans  fault 
also,  where  it  is  of  great  thickness,  and  still  dips  towards  the  east  beneath 
older  rocks.  From  this  we  may  conclude  that  the  overthrusting  of  the 
Klamath  mountains  upon  the  radiolarian  series,  which  was  observed  in 
south-west  Oregon,  also  occurs  in  the  west,  and  that  the  radiolarian  series 
enters  into  the  structure  of  the  Klamath  mountains  themselves  2. 

This  upper  Jurassic  series  is  represented  in  the  Sierra  Nevada  by  the 
Mariposa  shales,  which  are  also  characterized  by  Aucella  Erringtoni  and 
intercalations  of  diabase  and  serpentine.  Since  our  first  description  of  this 
range  (I,  p.  581)  it  has  been  ascertained  that  the  mass  of  granodiorite, 
which  occupies  the  east  of  the  Sierra,  and  from  Mariposa  onwards  its  whole 
breadth,  is  younger  than  the  Mariposa  shales.  Its  length  extends  over 
about  5  degrees  of  latitude,  and  its  breadth  in  the  south  is  more  than 
100  kilometers.    South  of  the  Kern  river  its  southern  extremity  abandons 

1  Gr.  F.  Kay,  Nickel  Deposits  of  Nickel  Mountain,  Oregon,  Bull.  U.S.  G-eol.  Surv.,  1907, 
no.  315,  pp.  120-127.  Fragments  of  radiolarian  rocks  enclosed  in  serpentine  and  meta- 
gabbro  are  mentioned  by  Diller  in  the  Roseburg  folio,  1898  ;  here  blue  amphibolite  schist 
is  mentioned  as  occurring  in  the  Aucella-bearing  Myrtle  Formation.  For  awaruite, 
Jamieson,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1905,  4  ser.,  XIX,  pp.  413-415  ;  for  glaucophane,  Nutter  and 
Barber,  Journ.  Geol.,  1902,  X,  pp.  738-744;  also  in  particular  Louderback,  Journ.  Geol., 
1905,  XIII,  p.  534 ;  and  Carey  and  Miller,  Journ.  Geol.,  1907,  XV,  pp.  152-169  (cf.  Ransome, 
note  3,  p.  423). 

2  J.  S.  Diller,  Bragdon  Formation,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1905,  4  ser.,  XIX,  pp.  379-387  ; 
0.  H.  Hershey,  Some  West  Klamath  Stratigraphy,  op.  cit.,  1906,  XXI,  pp.  58-66.  Apart 
of  Diller's  pre-Trias  intrusive  zone  would  fall,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  in  that  zone  which 
is  assigned  in  fig.  34  to  the  much  more  recent  Cascade  ranges. 


422  THE  APPEAEANCE  OF  THE  ANDES  [partv 


the  general  direction  to  the  south-east,  and  makes  a  bend  south-west  to  the 
Tehachapi  pass  (lat.  35°  10'  N.). 

The  sediments  which  border  the  west  side  of  its  northern  half  are  over- 
folded  towards  the  west,  and  inclined  beneath  the  batholite.  One  syncline 
was  traced  along  the  strike  for  almost  200  kilometers.  Turner  has  given 
a  section  through  the  county  of  Amador,  which  shows  the  overfolding  of 
the  whole  of  this  mighty  series  towards  the  west  ^.  The  beautiful  maps 
of  the  Survey,  for  example  Lindgren's  map  of  Truckee,  or  Lindgren  and 
Turner's  maps  of  Smartsville,  Jackson,  and  Placerville,  show  how  frequently 
this  series  is  penetrated  by  intrusive  rock. 

The  correspondence  of  this  granodiorite  with  that  of  Columbia  was 
recognized  by  Lawson  as  early  as  1893^. 

The  Calif ornian  Coast  ranges  (I,  p.  583).  It  has  been  shown,  in 
opposition  to  early  conjectures,  that  the  granite  of  the  Coast  ranges  is 
older  than  that  of  the  Sierra  Nevada.  It  is  accompanied  by  gneissose  schist, 
mica  schists,  crystalline  limestone,  and  clay  slates;  and  is  of  Carboni- 
ferous, or  even  greater  age.  The  radiolarian  rocks,  alternating  with 
sandstone,  here  form  the  Franciscan  series,  which  rests,  in  the  peninsula 
of  San  Francisco  for  instance,  autochthonously  upon  the  granite.  It 
extends  far  to  the  south,  and  there,  too,  is  accompanied  by  long  intercala- 
tions of  peridotite  and  other  basic  rocks.  There  also  chromite,  platinum, 
gold,  and  osmiridium  are  known  to  occur  in  them ;  they  contain  quicksilver. 
Fossils  occur  in  the  associated  shales,  but  are  rare  (Aucella,  Opis,  Hoplites). 
This  series  is  the  equivalent  of  the  Mariposa  beds  of  the  Sierra  Nevada 
and  the  Dothan  stage  of  Oregon.  It  was  formerly  regarded  as  Neocomian, 
by  which  it  is  covered  unconformably.  It  extends  southwards  as  far  as 
Santa  Barbara.  With  the  exception  of  a  few  traces  of  upper  Carboniferous 
species,  Palaeozoic  fossils  have  never  yet  been  found  beneath  the  Franciscan 
series ;  indeed  this  series  seems  to  form,  over  large  areas,  the  base  of  the 
normal  succession.  It  is  intensely  folded.  According  to  Ransome,  the 
glaucophane  schists  which  occur  along  with  basic  rocks  have  their  origin 
in  Radiolaria. 

The  Coast  ranges,  as  we  have  already  stated,  strike  obliquely  out  to  sea 
in  repeated  coulisses  directed  to  the  north-west ;  some  of  the  coulisses  are 
bounded  by  long  rectilinear  dislocations. 

One  of  these  lines  follows  a  direct  course,  running  S.  35°  E.  from  Punta 
Arena  to  mount  Pinos,  a  distance  of  600  kilometers.  It  enters  the  sea  near 
the  mouth  of  the  Golden  Gate  of  San  Francisco,  and,  according  to  Lawson, 

»  Turner,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1894,  XIV,  2,  pp.  457,  486.  A  general  map  of 
the  whole  batholite  is  given  by  the  same  author  in  op.  cit.,  1896,  XVII,  1,  p.  532, 
pi.  XVIII. 

^  A.  C.  Lawson,  Cordilleran  Mesozoic  Revolution,  Journ.  Geol.  Chicago,  1893,  I, 
pp.  579-586. 


0H.xn]  EAETHQUAKE  OF  1906 


423 


its  northern  half  was  the  starting-point  of  the  devastating  earthquake  of 
April  18,  1906.  This  resulted  from  a  horizontal  displacement  of  the  south- 
western part  of  the  mountains,  relatively  to  the  north-eastern  part,  to  the 
extent  of  about  10  feet  in  a  north-west  direction,  and  a  simultaneous 
relative  elevation  of  the  same  south-western  part  to  a  height  which,  in 
some  places,  reached  4  feet^. 

The  other  lines  of  dislocation  have  not  been  described  in  such  detail, 
but  we  can  distinguish  without  difficulty  a  series  of  coulisses,  and  also  some 
recent  volcanos  which  follow  the  strike  fairly  well  and  extend  from  Clear 
lake  towards  San  Francisco  bay  ^. 

The  north  is  covered  by  a  thick  mantle  of  Tertiary  beds,  pierced  through 
by  the  radiolarian  beds  of  the  Franciscan  series,  which  stand  out  in  sharp 
ridges.  Granite  first  makes  its  appearance  at  Punta  de  los  Reyes,  north 
of  San  Francisco,  and  in  the  adjacent  group  of  islands,  the  Farallones. 
This  probably  marks  the  beginning  of  the  coulisse,  which  is  cut  off  obliquely 
by  the  west  coast  of  the  peninsula  of  San  Francisco.  Lawson  and 
Crandall's  maps  of  this  peninsula  show  how  the  several  zones  of  rock, 
and  the  strike-faults  by  which  they  are  accompanied,  run  out  obliquely 
to  the  sea  ^.  In  the  regions  which  succeed,  the  arrangement  of  the  chains 
in  coulisses  has  been  described  by  Fairbanks,  The  granite  of  Pun  to  de  los 
Reyes  and  the  peninsula  of  San  Francisco  runs  towards  the  south-east 
through  the  sierras  of  Santa  Cruz  and  Gavilan  into  the  county  of 
Monterey ;  its  north-western  extremity  plunges  into  the  sea,  the  south- 
western lies  inland,  east  of  the  river  Salinas. 

East  of  this  coulisse  rises  mount  Diablo,  as  another  independent  range ; 
it  forms  a  regular  anticline  striking  to  the  south-east,  but  along  its  axis 
only  the  Franciscan  series  and  serpentine  are  exposed;  its  south-eastern 
continuation  does  not  possess  the  orographic  significance  which  many  maps 
assign  to  it*. 

Of  so  much  greater  importance,  however,  is  the  chain  of  Santa  Lucia, 
which  lies  west  of  the  Salinas  river,  and  rises  steeply  on  the  southern 

^  A.  C.  Lawson,  Preliminary  Report  of  the  State  Earthquake  Commission,  8vo,  1906, 
17  pp. 

2  G.  F.  Becker,  Geology  of  the  Quicksilver  Deposits  of  the  Pacific  Slope,  U.S.  Geol. 
Surv.,  Monogr.  XIII,  1888,  passim. 

^  A.  C.  Lawson,  Sketch  of  the  Geology  of  the  San  Francisco  Peninsula,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S. 
Geol.  Surv.,  XV,  1895,  pp.  399-476,  map ;  Leslie  Ransome,  Geology  of  Angel  Island, 
Bull.  Geol.  Univ.  Cal.,  1894, 1,  pp.  193-240  ;  G.  H.  Ashley,  Neocene  Stratigraphy  of  the 
Santa  Cruz  Mountains  of  California,  Proc.  Cal.  Acad.  Sci.,  1895,  2  ser.,  V,  pp.  273-376, 
map ;  Lawson  and  C.  Palache,  Berkeley  Hills,  a  Detail  of  Coast  Range  Geology,  Bull. 
Geol.  Univ.  Cal.,  1902,  II,  pp.  349-450,  map  ;  R.  Crandall,  Geology  of  the  San  Francisco 
Peninsula,  Proc.  Am.  Phil.  Soc,  1907,  XLVI,  pp.  1-55,  map. 

*  H.  W.  Turner,  The  Geology  of  Mount  Diablo,  California,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1891, 
II,  pp.  383-414,  map ;  for  the  orography  compare  the  little  map  in  Eldridge,  p.  366, 
pi.  XLIV. 


424         THE  APPEARANCE  OF  THE  ANDES  [paetv 


shore  of  the  bay  of  Monterey.  Its  western  flank,  formed  of  crystalline 
limestone  and  of  ancient,  sometimes  gneissose  schist,  descends  sheer  to  the 
sea ;  its  axis  consists  of  granite ;  Fairbanks  shows  that  this  axis  diverges 
at  an  acute  angle  from  the  line  of  the  coast  and  runs  towards  the  south- 
east, crossing  obliquely  the  valley  of  the  upper  Salinas.  Its  further 
continuation  lies  east  of  San  Luis  Obispo,  and  in  the  direction  of  San 
Emidio  and  the  Tejon  pass.  There  it  seems  to  form  a  junction  with  the 
chains  striking  towards  the  lower  course  of  the  Colorado  river  and  Lower 
California  ^. 

Thus  the  Sierra  Santa  Lucia  also  extends  far  inland,  but  the  coulisses 
which  follow  to  the  south  of  San  Luis  Obispo  gradually  change  their  direc- 
tion. To  the  north  of  lat.  36°  N.,  according  to  Fairbanks  and  Eldridge, 
the  mean  strike  of  the  folds  is  N.  20°-40°  W.,  near  San  Luis  Obispo  N.  50"^- 
60°  W.,  and  near  Point  Concepcion  N.  80°-90°  W.,  so  that  only  that  part  of 
the  coast  line  which  runs  east  and  west  near  Santa  Barbara  follows  to  some 
extent  the  direction  of  the  folds  2.  The  coulisses  which  rise  one  after  the 
other  to  the  south  of  the  continuation  of  Santa  Lucia  are  largely  formed 
of  Miocene,  but  even  in  the  Emidio  chains  this  is  folded,  up  to  a  considerable 
height.  The  Sierra  Santa  Inez,  the  most  important  of  the  east-and-west 
chains,  at  the  foot  of  which  lies  the  coast  region  of  Santa  Barbara,  mentioned 
above,  is  formed  entirely  of  Miocene ;  the  Sierra  Santa  Monica,  which  also 
runs  east  and  west,  shows  near  Los  Angeles  a  core  of  granite  beneath  the 
Miocene.  It  is  continued  in  the  islands  of  the  Santa  Barbara  archipelago  ; 
they  stand  on  a  common  base,  elongated  from  east  to  west  (San  Miguel, 
Santa  Rosa,  Santa  Cruz,  Anacapa). 

Fairbanks  remarks,  not  without  justice,  that  it  seems  as  though  a 
number  of  independent  chains  had  been  formed  at  different  times,  and  as 
though  the  compressing  and  elevating  forces  had  not  always  found  expres- 
sion along  the  existing  axes,  but  had  formed  new  axes  beside  them,  or 
even  in  a  divergent  direction. 

The  east-and-west  direction  is  not  maintained,  either  towards  the 
interior  or  towards  the  south. 

The  Santa  Anna  chain,  which  rises  not  far  from  Los  Angeles,  consists 
of  several  parallel  anticlines,  with  a  strike  to  N.  60°  W.,  and  runs  a  long 

^  H.  W.  Fairbanks,  Review  of  our  Knowledge  of  the  Geology  of  the  Californian  Coast 
Ranges,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1894,  VI,  pp.  71-102 ;  also  Lawson,  Geology  of  the 
Carmelo  Bay,  Bull.  Geol.  Univ.  Cal.,  1893,  I,  pp.  1-59,  map  ;  Bailey  Willis,  Some  Coast 
Migrations,  Santa  Lucia  Range,  California,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1900,  XI,  pp.  417-432, 
map  ;  E.  F.  Nutter,  Sketch  of  the  Geology  of  Salinas  Valley,  Journ.  Geol.,  1901,  IX, 
pp.  330-336. 

^  The  trendlines  of  this  region  are  given  in  R.  Arnold  and  R.  Anderson,  Preliminary 
Report  on  the  Santa  Maria  Oil  District,  Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1907,  no.  317,  66  pp., 
map. 


CH.  XIl] 


DEATH  VALLEY 


425 


way  towards  the  mouth  of  the  Colorado  river ;  Miocene,  traces  of  Carbo- 
niferous or  Trias,  and  crystalline  schists  are  known  in  it. 

The  great  Sierra  San  Bernardino,  or  Sierra  Madre,  which  is  the 
probable  continuation  of  Santa  Lucia,  or  else  a  new  coulisse  rising  in  close 
alternation,  strikes  parallel  to  the  sierra  of  Santa  Anna,  and  its  northern 
border  slopes  away  to  the  Mohave  desert.  The  ancient  basement  crops  out 
with  increasing  frequency ;  its  covering  is  almost  entirely  of  Tertiary  age. 
Campbell  crossed  the  Sierra  Madre  through  the  Cajon  pass ;  a  fault  cuts 
across  the  strike  of  the  chain  at  an  acute  angle  and  forms  the  southern 
margin,  probably  for  a  long  distance,  towards  the  south-east.  South  of 
the  fault  hornblende  schist  is  observed,  and  north  of  it  coarse  grey  granite, 
with  a  few  patches  of  altered  sediments.  This  is  followed  on  the  north  by 
sandstone  and  conglomerate,  thrown  into  gentle  folds,  and  apparently  of 
Eocene  age,  then  towards  the  margin  of  a  desert  by  a  mighty  belt  of 
gravel.  Here,  at  a  height  of  1,250  meters,  lies  the  summit  of  the  pass; 
Cajon  canon  cuts  completely  across  the  ancient  range  \ 

Beyond  the  Victor  and  Borate  ranges  the  desert  land  is  covered  by 
lacustrine  deposits,  containing  at  many  places  intercalations  of  borax- 
bearing  beds,  and  here  and  there  of  younger  lavas.  These  deposits  are  not 
of  equal  age  ;  some  are  intensely  folded,  others  undisturbed.  Rubble  formed 
by  the  disintegration  of  grey  granite  is  present.  There  are  short  rocky 
ranges  formed  of  the  same  granite  or  of  highly  altered  sediments.  Thus, 
we  reach  the  region  of  the  Basin  ranges  at  the  exit  of  Death  Valley. 
This  fault  trough,  according  to  S.  Ball,  is  190  kilometers  in  length, 
8-16  kilometers  in  breadth,  and  sinks  123  meters  below  the  sea-level ; 
Amargosa  chain  and  Funeral  chain,  on  the  east,  are  1,500-2,000  meters 
high ;  Paramint,  on  the  west,  over  2,700  meters,  and  the  fault  trough  appears 
to  be  one-sided,  produced  by  a  fracture  on  the  east  side  of  Paramint,  and 
thus  similar  in  structure  to  the  Dead  Sea  in  Syria.  At  the  bottom-  lies 
a  salt  deposit  ^. 

We  are  now  amidst  the  inbreaks  of  the  Basin  ranges:  The  ancient 
rocks  occur  here^  but  along  with  them  mighty  beds  of  Palaeozoic.  At  no 
great  distance  rise  the  White  mountains,  in  which  Walcott  observed  Cam- 
brian fossils  and  overfolding  towards  the  west^.  The  adjacent  gneisses 
are  certainly  pre-Cambrian. 

^  M.  E.  Campbell,  Reconnaissance  of  the  Borax  Deposits  of  Death  Valley  and  Mohave 
Desert,  Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  no.  200,  1902,  23  pp.,  map  ;  also  E.  W.  Claypole,  Sierra 
Madre  near  Pasadena ;  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1901,  XII,  p.  494. 

S.  H.  Ball,  Geological  Reconnaissance  in  South-west  Nevada  and  East  California, 
Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1907,  no.  308,  218  pp.,  map. 

'  C.  D.  Walcott,  Lov^^er  Cambrian  Rocks  in  East  California,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1895, 
3rd  ser.,  XLIX,  pp.  141-144  ;  Appalachian  Type  of  Folding  in  the  White  Mountain  Range 
of  Inyo  County,  torn,  cit.,  pp.  169-174.  The  White  Mountains  form  the  east  side  of  the 
trough  of  Owen  Valley. 


426  THE  APPEARANCE  OF  THE  ANDES  [party 


At  El  Paso  peak,  near  the  southern  extremity  of  the  Sierra  Nevada^  on 
the  north-western  margin  of  the  desert,  marine  Eocene  fossils  have  been 
found. 

Lower  California.  The  return  to  the  north-westerly  strike  may  be 
recognized  in  the  contrast  between  the  Santa  Barbara  islands,  which  run 
from  east  to  west,  and  the  more  southerly  islands,  such  as  San  Nicolas, 
San  Clemente,  and  Santa  Catalina,  which  are  directed  without  exception  to 
the  north-west.    They  have  been  described  by  Lawson  ^. 

The  mountain  ranges  lying  east  of  San  Diego  exhibit  rocks  of  granite 
and  gneiss,  bleached  white  by  the  weather.    In  front  of  these  a  platform 


Fig.  35.  Mouth  of  the  Colorado  river  (heights  in  meters).    (Approximate  topography  before 
the  sea  entered  the  depressions  lying  west  of  the  Colorado  river.  After  Lindgren.) 


known  as  the  San  Diego  mesa  extends  along  the  coast  with  a  breadth  of 
19-20  kilometers,  and  a  height  above  San  Diego  of  240  meters.  It  consists 
of  marine  Pliocene  and  a  covering  of  river  gravel ;  it  is  regarded  as 
a  Pliocene  delta.  Mount  San  Pedro  (449  meters),  south  of  Los  Angeles, 
connected  with  the  coast  by  a  flat  tongue  of  land,  is  formed  of  inclined 
Miocene ;  Santa  Catalina  (642  meters)  consists  of  quartzite,  diorite,  and 
a  much  younger  andesite  ;  San  Clemente  (597  meters)  for  the  greater  part 
of  the  same  andesite  ^. 

^  A.  C.  Lawson,  Post-Pliocene  Diastrophism  of  the  Coast  of  South  California,  Bull. 
Geol.  Univ.  Cal,  1893,  I,  pp.  115-160;  W.  S.  Tangier-Smith,  Geology  of  South  Catalina 
Island,  Proc.  Cal.  Acad.  Sci.,  1897,  3rd  ser.,  I,  pp.  1-71,  map ;  Geological  Sketch  of  San 
Clemente  Island,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  XVIII,  2,  1898,  pp.  461-496,  map ;  Topo- 
graphical Study  of  the  Islands  of  South  California,  Bull.  Geol.  Univ.  Cal.,  1900,  II, 
pp.  179-230,  map  ;  Smith  and  R.  Arnold,  Marine  Pliocene  and  Pleistocene  Stratigraphy 
of  the  Coast  of  South  California,  Geol.  Journ.  Chicago,  1902,  X,  pp.  117-138. 

^  San  Pedro  is  divided  into  terraces  up  to  a  height  of  366  meters,  San  Clemente  up  to 


CH.XII1  MOUTH  OF  THE  COLOKADO 


427 


In  our  earlier  attempt  to  represent  the  structure  of  lower  California 
(I,  p.  584)  our  information  was  restricted  to  one  source,  a  memoir  by  Gabb. 
Since  then  observations  have  increased  in  number.  With  regard  to  the 
general  structure  Emmons  and  Merrill  point  out  that  the  peninsula  is 
directed  to  the  north-north-west,  while  its  mountain  ranges  run  more  to 
the  north-west  and  give  rise  to  bays  on  the  west  coast  opening  towards  the 
north-west,  so  that  the  peninsula  assumes  a  coulisse -like  structure  ^ 
The  mountains  enter  the  peninsula  from  the  region  north  of  Los  Angeles 
and  east  of  San  Diego,  they  occupy  more  than  the  western  half  of  its 
breadth,  reach  a  height  of  1,500-2,000  meters  near  their  eastern  side,  and, 
according  to  Lindgren's  description,  sink  in  a  rapid  descent  to  the  depres- 
sion of  lake  Magnata.  Since  that  description  was  written  engineering 
works  have  given  the  drainage  of  these  mountains  accidental  access  to  the 
low-lying  regions.  A  vast  sheet  of  water  has  been  formed,  and  much 
arable  land  flooded  (Fig.  35)  \ 

It  was  already  known,  from  Gabb's  account,  that  the  peninsula  consists 
of  long  granite  ranges,  separated  from  one  another  by  flat  mesas  of  sand- 
stone, which  partly  covers  them,  both  granite  and  mesas  being  frequently 
concealed  by  a  flow  of  recent  volcanic  rock,  and  broken  through,  near 
lat.  27°  30' N.,  by  a  recent  group  of  volcanos  (Tres  Virgines  and  others). 

On  the  coast  near  San  Diego,  Lawson  and  Fairbanks  observed  Cretaceous 
(Chico  stage  with  Coralliochama  Orcutti  at  the  base)  and  Eocene  (Tejon 
stage)  underlying  the  Pliocene  of  the  mesa ;  a  patch  of  Cretaceous  lies  on 
the  south  side  of  Todos  Santos  bay.  Between  lats.  29°  30'  and  29°  20', 
according  to  Emmons  and  Merrill,  Cretaceous  and  Eocene  still  occur  in  the 
lower  parts  of  the  table  mountains.  White  has  remarked  in  connexion 
with  the  finds  near  San  Diego  that  Cretaceous  deposits  with  Atlantic 
(Texan)  characters  cross  over  to  the  west  side  of  the  Mexican  Sierra  Madre, 
while  a  very  difierent  Pacific  type  of  Cretaceous  predominates  in  California, 
and  consequently  the  narrow  hill  range  of  lower  California  must  have  formed 
a  dividing  barrier  in  the  Cretaceous  seas  ^. 

402  meters ;  tlie  fact  that  the  intervening  island  of  S.  Catalina  possesses  no  terraces  or, 
according  to  T.  Smith,  only  a  few  traces  of  them  in  the  lower  horizon,  led  Lawson  to 
assume  the  existence  of  independent  tectonic  movements.  Shaler  (Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc, 
1895,  VI,  pp.  141-166)  felt  the  inconsistency  of  this  and  assumed  the  existence  of  move- 
ments of  the  strand-line  (somewhat  as  understood  by  Strabo  or  Chambers). 

1  S.  F.  Emmons  and  G.  P.  Merrill,  Geological  Sketch  of  Lower  California,  Bull.  Am. 
Geol.  Soc,  1894,  XY,  pp.  489-514,  map,  in  particular  p.  513  ;  also  Merrill,  Notes  on  the 
Geology  and  Natural  History  of  the  Peninsula  of  Lower  California,  Rep.  U.S.  Nat.  Mus. 
Washington  (for  1895)  1897,  pp.  969-994. 

W.  Lindgren,  Notes  on  the  Geology  of  Baja,  California,  Proc.  Cal.  Acad.  Sci.,  1889, 
2nd  ser.,  I,  pp.  173-196  ;  McDougal,  Delta  of  the  Colorado,  Bull.  Am.  Geogr.  Soc,  1906, 
pp.  1-16,  map  ;  W.  T.  Lee,  Geology  of  the  Lower  Colorado  River,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc, 
1906,  XVII,  pp.  275-284,  map,  et  passim. 

^  C.  A.  White,  Mesozoic  and  Cenozoic  Palaeontology  of  California,  Bull.  U.S.  Geol. 


428  THE  APPEAEANCE  OF  THE  ANDES  [party 


The  northern  part  of  the  lower  Californian  range  is  formed  on  the  west, 
along  the  coast,  by  a  granite  ridge,  traversed  by  porphyry  ;  this  is  followed 
by  a  series  of  depressions  described  as  the  '  interior  valleys ',  and  then, 
forming  the  eastern  border,  comes  a  very  high  and  broad  granite  range. 
Gold-bearing  river  gravel  occurs  on  the  highest  ridges.  Towards  the  south 
the  mountains  become  lower ;  on  the  east  a  new  granite  range  rises  from 
beneath  the  mesas.  Thus  the  chains  succeed  each  other  in  an  alternating 
arrangement.  Between  the  granite  ranges  zones  of  highly  altered  shales 
striking  to  the  north-west  are  seen ;  jasper  is  also  mentioned,  but  as  fre- 
quent reference  is  also  made  to  the  radiolarian  shales  of  the  Franciscan 
series,  said  to  occur  in  the  coast  ranges,  it  is  possible  that  these  rocks  are 
of  a  similar  kind. 

The  land  at  the  head  of  the  bay  of  San  Sebastian  Viscaino  is  a  broad 
mesa,  which  runs  obliquely  through  the  peninsula. 

The  rocky  island  Gedros  (Cerros,  1,205  meters,  lat.  28°  20'  to  28°  N.) 
consists  of  highly  altered  schist,  amphibolite,  and  serpentine,  together  with 
granite  porphyry.  Basalt  flows  and  fossil-bearing  sandstones  likewise  occur. 
They  are  continued  towards  the  south-east  through  the  Sierra  de  Santa 
Clara,  which  stands  completely  isolated  in  a  desert  region,  and  extends  as 
far  as  Punto  Abrojos  of  Ballenas  bay^. 

Inside  of  this  coulisse  the  whole  breadth  of  the  peninsula  consists  of 
mesa  and  recent  volcanic  sheets.  The  remarkable  copper-bearing  sediments 
of  Boleo  (near  the  east  coast)  are,  according  to  Fuchs,  flat-lying  Miocene  ^. 

South  of  lat.  25°  N.  the  rocky  cape  of  San  Lazaro  (395  meters),  connected 
with  the  mainland  by  a  littoral  bar,  runs  out  into  the  sea.  This  is  joined 
by  the  islands  Magdalena  and  Santa  Margarita  (578  meters),  elongated 
towards  the  south-east  and  separated  by  lagoons  from  the  flat  mainland ; 
these  also  consist  of  highly  altered  slates,  serpentine,  and  other  rocks,  and 
Lindgren  regards  them  as  forming  a  second  coulisse,  similar  to  Santa  Clara. 
Plain  and  mesa  now  extend  along  the  east  coast  down  to  La  Paz  bay 
(lat.  24°15'N.),  and  on  the  west  coast  as  far  as  Lobos  point  (lat.  22°  23' N.) 

The  southernmost  part  of  the  peninsula  is  high  land.  The  south-west 
as  far  as  cape  San  Lucas  consists,  according  to  Gabb  and  Eisen,  of  granite ; 
the  peak  of  Santa  Genoveva  is  said  to  reach  a  height  of  8,000  feet.  In  the 
Cacachilas  mountains  the  granite  range  runs  to  the  north-north- west,  east 
of  the  capital  of  La  Paz,  but  the  islands  which  lie  in  the  same  direction 

Surv.,  no.  15,  1885,  p.  30.    Certainly  the  difference  in  Texas  is  great,  but  it  is  precisely  ! 
the  beds  with  Cot-alliochama  Orcutti  which  show  a  certain  resemblance  to  the  upper  Creta- 
ceous of  the  Tethys,  especially  the  Gosau  beds,  as  is  pointed  out  by  White  himself;  New 
Cretaceous  fossils  from  California,  tom.  cit.,  no.  22,  p.  9. 

^  W.  Lindgren,  Proc.  Cal.  Acad.  Sci.,  1893,  2nd  ser.,  Ill,  pp.  25-33. 

'  E.  Fuchs,  Note  sur  les  gites  cuivreux  de  Boleo,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1886,  3^  ser.,  i 
XIV ;  for  the  lavas  of  these  regions,  E.  Ritter,  ^Itude  de  quelques  roches  eruptives  de  la 
Baase-Califomie,  Arch.  Sci.  phys.  et  nat.  Geneve,  1895,  3«  ser.,  XXXIII,  pp.  330-344.  | 


CH.  XIl] 


CONNEXION  WITH  MEXICO 


429 


consist  (at  least  for  the  greater  part),  like  the  east  coast  to  the  south  of 
them,  of  volcanic  tuff. 

The  valley  of  the  San  J os^  bounds  the  great  granite  range  on  the  south- 
east ;  here  Gabb  mentions  crystalline  schist.  The  extreme  south-east  of  the 
peninsula,  the  Sierra  de  Trinidad  (879  meters),  is  formed,  according  to 
Eisen's  statement,  of  crystalline  limestone  \ 

Ordonez  and  Aguilera,  in  accordance  with  the  earlier  view  of  Gabb, 
regard  the  lofty  southern  part  of  the  lower  Galifornian  peninsula  as  the 
continuation  of  the  Mexican  Sierra  Madre  del  Sur  through  cape  Corrientes 
and  Las  Tres  Marias  islands.  The  coulisses  of  Santa  Margarita  and  Santa 
Clara  represent  its  further  continuations  ^. 

As  regards  the  islands  of  the  gulf  of  California  I  possess  no  information, 
with  the  exception  of  some  data  on  volcanic  rocks.  According  to  Gabb, 
Carmen  is  probably  a  fragment  of  the  mesa  Giganta  of  the  peninsula.  The 
eastern  coast  of  the  gulf  is  described  as  a  long  and  mighty  scarp,  which  lies 
nearly  on  the  continuation  of  the  eastern  scarp  of  the  Sierra  Nevada.  This, 
together  with  the  fact  that  the  granites  near  Todos  Santos  (lat.  31°  30'  to 
32°  N,  west  coast)  are  white,  contain  hornblende,  and  resemble  the  younger 
granite  of  the  Sierra  Nevada,  has  led  eminent  geologists  to  suppose  that  the 
peninsula  may  correspond  with  the  Sierra  Nevada,  but  the  gulf  with  the 
depression  of  the  Owen  valley,  and  so  on.  The  facts  we  have  cited  tend, 
however,  to  confirm  another  view,  also  put  forward  by  Mexican  geologists, 
according  to  which  the  peninsula  is  the  continuation  of  the  coast  ranges, 
and  the  gulf  corresponds  to  the  longitudinal  valley  of  the  Sacramento 
(I,  p.  586).  It  is  true  that  the  younger  beds,  though  they  are  folded  in 
the  Sierra  Santa  Monica,  near  Los  Angeles,  and  the  other  east-and-west 
trending  parts  of  these  upper  Californian  chains,  are  not  folded  in  the 
peninsula. 

The  south  border  of  the  Colorado  plateau.  The  Colorado  plateau  is 
like  a  blunt  wedge,  pointing  south,  and  is  inserted  between  the  chains 
which,  to  use  Button's  simile,  stream  towards  Mexico  like  an  army  of  cater- 
pillars crawling  from  the  north-west  and  north-east. 

This  southern  part  of  the  plateau  was  certainly  a  continent  during 
a  great  part  of  the  Mesozoic  aera.  Overlying  the  upper  Carboniferous, 
from  the  border  of  the  lavas,  which  surround  the  great  cone  of  the  San 
Francisco  (13,000  feet),  to  the  Colorado  Chiquito  (Little  Colorado),  and  far 
beyond  this  river,  are  first  brownish-red  clays  with  salt  and  gypsum,  and 
then  conglomerate,  sandstone,  and  some  limestone  (Shina-rump  formation), 

^  G.  Eisen,  Exploration  in  the  Cape  Region  of  Baja  California  in  1894,  Proc.  Cal. 
Acad.  Sci.,  1896,  2nd  ser.,  V,  pp.  732-778,  in  particular  p.  754,  maps  ;  cf.  an  illustration 
in  Diguet,  Ann.  de  Geogr.,  1900,  IX,  p.  246,  pi.  XI. 

^  Bosquejo  geologico  de  Mexico,  Bol.  Inst.  geol.  Mexico,  nos.  4,  5,  6,  1897  ;  Ordonez, 
p.  51 ;  Aguilera,  p.  189. 


430         THE  APPEARANCE  OP  THE  ANDES  [party 


which  contain  the  frequently-mentioned  fossil  woods  of  Arizona.  Remains 
of  Eelodons  and  Labyrinthodons  have  also  been  found.  Then  follows, 
chiefly  on  the  east  and  north-east,  the  red  sandstone  of  the  'Painted 
Desert',  which  extends  to  New  Mexico,  and  is  finally  surmounted  by 
transgressive  patches  of  Cretaceous  ^ 

New  Mexico  also  furnishes  a  Trias  flora  {Ckeirolepis  Miinsteri  and  other 
plants),  which  is  found  at  Abiqui,  80  kilometers  north-west  of  Santa  F^. 
This  locality  is  situated  in  the  Chama  valley,  on  the  border  region  of  the 
plateau. 

On  the  south-west,  from  the  Great  Canon  almost  as  far  as  Fort  Apache, 
a  distance  of  nearly  400  kilometers,  the  plateau  ends  in  the  Aubray  cliffs, 
a  scarp  formed  by  the  basset  edges  of  the  upper  Carboniferous,  which  has 
just  been  mentioned  as  the  basement  of  the  Trias.  It  is  flat-bedded  and 
overlooks,  especially  where  it  forms  the  MogoUon  mesa,  the  country  lying 
towards  the  south-west.  From  Fort  Apache  onwards,  lavas  of  increasingly 
recent  age  advance  to  the  border.  From  the  most  southerly  point  the 
boundary  turns  towards  the  north-east,  and  reaches  the  Rio  Grande,  which, 
for  more  than  300  kilometers,  separates  the  plateau  from  the  sierras ;  and 
then,  south  of  Albuquerque,  the  outrunners  of  the  Rocky  mountains  make 
their  appearance  2. 

In  front  of  the  steep  south-western  border  lies,  according  to  Ransome 
and  Leslie,  a  zone  of  mountains,  110-200  kilometers  in  breadth,  which 
strike,  between  the  plateau  in  the  east  and  the  Gila  desert  in  the  west, 
first  to  the  south-east  and  then  to  the  south.  Their  western  boundary  is 
marked  by  Fort  Mohave  on  the  Colorado  river,  and  the  towns  of  Phoenix 
and  Tucson.  They  reach  a  height  of  8,000  feet,  and  are  often  assigned  to 
the  Basin  range,  yet  no  folds,  only  fractures,  are  to  be  seen.  The  mining 
district  of  Globe  (lat.  33°  15'  to  33°  30'  N.,  long.  110°  45'  to  long.  111°  W.) 
presents,  apart  from  rarious  eruptive  rocks,  a  Palaeozoic  series,  including 
the  upper  Carboniferous,  which  is  only  traversed  by  normal  subsidence 
faults,  so  that  we  might  almost  suppose  we  had  before  us  a  downthrown 
belt  of  the  plateau  itself.  Further  east  also,  in  the  Clifton  Morenci  district 
(lat.  33°  to  33°  15'  N.,  long.  109°  15'  to  109°  30'  W.),  folding  is  scarcely 

'  Lester  F.  Ward,  Status  of  the  Mesozoic  Floras  of  the  United  States,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S. 
Geol.  Surv.,  1900,  XX,  2,  pp.  211-430,  in  particular  p.  320  et  seq. ;  and  Monograph 
XLVIII,  1905,  pp.  13-46. 

2  W.  M.  Fontaine  and  F.  H.  Knowlton,  Notes  on  Triassic  Plants  from  New  Mexico,  Proc. 
U.S.  Nat.  Mus.  for  1890,  XIII,  pp.  281-285 ;  C.  E.  Button,  Tertiary  History  of  the  Grand 
Canon  District,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Monograph  II,  1882,  pp.  14-15  ;  Mount  Taylor  and  the 
Zuni  Plateau,  Ann.  Rep.,  1886,  VI,  pp.  109-198,  maps,  in  particular  p.  118,  pi.  XII; 
C.  L.  Herrick,  The  Geology  of  the  Environs  of  Albuquerque,  Nevs^  Mexico,  Am.  Geol., 
1898,  XII,  pp.  26-43  ;  and  Report  on  a  geological  Reconnaissance  in  West  Socorro  and 
Valencia  Cities,  New  Mexico,  op.  cit.,  1900,  XXV,  pp.  331-346,  maps.  A  peculiar 
description  of  the  south-western  chains  is  given  by  J.  E.  Spurr,  Origin  and  Structure  of 
the  Basin  Ranges,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1901,  XII,  pp.  217-270,  map. 


CH.  XIl] 


RIO  PECOS 


431 


perceptible.  Here  Cretaceous  sets  in ;  its  discordant  overlie  is  ascribed 
not  to  tectonic  processes,  but  to  erosion ;  it  is  disturbed,  however,  by 
a  recent  intrusion  of  diorite  porphyry.  Recent  flows  of  lava  occur  in  both 
districts ;  and  spread  out  in  both,  as  the  most  recent  formation,  is  the  mighty 
Gila  conglomerate.  This  is  a  fluviatile  deposit,  formed  along  the  lines  of 
the  existing  valleys,  but  at  a  time  when  the  mountains  were  much  higher. 
A  few  patches  occur  up  to  a  height  of  5,000  feet  ^. 

This  conglomerate  slopes  away  on  the  south-west  to  the  desert,  from 
which  rise  a  few^  short  and  little-known  chains.  Nowhere  but  in  these 
can  we  possibly  suspect  a  continuation  of  the  Mesozoic  series  of  the  Basin 
ranges.  Further  towards  the  north-west,  east  of  Cadiz,  is  a  height  which 
exposes  Cambrian  beds  2. 

Then  follows  the  lower  course  of  the  Colorado,  which  lies  in  a 
depression. 

The  south-eastern  border  of  the  Colorado  plateau  presents  a  different 
character.  South  of  Albuquerque  the  Rocky  mountains  come  to  an  end. 
The  region  between  the  upper  Pecos  (down  to  lat.  31°  N.)  and  the  south- 
eastern border  of  the  plateau  possesses  a  structure  of  purely  Mexican  type. 

Two  series  of  sierras  striking  to  the  south-east  fill  the  space  between 
the  Rio  Pecos  and  the  Rio  Grande.  They  are  folded,  and  after  the  folding 
were  cut  through  by  considerable  faults,  striking  south-east,  which  have 
determined  their  existing  form  2.  The  stratified  succession  shows  that 
approaching  completion  of  the  series  which  may  so  often  be  observed  at 
the  entrance  to  a  folded  land.  Thick  upper  Carboniferous  limestone  is 
overlain  by  the  red  gypsif erous  clays  of  the  Permian  (and  the  Trias  ?)  of 
Texas ;  in  the  Malone  mountains  (lat.  31°  15'  N.,  right  bank  of  the  Rio 
Grande),  according  to  Cragin's  accounts,  Jurassic  with  Perisphinctes  also 
occurs,  belonging  to  the  Kimmeridge  stage  or  Tithonian,  and  corresponding 
with  the  Mexican  Alamitos  stage ;  then  follows,  with  subordinate  modifica- 
tions, the  Texan  Cretaceous  series  ^. 

The  first  series  of  sierras  begins  with  the  Jacarille  mountains  (lat.  34°  N.), 
which  lie  near  the  end  of  the  Rocky  mountains.  They  are  continued 
without  interruption  into  the  Sierra  Sacramento  and  Sierra  Guadelupe. 
Then  from  lat.  31°  N.  onwards  the  Cretaceous  plateau  of  Stockton  crosses 
over  to  the  west  side  of  the  Rio  Pecos ;  the  sierras  pass  by  the  last  out- 

^  F.  L.  Ransome,  Geology  of  the  Globe  Copper  District,  Ar.,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Profess. 
Papers,  no.  12,  1903,  168  pp.,  maps,  in  particular  pp.  10,  14-16 ;  W.  Lindgren,  The 
Copper  Deposits  of  the  Clifton-Morenci  District,  Ar.,  op.  cit.,  no.  43, 1905,  375  pp.,  maps, 
in  particular  p.  51  et  seq. 

^  Darton,  Iron  Mountain  near  Siam,  Journ.  Geol.,  1907,  XV,  pp.  470-473. 

^  C.  R.  Keyes  (Structures  of  Basin  Ranges,  Journ.  Geol.,  1905,  XIII,  pp.  63-70)  states 
that  the  folding  is  pre-Cretaceous  ;  I  follow  Stanton's  data  in  Cragin's  work  on  Malone. 

*  F.  W.  Cragin,  Palaeontology  of  the  Malone  Jurassic  Formation  of  Texas,  Bull.  U.S. 
Geol.  Surv.,  no.  266,  1905,  109  pp.,  map. 


432  THE  APPEARANCE  OF  THE  ANDES  [party 


runners  of  the  western  Altaides  (IV,  fig.  12,  p.  79),  and  are  cut  through 
in  the  San  Jago  chain  by  the  Eio  Grande. 

The  second  series  begins  further  north.  It  is  particularly  high  (3,900 
meters,  valleys  at  a  level  of  1,100  meters),  and  formed  for  the  greater  part 
of  upper  Carboniferous  limestone  and  recent  volcanic  rocks.  But  it  also 
includes  the  Jurassic  Malone  mountains,  and  south-east  of  these  the  Quit- 
man mountains,  in  which,  according  to  Stanton,  the  whole  Cretaceous 
succession  is  overthrown  towards  the  east. 

The  'bolson',  that  is,  the  depression,  devoid  of  outflow,  which  lies 
between  the  Sierra  Sacramento  of  the  eastern  series  and  the  Sierra  San 
Andrea  of  the  western  series,  is  covered  by  salt  and  gypsum,  derived  from 
springs  in  the  red  Permian^.  The  bolson,  75  kilometers  in  length,  in  the 
west  of  the  Guadelupe  chain  (lat.  32°  15'  to  lat.  32°  ST  N.),  is  a  fault-trough, 
according  to  Hill.  Between  the  Organ  and  Hueco  mountains  (lat.  32°  10'  N.) 
we  come  upon  a  recent  lava  stream,  which  has  flowed  down  for  50  kilo- 
meters from  the  north,  and  now  forms  a  '  mal  pais '  not  easy  to  cross  ^.  In 
the  Sierra  Vieja  on  the  Kio  Grande,  Cretaceous  coal  makes  its  appearance  ^. 
Without  much  change  in  character  these  sierras  reach  the  Rio  Grande, 
which  runs  athwart  them  between  lats.  29°  45'  and  29°  N.  Beyond  the 
river  they  are  continued  through  Coahuila  into  western  Tamaulipas. 

Mexico.  The  southern  outrunners  of  the  Rocky  mountains  have  dis- 
appeared. The  Colorado  plateau  terminates  in  Arizona  and  New  Mexico. 
Troops  of  chains,  of  the  same  tectonic  type  as  the  Basin  ranges,  and  with 
a  prevalent  strike  to  the  south-east,  cover  the  land,  and  form  the  continua- 
tion of  the  sierras  described  on  the  other  side  of  the  Rio  Grande.  On  the 
Pacific  side,  the  coast  range  is  continued  from  the  north-west  through  lower 
California  and  the  Marias  into  the  Sierra  Madre  del  Sur,  which  forms 
a  great  arc  concave  towards  the  north-east,  embracing  all  the  sierras  of  the 
interior. 

Up  to  twenty  years  ago  three  orographic  zones  were  supposed  to 
cross  the  breadth  of  the  country,  namely,  a  Sierra  Madre  Occidental, 
a  Central  Meseta,  and  a  Sierra  Madre  Oriental.  In  1890,  Heilprin 
showed  that  the  whole  land  is  folded,  and  that  its  inequalities  have 
been  levelled  up  in  the  case  of  the  Central  Meseta  by  volcanic  ejecta- 
menta  The  important  results  of  the  Geological  Survey,  and  in  particular 
the  comprehensive  descriptions  of  Aguilera,  have  established  the  fact  that 

1  C.  L.  Herrick,  Geology  of  the  White  Sands  of  New  Mexico,  Journ.  Geol.,  1900,7111, 
pp.  112-126,  map. 

'  R.  S.  Tarr,  Recent  Lava-flow  in  New  Mexico,  Am.  Nat.,  1891,  pp.  524-527. 

^  T.  W.  Vaughan,  Reconnaissance  in  the  Rio  Grande  Coal-fields  of  Texas,  Bull.  U.S. 
Geol.  Surv.,  1900,  no.  164,  100  pp.,  map. 

*  A.  Heilprin,  Geology  and  Pa,laeontology  of  the  Cretaceous  Deposits  of  Mexico,  Proc. 
Acad.  Nat.  Sci.  Phil.,  1890,  pp.  445-469. 


CH.XII]    STRATIFIED  SUCCESSION  IN  MEXICO  433 


there  is  no  Sierra  Madre  Oriental,  but  that  the  sierras  of  the  interior 
decrease  in  height  towards  the  Atlantic  coast  and  run  out  in  free  ends.  It 
has  also  been  shown  that  an  arcuate  marginal  fracture  next  the  gulf  of 
Mexico  does  not  exists 

Let  us  first  consider  the  stratified  succession. 

Marine  Palaeozoic  beds  are  seldom  visible.  Dumble  mentions,  as  occurring 
in  the  river  basin  of  the  Yaqui,  Sonora,  and  on  the  road  to  Hermosillo, 
upturned  quartzites,  and  also  granular  limestone  and  schist;  on  their 
basset  edges  upper  Silurian  with  Cyathophyllum  and  Heliolites  rest 
unconformably  ^,  but,  apart  from  these  occurrences  in  the  north-west,  no 
Palaeozoic  fossils  are  known,  until  upper  Carboniferous  limestone  once 
more  crops  out  very  far  to  the  south. 

In  Sonora,  especially  at  Los  Bronces  (east  of  Tecoripa),  in  the  coal-field 
of  Santa  Clara,  and  further  towards  Hermosillo,  conglomerate  and  sand- 
stone with  workable  coal  seams  and  a  Mesozoic  flora  (Bumble's  Barranca 
stage)  rest  on  a  basement  which  is  sometimes  Palaeozoic,  probably,  and  some- 
times pre-Cambrian  ^.  Further  south  they  rest  on  the  denuded  Archaean. 
Aguilera  mentions  them  at  numerous  localities  in  Sonora,  Puebla,  and 
Oaxaca 

It  seems  as  though  this  stage  followed  the  strike  of  the  ancient  rocks 
of  the  west  and  south.  Similar  plant-bearing  beds  are  also  known  in 
Honduras ;  there  they  possibly  rest  on  upper  Carboniferous  limestone  ^. 

Their  flora  is  often  described  as  Rhaetic,  but  since  stress  is  laid  on  its 
affinity  with  that  of  Abiqui,  North  Carolina,  and  Richmond,  and  no  exact 
descriptions  exist,  it  is  uncertain  whether  it  should  not  rather  be  correlated 
with  the  flora  of  the  Keuper.  In  any  case,  it  appears  that  the  areas 
indicated  were  dry  land  during  a  part  of  the  Trias  epoch.  The  traces  of 
shells,  which  Gabb  described  from  Los  Bronces,  are  of  too  doubtful  a  nature 
to  overthrow  this  conclusion  ^. 

^  J.  G.  Aguilera,  Bosquejo  Geologico  de  Mexico,  Bol.  Inst.  geol.  Mexico,  nos.  4,  5,  6, 
1897,  207  pp.,  map,  and  Sobre  las  condiciones  tectonicas  de  la  Republica  Mexicana,  8vo, 
Mexico,  1901,  34  pp. 

2  E.  T.  Dumble,  Notes  on  the  Geology  of  Sonora,  Mexico,  Trans.  Am.  Inst.  M.  E.,  1899, 
31  pp. 

*  E.  T.  Dumble,  op.  cit.,  and  Triassic  Coal  and  Coke  of  Sonora,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc, 
1900,  XI,  pp.  10-14. 

*  J.  G.  Aguilera,  Bosquejo  Geologico  de  Mexico,  Bol.  Inst.  geol.  Mexico,  nos.  4,  5,  6, 
1897,  p.  202. 

^  J.  S.  Newberry,  Rhaetic  Plants  from  Honduras,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1888,  3rd  ser., 
XXXVI,  pp.  342-351  ;  Taeniopferis  glossopteroides  Newb.  and  Nilssonia  polymorpha  Nath. 
A  marked  generic  correspondence  unites  this  flora  with  that  of  Los  Bronces  in  Sonora. 

^  Gabb,  in  Geology  of  California,  I,  p.  28,  Panopaea?  Above  the  Barranca  stage 
Dumble  describes  in  Sonora  andesitic  lavas  which  are  older  than  the  Cretaceous,  and 
terms  them  the  Lista  Blanca  stage.  I  have  no  further  confirmation  of  andesitic  erup- 
tions in  this  period. 

SOLLAS IV  F  f 


434         THE  APPEAEANCE  OF  THE  ANDES  [party 


The  case  is  different  further  inland.  Here  Burckhardt  and  Scalia  have 
made  us  familiar  with  a  Carnic  fauna  from  Zacatecas;  some  species 
(Sirenites,  Juvavites)  are  allied  to  those  of  the  Californian  Trias  ^. 

Lias  forms  the  next  stage.  Bose's  accounts  give  several  localities  for 
it  in  the  east  and  south-east  (Mexico,  Queretaro,  Hidalgo,  Puebla,  and 
Veracruz)  2. 

With  regard  to  middle  Jurassic  there  is  an  almost  complete  dearth  of 
information. 

Nikitin  was  the  first  to  mention  the  occurrence  of  Aucella  in  Mexico. 
In  the  Sierra  de  Catorce,  Castillo  and  Aguilera  have  distinguished  a  lower 
(Alamitos)  stage  with  numerous  Perisphinctes,  and  an  upper  (Ceneguita) 
stage  with  Aucella  ^.  Burckhardt  has  furnished  very  detailed  information 
concerning  the  Kimeridge,  Portland,  and  Neocomian  in  the  Sierra  de 
Mazapil.  Many  species  occur  which  in  Europe  belong  to  the  Tethys. 
Amidst  the  series  thus  characterized,  a  bed  with  Aucella  Fallasi  makes 
its  appearance  as  an  Arcto-Russian  intercalation  above  the  horizon  of 
Idoceras  Balderum,  and  beneath  that  of  Haploceras  Fialar.  Virgatites 
are  mentioned  as  occurring  somewhat  higher  up*. 

The  upper  Jurassic  of  Malone  on  the  Rio  Grande,  with  its  European 
characters,  has  been  already  mentioned.  Beds  of  the  same  European  type 
are  also  seen  at  Oaxaca,  in  the  south  ^. 

Neocomian  with  Holcostephanus,  next  comes  on,  near  Mazapil,  then 
thick  limestone,  a  zone  with  Parahoplites,  and  finally,  in  a  vast  transgres- 
sion and  of  great  thickness,  the  middle  and  upper  Cretaceous.  This  is  in 
the  main  an  extension  of  the  Texan  Cretaceous,  and  forms  a  considerable 
part  of  the  folded  sierras  of  central  Mexico. 

Marine  Eocene  and  Miocene  nowhere  advance  far  into  the  interior. 

The  Cretaceous  limestone  mountains  were  covered,  probably  after  the 
middle  Tertiary  epoch,  by  ashes  and  lava  ejected  from  hundreds  of  eruptive 
centres,  of  which  only  a  very  few  are  now  recognizable.  On  the  West  in 
particular  they  support  a  great  mass  of  acid  ejectamenta. 

The  series  of  rocks  concludes  with  the  volcanos  of  the  present  day, 
which  include  some  of  the  most  stupendous  in  the  world.    The  Pic  of 

*  C.  Burckhardt  and  S.  Scalia,  Faune  marine  du  Trias  superieur  de  Zacatecas,  Bol. 
Inst.  geol.  Mexico,  1905,  no.  21,  41  pp. 

^  E.  Bose,  Lias  in  Mexico,  Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1898,  pp.  168-175. 

*  Nikitin,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1890,  II,  p.  273  ;  A.  del  Castillo  y  J.  G.  Aguilera,  Fauna  fosil 
de  la  Sierra  de  Catorce,  Bol.  Com.  geol.  Mex.,  1895, 1 ;  Felix,  in  J.  Felix  and  H.  Lenk, 
Beitrag  zur  Geologic  und  Palaeontologie  der  Republik  Mexico,  3  parts,  1889-1899,  II, 
1899,  p.  164. 

*  C.  Burckhardt,  Geologic  de  la  Sierra  de  Mazapil,  Guide  X®  Congr.  geol.,  1906, 
no.  26,  40  pp.,  maps ;  and  La  Faune  Jurassique  de  Mazapil,  Bol.  Inst.  geol.  Mex.,  1906, 
no.  23,  216  pp. 

*  Felix,  op.  cit.,  Ill,  1891  (Palaeontographica,  vol.  XXXVII),  p.  140  et  seq. 


CH.  XII]  SIEEEA  MADKE  OCCIDENTAL  435 


Orizaba  measures  5,549  meters  in  height,  Popocatepetl  5,450  meters, 
Ixtaccihuatl  5,280  meters ;  Nevada  de  Toluca  and  others  exceed  4,000  meters 
in  height.  Some,  such  as  Colima,  have  been  very  active  in  recent  times. 
JoruUo,  with  its  four  cones  ^  rising  on  a  line  running  to  the  north-north- 
east, first  came  into  existence  in  September,  1759,  or  at  least  was  further 
developed  at  that  time. 

In  Sonora  the  west  side  of  the  Sierra  Madre  Occidental  presents,  as  we 
have  seen  above,  ancient  rocks,  Silurian,  and  the  Barranca  stage  of  the 
Trias,  with  its  coal-beds;  patches  of  Cretaceous  limestone  and  volcanic 
ejectamenta  cover  a  great  part  of  this  substructure.  Towards  the  south 
the  volcanic  accumulations  rapidly  increase  in  importance.  The  transverse 
section  drawn  by  Weed  from  Parral  (south-west  Chihuahua),  west-south- 
west, to  the  lower  course  of  the  river  Sinaloa,  shows  the  intensely  folded 
sediments  as  occurring  for  short  distances  in  the  western  foothills  and  the 
lower  part  of  the  eastern  border  only.  In  place  of  a  mountain  chain  we 
have  a  dissected  plateau,  2,500  meters  in  height,  in  its  highest  parts  even 
3,200  meters,  which  towards  the  east  sinks  gradually  to  the  lofty  inner 
plateau ;  but  towards  the  west,  a  little  west  of  Guadelupe  y  Calvo,  it  presents 
a  high  and  steep  cliff.  This  cliff,  however,  does  not  represent  a  fracture. 
It  is  the  result  solely  of  denudation,  and  the  zone  of  foothills,  about  24  kilo- 
meters in  breadth,  which  separates  it  from  the  low-lying  coast  region  is 
formed  by  the  basement  beds  of  the  great  plateau.  The  plateau  itself  once 
extended  further  towards  the  west. 

The  history  of  these  table-mountains  is  as  follows :  Upon  the  folded 
sediments  a  great  quantity  of  flat-lying,  coarsely  stratified,  andesitic  breccias, 
tuffs,  and  lavas  was  piled  up.  Local  eruptions  of  monzonitic  rocks  occurred. 
Then  the  whole  andesitic  land  was  cut  through,  much  in  the  same  way  as  the 
existing  surface,  by  a  number  of  valleys,  some  of  them  very  deep.  Then 
all  these  valleys  and  the  whole  andesite  mass  were  covered  up  by  rhyolitic 
and  dacitic  flows  and  ejectamenta,  which  produced  new  plateaux  over  the 
old  furrowed  plateaux  of  andesitic  rocks.  Upon  these,  finally,  plateaux  of 
basalt  occur  here  and  there  and  represent  the  most  recent  formation.  The 
existing  configuration  has  been  produced  by  denudation,  and  from  Weed's 
description  we  understand  how  it  is  that  only  andesites  and  not  rhyolites 
are  mapped  in  the  western  foothills  2. 

1  E.  Ordonez,  Le  JoruUo,  Guide      Congr.  geoL,  1906,  no.  XI,  54  pp.,  map. 

^  W.  H.  Weed,  Notes  on  a  Section  across  the  Sierra  Madre  Occidental  of  Chihuahua 
and  Sinoloa,  Mexico,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1902,  15  pp. ;  and  Notes  on  certain  Mines  of 
Chihuahua,  Sinoloa  and  Sonora,  Mexico,  op.  cit.,  1902,  48  pp.  Details  relating  to 
Parral  are  given  by  P.  Waitz,  Guide  X®  Congr.  geol.,  1906,  no.  XXI,  21  pp.,  map,  and 
Robles,  op.  cit.,  XXII ;  in  a  corresponding  manner  Hovey  describes  the  mining  district 
of  Guaynopita  (West  Chihuahua)  in  Festschrift  auf  H.  Rosenbusch,  8vo,  Stuttgart,  1906, 
pp.  77-95  •  a  survey  of  Chihuahua  is  given  by  the  same  writer  in  Bull.  Nat.  Mus.  N.Y., 
1907,  XXIII,  pp.  401-442,  map. 

F  f  2 


436         THE  APPEAEANCE  OP  THE  ANDES      [part  y 


These  data  confirm  the  excellent  description  of  the  great  Sierra  and  its 
rhyolites,  which  was  published  a  little  earlier  by  Ordonez  ^.  It  is  obvious 
that  the  Sierra  Madre  Occidental  is  for  the  greater  part  of  subaerial  origin. 
The  northernmost  parts  of  Sonora  present  a  certain  resemblance  to  the 
jagged  hill  ranges  on  the  margin  of  the  Gila  desert  of  Arizona.  Further 
south  the  several  ranges  press  more  closely  together,  and  then  follows  the 
volcanic  covering. 

In  Durango  and  Tepic,  as  in  Sinaloa,  an  older  eroded  andesite  formation  , 
may  be  perceived  beneath  the  rhyolites.  The  rhyolites  extend  for  the  most 
part  over  the  Sierra  Madre  Occidental ;  towards  the  east,  on  the  Meseta 
Central,  they  are  less  widely  distributed.  On  the  Sierra  they  seem  to  have 
proceeded  from  great  fissures,  running  as  a  rule  with  the  strike,  but  on  the 
Meseta  from  isolated  centres  of  eruption.  The  BufaSy  massive  blunt  pillars 
formed  of  rhyolitic  groundmass  reduced  to  fine  dust,  are  in  no  small  part, 
according  to  Ordonez,  the  hardened  contents  of  the  funnels.  The  great 
Bufa  of  Guanajuato,  which  contains  large  blocks  of  biotite  granite  and 
other  rocks  brought  up  from  below,  and  is  surrounded  by  a  zone  of  Locero, 
i.  e.  of  hornf els  produced  by  the  contact  alteration  of  a  red  conglomerate, 
may  be  regarded  as  a  typical  example. 

Towards  the  south  part  of  Jalisco,  according  to  the  sketch  map  by  | 
Ordonez,  the  rhyolites  disappear;  they  are  concealed  by  the  basic  lavas  I 
of  the  existing  volcanos,  but  still  crop  out  between  them,  as,  for  example,  I 
in  the  Navajas,  south  of  Pachuca,  which  include  fragments  of  a  meseta  fl 
more  than  3,500  meters  in  height.  || 

The  volcano  of  Ceboruco  and  other  recent  cones  conceal  any  orographic  1 
boundary  which  might  delimit  the  hills  on  the  side  next  cape  Corrientes. 
Those  who  have  sought  for  a  boundary  to  the  Sierra  Madre  Occidental  in  , 
the  configuration  of  the  country  have  fixed  upon  the  Rio  de  las  Balsas,  jj 
which  lies  much  further  south.    But  its  valley  is  merely  a  superficial 
feature,  due  to  erosion. 

It  is  a  fact  of  importance  that  the  rhyolitic  eruptions,  which  extend 
only  a  short  distance  towards  the  east  into  the  Meseta  Central,  turn  towards 
the  south-east  from  Tepic  and  Jalisco  onwards,  and  even  in  the  direction 
of  Jalapa  remain  visible  beneath  and  between  the  existing  volcanos,  nearly 
up  to  the  east  coast.  The  map  by  Ordonez  clearly  indicates  that  the  older 
volcanic  range  of  the  Sierra  Madre  Occidental  bends  round  into  the  zone  of 
the  existing  volcanos. 

The  Meseta  Central  is  higher  in  the  south,  in  the  direction  of  the  recent  | 
great  volcanic  mountains,  and  loses  in  height  towards  the  north,  reaching 
its  lowest  point  (1,700  meters)  in  the  Bolson  de  Mapimi, 

^  E.  Ordonez,  Las  Rhyolitas  de  Mexico,  Bol.  Inst.  geol.  Mex.,  nos.  14,  15,  1900  and  \ 
1901,  75  and  76  pp.,  map. 


CH.  XIl] 


BUFA  DE  MAPIMI 


437 


Here  its  resemblance  to  the  Basin  ranges,  as  shown  by  the  repeated 
trough-like  subsidence  of  the  folded  mountains  along  extensive  faults,  the 
numerous  but  less  considerable  volcanic  accumulations,  and  the  closed  drain- 
age system,  is  most  manifest.  The  drawings  and  written  communications 
which  I  owe  to  the  kindness  of  Herr  Edmund  Naumann,  supplemented  by 
the  accounts  of  other  observers,  are  my  authority  for  the  following  account. 

In  the  State  of  Parral,  as  well  as  in  Carmen  (on  the  boundary  between 
Durango  and  Chihuahua),  we  are  still  within  the  region  of  the  volcanic 
sheets  of  the  Sierra  Madre  Occidental,  which  are  here  about  800  meters  in 
thickness.  Further  towards  the  east  lie  regions  where  long  folded  Cretaceous 
ranges,  striking  towards  the  north-west,  are  separated  by  broad  level  plains, 
which  are  diversified  by  volcanic  hills  and  walls. 

The  folding  of  the  Cretaceous  limestone  is  here  carried  to  an  extraor- 
dinary degree.  Eobert  Hill  states  that  in  the  Sierra  Almoloya  (Chihuahua, 
between  Parral  and  Ximenes)  it  even  goes  as  far  as  the  formation  of 
plunging  sheets,  with  marmorization  or  foliation  of  the  limestone.  Were 
it  not  for  the  'recumbent  folds',  visible  in  the  steeply  upturned  ends  of  the 
sheets,  we  should  regard  the  sierra  as  a  long  quaquaversal  dome.  Intense 
overfolding  towards  the  north-east  is  also  mentioned  by  Naumann  as 
occurring  in  the  Sierra  Cadena  (north  Durango),  a  range  60  kilometers 
in  length.  This  direction  of  the  folds,  together  with  a  constant  strike 
of  the  numerous  chains  and  fractures  towards  the  north-west,  prevails 
over  the  whole  of  this  region.  The  folding  is  everywhere  older  than  the 
volcanic  accumulations  of  the  Sierra  Madre  Occidental. 

To  the  north-east  of  the  Sierra  Cadena  we  reach  a  plain,  25  kilometers 
in  breadth,  and  then  the  Bufa  de  Mapimi  (2,400  meters).  This  is  a 
repetition  of  the  Sierra  Cadena,  but  of  less  length.  Like  this  range  it 
slopes  gently  towards  the  south-west  and  steeply  towards  the  north-east ; 
the  descent  towards  the  north-east  amounts  to  700  meters,  and  at  the 
bottom  of  a  trough-like  inbreak  lies  the  rich  ore  deposit  of  the  Ojuela. 
This  is  a  vertical  pipe,  about  30  meters  in  diameter,  which  has  been  opened 
up  by  mining  to  a  depth  of  500  meters ;  it  is  in  pipes  of  this  kind  that  the 
auriferous  and  argentiferous  lead  ores  of  this  region  occur.  All  the  pipes 
are  connected  with  great  fissures.  According  to  Naumann  they  appear  to 
be  the  final  expression  of  eruptive  activity,  and  it  seems  as  though  the 
eruptive  dykes  were  cut  off  by  the  processes  involved  in  their  formation. 
To  the  north-west  of  the  Ojuela  we  meet  with  volcanic  rock  in  the  same 
fault-trough. 

On  the  other  side  of  the  Ojuela  a  short  horst  forms  the  Gambio  chain ; 
it  is  possible  that  towards  the  north-east  sediments  older  than  the  Cretaceous 
take  part  in  its  formation.  Then  we  again  reach  a  depression,  20  kilometers 
in  breadth,  hilly  towards  the  north,  and  presenting  a  chain-like  arrange- 
ment ;  finally  we  cross  another  sierra,  precipitous  on  that  side,  however, 


438         THE  APPEAEANCE  OF  THE  ANDES     [part  v 


which  faces  south-west,  and  beyond  this  is  the  station  of  Besmejillo,  on 
the  Central  Mexican  railway. 

The  volcanic  rocks  in  this  part  of  eastern  Durango  are  associated  with 
strike  fissures  and  make  their  appearance  sometimes  as  dykes,  sometimes 
as  volcanic  cones  ^. 

In  the  south  of  the  Bolson  de  Mapimi,  at  Parras,  and  nearly  as  far 
as  Mazapil,  the  folds  strike  not  to  the  south-east,  but  to  the  east-south- 
east and  nearly  east  and  west ;  at  Parras,  and  in  the  direction  of  Monterey, 
there  is  a  tendency  to  form  oval  brachyanticlines.  The  ore-bearing  sierras 
near  Mazapil,  formed  of  Jurassic  and  Cretaceous,  owe  their  richness  to 
igneous  intrusions,  which  while  forcing  their  way  up  have  absorbed  the 
adjacent  rock  2. 

The  famous  ore -deposits  of  Zacatecas  and  Guanajuato  have  originated 
in  similar  intrusions,  but  at  both  localities  sericitic  schists  crop  out,  repre- 
senting a  basement  not  elsewhere  visible  in  this  part  of  Mexico.  From  the 
account  of  Burckhardt  and  Scalia  it  appears  that  the  Carnic  Trias  met 
with  here  is  intimately  associated  with  spilite  (Roca  verde)^  thus  recalling 
similar  occurrences  in  the  Alps  ^. 

Let  us  now  turn  our  attention  to  the  so-called  Sierra  Madre  Oriental. 
It  does  not  form  a  tectonic  unit.  The  behaviour  of  the  Cretaceous  is 
instructive  here.  Further  south,  at  Cardenas,  between  San  Luis  Potosi  and 
Tampico,  Bose  has  shown  that  the  lower  Senonian,  besides  containing 
Exogyra  costata  and  some  other  North  American  species,  presents  the  Gosau 
facies,  which  is  continued  here  from  Jamaica*.  Traces  of  it  have  also 
been  discovered  between  Monterey  and  Saltillo,  and  here  in  the  north  it  is 
covered  by  coal,  which,  according  to  Aguilera,  forms  the  base  of  the  Laramie 
stage  ^.  Robert  Hill,  who  is  intimately  acquainted  with  Texas,  has  shown 
^  An  abstract  was  given  by  E.  Naumann  in  a  communication  to  the  Zeitschr.  deutscb. 
geol.  Ges.,  1898,  pp.  106-108,  and  Ber.  Senckenb.  naturf.  Ges.,  1901,  p.  88 ;  also  J.  D. 
Villarello,  Le  Mineral  de  Mapimi,  Guide  Congr.  geol.,  1906,  XVIII,  18  pp.,  and 
E.  Bose,  Mines  de  soufre  de  la  Sierra  de  Banderas,  op.  cit.,  XIX,  11  pp.  For  the 
recumbent  sheets  of  the  Sierra  Almoloya,  R.  Hill  in  Science,  May  3,  1907,  new  ser., 
XXV,  pp.  710-712  ;  for  the  bufa,  E.  Angermann,  Parerga  Inst.  geol.  Mex.,  1907,  II, 
pp.  17-25. 

^  Not  by  penetrating  hollow  spaces,  as  I  once  thought,  nor  by  active  participation  in 
the  folding.  The  folding  is  here  an  independent  process,  older  than  the  intrusion ; 
faults  were  subsequently  formed  ;  this  is  shown  with  particular  clearness  by  the  Sierra 
de  Concepcion  del  Oro  overfolded  towards  the  north  ;  Burckhardt,  Geologie  de  la  Sierra 
de  Mazapil,  Guide  X®  Congr.  geol.,  1906,  no.  XXVI,  40  pp.,  maps,  in  particular  p.  36  ;  and 
Sierra  de  Concepcion  del  Oro,  op.  cit.,  XXIV,  24  pp.,  maps. 

^  Burckhardt  et  Scalia,  Geologie  des  environs  de  Zacatecas,  Guide  X®  Congr.  geol., 
1906,  no.  XVI,  26  pp.,  maps ;  and  Villarello,  Hores,  et  Robles,  ^tude  de  la  Sierra  de 
Guanajuato,  op.  cit.,  no.  15,  23  pp.,  maps. 

*  E.  B6se,  La  Fauna  de  Moll,  del  Senon.  de  Cardenas,  Bol.  Inst.  geol.  Mex.,  no.  24, 
1906,  95  pp. 

^  J.  G.  Aguilera,  Guide  X®  Congr.  geol.,  1906,  no.  XXVII,  Gisements  carboniferes 
de  Coahuila,  17  pp. 


CH.  XIl] 


SIEREA  MADEE  DEL  SUE  439 


that  the  brackish-water  Laramie  stage  of  the  United  States  occurs  with 
unaltered  character  in  the  sierras  between  the  Rio  Pecos  and  Rio  Grande, 
and  from  Presidio  del  Norte  to  Tampico,  so  that  it  shares  the  folding  of 
the  eastern  sierras  of  Mexico  almost  as  far  as  lat.  22°  N.  We  know  from 
Aguilera  that  it  extends  into  northern  Coahuila. 

Here,  as  in  the  Rocky  mountains  (and  also  in  a  great  part  of  the  Inter- 
mediate range)j  according  to  R.  Hill,  the  last  folding  occurred  after  the 
Laramie  and  before  the  Eocene.  According  to  Hill's  sketch,  taken  near 
Lampazos  (west  of  Laredo  on  the  Rio  Grande),  it  was  directed  towards  the 
east.  The  Eocene  of  Laredo  contains  the  characteristic  species  Venericardia 
planicosta  ^. 

The  detailed  sections  drawn  by  Bose,  from  Veracruz  westwards,  beneath 
the  outrunners  of  the  Pic  of  Orizaba,  show  various  sub-divisions  of  the 
Cretaceous  overthrust  in  imbricate  fashion  towards  the  sea  2. 

The  whole  of  the  Sierra  Madre  Oriental  consists,  so  far  as  it  is  known, 
of  the  echeloned  free  ends  of  numerous  chains  folded  towards  the  east 
and  north-east. 

A  completely  different  structure  is  presented  by  the  Sierra  Madre  del 
Sur,  Beginning  in  cape  Corrientes  it  runs  to  the  east-south-east,  through 
Michoacan,  Guerrero,  Oaxaca,  Tehuantepec,  and  Chiapas,  as  a  broad  range, 
slightly  concave  towards  the  north,  formed  of  very  ancient  rocks.  It  is, 
without  doubt,  the  most  important  trend-line  of  Mexico. 

A  section  drawn  from  Acapulco  to  Veracruz,  which  Bose  and  Aguilera 
laid  before  the  Geological  Congress  of  Paris  in  1900,  showed,  near  Acapulco, 
a  zone  of  gneiss  and  mica-schist,  about  70  kilometers  in  breadth,  then 
Cretaceous,  a  second  zone  of  gneiss,  then  lacustrine  Tertiary,  again  Creta- 
ceous, and  again  mica-schist ;  next  follow,  on  the  plateau  (2,000  meters  in 
height),  great  deposits  of  gypsum,  recent  eruptive  rocks,  in  particular 
andesite,  traces  of  plant-bearing  Trias,  then  once  more  gneisses,  some  of  them, 
perhaps,  fairly  recent ;  beyond  these,  near  Ocatlan,  granite,  and  again, 
finally,  Cretaceous. 

The  section  drawn  by  Felix  and  Lenk  from  Puerto  Angel,  in  Oaxaca, 
northwards  across  the  Sierra  de  Cimaltepec  and  Sierra  de  Ejutla,  gives 
a  very  great  breadth  to  the  southern  and  most  important  range;  the 
height  exceeds  3,000  meters  ^. 

The  Sierra  Madre  Occidental  is  thus  a  volcanic  tabular  range  which 
covers  almost  completely  a  folded  range  lying  beneath  it ;  it  makes  a  bend 

1  R.  Hill,  Science,  May  3,  1907,  new  ser.,  XXV,  pp.  710-712,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1893, 
3rd  ser.,  XLV,  pp.  307-324. 

^  E.  Bose,  Geologia  de  los  Alrededores  de  Orizaba,  Bol.  Inst.  geol.  Mex.,  no.  13,  1899, 
52  pp. ;  Ein  Profil  durch  den  Ostabfall  der  Sierra  Madre  Oriental  von  Mexico,  Zeitschr. 
deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1901,  pp.  173-201. 

'  Felix  und  Lenk,  Beitrag  zur  Geologie  und  Palaeontologie  der  Republik  Mexico, 
3  parts,  1889-1899,  II,  p.  1  et  seq.,  pi.  V. 


UO         THE  APPEAEANCE  OF  THE  ANDES      [part  v 


towards  the  Sierra  Madre  del  Sur.  The  Meseta  Central  is  a  broken-in 
folded  land,  of  much  the  same  type  as  the  Basin  ranges.  The  Sierra  Madre 
Oriental  is  formed  by  the  ends  of  the  folded  ranges  of  the  Meseta  Central. 
The  Sierra  Madre  del  Sur,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  broad,  gently  curved 
range  of  gneiss  and  other  ancient  rocks. 

In  front  of  the  Sierra  Madre  del  Sur  the  zone  of  recent  volcanos, 
70-100  kilometers  in  breadth,  runs  obliquely  across  Mexico.  Its  lavas  are 
andesites  and  basalts.  Its  ejectamenta  have  greatly  increased  the  height 
of  the  surrounding  country. 

Humboldt  believed  that  these  volcanos  had  been  built  up  over  a  trans- 
verse fissure.  Felix  and  Lenk,  who  travelled  through  Mexico  in  1888  and 
1889,  differ  from  Humboldt  in  so  far  as  they  assigned  to  a  cliff  which 
bounds  the  plateau  on  the  south,  from  the  west  almost  to  Popocatepetl, 
the  significance  of  a  fracture  or  fault ;  they  also  assumed  the  existence  of 
a  principal  line  of  volcanic  activity  running  to  the  east-south-east,  almost 
corresponding  with  this  cliff,  and  of  numerous  secondary  fissures,  which 
approaching  from  the  north  joined  it  more  or  less  at  right  angles.  Of  these 
secondary  fissures  two  are  more  important  than  the  rest,  one  running 
through  Tlamacos,  Tlaxcala,  Ixtaccihuatl,  and  Popocatepetl,  and  the  other 
from  Cofre  de  Perote  to  Pico  de  Orizaba  ^. 

It  has  been  objected  to  this  view  that  it  leaves  out  of  account  several 
great  volcanos  of  the  plateau  such  as  Malinche,  and  the  more  remote 
volcano  of  Tuxtla,  or  refers  them  to  secondary  fissures ;  while  Colima, 
Tancitaro,  Jorullo  and  others  lie  wholly  south  of  the  cliff.  Consequently 
Sapper,  in  1893,  assumed  the  existence  of  only  two  principal  lines,  a  longer 
one  on  the  north  running  from  the  volcano  de  San  Juan  in  Tepic  to  the 
volcano  of  Tuxtla,  and  a  shorter  one  on  the  south  running  from  the  Bufa 
to  J oruUo  ;  transverse  lines  he  dispensed  with  altogether  ^. 

Heilprin  discovered  in  1890  that  near  Orizaba  on  the  east,  past  Tehuacan 
to  the  south-east,  and  in  the  state  of  Morelos  on  the  west,  the  folded  Creta- 
ceous limestones  underly  the  volcanic  ejectamenta,  and  in  particular  the 
spurs  of  the  Pico  de  Orizaba  and  Popocatepetl ;  and  he  came  to  the  conclu- 
sion that  no  fault-scarp  exists,  but  that  the  volcanos  are  seated  on  the 
folded  Cretaceous  formation,  which  strikes  away  beneath  them^  Bose 
arrived  at  a  similar  result ;  according  to  his  representation  the  great 
volcanos  should  correspond  rather  with  the  strike  of  the  folded  Cretaceous 

*  Felix  und  Lenk,  op.  cit.,  I,  passim ;  also  Ueber  die  tektonisclien  Verhaltnisse  der 
Republik  Mexico,  Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1892,  pp.  303-323,  map;  Ueber  die 
mexicanische  Vulcanspalte,  op.  cit.,  1894,  pp.  678-681  ;  and  Bemerkungen  zur  Topo- 
graphic und  Geologic  von  Mexico,  op.  cit.,  1902,  pp.  426-446. 

C.  Sapper,  Ueber  die  raumliche  Anordnung  der  mexicanischen  Vulcane,  Zeitschr. 
deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1893,  pp.  574-577,  map. 

^  Heilprin,  Geology  and  Palaeontology  of  the  Cretaceous  Deposits  of  Mexico,  Proc. 
Acad.  Nat.  Sci.  Phil.,  1890,  pp.  463  et  seq. 


CH.XII]  POPOCATEPETL  Ul 

ranges  which  approach  the  Sierra  Madre  at  right  angles.  The  steepness  of 
the  slopes  has  usually  been  overestimated. 

Isolated  maare  occur,  in  connexion  with  which  no  fractures  are  visible. 
Nevertheless,  the  pdssibility  of  the  existence  of  fissures  is  not  denied.  In 
particular  the  transverse  line  which  terminates  in  Popocatepetl  is  cited  as 
an  example,  and  Bose  supposes  that  the  eruptive  activity  has  wandered 
southwards  along  this  line  from  Ixtaccihuatl  (4,800  meters)  through  an 
intermediate  crater  to  Popocatepetl  (5,425  meters).  'It  might  well  be 
described/  says  Bose,  '  as  a  volcano  with  a  travelling  crater 

Many  circumstances  combine  to  obscure  the  problem.  As  a  volcano 
increases  in  height,  so  does  the  extension  of  the  base,  and  with  this  the 
concealment  of  the  substructure.  A  zone,  100  kilometers  in  breadth,  and 
covered  out  of  sight,  affords  too  much  room  for  conjecture.  We  may  be 
content  for  the  present  with  the  general  fact  that  a  broad  zone  of  lofty 
volcanos  runs  across  Mexico. 

The  term  ^across'  is  certainly  correct  in  a  topographic  sense,  but  it 
would  be  more  difficult  to  show  that  it  also  holds  in  a  tectonic  sense.  The 
volcanic  zone  runs  fairly  parallel  with  the  Sierra  Madre  del  Sur.  Bose 
has  also  observed  this  fact.  The  gneiss  of  this  zone  strikes  to  the  west- 
north- west;  if  we  regard  cape  Corrientes  as  belonging  to  the  north-east 
border,  then  the  direction  lies  between  west  and  north.  The  prevailing 
strike  of  the  Cretaceous  folds  is  only  exceptionally,  as  at  Parras  and 
Mazapil,  west-north- west  to  west,  elsewhere  it  is  approximately  N.  30°- 
40°  W.  Bose  has  also  traced  these  folds  with  a  strike  to  N.  30°  W.  beneath 
the  spurs  of  the  Pico  de  Orizaba. 

Aguilera  and  Ordonez  conjectured  that  the  encounter  of  these  two  direc- 
tions of  strike  in  the  folding  was  one  cause  of  the  appearance  of  the  vol- 
canos 2.  These  distinguished  investigators  regard,  as  we  have  seen,  the  Sierra 
Madre  del  Sur  as  the  continuation  of  lower  California,  and  the  gulf  of  Cali- 
fornia as  the  continuation  of  the  valley  of  the  Sacramento,  and  they  justly 
bring  into  comparison  this  encounter  of  the  two  directions  of  strike,  and  an 
encounter  of  the  coast  ranges  with  the  Sierra  Nevada  and  the  Basin  ranges. 

This  strike  to  N.  30°  W.  is  indeed  continued  into  the  southern  Cretaceous 
mountains  near  Tehuacan,  as  may  be  seen,  for  example,  at  Cuernavaca  in 
Morelos.  At  the  same  time,  however,  there  are  unexpected  exceptions. 
Bose  observed  an  anticline  with  a  strike  of  N.  70°  W.  south  of  Orizaba,  and 
there  is  no  lack  of  further  examples  ^.  We  may  therefore  ask  whether  the 
'  E.  B6se,  Geologia  de  los  Alrededores  de  Orizaba,  Bol.  Inst.  geol.  Max.,  no.  13,  1899, 
pp.  1-53  ;  and  Sobre  la  independencia  de  log  volcanes  de  grietas  preexistentes,  Mem. 
Soc.  cient.  Ant.  Alzate,  1899,  XIV,  pp.  199-231,  in  particular  p.  219. 

2  Aguilera  and  Ordonez,  Bosquejo  Geologico  de  Mexico,  Bol.  Inst.  geol.  Max., 
nos.  4,  5,  6,  1897,  p.  63  ;  Ordonez,  Rhyolithas  de  Mexico,  op.  cit.,  nos.  U,  15,  1900  and 
1901,  I,  p.  56. 

^  E.  Bose,  Orizaba,  etc..  Boll.  Inst.  geol.  Mex.,  no.  13,  1899,  p.  22  ;  Coapa,  south 
of  Tehuacan,  N.  70°  W.,  Aguilera,  Bosquejo,  op.  cit.,  nos.  4,  5,  6,  1897,  p.  84;  Zapo- 


442         THE  APPEARANCE  OF  THE  ANDES     [part  v 


ends  of  the  Cretaceous  sierras  do  not  make  a  bend  in  the  direction  of  the 
Sierra  Madre  del  Sur,  and  Aguilera  s  description  of  the  neighbourhood  of 
Tehuacan,  where  Cretaceous  "and  mica  schist  meet  together  with  the  same 
strike,  appears  to  show  that  they  do.  In  general,  however,  the  fact  cannot 
be  overlooked  that  the  ancient  rocks  of  Mexico  are  covered  far  and  wide 
by  autochthonous  plant-bearing  Trias  and  various  stages  of  the  Cretaceous, 
and  that  they  therefore  represent  a  very  old  structure. 

However  this  may  be,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that,  from  the  interior 
down  to  the  Atlantic  coast,  nowhere  does  a  boundary  exist  between  the 
volcanic  masses  of  the  Sierra  Madre  Occidental  and  the  recent  volcanic 
zone.  The  ancient  rocks  of  lower  California  and  the  Sierra  Madre  del  Sur 
describe  an  arc  concave  to  the  north-east,  and  the  volcanos  describe  a 
similar  arc  from  Sonora  onwards,  with  this  difference,  that  those  of  the 
west  are  extinct.  In  the  direction  of  the  Sierra  Madre  del  Sur  and  the 
most  ancient  rocks,  the  volcanic  zone  is  thus  not  a  transverse  but  a  longi- 
tudinal line.  Whether  the  same  is  true  for  the  Cretaceous  sierras  must  be 
left  to  further  investigation  to  decide. 

It  is  a  striking  fact,  opposed  to  the  observations  made  in  Hokkaido,  and 
the  Aleutian  islands,  and  others  made  in  South  America  to  which  we 
shall  refer  later,  that  in  Mexico  no  intercalations  of  tuffs  are  mentioned 
as  occurring  in  the  older  sediments,  such  as  the  adjacent  Cretaceous,  for 
example. 

Stratified  mccession  of  the  Intermediate  range.  It  has  been  repeatedly 
observed  that  parts  of  the  Rocky  mountains  run  out  in  coulisses  directed 
towards  the  south-south-east,  and  that,  in  the  west,  coulisse-like  spurs 
advance  towards  the  north-west  into  the  Pacific  Ocean.  The  tectonic 
element,  which  we  have  provisionally  designated  the  Intermediate  range, 
first  makes  its  appearance  on  the  borders  of  the  Copper  river  plateau, 
beneath  the  lavas  of  the  south  side  of  the  Wrangell  volcanos  and  in 
the  Scolai  range.  In  the  Alexander  archipelago  the  characters  of  the 
forelying  Elias  range  disappear  and  the  Intermediate  range  then 
includes  the  Columbian  granodiorite  and  the  Interior  plateau.  It 
sinks  to  no  inconsiderable  extent  beneath  the  lavas  of  Washington  and 
Oregon,  makes  its  appearance  again,  with  the  same  characters,  on  the 
boundary  of  Oregon  and  Idaho,  embraces  in  Nevada  and  Utah  the  whole 
of  the  desert  region  from  the  Sierra  Nevada  to  the  Wahsatch,  and  in 

titlan  in  a  similar  position,  N.  60°  W.,  op.  cit.,  p.  89.  Even  in  the  Cerro  de  la  Virgen 
south  of  Tlaxiaco,  Orizaba,  already,  it  is  true,  in  the  region  of  the  gneiss  mountains, 
Neocomian  occurs  with  a  strike  to  N.  54°  E. ;  Felix  und  Lenk,  Beitrag  zur  Geologic  und 
Palaeontologie  der  Republik  Mexico,  III,  p.  141 ;  also  a  north-east  strike  in  the  first 
foothills  near  Jalapa ;  Heilprin,  Proc.  Acad.  Nat.  Sci.  Phil.,  1890,  p.  460  ;  also  a  north- 
cast  strike  near  Totimehuacan,  a  little  south  of  Pueblo,  and  an  east-and-west  strike  to  the 
north  of  this  locality  ;  Aguilera,  Bosquejo,  etc.,  p.  80  ;  and  Bose,  Guide  X®  Congr.  geol., 
no.  II,  passim. 


CH.  XII]  BOUNDAEY  OF  THE  INTEEMEDIATE  RANGE  443 


Arizona  and  southern  California  is  hemmed  in  between  the  Colorado  plateau 
and  the  Pacific  coast  chain,  possibly  indeed  interrupted  by  them.  South 
of  the  Colorado  plateau  it  again  reappears  and  is  very  broad,  extending 
eastwards  even  as  far  as  the  Pecos.  Its  folded  sierras  are  here  sharply 
separated  from  the  tablelands  of  Texas,  although  the  Cretaceous  limestone 
is  the  same  in  both.  It  then  occupies  the  whole  centre  of  Mexico  up  to  the 
Sierra  Madre  del  Sur,  and  finally,  after  the  strike  has  turned  out  of  the 
south  and  south-south-east  into  the  south-east,  reaches  the  Atlantic  coast 
between  lats.  19°  and  26°  N. 

The  Intermediate  range  has  this  character,  in  common  with  the  Cale- 
donides  and  the  Saharides,  that  its  long  folds  are  not  collected  into  a  main 
chain.  In  the  north,  so  far  as  any  direction  of  folding  is  perceptible,  they 
are  driven  towards  west  or  south-west,  and  in  lat.  49°  N.  this  movement 
may  apparently  be  recognized  even  in  the  most  westerly  parts  of  the  Rocky 
mountains.  In  the  Sierra  Nevada,  overfolding  towards  the  west- south- 
west still  occurs ;  from  the  north  of  Mexico  onwards  the  opposite  direction 
to  the  east  and  north-east  prevails  with  equal  clearness.  Strike-faults  cut 
through  the  structure,  which  is  thus  often  divided  into  long  strips,  or  often 
also  let  down  to  form  deep  troughs  (Owen's  valley,  Death  valley,  Bolson 
de  Mapimi).  Eruptive  rocks  crop  out  along  these  faults.  The  Intermediate 
range  includes  the  batholites  of  Idaho  and  the  Sierra  Nevada,  in  addition 
to  the  granodioritic  batholites  of  Columbia,  among  which  we  may  reckon 
the  whole  series  of  the  Cascade  range.  Its  stratified  succession  is  more 
complete  between  the  upper  Carboniferous  and  Cretaceous  than  in  the 
boundary  regions. 

The  eastern  boundary  seems  to  be  defined  in  the  north  by  the  gneiss 
masses  on  the  west  side  of  the  Rocky  mountains.  Further  south  it  is 
marked  by  the  scarp  of  the  Wahsatch  range  and  the  western  border  of  the 
Colorado  plateau. 

The  western  boundary  is  defined,  from  lat.  41°  39'  N.  onwards,  by  the 
crystalline  rocks  of  the  Pacific  coast  ranges  (Californian  coast  ranges, 
Lower  California,  Maria  islands,  Sierra  Madre  del  Sur). 

The  Intermediate  range  stretches  obliquely  across  the  whole  continent, 
from  the  Pacific  to  the  Atlantic  coast,  and  thus  affords  us  an  opportunity 
of  studying  the  relations  which  existed  at  a  comparatively  early  date 
between  the  two  Oceans. 

Even  in  the  extreme  north,  as  in  the  Nutzotin  range,  north  of  the 
Wrangell  group,  the  Nikolai  diabase  is  overlain  by  Fusulina  limestone  with 
Productus  cora,  and  then  by  marine  Permian,  and  the  upper  Carboniferous 
limestone  is  probably  present  throughout  the  whole  region  of  the  Inter- 
mediate range.  Nor  is  it  absent  from  the  constriction  of  Arizona.  It  is 
developed  to  a  great  thickness  in  the  southern  part  of  the  Central  plateau, 
and  also  in  the  sierras  of  the  Rio  Grande. 


444         THE  APPEAEANCE  OF  THE  ANDES     [paet  v 

In  Texas  the  window  of  the  Cretaceous  table-mountains  exposes  the 
upper  Carboniferous  and  the  Pacific  Permian,  in  part  marine,  which  dip 
gently  towards  the  west,  beneath  the  European  Cretaceous,  which  dips 
gently  towards  the  east.  The  red  beds  of  the  Permian  form  by  their  broad 
*  Plazas '  the  flat  watershed  between  the  Canadian  river  and  the  Pecos,  and 
enter,  charged  with  gypsum,  the  stratified  series  of  the  adjacent  sierras  of 
New  Mexico. 

We  can  hardly  suppose  that  the  Permian  of  Texas  has  received  its 
fauna  from  the  east ;  but  it  cannot  be  shown  that  a  connexion  existed  by 
way  of  the  Intermediate  range. 

The  marine  Trias  enters  this  region  from  the  north  as  a  very  broad  belt, 
reaches  the  Rocky  mountains,  and  even  extends  to  their  eastern  border. 
In  the  United  States  its  subdivision  and  distribution  have  been  investigated 
by  Perrin  Smith.  Here  it  extends  from  the  sea  towards  the  interior  as  far 
as  Idaho,  and  then  advances  with  a  wedge-shaped  outline  towards  the 
south.  Its  most  southerly  point  is  represented  by  a  doubtful  outcrop  in 
the  Santa  Anna  chain,  California  (lat.  33°-34!°  N.),  which  may  indicate  an 
encroachment  on  the  Coast  ranges ;  well-developed  Trias  is  known  to 
extend  as  far  as  Inyo  city  (lat.  36°  30-37°  30'  N.).  The  fauna  of  the  lower 
Trias  shows  an  affinity  with  that  of  the  Arcto-Pacific  regions,  the  middle 
Trias  contains  Arctic  and  Indo-European  forms.  The  fauna  of  the  upper 
Trias,  containing  numerous  European  species  of  the  Carnic  stage  (zone  of 
Tropites  subhullatus),  seems  to  indicate  an  Alpine-Indian  and,  in  particular, 
an  Alpine  origin.  Nevertheless,  Perrin  Smith  maintains  that,  in  view  of 
our  less  complete  knowledge  of  the  Indian  fauna,  an  Indian  origin  is  the 
more  probable.  This  receives  some  support  from  the  fact  that  a  large  part 
of  the  western  Mediterranean  is  surrounded  by  Trias  of  Germanic  type  ^. 

In  Zacatecas,  south  of  the  constriction  of  Arizona,  upper  Trias  makes 
its  appearance. 

Marine  deposits  of  Rhaetic  age  are  not  known  either  in  the  north  or 
south  of  the  Intermediate  range. 

Lias  is  mentioned  from  several  localities ;  in  Mexico  it  extends  from  the 
coast  inland  at  least  as  far  as  Quer^taro. 

Of  the  Jurassic,  the  Kelloway  stage  with  Macrocephalites  and  Cadoceras 
is  mentioned  as  occurring  in  Alaska,  and  indeed  in  Cook  inlet  and  Shelikov 
strait.  An  isolated  stage,  which  may  be  correlated  with  the  Gardioceras 
cordatum  zone  of  the  Oxfordian,  accomplishes  an  independent  transgression. 
W.  N.  Logan  has  prepared  a  map  showing  its  distribution  ^.    It  extends 

^  J.  P.  Smith,  The  Comparative  Stratigraphy  of  the  Marine  Trias  of  West  America, 
Proc.  Cal.  Acad.  Sci.,  1904,  3rd  ser.,  GeoL,  I,  no.  10,  pp.  323-412,  in  particular  pi.  XL  ; 
also  Fefltschrift  fiir  A.  von  Koenen,  8vo,  Stuttgart,  1907,  pp.  377-434  (Cretaceous  and 
Jurassic  are  also  discussed  here). 

2  W.  N.  Logan,  A  North  American  Epicontinental  Sea  of  Jurassic  age,  Journ.  Geol., 
1900,  VIII,  pp.  241-273,  in  particular  p.  245. 


CH.XII]        CEETACEOUS  OP  THE  PACIFIC 


445 


from  the  Pacific  Ocean  inland  down  Fuca  strait,  and  occupies  an  area  not 
wholly  unlike  that  of  the  Trias,  but  lying  further  towards  the  east  and 
stretching  across  the  Rocky  mountains.  This  region  extends  from  the 
middle  of  Oregon  eastwards  into  the  Black  Hills  of  Dakota,  and  to  the 
south  as  far  as  the  Santa  Clara  river  (south-west  Utah,  near  lat.  37°  N.). 
At  both  these  latter  localities  we  see  the  transgression  beginning  to  thin  out 
between  gypsif erous  and  other  sediments ;  here  the  boundary  is  not  far  off. 
In  the  Wahsatch,  gastropods  and  bivalves  characteristic  of  this  zone  are 
still  to  be  found  ^.  It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  this  independent  trans- 
gression has  evidently  come  from  the  north-north-west,  and  that  the  Rocky 
mountains  as  little  afforded  a  limit  to  it  as  to  the  Trias. 

The  most  important  and  peculiar  member  of  the  Jurassic  is  formed  by 
the  radiolarian  beds,  which  in  the  Californian  coast  ranges  lie  on  much 
older  rock,  and  by  the  Mariposa  beds  of  the  Sierra  Nevada,  which  are 
generally  correlated  with  them.  The  latter  are  the  equivalents  of  the 
upper  Jurassic  Aucella  beds  of  Russia. 

Let  us  now  turn  our  attention  to  the  Jurassic  in  Mexico. 

Middle  Jurassic  is  not  mentioned,  but  from  Oaxaca  to  the  Rio  Grande 
upper  Jurassic,  belonging  to  the  Kimeridge  and  Portland  stages,  borders 
the  Atlantic  coast.  It  extends  to  Durango,  and  on  the  Rio  Grande 
(Malone)  crosses  the  105th  meridian. 

Burckhardt's  studies  in  Mexico  and  the  Andes  have  shown  that  near 
Mazapil  (San  Luis  de  Potosi)  a  bed  with  the  Russian  Aucella  (probably  the 
continuation  of  the  Mariposa  beds  of  California)  is  inserted  between  the 
Kimeridge  beds  of  West  European  type,  and  that  a  Virgatites  is  still  met 
with  at  the  base  of  the  Portland — and  further,  that  even  east  of  the  pass  of 
Tinguiririca  in  the  Andes,  i.  e.  about  62  degrees  of  latitude  further  south, 
the  Russian  types  (Virgatites)  are  intercalated  in  homotaxial  horizons  of 
the  uppermost  part  of  the  Jurassic. 

In  the  Cretaceous  of  Mexico  it  is  possible  to  distinguish  a  Pacific  from 
an  Atlantic  region  even  still  more  clearly  than  in  the  upper  Jurassic. 

The  Pacific  region  does  not  depart  very  far  from  the  coast.  It  presents 
itself  in  Alaska,  Queen  Charlotte  islands,  Vancouver,  and  the  adjacent  part 
of  the  continent,  in  South  Oregon,  and  California.  The  stratified  succession 
begins  with  the  Neocomian  (Knoxville  stage,  Aucella  crassicollis).  Where 
the  lie  of  the  beds  is  known  in  detail  (south  side  of  the  Wrangell  volcanos, 
Queen  Charlotte  islands,  Californian  coast  ranges^)  an  unconformity 
separates  the  Neocomian  from  the  underlying  rocks. 

The  succeeding  stages  (Horsetown  and  Chico)  extend  in  transgression 
(except  in  Alaska,  where  they  are  so  far  only  known  as  plant-bearing  beds) 

V  Boutwell  and  Stanton,  Journ.  Geol.,  1907,  XV,  p.  454. 

^  For  Knoxwell  in  the  CaHfornian  Coast  Ranges,  see  T.  R.  Crandall,  The  Cretaceous 
Stratigraphy  of  the  Santa  Clara  Valley,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1907,  4th  ser.,  XXIV,  pp.  33-54. 


446         THE  APPEAEANCE  OF  THE  ANDES  [party 


across  and  beyond  the  Neocomian,  the  Chico  (Senonian)  travelling  the 
farthest.  Starting  from  the  Queen  Charlotte  islands  and  Vancouver,  the 
Cretaceous  advances  southwards  in  the  direction  of  Puget  sound,  and  as  it 
does  so  the  Japanese,  Indian,  and  European  species  of  the  upper  beds 
increase  in  number. 

Diller  and  Stanton  have  given  a  map  showing  the  distribution  of  these 
two  stages  in  the  southern  regions  ^.  The  Horsetown  group  makes  its  first 
encroachment  from  the  sea  into  Puget  sound,  the  next  from  the  mouth  of 
the  Columbia  river  nearly  up  to  cape  Blanco,  and  the  last  from  the  Klamath 
river  across  the  whole  length  of  the  Californian  Coast  ranges  to  Santa 
Barbara.  The  Chico  stage  extends  over  and  beyond  all  these  three  regions 
of  the  Horsetown  stage.  The  boundary  runs  from  Fuca  strait  inland  to  the 
middle  of  Oregon  and  beyond,  and  then  recedes  to  the  western  foot  of  the 
Sierra  Nevada,  which  it  then  follows  towards  the  south. 

The  Atlantic  region  of  the  Cretaceous  is  characterized  in  like  manner 
by  the  transgression  of  the  younger  stages.  The  series  is  most  complete  in 
Mexico ;  the  Neocomian  appears  to  extend  across  the  whole  breadth  of  the 
land  as  far  as  Sonora.  Then  follows  the  thick  mantle  of  middle  and 
upper  Cretaceous,  stretching  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific  Ocean.  In 
Coahuila  the  Rudistes  and  Actaeonella  facies  of  the  Gosau  occur  in  the 
lower  Senonian  from  Jamaica  onwards.  The  brackish- water  Laramie  stage 
coming  from  the  north-east  extends  over  Tamaulipas,  and  rests  in  North 
Coahuila  on  the  Gosau  beds. 

In  Texas  the  lower  horizons  are  only  represented  by  the  Trinity  sands 
with  the  Wealden  flora,  and  by  traces  of  the  Aptian  stage.  The  limestone 
plateaux  corrrespond  to  the  middle  and  upper  Cretaceous.  From  this  point 
onwards,  the  Cretaceous  transgression  extends  through  the  prairie  land 
towards  the  north  into  the  region  of  the  Mackenzie,  but  at  its  base  the 
Neocomian  and  Gault  are  absent.  After  the  sea  had  advanced  thus  far 
it  began  to  recede,  and  the  concentric  zones  of  Tertiary  sediments  on  the 
lowermost  course  of  the  Mississippi  mark  in  succession  the  stages  of  its 
retreat. 

The  lower  Potomac  flora,  which  has  been  traced  along  the  Atlantic 
litoral  from  Maryland  into  western  Canada — its  traces  possibly  accom- 
panying the  Cretaceous  coal  series  even  beyond  cape  Lisburne  on  the 
Arctic  Ocean — is  contemporaneous  with  the  negative  phase  indicated  by 
the  Cyrena  marls  and  the  flora  of  the  Wealden,  from  the  Vistula  out  to 
the  Atlantic  coasts  of  Europe. 

Of  all  the  stages  of  the  Cretaceous,  only  the  Senonian  reaches  this 
coastal  belt  in  Maryland,  and  in  the  same  way  it  alone  reaches  Greenland, 
and  in  the  far  east  it  alone  extends  across  the  sea  of  Aral  and  beyond. 

This  picture  of  the  way  in  which  the  two  processes  mentioned  above, 

»  Diller  and  Stanton,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1894,  V,  p.  454. 


CH.XII]         UNEEPEESENTED  PALAEOZOIC  447 


and  the  ancient  shores  in  general,  ultimately  encroach  on  one  another, 
incomplete  as  it  is,  enables  us  to  form  some  conception  of  the  manner  in 
which  a  continent  gradually  acquires  continuity.  At  the  same  time  the 
Intermediate  range  appears  as  a  tectonic  element  of  a  peculiar  kind,  it 
seems  rather  a  region  of  subsidence  and  repeated  submergence  than  a 
simple  chain.  We  might  attempt  a  comparison  with  the  Tethys;  the 
Mesozoic  faunas  of  that  sea  extend  with  wonderful  uniformity  from 
southern  and  central  Europe  to  the  Sunda  islands,  while  the  Intermediate 
range,  uniting  Arcto- Pacific  and  sub- tropical- Atlantic  regions,  brings  together 
alien  elements,  and  was  probably  interrupted  for  a  time  in  the  constriction 
of  Arizona. 

Many  years  ago,  the  great  botanist  Asa  Gray  pointed  out  that  the 
migrations  of  floras  and  land-faunas  due  to  climate  are  more  easily 
observed  in  North  America  than  in  Europe,  because  the  mountains  and 
rivers  of  that  continent,  and  with  them  the  paths  of  migration,  maintain 
a  north  and  south  direction,  while  the  Alps  run  east  and  west.  The  case 
is  not  unlike,  and  we  may  hope  for  further  light  on  the  true  nature  of  the 
Mesozoic  stages. 

Finally,  it  may  be  pointed  out  that  from  the  beginning  of  the  Calif or- 
nian  coast  ranges  onwards,  through  all  their  continuations  and  through 
the  whole  of  the  Sierra  Madre  del  Sur  down  to  the  Atlantic  coast,  there  is  no 
recorded  instance,  save  for  a  statement  referring  to  Sonora,  of  the  occurrence 
of  thick  Palaeozoic  sediments  on  the  east.  From  its  commencement  to  its 
close  the  Palaeozoic  aera  is  only  represented  by  the  rare  occurrence  of  the 
upper  Carboniferous,  and  in  many  cases  only  Mesozoic  sediments  abut 
against  the  crystalline  rocks.  The  significance  of  this  character,  although 
merely  negative,  is  enhanced  by  the  fact  that  the  beds  sometimes  occur  in 
autochthonous  superposition — the  Bronces  stage  for  example,  which  lies 
autochthonous  on  crystalline  rocks. 

The  data  so  far  at  our  disposal  show  that  the  thick  lower  Palaeozoic 
series  of  the  east  terminates  suddenly  in  the  midst  of  the  Basin  ranges 
near  long.  117°  W.  (I,  p.  579).  It  then  advances  towards  the  Mohave  desert, 
and  Devonian  is  said  to  occur  even  in  the  Klamath  mountains. 


448 


CHAPTER  XIII 

THE  SYSTEM  OP  THE  ANDES;  ITS  TWOFOLD 

ADVANCE 

Chiapas,  Guatemala,  Honduras.  The  volcanos.  Panama.  First  advance.  Backward 
bend  towards  South  America.  Ecuador,  Peru.  Cordillera  Real,  Argentine  Chains. 
Cordillera  de  los  Andes  and  Cordillera  de  la  Costa.  Sierra  de  la  Ventana.  Patagonia. 
Second  advance.  Summary. 

Chiapas,  Guatemala,  Honduras.  The  States  of  Chiapas,  Tabasco,  and 
Yucatan,  as  defined  by  their  political  boundary,  still  belong  to  Mexico  ;  but 
the  continuity  in  structure  of  Central  America  will  be  more  plainly  exhibited 
if  we  consider  these  regions  in  connexion  with  the  south. 

We  have  already  seen  that  a  mountain  chain  runs  through  Guatemala 
in  the  direction  of  the  Rio  Motagua,  reaches  the  sea  on  the  golfe  Dolce, 
as  well  as  near  Omoa,  and  proceeds  into  the  Antilles.  We  have  also  recog- 
nized a  three-fold  division  of  the  Antilles  into  an  inner  volcanic  arc; 
a  middle  arc,  mountainous  and  rocky,  and  an  outer  arc,  formed  of  Tertiary 
or  still  younger  sediments.  In  our  first  account  we  were  led,  however,  to 
conclude  from  the  data  then  at  our  disposal  that  the  mountain  land  of 
Mexico  ended  in  Oaxaca  and  that  a  new  order  of  things  began  south  of  the 
isthmus  of  Tehuantepec  (I,  p.  543). 

The  interruption  caused  by  Tehuantepec  is  only  an  interruption  in  an 
orographic  sense.  Only  a  few  years  after  the  appearance  of  our  first 
account,  Herr  Sapper,  who  has  since  done  such  excellent  work  in  the 
investigation  of  Central  America,  was  able  to  send  me  information  from 
Coban  that  the  ancient  rocks  of  the  Mexican  Sierra  Madre  del  Sur  extend 
from  Oaxaca  through  Tehuantepec  and  Chiapas  into  the  mountains  of 
Guatemala  ^ 

From  Bose's  description  of  Tehuantepec  we  obtain  the  following  ^ : — 
The  lowest  pass  across  the  isthmus  lies  at  244  meters.    From  the  west, 
i.  e.  from  Oaxaca,  and  from  the  east,  i.  e.  from  Chiapas,  the  Sierra  Madre 

*  A  detailed  account  was  published  in  C.  Sapper,  Sobre  la  geografia  fisica  y  la 
geologia  de  la  Peninsula  de  Yucatan,  de  Chiapas  y  Tabasco,  Bol.  Inst.  geol.  Mex.,  1896, 
no.  3,  57  pp.,  maps. 

*  M.  Bose,  Resena  de  la  geologia  de  Chiapas  y  Tabasco,  Bol.  Inst.  geol.  Mex.,  1905, 
no.  20,  116  pp.,  maps,  and  Guide  X«  Congr.  geol.,  1906,  XXXI ;  Excursion  a  I'lsthme  de 
Tehuantepec,  40  pp. ;  also  G.  W.  von  Zahn,  Isthmus  von  Tehuantepec,  Zeitschr.  Ges. 
Erdk.,  1907,  pp.  321-333  and  361-373,  map. 


CH.  xm]  TEHUANTEPEC.  CHIAPAS 


449 


gradually  sinks  from  considerable  heights  down  to  this  side.  Mountains 
rising  to  600  or  700  meters  form  the  highest  parts  of  the  isthmus.  Gneiss, 
ancient  schists,  crystalline  limestone,  granite,  and  porphyry  form,  from  the 
south  coast  onwards,  a  more  elevated  strip  of  land,  about  90  kilometers  in 
breadth.  It  is  accompanied  by  folded  Rudistes  limestone.  Towards  the 
north  follow  slightly- folded  Tertiary  beds,  and  then  we  reach  the  Atlantic 
plain. 

The  same  Sierra  Madre,  which  forms  a  hilly  region  in  Tehuantepec, 
accompanies  the  south  coast  of  Chiapas  with  a  strike  to  east-south-east, 
and  before  it  reaches  the  boundary  of  Guatemala  its  granite  summits  have 
already  reached  heights  of  2,200  meters.  The  structure  of  Chiapas  presents, 
according  to  Sapper  and  Bose,  the  following  features  : — 

Lying,  in  the  south-east,  against  the  north  side  of  the  ancient  rocks  of 
the  Sierra  Madre  is  a  large  segment  of  folded  red  sandstone  and  upper  Car- 
boniferous. This  is  followed  throughout  the  length  of  the  range  by  a  zone 
of  sandstone  and  conglomerate  (Sapper's  stage  of  Todos  Santos),  resting 
in  some  places  on  upper  Carboniferous,  in  others  directly  on  pre-Cambrian 
rocks.  It  is  probably  the  equivalent  of  the  plant-bearing  series  of  the 
Trias,  which  occurs,  similarly  superposed,  both  in  Mexico  (Bumble's  Barranca 
stage)  and  in  Honduras.  The  beds  dip  towards  the  north,  but  are  not 
folded. 

We  now  reach,  towards  the  north,  a  broad  and  lofty  range  of  Cretaceous 
limestone,  the  Meseta  central,  the  southern  part  of  which  has  been  affected 
by  a  considerable  longitudinal  disturbance,  the  Depresion  central.  Accord- 
ing to  the  admirable  description  of  Bose,  it  resembles  a  strike- trough. 
The  southern  part  of  the  limestone  range,  together  with  the  *  Depresi6n ', 
lies  not  far  above  the  sea-level,  and  Tertiary  beds  now  make  their  appear- 
ance. On  its  northern  border  the  Meseta  attains  a  height  of  over  2,000 
meters,  rising  in  steep  steps,  which  might  be  regarded  as  so  many  step- 
faults.  The  north  border  of  the  Meseta  is  also  steep,  and  in  front  of  it 
blocks  of  Cretaceous  limestone  project  out  of  folded  Tertiary  land.  The 
fact  that  this  is  folded,  while  the  Cretaceous  limestone  is  horizontal,  is 
ascribed  by  Bose,  and  no  doubt  correctly,  to  the  comparatively  yielding 
nature  of  the  Tertiary  beds.  Towards  the  sea  they  lie  flat;  in  their 
southern  part  Nummulite-bearing  Eocene  occurs. 

Both  Sapper  and  Bose  have  observed  isolated  patches  of  marine  upper 
Tertiary  beds  up  to  the  astonishing  height  of  2,400  meters.  We  must 
therefore  suppose  that  the  whole  of  this  limestone  range  was  arched  up  at 
a  comparatively  late  period  and  then  let  down  along  step-faults. 

To  the  east,  a  second  limestone  range,  which  extends  to  Pet^n  in  Guate- 
mala, makes  its  appearance  north  of  the  folded  Tertiary  land,  between  this 
and  the  Atlantic  plain. 

On  this  substructure  of  Chiapas  volcanos  are  seated.    The  volcano  of 

SOliLAS  IV  Gr  g 


450  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [party 


Soconusco,  said  to  be  situated  in  lat.  15°  54' N.,  long.  93°  39'  W.,  does  not 
exist. 

Zontehuitz  (long.  92°  42'  W.,  2,858  meters)  is  the  ruins  of  an  andesitie 
volcano,  superposed  on  the  lofty  Cretaceous  mesa ;  beside  it  and  similar  to 
it  rises  the  Cerro  de  Hueytepec,  and  other  andesitie  extrusions  occur.  Bose 
makes  the  interesting  suggestion  that  the  Depresidn  central  corresponds  to 
the  lake  of  Nicaragua,  that  Zontehuitz  and  Hueytepec  stood  on  its  north- 
west border,  and  that  the  once  existent  volcanos  of  San  Bartolom^  and 
Mispilla  arose  out  of  the  lake  ^. 

The  volcano  of  Tacand^  on  the  south-eastern  boundary  (long.  92°  6'  W., 
4,057  meters),  is  seated  on  the  Sierra  Madre  ;  up  to  a  height  of  2,200  meters 
the  mountain  consists  of  ancient  granite,  and  the  magnitude  of  its  cone 
has  therefore  been  overstated,  and  the  same  is  the  case  with  some  of  the 
most  northerly  volcanos  of  the  Cascade  range.  Tacana  is  supposed  to  be 
the  most  north-westerly  member  of  the  long  line  of  Central  American 
volcanos. 

It  would  further  appear  from  Sapper's  works  that  the  whole  of  this 
region,  as  far  at  least  as  Costa  Rica,  is  occupied  by  a  virgation,  or  a  serial 
succession  of  concave  chains,  along  which  or  in  which  the  volcanic  lines  of 
Central  America  range  themselves  in  more  or  less  the  same  direction  ^. 

Before  a  general  survey  of  these  chains  is  attempted  two  localities  must 
be  discussed  separately ;  the  first  of  these  certainly  conforms  to  the  general 
structure,  while  the  second  is  of  an  alien  character. 

The  first  comprises  the  Cockscomb  mmintains  in  British  Honduras, 
a  wooded  hill-land,  surrounded  on  the  east  by  the  sea,  and  elsewhere  by 
a  plain,  as  much  as  1,000  meters  in  height,  rhomboid  in  outline,  70  kilometers 
broad,  and  90  kilometers  long.  The  range  consists  of  granite  and  quartz- 
porphyry,  clay- slate,  quartzite,  and  crinoidal  Carboniferous  limestone,  with 
a  strike  between  north-east  and  east.    Sapper  regards  it  as  a  horst  ^. 

The  second  locality  is  the  Isla  de  Finos,  lying  south  of  western  Cuba. 
Granular  marble  and  garnetiferous  mica-schist  occur  with  a  north-and- 
south  strike.    According  to  W.  Hayes  and  his  fellow-workers  the  rocks  are 

*  Bose,  Resena,  etc.,  p.  62. 

^  The  conception  of  the  general  structure  on  which  this  description  is  based)  is  not 
in  accord  with  that  which  Sapper  has  represented  in  Bericht  iiber  den  VIII.  Geogr. 
Congress,  1904,  pp.  231-238  (with  map  of  the  trend-lines).  Guided  by  the  Eurasiatic 
examples,  Sapper  supposes  that  the  mountain  arcs  of  Central  America  must  also  be 
convex  towards  the  exterior.  Thus  the  brow  of  the  Sierra  Madre  would  be  turned 
towards  the  Pacific  side.  We  have  assumed  that  these  arcs  have  a  concave  structure 
somewhat  like  the  southern  Appalachians.  This  is  supported  in  particular  by  the 
arrangement  of  the  rocks.  The  ancient  rocks  lie  in  Chiapas,  for  example,  on  the  Pacific 
side. 

3  Sapper,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1899,  Erganzungsheft  no.  127,  pp.  23-83  and  73  ;  also 
Bellamy,  Proc.  Geogr.  Soc,  1889,  p.  542  et  seq. 


CH.  XIII]  SIEERAS  OF  GUATEMALA 


451 


thrown  into  sharp  folds,  inclined  to  the  east,  and  repeated  by  imbricate 
structure  (possibly  also  by  north-and-south  step-faults).  Both  the  strike 
and  the  nature  of  the  rocks  stand  in  contrast  to  the  adjacent  parts  of 
Cuba^ 

If  we  disregard  these  two  localities,  and  endeavour  to  discover  the 
principal  lines  on  the  basis  of  Sapper's  observations,  we  are  led  to  results 
which  agree  very  well  as  regards  the  region  east  of  Tehuantepec  with  the 
earlier  conjectures  of  Seebach  (I,  p.  543)  2, 

The  Sierra  Madre  runs  from  the  south  of  Chiapas  to  the  east-south-east 
and  east  into  the  region  between  the  towns  of  Guatemala  and  Coban.  It 
is  known  there  as  the  Sierra  de  las  Minas,  and  attains  a  height  of  about 
3,000  meters.  Thence  it  bends  round  towards  the  east-north-east,  becomes 
narrower,  and  is  now  known  as  the  Sierra  del  Mico.  It  disappears  north 
of  the  mouth  of  the  Rio  Motagua. 

On  the  north  side  of  the  Sierra  de  las  Minas  lies  a  zone  of  folded 
sediments;  the  presence  of  upper  Carboniferous,  Cretaceous,  and  several 
stages  of  the  Tertiary  is  shown  by  fossils.  The  range  appears  to  be  let 
down  along  longitudinal  faults  against  the  foreland.  The  foreland  also 
is  traversed  by  long  step-faults,  particularly  towards  Petdn  (west  of  the 
Cockscomb  mountains).  Only  a  part  of  the  Tertiary  deposits  is  involved 
in  the  folding ;  the  rest  forms,  along  with  more  recent  sediments,  the  plain 
of  Tabasco,  Campeche,  and  Yucatan. 

On  the  north  side  of  the  Sierra  de  las  Minas  and  the  Sierra  del  Mico, 
Sapper  observed  a  band  of  serpentine  which  reaches  the  Golf o  Dolce ;  the 
south  side  of  the  range  is  also  accompanied  by  a  band  of  serpentine 
which  extends  in  the  longitudinal  valley  of  the  Motagua  for  a  distance  of 
225  kilometers.  It  is  regarded  as  younger  than  the  upper  Carboniferous 
and  older  than  the  middle  Cretaceous. 

South  of  the  Motagua,  a  parallel  chain  of  pre-Cambrian  rocks,  the  Sierra 
del  Espiritu  Santo,  rises  gradually  in  its  course  from  the  town  of  Guatemala 
onwards.    On  the  sea  coast  it  is  known  as  the  Sierra  Ocoa.    It  passes 

1  C.  Willard  Hayes,  T.  W.  Vaughan,  and  A.  C.  Spencer,  Geological  Reconnaissance  of 
Cuba,  8vo,  Washington,  1902,  123  pp.,  maps.  Some  data  certainly  lead  us  to  conjecture 
the  presence  of  similar  rocks  in  the  extreme  west  of  Cuba  ;  cf.  R.  A.  de  Yarza,  Bol.  Mapa 
geol.  Espana,  1895,  XX,  p.  72. 

2  For  Guatemala:  Sapper,  Grundziige  der  physischen  Geographic  von  Guatemala, 
Peterm.  Mitth.,  1894,  Erganzungsheft  no.  113, 59  pp.,  maps ;  Geografia  fisica  . .  .  de  Guate- 
mala, small  8vo,  Blblioteca  del  '  Progreso  Nacional '  de  Guatemala,  1897,  88  pp.,  and 
Die  Alta  Verapaz,  Mitth.  geogr.  Ges.  Hamburg,  1902,  XVII,  146  pp.,  maps.  For  Honduras, 
Beitrage  zur  physischen  Geographic  von  Honduras,  Zeitschr.  Ges.  Erdk.  BerHn,  1902, 
pp.  33-241,  maps  ;  for  the  entire  region  and  for  more  southerly  tracts,  Gebirgsbau  und 
Boden  des  nordlichen  Mittel-America,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1899,  Erg.-Heft  no.  127,  199  pp., 
maps,  and  Gebirgsbau  und  Boden  des  siidlichen  Mittel-America,  op.  cit.,  1905,  Erg.-Heft 
no.  151,  82  pp.,  maps ;  also  Verh.  Ges.  Erdk.  Berlin,  1900,  pp.  417-426  (with  a  map  of 
the  trend-lines  as  far  as  Panama). 

G  g  a 


452  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [part  v 


through  Puerto  Cortez  and  is  continued  in  the  elongated  islands  of  Utila 
(only  Quaternary  and  basalt),  Ruatan  (mica-schist,  strike  east-north-east) 
and  Bonaca  (phyllite,  serpentine)  ^. 

Serpentine  is  known  to  form  a  considerable  part  of  the  mountains  of 
Cuba,  and  it  occurs  also  in  Haiti  (I,  p.  543). 

The  whole  of  the  south  and  south-east  of  Guatemala  and  the  whole  of 
Salvador,  as  far  as  the  Terra  caliente  of  the  coastal  belt,  are  occupied  by 
the  recent  volcanos  and  their  accumulations ;  towards  the  east,  however,  in 
Honduras,  more  or  less  continuous  fragments  of  folded  chains  crop  out, 
which  present  an  arcuate  form  like  those  of  Guatemala,  but  trend  more  to 
the  east. 

A  conspicuous  line  of  depression  divides  Honduras,  in  the  meridian 
of  87°  45'  W.,  into  an  eastern  and  a  western  half ;  it  does  not,  however, 
seem  to  be  connected  with  the  strike  of  the  chains.  Among  the  latter  the 
Sierra  de  Pija  (Congrehoy  Peak  or  Cerro  Cangrejal,  2,450  meters)  is 
especially  prominent ;  it  borders  the  coast,  south  of  the  island  of  Ruatan, 
as  far  as  long.  86°  W.  and  beyond.  It  is  formed  in  great  part  of  ancient 
eruptive  rock.  South  of  this  locality  we  meet  continually  with  granite, 
ancient  schist,  quartzite,  and  Cretaceous  limestone  striking  east  with  a  little 
north  or  due  east.  In  the  ore-bearing  Sierrja  de  Juancito  (north  of 
Tegucigalpa),  Carboniferous  limestone  is  recorded,  and  from  this  range  the 
oft-mentioned  Rhaetic  (or  Keuper)  flora  is  derived  2. 

Traces  of  a  more  considerable  sierra  appear  to  strike  from  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Ocotal  towards  Gracias  a  Dios.  All  these  sierras,  however, 
are  much  lower  than  the  Sierra  de  Pija  or  the  chains  of  Guatemala,  and 
disappear  in  Nicaragua  before  reaching  the  Mosquito  coast  ^. 

The  volcanos.  In  Mexico  the  older  volcanic  coverings  of  the  Sierra 
Madre  Occidental  meet  the  broad  belt  of  recent  volcanos,  which  accompany 
the  northern  part  of  the  Sierra  Madre  del  Sur.  Then  the  volcano  of  Tuxtla 
stands  forth  towards  the  east-south-east,  and  thus  we  have  the  rare  case  of 
a  volcano  on  the  east  coast  of  America.  Still  further  to  the  east- south- 
east, but  in  the  interior  of  the  land,  the  little  series  of  extinct  volcanos, 
such  as  Zontehuitz,  rises  like  a  connecting  link  in  central  Chiapas.  Further 

1  Sapper,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  Erg.-Heft  no.  151,  p.  17. 

«  Newberry,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1888,  3rd  ser.,  XXXVI,  pp.  342-351 ;  A.  J.  Bourdariat, 
Esquisse  geologique  et  minerale  du  district  aurifere  de  S.  Cruz,  Honduras,  Bull.  Soc. 
geol.  Beige,  1893,  VII,  Memoires,  pp.  35-40. 

^  This  brief  description  differs  somewhat  from  that  which  Mierisch  has  given  of 
Nicaragua ;  it  is  based  on  Sapper's  publications,  and  letters  which  he  has  kindly  sent 
me.  B.  Mierisch,  Goldgebiete  im  Ostenvon  Nicaragua,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1893,  pp.  25-39, 
map  ;  and  Reise  quer  durch  Nicaragua  vom  Managua-See  bisCabo  Gracias  a  Dios,  op.  cit., 
1895,  pp.  57-66,  map.  Still  greater  is  the  difference  from  that  of  Crawford,  Geology  of 
Nicaragua,  Proc.  Am.  Assoc.  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  held  at  Washington  1891, 
Salem,  1892.  pp.  261-270. 


CH.  XIIl] 


VOLCANOS  OF  CENTRAL  AMEEICA 


453 


again  to  the  south-east,  and  still  more  remote  from  the  Atlantic  coast,  the 
granite  of  the  Sierra  Madre  supports  the  cone  of  Tacana,  already  mentioned, 
which  marks  the  commencement  of  the  long  zone  of  Central  American 
volcanos. 

This  zone  follows  the  Pacific  coast,  without  any  marked  deviation  from 
the  strike  of  the  sierras,  as  far  as  Fonseca  bay,  and  then  enters,  with 
a  slight  change  of  direction,  the  great  area  of  depression,  marked  by  the 
lake  of  Nicaragua,  which  cuts  obliquely  through  the  whole  continent. 
Then,  further  towards  the  south-east  and  also  further  inland,  volcanos 
again  appear  up  to  the  isolated  volcano  of  Chiriqui. 

Our  earlier  views  as  to  the  distribution  of  these  volcanos  (I,  p.  86), 
founded  on  the  work  of  DoUfuss  and  Montserrat,  must,  in  the  light  of 
more  recent  investigation,  and  especially  that  of  Sapper,  undergo  a 
change^. 

From  Tacana  onwards  Sapper  enumerates  81  considerable  cones  in 
this  zone,  44  of  which  have  been  active  in  recent  times. 

This  zone  of  fire,  narrow  as  we  see  it,  is  surrounded  by  andesitic  rocks. 
Between  lats.  89°  30'  and  90°  N.,  where  we  previously  (I,  p.  93,  fig.  5) 
marked  the  transverse  fissure  of  Chiquimula,  there  stand,  as  we  now  know, 
numerous  eruptive  centres  irregularly  disposed ;  the  active  volcano  of 
Jalapa  rises  one  degree  to  the  north  of  the  main  line,  elsewhere  so  sharply 
marked.  Cerro  Errapuca  (2,500  meters),  and  Cerro  Selaque  (2,800  meters), 
two  extinct  cones,  which  dominate  the  scene  in  south-west  Honduras,  lie 
equally  far  north  of  the  main  line.  In  the  andesite  region  of  the  upper 
Vulvul,  on  the  south-east  side  of  the  Cerro  del  Trapiche  (east  of  Matagalpa, 
lat.  13°  N.,  long.  85°  15'  W.),  Mierisch  thought  he  perceived  still  other 
craters  ^.  Tertiary  lavas  are  known  at  not  a  few  localities.  Extinct  erup- 
tive centres  will  certainly  be  discovered  to  the  north  of  the  existing  belt 
of  fire,  and  this  preliminary  survey  leads  us,  as  in  Kamchatka  and  Alaska, 
to  the  conclusion  that  the  existing  line  of  igneous  manifestation  is  but  the 
hemmedrin  remainder  of  a  once  much  more  widely  distributed  eruptive 
activity. 

Sapper  thinks  that  the  existing  line  should  be  divided  into  several 

^  Sapper,  Raumliclie  Anordnung  der  mittelamerikanischen  Vulcane,  Zeitschr.  deutsch. 
geol.  Ges.,  1897,  pp.  672-682,  pi.  XXIV  (here  another  lateral  line  is  marked  running 
south-east  from  San  Diego  towards  San  Vicente.  I  have  not  included  it  in  the 
enumeration  given  above,  because  it  is  precisely  here,  and  as  far  as  lat.  89°,  that  the 
eeries  appears  to  me  to  be  less  clearly  marked).  Numerous  descriptions  by  the  same 
author  in  Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1896,  pp.  14-26  (San  Salvador) ;  1899,  pp.  578-587 
(Las  Pilas) ;  1901  (southernmost  volcanos) ;  in  Centralbl.  f.  Min.,  1903,  pp.  33-52  (Santa 
Maria)  and  pp.  103-130  (Izalco);  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1894,  pp.  82-85  (types  of  crater) ;  1895, 
pp.  105-109, Guatemala;  1897, pp.  1-7  (Salvador  and  south-east  Guatemala) ;  also.  In  den 
Vulcangebieten  Mittel-Americas  und  West-Indiens,  8vo,  Stuttgart,  1905,  334  pp. 

^  Mierisch,  Goldgebiete  im  Osten  von  Nicaragua,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1895,  p.  62. 


454  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [paetv 


alternating  segments,  each  of  which,  as  it  follows  on  the  south-east,  is 
displaced  over  a  certain  distance  towards  the  one  in  front  of  it. 

The  first  segment  extends,  according  to  this  view,  from  Tacana 
(long.  92°  6'  W.)  to  Tajamulco  (long.  91°  54'  W.) ;  the  second  from  Lacandon 
(long.  91'  42'  50''  W.)  to  Pacaja  (long.  90°  36'  W.) ;  the  third  from  Tecuam- 
buro  (long.  90°  26'  W.)  to  Conchagua  (long.  87°  50'  W.) ;  the  fourth  extends 
towards  a  short  transverse  fissure  in  the  interior  of  Fonseca  bay,  from 
Coseguina  (long.  87°  35'  W.)  to  the  island  of  Madera  in  the  lake  of  Nicaragua 
(long.  85°  27'  30"  W.) ;  the  fifth  from  Orosi  (long.  85°  29'  W.)  to  Turri- 
alba  (long.  83°49'W.),  and  after  a  considerable  interruption  to  Chiriqui 
(long.  82°  30' W.). 

Although  this  division,  like  any  other  of  the  same  kind,  is  to  a  certain 
extent  a  matter  of  personal  judgment,  yet  it  cannot  be  denied  that,  with 
the  exception  of  the  region  between  long.  89°  30'  and  90°  W.,  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  active  volcanos  in  series  is  much  more  marked  than — for 
example — in  Mexico. 

The  volcanos  of  the  first,  second,  and  third  segments,  that  is  those 
occurring  as  far  as  Fonseca  bay,  are  seated  on  a  lofty  substructure,  formed 
chiefly  of  andesite,  in  which  parts  of  a  folded  sierra  are  visible  here  and 
there.  All  that  was  previously  said  as  to  the  tendency  of  the  eruptive 
centre  to  move  towards  the  Pacific  Ocean  holds  true  in  reference  to 
these  volcanos,  and  in  particular  to  those  on  the  north.  A  more  exact 
knowledge  of  the  alleged  transverse  fissure  of  Chiquimulu  necessarily  gave 
rise  to  doubt.  Nevertheless,  the  statements  previously  made  with  regard 
to  the  shorter  lines  still  hold  good;  the  line  from  Santa  Maria  to  Cerro 
Quemado,  which  was  then  regarded  as  the  sole  exception — since  the  crater 
active  upon  it  was  the  one  more  remote  from  the  sea — has  now  conformed 
to  the  rule,  for  in  October,  1902,  an  eruption  occurred  from  the  other 
crater,  that  of  Santa  Maria,  which  lies  next  the  sea.  During  this  eruption 
numerous  boulders  of  amphibolite  were  ejected,  showing  that  the  chimney 
in  the  mountains  beneath  had  been  enlarged  or  otherwise  altered  \ 

The  fourth  segment,  extending  from  Coseguina  to  Madera,  is  supposed 
by  Sapper  and  Mierisch  to  lie  in  a  fault-trough.  These  distinguished  inves- 
tigators have  been  led  to  give  renewed  expression  to  this  view,  owing  to 
the  growing  belief  that  the  volcano  of  Momotombo,  situated  at  the  north- 
western extremity  of  the  lake  of  Managua,  was  the  cause  of  the  earthquake 
of  the  29th  April,  1898 ;  they  showed  that  the  earthquake  was,  on  the 
contrary,  of  tectonic  origin  ^. 

Willard  Hayes,  in  making  investigations  preliminary  to  the  construc- 
tion of  an  inter-Oceanic  canal  through  lake  Nicaragua,  ascertained  that 

*  Sapper,  Centralbl.  f.  Min.,  1903,  p.  39  ;  Bergeat  says  amphibolite. 
^  K.  Sapper,  Das  nicaraguische  Erdbeben  vom  29.  April  1898  und  die  Maribios- 
Vulcane,  Globus,  1899,  LXXV,  pp.  201-208  and  222-227,  in  particular  p.  226. 


CH.  XIII]         LAKE  NICAKAGUA.    PANAMA  455 

a  part  of  the  isthmus  which  closes  the  lake  on  the  west  consists  of  the 
Orbitoides  (Lepidocyclina)  beds,  which  are  so  widely  distributed  in  the 
West  Indies.  They  are  known  here  as  the  Brito  formation.  Thus,  the 
existence  of  a  connexion  between  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  region  in 
the  Tertiary  aera  is  placed  beyond  doubt.  The  Brito  beds  are  moderately 
folded ;  their  strike  is  directed  a  little  more  to  the  west  than  the  trend 
of  the  coast.  They  are  covered  by  recent  lavas,  and  these,  according  to 
Hayes,  have  built  up  the  rest  of  the  great  dam  throughout  its  whole  extent 
towards  the  north-west  as  far  as  mount  Coseguina,  thus  cutting  off  from 
the  Pacific  Ocean  a  gulf  which  once  extended  from  Fonseca  bay  into  the 
existing  lakes  of  Managua  and  Nicaragua.  When  the  inland  seas  were 
closed  in,  their  waters  rose  to  such  a  height  that  they  overflowed  the  lip 
next  the  San  Juan  and  opened  up  a  passage  to  the  Atlantic  ^. 

In  support  of  this  view  Hayes  mentions  that  a  Megalops,  a  shark,  and 
a  sawfish  live  in  lake  Nicaragua ;  they  belong,  it  is  true,  to  groups  known 
to  ascend  into  fresh  water,  but  the  cataracts  of  the  San  Juan  would  oppose 
so  insurmountable  an  obstacle  to  their  passage,  that  they  must  be  regarded 
as  relics  ^. 

The  fifth  segment,  beginning  with  the  volcano  of  Orosi,  occupies  for 
a  short  distance,  south  of  lake  Nicaragua,  the  whole  breadth  of  the  isthmus. 
The  ejectamenta  of  Orosi  reach  the  Pacific  coast,  and  the  succeeding 
volcanos,  Rincdn  de  la  Vieja,  Miravalles,  and  Tenorio,  slope  towards  the 
west  to  the  depression  which  unites  the  peninsula  of  Nicoya  with  the 
mainland.  On  the  east,  however,  their  base,  like  that  of  all  the  succeeding 
volcanos  as  far  as  Turrialba,  lies  in  the  fluvial  region  of  the  San  Juan,  the 
valley  of  which  opens  wide  towards  the  Caribbean  sea. 

Panama.  The  Brito  stage  of  the  west  side  of  the  lake  of  Nicaragua 
is  continued  round  the  south  border  of  the  lake,  and  in  the  upper  course  of 
the  San  Juan,  according  to  Hayes,  calcareous  sandstone  is  encountered,  which 
must  be  regarded  as  the  Atlantic  continuation  of  the  same  stage.    On  the 

^  C.  W.  Hayes,  Physiography  and  Geology  of  the  Region  adjaicent  to  the  Nicaragua 
Canal  Route,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1899,  X,  pp.  285-348,  map.  The  danger  of  construct- 
ing a  canal  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  lines  of  volcanic  activity  has  been  pointed  out 
in  particular  by  A.  Heilprin,  Shrinkage  of  Lake  Nicaragua,  Bull.  Geogr.  Soc.  Phil.,  .1900, 
II,  pp.  115-124,  map. 

^  The  fish  fauna  of  lake  Nicaragua  has  been  described  by  Gill  and  Bransford  in  Proc. 
Acad.  Nat.  Sci.  Phil,  1877,  pp.  175-191.  Gill's  statement  that  the  sharks  of  the  lake 
are  identical  with  the  Pacific  and  different  from  the  Atlantic  species  is  to  be  found  in 
Hayes,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1899,  X,  p.  344.  Since  our  knowledge  of  the  distribution 
of  fish  has  made  considerable  advances  since  1877,  I  have  laid  the  question  before  Herr 
Steindachner.  This  distinguished  investigator  informs  me  that,  beside  the  endemic 
species  in  the  lake  of  Nicaragua,  only  cosmopolitan  species  are  known ;  in  particular, 
Megalops  is  found  in  great  quantity  in  the  lower  Amazon,  and  Pnstis  antiquorum  occurs 
in  the  east  and  west.  Thus  a  decisive  argument  disappears,  but  we  do  not  wish  to  deny 
the  probability  of  the  theory  in  question. 


456  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OP  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [party 


east  side  of  Turrialba  (lat.  10°  N.)  the  Tertiary  beds  are  exposed  in  a  long 
section,  which  has  been  described  by  Hill  and  Sjogren  ^.  Here  they  are 
folded  and  contain  volcanic  intercalations ;  the  Guallava  sandstone  of 
Hayes,  which  Dall  correlates  with  the  horizon  of  Vicksburg  ^,  is  the  con- 
tinuation of  the  Brito  stage.  Younger  Tertiary  beds  extend  towards  the 
Caribbean  sea ;  at  Limon,  on  the  east  coast,  Guppy  has  observed  Pliocene 
lying  unconformably  and  horizontal^.  Towards  the  west  the  folded 
Tertiary  beds  extend  far  inland  and  reach  considerable  heights.  Even 
beyond  the  volcanos,  still  south  of  San  Josd,  coal  is  found,  and  Gabb  states 
that  Tertiary  beds  form  a  large  part  of  the  Sierra  Candella,  which  extends 
from  the  volcanos  Irazu  and  Turrialba  towards  the  gulf  of  Nicoya  Folded 
Tertiary  beds  have  been  observed  by  Hayes  north  of  the  Pico  Blanco 
(long.  83*  W.).    Coal  is  also  known  on  the  shores  of  the  Chiriqui  lagoon. 

We  thus  see  that  the  Caribbean  slope  of  the  isthmus,  from  lake 
Nicaragua  and  the  Rio  San  Juan  to  the  line  of  the  canal  from  Colon  to 
Panama,  is  bordered  by  a  Tertiary  belt  of  varying  breadth.  On  lake 
Nicaragua  it  encroaches  on  the  Pacific  side,  and  possibly  extends,  in  the 
Sierra  Candella,  towards  the  entrance  to  the  bay  of  Nicoya ;  on  the  line 
from  Colon  to  Pmiama  it  occupies  the  whole  breadth  of  the  isthmus. 

The  studies  of  Zurcher,  Douvill^  and  Marcel  Bertrand,  based  on 
numerous  borings  made  along  this  line,  afford  the  most  important  data  for 
forming  an  opinion  on  the  structure  of  the  isthmus^. 

Marcel  Bertrand  writes  somewhat  as  follows : — 

The  highest  point  is  formed  by  a  superposed  dome  of  andesite,  the 
Gerro  Culehra.  The  canal  cuts  through  a  broad  saddle  of  Tertiary  beds, 
the  axis  of  which  lies  a  little  to  the  north  of  the  Culebra.  The  middle  of 
the  saddle,  which  is  at  the  same  time  the  oldest  visible  horizon  of  the 
Tertiary  formation,  is  an  accumulation  of  basic  volcanic  flows  and  breccias 
(Roche  de  Gamboa),  assigned,  on  account  of  an  intercalated  bed  of  small 
Nummulites  and  Orbitoides,  to  the  Tongrian  or  Aquitanian  stage.    It  is 

^  R.  Hill,  Geological  History  of  the  Isthmus  of  Panama  and  portions  of  Costa  Rica, 
Bull.  Mus.  Comp.  Zool.  Harvard  College,  1898,  XXVIII,  no.  5,  285  pp.,  maps;  in 
particular  p.  232,  and  App.,  p.  281,  Notes  by  A.  Sjogren  on  the  East  Section  of  Costa 
Rica. 

2  Dall,  Bull.  MuB.  Comp.  Zool.,  1898,  XXVIII,  no.  5,  App.,  p.  275. 

^  R.  J.  Guppy  and  W.  H.  Dall,  Description  of  Tertiary  Fossils  from  the  Antillean 
Region,  Proc.  U.S.  Nat.  Mus.,  1897,  XIX,  pp.  303-331. 

*  W.  M.  Gabb,  Notes  on  Costa  Rica  Geology,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1875, 3rd  ser.,  X,  pp.  198- 
204  and  320. 

^  P.  Zurcher,  Communication  preliminaire  relative  aux  observations  faites  dans  une 
mission  r^cemment  executee  dans  I'lsthme  de  Panama,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1898, 
3®  ser.,  XXVI,  pp.  425, 426  ;  D.  Douville,  Sur  Tage  des  couches  traversees  par  le  canal  de 
Panama,  tom.  cit.,  pp.  587-600;  I,  M.  Bertrand  et  P.  Zurcher,  ^tude  geologique  sur 
risthme  de  Panama ;  II,  M.  Bertrand,  Phenomenes  volcaniques  et  tremblements  de  terre 
de  I'Amerique  Centrale,  4°,  Paris,  1898,  38  pp.,  map. 


CH.XIII]  THE  INTEEOCEANIC  CANAL 


457 


not  sharply  separated  from  the  glauconitic  clays  which  follow  it  on  the 
Atlantic  side  and  are  covered  by  the  Orbitoides  limestone  of  the  Pena 
blanca.  This  is  followed  on  the  north  by  true  Miocene  (couches  de  Gatun 
and  other  beds)  containing  Turritella  tornata,  Pecten  subpleuronectes,  and 
Clypeaster,  and  also  trachytic  tuff.    Thus  we  reach  the  Atlantic  plain. 

On  the  Pacific  side  we  see  more  eruptive  rocks  and  an  increase  of  littoral 
characters.  In  particular,  the  volcanic  series  of  Gamboa  is  followed,  not  by 
the  Orbitoides  limestone,  but  by  laminated  marl  with  plant-remains  and 
a  little  Congeria,  and  towards  the  upper  part  some  lignite.  Of  the  marine 
fossils  of  the  Atlantic  side  only  traces  are  found  here.  The  next  beds, 
here  as  there,  are  Miocene  with  Pecten  subpleuronectes. 

The  most  recent  rock  is  the  andesite  of  the  Culebra. 

Here  Douvill^'s  studies  on  the  classification  of  the  Tertiary  sediments 
acquire  significance.  Two  important  horizons  must  be  distinguished :  the 
Orbitoides  limestone  of  the  Pena  blanca  and  the  stage  of  Gatun. 

The  first  of  these,  the  Orbitoides  limestone  (Brito  stage,  couche  de 
Vamos-Vamos,  Vicksburg  beds),  is  correlated  with  the  upper  part  of  the 
Aquitanian  stage.  In  the  investigations  preliminary  to  the  construction 
of  the  canal  it  was  traced  by  the  engineer,  M.  Canelle,  for  a  distance  of 
350  kilometers  towards  the  west  to  Chiriqui,  and  for  300  kilometers  towards 
the  east  to  the  Kio  Thuyra.  We  shall  meet  with  the  series  under  another 
name  in  the  Antilles,  and  it  is  possible  that  a  girdle  of  these  sediments  will 
one  day  be  found  to  extend  around  the  globe  ^. 

The  stage  of  Gatun  withTurritella  tornata  is  contemporaneous,  according 
to  Douvill^,  with  the  Burdigalian  (first  Mediterranean  stage).  It  occurs 
both  on  the  Atlantic  and  the  Pacific  side,  but  all  the  investigators  who 
have  turned  their  attention  to  this  series  conclude,  with  more  or  less 
positiveness,  that  a  continent  formerly  existed  to  the  west  of  the  existing 
Pacific  coast. 

The  rocky  islands  in  the  gulf  of  Panama  consist,  according  to  Wagner, 
Hill,  and  Bergt,  of  a  dark  eruptive  rock^.  Joukowsky  penetrated  for 
a  certain  distance  inland  up  the  river  Sambu,  which  runs  parallel  with  the 
south-east  of  the  gulf,  and  has  also  visited  the  eastern  part  of  the  peninsula 
of  Azuero  in  the  south-west.  In  both  these  regions  also,  dark  eruptive 
rock  (Labradorite)  was  encountered.  In  connexion  with  it  Tertiary 
deposits  occur,  similar  to  those  on  the  isthmus,  but  in  the  south-east,  on 
the  mountain  of  Sapo  (near  cape  Garachin^),  steeply-folded,  blue-gray 
limestone,  and  siliceous  shales,  possibly  of  Cretaceous  age,  crop  out  with 

*  H.  Douville,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  2  mars  1891,  p.  499  ;  and  Les  Foramini feres  dans 
le  Tertiaire  de  Borneo,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1905,  4^  ser.,  V,  pp.  435-464 ;  also 
Joukowski,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.,  23  avril  1906,  p.  964. 

^  W.  Bergt,  in  Reiss  und  Stiibel,  Geologische  Studien  in  der  Republik  Columbien,  II, 
Petrographie  der  alteren  Massengesteine,  4to,  Berlin,  1899,  pp.  219-223. 


458  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [party 


a  north-westerly  strike,  and  leave  no  room  for  doubt  that  we  have  here 
the  remains  of  a  cordillera  ^. 

The  shallow  gulf  of  Panama  terminates  in  a  steep  submarine  cliff, 
descending  for  more  than  3,000  meters. 

The  higher  mountains  have  been  little  explored,  are  difficult  of  access, 
and  largely  covered  with  volcanic  ejectamenta;  even  where  granite  and 
syenite  were  encountered,  the  observer  was  often  in  doubt  as  to  whether 
they  might  not  be  comparatively  young  intrusive  rocks. 

Within  the  Atlantic  Tertiary  belt,  and  running  parallel  to  the  coast, 
the  Sierra  de  Talamanca  rises  to  a  height  of  over  3,000  meters.  Its 
eastern  and  less  lofty  continuation  is  the  Sierra  Veragua;  it  consists,  so 
far  as  it  is  known,  of  syenite  and  granite.  The  lofty  peaks  of  mount  Lyon 
and  mount  Ujum  have  been  regarded  as  volcanos,  but  Pittier  and  Sapper 
share  the  doubts  of  Gabb  on  this  question.  On  the  highest  part  of  the 
sierra,  the  Bnena  Vista,  Pittier  found  a  peak  of  basalt,  and  on  the  western 
spurs  dioritic  rocks  ^.  That  Pico  Blanco  is  a  granite  boss  traversed  by 
dykes  of  porphyry,  has  been  mentioned  above.  Gabb  concluded  that  this 
granite  is  younger  than  the  upturned  Tertiary  beds ;  he  states  that  these 
are  altered  in  its  vicinity,  but  there  are  no  granitic  veins.  This  question 
is  not  yet  decided,  but  Gabb's  observations  seem  to  refer  to  a  lateral  branch 
of  the  sierra  which  runs  from  the  Pico  Blanco  to  the  east.  Sapper  crossed 
the  sierra,  going  from  the  Lajuna  di  Chiriqui  towards  David  (long.  82°  to 
82°  30'  W.).  Diorite  and  recent  eruptive  rocks  crop  out  on  the  lagoon; 
then  follow  basalt,  and  on  the  other  side  of  the  divide  diorite,  syenite,  and 
granite,  then  again  recent  eruptive  rock,  and  finally,  near  David,  some 
Tertiary  land.  Still  further  towards  the  east  (long.  81°  10'  W.)  the  sierra 
was  crossed  by  Hershey;  here  it  is  about  1,500  meters  in  height  and 
40  kilometers  in  breadth.  In  this  traverse  also,  massive  eruptive  rocks 
were  alone  encountered. 

This  sierra  disappears  fifty  kilometers  to  the  west  of  the  line  from  Colon 
to  Panama  and  thus  affords  room  for  the  low-lying  land  of  the  ship- canal. 
To  the  north-east  of  this  plain,  however,  the  asserted  recent  granites 
again  make  their  appearance,  occurring  in  the  Sierra  de  San  Bias,  which 
trends  to  east-south-east  along  the  Atlantic  coast. 

With  this  structure  it  is  doubtful  whether  or  not  the  Sierra  de 
Talamanca,  Sierra  Veragua,  and  Sierra  de  San  Bias  should  be  regarded  as 
branches  of  the  virgation  of  Honduras  and  Nicaragua. 

*  Joukowsky,  Sur  quelques  affleurements  nouveaux  de  roches  tertiaires  dans  I'lsthme 
de  Panama,  Mem.  Soc.  Phys.  et  Hist.  Nat.  Geneve,  1906,  XXXV,  pp.  155-178,  map.  In 
Azuero  indications  of  this  kind  are  not  known  to  occur  with  equal  clearness ;  see  also 
0.  H.  Hershey,  Geology  of  the  central  portion  of  the  Isthmus  of  Panama,  Bull.  Geol. 
Univ.  Cal.,  1901,  II,  pp.  231-267,  map. 

2  H.  Pittier,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1892,  p.  162. 


CH.  XIII]  SOUTHERN  VOLCANOS 


459 


The  western  part  of  these  sierras  meets  the  continuation  of  the  volcanos 
of  Costa  Rica.  The  volcanos  of  Poas,  Barba,  Irazu,  and  Turrialba,  are 
ranged  close  beside  one  another^.  The  pass  of  Ochomoga  (1,530  meters) 
separates  the  volcanos,  according  to  Pittier,  from  the  beginning  of  the 
sierra^.  The  Cordillera  de  Dota,  situated  to  the  south  of  Turrialba,  is 
also,  probably,  a  volcano ;  it  is  followed  by  a  long  break  in  the  mountains, 
extending  to  the  volcano  of  Ghiriqui,  which  also  joins  on  to  the  west  side 
of  the  Sierra  de  Talamanca. 

The  broad  Sierra  of  Aguacate,  which  runs  north  of  San  Jos^  from  the 
volcanos  of  Barba  and  Irazu  towards  Nicoya  bay,  has  been  investigated  by 
Attwood^  and  Hayes;  it  is  entirely  volcanic.  On  the  other  hand,  Hayes 
has  found  Rudistes  limestone  at  the  north  foot  of  the  Sierra  Candella 
which  follows  it  on  the  south ;  the  Tertiary  beds  of  this  sierra  have  been 
already  mentioned.  The  isolated  peak  of  Herradura  near  the  western 
end  of  the  Sierra  Candella,  which  is  often  cited  as  a  volcano,  cannot  be 
regarded  as  such;  it  seems  rather  as  though  a  series  of  Miocene  folds 
bordered  the  Pacific  coast  for  a  considerable  distance  even  to  the  west  of 
the  Sierra 

There  are  a  number  of  characters  which  indicate  that  the  promontories 
of  Nicoya,  Salsipuedes,  Burica,  the  island  of  Coiba,  and  then  Azuero  and 
Garachine,  are  fragments  of  one  or  several  Cordilleras;  but,  unfortunately, 
these  parts  are  but  little  known.  The  Rudistes  limestone  of  the  Sierra 
Candella  has  been  referred  to  above,  and  mention  has  also  been  made  of 
traces  occurring  in  Garachine.  Sapper's  map  marks  several  ranges  of 
limestone,  probably  Cretaceous,  extending  from  Nicoya  to  about  long. 
82°  30'  W. ;  they  lie  south-west  of  a  folded  Tertiary  zone,  which  might  be 
the  border  of  one  of  these  cordilleras  ^. 

Hill,  who  also  suspects  the  existence  of  some  connexion  between  the 
peninsulas,  cites  from  Nicoya  granite,  serpentine,  and  jadeite,  also  a  green 
quartzite,  which  is  regarded  as  the  oldest  rock,  and  the  '  Panama  formation 
a  greenish  white  rhyolitic  or  pumiceous  tuff,  which  is  said  to  be  older 
than  the  Tertiary  sediments  ^. 

These  peninsulas  still  offer  an  admirable  field  for  investigation. 

*  K.  Sapper,  Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1901,  pp.  24-51. 

2  H.  Pittier,  Sur  I'orographie  de  I'Amerique  Centrale  et  les  volcans  de  Costa  Rica,  Arch, 
Soc.  Phys.  et  Hist.  Nat.  Geneve,  1889,     ser.,  XXII,  pp.  466-472. 

'  G.  Attwood,  Geology  of  a  part  of  Costa  Rica,  Quart.  Jouvn.  Geol.  Soc,  1882,  XXXVIII, 
pp.  328-340,  map. 

*  A.  von  Frantzius,  Beitrag  zur  Kenntniss  der  Vulcane  Costa  Ricas,  Peterm.  Mitth., 
1861,  p.  329 ;  H.  Pittier,  op.  cit.,  1892,  p.  162. 

^  H.  Sapper,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  Erg.-Heft  no.  151,  pi.  I. 

«  R.  Hill,  Bull.  Mus.  Comp.  ZooL,  1898,  XXVIII,  no.  5,  pp.  206  and  221,  222.  The 
older  map  by  M.  Wagner  marks  in  the  interior  of  Nicoya  '  trachy-doleritic  hills  and 
tuff-formations  of  trifling  height Peterm.  Mitth.,  1863,  pi.  II. 


460  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [paetv 

First  advance.  Backward  bend  towards  South  America.  The  abysses 
of  the  gulf  of  Mexico  do  not  reach  4,000  meters.  The  greatest  depth  of 
the  Caribbean  sea  is  5,201  meters.  Between  the  two  basins  the  sea 
bottom  sinks  rapidly,  south  of  the  great  Cayman,  to  6,269  meters,  in 
the  Bartlett  abyss.  Just  outside  Amatique  bay  a  depth  of  3,075  meters 
has  been  sounded,  then  the  depth  rapidly  increases  up  to  the  Great 
Cayman,  and  reaches  5,260  meters  between  Jamaica  and  Cuba.  The  Sierras 
which  reach  Amatique  Bay  with  a  course  concave  towards  the  north 
(Sierra  del  Mico,  Sierra  del  Espiritu  Santo)  turn  their  convexity  towards 
the  north  as  they  pass  through  Roatan  towards  Jamaica,  and  the  Bartlett 
abyss  is  their  foredeep.  The  serpentine  ranges  of  these  sierras  are  not 
continued  into  the  serpentines  of  Cuba. 

The  Great  Cayman  is  part  of  a  submarine  ridge,  which  runs  from  the 
Sierra  Maestra  of  Cuba  past  the  Little  Cayman  into  the  Mysteriosa  bank. 
It  borders  Bartlett  abyss  on  the  north,  and  possibly  corresponds  to  the 
Coxcomb  mountains. 

To  the  north  of  this  ridge  lies  the  Yucatan  abyss  (—  4,709  meters) 
extending  in  the  same  direction  towards  the  east-north-east ;  a  little  to  the 
south  of  the  Sierra  de  Pinos  it  is  still  very  deep  (—  4,519  meters).  It  may 
be  regarded  as  the  foredeep  of  the  Cayman  ridge. 

To  the  north  of  Cuba  such  considerable  depths  are  not  known. 

It  is  only  where  the  flat  islands  off  the  coast  become  more  rare,  on 
the  other  side  of  Great  Inagua,  that  the  sea-bottom  again  descends,  north 
of  Haiti,  to  —4,186  meters,  and  still  further  east,  north  of  Puerto  Rico 
and  the  Virgin  islands,  it  attains  the  extraordinary  depth  of  8,341  meters. 
The  abyss  runs  towards  the  east ;  north  of  Sombrero  its  depth  amounts  to 
more  than  6,000  meters.  It  is  a  portion  of  the  foredeep  of  the  cordillera 
of  the  Antilles^  which  advances  here  into  the  Atlantic. 

Nowhere  in  the  Atlantic  region  is  so  considerable  a  deep  known  to 
exist.  In  lat.  (f  W  S.,  long.  18°  15'  W.,  -  7,370  meters  is  reached  in  the 
Romanche  abyss,  but  this  is  exceptional,  and  the  place  is  remote  from 
a  coast  or  a  visible  folded  range.  The  foredeeps  of  the  Pacific  alone  are 
comparable.  Here,  as  there,  the  foredeeps  do  not  coincide  with  the 
volcanic  lines. 

On  the  mainland  there  seem  to  be  indications  of  a  virgation,  but  in  the 
islands  the  branches  converge.  In  the  gulf  of  Guacanoyabo  the  Sierra 
Maestra  meets  the  principal  range  of  Cuba,  at  Port-au-Prince  the  line  from 
Jamaica  to  Jacmel  (Haiti)  unites  with  the  Cibao  range. 

We  may  now  pass  rapidly  over  some  further  details  relating  to  our 
earlier  account  (I,  p.  542)  ^. 

^  Cuba :  P.  Frazer,  Archaean  nucleus  of  the  Antilles,  Rep.  Brit.  Ass.  Adv.  Sci.,  Bath, 
1888,  p.  654  ;  Hayes,  Vaughan,  and  A.  C.  Spencer,  Geological  Reconnaissance  of  Cuba,8vo, 
Washington,  1901, 123  pp.,  maps,  cf.  p.  451,  note  1 ;  R.  A.  de  Yarza  (Rocas  hypogen.  de  la 


GH.  XIII]        FIRST  ADVANCE  OP  THE  ANDES 


461 


In  1887  MolengraafF  subjected  that  account  to  an  instructive  criticism, 
with  the  following  results.  For  the  region  beginning  in  the  west  and 
extending  up  to  and  including  Saint  Bartholomew,  the  data  are  undoubtedly 
correct.  With  regard  to  Antigua,  Purves  has  since  shown  that  its  eruptive 
rocks  are  recent,  and  consequently  it  does  not  represent  the  cordillera.  In 
Grande  Terre  (east  Guadeloupe)  only  Tertiary  beds  are  met  with  ;  Barbados 
is  little  known;  Trinidad  does  not  conform  to  the  bend.  These  facts, 
however,  are  not  incompatible  with  the  existence  of  an  arcuate  Antillean 
cordillera,  which  would  explain  the  corresponding  sequence  of  the  rocks  in 
Venezuela  and  Trinidad  on  the  one  hand,  and  Jamaica  and  the  remaining 
Antilles  on  the  other  ^ 

Robert  Hill,  another  investigator  intimately  acquainted  with  the  facts, 
has  shown  that  the  -  1,000  fathom  line  indicates,  in  its  course  from  South 
America,  three  long  ridges.  The  first  of  these  bounds,  at  its  northern 
extremity,  the  little  island  of  Aves  (Bird  Island).  The  second  is  formed 
by  the  arc  of  the  Antilles,  from  Grenada  to  Puerto  Rico,  and  includes 

Isla  de  Cuba,  Bol.  Com.  Mapa  Espana,  1895,  XX,  pp.  71-88)  describes  the  wide  distribu- 
tion of  the  diorites  and  serpentines  and  their  intimate  association  ;  V.  Pellitero,  Apuntes 
geologicos  referentes  al  itinerario  de  Sagua  de  Tanamo  a  Santa  Catalina  de  Guantanamo, 
en  la  Isla  de  Cuba,  torn,  cit.,  pp.  89-98,  map,  section  through  the  south-east  part  of  Cuba ; 
the  Sierra  de  Tahagua  strikes  to  the  east-south-east  to  the  Punta  de  Maisi  ;  it  consists  of 
anticlines  and  synclines  of  Cretaceous  and  Eocene  ;  on  the  anticlines  diorite  occurs  as 
a  basement ;  R.  Hill,  Notes  on  the  Geology  of  the  Island  of  Cuba,  Bull.  Mus.  Comp.  Zool., 
1895,  XVI,  pp.  243-288,  maps ;  J.  W.  Spencer,  Geographical  Evolution  of  Cuba,  Bull. 
Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1895,  VII,  pp.  67-94.— Jamaica :  R.  Hill,  The  Geology  and  Physical 
Geography  of  Jamaica,  Study  of  a  Type  of  Antillean  Development,  Bull.  Mus.  Comp. 
Zool.,  1899,  XXXIV,  256  pp.,  map.  The  eruptive  rocks  are  of  Cretaceous  and  middle 
Tertiary  age  ;  to  the  latter  belongs  the  so-called  extinct  volcano  of  Low  Layton  (p.  113). 
— Haiti :  L.  G.  Tippenhauer,  Die  Insel  Haiti,  8vo,  Leipzig,  1893,  693  pp.,  maps  ;  Geo- 
logische  Studien  in  Haiti,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1899,  pp.  25,  153,  201,  maps.  In  west 
Haiti  (with  the  possible  exception  of  Jacmel  peninsula)  the  east- south-easterly  direction 
is  probably  more  frequent  in  comparison  with  the  due  easterly  than  has  hitherto  been 
supposed,  and  doubtless  corresponds  to  that  of  the  Sierra  de  Tahagua  in  Cuba ;  Bergt, 
Zur  Geologie  von  San  Domingo,  Isis,  1897,  pp.  61-64  ;  W.  Sievers,  R.  Ludwig's  Reisen  auf 
San  Domingo,  Zeitschr.  Ges.  Erdk.  Berlin,  1898,  XXXIII,  pp.  302-354,  map.  Basalts 
begin  to  occur  in  the  west  more  frequently  than  had  been  supposed  ;  the  little  island 
of  Alta  Vela  lying  to  the  south  (150  meters,  augite  andesite  and  trachyte)  may  be  a 
continuation,  according  to  Sievers,  of  the  volcanos  of  the  Lesser  Antilles.  Bergt  has 
described  hornblende  gneiss,  and  other  Archaean  rocks  of  the  main  chain.  The  attempt 
to  claim  a  larger  distribution  for  Archaean  rocks  in  the  Antilles  has  been  opposed  by 
Hill  (in  particular  Jamaica,  p.  226) ;  Sievers,  Zur  Kenntniss  Puerto-Ricos,  Mitth.  geogr. 
Ges.  Hamburg  (1891-1892),  1895,  pp.  217-244,  map.  Proceeding  from  north  to  south 
we  meet  with  a  hill-range  of  Tertiary  limestone,  dipping  gently  towards  the  north,  then 
at  a  lower  level  diabase-porphyrite,  which  also  forms  the  north  side  of  the  southern 
ridge,  then  limestone  dipping  towards  the  north  and  apparently  Cretaceous. 

^  G.  A.  F.  MolengraalF,  Het  geol.  Verband  tusschen  de  W.  Indische  Eilanden,  Hand. 
Nat.  Geneeskund.  Congres,  Amsterdam,  1887,  10  pp.,  map ;  De  Geologie  van  het  Eiland 
St.  Eustatius,  Inaug. -Dissert.,  8vo,  Leiden,  1886,  62  pp.,  map ;  Purves,  Esquisse  geolo- 
gique  de  Vile  d'Antigua,  Bull.  Mus.  Hist.  Nat.  Belg.,  1884-1885,  III,  pp.  273-318. 


462  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OP  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [paktv 


a  very  deep  embayment  between  Sombrero  and  Anegada.  The  third  is 
very  much  constricted  north  of  Tobago,  and  extends  to  the  north  past 
Barbados.    A  tectonic  connexion  with  South  America  is  denied  ^. 

The  eruption  of  Mount  Pelde  in  1902  attracted  general  attention  to  the 
volcanic  arc  of  the  Antilles,  and  led  to  important  investigations. 

The  work  of  Lacroix  not  only  advanced  our  knowledge  of  volcanic 
phenomena  in  general,  but  also  dealt  with  the  special  problems  we  are  now 
considering.  Lacroix  shows  that  some  of  the  volcanos  have  ejected 
fragments  of  gabbro,  mica-schist,  vein-quartz,  and  other  rocks,  thus 
showing  that  the  arc  of  the  cordillera  is  present  underneath  the  volcanic 
arc.  The  volcanos  are  seated,  above  these  ancient  rocks,  on  a  substructure 
of  fairly  old  lavas  and  tuffs,  and  Tertiary  sediments ;  Lepidocyclina  occurs 
in  the  ancient  tuffs  of  Martinique.  This  substructure  becomes  visible, 
together  with  the  ancient  rocks,  on  some  of  the  islands  (Anguilla, 
St.  Martin,  St.  Bartholomew),  which  are  consequently  assigned  to  the 
cordillera  (I,  p.  549).  But  since  Molengraaff  and  Cleeve  have  found 
andesites  and  basalts  in  this  substructure,  Lacroix  infers  the  existence  of 
two  lines  of  volcanic  islands,  an  outer  and  older  line,  and  an  inner  line 
which  bears  the  active  volcanos.  The  former  would  comprise  Anguilla, 
St.  Martin,  St.  Bartholomew,  Antigua,  Grande  Terre  of  Guadeloupe,  and 
Desiderade ;  the  second,  St.  Saba,  St.  Eustace,  St.  Christopher,  Nevis, 
Kedonda,  Montserrat,  Basse  Terre  of  Guadeloupe,  Dominica,  Martinique, 
Santa  Lucia,  St.  Vincent,  the  Grenadines,  and  Grenada. 

In  the  same  year  Sapper  arrived  independently  at  a  similar  conclusion. 
The  older  line  advances  for  a  distance  of  50  kilometers  towards  the 
younger  inner  line.  '  We  may  say  that  this  is  mere  chance,'  writes 
Sapper,  *  or  idle  speculation  set  forth  on  the  map,  but  the  fact  remains 
that  all  the  volcanic  formations  of  the  Lesser  Antilles  assemble  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  these  curves,  and  do  not  occur  anywhere  outside 
them.'  ^ 

The  resemblance  of  these  curves  with  those  of  the  Aleutian  islands  and 
the  Kuriles  is  unmistakable. 

Hogbom  draws  attention  to  the  trifling  amount  of  potash  present  in 
almost  all  the  acid  rocks  of  the  Lesser  Antilles,  and  finds  that  the  plagioclase 
granites  pass  imperceptibly  into  the  quartz- diorites,  and  the  latter  into  the 
olivine  gabbro,  completely  resembling  in  this  respect  the  granites  and 

*  R.  Hill,  Jamaica,  p.  211  ;  Pelee  and  the  Evolution  of  the  Windward  Archipelago, 
Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1905,  XVI,  pp.  243-288,  in  particular  p.  279.  The  work  by  J.  W. 
Spencer,  Reconstruction  of  the  Antillean  Continent,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1895,  VI, 
pp.  103-140,  deals  less  with  these  questions  than  with  displacements  of  the  strand-line. 

*  A.  Lacroix,  La  Montague  Pelee  et  ses  Eruptions,  ouvrage  public  par  I'Academie  des 
Sciences,  4to,  Paris,  1904,  662  pp.,  maps,  in  particular  p.  3  ;  Sapper,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1904, 
Beilage-Band  II,  pp.  37,  38. 


CH.  XIIl] 


ABYSSAL  SEDIMENTS 


463 


diorites  (granodiorite)  of  the  Andes  ^  This  is  another  point  of  resemblance 
between  the  Antilles  and  the  Andes. 

The  mode  of  union  with  South  America  has  given  rise  to  doubt,  and 
must  now  be  considered. 

Barbados  (336  meters)  has  been  described  by  Harrison  and  Jukes- 
Browne.  On  the  long  north-eastern  coast  the  lowest  rocks,  known  as 
the  Scotland  beds,  are  exposed.  Gregory  has  correlated  them  with  the 
Vicksburg  stage  (Brito  or  Vamos-Vamos  stage  of  Nicaragua  and  Panama). 
They  contain  petroleum,  and  are  intensely  folded  and  overfolded,  but  cut 
through  by  numerous  faults,  which  show  that  the  island  forms  part  of 
a  field  of  fracture. 

The  folded  Scotland  beds  are  overlain  unconformably  by  siliceous  radio- 
larian  beds,  over  these  lies  a  sheet  of  white  coral  limestone ;  and  then, 
lying  at  a  trifling  height,  comes  a  still  more  recent  coral  limestone  ^. 

A  fossil  Cystechinus  crassus,  from  the  radiolarian  beds,  has  been  described 
by  Gregory ;  it  is  a  species  characteristic  of  great  depths  \  The  question 
arises  whether  the  foredeep  may  not  be  absent  here,  since  its  sediments 
have  been  raised  up  some  thousands  of  meters. 

In  any  case,  a  folding  movement  occurred  here  after  the  upper  Aqui- 
tanian  (Scotland)  period,  and  after  this  a  very  considerable  folding  or 
elevation  again  occurred. 

Traces  of  such  movements  are  also  found  in  some  of  the  other  islands, 
e.g.  in  Jamaica.  Under  similar  conditions  radiolarian  rocks  make  their 
appearance,  according  to  Gregory,  on  the  north  side  of  the  eastern  extremity 
of  Cuba. 

With  regard  to  Tobago  I  have  only  very  scanty  information.  The 
north-eastern  part  of  the  island,  according  to  Eggers,  is  rugged  and  moun- 
tainous (700  meters) ;  yellow  and  red  slates,  basalt,  and  diabase  are  said  to 
occur ;  the  south-western  part  is  flat  and  consists  of  coral  limestone 

We  may  supplement  our  earlier  account  of  Trinidad  (I,  p.  535)  by 
adding  that  the  Scotland  beds  (here  termed  the  Naparima  stage)  contain 
petroleum,  as  in  Barbados,  and  are  similarly  overlain  in  discordance  by 
radiolarian  beds.  Although  the  east-and-west  direction  is  clearly  expressed 

1  Hogbom,  Petrographie  der  Kleinen  Antillen,  Bull.  geol.  Inst.  Univ.  Upsala,  1905, 
VI,  pp.  214-232. 

2  J.  B.  Harrison  and  A.  J.  Jukes-Browne,  Geology  of  Barbados,  Salisbury,  1890, 
8vo,  64  pp.,  map ;  Geology  of  Barbados,  Geol.  Mag.,  1902,  pp.  550-554 ;  and  Quart. 
Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1891,  XLVII,  pp.  197-250,  and  1892,  XLVIII,  pp.  170-226 ;  J.  W. 
Gregory,  Contribution  to  the  Palaeontology  and  Physical  Geology  of  tbe  West  Indies, 
op.  cit.,  1895,  LI,  pp.  255-310,  in  particular  pp.  297  and  309.  Recently  Harrison  has 
distinguished  folded  lower,  and  unfolded,  unconformably  superposed,  upper  Scotland 
beds.  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1907,  LXIII,  p.  336. 

^  Gregory,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1889,  XLV,  p.  640. 

*  Baron  H.  Eggers,  Insel  Tobago,  Deutsche  geographische  Blatter,  Bremen,  1893, 
XVI,  pp.  1-20,  map. 


464  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [party 

in  the  contour  of  the  island,  yet  Wall  observes  that  the  strike  of  the  rocks 
is  almost  constantly  E.  20°  N. ;  thus  the  island  conforms  more  closely  with 
the  arc  of  the  Antilles  than  its  outline  would  lead  us  to  suspect  ^. 

In  the  northern  part  of  Venezuela,  adjacent  to  Trinidad,  Cortese 
observed  a  range  of  Archaean  schist,  already  well  known,  which  is  accom- 
panied in  the  south  by  Cretaceous  limestone.  Here  the  general  strike  is 
east,  or  east  and  a  little  north.  Cortese  found  that  the  ancient  schist  dips 
to  the  north,  but  the  Cretaceous  limestone  to  the  south,  and  that  they  are 
separated  by  a  fault.  The  petroleum-bearing  beds  lie  at  their  southern 
foot.  Petroleum  occurs  on  the  western  shore  of  the  gulf  of  Paria,  on  the 
northern  shore  of  the  gulf  of  Cariaco,  and  further  away  along  the  sea- 
coast.  A  line  of  hot  springs  runs  east  and  west  through  the  Tertiary  land. 
One  of  these,  near  Providencia,  is  an  intermittent  geyser. 

In  the  south  the  Cretaceous  limestone  follows  the  inner  cordillera. 
According  to  Cortese,  faults  running  east  and  west  determine  the  structure 
of  the  land  and  stand  in  some  causal  relation  with  the  earthquakes,  which 
are  of  frequent  occurrence.  We  may  therefore  infer  that  the  coulisse 
valley  between  Cumana  and  the  gulf  of  Paria  is  a  fault-trough. 

A  lower  Silurian  trilobite,  Calymene  senaria,  and  a  great  Orthoceras 
were  found  by  a  traveller  on  the  route  from  Caracas  through  Valencia  to 
Puerto  Caballo.  They  have  been  described  by  Drevermann.  These  are 
the  only  traces  of  lower  Palaeozoic  fossils  known  over  this  very  consider- 
able interval.  Confirmation  of  these  finds  would,  therefore,  be  of  no 
small  importance  ^. 

The  islands  of  Bonaire,  Curacao,  and  Aruha  have  been  described  by 
Martin ;  they  everywhere  present  the  same  rocks  as  the  mainland ;  among 
them  are  radiolarian  shales,  some  of  which  correspond  with  the  radiolarian 
beds  of  Barbados  and  Trinidad;  but  it  appears  that  similar  shales  also 
occur  beneath  the  Cretaceous  formation  ^. 

The  peninsula  of  Goajira,  which  projects  far  out  to  sea,  according  to 
Simons,  is  mountainous  and  formed  of  three  series  of  volcanic  hills  (up 
to  850  meters).  The  Teta  Goajira  (366  meters),  which  rises  solitary  out  of 
the  broad  plain  lying  between  these  ranges  and  the  north  border  of  the 
Sierra  de  Santa  Marta,  consists,  according  to  the  same  authority,  of  trachyte. 
Casas  and  Codazzi,  oificers  on  the  frontier  of  Columbia  and  Venezuela, 

1  Harrison  and  Jukes-Browne,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1892,  p.  217  ;  Gregory,  op.  cit., 
1895,  p.  299 ;  Wall,  op.  cit.,  1860,  p.  465. 

2  E.  Cortese,  Excursione  geologica  al  Venezuela,  Boll.  Soc.  geol.  ital.,  1901,  XX, 
pp.  447-469  ;  F.  Drevermann,  Ueber  Unter-Silur  in  Venezuela,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1904,  1, 
pp.  91-93. 

'  K.  Martin,  Geologische  Studien  liber  Niederlandisches  West-Indien  (in  his  Reise 
nach  Niederliindischem  West-Indien,  II),8vo,  Leiden,  1888,238  pp.,  maps;  also  J.  Lorie, 
Fossile  Mollusken  von  Cura9ao,  Aruba  und  der  Kiigte  von  Venezuela,  Sam  ml.  geol. 
Reichsmus.  Leiden,  1887-1889,  2.  Ser.,  vol.  I,  pp.  111-149. 


OH.  XIII]        THE  SWEEVE  OF  THE  ANDES 


465 


mention  the  occurrence  on  the  east  coast  of  Tertiary  beds  and  Cretaceous 
limestone,  which  they  regard  as  the  continuation  of  the  Sierra  de  Perijd, 
which  comes  from  the  south.  Its  northernmost  part,  the  Sierra  Macuira, 
should  also  consist  of  limestone,  according  to  this  account ;  it  is  said  to  be 
united  by  a  submarine  ridge  with  the  Monges  reefs,  and  also  with  the 
Aruba  chain  of  islands  ^. 

Thus  the  Sierra  de  Perija,  and  therefore  a  branch  of  the  Colombian 
Andes  themselves,  seems  to  swerve  from  the  north-and-south  into  the  east- 
and-west  direction.  Sievers  had  previously  arrived  at  the  same  conclusion 
when  investigating  the  Sierra  Nevada  de  Santa  Marta.  In  general,  this  is 
a  very  lofty  mountain  fragment  formed  of  pre-Cambrian  rock,  and  present- 
ing much  the  same  strike  as  the  Sierra  de  Perija  ^. 

On  a  map  of  the  trend-lines,  published  by  Sievers  after  very  extensive 
investigations,  we  see  how  the  several  branches  of  the  Andes,  approaching 
the  Caribbean  coast  from  the  south,  swerve  more  and  more  to  the  north- 
east, east-north-east,  and  even  east,  all  trending  towards  the  arc  of  the 
Antilles  ^.  These  branches  proceed  (I,  p.  535)  from  a  great  virgation  in 
south  Ecuador.  Their  four  off-shoots,  the  Cordilleras  de  Choco,  Occidental, 
Central,  and  Oriental,  are  separated  by  the  valleys  of  the  Atrato,  Cauca,  and 
Magdalena.  The  Cordillera  Oriental,  which  runs  furthest  to  the  north 
and  north-east,  is  the  first  to  come  to  an  end  towards  the  south.  The  Sierra 
de  Bogota  is  one  of  its  coulisses ;  it  has  been  studied  by  Hettner^*.  The 
Sierra  de  Merida,  described  by  Sievers,  is  one  of  the  succeeding  coulisses  ^. 
The  ridge  often  marked  on  the  maps  east  of  lake  Maracaibo  does  not  exist. 
Here  again,  the  dominant  strike  is  to  the  north-east.  The  Serrania  on  the 
coast  of  Caracas  and  the  Serrania  interior,  which  lies  to  the  south  of  it,  are 
further  coulisses,  and  the  Caribbean  range,  together  with  Trinidad,  is  also 
a  coulisse. 

New  light  is  thrown  on  this  representation,  in  itself  so  consistent,  by 
the  studies  of  Stille  on  the  Rio  Magdalena.  According  to  Stille,  the  valley 
of  this  river  is  a  fault-trough,  at  least  as  far  as  lat.  3°  45'  N. ;  the  east 

1  F.  A.  Simons,  Exploration  of  the  Goajira  Peninsula,  Proc.  Geogr.  Soc,  1885,  new 
ser.,  VII,  pp.  781-796,  map ;  Casas  und  Codazzi,  Vorlaufiger  Bericht  der  columbisch- 
venezuelischen  Grenz-Commission,  Ann.  Geogr.,  1902,  XI,  pp.  271-273. 

2  W.  Sievers,  Sierra  Nevada  de  S.  Marta  und  die  Sierra  de  Perija,  Zeitschr.  Ges.  Erdk. 
Berlin,  1888,  XXIII,  pp.  1-158,  map,  in  particular  p.  67  ;  W.  Bergt,  Beitrag  zur  Petro- 
graphie  der  Sierra  Nevada  de  S.  Marta,  etc.,  Tschermak,  Min.  Mitth.,  1889,  X,  pp.  271- 
386. 

^  W.  Sievers,  Karten  zur  physikalischen  Geographie  von  Venezuela,  Peterm.  Mitth., 
1896,  pp.  125-129,  pi.  X. 

*  A.  Hettner,  Kordillere  von  Bogota,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  Erg.-Heft  no.  104,  1892,  131  pp., 
maps;  Anden  des  weatlichen  Columbien,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1893,  pp.  129-136. 

^  W.  Sievers,  Cordillere  von  Merida,  Penck,  Geogr.  Abh.,  1888,  III,  Heft  1,  238  pp., 
map.  F.  von  Wolff  thought  that  the  crystalline  East  Cordillera  might  be  altered  Trias 
and  Jurassic,  Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1904,  XVI,  Protok.,  p.  96. 

SOIiLAS  IV  H  h 


466  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [paet  v 


border  of  the  trough  forms  at  the  same  time  the  west  border  of  the  Cor- 
dillera Oriental  and  the  Sierra  de  Perija,  so  that  the  lower-lying  region 
between  the  latter  and  the  Sierra  de  Santa  Marta  is,  in  all  probability, 
the  continuation  of  the  trough  of  the  Rio  Magdalena,  and  the  Sierra  Nevada 
of  the  Cordillera  Central  ^. 

"We  have  seen  above  that,  according  to  Cortese,  the  structure  of  north 
Venezuela  is  determined  by  fractures,  and  that  a  fault-trough  probably 
extends  from  Cumana  to  the  gulf  of  Paria.  These  fractures  are  regarded 
by  Cortese  as  connected  with  the  earthquakes  of  Venezuela,  and  by  Stille 
with  those  of  Bogota  and  Cucuta.  The  folding  is  anterior  to  the  fractures. 
The  fractures  on  the  Rio  Magdalena  are,  according  to  Stille,  younger  than 
a  great  part  of  the  Tertiary  formation  and  than  certain  andesitic  ashes  and 
lavas.    The  Cordillera  Oriental  bears  no  active  volcanos. 

The  rocks  mentioned  as  occurring  in  the  Colombian  Andes  and  the 
adjacent  parts  of  Ecuador  are  chiefly  pre-Cambrian  and  Cretaceous; 
eruptive  rocks  of  various  age  are  also  present.  Bergt  also  distinguishes 
on  the  west  side  of  the  Cordillera  Central,  from  lat.  4°  15'  N.  southwards, 
diorite  porphyrites  of  tonalitic  habit ;  he  compares  them  with  the  Mesozoic 
eruptive  rocks  which  attain  such  great  importance  further  south  ^.  Further, 
a  highly  altered  series  of  rocks,  which  occur  chiefly  on  the  west  side  of  the 
Cordillera  Central  between  lats.  3°  and  1°  N.,  must  be  regarded,  according  to 
Bergt,  as  Palaeozoic. 

Cretaceous  sediments  are  very  widely  distributed  and  of  great  thickness. 
On  the  Rio  Magdalena  Stille  estimates  their  thickness  in  round  numbers  at 
6,000  meters  ^.  The  lower  Cretaceous,  the  European  character  of  which 
was  already  recognized  by  Karsten,  includes  the  Hauterivian,  Barremian, 
Aptian,  and  Albian  stages  It  is  followed  by  the  upper  Cretaceous 
(Ananchytes  ovata,  Micraster  coranguinum),  then  red  marl  with  gypsum 
(Guaduas  beds,  which  Stille  refers  to  the  Cretaceous),  then  gravel,  and 
finely  clastic  sediments,  which  are  regarded  as  Tertiary. 

Thus,  in  Western  America,  from  Alaska  down  to  Ecuador,  the  uncon- 
formity and  transgression  of  the  Cretaceous  begins  not  with  the  Cenomanian 
but  the  Neocomian.     From  Wrangell  to  California  we  have  the  Russo- 

*  H.  Stille,  Geologische  Studien  im  Gebiete  der  Rio  Magdalena,  Festschrift  fur  A.  von 
Koenen,  8vo,  Stuttgart,  1907,  pp.  277-358,  map. 

^  W.  Reiss  und  A.  Stiibel,  Reisen  in  Siid-Amerika,  Geologische  Studien  in  der  Repubhk 
Colombia,  II ;  W.  Bergt,  Petrographie,  2.  Die  alteren  Massengesteine,  etc.,  4to,  Berlin, 
1899,  239  pp.,  map,  in  particular  p.  213  ;  several  details  also  in  J.  M.  Zujovic,  Les  Roches 
des  CordiUeres,  4to,  Paris,  1884,  75  pp.,  containing  the  description  of  Boussingault's 
collection. 

'  It  is  true  that  these  figures  include  the  Guaduas  beds,  which  with  equal  justice  might 
be  regarded  as  Tertiary.    The  presence  of  traces  of  Lias  (I,  535)  has  not  been  confirmed. 

*  G.  Steinmann,  Beitrag  zur  Geologie  und  Palaeontologie  von  Siid-America,  VI ; 
K.  Gerhardt,  Beitrag  zur  Kenntniss  der  Kreideformation  in  Columbien,  N.  J.  f.  Min., 
1897,  Beil.-Bd.  XI,  pp.  118-208  ;  Stille,  Geologische  Studien,  etc.,  p.  288  et  passim. 


CH.  XIII]  ECUADOR  467 

boreal  facies  of  the  Knoxville  stage,  and  in  Colombia  the  Mediterranean- 
European  facies. 

The  continuity  of  North  and  South  America  is  clearly  seen  if  we  add  the 
trend-lines  of  Central  America,  as  they  are  sketched  out  by  Sapper,  to 
Sievers'  map  of  the  trend-lines  more  to  the  south  ^.  We  then  perceive  two 
virgations  of  opposite  curvature,  which  unite  in  the  arc  of  the  Antilles. 

This  arc  indicates  the  advance  of  the  Pacific  folds  into  the  unfolded^ 
region  of  the  Atlantic^  and  into  that  part  of  it  in  particular  which  lies 
between  Laurentia  and  Brazilia.  The  movement  dominates  the  whole  of 
this  region,  and  determines  all  the  trend-lines  of  the  west  coast  from 
lat.  43°  N.  down  to  lat.  4°  S. 

Ecuador,  Peru.  (I,  p.  533.)  Towards  the  sea  the  Cordillera  Occidental 
is  bordered  by  a  plain,  but  isolated  bosses  of  syenite  and  diorite  emerge 
from  the  Inoceramus  limestone  of  Guayaquil  (I,  p.  533),  and  on  the  east 
coast  of  the  island  of  Puna  (lat.  2°  48'  S.)  Wolf  observed  a  breccia  of 
andesitic  lava  ^. 

Mud  volcanos  rise  here  and  there  in  the  Tertiary  coast  region,  which 
extends  through  Piura  and  the  desert  of  Sechura  down  to  lat.  7°  S. 
Grzybowski  finds  that  they  must  be  assigned,  along  with  the  beds  contain- 
ing petroleum,  to  the  lower  Miocene  or  the  boundary  of  the  Oligocene,  that 
is,  they  are  approximately  the  same  age  as  the  petroleum  beds  of  Trinidad. 
Here,  however,  granite  occurs  on  the  Rio  Tumbez  near  lat.  4°  S.,  and 
phyllite,  with  a  north  strike,  near  Payta  (lat.  5°  5'  S.)^.  They  probably  form 
offshoots  of  the  little-known  Cordillera  de  Amotape. 

The  great  range  of  Ecuador  consists  of  a  western  chain,  the  continuation 
of  the  Cordillera  Occidental,  formed  chiefly  of  intrusive  and  effusive  rocks 
of  Mesozoic  age,  and  an  eastern  chain,  corresponding  to  the  Cordillera 
Central,  which  is  composed  chiefly  of  pre-Cambrian  rocks.  These  are 
separated  by  the  Interandine  region,  which  is  bordered  on  both  sides  by 
recent  volcanos  and  cumbered  by  their  ejectamenta  ^. 

1  Sapper,  Verb.  Ges.  Erdk.  Berlin,  1900,  pi.  VII ;  and  Geogr.  Congress,  1904,  p.  238. 
Jukes-Brown  and  Harrison,  basing  their  arguments  on  the  uniform  girdle  of  strand-lines, 
that  is,  a  phenomenon  which  is  independent  of  the  mountain  structure  and  not  decisive  in 
this  case,  had  already  conjectured  that  the  Antilles  were  a  branch  of  the  Andes,  Quart. 
Joum.  Geol.  Soc,  1891,  XLVII,  p.  239,  *an  extension  or  offshoot  of  the  Andes.' 

2  T.  Wolf,  Geografia  y  Geologia  del  Ecuador,  8vo,  Leipzig,  1892,  671  pp.,  map,  pp.  237, 
238,  333.  Further  traces  of  recent  lavas  on  the  west  coast  were  mentioned  in  vol.  I, 
p.  532 ;  see  also  J.  Siemiradzki,  Geologische  Reisenotizen  aus  Ecuador,  N.  J.  f.  Min., 
1886,  Beilage-Band  IV,  pp.  195-227. 

^  F.  Moreno,  Yacimientos  de  petroleo  en  el  Departamento  de  Piura,  Bol.  Soc.  Geogr. 
Lima,  1894,  III,  pp.  283-343 ;  G.  Grzybowski,  Tertiarablagerungen  des  nordlichen  Peru 
und  ihre  Molluskenfauna  (Steinmann,  Beitrage,  VIII),  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1899,  Beilage-Band 
XII,  pp.  610-664,  map. 

*  Whether  Wolf's  '  Interandine  region '  (I,  p.  533,  near  long.  79°  E.,  not  between  longs. 
81°  and  82°),  and  in  particular  the  segment  of  Cuen9a,  indicates  the  presence  of  a  trough 
requires  further  investigation. 

H  h  2 


468  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [party 

South  of  lat.  4°  30'  S.  the  range  becomes  broader,  and  in  north  Peru 
more  diversified. 

The  structure  of  this  region,  which  includes  the  low  mountains  formed 
of  ancient  rocks  extending  along  the  coast,  the  lofty  Mesozoic  chains  and 
the  ancient  rocks  on  the  Maranon  in  the  east  (I,  p.  530),  has  more  than 
once  been  represented  by  transverse  sections,  but  that  drawn  by  Steinmann 
through  a  distance  of  220  kilometers,  from  Lima  across  the  first  lofty  chain 
of  the  Andes,  is  the  first  to  show  that  here  the  great  cicatrice  already 
makes  its  appearance,  and  is  already  developed  on  a  gigantic  scale.  From 
this,  as  from  a  repeatedly  reopening  wound,  molten  rocks  have  been  dis- 
charged ever  since  the  Rhaetic  or  the  Lias  down  to  the  present  day. 

Its  products  as  determined  by  Steinmann  are  the  following  : — 

1.  Basic  poTphyrites  (basic  felspar,  augite,  magnetite,  titaniferous  iron) : 
porphyritic  breccia  or  tuff  also  occurs,  frequently  containing  Jurassic  fossils 
or  wholly  represented  by  normal  Jurassic  sediments ;  2.  Andes  diorite  (also 
Andes  granite),  with  veins  of  aplite  and  pegmatite ;  3.  Quartz-andesite : 
this  is  more  characteristic  of  the  east ;  in  the  zone  of  contact  lie  the  ores  of 
Cerro  del  Pasco.    Active  volcanos  are  absent. 

Six  zones  have  been  distinguished :  1.  The  granitic  and  Tertiary  zone 
of  the  coast  (not  in  the  section) ;  2.  A  zone  of  normal  lower  Cretaceous,  not 
very  broad,  and  not  extending  far  beyond  Lima ;  3.  The  zone  of  the  diorites ; 
4.  A  porphyritic,  Mesozoic  zone;  5.  A  normal  calcareous,  Mesozoic  zone; 
6.  In  the  east  a  zone  of  ancient  schist  and  granite. 

In  order  not  to  lose  sight  of  the  magnitude  of  the  scale  we  may  bear  in 
mind  the  fact  that  the  section  across  this  foremost  chain  of  the  Andes  is 
equal  in  length  to  the  distance  from  the  outer  border  of  the  Jura  mountains, 
south  of  Bale,  to  the  southern  shore  of  lake  Maggiore.  Nearly  half  of  this 
distance  is  comprised  in  zones  3  and  4.  The  quartz-andesites  in  particular 
are  still  richly  represented  in  zone  5. 

At  the  end  of  this  section,  near  the  town  of  Lima  and  on  the  adjacent 
island  of  San  Lorenzo,  G.  Neumann  has  discovered  a  Wealden  flora  with 
some  European  species  lying  beneath  marine  Neocomian ;  this  affords  fresh 
evidence  that  the  coast  chains,  or  at  least  certain  parts  of  them,  were  dry 
land  during  various  stages  of  the  Mesozoic  aera  ^. 

Cordillera  Real  (I,  p.  518),  Argentine  chains  (I,  p.  512).  From  Peru 
onwards  the  mountains  are  divided  into  three  principal  zones.  The  first  of 
these,  on  the  east,  is  the  Cordillera  Real,  extending  along  the  east  side  of 
lake  Titicaca;  the  second  is  the  Cordillera  de  los  Andes,  on  which  the 
volcanos  are  seated  ;  the  third  is  the  Cordillera  de  la  Costa.  The  observa- 
tions collected  since  the  first  discussion  of  this  range  show  that  the  Cordillera 

^  Steinmann,  Observaciones  geologicas  de  Lima  a  Chanchamayo,  Bol.  de  1.  Ing.  Minas 
Peru,  Lima,  1904,  no.  12, 27  pp. ;  R.  Neumann,  Beitrag  zur  Kenntniss  der  Kreideformation 
in  S.  Peru  (Steinmann,  Beitr.,  XIII),  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1907,  Beilage-Band  XXIV,  pp.  69-132. 


CH.  XIIl] 


CORDILLEEA  EEAL 


469 


Real,  the  Bolivian  Altaplanicie  which  lies  in  front  of  it  on  the  west,  and 
also  the  Argentine  chains  in  the  south,  are  formed  of  the  same  stratified 
series  as  that  which  covers  a  considerable  part  of  the  Brazilian  mass, 
while  the  Cordillera  de  los  Andes  and  the  Cordillera  de  la  Costa  present  a 
divergent  series,  marked  by  the  diminished  development  of  the  Palaeozoic 
and  the  increased  development  of  the  Mesozoic  marine  beds.  This  fact  has 
an  important  bearing  on  the  nature  of  the  continent  itself  and  also  on  its 
relations  to  North  America. 

Let  us  approach  the  range  from  the  north-east.  Here  the  whole 
sedimentary  covering,  with  the  exception  of  some  insignificant  patches,  has 
been  removed.  Evans  met  with  some  exposures  on  the  Madeira  in  lat.  9°  S., 
and  observed  that  the  strike  of  the  ancient  rocks  was  already  directed 
parallel  with  the  Cordillera.  In  this  district  alkali  granites,  granulites, 
and  other  crystalline  rocks  occur  ;  and  then,  on  the  Beni,  in  rapids  situated 
at  great  distances  from  one  another,  come  gneiss,  aplite,  and  a  siliceous  rock 
with  sponge-remains.  The  plain  lies  surprisingly  low,  over  large  areas  in 
Caupolican  it  is  only  250  to  300  meters  above  the  sea. 

The  Cordillera  Real  increases  very  rapidly  in  height ;  towards  the  north- 
west, across  the  Nudo  de  Apollo bamba  and  beyond,  its  free  ends  disappear  ^. 
It  is  followed  by  the  giant  mountains  to  the  east  and  south-east  of  lake 
Titicaca  (lUimani,  Illampu,  and  others).  The  Nevados  de  Araca  form  its 
continuation  to  the  south-south-east,  and  this  direction  is  maintained  to  the 
north  of  Cochabamba,  where  an  east-and-west  strike  unexpectedly  sets  in, 
and  is  followed  by  a  sudden  bend  to  the  south,  as  though  the  bay  of  Arica 
really  indicated  a  syntaxis  in  the  interior  of  the  land,  although,  as  we  shall 
see  directly,  the  folding,  at  least  in  the  south,  does  not  bear  out  this  sugges- 
tion. Here  begin  the  long  Argentine  sierras,  which  likewise  disappear 
far  to  the  south  in  free  ends. 

From  the  summits  of  the  Illimani,  Conway  has  brought  back  gneiss  and 
coarse-grained  granite^.  The  slopes  are  formed  of  Palaeozoic  sediments. 
Steinmann  and  his  colleagues  Hoek  and  von  Bistram  have  given  an  interest- 
ing account  of  the  structure  of  the  chains  from  the  Illimani  (lat.  16°  40'  S.) 
past  the  bend  at  Cochabamba  to  lat.  22°  30'  S.  The  gneiss  soon  disappears 
and  the  mountains  are  formed  of  Cambrian,  Silurian,  and  Devonian  sediments 
overlain  by  a  red  Cretaceous  sandstone  (Steinmann's  Puca  sandstone)  all 
thrown  into  long  folds.  The  movement  of  folding,  as  far  as  can  be  dis- 
covered, is  directed  towards  the  east  and  must  be  younger  than  the  Puca 

*  J.  W.  Evans,  Expedition  to  Caupolican,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1903,  XXII,  pp.  601-646,  map ; 
The  Rocks  of  the  Cataracts  of  the  River  Madeira  and  the  adjoining  portion  of  the  Beni 
and  Marmore,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1906,  LXII,  pp.  88-124,  map. 

'  M.  Conway,  Exploration  in  the  Bolivian  Andes,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1899,  XIV,  pp.  14-34, 
map,  in  particular  Bonney,  pp.  18  and  31  ;  P.  Lake,  Trilobites  from  Bolivia,  Quart. 
Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1906,  LXII,  pp.  425-430 ;  E.  Wood,  GraptoUtes  from  BoUvia,  op.  cit., 
pp.  431-432. 


470  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [part  v 

sandstone.  This  sandstone  extends  over  so  wide  an  area  that  its  trans- 
gression does  not  seem  reconcilable  with  the  previous  existence  of  a  great 
range  ^. 

These  facts  are  supplemented  by  important  and  more  recent  observations 
made  by  the  Argentine  geologists,  which  have  been  communicated  to  me 
through  the  kindness  of  Messrs.  Hermitte,  Keidel,  and  Schiller. 

The  folding  towards  the  east  is  still  perceptible  in  the  extreme  east  of 
the  range ;  on  the  east  side  of  the  Sierra  de  Zenta  (about  lat.  23°  S.,  long. 
65°  10'  W.)  Keidel  observed  flakes  of  phyllite,  and  Cambrian  and  lower 
Silurian  sediments,  which  have  been  thrust  towards  the  east ;  even  the 
upper  Cretaceous  is  included  in  the  overthrust  flakes.  In  many  places  the 
eastern  border  of  the  pre- Cordillera  appears,  says  Keidel,  to  be  the  margin 
of  a  segment  which  has  been  thrust  up  on  to  an  invisible  mass ;  it  marks 
approximately  the  limit  up  to  which  the  efiect  of  the  horizontal  movement 
is  directly  visible  towards  the  east.  Similar  flakes  had  previously  been 
observed  by  Valentine  on  the  upper  Bermejo  in  the  same  region 2. 

From  this  point  to  Mendoza,  through  twelve  degrees  of  latitude,  the 
southern  border  of  the  range  reveals  long  fractures,  horsts,  and  trough- 
faults,  which  cut  through  the  folds.  Brackebusch  distinguished  in  this 
region  no  less  than  nine  mountain  ranges  or  coulisses,  proceeding  towards 
the  south ;  the  eastern  ranges  rise  more  or  less  isolated  from  the  plain,  the 
western  are  longer  and  more  closely  crowded  together.  Owing  to  this 
arrangement  the  isohypses  drawn  by  this  observer  present  us  with  a 
picture  which  resembles,  though  on  a  larger  scale,  that  of  the  outer  border 
of  the  Rocky  mountains  (p.  385,  fig.  31)  ^ 

These  coulisses  are  free  ends,  which  emerge  from  a  network  of  fractures. 
Stappenbeck  found  this  to  be  the  case  in  Rioja,  and  Keidel  in  Mendoza. 
Transverse  disturbances  also  set  in,  and,  as  a  consequence  of  the  persistence 
of  the  folding,  torsions  have  been  produced  near  Mendoza,  as  well  as  over- 
thrusts  of  the  Cambrian  on  to  plant-bearing  Rhaetic  beds. 

In  about  the  latitude  of  the  bay  of  Arica  the  western  part  of  the  'pro- 
montory of  Brazilia  was  overwhelmed  by  the  folding  movement  directed 
towards  the  east,  and  at  the  same  time  broken  in  along  sub-meridional 
lines.  This  process  gave  rise  to  the  Argentine  praecordilleras,  but  the 
movertient  decreases  in  force  towards  the  south  and  dies  away  south  of 

*  H.  Hoek  und  G.  Steinmann,  Erlauterung  zur  Routenkarte  der  Expedition  in  die 
Anden  von  BoHvien,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1906,  pp.  1-12,  maps. 

2  H.  Keidel,  Ueber  den  Ban  der  argentinischen  Anden,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien, 
1907,  CXVI,  pp.  649-674  ;  J.  Valentin,  Bosquejo  geologico  de  la  Argentina  (from  the  3rd 
edition  of  F.  Latzina,  Diccion.  geogr.  Arg.),  8vo,  Buenos  Aires,  1897,  50  pp. 

'  L.  Brackebusch,  Mapa  geologico  del  Interior  de  la  Republica  Argentina,  5  sheets, 
folio,  Gotha,  1892  ;  Hohenschichten-Karte,  in  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1893,  pi.  10.  A  summary 
of  the  petrographical  work  is  given  by  Romberg  in  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1893,  Beilage-Band 
VIII,  p.  276. 


cH.xiii]         FOLDING  OF  THE  FORELAND  471 


Mendoza  ;  possibly  it  has  not  come  to  an  end  even  at  the  present  day.  The 
very  considerable  quantities  of  post- Cretaceous  gravel  and  conglomerate 
which  occur  on  many  mountain-sides  show  inclinations  up  to  60°  and 
marked  unconformities.  The  network  of  faults  in  Mendoza  sometimes 
forms  the  starting  point  of  earthquakes. 

Although  the  isolated  Sierra  de  Cordoba  (2,530  meters)  presents  diver- 
gent inclinations,  yet  its  origin  may  be  ascribed  to  the  same  general  process. 
This  sierra  consists  almost  exclusively  of  pre-Cambrian  rocks.  Its  folds 
strike,  according  to  Bodenbender,  through  four  degrees  of  latitude,  chiefly 
to  N.  25°  W.  (with  variations  to  N.  25°  E.),  and  are  cut  through  by  younger 
fractures ;  the  sub-meridional  western  border  possibly  corresponds  through- 
out its  length  with  a  fracture  of  this  kind.  Considerable  subsidences  also 
reveal  a  covering  of  what  is  probably  Permo-triassic  sandstone  ^. 

This  extensive  folding  of  the  foreland  is  unique  of  its  kind;  a  closer 
comparison  between  the  Andes  and  Brazil  thus  suggests  itself.  On  the 
lower  Amazon,  Katzer  describes  transgressive  Devonian  represented  by 
the  Hamilton  stage  (according  to  Schuchert,  Oriskany)  of  the  United*  States. 
In  Matto  Grosso,  according  to  Ammon's  statement,  we  again  meet  with  the 
Hamilton  stage,  characterized  by  the  widely-distributed  Vitulina  pustnlosa, 
and  also  the  next  oldest  stage,  the  upper  Helderberg  (and  Oriskany  sand- 
stone), containing  a  great  quantity  of  Leptocoelia  (Anoplotheca)  flabellites. 
Both  the  Leptocoelia  and  the  Vitulina  stages  were  observed  by  Bodenbender 
in  the  pre-Cordilleras,  separated  only  by  a  bed  with  a  lower  Silurian  Meri- 
stella ;  Kayser  has  inferred  from  this  the  presence  of  a  transgression. 
Both  stages  reach  lake  Titicaca  ^. 

On  the  Amazon  these  stages  are  followed  by  the  marine  upper  Carbo- 
niferous. On  lake  Titicaca,  and  then  for  a  great  distance  towards  the 
north-east,  as  well  as  towards  the  south-east,  nearly  as  far  as  Cochabamba, 
Carboniferous  (upper?)  also  occurs  (I,  p.  518)^. 

^  G.  Bodenbender,  La  Sierra  de  Cordoba,  Anal.  Minist.  Agric,  Secc.  Geol.,  1905,  I, 
no.  2,  147  pp.,  map. 

2  F.  Katzer,  Das  Amazonas-Devon ;  Sitzb.  bohm.  Ges.  Wiss.,  1897,  50  pp.,  map,  in 
particular  p.  41 ;  Grundziige  der  Geologie  des  unteren  Amazonas-Gebietes,  8vo,  Leipzig, 
1903,  296  pp.,  map,  in  particular  p.  244  et  seq. ;  also  C.  Schuchert,  Geology  of  the  Lower 
Amazon  Region,  Journ.  Geol.  Chicago,  1906,  XIV,  pp.  722-746  ;  L.  vonAmmon,  Devoni- 
sche  Versteinerungen  von  Lagoinho  in  Mato  Grosso  (Brasil),  Zeitschr.  Ges.  Erdk.,  1893, 
XXVIII,  pp.  352-366 ;  G.  Bodenbender,  Devono  y  Gondwana  en  la  Republica  Argentina, 
Bol.  Acad.  Cordoba,  1897,  XV,  pp.  201-255,  map ;  Contribucion  al  conocimiento  de  la 
Precordillera  de  San  Juan  de  Mendoza,  etc.,  op.  cit.,  1902,  XVII,  pp.  203-264,  in  par- 
ticular pp.  221  and  232  ;  E.  Kayser,  Beitrage  zur  Kenntniss  einiger  palaeozoischer 
Faunen  Siid-Americas,  Zeitscbr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1897,  XLIX,  pp.  274-317;  for  all 
details,  A.  Ulrich,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1892,  Beilage-Band  VIII,  116  pp.,  in  particular  p.  90  et 
seq. ;  and  J.  Thomas,  Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1905,  LVII,  pp.  233-270. 

^  On  the  upper  Pachitea  (left  tributary  of  the  Ucayali  lat.  10-11°)  lies  upper  Carboni- 
ferous with  Spirifer  Condor  and  other  species  ;  these  were  found  by  Orton  and  determined 
by  DtBrby  ;  Katzer,  Grundziige  der  Geologie  des  unteren  Amazonas-Gebietes,  p.  246. 


472  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OP  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [paetv 


In  North  Brazil  and  in  this  part  of  the  Andes  all  marine  formations 
come  to  an  end  with  the  Carboniferous,  and  they  do  not  recommence  until 
the  deposition  of  the  upper  Cretaceous  covering ;  this  covering  occurs  in  both 
regions,  but  in  Brazil  it  presents  the  character  of  a  partly  marine  trans- 
gression, and  is  restricted  to  sublitoral  areas.  Marine  beds  of  Tertiary 
age  are  entirely  absent.  In  South  Brazil  the  marine  beds  in  general  are 
little  developed,  until,  proceeding  from  the  La  Plata  in  the  south,  a  great 
Tertiary  transgression  sets  in. 

We  now  reach  the  non-marine  deposits.  Iq  the  pre -Cordilleras,  between 
San  Juan  and  Mendoza,  Szajnocha  has  established  the  presence  of  the 
European  culm  flora ;  it  is  not  yet  known  in  Brazil  ^. 

Zeiller  has  shown  that  the  coal-measures  of  the  Rio  Grande  do  Sul 
and  the  southern  part  of  Santa  Caterina  (lat.  28°-32°  S.,  long.  48°-54°W.) 
contain  the  Khaharbari  flora  of  the  Indian  lower  Gondwana. 

Kurtz  discovered  the  same  flora  in  Bajo  de  Velis  (Sierra  San  Luis, 
lat.  32^  20'  S.,  long.  65°  30'  W.),  and  Bodenbender  found  it  in  the  sandstone 
which  occurs  in  the  so-called  Pampas  sierras  and  the  pre-Cordilleras, 
resting  sometimes  on  an  Archaean,  sometimes  on  a  Palaeozoic  foundation. 
The  typical  species,  Glossopteris  Browniana,  does  not  fail,  and  Lepidoden- 
dron  here  accompanies  this  flora,  as  in  South  Africa  and  on  the  lower 
Tunguska  (III,  p.  36)  \ 

Rhaetic  plant-remains  are  known  in  the  pre-Cordilleras.  Then  follow 
the  Puca  sandstones,  which  are  certainly  in  part  extramarine ;  and  fresh- 
water Cretaceous  marls,  containing  here  and  there  freshwater  shells 
and  Dinosaurs,  are  recorded  at  a  height  of  4,000  meters.  Above  these 
beds,  especially  in  certain  parts  of  the  Argentine  sierras,  there  lie,  precisely 
as  in  Colombia,  astonishing  thicknesses  of  gravel,  sand,  and  argillaceous 
sediment,  devoid  of  organic  remains,  which  have  been  affected  by  tectonic 
movements  from  the  time  of  the  upper  Cretaceous  down  to  the  present  day. 

From  this  it  appears  that  nowhere  between  lats.  14°  and  35°  S.,  at  least 
in  the  whole  of  that  region  of  the  Andes  which  lies  east  of  lake  Titicaca 
and  the  volcano  of  Tinguirica,  does  a  Mesozoic  completion  of  the  marine 
series  set  in.  In  the  Argentine  pre-Cordilleras  we  have,  in  fact,  a  foreland 
series.  It  corresponds  in  the  closest  manner  with  that  of  Brazil ;  from  the 
Carboniferous  to  the  upper  Cretaceous  no  marine  bed  makes  its  appearance, 
and  successive  floras  (Culm,  Gondwdna,  Rhaetic)  show  that  through  long 
periods  no  sea  existed  here.  Active  volcanos  are  absent  throughout  this 
eastern  part  of  the  Andes.  It  is  true,  however,  that  indications  exist 
of  former  volcanic  activity. 

*  L.  Szajnocha,  Carbonische  Pflanzenreste  aus  der  Argentinischen  Republik,  Sitzb. 
k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1891,  C,  pp.  199-209. 

^  R.  Zeiller,  Flore  fossile  des  gisements  houillers  du  Rio  grande  do  Sul  (Bresil  meridional), 
Bull.  Soc.  g^ol.  France,  1895,  3®  ser.,  XXIII,  pp.  601-628  ;  F.  Kurtz,  Contribuciones 
d  la  Palaeophytologi'a  Argentina,  Rev.  del  Museo  de  la  Plata,  1895,  VI,  pp.  119-139. 


CH.  XIIl] 


ALTAPLANICIE 


473 


Stelzner  has  shown  that  a  long  series  of  silver- tin  veins  extends  from 
the  northern  end  of  lake  Titicaca,  along  the  lofty  Cordillera  Real  through 
Oruro  and  the  famous  Potosi,  nearly  up  to  Argentina,  i.e.  from  lat.  15°  10' 
to  lat.  21°  S.  It  corresponds  with  a  range  of  quartz-trachyte  and  dacite  ^ 
which  is  at  most  of  Cretaceous  age.  This  range,  occurring  outside  the  zone 
of  the  existing  volcanos,  shows  that  here  also  the  volcanic  activity  has  been 
restricted  or  displaced.  At  other  places  also  andesites  cross  over  into  the 
eastern  region. 

In  the  west  of  this  part  of  the  Andes,  an  elongated,  narrow  plateau,  the 
Bolivian  AUaplanicie,  makes  its  appearance  as  a  fairly  independent  element. 
It  stands  out  very  plainly  in  about  lat.  16°  S. ;  beyond  lat.  23°  S.  the  plateau 
of  Atacama  may  be  regarded  as  its  continuation.  It  probably  attains  its 
greatest  breadth  in  the  latitude  of  the  bay  of  Arica  and  the  bend  of 
Cochabamba,  where  the  problematical  indications  of  a  syntaxis,  diverging 
from  the  easterly  direction  of  the  folding,  make  their  appearance.  Dereims 
estimates  the  height  at  3,700  to  3,800  meters  (Titicaca,  3,812  meters ;  in 
the  east,  Illampu  6,684  meters,  and  Illimani  6,458  meters,  according  to 
Conway ;  in  the  west,  Sajama  over  6,500  meters 

According  to  a  transverse  section  by  Steinmann  the  Altaplanicie  consists 
(in  lat.  17°)  of  gently  undulating  beds.  To  the  east  the  predominant  rocks 
are  the  Palaeozoic  series  of  the  Cordillera  Real,  traversed  by  trachyte, 
further  to  the  west  the  very  thick  Cretaceous  Puca-sandstone  and  the 
equally  thick  post-Cretaceous  sediments  ^. 

The  Cordillera  Real,  the  Argentine  cordilleras,  and  the  Altaplanicie 
form  a  mountain-land  with  the  stratified  sequence  of  the  Brazilian  fore- 
land, Andine  structure,  and  no  active  volcanos. 

The  Cordillera  de  los  Andes  and  Cordillera  de  la  Costa.  These  two 
chains  must  be  regarded  as  forming  a  single  structure.  The  Cordillera  de 
la  Costa  is  the  natural  foundation  of  the  Mesozoic  series,  which  rests 
autochthonously  against  and  upon  its  eastern  side ;  it  is  this  series  which 
bears  the  volcanos. 

In  Peru  marine  Trias  is  present.  In  south  Peru  and  for  a  long  distance 
down  into  Chile  the  series  ranges  from  the  Lias  into  the  Cretaceous ;  the 
Tertiary  is  represented  by  leaf -bearing  beds.  The  thick  Palaeozoic  series 
of  the  near  East  has  not  yet  been  observed,  only  at  La  Ligua  (lat.  32°  27'  S., 
north  of  Valparaiso)  shales  with  Productus  are  recorded  by  R.  A.  Philippi  ^. 

To  the  west  of  this  Mesozoic  series  the  Archaean  rocks  of  the  coast 

^  A.  W.  Stelzner,  Silber-Zinnerzlagerstatten  Bolivias  (edited  by  A.  Bergeat),  Zeitschr. 
deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1897,  XLIX,  pp.  51-142,  map. 

2  A.  Dereims,  Le  Haut  Plateau  de  Bolivie,  Ann.  de  Geogr.,  1907,  XVI,  pp.  350-359. 

^  G.  Steinmann,  Entstehung  der  Kupfererzlagerstatte  von  Corocoro,  Festschrift  fiir 
H.  Rosenbusch,  8vo,  Stuttgart,  1906,  pp.  335-367. 

*  R.  A.  Philippi,  Palaeozoische  Schichten  in  Chile,  Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1898, 
L,  p.  435. 


474  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [party 

Cordilleras  first  make  their  appearance  in  the  north  as  isolated  ridges 
(I,  p.  523) ;  further  south  they  form  long  continuous  ranges.  Where  they 
are  absent,  as  for  example  near  Iquique  (lat.  20°  10'  S.),  the  Mesozoic  rocks 
reach  the  sea.  Ascending  from  the  ancient  granite  of  the  coast  at  Copiapo 
(lat.  27°  15'  S.),  towards  the  east,  Steinmann  met  with  Mesozoic  porphy rites, 
then  siliceous  Neocomian  limestone,  and  afterwards  conglomerates  and  tuff, 
with  dykes  of  porphyrite.  At  La  Ternera  he  reached  coal-measures  resting 
on  a  conglomerate  of  Archaean  rocks ;  they  are  overlain  by  Lias  with 
Arietes  ^.  At  Caracoles  gypsum  makes  its  appearance  in  the  Oolites  and 
affords  an  easily  recognized  horizon. 

On  this  diversified  Mesozoic  series,  generally  beginning  with  the  lower 
Oolites,  the  great  volcanos  are  seated.  As  regards  their  distribution  we 
may  refer  to  what  has  been  said  above,  and  to  the  lists  of  Hauthal  (I,  p.  519 
et  passim).  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  volcanic  activity  has  manifested 
itself  over  this  long  line  from  very  remote  times,  since  the  lower  Oolites,  at 
least,  and  perhaps  since  the  Rhaetic  or  the  Lias.  Many  of  the  Mesozoic 
sediments  are  true  tuffs.  The  whole  series  is  invaded  by  sills  and  bosses. 
In  the  region  between  lats.  27°  and  30°  40'  S.,  as  would  appear  from  Moricke's 
observations,  diabases  and  augite  porphyrites  first  made  their  appearance, 
chiefly  as  outpoured  sheets,  with  beds  of  tuff  and  breccias,  and  these  were 
predominant  throughout  the  whole  of  the  Jurassic  and  a  part  of  the 
Cretaceous  period.  Then  more  acid  rocks  followed,  quartz-diorites,  horn- 
blende porphyrites,  and  granites  accompanied  by  quartz-porphyry.  Some- 
where near  the  beginning  of  the  Tertiary  times  plagioclase-augite  rocks 
made  their  appearance  and  were  followed  by  andesites  and  liparites.  The 
volcanos  in  Chile,  not  yet  extinct,  which  were  visited  by  Moricke,  are  formed 
of  basic  rocks,  varying  between  olivine-bearing  pyroxene  andesite  and 
basalt  ^. 

This  succession  of  Moricke's  is  valid  as  a  single  instance  only.  The 
quartz-diorites,  the  granites,  and  the  whole  group  of  the  so-called  Andes 
granites  may  be  regarded  as  the  equivalent  of  the  North  American  grano- 

^  H.  Graf  zu  Solms-Laubach  and  G.  Steinmann,  Das  Auftreten  der  Flora  der  rhatischen 
Kohlenschichten  von  La  Ternera  (Chile)  (Steinmann,  Beitrage,  VII),  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1899, 
Beilage-Band  XII,  pp.  581-609.  At  Jorquera,  south  of  Ternera,  the  ancient  hornblende 
gneiss  of  the  Coast  cordillera  crops  out  from  the  midst  of  the  Mesozoic  porphyrites ; 
F.  von  Wolff,  Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1899,  LI,  p.  478.  A  survey  of  the  Mesozoic 
zone  of  North  Chile  is  given  by  W.  Moricke,  Versteinerungen  des  Lias  und  Unteren 
Oolith  von  Chile  (Steinmann,  Beitrage,  II),  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1894,  Beilage-Band  IX, 
pp.  69-76  ;  for  the  physical  structure  of  the  north,  also  L.  Darapsky,  Das  Departement 
Taltal,  8vo,  Berlin,  1900,  229  pp.,  atlas. 

R.  Hauthal,  Die  Vulkangebiete  in  Chile  und  Argentinien,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1903, 
pp.  97-102,  map  ;  and  Distribucion  de  los  centres  volcanicos,  Riv.  del  Museo  de  La 
Plata,  1903,  16  pp.,  map  ;  a  small  supplement  is  given  by  Steflfen,  Verh.  deutsch.  wiss. 
Ver.  Santiago,  1904,  V,  p.  53,  note  ;  W.  Moricke,  Geologisch-petrologische  Studien  in 
den  chilenischen  Anden,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Berlin,  1896,  XLIV,  pp.  1161-1171. 


CH.  XIIl] 


VOLCANOS  m  LINES 


475 


diorites.  These  are  of  various  age,  some  of  them  very  recent.  They  are 
repeated  towards  the  south  ;  Nordenskjold  mentions  them,  e.  g.  in  the  island 
of  Calbuco  (north  of  Chiloe),  and  even  much  further  south  ^. 

Tracts  of  extraordinary  length  here  come  under  observation.  Burck- 
hardt  points  out  that  thick  conglomerates  formed  of  well-rounded  pebbles 
of  Jurassic  porphyrite  are  known  to  extend,  unchanged  in  character,  from 
Bolivia  to  lake  Nahuel-huapi,  that  is  for  not  less  than  25  degrees  of  latitude. 
These  facts  show  how  small  a  part  of  the  volcanic  history  of  these  regions 
is  represented  by  the  existing  volcanos. 

The  works  of  Hauthal,  previously  cited,  still  remain  our  principal  source 
of  information,  although  the  area  they  include  only  begins  at  lat.  22°  S. 
The  most  important  results  obtained  by  this  observer  are  :  the  scarcity  or 
complete  absence  of  volcanic  mountains  in  the  Patagonian  cordillera,  their 
almost  exclusive  occurrence  in  the  principal  cordillera,  their  arrangement 
in  series,  often  parallel  to  one  another  and  the  trend-lines  of  the  Andes,  and 
finally  their  most  frequent  occurrence  in  those  places  where  the  mountains 
consist  of  parallel  folds  running  north  and  south,  as  between  lats.  22°-27°  S., 
where  also  the  rectilinear  arrangement  is  most  clearly  seen. 

To  this  we  may  add  that  we  as  yet  possess  no  evidence  which  might 
indicate  a  migration  of  the  volcanos,  but  on  the  other  hand  fault-troughs 
are  known  in  the  volcanic  zone,  as  for  example  the  trough  of  Antofagasta^ 
mentioned  by  Hauthal,  which  is  150  kilometers  long  and  only  5  to  8  kilo- 
meters broad. 

We  have  already  observed  that  andesites  extend  into  the  region  of  the 
eastern  series,  but  no  active  volcanos  :  a  few,  such  as  the  twin  volcanos  at 
Poma  (Jujuy,  Hauthal's  no.  28),  may  stand  within  the  boundary,  but  they 
are  not  recorded  as  active. 

On  the  north,  the  western  border  of  the  Altaplanicie  may  be  taken  as 
marking  the  eastern  boundary :  but  I  can  find  no  precise  accounts  of  this 
boundary  in  its  course  further  to  the  south ;  the  older  stratified  series  of 
the  east  may  sink  normally  beneath  the  Mesozoic  series  of  the  Cordillera 
de  los  Andes  or  it  may  be  thrown  down  along  a  fracture,  but  in  the  absence 
of  information  we  cannot  decide  between  these  alternatives.  A  boundary 
between  a  thick  Palaeozoic  series  and  a  Mesozoic  series  which  is  without  a 
Palaeozoic  foundation  occurs,  as  we  know,  in  the  Basin  ranges  near  the 
117th  meridian  (I,  p.  579). 

In  the  south,  W.  Schiller  has  travelled  from  the  Pic  de  Palo  (east  of  San 
Juan),  which  consists  of  pre-Cambrian  and  Palaeozoic  rocks,  towards  the 
west  across  the  lower  Silurian  Sierra  del  Tigre  and  thence  into  the  Mesozoic 
region  of  mount  Aconcagua.   His  account  of  mount  Aconcagua  has  already 

^  0.  Nordenskjold,  Krystallinisclie  Gesteine  der  Magellanslander,  Wissenschaftliclie 
Eirgebnisse  der  schwedischen  Expedition  nach  den  Magellanslandern,  1901,  I,  pp.  175- 
240,  in  particular  p.  202. 


476  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [party 

been  published^.  From  letters  written  later  I  extract  the  following: 
Towards  the  boundary  the  structure  is  extremely  complicated ;  the  Pic 
de  Palo  is  overfolded  towards  the  west ;  west  of  the  Sierra  del  Tigre 
the  Mesozoic  quartz-porphyries  come  in.  Further  south  the  fault-trough  of 
Uspallata  marks  the  boundary.  The  Cordillera  (not  the  Sierra)  del  Tigre,, 
which  is  continued  towards  the  south  into  mount  Aconcagua,  consists  of 
quartz-porphyry ;  the  J urassic  and  Cretaceous  beds  which  are  superposed 
on  its  western  side  dip  towards  the  west,  and  are  cut  off  next  the  Espinacito 
pass  by  a  great  fault ;  this  fault  is  followed  by  the  same  series  of  rocks, 
from  the  quartz-porphyry  upwards,  similarly  dipping  towards  the  west. 
The  volcanic  rock  has  here  caught  up  mighty  fragments  of  Mesozoic  forma- 
tions, and  also  gypsum,  and  carried  them  to  a  great  height.  Aconcagua  is 
not  a  volcano,  but  an  accumulation  of  Mesozoic  rocks,  and  to  the  south  of 
this  great  mountain  (near  the  Penitentes)  a  great  overthrust  occurs  in 
Mesozoic  beds. 

Here  the  distinguished  geologists  who  are  occupied  with  this  region 
find  difficult  problems  confronting  them. 

Towards  the  south  the  eastern  Palaeozoic  series  completely  disappears ; 
and  the  eastern  chains  of  the  Cordillera  de  los  Andes  are  thrown  into  long 
open  folds  ^. 

Not  far  from  lat.  35°  S.  the  Sierra  Pintada  leaves  the  border  of  the 
Cordillera,  and  strikes  out  to  the  south-east  into  the  Pampas ;  according  to 
Wehrli  it  consists  of  dykes  and  long  veins  of  porphyry  and  diabase  which 
crop  out  from  tuff  and  sandstone.  This  sierra  is  cut  through  by  the  Rio 
Diamante  and  the  Atuel ;  its  southern  extremity  is  60  kilometers  distant 
from  the  border  of  the  principal  range.  A  plain  which  narrows  away  like 
a  wedge  towards  the  north  separates  it  from  the  border  of  the  high  moun- 
tains. In  the  United  States  this  plain  would  probably  be  described  as  a 
Park.  On  entering  the  great  range  Burckhardt  encountered  a  broad 
syncline  striking  north  and  south,  which  forms  the  outermost  part  of  the 
east  border  of  the  mountains  along  the  Atuel  (lat.  35°  S.)  and  the  Rio 
Malargue  (lat.  35°  30'  S.),  but  probably  extends  far  beyond  this.  This  syncline 

^  W.  Schiller,  Geologische  Untersucliung  bei  Puente  del  Inca  (Aconcagua),  N.  J.  f.  Min., 
etc.,  1907,  Beilage-Band  XXIV,  pp.  716-736,  map.  The  specimens  which  Fitzgerald 
brought  back  from  the  summit  of  Aconcagua  are,  according  to  Bonney,  hornblende 
andesite  ;  Fitzgerald,  The  highest  Andes,  8vo,  London,  1899,  p.  321. 

^  G.  Bodenbender,  Terreno  jurassico  y  cretacico  en  los  Andes  Argentines  entre  el  Rio 
Diamante  y  Rio  Limay,  Bol.  Acad.  Cordoba,  1892,  XIII,  pp.  5-47,  map ;  Lange,  Hauthal 
y  Wolff, Examen  topografico y  geologico  de  los  Departamentos de  S.Carlos, S.Rafael,  y  Villa 
Belti-an  (Provincia  de  Mendoza),  Rev.  del  Museo  de  La  Plata,  1895,  VII,  pp.  13-93,  maps  ^ 
C.  Burckhardt,  Profils  geologiques  transversaux  de  la  Cordillere  Argentine,  Ann.  Mus.  de 
La  Plata,  1900,  foL,  136  pp.,  maps ;  for  the  stratigraphy  of  the  Mesozoic  foothills  between 
lats.  35°  and  40°  S.  valuable  information  (based  on  Bodenbender's  collections)  is  given  by 
0.  Behrendscn,  Zur  Geologie  des  OstAbhanges  der  argentinischen  Cordillere,  Zeitschr. 
deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1891,  XLIII,  pp.  369-420,  and  1892,  XLIV,  pp.  1-42. 


€H.xiii]    SECTION  BETWEEN  LAT.  38^  AND  89^  S.  477 


comprises,  in  conformable  succession,  the  Mesozoic  series  from  the  lower 
Jurassic  upwards,  including  the  Senonian  and  the  Danian.  It  is  overlain 
unconformably  by  lavas  which  are  younger  than  the  folding. 

In  this  region  the  porphyrite  conglomerates  on  the  Rio  Colorado  become 
so  extremely  thick  that  they  form  the  greater  part  of  the  valley  slopes. 
Oypsum  is  intercalated  with  the  Jurassic  ^. 

Between  lats.  38°  and  39°  S.  Burckhardt  is  again  our  guide.  The  open 
folding,  the  porphyrite  conglomerates,  the  gypsum  and  the  recent  lavas 
reappear  here.  The  upper  stages  of  the  Cretaceous  are  not  to  be  seen,  but 
in  the  interior  of  the  mountains  a  freshwater  deposit  occurs,  believed  to  be 
Eocene ;  it  is  true  that  it  lies  unconformably,  but  its  bedding  is  disturbed. 
In  this  region  the  cordillera  maintains  its  original  direction,  but  the  strike 
of  the  folds  varies,  probably  owing  to  the  presence  of  large  granite  masses, 
and  the  whole  cordillera  is  broken  up  into  three  branches  by  the  insertion 
of  two  elongated  plains.  Burckhardt  enumerates  the  following,  taken  in 
order  from  east  to  west :  1.  The  eastern  zone,  cropping  out  from  the 
Pampas ;  simple  Mesozoic  folds ;  2.  The  plateau  de  las  Lajas ;  gravel  and 
recent  lavas  ;  3.  The  chain  of  Peiro  Hachado,  Mesozoic  folds ;  porphyry  and 
porphyrite,  recent  volcanic  cone  ;  4.  Plateau  of  the  Alumine,  recent  lavas, 
beneath  which  granite  is  exposed;  5.  Eastern  part  of  the  chain  of  Lon- 
quimay,  folded  Jurassic,  broken  through  by  a  more  recent  granite  boss; 
6.  Western  part  of  the  same  chain,  folded  porphyrite  conglomerates,  and 
porphyrite,  above  them  recent  volcanos  and  lavas  sloping  away  to  the 
longitudinal  valley  of  Chile.  The  structure  of  the  margins  of  the  inserted 
plains  leads  Burckhardt  to  the  conclusion  that  they  are  sunken  areas,  and 
that  a  virgation  of  the  Andes  occurs  here,  produced  by  subsidences  ^. 
The  occurrence  of  gypsum  at  a  definite  horizon  in  the  Jurassic  is  itself  an 
indication  of  local  subsidence  at  an  earlier  period  ;  we  shall  recur  later 
to  this  peculiar  structure,  which  so  strongly  recalls  that  of  the  Basin 
ranges. 

In  the  east,  near  Roca  on  the  Rio  Negro  (lat.  39°  5'  S.,  long.  67°  30'  W.), 
the  Guaranitic  stage,  consisting  of  red  sand  and  containing  remains  of 
Dinosaurs,  may  be  seen  beneath  the  general  covering  of  younger  forma- 
tions ;  it  forms  the  foundation  of  the  plain.  S.  Roth  has  found  lenticular 
marine  intercalations  in  this  sand,  and  Burckhardt  has  shown  that  its 
fauna  corresponds  with  the  upper  Senonian  and  Danian,  the  same  upper- 
most horizons  of  the  Cretaceous  which  have  just  been  mentioned  as 
occurring  in  the  syncline  of  the  Rio  Malargue  (lat.  35°  30'  S.).   It  is  the 

^  Webrli,  in  the  introduction  to  Burckhardt,  Profils  geologiques,  p.  7. 

^  C.  Burckhardt,  Coupe  geologique  de  la  Cordillere  entre  las  Lajas  et  Curucautin,  Ann. 
del  Museo  de  La  Plata,  1900,  100  pp.,  maps,  in  particular  pp.  64  and  65 ;  for  the  strati- 
graphy of  the  whole  range  between  lats.  33°  and  39°  S.,  Beitrage  zur  Kenntniss  der  Jura- 
und  Kreideformation  der  Cordilleren,  Palaeontographica,  1903,  L,  144  pp.,  maps. 


478  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [part  v 


same  stage  as  that  which  was  made  known,  about  32  degrees  of  latitude 
further  north,  by  Derby  and  White,  on  the  little  river  Maria  Farinha 
north  of  Pernambuco  (lat.  8°  S.) ;  its  correspondence  with  the  uppermost 
horizon  of  the  Cretaceous  of  Ninnyur  in  India  was  recognized  by 
Kossmat  ^. 

The  Guaranitic  sand  with  Dinosaurs  is  continued,  according  to  Roth's 
observations,  towards  the  west,  and  is  visible  on  the  lower  Pichi  Leufu 
(left  tributary  of  the  Limay,  lat.  40°  S.,  long.  70°  W).  A  lower  horizon  is 
formed  of  grey  quartzite.  Still  further  towards  the  west,  porphyry  tuff 
occurs,  and  a  tuff  of  vivid  red  and  yellow  colour  gives  its  name  to  the 
Piedra  Pintada.  In  this  red  tuffaceous  sandstone,  which  passes  below  into 
marly  limestone,  Roth  found  marine  Lias  fossils  and  an  intercalated  bed 
with  land-plants,  which  belong,  according  to  Kurtz,  to  the  flora  of  Raj- 
mahal  (upper  Gondwana  of  India). 

The  beds,  which  have  hitherto  lain  horizontally,  now  present  an 
increasing  number  of  disturbances,  and  in  the  ravine  of  the  neighbouring 
Sierra  de  la  Angostura,  which  is  about  1,000  meters  in  height,  gneiss  and 
granite  crop  out  2.  Porphyries  and  granite,  accompanied  by  recent  volcanic 
rocks,  follow  and  continue  as  far  as  the  river  Collon  Cura. 

The  Lias  fossils  of  the  Piedra  Pintada  are  the  most  southerly  pre- 
Cretaceous  marine  fossils  so  far  known  in  Patagonia.  Their  occurrence 
outside  the  border  of  the  great  cordillera  shows  that  the  Mesozoic  zone 
spreads  out  towards  the  east  beneath  the  Patagonian  plain ;  the  occurrence 
of  gneiss  and  a  land  flora  shows,  however,  that  the  foundation  of  this  zone 
is  already  visible  here,  and  the  superposition  of  the  land  flora  is  probably 
just  as  autochthonous  as  in  the  Cordillera  de  la  Costa.  At  the  same  time 
Archaean  rock  acquires  an  increased  development  in  the  high  mountains. 

*  Santiago  Roth,  Apuntes  sobre  la  geologia  y  la  paleontologia  de  los  territorios  del 
Rio  Negro  y  Neuquen,  Rev.  del  Museo  de  La  Plata,  1899,  IX,  pp.  141-196,  map  ;  Burck- 
hardt,  Le  gisement  supercretace  de  Roca,  op.  cit.,  1902,  X,  pp.  206-222 ;  A.  C.  White, 
Contribution  to  the  Palaeontology  of  Brazil,  Arch.  Mus.  Nac,  Rio  de  Janeiro,  1888,  IX, 
273  pp. ;  F.  Kossmat,  Bedeutung  der  siidindischen  Kreideformation,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol. 
Reichsanst.,  1894,  LIV,  pp.  459-478,  in  particular  p.  467.  The  description  of  the  regions 
to  the  south  of  lat.  39°  S,  is  based  on  the  beautiful  edition  of  Moreno's  map  (1 : 1,500,000), 
which  appeared  as  a  supplement  to  L.  Gallois,  Les  Andes  de  Patagonie,  Ann.  Geogr., 
1901,  X. 

-  Roth,  Kurtz,  et  Burckhardt,  Lias  de  la  Piedra  Pintada  (Neuquen),  Rev.  del  Museo  de 
La  Plata,  1902,  X,  pp.  225-250,  map.  According  to  Roth  the  gneiss  would  rest  upon  the 
Lias,  but  the  observer  states  that  he  had  no  opportunity  to  make  sure  of  this.  This  lie  of 
the  beds  would  indicate  a  considerable  movement  towards  the  east.  For  the  geographical 
position  see  H.  Zapalowicz,  Rio  Negro-Gebiet  in  Patagonien  ;  Denkschr.  k.  Akad.  Wiss. 
Wien,  1893,  LX,  pp.  531-564,  map.  According  to  the  maps  of  the  Padron  Minero  (An. 
Ministr.  Agric,  Secc.  Geol.,  1906,  I,  no.  3,  maps)  two  rivers  situated  somewhat  further 
south  bear  the  name  of  Pichi  Leufu.  The  same  work  mentions  numerous  dykes  of  gold- 
bearing  quartz  in  the  district  of  Teca  (Territory  of  Chubut,  lats.  42°  45'  and  43°  30'  S., 
and  longs.  70°  30'  to  71°  W.). 


CH.XIII]     DISPLACEMENT  OF  THE  WATERSHED  479 

Our  knowledge  of  the  range,  and  indeed  of  the  whole  of  Patagonia,  has 
been  greatly  increased  by  the  dispute  between  Chile  and  Argentina  with 
respect  to  their  boundary. 

On  the  partition  of  Patagonia  the  political  boundary  was  determined 
in  a  manner  which  to  some  extent  recalls  the  ancient  disputes  between  the 
Russians  and  Chinese  (III,  p.  109),  the  unknown  watershed  of  the  Andes  being 
adopted,  on  the  supposition  that  this  watershed  nearly  coincided  with  the 
crest  of  the  Andes.  But  this  range,  as  is  common  in  arctic  regions,  is  cut  across 
by  eydes,  so  that  south  of  lat.  41°  S.  the  watershed  is  almost  completely 
displaced  towards  the  east  side.  The  violence  of  the  western  storms,  the 
heavy  rainfall  on  the  Pacific  slope,  and  the  considerable  fall  of  many  of 
these  transverse  valleys  cause  the  rivers,  even  at  the  present  day,  to  cut 
their  beds  backwards,  which  is  equivalent  to  a  further  displacement  of  the 
watershed  towards  the  east,  and  many  of  the  great  lakes  on  the  east  side  of 
the  Andes  have  thus  acquired  an  outflow  towards  the  west  in  comparatively 
recent  times.  The  reports  of  StefFen  on  behalf  of  Chile  and  the  extensive 
travels  of  Moreno  and  his  colleagues  on  behalf  of  Argentina  have  not  only 
led  to  the  discovery  of  these  facts,  but  have  furnished  an  instructive,  though 
still  incomplete,  survey  of  the  Southern  Andes  ^. 

In  lats.  38°-39°  S.  the  cordillera  to  the  east  of  the  longitudinal  valley 
consists,  as  we  have  seen,  of  three  folded  zones,  which  are  separated  by  two 
downthrown  plains  (fault-troughs)  extending  from  north  to  south.  In  the 
western  plain  (Plateau  of  the  Alumin^)  granite  occurs  beneath  volcanic 
coverings;  the  granite  plateau,  which  Moreno  mentions  on  the  Pitchin- 
Nahuel-Huapi  (lat.  39°  35'  S.,  left  tributary  of  the  Alumin^),  is  probably  its 
continuation  2,  and  only  a  little  to  the  south  of  it,  according  to  Hauthal, 
this  range  must  possess  considerable  breadth  towards  the  west;  lake 
Huechu  Lafquen  lies  in  it ;  the  volcano  of  Lanin  and  others  are  seated  on 
it.  Beside  the  granite,  a  gneiss  range  ^  running  north  and  south  makes  its 
appearance  on  lakes  Lolog  and  Lacar  (lat.  40°  10'  S.).  These  ancient  rocks 
also  surround  the  whole  of  the  western  side  of  the  Nahuel-Huapi :  the 
great  Tronador  (3,400  meters,  lat.  41°  10'  S.)  is  an  extinct  volcano  on  a 
granite  base. 

Folded  ranges  of  Mesozoic,  however,  are  seen  again  to  the  east  of  the 

^  From  a  number  of  works  we  will  only  mention :  H.  Steffen,  Reisen  in  den  Patago- 
nischen  Anden,  Verh.  Ges.  Erdk.  Berlin,  1900,  XXVII,  pp.  194-220,  maps  ;  Reisenotizen 
aus  West  Patagonien,  Zeitschr.  Ges.  Erdk.  Berlin,  1903,  pp.  167-207 ;  The  Patagonian 
Cordillera  and  its  main  rivers  between  lats.  41°  and  48°  S.,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1900,  XVI, 
pp.  14-38,  maps ;  F.  P.  Moreno,  Apuntes  preliminares  sobre  una  excursion  a  los  territorios 
del  Neuquen,  Rio  Negro,  Chubut  y  Santa  Cruz,  Rev.  del  Museo  de  La  Plata,  1898,  VIII, 
pp.  198-372,  map  ;  Exploration  in  Patagonia,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1899,  XIV,  pp.  241-269  and 
353-378,  map. 

2  F.  P.  Moreno,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1899,  XIV,  p.  366. 

^  Hauthal,  in  Moreno,  Rev.  del  Museo  de  La  Plata,  1898,  VIII,  p.  338  et  seq. 


480  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [partv 


Cordillera.  On  the  south-east  border  of  the  Nahuel-Huapi,  near  Punto 
Moreno,  Wehrli  observed  a  zone  of  quartz-porphyry  and  porphyrite  extend- 
ing towards  the  south-east.  It  is  followed  on  the  east  by  coarse,  breccia- 
like tuffs,  and  still  further  to  the  east  by  sandstone ;  then  near  San  Carlos 
by  a  broad  anticline  of  beds  which,  judging  from  their  plant-remains,  can- 
not be  younger  than  the  upper  Cretaceous.  Similar  folds  are  visible  on  the 
east  border  of  the  Cordillera  even  to  the  south  of  lat.  40°  S.,  where  they 
disappear  beneath  the  lofty  basalt  mountains  which  accompany  this 
eastern  border  ^. 

The  rocks  of  the  south-eastern  part  of  the  Nahuel-Huapi  are  continued 
at  least  as  far  as  the  Rio  Manso  (lat.  41°  40'  S.) ;  east  of  the  river,  towards 
the  border  of  the  Cordillera,  Moreno  arrived  at  a  Cretaceous  chain,  which 
reaches  7,000  feet,  and  observed  peaks  of  a  porphyritic  rock  2. 

The  result  of  these  observations  is  as  follows : — 

The  ancient  rocks  of  the  Cordillera  de  la  Costa  proceed  further  and 
further  inland,  always  accompanied  on  the  east  by  Mesozoic  sediments; 
they  are  already  visible  in  lat.  40°  S.,  long.  70°  W.,  covered,  as  in  the  north, 
by  Mesozoic  plant-bearing  beds;  and  in  lats.  38°-39°  S.  two  long  plains 
(fault-troughs)  divide  the  Andes  lengthwise,  east  of  the  longitudinal 
valley. 

Porphyrites,  with  their  variegated  tuffs,  occur  at  many  localities.  They 
may  be  traced  into  the  Pampas,  and  far  to  the  south,  beneath  the 
basalts  which  accompany  the  east  border  of  the  range,  the  porphyry  boss 
of  mount  Kochaik  (lat.  49°  6'  S.,  long.  72°  W.)  is  still  visible  3.  Moreno 
mentions  a  depression  which  strikes  towards  the  south-east  nearly  parallel 
to  the  Rio  Negro,  and  to  the  south  of  this  a  fairly  extensive  mountain-mass, 
the  Balcheta  (about  lat.  40°  30'-40'  S.,  and  long.  66°-66°  30'  W.),  which  rises 
to  a  height  of  1,700  meters*.  A  porphyry  has  already  been  mentioned 
(I,  p.  516)  as  occurring  to  the  south  of  the  mouth  of  the  Rio  Negro  in  the 
Sierra  San  Antonio  at  the  head  of  the  gulf  of  San  Matias  (lat.  41°  40'  S.). 
To  the  south  of  this  locality  porphyritic  rocks  are  not  infrequent.    If  we 

^  L.  Wehrli,  Rapport  preliminaire  sur  mon  expedition  geologique  dans  la  Cordillere 
argentine  du  40°  et  41°  lat.  S.  (Region  du  Nahuel-Huapi),  Rev.  del  Museo  de  La  Plata, 
1899,  IX,  pp.  221-242,  map.  The  isolated  Cerro  del  Perro  formed  of  Liparite  or  trachyte 
rises  from  the  folds  of  the  east  border  without  any  disturbance  of  the  surrounding 
country.  For  the  part  which  borders  it  on  the  west,  see  Steffen,  Beitrage  zur  Topographic 
und  Geologic  der  andinen  Region  von  Llanquihue,  Festschrift  fiir  F.  von  Richthofen, 
large  8vo,  Berlin,  1893,  pp.  307-344,  maps ;  in  this  work  also  a  petrographical  description 
of  the  ancient  rocks  by  Pohlmann. 

2  Moreno,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1899,  XIV,  p.  363 ;  Steffen,  ibid.,  p.  36,  and  Mesozoic  traces 
near  lat.  43°  30'. 

3  Steffen,  loc  cii,  p.  263. 

*  Steffen,  Rev.  del  Museo  de  La  Plata,  VIII,  p.  302.  Thus  the  commencement  appears 
to  lie  not  far  from  the  Sierra  de  la  Angostura  and  the  Punta  Pintada. 


CH.  XIIl] 


PATAGONIA 


481 


add  to  the  facts  recorded  by  Darwin  those  observed  by  Scrivenor  \  the 
case  stands  as  follows  : — 

To  the  south  of  San  Antonio  (lat.  41°  40'  S.)  no  outcrop  is  so  far  known 
as  far  as  Trelew  on  the  lower  Chubut  (lat,  43°  15'  S.) ;  there  an  acid 
eruptive  rock  crops  out.  Then,  from  lat.  44°  S.  to  the  heights  of  the  Tetas 
de  Pinedo  (lat.  45°  3'  S.),  porphyry,  porphyrite,  and  porphyrite  breccia 
occur  at  a  number  of  places  along  the  coast,  as  at  St.  Elena  (lat.  44°  35'  S.) 
where  a  dyke  of  quartz-porphyrite,  11  kilometers  in  length,  is  exposed. 
Near  Malespina  (lat.  44"  30'  S.)  on  the  Chico  Chubut  quartz-porphyry  occurs 
and  a  closely  folded  porphyritic  mass,  the  folds  of  which  strike  to  the  south- 
east. I  think  we  may  assume  that  these  outcrops  on  the  Chico  Chubut 
and  on  the  coast  between  lats.  44°  and  45°  S.  are  outliers  of  the  ridge 
which,  according  to  Moreno,  strikes  from  the  north-north-west  to  lake 
Musters.  The  next  locality  known  is  Port  Desire  (Deseado ;  lat.  47°  50'  S.), 
where  Darwin  mentions  a  ridge  of  claystone  porphyry  and  stratified  breccia, 
134  meters  in  height,  and  extending  at  least  40  kilometers  inland. 

Finally,  eruptive  rocks  occur  in  Bird  island  (lat.  48°  56'  S.). 

Sheets  of  porphyry  pebbles,  the  Tehuelche  pebbles,  extend  through 
many  degrees  of  latitude.  Siemiradzki  and  Scrivenor  believe  that  they 
are  derived  from  isolated  masses  of  porphyry  within  the  Pampas  ^. 

A  general  consideration  of  these  facts,  in  particular  the  advance  of  the 
ancient  rocks  from  the  west  into  the  interior,  the  local  occurrence  of 
isolated  Mesozoic  ridges,  and  more  especially  the  structure  of  the  moun- 
tains which  bound  this  region  on  the  north  and  south,  has  led  to  the  view 
(I,  p.  516)  that  here  the  branches  of  the  Andes  diverge  from  one  another 
towards  the  south  and  south-east  in  virgation.    This  opinion  is  not  shared 

*  C.  Darwin,  Geological  observations  on  the  volcanic  islands  and  parts  of  South 
America,  2nd  ed.,  1876,  p.  435  et  passim ;  J.  B.  Scrivenor,  Notes  on  the  Geology  of  Pata- 
gonia, Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1903,  LIX,  pp.  160-179,  map. 

^  Darwin,  Geological  observations,  &c.,  p.  219 ;  J.  von  Siemiradzki,  Zur  Geologie  von 
Nord-Patagonien,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1893, 1,  pp.  22-32,  in  particular  p.  25  ;  Scrivenor,  Quart. 
Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1903,  LIX,  p.  169.  As  early  as  1892  Herr  von  Siemiradzki  wrote 
me  as  follows  in  a  long  and  instructive  letter:  *  The  Sierra  Lihue-Calel  (lat.  38°  S.,  long. 
66°  W.)  consists  of  five  very  short  anticlines  of  red  granite-porphyry  striking  to  the  south- 
east and  separated  from  one  another  by  broad  synclinal  valleys.  The  dry  river-bed  of 
the  Cura-C6  (which  once  connected  the  Rio  Salado  and  Rio  Colorado),  the  entrance  to 
which  is  stopped  up  by  sand-dunes  near  the  lagoon  of  Urre-Lafquen,  is  cut  deep  in  red 
granite.  The  so-called  Patagonian  pebbles  are  not  derived,  as  Darwin  believed,  from  the 
remote  cordillera,  but  from  these  local  ranges  which  seem  to  form  the  whole  foundation 
of  the  central  Pampas,  to  the  west  of  the  confluence  of  the  Cura-C6  with  the  Colorado. 
The  whole  range  of  Choique  Mahuida  which  extends  along  the  Cura-Co  .  .  .  must  be 
referred  here.  We  also  cross  small  porphyry  chains  in  the  region  between  the  upper 
Colorado  and  Rio  Negro.'  This  region  corresponds  approximately  to  the  north  boundary 
of  the  porphyry  pebbles.  Siemiradzki  did  not  share  the  view  that  the  Andes  separate 
in  virgation,  but  believed  that  there  was  an  independent  and  older  folding  with  a  south- 
easterly strike. 


482  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [partv 


by  experienced  Argentine  explorers.  The  objection  is  raised  that  Roth 
observed  gabbro  on  Lago  Musters,  also  effusive  rocks,  probably  quartz- 
porphyry  and  amygdaloidal  rocks.  None  of  these,  however,  have  anything 
to  do  with  the  Jurassic  porphy rites  of  the  Andes,  and  all  are  younger  than 
the  lower  Tertiary.  Evidence  in  favour  of  a  divergence  of  the  Cordilleras 
is  not  forthcoming.  Folding  does  not  occur,  only  local  disturbances  pro- 
duced by  eruptions  ^. 

It  may  first  be  observed  that  the  whole  region  presents,  not  the  rock 
sequence  of  Brazil,  nor  that  of  the  Argentine  praecordilleras,  but  rather 
one  approaching,  through  its  numerous  eruptive  rocks,  of  whatever  age 
these  may  be,  that  of  the  Western  Andes ;  and  from  these  mountains  it  is 
not  separated  by  any  sharp  boundary,  as  is  shown,  for  example,  by  the 
Sierra  Pintada  and  the  Pietra  Pintada. 

Sierra  de  la  Ventana.  (I,  p.  515.)  The  difference  of  opinion  just 
mentioned  extends  also  to  the  interpretation  of  the  chains  which  terminate 
in  the  east  near  cape  Corrientes  and  Bahia  Blanca.  No  doubt  exists  with 
regard  to  the  facts,  especially  after  the  detailed  description  by  Hauthal  and 
Schiller. 

A  northern,  less-elevated  series  of  chains  strikes  towards  the  south-east 
from  the  other  side  of  Olavarria  through  Tandil  to  cape  Corrientes.  j 
Granite  and  gneiss  crop  out  on  the  north  side.  These  are  covered  uncon- 
formably  by  dolomite,  quartzite,  and  sometimes  dark  limestone,  which  are 
not  strongly  folded,  though  traversed  by  faults.  The  quartzite  contains 
fossils  which  are  believed  to  be  Arthrophycus  Harlani,  Hall  (upper  limit 
of  the  lower  Silurian  of  North  America). 

Opposite  to  these  chains  in  the  south  and  separated  from  them  by  a 
plain  about  150  kilometers  wide,  rises  a  second  group  diverging  towards  i 
the  south-east,  and  named  from  its  highest  part  the  Sierra  de  la  Ventana  i 
(according  to  recent  measurements  1,280  meters  in  height).    To  the  south- 
west of  the  Sierra  Ventana  (F,  fig.  36)  ancient  granite  crops  out ;  then, 
forming  the  highest  part  of  the  sierra,  a  quartzite  precisely  similar  to  | 
that  of  the  Sierra  Tandil,  but  intensely  overfolded  from  the  south-west  | 
to  the  north-east.    At  the  north  foot  of  the  Sierra  de  la  Ventana  the  ^ 
quartzite  dips  to  the  south  and  is  underlain  by  clay  slate;  then  on  the 
slopes  of  the  Sierra  de  Pillahuinco  (D,  fig.  36),  which  lies  beyond  this 
range,  conglomerate  makes  its  appearance,  and  then  again  clay  slate. 

Hauthal  regarded  the  northern  (Tandil)  group  as  an  opposing  buttress, 
and  the  southern  (Ventana)  chains  as  folded  against  it  from  the  south-west. 
Schiller  and  Keidel  regarded  F  and  C  (fig.  36)  as  the  two  limbs  of 
a  syncline  overfolded  from  south-west  to  north-east  ^. 

'  Keidel,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1907,  CXVI,  p.  650. 

^  11.  Hauthal,  La  Sierra  de  la  Ventana,  Rev.  del  Museo  de  La  Plata,  1892,111,  pp.  3-11 ; 
Las  Sieri-as  entre  Cabo  Corrientes  6  Hinojo,  op.  cit.,  1896,  Vll,  pp.  477-490  ;  I.  Excursion 


CH.  XIIl] 


SIEERA  DE  LA  VENTANA 


483 


Burmeister  believed  that  the  sierras  Tandil  and  de  la  Ventana  were 
members  of  an  older  mountain  system;  Hauthal  and  the  observers  who 
followed  him  maintain  that  they  stand  outside  the  complex  of  the  Andes. 
Stelzner,  on  the  contrary,  regarded  them  as  branches  of  the  Andes.  I  believe 
that  Stelzner's  view  is  correct  as  regards  the  Sierra  de  la  Ventana,  but  not 
as  regards  the  Sierra  Tandil. 

Near  the  mouth  of  the  La  Plata,  on  the  island  of  Martin  Garcia,  a  basic, 
intrusive,  and  probably  ancient  rock  crops  out.    In  Buenos  Ayres  gneiss 
has  been  bored  at  a  depth  of  300  meters  ^.    These  are  traces  of  the  ancient 
Brazilian  mass,  and  to 
this,  forming  part  of  the 
border,  the  Sierra  Tandil 
belongs. 

We  regard  the  Sierra 
de  la  Ventana  as  part 
of  the  Palaeozoic  series, 
which  has  been  folded 
by  the  advance  of  the 
Andine  movement  into 
the  region  of  the  fore- 
land. The  direction  of 
the  foldings  to  the  north- 
-east is  that  which  the 
general  eastward  folding 
of  the  Argentine  chains 
would  lead  us  to  expect 
at  this  place.  This  view 
^Iso  accords  with  what  has  been  said  regarding  the  structure  of  the  east 
♦coast  of  Patagonia,  and  relieves  us  from  the  necessity  of  assuming  that 
the  Sierra  de  la  Ventana  is  an  independent  element  within  the  otherwise 
uniform  structure  of  South  America. 

Patagonia.     The  broad  plateaux  of  the  plain  increase  in  height 


600.000 


Fig.  36.   Trend  lines  of  the  Sierra  de  la  Ventana  (after  Hauthal). 

A.,  Sierra  de  Puan  ;  B.,  S.  de  Bravard ;  C,  S.  de  las 
Tunas;  D.,  S.  de  Pillahuinco ;  E.,  S.  de  Curumalal ;  F.,  S. 
de  Ventana. 


a  la  Sierra  de  la  Ventana ;  II.  Apuntes  geoldgicos  de  las  Sierras  de  Olavarria,  Public,  de 
la  Univ.  de  La  Plata,  1901,  no.  1,  pp.  1-30,  map  ;  and  Beitrage  zur  (xeologie  der  argenti- 
nischen  Provinz  Buenos-Ayres,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1904,  pp.  83-92  and  112-117,  map  (here 
;a  third  line  directed  to  the  south-  south-east,  that  of  the  Sierra  del  Chaco,  west  of  the 
Sierra  de  la  Ventana,  is  added  to  the  virgation)  ;  Schiller,  in  Keidel,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss. 
Wien,  1907,  CXVI,  pp.  650-652 ;  also  J.  Valentin,  Rapido  estudio  sobre  las  Sierras  de 
los  Partidos  de  Olavarria  y  del  Azul,  Rev.  del  Museo  de  La  Plata,  1894,  VI,  pp.  1-24. 
J.  von  Siemiradzki  mentions  Devonian  fossils  from  the  north-westerly  continuations  of 
the  Sierra  Tandil,  but  the  statement  has  raised  doubt;  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1893,  pp.  49  62, 
map ;  for  a  divergent  interpretation  of  the  facts  see  Sievers,  op.  cit.,  Litterat.-Bericht, 
1902,  p.  78. 

^  Valentin,  Bosquejo  geologico,  p.  12,  has  collected  the  data  on  this  point. 

I  i  2 


484  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [part  v 


towards  the  west.  Basalt  sheets  and  cones,  extensive  lakes,  and  mighty 
moraines  accompany  the  eastern  borders  of  the  mountains.  In  their  neigh- 
bourhood rather  steeply  inclined  Cretaceous  beds  occur.  At  some  distance 
from  the  mountains,  Cretaceous  and  Tertiary  lie  flat.  The  Cretaceous  alsa 
reaches  the  Atlantic  coast,  as,  for  example,  near  Port  San  Julian  (lat.  49'' 
20'  S.). 

At  Roca,  on  the  Rio  Negro  (lat.  39°  5^  S.),  red  sand  with  Dinosaurs,  the 
Guarantian  stage,  and  a  marine  deposit  of  upper  Senonian  or  Danian  make 
their  appearance.  On  the  upper  Limay  (lat.  40°  S.),  east  of  the  Sierra 
Pintada,  Roth  found  the  same  Dinosaurian  sand,  resting  there  on  quartzitic 
sandstone  ^. 

Much  further  to  the  south,  east  of  lake  Pueyrredon  (lat.  47°  30'  S.), 
Hatcher  observed  greensand  with  large  oysters,  above  this  conglomerate 
with  fossil  wood  perforated  by  marine  boring  shells,  then  the  fossiliferous 
Belgrano-beds,  the  fauna  of  which,  according  to  Stanton^  is  not  younger 
than  Gault.    The  Trigonia  recall  those  of  Uitenhage  ^. 

On  the  Cerro  Belgrano  porphyry-tuff  underlies  the  Cretaceous. 

On  the  Mayer  river  (lat.  48°  15'  to  48°  30'  S.)  we  meet  with  the  Dinosaur 
sands  of  the  north.  A  clear  idea  of  the  region  between  the  Lago  Argentino 
and  the  Seno  de  la  Ultima  Esperanza  (lat.  50°  10'  to  51°  55'  S.)  is  given  by 
Hauthal's  geological  map  and  the  description  by  Wilckens.  The  high 
mountains  are  covered  with  glaciers  and  unexplored.  On  the  east  they 
are  joined  by  a  zone  which  consists  of  quartz-sandstone,  and  above  this 
thick  beds  of  a  compressed  splintery  clay- slate  containing  Algae  like 
those  of  the  Flysch,  and  also  numerous  Inoceramus,  Pachydiscus,  and 
Cardiaster.  After  what  has  been  stated  previously  with  regard  to  the  East 
Alpine  Flysch  and  the  Yakutat  series  in  Alaska,  the  recurrence  of  this 
facies  at  such  remote  points  must  arouse  surprise.  Wilckens  terms  this 
horizon  the  stage  of  Inoceramus  Steinmanni ;  Paulcke  believes  it  is  of 
Senonian,  probably  upper  Senonian  age.  Above  it  follow  marine  beds,  and 
others  which,  from  the  similarity  of  their  plant-remains,  are  correlated  by 
Kurtz  with  the  Dakota  stage,  but  referred  by  Wilckens  to  the  upper 
Senonian.  The  stage  of  Lahillia  Luisae  contains  Baculites,  and  likewise 
belongs  to  the  upper  Senonian  ^. 

1  S.  Roth,  Rev.  del  Museo  de  La  Plata,  X,  p.  231. 

'  J.  B.  Hatcher,  Geology  of  South  Patagonia,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1897,  4th  ser.,  IV^ 
pp.  327-354 ;  and  Sedimentary  Rocks  of  South  Patagonia,  op.  cit.,  1900,  4th  ser.,  IX, 
pp.  85-108,  map ;  also  Report  of  the  Princeton  University  Expedition  to  Patagonia, 
1896-1899,  ed.  by  W.  Scott,  I,  Marine  cretaceous  Invertebrates,  by  T.  W.  Stanton,  4to, 
Stuttgart,  1901,  43  pp. 

'  R.  Hauthal,  in  F.  Kurtz,  Contribution  a  la  Paleophytologie  Argentine,  III,  Rev.  del 
Museo  de  I^a  Plata,  1899,  X,  pp.  43-61 ;  0.  Wilckens,  Die  Lamellibranchen,  Gastropoden, 
etc.,  der  Oberen  Kreide  Siid-Patagoniens,  Ber.  nat.  Ges.  Freiburg  i.  B.,  1906,  XV,  pp.  91- 
156 ;  W.  Paulcke,  Die  Cephalopoden  der  Oberen  Kreide  Sud-Patagoniens,  op.  cit.. 


CH.xiii]  CEREO  PAYNE  485 

The  beds  described  as  Neoeomian  in  Brunswick  peninsula  (mount  Tarn 
near  Port  Famine,  lat.  53°  30'  S.)  also  belong  to  the  border  of  the  mountains. 
The  problematical  species  Helicoceras fuegense  comes  from  some  place  further 
inland ;  Dana  gives  Nassau  bay  as  its  locality  (I,  p.  526)  ^. 

As  in  the  prairies  of  North  America,  so  on  the  outer  border  of  these 
high  mountains,  recent  granite  bosses,  resembling  laccolites,  protrude  here 
^nd  there.  Hauthal  mentions  several  examples,  in  particular  the  Cerro 
Payne  (lat.  50°  55'  S.,  long.  73°  W.,  2,500  meters),  surrounded,  as  with  a 
mantle,  by  Cretaceous  beds,  into  which  it  sends  off  apophyses.  Ghalten 
(Fitzroy,  lat.  49°  15-  S.,  long.  70°  W.)  is  also  a  granite  laccolite ;  like 
Cerro  Payne,  it  was  originally  regarded  as  a  volcano  ^.  The  Cretaceous 
marls  appear  to  have  played  the  same  part  with  regard  to  these  intrusions 
as  in  front  of  the  Rocky  mountains. 

The  subdivision  of  the  Tertiary  beds  cannot  be  discussed  here.  On 
the  Mayer  river,  according  to  Hatcher,  inclined  marine  beds  of  Tertiary  age 
rest  against  horizontal  freshwater  beds  of  the  same  age  ^.  In  Tierra  del 
Fuego,  Otto  Nordenskjold  observed  near  lake  Solier  (lat.  54°  25'  S., 
long.  67°  45'  W.)  vertical  beds,  probably  Tertiary,  in  the  northern  foothills 
of  the  Cordillera ;  they  probably  strike  away  to  the  extreme  point  of  cape 
San  Diego,  on  the  strait  of  Le  Maire.  For  details  we  must  refer  to  the 
comprehensive  work  of  Wilckens  on  this  subject  ^. 

In  the  plain  extending  from  Rio  Negro  to  Terra  del  Fuego  volcanic 
formations  occur  over  a  considerable  area  and  offer  a  marked  contrast  to  the 
lofty  cones  of  the  Andes.  These  are  broad  plateaux  of  basaltic  lavas  which 
when  poured  out  must  have  been  very  fluid.  A  map  showing  their  dis- 
tribution has  been  published  by  Hauthal ;  according  to  his  description  the 
flows  issued  quietly  from  fissures,  which  though  sometimes  scarcely  a  meter 
in  breadth  extend  for  many  miles.  Here  and  there  craters  may  be  seen, 
and  these  often  stand  in  closely  crowded  groups,  as,  for  example,  on  the 
lower  course  of  the  Rio  Gallego.  As  a  rule  the  cones  are  only  a  few 
hundred  meters  in  height^. 

1906,  XV,  pp.  167-244,  and,  in  particular,  O.  Wilckens,  Erlauterung  zu  R.  Hauthal's 
•Geologische  Skizze  des  Gebirges  zwischen  dem  Lago  Argentine  und  dem  Seno  de  la 
Ultima  Esperanza,  torn,  cit.,  pp.  75-96,  map. 

1  From  islands  in  Magellan  strait,  C.  A.  White  describes  some  upper  Cretaceous  fossils 
in  Proc.  U.S.  Nat.  Mus.,  1890,  XIII,  pp.  13,  14. 

^  Hauthal,  Ueber  patagonischen  Tertiar,  etc.,  Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1898,  L, 
pp.  436-440  ;  and  Ber.  IX.  Intern.  Congr.  Wien,  1904,  pp.  649-656. 

^  Hatcher,  Geology  of  South  Patagonia,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1897,  4th  ser.,  IV,  p.  338. 

*  0.  Nordenskjold,  Geological  Map  of  the  Magellan  Territories,  Wissenschaftliche 
Ergebnisse  der  schwedischen  Expedition  nach  den  Magellanslandern,  1899,  I,  no.  8, 
pp.  81-85.  The  assumption  of  Tertiary  age  is  based  in  this  case  on  petrographical 
correspondence.— 0.  Wilckens,  Die  Meeresablagerungen  der  Kreide  und  Tertiar-Forma- 
tion  in  Patagonien,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  Beilage-Band  XXT,  1905,  pp.  98-195,  map. 

^  R.  Hauthal,  Distribucion  de  los  centres  volcanicos.  Rev.  del  Museo  de  La  Plata, 
1903,  16  pp.,  map. 


486  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [partv^ 


In  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Andes,  between  lats.  40°  15'  and  41°  10'  S., 
these  flows  attain  a  very  remarkable  thickness ;  the  cones  rise  here,  as 
an  independent  meridional  series,  in  front  of  the  Andes,  with  which  they 
are  connected  by  a  volcanic  plateau.  Wehrli  terms  them  '  a  sort  of  Prae- 
Andes '  ^. 

This  arrangement  is  repeated  between  lats.  47°  and  48°  S. ;  the  heights 
here  are  still  more  considerable  (Cerro  Zeballos,  2,670  meters).  The  basaltic 
nature  of  these  volcanos  is  not  completely  established. 

We  w^ill  now  leave  the  border  of  the  mountains  and  turn  our  attention 
to  the  mountains  themselves. 

The  ancient  rocks  of  the  Cordillera  de  la  Costa  have  already  been 
described,  though  far  from  continuously,  down  to  about  lat.  46°  30'  S.,  and 
we  have  stated  (I,  p.  526)  that  according  to  Darwin  and  Steinmann  a  zone 
of  slate  and  sandstone  extending  along  the  east  side  of  the  mountains 
reaches  Brunswick  peninsula,  Admiralty  sound,  and  finally  Le  Maire  strait. 

This  is  the  course  of  the  great  trend-line,  concave  towards  the  north, 
which  repeats  the  curves  of  the  Sierra  Madre  of  Mexico  ^. 

Our  knowledge  of  the  most  southerly  part  of  these  mountains  has  been 
considerably  increased  by  Lovisato's  report  on  the  Italian  expedition  under 
Lieutenant  Bove  (1882)^,  then  by  Hyades,  who  accompanied  the  French 
Mission  to  Cape  Horn  (1882-3)  and  finally  by  the  Swedish  expedition 
under  Otto  Nordenskjold.    We  owe  to  the  last-named  a  geological  map, 

1  Wehrli,  Rev.  del  Museo  de  La  Plata,  IX,  p.  239. 

*  King's  excellent  description  gives  Obstruction  bay  (lat.  52°  10'  to  52°  30')  as 
the  end  of  the  Cordillera  de  los  Andes ;  H.  StefFen  (Yerh.  Ges.  Erdk.  Berlin,  1900, 
p.  212)  regards  the  fact  that  the  elongated  ranges  terminate  in  Chiloe  as  an  argu- 
ment against  the  connexion  of  the  Patagonian  Andes  with  the  Coast  chain. 
0.  Nordenskjold  (Geological  Map  of  the  Magellan  Territories,  p.  25),  on  the  other 
hand,  thinks  that  the  western  part  of  Magellan  strait  along  with  Admiralty  sound  and 
lake  Fagnano  may  be  regarded  as  the  continuation  of  the  longitudinal  valley  of  Chile 
which  begins  more  than  25  degrees  of  latitude  to  the  north  of  lake  Fagnano.  Fonck,  who 
is  one  of  those  best  acquainted  with  this  country,  regards  the  peaks  of  Sarmiento  and 
Darwin  to  the  south  of  this  line  as  representing  the  coast  Cordillera  as  opposed  to  the 
principal  cordillera,  which  is  becoming  extinct  (see  his  Introduccion  a  la  Orografia  y 
Geologia  de  la  Region  Austral  de  S.  America,  Entr.  I,  8vo,  Valparaiso,  1893,  98  pp.,  in 
particular  pp.  60  and  61).  Fonck  gives  reasons  and  quotes  older  authorities  in  support 
of  the  view  that  cape  Froward  (758  meters,  lat.  53°  55'  S.)  is  to  be  considered  as  the 
termination  of  the  South  American  continent  and  of  the  principal  cordillera  (Cordillera 
de  los  Andes)  (Examen  critico  de  la  obra  d.  sen.  perito  argentin.  F.  P.  Moreno,  8vo, 
Valparaiso,  1902,  146  pp.,  maps,  in  particular  p.  49). 

^  D.  Lovisato,  Una  escursione  geologica  nella  Patagonia  e  nella  Terra  del  Fuoco, 
Boll.  Soc.  geogr.  ital.,  1883,  XX,  pp.  333-347  and  420-44.8,  also  pp.  31-35  and  114-120, 
maps. 

*  Mission  scientifique  du  Cap  Horn,  1882-1883,  t.  IV:  Geologic,  par  le  Dr.  Hyades,  8vo, 
Paris,  1887,  242  pp.,  maps.  This  work  also  contains  the  description  of  the  rocks 
collected  by  Lovisato. 


CH.  XIIl] 


STATEN  ISLAND 


487 


covering  the  region  from  the  south  up  to  lat.  50°  S.  ^.  If  we  add  to  these 
works  the  earlier  accounts,  especially  those  of  King  and  Darwin,  we  obtain 
the  following  result : — 

In  Staten  island  (about  72  kilometers  in  length)  sandstone,  quartzite, 
and  clay  slate  predominate,  with  a  strike  to  east,  or  east  with  a  little  north. 
At  cape  Conway,  about  the  middle  of  the  north  coast,  some  fossils  were  found 
in  the  clay  slate  which  were  at  first  regarded  as  Palaeozoic.  Steinmann, 
however,  has  found  fragments  of  Inoceramus  in  the  same  specimens,  and 
regards  the  clay  slate  of  cape  Conway  as  the  continuation  of  the  Cretaceous 
rocks  of  mount  Tarn  on  the  mainland.  At  the  same  time  Steinmann 
observed  much  secondary  mica,  and  recognized  a  resemblance  to  the 
Biindner  schist ;  it  would  thus  seem  as  if  dynamic  action  had  produced  its 
effects  in  the  sediments  of  Staten  island  ^. 

Proceeding  inland  from  cape  Conway,  we  reach  the  peak  of  mount 
Sebastian  Cabot,  which  consists  of  hornblende  schist.  Both  the  Cretaceous 
clay  slate  and  the  hornblende  schist  are  continued  across  Le  Maire  strait. 

Schists  of  diverse  kinds,  but  in  particular  hornblende  schists,  form  the 
greater  part  of  the  mountains  from  this  point  onwards  as  far  as  Brunswick 
and  Otway  water,  i.e.  for  a  distance  of  500  to  600  kilometers.  The  same 
rocks  probably  penetrate  much  more  deeply  into  the  structure  of  the 
mountains  to  the  west  of  the  upper  course  of  the  river  Gallegos.  Horn- 
blende schist  predominates  in  Beagle  canal,  and  forms  the  high  mountains 
as  far  as  mount  Sarmiento,  then  parts  of  Clarence  and  Dawson  island,  cape 
Froward,  and  other  points.  On  the  north  side  of  the  island  of  Hoste  the 
rock  passes  into  hornblende  gneiss ;  in  other  places  quartz-schist  with  garnets 
was  found,  also  porphyritic  felspar  schist,  chlorite  schist,  and  at  two  places 
andalusite  schist.  All  these  schists  are  accompanied  in  the  north  by  the 
Cretaceous  zone  of  mount  Tarn.  Some  foraminifera  found  by  Hyades  in 
the  roofing-slate  of  the  island  of  Button,  which  lies  to  the  south  (west  coast 
of  Navarin,  Ponsonby  bay),  are  doubtful.  All  the  older  schists  have  been 
subjected  to  pressure  ^. 

To  the  south  and  west  of  this  range  a  long,  and,  as  we  may  infer  from 

^  0.  Nordenskjold,  Geological  map  of  the  Magellan  Territories,  Wissenschaffcliche 
Ergebnisse  der  schwedischen  Expedition  nach  den  Magellanslandern,  1899,  I,  no.  3. 

2  G.  Steinmann,  Das  Alter  der  Schieferformation  im  Feuerlande,  Centralbl.  fur  Min., 
1908,  pp.  193,  194. 

^  Ross  mentions  close-grained  greenstone  and  hornblende  rock  in  Hermite  island,  Voy. 
South.  Seas,  II,  p.  287 ;  syenitic  greenstone  on  a  basis  of  granite,  according  to  McCormick, 
op.  cit.,  p.  418.  Steffen  has  also  observed  granitic  rocks  in  Baker  fjord  (Estero  Calen, 
lats.  47°  50'  to  48°  15'  S.) ;  whether  they  belong  to  the  same  range  I  am  not  in  a  position 
to  decide.  Here,  too,  black  schist  follows  in  the  direction  of  the  eastern  mountain 
border ;  Der  Baker-Fjord  in  West-Patagonien,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1904,  pp.  140-144,  map. 
Hyades  states  that  there  is  a  transition  from  hornblende  granite  into  horneblende 
schist. 


488  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [partv 


Nordenskj  old's  map,  but  little  interrupted  zone  of  a  comparatively  recent 
granitic  rock  extends  from  the  extreme  south  far  to  the  north.  It  begins 
at  cape  Horn  and  Hermite  island  and  is  met  with  again  on  many  islands 
along  the  south  and  west  coast.  The  rock  is  also  known  in  Trinidad  canal 
(lat.  50°  S.) ;  and  it  resembles  so  closely  the  granodiorite  of  the  Andes  and 
western  North  Am'erica  that  Nordenskj  old  expressed  the  belief  that  a  great 
granite  range  extends  along  the  Pacific  coast  of  Patagonia,  like  that  which 
occurs,  for  example,  in  Alaska  \ 

Andesite  rocks  are  mentioned  only  at  a  few  points  (e.g.  in  the  midst  of 
Beagle  canal).  The  neighbourhood  of  Nassaii  bay  forms  an  exception. 
Andesites,  andesite  tufts  and  breccias,  columnar  basalt  and  labradorite,  occur 
in  Hardy  peninsula  and  the  islands  lying  off"  it  to  the  east,  south  of  Navarin 
and  north  of  Gr^vy.  They  mark  the  position  of  later  eruptions.  In  the 
north  of  the  island  of  Gr^vy,  Hyades  observed  comparatively  small  basaltic 
cones,  one  of  which  appears  in  Hauthal's  list  of  volcanos  as  mount  Oreille 
(313  meters,  lat.  55°  33'  S.). 

Mount  Oreille  is  separated  by  no  less  than  12  degrees  of  latitude  from 
the  most  southerly  volcano  so  far  known,  but  the  range  is  still  to  a  great 
extent  unexplored ;  small  mountains  of  this  kind  may  easily  pass  unnoticed, 
and  andesite  rocks  indeed  are  known  to  occur  here  and  there.  Mount  Oreille 
lies  at  a  spot  where  a  divergence  from  the  general  direction  of  the  strike  is 
indicated,  proceeding  from  Hardy  peninsula  through  the  Wollaston  islands 
towards  cape  Horn.  It  is  precisely  here,  in  Nassau  bay,  that  two  branches 
appear  to  separate,  one  of  them  striking  through  Staten  island  towards  the 
east,  and  finally  even  to  east  and  a  little  north,  the  other  through  cape  Horn 
towards  the  south-east.  It  is  true  that  the  latter  is  only  indicated  by  the 
position  of  the  islands,  and  in  the  island  of  Gr^vy,  just  beneath  mount 
Oreille,  amphibolites  still  occur  ^.  Thus,  it  remains  uncertain  whether 
a  coulisse  really  branches  off*  here.  In  support  of  this  supposition  we  may 
mention  that  Andersson  came  upon  a  strongly-folded  series  with  marine 
sheUs  and  driftwood  in  Tekenika  sound,  at  the  western  extremity  of  Nassau 
bay,  where  the  divergence  appears  to  take  place.  Helicoceras  fuegense 
also  comes  from  the  neighbourhood  of  Tekenika  ^. 

Second  advance.  Bellinghausen,  after  a  visit  to  the  south  Sandwich 
islands  in  1819,  during  which  he  witnessed  a  volcanic  eruption  in  Sawa- 
dowskij,  the  most  northerly  of  these  islands,  wrote  as  follows  : — '  The 
Sandwich  islands  and  the  Traversey  islands  appear  to  form  the  summits 

*  0.  Nordenskjold,  Die  krystallinischen  Gesteine  der  Magellanslander,  Wissenschaft- 
liche  Ergebnisse,  etc.,  1901,  I,  p.  193  et  passim. 

2  Near  cape  Hall,  Mission  scientifique  du  Cap  Horn,  1882-1883,  t.  IV:  Geologic,  par  le 
Dr.  Hyades,  p.  173. 

^  G.  Andersson,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1904,  p.  215.  Dana  says,  half-way  between  Orange 
liarbour  and  the  head  of  Nassau  bay  in  clay  slate ;  Dana,  in  C.  Wilkes,  U.S.  Explor. 
Expedition,  1849,  X,  pp.  604,  720. 


€H.  XIIl] 


SECOND  ADVANCE 


489 


of  a  mountain  ridge  which  is  connected  through  Clerk's  reef  with  south 
Georgia,  and  from  there  on  by  the  Aurora  reef  with  the  Falkland  islands '  ^ 
The  existence  of  the  Aurora  reef  has  since  been  found  to  be  extremely 
doubtful,  but  the  notion  that  there  is  some  connexion  between  Patagonia 
and  the  Antarctic  ranges  has  been  frequently  held,  and  was  expressed  by 
Barrow,  for  instance,  in  1831  ^. 

As  early  as  1886,  H.  Reiter,  in  a  remarkable  memoir,  propounded  the 
theory  that  the  contrast  between  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  regions  is  mani- 
fested even  in  these  southern  regions.  The  arc-like  structure  of  Graham 
land,  the  South  Shetland  and  South  Orkney  islands,  and  the  Patagonian  arc 
curved  in  the  opposite  direction  were  marked,  with  their  trend-lines,  on 
a  map  which  enables  us  to  recognize  the  peculiarly  harmonious  relations  of 
the  two  arcs  (II,  p.  204)  ^. 

In  1895  Petersen  thought  it  probable  that  the  volcanos  of  the  southern 
regions  just  mentioned  represented  the  continuation  of  a  series  of  Patagonian 
volcanos  bent  round  to  the  south-east 

In  the  same  year  Arctowski  drew  a  continuous  arcuate  trend-line  from 
Staten  island  through  the  south  Orkney  islands  towards  Graham  Land,  and 
propounded  the  hypothesis — not,  he  thinks,  too  bold — that  the  Andes  are  to 
be  seen  again  in  Graham  Land  ^. 

This  view  has  been  accepted  by  almost  all  modern  investigators,  including 
in  particular  J.  Gunnar  Andersson,  who  has  contributed  so  much  to  our 
knowledge  of  these  regions  ^. 

In  a  detailed  examination  of  this  question,  we  must  first  mark  off  the 
Falkland  islands,  which  have  been  described  on  an  earlier  page  (I,  p.  527) 
as  an  alien  and  divergent  fragment  of  folded  Palaeozoic  beds.  The  Devonian 
of  these  islands  is  wholly  unknown  in  the  western  Andes,  and  accords  com- 
pletely with  that  of  Matto  Grosso  and  the  Bolivian  Andes.  Darwin  says 
they  are  formed  of  steeply  inclined  clay  slates  and  sandstones,  presenting  on 
the  east  an  east  and-west  strike,  further  west  a  strike  to  west-north-west, 
and  still  further  west  to  the  north      At  cape  Meredith,  the  most  southerly 

^  F.  Lowe,  Bellinghausen's  Reise  nach  der  Siidsee  und  Entdeckungen  im  siidliclien 
Eismeer,  Erman's  Arch.  f.  wiss.  Kunde  v.  Russland,  1842,  II,  pp.  125-174,  in  particular 
p.  137. 

2  J.  Barrow,  Note  in  Journ.  Geogr.  Soc,  1830-1831,  I,  p.  62. 

^  H.  Reiter,  Die  Siidpolarfrage,  Habilitations-Schrift,  8vo,  Weimar,  1886,  34  pp.,  map. 

*  J.  Petersen,  Reisen  des  'Jason'  und  der  'Hertha'  in  das  antarktische  Meer, 
1893-1894,  Mitth.  geogr.  Ges.  Hamburg  (for  1891-1892),  Heft  II,  1895,  61  pp.,  map,  in 
particular  p.  31. 

^  H.  Arctowski,  Observations  sur  I'interet  que  presente  I'exploration  geologique  des 
Terres  Australes,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1895,  3«  ser.,  XXIII,  pp.  589-591. 

^  J.  G.  Andersson,  On  the  Geology  of  Graham  Land,  Bull.  Geol.  Inst.  Upsala,  1906,  VII, 
pp.  19-71,  maps  ;  also  Wilckens,  Zur  Geologie  der  Siidpolarlander,  Centralbl.  fiir  Min., 
1906,  pp.  173-180. 

'  C.  Darwin,  Geological  Observations  on  the  Volcanic  Islands  and  part  of  South 
America,  2nd  ed.,  1876,  pp.  440,  441. 


490  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [part  v 


part  of  West  Falkland,  the  Devonian,  according  to  Andersson,  rests  directly 
upon  gneiss.  These  observations  seem  to  indicate  an  arc  of  Devonian  open 
towards  the  north-east.  Added  to  this,  Arber  and  Nathorst  have  been  able 
to  show  that  traces  of  the  South  African  Glossopteris  flora  are  present 
among  the  plant-remains  brought  home  by  Andersson  from  the  little  Speed- 
well island  (south  of  East  Falkland),  and  Halle  has  subsequently  found 
Glossopteris  at  numerous  localities  in  East  Falkland  ^.  According  to 
information  which  Herr  Nathorst  has  kindly  communicated  to  me  by 
letter,  Halle  has  discovered  beneath  this  horizon  the  glacial  Talchir 
conglomerate. 

The  Falkland  islands  are  thus  a  fragment  of  an  ancient  continent^ 
comparable  with  Brazil  and  South  Africa,  and  at  the  same  time  completely 
different  from  the  Cordillera  de  los  Andes,  as  well  as  from  the  east  coast  of 
Patagonia,  south  of  the  Sierra  de  la  Ventana,  so  far  as  this  coast  is  at 
present  known. 

Burdiuood  Bank  stretches  out,  some  hundred  kilometers  long,  from 
Staten  island.  It  is  not  broad,  and  runs  first  to  east-north-east,  then  to 
east,  and  finally,  with  a  slight  bend,  to  south-east.  From  the  way  it  lies 
it  might  easily  be  taken  for  a  continuation  of  Staten  island.  In  lat.  54°  18'  S., 
long.  60°  W.,  not  far  from  the  spot  at  which  the  Admiralty  charts  mark 
Burdwood  Rock  as  a  '  danger the  younger  Ross  sounded  in  —  44  meters 
a  narrow  ridge  of  volcanic  rock,  stretching  from  east  to  west,  and  descend- 
ing rapidly  towards  the  north  and  south ;  further  east,  in  lat.  54°  41'  S.^ 
long.  55°  12^  W.,  he  came  on  black  sand  and  volcanic  rocks  at  —  489  meters. 
Moreno  observes  that  in  South  Patagonia  blocks  of  basaltic  lava,  and  in 
their  neighbourhood  ashes  also,  possibly  derived  from  submarine  eruptions, 
have  been  observed  on  the  Atlantic  coast  ^. 

It  has  been  ascertained  that  the  direction  of  cape  Horn  departs  from 
that  of  Staten  island  in  Nassau  bay,  where  also  the  volcanic  mount 
Oreille  is  situated. 

Diego  Ramirez  is  said  to  consist  perhaps  of  diorite ;  another  account 
mentions  porphyry  lavas  ^.  The  isolated  Shag  rocks  (lat.  53°  49'  S.,  long. 
43°  26'  W.)  do  not  lie  on  the  continuation  of  Burdwood  bank,  but  to  the 

^  J.  G.  Andersson,  Antarctica  expedition  arbeten  pS,  Falklandsoarne  och  Eldslandetl902, 
Ymer,  1902,  XXII,  pp.  515-528  ;  Contribution  to  the  Geology  of  the  Falkland  Isles,  Wiss. 
Ergeb.  Schwed.  Siid-Polar-Expedition  (NordenskjSld),  1907,  Bd.  Ill,  2,  38  pp.,  maps,  in 
particular  p.  13 ;  A.  G.  Nathorst,  Phyllotheca-Reste  aus  den  Falkland-Inseln,  Bull.  Geol. 
Inst.  Upsala,  1906,  VII,  pp.  72-76  ;  and  Geol.  Foren.  Stockh.  Forh.,  1908,  XXX,  pp.  202- 
204.  Arber,  who  has  traced  the  same  flora  in  Argentina  as  far  as  lat.  40°,  recognized 
this  resemblance. 

*  J.  C.  Ross,  Voyage  of  Discovery  and  Research  in  the  Southern  and  Antarctic  Regions, 
Svo,  1847,  II,  pp.  281,  315  ;  Moreno,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1899,  XIV,  pp.  253,  369. 

'  Hyades  has  collected  the  reports  ;  Mission  scientifique  du  Cap  Horn,  1882-1883,- 
t.  IV,  pp.  8  and  15. 


CH.XIII]  SOUTH  SANDWICH  ISLANDS 


north-east  of  it,  and  must  belong  to  another  coulisse.  The  Swedish  expedi- 
tion of  1902  approached  them,  but  they  still  remain  untrodden  by  the  foot 
of  man^ 

South  Georgia  has  been  described  by  Thiirach  as  a  fragment  of  a  chain, 
2,000  meters  in  height,  steep  and  violently  folded.  Phyllite  gneiss,  clay 
slate  and  quartzite,  diabase  and  schalstein,  have  been  observed.  They  strike 
to  the  north-west  in  the  direction  of  the  island,  and  this,  as  well  as  its 
outline  and  position,  renders  the  island  so  similar  to  the  fragments  of  the 
Cordillera  of  the  Antilles  that  Fricker  has  compared  it  with  Puerto  Rico 
and  Haiti.  Andersson's  collections  contained,  according  to  O.  Nordenskjold^ 
phyllite,  porphyritic  rocks  (probably  tuffs),  and  porphyrites  altered  by 
pressure. 

South  Georgia  does  not  lie  in  the  continuation  of  Burdwood  bank ;  an 
arcuate  connexion  through  the  Shag  rocks  would  seem  far  more  probable  ^. 
No  recent  information  on  the  South  Sandwich  islands  is  at  my  disposal ; 

I  Cook  and  Bellinghausen  imagined  from  the  form  of  the  islands  that  they 
were  of  a  volcanic  nature ;  as  regards  Sawadowskij  this  has  been  shown  to 
be  the  case,  but  there  is  no  direct  evidence  as  regards  the  other  islands  \ 
Certainly  the  impression  produced  by  the  map  given  by  Dumont  d'Urville 
does  not  in  the  least  suggest  that  of  great  and  lofty  fragments  of  Cordilleras. 

I  cut  through  by  fjords.  On  a  long  arc,  slightly  bent  towards  the  east, 
islands  of  fairly  equal  size  rise  at  intervals^  also  nearly  equal,  somewhat 
after  the  fashion  of  the  Antilles,  between  Montserrat  and  St.  Vincent. 
The  island  of  Ljeskow  alone  stands  out  of  line.  In  the  South  Orkneys 
(some  of  them  over  1,600  meters  in  height)  Pirie  has  found  greywacke, 
quartzite,  conglomerate,  and  black  slate.    In  the  eastern  part  of  the  group, 

I  near  cape  Dundas,  the  slate  has  furnished  a  graptolite  and  traces  of 

I  Phyllocarides  (Graptolite  island).  The  beds  are  folded  and  strike  to  north- 
west or  north-north- west.  Pirie  also  conjectures  that  we  have  here  a  frag- 
ment of  considerable  folded  range  which  may  have  connected  Patagonia 
with  Graham  I^and.  Bruce's  map  of  Laurie  island  shows  long  peninsulas 
running  at  right  angles  to  the  direction  of  the  island ;  they  lie  probably  in 
the  strike 

1  Andersson,  Ymer,  1902,  p.  410  ;  0.  Nordenskjold,  Petrographische  Untersuclmng  aus 
dem  westlichen  antarktischen  Gebiete,  Bull.  Geol.  Inst.  Upsala,  1905,  YI,  pp.  234-246, 
j   map,  in  particular  p.  245. 

'  2  H.  Thiirach,  Geognostische  Beschreibung  der  Insel  Sud-Georgien,  Ergeb.  d.  deutsch. 
Polar-Exped.,  1882,  II,  7,  58  pp. ;  K.  Fricker,  Antarktis,  Bibliothek  der  Landeskunde  von 
Kirchhoff  und  Fitzner,  I,  1898,  p.  110;  Andersson,  Antarctics  vinterexpedition  till  Syd- 
Georgien,  Ymer,  1902,  XXII,  pp.  409-421. 

'  F.  V.  Bellinghausen's  Forschungsfahrten  im  siidlichen  Eismeer,  1819-1821 ;  based 
on  the  original  Russian  work  published  by  the  Yerein  fiir  Erdkunde  in  Dresden  (by 
i    H.  Gravelius),  8vo,  1902,  p.  57  et  seq.  (also  Lowe,  see  note  1,  p.  489). 

*  J.  H.  Pirie,  Note  on  the  Geology  of  the  South  Orkneys,  Scot.  Geogr.  Mag.,  1904,  XX, 


492  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [party 

These  data  do  not  seem  to  accord  with  the  general  plan,  which  we  are 
about  to  discuss.  Nevertheless  Andersson  believes  that  some  connexion 
with  the  South  Shetland  group  may  possibly  exist.  At  the  most  easterly 
extremity  of  this  group  a  bend  to  the  east-south-east  is  actually  visible^. 

Let  us  now  approach  the  larger  masses  of  land  in  the  south. 

This  region  extends  in  an  arc  slightly  convex  to  the  north-west  through 
more  than  7  degrees  of  latitude  towards  the  south-south- west,  and  in  this 
direction  it  also  increases  in  breadth.  The  whole  country  is  covered  with 
snow  and  ice,  with  the  exception  of  those  tracts  which  are  excessively  steep 
and  a  few  isolated  active  volcanos.  Very  long  stretches  of  coast  are 
unapproachable  on  account  of  the  bordering  ice,  but  so  different  are  the 
outlines  of  the  Cordilleras,  cut  through  by  fjords  and  eydes,  from  those  of 
the  isolated  conical  volcanos  that  many  conjectures  made  in  advance 
of  actual  observation  have  since  been  confirmed.  The  existence  of  two 
distinct  ranges  of  volcanos  as  supposed  by  H.  Reiter  is  a  case  in  point. 

The  South  Shetland  islands  are  a  lofty,  narrow  rocky  range,  concerning 
which  I  have  only  a  few  data,  but  they  are  generally  regarded  as  a  frag- 
ment of  the  Cordillera.  Nordenskjold  reports  greenish  porphyrite  from 
Nelson  island.  Larsen's  description  of  the  passage  between  Greenwich 
island  and  Livingston  island  suggests  the  presence  of  sheets  of  columnar 
basalt.  Geikie  mentions  thick  flows  of  basalt  both  in  the  South  Shetlands 
and  in  Graham  Land,  similar  to  those  of  Greenland  and  the  Faeroes  ^.  South- 
east of  this  chain  lie  volcanos.  The  lofty  conical  island  of  Clarence  is 
believed  to  be  a  volcano.  Bridgman  island  has  been  observed  in  eruption. 
Deception  island  is  a  single  gigantic  crater ;  its  oval  basin,  filled  by  the  sea, 
measures,  according  to  Kendal's  map,  more  than  11  kilometers  in  length 
and  5-6  kilometers  in  breadth  ^.  Hoseason  island  has  also  been  supposed 
to  be  of  volcanic  origin. 

All  these  points  lie  in  the  direction  of  Bransfield  strait,  and  south-east 
of  this  strait  lie  the  most  extensive  traces  of  Antarctic  mountain  chains. 
It  is  possible  that  the  mountains  already  commence  in  Wedell  island,  others 
■extend  across  the  islands  of  Joinville  and  Dundee  to  Louis  Philippe  Land, 

pp.  130,  131  ;  On  the  Graptolite-bearing  Rocks  of  the  South  Orkneys,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc. 
Edinburgh,  1905,  XXV,  pp.  463-470;  and  Bruce,  Outline  Map  of  Laurie  Island,  Scot. 
Geogr.  Mag.,  June,  1905. 

1  J.  G.  Andersson,  Geology  of  Graham  Land,  Bull.  Geol.  Inst.  Upsala,  1906,  VII,  p.  32. 

2  J.  Petersen,  Reisen  des  'Jason',  Mitth.  geogr.  Ges.  Hamburg,  Heft  II,  1895,  p.  24; 
A.  Geikie,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  1898,  LXII,  p.  448.  It  is  not  clear  why  Miers  has  conjectured 
the  presence  of  hornblende  schist  in  the  most  northerly  part  of  South  Shetland,  Phil. 
Journ.  Edinb.,  1820,  III,  p.  379. 

'  Kendal,  Journ.  Geogr.  Soc,  1830-1831, 1,  pp.  62-66,  map.  Webster  describes  alter- 
nating layers  of  ash  and  ice  as  well  as  the  appearance  of  hot  vapour  on  the  strand  near 
Kbbe ;  Voyage  to  the  South  Atlantic  Ocean,  8vo,  1834, 1,  pp.  144-165,  and  II,  pp.  300- 
306.  Kendal  and  Webster  took  part  in  the  voyage  of  the  Chanticleer  under  Captain 
Foster's  leadership ;  Foster  was  drowned  on  the  return  journey  in  Chagres  river. 


CH.XIII]  SEYMOUK  AND  SNOW  HILL  ISLANDS  498 


which,  as  we  now  know,  is  connected  through  Banco  Land  and  Foyns  Land 
with  Graham  Land,  and  represents  the  north-eastern  extremity  of  this 
elongated  mountain  tract. 

Captain  Robertson  has  brought  back  granite  from  Dundee  island,  and 
a  pebble  of  red  jasper  with  radiolaria  ^  Of  particular  interest  is  Antarctic 
strait  between  Joinville  and  Louis  Philippe  Land.  J.  G.  Andersson  passed 
eight  months  on  the  west  shore  of  Hope  bay  and  made  a  geological  map  of 
the  coast.  Here  O.  Nordenskjold  has  described  the  reappearance  of  the 
Andine  group  of  granodiorites  of  southernmost  Patagonia,  and  Nathorst 
has  described  a  Jurassic  flora,  situated  in  lat.  63°  15'  S.,  which  resembles 
that  of  Europe  and  the  East  Indies,  and  reveals  no  climatic  difference  as 
compared,  say,  with  that  of  Yorkshire.  Freshwater  ferns  also  occur  here 
(Sagenopteris).  Above  lie  light-coloured  volcanic  tuffs.  The  moraines 
reveal  the  presence  of  quartz-diorite,  gabbro,  and  augite  porphyrite  ^. 

The  islands  which  lie  off  the  east  coast  between  lats.  63°  30'  and  64°  30'  S. 
are  formed,  in  contrast  to  the  mountainous  Louis  Philippe  Land,  of  a  sedi- 
mentary plateau,  upon  which  recent  volcanos  are  seated.  According  to 
Nordenskjold  and  Andersson  these  islands  include  the  great  Ross  island, 
with  mount  Haddington  (2,150  meters),  to  the  north  of  it  Vega,  then  to  the 
south-east  of  Ross,  on  the  other  side  of  Admiralty  sound,  the  Seymour  and 
Snow  Hill  islands,  and  in  the  sound  itself  the  little  Cockburn  and  Lockyer 
islands.  Mount  Haddington  rises,  according  to  Ross,  in  three  great  volcanic 
terraces.  All  around,  the  flat-lying  sediments  crop  out  from  beneath  the 
lavas,  and  form  the  whole  of  Seymour  island,  and  probably  of  Snow  Hill 
also.  They  contain  marine  shells  of  Senonian  age  (in  particular  Holcodiscus) ; 
Weller  points  out  their  affinity  with  the  Indian  Arialur  stage  and  the 
Senonian  of  Magellan  strait.  Kilian  arrives  at  similar  results  and  suggests 
that  the  Indian  and  Atlantic  faunas  are  connected  in  the  south,  thus 
agreeing  with  Kossmat,  and  also  with  Paulcke  and  Wilckens  \ 

Larsen  and  Donald  long  ago  brought  back  Tertiary  shells  from  Seymour 
island ;  Sharman  and  Newton  consider  that  it  is  of  Eocene  age  ;  as  like- 
wise does  Wiman,  who  described  the  vertebrae  of  Zeuglodonts  and  a 
remarkable  variety  of  bird-remains,  resembling  those  of  penguins,  which 
had  been  obtained  in  the  island 

^  A.  Geikie,  Notes  on  some  Specimens  of  Rocks  from  the  Antarctic  Regions,  with 
Petrographical  Notes  by  J.  J.  H.  Teall,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  Edinburgh,  1897-1898,  pp.  60-70. 

2  0.  Nordenskjold  and  G.  Andersson,  The  Swedish  Antarctic  Expedition,  Geogr.  Journ., 
1904,  XXIII,  pp.  207-220,  map;  0.  Nordenskjold,  Petrographische  Untersuchung  aus 
dem  westlichen  antarktischen  Gebiete,  Bull.  Geol.  Inst.  Upsala,  1905,  VI,  pp.  234-246, 
map  ;  A.  C.  Nathorst,  Sur  la  flore  fossile  des  regions  antarctiques,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris, 
6  juin  1904. 

'  Stuart  Weller,  The  Stokes  Collection  of  Antarctic  Fossils,  Journ.  Geol.  Chicago,  1903, 
XI,  pp.  413-419 ;  W.  Kilian,  Sur  une  faune  d' Ammonites  neocretacees  recueillie  par 
TExpedition  antarctique  suedoise,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  29  janv.  1906. 

*  Donald,  Geogr.  Journ.,  1893,  II,  p.  438  ;  and  A.  Geikie,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Surv.  for  the 


494  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [party 


The  conical  mountain  Percys  in  Joinville  island  (1,128  meters),  is  sup- 
posed to  be  of  volcanic  origin;  Paulet  island  (south-east  of  Dundee)  is 
a  crater  with  ohvine  basalt^.     Cockburn  island  in  Admiralty  sound  is  co 
probably  a  volcano,  but  recent  sediments  with  Pecten  are  known  to  occur  tli 
on  it:  mount  Haddington  also  is  regarded  by  Nordenskjold  as  a  great 
crater-bearing  volcano.    Ghristensen  has  been  ascended  by  Larsen ;  this 
island  is  a  volcano,  its  rocks,  according  to  Petersen,  are  felspar  basalt.  T( 
Lindenberg  was  in  eruption  when  Larsen  saw  it ;  the  little  Robben  islands  ii 
are  likewise  regarded  as  volcanic  ^. 

This  volcanic  zone  lies  to  the  east  of  Graham  Land,  which,  as  shown  in  m 
so  striking  a  manner  by  its  outlines,  is  a  repetition  of  the  Patagonian  pi 
Andes.    The  expedition  of  Charcot  brought  back  from  Gerlache  strait,  that  oi 
is  from  the  west  side  of  Graham  Land  between  lat.  64°  5'  to  65°  5'  S.,  only 
granite,  quartz-diorite,  and  volcanic  rocks  ^.  i 

These  data  are,  on  the  whole,  very  scanty,  yet  several  important  i 
conclusions  may  be  drawn  from  them.  I  ( 

Andersson  mentions  three  reasons  in  support  of  Barrow's  earlier  conjee-  | 
tures  and  Eeiter's  more  comprehensive  views  on  the  relations  of  Graham  ,  \ 
Land  to  South  America.  1.  The  outline  and  orography  of  the  southernmost  |  ] 
part  of  South  America  and  of  Graham  Land  resemble  each  other  so  closely  { 
that  one  continent  may  be  said  to  be  the  reflection  of  the  other.    2.  The  ] 
geological  structure  is  strictly  symmetrical.     3.  The  succession  of  the 
marine  upper  Cretaceous  and  Tertiary  beds  is  the  same  in  Patagonia  and 
in  Graham  Land ;  in  particular,  the  upper  Cretaceous  horizon  of  Labillia 
Luisa  is  repeated  in  the  two  regions. 

Passing  to  details,  we  may  extend  our  comparisons  as  follows  : — 

year  1893,  p.  273 ;  G.  Sharman  and  E.  T.  Newton,  Notes  on  some  additional  Fossils 
collected  at  Seymour  Island,  Graham's  Land,  by  Dr.  Donald  and  Captain  Larsen,  Proc. 
Roy.  Soc.  Edinb.,  1897-1898,  pp.  58-61  ;  C.  Wiman,  Vorlaufige  Mittheilung  uber  die 
alttei-tiaren  Vertebraten  der  Seymour-Insel,  Bull.  Geol.  Inst.  Upsala,  1905,  VI,  pp.  247-  ] 
252.  j 
1  Robertson,  in  Geikie,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  Edinb.,  1897-1898,  p.  66.  | 
^  Petersen,  Reisen  des  'Jason',  etc.,  Mitth.  geogr.  Ges.  Hamburg,  Heft  II,  1895,  i 
pp.  18  and  81 ;  Friedrichsen,  op.  cit.,  p.  59. 

*  E.  Gourdon,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  11  dec.  1905, 16  juillet  1906,  maps,  in  La  Geogra-  i 
phie,  1906,  p.  245  et  seq.    Unfortunately  the  principal  work  did  not  reach  me  until  i 
the  first  sheets  were  already  printed.    We  may  mention  as  an  important  point  that  \ 
granite  allied  to  monzonite  and  quartz-diorite  form  a  considerable  part  of  the  west.  The 
latter  in  particular  prevails  almost  universally  from  Hoseason  (lat.  63°  45'  S.)  to  a  point 
Bouth  of  the  island  of  Lund  (lat.  65°  25'  S.),  and  probably  forms  the  greater  part  of  | 
Palmer  archipelago,  the  islands  of  Wiencke  and  Wandel,  and  the  coast  of  Graham  Land,  j 
Gourdon  concludes  from  this  that  the  dioritic  rocks  of  Alaska,  California,  and  the  Andes  j 
are  allied  (Expedition  Antarctique  Franfaise  [1903-1905]  commandee  par  le  Dr.  Charcot), 
E.  Gourdon,  Geographic  physique,  Glaciologie,  Petrographie,  4^,  Paris,  1908,  in  particular  1 
pp.  149,  152,  204.    This  is  the  so-called  granodiorite  girdle  which  is  continued  in  a  long 
cicatrice  through  the  Intermediate  range  towards  the  extreme  south. 


CH.  XIII]  CONNEXION  OF  THE  ANTAECTIC  ISLANDS  495 

(a)  The  Falkland  islands  present  the  same  succession  of  rocks  as  the 
Argentine  and  Brazil ;  whether  they  most  resemble  Brazil  or  the  prae- 
€ordilleras  of  the  Argentine  can  only  be  determined  when  we  know  whether 
the  Gondwana  beds  are  also  folded.  The  succession  is  certainly  not  that  of 
the  Cordillera  de  los  Andes. 

(6)  Towards  the  interior  of  Patagonia  is  the  upper  Cretaceous  and 
Tertiary  plain.  This  corresponds  to  Snow  Hill  and  Seymour  island  in 
the  south. 

(c)  The  volcanos  of  the  Ross  group  (Paulet,  Haddington,  Christensen, 
and  others)  may  be  compared  with  those  situated  in  front  of  the  Andes,  in 
particular  between  lats.  47°  and  48°  S.  (Cerro  Colorado,  mount  Belgrano  and 
others),  which  further  north  have  been  termed  the  prae-Andes. 

(d)  In  the  north  of  Graham  Land  two  principal  features  of  the  western 
Andes  make  their  appearance,  namely,  the  diversified  eruptive  rocks  of  the 
Andes  and  a  Mesozoic  land  flora.  In  lats.  27°  15'  S.  (la  Ternera)  and  40°  S. 
^(Piedra  Pintada)  the  flora  is  that  of  the  Lias ;  here  it  is  middle  Jurassic. 

(e)  No  connexion  can  be  shown  to  exist  between  the  widely  remote 
Tolcanic  indications  of  Burdwood  hank,  the  volcanic  arc  of  the  South 
Sandwich  islands,  and  the  Bransfield  volcanos  (Bridgman,  Deception,  and 
others).  The  resemblance  between  the  South  Sandwich  islands  and  the 
volcanos  of  the  Lesser  Antilles  has  often  been  remarked  upon. 

Existing  observations  scarcely  permit  us  to  carry  comparisons  further. 
It  must  not  be  overlooked  that  Staten  island  and  cape  Horn  do  not  present 
.a.  completely  concordant  strike,  and  that  mount  Oreille  may  mark  perhaps 
the  beginning  of  a  new  volcanic  arc,  resembling  the  South  Sandwich  islands 
more  closely  than  Burdwood  bank.  Arctowski  marks  —  4,040  meters  a  little 
to  the  south  of  Staten  island.  The  connexion  of  the  other  groups,  such  as 
South  Georgia,  the  South  Orkneys  and  South  Shetland  islands,  must  remain 
;an  open  question. 

Bruce's  deep-sea  chart  represents  all  the  islands  mentioned  above,  along 
with  Patagonia  and  Graham  Land,  as  standing  on  a  common  arcuate  ridge, 
and  all  enclosed  by  the  curve  of  —  1,500  fathoms  (2,743  meters) ;  while 
deeper  water  enters  the  interior  of  the  arc  from  the  west,  and  extends 
even  to  the  north  of  the  South  Orkneys,  where  —4,219  meters  has  been 
sounded.  Similar  depths  extend  to  a  point  south  of  Staten  island.  It  had 
already  occurred  to  Grange  that  the  South  Shetland  islands  and  the  smaller 
islands  as  far  as  Elephant  island  form  part  of  a  common  mountain  range, 
running  parallel  to  the  curve  of  Graham  Land.  This  is  confirmed  by  the 
deep-sea  chart,  according  to  which  the  South  Orkneys,  along  with  the 
whole  of  Graham  Land,  are  also  included  by  the  curve  of  1,000  fathoms  ^. 

*  W.  J.  Bruce,  Bathymetric  Survey  of  the  South  Atlantic  Ocean  and  Wedell  Sea,  Scot. 
Geogr.  Mag.,  August,  1905,  XXI,  pp.  402-412,  map ;  J.  Grange,  Voyage  au  Pole  Sud 


496  DOUBLE  ADVANCE  OF  THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM  [party 

Immediately  to  the  east  of  the  South  Sandwich  islands  no  soundings 
have  been  made.  We  might,  perhaps,  expect  to  find  a  foredeep  there 
similar  to  that  which  occurs  outside  a  part  of  the  Antilles. 

We  may  now  regard  it  as  established  that  in  the  interval  we  have  just 
discussed  the  Pacific  structure  advances  for  the  second  time  into  the  A  tlantic 
region.  On  the  south-east,  towards  Coats  Land,  we  may  conjecture  the 
existence  of  a  foreland  occupying  a  similar  tectonic  position  to  Brasilia. 

Summary.  We  have  stated  on  an  earlier  page  (II,  p.  204)  that,  with  the 
exception  of  the  coast  of  Guatemala  where  it  wheels  round  to  the  Antilles, 
all  the  boundary  regions  of  the  Pacific,  known  in  any  detail,  are  folded  in 
the  direction  of  that  Ocean.  This  was  in  accordance  with  the  observations 
which  had  been  made  up  to  that  time.  We  now  know,  however,  that 
the  case  which  was  then  held  to  be  exceptional  must  now  be  regarded 
rather  as  the  rule. 

In  the  north  the  Elias  range  is  folded  in  the  Pacific  direction ;  this 
is  still  true  of  the  northern  part  of  the  Sierra  Nevada  of  California,  and 
certain  parts  of  the  Basin  ranges. 

As  soon  as  we  reach  the  Californian  coast  ranges  nothing  similar 
is  to  be  seen.  In  the  Mexican  sierras  the  folding  is  clearly  directed  towards 
the  Atlantic  Ocean,  and  this  is  also  the  case  further  south,  wherever  it 
is  clearly  expressed,  especially  in  the  Andes  of  Argentina. 

Right  down  into  the  Antarctic  regions  the  mountain  ranges  lying  next 
the  Pacific  coast  are  characterized  by  a  trifling  development  of  the  Palaeo- 
zoic series.  Upper  Carboniferous  alone  occurs  at  certain  places  in  the 
Andes ;  it  is  only  from  the  promontories  of  Venezuela  and  the  South 
Orkneys  that  Silurian  fossils  have  been  obtained.  This,  it  is  true,  is  a  nega- 
tive character,  which  may  be  brushed  aside  by  future  discoveries,  but  it  is 
certain  that  in  Mexico,  Honduras,  Chile,  and  the  antarctic  Andes, plant-bearing 
beds,  ranging  from  the  Keuper  to  the  middle  Jurassic,  occur  in  these  chains, 
and  show  that  they  formed  dry  land  during  a  part  of  the  Mesozoic  aera. 

It  is  not  till  we  pass  to  the  east  of  these  chains  in  South  America  that 
the  long  zone  of  marine  Mesozoic  beds,  recalling  the  Intermediate  range  of 
North  America,  makes  its  appearance,  and  with  it  the  zone  of  the  giant 
volcanos ;  to  the  east  of  these  lies  the  Palaeozoic  series  of  the  Altaplanicie, 
the  Cordillera  Real,  and  the  Bolivian  and  Argentine  Andes,  in  which, 
upwards  from  the  Gondwana  stage,  and  in  places  from  the  Culm,  only 
plant-bearing  beds  are  known  as  far  as  the  upper  Cretaceous  transgression. 

We  might  now  speak  of  two  groups  of  Antilles,  and  place  the  northern 
Antilles  beside  the  southern  (South  Sandwich  islands),  with  Patagonia  and 
Graham  Land  repeating  the  structure  of  Guatemala  and  of  Colombia- 
Venezuela.    These  two  groups  of  Antilles,  and  in  particular  the  northern 

sous  le  commandement  de  M.  J.  Dumont  d'Urville,  Geologie,  Mineralogie  et  Geographic 
physicale,  2  vols.,  8vo,  Paris,  1848-1854,  I,  p.  40. 


CH.  XIIl] 


WESTERN  FOREDEEPS 


497 


group,  clearly  present  some  of  the  tectonic  characters  of  the  Asiatic  island- 
festoons,  and  we  are  tempted  to  regard  the  Andes  as  an  imperfect  repetition 
of  the  Asiatic  plan ;  the  foreland  between  these  two  groups  of  Antilles 
(Argentine,  Brazil),  overwhelmed  in  an  easterly  direction,  might  have  been 
the  cause  of  this  defective  development. 

Two  objections  may  be  raised  to  this  assumption. 

The  first  of  these  lies  in  the  structure  of  the  chains  situated  further  to 
the  west,  which  correspond  rather  to  a  continent  of  Trias  and  Jurassic 
times,  since  marine  upper  Cretaceous  lies  unconformably  superposed  upon 
their  west  coast,  as  in  Quiriquina,  for  example. 

Further,  considerable  depths  exist  along  a  great  part  of  the  west  side, 
which  we  might  be  inclined  to  regard  as  foredeeps  situated,  in  contrast  to 
all  Asiatic  foredeeps,  on  the  west  side  of  a  range  folded  towards  the  east. 

Agassiz  has  given  a  very  clear  description  of  these  depths. 

Even  far  to  the  north,  where  the  mean  depth  of  the  Ocean  is  about 
2,000  fathoms  (3,658  meters),  we  observe  near  the  west  coast  of  America 
isolated  pits  of  greater  depth,  as  for  example  in  lat.  20°  N.  —4,380  meters, 
near  Manzanilla  —5,120  meters,  near  Acapulco  —5,341  meters,  to  the  west, 
off  the  coast  of  Guatemala,  —4,572  meters.  Then  the  depths  decrease  in 
the  direction  of  the  broad  plateau  which  rises  into  Cocos  island  and  the 
Galapagos.  In  the  south  the  depths  recur  near  the  west  coast.  Off  Callao 
they  already  reach  —5,869  meters,  further  south  —6,867,  then  —6,542 
meters,  and  the  U.S.  ship  Relay  observed  between  Antofagasta  and  Copiapd 
an  elongated  depression  with  —  7,626,  —  7,635  and  —  7,507  meters.  Even 
off  Valparaiso  the  depth  still  reaches  —5,651  meters^. 

To  the  west  of  these  abysses  lie  the  two  ancient  volcanic  islands  of 
San  Felix  and  San  Ambrosio ;  to  the  south  of  these  the  Chilian  cruiser 
Presidente  Pinto  sounded  such  trifling  depths  for  a  distance  of  760  kilo- 
meters that  the  existence  of  a  submarine  ridge  running  almost  north  and 
south  in  the  direction  of  Juan  Fernandez  seems  to  be  indicated  2. 

It  may  suffice  for  the  present  to  have  mentioned  these  facts,  which  are 
not  in  accordance  with  those  observed  in  connexion  with  Asia. 

Since  Victoria  Land,  with  the  Terror  volcano,  Auckland,  and  the  south 
of  New  Zealand  are  assigned  to  the  Atlantic  region  (IV,  p.  294),  it  seems  as 
though  the  boundary  between  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  systems  struck 
across  the  Antarctic  just  as  it  does  across  the  Arctic  region  ^. 

*  A.  Agassiz,  Report  on  the  Scientific  Results  of  the  Expedition  to  the  East  Tropical 
Pacific,  Mem.  Mus.  Comp.  Zool.  Harvard  Coll.,  1906,  XXXIII,  pi.  I.  These  deeps  form  the 
most  important  part  of  Van  de  Wiele's  *  Bassin  Preandin' ;  Van  de  Wiele,  La  Mediter- 
ranee  des  Antilles  et  le  Bassin  Preandin  consideres  comme  regions  d'affaissement,  Bull. 
Soc.  geol.  Beige,  1906,  XX,  mem.,  pp.  83-161,  map. 

2  Some  doubts  have  been  expressed  with  regard  to  this  result ;  cf.  Supan,  Peterm. 
Mitth.,  1899,  p.  183. 

'  On  this  point  Gregory,  in  Nature,  April  25,  1901,  p.  611,  and  April  16,  1908,  p.  561. 
8OLLA8  IT  K  k 


498 


CHAPTER  XIV 
ANALYSES 

Analysis  of  the  plan.  Linking  and  syntaxis.  Significance  of  the  foredeeps.  Folding. 
Backfolding  and  disappearance  of  the  folds  in  the  Asiatic  structure.  Analysis  of  the 
arcs.    Analysis  of  certain  transverse  sections. 

Analysis  of  the  plan.  The  series  of  details  we  have  cited  is  very  long, 
and  yet  it  is  full  of  gaps. 

One  of  the  greatest  ranges  of  the  earth,  that  of  New  Guinea,  is  very 
little  known.  With  regard  to  the  principal  range  of  the  Oceanides,  to 
which  it  belongs,  connected  observations  are  lacking  to  such  an  extent  that 
conflicting  statements  exist  even  as  to  the  direction  of  the  folds,  and  it  is 
not  certain  whether  Timor  belongs  to  the  range  or  not.  It  is  particularly 
to  be  regretted  that  notwithstanding  the  praiseworthy  efforts  of  many 
investigators  the  structure  of  the  South  American  Andes  still  diverges  in 
many  respects,  not  yet  explained,  from  that  of  other  chains.  This  and 
very  many  other  questions  must  be  left  to  future  investigation. 

On  the  other  hand  there  are  many  extensive  regions  in  which  the 
fundamental  features  of  the  structure  are  well  known.  Definite  units 
may  be  distinguished.  Comparisons  become  possible.  Contrasts  and  corre- 
spondences appear.  We  will  now  make  an  attempt  to  define  some  of  these 
units.  We  will  first  enumerate  them — although  they  differ  in  kind  and 
are  of  unequal  value — according  to  their  arrangement  in  space. 

1.  The  western  half  of  Laurentia  is  bounded  by  the  Rocky  mountains, 
the  Appalachians  and  the  United  States  chain ;  it  also  includes  Greenland, 
possibly  the  whole  of  the  North  Atlantic  field  of  fracture,  upon  which  stand 
the  islands  of  Iceland  and  Jan  Mayen,  and  even  the  western  Hebrides  and 
some  of  the  western  promontories  of  Scotland.  Wherever  Cambrian  beds 
occur,  they  lie  horizontal.  Younger  folding  is  entirely  absent,  except  on 
the  Mackenzie,  on  the  right  side  of  which  the  foreland  (Devonian  and 
middle  Cretaceous,  extreme  western  border  of  the  Canadian  shield)  has 
been  overwhelmed  by  the  folds  of  the  Rocky  mountains  and  thrown  into 
long  coulisses. 

The  entire  marine  Mesozoic  series  is  absent  up  to  the  transgression  of 
the  middle  and  upper  Cretaceous.  Marine  Tertiary  beds  are  confined  to 
the  neighbourhood  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean. 

In  the  south,  the  Colorado  Plateau  and  a  small  area  in  Burnet  County 
above  Austin  (Texas)  must  be  referred  here. 


CH.XIV]       CALEDONIDES.    ASIATIC  SYSTEM  499 

2.  The  Caledonides,  a  pre-Devonian  folded  range,  striking  towards  the 
south-south- west,  may  be  regarded  for  the  present  as  forming  the  eastern 
boundary  of  Laurentia.  Traces  of  it  are  possibly  to  be  seen  even  in 
northern  Spitzbergen.  It  occupies  the  west  of  the  Scandinavian  peninsula, 
then  the  Shetland  and  Orkney  islands,  Scotland,  almost  the  whole  of  Wales, 
and  a  very  considerable  part  of  Ireland.  It  lies  between  the  supposed 
Laurentian  gneisses  of  the  western  Hebrides  in  the  west  and  the  Baltic 
shield  in  the  east,  and  according  to  existing  data  its  folds  are  overturned 
and  overthrust  in  the  east  towards  the  east,  and  in  the  west  towards  the 
west.   They  form  a  uniform  zone,  but  not  a  uniform  mountain  chain. 

3.  The  Asiatic  (or  Eurasiatic)  system.  The  boundaries  of  this  system, 
which  encircles  the  globe,  are  defined  by  a  number  of  folded  arcs ;  free- 
branching  folds  extend  beyond  the  arcs.  It  includes  the  following  parts 
of  northern  and  western  North  America :  the  United  States  chain,  the 
Rocky  mountains,  the  Elias  mountains,  and  the  Alaskides.  It  claims 
almost  the  whole  of  Asia  along  with  the  eastern  island  festoons  as  far 
as  the  Bonin  islands  and  as  far  as  the  foredeeps  of  Palau  and  the 
Talauer  islands,  the  Burman  arc  and  all  the  mountain  ranges  which 
are  sharply  defined  towards  the  south  from  the  mouth  of  the  Ganges 
to  the  western  extremity  of  the  Great  Atlas.  The  whole  of  Europe 
belongs  to  it,  with  the  exception  of  the  Caledonides  and  the  supposed 
Laurentian  portion  of  north-western  Scotland.  One  long  free  branch 
extends  across  the  Atlantic  Ocean  and  forms  Newfoundland  and  the 
Appalachians.  It  dies  away  in  Texas  and  Oklahoma.  Thus  Laurentia  is 
surrounded  by  the  Asiatic  folds.  In  north-east  Siberia  (most  clearly  on  the 
upper  Annabar  and  Olenek),  and  also  on  the  right  tributaries  of  the 
Chatanga,  this  great  folded  structure  with  its  numerous  arcs  surrounds 
a  gneiss  region  across  which  a  horizontal  Cambrian  covering  is  spread. 
This  region,  therefore,  has  not  shared  in  the  folding  movements.  It 
extends  on  the  east  to  the  Lena,  on  the  west  to  the  Yenisei,  and  on  the 
south  into  the  amphitheatre  of  Irkutsk.  It  is  probably  continued  beneath 
the  recent  alluvial  land  of  West  Siberia.  We  have  named  it  Angara 
Land. 

In  addition,  great  not-folded  regions  occur  between  the  Asiatic  folds, 
e.  g.  in  northern  China,  in  Cambodia,  and  Borneo.  Here,  too,  we  refer  the 
Russian  platform  and  the  Baltic  shield. 

In  Europe  the  Altaides,  which  are  pre-Permian  branches  of  this  structure, 
are  distinguished  by  a  remarkable  peculiarity;  they  have  sunk  in  over 
•large  areas  and  determined  the  origin  of  posthumous  chains  within  the 
frame.  These  are  :  (a)  the  Alpides  (from  the  Balkans  to  the  Balearic 
isles);  (6)  the  folds  of  Provencal  and  the  Pyrenees;  (c)  the  folds  of 
the  London  and  Paris  basin ;  (d)  some  smaller  disturbances  in  western 
;  Portugal. 

K  k  2 


500 


ANALYSES 


[part  V 


The  Caledonides,  which  seem  to  be  inserted  between  the  remains  of 
Laurentia  and  the  western  part  of  the  Asiatic  structure,  date,  as  we  have 
seen,  from  the  pre- Devonian  period.  Thus,  even  at  this  remote  time,  the 
two  largest  elements  of  the  northern  hemisphere,  Laurentia  and  Angara  land, 
were  already  welded  together.  Indeed  the  Devonian  continent  of  Eria 
extends  across  both. 

The  Tethys  extends  throughout  the  southern  part  of  the  Asiatic 
structure. 

4.  The  Bohemian  mass  is  an  independent,  alien  and  very  ancient  frag- 
ment ;  it  includes  the  south  of  Bohemia,  parts  of  Bavaria,  upper  and  lower 
Austria  and  Moravia. 

5.  Gondwdna  land.  This  comprises  :  South  America  from  the  Andes 
to  the  east  coast  between  the  Orinoco  and  cape  Corrientes,  the  Falkland 
islands,  Africa  from  the  southern  offshoots  of  the  Great  Atlas  to  the  Cape 
mountains,  also  Syria,  Arabia,  Madagascar,  the  Indian  peninsula,  and 
Ceylon.  Here,  as  in  Laurentia,  there  is  no  recent  folding,  except  on  the 
extreme  western  border.  Just  as  the  folding  on  the  Mackenzie  extends 
from  the  west,  out  of  the  Rocky  Mountains,  into  the  stratified  series  of  the 
otherwise  rigid  Laurentian  foreland,  so  the  folding  of  the  Andes  likewise 
extends  from  the  west  into  the  stratified  series  of  Bolivia  and  the  Argentine, 
that  is,  parts  of  the  otherwise  rigid  Gondwana  land. 

As  in  Laurentia,  so  again  here,  the  marine  Mesozoic  series  is  almost 
entirely  absent  up  to  the  middle  Cretaceous  transgression.  The  latter 
covers  with  its  horizontal  plateaux  great  parts  of  the  Sahara,  Syria,  and 
Arabia,  and  thus  renders  the  north  of  Gondwana  land  difierent  in  appearance 
from  the  south. 

The  Saharides,  a  zone  of  folds  striking  towards  the  south  or  south- 
south-west,  extend  in  considerable  breadth  from  Tidikelt  to  South 
Dahomey,  that  is  between  lats.  19°  to  20°  N.  and  right  through  the  midst 
of  the  Sahara. 

This  zone  is  older  than  the  horizontally  transgressive  upper  Silurian 
and  consequently  older  than  the  Caledonides.  Nevertheless  there  seems 
reason  to  believe  that  it  may  represent  a  tectonic  delimitation  of  ancient 
date,  similar  to  that  of  the  Caledonides :  nor  must  the  fact  be  overlooked 
that  in  the  north-west  of  Scotland,  the  typical  region  of  the  Caledonides,  a 
considerable  gap  exists  between  the  folded  Cambrian  beds  and  the  unfolded 
Devonian,  so  that  the  greater  age  of  the  Saharides  can  only  be  deduced 
from  other  regions.  Africa  is  cut  through  by  long  fissures  upon  which 
active  volcanos  are  seated.  The  Cameroon  line  runs  nearly  north-east; 
the  lines  more  to  the  east  are  meridional  or  sub-meridional ;  one  of  them  is 
continued  through  the  Red  sea  and  the  Dead  sea  far  to  the  north. 

6.  The  Cape  range  consists  of  three  fragments,  the  foreland  of  which 
is  formed  on  three  sides  by  the  Karoo.    These  fragments  are  :  in  the  west 


^H.xiv]         OCEANIDES.    ANDINE  SYSTEM  501 

;he  Cedar  range,  in  the  south  the  Zwarte  range,  in  the  east  the  Pondo 
•ange,  which  is  represented  by  only  a  few  and  little-known  remains.  The 
Jape  range  represents  a  large  folded  system,  resembling  in  many  respects 
}he  Asiatic  structure,  and  now  submerged  beneath  the  waters  of  the  south 
^^-tlantic  and  south  Indian  oceans. 

7.  Australia  and  the  Oceanides.  The  present  state  of  our  knowledge, 
ivhich  leaves  much  to  be  desired  as  regards  the  islands,  is  best  in  accord 
mth  the  view  that  Australia,  which  is  folded  only  on  its  eastern  border, 
out  also  bears  several  Mesozoic  transgressions,  might  occupy  a  position 
somewhat  similar  to  that  of  north-eastern  Angara  land.  At  the  same  time 
it  is  surrounded  on  the  north  and  east  by  folded  arcs,  which  extend  to  the 
Carolines,  Raroia,  and  probably  to  Hawaii.  It  is  possible  that  the  insertion 
Df  these  arcs  begins  with  Soemba,  Rotti,  and  Timor,  and  that  they  mark  at 
the  same  time  the  line  of  separation  between  Australia  and  the  Asiatic 
system. 

It  is  not  wholly  improbable  that  in  the  peninsula  of  Beru,  New  Guinea, 
and  in  some  of  the  Sunda  islands,  a  narrow  strip  of  comparatively  ancient 
land  projects  between  the  folds  of  Asia  and  Oceania.  While  considerable 
parts  of  the  Oceanic  arcs  are  without  doubt  recent  folded  ranges,  it  is 
uncertain  whether  the  islands  of  Yap  and  Viti  Levu  should  be  regarded  as 
such  or  as  older  formations. 

8.  The  Andine  system  rises  from  the  sea  on  the  west  coast  of  America 
between  lats.  42°  and  41°  N.,  borders  this  coast  and  extends  beyond  it  at 
least  to  lat.  68°  S.  Its  folds  penetrate,  as  we  have  seen,  into  the  western 
part  of  Gondwana  land,  and  they  advance  to  the  north  and  south  of  it  far 
into  the  Atlantic  region.  This  is  the  origin  of  the  northern  and  southern 
Antilles. 

The  Intermediate  range,  which  forms  the  transition,  and  is  charac- 
'terized  by  a  greater  diversity  of  Mesozoic  sediments,  by  long  folds,  fault- 
I troughs  and  recent  volcanos,  advances  in  the  north  from  the  Alaskides  in  a 
trough-like  subsidence  near  the  Wrangell  group,  extends  as  a  broad  zone 
through  the  west  of  Canada,  forms  the  Basin  ranges  (which  include  a  closed 
drainage  system),  lies  in  front  of  the  most  northerly  range  of  the  Andes,  is 
possibly  interrupted  in  west  Arizona,  reappears  in  Mexico,  and  reaches  the 
Atlantic  coast,  where  it  covers  a  wide  area.  The  Cordilleras,  which  represent 
the  Intermediate  range  in  Mexico,  can  scarcely  be  distinguished  tectonically 
from  the  Sierra  Madre  del  Sur,  the  principal  range  of  the  Andine  system. 

In  South  America  the  Cordillera  de  los  Andes  itself  assumes  the 
characters  of  an  intermediate  range  in  those  regions  of  Bolivia  and 
Argentina  which  are  known  in  greatest  detail.  Here,  too,  Mesozoic 
marine  beds,  recent  volcanos,  and  long  fault-troughs  occur. 

Graham  Land  is  a  repetition  of  Patagonia  and  must  be  assigned  to  the 
Andine  system. 


502 


ANALYSES 


[part  V 


9.  Antarctis,  that  is  Victoria  Land  and  Wilkes  Land  as  far  as  the  Gauss 
mountains,  and  on  the  other  side  Coats  Land,  are  probably  continuations  of 
South  Victoria.  The  volcanos  which  occur  there — the  Terror  series — seem 
to  be  comparable  with  the  volcanic  series  of  Africa. 

A  glance  at  these  nine  units  of  such  unequal  value  shows  us  that  it  is 
only  in  the  Pacific  region  that  the  outlines  of  the  continents  and  islands 
throw  some  light  on  the  arrangement  of  the  trend-lines.  If  the  Atlantic 
region  as  it  existed  during,  say,  the  Permian  period,  could  be  restored  to  our 
view,  we  should  see  a  mountain  chain  striking  across  the  existing  Ocean 
from  Armorica  to  Newfoundland.  To  the  north  of  this  chain  we  should 
still  see  perhaps  the  Erian  foreland.  Europe  itself,  especially  the  Iberian 
peninsula,  would  extend  further  towards  the  west,  and  the  Cape  mountains 
would  possibly  extend  far  into  the  region  which  is  at  present  covered  by 
the  Ocean.  But  all  this  has  disappeared.  On  none  of  the  Atlantic  or 
Indian  coasts  (with  the  exception  of  the  Antilles)  is  any  mountain-making 
activity  now  to  be  found.  In  the  Pacific  Ocean  it  is  widely  distributed. 
This  is  the  essential  difference  between  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  part  of  the 
globe.  Of  the  nine  units,  two,  Laurentia  and  Gondwana  land,  are  well 
known,  they  possess  many  characters  in  common,  and  may  be  recognized 
by  the  absence  of  any  post-Cambrian  folding  (with  the  possible  exception 
of  the  Saharides,  and  of  the  encroachment  of  younger  folding  on  the 
Mackenzie  and  in  Bolivia  and  Argentina)  as  parts  of  the  earth  which 
had  become  rigid  early.  It  is  probable  that  Antarctis  occupies  a  similar 
position.  If  so,  then  the  Atlantic  half  of  the  globe  would  present  a  northern 
an  equatorial,  and  a  southern  region  of  ancient  rigefaction. 

The  Caledonides,  the  Cape  mountains,  and  the  Andine  system  are  folded 
fragments  of  various  age. 

The  Asiatic  system  is  a  folded  structure  which  has  been  greatly  checke 
in  its  development  by  the  rigid  forelands  of  Laurentia  and  Gondwana  land 
At  the  same  time,  however,  this  system  itself  encloses  a  pre-Cambrian 
plateau,  i.  e.  Angara  land.    It  seems  likely  that  Australia  stands  in  ? 
similar  relationship  to  the  Oceanides,  but  here,  as  we  have  seen,  observations 
are  wanting,  in  particular  as  regards  the  principal  chain,  that  of  Ne 
Guinea.    For  these  reasons  our  attention  is  directed  first  to  the  vast  Asiati 
system  when  considering  the  relations  between  the  folded  regions  and  thos 
which  last  became  rigid. 

Linking  and  Syntaxis  (pi.  IV).  The  frequently  recurring  arcuate 
form  of  the  mountain  chains  is  the  most  striking  feature  of  the  Asiatic 
system.  The  manner  in  which  the  arcs  encounter  each  other  is  twofold 
either  they  enter  into  syntaxis,  or  one  arc  cuts  across  the  direction  of  the 
other.  We  have  termed  this  second  case  intersection  (e.  g.  Ill,  p.  375) ; 
Richthofen  has  employed  the  term  linking  (Kettung),  which  we  shall  adopt. 

Richthofen  regarded  linking  (in  contrast  to  syntaxis)  as  a  characteristic 


CH.  XIV] 


LINKING  AND  SYNTAXIS 


508 


feature  of  eastern  Asia,  and  has  discussed  this  question  with  his  customary 
power  in  a  series  of  memoirs  ^. 

We  now  know  that  linkings  have  not  all  the  same  significance,  and  that 
both  linking  and  syntaxis  are  present  in  the  island-festoons.  The  islands 
from  Kamchatka  to  the  Kuriles  strike  in  linking  across  the  direction  of 
the  Alaskides,  Hokkaido  across  that  of  the  Kuriles,  and  so  on,  while  the 
Alaskides  enter  into  syntaxis  towards  the  east,  and  so  on. 

We  must  now  attempt  to  distinguish  between  the  different  kinds  of 
linking,  and  to  determine  what  it  is  that  gives  rise  in  one  place  to  linking, 
in  another  to  syntaxis. 

The  Carpathians  strike  across  the  direction  of  the  Sudetes  and  the 
Sandomir  mountains.  Both  the  latter  are  of  greater  age,  and  there  is  no 
doubt  that  they  dip  beneath  the  Carpathian  arc.  This  is  linking  by  over- 
whelming. 

The  western  side  of  the  Himalaya  enters  into  syntaxis  with  the  Iranian 
folds,  whereas  in  the  east  the  Burman  direction  cuts  across  that  of  the 
Himalaya ;  here  too,  on  the  Brahmaputra,  linking  sets  in.  The  situation, 
however,  is  not  the  same  as  in  the  Carpathians.  If  we  term  the  chain 
which  maintains  its  direction  unchanged  the  dominant  chain,  then  in  the 
first  case  the  dominant  (Carpathians)  is  the  younger,  in  the  second  case 
it  is  the  older  chain.  Here  Assam,  an  alien  wedge-shaped  fragment,  is 
inserted.  Maclaren  states  that  in  about  lat.  95°  45'  E.  the  Himalaya 
encounters  the  Miju  chains  striking  transversely  to  the  south-south-east ; 
they  are  the  older  and  form  part  of  the  Burman  arc.  Again,  near  Tezpur, 
in  about  long.  92°  45'  E.,  crystalline  rocks  crop  out  at  the  bottom  of  the 
valley  of  the  Brahmaputra,  between  the  Himalaya  in  the  north-west  and 
the  Patkai  mountains  In  the  south-east.  Both  ranges,  the  Himalaya  and 
Patkai,  are  accompanied  by  a  belt  of  Gondwana  and  Tertiary  beds  over- 
turned in  the  direction  of  the  Brahmaputra  ^.  The  older  Miju  chains  were 
first  on  the  spot ;  consequently  here  the  Himalaya  ends.  The  advancing 
strike  of  the  Patkai  mountains  probably  indicates  a  subsequent  welling- 
forth  of  the  Burman  fold.  It  is  certain  that  movements  have  occurred 
during  a  long  period  on  both  sides ;  this  is  shown  by  the  overfolded 
Sewalik  beds.  For  the  present,  however,  we  will  bear  in  mind  that  the 
Miju  chains  were  the  first  on  the  spot. 

The  asphalt  pavement  of  our  streets  not  infrequently  presents  fissures 
of  a  peculiar  kind,  and  also  a  series  of  arcs.  If  the  curbstone  sinks,  these 
are  bent  backwards  from  it  (pi.  IV,  fig.  1) ;  if  the  middle  part  sinks  and 
the  curbstone  retains  its  position,  they  are  turned  towards  it  (fig.  2).  In 

1  F.  von  Richthofen,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Berlin,  1900,  pp.  888-925 ;  1901,  pp.  782- 
808  ;  1902,  pp.  944-975,  map  ;  and  1903,  pp.  867-918. 

2  Maclaren,  Rec.  Geol.  Surv.  India,  1904,  XXXI,  pp.  179-232,  map  ;  and  1905,  XXXII, 
p.  150. 


504 


ANALYSES 


[part  V 


both  cases  the  tension  produced  by  subsidence  is  resolved  into  arcs,  not 
of  the  same  but  often  of  similar  magnitude.  The  fissure  arises  in  or  near 
the  middle  (g,  fig.  1)  and  then  elongates  itself  towards  the  two  sides.  If  it 
meets  at  the  same  time  with  a  neighbouring  fissure,  as  for  example  at  the 
point  a  in  fig.  7,  then  the  trend-line  of  a  syntaxis  is  produced  ;  if  it  stops,  or 
if  its  starting  point  was  not  in  the  middle  of  the  asphalt  (6),  then  linking  takes 
place  (c).  If  fig.  2  were  a  map,  we  should  say  that  there  was  syntaxis  in 
the  north,  and  linking  further  south,  and  in  every  case  the  northern  would 
be  the  dominant  arc. 

If  after  some  lapse  of  time  we  again  visit  the  same  spot  in  the  asphalt 
we  sometimes  find  that  the  continued  tension  has  affbcted  the  whole  of  the 
broken  line  /,  a,  e,  and  that  any  faint  continuations  which  may  exist  on 
the  inner  side  of  a  have  not  been  subjected  to  this  further  dragging.  In 
addition,  secondary  fissures  frequently  arise  within  the  arcs.  At  last  the 
asphalt  becomes  broken  up  and  useless. 

Three  arcuate  and  concentric  elements  occur  in  the  Asiatic  island 
festoons,  namely,  the  foredeeps,  the  folded  chains  (cordilleras),  and  the 
volcanic  lines.    The  last-named  are  particularly  adapted  for  comparison. 

A  hook-shaped  fracture  or  fissure  accompanies  the  hook-shaped  bend  of 
the  strike  in  the  syntaxis  of  Karoo  Port  (IV,  p.  288).  In  the  Aleutian 
islands  a  similar  fissure  has  developed,  under  continued  tension,  into  the 
fault-trough  of  Cook  inlet ;  the  fault-trough  bends  with  the  syntaxis,  and 
near  the  place  at  which  the  bend  is  made  (a,  fig.  2)  stands  the  Wrangell 
group  of  volcanos.  Other  arcuate  fragments  have  also  become  fault- 
troughs  by  the  same  process — for  example,  the  Fusiyama-Bonin  line  in  the 
Fossa  magna — and  in  the  same  way  fault-troughs  are  formed  in  the  strike 
of  the  great  volcanic  line  which  starts  from  the  Ho-shue-shan  and  follows 
the  Burman  trend-line  through  31  degrees  of  latitude,  to  the  volcanos  of 
Java  and  beyond  ^. 

That  the  volcanic  arcs  actually  stand  upon  fissures  is  also  evident  from 
the  fact  that  they  are  able  to  cross  over  into  the  arcs  of  an  alien  cordillera. 
Thus  the  arc  of  the  Kuriles  cuts  across  the  cordillera  of  Hidaka  in 
Hokkaido,  and,  while  here  the  intersection  is  only  continued  to  the  volcano 
of  Optateshike  (III,  p.  140,  fig.  7),  the  map  of  the  Japanese  survey  continues 
it  to  the  west  coast  of  Hokkaido.  Another  example  is  afforded  by  the 
caldron-fracture  of  Kago-shima  bay,  the  volcano  of  Sakura  and  others, 
which  mark  the  entrance  of  the  Liu-Kiu  line  into  the  cordillera  of  south 
Kiu-Shiu.    Here,  however,  transverse  folds  of  Tertiary  age  also  occur. 

The  long  fissures  or  faults  which  cut  through  Korea  in  a  virgation  open 
towards  the  south,  form  the  greater  part  of  the  east  coast,  and  convert 

^  W.  Volz,  Zur  Geologie  von  Sumatra;  Koken,  Geologische  und  palaontologische 
Abhandlungen,  1904,  new  ser.,  VI,  112  pp.,  maps;  also  Vorlaufiger  Bericht,  in  Sitzb.  k. 
Akad.  Wiss.  Berlin,  1907,  pp.  27-140. 


CH.XIV]     SIGNIFICANCE  OF  THE  FOREDEEPS  505 

the  south  into  a  rias  coast,  are  possibly  disjunctive  lines  which  belong  to 
Liu-Kiu. 

This  throws  some  light  on  the  fact  that  in  Mindanao  the  volcanos  stand 
principally  on  lines  of  depression  (III,  p.  247)  and  not  on  the  cordilleras. 

We  shall  soon  see,  however,  that  in  spite  of  many  points  of  resemblance 
comparison  with  the  fissures  in  the  asphalt  must  be  made  with  some 
reserve.  For  the  present  we  only  conclude  that  linking  arises  either  when 
an  older  chain  is  overwhelmed  (Sudetes),  whereby  the  younger  chain  (Car- 
pathians) becomes  the  dominant,  or  else  when  the  chain  which  first  reached 
the  point  of  encounter  maintains  its  position  as  dominant,  this  case  being  the 
most  frequent  in  the  island-groups  of  Asia.  The  Aleutian  islands  afibrd  an 
example  in  which  linking  with  the  dominant  (Kamchatka)  has  not  yet 
been  attained. 

Significance  of  the  foredeeps.  Let  us  refer  to  what  has  already  been 
said  on  pp.  294  and  328.  With  the  exception  of  a  depression  of  over 
7,000  meters,  near  the  middle  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  of  almost  unknown 
outline,  which  owing  to  its  position  can  scarcely  be  termed  a  foredeep, 
and  with  the  exception  of  the  long  depression  bordering  parts  of  the 
west  coast  of  America,  the  significance  of  which  cannot  be  discussed  here, 
all  the  foredeeps  lie  either  close  in  front  of  the  Asiatic  arcs,  or  within 
the  Oceanides.  The  foredeeps  of  the  northern  Antilles  occupy  a  position 
similar  to  that  of  the  foredeeps  of  Asia,  and  we  must  include  them,  as 
we  have  seen,  among  the  Pacific  structures.  From  analogy  we  may  con- 
clude that  a  similar  foredeep  will  one  day  be  discovered  outside  the  South 
Sandwich  islands. 

The  subsidences  of  the  asphalt  pavement  take  place  on  the  concave  side 
of  each  of  the  several  arcuate  fragments.  During  the  process  of  draining 
the  quicksand  beneath  the  town  of  Briix  the  subsidence  began  on  the 
periphery,  and  was  continued  towards  the  interior.  On  renewed  drainage 
subsidence  began  outside  the  area  which  had  already  sunk  and  narrowed 
away  towards  the  interior.  A  similar  process  seems  to  have  occurred  in  the 
north-west  of  Iceland  (IV,  p.  265,  fig.  23),  and  may  also  be  assumed  here. 

At  the  beginning  of  these  studies  attention  was  drawn  to  the  analogy 
which  exists  between  the  North  Pacific  Ocean  and  the  Indian  peninsula, 
and  the  comparison  may  be  extended  to  the  Karoo.  Folded  mountains 
advance  on  three  sides ;  the  fourth  side  is  open.  On  one  side  are  Kam- 
chatka, the  Aleutian  islands,  and  the  Elias  range  ;  on  the  second  the  Sind 
chains,  Himalaya,  and  the  chains  of  Arakan ;  on  the  third  the  three  Cape 
ranges.  The  Indian  peninsula  is  a  foreland,  the  Karoo  also,  and  we  must 
assume  that  another  foreland  lies  beneath  the  North  Pacific  Ocean.  In 
considering  these  main  features  of  the  structure  we  must  not  allow  our- 
selves to  be  deceived  by  the  hydrosphere.  If  we  could  remove  it  a  vast 
land  would  lie  before  us  at  a  depth  of  3,600-4,000  meters  below  the  existing 


506 


ANALYSES 


[part  V 


sea-level,  but  in  front  of  the  folded  arcs  we  should  see  elongated  strips  of 
land,  no  doubt  not  completely  regular,  which  would  lie  2,000,  3,000  or  even 
5,000  meters  lower  than  the  rest  of  the  vast  tract  of  newly  exposed  land  ^. 
This  great  tract  of  land  is  the  foreland.  The  outer  border  of  the  foredeep 
is  the  arcuate  border  of  a  subsidence  of  the  lithosphere^  and  the  inner  border 
of  the  foredeep  is  the  outer  border  of  the  folded  range  which  has  advanced 
from  the  direction  of  the  land  over  this  deep.  Asia  is  surrounded  on 
the  east  and  south  by  subsidences  of  this  kind.  We  have  termed  them 
vertices.  The  peninsula  of  India  is  a  horst  which  has  been  preserved  at 
a  spot  where  the  foredeeps  were  probably  less  deep,  and  where  they  are 
now  indicated  by  great  river-valleys  only.  Africa  is  a  horst  which  has 
been  preserved  throughout  its  whole  breadth,  from  the  folded  system  in 
the  north  (Atlas)  to  that  in  the  south  (Cape  mountains). 

The  arcuate  outer  margins  of  the  foredeeps  have  probably  been 
produced  by  the  breaking-up  of  an  extensive  sinking  movement,  which 
includes  the  whole  of  that  part  of  the  Pacific  Ocean  lying  in  the  direction 
of  Asia. 

That  the  Cambrian  beds  lie  just  as  undisturbed  in  the  backland  as  in 
the  foreland  now  becomes  intelligible,  as  well  as  the  fact  that  there  are 
neither  arcuate  chains  nor  foredeeps  (excepting  the  brow  of  the  two 
Antilles)  in  the  Atlantic  and  Indian  Oceans.  A  foredeep  makes  its 
appearance  as  soon  as  we  reach  the  Burman  arc. 

It  is  assumed,  as  we  have  seen  above,  that  the  two  margins  of  the  fore- 
deep are  of  different  character ;  the  outer  margin  is  a  subsidence-margin  of 
the  foreland,  which  is  covered  by  the  sea,  the  other  belongs  to  the  advancing 
folded  range. 

In  the  foredeep  volcanic  rocks  are  but  seldom  encountered ;  they  have 
been  found  in  front  of  the  Philippines,  but  in  this  case  they  may  have  been 
rained  down  from  above.  The  volcanos  which  accompany  the  island  festoons 
n^ver  stand  in  the  foredeep,  but  belong  entirely  to  the  folded  cordillera. 

Folding.  The  simplest  form  in  which  the  folds  are  distributed  occurs 
when  concentric  arcs  arise,  closed  at  both  ends,,  within  a  foreland  which 

^  With  regard  to  the  deepest  foredeep,  that  of  Guam  (9,636  meters),  G.  Scholl  writes  : 
'  The  characteristic  feature  of  this  foredeep  consists  in  the  fact  that  the  little  furrow, 
both  deep  and  narrow,  which  borders  the  east  side  of  the  islands  of  Guam,  Tinian  Saipan, 
and  others  in  a  north-and-south  direction,  is  followed  by  a  series  of  clearly  marked  eleva- 
tions or  ridges  running  from  west-south-west  to  east-north-east  (1,977, 1,260, 1,317  meters) 
as  though  a  great  fault-trough  were  present  here,  lying  between  horsts  (islands  in  the 
west,  submarine  ridges  in  the  east) '  ;  Ann.  d.  Hydrogr.,  1906,  XXXIV,  pp.  23-27.  De 
Lapparent  was  one  of  the  first  to  draw  the  attention  of  geologists  (as  early  as  1879)  to 
the  remarkable  distribution  of  the  great  deeps  (Note  sur  la  disposition  generale  des 
reliefs  du  globe  terrestre,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1879,  3«  ser.,  VII,  pp.  346-352),  but 
the  most  important  facts  have  only  become  known  subsequently.  The  part  played  by 
Supan  in  obtaining  recognition  of  their  true  significance  has  already  been  mentioned 
(IV  294). 


CH.  XIV] 


BRANCH  FOLDS 


507 


is  let  down  in  a  more  or  less  arcuate  form.  In  Asia  a  large  part  of  the 
arcs  of  its  vertex  and  of  its  margin  either  belong  to  or  approach  this  type. 
Frequently,  however,  the  arcs  are  not  closed,  and  an  open  virgation  is 
produced  with  free  ends.  The  arcs  may  also  be  resolved  into  oblique 
coulisses,  as  in  the  Rocky  mountains. 

The  virgation  may  show  a  tendency  to  elongate  and  join  the  arc,  as  on 
the  Helmund  or  in  the  Aleutian  islands,  or  it  may  extend  far  beyond  the 
arc,  as  in  the  Thian-shan.  Finally,  cases  are  known  in  which  folds  advance 
independently  for  a  great  distance  beyond  the  region  of  their  origin,  until 
they  die  away  at  last  in  free  ends.  We  have  termed  these  branch-folds. 
Their  formation  bears  witness  to  a  powerful  and  extensive  lateral  pressure, 
which  finds  expression  in  a  projecture  on  the  outer  envelope  of  the  planet. 
In  this  way  the  Appalachians  and  Hindu- Kush  were  formed,  as  well  as  the 
Burman  arc,  which  advances  far  beyond  the  marginal  arcs ;  possibly  also 
the  main  bulk  of  the  Ural,  although  it  is  here  regarded,  on  account  of  its 
position,  as  a  posthumous  line  of  the  Asiatic  vertex. 

These  free  folds,  which  strike  away  beyond  the  frame  of  a  vertex, 
present  independent  deflexions.  Where  they  meet  with  a  local  obstacle 
secondary  forced  virgation  may  arise,  which  is  different  from  the  primary 
virgation  of  the  Alaskides  or  the  Philippines.  Secondary  virgation  of  this 
kind  is  produced  by  the  Adirondacks  in  front  of  the  Appalachians,  and  the 
plateau  of  Ufa  in  front  of  the  Ural.  It  is  obvious  that  the  opening  of 
the  forced  virgation  lies  in  the  direction  of  the  free  ends.  In  the  case 
of  the  Appalachians  these  are  the  isolated  fragments  of  coulisses  which  lie 
far  beyond  the  Mississippi,  in  the  case  of  the  Ural  the  much  younger 
Yergeni. 

The  greatest  deflexions  are  exhibited  by  the  Alpides,  which  have  arisen 
within  the  subsidences  of  the  western  Altaides  as  posthumous  folding  of  the 
frame.  In  this  way,  continued  development  towards  both  ends  has  given 
rise  to  the  bends  at  the  Iron  Gate,  of  the  south-eastern  Carpathians,  at  the 
union  of  the  Alps  and  Apennines,  and  from  Sicily  towards  Tunis,  and, 
finally,  the  arc  of  Gibraltar;  it  has  thus  produced  an  almost  vermiform 
trend-line,  with  free  ends  in  both  directions,  namely  '  running  backwards ' 
(towards  the  Altaides)  in  the  east  Balkans,  the  spur  of  Valeni  and  the 
spur  of  the  Lagern  (Jura  mountains),  and  '  advancing '  in  the  Balearic  isles 
(as  far  as  Majorca),  although  directed  there  towards  the  east. 

Especially  instructive  are  those  cases  in  which  a  continued  development 
of  the  free  ends  seems  to  have  occurred.  An  example  is  afforded  by  the 
two  folded  ranges  of  upper  Tertiary  age,  which  advance  out  of  the  north 
border  of  the  Caucasus  and  strive  to  surround  the  Cimmerian  fragment  in 
the  Crimea.  As  other  examples  we  may  mention  the  ends  of  the  Ghissar 
range,  those  of  the  Amu-darya  at  and  below  Kelif ,  and  those  of  the  Mogul- 
tau,  which  are  cut  through  by  the  Sir-darya  below  Chodjent  (III,  p.  299, 


508 


ANALYSES 


[part  V 


pi.  IV).  These  cases  are  particularly  clear,  since  both  rivers  must  be 
regarded  as  antecedent. 

While  the  Dinarides  exert  pressure  upon  the  Alps  in  the  direction  of 
the  porphyry  mass  of  Botzen,  two  fascicles  of  folds,  caused  by  the  avoid- 
ance of  obstacles,  arise  in  the  Dinarides  themselves,  one  running  in  the 
direction  of  lake  Garda  and  the  fault  of  Schio,  the  other  in  an  east-south- 
easterly direction  through  South  Styria  and  Croatia.  The  latter  date  (like 
the  spur  of  Valeni  in  the  Carpathians)  from  the  post- Levantine  period ; 
but  only  a  part  of  their  long  free  ends  are  formed  by  folds,  the  remainder 
consisting  of  steeply  upturned  strips  defined  by  faults  (IV,  p.  378). 

Let  us  once  more  return  to  the  long  free  branching  folds. 

A  little  board  moves  slowly  on  a  surface  of  water.  In  front,  in  its 
wake,  steeper  waves  are  formed.  At  the  sides  they  flow  away  in  long  free- 
branching  waves,  separating  in  virgation,  as  the  distance  increases,  owing 
to  intercalations  and  divergence,  possibly  too,  like  the  Appalachians  in 
Alabama,  passing  from  convex  into  concave  trend-lines,  at  the  same  time 
constantly  decreasing  in  height  and  elongating  beneath  our  very  eyes. 
The  comparison  is  more  exact  if  we  imagine  the  little  board,  or  the  source 
of  the  movement,  just  below  the  surface  of  the  water.  Then  we  may  also 
discover  a  resemblance  between  the  waves  of  Krakatoa  which  encircle  the 
earth  and  the  long  arms  of  the  Altaides. 

Bachfolding  and  dying-out  of  folds  in  the  Asiatic  system.  Let  us 
attempt,  at  the  danger  of  repeating  ourselves,  to  analyse  the  elements 
which  form  the  Asiatic  system.  In  the  north  of  the  Canadian  shield  the 
United  States  chain  makes  its  appearance  as  part  of  the  periphery.  To  the 
north  of  this  chain  the  Arctic  Ocean  extends.  Then  Angara  land  is  reached, 
which  includes  all  the  land  between  the  Yenisei  and  Lena  along  with  the 
fluvial  region  of  the  Aldan,  and  is  probably  continued  beneath  the  plain  of 
West  Siberia.  It  is  beneath  this  Cambrian  platform  that  gneiss  is  exposed 
along  several  of  the  rivers  of  North  Siberia.  It  has  been  called  Angara 
land  on  account  of  the  diversified  late  Palaeozoic  floras  of  its  southern  part ; 
in  the  north  it  is  overlain  by  the  flat- lying  marine  beds  of  Mesozoic  trans- 
gressions. 

The  platform  extends  from  Bennett  Land  into  the  horseshoe-shaped 
amphitheatre  of  Irkutsk  (up  to  lat.  52°  N.),  which  is  the  inner  border  of 
the  ancient  vertex  on  lake  Baikal.  This  is  followed  towards  the  west  by 
the  pre-Devonian  vertex  of  Minuzinsk,  and  this  again  by  the  Carboniferous 
vertex  of  the  Altai.  We  now  approach  the  periphery.  We  may  regard 
the  United  States  chain  as  the  first  member  of  the  periphery.  The 
second  member,  which  is,  more  correctly  speaking,  a  series,  extends  in  the 
east  from  the  Rocky  mountains  and  the  Elias  range  through  the  Alaskides 
and  the  east  Asiatic  island  festoons  to  Halmahera  and  Celebes.  The 
Ural  ides  in  the  west  correspond  to  these  as  a  third  member.    The  Urals 


CH.XIV]      BACKFOLDING  ON  LAKE  BAIKAL  509 


which  form  their  main  stem  recall  the  Great  Khingan ;  their  continuations 
reach  the  north  of  Norway,  but  the  peripheral  structure  is  there  so  little 
developed  that  horizontal  Cambrian  beds  extend  from  the  east  up  to  and 
beneath  the  Caledonides. 

To  the  south  of  the  Philippines  and  the  Uralides  a  change  sets  in.  This 
begins  on  the  Altai.  Long  straight  lines  mark  the  southern  boundary  of 
the  succeeding  parts  of  the  periphery.  The  eastern  part  is  prolonged 
towards  the  south  into  the  Burman  arc.  The  western  part  reaches  the 
horst  of  Azov,  extends  towards  Europe,  is  prolonged  across  the  Ocean,  and 
does  not  terminate  until  it  reaches  the  other  side  of  the  Mississippi.  These 
are  the  eastern  and  western  Altaides,  which  form  the  fourth  and  fifth 
members  of  the  periphery. 

Within  these  long  branches  the  southern  marginal  arcs  represent  the 
sixth  and  last  member.  They  comprise :  the  Himalaya,  the  Iranian  arc, 
and  the  Tauro-Dinaric  arc.  The  arc  which  surrounds  the  western  Medi- 
terranean has  undergone  posthumous  alteration. 

Thus  the  Asiatic  system  terminates,  and  we  return  to  the  amphitheatre 
of  Irkutsk  (III,  p.  10,  fig.  2). 

Here,  in  the  middle  of  the  Asiatic  system,  which  all  around  strives 
towards  the  exterior,  undoubted  backfolding  occurs  next  the  interior,  that 
is,  over  the  concave  side  of  the  arc.  The  syncline  of  the  peninsula  of 
Olchon,  overfolded  towards  the  interior  (III,  p.  62,  fig.  4),  and  the  Silurian 
beds  of  the  Onot  range,  also  overfolded  towards  the  interior,  afibrd  the 
clearest  evidence  of  this  ;  but  in  the  west  also,  on  the  so-called  horst  of  the 
Yenisei,  Meister  has  since  observed  overfolding  towards  the  interior,  and 
the  horseshoe-shaped  folds  of  the  Angara  beds,  to  the  north-east  of  Nishni 
Udinsk,  show  that  at  a  time  even  later  than  the  Jurassic  a  constriction  of 
the  amphitheatre  occurred  in  this  otherwise  Archaean  tract  (III,  p.  23). 
Here  the  backfolding  is  also  accompanied  by  late  granitic  intrusions,  as 
at  Kruglaja,  near  Nishni  Udinsk,  and  the  rapids  of  Strielka  above  the 
mouth  of  the  Angara  ^. 

The  arc  of  Verkhoiansk,  the  innermost  branch  of  the  Anadyrides,  is 
folded,  according  to  Toll,  towards  the  interior ;  he  expressed  this  view  many 
years  ago,  when  it  was  little  likely  to  be  accepted ;  and  it  is  not  generally 
recognized  even  now  (IV,  p.  341). 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Romanzov  range,  in  contrast  to  the  other 
Alaskides,  is  folded  towards  the  interior.  The  overfolds  near  cape  Lisbume 
directed  towards  the  north,  and  the  arrangement  of  the  beds  shown  in  the 
section  of  the  Endicott  range,  bear  witness  to  this  (IV,  p.  352). 

^  Geologische  Beobachtungen  in  den  goldfiilirenden  Gebieten  Sibiriens,  Gebiet  des 
Jenissei,  Meister,  sheet  K-8, 8vo,  St.  Petersb.,  1903,  89  pp.,  maps.  Earlier  data  led  to  the 
conjecture  that  the  Kropotkin  mountains  (III,  p.  44)  were  also  backfolded  ;  doubts  have 
recently  arisen  with  regard  to  this  region  ;  op.  cit..  Region  of  the  Lena,  A.  Guerassimow, 
Sheet  III-6,  1907,  229  pp.,  map  (in  Russian). 


510 


ANALYSES 


[PAET  V 


Since  the  Rocky  mountains  form  a  syntaxis  with  the  Romanzov  moun- 
tains (not  with  the  Alaska  range)  and  are  moved  in  the  same  direction 
(that  is,  are  turned  away  from  the  forefolding,  which  is  directed  towards 
the  Pacific  Ocean),  they  must  be  regarded  as  backfolded  with  reference  to 
the  Asiatic  system.  The  backfolding  is  expressed  in  the  movement  towards 
the  east,  while  the  Elias  range  is  moved  towards  the  west.  In  the  southern 
part  of  the  Rocky  mountains,  however,  unilateral  movement  is,  as  a  rule, 
scarcely  perceptible. 

Between  the  several  branches  of  the  great  system  blocks  stand  out 
which  have  resisted  the  foldings  of  more  recent  date.  The  largest  of  these 
lies  in  North  China,  and  in  the  elbow  of  the  Hoangho  its  western  and 
northern  border  stands  in  the  position  of  a  foreland  in  face  of  the  folds  of 
the  desert  of  Gobi.  In  the  east  of  this  block  B.  Willis  and  Black  welder 
have  shown  that  the  coal-formation  of  Shansi  is  folded,  and  that  in  the 
Ki-tshou-shan  folding  and  overthrusting  towards  the  south-east  prevail  in 
the  Cambrian  and  pre-Cambrian  rocks.  Ki-tshou-shan  strikes  to  the  north- 
east and  forms  the  junction  with  Wutai-shan,  which  is  likewise  folded 
(These  facts  relate  to  the  mountains  marked  red  on  pi.  VII,  vol.  III.)  Thus 
the  bend  of  the  Wutai-shan  into  the  direction  of  the  Great  Khingan  is 
determined;  the  latter  strikes  to  the  east-north-east  even  as  far  as  the 
Dolon-nor^,  and  must  now,  in  accordance  with  earlier  conjectures,  and 
the  observations  made  in  the  north  (III,  pp.  116,  208),  be  included  among 
the  folded  structures. 

The  insertion  of  the  folds  which  approach  from  Kuku-choto  marks  the 
north-eastern  end  of  the  block  of  North  China.  All  these  branches  then 
are  forefolded. 

The  behaviour  of  the  block  of  South  China  differs  fundamentally  from 
that  of  North  China.  It  does  not  act  as  a  foreland,  damming  back  the  folds 
towards  the  west,  but  the  chains  of  the  great  ranges  are  continued  into  it 
and  gradually  flatten  out. 

The  chains  of  Yunnan,  running  almost  north-and-south  in  lat.  27**  30'  N., 
and  very  closely  crowded  together,  begin  to  diverge  from  one  another  to 
the  south  of  this  locality,  extending  in  the  Patkoi  range  towards  the  south- 
west, and  on  the  south-east  of  Talif u  in  the  direction  of  the  Red  river.  In  the 
north-west  other  meridional  chains  advance  east  of  Batang  to  the  Ta-pa- 
shan  and  the  Red  basin.  A  particularly  long  coulisse  (anticline  of  Tung- 
tshwang)  is  cut  through  by  the  Yan-tse-kiang  at  its  most  southerly  point. 
All  these  folds,  according  to  Leclere's  observations,  flatten  out  in  broad 
anticlines  towards  the  south.    Devonian,  Carboniferous,  marine  Permian, 

*  B.  Willis,  E.  Blackwelder,  and  R.  H.  Sargent,  Research  in  China,  2  vols.,  in  3  parts, 
4to,  Washington,  1907,  atlas. 

^  Communication  by  letter  from  Mr.  Ogawa,  on  a  journey  from  Peking  to  Dolon-Nor 
performed  in  1903. 


CH.  XIV] 


SOUTH  CHINA 


511 


marine  Trias,  and  Rhaetic  and  Liassic  plant-bearing  beds  broaden  out  over 
the  land,  and  it  is  not  till  we  approach  long.  108°  E.  that  an  older  founda- 
tion becomes  visible  beneath  them.  Flexures,  striking  to  the  north- north- 
east, and  a  general  subsidence  are  the  predominant  features  in  east  Yiinnan 
and  Kwang-si  \ 

Thus  we  may  indeed  say  that  this  part  of  China  bears  the  drooping 
remains  of  the  sedimentary  mantle  which  formerly  covered  the  high 
mountain  ranges  (III,  p.  231). 

Further  to  the  east  the  block  of  South  China  is  but  little  known. 
Proceeding  from  Fu-chu  towards  the  interior,  gneiss,  amphibolite,  granite, 
and  ancient  schists  have  been  met  with,  overlain  unconformably  by  beds  of 
Mesozoic  appearance  ^. 

Let  us  return  to  the  chains  of  Yiinnan.  The  chains  which  follow  the 
Red  river  towards  the  south-east  send  off  in  the  west  the  cordillera  of 
Annam,  which  becomes  convex  towards  the  east  and  conforms  to  the 
direction  of  the  line  of  the  Philippines.  The  eastern  coulisses  reach  the 
delta  of  the  Red  river  in  low  spurs,  but  towards  the  interior  they  are 
followed,  according  to  Zeil,  by  further  folds,  the  strike  of  which  makes 
a  bend  in  the  regions  situated  to  the  north  and  north-east  of  Ha-Noi,  out 
of  the  south-east  into  the  east-north-east,  with  the  convexity  turned 
towards  the  south  and  south-south-east;  we  await  further  information 
concerning  these  coulisses  ^. 

Then  come  still  additional  intercalated  segments  in  Cambodia  and 
South  Borneo. 

These  details  are  given  to  show  that  in  these  great  branches  of  the 
eastern  periphery  backfolding  has  almost  completely  disappeared.  A  local 
exception  occurs  in  the  Burman  arc,  in  South  Sumatra,  where  Tobler, 
while  surveying  the  petroleum-bearing  anticlines  of  Tertiary  age,  found 
that  they  had  been  produced  by  a  movement  directed  towards  the  north 
and  north-east,  i.  e.  by  backfolding 

In  the  Mustag-Ata,  on  the  east  side  of  the  Pamir,  there  is  a  tremendous 
overfold  or  overthrust  towards  the  east,  that  is  towards  the  concave  side  of 
the  Yarkand  arc  (III,  p.  273) ;  something  similar  may  also  be  seen  in  the 
folds  which  surround  the  Helmund. 

^  A.  Leclere,  !^tude  geologique  et  miniere  des  provinces  chinoises  voisines  du  Tonkin, 
Ann.  Mines,  1901,  9*^  ser.,  XX,  pp.  287-506,  maps. 

^  Kinosuki  Inouye,  A  Journey  along  the  Min  Kiang,  Province  of  Fukien,  China, 
Journ.  Geogr.  published  by  the  Tokyo  Geographical  Society,  1898,  X,  pp.  583-592  and 
637-641,  map  (in  the  Japanese  language,  kindly  translated  by  Mr.  Yamasaki). 

^  G.  Zeil,  Contribution  a  la  geographie  tectonique  du  Haut  Tonkin,  Ann.  Geogr.,  1907, 
XVI,  pp.  430-450,  map. 

*  A.  Tobler,  Topographische  und  geologische  Beschreibung  der  Petroleum-Gebiete  bei 
Mocara  Enim  (S.  Sumatra),  Tijdschr.  Nederl.  Aardrijkskund.  Genootsch.,  1906,  pp.  199- 
315,  maps,  in  particular  pp.  261  and  273. 


512 


ANALYSES 


[part  V 


We  will  now  return  to  the  inner  vertices. 

In  the  vertex  of  Minuzinsk  backfolding  also  occurs.  Near  the  Yenisei 
the  West  Sayan  is  overfolded  towards  the  north,  that  is,  towards  the 
interior,  and  the  horseshoe-shaped  folds  of  Devonian  below  the  town  of 
Minuzinsk  probably  play  a  part  similar  to  that  of  the  horseshoe-shaped 
folds  of  Jurassic  near  Nishni  Udinsk  (III,  p.  79). 

In  the  vertex  of  the  Altai,  the  question  as  to  the  presence  of  backfolding 
must  remain  undecided.  Some  observations  seem  to  show  that  the  border 
of  the  Kusnetskii  Alatau  is  folded  towards  the  west  over  the  coal-bearing 
beds  of  Kusnetzk,  but  they  scarcely  enable  us  to  arrive  at  a  decision^ 
(III,  p.  152). 

After  these  numerous  examples  of  the  repeated  occurrence  of  back- 
folding  we  will  now  extend  our  inquiry  to  Europe,  The  Timan-Kanin 
chain  in  the  north  and  the  Dinarides  in  the  south  retain  the  normal  fore- 
folding  towards  the  south,  even  on  this  continent.  The  line  of  the  Altai, 
which  reaches  a  point  to  the  north  of  the  horst  of  Azov,  behaves  in  a  manner 
characteristic  of  Asia,  and  this  is  also  true  of  the  problematical  lines  of 
Karpinsky.  On  the  other  hand  the  trend-lines  coming  from  the  Caucasus, 
which  reach  the  south  of  the  horst,  turn  from  this  point  onwards  towards 
the  north,  in  contrast  both  to  the  mountains  situated  in  the  north  and  those 
in  the  south.  At  first,  it  is  true,  we  only  see  posthumous  chains  (Balkans 
and  others).  In  this  respect,  however,  they  resemble  the  typical  western 
Altaides ;  these  first  become  visible  in  the  Sudetes  (IV,  p.  3). 

From  the  horst  of  Azov  omuards  the  whole  of  the  western  Altaides  (along 
with  their  posthumous  structures)  exhibit  backfolding  as  far  as  Texas  and 
Oklahoma. 

From  this  fact  a  number  of  conclusions  may  be  drawn. 

The  Rocky  mountains  proceed  from  the  island-festoons,  the  Appa- 
lachians from  the  Altaides,  but  it  is  only  the  fact  that  both  ranges  are 
backfolded  with  regard  to  the  great  Asiatic  system  which  renders  it 
possible  to  regard  Laurentia  as  the  common  foreland  of  both,  and  at  the 
same  time  of  the  United  States  chain,  which  exhibits  fore-folding. 

At  the  same  time  it  appears  that  both  in  the  east  and  west  it  is 
precisely  the  backfolded  free  branches  which  extend  farthest  beyond  the 
periphery,  namely  the  Rocky  mountains  in  the  east  and  the  western 
Altaides  in  the  west.    But  we  also  see  that  they  die  away  more  rapidly. 

In  the  Rocky  mountains  folding  commenced  as  early  as  the  upper 
Cretaceous,  thus  offering  a  contrast  to  the  Elias  range  which  is  still  in 
course  of  formation.  The  branches  of  the  Altaides  which  lie  outside  the 
horst  of  Azov  became  rigid  even  before  the  Permian  period,  but  later,  it  is 

^  J.  P.  Tolmatschew,  Geological  Observations  on  the  Kusnetzkii  Alatau,  Izviestija  Imp. 
1088.  Geogr.  Obsch.,  1903,  XXXIX,  pp.  390  436  (in  Russian) ;  Bogdanow's  statements 
(Verb.  russ.  min.  (Jes.,  1883,  XVIII,  pp.  149-211)  have  already  been  mentioned. 


CH.  XIV] 


ANALYSIS  OF  THE  ARCS 


513 


true,  they  gave  rise  to  posthumous  structures,  such  as  the  Alps,  in  the 
European  subsidences.  The  northern  part  of  the  Urals  is  old,  but  in  its 
southernmost  part  it  presents  very  recent  offshoots.  All  the  rest  of  the 
periphery,  from  the  Mediterranean  to  the  Elias  range,  may  be  regarded  as 
characterized  by  true  forefolding,  possibly  not  yet  completed.  Without 
anticipating  some  observations  to  follow  later,  we  may  refer  to  the  mode  of 
arrangement  of  the  active  volcanos,  which  is  in  complete  harmony  with  all 
the  preceding  conclusions. 

A  restriction  of  the  area  over  which  the  orographic  force  operates  occurs 
simultaneously  with  a  falling  off  in  the  intensity  of  this  force. 

The  backland  is  not  the  starting-point  of  an  active  fold-forming  force. 
The  Cambrian  beds  lie  just  as  undisturbed  in  the  backland  of  Angara  as  in 
the  foreland  of  Laurentia.  The  backfolding  is  a  secondary  phenomenon, 
the  result  of  a  redundancy  in  the  planetary  envelope. 

This  is  naturally  not  true  of  those  forced  backfoldings  which  have  been 
produced  by  a  violent  bend  in  the  strike,  such  as  occurs  at  the  Iron  Gates 
and  the  bend  of  the  Alps  to  the  Apennines. 

Analysis  of  the  Arcs.  The  structure  of  the  northern  Antilles  may  first 
engage  our  attention.  A  considerable  foredeep  lies  in  front  of  its  northern 
half.  Following  one  another  with  great  regularity  in  concentric  arcs  are  : 
a  series  of  Tertiary  islands,  a  short  series  of  extinct  volcanos,  the  arc  of 
active  volcanos,  and  finally  the  cordillera.  A  concentric  structure  is  also 
possessed  by  the  Asiatic  arcs.  A  tendency  to  the  same  plan  may  be  recog- 
nized even  where  the  lines  separate  in  virgation. 

We  mfiy  select  for  comparison  with  the  Antilles  four  types  of  arcs, 
represented  by  the  Philippines,  the  Liu-Kiu  islands,  the  Alaskides,  and  the 
Bonin  islands. 

1.  The  Philippines  (II,  p.  171 ;  III,  p.  246,  pi.  II.)  present  in  the  east 
a  long  foredeep  which  sinks  below  7,000  meters.  They  open  out  towards 
the  south  in  a  virgation  of  Cordilleras,  and  between  their  branches  several 
series  of  volcanos  make  their  appearance.  The  virgation  extends  across 
Mindanao,  and  dies  away  in  Celebes  and  Halmahera,  following  directions 
which  run  transverse  to  that  of  the  Burman  arc  ^. 


^  For  Celebes  (III,  p.  257)  the  most  important  source  of  information,  in  addition  to 
Wichmann's  works,  is  P.  and  F.  Sarasin's  Entwurf  einer  geographisch-geologischen  Be- 
schreibung  der  Insel  Celebes,  1901,  4to,  344  pp. ;  petrological  supplement  by  C.  Schmidt 
and  atlas.  The  succession  of  rocks  is  granite,  gneiss,  mica-schist,  and  other  schists ; 
further,  crystalline  limestones,  radiolarian  rock,  some  brown  coal,  lower  Tertiary,  and 
more  recent  limestone  and  Miocene  clays.  In  addition,  glaucophane  rocks,  peridotite, 
dunite,  and  diabase,  then  trachytic  and  leucitic  rocks,  and,  jfinally,  recent  volcanos  are 
present.  The  theory  that  a  separation  into  two  virgations  occurs  is  supported  in  par- 
ticular by  the  strike  to  north  and  north-north-east  in  the  extreme  north-west  (III,  p.  258). 
On  the  other  hand  the  interruption  of  the  cordillera  near  the  Equator  may  be  cited  as  an 
objection,  and  also  Wichmann's  statement  that  a  strike  to  north  45°  east  occurs  to  the 

SOLLAS  IV  Xi  1 


514  ANALYSES  [party 

The  inner  branch,  formed  by  the  Sarawak  or  upper  Kapoewas  range  of 
north  Borneo  (folded  Trias  and  Cretaceous),  marks  the  limit  of  a  large  alien 
segment  which  occupies  the  south  of  Borneo  between  the  branches  of  the 
virgation.  On  the  west  is  Pontianak,  lying  in  the  broad  alluvial  stretches 
of  the  river  Laudak.  To  the  north  of  this  locality  Wing-Easton  observed 
granite  with  transgressive  Cenomanian,  which  must  belong  to  the  alien 
segment  ^.  In  the  east,  according  to  Molengraaff,  it  is  bounded  by  a  trough 
in  the  direction  of  the  cordillera.  On  the  south  border  of  the  trough,  in 
the  direction  of  the  alien  segment,  rise  the  extinct  volcanos  of  the  Miiller 
range. 

2.  Liu-Kiu  islands.  The  strike  of  south  Honshiu,  which  also  prevails 
in  the  south  of  Kiushiu,  is  cut  through  here  by  the  volcanic  line  of  the 
Liu-Kiu  arc  as  it  enters  this  region.  This  is,  as  we  have  seen,  the  meaning 
of  the  bay  of  Kago-shima,  the  caldron  fracture  in  which  it  ends,  the  volcano 
of  Sakura  on  the  margin  of  the  caldron,  and  the  volcano  of  Kiri-shima 
which  rises  further  inland.  But  still  further  to  the  north,  near  the  town 
of  Kumamoto,  and  in  the  western  part  of  the  Amakusa  islands,  which  lie 
off  the  coast  towards  the  south-west,  deflexions  of  the  ancient  rocks  towards 
the  north  and  north-west  occur,  and  in  north  Kiushiu  the  Tertiary  beds 
rest  upon  long  tectonic  lines  of  post-Tertiary  age,  which  run  across  the 
main  strike  in  a  north-and-south  direction.  Japanese  geologists  think  it 
possible  that  these  may  be  ascribed  to  the  influence  of  Liu-Kiu^. 

The  middle  and  southern  part  of  Korea  is  of  great  age.  Some  folds 
occur  striking  to  the  east-north- east  or  north-east,  but  it  is  the  younger 
fractures  which  determine  the  character  of  the  country.  • 

A  great  fault-trough  extends  from  Gensan  on  the  east  coast,  in  about 
lat.  39"  N.,  and  becomes  so  broad  towards  the  south-south-west  that  the 
north  border  reaches  the  west  coast  in  lat.  37°  50'  N.,  the  south  border  in 
lat.  36°  N.  Recent  basalts  occur  in  the  fault-trough.  That  part  of  Korea 
which  lies  towards  the  north-west  (K6t6's  Palaeo-Chyo-s6n)  is  cut  up  into 

south  of  this  interruption  in  about  lat.  0*"  45'  S.  (Tijdschr.  Aardr.  Genootsch.,  1890,  2. 
Ser.,  VII,  p.  987).  This  seems  to  point  to  a  single  virgation  starting  to  the  north-east  of 
Minahassa.  Kruijt's  map  of  the  kingdom  of  Mori  (op.  cit.,  1900,  2nd  ser.,  XVII,  pi.  II) 
does  not  show  any  bend  of  the  chains  at  the  head  of  the  gulf  of  Tomori  (Mori)  from  the 
south-east  to  the  north-east  peninsula,  while  a  bend  of  this  kind  from  the  south-east  to 
the  north  (to  lake  Posso)  is  certainly  marked.  For  the  north,  Molengraaff,  Zeitschr.  prakt. 
GeoL,  1902,  pp.  249-257.  The  volcanic  mountains  of  Bowonlangi  and  the  volcanic 
group  of  the  Pic  von  Bontaing  lie  in  the  furrow  or  fault-trough  of  the  valley  of  Tempe. 

*  N.  Wing-Easton,  Geologic  eines  Theiles  von  West-Borneo,  8vo,  Batavia,  1904, 542  pp., 
atlas.  For  the  transgressive  Cenomanian,  Krause,  Samml.  geol.  R.  Mus.  Leiden,  1902, 
VII,  1,  28  pp.  The  trend-lines  of  the  folded  mountains  in  the  oil-bearing  beds  of  the 
bay  of  Brunei  in  Labuan  have  been  described  by  K.  Schmidt;  Gerland,  Beitrage  zur 
Geophysik,  1904,  VII,  121-136,  map. 

2  Outlines  of  the  Geology  of  Japan,  descriptive  text  to  geological  map,  1 ;  1,000.000, 
Tokyo,  1900,  pp.  26,  76,  102. 


CH.  XIV] 


ANALYSIS  OF  THE  AECS 


515 


numerous  segments.  In  the  south-east,  lines  of  fracture  occur  which  repre- 
sent a  virgation  starting  from  Gensan  or  a  point  lying  further  to  the  north. 
One  of  these  fractures  forms  the  greater  part  of  the  arcuate  east  coast; 
it  is  followed  by  three  long  parallel  fractures  ;  others  diverge  towards  the 
south-west,  and  the  south  coast  of  Korea  becomes  a  rias  coast.  These  long 
fractures  are  disjunctive  lines  in  a  virgation  which  may  possibly  be  included 
among  the  inner  zones  of  Liu-Kiu  ^. 

We  have  shown  previously  (II,  p.  176)  that  the  arc  of  Liu-Kiu  consists 
of  an  outer  rocky  cordillera  and  an  inner  volcanic  zone.  But  the  resem- 
blance to  the  Northern  Antilles  does  not  stop  here,  an  arc  of  Tertiary  beds 
being  present  outside  the  Cordilleras. 

The  innermost  zone  extends  from  the  volcanos  in  the  south-west  of 
Kiushiu  through  Iwo-shima  to  Tori-shima  and  other  islands,  and  finally 
to  the  volcano  of  Taiton  in  the  northern  extremity  of  Formosa  ^.  The 
second  zone  is  a  mountainous  cordillera;  Yaku-shima,  0-shima,  Tokuno- 
shima,  Okinawa-shima,  and  Migako-shima  are  its  most  important  members. 
Palaeozoic  beds  dip  here  towards  the  west,  and  are  thus  probably  over- 
folded  towards  the  Ocean,  as  in  south  Honshiu.  The  third  zone  consists 
partly  of  Lepidocyclina-limestone ;  it  includes  Tanega-shima,  Kikaiga- 
shima,  the  southernmost  part  of  Okinawa-shima,  and  other  islands. 

In  the  southern  group  of  Yaeyama,  Ishigaki  belongs  to  the  cordillera, 
but  andesite  also  occurs,  and  the  (volcanic)  mountain  of  Nasoko  which, 
precisely  like  the  extinct  volcanos  of  the  Antilles,  rises  more  towards  the 
exterior.  Iriomote  is  formed  of  folded  Tertiary.  The  influence  of  the 
Philippines  probably  expresses  itself  here  in  the  strike,  which  is  directed 
in  places  towards  the  north-north-east^. 

3.  The  Alaskides  (IV,  p.  346).  Within  the  foredeep  rises  a  cordillera 
formed  apparently  of  very  ancient  rock,  and  accompanied  on  its  south  side 
by  Flysch-like  sediments  as  well  as  by  folded  Tertiary  beds,  in  part  oil- 
bearing  (Kenai  and  Chugatsk  range).  Within  the  cordillera  lies  the  trough 
of  Shelikof  strait  and  Cook  inlet,  with  beds  ranging  from  the  Jurassic  to 
the  Tertiary,  with  disjunctive  lines  and  the  arc  of  the  volcanos.  Within 

^  Koto,  Orographical  Sketch  of  Korea,  Journ.  Coll.  Sci.  Tokyo,  1903,  XIX,  1,  61  pp., 
map ;  also  K.  Inouye,  Geology  and  Mineral  Resources  of  Korea,  Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  Japan, 
1907, 1,  1,  91  pp.,  map.  An  isolated  andesitic  cone  within  the  rias  coast  is  also  remark- 
able ;  E.  Sagawa,  Kojo  Island,  Corea,  Bull.  Geol.  Surv.  Japan,  1901,  XIV,  pp.  31-50,  map 
(in  Japanese  language ;  long.  128°  32'  E.). 

^  F.  von  Riclithofen,  Geomorphologische  Studien,  III,  Die  morphologische  Stellung  von 
Formosa  und  der  Riukiu-Inseln,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Berlin,  1902,  pp.  944-975,  map. 

^  S.  Yoshiwara,  Raised  Coral  Reefs  in  the  Islands  of  the  Riukiu  Curve,  .Tourn.  Coll. 
Sci.  Tokyo,  1901,  XVI,  Art.  I,  14  pp.,  map ;  Geological  Study  of  the  Riukiu  (Loochoo) 
Curve  and  its  relation  to  the  north  part  of  Formosa,  op.  cit.,  Art.  II,  67  pp.,  maps ; 
R.  B.  Newton  and  R.  Holland,  Fossils  from  the  Islands  of  Formosa  and  Riu-Kiu,  op.  cit., 
1902,  XVII,  Art.  VI,  23  pp. 

L  1  2 


516 


ANALYSES 


[part  V 


the  volcanic  arc  again  rises  the  main  cordillera  (Alaska  range),  accompanied 
by  secondary  branches. — An  alien  fragment  is  inserted  between  the  branches 
of  the  virgation  (Seward  and  Chuchki  peninsula). — The  last  cordillera 
presents  backfolding  towards  its  concave  side  (Romanzov  range). 

4.  The  Bonin  islands  (III,  p.  146;  IV,  p.  296).  From  the  profound 
disturbance  which  cuts  through  Honshiu  rises  the  series  of  the  Shichito 
volcanos  ^.  It  continues  the  western,  volcanic  series  of  the  Bonin  islands,  in 
front  of  which  there  lies  in  the  east  a  second  chain  of  islands,  the  Ogasawara 
chain,  formed  of  Tertiary  sediments.  This,  it  is  true,  is  only  known  from 
lat.  27°  40'  N.  to  lat.  26°  38'  N. 

These  four  types  present  a  definite  structure  and  a  definite  serial  order 
of  elements,  which  may  sometimes  be  incomplete,  but  is  never  inverted. 
The  first  element,  on  the  convex  side,  is  the  foredeep ;  the  second  is 
a  Tertiary  belt  which  is  often  folded,  and  often  characterized  in  a  striking 
manner  by  the  presence  of  Lepidocyclina  (outer  series  in  Liu-Kiu,  Oga- 
sawara chain  in  Bonin).  Then  follow  the  folded  Cordilleras,  the  innermost 
of  which  are  sometimes  backfolded  (Romanzov  range),  and  sometimes 
separate  from  each  other  in  virgation  (Philippines,  Alaskides).  Finally 
there  is  the  volcanic  arc.  This  always  lies  in  the  cordillera,  and  more 
precisely  in  the  zone  of  forefolding,  never  in  that  of  backfolding,  and  never 
in  the  foredeep.  In  the  Philippines  several  volcanic  lines  follow  the  virga- 
tion. In  the  Liu-Kiu  disjunctive  lines  may  possibly  be  recognized  as  far 
as  Korea.  Alien  fragments  sometimes  occur  between  the  branches  of  the 
virgation  (South  Borneo,  Seward,  and  Chuchki  peninsulas). 

The  same  structure  is  also  present  in  the  northern  Antilles,  but  in  these 
islands  no  Cordilleras  occur  within  the  volcanic  zone.  In  general,  the 
Cordilleras  are  the  first  to  show  a  tendency  to  disappear,  as  may  be  seen  in 
the  Bonin  islands,  while  the  volcanos  hold  their  ground  with  great  tenacity, 
as  in  the  Aleutian  islands. 

Arc  of  the  Oceanides.  In  the  light  of  the  preceding  facts  the  structure 
of  the  Oceanides  becomes  evident.  It  has  long  been  known  that  the  older 
rocks  become  rare  out  towards  the  Ocean.  This  corresponds  with  the 
disappearance  of  the  cordillera.  Sometimes  only  the  Tertiary  belt  with 
the  volcanos  remains,  as  in  the  new  Hebrides ;  sometimes  little  more  than 
the  Tertiary  belt  alone,  as  in  the  Paumotu  group ;  or  it  may  be  that  only 
a  chain  of  volcanos  marks  the  course  of  the  trend-line,  as  in  Hawaii,  out  in 
the  middle  of  the  Ocean. 

The  virgation  which  proceeds  from  New  Zealand,  and  follows  the  lines 
of  New  Caledonia  to  New  Guinea,  the  New  Hebrides  to  New  Ireland, 

'  Mr.  Ogawa  informs  me  that  on  the  upper  Tenrim,  on  the  west  side  of  the  Akaishi 
mountains,  he  has  observed  overthrusts  of  gneiss  over  younger  rocks  in  a  south  easterly 
direction,  that  is  towards  this  disturbance  (the  Fossa  magna),  and  that  Dr.  Suzuki  has 
observed  similar  overthrusts  near  Aoki,  further  to  the  south. 


CH.  XIV] 


THE  ANDINE  SYSTEM 


517 


and  the  Gilbert  islands  to  the  Carolines,  shows  clearly  the  gradual  dis- 
appearance of  the  Cordilleras ;  and  the  possibility  that  Viti  Levu  may  be 
an  older  segment  lying  between  the  branches  of  the  virgation  and  not 
forming  part  of  the  cordillera  becomes  more  readily  intelligible.  In  front 
of  the  east  side  of  the  structure  lies  the  foredeep  of  Kermadec  and 
Tonga. 

The  Marianne  islands  encounter  the  Carolines  in  linking ;  this  is 
also  true  of  the  traces  of  the  Raroia  group  with  respect  to  the  Paumotu 
islands. 

There  is  no  essential  difference  between  the  structure  of  the  arc  of  the 
northern  Antilles,  the  island  festoons,  and  the  Oceanides.  At  the  same  time 
it  must  be  remembered  that  this  structure  cannot  be  recognized  further  than 
Hawaii  and  the  Marquesas,  and  that  beyond  these  islands  in  the  direction 
of  South  America  a  region  intervenes  in  which  islands  are  rare,  and  are 
arranged  rather  in  groups  than  in  lines. 

Analysis  of  the  Andine  structure.  Here  comparison  is  much  more 
difficult,  owing  to  the  presence  of  an  eastern  and  a  western  foredeep. 

The  foreland  which  lies  between  the  two  groups  of  Antilles  is  not  let 
down  in  an  arc ;  nor  does  it  resist  the  great  movement  coming  from  the 
west,  but  in  Bolivia  and  Argentina  it  is  itself  thrown  into  folds  and  flakes 
over  a  considerable  area.  The  Cordillera  de  la  Costa,  which  forms  the 
starting-point  of  the  movement,  and  must,  according  to  older  views,  be 
regarded  as  the  central  chain,  presents,  in  complete  contrast  to  the  general 
rule,  plant-remains  belonging  to  the  Keuper  and  Lias,  and  in  the  extreme 
south  to  the  middle  Jurassic,  as  though  during  these  periods  there  had  been 
dry  land  over  large  areas,  or  as  though  a  coast  had  existed  in  the  vicinity. 
At  the  same  time  we  have  the  still  unexplained  fact  that  to  the  north, 
in  South  Oregon,  plant-bearing  beds  of  the  middle  Jurassic  set  in,  as 
well  as  abyssal  radiolarian  rocks,  probably  of  upper  Jurassic  age.  The 
latter  contribute  to  the  structure  of  the  Californian  coast  ranges,  which  are 
regarded  in  this  work  as  part  of  the  Andes. 

The  further  we  carry  our  comparisons  towards  the  north,  the  more 
striking  becomes  the  correspondence  between  certain  characters  of  the 
Andes  and  the  Intermediate  range.  In  the  first  place  there  is  the  frequent 
association  of  marine  Mesozoic  deposits  and  recent  volcanos,  then  the 
repeated  recurrence  of  long  ranges  of  granodiorite ;  and  at  the  same  time 
there  is  the  fact,  not  to  be  overlooked,  that  in  South  America  the  volcanic 
activity  dates  from  the  middle  Jurassic  or  Lias,  and  in  the  Aleutian  islands 
from  the  Volga  stage  or  Kelloway. 

In  the  fault- trough  of  the  Aleutian  volcanos  the  same  Mesozoic  series 
occurs  as  in  California,  with  the  same  unconformity  at  the  base  of  the 
Neocomian.  These  formations  are  continued  into  the  interior  plateau 
and  the  Basin  ranges  as  a  folded  region,  divided  into  numerous  submeri- 


518 


ANALYSES 


[part  V 


dional  horsts  and  fault-troughs,  among  which  we  will  only  mention 
Death  valley  (190  kilometers  long,  and  sinking  to  as  much  as  123  meters 
below  the  sea  level).  In  its  broadest  part  this  region  is  bounded  on  the 
east  by  the  slope  of  the  Wahsatch,  and  on  the  west  by  the  eastern  scarp  of 
the  Sierra  Nevada,  as  though  the  whole  range,  600  to  700  kilometers  in 
breadth,  had  been  let  down  in  strips  between  these  two  '  lines  of  weakness ' 
(I,  p.  578). 

Further  south,  from  Arizona  onwards,  this  structure  becomes  constricted, 
or  terminates.  In  Mexico  it  reappears ;  again  we  observe  the  Mesozoic 
series,  the  long  folds,  striking  here  to  the  south-east,  the  faults  and  volcanic 
phenomena,  and  the  bolsons  devoid  of  outflow.  Thus  we  reach  the  Atlantic 
Ocean,  while  to  the  south  the  giant  volcanos  of  Mexico  mark  the  bend  of 
the  strike  in  the  Sierra  Madre. 

Still  further  south  we  reach  the  Depresion  central  of  Chiapas  with  the 
volcano  of  Zontehuitz,  which  is  compared  by  Bose  with  lake  Nicaragua, 
and  further  away  follow  the  volcanos  of  Guatemala.  The  cordillera,  which 
must  be  regarded  as  the  continuation  of  the  Sierra  Madre,  strikes  away 
towards  Cuba  and  Jamaica.  In  Guatemala  the  volcanos  do  not  follow  this 
swerve,  but  are  continued  towards  the  south-east,  extending,  according  to 
Sapper,  in  repeated,  alternating  series,  as  far  as  Costa  Rica.  Of  these 
series  that  included  between  the  volcanos  of  Coseguina  and  Madera  (lakes 
of  Managua  and  Nicaragua)  stands  in  a  fault-trough. 

Nothing  similar  is  known  in  the  Antilles.  On  the  mainland,  a  fault- 
trough  probably  occurs  between  Cumana  and  the  gulf  of  Paria ;  the  valley 
of  the  Rio  Magdalena  has  also  been  described  as  a  fault-trough.  We  have 
already  called  attention  to  the  not  infrequent  arrangement  of  the  volcanos 
in  straight  lines  within  the  volcanic  zone,  and  the  occurrence  of  fault- 
troughs,  as  for  example  near  Antofagasta  and  as  far  as  Lonquimay,  and 
also  outside  this  zone  in  the  Argentine  Andes.  Several  of  these  fault- 
troughs,  as  in  the  Basin  ranges  for  example,  are  over  100  kilometers  long 
and  only  8-9  kilometers  broad. 

On  the  north,  to  the  west  of  the  syntaxis,  in  Cook  inlet,  the  presence  of 
true  freshwater  beds  of  the  Kenai  stage  shows  that  in  the  Tertiary  aera 
the  trough  must  have  been  occupied  by  a  long,  narrow  lake,  cut  off  from 
the  sea.  On  the  south,  at  a  distance  from  the  Kenai  stage,  the  gypsum 
which  is  intercalated  in  the  Jurassic  formation  of  the  volcanic  zone  leads  to 
a  similar  conclusion.  In  this  region  also,  waters  cut  off  from  the  Pacific 
Ocean,  or  only  imperfectly  united  with  it,  must  once  have  occupied  the  site 
of  the  great  Cordillera  de  los  Andes.  Schiller  has  collected  all  the  facts 
known  concerning  these  gypsums.  They  already  make  their  appearance  in 
lat.  23°  S.,  near  Caracoles,  where  they  overlie  the  Kelloway  ;  they  are  possibly 
repeated  in  the  Cretaceous,  and  are  known  in  greater  detail  in  the  region  of 
the  Aconcagua  ;  in  these  more  southerly  districts  they  lie  upon  the  Kelloway 


CH.  XIV]  FAULT-TEOUGH  IN  W.  SOUTH  AMERICA  519 


and  beneath  the  upper  J urassic,  and  extend  upwards  in  the  territory  of  the 
Neuquen  as  far  as  the  Kimeridge.^ 

The  distance  from  Caracoles  to  Neuquen  amounts  to  almost  16  degrees 
of  latitude.  An  account  of  the  region  between  lats.  32°  and  39°  S.  is  given 
in  two  important  works  by  Burckhardt.  A  porphyry  conglomerate  is 
widely  distributed  over  this  long  tract  in  the  western  part  of  the  Andes, 
and  attains  a  considerable  thickness ;  in  the  east  it  is  replaced  by  sandstone. 
Both  conglomerate  and  sandstone  are  inserted  immediately  above  the 
gypsum,  and  are  therefore  upper  Jurassic.  Burckhardt  concludes  that  a 
long  narrow  arm  of  the  sea  must  have  existed  in  the  form  of  a  fault-trough, 
like  the  Red  sea,  and  that  it  was  bounded  on  the  west  by  continental  land, 
which  was  the  source  of  the  porphyry  pebbles  and  now  lies  submerged 
beneath  the  Ocean.^ 

In  addition  to  all  these  longitudinal  disturbances  there  are  the  two 
longitudinal  valleys  of  the  Sacramento  and  of  Chile.  The  considerable 
depth  which  borders  the  west  coast,  and  descends,  between  Antofagasta 
and  Copiapo,  below  —7,600  meters,  is  independent  of  the  volcanos,  but 
apparently  does  not  lie  in  the  usual  series. 

This  whole  zone  is  folded ;  up  to  the  outcrop  of  older  rocks  in  Arizona 
the  movement  in  the  Basin  ranges  is  directed  towards  the  west,  at  least  in 
so  far  as  a  movement  in  one  direction  can  be  recognized.  Then,  in  North 
Mexico,  it  is  directed  towards  the  east  and  north-east.  This  direction  also 
prevails  in  the  Argentine  Andes.  If  these  were  folded  towards  the  west,  or 
if  we  might  regard  them  as  produced  by  backfolding,  then  the  east  would 
be  a  normal  backland,  the  bay  of  Arica  a  normal  syntaxis,  and  the  deeps  off 
the  west  coast  normal  foredeeps.  But  this  explanation  is  contradicted  by 
the  signs  of  a  Mesozoic  mainland  visible  along  the  Cordillera  de  la  Costa, 
as  well  as  by  the  observations  of  Steinmann  and  his  colleagues,  and  those 
of  the  Argentine  geologists  who  state  that  the  movement  is  directed  almost 
exclusively  towards  the  east. 

Southern  and  western  parts  of  the  Asiatic  system.  The  periphery  of 
this  system  has  been  divided  into:  1.  The  United  States  chain;  2.  The 
whole  of  eastern  Asia  as  far  as  lake  Banda ;  3.  Corresponding  to  this  in 
the  west,  the  Uralides  ;  then,  the  long,  free  branches  of  the  Altaides,  extend- 
ing beyond  the  periphery,  which  include,  4,  the  eastern  (the  Burman  arc), 
5,  western  Altaides ;  and  finally,  6,  the  three  inner  marginal  arcs  (the 
Himalaya  to  the  Dinarides).    We  will  return  to  our  original  order. 

1  Schiller,  Geologische  Untersuchung  bei  Puerto  del  Inca,  p.  722,  note  2. 

^  C.  Burckhardt,  Traces  geologiques  d'un  ancien  continent  pacifique,  Rev.  del  Museo  de 
La  Plata,  1900,  X,  pp.  177-193,  map  ;  Beitrage  zur  Kenntniss  der  Jura  und  Kreideforma- 
tion  der  Cordillera,  Palaeontographica,  1903,  L,  144  pp.,  in  particular  p.  124  et  seq. 
Steinmann  thinks  that  the  volcanos  alone  would  have  sufficed  to  form  the  conglomerate, 
N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1902,  II,  p.  429. 


520 


ANALYSES 


[PAET  V 


In  the  Uralides  (3)  Nova  Zembla  is  connected  by  linking  with  the  Urals 
(III,  p.  374  ;  fig.  18).  The  whole  of  the  northern  part  of  this  system  is  of 
considerable  age ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  Yergeni  mountains  in  the  south 
are  of  comparatively  recent  date,  and  recall  the  free  offshoots  of  the  east 
Asiatic  branches.    Disjunction  is  unknown  ^. 

The  Burman  arc  (4)  is  clearly  related  to  the  eastern  arcs.  In  the  south 
it  is  accompanied  by  a  fore  deep  of  about  7,000  meters.  Several  Tertiary 
islands  lie  in  front  of  it  (Mentawei  and  others),  and  the  largest  and  most 
regular  volcanic  disjunctive  zone  of  the  earth  accompanies  it  deep  into  the 
mainland.  It  is  distinguished  however  from  the  arcs  of  eastern  Asia 
by  the  convexity  of  its  main  branch,  which  is  directed  towards  the  west 
and  south-west,  while  some  of  its  inner  branches,  diverging  from  this  main 
branch,  adapt  themselves  in  Annam  to  the  direction  of  the  Philippines. 
The  place  of  separation  is  marked  by  the  insertion  of  the  mass  of  Cambodia. 
The  free  end  is  directed,  not  to  the  south  or  south-west,  but  to  the  east,  and 
in  respect  to  this  direction  it  presents  a  similar  contrast  to  the  Philippines 
and  the  Celebes,  as  the  Caucasus  does  to  the  Yergeni  mountains. 

The  western  Altaides  (5)  extend  beyond  the  periphery  in  free  branches 
which  are  even  longer  than  those  of  the  eastern  Altaides.  They  became 
rigid,  outside  the  horst  of  Azov,  as  early  as  the  Permian  period,  gave  rise 
subsequently  to  posthumous  ranges  in  sunken  areas,  and  are  wholly 
backfolded ;  they  thus  present  peculiar  features  which  are  not  repeated 
elsewhere. 

The  inner  marginal  arcs  (6)  present  a  remarkable  contrast  to  the  Altai- 
des, which  strike  across  and  beyond  them.  This  contrast  is  already  apparent 
between  long.  100°  and  96°  E.  (Ill,  pi.  VII.),  in  the  manner  in  which  Khrebet 
Pustyinji  strikes  across  the  directions  of  the  Lun-shan  (north-west)  and 
San-sjan-tsy  and  Shi-boa-shan  (north-east),  in  the  region  where  these  enter 
into  syntaxis.  The  Thian-shan  as  it  proceeds  forms  the  chord  of  the  arc 
which  encloses  the  plain  of  the  Yarkand,  and  then  strikes  across  the 
western  end  of  this  arc  in  the  Pamir.  Maintaining  the  same  invariable 
direction  to  the  west-north-west,  the  coulisses  of  the  Hindu-Kush  strike 
from  the  Balchan  to  the  Caucasus,  forming  the  chord  of  the  arc  of  the 
south  Caspian,  and  in  like  manner  the  Caucasus  itself  crosses  the  syntaxis 
of  the  second  and  third  of  these  marginal  arcs. 

All  these  marginal  arcs  are  folded  towards  the  exterior,  as  is  the  entire 
periphery  of  this  great  system.    Recumbent  sheets  are  formed  on  the 

*  On  this  question  also  Duparc,  Mrazec,  et  Pearce,  Sur  I'existence  de  plusieurs  mouve- 
ments  orogenetiques  successifs  dans  TOural  du  Nord,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.,  9  mars  1903, 
pp.  629-631.  The  description  of  the  Kwarkush  and  Bassegi  chain  given  in  III,  pl.  V, 
must  be  modified  in  some  respects ;  Duparc  et  Pearce,  Recherches  geologiques  et  petro- 
graphiques  sur  FOural  du  Nord,  etc.,  II,  Mem.  Soc.  phys.  hist.  nat.  Geneve,  1905,  XXXIV, 
p.  557  et  seq. 


CH.  XIV] 


THE  ALTAIDES 


521 


boundary  of  Tibet  at  Hundes  and  probably  at  other  localities.  The  back- 
folding  which  sometimes  occurs  has  already  been  mentioned  ^. 

In  Baluchistan  the  regular  folded  ranges  are  separated,  according  to 
Yredenburg's  accounts,  by  broad  desert  plains,  and  in  numerous  examples 
the  movement  is  always  towards  the  low-lying  area,  whether  that  lies 
to  the  north  or  the  south ;  the  prevailing  direction  is  to  the  south.  The 
intervening  valleys  are  in  many  cases  true  subsidences. 

In  spite  of  the  contrast  presented  by  the  directions  of  the  Thian-shan 
and  the  Yarkand  (Himalaya)  arc,  unconformity  occurs  in  both  at  the  base  of 
the  upper  Carboniferous  or  Permian,  and  in  both  the  movement  is  continued 
into  the  Tertiary  aera,  as  is  the  case  on  the  outer  border  of  all  the 
marginal  arcs. 

The  Iranian  arc  displays  a  remarkable  tendency  to  the  formation 
of  secondary  intervening  spaces.  One  such  space  is  produced  by  the 
Sulaiman  range  which,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Salt  chain,  advances  far 
beyond  the  outer  border  of  the  Iranian  arc  towards  the  south,  and  then 
breaks  up  into  chains  of  less  elevation ;  these  swerve  round  to  south-west, 
west,  and  finally  north-west,  and  thus  enclose  the  'parasitic'  space  of 
Setuestdn  (III,  p.  284).  The  inner  principal  ranges  of  Iran,  running  nor- 
mally to  the  south-south-west  or  south-west,  that  is  towards  Kandahar, 
bound  this  interval  along  the  chord  of  the  arc  in  a  manner  precisely  recall- 
ing the  Altaides.  Near  Quetta  these  border  ranges  turn  back  to  the  main 
chain. 

^  The  structure  of  Tibet  is  gradually  becoming  clearer.  To  the  east  of  DarjeeHng 
first  the  Tertiary  belt  and  then  a  belt  of  lower  Gondwana  dip  to  the  north-north-west 
beneath  the  gneiss  of  the  great  range,  which  is  over  100  kilometers  broad  and  extends 
to  about  lat.  28°  N.  (I,  p.  449).  On  the  Guicha-La  (5,007  meters),  in  the  midst  of  the  gneiss 
and  only  11-7  kilometers  to  the  south  of  the  peak  of  the  Kanchinjunga  (8,579  meters), 
the  walls  of  the  Pandim  (6,711  meters)  exhibit  in  the  zone  of  contact  altered  sediments 
with  garnet,  scapolite,  and  other  minerals,  traversed  by  dykes  of  pegmatite.  A  crinoidal 
limestone  altered  in  a  similar  manner,  and  probably  of  Palaeozoic  age,  was  encountered 
to  the  north  of  this  locality  on  the  north  boundary  of  the  gneiss,  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Jonsong-La.  Sofar  Garwood.— Further  to  the  east,  on  lake  Cholarno,  also  on  the  northern 
boundary.  Hooker  mentions  crinoidal  limestone,  and  still  further  east  Hayden  observed 
a  mass  of  Trias  (?)  let  down  in  gneiss  (long.  89°  15'  E.).  On  the  other  side  of  lat.  28°  N. 
lies  avast  region  of  sediments  which  are  in  part  strongly  compressed,  with  the  exception 
of  a  narrow  strip  of  Cretaceous  and  Eocene  ;  this  has  so  far  furnished  fossils  of  Jurassic 
age  only.  It  extends  beyond  Lhassa,  and  in  all  likelihood  as  far  as  the  Cretaceous  of  the 
Tenri-Nor.  This  broad  Mesozoic  zone  is  interrupted  by  granite  on  the  Brahmaputra 
south  of  Lhassa,  near  Lhassa  itself,  and  at  some  other  points.  Garwood  conjectures  that 
Kanchinjunga  and  the  great  gneiss  zone  is  a  granite  intrusion  of  Palaeozoic  or  even 
later  age.  E.  J.  Garwood,  Notes  on  a  map  of  the  Glaciers  of  Kanchenjunga,  Geogr. 
Journ.,  1902,  XX,  pp.  13-24,  map;  Geological  structure  and  physical  features  of 
Sikhim,  in  D.  Freshfield,  Round  Kanchenjunga,  8vo,  London,  1903,  pp.  275-299  and  307, 
map  ;  H.  H.  Hayden,  Preliminary  Note  on  the  Geology  of  the  Provinces  of  Tsang  and  U 
in  Tibet,  Rec.  Geol.  Surv.  in  India,  1905,  XXXII,  pp.  160-174,  map ;  and  Geology  of  the 
Provinces  of  Tsang  and  U  in  Central  Tibet,  Mem.,  op.  cit.,  1907,  XXXVI,  pp.  122-301, 
map. 


522 


ANALYSES 


[part  V 


Within  the  main  chain  this  arrangement  is  repeated  on  a  larger  scale. 
North  of  Quetta  the  ranges  run  to  the  south-south- west,  separate  from  one 
another,  bend  in  an  arc  towards  the  west,  and  then  north-north-west,  at 
the  same  time  losing  in  height,  and  finally  disappear  in  the  north  of  the 
desert.  Thus,  a  second  space  is  marked  out;  the  bend  of  its  border  is 
reflected  in  the  bend  of  the  Helmund.  At  the  same  time  long  ranges 
extend  from  Bampur  towards  the  north-west,  bounding  the  desert  of 
Dasht-i-Lut.  On  the  outer  border  a  secondary  syntaxis  possibly  occurs 
in  the  strait  of  Hormuzd,  and  then  at  last  this  border  strikes  along  the 
Persian  gulf  and  the  Tigris  to  its  syntaxis  near  Diarbekr. 

The  formation  of  the  basin  of  Sewestan,  the  basin  of  the  Helmund,  and 
the  desert  of  Dasht-i-Lut,  narrowing  away  in  a  wedge  towards  the  south- 
east, does  not  conclude  the  process  of  inner  sub-division.  Around  the  south 
border  of  the  Caspian  the  Alburs  range  makes  its  appearance  as  an 
independent  secondary  arc ;  in  the  province  of  Ghilan  its  west  side  merges 
into  the  normal  chains  of  Iran  (III,  p.  289). 

The  Tauro-Dinaric  arc  (I,  p.  498,  III,  p.  316)  consists  of  two  arcs,  each 
of  which  has  opposed  the  development  of  the  other.  Their  encounter  takes 
place,  according  to  the  later  investigations  of  Philippson,  west  of  the 
peninsula  of  Kyzikos,  and  west  of  lake  Manias,  along  the  river  Simau.  To 
the  south  of  this  river  their  course  becomes  somewhat  erratic,  since  a  great 
tract  of  crystalline  rocks,  the  Lydian-Karian  mass,  occupies  the  region 
from  this  point  southwards  across  the  Meander  and  as  far  as  Denizlu  and 
Milas  ^.  Dinaric  ranges  striking  to  the  north-east  extend  through  Rhodes 
to  Asia  Minor  ;  in  west  Lycia  the  Tauric  direction  makes  its  appearance. 
Within  the  Taurides  a  smaller,  East  Pontic  arc  may  be  distinguished,  which 
includes  the  coast  almost  as  far  as  Sinope.  The  principal  Tauric  arc  is 
of  much  greater  size ;  it  comprises  the  Taurus  and  Antitaurus,  Amanus, 
Cyprus,  and  in  western  Asia  Minor  a  considerable  number  of  chains  running 
to  the  north-west.  It  encloses  the  depression  of  Lycaonia.  The  West 
Pontic  arc  is  less  clearly  marked ;  to  its  western  part,  striking  to  the  west- 
north- west  and  west,  we  may  assign  the  Olympus  of  Brussa  and  the  broad  \ 
serpentine  region  to  the  south  of  it,  as  far  as  Taushanli  and  Kiutahia.  The 
chains  situated  further  to  the  south  which  advance  from  the  south-east, 
near  Afiun-Karahissar  and  Ishikli  across  the  lakes  of  Pisidia,  belong  to 
the  principal  Tauric  arc.  i 

Within  the  Dinarides  the  tendency  to  form  secondary  arcs  is  not  so 

1  Thus  the  north-and-south  strike  to  the  north  of  Smyrna  does  not  possess  the  signifi-  \ 
cance  assigned  to  it  (III,  p.  325)  ;  Philippson,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Berlin,  1903,  VI, 
p.  114,  and  Zeitschr.  Ges.  Erdk.  Berlin,  1905,  p.  421.    Cayeux  proposed  to  draw  a  trend- 
line  from  Crete  westwards  ;  1  think  we  must  retain  the  older  view,  which  is  also  repre- 
sented by  Philippson. 


cH.xiv]  TAURO-DINAKIC  AEC  528 

great.  There  is  a  difference  oi*  opinion  as  to  whether  a  secondary  arc 
exists  in  Albania  ^. 

The  encounter  of  the  Burman  and  the  Yarkand  arcs  might,  as  we  have 
seen,  be  described  as  a  normal  linking  with  an  eastern  dominant,  but  the 
insertion  of  a  foreign  fragment  (Assam)  alters  the  case. 

The  arcs  of  Yarkand  and  Iran  meet  in  the  syntaxis  on  the  Jhelam, 
which  is  still  traceable  on  the  north  as  far  as  the  Pamir. 

On  the  boundary  between  the  Iranides  and  Taurides  a  syntaxis  occurs 
between  the  secondary  arc  of  the  Alburs  and  extends  through  east  and  west 
Karabagh  and  the  east  side  of  the  East  Pontic  arc,  while  in  the  south 
the  Persian  chains  of  Zagros  enter  into  syntaxis  with  the  Taurus  somewhat 
to  the  east  of  the  meridian  of  Diarbekr  ^. 

The  Dinarides  surround  the  Adriatic  as  far  as  Monte  Gargano  and 
Monte  Conero,  near  Ancona,  and,  maintaining  an  uninterrupted  strike, 
which  turns,  however,  gradually  towards  the  west,  reach  the  southern  side 
of  the  Alps.  They  not  only  retain  this  southwardly-directed  folding  of  the 
marginal  arcs,  but  are  traversed  by  overthrusts  as  they  make  their  concave 
bend  towards  the  south-west  ^. 

The  volcanos  do  not  always  stand  in  such  obvious  relationship  with 
the  mountain-structure  as  in  the  eastern  periphery  of  Asia ;  and  they  lie 
further  towards  the  interior.  The  Yarkand  arc  includes  the  basalt  zone  of 
the  Stok,  which,  accompanied  by  Eocene,  occurs  to  the  south  of  the  gneiss 
chain  of  Ladakh,  and  will  be  considered  later. 

A  fragment  of  an  arc  formed  of  great  volcanos  surrounds  the  south  side 
of  the  plain  of  the  Helmund  (Koh-i- Sultan  and  others).  Somewhat  further 
towards  the  south-west  and  towards  the  exterior  rises  Koh-i-Tafdan 
(4,111  meters),  and  from  this  point  onwards  the  volcanos  appear  to  be 
arranged  between  the  coulisses  in  a  common  zone  which  strikes  towards 
the  north-west.    In  this  zone  we  must  include  Koh  Hazar  (south  of 

1  Cvijic  describes  a  secondary  syntaxis  near  Skutari,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1901, 
CX,  pp.  437-478,  map.  A  divergent  opinion  is  represented  by  F.  Baron  Nopsca,  Zur 
Geologie  von  Nord-Albanien,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1905,  LV,  pp.  85-152,  map, 
in  particular  p.  139.  The  observations  of  Vetters  (Anzeig.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  21  Dec. 
1905)  show  the  complicated  structure  of  this  region. 

^  A  tectonic  sketch  of  Armenia  published  by  F.  Oswald  marks  a  '  Tauric  horst '  to  the 
south  of  lake  Wan,  running  to  the  south-east.  This  represents  the  bend  of  a  part  of  the 
Zagros  chains,  still  unfortunately  but  little  known  ;  F.  Oswald,  Treatise  on  the  Geology 
of  Armenia,  8vo,  Beeston  (Notts),  1906, 516  pp.,  maps,  in  particular  pp.  109  and  270.  In 
addition  for  the  west,  the  trend-lines  in  F.  X.  Schaffer,  Cilicien,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1903,  Erg.- 
Heft  no.  141,  pi.  I.  G.  W.  v.  Zahn  (Stellung  Armeniens  im  Gebirgsbau  von  Vorderasien, 
publ.  by  the  Inst.  f.  Meereskunde,  1906,  Heft  10,  89  pp.,  maps)  and  Schaffer  (Grundziige 
des  geologischen  Baues  vom  Tiirkischen  Armenien,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1907,  pp.  145-153, 
map)  have  since  published  divergent  views.  Pending  further  observations  I  may  refer 
to  I,  pp.  632-636,  and  III,  pp.  402-405. 

'  Kossmat,  Palaeozoische  Schichten  der  Umgebung  von  Eisnern  und  Polland,  Verb, 
k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1904,  pp.  87-97  et  passim. 


524 


ANALYSES 


[part  V 


Kirman).  The  volcanos  have  been  observed  as  far  as  the  other  side  of 
lat.  35°  N.  In  the  vicinity  of  the  syntaxis  the  same  direction  towards 
the  north-west  sets  in,  e.g.  on  lake  Goktshai,  but  the  number  of  the 
volcanos  increases  considerably  ;  they  extend  into  the  south-westerly  chains 
of  the  Taurides,  and  there  seems  to  be  no  law  as  to  their  distribution.  In 
the  syntaxis  itself  rise  the  two  parallel  chains  of  Ararat  (5,159  meters)  and 
Tandurek  -  Aladagh. 

On  the  secondary  arc  of  the  Alburs  rises  mount  Demavend,  affording 
the  rare  example  of  a  crest  volcano,  and  this  is  repeated  in  a  striking 
manner  in  the  adjacent  branch  of  the  Altaides,  namely,  the  Caucasus 
(Kasbek  and  Elbruz). 

It  is  only  within  the  Taurides,  on  the  border  of  the  Lycaonian  plain, 
that  a  fragment  of  an  arcuate  series  is  again  seen  (Erdshias-Dagh  and 
others)  ^. 

Within  the  Dinarides  a  volcanic  arc  extends  from  Nisyros  through 
Santorin. 

Throughout  the  region  of  the  marginal  arcs,  with  the  exception  of  the 
Dinarides,  such  continuous  circumvallation  occurs  that  closed  drainage 
systems  are  produced.  In  the  first  arc  there  is  the  basin  of  the  Yarkand, 
in  the  second  that  of  the  Helmund  and  the  South  Caspian,  in  the  third  the 
Lycaonian  depression.    The  Dinaric  enclosure  is  open  to  the  sea. 

As  the  result  of  these  comparisons  we  see  that  the  North  Antilles 
(probably  also  the  South  Antilles),  the  Alaskides  and  all  the  island  festoons 
as  far  as  the  Philippines,  the  Oceanides  also,  and  in  Asia  the  oppositely-curved 
Burman  arc,  present  a  similar  structure,  and  that  this  structure,  although 
less  sharply  defined,  is  also  perceptible  in  the  southern  marginal  arcs 
situated  in  great  part  on  the  mainland. 

The  constant  occurrence  of  the  arc  of  active  volcanos  within  the  zone 
of  forefolding  is  a  remarkable  fact. 

Analysis  of  certain  transverse  sections.  The  filling  up  of  depressions,* 
the  universal  action  of  denudation,  and  the  advance  of  the  mountains,  all 
work  together  upon  the  continents  to  conceal  the  foredeeps,  yet  we  perceive 
how  commonly  these  features  are  indicated,  either  by  a  long  outer  zone  of 
thick  younger  sediments,  such  as  the  Flysch,  or  a  broad  valley,  such  as 
that  of  the  Ganges  or  the  Guadalquivir,  seated  directly  over  the  boundary 
between  the  foreland  and  the  mountains.  Frequently,  however,  the  fore- 
deep  has  left  no  signs  of  its  existence,  and  we  are  unable  to  discover 
whether  it  has  ever  been  present,  or  whether  the  mountains  have  stepped 
completely  across  its  whole  extent. 

Although  the  Alpides  occupy  an  exceptional  position  as  representing 

^  A.  Penther,  Reise  in  das  Gebiet  des  Erdschias-Dagh,  Abh.  geogr.  Ges.  Wien,  1905, 
VI,  pp.  1-48,  map. 


CH.  XIV]        MARGIN  OF  THE  CARPATHIANS 


525 


posthumous  folding  within  the  frame,  yet  they  are  known  in  such  detail 
that  we  may  select  them  as  our  first  example. 

In  front  of  the  Alps  lie  two  sedimentary  zones  of  varying  breadth 
which  sometimes  becomes  considerable ;  these  are  the  Flysch  and  the 
Mediterranean  Molasse,  beneath  which,  in  the  east,  lie  the  thick  upper 
Oligocene  beds  of  Dobrotov. 

Near  Borydav  (IV,  p.  207),  where  numerous  borings  for  ozokerite, 
sometimes  1,000  meters  deep,  reveal  the  structure  of  the  land,  the  outer 
border  of  the  Flysch  is  thrust  in  repeated  flakes  over  the  Mediterranean 
salt  formation  and  the  Dobrotov  beds.   The  two  latter  slope  gently  beneath 


Fig.  37.  Deep  borings  at  Boryslav  (after  Grzybowski  and  Miacynski). 
a,  a,  fissures  with  ozokerite. 

the  Carpathians.  At  the  same  time  the  Dobrotov  beds  are  arched  up  in 
an  anticline,  as  a  result  of  the  general  pressure  which  acted  from  the  south. 

This  is  perhaps  the  origin  of  the  crushed  anticlines  further  west  in  the 
salt  formation  of  Bochnia  and  Wieliczka.  Still  further  west,  towards 
Ostrau  and  Weisskirchen,  the  Flysch  (sub-Beskidian  and  Beskidian  zone) 
rests  on  the  Carboniferous  of  the  Variscan  foreland.  Even  still  further 
south,  where  the  Jurassic  of  Nikolsburg,  superposed  on  the  foreland,  is 
exposed  beneath  the  outermost  border  of  the  Flysch  (autochthonous 
Klippen  of  Uhlig),  the  case  may  be  similar.  In  Lower  Austria  the  contrast 
between  the  Bohemian  mass  and  the  Alps  becomes  sharper;  they  are 
separated  by  a  narrow  but  well-defined  Mediterranean  zone.  Still  further 
west  lies  that  locality  in  Upper  Austria,  17  kilometers  from  the  visible 
border  of  the  Bohemian  mass,  and  26  kilometers  from  the  border  of  the 
Alps,  where,  as  we  have  seen,  the  Bohemian  gneiss  has  been  revealed  by 
boring  beneath  middle  Tertiary  sediments,  1,037  meters  in  thickness. 


526 


ANALYSES 


[part  V 


without  encountering  any  trace  of  Alpine  formations.  In  Bavaria  the 
border  of  the  foreland,  marked  from  Regensburg  onwards  by  the  Danube 
fault  (flexure),  departs  from  the  Alps,  and  there  the  lower  limit  of  the 
Bavarian  molasse  was  not  reached  by  boring  at  a  depth  of  600-700  meters. 

From  the  Black  Forest  onwards  other  conditions  set  in.  The  Jura 
mountains,  although  stowed  against  the  foreland,  are  attached  to  it.  The 
Rhine  trough  forms  a  gap,  and  several  arcs  press  into  it,  like  waves  into 
a  bay. 

This  feature  is  represented  in  the  accompanying  illustrations  :  fig.  38, 
a  preliminary  diagrammatic  sketch  by  Steinmann,  and  fig.  39,  by  von  Huene. 


Fig.  38.    The  Rhine  valley  near  Bale  (after  Steinmann). 
The  chains  are  as  follows : — I.  Biirgerwald  ;  II.  Fliihen  ;  III.  Blauenberg ; 
IV.  Blauberg;  V.  Movelier;  VI.  Mt.  Terrible;  VII.  Clos  du  Doubs  ;  VIII.  Claque- 
relle  ;  IX.  Mout ;  X.  Rothmatte  ;  XI.  Raimeux  ;  XII.  Hauenstein  ;  XIII.  Weis- 
senstein  ;  XIV.  Chasseral ;  XV.  St.  Verena. 

Near  Kandern  the  Dinkelberg,  which  is  continuous  with  the  table- Jura, 
is  thrown  down  by  a  fault.  The  Dinkelberg  and  the  table- Jura  represent 
the  foreland.  It  disappears  towards  the  south  beneath  the  mount  Terrible 
chain  and  the  mighty  overthrust  which  succeeds  further  towards  the  east. 
In  the  south-western  part  of  the  table- Jura  a  fractured  area  is  formed  by 
subsidence,  in  which  we  see  the  remains  of  one  Jurassic  arc  to  the  south  of 
Liesthal  (X,  fig.  39),  and  another  to  the  north  of  it;  as  to  the  continuation 
of  the  latter  into  the  Rhine  trough  nothing  is  known.  The  Biirgerwald 
and  Fliihen  chains  are  the  foremost  of  the  arcs  which  enter  the  trough ;  they 


CH.  XIV] 


THE  RHINE  VALLEY 


527 


are  followed  by  others.  Near  Liesthal  it  seems  as  though  the  subsidence 
had  been  renewed  during  the  advance  of  the  arc^. 

This  close  connexion  with  the  foreland  is  maintained,  and  in  the  east  of 
the  Central  Plateau,  according  to  Michel  Ldvy,  the  mountains  exert  an 
effect  upon  the  foreland. 

The  sharply-marked  northern  boundary  of  the  Alps  does  not  disappear. 

It  follows  the  south  border  of  the  Molasse  as  far  as  the  lake  of  Geneva, 
and  if,  at  the  time  of  the  Molasse,  a  foredeep,  or  the  commencement  of 
a  foredeep,  were  present  here,  it  must  have  lain  in  the  midst  of  the 
Helvetian  region,  between  the  Alps  and  the  Jura,  thus  affording  a  remote 
resemblance  to  the  Caiman  deep  of  the  West  Indies. 


Fig.  39.    Fractured  area  in  the  Tafel-Jura  (after  von  Huene). 
I.  Biirgerwald  chain  ;  II.  Fliihen  claain. 


Further  examples  will  be  found  in  the  preceding  chapters.  Cases  are 
also  known  in  which  the  foreland,  having  been  overpowered,  was  carried 
up  again  to  the  surface  within  the  folded  mountains. 

In  the  Caledonian  zone  of  disturbance  Nicol  recognized,  as  early  as  1844, 
that  a  series  which  rests  on  the  western  (foreland)  gneiss  dips  again 
beneath  the  gneiss  in  the  east;  in  1860  he  was  able  to  state  definitely  that 
this  eastern  gneiss  was  carried  up  over  this  series  by  a  dislocation,  and 
Nicol  thus  became  one  of  the  first  representatives  of  the  more  recent 

^  G.  Steinmann,  Beziehungen  der  oberrheinischen  Tiefebene  zu  dem  nordschweizer. 
Kettenjura,  Ber.  naturf.  Ges.  Freiburg  i.  B.,  1892,  VI,  pp.  150-159 ;  F.  v.  Huene,  Geolo- 
gische  Bescbreibung  der  Gegend  von  Liestal  im  Scbweizer  Jura,  Verb,  naturf.  Ges.  Basel, 
1900,  XII,  pp.  293-372,  map  ;  also  A.  Tobler,  Jura  im  Siidosten  der  oberrheinischen 
Tiefebene,  op.  cit.,  1898,  XI,  pp.  283-369,  map  ;  and  A.  Buxtorf,  Vor-  oder  altmiocane 
Verwerfungen  im  Basler  Tafel-Jura,  Eclogae  Geol.  Helv.,  1900,  VI,  pp.  176,  177; 
E.  Greppin,  Hornli  bei  Grenzach,  Verb,  naturf,  Ges.  Basel,  1905,  XVIII. 


528 


ANALYSES 


[part  V 


tectonic  views.  Since  then  the  continued  labours  of  the  Geological  Survey 
of  Great  Britain,  in  particular  the  work  of  Peach  and  Horne,  and  the 
investigation  of  the  ancient  crystalline  rocks  by  Teall,  have  given  us 
a  deeper  insight  into  the  structure  of  this  region.  The  gneiss  has  in  fact 
been  carried  from  the  east,  in  masses  more  than  1,500  feet  thick,  over  the 
Cambrian  and  pre -Cambrian  series,  which  rest  in  autochthonous  super- 
position upon  the  gneiss  of  the  foreland^. 

Similar  processes  may  have  led  to  the  exposure  of  the  Variscan  base- 
ment in  the  gneiss  masses  of  the  mont  Blanc  zone. 

For  several  decades  past  the  notion  that  the  Carpathians  had  advanced 
for  great  distances  over  an  heterogeneous  foreland  was  regarded  with 
profound  scepticism.  But  it  soon  appeared  that  the  views  prevailing  with 
regard  to  the  unilateral  movement  of  the  Alpine  structure  towards  the 
north  represented  only  a  small  fraction  of  the  truth.  What  was  manifest 
to  the  eye  was  declared  to  be  physically  impossible.  Now  throughout  the 
long  chain  of  the  Alpides,  from  the  window  of  the  Paring  to  cape  de  la  Nao 
at  the  end  of  the  Betic  cordillera,  we  are  acquainted  with  overthrusts  of 
entire  mountain  masses  on  the  grandest  scale,  and  the  window  of  the  Uohe 
Tatra  is  repeated,  for  example,  in  the  Trois  Seigneurs  of  the  Pyrenees. 

The  question  may  be  raised,  whether  the  cause  of  these  unexpected 
phenomena  does  not  lie  in  the  exceptional  position  of  the  mountains  within 
the  frame  of  the  Altaides,  and  the  restriction  of  all  orogenetic  activity  to 
a  limited  interval  in  a  meridional  direction.  This  question  can  only  be 
answered  by  the  comparative  method.  To  this  end  we  will  choose  three 
types  of  different  age,  namely,  the  zone  of  Eriboll  from  the  Caledonides, 
the  coalfield  of  Belgium  from  the  Variscan  system  (the  comparison  of 
which  with  younger  mountains  led  M.  Bertrand,  many  years  ago,  to  most 
instructive  conclusions),  and,  finally,  parts  of  the  Alps. 

We  have  already  seen  what  peculiar  and  powerful  movements  are 
produced  by  the  constriction  of  currents  of  water  (II,  p.  343)  or  tongues 
of  ice  (II,  p.  344,  fig.  36,  and  p.  358,  fig.  37).  The  stream  dives  downwards, 
with  extraordinary  power  hollows  out  its  bed  into  colks,  carries  heavy 
boulders  upwards,  and  spreads  them  out,  in  an  arc.    The  inland  ice,  as  it 

'  B.  N.  Peach,  J.  Horne,  Gunn,  Clough,  and  Hinxman,  Geological  Structure  of  the 
North-west  Highlands,  with  petrological  chapters  and  notes  by  J.  J.  H.  Teall,  ed.  by 
Sir  A.  Geikie,  Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  Gr.  Britain,  8vo,  1907,  668  pp.,  map.  Here  again  we 
find  the  interpretation  of  the  facts  gradually  becoming  clearer.  The  structure  of  the 
Caledonides  in  Scandinavia,  overthrust  on  both  sides,  and  the  attempts  made  to  explain 
it  (III,  p.  395),  will  not  again  be  discussed  here;  the  supposition  that  the  covering 
segments,  which  in  part  resemble  gneiss,  belong  to  a  Devonian  transgression  can  scarcely 
be  the  solution.  This  view  presupposes  a  mighty  dynamic  alteration,  and  consequently 
great  tectonic  processes  after  the  time  of  the  Devonian,  an  assumption  which  is  supported 
by  no  other  evidence.  Cf.  K.  0.  Bjorlykke,  Centr.  Norges  Fjeldbygning,  Norg.  geol. 
Unders.,  1905,  no.  39,  610  pp.,  map. 


CH.xiv]  THE  ZONE  OF  EEIBOLL 


529 


comes  down  between  the  nunataks,  flows  with  accelerated  velocity,  carries 
the  ground  moraine  up  from  the  bottom  and  spreads  it  out  in  an  arc  over 
the  ice  in  front.  The  latter  occupies  the  position  of  a  foreland,  and  fig.  36 
shows  indeed,  to  the  south  of  Nasausak,  two  arcs  lying  one  behind  the  other. 

Different  as  these  cases  may  seem  from  those  of  mountain  building,  yet 
they  illustrate  the  occurrence  of  important  upward  movements,  and  show 
i  their  tendency  to  find  expression  at  the  surface  in  regular  arcs. 

In  the  Alps  we  can  distinguish  with  the  greatest  clearness  three  horizons 
of  movement.  The  first  movements  are  the  uppermost,  and  the  most 
effective  in  bringing  material  within  reach  of  denudation.  The  sheets  rise 
from  the  depths  on  a  gently  ascending  sole-plane,  then  frequently,  but  not 
invariably,  climb  over  a  rolling  ridge  or  '  yoke '  (Joch)  ^,  above  which  they 
form  a  dome  (Lugeon's  'carapace'),  and  beyond  the  yoke  they  reach  a 
descending  sole-plane.  As  they  move  over  this  the  force  of  gravity  may 
lead  to  acceleration  and  tension,  and  thus  give  rise  to  the  phenomenon 
which  Reyer  many  years  ago  described  as  glide-folding.  Beyond  the  descend- 
ing sole-plane  the  sheet  breaks  up  into  simple  or  steeply-upreared  flakes 
(Deckschollen),  or  it  may  happen  that  the  movement  of  the  sheet  is  retarded 
or  arrested  next  the  sole-plane  while  it  continues  its  advance  unchecked 
above,  so  that  the  upper  layers  of  the  sheet  move  on  something  like  the 
scorias  of  a  lava  stream,  which  travel  fastest  on  the  surface,  are  carried 
down  by  rotation  at  the  front,  and  form  a  pavement  beneath  the  stream 
on  its  bed.  Such  a  movement  gives  rise  to  the  rotated  fold  (Drehfalte). 
Sometimes  these  ends  of  the  sheets  lie  in  basins^  some  of  which  may  have 
been  scooped  out,  while  others  are  due  to  the  weight  resting  on  them. 

The  yoke  may  be  a  foreign  body  or  an  accumulation  of  earlier  sheets. 
It  must  be  distinguished  from  later  arching  up. 

Still  deeper  lie  the  very  extensive  sole-planes  upon  which  the  most 
important  movements  take  place,  such  as  that  of  the  Dinarides  towards  the 
Alps ;  of  these  we  will  only  observe  for  the  present  that  they  do  not  seem 
in  any  way  to  owe  their  origin  to  folds. 

{a)  The  zone  of  Eriholl  (II,  p.  82 ;  III,  p.  397).  In  this  zone,  as  we 
have  already  seen,  observations  have  been  made  on  the  great  overthrusts 
by  Nicol,  Lapworth,  Hicks,  and  Callaway,  and  the  Geological  Survey  has 
issued  such  a  masterly  report  by  Peach  and  Home  and  their  colleagues 
that  it  may  almost  be  said  to  make  the  mountains  transparent  ^.  The 
strike  is  to  the  north-north -east  ;   the  movement  proceeds   from  the 

*  In  the  original '  ein  sattelformiges  Joch '  Saddle-like '  would  be  a  misleading 
translation,  as  only  one  curve  of  the  saddle  is  intended,  that  namely  given  by  a  section 
from  side  to  side.  'Joch'  is  also  used  in  a  rather  special  sense:  the  English  word 
*  yoke  once  used  to  denote  a  chain  of  hills  or  a  single  hill  (Troutbeck  yoke),  may  serve 
as  an  equivalent.    [Note  by  Editor.] 

Peach,  Home,  and  collaborators,  in  Geological  Structure  of  the  North-west  Highlands, 
&c.,  Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  Gr.  Britain,  in  particular  p.  463  et  seq. 

SOLIiAS  IV  Mm 


530 


ANALYSES 


[part  V 


east-south-east;  and  from  the  same  direction  come  the  ascending  sole- 
planes.  Some  of  the  planes  of  movement  have  been  originated  in  over- 
turned folds;  other  planes  which  form  an  imbricate  structure  have  not 
been  produced  by  folding,  and  their  angle  of  inclination  differs  from  that 
of  the  greater  planes  of  transport  (major  thrusts).  The  latter  vary  a  little 
in  their  strike  and  dip,  the  inclination  as  a  rule  being  gentle.  Each  major 
thrust  may  be  overridden  by  one  following  it.  The  rocks  of  the  east  may 
be  carried  along  them,  over  all  other  disturbances,  away  to  the  foreland  in 
the  west.  The  gneiss  of  the  east  may  even  come  to  rest  on  the  flat-lying 
Cambrian  beds  of  the  west.  On  the  brow  of  advancing  sheets  friction  at 
the  base  may  produce  a  tendency  to  overfold  the  brow  from  above  for- 
wards, so  that  the  upper  part  inserts  itself  in  reversed  order  beneath  the 
sheet  itself,  that  is  beneath  the  gneiss.  Thus  we  have  something  resembling 
a  recumbent  fold,  as  on  Ben  More  (fig.  40). 

On  the  extreme  western  border  overlapping  folds  occur,  or  imbricate 
structure,  and  also  detached  segments,  bounded  by  a  circular  dislocation. 


^  Ben  More  N- 


FiG.  40.  Rotated  Fold  of  Ben  More,  Assynt  (after  Peach  and  Home). 
A,  Ancient  Gneiss ;  B<*,  Basalt  dykes  in  the  Gneiss  ;  B,  Torridon  sandstone  (Pre- 
Cambrian)  ;  C,  Cambrian  (Ca,  basal  Quartzite  ;  Cb,  Pipe  rock  ;  Cc,  Fucoid  beds ;  Cd,  Serpulite 
grit ;  Ce,  Limestone)  ;  F,  Intrusive  rock  ;  T,  Ben  More  thrust  plane ;  t,  t,  minor  thrusts. 

These  are  the  basins  or  pans;  several  pans  may  even  occur  (e.g.  Loch 
Lamarscaig,  op.  cit.,  p.  593,  fig.  66)  one  behind  the  other. 

Finally,  among  many  other  interesting  facts  it  may  be  noticed  that  in 
the  north,  west  of  Loch  Eriboll,  fragments  of  the  foreland,  along  with 
fragments  of  the  overthrust  border,  which  rests  upon  them,  are  let  down 
along  great  faults.  Some  of  these  are  strike  faults,  others  transverse 
(flaws,  perhaps),  and  the  horizontal  displacement  along  one  of  the  latter 
amounts  to  8  kilometers.    The  trough-like  subsidence  is  Durness  Basin  ^ 

Thus  in  the  zone  of  Eriboll  there  are  several  ascending  sole -planes ; 
they  are  the  '  major  thrusts '  and  are  distinguished  by  special  names  such 
as,  Moine  thrust,  Glencoul  thrust,  and  others.    The  yoke  is  often  indicated 

'  Op.  cit.,  pp.  479, 487,  figs.  21,  23. 


CH.XIV]  THE  BELGIAN  COALFIELD 


531 


in  sections  by  a  curved  dotted  line.  Not  much  mention  is  made  of 
descending  sole- planes;  typical  basins,  however,  with  recumbent  flakes 
(Deckschollen)  occur  in  the  west. 

(b)  The  Belgian  coalfield  (I,  p.  141 ;  II,  p.  92).  Here  the  Faille  du 
Midi  plays  a  part  somewhat  similar  to  that  of  the  Moine  thrust  in  Scot- 
land ;  in  fact  the  movements  seem  to  be  restricted  even  more  closely  to  this 
surface.  The  Faille  du  Midi  carries  Silurian  and  Devonian  from  the  south 
up  an  ascending  sole  on  to  the  Coal-measures,  and  it  is  present  on  both 
sides  of  the  syntaxis  of  Valenciennes. 

In  the  west,  near  Lens  (Pas  de  Calais)  it  ascends,  according  to  Barrois, 
at  an  angle  of  less  than  25° :  the  Coal-measures  which  lie  beneath  it  are 
compressed  into  a  basin  inclined  towards  the  south.  A  pinched-in  frag- 
ment with  reversed  bedding  is  visible  on  the  border  of  the  Faille  du 
Midi ;  Gosselet  terms  such  fragments  'Lambeaux  de  poussde^'. 

In  the  cusp  of  the  syntaxis,  according  to  Chapuy's  description,  the  same 
Coal-measures  pass,  in  spite  of  all  disturbances,  from  the  Variscan  into  the 


Fig.  41.  Structure  of  the  coalfield  near  Denain  and  Anzin  (after  Marcel  Bertrand). 
sily  Silurian  ;  d,  Devonian  ;  ca,  Carboniferous  limestone  ;     Coal  measures ;  F,  surface  of 
dislocation. 

Armorican  region  2.  Here  Marcel  Bertrand  drew  the  section  upon  which  is 
based  that  comparison  between  the  Proven9al  folds  and  the  Alps  which 
was  destined  to  exercise  so  great  an  influence  upon  our  conception  of  the 
Alpine  structure.  We  will  adopt  for  the  present  the  terminology  of  his  time. 

FF  (fig.  41)  is  the  Faille  du  Midi ;  sil  and  d  resting  upon  it  is  the 
*  massif  charri^';  all  that  lies  in  front  of  it  is  cut  through  here  by  a 
disturbance  F,  so  thf  two  parts  are  formed  (lambeau  de  pouss^e  and  lame 
de  charriage),  and  in  front  of  them,  outside  the  principal  disturbance,  there 
lies  a  narrow  boundary  zone  (retrouss^).  All  these  parts  rest  upon  the 
principal  coal  basin  [ca  and  A);  M.  Bertrand  conjectured  that  they  had 
sunk  down  owing  to  their  own  weight^.  Cornet  and  Briart  had  already 

^  C.  Barrois,  L'extension  du  Silurien  superieur  dans  le  Pas-de-Calais,  Ann.  Soc,  geol. 
du  Nord,  1898,  XVII,  pp.  212-225  ;  Gosselet,  L'Ardenne,  4to,  1888,  p.  735. 

^  Chapuy,  Note  sur  la  constitution  du  midi  du  bassin  houiller  de  Valenciennes,  Ann. 
des  Mines,  1895,  9«  ser.,  VIII,  pp.  192-217,  map. 

^  M.  Bertrand,  Sur  le  raccordement  des  bassins  houillers  du  Nord  de  la  France  et  du 

M  m  2 


i 


532 


ANALYSES 


[part  V 


attempted,  in  the  year  1877,  to  explain  these  strange  phenomena.  They 
thought  that  great  overfolding  had  occurred,  then  subsidence  on  the  north 
side,  and  not  till  later  the  overthrust  on  the  Faille  du  Midi  (I,  p.  142,  fig.  17). 
Particular  stress  was  laid  on  the  reversed  position  of  the  beds  in  that  frag- 
ment which  Gosselet  termed  the  lambeau  de  poussde.  Gosselet  himself 
declared  that  subsidence  in  the  north  was  the  cause  of  the  great  fore- 
folding.    Later,  in  the  year  1894,  Briart  brought  forward  a  new  theory 


Figs.  42  and  43.  Recumbent  flakes  of  Fontaine-V  Eveque  (after  Briart). 
e?2>       Devonian  ;  caj,  ca^,  Carboniferous  limestone  ;  Ti-^^h^,  Coal-measures  ;  /2iNorm., 
and  h  ^  Norm.,  Coal-measures  below  the  recumbent  flakes.   The  broken  lines  are  hypothetical. 


more  closely  approaching  the  ideas  of  Bertrand.  The  lambeau  de  pouss^e 
of  Fontaine-l'fiveque,  which  is  11  kilometers  in  length  and  3  kilometers  in 
breadth,  was  believed  to  owe  its  origin  to  recumbent  flakes  lying  one  over 
the  other  ^.    In  this  section  we  are  able  to  perceive  with  greater  clearness 

Sud  de  I'Angleterre,  Ann.  des  Mines,  1893,  9®  ser..  Ill,  pp.  5-83,  maps ;  Etudes  sur  le 
bassin  houiller  du  Nord  et  sur  le  Boulonnais,  op.  cit.,  1894,  9«  ser.,  V,  pp.  569-640, 
maps  ;  le  Bassin  cretace  de  Fuveau  et  le  Bassin  houiller  du  Nord,  op.  cit.,  1898,  9®  ser., 
XIV,  pp.  5-85,  maps. 

1  A.  Briart,  Geologie  des  environs  de  Fontaine -I'i^veque  et  de  Landelies,  Ann.  Soc.  geol. 
de  Beige,  1894,  XXI,  pp.  35-69,  map. 


CH.  XIV] 


MASSIF  DE  THEUX 


533 


that  the  Faille  de  la  Tombe,  which  lies  immediately  in  front  of  the  ascend- 
ing sole  (Faille  du  Midi),  must  be  regarded  as  the  pan. 

According  to  this  description  the  filling  of  the  pan  consists  of  the  three 
wedge-shaped  pieces  I,  II,  and  III.  If  these  are  regarded  as  forming  a 
whole,  they  present  a  reversed  bedding,  extending  from  c?2  to  h^.  It  was 
this  reversed  order  which  attracted  the  attention  of  Comet  and  Briart  in 
1877,  and  led  them  to  assume  the  presence  of  a  subsidence. 

After  a  series  of  systematic  studies,  among  which  we  must  mention 
those  of  Dorlodot,  Brien  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  series  I  -f-  II  +  III, 
included  in  the  Faille  de  la  Tombe,  does  in  fact  form  a  single  whole,  and 
must  be  regarded  as  an  overturned  fold  ^. 

Thus  we  arrive  at  the  conception  held  by  Scotch  investigators  with 
regard  to  Ben  More,  namely,  that  of  the  rotated  fold.  The  movement  along 
an  ascending  sole  has  been  arrested.  The  upper  beds  h^^  and  h^  of  this  thick 
sheet  have  continued  the  movement,  and  are  folded  over  the  northern 
margin  of  the  sheet.  The  h  in  the  basin  is  not  a  part  of  the  subjacent  h^y 
marked  normal,  but  has  been  transported  a  long  way  from  the  south  and 
carried  high  up  over  the  Faille  du  Midi. 

The  extensive  investigations  of  Fourmarier  to  the  east,  between  Liege 
and  Verviers,  have  furnished  the  following  rather  unexpected  result^  : — 

Coming  from  the  south-east  we  encounter  first  the  syncline  of  the 
Eifel,  and  then  the  broad  anticline  of  the  Ardennes,  from  the  northern 
part  of  which  projects  the  pre-Devonian  mountain  core  of  Stavelot  (Hohe 
Venn).  This  is  followed  by  the  syncline  of  Dinant  and  its  north-eastern 
continuation  on  the  Vesdre,  then  by  the  coal  basin  of  Herve,  and  the  north- 
easterly continuation  of  the  coal  basin  of  Namur.  The  whole  formation 
follows  the  general  Variscan  movement,  which  is  here  directed  towards  the 
north-west.    The  Faille  du  Midi  is  splintered  up. 

Near  Theux,  to  the  north-west  of  Spa,  the  singular  Massif  de  Theux 
makes  its  appearance,  pushing  its  way  beneath  the  Cambrian  and  lower 
Devonian  rocks  of  the  overthrust  northern  border  of  Stavelot.  It  presents 
a  series  of  beds  ranging  up  into  the  Coal-measures  h^.  It  has  been  regarded 
as  downthrowif ;  according  to  Fourmarier,  it  is  a  window,  not  indeed  of  the 
adjacent  basin  of  Dinant,  but  of  the  basin  of  Namur  situated  to  the  north- 
The  southern  basin  (Dinant)  has  been  carried  forward  for  a  distance  of 

^  V.  Brien,  Description  et  interpretation  de  la  coupe  de  calcaire  carbonifere  de  la 
Sambre  a  Landelies,  Ann.  Soc.  geol.  Beige,  1904-1905,  XXXII,  Mem.,  pp.  239-259  ;  Lohest 
(Observations  au  travail  de  M.  V.  Brien,  etc.,  torn,  cit.,  pp.  257-260)  believes  that  the  pheno- 
menon is  a  great  faulted  fold  ;  according  to  this  view  the  Faille  de  la  Tombe  becomes 
the  continuation  of  the  Faille  du  Midi.  This  does  not  alter  the  fact  that  the  contents  of 
the  pan  were  derived  from  above. 

^  P.  Fourmarier,  La  structure  du  Massif  de  Theux,  Ann.  Soc.  geol.  Beige,  1906,  XXXIII, 
Mem.,  pp.  111-138,  maps  ;  and  La  tectonique  de  TArdenne,  op.  cit.,  1907,  XXXIV,  Mem., 
pp.  15-124,  maps. 


534 


ANALYSES 


[PAKT  V 


about  15  to  20  kilometers.  The  coal  basin  of  Herve  belongs  to  it,  and 
rests  as  a  recumbent  flake  on  the  northern  basin  (Namur).  This  northern 
basin  (Namur)  appears  near  Theux  as  a  window  beneath  the  southern 
basin  (Dinant). 

Proceeding  from  south  to  north,  let  us  attempt  to  applj^  the  expressions 
employed  here  to  Fourmarier's  conception. 

The  outrunners  of  the  Faille  du  Midi  which  make  their  appearance  in 
the  mass  of  Stavelot  represent  the  ascending  sole.  The  dome  over  the  yoke, 
now  denuded  away,  lay  high  above  the  window  of  Theux,  and  once  united, 
across  Theux,  the  basin  of  Namur  with  the  Coal-measures  of  Herve.  In 
this  way  we  have  arrived  at  a  new  tectonic  conception,  the  window  on 
the  yoke. 

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  deeper-lying  movements. 

In  1894  it  was  shown  by  L.  Cremer  that  the  coalfield  of  Westphalia  is 
cut  through  by  oblique  thrust-planes,  dipping  at  a  variable  angle  with  an 


Eilozneter 


Fia.  44.  Section  of  the  coalfield  from  Saint  Eloi  to  Saint  Leon  (after  Briart,  with  the  omission 

of  numerous  details). 

average  of  15°,  along  which  parts  of  the  same  coal-seam  may  lie  700 
meters,  or  in  one  case  probably  much  more  than  1,000  meters,  distant 
from  one  another.  Such  thrust-planes  may  be  followed  along  the  strike 
for  a  distance  of  28  kilometers.  They  are  folded  tvith  the  Goal-measures, 
and  consequently  older  than  the  folding  and  not  the  result  of  it  \ 

The  breadth  of  the  principal  coal  basin  of  Belgium  (/ig  normal  in 
figs.  42  and  43),  measured  at  the  outcrop  in  the  Hennegau,  varies  from  8  to 
15  kilometers.  Fig.  44  presents  a  generalized  section  of  part  of  this 
basin.  Oblique  planes,  all  inclined  towards  the  south,  and  all  slightly 
concave  upwards,  cut  through  the  Coal-measures.  Towards  the  south  they 
lie  flatter,  towards  the  north  steeper,  and  each  one  becomes  steeper  as  it 
approaches  the  surface.  This  is  the  rule  as  far  as  the  Pas  de  Calais.  The 
Faille  du  Placard  splits  up,  and  each  branch  follows  the  same  law^\ 

*  L.  Cremer,  Ueberschiebungen  des  westfalischen  Steinkohlengebietes,  Gliickauf, 
Essen,  1894,  nos.  62-65. 

'  A.  Briart,  Les  Couches  du  Placard  (Mariemont),  Ann.  Soc.  geol.  Beige,  1898,  XXIV, 
pp.  237-255 ;  cf.  Harze  and  Habets,  Notes,  op.  cit.,  1899,  XXVI,  Mem.,  p.  129. 


CH.XIV]  THE  BELGIAN  COALFIELD 


Smeysters  has  published  a  varied  series  of  these 
sections  ^.  On  these  planes,  almost  without  ex- 
ception, the  southern  part  is  thrust  up  over  the 
northern.  Thus  in  the  district  of  Boubier 
(Charleroi),  for  example,  an  anticline  over- 
folded  towards  the  north  is  cut  through  obliquely 
by  the  Faille  du  Carabinier,  which  ascends 
towards  the  north  at  an  angle  of  10°,  and  one 
of  its  moieties  is  carried  upwards  for  at  least 
1,000  meters.  On  the  Faille  d'Ormont  the 
ascent  amounts  to  over  2,000  meters  ^.  In  the 
examples  selected  from  Westphalia  the  folding 
was  younger  than  the  thrust-planes,  but  here 
it  is  older. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  principal  coal 
basin  of  Belgium,  regarded  as  a  whole,  is  a 
syncline  overfolded  towards  the  north,  since  it 
is  bounded  both  on  the  north  and  south  by  the 
Carboniferous  limestone,  and  on  both  sides  it 
begins  with  the  lower  Coal-measures.  In  the 
south,  however,  it  extends  beneath  the  Faille  du 
Midi ;  and  if  we  imagine  these  concave  planes  of 
movement  to  be  prolonged  in  the  same  direc- 
tion, then  the  whole  coal  basin  would  be  divided 
into  a  number  of  concave  wedges,  lying  obliquely 
one  upon  another,  which  have  been  thrust 
upwards  and  northwards  more  or  less  against 
one  another  by  independent  movements.  This 
movement  of  the  wedges  is  due  to  their  efforts 
to  escape  the  tremendous  pressure  exerted  from 
the  direction  of  the  Faille  du  Midi.  This  pressure 
still  manifests  itself  in  earthquakes.  The  earth- 
quakes of  February  23,  1828;  of  November, 
1881 ;  and  of  September  2,  1896,  proceeded 
from  the  Faille  du  Midi,  and  Smeysters  there- 
fore describes  them  as  'seismes  de  chevauche- 
ment ' ;  they  recall  the  Kangra  earthquake  which 
proceeded  from  the  planes  of  overthrusts  in  the 
Sewalik  mountains. 


^  J.  Smeysters,  Etude  sur  la  constitution  de  la  partie 
orientale  du  Bassin  houiller  du  Hainaud,  Ann.  Mines 
Beige,  1900,  V,  127  pp.,  maps. 

J.  Smeysters,  Ann.  Mines  Beige,  1900,  V,  pp.  68  and 
123,  fig.  24. 


586 


ANALYSES 


[part  V 


Planes  of  movement,  such  as  the  Failles  du  Carabinier,  du  Placard,  and 
the  others  shown  on  fig.  44,  cannot  therefore  be  described  as  faults; 
neither  are  they  produced  by  folding ;  they  are  planes  of  a  special  character. 
We  will  term  them  listric  planes  (XLcrrpov,  a  shovel). 

The  Alps.  The  section  of  the  Simplon  (IV,  p.  124  ;  fig.  17)  shows 
broad  dotted  arcs,  convex  above.  Similar  lines  may  be  seen  above  the 
section  of  the  fold  of  Glarus  (fig.  45)  ^  and  above  each  of  the  general 
sections  of  the  Swiss  Alps,  which  have  been  published  during  recent 
years  to  illustrate  the  views  of  Schardt  and  Lugeon  on  the  Alpine  sheets. 
These  lines  are  intended  to  show  that  there  are  ascending  and  descending 
soles ;  that  broad  yokes  were  once  present  high  above  the  existing  Alps, 
which  have  been  destroyed,  and  that  the  whole  of  the  Helvetian  Alps 

NW  ^  2042 


Fig.  46.  Section  through  a  part  of  the  pre- Alps  of 
T,  Trias  (Tc,  Rauchwacke ;  Td,  limestone) ;  Si,  Lower  shales  and  limestone ;  Bi,  Lower 

Cr,  Cretaceous ;  Fin, 

from  the  lake  of  Geneva  to  the  Rhaeticon  is  surrounded  by  the  remains 
of  Lepontine  domes.  Thus  this  part  of  the  Helvetian  Alps  becomes  as  it 
were  a  window  with  a  Lepontine  frame  (IV,  p.  154)  or  it  may  be  described 
as  a  great  window  in  the  yoke. 

The  Dent  Blanche  is  a  fragment  on  an  ascending  sole  :  it  is  probably 
derived  from  the  Dinaric  border,  and  it  presents  Lepontine  rock  resting 
on  Lepontine  rock.  The  Lepontine  recumbent  flakes  near  the  northern 
border  of  the  Flysch  reached  their  present  position  on  a  descending 
sole,  crossing  regions  in  which  the  great  chains  (Wildstrubel  and  others) 
were  produced  at  a  later  period  of  folding. 

■  It  is  precisely  in  these  cases,  however,  that  the  sole  has  least  the  appear- 
ance of  a  single  sharp  plane  of  dislocation ;  it  seems  much  rather  to  be  the 

'  Albrecht  Heim,  Ban  der  Schweizeralpen,  Neujahrsblatt  der  naturf.  Ges.  fiir  1908, 
no.  110,  4to,  Ziirich,  26  pp. 


CH.  XIV] 


GLIDING 


537 


sum  of  such  planes  lying  between  the  extremely  elongated  middle  limbs  of 
dragged-out  folds.  This  elongation  must  have  taken  place  rather  slowly 
in  those  cases  where  it  has  produced  marmorization  of  the  limestone  beds, 
since  solution  and  crystallization  are  improbable  accompaniments  of  a 
catastrophe  ^. 

These  facts,  however,  greatly  modify  the  conclusions  drawn  from  the 
transportation  of  recumbent  flakes  over  long  distances.  It  is  thus  difficult 
to  resist  the  suggestion  that  a  certain  amount  of  persistent  gliding  has 
occurred  over  the  northern  descending  sole,  so  that  here  the  older  con- 
ception of  Reyer  again  comes  to  the  front  ^. 

The  zig-zag  folds  of  mont  Joly  (IV,  p.  117,  fig.  16)  show  how  horizontal 
anticlines  and  synclines  are  produced  by  constriction  from  above  downwards. 


MuttenkopF  SO 

1700 


Freiburg  (Prealpes  medianes),  after  Jaccard. 

Breccia  ;  Dm,  Dogger  or  Lower  Oolite,  with  Mytilus  ;  M,  Malm,  or  Middle  and  Upper  Oolite  ; 
Niesen  Flysch  ;  Fl,  Flysch. 

It  almost  seems  as  though  a  mountain  segment  of  much  greater  size  had 
passed  over  these  folds  and  had,  so  to  speak,  taken  them  with  it. 
The  ends  of  the  plunging  sheet  or  rotated  folds  are,  however,  more 
difficult  to  explain. 

Jaccard's  description  of  the  Hornfluh  may  serve  as  an  example^. 

1  Arnold  Heim  states  with  regard  to  the  upper  Cretaceous  limestone  of  the  Santis 
that  when  it  is  drawn  out  to  twice  its  original  length  only  the  arragonite  shells  of  the 
Poraminifera  are  calcitized.  When  the  extension  is  fivefold,  half  of  the  whole  mass  is 
converted  into  calcite  with  a  fibrous  structure.  Whether  the  extension  ever  rises  to 
twentyfold  cannot  be  tested  in  this  manner  because  the  process  of  calcitization  would 
already  have  advanced  too  far  (Arnold  Heim  in  Albrecht  Heim,  Santis-Gebirge,  p.  471 
et  seq.). 

^  E.  Reyer,  Theoretische  Geologic,  8vo,  Stuttgart,  1888,  p.  475  et  seq. ;  Ueber 
Deformationen  und  die  Gebirgsbildung,  8vo,  Leipzig,  1892,  p.  16  et  seq. 

^  F.  Jaccard,  La  region  de  la  breche  de  la  Hornfluh,  Bull.  Lab.  Geol.  Lausanne,  1904, 
no.  5,  205  pp.,  map ;  and  La  region  Rubli-Gummfluh,  Bull.  Soc.  Vaud.  Sci.  Nat.,  1907, 
XLIII,  pp.  407-548,  map  ;  also  de  Girard  et  Schardt,  Programme  de  I'excursion  dans  les 


538 


ANALYSES 


[PAKT  V 


Here  we  stand  between  lake  Thun  and  the  lake  of  Geneva,  to  the 
south-west  of  Saanen.  The  basement  is  formed  of  Flysch  and  upper 
Cretaceous.  The  alien  superposed  series  does  not  form  true  flakes  but  is 
represented  chiefly  by  two  lenticular  masses,  8J  and  7  kilometers  in  length, 
the  Gummfluh  (2,461  meters),  and  the  Rubli  (2,288  meters)  which  form 
part  of  Lugeon's  series  of  breccia  sheets  (IV,  p.  152).  Judged  by  their  strike 
these  masses  are  divided  into  3,  4,  or  5  strips,  more  or  less  separated 
by  Flysch,  ivhich  represent  so  many  rotated  folds  overtaking  one  another. 
These  rotated  folds  or  ends  of  plunging  sheets  are  sunk  into  the  Flysch 
from  south-east  to  north-west  ^. 

The  complete  rotated  fold  begins  on  the  south  side  with  the  lower  Trias, 

and  this  is  followed  by  the 
whole  of  the  Mesozoic  series 
as  far  as  the  upper  Jurassic, 
which  rises  high  in  steep 
rocks.  This  series  surrounds 
in  an  arc  the  oldest  core  of 
lower  Trias.  The  structure  is 
the  same  as  that  of  Ben  More 
and  Fontaine-riSveque,  but 
here,  as  we  have  seen,  it  is 
repeated  five  times  in  succes- 
sion. In  each  case,  the  whole 
series  must  have  bent  down- 
wards as  far  as  it  could  go,  the 
sheet  must  then  have  moved 
forwards,  and  another  rotated 
fold  must  have  separated  off 
as  the  upper  part  acquired  a 
higher  velocity.  This  process 
is  only  conceivable  if  we 
consider  the  nature  of  the 
Flysch.  It  would  seem  that  the  Flysch  was  not  capable,  by  itself,  of  sup- 
porting the  sheet  and  this  in  its  forward  movement  always  found  a  basis 
of  attachment  in  the  preceding  rotated  fold  which  had  already  sunk  itself 
to  the  lowest  limit.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  descending  lobes  follow 
each  other  in  such  close  succession  ;  indeed  it  may  even  happen  that  one 
is  almost  embedded  in  that  preceding  it. 

Alpes  de  la  Gruyere  et  du  Pays  d'En-haut  vaudois,  Eclogae  Geol.  Helv.,  1908,  X,  pp.  165- 
195  et  passim. 

^  '  Tetes  de  pli-faille,  plantees  dans  le  flysch  '  .  .  .  Jaccard,  Rubli-Gummfluh,  p.  455  et 
passim.  A  beautiful  example  is  given  by  Lugeon  south  of  the  lake  of  Geneva  on  the 
Di-ance  near  St.  Jean  d'Aulph  (Grandes  Nappes  de  Recouvrement,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France, 
1902,  4«  ser.,  I,  pi.  XII,  fig.  2). 


Mattstoch 

1936 


Ob.Furggle 


Fig.  47.  The  Mattstock  between  Thun  and  the  Walensee 
(after  Arnold  Heim). 
C1+C2,  Valengian ;  Cg,  Siliceous  limestone;  c^, 
Drusberg  bed;   Cg,  Schrattenkalk  ;  Fl,  Flysch;  n, 
Nummulitic  beds. 


OH.  XIV]    EOTATED  FOLDS  OP  THE  PRE-ALPS  539 


In  addition,  lobes  of  Cretaceous  occur  which,  according  to  Jaccard's 
statement,  do  not  belong  to  the  series  of  rotated  folds,  but  more  or  less 
envelop  them  and  plunge  down  with  them  into  the  Flysch. 

In  the  east,  north  of  the  Walensee,  a  thick  conglomerate,  the  Nagelfluh 
of  the  Molasse,  lies  opposite  the  advancing  border  of  the  Alps.  It  dips 
towards  the  south.  Arnold  Heim  and  E.  Blumer  have  made  us  familiar 
with  the  mode  of  contact  ^.  The  rigid  Nagelfluh  is  interrupted  along  the 
zone  of  contact  by  hollows  possibly  due  to  erosion.  Into  these  the  Flysch 
has  been  driven  like  a  plastic  mass,  and  the  great  advancing  sheet  of 
Cretaceous  limestone  rears  itself  up,  creeps  upwards  over  the  Flysch, 
assumes  a  vertical  position,  and  finally  turns  over  backwards.  Arnold  Heim 
has  termed  this  a  turnover  klippe.  It  is  the  reverse  of  a  rotated  fold  ; 
in  the  Mattstock  the  movement  takes  place  from  below  upwards,  and  the 
oldest  member  of  the  series  lies  towards  the  exterior  (syncline,  fig.  47) ; 
in  the  rotated  fold  the  movement  is  directed  from  above  downwards,  and 
the  youngest  member,  outstripping  the  others,  lies  on  the  exterior  (fig.  46, 
anticline). 

It  is  precisely  these  ends  of  the  sheets  which  have  directed  attention 
anew  to  the  diminution  of  the  earth's  circumference,  which  they  indicate. 
In  the  case  of  the  individual  sheet,  the  end  of  which  may  lie  80  kilo- 
meters or  more  away  from  the  root,  two  circumstances  must  be  taken 
into  account :  first,  the  supposed  gliding  on  the  descending  sole ;  this  is, 
strictly  speaking,  a  secondary  phenomenon,  but  may  have  had  some  effect 
in  determining  the  distance  traversed ;  secondly,  the  stretching  of  the  rocks, 
which  may  be  left  out  of  account  in  estimating  the  length  of  the  path,  but 
is  of  some  importance  when  considered  in  connexion  with  the  correlated 
reduction  in  the  length  of  the  earth's  circumference.  It  may  diminish  this 
reduction  to  the  extent  of  a  fifth,  or  tenth,  or  even  some  smaller  fraction. 

It  is  the  number  of  sheets  lying  one  upon  another,  as  seen  in  the 
Swiss  alps,  which  most  impresses  us  with  the  magnitude  of  the  phenomenon  ; 
it  is  impossible,  however,  to  arrive  at  a  numerical  estimate. 

But  even  in  these  outer  envelopes  of  the  Alps  the  influence  of  the  load 
due  to  overlying  rocks  is  already  unmistakable.  The  greater  this  is,  the 
more  the  contrast  in  the  nature  of  the  rocks  disappears,  and  the  conception 
of  a  general  flow  comes  to  the  front.  For  this  reason,  Sollas,  when  he 
employed  in  his  experiments  a  'glacier  of  pitch',  instead  of  alternating 
layers  of  rigid  and  plastic  material,  came  a  step  nearer  to  nature  and  was 
even  able  to  produce  genuine  '  recumbent  folds ',  that  is,  rotated  folds  2. 

1  Arnold  Heim,  Brandung  der  Alpen  am  Nagelfluh-Gebirge,  Vierteljahrschr.  naturf. 
Ges.  Zurich,  1906,  LI,  pp.  441-472,  map  ;  E.  Blumer,  tom.  cit.,  pp.  473-480. 

^  W.  J.  Sollas,  Recumbent  folds  produced  as  a  Result  of  Flow,  Quart.  Joum.  Geol.  Soc, 
1906,  LXII,  pp.  716-721.  Here  we  may  refer  to  B.  WiUis's  beautiful  figure  in  Ann.  Rep. 
U.  S.  Geol.  Surv.,  XIII,  2  pi,  XCVI,  B. 


540 


ANALYSES 


[part  V 


In  spite  of  all  this  we  are  left  with  the  impression  that  the  advance  of 
the  Lepontine  sheets  far  over  the  Helvetian  formations  was  only  an  episode, 
and  the  subsequent  up-folding  which  produced  the  great  Helvetian  chains 
was  a  process  quite  independent  of  it.  This  later  process  altered  the 
Lepontine  sole,  and  the  great  lower-lying  planes  of  movement  are  easier 
to  trace  in  the  east. 

In  the  East  Alps,  notwithstanding  the  numerous  questions  which  still 
remain  open,  we  see  clearly  the  advance  of  the  Dinarides  towards  the  north 
over  the  East  Alpine  sheet,  then  of  the  East  Alpine  over  the  Lepontine 
sheet,  and  of  the  Lepontine  over  the  Helvetian  sheet.  Nowhere  are 
recumbent  folds  or  other  details  of  this  kind  so  far  known.  In  general, 
however,  the  following  comparison  may  be  permitted. 

As  soon  as  the  older  Helvetian  formations  (although  subsequently  up- 
folded  again)  gave  the  first  impulse,  in  a  part  of  Switzerland,  to  the  forma- 
tion of  the  yoke  which  the  Lepontine  sheets  were  forced  to  ascend,  an 
extensive  Lepontine  range,  the  Tauern,  became  the  yoke  which  the  east 
Alpine  sheet  has  ascended.  The  window,  from  which  the  Lepontine  sheets 
look  out,  has  been  formed,  not  only  by  erosion,  but  possibly  also  by  rending 
of  the  sheet.  It  is  a  window  on  a  yoke,  like  the  little  Massif  de  Theux  in 
Belgium,  and  like  a  part  of  the  Helvetian  Alps  within  the  girdle  of 
Lepontine  remnants. 

The  anticline  folded  on  the  core  of  the  Tauern,  which  was  so  long 
regarded  as  a  proof  of  the  symmetrical  structure  of  the  Alps,  now  forms 
with  its  southern  limb  the  ascending  sole,  and  with  its  northern  limb 
the  descending  sole  of  the  east  Alpine  sheet.  It  is  not  impossible  that  the 
Eastern  Alps,  like  the  Bernese  Alps,  were  subsequently  up-folded.  The 
limestone  zone,  with  its  concave  sole,  holds  the  position  of  a  recumbent 
flake  in  a  basin. 

Concerning  the  sole-planes  of  these  great  movements  we  can  as  yet  say 
little,  except  that  there  is  nothing  to  show  they  originated  in  folding ;  that, 
like  the  major  thrusts  of  Caledonia  and  the  listric  surfaces  of  Belgium, 
they  probably  ascend  obliquely  at  a  gentle  angle,  and  indeed  that  they 
were  already  in  existence  as  gently  ascending  planes  before  the  folding. 
This  supposition  seems  at  least  to  correspond  with  the  fact  that  the  East 
Alpine  sole,  below  the  Selvretta  and  the  Oetz,  bears  upon  its  surface  great 
crystalline  masses,  and  that  these  disappear  towards  the  north  from  above 
the  sole,  so  that  on  the  boundary  of  Flysch  the  sheet  does  not  extend 
downwards  beneath  the  Trias. 

An  instructive  study  is  afforded  by  the  Carpathians. 

Marcel  Bertrand  has  repeatedly  drawn  attention  to  the  fact — and 
especially  in  a  lecture  delivered  in  1894  at  Zurich — that  certain  sedimentary 
facies  are  repeated  in  the  great  ranges.  As  examples,  he  mentions :  the 
sediments  which  have  been  transformed  into  gneiss,  the  Carboniferous,  the 


CH.  XIV] 


THE  BELGIAN  COALFIELD 


541 


Cretaceous  and  Eocene  Flysch,  and 
finally  the  molasse.  These  are  said 
to  have  collected  in  depressions,  and 
then  to  have  been  involved  in  the 
formation  of  the  mountains.  The 
Carboniferous  of  the  West  Alps  is 
termed  'un  Flysch  houiller'^. 

At  the  time  when  these  views 
were  expressed  they  were  merely  con- 
jectures, but  the  conjectures  of  a 
master  mind.  They  were  understood 
by  few.  It  is  now  known  that  a 
girdle  of  Coal-measures  accompanies 
the  whole  outer  border  of  the  western 
Altaides,  wherever  this  border  is  visi- 
ble from  Silesia  to  the  other  side  of 
the  Mississippi,  and  that  near  Paru- 
schowitz  in  Silesia  its  lower  limit  was 
not  reached  by  boring  at  a  depth  of 
2,003  meters.  In  like  manner  the 
Flysch  is  known  on  the  outer  border 
of  a  number  of  mountain  chains. 

The  structure  of  the  Belgian  Car- 
boniferous would  be  unknown  were  it 
not  for  mining  operations  ;  that  of  the 
Flysch  may  be  recognized  wherever 
rocks  of  some  resistance  are  inter- 
calated with  it. 

The  extremely  regular  arc  of 
klippen  which  surrounds  the  Hohe 
Tatra  indicates  an  extensive  move- 
ment towards  the  north,  which  can 
only  have  been  directed  obliquely 
from  below  upwards.  When  Lugeon 
wrote  his  famous  treatise  on  the 
Carpathians  he  had  no  doubt  that  the 
klippen  had  emerged  in  an  arc  from 
below ,  out  of  the  Flysch.  Uhlig,  while 
supporting  Lugeon,  has  taken  an  even 

1  M.  Bertrand,  Structure  des  Alpes  fran- 
9aises  et  recurrence  de  certaines  facies  sedi- 
mentaires,  C.  R.  VI.  Congr.  geol.  intern. 
Zurich,  1894,  pp.  163-177. 


542 


ANALYSES 


[part  V 


broader  view  of  the  facts.  He  believes  that  the  '  surging  frontal  region ' 
of  the  Pienine  klippen  emerges  along  oblique  planes  from  beneath  the 
Hohe  Tatra  (fig.  48,  W,  W), 

These  planes  of  Tnovement  W,  W  are  listric  surfaces.  They  correspond 
to  the  Faille  du  Carabinier  and  other  faults  in  Belgium.  They  first  a.scend 
gently,  and  then  become  steeper ;  they  bound  a  number  of  wedge-shaped 
bodies  which  may  be  thrust  northwards  one  against  the  other,  and  it  is 
very  probable  that  the  arc  of  klippen  was  brought  to  the  surface  upon 
these  listric  planes. 

With  this  our  series  of  comparisons  comes  to  an  end.    The  structure  of 
the  Alps  may  be  recognized  not  only  in  its  main  features,  but  also  in  many 
of  its  details,  in  the  zone  of  EriboU  and  in  the  Belgian  coal-field.  The 
Flysch  and  the  Coal-measures  were  laid  down  under  very  different  circum 
stances,  but  in  tectonic  processes  they  play  similar  parts. 

This  analysis  leads  for  the  present  only  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
tangential  force  acting  in  one  direction  expresses  itself  mainly  in  two 
independent  forms,  namely  as  folding  and  as  the  movement  of  isolated 
fragments,  or  even  of  great  masses  over  surfaces  ascending  obliquely  from 
below.  The  listric  planes  lie  in  compressed  synclines  and  are  a  part  of 
them.  Their  concave  form  is  possibly  only  a  consequence  of  the  fact  that 
their  forepart  has  been  less  heavily  weighted.  The  sole  planes  of  the 
major  thrusts — the  Faille  du  Midi,  the  Alpine  sheets,  and  the  Dinarides — 
belong  to  another  order  of  things.  All  these  planes  are  distinct,  both  in 
their  origin  and  nature  from  the  disjunctive  planes. 


543 


CHAPTER  XV 
THE  DEPTHS 

Classification  of  the  depths.  Emission  of  gas,  batholites,  ores.  Intrusion  by  melting 
through.    Passive  lateral  injection.    Green  stones. 

Classification  of  the  depths.  In  the  following  discussion  of  the  depths 
of  the  earth  we  will  take  for  our  starting-point  the  parallel  drawn  by 
Daubr^e  between  the  total  mass  of  the  meteorites  preserved  in  collections, 
and  the  total  mass  of  the  earth.  According  to  this  parallel  the  assumption 
that  all  meteorites  were  once  arranged  according  to  their  density  as  parts 
of  a  common  mass  lead  us  to  the  conception  of  a  body  constituted  like  the 
earth.  A  core  of  nickel-iron  (e.g.  the  meteorite  of  Agram  or  Elbogen) 
would  be  followed  by  an  envelope  of  nickel-iron  with  peridote  (e.g. 
Rittersgriin),  and  this  would  probably  form  the  transition  to  a  less 
ferruginous  envelope  of  magnesium  silicates  (Chassigny).  Then  the  felspar- 
bearing  rocks  would  begin  (eucrite ;  Juvinas,  Stannern).  But  the  resem- 
blance does  not  end  here.  The  acid  felspar  rocks  of  the  earth  are 
represented  among  the  meteorites,  so  far  as  their  chemical  composition 
is  concerned,  by  the  once  completely  molten  tektites  (Moldavite,  Australite, 
Billitonite).  The  lightest  carbon-bearing  meteorites  might  be  regarded  as 
tuffs. 

Thus  Daubr^e's  parallel  leads  us  so  far,  that  we  may  now  venture  to  take 
a  step  further.  When  we  consider  the  recurrence  of  definite  petrographical 
types  in  the  several  cases,  the  discovery  of  small  celestial  bodies  outside 
the  orbit  of  Jupiter,  and  inside  the  orbit  of  Mars,  and  the  probability  that 
certain  planetoids  are  angular  fragments,  we  are  led  to  regard  the  meteorites 
as  planetary  fragments,  possibly  parts  of  an  anonymous  body  once  occupying 
the  gap  between  Mars  and  Jupiter  ^. 

*  Einzelheiten  in  der  Beschaffenheit  einiger  Himmelskorper,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss. 
Wien,  1907,  CXVI.  sect.  1,  pp.  1555-1561.  As  is  well  known,  the  theory  of  the  cosmic 
origin  of  meteorites  is  based  on  the  great  rapidity  with  which  they  enter  the  atmosphere, 
but  the  observation  of  this  fact  is  attended  by  so  many  difiiculties  that  the  most  distin- 
guished astronomers  have  obtained  for  some  cases  a  hyperbolic  and  for  others  an  elliptical 
path.  The  fact  that  the  hundreds  of  known  meteorites  may  be  divided  into  a  small  number 
of  groups  (three  to  five  or  six),  indeed  that  a  petrographical  classification  is  possible  at 
all,  is  a  decisive  argument  against  cosmic  origin.  Soon  after  the  appearance  of  this 
work  G.  Tschermak  published  an  extremely  comprehensive  study,  according  to  which 
meteorites  of  a  similar  nature  reach  the  earth  at  intervals  of  a  year,  or  with  a  regular 


544 


THE  DEPTHS 


[part  V 


Further,  we  assume  the  existence  of  three  zones  or  envelopes  as  deter- 
mining the  structure  of  the  earth,  namely,  the  barysphere  or  the  Nife 
(Ni-Fe),  Sima  (Si-Mg),  and  Sal  (Si-Al).  This  division  differs  from  the 
classification  which  has  been  proposed  by  distinguished  American  petro- 
graphers,  in  the  separation  of  the  metallic  barysphere  (Nife). 

Wiechert  arrives,  on  mathematical  grounds,  at  the  existence  of  a  rocky 
mantle,  1,400  kilometers  in  thickness,  with  a  density  of  3"0  to  3'4,  and 
within  this  of  a  nucleus  of  iron  5,000  kilometers  in  radius,  with  a 
density  of  7*8 ;  he  finds  confirmation  of  this  in  seismic  observations,  from 
which  he  infers  the  existence  of  a  comparatively  sharp  boundary  at  a  depth 
of  about  1,500  kilometers.  Oldham  also  conjectures  from  seismic  observa- 
tions that  a  boundary  exists  at  a  depth  equal  to  about  one-fourth  of  the 
radius  (1,594  kilometers),  and  this  corresponds  in  a  striking  manner  with 
Wiechert's  calculations ;  but  this  limit  only  holds  as  regards  the  propagation 
of  earthquakes  beneath  the  Pacific  Ocean  and  not  beneath  the  Eurasiatic 
Continent  ^. 

Let  us  return  for  the  present  to  the  other  method  of  comparison. 

In  meteoric  irons  the  heavy  metals  are  also  met  with.  Davison,  for 
instance,  has  found  platinum  and  iridium,  and  Liversidge  gold  ^.  On  the 
earth  these  metals  occur  where  we  should  be  most  inclined  to  suspect 
an  autochthonous  origin,  in  the  Sima,  and  particularly,  as  among  the 
meteoric  irons,  in  association  with  nickel,  chromium,  and  iron.  In  the 
nickel  ores  of  Sudbury  (Canada),  which  we  shall  discuss  directly  in  greater 
detail,  it  pays  to  separate  the  platinum  from  the  nickel.  It  makes  its 
appearance  in  this  locality  as  sperrylite  (Pt  Asg).  Vogt  records  gold  and 
platinum  from  Scandinavian  nickel  ores.  The  platinum  grains  of  Nishni- 
Tagilsk  occur  in  chromite  (or  limonite),  according  to  Inostranzeff.  The 
richest  finds  of  platinum  in  North  America  occur  on  the  river  Similka- 
meen  (British  Columbia),  in  a  Sima  chromite-bearing  region.  Kemp  states 
that  sometimes  chromite  and  sometimes  platinum  was  excreted  first.  Beck 
mentions  cases  in  which  platinum  and  osmiridium  did  not  separate  out  till 
after  the  consolidation  of  chromite  and  pyroxene  ^. 

displacement  of  the  annual  date  of  falling  (e.  g.  six  falls  of  eucrites  with  a  regular  advance 
of  the  node).  This  does  not  close  the  question  of  the  cosmic  origin,  but  opens  up  a  new 
and  important  path  of  inquiry  ;  Tschermak,  Ueber  das  Eintreffen  gleichartiger  Meteore, 
torn,  cit.,  Abth.  II  a,  pp.  1407-1441. 

^  E.  Wiechert,  Massenvertheilung  im  Innem  der  Erde,  Nachr.  Ges.  Wiss.  Gottingen, 
1897,  pp.  221-243  ;  Was  wissen  wir  von  der  Erde  unter  uns  ?  Deutsche  Rundschau,  1907, 
pp.  376-394 ;  R.  D.  Oldham,  Origin  of  Oceans,  II,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1907,  pp.  344- 
350,  in  particular  p.  347. 

Liversidge,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  N.S.W.,  1902,  p.  xxix  ;  such  occurrences  have  long  been 
conjectured  a  priori,  E.  Suess,  Die  Zukunft  des  Goldes,  8vo,  Wien,  1877,  p.  354. 

^  A. Inostranzeff,  Gestalt  des  Platins  in  seinem  Muttergestein  amUral,Trudi  d.naturhist. 
Ges.  St.  Petersburg,  geol.  und  min.  Abth.,  1906,  XXIII,  pp.  1-7;  and  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci. 
Paris,  1894,  CXVIII,  p.  264  ;  Vogt,  Platingehalt  in  norwegischem  Nickelerz,  Zeitschr. 


CH.  XV] 


SPECTEA 


545 


In  addition,  we  have  the  occurrence  of  the  metallic  nickel-iron  (awaruite) 
under  similar  conditions ;  this  has  been  mentioned  above  when  describing 
the  Klamath  mountains.  Awaruite  was  discovered  by  Skey  to  the  north 
of  Big  Bay  (Awarui)  in  South  New  Zealand,  and  is  known  in  gold  placers 
at  Lilloet  on  the  Fraser  river  (British  Columbia),  at  several  localities  in  the 
gold  and  osmiridium-bearing  serpentine  of  Oregon,  on  the  Smith  river, 
Del  Norte  City,  California,  and  finally,  in  upper  Italy  on  the  river  Elvo, 
near  Biella,  where  it  occurs  in  gold-bearing  sand,  which  appears  to  be 
derived  from  the  moraine  of  the  Aosta  valley  ^. 

Rocks  of  abyssal  origin,  or  at  least  presenting  the  characters  which  we 
should  imagine  abyssal  rocks  would  possess,  are  thus  not  infrequently 
seen  on  the  earth's  surface.  This  explains  the  peculiar  interest  attached  to 
tectonic  studies  of  the  so-called  green  rocks.  The  most  frequent  form  in 
which  they  occur  is  serpentine  with  chromite,  more  or  less  nickeliferous, 
and  more  seldom  with  nickel  ore.  Since  chromium  is  the  element  which 
possesses  the  widest  distribution  we  term  this  typical  form  Crofesima; 
Nicrofesima  would  be  more  correct,  and,  in  some  cases,  Nifesima. 

There  are  certain  circumstances  which  seem  to  indicate  that  the  Sal 
envelope  is  of  no  very  great  thickness. 

From  the  studies  of  J.  H.  L.  Vogt  it  appears  that  the  series  of  nickeli- 
ferous magnetic  pyrites  (Nifesima)  of  Norway  is  difierent  in  the  zone 
of  norite  contact  from  the  metallic  series  in  the  zone  of  Sal  contact. 
Further,  the  observations  of  Sir  Norman  Lockyer  lead  us  to  conclude  that 
the  Nifesima  series  is  formed  of  the  same  materials  as  those  which  appear 
in  the  spectrum  of  a  Cygni  and  the  sun  (with  the  exception  of  platinum). 
The  typical  metals  of  the  Sal  series,  on  the  other  hand,  do  not  appear  (with 
the  exception  possibly  of  yttrium  and  lithium)  in  a  Cygni ;  several  of  them 
are  certainly  represented  in  the  Fraunhofer  spectrum  of  the  sun,  but  they 
do  not  occupy  a  prominent  position  2.  From  this  we  may  infer  that  if  the 
earth  is  of  a  similar  nature  to  the  sun  and  the  star  a  Cygni,  and  if  these 
were  all  dissolved  in  one  great  ball  of  fire,  then  on  this  ball  also  the  Sal 
metals  would  occupy  a  less  prominent  position  than  those  of  the  Sima  series. 

prakt.  Geol.,  1902,  pp.  258-260 ;  D.  Day,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1898,  XIX,  6,  p.  268 ; 
J.  F.  Kemp,  Geological  Relations  and  Distribution  of  Platinum  and  associated  Metals, 
Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1902,  no.  193,  95  pp. ;  R.  Beck,  Nickelerzlagerstatte  von  Sohland, 
Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1903,  pp.  296-331 ;  and  Struktur  des  uralischen  Platins,  Ber. 
Ges.  Wiss.  Leipzig,  1907,  LIX,  pp.  387-396. 

^  G.  H.  F.  Ulrich,  Discovery,  Mode  of  Occurrence  and  Distribution  of  the  Nickel-Iron 
Alloy  Awaruite,  Quart.  Joum.  Geol.  Soc,  1890,  XLVI,  pp.  619-632,  map  ;  Jamieson  (IV, 
p.  421,  note  1),  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1905,  4th  ser.,  XIX,  pp.  319  and  413-415;  Q.  Sella, 
C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  1891,  CXII,  p.  171. 

2  J.  H.  L.  Vogt,  Zeitschr.  prakt.  Geol.,  1894,  p.  887 ;  1900,  p.  233  ;  1901,  pp.  10,  180, 
289 ;  N.  Lockyer,  Publication  of  the  Solar  Physics  Committee,  1907,  Spectroscopic  Com- 
parison of  Metals  present  in  certain  Terrestrial  and  Celestial  Light  Sources,  p.  ix ;  also 
Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1907,  CXVI,  pp.  1555-1561. 

SOLIiAS  IV  N  n 


546 


THE  DEPTHS 


[part  V 


That  the  Sal  envelope,  the  most  accessible  to  observation,  does  not  form 
a  very  important  part  of  the  mass  of  the  planet  is  also  evident  from  its 
trifling  density  (about  2*7)  when  compared  with  the  density  of  the  earth  as 
a  whole  (5*5  or  5*6). 

We  therefore  infer  that  even  if  the  existence  of  a  comparatively  sharp 
boundary  at  a  depth  of  1,500  kilometers  should  be  confirmed,  yet  it  cannot 
represent  the  limit  between  Sal  and  Sima,  but  only  between  Sima  and  Nif e, 
that  is,  it  is  the  upper  limit  of  the  barysphere.  If  we  compare  a  series 
of  those  meteorites  which  consist  both  of  Sima  (peridote)  and  Nife,  we  may 
justly  be  astonished,  not  only  at  the  sharp  delimitation  between  these  con- 
stituents, but  at  the  contrast  in  their  densities.  In  the  mass  of  Tula  the 
density  of  Nife  is  7*33,  that  of  the  accompanying  Sima  (possibly  not  quite 
free  from  iron  ? )  4'15  ;  in  the  mass  of  Krasnoiarsk  the  respective  densities 
of  the  two  zones  are  7*1 6-7*86  and  3*43,  in  that  of  Rittersgriin  7*5  and  3.23, 
and  so  on  ^. 

Such  great  differences  might  well  favour  the  formation  of  a  compara- 
tively sharp  differentiation  limit.  Wiechert's  calculations  led  him  to  place 
the  limit  of  the  rocky  crust  of  the  earth  at  a  depth  of  1,500  kilometers, 
with  a  density  of  3*0  to  3*4  as  against  the  iron  nucleus  with  a  density 
of  7*8.    The  correspondence  in  the  densities  is  obvious. 

The  Sal  envelope  is  chiefly  formed  of  gneiss,  or  rather  of  that  series  of 
various  altered  sediments  and  batholites  which  are  included  under  this 
term,  and  range  from  the  hornblende  gneiss  of  the  Sima  in  the  Baikal 
vertex  to  the  so-called  normal  gneiss  of  Freiberg  with  a  percentage  of 
65  to  66  SiOg,  and  the  red  gneiss  of  the  Erzgebirge  with  76  SiOg.  Here 
an  analogy  with  the  other  heavenly  bodies  is  only  presented  by  the 
tektites. 

The  stratosphere,  or  younger  sedimentary  envelope  has  been  formed 
almost  entirely  at  the  expense  of  the  Sal  envelope,  and  to  use  Bischof 's  and 
Walther* s  happy  expression,  by  the  method,  or  more  correctly  by  the  methods, 
of  selection  ^.  These  indeed  are  of  many  kinds,  from  the  weathering  of 
orthoclase,  to  the  sweep  of  the  storm  across  the  sandy  desert,  and  the  quiet 
work  of  living  organisms.  The  greater  part,  as  much  as  99*06  per  cent.,  of 
the  outer  part  of  the  earth  is  formed,  according  to  F.  W.  Clarke,  of  only 
eight  elements.    These  are :  O,  Si,  Al,  Fe,  Ca,  Mg,  Na,  and  K  ^.    In  the 

^  Such  inclusions  of  olivine  scarcely  contain  any  nickel,  whereas  nickel  is  very  widely 
distributed  in  terrestrial  olivines.  Daubree  points  out  that  Ni  has  less  affinity  for  0  than 
Fe,  and  ascribes  the  fact  to  this  circumstance ;  on  this  point  see  also  Farrington,  Am. 
Journ.  GeoL,  1901,  X,  p.  397. 

*  J.  Walther,  Ueber  die  Auslese  in  der  Erdgeschichte,  8vo,  Jena,  1895,  36  pp. 

"  F.  W.  Clarke,  The  relative  Abundance  of  the  chemical  Elements,  Bull.  U.S.  Geol. 
Surv.,  1891,  no.  78,  pp.  34-42,  and  op.  cit.,  1897,  no.  148,  pp.  9-14  ;  J.  H.  L.  Vogt,  Ueber 
die  relative  Verbreitung  der  Elemente,  Zeitschr.  prakt.  Geol.,  1898,  p.  225  et  seq. ;  also 
L.  de  Launay,  La  distribution  des  elements  chimiques  dans  Tecorce  terrestre.  Rev.  gen. 
des  Sciences,  Paris,  30  avril  1904,  pp.  386-404. 


CH.  XV] 


SUDBURY 


547 


work  of  living  creatures  two  of  the  chief  of  these  elements,  Al  and  Mg  are 
neglected,  Ca  is  preferred,  and  in  addition  the  scarcely  soluble  Si.  Bacteria 
perform  their  work  of  selection  to  a  certain  extent  outside  the  range  of 
these  eight  elements,  since  they  cover  the  bottom  of  the  Black  Sea  with 
iron  pyrites ;  nodules  of  manganese  are  secreted  by  algae,  and  so  on. 

We  thus  arrive  at  the  following  hypothetical  conception  of  the  interior 
of  the  planet.  A  nucleus  of  Nife  and  heavy  metals  extends  from  the  centre 
outwards  for  three  quarters  of  the  radius ;  then  follow,  at  a  depth  of  about 
1,500  kilometers  below  the  surface,  separated  by  a  fairly  sharp  boundary, 
Crof esima  and  Nif esima,  and  all  the  other  rocks  of  Sima  up  to  Sal.  Further 
observations  may  lead  us  later  to  infer  the  existence  of  a  more  detailed 
subdivision.  The  stratosphere,  although  in  places  interrupted  and  covered 
by  Sima  masses,  may  be  assigned  as  a  whole  to  Sal. 

Some  idea  of  the  nature  of  the  upper  parts  of  the  planet  may  be 
obtained  from  Coleman's  description  of  the  richest  known  deposit  of  nickel 
at  Sudbury  in  Canada  ^. 

Here  a  series  of  rocks  about  2,000  meters  in  thickness  rests  upon  gneiss, 
granite,  quartzite,  and  other  rocks,  and  is  covered  by  thick  Cambrian  or 
pre-Cambrian  sediments.  It  forms  a  basin  58  kilometers  in  length  and 
26*5  kilometers  in  breadth.  Its  upper  part  consists  of  granitic  rock  with 
an  average  of  66.87  SiOg ;  as  the  proportion  of  Si,  Na,  and  K  decreases, 
and  of  Ca  and  Mg  increases,  this  gradually  passes  into  rocks  which  are 
described  by  the  several  observers  as  granodiorite,  quartz-diorite,  or 
micropegmatitic  syenite.  The  terminal  member  is  a  grey  norite  with 
64.61  SiOg. 

At  its  base,  and  without  a  sharp  upper  limit,  the  nickel  ores  rest  upon 
and  within  the  inequalities  of  the  foundation ;  they  are  followed  by  a  girdle 
of  mines  surrounding  the  base  of  the  great  basin.  Beside  iron,  nickel, 
and  copper,  cobalt  occurs,  then,  in  order  of  richness,  silver  and  platinum, 
a  small  quantity  of  native  gold,  iridium,  and  osmium,  and  traces  of 
rhodium  and  palladium. 

Thus  within  the  trifling  depth  of  2,000  meters  we  have  passed  from 
Sal  granite  to  a  Nife  zone  with  heavy  metals.  These  observations  coincide 
with  those  made  by  Vogt  in  the  Norwegian  nickel  mines.  The  differentia- 
tion has  occurred  in  these  cases  chiefly  under  the  influence  of  gravity,  as 
is  shown  by  the  relation  of  the  ores  to  the  foundation,  and  for  the  present 
we  may  bear  in  mind  that  Na  and  K  decrease  before  Ca  and  Mg. 

The  nickel-bearing  rocks  at  Sudbury  must  have  formed  a  molten 

1  A.  P.  Coleman,  The  Sudbury  Nickel  Field,  Rep.  Bureau  Mines,  Toronto,  1905,  XIY, 
3,  188  pp.,  map  ;  The  Sudbury  Laccolitic  Sheet,  Am.  Journ.  Geol.,  1907,  XV,  pp.  759-782, 
map ;  also  A.  E.  Barlow,  Origin,  geological  Relation  and  Composition  of  the  Nickel  and 
Copper  Deposits  of  the  Sudbury  Mining  District,  Rep.  Geol.  Surv.  Canada,  1904,  XIV, 
236  pp.,  maps,  and  op.  cit.,  XV,  A,  pp.  254-269. 

N  n  2 


548  THE  DEPTHS  [partv 

mixture  when  they  were  carried  upwards  into  their  present  position, 
otherwise  it  would  have  been  impossible  for  them  to  suffer  the  same  kind 
of  differentiation  for  a  second  or  possibly  even  a  third  time. 

The  product,  however,  coincides  very  nearly  with  that  which  we  have 
pictured,  from  other  considerations,  as  the  result  of  the  primary  differentia- 
tion accompanying  the  original  formation  of  the  earth's  body.  The  re-melt, 
indeed,  seems  to  provide  us  with  an  experiment. 

Emission  of  gas.  That  steam  is  the  driving  force  of  volcanic  eruptions 
has  long  been  known,  but  it  was  not  known  from  what  source  the  steam 
was  derived.  Appeal  was  made  to  the  proximity  of  the  sea.  Daubr^e 
believed  that  he  was  able  to  show  by  an  experiment  that  infiltrating 
water  might  succeed  in  reaching  even  the  heated  abysses  of  the  earth. 
Poulett  Scrope  objected,  that  apart  from  all  other  difficulties,  this  experiment 
only  shows  that  water  may  find  its  way  to  the  surface  of  subterranean 
lava,  but  does  not  explain  the  intimate  admixture  which  is  known  to  exist. 
Bischof  inquired  how  the  escape  of  carbonic  acid  gas  could  be  explained 
by  such  infiltration.  Thus  very  serious  doubts  were  entertained  on  this 
question  ^. 

The  explanation  lies  in  another  direction. 

Just  as  molten  iron  absorbs  extremely  large  quantities  of  gas,  and  gives 
them  out  again  as  it  cools,  so  the  globe  of  the  earth  once  absorbed  extremely 
large  quantities  of  gas,  which  it  is  now  still  continuing  to  emit. 

The  recognition  of  this  fact  led  to  the  distinction  of  two  kinds  of  waters. 
The  vadose  waters — a  name  originally  chosen  by  Posepny  for  the  waters 
which  infiltrate  from  the  surface  and  escape  from  mineral  lodes — include 
all  the  waters  of  the  earth's  surface,  such  as  oceans,  rivers,  clouds,  atmo- 
spheric precipitations,  and  artesian  springs.  Juvenile  waters,  on  the  other 
hand,  are  those  which  arise  when  the  hydrogen  issuing  from  the  earth's 
interior,  under  very  high  pressure  and  at  a  very  high  temperature,  combines 
with  the  oxygen  of  the  atmosphere.  The  white  balls  of  steam  emitted  by 
the  volcano  become  clouds,  and  a  juvenile  rain  pours  down  its  slopes.  The 
juvenile  hot  springs  bring  up  unexpected  mineral  matters  from  the  depths  2. 

*  Complete  list  of  the  older  literature  in  E.  Reyer,  Beitrage  zur  Physik  der  Eruptionen, 
8vo,  Wien,  1877  ;  this  subject  is  discussed  in  detail  by  G.  Tschermak,  Ueber  den  Vulca- 
nismus  als  kosmische  Erscheinung,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1877,  LXXV,  pp.  151-176  ; 
A.  C.  Lane,  Geological  activity  of  the  Earth's  originally  absorbed  Gases,  Bull.  Am.  Geol. 
Soc,  1894,  V,  pp.  259-280.  Van  Hise  says :  '  In  regional  extrusions  it .  .  .  appears  highly 
probable  that  the  occluded  water  has  been  held  by  the  magma  from  the  first  * ;  Trans. 
Wisconsin  Acad.  Sci.,  1898,  XI,  p.  498,  note  ;  further,  C.  Doelter,  Physik  des  Vulcanismus, 
Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1903,  CXII,  pp.  681-705,  in  particular  p.  703.  N.  S.  Shaler 
thought  that  the  explanation  lay  in  the  water  contained  in  deep-lying  sediments ;  Con- 
ditions and  effects  of  the  expulsion  of  gases  from  the  earth,  Proc.  Boston  Soc.  Nat.  Hist., 
1897,  XXVII,  pp.  89-106. 

E.  Suess,  Ueber  heisse  Quellen,  Verh.  Ges.  deutsch.  Naturf.  und  Aerzte,  Karlsbad, 
1902,  Allg.  Theil,  20  pp.,  Leipzig,  1902. 


CH.  XV] 


OCEANIC  WATER 


649 


Just  as  there  is  juvenile  hydrogen,  so  there  is  juvenile  chlorine,  fluorine, 
sulphur,  arsenic,  carbon,  and  a  series  of  other  elements,  all  emitted  by 
volcanos.  In  fumaroles  we  may  even  observe  that  the  elements  emitted 
towards  the  close  of  an  eruption  succeed  one  another  in  a  definite  order,  so 
that  when  in  certain  eruptions  a  great  variety  of  gases  is  poured  forth,  the 
chlorine  and  fluorine  (CI  and  F)  come  to  an  end  first,  then  the  sulphur  and 
arsenic  (S  and  As),  while  the  carbon  (C)  continues  its  escape  longest.  In 
this  way  a  certain  scale  of  temperatures  is  given,  namely  CIF,  SAs, 
and  C,  but  in  spite  of  this  the  fact  remains  that  exhalations  of  CI  may 
continue  for  a  very  long  period,  as  in  Java,  for  example ;  that  solfataras 
are  fairly  widely  distributed,  and  that  the  solfatara  of  Puzzuoli  gives  out 
S  and  As ;  finally,  that  carbonic  acid  gas  issues  in  quantity  from  the 
ground  in  places  which  have  experienced  no  volcanic  eruption  since  the 
Tertiary  epoch. 

Hot  springs,  so  far  as  they  are  juvenile,  are  simply  a  milder  form  of 
the  volcano.  The  chlorine  contained  in  hot  springs  now  becomes  intel- 
ligible, and  we  can  understand  how  those  of  Carlsbad,  for  example,  bring 
yearly  to  the  surface  a  million  kilogrammes  of  juvenile  salt  through  the 
granite  but  not  out  of  it. 

Laspeyres  has  pointed  to  the  great  quantities  of  carbonic  acid  gas 
which  the  granite  contains ;  he  states  that  one  cubic  kilometer  of  this 
granite  is  sufficient  to  feed  the  springs  of  Nauheim  for  2,730  centuries. 
But  the  carbonic  acid  gas  is  sealed  up  in  a  liquid  state  in  cavities  of  the 
quartz,  and  as  Delkeskamp  justly  observes,  it  is  hard  to  understand  under 
what  circumstances  a  continuous  escape  could  take  place  ^. 

Thus  with  every  volcanic  eruption  the  quantity  of  vadose  water  present 
on  the  earth's  surface  is  increased.  The  atmosphere  also  is  continuously 
enriched.  While  formerly  the  Ocean  was  supposed  to  be  the  source  from 
which  by  infiltration  the  volcanos  are  supplied,  now  it  is  regarded  as 
the  receptacle  for  juvenile  waters ;  the  quantities  of  chlorine  which  it 
contains  are  consistent  with  this  view ;  and  thus  the  waters  of  the  Ocean 
hear  witness  to  the  escape  of  gas  from  the  planet  ^. 

The  rhythmic  pulsations  which  are  sometimes  visible  in  craters  have 
the  same  origin  as  the  pulsations  of  hot  springs.    In  September,  1902, 

1  R.  Delkeskamp,  Vadose  und  juvenile  Kohlensaure,  Zeitschr.  prakt.  GeoL,  1906,  XIV, 
pp.  33-47.  This  fact  is  also  overlooked  by  Gautier,  La  genese  des  eaux  thermales  et  ses 
rapports  avee  le  volcanisme,  Ann.  des  Mines,  (1906)  1907,  9®  ser.,  XI,  pp.  316-375.  The 
gases  of  the  fumaroles  which  serve  Gautier  for  comparison  do  not  contain  CI,  possibly 
because  they  were  not  extremely  hot ;  the  CI  contents  of  the  springs  could  hardly  be 
derived  from  granite. 

This  is  dealt  with  in  detail  by  F.  Freiherr  von  Richthofen,  Das  Meer  und  die  Kunde 
vom  Meer,  Rectorats-Rede  gehalten  zu  Berlin  am  3.  August  1904, 4to,  45  pp.,  in  particular 
p.  12  et  seq. 


550 


THE  DEPTHS 


[party 


Sapper  observed  pulsations  of  this  kind  in  a  secondary  crater  of  Izalco  ^. 
In  March,  1871,  two  sets  of  rhythmic  pulsations  were  observed  at  Vesuvius, 
one  of  slower  period  in  the  principal  crater,  and  the  other  more  rapid  in 
a  secondary  crater  on  the  outer  slope  of  the  cone.  The  lava  of  the 
secondary  crater  contained  crystals  of  leucite  bearing  signs  of  superficial 
fusion,  but  not  completely  molten.  As  soon  as  the  matrix  was  molten, 
the  gases  welled  up,  probably  in  clusters  of  bubbles,  through  the  lava, 
united  together,  and  raised  the  level  of  the  boiling  mass  in  the  funnel 
for  about  one  meter ;  then  after  6-8,  or  sometimes  15  seconds,  the  explosion 
followed. 

Doelter  places  the  melting-point  of  the  Vesuvian  lava  at  1,090°  C.,  of 
the  leucite  at  1,310°  C.  Johnston-Lavis  describes  the  leucites  in  detail ; 
they  may  be  broken,  and  partly  healed  together  again,  fused  at  the  edges, 
or  traversed  oy  concentric  zones  of  microliths  or  gas  cavities.  They  bear 
witness  sometimes  to  violent  movements^  sometimes  to  the  variation  of 
temperature  in  the  funnel  2. 

In  the  Cheviot  hills,  on  the  Scottish  border,  andesite  lavas  are  cut 
through  by  dykes  of  quartz-f elsite.  But  Teall  found  that  the  phenocrysts  of 
the  andesite  correspond  to  the  basic  part  of  the  original  magma,  while  the 
quartz-felsite  of  the  dykes  corresponds  to  the  glassy  ground-mass,  i.  e.  to 
the  mother-liquor  remaining  after  the  removal  of  the  phenocrysts^. 

In  the  tuffs  of  the  Albanian  mountains  groups  of  leucite  crystals 
may  be  found  fritted  together,  along  with  loose,  sharp-edged  crystals  of 
augite. 

The  incandescent  cloud  which  destroyed  Saint-Pierre  in  Martinique  on 
May  8,  1902,  contained  crystals  of  plagioclase  and  hypersthene.  Lacroix 
and  other  observers  came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  issued  from  the  earth 
with  a  temperature  below  1,280°  C. ;  it  did  not  melt  the  copper  wires  of 
the  telephone  circuits,  and  must  therefore  have  been  below  1,058°  C.  when 
it  reached  the  unfortunate  town,  but  it  must  have  exceeded  650°  to  700°  C, 
as  is  shown  by  Sapper's  observations  on  half-melted  bottles 

In  the  first  two  cases  the  presence  of  the  phenocrysts  shows  that  the 
last  flows  were  re-melts.    The  processes  active  in  Vesuvius,  which  caused 

^  K.  Sapper,  Centralbl.  f.  Min.,  1903,  p.  111.  A  good  comparison  between  the  pulsa- 
tions in  hot-springs  and  volcanos  was  given  as  early  as  1842  by  C.  F.  von  Graefe,  Die 
Gasquellen  Siid-Italiens  und  Deutschlands,  8vo,  Berlin,  1842,  pp.  35  and  42. 

2  G.  vom  Rath,  Zeitschr.  deutscb.  geol.  Ges.,  1871,  p.  710;  also  hot  springs,  p.  6; 
H.  J.  Johnston-Lavis,  Geology  of  M.  Somma  and  M.  Vesuvius,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc, 
1884,  XL,  pp.  35-119,  in  particular  pp.  90  and  94. 

'  J.  J.  H.  Teall,  Anniversary  Address,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1901,  LVII,  p.  Ixxxii; 
a  very  instructive  example  is  given  by  Lacroix,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  8  dec.  1902, 
pp.  1068-1071.  Many  examples  of  such  fractional  crystallization  are  given  by  Daly, 
Am.  Journ.  Geol.,  1908,  XVI,  pp.  401-420. 

*  K.  Sapper,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1904,  II,  p.  17. 


CH.  XV] 


BATHOLITES 


551 


the  temperature  to  rise  to  the  melting-point  of  the  lavas  but  not  of  the 
leucite,  cannot  fail  to  awaken  a  suspicion  that  the  rhythmically  ascending 
gases  themselves  were  the  heat  carriers  in  the  volcanic  funnel,  just  as  they 
are  in  hot  springs.  The  two  other  cases  illustrate  the  more  violent  intru- 
sion of  the  gases  which  leads  to  the  dissipation  of  the  lava  into  dust.  From 
this  point  of  view  the  difference  in  the  height  of  the  two  volcanic  lakes  of 
Hawaii  becomes  more  intelligible.  A  difference  of  two  or  three  thousand 
meters  in  the  relative  level  becomes  as  nothing  in  comparison  with  the 
depths  from  which  the  gases  are  derived ;  it  only  reveals  a  certain  degree 
of  independence  in  the  two  funnels. 

This  conception  of  heat-carrying  gases  must  greatly  modify  many 
other  of  our  views.  The  juvenile  water  will  possess  the  power  to  which 
Arrhenius  and  McMahon  call  special  attention,  that  of  dissolving  quartz  ^. 
The  geothermic  stage  loses  its  significance  in  connexion  with  the  origin 
of  juvenile  springs.  With  the  lavas  which  come  from  subterranean  depths 
the  re-melts  associate  themselves ;  and  in  this  we  find  an  explanation  of  the 
not  infrequent  tendency  to  a  separation  of  the  phenocrysts  from  the  ground- 
mass  in  these  re-melts.  The  sun  is  in  a  state  of  almost  free  gas-emission. 
In  the  moon  this  state  appears  to  have  ended.  The  body  of  the  earth  has 
given  forth  its  seas,  and  is  now  in  an  intermediate  phase. 

Batholites.  This  term  was  proposed  (I,  p.  168)  for  the  great  cake-like 
masses,  composed  chiefly  of  granite,  which  appear  to  be  inserted  in  the 
stratified  formations.  In  describing  these  bodies,  I  started  from  the  theory 
— based  on  Hopkin's  'residual  lakes'  and  Button's  'maculae' — that  the 
intrusion  of  the  granite  mass  must  have  been  preceded  or  accompanied 
(owing  to  damming  back  and  unloading  of  pressure)  by  the  formation  of 
a  corresponding  cavity.  But  a  renewed  examination  of  the  granites  of 
the  Erzgebirge  made  in  1893,  with  the  assistance  of  notes  provided  by  Herr 
Credner  and  under  the  friendly  guidance  of  Prof.  R.  Beck,  convinced  me 
of  the  fact  that  the  contours  of  these  intrusive  masses  cut  through  both 
the  strike  and  the  folds  of  the  mountains  in  the  most  uncompromising 
fashion,  much  as  a  white-hot  soldering-iron  thrust  through  a  plank 
cuts  across  the  grain.  Then  came  the  observations  made  on  the  escape 
of  molten  matter  in  the  moon,  and  now  batholites  may  be  described  as 
intrusive  masses,  which  are  continued  down  into  the  'eternal  depths', 
in  opposition  to  laccolites,  which  are  lateral  intrusions  upon  an  alien 
foundation  ^. 

Indeed,  a  consideration  of  the  facts  as  they  occur  in  nature  leads  to  the 

1  S.  Arrhenius,  Zur  Physik  des  Vulcanismus,  Geol.  Foren.  Stockh.  Forh.,  1900,  XXII^ 
pp.  395-420,  in  particular  p.  415  ;  McMahon,  Presidential  Address,  GeoL  Sect.  Brit. 
Assoc.  Belfast,  1902,  pp.  589-696. 

*  Some  observations  on  the  moon,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1895,  CIV,  pp.  21-54,  in 
particular  p.  53. 


552 


THE  DEPTHS 


[PAKT  V 


certain  conclusion  that  batholites  have  reached  their  present  position  (mise 
en  place)  by  melting  and  absorbing  the  adjacent  rock. 

This  theory  has  been  rejected  by  many  distinguished  petrologists,  on 
the  ground  that  cases  in  which  absorption  of  the  adjacent  rock  has  affected 
the  chemical  composition  of  the  intrusive  magma,  are  rarely  discoverable. 
It  is,  however,  by  no  means  new.  Many  of  the  earlier  geologists  adopted 
it ;  its  truth  may  be  recognized  in  definite  instances,  the  granite  of  Wiin- 
siedel,  for  example,  as  shown  on  Giimbel's  map  of  Bavaria.  More  recently, 
Michel  Levy's  work  on  the  granite  of  Flamanville  has  had  considerable 
influence  in  affecting  opinion  in  its  favour  ^. 

Long  ago  De  la  Beche  had  recognized  the  subterranean  continuity  of 
the  granites  which  extend  from  Dartmoor  to  the  Scilly  isles,  and  he  even 
drew  attention  to  the  connecting  elvan-dykes  ^. 

The  granite  masses  of  the  western  Erzgebirge  are,  as  Dalmer  pertinently 
observes,  bosses  intruded  into  the  schist  formations,  and  they  form  part  of 
a  ridge-like  elevation  of  a  still  greater  mass  which  extends  for  a  consider- 
able distance  under  this  range  ^.  Barrois  makes  a  similar  statement  with 
regard  to  the  granites  of  Brittany,  and  refers  to  a  tourmalinized  patch  of 
sandstone  as  one  of  the  indications  of  subterranean  connexion  One  more 
stroke  of  the  plane,  says  Lacroix,  and  the  granites  of  the  Pyrenees  are 
united. 

In  Cornwall  the  granites  follow  the  Armorican  strike  as  far  as  the 
Scilly  isles.  The  case  is  similar  in  Brittany.  In  the  eastern,  Variscan  part 
of  the  Central  plateau,  Michel  Ldvy  entertains  no  doubt  as  to  the  connexion 
of  the  granite  of  the  Morvan  with  that  of  the  Lyonnais.  It  sometimes 
seems,  however,  as  though  the  granite  preferred  certain  zones  of  rock, 
especially  clay  slates  of  various  ages.  In  Brittany  cases  are  even  known 
in  which  the  granite  has  consumed  the  slate  and  spared  the  intermediate 
beds  of  quartzite,  so  that  these,  highly  altered,  project  into  the  granite  ^. 

Daly  explains  the  intrusion  as  similar  to  the  process  which  the  miner 
terms  *  overhand-stoping The  weight  of  the  walls  and  roof  is  greater 
than  that  of  the  liquid  or  viscous  magma.  Fragments  are  set  free  by  the 
action  of  heat  and  gravity,  and  sink  into  the  magma.  These  either  form 
highly  altered  inclusions,  or  they  are  consumed  on  their  way  to  the 
depths  ^. 

1  M.  Levy,  Contribution  a  I'etude  du  Granite  de  Flamanville  et  des  Granites  fran9ais 
en  general,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1893,  V,  pp.  317-357. 

-  H.  de  la  Beche,  On  the  Formation  of  Rocks  of  South  Wales  and  South-west  England, 
Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  England  and  Wales,  1846,  I,  pp.  1-296  ;  for  example,  pp.  233  and  236. 

^  K.  Dalmer,  Die  westerzgebirgische  Granitmassivzone,  Zeitschr.  prakt.  Geol.,  1900, 
pp.  297-318,  map. 

*  C.  Barrois,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1903,  XIII,  pp.  538  et  seq. 

"  C.  Barrois,  Le  Bassin  de  Menez-Belair,  Ann.  Soc.  geol.  Nord,  1894,  XXII,  pp.  181  to 
350  et  passim. 

R.  A.  Daly,  The  Mechanics  of  Igneous  Intrusion,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1903,  XV,  pp.  269- 


Oil.  xv] 


PEGMATITE  VEINS 


553 


We  are  now  able  to  understand  the  nature  of  the  pegmatite  veins  which 
proceed  from  the  margin  of  the  batholite.  They  often  begin  as  fissures, 
which  prepare  the  way  for  the  detachment  of  a  considerable  mass  of  the 
roof.  Hence  their  course  is  irregular,  and  hence  they  thin  out  as  they 
proceed  farther  from  the  batholite.  They  become  filled  with  hot  solutions 
and  tin  ore,  and  deposits  representing  the  whole  series  of  the  GIF 
fumaroles  are  formed.  This  is  described  in  the  most  instructive  manner 
by  R.  Beck,  who  at  the  same  time  calls  attention  to  the  part  played  by 
the  juvenile  gases  ^.  Fluor  spar  represents  the  fluorine,  tourmaline 
the  boron,  and  so  on;  the  native  gold  which  occurs  might  well  be 
regarded  as  an  indication  of  chlorine.  It  is  well  known  that  great 
losses  occur  when  gold  ores  are  placed  in  the  reverberatory  furnace 
along  with  common  salt^. 


Fig.  49.  Roof  of  the  granite  of  Markersdorf. 
7,  7,  Granite  ;  A,  A,  horizontal  joints  in  the  granite  ;  S,  andalusite  hornfels  ;  pegmatite 
vein  ;     0,  *  Zwitter '  clefts  ;  Kl,  Kl,  joints. 

Fig.  49  represents  a  part  of  the  roof,  about  four  meters  in  width,  of  the 
tin  granite  at  Markersdorf  (south-east  of  Dresden)  on  the  way  to  Gottleuba. 
S  is  clay  slate,  transformed  into  andalusite  hornfels.  The  pegmatite  vein 
p  shows  that  part  of  the  roof  is  already  becoming  detached.  Delicate 
vertical  fissures  {z,  z)  ascend  from  the  granite  into  the  roof ;  these  are  the 
so-called  Zwitter,  accompanied  on  both  sides  by  a  belt  formed  by  tin 

298,  and  XVI,  pp.  107-126  ;  also  Geology  of  Ascutney  Mountain,  Vermont,  Bull.  U.S. 
Geol.  Surv.,  1903,  no.  209,  122  pp.,  map.  Detailed  information  on  the  literature  in 
J.  J.  Sederholni,  Om  Granit  och  Gneis,  etc..  Bull.  Com.  geol.  Finlande,  no.  23,  1907, 
110  pp.,  map. 

^  R.  Beck,  On  the  Relation  between  Ore  Veins  and  Pegmatites,  Trans.  Geol.  S.  Africa, 
1905,  pp.  147-150. 
^  E.  g.  Engineering  and  Mining  Journal,  New  York,  Aug.  29,  1903. 


554 


THE  DEPTHS 


[part  V 


exhalations.  These  hot  exhalations  were  the  latest  phenomenon ;  they 
were  even  later  than  the  overhand-stoping  ^. 

This  is  a  short  episode  in  the  course  of  the  manifold  processes  revealed 
by  observation  as  soon  as  we  proceed  to  trace  the  stages  of  cooling  and  to 
examine  the  primary  distribution  of  the  ores  in  the  accompanying  lodes  ^. 
At  the  same  time  it  may  be  observed  that  nothing  is  known  as  to  the  tem- 
perature of  the  hottest  existing  fumaroles  (GIF),  except  that  it  exceeds  500°C. 
The  Zwitter  (z)  in  fig.  49  may  thus  have  been  formed  at  a  temperature  far 
below  that  of  the  pegmatite  p,  and  the  fissure  0,  which  cuts  through  p, 
may  even  be  a  contraction  crack  due  to  cooling. 

On  an  earlier  page  we  distinguished  between  chlorine,  fluorine  (CI,  F) ; 
sulphur,  arsenic  (S,  As) ;  and  carbon  (C)  fumaroles.  A  great  number  of  lodes 
are  known  in  which  only  phase  I  (CI,  F)  or  phase  II  (S,  As)  is  represented 
in  metallic  combinations ;  if  both  occur,  I  is  uppermost ;  phase  III  (C)  is 
seldom  visible,  and  generally  lies  lowest.  In  such  lodes  the  ores  follow  the 
series  of  the  fumaroles,  and  cooling  takes  place  in  a  downward  direction. 
Phase  I  is  that  of  the  tin,  which  we  have  just  referred  to  above ;  phase  II 
is  that  of  the  sulphur  and  arsenic  combinations  of  copper,  silver,  and  other 
metals.  In  Cornwall,  phase  I  alternates  with  II  represented  by  copper 
pyrites.  In  Freiberg  it  is  said  that  some  lodes  of  copper  pyrites  have  a  tin 
hat  ^.  The  third  phase  (III)  of  decreasing  temperature  represented  by  the 
carbonates  includes  the  uranium  ores  of  Joachimsthal. 

On  the  summits  of  the  Erzgebirge  lies  an  ancient,  tin-bearing,  alluvial 
land,  partly  protected  by  a  basalt  covering,  which  was  formerly  washed 
for  tin  (phase  I).  On  the  slopes  silver  was  obtained  at  several  localities 
(Abertham,  Gottesgab,  and  other  places).  Still  lower  lies  Joachimsthal. 
In  the  sixteenth  century  it  furnished  abundant  supplies  of  silver,  and  from 
this  valley  the  coinage  of  the  (Joachims)  thaler  spread  over  the  whole 
world ;  in  the  seventeenth,  and  still  more  in  the  eighteenth  century  the 
output  diminished,  and  there  came  a  time  when  this  once  famous  district 
maintained  itself  by  preparing  blue  pigment  from  cobalt  pyrites  (end  of 
phase  II).  Still  lower  down  the  carbonates  were  reached.  The  filling  of 
the  lodes  is  here  symmetrical.  A  thin  crust  of  quartz,  which  turns  the 
points  of  its  pyramids  towards  the  interior,  is  followed  on  both  sides  by 
pitchblende,  with  a  botryoidal  surface,  doubtless  deposited  from  solution ; 

^  Similar  examples  in  R.  Beck,  Die  Contacthofe  des  Granits  und  Syenits  im  Schiefer- 
gebiete  des  Elbethalgebirges,  Tschermak  und  Becke,  Min.  Petr.  Mitth.,  1893,  XIII, 
pp.  290-342. 

*  Details  in  J.  H.  L.  Vogt,  Zeitschr.  prakt.  Geol.,  1895,  pp.  145  et  seq.  Many  more 
recent  examples  may  be  found  in  the  text-books  of  Beck,  de  Launay,  and  Bergeat ;  also 
de  Launay,  Sur  les  types  regionaux  de  gites  metalliferes,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  12  mars 
1900,  and  Sur  la  notion  de  profondeur,  appliquee  aux  gisements  africains,  op.  cit., 
23  juin  1902. 

'  H.  Miiller,  Freiberger  Erzgange,  Erlaut.  geol.  Spec.-Karte  v.  Sachsen,  1901,  p.  140. 


CH.  XV] 


CONNEXION  WITH  VOLCANOS 


555 


the  middle  part  of  the  lode  is  completely  filled  by  crystalline  dolomite 
(phase  III)  \ 

The  history  of  this  mining  town,  the  transition  from  tin  washing  to  the 
prosperous  mining  of  silver,  and  then  to  the  production  of  cobalt-blue  and 
last  of  uranium  pigments,  illustrates  the  primary  differences  of  depth 
at  which  the  ores  occur,  and  at  the  same  time  the  succession  from  the 
sublimated  ores  to  the  thermal  hot-spring  deposit  and  the  last  abyssal 
expressions. 

This  is  a  field  in  which  further  investigations  will  bring  to  light  much 
that  is  new.  This  is  shown  by  Brogger's  studies  of  the  Norwegian  granite 
pegmatites,  which  establish,  for  example,  the  occurrence  of  uranium  and 
thorium  compounds,  in  association  with  topaz,  beryl,  tourmaline,  and  other 
minerals  of  phase  I,  and  with  pyrites  of  phase  II,  under  such  circumstances 
as  might  give  them  a  place  in  our  classification  even  above  phase  I  ^. 
In  Colorado,  pitchblende  occurs  along  with  pyrites  (phase  II).  This  recalls 
the  fact  that  in  volcanos  all  the  phases  appear  at  first  together,  and  only 
become  separated  when  cooling  begins.  In  the  case  of  tin,  as  was  shown 
long  ago  by  Daubr^e,  the  stability  of  the  compounds  at  a  high  temperature 
is  especially  manifest. 

Apart  from  these  phases  of  cooling,  the  system  of  pegmatite  veins 
which  so  often  surrounds  undisturbed  the  summit  and  parts  of  the  sides 
of  a  batholite  shows  that  no  important  tectonic  changes  have  occurred 
since  the  intrusion.  The  tin-granites  of  the  Erzgebirge  are  thus  later  than 
the  Variscan  folding,  or  at  least  their  intrusion  did  not  come  to  an  end 
until  after  the  close  of  the  folding. 

Connexion  with  volcanos.  In  an  earlier  place  (I,  p.  172)  we  endeavoured, 
by  following  the  stages  of  a  denudation  series,  to  find  the  path  which 
leads  from  the  ash-heaps  of  the  present  day  to  the  granite  masses  of  the 
Erzgebirge. 

We  will  now  return  to  the  same  path,  following  other  indications.  It 
was  a  great  step  in  advance  when  Rosenbusch  distinguished,  more  definitely 
than  had  ever  been  done  before,  abyssal,  dyke,  and  flow  rocks.  The  abyssal 
rocks  include  all  those  which  ascend  from  the  depths  of  the  earth  '  but  do 
not  reach  the  earth  s  surface and  thus  do  not  attain  the  explosive  phase. 

^  J.  St6p  and  F.  Becke,  Das  Vorkommen  des  Uranpecherzes  im  St.  Joachimsthal,  Sitzb. 
k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1904,  CXIII,  pp.  585-618,  in  particular  p.  614.  The  height  of 
the  tin-beds  above  sea-level  is  about  1,050  meters ;  from  the  Werner-Schacht  (height 
above  sea-level  917-7  meters),  302-5  meters  below  Tagkranz  (height  above  sea-level  615-2 
meters,  Danielli-StoUen),  down  to  the  greatest  depth  accessible  to  us  at  present  (height 
above  sea-level  502  meters),  Uranium  ores  prevail  almost  exclusively.  Dalmer  (Zeitschr. 
prakt.  Geol.,  1900)  conjectures,  in  opposition  to  the  fluor-fumaroles  of  tin,  that  sub- 
granitic  hot  springs  may  occur. 

2  W.  C.  Brogger,  Die  Mineralien  der  siid-norwegischen  Granit-Pegmatit-Gange,  I, 
Niobate,  Tantalate,  Titanate  und  Titaniobate,  Kristiania  Vidensk.  Selsk.  Skrift,  1906, 
no.  6,  159  pp. 


556 


THE  DEPTHS 


[part  V 


The  tourmalinized  spots  marked  on  the  detailed  map  of  Saxony 
represent  localities  which  have  been  reached  by  boron  vapours,  i.  e.  by 
pneumatolitic  influences,  but  not  yet  by  the  uprising  batholite.  If  the 
denudation  were  to  proceed  further,  a  system  of  pegmatite  veins  and  lodes 
would  probably  be  exposed,  and  then,  beneath  the  highly  altered  roof  the 
granite  of  the  batholite.  It  may,  however,  be  asked  what  would  have 
happened  if  the  melting  process  or  the  overhead-stoping  itself  had 
approached  nearer  the  surface. 

We  now  come  upon  a  gap  in  our  existing  terminology,  and  it  occurs 
indeed  in  all  European  languages.  Veins  (Adern)  is  the  name  given  in  this 
work  to  the  outrunners  of  a  considerable  mass,  which  are  thicker  at  their 
origin  and  thin  out  towards  their  distant  extremity,  without  straight 
selvages  or  a  definite  strike  and  dip.  Typical  examples  are  the  pegmatite 
veins  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  batholite;  these  are  often  fissures,  as  in 
fig.  49,  which  may  lead  later  to  the  detachment  of  part  of  the  roof.  These 
must  be  carefully  distinguished  from  dykes  (Gauge),  although  under  this 
term  the  most  diverse  forms  of  fissure  may  be  included.  Daubree  termed 
those  fissures  which  are  accompanied  by  a  dislocation,  paraclases,  and  those 
which  do  not  exhibit  a  dislocation,  diaclases.  The  former  correspond  to 
Stelzner's  exokinetic  fissures,  which  are  opposed  to  the  endokinetic  (contrac- 
tion and  dilatation)  fissures. 

Instead  of  following  further  these  attempts  at  classification,  let  us 
consult  one  of  the  most  instructive  works  on  this  subject  which  has  been 
produced  in  recent  times,  Barrell's  Description  of  the  Mining  District  of 
Marysville^  Montana^.  The  batholite  of  Marysville  consists  of  quartz- 
diorite,  and  is  associated  with  the  much  larger  batholite  of  Boulder.  The 
mine  follows  contraction  fissures,  which  lie  a  little  outside  its  surface,  and 
parallel  to  it.  This  surface  is  exposed  to  a  depth  of  about  1,000  feet,  and 
descends  on  the  whole  gently,  but  sometimes  in  gigantic  steps.  Injected 
dykes  also  occur.  These  must  have  originated  suddenly  and  at  various 
times  (intermittent).  If  they  had  not  been  sudden  the  injection  would 
have  grown  cold  on  account  of  its  considerable  length.  In  this  respect, 
says  Barrell,  these  dykes  recall  volcanic  action. 

We  can  easily  imagine  how  a  dyke  of  this  kind  may  reach  the  surface ; 
a  volcano  then  arises,  the  hot  juvenile  gases  stream  towards  the  funnel  as 
it  becomes  broader,  and  with  their  discharge  the  upward  course  of  the 
batholite  ceases  its  progress.  In  another  case  it  may  happen  that  the  roof 
collapses  over  the  crown  of  the  batholite,  a  network  of  fissures  is  produced, 
numerous  eruptions  and  flows  take  place,  and  then  this  batholite  likewise 
remains  below  the  surface. 

^  J.  Barrell,  Geology  of  the  Marysville  Mining  District,  Montana,  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  Prof. 
Papers,  no.  57,  1907,  174  pp.,  maps,  in  particular  p.  158. 


CH.xv]     HOLOCRYSTALLINE  CONSOLIDATION  557 


The  second  case  seems  to  be  of  frequent  occurrence,  but  there  are  well- 
known  examples  in  which  the  process  was  different,  and  the  denudation  of 
an  ash-cone  would  reveal,  even  before  reaching  its  base,  the  abyssal  rock 
of  a  batholite.  Close  to  the  slopes  of  the  broad  basalt  mass  of  Duppau  in 
Bohemia,  theralite  traversed  by  dykes  of  elaelolite  syenite  comes  to  the 
surface  ^.  At  the  base  of  the  ashes  and  lavas  of  the  Euganaean  hills  augite- 
syenite  is  visible^.  In  these  and  a  great  number  of  similar  cases  the 
formation  of  such  rocks  extended  up  to  a  considerable  height  within  the 
ancient  funnel.  The  dismantled  giant  volcano  of  Kenia  also  exposes  keny te, 
a  rock  resembling  nephelin-syenite,  on  its  summit  (about  5,790  meters). 
Here  we  can  scarcely  escape  one  of  two  conclusions,  either  that  a  magma 
was  carried  up  high  above  the  surrounding  country,  and  by  the  expulsion 
of  a  comparatively  thin  sheet  of  loose  and  scoriaceous  rock  was  able  to 
solidify  in  holocrystalline  form,  or  that  the  persistent  influx  of  heat  has 
transformed  the  ashes  and  lavas  themselves  into  kenyte  (IV,  p.  275). 

Widely  as  this  conception  differs  from  traditional  views,  it  was  yet 
suggested  many  years  ago  by  Hague  in  connexion  with  the  Absaroka 
mountain  of  the  Yellowstone.  He  doubted  the  necessity  of  a  great  super- 
incumbent mass  for  the  production  of  granular  crystalline  rocks,  and 
believed  that  intrusive  bodies  of  great  size  might  be  brought  to  a  standstill 
without  the  occurrence  of  important  phenomena  at  the  surface. 

Weed  and  Barrell  arrived  at  precisely  the  same  result  in  the  case  of  the 
batholite  of  Boulder,  which  extends  over  5,000  square  kilometers.  It  con- 
sists of  quartz-monzonite,  covered,  so  far  as  it  is  known,  by  andesites  only. 
On  the  boundary  of  the  andesite  a  zone  of  acid  granite  sets  in.  Fine  pro- 
cesses run  from  the  batholite  into  the  andesite,  which  is  therefore  regarded 
as  the  older.  Near  Elkhorn  it  rises,  even  at  the  present  day,  to  a  height 
of  9,000  feet  (2,700  meters)  (5,000  feet  above  Boulder  valley). 

The  question  naturally  suggests  itself  whether  it  would  not  be  sufficient 
to  regard  the  andesite  as  the  volcanic  fades  of  the  quartz-diorite,  and  the 
result  of  the  same  melting  process  as  produced  the  batholite,  and  still  main- 
tained its  activity,  in  a  modified  form,  even  after  reaching  the  surface  ^. 

1  F.  Becke,  Verh.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1900,  pp.  351-353 ;  J.  B.  Wiesbauer,  Thera- 
Hth  im  Duppauer  Gebirge,  Sitzb.  Ver.  Lotos,  Prag,  1901,  new  ser.,  XXI,  pp.  62-69  ; 
J.  E.  Hibsch,  Das  kornige  Gestein  von  Rongstock,  Tscherm.  Min.  Mitth.,  1895,  XY, 
pp.  487-489 ;  Sodalith-Augit-Syenit  im  bohmischen  Mittelgebirge  und  die  Beziehungen 
zum  Essexit,  op.  cit.,  1902,  XXI,  pp.  157-170  et  passim.  The  Essexite  of  Rongstock  and 
the  Sodalith-Augite-Syenite  of  Gross-Priessen  are  visible  at  the  surface. 

^  F.  GraefF  and  R.  Brauns,  Zur  Kenntniss  des  Vorkommens  korniger  Eruptiv-Gesteine 
bei  Cingolina  in  den  Euganeen  bei  Padua,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1893, 1,  pp.  123-133. 

^  W.  H.  Weed,  Geology  and  Ore  Deposits  of  the  Elkhorn  Mining  District,  Jefferson 
City,  Montana,  with  a  petrographical  Appendix  by  J.  Barrell,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.Surv., 
1901,  XXII,  2,  pp.  399-549,  maps,  in  particular  p.  451 ;  and  Barrell,  op.  cit.,  Prof.  Papers, 
no.  57. 


558 


THE  DEPTHS 


[part  V 


Barrell  draws  attention  to  the  penetration  of  granite  into  the  andesite 
of  the  Cascade  range  (IV,  p.  416). 

As  a  further  example  we  may  quote  MolengraafF's  description  of  the 
Buschfeld  granite  of  the  Transvaal,  which  north  of  Pretoria  covers 
60,000  square  kilometers,  and  is  thus  larger  than  Bohemia.  So  far  as  the 
facts  are  known,  the  surrounding  sediments,  which  are  possibly  pre- 
Cambrian,  dip  beneath  the  granite^  normally  to  the  north  of  Pretoria  and 
then  in  step-faults.  A  broad  aureole  of  contact  surrounds  the  granite. 
We  reach  first  an  outer  border  of  Sima  compounds,  that  is,  a  zone  of 
pyroxenite  and  norite  with  chromite  and  magnetic  iron,  and  also  dykes  of 
cobalt,  then  a  zone  of  nepheline-syenite,  and  finally  the  vast  region  of  the 
red  granite. 

From  this  description  we  conclude  that  the  Sudbury  type  is  repeated 
here,  and  that  the  Crofesima  belt  underlies  the  Sal  rocks,  the  transition 
being  marked  by  nepheline  syenite. 

In  the  granite,  tin  ores  occur  together  with  the  usual  pneumatolytic  series. 
Upon  the  granite  rest  isolated  patches  of  Waterberg  sandstone,  the  highest 
member  of  the  Karoo  series ;  these  become  over  1,000  meters  thick  towards 
the  north.  At  another  locality,  in  the  Springbok  Vlagte,  an  amygdaloid 
basalt,  which  Molengraaff  is  inclined  to  regard  as  representing  the  final 
phase  of  the  molten  rocks,  spreads  out  above  the  granite  over  an  area  of 
about  3,400  square  kilometers  ^. 

The  intrusive  masses  of  Sudbury,  Boulder,  and  Buschfeld  are  generally 
regarded  as  laccolites :  a  view  hard  to  reconcile  with  the  extension  of  the 
two  latter  masses. 

With  regard  to  Sudbury,  Coleman  finally  arrived  at  the  hypothesis  that 
the  place  of  emission  lay  beneath  the  great  basin.  This  will  also  hold  good 
for  Boulder  if  the  quartz-diorite  and  andesite  are  genetically  connected. 
The  presence  of  tin  supports  the  same  conclusion  with  regard  to  Buschfeld. 

Important  in  this  connexion  is  the  statement  of  Lacroix  that  in  mount 
Pelde  rocks  with  free  quartz  consolidated  in  a  crystallized  state  under 
a  very  slight  covering  of  ash,  almost  indeed  in  the  open  air,  and  that 
consequently  the  thickness  of  superincumbent  rock  necessary  for  the 
formation  of  holocrystalline  rocks  has  been  greatly  over-estimated  ^. 

Among  the  cases  we  have  adduced,  there  is  none  which  has  been 
affected  by  the  formation  of  a  considerable  fissure.  Since  Nifesima  and 
Crofesima  are  so  frequently  represented,  we  must  assume  that  the  juvenile 

*  G.  A.  F.  Molengraaff,  Geologie  de  la  Republique  Sud-Africaine,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France, 
1901,  4«  ser.,  I,  pp.  13-105,  map  ;  F.  H.  Hatch,  Geology  of  the  Marico  District,  Trans. 
Geol.  Soc.  S.  A.,  1904,  VII,  6  pp.,  map ;  also  Kynaston,  op.  cit.,  1905,  VIII,  pp.  56-62 
et  passim  ;  H.  Merensky,  Neue  Zinnerzwerke  in  Transvaal,  Zeitschr.  prakt.  Geol.,  1904, 
XII,  p.  409 ;  A.  L.  Hall,  Geological  Notes  on  the  Bushveld  Tin  Area,  Trans.  Geol.  Soc, 
S.  A.,  1905,  VIII,  pp.  47-55  et  passim. 

^  A.  Lacroix,  Le  Mont  Pelee  apres  ses  eruptions,  4to,  Paris,  1908,  p.  69  et  passim. 


CH.  XV] 


UPWARD  MELTING 


559 


gases  are  originally  liberated  beneath  the  Sal  mantle.  Owing  to  their  high 
temperature  they  melt  and  stope  their  way  through  the  overlying  rocks,  and 
thus  force  their  way  upwards.  In  this  process  an  increasingly  great  quantity 
of  fragments  of  Sal  rocks  and  also  of  sediments  become  molten  and  are 
received  into  the  gas-filled  magma,  sinking  by  their  weight.  The  magma 
approaches  the  surface  as  a  mixture.  Then  follows  explosion,  pulverization, 
the  piling  up  of  a  cone,  and  the  outflow  of  lava.  The  emission  of  juvenile 
gases  continues.  Eruptions  are  repeated  from  time  to  time.  A  continually 
increasing  area  of  the  earth's  surface  becomes  covered  with  ash  and 
lava.  The  afflux  of  gases  still  persists ;  they  heat  and  melt  part  of  their 
surroundings,  but  they  no  longer  cause  eruptions.  Their  own  ejectamenta, 
spread  out  at  the  base  of  the  cone  and  round  about  it,  are  melted  and 
converted  into  holocrystalline  rocks,  and  concurrently  the  Nifesima  they 
contain  separates  out  at  the  base  while  the  lighter  Sal  rocks  remain  above. 
The  effects  of  this  process  may  be  restricted  to  the  region  below  the 
cone,  leaving  beneath  it  a  fragment  of  the  original  roof  only  traversed  by 
dykes  (and  this  appears  to  be  the  rule),  or  they  may  extend  higher  up  the 
funnel  (Euganaean  hills),  or  through  the  whole  cone  (Kenia),  or  over  a 
wide  area  (Boulder).  Finally  the  emission  of  hot  gases  recedes  into  the 
funnel.  Here,  too,  differentiation  may  take  place  next  the  walls,  but  the 
original  course  along  the  axis  of  the  funnel  is  destroyed  by  the  melting, 
and  can  only  be  recognized  in  exceptional  cases  by  a  belated  intrusion,  as 
e.g.  in  Magnet  Cone,  Arkansas,  where  a  differentiated  product,  derived  from 
deep-lying  Sima,  ascends  towards  the  middle  of  the  funnel  ^. 

Thus  assimilation  and  differentiation  succeed  each  other.  But  the 
cessation  of  eruption  by  no  means  marks  the  close  of  the  process.  Fissures 
are  formed  by  cooling,  and  are  lined  and  filled  with  ores  deposited  in 
a  definite  order  which  recalls  the  fumaroles.  Tin  may  thus  find  its  way 
into  the  andesites  of  the  Bolivian  Andes  and  the  rhyolites  of  Mexico. 
At  the  same  time  all  the  subterranean  parts  are  finally  transformed  into 
a  broad  batholite. 

For  many  years  the  belief  has  prevailed  that  Sal  batholites  are  much 
more  numerous  than  Sima.  A  knowledge  of  the  Charnockite  masses  of 
Southern  India  and  the  Anorthosites  of  Canada  is  likely  to  modify  this 
impression.  The  Sal  masses  are  usually  surrounded  by  Sima,  these 
together  represent  the  separated  products  of  a  mixed  magma  ^.  The  last 
after-efforts  appear,  as  a  rule,  to  give  rise  to  Sal,  often  very  siliceous. 

»  Washington,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1900,  XI,  pp.  389  et  seq. 

^  *  True  batholitlis  of  gabbro  are  uncommon,  perhaps  because  batholithic  intrusion  is 
always  dependent  on  assimilation';  R.  A.  Daly,  Differentiation  of  a  Secondary  Magma 
through  Gravitational  Adjustment,  Festschrift  fur  Herrn  von  Rosenbusch,  8vo,  Stuttgart, 
1906,  p.  233 ;  also  his  Geology  of  Ascutney  Mountain,  Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  no.  209, 
1908,  p.  110  et  seq.   We  do  not  wish  to  deny  that  in  this  zone  later  layers  have  been 


560 


THE  DEPTHS 


[part  V 


Passive  injection.  There  are  certain  dykes  which  are  filled  from  below, 
not  with  molten  rock,  but  with  sandstone;  these  show  that  hydrostatic 
pressure  must  not  be  overlooked  in  considering  subterranean  processes. 

An  instance  has  been  described  by  Rogers  and  Du  Toit  from  Elands 
Vley,  not  far  outside  the  region  of  the  South  African  dolerite  dykes.  The 
dyke  is  intruded  into  the  Witteberg  beds;  it  ascends  steeply  between 
parallel  walls,  with  a  breadth  of  only  24  to  2*5  meters,  but  a  length, 
according  to  one  estimate,  of  11  kilometers,  and  according  to  another  of 
more  than  57  kilometers.  The  beds  on  each  side  are  slightly  upturned, 
and  the  infilling  material  is  not  dolerite,  but  sandstone  ^. 

Many  examples  of  a  similar  kind  have  been  observed  in  the  United 
States.  In  these  cases  also,  the  acting  force  was  often  sufficient  to  cause 
an  upward  bend  in  the  adjacent  rocks  and  to  carry  up  torn-off"  fragments 
towards  the  surface  ^. 

In  the  case  of  bituminous  dykes  gas  pressure  may  play  some  part, 
but  the  results  are  much  the  same.  In  Utah,  according  to  Eldridge,  a 
bituminous  dyke,  known  as  the  Culmer  vein,  may  be  traced  through  the 
desert  for  a  distance  of  11  kilometers;  its  breadth  varies  from  30  inches 
to  a  fraction  of  a  line.  It  is  straight,  with  smooth  lateral  walls,  and  runs 
completely  independent  of  the  strike  of  the  rocks  it  traverses.  Similar 
dykes  occur  in  association  with  it  ^. 

The  gas  pressure  which  sometimes  assists  in  the  formation  of  these 
dykes  leads  us  on  to  those  injections  which  have  been  brought  into  their 
present  position,  at  least  in  the  opinion  of  the  observers,  by  hydrostatic 
pressure,  though  they  are  also  accompanied  by  contact  minerals.  Such 
are,  according  to  PoSepny's  view,  the  dykes  of  Rdxbanya  in  south-east 
Hungary  (I,  p.  160) ;  Salomon  ascribes  the  ascent  of  the  tonalite  mass  of 
the  Adamello  to  the  subsidence  of  the  plain  of  Lombardy,  and  Brogger  is 
inclined  to  explain  the  ascent  of  the  Drammen  granite  on  the  Christ  iania 
fjord  in  a  similar  manner*. 

The  passive  movement  is  seen  more  clearly,  owing  to  the  great  rarity 
or  entire  absence  of  contact  minerals,  in  the  local  swelling  up  of  sills,  which 
Gilbert  terms  laccolites  (I,  p.  148).  We  shall  return  to  these  later,  because 
not  infrequently  much  too  wide  a  scope  is  given  to  this  expression,  and  bodies 

formed  by  solution ;  the  garnierite  of  New  Caledonia  is  an  example  of  this,  and  others 
are  given  by  Foullon  (Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1892,  XLII,  pp.  223-310).  Accord- 
ing to  T.  Beck  they  even  seem  to  occur  in  the  case  of  platinum. 

^  Rogers  and  Du  Toit,  Geological  Survey  of  parts  of  Ceres,  &c.,  Geol.  Comm.  Cape  of 
Good  Hope,  Ann.  Rep.  (1903)  1904,  IX,  p.  17. 

2  For  examples  of  such  dykes,  J.  F.  Newsome,  Clastic  Dikes,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1903, 
XIV,  pp.  227-268. 

^  G.  H.  Eldridge,  The  Asphalt  and  Bituminous  Rock  Deposits  of  the  United  States, 
Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1901,  XX,  1,  pp.  209-452,  maps,  in  particular  p.  343. 

*  Salomon,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Berlin,  1901,  pp.  743-747,  BrCgger,  Eruptivgesteine 
des  Kristianiagebietes,  1895,  II,  pp.  116  et  seq. 


CH.  XV] 


LACCOLITES 


561 


of  this  kind  are  even  sometimes  regarded  as  active  elements  in  the 
formation  of  mountain  chains. 

Daly  has  collected  definitions  of  the  word,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt 
as  to  what  is  meant  by  a  laccolite.  '  The  first  step  in  its  formation says 
Gilbert, '  is  the  penetration  of  a  thin  layer  of  lava  along  a  bedding  plane, 
which  spreads  out  on  the  principle  of  the  hydraulic  press,  until  its  area 
corresponds  to  the  deformation  of  the  covering  beds.  ...  As  soon  as  the 
lava  is  able  to  arch  up  the  beds  it  does  so,  and  this  position  gives  rise  to 
a  laccolite  .  .  .  ^ 

A  characteristic  feature  lies  in  the  fact  that  although  the  roof  is  arched, 
the  basement  remains  unaltered.  The  latter  may,  at  most,  become  slightly 
concave,  probably  owing  to  its  load,  and  then  a  cross-section  is  len- 
ticular in  form.  Thus  it  appears  that  a  laccolite  may  well  produce  a  local 
intumescence,  but  not  a  mountain-chain. 

Whitman  Cross  has  made  a  number  of  instructive  observations  in 
Colorado,  Utah,  and  Arizona ;  he  points  out,  for  example,  that  the  bedding- 
planes  are  sometimes  cut  through  at  an  acute  angle,  and  that  the  lifting 
of  the  load  may  be  facilitated  by  tectonic  processes,  as  in  cases  where  the 
beds  are  about  to  become  folded,  he  also  calls  attention  to  the  similarity  of 
the  rocks  in  all  American  laccolites,  the  absence  of  vesicles  and  contact 
minerals. 

On  the  northern  periphery  of  the  Little  Belt  mountains  Weed  describes 
no  less  than  fifteen  of  these  bodies,  each  of  which  terminates  steeply  in  the 
direction  of  the  plain  ^. 

This  lateral  extrusion  of  less  hot  magma  affords  one  of  the  clearest 
examples  of  the  behaviour  of  molten  masses  during  tectonic  processes. 

The  force  which  produced  the  arching  up  of  American  laccolites  has 
frequently  been  overestimated,  judging  from  idealized  sections,  because,  as 
we  have  seen  above,  the  overlying  load  necessary  for  the  formation  of 
holocrystalline  rocks  has  also  been  overestimated  ^. 

The  green  rocks.  Under  this  name,  which  corresponds  to  the  '  pietre 
verdi  '  of  Italian  geologists,  we  include  the  Nicrofesima  and  Crofesima  sills, 
which  are  very  widely  distributed  as  intercalations  in  many  folded  ranges. 
They  never  form  the  axis  of  a  range,  and  there  is  scarcely  a  case  in  which 
a  Sima  batholite  can  be  fairly  regarded  as  their  probable  point  of  origin. 
They  occur  as  intercalations  in  the  Caledonides,  in  the  pre-Permian  Altaides, 
and  in  the  youngest  ranges,  and  in  some  places  their  injections  are  certainly 

^  R.  A.  Daly,  Classification  of  Igneous  Intrusive  Bodies  ;  Am.  Journ.  Geol.,  1905,  XIII, 
pp.  485-508,  in  particular  p.  493. 

2  W.  Cross,  The  Laccolitic  Mountain  Group  of  Colorado,  Utah,  and  Arizona,  Ann.  Rep. 
U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1895,  XIV,  2,  pp.  157-241 ;  Weed,  op.  cit.,  XX,  3,  p.  394.    For  the  mode 
of  contact  in  laccolites,  M.  Levy,  Porphyre  bleu  de  I'Esterel,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France, 
1896,  3«  ser.,  XXIV,  pp.  123-138. 
^  Lacroix,  La  Montague  Pelee  apres  ses  eruptions,  4to,  Paris,  1908. 

SOLLAS  IV  0  0 


562 


THE  DEPTHS 


[part  V 


as  recent  as  the  middle  Tertiary  times.  They  are  frequently  associated  with 
nickel  and  chromium,  in  many  places  also  with  platinum,  gold,  awaruite, 
and  the  whole  abyssal  series. 

In  the  Pyrenees  Lacroix  distinguishes  the  Iherzolites  (peridotite  with 
diopside,  bronzite  and  spinell)  from  the  ophites  (labrador-diabase  or 
andesitic  diabase).  In  some  cases,  not  very  frequent,  they  are  associated 
with  Sal  sills.  Stoliczka  marks  Sal  and  Sima  injections  in  the  limestone 
cliflfs  of  Afghanistan.  J.  H.  L.  Vogt  states  with  regard  to  northern 
Norway,  that  the  extremely  great  length  of  the  sills  points  to  contem- 
poraneity with  the  folding.  Here  they  consist  of  gabbro,  or  sometimes  of 
a  white  granite,  and  of  intermediate  rocks  such  as  adamellite  and  others. 
The  granites  have  as  a  rule  suffered  from  pressure,  while  the  isolated 
occurrences  of  gabbro  have  not  ^. 

Throughout  they  exhibit  occasionally,  but  not  invariably,  volcanic 
contact ;  the  Mesozoic  serpentines  in  the  Carpathians  of  Roumania,  for 
example,  are  associated  with  hornfels  and  contain  inclusions  of  garnet  and  1 
idocrase  (IV,  p.  18)  ^. 

There  is  a  sharp  line  of  division  between  the  mode  of  occurrence  of 
these  rocks  and  that  characteristic  of  basalts.  On  the  outer  border  of  the 
Tauric  range,  in  the  Kurden  range,  and  as  far  as  Antioch,  post-Cretaceous 
green  rocks  occur,  especially  olivine-gabbro  and  serpentine.  They  are 
repeated,  correspondingly  with  the  outer  border  of  the  range,  in  Cyprus. 
At  the  same  time  the  African  fractures  are  continued  towards  the  north 
into  the  foreland  of  the  Dead  sea ;  these  are  accompanied  by  basalt,  and 
it  is  stated  that  they  extend  into  the  neighbourhood  of  Marash,  far  into 
the  interior  of  the  folded  range  (IV,  p.  279). 

In  the  outer  chains  of  younger  folded  mountains  the  green  rocks  make 
their  appearance  as  long  bands,  as  is  especially  well  seen  in  the  Burman 
arc ;  here  we  must  refer  the  serpentine  bands  of  Arakan.  The  serpentines 
of  Guatemala  and  Cuba,  and  many  others,  might  be  cited  as  examples. 

They  occur  with  particular  frequency  in  association  with  radiolarian 
rock,  as,  for  example,  in  a  part  of  the  Lepontine  sheets  of  the  Alps,  and  in 
the  Pienines,  but  more  especially  in  the  Californian  coast  ranges ;  Ransome 
thinks  that  glaucophane  owes  its  origin  to  this  association  ^. 

1  J.  H.  L.  Vogt,  Sondre  Helgeland,  Norg.  geol.  Unders.,  1900,  no.  29,  175  pp.,  maps,  j 

in  particular  p.  3  (note)  and  159 ;  C.  F.  Kolderup,  Die  Labradorfelsen  des  westlichen  l 

Norwegens,  Bergens  Mus.  Aarb.,  1903,  no.  12,  129  pp.,  map,  in  particular  pp.  92,  126  I 
et  passim.    A  very  instructive  discussion  of  these  questions  also  in  Sjogren's  work  on 
Sulitelma  and  in  Holmquist,  Profil  nach  Kvikkjok  (Sver.  Geol.  Undersokn.  Afh.,  1896, 

XVIII,  and  1900,  XXII).  ! 

'  L.  Mrazec,  Sur  les  schistes  cristallins  des  Carpathes  meridionales,  Congr.  geol. intern.,  j 

C.  R.  IX«  Congr.  geol.  Vienne,  1903,  pp.  631-648,  map,  in  particular  pp.  638,  639.  j 

*  F.  L.  Ransome,  The  Geology  of  Angel  Island,  with  a  note  on  Radiolarian  Chert,  &c.,  I 
by  J.  G.  Hinde,  Bull.  Geol.  Univ.  Cal.,  1894, 1,  pp.  193-240,  map.   The  bedding  of  the 


CH.XV]     GREEN  EOCKS  AND  THE  DEEP  SEA 


563 


The  green  rocks  never  proceed  into  the  foreloMd.  In  the  eastern  part  of 
the  Appalachians  (Piedmont)  a  thick  zone  of  gabbro  and  serpentine  strikes 
from  New  York  State  to  Virginia.  Far  to  the  west,  outside  the  Appala- 
chians, some  remarkable,  but  isolated  Sima  dykes  make  their  appearance, 
certainly  at  a  great  distance  from  one  another,  but  so  far  as  their  age  is 
known,  they  are  more  recent  than  the  Appalachians,  and  in  some  cases 
resemble  far  more  closely  the  diamond  pipes  of  South  Africa^. 

G.  Steinmann,  in  a  compendious  work  brings  these  green  rocks  into 
connexion  with  deep-sea  deposits,  and  supposes  that  'magmatic  masses 
of  extreme  basicity  accumulate  in  the  great  abyssal  depths while  more 
acid  magmas  ascend  beneath  the  sockles  of  the  continents  ^. 

This  view  is  based  on  numerous  cases  in  which  radiolarian  chert  is 
associated  with  these  green  rocks. 

All  these  cases  are  well  attested.  In  fact,  heavy  Sima  rocks  also 
emerge  not  infrequently  from  the  sea.  Basalts  probably  lie^beneath  a  part 
of  the  North  Atlantic  Ocean,  and  gabbro  occurs  in  the  east  of  Iceland  ^. 
The  island  of  St.  Paul,  in  the  middle  of  the  Atlantic  (lat.  0°  58'  N.,  long. 
29°  15'  W.),  is  formed  of  peridotite  (sp.  gr.  3-287),  with  dark  bands 
composed  of  olivine  granules  and  chromite*.  Hawaii  consists  of  heavy 
Sima  rocks,  and  nowhere  is  the  development  of  the  green  rocks  so  con- 
siderable as  in  New  Caledonia  and  New  Zealand. 

In  the  majority  of  the  cases  cited,  we  may  doubtless  assume  that  the 
radiolaria  really  point  to  the  deep  sea.  This  is  in  complete  accord  with 
what  has  already  been  said  as  regards  the  foredepth  of  the  Northern 
Antilles  and  the  radiolarian  rocks  of  Barbados.  In  the  Alps,  e.  g.  in  Wah- 
ner's  sections  of  the  Sonnwend  range,  this  view  is  also  supported  by  their 

radiolarian  rocks  is  so  regular  that  Lawson  and  Palache  assume  a  rhythm  ;  op.  cit., 
1902,  II,  no.  12  (The  Berkeley  Hills),  p.  354  et  seq.  A  survey  of  the  outcrops  on  the  peri- 
phery of  the  Asiatic  system  is  given  by  F.  Sacco,  Las  formations  ophitiferes  du  Cretace, 
Bull.  Soc.  geol.  Beige,  1905,  XIX,  pp.  247-266. 

^  Diller,  Peridotite  of  EUiot  county,  Kent,  Bull.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  no.  38,  1887,  31  pp., 
recognizes  the  resemblance  to  South  Africa  (p.  23).  Kemp  and  Ross  mention  the 
following  occurrences :  1.  three  dykes  of  mellilite  basalt  and  serpentine,  one  of  them 
near  Syracuse,  another  to  the  east  of  it,  and  a  third  400  kilometers  to  the  south-west  of 
the  town.  2.  South-west  Pennsylvania,  820  kilometers  from  the  latter  locality,  two  dykes 
•of  peridotite,  side  by  side  with  pyrope  and  ilmenite,  recalling  diamond  pipes ;  3-440 
kilometers  to  the  west  of  No.  2  a  thick  dyke  of  mica  peridotite ;  and  4480  kilometers 
south-west  of  No.  3,  near  Pike  City,  Arkansas,  another  dyke  of  this  kind  said  to  be 
younger  than  the  Cretaceous.  No.  2  converts  the  coal  into  coke  for  50  feet  and  is 
younger  than  the  Permian,  Ann.  N.Y.  Acad.  Sci.,  1907,  XVII,  pp.  509-518. 

^  G.  Steinmann,  Die  geologische  Bedeutung  der  Tiefseebildungen  und  der  ophioli- 
tischen  Eruptiva,  Geologische  Beobachtungen  in  den  Alpen,  II,  Ber.  naturf.  Ges.  Freiburg, 
1905,  XVI,  pp.  44-65. 

3  Thoroddsen,  Island ;  Peterm.  Mitth.,  Erg. -Heft  no.  153,  1906,  pp.  264-265. 

*  A.  Renard,  Report  on  the  Petrology  of  the  Rocks  of  St.  Paul,  Challenger  Narrative, 
II,  29  pp.  The  rock  bears  the  closest  resemblance  to  the  peridotite  of  the  Ultenthal 
<Tyrol). 

0  0  2 


564 


THE  DEPTHS 


[part  V 


association  with  Aptychus  limestone,  and  the  fact  that  the  calcareous  base 
of  the  sharks'  teeth  has  been  dissolved  and  removed.  From  this  it  follows^ 
however,  that  the  Tethys,  where  it  extended  over  many  places  now 
occupied  by  the  Alps,  or  over  the  region  in  which  the  roots  of  the 
Lepontine  sheets  are  to  be  found,  can  hardly  have  been  less  than 
4,000  meters  in  depth. 

Yet  where  the  folded  mountains  have  not  been  formed  in  the  deep  sea, 
the  green  rocks  still  make  their  appearance.  This  is  particularly  well 
shown  in  the  Pyrenees,  where,  in  the  west,  north  of  the  plain  of  Mauleon, 
the  external  form  of  the  mountains  is  completely  lost,  the  Trias  is  only 
represented  by  gypsum,  and  the  whole  stratified  series  is  of  trifling  thick- 
ness and  repeatedly  interrupted,  but  at  the  same  time  it  is  dislocated,  and 
as  far  as  Dax,  accompanied  by  ophite  (IV,  p.  339).  The  green  rocks  are 
here  associated  with  dislocations,  but  not  with  the  deep  sea. 

The  green  rocks  are  sills  in  dislocated  mountains,  which  sometimes  follow 
the  bedding  planes  and  at  others  the  planes  of  movement  ^.  They  follow 
the  planes  of  movement,  for  example,  in  the  window  of  the  Paring  and  in 
the  window  of  the  Inn,  but  in  the  latter  there  is  a  possibility  that  they  were 
transported  as  an  already  consolidated  injection.  This  doubt  does  not 
attach  to  the  great  plane  of  movement  upon  which  the  Tibetan  segments 
have  been  carried  over  parts  of  the  Himalaya ;  for  this  reason  it  deserves 
a  closer  consideration. 

We  have  repeatedly  made  mention  of  the  chain  of  Eocene  and  possibly 
Miocene  beds,  which  accompanies  the  upper  Indus  ;  it  attains  a  length  of 
over  300  kilometers ;  a  breadth,  in  places,  of  30  kilometers,  and  a  height, 
in  the  Stok  (south  of  Leh)  of  6,400  meters. 

On  its  north-east  side,  according  to  Lydekker,  the  Tertiary  beds,  often 
lying  remarkably  flat,  rest  normally  superposed  upon  the  gneiss  and  syenite 
of  Ladakh.  Its  south-west  side  is  accompanied  at  both  ends  by  two  long 
ranges  of  Sima  rock,  with  a  maximum  breadth  of  16  kilometers.  Both 
the  Tertiary  sediments  and  Sima  rocks  terminate  towards  the  south-west 
along  a  fracture  which  separates  them  from  the  Carboniferous  and  gneiss 
of  the  chain  of  Zanskar. 

Basalts  and  ashes  occur,  which  point  to  eruption,  and  from  the  Puga 
valley  (north  of  lake  Tsomoriri)  McMahon  describes  holocrystalline  peridotite, 
gabbro,  and  serpentine.  These  form  part  of  the  eruptive  zone,  and  occur 
in  it,  both  in  the  south-east  near  Hanli  (Rupshu)  and  in  the  Markha  valley 
(south  of  Leh)  K 

Let  us  now  turn  our  attention  to  a  point  300  kilometers  further  to  the 

*  E.  Suess,  Sur  la  nature  des  charriages,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.,  7  nov.  1904. 

*  R.  Lydekker,  Geology  of  the  Kashmir  and  Chamba  Territory,  Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  India, 
1883,  XXII,  pp.  99-121;  C.  A.  McMahon,  Petrological  notes  on  some  Peridotites,  &c., 
op.  cit.,  1901,  XXXI,  pp.  303-329. 


CH.  XV] 


INJECTIONS  IN  BALCHDUKA 


565 


south-east,  following  the  strike  of  the  mountains,  and  consider  Griesbach's 
map  of  the  watershed  between  the  Indus  and  Sutlej,  in  conjunction  with 
Krafft's  map  of  the  heights  of  Balchdura  and  Kiogarh,  situated  near  this 
watershed  :  the  last-named  map  also  embodies  the  results  of  Griesbach  and 
Diener^  (III,  p.  278,  fig.  15). 

The  traveller  approaching  this  watershed  from  the  south-west  sees 
before  him  the  great  scarp  of  the  Silakank,  facing  to  the  south  (I,  p.  437, 
fig.  46),  which  includes  the  whole  series  of  Spiti,  from  the  Silurian  to  the 
Cretaceous  Flysch  (sandstone  of  Gieumal).  This  series,  some  thousand 
meters  thick,  forms  the  basement  of  the  plateau  of  Hund^s. 

Griesbach,  approaching  Hundes  across  the  Niti  pass  (very  nearly  north 
of  the  Silakank)  observed,  besides  Flysch  with  Inoceramus,  an  altered  rock 
with  Nummulites,  which  he  correlated  with  the  above-mentioned  Eocene 
^one  of  the  upper  Indus.  Hundes  is  covered  by  Tertiary  deposits,  in  which 
the  Sutlej  has  excavated  its  bed  2.  Further  to  the  south-east,  on  the 
Balchdura  pass,  he  met  with  basic  eruptive  rocks,  which  he  assigned 
forthwith  to  the  great  mass  of  similar  rocks  observed  by  Strachey  on  lake 
Manasarowar,  and  regarded  as  the  continuation  of  those  on  the  upper  Indus  ^. 

Balchdura  pass  is  one  of  those  points  at  which  the  alien  recumbent 
sheets  of  Tibet  rest  upon  the  Flysch  and  the  Himalayan  series.  The  great 
similarity  of  its  facies  with  certain  East  Alpine  stages  of  the  Trias  and 
Lias  has  been  established  by  Diener  \ 

Krafit  has  shown  that  the  Flysch,  into  which  no  dykes  extend,  is  here 
followed  by  eruptive  rocks,  filled  in  places  with  hundreds  of  exotic  Tibetan 
blocks.  Some  of  the  blocks  have  been  injected  with  narrow  dykes  which 
have  marmorized  the  limestone.  On  some  of  the  Kiogarh  hills  the  pro- 
portion of  eruptive  rock  is  so  small  that  these  hills  may  be  regarded 
as  limestone.  The  blocks  are  chiefly  very  much  altered  andesites  or 
diabases  ;  on  Balchdura  serpentine  with  chromite  has  also  been  found. 

Krafft  justly  observes  that  the  source  of  these  rocks  must  lie  towards 
the  north  or  north-east,  for  there  no  dykes  occur  in  the  basement.  In  the 
same  direction  also  lies  the  probable  source  of  the  exotic  blocks. 

These  observations  show  that  the  overthrusting  of  the  Tibetan  segments 
and  the  emergence  of  the  Sima  rocks  occurred  simultaneously. 

1  Griesbach,  Geology  of  the  Central  Himalaya,  Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  India,  1891,  XXIII, 
2B2  pp.,  maps ;  A.  v.  Krafft,  Notes  on  the  'Exotic  Blocks'  of  Malla  Johar  in  the  Bhot 
Mountains  of  Kumaon,  op.  cit.,  1902,  XXXII,  pp.  127-183,  pi.  14. 

2  Griesbach,  op.  cit.,  Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  India,  1891,  XXIII,  pp.  83, 130,  155. 

3  Cf.  Oldham,  Manual  of  the  Geology  of  India,  2nd  ed.,  1898,  p.  348.  The  pass  of 
Balchdura  slopes  north-east  to  the  Sutlej,  the  distance  is  only  about  23  kilometers  ;  the 
distance  of  the  lake  from  the  conjectured  continuation  of  the  strike  would  not  be  much 
greater  (according  to  Griesbach's  map). 

*  K.  Diener,  Die  Faunen  der  tibetanischen  Klippen  von  Malla  Johar  (Central  Himalaya), 
Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1907,  CXVI,  pp.  693-714. 


566 


THE  DEPTHS 


[part  V 


If  the  Sima  rocks  of  Balchdura  and  Kiogarh  may  be  regarded  as 
actually  forming  the  continuation  of  those  of  the  lake  of  Manasarowar, 
then  we  arrive,  by  conjecture,  at  the  following  result : — 

From  Kargil,  on  the  Indus,  onwards,  a  Tertiary  intercalation  extends, 
parallel  to  the  strike  of  the  mountains,  for  about  600  kilometers ;  it  is 
accompanied  for  long  distances  by  Crofesima,  andesitic,  and  basaltic  rocks^ 
and  in  places  by  ashes.  The  latter  indicate  that  a  zone  of  volcanos  formerly 
existed  here,  lying  in  the  strike  of  the  mountains.  — 

Hochstetter  recognized  long  ago  that  the  Nifesima  rocks  of  New  Zealand 
form  a  mighty  sill.  Most  probably,  according  to  Mackintosh  Bell,  and 
Fraser,  they  have  forced  their  way  into  the  great  range  east  of  Hokitika, 
along  lines  of  weakness  at  the  base  of  monoclinal  folds  ^.  But  that  these 
sills  were  primary,  independent  paths  of  discharge  from  magmatic  depths 
hardly  admits  here  of  direct  proof,  unless  we  are  content  to  recognize  the 
abyssal,  Nifesima  series,  such  as  awaruite,  nickel  ores,  &c.,  as  in  itself 
sufficient  evidence. 

Balchdura  represents  the  margin  of  a  plane  of  movement  of  the  first 
order,  along  which  sedimentary  series  of  divergent  facies  rest  one  upon  the 
other. 

The  sole  of  the  Dinarides  on  the  south  border  of  the  Alps  is  a  plane  of 
the  same  kind.  In  association  with  this,  also,  intrusions  occur.  Sometimes 
they  coincide  with  the  boundary,  and  at  others  lie  to  the  north  or  south 
of  it.  We  have  already  referred  to  the  relations  of  the  several  parts  of 
this  structure  to  one  another,  and  especially  to  the  green  rocks  of  Ivrea^ 
the  tonalite  zone,  and  the  Styrian  andesites  (IV,  p.  135).  Lacroix  concludes 
that  the  green  rocks  of  the  Pyrenees  are  derived  from  the  marginal  facies  of 
granitic  batholites.  They  would  thus  be  separations  from  a  mixed  magma, 
recalling  the  base  of  Sudbury,  and  it  is  possible  that  the  question  may  one 
day  be  raised,  whether  the  principal  range  of  Ivrea  with  its  nickel  ores  and 
peridotite  is  not  the  natural  base  of  the  diorites.  It  sends  its  green  sills 
only  into  the  Alps,  not  into  the  Dinarides. 

As  soon  as  we  attempt,  however,  to  discover  a  path  of  discharge  we 
must  not  forget  that  an  actual  superposition  of  the  Dinarides  upon  the  Alps, 
such  as  might  be  expected,  is  preserved,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  only  at  one 
restricted  locality,  and  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  along  considerable  inter- 
vals only  violent  compression,  or  fracture  is  shown,  and  that  in  Carinthia 
the  tonalite  range  is  accompanied  for  more  than  40  kilometers  by  a  narrow, 
younger  range  of  granitite,  which  is  separated  from  the  tonalite  by  a 
narrow^band  of  highly  altered  schist;  further,  that  the  tonalite  is  occasionally 
converted  into  gneiss  by  later  metamorphism — in  short,  that  this  line  of 
thrusting  of  the  first  order  must  also  have  been  the  scene  of  further 

^  J.  Mackintosh  Bell  and  C.  Fraser,  Geology  of  the  Hokitika  Sheet,  &c.,  Bull.  Greol. 
Surv.  N.Z.,  no.  1,  1906,  101  pp.,  maps,  in  particular  p.  68. 


CH.  XV] 


INJECTIONS  FOLLOWING  SOLES 


567 


tectonic  processes  of  a  different  kind.  Along  the  Drau  and  the  Gail 
a  long  downthrown  area  actually  makes  its  appearance  in  the  Alps. 

Both  the  ashes  and  lavas  of  Tsomoriri,  and  the  andesites  of  South  Styria 
point  to  the  presence  of  volcanos.  These  facts  will  come  under  considera- 
tion in  discussing  the  occurrence  of  active  volcanos  ^. 

^  Here,  as  in  the  two  following  chapters,  we  meet  in  all  cases  with  a  peculiar  difficulty 
in  giving  specific  gravities.  Sal  is  given  as  2*7  (p.  546),  while  many  works  mention  2-8 
as  the  mean  result  of  numerous  determinations.  But  since  most  collections  contain  only 
a  few  specimens  of  uniform  and  widely  distributed  gneiss,  but  a  great  many  of  various 
kinds  of  dyke  rocks,  inclusions,  and  so  on,  I  think  that  2-8  is  too  high.  For  the  same 
reason  3-287  may  be  correct  for  the  peridotite  of  St.  Paul  (p.  563),  but  for  the  general 
questions  considered  here  the  associated  chromite  must  also  be  taken  into  account. 


568 


CHAPTER  XVI 
OEIGIN  AND  AEEANGEMENT  OF  VOLCANOS 

Phreatic  explosions.  Association  with  dykes.  South  African  funnels.  Distribution 
of  the  volcanos.    Volcanic  lines.    Atlantic  and  Pacific  lavas. 

Phreatic  explosions >  When  juvenile  hydrogen  encounters  an  unlimited 
quantity  of  vadose  water,  we  witness  a  spectacle  such  as  was  presented  by 
Krakatoa  in  1883.  In  discussing  the  great  pulverization  which  preceded 
the  formation  of  Monte  Nuovo,  Johnston- Lavis  suggests  the  possibility  that 
the  first  outbreak  may  occur  with  increased  violence  if  the  ascending  lava 
meets  with  a  water-bearing  stratum^.  In  this  case  the  effect  may  have 
been  due  to  phreatic  water  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  sea,  but  when 
phreatic  water  is  confined  in  the  fissures  of  a  limestone  formation,  the 
explosion  shatters  the  limestone,  and  finds  relief  in  eruption  channels  (Dia- 
tremes,  Daubr^e).  This  may  have  been  the  origin  of  the  millions  of  small 
angular  fragments  of  Apennine  limestone  in  the  tuff  of  the  Albanian 
mountains,  and  to  the  same  cause  may  be  attributed  the  fluorspar-bearing 
volcanetti,  discovered  by  Scacchi  round  the  margin  of  the  central  Italian 
inbreak,  from  Mondragone,  north  of  the  lower  Volturno,  through  Caserta 
to  the  north  border  of  the  peninsula  of  Sorrento.  Scacchi  thinks  that 
they  were  all  of  late  origin  and  short-lived  ^. 

The  almost  circular  Ries  near  Nordlingen,  has  been  regarded  as  an 
inbreak  (I,  p.  197).  Branco  has  since  described  over  a  hundred  tuff-filled 
eruption  channels  (necks,  embryonic  volcanos)  which  occur  in  its  immediate 
neighbourhood.  A  number  of  parallel  instances  have  convinced  me  that 
the  Ries  was  produced  by  a  phreatic  explosion  at  the  base  of  the  Jurassic 
limestone  ^.  Sedimentary  and  in  part  granitic  blocks  have  been  driven 
out  beyond  its  borders,  but  the  preservation  of  the  granitic  mass  in  the 

^  Johnston-Lavis,  Geology  of  Mt.  Somma  and  Mt.  Vesuvius,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc, 
1884,  XL,  pp.  35-119,  in  particular  p.  40. 

A.  A.  Scacchi,  Le  regioni  vulcaniche  fluorifere  della  Campania,  Mem.  Com.  geol, 
ital.,  1890,  IV,  47  pp.,  map  (a  first  edition  appeared  in  1885). 

'  E.  Suess,  Einige  Bemerkungen  tiber  den  Mond,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1895,  CIV, 
pp.  21-54,  in  particular  p.  34.  Daubree's  experiments  show  the  force  of  an  explosion, 
but  presuppose  the  presence  of  a  fissure ;  Experiences  sur  les  actions  mecaniques 
exercees  sur  les  roches  par  des  gaz,  etc.,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  24  nov.  1890  et  seq. 


€H.  XVl] 


PHEEATIC  EXPLOSIONS 


569 


centre  is  significant.  The  complete  fragmentation  (Vergriesung)  of  the 
Jurassic  limestone  is  the  same  phenomenon  as  the  shattering  of  the  Apen- 
nine  limestone.  The  limestone  blocks  also,  which  lie  within  the  volcanetti 
are  said  to  fall  to  pieces  beneath  a  blow  of  the  hammer  ^ 

The  same  explanation  also  holds  good  for  the  eruption  canals  of  eastern 
Fife,  described  in  a  masterly  manner  by  Sir  Archibald  Geikie  ^. 

The  peninsula  between  the  Firth  of  Tay  and  the  Firth  of  Forth  consists 
on  the  north,  south  of  Dundee,  of  Old  Red  Sandstone,  and  on  the  south,  of 
Carboniferous,  probably  7,000-8,000  feet  thick,  with  repeated  dykes  and 
intercalations  of  dolerite.  In  the  Carboniferous  area  a  zone  about  13-16 
kilometers  broad,  extending  from  St.  Andrew's  bay  south-south-west  to 
Largo  bay,  presents  about  eighty  volcanic  necks  or  eruptive  chimnies. 
Only  one  of  them  lies  outside  the  Carboniferous,  and  to  the  west  of  it. 
Almost  all  are  filled  with  a  tuff  produced  by  the  pulverization  of  a  basic 
lava ;  the  rare  exceptions  have  apparently  remained  empty,  and  now 
contain  nothing  but  ordinary  debris.  Sections  observed  along  the  coast 
show  that  they  are  independent  of  the  faults,  and  the  lie  of  the  Carbon- 
iferous beds,  and  that  each  of  them  must  have  been  bored  out  as  a  more  or 
less  cylindrical  cavity.  They  vary  in  diameter  from  9  to  about  800  meters. 
Loose  crystals  of  orthoclase,  sometimes  more  or  less  rounded  and  corroded, 
and  in  one  case  as  much  as  two  pounds  in  weight,  as  well  as  hornblende, 
augite,  pyrope,  and  a  great  deal  of  quartz  sand  lie  in  the  tuff.  All  the  more 
striking  is  the  fact  pointed  out  by  Geikie,  that  although  they  contain 
innumerable  splinters  of  Carboniferous  rocks,  yet  no  trace  of  the  subjacent 
Old  Red  Sandstone  or  of  still  deeper-lying  sediments  has  been  observed. 
'  It  must  be  admitted,'  says  Geikie,  '  that  from  the  nature  of  the  contents 
of  the  necks  no  argument  can  be  drawn  in  favour  of  a  deep-seated  origin 
for  the  eruptions.' 

We  should  be  inclined  to  look  for  this  origin  in  a  phreatic  layer  at  the 
boundary  of  the  Old  Red  Sandstone  and  the  Carboniferous. 

Connexion  with  dykes.  Where  it  is  possible  to  approach  the  deeper- 
seated  afferent  paths  we  generally  arrive  at  fissures.  A  simple  illustra- 
tion is  afforded  by  Button's  description  of  the  region  situated  between  the 

^  W.  Branco,  Schwaben's  huiidert  fiinf-und-zwaiizig  Vulcan-Embryonen  und  deren 
tufferfiillten  Ausbrucbsrohren,  Jabresh.  Ver.  Naturk.  Wiirtt.,  1894  and  1895,  816  pp., 
maps ;  also  a  number  of  works  by  Branco,  Koken,  E.  Fraas,  Knebel,  Gaiser,  and  Ober- 
dorfer.  I  only  mention  Branco,  Das  vulcaniscbe  Vorries,  etc.,  Abb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Berlin, 
(1902)  1903,  132  pp.,  map.  The  twisted  trachyte  drops  of  the  adjacent  Haarhof  are  of 
no  value  (without  inclusions  of  an  older  lava)  as  indications  of  a  former  eruption  ;  on 
this  point  see  MercalH,  Notiz.  Vesuv.,  1895,  pp.  7,  10.  Branco  describes  the  process  in 
the  Ries  as  a  contact  explosion  ;  by  contact  he  means  the  lower  limit  of  the  subterranean 
water. 

A.  Geikie,  The  Volcanic  Necks  of  Eastern  Fife,  Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  (from  the  Geology 
of  East  Fife),  1902,  pp.  200-283,  map. 


570  OEIGIN  OF  VOLCANOS  [partv 

Rio  San  Jos^  and  the  Puerco,  close  to  the  south-east  border  of  the  Colorado 
plateau  ^. 

Mount  Taylor  (3,471  meters),  an  andesitic  cone,  dominates  the  volcanic 
mesa  (2,500  meters)  which  surrounds  it.  The  mesa  descends  steeply  to- 
a  plain  formed  of  horizontal  Cretaceous  beds.    In  the  north  it  terminates 


Fig.  50.    Mesa  of  mount  Taylor  and  Prieta  Mesa  (after  Button). 
T,  Trias  ;  J,  Jurassic  ;  K,  Cretaceous  ;  Vt,  Tertiary  eruptive  rock  ;  Vb  (black),  recent  Basalt. 

along  a  depression,  19  kilometers  broad,  which  lies  250  to  450  meters 
lower,  and  is  traversed  by  the  Puerco ;  on  the  other  side  of  the  river  lies 
the  mesa  Prieta,  which  once  formed  the  continuation  of  the  mesa  of  mount 
Taylor  (fig.  50). 

'  C.  E.  Dutton,  Mt.  Taylor  and  the  Zuni  Plateau,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1885,  VI,. 
pp.  111-202,  map. 


CH.  XVl] 


CONNEXION  WITH  DYKES 


571 


Above  these  two  volcanic  plateaux  rise  between  100  and  200  scattered 
necks,  representing  so  many  centres  of  eruption.  Between  the  plateaux 
the  Puerco  has  removed  by  denudation  not  only  the  volcanic  sheets, 
but  in  places  also,  a  thickness  of  300  meters  of  friable  Cretaceous 
sediments,  so  that  the  upward  course  of  the  funnels  is  visible.  At  first 
glance  the  cross-section  appears  to  be  circular ;  but  this  is  only  true  of  the 
upper  parts.  Further  down  a  lateral  extension  occurs.  '  The  longer  axis,' 
says  Button, '  is  often  continued  right  and  left  into  dykes  which  extend  far 
from  the  centre  of  eruption.' 

A  number  of  similar  examples,  in  which  a  network  of  dykes  is  exposed 
beneath  effusive  masses  might  be  cited.  Here  we  will  only  mention  those 
in  which  active  agency  of  the  gases,  and  the  secondary  results  of  this  agency 
are  visible. 

In  the  course  of  about  twenty  years,  subsequent  to  1874  a  long 
fissure  opened  up,  during  repeated  eruptions,  across  the  crater  and  all 
the  upper  part  of  mount  Aetna  (I,  pp.  84,  177),  and  as  early  as  1883 
Silvestri  observed  that  as  the  fissure  became  wider,  a  greater  quantity  of 
gas  escaped,  and  the  activity  of  the  mountain  in  other  places  was  diminished 
by  this  discharge ' . 

In  the  coal-mines  of  Ostrau  the  lower  horizons  present  a  large  number 
of  steeply-ascending  fairly  parallel  basalt  dykes;  at  higher  horizons  the 
miner  can  drive  his  levels  without  encountering  them.  Only  at  one  locality, 
near  Polnisch- Ostrau,  does  such  a  dyke,  ascending  through  marine  Tertiary 
sand,  reach  the  existing  surface.  The  basaltic  injection,  after  rising 
upwards  in  the  dykes  for  many  thousands  of  meters,  and  on  the  way 
converting  the  coal  for  a  short  distance  inwards  into  coke,  then  came  to 
a  full  stop  one  or  two  hundred  meters  below  the  existing  surface  ^. 

Geikie  has  described  the  manner  in  which  the  Cleveland  dyke  of  Scot- 
land remains,  for  a  considerable  distance,  just  under  the  surface  ;  in  places 
it  seems  as  though  its  subterranean  head  followed  the  irregularities  of  the 
ground,  although  it  has  ascended  from  depths  in  which  the  thickness  of 
the  sediments  alone  amounts  to  5,000  meters.  As  the  dyke  approaches  the 
surface  it  sometimes  thins  out,  so  that  while  at  some  distance  below  the 

*  'Perche  avendo  esse  (le  materie  vaporose)  potuto  trovare  un  immediato  sfogo  da 
estesa  fenditura  rimasta  aperta,  fecero  rapidamente  diminuire  quella  tensione  necessaria 
a  spingere  al  di  fuori  la  lava  di  centri  di  dove  avea  incominciato  a  scaturire,'  0.  Silvestri, 
Sulla  esplosione  eccentrica  dell'  Etna  arr.  il  22  Marzo  1883,  Acc.  Gioen.  Catania,  1884, 
XVII,  195  pp.,  maps,  in  particular  p.  125 ;  A.  Ricco  e  S.  Arcidiacono,  L'eruzione  del- 
I'Etna  nel  1892,  R.  Osserv.  di  Catania  ed  Etneo,  1904,  I  (in  three  parts,  maps)  et  passim. 

*  The  older  known  examples  are  recorded  by  J.  Niedzwiezki,  Jahrb.  k.k.  geol.Reichsanst., 
1873,  XXIII,  pp.  283-288,  map.  A  sketch  of  the  details  was  presented  to  the  members  of 
the  Ninth  Geological  Congress  of  1903  by  Director  of  Mines  Dr.  Fillunger  in  Mahringen- 
Ostrau.  On  the  low  temperature,  Jicinksky  in  Monographic  des  Ostrau-Karwiner 
Steinkohlen-Revieres,  4to,  Teschen,  1885,  p.  11,  figs.  3-7. 


572  OEIGIN  OF  VOLCANOS  [paktv 

surface  it  may  measure  24  meters ;  at  about  100  meters  higher  it  becomes 
only  6  meters,  and  then  wedges  out;  sometimes  it  ends  bluntly  and 
suddenly^  (fig.  51). 

In  the  sapphire  mines  of  Yogo  canon,  Montana,  a  dyke  of  basic 

lamprophyre  3  to  6  feet  thick  ascends 
through  limestone.  Weed  and  Pirsson 
describe  a  spot  at  which  this  dyke  fails  to 
reach  the  surface  and  terminates  abruptly. 
Its  head,  however,  is  converted,  by  the 
inclusion  of  more  or  less  altered  frag- 
ments of  limestone  and  shale,  into  a 
Fig.  51.  End  of  a  basalt  dyke  (sifter  breccia  ;  it  is  in  this  that  the  sapphires 
'^^^^^)'  are  found  2. 

In  Ostrau,  as  in  the  Yogo  canon,  indi- 
cations of  a  high  temperature  are  visible  even  in  the  upper  parts  of  the 
dykes.  Fig.  51  can  only  be  explained  on  the  assumption  that  a  fissure 
existed,  and  that  the  parallel  walls  were  forced  asunder. 

In  Ostrau  I  was  left  with  the  impression  that  the  injection  of  the  dykes 
took  place  simultaneously  and  fairly  equably.  When  it  arrived  at  a  point 
100  or  200  meters  below  the  existing  surface  an  eruption  may  have  occurred 
somewhere,  which  caused  a  general  relief  of  pressure  and  a  consequent 
cessation  of  movement.  Possibly  we  may  connect  with  this  Geikie's 
statement  that  in  the  basalt  dykes  of  Scotland  a  lateral  movement  of 
vesicles  is  indicated. 

It  is  obvious  that  a  whole  network  of  dykes  may  be  present  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  a  volcano,  and  yet,  owing  to  the  relief  of  pressure  brought 
about  by  the  volcano,  may  fail  to  reach  the  surface.  But  the  recognition 
of  this  fact  does  not  advance  us  much,  for  the  dykes  which  reach  the 
surface  may  either  represent  fissures  formed  in  the  roof  of  an  ascending 
batholite,  or  they  may  be  fissures  formed  by  faults ;  as  regards  the  latter, 
however,  especially  when  they  are  arranged  in  steps,  the  question  still 
remains  whether  they  may  not  have  arisen  by  an  after-subsidence  of  the 
magm,a.  Such  step-faults  have  been  described  in  detail  by  Hibsch  in  the 
region  comprised  in  sheet  Priesen  of  the  Bohemian  basalt  mountains^. 
The  question  is  much  more  difficult  of  solution  where  undoubted  tectonic 
disturbances  occur  beneath  a  volcanic  region,  as  well  as  step-faults  of 

^  A.  Geikie,  Ancient  Volcanos  of  Great  Britain,  8vo,  1897,  II,  p.  147  et  seq. ;  J.  J.  H. 
Teall,  Petrological  Notes  on  some  North  of  England  Dykes,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc, 
1884,  XL,  pp.  209-246. 

W.  H.  Weed,  Geology  of  the  Little  Belt  Mountains,  Montana,  accompanied  by  a 
Report  on  the  Petrography  of  the  igneous  Rocks  by  L.  V.  Pirsson,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol. 
Surv.,  1900,  XX,  3,  pp.  257  to  581,  maps,  in  particular  pp.  454-459  and  552. 

^  J.  E.  Hibsch,  Geologische  Karte  des  bohmischen  Mittelgebirges, Blatt  V ;  (Tschermak), 
Becke,  Min.-petr.  Mitth.,  1902,  new  ser.,  XXI,  pp.  465-590,  in  particular  p.  469,  map. 


CH.  XVl] 


DYKES 


578 


various  ages.  Such  a  case  has  been  described  in  central  France  by  Michel 
L^vy,  Giraud,  Boule,  Glangeaud,  and  other  observers  ^  In  other  cases  two 
formations  of  a  different  nature  are  brought  into  close  apposition,  and  the 
occurrence  of  volcanic  rock  on  a  tectonic  boundary  is  undoubted,  as  in  the 
Banat  (I,  p.  162,  fig.  21) ;  sometimes  we  have  an  inbreak  as  in  the  Lipari 
isles,  sometimes  great  afferent  paths  of  the  first  order,  which  become 
visible  in  long  volcanic  lines. 

In  addition  to  the  various  kinds  of  dykes  just  enumerated,  there  is 
yet  another  group  of  different  origin.  This  includes  dykes  which  are  very 
long,  parallel,  and  rectilinear,  with  smooth  selvages,  often  of  trifling  thick- 
ness, and  cutting  across  the  strike  of  the  formations.  Examples  of  this 
kind  were  quoted  in  discussing  passive  injections ;  the  bituminous 
dykes  of  Utah  are  typical.  Diller  found,  in  1890,  that  certain  dykes  of 
sandstone  in  California  follow  the  cleavage^.  This,  indeed,  is  the  only 
adequate  explanation.  Neither  explosion,  folding,  nor  contraction,  but 
only  general  pressure,  possibly  accompanied  in  places  by  a  slight  secondary 
torsion,  is  capable  of  producing  parallel  lines  of  this  kind.  No  small  part 
of  Daubr^e's  diaclases  must  be  referred  here.  Parallel  volcanic  injections 
of  this  kind  are  also  known,  and  their  connexion  with  the  cleavage  has 
long  been  recognized.  In  not  a  few  cases  parallel  lodes  must  be  included 
under  this  head. 

A  peculiar  feature  of  these  fissures  consists  in  the  fact  that  when  they 
reach  the  boundary  of  another  rock  less  suited  for  the  formation  of 
cleavage  planes,  they  suddenly  splinter  out  or  come  to  an  end.  The 
German  miner  says  '  the  dyke  smashes  itself  up '.  Bituminous  dykes 
behave  in  a  similar  manner  ^. 

South  African  funnels.  South  Africa  affords  examples  of  injection 
and  explosion  in  most  manifold  variety. 

The  dolerite  sills  of  the  Karoo  belong  to  an  older  phase  of  that  widely 
extended  process,  the  more  recent  phase  of  which  is  represented  by  the 
diamond-hearing  funnels.  On  the  north  side  of  the  Cedar  mountains  the 
sills  reach  the  Atlantic  Ocean;  in  the  Great  Kei  they  reach  the  Indian 
Ocean. 

^  Here  we  will  only  refer  to  M.  Levy,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  Beige,  1890,  ser.,  XVIII, 
p.  700,  fig.  3,  and  M.  Boule,  op.  cit.,  1893,  3e  ser.,  XXI,  p.  552,  fig.  11  ;  further  to 
Giraud,  Bull.  serv.  Carte  geol.,  1903,  XIII,  p.  897,  fig.  97,  and  Glangeaud,  Limogne, 
Sept  periodes  d'activite  volcanique  du  Miocene  inferieur  au  Pleistocene,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci. 
Paris,  9  mars  1908. 

^  J.  S.  Diller,  Sandstone  Dykes,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc,  1890, 1,  pp.  411-442.  We  will 
not  here  enter  into  the  question  whether  and  to  what  extent  torsion  is  responsible  for 
the  cleavage. 

'  As,  for  example,  in  West  Virginia,  Eldridge,  The  Asphalt  and  Bituminous  Rock 
Deposits  of  the  United  States,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1901,  XX,  1,  pp.  209-452, 
maps,  note  4,  p.  236. 


574  OKIGIN  OF  VOLCANOS  [party 

Still  wider  is  the  distribution  of  the  funnels.  One  only  is  known  in  the 
folded  mountains,  not  far  from  Heidelberg ;  it  is  younger  than  the  Uiten- 
hage  series  ^  Even  to  the  east  of  Rietfontein,  more  than  7  degrees  of 
latitude  to  the  north  of  Heidelberg,  Cohen  has  observed  the  same  mellilite- 
basalt^,  and  diamonds  are  found  even  on  German  territory  up  to  the 
neighbourhood  of  Llideritz  bay.  Harger  mentions  funnels  in  the  north- 
west as  far  as  Damara  land,  and  in  the  north-east  even  into  the  neighbour- 
hood of  the  Zambesi  ^.  The  whole  land,  extending  over  about  16  degrees 
of  latitude,  must  be  regarded  as  a  region  of  great  gaseous  eruptions.  No 
other  example  is  known  which  can  even  approach  it  in  magnificence. 


Fig.  52.    Dyke  near  Makomereng  (after  Schwarz). 
Black,  Dolerite  ;  1  to  4,  Stages  of  the  Karoo  series  ;  a  to  e,  small  pipes. 

Rogers  and  Schwarz  conclude,  as  the  result  of  their  valuable  investiga- 
tions, that  the  dolerite  sills  are  inclined  on  all  sides  towards  the  basin- 
shaped  centre  of  the  Karoo,  or  more  precisely,  that  they  lie,  towards  the 
centre,  in  the  deeper  beds  of  the  Karoo  series.    This  result  is  brought  about 

^  A.  Rogers  and  E.  Schwarz,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Comm.  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  (1898)  1900, 
p.  62.  On  the  Zuurberg  a  fault  occurs  accompanied  by  a  dyke  of  mellilite  basalt,  also 
more  recent  than  the  Uitenhage  stage  ;  Trans.  S.  African  Phil.  Soc,  1905,  XVI,  pp.  189- 
199.  At  a  great  distance  from  this  point  towards  the  north-west  two  other  dykes  occur 
in  the  folded  mountains.  Since  ashes  and  flows  are  mentioned  on  the  Drakenberg  in 
cavernous  sandstone  (Rhaetic  or  Lias),  the  eruptions  seem  to  have  been  of  long  duration  ; 
cf.  Du  Toit,  Trans.  S.  African  Phil.  Soc,  1905,  XVI,  a.,  pp.  53-70,  map. 

^  E.  Cohen,  Mellilith-Augit-Gesteine  und  calcitfiihrender  Aplit  aus  Siid-Afrika, 
Tschermak,  Min.  Mitth.,  1895,  new  ser.,  XIV,  pp.  188-190.  Cohen  was  one  of  the  first 
to  give  a  detailed  description  of  the  occurrence  of  diamonds. 

^  H.  S.  Harger,  The  Diamond  Pipes  and  Fissures  of  South  Africa,  Trans.  S.  African 
Phil.  Geol.  Soc ,  1905,  VIII,  pp.  113-115. 


CH.  XVl] 


DIAMOND  PIPES 


575 


in  one  of  two  ways ;  either  the  sills  cut  through  the  beds  at  an  acute  angle, 
or  a  sill  suddenly  and  abruptly  enters  a  lower  bedding  plane.  It  is  inferred 
that  the  centre  of  the  Karoo  has  subsided.  Rogers  remarks  that  a  true  batho- 
lite  has  never  been  observed  in  the  Karoo  ^.  The  various  ascending  dyke- 
fissures  and  eruptive  centres  are  also  affected  by  these  general  conditions. 

In  Matatiele,  under  the  slopes  of  the  southern  Quathlamba,  E.  Schwarz 
has  described  19  doleritic  outbreaks,  and  in  part  also  their  connexion  with 
the  dykes.  Fig.  52  represents  one  of  these  dykes,  over  160  kilometers  in 
length,  and  for  the  most  part  only  18  to  20  meters  in  breadth,  but  at  one 
place  it  rapidly  widens  out.    This  is  the  lemon-shaped  cross-section  of  an 


Fig.  53.    Interrupted  dyke  in  Matatiele  (after  Schwarz). 


•eruptive  centre,  which  continued  drilling  has  brought  constantly  nearer  a 
circular  form.  A  second  dyke  (fig.  53)  is  only  visible  for  6-5  kilometers  ; 
its  thickness  is  very  variable,  but  reaches  360  meters.  It  forms  a  high 
wall  between  two  of  the  uppermost  tributaries  of  the  Umzimburu 
(St.  John's  river),  and  is  broken  up  into  conical  peaks  by  weathering, 
l^ear  its  centre  the  dyke  is  suddenly  interrupted,  and  the  sandstone 
beds  extend  horizontally  over  it  ^. 

A  little  west  of  Sutherland  (S.W.  Roggeveld),  Rogers  and  Du  Toit 

^  Rogers  and  Schwarz,  Geological  Survey  in  the  South  Parts  of  the  Transkei  and 
Pondoland,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Comm.,  (1901)  1902,  pp.  25-46,  map,  in  particular  p.  30 ; 
Rogers,  An  Introduction  to  the  Geology  of  Cape  Colony,  8vo,  London,  1905,  p.  247  ;  and 
<^}ouritz  River,  Trans.  S.  African  Phil.  Soc,  1903,  XIV,  p.  377  et  passim. 

^  E.  Schwarz,  Geological  Survey  of  Part  of  the  Matatiele  Division,  Griqua  Land  East, 
Geol.  Comm.  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  (1902)  1903,  VIII,  pp.  11-96,  map,  in  particular  p.  48  et 
«eq.,  *  Fissures  of  Eruption.' 


576 


OEIGIN  OF  VOLCANOS 


[part  V 

observed  a  semi-circular  dyke  of  mellilite-basalt  2  kilometers  in  length, 
split  at  one  end,  and  at  the  other  narrowing  away  along  a  line  of  distur- 
bance (fig.  54,  II).  On  the  south  the  sandstone  dips  away  from  the  dyke  on 
both  sides,  but  on  the  north  only  in  places,  and  then  only  on  the  south  side. 
In  the  angle  of  I  a  shaft  was  sunk  in  bluish  grey  tufi" ;  towards  the  south- 
west we  see  a  breccia  of  sandstone  and  schist ;  between  the  fragments  the 
microscope  reveals  mica,  augite,  perofskite,  and  other  minerals.  At  other 
localities  a  grey  rock  occurs,  with  numerous  crystals  of  olivine,  and  bits  of 


Fig.  54.    Intrusion  of  Mellilite  Basalt  near  Sutherland  (after  Rogers  and  Du  Toit). 

ilmenite,  as  in  the  diamond-bearing  funnels;  III  and  IV  are  mellilite- 
basalts:  V  to  VII  are  imperfectly  exposed,  but  certainly  different  from 
the  others;  they  contain,  in  addition  to  many  shards  of  sandstone  and 
shale,  only  an  extremely  vesicular  glass  ^. 

This  case  may  possibly  represent  an  attempt  to  form  a  crater.  II  may 
have  been  discharged  through  V-VIII. 

We  now  approach  the  diamond-bearing  funnels.  They  often  traverse 
thick  doleritic  sills.  Broadening  towards  their  upper  part,  they  attain 
diameters  up  to  300  and  exceptionally  even  685  meters.  Many  of  the 
smaller  funnels  are  lemon-shaped  in  cross- section Harger  shows  that 

1  A.  Rogers  and  A.  L.  Du  Toit,  Ann.  Rep.  Geol.  Comm.  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  (1903)  1904, 
p.  43  et  seq.  The  Sutherland  Volcanic  Pipes  and  their  Relationship  to  other  Vents  in 
South  Africa,  Trans.  S.  African  Phil.  Soc,  1904,  XV,  pp.  61-83. 

*  See,  for  example,  Hatch  and  Corstorphine,  Geology  of  South  Africa,  8vo,  1905,  p.  290, 


CH.  XVl] 


ATLANTIC  VOLCANOS 


577 


several  hundreds  of  these  funnels  are  scattered  through  South  Africa. 
They  appear  to  occur  in  groups,  and  many  dykes  are  known  besides,  from 
30  meters  down  to  a  few  inches  in  width,  which  often  contain  diamonds 
but  are  not  worth  the  trouble  of  working.  They  are  frequently  filled  with 
harder  rock,  and  sometimes  broadening  out  suddenly,  assume  all  the 
characters  of  the  funnels.  Thus  we  must  conclude  that  the  diamond- 
hearing  funnels  are  also  connected  with  a  network  of  dykes. 

Du  Toit's  description  of  the  St.  Augustin  mine  at  Kimberley  gives  some 
idea  of  this  connexion  (fig.  55). 


Fia.  55.  Saint  Augustine  mine,  near  Kimberley  (after  Du  Toit). 
Explosion  along  a  crooked  path  proceeding  from  a  fissure. 


At  a  depth  of  244  meters  we  see  the  fissure ;  between  this  depth  and 
155  meters  the  mixture  of  gases  and  diamond-bearing  tuff,  forcing  its  way 
upwards,  found  a  spot,  situated  more  than  20  meters  to  the  south  of  the 
fissure,  where  it  was  able  to  bore  its  way  through  and  explode.  Where  the 
perforation  begins  the  fissure  disappears  (evidently  owing  to  discharge), 
and  at  a  depth  of  155  meters  (IV)  it  is  seen  no  more.  At  a  depth  of 
131  meters  the  axis  of  the  perforation  is  displaced  to  the  extent  of  over 
30  meters;  from  this  point  onwards  it  ascends  and  becomes  rapidly 
broader  ^ 

in  particular  Harger,  Trans.  S.  African  Geol.  Soc,  1905,  VIII,  pp.  113-115,  and  numerous 
accounts  by  Graichen,  Macco,  Voit,  and  R.  Beck,  in  Zeitschr.  prakt.  Gaol.,  especially  1906 
and  1907. 

^  Du  Toit,  Geological  Survey  of  the  East  Portion  of  Griqua-Land  West,  Geol.  Comm. 
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  Ann.  Rep.  (1906),  1907,  XI,  pp.  87-176,  in  particular  p.  140. 

SOLIiAS  IV  ^  P 


578  DISTEIBUTION  OF  VOLCANOS  [part  v 


We  will  not  in  this  place  enter  into  a  detailed  description  of  the 
composition  of  the  kimberlite,  the  rock  which  fills  the  pipes.  In  spite 
of  many  points  of  resemblance  with  rocks  which  must  be  regarded  as 
representing  the  great  depths,  a  difference  may  yet  be  observed.  Chromium 
plays  only  a  subordinate  part,  and  nickel  is  not  mentioned.  It  is  possible 
that  the  ilmenite  which  sometimes  occurs  here  in  great  quantity  may 
indicate  an  opposition  between  nickel  and  titanium  similar  to  that  which 
is  observed  in  many  iron  ores,  in  some  of  the  fixed  stars,  and  in  sun-spots. 
Titanium  accompanies  the  great  gaseous  eruptions  of  the  sun,  just  as  it 
has  accompanied  here  the  greatest  gaseous  eruptions  of  the  earth  ^.  Among 
the  many  problems  with  which  we  are  confronted  in  passing,  this  is  one 
of  the  most  fascinating. 

The  presence  of  diamonds  is  known  at  not  a  few  places ;  they  always 
occur  in  sporadically  distributed  deep-seated  Sima  rocks,  and  always  in 
regions  which  have  long  been  consolidated.  One  such  locality  is  Ruby  Hill, 
Dinoga,  Murchison  county,  New  South  Wales  ^.  In  Borneo  diamonds  are 
found  in  peridotite.  Widely  scattered  occurrences  of  similar  rocks  have 
already  been  mentioned  in  the  United  States,  but  they  have  so  far  yielded 
no  diamonds. 

In  their  typical  form,  as  they  occur  in  South  Africa,  the  diamond 
pipes  are  indications  of  mighty  gaseous  eruptions  which  proceed  from 
very  great  depths.  They  form  an  independent  group  among  explosive 
phenomena. 

Distribution  of  volcanos.  The  emission  of  gases  does  not  take  place 
so  freely  on  the  earth  as  in  the  sun,  and  has  not  advanced  so  far  as  in  the 
moon.  It  is  restrained  by  the  lithosphere.  Thereby  it  is  brought  under 
the  control  of  definite  circumstances,  which  admit  of  classification,  with 
a  remainder,  it  is  true,  of  outstanding  exceptions. 

The  distribution  of  volcanos  does  not  follow  the  same  plan  in  the 
Atlantic  and  the  Pacific  hemispheres. 

In  the  Atlantic  region  we  meet  with  (a)  diffuse  volcanic  areas;  (b) 
volcanos  standing  on  disjunctive  lines  produced  by  tension ;  (c)  volcanos 
collected  in  groups. 

(a)  An  example  of  a  diffuse  volcanic  area  is  afforded  on  the  largest 
scale  by  the  basaltic  lavas,  which  extend  from  Greenland  to  the  north 
of  Ireland  and  cover  a  considerable  part  of  North  Siberia  (IV,  p.  261).  It 
cannot  be  shown  that  this  boreal  region  was  ever  simultaneously  active 

*  E.  Suess,  EigenthiimUchkeiten  einiger  HimmelskOrper,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien, 
1908,  CXVI,  pp.  1555-1561. 

2  E.  F.  Pittman,  Ann.  Rep.  Depart.  Mines,  N.S.W.  (1900),  1901,  pp.  180,  181,  map. 
In  Brazil  diflferent  conditions  prevail ;  cf.  0.  Derby,  Am.  Journ.  Geol.,  1898,  VI,  pp.  121- 
146. 


CH.  XVl] 


VOLCANOS  OF  THE  PACIFIC 


579 


over  its  whole  extent.  On  the  lower  Tunguska  the  flows  appear  as  early 
as  the  Permian  flora,  and  further  south  they  are  younger  than  the  existing 
valleys ;  in  Franz- Josef  Land  they  belong  to  the  middle  J urassic ;  in  the 
island  of  Disko,  West  Greenland,  they  range  through  the  period  of  the 
lower  and  middle  Cretaceous;  in  Ireland  they  are  Tertiary;  the  active 
volcanos  in  Iceland  and  Jan  Mayen  are  probably  their  last  remains. 
Where  they  have  been  studied  in  detail,  as  in  Scotland,  these  lavas  are 
found  to  have  issued  from  an  extensive  network  of  dykes.  In  Greenland 
they  rest  upon  parts  of  Laurentia ;  in  Scotland,  Ireland,  and  the  Faeroes 
upon  the  Caledonides;  in  Siberia  upon  Angara  land  and  also  upon  parts 
of  the  Baikal  vertex. 

A  second  example  is  presented  by  the  effusive  sheets  of  the  Deccan  trap 
(I,  p.  411).  The  date  of  these  is  supposed  to  lie  nearly  on  the  boundary 
between  the  Cretaceous  and  the  Eocene.  Their  outliers  extend  from  the 
Indian  peninsula  to  the  outer  folded  ranges  of  the  Iranian  chains  of  Sind, 
which  form  part  of  the  periphery  of  the  Asiatic  system. 

The  sheets  and  deposits  of  the  Karoo  are  of  Permian  and  lower 
Mesozoic  age ;  they  are  distinguished  by  the  gaseous  eruptions  which 
followed  them. 

(b)  The  volcanos  standing  on  disjunctive  lines  are  represented  in  the 
African  troughs.  The  troughs  of  the  Rudolf-See — Syria,  Tanganyika, 
and  Kameroon  are  the  most  important.  The  fissures  from  which  they 
proceed  have  been  produced  by  tension,  and  the  after-subsidence  of  the 
borders  has  given  rise  to  the  long  horsts  in  the  fault-troughs. 

One  of  these  lines,  the  Rhine  trough,  lies  outside  Gondwana  land,  in  the 
midst  of  the  western  Altaides ;  but  the  direction  is  the  same,  and  we  must 
assume  the  existence  of  similar  tensions. 

It  is  worthy  of  note  that  in  the  panzer-horst  of  Iceland,  also,  the  simple 
fissures  show  a  tendency  to  pass  into  troughs. 

(c)  Examples  of  groups  of  volcanos  are  afforded  by  the  Azores,  the 
Canary  isles,  and  the  greater  part  of  the  Cape  Verd  islands.  Isolated  lines 
afford  evidence  that  fissures  exist  in  these  islands  also. 

In  the  Pacific  region  we  are  acquainted  with  : 

(a)  Diffuse  areas ;  these  are  only  present  where  the  boreal  region 
encroaches  from  the  north  into  Mongolia  and  the  northern  part  of  the 
ancient  vertex.  It  is  possible,  however,  that  the  Mongolian  basalts  belong 
to  the  next  division. 

(b)  Volcanos  on  disjunctive  lines.  These  play  the  principal  part  in  the 
whole  of  the  Pacific  region,  throughout  the  periphery  of  Asia,  and  in  the 
Andine  structure.  The  volcanic  arcs  of  both  groups  of  Antilles  are  also 
to  be  included  under  this  head. 

The  observations  made  within  the  Oceanides  are  unfortunately  very 
disconnected,  and  throw  little   light  on  the  question   of  distribution, 

p  p  a 


580  DISTEIBUTION  OF  VOLCANOS  [party 

So  far  as  the  relations  of  the  lines  of  volcanos  to  the  fore-troughs  and 
the  folding  can  be  determined,  they  correspond  to  those  recognized  in 
Asia. 

(c)  Grouped  volcanos.  Between  the  Oceanides,  Hawaii,  and  the  west 
coast  of  America,  we  were  able  to  distinguish  a  region  in  which, 
instead  of  Pacific  arcs,  only  groups  occur,  such  as  the  Galapagos  and 
Easter  island. 

{d)  The  volcanos  of  the  Alpides  form  a  distinct  group,  even  if  judged 
only  by  their  mode  of  origin.  They  present  us  with  a  combination  of 
different  characters ;  while  the  little  range  of  andesite  in  the  south  of 
Styria,  along  with  the  great  tonalite  range  of  the  East  Alps,  exhibits 
Andine  characters,  the  Lipari  islands,  on  the  other  hand,  may  be  regarded 
as  a  typical  example  of  grouped  volcanos. 

Although  the  above-mentioned  subdivisions  include  by  far  the  greater 
number  of  the  Pacific  volcanos,  and  especially  the  so-called  '  girdle  of  fire ', 
yet  there  are  some  isolated  occurrences,  both  large  and  small,  which  are 
not  embraced  by  this  classification.  Above  all  there  is  the  volcanic  range 
which  extends  across  the  general  strike  of  the  mountains  from  the  Yellow- 
stone park  through  the  fluvial  regions  of  the  Snake  and  Columbia  rivers. 
Then  there  are  the  volcanos  which  surround  the  border  of  the  Colorado 
plateau ;  of  these  it  is  impossible  to  say  (especially  in  the  south-east,  near 
the  extremities  of  the  Rocky  mountains)  whether  or  not  they  can  be 
correlated,  in  a  tectonic  sense,  with  the  volcanos  of  the  Basin  ranges. 
Further,  we  have  the  two  peak- volcanos  of  the  Caucasus,  and  Demavend 
on  the  south  Caspian  arc ;  the  volcanos  of  Auvergne,  which  M.  Levy  has 
brought  into  connexion  with  the  syntaxis  of  the  Armorican  and  Variscan 
folds ;  and  within  the  latter  the  Eif el,  and  the  basalts  extending  from  the 
Vogelsberg  to  Bavaria  and  Bohemia.  The  youngest  eruptions  of  these 
basalts  lie  close  beneath  the  fracture  of  the  Erzgebirge,  and  yet  reappear  in 
the  east  on  the  summits  of  the  Riesengebirge,  and  may  be  followed  further 
as  far  as  Ostrau,  where  the  dykes  have  been  exposed  by  mining.  To  this 
group  we  must  also  refer  the  Euganaean  mountains  in  the  Dinarides ;  mount 
Vulture,  situated,  as  an  exception,  on  the  outer  border  of  the  Apennines  ; 
and  in  the  far  east,  the  but  little-known  volcanos  of  Mergen  (III,  p.  118), 
not  to  mention  others. 

Neither  the  information  nor  the  space  at  my  disposal  permits  of  a  detailed 
discussion  of  all  these  exceptions.  It  will  suffice  to  examine  this  remarkable 
phenomenon  in  its  main  features,  and  wherever  possible  to  elucidate  further 
the  relations  of  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific  hemisphere. 

Volcanic  lines.  A  consideration  of  the  moon  shows  that  direct  melting 
down,  i.e.  complete  absorption  of  the  roof  is  the  lunar  form  of  volcanic 
action.  With  regard  to  the  existing  state  of  the  terrestrial  lithosphere 
three  processes  are  in  question  :  subsidence,  inbreak,  folding,  and  rending. 


CH.  XVl] 


VOLCANIC  LINES 


581 


Inbreak,  associated  with  shattering,  must  be  distinguished  from  extensive 
subsidence  more  strictly  than  it  has  been  hitherto. 

We  may  recognize  in  the  Lipari  islands,  if  we  share  Hoffmann's  view, 
three  volcanic  lines  which  converge  towards  the  centre  as  so  many  radial 
fissures ;  or,  if  we  agree  with  Bergeat,  we  may  continue  the  two  northern 
lines  to  form  a  curve^ — Ustica,  Salina,  Stromboli — parallel  to  the  Calabro- 
Sicilian  shore  (Salina,  Vulcano,  Aetna  remaining  as  the  only  radial  line) ; 
but  in  either  case  this  group  of  islands  will  still  represent  a  fractured  area 
in  process  of  subsidence  ^.  We  say  in  process  of  subsidence,  for  since  its 
seismic  peripheral  line  has  been  described  it  has  repeatedly  been  the  scene 
of  devastating  catastrophes. 

In  the  case  of  other  volcanic  groups  observations  on  the  periphery  are 
lacking;  they  are  for  the  most  part  islands.  Shorter  lines  of  volcanos 
are  visible,  for  example  in  the  Canary  islands,  and  most  of  these  groups 
are  doubtless  similar  local  areas  of  fracture,  and  sinking  roofs  of  batholites. 

The  exceptional  position  of  the  Alpides,  which  often  exhibit  inner 
borders  beset  with  volcanos,  also  leads  us  to  suspect  that  the  western 
Mediterranean  consists  of  inbreaks.  Here  we  have  an  instructive  contrast. 
With  the  exception  of  the  line  from  Hohentwiel  to  the  Ries,  and  the  whole 
divergent  boundary  between  the  Carnic  range  and  the  Alps,  the  borders  of 
the  subsidences  in  which  the  Alps  took  their  birth  nowhere  exhibit  younger 
volcanic  formations,  neither  in  those  parts  which  belong  to  the  Russian 
plain,  nor  in  those  which  belong  to  the  Bohemian  mass  or  the  Altaides  or 
the  Sahara.  Yet  more  than  this  may  be  seen.  The  Variscan  subsidences 
show  marginal  fractures  which  they  have  not  themselves  produced,  but 
have  availed  themselves  of,  and  rendered  visible  (IV,  p.  30).  This  is  true, 
for  example,  in  the  case  of  those  Karpinsky  lines  which  in  eastern  Bavaria 
become  the  marginal  fractures  of  Variscan  horsts. 

The  same  relations,  on  a  far  grander  scale,  are  manifest  in  the  Indian 
Ocean  (IV,  p.  285).  The  Sahyadri  fracture  on  the  west  side  of  the  Indian 
peninsula  extends  through  12  degrees  of  latitude,  and  cuts  partly  through 
gneiss,  and  partly  through  the  lavas  of  the  Deccan,  which  are  independent 
of  it.  All  the  east  side  of  Madagascar  represents  an  almost  rectilinear 
fracture,  extending  through  10  degrees  of  latitude.  Both  these  lines  are 
devoid  of  volcanos.  Still  more  striking  is  the  coast  of  Syria,  which  lies  so 
near  the  trough  of  the  Jordan,  and  differs  so  greatly,  in  its  rectilinear 
course,  from  the  other  Mediterranean  coasts.  It  is  unaccompanied  by 
volcanos,  as  is  likewise  the  south-eastern  Mediterranean  as  far  as  Cyprus, 
Crete,  and  Malta. 

Throughout  this  vast  region  there  seems  to  be  a  latent  tendency  to 

^  I,  p.  83,  fig.  4  ;  A.  Bergeat,  Die  aolischen  Inseln,  Abh,  k.  bayer.  Akad.  Wiss.  Miinchen, 
1899,  XX^  274  pp.,  maps,  passim. 


582  DISTEIBUTION  OP  VOLCANOS  [paetv 


submeridional  disjunction,  which  is  both  aroused  and  made  use  of,  in  some 
places  by  subsidences,  and  in  others  by  rending,  but  not  by  both  together. 

The  Red  sea  and  the  Arabian  sea  are  fault-troughs  and  contain 
volcanos.  The  conditions  on  the  Terror  line  are  doubtless  similar.  In 
the  west  the  Kameroon  line  runs  transverse  to  the  course  of  the  coast  and 
is  clearly  continued  far  into  the  sea. 

The  existence  of  such  a  latent  disjunction  in  Africa  has  already  been 
conjectured  by  French  investigators,  who  have  brought  it  into  connexion 
with  the  submeridional  strike  of  the  Saharides.  Isolated  accounts  certainly 
indicate  that  these  mountains  diverge  in  the  south  towards  the  south-west 
(almost  in  the  direction  of  the  Kameroon  line),  but  our  knowledge  of 
South  Africa  does  not  at  present  support  the  supposed  connexion  with 
folding. 

These  observations  acquire  increased  significance  from  the  fact,  that  in 
the  Pacific  region,  also,  the  volcanic  lines  are  everywhere  absent  from  the 
outer  borders  of  the  foredeeps.  Even  a  subsidence  to  depths  of  8  and 
9  kilometers  does  not  succeed  in  exciting  a  volcanic  eruption  in  this  region. 
It  may  be  objected,  that  the  foredeeps  were  sunk  in  ancient  and  long- 
consolidated  forelands,  which  were  little  favourable  to  volcanic  activity, 
but  the  African  fractures  have  awakened  numerous  volcanos  in  ancient 
land  of  precisely  this  nature. 

Local  inbreak,  Oceanic  subsidence,  and  linear  disjunction  are  thus 
different  and  independent  phenomena.  We  have  several  times  remarked 
that  the  contraction  of  the  earth  resolves  itself  into  a  radial  (sinking)  and 
a  tangential  (folding)  element.  The  Oceanic  abysses  and  likewise  the  fore- 
deeps are  the  expressions  of  the  radial  element,  i.  e.  of  the  subsidence ;  not 
brought  about  by  internal  cavities,  but  by  a  diminution  of  the  planetary 
volume. 

The  Oceanic  subsidence  resolves  itself,  more  or  less  after  the  plan  of  the 
stresses  in  an  asphalt  pavement,  into  isolated,  elongated  arcuate  fragments. 
Contraction  has  left  the  outer  and  in  part  sedimentary  covering  of  the 
earth  in  excess.  The  tangential  force  carries  this  excess,  in  arcuate  folds, 
into  and  over  the  subsided  foredeep.  The  arcs  encounter  one  another  in 
linking  or  syntaxis.  The  movement  increases;  under  the  stupendous 
pressure  the  folds  are  urged  on ;  they  overturn ;  possibly  also  listric 
planes  are  produced.    Finally  backfolding  sets  in. 

In  all  these  processes  the  upper  parts  of  the  lithosphere  play  a  passive 
rdle.  Through  the  contraction  of  the  deeper  parts  they  are  carried 
forwards,  folded  and  overthrust.  The  stratosphere,  and  a  considerable 
part  of  the  Sal  envelope  do  not  fold  themselves,  but  they  are  folded.  But 
this  outer  part  of  the  planet  also  exhibits  a  process  peculiar  to  itself,  it 
rends  asunder. 

That  this  rending  takes  place  from  above  downwards  has  already  been 


CH.  XVI]     VOLCANOS  ON  DISJUNCTIVE  LINES 


583 


stated  in  describing  the  African  fractures.  This  is  very  clearly  shown  by 
the  relation  of  the  rents  to  the  folding.  In  East  Africa  and  in  Syria  the 
direction  of  the  fault-troughs  is  most  probably  independent  of  the  folding. 
In  the  Rhine  trough  it  is  certainly  so.  Equally  certain,  on  the  other 
hand,  is  its  partial  dependence  on  the  strike  of  the  folds  in  the  greater  part 
of  Asia. 

The  innermost  parts  of  this  vast  continent  are  traversed  by  disjunctive 
lines  which  for  long  distances  run  with  the  strike  of  the  folds,  and  in  others 
diverge  from  it,  yet  taken  together  they  give  rise  to  a  configuration 
which  corresponds  on  the  whole  with  the  disposition  of  the  folds. 
Frequently  they  produce  disjunctive  troughs  along  which  porphy rites  with 
tuffs  and  breccias,  basalt  and  various  other  eruptive  rocks  occur.  Two 
recent  cones  of  loose  scoriae  and  lava  rise  on  the  Vitim.  The  Cis-Baikal 
range  owes  most  of  its  existing  form  to  these  disjunctions.  Three  disjunctive 
troughs  cross  the  Selenga.  Lake  Baikal  itself  seems  to  consist  of  two  of 
these  troughs  united,  and  all  the  elongated  subsidences  and  horsts  of  the 
Dsapchyn  which  issues  forth  from  the  valley  of  the  Lakes,  and  those  of  the 
horst  of  Altain-Nuru  up  to  the  trough  of  Ljuk-tshun  have  originated 
between  lines  of  this  kind.  In  the  west  the  case  is  similar.  The  autonomy 
which  such  lines  present  in  isolated  cases  may  be  seen  most  clearly  in  the 
trough  of  the  Ebi-nor,  which  cuts  across  the  Dsungarian  Ala-tau. 

Such  influence  exerted  by  folding  upon  disjunction,  even  if  only  partial, 
can  be  comprehended  only  on  the  supposition  that  the  folding  movement 
occurs  at  the  same  time.  That  the  island  festoons  were  originally  accom- 
panied by  rectilinear  volcanic  fissures,  and  that  they  were  converted  into 
arcs  by  the  folding  is  an  impossible  assumption.  Since  the  volcanic  lines 
always  occur  within  the  forefolding,  they  find  themselves  at  the  same  time 
in  the  place  to  which  the  folded  series  asserts  the  chief  claim.  But  they  are 
not  produced  by  the  folding  ;  they  recall  rather  the  resolution  of  superficial 
stresses  in  the  asphalt,  and  their  autonomous  continuations  betray  their 
independence. 

They  are  simple  lines,  and  sometimes  no  doubt  there  may  be  two 
parallel  lines  (e.  g.  Ecuador),  or  these  may  be  joined  by  other  lines 
(e.g.  western  Java).  Between  these  lines  troughs  arise,  in  which,  or  on 
the  border  of  which,  stand  volcanos,  as,  for  example,  the  Wrangell  group, 
the  Aleutian  volcanos  in  Cook  inlet,  those  in  the  Fossa  magna  of  Honshiu, 
possibly  also  in  Mindanao.  The  arcs  of  volcanos  stand  without  exception 
in  the  zone  of  forefolding  from  Wrangell  to  Santorin,  and  they  always 
remain  independent  of  the  foredeep.  The  autonomy  of  the  disjunction 
finds  expression  in  the  prolongation  of  the  line  of  the  Kuriles  across  the 
strike  of  Hokkaido,  and  in  the  entrance  of  the  volcanos  of  Liu-kiu,  into 
southern  Kiu-shiu. 

The  same  situation  recurs  in  the  Intermediate  range  of  America  and  in 


584  DISTEIBUTION  OF  VOLCANOS  [party 


the  Andine  structure.  Volcanos  and  troughs  united  extend  through  the 
Basin  ranges,  Mexico,  and  the  Andes.  The  northern  Antilles  show  the 
same  arrangement  as  the  peripheral  arcs  of  Asia.  But  where  the  influence 
of  the  folding  diminishes,  the  resemblance  to  Africa  increases.  The  volcanos 
of  Omotepec  and  Madera  in  the  trough  of  the  lake  of  Nicaragua  may  be 
compared  with  the  volcanos  of  Hohnel  island  in  the  trough  of  the  Rudolf- 
See,  and  also  to  the  Kaiserstuhl  in  the  Rhine  trough. 

The  volcanic  lines  of  the  island  festoons  and  the  disjunctive  lines  of 
Central  Asia  are  identical  phenomena. 

This  fact,  however,  could  not  be  recognized  before  the  Central  Asiatic 
lines  were  known.  It  was  not  understood  how  two  opposed  processes  such 
as  folding  and  rending  could  arise  side  by  side.  Originally  we  regarded 
the  arcs  of  volcanos  as  the  fractured  borders  of  vast  subsidences  (I,  p.  457). 
Subsequently  Ferdinand  von  Richthofen  was  so  impressed  by  the  contrast 
between  folding  and  rending  that  he  attributed  a  divergent  structure  to 
island  festoons  in  general.  In  the  last  of  his  comprehensive  works  on  this 
subject  he  maintains  that  the  island  festoons  have  indeed  the  resultant 
form  in  common  with  the  Alpine  type,  but  differ  from  the  geogenetic 
standpoint. 

On  the  one  hand,  we  see  in  the  Alps  an  overwhelming  of  a  foreland— 
usually  a  subsided  foreland — as  the  result  of  a  force  directed  outwards ;  in 
the  island  festoons,  on  the  other  hand,  we  see  a  tendency  to  a  retreat  of  the 
foreland,  and  a  rending  on  the  other  side  of  the  outer  border  ^. 

Rothpletz,  a  year  earlier,  regarded  the  troughs  as  evidence  of  dilatation, 
and  supposed  that  volcanic  action  proceeds  continuously  over  the  whole 
earth,  while  folding  only  occurs  periodically,  and  he  thought  that  in  this 
way  the  conflicting  views  on  the  dilatation  and  contraction  of  the  earth's 
body  could  be  explained  ^. 

The  preceding  analysis  of  the  arcs  has  shown,  however,  that  the  main 
features  of  the  structure  of  the  island  festoons  are  repeated  not  only  in  the 
Aleutian  islands  and  the  Antilles,  but  also  in  the  Burman  arc,  and  in 
the  marginal  arcs  as  far  as  the  Adriatic.  They  are  separated  in  time  just 
as  little  as  they  are  in  space,  and  it  is  generally  admitted  that  the  young 
mountain  ranges  display  the  most  active  vulcanism.  Yet  it  is  hard  to 
understand  how  the  ascending  course  of  the  lava  can  maintain  its  existence 
in  a  folding  range. 

There  are  two  solutions  to  this  problem.  The  first  applies  when  the 
disjunction  is  turned  aside  into  the  direction  of  a  thrust-plane,  or  at  least 

^  F.  von  Richthofen,  Geomorphologische  Studien  aus  Ost-Asien,  FV"  and  V,  Sitzb.  k 
preuss.  Akad.  Wiss.  Berlin,  1903,  p.  872. 

'  Rothpletz,  Ueber  die  MogUchkeit,  den  Gegensatz  zwischen  der  Contractions-  und  der 
Expansionstheorie  aufzuheben,  Sitzb.  k.  bayer.  Akad.  Wiss.  Miinchen,  1902,  XXXIJ, 
pp.  311-325. 


CH.  xvi]        VOLCANIC  AECS  AND  FOLDING 


585 


follows  this  direction  on  the  whole,  apart  from  possible  divergence  at  its 
autonomous  ends.  This  case  is  not  improbable  in  itself,  for  the  strike 
of  the  disjunction  alone  shows  the  great  influence  of  the  tangential  move- 
ment. The  disjunction  may,  it  is  true,  become  broken  up,  as  it  approaches 
magmatic  depths,  into  a  girdle  of  fine  cracks.  Some  of  these  may  offer 
a  path  to  the  juvenile  gases,  and  be  bored  out,  not  along  their  whole  length, 
but  in  favourable  places,  to  form  volcanic  pipes,  as  along  the  Laki  fissure 
in  Iceland.  Thus,  a  long,  linear  series  of  eruptive  centres  may  arise,  the 
connexion  of  which,  at  some  depth,  is  beyond  doubt,  but  which  can  only 
be  recognized  at  the  surface  by  the  serial  arrangement. 

A  second  tentative  solution  is  suggested  by  the  transverse  crevasses  of 
glaciers.  These,  with  steep,  straight  walls,  cut  through  the  viscous,  moving 
mass  of  the  ice.  They  are  carried  along  for  some  distance  with  the  ice,  bend 
more  or  less  into  its  arcuate  strike,  and  finally  close  up,  while  fresh  crevasses 
arise  in  the  old  place.    They  hold  their  ground  by  repeated  renewals. 

There  are  some  volcanos  which  are  not  stationary  but  wandering.  In  so 
far  as  this  wandering  points  to  a  decrease  of  activity,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
gradual  restriction  of  the  Phlegraean  fields,  or  to  an  elongation  of  the  volcanic 
line,  as  in  Hawaii,  it  may  be  left  out  of  account.  But  in  the  arcs  themselves 
indications  occur  of  a  lateral  displacement  both  on  a  large  and  small  scale. 
The  tract  of  rhyolite  and  dacite,  characterized  by  silver-tin  lodes,  which 
extends  through  six  degrees  of  latitude,  from  lake  Titicaca  to  Argentina, 
lies  to  the  east  of  the  line  of  the  Andine  volcanos,  and,  judging  from  the 
direction  of  the  folds,  in  front  of  them.  In  the  West  Indies,  the  zone  from 
Anguilla  to  Desiderade  lies,  with  its  older  lavas,  outside  of  and  in  front  of 
the  active  volcanos.  In  Sumatra  the  case  is  probably  the  same  (I,  p.  457)  ^. 
In  the  Aleutian  islands,  on  the  other  hand,  the  volcanos  Bogosslowsk  and 
Orewingk  have  arisen  within  the  arc,  as  though  a  new  parallel  line  were 
about  to  be  formed. 

Among  the  volcanos  of  Central  America,  transverse  lines  are  recorded 
by  Dollfuss  and  Montserrat,  along  which  the  volcanic  activity  appears  to 
approach  the  main  line  in  the  direction  of  the  adjacent  sea.  The  most 
northerly  line,  that  of  Chiquimula,  offers  an  exception.  In  later  times, 
owing  to  the  eruption  of  the  volcano  of  Santa  Maria  this  most  northerly 
line  also  appears  to  have  conformed  to  the  rule  (IV,  p.  454),  but  the  exist- 
ence of  other  transverse  lines  has  been  rendered  doubtful,  since  Sapper 
mentions  new  eruptive  centres  between  them.  Sabatini  conjectures  that  a 
similar  displacement  in  the  direction  of  the  sea  may  be  perceived  in  several 
of  the  Roman  volcanos  ^  The  transverse  line  of  Ixtaccihuatl- Popocatepetl 
in  Mexico  shows  clearly  a  movement  of  approach  to  the  principal  line 

.  '  Volz,  Sitzb.  k.  preuss.  Akad.  Wiss.  Berlin,  1907,  p.  139. 
2  V.  Sabatini,  Vulcano  Laziale,  Mem.  Carta  geol.  ital.,  1900,  XI,  392  pp.,  map ;  cf.  note 
to  p.  32. 


586  DISTEIBUTION  OF  VOLCANOS  [party 


(IV,  p.  440).  Jensen  describes  an  example  of  displacement  along  transverse 
lines^  on  a  smaller  scale,  in  the  trachyte  mountains  of  Queensland  ^. 

In  this  connexion  we  may  also  refer  to  a  fact-  already  mentioned  in 
discussing  Kamchatka  and  the  Aleutian  islands,  namely,  that  within  the 
principal  zone  (with  the  exception  of  some  closely  adjacent  points  such  as 
mount  Bogosslovsk)  a  large  number  of  extinct,  but  no  active  volcanos 
occur.  None  of  these  circumstances,  however,  afford  any  evidence  as 
to  the  renewal  of  the  volcanic  fissures,  such  as  occurs  in  the  case  of 
the  crevasses  of  a  glacier.  The  recurrence  of  the  crevasses  is  produced 
by  a  constant  cause,  as  a  rule  by  a  sudden  increase  in  slope  of  the  rocky 
floor ;  as  to  whether  anything  corresponding  to  this  might  be  operative 
beneath  the  folding,  whether  it  might  be  produced  by  a  displacement 
fissure  of  the  kind  illustrated  by  the  lines  in  pi.  IV,  whether,  indeed,  it  is 
physically  possible  at  all,  we  are  not  in  a  position  to  judge. 

The  numerous  blocks  of  diorite  which  have  been  ejected  by  Bogosslovsk 
of  late  years,  and  the  large  number  of  amphibolite  blocks  ejected  by  Santa 
Maria  de  Chiquimulo  in  1902,  certainly  point  to  actual  displacement  of  the 
funnels,  but  if  we  turn  from  isolated  examples  and  take  a  broader  survey 
the  manifold  variety  of  the  phenomena  becomes  apparent.  On  one  line 
only  isolated  eruptive  centres  have  been  formed,  recalling  the  row  of 
borings  made  by  the  Eskimo  in  a  reindeer's  antler  preparatory  to  splitting 
it ;  on  another  line  an  elongated  batholite  is  exposed ;  on  a  third  the  crust 
is  cut  through  by  long  parallel  fissures  and  let  down  in  troughs,  which  may 
or  may  not  be  occupied  by  volcanos.  In  those  places  where  such  troughs 
lie  outside  the  younger  folding,  as  in  Africa  and  Central  Asia,  there  is  no 
clear  evidence  of  volcanic  displacement,  although  in  Central  Asia  the  lines 
are  bent  in  the  direction  of  the  folding.  In  both  regions  there  are  also 
troughs  without  volcanos,  such  as  the  district  of  lake  Tanganyika,  lake 
Baikal,  and  the  subsidence  of  Ljuktshun.  That  in  the  younger  folded 
regions  injection  may  proceed  from  the  sole  is  shown,  for  example,  by  the 
occurrences  on  the  upper  Indus  and  the  band  of  Ivrea.  It  is  highly  probable 
that  the  bands  of  amphibolite  which  occur  in  the  north  along  the  Caledonian 
overthrust  are  similar  injections,  and  that  the  olivine  gabbro  of  Sulitelma, 
for  example,  finds  its  continuation  in  the  amphibolite  of  the  Tarrekaisse 
and  the  Sarjek,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  zone  of  overthrusting  2. 

^  H.  I.  Jensen,  Geology  of  the  Volcanic  Area  of  the  East  Moreton  and  Wide  Bay  Dis- 
trict, Queensland,  Proc.  Linn.  Soc.  N.S.W.,  1906,  pp.  73-173,  maps,  in  particular  p.  97 
(the  place  Hes  between  lats.  27°  and  28°  S.). 

2  H.  Sjogren,  Cm  Sulitelma-omr^dets  Bergarter  och  Tektonik,  Geol.  Foren.  Stockh. 
Forh.,  1896,  XVIII,  pp.  346-376,  in  particular  p.  361 ;  P.  I.  Holmquist,  En  geologisk 
Profil  ofver  Fjellomradena  emellan  Qvikkjokk  och  Norska  Kusten,  op.  cit.,  1900,  XXII, 
pp.  72-104, 151-177,  and  232-272,  in  particular  p.  255,  map  ;  Hamberg,  Om  fasta  bergets 
geol.  inom  Sarjektrakten,  op.  cit.,  1901,  XXIII,  pp.  18-23,  further  p.  26 ;  for  similar 
occurrences  see,  in  addition  to  the  works  of  Vogt  already  mentioned,  in  particular 


CH.  XVl] 


rVEEA.    COOK  INLET 


587 


Where,  however,  the  sole  lies  as  flat  as  in  the  latter  case,  it  cannot 
at  the  same  time  have  been  the  path  followed  by  eruptions.  Here  again 
nature  is  not  cast  in  one  mould. 

While  in  the  range  of  Ivrea  the  voluminous  injection  which  followed  the 
direction  of  the  folding  (opposed  to  the  direction  of  the  Dinarides),  and  the 
occurrence  of  nickel  ores,  points  to  the  proximity  of  the  funnels ;  in  the  east, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  tonalite  band  shows  that  a  zone  of  disjunction  was 
present  close  to  the  boundary,  separating  the  Alps  from  the  Carnic  mountains 
and  the  Dinarides,  and  that  this  zone  was  subsequently  affected  by  an  over- 
thrust  from  the  south.  The  long  parallel  range  of  granitite,  which  accom- 
panies the  tonalite,  and  further  west  the  fractured  area  of  Lienz,  are  doubtless 
indications  of  this  disjunction.  The  whole  tonalite  zone  has  been  overturned 
subsequently  towards  the  north  and  converted  into  tonalite  gneiss.  This 
movement,  however,  does  not  mark  the  termination  of  the  volcanic  processes, 
for  the  andesites  of  South  Styria,  which  we  regard  as  the  continuation  of  the 
tonalites,  are  more  recent  than  the  movement.  We  are  still,  however,  far 
from  completely  understanding  this  process,  since  far  to  the  north,  on  the 
Wolfgang-see,  blocks  of  tonalite  (and  gabbro)  occur  which,  to  all  appearance, 
have  been  transported  in  the  Werfen  shales,  and  consequently  on  the  East 
Alpine  sole,  which  lies  tectonically  lower  than  the  Dinaric  sole. 

Let  us  examine  another  example. 

At  the  time  of  the  deposition  of  the  Kenai  stage.  Cook  inlet  formed 
a  trough,  and  enclosed  a  freshwater  lake ;  later  on  subsidence  occurred ;  Ter- 
tiary folds  on  the  eastern  sea-border  may  be  taken  to  show  that  the  zone  of 
the  mountains  lying  outside  the  trough  was  moved  independently.  On  the 
other  side  of  the  syntaxis  the  St.  Elias  mountains  and  the  Rocky  mountains 
diverge  far  apart,  and  the  greatest  cicatrice  of  the  earth,  the  granodiorite 
of  Columbia  makes  its  appearance  between  them.  By  carrying  von  Richt- 
hofen's  theory  a  little  further  we  might  assume  an  extensive  movement 
in  the  Pacific  direction  (approximately  the  line  fae,  IV,  p.  503),  in  accordance 
with  the  conjecture  that  a  movement  of  segments  occurred  along  the 
African  fissures  to  the  east  of  Ankober.  There  are  so  many  problems 
and  difficulties  connected  with  these  questions  that  it  would  scarcely  be 
profitable  to  pursue  them  further  at  present. 

Atlantic  and  Pacific  lavas.  The  fact  that,  with  the  exception  of  the 
riven  continent  of  Africa,  none  of  the  ancient  forelands,  neither  Laurentia 
nor  Brasilia,  nor  Angara  land  nor  Australia  possesses  active  volcanos 
remote  from  the  sea  has  long  since  attracted  attention.  In  North  America 
in  particular,  geologists  have  occupied  themselves  with  the  contrast  between 
East  and  West.  The  classification  of  the  dislocations  upon  which  volcanos 
are  seated,  given  by  M.  Levy  in  1898,  also  distinguishes  in  the  first  place 

C.  F.  Kolderup,  Labradorfelsen  des  westHchen  Norwegen,  Bergen's  Mus.  Aarbog,  1903, 
no.  12,  129  pp.,  map. 


588  DISTEIBUTION  OF  VOLCANOS  [party 


between  those  in  folded  and  those  in  unfolded  land^.  That  there  is  a 
regional  difference  in  the  lavas,  however,  was  not  known. 

In  1902  Becke  published  the  surprising  observation  that  two  types  are 
to  be  distinguished  in  recent  volcanic  rocks,  and  that  regions  which  in  the 
main  are  folded  tangentially  belong  to  the  one  (Andes  type),  while  regions 
with  dominant  radial  dislocations  (segmental  fractures)  belong  to  the 
other  (type  of  the  Bohemian  Mittelgebirge)  ^. 

A  few  months  later,  in  1903,  Prior  arrived  independently  at  the  same 
conclusion,  as  the  result  of  his  investigations  of  east  African  rocks  ^,  and  in 
the  same  year,  1903,  Becke's  more  detailed  work  on  this  subject  appeared, 
in  which  these  two  types  are  distinguished  as  Pacific  and  Atlantic. 

Thus  there  is  a  tephritic  or  Atlantic,  and  an  andesitic  or  Pacific  series. 
The  Atlantic  series  is  characterized  by  the  greater  quantity  of  alkalies, 
especially  sodium,  while  in  the  Pacific  series  the  alkalies  diminish  and 
calcium  and  magnesium  occur  in  greater  quantity.  The  ultra-basic 
magnesian  rocks  (i.e.  Crofesima)  appear  to  be  common  to  both  series. 
Both  also  possess  acid  members. 

According  to  existing  observations,  the  tephritic  series  is  found  in  the 
Atlantic  Ocean,  Africa,  Antarctis,  and  parts  of  Europe.  It  predominates 
within  an  arc  drawn  from  Tristan  d'Acunha  through  Trinidad,  Fernando 
Noronha,  Ascension,  the  Cape  Verd  islands,  Teneriffe  to  Pantelleria,  Aden, 
and  Madagascar.  All  the  African  fractures,  the  isolated  outcrops  on  lake 
Tchad  and  Schari*,  and  the  Transvaal  belong  to  it.  In  the  south  it 
includes  Kerguelen,  the  Gaussberg  (according  to  Philippi),  Cape  Adare,  and 
South  Victoria  Land.  Prior  thinks  that  Dunedin  in  South  New  Zealand 
must  be  referred  here,  but  not  the  northern  island. 

To  the  north  of  the  Mediterranean  this  group  includes  the  Bohemian 
Mittelgebirge,  Rhone,  Vogelsberg,  Eifel,  Hohgau,  the  Kaiserstuhl  in  the 
Rhine  trough,  and  further  north  the  Inner  Hebrides,  Faeroes,  and  Iceland. 

The  Siebengebirge  on  the  Rhine,  the  Gleichenberg  in  Styria,  Predazzo, 
and  Auvergne  are  doubtful;  either  rocks  transitional  between  the  series 
occur,  or  there  are  differences  of  opinion  as  to  their  interpretation. 

The  Pacific,  andesitic  series  occurs  in  Santorin  (Dinarides),  the 
Carpathians,  and  in  the  andesites  at  the  eastern  end  of  the  tonalite  zone 

'  M.  Levy,  Sur  la  coordination  et  la  repartition  des  fractures  et  des  effondrements 
de  I'ecorce  terrestre  en  relation  avec  les  epanchements  volcaniques,  Bull.  Soc.  geol. 
France,  1898,  3«  ser.,  XXVI,  pp.  105-121. 

2  F.  Becke,  Verb.  Ges.  deutsch.  Naturf.  und  Aerzte  zu  Karlsbad,  1903,  2.  Theil, 
Protok.  d.  naturw.  Abtheil.  vom  22.  Sept.,  pp.  125-126.  [This  was  first  pointed  out  by 
Harker,  Science  Progress,  1896,  vol.  vi,  pp.  12-23.] 

^  G.  T.  Prior,  Contribution  to  the  Petrology  of  British  East  Africa  ;  Comparison  of 
volcanic  rocks  from  the  Great  Rift  Valley  with  rocks  from  Pantelleria,  the  Canary 
Islands,  Ascension,  St.  Helena,  Aden,  and  Abyssinia,  Min.  Mag.,  1903,  XIII,  pp.  228-263, 
and  Nat.  Antarct.  Exped.,  I.  Geol.,  1907,  p.  122  et  seq. 

*  Gentil  et  Preydenberg,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  17  fevr.  1908. 


CH.  XVI]         ATLANTIC  AND  PACIFIC  LAVAS 


589 


of  the  Alps.  Vesuvius  and  the  Phlegraean  fields  are  assigned  by  Becke  to 
the  tephritic  series. 

All  the  coasts  of  the  Pacific  Ocean — from  New  Zealand  to  Java,  Alaska, 
and  all  the  western  coast  of  America  belong  to  the  andesitic  series.  Where 
the  northern  Antilles  advance  into  the  Atlantic  region  the  andesitic  rocks 
advance  with  them.  Lacroix  points  out  the  affinity  between  the  volcanic 
rocks  of  the  Lesser  Antilles  and  the  rocks  of  Ecuador  and  South  Columbia 
studied  by  Kiich.  On  the  other  hand,  tephritic  rocks  are  known  in  the 
tableland  of  Texas. 

Tephritic  rocks  also  prevail  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  United  States, 
whereas  in  the  west,  as  we  have  seen,  andesites  occur.  The  rocks  of  the 
laccolites  and  sheets  to  the  east  of  the  Rocky  mountains  in  Montana  are 
regarded  by  Becke  as  a  peculiar  development  of  the  tephritic  series. 

Although  many  important  points  still  await  investigation,  yet  the 
results  already  obtained  are  so  comprehensive  that  we  do  not  hesitate  to 
accept  the  proposed  designations,  and  to  recognize  the  tephritic  as  the 
Atlantic  and  the  andesitic  as  the  Pacific  series.  Becke  even  goes  a  step 
further,  since  he  regards  these  designations  not  merely  as  geographical  but 
as  indicative  of  two  regional  types,  the  one  connected  with  inbreaks  due  to 
radial  contraction  (tephritic,  Atlantic)  and  the  other  with  folding  by  tan- 
gential thrusting  (andesitic.  Pacific)  Many  facts  may  be  cited  in  favour 
of  this  view,  as  for  example  the  advance  of  the  andesites  into  the  Antilles, 
and  in  contrast,  the  occurrence  of  tephritic  rocks  in  Texas,  or  again,  the 
entrance  of  the  andesites  into  the  Aegaean  sea,  the  Carpathians,  and  parts 
of  the  Alps.  Even  the  tephritic  nature  of  the  rocks  in  the  surrounding 
neighbourhood  of  Naples  is  in  accordance  with  the  supposed  existence  of 
an  inbreak  at  this  locality. 

The  island  of  Java,  as  described  by  Verbeek  and  Fennema,  affords  an 
instructive  instance.  The  volcanic  zone  is  formed  by  116  volcanos,  all  of 
considerable  size.  In  addition  to  this  zone  there  exists  a  region  of  limited 
extent  characterized  by  tephritic  leucite  lavas  (III,  p.  261).  It  is  formed 
by  five  volcanos  situated  along  the  north-east  coast  and  on  the  adjacent 
island  of  Baw^an,  and  extends,  according  to  the  latest  accounts,  through 
Saleyer  into  south  Celebes.  At  the  same  time  an  important  abyss 
(—  5,121  meters)  occurs  in  the  sea  of  Flores  to  the  south  of  Saleyer  and 
the  small  adjacent  islands  (also  leucitic),  and  separates  them  from  the 
leucitic  volcanos  in  Baw^an  and  Java.  Thus  it  seems  possible  to  dis- 
tinguish the  boundaries  of  an  Atlantic  region,  the  existence  of  which  is 
also  suggested  by  the  older  rocks  of  the  Karimoen  islands ;  yet  within  this 
region  stands  the  volcano  of  Lourous,  one  of  the  leucitic  cones  of  the  north- 

^  F.  Becke,  Die  Eruptivgebiete  des  bohmischen  Mittelgebirges  und  der  americanischen 
Anden.  Atlantische  und  pazifische  Sippe  der  Eruptiv-Gesteine,  Becke,  Min.-petr.  Mitth., 
1903,  XXII,  pp.  209-265. 


590 


DISTEIBUTION  OF  VOLCANOS 


[part  V 


east  coast,  which  in  a  comparatively  late  eruption  poured  out  hornblende 
andesite,  the  Pacific  rock  of  the  principal  zone  ^. 

This  may  be  a  boundary  phenomenon ;  nevertheless  it  points  to  a  com- 
paratively sharp  separation  of  the  two  rocks  below  the  surface. 

We  have  already  alluded  to  the  tephritic  nature  of  the  Terror  volcanos 
as  a  reason  for  assigning  South  Victoria  Land  to  the  Atlantic  hemisphere, 
and  Gourdon  has  called  attention  to  a  block  of  alkali-rich  granite  on  the 
island  of  Wandel  which  he  regards  as  an  erratic  in  an  Andine  region^. 
Future  research  will  show  whether  it  is  an  indication  of  the  Atlantic 
foreland.  The  confirmation  of  the  tectonic  and  petrographical  results  is 
mutual.  We  may  regard  the  tephritic  nature  of  the  Atlantic  islands  as 
testifying  to  the  organic  unity  of  the  Atlantic  coasts,  and  in  like  manner 
the  andesite  rocks  in  the  Carpathians  and  Alps  as  an  indication  of  their 
connexion  with  the  Asiatic  system. 

Becke  s  hypothesis  rests  on  the  assumption  that  in  the  funnels  of  the 
Pacific  volcanos  a  very  considerable  consumption  of  sedimentary  rocks 
occurs;  this  would  explain  the  large  amount  of  calcium  and  magnesium 
contained  in  them.  The  following  observations  may  also  be  considered  in 
this  connexion : — 

In  the  Atlantic  hemisphere  rigef action  must  have  made  particularly 
rapid  progress  during  the  later  periods.  Towards  the  close  of  the  Carboni- 
ferous the  western  Altaides  were  folded  across  the  Ocean,  and  the  folding 
of  the  Cape  mountains  must  have  continued  into  the  epoch  of  the  lower 
Trias.  After  this  time,  however,  no  important  folding  occurred  from  the 
Ganges  to  cape  Horn.  In  the  middle  of  the  Tertiary  aera  rigef  action  was 
already  so  far  advanced  that  the  Rhine  trough  opened  up  obliquely  across 
the  Variscan  strike.  In  Laurentia  rigefaction  is  much  older  still,  and  in 
the  Sahara  it  dates  at  least  from  the  upper  Silurian. 

Thus  the  question  arises  whether  the  diminution  of  calcium  and  mag- 
nesium in  the  Atlantic  hemisphere  may  not  stand  in  some  connexion  with 
the  progress  of  consolidation  (IV,  p.  547).  We  may  also  inquire  whether 
it  was  the  subsidence  of  the  Altaides  (an  event  anterior  to  the  posthumous 
building  up  of  the  Alpides)  which  gave  rise  to  the  Pacific  rocks,  while  at 
the  same  time  Atlantic  rock  made  its  appearance  in  the  foreland.  But  as 
Becke  justly  observes,  we  have  first  to  determine  whether  this  distinction 
between  Atlantic  and  Pacific  rocks  can  also  be  recognized  in  the  earlier 
eruptive  epochs. 

^  R.  D.  M.  Verbeek  et  R.  Fennema,  Description  geologique  de  Java  et  Madoura,  2  vols. , 
8vo,  Amsterdam,  1896,  atlas,  p.  986  et  seq.,  p.  1015;  and  Verbeek,  Rapport  sur  les 
Moluques,  8vo,  Batavia,  1908,  844  pp.  and  atlas,  in  particular  pp.  772,  773.  The  latter 
very  comprehensive  work  came  to  hand  too  late  to  be  made  use  of  in  the  preceding 
chapters. 

^  Gourdon,  Expedition  Charcot,  Geogr.  phys.  etc.,  p.  208. 


591 


CHAPTEB  XVII 
THE  MOON.    HYPOTHESES.  RETROSPECT 

The  moon.  Lunar  and  terrestrial  sea  basins.  Separation  of  the  moon  and  its  conse- 
quences. Isostatic  compensation  of  mountains.  Compensation  of  continents.  Com- 
pensation, in  general.    Contraction  of  the  earth's  body.  Retrospect. 

The  moon  (see  pi.  V).  The  satellite  which  accompanies  our  planet  is 
a  fragment  of  our  planet  itself.  The  elevations  on  the  moon  probably 
reach  a  height  of  7,000  meters.  This  measurement  is  obtained  from  the 
steep  interior  slopes  of  Casatus  and  Newton,  situated  on  the  southern 
limb  of  the  moon.  The  shadow  which  descends  into  the  crater  of  Theo- 
philus  reveals  a  precipice  of  5,500  meters ;  the  peak  of  Huyghens  in  the 
lunar  Apennines  rises  to  as  great  a  height.  Colours  may  also  be  recog- 
nized, dark  spreads  of  lava  in  the  Mare  Crisium,  Mare  Tranquillitatis,  and 
elsewhere;  spots  also  of  dazzling  whiteness,  such  as  Aristarchus;  long 
white  rays,  such  as  proceed  from  Tycho,  Copernicus,  and  others. 

If  we  would  attempt  to  compare  the  earth  with  the  moon  we  must  first 
remove  from  it  not  only  the  atmosphere  which  breaks  the  brilliance  of  the 
sunlight,  but  also  the  masses  of  Polar  ice,  the  snow  fields  of  the  high 
mountains,  the  prairies  and  forests,  the  soil,  and  finally  all  the  waters 
of  the  Ocean  and  all  the  features  consequent  on  erosion  and  abrasion.  Its 
bare  face  shows  at  once  how  accustomed  we  are  to  compare  the  relative 
heights  of  the  earth  with  the  absolute  heights  of  the  moon.  The  heights 
of  the  moon  may  descend  more  steeply  than  those  of  the  earth ;  but  they 
are  not  more  considerable. 

Let  us  now  imagine  ourselves  ascending  from  the  deepest  abysses  of  the 
Oceans  to  the  highest  mountain  summits,  and  let  us  follow  at  the  same 
time  the  figures  published  by  H.  Wagner  ^.  When  in  our  ascent  we  have 
reached  a  level  of  —  4,000  meters,  39  per  cent,  of  the  surface  of  the  litho- 
sphere  already  lies  below  us.  At  a  level  of  --  3,000  meters,  52  per  cent. ; 
that  is,  more  than  half  the  planetary  surface  lies  lower  than  --  3,000 
meters.  When  we  reach  the  sea-shore  we  have  left  behind  71-8  per  cent, 
of  the  surface.  Only  28-2  per  cent,  forms  dry  land,  and  of  the  entire 
surface  of  the  planet  only  6  per  cent,  lies  above  a  level  of  +  1,000  meters 
So  trifling  is  the  total  surface  of  the  mountains  as  a  whole,  while  that  of 
the  high  mountains  alone  is  more  trifling  still. 

^  H.  Wagner,  Lehrbuch  der  Geographic,  7th  ed.,  8vo,  1903, 1,  p.  254. 


592 


THE  MOON 


[part  V 


The  morning  sun  shines  far  below  us  over  the  coast  of  North  Chile, 
where  the  watershed  of  Atacama  rises  almost  13  kilometers  above  the 
exposed  abysses.  From  the  summit  of  Llullaico  the  height  is  more  than 
14  kilometers,  but  the  abysses  are  too  remote  to  show  the  whole  length  of 
the  shadows  cast  by  the  mountains,  nor  in  the  early  light  can  we  discern 
the  boundary  between  the  abyss  bordering  the  coast  and  the  sea  floor 
which  overlooks  the  abyss.  Above  the  sea  floor  rise  hundreds  of 
islands  arranged  in  curves,  some  of  them  considerable  masses,  others 
like  slender  turrets,  and  yet  others  more  slender  still,  almost  resembling 
minarets.  These  are  4  to  5,  in  one  case  (Guam)  more  than  9  kilometers 
high,  and  as  the  day  advances  their  shadows  move  beneath  our  eyes  as  if 
cast  by  the  gnomons  of  so  many  gigantic  sun  dials.  In  the  north  a  dark 
spot  is  visible,  the  basalt  field  of  the  Snake  and  Colorado,  and  while,  filled 
with  astonishment,  we  contemplate  this  spectacle,  twilight  sets  in,  and 
further  north  a  white  spot  stands  out  in  southern  Alaska.  This  extends 
from  lat.  60'  44'  N.,  long.  138°  30'  W.  (O'Connor  glacier,  north  side  of 
mount  St.  Elias)  into  the  valleys  of  the  lower  Pelly,  lower  Lewes,  and 
White  river,  and  finally  almost  to  lat.  64°  30'  N.  and  long.  141°  W.  (Forty 
Mile  district  in  the  region  of  the  Yukon).  This  spot  represents  the  white 
ash  probably  derived  from  the  volcano  of  Na-taz-hat  (about  lat.  61°  30'  N., 
long.  141°  30'  W.)^.  Before  night  descends  the  shadow  of  Fusiyama 
shows  a  height  of  11  kilometers. 

All  the  laborious  and  conscientious  efibrts  made  by  Madler,  Julius 
Schmidt,  and  other  distinguished  investigators  to  represent  the  surface  of 
the  moon  by  drawings  have  been  surpassed  by  the  achievements  of  photo- 
graphy. In  particular  the  Atlas  of  the  Moon,  containing  photographs  by 
Loewy  and  Puiseux,  and  published  by  the  Paris  Observatory,  afibrds  a 
rich  store  of  information  2.  In  addition  we  have  the  series  of  photographs 
by  the  Lick  and  Yerkes  observatory,  published  by  the  Smithsonian  institu- 
tion, with  descriptions  furnished  by  Shaler  ^    In  this  place  reference  will 

1  IV,  p.  400 ;  also  Brooks,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  1900,  XXI,  2,  p.  365.  Schwatka 
first  observed  the  ash  as  a  white  streak  in  the  forest  soil.  At  many  places  it  is  only  an 
inch  to  a  foot  thick  ;  towards  the  Skolai  range  it  reaches  a  thickness  of  100  feet. 

*  M.  Loewy  et  P.  Puiseux,  Atlas  photographique  de  la  Lune,  publie  par  I'Gbservatoire  de 
Paris,  1896 ;  so  far  59  maps,  foHo,  and  9  parts  of  text.  Unfortunately  M.  Loewy  did  not  live 
to  see  the  completion  of  this  beautiful  work.  The  views  expressed  above  on  melting 
up  and  lunar  volcanic  activity  were  first  published  by  me  in  1895  (Einige  Bemerkungen 
iiber  den  Mond,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  CIV,  pp.  21-54).  They  were  adopted  as 
regards  essential  points  by  M.  Puiseux  (La  Terre  et  la  Lune,  8vo,  Paris,  1908,  176  pp., 
maps,  in  particular  p.  139).  On  the  other  hand,  subsequent  observations  have  convinced 
me  that  as  regards  the  rays  of  Tycho,  &c.,  the  theory  of  Loewy  and  Puiseux  is  more  cor- 
rect. Several  figures  from  this  atlas  are  given  by  F.  Sacco,  Essai  schematique  de  Seleno- 
logie,  8vo,  Turin,  1907,  47  pp.    It  is  impossible  to  give  a  list  of  all  the  recent  literature. 

'  N.  S.  Shaler,  A  Comparison  of  the  Features  of  the  Earth  and  the  Moon ;  Smithson. 
Contrib.,  1903,  XXXIV,  79  pp.,  25  maps. 


CH.XVII]         LUNAR  SMELTING  FUENACES 


598 


be  made  to  some  special  points  only,  and  first  of  all  the  volcanic 
phenomena. 

Great  smelting  furnaces.  The  so-called  seas  of  the  moon  are  for  the 
most  part  insunken  plains  of  consolidated  lava,  with  a  regular  round  or 
oval  outline  and  fairly  sharp  boundaries ;  sometimes,  however,  they  over- 
flow into  neighbouring  depressions,  as  is  particularly  well  seen  on  the 
margin  of  the  Mare  Humorum,  where  the  lava  of  this  '  sea '  flows  away 
into  several  older  craters  and  almost  submerges  others.  The  crowding 
together  and  confluence  of  the  circles  may,  it  is  true,  give  rise  to  com- 
paratively irregular  outlines,  but  a  number  of  typical  cases,  such  as  the 
ellipse  of  the  Mare  Crisium  (570  and  450  kilometers)  or  the  Sinus  Iridum 
(215  kilometers)  as  it  opens  into  the  Mare  Imbrium  clearly  show  the 
normal  form.  In  the  Mare  Nectaris,  Loewy  and  Puiseux  distinguish  five 
subsidences  in  succession,  with  a  total  fall  of  several  thousand  meters. 
Where  two  contours  intersect,  wedge-shaped  horsts  are  formed.  Such  are 
cape  Heraclides  and  cape  Laplace  on  the  boundary  between  the  Sinus 
Iridum  and  the  Mare  Imbrium,  and  on  a  larger  scale  the  Apennines  and 
Carpathians  between  the  Mare  Imbrium  and  the  almost  circular  Mare 
Serenitatis. 

The  terrestrial  batholites  show  us  how  a  heated  mass  in  the  interior  of 
the  earth  may,  if  the  heat  is  continually  renewed,  approach  the  surface  by 
melting  its  way  up.  If  it  reaches  the  surface,  then,  as  we  see  in  the  moon, 
a  lava  plain  is  formed,  the  outline  of  which,  owing  to  the  comparatively 
small  diameter  of  our  satellite,  must  approximate  to  a  conic  section. 
The  regular  peripheral  subsidence-fractures  which  surround  the  Mare 
Humorum  at  some  distance  from  its  margin,  and  other  similar  examples 
show,  however,  that  in  some  cases  the  circular  subsidence  extends  beyond 
the  surface  of  the  lava. 

Such  very  considerable  melting-up  of  the  moon's  substance  shows  us 
also  how  widely  nature  departs  from  any  regular  course  of  cooling.  The 
renewed  occurrence  of  high  temperatures  in  regions  which  have  already 
solidified  is  frequent  in  the  history  both  of  the  earth  and  the  moon, 
and  we  do  not  know  whether  the  consolidated  outer  envelope  of  the 
earth  may  not  be  exposed,  even  at  the  present  day,  to  similar  attacks  from 
within. 

Circular  ramparts.  These  are  smaller  smelting  furnaces,  and  are  seen 
most  clearly  in  the  face  of  the  moon.  In  the  midst  of  a  gently  rising,  or 
even  perfectly  level  surface,  a  vast  abyss  opens  up,  with  steep,  often 
terraced,  walls,  descending  in  many  cases  to  a  depth  of  several  thousand 
meters.  At  the  bottom  lies  a  consolidated  lava  lake ;  frequently  the  first 
subsidence  has  been  followed  by  a  second,  third,  sometimes  a  fourth,  and 
exceptionally  even  by  a  fifth.  The  lake  sinks  deeper  and  deeper,  almost 
always  becoming  smaller  at  each  descending  stage,  and  at  the  last,  when  it 

SOIiLAS  IV  Q  q 


594 


THE  MOON 


[part  V 


has  become  smallest,  it  may  lie  more  than  5,000  meters  beneath  the 
surrounding  surface. 

Loewy  and  Puiseux  justly  regard  the  Sinus  Iridum  as  a  connecting 
link  between  the  seas  and  these  smaller  and  more  sharply  defined  smelting 
furnaces,  some  of  which,  such  as  Clavius,  for  example,  still  attain  a 
diameter  of  228  kilometers.  With  equal  justice  Dana  compared  them 
as  early  as  1846  to  the  volcanos  of  Hawaii,  and  Pickering  has  pub- 
lished a  series  of  instructive  photographs  of  these  terrestrial  volcanos 
which  were  taken  for  the  special  purpose  of  comparison  with  the 
moon  ^.  In  Hawaii  the  lava  lake  of  Mauna  Loa  lies  on  the  summit  of 
a  gigantic  mass  of  lava  which  rises  4,175  meters  above  the  sea-level,  or 
9  kilometers  above  the  sea-floor,  and  slopes  gently  down  on  all  sides. 
A  few  lunar  volcanos,  and  in  particular  Wargentin,  have  had  force 
enough  to  drive  their  lavas  upwards  till  they  overflowed  the  margin  of  the 
pipe.  It  is  clear  that,  if  the  number  of  these  lunar  volcanos  had  been  less 
and  the  force  more  considerable,  their  repeated  overflow  would  have 
produced  mountains  of  a  similar  kind  to  those  of  Hawaii. 

At  the  same  time  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  beside  the  lofty 
Mauna  Loa  there  stands  the  much  lower  Kilauea  (1,280  meters),  which  also 
bears  a  lava  lake,  and  that  with  a  distance  between  them  of  little  more 
than  30  kilometers  the  diflerence  in  height  between  the  two  lakes  of 
glowing  lava  amounted,  at  the  time  of  Button's  visit  in  1882,  to  not  less 
than  2,834  meters  ^. 

In  the  case  of  terrestrial  volcanos,  the  margin  of  a  comparatively  large 
crater  is  not  seldom  surmounted  by  a  younger  crater  which  is  almost 
always  smaller ;  this  rides  upon  the  edge.  Thus  in  the  Phlegraean  fields 
the  crater  of  Agnano  rides  upon  Astroni.  In  the  Albanian  mountains  the 
crater  lakes  of  Nemi  and  Albano  are  seated  upon  the  border  of  the  crater 
of  Tusculum.  The  lake  of  Bolsena  is  surrounded,  according  to  Moderni's 
investigations,  by  four  craters,  each  of  which  has  an  independent  history ; 
they  surround  traces  of  eighty- nine  pipes  (including  doubtful  cases). 
Within  the  immediate  surroundings  of  the  lake  of  Bracciano,  Moderni 
has  counted  fifty-two  of  these  pipes  ^. 

*  Loewy  et  Puiseux,  Atlas  photographique  de  la  Lune,  II,  p.  54 ;  J.  D.  Dana,  On  the 
Volcanos  of  the  Moon,  Am.  Journ.  Sci.,  1846,  2nd  ser.,  II,  pp.  335-355  ;  J.  W.  Pickering, 
Lunar  and  Hawaian  physical  Features  compared,  Mem.  Am.  Acad.  Arts  and  Sci.,  1906, 
XIII,  pp.  151-179. 

2  C.  E.  Button,  Hawaian  Volcanos,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.,  (1882-1883)  1884,  IV, 
pp.  75-219,  maps,  in  particular  p.  120  (also  IV,  p.  322). 

^  P.  Moderni,  Contribuzione  alio  studio  geologico  dei  vulcani  Vulsini ;  Boll.  R.  Com. 
geol.  ital.,  1903,  XXXV,  p.  121  et  seq.,  map  ;  Le  bocche  eruttive  dei  vulcani  Sabatini,op. 
cit.,  1896,  XXVII,  p.  57  et  seq.,  map.  It  is  true  that  Pareto  and  Ponzi  already  conjectured 
that  these  two  lakes  are  not  craters  but  *  avallamenti,'  i.  e.  valleys,  formed  by  the  coales- 
cence of  several  ejectamental  cones.  But  it  is  very  difficult  to  believe  that  these  great 
circular  water  basins,  situated  on  the  broad  cones  of  tuff,  and  the  straight  line  of  the 


CH.XVII]  RIDING  CEATERS  595 

This  riding  of  the  younger  circle  upon  the  edge  of  the  older  long  since 
attracted  the  attention  of  selenologists.  It  may  be  observed  in  Stoefler, 
Baronius,  Albategnius  A,  Thebit  A,  Davy,  Clavius  a  and  h,  and  even 
several  successive  generations  may  be  distinguished,  as  a  rule  with  a  con- 
tinually decreasing  diameter,  and  the  lava  lake  always  at  a  lower  level. 
If  we  could  wander  around  Clavius  or  Stoefler  it  might  be  possible  to 
count  as  many  remains  of  pipes  as  Moderni  counted  around  the  lake  of 
Bracciano  (pi.  V,  fig.  2). 

The  ^  riding '  on  the  ancient  rampart  may  perhaps  be  explained  by  the 
fact  that  in  the  ancient  crater,  on  the  margin  of  the  obstruction  next  the 
inner  side  of  the  rampart,  peripheral  Assuring  frequently  occurs ;  out  of 
the  fissures  gases  ascend.  This  is  beautifully  exemplified  in  the  Phlegraean 
solf atara  ^.  The  outrushing  gas  bores  a  way  for  itself  and  a  new  crater  is 
formed.  From  these  smaller  peripheral  apertures,  according  to  Loewy  and 
Puiseux,  proceed  the  long  rays  of  white  ash  which  surround  many  of  the 
•craters.  This  is  why  some  of  these  rays  are  not  radial,  but  tangential, 
with  regard  to  the  crater.  From  Meissier  two  slightly  divergent  tangen- 
tial lines  proceed,  which  were  probably  produced  by  the  same  ash-cyclone. 
It  has  been  shown,  in  particular,  that  the  rays  proceeding  from  Tycho 
exhibit  a  denser  whiteness  where  they  encounter  an  obstacle,  and  that 
in  general  lines  of  this  kind  flatten  out  upon  plains.  Consistently 
with  this  Sapper  observed  in  the  eruption  of  Santa  Maria  in  Guate- 
mala, October,  1902,  that  the  slopes  facing  towards  the  volcano  were  more 
thickly  covered  with  ash  than  those  facing  away  from  it  2. 

The  smaller  bright  white  flecks^  such  as  occur  in  Humboldt  and  Werner, 
a.re  possibly  formed  of  alum,  which  also  occurs  at  the  bottom  of  the 
Phlegraean  solfatara. 

The  occurrence  of  ash  and  pulverization  in  the  lunar  eruptions  pro- 
duces a  further  important  approach  to  terrestrial  conditions,  but  ejecta- 
mental  cones  are  rare.  Loewy  and  Puiseux  describe  Cichus  as  such 
a  cone ;  another  is  described  by  Pickering ;  it  occurs  between  Ries  and 
Mercator.  Hyginus  is  rather  a  pit  on  a  fissure,  and  is  itself  cut 
through  by  the  fissure  ;  it  reminds  us  of  Tarawera  in  New  Zealand,  which 
in  a  short  space  of  time — a  few  hours — was  cut  straight  across  by  a  fissure 
in  1886.  The  fissure  of  Tarawera  presents  numerous  smaller  pits  and 
craters  along  its  course ;  they  may  be  as  much  as  800  feet  deep  and  have 
emitted  ash  but  no  lava.    Such  fissures  accompanied  by  numerous  smaller 

Roman  eruptive  centres  should  have  arisen  by  the  accidental  grouping  together  of 
smaller  volcanos. 

1  G.  Mercalli,  Stato  att.  d.  Solfatara  di  Pozzuoli,  Atti  Accad.  Ponton.,  1907,  XXXVII, 
no.  6,  16  pp. 

^  Loewy  et  Puiseux,  III,  p.  37  et  seq.,  VII,  17  ;  VIII,  14  (cyclones)  et  passim  ;  Sapper, 
€entralbl.  f.  Min.,  1903,  p.  43 ;  cyclones  are  described  by  this  author  in  N.  J.  f.  Min., 
1904, 1,  p.  63  ;  also  Lacroix,  Mont  Pelee,  II,  pp.  20,  21. 

Q  q  2 


596 


THE  MOON 


[part  V 


pits  and  craters,  and  here  and  there  by  a  small  accumulation  of  debris, 
occur  at  a  number  of  places  in  the  moon  and  sometimes  even  cut  through 
the  surface  of  a  smelting  furnace.  They  may  be  clearly  seen,  for  example, 
between  Copernicus  and  Eratosthenes.  They  are  related  to  the  smelting 
furnaces  somewhat  in  the  same  way  as  the  long  straight  fissures  of 
Iceland,  with  their  rows  of  pits  and  craters,  are  related  to  the  caldron  of 
Askia  (IV,  p.  265). 

On  the  slopes  both  of  Kilauea  and  Mauna  Loa  isolated  ejectamental 
cones  occur,  distinct  from  the  lava  lakes.  Mauna  Kea  (4,230  meters) 
to  the  north  of  Mauna  Loa  does  not  possess  a  lava  lake,  but  bears  a  number 
of  these  cones.  From  its  general  structure  we  see  that  it  has  been  formed 
in  the  same  way  as  its  neighbours ;  the  ash  cones  are  here  of  later 
formation,  following  on  the  extinction  of  the  open  lava  lake. 

In  this  way  the  transition  is  made  from  the  open  pipes  to  the  accumu- 
lations issuing  from  fissures,  and  the  normal  terrestrial  ash  cones. 

The  moon  presents  yet  another  distinct  group  of  circular  apertures 
distinguished  by  a  sharply-defined  margin  and  great  depth  ;  these  may 
attain  a  diameter  of  15  and  even  18  kilometers.  Sometimes  the  lip  seems 
to  be  produced  into  an  almost  conical  form.  Of  this  group  Ptolemaeus  A 
may  be  regarded  as  a  type.  These  apertures  have  probably  been  formed 
by  isolated  explosions  of  gas.  They  may,  perhaps,  be  compared  to  the 
diamond-bearing  pipes  of  South  Africa  ^. 

Whatever  other  physical  differences  distinguish  the  earth  and  the  moon 
they  agree  in  the  fact  that  the  volcanic  activity  on  both  has  passed  through 
a  very  similar  course  of  development.  Light  and  dark  coloured  ash  may  be 
distinguished,  showing  the  separation  of  Sal  rocks.  This  also  presupposes 
a  certain  amount  of  oxygen  for  the  formation  of  oxides.  If  the  occurrence 
of  alum  should  be  confirmed,  we  should  have  another  important  point  of 
resemblance  to  terrestrial  conditions.  Everything  points  to  the  original 
presence  of  juvenile  gases. 

Considering  how  close  a  correspondence  exists,  the  question  arises  whether 
the  terrestrial  sediments  do  not  conceal  some  sort  of  substructure  which  may 
have  been  formed  in  the  course  of  time  in  the  same  manner  as  the  lunar 
surface,  and  may  have  influenced,  or  even  controlled,  all  the  tectonic  features 
of  the  earth. 

A  comparatively  simple  case  is  presented  by  the  valley  of  the  Alps, 
a  rectilinear  furrow,  130  kilometers  in  length  ;  its  breadth  at  its  commence- 
ment is  9  to  10  kilometers,  thence  onwards  it  decreases  at  first  and  for 
a  distance  of  90  kilometers  very  slowly,  and  then  very  suddenly,  as  it 
undergoes,  to  all  appearance,  a  slight  bayonet- shaped  displacement ;  but  it 
is  still  recognizable  for  another  40  kilometers.   The  very  steep  walls  on  its 

*  On  this  group  and  the  not  infrequent  occurrence  of  twins,  see  also  Einige  Bemer- 
kungen  iiber  den  Mond,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  CIV,  p.  46. 


CH.XVIIJ  THE  VALLEY  OF  THE  ALPS 


597 


two  sides  are  3,000  meters  in  height.  We  should  take  the  valley  for  a 
fault-trough  were  it  not  that  its  bottom  is  perfectly  level.  It  is  supposed 
that  a  slight  displacement  of  the  walls  may  have  occurred  ^. 

Supposing  that  before  the  formation  of  this  split,  the  lava,  more  than 
3,000  meters  in  thickness,  as  shown  by  the  walls,  had  been  overlain  by 
several  thousand  meters  of  gneiss  and  ancient  schist,  as  in  East  Africa, 
then  the  rending  would  have  started  from  the  surface,  where  the  cleft 
would  have  been  broader,  and  owing  to  fragments  detaching  themselves  from 
the  sides  and  slipping  down  it  would  have  preserved  the  characters  of  a  dis- 
junctive trough,  let  down  along  step-faults.  The  conjectured  displacement 
of  the  faulted-down  strips  would,  at  most,  have  found  expression  in  its 
breadth.  In  addition,  we  may  call  to  mind  the  theories  formed  in  con- 
nexion with  the  right  angle  in  the  descents  near  Ankober,  and  with  the 
low-lying  Afar. 

The  valley  of  the  Alps  terminates  near  the  Mare  Imbrium ;  its  outline 
there  is  not  clear ;  the  end  of  the  fissure  occurs,  however,  at  its  broadest 
part,  and  in  this  it  resembles  the  southern  end  of  the  Rhine  valley. 

The  Wall  in  the  moon  is  a  simple  fault. 

There  are  a  number  of  straight  parallel  lines  on  the  moon,  which  seem 
to  indicate  a  tendency  in  its  surface  to  form  fissures ;  several  of  these  lines 
occur,  for  example,  between  Arzachel,  Albategnius,  and  Ptolemaeus.  We 
mention  them  here  because  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  earth  exhibits 
a  similar  tendency  in  the  contour  of  the  Indian  Ocean,  and  as  far  as  the 
region  of  the  East  African  faults  (where,  however,  they  run  in  a  more 
north  and  south  direction),  possibly  also  in  the  northernmost  part  of  the 
Atlantic  Ocean  as  far  as  Greenland.  The  fissures  which  run  from  Hyginus 
to  the  Mare  Tranquillitatis  are  ^arranged  in  an  alternating  series.  In  the 
East  African  trough,  as  is  well  known,  a  repeated,  abrupt,  oblique  back- 
ward movement  takes  place  from  the  neighbourhood  of  meridian  36°,  and 
an  equally  abrupt  return. 

Ocean  basins  of  the  moon  and  earth.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  first 
volume  of  this  work  it  was  stated  that  the  Oceanic  basins  of  the  earth 
arise  and  increase  in  extent  by  subsidence  and  inbreak  (I,  p.  604).  Evidence 
for  this  was  found  in  the  outlines  of  the  Atlantic  horsts,  which  cut  through 
the  structure,  the  breaking  off  of  whole  folded  ranges,  and  the  not  infre- 
quent advance  of  plant-bearing  beds  to  the  coast.  At  the  conclusion  of  the 
second  volume  the  excess  of  the  eustatic,  negative  displacements  of  the 
strand  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the  subsidences  must  take  place  in  abrupt 
gradations.  The  wedge-shaped  outlines  of  some  of  the  continents  were 
shown  to  have  arisen  through  the  intersection  of  two  areas  of  subsidence 
of  different  age  (II,  p.  537).  The  lunar  seas  are  likewise  areas  of  subsidence, 

1  Einige  Bemerkungen  iiber  den  Mond,  p.  39  ;  Loewy  et  Puiseux,  III,  p.  23  et  seq., 
IX,  p.  45. 


598 


THE  MOON 


[part  V 


are  likewise  separated  by  wedge-shaped  horsts,  and  also  of  unequal  age. 
Thus  the  lunar  Apennines  and  Caucasus,  for  example,  are  wedge-shaped 
horsts  separating  the  Mare  Serenitatis  and  Mare  Imbrium  (pi.  V,  fig.  1)  ; 
the  marginal  fractures  on  the  west  side  of  the  Mare  Nectaris,  for  example, 
at  the  foot  of  the  lunar  Pyrenees  bear  witness  to  the  inbreak ;  the  repeated 
lines  on  the  border  of  the  Mare  Humorum  show  the  after-subsidence ;  the 
Mare  Nectaris  and  Mare  Crisium  are  more  recent  than  others,  and  so  on. 

Iceland,  a  volcanic  panzer-horst,  the  subsidences  of  which  probably 
belong  to  a  higher  horizon  of  the  earth's  interior,  may  furnish  us  with  the 
truest  conception  of  the  caldron  fractures  of  the  moon.  They  occur  in  the 
north-west  peninsula  (IV,  p.  265,  fig.  23),  and  still  more  clearly  in  Faxafjord. 
Here  the  two  promontories  of  Snefells  Jokul  and  Reykjanes  represent  the 
lunar  capes  of  Heraclides  and  Laplace  at  the  entrance  to  the  Sinus  Iridum. 
They  are  followed  by  the  considerable  fracture  which  extends  in  an  arc 
from  the  north-east  to  Reykjavik  and  cuts  through  the  whole  of  Iceland. 

The  Calabrian  earthquakes  show  how  the  growth  of  a  caldron  fracture 
may  continue  under  our  very  eyes.  In  this  region  the  Lipari  volcanos  rise 
in  the  centre,  Aetna  on  the  periphery.  If  the  lavas  of  the  Lipari  volcanos 
were  to  spread  out  over  the  whole  depression  and  become  visible  to  the 
eye,  then  the  correspondence  with  lunar  forms  would  be  still  greater. 
The  Rousillon  cuts  into  the  Pyrenees  as  a  caldron  fracture  and  has  no 
relation  to  their  structure.  Many  similar  examples  have  been  given 
previously  (I,  p.  134). 

On  the  east  border  of  the  Alps  two  caldron  fractures  appear  to  come 
into  contact.  In  the  Paris  basin,  and  in  certain  parts  of  the  Mediterranean 
the  circular  form  is  more  or  less  preserved ;  when  the  extent  of  the  sub- 
sidence becomes  still  greater  the  circular  form  disappears. 

The  explanation  of  the  fact  that  lava  floods  do  not  occur  to  anything 
like  the  same  extent  on  the  earth  as  on  the  moon  is  probably  to  be  found 
in  the  thickness  of  the  outer,  and  in  part  sedimentary,  envelope.  The 
longer  duration  of  the  processes  has  also  caused  the  outlines  to  encroach  on 
one  another.  In  the  Pacific  Ocean  we  have  in  addition  the  confusion 
caused  by  later  tectonic  processes,  and  in  the  Indian  Ocean  the  use  made 
of  isolated  fissures  by  the  subsidence.  The  wedge-shaped  masses  of  Green- 
land, Africa  (including  the  Cape  mountains)  and  the  Indian  peninsula  are  not 
opposed  by  a  second  wedge,  as  the  lunar  Apennines  are  by  the  Caucasus. 

Loewy  and  Puiseux  find  that  three  constant  stages  may  be  distinguished 
in  the  moon,  each  of  which  indicates  a  long  period  of  rest  and  consolidation. 
The  first  of  these  corresponds  to  the  higher-lying,  but  little  interrupted 
and  older  regions  in  the  southern  part  of  the  moon ;  the  second,  at  least 
3,000  meters  lower,  to  the  general  level  of  the  seas,  and  the  third,  again 
3,000  meters  lower,  to  the  bottom  of  the  circular  walls,  which  were  formed 
at  the  expense  of  the  seas  after  their  consolidation.   Each  of  the  two  latter 


CH.  XVIl] 


OCEAN  DEPTHS 


599 


stages  is  regarded  as  indicating  the  retreat  of  the  lavas  to  an  equal  extent ; 
fresh  seas  and  circular  walls  have  been  formed  later,  at  the  expense  of  the 
most  recent  stage^  and  we  have  no  reason  to  assume  that  this  formation  took 
place  in  a  different  manner  from  the  seas  themselves  ^. 

We  have  already  observed,  in  comparing  Mauna  Loa  and  Kilauea,  to 
how  great  an  extent  the  upward  impulse  may  vary  in  adjacent  vents  ;  a 
general  sinking  of  the  lava  in  the  vents,  however,  may  indicate  a  general 
increase  in  the  gas  emission  and  contraction. 

On  the  earth  not  an  inch  of  the  surface  is  known  the  height  of  which 
has  remained  unaffected  by  denudation  or  other  processes,  and  thus  a  point 
of  comparison  with  the  first  phase,  the  ancient  land  in  the  south  of  the  moon, 
is  lacking.  We  must  have  recourse  to  mean  values,  but  these  also  fail  to 
give  the  original  level.  In  the  case  of  Africa  we  have  five  estimates  of  the 
mean  height,  all  lying  between  602  and  662  meters.  Eight  figures  for 
Asia  vary  between  920  and  1,010  meters.  Two  divergent  figures  lie  below 
these  numbers  2.  The  mean  depth  of  the  three  great  Oceans  amounts, 
according  to  Kriimmel's  later  calculations  to  3,997  meters,  3,858  for  the 
Atlantic,  3,929  for  the  Indian  and  4,097  for  the  Pacific  Ocean  ^.  Thus  the 
depths  of  the  Oceans  approach  so  closely  to  a  round  4,000  meters,  that  an 
observer  on  the  moon  might  regard  them  as  the  result  of  one  and  the  same 
phase  of  consolidation  (in  the  lunar  sense).  We  might  object  that  they  are 
of  different  age ;  he  would  reply  that  the  sum  of  the  aeons  which  is 
embraced  by  the  stratigraphical  chronology  of  the  geologist,  lies  wholly 
within  the  epoch  of  such  a  phase. 

Here  we  are  in  the  danger  zone  of  mean  figures.  The  way  in  which 
the  foredeeps  in  front  of  the  Burman  arc  advance  into  the  Indian  Ocean, 
and  those  in  front  of  the  North  Antilles  into  the  Atlantic  region  shows 
that  they  are  independent  of  the  general  Pacific  subsidence,  and  more 
recent  than  it.  The  bottom  of  the  Ocean  behaves  like  a  submerged 
foreland.  The  observer  in  the  moon  would  distinguish  three  stages,  that 
of  the  Indian  peninsula,  that  of  the  Pacific  Ocean,  and  that  of  the  fore- 
deeps,  each  of  them  about  4,000  meters  in  height.  The  continent  of  Asia 
would  correspond  to  the  folded  sediments  which  are  absent  on  the  moon. 
We  must  seek  a  broader  basis  for  our  discussion. 

The  terrestrial  sea  basins  are  such  mighty  interruptions  of  the  general 
surface,  that  distinguished  naturalists,  such  as  Wallace,  have  believed  them 
to  be  immutable  forms  of  the  body  of  the  earth  imprinted  on  it  from  the 
beginning ;  no  new  Oceanic  basin  could  be  formed,  and  no  existing  basin 
could  be  destroyed.  Observation  does  not  confirm  these  views.  We  must 
^  Loewy  et  Puiseux,  Atlas  photographique  de  la  Lune,  IX,  p.  12. 

^  Table  in  Supan,  Grundziige  der  physischen  Erdkunde,  4tli  ed.,  1908,  p.  48.  The 
divergent  figures  in  the  height  of  Asia  are,  Humboldt  (1844)  351  meters,  and  Lapparent,; 
879  meters  ;  for  mean  heights  and  depths,  see  also  Penck,  Morphologie,  8vo,  1894, 1,  p.  151. 

^  0.  Kriimmel,  Handbuch  der  Ozeanographie,  8vo,  Stuttgart,  1907, 1,  p.  144. 


600 


THE  MOON 


[part  V 


certainly  distinguish  between  the  outlines  of  the  seas  and  of  the  sea  basins. 
The  outlines  change,  and  not  without  reason  are  transgressive  or  supraconti- 
nental  seas  distinguished  from  the  deep  basins.  The  former  are  produced 
by  changes  in  the  shape  of  the  hydrosphere,  the  latter  by  deformations  of 
the  lithosphere.  The  outlines  of  the  transgressions  change ;  the  deep  basins 
change  also. 

The  subsidences  of  the  Altaides  which  occurred  in  Europe  were  accom- 
panied by  displacement  of  the  folding  processes,  and  it  even  seems  as 
though  it  were  just  these  subsidences  which  led  to  the  interruption  of 
any  further  folding  of  the  Altaides  in  Europe  and  North  Africa. 

In  later  times  the  Tethys  was  subjected  to  pressure,  which  came  from 
the  north  in  Asia,  and  from  the  south  in  Europe ;  in  the  great  mountain 
ranges  overthrusts  and  foldings  occurred,  the  deeps  were  closed  up  and  the 
sea  displaced.  Then  new  inbreaks  took  place ;  in  the  Mediterranean  they 
are  still  in  progress.  All  examples  of  caldron  fractures,  with  the  exception 
of  those  of  Iceland,  lie  inside  the  Altaides  or  their  posthumous  structures, 
Not  one  crosses  to  Africa,  and  this  explains  the  divergent  structure  which 
characterizes  the  south-eastern  part  of  the  Mediterranean  as  far  as  the 
rectilinear  Syrian  coast. 

A  deep  sea,  extending  from  Sunda  to  southern  Europe  was  incorporated 
with  the  continent,  and  that  this  process  really  involved  the  advance  of 
the  Pacific  and  very  profound  movement  is  proved  not  only  by  the  entrance 
of  Tibetan  faunas  into  the  East  Alps,  but  also  by  the  occurrence  of  Pacific 
lavas  in  the  same  region.  In  this,  too,  lies  the  affinity  of  Gibraltar  with  the 
North  Antilles. 

The  changes  which  the  earth's  surface  has  experienced  in  later  times 
are  incomparably  greater  than  was  formerly  admitted,  and  we  hesitate 
therefore,  to  press  further,  on  the  basis  of  mean  figures,  this  comparison 
with  the  phases  of  consolidation  of  the  moon.  — 

Previous  to  the  recognition  of  the  process  by  which  terrestrial  batholites 
melt  a  way  for  themselves,  the  filling  of  the  lunar  seas  with  lavas  appeared 
so  inexplicable,  that  even  experienced  investigators  believed  that  these 
forms  were  produced  by  the  impact  of  foreign  bodies^.  A  batholite  on 
its  upward  course  does  not  produce  a  fissure  extending  through  several 
degrees  of  latitude.  If  it  does  not  actually  reach  the  surface  by  melting 
its  way,  then — and  this,  as  far  as  the  facts  can  be  discovered,  is  generally 
the  case — its  roof  opens  in  a  network  of  fissures,  and  the  lavas  issue  forth. 
This  is  the  explanation  of  the  group  volcanos. 

Outside  the  Atlantic  region,  group  volcanos  occur  only  in  an  eastern 
part  of  the  Pacific  Ocean  (Galapagos,  Easter  island),  and  in  the  western 
Mediterranean.  In  the  Atlantic  region  itself  we  have  the  Azores,  the 
Canary  islands,  and  the  Cape  Verd  islands.     We  should  mention  also 

'  Shaler,  Smithson  Contrib.,  1903,  XXXIV,  p.  15. 


CH.  XVII]  SEPAEATION  OF  THE  MOON 


601 


the  repeated  submarine  eruptions,  the  numerous  earthquakes,  which 
Rudolph  records  particularly  in  the  neighbourhood  of  St.  Paul,  and  the 
fact  that  while  there  are  no  active  volcanos  in  Brazil,  yet  in  the  west  of 
the  Ocean  the  only  islands  are  those  formed  of  volcanic  rock  (Trinidad, 
Fernando  Noronha,  Abrolhos).  It  is  well  known  that  the  majority  of 
Oceanic  islands  are  of  volcanic  origin^.  In  any  case  the  distribution 
of  recent  volcanos  over  the  bottom  of  the  Oceans  contrasts  with  their 
absence  in  India,  Cambodia,  the  North  China  mole,  Angara  land,  Laurentia, 
and  Brazil,  and  also  with  their  rare  occurrence  in  all  ancient  lands, 
excepting  Africa,  where  they  arise  in  a  different  manner.  At  the  same 
time  it  is  a  striking  fact  that  the  Sandwich  islands,  with  possibly  the 
greatest  accumulation  of  heavy  lavas  in  existence,  and  with  their  glowing 
lava  lakes  recalling  those  of  the  moon,  should  rise  from  the  midst  of  the 
Pacific  Ocean. 

Separation  of  the  moon  and  its  consequences.  It  is  with  extreme 
distrust  that  the  geologist  regards  all  attempts  to  apply  the  exact  methods 
of  mathematics  to  the  subject  of  his  studies.  For  him  the  present  is 
a  rapidly  passing  moment,  and  while  he  measures,  according  to  his  own 
standard  of  time,  the  age  of  the  foundations  upon  which  the  superstructure, 
admirable  enough  in  itself,  of  modern  geodesy  is  erected,  yet  these  founda- 
tions themselves  appear  to  him  mutable  and  temporary.  We  have  no 
precise  knowledge  as  to  what  extent  the  strand-line,  upon  which  so  many 
investigations  have  been  based,  may  be  influenced  by  continental  attraction ; 
but  that  its  level  changes  is  well  known.  A  considerable  part  of  the 
European  and  North  American  coasts  is  surrounded  in  the  Atlantic  Ocean 
by  a  shallow  shelf  with  a  well-defined  boundary  next  the  great  depths. 
This  enters  the  Arctic  seas,  and  Nansen  sounded  its  edge  to  the  north  of 
the  New  Siberian  islands  at  —100  meters.  Further  to  the  north,  i.e. 
beyond  lat.  80°  N.,  the  sea  is  3,000  to  4,000  meters  deep  2,  This  shelf 
records  the  existence  of  a  lower  level  of  the  strand  at  a  time  when  all  the 
coasts  mentioned  above  already  possessed  the  principal  features  of  the 
existing  relief. 

At  another,  and  probably  still  later  period,  the  water  over  the  North 
Pole  rose  to  a  much  higher  level  than  at  present.  Great  parts  of  Siberia 
were  submerged.  In  Scotland  the  strand  reached  a  level  of  + 161  meters. 
In  Arctic  North  America,  as  for  example  in  Discovery  Harbour  (lat. 
81°  45'  N.),  My  a  truncata  has  been  recorded  at  a  level  of  about  -1-591 
meters ;  in  Montreal  the  sea  reached  a  level  of  143  meters,  in  Nantucket 
of  26  meters ;  its  traces  disappear  towards  lat.  40°  N.    At  that  time,  as  is 

^  II,  p.  133  ;  E.  Rudolph,  Ueber  submarine  Erdbeben  und  Eruption  ;  Gerland,  Beitrage 
zur  Geophysik,  1, 1887,  p.  133  et  seq.,  in  particular  p.  289,  maps  (also  following  volumes). 

^  F.  Nansen,  The  Norwegian  North  Polar  Expedition,  1893-1896 ;  Scientific  Results 
V,   1904 ;  Bathymetric  Features  of  the  North  Polar  Seas,  4to,  232  pp.,  maps. 


602 


HYPOTHESES 


[part  V 


shown  by  the  shells,  both  the  Gulf  stream  and  a  cold  counter  current 
were  already  in  existence. 

Each  of  these  epochs  would  have  afforded  a  different  value  for  the 
ellipticity  of  the  earth,  and  we  must  console  ourselves  with  the  reflection 
that  in  those  stretches  of  coast  of  which  we  possess  the  most  precise  know- 
ledge such  general  alterations  of  the  hydrosphere  are  not  established  with 
certainty  ^. 

Making  the  reservations  which  attach  to  these  and  similar  observations, 
we  will  now  attempt  to  discover  whether  a  number  of  events,  which  are  all 
for  the  most  part  older  than  the  formations  accessible  to  the  hammer  of 
the  geologist,  have  or  have  not  left  their  last  and  most  external  traces  on 
the  existing  face  of  the  earth. 

Kant  was  aware,  as  early  as  1754,  that  the  rotation  of  the  earth  is 
retarded  by  the  tides,  and  that  this  retardation  will  continue  until  the 
earth  at  last  will  always  turn  the  same  side  to  the  moon  ^.  At  the  present  day 
we  are  able  to  measure  the  bodily  tides  of  the  planet  ^.  Jacobi  has  shown 
that  an  ellipsoid  with  three  axes  may  represent  the  equilibrium  figure  of 

*  In  forming  an  opinion  of  the  Bothnian  movements  we  must  be  careful  to  disregard 
the  prehistoric  indications,  which  were  determined  by  other  factors.  The  traces  in 
question  here  can  hardly  have  originated  very  long  before  the  close  of  the  seventeenth 
century  (II,  p.  413).  We  still  regard  them  as  phenomena  produced  by  discharge.  If 
we  are  unwilling  to  attribute  such  an  effect  to  a  change  in  the  atmospheric  precipita- 
tions alone,  we  may  assume  that  at  that  time  a  particularly  large  quantity  of  heavy 
water  produced  by  storms  travelled  from  the  Cattegat  across  the  threshold  of  the  northern 
basin,  and  maintained  the  freshwater  supplies  at  a  higher  level,  until  it  gradually  dis- 
appeared by  diffusion  (II,  p.  397).  Rosen's  works  show  the  difficulties  connected  with 
exact  measurements  in  these  waters  which  fluctuate  with  the  season  (Ymer,  1896,  XVI, 
j)p.  65-77,  map).  —  At  Swinemiinde  the  mean  level  has  remained  unchanged  since  1811 
(Seibt  in  Veroff.  k.  preuss.  geodat.  Inst.,  1881,  1890).  A  divergent  statement  for  Memel 
was  based  on  a  displacement  of  the  gauge  (II,  p.  400).  In  the  Y  in  front  of  Amsterdam 
the  mean  level  did  not  alter  from  1700  to  1860  (H.  G.  van  der  Sande-Bakhuyzen,  Akad. 
Amsterdam,  1908,  pp.  703-710).  —  Spratt's  statements  with  regard  to  a  tilting  movement 
in  Crete  (II,  p.  437)  are  based,  as  Cayeux  has  since  shown,  on  an  error  (Ann.  Geogr.,  1907, 
XVI,  pp.  97-116).  — A.  Grund  finds  that  the  strand-line  at  Ephesus  has  maintained  the 
same  level  since  the  time  of  the  oldest  harbour  structures  (Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien, 
1906,  CXV,  1,  pp.  241-262,  map).  The  discovery  of  pholas  holes,  which  are  older  than 
Elephas  antiquus,  in  the  caves  of  Monaco  (M.  Boule  on  Les  Grottes  de  Grimaldi,  4to, 
Monaco,  1906,  II,  p.  152  et  seq.)  shows  that  mistakes  arise  if  we  confuse  such  borings 
with  historic  characters.  From  the  works  of  MM.  Lamothe,  Depc^ret,  Choffat,  Negris, 
and  others,  which  relate  to  tracts  of  considerable  extent,  it  may  be  seen  which  of  the 
earlier  movements  of  the  Mediterranean  must  be  regarded  as  eustatic,  and  which  as 
local. 

2  Immanuel  Kant,  Untersuchung  der  Frage,  ob  die  Erde  in  ihrer  Umdrehung  um  die 
Achse  .  .  .  einige  Veranderungen  seit  den  ersten  Zeiten  ihres  Ursprunges  erlitten  habe, 
Konigsberg,  Frage-  und  Anzeigungsnachrichten,  1754,  nos.  23  and  24  ;  also  his  Siimmtliche 
Werke,  Ausgabe  Hartenstein,  1867,  I,  pp.  179-186. 

^  0.  Hecker,  Beobachtungen  an  Horizontalpendeln  iiber  die  Deformation  des  Erdkdrpers 
unter  dem  Einflusse  von  Sonne  und  Mond,  Veroff.  preuss.  geodat.  Inst.,  1907,  new  ser. 
110.  32,  95  pp. 


CH.XVII]  SEPAKATION  OF  THE  MOON  603 

a  rotating  fluid.  Poincare  has  determined  the  conditions  with  greater 
exactitude.  Considerations  of  this  kind  have  formed  the  starting-point 
of  a  series  of  brilliant  studies  in  which  Sir  George  H.  Darwin  has  devised 
new  methods  of  investigating  the  remote  history  of  our  planetary  system. 

The  most  important  results  obtained  by  Darwin  are  the  following. 
The  body  of  the  earth  was  in  fact  at  one  time  an  ellipsoid  with  three  axes, 
rotating  with  a  considerable  velocity.  A  constriction  began  to  form 
(Jacobi's  pear),  finally,  a  smaller  body,  the  moon,  detached  itself  from  the 
equator.  Its  mass  amounts  approximately  to  of  the  mass  of  the 
remaining  body  of  the  earth.  Each  of  the  two  bodies  gave  rise  to  tides 
in  the  other;  and  these,  owing  to  the  proximity  of  the  two  bodies  and 
their  viscous  state  at  that  time,  were  of  great  magnitude,  and  had  a 
retarding  action  owing  to  the  internal  friction  of  the  bodies.  The  action 
of  the  earth  on  the  moon  was  much  more  powerful  than  that  of  the  moon 
on  the  earth.  The  moon  began  to  move  away.  Its  velocity  of  rotation 
diminished ;  as  in  like  manner  did  that  of  the  earth,  which  at  that  time 
took  only  a  few  hours  to  complete  a  single  rotation,  and  now  requires 
24  hours.  This  change  proceeded  in  the  different  bodies  to  a  different 
degree.  Thus  it  has  come  to  pass  that  the  moon  has  almost  entirely  lost 
its  movement  of  rotation,  and  that  the  time  taken  by  the  moon  to  make 
one  revolution  round  the  earth  (month)  was  once  29  (at  that  time  some- 
what shorter)  days,  whereas  at  present  it  is  only  27  days.  A  time  will 
arrive,  as  the  rotation  of  the  earth  becomes  slowed  down,  in  which  the  day 
will  reach  a  length  of  55  hours ;  the  day  and  the  month  will  be  of  equal 
length,  as  during  the  period  of  Jacobi's  pear,  and  from  that  time  onwards 
the  earth  will  always  turn  the  same  side  to  the  moon,  supposing  that  no 
disturbances  are  caused  by  other  bodies^. 

The  mathematician  was  confronted  with  a  new  problem  in  the  resolu- 
tion of  the  common  centre  of  gravity ;  the  geologist  is  concerned  with  the 
discovery  of  some  traces  of  these  past  events,  and  seeks  in  particular  for 
indications  of  the  place  of  disruption,  of  greater  bodily  tides,  and  finally  of 
a  more  rapid  rotation. 

^  We  cannot  attempt  in  this  work  to  give  any  idea  of  the  merits  of  investigators  such 
as  Thomson  and  Schwarzschild,  who  besides  those  already  named  have  contributed  to  a 
clearer  conception.  A  history  of  the  process  has  been  given  by  A.  Prey  in  the  Astrono- 
mischer  Kalender  der  Wiener  Sternwarte  fiir  1905,  pp.  114-125.  Gr.  H.  Dai-win's  results 
were  first  published  in  some  detail  in  the  Phil.  Trans.,  vol.  170  A  (1879),  1880  (On  the 
Bodily  Tides  of  Viscous  and  Semi-elastic  Spheroids,  and  on  the  Ocean  Tides  upon  a  Yield- 
ing Nucleus,  pp.  1-35 ;  On  the  Precession  of  a  Viscous  Spheroid  and  on  the  remote  History 
of  the  Earth,  pp.  447-538  ;  Problems  connected  with  the  Tides  of  a  Viscous  Spheroid), 
which  were  followed  by  others  (in  particular  op.  cit.,  1880,  vol.  178  A,  pp.  379-428,  and 
1902,  vol.  198  A,  pp.  301-331  ;  also  in  particular  Poincare,  op.  cit.,  pp.  333-373).  A 
short  summary  was  given  by  Darwin  before  the  British  Association  in  Capetown,  1905 
(Nature,  1905,  vol.  72,  p.  441  et  seq.) ;  his  works  on  this  subject  are  collected  in  Scientific 
Papers,  Cambridge,  8vo,  so  far  I  and  II,  1906  and  1907. 


604 


HYPOTHESES 


[part  V 


There  is  no  lack  of  attempts.  As  early  as  1881  Robert  Ball  believed 
that  the  scar  left  on  the  earth,  at  that  time  by  no  means  consolidated, 
would  soon  have  closed,  but  since  the  magnitude  of  the  tides  decreases 
with  the  cube  of  the  distance,  we  must  assume  the  existence  of  extremely 
high  tidal  mountains  in  the  earliest  times. 

When  the  distance  of  the  moon  from  the  earth  was  ^  of  what  it  is  at 
present,  these  waves  must  have  been  600  feet  high  on  the  earth.  Exces- 
sively large  waves  of  lava  must  have  swept  over  the  moon.  Robert  Hull 
concluded  that  great  planes  of  denudation  must  have  been  produced. 
Darwin  attempted  to  moderate  these  views.  The  high  tides  assumed  by 
Ball  must  have  belonged  to  a  period  at  which  the  ellipticity  of  the  earth 
was  about  twelve  times  as  great  as  at  present;  such  a  state  is  probably 
anterior  to  any  of  those  which  are  recorded  in  the  stratified  rocks.  The 
movements  of  the  atmosphere,  storms,  and  atmospheric  precipitations,  must 
have  been  very  violent ;  Osmond  Fisher  proceeded  from  the  assumption  that 
heavy  basic  lavas  form  the  bottom  of  the  Ocean.  The  separation  of  the 
moon  involved  the  peeling  off  of  a  layer  of  unequal  thickness  ;  the  thicker 
places  would  be  our  existing  seas ;  it  was  the  lighter  (Sal)  parts  that  were 
removed ;  basic  lavas  would  have  welled  up  and  filled  up  the  basins  ^. 

Somewhat  later  J  cans  expressed  the  opinion  that  in  Darwin's  investiga- 
tions the  influence  of  gravitation  had  not  been  sufficiently  considered. 
Sollas  attempted  to  approach  the  problem  by  means  of  morphological  com- 
parisons, and  both  observers  arrived  by  different  roads  at  the  conclusion 
that  the  existing  form  of  the  earth  still  presents  traces  of  the  pear :  the 
land  hemisphere  corresponds  to  the  broad  end,  and  a  place  somewhere  in 
the  Pacific  Ocean  would  correspond  to  the  stalk  of  the  pear.  Lapworth 
thought  that  the  land  of  the  Arctic  regions  must  be  regarded  as  the  broad 
end  2. 

For  us  one  fact  alone  is  certain,  that  the  distribution  of  the  great  Ocean 
subsidences  is  not  accidental,  but  must  be  the  result  of  a  process  of  develop- 
ment, inherent  in  the  nature  of  the  planet,  which  is  not  yet  at  an  end. 
Any  serious  attempt  to  obtain  further  knowledge  of  this  process  of 
development,  and,  if  possible,  to  bring  the  results  of  the  mathematician 
into  connexion  with  those  of  the  geologist  is  to  be  welcomed. 

Of  the  further  studies  by  mathematicians  only  those  of  Love  need 
concern  us  here.  They  take  into  account  an  eccentric  position  of  the 
centre  of  gravity,  an  inherited  tendency  to  an  ellipsoidal  form,  the  earlier 
and  the  existing  influence  of  the  moon,  and  the  rotation  of  the  planet.  An 

^  R.  Ball,  Nature,  1882,  XXV,  pp.  103  et  sqq. ;  E.  Hull,  torn,  cit.,  p.  177  ;  G.  H.  Darwin, 
ibid.,  p.  213  ;  0.  Fisher,  ibid.,  p.  243. 

J.  H.  Jeans,  Vibrations  and  Stability  of  a  Gravitating  Planet,  Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  1903, 
LXXI,  pp.  136-138;  W.  J.  Sollas,  Figure  of  the  Earth,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc.,  1903, 
LIX,  pp.  180-188  ;  Lapworth,  torn,  cit.,  p.  188. 


CH.  XVIl] 


SPHERICAL  HARMONICS 


605 


attempt  is  made  to  show  by  analytical  methods  that  the  earth,  in  order  to 
reach  its  existing  state,  must  have  passed  through  three  phases  (spherical 
harmonics),  each  of  which  has  been  impressed  on  the  one  preceding  it. 
The  first  harmonic  is  the  simplest;  it  corresponds  approximately  to  the 
figure  described  by  Dante  as  impossible  (II,  6,  fig.  2).  The  centre  of 
gravity  is  eccentric  ;  it  is  the  centre  of  the  hydrosphere  which  hangs  from 
the  planet  'like  a  drop  of  water  on  a  greasy  shot'.  The  centre  of 
the  dry  land  would  lie  approximately  near  Wady  Haifa.  The  second 
harmonic  leads  to  two  antipodal  depressions  at  the  places  where  the 
ellipsoid  of  the  lithosphere  passes  beneath  the  spheroid  of  the  water ;  one 
of  these  depressions  would  be  the  Pacific  Ocean,  the  other  the  Mediterranean 
with  its  surroundings,  Africa,  and  parts  of  the  Atlantic  and  the  Indian 
Oceans ;  this  phase  appears  to  be  less  clearly  marked  (Africa  would  have 
been  submerged).  The  third  harmonic  gives  an  oval  central  piece  of  land, 
formed  by  parts  of  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa,  surrounded  by  a  depression 
corresponding  to  the  Arctic,  Atlantic,  and  Indian  Oceans,  together  with 
West  Africa,  North  and  West  Europe,  and  fragments  of  Asia.  This  is 
followed  by  a  protuberant  ring  extending  through  both  the  Americas, 
Antarctis,  Australia,  and  New  Guinea.  Finally,  we  should  have  the  Pacific 
Ocean,  which  Love  regards  as  the  broad  end  or  crown  of  the  pear.  Love 
adds  that  the  changes  in  the  earth's  form  must  be  ascribed  to  two  causes, 
gravitation  and  tectonic  processes.  Gravitation  influences  the  mass,  and 
displaces  the  Oceans.  Tectonic  processes  must  be  held  responsible  for  the 
formation  of  mountains,  and  possibly  of  the  Oceanic  abysses.  Except 
where  they  incidentally  accompany  the  action  of  gravity,  tectonic  changes 
must  be  ascribed  to  the  cooling  and  contraction  of  the  earth  ^. 

Love's  results  are  described  by  the  author  himself  as  tentative  essays, 
and  as  regards  their  correspondence  with  the  facts  of  nature,  they  must  not 
be  subjected  to  a  severe  scrutiny.  Our  object  is  merely  to  show  how  the 
mathematician  obtains  deformations  of  the  earth,  which  far  exceed,  both  in 
extent  and  significance,  the  dislocations  studied  by  the  geologist ;  beside 
these,  indeed,  tectonic  processes  may  be  regarded  as  mere  incidents.  These 

^  A.  E.  H.  Love,  Gravitational  Stability  of  the  Earth,  Phil.  Trans.,  1907,  vol.  207  A, 
pp.  171-241 ;  Address  Brit.  Assoc.  Leicester,  1907,  12  pp. ;  and  Figure  and  Constitution 
of  the  Earth,  Roy.  Inst.,  March  6,  1908,  15  pp.  Of  the  most  recent  works  the  following- 
may  be  mentioned  :  L.  Waagen,  Wie  entstehen  Meeresbecken  und  Gebirge  ?  (Verh.  k.  k. 
geol.  Reichsanst.,  1907,  pp.  99-121),  takes  the  point  of  view  of  the  contraction  theoiy  and 
deals  with  its  connexion  with  folds;  R.  D.  Oldham,  Origin  of  the  Oceans  (Quart.  Journ. 
Geol.  Soc,  1907,  LXIII,  pp.  344-350),  deals  with  the  difference  in  the  propagation  of 
seismic  waves  beneath  the  Pacific  Ocean  and  the  Eurasiatic  continent ;  W.  H.  Pickering,. 
The  Place  of  Origin  of  the  Moon;  the  volcanic  Problem  (Am.  Journ.  Geol.,  1907,  XV,. 
pp.  23-38,  map) ;  the  place  of  separation  lies  in  the  middle  of  the  water  hemisphere, 
about  1,000  miles  (1,600  kilometers)  north-east  of  New  Zealand  in  lat.  25°  S.  The  land 
hemisphere  was  torn  apart ;  hence  the  symmetry  of  the  Atlantic  contours. 


606 


HYPOTHESES 


[part  V 


two  branches  of  study  have  not  yet,  however,  been  brought  into  connexion, 
and  we  can  only  offer  now  a  few  isolated  suggestions. 

1.  Twin  bodies,  which  are  later  constricted  off,  are  known  among  the 
Tektites.  These  glassy  meteorites  seem  to  occur,  so  far  as  observations 
exist,  over  a  long  strip  of  the  earth's  surface  extending  from  Australia, 
through  Billiton  island,  to  Moravia,  the  south  of  Bohemia,  and  possibly  even 
as  far  as  Kristianstad  in  Scania.  Such  twin  bodies  have  so  far  only  been 
met  with  among  the  Australites.  As  early  as  1898  R.  H.  Walcott  ascribed 
their  origin  to  a  violent  rotation,  and  thought  they  pointed  to  the  tearing 
apart  of  a  dumb-bell  form. 

F.  E.  Suess  compared  them  with  the  constricted  ellipsoid  of  Jacobi,  and 
the  double  stars.  It  is  as  though  Nature  had  provided  us  with  an 
illustration  ^. 

2.  The  moon,  with  a  density  of  3-4  is  lighter  than  all  the  inner  and 
heavier  than  all  the  outer  planets.  We  are  once  more  reminded  of  the 
light  crystals  of  peridote  in  the  heavy  bath  of  Nife,  exhibited  by  certain 
meteorites,  and  the  sharp  boundary,  drawn  by  Wiechert  at  a  depth  of 
about  1,500  kilometers,  between  the  heavy  metallic  core  of  the  earth,  and 
the  stony  crust  with  a  density  of  3-4.  From  the  latter  the  greater  part 
of  the  moon  was  probably  derived.  In  the  main  body  the  metallic  material 
must  for  the  most  part  have  already  been  concentrated  in  the  core.  At 
the  time  of  the  separation  of  the  moon  almost  all  the  Sima  rocks  of  the 
earth's  surface  certainly  possessed  a  density  below  3-4,  and  the  white  ashes 
show  that  the  moon,  at  the  time  of  separation  carried  Sal  materials  with  it. 
Since  it  cannot  contain  much  Nife,  while  it  possessed  a  suflBcient  quantity 
of  juvenile  gases,  we  may  suppose  that  on  the  earth  also  these  gases  and 
with  them  our  volcanic  eruptions  do  not  proceed  from  the  depth  of  the 
Nife  but  from  Sima,  i.  e.  from  that  zone  of  the  earth's  body  which  extends 
for  almost  1,500  kilometers  beneath  the  Sal  envelope. 

3.  As  examples  of  ancient  abrasion,  caused  by  powerful  tides,  we  might 
point  to  the  Pre- Cambrian  surfaces  of  North  Canada,  and  North  Russia, 
but  even  these  were  preceded  by  foldings  and  unconformities.  Profound 
abrasion  is  also  exhibited  by  the  gold-bearing  beds  of  the  Transvaal. 

1  R.  H.  Walcott,  Occurrence  of  So-called  Obsidian-Bombs  in  Australia,  Proc.  Roy.  See. 
Victoria,  1898,  new  ser.  XI,  1,  pp.  23-53,  in  particular  p.  35  ;  F.  E.  Suess,  Herkunft  der 
Moldavite,  Jahrb.  k.  k.  geol.  Reichsanst.,  1900,  L,  pp.  193-382,  in  particular  note  to 
p.  339  ;  also  F.  Eicbstadt,  En  egendoml.  af  rent  glas  besttod.  meteorit,  funnen  in  Sk§,ne, 
Geol.  For.  Stockh.  Forh.,  1908,  XXX,  pp.  323-330.  The  'buttons'  generally  become 
surrounded  with  a  broad  and  flat  equatorial  girdle,  which  may  possibly  be  due  to  the 
resistance  of  the  air.  Walcott  also  figures  a  twin  with  an  equatorial  girdle  ;  in  this  case 
the  rotation  was  probably  lost  before  the  separation.  In  another  button  the  elongated 
remains  of  the  attached  part  (the  stalk  of  the  pear)  is  still  present ;  in  this  case  the 
equatorial  girdle  became  detached  like  one  of  Saturn's  rings,  and  is  open  where  the  stalk 
occurs. 


CH.  XVIl] 


TEERESTEIAL  TIDES 


607 


4.  Darwin  states  that  if  bodily  tides  have  influenced  the  arrangement  of 
the  mountain  chains,  then  we  should  expect  to  find  at  the  equator  a  north 
and  south  strike,  towards  the  north  a  north-easterly  strike,  and  towards  the 
south  a  south-easterly  strike.  This  supposition  holds  for  almost  the  whole 
of  the  Pacific  region.  The  advance  of  the  Antilles  towards  the  east,  the 
arrangement  of  all  the  arcs  of  Eastern  Asia  and  the  Oceanides,  and  in 
particular  the  fact  that  almost  all  the  Asiatic  virgations  open  towards  the 
west  and  south-west  are  consistent  with  the  theory.  But  there  is  no  lack 
of  exceptions  ;  the  St.  Elias  range  is  folded  towards  the  west  or  south-west, 
likewise  the  great  Burman  arc  and  the  Urals.  The  whole  of  that  part 
of  the  Western  Altaides  lying  outside  the  horst  of  Azov  is  opposed  to 
the  rule. 

An  attempt  has  been  made  to  explain  the  arrangement  from  the  rotation 
of  the  earth.  Douville  has  adduced  the  earlier,  more  rapid  rate  of  rotation 
and  obtains  a  prevalent  east  and  west  direction.  Prinz,  on  the  other  hand, 
finds  a  prevalent  north  and  south  direction  ^  We  may  also  point  to  the 
folding,  directed  to  the  south,  of  the  United  States  chain,  situated  on 
the  other  side  of  the  Pole ;  also  of  the  Aleutian  islands  and  the  southern 
marginal  arcs,  and  in  particular  to  the  Cape  mountains  directed  towards 
the  north  ;  the  exceptions  are  the  same. 

5.  In  the  pre-Cambrian  regions  and  in  horsts  parts  of  older  plans  are 
visible,  and  the  subsidences,  which  follow  upon  them  and  bound  them,  are 
independent  of  these  older  plans.  In  Europe  the  situation  is  particularly 
striking,  owing  to  the  manner  in  which  the  Caledonides  in  the  north  and 
the  Saharides  to  the  south  are  cut  through  by  the  Altaides.  The  contrast 
between  the  directions  which  dominate  the  Bohemian  mass  and  that  of  the 
East  Alps  affords  another  example,  and  similarly,  in  North  America,  the 
contrast  between  Laurentia  and  the  Appalachians. 

The  fact  must  therefore  he  recognized  that  the  face  of  the  earth  presents 
several  plans,  imposed  one  upon  the  other. 

6.  The  dislocation  which  preceded  the  upper  Carboniferous  is  of  such 
extraordinary  extent  that  it  might  be  described  as  a  deformation  of  the 
earth's  face.  As  this  disturbance  is  characterized  by  its  extent,  so  the 
Tertiary  movements  in  the  Alpides  are  characterized  by  their  intensity; 
they  must  also  have  been  succeeded  by  widely  distributed  rending  apart. 
The  disturbance  preceding  the  Neocomian  in  the  west  of  North  America 
and  other  examples  of  importance  might  also  be  mentioned.  These,  we 
may  suppose,  are  all  of  later  date  than  the  changes  of  form  produced  by  the 
spherical  harmonics.  Whether  they  are  causally  connected,  I  am  not  in 
a  position  to  judge. 

^  Douville,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  7  mars  1904  ;  Prinz,  Sur  les  similitudes  que  pre- 
sentent  les  cartes  terrestres  et  planetaires  (torsion  apparente  des  planetes),  Ann.  Observ. 
Brux.,  1891,  34  pp. 


608  HYPOTHESES  [party 

Isostatic  compensation  of  the  mountains,  Pratt  found  that  the  Himalaya 
in  Kaliana,  about  64  kilometers  to  the  south  of  its  foot,  only  gives  a  deflexion 
of  6''  or  7'^  instead  of  27''  which  is  the  theoretically  determined  amount. 
This  led  him  to  conclude,  in  1852,  that  gravity  does  not  attain  its  normal 
value  in  the  Himalaya.  He  went  even  further,  and  believed  that  the  distri- 
bution of  mass  around  the  earth  is  uniform;  on  the  continents  there 
should  be  a  deficiency  of  mass  below  the  surface,  beneath  the  sea ;  on  the 
other  hand  there  should  be  a  compensatory  excess.  He  named  this  the 
compensation  theory.  The  pendulum  measurements  quoted  by  Basevi  and 
Heaviside  between  the  years  1865  to  1873  do,  in  fact,  show  a  deficiency  of 
mass  in  the  foothills  of  the  Himalaya ;  Mor^  the  highest  station,  and  the 
only  one  situated  within  the  high  mountains  (4,696  meters)  gave  a  particu- 
larly large  deficiency.  Opinions  differed,  until  Sterneck  invented  a  more  con- 
venient and  exact  pendulum  apparatus  and  made  numerous  measurements 
in  Austria,  while  Helmert  applied  to  the  subject  ingenious  mathematical 
methods. 

A  calculation  made  by  Helmert,  which  appeared  in  1892,  created  a  deep 
impression  ;  this  was  based  on  measurements  made  by  Sterneck  at  thirty - 
seven  stations  situated  on  a  line  356  kilometers  in  length,  extending  through 
the  heart  of  the  Tyrolese  Alps  and  surrounding  Oetz  and  Stubai  in  a  ring. 
The  result  in  this  case  also  showed  that  a  deficiency  of  mass  occurs,  even  if 
it  does  not  completely  compensate  for  the  mass  of  the  mountains.  This 
deficiency  must  occur  in  the  upper  layers  of  the  earth's  crust,  since  it  is 
scarcely  perceptible  at  Munich  and  Padua.  The  density  appears  to  be 
greater  in  the  layers  beneath  the  sea,  which  are  inaccessible  to  direct 
observation,  than  beneath  the  continents.  The  deficiency  beneath  the  Tyro- 
lese Alps  was  estimated  at  a  thickness  of  1,200  meters,  with  a  density  of  2-4  ^. 

There  is  a  similar  basis  for  Button's  view,  according  to  which  the 
foreland  is  sinking  and  the  mountains  are  rising.  This  is  designated  by 
Button  as  isostasy,  and  he  believed  at  first  that  a  part  of  the  effect  must 
be  ascribed  to  the  sediments  carried  down  from  the  mountains,  but 
that  in  any  case  a  special  elevating  force  is  required  to  account  for  the 
tablelands  ^. 

This  theory  found  much  support,  especially  in  America.  The  position 
of  the  Appalachians  seemed  to  accord  with  it  particularly  well.  At  the 
same  time  some  doubts  were  expressed.  As  the  measurements  increased  in 
number,  the  compensation  was  found,  as  a  rule,  to  be  only  partial.  To 
geologists,  cavities  of  a  height  of  1,000  meters  or  more  seemed  out  of  the 
question,  and  no  mountain  rock  is  known  of  so  low  a  density  that  it  could 

^  F.  R.  Helmert,  Die  Schwerkraft  im  Hochgebirge,  Veroff.  k.  preuss.  geodat.  Inst.  u.  d. 
Centralbur.  d.  internat.  Erdmessung,  Berlin,  1890,  52  pp.,  map. 

*  C.  E.  Button,  Some  of  the  greater  Problems  of  Physical  Geology,  Bull.  Phil.  Soc. 
Washington,  1892,  XI,  pp.  51-64. 


cH.xvii]  ISOSTATIC  COMPENSATION 


609 


represent  the  deficiency.  The  continuation  of  Sterneck's  work  revealed 
much  that  was  unexpected.  In  contrast  to  the  Tyrol,  the  Carpathians 
showed  a  deficiency  beneath  the  foreland  ;  this  deficiency  extends  from  the 
north  into  the  mountains  near  Slavsko  (594  meters),  becomes  more  con- 
siderable, and  ends  *  quite  suddenly '  about  20  kilometers  to  the  north  of 
the  crest  (Beskid,  799  meters)  against  an  area  of  excess,  which  extends 
from  this  point  onwards  (still  north  of  the  crest)  over  the  whole  of  the 
Hungarian  plain.  This  region  of  excess  also  advances  fairly  deep  into 
the  most  easterly  part  of  the  Alps.  In  South  Tyrol,  also,  a  marked  excess 
within  the  mountains  already  occurs  at  Ala ;  it  persists  through  Verona  into 
the  plain ;  Mantua  shows  a  deficiency  in  the  foreland.  In  the  Caucasus 
Stebnitzki  found  no  correspondence  between  the  deficiency  and  the  moun- 
tain boundaries.  Costanzi  thinks  that  the  negative  values,  in  general,  do  not 
coincide  with  the  axes  of  the  mountains,  but  are  displaced  in  the  direction 
of  a  neighbouring  depression ;  in  the  case  of  the  Alps  and  Carpathians 
he  conjectures  that  the  displacement  follows  the  tectonic  movement  ^. 

In  the  case  of  isolated  mountains  the  results  become  incomprehensible. 
At  the  foot  of  Mauna  Kea  in  Hawaii  (3,980  meters),  Preston  obtained  from 
observations  with  the  pendulum  the  extraordinary  density  of  3-7,  while  the 
upper  half  of  the  mountain  gives  2-1 ;  the  mean  of  the  two,  however,  2-9,  is 
probably  near  the  truth  ^.  A  similar  result,  according  to  Ricco's  statement,  is 
afforded  by  Aetna.  In  the  centre  of  Sicily  the  data  show  a  deficiency  of 
gravity,  towards  the  mountain  this  diminishes  and  an  excess  sets  in,  which 
increases  as  we  proceed,  but  on  the  summit  (2,993  meters)  a  deficiency  occurs. 
As  shown  in  a  section,  the  curve  of  the  density  corresponds  in  a  striking 
manner  to  the  negative  of  the  curve  of  the  surface  ^. 

From  these  facts  we  learn  the  following.  On  the  isolated  summit  of 
a  cone,  such  as  Aetna,  the  lesser  mass  of  the  summit  should  be  taken  into 
account  (but  not  cavities  in  the  mountain).  Since  the  action  of  gravity 
decreases  with  the  square  of  the  distance,  the  cause  of  such  a  rapid  change 
as  that  occurring  in  the  Carpathians  and  in  South  Tyrol  cannot  possibly 
lie  at  any  considerable  depth.  At  the  surface,  however,  four  factors  only 
come  under  consideration :  the  relief,  tectonic  structure,  density  of  the  rock, 
and  mode  of  reduction  of  the  observations.    The  first  three  are  known; 

*  R.  V.  Sterneck,  Schwerkraft  in  den  Alpen,  Mittli.  k.  k.  milit.  geogr.  Inst.  Wien,  1892, 
XI,  108  pp.,  map ;  Relative  Schwerebestimmungen  ausgefiihrt  im  Jahre  1893,  op.  cit.^ 
1894,  102  pp.,  map,  in  particular  p.  87  ;  G.  Costanzi,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  21  oct. 
1907. 

^  E.  D.  Preston,  Gravity  Determinations  at  the  Sandwich  Islands,  Am.  Journ.  Sci., 
1893,  CXLV,  pp.  256,  257.  The  specific  gravities  in  Kilauea  lie  according  to  Silvestri 
between  2-72  and  3-03  ;  Silvestri  in  Tacchini,  Relazione  sugl'  echssi  totali  di  sole  1882- 
1887,  52  pp.,  in  particular  p.  50. 

^  A.  Ricco,  Anomalia  della  gravita  e  magnetismo  terreno  in  Calabria  e  Sicilia,  Boll. 
Soc.  Sism.  Ital.,  1908,  XII,  et  passim. 

80LLAS  IV  Br 


610 


HYPOTHESES 


[part  V 


the  mode  of  reduction  is  indicated  by  the  case  of  Mauna  Kea,  where  the 
extracted  mean  gives  a  probable  value  for  the  density. 

The  law  of  Bouguer  (or  Young),  which  is  generally  employed  in  these 
calculations,  includes  two  factors ;  the  first  of  which  relates  to  the  height 
above  the  sea  of  the  observing  station,  the  second  to  the  vertical 
attraction  of  the  mass  which  lies  between  this  station  and  the  sea 
level ;  in  the  case  of  an  irregular  surface,  a  local  correction  for  the 
relief  must  also  be  made.  In  the  second  factor,  the  entire  mass  situated 
between  the  station  and  the  sea  level  is  regarded  as  a  slab  of  the 
equated  mean  height  of  the  continent,  and  of  infinite  extent.  Modifications 
of  these  laws  have  been  introduced  by  Helmert.  As  early  as  1880  and 
1883,  Faye  proposed  to  omit  the  second  factor  of  Bouguer's  law,  but  to 
make  use  of  the  first  and  of  all  local  corrections.  In  making  this  proposal, 
Faye  was  able  to  point  out — as  Clarke  had  done  previously — that,  with  the 
omission  of  this  factor,  the  great  deficiency  below  Mor4  the  highest  point 
in  the  Himalaya  measured  with  the  pendulum,  completely  disappeared. 
At  the  same  time  he  observed  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  determine, 
even  approximately,  the  density  of  the  planet  from  isolated  mountains, 
if  these  mountains  were  themselves  lighter,  and  were  compensated  by 
masses  beneath  the  sea^. 

This  is  not  the  place  to  discuss  in  detail  points  of  this  kind.  An 
example  on  a  large  scale  may  be  mentioned,  the  measurements  of  which 
have  been  calculated  according  to  the  methods  both  of  Bouguer  and  Faye  : 
this  is  Putnam's  cross-section  of  the  United  States  ^.  Bouguer's  law  gives 
negative  results  throughout,  from  Boston  to  San  Francisco  (with  the 
exception  of  Washington,  to  be  discussed  later).  The  deficiency  increases 
gradually  from  the  east,  especially  from  1,000  meters  upwards,  and  above 
2,000  meters  becomes  very  considerable.  The  maximum  of  these  negative 
values  lies  in  Gunnison,  Colorado  (2,340  meters),  close  to  the  main  body  of 
the  Rocky  mountains ;  in  California  the  values  decrease.  Thus  this  law 
gives  a  deficiency  along  the  whole  line,  becoming  very  considerable  beneath 
the  high  mountains,  and  it  stands  in  complete  opposition  to  the  relief.  If, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  calculation  is  made  for  the  first  factor  only  of 
Bouguer's  law,  then  though  it  also  gives  a  deficit  in  the  east  and  beneath 
the  plains,  yet  this  is  much  more  trifling  than  that  obtained  by  the  first 
calculation ;  in  the  Appalachians  indeed,  a  small  positive  value  occurs,  and 
the  deficiency  does  not  increase  in  the  direction  of  the  mountains.  Further 

»  Faye,  C.  R.  Acad.  Soi.  Paris,  24  mai  1880,  21  juin  1880,  30  avr.  1883  et  passim.  The 
fact  that  the  density  of  the  earth  is  measured  by  the  attraction  of  mountains  is  also  men- 
tioned by  Hann  as  incompatible  with  compensation  ;  Schwerecorrection  bei  barometri- 
schen  Hohenmessungen,  Peterm.  Mitth.,  1903,  pp.  163-166. 

'  G.  R.  Putnam,  Results  of  a  tmnscontinental  Series  of  Gravitational  Measurements, 
Bull.  Phil.  Soc.  Washington,  1895,  XIII,  pp.  31-60 ;  and  G.  K.  Gilbert,  Notes  on  the 
Gravity  Determinations  reported  by  Mr.  Putnam,  op.  cit.,  pp.  61-75. 


CH.  xvii]      GRAVITY  IN  ROCKY  MOUNTAINS  611 

in  the  mountains  themselves,  all  the  stations  which  lie  above  1,800  to 
2,000  meters  (with  the  single  exception  of  Gunnison)  give,  instead  of 
a  deficiency,  an  excess  with  a  considerable  maximum  beneath  Pikes  Peak 
(4,293  meters,  Rocky  mountains),  the  highest  point  on  the  line.  Finally  the 
introduction  of  local  correction  levels  out  the  inequalities,  shifts  to  some 
extent  the  positive  values  from  the  high  mountains  towards  the  eastern 
foothills,  reduces  the  excessive  maximum  beneath  Pikes  Peak,  makes 
Gunnison  also  positive  and  so  on. 

Thus  while  Bouguer's  calculation  leads  to  a  great  deficiency  beneath 
the  high  mountains,  that  of  Faye  accords  on  the  whole  with  the  general 
form  of  the  surface ;  at  the  same  time  the  differences  between  the  theoretical 
gravity  and  that  determined  by  the  pendulum  are  so  far  reduced  that 
Putnam  no  longer  ascribes  any  importance  to  what  remains.  For  this 
reason  Gilbert  concludes  that  the  lithosphere  possesses  a  greater  load- 
bearing  capacity  than  is  assigned  to  it  by  the  champions  of  isostasy.  The 
Appalachians,  Rocky  mountains,  and  Wahsatch  plateau  are  extra  loads 
which  are  supported  by  the  rigidity  of  the  earth.  Here,  therefore,  the 
results  of  the  geodesist  and  those  of  the  geologist  are  in  complete  accord. 

The  question  now  arises  as  to  how  this  result  can  be  reconciled  with 
that  obtained  in  Central  Tyrol  after  so  much  exact  observation  and 
ingenious  calculation.  From  Helmert's  table  we  see  that  g — y  (difference 
between  the  measured  and  the  theoretical  value  of  gravity)  is  negative  in 
all  the  37  stations  of  the  ring,  but  that  towards  both  the  heights  of  the 
Brenner  and  the  sources  of  the  Etsch  (Reschen-Mals)  this  difference 
becomes  less  considerable.  The  greatest  height  in  the  ring  is  1,483  meters, 
its  mean  height  790  meters.  It  is  surrounded  by  much  higher  mountains, 
and  the  mean  height  of  the  enclosed  mass  (Oetz  and  Stubai)  is  over  2,000 
meters.  Many  peaks  exceed  3,000  meters,  not  a  few  even  3,500  meters. 
If  we  leave  the  ring  in  the  south  and  enter  these  high  mountains,  we  still 
find  a  negative  value  at  a  height  of  1,636  meters  (Pf elders),  but  this  is  con- 
siderably smaller  than  in  the  ring,  and  at  a  level  of  2,967  meters  (Sandbiichel) 
the  value  is  positive,  which  is  not  the  case  anywhere  inside  the  ring.  We 
obtain  the  same  result  if  we  ascend  from  the  ring  towards  the  south-west 
to  Franzenshohe  (2,188  meters),  and  the  Stilfser  Joch  (2,760  meters) ;  both 
localities  are  positive.  We  must,  therefore,  suppose  that  conditions  prevail 
similar  to  those  in  the  Rocky  mountains,  and  that  the  imaginary  deficiency 
beneath  the  Alps  is  caused  by  the  low-lying  position  of  the  ring.  This 
admirable  work  should,  therefore,  be  completed  by  pendulum  measurements 
on  the  summits. 

We  will  next  pass  to  the  more  recent  work  in  India. 

Burrard  divides  India  into  four  regions.  These  are  :  I,  the  Himalaya ; 
II,  the  vast  plain  traversed  by  the  Ganges,  the  southern  border  of  which 
maintains  a  remarkable  parallelism  with  the  foot  of  the  mountains ;  III,  the 

K  r  2 


612 


HYPOTHESES 


[part  V 


peninsula :  and,  IV,  north-western  India,  situated  on  the  other  side  of  the 
syntaxis.  In  IV  the  investigation  has  not  made  much  progress,  so  that  for 
the  present  it  may  be  left  out  of  account  \ 

The  peninsula,  III,  exhibits  heavy  rocks  widely  distributed.  The  most 
ancient  are  the  batholites  of  chamockite ;  next  worthy  of  mention  are  the 
basic  rocks,  which  near  Rajmahal,  for  example,  on  the  boundary  between 
II  and  III  are  2,000  feet  thick ;  they  belong  probably  to  the  period  of  the 
upper  Gondwana ;  finally,  in  the  west  there  is  the  extensive  Deccan  trap. 
Near  Bombay  it  reaches  a  thickness  of  6,000  feet,  if  we  include  some 
intercalated  sedimentary  beds.  It  forms  broad  table-mountains,  which  in 
the  Sahyadri  reach  a  height  of  over  4,000  feet. 

To  the  north  of  Delhi  the  ranges  of  the  Aravali  mountains  striking 
towards  the  north-east,  disappear  beneath  the  plains  of  II.  Here  we  must 
refer  a  range  of  quartzite  and  itacolumite ;  situated  upon  it  is  Kaliana 
(lat.  27°  4'  N.,  not  far  from  MuzafFarnagar),  Everest's  observing  station,  and 
the  starting-point  of  Pratt's  compensation  theory.  Much  further  towards 
the  north-west,  the  remains  of  the  Aravali  quartzites  of  II  crop  out  in  the 
Korana  mountains  on  the  Chenab,  about  60-70  kilometers  away  from  the 
Salt  range  ^. 

The  high  mountains  of  I  are  separated  from  II  by  the  belt  of  the 
Tertiary  Sewalik  hills,  which  consist  of  sandstone  and  conglomerates,  the 
latter  completely  resembling  the  existing  alluvium  of  II.  The  gneisses 
which  occur  in  Sikkim  and  still  further  towards  the  east,  to  the  north  of 
this  zone  and  on  the  border  of  the  Himalaya,  are  overthrown  towards  the 
south ;  Gondwana  beds  dip  beneath  them.  They  doubtless  correspond  to 
the  gneisses  of  III  (peninsula)  precisely  as  the  zone  of  mont  Blanc  corresponds 
to  the  Variscan  foreland. 

The  first,  and,  as  Burrard  justly  observes,  the  most  remarkable  fact  is 
that  in  general  a  distribution  of  the  weight  in  well-marked  zones  is 
manifested.  Zone  II  obviously  corresponds  to  theforedeep  of  the  Himalaya, 
and  according  to  observations  made  elsewhere,  no  serious  objection  could 
be  raised  to  the  assumption  that  here,  in  front  of  the  Himalaya,  there  lies 
a  subsidence  6  to  7  kilometers  in  depth,  or  even  more,  which  is  filled 
with  a  sediment  of  a  much  lower  specific  gravity  than  2'8.  The  pendulum 
observations  are  calculated  according  to  Bouguer,  on  the  assumption  that 
the  general  density  of  the  rocks  is  2«8,  which  is  certainly  too  high ;  a  com- 
parison of  these  with  other  results  is  thus  rendered  very  difficult. 

*  S.  G.  Burrard,  Intensity  and  Direction  of  Force  of  Gravity  in  India,  Phil.  Trans., 
vol.  205,  A,  pp.  289-318,  map  ;  Burrard  and  H.  H.  Hayden,  Sketch  of  the  Geography 
and  Geology  of  the  Himalaya  Mountains  and  Tibet,  4to,  Calcutta,  1907,  Part  II,  pp.  bl- 
56,  maps. 

^  I,  p.  447 ;  Medlicott  and  Blandford,  Manual  of  the  Geology  of  India,  I,  p.  52  ;  for 
Kaliana,  R.  D.  Oldham,  Rec.  Geol.  Surv.  India,  1889,  XXII,  pp.  51-56. 


CH.  XVIl] 


INVISIBLE  MOUNTAINS 


618 


The  results  obtained  by  Burrard  and  Lenox  Conyngham  may  be 
summed  up  as  follows. 

Across  the  peninsula  the  deflexions  of  the  plummet  are  variable  but  not 
considerable  ;  of  greater  extent  are  the  variations  of  gravity  as  determined 
by  the  pendulum.  Towards  the  north  border,  that  is  120  to  200  kilometers 
to  the  south  of  the  foot  of  the  Himalaya,  an  excess  of  mass  gradually  sets 
in,  so  that  at  Kisnapur,  for  example,  the  height  above  the  sea-level  would 
have  to  be  increased  from  35  meters  to  339  meters  in  order  to  accord  with 
the  requirements  of  the  pendulum;  in  other  words,  the  pendulum  shows 
an  excess  of  304  meters  in  height  with  the  density  of  2'8.  This  has  led 
Burrard  to  suppose  that  to  the  visible  Himalaya  is  opposed  a  second, 
^parallel  and  invisible  range.  Starting  from  this  border  or  invisible  range, 
with  its  hypothetical  great  weight,  the  value  of  gravity  gradually  decreases 
in  II  (foredeep) ;  the  plummet,  however,  remains  turned  to  the  south, 
i.  e.  the  attraction  of  the  peninsula  is  still  greater  than  that  of  the  Himalaya. 
Then  the  southern  attractions  of  the  peninsula  encounter  the  northern 
attractions  of  the  Himalaya,  and  they  partially  compensate  each  other. 
This  explains  the  exceptionally  small  deflexion  of  the  plummet  in  Kaliana, 
on  which  Pratt's  compensation  theory  is  based.  It  amounts,  in  place  of 
the  theoretical  attraction  of  the  Himalaya,  to  only  5  or  6''  N.,  while 
88  kilometers  further  north,  in  Dehra  Dun  (Sewalik  zone)  it  is  as  much 
as  37''  N.  Nevertheless  the  pendulum  shows  a  considerable  decrease  of 
gravity  at  this  place.  In  general,  a  large  deficiency  may  be  observed  in 
the  northern  part  of  the  trough ;  Pathankol  in  the  foothills  would  be 
converted,  according  to  the  pendulum,  from  a  height  of  331  meters  into 
a  depression  of  —  1,208  meters.  The  turning  of  the  plummet  towards  the 
north  takes  place  with  remarkable  sharpness  (Kurseong  50'',  Tonglu  42", 
and  other  places  all  belonging  to  the  outer  Himalaya).  Here  lies  the 
maximum  of  the  northern  deflexions ;  it  is  true  that  they  are  known  as 
far  as  80  kilometers  to  the  north  of  the  foothills,  but  they  diminish 
in  comparison  to  the  mountain  border  (most  remote  point  Kidarkanta, 
3,813  meters,  deflexion  27"  N.).  The  fact  that  the  deflexions  of  the  plumb- 
line  are  greatest  on  the  mountain  border  is  explained  by  Burrard  on  the 
hypothesis  that,  as  we  proceed  into  the  mountains  the  region  passed  over 
exerts  a  compensating  action  on  the  plummet. 

The  measurements  which  have  been  made  in  the  high  mountains  with 
Sterneck's  apparatus  are  still  few  in  number;  they  have,  in  general, 
considerably  reduced  but  not  destroyed  Basevi's  negative  values.  Mor^ 
was  not  reached;  according  to  the  earlier  determinations  and  Bouguer's 
formula,  its  height  (4,696  meters)  should  give  a  deficiency  of  4,484  meters. 
We  have  already  observed  that  Clarke  by  simplifying  Bouguer's  formula  has 
caused  this  deficiency  to  disappear.  The  fact  that  on  the  other  side  of 
More  the  plummet  is  deflected  also  towards  the  north  led  Burrard  also  to 


614 


HYPOTHESES 


[part  V 


doubt  the  accuracy  of  the  figures  obtained  by  the  pendulum  for  this 
station  and  the  next  higher  station  of  Mussooree  (2,109  meters,  deficiency 
1,333  meters).  No  other  pendulum  measurements  have  as  yet  been  made 
in  these  high  mountains. 

Burrard  also  thinks  that  the  general  deflexion  of  the  plummet  towards 
the  south  in  II  (foredeep)  is  caused  by  a  decrease  in  mass  beneath  the  plain 
rather  than  beneath  the  mountains.  In  fact,  all  the  figures  determined  by 
the  plummet  may  be  explained  on  the  assumption  that  the  foredeep  is  filled 
with  sediment  of  a  less  density,  beneath  which  the  ancient  rocks  of  the 
foreland  dip  from  the  south,  until  they  arrive  in  front  of  the  steep  brow  of 
the  Himalaya.  The  boring  of  the  Bohemian  granite  at  Wels,  in  front  of 
the  brow  of  the  Alps,  led  to  precisely  the  same  conjecture.  It  is  not 
impossible  that  calculations  of  the  subterranean  form  of  the  foredeep  may 
one  day  be  made,  similar  to  those  which  Eotvos  has  attempted  to  make 
from  the  data  obtained  with  his  torsion  balance  near  Arad  \ 

A  boring  at  Lucknow,  sunk  for  about  300  meters  below  the  sea-level, 
did  not  reach  the  base  of  the  recent  sediments.  It  is  even  possible  that 
the  question  may  one  day  be  raised  whether  the  problematic  '  Swatch  of  no 
ground ',  a  pit  400  to  600  meters  deep,  in  the  delta  of  the  Ganges,  may  not 
be  one  of  the  last  traces  of  this  foredeep,  bent  round  in  the  direction  of 
Burmah. 

In  the  Himalaya,  therefore,  while  the  deflexions  of  the  plumb-line  may 
be  brought  into  tolerable  accord  with  the  structure,  doubts  exist  as  to  the 
interpretation  of  the  pendulum  measurements.  The  geologist,  who  finds  it 
hard  to  understand  a  deficiency  in  the  high  mountains,  finds  it  no  less  hard 
to  understand  an  excess,  and  an  invisible  range  in  the  plain  ^.  It  is  to  be 
expected  that  the  method  indicated  by  Clarke  in  explanation  of  Mor^  will 
also  lead  to  the  explanation  of  other  difficulties. 

The  existing  state  of  observation  does  not  justify  us,  in  the  face  of  so 
many  contradictory  facts,  in  regarding  the  existence  of  deficiencies  of  mass 
beneath  the  mountains  as  proved.  It  would  be  inconsistent  with  all 
geological  observations. 

Compensation  of  the  continents.  In  addition  to  the  question  of  the 
compensation  of  mountains  we  are  confronted  with  the  far  more  important 
question  whether,  as  Pratt  maintained,  the  continents  are  held  in  a  position 
of  equilibrium  by  heavier  masses  beneath  the  sea ;  and  we  are  called  upon 
to  solve  a  second  question,  whether,  as  Dutton  believed,  the  sinking  of  the 
sea-basins  caused  the  elevation  of  the  continents. 

^  Baron  R,  Eotvos,  Bestimmung  der  Gradienten  der  Schwerkraft  und  ihrer  Niveauflache 
mit  Hiilfe  der  Drehwage,  Verb.  XV.  Conf.  d.  allgem.  Erdmessung  (1906),  4to,  1908,  I, 
pp.  337-395,  in  particular  p.  388,  and  fig.  8,  p.  366. 

Doubts  of  another  kind  are  expressed  as  to  its  existence  by  0.  Fisber,  Phil.  Mag., 
1904, 6th  ser.,  VII,  pp.  14-25  ;  on  the  other  hand  Burrard,  ibid.,  pp.  292-294. 


CH.xvn]  COMPENSATION  IN  ASIA 


615 


Here  we  may  cite  three  examples ;  one  of  them  is  based  on  the 
hypothesis  of  a  distinguished  geologist,  a  second  depends  on  deflexions 
of  the  plummet,  and  a  third  is  founded  on  observations  made  with  the 
pendulum. 

Bailey  Willis,  who  possesses  a  detailed  knowledge  of  the  Appalachians, 
has  travelled  through  the  eastern  part  of  Asia,  and  has  attempted  to  apply 
the  isostatic  theory  to  that  continent.  It  is  true  that  in  doing  so  he  has 
given  this  theory  a  new  form.  He  takes  it  for  granted  that  heavier  rocks 
lie  beneath  the  Ocean  than  beneath  the  continent.  The  two  kinds  of  rocks 
meet  in  contact.  The  continued  pressure  of  the  heavier  part  overcomes 
the  rigidity.  A  zone  in  which  a  slight  flow  takes  place  from  the  heavier 
towards  the  less  heavy,  that  is  from  the  sea  towards  the  continent  is 
established.  We  might,  for  example,  assume  that  the  action  at  the  surface 
is  zero,  that  it  increases  in  a  downward  direction,  and  at  a  depth  of  100 
miles  (160  kilometers)  is  again  zero,  since  the  basement  is  rigid.  Asia 
would  thus  have  been  formed  by  pressure  proceeding  from  the  Indian  and 
Pacific  Oceans  and  directed  towards  the  Baikal  vextex.  It  was  a  submarine 
extension  (oceanic  spread),  constantly  in  progress,  but  manifested  spas- 
modically, which  compressed  the  lighter  rocks,  and  Asia  was  therefore 
formed,  not  by  overthrusting,  but  by  undeiihrusting. 

This  hypothesis — for  so  it  is  termed  by  its  ingenious  author  himself — 
has  this  advantage,  that  it  does  not  presuppose  the  existence  of  cavities 
beneath  the  mountains.  If  we  attempt  to  apply  it  to  the  overturned,  outer 
marginal  folds,  we  find  that  the  convex  form  of  the  arcs  is  opposed  to  it, 
and  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the  other  main  features  of  the  structure,  such 
as  the  overthrusting  of  the  Tibetan  segments,  directed  towards  the  south, 
the  linking,  the  virgation  of  Thian-shan,  and  the  advance  of  the  Bonin 
islands  towards  the  middle  of  the  Ocean  can  be  reconciled  with  an  under- 
thrusting  which  would  extend  to  lake  Baikal  ^ 

The  plummet  forms  the  basis  of  the  extensive  surveys  which  have  been 
made  by  Tittman  and  Hayford  across  the  whole  breadth  of  the  United 
States,  and  through  more  than  31  degrees  of  latitude.  An  attempt  to 
represent  the  geoid  in  equipotential  curves  by  means  of  these  observations 
shows  a  parallel  slope  along  the  Atlantic  coast  from  lat.  45°  to  47°  N. ;  the 
Adirondacks  and  Alleghanies  are  fairly  well  marked :  the  deepest  place 
lies  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  Oberen  lake,  which  descends  here  100  meters 
beneath  the  sea-level.  Thus  with  one  problematic  exception  in  the  south — 
where,  throughout  Alabama,  an  ascent  of  the  geoid  surface  occurs  in  the 
direction  of  Mobile — we  see  that  the  geoid  surface  is  dependent  on  the  form 

^  B.  Willis,  Research  in  China,  4to,  1907,  pp.  115-133  ;  similar  views  are  expressed  in 
his  Theory  of  Continental  Structure  applied  to  North  America,  Bull.  Am.  Geol.  Soc!, 
1907,  XVIII,  pp.  389-412. 


616 


HYPOTHESES 


[PAET  V 


of  the  earth's  surface,  or  is,  as  it  were,  a  generalized  or  modified  image  of 
the  relief  of  the  land  ^. 

This  result  is  instructive  and  admirable  in  itself,  but  it  is  hard  to 
follow  the  report  beyond  the  limits  of  these  data.  The  foregoing  data  led 
to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  necessary  to  use  as  large  a  radius  as  possible 
for  comparison  at  each  station.  Radii  were  finally  employed  of  as  much 
as  4,126  kilometers,  so  that  a  station  in  the  extreme  east  included  in  its 
radius  the  Pacific  coast,  and  vice  versa.  As  a  natural  result,  an  increasingly 
large  number  of  mean  estimates  was  found  necessary,  in  particular  as 
regards  the  sea^. 

In  spite  of  the  difficulties  involved  in  this  method,  its  authors  believed 
that  they  were  in  a  position  to  assert  positively  that  the  United  States  do 
not  maintain  their  height  above  the  sea  owing  to  the  rigidity  of  the  earth, 
but  that  they  are  '  buoyed  up  '  or '  floated '  owing  to  their  lesser  density.  If 
the  isostatic  compensation  is  uniform,  it  must  be  effected  within  114  kilo- 
meters, or  certainly  between  80  and  160  kilometers. 

These  statements  have  led  Chamberlin  to  observe  that  compensation 
may  also  occur  in  a  body  with  the  rigidity  of  granite  or  steel.  A  viscous 
foundation  is  not  necessary.  Such  a  foundation  would  bring  about  some- 
thing like  perpetual  movement,  and  its  state  would  render  it  incapable  of 
accumulating  the  lateral  stresses,  and  then  of  resolving  them,  a  process 
which  the  tectonic  movements  lead  us  to  assume.  Rigidity  and  isostatic 
compensation  are  not,  therefore,  to  be  regarded  as  completely  opposed  ^. 

We  now  proceed  to  observations  made  with  the  pendulum. 

In  the  neighbourhood  of  the  coasts  positive  results  are  obtained  almost 
everywhere.  An  isolated  positive  result,  observed  in  Washington,  has  been 
mentioned  above.  The  numerous  pendulum  observations  which  have  been 
carried  out  by  the  Austro-Hungarian  navy  on  remote  coasts  and  islands,  the 
large  number  of  observations  made  by  the  German  navy  from  Cameroon 
to  Cape  Town,  and  many  other  investigations  have  confirmed  this  fact. 
Helmert  estimates  the  excess  of  the  coast  stations  over  the  interior  at 
+  0-036  cm.* 

^  0.  H.  Tittman,  Report  on  Greodetic  operations  in  the  United  States,  Verb.  XIV.  Conf. 
a.  allgem.  Erdmessung  (1903),  1904,  I,  pp.  182-212,  map ;  Tittman  and  J.  F.  Hayford, 
op.  cit.,  XV,  Conf.  (1906)  1908,  I,  pp.  192-235,  map. 

2  The  mean  depth  in  fathoms  was  multiplied  by  3-69  (1-03  for  water  +  2-66  for  the  mean 
density  of  the  rocks),  and  the  result  given  as  a  negative  height  in  feet.  This  process  was 
continued  down  to  depths  of  almost  3,000  fathoms. 

2  Chamberlin,  Journ.  Geol.,  1907,  XV,  pp.  73-78;  Hayford,  tom.  cit.,  pp.  79-81, 
conforms  in  all  essential  points  with  Chamberlin 's  views. 

*  Relative  Schwerebestimmungen  durch  Pendelbeobachtungen,  ausgefiihrt  durch  die 
k.undk.  Kriegsmarine,  1892-1894,  herausgegeben  vom  Reichskriegsministerium,  Marine- 
section,  8vo,  Wien,  1895,  630  pp.,  maps  ;  M.  Loesch,  Bestimmung  der  Intensitat  der 
Schwerkraft  auf  20  Stationen  der  westafricanischen  Kiiste  von  Rio  del  Rey  (Kamerun- 
Gebiet)  bis  Kapstadt,  4to,  Reichsmarineamt,  Berlin,  50  pp.,  map.    For  the  theoretical 


CH.XVII]         GEAVITY  BENEATH  THE  SEA 


617 


The  diversity  of  the  coasts  which  have  been  taken  into  consideration  is 
alone  sufficient  to  remove  any  suspicion  that  this  excess  can  be  based  on 
the  nature  of  the  rock,  and  it  became  a  matter  of  importance  to  discover 
some  method  of  making  gravity  measurements  in  the  open  sea.  This 
difficult  problem  was  solved  in  a  brilliant  manner  by  0.  Hecker,  who 
devised  a  method  based  on  the  comparison  of  the  readings  of  the  boiling- 
point  thermometer  and  the  mercury  barometer.  As  a  result  we  are  told 
that  it  may  be  regarded  as  proved  that  the  lesser  density  of  the  waters  of 
the  Oceans  is  compensated  by  the  greater  density  of  the  sea  bottom.  On 
the  other  hand  the  continental  protuberances  rising  above  the  sea-level  are 
not  really  accumulations  of  mass  in  the  earth's  crust,  but  the  apparent 
excess  of  mass  is  counterbalanced  by  a  defect  beneath  the  continents  ^. 

For  a  closer  consideration  of  the  results  we  must  first  omit  the  measure- 
ments made  in  the  coast  regions;  we  will  disregard  all  measurements 
above  —  200  meters.  Then,  so  far  as  a  conclusion  can  be  drawn  from 
observations  along  isolated  lines,  the  following  results  present  themselves 
to  the  geologist. 

With  a  trifling  exception  in  the  south-east  of  Australia,  positive  values 
are  obtained  for  the  whole  region  of  the  Red  sea  and  of  the  Indian  Ocean, 
as  well  as  across  the  northern  part  of  New  Zealand  as  far  as  the  Tonga 
plateau ;  on  the  latter,  at  a  level  of  —  2,700  meters,  a  very  high  positive  value 
was  obtained,  while  the  Tonga  foredeep,  down  to  a  depth  of  8,500  meters,  gave 
considerable  negative  figures.  This  region  from  Suez  to  Tonga  separates 
two  areas,  distinguished  by  a  much  greater  diversity,  namely,  the  Mediter- 
ranean and  the  Atlantic  Ocean  on  one  side,  and  the  large  remaining  part  of 
the  Pacific  Ocean  on  the  other. 

As  opposed  to  the  Indian  region,  the  Mediterranean,  according  to  eight 
measurements  made  down  to  —3,500  meters,  furnished  only  negative 
values. 

In  so  far  as  we  may  make  preliminary  generalizations  at  all  from  these 
determinations,  the  lines  measured  in  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  Oceans  show 
concordantly,  first  a  broad  positive  belt  surrounding  the  continents,  then 
a  neutral  or  negative  zone,  and  within  this  a  closed,  positive  region.  The 
latter  is  connected  with  two  of  the  heaviest  places  known  anywhere  on  the 

side  of  the  question,  0.  E.  Schiotz,  Ueber  die  Schwerkraft  auf  dem  Meere  langs  dem 
Abfall  der  Kontinente  gegen  die  Tiefe,  Skrift.  Vedensk.  Selsk.  Christiania  (1907),  1908, 
no.  6,  28  pp. 

^  0.  Hecker,  Bestimmung  der  Schwerkraft  auf  dem  Atlantischen  Ocean,  VerofF.  k. 
preuss.  geodat.  Inst.  Berlin,  1903,  new  ser.,  no.  11,  137  pp.,  map  ;  and  Bestimmung  der 
Schwerkraft  auf  dem  Indischen  und  Grossen  Ocean,  op.  cit.,  1908,  new  ser.,  no.  12, 
233  pp.,  maps,  in  particular  p.  213.  In  the  case  of  the  data  given  in  this  work,  it  is 
a  pity  that  the  extremely  exact  observations  on  gravity  are  not  accompanied  by  sound- 
ings ;  the  depths  have  been  taken  from  the  English  Admiralty  map  and  the  Monaco 
map. 


618 


HYPOTHESES 


[PAKT  V 


earth.  In  the  Atlantic  Ocean  it  is  marked  by  the  island  of  St.  Paul 
(lat.  0°  58'  N.,  long.  29°  15'  W.),  formed  of  peridotite,  the  density  of  which, 
apart  from  the  still  heavier  intercalations  of  Crofe  and  olivine,  is  3-287 
(IV,  p.  563).  The  positive  Pacific  region  coincides  with  the  mighty  basaltic 
accumulation  of  the  Sandwich  islands  (Honolulu,  lat.  21°  17'  N.,  long.  157° 
30'  W.),  the  mean  density  of  which  must  be  at  least  3.^ 

Let  us  consider  the  position  in  greater  detail.  In  the  Atlantic  Ocean, 
on  the  lines  from  Hamburg  to  Rio,  and  Rio  to  Lisbon,  Hecker  made  67 
measurements  at  and  below  —200  meters;  of  these  one  gave  a  zero  value, 
29  are  positive  and  37  negative.  The  excess  of  values  is  negative.  Both 
routes  lie  to  the  north-west  of  St.  Paul,  and  the  excellence  of  the  observa- 
tions is  shown  by  the  fact  that  in  both  cases  (from  lat.  1°  58'  S.,  long.  31° 
23'  W.  to  lat.  6°  39'  N.,  long.  27°  25'  W.,  and  from  lat.  3"  37'  N.,  long. 
29°  47'  W.  to  lat.  10°  54'  N.,  long.  27°  21'  W.)  the  instruments  revealed  the 
extension  of  the  heavy  rocks.  The  depths  descend  to  —  5,000  meters,  and 
the  positive  maximum  was  encountered  at  the  highest  point  crossed  on  the 
equatorial  ridge,  at  —  2,000  meters,  about  140  kilometers  from  St.  Paul. 
This  interval  includes  10  of  the  29  positive  Atlantic  measurements,  so  that 
a  considerable  negative  value  remains  over  for  all  the  rest  of  the  Ocean. 
But  even  in  this  remaining  part  we  observe  two  high  positive  measure- 
ments, adjacent  to  one  another,  near  lat.  35°  N.,  long.  12°  W.  (  —  3,500  and 
—  3,600  meters),  between  the  submarine  heights  which  run  from  Madeira 
towards  Gettysburg  and  which  may  be  regarded  with  great  probability  as 
volcanic. 

The  conclusion  is  that  heavy  rocks  are  certainly  present  beneath  the 
Atlantic  Ocean,  but  that  they  probably  form  a  locally  restricted  feature  in 
a  region  chiefly  negative. 

The  Sandwich  islands  have  been  previously  described  (IV,  p.  322)  as 
a  series  of  islands  extending  almost  from  long.  180°  to  155°  W. ;  in  the 
west-north- west  they  are  small,  low,  and  extremely  steep,  and  covered  with 
limestone;  towards  the  east-south-east  they  reveal  in  increasing  extent 
the  volcanic  foundation.  The  volcanic  activity  becomes  displaced  towards  the 
east- south-east ;  the  gigantic  Mauna  Loa  lies  near  the  extremity  of  the  series 
in  lat.  19°  30'  N.,  long.  155**  28'  W.  Since  Hecker  travelled  not  very  far  to 
the  north  of  this  island  chain  and  records  positive  values  in  lat.  29°  30'  N. 
and  long.  177°  14'  W.  we  conclude  that  the  heavy  rocks  of  Hawaii  actually 
extend  through  10  degrees  of  latitude  and  22  degrees  of  longitude  from 
west-north-west  to  east-south-east.  Hecker  also  reached  the  closed 
positive  region  as  early  as  lat.  12°  19'  N.,  long.  161°  38'  W.,  so  that  we  may 
conjecture  that  the  extension  is  very  great  in  this  direction  also.  On  the 
other  hand,  towards  the  north-east,  in  the  direction  of  San  Francisco,  no 
such  indications  are  mentioned.    The  high  positive  values  in  the  neigh- 

1  Dana  says  34  ;  cf.  p.  609,  n.  2. 


CH.  XVIl] 


DENSITY  OF  THE  KOCKS 


619 


bourhood  of  Honolulu  and  Oahu  are  soon  followed  by  a  zone,  beginning 
between  lats.  24°  and  25°  N.  and  extending  to  lats.  36°  or  37°  N.,  which 
shows  1 6  negative  as  against  only  3  positive  measurements ;  then  we  reach 
the  positive  girdle  of  California. 

The  negative  zone  also  is  clearly  marked  towards  the  south-west  in  the 
direction  of  Tonga,  but  less  clearly  towards  the  west-north-west  in  the 
direction  of  Yokohama,  where,  in  contrast  to  the  foredeep  of  Tonga,  which 
gives  high  negative  values,  the  Japanese  foredeep  lies  within  the  positive 
girdle,  and  on  its  eastern  slope,  at  levels  of  —  6,100  and  —  6,400  meters,  has 
given  positive  values  ^. 

The  results  obtained  in  the  Pacific  Ocean  correspond  in  all  essential 
"points  with  those  obtained  in  the  Atlantic. 

Hecker's  investigations  do  not  furnish  a  complete  picture  of  the  oceanic 
basement,  but  they  have  supplied  the  first  outlines ;  in  their  bearing  on  the 
constitution  of  our  planet  they  are  of  the  greatest  importance,  and  open  up 
a  completely  new  method  of  exploring  that  part  of  it  which  is  concealed  by 
the  Oceans. 

The  following  remarks  may  help  us  to  appreciate  the  value  of  his 
conclusions  in  respect  to  the  question  of  isostatic  compensation. 

Disregarding  loose  sand  and  pebbles,  the  densities  of  the  various  rocks 
of  the  earth's  crust  vary  from  1-2  or  1-5  (coal)  to  3-3,  a  figure  very  rarely 
exceeded  except  in  the  case  of  metallic  ores.  The  mean  density  of  the 
gneiss  of  Pikes  Peak,  as  obtained  from  twelve  specimens  by  Whitman 
Cross  and  Gilbert,  is  2-615,  and  the  density  of  the  massive  rocks  which 
come  into  question  in  considering  the  high  mountains  seldom  lies  below  2-3 
or  above  2-85.  These  narrow  limits  show  how  difficult  it  is  to  admit  that 
deficiency  or  excess  can  compensate  each  other  within  the  series  of  rocks 
known  to  us. 

Only  the  heaviest  Sima  eruptive  rocks  exceed  these  limits,  and  here  the 
highly  fluid  basaltic  rocks  with  a  density  of  about  3  have  a  particular 
significance.  In  those  parts  of  the  sea  bottom  where  few  sediments  are 
formed,  lava  may  rest  upon  lava.  Since  no  erosion  occurs,  the  tablelands 
are  not  interrupted  by  valleys,  and  the  action  upon  the  pendulum  or 
barometer  is  direct. 

On  the  mainland,  bare  tablelands  of  basalt  may  easily  be  undermined ; 
their  remains  are  carried  into  the  sea.  The  tableland  of  the  Deccan  trap 
(basalt),  which  once  extended  through  almost  10  degrees  of  latitude  and 
16  degrees  of  longitude,  covering  the  Indian  peninsula  over  scarcely  less 
than  300,000  square  kilometers,  would  still  be  preserved  in  its  entire  extent 
if  it  had  overflowed  the  sea  bottom.    On  dry  land  it  has  been  broken  up 

1  34°  57',  149°  55',  and  34°  56',  148°  27' ;  according  to  the  Japanese  isobaths  of  1899  it 
should  te  -6,600  and  -7,100  meters. 


620 


HYPOTHESES 


[part  V 


into  isolated  patches.  The  western  part,  which  is  still  continuous,  was 
spread  out  over  a  continent,  levelling  up  mountain  and  valley,  and  it 
contains  intercalations  of  freshwater  beds,  but  near  Rajamahendri,  on  the 
lower  Godaveri,  an  isolated  patch  occurs  336  kilometers  from  the  margin 
of  the  main  mass  as  it  now  exists,  and  contains  intercalated  brackish  water 
beds,  which  show  that  at  this  place  the  lava  flows  reached  the  coast.  Thus 
the  fall  of  the  land  was  directed  towards  the  east,  as  at  present,  and  the  frag- 
ments worn  away  from  the  tablelands  were  carried  into  the  bay  of  Bengal. 
This  is  a  case  in  which  the  mean  density  of  the  submarine  rocks  is  increased 
by  transported  material,  since  trap  is  heavier  than  gneiss. 

The  great  basalt  plateaux  of  the  substructure  of  Iceland  have  not  been 
raised  out  of  the  sea,  as  is  shown  by  the  intercalated  plant-bearing  beds ; 
the  downthrown  continuations  of  the  horst  occupy,  however,  a  large  sub- 
marine area.  In  addition,  there  are  not  only  the  Sandwich  islands  and 
St.  Paul,  but  also  the  basalt  plateaux  of  Kerguelen  and  numerous  other 
islands.  We  are  reminded  of  the  dark  lavas  of  the  lunar  seas,  which 
likewise  do  not  invariably  reach  the  border  of  the  sea. 

Thus  it  would  not  be  surprising  if  Hecker's  measurements  had  given 
a  still  greater  and  more  uniform  submarine  density.  But  it  is  a  long  way 
from  this  to  the  proof  of  a  deficiency  beneath  the  continents  or  of  an  active 
compensation,  i.  e.  to  a  deforming  tectonic  influence  exerted  on  the  con- 
tinents and  the  mountains  by  the  sea,  such  as  is  presupposed  by  the 
isostatic  theory  of  Button  and  his  successors  :  whether  the  influence  is 
exerted  through  a  viscous  medium,  or  acts  upon  a  rigid  body  in  Chamber- 
lin's  sense,  is  of  little  importance  in  this  connexion.  It  is  true  that  some 
examples  of  passive  injection  produced  by  subsidence  have  been  recorded ; 
thus  Salomon  thought  that  the  igneous  magma  of  the  Adamello  had  been 
extruded  by  the  subsidence  of  the  plain  of  Lombardy.  In  these  cases, 
however,  we  are  always  dealing  with  molten  magmas  and  secondary 
phenomena  of  the  great  mountain-forming  process.  When  this  process  is 
contemplated  as  a  whole,  all  suppositions  of  this  kind  prove  inadequate. 

Hecker's  largest  positive  region,  the  centre  of  which  is  the  Indian 
Ocean,  belongs  chiefly  to  the  Atlantic  hemisphere.  The  correspondence 
of  great  parts  of  the  coast  in  the  east  and  west  of  the  Atlantic,  as  well  as 
the  continuation  of  the  Cameroon  line  into  the  sea,  show  that  considerable 
parts  of  the  sea  bottom  resemble  on  the  whole  the  neighbouring  continents, 
possibly  with  the  addition  of  volcanic  flows. 

In  regard  to  the  Indian  Ocean  in  particular,  we  can  speak  with  greater 
certainty. 

Towards  the  end  of  his  active  life,  I  had  the  pleasure  of  a  conversation 
with  Ludwig  Griesbach,  the  distinguished  Director  of  the  Indian  Survey, 
on  the  subject  of  the  Indian  peninsula.  There  is  no  doubt,  he  said,  that  it 
is  simply  a  fragment.    It  might  at  most  be  compared  with  the  north- 


CH.  XVIl] 


THE  INDIAN  OCEAN 


621 


western  segment  of  a  much  greater  circle,  namely,  with  the  most  recent 
rocks  situated  towards  the  north-west,  but  even  these  are  probably  pre- 
Cambrian.  We  have  described  South  Africa  and  India  as  a  broken-up 
continent  (I,  p.  387).  One  of  the  chief  arguments  we  then  adduced  in 
support  of  this  view  rested  on  the  horizontal  superposition,  in  both 
countries,  of  the  Gondwana  beds  containing  Glossopteris  upon  much  older 
rocks.  Since  then  the  same  relations  have  been  discovered  in  Madagascar  ^. 
At  the  time  of  the  Glossopteris  flora,  Gondwana  land  was  a  continuous 
continent.  Then  it  broke  down,  sometimes  along  extensive  rectilinear 
fractures,  into  fragments.  The  concordant  results  of  the  work  of  English 
investigators  in  Cutch  and  Kattyawar,  of  Bornhardt  in  German  East 
Africa,  and  Lemoine  in  Madagascar,  show  that  the  marine  Lias  in 
Madagascar  is  the  first  indication  of  the  presence  of  the  sea.  Then  the 
great  transgression  of  the  lower  Oolites  coming  from  the  extreme  north 
reaches  Franz-Josef  Land,  extends  across  parts  of  European  Russia, 
Bokhara,  and  Baluchistan  to  lat.  22°  N.  on  the  west  coast  of  the  peninsula, 
also  along  the  west  coast  of  Madagascar  to  about  lat.  23°  S.,  and  along  the 
east  coast  of  Africa,  according  to  observations  hitherto  made,  as  far  as 
lat.  10°  S.  The  upper  Cretaceous  transgression  everywhere  extends  further 
towards  the  south,  and  penetrates  between  Madagascar  and  India  ^.  The 
west  coast  of  the  peninsula  is  formed,  through  4  degrees  of  latitude,  by 
the  Deccan  trap.  It  is  not,  as  we  have  seen,  raised  out  of  the  sea,  but  its 
western  continuation  is  downthrown. 

The  east  coast  of  Madagascar  is  also  a  fracture.  Depths  of  5,349  meters 
have  been  sounded  in  its  neighbourhood.  Towards  the  north  the  sea 
bottom  shows  traces  of  chloritic  schist  with  sericite ;  Reunion  and  Mauritius 
contain  volcanic  rocks,  chiefly  basaltic  ^. 

There  is  every  reason  to  suppose  that  the  nature  of  the  basement  of 
the  Indian  Ocean  resembles  that  of  the  surrounding  continents.  A  greater 
value  for  gravity  would  point  to  a  wider  submarine  distribution  of  the 
Deccan  trap,  further  to  the  south,  for  example,  in  continuation  with  the  basalts 
of  Crozet,  Kerguelen,  Heard  island,  and  elsewhere,  but  there  is  nothing  to 
indicate  an  influence  exerted  laterally  on  the  continent  or  the  high 
mountains  of  Asia  by  lava-flows  of  this  kind. 

Similar  data  concerning  the  sea  bottom  are  difficult  to  obtain  in  the 
Pacific  hemisphere  owing  to  folding,  but  the  mere  fact  that  folding  is  present 
in  the  New  Hebrides  and  overthrusting  in  New  Caledonia,  and  that 
arcuate  Cordilleras  advance  far  into  the  Ocean,  is  opposed  to  the  hypothesis 
1  M.  Boule,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  2  mars  1908. 

^  A  Uttle  map  of  the  transgressions  is  given  by  Lemoine,  Madagascar,  p.  466.  Kitchin 
has  given  an  excellent  account  of  the  difficulties  which  still  exist  in  the  case  of  the  lower 
Cretaceous  ;  Invertebrate  Fauna  and  Palaeontological  Relation  of  the  Uitenhage  Series, 
Ann.  S.  African  Mus.,  1908,  VIT,  p.  21,  p.  250,  in  particular  pp.  51-60. 

3  J.  Thoulet,  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  18  fevr.  1907. 


622 


HYPOTHESES 


[PAET  V 


of  an  isostatic  compensation  acting  from  the  sea  outwards.  Such  a  com- 
pensation should  first  of  all  close  up  the  foredeeps,  but  it  is  just  the  deepest 
measurements  in  one  of  the  foredeeps  (Tonga)  that  have  furnished  Hecker 
with  negative  values. 

The  investigations  inspired  by  the  compensation  theory  have  thus 
furnished  much  fresh  information,  particularly  as  regards  the  supposed 
nature  of  the  sea  bottom,  but  so  far  no  new  light  has  been  thrown  on  the 
development  of  the  face  of  the  earth.  Many  conceptions  might  perhaps 
have  received  less  support  if  it  had  been  possible  in  practice  to  avoid 
making  sections  on  a  distorted  scale,  if  comparison  of  the  continents  with 
vertically  descending  blocks  had  not  been  so  generally  made  as  to  exceed 
all  moderation,  and  if  the  fact  had  constantly  been  borne  in  mind  that  more 
than  one  half  of  the  planetary  surface  lies  about  3,000  meters  deep  beneath 
the  sea,  while  altogether  only  0-06  parts  rise  more  than  1,000  meters 
above  it. 

Contraction  of  the  earth's  body  ^.  In  this  work  we  have  taken  as  our 
starting-point  the  conception  that  dislocations  are  the  result  of  movements 
produced  by  a  diminution  in  the  volume  of  the  planet  (I,  p.  107).  These 
movements  we  have  divided  into  radial  (sinking)  and  tangential  (thrusting 
and  folding)  movements,  according  to  the  manner  in  which  the  stresses  are 
resolved.  The  theories  of  filie  de  Beaumont  were  also  based  on  the 
contraction  of  the  planet,  and  he  believed  that  folded  ranges  were  produced 
as  it  were  in  a  vice,  two  powerful  masses  moving  one  against  the  other. 
In  opposition  to  this  view  it  is  assumed  in  this  work  that  a  general, 
unilateral,  but  not  equable  movement  occurs.  This  gives  rise  to  the  contrast 
between  the  foreland  and  backland,  which  led  to  the  idea  that  the  foreland 
is  overtaken  by  the  folding.  This  earliest  conception  owed  its  origin  to  the 
approximate  correspondence  in  strike  of  the  Alpine  and  the  Variscan 
trend-lines  ^. 

A  consideration  of  the  forelands  revealed  with  increasing  clearness  the 
unilateral  structure  of  the  folded  ranges.  Instances  became  known  in 
which  the  foreland  exhibited  a  strike  so  completely  divergent  that  a 
common  movement  was  out  of  the  question.  In  the  Caledonides  it  seemed 
possible  that  the  older  conception  of  filie  de  Beaumont's  might  hold  good, 
but  on  their  southern  border  their  direction  is  cut  through  by  that  of  the 

^  We  may  mention  as  one  of  the  most  decided  champions  of  this  theory  in  Grermany 
Bergrath  von  Diicker,  who,  basing  his  position  on  the  works  of  Favre  and  de  Beaumont, 
contended  against  the  theory  of  elevation  in  favour  at  his  time,  in  a  number  of  essays 
which  appeared  in  the  '  Berggeist '  of  Cologne  from  1861  to  1866,  also  in  addresses 
delivered  before  the  Naturalists'  Association  at  Giessen  in  1864,  at  Hanover  in  1865,  and 
at  Baden-Baden  in  1879.  'The  cause,'  he  said  in  1864,  'lies  in  the  wrinkling  of  the 
earth's  crust  due  to  the  shrinkage  of  the  whole  earth.'  A  similar  opinion  is  expressed 
by  Runge  in  Roomer,  Geologic  von  Ober-Schlesien,  8vo,  1870,  p.  460. 

2  Anzeig.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  17.  Juli  1873,  pp.  130-131. 


cH.xvii]         FOLDING  AND  SUBSIDENCE 


623 


iArmorican  folds.  On  the  upper  Hoangho  the  mole  of  North  China  is  an 
obstructing  foreland,  as  is  shown  by  the  overfolding  of  the  Alashan  range. 
At  the  same  time  it  forms  in  the  east  a  backland  for  the  folded  ranges  of 
Shan-si.  Here  existing  accounts  point  to  a  universal,  common  movement 
over  a  considerable  part  of  Asia.  The  tortuous  trend-lines  of  the  Alpides 
bear  witness  to  the  resistance  of  the  horsts.  In  the  Argentine  the  foreland, 
which  may  be  recognized  by  its  stratified  succession,  is  involved  over 
a  considerable  breadth  in  the  folding  of  the  Andes. 

Thus  the  degree  of  stowing  differs  in  the  different  cases,  but  with  the 
exception  of  the  first  they  all  point  to  unilateral  movement. 

In  the  Asiatic  system  backfolding  has  been  shown  to  result  from  an 
excess  in  the  volume  of  the  upper  zones  of  the  earth.  In  the  periphery  of 
Asia,  it  is  restricted,  so  far  as  is  known,  to  a  narrower  area  than  the  fore- 
folding,  but  where  the  areas  become  free  ends,  backfolding  predominates, 
as  is  seen  on  the  one  hand  in  the  Rocky  mountains,  and  on  the  other  in 
that  part  of  the  Altaides  lying  outside  the  horst  of  Azov.  It  is  true  that 
in  the  Rocky  mountains  the  peculiar  oblique  division  into  coulisses  occurs 
in  addition,  and  outside  the  horst  of  Azov  the  normal  forefolding  is  not 
visible  at  all;  only  the  continuity  of  the  system  as  a  whole  justifies 
a  description  of  its  structure  as  backfolding. 

The  objection  has  been  raised  that  the  amount  of  the  subsidences  does 
not  correspond  with  that  of  the  tangential  movements.  Estimating  the 
mean  depth  of  the  existing  seas  at  4,000  meters,  and  their  extension  at 
three-quarters  of  the  planetary  surface,  the  sum  total  of  the  subsidence, 
that  is,  of  the  diminution  of  the  radius,  would  amount  to  3,000  meters. 
This  would  correspond  to  a  diminution  in  the  circumference  of  about 
19  kilometers  only,  which  is  not  nearly  as  great  as  the  amount  ascertained 
by  observations.  This  objection  neglects  the  fact  that  it  is  not  alone  the 
localized  sea  basins  which  bear  witness  to  the  contraction  of  the  planet. 
The  forefolding,  in  particular,  attains  its  greatest  importance  under  the 
direct  influence  of  a  subsiding  foreland.  At  first  only  one  great  example, 
that  of  the  Belgian  Faille  du  Midi,  was  taken  into  consideration  (I,  p.  142). 
When  the  Caledonides  in  the  West  of  Scotland  and  the  Alps  also  were 
compared  with  the  Belgian  coalfield,  it  appeared  that  in  these  three  cases, 
which  represent  the  greatest  mountain  structures  of  Europe,  the  movement 
took  place  over  obliquely-ascending  soles,  and  the  folding  thus  becomes  a 
secondary  phenomenon.  At  the  same  time  there  is  no  complete  separation 
between  the  radial  and  the  tangential  stresses. 

The  resolution  of  the  stresses  proceeded  uniformly,  and  occurred  on  one 
or  more  surfaces  (soles  of  the  first  order),  which  correspond  more  or  less  to 
the  resultants  of  the  two  forms  of  stress.  Great  wedge-shaped  fragments 
of  the  earth  were  transported  over  the  foreland,  and  the  subsidence  was 
consummated  in  the  range  itself  and  possibly  in  the  foredeep  also.  The 


624 


HYPOTHESES 


[part  V 


forces  must  have  found  expression,  however,  at  such  a  depth  that  they  led 
to  the  asc«nt  of  Pacific  rocks  in  the  Alps,  and  enabled  the  green  rocks  in 
the  foothills  of  the  north-western  part  of  the  Pyrenees  and  in  the  Mediter- 
ranean Atlas  to  force  their  way  into  lagoon  sediments,  and  into  the  Trias 
of  Germanic  type. 

Among  recent  high  mountain  ranges  the  Alps  are  at  present  known  in 
the  greatest  detail.  For  this  reason  we  may  call  to  mind  that  it  is  not  only 
their  outer  border  which  was  overfolded  subsequently  to  a  part  of  the 
Tertiary  formation.  It  is  true  that  there  are  older  unconformities  and 
ingressions,  such  as  that  of  the  Gosau  beds  and  that  of  the  Eocene  of  North 
Tyrol,  which  place  beyond  doubt  the  existence  of  older  structures,  but  at 
the  same  time  a  variety  of  circumstances,  such  as  the  pinching-in  of  the 
long  Tertiary  Flysch  zone  of  the  Aiguilles  d'Arves  to  the  east  of  mont 
Pelvoux  and  mont  Blanc,  the  long  sjmcline  of  the  advancing  Dinarides 
in  the  western  Tyrol,  or  the  pinching-in  of  the  sediments  of  the  second 
Mediterranean  stage  near  Borgo  in  the  val  Sugana,  as  well  as  many  other 
features — all  enable  us  to  perceive  with  certainty  that  in  the  Alps,  and  also 
in  the  above-mentioned  part  of  the  Dinarides,  the  essential  features  of  the 
existing  structure  were  not  produced  before  the  middle  of  the  Tertiary  aera» 
On  this  point  all  recent  observers  are  in  accord. 

It  is  certain  that  the  contraction  which  has  taken  place  here  is  of  extra- 
ordinary extent.  In  the  northern  Variscan  foreland  the  movement  is  directed 
towards  the  north.  To  the  south  of  this  foreland  lay  a  foredeep,  and  south 
of  this  again  followed  the  great  sheet-like  overthrustings  likewise  directed 
towards  the  north.  The  Carnic  Alps,  of  equal  age  with  the  foreland,  were 
also  driven  towards  the  north,  and  likewise,  in  spite  of  their  southwards- 
directed  folding,  the  Dinaric  series  superposed  on  the  Carnic  foundation. 
The  Dinarides  are  now  wedged  in  between  the  Alps  and  the  Apennines,  and 
the  latter  are  driven  towards  the  north-east,  so  that  the  Dinarides  become 
the  foreland  of  the  Apennines.  It  is  impossible  to  say  to  what  distances 
this  great  rending  of  the  planetary  surface  extended  towards  the  south  and 
south-west. 

Beneath  the  high  mountains,  however,  even  down  to  great  depths,  no 
deficit  occurs,  such  as  is  required  by  the  theory  of  isostatic  compensation ;  in 
reality  they  surmount  the  previously  overthrust  zone. 

It  was  these  very  investigations  on  isostatic  compensation  that  led  to 
views  on  the  rigidity  of  the  earth  which  we  have  now  to  take  into  account. 
Lord  Kelvin,  and  after  him  Sir  George  H.  Darwin,  believed  that  the 
rigidity  should  be  about  that  of  steel. 

So  far  as  our  studies  are  concerned  it  would  appear  as  though  it  were 
simply  a  function  of  the  contraction  of  the  planet,  and  of  the  pressure, 
which  first  manifests  itself  at  the  moment  of  resolution  of  pressure.  The 
material  is  probably  that  which  is  brought  up  by  intrusions,  namely  Sima 


CH.  XVIl] 


EIGEPACTION 


625 


or  Sal  rock.  The  melting  is  produced  by  juvenile  gases.  It  is  these  also 
which  give  rise  to  such  batholites  as  may  occur. 

The  question  now  arises  as  to  what  we  are  to  understand  by  the  term 
rigefaction,  a  word  frequently  employed  in  this  work.  We  have  encountered 
its  effects  in  a  particular  form,  as  disjunctive  lines  and  fault-troughs,  that  is 
as  rents,  which  open  from  the  surface  downwards.  In  East  Africa  their 
rectilinear  course  shows  that  uni-directional,  mountain-forming  stresses  are 
absent.  The  arcuate  rents  in  eastern  Asia,  on  the  other  hand,  indicate  the 
presence  of  the  uni-directional  stresses.  The  rectilinear  course  of  the  Rhine 
valley  shows  that  there  the  ancient  Variscan  thrusts  were  absent  in  the 
Tertiary  epoch,  as  were  the  Alpine.  This  is  the  more  remarkable  since  the 
Variscan  trend-lines  do  not  differ  so  very  much  from  those  of  the  Swiss 
Alps,  so  that  the  Alps  may  be  described  as  posthumous  Altaides,  and  in  the 
formation  of  the  Alps  we  may  conjecture  a  renewal  of  activity  after  a  long 
summation  of  stresses.  The  fact  that  on  the  Rhine  uni-directional  mountain- 
forming  stresses  are  absent  led  us  to  conclude  that  this  region  is  rigefied. 
It  has  not  been  proved  that  this  mode  of  rigefaction  is  dependent  on  a  local 
cooling  of  the  earth.  The  Alps  occupy  an  exceptional  position  as  a  folding 
within  the  frame.  If  a  larger  number  of  such  cases  were  known,  and  it  were 
possible  to  take  a  general  survey  of  the  earth,  we  should  see  how  the  lateral 
stresses  are  distributed  in  space.  That  they  were  once  universal  is  inferred 
from  the  widely  extended  folding  of  pre-Cambrian  rocks ;  that  they  are  not 
so  at  present  is  evident  from  the  distribution  of  the  folded  ranges.  In  Asia 
this  distribution  has  long  been  very  uniform,  as  is  shown  by  the  corre- 
spondence of  vertex  and  periphery.  Here,  however,  the  fact  must  be 
taken  into  account  that  the  two  free  branches  of  the  Asiatic  structure, 
the  Rocky  Mountains  and  the  Altaides  which  lie  outside  the  horst  of  Azov, 
were  rigefied,  the  former  towards  the  close  of  the  Cretaceous  period,  the 
latter  after  the  dislocation  of  upper  Carboniferous.  The  question  has  also 
been  raised  whether  the  European  subsidence  may  in  this  case  have  led  to 
the  rigefaction,  i.  e.  the  conclusion  of  the  stresses.  In  contrast  to  the  rigefac- 
tion of  these  ends,  mountain-forming  movement  occurred  not  only  on  the 
outer  border,  but  also  in  the  interior  of  Asia  up  to  a  late  period ;  examples  are 
afforded  by  the  folded  Jurassic  beds  on  the  Bureja,  the  recent  folds  beneath 
the  plain  of  north-west  Manchuria  and  on  the  Amur,  the  pinched- in  syncline 
of  the  recent  Gobi  beds  between  the  Richthofen  range  and  the  Tolai-shan  in 
the  Nan-shan,  the  overfolded  Artush  beds  at  the  south  foot  of  the  Thianshan, 
the  backfolded  Jurassic  Angara  beds  on  the  Angara,  with  other  examples 
extending  up  to  the  vertical  plant-bearing  Tertiary  beds  of  New  Siberia. 

A  contrast  is  presented  by  Africa,  and  the  absence  of  folding  might  lead 
us  to  seek  the  place  of  separation  of  the  moon  in  the  Atlantic  region.  The 
rigefaction,  however,  did  not  occur  in  the  Sahara  until  after  the  upper 
Silurian,  nor  on  the  Armorican  line  until  after  the  middle  Carboniferous, 

SOLLAS  IV  S  S 


626 


HYPOTHESES 


[PAKT  V 


nor  in  the  Cape  mountains  until  after  the  Permian.  Here  it  may  be  asked 
whether  the  interruption  caused  by  the  Atlantic  subsidence  brought  about 
the  rigef  action  of  the  Appalachians.  On  these  questions  the  existing  state  of 
observations  throws  no  light ;  we  only  know  that  in  the  Pacific  hemisphere 
the  case  is  different. 

Round  about  the  Pacific  Ocean,  and  along  the  southern  marginal  arcs  of 
Asia  to  the  Adriatic  sea,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Pole  in  the  United 
States  chain,  and  again  far  away  in  the  Cape  mountains,  there  makes 
its  appearance,  notwithstanding  the  exceptions  already  mentioned  (Elias 
mountains,  Burman  arc,  Urals),  such  an  arrangement  of  the  folded  ranges 
that  we  are  led  to  consider  whether,  in  respect  to  this  great  part  of  the 
earth,  we  must  not  admit  the  action  of  bodily  tides  or  of  the  rotation,  in 
addition  to  the  contraction  of  the  planet,  as  a  possible  factor  in  determining 
the  plan  of  the  folded  ranges.  The  possibility  of  such  an  influence  would 
also  modify  certain  elementary  conceptions  in  tectonics,  for  whereas  it  has 
been  supposed  hitherto  that  the  deeper  lying  zones  of  the  earth  contract 
and  carry  the  upper  zones  forward,  it  would  now  be  necessary  to  take  into 
account  an  action  working  from  above  downwards.  In  the  Alps  a  distinctly 
marked  peak-folding  is  well  known.  This  action  would  also  simplify  our 
conception  of  overthrust  sheets,  but  it  is  precisely  in  the  Alps  that  the 
direction  does  not  follow  the  lines  of  the  tides  and  the  rotation. 

The  distinction  between  the  Atlantic  subsidences  and  the  foredeeps 
stands  out  very  clearly.  While  the  Atlantic  and  especially  the  European 
subsidences  lie  transversally  across  the  folds,  which  are  interrupted  and  of 
earlier  date,  the  foredeeps  on  the  other  hand  are  intimately  associated  with 
the  folds  and  follow  the  same  direction. 

Many  years  ago  Middlemiss  recognized  the  foredeep  of  the  Himalaya  as 
a  zone  of  subsidence,  and  believed  that  forefolding  and  subsidence  went  as 
it  were  hand  in  hand  ^. 

Similar  relations  may  be  seen,  on  a  very  small  scale,  on  the  border  of 
the  Jura  mountains  towards  the  table- Jura  ;  there,  however,  the  subsidence 
of  the  Rhine  valley  afibrded  an  opportunity  for  the  folding  to  advance 
(IV,  p.  527).  We  might  almost  suppose  that  the  foreland  had  been  forced 
down  by  the  advancing  range.  Other  facts,  as  for  instance  the  position  of 
the  northern  Antilles,  support  the  conclusion  that  the  subsidence  was  the 
primary  phenomenon. 

The  coal-bearing  zone  on  the  north  border  of  the  western  Altaides, 
extending  from  Silesia  to  Ireland,  and  on  the  other  side  of  the  Ocean  to 

^  C.  S.  Middlemiss,  Physical  Geology  of  the  Sub-Himalaya  of  Garwhal  and  Kumaun  ; 
Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  India,  1890,  XXIV,  pfc.  2,  143  pp.,  maps,  in  particular  p.  138  et  seq. 
Similar  observations  by  this  distinguished  geologist  are  already  to  be  found  in  his  work, 
On  the  Structure  and  Relationship  of  the  South  Portion  of  the  Himalaya  Ranges  between 
the  Rivers  Ganges  and  Ravee,  op.  cit.,  1864,  III,  pt.  2,  209  pp.,  maps ;  and  in  The  Alps 
and  the  Himalaya,  a  Geological  Comparison,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1867,  pp.  34-52. 


cH.xvii]        SUBSIDENCE  AND  FOREDEEPS  627 


I beyond  the  Mississippi ;  the  Flysch  and  Molasse  zone  in  the  north  of  the 
Alps,  and  the  Sewalik  zone  in  the  south  of  the  Himalaya  are,  in  the  main, 
deposits  in  foredeeps.  In  the  subsequent  history  of  the  foredeep  the  part 
lying  next  the  mountains  was  overstepped  by  them  and  folded  in,  so  that 
the  Belgian  coalfield,  for  example,  comes  to  lie  beneath  the  older  rocks  in 
the  south  as  a  compressed  syncline  divided  by  listric  planes.  That  part 
of  the  zone,  however,  which  was  more  remote  from  the  mountains  remained, 
as  well  in  the  Belgian  as  in  the  American  coalfields,  in  the  Molasse  of 
Switzerland  and  in  the  Sewalik  zone,  flat,  and  undisturbed.  The  foredeeps 
are  not  synclines  in  the  tectonic  sense  of  the  wordy  for  one  side  belongs  to 
the  foreland,  the  other  to  the  folded  mountains.  Speaking  generally,  with 
the  exception  of  bays  belonging  to  rias  coasts,  no  tract  of  the  sea  is  known 
which  has  been  transformed  by  lateral  pressure  into  a  syncline.  The 
manner  in  which  sea  basins  arise  by  the  coalescence  of  subsidences  is 
illustrated  by  the  history  of  the  Mediterranean  ^ 

Not  all  folded  ranges  possess  foredeeps ;  many  flatten  out,  or  form 
parmas,  as  for  instance  the  Urals  and  the  Appalachians.  Nor  is  it  by  any 
means  an  established  fact  that  all  folded  ranges  have  ascended  from  below 
on  obliquely  inclined  soles.  It  is  highly  probable  that  very  many  of  them 
have  developed  by  repeated  folding,  or,  like  the  Appalachians  in  Alabama, 
have  allowed  the  folds  to  pass  in  places  into  thrust  planes.  The  Faille  du  Midi 
itself  belongs  rather  to  the  periphery  of  the  Altaides.  But  all  folded  ranges, 
impelled  by  the  general  struggle  for  space,  have  a  tendency  to  enter  into  the 
subsidences,  as  for  instance  the  above-mentioned  Jurassic  folds  in  the  Rhine 
valley,  or  to  overthrust  the  subsidences,  or  to  throw  the  subsidences  them- 
selves into  folds.  This  is  the  reason  we  so  frequently  encounter  a  richer 
marine  series  in  the  folds  than  in  the  foreland,  and  why  compressed  sea  basins 
have  been  so  frequently  mentioned.  At  the  same  time  it  is  remotely 
suggested  that  secondary  subsidences  interrupt  the  progress  of  the  folding, 
but  the  connexion  between  cause  and  effect  is  not  established  in  this  case, 
and  the  folding  of  the  Rocky  Mountains  comes  to  an  end  without  any 
known  inbreak  or  subsidence.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  not  impossible 
that  the  overridden  and  subsided  foreland  sinks  beneath  the  high  mountains 
and  assists  in  producing  zonal  differences,  or  such  flakes  as  are  too  large  to 
be  produced  by  folding.  This  is  possibly  true  for  parts  of  the  Alps ;  a  good 
example  seems  to  be  afforded  by  Hazara  \ 

^  The  lie  of  the  sediments  which  fill  it  is  possibly  synclinal,  somewhat  as  described  by 
Haug,  Traite  de  Geologic,  I,  1907,  p.  159,  fig.  36.  This,  however,  is  not  the  tectonic 
conception  of  the  geosyncUne,  and  the  geanticline  cannot  be  regarded  as  its  opposite  ;  the 
geanticline  was  originally  conceived  by  Dana  in  a  diflferent  sense,  but  to  many  authors 
both  words  seemed  to  presuppose  equilibrium  and  the  germ  of  the  isostatic  theory.  For 
this  reason  I  regret  that  I  at  first  employed  the  term  geosyncline  in  this  work  ; 
subsequently  I  avoided  it. 

2  Middlemiss,  Hazara,  Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  India,  1896,  XXVI,  p.  261. 

S  S 


628 


EETEOSPECT 


[party 


The  great  significance  of  the  subsidences  also  becomes  apparent  in  the 
negative  movements  of  the  strand.  The  so-called  '  epeirogenetic  '  movements, 
which,  in  addition  to  tectonic  movements,  are  said  to  be  produced  by  some 
unknown  force,  are  in  my  opinion  either  local  phenomena,  connected  with 
the  general  structure  of  the  land,  as  for  example  in  the  case  of  the  marine 
upper  Tertiary  deposits  which  Diener  observed  resting  upon  the  broken-up 
fault-plexus  of  the  desert  of  Palmyra,  or  they  are  based  upon  changes  in 
the  form  of  the  hydrosphere.  From  the  extensive  tablelands  of  lower 
Palaeozoic  between  the  Jenisei  and  the  Lena  to  the  flat-lying  patches  of 
lower  Silurian  which  are  scattered  over  the  Canadian  shield,  and  again  to 
the  flat-lying  Cretaceous  platforms  of  the  Sahara  and  Texas,  the  upper 
Tertiary  belts  of  the  Mediterranean,  the  recent  strand-lines,  and  the  terraced 
islands  of  the  existing  Oceans — in  all  these  features  we  see  negative 
processes  of  such  extent  that  they  can  only  be  ascribed  to  subsidences  of 
the  sea  bottom  and  the  consequent  sinking  of  the  strand-line,  a  process 
recognized  long  ago  by  Strabo.  No  form  of  tectonic  movement  could 
produce  the  uniform  elevation  above  the  sea  of  a  tract  of  land  so  extensive 
as  the  African  desert. 

Of  greater  diversity  and  more  difficult  of  explanation  are  the  trans- 
gressions. Apart  from  the  uninterrupted  positive  activity  of  transported 
sediment,  they  appear  sometimes  to  stand  under  a  scarcely  explicable 
influence,  produced  by  rotation  ;  at  others  we  are  tempted  to  ask  whether 
some  great  tectonic  change,  the  gradual  folding  up  of  a  range  or  a  new 
subsidence,  may  not  have  influenced  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  earth,  in 
consequence  of  which  compensation  has  occurred  through  a  change  in  the 
form  of  the  hydrosphere  in  accordance  with  Clairaut's  principle. 

This  is  by  no  means  the  only  phenomenon  the  solution  of  which  must 
be  left  to  the  future.  The  deeper  reason  for  the .  difference  between  the 
Pacific  and  Atlantic  hemispheres  is  not  known ;  for  the  present  we  can  only 
record  the  facts.  The  intercalation  of  the  apparently  loosened  zone  of  the 
American  Intermediate  mountains  with  the  Basin  ranges,  and  also  with  the 
South  American  Andes,  is  not  explained  in  a  perfectly  satisfactory  manner, 
and  the  position  of  the  depression  along  the  west  coast  of  South  America  is 
not  in  accord  with  the  general  arrangement  of  the  deeps.  Our  knowledge 
of  Timor  and  the  islands  lying  off"  it  is  not  sufficiently  far  advanced  to 
permit  us  to  form  an  opinion  on  the  relations  of  Australia  to  Gondw^na 
land.  The  two-sided  structure  of  the  Caledonides,  as  it  is  represented 
in  existing  accounts,  is  difficult  to  bring  into  accord  with  other  observations 
on  mountain  structure.  The  nature  of  Karpinsky's  lines  is  unknown. 
A  number  of  doubts  and  questions  remain  unanswered  in  this  incomplete 
attempt  to  obtain  a  general  conception  of  the  face  of  the  earth ;  they  hang 
from  it  like  the  loose  threads  of  an  unfinished  texture. 

Summary.    From  the  summits  of  the  Tauern  we  look  towards  the 


CH.XV1II]         NOETH  AND  CENTRAL  ASIA  629 


south,  where  the  white  peaks  of  the  Dolomites  rise  from  the  haze  of  early 
dawn.  The  eye  feasts  on  the  alternating  splendour  of  snowfield,  rock,  and 
forest,  and  follows  the  play  of  the  white  mists  which  rise  from  the  Puster- 
thal  and  the  valley  of  the  Rienz.  It  is  not  without  reluctance  that  the 
traveller  turns  from  the  charms  of  the  landscape. 

The  outer  walls  of  an  ancient  temple  are  covered  over  with  sculpture, 
and  in  the  midst  of  the  skilful  carving  gape  the  joints  of  the  masonry, 
widened  by  the  hand  of  time ;  so  we,  through  the  midst  of  this  noble  scene, 
draw  the  dividing  planes.  The  Tauern  themselves  become  a  window,  and 
the  dark  heights,  which  separate  them  from  the  Dolomites,  become  the 
border  of  a  sheet,  the  continuation  of  which  lies  far  to  the  north,  on 
the  other  side  of  the  Tauern ;  we  separate  the  Dolomites  completely  from 
the  Alps,  and  assign  them  to  the  Dinarides,  which  approach  from  Dalmatia. 
We  separate  the  eastern  from  the  western  Pamir,  the  east  Sayan  from  the  west 
Sayan,  and  the  horst  of  the  Gobi- Altai  from  the  folded  range  of  the  Russian 
Altai ;  and  we  unite  the  Sudetes  with  the  Harz,  Brittany  with  Cornwall,  with 
Newfoundland  and  the  Appalachians,  and  the  Antilles  with  the  Andes. 

Thus  unexpected  unities  have  taken  form,  and  now,  once  more,  as  at  the 
beginning  of  this  work,  we  will  suppose  the  earth  to  rotate  beneath  our  eyes. — 

Let  us  place  in  the  middle  of  the  picture  the  meridian  of  105°  E.,  and 
bound  it  by  the  meridians  of  130°  E.  and  80°  E. 

A  great  part  of  the  Asiatic  system  is  visible.  In  the  north-east  lie  the 
New  Siberian  islands  with  beds  folded  towards  the  north-east.  Tertiary 
leaf -bearing  beds  emerge  steeply  upturned.  The  delta  of  the  Lena  lies  in 
the  folded  Mesozoie  offshoots  of  the  arc  of  Verkhoiansk.  Then  we  perceive 
the  northern  part  of  the  broad  and  ancient  Angara  land.  Cambrian  beds 
lie  horizontal ;  they  are  exposed  for  a  great  distance  along  the  Lena.  On 
the  Chatanga  gneiss  makes  its  appearance  from  beneath  them.  This  ancient 
land  extends  on  the  south  to  the  amphitheatre  of  Irkutsk,  where  it  is 
bounded  by  the  horseshoe-shaped,  backfolded  border  of  the  ancient  Baikal 
vertex.  In  this  interval  posthumous  horseshoe-shaped  folds  are  seen, 
formed  of  plant-bearing  beds  of  Jurassic  age.  Its  south-eastern  boundary 
lies  a  little  to  the  west  of  the  western  margin  of  lake  Baikal ;  the  south- 
western boundary  is  formed  by  the  Sayan. 

This  horseshoe-shaped  or  arcuate  vertex  is  the  innermost  and  oldest 
part  of  a  structure  formed  of  many  similar  arcs,  which  are  convex  towards 
the  exterior,  and  frequently  cut  through  by  more  or  less  continuous  dis- 
junctive lines.  A  second  vertex,  probably  of  Devonian  age,  is  to  be  seen 
near  Minuzinsk,  a  still  more  recent  vertex,  constructed  later  as  part  of  the 
Carboniferous,  on  the  Altai.  Towards  the  east  arcuate  trend-lines  succeed 
one  another  as  far  as  the  Pacific  Ocean,  from  the  Anadyrides  to  the 
Philippines,  and  in  the  south  they  form  the  marginal  arcs  as  far  as  the 
Dinarides.   On  the  disjunctive  lines  stand  the  volcanos,  and  in  those  places 


630 


EETEOSPECT 


[part  V 


where  the  Cordilleras  are  submerged,  volcanos  reveal  the  trend-lines  of  their 
arcs  as  far  as  the  Bonin  islands  and  the  Marianne  group. 

As  we  look  towards  the  periphery  we  see  the  gradual  completion  of  the 
marine  series,  and  from  the  Okhotides  to  the  Dinarides  the  folding  seems  to 
extend  throughout  the  whole  region  into  the  middle  Tertiary  or  even 
later  times. 

This  uniform  structure  is  interrupted  by  two  long,  free  branches,  which 
stretch  far  beyond  the  periphery.  They  proceed  from  the  south  of  the 
Altai  and  are  therefore  termed  the  Altaides.  The  eastern  Altaides  form 
the  Burman  arc.  The  western  Altaides  strike  in  a  straight  line  to  the  west- 
north-west  across  the  northern  border  of  the  Pamir  and  the  Iranian-Tauric 
syntaxis,  and  finally  reach  the  Caucasus,  where  they  enter  Europe. 

Turning  our  glance  towards  the  south-east  we  see  in  Australia  a  land 
which  seems  to  occupy,  within  the  arc  of  the  Oceanides,  a  position  similar 
to  that  of  Angara  land  within  the  arcs  of  Asia.  Australia  is  continued  to 
the  south  through  Auckland  and  other  countries  towards  the  Antarctis. 

The  Asiatic  system,  if  we  disregard  the  advance  of  the  Altaides,  has 
added  arc  to  arc  with  the  greatest  regularity  since  pre-Cambrian  times, 
and  has  been  completing  itself  on  the  old  plan  up  to  a  recent  period ;  and 
Austi'alia  with  the  Oceanides  is  possibly  a  repetition  of  this  plan;  now, 
however,  as  we  look  towards  the  south-west,  we  perceive  a  different  and 
divergent  structure — the  Indian  peninsula. 

Here  there  is  no  approach  to  an  arcuate  arrangement,  and  recent  folding 
and  the  Mesozoic  and  Tertiary  series  are  only  represented  in  a  fragmentary 
manner.  It  is  true  that  ancient  sediments  of  various  kinds  are  folded,  but 
they  have  never  yet  furnished  any  organic  remains.  We  only  perceive 
that  the  direction  of  these  folds  is  foreign  to  the  Asiatic  structure,  and 
that  the  peninsula  is  a  fragment  bounded  by  fractures  on  all  sides. 

This  is  the  alien  foreland,  against  which  the  Burman  arc,  the  Himalaya, 
and  the  Iranides  are  stowed. — 

The  planet  has  now  continued  on  its  journey  for  six  hours,  so  that  we 
are  facing  the  interval  between  40°  E.  and  10°  W.,  and  the  meridian  of  15°  E. 
runs  through  the  middle. 

This  interval  comprises  Europe  and  almost  the  whole  of  Africa. 

In  Spitzbergen  a  trace  of  the  pre-Devonian  Caledonides  protrudes  from 
the  flat-lying  Mesozoic  sediments  which,  as  a  part  of  the  circumpolar  trans- 
gressions, form  both  Franz  Josef  land  and  the  surrounding  islands,  together 
with  Bear  island. 

Jan  May  en  and  Iceland  are  of  recent  volcanic  origin.  In  the  most 
northerly  part  of  Scandinavia  an  outrunner  of  the  Uralides  makes  its 
appearance  crossing  over  from  Swatoi  Noss.  Then  we  come  to  the  sub- 
meridional  Caledonides,  which  include  the  whole  of  the  west  of  the 
Scandinavian  peninsula,  the  Orkneys  and  Shetlands,  Ireland  down  to 


CH.  XVIl] 


EUEOPE 


631 


the  lower  course  of  the  Shannon,  Wales  with  the  exception  of  its  outermost 
southern  border,  Scotland  with  the  exception  of  its  outermost  western 
border,  and  England  nearly  as  far  as  the  Mendips. 

The  Caledonides  divide  the  Bothnian  shield  (which  we  assign,  together 
with  the  Uralides,  to  the  Asiatic  structure)  from  a  gneiss  region  of  no  very- 
great  extent,  and  chiefly  represented  by  the  western  Hebrides,  which  is 
assigned,  although  with  some  reserve,  to  Laurentia. 

Here,  on  the  line  from  the  Shannon  to  the  Mendips,  which  finds  its 
continuation  in  the  north  border  of  the  Belgian  coalfield,  we  observe  another 
order  of  things. 

From  the  extreme  north  down  to  this  line  there  is  no  folding  which  is 
later  than  parts  of  the  Devonian.  From  this  line  onwards  younger  folds 
occur;  in  place  of  the  submeridional  Caledonides  a  more  east  and  west 
direction  makes  its  appearance.  This  is  the  region  of  the  western  Altaides 
which  crowd  in  from  Asia.  With  a  direction  to  west-north- west  they  strike 
across  the  Caspian  sea  as  branches  of  the  Thian-shan.  A  rather  weak,  nor- 
thern branch  dies  away  in  the  coalfield  on  the  Donetz ;  a  much  stronger 
branch  extends  from  the  Caucasus  to  the  southern  side  of  the  horst  of  Azov. 

From  this  point  onwards  the  folding  turns  to  the  north,  abandoning  the 
southerly  folding  of  the  Asiatic  arcs  which  has  prevailed  hitherto,  and  at 
the  same  time  the  Dinarides,  one  of  the  marginal  arcs  of  Asia,  makes  its 
entrance.  It  is  very  broad,  occupies  the  interval  as  far  as  Cyprus,  Crete, 
and  the  Adriatic  sea,  forces  its  way  between  the  Alps  and  the  Apennines,  and 
retains,  in  contrast  to  the  Altaides,  the  Asiatic  folding  directed  to  the  south. 

The  Altaides  broaden  out,  push  forth  new  branches,  and  thus  at  last 
occupy  all  the  south  of  Europe,  and  surround  as  well  the  western  Medi- 
terranean. Their  southern  boundary  forms  the  south  of  the  Great  Atlas, 
then  of  the  Mediterranean  Atlas  and  the  zone  of  encounter  with  the  Dinarides. 

In  this  area  assigned  to  the  Altaides,  ranges,  however,  arise,  which  are 
of  difierent  ages. 

The  western  Altaides,  in  the  narrower  sense,  comprise  the  Variscan  and 
the  Armorican  arc,  the  Montague  Noire,  Corsardinia,  the  greater  part  of  the 
Iberian  peninsula,  as  far  as  the  Guadalquivir  and  the  Great  Atlas,  and 
finally  the  Camic  Alps,  which  emerge  between  the  Alps  and  the  Dinarides. 
Their  folding  had  terminated  before  the  close  of  the  Carboniferous,  and  at 
the  time  of  the  Permian  they  may  be  regarded,  except  for  some  quite 
insignificant  undulations,  as  having  already  passed  into  a  state  of  rigidity. 

Then  the  chains  become  broken  up  into  horsts  by  a  number  of  sub- 
sidences, which  recall  to  some  extent  the  limited  subsidences  of  the 
Mediterranean ;  and  out  of  these  subsidences,  that  is,  out  of  the  very  heart 
of  the  rigid  Altaides,  and  to  a  large  extent  bounded  by  their  horsts,  rises 
a  new  structure,  that  of  the  posthumous  Altaides. 

These  fall,  according  to  the  subsidences,  into  separate  groups.  Of  these 
by  far  the  largest  is  that  formed  by  the  Alpides,  extending  from  the 


632 


EETROSPECT 


[part  V 


Balkans,  through  the  Carpathians,  the  Alps,  the  Apennines,  the  Medi- 
terranean Atlas,  and  the  Betic  Cordillera  to  Majorca.  This  group  is 
folded,  like  the  Altaides,  to  the  north ;  frequently  diverted  by  the  horsts ; 
forced,  in  the  Mediterranean  Atlas,  to  assume  folding  to  the  south,  and  in 
no  small  part  built  up  as  late  as  the  Tertiary  aera. 

A  rather  more  independent  position  is  occupied  by  the  Proven9al  folds, 
which  are  continued  into  the  outer  border  of  the  Pyrenees  and  through 
these  into  the  Cantabrian  range. 

Independent  but  gentler  posthumous  folding  is  presented  by  the 
London  and  Paris  basins  and  a  subsidence  of  western  Portugal. 

A  characteristic  rias-coast  marks,  in  the  south-west  of  Ireland  and  in 
Brittany,  the  foundering  of  the  Armorican  arc.  From  this  point  nearly 
to  the  Wady  Draa  the  Atlantic  coast  belongs  to  the  Altaides. 

In  addition  the  following  elements  must  be  taken  into  account:  the 
Cimmerian  mountains,  that  is,  the  remains  of  a  folded  range  of  Mesozoic 
age,  which  forms  the  Crimea  and  Dobrudsha,  embraces  the  mouths  of  the 
Danube,  and  disappears  beneath  the  strongly  projecting  arc  of  the  Car- 
pathians— further,  the  range  of  Sandomir  in  Poland,  already  faulted  down 
in  front  of  the  border  of  the  Carpathians,  which  has  been  regarded  in  this 
work  as  a  foot  range  of  the  Sudetes,  but  may  possibly  prove  to  be  an 
arching  up  of  the  Russian  foreland  produced  by  the  Sudetes — finally  the 
Bohemian  mass,  a  fragment  of  a  very  ancient  range,  making  its  appearance 
within  the  Variscan  arc,  and  deflecting  the  range  of  the  Alpides. 

We  observe  the  rigefaction  of  the  Altaides  before  the  time  of  the 
uppermost  Carboniferous,  and  the  renewal  and  persistence  of  the  folding  in 
its  subsidences.    Thus  the  movements  have  been  separated  in  space. 

We  have  arrived  at  a  boundary  which  belongs  to  the  Altaides  in 
respect  to  that  part  of  its  course  formed  by  the  south  border  of  the  Great 
Atlas  and  extending  as  far  as  the  Jebel  Bechar ;  from  Jebel  Bechar  to  the 
Adria  it  belongs  to  the  Alpides,  and  from  the  Adria  onwards  as  far  as 
Djabekr  it  belongs  to  the  Dinaro-Tauric  marginal  arcs.  This  boundary  is 
followed  in  Africa  by  an  ancient  structure  which  extends  through  about 
65  degrees  of  latitude  and  is  devoid  of  any  recent  folding. 

In  the  western  Sahara  the  submeridional  Saharides  extend  from  the 
north  to  beyond  the  Niger ;  their  folding  is  older  than  upper  Silurian ;  we 
must  thus  regard  them  as  older  than  the  Caledonides,  which  in  other 
respects  they  resemble.  To  the  east  of  them,  as  far  as  Syria  and  Arabia, 
extends  the  Cretaceous  and  Tertiary  desert  plateau,  to  the  south  of  them 
Archaean  formations  and  the  deposits  of  the  Karoo,  forming  a  complex 
comparable  to  the  Indian  peninsula.  Long  fissures,  beset  with  volcanos, 
cut  through  the  continent.  Madagascar  is  a  fragment  of  the  ancient 
Gondwdna  land. 

In  the  south  a  difierent  scene  is  disclosed.  Three  fragments  of  folded 
mountain  chains  advance  from  three  sides  towards  the  Karoo.  These 


cii.  XVII]      LAUEENTIA.    KOCKY  MOUNTAINS  633 


folded  ranges,  however,  were  already  rigid  before  the  close  of  the  Permian, 
and  they  form  a  southern  pendant  to  the  marginal  arcs  of  Asia.  Cape 
Agulhas  is  not  so  far  from  the  equator  as  Crete  or  Cyprus,  and  if  the  north 
were  submerged  to  the  same  extent  as  the  south,  the  whole  of  Europe 
would  lie  beneath  the  Ocean,  and  of  its  complicated  structure  even  less  would 
be  visible  than  of  the  southern  structure  on  the  borders  of  the  Karoo. 

Of  the  preceding  the  following  facts  deserve  special  attention :  first, 
the  intersection  of  an  older  structure  (Caledonides,  Saharides)  by  a  younger 
(Altaides) ;  next  the  rigefaction  and  subsidence  of  the  latter ;  then  the  birth 
of  new  ranges,  particularly  the  Alpides,  within  these  subsidences ;  and, 
finally,  the  existence  at  the  Cape  of  the  fragments  of  a  great  folded  system 
constructed  like  the  periphery  of  Asia,  but  turned  towards  the  north. — 

We  will  again  suppose  that  the  earth  has  travelled  on  its  course  for  six 
hours.  The  meridian  of  15°  E.  has  disappeared,  and  in  its  place  the 
meridian  of  75°  W.  now  occupies  the  middle  of  the  picture,  but  the  great 
difibrence  in  longitude  of  North  and  South  America  obliges  us  to  consider 
a  broader  section.  Even  the  interval  between  50°  W.  and  130°  W.  is  not 
quite  sufficient. 

In  the  north  we  first  observe,  as  it  strikes  obliquely  across  Ellesmere 
Land,  the  United  States  chain,  a  fragment  of  the  Asiatic  periphery,  with 
the  same  rich  Mesozoic  succession,  but  extending  beyond  the  pole.  Then 
we  reach  the  flat-lying  lower  Palaeozoic  belt,  and  the  ancient  crystalline 
mass  of  Laurentia.  Towards  the  north-east  this  mass  includes  Greenland, 
it  may  possibly  extend  through  the  whole  breadth  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean 
to  the  Hebrides ;  in  the  south  it  forms  the  middle  of  the  United  States  as 
far  as  Texas.  In  Laurentia,  as  in  Africa  and  India,  the  absence  of  younger 
folding  runs  parallel  with  the  absence  of  any  well-marked  development  of 
marine  Mesozoic  beds.  On  its  eastern  side  Newfoundland  reveals  to  us 
once  again  the  rias-coast,  which  withdrew  itself  from  our  view  as  Ireland 
and  Brittany  passed  out  of  sight.  It  is  a  continuation  of  the  western  main 
branch  of  the  Altaides,  already  rigid,  in  America  also,  before  the  Permian, 
but  without  inbreaks  or  other  posthumous  structures.  Here  it  is  known 
as  the  Appalachians ;  it  forms  the  south-eastern  and  southern  boundary  of 
the  foreland  of  Laurentia  and  dies  away  in  Oklahoma. 

A  mighty  range — the  Rocky  mountains — forms  the  western  boundary. 
Its  syntaxis,  with  the  Alaskides,  a  range  of  purely  Asiatic  type,  which 
takes  place  between  the  meridians  of  146°  and  147°,  shows  that  it  also 
belongs  to  the  outrunners  of  the  Asiatic  system,  which  thus  surrounds  all 
the  American  part  of  Laurentia.  This  range  which,  over  long  intervals, 
presents  an  oblique,  coulisse-like  structure,  is  stowed  in  the  south  against 
the  ancient  block  of  the  Colorado  plateau,  and  dies  out  on  its  east  side. 
Its  folding  came  to  an  end  after  the  upper  Cretaceous.  Yet  another 
branch,  the  Elias  range,  proceeds  from  the  syntaxis  in  meridian  147°.  Just 
as  in  the  Alaskides  the  Eocky  mountains  correspond  to  the  Romanzov 


634 


EETROSPECT  ,  [pakt  v 


range,  so  the  Elias  range  corresponds  to  the  Kenai  mountains,  and  is  driven, 
like  these,  towards  the  Pacific  Ocean ;  it  is  not  rigefied ;  Tertiary  beds  are 
folded  in  it ;  and  it  is  still  subject  to  movement. 

Between  the  Elias  range  and  the  Kocky  mountains  the  Intermediate 
range  makes  its  advance :  it  is  a  long  zone  characterized  by  a  fairly  rich 
Mesozoic  series,  by  folding,  disjunctive  lines,  troughs,  and  volcanos.  To 
this  range  we  assign  the  great  Columbian  batholite  of  granodiorite,  the 
continuation  of  which  forms  the  volcanic  Cascade  range,  and  a  long  tract 
of  similar  structure  extending  to  the  Basin  ranges  and  the  west  side  of  the 
Colorado  plateau.  In  Arizona  this  zone  appears  to  be  interrupted,  but  its 
characters  are  repeated  by  the  Mexican  sierras,  which  at  the  same  time 
trend  away  to  the  south-east,  decreasing  in  height  up  to  the  immediate 
neighbourhood  of  the  gulf  of  Mexico. 

The  Calif ornian  coast  ranges  mark  the  first  appearance  of  the  colossal 
range  of  the  Andes.  Divided  into  a  number  of  oblique  coulisses  they  strike 
through  upper  California,  across  the  Maria  islands  into  the  Mexican  Sierra 
Maestra  del  Sur,  the  north  side  of  which  is  accompanied  by  gigantic 
volcanos.  Its  further  continuation  runs  unbroken  across  Tehuantepec  to 
Guatemala.  The  branches  become  concave  towards  the  north,  while  the 
western  part  of  the  Antilles  forms  a  virgation  which  includes  the  main 
range  of  Cuba,  of  the  line  from  the  Sierra  Maestra  to  north  Haiti,  and  then 
of  the  line  from  Jamaica  through  south  Haiti  to  Porto  Rico ;  in  Guatemala,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  branches,  concave  towards  the  north,  make  a  bend  from 
the  gulf  of  Amati  across  the  island  of  Roatan  into  the  direction  of  Jamaica. 
This  is  the  first  entry  of  the  Andine  structure  into  the  Atlantic  region. 
The  above-mentioned  virgation  unites  in  the  Lesser  Antilles  to  form 
a  single  arc,  which,  subdivided  into  zones  like  the  peripheral  arcs  of  Asia, 
passes  through  Trinidad  to  Venezuela,  and  through  Columbia  and  Ecuador 
back  to  the  main  range  of  the  Andes. 

In  South  America  the  Brazilian  foreland  plays  a  part  similar  to  that  of 
Laurentia  in  the  north.  Here,  too,  recent  folds  are  absent,  and  almost  all 
the  marine  Mesozoic  beds.  From  the  Carboniferous  to  the  middle  Cretaceous 
only  extra-marine,  plant-bearing  beds  are  known.  Towards  the  west, 
however,  unusual  conditions  set  in.  The  folding  directed  to  the  east, 
which  characterizes  a  great  part  of  the  Andes,  extends  its  influence  to  the 
stratified  series  of  the  foreland  and  the  high  mountains  to  the  east  of  lake 
Titicaca,  such  as  Illimani  and  its  companions ;  the  whole  of  the  Cordillera 
Real  and  the  Argentine  Andes  are  formed  of  the  same  stratified  series.  It  is 
not  until  we  reach  the  west  that  we  meet  with  marine  Mesozoic  beds  in  the 
Cordillera  de  los  Andes,  where  they  make  their  appearance  as  a  long  and 
narrow  strip,  with  long  disjunctive  lines  and  troughs  and  the  well-known 
gigantic  volcanos,  thus  reproducing  the  principal  features  of  the  Intermediate 
range  and  the  Basin  ranges  of  North  America.  The  western  border  is  formed 
by  a  mountain  range,  which,  as  shown  by  the  presence  of  superposed  plant- 


CH.  XVIl] 


ANDES.  ALASKIDES 


635 


bearing  beds  on  its  east  side,  formed  part  of  a  continent  in  Mesozoic  times. 
The  same  superposition  of  plant-bearing  beds  is  again  seen  in  the  Sierra 
Maestra  del  Sur  of  Mexico,  in  the  heights  of  Honduras,  in  Chili,  and  down 
to  the  Antarctic  region.  Still  further  west  the  sea  presents  an  important 
and  elongated  deep,  but  its  relations  to  the  Andes  have  unfortunately  not 
yet  been  ascertained. 

The  view  has  been  put  forward  that  the  southern  Andine  branches  bend 
to  the  south-east,  and  then,  diverging  from  one  another,  approach  the  sea 
between  cape  Corrientes  and  cape  Horn  in  a  similar  manner  to  the  Mexican 
sierras.  The  land,  however,  is  little  known,  and  this  theory  is  contested. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  principal  range  of  the  Andes 
describes  a  curve  about  the  south  of  Patagonia,  which  in  a  tectonic  sense 
resembles  the  concave  chains  of  Guatemala.  Further  away,  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  islands  enables  us  to  recognize  a  second  advance  of  the  Andine 
system.  The  analogy  presented  by  the  contours  of  Patagonia  and  Graham 
Land,  and  the  volcanic  arcs  of  the  South  Sandwich  islands  are  indications 
of  this  advance,  and  the  whole  archipelago  is  termed,  for  want  of  a  better 
name,  the  South  Antilles. 

An  important  foredeep  may  be  supposed  to  exist  outside  the  South 
Sandwich  islands,  and  a  foreland  representing  Brazil  in  the  east  of  Graham 
Land. 

The  region  just  considered,  extending  from  Ellesmere  to  Graham  Land, 
is  the  only  region  on  the  globe  which  permits  us  to  follow  its  structure 
from  the  Arctic  to  the  Antarctic  ice-fields. 

We  may  again  suppose  six  hours  to  have  passed,  and  we  reach  the 
meridian  165°  W.  extending  along  the  west  coast  of  Alaska  to  Bering  sea. 

The  great  arc  of  the  Alaskides  is  constructed  on  the  Asiatic  type,  of 
which  indeed  it  is  one  of  the  most  perfect  examples.  The  Romanzov  range 
in  the  north,  the  Alaska  range  with  the  lofty  mount  McKinley,  and  the 
peninsula  of  Alaska  with  the  volcanic  arc  of  the  Aleutian  islands  are  the 
most  important  parts  of  the  great  virgation.  Angara  land,  however,  is  not 
the  backland,  or  at  least  is  not  visible  as  such;  Bennet  land  is  the  last 
fairly  well-known  trace  of  a  foreland. 

Stewart  peninsula,  a  segment  entering  between  the  branches  of  the 
virgation,  is  continued  towards  Asia,  and  the  New  Siberian  islands  are 
possibly  one  of  the  last  traces  of  the  backfolded  Romanzov  range. 

The  Alaskides  form  a  true  bridge  between  Asia  and  America,  and  as  we 
have  seen  above,  we  assign  the  Rocky  mountains  and  the  St.  Elias  range 
to  the  Asiatic  system. 

To  the  south  of  the  volcanic  arc  and  the  foredeep  of  the  Aleutian 
islands  the  Pacific  Ocean  broadens  out  down  to  the  south-easterly  trending 
range  of  the  Sima  volcanos  of  Hawaii.  With  a  few  exceptions,  the  theory 
that  the  arcs  of  the  Oceanides  are  parts  of  folded  mountain  ranges  or  their 
accompanying  volcanos  scarcely  admits  of  doubt.    An  important  exception 


636 


RETROSPECT 


[part  V 


is  presented  by  Viti  Levu,  which  is  possibly  the  remains  of  a  closed-in, 
unfolded  segment. 

The  arcs  are  frequently  interrupted.  The  first  trifling  indication  of  an 
arc  is  given  by  the  atoll  of  Raroia  and  some  occurrences  of  a  similar  kind, 
which  are  linked  with  the  line  of  the  Paumotu  islands.  The  principal  lines 
of  the  Polynesian  region  are  formed  by  the  Paumotu  islands  and  Tahiti. 
In  the  Australian  region  we  recognize  three  arcs :  the  first,  bounded  by 
a  mighty  foredeep,  extends  from  the  north-east  of  New  Zealand,  through 
the  Kermadec  and  Tonga  islands ;  the  second,  proceeding  from  it  in  virga- 
tion  but  less  connected,  includes  the  Caroline  islands,  Radak  and  Ralik; 
finally,  the  main  arc  includes  the  north-west  of  New  Zealand,  New  Cale- 
donia, the  New  Hebrides,  the  Solomon  islands,  and  probably  New  Guinea. 

The  folding  is  directed  mainly  towards  the  north-east,  in  the  periphery 
of  Asia  to  the  east  and  south-east,  in  the  Alaskides  to  the  south,  in  the 
St.  Elias  range  (judging  at  least  from  the  arrangement  of  the  rocks)  to 
the  south-west. 

In  the  south  of  New  Zealand,  the  islands  which  follow  towards  the 
south,  and  in  Victoria  Land,  divergent  Atlantic  characters  make  their 
appearance. 

In  another  six  hours  the  great  Asiatic  system  once  more  extends 
beneath  our  eyes.    The  earth  has  completed  her  day's  journey. 

Note  to  PI.  V.  (In  these  figures  the  north  lies  below).  Fig.  1  shows  the  coalescence  of 
two  of  the  seas  which  Loewy  and  Puiseux  compare  with  the  Mediterranean  inbreaks,  on 
the  left  the  Mare  Serenitatis,  on  the  right  the  Mare  Imbrium.  The  peninsulas  separating 
them  are  above  (in  the  south)  the  Apennines,  and  below  the  Caucasus.  Three  striking 
circumvallate  rings  rise  from  the  Mare  Imbrium,  Archimedes,  Autolycus,  and  Aristillus. 
The  space  between  them  and  the  steep  scarp  of  the  Apennines  is  the  Palus  Putredinis  ; 
it  enters  between  the  Caucasus  and  the  Apennines ;  the  latter  bears  here  very  high 
mountains,  such  as  Mount  Hadley,  which  are  not  volcanos  but  segments.  On  the  other 
side  of  the  gap  between  the  Apennines  and  Caucasus,  a  faint  white  spot  appears  on  the 
dark  ground  of  the  Mare  Serenitatis.  This  is  Linnaeus,  in  which  recent  alterations  are 
believed  to  have  taken  place.  A  somewhat  brighter  white  spot  (alum  ?)  lies  to  the  south 
of  it,  where  the  Apennines  dip  gently  beneath  the  lava  flow  of  the  sea.  Between  the 
Caucasus  and  the  border  the  great  circumvallate  plains  Eudoxus  and  Aristotle  occur. 
The  mountains  on  the  north  border  of  the  Mare  Imbrium  are  the  Alps  ;  the  valley  of  the 
Alps  is  visible  as  a  straight  cut.  Fig.  2  shows  above  to  the  left  and  in  some  other  places 
parts  of  the  so-called  'ancient  land,'  namely,  less  altered  parts  of  the  lunar  surface,  to 
some  extent  comparable  with  the  basaltic  substratum  of  Iceland.  Many  '  riding  ' 
craters  are  visible.  A  beautiful  example  is  seen  below  on  the  right ;  then  follow  in  a 
submeridional  series  the  three  circumvallate  plains,  Purback  overlapping  into  Regio- 
montanus,  and  Walther ;  then  above  on  the  right  Orontes  with  two  larger  '  riding ' 
craters  following  towards  the  left ;  the  last  is  Nasreddin.  To  the  left  of  Nasreddin  lies 
Stoefler ;  above  to  the  right  and  below  to  the  light  it  presents  small  riding  craters, 
above  to  the  left  the  larger  riding  crater  of  Faraday,  which  is  again  followed  by  two 
generations,  and  so  on.  These  occurrences  show  that  there  is  every  stage  of  transition 
between  riding  eruptive  centres  and  circumvallate  plains,  and  that  the  moon  at  its 
separation  from  the  earth  took  with  it  many  juvenile  gases,  although  judging  from  the 
entire  weight,  3'4,  very  little  Nife  can  have  gone  with  it. 


637 


CHAPTER  XVIII 
LIFE 

Introduction.  The  strand.  History  of  the  Caspian  sea.  Appearance  of  placental 
mammals.  Asylums. 

In  the  city  of  Vienna  many  thousands  of  human  bodies  must  have 
passed,  in  the  course  of  years,  under  the  hands  of  Carl  Rokitansky,  one  of 
the  great  founders  of  pathological  anatomy.  He  watched  the  passing 
generations  ;  he  saw,  outside  the  limits  of  the  human  race,  repeating  itself 
under  the  most  diverse  modifications,  the  same  succession  of  birth,  growth, 
propagation,  and  death.  All  life  appeared  to  him  as  a  single  manifestation, 
and  in  summing  up  his  observations  he  spoke  not  of  unity,  or  of  common 
origin,  but  of  the  solidarity  of  all  life  ^. 

Lamarck  and  Darwin  led  the  way  to  this  conception,  but  now  that  it  is 
reached  it  appears  to  us  not  as  the  final  result  of  a  comprehensive  synthesis, 
but  as  the  elementary  physiological  starting-point,  to  which  these  great 
investigators  have  led  us  back.  It  brings  with  it  the  idea  of  a  biosphere, 
which  assigns  to  life  a  place  above  the  lithosphere,  is  concerned  only  with 
life  on  this  planet  and  all  the  conditions  in  regard  to  temperature,  chemical 
composition,  and  so  forth,  necessary  for  its  existence,  and  leaves  on  one 
side  all  speculative  hypotheses  as  to  the  possible  presence  of  living  beings  on 
other  heavenly  bodies.  Determined  by  these  conditions,  the  biosphere  is 
a  phenomenon  limited  not  only  in  space,  but  also  in  time. 

We  know  nothing  of  the  origin  of  life.  The  reduction  and  atrophy  of 
the  eyes  of  the  Cambrian  Trilobites  show  that  these,  although  the  earliest 
creatures  known  to  us,  are  yet  not  actually  the  earliest  that  existed.  Even 
the  Xiphosures  of  the  North  American  Belt  Stage  by  no  means  present  the 
character  of  primitive  animals. 

Little  as  we  know  as  to  the  details  of  the  beginning,  equally  little  do  we 
know  as  to  those  of  the  end,  although  this  end  is  inevitable.  Some  vast 
prospective  changes  may  be  inferred  from  the  tidal  retardation  of  the 
planetary  movements — in  particular  the  final  loss  of  sunlight  over  half 
the  surface — but  it  will  be  seen  from  what  follows  that  there  may  lie  in  the 

^  C.  Rokitansky,  Die  Solidaritat  alles  Thierlebens,  Vortrag  in  der  feieiiichen  Sitzung 
d.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  31.  Mai  1869 ;  Almanach  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1869,  XIX,  pp.  185- 
220. 


638 


LIFE 


[part  V 


very  structure  of  the  planet  itself  a  source  of  danger  threatening  a  not 
inconsiderable  part  of  the  living  world. 

Life  is  embodied  in  an  almost  infinite  variety  of  forms.  If  we  consider 
the  wide  distribution  and  uniformity  of  the  freshwater  fauna  of  the  Devonian 
continent  of  Eria,  or  the  floras  of  the  Carboniferous,  or  the  terrestrial  fauna 
and  flora  of  the  Gondwana  period,  we  shall  readily  admit  that  the  variety 
has  increased  in  the  course  of  time.  Physical  influences  have  possibly 
remained  unchanged,  but  their  effects  have  accumulated.  Even  in  com- 
paratively early  times  there  were  glacial  epochs ;  and  the  traces  of  warmer 
epochs  date,  even  in  Arctic  regions,  from  periods  as  remote  as  the 
Palaeozoic  aera.  The  sea  of  the  coral-bearing  Gosau  beds  was  warmer 
than  that  of  the  contemporaneous  Cretaceous  of  North  Germany,  and  the 
coral  sea  of  Castel  Gomberto  was  warmer  than  that  of  the  sands  of 
Weinheim  and  Fontainebleau.  Each  new  climatic  phase  was  accompanied 
by  a  more  greatly  modified  and,  as  a  rule,  more  highly  specialized  fauna 
and  flora.  But  the  case  is  different  when  we  turn  to  the  face  of  the  earth 
itself.  For  the  whole  of  its  existing  state — with  the  outlines  of  the 
continents,  the  mountains  and  valleys,  lakes  and  rivers,  and  the  depths 
of  the  sea — is  the  product  of  an  accumulated  sum  of  different  processes. 

At  the  very  outset,  an  attempt  to  consider  the  biosphere  and  the  litho- 
sphere  simultaneously,  shows  that  as  the  island  of  Trinidad,  for  example, 
presents  throughout  fluviatile  fishes  characteristic  of  South  America,  so 
even  islands  which  are  separated  from  the  mainland  by  depths  of  several 
thousand  meters,  may  yet  possess  many  land  and  freshwater  animals  which 
are  identical  with  those  of  the  continent.  Such  an  island  cannot  have  been 
raised  out  of  the  sea,  but  the  dividing  deep  must  have  been  formed  by 
subsidence.  The  islands  containing  such  a  fauna  and  flora  are  therefore 
horsts,  and  the  theory  of  the  permanence  of  oceanic  basins  represented  by 
Wallace,  is  for  this  reason  alone  untenable. 

The  influence  of  external  conditions  is  clearly  manifest  in  the  fact  that 
changes  do  not  always  occur  simultaneously  in  the  marine,  terrestrial,  and 
freshwater  animals.  In  the  middle  Cretaceous  of  the  United  States,  for 
example,  the  existing  dicotyledonous  forests  made  their  appearance  and 
underwent  a  rapid  development,  while  the  ancient  flora  disappeared,  and 
yet  the  ancient  types  of  plant-eating  reptiles  persisted  down  to  the  close  of 
the  Cretaceous. 

Richard  Owen  observed  many  years  ago  that  if  we  add  to  the  existing 
Australian  marsupials  those  of  their  ancestors  which  became  extinct  in 
quite  recent  times  we  obtain  a  group  presenting  a  subdivision  into  carni- 
vorous, insectivorous,  herbivorous  and  rodent-like  animals  similar  to  that 
presented  by  the  great  land  faunas  of  Eurasia.  The  attempt  has  been 
made  to  show  that  a  corresponding  subdivision  can  be  traced  even  in  the 
Mesozoic  reptilian  faunas.    Osborn  has  termed  this  phenomenon  the  law 


IH.  XVIIl] 


ECONOMIC  CONDITIONS 


639 


d£  adaptive  radiation,  and  cites  as  an  example  the  oldest  Tertiary  mammalian 
fauna — that  of  Puerco  in  New  Mexico  ^. 

That  the  great  units  are  subject  to  economic  conditions — that  a  certain 
number  of  beasts  of  prey  presuppose  a  certain  number  of  plant-eating 
animals,  and  these  a  sufficient  supply  of  food-plants — that  the  insect- 
eating  animals  presuppose  insects,  that  certain  insects  are  dependent  on 
certain  kinds  of  plants,  and  certain  plants  on  insects — that  coprophagous 
animals  and  parasites  of  every  kind  have  their  particular  conditions 
of  life — needs  no  explanation.  It  is  equally  obvious  that  in  the  rela- 
tion of  plant-eating  animals  to  beasts  of  prey  it  is  not  the  number 
of  species,  but  of  individuals,  and  the  character  of  these  individuals, 
which  is  of  importance.    It  is  a  striking  fact  that  in  tracing  the  history  of 

;  the  Tertiary  land  faunas  we  by  no  means  invariably  find  a  continuous 
modification  of  the  several  species,  such  as  we  should  expect  from  the 
undisturbed  and  persistent  effect  of  natural  selection,  but  that  quite  new 
faunas,  whole  economic  units,  as  it  were,  follow  each  other  in  succession  ; 
a  fact  especially  evident  in  the  Miocene  of  Europe.  It  was  the  recognition 
of  this  that  led  to  the  theory  of  great  migrations ;  and  in  this  connexion 
the  fundamental  works  of  Lydekker  and  Dep^ret  may  be  mentioned  2. 

At  the  same  time,  however,  there  are  isolated  cases  of  still  persisting 
relics  and  drifted  colonies,  such  as  exist,  for  example,  on  oceanic  islands. 
For  this  reason  Baur  distinguished  continental  islands  with  an  harmonious, 
and  oceanic  islands  with  a  disharmonious,  fauna  and  flora.  Hedley  has 
attempted  to  determine  the  limits  of  these  two  types  of  islands  in  the 

i  Pacific  Ocean.^ 

In  the  following  pages  some  examples  on  a  larger  scale  will  illustrate 
1  from  the  chorographic  point  of  view  only,  the  manner  in  which  life  adapts 
itself  to  the  face  of  the  earth.  But  so  little  do  we  know  of  the  conditions 
which  govern  the  life  of  marine  animals,  and  the  nature  of  the  boundaries 
which  determine  their  distribution,  that  we  can  only  deal  at  present  with 
the  inhabitants  of  fresh  water  and  the  dry  land. 

The  simplest  case  of  this  adaptation  occurs  among  plants.  Hooker,  in 
!  his  famous  introduction  to  the  Flora  of  Tasmania  has  already  pointed  out 
(  that  varieties  are  most  liable  to  occur  on  the  boundaries  of  distributional 

'      1  H.  F.  Osborn,  The  Law  of  Adaptive  Radiation,  Am.  Nat.,  1902,  XXXVI,  pp.  353-363. 
j      ^  L.  Lydekker,  Geographical  History  of  Mammals,  8vo,  Cambridge,  1896  ;  A.  C.  Deperet, 
!  Transformation  du  monde  animal,  Svo,  Paris,  1907,  and,  in  particular,  communications  in 
the  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  June  5,  1905  (Evolution  des  mammiferes  tertiaires,  methodes 
et  principes),  Nov.  6,  1906  (Importance  des  migrations),  further  of  Mar.  12  and  Dec.  24, 
1906. 

3  G.  Baur,  Origin  of  the  Galapagos,  Am.  Nat.,  1891,  XXV,  pp.  217-229,  and  307-326 ; 
New  Observations  on  the  Origin  of  the  Galapagos,  with  Remarks  on  the  Age  of  the 
Pacific  Ocean,  op.  cit.,  1897,  XXXI,  pp.  661-680  et  seq. ;  C.  Hedley,  Zoo-geographical 
Scheme  for  the  Mid-Pacific,  Proc.  Linn.  Soc.  N.S.W.,  1899,  pp.  391-417,  in  particular 
p.  393. 


640 


LIFE 


[part  V 


provinces  ^.  Lundstrom  thinks  it  probable  that  near  their  northern  boundary 
the  willows  of  Nova  Zembla  are  still  forming  new  species  2.  Important 
investigations  have  been  made  by  Wettstein,  Engler,  and  others  on  the 
colonization  of  the  peaks  of  high  mountains  ^.  These  are  supplemented  by 
the  instructive  accounts  given  as  to  the  gradual  development  of  the  vegeta- 
tion of  Scandinavia  by  J.  Steenstrup,  Andersson,  Nathorst,  Blyth,  and 
others,  from  which  much  may  be  learnt  concerning  the  origin  of  post- 
glacial variations.  In  all  these  cases  the  aggressive  vanguard  consists 
of  the  hardier  varieties.  If  a  severer  climate  were  to  return  the  mother 
plants  would  probably  disappear  and  these  varieties  would  survive  as 
independent  species. 

We  will  now  give  some  examples  of  a  less  simple  character.  We  will 
first  consider  the  life  of  a  normal  shore-line  which  is,  as  it  were,  at  rest, 
then  of  a  shore-line  which  is  growing  smaller  and  undergoing  negative 
movement  (Caspian  sea),  and  finally  of  shore  deposits  with  organic  remains 
washed  in  from  the  land  (appearance  of  placental  animals). 

The  Strand.  Chun  placed  the  limit  at  which  sunlight  ceases  to  be 
visible  at  —400  meters.  The  broad  zone  extending  from  the  shore  to  this 
depth,  subject  to  continual  changes  in  insolation,  to  storms  and  tides,  and 
aff*ected  also  more  than  any  other  part  of  the  earth  by  displacements  of  the 
strand-line,  is  stamped  by  a  number  of  characters  which  point  to  it  as 
the  region  from  which  all  the  rest  of  the  world  has  been  colonized.  From 
this  region  living  creatures  made  their  way  up  towards  the  sun,  and  down 
into  the  abysses,  and  sometimes  it  has  received  dwellers  upon  the  land 
returning  to  a  habitat  in  the  sea. 

The  migration  to  the  land  was  long  ago  recognized,  and  was  described 
by  Bronn,  in  1860,  as  the  '  terripetal  movement ',  but  it  was  also  supposed 
that  primitive  forms  still  maintained  their  existence  in  the  undisturbed 
regions  of  the  deep  sea.  This  view  was  opposed  by  Neumayr,  whose 
objections  were  chiefly  drawn  from  the  distribution  of  the  Echinidae.  Subse- 
quently Smith-Woodward  concluded,  from  palaeontological  studies,  that 
a  migration  of  fishes  from  the  strand  to  the  abysses,  and  indeed,  the 
existence  of  deep-sea  fishes  in  general,  could  not  be  traced  backwards 
beyond  the  Cretaceous  period 

^  J.  D.  Hooker,  On  the  Flora  of  Australia,  being  an  introductory  Essay  to  the  Flora 
of  Tasmania  (Botany  of  the  Antarctic  Expedition  III),  4to,  London,  1859,  cxxviii  pp. 

2  Axel  N.  Lundstrom,  Kritische  Bemerkungen  iiber  die  Weiden  Nowaja  Semlaas  und 
ihren  genetischen  Zusammenhang,  Nov.  Act.  R.  Soc.  Upsala,  1877  ( Jubilaums-Band),  p.  25 : 
'  It  is  much  more  probable  .  .  .  that  there,  as  von  Baer  says,  although  in  a  somewhat 
different  sense,  creation  is  still  proceeding.' 

^  For  this  reason  we  have  refrained  from  quoting  the  high-mountain  floras  of  the 
Kilima  Njaro,  Cameroon,  and  other  places  (also  Kinibalu  in  Borneo)  as  evidence  of  dis- 
tant migration. 

*  H.  G.  Bronn,  Stufengang  des  organischen  Lebens  von  den  Insel-Felsen  des  Oceans 


CH.  XVIII]  DEVELOPMENT  OF  LUNGS  641 

The  polymorphism  of  molluscan  shells  in  waters  of  variable  composition 
is  well  known.  Not  a  few  marine  genera,  such  as  Area,  Siliqua,  and  Cardium, 
occur  in  waters  less  salt  than  the  sea,  and  indeed  in  almost  fresh  water.  The 
most  striking  case  is  that  of  Trigonia.  Some  of  the  rivers  of  North  America, 
South  America,  and  China,  contain  sculptured  Unios,  with  an  ornamentation 
which  presents  every  stage  of  transition  down  to  that  of  Trigonia.  The 
affinity  of  the  two  species  was  pointed  out  many  years  ago  by  Lamarck ; 
Neumayr  maintained  that  the  Unionidae  were  derived  from  Trigonias. 
White  showed  that  sculptured  Unios  occur  as  early  as  the  brackish  water 
Laramie  stage,  and  that  the  existing  species  of  the  Mississippi  are  their 
direct  descendants.  We  must  therefore  assume  that  Trigonias  ascended 
the  rivers  and  became  Unionidae,  and  that  sculptured  Unios,  such  as  are  met 
with  in  the  upper  Tertiary  beds  of  South  Europe  and  up  to  Omsk  in 
Siberia,  and  at  other  localities,  cannot,  as  Steinmann  justly  concludes,  be 
regarded  as  evidence  of  the  continuity  of  the  rivers  ^. 

The  entrance  of  fish  into  the  rivers  takes  place,  as  is  well  known,  in 
a  number  of  distinct  steps.  In  addition  to  fish  which  are  purely  marine 
there  are  others  which  deposit  their  spawn  in  fresh  water,  but  there  are 
also  regressive  river  fish,  so  to  speak,  which  spawn  in  salt  water ;  next, 
there  are  fish  living  in  rivers,  but  whose  nearest  relations  belong  to  salt 
water  ;  then  there  are  purely  freshwater  fish,  and  finally,  a  few  ancient  forms 
living  in  fluviatile  marshes,  such  as  Polypterus,  which  may  still  be  included 
among  the  fishes,  though  they  possess  lungs. 

In  the  terripetal  movement  no  change  is  more  characteristic  than  the 
development  of  the  lung.  It  is  not  formed  at  the  expense  of  the  gills,  but 
in  the  higher  Vertebrates  proceeds  from  the  oesophagus,  immediately  behind 
the  thyroid  gland,  as  a  completely  independent  organ.  The  gills  may  even 
continue  their  functions  for  a  time  side  by  side  with  the  lung,  as  in  the 

bis  auf  die  Festlander,  8vo,  Stuttgart,  1860,  Festrede,  31  pp. ;  M.  Neumayr,  Ueber  den 
alterthumlicben  Charakter  der  Tiefseefauna,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1882,  I,  pp.  123-131  ; 
A.  Smith-Woodward,  Antiquity  of  Deep-Sea  Fish-Fauna,  Nat.  Sci.,  1898,  XII,  pp.  257- 
260. 

1  M.  Neun^ayr,  Herkunft  der  Unioniden,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1889,  XCVIII, 
pp.  1-23 ;  (j.  Steinmann,  Geologische  Grundlage  der  Abstammungslehre,  8vo,  Leipzig, 
1908,  pp.  99  et  seq. ;  for  North  America  in  particular,  C.  A.  White,  Review  of  the  non- 
marine  fossil  Mollusca  of  North  America,  Ann.  Rep.  U.S.  Geol.  Surv.  (1881-1882),  1883, 
III,  pp.  403-550.  According  to  an  earlier  statement  in  Lycett  (Monograph  of  British 
fossil  Trigonia,  Pal.  Soc,  1872-1879,  p.  233),  it  seems  as  though  a  greater  develop- 
ment of  the  epidermal  covering  in  brackish  water  may  bring  about  a  reduction  of 
ornamentation  in  the  living  Trigonia  uniophora.  At  the  same  time  we  may  refer  for 
example  to  Unio  Letsoni  from  the  Laramie  of  Montana  (Whitfield,  Ann.  Mus.  N.Y.,  1907, 
XXVII,  p.  627),  and  the  very  deeply  folded  Unionides  from  Baluchistan  (Blandford, 
Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  India,  1883,  XX,  p.  236  et  seq.):  also  with  regard  to  the  Paludinas 
which  are  associated  with  these  Unionides  in  Slavonia  and  their  variability,  reference 
may  be  made  to  what  has  been  said  by  Monsuy,  Ann.  Mines,  1907,  10«  ser.,  XI,  p.  473  et 
seq.,  on  their  occurrence  in  Yunnan  and  the  north  of  Kuang-si. 

SOLLAS  IV  T  ^ 


642 


LIFE 


[part  V 


case  of  frogs.  Finally,  even  in  the  highest  mammals,  a  trace  of  the  gills 
remains  in  embryonic  life,  as  a  mark  of  the  common  origin  in  the  sea.  The 
lung  occurs  in  all  terrestrial  animals,  the  land  snail,  the  reptile,  the  bird, 
and  the  mammal ;  the  same  need  excites  the  same  new  growth. 

We  will  not  discuss  here  the  modifications  experienced  by  the  extremities, 
but  add  a  few  words  on  the  organs  of  sense. 

In  the  ear  of  the  toothed  whale,  that  is,  of  a  mammal  which  has  returned 
to  the  sea,  the  auditory  meatus  is  almost  completely  closed ;  the  transmis- 
sion of  sound  must  take  place  through  the  body,  since  the  tympanic 
membrane  can  scarcely  receive  sound  waves.  DoUo  found  that  in  the  case 
of  Plioplatecarpus,  a  Cretaceous  Mosasaur,  and  Ichthyosaurus  the  trans- 
mission of  sound  also  takes  place  through  the  substance  of  the  body^. 

This  case  of  the  recurrence  of  the  same  modification  in  animals  so 
different  from  one  another,  is  frequently  repeated  in  the  case  of  the  eye, 
and  it  is,  in  fact,  difficult  to  understand  these  processes,  without  assuming — 
at  least  in  the  case  of  the  eye — a  unity  in  the  system  of  sense  organs, 
in  accordance  either  with  Haeckel's  idea  of  sensillae,  or  with  the  results 
of  investigation  which  have  lately  been  made  known.  Eyes  may,  in  fact, 
arise  in  the  most  diverse  parts  of  the  body,  even  within  the  mantle  of 
cephalopods,  and  on  the  gills  of  certain  bivalves  ^.  Palaeontological  researches 
leave  no  room  for  doubt  that  even  the  paired  eyes  of  existing  mammals  are 
the  result  of  a  long-continued  process  of  concentration. 

In  1886  de  Graaf  found,  in  the  case  of  Anguis  fragilis,  that  the  parietal 
foramen  was  occupied  by  an  arrested  eye ;  he  regarded  it  as  a  reversion, 
and  inferred  from  the  occurrence  of  the  parietal  foramen  in  the  Stega- 
cephala  that  this  group  possessed  a  functional  parietal  eye.  A  little  later 
Credner  showed  that  in  the  Permian  Anthracosaurus  raniceps  the  scaly 
skin  does  not  extend  over  the  parietal  foramen,  and  thus  obtained  confirmation 
of  the  original  presence  of  an  eye  ^. 

From  further  observations  we  derive  the  following  facts. 

During  the  Gondwana  period^  as  we  have  frequently  pointed  out,  the 
earth  presented  a  number  of  extensive  continents  with  a  very  widely 

*  L.  Dollo,  L'Audition  chez  les  Ichthyosauriens,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  Beige,  1907,  XXI, 
Proc.-verb.  pp.  157-163;  also  op.  cit.,  1904,  XVIII,  pp.  208-213,  and  XIX,  1905,  pp.  125- 
131. 

2  Hoyle,  Verb.  V.  intern,  zool.  Congr.  Berlin,  1902,  p.  774;  P.  Pelseneer,  Yeux 
branchiaux  des  Lamellibranches,  Bull.  Acad.  Sci.  Brusxelles,  1908,  pp.  773-778.  Euslin 
states  than  Planaria  are  able  to  increase  the  number  of  their  eyes  ;  Jahresh.  Ver.  Naturk. 
Wiirtt.,  1906,  LXII,  pp.  306-360.  Parker  has  found  sensitive  organs  over  the  whole  body 
of  Protopterus ;  Proc.  Roy.  Soc,  1891,  p.  549. 

'  All  details  are  to  be  found  in  F.  K.  Studnicka,  Die  Parietal-Organe  (Oppel,  Lehrbuch 
der  vergleichenden  mikroskopischen  Anatomie,  V),  8vo,  Jena,  1905,  254  pp.  No  fossil 
with  paired  apertures  is  so  far  known,  possibly  however  the  scales  of  Anthracosaurus 
figured  by  Credner  are  an  indication  of  this ;  Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1866,  XXXVIII, 
pp.  592-596. 


CH.  XVIIl] 


THE  EYE 


643 


distributed  flora  and  fauna.  About  this  time  there  lived  in  places  very 
remote  from  one  another  land  reptiles  in  which  the  parietal  aperture 
presented  dimensions  which  have  never  since  been  attained;  this  was 
especially  the  case  with  the  Anomodonta.  Many  years  ago  Cope  was 
struck  by  the  extraordinary  size  of  this  structure  in  the  Diadectides  from 
the  Permian  deposits  of  Texas  ^.  Far  from  there,  near  Elgin,  in  the  north- 
east of  Scotland,  beds  of  the  age  of  the  Gondwana  fauna  have  furnished 
remains  of  the  reptile  Gordonia  Traquairi,  and  in  this  the  parietal  aperture 
lies  in  an  elongated  depression.  Its  '  deep  cup-like  form ',  says  Newton, 
'  is  probably  an  indication  that  it  lodged  a  well-developed  eye '  ^.  Seeley 
has  described  an  incomplete  skull  of  Deuterosaurus  from  the  Permian  of 
the  Urals,  in  which  the  parietal  aperture  is  connected  with  the  cranial 
cavity  by  a  canal  three-quarters  of  an  inch  wide  ^.  In  the  skull  of 
Delphinognathus  from  South  Africa  the  middle  of  the  vertex  rises  in  an 
independent  cone,  which  bears  the  broad  (almost  2  centimeters  across) 
crater-like  parietal  aperture,  surrounded  by  radiating  vascular  impressions 
In  these  cases  the  central  organ  itself  may  have  possessed  a  very  different 
form  from  that  now  existing. 

Jack  el  has  collected  similar  observations  from  different  formations. 
These  show  that  in  not  a  few  Devonian  fishes  the  aperture  lies  not  in  the 
parietal  but  in  the  frontal  bones.  Further,  in  Thursius  and  Diplopterus 
it  is  accompanied  by  a  ring  of  small  ossified  plates  which,  notwithstanding 

1  Cope,  Amer.  Nat.,  1880,  XIV,  p.  304,  Skull  of  Empedocles ;  also  Proc.  Am.  Phil.  Soc. 
Philadelphia,  1882,  XIX,  p.  45. 

2  E.  T.  Newton,  New  Reptiles  from  the  Elgin  Sandstone,  Phil.  Trans.  (1893),  1894, 
vol.  184,  B,  pp.  481-593,  in  particular  p.  438.  There  is  still  a  lack  of  complete  agree- 
ment as  to  the  age  of  these  beds.  Noetling  and  Hayden  state  that  in  Kashmir  the  beds 
with  Gangamopteris,  Archegosaurus,  and  other  genera  are  overlain  by  marine  upper 
Carboniferous.  Hayden  (Rec.  Geol.  Surv.  India,  1907,  XXXVI,  pp.  23-29)  and  Amalitzky 
state  that  in  North  Russia  the  marine  Zechstein  rests  upon  the  beds  with  Gangamopteris, 
Glossopteris,  Dicynodon,  and  other  genera,  beneath  these  lies  lower  Permian  with  Callio- 
pteris  conferta,  and  beneath  this  again  marine  lower  Permian  with  Productus  cancrini 
(Amalitzky,  Excursion  geologique,  Expose  a  la  Societe  imperiale  naturaliste  St.  Petersb., 
1899,  25  pp. ;  also  C.  R.  Acad.  Sci.  Paris,  4  mars  1901,  et  passim).  Near  Elgin  at 
least  two  different  horizons  of  the  African  Karoo  are  distinguished  by  Newton.  We 
have  included  the  accompanying  glacial  period  in  the  Carboniferous ;  Tscherny- 
schew  does  the  same.  Koken  assigns  it  to  the  Permian  (Indischer  Perm  und  die  Per- 
mische  Eiszeit,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  Festband,  1907,  pp.  446-546,  map) ;  Arber  (Catal.  Glossopte- 
ris flora,  Brit.  Mus.,  1905),  unites  the  Glossopteris  flora  with  the  upper  Carboniferous ; 
Seward  (Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1908,  LXIV,  p.  Ill)  points  out  that  at  Tete  on  the 
Zambesi  the  typical  flora  of  the  European  upper  Carboniferous  occurs  independently  of 
the  Glossopteris  flora. 

3  H.  G.  Seeley,  Research  on  Fossil  Reptiles,  VIII,  Phil.  Trans.,  1894,  vol.  185,  B, 
pp.  663-717,  in  particular  p.  677. 

*  H.  G.  Seeley,  Delphinognathus  conocephalus  from  Middle  Karoo  Beds,  Cape  Colony, 
Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1892,  XLVIII,  pp.  469-475. 

T  t  2 


644 


LIFE 


[part  V 


the  doubts  which  have  been  raised,  should  be  regarded  in  my  opinion  as 
a  sclerotic  ring  ^. 

In  living  reptiles  two  structures  occur,  lying  one  behind  the  other, 
these  are  the  parietal  organs  with  the  parietal  eye,  and  behind  this  the 
pineal  organs ;  in  certain  cases  the  former  alone  enter  a  parietal  aperture. 
That  in  these  cases  we  are  really  dealing  with  the  rudiment  of  a  third  eye 
is  shown  by  the  fact  that  in  not  a  few  Saurians  the  presence  has  been 
established  of  a  refractive  lens,  a  pigmented  retina,  and  a  special  nerve 
which  establishes  connexion  within  the  brain.  Beside  the  Saurians,  a 
particular  interest  attaches  to  Sphenodon  (Hatteria),  a  remarkable  relic  of 
the  Permian  epoch,  which  still  leads  an  isolated  existence  on  some  small 
islands  in  Cook's  strait  (New  Zealand).  Its  third  eye,  with  lens  and  retina, 
projects  into  the  parietal  aperture.  In  fully  developed  individuals  this 
aperture  is  closed  by  connective  tissue. 

The  rudiment  appears  to  have  been  originally  paired,  and  then  to  have 
become  single,  by  selection  of  one  of  the  two  parts.  Thus  the  pineal  organ, 
almost  the  sole  indication  which  remains  of  these  structures  in  existing 
mammals,  would  represent  a  fourth  eye.  Even  in  man  himself  traces  of 
a  iiervus  parietalis  have  been  found  2. 

Of  a  different  kind  is  the  struggle  of  the  eye  with  darkness.  Even  in 
the  early  days  of  the  Palaeozoic  aera  the  facetted  eyes  of  Trilobites  are 
affected  sometimes  by  atrophy,  sometimes  by  hypertrophy,  and  in  the 
lower  Silurian  genus,  Trinucleus,  it  may  happen  that  young  specimens 
have  facetted  eyes,  while  the  adults  are  blind.  Bat  if  we  follow  Exner's 
experiments  on  the  migration  of  pigment  in  the  facetted  eye,  and  Chun's 
observations  on  the  luminescent  organs  and  the  telescope  eyes  of  deep  sea 
animals,  we  arrive  at  wonderful  physiological  processes,  and  new  growths, 
which  have  certainly  been  excited  and  educed  by  external  circumstances, 
but  to  a  degree  far  exceeding  the  powers  of  adaptation  ^  as  conceived  by 
the  simple  views  now  prevalent. 

The  luminescent  organs,  once  regarded  as  accessory  eyes,  are  certainly 
aids  to  sight,  but  yet  quite  independent  structures.  Their  autonomous 
origin,  however,  appears  less  wonderful  than  that  of  the  lung,  since  eyes 
may  be  produced  in  such  different  parts  of  the  body,  but  they  occur, 
precisely  like  the  lung,  in  animals  of  the  most  diverse  kinds,  Crustacea, 

^  0.  Jaekel,  Epiphyse  und  Hypophyse,  Sitzb.  Ges.  naturf.  Freunde,  Berlin,  1903, 
pp.  27-58  ;  the  parietal  aperture  is  here  termed  the  epidyse  ;  the  epiphyse  is  the  pineal 
body  which  will  be  mentioned  later. 

'  0.  Marburg,  Normale  und  pathologische  Histologie  der  Zirbeldriise,  Arbeiten  aus  dem 
neurologischen  Institut  der  Wiener  Universitat,  ed.  by  Obersteiner,  1908,  XVII,  pp.  217- 
279.    Professor  Zuckerkandl  has  drawn  my  attention  to  this  fact. 

'  S.  Exner,  Die  Physiologie  der  facettirten  Augen  von  Krebsen  und  Insecten,  8vo, 
1891,  206  pp.;  C.  Chun,  Leuchtorgan  und  Facettenauge,  BioL  Centralbl,  1893,  XIII, 
pp.  554-571  ;  also  the  works  of  the  Valdivia  expedition. 


CH.  XVIIl] 


THE  CASPIAN 


645 


cephalopods,  and  fishes.  Similar  rudiments  have  even  been  observed  in 
some  of  the  mammals  which  have  returned  to  the  sea^. 

The  lung  is  the  product  of  life  on  land,  the  luminescent  organ  the 
product  of  the  deep  sea,  and  between  them,  as  the  place  of  departure,  lies 
the  strand.  Certain  classes  of  animals  are  permanently  endowed  with  the 
ability  to  produce  the  same  new  formations  under  the  same  external 
circumstances.  This  indicates  much  more  than  a  common  descent.  It  is 
not  convergence,  but  persistent  parallelism.  The  earlier  state  disappears 
during  embryonic  life.  New  species,  even  new  genera  arise,  yet  along 
with  this  splitting  up,  identical  organs  are  formed  in  different  animals 
under  the  manifold  influences  which  we  are  accustomed  to  include  under 
the  term  'adaptation'. 

History  of  the  Caspian  sea.  The  strand,  as  we  have  just  considered 
it,  is  free  and  open.  But  there  are  cases  in  which  it  becomes  enclosed, 
restricted,  and  holds  the  inhabitants  of  the  waters  prisoner. 

The  face  of  the  earth  presents  two  examples  of  the  remains  of  great 
seas,  scarcely  disturbed  by  tectonic  phenomena.  The  descendant  of  the 
first  is  the  dead  salt  basin  of  the  Djouf  in  the  western  Sahara,  and  the 
moribund  descendant  of  the  second,  which  we  may  term  the  Palaeocaspian, 
is  the  Caspian  sea.  At  the  time  of  the  upper  Cretaceous  both  were 
covered  by  the  marine  transgression  which  extended  from  the  Atlantic 
Ocean  into  the  Tarim  basin.  Then  separation  occurred,  partly  owing  to 
the  excess  of  the  negative  displacements  of  the  strand  and  partly  owing 
to  tectonic  movements  (Alps,  Iran).  The  Djouf  was  separated  ofi",  solely, 
it  would  appear,  by  the  retreat  of  the  sea.  The  separation  seems  to  have 
taken  place  from  north-west  to  south-east,  from  the  hills  of  Ahaggar,  not 
very  far  from  Bilma,  in  the  direction  of  the  mountains  of  Tibesti,  thus 
dividing  an  Atlantic  from  a  Libyan-Mediterranean  basin  (I,  p.  359;  IV, 
pp.  6,  89).  By  no  means  so  clear,  even  in  middle  Tertiary  times,  was  the 
boundary  between  the  Palaeocaspian  region  and  the  Mediterranean,  and 
while  the  Mediterranean  still  extended  itself  by  subsidences,  the  Palaeo- 
caspian remained  a  transgression-sea,  divided  by  mountain  structures,  but 
not  widening  its  bounds.  For  this  reason  it  must  be  regarded  simply  as 
a  late  and  transitory  extension  of  the  Tethys. 

To  the  west,  all  the  plains  of  the  middle  and  lower  Danube  and  the 
northern  slopes  of  the  Carpathians  and  the  Caucasus  belong  to  the  Palaeo- 
caspian sea.  To  the  east,  upper  Cretaceous  and  Eocene  reached  Kashgar 
and  Sanju,  and  it  is  a  question  whether  the  gypsums  of  the  Pamir  are  not 
of  Tertiary  age.  On  the  whole,  however,  the  history  of  this  sea  remains 
for  a  long  period  bound  up  with  that  of  the  Mediterranean. 

The  fact  that  the  southern  borders  of  the  Bohemian  horst  are  sur- 

^  A.  Putter,  Anpassung  der  Saugethierangen  an  das  Wasserleben,  Verb.  V.  intern, 
zool.  Congr.  Berlin,  1901,  pp.  613-620. 


64:6  LIFE  [pAKT  V 

rounded  only  by  litoral  deposits  of  the  first  Mediferranean  stage  points  to 
some  decisive  event,  and  we  may  take  this  region  as  the  starting-point  of 
our  further  studies.  They  will  be  based  on  what  has  already  been  said 
with  regard  to  the  history  of  the  Mediterranean  (I,  p.  277),  but  will  refer 
chiefly  to  the  fauna.  Notwithstanding  this  limitation,  the  subject  remains 
so  extensive  that  it  is  necessary  to  make  a  subdivision.  We  shall  first 
consider  briefly :  (1)  Central  and  East  Europe,  particularly  with  reference 
to  the  age  of  the  faunas ;  we  shall  next  make  (2)  a  comparison  with  India ; 
then  (3)  with  North  Africa ;  and  finally  (4)  give  a  sketch  of  the  existing 
conditions  in  the  Caspian. 

1.  The  above-mentioned  litoral  deposits  of  the  Bohemian  horst,  resting 
on  a  brackish-water  basement  bed  with  Gerithium  margaritaceum  (beds  of 
Molt,  upper  Aquitanian,  according  to  Deperet)  comprise  the  marine  sands 
and  Lithothamnium  limestones  of  the  first  Mediterranean  stage,  and  a  land 
fauna,  the  correspondence  of  which  with  that  of  the  sands  of  Orleans  has 
been  established  by  Deperet.  This  fauna  is  known  as  far  as  the  lower 
course  of  the  Tagus;  its  most  characteristic  genus  is  the  great  Suidine 
genus  Brachyodus,  but  Mastodon  angustidens  is  also  said  to  occur  ^. 

After  the  deposition  of  these  beds  a  great  constriction  of  the  sea 
occurred ;  its  efiects  can  be  traced  from  Bavaria,  through  eastern  Europe 
and  a  long  way  towards  Asia.  Salt  and  gypsum  were  deposited ;  this  is 
the  saline  epoch  of  the  Schlier,  the  first  harbinger  of  the  end.  Besides 
Mediterranean  species,  a  not  inconsiderable  number  of  new,  endemic 
species  occur  in  the  associated  marls;  a  whale  also,  8  meters  in  length, 
has  been  found.  No  great  changes  would  be  required  even  at  the 
present  day  to  completely  close  up  the  Mediterranean  together  with  the 
Pontus. 

The  period  in  which  evaporation  was  in  excess  of  precipitation  came  to 
an  end.  Brackish  water  Cardiums  made  their  appearance.  Freshwater 
beds  with  Oncophora  were  spread  out  from  the  west  into  Moravia.  Leaves 
of  the  cinnamon  tree  were  blown  in  by  the  wind ;  and  on  the  east  border 
of  the  Alps  brown  coal  was  formed.  A  horizon  (Helvetian)  characterized 
by  Gerithium  ligmtarum  marks  the  beginning  of  the  second  Mediterranean 
stage.  The  transgression  was  of  moderate  extent.  Round  about  the 
margin  of  the  sea  the  consequences  of  the  dry  period  had  by  this  time 
ceased  to  be  manifest,  and  the  whole  of  Central  Europe  was  occupied  by 
a  rich  land  fauna.  Brachyodus  had  disappeared;  Mastodon  angustidens 
still  existed,  and  in  addition  Anthropoid  apes,  Amphicyon,  Dinotherium, 
Anchitherium,  Hyaemoschus,  Prox,  Palaeomeryx,  Listriodon  and  other 

'  Deperet,  Fauna  von  miocenen  Wirbelthieren  aus  der  I.  Mediterran-Stufe  von  Eggen- 
burg,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1895,  CIV,  pp.  395-416  ;  Le  Neogene  Continental 
dans  la  Basse  Vallee  du  Tage,  Paleontologie  par  F.  Roman,  Stratigraphie  par  A.  Torres, 
Comm.  serv.  geol.  Portugal,  Lisbon,  1907, 108  pp.,  4to. 


CH.  xviiil        MALAYAN  FAUNA  IN  EUROPE 


647 


genera.  This  fauna  also  extended  towards  the  west  as  far  as  the  lower 
course  of  the  Tagus.  Among  the  best-known  fossil  localities  are  Sansans, 
Steinheim,  and  the  younger  brown  coals  of  Styria  (Eibiswald). 

In  1870  Oskar  Fraas  wrote  that  a  study  of  the  fossils  of  Steinheim 
leads  irresistibly  to  the  conclusion  that  this  fauna  is  still  living  in  the 
Indian  archipelago.  Not  long  afterwards  A.  von  Pelzeln  described  it  as 
Malayan  ^  We  shall  make  use  of  this  name,  not  to  imply  that  the  Malayan 
regions  were  the  original  home  of  these  animals^  hut  only  to  indicate  that 
at  the  present  day  Malay  still  possesses  forms  which  exhibit  a  particularly 
close  relationship  with  them. 

The  area  of  deposition  was  again  reduced,  this  time  evidently  by  an 
extensive  subsidence  of  the  strandline.  The  Palaeocaspian  region  was  cut 
off  from  the  Mediterranean,  and  has  remained  closed  ever  since.  The 
new,  Sarmatian  sea  reached  its  western  limit  in  lower  Austria,  and  included 
in  the  east  the  sea  of  Aral.  The  composition  of  its  waters  ceased  to  be 
completely  normal.  The  fauna  was  poor  in  species,  but  excessively  rich 
in  individuals.  Certain  Mediterranean  relics  still  continued  to  exist  beside 
the  endemic  fauna,  in  which  marine  mammals  are  conspicuous,  and,  among 
the  molluscs,  Trochus,  Mactra,  Cardium,  and  other  genera.  Cephalopods, 
Brachiopods,  Echinids,  and  corals  are  absent,  and  no  longer  survived  in  the 
Caspian  region. 

This  change  in  the  contour  of  the  sea  and  its  fauna  was  not  accompanied 
by  any  important  change  in  the  Malayan  land  fauna.  Subaerial  erosion  of 
the  Sarmatian  deposits  next  occurred,  and  indicates  a  renewed  negative 
movement;  it  was  so  considerable  as  to  suggest  that  the  strand  of  the 
Mediterranean  may  have  lain  lower  than  at  present.  The  region  previously 
marine,  was  now  occupied  by  a  chain  of  freshwater  lakes;  this  is  the 
period  of  the  Pontic  stage.  Now  for  the  first  time  the  Malayan  fauna 
disappears,  and  its  successor  bears  a  completely  African  stamp.  Apes, 
Machairodus,  Hyaena,  Mastodon  longirostris,  Dinotherium  giganteum,  Hip- 
potherium,  Helladotherium,  Camelopardalis,  Gazella,  Palaeoryx,  Struthio 
and  other  genera  are  characteristic.  It  is  known  on  the  lower  Tagus,  at 
Concud  (Spain),  Eppelsheim  (near  Frankfort),  in  the  Congeria  beds  of 
Vienna,  and  the  Belvedere  Schotter,  near  Balta  (Podolia),  Pikermi  (not  far 
from  Athens),  in  the  island  of  Samos,  at  Maragha  (Persia),  and  many  other 
places.  Forms  characteristic  of  the  cape  of  Good  Hope  occur  at  the  most 
remote  localities,  as,  for  example,  Orycteropus  found  in  Maragha  and  in 
Samos.    Manis  presents  a  similar  case^. 

^  0.  Fraas,  Fauna  von  Steinheim,  Wiirtt.  naturw.  Jahresh.,  1870,  XXVI,  pp.  145-306, 
in  particular  p.  297  ;  A.  von  Pelzeln,  Africa-Indien,  Verh.  zool.-bot.  Ges.  Wien,  1875 , 
XXV,  pp.  33-62 ;  Die  malayische  Saugethierfauna,  Festschrift  d.  zool.-bot.  Gres.,  4to, 
Wien,  1876,  pp.  50-74,  map  ;  observations  on  this  by  Blanford  in  Proc.  ZooL  Soc,  1879, 
pp.  631-634. 

2  Forsyth  Major,  Proc.  ZooL  Soc,  1893,  p.  239. 


648  LIFE  [PAKT  V 

With  many  changes  of  fortune  the  Holarctic  fauna  and  flora  then 
advanced  from  the  north  through  Europe;  Asiatic  elements  made  their 
appearance ;  nevertheless,  even  at  the  present  day,  African  relics  exist  in 
some  parts  of  the  northern  coast  regions  of  the  Mediterranean. 

2.  The  history  of  the  Mediterranean  has  been  happily  completed  by 
Pilgrim's  investigations  on  the  Persian  gulf  ^. 

The  conjectured  secondary  syntaxis,  supposed  to  occur  at  Bender  Abbas, 
actually  takes  place.  One  of  the  exterior  chains  of  Iran  which  sink 
beneath  the  surface  at  Karachi,  reappears  at  Ras  el  Hadd  in  south-east 
Arabia.  It  strikes  in  an  arc  as  a  fairly  high  chain  through  Oman,  and 
reaches  cape  Masandam  opposite  Bender  Abbas.  It  consists  of  crystalline 
schist,  Palaeozoic  and  Trias  deposits,  a  thick  basic  intrusion,  then  Cretaceous 
and  Tertiary.  The  gulf  of  Oman  is  thus  not  a  fore-trough,  but  lies  within 
the  virgation  of  the  chains  of  Sind,  which  is  indicated  in  the  east.  The 
fore-trough  of  the  Zagros  chains  does  not  begin  until  we  reach  the  strait 
of  Hormuzd,  and  it  is  supposed  that  the  subsidence  of  the  Persian  gulf  did 
not  take  place  until  very  recent  times.  This  conjecture  rests  on  the  fact 
that  the  Eocene  sediments  in  the  island  of  Bahrein  are  different  from  those 
of  Persia. 

On  the  Persian  side  the  Cretaceous  and  Eocene  are  covered  by  the 
lower  Nari  stage  of  India  (Oligocene),  and  this  by  the  upper  Nari,  which 
corresponds  with  the  deposits  on  lake  Urmia,  i.e.  the  first  Mediterranean 
stage.  Then  follows  widely  distributed  gypsum.  It  is  overlain  on  the 
whole  tract  from  Bushehr  to  Bender  Abbas  by  the  very  thick  equivalents 
of  the  second  Mediterranean  stage  with  Pecten  Virleti  and  Venus  aglcmrae. 
Pilgrim  consequently  places  the  gypsum  on  the  horizon  of  the  Austrian 
Schlier. 

The  zone  of  Pecten  Vatteli,  or  the  coast-zone  which  now  follows,  is 
known  from  Kishm,  along  the  Makran  coast  as  far  as  Karachi.  Strange 
to  say  it  presents  a  fair  number  of  endemic  species  ^. 

The  Bachtyari  series,  to  all  appearance  an  ancient  river  formation,  now 

'  G.  E.  Pilgrim,  Geology  of  the  Persian  Gulf,  Mem.  Geol.  Surv.  India,  1908,  XXXIV, 
pt.  4,  177  pp.,  maps  ;  Diener,  Some  Fossils  from  the  Sedimentary  Rocks  of  Oman 
(Arabia),  Records,  op.  cit.,  1908,  XXXVI,  pp.  156-163.  Even  at  the  time  when  the  preced- 
ing page  (p.  522)  was  in  the  press  this  work  of  Pilgrim's  was  unknown,  and  the  syntaxis 
at  Ormuz  was  therefore  up  to  the  present  a  matter  of  conjecture  only  ;  on  this  point  see 
also  I,  p.  426,  and  III,  pp.  288-297. 

2  I,  p.  326.  Pecten  Vatteli  was  described  by  T.  Fuchs  from  the  material  excavated  from 
the  Suez  Canal  between  the  Bitter  lakes  and  Suez  (Denkschr.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1877, 
XXXVIII,  p.  407).  Blanckenhorn  describes  this  species  as  one  of  the  typical  fossils  of 
the  upper  Pliocene — Pleistocene  coral  reefs  and  coast  deposits  of  the  Gulf  of  Suez ;  it 
occurs  in  older  (post-Miocene)  coral  structures  on  the  south-east  side  of  Mount  Sinai 
(Hume,  South-east  Sinai,  Survey  Department,  Egypt,  1906,  p.  136)  and  in  Pleistocene 
coast  deposits  near  Tanger  in  East  Africa  (Koert,  Monatsber.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1908, 
LX,  pp.  326-328. 


CH.  XVIIl] 


PERSIAN  GULF 


649 


follows  unconformably.  Lof tus  has  even  traced  it  to  Mosul  on  the  Tigris ; 
it  was  involved  in  the  folding  movements.  One  might  well  suppose  that 
it  had  filled  up  an  ancient  fore-trough.  Finally,  a  foraminiferal  limestone 
(Miliolite)  with  oolitic  structure  occurs  in  horizontal  beds ;  it  is  believed  to 
have  been  formed  by  the  wind.  Consolidated  shell  beds, '  litoral  concrete,' 
conclude  the  succession. 

The  '  blind  alley '  of  the  existing  Persian  gulf  contains,  like  the  zone  of 
Pecten  Vatteli,  a  number  of  endemic  molluscs. 

The  most  important  changes  in  the  middle  Tertiary  seas  can  be  traced 
onwards— as  we  have  previously  pointed  out,  and  as  is  shown  more 
especially  by  the  intercalation  of  gypsum  and  salt  on  a  particular  horizon 
— not  only  through  Armenia  and  the  high  land  of  Iran  to  Chorassan^  but 
also  through  Mesopotamia  and  at  least  as  far  as  the  strait  of  Hormuzd. 
Livingstone's  account  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  elephants  and  rhinoceroses 
from  regions  which  had  become  arid  gives  some  idea  of  the  possible 
influence  of  such  a  period  on  the  fauna. 

The  Tertiary  deposits  of  the  Persian  gulf  are  connected  through 
Karachi  with  those  of  the  valley  of  the  Indus. 

The  succession  of  land  faunas  in  India  precisely  resembles  that  in 
South  Europe.  We  will  confine  ourselves  to  a  few  isolated  examples.  In 
the  Bugti  mountains  of  east  Baluchistan  (southern  foothills  of  Sewestan  in 
the  direction  of  the  Indus)  Blanford  observed  Brachyodus,  and  Unios  with 
a  remarkably  folded  ornamentation;  Pilgrim  has  assigned  them  to  the 
Aquitanian  stage  ^.  At  Kushalgarh  on  the  Indus  (Rawalpindi)  the  mamma- 
lian remains  frequently  referred  to  as  the  '  Attock  fossils '  occur.  Dinothe- 
rium,  Amphicyon,  and  Listriodon  point  to  the  Malayan  fauna  ^  The  rich 
Sewalik  fauna  of  the  foothills  of  the  Himalaya  bears  the  African  stamp, 
like  the  other  Pontic  faunas  at  Pikermi  and  Maragha.  It  is  also  known 
on  the  Irawaddi  in  Burma. — 

The  question  now  arises  as  to  what  we  are  to  understand  by  Malayan. 
Let  us  follow  Blanford's  classification  of  the  distributional  areas  of 
India  ^. 

The  Holarctic  fauna  comes  down  from  the  north  and  north-west  and 
occupies  the  highland  of  Tibet,  the  Punjab,  and  the  desert  regions  up  to 
the  Aravali  mountains.    The  typical  Malayan  region  begins  at  present  in 

1  W.  T.  Blanford,  Geological  Notes  on  the  Hills  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  the  Sind  and 
Punjab  Frontier  between  Quetta  and  Dera  Ghazi  Khan,  Mem.  GeoL  Surv.  India,  1883, 
XX,  pp.  105-240,  in  particular  p.  161  et  seq.,  and  p.  233  et  seq. ;  G.  E.  Pilgrim,  New 
Suidae  from  the  Bugti  Hills,  Baluchistan,  Records,  op.  cit.,  1907,  XXXVI,  pp.  45-56. 
and  Persian  Gulf,  Note  to  p.  33. 

2  Lydekker,  Rec.  Geol.  Surv.  India,  1876,  IX,  p.  91  et  seq.,  and  1887,  XX,  pp.  51-63  ; 
Wynne,  op.  cit.,  1877,  X,  p.  119 ;  also  in  this  work,  I,  p.  443,  note  2. 

^  W.  T.  Blanford,  Distribution  of  Vertebrate  Animals  in  India,  Ceylon,  and  Burma, 
Phil.  Trans.,  vol.  194,  B,  pp.  335-436,  map. 


650 


LIFE 


[part  V 


Tenasserim  and  extends  far  to  the  south-east.  This  adjoins  on  the  north 
the  Transgangetic  region.  The  Transgangetic  fauna  occupies  Burma, 
Assam,  and  the  forest  region  of  the  Himalaya.  But  in  this  forest  region 
an  increasingly  large  admixture  of  Holarctic  species  makes  its  appearance 
as  we  proceed  towards  the  west,  and  it  seems  as  though  the  Transgangetic 
fauna  had  its  original  home  here,  then  withdrew  during  a  cold  period,  and 
returned  again  in  quite  recent  times  through  the  forests  of  Assam.  It  is 
these  two  faunas,  that  of  Tenasserim  and  that  of  the  Transgangetic  region, 
which  together  form  the  Malayan  fauna  of  Pelzeln ;  and  it  is  in  these  that 
Lydekker  recognized  a  difference  from  the  Sewalik  fauna  and  a  resemblance 
to  the  Oligocene  or  Miocene  faunas  of  Europe  ^. 

The  Cisgangetic  region,  that  is  Hindustan  proper,  includes  many  genera 
of  the  Indo-Malayan  (or  Oriental)  fauna,  such  as  Semnopithecus,  Elephas, 
and  others,  which  dwell  chiefly  in  the  wooded  parts  of  the  peninsula,  but 
it  also  contains  elements  of  a  second  fauna,  the  Aryan  fauna  of  Blanford, 
such  as  Melursus,  Boselaphus,  Antilope,  and  other  genera,  which  are  charac- 
teristic of  tropical  Africa,  but  are  absent  from  North  Africa  and  the  adjacent 
parts  of  Asia.    Precursors  of  both  these  faunas  occur  in  the  Sewalik. 

Finally,  we  must  distinguish  from  the  Cisgangetic  region  the  district  of 
Malabar,  which  extends  along  the  west  coast  of  the  peninsula  and  includes 
south-west  Ceylon.  Here  not  a  few  genera  of  the  Transgangetic  and 
Malayan  fauna  occur,  which  are  not  met  with  elsewhere  on  the  peninsula. 
The  correspondence  is  so  striking  that  as  early  as  1870  Stoliczka  raised  the 
question  whether  the  Malayan  fauna  might  not  once  have  been  distributed 
over  the  whole  peninsula  ^.  Blanford  distinguishes  here  traces  of  a  third 
still  older  fauna,  the  Dravidic,  which  includes  only  a  few  mammals,  and 
consists  chiefly  of  reptiles  and  some  land  snails. 

This  division  of  India  completely  excludes  the  inhabitants  of  rivers. 
The  gavial  of  the  Sewalik  beds  lives  in  the  Indus,  Ganges,  Brahmaputra, 
and  Mahanadi ;  but  it  is  also  recorded  from  the  river  Koladyne  (North 
Arakan).  The  subsidence  of  the  gulf  of  Bengal,  on  the  site  of  which  the 
Ganges  may  once  have  flowed,  is  possibly  a  very  recent  event,  as  this 
distribution  may  perhaps  suggest.  The  crocodile  and  JEmys  tectum  of  the 
Sewdlik  fauna  still  exist  at  the  present  day  ^. 

^  R.  Lydekker,  Geographical  History  of  Mammals,  8vo,  Cambridge,  1896,  p.  291. 

F.  Stoliczka,  Contribution  to  Malay  Ornithology,  Journ.  Asiat.  Soc.  Bengal,  1870, 
XXXIX,  pp.  277-334,  in  particular  pp.  279,  280. 

The  Tertiary  Crocidilians  of  Malta  and  Gozo  as  well  as  of  the  first  Mediter- 
ranean stage  at  Eggenburg  belong  to  the  genus  Tomistoma  at  present  existing  only  in 
Borneo.  R.  Lydekker,  Notes  on  the  fossil  Mammalian  Faunas  of  India  and  Burma,  Rec. 
Geol.  Surv.  India,  LS76,  IX,  pp.  86-106,  in  particular  p.  97  ;  Occurrence  of  the  Croco- 
dilian Genus  Tomistoma  in  the  Miocene  of  the  Maltese  Islands,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc, 
1886,  XLII,  pp.  20-22. 


CH.  XVIII]    TEETIAEY  FAUNAS  OF  N.  AFEICA  651 


We  will  defer  giving  a  synthesis  of  these  details  until  we  have  considered 
the  facts  presented  by  North  Africa. 

3.  The  correspondence  of  the  Mediterranean  Atlas  with  Europe  is  well 
known.  Deperet  has  shown  that  Pomel's  Cartennian  corresponds  with  the 
first  Mediterranean  stage,  and  that  in  Kabylia  this  stage  contains  Mastodon 
angustidens'^.  Pomel's  Helvetian  is  the  second  Mediterranean  stage,  and 
the  Sahelian  is  probably  a  marine  equivalent  of  the  Pontic  stage.  In  Oran 
and  Constantine  the  land  fauna  of  African  character,  which  corresponds  to 
the  Pontic  stage,  has  also  been  met  with. 

The  ancient  rocks  forming  the  basement  of  Gondwana  land  extend  from 
the  southern  half  of  Africa  northwards,  passing  between  the  Nile  and  the 
Red  sea,  and  in  Sinai  they  cross  over  to  Arabia.  We  have  already 
mentioned  that  the  fall  of  the  Cretaceous  sea-level  brought  about  a  separa- 
tion of  the  seas  of  the  Sahara,  which  ran  approximately  along  the  line  from 
Ahaggar  to  Tibesti,  and  that  on  both  sides  of  this  line,  Eocene  and  then 
Miocene  sea-basins  were  left  behind.  In  the  Libyan  basin  the  deposits 
of  the  Miocene  coming  from  the  lower  Nile  reach  the  existing  seacoast  near 
Tripoli,  but  they  do  not,  it  would  seem,  extend  very  far  into  the  interior 
of  the  desert.  Great  rivers  were  discharged  into  this  sea ;  the  Wady 
Igharghar  was  probably  the  most  important  of  them.  None  of  these 
Tertiary  rivers  reach  the  sea  at  the  present  day. 

The  contours  of  the  several  groups  of  strata  which  succeed  each  other 
with  a  fair  degree  of  regularity  to  the  south  and  south-west  of  Cairo  thus 
indicate  so  many  contours  of  the  north  coast  of  the  ancient  continent,  and 
the  remarkable  remains  of  terrestrial  animals  which  occur  here  in  fluvio- 
marine  litoral  beds  simply  represent  a  small  part  of  the  great  variety  of 
forms  which  at  that  time  inhabited  northern  Gondwana  land. 

The  palaeontological  discoveries  of  Andrews,  and  the  stratigraphical 
observations  of  Beadnell,  show  that  in  the  middle  Eocene  (Mokattam  stage) 
of  the  Fayum  the  purely  marine  zone  of  Nummulites  Gizehensis  is 
overlain  by  white  marls  with  fishes  and  Zeuglodon.  Then  follows  an 
alternation  of  limestone,  marl,  and  sandstone,  with  Moeritherium,  Barythe- 
rium,  a  number  of  marine  mammals,  and  fishes,  especially  roach.  The 
upper  Eocene  (Barton  stage)  is  fluvio-marine.  Here  the  strange-looking 
Arsinotherium  occurs,  Palaeomastodon,  a  forerunner  of  the  Elephants,  and 
in  addition  to  many  forms  unknown  elsewhere,  such  genera  as  Hyaenodon, 
Procyon,  and  a  few  others,  which  show  points  of  relation  to  the  equally 
ancient  land-fauna  of  Europe,  which  so  far,  however,  is  not  known  in  any- 
thing like  the  same  abundance.  Here,  too,  numerous  marine  mammals  have 
been  found  ^,    In  the  Fayum  other  fluvio-marine  deposits  follow  on,  and  in 

1  Deperet,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  France,  1897,  3«  ser.,  XXV,  pp.  518-521. 
^  C.  W.  Andrews,  Descriptive  Catalogue  of  the  Tertiary  Vertebrates  of  the  Fayum, 
Egypt,  4to,  London  (British  Museum),  1906,  324  pp. 


652  LIFE  [pARTvi„r^ 

their  continuation  near  Moghara,  160  kilometers  west  of  Cairo,  Blancken- 
horn  discovered  Brachyodus  and  Khinoceros,  and  Beadnell,  somewhat  later,  ..  (li 
remains  probably  belonging  to  Mastodon  angustidens.    These  fossils  are  rl 
associated  with  Mytilus  aquitanicus,  and  correspond  with  the  earliest  k 
representatives  of  the  Malayan  fauna.    During  the  second  Mediterranean  ^^itli 
stage  a  marine  transgression  occurs.    Further  away,  in  the  Wady  Natrun,  |^frii 
Hipparion  afF.  gracile,  Hippopotamus  hipponensis,  Sus,  Hippotragus  cor-  prl 
dieri,  Samotherium  (or  Libytherium)  have  been  found,  as  well  as  species  \0 
of  Mastodon ;  i.  e.  a  fauna  representing  the  Pontic  period  of  Europe.  It 
was  during  the  Pontic  period  that  the  African  type  made  its  appearance,  ^hi 
both  in  Europe  and  in  India  ^.    Finally,  at  Qasr-el-Sagha  (Schweinfurth's  f^c 
Tempel)  Beadnell  obtained  from  the  deposits  left  by  the  ancient  extension 
of  lake  Moeris,  to  the  north  of  the  east  end  of  the  Fayum,  Elephas  afri-  (Jq 
canus,  Hippopotamus  and  Bubalus,  associated  with  Neolithic  flints,  that  g 
is,  the  existing  land-fauna,  although  no  Egyptian  record  mentions  the  g 
elephant  ^. 

Here  we  may  again  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  term  Malayan  I  \{ 
or  African  fauna  was  not  chosen  in  order  to  indicate  the  original  |l 
habitat  of  this  fauna,  but  its  relationship  to  the  existing  faunas.    In  |i 
Africa  a  Malayan  horizon  is  clearly  intercalated  between  the  mammalian  5 
horizons  of  the  Fayum  and  the  existing  animal  world.    It  is  by  no  means  , 
certain  that  a  Malayan  residue  does  not  still  survive  in  West  Africa  ^.  In 
that  case  the  anthropoid  Dryopithecus  on  Dep^ret's  horizon  of  St.  Gaudens 
(which  is  correlated  approximately  with  the  Sarmatian  stage)  would 
indicate  a  connexion  between  the  orang  of  Borneo  and  the  gorilla  of  West 
Africa.   Thus,  here  again,  we  should  have  to  separate  off  from  the  African 
fauna  a  Malayan  residue,  corresponding  with  the  residue  in  Malabar. 

4.    Let  us  now  attempt  to  sum  up,  completing  our  observations  where 
they  are  deficient.    We  will  begin  with  the  Caspian  region. 

(ay  The  genus  Brachyodus  dates  from  the  Oligocene  period ;  as  a  Iiar- 
binger  of  the  Malayan  fauna  we  have  Mastodon  angustidens.  This  fauna 
is  known  throughout  Central  Europe,  also  in  Baluchistan  (Bugti)  and  west 
of  Cairo  (Moghara).  The  normal  Mediterranean  marine  fauna  extends 
from  Central  Europe  and  North  Africa  to  Asia  Minor  and  Persia  (First 
Mediterranean  stage  Burdigalien). 

^  Blanckenhorn,  Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1901,  pp.  55,  101 ;  Andrews,  Geol.  Mag., 
1899,  Dec.  lY,  vol.  VI,  pp.  481-484,  op.  cit.,  1900,  VII,  pp.  401-403,  and  Descriptive 
Catalogue,  p.  x  et  seq.  F.  Stromer  mentions  Brachyodus  also  from  the  Wady  Faregh, 
Ber.  Senckenb.  Naturf.  Ges.,  1904,  p.  112. 

2  Beadnell,  Geol.  Mag.,  1903,  4th  ser.,  vol.  X,  pp.  53-59;  Andrews,  torn,  cit.,  p.  336; 
for  the  stratified  succession  in  general,  Barron,  op.  cit.,  1904,  5th  ser.,  I,  pp.  603-608. 

^  For  the  views  of  Wallace  and  Lydekker  on  such  relations  see  the  latter's  Geographical 
History  of  Mammals,  p.  257 ;  how  the  West-African  Fauna  following  the  great  forest 
extends  as  far  as  the  watershed,  may  be  seen  from  Emin  Pasha's  account  in  Proc.  Zool. 
Soc,  1888,  part  1. 


!H.  XVIIlJ 


THE  PALAEOCASPIAN 


658 


(b)  First  closure  of  the  sea ;  salt  and  gypsum  from  the  middle  Danube 
to  the  highland  of  Persia,  Hormuzd  and  Suez.  Mediterranean  shells  along 
with  endemic  species  (Schlier). 

(c)  Fluviomarine  sediments,  brown  coal,  then  a  moderate  transgression 
with  a  normal  Mediterranean  fauna  in  central  and  South  Europe  and  North 
Africa.  A  rich  Malayan  mammalian  fauna  in  Central  and  South  Europe, 
North  Africa  and  on  the  Indus  (Kushalgar).  (Second  Mediterranean  stage  — 
lower  and  middle  Vindobonian  =  Helvetian  and  Tortonian.) 

(d)  Second  closure  of  the  sea,  affecting  the  much  more  restricted  area 
which  extended  from  lower  Austria  across  the  sea  of  Aral,  including  the 
Troas  on  the  south.  First  clearly  marked  appearance  of  the  Palaeocaspian 
contour,  which  from  this  time  onwards  becomes  increasingly  restricted. 
Composition  of  the  water  not  normal ;  numerous  marine  mammals  ;  endemic 
molluscs  with  Mediterranean  relics.  Persistence  of  the  Malayan  land-fauna 
(Sarmatian  stage  =  upper  Vindobonian). 

(e)  The  Malayan  land-fauna  now  disappears  from  the  whole  region. 
It  still  exists  at  the  present  day  in  the  Malay  peninsula,  and  far  towards 
the  east ;  it  also  extends  from  Tenasserim  through  the  Transgangetic  region 
to  the  foot  of  the  Himalaya,  occurs  in  an  isolated  district  in  Malabar  and 
south-west  Ceylon  ;  and  possibly  also,  as  a  residue,  in  West  Africa.  Every- 
where, through  the  whole  of  Central  and  Southern  Europe,  North  Africa,  and 
India  it  was  displaced  by  an  African  fauna.  The  Sarmatian  stage  in  Europe 
is  immediately  followed  by  a  period  in  which  the  level  of  the  strandline 
was  low,  and  erosion  occurred  ;  it  was  at  this  time,  apparently,  that  the 
African  fauna  made  its  entry.  It  extends  over  parts  of  Europe,  occurs  in 
Egypt  (Wady  Natrun),  reaches  Persia  (Maragha),  India  (Sewalik)  and  Burma. 
Everywhere  it  appears  as  the  younger  fauna,  but  on  the  Irawaddi  the 
Malayan  fauna  afterwards  again  took  possession  of  a  region  which  during 
the  Tertiary  aera  had  borne  an  African  fauna  (Sewalik). 

The  eroded  surface  was  first  covered  by  Andrussow's  Maeotic  stage.  In 
the  north-west  of  Hungary,  as  Hoernes  has  shown,  it  corresponds  with 
a  zone  characterized  by  Melanopsis  impressa.  Andrussow  believes  that  at 
this  time  the  Palaeocaspian  region  was  already  divided  into  several 
basins  ^. 

The  last  forefolding  of  the  Himalaya  and  the  Zagros  chains,  the  sub- 
sidence of  the  gulf  of  Oman,  the  Persian  gulf,  the  separation  of  Ceylon,  the 
opening  of  Suez  strait,  and  the  Aegaean  subsidence  are  more  recent  than 
the  appearance  of  the  African  types.    Very  recent  post-Pontic  foldings 

^  The  contours  of  the  Maeotic  basin  in  the  Caspian  region  are  described  in  Andrussow^ 
Miocene  of  the  Caspian  regions,  Bull.  Com.  geol.  Russie,  1899,  XVIII,  pp.  339-369  at  the 
end  (in  Russian),  and  in  particular  Maeotic  stage ;  Verb.  Min.  Ges.  St.  Petersb.,  1905, 
2nd  ser.,  XLIII,  pp.  289-449,  map.  For  north-western  Hungary,  R.  Hoernes,  Vorpon- 
tische  Erosion,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1900,  CIX,  pp.  811-857. 


654 


LIFE 


[part  V 


occur  at  the  end  of  the  Balkans,  and  on  the  border  of  the  southern 
Carpathians,  likewise  in  the  Crimea;  the  Caucasus  is  accompanied  by 
Sarmatian  folds.  Nevertheless  the  Sarmatian  (at  the  same  time  Palaeo- 
caspian)  belt  crosses  over  with  flat  bedding  from  Bukovina  to  Bessarabia, 
its  north  border  reaches  Ekaterinoslav,  then  the  northern  shore  of  the  sea 
of  Azov,  and  finally  north  of  the  Manytsh  the  Caspian  sea  ^. 

(/)  Great  freshwater  lakes  make  their  appearance  in  the  valley  of  the 
Danube  with  an  endemic  fauna  (Cardium,  Congeria,  Melanopsis) ;  traces  of 
it  also  occur  outside  the  Sarmatian  contour,  e.g.  on  the  lower  Ehone 
(Pontic  stage). 

Sabba  Stef  anescu's  map  shows  very  clearly  that  the  Roumanian  Tertiary 
deposits  coming  from  the  extreme  west,  almost  from  the  point  of  exit  of 
the  Danube,  follow  the  foot  of  the  Carpathians  in  parallel  zones,  at  the 
same  time  forming  a  basin  closed  in  the  west  and  open  towards  the  south 

If  in  connexion  with  this  we  consider  Andrussow's  map  of  the  Maeotic 
and  Pontic  deposits,  we  discover  the  existence  of  a  vast  sheet  of  water, 
which  adjoins  on  the  north  the  Sarmatian  belt,  and  then  advances  towards 
the  Manytsh,  and  then  of  a  second  sheet  of  water,  which  represents 
a  Caspian  sea  very  much  extended  towards  the  north.  To  the  south-east 
of  the  Pontus,  in  the  government  of  Kutais,  Michailowski  and  Weber  have 
also  established  the  presence  of  Pontic  deposits  ^. 

(g)  The  closing  of  the  basin  increased,  but,  in  south  Bessarabia,  sands 
with  Cardium  semisulcatum,  C.  novorossicum,  Unio  maximus,  and  other 
shells  characteristic  of  the  steppe  limestones  of  Odessa,  still  contain 
Mastodon  longirostris,  Hi2Jpotherium  gracile,  and  other  species  of  the 
African  land  fauna  ^. 

(h)  The  Levantine  stage,  which  in  Roumania,  Hungary,  and  Austria 
represents  the  horizon  of  Mastodon  avernensis,  appears  to  be  but  little 
represented  in  the  more  restricted  area  between  the  Pontus  and  the  sea  of 
Aral.  This  species  is  recorded  as  occurring  to  the  south-west  of  Taganrog, 
and  Levantine  shells  are  mentioned,  but  with  some  doubt,  as  occurring  in 
Kutais. 

(i)  The  advance  of  the  Holarctic  fauna  now  displaces  the  African  fauna, 
but  since  the  identity  of  Elephas  namadicus  and  Elephas  antiquus  has 
been  established  by  Pohlig,  we  see  for  how  long  a  period  the  encroachment 
of  some  of  the  great  African  land  animals  into  Europe  and  India  must 

^  I,  pi.  V.  I  may  refer  to  a  little  map  by  Sokolow  in  his  History  of  the  Steppes  around 
the  Black  Sea,  Pedologie,  1904,  no.  3,  44  pp.  (in  Russian). 

^  Sabba  Stefanescu,  ^Itude  sur  le  terrain  tertiaire  de  Roumanie,  4to,  Lille,  1897, 
178  pp.,  map. 

^  G.  Michailowski,  The  Pliocene  of  some  regions  of  the  West  Caucasus,  Verh.  Min. 
Ges.  St.  Petersb.,  1902,  2.  Ser.,  XL,  pp.  129-177  (in  Russian). 

*  A.  Wenjukow,  Unterpliocene  Siiugethierfauna  in  den  Sanden  Siid-Bessarabiens, 
Verh.  Min.  Ges.  St.  Petersb.,  1901,  2.  Ser.,  XXXIX,  pp.  31,  32. 


CH.  XVIII]  THE  PALAEOCASPIAlSr  655 

have  persisted.  If  we  compare  Pilgrim's  description  of  the  fauna  of  the 
alluvium  of  the  Godavari,  and  of  the  caves  of  Karnul  (on  the  Kistna  where 
the  remains  of  Manis  still  occur),  with  Boule's  account  of  the  stratified 
succession  in  the  Grimaldi  grottos  (Monaco),  we  discover  that  man  was  a 
witness  of  this  extension,  both  in  Europe  and  in  India  ^.  In  Europe  it 
extends  into  the  interglacial  phase  of  the  Chell^en.  Numerous  relics  of 
the  African  fauna  are  still  living  at  the  present  day  in  the  south  of  Europe ; 
in  India  similar  relics  survive  as  the  Aryan  element  in  the  fauna  of  the 
cis-Gangetic  region. 

{k)  We  have  now  arrived  at  the  glacial  epoch.  The  ice  advanced 
farthest  in  the  valley  of  the  Dnjepr,  where  it  came  down  close  to  48°  50'  N. 
The  Volga  represents  a  great  line  of  drainage,  along  which  the  water  from 
the  melting  ice  flowed  towards  the  Caspian.  It  now  becomes  possible 
to  gather  some  information  from  the  existing  hydrographical  relations. 
We  will  take  as  our  guides  the  numerous  and  frequently-mentioned  works 
of  Andrussow,  and  two  other  admirable  works — that  of  Sokolow  on  the 
liman  of  the  Mjus  near  Taganrog,  and  Berg's  monograph  on  the  sea  of 
Aral  2. 

At  the  present  day  the  level  of  the  Black  sea  stands  almost  at  the  zero 
point,  that  of  the  Caspian  at  —25-4  meters,  and  of  the  sea  of  Aral  at 
+  50  meters. 

The  species  of  Cardium  which  characterize  the  Caspian  fauna  (Didacna 
trigonoides,  Adacna  plicatco,  and  others)  must  be  carefully  distinguished 
from  the  allied  species  of  the  Levant  and  the  Pontus.  The  Caspian  species 
are  known  in  a  fossil  state  in  all  three  seas,  but  it  is  only  in  the  Caspian 
that  they  still  survive. 

The  deposits  in  which  they  are  found  occur  at  the  same  height  around 
the  sea  of  Aral  and  the  Caspian,  that  is  4  meters  above  the  level  of  the 
existing  sea  of  Aral,  and  almost  80  meters  above  the  Caspian.  At  the  time 
of  this  high  level  the  two  seas  were  connected  on  the  east  and  south  side 

*  PoMig,  Act.  Nat.  Curios.,  1892,  LVII,  pp.  276  and  337  ;  Pilgrim,  Occurrence  of  Elephas 
antiquus  (Namadicus)  in  the  Godaveri  Alluvium,  Rec.  Geol.  Surv.  India,  1905,  XXXII, 
pp.  199-218  ;  Les  Grottes  de  Grimaldi,  4to,  1906 ;  M.  Boule,  Geologie  et  Paleontologie,  I, 
pp.  75-156. 

N.  Sokolow,  Der  Mius-Liman  und  die  Entstehungszeit  der  Limane,  Verh.  russ.  Min. 
Ges.,  1902,  XL,  pp.  35-112,  maps  ;  L.  Berg,  Der  Aral-See,  Attempt  at  a  pliysico-geogra- 
phical  monograph  (Wissenschaftliche  Resultate  der  Aral-Expedition,  IX),  Izviestija  of  the 
Turkestan  branch  of  the  Imp.  ross.  Geogr.  Obsch.,  1908,  V,  580,  maps  (in  Russian).  The 
figures  giving  the  water-levels  are  according  to  the  more  recent  measurements ;  cf.  I, 
p.  346.  The  sea  of  Aral  fluctuated  in  the  summer  of  1901  from  -f49-8  to  50-28  meters. 
The  literature  of  this  region  begins  with  Herodotus.  Pallas,  with  great  penetration,  gave 
a  correct  interpretation  of  many  of  the  facts  in  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century. 
A  number  of  publications  followed,  among  them,  in  1900,  Bruckner's  studies  on  earlier 
fluctuations.  The  latest  is  probably  that  of  E.  Huntington,  The  Pulse  of  Asia,  8vo, 
London,  1907,  415  pp.,  maps. 


656 


LIFE 


[part  V 


of  the  dividing  plateau  of  Ust-Urt  through  the  Usboi  and  the  Sary- 
Kamysh.  The  Caspian  possessed  some  communication  with  the  Pontus 
through  the  valley  of  the  Manytsh.  The  Pontus,  however,  stood  only 
a  few  meters  above  its  existing  level.  Climatic  influences  produced  a 
general  subsidence  of  the  water-levels.  The  seas  became  separated.  The 
Manytsh  dried  up ;  the  Pontus  continued  to  sink,  probably  to  a  depth  of 
30  or  40  meters  below  its  existing  level.  The  mouths  of  its  tributaries 
became  elongated.  The  Dardanelles  opened  up;  the  salt  water  of  the 
Mediterranean  flowed  in,  raised  the  Pontic  level  to  the  zero  point,  flooded 
the  river  mouths  (limans ;  these  as  they  now  exist  have  been  regarded  as 
a  proof  of  continental  subsidence)  and  killed  the  Caspian  Cardium  fauna  in 
the  Pontus. 

The  Caspian  also  continued  to  sink,  but  the  new  watershed  exposed 
between  it  and  the  sea  of  Aral  formed  an  imperfectly-bounded  drainage 
area  belonging  to  the  Amu-darya,  which  had  no  opportunity  to  hollow  out 
a  normal  bed,  and,  dividing  into  two  main  branches,  discharged  itself  at 
this  time  into  the  Caspian.  The  completely  isolated  sea  of  Aral  began 
to  grow  salt.  Gradually,  however,  the  Amu-darya  diverted  constantly 
increasing  quantities  of  water  into  this  sea,  and  quite  recently,  according 
to  the  Russian  maps  probably  since  the  sixteenth  century  only,  it  has 
poured  the  whole  of  its  waters  into  the  sea  of  Aral.  Subsequently,  the 
Caspian  doubtless  sank  to  a  still  lower  level;  the  sea  of  Aral,  however, 
flUed  up,  became  very  nearly  fresh,  and  is  probably  rising  at  the  present 
day. 

The  deposits  with  Caspian  Cardiums  which  occur  around  the  sea  of 
Azov,  and  extend  as  far  as  the  Dnjestr,  contain  the  remains  of  Elephas 
antiquus  and  Rhinoceros  Mercki,  that  is,  the  same  fauna  which  has  just 
been  mentioned  as  belonging  to  the  interglacial  phase  of  the  Chelleen.  In 
the  caves  of  Grimaldi  it  is  accompanied  by  Hippopotamus,  but  besides  these 
great  African  animals  there  appear  here  and  there  Equus  caballus,  Gervus 
capreoluSy  and  other  Holarctic  species,  including  man.  In  the  Pontus  this 
brackish  Cardium  fauna  was  killed  by  the  inflowing  salt  water  of  the 
Mediterranean,  in  the  sea  of  Aral  it  was  killed  either  by  increasing  salinity, 
or  at  a  later  time  by  the  fresh  water  of  the  Amu.  In  the  Caspian  it  still 
leads  an  isolated  existence.  The  Caspian  Phoca  probably  accompanied  it ; 
there  are  closely  allied  Sarmatian  and  Pontic  seals,  and  it  is  not  necessary  to 
assume  a  northern  origin.  The  fluviatile  fauna  of  that  time  persists,  however, 
in  the  rivers,  and  in  part  also  in  the  seas.  The  sea  of  Aral  was  possibly 
repopulated  with  fishes  from  the  rivers.  The  carp  during  times  of  high 
water-level  even  entered  the  Tshu  and  the  Issyk-kul  through  the  Sir-darya. 
Caspian  Mysides  seem  to  have  travelled  through  the  Volga  to  Yaroslav, 
12  degrees  of  latitude  above  the  existing  mouth.  It  is  now  easy  to  under- 
stand how  it  happens  that  so  many  fishes  are  common  to  the  Danube  and 


CH.  XVIIl] 


DESICCATION 


657 


the  Asiatic  rivers,  and  that,  after  changes  of  this  kind,  the  fauna  of  the 
sea  of  Aral  should  be  poor.  Nevertheless  some  new  endemic  varieties  and 
species  make  their  appearance.  Completely  alien,  and  probably  much 
more  ancient,  are  the  two  species  of  sturgeon  (Scaphirhynchus)  occurring 
in  the  Amu-darya,  a  river  which  has  long  been  inaccessible  to  any  new 
immigration.  The  nearest  relations  of  these  two  species  live  in  North 
America.    The  river  fauna  has  an  independent  history. 

{I)  Sokolow  states  that  the  Loess  with  Elephas  primigenius  is  in  part 
at  least  older  than  the  submergence  of  the  limans,  and  consequently  than 
the  opening  of  the  Dardanelles.  The  aridity  which  gave  rise  to  the  Loess 
at  the  close  of  the  glacial  epoch  has  been  brought  into  connexion  with  the 
sinking  of  the  water-levels.  In  any  case  it  does  not  seem  to  have  come  to 
an  end.  It  manifested  itself  not  only  in  the  Caspian,  but  in  the  Dead  sea, 
lake  Rudolf,  round  about  the  Salt  lake  of  Utah,  on  lake  Titicaca,  and,  in 
short,  on  the  most  remote  lakes  without  outflow.  Recent  French  investiga- 
tions in  the  Sahara  lead  us  to  conjecture  that  even  in  historic  times  the 
drying  up  of  the  Wadys  had  not  progressed  so  far  as  at  present.  It  is  true 
that  in  this  case  the  wind  has  exerted  an  effect  by  choking  up  with  sand. 
From  the  ancient  fluvial  deposits  of  the  Baringo,  stone  implements  are 
recorded,  and  in  the  Kalahari  desert  the  existing  conditions  were  preceded 
by  a  pluvial  epoch  ^.  The  effect  of  drought  on  the  vegetation  and  through 
this  on  the  fauna  must  be  great.  Indeed,  the  Edentates  of  South  America 
have  actually  become  smaller,  so  have  the  Lemurides  of  Madagascar  and 
the  non-placental  mammals  in  Australia.  Wallace  concludes  that  we  are 
living  in  an  impoverished  world. 

The  appearance  of  placental  mammals.  A  great  diversity  of  opinion 
has  been  expressed,  a  prioi^i,  on  the  circumstances  which  accompany  a 
vertical  movement  of  the  strand-line.  Distinguished  investigators  have 
even  put  forward  the  strange  theory  that  sediments  are  only  formed 
'during  subsidences',  i.e.  in  positive  periods.  But  the  circumstances  are 
in  each  case  so  different,  that  only  observation  and  comparison  can  lead  to 
any  result.  Comparison  is  rendered  difficult  by  the  fact  that  it  must 
embrace  very  great  surfaces,  in  order  to  answer  the  first  question  alone, 
that  is,  whether  the  change  in  the  strand-line  is  general  and  eustatic,  or 
connected  with  phenomena  of  gravitation,  or  only  local  and  tectonic. 

There  is  no  dearth  of  sections  across  the  strand  showing  the  marine 
series,  and  affording  some  conclusions  with  regard  to  the  marine  animals ;  an 
instructive  example  belonging  to  the  Rhaetic  period  has  already  been  given ; 
this  presented  positive  movement  with  terrestrial  partings  (II,  p.  260). 
Sections  which  at  the  same  time  show  the  appearance  of  a  fauna  of 

^  Gregory,  The  G-reat  Rift  Valley,  8vo,  1896,  p.  324 ;  S.  Passarge,  Klimatische  Verhalt- 
nisse  Siid-Africas  seit  dem  mittleren  Mesozoicum,  Zeitschr.  Ges.  Erdkunde,  1904,  pp.  176- 
193,  maps. 

SOLLAS  IV  U  U 


658 


LIFE 


[part  V 


terrestrial  mammals  are  rare,  and  many  of  these  only  indicate  an  un- 
essential accident  due  to  intercalation,  and  having  no  connexion  whatever 
with  a  change  of  the  strand-line. 

The  negative  movements  occurring  between  the  Jurassic  and  Cretaceous 
had  already  begun  during  the  Jurassic  period.  The  Jurassic  of  Northern 
Switzerland  affords  the  earliest  evidence  of  the  impoverishment  of  the 
marine  fauna;  the  alternation  of  forest  growth,  freshwater  and  marine 
beds  on  the  island  of  Purbeck  marks  the  oscillations.  Similar  conditions 
are  also  revealed  by  the  Atlantosaurus  beds  of  the  Black  hills  of  Dakota, 
their  erosion  by  flowing  water,  and  the  deposition  of  a  coal-bearing  series 
containing  the  Potomac  flora  in  the  valleys.  The  lithosphere  was  subsiding 
in  fragments  at  places  possibly  remote  from  one  another ;  the  strand 
sinking  by  a  eustatic  movement ;  the  vegetation  advancing  and  struggling 
for  the  possession  of  new  ground. 

In  like  manner  in  North  America  the  brackish  water  Laramie  lake  came 
into  existence  towards  the  close  of  the  Cretaceous,  and  afterwards,  in  the 
basin  of  the  Puerco  river  in  New  Mexico,  a  series  was  exposed,  above  the 
Laramie  and  beneath  the  Wahsatch  stage,  which  contains  the  oldest 
remains  of  placental  mammals  so  far  known. 

It  is  the  same  in  Europe,  where  we  find  the  uppermost  beds  of  the 
Cretaceous,  the  Danian  and  Montian,  restricted  to  a  smaller  area  than 
the  Senonian.  The  marls  of  Meudon,  the  sands  of  Rilly  and  Bracheux,  the 
freshwater  limestone  of  Rilly,  the  lignites  and  plastic  clay,  represent  in  the 
Paris  basin  the  oscillations  of  the  boundary. 

Where  the  Cretaceous  sea  was  of  greater  depth  the  results  took  a 
difierent  form.  In  Istria  and  Dalmatia  we  find  intercalated  in  the  lower- 
most marine  Eocene,  close  to  the  limit  of  the  Cretaceous,  lacustrine  beds 
with  tropical  land  and  freshwater  shells,  Stache's  Liburnian  stage  ^. 

In  the  eastern  Sahara  the  sea  was  still  deeper ;  and  the  marine  Eocene 
rests  upon  marine  Cretaceous. 

In  New  Mexico  mammalian  remains  occur  in  the  Puerco  stage,  the 
lowermost  part  of  the  Eocene,  and  some  hundreds  of  feet  higher  on  a 
second  horizon,  the  Torrejon  stage.  They  were  first  made  known  by 
Cope ;  the  great  progress  which  has  since  been  made  in  their  investigation 
we  owe  to  Wortman  and  Matthew  2.    No  species  is  common  to  both  stages, 

^  G.  Stache,  in  F.  Sandberger,  Land-  und  Susswasser-Conchylien  der  Vorzeit,  4to, 
Wiesbaden,  1870-1875,  pp.  120-139  ;  and  Die  Liburnisclie  Stufe,  I,  Abb.  k.  k.  geol. 
Keicbsanst.,  1889,  XIII,  170  pp.,  map. 

^  E.  D.  Cope,  Synopsis  of  the  Vertebrate-Fauna  of  the  Puerco  Series,  Trans.  Am.  Phil. 
Soc.  Philadelphia,  1890,  new  ser.,  XVI,  pp.  298-360 ;  J.  L.  Wortman,  Ganodonta  and 
their  Relationship  to  the  Edentata,  Bull.  Am.  Mus.  Nat.  Hist,  New  York,  1897,  IX, 
pp.  59-110  ;  W.  D.  Matthew,  Revision  of  the  Puerco-Fauna,  tom.  cit.,  pp.  259-323  ; 
Torrejon  has  also  been  found  in  Montana  ;  E.  Douglass,  Cretaceous  and  Lower  Tertiary 
Section  in  South  Central  Montana,  Proc.  Am.  Phil.  Soc,  1902,  XLI,  pp.  207-224. 


CH.  XVIIl] 


PUEECO  AND  TOBEEJON 


659 


but  the  degree  of  general  development  is  similar.  Most  of  the  animals  are 
small;  the  predominance  of  arboreal  animals  is  remarkable.  The  Multi- 
tuberculata  (Allotheria)  belong  to  the  Monotremes  or  Marsupials,  and  are 
of  Mesozoic  origin.  The  Primates  (Lemurides),  the  creodont  Carnivora, 
Rodents  (?)  and  Ungulates  are  represented  by  primitive  forms,  but  little 
differentiated,  and  the  toes  of  the  Ungulates  are  still  divided,  but  besides 
these  animals  the  family  of  the  Ganodonts  makes  its  appearance,  and 
represents  the  Edentates,  which  have  so  far  overtaken  the  other  placentals 
in  specialization  that  Wortman  supposes  they  must  have  had  Mesozoic 
^incestors. 

At  Cernay,  not  far  from  Rheims,  Lemoine  has  discovered  the  Torrejon 
stage  above  the  limestone  of  Rilly.  The  Multituberculata  occur  here  also, 
and  as  in  New  Mexico  are  associated  not  only  with  Lemurids,  Carnivores, 
^nd  Ungulates,  showing  the  same  low  degree  of  differentiation,  but  also 
with  great  ostrich-like  birds. 

In  New  Mexico  the  layers  containing  these  faunas  are  intercalated  in 
the  midst  of  thick  sediments ;  Torrejon  in  particular  is  a  single  layer  of 
very  inconsiderable  thickness.  Priem  describes  the  series  near  Rheims  as 
^in  alternation  of  litoral  beds  in  which  lluviatile  fishes,  such  as  Amia  and 
Lepidosteus  are  associated  with  Silurides  and  Labrides.  To  the  same 
^alternation  of  beds  belongs  the  rich  flora  of  Suzanne  which  indicates 
a  warmer  climate^. 

From  the  preceding  we  perceive  first,  that  the  oldest  known  placental 
fauna  is  associated  with  a  Mesozoic  residuum,  and,  as  is  shown  by  the 
<j[anodonts,  does  not  include  the  oldest  placentals ;  secondly,  that  we  are 
dealing  with  forms  accidentally  washed  in  at  times  of  high  water,  possibly 
swept  out  of  a  forest,  a  view  supported  by  the  occurrence  in  France  of 
beds  with  driftwood  and  Unios ;  and  last,  that  not  only  the  correspondence 
of  the  land  faunas,  but  the  presence,  in  France  in  particular,  of  the  genera 
Amia  and  Lepidosteus  which  occur  in  America  both  as  Tertiary  fossils  and 
as  living  forms,  points  to  a  connexion  between  the  continents. 

The  most  instructive  fact,  however,  is  the  close  similarity  in  the 
differentiation  and  the  systematic  subdivision  of  the  faunas  on  this  ancient 
common  continent.    In  America,  as  in  Europe,  the  Coryphodon  fauna  is  the 

^  Lemoine,  ^Itude  d'ensemble  sur  les  dents  des  mammiferes  fossiles  des  environs  de 
Reims,  Bull.  Soc.  geol.  de  France,  1891,  3«  ser.,  XIX,  pp.  263-294,  et  passim ;  F.  Priem, 
Poissons  de  I'J^ocene  inferieur  des  environs  de  Reims,  op.  cit.,  1901,  4®  ser.,  I,  pp.  477- 
504  ;  Saporta,  Prodrome  d'une  flore  fossile  des  Travertins  anciens  de  Sezanne,  Mem.,  op. 
cit.,  2®  ser.,  VIII,  pp.  289-435,  and  in  particular  his  Le  Monde  des  Plantes,  8vo,  Paris, 
1879,  p.  213  et  seq.  ;  M.  Leriche,  Sur  I'age  des  *  Sables  a  Unio  et  Teredines  '  des  environs 
d'J^pernay  et  sur  la  signification  du  terme  Sparnacien,  Bull.,  op.  cit.,  1904,  4^  ser.,  IV, 
pp.  815-817.  Riitimeyer  has  also  discovered  traces  of  the  Torrejon  stage  in  the  bone  earth 
of  Egerkingen  ;  here  Calamodon  probably  represents  the  Edentates  (Verb,  naturf.  Ges. 
Basel,  1890,  IX,  34  pp.). 

U  u  2 


660 


LIFE 


[part  V 


next  to  occupy  the  Eocene  land.  The  close  similarity  reveals  itself  even  in 
these  fleeting  glimpses — all  that  is  granted  to  us — into  the  then  prevailing 
conditions.  In  Patagonia  we  shall  meet  some  confirmatory  evidence  on 
this  point. 

It  is  quite  possible  that  eustatic  movements  have  their  effect  upon  the 
world  of  life,  either  by  promoting  terripetal  migrations,  or,  in  the  opposite 
direction,  by  promoting  a  return  migration ;  if  they  are  rapid  they  may^ 
indeed,  cause  the  destruction  of  the  whole  litoral  zone,  but  actual  observa- 
tions fail  us  on  this  point,  and  we  cannot  venture  beyond  the  data  furnished 
by  Biology. 

Places  of  refuge.  The  examples  cited  above,  especially  those  illustrating 
the  contrast  between  the  processes  taking  place  on  the  stable  strand,  and 
those  affecting  the  Palaeocaspian  sea,  would  certainly  invite  us  to  a  closer 
examination  of  the  question  as  to  how  far  we  must  distinguish  between 
active  and  passive  changes.  We  cannot^  however,  embark  upon  such  an 
inquiry,  and  must  adhere  to  the  chorographic  method,  nor  can  we  enter 
into  the  question  to  what  extent  natural  selection,  hybridization,  and 
heredity  may  have  been  concerned  in  the  formation  of  the  new  species  and 
genera  which  have  come  under  our  notice. 

If,  however,  we  consider  carefully  the  actual  surface  of  the  earth,  we 
shall  perceive  that  there  are  tracts  in  which  terrestrial  forms  of  life  have 
been  protected  from  the  action  of  such  physical  changes  as  transgressions 
and  mountain  building,  for  a  very  long  period.  There  are  regions  which 
since  the  time  of  the  great  disturbances  of  the  upper  Carboniferous  have 
been  practically  untouched  by  such  movements,  and  the  history  of  these — 
extending  over  a  very  long  period,  as  a  rule  from  the  lower  Gondwana 
down  to  the  present  day — is  solely  represented  by  the  remains  of  successive 
land  floras;  marine  sediments  are  completely  absent.  It  is  true  that 
in  these  places  life  was  not  exempt  from  the  influence  of  climatic  changes, 
nor  from  economic  disturbances  produced  by  the  immigration  of  invading 
organisms^  nor  even  from  the  effects  of  complete  subsidence  beneath  the 
sea ;  nevertheless  floras  followed  one  upon  another  in  successive  develop- 
ment,, and  the  living  world  was  less  molested  in  these  places  than  elsewhere : 
we  shall  term  them  therefore  asylums. 

From  these  places,  after  times  of  great  disturbance,  new  colonies  spread 
over  the  land,  and  for  this  reason  we  have  compared  them,  in  an  earlier 
passage,  to  Linnaeus'  island  of  Paradise  (III,  p.  149). 

We  distinguish  in  general  four  of  these  asylums.    These  are : 

1.  Laurentia^  including  the  boundary  of  the  northernmost  part  of  the 
Atlantic  Ocean. 

2.  Angara  land,  namely  the  tableland  of  East  Siberia,  up  to  the  Arctic 
transgressions ;  possibly,  also,  parts  of  China. 

3.  Gomhrdna  land  (Arch-Amazonia  +  Arch-Helenis  of  Ihering ;  South. 


CH.  XVIIl] 


FOUK  ASYLUMS 


661 


Atlantis  +  Gondwana  land  of  Arldt),^  i.  e.  the  Indian  peninsula,  Madagascar, 
Africa,  from  the  south  border  of  the  Karoo  to  the  Sahara,  and  in  the  east  to 
Sinai  and  beyond,  and  in  addition  great  parts  of  Brazil  and  Argentina. 
4.  Antarctis  with  Australia  and  Patagonia. 

With  a  few  exceptions  these  regions  have  not  been  affected  by  folding 
movements  since  the  close  of  the  Carboniferous  period ;  in  the  northern 
hemisphere  they  have  formed  the  forelands  or  backlands  to  these  move- 
ments. It  is  in  these  regions  that  we  might  be  inclined  to  see  indications 
of  the  permanence  of  continents,  if  it  were  not  that  three  of  them  present 
obvious  signs  of  having  been  broken  up.  The  regions  which  were  laid  dry 
by  the  retreat  of  the  Cretaceous,  such  as  the  Sahara,  the  Caspian,  and  the 
Laramie  lake,  belong  to  the  periphery  of  such  asylums  and  sometimes 
unite  them  or  their  fragments  into  larger  continents.  All  the  more  recent 
mountain  chains  lie  outside  these  asylums,  but  not  all  lie  outside  the 
region  of  the  Gondwana  flora.  The  Antarctic  Andes  are  not  included  in 
Antarctis. 

1.  Laurentia.  In  North  America  the  typical  Gondwana  flora  has  not 
yet  been  discovered.  In  that  part  known  as  Laurentia,  the  upper  Carboni- 
ferous is  followed,  as  in  Germany,  by  the  Permian  Walchia-flora.  The 
Newark-flora  of  the  Keuper  does  not  occur  in  Laurentia,  but  on  the  down- 
thrown  eastern  side  of  the  Appalachians,  and  this  is  also  true  of  the 
Potomac-flora  (Wealden)  in  Maryland.  Some  of  its  characteristic  species 
continue  to  make  their  appearance  as  far  as  Texas,  or  again  in  West 
Canada,  and  probably  as  far  to  the  north  as  cape  Lisburne.  They  may 
perhaps  indicate  the  margin  of  the  Laurentian  asylum.  Many  times  in 
succession  during  the  Cretaceous  epoch  this  margin  was  submerged  beneath 
the  sea,  but  the  centre  has  remained  an  asylum  even  down  to  the  present 
day.  There,  the  faunas  of  land  and  fresh  water  succeed  each  other  in  an 
unbroken  series.  Its  history,  however,  differs  in  two  respects  from  that  of 
Europe.  In  the  first  place  it  has  not  experienced  the  repeated  invasions 
of  the  sea  which  render  the  European  systems  so  diversified  and  so  instructive. 
Consequently,  Lepidosteus,  Amia,  and  the  folded  Unios  were  able  to 
ascend  from  the  Tertiary  lakes  into  the  existing  rivers  of  North  America ; 
in  Europe  they  disappear  in  the  middle  Tertiary.  In  the  second  place,  the 
principal  lines  of  the  configuration  strike  in  a  meridional  direction,  so  that 
climatic  changes  are  manifested  in  a  simple  manner,  and  displacements  of 
the  faunas  from  and  towards  the  Pole  can  be  more  clearly  followed. 

The  oldest  Tertiary  sediments,  Puerco,  Torrejon,  and  W^ahsatch  (Cory- 
phodon  fauna)  belong  to  the  periphery  of  the  Laurentian  asylum. 

The  Torrejon  stage  and  the  Coryphodon  fauna  are  repeated  in  France, 

^  H.  von  Ihering,  Archhelenis  und  Archinotis,  gesammelte  Beitrage  zur  Geschichte  der 
neotropischen  Region,  8vo,  Leipzig,  1907 ;  T.  Arldt,  Entwicklung  der  Kontinente  und 
ihrer  Lebewelt,  8vo,  Leipzig,  1907. 


LIFE 


[part  V 


and  the  succeeding  faunas  also  exhibit  on  both  sides  of  the  Ocean  many 
connecting  links  ;  towards  the  Miocene  these  become  rarer. 

These  correspondences  point  to  a  continuous  continent  in  the  north. 
The  fact  that  Amia  and  Lepidosteus  occur  in  the  European  Tertiary  alone 
renders  it  altogether  improbable  that  the  only  communication  which  served 
for  all  these  rich  faunas  lay  across  Bering  sea.  This  route  could  only  have 
been  followed  by  immigrating  species  of  Asiatic  type  during  glacial  or  post- 
glacial times. 

In  regard  to  communication  across  the  North  Atlantic  we  are  in  possession 
of  the  following  facts  :  Extending  far  from  the  south,  almost  to  lat.  42°  N., 
a  marine  selvage  (IV,  p.  75,  fig.  11)  extends  along  the  western  coast,  which 
shows  that  during  the  Tertiary  aera  the  continent  did  not  extend  over  this 
region  into  the  existing  sea.  From  lat.  42°  N.  towards  the  north  the  coasts 
are  bare.  On  the  island  of  Disko,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  trifling 
intercalations  representing  the  Senonian  sea,  terrestrial  floras  succeed  each 
other  from  the  lower  Cretaceous  to  the  Tertiary,  almost  as  though  this  were 
an  asylum.  The  coast  around  cape  Farewell  is  bare.  At  the  beginning  of 
the  Miocene  epoch  a  bridge  of  basaltic  flows  connected  this  coast  with 
Iceland,  the  Faeroes  and  Scotland  ^.  It  was  covered  with  forest,  the  leaves 
of  which  are  preserved  in  the  associated  tufis. 

From  this  point  onwards  the  situation  is  changed. 

On  the  peninsula  of  Tjornes  (north  Iceland)  the  plant-bearing  series  is 
underlain  by  a  marine  bed,  which  is  correlated  with  the  English  Crag  2. 
On  the  coast  of  Greenland,  in  lat.  69°  24'  N.  and  also  near  lat.  75°  N., 
Miocene  deposits  occur  which  are  perhaps  parts  of  a  surrounding  border. 
They  are  repeated  in  Spitzbergen,  intercalated  between  plant-bearing  beds, 
and  beneath  this  series  lies  a  similar  alternation  of  marine  and  plant-bearing 
beds  but  of  Jurassic  age.  A  precisely  similar  alternation  also  occurs  in  the 
Carboniferous,  and  marks  repeated  shallow-water  transgressions. 

Finally  there  follow  in  the  whole  region  the  circumpolar,  post-glacial 
transgressions  under  which  Iceland  was  also  submerged. 

In  the  North,  Eocene  marine  deposits  are  entirely  absent. 

Thus  to  the  north  of  Iceland  there  did  probably  exist  a  temporary 
communication  which  was  frequently  interrupted  by  transgressions.  Since 
the  time  of  the  Eocene  no  communication  has  taken  place  across  the  Ocean 
south  of  lat.  42°  N.  in  the  west,  and  south  of  lat.  52°  N.  in  the  east,  though 
on  this  side  islands  of  considerable  size  may  have  lain  near  the  periphery. 
In  the  south  of  England  and  in  Belgium  the  lowermost  Eocene  (Thanetian) 
is  represented  both  by  marine  and  plant-bearing  beds. 

*  T.  Thoroddsen,  Hypotesen  om  en  postglacial  Landbro  over  Island  og  FaercJerae  set  fra 
en  geologisk  Synspunkt,  Ymer,  1904,  pp.  392-399. 

»  II,  p.  67 ;  Nathorst,  Zeitschr.  deutsch.  geol.  Ges.,  1896,  XLVIII,  pp.  983-986 ; 
H.  Pjeturss,  Zeitschr.  Ges.  Erdk..  1908.  p.  455  et  seq. 


CH.  XVIIl] 


ASYLUMS 


663 


These  results  only  give  us  limits,  and  it  is  possible  that  Iceland  was 
separated  from  the  continent  before  the  existence  of  its  basalt  bridge,  as 
this  bridge  itself  seems  to  indicate.  The  whole  of  Laurentia,  however, 
is  evidently  a  natural  unit,  a  foreland  to  the  United  States  chain  as 
well  as  to  the  Appalachians,  with  a  flat  Palaeozoic  belt,  only  submerged 
by  later  seas  on  its  margin,  and  never  folded  since  the  Cambrian 
epoch.  It  possibly  also  formed,  in  the  western  Hebrides,  a  Caledonian 
foreland.  At  the  same  time,  in  the  west  as  in  the  east,  we  see  the 
subsiding  rias  coasts  of  the  western  Altaides,  which  once  extended  across 
the  Ocean,  representing  the  remains  of  a  second  natural  unit.  Both  are 
broken  up. 

2.  Angara  land  (III,  p.  19).  This  asylum  has  not  been  reduced  to 
fragments.  The  Lena  and  Yenisei  form  its  boundary  for  long  stretches ; 
towards  the  south  it  comprises  the  amphitheatre  of  Irkutsk  ;  towards  the 
north  the  ancient  tableland  sinks  gradually  beneath  the  northern  trans- 
gressions. On  all  the  three  great  rivers  which  flow  from  the  amphitheatre 
to  the  Yenisei — the  Angara,  the  Stony,  and  the  Lower  Tunguska — we  meet 
with  the  Tungusian  or  lower  Gondwana  flora;  Jurassic  and  Tertiary 
floras  are  known  at  many  localities,  but  nowhere  a  marine  deposit  since  the 
time  of  the  lower  Palaeozoic  beds,  which  have  remained  horizontal.  Here 
we  may  expect  great  discoveries  of  fossil  land-animals. 

3.  Gondwdna  land  (I,  p.  387;  IV,  p.  471).  This  vast  continent  extended 
from  the  east  side  of  India  into  the  west  of  Brazil,  and  to  the  Argentine 
Cordilleras.  Only  in  its  westernmost  part  was  it  involved  in  folding.  Up 
to  the  most  remote  points,  on  the  east  and  on  the  west,  we  find  representa- 
tives of  the  different  stages  of  the  Gondwana  flora,  and  from  India  to  South 
America  we  meet  with  reptiles  which  have  reached  a  similar  level  of  develop- 
ment. With  the  exception  of  certain  encroachments  of  the  upper  Cretaceous, 
no  sea  has  extended  over  this  continent,  now  broken  into  fragments,  since 
the  Carboniferous  period. 

The  Gondwana  flora  also  extended,  however,  into  the  region  of  the  Tethys, 
though  perhaps  it  occurred  only  in  islands  of  that  sea.  In  Kashmir  it 
makes  its  appearance  between  upper  Palaeozoic  beds,  and  on  the  pass  of 
Bamian,  in  the  heart  of  the  Hindu-Kush,  as  the  base  of  the  Mesozoic  series ; 
it  is  also  continued,  in  some  places,  as  far  as  east  Chorasan.  It  has  been 
discovered  even  on  the  Dwina  in  North  Russia,  where  it  is  associated  with 
similar  reptiles  to  those  found  in  the  south,  and  forms  perhaps  a  colony 
derived  either  from  Angara  land  or  Gondwana  land.  None  of  these  last- 
mentioned  localities,  extending  from  Kashmir  to  the  Dwina,  can  be  taken 
into  account  when  considering  asylums,  since  they  were  all  subsequently 
exposed  to  inundations. 

Gondwana  land  has  been  so  frequently  discussed  in  this  work  that  we 
will  now  confine  ourselves  to  the  consideration  of  a  particular  question, 


664 


LIFE 


[part  V 


namely  the  manner  in  which  this  continent  was  broken  into  by  the 
Atlantic  Ocean  (I,  p.  288). 

The  Loire,  the  Gironde,  the  Tagus,  and  the  Guadalquivir  present  in 
the  lower  part  of  their  course  so  complete  a  resemblance  to  ordinary  bays 
of  the  sea,  that  notwithstanding  the  occurrence  of  granite  on  the  Berlengas 
(off  the  coast  of  Estremadura)  the  supposition  of  continuity  with,  a  much 
vaster  continent  situated  in  the  existing  Atlantic  region  can  hardly  be 
entertained.  Santa  Maria,  in  the  Azores,  Madeira  and  Porto  Santo  are 
engirdled  by  the  second  Mediterranean  stage ;  during  the  deposition  of  this 
stage  no  continuous  continent  existed  here,  and  if  any  settlement  of  these 
islands  took  place  from  Europe  it  must  have  occurred  previously,  unless  it 
were  caused  by  drift  ^. 

From  lat.  42°  N.  towards  the  south,  as  we  have  seen  above,  junction  with 
an  Atlantic  continent  is  excluded  during  the  Tertiary  aera.  This  probably 
holds  good  for  the  region  extending  to  the  Orinoco.  Although  in  the  west  of 
the  European  Mediterranean  the  Germanic  facies  of  the  Trias  is  dominant, 
and  thus  some  doubt  may  arise  as  to  its  connexion  with  the  Trias  of  Mexico, 
yet  the  Mexican  Alamitos  stage  throughout  its  course  from  the  Rio  Grande 
to  the  Durango  completely  corresponds  with  the  European  Kimeridge. 
The  Gosau  facies  of  the  upper  Cretaceous,  with  its  Actaeonellas  and 
Hippurites,  occurs  in  an  unmistakable  manner  in  Jamaica  and  North 
Coahuila  (in  the  latter  beneath  the  Laramie  beds).  In  the  case  of  the 
Eocene  it  would  be  more  difficult  to  establish  correspondence.  We  may, 
however,  correlate  the  Lepidocyclina  stage  of  Florida,  Nicaragua,  and 
Panama  with  the  first  Mediterranean  stage  (Brito  or  Vicksburg  stage). 
About  this  time  communication  with  the  Pacific  was  open  both  across 
lake  Nicaragua  and  across  Panama  (here  at  a  later  time  also).  We  must 
thus  assume  that  the  Tethys,  during  at  least  a  part  of  its  existence,  extended 
across  the  existing  Atlantic  Ocean. 

It  is  more  difficult  to  follow  the  situation  in  the  south. 

After  a  close  examination  of  all  the  facts  connected  with  the  distribu- 
tion of  the  African  flora,  Engler  concludes  that  they  would  be  best  explained 
if  we  could  establish  the  existence  of  fairly  large  islands  or  a  continuous 
tract  of  land  between  the  north  of  Brazil,  south-east  of  the  estuary  of  the 
Amazon,  and  the  bight  of  Biafra^.    Let  us  examine  this  conclusion. 

*  J.  C.  Berkeley  Cotter,  Nota  cle  alg.  fosseis  terciar.  do  Archip.  da  Madeira,  Commun. 
da  Commiss.  d.  Trab.  geol.  de  Portugal,  1888-1892,  II,  pp.  232-254 ;  and  Nota  de  alg. 
fosseis  terciar.  da  Ilha  de  S.  Maria  no  Archip.  d.  A9ores,  torn,  cit.,  pp.  255-287.  In 
Vol.  I,  p.  302,  misled  by  the  resemblance  of  the  Turitellae  of  St.  Gallen,  I  correlated  the 
Swiss  marine  molasse,  the  type  of  the  Helvetian,  with  the  horizon  of  Gauderndorf  in  the 
first  Mediterranean  stage.  It  corresponds  to  the  horizon  of  Grund  at  the  base  of  the 
second  Mediterranean  stage.  Thus  what  has  been  said  in  I,  p.  288  on  the  border  of 
Atlantic  islands  needs  correction. 

-  A.  A.  Engler,  Floristische  Verwandtschaften  zwischen  dem  tropischen  Africa  und 


CH.  XVIIl] 


ATLANTIC  SUBSIDENCES 


665 


Broadly  speaking,  the  mouth  of  the  Orinoco  may  be  taken  as  the  northern 
boundary  of  the  South  American  part  of  Gondwana  land,  and  the  mouth 
of  the  La  Plata  or  cape  Corrientes  as  its  southern  boundary. 

The  coasts  of  Guiana  are  little  known,  and  probably  consist  only  of  the 
ancient  rocks  of  the  interior.  They  are  succeeded  by  the  broad  alluvial 
plains  of  the  Amazon.  From  Para  (lat.  i°  S.)  to  Gaho  Frio,  i.e.  through 
22  degrees  of  latitude,  patches  of  the  upper  Cretaceous  transgression 
accompany  the  shore.  In  some  places  they  also  extend  further  inland,  and 
must  probably  be  regarded,  not  as  a  selvage,  but  as  the  remains  of  a  sheet. 
On  the  Abrolhos  islands  (lat.  18°  S.)  Derby  mentions  a  similar  patch  of 
sediments,  associated  with  basic  rocks,  which  also  occur  on  the  mainland  ^. 
Similar  relations  doubtless  prevail  as  far  as  the  La  Plata. 

These  facts  correspond  with  those  observed  on  the  border  of  the  ancient 
Archaean  plateau,  a  fragment  of  the  great  asylum.  They  also  correspond 
completely  with  those  observed  on  the  border  which  Ihering  supposes  to 
adjoin  his  downthrown  continent  of  Arch-Helenis  from  the  Amazon  to  the 
La  Plata.  No  Tertiary  border  is  present ;  Ihering  mentions  a  post-Tertiary 
litoral  zone  which  extends  from  San  Paolo  towards  the  south  ^. 

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  east  side  of  the  Ocean.  As  far  as  the  Wady 
Draa  no  junction  with  a  continent  is  to  be  expected.  The  region  extending 
to  cape  Bojador  is  little  known.  In  Rio  de  Oro  ancient  rocks  and 
Palaeozoic  beds  advance  to  the  sea.  From  lat.  23°  N.  onwards  a  bed  with 
Ostrea  and  Tellina  is  mentioned  as  occurring,  and  further  south,  according 
to  the  last  communication  which  I  owe  to  the  kindness  of  M.  Chudeau, 
a  broad  bay  opens  up ;  it  extends  far  into  the  interior  and  also  towards  the 
south  as  far  as  the  mouth  of  the  Senegal  and  beyond.  M.  Chudeau  inquires 
whether  this  bay  may  not  correspond  with  the  Marginella  beds  of  Tim- 
buctu.  We  may  assume  that  the  coast  from  lat.  23°  N.  onwards  to  at  least 
lat.  15°  N.  belongs  to  the  middle  Tertiary  inland  sea  which  extended  from 
this  point  towards  Central  Africa  (IV,  p.  89). 

At  cape  Verd  volcanic  rock  rises  out  of  recent  alluvial  land ;  the  islands 
of  the  same  name  are  probably  formed  by  a  continuation  of  these  rocks. 
On  one  of  them  ancient  rocks  are  said  to  occur,  and  such  rocks  are  widely 

America,  sowie  liber  die  Annahme  eines  versunkenen  brasilianisch-aethiopischen  Conti- 
nentes,  Sitzb.  k.  preuss.  Akad.  Wiss.  Berlin,  1905,  pp.  180-231,  in  particular  pp.  229. 

^  0.  Derby,  Sedimentary  Belt  of  the  Coast  of  Brazil,  Am.  Journ.  Geol.,  1907,  XV, 
pp.  218-237.  Tertiary  beds  are  also  mentioned,  but  no  fossils  are  known  with  certainty. 
South  of  Bahia,  brackish  beds  with  plant-remains  and  Dinosaurs  rest  upon  limestone 
with  Neithea ;  this  should  indicate  the  negative  phase  at  the  close  of  the  Cretaceous, 
which  may  be  recognized  into  the  Argentine  Andes.  Thus  it  is  doubtful  whether  the 
Abrolhos  must  be  included  among  volcanic  islands. 

^  H.  V.  Ihering,  Les  mollusques  fossiles  du  Tertiaire  et  du  Cretace  superieur  de 
I'Argentine,  An.  Mus.  Nac.  Buenos  Ayres,  1907,  XIV,  611  pp.,  in  particular  p.  483. 


666 


LIFE 


[part  V 


distributed  over  this  part  of  the  mainland.  It  is  here,  then,  near  cape 
Verd,  that  a  possible  junction  first  makes  its  appearance. 

The  following  tract  of  coast  as  far  as  Cameroon  belongs  to  that  fragment 
of  the  ancient  crust  which  was  probably  separated  from  Africa  during  the 
upper  Cretaceous  period  or  even  later.  In  Cameroon,  Eocene,  as  well  as 
Cretaceous,  has  been  met  with  ^.  The  line  of  volcanos  which  extends  to 
Anno  Bom  indicates  the  continuation  of  the  continental  structure  beneath 
the  Ocean.  From  this  point  (lat.  4°  N.)  onwards  there  is  unfortunately 
a  dearth  of  observations  nearly  as  far  as  Landana  (lat.  5°  S.),  and  then,  as 
far  as  lat.  16°  S.,  there  follows  a  border  of  upper  Cretaceous  and  Tertiary 
(chiefly  with  Lepidocyclina)  which  so  far  has  been  determined  at  only 
a  few  localities^.  In  German  south-west  Africa  the  coasts  appear  to 
be  bare  rock. 

These  data,  although  fragmentary,  are  yet  sufficient  to  show  that  a 
possible  continental  junction  may  be  sought  between  lats.  15°  and  4°  N., 
that  is,  in  the  bight  of  Biafra  and  to  the  north  of  it,  but  the  possibility  of 
its  existence  as  far  as  lat.  5°  S.  is  not  excluded.  To  the  south  of  lat.  16°  S. 
the  situation  is  still  obscure.  These  facts  show  that  it  is  the  two  parts  of 
South  America  and  Africa  at  present  projecting  farthest  into  the  Ocean 
which  afford  the  strongest  suggestion  of  having  been  originally  connected. 

The  correspondence  of  the  se  results  with  those  obtained  by  Engler  is 
striking.  ScharfF  also  places  the  connecting  land  to  the  south  of  the 
Atlantic  groups  of  islands^.  Ihering  places  the  north  boundary  of  his 
downthrown  continent  of  Arch-Helenis  remarkably  far  to  the  south. 
Kobelt,  basing  his  views  on  the  land  snails,  has  discovered  many  African 
characters  in  the  Azores;  at  the  same  time  the  European  Miocene  is 
generally  represented  on  the  islands,  and  for  this  reason  he  looks  for  the 
connexion  further  to  the  north  It  is  possible  that  at  some  future  time 
some  significance  will  be  found  in  the  fact  that  the  girdle  which  occurs 

'  IV,  p.  92.  Chautard  conjectures  that  the  separation  continued  into  the  Eocene,  and 
points  to  the  Eocene  of  Cameroon  ;  Materiel  pour  la  geologie  et  la  mineralogie  de 
I'Afrique  occidentale  fran9aise,  I,  Gorea,  1906,  8vo,  15  pp. 

2  P.  Choffat,  Contribution  a  la  connaissance  geologique  des  Colonies  portugaises  de 
I'Afrique,  II,  Nouvelles  donnees  sur  la  zone  littorale  d'Angola,  Commission  geologique 
du  Portugal,  4to,  1905,  78  pp.  There  is  at  my  disposal  no  evidence  on  the  existence  of 
ancient  mainland  from  Tristan  d'Acunha.  The  island  is  volcanic ;  a  loose  block  of 
gneiss  of  no  importance  ;  E.  H.  L.  Schwarz,  The  Rocks  of  Tristan  dAcunha,  with 
their  bearing  on  the  question  of  the  permanence  of  Ocean  basins ;  Trans.  S.  African 
Phil.  Soc,  1905,  XVI,  pp.  9-51  ;  and  The  former  land-connexion  between  Africa  and 
South  America,  Journ.  Geol.  Chicago,  1906,  XIV,  pp.  81-90. 

^  R.  F.  Scharff,  Some  Remarks  on  the  Atlantis  Problem,  Proc.  Roy.  Irish  Acad.,  1903, 
XXIV,  B,  pp.  268-302,  in  particular  p.  279. 

*  W.  Kobelt,  Verhiiltniss  der  europaischen  Landmollusken-Fauna  zur  west-indischen 
und  centralamerikanischen,  Nachrichtenblatt  d.  deutsch.  Malakoz.  Ges.,  1887,  pp.  145- 
148. 


CH.  xviii]        ANTAKCTIS  AS  AN  ASYLUM 


667 


around  some  of  these  islands  belongs  to  so  late  a  period  as  the  second 
Mediterranean. 

4.  Antarctis.  That  Australia  and  Patagonia  were  once  connected  by 
mainland  has  long  been  repeatedly  asserted  by  biologists.  Hedley,  as  the 
result  of  a  detailed  investigation,  is  led  to  assume  the  past  existence  of 
a  region  with  a  mild  climate,  extending  across  the  south  of  Tierra  Fuego 
to  Tasmania.  Osborn  has  even  attempted  a  restoration  based  on  the 
1000-fathom  isobaths^.  These  speculations  have  received  support  from 
palaeontological  discoveries,  but  the  extensive  breaking-up  of  the  Polar 
regions  and  our  slight  knowledge  of  them  render  it  difficult  for  the  geologist 
to  arrive  at  any  decided  opinion  on  this  point. 

(a)  Australia  (II,  p.  149;  IV,  p.  291).  The  eastern  part  of  the  con- 
tinent presents  the  same  succession  of  floras  as  that  which  characterizes  the 
asylums  from  the  time  of  the  lower  Gondwana  onwards  ;  and  the  glacial 
phenomena  which  accompany  the  beginning  of  this  series  in  India  and  South 
Africa  are  also  met  with  on  this  side  of  the  continent ;  towards  the  west, 
however,  marine  transgressions  set  in.  The  granites  of  the  Australian 
Cordillera  cross  Torres  Strait  into  the  south  of  New  Guinea,  and  Australian 
Unios  inhabit  the  Fly  river.  The  east  coast  is  bare  rock  and  has  been  formed 
by  a  series  of  longitudinal  faults  of  comparatively  recent  date ;  the  sea  on 
the  east  may  be  regarded  as  a  recent  subsidence.  The  south  coast  is  accom- 
panied by  Tertiary  sediments  and  is  probably  a  slightly  older  fracture. 

Tasmania  is  a  southerly  continuation  of  Australia.  The  recent  geological 
observations  made  in  Auckland  and  the  adjacent  islands  reveal  continental 
conditions  and  an  original  connexion  with  the  south,  possibly  also  with  the 
south-west  of  New  Zealand,  which  together  with  Stewart  island  is  distin- 
guished from  the  New  Zealand  mountains  by  a  divergent  structure  ^.  This 
was  possibly  the  route  by  which  the  Tertiary  giant  penguins  (Palaeeudyptes) 
reached  Otago^.  They  show,  along  with  the  great  Tertiary  penguins  of 
Seymour  island,  both  the  original  connexion  of  these  remote  points,  and  the 
age  at  which  these  exclusively  Antarctic  animals  existed*.  The  horned 
tortoise,  Miolania,  an  inhabitant  of  land  or  marshes,  occurs  on  the  little 
island  of  Lord  Howe,  as  well  as  in  recent  sediments  in  Queensland,  and  an 
allied  species  is  found  in  the  older  sandstones  of  Patagonia  ^. 

^  C.  Hedley,  Considerations  on  the  Surviving  Refugees  in  Austral  Lands  of  Ancient 
Antarctic  Life,  Proc.  R.  Soc.  N.S.W.,  1895,  pp.  197-206,  in  particular  p.  203 ;  Osborn, 
Correlation  between  Tertiary  Mammal  Horizons  of  Europe  and  America,  Ann.  Acad.  Sci. 
New  York,  1900-1901,  XIII,  pp.  1-72,  in  particular  p.  52. 

2  See  addendum  at  foot  of  p.  327  (IV). 

3  Hector,  Quart.  Journ.  Geol.  Soc,  1876,  XXXII,  p.  53. 

4  Wiman,  Bull.  Geol.  Inst.  Upsala,  1905,  VI,  pp.  247-252. 

^  The  existing  accounts  are  collected  in  A.  Smith-Woodward,  Some  Extinct  Reptiles 
from  Patagonia,  Proc.  Zool.  Soc,  1901,  new  ser.,  I,  pp.  169-184  (II,  p.  162  ;  Megalania 
was  originally  regarded  as  a  Lacerta). 


668 


LIFE 


[part  V 


The  numerous  works  which  have  recently  appeared  on  the  existing 
fauna  of  Australia  do  not  yet  seem  to  have  led  to  a  fresh  classification ;  we 
will  retain  Hedley's  subdivision,  according  to  which  we  must  distinguish : 
1.  The  oldest  autochthonous  fauna  {Eyrean,  Spencer),  chiefly  in  the 
extreme  south-west;  2.  The  second  endemic  fauna  {Euronotian,  Tate) 
with  the  typical  Monotremes,  Marsupials,  and  so  on,  distributed  over  the 
whole  continent,  and  extending  in  isolated  representatives  to  New  Guinea 
and  the  Solomon  Islands;  3.  As  the  most  recent  element,  the  Papuan 
fauna,  which  advances  from  New  Guinea  chiefly  along  the  east  coast  of 
Queensland  ^ 

Let  us  recall  the  fact  that  the  series  of  land  floras  is  preserved  only  in 
the  east ;  as  regards  the  relative  importance  of  the  freshwater  fauna  and 
the  transgressions,  it  must  be  observed  that  Ceratodus  still  lives  in  Queens- 
land, and  is  also  met  with  in  South  Victoria  in  Mesozoic  beds^.  Thus 
relics  of  the  Antarctic  fauna,  and  the  entirely  alien,  more  highly  difleren- 
tiated,  Papuan  fauna  are  found  together. 

(b)  Patagonia.  The  discoveries  of  the  brothers  Ameghino,  and  the  works 
of  Hatcher,  Ortman,  Gaudry,  Sinclair,  and  other  investigators  in  Patagonia 
have  made  us  familiar  with  a  series  of  faunas  which  seem  to  have  no  rela- 
tions with  the  mammals  of  the  northern  hemisphere.  It  is  possible  that  no 
single  genus  is  common  to  both  regions,  and  yet  there  is  a  certain  parallelism 
of  development.  Unfortunately  the  stratigraphical  data  are  not  in  complete 
accordance.  The  latest  observations  of  Roth  confirm  the  much-contested 
statement  that  Dinosaurs  occur  along  with  the  oldest  mammalian  fauna 
(Notostylops-fauna) ;  this  is  never  the  case  in  North  America  or  Europe^. 
The  Carnivores  are  without  exception  Creodonts ;  the  Edentates  are  already 
represented  by  one  great  form  (Palaeopeltis).  The  occurrence  of  Ganodonts 
in  the  Puerco  fauna  of  New  Mexico  would  lead  us  to  expect  ancestral 
Edentates  at  still  earlier  horizons. 

We  will  not  enter  into  details  respecting  this  remarkable  fauna.  In 
North  America  and  Europe  the  negative  movements  on  the  boundary 
between  the  Jurassic  and  Cretaceous  and  between  the  Cretaceous  and 
Tertiary  were  oscillatory,  and  an  earlier  phase  of  such  oscillations  may, 
according  to  Roth's  data,  have  occurred  in  Patagonia. 

The  Pyrotherium  fauna,  which  comes  next,  contains  numerous  animals, 
some  of  them  of  large  size,  and  the  various  groups  continue  their  evolution 
into  the  third  or  Santa  Cruz  fauna  which  is  assigned  to  the  upper  Oligocene 

'  Hedley,  A  zoogeographical  Scheme  for  the  Mid-Pacific,  Proc.  Linn.  Soc.  N.S.W., 
1899,  pp.  391-417. 

^  Smith-Woodward,  Tooth  of  Ceratodus  and  a  Dinosaurian  Claw  from  Lower  Jurassic, 
Victoria,  Ann.  Mag.  Nat.  Hist.,  1906,  ser.  7,  XVIII,  pp.  1-3. 

'  Santiago  Roth,  Beitrag  zur  GHederung  der  Sedimentablagerungen  in  Patagonien  und 
der  Pampas-Region,  N.  J.  f.  Min.,  1908,  Beilage-Band  XXVI,  pp.  92-150  ;  this  also  serves 
to  correct  what  has  been  said  in  Vol.  II,  p.  305  on  the  Tertiary  formation  of  Patagonia. 


CH.  XVIIl] 


PATAGONIAN  FAUNAS 


669 


or  Miocene,  but  here  too  the  Carnivora  are  all  small  and  Creodont ;  neither 
Proboscidians  nor  Ruminants  occur;  but  the  Edentates  are  already  in 
possession  of  their  immense  claws.  Still  higher  follows  the  much  younger 
Pampas  fauna  with  Megatherium,  Glyptodon,  and  other  genera,  the  gigantic 
descendants  of  the  older  Edentates. 

The  habitat  of  the  three  older  Patagonian  faunas  by  no  means  presents 
the  characters  of  an  ancient  asylum.  Cretaceous  transgressions  are  known, 
and  the  ancient  floras  are  absent.  Doubtless  we  have  here,  as  in  New 
Mexico,  only  the  border  of  a  continent.  Gaudry  has  justly  pointed  out 
that  this  diversified  fauna  presupposes  a  much  wider  distributional  area 
than  is  afforded  by  existing  Patagonia  ^.  The  adjacent  Falkland  islands, 
however,  actually  present  the  most  characteristic  feature  of  an  asylum.  In 
these  islands  the  lower  Gondwana  flora  does  in  fact  lie  upon  ancient  rock, 
and  we  are  led  to  conjecture  that  the  home  of  Notostylops,  Pyrotherium, 
and  the  rest  of  these  strange-looking  animals  must  have  extended  out 
towards  the  Ocean  far  beyond  existing  Patagonia. 

The  fauna  of  Santa  Cruz  is  doubtless  much  older  than  the  Eurynotic 
fauna  of  Australia,  the  gigantic  ancestors  of  which  scarcely  reach  back  as 
far  as  the  Tertiary  aera.  In  the  Santa  Cruz  fauna,  however,  we  already 
discern  an  increasing  resemblance  with  that  of  Australia.  Sinclair  has 
recognized  among  the  marsupials  of  the  Patagonian  fauna  the  ancestors  or 
relations  of  such  Australian  groups  as  the  Thylacinidae  and  the  Diproto- 
donts,  and  along  with  these  the  ancestors  of  the  existing  Didelphidae  of 
South  America  ^. 

Hedley  has  attempted  to  represent  on  a  map  the  boundary  between  the 
continental  islands  of  Australia,  populated  by  original  connexion  with  the 
mainland,  and  the  Oceanic  islands  colonized  by  drift.  The  boundary 
coincides  with  that  between  the  two  inner  Australian  arcs,  but  also 
includes  Viti  Levu.  The  Papuan  fauna  is  shown  as  streaming  out  of  New 
Guinea  on  the  south,  to  Australia,  and  south-east  to  the  New  Hebrides. 
A  second  stream,  the  origin  of  which  is  believed  to  be  Antarctic,  proceeds 
from  New  Zealand  through  Norfolk  island  to  New  Caledonia.  The  facts 
previously  referred  to  in  connexion  with  Palaeeudyptes  and  penguins  may 
be  regarded  as  a  confirmation  of  this  view.  As  we  have  already  seen, 
a  further  trace  of  Antarctic  life,  which  has  possibly  come  across  Auckland, 
may  very  well  be  present.  Hedley  regards  this  residue  as  older  than  the 
Eurynotic  fauna  of  Australia,  and  thus  arrives  at  the  conclusion  that  this 
Eurynotic  fauna,  with  its  abundance  of  Implacentalia,  which  we  have 
always  been  accustomed  to  regard  as  one  of  the  oldest  of  living  faunas,  is 

*  A.  Gaudry,  j^tude  sur  une  portion  du  monde  antarctique,  Ann.  d.  Paleontologie, 
1906,  I,  fasc.  3,  pp.  1-43,  in  particular  p.  8. 

2  W.  J.  Sinclair,  Marsupial  Fauna  of  tlae  Santa  Cruz  Beds,  Proc.  Am.  Phil.  Soc,  1905, 
XLIX,  pp.  73-81.  For  a  comparison  with  Europe  cf.  Deperet,  Transformation,  p.  318 
et  seq. 


670 


LIFE 


[part  V 


in  fact  younger  than  the  faunas  of  Patagonia  and  New  Zealand,  and  so  far 
represents  the  latest  fossil  member  of  the  evolutional  series  in  Antarctis. 
We  may  suppose  that  its  peculiarities  have  been  preserved  by  isolation. 

This  first  survey  of  the  Pacific  arcs  shows  that  here,  in  contrast  to  the 
Atlantic  region,  the  task  which  presents  itself  is  that  of  following  out  long 
lines.  The  only  exception  occurs  in  the  east  of  the  Pacific,  where  the 
islands  are  arranged  in  groups,  after  the  Atlantic  type;  and  in  this 
connexion  it  may  be  pointed  out  that  the  Galapagos  are  possibly  a  panzer- 
horst,  like  Iceland  and  Kerguelen ;  a  view  which  accords  with  Baur's,  who 
regards  their  fauna  as  continental  ^. 

The  Pacific  arcs,  particularly  the  island-festoons,  as  well  as  the  northern 
Antilles,  present  a  number  of  connexions  and  separations  which  it  is 
impossible  at  present  to  disentangle.  Herr  Steindachner  informs  me  that 
Cobitis  taenia,  well  known  as  one  of  the  commonest  European  river  fish, 
lives  not  only  in  Japan,  but  also  in  Formosa.  The  presence  of  mastodons 
in  Borneo,  Banca,  Sumatra  and  Java  afibrds  another  example  of  connexion  ; 
the  attempt  of  the  brothers  Sarasin  to  determine  the  order  in  which 
successive  faunas  entered  Celebes  reveals  the  difficulties  of  the  problem  ^. 

The  great  asylums  of  land  animals  also  serve  as  asylums  for  land 
floras  and  inhabitants  of  rivers,  but  for  each  group  in  a  different  manner. 
For  the  sea  we  have  at  present  no  means  of  making  similar  observa- 
tions. Even  in  the  case  of  the  land,  there  may  have  been  still  other 
regions  besides  those  cited  here ;  Borneo,  and  high  mountain  ranges  for 
example,  have  certainly  served  at  times  as  places  of  refuge.  Whether  the 
older  conception  of  '  centres  of  creation '  can  be  applied  to  asylums  is 
a  question  difficult  to  answer,  since,  as  the  preceding  examples  show,  species 
and  genera  may  arise  under  a  great  variety  of  circumstances,  and  at  the 
most  diverse  places,  and  may  then  migrate  or  perish  together.  What  we 
observe,  is  an  extremely  uniform  distribution  of  an  upper  Carboniferous - 
Permian  flora  and  fauna  over  most  of  these  asylums,  and  even  where  this 
is  absent,  as  for  example  in  Laurentia,  there  is  yet  a  very  concordant  phase 
of  organic  development  in  the  Permian  land  fauna.  There  is  yet  more  to 
be  seen.  The  independence  of  the  Tertiary  faunas  of  Antarctis  (Australia 
+  Patagonia)  is  undeniable,  as  is  also  the  fact,  however,  that  its  starting- 
point,  or  apparently  oldest  element  as  represented  by  the  Monotremes  or 
Marsupials,  does  not  differ  essentially  from  that  of  the  faunas  of  the 
northern  hemisphere;  that  even  the  nature  of  the  differentiation  in  its 

^  G.  Baur,  IV,  p.  824,  note  4. 

*  P.  and  F.  Sarasin,  Geologische  Geschicbte  der  Insel  Celebes  auf  Grund  der  Thierver- 
breitung  (Material  zur  Naturgeschichte  der  Insel  Celebes,  III,  4to,  Wiesbaden,  1901), 
and  K.  Martin,  Zweiter  Beitrag  zur  Frage  nacb  der  Entstehung  des  ostindischen  Archi- 
pels,  Geogr.  Zeitschr.,  1907,  XIII,  pp.  425-438  ;  H.  Hofer,  Das  polynesische  alteozoische 
Festland,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1908,  CXVII,  pp.  513-518. 


CH.  XVIIl] 


EIVERS  OF  THE  ASYLUMS 


671 


Edentates,  Ungulates,  and  other  orders  is  similar  in  both  cases, — that  both 
types  of  fauna,  the  northern  and  equatorial  on  the  one  hand,  and  the 
southern  on  the  other,  approach  the  same  goal  by  similar  routes,  but 
the  southern,  even  in  its  most  recent  member,  the  Eurynotic  fauna,  has  not 
reached  the  same  stage  of  development  as  the  widely  extended  northern 
and  equatorial  faunas.  This  is  shown  by  the  contrast  to  the  Papuan  fauna 
presented  by  the  north  and  east  of  Australia. 

Without  entering  further  into  these  biological  questions,  let  us  again 
turn  our  attention  to  the  nature  of  the  asylums.  They  coincide  partly,  but 
not  wholly,  with  tectonic  units.  Although  the  north  of  European  Russia 
presents  us  with  horizontal  Cambrian  sediments,  and  the  fauna  and  flora  of 
Gondwana,  yet  it  cannot  be  included  among  the  asylums  on  account  of  the 
marine  transgressions  which  followed.   Other  examples  are  not  hard  to  find. 

Asylums  reveal  themselves  as  ancient  lands  both  by  their  structure  and 
by  the  fauna  of  their  rivers.  Lakes  without  overflow  are  almost  entirely 
absent,  unless  in  fault-troughs.  Even  Victoria  Nyanza  is  probably  a  local 
subsidence.  In  Africa,  outside  the  Sahara,  the  sources  of  rivers  have  been 
brought  so  near  together  by  retrogression,  and  their  upper  courses  have 
mutually  influenced  each  other  to  such  an  extent,  that  the  fluviatile  fauna 
has  become  uniform.  This  is  Boulenger's  Megapotamic  sub-region,  in- 
cluding the  Nile,  Niger,  Gambia,  Senegal,  Congo,  and  Zambesi  rivers,  and 
lake  Chad.  In  the  bay  of  Bengal,  as  we  have  seen,  the  rivers  of  its  east 
and  west  sides  may  once  have  been  tributary  to  a  prolongation  of  the 
Ganges,  which  has  since  foundered  in.  All  the  oldest  types  of  fishes  live 
in  asylums,  as  for  example,  Ceratodus  in  Australia  (Antarctis),  Polypterus 
and  Protopterus  in  Africa  (east  Gondwdna  land),  Lepidosiren  in  Brazil 
(west  Gondwana  land)  and  finally  Amia  and  Lepidosteus  in  North  America 
(Laurentia) . 

The  residue  of  a  Sarmatian  fauna  now  living  in  lake  Baikal  indicates 
an  asylum  situated  close  outside  Angara  land  in  a  trough.  A  similar 
asylum  in  a  trough  is  lake  Tanganyika.  Moore  regards  the  remarkable 
relic-fauna  of  this  lake  as  the  remains  of  a  Jurassic  marine  transgression  ; 
Boulanger  is  inclined  to  regard  it  rather  as  an  Eocene  transgression ;  since 
the  discovery  of  the  Medusa  of  lake  Tanganyika  in  Victoria  Nyanza, 
and  in  the  river  Niger,  the  idea  suggests  itself  with  increasing  force  that 
a  similar  migration  from  the  sea  may  still  take  place  at  the  present  day. 
On  an  earlier  page  similar  facts  have  been  stated  with  regard  to  the 
Mysidae  of  the  Volga.  We  will  content  ourselves  for  the  present  with  the 
observation  that  so  far  neither  a  Jurassic  nor  an  Eocene  transgression  is 
known  to  approach  within  great  distances  of  lake  Tanganyika;  further, 
that  even  the  upper  Cretaceous  transgression,  the  most  widely  distributed 
in  Central  Africa,  is  not  known  in  the  region  of  the  East  African  troughs. 
Nor,  according  to  Bornhardt's  observations  (Makonde  beds),  does  it  ascend 


672  LIFE  [PARTY 

from  the  east  over  the  ancient  highland  in  which  lake  Nyassa  is  let  down. 
On  the  other  hand,  Pyrgulifera  (Moore's  Paramelania),  a  genus  found  in 
lake  Tanganyika,  is  widely  distributed  both  in  Europe  and  in  North 
America  in  fresh  or  hrachish  ivater  deposits  of  upper  Cretaceous  age.  In 
Hungary,  especially,  it  occurs  abundantly,  associated  with  coal-beds  of  the 
Gosau  formation  ^. 

The  river  systems  of  the  asylums  are  discharged  almost  exclusively 
into  the  Atlantic  or  the  Arctic  Ocean.  The  Atlantic  hemisphere,  with  its 
widely  extended  watershed,  is  that  of  the  dry  land,  the  Pacific  that  of  the 
sea,  and,  considering  the  trifling  age  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  the  subsidences 
which  divide  up  the  asylums  in  that  region  appear  almost  like  an 
endeavour  to  establish  planetary  equilibrium. 

In  our  survey  of  Asia  (III,  p.  311)  we  stated  that  all  the  ancient  regions 
possess  well-developed  river-systems  and  a  free  outflow  to  the  sea.  This  is 
true  of  all  asylums.  Eegions  such  as  the  Caspian  or  the  Gobi  do  not 
occur  among  them.  The  Djouf  of  the  Sahara  rests  upon  the  Cretaceous 
mantle.  The  distinction  between  central  and  peripheral  regions,  and  the 
difference  in  their  value  in  respect  to  living  beings,  have  been  clearly 
pointed  out  by  Richthofen.  According  to  Richthofen,  all  asylums  ars 
peripheral  regions.  There  are  also  regions  outside  the  asylums  which 
possess  a  peripheral  position,  such  as  that  of  lake  Laramie  and  most  of  the 
Mediterranean  lands.  At  the  same  time  the  Polar  parts  of  the  asylums, 
owing  to  their  climate,  have  ceased  to  serve  as  places  of  •  refuge  since  the 
Tertiary  aera.  The  other  asyJums,  however,  are  regions  of  maximum 
value  for  colonizcdion. 

When  a  subsidence  occurs  towards  the  middle  of  an  ocean  it  is  followed 
by  a  negative  eustatic  movement  of  the  strand  and  an  extension  of  the 
mainland.  Similar  subsidences,  however,  have  often  encroached  upon  the 
mainland,  and  the  gain  in  land  laid  dry  has  been  counterbalanced  by  loss 
through  submergence.  But  gain  or  loss,  so  far  as  it  affects  the  living  world, 
is  not  measured  merely  by  the  extent  of  the  area  exposed,  but  also  by  its 
nature.  If  we  imagine  that  a  pan-Thalassa  originally  covered  the  planet, 
then  every  change  at  that  time  would  mean  a  gain  for  the  mainland.  With 
continued  development  of  the  seas  the  situation  had  become  changed  to 
such  an  extent  that  at  the  present  day  only  0-28  of  the  surface  of  the  planet 
is  dry  land.  Any  further  loss  in  asylums  (except  in  polar  regions)  is  a  loss 
of  valuable  ground,  and  the  nature  of  the  surfaces  gained  has  not  always 

*  A  survey  is  given  by  C.  Gravier,  La  Mecluse  du  Tanganyika  et  du  Victoria  Nyanza, 
sa  dispersion  en  Afrique,  Bull.  Mus.  Hist.  nat.  Paris,  1907,  pp.  218-224,  map ;  W.  J. 
Sollas,  Freshwater  Faunas  in  the  Age  of  the  Earth,  London,  1905,  pp.  208-215  ;  G.  A. 
Boulenger,  Distribution  of  African  Freshwater  Fishes  (South  African  Meeting  British 
Association),  Nature,  Aug.  24,  1905,  pp.  413-421  ;  Tausch,  Ueber  einige  Conchylien  des 
Tanganyika-Sees,  Sitzb.  k.  Akad.  Wiss.  Wien,  1885,  XC,  pp.  56-70. 


CH.  XVIIl] 


PAN-THALASSA 


673 


been  equal  in  value  to  that  of  those  which  have  been  lost.  On  the  whole, 
however,  the  loss  of  surface  has  exceeded  the  gain ;  this  is  shown  by  the 
trifling  extent  of  the  existing  remains,  and  the  terraced  islands  of  the  Pacific 
do  not  indicate  that  the  process  is  at  an  end.  The  comprehensive  biological 
work  of  the  Ghallenger  led  Murray  to  conjecture  that  in  the  Palaeozoic 
aera  the  Oceans  were  not  so  deep  as  at  present  and  were  strewn  with 
numerous  islands ;  later,  the  continental  land  became  more  continuous  and 
higher,  while  the  Oceans  were  more  circumscribed  and  grew  deeper^. 

This  conclusion  the  geologist  may  accept  in  all  essential  points.  The 
Oceans  have  become  more  restricted  and  deeper,  and  at  the  same  time  the 
continents  have  become  higher  as  a  consequence  of  subsidences.  For 
the  same  reason,  as  is  shown  by  the  Sahara  and  the  Caspian,  the  continents 
have  become  more  continuous,  but  this  is  due  to  the  radial  effects  of 
contraction;  in  addition,  we  have  the  mountain  chains  as  the  result  of 
tangential  action,  and  these  acquired  especial  importance  at  the  time  when 
the  Tethys  was  incorporated.  Leading  investigators  of  the  moon  have 
attempted  to  distinguish  definite  lunar  diameters  corresponding  with 
phases  of  contraction.  On  the  earth  such  phases  cannot  be  recognized 
(IV,  599),  but  in  spite  of  the  risk  attaching  to  averages  we  may  point  out 
as  a  remarkable  fact  that  the  mean  depths  of  the  Atlantic  (—3858  meters), 
the  Indian  (  —  3929  meters),  and  the  Pacific  Ocean  (  —  4097  meters)  lie  very 
near  a  common  mean  of  about  —  4000  meters. 

If  there  were  even  a  remote  tendency  in  the  contraction  of  the  planet 
to  establish  a  new,  uniform  radius,  if  the  Atlantic  subsidences  which  cut 
through  our  most  valuable  asylums,  have  actually  been  produced  by  an 
eflTort  to  establish  planetary  equilibrium,  then  we  should  have  to  fear 
a  progressive  diminution  of  the  area  inhabitable  by  land  and  freshwater 
animals.  Not  life  itself,  but  a  very  important,  and  indeed  the  most  highly 
organized  part  of  it  would  be  doomed  to  final  destruction,  and  would  be 
restored  to  the  pan-Thalassa. 

In  face  of  these  open  questions  let  us  rejoice  in  the  sunshine,  the  starry 
firmament  and  all  the  manifold  diversity  of  the  Face  of  our  Earth,  which 
has  been  produced  by  these  very  processes,  recognizing,  at  the  same  time, 
to  how  great  a  degree  life  is  controlled  by  the  nature  of  the  planet  and 
its  fortunes. 

*  J.  Murray,  Report  on  the  Scientific  Results  of  the  Voyage  of  H.M.S.  Challenger, 
Summary  II,  1895,  p.  1462. 

CORRIGENDA 

Page  26,  line  8.     The  term  '  rich  in  graphite,'  refers  to  the  Moldanubian  zones 
near  the  Moravian  region  ;  the  dislocation  on  the  upper  March  lies  within  the  Sudetes. 
Page  194,  line  1,  for  Eastern  read  Western. 


SOLLAS  IV 


X  X 


3913  OV
