The Face of the Earth, Vol. 2 (Eduard Suess (W. J. Sollas, trans.), 1906)
==========================================================
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.42507). Staged for the Tower of Babel library.

imHRvcowr.


THE FACE OF THE EARTH

(DAS ANTLITZ DER ERDE)

By EDUABD SUBSS

PB0FE880B OF GEOLOGY IN THE UNIVEB81TT OF VIENNA
FOBEIQN MEMBER OF THE BOYAL 8OOIBTY OF LONDON


TBAN8LATKO BY

HERTHA B. C. SOLLAS

rH.D. HBIDELBERO; OF NEWNHIIM COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE


tTNDXB THE BIBSCTION OF


W. J. SOLLAS

8C.D. (cANTAB.), LL.O. (dUBLIN), M.A. (oXON.), F.R.8.
FELLOW OF UNIVERSITY COLLEGE, OXFORD
PROFESSOR OF GEOLOGY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD


VOL. II


OXFORD

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

1906


^ S I •

3


HENRY EROWDE, M.A.
W'Bi.isiiicii. rro -niK usfxvsRsx'r^'' ov oxn>RX»
TX>isri>ON, b:i>iii9^buroxi:


?ajti:w YORK Aia]> *roxM»rYO



INI O -


^ 9 c)c?i



Ill


CONTENTS

PART III

The Sea

FAGS

Chapter I. Conflict of Opinion regarding the Displacement of the Strand :
Terminology and General Observations. Strabo. Dante. Celsius and
Linnaeus. Nordonankar. Playfair and Leopold von Buch. Goethe. Lyell and
Darwin as supporters of the thcoiy of elevation. Bravais and Eugene Robert.
Chambers and Domeyko; renewed expressions of doubt. Theories based on
gravitation. Adhdmar and his successors. Summaries; IToworth. Terminology.
Genuine case of dislocation in New Zealand. Plan of the following chapters . 1

Chapter n. The Outlines of the Atlantic Ocean. The Canadian shield. The
Baltic shield. Glint lines. The table-land of Spitzbergen. Greenland. The
Caledonian mounLiins. The Armorican mountains. The Variscan mountains.

The syntazis of Central Europe. The Iberian Mescta. Survey of the pre-
Permian mountains in Europe. The islands of Europe. Western Africa. The
east of ‘Central and South America. Survey of the outlines of the Atlantic . 30
Chapter III. The Borders of the Pacific Ocean. New Zealand. Australia.

New Caledonia. The sea of Banda. Borneo. Cochin China, Tongking. The
Philippines. Formosa and the Liu-Kiu islands. Japan. The Kuriles and
Kamchatka. Geneml survey of the island arcs. Eastern China. North-eastei-n
Asia. The arc of the Aleutian islands. The west coast of America . . • 143

Chapter IV. Comparison of the Atlantic and Pacific Outlines. The Atlantic
structure. The Pacific structure. Their dissimilarity. Distribution of islands
and volcanos. Overthrusting of the depressions. Progressive completion of the

Mesozoic series towards the Pacific coast 201

Chapter V. Palaeozoic Seas. Introduction : The abyssal i*egion ; cycles ; thick-
ness of the sediments. The North Atlantic continent. Upper limit of the
Silurian. Universality of the middle Devonian transgression. The Carboniferous
system. Paralicbeds, Alternation of coal beds and marine sediments. Trans-
gression of the Carboniferous limestone. The Permian system. Gondwana

land. General Survey 208

Chapter VI. Mesozoic Seas. The seas of the Trias. Positive movements in
the Rhaetic epoch. Continuation of positive movements during the Jurassic
epoch. Negative jihase in central Europe and commencement of the Cre-
taceous epoch. Later transgressions and intermixture of the Cretaceous faunas.

The Cenomanian transgression. General survey of the Mesozoic seas • . 256

Chapter VII. Tertiary Seas and recent Limestone Formations. Negative
phase at the close of the Cretaceous epoch. The central Mediterranean of the
Tertiary aera. The east coast of North America. The Tertiary region of

Patagonia. Recent limestone formations. Summary 296

Chapter Vm. The Strand-lines of Norway. From Tjoalma Vagge to the sea.
Prom lake TorneH to the sea. Movement of the ice contrary to the slope of the
valleys. Origin of the glint lakes of Lapland. Ancient strand-lines of the Qords.
Origin of the seter. Comparison with Greenland. Vestiges left by the retreat-
ing ice 326



iv


CONTEND


PAGE

Chapter IX. The Temple of Serapis near PuzzuolL The north-west coast of
Italy. Situation of the temple of Serapis in the Phlegraean crater. The temq^
up to the year 1538. The eruption of 1538. Excavation of the temple and its
present condition. Various attempts at explanation. Volcanic phenomena . 364
Chapter X. The Baltic and the North Sea during the Historic Period.
Salinity within the Skager Back. Mean level of the Baltic on the German
coast. Oscillations on the coasts of Sweden and Finland. General survey of
the negative displacement. Submerged forests and peat bogs of the North

sea. The haffs and peat bogs of the Baltic coasts 393

Chapter XI. The Mediterranean during the Historic Period. The sea of Azov
and the Black sea. Locus of maximum depression in the surface of the Mediter-
ranean. The western Mediterranean. Venice. The Dinaro-Tauric region.

The south-east Mediterranean. Conclusion . 431

Chapter XH. Strand-lines of the North. Diversity in form of the surface of the
Oceans. Western coasts of the North Atlantic. Eastern coasts of the North
Atlantic. The north of Eurasia and the west coasts of the North Pacific. East

coasts of the North Pacific 466

Chapter XHI. Strsuid-lines of the Equatorial and Southern Coasts. Western
coasts of the Atlantic Ocean, central and southern part Eastern coasts of the
Atlantic Ocean, African part. Coasts of East Africa and Arabia. Coasts of
India and Further India. Coasts of the Polynesian islands and Australia. West

coast of South America 498

Chapter XIV. The Oceana. The boundaries of the Oceans. Eustatic negative
movement. Transgressions. Eustatic positive movement. Inadequacy of
eustatic movements. River mouths and river terraces. General survey of
comparatively recent strand-lines. Oscillations of the Oceans. Alternating
equatorial phases. The continents a result of subsidence. No appreciable
change of level in the historic period 585



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


PLATES

I (=VII). A Part of Tromafi-Amt Frontispiece

II («=V1II). Diagrammatic Repreaentation of the successive Eruptions

in the Phlegraean Fields To face p, 368

III (=IX). The Monthly Mean Water-level for the years 1873, 1874

and 1875 from Rdnnskar to Nord Kostcr „ 404


FIG. page

1. The Earth and Ocean according to Brunetto Latini 5

2. The Earth and Ocean according to Dante 6

3. Hypothetical Section across the River St. Lawrence and the Isle of Orleans 35

4. Aretio North America 40

5. Scania 47

6. View from the Omesvarre, South of the Bals Fjord 58-59

7. Tjoalma Vagge, Moraine Landscape on the Boundary between Norway and

Sweden 61

8. Spitsbergen 68

9. Diagrammatic Representation of the Structure of West Spitzbergen 70

10. A General Sketch of the Structure of Scotland 78

11. Diagrammatic Section of the Archaean Foundation and Fragments of Mesozoic

Rocks on Mont Lozere 112

12. Section through the Anthracite Basin of Chalonnes on the Lower Loire . . 113

13. Jurassic Limestone pinched into the Gneiss at Farnigen in the Mienthal . . 115

14. The Basin of Asturias 125

15. The Island of Antigua 136

16. New Zealand 145

17. Japan 178

18. Cys/isowa Guer.-Menev 211

19. Petalophthabnus artniger. Will. Suhm 212

20. Polycheles crucifera^ Will. Suhm 212

21. Conocephalites Sulzeri, Schloth 213

22. Cyclopean Eyes 214

23. Acidaspm mira, Barr 214

24. Trinucleus omatus, Stern 215

25. Section near Iowa City 238

26. Fossil Forests of the Carboniferous Period 244

27. View from the Oberlahner, Ascent to the Funtensee Alp, Steinerues Meer . 261

28. The Valley of the Blue Nile 275

29. Limestone Beds in Sombrero 312

30. Uvea, Loyalty Group 316

31. Lifu, Loyalty Group 316

32. Diagrammatic Sketch of the Left Side of the Upper SOrdal .... 335

SOI.LAS iz L



Vi LIST OP ILLUSTRATIONS

FIG. PAGE

33. Diagrammatic Section across the Left Side of tHe Upper SOrdal . . . 336

34. The Seven Sisters f 337

35. Closure of the Neu-Haufen Dyke, Schttttau 343

36. Dalager's Nunataks 344

37. Frederikshaabs Isblink 358

38. Jakobshavns Isfjord 359

39. Monte Olibano, Seaward Face 373

40. The Volcanic Eruption of Monte Nuovo and the Shore abandoned by the Sea . 380

41. The Mausoleum in the Bay of Makri 449

42. The Third and Fourth Teeth of the Pettini di Ragusa 454



PART III


THE SEA

CHAPTER I

CONFLICT OP OPINION REGARDING THE .
DISPLACEMENT OP THE STRAND : TERMINOLOGY
AND GENERAL OBSERVATIONS

Strabo. Dante. Gelsias and Linnaeus. Nordenankar. Playfair and Leopold von Buck.
Goethe.* Lyell and Darwin as supporters of the theory of elevation. Bravais and
Eugene Robert. Chambers and Domeyko; renewed expressions of doubt. Theories
based on gravitation. Adh^mar and his successors. Summaries; Howorth. Terminology.
Genuine case of dislocation in New Zealand. Plan of the following chapters.

We havo descended from the mountains and stand on the seashore. The
eye roams unchecked over the vast expanse of waters. A great wave
approaches and seems about to reach us ; suddenly its crest curls over, it
plunges downwards, and with a dull roar, sweeps a little further on with-
out wetting our feet. Then the water streams back, and a long green
ridge of seaweed remains to mark the limit of its advance. Soon a second
wave follows, then a third, and from time to time one somewhat higher
than the rest, which whirls the seaweed further up the beach, and drives us
back towards the foot of the cliff.

The roll of the waters is repeated like the chorus of a mighty song.
The sublimity of the scene might hold us captive for whole hours. At
length the crest of the wave breaks at a greater distance from us, and soon
the lowest point of the ebl^ will be reached. Then the Ocean returns and
all the bands of white shells, and the green coils of seaweed it had left
beliind, are again swept together by the ever advancing line of the waves,
until after six hours of rising tide even the spot* where we first stood is
reached, and at last the sea washes once more against the foot of the cliff.

So to a stately measure the heavenly bodies cause the swaying Ocean to
alternately advance upon the land and retire. •

Let us now turn to the cliff. Here the traces of an older strand may be
clearly seen, standing high above the existing level of the sea. For mile
after mile they may be followed at a constant height, undisturbed by the
nature or structure of the coast, over cliffs of limestone, granite, or ancient

•OLfAS 11 Q


V



2


DISPLACEMENT OP THE STRAND [pabJiii

volcanic ash, or late Tertiary detritus ; they encircle as with a girdle^ not
only the mainland, but also the islands off its shores. w

This is something very different from the crushing and overthrusting
we meet with in the mountains, and very different from folding, which is
determined by the strength and direction of the tangential stress, by the
rigidity of the rocks, and the resistance offered by opposing masi^s, changing
consequently in character as it passes from place to place. The phenomenon
before us is of an altogether different nature, and if we recall the play of
the tides with their rhythmic rise and fall in phases of half a day, then
nature herself seems to suggest the question whether other forces may not
Qxist capable of causing much more important oscillations and of much
longer periods than that which we have pictured as driving us back to the
foot of the cliff.

Many distinguished observers have answered this question in the
affirmative ; others have supposed that changes may have occurred in the
volume of water in the Ocean ; others, on the contrary,have imagined uniform
and gradual movements of the solid land — secular movements, as they are
generally termed. These conflicting theories have been advanced and
adopted in turn accoMing to the state of knowledge at the time or the
views which happened to be in favour regarding ibhe origin of mountain
chains and the conditions of equilibrium of the sea-level.

The ancients were well- aware that the sea once extended' inland as far
as the oasis of Jupiter Ammon, and that it covered all the low-lying ground
from the Casius to the Red Sea : the polemic in Strabo’s Geography (1, 3)
bears striking witness to the zeal with which they sought to solve this
problem. In accordance with Archimedes, Strabo asserted that the surface
of all undisturbed water tends to correspond With that of a sphere, which
has the same centre as the earth. Seas, he maintains, have no slope. He
reproaches Eratosthenes with credulity for -having believed on the evidence
of certain engineers that the water on the two sides of the isthmus of
Corinth stood at different levels. According to Strabo, not only islands
and isolated, mountains arc subject to elevation, but also the mainland
itself ; on the other hand tracts of land of greater or less extent are liable
to give way and sink towards the interior. —

Space would fail, were I to attempt to -write the history of this discussion,
which is as old as our science itself ; yet as previously we illustrated -the
nature of volcanos and the diverse origin of earthquakes by certain selected
examples, so now we will attempt by means of a few chapters of this history
to bring into relief some at least of the successive aspects which this ques-
tion has assumed.

Now, however, it is no longer to the mute eloquence of nature that we
must lend an ear, but to the conflict of 'human opinion, sometimes loud-
voiced enough. —



VINCENTIUS OP BEAUVAIS


3


CH.*l]

is January 20, 1320. The bells of Verona ring in a bright Sunday
mormng, and the crowd greets with respect a personage of tall stature and
earnest countenance, approaching with slightly inclined head to enter the
chapel of Santa Helena: it is Danie.

All that can move the hiuman soul the great poet has felt, and in the
realm of imagination he has travelled farther than any mortal man before
him! He has survived the loss of his Beatrice, aiid the loss of the emperor
from whom ho had hoped a better future for his country. Now 'flying
from the hatred of his native city he has found a refuge at the court of the
leader of the Ghibellines of upper Italy, Can Grande of the house of the
Scaligeri. With a gift of description never before eq\ialled he has led his
astonished contemporaries to the heighte of the blessed and the depths of
the lower world ; and now ho I’etums to the starting-point of his mightiest
creation, to the examination of that which is greater than all the concep-
tiqns of poetry, the actual constitution of the Universe.

Dante has to-day invited the whole educated world of Verona to listen
to a discourse in this chapel, entitled * De aqua et terra.’ He proposes to dis-
cuss the relative position of land and sea, and as he tells us himself, every
one came at his invitation, ‘ with the exception of a few, who feared by their
presence to confirm the exceptional importance of others

But it is difficult for us, accepting as it were this invitation after an
interval of more than five hundred years, to examine without prejudice the
views’of the great poet. It is not easy to free ourselves from that presump-
tion of superiority with which we are wont to regaitl the eflbrts of a period
so remote, in which nevertheless, with the assistance of Arabian science and
the somewhat fragmentary remains of Aristotle, the foundations of the
existing edifice were laid : a task accomplished, in spite of the paucity of
observations, by the courageous and untiring efforts of the more eminent
.spirits to obtain a victorious comprehension of the Cosmos as a whole.

The work of recognized authority in Dante’s time was the ‘ Speculum
quadVuplex ’ of the Dominican, VincerUiua of Beauvais, completed in the
year 1244. This monk, one of the ornaments of the court of Saint Louis,
arranged the material in the cosmographical part of his encyclopaedia in
accordance with the seven days of creation ^ Vincentius points out the
contrast which exists, in the* genesis of the elements, between the fiat lux
on the one hand, and the congregentur aquae ut appareat arida on the
other. In the expression congregentur aquae he sees a condensation of the

’ Quistione trattata in Verona da Dante Alighieri il di 20. gennajo Mceexx intorno
alia forma del globo terracqueo ed al luogo respettivamente occupato dall’ acqua
e dalla terra ; ed. Torri, Livorno, 1843, p. xlii, § xxiv.

^ Bibliotheca Mundi, «eu vener. viri Vincentii Burgundi ex ord. praedicat. episcop.
bellovac. fipeculum quadruplex, natnrale, doctrinale, morale, historiale; fol. Bellenis,
Duaci, 1624 ; lib. V, col. 307, et seq.



4


DISPLACEMENT OP THE STRAND [parJiii

water vapour in the lower layers of the atmosphere, an accumulation ^ the
resulting water in the hollows of the earth’s surface, the awakening (ff the
via inclinatim ad desceneum, or, as we should say, of the force of gravity,
previously slumbering in the molecules of water. As the blood communi-
cates with the heart, so all the waters flow into the sea. !^e surface of
the earth is spherical, so likewise is that of the waters.

Thus far the conceptions of Yincentius are clear, and there is no funda-
mental difference of opinion among his successors. In con tinuing his
examination of the curvature of the Ocean, Yincentius is led to reflect on
the rounding of the surface of water in a goblet, and the spherical form of
a drop. The fact that the shore may be kept longer in view from the mast
of a ship .than from the deck, seems to him a proof of the independent con-
vexity of the surface of the sea, and from the presence of springs in the
high mountains, he concludes that the Ocean must stand at a higher level
than the mainland.

Thus Yincentius furnishes us with the first, though vague suggestion, of
a force of cohesion, as seen' in the law by which a drop is formed : this
influences and indeed determines the form of the surface of the Ocean, which
consequently does not depend solely on the action of gravity. We might
almost say that he represents the Ocean to us as a single gigantic drop
adhering to the globe ^

Other investigators, as Boger Bacon, in his remarkable ‘Opus Maius,’
which he presented to Pope Clement lY in 1267, 8tai>t from the unity of
the Centi'um mwndi and the concentric arrangement of all the spheres of
the Universe : this view received its clearest expression, so far as it refers
to the Ocean, in that famous chapter, where Bacon shows that a goblet
would be capable of containing more liquor in the cellar than in the tap-
room. Every point in the surface of a liquid, says Bacon, lies equally
distant from the centre of the earth, every such surface is thus a part of
a spherical surface ; the nearer the centre, tlie smaller the radius of curva-
ture, the more considerable therefore its elevation above the edge of the
vessel

Nevertheless the idea gained ground that the oceanic sphere possessed
an independent form, its elevation above the mainland was held to be an
incontestable fact, perceptible to the senses, and many authors spoke of it
as rising in a definite asymmetrical ridge. Among these, was Brunetto
Latini, that teacher, who had instructed Dante ‘ how man may immortalize

' Op. cit. lib. VI, col. 377, cap. xii. ‘ Quod etiam Oceanus tenam cingens in verticem
sit coactuB.’ W. Schmidt justly lays emphasis on the importance of this passage, and on
the contrast between self-conformation aoA. figure of the. earth ; see his dissertation, Ueber
Dante’s Stellung in der Geschichte der Kosmographie, 8ro, Graz, 1876, p. 10, note.

* Fratris Roger! Bacon, ord. minor., Opns Maius ad Clementem IV, Pont. Rom. ; ed.
Jebb, foi.,'I,ond., 1733, p. 97, cap. x.



DANTE


CM.^]

himself After the defeat inflicted by Manfred on. the Florentines near
Monlp Aperti in 1260, Brunetto, who was also a distinguished statesman,
retired into exile in France, where he remained until 1267, i. e. until after
Slanfred’s death at the battle of Benevento. It was during this period that
he composed his chief work ‘ Li Livres dou Treror’ : in this also the theory
of the elevation of the sea above the land was maintained, chiefly on account
of the elevated situation of many springs ‘K But in Dante’s case the intui-
tion of a scientiflc mind gradually entered into conflict with the views of
his beloved teacher, and that is probably the reason why Dante in the whole
of his discourse *De aquaet
terra’does not once mention
the name of any of his
opponents ^

Dante begins by enu-
merating the arguments of
the rival schools, and shows
that they lead' to two alter-
natives ; either the whole
mass of water is situated
eccentrically or there is a
local swelling up of part of
it. He asserts that neither
. of these hypothec is ten-
able. If the mass of the
Ocean were eccentric, then
water must be capable of
flowing both upwards and
dovrawards. Let the points A and if (Fig. 2) represemt the two centres. A mass
of earth and a quantity of water falling from Z to the earth would proceed
in different directions : but gravity is a property common to all bodies.

For the same reason a local protuberance of the Ocean is also impossible,
for it would be at once dispei’sed.

The. Ocean is thus concentric with the earth and every part of its surface
is equidistant from the common centre. Since, however, the shpres of the
continents and the continents themselves rise above the surface of the

’ Inferno, cant. XV, v. 82-85.

* Brunetto Latini, Li Livres dou Tresor, publ. par P. Chabaille, Collection de doca-
nente in^ita sur I’histoire de France, publiee par leseoins du Ministre de I’lnstniction
Pnblique, 4to, Paris, 1863. In particular liv. I, cap. evi, pp. 114-116; also p. 169 : * et
Mauritaine fenit en haute mer de Egypte ; et commence cele de bil>e, ou il y a trop
fieres merveilles ; car la mer i est asses plus haute que la, terre, et se retient dedans ses
marges en tele maniere que ele ne chiet nc ne decourt sor la terre.’ ,

^ Inferno, cant. XV, v. 119, 120: ‘Siati roccomandato il mio Tesoro Nel quale io
vivo ancora. . . .’


6


DISPLAOiiMENT- OF THE STRAND [pAirfra


water, these parts of the earth must be higher than the Ocean. Again, it.
is evident that the earth rises from the Ocean owing to’ particular 'eleviKions
of its mass, and not as the result of eccentricity, since in the latter case the
diy land would be bounded by a circular outline, and this we know is not
the case.' . •

There exists then a true elevation of the land, and of this we must
seek to discover the cause. ' Dko igitur,’ sayR Dante, 'quod causa huius
devationis. effijdens non jmtest esse teh'ra ipse; quia qvAtni devari sit
quoddam ftn'i suraum; et ferri mrsum sit contra naturam terrae.',’
The earth cannot elevate itsdf; nor can the cause be water, fire, or air;
the elevating force must therefore be sought in the heavens.

In the starry firmament this force
caniiot for obvious reasons emanate
from the moving stars, the moon,
sun, or planets it must therefore be
sought in the fixed stars, which exer-
cise this influence, either after the
manner of magnets or by the pro-
duction of active vapours. Dante
thus adopts the system which had
already been expounded in greater
detail by Riatoro d' Arezzo in 1282 ;
according to this not only must
the irregularities of the earth’s
surface be ascribed to the fixed
stars, but mountains' and valleys
present . as it were a mirror of the
various distances of these stars
from the earth, in an inverted sense,
like the impression of a seal in wax \
In conclusion, Dante reminds his hearers that the apparent sinking of
the coast observed by the departing sailor simply results from the general
curvature of the liquid sphere, and adds it has long been known that
springs are not fed by water directly ascending, but are formed by the
condensation of water vapour on the mountains —

* Dante, Quistione, &c., § xx. De. cauaa eiiiciente elevationis Terrae ; ed. Torri,
p. xxxvi.

* Riatoro d'Arezzo, La Compoaizione del inondo, testo italiano del 1282 pubblicato da
E. Narducci, 8vo, Roma, 1859, p. 79. In addition Riatoro is aware of the erosive power
of water, and of the existence of fossilized remains of marine animals : he even suggests
the influence of earthquakes on mountain structure, p. 83, et seq.

^ This was the opinion of Dante, the cosmogiapher ; let us compare it with [the views
expressed in] his poetry. Vincentius of Beauvais dedicates a whole chapter (lib. YI,
cap. vii) to the question : ‘ Quorsum iniectus lapis erit casurus, si perforatus sit terrae



Fro. 2. Copied from Dante : Quaeatio d»
forma et situ agucu et teirae, editio Torri,
p. xxiv.

A Centre of tho Earth and Heavens,

B Centro of tho Ocean ;

+ indicates the Earth, tlio Ocean, ttt tliC
Heavens.


cH»i] DE MAILLET. SWEDENBORG • 7

Dante died in the following year, A.D. 1321. Let us hasten through
the oenturies towards a period when as the result of increased observation
that varied and almost uninterrupted succession of diverse theories arose,
which has not even yet reached an end.

In 1692, a young nobleman of Lorraine, Benoiet de MaiUet, was
appointed French consul in Egypt; transferred in 1708 to Leghorn, he
was afterwards sent on several occasions to the Levant, and thus became
acquainted with the coasts of the Mediterranean. He observed indications
of the retreat of its waters, and concluded that* the volume of the Ocean
suffers a continuous diminution: his results were not published till after
his death in 1748 \ '

Meanwhile attention was being directed in Sweden to facts of the same
kind. In 1702, the physicist Hjdrne, having discovered that the coast-line
was receding, caused marks to bo cut in several of the rocks in order to
measure the rate of the movement. Emmanud Swedenboiy believed the
sea to be sinking, and this to a greater extent in. the north than in the
south : in proof of this he called attention to the rapid increase in the area
of Lapland. The idea of a change in the form of the liquid envelope of
the planet here finds definite expression. In a letter of May 21, 1721,
addressed to Jacobus a Melle (von Honig) of Lubeck, Swedenborg asserts,
not indeed as a fact, but as a hypothesis worthy of consideration, that ‘ the
water of the Ocean sinks towards the poles and (probably) rises towards
the equator, and that islands previously separated from the land have been
united with it by the sinking of the sea

Swedenborg took no part in the discussion of this question which arose ,
a few years later in his own country : his name is scarcely mentioned in
connexion with it. The poet Dante, after he had achieved the greatest
creations of his genius, was still oipablo of high endeavour in the pursuit

globus.’ It will rest in the centre, says Vincentius. It appears to many authors of that
time to be an almost insoluble problem that an element so light as fire should appear in
the interior of the earth, since the spheres are otherwise arranged according to the
'weight of their matter.* Let us consider in addition the conception of Jerusalem as the
centre of the inhabitable world, and the relations of the central fire of the earth to hell.
Lucifer, cast down headlong, r^hes the earth at a point exactly opposite to Jerusalem,
and travels to the centre of the globe ; the principle of evil i» now identified with the force
of gravity, Cf. the sketch of the centre of the earth by Philalethes, Uebersetzung von
Dante's GlOttlichcr KomOdic, 3. Aufl., 1877, Taf. II, III.

' Telliamed, ou Entretiens d’un philosophe indien sur la diminution de la mer, avec
nn missionnaire fran^ais ; vol. 1, 1748, vol. II, 1755. Some absurdities and a certain lack
of criticism as regards the facts enumerated may have contributed to cause this work,
in which e. g. Bronn’s Terripetal theory is clearly anticipated, to fall too early into
oblivion. Quatrefages baa done it justice in his 'Charles Darwin et, ses precurseurse
franfais,’ 8vo, 1870, p. 19-32.

^ Epistola nobiliss. Emanuelis Swedenboigii ad Vir. celeberr. lacobum h Melle.
Acta Literar. Suec. 1, Upsala et Stockholm, 1721, p. 196 ; also by the same, Miscellaneac
observationes circa res naturales, 8vo, Leipzig, 1722, 1, p. 47.



8 • DISPLACEMENT OP THE STRAND [PAR#ra

of physical truth: the naturalist Swedenborg on the other hand |fter
a long ^ientific career turned his attention towards the spiritual \^rld.
The poet may attempt to cross the limits of the earthly, he is lord in the
kingdom of dreams;, but if the man of science, whose heavier foot is
accustomed to the firm ground of proof, venture into this realm, then while
he thinks he is perceiving realities visions are his masters.

In the region of the Mediterranean, two distinguished hydraulic
engineers, Manfr&li of Bologna and Zendrini of Venice, had meanwhile
made observations, which led to results entirely opposed to those of
de Maillet, but in harmony with the suggestion of Swedenborg. In their
opinion the surface of the Mediterranean, so far from being in process of
sinking, was slightly rising. The discovery of a marble pavement beneath
‘the cathedral of Ravenna, eight inches below high-water mark, and the
constant flooding of some of the lower parts of the Doge’s palace in Venice,
as well as the condition of the church of Saint Mark, were the evidence of
this movement. Manfredi’s treatise, * De aucta maris altitudine,’ did not
appear till after his death in 1746 : in this he explained the rising of the
sea-level as due to the great quantity of sediment yearly carried down to
the sea by rivers

Let us now return to Sweden.

It is the autumn of the year 1729. In the university garden of Upsala
sits a poorly clad student of medicine and jots down the names of the
plants. His poverty is such, that, as he confessed later, he cannot afford
to have his shoes mended, and is obliged to put paper in them that he may
not walk on the bare sole. This is Linnaeus, son of the vicar of Sten-
brohult, now in his twenty-second year. An ecclesiastic of some note,
Olaf Cdsius, subsequently provost of the chapter of Upsala, and now
engaged in preparing a history of plants mentioned in the Bible, addresses
the student, questions him .conceniing a number of botanical names used
by Toumefort, is delighted with his knowledge and takes him back to
his house. The young man’s zeal soon wins for him the full favour of
Oelsius and the intimate friendship of his nephew Andreas

' E. Manftedi, De aucta maris altitudine ; De Bonon. Scient. et Art. Institute atq.
Acad: Commentarii ; tom. I, pars 2,‘ Bonon., 1746, pp. 1-19. Manfredi had made his
observations in 1731, and died not long after, in 1739 ; cf. op. cit. tom. II, pars 1, 1745,
p. 237 et seq. Ravenna, according to the testimony of Vitruvius, was moreover entirely
built on piles; to what extent even in early times its low situation gave rise to
complaints is shown by the passage quoted by Manfredi from Sidonius Apollinarius, an
author of .the end of the fifth century, who calls Ravenna a marsh where, contrary to all
the laws of nature, ‘muri cadunt, aquae stant, turres fluunt, naves sedent, aegri
deambulant, medici iacent, algent balnea, domicilia confiagrant, sitiunt vivi, natant
sepulti.' The graves thus extended downwards into the water.

* Afzelius, Linnd's eigenh&ndige Aufseichnungen- fiber sich selbst, aus dem Schwe*
diseben y. Lappe, 8vo, Berlin, 1826, p. 12.



9


CH.I] CELSIUS AND LINNAEUS

It was in 1724, while still a youth, that Andreas Celsius had visited the
shorra of the gulf of Bothnia. He had observed the retrbht of the sea at
Huddihsvall, Fite&, and LuleA At Torne& he had been, shown to his
astonishment that the harbour constructed in 1620 was already useless.
Mariners pointed out places, now scarcely navigable for boats, on which
great ships had once sailed. Near Langeld and in other places he saw
rings to which ships had once been made fast, now at a distance from the
sea. From these facts he inferred a sinking of the sea-Ievel to the extent
of about forty-five inches (133 cm.) in the century.

Let us now pass over the fourteen years whicii followed the meeting
in the botanic garden. Linnaeus and Andreas Celsius have both l^ecome
professors in ordinary at the University of Upsala. They have travelled
much in Europe, and*Celsius has enjoyetl the friendship of Manfredi in
Bologna; he has also taken a prominent part in the measurement of
degrees made by the French in the north ; they have dach visited Lapland ;
each enjoys the highest reputtition in the learned world. They agi’ee
together to put forward in University lectures the much discussed and
much opposed views of Celsius on the shrinking of the sea '.

Linnaeus delivered his lecture on April 12, 1743, Celsius followed on.
the 22nd of June in the same year : in giving an account of these discourses
I will take first that of Celsius, since he is the greater authority on this
subject, and preseiiis ns on this occasion with a summary of his views.

Celsius adopts the following line of argument : —

We must consider our planet in three successive states: the first is
that of inundation, the last that of conflagration, and between these is an
interm'ediate state. As regards the state of inundation, which commenced
very long ago, we have information of various kinds. We now live in the
intermediate state, but everywhere we may observe signs of the retreat of
the sea; its volume is diminishing, and so we are hastening to the last
state, .that of conflagration: the sun has already entered upon this, the
planets are in various stages of the intermediate state, more or less removed
from inundation and conflagration.

Linnaeus adds to this, as a kind of supplement, the following : —

The Loi’d did not create many individuals nor were they scattered over
the whole world— to what end the creation of many when the same object
may be attained by means of one pair or oven one individual ? Year by
year the sea recedes, and the outlines of the mainland are correspondingly

’ C. Linnaei Oratio de Tellnris habitabilis jneremento, ct A. Cehii Oratio dc Muta-
tionibua genemlioribaa quae in Superficie Corporam Coelestium contingunt, 8vo, Lugd.
Batav., 1744 ; for the actual facte also: A. Celeiue, Anmerkung von Verminderung dee
Waeaere in dcr Oeteee und dem Setlichen Meere; der kfln. echvred. Akad. d. Wiee.
Abhandl., Ac., auf dae .Tahr 1743, tranelated by A. G. Kiletner; V, Hamburg, 1751,
pp. 25-37.



10


DISPLACEMENT OF THE STRAND [pai* iii

extended. Originally the mainland was only a little island contf^jning
everything whidh the Creator had appointed for the use of the h£man
race. This island, that is to say Paradise, we may imagine as a lofty
mountain under the equator ; over the slopes, from foot to snow-covered
summit, every species of plant found the climate suited to it. As the
mainland increased in size the seeds of these plants, often of peculiar and
specially adapted structure, were distributed by winds, rivers, and birds.

Andreas Celsius died in 1744, the very year in which these two lectures
appeared in print in Leyden. The conclusions of Linnaeus were on all
sides favourably received, owing to their conformity with biblical toadition,
whereas those of Celsius, although the outcome of the same general view,
called forth the most violent opposition, particularly his reference to the
approaching destruction of all living things. Affairs reached such a point,
that when the state historian, Olatus Dalin, brought forward fresh proofs
from historical sources in favour of Celsius, the Swedish diet expressed its
disapproval of his theory by a special decree.

TWs, however, did not temper the keenness of the -controversy. Many
supported the views of Celsius ; some attempted to explain the shrinking
of the Ocean by evaporation into space, others returned to an older theory
of Pontoppidan, revived of late years by Saemann, according to which the
fixation of water vapour had taken place during the consolidation of the
globe. On the other side, the lejwling opponent of the theory was Bro-
wallius, the learned bishop of Abo. He pointed out that the l<Jw island of
Saltholm, near Copenhagen, was in existence as far back as 1230, and
consequently that the observations made by Celsius further to the north
were not confirmed in the south : he showed also that in the north itself,
on the coast of Finland, in the district of Abo and in Bjorneborg’s Lto,
trees of great age stand but a few feet above the actual sea-level ; as for
instance in Bjemoskargaard, where a tree was felled which stood only four
feet above the water-level although it was 810 years old. To these very
important and indisputable facts I shall recur later h

The work of Bishop Browallius made a deep impression, and treatises
on this subject became less numerous ; finally, in 1792, that is almost fifty
years after the two discourses of Celsius and Linnaeus, Admiral Norde-
nankar, who possessed a thorough knowledge of the Baltic, advanced hew
views on the undoubted sinking of the water-level. The work in which
these were published failed unfortunately to find the appreciation it
desprved". According to NoixIenaUkar the Baltic must be classed with

* J. Brovalliug, Betilnkningar ora Vattensminakning, 8vo, Stockholm, 1755 ; publiahed
in German under the titi q ‘ Hiatoriache and phy aikaliache U hterauchung der vorgegebenen
Verminderung dea Waaaera und VergrSaaerung der Erde,’ &c., tranalated by K. £. Klein,
8vo, Stockholm, 1756.

” J. Nordenankar, Tal. om StrOmg&ngarne i dater-Sjbn, h3.Uet for kongl; Vetenakapa



FRISI. BREISLAK


11


CH.%]

inlajlil lakes, the universal characteristic of which is that they stand at
a higher level than the Ocean, just as the Malar stands al a higher level
than the Baltic. For this reason the decrease of the water is less
surprising. It was not -till communication was established between the
Baltic and the North Sea through the Oresund and the Belts that the
shrinkage of the water began; but at what period this connexion was
effected wo do not know, nor do we know when the waters of the Baltic,
either by steady eflux or by a sudden outburst, will be brought into
equilibrium with the Ocean; and not till this happens will the sinking
of the Water-level come to an end.

No fewer than two hundred rivers flow down from the surrounding
land into the Baltic, and the water-level consequently varies with the
year and the season. Steady winds accelerate discharge into the
North Sea or check it, according to their direction, and thus affect the
water-level.

Nordenankar has thus the credit of calling attention for the first time
to the peculiar conditions which prevail in the Baltic, arid the important
influence of the fresh water which flows into it.

In Italy, meanwhile, a fresh approach had been made to the earlier
views of Swedenborg.

The first volume of the works of the mathematician FriHi, published in
Milan in 1782, contains a remarkable chapter ' Dc aucta et imminuta
Marium Altitudine.’ The author concludes from the observations of
Celsius and Manfredi that the sea-level in the north is sinking, while
in the Mediterranean it is rising. Distinguished investigators had, it is
true, expressed the opinion that the mainland of Scandinavia is being
raised by the force of a subterranean fli’e (Runeberg), but the elevation
of such vast districts and such mighty mountain chains cannot take place
without great and prolonged concussions of the earth or without the
subterranean fire somewhere making its appearance, and even then, sucli
movements would be very unequal in extent. Frisi further observes that
although all seas with free- communication must adapt themselves to the
form of some continuous curve, yet an increased velocity of rotation would,
produce subsidence of the sea-level towards the poles. Such an acceleration
is experienced by all bodies in process of condensation, which rotate alx)ut
a definite axis ^

Even in the case of Italy doubts arose. Breudak examined the now

Academien, vid Praesidii nedlitggande, 18. Jan. 1792, 8vo, Stockholm, 1792. My
attention was drawn to this treatise, now very 'rare, by Dr. D. G. Nathorst and Dr. J. A.
Ablstrand, librarian in Stockholm. A German translation exists under the title ‘ Die
Strdmungen der Ostsee.'

* P. Frisii Operum tomus I, Algebram et Geometriam analyticam continens, 4to,
Mediolani, 1782, pp. 270-276.



12


DISPLACEMENT OP THE STRAND [pAiAm

classic example of the temple of Serapis at Fuzzuoli ; he was oblig^ to
admit that no satisfactory explanation had been found, and in the French '
edition of his Travels in Campania published in 1801 he suggests the
theory that the land itself had sunk five meters and had then risen again
to the same extent. The translator Pommsremi, it is true, adds, ‘This
notion seems to be a jest; it is like cutting the Gordian knot because we
cannot unravel it

The views of Frisi were opposed by Playfair in 1802, chiefly on the
ground that coral reefs had been met with in the tropics below- the existing
sea-level; and returning to the older theory of Lassaro Moro, Playfair
came to the conclusion that in Sweden the land was indeed in process
of elevation. At the same time he enfphasized the absence of trustworthy
observations and the difficulty of obtaining them. The views we now
regard as established, he remarks, arc merely prdvisional and will be
altered and corrected as knowledge advances

Leopold von Buck soon followed with much greater decision in the
same path. In the last days of September, 1807, he travelled from Tornea
to the south. ‘ It is certain,' he wrote -then, * that the surface of the sea
cannot sink; the equilibrium of the seas simply does not permit of it.
Since, however, the phenomenon of diminution cannot be doubted, there
remains, as far as we can see at present, no other course than to admit that
the whole of Sweden is heinfi slowiy elevateilf from Frederikshald to Abo
and perhaps even to Saint Petersburg V

A -change of opinion was beginning to make itself felt. The theory
of des^iccation, as we will call the doctrine of de Maillet and Celsius, was
gradually ‘ giving way to the theory of elevation advocated by Playfair
and von Buch.

We must not, however, imagine that the desiccation theory was at
once abandoned. On the contrary, for a brief season it attained greater
popularity than ever before. This was at the conclusion of the great wars,
at the beginning of the last centuiy, when millions of men were expecting
the end of the world on July 18, 1816. Justus the individual, weakened
physically by want of food or poverty of blood, is subject to mental
disturbances in * which depression, anxiety, and undefined presentiment of
death struggle for expression, so the exhaustion of the people at that time
might be measured by the irresistible force with which the idea of the
immediately impending end of all living things took possession of whole

’ S. Breislak, Voyages physiques et lithologiqiies dans la Cainpanie ; traduit par le
general Pommereuil ; Paris, 1801, II, p. 170, note.

^ The detailed treatise is contained in note xxi to Playfair's edition of J. Hutton's
Theory of the Earth, Edinb., 1802.

’ L. V. Buch, Gesammelte Schriften, herausgeb. v. Ewald, Roth u. Eck, II, p. 504.
The * Reise nach Norwegen und Lappland’ ax^peared in 1800.



13


CH.I1 K. VON HOFF. GOETHE

nati^, as by an intellectual epidemic. The newspapers took particular
pleasure in discussing the theory of Celsius Which, condemned years
before as pessimistic, because it prophesied the destruction of all life, now
suddenly reappeared to comfort tormented humanity, by the prospect
of many thousands of years of existence. The dreaded date passed by;
a little polemic followed, and then the whole incident dropped into
oblivion \

The theory of elevation, however, had as yet by no means attained
supremacy. Many of the most distinguished geologists of the time
' regarded it with disfavour. ^Cuvier and Brogniart, who hod proved the
repeated alternation of marine and fresh-water deposits in the neighbour-
hood of Paris, nowhere speak in their works of elevation or subsidence
of the land. The Cretaceous, , so they say in substance, is deposited by
a first sea’, this withdraws («e re4'tr6),.frosh-water deposits succeed, . . .
another sea, populated by other Mollusca, returns (revient) to retire once
more (se retire), &c.* The same expressions were employed by'Omalius
d’Halloy in 1818 and later in 1827, when Constant Privost undertook to
dispute before the French Academy the results of thero stratigraphical
'investigations ; authoritative at that time, he too did not base his position
on the tlieory of elevation. On the contrary, he doubted whether the
presence of intercalated fresh-water formations could be i-egarded as an
indication of the complete withdrawal of the sea, and attempted to explain
the whole stratified succession around Paris simply by a repeated subsidence
of the watei's, thus returning to the fundamental idea of Celsius, now based
on otlier arguments and clothed in a new form ^

Even in 1822, K. von Hoff himself, the conscientious critic who hod
devoted himself particularly to the investigation of such questions in
Germany, was unable to adopt the theory of von Buch : he also believed
that the sinking of the sea must necessarily be a universal and unifonii

^ 8eel, Voin Wc^ltuntergange, mit Deziehung auf die verkttndete Wasserabnahme dcr
Erde, 8vo, I'rankfurt, 1817 ; W . . . n in the Mainzer Zeitung of the 15th Februarj, 1817,
&c. Even at the beginning of this century discussions took place on the cause of the
universal diminution of the waters, which was considered to be fully established as
the cause of these' phenomena ; so for example, Poiret, Conjectures sur les causes de la
diminution des eanx de la mer, Joum. de Phys., LX, an xiii, pp. 226-237 ; Patrin,
Remarques sur la diminCtion de la mer et sur les lies de la mer du Sud, op. cit., pp. 306-
823 ; Poiret, op. cit.# in the next volume, pp. 17-22.

* Cuvier et Brogniart, Description g^ologique des environs de Paris. The geological
part was first published by Brogniart, 1808, in the Annales du Musde, and then
independently in 1811, later with Cuvier’s ‘Ossements fossiles.’

* Omalius d’Halloy, Note sur Ic gisement du calcaire d’eau douce, dans les ddparte-
ments du Cher, do I’Allier et de la Nifevre ; Jdurn. de Phys., 1818, LXXVII, p. 104
et passim.

* Constant Prevost, Les continens actuels ont-ils ete, k plusieurs reprises, submerges
par la mer ? Compt. rend., IV, 1827, pp. 249-346.



14


DISPLACEMENT OP THE STRAND [paA ra

phenomenon; von Buch’s ‘bold idea’ he regarded as ‘a truly desplirate
means of explanation V

This judgement won the full approbation of Qoethe, who in this con>
nexion dedicated to von Hoff a remarkable essay on the temple of Sefapia
‘ For what, after all,’ wrote Goethe, ‘ is all this, shoving up of the mountains
but a mechanism which gives no aid to the understanding and no play to
the imagination 1 Merc words, without any corresponding ideas

‘The earth cannot raise itself,’ says Dante, ‘that is contrary* to its
nature’: there is a singular parallelism between these words and those-
of Wolfgang von Goethe written 500 years later. No-one, in the'history
of the human intellect, stands above these two men; indeed, few -stand
beside them. Their keen eyes perceived the difficulties, but even they were
not able to find any satisfactoiy solution. The pressing need for explana-
tion brought about a return to the theory of elevation. In the year 1884,
von Hoff also conformed to the new theory of the gradual elevation of
continents, yielding to tlie force of fresh date, and won over by the theoiy
of the elevation of volcanos and other mountains, which had meanwhile
been further developed by Humlraldt, von Buch, and their contemporaries.

The tlmory of elevation soon received the most important support from
the investigations of Charles Lyell and Charles Darwin.

Charles J/yell travelled in the summer of 1834 to Sweden, -satisfied
himself of the truth of the alleged, facts, and pointed out, oven in his first
accounts, that the evidence of a rising of the land is much clearer in the
north than in the south At a later period, he inclined to the view, based
chiefly on Nilsson’s observations, that the elevation was greatest in the
north of Scandinavia, decreased towards the south, and disappeared near
Sodertelje, a few miles to the south-west of Stockholm, but from this point
subsidence set in and continued to the southern end of the peninsula, so
that a tilting movement is thus in progreas, and the limb south of the
axis is much shorter than that to the north of it*.

During the years 1832 • to 1836, Charles Darxvin accomplished his
memorable voyage . to the Pacific Ocean and to South America. The
discovery of the structure of coral reefs led him at first to suppose that an
extremely extensive subsidence was taking place in tropical regions over
the greater part of the floor of the Pacific Ocean. Darwin attempted even


’ K. E. A. von Hoff, Geschiclite dei- (lurch. Ueberlielerung nachgewicsencu natilrlichen
Verfinderungen der Erdoberfliiche, I, 1821, p. 447 ; II, 1834, p. 316 etseq.

* Wolfgang V. Goethe, Geolc^sche Probleme pnd Versuoh ihrer AuflSttung. The
essay on the temple of Serapis bears the title ‘Architektonisch-naiurhistorisches
Problem.’

• C; liyell. On the Proofs of a gradual Rising of the tend in certain Parts of Sweden.
The Bakerian tecture, read Nov. 27, 1834, Phil. Trans., 1835.

‘ e. g. in Principles of Geology, 1 1th ed., 1872, II, p. 190.



cH.ll BRAVAia EUGENE ROBERT 16

to rej^resent on a map the distribution of areas of elevation and subsidence
within these regions over the whole world

A visit to the coast of South America, however, led to the discovery
of a rising movement affecting the whole southern part of the continent
down to about lat. 30° S., and this, judging from the successive terraces
left by the sea, must in Darwin’s opinion proceed int&rniittentlyK

The wide distribution of this phenomenon in space and its intermittent
character were the two facts which began to suggest fresh doubts. The
principal argument in support of the theory of elevation was indeed the
local variability in the change of level experienced by the strand, and now
the range of the proofs began to exceed the limits of the premises. -

Bravais had asserted that two strand-lines in the Allen fjord, hear
Hammerfest^ were not horizontal, and that the slope of the higher terrace
was greater than that of the lower; but this evidence could no longer
be regarded as conclusive. £lie de Beaumont, in a detailed report, certainly
thought he had succeeded in showing, that Bravais’ observations indicated
some coxmexion between the rise of the Scandinavian chain and the emer-
gence of the littoral terraces ; but the same report gives evidence of the
distribution of similar terraces over the whole of northern Europe, and
thus. simultaneously supplies the refutation of this hypothesis. Further,
it has since been shown that Bravais’ observations were incorrect. The
terraces near Hammerfest are just as closely parallel to the existing sea-
level . as everywhere else in Norway, and Bravais seems to have brQught
into the same line of measurement fragments of strand-lines and terraces
which were really distinct

The ‘.Commission scientifique du Nord,’.of which Bravais was a member,
also included the geologists Durwher and Eugene Mobert. The report of
Bravais, so completely in accord with the views prevalent at the time —
erroneous, none the less, as was subsequently shown — found recognition
on all sides; while the complete and invaluable collation of the facts
furnished by Eugene Robert received .scant attention. This work was laid


' C. Darwin, The Structure and Distribution of Coral Keefs, Ist ed., 8vo, 1842.

* Id., Geological Observations on South America, 8vo, 1846, p. 26, et passim.

* Rapport sur un mdmoirc de M. A. Bravais relatif aux ligncs d’ancien niveau de la
mer dans le Finmark (M. £lie de Beaumont rapporteur); Compt. rend., 1842, XV,
pp. 817-849. In opposition to these views it will 'suffice to quote, among recent
publications, T. Kjerulf, Einige Chronometer der Geologic, aus dem Norwegiseben
ttbersetzt von B. Lehmann, Samml. gemeinverstilndl. Vortrilgo v. Virchow und Holtzen-
dorff, XV. Serie, Heft 352, 858, 1880, p. 14, and in particular K. Pettersen, Terrasser og
gamle Strandliqjer, 3. bidrag, Tromsb Museum’s Aarshefter, III, 1880, pp. 80-36 ; the
same, translated by Lehmann in Zeitschr. f. d. ges. Naturwiss., LlII, 1880, pp. 815-822.
This treatise was probably not yet known to v. Decheu when he spoke on this subject
before the Niederrheinische Qcsellschaft Tiir Natur- und Heilkunde at Bonn on
November 8, 1880.



16


DISPLACEMENT OF THE STRAND [p4rm

before the Acad^mie dee Sciences in 1844 ^ It shows for the first tidle the
extension of the phenomenon over the whole northern region, and (dthough
the author has nowhere ventured to draw the final conclusions from his
observations, yet ho evidently perceived the insufficiency of the prevailing
theory. •

Enghne Robert concludes his report with the following' summary : —

1. The vestiges of ancient strand-lines do not appear to be uniformly
distributed over the globe; in the southern hemisphere they seem to be
comparatively rare.

2. They appear to become more frequent as we approach the poles;
but this may simply mean that they are better pi'eserved in these regions,
where a scanty population, lacking our great industrial resources, has
effected -scarcely any change in the land it occupies.

3. They also become more .sharply marked the more remote they are
from the equator ; but here again, as Robert sug^ts, an explanation may
be found in the fact tliat the atmosphere and vegetktion exert a le^
destructive action on the rocks in the arctic regions.

4. The ancient sea-maigins for which the evidence is most conclusive
attain the greatest height (162 to 195 meters) towards the north

This work of Eughne Robert, which might have had a most stimulating
influence, has been almost completely overlooked. Nevertheless, the wide
distribution pf the teiTaces became increasingly apparent, and it was
precisely those who dedicated themselves to the special investigation of
this class of facts, who were least able to repress their doubts regarding
the ancient theory of elevation.

In 1848, RoiieH Chartibers published a very instructive work on ancient
^ea-margins, containing a comparative study of the terraces of North
America, Great Britain, France, and Norway. The author lays stress on
the fact that no case of elevation observed during the existing period has
' affected an area at all approaching in extent that indicated by these
ancient terraces \ He remarks : —

* The recession, accession, and second recession of waters indicated here,
do not necessarily imply risings and fallings of our island, but may be

' E. Robert, Recueil d’observationB ou rechercbes gdologiques, tendant b prouver,
Binon.qae la mer a baisBd et baisae encore de nouveau sur tout le globe, notanunent dans
I'Hemisphere Nord, du moins que le pbdnomene de eoulevement, depuis I’dpbqae oil il
a donnd naiasance aux grandes chatnes de montagnes, n'a plus guere continud se
mani fester que d’une maniere lento et graduelle; Compt. rend. 30 Juillet 1844, XIX,*
pp. 265-267.

* Voyage de la Commission scientifique du Nord en Scandinavie, en Laponie, au
Spitzberg et aux Ferde pendant les anndes 1838, 1839 et 1840 sur la corvette * La
Rccberche,’ publid sous la direction de Paul Gaimard ; E. Robert, Qdologie, vol. X,
pp. 104-195.

■* R. Chambers, Ancient Sei^Murgins, as Memorials of Changes in the relative Level of
Land and Sett, 8vo, 1848, p. 320. «



CH.il CHAMBERS. DOMEYKO. DANA 17

aocoujited for if we suppose some distant ocean bed sinking, then rising,
then sinking again. Perhaps it may be some such latent change which has
produced thoso immersions of forests and those wearings of coasts, with
which English geologists are familiar. I feel, at least, a particular difficulty
in admitting partial subsidences of land in the British Islands, when I see
such uniform terraces around their coasts, as, in that case, deflexions from
the true lines ought to have been conspicuous, wliich I am sure they
are not.*

Rejecting for these reasons a local explanation, Chambers suggests that
the extensive subsidence in the region of coral islands, that is, in the torrid
zone, must cause the ocean waters to flow away from the poles. This is,
so far as I know, the first attempt to bring into causal connexion the for-
mation of atolls in the tropics and that of terraces in the higher latitudes.

In the same year, 1848, a. description of the terraces of the coast of
Chili, by Domeyko, appeared. The author made a direct comparison
between these and the terraces of Norway. Although, according to
Bravais, the terraces of the Alten fjord are far from horizontal, and
although the lines marking the recent sojourn of the sea occur at very
different heights, and at places so remote as Coquimbo on the one hand
and the Alten fjord on the other, yet in both these regions the number of
lines is very limited. We are led, therefore, to suppose that these phenomena
are in no way dependent on local causes, but are connected with circum-
stances which influence the great revolutions of the globe, and aflect 1x>th
hemispheres simultaneously ^

The following year, 1849, Dana, having completed his great voyage in
the northern part of the Pacific, expressed his l)elief that the rise is greatest
towards the north pole : the opposite movement towards the equator

While the theory of elevation thus gained no support from a wider
knowledge of the^ characters of these phenomena, a new school of thought
arose, which inquired seriously into the question of the invariability of the
conditions which detei-mine the 'equilibrium of the Ocean. Very diflerent
causes have been suggested from time to time as capable of producing
a universal alteration in the form of the oceanic surface: in all of them
the force of gravity plays a leading part. I will therefore include all
views of, this kind — using an expression of James Croirs in a slightly
extended sense — under the common name of gravitation theories.

The controversy between Dante and his opponents turned on a question
of gravitation. To the gravitation theories belong also the views of
Swedenborg. At a later time, when Halley*s theory was jn favour,
Z. Bernard supposed that the terrella,’ which Halley conceived to be

1 Domeyko, Memoire sur le terrain tertiaire et left ligncR d'ancien niveau de TOcean
du Sud, aux environs de Coquimbo (Chili) ; Ann. des Minen*, 1848, 4** ser., XIV, pp. J 53-162.

* .1. S. Dana in Wilkes, U.S. Explcfr. Exped. 1849, X, pp. 670, 677.

BOLLAB-,!! Q

<5 4 K ■'i



18 DISPLACEMENT OF THE STRAND . tPA|r ra

moving independently within theliollow body qf the earth, thus cuising
the displacement of the magnetic poles, was also responsible for changes
in the form of the oceanic surfaced- In 1804, TFmZe, starting from the
assumption that the centre of gravity of the globe is not necessarily
coincident with its centre of figure, proceeds to show th^t the position of
the former may be altered by the transport of sediments and various other
causes. But this will bring about a cliange in the surface of the Ocean ‘
These various views may all be included in the group of gravitation
theories} as well os those embodied in the important' works of Adhdmar.

Bertrand and Wrede sought the cause of the alteration within our
planet or upon its surface, Adht^mar on the other hand outside it, in its
relations to other members of the solar system ; his theory is thus based
on considerations similar to those involved in the explanation of the tides.

The work which laid the foundation of this theory appeared in
1842 ^ Its main outlines arc essentially as follows: —

The inherent heat of the planet is scarcely appreciable at the suHace,
and may be regarded as constant. The warmth of which we are sensible
is almost exclusively derived from the sun. Any given place receives this
heat during the day only, losing it again by radiation at night, so that
with an equal duration of day and night the amount of heat received
during the day and that lost during the night balance each other. The
length of the day is thus one of the most important elements in the
temperature of a place. At the- south pole the hours of the night exceed
those of the day by 168 in the year; it thus receives less sunshine, is
consequently colder, and presents conditions far more favourable to the
accumulation of ice than the regions around the north pole, where the hours
of the day are more numcrolis by 168 than those of the night. This state
of things is dependent on the position of the earth with regard to the sun,
and on its movement. Owing to the precession of the equinoxes, the
.equal duration of day and night in all latitudes would recur at the same
point on the earth’s orbit at intervals of 25,900 years, but since the
simultaneous displacement of the perihelion must be taken into account,
this period is reduced to About 21,000 years. While, in our hemisphere, the
sum of spring and summer is now some days longer than the sum of autumn
and winter, at the end of half this period, that is in 10,500 ye^rs, these
relations will be reversed. In the year 1248 of our era, the equal duration
of day and night coincided with the perihelion ; since that time the

* L. Bertrand, Renouvelleinents pdriodiques des continens terrestres, 8to, an VIIT,
pp. 274-300.

* E. F. Wrede, GeognoBtieche Untersuchungen (Iber die siidbaltischen Llinder,
besonders ttber das untere Odergebiet, nfebst einer Betrachtung Ober die allm&hlige
Verandemng des Wasserstandes auf der nOrdlicben Halbkugel der Erde und deren
physischen Ursachen ; 8vo, Beriin, 1804.

’ J. Adh^mar, Revolutions de la mer, 8vo, Paris, 1842.



ADHfiMAR CROLL AND SCHMICK


19


CH. Il

northern hemisphere has been gradually growing colder, the southern
warmer. Up to the year 1248 this circumstance caused the continuous
enlargement of the ice-cap which surrounds the south pole ; by the for-
mation of this cap the centre of gravity of the planet was displaced, and
the oceans ' were drawn towards the south. This explains the greater
expanse of ocean in the south, and the predominance of land towards
the north. .After 10,500 years, that is in about the year 11,748 of our
era, the same state of maximum refrigeration and maximum submergence
will be reached by the north pole.

Thus the planetaiy movement would determine a 2 )er iodic, tramfereyice
of the ice-cap from one pole to the other ^ ancj an accompanying submergence
of the corresponding hemisphere;

It must, however, bo observed that this conclusion is refuted by
historic testimony. For if the northern hemisphere has actually been in
process, of cooling since the year 1248, and its ice-cap therefore in-
creasing, then, since about one-seventeenth of the period preceding the
maximum accumulation of the seas in the northern hemisphere has now
already elapsed, some rising of the waters should be observed on all the
northern shores, and this is not the case. Adh^mar certainly felt this
contradiction, and miule an attempt to meet it. He supposed that the
Antarctic ice needed a very long period to disappear, and even suggested
that a sudden adjustment might be possible as soon as the centre of gravity
crossed the plane of the equator. The phenomena in the Baltic might
perhaps be ascribed to local cbndilions.

• In -spite of this and of many other weak points, Adhe'mar s work was
most stimulating in its influence as a serious attempt to explain, by a single
aAd consistent theory, three great phenomena, namely, the predominance
of water in the southern hemisphere, the periodic return of glacial epochs,
and the universality and constancy of oscillations gf strand-line. Croll in
England, Schmick in Germany, and many others, have amended and
developed Adh^mar’s views, all retoining the main idea of an accumulation
of the sea, which is periodically transferred from one pole to the other.
On the other hand, distinguished climatologists, and in particular A.Woeikof
have definitely asserted that the facts on which Adlu^mar and his successors
have based their theory, are incompetent to produce such extreme changes
of climate as they have been supposed ^


^ J. Croll, Climate and Time in their geological relation!, a Theory of the secular
changes of the Earth's .climate, 8vo, ‘London, 1875. This, principal, work had been
preceded by a number of smaller treatises which appeared, since 1864, chiefly in the
Phil. Mag. ; of those which followed 1 will only mention : Physical Causes of the
Submergence and Emergence of Continents, Geol. Mag., 1874, p. <309 ; Schmick, Pie
Umsetzung der Meere und die Eiszeiten der Halbkugeln der Erde, ihre Ursachen und
Perioden, 8vo, KOln, 1869 ; by the same, Pas Fluthphiinomen und sein Zusammenhang
mit den s&culfixen Schwankungen des Seespiegels, 8vo, Leipzig, 1874 ; by the same, Die



20 DISPLACEMENT OF THE STRAND [p|rt in

All explanations belonging to the group of gravitation theoriJe pre-
suppose that the sum of observations as to the oscillations in various parts
of the world may, after the elimination of erroneous or doubtful cases,
be expressed by some simple formula; in other. words, that there exist
great and continuous regions of changing level, the* distribution of which
is related to the rotation axis of the globe according to some easily
recognizable law. If, on the other hand, it can be shown that the distri-
bution of these oscillations is sporadic, not following any recognizable law,
then their origin cannot be sought in alterations of the form of the sea,
the whole group of gravitation theories must bo abandoned, and we .must
return, in spite of all objections, to the theory of movements of the solid crust.

There is no lack of attempts to determine the geographical distribution
of the so-called ‘secular oscillations/ We may refer to the works of
Ricluz^y Pesctiel^, Hahn^, and others; as well as to the little

sketch-map by G. R. Creciner \

These attempts have not led to results sufficiently uniform to come
under the form of a law. All the authors just mentioned indicate eleva-
tions and subsidences in the most diverse geographical latitudes, often,
indeed, opposite movements in the most closely adjacent regions.

The case is otherwise with the investigation made by H. 11. Howorth.
In a number of tracts which have appeared since the year 1871, he has
attempted to show, always from the standpoint of the elevation theory,
that the land round the poles is I’ising, and he finally reaches the conclusion
that an actual deformation of the planet is in progress, contraction taking
place about the equatorial region, an<l proceeding thence in an increasing
convexity, which probably attains its maxiimim over the magnetic poles

Aralo-Kaspi-Niederung und ihre Bofiinde im Lichte. der Lehie von den saculilren
Schwankungen des Heespicgclfl und dcr WiiiTnezonen, 8vo, Leipzig, 1874. On the other
side, in particular Pilar, p]in Beitrag zur Frage iiber die Ursachen der Kiszeiteii, 8vo,
Agrain, 1876. Ar treatises all tending more or less in the direction of this branch of the
gravitation theory I may also mention : Le Hon, I^eriodicite des deluges, 8vo, Bruxelles,
1858; Garret, Le deplacement polaire, preuves de la variation de Taxc terrestre, 8vo,
Paris, 1876 ; Peroche. Les phonbmenes glaciaires et torrides, causes auxquelles doivent
6tre attribues la precession des equinoxes et les oscillations polaires, 8vo, Paris, 1877.
On the other hand, A. Woeikof, Mitth. geogr. Ges. Wien, 1882, pp. 356-369, aifi Am.
.Fourn. Science, 1886, XXXI, pp. 161-178.

‘ Ri^cluz, La Terre, 3” ed., 1874, I, pp. 709-767 ; general map, pi. xxiv ; also Revue des
Deux Mondes, 1*^*^ janv. 1865. ’

O. Peschel, Neue Probleme der vergleichenden Erdkunde, 2. Aufl., 1876, pp. 97-114.

* F. (j. Hahn, Untersuchungen iiber das Aufstcigen ,und Sinken der Kiisten, 8vq,
Leipzig, 1879.

* A. Issel, Le oscillazioni lente del suolo o bradwismi, gr. 8vo, Genova, 1883.

^ (t. R. Credner, Die Deltas, ihre Morphologie, geographische Verbreitung und
Fintsteliungsbedingungen ; Peterm. Geogr. Mittheil., Erglinzungsbd. XII, 1878, pi. iii.

^ Howorth's first statement that all the land round the north pole is rising, and the
veatvr it lies to th‘ pote the prater the exte^it of the elerathn, I find in Nature, Dec. 20,



CH.i| HOWORTH. BELT 21

Sti^ange to say, Howorth does not seem to have obeyed that his
results, if they should prove true, would at once menace the vety founda*
tion of the elevation theory, , and would raise the question whether this
uniform result is not to be ascribed to an alteration 'in the form of the
surface of the sea. It must be admitted, besides, that Howorth’s actual
data are somewhat defective, and that many contradictory observations
reniaip unexplained; on the other hand, we must not omit to mention
that TJumias Bdt, following another method based on' a study of the
existing distribution of species, has arrived (juite independently at a I'esult
which, in sul>stance, exactly cor^ponds with that obtained by Howorth*,
though it 1‘eceives a very different explanation.

Belt maintains that a rising of the waters altout the equator has been
taking place since the glacial period. The difference between the marine
Mollusca on the two sides of the isthmus of Panama ; the resemblance
between the teri'estrial Mollusca of the northern islands and the West Indies
as far as Puerto Rico and those of Central America and Mexico, and the
correspondence of the land shells of the southern islands partly with those
of Venezuela and partly with those of Guiana; the well-known facts of
geographical disti'ibution presented by the Malay archipelago, and the
gigantic statues of Easter island, are for Belt so many pixHjfs of this
continuous rising. The author believes the explanation to lie in the
periodic and simultaneous fonnation of ice-caps at both poles, as the result
of changes in the obliquity of the ecliptiq.

The contraction of the globe about the equator imagined by Howorth,
and the rising of the oceans about the equator supposed by Belt, are,
however, only two different explanations of one and the same conception
of the facts.

This conception, however, is the same ns that which long ago was
held — though on different grounds — by Swedenborg and Friti, and more
recently by Robert Chambers. It presupposes on each side of. the equator
a nearly symmetrUxit and homologous arrangement of the regions of eleva-
tion and depression, while from the premises of Adh^mar and his successors,
the oscillations on the opposite sides of the equator must be opposed,
i.e. complementai'y.

1871, pp. 162 and 163; much more detailed evidence is given for the statement in
a work by the same author, Recent Elevations of the Earth's Surface in the Northern
Circumpolar Regions, Joum. Geogr. Soc., 1873, vol. 43, pp. 240-263. The data for the
South Polar regions are contained in Nature, March 28, 1872, pp. 420-422, and the
conclusions drawn chie6y in Nature, Jan. 15, 1874, p. 201. Murphy maintains, op. cit.
Jan. 18, 1872, p. 225, that the southern regions are also rising, so that the perimeter of
the equator is diminishing ; cf. also Hamilton, .op. cit., Jan. 25, 1872, p. 242, and Murphy,
Feb. 8, 1872, p. 285.

* T. Belt, The Naturalist in Nicaragua, 8vo, 1874, pp. 263-274. Also; The. Glacial
Period in the Southern Hemisphere, Quart. Joum. of lienee, July, 1877.



22 DISPLACEMENT OF THE STRAND [Pi^ ra

Comtemponuy literature shows that opinions on this im^rtant
question are still widely divergent.

Howorth and Belt, as we have just seen, were led by different paths
to the same view, that which involves a symmetrical displacement of
masses of water on each side of the equator. * •

It may be shown that the opinion of many observeils eminent in this
branch of inquiry inclines towards the view represent by this last .group
of theories. I may mention, in particular, Jiiliun von most

competent authority on the ancient terraices in New Zealand, and Warren
Upham^, who has described the recent alluvial land in New Hamp-
shire. In 1875, N. S. Skater declared the theories of Adhdmar and Croll to
bo very improbable, since all observations are in favour of the simultaneous
glaciation of both hemispheres, but hc nevertheless expressed his conviction
that it is the sea and not the land which is subject to movement

The gravitation theory introduced by Adh^mar, which involves the
asymmetric accumulation of the seas, has nevertheless, in the completed
form which we owe to Cioll, found numerous adherents in England : it
has been fully accepted by Charles Darwin, James Qeikie, and many
others ; it is true that in most cases the theory has been applied to explain
changes of climate rather than movements of the sea-level.

Charles Lyell, whose long career produced such important results for
our science, was always a keen opponent of the theory of the elevation of
volcanic mountains, the theory, that is, of elevation craters, and an equally
keen and influential champion of the theory of secular oscillations of the
continents. On the formation of mountain chains, he never expressed-
himself with equal decision. In the later editions of his ‘ Principles,’ all
the older theories and arguments in favour of continental movements are
retained; but notwithstanding this, Croll’s theory finds recognition as re-
vealing a hitherto neglected vera causa of a certain oscillation of the
sea-level .

The elevation theory rests, even at the present day, on the alleged
unequal movement of neighbouring regions, and the alleged tilting move-
ment of whole countries such as Sweden and Greenland. In spite of the

* J. V. Haafit, Geology of the Provinces of Canierbuiy and Westland, New Zealand, 8vo,
1879, p. 881.

* Warren Uphaui in Hitchcock, Geology of New Hampshire, 8vo, 1878, III, p. 329 et scq.

* N. S. Shaler, Notes bn some of the Phenomena of Klevation and Subsidence of the
Continents ; Proc. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist., 1875, XVII, pp. 288-292. A similar recognition
of the return to the idea of the variability of the ocean surface is also to be found in
certain hydrographic treatises, e.g. in. Stahlberger, Ueber Seespiegelschwankungen,
Mittheil. geogr. Ges. Wien, 1874, 2. Ser., VII, pp. 58-66.

* Lyell, Principles of Geology, 11th ed., 1872, I, p. 279. The introduction to this
edition is the best illustration of Ly ell's position with regard to thb question. Croll’s
gravitation theory is recognized, but its influence on climate is not admitted to be so
great as is claimed by other authors.



TRAUTSCHOLD. SUESS


. OH.^

attacKS of certain physicists, directed chiefly against the absence of a closer
definition of the stupendous force, which is said to elevate and depress
great parts of the earth’s surface, the elevation theory has maintained its
. position as thO' accepted, doctrine up to the present day, especially among
geologists who devote themselves to stratigraphy; from this doctrine the
explcmation of transgressions and gaps in the series of formations is
derived, just as it was sixty or seventy years ago

Wrede’s hypothesis that the position of the centre of gravity of the
solid earth is altered by the displacement of sediments, was revived some
time ago by G*. /(2</er

H. TrautschoUd has drawn his conclusions from a comparison of the
nature and distribution of the ancient sediments ; in numerous treatises he
lias persistently maintained, in opposition to the prevailing opinion, that
secular upward or downward movements of the continents do not take place
This wide divergence of opinions on a question of vitjil importance in
.our science, has led me to submit all the actual observations hitherto
obtained to a fresh examination. I felt the further incited to this task,
because, relying on the teaching of revered masters, 1 myself made many
years ago an attempt to bring the new views -on the fonnation qf moun-
tains into harmony with the received doctrines ; I refer to my treatise en-
titled * Die Entstehung der Alpen.’ I there maintained that the movement
of Scandinavia might bo attributed to the formation of a fold of great
amplitude within the earth’s crust. Still, although I added that the wide
distribution of certain marine deposits, especially of the middle Cretaceous,
is not to be explained in this way, and, at the same time, expressed my
belief that the temporary extension of the seas must depend on causes far
more general, and probably subject to a certain degree of periodicity ; yet,
even with these qualifications, I could not conceal from myself that such
an interpretation was unsatisfactory *.

The folding of the mountain chains and the formation of horiisontal
strand-lines which run without interruption* over mountain segments of

*' ''Again, Buccessivc strata of different kinde are accounted for by the gubeidonce of
land ; it sinks beneath the sea to receive its load of sediment, as the camel drops on its
knees and then rises ; but, more patient and accommodating than the camel, it takes as
' many loads as the geologist is pleased to impose on it. This assumption of the
unlimited sinking and rising of land is plausible and convenient, but it is inexplicable
and unproved.’ Desborough Cooley, Physical Geography, 8vo, London, 187C, p. 428.
Siemens expresses similar views in Monatsber. Akad. d. Wiss. Berlin, 1878, p. 572,

* G. J&ger, Die Polilflehtigkeit des landes, Ausland, 1865, p. 867, and 1867, p. 121.

* H. Trautschold,' Ueber s&culilre Hebungen und Senkungen, 1869 ; Sqr Pin variability
da niveau des mere, 1879 ; Zur Frage liber das Sinken des Heeresspiegels, 1880, and
many later articles ; all in the Bull. Soc. Imp. des NaturaL de Moscou,

* Die Entstehung der Alpen, 1875, pp. 119, 150 ; Ueber die vermeintlichen s&cul&ren .
Schwankpagen einzelner llicile der Erdoberfl&che, Verhandl. geol. Keiebsanst., 1880.
pp. 171-180.



24 DISPLACEMENT OP THE STRAND [PA|Tm

the most diverse description, are two entirely different things, and the
elevation theory therefore ascribes to the lithosphere two movements of
a completely different nature. An examination of the actual data on which
this theory rests has proved, however, to be an extremely difficult task.

In 1834, at the annual meeting of the Geological Society of London,
not long after the publication of the last volume of Lyell’s ‘ Principles of
Geology,’ the president Oi'eenough warned the members against too ready
an adherence to the theory of elevation which was then rapidly gaining
recognition. The statements regarding the elevation in Chili in 1822
were, he said, untrustworthy ; the term ‘ elevation ’ was used in the .most
various senses, and of the uniform elevation of a whole continent it was
almost impossible to form a conception; above all, a terrninology yrm
needed which should not involve any pi*econceived theory’.

This warning appears to have produced no result, and it was not
until 1848 that Robert Chambers . introduced a new phrase ; he spoke
neither of elevation nor of subsidence, but only of 'changes of relative,
level,’ or, as we shall say, diaplacemeivts of the titrand-line.

With the adoption of these neutral terms it at ‘once follows that the
displacements of the strand-line in an upward direction must be described
as positive, those in a downward direction as stegative, since this is the
terminology universally employed by all oceanographers and in all
operations of water ganging. Hero we have no choice, and ' all in-
vestigators who have sought to abandon the adventurous sea of theories
for the solid ground of fact, and have endeavoured to obtain information
by direct measurements of the water-level from the shore, like Fot'ssman
for instance in his valuable investigation on the level of the Baltic, have
adopted naturally the signs -f and — in recording their results. In this
work therefore the older term devation of the land will bo replaced by
negative displacement of the strand-line, and subsidence of the laml by
positive displacement of the strand-line.

But if, equipped with this neutral terminology, we now attempt to
pi'oceed to a serious examination of the {M)8ition, we find ourselves con-
fronted with so many circumstances which may exert an influence on the
sea-level, by so much uncertainty in the existing data, and by so many
sources of error, that finally little ' remains as the result of many years'*
labour, but a conviction that many doctrines which in spite of the
warnings of unprejudiced authorities have become accepted dogmas are
erroneous, and a hope that the rising generation will succeed in obtaining
a more exact knowledge of the laws w'hich govern the statics of the seas.
For this reason the following chapters in so far 'as they treat of displace-
ment of the strand are mainly critical. •

’ G. B. Greenough, Address delivered at the Annivei'sary Meeting, Feb. 21, 18^ ; Proc.
Gcol. Soc., 1833-1838, II, pp. 54 ct seq.



METHODS


25


CH.


There are three methods of studying changes in the sea-level.

The first. consists in tracing the various extension of the ancient seas.
Although the strand-line itself can seldom be recognized, yet iu the gr^t
‘transgressions, particularly that of the middle Cretaceous, we perceive the
widely distributed signs of positive movement. Frequently, doubtless
even as a rule, these transgressions are accompanied by erosion, and hbnce
negative movements are far more difficult to discover by this method than
positive, and are only rarely brought to light, if indeed they do not
frequently escape observation altogether.

The second method is found in a comparative study of the nature of
the sedimentary formations. Very distinguished investigators, Charles
Darwin for example, have believed that sediments were oidy^fonned with
a sinking sea-bottom, that is during a positive nioyement. This is by no
means the case, but it is evident that with a predominance of the negative
movement the approach of that critical moment is hastened when the
upper surface of the sediment and the surface .of the sea coincide at
the same level. For the present it is sufficient to refer to what has been
said with regard to the supeiposed and api)Osed series on the isthmus of
Suez (I, pp.'378 et seq.).

The third method, finally, is the examination, of the existing coast, but it
is precisely in this study of the evidence furnished by marks upon the
coast that we meet with the greatest difficulties. Positive movements as
a rule conceal their own traces, and it is otdy exceptionally, os in the case
of coral reefs, for instance, that they are definitely recorded. Negative
movements leave visible signs-: but this is not all. Even when an
oscillatory movement is taking place, in which the positive character
predominates, it may often happen that the only evidence which remains
is that of a negative movement. An example will make this clear. Let
ab, he, cd, represent equal spaces traversed in equal times, and let us
suppose that we have a preponderance of the positive movement, such that
the ratio of the positive di.splacement to the negative is os 4 : 3 . We shall
then have the following scheme : —

111


6

fC'ifii

— mn


+ de


—no

&c.

+ Cll


-OJi

+J>q

+ bc

—y/f

i

}

+ ab

h


In 4 units of time the strand will traverse 4 positive units of distance
from a to e, it will leave here its highest mark, and then sink through
3 native units of time to h, it will then again ascend in 4 positive units
of time to m, and so on. In this case, however, the relict strand-line at e



26


DISPLACEMENT OF THE STRAND [PA|rr ui

will remain visible through the 6 units of time included between tf and H,
of which 8 are negative and 3 positive, and it is only during the single
unit of time Zm that it wiU be concealed. Although the positive movement
thus prerlominates in the ratio of 4:3, yet the chances are as 6:1 that
a mark will be seen, above the water-level from which negative -movement
may be inferred. . Even in the case of a double predominance of the
positive movement, that is with a ratio of 6:8, there is still a twofold
probability that a negative mark will be seen above the water-level.

But in nature the movements do not take place either by regular
oscillations or with regular intermittence ; and a whole series of factors
of greater or less -importance come into play and influence the position
of the strand. The simple example given above is intended merely to
show how necessary it is not to lose sight of compensating movements.

In 8 tud 3 riiig the strand wo must further distinguish between the
movements of the present day which may be directly recorded by tide
gauges and those which can only be inferred from ancient remains such
as the so-called ‘ raised beaches.’ A link between the movements now in
progress'and those of the ancient- world is aflbrded by evidence which lies
within the limits of historic time, i. e. to which a date or period can be
assigned and approximately expressed in figures, as for instance in the
case, of the LUJiovUnnus borings in works of Roman construction..

It is obvious that the histoiic period, as we have defined it, is far from
possessing the same importance and duration at the mouths of the Nile, of
the Rhine, and the Mississippi ; but similar difierences also exist in speaking
of other periods, tvs, for instance, the glacial or pre-glacial. Greenland is
still in the glacial period, and no one who has seen the moraines of Lapland
• in the 70th degree of north latitude will find it easy to believe that these
are just as ancient as those of the moraine lands long abandoned by the ice .
at the foot of the Alps.

One of the most dangerous sources of error lies, indeed, in the temptation
to class together, without distinction, strand-lines of different age. Thus
the oft-repeated assertion that Greenland is now undergoing a tilting
movement rests solely on a mistaken association of extremely ancient
high-lying strand-lines in the north with marks appureutly positive on
buildings in the south, which are of very recent date. It may, however,
suffice to mention that in 'Ingalliko fjord itself, said to be experiencing
a t) 08 itive movement, high-level strand-lines are equally present, as in the .
north.

The level of the sea depends- on the tides, the heat of the sun, the
atmospheric pressure, the prevailing winds, the influx of fresh water, and,
in enclosed seas, on evaporation. It is also affected by local sources of
- attraction and many other circumstances. Among those, however, are
some which make it difficult to ascertain the mean level, and render a long



OCEANIC SUBSIDENCES


27


series of measurements necessaiy before changes of level can be made
manifest; this is particularly true of the winds and climatic factors
generally. Some movements, such as the tides, may be easily eliminated,
owing to their periodicity; others, again, such as the attraction of the
continents, only need be considered in the cose of particular telluric
changes ; others, finally, such as the deposition of sediments; act slowly
but constantly, producing a positive movement, which is general so far
as it results from displacement, and local so far as it is a consequence
of attraction. We shall have occasion later to study some of these factors
in greater detail.

In addition to all these processes great and general negative movements
are from time to time produced by the formation of fresh oceanic abysses,
or by the addition of new areas of subsidence to abysses already m
.existence, and it is impoiiMint to bcar'in mind that movements of this kind
surpass all others in importance.

In the first volume of this work certain seas, in particular the Mediter*
ranean, ivere studied in some detail ; the various ages of successive
subsidences in the Aegean, the North Atlantic, and the Tyrrhenian sea,
were detennined within narrow limits, and the relation of these seas to
the oldef extensions of the Mediterranean we^c discussed. It Is now' my
task to investigate the Iwundaries, first of the Pacific, and then of the
Atlantic Ocean, and to compai'e them with each other, os a preliminary to
the discussion of the gi'eat oceanic areas of subsidence. While thus
engaged in a study of the coasts, opportunities will arise of completing
the tectonic sketches which were outlined in the fii'st volume, and so of
preparing the way for the survey of the face of the earth, reserved for the
last volume.

Although the formation of the Aegean inbreak falls possibly within
a period more recent than the glacial episode, when the region was already
inhabited by man, still we may fairly assert that a general suljsidence of
the strand-line, as a consequence of the sudden formation of a great oceanic
abyss, has not taken place for some thousands of years past. Yet in
contemplating those trilling changes in the coast-line, which take place
here and there before our eyes — the results, as we have seen, of a great
variety of circumstances — we are again and again tempted to regard them
as the direct successors of those remote events which have left their traces
in' a long-forgotten past. Thus the displacements of the strandrline in
the Baltic, at present a closed sea, have been interpreted as the effects of-
the same causes as gave rise to the ancient high-level strand-lines . and
shelly beaches of a sea which was certainly not thus closed.

It thus becomes necessaiy to subject some of the more important cases
of change obsenred daring the historic period to a searching elimination.
If, however, the result should lead us to the conclusion that local factors of



28


DISPLACEMENT OP THE STRAND [paw hi

a climatic nature, for instance, possess a greater influence than is usually
attributed to them, and that where these are absent long stretches of coast
show no signs of movement within the historic period, yet this would not
prove that such movement does not take place. A study of the animal
kingdom does not reveal any change in species within the historic period,
but it does not follow that species are immutable. All that we can
conclude is that within the limits of observation and of the period over
which our observations extend, such changes are not discernible. But
this result would involve considerable modification in current views as
regards the stmnd-linc.

With the increased attention given during the last few years to the
study of earthquakes and dislocations we have gained a closer acquaintance
with the characters which (listiuguish a dislocation of the lithosphere, and
at the same time have come to recognize the mrity of such an occurrence.
The mast remarkable dislocations of our times are no doubt those in the
west of the United States, which have been described by Gilbert on the
borders of the Great Salt lake, by Russell in the Great Basin, and by
Reyer in the Sierra Nevada. These are all changes in the relative position
of two segments of the earth’s crust, occurring along a line which is
usually many miles in length. The throw does not as a rule amount to
more than a few metres; the course at the surface of the ground is always
very sliarply defined, often indeed it appears as an open cleft many miltes
long.

I know, however, of only a single case in which a recent dislocation
has reached the sea-coast and produced a local change in the strand-line.
This occurred in New Zealand ; Lyell has given an account of it *. .

In the year 184)8, during jm earthquake at White Bluff, Cloudy bay,
a fissure opened on the south coast of Cook strait, and ran to the south-
south-west, parallel to the course of the mountains; it was said to be
traceable into the interior for a distance of 60 miles; On January 23,
1856, a violent earth(iuake again occurred, and this time a line of
dislocation appeared on the north coast of Cook strait; it began on the
east side' of Muka-Muka cliff, 12 miles south-east of Wellington, and
was continued in a north-north-easterly direction, following closely the
eastern foot of the Reniutaka chain ; it. presented, for the greater part of
its course, the form of. an open fissure, and extended 90 miles into the
interior of North island. This fracture may perhaps be regarded as
the continuation of that which was formed in 1843 in South island. The
area lying to the east of this lino remained wholly unaffected by the fault
of ■ 1855 ; that to the west was displaced, downwards in South island, and

' C. Lyell, Hull. boc. gtiol. de Fr., 1865, 3* s4r., XllI, pp. 661-667 ; PrincipleH of Geology,
11th cd., 1872, pp. 82-89 ; also R. Mallet, Report on the Facts and Theory of Earth-
quake Phenomena, Rep. Brit Ass., 1858, p. 105.



CH. *l]


DISLOCATION IN NEW ZEALAND


29


upwards in North island. In the south the subsidence close to, the fissure
amounted to 5 feet, in the north the elevation at its maximum, on the east
.side of Muka-Muka cliff, was. 9 feet: a white band of nullipores which
marked the former strand now stood, west of the line of dislocation, 9 feet
above the water-level, while to the east its position remained unchanged.

From here the movement decreased towards the west, so that at Port
Nicholson, 11. miles to the vrest, it was reduced to one-half, and at a distance
of 23 miles was no longer observed. In this case w^e may speak of a tilting
movement, for the dislocation is visible not only on the coast but in the
interior of the island, and the facts are beyond doubt. The presence of
a visible line of dislocation sharply separating the moved area from the
unmoved distinguishes this case from all the others wdiich w-e are about
to discuss.

The method we shall adopt in this discussion is as follows : —

We shall first explain the structure of the shores of the Atlantic and
of the Pacific Oceans, and then point out the very remarkable contrast
which distinguishes these two occan-ba»sins.

We shall next pass on to consider the seas of ancient times. It must
not be forgotten that it was the extraordinary extent of the seas in the
earlier periods of the earth’s history which gave the first impulse to all
these discussions. The question will then arise whether the nature and
the distribution of the ancient sediments point to local or general altera-
tions in the sea-level. For the solution of this it will not be necessary to
treat the deposits of e^ich stratified system with eciual fullness. On the
contrary, I do not propose to discuas the distribution of the sediments in
any detail except in those cases where observations have already led to
clear and definite results, and I shall only incidentally refer to their nature.
Thus in the Carboniferous the presence of the Coal-measures, so far as they
lH>ar on the question before us, wdll taken into consideration, and in the
Khaetic period the foiTOation of the limestones.

Among the events of the imnxediate past and of the existing present
are some of exceptional importance, such as the origin of the Norwegian
strand-lines, the behaviour of the Baltic, and the temple of Serapis at
Puzzuoli in the Mediterranean : these demand a more detailed investigation.
In conclusion >ve shall attempt a survey of existing olKservations.



30


CHA PTER // .

THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN

The Canadian shield. The Baltic shield. . Glint lines. The table-land of Spitzbergen.
Greenland, llie Caledonian mountains. The Armoriciui mountains. The Variscian
mountains. The syntaxis of Central Europe. The Iberian Meseta. Survey of the pre-
Permian mountains in Europe. The islands of Europe. Western Africa. The east of
Central and South America. Survey of the outlines of the Atlantic.

The Caiuulimi Skidd. The whole of tJie north-east of America, from
the mouth of the St. Lawrence to that of the M^kenzie, together with
the adjaceht islands of the Arctic Ocean, belongs to a broad table-land of
horizontal Palaeozoic beds, fimii beneath which the Archaean foundation
crops out in the middle of the table-land not unlike a flat shield. This
Archaean shield is thus surrounded by a ring of horizontally stratifled sedi-
ments. The primaeval rocks composing it were not only folded in pre-
Cainbrian times, but were also exposed to severe denudation, so that the
Palaeozoic series rests oti the planed-down edges of Archaean folds. Many
great patches of the Palaeozoic covering, however, remain preserved on the
shield itself. The exposure of the shield, the outlines of the inner margin
of its Palaeozoic girdle, as well as of the superincumbent Palaeozoic patches,
result to a great extent from the glacial ero.sion which these regions have
experienced in comparatively recent times.

It is to the exposed Arohaean surface that we give the name of the
Canadian shield.

Resting upon this shield, a little outside the central region towards the
east, lies the sheet of W'ater known as Hudmm Iniy. As we might expect
from the uniform structure of the land, this large arm of the sea is of a very
uniform and trifling depth, which amounts, in Hudson bay and James
bay, to only about 70 fathoms ; towards Hudson strait, the bottom sinks
to 100 fathoms and over ; in Fox channel the depths are much more con-
siderable. Hudson l)ay cannot, thereforo, be compared with the deep
inbreaks of the Me<literi'anean, the gulf of Mexico, or the Caribbean sea.
Nfeither the expression ‘ fore-sea ’ (Vormeer) nor ‘ back-sea ’ (Rilckmccr) is
here applicable ; the bay is only a submerged plateau, a shallow pan.

A' similar strocture is presented elsewhere in only one instance, th{it of
the Baltic sea.

Such details as we possess concerning the structure of the neighbourhood
of Hudson bay, and of the several Palaeozoic patches which rest upon the



31


CH. li] THE- CANADIAN SHIELD

shield, we owe almost .exclusively to the labours of Robert BelP. . The
shores are flat ; only on the east coast of James bay and to the north of it,
towards cape Wolstenholme, do more considerable heights occur, attaining
nearly 2,000 feet.

' A band of horizontally stratified sediments of Silurian and Devonian ■
age starts from the south and extends for a great distance up to the southern
and western part of the shores of James bay. On the west of Hudson bay,
near the mouth of the Churchill river, lies a great mass of ancient quartzites
with horizontal stratification. In the north crystalline schists are found
about Chesterfield inlet ; Marble island owes its name to an error ; it is not
fomled of marble, but of quartzite and schist At capo Southampton and
on Mansfield island thinly, stratified fossiliferous limestone of Silurian age
lies in hundreds of horizontal beds, which the undermining waves bi-eak up
into towers and pillars. The contrast between the plateau-like Mansfield
island and the surrounding country is descrilied as striking in the extreme.
Between these regions the greater part of the land consists in all proba-
bility of gneiss. Cape Wolstenholme is also fonnod of gneiss, as well as
a large part of the east coast, but in Natapuka sound remains of the
Palaeozoic covering occur.

We will now pass out of the bay through Hudson strait, where the
border of the shield is least known and where its form appears to be least
regular.

The islands off cape Wolstenholme, Digges, Nottingham, and Charles
island, as well as Prince of Wales sound and North bay lying opposite,
on the coast of Meta incognita, are wholly comjwsed of gneiss, as is all
that is known of the south coast of Meta incognita as far as the Savage
islands, near Resolution island.

Proceeding towards cape Chudley and ‘the sea, however, we encounter
an independent and fairly lofty chain, which can no longer he regarded as
-belonging to the Canadian shield or to its border. The position of this, os
we shall sec later, is of particular importance : it l)egins near Belle Isle straits
and forms the whole coast of Labrador; in its northern part it attains
a height of 6,000 feet and reaches Hudson strait near cape Chudley with
a height of 1,500 feet. According to Bell’s observations this coastal chain
is not broad, and is followed on the west by a flat country through which
the Whale river flows to the north into Ungava bay. In the south the two
little islands, Castle island and Henley island, facing the northern point , of

' K. Bell, Report on Hudson’s Bay and some of the Lakes and Rivers lying to the West
of it, Geol. Snrv. Canada, Report for 1878-1880, p. 27, C. et seq. ; by the same. Report on
the Geology, Mineralogy, Zoology, and Botany of the Coast of Labrador, Hudson's Straits,
and Hudson’s Bay, op. cit. for 1882-1884, DD. Digges, near cape Wolstenholme, is
only a single island cut through by two deep furrows ; it was at one time 8ui>po8ed that
three independent islands existed here.



32 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [part iii

Newfoundland, consist of horizont|Ll sheets of an eruptive rock such as are
kaown in several places elsewhere ‘in Canada, intercalated into the lowest
Palaeozoic beds, and these sheets form a startling contrast to the surrounding
country, which consists of gneiss. We may add at once that the island of
Anticosti in the gulf of St. Liiwrence is formed of flat-lying Silurian beds.

The coast-chain of Labrador consists, so far as it is known, of gneiss and
other Archaean rocks. Its lower parts are rounded by ice, but above it is
broken up into jagged peaks and sharp ridges. The ice did not reach the
upper parts, although in the south' it extended up the slopes to a height of
about 1,600 feet.

Sutherland had already shown that the highly glaciated west coast of
Davis strait and Baffin bay, from Cumberland bay nearly as* far as cape
Walter Bathurst, consists chiefly of Archaean rocks ; traces 6f a Palaeozoic
covering have only been met with near ciipe Durban and to the south of it L
Hall subsequently visited the southern part of these regions: the most
detailed observations have been made by Boas. From these it appears that a
high and narrow coast-chain, precisely similar to that of Labrador, exists here.
Dr. Boas has had the kindness to furnish me with the following description :
‘ The narrow range which forms Cumberland peninsula runs along the west
coast of Baffin bay up to Lancaster sound. In tiome bay, where the coast
assumes a north to south direction, a remarkable gap occurs^j and the hilly
country of the west advances as far as Davis strait. This range, as far as
it is known to me, consists in its central part of gneiss, in the peripheral
parts of coarse-grained granites. The whole range, rising in steep horns
and peaks to a height of 2,000 meters and over, is characterized by narrow
valleys with precipitous walls which extend across the peninsula and con-
nect the corresponding fjords of the opposite coasts, the height of the passes
l>eing scarcely 160 meters! The country is thus cut up into steep- walled
mountain masses, three of which succeed each other as far as Home bay.
Furtlier to the north also the mountains are completely intersected by deep
fjords’ which merge into valleys opening on to the western plains. Pre-
cisely analogous features are met with in the extreme north, where Hayes
sound appears to fomi a similar divisional line, an<l where the valley which
connects Greeley and Archer fjords separates two mighty highlands.

‘ To the west of the range lies a hilly country, apparently quite irregular,
and composed of coarse-grained granite. A glance at the fjords of the
north-west coast of Cumljerland shows the predominance of a north-west
and north to south direction in the course of the valleys. The form of the
fjords is here very striking : they consist almost everywhere of basins
connected by narrow gullies in which rapids are formed by the water
flowing into or oht of them according to the state of the tide.

' P. C. Siiiherliind, On the Geological and Glacial Phenomena of the Coasts of Davis
Strait and Baffin’s Bay; Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc..*18r)8, IX, p. 299.



CH.II] CUMBERLAND IN BAPPIN-LAND 38

•

‘ As we advance towards the west the hills become lower and the valleys
broaden until we find ourselves at last oi} a boundless plain.

* Here the Silurian limestones begin, which in the more southerly parts
of the count!) had been found’ at the upper end of Frobisher bay and on
the shores of lake Kennedy, where they are surprisingly rich in fossils.
The first of these localities was made known by Hall. Unfortunately
I did not find the rock in place, since the plains were covered by very deep
snow, so that I cannot say whether the beds lie horizontal or not ;
probably they do. The lakes of this region must certainly l:>e regarded
as relics of the sea. The whole eastern half of Fox basin is flat, and
the plain is an exposed sea bottom, ns is proved by the remains of whales,
walruses, &c.

‘ Orographically, the peninsula Ixjunded by Cumberland sound aind
Frobisher bay is completely separated from the range described above.
The peninsula attains its greatest height in its southern parts, and slopes
away to the plain towards the north-west. The northern shore consists
exclusively of granite: in the south limestones (Silurian?) occur. Sand-
stone also has been found in the extreme south.

‘ The peninsula of Meta incognita is also completely independent of the
northern plateau, for the plain reaches as far as Frobisher bay.'

I have given this information in full, since it embodies all tliat we
' actually know of a lofty and independent range ; consisting chiefly of gneiss
and extending from the southern part of Cumberland nearly as far north
as cape Walter Bathurat. It is either the direct continuation of the lofty
gneiss range, which Robert Bell followed along the coast of Labrador from
Belle Isle strait to cape Chudleigh, or at least corresponds very closely in
position with such a continuation.

To the west of this coastal range lies a flat country, in which Silurian
limestone with horizontal stratification has been observed in several locali-
ties. Boas conjectures, witli great probability, that the horizontal Silurian
limestone which we shall meet with later more to the north in Prince Regent
inlet is continued thence on to the fiat eastern half of Melville peninsula,
where Hall observed it near Igluling, thence to lake Nettilling (lake
.Kennedy) and to the upper end of Frobisher bay Such then is the north-
eastern border of the Canadian shield, separated by a long and lofty gneiss
range from the depths of Baflbi bay and Davis strait.

A continuation of this Silurian zone is so far not known on the shores
of Hudson strait, and it is therefore not possible to say whether it should
be looked for in the plain which extends from Ungava bay through Labrador
southwards to Belle Isle strait and the island of Anticosti. '

That Anticosti consists of horizontal Silurian limestone has already been

* Franz Boas, Bafiin-Land ; Geographische Ergebnisse einer 1883 und 1884 ausgeftthrten
Forschungsreise : Peterm. Mittheil., Erganzungshefb No. 80, 1885, pp. 50 and 57.

■OLLAB y ]>



84 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [pabtih

mentioned ; but just as to the north-east the Silurian girdle in Cumberland
peninsula is bounded on the exterior by the lofty gneiss range of the coast,
so on the St. Lawrence it is bounded on the exterior by the folded mass
of Maine and New Brunswick.

The cast of the United' States is traversed by folds which have been
produced by a tangential movement directed from the existing Atlantic
ocean towards the mainland. Wo have seen (I. pp. 553-555) that from
Alabama to Georgia these folds strike to the north-east more or less
parallel with the coast, thus forming the Alleghany mountains, and are
finally continued into the Catskill mountains north-north-west of New
York, where they arc joined by a system of folds striking from north to
south.

The Alleghanics are not separated from the adjacent plain on the west ;
•the intensity of the folding ‘decreases in this direction and a secondary
folded formation or parma, the Cincinnati uplift, lies in front of them.
With the folds which run from north to south the case is different. Their
western border extends along the length of lake Champlain, reaches the
St. Lawrence near Quebec, and then, with the trend curving to the north-
east, follows the right shore of this great river. The country to the right
of the river is folded, that to the left of it is flat table-land.

It is true that on the left shore the whole Archaean and Azoic series
has been intensely folded, but it was abraded at a very early period, and on”
the denuded folds several members of the Silurian were deposited horizon-
tally ; these, however, have been so far removed in later times, that over
large areas the Archaean foundation alone is visible. This is the case
according to Laflammc around lake St. John and in the whole fluvial
region of the Saguenay. Some parts of the Palaeozoic patches of lake
St. John contain petroleum

Selwyn’s admirable account of the structure of this region confirms
Logan’s view, that the St. Lawrence must be regarded as marking an
extremely important boundary line in the structure of the country ^ All
the Silurian on the right bank, from Quebec away towards capo Rozier,
follows the trend of the shore-line and is overfolded towards the west, so
that the beds are inverted as in the outer border of the Alps. These Silut
rian folds are followed towards the east, at a distance of a few miles from
the river, by a long and narrow but not continuous zone of Archaean rocks ;
two other similar zones, running close together and nearly parallel, strike
north and south towards the south-east part of Chaleur bay ; another zone

* J. C. K. Laflammc, Report on Geological Observations in the Region of the Saguenay ;
Geol. Surv. Canada, Report for 1882-1884, D. *

* A. Selwyn and G. H. Dawson, Descriptive Sketch of the Physical Geography and
Geology of the Dominion of Canada, 8vo, Montreal, 1884, with map, pp. 5-26; also
E. Gilpin, jun., The Geology of Gape Breton Island, Nova Scotia, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc.,
1886,’ XLII, pp. 515-526, map.



THE LOWER ST. LAWRENCE


36


CH. ll]

of Archaean masses runs in a curved line along the bay of Fundy, then
reaches the most northerly part of cape Breton on the north-east and is
continued across the bea into Newfoundland. Still further to the east
follow the zones directed to the east-north-east which have been already
mentioned (1. p. 554).

The folding is’ older than a part of the Carboniferous period, as is
shown by the lie of the Coal-measures in New Brunswick, and did not
extend beyond the present line of the lower St. Lawrence, but it has
been dammed back against this line, and overfolding has taken place in
consequence. Selwyn represents the structure of the St. Lawrence valley
itself by the accompanying section.

On the left we see the edge of the table-land ; an upper member of the
lower Silurian (Trenton limestone) lies in transgression on the abraded


Montmorency of

Falls Orleans



Flo. 3. Hyiiolhetical Section across the rirer St. Lawrence and the isle of Orleans. After Selwyn.

I, JIj III Faults ; gn Gneiss ; / rod, green, and black shales and sandstones with Cambrian
fossils in the included pebbles (^Lauzon stage') ; j Levis conglomerate and Graptolite shales
(Lower Silurian') ; y Chazy limost<nio and other bods (Lower Silurian) ; Trenton limestone,
lying transgressivoly on the gneiss (Upper Silurian) ; /, 6 Utiiui and Hudson stages (Upper
Silurian).

folds of the gneiss. The nortliern arm of the St. Lawrence is a true
fault trough, for the downthroWn strata of the river bed, visible along the
fractures op both shores, belong to the more recent divisions of the lower
Silurian (Utica and Hudson stages) ; the isle of Orleans is a horst, and at
the same time part of the foldetl region.

The boundary between the folded region and the table-land runs
between cape Rozier and the island of Anticosti ; this part of the gulf of
St. Lawrence and the lower part of the river is therefore a true- ‘fore-
valley ’ (Vorthal), like the Persian gulf.

The folds of New Brunswick and cape Breton island run, out in jagged
ends towards the gulf of St. Lawrence, and are continued, as we said
above, into Newfoundland. The very first examination of the island made
by Jukes in the years 1839 and 1840, showed that its outline is entirely deter-
mined by folds striking across it; the saddles of these folds form peninsulas



86 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [PART in

both on the north and south coasts, while the bays, such as White bay, Notre
Dame, Bonavista, Trinity and Conception bay in the north, and Fortune,
Placentia and St. Mary bay in the south, correspond, for the greater part,
to synclinals. The later surveys of Murray and Howley confirm this result ^
the great -northern peninsula is probably a single continuous* anticlinal;
a fault appears to run with the strike from the neighbourhood of cape Bay
in the south-west of the island through the Grand lake to White bay, that
is, across the whole island : in the south-east, the extent to which the out-
line is determined by the folds is shown with particular clearness by the
Avalon peninsula. I’he mean direction of the folds is N. 27* E. They are
formed of Archaean and Palaeozoic rocks; the Carboniferous formation, -
or at least a part of it, lies unconformably upon them

Here we have l)efore us a striking example of that form of coast which,
with F. von Richthofen, we will tenn the rias coast. It indicates the plung-
ing of great folded mountains beneath the ocean Thus, the outer border
of the ginllc of flat-lying beds surrounding the Canadian shield is defined
towards the north-east by the gneiss mountains of the we.st coast, by
Baffin bay, Davis strait, and Labrador; towards the south-east by the
St. Lawrence, and the folded mountains of New Brunswick and New-
foundland. On the south and west tlicrc is no such outer boundary of the
encircling zone ; it. becomes continuous, in Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota
and the northern Prairie land, with thfe widely extended Palaeozoic deposits
of the neighbouring regions, and is covered towards the west by the
transgressive Cretaccou.s.

On the inner bonier of the girdle, that is, along the margin of the
Archaean shield, a phenomenon appears for the first time to which I shall
subsequently have frequent occasion to refer ; I allude to the evident con-
nexion which exists between the position of the great lakes and the course
of this Iwundary line.

The line runs from tl\e north-east end of lake Ontario to the east end
of Georgian Ixiy, and thence towards the west end of lake Superior. The
northern shores 'of the great sheet of water consist chiefly of Archaean,
or at least Azoic rocks, M*hilc on the .south side the various members of the
Palaeozoic series occur, and spread out towards the United States.

Further to the north-west, the coincidence of the lakes with the boundary
of the Archaean shield is still more striking ; Richardson, Isbister, and other
observers long ago called attention to it ^

* J. B. Jukes, General Report of the Geological Shrrey of N.ewfoundland, 8vo, London,
1843, map, p. 128 et seq.; A. Murray and J. P. Howley, Geological Survey of Newfound-
land, 8vo, London, 1881, p. 1.39 et passim ; also J. Milne, Notes on the Physical Nature
and Mineralogy of Newfoundland, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc,, 1874, XXX, pp. 722-745.

* F. von Richthofen, I'ilhrer filr Forschungsreisende, 8vo, 1886, p. 308.

* J. Richardson, On some Points of the Physical Geography of North America in
connexion with its Geological Structure, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1851, VII, pp. 212-215;



<«. II]


CANADIAN ZONE OF LAKES


37


The east side of lake Winnipeg is Archaean, while the islands and the
west shore belong to the horizontally stratified Palaeozoic border on this
border lie Winnipegosis, Manitoba, and a ci-owd of smaller sheets of water,
and*to the west of these begins that vast region of Cretaceous deposits
which extends to the foot of the Rocky mountains (I, pp. 568, 584).

In descending the river Athabasca, Bell found himself between
Cretaceous rocks as far as Drowned rapid, i.e. to about lat. 66® 40' N. ;
from this point onwards Devonian sandstone, rich in petroleum and lying
horizontal, makes its appearance. The petroleum forces its way up through
the Cretaceous beds, flows out and covers the slopes of the shores with
bitumen. The outflow, liowcver, appears to be very local ; a thick bed of
clay at the b«ise of the Crebiceous holds the petroleum down over large
areas. Some patches of Cretaceous are still to be seen further to the
north ; the flat-lying Palaeozoic deposits are continued to lake Athabasca
and form its southern sliore as far as it is known. The northern shore,
on the other hand, consists of gneiss. Gneiss also forms the islands at the
west end of the lake and the country about the mouth of the river
Athabasca, and the exit of the Great Slave river \

The work of the Geological Survey of Canada, which has extended as
far as the Great Slave lake, and the highly iinportant explorations of
Richardson, Youle Hind, Kennicott, and others, in the inhospitable regions
which stretch northwards from the Great Slave lake to the Arctic Ocean,
enable us to trace the boundary between the Archaean shield and the
Palaeozoic border, which takes approximately the following course^: —

For a very long distance it almost coincides with the Slave river; and
that half of the Great Slave lake which lies east of the mouth of this river is
floored by Archaean rocks, that to the west, on the otlier hand, by Palaeozoic
beds. On the west shore important springs of petroleum occur. To the
north of the Great Slave lake the lx)undary is indicated, according to
Richardson, first by a long arm of tlie lake, then by a s(*ries of smaller
.sheets of water. It extends to lake La Martre, then with a change of
direction reaches the south-east part of Great Bear lake? in MacTavish
bay, and follows the lower course of the Coppennine river down to tlie sea,

by the same. Narrative of an Arctic Search Expedition, 2 voLs., London, 1851, and The
Polar Regions, Edinburgh, 1861, pp. 285-289; Murchison, Siluria, 4th cd., 1867, p. 440
et passim ; further, A. K. Isbister, On the Geology of the Hudson Bay Territories and
of portions of the Arctic and North-western Regions of America, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc.,
.1855, XI, p. 503. This western boundary of the shield from the south up to the Slave
lake is marked on the general map of the Geological Survey of Canada which appeared
in 1883.

' R. Bell, Report on Part of the Basin of the Athabasca River, N.W. Territory ; Geol.
Surv. Canada, Report for 1882-1884, CC.

* F. B. Meek, Remarks on the Geology of the Valley of Mackenzie River, with Figures
^nd Descriptions of Fossils from that Region, chiefly collected by the late R. Kennicott;
Trans. Chic. Acad. Sci., 1867-1869, 1, pp. 61-114, pi.



38 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [paktiii

so that cape Barrow and its adjacent islands in Coronation gulf consist of
granite and gheiss, while cape Krusenstem, a little farther west, belongs
to the Palaeozoic girdle, which, maintaining a great breadth, extends beyond
the mouth of the Mackenzie. *

Those explorers who liave followed the course of the Mackenzie have
thus encountered only Palaeozoic deposits and some patches of upper Cre-
taceous and Tertiary ; but we have alreaily mentioned that from the upper
tributaries of the Peace river the border of the Rocky mountains assumes
an almost north-and-soutli direction, so that it should meet the Mackenzie
below the confluence of the Liard (I, p. 558), and indeed, steeply upturned
beds, offering a striking contrast to the horizontol strata of the rest of the
broad border, have been observed at several localities within this region,
particularly below Fort Simeon, that is to say a little below the con-
fluence of the Liard and the Mackenzie, and the heights visible from there
have, in fact, been expressly, described as spurs of the Rocky mountains.
Then follows on the Mackenzie river a long stretch of country formed of
horizontal Palaeozoic beds; near the Ramparts, however, in lat. 66“ N.
a steep dip to the north-west predominates, but still further down the
valley, in the nanws alwve the delta, the beds again become horizontal ;
to the east they arc known as far as the upper course of Anderson river,
or indeed, tus we saw alswo, oven as far ns cape Krusenstem, and to the
west as far tus the upper reaches of Porcupine river. Kennicott, MacFarlane,
and Petitot have ti'aced them in. these remote regions '.

Some connexion with the Rocky mountains thus evidently exists, though
its precise nature is not known. A very remarkable fact, established by
Meek, is the extraordinaiy constancy an<l imporbince presented by the
middle divisions of the Devonian within the Palaeozoic border. The fossils
which have been found in it enable ua in fact to trace the deposits of the
Hamilton group (middle Devonian) from Rock island, Illinois, through
Iowa, Minnesota, Dakuto, the great girdle along the lakes, and down the
Mackenzie almost to the Arctic Ocean; the fossil! ferous localities most
remote from one another, separated by nearly thiriy degrees of latitude,
possess a not inconsiderable number of species in common ; in the south,
as well os at several localities in the extreme north, these deposits arc
characterized by their richne.ss in petroleum and by salt springs; this
character extends, indeed, os far east as G«ispt^, and we have already men-
tioned it in connexion with the isolated patches of lake St. John, north
of the lower St. Lawrence.

As regards more recent deposits a number of patches may be observed
on the Bear river, which flows from the Great Bear lake iitto the Mackenzie.

^ Meok, tom. cit., p. 74 et seq. ; H4bert, Documents sur la g4ologie du MacKenzie,
recueillis par le Pere Petitot, Bull. Soc. g4ol. do Fr., 1874-1875, 3* a4r.. Ill, p. 87 ;
Petitot, Notes geologiques sur le bassin du MacKenzie, torn, cit., pp. 88-98.



CH. n]


CANADIAN ZONE OP LAKES


39


Sir John Richardson found an Ammonite in the rapids of this river; Hind
brought home an Ammonite and an Inoceramus, obtained from horizontal
beds. The marine Cretaceous beds thus extend along the outer border of
the ftocky raohntains from the far-distant south to lat. 65“ N. Tertiary
lignites appear in many places, both on the Bear river and the Mackenzie ;
the plant remains have been described by Heer. They extend as far as
the islands which lie opposite the mouth of the Mackenzie ; one patch lies
between cape Bathurst and cape Parry ; it was this patch that Miertsching
saw on fire in 1850. From hero the lignites extend further to the west
coast of Banks’ Land and Prince Patrick island *. The phonolite mountains
of the lower Mackenzie and of the Bear river, mentioned by Petitot, are
probably of the same age.

We thus perceive that the abraded Archaean' platform, on which
Hudson bay lies, may be traced from the east to a great girdle of lakes,
the position of which stands in evident connexion with the course of the
flatly-bedded Palaeozoic border. For, apart from the isolated |)atches of
Palaeozoic resting upon it, already mentioned as occurring on the shores of
Hudson bay, the boundary of the Archaean region runs in such a manner
that the north coast of the northehi bays of lake Huron, the north coast
of lake Superior, and the cast coast of lake Winnipeg still consist of
Archaean rocks, while the sheets of water themselves lie entirely or for
the greater part' on the Palaeozoic girdle ; and from lake Winnipeg the
boundary runs through the western end of lake Athabasca across the Great
Slave lake, following the great notch in its north side near Fort Rea,
through lake La Martre, thnmgh the east half of the Great Bear lake, and
finally to Coronation gulf in the Arctic Ocean.

Isbister long ago pointed out the analogy Ijetween the position of
Coronation gulf and of the lakes just discuased. In order to examine
more closely into this resemblance, let us now turn to the Arctic
archipelago.

Among the many perilous journeys made through the Arctic archi-
pelago of North America, none has produced richer result;), os regards
our knowledge of the geological structure of this region, than the search
for the remains of Sir John Franklin and his companions, conducted by
M’Clintock in the years 1857 to 1859. It was the results of this expe-
dition that Haughton made use of, in conjunction with other observations
of an earlier date, when he constructed the first general map of the region,
and clearly displayed the extremely simple manner in which its stratified
rocks are arranged

I

' 0« Heer, Flora fossilis arctica, 1868,1, pp. 25 and 185-139.

* Capt. F. L. M*Clintock, Reminiscences of Arctic Ice Travel in Search of Sir J. Franklin
and his Companions, with geological Notes and Illustrations by S. Haughton, Journ. Roy.
Dub* Soc., 1858, I, pp. 183-250, pi. and geological map ; by the same, The Voyage of the



40 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [paktui

All these islands and peninsulas, from the continent of America to the
noi'th of Parry islands, form the horizontally stratified northern border of
the great Archaean shield which we have just studied in the north of the
continent: the several sedimentary formations of this border are so arranged
that they strike to the east or north-east, and become progressively more
recent as they are traced towanls .the pole

The Archaean rocks, which form «ipe Barrow and the adjacent islandH



Fio. 4. Arctic I^urth America (after Maehire, llaugliton, and others).

A Archaean and granite ; s Silurian; cu Devonian (?) and basal Carboniferous; ca Cai*-
honiferoiis limestone ; m Trias (?) and Jurassic ; te Loaf-bearing Tertiary beds (cape Bathurst,
north-west Banks’ Land and Prince Patrick i.slaiid); Basalt on capo Alexander in Smijbh sound.

in Coronation gulf, arc also met with ‘at the mouth of the Great Fish
river; Rae observed them on Melville peninsula, and their northern margin
passing through Eclipse? sound reaches the shore of Baffin bay near cape

Fox in the Arctic Seas —A Narrative of the Discovery of the Fate of Sir J. Franklin
and his Companions, Svo, 1859 ; Append. No. IV, Geological Account of the Arctic
Archipelago, by 8. Haughton, pp. H72-899, and geological map; general descriptions
also in O. Heer, Flora foasilia arctica, T, 4to, 1868, map ; C. E, de Ranee, Arctic Geology,
Nature, • 1875, p. 448, geological sketch-map. The most important works are cited by
11. Jones, Manual of the Natural History, Geology and Physics of Greenland and the
neighbouring regions, 8vo, 1875, London.

* A new map of the Arctic regions by G. M. Dawson appeared in 1883, too late to be
made use of here. It does not render necessary any important alteration of our general
description, but extends the Silurian, for example, over Wollaston Land and Victoria
Land ; G. M. Dawson, Notes to accompany a Geological Map of the Northern Portion of
the Dominion of Canada, Geol. Surv. Canada, 1887 (Annual Report for 1886), R, 62 pp.
and map.


CH.I1]* NORTH EDGE OF CANADIAN SHIELD 41

Walter Bathurst To the north of this cape, the eastern part of North
Devon as far as cape Warrcnder consists of the same rocks.

In these regions, especially near cape 'Walter Bathurst, as well as in
Wolstenholme sound on the east side of Baffin bay, the ancient rocks are
overlaid by red sandstone, which is, perhaps, the same sandstone as that
visible towards the west, in North Somerset, as the base or lowest member
of the Silurian deposits.

The Archaean region is followerl by a broad girdle of Silurian, which,
in continuation of the broad Palaeozoic region already mentioned as lying
between cape Kruscnstern and the mouth of the Mackenzie, extends from
Coronation gulf to Baffin bay. This zone consists of alternating beds of
limestone an<l argillaceous sediments: their horizontal stratification gives
to the cliffs that resemblance to fortifications so often mentioned by Arctic
explorers.

With regard to Wollaston Tjand and Victoria T^and I possess no informa-
tion. The Silurian zone is known in the southern ])art of Banks' Land,
and it forms the northern half of Prince Alliert Land : it includes Prince
of Wales Land, the little . islands in Barrow strait, the greater part of
Cornwallis island and of North Devon up to Jones sound, then both shores
of Lancaster sound and of Prince Regent inlet, NoriJi Soiaerset, and to the
south the greater pai*t of Boothia with the magnetic j)ole, and King William
Land

In Peel sound the Archaean or more recent granitic rocks are visible on
the coast beneath the Silurian : cape M'Clure on Prince of Wales Land is
described as eniptive syenite.

It is very remarkable, considering the great development of Devonian
sediments in the valley of the Mackenzie, that only isolated traces of
'a Devonian zone have been met with in the Arctic archipelago, as, for
instance, on the Princess Koval islands and Byam Martin.

The next zone is formed mainly of sandstom^ and in some localities
contains coal beds. Heer, ju<Jging l»y the jxjsition of the beds and the
plant remains, assigns it to the lower Carl)onifenjus and the Ursa stagti
It forms th(i north half of Banks’ Laml, the south half of Eglinton, Melville
island with the exception of the two nortljern peninsulas, Byam Martin,
next Bathurst, with the exception of the three northern peninsulas, and is
then, perhaps, continued across North Devon to the small islands which lie
to the east.

This coal-bearing zone is followed in normal superposition by a richly
fossiliferous zone of marine Carl)onifcrous limestone. It comprises Prince

^ The most important source of information previous to M’Clintock on the Silurian
fauna of this zone is J. W. Salter, On Arctic Silurian Fossils ; Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc.,
1853, IX, pp. 312-317, pL
2 Heer, Flora fossilis arctica, I, p. 19, ct passim..



42 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [paktiii

Patrick island, the northern part of Eglinton, all the northern promontories
of Melville and Bathui'st, the little islands of Penny strait and GHnnell
Land ^

The Carboniferous limestone is the northernmost zone ; but in the east
of Prince. Patrick island, on the north-west coast of Bathurst and on
several little islands north of Orinnell Land, small patches of later
deposits rest upon it, and indicate a Mesozoic zone lying beneath the
Arctic Ocean. The fossils consist of the remains of Saurians, Ammonites,
and a few bivalves. Neumayr has compared the remains of Ammonites
from Wilkie point, Prince Patrick island (lat. 76® 20' N.), with species of
the middle Jurassic

Since the parallel zones just enumerated strike • east-north-east or
north-east, the (jucstion arises whether they do not reappear on the
western shores of Smith sound or of Kennedy channel. The structure
of these coasts, as represented by Feiblen and de Ranee, certainly shows
that here also Archaean, Silurian, and Carboniferous rocks are present, and
that here too a north-easterly strike predominates, but the beds are
upturned and folded, and we thus enter a region of fundamentally different
structure \

We will only cast a hasty glance over these regions.

The Archaean rocks of Ponds inlet, cape Walter Bathurst, and eastern
North Devon form towards the north the whole of the lofty coast of
Ellesmere Land, and near cape , Isabella they cross over to the east side
of Smith channel, where they are covered by leaf-bearing Tertiary beds in
the vicinity of port Foulke.

Silurian deposits reach the coast with a north-east strike, and occupy
almost the whole area lying between lat. 79® and 80' N. On Bache island
they lie fairly flat on the syenite and granite foundation, but in Norman
Lockyer island in lat. 79'' 25' N. the dip becomes steeper, and further on an
anticlinal is formed. This Silurian zone, which terminates on the west
side of Smith sound in Scoresby bay,' is continued with the same strike
obliquely acims this arm of the sea, and on its east side forms in all
probability a gx’cat part of the floor of the Humboldt glacier and of
Washington Land. It also embraces Petermann tjor<l, Polaris bay, and.
the interior of Halls Lind as far as Newman bay.

North of the Silurian region follow strongly folded ancient rocks^ mica

' The Grinnell Land of certain travellers, sepaiuted from North Devon only by Arthur
Btraits, and not to be confounded with Grinnell Land in lat. 80'’ N. on the- Kennedy
channel.

* M. Neumayr, Biq geographische Verbreitun^ der Juraformation ; Denkschr. k. Akadr
Wissensch. Wien, 1885, L, pp. 94 and 141.

* Capt. 11. W. Feilden and 0. £. de Ranee, Geology of the Coasts of the Arctic Lands
visited by the late British Expedition under Capt. Sir G. Nares; Palaeontology by
R. Etheridge ; Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1878, XXXIV, pp. 556^639, map and pi.



CH. II]


THE CANADIAN SHIELD


43


schists and quartzite, known as the ‘ Rawsou beds.’ They strike north-
north-east and form the west shore of Scoresby bay up to capo Creswoll in
lat. *82**40'N. On. the other side of Robeson channel they form all the
land north of Polaris bay and Newman bay.

Far to the north, beyond the Rawson beds, some Devonian appears in
Dana bay; on the north side of Grinnell Land, on Feilden and Parry
peninsula up to Clements Markham’s inlet, Carboniferous limestone is
met with, precisely in the line of strike of tlie Carboniferous limestone of
the Parry islands. Beneath the Carboniferous limestone and beyond it, up
to the farthest point hitherto reached, stretch the rocks of the Rawson
beds. —

The results of the preceding observations may l )0 summed up in the
following sketch.

The Canadian shield, that abraded Archaean surface which bears the
shallow waters of Hudson bay, is surnninded liy a ring of flat-lying
Palaeozoic beds; in a few places this ring has been entirely destroyed by
denudation, «as in the south-Ciist towards the lower course of tlie Saint
Lawrence, but elsewhere it is continuous and often of great breadth. On
the west the Devonian contributes to its fonnation, though the Silurian
has not yet been oliserved at its base. The margin of the shield on tlie
south and west is accoinpanied by a long series of great lakes. Lake
Huron with its northern bays, lakes Superior, Winnipeg, Athabfisca, the
Great Slave lake, lake Jai Martre and the Great Bear lake are situated in
such a manner that a larger or similler part of each lies within the
Archaean shield, the remaining part within the. Palaeozoic border. I’ho
l)Oundary then reaches Coronation gulf, probably follows Simpson straits,
and runs through Melville peninsula, but has not been determined farther
to the south. The Piilaeozoic border is known in East Melville, on the
Nettilling, and at the upper end of Frobisher bay. It is not known to be
continued into Hudson strait. We And it again at Anticosti and in
patches on the very severely denmled region of the Saguenay.

In the Arctic archipelago the lx)rder is formed of zones of Palaeozoic
rocks, following one another in regular order and overlaid t<jwards the
north by patches of Mesozoic deposits. Towards the west, where it consists
chiefly or exclusively of Devonian, the border sinks beneath the Cretaceous
beds of the prairies. Towards the south it passes into the folding of the
Cincinnati uplift and the folds of the Appalachians. To the scjuth-east
it is bounded by the St. Lsiwrence, and the fcjided mountains of New
Brunswick and Newfoundland. To the east and north-east an independent
gneiss range forms a lx)undary along the coast and inns from the strait
of Belle Isle, on the coast of Labrador, to Hudson strait and Resolution
island. Another independent lofty gneiss range, perhaps a continuation of
that just mentioned, runs along the coast of Cumberland, is interrupted at



44 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [partiii

Home bay, and extends thence to cape Walter Bathurst. From there lofty
gneiss or granite mountains stretch through the east part of North Devon
and along tlic coast of Ellesmere Land to cape Sabine in Smith sound.

The numerous inlets, bays, and sounds of the Arctic archipelago lie on
the flat-bedded Palaeozoic border, and the north coast of the mainland
probably coincides for a long distance with the north edge of the shield.

2. The Baltic shield. The fundamental features of the part of North
America /pist discussed are repeated in a remarkable manner in a part of
nortliem Eurasia. Ltipland and Finland are formed, like the Canadian
shield, of Arcliaean rocks, which were already folded before the Cambrian
period : like it, they are surrounded by a curvilinear border of flatly bedded
Palaeozoic sediments, owing their exposure chiefly to later erosion by ice,
and finally, like it, they are covered hy a vast labyrinth of small sheets of
water, which are united by a maze of streams. In both cases a number
of great bays an<l inland seas lie on the boundary region between the
Archaean and Palaeozoic rocks; the limit of -the Palaeozoic girdle runs
from the coast of Swe<len near Oeland across the Baltic north of Gothland
and north of Dago, through the gulf of Finland, quite close to its southern
shore, then through lake Ladoga, also close to its southern shore, then, with
a somewhat more obliciue direction to the north, through the south part of
lake Onega ; it rciichcs the sea not far from the town of Onfega, probably
crosses the peninsula wliich runs out to the north, and the gulf of
Archang(il; and then extends beneath tlu^ sea up to cape Voronov.

^riius the lialtic sea, like Hudson bay, represents a partial submergence
of the abradcfl Archaean platform, tliough in this case the submergence is
less extensive; the gulf of Finland, lakes Ladoga and Onega, and the bays
of the White sea occupy a position similar to that of lakes Superior,
Winnipeg, and the other oft-cited lakes of the American festoon, together
with Coronation gulf and its continuations. To all these we may apply
the obsei'vation, made long ago by Richardson with regard to the American
lakes, that in each case without exception one part of the sliore is Archaean,
another part Palaeozoic, and that the lakes lying to the south of the
boundary, on the Palaeozoic region itself, such as lake Peipus, lake Ilmen
and others, correspond to Winnipegosis and its companions.

The I’alaeozoic girdle is distinguished in its western part and even
south of the gulf of Finland by the fact that the several members of the
Cambrian and Silurian systems rest upon one another in regular succession,
so that as tlie distance increases the deposits become continually more
recent ; but furtlier to the north-east the red Devonian sandstone, coming
from the south and e»ist, encroaches more and more on the parallel Silurian
zones, covering them out of sight one after the other, so that on the south
* shore of lake Ladoga none but their inner, that is older, members remain
visible between the Devonian sandstone and the Archaean rocks, till finally



CH. n]


THE BALTIC SHIELD


45


this sandstone comes directly in contact with the Archaean i*egion, and on
the coast of the North sea neither Cambrian nor Silurian l)eds are to bo
seen, but only Arcliaean rocks and the red sandstone.

This transgression of the Devonian sandstone has long been known :
Murchison' has given a clear account of it; and since I shall have to refer
to it later, the following details may be introduced here.

On the long island of Oelaml the strike, according to l^anies, follows
approximately the direction of the island itself, which is elongated to the
north-north-east, so that the Cambrian beds lie on its west side, and to
the east of these the lower Silurian stages succeed each other in regular
order 2. GotMaiul belongs -wholly to the upper Silurian; the various
subdivisions of this system follow one another in tuscemling order towards
the south-east, and, as shown on the map drawn up l)y F. Schmidt, their
boundaries run obliquely across the island to the north-east •*.

The detailed descriptions of Grewingk and F. Schmidt show that the
strike, directed in Ocland to the north -north-east and in Gothland to the
north-east, is bent round beneath the sea so completely that in Dago, Oesel,
and Esthonia it runs from west to east parallel to the south sliore of the
gulf of Finland. The Cambrian deposits- follow this coast, to the south
they are succeeded by beds of lower Silurian, as in Oeland; Dago and
Oesel are formed of upper Silurian, as is Gothland, and the highest Silurian
beds are exposed in the south part of Oesel. Tlie red Devonian sandstone
forms the shores of the gulf of Riga, and at the north-east Corner of this
gulf, near the bay of Pernan, it overlies the upper Silurian ; the highest
member of the upper Silurian, however, which is visible in tha south of
Oesel, seems to have already disappeared, anti the - red sandstone now
advances further and further to the nortli, concealing the Silurian, so
that between Saint Petersburg and Gatschina only the Cambrian and
a narrow band of lower Silurian beds arc to be seen; at the entrance of
the Sjas into lake Ladoga a Caml)rian zone alone is visible beneath the red
sandstone, and soon nothing but Archaean rocks and rod sandstone form
the surface of the ground

* R. I. Murchison, E. de Verneuil, and A. von Kayserling, The Geology of Russia in
Europe and the Ural Mountains, 4to, 1S45, I, pp. 41-49.

^ W. Dam^s, Geologische Reisenotizen aus Schweden; Zeitsch. deutsch. geol. Gesellsch.,
1881, XXXllI, pp. 415 -433.

^ F. Schmidt, Beitrage zur Geologic der Insel Gotland; Arch. Naturk. Liv-, Esth- und
Kurlands, Doi-pat, 1859, 1. Si‘r., Bd. 11, pp. 403-464, map.

* C. Grewingk, Krlauterung zur zweiten Ausgabe der geognostischen Karte Liv-, Esth-
und Kurlands, 8vo, Dorpat, 1879 (with map in Fol.) ; also in Arch, ^aturk. Dorpat,
1. Ser., Bd. VIII ; F. Schmidt, Revision des ostbaltischen silurischcn Tcilobiten nebst
geognostischer Uebersicht dcs ostbaltischen Silurgebietes, Mem. Acad. Imp. Sci.
Saint-Petersb., 1881, 7® ser., XXX, pp. 55 et seq. ; and by the same, On the Silurian (and
Cambrian) Strata of the Baltic Provinces of Russia, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1882,
XXXVIII, pp. 514-535, map, pi. xxiii.



46 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [parpiH

In this region there are certainly some slight undulations in the
Silurian, but the most marked of these appear to be nothing more than
those accessory distnrbancas of dragging out or shattering, which
accompany faults: generally speaking, the bedding of the Palaeozoic
sediments is everywhere very flat. In striking contrast to this, the
Archaean rocks are folded, and strike, as Inostranzoff has shown, along
the great inland seas to the south-east, i. e. across the course of the
Palaeozoic girdle; their strike determines the trend of the peninsulas
in the north part of lake Onega

On the south and south-east shore of this lake the predominant rock
is the red sandstone, which as we have already seen occupies the eastern
part of the golf of Onega. On the little island of Ki-Ostrof, a few miles
north of the town of Onega, Murchison observed granitic gneiss with
vertical foliation

Let us now turn our attention to the south of the Scandinavian
peninsula.

A glance at the map might naturally lead us to suppose that Scania
stands in an independent position. If the slightly curved coast of Bohus
and Halland were directly joined to that of Blekinge, the south coast of
Scandinavia would present a much more regular outline, and Scania seems
to be added on as an appendage. Closer examination confirms this view.
Scania is formed of fragments of a great plateau, broken up by fractures.
It presents us with Mesozoic setlimcnts which are elsewhere unknown in
Scandinavia, although they once probably possessed a much wider
extension towards the north. Apart from pre-Silurian and Silurian
rocks w’C meet with red clay, usually assigned to the Kcuper, then coal-
bearing sediments belonging to the Rhaetic and Lias, the latter with
marine Iwds, and Anally the middle ' and upper Cretaceous. In one
locality the coal-bearing series abuts against the gneiss, in another against
the Silurian ; the Cretaceous rests sometimes on the Lias, sometimes abuts
against the Silurian, at others overlies the gneiss, and as E. Erdmann has
shown the whole region is traversed by great longitudinal fractures which
run from north-west to south-east; along these the whole country has
been let down • iiregularly, with the formation of troughs and horsts.
The investigations of Nathorst have shown further that this subsidence
has taken place at different times, and that it is possible to classify the
fractures according to their age

* A . A. InostranzcfF, Carte geologique de la partie fieptentrionale du Gouvememeht
Olonetz ; Mat4r. Gdol. Russ., 1877, VII, pi. ii et pamim.

* Murchiaon; The Geology of RuBsia in Europe and the Ural Mountains, pp. 21, 22.

’ E. Erdmann, Description de la formation carbonifere de la Scanie, 4to, 1873 (in the
publications of the Royal Swedish Geological Institution) ; Herr Ertoann has kindly
furnished me with more recent observations on the fault lines ; G. Nathorst, Till ftftgan



CH. II] TABULAE FKACTUEES OF SCANIA 47

We now recognize Hallands As with Hallands Vadero, north of the
Skelder Vik, and the Kullon, south of this bay, as two horsts, running out
to the north-west; Bomele Klint in the interior of the country is a similar
horst, and the projection of the land to the south-east between Ystad and
Cimbrishamn is determined in like manner by the fractures, which run to
the south-east. We can distinguish among the.se fractures those which
were produced after tlie Silurian and before the Keupcr from others which



Fig. 6. Smnia, after O. Naihorst.

A Archaean ; s Cambrian and Silurian ; k Keupcr; rh Rhaetic and Lias ; cr Crotaceous;
3 Diabase ; Basalt shown in black. Strong lincs^ deiinitoly ascertained faults ; broken lines,
conjectural faults.

were formed after the Keuper and hotore the Cretaceous, and these from
yet others which were formed after the Cretaceous ; and thus the deposition
of the Cretaceous on the gneiss, i. e. on an old exposed horst, finds an
explanation. Nathorst has shown that the horst of the Kullen, for
example, as well as its probable continuation the SCder Asen, is bounded

om de Sk&nska dislocationernas 3.1der, Geol. Fdren, Stockh. FOrh., 1887, IX, pp. 74'130,
map8. One of the transverse fracturea is clearly figured by Hauchecome in Zeitschr. f.
Berg', Htttt. u. Salinenw., 1875, XXIII, plate b in text.


48 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [partiii

on the south by a fracture which is older than the Trias, and on the north
by another which is younger than the Cretaceous, and in this country,
which has not been subjected to any folding since the Cambrian period,
we have a new and an instructive example of the breaking down of
a table: land accomplished piece by piece and at different tim^s. A few
short transverse fractures, running to the north-north-east, also occur.
The older diabase dykes follow the master fractures to the south-east,
and the younger basaltic dykes appear to correspond to the north-north-
east strike of the transverse fissures.

Bornholm is the continuation of tliis fractured table-land or rather of
the horst, formed of gneiss and Palaeozoic sediments, which projects at
Melby Asen and near Cimbrishamn. In the south-west part of Bornholm
the subsided coal-bearing series of Scania is visible, together with down-
thrown patches of Cretaceous K

Now that we have separated otf* Scania and Bornholm let us cast
a glance over the great peninsula of Scandinavia.

A lofty range of mountains rises in the west facing the Atlantic
Ocean; to the east and south next the Baltic and the Skager Rack
extends a broad tract, lying at a low level in the whole of the south part of
the peninsula, and consisting chiefly of Archaean rocks. The boundary
between the mountains in the west and the Archaean land in the east is
marked by a great scarp, which may be followed from Stavanger in
lat. 59*’ N. into the northern part of the district of Tromso in lat. 70® N. :
it describes an irregular and frequently inten-upted line, but on the whole
follows the main direction of the peninsula. Although the mountainous
region consists in great part of folded ranges which mostly run out to the
Atlantic coast, cutting it obliquely, yet much of the eastern slope presents
us with beds which lie quite flat, and facing it on the east there rise from
the Archaean region isolated mountain masses, formed of the same hori-
zontal beds, which must evidently be regarded as outliers of the great
escarpment. Thus the face of the escuirpTiient certainly does not correspond
as a whole with a continuous fracture ; over the greater part of its course
it is without doubt a denudation boundary, and as Pettersen rightly
pointed out, when describing its northern part many yeara ago, the
mountains in that region must once have extended beyond the escarpment
much further to the east than they do at present.

The Archaean region is bounded on the east by that flat-bedded
Silurian belt which borders ' the peninsula west of Oeland, and thence
runs as we have already seen beneath the Baltic to the gulf of Finland.

^ K. V. Scebach, Bcitriige zur Geologie von Bornholm, Zeitsch. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1865,
XVII, pp. 3118-347, pi. viii ; M. .Tespersen, Bidrag til Bornholm’s Geotektonik, Nat. Tids.
KjCbenh., 1867, 3. R., V, pp. 33-52, pi. vii ; Nathorst, Till friigan om de SkA.n8ka disloca-
tionernas Mder, Gcol. FOren. Stockh. FCrh., 1887, IX, pp. 116 et seq.



THE SILURIAN OP CHRISTIANA


49


GH. n]


It includes the south of Norway and most of Sweden. It mes towards
the north, whore it is covered by dense foreSt ; in the south it bears the
great lakes; everywhere it shows traces of the grinding action of the
ice. It was luimerly covered by a continuous sheet of Silurian beds,
and the isolated fragments of this sheet which have escaped destruction
doubtless owe their preservation to subsidence. The most important of
the downthrown patches is the remarkable band of Silurian deposits, more
than 200 kilometers long, which runs from the east slope of the mountains
to the south-south-west across lake Mjiisen and Christiania, and then down
the west side of the fjord ; its middle part is often spoken of as the Silurian
region of Christiania.

This band has indeed experienced strange vicissitudes. Considerable
parts of it first underwent folding and subsequently abrasion ; then it was
broken up into segments and subsided; later or perhaps simultaneously,
copious injections of a red granite, the Drammen granite, welled up into it ;

’ then it was travcrse<i by more I’cccnt eruptive dykes, and finally cut up by
a number of smaller trough faults, which form the existing transvem^
valleys

In the north, on lake Jlljdsen, the folding is very intense, and over-
folding also occurs. At Christiania the folding is equally intense ; south
* and south-west of Christiania the cotusts of the fjord afford nmny well-
known examples of stnictural features, such as intrusions of more recent
granite in the fonn of laccolites, with an altered roof of Silurian limestone ;
fractures bringing the Silurian beds against the ancient gneiss ; and finally
horizontal displacements of orographic blocks. On this coast also, to the
south-west, are found the lulmirable examples of small trough faults
.which have been described by Kjerulf. Brogger has given an extremely
instructive account, describing in detai^ the movements of the mass and
the history of its injection

Still further to tlie .south, l»etween Skien and Langesund, fold jpg has


* T. Kjerulf, Dislokationeme i Kristiaiiia dalcn ; Nyt Mag. Naturvid. Christiania, 1883|
XXVIli, pp. 79-88 and 171-197, and in many other publications.

* W. C. BrOgger, Die silnrischen Etagcn 2 und 8 im Kristianiagebiet und auf Egger,
•Universitftts-Programm fflr das 2. Semester 1882, 8vo,.Kri8tiania, 1882 j and in particular
by the .same, Ueber die Bildungsgeschichte des Kristiania Qords, Nyt Mag. Naturvid.,
1886, XXX, pp. 96-244, map ; further, Om Kristiania ijordens Dannelse, Naturen, 1886,
fto. 7, 8 ; also A. Penck, Ueber einige Kontaktgesteine des Kristiania-Silurbeckens, Nyt
Mag. Naturvid., 1881, XXV, pp. 62-82 ; E. Reyer, Vier AuRfiOge in die Eruptivmassen bei
Christiania,' Jahrb. k.-k. gcol.. Beichsanst., 1880, XXX, pp. 27 -42, &c. 1 have myselfhad
an opportunity of visiting with Herr L. Burgerstein some .of the most characteristic
points of contact of the Drammen granite with the Silurian deposits, of collecting at the
zone of contact fragments of HalysitcK converted into Vesuvian, and of convincing
myself as to the correctness of Ejcrulfs description of the Drammen granite. BrOgger’s
investigations are among the most detailed which we possess on the formation of a great
trough.



60 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [PAOTin.

disappeared. The narrow strip of Silurian rocks rests towards the west on
gneiss and towards the east 4t sinks with a rapidly increasing dip, that is
as though by flexure, beneath a very extensive mass of syenite. This
narrow strip is also traversed, as shown by Brogger, by longitudinal and
transverse faults and by many intrusive dykes ; the various segments have
been let down to different depths. Brogger has at the. same time shown
that the subsidence of these segments and the ascent of the eruptive rocks
are probably connected phenomena \ Since, however, the island of Nord
Koster also bclojigs to the Silurian, it is- possible that the whole coast up
to the faults of Scania will prove to be a continuation of the eastern
fracture.

To the east of the great downthrown zone, fragments of ancient
sedimentary masses are also faulted in ; these occur on the south-east side
of lake Wenem, between this lake and lake Wettem, on the east shore of
lake Wettem, north of this lake, and in other places; Nathorst is even of
opinion that the line of demarcation between the gneiss and the granite,
so sharply defined in south Sweden, represents a great pre-Silurian fault.
The supposed fault would run from the neighbourhood of Solvesborg, on
the south coast, towards the north, crossing obliquely the southernmost
part of lake Wettem, and touching the cast side of lake Wenem it would
then proceed, with a slight deviation towards the north-north-west, up to '
the high mountain ranges. It would extend from lat. 5i3° to lat. 61” N.,
and the donmthrown part would be the gneiss forming the west limb.
The intrasions of hyperite, which make their appearance in the gneiss close
to the supposed fault-lino, might then be a direct consequence of the
subsidence itself^.

The view that great subsidences have afiected this Archaean region in
ancient times appears to be rapidly gaining ground among Scandinavian
geologists, and Svedmark has drawn up a whole system of conjectural
lines of fracture in the region extending north of Stockholm as far as the
sea of Xland, which is distinguished by its extraordinaiy depth —

The mountain region, which is to no small extent. a true table-land,
presents a fundamentally different character.

From Kragero in the east to Stavanger in the west, the whole south
coast of Norway is fonned of gneiss and granite, and the same rocks
passing through Christiansand form all the country far into the interior.
This is the western part of the Archaean region. Above it, extending*

' W. C. BrOgger, Spaltenverwerfungen in der Gegend Langesund-Skieii ; Nyt Hag.
Naturvid., 1884, XXYIII, pp. 253-419, map.

* G. Nathont, Ett ibrsOk att fbrklata .onaken till den skarpa grftnaen mellan sbdia
Sverigei vestra och <!et» urterritorium; Geol. FOren. Stockh. Fbrb., 1886, VIII, pp. 95-102.

’ E. Svedmark, Orografiska studier inom Roalagen ; Geol. FOren. Stockh. FOrh., 1887,
IX, pp. 188-210, map.



CH.n] LANGFJELD. THE SPARAGMETE 61

from Stavanger to the north-east, a steep, scarp rises which runs in and
out with an irregular lobate outline; this is the edge of the extensive
Langfjeld and at the same time the beginning of the great eastern slope.
The most striking feature presented by this scarp is the contrast it offers
to the regions lying more to the east in the thickness attained by the
Cambrian system, owing to the intercalation of great masses of quartzite
and schists. Tellef Dahll has examined a j>art of it to the' north-east of
Stavanger; he found that the escarpment was formed of approximately
horizontal beds of quartzite and lustrous schists, and in the Huull)erg,
where the boundaries of the throe southeni dioceses of Norway unite,
he discovered in the lower part of this series a bed with Dictyogmptvs
'fiabeUif<n^i8(=Diciyo'i!ienia vot'iale); the 'whole series is therefore assigned
to the ' primordial ’ stage. On the Hallingskarve, near the uppm: end of
the Hardanger fjord, a recent ' granite is found, according to the same
observer, overlying this series. In other places superimposed masses of
mica schist and hornblende schist are described as piled high above it ^

The flat-bedded series of schists and quartzites is continued to the
north-east over a part of the Vidden, through Hallingdal and into the
Qudbrandsdal ; it forms also some isolated masses which face the east
border of the mountains. The quartzite of the groat ranges must be
regarded as a higher member of the series, but in this region tUso mica
schists, augen-gneiss and hornblende schists are said to occur high on the
summits. The. arrangement of the l)ed8, however, is not sufficiently
known *.

To the north of this region rise the rugged mountains of the Jdtun
fjeld, fonnod of gabbro. The sketch-map published by Reusch gives the
impression that this series of great masses of gabbro marks the boundary
between the flat-bedded eastern part of the range and the western folded
part

The flat-bedded girdle soon changes its character, and we reach a region
which it is particularly difficult to describe in detail. I follow the data
given in a series of masterly descriptions by Kjerulf S

On the side of the Gudbrandsdal the flat-bedde<l . series presents itself
as an alternatfon of schists and blue quartzites ; hitherto they have rested
on the Archaean rocks ; now a mighty series of feldspar-bearing sandstone,
the ‘ sparagmite ’ of Norwegian geologists, is inserted beneath them ; the

' Tellef Dahll, Ueber die Geologic Tellemarkens, translated into German by
W. Christophersen, 4to, Christiania, 1860, pp. 16-19.

* Bjemlf, Die Geologie des sfldlichen und mittleren Norwegen, p. 184.

* Hans H. Reusch, Die fossilieniUhrenden krystallinischen Schiefer ivon Bergen in
Norwegen, German translation by K. Baldauf, 8ro, Leipsig, 1883, p. 5.

* Of these I will only mention Geologisk Oversigtskart over det sydlige Norge, fol.
1878, and T. ^emlf. Die Geologie des sttdlichen und mittleren Norwegen, German
translation by Gurlt, Svo, Bonn, 1880.



62 THE OUTWNES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [PABini

upper part of this series yields Paradoxides and may therefore be definitely
assigned to the Cambrian system. In the lower part of the sparagmite
lies the unfossiliferoos zone of the Bind limestone! But while the
sparagmite with the Birid limestone lies beneath the schists and . blue
quartzite, the richly fossiliferous series of the lower Slluriaq lies above
the stage of the blue quartzite and, as it appears, unconformably, so that
,the Orthoceras limestone, for example, rests on different stages of the
Cambrian system. At lake Mjosen the lower Silurian is present in
considerable thickness, and it is from the neighbourhood of this lake that
the long strip of faulted-down Silurian branches off to the south-south-
west, and, as we have already seen, reaches the sea by way of Christiania,
thus dividing the Archaean region into two parts. The thick accumula-
tions of the Cambrian, with which we have just l>ecome acquainted as the
b^ue quartzite and the sparagmite stage, do not accompany this band.

On the Herjehogna, a peak 3,800 feet in height, situated in Dalome
at about lat. 61° 30' N., the rampart of quartzite crosses the Swedish
frontier. It marks the eastern edge of the mountains, but not, in this region,
the east boundary of the sedimentary beds which are superposed on the
Archaean foundation, for in front of it and emerging from beneath its
foot the continuation of the Norwegian sparagmite, here called the Dala-
sandstone, makes its appearance and extends at no great height over
a great part of southern Dalame. ■

For a knowledge of these ' regions and of those extending to the north
through Heije&dalen and Jemtland to lat. 64° N., the works by Tomebohm
published in 1873 are the chief source of information, and it is the results
obtained by this indefatigable observer which will Jiow lie my guid^ .

The ({uartzite which forms the great rampart, here called the Wemdal
qiiartzitc, is the continuation of the high-mountaiti ({uai'tzitc of Norway ;
the rampart bounds the mountainous region. At iis foot, a little north
of lat. 62° N., the sparagmite disappears, yet the rampart does not rest
directly on the Archaean rocks ; for close to its foot a series of Silurian
beds is intercalated, in particular the Orthoceras limestone ; this accom-
panies the quartzite rampart into the neighbourhood of Arsanies Kapell,
in about lat. 62° 45' N., forming a narrow belt, and according to Tome-

' A. E. Tflrnebohm, Ueber die Geognosie dcr schwedischen Hochgebirge; Bihang
avenska Vet Akad. Hand!., I, no. 12, 187.1, map ; Sver. geol. UndersCkn., ser. C, no. 9.
Part of this provionaly appeared in En geognoatiak Profil bfver den Skandinaviaka
Fjilllryggen mellan Oateraund och Levanger ; by the same, Ofvera. K. Vet. Akad. Fdrh.,
1872, and Sver. geol. UnderaOkn., ser. C, no. 6, 1872. TCmebohm has diatinguiahed
in the high mountain beds two groups, the Seve and the Kdli ; but subsequent
observers do not seem to have conaidered these new designations necessary. A good
general geological map of the region around the Stor Sjtin is contained in A. Q.HOgbom,
Glaciala och Petrogiaiiska Jakttagelser i Jemtlands LAn ; SVer. geol. Undersbkn., ser. C,
no. 70, 4to, 1885.



JEMTLAND


53


CH. ii] -

tbohm underlying the quartzite. Proin this point the rampart recedes
very far towards the north-west, only advancing again in the north,
and it thus forms an irregular arc within which the, Silurian beds are
distributed with horizontal bedding. On these tabular masses of Silurian
lies the great lake of Stor Sjon, Towards the east these masses rest on
the Archaean rocks, which here, however, attain a greater elevation than
in the south, and even rise higher than the Silurian table-lands.

We now scale the quartzite rampart and reach the mountainous region,
on which several summits attain a height of 5,000 to 6,000 feet ; a con-
siderable part lies above the limit* of forest growth, i.e. over 2,800 feet.
Hero a lower group may be distinguished, consisting of quartzite and
mighty masses of crystalline schists, namely mica schists, hornblende
schists, and even gneiss; and an upper group which comprises semi-crystal-
line clay slates and likewi.se hornblende schists. Strange though it may
seem to encounter gneiss and hornblende schists high alx)vo the Silurian
in normal superposition, yet we mu.st remember that a precisely similar
phenomenon has been observed by Norwegian investigators in the south
part of the groat mountain border. In short, the succession of rocks as
given by Tdmebohm is as follows : older granite (Archaean) ; on this,
Dala-sandstone (sparagmite, only in the south); Silurian in the north-
east up to the horizon of the Pentamcrus lirae.stone ; then Wemdal
quartzite, which forms the great rampart above the Silurian, and above
this another fnighty sei'ies of highly crystalline schists.

The conclusions arrived at by Tornelwhm have Iwen disputed.
Svenonius, as the result of a series of detailed surveys, considers that
the narrow belt of Silurian deposits at the foot of the quartzite rampart,
and with it the expanse of Silurian a1x)ut Stor Sjon, <lo not really underlie
the quartzite; the quartzite is certainly traversed l)y .several folds, while
the Silurian shows absolutely no .signs of folding; thus the quartzite
rampart represents a Silurian sliore, and the Silurian was deposited
against it, as well as in the pre-Silurian valleys '.

This view, however, wliich accords so well with the older conceptions
of the great antiquity of the crystalline schists, was destined soon .to
undergo great modification, chiefly owing to the continued labours of. the
same conscientious investigator. The most important of the fresh oi>ser-
vations was . the discovery of Silurian fassils at many localities within the
great ranges themselves. The untiring zeal of Scandinavian geologists

’ F. SveooniuB, Till Frllgaii om FOrMllandet mellan *Wenisdal’»{2uait8iten ’ och
rilariska Formationen inom sCdra Delen af Jftmtlandg Lila ; Sver. geol. UnderaOkn., ser. C,
no. 49, 8vo; also ftfvew. K. Vet. Akad. F«rh., 1881, no.. 10. HOgbom has since shown
* that parts of the east border of the Silurian region are faulted down into the Archacad
foundation. By the same, Om fOrkastnings-breccior vid den JUmtlandska Silurforma-
tionens ostra girilns ; Geol. Fdren. Stockh. FOrh, 1886, VIII, p. .352.



64 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [pakpiii

■will certainly succeed in dissipating at last tlie doubts which at present
exist as to the relation between the Silurian table-lands of the Stor Sjbn
and the high mountain ranges.. Let us now turn our attention to the
north while continuing to follow the eastern boundary of the.mountains.

A little way to the north, very nearly in lat. 64° SCy N., where the
Sjpugdelv, coming from the west, flows into the Tasjon, Svenonius met
with fossiliferous Cambrian deposits. These are folded with the quartzite
and lie in a synclinal of this rock In the northern part of Jemtland and
in Westerbottcn, a new element now makes its appearance in the mountain
border, namely, a very long scries of large and small masses of olivine
rock and serpentine, .which arc intercalated like sills with the schists of
the high mountaina

East of Grong, in the midst of the Norwegian mountains, in lat. 64° N.,
Hauan met with a great mass of anorthite olivine rock^ the beginning,
apparently, of an extremely long band, which' follows the general strike
of the mountains from here towards the north-north-east, crosses the
Swedish frontier, and becomes visible on the cast slope. Many isolated
exposures had been known. from comparatively early times; Svenonius
has shown their continuity. The largest masses, are the Rodfjallet on the
Stor Blisjbn near the headwaters of the Sjougdelv, mentioned above, and
the mountains of Graipies and Oina, which lie in close proximity to one
another north of Fatmomak (lat. 65° N.). The series is continued much
further still : mountains of olivine occur even beyond lat. 67' N. to the
south-west, west, and north-west of Kvikkjokk.

.It was -in this region also that Svenonius was quite recently led to
assign a ‘post-Azoic’ age to these mighty, high-mountain formations,
owing to the discovery of fossils, particularly of a bed containing Hyolithes
in the Paije Sartajaur and of Encrinite joints in the high mountains. The
same observer has had the kindness to inform me that he has now found
the Hyolithes beds in flve or six places in Norbottens Lappmai'k, bu^ not
yet in Jemtland, and, on the other hand, he has met with fragments
of Crinoids in the extreme northern part of Jemtland and at some
localities in Westerbottens Lappmark, in the calc-mica scliist of the high
mountains. The beds of Hyolithes appear to underlie the mountains and
form a belt along their eastern boundary.

* Svenonius, Om ‘ Seve gruppen ’ i nordligastc Jilmtland och Angermanland, saint
dess FOrhUlende till fossilfCrande Imager ; Sver. geol. UndersOkn., ser. 0, no'. 45, 8yo, and
Oeol. FSren. Stockh. FOrh., 1881, V, pp. 434-497, pi. zz, zzi.

* Kjerulf, Oeologie des sttdlichen Norwegen, p. 272.

* Svenonius, Om Olivinstens och Serpentin fCrekomster i Norrland, Sver. geol. Under-.
sOkn., ser. C, no. 56, and Geol. FOren. Stockh. FOrh., 1883, VI ; by the same, Studier vid
Svenska Joklar, Sver. geol. Undersflkn., ser. G, no. 61, and Geol. Ffiren. Stockh. F6rh.,
1884, VII, pp. 5-38, and Nya olivinstens fOrekomster i Norrland, tom. cit., ser.C, no. 61,
and Geol. F«ren. Stockh. Fflrh., 1885, VII, pp. 201-210.



LAPPMARK


5fi


CH. II]

We now'enter a region which has been made known in its general-out*
lines by HummeFs survey, and by a section drawn by K. Pettersen across
the peninsula, from north-west to-south-east, i.e. from Saltdalen to P'ite&^

The peninsula consists here, according to Pettersen, of the following
parts*- The gulf of Bothnia is bordered on. the coast by a narrow belt ol
lowland, formed of gneiss in steeply upturned beds. The country- then
suddenly rises towards the interior to a height of about 1,100 feet, and
from here there, extends a -monotonous granitic highland, for the greater
part covered by forest and aboAt 200 kilometers broad. It rises very
slowly on the west towards the .zone of the great lakes, so that the water-
level of the Saedva for example, west of the Hornafvan, lies 1,420 feet
above the sea. Towards the lakes some degree of variety replaces the
monotony of the east ; isolated ranges rise some hundreds of* feet above
the surrounding country. • Finally, at the west end of tlie Hornafvan and
between this great lake and the Laiselv, which follows on the south, we
reach the great rampart, which still marks the east edge of the mountain
highland. Its highest ridge lies at a height of about 2,500 feet. It
appears from Hummers observations that the northeVn continuation of
the rampart is crossed by several of the great lakes; this is the case to
the east of Kvikkjokk, .and the TorneS, Trask lies in such a manner that
almost its wliole western part is let down into the mountain highland,
while the larger, eastern part lies outside it.

Above the rampart,, a little way to the south, tliere rises the isolated
peak of Peljakaisse (1,064 meters), which lies 275 kilometers from the
gulf of Bothnia, and 187 kilometers frorn the Atlantic Ocean ; and now
the snowy peaks crowd higher and higher towards Sulitjelina (1,875
meters) and the far higher summits in the north, namely Sarjektj&kko
(2,128 meters) in Liilea, and Kebnekaisse (2,156 meters) in Torne&
Lappmark

The rampart itself from north Jemtland up tlu’ough Lappmark con-
sists, so far as yet known, of a mighty series of strata lying horizontal.
Pettersen distinguishes a group of beds at the foot of the rampart, which

^ David Hummel in Underdi\nig Ber&ttelse om en p& nSidig Befallning iir 1875
fdretagen UndersOkning af Malmfyndigheter inom Gellivare och Jukkasjarvi Socknar af
Norrbottens lAn, Sver. geol. UndersCkn., 4to, 1877 ; see also pi. i in this memoir,
GeologiBk Of^ersigtskarta ofver den kanda Helen af Norrbottens Liln, and pi. ii,
Geologisk Karta Ofver en del af Tornc och Lule Lappniarker; Karl Pettersen, Det
nordlige Sveriges och Norges Geologi ; med et geologisk Profil over den Skandinaviske
Halve fra Saltdalen til Pitei\, in Lie, Mailer and Sars, Archiv. Math. Naturvid. Christiania,
.1878, III.

* Svenonius, Ni\gra ord om Svenska Lappland, in the publication called ‘Heidnin,’
February and March, 1885, pp. 26-33. The altitudes, as Herr Svenonius informs me,
are taken from ‘Norrbottens Ians Ekonomiska* Kartwerk ’ and rest on trustworthy
measurements.



66 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [partiii

he calls the Dividal group, after a valley in Tromsd stift, south of the
Bals fjord ; it consists of fine-grained schists, red, green or grey in colour,

. of quartzite and quartz schists, and corresponds to that zone in which
Svenonius found Hyolithes; we assign it. to the Cambrian system. Above
this group lies the group of the Tromsb mica schists, composed of mca
schists and quartzite.

Inr order to discuss the further continuation, of the rampart beyond
the Tornei. Trask, so far as it is known, -we must first consider the main
features in the structure of northern Norway, Pettersen's extensive
.investigations and the geological map by Telfcf Dahll aie the most im-
portant sources of information ^

First of all, it must be Viomc in mind that .the great chain of islands
which borders the mainland on the west, the Lofoten and the Wcsteraalen,
is formed of gneiss and granite, evidently of very great age; and thus
these islands probably exhibit the oldest rocks which exist in the mountain
ranges of the north We shall soon see, that the Hebrides similarly
present us with the most ancient rocks of Scotland. In the nortA-east
part of the northernmost of these islands, at Ramsaa, in the island of
Ando, there lies a small patch of more recent sediments. At one time
coal mines wbrc worked here, now said to be filled up. Some slabs of
sandstone filled with valves of Aucella, to be seen in the museum at
Tromsb, show that these sediments are those Mesozoic deposits of the
north which once extended from Spitzbergen to Ando®. This ii^lated.
patch lies close to the sea-coast, and although the data as to the lie of the
beds are very incomplete, yet the 'similar patches in Scotland show that
we probably have here a faulted-down fragment, preserved as the last
remaind of a deposit which formerly extended over a wide area.

■ Another element of particular importance in the structure of the
country is the lofty and extremely rugged mountain range, which strikes
to the north-north-east and separates the Lyngen fjoixl from the Ulfs fjord

' ToUef Dahll, Geologisk Kart over det Nordlige Norge, mit Bistand af Comeliuasen,
Ujortdahl, Lassen og C. fettersen, fol., Christiania, 1886-1879: Pettersen’s later
treatises are contained partly in the Tronisd Museum’s Aarsheftcr, partly in Arch. Hath'.
Natnrvid. of Lie, Mdllcr, and Bars. Pettersen distinguishes three groups of stratified
formations: Dividal group, TromsO mica schist, and 'Bals Qord group; the latter has
recently been regarded as older than the TromsO mica schist ; since however'this question
is not of primary importance for the subjects treated here, I have not quoted, besides
the Dividal group, any other members in the table-land, or, as it is usually called in
Norway, the high mountain series; cf. Pettersen, BalsQordgruppens plads i deh
geologiske FOlgerakke, Troinse Museum’s Aarshefter, VI, 1883, pp. 87-97. Several of
the most important rocks of these regions are described by Philippson in Verb, natorh. .
Vcr. preuss. Rheinl., 1883, XL, Sitzungsber., pp. 190-210. •

^ Pettersen, Lofoten og Vesteraalen : Arch. Math. Naturvid., 1881, V, map.

’ Among the plant remains of AndO are two species of Pinus which 0. Heer has
compared with those of Spitzbergen.



LYNGEN


67


OH.!!]

on the west. Its black, terribly steep peaks rise to a height of about
1,800 meters above the sea ; glaciers descend between them ; the contrast
with the gentler mountains of the surrounding country is extremely
striking. The outlines recall, by their savage aspect, the tonalite crags
of the •Fresanella in Tyrol. This range, which may be clearly seen on the
map by Tellef Dahll, oonsists of gabbro and serpentine, and resembles to
some extent the great ‘cicatrice’ of gabbro which forms the Jdtun
hiountains in the south.

Not far from the place where the upper extremities of the Bals fjord

* and the Lygeh fjord approach each other in the south, rises the steep pyra>
mid of the Pig-tind, which is a part of the L 3 mgen range ; a long, abrupt,
but low ridge of gabbro, which strikes south of the Bals fjord obliquely
to the west-soutli-west ' through the great valley of the Maalselv, may
perhaps be considered os a continuation of this range, bent into the strike
of the mountains ; but it is hard to say. Even much further to the west-
south-w.est, e.g. at the foot of the Istind in Bardo, numerous injections
of eclbgite and gabbro arc visible, as though a zone of fracture and
intrusion ran from Arno in the north through Lyngcn, and then parallel
to the main strike across the valley of Bardo.

. The rocks which appear on the west of this zone towards the islands
and in the islands themselves, up to the ancient gneiss, exhibit many dis-

• turbances, but in the interior of the Bals fjonl, as well ns towards Malanga,
the well-stratified mountain ' masses assume more and more the foim of
broad blocks, sometimes gently inclined, sometimes lying nearly hori-
zontal. Violent local folding is present, but the mountain structure, as
a whole, is not that of a folded range.

The country lying to the east of the zone of intnisions, or the zone of
the Lyngen gabbro, foims a continuous zone of stratified rocks extending
to the east border of the mountains, i.e. to the great rampart. . This is the
zone of the high mountains, properly speaking. It is composed of clay
slates, quartzite, and a later mica schist.

The desire to become acquainteil with one of the valley systems which
open into the northern fjonls, as far as the waterslied, led me to visit these
mountains, and the abundant directions and explanations with which
Herr Pettersen kindly furnished me, enabled me in a short time to obtain
some insight into their peculiar structure. Di*. I^co Burgerstein did me
the favour of accompanying mo *. •

^ I owe particular thanks to my companion. Dr. Leo Burgerstein, who, with tfne self-
sacrifice, strove to reduce for me, as fiir as possible, the inconveniences of such a journey,
and thus enabled me to devote my whole time to my work. Most of the localities
mentioned here may be seen on Pettersen's general map of the south part of Tromsb
district, in his Geologiske UndersSgelser in den TromsS Amt og tilgrsendsendc Dele af
Nordlands Amt ; K. Norsk. Vid. Selsk. Skr., 1874, VII, pp. 261- 444'and pL



68 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [PARira

Travelling southwM'da from the Malangen fjord to the lake of Tome&
we reached the plain of the l^tromsmden (lat. 68* 48^ N.; 61'5 meters);
and here, just where the Social, coming from the south, opens into the
valley of Bardo, there rose before us a marvellous scene. Lofty moun-
tains of horizontally stmtified quartzite surround the plain, and - reach
a height of as much as 2,000 feet above the valley bottom : Bbrgsklatten
in the east, Bjbmefjeld and Storfjeld in the west, and the wedge-shaped
Rubben, which separates SSrdal from the upper Bardo, in the south.'
Round about the plain there runs at a uniform level from one mountain
mass to another a narrow band of startling whiteness, looking as though
it had just received a coating of whitewash. This is a lied of limestone
which, intercalated with the dark quartzites, not only renders obvious


In the distance the gabbro HOlltind

of Lyngen



North.

Fio. 6. Vk^oj'rom the Omasvarre, south of the Babtfjord^


the horizontal bedding, but also shows that tliis valley has been produced
solely by erosion \

From here we continued our journey 25 kilometers further to the
south through the Sordal to the frontier, always among mountains
formed of flat-lying beds. In its - upper course the stream has cut for
itself an inaccessible ravine, and we now ascend towards the south-east
the ancient glacier bed of the Stagenuni (782 meters). Here we find
ourselves standing above the quartzite, on coarsely foliated mica schists
of a dark-grey or pinchbeck-brown colour. The great sheet of water
which forms the north-west part of the Tornea Trask now lies spread
out before us in incomparable beauty. On our right the opposite shore
is Ixirdered by a tongue of flat woodland, corresponding with the mouth
of the Nuorajoki ; further iiway to the left, the steep walls of the moun- .

^ This white band has also been observed by Pettersen, Noiiser vedrorende den
nordnorske Qeldbygning ; Geol. Pdren. Stockh. F6rh., 1886, VIII, p. 466.


’ OMASVABRE


OH. h]


6 «


tain Abesko advance clo^ to the water’s edge, and its broad but noble
forms are mirrored in the lake. In the background there rise 6ne above
the other the* white rounded, or dome-like summits of the mountains of
Tome& Lappland. All the country visible at a little distance — ^the cubical
summits of the w<»t side of the Sordal, such as Spikalomi, aiid the equally
high mountains of the east side, such as the Etnamjoski peak, which
belongs to the great group of the Duotldarats— is composed throughout
of horizontal lieds up to a height of more than 3,000 feet above the sea-
level. We are thus standing on a fragment of true table-land, and
'descenjling to the lake we find its extremity divided by a projecting reef
of quartzite with the bedding equally horizonal. The great rampart how-
ever lies, as Hummel has shown, still further to the east.


Rismaftlstind


nattevarre



Fjttll Frftsk

TromaO atift (Ut. 69° S' N.) towards the east.


South


Tlic structure of the mountain lan*l lying south of the Bals fjord may
be seen from the sketch (Fig. 6), made from the broad ridge of the Omas-
varre (67d meters, lat. 69° 8' N.), situated 11 kilometers south of thfe
end of this fjord. It was drawn looking to the cast, and on the left,
i.e. towards the north, a few of the peaks of the Lyngen range arc visible.

These peaks excepted, all tlie mountains are well stratified ; the
colouring, the alternation of schist and quartzite, and the long lines of
snow resting on the ledges, all combine to bring out the lie of the beds
in clearest detail. On the right, not only the broad mass of the Buosta-
fjeld (1,672 meters), just outside the limits of the sketch, but all the
mountain land far to the south is formed of horizontal bedsi The first
mountain repre.sented on the right, the southernmost member of the group
of the Hattevarre, has the form of a regular pyramid, yet it nevertheless
equally consi.sts of horizontal beds. The beds of the principal mass of
the Hattevarre are also nearly horizontal, but towards the Bismaalstind


60 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [partiii

inclination ^ets in and increases towards the north; in the Rismaalstind
itself the dip is alreafly very marked, and in the Hdlltind it has
become so steep that the north flank is formed by a single bedding plane ;
this plane plunges into the Bals fjord, and the niountains which we see
further away towards the Lyngeii range also form part of the dide of the
fjord. There is nowhere any trace of folding in this extensive range. It
would rather seem as though the tvhde taUe-land plunged in a single
mighty fleuure dotva to the gabbro of Lyngen, and in fact Fettersen
published some ycai's ago a section taken a little more to the north,
iicross the Lyngen fjonl, in which the whole mass of stratified formations
is represented as bending in an arc lieneath this range of gabbro. • At that
time Fettersen even thought that the gabbro was intercalated with the
stratified formations, and shared with them a common dip. I have not
myself visited the mountains in the immediate neighbourhood of the
gabbro range ’.

At the foot of the Ruostafjehl, mentioned above, a long, valley opens —
•the Dividal — which comes fram the .south-south-east ; its right slope may
l|e regarded as the continuation of the section just discussed. • It is after
this valley that Fettersen has named the lowest member of the high moun-
tain series. A.scending the valley we met the Dividal stage, represented
by shales which resemble in every paiiicplar the Cambrian shales of Ginec
in Bohemia. We found no fossils, but typical plaited slabs such as occur
in the ‘primordial’ deposits of Sweden. We followed the Dividal for
a distance of 36 kilometers, always with mountains formed of flat-lying
beds on both sides, and then turned to the west into the Skakterdal,' where
it joins the Dividal, and ascended it to the edge of the table-land, that is, to '
the great rampart. Here we perceived that to the south-east the Archaean
foundation, and with it the whole of the superimposed scries, gradually rises
towards Sweden. At the liottom of the Dividal we saw the lowest members
of this series ; further to the south Fettersen has even found the Archaean
rocks exposed in the bed of the Dividal itself. From here (Hiittc Frihedsli,
187 meters) we were obliged to ascend through the Skakterdal to a height
of 724 meteis in order to rejich the junction with the overlying beds.

Our way led us over Inmd rocky floors, polished and strewn with
blocks which looked as though they had only yesterday been abandoned
by the glacier, until finally the table-land teimiinated- in two great cubical
mountain masses. Store Jerta on the right, Namna on the left, which seem
to guard, like towers, the mouth of the pass. Through this we step out
into a moraine region dotted over with innumerable pools of waiter, the
'Ijoalma Vagge (lat. 68® 40' N.).

Looking backwards from this desolate table-land we now see that the

' Fettersen, Profil fra Kigsgrsndsen over Lyngen til KvalC ; Foih. Yid. Selsk.
Christiania, 1868, pp. 1.55-1.58, pi.



TJOALMA VAGGE


61


GH.n]


great rampart is here divided into a series of table mountains: Julos
Varre, Store Jerta, Namna, Bumansberg, Kalbir Yarre, and others. From
the anlerior slope of those nearest us, the Store Jerta, Namna, and Bumans-
berg, there advances with a particularly steep descent an intercalated bed
of solid rock, which enables us even from a distance to perceive the original
continuity of all these several bastions.

Thus the great rampart is here broken up into 'bastions; and it is easy
to see that it was through the gaps between them, and in particular
through that between Store Jerta and Namna, which leads down to the
• Skakterdol, that the ice-'cap which once rested on the table-land thrust
forth* its glaciers towards the Atlantic Ocean.

Outside the bastions, on the barien table-land, below the moraines of



Fig. 7. TJoalma Vaggc, Moraine landscape on the boundary between Norway and Sweden

. (lat. G8® 40' N.).

In the foreground the ground-down roches moutonntes of the red Swedish granito,
in the distance the superposed table mountain.

TJoalma Vaggo, nioutonn^ed bosses project which belong to the Archaean
foundation. This* is formed of a bright-red granitic rock, of 'distinctly
banded structure; it strikes to the north, and dips at about 30° to the
east. It is the source of those red blocks which have been carried out to
the west into the fjord ; these will be discussed later.

The ancient rocks of the Lofoten and Westeraalen,. particularly the
granite, gneiss and ancient mi<» schists, frequently accompanied by bosses
of gabbro, are continued in the same direction along the Atlantic coast.
.They occur in the island of Amd, form that part of the peninsula of
Meiland between the Rejsen and Kvanangen fjord which is turned towards
the sea^ as well as the whole northern part of the great ^ninsula of
Berg, which follows next, then wholly or in gi'eat part the islands of

* Pettenen, Kvsenangen, Trpnistf Mus. Aarsh., IV, 1881, describes Bergs and
MeilandshalvO, together with Spildem, Rods, and Haukd, as once continuous rocky
rampart.


62 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLAI^l’IC OCEAN [PARrra

Stjerno, Seljand, Sor5, Kvalo, as well as the whole north-west part of
the Porsanger peninsula), together with Hjelmso, and we meet with them
on Magcro e^ctehding up to the North cape. The islands, together with
the most projecting parts of the mainland, thus form the continuation
of the range of the Lofoten. The greater part of this range is 1,000 feet
higher than the regions which .succeed it towards the interior ; it is broken
across by- the fjords.

Within this western range of gneiss lies the table-laud, and the base
of this, i.c. the lowest beds of the Dividal group, now also makes its
appearance on the northern edge, as for exaniple, on the east side of -
Kvanangeii, at Alten, on the south side of Lerbotn, in the Komak Qord,
and in the Kippe fjord on the west side of the Poi'sanger peninsula
(lat. 70” 30' N.). These exposures mark the boundary of the table-land
against the western range of gneiss. In Lerbotn the Dividal beds are
steeply upturned and the gneiss is not seen ; in the Koinak ^*ord they
lie horizontal, and the gneiss is also' horizontal ; in the Rippe fjonl they
arc intensely folded, while the older rocks are not folded, but exhibit
fairly undisturbed bedding-. With complete justice Pcttersen concludes
that .the Rippe fjord is traverse by a great dislocation, and that the
table-land lying towards, the interior is thrown jdown against the gneiss
range L

The line of demarcation between -the gneiss range and the table-land is
thus a zone of dislocation, and this dislocation runs across those parts of
the mainland which project into the sea and acro.S8 a number of fjords.
The table-land, here formed chiefly of schistose quartzite, extends from it
over a wide area as far as the eastern rampart, so often mentioned above. .

While the gneiss zone as a rule has a height of 3,000 feet, the table-
land in its western part does not rise to more than about 2,000 feet. Its
east border is little known. We left it in Tjoalma Vagge; Pettersen
observed the base of the superposed beds on the upper Rejsenelv, not far
from the Norwegian frontier; there the mountain mass of Reisduoddar
Haldij consisting of gabbro and serpentine, rises oh the edge of the table-
land to a height of 4,000 feet

According to Tellef Dahll’s map the edge of the superposed beds now
recedes a little, advancing again towards the south in the direction of
Kautokeino. Leopold von Such, after having crossed south of Alten

* Pettersen, De Norske KyststrOgs Geologi, IV, Porwnger-halvOen ; Arch. Hath.
Naturvid., X, 1884, map, in particular p. 167. It is a pleasing fact that in the extreme
north, in lat. 70' 30' N, where hardly a tree or even a bush rejoices the eye, this
observer has arrived by an unprejudiced contemplation of nature at the same views of
the subsidence of great mountain segments which have elsewhere, under much more
favourable conditions, only been adopted after much discussion.

* Pettersen, Ueber das Vorkommen des Serpentine und Olivinfels im N. Norwegen ;

N. Jahrb., 1876, pp. 613-622.



OH. II] THE NORTH OF NORWAY 63

horitontal beds of quartzite and mica schist, ascended this slope from the
l^ohm-jaui'e towards Kautokeino and there reached the granite

In the north wc .possess the observations of Tellef Dahll. According
to these the boundary of the. table-land runs from the neighbourhood of
Kautokeino, along the Altenelv to the noith, and on the river regular beds
of graphite occur, intercalated with the stratified formations. Near the
Jes Jaure, where serpentine crops out, the boundary turns to the north-
east; it reaches the end of the Porsanger fjord and thence runs to the
east. Raste Kaisse, south of the Lakset fjord, 3,000 feet ' high, and
presenting beds of sandstone 2,000 feet thick, lies on this boundary,
which reaches the western end of the Varanger fjord; the south side
of this fjord belongs to the Archaean region, the north side to the
table-land

In the north of the peninsula we may thus distinguish tliree chief
elements as wc proceed from west to east: the great gneiss zone of the
Atlantic coast, which we call the zone of the Lofoten, then the table-land,
which in spite of its poverty in organic remains has been proved to belong
to the Cambrian system, in part even to the lower Silurian, and’ finally
the Archaean land on the cast. The western boundary of the table-land
•is a fracture, the eastern corresponds to normal superposition.

Towards the south the line of .the Lofoten abandons the direction of
the coast, but the investigations of Pettersen show that the masses of
gneiss and granite, of which the Lofoten islands consist, are also present
on the east side of the Vest fjord, and this great trough has been faulted
down into the rocks of the Lofoten, the-so-called ‘ coast-granite.’ Further
to the east, on the mainland, we find the same stratified rocks as we have
just encountered bbout lake Torned and the Bals fjord, but here they are
folded. Gneiss and a long band of granite (the Kjblcn granite) crop out
in the anticlinals. The folds strike nearly parallel to' the. coast ; they
form the mountain of Sulitjelma ; they are intersected transversely by the
fjords, as for instance by the Salten fjoitl. Here then'efore a folded region
lies betioeen the range of the Lof<den and the talde-land \

Further to the south the folded region forms the Atlantic coast almost
as far down as the mouth of Hardanger fjord (lat. 60° N.). It hero con-
sists, apart from intrusions of eruptive rocks, paHly of beds of the same

* L. von Buch, Keise (lurch Norwegen and Lappland, II, Berlin, 1810; Gesammelte
'Sohrilten, edited by Ewald, Roth und Eck, 1870, II, pp. 449-4^8 an(l the section pi. v.

* Tellef Dahll, Oni Finmarken’s Geologi; Forh. Yid. Selsk. Christiania, 1868, pp. 213-'
222, pi, iv. T. Dahll rightly recognizes here the equivalents of the Cambrian alum -
shales ; he regards the overlying beds as Devonian, the graphite beds as altered Coal-
measures of the Carboniferous period, and the brown sandstones, superimposed on these,
as Permian ; no fossils have so far been found.

* Pettersen, Vestfiorden. og Salten ; Arch. Math. Naturvid., 1886, XI, pp. 377-492,
map.



64 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [pabthi

• * •

age as those of the table-land (as is proved *by the Silurian fossils found in
many places), and partly of the rocks which underlie these beds.

The two transverse sections so far published, as for instance that of
Trondhjem by Mcraker’, scarcely enable us as yet to form any definite
opinion as to the direction in which tangential force has acted; but the
laborious surveys of this extensive and sparsely populated .mountain region
accomplished by Kjerulf and his fellow workers show clearly that tlie
folds strike down from tlie north towards the south-west into the imme-
diate neighbourliood of that part of the country which projects furthest to
the west, the promontory of Stat (lat. 62° 10' N.), without however follow-
ing exactly the course of tlie coast. Towards the south, indeed, according to
Kjenilf's map, the folds appear. to turn more and more to the west, so that*
the Vigten islands, and next, with a more westerly trend, the great islands
to the south outside the Trondhjem fjord, indicate the strike of the folds
as they pass out to sea, and the more south-westerly course of the coast
towards Stat appears equally to correspond with a swerving of the folds.
Just above Stat promontory, however, an unexpected deflexion occurs.
The principal band qf gneissose granite, which comes down from the
north-north-east in the direction of the Vartdals fjord, runs to the Vanelvs
fjord, then bends up towards the north-west, and so reaches with this
direction Stat promontory and the island of Saiido This is the begin-
ning of a change in direction. To the south of Stat the strike. is due west,
and correspondingly the fjords also here assume an east to west direction ;
till finally, still further to the south beyond the Sogiie fjord, the folds
which appear on the coast strike into the interior, describing a semicircle
around the neighbourhood of Bergen, and to the south of Bergen they
reach the sea for the second time.

In its southern part, this semicircular curvature has been described in
great detail by H. Reusch \ It is not a curvature with torsion like the

^ T. Kjerulf, Meraker profilet, K. Norsk. Vid. Selsk. Skr., 1882, pp. 63-140, 7 pi.;

F. Sveiionius, Ni\gra profiler inom inellersta Skandinaviens SkifFeromrade, Geol. FOren. ‘
Stockh. .Fork., 1885, VII, pp. 631-653, pi. xvii. Fossils from these regions have been
described by BrcJgger, Om Trondhjcmfeldets midlere Afdeling mellein Guldalm og
Meldalen ; Forh. Vid. Selsk. Christiania, 1877, no. 2, i>p. 1-28, pi. and maps.

* Hans H. Reusch, Grundfjeldet i sOndre SOndmOr og en Del af NordQord ; Forh. Vid.
Selsk. Christiania, 1878, no. 2, pp. 1-18, map.

^ Hans* H. Reusch, Silurfossiler og pressode konglomerater i Bergensskifsene,
Universitets Program for 1 Halvaar 1883, 8vo, Christiania, 1882; by the same, Die
fossilienfiihrenden krystallinischen Schiefer von Bergen in Norwogen, translated into*
German by Baldauf, Leipzig, 1883. These investigations have futnished excellent
(jxamples of the extreme alteration of the rock by pressure and of the preservation of
fossils in such rocks; they exactly correspond with observations made in the Alps.

I was, however, much struck by the fact that in the flat-bedded parts of Norway also,
particularly in the north, mica schist and hornblende schist occur, as has been already
mentioned by many writers, and that in the Tromsd district for example, as Pettersen



CH.II]


GLINT LINES


66


great Roumanian arc on the lower Danube (I, p. 482), and indeed I know
of no other example of the same kind. To the south of it, on the Har-
danger fjord the folds terminate, and the horizontally stratified belt
extends to Stavanger.

The way in which the folded ranges strike out to sea, in particular the
bending round near Stat, the westerly strike of the folds south of Stat, and
the lie of the Bergen arc, show that the continuation of these mountains
lies to west and south-west beneath the sea. The direction of the struc-
tural features in west Scandinavia points towards the Shetland and Orkney
islands, but the discussion of the remarkable correspondence which exists
between Scotland and the mountains of Norway may be postponed to
a later occasion.

8. Olint lines. On both sides of the Atlantic Ocean, to the north-west
and to the north-east, there lies a vast region of Archaean rocks, from
which the sedimentary covering, except for a few isolated patches, has
been removed by erosion. In each of these regions there lies a shallow
sea, on one side Hudson bay, on the other the Baltic. Each region is
surrounded as with a rampart by the basset edges of the sedimentary
formations, elsewhere swept away; these sediments everywhere belong
to the older divisions of the Palaeozoic period, at latest to the Devonian,
and round both shields they lie flatly bedded. In Russia the' feature
formed by these basset edges is known as the glints and we shall in future
employ this term for long lines of escarpment formed of flat-lying beds,
when they arc due, not to fracture, but to denudation ^

The glint of each of the two shields is marked by a long series of fresh-
water lakes, which lie in its course.

The glint lakes around the Canadian shield are: Ontario, Georgian
bay, lakes Superior, Winnipeg, Athabasca, Great Slave lake. Martyr lake,
Great Bear lake ; the glint line then runs out into Coronation gulf, which
is situated like a glint lake.

The glint line of the Baltic shield runs close to the. east coast of Sweden

rightly observeR, the lowest of these beds show the least alteration. Indeed, I have seen
at the southernmost end. of the Bals fjord, near the place where the great flexure (Fig. 6,
pp. 58, 59) reaches the sea, many signs of striation and gliding on the bedding planes,
and have found in some places, as at the bottom of the Dividal itself, partings in which
the layers are plicated into themselves, as it were, although the other beds have
remained horizontal; we may thus conclude that during the formation of so great
a flexure there occur such tensions and interior movements of the beds one over the
other that great altei-ation of the rocks may be produced without any real folding ; but
there are vast regions where such flexures do not occur, and yet through nearly the
whole length of the peninsula crystalline schists are known at a higher level than
deposits which are undoubtedly of Cambnan age.

^ The outcrops described by Zittel in the Libyan desert are glint lines, produced by
abrsision ; the declivities at the south foot of the Uinta, which were produced by flexures,
are not so.


HOLLAS IX •



66 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [PABTin

not far from -Kalmar, then through the sea north of Gothland, north of
Dago, through the gulf of Finland, which also has the position of a glint
lake, through lakes Ladoga and Onega, into the gulf of Archangel and so
to the Arctic Ocean.

A closer inspection of the structure of the Scandinavian .peninsula
shows that, in the north at leai^t, north of Jemtland or of lat. 64* N., the
eastern face of the table-land with its slightly inclined bedding, its bastion.^
and ancient glacier portals, forms part of the Baltic glint. Just as, many
years ago, Richardson and Isbister in north Canada remarked with as-
tonishment the presence of so many lakes on the Palaeozoic boundary line,

. so, many years ago Tomebohm observed here that most of the great lakes
of Lapland are intersected by this line of escarpment Indeed, all these
great lakes, such as Homafvan, Saggat Trask near Kvikkjokk, Lule&
Jaur, Paitas Jaur, Tome^ Trask, Alte Vand and Ruosta Vand, must be
regarded as a series of glint lakes. The glint rises higher here than
elsewhere, and the transverse position of the lakes is more strikingly
shown than in any other region of. similar character. The majority of
these lakes find an outlet for their waters into the gulf of Bothnia, the
remainder into the Atlantic Ocean, but this is a point which we peed not '
consider at present.

The glint line is continued through the north of Finmark to the end
of Varanger fjord, and through this to the Arctic Ocean.

From the foregoing, we perceive that there are not only glint lakes,
but also glint gulfs of the .sea. Such are ; the gulf of Finland, the gulf
of Archangel, Varanger fjord and Coronation gulf. Of these four gulfs,
three belong to the Arctic Ocean.

4. The talle-la/nd of Spitzhergen. The Russian chain of lakes reaches
the Ocean in the gulf of Onega and the White sea, immediately to the
west of the peninsula of Kanin, the relations of which with the Ural
range have already been di.scu8sed.

We have already learnt that Nova Zcnibla is a mountain chain folded
to the west and north-wc.st, which joins the Ural near Konstantinov-
Kamen in lat. 68* 29' N. (I, p. 504), the shar of Jugor, the straits of .Kani,
and the Matotshkin shar arc transverse furrows, and the Kara sea is
a ‘ back-sea ’ (Ruckmeer). The Timan range, a* divergent fore-fold or
parma of the Ural, unites in syntaxis on the Sula with a little fragment
of an arc, which strikes from the north-cast of the Tshesskaja bay tictoss
the peninsula of Kanin towards Kanin Noss (I, p. 505) ^

’ Tomebohm, Geognostik schwediseber Hochgebirge, p. 49.

* A. Wichmann has expressed doubt as to Hofer’s conception of the structure of Nova
Zembla ; but since Wichmann himself regards the island as the direct continuation of
the island of Waigatsch and of the Pae-chol, this settles the chief ^[ueBtion. I hare
recently rediscussed the matter with Herr Hofer, and am the more conrinced that his



CH.II] DEPTH OP THE SEA ABOUT SPITZBERGEN 67

We have thus good reason to suppose that the valley of the Petchora,
the floor of which is formed in great part of flat-lying Jurasric beds,
stretches across the flat island of Kolguev to be continued beneath the
south-east part of the Barents sea: this gives all the more interest to
a knowledge of Spitzbergen, Franz- Josef Land, and Bear island.

Those who, like Nordenskjold, Mohn and Nathorst, are best acquainted
with these regions, have conjectured that a connexion once existed between
Spitzbergen and the north of Norway; and Pettersen, who has brought
together all the observations relating to this subject, distinguishes the
table-land, or the group of great islands which may once have occupied
the site of the existing Barents sea, as the ‘Arctis^/

It is to the west of the Lofoten islands, on the Vestpraals-Eggen, that
the sea first sinks to considerable depths along the Norwegian coast, as
has been shown with great clearness by Mohn. The steep submarine slope
runs thence to the north, towards the west coast of Spitzbergen. Barents
sea lies above it, outside and to the east of the great depths of the Green-
land sea, which sinks between Norway and the recent volcanic island of
Jan Mayen to below 2,000 fathoms, and between Spitzbergen and Greenland
to below 2,600 fathoms. Barents sea is thus of trifling depth ; a furrow
about 200 to 300 fathoms deep runs up between Norway and Bear island,
and this is its deepest part ; the hundred fathom line, however, runs from
the Murman coast towards Nova Zembla, then from the north-west part
of this island to the west and includes Bear island; so that the islands
mentioned above, extending from Spitzbergen to. Franz- Josef Land and to
Bear island^ form the highest parts of a single continuous plateau.

The results published by the Norwegian North-sea expedition show
besides, that lying on the submarine slope which descends to the great
depths from lat. 65° 36' to 68® 21' N., and in isolated localities even up to
lal. 78° N., there are some residual fragments of Cretaceous, although
deposits of this system are not known at present on the neighbouring land*
These consist of pieces of chalk and flint ; in lat. 65° 43' N., long. 7° 29' E.
a fragment of a Belemnite was obtained from a depth of 194 fathoms.
These fragments either prove the existence of a submarine Cretaceous
belt, or excessive denudation of the surrounding land

Let us now turn our attention first to the archipelago of Spitzbergen,
Through the great kindness of Professor Nathorst, of Stockholm, I am
able to make use of his comprehensive, and, as yet, unpublished observa-

views are correct since they fully accord with what we know of the structure of the
north Ural ; A. Wichmann, Zur Geologic von Nowaja-Semlja, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol.
Ges., 1886, XXXVIII, pp. 516-550.

^ K. Pettersen, Arktis, II ; Arch. Math. Naturvid. Kristiania, 1882, pp, 465-489.

• H. Mohn, Dybde-Kart over N’ordhavet ; Norske Nordhavs-Expedition, 1887, XVIII,

pi. i.



68 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [pabtiu


tions on the stratified series and the structure of Spitzbei^en. ' The
following description is derived from communications he has kindly made



Fig. 8. SpiUOtergvn,


me by letter, and affords a more complete picture than the valuable works
of Nordenskjold, Hofer, Drasche, and others

’ In particular, A. E. Nordenskjold, Spetsbergen’s Geologic, K. Svenska Vet. Akad.
Handl. Stockholm, 1867, VI, with geological map, also an English translation in the


CH.n] • SEQUENCE IN SPITZBEBGEN 69

According to Nathorst the stratified sequence of Spitsbergen is as
follows

The TeHiary deposits consist, in the first place, of about 500 feet of
lacustrine sediments with coal and land plants ; beneath these lie 2,600 feet
of marine sandstone, clay, and other beds, with marine mollusca, and
finally another 100 feet of coal and plant-bearing beds.

Beneath thdse Tertiary beds a gap occurs with unconformity, then
comes the Jurassic series, first, marine beds with Leda, Nucula and others,
and then lacustrine beds with plants and fresh-water mollusca (once erro-
neously believed to be Cretaceous); next, marine beds with Ammonites;
again, limnic beds with coal and plants ; below these again, sediments which
are perhaps marine. The Jurassic rests conformably on marine sediments,
also completely conformable among themselves, of the Trias, Permian, and
Permo-Carboniferous ; the last of these rests also conformably on the Ursa
stage, which contains plant remains, but in one locality it also exhibits an
intercalation of marine sediments.

The Ursa stage rests unconformably on the Devonian series of Liefdo
bay, which contains Cephalaspis, Scapliaspis, and plant remains of the Old
Red sandstone : in this series also a marine bed is probably intercalated.

The Devonian rests unconformably on the much older Hccla Hook
system, which has not as yet afforded fossils; it consists of quartzite,
phyllites, limestone, and dolomite, and close to it there occur granite,
gneiss, and hornblende schists, which are said to represent the Archaean
foundation, though Nathorst does not consider this definitely established.
The Hecla Hook rocks which 1 saw in Stockholm resemble the phyllites of
the eastern Alps.

Of the more recent eruptive rocks only diabase occurs ; it traverses the
beds as far as the Trias, in places even to the Jurassic. The largest masses
of diabase .occur in a zone running from south to north, which extends
from the Thousand islands along the Star fjord far into the straits of
Hinlopen. .'

The dislocations resulting from tangential stresses arc confined to the
fundamental rocks, and the Hecla Hook beds. These are, as a rule, steeply
upturned, and form the sharp jagged mountains to which the highest peaks
of Spitsbergen, such os the Homsundstind,^ belong. All the other deposits,
however, from the Devonian upwards, retain, except on the west side of
Spitzbergep, a horizontal or only gently inclined position, save for some
local and insignificant disturbances. The whole of the country formed by
them is table-land. '

tieol. Mag., 1872 ; H. Hofer, Graf Wilczek’t Nordpolfabrt im Jahre 1872, 1. : Beitr&ge zur ^
Geographie Sfld-Spitzbergena, Peterm. Mittheil., 1874, pp. 220-223; R. von Draache,
Geologiacho Beobachtungen auf einer Reiae nach den Weatkfiaten Spitzbergena im
Sommer 1878, Verb. k. k. geol. Reicha, 1873, pp. 260-863.



70 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [pabtiii

Along the west side of Spitzbergen there runs a long horst which,
towards the east, is separated from the island by a great line of fracture.
On this line the sedimentary beds are steeply uptumiod or even inverted ;
acconling to Nathorst the feature must be regarded as a fault with down-
throw to the east accompanied by .upward flexure. The .throw of the
dislocation must amount to several thousand feet, since on the Ice sound,
where the flexure is most widely extended, even the Tertiary beds are
afiected ; the same is the case in King's bay. In Bel sound the upturning
appears to terminate with the Trias.

The greater part of Spitzbergen is thus a table-land, and the same

would seem to be true of Barents Land, Edge island, and Hope island, since

all the beds of these islands appear to lie horizontal.

Another great fault runs down through

Wijde bay towards Klaas Billen bay.

This disturbance is, however, certainly

very ancient,- even older than the Ursa

stage, since, west of Klaas Billen bay, beds

of this stage lie flat on the Devonian,

which is somewhat steeply upturned

against the fracture, and to the east of

this bay they rest immediately on the

fundamental rocks still retaining their

flat l)ed«ling. In Liefde bay, Klaas BiUeu

bay, and Dickson bay, Nathorst found the

Fio. 9. Diagrammatic repr^nti^n of tfw Devonian everywhere horizontal, and the
after Nathorst. , , t. • ■ i , , i

whole Devonian table-land appeared to
him to be let down in an old pre-Carlx)niferous fault-trough.

It thus appears that faults are present of very different age ; some are
pre-Carboniferous, while others arc post-Tertiary, and have produced im
upward flexure of the Tertiary beds.

The throw of another fault, situated in Bel sound, along the north
coast of Van Keulen’s bay, must, acconling to Nathorst, amount to at least
2,000 feet, for beds of Carlioniferous limestone arc exposed both in the
mountain peaks and on the seashore below.

Other faults of trifling impprtance also occur, some of which coincide
with the He of the fjords.

These main lines of the structure appear in the little map. Fig. 8,
reduced from a sketch which Professor Nathorst was kind enough to send
me. The ancient Hccla Hook rocks form almost the entire west coast,
probably also Prince Charles promontory ; the Archaean foundation makes
its appearance in the north-west. Between Liefde bay and Wijde bay the
Devonian is exposed, bounded on the east by the fracture, and on the whole
north coast the ancient rocks of Hecla Hook and the Archaean arc visible.


Dragging in
tho ^

fault trough
Horst I


Arctic Ocean



cH.n] TABULAR FRACTUBES OP SPITZBEBGEN 71

The centre of the country and the whole eastern part from the South cape
to beyond Edge island is occupied by later sediments, and by the Mesozoic
exposures of diabase.

It is extremely likely that the eastern islands are the continuation of
the Mesozoic table>Iand in which Stor fjord lies.

As to King Glvarl&s Lund Nathorst observes that the only fossil so far
known is a fragment of fossilized wood, described by Schrdter as Larix
Johnseni, and believed to be Miocene; that Tertiary beds occur here is
certainly possible, but in Spitzbergen a conifer is found which probably
belongs to Ltirix, and this occurs in the upper Jurassic.

In Franz- Joisef Jmvd the bold sledge journey of Payer has made us
acquainted with horizontal sheets of eruptive basalt, and the more recent
investigations of Leigh Smith have still further extended our knowledge.
In Eira harlx)ur (lat. 80° 10' N. Franz-Josef Land, S.W.), Grant, who accom-
panied Leigh Smith, found that the clitf, 1,040 feet in height, is formed at
its base of Oxfonl clay with Belemnites. Above this follow beds with,
coniferous wood and cones, and other plant remains ; they are believed to
be Cretaceous. The whole is covered with a sheet of basaltic lava
Let us now turn our attention from Spitzbergen to the south.

Bear idand consists of horizontal betls of Permo-Carboniferous age,
and the Ursa series. Nordenskjold met here with the Hecla Hook rocks ;
according to Nathorst it is uncertain whether these are exposed by erosion
or by a prolongation of the great line of fracture which runs along the
west side of Spitzbergen. The island is nothing but a fragment of the
Spitzbergen table-land ; Mohn has given a vivid account of the unceasing
attack of the breakers on these horizontal beds, the undermining of the
cliffs, the formation of great clefts, and the slipping down of mighty masses
of limestone ; such fallen masses, standing in isolated pillars of towers at
the end of flat tongues of land, often remain to bear a long-enduring
testimony to the destructive violence of the waves

Thus we find repeated on this island that castellated form of the cliffs
which has been so often described as characterizing the Palaeozoic limestone
beds, likewise horizontal, of the North American archipelago, e.g. in the
Parry islands and Lancaster sound. There we found arms of the sea
running up in many ramifications between the islands of the archipelago,
like a submerged .system of river courses. We can indeed picture to
•ourselves how, with a rising strand-line, the sea will penetrate into the
valleys of a horizontally stratified land, how it will wMen them by under-

I

* C. R. Markham^ The Voyage of the * Eira,’ and Leigh Smith’s Arctic Discoveries in
1880; Proc. Geogr. Soc., London, new series, III, 1881, p. 135. According to Carruthers
the conifer is a true pine. Etheridge mentions still older rocks beneath the Jurassic ;
tom. cit, p. 147.

^ Norske Nordhavs Expedition, V, 1882 ; H. Mohn. Geografi og Naturhistorie, p. 32.



72 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [PAierra

mining thoir banks, and so prodnce outlines which, as isoon as the secondary
watersheds have been crossed or destroyed, may come at last to resemble
nnd not remotely those of the Parry archipelago. In the same way Bear
island is regarded by most observers simply as an outlier of the great
table-land, separated by erosion. Thus the sea completes the work which
the rivers had begun, and in this way are accomplished those extensive
abrasions to which the stratified succession of so many lands bears
witness.

6. Greenlavd. The fundamental feature.s'of the stratified succession in
Spitsbergen are repeated in Greenland, but only on the edst coast and
a part of the south-west. This correspondence has often been remarked
upon by competent observers. Here as there, red sandstone rests hori-
zontally and unconformably- on ancient folded rocks, and the folding is
thus older than the sandstone. In ' Greenland the red sandstone has
nbt as yet furnished any urgatiic remains, but it may doubtless be corre-
lated with the Liefde bay series of Spitzbergen. The Mesozoic and
Tertiary deposits al.so lie flat, as in Spitzbergen. This is the constitution
of the great peninsula in the east,- so far as the inland ice and the in-
hospitable nature of the coast have pennitted us to become acquainted
writh it; in the west the characters of an abraded table-land are con-
tinued far to the north, probably about ns far as the Humboldt glacier,
where, as we have already seen, the upturned Silurian strata extend from
Nonnan Lockycr island (lat. 79° 25' N.) in Scoresby bay across Smith sound
with a north-easterly strike (II, p. 42).

Greenland, as far north as Humboldt glacier, is probably an Ancient
table-land, yet it diffei’s in some respects from the Canadian and Baltic
table-lands, for in the.se two regions we meet with horizontal Silurian beds
of marine origin, while in Greenland as in Spitzbergen the scries of flat- .
lying beds does not begin, according to tlie present state of our knowledge,
before the red sandstone.

Payer and Copeland have explored the east coast between lat. 73°
and 76* N. ; the facts brought together by Hochstetter and his fellow
worker's show that the greater part of the coast of the mainland, together
with most of Clavering island and Kuhn island and the north of Shannon
island, consists of Archaean rocks. Ancient quartzite, clay slates, and lime-
stone, which are ^ignod to the Hecla Hook scries of Spitsbergen, are
exposed on the north coast of Franz-Josef fjord. In False bay (Clavering'
straits, west of Sabine island) Payer made the remarkable discovery of
Bhaetic fossil, RhyncJumdla JustdcodcUa, the only representative of this
series found as yet in the Arctic regions. On Kuhn island there are
Jurassic deposits similar to those of Spitzbergen, and similarly associated
with coal and plant-bearing beds. Basalts and plant-bearing sediments
of middle Tertiary age crop out for a great distance along the coast from



GBEENLAND


73


OH.n]

the little Bontekoe islands in front of Franz- Josef fjord, northwards up to
the middle of Shannon island, so that all the land which runs farthest
out to sea — such as cape Broer Buys, cape Borlase Warren, Sabine and
Pendulum island,* and cape Philip Broke on Shannon island — belongs to the
basalt region. Hochstetter foreland also is middle Tertiary; it has furnished
remains of Tertiary marine mollusca similar to those of Spitsbergen. I may
■observe that these are the only two regions in. the Arctic Ocean which
have afforded marine Tertiary fossils. The basalts of Iceland, the Faero^,
and even Ireland (so far to the south) and the west coast of Greenland are
everywhere accompanied by Tertiary beds which contain no other fossils
than terrestrial plants ^ (I, p. 287).

The west of Greenland, from cape Farewell to lat. 61” N., consists
mainly of granite, beside which gneiss appears only in isolated localities —
according to Liaube on the precipitous cape Whitsuntide on the east coast,
and on Sermeiaoak in the south-west. On the east coast the granite
frequently contains hornblende; on the west, according to the recent
investigations of Steenstrup and Komerup, it is traversed north of Igaliko
fjoid by a mass of syenite, and north of Julianehaab, at the mouth of
the Tunugdliartik, by a mass of sodalite syenite, which is cut right through
the middle by the fjord. A great mass of red sandstone, accompanied by
porphyry, separates, north of the sodalite-syenite, the Sermilik from the
Tundgdliarfik fjord, and e:( tends across the latter to the north end of
the Igaliko fjord. So far the red sandstone, os we have already mentioned,
has not afforded any organic remains

In the interval between lat. 63” 15' and 64” 15' N. Komerup en-
countered only Archaean rocks, chiefly grey gneiss. Its strike is generally
directed to the north-east

The land much further to the north also, between lat. 66“ 15' and
68“ 16' N., was found by the same observer to be formed of different

^ F. V. Hochstetter, Geologic Ost-Grdnlands zwischen dem 73. und 76.” n. Br. : a. Allge-
meine Uebersicht, bearbeitet von Franz Toula, b. Speciellc Darstellnng, bearbeitet von
Oscar Lenz ; Mesozoische Versteinerungen von der Kuhinsel, von Franz Toula, in Zweite
Deutsche Nordpolfahrt, II, 1872, pp. 471-511, and Hochstetter, Geologische Kartenskizze
von Ost-GrOnland nach den Beobachtungen und Sammiungen von Payer und Copeland,
op. cit., pi. i. All the earlier geological literature of Greenland is given in Rupert
Jones’ valuable manual of the Natural Histoiy, Geology, and Physics of Greenland, 8vo,
London, 1875.

* Gustav Laube, Geologische Beobachtungen gesammelt wllhrcnd der Reise des
‘Hansa’ und gelegentlich des Aufenthaltes in Siid-Grdnland, Silz. k. Ak. Wise. Wien,
1‘873, LXVIII, pp. 17-109, and geological map; E. J. V. Steenstrup ogiA. Komerup,
Beretning om Expeditionen til Julianehaab’s Distrikt i 1876, Meddels. om GrOnland II,
KjObnhavn 1881, pp. 1-26 ; Steenstrup, Bcmwrkningcr til et geognostik Oversigtskaart
over en Del af Julianenhaab’s Distrikt, op. cit., pp. 27-41, and geological map.

■'' A. Komerup, Geologiske lagttagelser fra Vestkysten af GrOnland (lat. 62° 15'-
64“ 15' N.) ; Meddels. om Grdnland, 1, 1879, pp. 77-139, geological map B. •



74 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [pabtiii

varieties of gneiss, and this great mass of gneiss, lying in folds striking
to the north-east, appears to form by far the larger part of the west coast s

Between lat. 70® and 72® 39' N. and beyond, the same Archaean rocks
crop out at the edge of the inland ice, but in front of them, towards the
sea, lie great basaltic regions, such ^ we have already studied 'On the east
coast from the mouth of Franz-Josef fjord up to Shannon island. I may
cite as examples taken from the latest surveys of Steenstrup, Disko island
(on the south and south-yirest coast of which the Archaean foundation is
visible), then Hare island, the peninsula of Nugsuak, Ubakjendt island, the
peninsulas of Svartenbuk and Ingnerite. On this side as in the east, the
Archaean region of the interior is bounded by a basaltic belt, and it is
beneath these mighty sheets of lava that those rich Cretaceous and middle
Tertiary floras are preserved which have furnished the most important
material for the investigations made by Oswald Heer on the Arctic floras
of the past

A bu;t of great importance in its bearing on questions to be discussed
later is the discovery made by Steenstrup of the presence of marine Cre-
taceous fossils within this series of beds which, except for some local
disturbances, are always horizontal. The succession, according to the
present state of our knowledge, is as follows: — (1) Rome beds, resting
directly on gneiss, and containing a terrestrial flora of lower Cretaceous
age; (2) Alane beds, with a terrestrial flora of Cenomanian age, Corre-
sponding to that of the Quader sandstone of Central Europe, and containing
several species of the flora of the Dakota stage in America; (3) Patoot
beds, containing a terrestrial flora of Senonian age, and also, up to 1,200
feet above the existing sea-level, Cretaceous marine fossils. Loriol has
established their affinity with the Fort Pierre and Fox Hill beds of
Nebraska •**. Above these lie the Tertiary plant-bearing beds, and the
great basaltic sheets which reach a height of more tlian 5,000 feet above
the existing sea.

The Cretaceous marine beds are known in the south of the peninsula
of Nugsuak, and also in the north’ up to about lat. 70® 45' N. Thus far
therefore the Senonian sea had penetrated. We mentioned a patch of
marine Cretaceous on the Mackenzie in lat. 65® N. and the fossils of Patoot
point clearly to a connexion with the Cretaceous sea of the North American
prairies. Although we shall scarcely be aide to determine how far the
Cretaceous sea once extended to the east, over the abraded Canadian

* A. Kornerup, Ooologiskc lagttagelser fra Vestkysten af Gronland (lat. 66° 55'-
68° 15' N) ; op. cit., II, 1881, pp. 151-208, geological map, pi. vi.

* K. .1. V. Steenstrup, Bidrag til Kjendskap til de gcognostiske og geografiske Porhold
i cn Dal af Nord-GrOnland, Meddels. IV, 1883, pp. 173-242, geological map; and by the
same, Om Forekomsten af Forsteninger i de Kulfcirende Dannelser i Nord-Grfinland, op.
cit., V, 1883, pp. 45-77.

* P. de Loriol, Om fossile Saltvandsdyr fra Nord-Gronland ; tom. cit., pp. 203-213.



CH.II] THE CALEDONIAN MOUNTAINS 76

table-land (I, p« 558), yet in the extreme north we recognize it in isolated
traces beneath the basaltic sheets.

The earlier observations of Sutherland, who was already acquainted
with the basalts from Disko up to Proven island in lat. 72® 20' N., show
that the coast to the north of Proven island, as far. as cape York in
lat. 76® N., consists, together with the bordering islands, almost exclusively
of gneiss and granite. North of cape York up to cape Atholl, i.e. for
a distance of atout 30 to 40 knots, basaltic outflows, probably the same
as those of Disko, again make their appearance \

Cape Alexander at the mouth of Smith sound consists of basalt, and
. this again is followed to the north by gneiss ; the rest of the east coast
of Smith sound towards the Humljoldt glacier appears to be unknown

Along this great ice stream or close to its further side, the folded ranges
with Palaeozoic fossils begin. Tho Tertiary lignite beds also extend into
this region, and were encountered by Feilden in Grinnel Land, at Discovery
harbour in lat. 81® 45' N.

Great as is the variety of sediments on the west coast of Greenland,
yet as far north iis the Humboldt ghicier the only beds which have so far
afforded marine fossils .are the Senonian intercalations of Patoot ; a striking
contrast to the east coast, where indeed tlie Crebiceous formation has never
yet been encountered, neither has it been met with in Spitzbergen.

6. The Caledonian mounlaine. ‘The Scottish Highlands, with the
Hebrides and Donegal on the one hand, and the Orkneys and Shetlands
on the other, must be regarded — to use a technical phrase — as mere “ out-
liers” of the Scandinavian peninsula.’ So writes Judd, one of the geologists
best acquainted with the country ; and other distinguished in vestigators,such
as A. Geikie, hold the same view^. This conception of the Scotch geolo-
gists rests, it is true, primarily on the correspondence between the stratified
series of the two regions. Tlie Torridon sandstone, an arkose, or sandstone
containing feldspar, which underlies the Cambrian, is correlated with the
.sparagrnitc of Norway. A. Geikie is inclined to think that the zone of
Old Red sandstone, which has been traced along the Moray firth through
the east of Ross and Sutherland, then through Caithness to the Orkneys
and into the southern part of the Shetland islands, may once possibly have

' P. C. Sutherland, On the (jcological and Glacial Phenomena of the Coasts of Davis'
Strait and Baihn's Bay ; Quart. Journ. (tcoI. Soc., 185.3, IX, p. 297. I have not ventured
to quote the observations made north of cape Atholl, since they are rather indefinite and
evidently made from the ship.

* The little map by Feilden and do Ranee in Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc.,* 1878, XXXIV,
pi. zxiv.

® 0. Heer, Notes on Fossil Plants discovered in Grinnell-Land by Capt. H. W. Feilden ;
tom. cit., pp. 66-70.

^ J.W. Judd, Address to the Geological Section of the British Association at Aberdeen,
1885.



76 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [paotiii

extended into the Sogne fjord and Dais fjord, where similar red con-
glomerates have been met with, although so far without organic remains \
Judd points out the striking resemblance that exists between the Mesozoic
deposits of Scania and those rare patches of the same age in Scotland,
which have been, preserved by great subsidences or beneath * sheets of.
basalt. In both regions the series begin with Trias sediments (containing
reptiles in Scotland), and above this there follows a series of alternating
marine and fresh- water deposits, the latter containing the remains of
terrestrial plants; in both regions the lowest members of the Cretaceous
are absent, and the higher membei's are alone represented. At Ando, in
the Lofoten islands, the Jurassic no doubt owes its preservation to subsi- '
dence, as it does on the Scotch coast.

Our study of the Scandinavian peninsula has shown that it may be
distinguished into several regions. The first is the Archaean zone of the
Lofoten or the western zone of gneiss, which may be traced across the
islands and peninsulas of the north; from Magero to Vest fjord. The
second region is the table-land of the north, separated by dislocation
from the western zone of gneiss and terminating on the east with hori-
zontal stratification in the glint, which runs down from the Varanger fjord.
In the Rippe fjord, lat. 70"' 30' N., the dislocation along the western gneiss
zone is a fault with upward fiexure of the down-thrown table-land ; at the
bottom of the Bals fjord, on the other hand, in lat. 69® 10' N. all the table-
land appears to dip westwards in a great flexure beneath the gneiss zone,
or at least beneath the band of gabbro which lies in front of it. Further
to the south the table-land itself in its western part appears to be thrown
into the long, south-south-west striking folds of the great Norwegian ranges,
while to the east it always remains flat and runs out to the glint. East of
the glint’ lies the Archaean table-land of the gulf of Bothnia; that is, the
Baltic shield.

These fundamental features in the structure of the Scandinavian
peninsula enable us to perceive that there exists in the two regions not
only a correspondence between the stratified succession as shown above,
but also a far-reaching correspondence in structure, and that the contours
of the Atlantic from the North cape in lat. 71° 10' N. to at least as far as
Donegal bay in lat. 54° 30' N. are formed by once continuous mountain
ranges, constructed on a common plan.

A. and J. Geikie have shown in a number of highly instructive descrip-
tions that the structure of Scotland is clearly expressed in the configuration
of the surface, as well. as in the character of the landscape. It also reveals
itself in the plainest manner in the course of the coast lines

* A. Geikie, Textbook of Geology, 8vo, London, 1885, p. 712.

^ From this long series 1 will only quote the latest work known to me : J. Geikie, The
Physical Features of Scotland, Scott. Geogr. Mag., I, 1885, pp. 26-41. For the con-



CH. n]


GNEISS OF THE HEBRIDES


77


Scotland and the adjacent islands are represented in Fig. 10 on the
same scale as that chosen for the sketch of Spitsbergen (II, p. 68, Fig. 8).
We observe a continuous range of Archaean rocks in the north-west. The
ancient gneiss is visible in the Hebrides, in the south-east of the islands of
Coll and Tiree, in Raasay and Rona, and along the north-west coast of
Scotland. In a precisely similar fashion the Archaean range of the
Lofoten lies to the west and in front of the Scandinavian peninsula.

The Minch lies on the gneiss region in the same way as the Vest fjord does
in Norway; some of the Tertiary volcanos of the Hebrides belong to the same
region (I, p. 156, Fig. 19), and in partfcular the great basalt flows of Skye.

The Archaean area is bounded on the east by a zone of dislocations
of a peculiar nature; beginning on lake Eriboll it is continued through
loch Assynt and the upper parts of loch Broom and loch Maree as far as
loch Carron, and no doubt still further to the south-south- west, on the inner
side of the gneissose islands of Coll and Tiree. Murchison, deceived by the
’ extraordinary position of the beds in the north part of this zone, came to
the conclusion many years ago that the gneiss is here normally superposed
on fossiliferous Silurian beds, and he consequently asserted the existence
of a more recent Silurian gneiss as opposed to the ancient gneiss of the
Hebrides. Nicol challenged Murchison's views, and thought that the super-
position of the gneiss was due to great dislocations. This interpretation was
revived by Bonney, Hicks, and Callaway, and found its strongest support
in the brilliant discoveries of Liipworth To bring a long controversy to
a close, A. Geikie, as the Director of the Geological Survey, commissioned
Messrs. Peach and Home to make an exact survey of the district around loch
Eriboll and the extreme north-west of Scotland. As a result of this work,
A. Geikie has now admitted, with the sincerity which distinguishes and
honours the true man of science, the erroneousness of the older theory

The section from the Kyle of Durness across loch Eriboll published by
Peach and Horne reveals the following features: —

tinuation to Ireland, R. Harkness, On the Rocks of Portions of the Highlands of Scotland
South of the Caledonian Canal and on their Equivalents in the North of Ireland, Quart.
Journ. Geol.Soc., 1861, XVII, pp. 256-271 ; E.IIull, The Physical Geology and Geography
of Ireland, 8vo, London, 1878, p. 20; C. Callaway, On the Granitic and Schistose Rocks
of North Donegal, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1885, XLI, pp. 221-239 (Overfolding in
Donegal, p. 238),

^ H. Hicks, On the Metamorphic. and overlying Rocks in parts of Ross and Inverness
Shires, Quart. Journ. Gcol. Soc., 1883, XXXIX, pp. 141-159 (Appendix : On the Litho-
logical Characters of a Series of Scotch Rocks, &c., by T. G. Bonney,' tom. cit., pp.
159-166), and map; C. Callaway, The Age of the newer Gneissic Rocks of the Northern
Highlands, tom. cit., pp. 3»55-414 (Lithology in Appendix by Bonney, fvi). 414-420);
C. Lapworth, Close of the Highland Controversy, Geol. Mag., 1885, pp. 97-106 et passim.

^ A. Geikie, The crystalline Rocks of the Scottish Highlands, Nature, Nov. 13, 1884,
pp. 29-31, and B. N. P. Peach and J. Horne, Report on the Geology of the North-west of
Sutherland, tom. cit., pp. 31-35. The correspondence of the Tx>foten islands and the
Hebrides is emphasized by Bonney, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1870, XXVI, p. 623.



78 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [part



Fig. 10. A General Sketch of (he Structure of Scotland based on the (Tcological Map pf Scotland,

by Sir A. Geikie.

a Archaean ; .<« Silurian and ancient schists, together with included masses of Granite ;
d Old Rod sandstone, and ca Carboniferous, together with eniptive masses, whether Devonian
or Carboniferous is still a matter of opinion ; tr Trias ; J Jurassic; Tertiary eruptive rooks are
shown hUuk, (The thiiist-plano which forms the eastern boundary of the Hebridean gneiss
is not completely indicated.) '


CH.n] OVERTHRUSTS ON LOCH ERIBOLL 79

In the neighbourhood of Durness, that is in the northvwest, the
Cambrian beds, probably 2,000 feet thick, folded and transversed by faults,
rest upon the gneiss. Another range of gneiss advances towards the sea,
and also bears in the east a patch of Cambrian. Then the country breaks
up on the southern shore of loch Eriboll into numerous flakes of gneiss and
Cambrian, the thnist-planes of which dip to south-east and east-south-east,
and thus reveal a considerable tangential iriovement from this direction.
Above these smaller flakes, and overthnist from this same direction, that
is from the east-south-east, lies a mass of ancient gneiss, with a maximum
thickness of 400 feet. This overlies, on a great plane of reversed faulting
(thrust -plane of the Scotch geologists), all the various stages of the
Cambrian one after the other, as they appear in succession in the smaller
flakes. A patch of .this overthrust mass of gneiss, separated from it by
denudation, lies isolated on the Cambrian in the north-west of Ben
Arnaboll.

East of Whitten head, at the mouth of loch Eriboll, there follows
a second and yet vaster overthrusting of gneiss, which may be followed
for many miles to the south-south-west — a second imister-flake, so to
speak, superposed on the first.

So far we have traced the overthrusts for a distance of 90 miles to
the south-south-west, and an isolated exposure of gneiss over Cambrian
in the west reveals a tangential movement of the great gneiss flakes to the
extent of at least 10 miles. It is obvious that on these immense surfaces
of movement a really extraordinary amount of gliding, grinding, scoring,
rolling out and manifold alteration of the rocks must have occurred.

Above the edges of a system of smaller flakes, which assumes the
form of a unilaterally compressed trough, other mucli larger flakes have
been driven in an almost horizontal direction for a distance of at least
10 miles. The movement came constantly from the cast-south-cast. Such
then is the appearance presented by the base of the outer border of a lofty
mountain chain, when completely levelled down by denudation. The gneiss
of the Hebrides lies in front of it, like Bohemia before the eastern Alps.
All these great movements however are older than the lower part of the
Devonian red sandstone, and fragments of the ancient .mountain chain are
included in the breccias and conglomerates of this formation.

This zone of overthrusting we will designate for brevity ‘ the Eriboll
zone of overthrust! Judging from its lie and position it corresponds to the
great dislocation which in the extreme north separates the table-land of
Norway from the western zone of gneiss, ,

To the south-east of the Eriboll zone the Scotcli higlilands extend as
far as a line of fracture which nins from near the mouth of the Clyde
across the south part of loch Lomond, and then across the whole country,
keeping a north-east direction till it retiches the cast coast at Stonehaven.



80 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [pakphi

This fracture sharply bounds the highlauds on the south-east, and they are
divided in the middle by a parcel fracture which runs from loch Linnhe
right across the country, and is continued parallel to the north cout of
the Moray hrth. The first line marks the .south border of the Grampians
the second is the line of the Qr^t Glen. The latter cuts so deeply into the
country that it has rendered possible the construction of the Caledonian
canal.

The two moieties of the Scotch highlands are formed principally of
Silurian beds, thrown into folds which strike to the north-east, ne^ly
parallel to the zone of Eriboll. These are the inner folds of the chain.
The great fractures are therefore longitudinal fractures which run with
the strike. On the eroded surface of these ancient mountains, on its slopes
and in its hollows, lies the Old Red sandstone, preserve^ from destruction to
the present day, in some places as originally superposed, in others owing
to subsidence.

We see it, as it extends from the bottom of the Great Glen to the north-
east, bordering both shores of the Moray firth, then broadening out over
Caithness, and passing out to sea from this northernmost extremity of
Scotland to form the Orkney islands. It is still visible on the south-east
side of the Shetland group, and thence is continued, as Geikie believes,
along the Sogne fjord or the Dais fjord.

South of the Great Glen granitic intrusions increase in number. In
this region we find that the ridges which trend* towards Ireland correspond
in direction with the strike of the ancient formations which, as matter of
fact, do indeed find their continuation in the north of that island. Finally,
as we reach the Clyde, we encounter the faulted boundary of the highlands.

All the country south of this fracture, about as far ^ Girvan on the
firth of Clyde and Dunbar on the firth of Forth, is known as the Central
lowlands. This is the richest part of Scotland ; here lie Edinburgh,
Glasgow, and the coalfields. It is a trough; the southern edge is split
up by numerous fractures, and consequently does not contribute so con-
tinuous a feature to the landscape os the northern edge. The trough is
filled with subsided masses of Devonian red sandstone, and the various
stages of the Carboniferous, w’hich elsewhere have been swept away
over vast areas, leaving exposed the Silurian horsts on the north and on
the south. The constriction of Scotland between the firth of Clyde and
the firth of Forth corresponds to the trough, while the horsts project to
north-east and south-west into the sea. The subsidence would find yet
clearer expression in the .configuration of the land were it not that
eruptive rocks, in particular porphyries, accompany the down-thrown
sediments, and these rise in hills above their surroundings owing to the
greater resistance they offer to denudation.

We will now pass to a consideration of the south edge of the trough.



THE SCOTCH TROUGH


81


€H.U]

On the sonth a second Silurian horst is seen, which recalls in many
respects the highlands. The Lammermuir hills and the Moorfoot hills
in the north-cast belong to its outer part. Fractures are numerous, but
not as it would appear continuous, and sinking movements have taken
place here at various times. A few are certainly older, others just as
certainly younger, than the Carboniferous period.

The principal fracture in the central region is overlaid and covered up
towards the north-east by the Coal-measures of Midlothian. Along this
fracture the whole thickness of the Old Red sandstone amounting to at least
16,000 feet is . let down in the middle of the country. In this region the
dislocation is certainly older than the Carboniferous of Midlothian, which
rests, south-east of the fracture, directly upon Silurian; thus before the
deposition of the Carlx)niferous limestone the Old Red sandstone was not
only faulted down, but its whole thickness was removed by erosion. Never-
theless, subsequent movements have also affected the Carboniferous. At
the same time, the fault in tliis region has so little effect on the surface of
the country that it is crossed by several river valleys; and thus the Nith,
a little river which rises in the southern Silurian horst, flows across the
great fracture into the sunken region, makes a bend near New Cumnock
in the Carboniferous, returns across the fracture into the Silurian and
finally flows into the Solway, having thus completely traversed the
southern horst

Thus geology points to subsidences in the midst of the mainland which
may attain in a single fault the mean depth of the Atlantic Ocean, and
yet this fault manifests itself so little in the landscape that a mere
thread of water such as the Nith pursues its winding course undisturbed
across it.

In the north-east, on Dornoch firth and on the south side of Moray
firth, patches of Mesozoic and in particular of Jurassic rocks occur close
to the sea, separated by faults from the ancient highlands behind them.
Judd has described these rocks in detail ^ They arc downthrown fragments ;
one of them forms the Jurassic coalfield of Brora on the coast of Sutherland.
The lines of subsidence correspond here to the course of the coast and are
almost parallel to the Great Glen. Where the line of the Great Glen
itself is continued along the north shore of Moray firth to the sea, some
downthrown patches of Mesozoic lie against it. Other patclies lie on
the south-east side of the same firth. In the highlands Meso^soic deposits
have furnished abundant material to the ancient glacial debris, and on
the west side, e.g. on Skye, they remain preserved from /denudation
beneath the basaltic sheets in patches of considerable size. Judd rightly

* Peach, 'Mem. Geol. Surv. Scotland ; Explanation of Sheet 15, 8vo, 1871, pp. 7 and 37.

* J. W. Judd, "fhe Secondary Rocks of Scotland ; Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1873, XXIX,
p. 113 et seq., pi. vii (cf. I, p. 206).

80LLAS II


G



82 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [part hi

concludes that they must once hav^ covered the greater part of the
highlands and that great subsidences must have occurred even after the
Mesozsoic period.

These downthrow!! patches of Mesozoic beds increase the resemblance
of the highlands to the horsts of the Rhine, but we must observe that
the subsidence faults^ in Scotland are true longitudinal faults in the
direction of the ancient folding, while in the Vosges and the Black
Forest the folds are cut through obliquely by the faults of the Rhine
valley \

Shetland and the Orkneys, the Scotcli highlands together with the
trough of the lowlands, and the southern horst, must be regarded as the
continuation of the folded mountains of Norway. The sea which separates
Scotland from Norway lies on a downthrown segment of these mountains,
as is shown by the mighty fractures of the Scotch coast. These pre-
Devonian mountains, which proceed from Norway and form the whole
of Scotland, together witli their overthrust outer border along the zone
of Eriboll, we call the Caledonian mountains.

In Scania many movements may be shown to have taken place after
the Cretaceous period. In Scotland we observe subsidences, some of
which are very ancient, and others- which arc post-Cretaceous, probably
even post-Tertiary, in age; Judd indeed believes that the separation of
Scandinavia from Scotland took place in comparatively recent times,
perhaps even after the appearance of man. A curious fact may be cited
in support of this view. Peach and Horne have found that the Shetland
islands are everywhere polished by ice, and that the glacial striae cross the
eastern side of the islands from the north-east, swing round to the north-
west on reaching the central axis, and proceed in this direction across the
western side of the islands to the Ocean. Thus a continuous slieet of ice
coming from Scandinavia must have moved transversely .across these
islands

The Caledonian mountains are continued through a great part of Ireland
and Wales.

Ireland includes mountains of very various structure. In the north
rise the ridges of Donegal, readily recognized as the prolongation of the
mountains of Scotland , the strike is the same in both. They reappear in

^ In this way Lepsiud explains the subsidences of Saverne and in the Kraichgau ;

R. Lepsius, Die oberrheinische Tiefebene und ihre Raudgebirge; Forschungen zur
deutschen Landes- und Volkskunde, herausg. v. K. Lehmann, I, 2. Heft, 1885, p. 70.
The fault-lines strike out along Dornoch and Moray firth in the same manner as those
which proceed from the west border of the Bohemian mass towards Bavaria.

^ B. N. Peach and J. Horne, The Glaciation of the Shetland Isles; Quart. Journ.
Geol. Soc., 1879, XXXV, pp. 778-811, and geological map. The authors suppose that
the sea between Scandinavia and the Shetiands was completely displaced by the
ice mass.



THE IRISH COAST


83


OH. II]


Mayo and on the north side of Galway bay. In like manner the older
formations crop out in the south-east of the island, again with the same
strike to the south-south- west ; they extend through Carlow, Wic^dow, and
Wexford, and their folding is prior to the deposition of the Old Red
sandstone. These fragments of the pre-Devonian Caledonian mountains
are united together by a broad platform of flat-lying Carboniferous lime-
stone, from the surface of which the Coal-measures have in large part been
removed by erosion ; it is so flat that from Dublin in the east to Galway
in the west there is scarcely an elevation which attains the height of
260 feet.

In the south of the island another range of mountains appears. This is
younger ; the Old Red sandstone and the Carboniferous limestone are here
thrown into long folds, which strike from west to east, but are deflected in
the south-west comer of the island to the west-south-west. The various
anticlinals run out into the Atlantic in projecting spurs, while the synclinals
form deep bays. These submerged synclinals follow one another in close
succession in the bays of Dingle, Kenmare, Bantry, Dunmanus, and Crook,
so that the outline of the south-west coast of Ireland is entirely determined
by folding of the crust.

On the peninsula between Dingle bay and Kenmare l)ay an anticlinal of
the Old Red sandstone rises in Macgillicuddy Reeks to form the highest
peak in Ireland (3,414 feet). Near the lake of Killamey this anticlinal is
completely overfolded to the north, so that the flat-lying Carboniferous
limestone of central Ireland is found here together with pinched-in Culm
beds, dipping to the south, Ireneath the Old Red saiuLstone.

These folds and overfolds in the south of Ireland also strike out'to sea
on the east coast of Cork and in Waterford. They are only a part of
a great arcuate range, which is continued from here towards the east into
Wales and England, and thence still further into Belgium \

This great arc, striking from east to west, and opposed in so marked
a manner to the older Caledonian folds striking to the south-south-west,
wo will designate the' Arnxorican arc : we hero meet with its northern border
for the first time: the contrast between it and the Caledonian folds is
especially well seen in the south-east of Ireland, as in the counties of
Kilkenny and Carlow.

Let us now return to the other .side of St. George’s channel. Moore has
shown how in Wigtownshire, on the south-west coast of Scotland, the
.rocks of the Southern Uplands, thrown into steep folds, proceed towards
the sea between CorswcU lighthouse and the Mull of Galloway. In the
north of this coastal region the greater part of the folds are overturned to

* Hull, Physical Geology and Geography of Ireland, p. 138. A section through
Dingle, Kenmare, and Bantry bay, showing a great fracture in the first, and synclinals
in the other two bays, is given by Kinahan, Geol. Mag., 1879, 2nd ser., VI, p. 351.



84 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [part m

the north-west; in the south, on the other hand, to the south-east; so that
an imbricated fan structure is produced ^

In like manner the gneiss ridges of Anglesey strike across the island
to the south-west, and are continued on the south coast of Carnarvon bay
into the peninsula of Ueyn, which faithfully follows the Caledonian
direction. These parts of North Wales belong, however, as shown by their
strike, to a part of the Caledonian region lying further to the east than
the ranges of Carlow and Wexford mentioned above; these, it is true,
are followed in the extreme south-east of Ireland near Camsore point,
south of Wexford bay, by another small exposure of ancient rocks.

The folds of North Wales, like those of Carlow and Wexford, are
older than the Old Bed sandstone. From the north side of Anglesey
the Carboniferous limestone extends in a great arc along the border
of the folded region, so that throughout the east of Wales it rests on the
various members of the Silurian formation; it is accompanied by a dis-
continuous band of Old Bed sandstone which further south broadens out
over a wide area in Hereford and Brecknock

We have now reached South Wales, that r^on in which we may see,
thanks to profound erosion, the encounter of the pre-Devonian Caledonian
ranges, striking south-south-west to south-west, with the more recent post-
Carboniferous Armorican folds, striking east to east-south-oast. Here
I follow principally the description given as early as 1846 by De la Bdche ;
this I cannot mention without an expression of. deep gratitude to the
author, now long since dead, since it exercised many years ago a decisive
influence on my own views as to the structure of great mountain ranges.
Although published forty years ago, this description is inspired by those
conceptions of the formation of mountain ranges by lateral pressure, and
of the true influence of granite masses, which are now winning their way
step by step to general acceptance

The boundary line between the Caledonian and Armorican regions may
be recognized with comparative ease on any geological map, for the north
border of the Armorican range coincides with the south border of the coal-
field. Leaving Waterford in Ireland, the boundary line enters St. Bride's
bay, Pembrokeshire, with a strike bent a very little from east to east-
south-east, passes across the upper part of Caermarthen bay, then across
Swansea bay to the broad estuary of the Severn which it reaches in the
neighbourhood of Cardiff, it crosses the Severn and is continted on the

. * J. C. Moore, On the Silurian Bocks of Wigtownshire ; Quart. Joum. GeoL Soc.,*
1856, XII, pp. 859-366.

^ A. C. Ramsay, The Geology of North Wales; Mem. Geol. Surv. Great Britain,
vol. Ill, 1866, p. 13.

’ Sir Henry T. de la B6che, On the Formation of the Rocks of South Wales and South-
west England ; Mem. Geol. Surv. Great Britain, 1846, voL I, pp. 1-296, in particular,
pp. 221-239 ; cf. Entstehung der Alpen, p. 16.



THE COASTS OF WALES


86


cn. n]


north border of the Mendip hills. Thus it is only the southern part
of the three promontories on the north coast of the Bristol channel which
belongs to the Armorican folds. North of the boundary, the rich coal-
fields of St. Bride’s bay extend in the form of a narrow compressed zone
to Caermartiien bay; this they cross,. and attain on its further side
a continually increasing breadth until they spread out in Glamorgan
and Monmouth as the great coalfield of South Wales. This expansion
corresponds to the retreating curve of the northern mountains — the
continuation of the Caledonian hill-ranges of North Wales ; these we must
now consider in greater detail.

In North Wales wo have already become acquainted with the typical
Caledonian strike in Anglesey and the peninsula of Llo3m, and we liave also
seen that the Caledonian folding is older than the Old Bed- sandstone.
The Caledonian folds arc continued through Merioneth and are sometimes
directed from north to south, but in Cardigan they make a bend to the
south-west which becomes more and more marked towards the south, and
beyond the town of Cardigan towards Fishguard they swing completely
round into the Armorican direction, or from east to west ; the bods are then
' very much disturbed both in a horizontal and vertical direction. Here,
‘in the northern part of Pembrokeshire,’ says Do la BSche, ‘we may have
the complicated forms resulting from a twist of the rocks in a new
direction over an older one

St. David’s head, which bounds St. Bride’s bay on the north, consists,
according to A. Geikie, of an anticlinal of Cambrian rocks, which’ strikes to
the south-west, that is obliquely across the peninsula, and is overfolded to
the south-east \ The predominance of a trend so entirely difierent from .
that of the Armorican folds is veiy remarkable. Towards the interior of
the country, it is true, the overturned south-east side assumea a vertical
position; but towards the head of St. Bride’s bay, next the pinched-in
'band of Coal-measures, great fractures and disturbances occur in the
Cambrian rocks", and it is not till we proceed further to the east, where
the coalfields of Glamorganshire broaden out, that we first see with some
distinctness a deflexion from the Caledonian to the Armorican direction.
Hete, according to De la Bdche, the great coalfield forms three anticlinals
which strike to the south-west, but tpwards' the south, these are succeeded
by others which strike from east to west. . This might well be a case of
syntaxis, such as we have already studied - in the anticlinals of the foot-

•* Op. cit., p. 223.

* A. Geikie, On the supposed Pre-Cambrian Rocks of St. David’s; Quart! Joum. Gedl.
Soc., 1883, XXXIX, pp. 261-333, map, p. 268 granite crops out from the overturned
limb. On the other hand Hicks, On the Pre-Cambrian Bocks of Pembrokeshire ; op.
cii, 1884, XL, pp. 507-560, map, where the presence of Archaean rocks is maintuned.

* J. E. Marr and T. Roberts, The lower Palaeozoic Rocks of the Neighbourhood
of Haverfordwest ; Quart. Joum. Qeol. Soc., 1885, XLI, pp. 476-491, pi. xv.



86 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [part in

hills of the Himalaya and of the Hindu Kush on the Jehlam. But there
are other tectonic features, particularly in Ireland, which show that we
have hero, not a case of syntaxis as on the Jehlam, but the encounter
of a younger arc with an older folded system, resembling rather the
encounter of the Carpathians and the Sudetes in Silesia and north'Moravia.

We will not enter in detail into the structure pf Hereford and Gloucester,
but turn our attention to the south.

7. The Armwrican mountains. We have seen that in the south of
Ireland the Devonian and Carboniferous beds are thrown into great folds,
which in the south-west of Cork' strike to the west-south-west, but
elsewhere, in Cork, Kerry, and Waterford, from east to west, these folds are
sometimes overfolded to the north, and they crop out again towards the
east in South Wales. We there traced their northern boundary from
St. Bride’s bay, along the south border of the great coalfields, across
Caermarthen bay and Swansea bay to the neighbourhood of Cardiff on
the lower Severn. This line is distinguished near Tenby in Caermarthen
bay, and in Swansea bay, by overthrust inversion of the Coal-measures ;
all the country visible to the south of it, namely the three peninsulas on
the noiih side of the Bristol channel, consists, like the folds of Ireland,
of anticlinals and synclinals of Old Red sandstone and Carboniferous lime-
stone, in so far as they are not concealed by patches of the transgressive
covering of younger sediments which begins here. This transgressive
series commences with the Permian and includes more to the east the
whole Mesozoic series.

The direction of the northern boundary of the Armorican system and of
its folds themselves is here east and a little south, and the continuation of the
bands of Carboniferous limestone across the Bristol channel is marked by
rocky islands, such as the Steep Holme, for example. This islet was rightly
recognized by Buckland and Conybearc, in the year 1824, as the fragment
of a fold overturned towards the north. These keen-sighted observers also
perceived that the island of Flat Holm, lying a little to the north of the
Steep Holme and likewise formed of Carboniferous limestone, is a flat
anticlinal striking north-east towards the peninsula of Brcan Down ; we
can therefore no longer assign it to the Armorican folds

•

' W. Buckland and W. D. Oonybeare, Observations on the South-west Coal District
of England, Trans. Geol. Soc., 1824, 2nd ser., II, pp. 214-232; figure of the inverted
stratification on Steep Holme, p. 233. The peculiar manner in which the mountain
chains meet, the rectilinear, south-westerly strike in north Wales, and the bend to the
south-west which, the Silurian zone presents near St. Bride’s bay may be seen on
Ramsay’s general map, Geology of North Wales, Mem. Geol. Surv., 1866, vol. III.
A slight deviation in north Wales from a south-west or south-south-westerly direction
to one somewhat more southerly is shown in the diagrammatic sketch of the directions
of strike given by Larivi^re, Notes d’un voyage aux ardoisieres du Pays de Oalles, Ann.
des Mines, 1884,* 8® ser., VI, pi. xiii, fig. 1.



€H. II] • THE BRISTOL CHANNEL 87

• Thus the Steep Holme, situated north of Bridgwater bay, leads us to the
long anticlinal of the Mcndips, which extending from the sea-coast towards
Frome forms the mast northerly of the Armorican anticlinals. It coilsists
of Carboniferous limestone through which the Old Red sandstone makes its
appearance in four exposures. In its eastern part the arching passes into
overfolding to the north; the Coal-measures lying in front of it on the
north are crumpled up in zigzags, and dip towards the south beneath the
anticlinal of Carboniferous limestone. The lie of the beds bears so strong
a resemblance to that of the Belgian Coal-measures, also overfoldcd from
the south, that, as early as 1824, Buckland.and Conybeare, availing
* themselves of the descriptions given by Qmalius d’Halloy, compared the
easteni part of the Mendips with the neighbourhood of Namur and Luttich

Near Frome the Carboniferoi^s disappears beneath the Cretiiceous, but
the anticlinal of the Mcndips is continued, as we shall see, in the form
of a much more recent anticlinal towards the cast. South of the Mendips,
at the head of Bridgwater bay, lies alluvial land with patches of Mesozoic,
but soon there rises in the south-west the extensive Devonian region which
foiTOs west Somerset, Devonshire and Cornwall.

This great peninsula belongs entirely to the Armorican folds, and the
strike of the Devonian and Carboniferous beds, of which it is chiefly formed,
corresponds precisely, especially in the northern region, to that of the
Mendips. It presents on the north a zone of Devonian rock, which strikes
from Bridgwater and tlie Quantock hills towards Lundy island, the
northern half of this island being formed by an intrusion of more recent
granite ; then follows a broad central zone, in whicli the Culm beds attain
a considerable development, and last a southern' Devonian zone, which
includes the greater part of the south coast of the peninsula and the
southern half of its Atlantic coast. Tliis southern Devonian zone is marked
by a series of great post-Carboniferous granite bosses. The most easterly
and extensive of these forms Dartmoor forest, south-west of Exeter; a
second lies west of Liskeard, a third north of St. Austell, a fourth west of
Falmouth ; the larger mass wliich follows fonns the extreme end of the
peninsula as far as Land’s End, and the Scilly isles are -the summits
•of another granite mass covered by the sea^.

^ Tom, cit., p. 220 ; for the Mcndips in particular, C. Moore, On Abnormal Conditions
•of Secondary Deposits when connected with the Somersetshire and South Wales Coal
Basin, Quart. Joum. Gcol. Soc., 1867, XXIll, pp. 449-56H, in particular ]). 451 et seq. ;
H. B. Woodward, Geology of the East Somerset and the Bristol Coalfields, Mem. Geol.
Surv. England and Wales, 1876, pp. 22, 190 et seq. Attempts to explain ^hc inversion
of the Coal-measures by the method adopted in this work have only led to far greater
complications ; of. H. B. Woodward, Remarks upon Inversions of Carboniferous Strata
in Somersetshire, Geol. Mag., 1871, VIII, pp. 149-154.

* A. Sedgwick and R. I. Murchison, On the Physical Structure of Devonshire ; Trans.
Geol. Soc. 1840, 2nd ser., V, pp. 633-704, pi. 1-lviii, map. The Devonian of north



88 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [part hi

The granite masses cause considerable local disturbances in the strike^
which otherwise faithfully follows the curve of the Armorican folds. From
the west of Liskeard down to the Scilly isles the series of granite masses
is directed more to the south-west than we should have expected from
the strike of the folds in the Bristol channel and it has therefore been
supposed that they are independent of the strike. But the slight deviation
to the south-west corresponds to the similar deviation in Cork, e.g. in
Bantry bay, and this shows that the vertex of the Armorican arc lies between
Ireland and Wales or in Pembrokeshire. Further we shall see soon that
tlie two granite masses of the Harz, which are precisely analogous to those
of Cornwall, are by no means disposed iiccording to the strike. Do la Beche
conjectured the existence of a subterranean connexion between the granite ‘
masses, and with admirable sagacity recognized, as early as 1846, that
it was not by their eruption the mountains had been upheaved, but as
a consequence of a much more general force which at’ the same time
manifested itself in folding.

South of the series of granite masses, along the south edge of the
southern Devonian zone, Archaean rocks crop out on the south coast
in two restricted areas at the Lizar<l in the west and Prawle Point
(south of Dartmouth) in the east. These rocks form the foundation Of
the Devonian mountains, though in the south these also include Silurian
deposits. In tlie first locality, or the Lizard, hornblende schists and
serpentine are visible ; in the second at Prawde Point, cliloritic schists and
mica schists. At the Lizard the strike is south-west, corresponding to that
of the south-west of Ireland and of the series of granite masses; at
Prawle Point it is directed east and west. Between these two places reefs
of rock rise from the sea, one of which l^ears Eddystone lighthouse:
these consist of gneiss.

Let us now attempt to obttiin a general view of the mountain fragment
of south-w^est England. The most ancient foundation is seen in the south
as the gneiss of the Eddystone. This is followed by fragments of an
ancient mantle of schists, the hornblende schists of Lizard Point in the
west, and the cliloritic and mica schists of Prawle Point in the east. Thus
we reach the great southern zone of Devonian, with subordinate bands
of Silurian, which encloses the long series of granite masses extending
from the Scilly isles to Dartmoor; then further to the north follows

Devon, which forms tho south coast of the Bristol channel, is foraied of beds regularly
inclined to the south, which dip beneath the Culm of the synclinal, but immediately in
front of the east boundary of the horst they experience, evidently owing to a local
advance of the mountains, a sigmoid flexure of the 'strike towards tho north, and-
in front of this east boundary stand, as a fairly independent fragment, tho Quantock hills,
in which the elbow is continued. But the return to the normal direction of the
Mendips takes place deep below the ground and is invisible. These relations are veiy
clearly shown on the map by Etheridge, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1867, XXIIl, p. 580.



89


CH. n] THE COAST OP BRITTANY

the broad Culm zone, then the north Devonian zone as far as the Bristol
channel. At the same time all these mighty deposits are thrown^ into
nam)w parallel folds, which are frequently overturned to the north,
especially in Somerset. Then still further to the north there follows the
anticlinal of. the Mendips (beneath which the inverted Coal-measures dip
to the south), and the western prolongation of- the Mendips, which extends
as far as St. Bride's bay.

Such is the structure of a great folded complex, developed under
a pressure acting from the south. With perfect justice Bonney remarks
that this great series of folds scarcely yields in importance to the existing
chain of the Alps, and he compares the gneiss of the Eddystone with the
gneiss cores of the Alps^. What we see here is the ruins of a mighty
mass of lofty mountains ; the Lizard and Prawle Point, the last remains
of the scliist zone, project like cape Matifou and the peninsula of Bonzar^i
on the two sides of the bay of Algiers (I, p. 223).

Bonney believes that the foundation of this great mountain region is
continued in the ancient rocks of the neiglibouring parts of northern
France, and to these we will now turn our attention.

The north-west of France is formed of Archaean and Palaeozoic rocks;
they form the soil of Brittany and extend from the Cotentin into the
Vendee. Towards the east and south their continuation is concealed by
Jurassic beds. The eastern boundary of their outcrop runs from the east
side of the Cotentin to Alen 5 oii, and thence southwards through Angers
to Partenay and Saint-Maixent, north-east of Niort. In this region the
boundary turns in a riglit angle to the west, and reaches the sea nortli
of La Eochelle, near Les Sables <r01onne.

The strike of these older rocks is directed to the west-north-west with
deviations to west and north-west, and. in the western parts of Brittany
the westerly direction appears to predominate. A glance at tlie excellent
but somewhat antiquated map of filie de Beaumont and Dufn?noy shows
us that the peninsula of the Cotentin is a fragment of a great horst, like
the Morvan or the Tliuringerwald, and that the strike runs transversely,
across it from east to wx'st, while the lie of the great Arrnorican peninsula
corresponds with the strike.

Much has been written on this part of the country : Dalimier has
described the Cotentin; for Normandy I may mention the works of
Barrois, Hubert and Lebesconte. It is alx)ve all Barrois who has devoted
particular attention to the tectonic problems, and, supplementing the earlier
investigations of Boblaye, has elucidated the structure of the country

* T. G. Bonney, On the Geology of the South Devon Coast from Torcross to Hope
Cove ; Quart. 4ourn. Geol. Soc., 1884, XL, pp. 1-25, in particular ];>. 24.

* P. Dalimier, Stratigraphic des terrains primaires dans la presqu'ile du Cotentin, 8^’,
Paris, 1871 ; C. Barrois, Obser\'ations sur la constitution geologique de la Bretagne, Ann.



90 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [part ra

The whole region, extending' through three degrees of latitude, is
thrown into nearly parallel folds. Here also the most important fol ding
occurred within the Carboniferous periotl.

There are two great' anticlinals and a number of subordinate ones. The
northern of the two great anticlinals forms the peninsula to the north of
Brest, with the Montagnes d’Arr^e, and extends as far as the Jurassic near
Alenfon, its northern flank nearly coinciding with the north coast of
Brittany; it consists chiefly of Archaean rucks, which are frequently
traversed by granite. The southern great anticlinal is formed of Cambrian
beds, and is penetrated in many places by granite ; it forms the Pointe du
Rax, the most southerly of the three spurs which Brittany sends out
towards the Ocean, comprises the Morbihan, and runs past Vannes and
Nantes. Between these two great anticlinals and to the north and south
of them, numerous folds, crowded together, run side by side almost in the
same direction; in these also, e.g. near Rostrenen, north of the Morbihan,
post-Carlx)nifcrou 8 granites have been intruded.

It is a significant fact that the first of the northern synclinals, the
Bassin do Mortain, which crosses the Cotentin peninsula north of Alen90n,
passing through Domfrant and Mortain, docs not terminate on the coast
in the Baie de Cancale, but according to Barrois it reappears more to the
west on the north coast of Brittany at cape Frebel, and then, keeping the
same direction, runs towards Paiinpol and traverses the northern extremity
of Brittany.

On the west coast, the northern anticlinal is continued into the island
of Ouessant, and the southern passes from Quimper across Pointe du Rax
into the little tie de Scin ; between these two great .anticlinals there lies
a broad synclinal, which includes the various members of the Palaeozoic
series from the Silurian to the Carboniferous. It embraces many sub-
ordinate folds, and extends from Laval on the Maycnne westwards to the
sea. To this principal synclinal belongs the irregular-shaped spur which,
south of Brest, projects towards the Ocean between its two companions on
the north and south.

The whole country is thus folded in the same direction as the south
of Ireland and England, and speaking broadly the folding was accom-

Soc. geol.. Nord, 1883-1884, XI, pp. 87-91 and 278-285; by the same. La structure
stratigraphique des montagnes du Menez, op. cit., 1885, XTII, pp. 65-71 ; by the same,
Aper^u de la structure gc^ologique du Pinistere, Bull. Soc. g^ol. de Fr., 1886, 8* ser.,
XIV, pp, 655-665, and Aper^ii de la constitution guolo^que dc la rade de Brest, tom.
cit., pp. 678-706 et passim ; E. Hubert, Phyllades dc Saint-IiO et conglom^rats pourprt^s
dans le Nord-Ouest de la France, tom. cit., pp. 713-774, and Observations sur les groupes
B^dimentaircB les plus anciens du Nord-Ouest de la France, Compt. Rend., 1886, CIII,
pp. 230-235, 303-308, and 367-371 ; F. Ldbesconte, Constitution gen^^e du massif
breton comparec ii celle du Finistere, Bull, Boc. geol. de Fr,, 1886, 3* ser., XIV, pp. 776-
819 et passim.



CH. II] THE BELGIUM FOREFOLDING 91

plished in both r^ons at the same time. In breadth this great folded
region, now broken up, extends from the Mendips into the Vend^.

In the neighbourhood of Exeter, where the peninsula becomes narrower,
the Palaeozoic formations dip beneath a Mesozoic covering, and more to the
north, near Frome, the anticlinal of the Mendips disappears in the same
manner beneath the more recent sediments. This mantle of younger rocks
conceals the foundation of the whole south-east of England. But we have
already mentioned that the similarity in the lie of the beds on the north
border, of the Mendips and in the Belgian coalfield is so great that it
was observed many years ago by Buckland and Conybearc. In 1865,
Godwin Austen ventured to express the opinion that an actual connexion
exists below the ground between the overthrust Coal-measures of the
Mendips and those of Boulogne, and that it might even bo possible by
means of boring to prove the existence of these Coal-measures in the
neighbourhood of Tjondon itself. He based this view not only on the
correspondence in the lie of the beds and the strike of the folds in these
two regions, so far disttint from each other, but also on the presence of
more recent disturbances in the sxipeqwsed Mesozoic beds, which follow the
same strike *.

The borings which have lieen made have revealed various Devonian
Iteds at a great depth, and it has been placed beyond doubt that l^eneath
London the Great Oolite rests directly, without any intervening Lias or
Trias, upon Palaeozoic beds, as is also the case near Calais, where the
continuation of the Belgian forcfolding rejiches the sea This forefolding
has been discussed in an earlier passage (I, p. 142 et seq.). Along a line
running from Boulogne to Aix-la-Chapelle older beds arc driven forward
over younger. Bertrand compares this zone of forefolding with certain
parts of the Alps of Glarus There is indeed the greatest resemblance
to the overfolded outer borders of the Alps, the Carpjithians or the
Himalaya. That this zone of forefolding finds so little expression in the
configuration of the country, and that its presence in the north of France
was only discovered by means of borings, has no licanng on the inimediate
question. All that has been established in this region by mining or by
laborious comparative studies finds its sole analogy in the outer borders
of the greatest mountain chains now existing, or in that ancient border,
exposed by profound abrasion, as the forefolded zone of EriboJI.

A difference presents itself, however, in one striking particular. The

* R. Godwin Austen, On the possible extension of the Coal-measures beneath the
South-eastern part of England ; Quart. Jonm. Geol. Soc., 1856, XTI, pp. 38-73, map.

’ .Tudd, On the Nature and Relations of the Jurassic Deposits which underlie London ;
op.'cit., 1884, XL, p. 754.

’ M. Bertrand, Rapport de structure des Alpes do G laris et du bassin houiller du Nonl;
Bull. Soc. ^ol. de Fr., 1884, .3® s^r., XII, pp. 318-330, pi. xi.



92 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [part hi

outer boi'dcrs of the great mountain chains are’always more or less convex
in the direction of the tangential movement. A concavity or even
a re-entrant angle within a region of forefolding has always been regarded
as an indication of syntaxis, i. e. of the encounter of two differently directed
components of the folding force.

The Belgian zone of forefolding is concave. The descriptions given by
Gossclet and Delwaque s map show this plainly \ From Calais to Douai
the overthrust zone strikes E. 15® S. ; between Dguai and Valenciennes it
is abruptly bent and extremely disturbed ; from Valenciennes it turns first
cast-north-cast and then near Aix-la-Chapello to the north-east. The
western part is thus folded from south-south-west to north-north-east;
the eastern, on the other hand, from south-south-east to north-north-west
and from south-east to north-west, while between Douai and Valenciennes
lies the syntaxis in a gentle curve.

Thus the miter borders of two mo^nUdn systems unite in the Belgiun
zone of forefolding. The eastern part is the outer border of the Ardennes,
and the western is the continuation of the Mendips or the outer border
of the Armorican arc. The Armorican arc itself is at this point almost
concealed by the overlying Mesozoic sediments. The presence of Palaeozoic
beds has, it is true, been established by means of boring in many places
west of the coal-bearing zone of Calais-Do.uai, but it is only near Marquise,
north of Boulogne, that the Devonian rises in a small outcrop from
beneath the Jurassic mantle. From this place the strike passes acroSwS
to England.

The folds of the south of Ireland, those on tlie north side of the Bristol
channel, the anticlinal of the Mendips, the folded region of Somerset,
Devon, and Cornwall, the ancient folded mass of the Cotentin, Brittany,
and the Vendee; then, to the east, the Devonian island of Boulogne and
the western lialf of the forcfolded zone of Belgium in its course from
Calais to Douai ; all these we now see unite together to form the great
Armorican arc. A broad gap however remains between Exeter and
Boulogne.

The formation of this arc took place towards the close of the Carboni-
ferous period ; the great mountains were then worn down by denudation,
and covered unconformably by thick deposits of more recent sediments.
Tlien piece by piece the mountains collapsed, and one of the most extensive
subsidences is that between Exeter and Boulogne. It appears, however,
that within the limits of this nnhsideme fresh foldings subsequently occurred
vjJtich folUnved the ancient Airnwrican direction.

In the region indicated above, between Exeter and Boulogne, lies the

^ J. GoBselei, Esquisse geologique du Nord de la France, fasc. Terrains primaires,
8®, Lille, 1880, atlas; G. Dewalque, Carte geologique de la Belgique, folio, Brussels,



BOULOGNE


93


CH. II]

denuded dome of- the Weald. Bounded on all sides by the escarpment
of the Chalk, it rises over an elliptical area, which includes the greater
part of Sussex and a part of Kent, and extends some distance .b^ond
Boulogne.

Hopkins showed in 1841 that this dome consists of several parallel
anticlinals — three to four, at least — closely erowded together ; in the west
they strike east to west, but in the east they are deflected to the south-east,
in the direction of their prolongation into the Boulonnais *.

In Franco it was found by d’Archiac, in 1846, that the watershed of
Artois marks an important Ixjundary line in relation to the development
of the Cretaceous system, and that this line, which he called the ‘ axe do
I’Artois,’ runs to the north-west (W. 34“ N.) from Arras, but that in the
Boulonnais it undergoes a deflexion to the west, and is continued beyond
the Channel into the Weald The axis of Aidois, however, corresponds
with the zone of overthrust Coal-measures, which, as we have seen, forms
the outer border of the Armorican folds ; on its site liorings have Imen
made which reached Palaeozoic beds, and the Devonian outo’ops in the
neighbourhood of Boulogne already stand within the Cretaceous escarp-
ment which extends from England, and bounds the anticlinals of the
Weald.

As early, therefore, Jis 1846 a number of folds were known, having
the form of a circular arc, which run first to the west-north-west, then
curve across the Channel and extend in a more and more east to west
<lirection through the south of England

The significance of the axis of Artois for a knowledge of the English
folds has been fully recognized by Godwin Austen, and fonhed one of the
most important arguments in support of his theory that the coalfields of
Mons and the Boulonnais must find a subterranean continuation beneath
the neighbourhood of London and as far as the coal districts north of the
Mendips. Indeed, Godwin Austen in his now famous treatise on this
subject even maintained as a universal law that when any zone of the
earth’s crust' is considerably folded or fractured, subsequent disturbances

^ William Hopkins, On the ^eolog'ical Structure of the Wealden District and of the
Bas-Boulonnais ; Trans. Geol. Soc., 1845, 2nd ser., VII, pp. 1-51, map. The meridional
transverse fractures described by Hopkins are partly true flaws, i. e. dislocation planes
like the Mcdim fault in the isle of Wight. Tho important earthquake of April 22,
1884, would thus be a flaw-shock, like so many Alpine earthquakes, and .an indication of
the persistence of forces similar to those acting in the Alps; Meldola and White,
Nature, January 21, 1886, p. 265.

^ D’Archiac, Etudes sur la formation cr^tticee des versants snd-oucst, hord et nord-
onest du Plateau Central de la France, M4m. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1846, 2« ser., II, p. 116 ;
on the map pi. 1, a dotted line shows tho supposed connexion of the axis of Artois with
the Weald. At that time the Coal-measures were supposed to be overthrust near Arras';
this conjecture was confirmed by borings ; Degoussee and Laurent, On the Valenciennes
Coal-Basin, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1856, XII, p. 252, pi. v.



94 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [part in

follow the previous lines, and this simply because these lines appear to be
lines of least resistance \

The anticlinals of the Weald were described later in great detail by
Topley, and their deflexion towards the Boulonnais may be regarded as
completely established

But these anticlinals are continued towards the west across the region
of the Weald ; and in addition a new and mighty anticlinal succeeds in
the south, which again brings the deposits of the Weald into view, but
lies for the greater part beneath the sea. It is visible in the southern half
of the isle of Wight; its northern flank with deeply upturned, and in part
even inverted, beds runs through the whole breadth of the island from
the Needles in the west to Culver cliff in the east, and the rhomb-like
fonu of the island is determined by the course of the rocks which offer
the greatest resistance to denudation ^ From hero it continues to the west
. across Purbeck to Weymouth ; and south of Weymouth, on the peninsula
of Portland, we meet with Jurassic beds which are steeply upturned.

While the exploration of these folds was being pursued in England, it
was discovered in the north of France that a series of similar anticlinals
striking to the north-west exists outside the axis of Artois and 'parallel
to it.- They have this character in common with the English folds, that
the dip of the northern limb of the anticlinals is steep, while that of the
southern limb is very gentle. The most important of these is the line
of disturbance of the Pays de Bray, which in the midst of the basin of
Paris, between Beauvais and Neuchatel, exposes not only the lower
members of the Cretaceous but also the upper Jurassic. This remark-
able disturbance was first described by £]ie de Beaumont and then- in
great detail by He Lapparent *. Hubert and De Mercy have made known
to us yet other folds, also striking to the north-west, but of less impor-
tance, and Hubert even believed that he could prove the existence of
a second system of disturbances running at right angles to the firsts

’ Godwin Austen, tom. cit., p. 62. The folds bad been already described by
P. J. Martin, On the anticlinal Line- of the London and Hampshire Basin, Phil. Mag.,
1851, 4th ser., II. pp. 41-51, 126, 189, 278, 366, 471 ; further, op. cit., 1856, 4th ser., XII,
pp. 447-4.52 ; and 1857, XIII, pp. 33, 109.

■ * William Topley, The Geology of the Weald, Mem. Geol. Surv. England and Wales,
8vo, 1875, maps; in particular, pp. 216 et seq.

' Edward Forbes, On the Tertiary Fluvio-Marine Formation of the Isle of Wight ;
Mem. Geol. Sutv. Great Britain, 8vo, 1856, map.

' K. de lapparent, Hole sur le soaVevement da Pays de Bray ct I'ouverture de
la valiec de la Seine; Bull. Soc. gdol. de Fr., 1871, 2’ ser., XXIX, pp. 231-238, pi. 1 ;
and by the same, Traitd de Oeologio, 2" 4d., 8™, Paris, 1885, p. 1420..

‘ Hdbert, Note sur la craie blanche et la oraie maraeuse dans le bassin de Paris, Bull,
oc. gdol. de Fr., 2 8dr.,1863, XX, pp. 605-681 ; Ondulations de la craie dans le bassin

?!t’ PP* 446-472, and pp. 583-595; further, op. cit.,

18/5, L Sdr., Ill, pp, 512-546, map; by the same, Ondulations de la omie dans fe Nord



POSTHUMOUS FOLDING


96


OH. n]

Finally, C. Barrois, after a careful study of the numerous works of his
predecessors and a detailed examination of the folds in England which
traverse the Chalk to the west of the Weald, succeeded in obtaining the
following results^: —

The axis of Artois leaves France somewhat south of the older rocks
of the Boulonnais, reaches England at Dungenuss, is continued as one of
the anticlinals in the northern part of the Weald, and proceeds with an east
to west direction through the Chalk past Kingsclere towards Ham, Frome,
and the Bristol' channel.

A second line, designated by Hdbcrt the axis of La Bresle, strikes to
the north-west, reaches the sea near Trdport, and coincides with that great
anticlinal of the Weald which Hopkins calls the line of Greenhurst ; this
strikes past Petersfield and Winchester through the Chalk, past Stockbridgo
into the valley of Warminster.

The axis of the Pays de Bray, finally, distinguished by the great extent
of the dislocation, must probably lie regardetl as part of that great fold
which runs through the isle of Wight to Purbeck.

Each of these folds is steeper towards the north than towards the
south; in some of them the folding movement has certainly continued
far into the Tertiary period.

These results are far reaching in their significance. Even if it should
bo shown later that some of the lines in question do not traverse the
whole distance as continuous folds, but that contiguous anticlinals running
in the same direction replace each other, as. in the Jura, yet this will not
affect the fact that there exists a system of folds formed under a move-
ment to the north-east and north, which strikes to the north-west in
France, curves round in an arc tt) west-north-west and west in the region
of the Channel, and extends with a westerly strike through the south of
England to Weymouth and the Mendips. These lines correspond, however,
to the downthrown segments of the Anuorican are and Join together the
projecting horsts. The region was foldetl, jxs we have seen, at the close
of the Carboniferous period, was covered with younger sediments and
subsided; then there occurred in the same place a folding of the younger
sediments, and this more recent folding coincides in direction with the
older folding which preceded it.

This phenomenon we term fMUuf. It is very likely that

in most other mountain systems repeated movements in the same direction

.de la France, Ann. Sci. g^ol., 1876, VIT, Ait. no. 2, 48 pp., map; K.de Mercby, Note aur
la craie dana le Noid de la France, Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1863, 2‘ a6r., XX, pp.
631-644.

* C. Barroia, Ondulations de la ciaie dana le Sud de I’Angleterre, Ann. Soc. gdol.
Nord, 1875, III, pp. 85-111 ; and in particular, Recherchea aur le terrain cr4tacd
8up4rieur de I'Angleterre et de I'Trlande, 4to, Lille, 1876, pp. 114-123.



96 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [paot in

have occurred at very different times; but seldom do we witness so striking
an episode as is here presented in the subsidence of a great segment of
a mountain arc between successive periods of folding ; and in this example
wc find clearly displayed the extraordinary constancy in the direction of
the folding force.

The result then of all the observations we have now brought together
is as follows : — The coast of the Atlantic Oce^n, from the mouth of the
Shannon to some distance beyond the mouth of the Loire, is formed by the
bi'caking-off and subsidence of fragments of a great mountain chain, which
was folded towards the north, and acquired the greater part of its elevation
towards the close of the Carboniferous period ; its' vestiges can now oply
be traced in isolated borsts and in po.sthumous foldings. The oldest rocks
of this chain may be seen in the Vendde, 'Brittany, and the Cotentin,
as well as in the gneiss of the Eddy.stone, and the ancient exposures of
schist on the south coast of the peninsula of Cornwall. Tlic next xone,
consisting chiefly of Devonian deposits, and marked in its southern part by
numerous granite mas8c.s, forms the peninsula of Cornwall and Devon
up to the Bristol channel. Tlie outermost zone, overthrust towards the
exterior, is" for the most part of Carboniferous age, but beneath it the
imdcrlying Devonian also crops out. Its northern boundary, which at the
same time represents the outer Itorder of the chain, runs across the south
of Ireland to St. Bride’s bay, continues close to the north coast of the
Bristol channel an<l along the north side of the Mendips as far as Frome,
then, indicated by posthumous movements, it follows close to the hortli
flank of the Wealden dome, the North Downs, and with a gradually
increasing curvature to tlie south-east pusses lietween Boulogncjind Calai.s,
and is thence continued beyond Douai.

Tlie breadth of the complex, the mighty inveraions and imbrications,
e. g. in Somerset and Devon as far south as Exeter, the violent overthrusting
of the outer border, the great displacement along certain flaws — even when
these are posthumous jis in tlie case of the Medina ‘ fault,’ which runs
across the isle of Wight — and finally the series of granitic intrusions in
Devonshire as well «is in Brittany ; all combine to show that wc have
before us the vestiges of a great mountain range. Towards the north this
range forms a flat arc. The last parts visible in the west, as in the
neighbourhood of Bantry bay and the coasts of Finisthre, show that the
remains of this range are continued beneath the Ocean in a west-south-
westerly direction, and the islands which lie oflT many of the promontories
offer a .slight indication of this continuation. The eastern parts lie beneath
the basin of Baris, and here too their strike may be recognized in posthumous
movements, as in the Pays de Bray.

'rhis is the great pre-Permian range of western Europe. The traces of
its interior and presumably most elevated zone lie in Brittany and the



CH. n] THE VARISCAN MOUNTAINS 97

Vendee; for this reason we give these fragments the general name of
the ArrMrimm, chain. '

8. The Yariscdn monniains. The rias>coasts of the south of Irefand,
of Cornwall and Brittany,- form a very typical part of the outlines of
Europe ; corresponding to them, on the other side of the Atlantic, are the
rias-coasts of Newfoundland and Nova Scotia, which also represent the
extremities of a great folded range passing beneath the sea. Starting
from Ireland, where the contrast between the north and south is so marked,
we have now examined the horsts which exhibit folding in a common
direction, as far as the syntaxis between Douai and Valenciennes; these
combine to form the Armorican arc, the unity of which is shown by the
corresponding course of the posthumous folds.

We will now tom aside for a moment from the subject of this chapter,
that is the description of the Atlantic coasts, and following the same
method as we. have just pursued endeavour to obtain a general view of
the mountains of Germany, or the greater nuiyber of them. This attempt
could not be made earlier, because it was first necessary to become familiar
with the idea of a horst, and the closely connected conception of extensive
subsidences of the surrounding country ; and it was also essential to make
ourselves acquainted with that peculiar feature — the arcuate course of
the trend-lines and their syntaxis — which is repeatedly exhibited by so
large a number of folded mountain chains.

This digre^ion will be as brief as the difficulty of the subject permits.
The fragments which I propose to consider are :

(а) The Devonum mou'otavm of the Rhine, namely the collective masses
of the Ardennes, the Eifel, the Westcrwald and the Sauerland, and next
the Hochwald, Hunsriiek and Taunus;

(б) The mountaim of the Rhine, between Bingen and the lake of
Condance, i. e. the Spessart, Odenwald, Hardt, Vosges and Black Forest.

(c) The Harz.

id) The mountains of Saxony, namely the Erzgebirge and Fichtelgebiige,
Frankenwald and Thiiringerwald.

(e) The Sudetes together with the Riesengebirge.

Many of these fragments are bounded on all sides by longitudinal
fractures or by oblique transverse fractures ; a part of the mountains of
Saxony and of the Sudetes sinks beneath* the north-Genuan plain; the
Carpathians approach the Sudetes at right angles to their .strike on the
east and even appear to be driven over them (I, p. 186).

All these mountain fragments have this feature in commonj that they
experienced a great and general folding towards the close of the Carboni-
ferous period; then they were covered by thick deposits of more recent
sediments and collapsed later, piece by piece, and at divers times ; many
underwent subsequently a second . folding. Thus far, therefore, their

80LL.A8 11 • H



98 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [PAirrm

past history resembles in all points that of the Armorican arc. The basal
beds of the downthrown fragments are not always of Permian age; in
some places they are fragments of the higher subdivisions of the Coal-
measures, pinclied into the fractured margin. This is the case on the
north, as on the south margin of the Harz, at Ilefeld, Orilleuberg and
Ballenstedt S at Stockheim on the western marginal fractui'e of the Fichtel-
gebirge and at Rossi tz south of Briinn, on the great fault which separates
the Sudetes from the Bohemian mass‘\ Elsewhere and over vast regions
the Rothliegende is the lowest member of the subsided series.

The northern and eastern parts, namely the Ardennes, the Devonian
mountains of the Rhine, the Harz and the northern part of the mountains
of Saxony, as well as the eastern and south-eastern part of the Sudetes,
are characterized by the great development of the Devonian system, which
is of immense thickness and astonishing uniformity; -great regions are
formed by this system alone^ and in Moravia and Silesia it presents essen-
tially the same subdivisions, as on the Rhiue^ The interior parts of the arc
consist more or less exclusively of pre-Devonian rocks, as in the mountains
of the Rhine near Bingen, the Erzgebirge, and the western part of the
Sudetes with the Ricsengebirge.

' (a) The Devoniun mountains of the Rhine. We arc indebted to the
united efforts of German, Belgian, and French investigators, and in particular
to the achievements of II. von Dechen, fpr our knowledge of the structure
of this vast region, which extends from Frankfort to Diisseldorf and from
Mezieres nearly into the neighbourhood of Paderborn.

A unijPorm strike to the north-east predominates in the whole region,
which for the greater part is thrown into folds overturned to the north,
or imbricated in tine flakes with a SQuth-ejisterly dip. The coalfields of
Belgium cast of Valenciennes and those on the Ruhr form the outer border.

The overfoldcd Coal-measures, from the Boulonnais towards Douai, have
been recognized as part of the Armorican arc; from the short stretch*
of country l)etwcen Douai and Valenciennes which marks the region of
syntaxis, the Coal-measures turn to the east-north-east and northreast, and
are still affected by overthrusts on a grand scale. Aix stands on an
anticlinal between two coal basins, the basin ol‘ Eschweiler in the south,
and that of Worms in tlie north ; but still further to the north, in Holland,
Coal-measures diave been reached by borings beneath the plaint Great

* C. E. Weiss, Die Steinkohlen-fiihrenden Schichten bci Ballenstedt am nOrdlichen
Ilatzrande ; Jahrb. k. ])rcus8. geol. Landesanst., 1881, pp. 595-603.

“ C. W. Giimbel, Geognostischo Beschreibung des Fichtelgebirges (Geognostische
Beschreibung des Kdnigreiches Bayern, III),’8vo, Gotha, 1879, pp. 555-575.

^ A. Makot’sy und A. Rzehak, Die gcologischeti Verhilltnissc der Uingebung voii
Briinn ; Verb. nat. Ver. Briinn, 1884, XXII, p. 82, and geological map.

^ G. Lambert, Nouveau Bassin liouiller dccouvert dans le Limbourg hollandais,
Rappoi-t, Alin. Soc. geol. Belg., 1877, IV, pp. 116-130 ; Rapport de M. von Dechen, tom.



99


OH. n] THE RHENISH DEVONIAN MOUNTAINS’

dislocations here traverse the coal beds, such as the Feldbiss, with its
continuation the Miinstergewand^ which forms the eastern boundary of
the basins just mentioned ^ *

On the right side of the Rhine, the continuation .of the Coal-measures
appears to be moved much more towards the north. According to von
Dechen the Coal-measures of the Ruhr have been recognized near Duisburg
and Ruhrort; those on the left bank near Vluyn, north of Crefeld^;
we may therefore conjecture that the Coal-measures which cross the valley
• of the Rhine are cither heaved by a flaw, or bent in a sigmoid curve, and
this supposition is in complete accordance with the’ lie of the folds which
follow further to the south.

Such sigmoid curvature is not rare in folded ranges; the advance
of one part of the range relatively to another, implied by such a curvature,
occurs in several places on the outer border of the Alps. The sigmoid
curve is often intersected by flaws striking across it, and is thus resolved
into a number of small forward displacements. A ladder-like arrangement
of the flaw surfaces is then exhibited by the sigmoid. These may be seen
on the smallest scale, as in thin slices under the microscope ; and on the
grandest, as in great mountain masses. Studer's geological map of Switzer-
land shows how the anticlinal of the Molasse, as it proceeds to the cast
from Sankt Gallen and Appenzell, begins to undergo on crossing the Rhine
a marked deflexion forwards, i.e. to the north-east, and this leads in
Vorarlberg^and the adjsicent part of Bavaria to the edge of the Bavarian
Alps which lie much further to the north. In the same way the great
Cretaceous limestone mass, which extends from the Toggenburg through
the Santis to the Iller, describes in the same district, within the Flysch
zone, a corresponding sigmoid curve. At the same time a part of this •
mass lies in flakes, and flaw planes, striking to the north, cut through the
Santis (I, p. 116) *^

The Rhine crosses the folded Coal-measures between Aix and Dusseldorf
in the same manner as it crosses the Alps above the lake of Constance,
and it is probable that many of the numerous transverse- fractures, along
which, in the neighl)ourhood of . Aix, von Dechen observed considerable
displacements both in the horizontal and vertical direction, play the same
part as the flaws of the Santis. This is the more worthy of remark

cit., pp. 180-1«S2 ; F. L. Cornet, Notice sur le Uassin houiller Limbourgeois, tom. cit.,
pp. 133-142.

' H. V. Dechen, GcologiBche und palilontologische Ucbersicht der Hheinprovinz und
der Provinz Westphalen (Plrliluterungen zur gcologischen Karte, II}, 8vb, iBonn, 1884,
pp. 227, 230 ; also a much earlier work : Ueber den Zusammenhang der Steinkohlen-
reviere von Aachen und an der Ruhr, Zeitschr. f. Berg-, Hiitt.-, Salinenw., 1885, III,

pp. 1-^.

^ Id., Uebersicht der Rheinprovinz, p. 208.

^ e. g. Mojsisovics, Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1873, XXIII, p. 174.



100 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [part hi

because, the earthquakes of Herzogenrath, north of Aix, which continued
for several years, proceeded, according to Von Lasaulx, from the greatest
of these dislocations, the Feldbiss, and must' thus be classed with the group
of flaw shocks, like so many earthquakes of the Alps ^

The most ancient rocks of the Ardennes belong to the Silurian.
Gosselet distinguishes three Silurian zones, which, however, are not all of
equal value, namely, the zone of Brabant, of Condroz, and of the Ardennes
proper

That which is known in Belgium as the zone of Brabant is the
common foreland of the overthmst region lying in front of both members
of the syntaxis ; it has been traced by brings beneath the plain, as far
as Brussels and Ostend.

Then towards the south follow the overthmst Coal-measures, already
frequently mentioned, and the zone of Condroz is that ridge which has
been moved from the south-east over the Coal-measures, recalling by this
position the anticlinal of the Mendips (I, p. 142, Fig. 17). Folded Devonian
accompanies this zone, and to the south it is followed by a broad synclinal
of folded Carlx>nifcrous limestone, the basin of Dinant. To the south of
this broadens out the extensive region of the Ardennes proper, formed
chiefly of lower Devonian beds.* Their strike is directed, precisely like
that of the Coal-measures, to east-north-east and north-east; they are like-
wise ovcrfolded from the south-east, and out of their midst there rise —
not unlike the gneiss cores of the Alps — four masses which form the
Cambrian zone of the Ardennes.

All four masses are built up of Cambrian deposits ; neither upper nor
lower Silurian is known here. There arc two largo masses, those of
Rocroi and Stavclot, the latter called by the Germans the Hohe Venn, an<l
two smaller, those of Serpont and of Givonne.

The mass of Rocroi, that of Serpont, and the Hohe Venn lie in one and
the same zone of strike; the smaller mass of Givonne is situated above
Sedan, south of the mass of Rocroi. In all the masses, as well as in the
surrounding Devonian, the beds dip towards the south, corresponding to
the general inversion. The Belgian geologists maintain that the relations
with the Devonian are those of genuine unconformability, but the observa-
tions of German investigators do not lead to this conclusion, at least not
with the same degree of certainty.

The mass of Rocroi lies on the south-west boundary of the Ardennes,
.and is cut through obliquely by this boundary south of Hirson, so that its
outline somewhat resembles an obliquely intersected ellipse. It is continued
in any case across the marginal fractures, beneath a part of the Mesozoic

^ A. von Lasaulx, Das Erdbeben von Herzogenrath am 22. October 1873, 8vo, Bonn,
1874, p. 141 et seq.

^ Gosselet, Esquisse g^ologique du Nord de la France, fasc. 1, p. 17 et eeq.



THE HOHE VENN


101


OH. Il]

sediments of the plain towards the west Across this mass the Meuse flows,
disclosing a beautiful section ; Von Lasaulx has described the constant dip
towards the south-east, which is exhibited by all the members of this mass,
from Mezi^res on the south, through the Devonian, the Cambrian mass of
Rocroi and the Devonian of its northern flank, up to the Carboniferous
limestone of the basin of Dinant on the north \ .

The strike of the Coal-measures, directed first to east-north-east then
to north-east, is clearly repeated in the alinement of the three masses of
Rocroi, Serpont, and the Hohe Venn ; in the most distant part of the Hohe
Venn, near Diiren, east of Aix, the strike passes with equal clearness into
north-north-east.

The Hohe Venn begins north-west of Houflalizc and proceeds towards
DUren. It is broader in its southern part, and is produced with a slight
curvature first to the north-east and then more and more to the north-
north-east. This is no doubt the same sigmoid as that described by the
strike of the Coal-measures as they cross the valley of the Rhine. The
mass of the Hohe Venn is related in the same way to the Coal-measures as
tlie limestone mass of the iiantis and its continuation to the overthrusting
of the Molasse. The whole northern part of the anticlinal of tlie Hohe
Venn also shows inverted, bedding, and the full force of the sigmoid cur-
vature finds expression on the western side of the extreme end of the mass.
In this region near M^rode, as Holzapfel has shown, the lowest member of
the south-east side, tlie lower Devonian, is completely driven over tlie
western limb of the arch, and overlies the upper Devonian and Carboni-
ferous ; and immediately to the south of this locality several parallel flaws,
accompanied by as many successive forward thrusts, intersect the westei-n
limb \ .

' A. von hasaulx, Ueber <lie Tektonik und die Eruptivgostcine der fninzoaischen
Ardennen, Vortrag in der Herbst-Versammluiig des naturhistorischen Vereines der
preussischen Rheinlande und Westphalen, 7. October 1883, 8vo, Bonn, 1884. Gosselet’s
‘Faille de Remagne’on the south-east, side of the little mass of Givonne is a thrust-
plane. By the same, Sur la faille de Remagiic et sur le metamorphisme qu’elle
a produit, Ann. ISoc. geol. Nord, 1883-1884, XI, pp. 176-190. I have not considered it
necessary to enter in detail into the disputed question whether an original unconform-
ability exists or not between the overthrust Cambrian anticlinals and the lower
Devonian, since the imbricated structure is universally acknowledged. Nor have
I discussed the question of the existence of traces of a granitic intrusion beneath the
Hohe Venn ; A. von Lasaulx, Der Granit unter dem Cambrium des Hohen Venn, Verb,
naturhist. Ver. preuss. Rheinl., 1884, XLT, pp. 418-450 ; Dewalquc, Sur les Filons
granitiques et les Poudingues de Lammeimiorf, Ann. Soc. geol. Belg., 1885, Xll, pp.
158-163. ■ *

. £. Holzapfel, Die Lagerungsverhaltnisse des Devon zwischen Roer- und Vichtthal,

Verb, naturhist. Ver. preuss. Rheinl., 1883, XL, pp. 397-420, map; G.Dewalque, Sur la
terminaisoik N.-E. du massif cambrien de Stavelot, Ann. Soc. geol. Belg., 1884, XI, Bull.,
pp. exx-exxv. In this respect my opinion differs essentially from. that of Lossen,
a distinguished observer of such phenomena. Lossen sees in this bend of the Hohe



102 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [pabt ni

The foregoing will suffice to show to what extent the-structure of the
northern border of the Rhenish mountains resembles the northern border
of the Alps, and I shall now enter less into detail.

The Cambrian masses of the Ardennes, the extremity of which we
have just studied near Diiren, are not continued across the Rhine. Many
series of overthrust anticlinals and s3mclinals composed of Devonian
deposits form the mountains far and wide. Their strike is constantly
directed to the north-east, and is clearly expressed in the nosing out of
the folds along the eastern border of the Sauerland, the Westerwald and
the Taunus, as well as in the general outlines of these mountain fragments.
Still, towards the south, the overthrusting appears to be of trifling extent.
Synclinal limbs dipping to the north-west, that is, normally inclined,
alterjiate more frequently with opposed limbs dipping to the south-east.
On the southernmost edge, from Hoinburg von der Hdhe through Wiesbaden
up to the valley of the Nahe, Von Dechen marks a zone of more ancient
sericite schists and gneisses as the foundation of the folded Devonian
mountains. Their position is similar to that of the ancient schists of the
Lizard and Prawle Point, on the inner side of the Devonian formations of
Cornwall. According to C. Koch, it is along the axis of a symmetrical
anticlinal, close to the most southerly edge of the Taunus, that the sericite
gneiss crops out. It is succeeded on each side by green sericite schists, and
these again by the phyllite of the Taunus with beds of quartzite. The
anticlinal r*uns to the south-west, crossing the Rhine near Assmanshausen.
Only .its upper members are visible here; they have closed over the gneiss,
and further to the south-west on the left side of the Rhine these too
become concealed beneath the now continuous beds of the Taunus quartzite,
which in their turn disappear, still further on, beneath the sliales of the

Hunsriickb ‘ .

•

Venn, as well as in that of the basins of the Eifel situated further to the south, a torsion
or deformation of the anticlinal which originally followed the direction of the
Netherlands, by later Hcrcynian folding. In that case it seems to mo there would not
be produced a curvature of the existing anticlinals, but the formation of new anticlinals
transverse to the original folds. I may add that the radial system of dykes of
Andreasberg represented here by Lessen (fig. 12, 1, p. 163), so closely resembles the
effect of torsion that I too should be inclined to regard this explanation as the most
suitable for the present ; on the other hand, T cannot recognize from the data hitherto
published any turning round of the whole folded system of the Harz; K. A.-Ijossen,
Ueber das AuftretenmetamorphischerGesteinein den alton pald.ozoischcn Gebirgskemen
von den Arden iien bis ziim Altvatergebirge, und liber^ den Zusammenhang dieses
Auftretens mit der Faltenverbiegung (Torsion), .Jahrb. k. preuss. geol. Landesanst.,
1884, pp. 56>112. A. v. Groddcck sees in the Harz only folding in the direction of the
Netherlands, and this view appears to me to correspond with the observations so
far published ; op. cit., 1883, p. 73, note.

' C. Koch, Ueber die Gliedeiung der rhcinischen Unterde^n-Schichten zwischen
Taunus und Westerwald ; Jahrb. k. preuss. geol. Landesanst., 1880, p. 198 et seq., section
on pi. vi.



CH. n] THE RHINE MOUNTAINS ABOVE BINGEN 103

(6) The mountaim of the BMne above Bingen. The southern border of
the foldAl Devonian region is immediately succeeded by the coalfields of
the, Saar, which present a fundamentally different structure ; the n&ture
of the underlying rocks is not known; on the Coabmeasures the.Roth-
liegende lies conformably and without any clearly defined limit. . Gentle
folds occur and are traversed by numerous fractures. Von Dechen has
enumerated many of these in order to show how extreme is the fragmenta*
tion of the earth’s crust in this region k A mighty fault Iwunds the Coal-
measures on the south ; ticcording to Klivcr’s estimate its throw near
Bexbad and Sankt Ihgbert amounts to 4,000 meters, near Dudweiler to
3,000 meters. In the south it runs from Saarbriick for some distance past
■ Forbach in the direction of Saint-Avold towards France, probably with
a bend to the west-south-west, and Lepsins has followetl it to the north-
east as far as Alzey in the Rhine valley

Thus this transgressive segment is sharply separated from the more
southerly heights by a tremendous subsidence which has taken place along
faults following in the main the strike of the Devonian chain, but we must
not forget that these mighty movements are much more recent than the
folds, the connexion of which we are seeking to trace. The downthrown
fragment is also gently folded, either by compression during subsidence or
by posthumous movement. It presents a distant rcsemldance to the great
trough subsidence of Edinburgh and Glasgow.

In the north-east the case is certainly different. On the we.st side of
the -Spessart, east of Hanau and Aschaffenburg, gneiss and crystalline
.schists crop out; the northern outliers of the Odenwald near Darmstadt
also approach to within 30 kilometers of the southern edge of the Taunus,
and are only separated from it by the recent deposits of the Rhine valley.
The Odenwald is followed across the Rhine by the exposures of older
rocks on the east side of the Hmmltwald, emerging, as along the Odenwald
and the Spessart, from beneath a thick covering of Runter sandstone,
while still further to the south rise the great horsts of the Vosges and
the Black Forest.

■We have already described the way in which these mountains have
collapsed (I, pp. 194-197) and the Mesozoic table-lands around them have
been let down, leaving the existing heights as the ruins of a once con-
tinuoiis range. These fragments have been left standing, like the remains
of an ancient edifice surrounded by the ruins of mighty ramparts ; and
we have now to consider not the circumvallatc ramparts Itut the structure

I

^ H. von Dechen, Uebersicht der Rheinprovinz, pp. 269-275.

^ Op. cit., p. 261 ; on the closely but not exactly corresponding course of a much
later fault, instructive information is given by 6. Mayer, Ueber die Lagerung8verhfi.lt-
nisse adi Sfidrande des Saarbriickner Steinkohlengebietes, Mitthcil. Commiss. f. geoL
Landes-Unters. v. Elsass-Lothr., 1886, 1. -



104 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [pabt ra

of tho ancient edifice itself as preserved in the svirviving fragments ; we
must seek to discover the position of the corner-stones, or per<9iance of
som6 remnant of a still recognizable comice, so that we may recover the
original outline from the rains. It would thus be our task to examine
the direction of the strike and the succession of the rocks in each of these
several horsts, were it not that this work has already been admirably
accomplished by Kichard Lepsius, who has made use of all the observations
collected since the time of Peter Merian ; it is only necessary, therefore, to ’
recapitulate the results already obtained ^

All the primitive formations on Ixith sides of the Rhine, from the* Jura
mountains' to the Taunus, have a common strike, and this is parallel to
the strike of the Taunus. The wliole of this fundamental mass, now
broken into fragments, was once folded by a common tangential ' force
acting from south-south-east to north-north-west. Gneiss, mica schists,
and isolated beds of Devonian and Culm follow the common strike, which
may be disturbed by intrusive granite masses, but only locally or within
narrow limits. The folding took place towards the end of the Carboni-
ferous period. On the folded chain, beds 1,200 to 1,500 meters in thick-
ness, ranging from the upper Rothliegende to the upper Jurassic, were
deposited ; then the chain collapsed along great lines of fracture ; and the
table^land of Tria* and Jurassic rocks sulwided at least 2,500 meters during
the interval between the Tertiary period and the present day.

From the southern end of the Black Forest and the Vosges, as far as
the overthrust Coal-measures near Aix and on the Ruht, we thus see one
and tho same system of folds which were formed towards the close of
the Carboniferous period. The Black Forest and the Vosges, as far as
the ancient rocks of the Spessart near Hanau and Aschafleiiburg, stand
in the -same relation to the Devonian foimations of the Rhine, from the
Taunus to the Ruhi*, as that in which- the ancient rocks of Brittany and
the Cotentin, together with the gneiss reefs of the Eddystone, stand to the
folds of Devonshire and the overfolded Coal-measures on the north side
of the Mendips and the Bristol Channel.

Now for the first time we embrace in one view the whole breadth of
that great German arc, the outer border of which enters into syntaxis,
in the north-east of France, with the outer border of the Armorican
arc. It is not inferior in magnitude to the latter, nor* are its folds
less powerful.

(c) The Ilarz. This horst presents the form of an ellipse elongated
from west-north-west to east-south-east, but the strike of the beds is
transverse, running to east-north-east or north-east. This is very clearly

' R. Lepnus, Die oberrheinische Tiefebene und ihre Randgebirge ; Forschungen zur
deutschen Iiandes- und Volkskunde, issued by R. Lehmann, 1, Heft 2, 8ro, Stuttgart,
1885, p. 52 et seq.



THE HARZ


106


OH. II]

8hown in Lossen’s beautiful map of the Harz mountains, as well as in
' numerous detailed descriptions of the district. Lossen believes that this
dominant strike has been disturbed in certain localities by later folding
in another direction, but Von Grdddeck does not regard this as definitely
proved \

Devonian beds fonn the greater part of the Harz, and these Correspond
so closely with those of the Schiefergcbirge of the Rhine that Von Koenen
regards a subterranean connexion of the two masses as indisputable

Two granite masses, the Brocken and the Romberg, rise out of the
Devonian area ; they do not extend along the strike of the stratified racks,
but with this exception . resemble in their most important features the
granite bosses in the Devonian region of Cornwall. They produce at
most only a local deflexion of the general strike. The whole of the
upper Harz is folded, according to Von Groddeck, into an anticlinal, both
limbs of which arc thrown into sul)sidiary synclinals and anticlinals. The
south-east limb is vertical or overturned, while the north-west limb has
a regular and gentle dip In the central Harz, Kayser describes a great
anticlinal of lower Devonian, which strikes from Herzberg and Irfuiterberg
on the south-west border of the mountains to east-north-east or north-east,
straight across them to Rambeig; it is followed both on the north and
south by many parallel folds'^. Towards the north, in particular on the
south-west side of the Brocken, folds occur striking directly on to the
granite mass ; they are preservetl as altered fragments resting on the l>ack
of this laccolite, which is- now exposed by erosion. Most of these folds
are overthrust to the north-yvost. In tlie south-ejist part of the Harz the
same strike prevails, but the overthrusting- to the north-west does not
occur here. On the contrary, it appears from Lossen s description that
towards the south-east border overfolding of the beds takes place in the
opposite direction, so that in this part of the Hara fan-structure is met
with^ In the Schiefergcbirge of the Rhine also, the overfolding to the
north-west diminishes as we approach their south-east border. The Harz,
indeed, is merely a portion of the Rhenish Schiefergcbirge.

(d) The mouiitavne of Saxony. The east-north-east to north-east strike
of the Black Forest points to the middle of the great fractured area of
south Germany. The country to the north of Tubingen and Nurnberg

' A. von Groddeck, Jahrb. k. preuss. geol. Landesanst., 1883, p. 73,. note; cf. above,
note 2 on p. 101.

^ e. g. A. von Koenen, Ueber Dislokationen westlich und BQdwestlich voni Hara ; op. •
cit, p. 46, 1884.

A. von Groddeck, Zur Kenntniss des Oberharzer Culm ; op. cit., 1882, p. 67.

* E. Kayser, Ueber das Spaltensysteni am siid west lichen Abfalle des Brockenmassivs,
insbesondere der Gegend von Sankt Andreasberg; op. cit., 1882, p. 424.

” (Lossen); Erlauterungen zur geologischen Specialkarte von Treusseii u'nd der.
ThUringiseben Staaten ; Gradabtb. 56, Nr. 30, Blatt Wippra, 1883, p. 36.



106 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [part in

•

most have for the base of its foundation the continuation of the Black
.Forest, and as soon as we .pass BairCnth and cross the marginal fractures
on the east of the great subsidence the older rocks reappear with the strike
of the Black Forest.

The chief ridge of the Erzgeljirgo continues the north-easterly direction
as far as the Kibe. On the Bohemian side this is cut off by a great
fracture, on Which a long series of Tertiary volcanos once rose. Towards
Saxony and Thuringia, however, there follows a series of great parallel
folds driven towartls the north-west, which form all the country for a great
distance into the plain.

We will first consider the Fichtelgebirge and the Frankenwald. The
stnrcture of this region is detennined by two directions ; one, the more
important, is to the north-east, the other to the north-west. Giimbel,
however, has justly pointed out that the first or generally domintmt
direction finds expression in folds, the second in fractures ; but it is the
folds only which now interest us, and not the fractures, which are of piuch
more recent date^ From Gumbel’s very detailed descriptions it further
appears that the great granitic intrusions of the Fichtelgebirge and Selb,
which surround th«J sources of the river Eger, influence the general strike
of the gneiss and the ancient schists on the north-east, to so small an
extent that even the Cambrian fragment of Wunsiedcl, surrounded on
three sides by granite, retains the normal strike unchanged. Thus the
Fichtelgebirge is but the western extremity of the Erzgebirge, and the same
strike is maintaiticd from the marginal fractures of the south-German
subsidence, near Goldkronach, as far as the Elbp. The Erzgebirge, however,
is the principal and characteristic range of the whole mass of Saxony.

Towards the north this principal range is immediately followed on the
west by closely folded Palaeozoic slates, and then rising out of them comes
the gneiss of the MUnchberg in a broad elliptical mass. It extends to the
north-east from the marginal fractures into the immediate neighbourhood
of the town of Hof, where the Cambrian appears arid forms its border.
The MUnchberg mass presents a most instructive picture of a gneiss core
of the Alps, denuded almost to its base. The smaller folds and crumplings
have vanished ; the simplified elliptical outline and the overfolding to the
north-west remain •

The strike to the north-east is maintained throughout the whole of the
Frankenwald • and also through the ThUringcrwtild, so far as it is not con-
.cetiled by Permian rocks. We know that the Thuringerwald is a horst,
bounded on one side by the continuation of the marginal fractures of the

* C. W. Gttmbcl, Geognostische BeBchreibung des Fichtelgebirges mit dem Franken-
waldn und dem westlichen Vorlande (Geognostigeho Beschreibung des KOnigrrichea
Bayern, III), 8vo, Gotha, 1879, in particular pp. 97, 628 et seq.

‘ Id., op. cit., p. GS.*) et passim.



OH. n] .


THE ERZGEBIRGE


107


great south-Oerman sunken area, which extends past Coburg and Mein-
ingen, and on the other side by the marginal fractures of the northern
sunken area in the neighbourhood of Gotha and Weimar. Thus, then, in
the Thttringerwald, the beds strike transversely across the mass, and this
range of heights reproduces the structure of the Cotentin ^ The strike of
the beds in eastern Thuringia, the Carboniferous age of the chief folding,
and the Permian transgression have been described in detail by Liebe^..

Refraining from all detailed description we now pass to the structure
of the western part of the kingdom of Saxony. This is another fragment
of the same mass.

In 1876 H. Credner expressed for the first time the opinion that the
Erzgebirge is not an independent mountain* range, but ratlier the most
southerly of three parallel folds which run from south-west to north-east
thi’ough the west of Saxony. The middle fold to the north of it is a very
symmetrical anticlinal, known as the Mittelgebirgc or the granulite moun-
tains of Saxony, and the most northerly fold, also an anticlinal, though
covered for Uie greater part by recent alluvial land, forms the mountain’s
of Liebschlitz, near Strehla on the Elbe 'K

Just as the elliptical ma.S8 of the Miinchberg gneiss lies in front of the
western Erzgebirge, so here, in front of the same chain, lies the ellipse
of the Saxon Mittelgebirge, directly north of Chemnitz. Tlie towns of
Glauchau, Rochlitz, Dobeln, and ITainichen may serve to indicate its
boundary. The ellipse is somewhat larger than that of the Miinchberg,
its border more regular and its abrasion still further advanced, but tlie '
main features of its structure are the same, and Credner's map of the
range, like Giimbels map of the Miinchberg mass, gives us the plan of
a much worn-down mountain core^.

’ The north-easterly strike of the Thuringerwald is clearly represented on Richter’s
general inap in Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1851, XX, pi. xx*^ likewise in Credner,
Versuch ciner Hildungsgescihichte des Thiiringcrwaldes, 8vo, 1855, and in more recent
works, e. g. H. Loretz, Heitrag zur geologischen K^nntniss der cambrisch-phyllitischen
Schieferreihe in Thiiringen, Jahrb. k. preuBs. geol. Landesanst., 1881, p. 244, in
particular the corresponding sheet of the special map ; in the present work the
fractures have been discussed in vol. I, p. 193. Lately Loretz has distinguished in the
south-east of the Thuringerwald, besides the close and general folding in the direction
of the Erzgebirge, other wide undulations, on a groat or even very great scale, most
of which also strike to the north-cast hut some to the north-west ; Loretz, Zeitschr.
deutsch. geol. Ges., 1886, XXXVllI, pp. 468, 469.

* K. T. Liebe, Uebersicht fiber den Schichtenaufbau Ostthfirihgens ; Abb. geol.
Specialkarte, Preuss. etc., 1884, V, pp. 398 and 530, map, et passim. ^

* H. Credner, Das vogtlfindisch-erzgebirgische Erdbeben vom 23. November 1875,
Zeitschr. ges. Nat. Halle, 1876, XLVllI, p. 261 ; also by the same, Ueber das erzgebirg-
ische Falteosystem, Vortrag gehalten auf dem 2ten deutschen- liergmannstage, 8vo,
Dresden, 1883.

^ Id., Das sfichsischc Granulitgebirge und seine Umgebung, 8vo, Leipzig, 1884, map, in
particular p. 61 et seq.



108 THE OUTMNES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [part ra

A noteworthy interval lies between this great ellipse and the Erzge-
birge. The Archaean rocks of the Erzgebirge are followed by a Silurian
zone; then to the east of Hainichen and Frankenberg the gneiss of the
Erzgebirge appears once more, as a wedge 20 kilometers in length, and
between this and the border of the ellipse lie Culm and Cambrian phyllite.
To the south-west, however, in the direction of Chemnitz the steeply
upturned Culm is covered by upper Carboniferous of the same age' as
Saarbr'iick beds, and by Rothliegende. These younger beds are horizontal,
and indicate once more, as in so many other places, the magnitude of the
disturbances which must have occurred before the conclusion of the
Carboniferous period.

It is tile most northerly of the three anticlinals of Saxony which lies
most deeply buried beneath younger deposits. Its oldest rocks crop out,
as .we have seen, near Strehla. Credner has shown that the series of
exposures of greywacke, which begins at Hainichen and Otterwisch (north-
east of Borna), runs over the Deditzberg near Crimma to the Collmbergo
and nearly up to the Elbe, corresponds to the southeni side of the anti-
clinal, while the northern flank is visible immediately to the south of
Leipzig

This anticlinal reaches the Elbe with an east-north-east strike, but near
Riesa, not far to the south-east of it, there crop out Archaean I'ocks, which
strike from north-west to south-east in the direction of the Riesengebirge
and the western part of the Sudetes. In these exposures of Riesa we
may doubtless recognize the continuation of the long gneiss band of
Grossenhain, which, according to Naumann, proceeds from the district
north of Dresden, and runs from the south-east in a gentle curve to
reach the Elbe directly cast of Riesa. A broad tract of Palaeozoic rocks
extends north of this band of gneiss into the neighliourhood of Ortrand,
and forms the commencement of the great Palaeozoic zone which runs
from this point through the whole of Lusatia to lower Silesia, past
Konigsberg, Camenz; and Gorlitz, to the- graptolite slates of Lauban ; it
forms an important element in the structure of the Sudetes, and may be


’ H. Credner, Der Hoden der Stadt Leipzig, 8vo, Leipzig, 185S, p. 7. Profesaor
Credner has been kind enough to furnish me with the following observations which have*
an important bearing on the questions treated here: (1) Phyllites of Wellerswalde,
sti-ike N. 75'^ E., dip steep to SSE. ; (2) Andalusito mica schists of Clauschwitz, strike
N. 60® E., dip vertical ; (3) numerous outcrops of lower Silurian greywackes, strike
N. 45®“ 50® E. to N. 60" E., sometimes N. 70® E.. dip stee[) to south. The greywacke
)>rescnts in it^ eastern course towartls the Elbe a strike of N. 45°-50® E,, further to the
west towards the Collmbergc of N. 60®-75®E, As far’ as Hainichen, strike WSW.-ESE.
and dip to the south. SSE. from the Strehla mountains and S. of Riesa some
isolated bosses of ciystallinc schists. (gneiss, hornblende schist, &c.). emerge from the
diluvium. These strike SE.-NW., that is almost at right angles to the greywacke zone
of Oschatz-Strehla. The detailed survey of Lusatia is not yet completed.



THE SUDETES


CH. n]


109


followed much further etill, 'striking at first east-south-east, then south-east,
and afterwards more and more to south-south-east.

Notwithstanding the deflexion of the strike at what is supposed to be
the north-eastern extremity of the gneiss band of Grossenhain (a deflexion
compensate further to the east by a great extension of the greywacke
zone), I nevertheless believe that the gi'eywacke exposed on the left
bank of the Elbe up to Oschatz and Strchla must be regarded as a con-
tinuation of the greywacke on its right bank. In this I agree with
Naumann and Cotta, who assumed the existence of such a continuity
many years ago

(e) The Bv/detes. A tremendous fracture cuts off the south side of the
Riesengebirge and extends beyond Dresden. On the outer edge of the
mountains, as we have already seen, the folded zones on the two sides
of the Elbe fit together fairly well.* The ea.sterh, that is the Sudetic
side of the mountains, shows this aidaptation to a common ate most
plainly, for towards Moravia the strike Ixjcomes tvlmost north-cast. From
this point the several zones of the mountains must bend round through
90“ in order to adaipt theinselves in some measure to the Jirc, and this
they do.

I do not propose to discuss in detail the structure of the Sudetic arc,
since the authors of the geological maps of lower and upper Silesia have
represented it in so clear a manner. The arcuate plan would l)e still more
obvious were it not, apart from the fnicture of the inner bonier, that there
is a complete absence of correspondence between the outer lx)rder of the
mountains and their structure. From the Katzbach onwards, past Frei-
burg and Jaueniig the mountains arc cut off obliquely by a long line,
which cannot be other than a fracture, and l)eyond Jauernig on the one
hand and Zicgcnhals and Hotzenplotz on the other we sec the several
Palaeozoic zones of the arc with a north-north-west strike <lisappear one
after the other beneath the plain. Their continuation probably lies coh--
cealed somewhere to the north of the Zobten.

• ^Phe stratified series of these mountains, particularly the Devonian, '
shows, as we have already seen, a close resemldance to that of the other
fragments of arcs as far as the Rhjne. In this region also the most im-
portant movements occurred towards the close of the Carljonifcrous period,
certainly before the Rothliegende. The subsequent folding, not only of
the Permian but also of the transgressive Cretaceous beds, into synclinals
which follow the general strike of the arc, as on the Ifeusclveuer and in
the basins of Lbwenberg and Lahn, .shows that posthumous movements
have occurred similar to those of the south of England.

' B. Cotta, Erliluterungen zu Section VI der geognoBtigehen Charte don KOnigreicheg
Sachgen, 8vo, 1839, p. 46; Naumann und Cotta, Erl&nterungen zu Section' X, 1845,
p.448.



110 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [PAicrm

Great masses of granitic rocks rise out of the western part pf the chain
on its inner side ; but Roth very justly remarks that the foldings and
dislocations of the stratified rocks cannot be ascribed to the granite ; these
phenomena are more probably connected with movements of the earth’s
crust ‘during which opportunity was afforded to the granites to force
their way upwards.’ Beyrich thinks we may assume that these granites,
like those of the Harz and Devonshire, w'cre intruded during the Devonian
or the early part' of the Carboniferous period

In lower Silesia the chief structural features of the country have been
determined by F. Roomer, and the researches earned out on Austrian
territory show that in the -neighbourhood of the Altvatergebirge pheno-
mena of compression occur which equal in intensity those of the Alps, both
as regards the position of the strata and the alteration of the rocks

(/) Summary. We have now reached the eastern extremity of the
great shattered mountain arc of .Central Europe. Its outer border may
Ihj- traced from the syntaxis near Valenciennes as far as the Rhine, and
after it has crossed the river in a sigmoid curve may be followed some
distance furtlier along the Ruhr ; its continuation on tlie east lies in the
coalfields of lower Silesia and Moravia. Towards the interior follows
a broad zone, chiefly Devonian, which extends through the Ardennes, on
the Rhine up to the southern border of the Taunus, in the TIarz, and in
the more distant parts of the Sudetes. The zones lying still further
towards the intei'ior consist principally of crystalline rocks; they are
traversed by more closely fohled zones of Silurian, Devonian, and Culm,
and form the mountains of the Rhine from the Taunus up to the southern
end of the Black Forest, the Fichtelgebirge and Erzgebirge with the
Frankenwald and Thiiringerwald, the Riesengebirge, and a part of the
Sudetes.

Like the Annoric^ui mountains this arc was folded chiefly towards the
close of the Carlwniferous period, certainly befqre the Rothliegende, and
was broken up at various tiines. But here too posthumous movements have
occurred, and these appear most clearly in the Cretaceous basins of the
Sudetes. Great transgreasions over the folds begin in the upper
Carboniferous, as for example in the coal district of the Soar.

The highest .summits of this ancient range probably stood on the site
of the Ballons des Vosges, in the south part of the Black Forest, on the
line running thence to the Erzgebirge, on this range itself, and on the inner
side of the Sudetic fragment. But nowhere do the outlines of the ancient

' Justus Roth, Rrliiuterungen zu <ler goognostischeu Karte vom Niedorschlesischen
Oebirge und den uiiiliegcndcn Gcgcndcn, 8vo, Derlin, 1867, p. 390.

^ A new series of researches is now in progress; von Camerlander, Reisebericht
aus W. Schlesinn, Verb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1886, pp. 294-301 ; F. Recke and
M. Schuster, op. cit., 1887, pp. 109-119.



Ill


OH. II] THE SYNTAXIS OF CENTRAL EUROPE

mountain cored stand out so clearly as in front of this main 'line, in the
gneiss ma/3s of the Munchberg near Hof, and in the granulite mountains
of Saxony. It is thus fitting that thd name of this range, which inchides
most of the German horsts, should be borrowed from the land of the
Varisci or the Vogtland; and we shall name it therefore the VaHst?an
raTtge^ ivom the Latin name of Hof in Bavaria (Curia VarUcovum).

9. The eyntaxis of Central Europe. In a previous chapter (I, p. 421)
we became acquainted with the syntaxes of India. The arcs of the
Him&laya and those of the Hindu Kush advance like a succession of
gigantic folds on the surface of two viscous streams moving to* the south-
west and south-etist ; they meet each other along a line, indicated in the
south by the river Jehlani, which may V)e followcti far into the mountain
region with a direction almost due north, only deviating a little to the east.
Wo see, besides, that the folds of the forclying Tertiary land follow similar
lines, though the re-entrant angle of the outer l)order is somewhat more
obtuse than at the junction on the inner side of the chains.

We must now turn our attention to the syntaxis of the Armorican with
the Variscan folds. In the great mountain-ranges of Asia the chief obstacle
to a more exact knowledge of the country lies in its impracticable nature ;
here the difficulties are of another kind. Everywhere the chain is
completely worn down, so that scarcely a trace of the original configuration
of the surface can be recognized ; on the ground plan thus lying before us,
the true lines of structure, appearing generally as long denuded folds, or
parallel fractures of great length, must be carefully distinguished from
a number of others, various in character and of secondary importance,'
or from merely superficial features, frequently regarded as characteristic.
In determining the orientation of the so-called mountain systems we
depend sometimes on the <lirection of intrusive granite cores or lines of
volcanos, sometimes on the marginal fractures of horsts, and often even on
the trend of ridges formed by erosion, or indeed of watersheds. But it is
evident that in folded ranges only the folds themselves and the longitudinal
fractures or thrusts, by which they are accompanied, should be taken into
account, and it is equally evident that in a profoundly abraded range
• Archaean rocks will form the greater part of the surface; of the sedimentary
beds which once covered them, only the innermost wedge-shaped extremities
of the chief synclinals will be preserved.

From this it follows that the very long pinched-in bamls of Silurian,
Devonian, Culm, and Carboniferous, which may be met with here and there
in the Archaean regions, furnish the true trend-lines and guide us to the
course of the great mountain ranges of former times;'

In the region where we might expect .to find the inner branches of the
two ancient mountain arcs of Central Europe uniting in syntaxis, rises the
Central Plateau of France. This vast mass, composed chiefly of gneiss and



112 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [part in.


granite, terminates in the east, towards the valley of the Rhqne and the
Saone, in a long slope running north and south, which, as we shall -see
directly, cuts obliquely across the structural features of the mass, and is
therefore a fracture. From the neighbourhood of Valence and Privas,
where a great stream of Imsalt flows down from the heights into the
valley, the Iwundary line of the Central Plateau trends to the south-South-
west, nearly as far as Lc Vigan on the upper Hdrault, and even further, to
Carcassone, if we include the Montague Noire; thence it runs to the north-
west, describes a concave arc in the direction of Fig^, passes to the east
of Pdrigueux, turns round Limoges in a broa«l curve and then runs east-
north-cast past Saint- Arnand towards Avallon at the northern point 'of the
Morvan.

This outline is interrupted by tlirec great bays. Two of them lie close
together and correspond to the valleys of the Loire and the Allier ; one of
these cuts off the Morvan; they are separated from one another by the



spur-shaped range of
Forez. We have al-
ready seen that the
Morvan, which pro-
jects towards the
north, is surrounded
by faults (I, p. 204);
it may be compared
to the Cotentin and


j'.Fio. 11. Dingrntntnttttc section i\f Vie A-TchcLean foundiUion and ^PhilriniJCrWRlfl.

fragments of Mesozoic rocks on Mont Ijozirv, • I'l '

The two river valleys


right and left of the chain of Forez are filled with fresh-water deposits of


the upper Tertiary, and, on the Allier especially, with tlie products of recent
volcanos.


The soutliem Miay’ differs completely in structure. It opens north-
west of Montpellier between Le Vigan and Lodeve and extends with an
irregular outline to the north-east as far as Mende, to the north-west into
the region between Lot and Aveyron. This region, surrounded l>y
mountiiins of gneiss and granite, consists of Jurassic limestone forming
plateaux which for the greater part bear the name of Mes Gausses,* The
plateau of Larzac forms its southern part. The whole region of the
Gausses is generally regarded as a ‘Jurassic gulf,’ and the Gevennes and
the Montagne Noire as tlie shores of this gulf 2 . Against this conception,
Iiowever, the steep and bare escarpments of the Gausses, tis well as tlie


' P. Gourret, Constitution geologique du Larzac et des Gausses meridionaux du
Languedoc ; Ann. Sci. geol., 1884, XVI, pp. 1-229, map and plate.

^ G« Fabre, Sur les preuves de la submersion du Mont Lozere a I'epoque jurassique ;
Puli. Soc. g^»ol. de Fr., 1873, 3« ser., T, p. 323.



CB.n\ THE CENTRAL PLATEAU 113

numerous .faults by which they are traversed, suggest a waMiing, The
Gausses are only a downthrown fragment of. the vast Mesozoic covering
which once extended over a gi*eat part of the Central Plateau ^.nd^here
remains preserved. The same explanation applies to the survival of
a patch of Keuper, on the summit of the Souquet in the Cevennes,
at a height of 1,300 meters^.

While the Central Plateau is thus lx)undcd on the north-east, east, and
south by lines of fracture, its extreme western end is seen to dip beneath
the depression of Poitiers; and since the Archaean foundation is visible
in so many places between this western end and the south-eastern part
of the Archaean hills of the Vendt^e and Deux-S^vres near i^iint-Maixent,
which lies opposite to it, it is clear that the superficial covering which
separates the Central Plateau from the mass of Brittany is of very trifling
thickness. ' .

Volcanic masses, such as the Mezen and the eruptive centres between



Fig. 12. Section throtAgh the Anthracite basin of Ohaloniies on the lower Loircy after Fagos^

the Loire and the Allier, the Cantal, Mont Dorc and the volcanos near
Clermont, are superposed on the Central Plateau, but they do not concern
us here, since our object is to determine the direction of the syntactic folds.

Let us begin our description in the west.

An extremely thick band of gneiss and granite runs from the Morbihan
iri a south-easterly direction past Nantes to Partenay and Saint-Maixent.
It is clearly the same as that wdiich becomes visible below Poitiers and
is continued into the Central Plateau. On its northern edge wo observe
a continuous band of Devonian and anthracite-bearing Culm beds, over
100 kilometers in length, which is pinched into the ancient formations. It
begins near Nort, north of Nantes, describes like the Armorican arc a gentle
curve to the north, is cut through obliquely by the Loire near Clialonnes,

} E. DumaB, Statistique ^^ologique, mineralogique, m^tallurgique et paleontologique
du depaitemeni du Gard, 8vo, Paris, 1876, p. 155.

^ A. Burat, Les Houilleres de la France, 8vo, Paris, 1867, atlas, pi. 23, fig. 1.


80LLAS U


114 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [pabtui

and reachoa the outer border of the horst near Doud, 80 uth>west of Saumur.
In this long narrow band the plication of the bods is so intense, that the
same horizon of the Culm, bent back upon itself, actually appears three
times in the same transverse section, and it was for a long time supposed
that the Devonian and anthracite were regularly interbedded. In the
most important exposures the beds converge as they dip steeply down-
wards. Such is the aspect of the crushed extremity of a synclinal fold
as it occurs in the Swiss Alps under the most- extreme conditions of
compression and rolling out. There we meet with Jurassic limestone in
gneiss, here with Devonian and Culm ; the tectonic process is the' same ;
and thus the 'band of anthracite on the lower Loire provides us with the
trend-line of a mountain chain folded to the north with great intensity, and
once undoubtedly of great height.

To the south of the band of granite and gneiss just mentioned, there lies
near Chantonnay and Vouvant the coalfield of the Veilddc ; it- is faulted
down into the gneiss, and is about 60 kilometers long; it strikes also to the
south-east, and, in the midst uf the ancieirt rocks, is accompanied along its
whole length by an isolated strip of Jurassic sediments. Orand-Eury
assigns it to the middle-Carboniferous. Burat observes that the direction of
this Carboniferous inlicr coincides with that of the .south-western border
of the Central Plateau, which is accompanied by a series of small exposures
of Carboniferous; .all of them) like the border- itself, striking to the south-
east and subsequently finding their continuation in the .'coalfield of Aubin ;
this lies transversely across -the region uniting the Montagne Noire with
the Central Plateau, and strikes right into the region of the Causses \

It would thus appear that the south-western lx)rder of the Central
Plateau 'must be regarded as one of the Amiorican trend-lines, but since
according to Grand-Eury these exposures arc younger than the Carboniferous
of the Vendde, and the distance between the two groups is also great, this
question may still be considered as open.

The presence of Variscan trend-lines in the^ Central Plateau is very
clearly marked. The primitive formations may be seen at many places
to the west of the Vosges beneath the Mesozoic covering, as for example on
the Moselle near spinal and at the bottom of many valleys right up to the
neighbourhood of Bourbonnc-les- Bains. To the cast of -the Morvan the
granite also crops out at many places near Sombemon, west of Dijon, and
the exposures indicate a subterranean connexion running from the Vosges
in a south-westerly direction through the Cdte d’Or towards the Central
Plateau.

In the interior of the Central - Plateau a long ‘ line ’ appears as the most
important feature. ■ -


‘ Burat,' op. cit., p. 199.



OH. n]


THE LINE OP DECIZE— MAURIAG


116


Near Decize, on the Loire, a fragment of Carboniferous crops out in
the plain between two faults. It is the forerunner of a long and con-
tinuous series of coalfields, which begin, near Sauvigny on the norfhern
border of the ancient mass 'and extend almost without interruption to
P14aux, south of .Mauriac, south of the Dordogne. This line is 160 kilometers
in length, or if we continue it to Decize, 320 kilometers ; its direction is
N. 16" E. ; Decize lies a veiy little further to- the east, in accordance with



Fia. 13. Jurassic limestme pinched into (he gneiss at Farnigen in (he Mienthal, aftor Baltzer K


the general run of the Variscan arc. ‘ This remarkable arrangement/
wrote £lie de Beaumont in 1841, ‘ may be easily explained if we assume
that the ancient formations have been folded back upon thenjselves, and
that these Carboniferous deposits are only the remains of once much more
extensive Coal-measures which were overpowered by the fold fonned on


^ A. Baltzer, Der mechanische Contact von Gneiss und Kalk im Berner Oberland ;
Beitr. z. geol. Karte der Schweiz, XX, 1880, atlas in folio, pi. x, fig. 1.


116 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [part ra

the surface of the ancient rocks Only a master mind of deep insight
could have arrived at this view. at that early period; we now recognize
a long Variscan trend-line stretching into the more distant and southerly
parts of the Central Plateau.,

In studying more closely the Coal-measures of the Central Plateau we
must now bear in mind that at various parts of its margin, as for instance
around the spur of the Morvan^ as well as towards the south, patches
of Carboniferous occur steeply upturned along the marginal fractures,
lying sometimes in little trough subsidences, sometimes at the base of
downthrown marginal segments, precisely as on the border of the Harz
and on the transverse fracture of the Fichtelgebirgc near Goldkronach.
Among these marginal segments we may doubtless include the coalfield
of Autun oh the eastern border, which, is partly of Permian age. For
a knowledge of the inner structure of the mass, however, only those zones
are of importance which follow definite lines within the mas’s itself.

Many years ago, French geologists believed that an intimate connexion
existed between the older formations of the Vosges and the Central
Plateau. In 1856 Coquand pointed out that the little granite boas of Serre,
near D61e, was a true connecting link between these two great masses, and

* ^Snisis dans la ride.^ Dufr6noy et filie de Beaumont, Explication de la Carte
g^ologiquc de la Prance, 4to, Paris, II, 1841, p. 625 et seq. filic de Beaumont expressly
included this line in his ^ Systeme du Rhin,' but he understood by this term not the
direction of the folds of the Rhine mountains, but of the Rhine fractures, which cut the
strike at an acute angle. The curve of the great arc brings the trend-lines of the folds •
themselvejs into the same direction in the Central Plateau as the fractures present on the
Rhine. But the truth of the comparison with the infolded synclinals* of th6 Alps
appears from the fact that in one of the many small bands of the Carboniferous
formation which lie outside thjs main line, at Langcac on the Allier, not only does the
Carboniferous formation of the border dip beneath the gneiss, as happens often enough,
but the gneiss lies for a great distance upon the Carboniferous. According to Amiot’s
description the overthrust mass of gneiss has a length of one kilometer, and attains
a breadth of 500-600 meters ; one shaft traversed 36, another 80 meters of gneiss,
before it reached the Coal-measures, which however are not inverted. For this reason it
has been thought that this superposition must be explained by a landslip, but not
every overthrust shows the inverted, and at the same time the normal succession ;
Tournaire, Note sur la constitution gcologique du dopartement de la Haute-Loire et
sur les revolutions dont ce pays a ete le theatre, Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1869, 2^ s^r.,
XXVI, p. 1122, and Amiot, Bassin houiller de Langeac, in £tudes des Gites mindraux,
Ministere des Travaux publics, 4to, Paris, 1881, p.. 313, atlas in folio, last plath,
sections no. 1 and no. 10. The tectonic division of the Carboniferous into two series
has been emphasized by Douvilld in Compt. Rend, sur les terrains houillers des bords du
Rhin, LXXrV, 1872, pp. 1323 1325.

* T. Ebray, Nullite du systeme de soiildvement du Morvan,. Bull. Soc. geol. do Fr.,
1867, 2® ser., XXIV, pp. 717 -721 ; Michel Ldvy, Note sur le terrain houiller des environs
de Montreuillon, le long de la bordure occidentale du Morvan, op. cit., 1879, 3® ser.,
VII, pp. 914“919 ; in an essay on the Alpine faults, Ebray says : ‘ C’est dans Panalyso
des failles que doit se trouver la theorie de la formation des montagnes,' op. cit., 1867,
2® sdr., XXIV, p. 403.



OH. n] THE VOSGES AND CENTRAL PLATEAU 117

that a continuous line of dislocation might be followed from the southern
end of the Vosges into the Central Plateau.

About the same time Foumct observed that the axis of Mont Saint*
Vincent, an Archaean range which reaches the valley of the Sadne with
’ a north-easterly direction west of Chalon-8ur-Sa6ne, may be followed
between the Doubs and the Oignon past Ddle into the neighbourhood
of Belfort, and that the disturbances which produced the mountain folds in
Sadne-et-Loire probably made their effect felt across the Serre near Ddle
as far as Giromagny in the Vosges. Foumet speaks of a chaifi/e Gib&tmo-
Voagienne as opposed to the Jura mountains and the Ea^terel, and even to
the Black Forest *.

. The direction of this line is south-west to ,north-cast. ' Between
Giromagny and Belfort a fragment of Rothliegende forms the southern
end of the Vosges. It is accompanied near Ronchamps by a small exposure
of Carboniferous, recalling the margittal fragments of the Morvan^the Harz
and so many other horsts. From this neighbourhood a series of faults
runs to the south-west, and causes a zone of Trias to crop out for a long
distance between the Jurassic plateaux. Further to the south-west this
dislocation or scries of dislocations, which, as it happens, forms the
European watershed over the whole of this distance, coincides with the
steeper south-eastern border of the granite Ixos of the Serre ; still further
to the south-west it coincides with a group of great disturbances running
to the south-west, which for a distance of 60 kilometers intersect obliquely
the southern prolongation of the Morvan and strike across from the valley
of the SaOne into that of the Loire. These south-westerly lines bound the
impprtant pinched-in Carboniferous zones of Blanzy and Creuzot, which
are separated from one another by a trough subsidence between parallel
south-westerly fractures ; in this the Carboniferous has been let down more
than 800 meters, as is &hown by borings. These lines reach the valley
of the Loire near Digoin, and in the same direction on the other side of the
valley another outcrop of workable Coal-measures occurs near Bert; this
is let down with the same south-westerly strike, at right angles to the
direction of the most northerly part of the Forez. Grand-Eury, it is true,
has shown that the Coal-measures of Bert are not of Carboniferous, but
Permian age, and they are consequently not the direct continuation* of the
Coal-measures of Blanzy and Creusot ; but the correspondence in position

* H. Coqnand, M^moire g^ologique sur Texistence du terrain permien ct du repre-
sentant du Grfes vosgien dans le depaitement de Sadne-ct-Loirc et dans les montagnes
de la Serre (Jura), Bull. Soc. g4ol. de Fr., 1856, 2* sen, XIV, pp. 13-47, pi. i, in
particular p. 40 ; J. Foumet, De I’extension des terrains houillers soUs les formations
secondaires et tertiaires de .diverses parties de la France, Mem. Ac. Lyon, 1855, V,
pp. 239 et seq, p. 287 ; also by the same, Aper 9 us sur la structure du Jura septentrional,
op. dt., 1861, XI, p. 70 ; see also Joutdy, Orographique du Jura DOlois, op. cit., 1872,
2* sd., XXIX, p. 337 et passim.



118 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [part m

is so dose that we must regard them as the continuation of the Permian
beds overlying the great Carboniferous band on . the right bank of the
Loire

The length of this dislocation, from Bert to the southern extremity
of the Vosges, amounts to about 280 kilometers.

It is important to note that this lino, which may easily be followed
on the geological map, forms the southern end of the Vosges and the
marginal fracture of the little horst on the Scrre, and then cuts right into
the mass of the Central Plateau. As may l)e seen from the brief account
given above it is mainly of post>Permian age, in its north-eastern part
even post-Jurassic, but its relations to the folded Carboniferous zones
of Sa6ne-et-Loire show that the existing dislocation corresponds to the
original strike of the chain, and that it is a true longitudinal dislocation,
like, the great fracture of Saint- A void in the region of the Saar.

£lie de Beaumont designates the southern continuation of the Morvan
the ‘chain of the Tarare.’ Although it is broken oft* on the east by the
great fracture of the Rhone valley, yet it is composed of rocks which strike
to the south-west, and contains zones of Palaeozoic beds, some of theni
bearing anthracite, wliich follow the same direction^. The coalfield of
Saint-£tienne also extends transversely across the chain, and its strike is
not es.sentially difi’erent.

It is not necessary to cite further details. The lines Dccize — Sauvigny
— Montaigu — Mauiiac and Belfort — Serre — Blan/^y — Digoin — Bert, as well
as the general strike of the zones of the Morvan and the Tarare, show that
the whole eastern part of the Central Plateau, together with the volcanic
regions as far down as the Dordogne, belongs to the Variscan arc, and that
the arcuate ranges towards the middle of the syntaxis show a tendency
to describe a more acute angle, that is to say a sharper curve, and to pass
from a south-west to a south-south-west direction.

The manner in which the Armorican system enters the Central Plateau
is not so clearly marked, but the position of the mountain ranges of the
Vendee, and their vi.sible continuation below Poitiers, leave little room for
doubt that the smaller western part of the Central Plateau belongs tor this
.system.

If we now piece together the fragments thus found, we see that the
syntaxis of the Armorican and Variscan ranges runs right across France.
The syntaxis of the overfolded outer .borders takes place between Douai
and Valenciennes. Further to the south these ranges must once have
encountered each other a little east of Paris, their inner branches joining

' Gran4-Eury, Flore carbonifere du ddpartem^nt de la Loire, 4to, Paris, 1877, II,
p. 511.

* £lie de Beaumont, Explication de la Carte gdologiqne, II, p. 152.



CH. n] THE ALPS AND PYRENEES 119

at a more acute angle. much further to the south, near the head'Waters
of the Dordogne.

The great ancient ranges have been levelled down, broken up, and sunk
in. .It is only with difficulty that we trace by means of the pinched-
in ends of the synelinals the position of the great folds by which they
were built up. But over these fragments in the south-east of England and
the north of Friince the ancient folding foixje reawakened after the
collapse, and pi'oduc'ed the posthumous ranges of the Weald, the isle
of Wight, and the Pays de Bray ; . while over the ancient mountains in the
east were formed the Cretaceous .synclinals of the Sudetes. In Central
Europe another phenomenon occurred. Here, too, more recent movements
of folding took place, following the old directions. But these did not find
expression above the ancient fragmentary arcs; they were dammed back
by the steep fractured margins of' the segments left in position or less
deeply sunk down. Thus the arcuate folds of the Jura, which deviate but
little from the Variscan direction, run pa.st the southern end of the Vosges,
where they are checked by the Serre, and beyond the Serre lies Jurassic
table-land \ In the same way the course of the whole outer border of the
Alps is predetermined by the position of the forelying segments.

The map of Europe shows us even more. 2%e existing contrast between
the Alps and the Pyrenees is the same as that which once existed between
the Armorican ami the Variscan mountains.

Our knowledge- of the relations of the Alps to the Pyrenees has’ been
greatly increased of late years by the efforts of French geologists, "and
particularly by the investigations of Marcel Bertrand in Provence, which
have rectified many previous views: the most important result is the
pi'oof obtained by Bertrand that the mass of Hyferes (I, PI. Ill, l ) is not
a horst serving as a buttress and comparable to the Central Plateau, but
part of an independent range folded by a force directed towards the north.

We will now trace thfe course of the outer folds from Geneva to the
Mediterranean on the map dra'wn up by Carez and Vasseur*.

In the first place it may .be observed that according to Bourgeat’s
observations the folds of the Jura mountains between the valley .of Ain '
and lake Geneva show inversion of the beds seven times in succession,
possibly owing to the resistance offered by the Serre near D61c Then as
the curve of the Jura mountains gradually flattens out, the folds* assume
towards the south, in the direction of lake Bourget, an almost duo north
and south strike; but from Chamb^ry onwards they again turn to the
south-south-west, i.e. they again advance towards the plain- <5f the Rhone

* joinrdy, tom. cit., p. 376.

’ 6. 'Vaaseur et L. Carez, Carte g6ologique de la France, Sheets IX and XII.

’ Bonrgeat, Sur .la repartition -des renrersementB de terrains dans la region du Jura
comprise entre Geneve et Poligny ; Compt. Rend., 1886, CII, pp. 563-565.



120 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [part ik

•

valley ; the caiose of this deflexion lies in the interior of the chain where
the mighty granite mass of the Pelvoux juts out in strong relief. The
curve .in which the folds bend round this mass becomes continually
broader; passing from the south-south-westerly dii'ection, they run.finit
from north to south, then to south-east, until finally ridges appeal: south of
the Pelvoux, which strike due east to west, almost perpendicular to the,
main direction of the Alps, and yet they correspond only to the independent
girdle of the south side of this mass. These transverse ridges, which
include the Ventoux and the Montagnes de la Lure, do not again join the
outer border of the principal chain of the Alps. A long tongue of Miocene
deposits, penetrating the range west of Digno, accentuates still more
sharply the independence of the Pelvoux ; beyond it, forming a new arc,
for the greater part also convex to the south, begin the outer folds of the
Maritime Alps, which, closely crowded together, reach the sea near Nice
■ with a fresh deflexion of the strike to the south.

Thus we see first the arc of the Jura flatten out near lake Bourget.
Then the girdle of the Pelvoux advances independently, to terminate
towards the south in transverse chains, and we are reminded of the fact
•that the Pelvoux represents the extremity of the granitic outer chain
which proceeds from Mont Blanc. Finally the outer border of the
Maritime Alps appears, also accompanied by . transverse chains, which turn
first to the south-south-west and then south to the sea.

This arrangement naturally gives rise to a fairly complicated structure
in rile several chains. Leenhardt and Kilian have recently described the
transverse chain of Ventoux-Lure; it is on the whole an anticlinal, cut-
through for the greater part by a longitudinal master fault, by which the
northern limb is thrown down \

The chain of Ventoux-Lure slopes away gently to the •south, and is
followed in this directioil, between the Durance and the Rhone, by a new
transverse chain, the LCljcron; in the we.steni continuation of this lies the
chain of the Alpines, which terminates near Arles.

The approximately east to west strike- is continued up to the chain of
* Sainte-rBaume, east of Marseilles ; which, as Bertrand has shown, is com-
pletely overfolded to the north for a distance of 15 kilometers. Within
this chain however, that is, towards the south, there follows another and
yet more mighty overthrust, which begins in the neighbourhood of Saint-
Cyr, and further to the east, near Le Beaiisset, north-west of Toulon, is

* F. Leeahardt, ^tude geologique de la region du mont Ventoux, 4to, Montpellier et
Paris, 1883, 273 pp., maf> ; W. Kilian; Note prcliminuirc sur la structure geologique de
la Montagne de Lure, Basses-Alpcs, Compt. Rend., 1886, CII, pp. 1407-1409 ; and Note
geologique sur la Chaine de Lure, Fcuille des Jcunes Naturalistos, Paris, 1887, XVII,
pp. 48-55, section. The position ol this chain led me to assign it to the girdle of the
Privoux ; Kilian compares it i^ith the more southerly transverse chains.



CH.n] SYNTAXIS WITH THE HYilRES CHAIN 121

finally carried so far that a completely crushed mass of Trias is driven over
the upper Cretaceous, with a horizontal displacement of at least 6 kilo-
meters, as estimated by Bertrand \ We are now in that independent folded
' range, mentioned above, to which belong, according to all appearances, all
the heights from the mouth of the Rhone, to Antibes.

A very complicated syntaxis thus occurs in the south-east of France ;
folding movements approach one another, directed on the south border
of the Pelvoux from north to south, on the south border of the
Maritime Alps likewise from north to south, and fuilihcr on, along the
Var, from east to west, then on the outer border of the chain of Hyferes
from south to north and on the Var from west to east. This gives rise to
a general folding of the intervening land with a very variable degree of
intensity, ■ resulting in the formation of chains of heights, such as the
Alpines and the Leberon, in the more open parts of the syntactic region,
and to an ever closer crowding and crashing of the convergent folds, as the
lx)rder of the Alps and that of the chain of Hyeres approach one imother
from Castellano to the Var.

Bertrand justly considers the Maures or the chain of Hyeres as an
important and independent link standing in the space which at present,
separates .the Pyrenees fi*om the chain of tlie Alps. It is evident that the
Alps and the Pyrenees do not approach each other in a simple V-shaped
syntaxis. It is clear also that on the south side of the Pelvoux and the
Maritime Alps the folding force, which elsewhere in the Alps is always
directed to the north, turns just as completely to the south as it does in the
extremity of the Carpathians in the .south of Transylvania. Perhaps we
may even succeed in showing that the syntaxis on the lower Yar is another
though minor example of that direct opposition of the tangential move-
ments, which is displayed on so grand a scale between the Himalaya and
the Burmese chains on the Brahmaputra (I, p. 452).

Thus several arcs crowd together in the south of France. The junction
with the Pyrenees is not to be seen, but the plan of the mountain chains
lies before rfs, and we observe the remarkable likeness of the younger to.
the older mountains.

From this it results that the prevailing tangential movement to the
north, which is characteristic of the Alps and Pyrenees, affected Northern
Europe, as far as the Caledonian folds extend, before the Devonian, and •
the whole of Central Europe before the Carboniferous. If we consider
the ancient syntaxis in the Central Plateau of France and its position
between the Alps and the Pyrenees, we are even justified in speaking of

^ M. Bertrand, Coupes de la chaine dc la Sainte-Beaume, Provence, Bull. Soc. g4ol. de
Fr., 1885, ser., XIII, pp. 115-150, map ; and R6le dos actions m^caniques en Provence,
explication de Panomalie stratigraphiqiie du Beausset, Gompt. Rend., 13 Juin 1887,
CIV, p. 1735.



122 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [paihfiii

the Variacan Alps and the Armorican Pyrenees : understanding by these
expressions the older pre-Permian chains.

'In the Jtarde, as we haVe said, an older Europe stands disclosed
(I, p. 203). We arc now in a position to trace its leading features.
A great folded system of lofty mountains— proceeding from Central France,
out of a region indicated at its northern end by Douai and Valenciennes,
and at its southern end by the upper course of the Dordogne — runs in arc-
like curves to nortli-west and west-north-west. This system embraces the
west and north of France, the south of England and the narrow zone in
South Wales and Ireland. In Brittany, Cornwall, and Bantry bay, its
folds may still be seen running out towards the Ocean, beneath which their
last ruins lie concealed.

From the same region of syntaxis other great ranges run in arcs to the
north-north-east and north-east; these comprise all that part of the existing
continent comprised between the southern end of the Black Forest to the
coalfields on the Ruhr, the Harz, the Erzgebirge, and the Sudetes.

The ancient chaips collapse and new terrestrial folds approach them
from the south. The Pyrenees and Alps follow the old directions, and
adapt themselves to Uk*. outlines of the ancient fragments still projecting
which check their course. The Carpathians however, restricted by no
fractured liorder, ride over the ancient mountains.

Thus it happens that in the syntaxis of the Central Plateau of France
the chief tectonic lines converge towards the south, but in northern and
central Bolicmia, which lie within the arc, towards the north ; so that in
the former case the characteristic figure is a V, in the latter the same
inverted A. For the long lines of fracture of tlie Silurian trough of
Bohemia, with which Krejci has made us acquainted^ and the fault at the
■ foot of the Erzgebirge, as well as the line of fracture of the Daubrawa as
far as Elbe-Teinitz and the faults at the foot of the Riesengebirge, are
longitudinal lines running approximately in the same direction as the
fragment of arc which they affect.

Between these arcs, however, there lies, strange and unexplained, the
mountain . fragment of Bioa, striking to the north-west and folded
according to Giimbel to the north-east, namely the Bavarian forest with
the south-western marginal district of Bohemia and opposite to this the
great gneiss basin of the Waldviertel in lower Austria with its strike
directed to the south-south-west. Whether these are the traces of a still
older syntaxis, or what other significance they possess, further investigation
must decide.

10. The. Ihei'ian Meseta. In an earlier passage we distinguished, In

* F. Becke, Die krystallinischen Schiefer des niederOsterreichiBcben Waldviertels ;
Siteunpsber. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1881, LXXXIV, p. 546 ; cf. also the earlier observations
of Holgor, Gzjzek, Lipoid, and others.



CH.n] THE IBEBIAN MESETA 123

accordance with the views of MacFherson, three elements in the Iberian
peninsula, namely: the Meseta, composed chiefly of ancient rocks; the Betic
cordillera, a folded chain, in the south; and the Pyrenees, also a folded cKain
in the north-east.

The chain ' of folded mountains which forms the noiHih coast of w.estem
Africa swerves completely ixjund in Morocco, from east and west to south-
east and north-west, and finally to south and north, and with this northern
stnke reaches the straits of Gibraltar. At the Kds Torf (cabo Negro) and
near Ceuta, mica schist and ancient clay slate crop out; further to the west,
above T^tuan, Trilobites have been found ; then follows a zone of red
sandstone ; west of this the Mesozoic limestone band of the Jebcl Musa is
continued into the Rock of Gibraltar; still further to the west is Flysch,
which forms cape SparteL This mountain arc closes thp Merliterranean, turns
completely round in Spain to the cast-north -east, runs in this direction up

Alicante, and forms all that part of the country lying south of the Guadal-
quivir. This ip the Betic cordillera, traversed by great flaws (I, p. 227).

Just as the folding of the Alps is checked by the fractured Iwrclers of
the opposing horsts, so the Betic folding is arrested along the Guadalquivir,
and dammed back by the southern Imrder of. the Meseta ; this has been
shown in a convincing manner by MaePherson *.

Near Villa do Bispo on the Atlantic coast, a little to the north of cape
St. Vincent, the southera edge .of the Meseta is visible; Mesozoic bods
accompany it in the south. It runs fairly parallel to' the coast through
Algarve to tlie mouth of the Guadiana, accompanied so far by the
Mesozoic zone; thence it stretches almost in a straight line to the east-
north-east a long way into the interior, forming the northern slopes of the
valley of the Guadalquivir and at the same time the southern slope of the
sierra Morena further to the east (I, p. 294). The way in which the margin
cuts across the strike of the ancient rocks of the Meseta along the Guadal-
quivir led MaePherson to recognize in it a mighty fracture; this is the
fault of the Guadalquivir.

Calderon’s instructive representation of the structure of the Meseta
and Botella’s geological map show the polyhedral outline and peculiar
configuration of this great horst

1 J. MaePherson, Breve noticia acerca la especial estructura dc la Peninsula Iberica,
An. Soc. Espan. Hist. Nat., 1879, VIII, pp. 5-26 ; and Uniclinal Structure of the Iberian
Peninsula, 8vo, Madrid, 1880. For the transverse fracture in the direction of the strike
on the south border of the Meseta see in particular his little map in the Estudio
geoldgico y petrogrAfico del Norte de la Provincia de Sevilla, Bol. Com. Map. (leol.
Espa^., 1879, V, sheet G ; for the Betic flaws, C. Barrois et A. Offret, Sur la constitution
stratigraphique dela chafne Betique, Compt. Rend., 1886, CII, p. 1341.

^ S. Calderon y Arana, Ehsayo orogenico sobre la meseta central de Espana, An. Soc.
Espan. Hist. Nat., 1885, XIV, pp. 131-172 ; F. de Botclla y dc Homos, Mapa geologico '
de Espana y Portugal, 1 : 2,000,000r fol., Madrid, 1879.



124 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [paothi

•

The fault of the Guadalquivir runs down as we have seen, .from the
cast-north-east, passes close to the mOuth of the Guadiana, and is ccmtinued
through Algarve into the vicinity of cape St. Vincent. The Culm, which
forms the south-westeni part of the Meseta in southern Po^ugal, dipi^
towards the Atlantic Oc^n beneath recent Tertiary beds, As may be
seen on the map by Uibeiro and Delgado, but along the coast itself it again
crops out from under these beds. It is only further to the north, from
central Alcmtejo onwards, that the western outlines of the Meseta are more
clearly defined. Its rocks, striking to the north-west, advance in sharply
outlined ridges, which run in rias lines, as it were, into the Portuguese
plain ; as examples, wc may mention in particular the granite ranges of
Evora. Near Tancos on the Tagus the boundary again becomes rectilinear
and sharply marked ; it runs thence to the north-north- west, a little to the
cost of Thomar and Coimbra, and roaches the sea not far south of Oporto
From this place onwards the rocks of the Meseta form all the iron-
bound 'coast of the north-west far across to the Asturias, where the
Cretaceous mountains of Oviedo, and then of Santander and Bilbao, join
the Pyrenees with an east to west strike. The north-eastern edge of the
Meseta, liowever, is bordered by a broad zone of downthrown Mesozoic
patches which extend from Cuenca to the gulf of Valencia and .cabo de
la Nao.

The structural peculiarities of this great horst are especially apparent
in the north-west. Fortunately there is a series of excellent treatises on
this region ; we will only mention those of Wilhelm Schulz and Charles
Barrois. Barrois in particular has described in a masterly manner the
chief structural features of Galicia and Asturias, and the remarks which
follow are borrowed from his monograph

The most ancient rocks crop out in Galicia; these are mica schists,
green schists and serpentine, as well as gneiss and intrusive granite. They
strike almost north to south, but with a gentle curve to the west ; in the
north of Galicia the beds dip to the north-west, in the centre to the west,
and in the south to the south-west. The dip of the beds is thus directed
beneath the arc and towards the exterior so to speak. On the boundary of
Asturias, Cambrian deposits begin, broken through in places by granite
bosses, which play a passive part in the movements of the mountains.

^ C. Ribeiro e .T. F. Nery Delgado, Carta geologica de Portugal, 1 : e500,000, fol.,
Lisboa, 1876. The small granite masses near Cintra do not belong to the Meseta, but,

• according to Choffat, are of post-Cenomanian age ; P. Ghoffat, Age du granit de Cintra,
Jom. Sci. Math. Ac. R. Lisb., 1884, XXXIX.

* G. Schulz,’ Descripcion geoldgica de la provincia del Oviedo, Asturias, 4to, Madrid,
1858, and atlas; C. Barrois, Recherches sur les terrains anciens des Asturics et de la
Galicie, Mem. Soc. g^oL Nord, II, Lille, 1882, 630 pp. and plate. Among earlier works
must be especially mentioned A Paillette, Recherches sur quelqucs-unes des roches qui
constituent la province des Asturies, Bull. Soc. gcol. de Fr., 1845, *2^ ser., II, pp. 439-482.



THE BASIN OP ASTURIAS


126


ca.n]

The dip of the Cambrian beds is precisely the same as that of the older
rocks of Qalicia, that is beneath the outer arc, and the Archaean rocks are
consequently driven over the Cambrian. Within the Cambrian, howe*^er,
there follow conformably, with the same dip, a Silurian, a Devonian; and
finally a Carboniferous arc, always with inverted bedding and increasing
constriction of the arc. So that on the Rio dc Pervia the northern branch of
the Devonian arc reaches the sea with a north-easterly strike, and 'the
Carboniferous is compressed into an ellipse striking from west to east.
The mighty curve of a great range is thus visible, and within the curve
imbricated structure. Towards the west, in Galicia, the most ancient rocks
form the outer arc ; towards the east, in Asturias, the Carboniferous beds.



Fig. 14. 'The Basin of AsiuriaSf after Schulz and Botella.

On the left the Archaean region (granite, gneiss, and ancient schists) ; next to the jight,
Cambrian and Silurian zone cb. sil,, with masses of granite 7 ; then the Devonian zone d, and
the infolded Carboniferous limestone and Culm ca, and the Coal-measures c, which are partly
folded into the basin, and partly overlap it transgrossively ; m transgressive Mesozoic patches ;
aUuv, alluvial plain of Leon.

which are the youngest, lie in the middle of the arc, now much narrowed
by the approximation of its branches Tliere is a general overthrusting
towafds the interior. The northern branches strike out towards the bay
of Biscay ; the Archaean rocks are directed north to north-north-east, the
Cambrian and Silurian, north-north-east, and the Devonian, noi;th-ca8t.

This great concave curve embraces the whole series of the older rocks,
innlmling the middle part of the Coal-measures. It is a remarkable
circums^ce, however, that outside these concentric basins the highest
.divisions of the Coal-measures occur in transgression. These transgressive



126 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [PARira

beds, it is true, have also been folded subsequently,, and in the ‘same
direction ; Barrois recognizes ‘ the fact of the recurrence of the same move-
inents at different epochs

In the province of Oviedo there now follows unconformably the whole
Mesozoic series, together with the Nuinmulitic limestone, striking to the
east and folded to the north; it is regarded as the western part of the
‘ Pyrenees and does not concern us here.

It is the outer part of the basin of . Asturias, and in particular the
mountains of Qalicia, which run down to the south-south>east and south-
east into the great Meseta. A largo number of separate works by the
Geological Survey of Spain, now making such admirable progress, show
us the further course of the rocks in the same direction. In places, it is
true, patches of Cenomanian rest on the ancient mass, os in Bohemia, while
.the central and eastern part of the Me^ta are covered far and wide by
Tertiary fresh-water beds. Notwithstanding this we observe the following
facts. The ranges running down from Galicia through Tras-os-Montes and
Beira Alta are formed of ancient folded systems accompanied by great
exposures of granite. The direction is south-south-east to south-east. To
the south of Salamanca a mighty branch is given off in virgation to the east
and east-north-east. It consists chiefly of granite and gneiss, and forms the
sierra de Gredos and sierra de Guadarrama. The other ranges, however,
continue their course to the south-east, and form a number of almost
parallel folded ranges of great- length, closely packed and in many cases
slightly convex to the soyth-west. They consist of Archaean and
Palaeozoic rocks, including a part of the Carboniferous, as in Asturias.
The course of this arc may be best indicated by a line drawn from Oporto
to the south-east past Alcantara, then a little west of C&ceres, past Don
Benito, then, with a slight bend, through Pozzoblanco to the sierra Morena.
This line is especially characterized by long granite ridges. Thus with
a strike directed in general to the south-east, the folded ranges of the
Meseta reach the Guadalquivir, where they are broken off transversely, as
we have already seen.

The bands of granite in this intensely folded mountain system were
for the most part intruded, according to MaePherson, during the Carboni-
ferous period. Here also the upper beds of the Carboniferous lie uncon-
formably on the folded region, as in Asturias, and the ^neral structure of
these mountains thus dates, like that of the Armorican and Yariscan
systems, from the last days of the Carboniferous period.

These folded ranges striking to the south-east are now continued into
the south of Portugal and form the whole south-west of the Me^ta. They
are the same ranges which have already l)een describied as advancing with
a north-west trend into the Portuguese plain in Alemtejo, like the granite
• ’ Barrois, H^m. Soc. g4ol. Nord, 1882, op. cit., p. 604.



127


0H.n] 9END OP THE ASTURIAN BASIN

of Evdra; Further south, the strike turns somewhat mpre to the west-
north-west, and in tliu south of Alemtejo, between .Beja and Mertola, where,
according to Delgado, the prevailing dip is to' the north-east, imbricated
structure would seem to occur.

In the Spanish province of Huelva lie the famous mines of Rio Tinto ;
the strike is N. 70° W., and thence, according to Delgado, the copper pyrites
. may be followed for a distance of 145 kilometers, to Aljustrel in Portugal,
the strike gradually turning to N. 50° W. If, however, we include the
pyrites of Caveira near Grandola, then the length of the band would
amount to 183 kilometers ^

These great arcs of the south-western Meseta appear in fact to have
been folded towards the south-west, and MacPhei’son’s assertion therefore
applies to 'them, i.e. that a consideniblc part of the mountain ranges of the
Iberian peninsula has not been thrust to the north like the Alps, but to the
south like the folded ranges of North Africa.

We now find ourselves eonfronted by a number of the most difficult
questions.

Let us first consider the relation of these ares to the Betic Cordillera.

The older folds reach the fault of the Guadalquivir with a south-easterly
strike ; the Betic folds stinke -to the east-north-east, or almost at . right
• angles to them. • In' precisely the sahie way, with a transverse strike, the
Carpathians approach the Smletes. Here, on the Guadalquivir, however, it
is quite clear that it is not the direction of the older folds, but that of the
fractured border, which detennines the course of the succce«ling younger
folds.' Beyrich arrived at the same result many years ago in the case of
the Sudetes.

Let us now glance at the position of the Asturian Imsins. These basins
with imbricated structure, which dip beneath the- outer arcs, indicate in any
case the deflexion of a folded range. It is the outer arcs of the southern
flank which we have followed from Oporto up to the Guadalquivir, and
through Alemtejo into the neighbourhood of cape St. Vincent. In just
the same way the younger folded chain, after crossing from Africa, bends
round in Gibraltar to form the Betic cordillera, and if we could make
a horizontal section, some thousands of feet below the western end of the
Mediterranean, we should probably find an arrangement of the rocks
similar to that in the Asturian basins. Between Ceuta and Tangier the
beds run from south to north, at right angles to the straits of Gibraltar,
exactly like the rocks in western Galicia, save that here there is more of
the outer and tess of the inner arc to be seen, while In the noi^h only the
inner arcs aro visible.

Since we know that the mountains of North Africa are only the last

* J. F. N. Delgado, Sobre a exiitencia do terreno Siluriano no Baizo Alemtejo; Mem.
Ac. Sci. Lub., 1876, p. 12, note.



128 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC. OCEAN [PABrra

of the numerous arcs which mark the southern boundary of Eurasia, and
that it is these boundary arcs which retain in Europe the curvature and
foklsng to the south characteristic of Asia, we obtain the following result: —

The bending round of the tvetitemmost mountain range of Eurasia,
where the fdding movements pass from a northerly to a soviherly direction,
takes 'place at p-resent 'near Gihrailar; but towards Uie close of the Carboni-
ferous period wnother great mountain system had pi'eviously arisen, in
ivhich the chxinge in direction of the folding mmement from lunih to south
manifested 'itself in the fdace 'noto occupied by the Asturian baoins, i.e.
about eight degrees of latit'ude 'north of the existing circumflexure.

This ancient chain was subsequently worn down and broken up, and the
new arc was arrested on the Guadalquivir by the fractured border. The
reconstruction of the continent on the old plan is much more clearly
manifest here than in Central Europe. The Pyrenees appear to have
followed the Armorican are, and the Alps the Variscan, simply as a result
of the persistence of the southern thrust acting within the space included
by the residual fragments, but this is not all, and indeed an entirely new
problem now presents itself. For we have here not simply an ancient,
mountain range followed by a new one, folded in the same direction, but
an ancient circumflexure followed by a new circumflexure. The region of
recurvature has been displaced southwards and wo do not find, as between *
the Black Forest and the Jura, folds driven to the north-north-west,
following other folds driven, in precisely the same direction, but along the
fault of the Guadalquivir, the Meseta is formed by that branch of the
ancient mountains which is folded to the south-west, while opposite to it
lies the branch of the Betic cordillera, folded to the north-north-west.

The. question at once suggests itself whether the ancient Iberian rtvnge
is not a fragment of the Armorican arc. In age they correspond ; the rocks
of Asturias resemble those of Cornwall and Brittany, and botti the folded
regions are certainly continued far beneath the sea ; but whether they
meet or unite, and if so in what manner, it is impossible to determiinc.

In the Meseta it is again the upper divisions of the Carboniferous
which correspond with the pejnod of greatest tectonic movement. In the
last century, when Werner drew for the first time the limit between the
'transition fonnations’ (Uebergangsgebirge) and the ‘horizontal fom^
tions’ (Flbtzgebirge) he had no other line of demarcation in mind than that
afforded by the great discordance within the Carlxiniferous formation in
Saxony. It is with the same meaning that the term ‘ Flbtzgebirge ’
appears again on Los.sen’s map of the Harz. Everywhere we find this
limit. The Coal-measures of Ostrau, which form part of the Sudetes, stand
in the same relation to those of Rossitz in Moravia, as those of Sama to the
transgressive CoaJ-measurcs of Tineo in Asturias, and in Nova Septia we
meet with the same limit on the other side of the Ocean.



129


can] PRE-PERMIAN MOUNTAIN RANGES

11. Survey of the pix-Pemiian ranges in ilurope. The original con-
tinuity of the Armorican horsts, or at least of some of them, was, as we have
seen, rightly recognized by English and French geologists many years ^go.
A perception of the continuity of a great part of the Variscan horsts also
is evident enough in Lossen's instructive work on the nature of the
mountain cores which lie between the Ardennes and the Altvater. This
treatise also shows us how impossible it must have been in the time of
L. von Buch — when observation was not yet sufficiently advanced to
distinguish lines of fault from the strike of the folds — to form any con-
ception of the structure of the land which would correspond to the existing
state of our knowledge. A large ‘parfr of the Armorican liorsts have been
grouped together by Penck also under the name of. the Central German
Alps,’ with recognition at the same time of their Carlx)niferous age h

The Variscan chain makes its appearance first on the northern border
of the Carpathians and strikes to the north-east and north-north-east in
Moravia, as though it ha<l here experienced a deflexion similar to that of
the end of the Carpathians, and as though some trace of the tectonic
relations of the Iberian mountains were about to recur. Then the range,
as it forms the Sudetic arc, turns forward to the north, north-north-west,
and finally north-west, and so passes to the Elbe.

Next follow with a north-east to east-north-east trend tlie mountains
of Saxony, namely the Erzgebirge and Fichtelgebirge, the Saxon folds up
to Leipzig and those folded fragments which are preserved in the Thiiringer-
wald and Frankenwald. These all belong to the inner Variscan zones.
Their continuation forms the Black Forest, the Vosges, and the exposures
of older formations in the Odenwald and Spessart ; the strike of the folds
is directed to tlie north-east, and they proceed, to the south-west, past Dole
to the Central Plateau of France. Meanwhile the strike gradually passes
over from north-east and south-west to north-north-east and south-south-
west, as is clearly shown by the patches of Coal-measures which occur
pinched into the gneiss as far as the upper Allier. The outer zones of the
arc are visible, apart from the Sudetes, in the Harz and in the Devonian
mountains of the Rhine, froin the Taunus up to the Coal-measures in the
north. The overthrust outer border is only to be seen between Valenciennes
and the neighbourhood of Aix-la-Chapelle and in a part of the coalfields on
the Ruhr.

The Armorican range rises in the western part of the Central Plateau ;
in the Vendee, Brittany, and the Cotentin, it trends first west-north- west and

I

^ K. A. Lessen, Ueber das Auftreten metamorphischer Gestcinc in den alien
pal&ozoischen Gebirgskernen von den Ardennen bis zum Altvatergebirge, und Uber den
Zusammenhang dieses Auftretens mit der Faltenverbiegung (Torsion), Jahrb. k. preuss.
geol. Landesanst, 1884, pp. 56-112 (on torsion cf, here note 2 on p. 101) ; A. Penck, in
L&nderkunde des Erdtheils Europa, published by A. Kirchhoff, 1886, 1, p. 313.

K


SOLLAS II



130 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [paethi

then, as it proceeds towards the Ocean, more and more to the west. The
outer zones are visible in the Devonian reef near Boulogne, in Cornwall
andDevon, and in the southernmost parts of Wales and Ireland. The over-
thrust outer border may be traced in a west-north-west direction from
Douai to Calais. The posthumous folds of the Weald indicate the con-
tinuation of the range. The overthrust outer border is next again seen on
the north side of the Mendips; it strikes across the Bristol channel towards
St. Bride’s bay in the south-west of Wales, and thence through the south
of Ireland. The trend turns, towards the Atlantic Ocean, from west-north-
west to west, and finally, near the sea, almost to west-south-west.

The Iberian fragment is thrown into folds which trend in a gentle curve
from Galicia and the north of Portugal to the sciuth-south-efiist and south-
east, and with frequent ovcrfolding to the south-west; but they are abruptly
cut oft* along the Guadalquivir, opposite the Bctic cordillera. They give
off a branch which forms the sierra de Guadarrama, but in Asturias their
inner parts bend round so completely that a peculiar basin-like structure is
produced, with the older members situated on the exterior of the basin, but
thrust over the younger members of its interior in great flakes. Thus
the Iberian fragment reaches the sea, striking in Galicia to the north
and north-north-east and in Asturias to the north -north-east,’north- east, and
finally east-north-east. Its connexion with the Armorican range is not known.

It thus appears that towards the close of the Carboniferous period great
mountain ranges arose in Central Europe, which were folded towards the
north, like the existing Alps. They then collapsed and their fractured
borders resisted the development of the new folds, which now form the
Betic cordillera, the Pyrenees, the Alps, and the Carpathians. That
fragment which still exhibits the ancient syntaxis, the Central Plateau
of France, now separates 'the arcs of the Alps from the Pyrenees. The
basin structure of Asturias is repeated in the curvature of the chain near
Gibraltar.

In this way Central and Western Europe were reconstructed for the
second time.

12. European islands. The significance of the islands of the Atlantic
and of the archipelagos of Europe is apparent from the facts which have
already been described.

The Orkrteys and the Shetland islands are parts of the pre-Devonian
Caledonian range which strikes towards Norway.

The inner //eftriefes represent in part comparatively recent volcanos:
the outer Hebrides together with the adjacent coast of Scotland correspond
in position and structure with the Lofoten islands and the east coast of the
Vest fjord.

WaigatscJi and Nova Zemhla are fragments of an independent folded
range which is syntactic with the northern Ural at Eonstantinov-Eamen.



ISLANDS OF -EUROPE


131


CH.1I]

Spitzbergen together with the neighbouring islands up to Franz-Joaef
Land and Bear.idand are relics of a plateau with Devonian ' beds lying
horizontally, as in Scotland.

Jan Mayen is of recent volcanic origin.

The Faeroes are remnants of ancient volcanic flows with intercalations
of Tertiary plant-bearing beds.

The great island of Icdand, finally, presents an older volcanic sub-
structure similar to that of the Faeroes, on which recent volcanos are
superposed. The substructure contains plant-bearing beds, and is of
middle Tertiary age. This part corresponds to the similar series of the
Faeroes and Greenland. The subsequent eruptive formations, however,
belong to different periods, as is indicated hy the distribution of the glacial
markings, and an intervening inundation of the island. The volcanic
activity must have persisted from the michlle Tertiary period down to tlie
present day.

Many investigators have visited Iceland since Eggert Olafssen and
Bjarne Povelsen made their observations on the natural history of the
island, between the years 1752 and 1757^. But, not to speak of the great
difficulties due to climate, the impracticability of the country, and its extent,
these passing visits were the less likely to lead to a clear insight into the
structure of the islancl since the investigators as a rule concentrated their
attention on general questions concerning the nature of the volcanic
phenomena. But now, since an Icelander,- Thoroddsen of Reykjavik, has
devoted himself to the geology of his country and, with as much per-
severance as ability, is tracing out, year after year, the fundamental
features of its structure, the facts are beginning to appear with ever-
increasing clearness. At the same time it becomes more and more apparent
that the ancient volcanic substructure is traversed like Scania and Spitz-
bergen by fractures which cut it up into horsts and troughs, and that with
these fractures the more recent manifestations of volcanic activity are
connected. Permission has been kindly granted me to borrow from
Thoroddsen’s as yet unpublished observations the following information: —
Not only is Snaefeirs Sysla, the great peninsula half-way down the west
coast, a true horst bounded on the* north and south by Ihies of fracture,
and not only is Faxa Fjordr on the south side, together with the depression
which continues it into the interior, an area of subsidence — facts which have
been already mentioned by Keilhack — but Breidi Fjordr in the north of

^ Eggert Olafssen og Bjame Povelsen, Reise igjennem Island, 1752-1757, 2 vols., 4to,
Sor5, 1772 (translated into English, 2 vols., 1800-1805).

2 K. Keilhack, Beitriige zur Geologic dor Insel Island, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges.,
1886, XXXVIII, pp. 376-449 ; on p. 892 there is a transverse section of the fault trough
on the south side of the Skard-sheidi, i. e. on the south side of the great horst of Snaefell.
The communications of Herr T. Thoroddsen, of Reykjavik, I owe to the intervention of



132 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [part in

the peninsula, as well as Hiina Fl<Si on the north coast of Iceland tc^ther
with Steingrines Fjdrdr, also owe their origin to subsidepces, which have
evidently had the most pronounced effect in determining the contour of the
table-land. The southern range of Beykjanes is also a horst, on both sides
of which movemeats appear to have occurred in quite recent times.
Nowhere in the south of Iceland do earthquakes occur so frequently as on
the south side of this peninsula.

• Without anticipating further the publication of Herr Thoroddsen’s results,
it may be pointed out that the discovery of these plateau fractures, and the
breaking up of the island into horsts, steps, and troughs, while of great
local interest, suggests questions of a more general kind. In the first place
we sec in the progress of these 'subsidences the continuation of the pro-
cesses which have foiTOcd the .surrounding part of the Ocean. Further it
must be borne in mind, that all the middle Tertiary rocks of the sub-
structure contain no organic remains except land plants, and have certainly
l)een formed al)ovo the sea. A little patch of marine deposits found near
Halbjar'warstadir, north of Husavik on the north-east coast, is placed by
Morch on the horizon of the English Crag ’ : in addition, glacial or post-
glacial shell beds which attain a height of about 200 feet are met with in
many places. The island was, therefore, paidiially inundated at a later
time. Thus in Iceland the question is very definitely suggested whether
the movements of the solid land are .suificient to explain the displacements
of the coast lino or whether we must invoke independent changes in the
level of the sea.

13. Western Africa. The scant observations hitlierto made on the
.north-west coast of Africa leave us free to suppose that Tertiary deposits
such as we have studied on the west coast of Spain may exist here also.
From lat. 29’ 30' to 28’ N. Duro found the coast formed entirely of beds of
light-coloured sandstone, undermined by the sea. Similar beds exist in the
Wady Draa. Scaling the clifts along the coasts we see before us an
illimitable plain \ The conclusion that the middle Tertiary sea covered
the western Sahara seems irresistible and the observations of Lenz on his
journey to Timbuctoo accord well with such a view.

The adjacent islands are volcanic and some of them bear still active
cratersL An independent series underlies them. L. von Buch distinguishes
in the Canary islands a foundation of older volcanic rocks on which the
more recent volcanos were seated. We owe to Doclter the unexpected

Profeasor Nathorst of Stockholm ; cf. also T. Thoroddsen, Eine Lavawttate im Inncm
lalanda, Peterm. Mitthcil., 1885, XXXI, pp. 285, 327, pi. xiv.

* 0. A. L. Mfirch, On tho Mollusca of the Crag formation of Iceland ; Geol. Mag., 1871,
VIII, pp. 391-400.

* C. F. Duro, Exploracidn de una parto de la Costa Nonieste de Africa; Bol. Soc.
geogr. Madrid, 1878, IV, pp. 184-199.



CH.n]


ISLANDS OFF WEST AFRICA


133


discovery that Majo, one of the Cape de Verd islands^ is formed to a large
extent not of volcanic rocks but of slate, and limestone, the remnant of an
ancient continent ^ We have already pointed out that marine deposits of
middle Tertiary age, havjng the characters of the first Mediterranean stage,
contribute to the structure of Madeira and Porto Santo, as well as of Santa
Maria, the most southerly of the Azores (I, p. 288).

Remote from all these islands, in space as in the nature of their rocks,
are the five black reefs lying far out to sea in lat. 0" 55' N, which are
designated together as Saint Paul’s rocks. Darwin did not regard them
as volcanic islands, and Renard has shown, from the specimens brought
home by the Challenger Expedition, that they consist of peridotite^.

As regards a very large number of the volcanic islands of the eastern
half of the Atlantic, there is good, reason to suppose that the volcanos stand
on a common foundation. This was the view of L. von Buch and Hartung,
and has been supported by Calderon in a recent review of the question

Of this region we may affirm, with much greater certainty than of the
north, that the visible volcanic islands represent only a small part of
extensive volcanic regions covered l)y the sea. The numerous indications
of submarine activity — such as sudden shocks, eruptions of smoke, or un-
expected shallows, which have been recorded between long. 18® and 26® W.,
especially in the neighbourhood of the equator — led Daussy as early as 1858
to suspect the existence of a submarine eruptive region situated in about
lat. 0® 22' S. and long. 22®' W.^

The leaf-bearing Tertiary beds which appear’ in the Hebrides, the
Faeroes, ‘and in Ireland and everywhere in the north accompanying the
basaltic lavas, are not to be found on these islands. To complete the con-
trast, while the Tertiary beds of the north are never marine, those of the
islands are exclusively so ; Tertiary beds, however, are restricted to some
of the islands already referred to.

Our knowledge of the geological structure of Sehegambia and Guinea
is extremely fragmentary. Gurich’s survey of existing observations sho\\rs,
however, that the same structure which it seemed possible to trace (I, p. 398)
from the far south up to Pungo Andongo (lat. 9® 24' S.) probably prevails
as far as the lower Faleme and the upper Senegal, as well as over a very

' C. Doelter, Die Vulkane der Cap Verden und ihre Producte, 8vo, Gratz, 1882.

* A. Renard, Description litholo^que dcs recifs de Saint-Faul ; Ann. Soc. Beige de
Microscopft, 1882, 53 pp.

^ D. S. Calderon, Edad geoldgica de las Islas Atldnticas, y su rclacidn con los' Con-
tinentes, Bol. Soc. geogr. Madrid, 1884, IX, pp. 377-399 ; see also Milne Edtrai-ds, Compt.
Rend., 1883, XCVII, p. 1389.

* P. Daussy, Note sur I’ezistencc probable d'un volcan sous-marin, situe par environ
0® 20' de lat. sud et 22® 0' de long, ouest, Compt. Rend., 1853, VI, p, 512, reproduced with
a map showing the distribution of the observed shocks, in MallePs fourth Report upon the
facts and theory of Earthquake Phenomena, Rep. Brit. Ass., 1858, p. 20 et seq.



134 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIQ OCEAN [part in

large part of the alluvial river basin of the Djoliba [Niger] and the Binue.
Folded Archaean rocks, fairly various, accompanied here and there by clay
slate of unknown age, form a basis surmovmted by great horizontal masses
of red sandstone. These are frequently broken \ip into table mountains
and do not appear, in the regions studied by Giirich, to exceed a 'height of
300 meters. Giirich is inclined to regard the exposures of Foyaite in the
Los islands, and the olivine gabbro of Freetown (Sierra Leone), as inter-
bedded with the horizontal sedimentary strata ^

These characters recur with marvellous uniformity ; we recognize them
. in the descriptions of the banks of the Congo by Long and Baumann, and
they are clearly shown in Pechuel-Locsclie’s geological map of the western
Congo region. It is near Kalubu, far below Stanley Fool, that the region
of the horizontal red sandstone begins, which extends into the interior
beyond the Pool

To the north of the equator, however, a new element appears, the zone
of middle Cretaceous and Tertiary marine beds, which, as it would now
seem, border almost the whole coast up to the Cunend These wore first
discovered at a few widely separated points by Giebel and Lenz (I, p. 898).
Since then similar Cretaceous beds have been described by Malheiro and
Chofiat in the neighbourhood of Benguela. Here red sandstone, containing
some gypsum, sulphur, and copper, rests upon gneiss, and is followed by
Cretaceous beds ^ Still further to the south, on the coasts of Mossamedcs,
Anchieta describes the Cretaceous and Tertiary sediments as a selvage,
hardly 100 meters high and 20-25 kilometers broad, formed of horizontal
beds which are bounded towards the interior by gneiss *.

On the lower Khuiseb, ancient folded schists strike according to Stapff
north-west and south-east. In Angra Pequeila jointed limestone, some-
times still in thick beds, rests, according to Schenk, on the horizontal sand-
stone which covers the Archaean foundation ; here great plateau fractures
occur, which correspond to the course of the coast and are probably only

^ 6. Giirich, Beiti%e zur Geologic von West-Afrika, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges.,
1887, XXXIX, pp. 96-135 ; see in particular A. Fomel, Le Sahara, 8vo, Alger, 1872,
pp. 23 et seq., and for the coast regions, 0. Lenz, Yerh. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1878,
pp. 52, 119, 148, 168, et passim; also Geologischc Karte von West-Afrika, Peterm.
Mittheil., 1882, pi. i ; C. W. Giimbcl, Beitr&ge zur Geologic dcr Goldkiisto in West-
Afrika, Sitzber. k. bayr. Akad. 1882, pp. 170-196; Chaper, Note sur la gdologie de
la possession fran^aise d’Assinie, Bull. Soc. geol. de IV., 1885-1886, 3* sdr., XIV,
pp. 105-112. * •

* 'PechuSl-Loesche, Zur Geologie des vestlichen Congogebietes ; Deutsche Rundschau
f. Geogr. und Stat., published by F. Umlauft, Vienna, 1886, VIII, pp. 289-293, map. In
•the region of the coast asphalt is said to occur.

' P. Choffat, Note pr4iiminaire sur des fossiles recueillis par M. Louren(o Malheiro
dans la province d'Angola ; Bull. Soc. gdol. de Fr., 1887, 3* ser., XV, pp. 154-157.

* J. de Anchieta, Tra 9 oi geologicos da Afnca occidental portugueza ; Bol. Soc. geogr.
Lisboa, 1885, 5* ser., no. 9, pp. 525-529.



CH.n] CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA 136

the continuation of the remarkable plateau fractures of Cape Colony,
previously described \

All these observations, though scattered over large areas, confirm the
view that Africa, with the excoption-of its north-western part, is an ancient
table-land, and the presence of the middle Cretaceous transgression adds
another remarkable feature to its resemblance with other table-lands and
horsts situated far away from it. *

14. The East of Central a'tid South America. From the descriptions
given in previous chapters of the tabular structure of Florida and the
resemblance between the cordillera of the Antilles and the borders of the
western Mediterranean or of the Hungarian plain, we may deduce
the structure of the coast of Central America.

' A great variety of marine beds of Tertiary or still more recent age
occurs in this region, and the classing together of calcareous deposits of
different age has led to many erroneous conceptions with regard to eleva-
tions of the land, said* to have occurred in quite recent times. Wo may
take this opportunity to recall the European characters presented by the
Mesozoic and Tertiary marine faunas of this part of America (I, p. 522).

As the subject is of some importance in connexion with one of the follow-
ing chapters we will now illustrate the structure and succession of strata
in the outer Antilles by means of an example, selecting for this purpose
the island of Antigua and making use of information drawn from the
descriptions given by Purves

Antigua has the form of a triangle; its longest side is turned to the
north-east, facing the Ocean, and measures 25 kilometers. On this side
the submarine slope is very gentle; on this side also the most recent beds
occur, which are continued into Barbados, only 48 kilometers distant and
separated by no greater depth than 80-40 fathoms. To the south-west, on
the other hand, the fall is very rapid, and towards the island of Guadeloupe,
which is not further away than Barbados, we soon meet a depth of 300
fathoms. The south-western part of Antigua is mountainous and attains
a height of 1,400 feet ; the north-eastern part is hilly, and between 300 to
500 feet in height ; between these two regions a low plain stretclies from
north-west to south-east, its strata striking in the same direction.

The more elevated south- westepi part consists of ancient eruptive rocks
which are described as porphyrites and volcanic agglomerates (Fig. 15).
Stratified tuff rests upon these towards the north-east (T^). The tuff is

’ F. M. Stapff, Karte des npteren Khuisebthales, Petenn. Mittheil., 1887, pp. 202-214,
map ; A Schenk, Ueber die geologischen Verhaltnieso von Angra Peqaena, Zeitsebr.
deutich. geol. Gee., 1885, XXXVII, pp. 534-536; for the south see also A. MouUe,
Mdmoire sur la gdologie g^ndrale et sur les mines de diamants de I’Afrique du Sud, Ann.
Mines, 1885, 8* Hr., VII, pp. 193-348.,

* J. C. Parves, Esquisse gdologique de Hie d'Antigoa ; BuU. Mua B. Hist nat. Belg.,
1886, III, pp. 269-318, pi. ziv.



136 THE OUTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [PAurra

• •

followed by the ‘lower or marine siliceous limestone, which contains
numerous remains of shells and in addition Prionastraea diversifomda,
Solerjidraea taurirmms, Stylocoenia hbato-rotundata, Porites Gollegnimui,
which all occur in the Mediterranean deposits of Turin, and Alveopora
daedalea, which lives at present in the Bed sea, the Indian OceaU, and the
Pacific (shown by the black band a, «, Fig. 15). This siliceous limestone
is overlaid by sand and volcanic ejections (G) ; then follows upper siliceous
limestone ; it contains only fresh-water shells and silicified wood (the first



Flo. 16. 27i« isZand of Antigua, after Purros.

white band h, h. Fig. 15). Upon it rests another layer of tuff (Tj) and out
of this a peak of trachydolerite projects. A strike fault, which traverses
the whole island, repeats the outcrop of the beds », 6, and T^. We have
now crossed the mountains as well as the central plain, and have reached
the foot of the hills which' occupy the north-eastern part of the island.
They consist of white or yellowish marl and white limestone ; towards the
sojith-west they end in a steep scarp; to the north-east the beds sink
gradually beneath the sea, giving rise to numerous reefs (c). Here, accord-
ing to Purves, the specimens of Orhitaidee ManteUi from Antigua, described
by Rupert Jones, were in all prol^bility obtained; they indicate the
honzon of the white Orbitoides limestone of Jamaica.


ANTIGUA. THE AMAZON


187


€H. n]


All the beds hitherto mentioned are very gently inclined to the north-
east. • In the most northerly part of the island they are covered by
horizontal beds of marl containing a mixture of marine and terrestrial
shells, nearly all of which belong to existing species (ti). The lower marl
beds are purely marine ; in the upper beds the association with marine
species of such genera as Melampus, Physa, and Planorbis, point to a muddy
shore, A small exposure of basalt appears on the north coast.

This example shows how complicated the conditions are. Tlie coralli-
ferous deposits of the first Mediterranean stage («, a) rest on older tuff. .
The eruptive activity persisted through all that part of the Tertiary period
which is represented in the island, and the middle Tertiary Orbitoides
limestone (c, c) sinks so graflually beneath the sea that its fragments,
surrounded as they are by living coral reefs, might easily be mistaken
themselyes for modern 6oral reefs left dry by the sea.

The same deposits of the first Mediterranean stage which we have just
mentioned probably also form the foundation of the Bahamas. Tlie Orbi-
toides limestone also forms a large part of Florida and runs still further
north in the valley of the Mississippi. In this table-land the gulf of Mexico
is let down (I, p. 284) and foniis the ‘ fore-sea,’ a trough lying in front of
the cordillera of the Antilles. ■ The remains of the deep-sea fauna of the
Pacific, living at present in the depths of the gulf of Mexico, and the inter-
calation of the lacustrine Grand Gulf Series above the marine Tertiaiy of
the lower Mi8si.ssippi, show that the separation of the Pacific from the
Atlantic region must have taken place in comparatively recent times,
under conditions so complicated and variable that we can at present form
no clear conception of them.

Let us now turn our attention to the regions further south.

Marine deposits of Tertiary age extend far up the valley of t)ie
Orinoco.

The map of eastern Guayana, con.stnicted by V^ain from the observa-
tions of Crevaux, shows a more or less east to west strike of the ancient
rocks composing this region. The intercalated Palaeozoic beds which form
the northern part of the basin of the Amazon follow the same direction,
arid the coui'sc of this coast from Cayenne to the mouth of the Amazon
thus cuts directly across the strike. ’ For almost the whole of this distance,
however, a broad band of recent alluvial deposits appears to lie between
the edge of the mountains and the sea

Now the basin of the Amazon broadens out. From what we at present
know of the structure of Brazil we must conclude that the contour of the
continent also cuts across the strike of the rocks as far as cape Saint-Boque,

’ C. y^Iain, Esquisse gdologique de la Gujane franfaise et des baasins da Parou et du
Yari, d’apres les explorations da Dr, Crevaax ; Bull. Soc. geogr. Paris, 1885, 7® s^r., VI,
pp. 453-495, map.



138 THE OUTLINES .OP THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [pabtiii

but from this promontory onwards the course of the coast, at least as far
as Paraguay, is determined by that of the mountain ranges.

As regards this important I’egiou we may add to our previous remarks
the following observatiohs : —

Mr. Orville Derby has been good enough to call my attention to the
way in which the direction of this coast is repeated not only in the course
of the Parahyba but also in that of the Parana and the S%o -Francisco.
Indeed any map of Brazil will show that on leaving the watershed these
two great rivers flow to the north-east and south-west on the same line
parallel to the coast, and then both tum at a right angle to the sea. . Their
mouths are separateil by 25 degrees of latitude. The mountain range,
however, which is marked along the watershed on many maps does
not exist.

The relation between these two rivers resembles- that between the Indus
and the Brahmaputra, which also flow in opposite directions along the
same line of strike and then, deflected at right angles, leave the mountains
by lateral valleys. 'The Rhine and Rhone afibrd a well-known example of
precisely the same kind in the Alps; and in this connexion the Saint-
Qotthard is only a secondary watershed within a longitudinal valley. '

The structure of the mountain ranges which determine the direction of
the coast and the course of these rivers is known in its main features chiefly
from the descriptions of Orville A. Derby. These mountains are formed
of folded Archaean rocks. They unite near the upper waters of the Rio
Grande. The Serra do Mar runs from the south-west along the coast ; the
Serra da Mantiquira proceeds further to the north-east ; towards the north-
north-east, east of Sao Francisco, lies the Serra do Espinha 9 o, and another
range, the Serra da Canastra already known to Esebwege, runs off to the
north-west between the Rio Pardo and the Supucahy ; it is continued in
a manner not precisely determined towards Goyaz.

Against the west side of the folded Archaean region, extending towards
the Parana, lies a tabular zone of horizontal beds, in which Devonian and
Carboniferous fossils have been found. This zone lies at a height of 900-
1,000 meters, and further noHh of 700-800 meters. Dykes of diabase
break through it and project in ridges from its surface.

On the west of this tabular zone of Devonian and Carboniferous rises
a scarped outcrop which runs from Uruguay to Minas Geraes ; its eastern
edge reaches a height of only about 1,000 meters on the Parana, and of
1,200 meters in Minas Geraes. This is the edge of another tabular zone,
which consists of Permian or Trias with overlying sheets of melaphyre.

The eastern aflluents of the Parana have cut deep furrows in the
horizontal beds. The decomposition of the diabases and melaphyres
produces the best soil for the coffee plantations.

On the Sao Francisco the structure is similar, but between the folded



SEBBA DO MAB


OH.U]


139


Archaean chains and the region of horizontal strata a tract of folded
Silurian appears \

Two elements must thus be distinguished in the south-east and east of
Brazil, namely, the folded mountain ranges, which, as we have said, even
include the Silurian on the Sao Francisco, and the flat-bedded table-lands,
which begin with the Devonian and are very widely distributed towards
the interior.

In these pre-Devonian mountain chains the older rocks lie towards the
east; and the folding movement, as far as it has been at present recognized,
was directed towards the interior. This observation is of great importance.
It asdgna to tJie Serra do Mar in the continent of South America a position
similar to that occupied in North Ameiica hy the Appalachians.

I believe, writes Mr. Orville Derby, that the comparison of the
orographic system of Brazil with the Appalachians is based on a true
homology, and that the chief difference lies in the age of the most
important elevation, which in North America affects the whole Palaeozoic
series, while the formation of the greater part, if not the whole, of the
Brazilian was pre-Devonian.

It follows further that the coast mountains of Brazil occupy the same
position with regard to the Andes as the Appalachians to the cordilleras of*
the west of North America, and that in the whole breadth of both continents
the tangential movement is directed from the Atlantic Ocean towards the
Pacific.

South of the La Plata we reach the region which lies within the virga-
tion of the southern Andes. On the La Plata itself marine deposits of
Tertiary age are present which extend far into the interior of the land.
They are the commencement of that very varied series of horizontal
Tertiary deposits, partly marine and partly continental, which, enclosed
between, the branches of the virgation, fonn the entire coast of Patagonia.
They will be discussed in a later chapter.

As we have already learnt, the Falkland islands are a folded fragment
of Palaeozoic sediments completely alien to the adjacent continent (I, p. 627).
The reports of the German polar station in South Georgia show that the
island is formed of folded clay slate


' 0. A. Derby, ContribufSes para o estudio da geographia physica do Valle do Rio
Grande, Bol. Soc. geogr. Rio de Janeiro, 1885, 1, no. 4, 30 pp. ; by the same, Geographia
physica do Brazil, In d’Abreu e A. do Valle-Cabral, Brazil Geographico e Historico, vol. I,
1884, translated into English in the ‘ Rio News,’ 5, 1.5, 24 December, 1884. A geological
map of this region, by the same author, appears in K. F. van Dclden Lapmc, Brazilifi en
Java, Verslag over de Koffiecultuur in Amerika, AsiS en Africa ; Bijdr. tot de Taal-, Land-
en Volkenkunde van Ned. IndiS, 1885, IV, 6, pi. i ; cf. also the present work, I, p. 510,
note 2.

* E. Mosthoff und H. Will, Die Insel Sfid-Georgien ; Deutsche Geogr. Blfttter, Bremen,
1884, VII, pp. 118-151, in particular p. 119, etseq.



140 THE OtJTLINES OP THE ATLANTIC' OCEAN [PAittra

Tristan da Cunha and Diego Alvarez (Gough) are of volcanic origin.

15. General survey of the Atlantic coaMs. The numerous facts just
discussed lead to the conclusion that a certain amount of symmetry exists
between the two sides of the Ocean. In some cases comparison is im-
possible, in others a correspondence is striking, even if difiScult to 'explain.
I will now attempt a representation of the facts, taking each region in
turn.

(tt) To the north, in the middle of the Ocean, rises the wedge-shaped
ma.s8 of Greenlaiul ; on each side lies the sea.

(ft) The eastern boundary of this sea is fomred in the first place by
a range of ancient gneiss which strikes down from Magero to the jagged
peaks of the Lofoten, and is visible in the Hebrides further to the south-
west. — The western lx)undary, in Davis strait and Baffin bay, consists
likewise of a jagged gneiss range, which comes from the north and follows
the coast towards cape Walter Bathurst, through Cumberland and Labrador
up to the straits of Bello Isle.

(c) A folded range of pre-Devonian age, the Caledonian mountains,
beginning probably in Norway, runs through the Shetlands and the
Orkneys, Scotland, Wales, and a great part of Ireland. The Scotch horsts
lie in its strike. — No corresponding range is known in America.

(d) On the east of the gneiss range and the Caledonian zone there
follows in Europe the great Baltic shield. The folded Silurian beds of
Norway appear to pass into the flat-lying Silurian of its western border.
Archaean formations are e.xposed in the middle of the shield ; the glint line
completely surrounds it. The Varanger fjord, the lakes of Lapland, the
gulf of Finland, lakes Ladoga and Onega and the gulf of Onega mark the
edge of the shield. The shallow gulf of Bothnia lies upon it.

A similar structure is repeated in Canada. West of the gneiss range
of the coast lies the groat Canadian shield. It is surrounded by flatrlying
Palaeozoic lieds. The great lakes mark its southern boundaiy, which runs
down through lakes Winnipeg and Athabasca, the Slave lake, Marten lake
and Bear lake to Coronation gulf ; then probably through Simpson strait
and perhaps through Melville peninsula. Hudson bay, of no great depth,
lies upon it.

In Europe, as in North America, there is a shield, a shallow sheet of
water, a ring of glint lakes, and a flatly bedded Palaeozoic border.

(e) On the west coast of Ireland where the Caledonian mountains,
striking to the south-west, disappear, the folded ranges of another chain
arise, which proceed in an arc from the interior of the continent, striking
first to west-north- west, and then to the west. It is folded to the north.
This is the Amiorican arc. It reaches the south-west coast of Ireland
with a westerly direction ; this coast, Cornwall and Devon, as well as the
coasts of the north-west of France, owe their rocky shores to the way in



OH.ja] SYMMETRY OF THE ATLANTIC 141

I , .

which these folds strike out to sea. This chain arose for the most part
before the end of the Carboniferous period.

In the same way Nom Scotia and NewfouiicUaiul are detached 'from
the contour of America and show us the folds of a groat mountain range,
which coming from the south-west assumes gradually a west to east
direction. This range also is folded to the north like the Armprican arc ;
it also attained its chief development before the close of the Carboniferous
period.

(/) In Europe there next follow the Pyrenees. It is impossible to
discover a corresponding range in America.

{g) In Europe we now arrive at the basin of Asturias. There is nothing
'similar to be met with in America.

(/() We then come to the Mediterranean on the cast side of the Ocean.
It is closed in near Gibraltar by a chain folded towards the exterior and
bent round in a sharp curve. This is the most westerly prolongation of
the Betic cordillera and presents at the same time the only instance in
which the outer margin of a folded range reaches the east coast of the
Atlantic, without sinking beneath the Ocean in a rias coast.

On the west side of the Ocean, though further to the south, wo see the
Caribbean sea, ginlled about by the cordillera of the Antilles, which also is
folded towards the exterior and sharply curved round: this again is the
only place on the western side where the outer border of a folded range
reaches the coast without being faulted down as it strikes out to .sea.

It is not possible to continue these comparisons further to the south.

Greenland lies symmetrically between two continents. The gneiss
range of the Lofoten corresiwnds to that of Labrador; but the objection
may be raised that in Europe the former is interrupted for a great distance
and that the latter in America is little known. The Caledonian range is
absent in America. The two shields correspond and the two pre-Permian
rias coasts. The Pyrenees and the basin of Asturias arc not represented
in America; on the other hand there is a striking resemblance between
the two Mediterraneans with their girdle of folds.

It may be observed that certain elements are represented in Europe
twice over as it were; thus the Armorican rias coast is repeateil by the
Pyrenees' g,nd the basin of Asturias by the girdle of the Mediterranean.
This duplication, however, arises from the repetition of the pro- Permian by
the Tertiary ranges, the building .and rebuilding of Europe revealed by the
horsts.

The Caledonian folds do not come into question here; .they are not
known in North America, and in the northernmost part of Norway no
Caledonian folds are interposed in the course of the horizontally .stratified
masses of the lake region as they extend to the west, up to the dislocation
which separates them from the gneiss of the Lofoten.



142 THE OUTLINES OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN [PABTin

Dingle bay on the west of Ireland, on the outer border of the AnUorican
arc, corresponds consequently to Belle Isle straits between Labrador and
Newfoundland. Both lie approximately in the same geographical latitude.
But thence to the south the homologous parts of Europe are much more
closely crowded together than their Mexican equivalents, and thus the
Mediterranean lies considerably further north than the Caribbean sea.

It is to the repeated reconstruction of Europe that the peculiar diffi-
culties are due which have always confronted tectonic studies in this
continent. Elsewhere the mountains are moife uniform in structure, planned
on broader and simpler lines. Even if in many cases we have not been
able to follow the bordering faults all round the mountain fragments which
we have represented as horsts, even if we prefer to assume that the
Central Plateau and Brittany, for example, have been separated across
Poitieus not by subsidence, but by erosion, yet this will not alter the result.
From the lower Guadalquivir up to the neighbourhood of Briinn the
younger folded ranges are faced by the walls of faults. What is there
known as the sierra Morena is here called the Manharts-Gebirge, and the
only question which remains is to what extent the fragments to the north
of these walls are to' be regarded as independent of one another. This
question, however, is only of secondary itnportancc, since within the
mountain segments themselves mighty dislocations are present of the most
various age, as for example the marginal fractures of the Scotch trough,
the fault of Saint-Ingbert in the basin of the Saar and the Letten kluft
near Przibram.



143


CHAPTER III

THE BORDERS OF THE PACIFIC OCEAN

New Zealand. Australia. New Caledonia. The sea of Banda, Borneo. Cochin-chida,
Tongking. The Philippines. Formosa and the Liu-Kiu islands. Japan. The Kuriles
and Kamchatka. General survey of the island arcs. Eastern China. North-eastern
Asia. The arc of the Aleutian islands. The west coast of America.

1. N&o) Zealand. Since the brilliant description of this island group by
F. von Hochstettcr, our knowledge of its structure has been greatly
increased by the contributions of Hutton and Julius von Haast and by
the work of the Geological Survey under the direction of J. Hector.
Space precludes more than a summary of the most important results
achieved by these laborious investigations; I am fortunate, however, in
having at my disposal, not only a large liody of already publi.shed material
and the general geological map by Hector, but also information afforded
me in friendly communications by Herr von Haast, and a detailed manu-
script sketch which I owe to the kindness of Captain Hutton.

The series of marine beds in New Zealand is ’ very complete. The
Silurian is represented by at least two series of fossiliferous strata, a lower
group with Graptolites and 'an upper group with Trilobites ; the Devonian
is less distinct; the Carboniferous limestone contains Spirifer bievlattm;
Productus hrachytluiet'vs, and other characteristic species; above it lies
the group distinguished by Glossopteris, but the marine Carboniferous
beds, which in Australia overlie the coal with Glossopteris, are not recorded
froiu New Zealand. The Trias is represented by the Wairoa beds with
Pseudomonotis and Halobia. Then follow beds distinguished by Ammo-
nites and Brachiopods, which are assigned to the Lias or lower Jurassic
(Catlin’s River and Bastion Series), and plant-bearing beds with Macro-
teieniopteris lala, which are correlated by Hector with the BAjmah&l series
o;f India. This flora, corresponding approximately to" the middle of the
Gondwana series, is evidently the same as that which extends with such
an astonishingly wide distribution through almost the whole of Eurasia;
as regards its relations to the marine deposits of New Zealand, there is at
present great dearth of information. Deposits with Bdemnites
are rightly or wrongly regarded as representatives of the lower Creta-
ceous; then follow very fossiliferous- sediments of the middle Cretaceous
and a series of. marine Tertiary formations. The sediments are accompanied



144 THE BOEDEES OP THE PACIFIC OCEAN. [PARrra

by various volcanic rocks, which begin in the Palaeozoic aera and, on North
island; are still i 4 process of extrusion.

Varied as is the succession of the strata, the structure and features of
the land are no less. so. In the south it forms a true AlpiAe region where
several peaks rise above 3,000 meters; in the middle of North island lies
one of the most rematkable volcanic areas in the world. The outlines of
the islands, however, correspond only in part with the trend of the
mountain folds; fracture and subsidence have had a large share in their
formation.

^ Hochstettcr had already suspected that Cook strait and Foveaux strait,
which separate the three islands, were due to the sub^dence of mountain
blocks ; hp was also aware tliat the mountain chain which follows the east
coast of North island from East cape to Wellington is continued on the
other side of Cook strait between the east coast of South island and
the river Awatcre, and that this 'continuation lies to the east, outside the
trend of the principal chain More recent investigations in the south,
however, have revealed the remarkable fact that in the southern half of
South island two directions of strike and folding encounter one another
almost at right angles, and the knowledge we have accjuired in other parts
of the earth leoils us to conclude that in this region two independent
unilateral citaim meet in eyntaxie. One of these chains trends to the
north-east, and its oldest rocks lie to the north-west and w.est; all the
mountain fragments of North island belong to it. The second chain runs,
so far os it is known, to the south-east, and its oldest rocks crop out on its
south-west side; it includes the southern part of South island together
with Stewart island. On the east coast near Dunedin it is broken off
transversely across its whole breadth

The chief structural features which are developed from this plan arc
as follows : —

A long narrow band of gneiss! and ancient granite follows the west
coast of the middle part of South island. It has been described' by
Herbert Cox Only a few Palaeozoic patches lie along the coast on the
western flank of these ancient rocks ; towards the east, on the other hand,
they furnish the base of an extremely thick zone of slates, also Palaeozoic,

’ P. von Hochstetter, Geologic von -Neu-Seeland ; Rcisc der dsterreichischen Fregatte
Novara um die Erde, Geologischer Theil, I, 4to, Wien, 1864, p. xlvi, 2, et passim.
Hochstetter’s first ^pression of Cook strait was not that of simple fracture, but of
a displacement of the islands in an opposite direction by a mighty lateral force ; by the
same. Lecture on the Geology of the Province of Nelson, New Zealand Government
Gazette, Nelson, Oct. 22, 1859, p. 101-.

* I refer the reader to the diagram of South island in Hutton’s Sketch of tho Geology
of New Zealand ; Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1885, XLI, p. 195.

* S. H. Cox, Report on Westland District; Rep. Geol. Siirv. New' Zealand, 1874-1876,
Wellington, 1877, pp. 63-93, map.



OH. m]


NEW ZEALAND


145


which form the highest summits of the New Zealanii Alps. Here is
situated mount Cook, which attains a height variously estimated at from
3,762 to 8,963 meters ; great glaciers descend from this lofty range ; a' vfvid
and instructive picture of the region has been given by Von Lendenfeld *.
Towards the east the range slopes down and is followed by a long synclinal



Fio. 16. Neio Zmlanrf,

A, Archaean ; /), crystalline schists and Palaeo/oic ; irj, Trias and Jurassic ; crt^ Cretaceous
and Tertiary ; dotted areas, volcanic regions, chiefly acid lavas and their associated tufls ;
black, principal volcanos and basic lavas ; white, recent alluvium.

of Mesozoic beds, till the Palaeozoic foundation again rises in an 'anticlinal;
then comes a broad plain on the east which unites the border of the moun-
tains with a block-like mountain mass projecting far out to sea. This is

* R. v. Lendenfeld, Der Tasman-Gletscher und seine Umgebung; Peterm. Mitth.,
Ergflnzungsheft, Nr. 75, 1884, 80 pp., maps.

SOLLAB II • '



146 THE BOBDERS OF THE PACIFIC OOEAN [PAirrin

Banks peninsula. Haast, who has examined and described the whole of
that part of the island just referred to, has shown that on the west side *
of this mass' some ancient schists crop out, and associated with these quartz-
bearing porphyry, but all the rest of the mass, which attains a height of
927 meters, rising from an area as large as the {mse of Aetna, consists
of a number of closely crowded craters of various age, standing beside and
above one another. Some of these reveal the same radial arrangement
of the dykes as distinguishes mount Venda in the Euganean region
(I,p. 146)1. ■

The ancient rocks of the west strike to the north-east, and pass into
elongated mountain cores ; one of these reaches the sea on the west coast
of Tasman bay. On North island neither gneiss nor granite -is exposed.

Palaeozoic rocks also appear to the west of the crystalline schists of
Tasman bay ; but the principal zone, which runs from mount Cook to the
north-east and includes many lofty peaks, reaches Cook strait, passing
mount Franklin on the east side of Tasman bay ; it then breaks up into
a number of peninsulas, islands, and cliffs, and sinks beneath the sea
between d’Urville island and Blenheim. To the east the principal Palaeo-
zoic zone is followed by the Mesozoic synclinal, which still further east,
beyond the river Awatere, is followed V>y Palaeozoic anticlinals; towards
the east coast these in their turn are accompanied by a Mesozoic zone.

These anticlinals of Palaeozoic rocks lying east of the Awatere form the
Kaikoura chains, which attain a height of over 8,000 feet; Hochstetter
rightly recognized them as the continuation of the long Palaeozoic range
of North island : this begins near Wellington, and as the Tararua chain, the
Kuahine chain, or under other names attains in several places a height of
over 5,000 feet; it finally reaches the north coast east of the bay of Plenty.
A Mesozoic zone and' subsidiary Palaeozoic chains border its east side
from cape Palliser to cape Bunaway, so that the courae of this part of
the coast corresponds with the actual strike of the beda

The long and narrow Palaeozoic band running from Wellington to
the north coast, which for brevity we will call the Kuahine chain, is
the only .continuous folded range of North island. Towards the west
it is followed by the extensive volcanic region of lake Taupo with the
gigantic volcanos Tongariro and Kuapehu. On the west side of the island
another volcano, mount Egmont, emerges in a great circular outline from
the sea. Tertiary and even more recent sediments form the north coast
of Cook strait between this broad cone and the south end of the Kuahine
range. To the north-west Palaeozoic rocks are known in many localities ;
up to the North cape, however, and beyond it, these are only the isolated
fragments of the sunken range, between which recent volcanos appear in

* Julius V. Haast,' Oeology of the Provinces of Canteihurjr and Westland, 8vd, Christ-
church, 1879, pp. 324-349.



CH. m]


NEW ZEALAND


147


maixy places, especially near Auckland. More recent sediments, tuffs, and
lavas unite diese fragments by a superficial covering, and so form the
greater part of North island. The regular arc-like curve of the'nofth-
western shore is formed by littoral accumulations which run from one
mountain fragment to another. The north-western coast, therefore, in no
way represents the actual trend of the mountains. The south-east coast,
interrupted by Hauke bay, alone corresponds with this direction.

The principal chains of South island disappear at Cook strait, and it is
only a secondary chain which is continued across North island as the
Ruahine range. We naturally look for the continuation of the principal
chains of the south beneath the volcanic region of the north. ‘ Probably,’
says Hutton, ‘ the ge-anticlinal of the South island runs through the centre
of the North island from Wanganui .to the bay of Plenty Hochstetter
has already distinguished imder the name of the Taupo mountains a series
of recent volcanos running right through North island parallel to the
Ruahine range and to the west of it. This zone, characterized by acid
lavas, runs in a north-easterly direction 'from the mouth of the Wanganui
on the coast of . Cook strait to tJic island of Whakari (White island), an
active volcano which rises from the bay of Plenty. Ruapehu (2,793
meters), Tongariro (2,582 meters), lake Taupo, Tauhara and Putanaki
(mount Edgecumbe) lie on this lino, which Hochstetter regarded as the
boTindary or margin of a downthrown area*.

Let us return to South island.

The syntaxis does not take place at an acute angle, but in a fairly open
curve. Possibly the form of syntaxis as projected- on the map is determined
by the degree to which denudation has advanced.

A Palaeozoic spur runs out from the region of mount Cook to the south-
east, and approaches the mouth of the Waitaki on the east coast in a gentle
curve. A second arc lies to the south of this river. Finally, the whole of
the Palaeozoic zone, here very broad, swerves round near lake Wanaka, in
west Otago, from south-west through south to south-east, and then ends
by breaking off on the coast near Dunedin as we have already seen. On
the south-east coast this zone extends to Molyneux bay, and is there
followed on the south by a very remarkable Mesozoic zone, which includes ■
the *Hokanui mountains and is distinguished by a particularly rich suc-
.cession of Jurassic beds, both marine and continental, as the observations
of Cox and M’Kay have shown®. This zone takes part in the folding,

. * Hutton, Sketch of the Geology of New Zealand, p. 197. '

^ F. Ton Hochstetter, Qeologie von Neu-Seeland, p. 92 et seq.

’ S. H. Cox, Report on the Geology of the Hokanui Ranges, Southland, Rep. Geol.
Snrv. New Zealand, 1877-1878, Wellington, 1878, pp. 25-48, map ; Alexander M'Kay,
Notes on the Sections and Collections of Fossils obtained in the Hokanui District, tom.
cit., pp. 49-90 ; by the same, Mataura Plant-beds, Southland County, op. cit., 1879-1880,



148 THE BORDEES OP THE PACIPIO OCEAN [pabthi

strikes to the south-east, and finally almost due east. To the south and
south-west it is again followed by slates, forming the north part of Stewart
isldnd, and then finally by gneiss.

The extreme south-west of South island from Milford sound onwards
consists of gneiss; the coast is very steep and cut into by ^eep fjords;
gneiss also forms the southern moiety of Stewart island.

The processes by which the mountains of New Zealand have been built
up were distributed over an extremely long period of time. Folding move-
ments occurred before the Mesozoic aera; the middle and upper Creta-
ceous in particular, distinguished here as in Europe by the presence of
a dicotyledonous flora, lies in discordance in many places, but in several
parts of South island post-Cretaceous folding is also known. The ^tive
volcanos, the numerous hot springs of North island, and the seismic
phenomena show that the breaking up of the cordilleras cannot be regarded
as'yet at an'end.

‘ Mountains with sharply jagged peaks,’ writes Captain Hutton, ' are
the exception in Switzerland, and the rule in New Zealand. Waterfalls
are rare in New Zealand ; a few occur up the deep fjords of the south-west
coast, and some few small ones at the head of the valleys in the great
ranges. Yet the Alps of New Zealand are quite as bold and steep as those
of Switzerland ; their ravines are even more numerous and deeper. The
passes are deeper in New Zealand, the valleys much more terraced, and
the mountains on the whole more extensively covered by loose ddbris than
in Switzerland. This is certainly truer of Canterbury, Nelson, and Marl-
borough, than of Otago. The explanation lies in the fact that the Alps
of New Zealand are by far the older. They have been exposed to the
action of the weather, at least in part, since the Jurassic period, and many
of the larger valleys were already excavated', almost to their existing depth,
before the Oligocene period.'

The smaller islands which surround New Zealand in the south and
south-east have a very varied structure. Such observations as exist upon
them have been brought together by Meinicke and Hutton^. Since

pp. 39-48. In this work some remarkable observations are recorded on the passage of
.the stalk of Macrotacnioptcris through several beds of wnd ; this suggests that we may
here have beds qf aeolian origin. In the . interior of the chain also the syntazis does not
.take place at an acute angle, for at the northern half of the elbow-like bend of lake
Wakatipu M’Kay observed a strike from north to south (District West and North of Lake
Wakatipu, tom. cit., p. 118 et seq.), and the south-south-easterly direction occurs first
on lake Te Anau, which lies on the boundary between ancient schist and gneis8‘(Co^,
Report on the Geology of the Te Anau District, op. cit., 1877-1878, p. 110 et seq.).

1 C. R. Meinicke, Die kleinen Inseln im Stiden und Sddosten von Neu-Seeland,
Peterm. Mitth., 1872, XVIII, pp. 222-226 ; F. W. Hutton, On the origin of the Fauna
and Flora of New Zealand, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., 1884, 5th ser., XIII, pp. 425-448, and
. 1885, 5th ser., XV, pp. 77-107 ; in particular in the latter part, p. 80 et seq.



OH. ni] AUI^TBALIA 149

nothing in the nature of a general view can be gained from these widely
separated localities, the. following brief account may suffice.

From' the Snares islands Armstrong obtained basalt, decomposed quartz
porphyry, and jasper. Auckland island, according to Hector, consists of
granite. Tertiary sandstone, and volcanic rocks: this accords with the
specimens collected by- Armstrong. On Macqaarie island, Scott found
greenstone and amygdaloids with mesotype and analcime. Campbell island,
according to Hector, presents blue slates and limestone which resemble the
older Mesozoic rocks of New Zealand, as well as Cretaceous with flint, and
volcanic rocks The Antipodes islands consist of dolerite and phonqlite.
Sounly island, according to Norman, appears to consist of granite. On
Chatham, island, according to. Haast and Travers, mica-schists, Miocene
limestone, and volcanic rocks occur

2. Australia. An ancient folded range accompanies thp whole of the
eastern coast of the Australian continent. It, rises in Tasmania in wild
highlands covered with great lakes, projects from Baas strait in the' form
of numerous islands, and on the other side, in the south-east of Australia,
attains its loftiest summit, over 7,000 feet in height It proceeds along
the east coast, rises in lat. 17° 30' S. to over 5,000 feet in the Bellenden
Ker, and then decreases considerably in height. We shall find traces
of it, however, up to the extreme north of York peninsula and across
Torres strait.

This great folded range may be followed through 34^ degrees of latitude,
but its southern end, at South cape in Tasmania, is defined by a fracture,
and its northern end is not known. It bears no general name ; following
Clarke, who has done so much for our knowledge of Australia, we will speak
of it as the Australian conlillera. This name, however, ceases to be
applicable to some of the elements into which it breaks up, though
these are closely connected among themselves. In the southernmost
part of the continent the cordillera sends off a hilly range, which curves
first in an arc and then runs from east to west through Victoria.
Selwyn and others, however, showed long ago that even in this east
to west ridge the foldings present the same north and south strike as on

* ^ilhol's statements as to the age of the limestone in Campbell island are unfor-
tunately so contradictory that I must refrain from making use of them; II. Filhol,
Mission de Tile Campbell : Constitution g^ologiquc do Hie, Compt. Ren||., 1876, LXXXIV,
pp. 202-205, and Rapports geologiques et zoologiques do Tile Campbell avec les terres
australes avoisinantes, op. cit., 1882, XCIV, pp. 563-565.

* In the Tertiary deposits of Chatham island Hutton recognizes the Fareora system of
New Zealand ; Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1885, XLT, p. 209.

’ R. V. Lendenfeld gives mount Townshend with a height of 7,256 feet as the highest
point, whereas its neighbour mount Kosciusko or Mueller’s peak (7,176 feet according to
Neumayr) is usually so regarded ; Lendenfeld, The Glacial Period in Australia, Proc.
Linn^ Soc. N.S.'W., Sydney, 1886, X, p. 47.



160 THE BORDERS OP THE PACIFIC OCEAN [PAurra

the east coast, so that here the course of the range is perpendicular to
its structure \ '

‘Broad plains succeed the cordilleAt on the west ; then comes,' north of
the Darling river, a mountainous tract, formed by Barrier ra^ge and Grey
range, which also runs north and south. This is again followed'by lowland,
and then we meet the much more important chains situated on the east, in
part also on the west, of Spencer gulf, lake Torrens, and lake Eyre. To
the west of these chains is a broad table-land which extends as far as the
west coast of the continent.

The south-western part of this table-land is formed of granite and
gneiss, with an undulating surface, and along the coast it breaks off in
a long scarp. This scarp is known in the south as the Darling range.
Gregory, in his laborious explorations, traced it for more than nine
degrees of latitude, from cape Beaufort in Flinders bay up to the river
Gascoyne. In the south it presents a steep face, 800 to 1,200 feet high for
more than four degrees of latitude, while at a greater distance from the
sea the table-land reaches a height of 1,400 to 2,000 feet. At the foot of
the scarp lies a strip of flat land with rare extrusions of basalt, and in front
of this again, in the extreme south, another gneiss zone running from cape
Leeuw-in to cape Naturaliste. Further to the north, from about lat. 31° S.
a narrow gneiss zone again appears in front of the scarp ; it recedes from
the latter more and more to the north-north-west, including in this manner
the coal-field on the river Irwin. The same zone of gneiss reappears
between the river Greenough and Murchison. It is pc^ible that it forms
Edel land and the regions around Shark bay ^

The section which Gregory has drawn from west to east in lat. 25° 15' S.
represents the table-land as consisting of gneiss and granite overlaid by
metamorphic schists ; while to the west of it lies a Palaeozoic series from
which Carboniferous fossils have been obtained, and this is covered by
Mesozoic beds with Ammpnites and Trigonias. Since these observations,
Huddlestone has shown that, according to the collections made by Forrest,
a great zone of Carboniferous limestone may be recognized on the Kennedy
range as far as lat. 24° S., which extends west of the ancient rocks towards
the north : the Mesozoic fossils of western Australia have been examined
by Moore and Neumayr., According to Neumayr’a results only a part of
the middle Junassic, the zone of StephaTbOceras Humphriesianum, can as
yet be definitely shown to exist here or elsewhere in Australia. The zone,
however, recalls in a truly astonishing manner the corresponding beds of

‘ A. R. C. Selwyn, Geology of the Colony of Victoria, in ‘The Colony of Victoria in
Australia, its Progress, Resources, &c.,' published for the International Exhibition in
London, 1862, Svo, Melbourne, 1861, p. 185.

* F. T. Gregory, On the Geology of a Part of Western Australia ; Quart. Joum. Geol.
Soc., 1861, XVII, pp. 475^83.



161


OH. in} SOUTH COAST OP AUSTRALIA

Europe. The general characters of all the species .are similar, and some of
them are identical ; even the nature of the rock, which is a reddish*brown
oolite, is the same. The beds overlying this zone have afforded a number
of upper Cretaceous species which have been described by Moore

We may consider the long face of the table-land to which the Darling
range belongs as a fault scarp, and the Carboniferous and Mesozoic beds,
which lie in front of. it on the west, as downthrown zones. This is an
interpretation which in many similar cases elsewhere has alone proved
capable of explaining all the facts.

The surface of the table-land, as far as it is known, consists only of
granite, gneiss, and ancient schists, and is widely covered with sandstone.
The sandstone contains no fossils, and its beds occupy a very large part of
the interior. We will call it with Daintree the Desert sandstone, Forrest,
who penetrated into the interior from the west coast in lat. 29“ S. nearly
as far as long. 129° E., also encountered nothing but granite and sandstone.

The south coast of Australia is particularly characterized by the large
part taken by marine Tertiary beds in its fonnation. Clarke has emphasized
the remarkable fact that while marine Tertiary sediments occur with- so great
an extension on the south coast, yet so far not a trace of such deposits has
been met with on the east coast in its course from cape Howe to cape York, or
on that side of the Australian continent which is known in greatest detail K
All these Tertiary beds are horizontal ; their upper limit lies only a few
htmdred feet above the sea ; the fossils they contain show that they are of
various age. The lower beds contain very few species known to occur
in the existing seas. The Australian palaeontologists have attempted, in
spite of Duncan’s objections, to apply the- European terms Eocene, Miocene,
and Pliocene to the various subdivisions, according to the percentage of
existing species they contain’*.

In the Great bight, in the St. Vincent gulf, and in the fluvial region
of the Murray, these deposits penetrate far into the continent. Tate has
given an instructive account of their mode of occurrence in the Grmt
bight \ to this I am indebted for the following account*; —

* W„ H. HuddleBton, Notes on a Collection of Fossils and of Bock-specimens front West
Australia, North of the Gascoyne River, Quart. Joum. Oeol. Soc., 1883, XXXIX, pp.
582-595, pi. ; C. Moore, Qn Australian Mesozoic Geology and Palaeontology, op. cit.,
1870, XXVI, pp. 226-263, pi. ; M. Neumay'r, Dio geographisebe Ve^breitung der Jura-
formation, Denkschr. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1885, L, p. 117 et seq.

** Rev. W. B. Clarke, Remarks on the Sedimentary Formations of New South Wales,
illustrated by References to other Provinces of Australia, 4th ed., 8vo, Sydney, 187,8,
p. 7 et passim. '

* A summary is given by J. E. Tenison Woods, Physical Structure and Geology of
Australia ; Proc. LiniL Soc. N.S.W., 1883, VII, p. 380 et seq.

° . R. Tate, The Natural History of the Country around the Head of the Great Australian
Bight ; Trans, and Proc. and Rep. Phil. Soc., Adelaide, South Australia, for 187S-1879,
Svo, Adelaide, 1879, pp. 94-128, pi.



162 THE BORDEBS OP THE PACIFIC OCEAN [PARrra

Tho great Tertiary plateau is framed round by granite, gneiss, and
ancient schists. These rocks are seen in the west near Culver point (long.
124* 45' E.), in the interior of the countiy near Boundary Dam (lat.
29" 20' S., a little to the west of long. 129* E.), then in the east near
Coidea waters (long. 131° 50' 81" E., lat. 30* 20' S.), and near Pidinga
(long. 32“ 7' 11" E., lat. 30* 10' 25" S.). They reach the coast near Fowler’s
bay (between long. 132° and 133° E.). They also form the foundation of
the whole of Eyre peninsula, which is surrounded only by a narrow border
of recent marine sediment.

Within this outerr frame stands the plateau which reaches the sea in
a gentle curve between Culver point and Fowler’s bay, thus forming tho
inner limit of tho Great bight.

From Culver point for about a hundred miles to the north-east the
southern edge of the plateau forms a wall descending vertically into the
sea ; then the edge recedes a little, a flat known as Roe’s plains lies in front
of it, and the cliff bears the name of Hampton range ; at Wilson’s bluff near
Eucla (long. 129* E.) it once more reaches the sea, and from here to the
head of the Great bight (long. 131° E.) it again forms a vertical, often
indeed overhanging wall, which, bordered by no intervening flat land,
plunges directly into the sea. This is the well-known Bwiida cliffs. From
the head of the Great bight up to Fowler’s bay, sand dunes and recent
marine deposits^ rest against the cliff, and in great part conceal it from
sight.

The great tabular Tertiary mass, bounded in this fashion, is named by
Tate the Bumdd platmv,', on the maps a part of it is known as the
NulUihor jilain.

The Bunda cliffs at their western end are 250 feet high, at the eastern
only 15.5 feet. They reveal three groups of strata; at the top a bed of
hard limestone, brown, grey, or reddish in colour, beneath this loose yellow .
Polyozoan limestone, and Anally a white chalky rock, with strings of dark
flint, which presents much resemblance to the white chalk of England.
This lowest member has the greatest thickness. Near Eucla tho upper
limestone is 50 feet thick, the Polyzoan limestone 12 feet, and all the
remainder is included in the lowest stage. All the members belong to
the oldest division of the Australian Tertiary.

The upper limestone forms the entire surface of the Bunda plateau.
It is an exposed sea floor. No tree, no water, no valley is anywhere to
be seen. Caves run through the rock ; red clay, residual from solution,
covers the lower-lying places. It is a desert ‘karst’ land, and many
a moving tale is told of the privations and sufferings, sometimes only
ended by death, of travellers who have ventured upon this vast plain
without sufficient provision against its dangers.

The Tertiary deposits which appear on the north side of Kangaroo



OH.ni]


AUSTRALIA


153


island in Aldinga bay, -and about a great part of St. Vincent gulf, were
regarded by Tate as the continuation of those of the Bunda plateau.
They rest against older rocks which form a part of Yorke peninsula* and
rise north of cape. Jervis in long ranges running north and south. These
ranges, hitherto unfortunately but little investigated, must now engage our
attention ^

The rocks whiph compose them are all of great age. The few fossils
hitherto found belong to the lower divisions of the Silurian. In Eyre
land no definite general strike can bo made out. On Yorke peninsula the
Silurnui is known to occur. A long and unifonn range commences at
the northern end of St. Vincent gulf: this Ls Flinders range. The
chain nins with slight curvature along the east side of lake Torrens up to
its northern end. It attains a height of 3,000 feet. Burr, who long ago
examined the country around mount Arden between Spencer gulf and lake
Torrens, makes the strange assertion that crystalline rocks such as gneiss
and mica -schists occur higher in the scries than slates, limestone, and
sandstone ; Selwyn does not express any decided opinion on this point, and
the relations of the beds cannot at present be regarded as established.

Mount Norwest, north of lake Torrens, forms the northern end, slightly
deviating to the north-west, of a branph of Flinders range. Scoular
encountered here ancient purple slates and projecting ridges of quartzite.

The mountains, of very inconsiderable height, slope to the east beneath-
a broad plain of clay, containing nodules in which Mesozoic fossils are
found ; this plain surrounds lake Eyre on its southern side, which abounds
in springs. The impervious clay forms the lx)ttom of the numerous salt
lakes of this region, but it sometimes contains beds of sand in which
drinkable water occurs. It follows the south-west side of lake Eyre; to
the west of this great lake slate and quartzite again crop out with
a steep dip and form Denismt range. Here also a well-marked defiexion
to the north-west occurs. Whether this range is to be regarded as an
independent structure, or as the continuation of mount Norwest, is difficult
to determine, owing to the nature of the country *.

Let us now return to the sea.

Addaide range is a meridional chain which comes next on the east.
It begins at cape Jervis, sends off two little branches from its southern end
to the south-west, and then trends northwards nearly up to lake Frome
(lat. 31“ S.); it runs parallel to Flinders range and its summits attain
approximately the same height. Still further to the east lies another

• I

^ The best summary is given by Tate, Leading Physical Features of South Australia :
Anniversary Address of the President to the Philosophical Society of Adelaide for 1878-
1879, tom. cit., pp. xli-lxxi.

’ Gavin Scoular, Sketch of the Geology of the South and West Parts of the Lake Eyre
Basin ; Trans. Proc. Roy. Soc. S. Austr., Adelaide, 1887, IX, pp. 39-54, map.



164 THE BORDEBS OF THE PAOIFIG OCEAN [PABrin

meridional chain formed of Barrier and Grey ranges. It presents ancieht
rocks which appear to be the same as those already met with. Here we
are' in the midst of a very extensive region of marine Cretaceous sediments
which spread from Queensland to lake Eyre and probably far beyond it.

1 do not propose to discuss the Tertiary deposits of the Murray river in
detail ; they are more recent than those of the Great bight and are referred
to the Miocene. Tenison Woods gives 600 feet as the greatest height at
which thdy occur. They also extend on the south coast into Bass, strait,
and even reach the southern part of north Gippsland. There also,
according to Howitt, the greatest height they attain is 600 to 700 feet ^
They do not occur beyond cape Howe.

We now reach the region of the Gi-eat cordillera. It is indeed only
a continuation, on a larger scale, of the same system of parallel chains
which we have just passed in review. The mass of the mountains
is formed of granite and porphyry, crystalline schists, Silurian and
Devonian rocks, all intensely folded, standing indeed as a rule nearly
vertical. The strike does not deviate essentially from the meridional
direction, except in the north, where it becomes north-north-west. The
Carboniferous lies fairly flat, in any case much less folded than the rocks
of the high mountains, and all the younger strata may be regarded as
horizontal.

In the whole region of the cordillera a very remarkable gap in the
series of marine sediments occurs above the marine Carboniferous and
extends us far up as the Cretaceous. In the place of marine formations
a diversified scries of plant-bearing strata appear, among which some
sandstone beds occur, believed to be of aeolian origin. The variety of the
floras, already apparent from the earlier investigations of Feistmantcl, has
been brought into the clearest light by Tenison Woods. It is so great that
we may hope with the progress of these studies to recognize most of the
members of the Indian Gondw&na series in the region of the Australian
cordillera ^

It is a remarkable fact, however, that the flora of the GondwAna series
is preceded in Australia by a number of others which have the character
of the Palaeozoic floras of Europe. The most important which in the
present state of our knowledge can be distinguished in this region are as
follows : —

(a) A Devonian' flora with Lepidodendron 7i,othv/m, which occurs in

’ A. W, Howitt, Notes on the Physical Geography and Geology of North Gippsland,
ITictoria ; Qnart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1879, XXXV, p. 40. . .

‘‘‘ Otto Feistmantel, Die pal&ozoische und mesozoische Flora des Ostlichen Australien,
Pal&ontographica, Suppl. HI, Lief. 3, 1878-1879; and J.E. Tenison 'Woods, On the fossil
Flora of the Coal Deposits of Australia, Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W. for 1883, VIII, 1884,
pp. 37-167, pi.



FLORAS OF AUSTRALIA


155


GH.m]

Thuringia in the upper strata of the Gypridina shales, that is to sajr in
the upper part of the Devonian of Germany; i^ is also known in the
Devonian of Canada. Carruthers was the first to point out thijs oorre-
spondence*. Species of the genera Cordaites, Sigillaria, Archaeopteris,
and others, are recorded from the same horizon.

(b) A flora which corresponds with the European Culm. Lepidoderuiron
Vdiheimianum was recognized by Crepin many years ago among Aus-
tralian fossils. . Gcdamites radiatus, CyclostigTna awtraie, Fei.stmantel
(which this author admits he can scarcely distinguish himself from the

• Irish Cyclostigma KiUork&nse), Rfuteopteris imtequilatera, and others also
occur ®.

(c) After the Culm flora the striking correspondence with the floras of
the northern hemisphere is interrupted for a long period, and strata with
Glos8optei''is Browniana rest upon the lower Carboniferous limestone ; they
afford evidence of a glacial period ; in the morainic accumulations of this
epoch gold has been found in places. These beds correspond with the
Talchir deposits of India.

(d) Above the marine beds which overlie these glacial deposits — the last
marine beds of the cordillera till the Cretaceous is reached-^various plant-
bearing deposits occur which in their lower part still afford Glossopteris ;
they include the chronological equivalents of the Trias and the Rhaetic.
Whether the equivalents of the Permian are also to be placed here must
remain for the present uncertain.

(e) An extensive and important series of strata characterized by the
genera Thinnfeldia and Taenioptoris includes the Jerusalem beds of
Tasmania and the Clarence beds of New South Wales; it is also well
represented on the east coast of Queensland.

We shall return to this non-marine series later. The deposits
immediately succeeding arc much more recent; they are marine, and
according to Neumayr’s investigations correspond approximately to the
Aptian stage of the Cretaceous system.

The inhospitable higfdands of Tasmania are a fragment of the
Australian cordillera. The greater part forms a table-land about 4,000 feet
high, which is cut up by valleys. To the east it breaks off sharply along
the coast. Strzelecki laid the foundation of our knowledge of the island ;

his results have been supplemented by later works ^ The rocks are the

•

^ W. Carruthers, Notes on Fossil Plants from Queensland, Australia ; Quart. Journ.
Geol. Soc., 1872, XXVIII, pp. 350-354, pi.

^ Tenison Woods, A Fossil Plant-Formation in Central Queensland ; Journ. Roy. Soc.
N.S.W. for 1882, XVI, 1883, pp. 179-192, pi.

’ P. £. de Strzelecki, Physical Description of New South Wales and Van Diemen’s
.Land, 8yo, London, 1845 ; Tenison Woods, A Physical Description of the Island of
Tasmania, Trans, ^y. Soc., Victoria, Melbourne, 1883, XIX, pp. 144-166. On the
watershed between the river Tamar and Port Sorel river the strike diverges considerably



166 THE BORDERS OP THE PACIFIC OCEAN [PAiffm.

same as those composing the cordillera on the mainland of Australiai but
eruptive greenstones belonging to the later part of the Mesozoic period
occun here in greater profusion. Granite, ancient crystalline schists, and
Silurian beds are exposed in steeply upturned zones with a nprth and
south strike; the Carboniferous, of marine as well as extra-marine
development, lies flat upon them ; then follow more recent plant-bearing
beds; the horizon with Thinnfeldia is also represented, and all these
deposits are surmounted by sheets of greenstone, which form a large part
of the surface of the table-land. Marine beds of the Mesozoic period are
entirely absent; Tertiary marine deposits corresponding to those of the
Great bight are known on the north coast at a trifling height above
the sea. Tertiary basalts occur both- in the north and south of the island.

The rocks of the cordillera, locally overlain by Tertiary beds, now form
the islands of Bass strait, and if we follow their strike to the mainland we
reach the Audralian AlpSy the highest part of the cordillera. R. von
Lendenfeld has described their structure in detail. Although in the south-
east of Australia the principal range of mountains bends through an arc
into an east and west direction, yet the structure, as we have previously
observed, docs not correspond with this direction. It is evident from
R. voii Lendenfeld's description that the arc breaks up into a number of
transverse chains, running meridionally or converging slightly to the south ;
these show the true strike of the steeply upturned zones of granite, gneiss,
and Silurian in this region. In the Bogong mountains there occurs in addi-
tion an extensive, eruptive mass of a basic rock, probably of Devonian age.

The tectonic trend-lines are slightly convex towards the east and
indicate folding from the west. This folding is older than the Carboni-
ferous V

The mountains proceed with the same structure from the east of
Victoria to New South Wales, running fairly parallel with the coast, which
descends rapidly to a depth of moi'e than 2,000 fathoms. The geological

from the meridian (N. W) ; Norman Taylor, Notes on the Geology of the We§t

Tamar District, Tasmania, Trans, and Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, 1880, XVI, p. 156.
Many observers mention faults in Tasmania. Harrison writes on the region between the
Derwent and mount Wellington as follows: 'As a very homely illustration we may
suppose a set of wooden cubes to be laid out upon a yielding foundation, say a sofa
cushion, so that the surface of the whole represents a perfectly level superficies. Anon,
and some disturbing force changes the horizontal plane of each cube into a gently sloping
incline, and forms at every joint a diminutive escarpment. If we can only imagine that
some molten substance, such as wax, has been forced through the various interstices
from beneath, so that its overflow partially fills up the miniature valleys, we shall have
a model representation of Hobart Town with its sandstones, dislocations, and eruptive
rocks ; *’ T. Harrison, Notes on the Geology of Hobart Town, Trans. Proc. Roy. Soc.,
Victoria, VI, 1865, p. 133.

^ R. v. Lendenfeld, Forschungsreisen in den Australischen Alpen; Peterm. Mitth.,
Erg&nzungsheft, Nr. 87, 1887, 37 pp., maps.



EAST COAST OP AUSTRALIA


167


OB.ra]


iQftp of New South Wales 'by Clarke and Wilkinson shows that nearly
meridional zones of granite and steeply folded Silurian, accompanied by
a number of similar zones of Devonian and ancient porphyry, form the east
coast nearly up to Bateman’s bay in lat. 2° 35' 40" S. ; from this point to
the north, their eastern border, following approximately the meridian of
long. 150° E., recedes further and further from the coast; north of Mudjgee
on the watershed between the Hunter river and the Macquarie in about
lat. 32® 10' S., the whole cordillera, still directed north and south, disappears
beneath flat-lying Carboniferous beds

While the zone is covered in transgression by the Carboniferous, there
crops out to the east of it, in nearly the same latitude, along the Manning
river, on the north border of the same overlying Carboniferous, another
great zone of granite and Silurian, also striking north and south, which
very nearly coincides with the New England range and runs nortli wards
to Queensland. The cordillera thus consists here of two folded ranges,
which alternate with each other; Ixtth strike with tlie meridian. The
range coming from the south lies between long. 148° and. 150° E. and
disappears before it has reached lat. 32° S. ; the range running to the north
begins in lat. 32° S. and its central part lies between loug> 151° and 152° E.
The Carboniferous formation surrounds the end of one and the beginning
of the other range, and extends along the coast from lat. 35° 40' S. to
beyond Port Macquarie, i. e. to beyond lat. 31° 30' S. More recent plant-
bearing beds overlie it in the south.

In this intermediate region of horizontal beds Sydney is situated, and
the most important coal-measures of the colony occur here ; these are the
Glossopteris beds. The river-basin of the Hunter belongs to this region.

Let us again turn our attention to that folded range wliich begins m
lat. 32° S. with the New England range. Daintree’s excellent description
of Queensland well enables us to recognize its peculiar features In the
north part of New South Wales this range consists of folded lower
Palaeozoic beds through the midst of which rise high granite mountains.
Towards the north the granite seems to disappear ; Devonian beds form
the greater part of the range and an extremely long band of Devonian
forms the continuation of the mountainous zone, following the course of
the coast with a gentle curvature up to Shoalwater bay, i. e. to beyond
lat. 22° 30' S. According to existing accounts this chain thus extends

* Geological Sketch-Map of New South Wales, compiled from the Original Map of the
late Rev. W. B. Clarke by C. S. Wilkinson ; contained in Ann. Rep. Dep. Mines, N.S.W.,
for 1880, 4to, Sydney, 1881. According to Clarke (Remarks, &c., p. 18) the tin-bearing
granite of Queensland and New South Wales is of Devonian age, and consequently much
younger than the other granite.

* R. Daintree, Notes on the Geology of Queensland, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1872,
XXYIII, pp. 271-317, map ; R. Etheridge, Description of the Palaeozoic and Mesozoic
Fossils of Queensland, tom. cit, pp. 317-359, pi.



168 THE BORDERS OF THE PACIFIC OCEAN [PAirrin

froiu the parallel of 32° S., through degrees of latitude, to the north.
Its opposite slopes are fonned of different sediments. On the east side
towaixls the sea there lies an almost continuous zone of Mesozoic plant-
bearing beds, which begins in lat. 30° S. in New South Wales and extends
to beyond lat. 25° S.* This is the chief region of the Thinnfeldia beds,*
and, as we see, this important area .of deposition lies outside that of the
coal-measures. On the west side of the mountains, however, lies a long
zone of Carboniferous deposits. It has afforded marine fossils of the
Car^niferouS limestone and plants of the Culm. The beds are thrown
into very broad undulations. This zone extends from the head waters of
the Hunter along the west side of the New England range, and Daintree
has traced the great outliers running parallel to the coast which form its
prolongation even as far as between lat. 21° and 20° S. These outliers of
the extreme north are situated in a granite region to which we shall refer
presently.

The cordillera slopes to the west, beneath the desert sandstone and t]ie
marine Cretaceous deposits. These form the soil of the deserts of the
interior up to the gulf of Carpentaria and far away to the west, only
interrupted here and there by ridges of granite or Palaeozoic sediments.
At one locality, however, near Maryborough in lat. 25" SI/ S., a little outlier
of marine Cretaceous appears on the east side of the range resting on the.
Mesozoic plant-bearing beds.

The chain which begins with the New England range, terminates as we
have seen at Shoalwater bay: it consists here of folded Devonian. It
forms the middle part of the Australian coast which projects furthest tO
the east. In its northern part a strike of N. 30° W., corresponding to the
course of the coast, has been observed in places. On the west side of
Broad sound a great' ridge of granite rocks crops out to the west of this
Devonian range. Just as the long anticlinals of a folded range replace
each other alternately, so apparently do these several zones. On the
southern part of this granite range lie the most northerly patches of
the Carboniferous zone ; some Devonian and Silurian accompany the range
in the west towards the plain, but from lat. 22° S. to the north the whole .
coast, as far as it is known, is formed of granite rocks. In this region the
mountain^ have lost considerably in height. The desert sandstone
encroaches steadily upon them from the west.

Rattray has described the desert land around cape York. ■ The granite
mountains extend along the east coast to the north ; cape Melville
(lat. 14° 15' S.), cape Direction (lat. 12° 50' S.), then Weymouth cape, Fair
cape, and others, consist of granite ; the extremity of the peninsula is of

' The south part of the Clarence river is desenbed by Stephens, Notes on the Geoloj^
of the Southern Portion of the Clarence River Basin ; Proc. Linn. Soo. N.S.W. for 1883,
VIII, 1884, pp. 519-531.



CAPE YORK


169


CH. m] '

porphyiy. The desert sandstone forms the subsoil far and wide; on the
island of Albany it reaches the sea. A red deposit resembling laterite
rests upon it over large areas ^

The islands and reefs of Torres strait consist in. no small part of
granite, and form the continuation of the cordillera towards New Guinea.

According to the observations hitherto made, the folded ranges of the
Avutralian continent are parts of a mountain system distinguished by
common characters. They are all more or less meridional, or so arranged
that with a slight deviation from the north and south direction, such as
occurs for instance in north Queensland, they form* as a whole an arc
slightly convex to the east. They are older than the Carboniferous p,nd
in Queensland in particular older than the Culm. The chains rise both to
east and west, but chiefly to the east of the line of depressions which is
marked by lake Eyre, lake Torrens, and Spencer gulf. The first is
Flinders range, the second Adelaide range, the third Barrier and Grey
ranges, the direction of which is continued far in the north by McKinlay
range; the last, according to Daintree, also consists of ancient rocks.
There now follow, to the cast, the members of the great cordillera, namely
a chain which run’s from Tasmania through the Australian Alps up to the
Hunter river in lat. 32° S. ; a second which replaces the first in lat. 32° S.,
east of the Hunter, and strikes parallel to the coast up to al)out lat.
22° 30' S. ; finally a third which follows and replaces the second on the
west side of its northern end, then decreases in height and, directed to
the north-north-jvest, extends beyond cape York through the islands of
Torres straits to New Guinea.

The volcanic formations have not yet been mentioned, although they
play no inconsiderable part in the structure of the cordillera. There is
here no question of those older eruptive rocks which, within the folded
Palaeozoic series and in unmistakable association with the auriferous
deposits, have played such an important part in these countries, but we
are concerned with the much more recent lavas of middle Tertiary or even
later age. These are exclusively basic. On the higher parts of the
cordillera and its slopes, from Tasmania through Victoria, New South
Wales, and Queensland, many basaltic streams and sheets are visible,
resting, in places on leaf-bearing beds which cannot be older than the
middle Tertiary. Daintree has shown that the desert sandstone of Queens-
land rests upon lavas of this kind. At the same time it must be borne in
mind that this widely extended aeolian formation is older than the fauna
of the great marsupials, such as Diprotodon and its contemporaries, which
are met 'v^ith in ■ much more recent breccias and in the erosion valleys of
the desert sandstone.

' A. Rattray, Notes on the Geology of the Cape York Peninsula, Australia ; Quart
Joum. Geol. Soc., 1869, XXV, pp. 297-305.



160 * THE BOBDEBS OF THE PACIFIC OCEAN [PARini-

In Queensland, somewhat north of lat. 21° S., on the other hand,
a number of eruptive centres occur which are shown to be of recent age
by the complete preservation of their ash cones; in some places .their lavas
have flowed oyer the desert sandstone. Similarly’ volcanic formations,'
still bearing their ash cones, are met with in the south, as in that part of
Victoria where the direction of the mountains lies transverse to the
structure, or in other words, where the elevations but not the folds are
bent round towards the west. These volcanic formations, bearing all the
external signs of a "recent date, are continued through the south of Victoria
to the west. The cone of mount Gambier is superposed on horizontal
marine beds of Tertiary age; Woods has described it in detail^. The
remains not only of great marsupials, byt also of the dingo, have been
found in or beneath the ashes of these volcanos.

Basic volcanic eruptions have thus taken place in the cordillera since
the Miocene period, and in the north, as well as in Victoria, they have
lasted up to a very recent period. .

There is little to say of the deserts of the interior. All that enter-
prising travellers have seen or collected in these inhaspitable regions is
granite, which appears to crop out at the surface in a weathered condition
over vast areas; ancient schists; some exposures of marine Mesozoic
deposits; and a vast covering of desert sandstone. The doubts which
have been raised as to the presence of marine Jurassic beds in the east
of the country have already lieen mentioned ; the same uncertainty affects
all the finds hitherto made in the interior; the Cretaceous alone can be*
regarded as definitely identified. This certainly extends from the western
slopes of the cordillera, or more exactly from the outlier on its east side
near Maryborough in Queensland, to mount Stuart in Grey range, beyond
this past lake Eyre, to the north-west nearly to the gulf of Carpentaria,
and certainly much further still into the interior.

The explorers who have entered the country from the north-west coast
have also encountered only granite and desert sandstone, or possibly basalt
as well, e.g. on the Victoria river. True Jurassic fossils are not obtained
until we reach the Glenelg river between lat. 15° and 16° S.; this was
the locality assigned to the specimens sent to Europe which Ncumayr
described ; they show a striking correspondence with the species collected
by Gregory and his successors in the more southerly parts of the west
coast Similar deposits have as yet nowhere been met with in the centre

* J. E. Woods, Geological Observations in South Australia, 8vo, London, 1862, p. 224
et seq.

* Neumayr, op. cit., p. 140 et seq. Depuch island, long. 117° 44'* E., lat. 20° 37' S.,
is said to be a great accumulation of blocks of greenstone rising 514 feet high above
the flat coral reef of the neighbourhood; Wickham, Note on Depuch Island, Joum.
Qeogr. Soc., 1842, XII, pp. 79-83.



161


CH.m] AUSTRAUA AND SOUTH AM^OA

or of Australia, and we must for t&e present consider these remark-
able sediments, which recall so strongly the Jurassic deposits of Europe, as
confined to the west of the table-land . * •

Let us now cross to the other side -of the Pacific Ocean, within the
same parallels of latitude, keeping in mind the results we have obtained in
Australia and New Zealand.

On the western border of the Gran Chaco rise a number of lofty
narrow chains composed of ancient rocks and running north and south :
the dip of the beds is very steep. The most easterly of these, near the
' town of Cordoba, as for instance the sierra Ischilin, sierra dc Cordoba and
sierra Ccrezuela, consist of granite, gneiss, and Archaean schists. Further
'north the sierra de Aconquija, formed of granite and gneiss, and a large
number of narrow parallel ranges composed of Cambrian and Silurian
beds continue this system of meridional sierras as far as Bolivia (I, p. 512).
Further to the west the series of marine formations is completed by the
addition of mighty Meso^ic deposits. Recently, Mojsisovics has shown
that the marine Trias also occurs in the northern part of the Andes, its
proved by the specimens found by Reiss and Strubel in Peru, and by
lindig in ChaparaP.

With the completion of the Mesozoic series we reach the great
mountains. Beyond them, there lies towards the west the deep valley
of Chili, then the singular Coast cordillera, and last the Ocean.

Now let us cross Australia, but instead of from east to west we will
take an, opposite course and travel from west to oast.

In place of the Gran Chaco or the Pampas, there lie before us the
deserts of Western Australia ; instead of the lagoons of the western border,
the sheets of water which extend from Spencer gulf to lake Eyre ; instead
of the meridional sierras of Cordoba with their ancient rocks, we have
Flinders range, Adelaide range. Barrier and Grey ranges ; and the place of
the other parallel chains is taken by the alternating members of the
Australian cordillera. For a long distance the further extension of the
continent is now concealed by the sea, but beyond it, in New Zealand,
the Mesozoic series is completed, the marine Trias is represented together
with several members of the Jurassic system, and with this completion of
the series we reach the great .ranges and at the same time h region of much
more recent folding K

Just as the Argentine sierras on the border of the great plain cannot
be separated from the principal range of the Andes, but constitute with it

I

* E. von Mojsisovics, ArktischeTriasfaunen; Mdm. Acad. 'Imp. ScL Saint-P^tersb., 1886,
?• B4r., XXXIII, p. 151.

* On the greater completeness of the series in New Zealand, see in particular Hector,
The Geological' Formations of New Zealand compared with those of Australia ; Journ. Roj.
Soc. N.S.W. for 1879, XIII,. 1880, pp. 66,67.

80LLAS 11 • If



162 THE BORDEBS OF THE PAGHIO OCEAN [PAtom

a single mountain system constructed on a common plan, so all the ehamw
from Flinders range to the Australian cordillera, including the longer of
the' two syntactic mountain' segments of New 'Zealand, must be equidly
regarded as parts of a single system similarly constructed on a common
plan.

In this connexion we may recall the remarkable distribution of the
muine Tertiary beds which border the sooth coast of Australia, enter into
the transverse subsidence of Bass strait, and oven reach the southern part
of North Gippsland, but are entirely absent on llie whole east coast of the
jnainland, as well as on the cast coast of Tasmania, which is bounded
abruptly by steep clifis. Clarke consequently has been led to conjecture
that the continuation of the Australian continent towards the east is cut off
by a recent subsidence ^ •

In confirmation of this hypothesis it may be pointed out that on L6rd
Howe island, between Australia and New Zealand, great bones of terrestrial
animals have been found which are ascribed to the gigantic lacertilian
forms Megalania and Notiosaurus. On the Australia mainland these
genera were contemporaries of Diprotodoh and other great maraupials,
an^ thus lived after the deposition of the desert sandstone, or in very
recent times. The existing area of Lord Howe island could not possibly
* have supported such large animals

3. New Caledonia. Many years ago distinguished observers, such as
Dana and Clarke, had been led to regard New Caledonia as the continua-;
tion of New Zealand ; the connexion was said to be indicated by the strike
of the north-western peninsula of New Zealand, and by Norfolk island;^
We know now that the direction' of the peninsula docs not correspond with’
the principal strike of New Zealand. There are certainly, however, some
features in New Caledonia which rev^l a particular resemblance with
New Zealand.

Gamier and Heurtcau have published detailed reports on the structure
of this great island : its fossils have been described by Deslongchamps and
P. Fischer \ The structure ^ as follows : —

On the south-west coast, and especially in the southern half of the-,

^ Clarke,' Remarks on the Sedimentary Formations of New South Wales, illustrated by
References to other Provinces of Australasia, 4th ed., 8vo, Sydney, 1878, p. 7.

* K D. Fitzgerald, Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W;for 1884, IX, 18%, p. 1206.

* Gamier, Essai sur la gdologie'et les ressources mindrales de la Nouvelle-Calddonie,
Ann. Mines, Paris, 1867, 6* sdr., XII, p. 1, map ; £. Heurteau, Rapport k M, le Ministre
de la Marine et des Colonies sur la constitution gdologique et les richesses mindralies de
la Mouvelle-Calddonie, op. cit, 1876, 7* sdr., IX, pp. 282-454, map ; for the fossils,
£. Deslongchamps, Documents sur la gdologie de laNouvelle-Calddonie, Bull. Soc.Linn.
Norm., 1864, VIII, pp. 832-378 ; P. Fischer, Motes sur les roches fossiliferes de I’Archipel
Calddonien, Bull. Soc. gdol. de Fr., 1867, 2* sdr., XXIV, p. 457, and F. Teller in
£. Mojsisovics, ArktischeTriasfaunen, Mdm. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Fdtersb., 1886, 7* sdr.,
XXXIII, p. Ill et seq.'



CH. ra] NEW CALEDONIA 168

island, melaphyve and associated tuf& appear in several places. These are
followed on the east by-an altered rock in which Spirigera Wreyi of the
New Zealand Trias has been found. This is overlaid by Trias 8bales*with
Peeudomonotis Pichmond/Mna and MytUue prdblematicvs, that is by the
equivalent of the middle Trias of New Zealand. These deposits are kno^
in the islands of Ducos and Hugon. The Trias zone is followed by a much
longer narrqw zone striking parallel to the coast and formed of a series of
coabbearing beds. These beds are known on the coast for a considerable
distance to the north-west and consist chiefly of sandstone and- conglo-
merate; some of the marine fossils found in them have been identified with
species of the European Lias ; the coal is supposed to be Bhaetic or lias.
The zone which follows the coal-bearing beds is by far the most important
and occupies the greater part of the island ; it is an enormous band' of
serpentine and green schists accompanied by dykes of cuphotide, which is
distinguished by its richness in chromite and nickel. This band of
serpentine forms the ile des Fins and the southernmost part of New
Caledonia, then the coasts on the north-east side up to Uailu, that is for
half the length of the island, and on the south-west side up to Mont Dore.
It then gives place on this side to the sedimentary zones already mentioned,
and. reaches the south-west coast further to the north; finally, striking
right across the middle of the island, it reaches the most northerly point of
New Caledonia and is oven continued beyond it into the island of Paaba.
This band of serpentine, striking from the tie des Pins to' Paaba, rising in
many isolated bosses, black, barren, and rocky, is frequently covered by
dark red clay resulting from its disintegration. It often occupies the
whole breadth of the island and is characteristic of New Caledonia.

All the rocks hitherto mentioned strike to the north-west in accordance
with the direction of the island. This renders it all the more strange that
in the northern part of New Caledonia there arc other and older rocks
which all strike iti quite another direction. Heurteau describes them as
a zone of mica-schists bordered on both sides by slates. The mica-schists
form the fairly large mountain ridge which separates the river Diahot from
the east coast ; this ridge is directed to the north-west like the band of
serpentine and the length of the island itself, but the mica-i^hists according
to Heurteau’s explicit statement strike across this ridge to the north-east.
The slates extend to the south nearly as far as Uailu, from which point
onwards, as we have already mentioned, the coast is formed of serpentine
down to the southern end of New Caledonia. Crystalline limestone is
interstratified with the slate zones on each side. ■

Heurteau’s description of the valley of the Diahot shows that the strike
of ibis ancient schist is actually N. 30° E. to N. 55° E. ; it is solely at the
north end of the island that the strike of the northern slate zone bends
more and more into the general strike to the north-west.



164 • THE BORDEBS OP THE PACIFIC OCEAN [parthi'

Thus we recognize in New Caledonia two groups of rocks which strike '
in different directions. The first, occupying much the more extensive area,
is diiected to the north-west like the island itself, and consists of a zone of
melaphyre and tuff, of Trias, Meso^ic cOal-measures, and the great band of
serpentine. The second group strikes to the north-east, is known only in the
north, and consists of mica-schists and slate. The first group is a fragment
of a mountain complex displaying parallel zones ; as to its precise relations
to the second group it is not possible at present .to form any opinion.

The age of the great serpentine band is not known. Such a vast mass
of 'serpentine has never yet been encountered at any other point on 'the
whole west coast of the Pacific Ocean. Its position would seem to assign
it to the outer zones of a great mountain range, like the serpentines whicli
are known at -so many points in the flysch : Heurteau, on account of the
presence of nickel and cinnabar in both cases, has compared it to the
serpentine of ‘New Almada in the coast chain of California h The more
significant is tlie fact that fossils, which he regards as upper Cretaceous,
have recently been described by Batte from the interior of New California®.

Recent volcanic rocks have nowhere been observed in the island.

I. do not propose to refer in this place to the coral formations which
surround New Caledonia, nor to the important calcareous deposits which
■ form the parallel series of the Loyalty islands. These will be discussed in
a later chapter. It is important, however, in view of later descriptions, to
mention the fact that Tenison Woods has described marine Tertiary fossils
from Viti Levu. The .species are extinct, but still of tropical character ®.

There is an extreme dearth of information as regards the islands which
follow towards the north-west — so far as they do not consist of coral reefs,
or more recent volcanic formations — and only their general direction
permits us to form any conjecture as to their structural relations.

Only isolated specimens have been described from New Britain and
Ne^v Irdand. As regards New Ireland, Schleinitz informs, us that at
Carteret and Sulphur harbour the mountains consist of limestone, but
rolled pebbles show that granite, porphyry, hornblende, and sandstone may
occur in the interior of -the island. This agrees with laversidge’s account,
who mentions besides porphyry and diorite, some grey limestone probably
ancient, from a mountain 2,500 feet high, also somewhat ancient volcanic
ashes, re’d jasper, sandstone, epidote, and amygdaloidal lavas. From New
Britain various volcanic rocks and white limestone are recorded *.

' Heurteau, op. cit., p. 399.

* Ratte, Pioo. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., 1884, IX, p. 681. The genera quoted are Bostellaria,
Fusus, Fleurotomaria (?), Belemnitea, Nautiiug.

° J. E. Tenison Woods, On some Fossils from Levuka, Viti ; Proo. Linn. Soc. N.S.W. ,
1879, IV, pp. 858, 859.

* Von Schleinitz, Annal. d. Hydrographie, 1876, IV, p. 365 ; A. Liversidge, Bocks from
New Britain and New Ireland, Joum. Roy. Soc. N.S.W. for 1882, XVI, pp. 47-51.



THE SEA OP BANDA


166


OH. m]

4. Tha Sea of B<mda, Borneo. As we approach New Gwmea we
perceive the importance of the Tertiary formation in the archipelago of
Shndu. Wo have already seen that the marine Tertiary sediments on the
south coast of Australia are widely distributed in the Great bight, and that
they enter Bass strait, but that the whole east coast of Australia and
Tasmania up to Torres strait has never yet furnished any trace of
marine Tertiary beds. In Hall sound, New Guinea, Maclay collected
marine Tertiary shells, but Tenison Woods maintains that these are entirely
different from those . of the Tertiary deposits of South Australia
According to Martin’s descriptions a large part of the north-western coasts
of ‘New Guinea is formed of Tertiary limestone, chiefly distinguished by
Orbitoides and Lithothamnia, and probably of early Miocene age: it ends
in cliffs 200 to 800 meters high. This limestone likewise forms the little
island of Koor in the south-west, and several of the adjacent larger islands,
as well as the little island of Sowek in the north of Geelvink bay. On the
island of Lakahia, opposite Merkus-Ort, sandstone with coal-beds is said to
occur \

The snow-covered mountains in the interior of New Guinea are- wholly
unknown. .

The Malay arc, which runs from Bunita through Malacca, the Andamans
and Nicol)ars, Sumatra and Java, to beypnd Flores (I, p. 458), is difficult to
follow, since our knowledge of the eastern parts of this long, series of
islands is very slight; it is, however, quite apparent that Sandalwood island
and Timor lie outside the arc. /

Very little is known about Sandalioood ida'nd. Timor differs consider-
ably from the descriptions we possess of the islands lying vfithin the are.
Since Beyrich first pointed out tlie presence of Carboniferous limestone on
Timor, numerous investigators, Martin and Wichmann in particular, have
published ticcounts of the rocks of this island. Ancient schists, tonalite,
diorite and serpentine ate present; the Carboniferous limestone is widely
distributed; the occurrence of Trias has not been placed beyond doubt;
the Tertiary deposits occupy a laige area, and appear, as on Java, to rise to
a height of several thousand feet in the interior of the island

* G. S. WflkinBon, Notes on a Collection of Geological Specimens collected by
W. Macleay, Esq., from the Coasts of New Guinea, Cape York, and neighbouring Islands,
in Clarke, Remarks on the Sedimentary Formations of Now South Wales, 4th ed.,pp. 97,
98; further, J. E. Tenison Woods, On a Tertiary Formation at New Guinea, Proc.
Linn. Soo. N.S.W., 1877, II, pp. 125-128 and 267, 268 ; further, by the same. Physical
Structure and Geology of Australia, Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., 1883, VII, p. 381.

.* K. Martin, Eine Terti&rformation von Neu-Guinea und benachbaften Inseln, naob
Sammlungen von Macklot und von Rosenberg’s, Sammlungeii des geologischen Reichs-
Museums in Leiden, edited by K. Martin and A. Wichmann ; Beitrftge zur Geologie
Ost-Asiens und Australiens, 1881-1883, 1. Ser., pp. 65-83.

’ E. Beyrich, Ueber eine Ephlenkalk-Fauna auf Timor, Abh. Akad. Berlin, 1864, p.61 ;
K. Martin, Die versteinerungsfQhrenden Sedimente Timers, nach Sam mlu ngen von



166 THE BORDEES OP THE PACIFIC OCEAN [PABrnr

Timor does not follow the direction of the great arc and its relations
with the latter are not known. Let us now turn to the eastern end of
the arc.

It is to my mind a very instructive fact that steep folds occur, as
Verbeek has shown, in the Tertiary beds which lie at the foot of the
volcanos in the residency of Gheiibon in Java^ The continuation of the
mica-schists of Java has been discovered in Madura, overlain, in this case
as in that, by the marine Tertiary sediments. The line of volcanos is the
only indication of the continuation of the arc through Bali, Suinbawa and
Flores. Tertiary ‘formations, as in Java and Madura, play a prominent part
in the structure of. these islands. The borders of the Ba/nida sea have
been' described by Riedel.' From his accounts wo gain the most important
fact that the islands of !^mang, Damma, Toun, Nila and Serna form a long
and connected chain of still active volcanos ; aA- their fuither continuation
we must probably regard the volcanic islands of Tuur, the most southerly
of the Watubela group (south of the Gorong archipelago) ; its last eruption
took place in the year 1659. These six volcanic islands lie exactly on the
prolongation of the great zone of volcanos which curves down from Java,
and they carry the arc into the immediate neighbourhood of -New Guinea.
The fact is all ‘the more remarkable since outside the arc volcanic
phenomena are only known at one' point, that is on the east side of the
island of Motu

A series of middle Tertiary beds, consisting of sandstone, marl, or lime-
stone, forms a great part of the islands lying in front of the volcanic chain.
Leti and Moa are formed of this series, while the next island, Lakor, is
a recent coral formation. The Luang-Sermatta group is also middle
Tertiary, as well as the Babar group ; from the latter, however, Mesozoic
limestone said to be Jurassic is also mentioned. The Tanembar or
Timorlao group consists almost exclusively of low-lying coral limestone,
but in the south-eastern part of Jamdena, the largest island of the group,
late Tertiary land is visible. In the Kei group the great island Nuhujuut
is middle Tertiary; it rises towards the north to, a height of 400-500
meters. The principal group of Aaru is a recent limestone plateau
traversed by salt-water channels, 25 to 800 meters in breadth, which cross
the island obliquely from coast to coast ; in the south-east recent Tertiary
land rises to a height of 50 metqrs It is clear from Martin’s acc6unts
that these Tertiary deposits are a continuation of those of New Guinea.

Reinwardt, Hacklot und Schneider, Samml. geol. Beichsmus. in Leiden, 1881-1883, I,
pp. 1-64, plate ; A. Wichmam, Gesteine von Timor; op. cit., 1882, II, pp. 1-72, plate. -

* R. D. M. Verbeek, Over de dikte der tertiaire afzettingen op Java ; Verb. Akad.
Amsterdam, 1883, XXIII, D, 11 pp., plate.

‘ J. G. F. Riedel, De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selobes ‘en Papua, 8vo,
’s Gravenhage. 1886, maps. A map of Aara in Verb. Gesellsch. f. Erdk. Berlin, 1885,
XII, pi. i.



BORNEO


16T


OH. m] .


The two islands lying north-east of Timor, Eetiar (or Weetar) and
Keisar (1,200 meters high), each consist of ancient rocks with others which
are apparently of Mesozoic age. In like manner, ancient rocks, said te be'
associated in places with Palaeozoic or Mesozoic limestone, form the high
chain which extends from Biu^ (2,500 meters) past Ceram (also rising to
2,600 meters) to the Seranglas and Gorong archipelago. Middle Tertiary
beds accompany this range, and fonn the island of Amboina. As on the
Irawadi, the Nicobars,' Sumatra, and Java, so now on the east coast of
CeraiA also, we meet with springs of petroleum

Tlte middle Tertiary aeries, distinguished in ' some of its members by
coal beds, or by Nummulites, Orbitoidca, peculiar Lithothamnia and the
genus Cycloclypeus, is assigned by Verbeek to the Eocene in part, but is
regarded by Martin as Miocene. Martin has found Tertiary limestone in
Amboina, Buton, and Madura, and notably in Borneo, where it is widely
distributed^. . . .

It cannot be denied that the volcanic chain which extends from Bomang
to Tuur presents a close resemblance to the volcanic arc on the inner side
of the Lesser Antilles. The Tertiary islands and the recent limestone
plateaux similarly correspond to the succeeding outer arc. The Banda sea
would thus appear to be homologous with the Caribbean ; ahd the Arafura
sea, lying on the foreland,, with the gulf of Mexico or the adjacent part of
the Atlantic Ocean.

Although Mesozoic or Palaeozoic sediments are frequently meptioned
as occurring in this region, yet as far as my information extends no organic
remains, older than the 'I’ertiarypcriotl, have hitherto been met with except
in Bm'Tieo.

We possess a geological map of this great island, constructed by
Sehwwmr and Gaffron in the years 1843-1848 ; it comprises the southern

* Riedel, op. cit., p. 86. On the petroleum of the east coast of Sumatra see Everwijn,
.Jaarb. Mynw. Ned. 0. In4., V, p. 186; in North Sumatra, op. cit., IV, o, .pp. 15-33
and 188 ; in Soerabaja, op. cit., IV, h, p. 118 ct passim.

* K. Martin, Die wicht4p)ten Daten unserer geolo£pschcn Konntniss vom nieder-
lilndisch-ostindischen Archipel, Bydr. tot dc Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde van Ned.
Indi6 ; uitgeg. vanw. bet kon. Inst., &c.,,ter Gelegenh. van bet VI. intemat. Congress d.
Orientalist, te Leiden, 8vo, 's Gravenhage, 1883, pp. 17-34 ; cf. also D. Schneider,
Geologiscbc Uebersiebt iiber den holliindisch-ostindischen Archipel, Jahrb. k. k. geol.'
Beichsanst., 1876, XXVI, pp. 113-134, maps. For Tertiary formations see in particular
K. Martin, Neue Fundpunkte von Teiiiiir-Gesteinen im indischen Archipel, nach
Sammlungen von Horner, Korthals, Macklot, Mflller und Reinwardt, Samml. geol.
Reichsmus. in Lciden,>l, pp. 131-179 ; also A. BOhm, Ueber einige terti&re Fossilieii von
der Insel Madura, Denkschr. k. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1882, XLV, p. 359 ;'on the disputed
question as to the age of these deposits I must refer the reader to Verbeek, Bo6ttger,
(^yler, and C. von Fritsch, Die Eoc&nformation von Borneo und ihre Versteincrungen,
Hidaeontographica, 1875, Suppl. Ill, Heft 1, and Verbeek, Boettger, and K. von Fritsch,
.Die Terti&rformation von Sumatra und ihre . Thierreste, op. cit., 1880, Suppl. Ill,
Heft 8-11.



168 THE BORDERS OP THE PACIFIC OCEAN [pamiii

ai^a and extends a little beyond the equator; there are also a series of
detailed descriptions by Dutch mining engineers and an instructive general
account of the whole by K. Martin \

The first explorers, Homer and ‘Schwaner, had already recognized that
in the interior of Borneo mountains exist formed of granite,' .serpentine,
crystalline schist and other ancient rocks, which strike in a similar direc-
ti<Hi to the hill-ranges of Celebes and Halmahera; the hollows between
them are, however, filled with Tertiary sediments. Martin shows how
Pechel and Wallace had independently of each other perceived this curious
homology of the three adjacent islands which yet finds so little expression
in the outlines of Borneo \

Besides this Tertiary transgression, Verbeek has recently made known
in Borneo fossiliferous marine deposits of the Cretaceous period, occurring
pn the Seterocang, a tributaiy of the river Kapoea' which fiows down to
.the west coast. Amongst the specimens collected by van Schelle, Ceinitz
has recognized some fossils so closely related to Vola gvMdricoetata,
Trigoniu, limhata, Goniomya denignata, Hemiaster svMacunoam and
Hemiakter pteheitis, as well as other upper Cretaceous species, that he
correlated the deposit with the upper Senonian

* Tenison Woods asserts that the coalfields of the west are contem-
poraneous, in part at least, with the Newcastle beds of Australia; with
regard to Labuan this is merely a conjecture ; the coal district of Sarawak
has afibrded Phyllotheca civ^raliH and Vertebraria sp., that is to say species
characteristic of these Australian deposits *.

Finally, marine fossils, either Devonian or Carboniferous, are also
present; van Schelle mentions traces of them in the western residency
and Tenison Woods quotes Fenestella and Stenopora from a limestone in
the north ,

5. Cochin-chinui, Tongldng. In recent times our knowledge of the

’ K. Martin, von GaiFron’s geologiache Karte von SOd-Bomeo, Samml. geol. Reichsmus.
in Leiden, I, pp. 179-193, map ; also op. cit., p. 132 et seg.

* T. Posewitz’ account of the case is perhaps too uncompromising, TTnserc geologischen
Kenntnisse von Borneo ; Jahrb. k. ung. geol. Anst., 1882, VI, pp. 135-162, map.

* R. D. M. Verbeek, Over het voorkomen van gesteenten der krijtformatie in de
residentie Westemfdeeling van Borneo ; Verpl. en Meded. K. Akad. Wet. Amsterdam,-
Afd. Natuurk., 1884, XIX, 2. reeks, med. pp. 39-43. Martin regards these deposits as
a tropical modification of a Tertiary formation, but no member so far known among the
Tertiary deposits of Java and Sumatra appears to bo so rich in species usually supposed
to be Cretaceous types.

* Tenison Woods, The Borneo Coalfields, Nature, April 23, 1885, pp. 588, 584 ; cf. also
J. Motley, On the Geology of Labuan, Quart. Joum. GeoL Soc., 1853, IX, pp. 54-57.

* Schelle, Bericht in Peterm. Mitth., 1885, p. 320; Tenison Woods, The Geology of
Malaysia, South China, &c.. Nature, Jan. 7, 1886, p. 232. Hart Everett mentions
crinoidal limestone from north-east and north-west Borneo, but without any closer
indication of age ; Report on the Exploration of the Caves' of Borneo, Proc. Roy. Soo.,
1880, XXX, PP..310-321.



COCHIN^CfflNA


169


OH.m]


luamland of Further India has been largely extended by the 'labours of
French geologists. The bold expeditions of Gamier have been followed by
the investigations of Ratte and Feliton in lower Cochin-china and Cambodia,
of .E. Fuchs on the coast of Annam and in Tbngking, and of Jourdy on the
east of Tongking While many que.stions must still remain open, sufficient
is ascertained to furnish the following account.

As in Borneo, recent eruptive rocks are very feebly represented;
isolated occurrences of such ' rocks surround indeed the south and east
coasts of Further India, but on the mainland itself they are known only at
a single locality, quite close to the south coast. A boss of basalt occurs
at this place, which is situated south of Bien-Hoa. The Tigre, a little
island on the east coast (N. of lat. 70® N.), consists of trachyte ; trachyte
is also known from Pulo Condore and Pulo Wai in the east and west of
the southern extremity of Cochin-china.

A part of Pulo Condore, however, consists of granulite, and this is the
forerunner of numerous protrasions of this rock which rise near cape
Saint-Jaeques and in the neighbourhootl of Baria. They are accompanied
by diorite and are associated towards the noith with considerable masses
of ancient schistose rocks. These isolated exposures of ancient rocks,
extending towards cape Saint-Jacques, must ' l)o regarded together with
Pulo Condore as the southern extremity of the long range of hills which,
starting from the granitic table-land of Lao.s, descends along the east coast
of Annam;

We will first describe somewhat in detail the delta of the Mekong.

Tlie gi'anulite hills of Baria are continued to the north-west to Bicn-
Holl. Still fuither to the north-west there rises from the alluvial land
a ridge of friable sandstone, the first outlier of a denuded sheet of sand-
stone, numerous remains of which again appear in the north superposed
upon Rhaetic coal beds ; to the west of the sandstone riilge rises another
granulitie mountain near Tay-Ninh. On the west side of the great river
between Chaudok and Rach Gia a group of granulitie ahd granitic hills
again occurs, accompanied by the same sandstone; to the north-west of
this group, western Cambodia as far as it is known is covered over wide
areas by the friable sandstone, resting upon upturned beds of limestone,
which are assigned to the lower Carboniferous. The great islcCnd of


^ P. Ratte, Note surrindo-Chinc, Bull. Soc. geol. dc Fr., 1875-1876, 3® ser., IV, pp.509-
522 ; Petiton, Esquisse g^ologique dc la Cocbinchine fran 9 aise, du Cambodge (province
de Poursat) et de Siam (province dc Battambang), op. cit., 1882-1883,* 3® ser., XI, pp.
384-399, map ; E. Fuchs et E. Saladin, Mdmoiro sur I'exploration des gites de com-
bustibles et de quelques-unes des gites metalliferes de Tlndo-Chine, Ann. Mines, 1882,
8® s^r., II, pp. 185-298, map ; E. Jouixly, Sur la gdologie de Test du Tonkin, Compt.
Rend., 1886, CIl, pp. 937-939, and Bull, Soc. geol. de Fr., 1885-1886, 8® sdr., XIV, pp.
14-20, plate ; Note compldmentaire, tom. cit., pp. 448-453.



170 THE BORDERS OF TH^) PACIFIC OCEAN [PABTin

•

Phonkok consists of the same sandstone ; which also forms the EUephant
mountain situate to the north of the island.

These heights, and especially the ^nulitic ridges and mountains
between Baria and Bien-Hok, those of Tay-Ninh, and on the other side of
the Mekong those of Chaudok, form an incomplete boundary 'about the
vast alluvial region ; or perhaps they should rather be regarded as repre-
senting islands and peninsulas united by the alluvial land which now alone
forms the whole region up to its southernmost extremity. The part played
by the great interior lakes of Cambodia in this extensive advance of the
growing land is very peculiar. Fuchs has given a lucid description of
the process. The sea once covered the area now occupied by the alluvium
of the Mekong. The mouth of the river then lay far to the east of the
great lakes near the existing province of Pnom Bach^ ; the heights of the
existing province of Kompong Soai, composed of granitic rocks and quartz
porphyry, separated the mouth from the great lakes which then formed
the ntost northerly part of a gulf penetrating deep into the land. The
advance of the river deposits cut off this part of the gulf from the open
sea. The river Tonle Sap, which at present joins the Mekong near Pnom
Penh and unites that river with the lakes, has so trifling a fall that during
one part of the year it bears the high waters of the Mekong northwards
into the lakes and for the other part of the year it Ciirries the overflow of
the lakes southwards into the Mekong. The direction of the waters is
reversed as .soon as the Mekong rises near Pnom Penh to a height of
7-8 meters above mean level ; but it rises every year to a height of 12-14
meters above this •level. .

There is a great dearth of information concerning Annam. We know
that a hilly ridge of granite accompanies the coast, that ancient schists
occur along its. easteni side on the river Tourane near Hue, and that
coal-bearing deposits are also present which probably correspond with those
of Tongking.

The plain of Tongking is much better known. . Friable shales with few
fossils are assigned to the Devonian, but this determination needs confirma-
tion. A very prominent element is a hard limestone resembling marble,
which projects in bluft' rocks from many parts of the delta and forms
outside it innumerable reefs hnd islands. Fossils of the Carboniferous
limestone have been found in it by* Jourdy. Alx>ve it lie calcareous shales
intercalated with sandstone and containing fossils which, according to
Douville, are closely related to MyopJm'ia Gddfuasi of the Keuper. I shall
shortly have to refer to similar Myophorias obtained by Ldezi from
Tshung-tien in Yunnan. There now follow sandstone and shales which
form the coal-bearing series of Tongking. Zciller has examined the flora
of these beds, and- has arrived at the remarkable result that 10 to 12 species
correspond with those of the Bhaetic stage of Europe, while an equal



171


OH..in]. THE PHILIPPINES

nniaber are known in India, on the horizon of either the upper beds of the
lower Gondw&na or the base of the upper Qondw&na. The number of. new
species is comparatively small •

This series, of strata is thrown into folds which strike soUth-west to
north-east; they reach the sea, and Jourdy indicates their continuation on
Hainau, but on what grounds I have no information. Accoi'ding to the
same observer this system of folds striking north-east is traversed by frac-
tures which run from north-west to south-e^t, at right angles to the folds.

Deposits of more recent age than the Rhoetic coal-measui'es are so far
not known in these regions.

6. The Philippine. The observations made in Celebes and Halmahcra
so far known- to me are not sufficient to hazard even a conjecture os to the
structure of these islands. We only know that ancient rocks such as
granite and ancient schists are present, and a large number .of recent
volcanosj many of them still active.

The accounts of the PhUippinee are much more complete, but here
again we are unable to fonn any definite opinion as to the structural plan.
The Philippines have so far furnished no fossil remains of the Palaeozoic
or the Mesozoic period. Superposed upon gneiss, talc-schists, serpentine
and widely distributed gabbro and dialmse, lies a sedimentary series which
consists of a zone of limestone confoimably overlaid by coal-bearing beds
of unknown age, .further of Nummulitic limestone, a more recent coral
limestone reaching a height of 4,000 feet, which I correlate with the
middle Tertiary coral limestone of the Banda islands and Bonino, and
finally recent marine sediments. These forinations are as.sociatod with
a varied scries of volcanic rocks which .date at least from the Nummulitic
period!

All observers are agreed that the ancient formations are to be regarded-
as forming, not a table-land, but a number of chains. Of these chains,
however, only fragments are to be seen ; the sea conceals a large part,' and
another part is smothered up under ashes and tuft’ ejected from the recent
volcauos. The outlines of the islands do not everywhere correspond with
the' strike of the ancient formations, but have been affected in many ways
by the presence of volcanic mosses; this is particularly the case in the
southern part of Luzon.

In 1878 R. von Drasche, in a compendious description of Luzon,
represented the Philippines us a number of chains which in the north of
this island are closely crowded together and run nearly north and south,
but diverge in virgation towards the south and south-west. ‘ In north and
central Luzon, the north and south direction predominates; in the south

^ B. Zeiller, Ezamen de la Flore fossile des couches de charbon du Tong-king, Ann.
Mines, 1882, 8* sdr., II, pp. 292-352, plate-; also Ball. Soc. g<iol. dc Fr., 1882-1883, 3* s^r.,
XI, pp. 456-461, and 1885-1886, 3« s4r„ XIV, pp. 454-463, plate.



172 THE BORDEBS OP THE PACIFIC OCEAN [PABTiii

the islands diverge from one another radially like a fan, and a gradual
turning round may be observed from north-west and south-east to north-
east and south-west, so that the directions of the strike in Palawan and
south Luzon, the opposite ends of. the fan, are peipendicular to one
another/ The eastern branches are thereby bent more strongly to the
east, and Drasche emphasizes their tendency to adapt themselves to the
course of the coast of Annam in the same way as New Zealand and New
Caledonia do to the east coast of Australia

Subsequent observations seem to confirm this conception. To arrive at
a clear idea of the position of the several chains, we must bear in mind
two conspicuous lines of depression, which as early as 1869 were definitely
marked by Semper on his general map of the islands The first of these
lines corresponds with the longitudinal depression which runs through the
west of Luzon from the bay of Lingayen to that of Manila, and marks off
a mountain chain, the sierra de Zambales, from the rest of the island. The
second line corresponds with the depression which occurs in the eastero
part of Mindanao, and runs, interrupt^ by a watershed of no great height,*
from the bay of Butuan in the north to that of Davao in the south. This
also bounds an independent mountain chain which strikes almost north
and south from cape Surigao to cape St. Augustine.

The sierra de Zambales in west Luzon was crossed by Drasche in two
places; it consists chiefly of gabbro and talc-schist with serpentine; great
masses of trachytic tuff* rest on its eastern slope. Its southern extremity,
projecting into the gulf of Manila, is however of recent volcanic origin,
and must be disregarded in considering the direction of the chain. ‘ The
longitudinal depression is broad; it presents recent marine deposits, as
observed by Centeno ; Arayat, an isolated volcano, rises out of its plain ^
It appears to have been in this more independent brtoch of the sierra do
Zambales, which curves in an arc towards Palawan, through Luban and
the Calarnianes, that Tenison Woods observed ancient limestone^. The
island of Palawan is fonned, according to Centeno, by a long continuous .
sierra. This arc of Zambales-Palawan, the most westerly of the virga-
tion, does, in fact, take a course which corresponds in a striking manner to
that of the coast of Annam.

' R. von Drasche, Fragmente zu einer Geologic dcr Insel Luzon (Fhilippinen), 4to,
Wien, 1878, p. 3. The oldest geological account of the Philippines known to me is that
by the mining engineer, I. Sainz de Baranda, Islas Pilipinas, 8vo, Manila, 1840. In
1873 Roth attempted to give a brief account of them from Jagor’s collections ; this
excellent description, however, has little reference to the tectonic relations ; J. Roth,
Ueber die geologische BeschafPenheit der Phllippinen, in F. Jagor, Reisen in den
Philippinen, 8vo, Berlin, 1873, pp. 333-354.

* C. Semper, Die Philippinen und ihre Bewohner, sechs Skizzen, 8vo, Wttrzburg, 1869.

’ J. Centeno, Memoria geoldgico-mineral. de las Islas Pilipinas ; Bol. Com.Mapa geol.

Espaha, 1876, III, pp. 181-234, map, in particular p. 184.

* Tenison Woods, Nature, Jan. 7, 1886, p. 232.



GH.m] LUZON 173

In the north of Luzon two great cordilleras, separated by the Rio
Grande de Cagayan, extend as far .as the latitude of the gulf of Lingayen,
then unite, and for a certain distance follow the east coast. Further to
the south. the mountains are very much broken up and overlaid by exten*
sivo volcanic masses, but the strike to the south-south-east appears clearly
in a long band of Nummulitic limestone interbedded with trachytic tuff,
which may be traced from the province of Bulacan across the Laguna to
Majaijay. Richthofen was the first to note its existence

Drasche supposed that the outline of Masbate was due to bifurcation,
and this would correspond with the structure of Porto Rico in the Antilles ;
but the structure of Masbate is unknown.

Zebu has been described in detail by Abclla. The oldest locks arc
diorite and dioritic tuff ; they form two considerable masses in the centre
of the island and a smaller mass at its southern end, and are surrounded by
beds containing Nummulites. More recent limestone forms the remainder
of the island, that is, by far the greater part; in some places it lies
horizontal, in others it is upturned like the Nummulitic lieds. The lignites
of Zebu have also been placed in this group, which would thus include
deposits of various age. The strike of the rocks corresponds on the whole
with the outline of the island, and thus to the direction of one of the
middle branches of the virgation *.

The* coal beds also make their appearance, according to Centeno’s
observations, on the adjacent island, Isla de Negros, and traces of them
ato known on the western part of Mindanao, north of the bay of Siliagucy.
It is possible that a part of western Mindanao may prove to be the con-
tinuation of Zebu and the Isla de Negros.

The gold-bearing hill range of Pigholugan, near the gulf of Macajalar
in Mindanao, that is nearly in the middle of the north coast of the island,
consists, according to Abella, of ancient quartzite and clay slates which
strike north-north-east and south-south- west \

The eastern sierra of Mindanao, which lies beyond the two bays of
Butuan and Davao (or Tagloc), was visited by Montano ; from its northern
extremity it proceeds to the south-south-east, and then turns due south;
it consists of greywackes, ancient schists, primitive limestone, serpentine,
quartz, porphyry, and melaphyre. This mountain range must probably
regarded as -the continuation of the island of Leyte *.

^ F. von Richthofen, Ueber das Vorkommon von Nummulitenformen auf Japan und
den Fhilippinen ; Zeitechr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1862, XIV, p. 358 ot seq.

* £. Abella y Castmego, Rapida descripcion fisica, geoldgica y mineral, de la Isla de
Ceba ; Bol. Com. Mapa geol. Espana, 1886, XIII, pp. 1-187, map.

* Id.r Memoriaaceroa los criaderos anriferos del segundo distrito del depaitamento de
Mindanao ; op. cit., 1879, VI, pp. 38-79, maps, in particular p. 60.

* J. Montano, Rapport h M. le Ministre de I’lnstruction publique sur une mission aux
ties Philippines et en Malaisie ; Archives des Missions, 1885, 3* s^r., XI, pp. 271-479,
maps, in particukr pp. 271-277.



174 THE BOEDERS OP THE PACIFIC OCEAN [PABTin

Still further towards the exterior lies a second band of coal-bearing
beds which strikes to the south-east, and has been traced by Centeno from
the< region of Caramuan, actoss the island of Batan, and across Sugud in
south Luzon into the island of Samar.

If we transfer these observations to a map, we attain a virgation from
south-west in Palawan to south-east in the zone of the coal beds of south
Luzon and Samar.

It is not improbable that the most westerly arc, Zambales-Palawan, is
continued to Borneo. Such a continuation is less certain for the .mountains
of west Mindanao and Basilan ; Yolo consists, according to Itier, of coral
formations resting on basalt*. The prolongation of the eastern chain of
Mindanao towards the south is only indicated by volcanos: on the west
coast of the .bay of Davao, the cone of Apo rises, according to Montano’s
measurement, to a height of 3,143 meters ; it forms the highest peak of the
Philippines. The volcanic zone would now seem to extend through Butulan
and the island of Sangir to the volcanos of northern Celebes.

It was generally assumed by earlier writers, that a single zone of
volcanos extended in an arc through the Philippines to the north ; but tho
case is not so simple. Centeno considers that there are two chains of
volcanos which should unite in south Mindanao. The western chain
begins on the Buguias, north of Lingayen bay, and includes the volcanos
of Arayat and Taal, Canlaon on the Isla de Negros, the island of* Fuego,
the volcano de Macaturin in Mindanao, and the volcano of Cotabato; this
line has been named the system of the -Taal. The eastern chain is the
system of the Majon (Albay), and extends from the Isaro in south Luzon
past Albay and Bnlusan, the solfataras of Leyte, the volcano Camiguin,
north of Mindanao, which first arose in 1871, then to Apo and Butulan.
The solfataras in the trachytic mountains of the island of Bitisan, which
have recently been described by Abella, might then be regarded as inserted
into this zone. Abella, however, conceives the continuation of this line as
drawn not through Camiguin, but further east, following the direction of
the island of Leyte towards Mindanao and Drasche’s geological map
of south Luzon shows so many volcanic eruptions of- such various descrip-
tion, that it is difficult to find definite guiding lines in this region. The
clearest line of this kind makes its appearance in south-east Luzon' between
the Isaro and the Bulusan, and is. continued towards Biliran; it lies com-
pletely in the strike of this part of the virgation -

* J. Itier, Extrait ‘d’une description de Tarchipel des lies Solo ; Bull. Soo. gdogr.,
Paris, 1846, 3® s^r., V, pp. 311-819. •

® From Montano’s last description one would certainly be inclined to doubt that lake
Mainit on the peninsula of Surigao (N. Mindanao) is really a crater.

’ Brnsche, p. 72, assigns to this line the closely adjacent volcanos of Labo, Isard, Iiiga,
Masaraga, Albay, and Bnlusan.



cam] FORMOSA 176

Farther to the north of Luzon, in about lat. 18” 10' N., where Cabo del
Engafio begins to jut out, stands 'the volcano de Cagua. Towards the
north-west there follow the volcanic island, of Babayan, then the Batjuies
islands, and finally the great island of Formosa.

7. Formosa and the Litt-Kiu iUands. Formosa is still unfortunately
but little known ; the observations' of Swinhoe, Richthofen, and l^zack
are confined to isolated localities in the north Monkey mountain or
Taku Shan, on the west coast, has been described by Guppy ‘ ; Kleinwachter
has visited the south part of Formosa.^. An important mountain range
which, according to some statements, reaches a height of 10,000 feet,
according to others of 12,000 feet, extends through the eastern part of the
island toward the north and north-noi’th-east. The east coast is in places
very steep, and near Chokeday (lat. 24* 10' N.), according to Richthofen,
it. descends precipitously from heights of 6,000-7,000 feet into the deep sea.
On the other 'hand, the whole western side of the isl&nd is low, and the
plain is only interrupted by isolated hills formed of coral limestone.

Kleinwachter reached the slopes of the Kucili Shan, the highest peak
(about 9,000 feet) in the southern half of the mountain chain, and he found
that this consists of folded hornblende-schists and clay slates, together
with quartz porphyry. The pebble of the river Tamsui show that further
north granite also enters into the structure of the rapge. Against theee
mountains there rest in the south, first quartzose sandstone, and then coral
limestone, of which the two southern promontories of Formosa consist.
We have already mentioned that coral limestone forms the isolated moun-
tains of the western plain ; it is assigned, as a rule, to the Tertiary ; and it
also forms the island of Lambay, lying off the west coast. In the isolated
Monkey mountain, cavernous limestone with Scutella, Balanus, and corals
rises 1,100 feet above -the sea in lieds which dip 35“ to 40” E. In the north •
of the island, on the Kilung river, middle Tertiary coal-seams are being
worked ; they lie in a synclinal witli steeply inclined limbs ; these, like
those of -Monkey mountain, show that Formosa must be included among
the regions which have experienced folding in i^nt times.

* Robert Swinhoe, Noteit on the Island of Formosa, Joum. Roy. Geogr. Soc., 1864,
XXXIY, pp. 6-18, map ; F. von Richthofen, Ueber den Gebirgsbau an der Nordktlste von
Formosa, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 18.60, XII, pp. 532-545 ; D. Tyzack, Notes on the
Coalfields and Coal-mining operations in N. Formosa, Trans. N. Engl. Inst. Eng.,
Newcastle, 1884-1885, XXXIV, pp. 67-79, map ; and J. A Lehour, Notes on sonic fossils
from N. Formosa collected by Mr. D. Tyzack, tom. cit., pp. 81, 82. Arthur Comer
mentions a Palae 9 zoic fossil, Momtis Hamti, from the neighbourhood of Monkey mountain,
but this discovery is so far unconfirmed ; A Journey in the Interior of Formosa, Proc.
Geogr. Soc., 1874-1875, XIX, p. 515.

* H. B. Guppy, Some Note's on the Geology of Takow, Formosa ; Journ. N. China Br.
R. As. Soc., Shanghai, 1881, new ser., XVI, pp. 13-17.

3 G. Eleinwftchter, Researches into the Geology of Formosa ; op. cit, 1884, new ser.,
XVIII, pp. 87-53, map.



176 THE BORDERS OF THE PACIFIC OCEAN [PAwrin

At the mouth of the river Tamsui, .Rich|ihofen observed' trachyte and
horizontally bedded trachytic tuff. The great solfataras, north-west of
Killing, probably also proceed from trachyte These trachytes are the only
recent volcanic rocks known in Formosa, and the early statements as to
the presence of active volcanos in the island have not so far been, confirmed.
KlCinwachter, it is true, mentions that on the flat coast near Langchiao
flames often break forth from the baked ground, but he conjectures that
they are due to gases which accompany petroleum. The Chinese statement
that in the year 1732 flames and mud burst forth on the Chih Shan, or
Pineapple hill, near Takow, may perhaps be explained in the same way.
Petroleum is, in fact, known to occur in the north near Tangshui below
Tamsui. All these localities lielong to the west coast.

The Pescadores islands consist, as Edmund Naumann kindly informs
me, of alternating layers of basaltic tuff and coral limestone.

While the north to south trend of Formasa might, perhaps, suggest
a continuation of the northerly direction of north Luzon, the southern
extremity of the great arc of the TAu-Kiu islands already deviates con-
siderably from this direction. Dbderlein has recognized the important fact
that in the whole northern part of this are, i.6. from about lat. 25° 30' N,
to as far as Kiushiu, we may distinguish "lietween an outer series of islands,
turned towards -the great Ocean, and an inner series. The outer series
comprises the great nun-volcanic islands of Okinawa-shima, Tukono-shima,
Amami-o-shima, Yakuno-shima, and Tanega-shima, while the inner chain
is fonned of smaller islands, which so far as they are known arc of volcanic
origin ; such are (perhaps) Kume-shima, then the volcano Tori-shima (Sul- •
phur island), then (probably) the Linschotens, Erabu-shima, Kose-shima,
Yuo-shima, Tage-shima, and directly joining the arc we meet •with Satsuma —
Fujiyama on Kiushiu, the volcano Saknra-shima, which forms an island
in the gulf of Kago-shima, Kiri-shimi-yama, and finally the famous
Aso-yama in Kin shiu^.

Thus in the arc of the liu-Kiu islands that arrangement is repeated
which we have alroady observed in the Antilles, the Nicobar and Andaman
islands, and the Banda islands, and which is so closely paralleled in the
Carpathians and the Apennines. The fragments of the cordillera stand
on the exterior, the volcanos on the inner side. At the same time the
extension of the arc into Kiushiu is unmistakable, and the south-east
part of Kiushiu appears to be the continuation of the outer zone of the
Liu-Kiu islands.

In OHnawa Perry and Jones met north of Nafa with gneiss, clay slates,
and beds possibly containing coal: the most striking feature in thedond-

* Several tiavellers have deecribed the rock as porphyry.

’ L. Dcderlein, Die Liu-Kiu-Insel Amami Oshima; Mitth. deutsch. Oes. Ostasieiis,
Yokohaioa, 1881, Heft 24, 31 pp., map, in particular p. 2.



JAPAN


177


OH. ra]

flcape of the islaoid, howevei:, is formed by a steep ridge of fossiliferous
limestone 400 to 600 feet high, which is broken up into a number of jagged
peaks, probably by the same process of erosion os forms ' Earrenfelder '
or grykes ; it runs through a great part of the island, directed N. 60® to
60® E. The gneiss is strongly folded \

Amami-o-shima, according to Doderlein, is mountainous and consists
of gneiss, granite, granulite, and crystalline schists. Clay slates steeply
upturned are to be seen on the cast coast.

8. Japan. The islands of Japan, together with New Zealand, are
peculiarly well adapted to throw light on the structure of the wonderful
island arcs which surround the Pacific Ocean, for they consist of fragments
of simple cordilleras ; the general plan is not complicated by virgation as
in the Philippines, and fragmentation has not advanced so far as in the
Banda islands and the arc of the Liu-Kiu islands. Fortunately we possess
a recent account by Edmund Naumann. It is based on the result of many
years of arduous work carried on with the co-operation of able Japanese
geologists and contains a large number of fresh observations The author
has very kindly furnished me, both in written and oral communications,
with additional information on many points, so that it is on his observa-
tions together with Milne's account of the volcanos of Japan and the
much older map of Yezo by Lyman that the following description is
chiefly based.

In the configuration of Japan a certain symmetry may be easily

• recognized. The great island of Hondo, bent in a gentle arc, is accompanied .

• on the north-east as on the south-west by an extensive island — Yezo on


' M. G. PeiTy, Narrative of the Expedition of an American Squadron to the China Sea»
and Japan, compiled by F. L. Hawks, 4to, Washington, 1856, I, pp. 184, 311; G. Jones,
Report bn a Geological Exploration of Lew-Chaw, op. cit., 11, pp. 53-56; and
Doderlein, op. cit., p. 27. l^lie de Beaumont quotes fossils collected by the missionary
P. Furet at Nafa in Okinawa, the age of which, however, cannot be regarded as certainly
established ; Compt. rend., 1859, XLVIII, p. 287, and J. Marcou, Lottres sur les roches
du Jura, 8vo, Paris, 1857-1860, p..269. The coral limestone, 200 feet above the sea and
far distant from it, is mentioned by R.> H. Bninton, Notes taken on a visit to Okinawa
Shima, Loochoo; Trans. Asiat. Soc. Japan, Yokohama, map, 1876, IV, pp. 66-77, in
particular p. 72.

* E.. Naumann, Ueber den Bau und die Entstehung der japanischen Inseln,8vo, Berlin,
1885, 91 pp. ; by the same. Die Erscheinungen des Erdmagnetismus in ihrer Abhangig*
keit vender Erdrinde, 8vo, Stuttgart, 1887, in particular p. 15etseq. ; Geological Survey
of Japan, Reconnoisaance map. Geology, Division I, by E. Naumann, assisted by Takao
Figitanai, Akira Yamada, Ichitaro Ban and Shogo Nishiyama (publication not yet
complete). A little geological sketch-map of earlier date appears in J*. G. Godfrey,
Notes on the Geology of Japan ; Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1878, XXXI V, pp. 542-554.

’ J. Milne, The Volcanos of Japan; Trans. Scis. Soc., Japan, Yokohama, 1886, IX^
pt. 2, 184 pp., maps.

^ B. Smith Lyman, geological Survey of Hokkaido, A geological Sketch-Map of the
Island of Yesso, Japan, fol., Tokei, 1886.

* SOLLAS tx •


N



178 THE BOKDEES OP THE PACIFIC OCEAN [PAM-m

the one hand and Kinshiu on the other, and each of these advances a little
farther towards the Ocean than the adjacent end of Hondo.

As we have already seen, the arc of the Liu-Kiu islands extends from
the south-south-west into the island of Kiushiu, so ths.t some of the
volcanos of Kiushiu must be regarded as a part of the arc of Liu-Kiu.



Fio. 17. Japan,

' The closely cross-hatched zone traversing the middle of Honshiu indicates the ^ great foss ; ’
the zone with simple hatching which runs through Shikoku and Kii, shows the strike of the
crystalline schists. The caldrons of the west coast (Iwaki, Morioshi, and others) are indicated
by lighter cross-hatching.

At the same time the south-east part of Kiusliiu forms the continuation
of the outer zone of ancient rocks of this arc, that is of Okinawa-shima,
Amami-o-shima, &;c., and in fact this • zone approaches in the island of
Tanega-shima quite close to the south coast of Kiushiu.

Similarly the volcanic arc of the Kuriles coming from the north-cast


179


CH.ra] SHIKOKU AND Kll

enters into the body of Tezo. The connecting lidk is formed near Nemuro
by the peninsnla jutting out of the eastern half of Tezo, and Milne
mentions four volcanos in the eastern part of Tezo, two of them active,
which must be included in the range of the Kuriles ^

The seas which surround Japan, particularly the adjacent part of the
Padiic Ocean, are of very great depth ; in fact the oceanic abysses sounded
here are among the deepest known, while the island-strewn gulf which
penetrates into the interior of Hondo has a depth of only 30 fathoms.
This gulf, therefore, is due to only a slight submergence, which has
followed indeed the trend of the arc.

The gulf or inland sea is separated from the Ocean on the south by the
laige island of Shikoku, and this is followed on the east by the peninsula
of Kii which agrees with Shikoku in structure. The middle of the Pacific
coast of Hondo is met by the chain of volcanic islands, which includes the
island of 0-shima ; this we will call the Shishi-to chain. North of the .
bay of Tokio the coast trends more and more to the north, and bulges out
in two broad projections separatefl by the bay of Sendai. The southern
of these regions which protrude out of the general course of the arc, we
will call with Naumann the Abukuma mountains, that north of the bay of
Sendai the Kitakami mountains.

The holy mountain Fujiyama, with its symmetrical ash-cone rising
12,400 feet high, marks the logion in which the volcanic chain of Shishi^to
meets the middle of Hondo. A mighty line of division here cuts across
Hondo from side to side; it is signalized by a great accumulation of
volcanic products and is of the first importance in. a study of the structure
of the chain. Naumann speaks of it as the great region of fracture or the
‘ great foss ’ : it divides the island into two moieties, which we will call
north Japan and south Japan.

Shikoku and Kii, situated on the south-east coast of Hondo, are formed
of stratified zones striking to the east-north-east; Badiolarian slates of
Palaeozoic age, upper Carboniferous limestone, Trias, Jurassic, Cretaceous,
and some Tertiary betls arc present; they are thrown into folds, either
normal or slightly overturned towards the Ocean, and form in a quite
unmistakable manner the outer zone of a mountain chain folded in the
direction of ^e Ocean, that is to the south-east. Mesozoic deposits occur
also as narrow liands pinched into the Palaeozoic complex. Behind these
folded beds, that is towards the interior, a zone of crystalline schists very
steeply upturned runs through Shikoku and Kii ; characterized by great
resistance, they stand out in the configuration of the country and form
the long tongues or peninsulas which proceed from both sides of Shikoku
as well as of Kii, and constrict the passage from the Ocean to the interior

* These are: Iwo-san, active, with a caldron of boiling mud and sulphur, Kusuri,
Oakan, with a regular conical form, and Meakan, an active cone.



180 THE BOBDEBS OP THE PACIFIC OCEAN [PABTin

sea. From the western part of Shikoku in particular a long spur extends
towards the east of Kiushiu, and a ‘glance at the map will show that in
spite of the penetration of the lau-Kiu arc into Kiushiu, the general strike
of the folded ranges of south Hondo is also continued into a part.of this
island. • .

• I

The continuous course of this more resistant zone of schist, with its
wing-like projections, gives to Shikoku the form of a double rhomb and to
Kii of an irregular simple rhomb. 1 mention this fact because tHe same
causes have produced the lozcngc-like form of the isle of Wight, whjch is
also due to the ijrominence of. more resistant beds, and because we shall
meet with the same phenomenon on a larger scale in the outlines of Yezo.

The rocks of the outer zone of Shikoku and Kii arc continued still
further through Shima, which is formed by the eastern spur of Kii, but
towards the great division in the middle of Hondo the strike 1)ends from
.east-north-east to north-cast and finally to north-north-east, and so describes
an arc such as is usually formed by folds about to meet a second mountain
range in syntaxis. Since, this segment of the chain, bent in an arc, is cut
off by the zone of division or fracture which strikes N. 26* W., a wedge
results which Naumann calls the Akaishi sphenoid.

On the inner side of the long schist range of Shikokti and Kii older
rocks occur, principally granite, which is weathered into a number of
rounded summits and rises in innumerable islands out of the interior sea.
The ranges lying towards the Japanese sea also consist of granite, ancient
schists, quartz porphyry, and ancient massive rocks of various kinds. The
north coast is distinguished by a few caldron-shaped sul>sidences, among
which that of the volcano Daisen and the Sampei caldron may be mentioned
in particular. The 'strike of these inner zones corresponds with that of
Shikoku and Kii, with the same deflexion towards the region of fracture.
On Kiushiu a cluster of I’ecent volcanos in the middle’ of the island corre-
sponds to the continiiation of the interior sea. In the north-west of Kiu-
shiu, Naumann believed he had seen a great granitic laccolite ; certainly
a considerable part of the Japanese granites first made their appearance
towards the close of the Palaeozoic period.

Naumann believes that it is the Chinese chains, striking out in the
Tshu-san islands, which arc continued through Kiushiu into the chain of
south Hondo. A further examination of Kiushiu will show us in what
way the arc of the Liu-Kiu meets it, whether directly or in syntaxis.

We have now reached the region of fracture. The line of the Shishi-to
volcanos, coming from 0-shima, the last great eruption of which took place
in January, 1877,- meets the peninsula of Izu ; here rise Amagi-san (4,700
feet), Hakone-yama (4,474 feet), Ashidaka-yama and the mighty Fuji-san.
These are followed by a serried row of numerous other, great volcanos,
among them Yatsuga-taka (9,114 feet) with its twin peaks, Asama (8,800



181


CH.in] ABUETJMA AND ETTAKAMI

feet) where an eruption occurred in 1870, Benge-san (9,800 feet) with two
craters, Tate-yama (9,400 feet) which stands on granite, and others \

On the c>ther side of the great foss the structure of south Japatt is
repeated in its main lines. The Ahukuma mountains and the Kitakami
mountains consist of a series of fossiliferous rocks similar to those of
Shikoku and Kii, and similarly thrown into folds, which strike parallel to
the general direction of this part of the island, that is fairly to the north.
Towards the south, in the mountain region of Quanto, the folds are bent
back .towards the zone of fracture as in the Akaishi sphenoid on the other
side of this zone. In this case, however, the bending back is accomplished
by a change from north and south, first into a south-west and then finally
into a north-westerly direction ; the north-westerly strike of the inner zones
persists nearly to the middle of north Japan. The central region, however,
which should correspond to the position of the interior sea, is occupied by
a long scries of volcanos which wo will term the meridional chain of north
Japan. A group of five volcanos rises in the south towards the fractured
region near the beginning of this chain ; the highest mountain of this group,
Shipane-san (8,500 feet), was in eruption in 1872 ; Milne mentions 21 volcanos
in the meridional chain. A part of western Yezo also belongs to it, with
13 volcanos, many of them active.

Finally the west coast of nprth Japan is characterized by fohr g^t
caldron insinkings, each of which encloses a great volcano; these are,
from south_ to north, Gwassan, Chiokai (7,100 feet), Moriyoshi (5,800 feet),
and Gunju-san (7,000 feet), which gives off a little steam ; its last erup-
tion was in 1824. These caldrons which, have been let down into the
ancient rocks of the inner side of the chain are similar in every respect
to the bays of Naples, Salerno, Santa Eufemia, and Algiers, and the 6ther
caldron inbreaks' which surround the western Mediterranean on the inder
side botli of the Apennines Jind of the coi’dillera of north Africa.

We thus see that south Japan consists of a cordillera of unilateral
structure, folded towards the Ocean : its subsidences are represented on
the inner side by the caldrons of the Sampei and Daisen; its inner zone
appears in Chugoku' and is marked by the granite rocks of the interior
sea ; its outer zones lie in eastern Kiushiu, in the mountainous country of
Shikoku and Kii, and bend inwards in the Akaishi sphenoid to meet in
syntaxis a second cordillera) that of north Japan. North Japau also is
traversed by a cordillera ; the subsidences on its western inner border are
marked by great caldrons from the Gwassan to the Iwaki ; its outer zones
start from the syntaxis in the mountainous country of Quanto, describe |Ui
arc, and then proceed through the mouirtains of Abukuma and Kitakaipi.

* Several of the volcanos in the great fractured region have been described by B. von
Drasche in Bemerkungen fiber die japanischen 'Vulcane Asama-Yama, Jaki-Tama,
Iwawasi-Yama und Fusi-Yama ; Tschermak's Min. Mitth., 1877, pp. 49-60.



182 THE BORDERS OP THE PACIFIC OCEAN [pamih

The syntaxis indicated by the inflexion towards the interior exhibited
both by the Akaishi and the Quanto region, but in opposite directions, is
distinguished from all other cases of syntaxis by the fact that a laige part
of the syntactic region has subsequently collapsed and great volcanos have
arisen in the trough, on the continuation of the Shishi-to chain.

There is some difference of opinion, not as to the facts but as to the
precise manner of interpretation. Naumann prefers to regard the great
trough not as a recent subsidence but as a very ancient Assure, although
not so old as the main longitudinal. fracture of the whole range, and he
assumes the presence of a pre-existing obstacle to the folding, somewhere
in the position of the Shishi-to chain. Harada, however, adopts the same
explanation as we have given above

Milne, has incidentally made a comparison between the Shishi-to chain
and the Ladrones ; this would involve the existence of another insular
arc, syntactic with the arc of south Japan, and syntactic against that of
north Japan. But such a supposition does not accord with the existence
of the downthrown syntactic fragments encountered within the fractured
region; and still less with the aspect presented by other regions of
syntaxia

Our knowledge of Yezo is unfortunately less complete than that of
Hondo. Piunpelly, who some time ago examined the south part of the
island, encountered on the southern peninsula, between Hakodate and
Volcano bay, a range of ancient schists with qiiartz porphyry and green-
stone which strikes to the noith-west and must probably be regarded as
the continuation of the northern arc of Hondo.

This band is surrounded by more recent volcanos and by recent marine
deposits arranged in terraces ®. From Lyman’s map we may conclude that
a long range of folded rocks strikes across the island through its greatest
breadth towards the north-noi’th-west in the direction of Saghalin. The
island owes its lozenge-like form to this great range, thus recalling
Shikoku, Kii, and the isle of Wight. We must perhaps regard it as the
continuation of Saghalin. It has also been represented as the continuation
of tlte northern arc of Hondo carried further towards the Ocean, but the
fragment striking to the north-west, which Ihimpelly observed near
Hakodate, does not support this conjecture. We also know from Naumann
that, in central Yezo the middle Cretaceous covers a large area and is
probably directly superposed on ancient rocks. In like manner, according
to the investigations of F. Schmidt and P. von Glehn, the Cretaceous in
the south part of Saghalin attains a very wide development, and the

* Naumann, Erdmagnetismus, p. 18; Harada-ToyokiUi, letter in Anz. k. Ak. Wiss.
Wien, July 7, 1887.

* R. Pumpelly, Oeological Researches in China, Mongolia and Japan ; Smithsonian
Contributions, No. 202, 1866, p. 79 et seq., in particular p. 106, pi. vui.



183


OH.in] THE KUBILES

impression made on Naumann also was that this Cretaceous of Sakhalin
would be found to traverse the whole of Yezo or would certainly be
continued into the peninsula. Pending further information, however, it
would be well not to directly connect ^ghalin and the principal chains
of Yezo with the principal chain of Hondo, but to regard them as forming
an independent feature lying further to the east and distinguished by
a considerable development of the Cretaceous

In conclusion we know that a part of the east of Yezo belongs to the
volcanic arc of the Kuriles.

9. The Kuriles and Kamchatka. The Kuriles have been visited three
times by Milne. They contain twenty-three well-formed cones, sixteen of
them smoking, arranged in a long arc. Sedimentary beds or older rocks
have not been encountered; the elongated islands, such as Iturup, 216
kilometers long, appear to have been formed by the action of marine
currents which, flowing parallel to the arc, have united the cones by piling
up the ashes between them ^ .

The island of Paramushir, more than 90 kilometers long, consists of
a series of extinct volcanos, with one crater still smoking, directed to the
north-east and surrounded by an accumulation of ashes and lavas. Only
a narrow arm of the sea separates this island from the flat island of
Shumochu, which follows on the north-east and also consists of ashes and
lavas ; this in its turn is only separated from cape Zopatka, the southern
point of Kamchatka, by a channel of no great depth, due to marine
erosion. North-west of Paramushir there rises out of the sea the steep
isolated cone of Alaid, which last broke into eruption in 1796. These are
the most northern of the Kuriles, and now the great train of volcanos,
which we have been able to trace from the east of Yezo, enters the
peninsula of Kamchatka. The series proceeds through the eastern part
of the peninsula, comprising according to Dittmar thirty-three volcanos,
twelve of them active “. The most northerly of these are the Kljutshewska

' For Sakhalin : F. Schmidt, Sachalin ; Baer and Helmersen, BeitrSige zur Kenninim
des ruBsischen Reiches, 1868, XXV, p. 177 et seq. ; P. von Glchn, Heisebericht von der
Insel Sachalin, tom. cit., p. 189 et seq., in particular pp. 203-277 ; also Schebunin’s
map of Sachalin; farther, F. Schmidt, Ueber die Petrelhcten der Insel Sachalin,
Hem. Ac. Imp. Saint-P^tersb., 1873, 7‘ scr., XIX, No. 3. For Yezo : £. Naumann, Ueber
das Vorkommen der Xreideformation auf der Insel Yezo (Hokkaido), Mitlh. deutsch.
Ges. Ostasiens, Yokohama, 1880, Heft 21 ; and by the same, Bau upd Entstchung der
japaniseben Inseln, p. 21.

^ Milne, A Cruise among the Volcanos of the Kurile Islands ; Geol. Mag., 1879, 2nd ser.,
VI, pp. 337-348, map ; and Volcanos of Japan, pp. 123-169, map. '

’ C. von Dittmar, Die Vulcane Kamtschatkas, Peterm. Geogr. Mitth., 1860, IT, p. 66 ;
also A Postels Bemerknngen Qber die Vulcane der Halbinsel Kanitschatka, M^m. Ac.
Imp. Saiilt-Petersb., 183.5, II, pp. 11-28, and Perrey, Document sur les tremblements de
terre et les phdnombnes volcaniques dans I’archipel des Kouriles et an Kamtsohatka,
166 pp., 8to,‘ 1863 (in the Ann. Soc. agric. Dyon).



184 THE BOEDERS OF THE PACIFIC OCEAN [PArara

Sopka (lat. 56° 8' N., 4,804 meters) and the Shewelutsh (lat. 56^40''-N.,
8,215 meters) ; both these great mountains have been described in detail
by Erman’. In the axis of the peninsula a broad longitudinal valley,
stretching to the north-east, corresponds to the upper course of the river
Kamchatka; this river after following the valley for a great 'part of its
length turns almost at right angles, and flowing to the east at the north
foot of the Kljutshewska Sopka reaches the sea near Nishne Kamchatka.
The series of active volcanos extends east of this valley to the Kljutshewska
Sopka, and the Shewelutsh alone rises north of the lower course of the river.

Dittinar has published a general geological map of the peninsula,
in which he has incorporated Ennan’s observations Judging by the
structure of the Kiu-Liu, the Antilles, and other island arcs, we might
expect the subsided cordillera of the Kuriles to become visible in
Kamchatka on the east side of the volcanos. Dittmar does in . fact
mention ancient crystalline schists and similar rocks on all the peninsulas
of the east coast to beyond lat. 58° N., with the exception of the broad cape
Krono/.kij, which is covered with ashes and lavas ; granite and gneiss
appear here and there at the very foot of the volcanos. Analogy would
certainly lead us to regard these rocks in the cast and Jbhose at the foot
of the volcanos as the few visible remains of the cordillera of the Kuriles.
Many ranges of granite, gneiss, and ancient schLsts of greater importance
appear, however, to the west of the great volcanos, and in particular a long
range lying west of the upper course of the Kamchatka river; this is
apparently 2^ degrees of latitude in length and accompanied by clay slates;
to the north follow mountains of porphyry. The.se again are joined by
recent volcanic ejections; between lat. 56°10'N. and lat. 57°80'N. there
rises in the west a group of five extinct volcanos forming an independent
western zone.

Two fragments of arc would thus appear to occur in Kamchatka— an
eastern segment with the great active volcanos and the ancient rocks of
the eastern promontories, representing the continuation of the Kuriles, and
a western .segment to which would belong the range of hills west of the
Kamchatka valley, together with its prolongations and the extinct volcanos
of the oiorth-west ; this is just what we find in Yezo, where indeed we
were able to distinguish three successive arcs, one behind the other.

* A. Erman has already published a geological map which embraces Kamchatka in
Erman’s Archiv fdr wissenschaftliche Kunde von Kussland, 1842, II ; in the following
volume there is a description of some fossils from Kamchatka by Girard.

* Dittmar, Ein paar erliiutemdo Worte zur geognostischen Karte Kamtschatkas ; Bull.
Ac. Imp. Saint-Petersb;, 1855, XIV, pp. 241-250, map. Professor Kreutz, of Cracow,
has kindly sent me a list of the rocks collected by Professor Dybowski in Kamchatka and
■the Commander islands, and observes among them, from Tigil (Kamchatka), light grey
compact siliceous limestone filled with Trochammina, Haplophtagmium, liagena, and
other rhizopods.



185


cH.in] REVIEW OP THE ISLAND ARCS

The west coast in the neighbourhood of Bolsherezh, and even much
further to the north, is iiat. In the west and in the Kamchatka valley
Tertiary coal beds with leaf imprints make their appearance. They nlso
occur far to the north, on cape Tajganos and northwards as far as Ishiga,
lying in patches on the granite and the ancient schists of the peninsula.

10. General mi'vey of the island arcs. It follows from this investiga-
tion that in the north-east of A.sia the following arcs may be distinguished: —

(a) The arc of the Liu-Kin islands. This consists of the fragments of
the cordillera which form an outer zone, and of the volcanic zone on the
iAner side ; it extends into the south of Kiushiu.

‘ (&) The arc of south Japan. Its outer zone extends from Kiushiu
through Shikoku and Kii, and is bent l)ackward8 in the Akaislii sphenoid
in the direction of a syntaxis- against the great fractured region which
distinguishes the middle of Hondo. Naumann supposes that it is continued
to the folded ranges of south China which run out to sea near the Tshu-son
islands.

(c) The arc of north Japan. The outer zones proceed from the fractured
region, bending through the mountains of Quanto to continue through
Abukuma and Kitakami. The inner zones bear the volcanic meridional
chain and the west coast is characterized by caldron inbreaks. A part of
the continuation of the arc directed to the north-west lies in the .southern
part of Yezo.

{d) The arc of centred Veso ami ikighalin, situated somewhat nearer
the Ocean, is distinguished by the development of the Cretaceous system.

(e) The are of the Kui'Ues. The east of Yezo Ijelongs to the arc which
runs into .southern and eastem Kamchatka as far as the volcano of
Shewelutsh. It is represented as far as Kamchatka by volcanos only,
but no doubt the zone of older rocks lying east of the Kamchatka river
together with the volcanos may lie regarded as a part of its cordillera.

(/) The fragment in central and western Kamchatka.

11. The north of China. The question now arises as to the relations of
these island arcs with the mountain chains of the Asiatic continent. We
were able to trace the Malay arc from Yunnan to the west coa.st' of New
Guinea. But the ‘chains of the Philippines diverging towards the south
presented no \n.siblc continuation on the mainland. The trend-lines of the
northern arcs and the adjacent ranges of China have often been repre-
sented diagrammatically, but the schemes even of the most competent
authorities, such as Pumpelly and Ldezi, differ completely' from one
another^.

As the result of a laborious journey from the central Yang-tse-kiang
through Peking into Mongolia, Pumpelly was able to confirm the statement

' Pampelly, Geological Researches, &c., pi. vii ; L. L6czi, A Khinai birodalom termea-
zeti Viszonyainak es Orsz^gainak Leirdsa, 8to, Budapest. 1886, p. 19.



186 THE BORDERS OF THE PACIFIC OCEAN [PABTin

of earlier travellere that the mountain chains of China strike chiefly from
south-west to north-east (more exactly W. 30* S. to E. 80“ N.), and he
distinguished the mountains which follow this direction as the Sinian
tydem\ But it will only be possible to obteun a general idea of this vast
empire when Richthofen’s comprehensive works have been completely
published 'K In the great work with which F. von Richthofen has enriched
our science he has not only recorded observations accumulated during
many years of travel, but has also attempted to analyse the structure of
the land into its various elements and to determine the relations of these
elements to one another. In the south, long folded ranges predominate,
some striking out to the sea in the Sinian direction, i.o. to the north-etOst,
the others in the south-west running from Ya-tshon-fu and further through
Yunnan to the south-south-west, and as it now appears forming the
beginning of the Malay arc. In the north, however, the structure of
the country is much more difficult to interpret ; particularly so north of
Han-tshang-fu, where near lat. 33° N. the Sinian chains abut against the
south side of the rectilinear chain of the Tsin-ling-shan, which trends
east-south-east, and thence into the southern part of Mongolia. Fragments
of ancient table-land are present, and folded ranges of different age and
direction, as well as subsidences, also of different age. Richthofen has
distinguished and defined these regions; master of a' vast field of fresh
observations, he has arrived at general conceptions which accord in the
most happy manner with views on the origin of mountains simultaneously
developed in other lands. Thus, what is described in China as a ‘ diagonal
mountain,’ i. e. as a mountain in which the direction of the folding does not
correspond with the orographical outline, is in fact a horst, the visible
remains of an ancient folded range. In a number of very important
points the description of China has confirmed views already accepted in
Europe. This is particularly true of Richthofen’s statement, that in a
country already folded fresh folds or even faults may be produced which
follow the original direction

No marine deposit of Mesozoic or Tertiary age is known anywhere in
the north of China or in the south as far as Yunnan. The sediments of
the lower or middle Jurassic contain only terrestrial plants and coal beds.
They are directly succeeded by lacustrine deposits of very recent date,
then by the loess and the alluvium of the great plain of the Hwang-ho.
Even the Silurian and Devonian sediments have not yet been encountered
between the Weiho and Mongolia, that is in the whole of China north of

' Pumpellj, op. cit., p. 67 et seq.

F. von Richthofen, China, Ergebnisiie eigener Reiseh und damuf gegriindeter
Studien, 8vo, Berlin, I, 1877; II, Das nOrdliche China, 1882; IV, FalHontologischer
Theil, 1883; Atlas, fol. 1, 1885.

’ Richthofen, op. cit., II, p. 637.



OfflNA


187


OH. in]


the Tsin-Iing-shan ; in that region the Carboniferous lies immediately on
the Cambrian beds, and is followed by the Mesozoic.

The several elements of the structure do not stand out very obviodisly,
since a part of the interval between them is occupied by the shallow
waters of the gulf of Pe-chi-H, an inland process of the Yellow sea, and
another part is concealed by the alluvial land of the Hwang-ho. If we
imagine this alluvial land to be submerged as far as the foot of the
mountains, that is, to. Peking, Hwai-king-fu, and Nanking, then, the
mountain mass of Shan-tung will rise out of the waters as an island.

This mountain mass is cut right across by a great fault along the
Wei-ho. The western half shows the Archaean foundation covered by
horizontal Cambrian and Carboniferous beds, and it sinks to the north
along faults running in the same direction but not parallel. In east
Shan-tung the Archaean foundation is laid bare ; a folded chain trending
to the north-east once existed here; it was denuded before the Cambrian
period, and on its planed-down surface rests a horizontally stratified mass
of Cambrian deposits \ Thus in Archaean times folding already existed
here, and the strike of these primaeval folds does not differ materially
from that of the recent folds in south Japan. Since the Cambrian period
no folding has taken place in this region ; fractures alone have occurred.
West Shan-tung appears to be the downthrowri part of a shattered horst,
since here the sedimentary covering is more completely preserved. The
fractures in west Shan-tung are, in part at least, of pre-Carboniferous ago,
as is shown by the transgressive bedding.

Liao-tung has the same structure as cast Shan-tung and may be
regarded as its continuation. Here, too, the fundamental rocks are folded,
and we meet with superimposed patches of horizontal Cambrian beds ; on
the border of Korea these have furnished Trilobites *.

The journeys subsequently made in Korea by Gottsche show that these
deposits extend into north Korea; that by far the greater part of this
peninsula consists of crystalline schists, and that, with the exception of
the Tertiary lignite beds, the small patches of recent strata overlying thtmi
include no sediments of later date than those of north-east China


‘ Richthofen mentions at several jdaccs a still older direction which is said to be
recognizable in the most ancient gneiss ; NE.-SW. is the strike of the folded mica-schists,
primitive limestone, &c.

• Dames compares two localities with the lowest division of the American Potsdam
sandstone ; the third, from the presence of the genus Dorypyge, most clopely corresponds
to the Quebec group of Utah. He leaves it an open question whether this horizon
should be assigned to the lower Silurian, or, as Barrande thinks, to the Cambrian ;
W. Dames, Cambrische Trilobiten von Liautung, in Richthofen, China, IV, p. 33.

■ C. (Jottsche, (jeologische Skizze von Korea ; Sitzungsber. k. preuss. Akad. Wiss.
Berlin, XXXVI, Sitzung vom 15. Juli 1886, 17 pp., map. The island of Mackau in the
archipelago lying south-west of Korea has been visited by Guppy ; it consists of gneiss,



188 THE BOKDEES OF THE PACIFIC OCEAN [partiii

Thus on either side of the Yellow sea stands a primitive orographic
mass, Korea with Liao-tung on the one hand and Shan-tung on the other;
eaelf is characterized by the fact that Cambrian sediments rest in
horizontal sheets on an Azoic foundation. The structure of these regions
is wholly different from that of the neighbouring Japan.

• The accounts hitherto published do not enable us to speak with equal
certainty of Liuolmy but pending further information, I have no hesitation
in regarding the greater part of it as belonging to the next mountain
fragment.

A region composed of parallel mountain chains has been graphically
described by Richthofen as a grill or grid (‘Rost’), and in this sense we
speak of the grill of Peking. Its ranges strike E. 30® N. How far it is
continued past Tshong-to-fu in the same direction into eastern Mongolia
is at present unknown. To the north it is in great part covered by recent
lavas, which appear outside the Great Wall in broad platforms, but beyond
these platforms and even projecting from them fragments of the grill are
still to be seen. To the west the grill ends suddenly against the plains of
Ta-tung-fu and Hsin-tshou, along a line which cuts the strike of the ranges
transversely. The direction which is distinctive of the grill dates from
a very early period, for while the gentle undulations of the gneiss maintain
the characteristic direction, e. g. in the lofty mountain of Wu-tai-shan, the
Cambrian beds lie flat. But of much greater importance, as regards the
existing form of the grill, than these ancient folds appear to be the flexures
and longitudinal fractures with dragged-back edges which follow the
original direction, and throw down the whole region in successive steps
from Mongolia towards the great plain.

These subsidences possibly date from different periods; in any case
they are much more recent than the pre-Cambrian folds.

The mightiest and longest range of the grill begins in the south-west
with the gneiss dome of Wti-taisJum, which is over 10,000 feet in height
and lies north of Hsin-tshou; this is continued to the north-east in the
Hsian- wu-tai«shan, and then in the Nankou chain, which sinks in the south-
west by a great flexure to the plain of Peking. The range of Wu-tai-shan
is followed on the south by that of Hsi-tshou-shan, which is doubtless
continued to the north-east in the gi*anite ridge of Hong-shan. The latter,
instead of proceeding to the north-cast like the others, collapses, and it is
only on the other side of the plain of Peking that the Pan-shan rises in the
same line of strike. This sunken area of Peking is thus open to the south-
east towards the gi’eat plain, and bounded on the north-west by the flexure
of Nankou ; it is in fact an inbreak between Hong-shaii and Pan-shan.

Nearly six degrees of latitude south of Peking .lies Hsi-ngan-fu, and

greiBen, and quartzite ; Notes on the Geology of the Corean Archipelago, Nature, March
3, 1881, pp. 417, 418.



CH. Ill]


TSIN-LING-SHAN


189


south of this great town rise the snow-covered peaks of the mighty Tdn-
ling-<8han, which trends in a straight line from W. 12* N. to E. 12* S. an'd
marks the boimdary between north and south China. It is a long range of
unilateral structure ; on its north side the gneiss reaches a height of over
11,000 feet-; the more recent sediments lie to the south. In the east, on
the road between Kai-fong-fu and H«iang-yang-fu, it is completely faulted
down across the strike ; .beyond this line it again emerges as the Hwai
mountains, and attains a height of 4,000 feet. The last outposts may 'be
seen near Nan-king, in the region at the mouth of the Yang-tse-kiang. ' .

The rectilinear east-south-east trend of the Tsin-lingrshan and its
prolongations thus differs considerably from the east-north-easterly or
north-easterly strike of the Peking district. But before speaking of this
great range reference must be niade to some regions situated to the north
of it.

The Wei-ho follows in its upper course the cast-south-east trend of the
Tsin-ling-shan and flows along the north foot of these mountains. A little
al)Ove Hsi-ngan-fu, however, it abandons both this direction and the foot
of the mountains and turns to the east-north-east; it thus reaches near
Tung-hwan-ting the Yellow river, which here tiirns in a sharp elbow and
. then continues the direction of the Wei-ho up to the eastern termination
of the mountains. In the triangular space confined between the river
valley running to the east-north-east and the Tsin-ling-shan trending to
the east-south-east other ridges rise which in an orographical sen.se form
the northern outposts of the Tsin-ling-shan. Of these chains wo must
first separate off Hwa-shan, which trends in a different •direction, and is
situated close to the confluence of the Wei-ho with the Hwang-ho; wo
shall refer to this later. The other ranges, chief among which are Fu-niu-
shan near the base of the triangle and Sung-shan near its northern apex,
also follow an east-south-east direction, but their .structure is not
determined like that of the Tsin-ling-shan by folding, but by parallel
fractures. We have here, indeed, the fragments of an ancient table-land
formed of Cambrian sediments with directly superposed Coal-measures,
but without the Carboniferous limestone, elsewhere ^ widely distributed.
The transgressive Coal-measures are 'thus situated behind the Tsin-ling-
shan, folded to the south, very much in the same way as the Coal-measures
of Bohemia lie behind the Yariscah chains, folded to the north.

The Tsin-ling-shan has .been crossed in various places by David
Richthofen, Sz^hdnyi, and Ldezi. The transverse section of which we
have the most precise knowledge is that on the Tsin-ling road which leads
from the north into the basin of Han-tshung-fu ; it has been described in
detail by Richthofen. The northern slope is steep, the southern likewise,*

' A. David, Journal de mon troisifeme voj^ge d’exploiation dans I’Empire chinois,

2 vola., 8to, Paris, 1875.



190 THE BORDEBS OP THE PACIFIC OCEAN [pabtui

and the range thus resembles a solid beam ; nevertheless, situated almost
in the middle of this yrell-defined orographic region, lies an important
tectonic boundary. Richthofen coming from the north first encountered
a great band of gneise accompanied by red granite, then Azdic schists and
massive rocks, the Wutai-beds, and with these, rocks containing chlorite
and hornblende. On this zone, patches of Carboniferous beds with
anthracite are superposed in transgression, as is so often the case in the
older folded ranges of Europe. The Wutai zone is followed on the south
by folded beds, among which middle Silurian, upper Silurian, Devonian,
and Carboniferous limestone may be recognized by their fossils. The first
three members of this series are, as we have already stated, unknown in the
whole of the vast region extending ndrth of Tsin-ling-shan into Mongolia,
where the Cai'lwniferous limestone always rests directly on Cambrian beds ; '
and it is very remarkable to observe that here, as in the Alps, the Andes,
and so many other mountain ranges, the series of marine deposits b^mes
complete as it leaves the table-land to enter the great folded chains.

South of this folded zone a more recent granite mass emerges . neai*
liu-pa-ting. It is situated south of the middle of the range. A band of
micaceous slate and sericite phyllites, perhaps altered Carboniferous,
follows the mountains with a completely abnormal strike ; we then reach .
a zone, twenty-two geographical miles broad, occupying a third of the whole
breadth of the chain, and with a completely different strike ; from the north
border of the mountains up to the granite of Liu-pa-ting the direction
E. 12° S., or the normal direction of the Tsin-ling-shan, prevails, but in
this broad zone the strike is to the east-north-east. We have now reached '
the region of the Sinian direction of folding; in'Sze-tshwan it becomes
north-east and dominates the whole of south China.

The rock with the Sinian strike which forms the broad zone on the
south side of the Tsin-ling-shan is formed of micaceous gneiss, intensely
folded with frequently repeated intercalations of crystalline limestone;
perhaps, as Richthofen conjectures, Silurian sediments which have. suffered
'metamorphosis.

Befoi'e discussing the adjacent folded ranges of south' China, let us
return once more to the north.

• We have seen how the grill of Peking breaks off to the west against
the plains of Ta-tung-fu and Hsin-tshou; the Hsi-tshou-shan forms its
south-western extremity. From the border of this mountain fragment
down to the Hwang-ho, a steep cliff, which forms the western boundary
of the plain, runs past Pau-ting-fu and Tshbng-ting-fu. Prom Paui-ting-fu
its direction is south-south- west, and further to the south before reaching
'the Hwang-ho it bends in a curve from south-south-west to south-west
and west-south-west, ^is cliff, about 2,000 feet high, bears for its whole
length the name Tai-hang-tshan, In the north, near Tshong-ting-fu, an



GH.inJ


TAI-HANG-SHAN


191


older mountain segment is visible; with this exception Tai-hang-shsn
forms the border of a vast table-land of Carboniferous sediments which
extend from the north with horizontal bedding through the whole, of
southern Shansi and northern Shensi as far as the north foot of the Tsin-
ling-shan. A first stage, which consists of Carboniferous limestone and
coal-bearing sediments, is followed by a second formed of a supra-Carbo-
niferous sandstone, and thus the table-land attains a height of 6,000 feet
On the east and south-east it descends in steps to the great plain, and.
Tai-hang-shan itself is partly a fiexure and partly a step fault.

The way in which the southern part of Tai-hang-shan is bent back-
wards is very striking, and strange to say this course is repeated in a long
narrow* range formed of gneiss and other ancient rocks which emerges
from the Carboniferous plateau.. This range bears successively the names
Hwa-shan (south of the Uwang-lio), Fong-tiau-shan, Hsian-raieu-shan, and
Ho-shan. I should not be averse, while awaiting further information, to
regard this whole range as a horst left in relief amid the broad sunken
table-land. Beyond it fiexures and faults running in the same direction
follow one another up to the plain o'f Ta-tung-fu. This is succeeded on
the west by a table-land presenting the same structure formed of a Mesozoic
coal series.

Orographic blocks let down in steps thus surround the great plain on
the whole of its northeni side. The fiexure of Nan-kou above Peking an«l
Tai-hang-shan, the boundary face of the table-land, ai’e the features most
characteristic of this structure.

tn the south the case is entirely difterent. We have already become*
acquainted with the Tsin-ling-shan as an asymmetric range folded to the
south, like all the great chains of Asia, and we have already pointed out
that other folds join on to its south side which strike to the east-north-east
and further south to the north-east. The micaceous gneiss with crystalline
limestone, which we mentioned as occurring on the south side of the Tsin-
ling-shan, is followed south of the depression of Han-tshung-fu by a zone
of folds fonned of Silurian, Devonian, and Carboniferous limestone, and
inverted to the. south ; these folds arc covered towards the south by a series
of sediments lying unconformably. This new series Ijegins with limestone
of unknown age ; upon it rest coal-measures of the lower Jurassic ; these
are covered by red, argillaceous, and sandy sediments, most likely of lower
Jurassic age, which fill the ‘ red basin ’ of Sze-tshwan. This more recent
series has also experienced lateral movement and longitudinal fracture.

The folds which meet the southern slope of the Tsin-ling-shan are
continued, as we have said, through the whole of the south of China.
For a distance of almost ten degrees of latitude, says Richthofen, the
numerous parallel and closely crowded mountain ranges striking from
west-south-west to east-north-east are cut off transversely or diagonally by



192 THE BORDERS OF THE PACIFIC OCEAN [pabthi

the curve of the coast. We have seen that the same direction of folding
also prevails in Tongking ^ ‘

,A.a regards the relations of China with the island arcs, the following
must be borne in mind.

In the neighbourhood of Nan-king the continuation of Tsin-ling-shan
reaches the sea. North of this point the whole country consists of ancient
table-land ; beneath it, pre-Cambrian folding of the Archaean and Azoic
^ks, with a north-easterly strike, may bo observed in places. The only
marine deposits which have been recognized are those of the Cambrian
system and the Carboniferous limestone. The Tsin-ling-shan does not
correspond in its course with the island arcs. To the south of it lie chains
folded to the south in which middle and upper Silurian as well as Devonian
are known, but no recent marine deposits on this side of Yunnan. The
strike of the chains certainly coincides with that of south Japan, and here,
according to Naumann, we must look for the continuation of the arc of
that island

. 12. The tKn'th-ecut of Aeia. In Europe the recurrence of folding

directed to the north, from the pre-Devonian overthrusts of north Scotland
to the most recent movements of the Alps, has shown how extraordinarily
constant in direction the tangential movement may bo over am extensive
area ; China affords a similar example.

The pre-Ctimbrian folds of northern China, which were worn down and
then covered by the flat-lying Cambrian sediments, present the same north-
east strike as prevails in that vast region of far more recent folding which
extends south of the Tsin-ling-shan down to Tongking.

This same north-easterly direction, characteristic of the Sinian system
of Pumpelly, also prevails with certain deviations to the north-north-east, in
the whole of north-eastern Asia from the Great Wall to the Arctic Ocean.
A study of the relations of this east Asiatic ridge trending to north-east
and north-north-east with the Altai and the chains of Thian-shan, would
require first of all a discussion of the extensive and laborious investigations
which have been carried out by Russian geologists in the region of lake •
Baikal; but such a discussion would lead us too far from the subject of
this chapter, which is devoted to the outline of the Pacific Ocean, and it
must, therefore, be reserved for. a later page. For the present it will 'suffice
to mention some of the principal features.

Even in Liau-hsi some indications, as in the Y-wu-lu-shan, point to the
ocQ^rrence of a strike directed to the north-north-east, but it is precisely

' Richthofen, Fhhrer filr Forschungareisende, 8vo, Berlin, 1886, p. 309, 310.

^ Tshe-kiang and Fu-kiang are still unfortunately almost unknown ; Basset-Smith
encountered granitic and felsitic rocks and steeply upturned schists on the islands of this
coast ; see Notes on the Geology of port of the Eastern Coast of China, Nature, June 16,
1887, pp. 163, 164.



THE STANOVOI.


193


OH.m]


hero that observations become less connected. A fact of greater impor*
tance is the existence of a zone of volcanic rochs running from south-south-
west to north-north-east, which Richthofen has traced from Wei-hsien in
Shantung, past Tong-tshou-fu and the Miau-tau islands, through the valley
of the Liau; and he believes it may extend into the neighbourhood of
Mergen^. Richthofen also points out that the Great Rhingan is not a
mountain chain but the edge of a table-land, and that it nearly coincides
with the prolongation of the edge of the Carboniferous table-land of Shansi,
i. e. to the Tai-hang-shan

If from Peking we cross the eastern Gobi by the route described by
Muschketow, to the north-north-west, we encounter beyond the desert, on
the right bank of the Ssclcnga, a grill of parallel chains which strike from
south-south- west to north-north-oast®. Wenjukow enumerates ten parallel
chains besides the' long range of the Apple mountains or Jablonowyi^.
The Jablonowyi ridge represents, like the Ehingan, the steep face of
a flexure dropped on the east, or a fracture; this is confirmed by all
descriptions of the road from lake Baikal to Tshita, and by Kropotkin’s
express statement. Here begins the great ridge of the divide, the Stanovoi,
explored by Middendorf; it is a plateau of variable breadth surmounted
by secondary hill ranges; its cast border trends to north-east or north-
north-east across the valley of Amur to the sea of Okhotsk, of which it
forms the west shore, and is then continued to the Arctic Ocean. On the
east it is followed by successive chains, all striking to north-east or north-
north-east ; among them, in particular, Doussc Alin, or Middendorf’s Bureja
mountains, and Sikhota-Alin, the coast range of Manchuria. Kropotkin
has published an extremely instnictivc sketch-map of the trend-lines of
these chains, which exhibit throughout a certain tendency to converge
towards the southern half of the sea of Okhotsk, and all disappear along
the south coast of this sea ®. Hence the great number of islands and bays
on. this part of the coast, which is a true rias coa.st, like that of the south-
east of China. In one of these bays, the bay of Tugur, west of the island
of Klein-Shantar, Middendorf discovered on cape Karaulnoi, in Maiiiga
harbour, contoi'ted beds of clay slate, containing the first specimens of


* Richthofen, China, II, p, 50 et passim. The volcano Pei-shan at the sources of the
Sungari appears to lie somewhat east of this line ; cf. Proc. Googr. Soc., London, 1886,

■ VIII, p. 779. Richthofen refers here to the eruption of Ujun-Choldongi of 1721 to 1722
' mentioned by Wenjukow; this region lies twenty-five versts SE. of Mergen on the river
Nemer, not far from the mountain Dousse-AIin to be mentioned directly. *

* Richthofen, op. cit., II, p. 520 et passim. '

’ J. Muschketow, Gcologische Notizen fiber die Ost-Mongolei Gornoi Joum., 1881, II,
pp. 80-98, with a geological map of the route from Dolon-nor to lake Tarei.

* Wenjukow, Die russisch-asiatischen Grenzlandc ; German translation by Krahmer,
8vo, Leipzig, 1874, p. 187.

* Kropotkin in E. Recluz, Nouvcllc Geographic universelle, VI, 8vo, Paris, 18G1, p. 81.3.

BOLLAH XI • O



194 THE BORDERS OF THE PACIFIC OCE^ [paetiii

PseudovwTiotis Ochotica, which proves that the Trias was involved in the
elevation of these chains. This fossil has acquired, as we shall see later,
a peculiar importance in the history of the whole Pacific Ocean ^

The furrow of lake Chanka, the Ussuri, and the lower Amur, as seen on
the map, correspond very nearly with the west border of the coast range
of Sikhota-Alin, and R^cluz, in his description of this region, based on the
observations of Kropotkin, makes the just remark that a slight submer-
gence would suffice to convert Sikhota-Alin into a new island arc*.

A comparison of Richtliofen*s results in northern China with those of
Russian geologists in east Siberia thus enables us to recognize the Tai-pai-
shan in Shansi, the Great Khingan in Mongolia, the Apple mountains in
the trans-Baikal region, and the east of part of the dividing ridge of
Stanovoi from the Apple mountains to beyond Okhotsk, as the edges
of great platforms wliich have been let down in the direction of the Pacific
Ocean. ‘ Certain facts,’ says Richthofen, ‘ indicate that the Ricific basin is
surrounded by step faults on the grandest scale V

In front of these tectonic lines lie the extremely ancient fragments of
table-land which surround the Yellow sea; in front of these again, lie the
island arcs. We may now attempt to compare these arcs more closely with
the mainland.

The origin of the Liu-Kiu arc cannot be discusse*! until the structure
of Formosa is known in greater detail.

The arc of south Japan is connected, in’ Nauinann’s opinion, with the
northern part of the rias coast of south China. This arc curves past
the fragments of table-land surrounding the Yellow sea, and is joined in
a peculiar syntaxis by the arc of north Japan.

Next, however, so far as we can judge at present, the arc of the middle
part of Yezo, which we may suppose to represent a part of the arc of
Sakhalin, arises outside the arc of north Japan, so that the latter is
inserted, so to speak, between the coast chain and the arc in front of it.
Still further towards the exterior lies the arc of the Kuriles together
with east Kamchatka ; towards the interior, on the other hand, the fragment
of west Kfimchatka.

We cannot say that these arcs are syntactic in a deep re-entrant angle,
like the Asiatic chains on the Jehlam, or like the Armorican and Variscan
mountains between Douai and Valenciennes, or like the Ural and the arc
of Nova Zernbla on the Konstantinov-Kamen. The only exception is the
sharp syntaxis in the middle of Honshiu ; here the bend is really similar
to that of the above examples, yet there is a difference owing to the

' G. von Hclnier»en in A. T. von Middendorf's Reise in den iiussersten Norden und
ORten Sibiriens, T, 4to. St. Petersburg, 1848, p. 219, Atlas, pi. xvii.

E. Kecluz, Nouvelle Oeographie universelle, VI, 8vo, Paris, 1861, p. 860.

* Richthofen, Fiihrer fur Forschungsreisende, p. 605.



BLOCKS BETWEEN THE FOLDS


195


CH. Ill]


approach of the Shichi-to chain, and the north Japanese arc reproduces so
exactly the arc of south Japan in its main feature, that we are reminded
of the conditions on the strait of Orinuzd where a secondary notching of
a similar kind appears to be present (I, p. 426).

The island arcs lie against and behind each other at an obtuse angle,
and this is the. more striking since the succeeding arc of the Aleutian isles
shows a far greater independence, and as we proceed in the direction of
America we recognize a much greater contrast to tlie arcs, and a greater
resemblance with normal syntaxis.

Apart from the Philippines, the relations of which are still unexplained,
these arcs arc seen to stand in very intimate connexion with the arcs of
the Asiatic continent. Asia consists of an obstructive fragment of Indo-
Africa — the peninsula of India, which does not now concern us, and of
a great piece of the earth s crust folded to the south. The folds, however,
are interrupted .and separated by platforms which lie between them like
rigid blocks, although in the platforms themselves we may also recognize
the traces of much older folding in the same direction.

We shall show later, with greater detail th.an we have yet done, tliat
the Himillaya actually termin.ates on the Brahmaputra. There are chains
lying behind the Himalaya joining the meridional chains of Yunnan which
pass the end of the Himalaya and are continued in the Malay arc. This
arc we have traced through the Banda islands as far as the coast of New
Guinea. But although to the south it passes considerably beyond thc‘
equator, yet in a tectonic sense it lies wholly behind the Ilinullaya, or
if wc were. to number the great folded ranges from the exterior inwards,
the Himillaya would receive the number 1 and the Malay arc the number 2.
The encounter of the two rtanges above the wedge-sluipcd fragment of
Shillong is thus different from the syntaxis on the Jehlam.

We have already observed that our insufficient knowledge of Formosa
prevents us from forming 'an opinion as to the arc of Liu-Kiu, but the
south Japanese arc probably issues from the folds of south China, exactly
as the Malay arc does from the chains of Yunnan, and it lies hehind thi‘
Malay arc in the same sense as this lies hehind or within the Himalaya.

In the same sense the chains of east Siberia lie behind or within those
of south China, and, notwithstanding the peculiar insertion of tlic north
end of the north Japanese arc in Yezo mentioned above, we must regard
all those arcs which stand in relation to the east Siberian chains as lying
further towards the interior. With regard to this point the absence bf
a more detailed knowledge of Sakhalin and of central Yezo *is much to
be regretted, for the map shows a much more exact correspondence of
the coast range Sikhota-Alin with the distant arc of the Kuriles than
with the arc of Sakhalin lying between them.

Thus the east Asiatic coast does not resemble a scries of independent



196 THE BOEDERS OF THE PACIFIC OQEAN [pabtiii

ranges advancing towiuds the .sea, but rather a stupendous virgation
extending over the whole fyreadth of Eurasia, the successive divergence of
the %ame folded systems vrhich, closely crowded together in the interior
of the continents, form the great and lofty highlands. In this diveigence
each of the great branches shows near its extremity, i.e. towards the
Ocean, a tendency to recurve to the north, and thus arise the island festoons
of east Asia.

13. The arc of the Aleutian idands. In scarcely any ot^er part of the
Pacific outline is the tendency towards the arc-like disposition so sharply
expressed as in the zone of volcanos and mountain fragments which pro-
ceeds from the Commander’s islands through the Aleutian islands, the
peninsula of Alaska, Kadiak and KenaS, and separates Behring sea from
the Ocean. Grewingk, in 1850, published a geological description and map
of this region, based on the observations of his time, which may still
be consulted with advantage; he compared it to a knotted rope hung
between the rocky pillars of America and Asia, whfch, sinking under its
own weight, had bent its supports towards one ' another ^ Grewingk
represented the contrast between the Aleutian and the American directions
of strike by means of trend-lines, and Dali’s subsequent investigations
appear to indicate that between the Mackenzie and the upper Yukon, in
about lat. 64° N., the Aleutian and the west American chains meet in syn-
taxis at a fairly acute angle *. The chain running to the north-east which
reaches this part of the syntaxis is called by Grewingk the Tschigmitge-
birge ; Dali terms it the Alaskan range. It lies on the interior side of the
, principal range, which extends from the north coast of Cook’s inlet through
Alaska and the island arc. Cook’s inlet itself and the strait of Shelechov
lie in the strike of the mountains, somewhat like the gulf of Ancud and
the channel of Moraleda in the south of Chili. The gulf of Tshagatska
(Prince William sound) and the mouth of the Copper river mark the place
where the course of the coast is determined by the re-entrant angle of
syntaxis. Whether the Romanzov mountains in the north between fort
Yukon and the Arctic Ocean, or the upturned Palaeozoic beds which
Beechey observed near cape Lisburn, must be regarded as northern ranges
parallel to the Aleutian arc can hardly be determined at present.

‘ C. Grewingk, Beitrago zur Kenntniss der orographischen und geognostischen
Besebaffenheit der NW.-Eiiste Amerikas mit den anliegenden Inseln, in Verb. Min. Ges.,
St. Petersburg, 1850, 8vo, p. 215 ; E. von Eicbwald, Geognostiscb-patAontologische
Bemerkungen fiber die Halbinsel Mangischlak und die Alfiutischen Inseln, 8vo, St.
Petersburg, 1871.

® W. H. Dali, Alaska and its Resources, 8vo, Boston, 1870, p. 286 ; cf. further, Amer.
Journ., 1868, 2nd ser., XLV, pp. 96-99, and 1876, 8rd ser., XI, p. 242 ; C. A. White, On
a small Collection of Mesozoic Fossils collected in Alaska by Mr. Dali, Bull, U.8. Geol.
Surv. Territories, 1884, No. 4, pp. 98-103; for the Yukon, also Krause, Zeitschr.' ErSk,,
Berlin, 1883, XVllI, p. 348; Schwatka, Joum. Amer. Geogr. Soc., 1884, XVI, p. 874
et passim.



cH.ra] . THE ALEUTUN ISLANDS 197

The breaking up of the mountain chain which is accomplished by the
isolated advance of the peninsula of Alaska, and then by the division of
the prolongation of the peninsula into the groups of islands, is a fresh
example of a phenomenon which wo have observed from Kamchatka to
the Kuriles, from Arakan to the Nicobars, and on other coasts having
the Pacific structure. Here, however, the orographic form of the peninsula
is modified by a form of erosion peculiar to the north. This is represented
by extremely deep transverse valleys, which in Norway are called ‘ eyde,’
in Alaska ‘perenossi,’ i.e. carrying places or ‘portages! as. they are called
in Canada, though this last term is used in a more extended sense to
include the low watersheds of the abraded Archaean shield. They are the
same deep valleys as are described by Boas on Cumberland peninsula, where
they connect the corresponding fjords of the two coasts (II, p. 32). Alaska,
just like Cumberland peninsula, is cut across many times by ‘these deep
furrows. The first runs from the most northerly part of the peninsula
through the. great lake of lliamna, and Grewingk enumerates five other
perenossi ; lakes frequently lie in their course, and Dali was informed that
some of them are so low that in the whole transit it is scarcely necessary
to lift the boat out of the water.

' Archaean rocks are known on the south-east coast of Kenat and Kadiak,
as well as at several localities in Alaska ; at Unalashka and in some of
the western islands as far as Attu, mctamorphic rocks and ancient por-
phyry are mentioned as forming thO foundation. In the Commander’s
islands the foundation is Archaean. At cape Nunakhalkak, on the north-
east coast of Alaska (about, lat. 68° 20' N.), Pinart found fossils of the
Trias ^ ; on the east coast Jurassic deposits are known, which, as it appears,
belong to different stages of the middle and upper Jurassic, and the Aucclla
beds appear at various points on the east coast as well as near Port
Mdller on the north-west coast of the peninsula.

The Tertiary formation of this region deserves particular attention and
renewed investigation. In many places, particularly in Cook’s inlet, the
Tertiary leaf-bearing beds with lignite occur which distinguish the Arctic
regions in so peculiar a manner. Hccr has described their flora They
extend as far as cape Tolstoi in Morton sound. Above these leaf-bearing
beds Dali observed, near Nulato, on the lower Yukon, a brown sandstone
with Crepidula, Ostraea, and other marine mollusca of extinct species.
This sandstone has a fairly wide extension. On the Shumagin islands,
which lie off the south-east coast of Alaska, Dali found resting on syenite
or granite, first very much altered quartzite, then blue sandy shales with
beds of lignite, silicified wood, beds of conglomerate and leaves of Platanus,

* P. Fischer, Sur quelques fossiles de PAlaska, in A. L. Pinart, Voyages a la Cdte
Nord-Ouest de I’Am^rique, 4to, 1875, 1, p. 32.

* 0. Heer, Flora Fossila Alaskana, 4to, Stockholm, 1869 (in Svensk. Akad. Handl.).



198 THE BORDERS OF THE PACIFIC OCEAN [partiii

then conglomerates and sand with Sequoia, and above this the brown
marine sandstone with Crepidula, vertebrae of whales, oysters and wood
perforated by borings. The Tertiary beds are traversed by basalts

These deposits, wliich appear to be of middle Tertiary age, are so far
the only trace of a connexion with the marine Tertiary beds which have
been mentioned as occurring in SpitJsbcrgen and the east of Greenland
(II, pp. fi9, 73). They must be carefully distinguished from other marine
beds which contain living species or a fauna very closely allied to the
present, and which are regarded by many observers as also of Tertiary age.
These occur at many points of the Aleutian arc, as well as in Kamchatka,
Sakhalin, and on the Pribylov islands, resting horizontally against the
older rocks of the coast, and Grewingk has justly emphasized their
striking resemblance to the shell-bearing beds of Beauport near Quebec in
Canada.

In conclusion, a zone- of mighty volcanos takes part in the structure of
the Aleutian arc. It would be superfluous to enumerate them. With the
giant Iliamna and the Ujakushatsh (or Burnt. mountain) on the west side
of Cook’s inlet, this volcanic zone makes its entrance into the continent
of America. It is very active; several great eruptions occurred in the
course of the eighteenth century: during one of them, in 1796, the new
volcano, Saint Johann Bogoslow, was formed, which rises from the sea west
of the northem point of Unalashka; finally in December, 1883, the mouth
of Cook’s inlet was the scene of violent volcanic phenomena.

14. The v?est coad of America, The lofty mountain ranges which
border the Pacific coast of America have been already described. The
contrast between their direction and that of the Aleutian islands is very
striking. In Chatham straits, east of Sitka, Blake observed mica-schist in
an almost vertical position striking parallel to the coasts and from the.
works of Canadian geologists we have learnt that Vancouver and the
(jucen (Charlotte islands must be regarded merely as the outer chains of
those cordilleras which traverse the north-western part of America.
Further to the south we reach the great lava flood of Washington and
Oregon, l)encath which only isolated fragments of the downthrown cor-
dillera are visible. It is in the Cascade range that these eruptive products
attain their* greatest height; and the overwhelmed forests beneath the
lava recall the similar occurrences of Tertiary age which are so widely
distributed in high latitudes. This volcanic region extends as far as mount
Shasta, and some observers include in it the range of Lassen’s peak which
joins the sierra Nevada.

We liere approach the region of the Basin ranges, distinguished by its

^ Dali, Note on Alaska Tertiary Deposits; Amer. Journ., 1882, 3rd ser., XXIV, p. 67.

* T. A. Blake, Topo^^raphical and Geological Features of the NW. Coast of America;
Amer. Journ., 1868, 2nd ser., XLV, pp. 242-247.



199


OH. Ill] WEST COAST OP AMERICA

peculiar atructure. More or less meridional chains were formed by folding,
then followed faults, which run almost with the strike of the folds, and
along these the folded country has been let down. Diller has shown ihat
the structure of the Basin ranges extends to the northern part of the
sierra Nevada. Tliis, too, is cut through between Sacramento and Honey
lake by two faults running almost with the strike, whicii form American
valley and Indian valley with a downthrow on the east, the dip being
directed mainly to the west. On the west side of Honey lake lies a third
line of fracture, which corresponds to the east border of the sierra. The
outermost ' part of the west border of the mountains appears to bo over-
turned *.

The difference in structure between the Coast ranges and the sierra
Nevada, indicated by earlier investigations, is shown by fresh observations
to be less than was supposed. In the north, Diller has found fossils of the
Carboniferous lime.stone west of Shasta valley in the region of the Coast
ranges; and, further south. White has shown the correspondence of the
Aucella beds of the Coast ranges with those of the sierra. Becker regards
lx)th mountain ranges as forming part of the system of western cordilleras.
Since the lower Cretaceous, and very probably since a far earlier period,
the whole region between the Wahsatch and the Pacific coast has, aecoi'ding
to Becker, beei\ the scene of the ‘ recurrent, if not constant action of lateral
compression, exercised practically in one and the same direction V

The distinction between the movement of folding and the formation of
great fractures along which collapse takes place is becoming recognized
with ever-increasing clearness. In the north, between the Si.skiyou moun-
tains and the Ca.scade range (south Oregon), the Cretaceous formation,
according to Whitney, is upturned. On the western side of the sierra
Nevada the upper Cretaceous lies horizontally in the foothills. In the
Coast ranges the middle Tertiary beds have also been involved in the fold-
ing. The age of the folds, as far as the position of the beds gives evidence
of it, thus differs locally. The faults and subsidences, it is true, are also
of different age, but the way in which they intersect the folded bands
leaves no room for doubt that they are younger than these. Most observera
hold the view that they are very recent, and that even the movements
taking place at the present day are a continuation of the great process of
subsidence. Gilbert’s observations on the more recent dislocations along
the Wahsatch fault have already been mentioned (I, p. 578). It is asserted

* J. S. Diller, Notes on the Geology of North California; Bull. U.S. Geol. Surv. •
Territories, No. 33, 1886, pp. 373-387. •

’ G. F. Becker, Notes on the Stratigraphy of California, Bull. U.S. Geol. Surv.
Territories, No. 19, Washington, 1885, p. 212 ; Cretaceous Metamorphic Rocks of California,
Amer. Journ., 1886, 3rd ser., XXXI, pp. 348-357, &c, ; for the palaeontological evidence
of the Aucella beds, C. A. White, On the Mesozoic and Cainozoic Palaeontology of Cali-
fornia, Bull. U.S. Geol. Surv. Territories, No. 15, 1885, pp. 7-32.



200 THE BORDERS OP THE PACIPIO OCEAN [PAram

that the earthquake of March 26, 1872, on the east border of the sierra
Nevada (I, p. 74) was accompanied by a dislocation, and Beyer describes
ice-polished granite cliffs on lake Fordyce which have been cut t^ugh by
post-glacial faults ^ Within the downthrown area of the Basin ranges,
and particularly in the northern part of south Oregon, Bussell -has traced
fresh indications of quite recent movements, not yet covered by vegetation,
and extending for great distances along ancient fault-lines. They traverse
recent terraces and cones of ddbris, and may attain a throw of fifty feet ;
Bussell thinks that some of them have been produced within the last few
years, and he gives instances from Surprise valley (long. 120” W., lat.
4r-42” N.), which is often visited by earthquakes^.

In Central America the cordillera of the Antilles is broken off towards
the Pacific Ocean (I, p. 642).

. Through the whole of ^uth America as far as cape Horn, the course of
the coast, as we have already seen, is determined by the mountain chains.

* E. Reyer, Zwei Profile durch die Sierra Nevada; N. Jahrb, Min., Supplement,
lY, 1886, pp. 291-326, map.

* I. C. Russell, A Geological Reconnoissance in South Oregon; IV Report of the
Ann. Rep. U. S. Geol. Surv., 1882-1883, 8vo, 1884, pp. 431-464, in particular pp. 442 et
seq. The attempts made to draw definite conclusions as to the persistence of tectonic
movements from the behaviour of rivers dp not seem to me at present to have led to
convincing results, for the question is affected by displacements of the strand-line, which
must be regarded as independent of these tectohic movements ; cf. J. le Conte, A Post-
Tertiary Elevation of the South Nevada shown by the River-beds, Amer. Joum., 1886,
3rd ser., XXXIl, pp. 167-181.



201


CHAPTER IV

COMPAEISON OF THE ATLANTIC AND PACIFIC

OUTLINES

The Atlantic structure. The Pacific structure. Their dissimilarity. Distribution of
islands and volcanos. Overthrusting of the depressions. Progressive completion of the
Mesozoic series towards the Pacific co^t.

The contents of the two preceding chapters have now placed us in
a position to appreciate more precisely the distinction which exists between
the Atlantic and Pacific coasts. ^

Let us first recall the strange approach to a symmetrical arrangement
which manifests itself in the Atlantic region.

In the north stands the wedge-like mass of Greenland ; on each side of
it lies an arm of the sea. On the west the mainland begins with an
imposing range of very ancient gneiss, which borders the west coast of
Baffin bay and Davis strait, and extends nearly as far as the strait of Belle
Isle. On the east a similar chain of gneiss forms the greater part of the
islands and coasts of northern Norway ; it appears to find its continuation
in the gneiss of the outer Hebrides.

Within the Hebrides follow the pre-Devonian overthrust folds of the
Caledonian chain ; I know of nothing similar in America.

We now encounter in the west the Canadian shield with its fiat
bedding, and the shallow pan. of Hudson bay surrounded by a girdle of
glint lakes. In the east we have the Baltic shield, with the Palaeozoic
beds lying equally flat upon abraded Archaean folds, and the shallow
^Itic pan likewise surrounded by a girdle of glint lakes. It is pnly by
;fegiurding certain flat-bedded patches as representing the border of the
ibanadian shield, that it can be said to reach the open Ocean at all, and
then it forms only a veiy short stretch of coast along the strait of Belle
Isle. The Baltic shield is nowhere in contact with the Atlantic Ocean,
properly Cb called. On the other hand both shields reach the Arctic
Ocean ; Coronation gulf in the west, the Varanger fjord' in the east,
and to a certain extent also the gulf of Onega, present the characters
of glint bays: '

Beyond the strait of Belle Isle follow the jagged , rias coasts of New-
foundland, New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia, where the folds of the
mountain ranges which were elevated towards the end of the Carboniferous
pmod sink beneath the sea. These mountain ranges are folded to the



202 ATLANTIC AND PACIFIC COMPAEED [paothi

north-west and north, and their outer border coincides with the right bank
of the lower St. Lawfence and the east shore of Belle Isle strait. The
gulf of St. Lawrence forms the boundary of these folded ranges; the
island of Anticosti does not belong to them, but to the border of the shield.
To this rias coast corresponds in Europe the rias coast of the'Armorican
remge, which is also in its main features post-Carboniferous, certainly pre-
Permian in age, and which extends from the Shannon nearly to La
Rochelle. This range is cut through by .St. George’s channel and the
English channel ; it is folded to the north-east, north, and finally to the
north-north-west.

In Europe the next part of the Atlantic coast further south is occupied
by the last outposts of the Pyrenees; we#aay regard the formation of this
chain, together with the Alps, as subsequent for the most part to the
subsidence of the pre-Pennian ranges, the course of both being to a. large
extent detennined by the trend of those older mountains and by the
position of their faulted margins.

The overthrusting of the northern border appears to be less marked
than in other European ranges ; towards the west, in the north of Spain,
this border reaches the sea, but it has collapsed in the Basque provinces
(I, p. 289 ; II, p. 121). Then comes, along the north-west coast of Spain,
the fractured margin of that group of structures, almost unique in their
arrangement, which form the basin of Asturias, and indeed in such a
manner that the several members of this basin become more and more
perpendicular to the coast as they strike out to sea. This basin also is
of pre-Permian age, and it looks as if it were about to repeat itself in the
sudden bend of the Betic cordillera in the straits of Gibraltar.

It is the fragmentation and reconstruction of the folded ranges which
have given to the coast of western Europe its variety of form. These
processes did not occur in North America, and there a mediterranean sea
bounded towards the Ocean by the arc of the Antilles lies much further
south than in Europe. In Europe the arc of the Antilles finds its precise
homologue in the arc of the Betic cordillera.

The /Alleghanies and all the other folded ranges of eastern North
America as far as Newfoundland are folded away from the Atlantic Ocean
and turn their inner side and their oldest rocks to it. Our increasing
knowledge of the mountains of Brasil shows us more and more clearly that
the folding in all the chains of this region is also turned away from the
Atlantic in the direction of the Andes, so that the innermost zones lie next
this Ocean. Consequently the arc strikes out to sea in cape Corrientes and
Staten island.

In west Africa the end of the great Atlas is unknown ; the south shows
fractured table-land.

With the exception of the cordiUera of the Amiillee and the mountain



ATLANTIC CHARACTEBS


203


CH. iv]


fragment of Qifyraltar, which form resp^tively the boundary of the two
mediterranean seas, the outer side of a folded range nowhere determines the
outline of the Atlantic Ocean. The older folded ranges which extend from
Maine to Newfoundland turn, it is true, their outer side to the lower
St. Lawrence and the strait of Belle Isle, but where they reach the great
Ocean they disappear beneath it. The inner sides of folded ranges, jagged
rias coasts which indicate the stdjsulence of mountain chains, fractured
margins of horsts, and fractured table-land form the diversified boundary
of the Atlantic Ocean.

The same structure also characterizes the coast of the Indian Ocean as
far to the east as the mouths of the Ganges, where the outer border of
the Eurasian chains meets the sea. The Erythraean trough, the fracture
of the Quathlamba in Natal, as well os that of the Sahy&dri in India, and
the structure of Madagascar, the faults of which have been recently
described by Cortese, indicate that the structure of this region has been
determined by tabular fractures It is only in the Persian gulf that some
of the outer Iranian zones reach the sea.

The west coast of Australia likewise exhibits Atlantic structure. From
the arrangement of the folded ranges we know that they turn their convex
side to the Pacific Ocean, and a comparison with South America shows that
from the continent of Australia as far as New Zealand and probably New
Caledonia, a more or less concentric system of folds is present, turned
towards the Pacific side.

The west coast of Australia thus presents much the same relations as
that of the east coast of Brazil.

The borders of the Pacific Ocean may bo divided for convenience into
five parts.

The first is formed by the arc of the -Aleutian islands. While the
north of the Atlantic Ocean is characterized by the Archaean mass of
Greenland, hero on the other hand is swung an island arc, affording with
its folded Mesozoic beds and its inner zone of active volcanos a complete
contrast of structure. The syntactic angles of the arcs in the north Pacific
Ocean at once recall the relations of the mountain chains of India
(I, p. 462).

The second part consists of the west coast of North America, from the
gulf of KcnaK down to the coast of Mexico. The Queen Charlotte islands
are regarded by Canadian geologists as an outer chain of the cordilleras.

The third part is South America', it begins in Guatemala, where the
cordillera of the Antilles strikes across Central America, is divided into
two by a syntaxis in the gulf of Arica and prolonged in an arc to the
south beyond capo Horn. This part is characterized by the coast cordillera,

' E. Cortese, Una escursione al Madagascar, Boll. R. Com. Geol. d’ltalia, 1887, XVIII,
pp. 129-134; and Osservazioni geognostiche sul Madagascar, tom. cit., pp. 181-191.



204


ATLANTIC AND PACIFIC COMPABED [PABrm

where the stratified series does not appear to begin till the Neocomiftn ; it
recalls in many respects the coast chains of California, as well as the
Niuobars and Andamans, which have a similar structure.

The fourth part is formed by the area of eaatern Aaia, which we have
recognized in many of their most important segments as the recurved
extremities of the great chains of central Asia; they are not syntactic
after the manner of independent arcs, but lie one behind the other, forming
the termination of a series of chains folded in the same direction and
belonging to a single system. The great Malay arc marks the southern
border of this system. Timor and Soemba lie outside it ; whether these
two islands should be included in the Australian region must for the
present remain undecided.

As the fifth part we regard the Australian chains together with New
Zealand and New Caledonia. An opportunity has already presented itself
of comparing the Australian chains of the Flinders and Adelaide ranges as
far as the east coast with the meridional sierras in the west of Cordova.
The absence of middle Tertiary deposits over , the whole of the eastern
coast of Australia and Van Diemen’s Land, in contrast to their rich
development on the south coast of Australia and in Bass strait, leads to
the supposition that the continent east of the existing coast has only in
comparatively recent times subsided to the great depths which are now
known to occur in this region.

To complete the boundary of the Pacific Ocean wo should here add,
perhaps, a south part, the Antarctic, but the accounts at our disposal of
this region are too fragmentary to be of any value. The syntaxis of an .
arc lying outside the Australian system with the south side of New
Zealand (II, p. 183, Fig. 16) is not without suggestiveness. In the more
southern latitudes, H. Reiter has concluded from the observations of
travellers, that the regions corresponding to the Pacific Ocean and those
lying further to the east, from the Balleny islands and Victoria land to
the sooth Orkneys, are constructed on the Pacific type ; the other regions,
however, on the Atlantic type It is possible that this conjecture may be
confirmed some day by fresh discoveries.

With the excejption of a part of the coast of central America in
Guatemala, where the bending cordillera of the Antilles has sunk in, the
whole border of the Pacific Ocean, wherever it is known in any detail, is
formed of mountain chains folded towards .the Ocean in such a manner
that their outer folds either form the boundary of the mainland itsdf or
lie in front of it as penineulas and island chains.

No folded range turns its inner side to the Pacific; no table-land
reaches the shores of this Ocean.

* H. Reiter, Lie Sfldpolarfrage und ihre Bedeutung fflr die genetieche Gliederung der
Erdoberfl&che, 8vo, Weimar, 1886, 34 pp., map.



CH.IV] ATLANTIC AND PACinC KLANDS 206

In the AUarUic region the shallow basin of Hudson bay on the
Canadian shield coirresponds to that of the Baltic and the gulf of Bothnia
on the Scandinavian shield. The irregular arms of the sea around the gfilf
of St. Lawrence, between the rias coasts of the ancient mountain folds of
New Bninswick, capo Breton, and Newfoundland, occupy a position similar
to that of the English channel which crosses the Annorican folds. The
great inbreak of the foreland of the Antill^ occupied by the gulf of
Mexico finds no counterpart in the European region, where a dominant
character is the repeated formation of mountain chains; the Caribbean
sea represents the Mediterranean, unless, indeed, we prefer to compa.re it
with the basin of Asturias.

The volcanic islands stand in groups, like the Azores, the Canary
islands, and the Capo de Yerde islands, or run in straight lines as in the
prolongation of the Cameroons in the gulf of Guinea. The coral reefs of
the Laccadives and Maladives, as far as the Chagos islands, also lie in
a straight line. Volcanos arranged in curved lines only occur in one
of the two regions in which the Pacific, type encroaches on the Atlantic
region, namely in the Antilles.

Kerguelen, according to the investigations of Studer, Moseley, and
Renard, consists of successive sheets of lava, chiefly basic These rise in
great terraces one above the other ; the trachytes and phonolites appear to
be older than the basalts. Between the basic flows there exist in some
places intercalated beds of lignite, sometimes with trunks of great conifers,
•probably the relics of ancient forests. These facts show that Kei^elen is
the remains of a once more extensive land and that the outflows did not
take place beneath the sea. This resemblance with the Faeroe islands and
'Iceland is very remarkable.

In the Pacific region, on the other hand, and particularly in that part
of it which belongs to Eurasia, the arc-like disposition and the ‘hinder
seas’ within the arcs are characteristic. We may doubtless regard that
branch of the Mediterranean which lies to the north of Candia and Cyprus
as a representative of those hinder seas of eastern Asia ; the gulf of Pegu
is another example of this relation which recurs under various forins as far
as Behring sea. It is less marked on the west coast of America. The
boundaries of the strait lying on the inner side of Queen Charlotte islands •
are particularly incomplete. The gulf of California, on the prolongation
of the valleys of San Joaquin and the Sacramento, as well as the gulf of
Corcovado on the prolongation of the longitudinal valley of Chili — both of
them clearly determined by the strike of the mountain chain — differ to .

* T. Studer, Geologische Beobachtungen auf Eerguelenland, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol.
Ges., 1878, XXX, pp. 327-3.50, map, pi. xv ; H. N. Moseley, Notes of a Naturalist on the
* Challenger,’ pp. 184-215 ; A. F. Renard, Notice sur la geologie de Tile de Kerguelen,
Bull. Mus. R. d’Uist. nat. de Bruxelles, 1886, IV, pp. 223-272, pi. v.



206


ATLANTIC AND PACIFIC COMPAEED [partiii

some extent from the hinder seas of eastern Asia. They do not lie behind
the cordilleras, but between the coast chain and the principal cordillera, or
entjrely within the coast chain, as happens in the south, and these pecu-
liarities are repeated with slight modification in the strait of Shechelov
and Kenai sound.

The mountain arcs which characterize the boundaries of Eurasia, and in
particular of eastern Asia, exhibit the arcuate plan in almost every possible
stage of existence. Beginning with a completed cordillera with volcanos
alined on its inner side, as in Italy — or upon its inner side and in the midst
of the cordillera itself, as in north and south Japan — we pass to a cor-
dillera cut off by the sea and prolonged by a mere chain of islands, with
volcanos rising out of the sea, as in the chain of Pegu (coast of Arakan,
Nicobars, and Andamans) with the volcanos of Puppa Doung, Chouk Talon,
Barren island, and Narkondam, on the inner side; and then to an arc
having no visible attachment to the mainland, with fragments of the
cordillera forming an outer chain of islands and volcanic mountains an
inner chain, as in the Liu-Kiu; next to a volcanic arc with the merest
remnants of a cordillera, as in Java ; and finally to a volcanic arc alone, as
in the Kuriles, unle*ss, indeed, the east of Kamchatka represents a part of
the cordillera of these islands.

The case is similar as regards the outer Australian arcs. If we accept
Dana’s views as to the trend-linos of the Polynesian islands we must regard
not only New Caledonia with the Lousiade group, but also the Loyalty
islands and the whole zone of the New Hebrides, the Solomon islands. New
Ireland, and the Admiralty gi*oup as outer arcs of the Australian region.

Whatever may be the true relation of this chain of islands to the
mountain ranges of Australia, it is certsiin that in advancing towards the
Ocean the arrangement of the islands becomes less and less arcuate. To
the east, on the west coast of central America occurs, as we have seen, the
only case in which a folded range is cut directly across by the Pacific
coast. This is the cordillera of the Antilles, with its well-known re-
semblance to the cordilleras of South America. Precisely at that point
where the arcuate continuation of this chain might be expected to meet
the principal chains of South America, lie the volcanic Galapagos — a
sporadic group presenting the same form of association as occurs elsewhere
in the Atlantic region (I, p. 143).

We have quoted llichthofen’s observation that ‘certain facts point to
step faults on the grandest scale as forming the boundary of the Pacific
basing’ Drasche believed that it would be sound geology to draw the

^ F. von Richthofen, Fiihrer fiir Forschungsreisende, 8vo, Berlin, 1886, p. 605. We
may remark in passing on the concordance in the reBults obtained by investigators in
describing the continental margins ; see C. V^lain, Les Volcans, 8vo, Paris, 1884, p. 126,
figs. 42 and 43, and .1. Walther, Uber den Ban der Flexuren an den Grenzen der



WATERSHED OP THE GLOBE


207


CH. rv]


western -boundary of the Pacific Ocean outside the island arcs from
Kamchatka through Japan and onwards from New Zealand through
Auckland and Macquarie islands to Victoria land in the Antarctic regign
In any case we see how the volcanic circle of the Pacific resolves itself into
a series of arcs. Many of these lie inside tlie fragmentary remains of
a cordillera ; others, especially the giant volcanos of South America, stand
upon the cordilleras themselves. Further, vre can now clearly recognize,
that the hypothesis of the formation of folded chains by the thrusting
from the Ocean towards the land of the border of a sinking basin or
geosynclinal is in no way founded on fact. There is no- geosynclinal in
the world greater than the Pacific, and the mountain ranges, so far from
being turned away from it, are turnecl in the opposite direction, bicing it,
and so aiford an example on the . grandest scale of the general tendency to
overthrust the depressions (I, p. 143).

The miirch of the folded ranges on the borders of the Pacific is
accompanied both in North and South America by a general descent of
the mainland in tlie opposite direction, that is towards the Atlantic, and
on both continents almost the whole of the rainfall flows away on this side.
The same is true, although not in so marked a manner, of the other
continents. A. von Tillo has described the line which runs from cape
Horn along the west coast of America to Behring strait, and from there
through the middle of Asia across the coast of Syria east of the Nile to
the cape of Good Hope, as ‘the chief watershed of the globe**.' When we
include Arabia and India also in the region bounded by coast built on the
Atlantic type we realize how disproportionately large is the volume of
fresh water which it supplies to the sea.

A last important character should here find mention. This is. the
completion of the marine Mesozoic series whit h we perceive as we approach
the Pacific coasts. On the Atlantic coasts nothing similar is to be observed.
This fact, so important in the history of the Oceans, will clearly appear in
the following chapters.

Kontinente, Zeitschr. Natnrwiss., Neue Folge, Jona, 1886, XIII, Taf. xii, fig. 3. Waltlior
lays particular stress on Scrope’s view, that eruptions predominate* in those parts where*
the convexity turns downwards.

^ R. von Drasche, Qber paliiozoische Schichten auf Kaintschatka und Luzon ; N. Jahr b.
Min., 1879, pp. 265-269.

® A. von Tillo, Ein Wort fiber die Ilauptwasserscheide der Erdc : Peterm. Mittli., 1887,
XXXIIl, p. 101.



208


CHAPTER V

PALAEOZOIC SEAS

Introduction : The abyssal region ; cycles ; thickness of the sediments. The
Noith Atlantic continent. Upper limit of the Silurian. Universality of the middle
Devonian transgression. The Carboniferous system. Paralic beds. Alternation of coal
beds and marine sediments. Transgression of the Carboniferous limestone. The
Permian system. Gondwana land. . General Survey.

The object of the next throe chapters is not to give a complete survey
of the results of stratigraphical geology. From the earliest times the
starting-point of all tlie various theories which relate to changes of land
or sea has been the remarkable fact that we find in the midst of the land
the remains of shells or fishes belonging to the sea. This was the problem
which first pressed for solution ; now another question confronts us, and
we must seek to determine, by means of the facts ascertained in the study
of strata, whether the conditions under which inundation and emergence
took place in early times were of such a nature as to compel us to seek
their explanation in secular oscillations of the continents, or whether, on
the contrary, this hypothesis is incompetent to explain them. We are
thus led to consider the successive changes in the extension of the seas, and
at the same time the various nature of the sediments.

While dealing with the first point wo shall have occasion to refer
in greater detail to the fact mentioned at the conclusion of the last chapter
— that the Mesozoic series grows more complete as wc proceed from the
interior of the continents towards the Pacific Ocean. In the second place,
in treating of the Carboniferous period, the formation of the Coal-measures
must be carefully discussed, for, in explanation of this, it has been assumed
without hesitation that the solid land may have oscillated up and down
as many as a dozen times, or even more. In our treatment of the Mesozoic
aera and subsequent periods we must pay particular attention to the nature
of the calcareous formations. .

The treatment of the subject will consequently be very unequal, and
only such facts will be chosen as have an important bearing on the question
at issue.

A study of the history of the seas must certainly be based on a
knowledge of their existing state. This knowledge, however, is very
fragmentary. The expeditions undertaxken in recent times to explore the
<loep regions of the ocean have brought to light so many new and



209


CH.V] NATUKE OP THE SEDIMENTS

unexpected facts, that it is evident we have as yet scarcely crossed the
threshold of great discoveries in this field of investigation. But these
explorations rre attended by every kind of difficulty ; isolated soundings,
separated by great intervals, arc only obtained here and there. The slopes
of our mountains, on the other hand, reveal to the eye, in innumerable
exposures, vast masses of sediments accumulated at various depths in the
ancient seas, together with the remains of the animals which peopled them.

Among these ancient formations we may distinguish those which have
been deposited by evaporation from solution, such as gypsum and rock-
salt; next clastic sediments, i. e. those which have boon mechanically
transported and then deposited on the bottom, such as sand and mud ; and
finally organic formations, such as coral reefs, which have been constructed
by living creatures. In addition to these three chief groups, two otliers
must also be mentioned. They both resemble clastic formations in many
important respects, but their material is not derived from the solid land,
which, as is generally admitted, is the source of clastic deposits, but from
the depths of the sea itself. These are, fir.st, volcanic ashes and scoriae,
which rise from the bosom of the earth and spread themselves out over
the floor of the ocean; and secondly, the remains of the hard paiis of
calcareous or siliceous organisms, such as Badiolaria and Globigcrinae,
which, together with fragments of shells and other debris, form a silt of
organic origin, and these have contributed largely to the sediments of
ancient sea.s, now foming a visible part of the earth’s crust.

The chemical composition of beds of rock-salt and its associated
minerals, shows that the substances held in solution by the sea were the
same in the past as in the present. But as soon as we leave these products
of evaporation, formed in lagoons or in more or less enclosed arms of the sea,
and turn to the depths of the Ocean, the difficulties of comparison increase.

In existing seas the temperature remains constant from a certain depth,
which diminishes towards the poles, down to the bottom. The sun does
not penetrate into this abyssal region, the manifold influence of diurnal
and seasonal changes or differences in latitude does not afiect it. The same
climate prevails in the depths of all the oceans, and a uniform fauna
characterizes them, exposed to no change of conditions except differences
of pressure, which correspond to differences of depth. Thus it appears, as
recorded by Wyville Thomson, that the CJutllenger in dredging below
500 to 600 fathoms evetywhere brought to the surface a fAuua identical
in all essential features, in the Indian Ocean as in the Southern Ocean
down to the Antcurctic circle ; in the Pacific Ocean, both north' and south ;
and in the different regions of the Atlantic Ocean

* C. Wyville Thomson, Report on the Scientific Results of the Voyage of H.M.S.
Challenger, daring the years 1878-1876, under the command of Captain 0. S. Nares and
Captain F. T. Thomson ; Zoology, I, London, 1880, pp. 48-50.

■OLLAB XI ^ p



210


PALAEOZOIC SEAS


[past m

It is not until we reach the shallower zones of the sea that the
differences in warmth and illumination begin to manifest themselves, the
distinction of climates makes itself felt, and zoological provinces assume
definite limits. The diversity in external conditions of existence increases
as we approach the shore, and with it the multiplicity of living forms
themselves ; and beyond the margin of the tides, on the dry land, where
the rays of the sun have only to penetrate the atmosphere, and where lungs
have taken the place of gills, not only the variety but the variability
of external conditions reaches its maximum. We can now more easily
understand the extraordinarily wide distribution of certain marine faunas
in early times; it is also comprehensible that on dry land and in the
shallower zones of the sea the displacement or even the extinction of
faunas may be brought about by altered conditions of existence. But this
renders it all the more difficult to explain the fact that the cosmopolitan
abyssal fauna, exposed to no difference of temperature and hardly even sub-
ject to change of place, should yet have likewise suffered transformations.

Thus the whole of the animal world which forms the biosphere falls
into two chief groups, according to its habitat, of which one is under the
influence of the sun, the other withdrawn from this influence. The first
group comprises the inhabitants of the land, of fresh water, and of isolated
zones of the sea ; the second group is the abyssal circle of living things.

The absence of sunlight in any region inhabited by living beings,
whether in a cave, or the depths of a lake, or the bottom of a well, or
finally in the abysses of the Ocean, betrays its effects, in the most diverse
classes of the animal kingdom, most obviously by modification or atrophy
of the eye. A great number of animals in the abyssal regions are blind,
so were many Trilobites of the lower Silurian, and particularly of the
Cambrian seas — a correspondence which has been repeatedly pointed out ;
the phenomenon, however, is so peculiar that it deserves to be illustrated
by a few examples.

A little blind Arthropod, Oecidotaea stygia, which lives in the caves of
North America, is closely related to AbMus communis, which possesses
sight and does not inhabit caves ; it looks like an emaciated, badly armed
Asellus which has lost its eyes. Its introduction into the caves must be
later than the time when the river terraces were being formed in the
valleys of the United States. But it has been shown by Packard that
the optic nerve, together with the ganglia, is completely absent in all the
specimens of Oecidotaea which he has examined ; nevertheless, in some in-
dividuals a small dark spot is visible on the exterior, which under the micro-
scope is seen to represent the extremely rudimentary remains of the eye. In
the majority of individuals, however, there is no trace of such a structure

* A. 8. Packard, On the Structure of the Brain of the Sesaile-eyed Crustacea ; Mem.
Nat Acad. Sci. WashingtoA, 1885, III, pp. 99-110, pi.



BYES OP DEEP-SEA ANIMALS


211


OH. V]

Niphargus, a blind genus of the Qammaridae, occurs in the caves of
Carinthia, as well as in the underground waters of many springs; and
Forel has found it in the depths of the lakes of Geneva and Neuch&tel.
Humbert has expressed the opinion that the species living in the Swiss
lakes have not been produced by a modification of species possessing sight,
such as Oammarm ptUex, but
owe their origin to the immi-
gration of forms inhabiting
subterranean water

Numerous other facts hav-
ing an important bearing on
the origin of isolated faunas
in lakes might be cited in proof
of such a migration of small
animals living in subterranean
waters ; and it is an open
question whether the American
Cecidotaea stygia might not
have been an inhabitant of sub-
terranean water before it occu-
pied caves, and even before the
formation of the river terraces.

The New Zealand ‘ frost-
fish,’ Lepidotvs which

has very large eyes, has been
described by von Lendenfeld
as a deep-sea species. The
migration of an inhabitant of
the shallower zone into the un-
illumincd depths is a very slow
process, requiring for its ac-
complishment, according to
Lendenfeld, many successive
generations. If the eye were
originally well developed, it might gradually increase in size ; but if, on the
contrary, weak or unable to adapt itself, owing to over-rapid change of
habitat, atrophy and blindness might result *.

We sometimes find, not only towards the upper limit of the abyssal

I

^ A. Humbert, Description du Niphargus puteanu>t, var. FortlU, Bull. Soc. Vaud. Sci.
nat., 1876, XIV, pp. 278-398 and pi. ; also Arch. Sci. phys. nat. Geneve, 1877, nouv. ser.,
vol. 1, 108, pp. 58-75.

’ R. von Lendenfeld, Note on the Eyes of Deep-sea Fishes ; Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W.,
Sydney, 1885, IX, pp. 699, 700.


212


PALAEOZOIC SEAS


[PABT m


region but much below it, even down to great depths, some animals
possessing well>developed eyes with others completely blind, aiid also
even, here and there, some which show clearly that the eye has become

enlai^ged.



Fio. 10. Petctlophthalmu4i armiger^ Will. Siihm (after Willo-
moes-Suhm).

Magnified two diameters ; between cape Palmas and Saint-
Paul, in 2,600 fathoms ; 170 nautical miles east of Saint*Paul in
1,600 fathoms ; also in lat. 86° 4V S. long., 20° 55' W., about 400
nautical miles west of Tristan d’Acunha group, in 100 fathoms.


Neptunua (Fig. 18),
with eyes which meet
in the middle line,
lives at great depths
in the Atlantic, yet
has several times been
captured at the sur-
face during the night ;
it appears to belong
to that largo group of
pelagic animals which
come to the surface at
night and return by
day to the depths.
The Schizopod Petal-

opkthalmus armiger, described by Willemoes-Suhm, is still more character-
istic (Fig. 19). Its eye-stalks terminate in vesicular enlargements, which

are formed of chitin and show no
trace of the structure proper to
sight. The eye has been destroyed
by its enlargement ^

Polycheles and Willemoesia are
closely allied to the Jurassic genus,
Eryon; the two living forms are
inhabitants of the deep sea, and
Willemoesia has been found both in
the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans at
a depth of 1,900 fathoms. The eyes
in both these genera are so small
and well concealed that for a long
time they were overlooked, but
Spence Bate affirms that in early
stages of development the embryo
of Willemoesia possess organs of sight constructed on the usual Crustacean
plan * (Fig. 20).

We will now turn our attention to the observations on the eyes of

’ R. von WillemoeB-Suhm, On some Atlantic Crustacea ffem the ‘ Challenger ’
Expedition ; Trans. Linn. Soc. London, 1875, 2nd ser., I, pp. 28-59 ; pi.

* G. Spence Bate in Challenger, Narrative I, 2nd part, p. 524.



Fio. 20. PtHychdee ernH/era, Will. Sulim
(after Willemoes-Suhm).

Magnified four diameters; 4S0 fathoms;
Sombrero, West Indies.



BLIND TRILOBITES


218


OH. V]


Trilobites made by Bsrrande, long before our present knowledge of the
deep-sea fauna had thrown light on their special significance.

In 1872 Barrande summed up all that was then known on the eyes of
Trilobites and arrived at the following results ^ : —

Among the Trilobites of Bohemia there are six genera of which all the
species are blind, and six which include both blind species and those pro-
vided with eyes. The earliest or 'primordial' fauna contains, out of
27 species, seven without eyes ; the second fauna, 25 species out of 127 ;
and the third fauna only one species out
of 205. The blind species appear in the
argillaceous sediments, more particularly
in the Cambrian slates, and in the argil-
laceous deposits dj, d^, and d^, of the lower
Silurian L, but not in the beds which are
predominantly quartzose, and the single
blind species of the upper Silurian is
found in argillaceous limestone. There
arc, however, forms with quite abnor-
mally large eyes, such as Aeglina and
Remopleurides, and it is Just these large-
eyed species which are found associated
with the completely eyeless ones and
once lived along with them In the
case of Aeglina ammta, as in that of
the English species Aeglina mirahUia, the
enlargement of the eyes is so far advanced
that they meet ft’om side to side in the
middle, and Barrande calls this the Cyclo-
pean form (Fig. 22).

It is obvious that the eye of Trilo-
bites in the Silurian period was exposed
by disuse to an atrophy analogous to that experienced in other classes
of animals in later times, and that here too the result was blindness,
either by direct atrophy or by enlargement, which is as it were an attempt
of the eye to maintain its existence. Acidaspia mira (Fig. 23), which
occurs in the upper Silurian limestone, shows a stalked eye like that of
existing Crustacea, well furnished with organs of sight ; the eye of Aeglina
(Fig. 22) may be compared with that of Cyatiaoma Neptunua (Fig. 18),



Fjo. 2 1 . ConocBj^aliUs Sutzm^ Sohlotli .
(after Barrande).

Primordial stage ; Geinetz, Bo-
hemia; blind.


' J. Barrande, Systemo siluricn du centre de la Boh^me, Supplement au vol. I, 4to,
Prague, 1872, pp. 155-164 and 195-197.

* ‘ Pourrait-on penler que les yeux de ces Trilobites 4taient destines a supplier par
leurs dimensions extraordinaires k la faiblesse de la lumiere transmise a travers les
eaux troubles ? ’ Ban*ande, tom. cit., p. 162.


214


PALAEOZOIC SEAS


[PABT m



which well deserves Barrande’s designation ‘^clopean’; it exhibits that
process of enlargement which is exemplified by the ' frost-fish ’ of New

Zealand, and with the development
of peduncles would lead to the blind
goggle eye of PetcdopMJudmm ar-
niiger. ConocephalUes Stdzeri, finally,
which is quite blind and occurs in
the Cambrian slates of Bohemia as-
sociated with Conocephalites striatue,
a species provided with eyes, con’e-
sponds with many examples of com-
plete absence of any external vestige
of an eye which are known in the
™ waters, in

subterranean water, and in caves.
These species which have become
blind lived amidst others which were
Fia. 22. Gyclopoan Eyes (after Barrande). provided with eyes, as is also the

Vosek ; e, d. Aeglina arut<Ua, dj , near Leiskow. the deep sea and at the bottom of the

lake of Geneva, as has been observed
by Forel *. Barrande has also found that in the youngest individuals
of Triimdevs Bucklandi, a blind species of the lower Silurian, there is

a little wart in place of the eye
in the middle of the cheek, which
disappears with age ; we are thus
reminded of Willemoesia, the
Lernaides and other animals
which possess in their youth the
rudiment of an eye, destined
with the advance of age to be-
come partly or entirely lost. In
the blind species Trinucleua
ornatua a young form possessing
eyes has not so far been observed
(Fig. 24).

The numerical statements of
^yUpperSilurUn,E,Lodmtz, Bohemia. Stalked ^ ^ distribution

of blind Trilobites in the several
stages may possibly be very much modified by later discoveries. Barrande
himself observes that the preponderance of blind species in the Cambrian

* J. Forel, Faune profonde du lac Ldman ; Verb, ichweiz. nat. Gea zu Chur, 1873-1874,
p. 136.



Fio. 23. Acida^pis mira^ Barr, (after Barrande).


BLIND TRILOBirES


216


CH. V]

deposits of Bohemia is to be attributed to Agnostus, an extremely
divergent genus. On the other hand, it most not be forgotten that the
other Cambrian genera, such as Hydrocephalus, Paradoxides, and in
England Anopolenus certainly possess a facial suture and large
elongated ocular tubercles, but so far as 1 know facets have not been
observed, except in a very few species, if indeed in any; in the lower
Silurian the very large eye, also elongated and actually faceted, of the
genus Remopleurides indicates, even by its size, merely an approach to
blindness. Indeed so far Conocepheditea striatwa appears to be the only
species of the ‘ primordial ’ fauna of Bohemia in which it is really possible
to observe the facets. Whatever light further investigation may shed on
this question, so much is already evident, that even
among Silurian animals the twofold process which
leads to blindness was already in active operation.

From this wo may conclude that the cause of
the blindness was the same as among the existing
inhabitants of the deep sea, namely the absence of
sunlight; at the same time, however, it appears
that the oldest known fauna of the Cambrian
system must be regarded as a transformed fauna,
and thus presupposes the existence of a still older
fauna of which we have no knowledge. Just as the
ancient salt deposits testify to a correspondence
between the past and present, lx)th as to the nature
of the substances contained in solution and the order
in which they were extricated by crystallization, so the structure of the
eyes in the oldest known organisms gives us reason to suppose that the
penetration of sunlight into the once-existing seas took place under similar
conditions and exercised on the organs of vision the same influence as at
the present day.

So far we may pursue the comparison between the past and the present
with some degree of certainty; but as soon as we attempt to determine
with precision the limits of the abyssal region and to express it by figures,
difficulties present themselves. Observations on the depth to which light
penetrates, made by sinking a white disc, cannot be accepted as conclusive,
since the peix;eptive faculty of these strangely modified eyes is not known
to us, and many of the animals which have become blind, such as Petaloph-
thalm/m armiger mentioned above, have the habit of coming to the surface
of the sea at night. Thus it happens that the expression ‘deep sea’ is

*'H. Hicks, Note on the Oenus Anopolenus; Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc. 1865, XXI,
pp. 477-482, pi. Blind animals which present no exterior trace of an eye, but still
possess a concealed rudiment, have been long known as occurring in wells; Bell,
Crustacea, 8to, London, 1853, Introduction, p. xxzi et passim.



Fio. 24. TrinwHtmoma-
tus, Stern (after Bar-
ronde).

Lower Silurian d,, Tru-
bin, Bohemia. Blind.



216


PALAEOZOIC SEAS


[PABT m

understood in most different senses. T. Fuchs, who has given particular
attention to this question and who by his exact knowledge of the Tertiary
deposits is especially qualified to form an opinion, lays great stress on the
influence of light, but places the limit between the littoral zone and the deep
sea at a depth of only 40-50 fathoms. Other authorities differ greatly ;
Gunther, for instance, puts the approximate limit of the deep-sea fauna at
a depth of 500 to 600 fathoms

For those studies of a general nature in which the expression is
employed, it seems to me most convenient to draw the line where the
greatest difference of the most general kind makes its appearance, and that
is where the diversity of climates ends and the universal fauna begins.
This fauna is not subject to those laws of distribution which dominate the
shallower zones, and changes in external conditions must affect it in an
altogether different manner.

The shallower regions may now be further divided into several zones,
and they are distinguished also by the great variety of their sediments.
But the undoubted fact must not lie overlooked that terrestrial plants
and clastic sediments may lie carried away into great depths®. The
presence of lieds of little pebbles of variegated quartz in the Cambrian
slates of Giuetz, which contain the blind Trilobites mentioned alxive, is
a striking example of this fact. Indeed it must be admitted that in many
cases the belt of clastic materials which surrounds many parts of the
continents descends into the region of the abyssal fauna, and that it did so
even in the ancient seas.

This clastic belt, however, is neither equally broad nor of equal thick-
ness, and where it recedes or thins out the pelagic sediments introduce
themselves with continually increasing purity. As a rule they are
calcareous, though under certain circumstances limestone may also be
deposited at trifling depths or even at the sea-level, for the conditions
which govern the formation of marine limestone are very varied. There
are massive coral reefs in which living organisms not only secrete the
carbonate of lime, but also determine the form of the reef as a whole.
These, however, constitute but a small fraction of the calcareous deposits,
which for the most part are regularly stratified. Limestone may also be
formed by organic debris, i.e. by the breaking up under the action of the
waves of the hard calcareous parts of molluscs, corals, and other marine
animals ; this disintegration may proceed so far that after a storm a broad
band of milky water surrounds the limestone reef, as Alexander Agassiz

* T. Fuchs in numerous papers ; in particular in Verh. k. k. geol. Reichs., 1882,
pp, 55-68 ; Sitz. zool.-bot. Ges. Wien, April 5, 1882 ; and by the same, Welche Ablage-
rungen haben vir als Tiefseebildungen zu betrachten ? N. Jahrb., 1882, 2. Beilage-Band,
pp. 487-584.

* Examples in Fuchs, Welche Ablagerungen, &c., p. 498 et seq.



OSCILLATION


217


CH. v]

describee in the case of the keys of Florida. Finally limestone may be
formed by the showering down on the bottom of the sea of delicate
calcareous shells, such as the tests of Globigerina ; but at extremely great
depths carbonic acid occurs in such quantity that these delicate shells are
dissolved and no limestone is formed. There are various signs by which
limestone beds reveal the action of the atmosphere and a temporary
emergence from the sea. One of these is the interspersion of fragments of
light red clay or of argillaceous limestone in the white limestone, such as
occurs for instance in the Bermudas. Of a similar nature are the residues
of red earth left on the solution of limestone, which are met with on so
many coral islands, and in the dolinas of the Karst, where they form the
‘terra rossa.* Another indication is the presence under certain circum-
stances of phosphates, the origin of which may be similar to that of the
existing beds of guano. These few examples may suffice to show how
various are the phenomena. But they do not exhaust the difficulties, and
there is still another question for solution, since some beds of carbonate of
lime contain a small, and others a considerable, admixture of carbonate of
magnesia, and beds of dolomite may alternate with beds of limestone.

Thus the most careful observation is necessary in the study of stratified
limestones.

Many years ago Murchison expressed the opinion that the middle stages
of every geological formation consist of limestone, and this idea was worked
out in greater detail by Hull in 1862 for several foimations, particularly
the Carboniferous, The predominance of the terrigenous, that is clastic,
elements carried down from the land should, according to Hull, lead us to
recognize phases of oscillation of the land, and he thus distinguishes three
stages : —


Upper stage . . . movement . . . detrital formation.

Middle stage . . . repose calcareous „

Lower stage . . . movement . . . detrital „

At the same time he concluded from the distribution of the clastic
materials in England that we may assume land to have existed to the west
and north-west during a series of geological periods

The simpler stratigraphy of the United States has led American
geologists to adopt similar views. Newberry, in 1860 , starting from the
Cretaceous transgression of the west, arrived at the conception of ‘ cycles of
deposition,’ i.e. a periodic return of similar conditions of dcposijiion, or in
other words an alternation of deposition in shallow water and in the open

* E. Hall, On Iso-diametric lines as a means of representing the Distribution of
sedimentary Clay and Sandy Strata, as distinguished from Calcareous Strata, &o.;
Quart. Joum. Oeol. Soc., 1862, XVIII, pp. 127-146, pi.



PALAEOZOIC SEAS


218


[part m


sea. In 1874 this theory was applied in detail to the Palaeozoic sediments
(I. p. 13).

••Newberry distinguished the following elements in such a cycle : —
(1) coast, (2) region outside the coast, (3) open sea, (4) retreating sea; or
sediment 1, mechanically transported; 2, mixed; 3, organic} 4, mixed.
Within a larger cycle smaller cycles owing to oscillation would arise, as is
suppased to have happened in the Carboniferous, and strictly speaking only
three elements can be distinguished in a cycle, namely, two deposits in
shallow water separated by deposits in the open sea. The Palaeozoic aera
would include four great cycles *.

Other investigators in America have followed in the same direction,
most prominently Dawson in 1868

A study of the Tertiary scries of Belgium had led Andr4 Dumont to
recognize that the intercalation of thick beds of coarse pebbles indicates
some particular change in physical conditions ; he therefore attempted to
determine the limits of the Tertiary stages by means of these pebble beds.

Rutot and van den Broeck have renewed this attempt. They endea-
voured to show that in secular, continental subsidence (positive movement),
the margin of the sea as it advances towards the interior covers the land
with a layer of coarse beach pebbles {gravier d’ immersion) ; and on this, as
the movement continues, finer sand, and finally the clay of the deeper marine
zones, is laid down ; if the oscillation then passes into its opposite phase,
i.e. if negative movement succeeds, the clay will again be followed by sand,
and this by an upper layer of rolled pebbles {gravier d’imertdon), which it
is true is often not fully developed or is destroyetl by erosion. This series —
pebbles of submergence, sand, clay, sand, and pebbles of emergence — is called
a complete ‘ cycle s^imentaire ’ and regarded as equivalent to a complete
secular oscillation. The clay thus takes the form of a lens thinning out
towards the land. In this partieular case no calcareous formation of any
importance results ; only clastic materials are dejwsited. The cycles may
be incomplete or the corresponding deposits removed in part by erosion.
The author has cited as an example the lower Tongrian marine stage, con-
sisting of Tg Itt (pebbles), Tg (sand), Tg Ic (clay), Tg It? (sand), which all
belong to the zone of Oatrea ventildbrum\ then comes Tg 2a (sand with
Cytherea aemietriata), Tg 2b (clay with Cylherea incramda), Tg 2c (sand
with Cerithium j^licatum) ®.


' J. S. Newbeny, Circles of Deposition in American Scdimentaiy Rocks ; Froc. Amer.
Assoc. Adv. Sci. Portland, Maine, 1873, 8to, Salem, 1874, pp. 185-196.

’ J. W. Dawson, Acadian Oeology, 2nd ed., 1868, pp. 135-138.

’ A. Rutot, Les phenomenes de la sedimentation marine dtudids dans leurs rapports
avee la stratigraphie regionale. Bull. Mus. R. Hist. nat. Bruxelles, 1883, II, pp. 41-83 ;
E. Tan den Broeck, Note sur un nouvel mode de classification et de notation graphique
des depdts geologiqucs base sur I’etude des phenomtnes de la sedimentation marine, tom.
cit., pp. 341-369.



OH. v] CYCLES AND THEORY OP ELEVATION 219

Considerations of this kind lead to the supposition of very frequent and
very regular alterations of the coast-line which are difficult to reconcile
with the principles of the elevation theory, and Newberry chooses expres-
sions such as : advance of the sea and retreat of the sea, or the same words
as were employed by Brogniart, Omalius d’Halloy, and others before the
prevalence of the elevation theory (II, p. 13).

According to these views the limits of a system, sometimes even of its
subordinate stages, might be regarded as an expression of the negative
phase, while the positive phase would correspond approximately to the
middle of the formation. But it is a fact that the nomenclature created in
Europe, and with it the principal limits of the stratigraphical systems, have
been found applicable in all geographical latitudes and in the most distant
regions of the globe. It is impossible, however, that a cycle of this kind
can affect in the same sense the whole surface of our planet. We must
suppose that positive areas in one part are opposed by negative areas in
another. The theory of elevation, in particular, is inconsistent with the
conception of a positive or negative movement extending simultaneously
over the whole earth, or even over a very large part of it ; diveraity of the
movement is characteristic of this theory.

The thickness of the sediments themselves, however, sometimes amounts
to thousands of feet. In every individual case, these sediments, as they
increased in thickness at any given place where a section has been studied,
must necessarily have produced a constant diminution in the depth of
the sea.

If the level of the coast-line remain wholly unchanged they must
finally reach the surface of the sea, and affortling the observer evidence of
shallow water and life under littoral conditions, may lead him to the
mistaken inference of a negative movement. Every negative movement is
strengthened in its effects by the progress of sedimentation, and every
positive movement increases the depth of the sea only by so much as it
exceeds the thickness of sediment forming at the same time and place. The
same considerations apply to an oscillatory movement. It may then happen
that the thickness of the sediment, limestone for example, may equal the
positive excess, or Sed. = Pos. — Neg. The upper surface of the sediment
will then correspond to the highest level of the positive phase, that is to the
sign e or m in the table on p. 25 ; and it is in no small degree probable that
this surface will lie above the sea-level and lead us to infer an elevation of
the land. We shall meet with this case in recent limestone formations and
coral islands. '

llie process may be represented somewhat more exactly. The thickness
is often so great, that by increase of the local attraction it raises the sea-
level a perceptible amount, a. At the same time over the whole earth
sediment is being continually carried down into the sea; thus the sea is



220


PALAEOZOIC SEAS


[past ni

gradually forced to overflow its shores, and for any given interval of time
by a quantity <r. The formula which represents the increase in the depth
of the sea is therefore

(Pos. + o + <r) > (Neg. + Sed.)
and for a diminution in the depth of the sea :

(Pos. + a + ff) < (Neg. + Sed.).

In this connexion I cannot repress a doubt that in some of the most
frequently repeated statements as to the measured thickness of clastic
deposits, particularly of the Carboniferous system, some exaggeration in
the figures is to be feared. It is not always permissible in fact to take the
sum of the several thicknesses, as for instance in limestone formations, for
this method assumes that the sediments in question were deposited verti-
cally, one above the other, while some at least were really formed on talus
slopes advancing towards the sea, and thus, to a certain extent, beside each
other or resting against one another. In this way we might obtain figures
for the thieknesses of clastic sediments which would far exceed the truth ;
still in any case these thieknessas, even if strictly estimated, would certainly
amount to many thousands of feet.

1. The North AUanJtic continent. A belt of clastic sediments afibrds
a basis of hypothesis as to the position of the continent from which it has
been derived. In North America we meet with the greatest thicknesses of
Canjbrian and Silurian shale and sandstone in the vicinity of the Atlantic
coast, namely in the east and south-east of Canada, in the adjacent north-
ea.stem part of the United States, and in the Appalachians. Thence the
thickness diminishes towards the Mississippi ; shale and sandstone diminish
in importance, while limestone increasingly predominates.

We see something similar, although not with equal distinctness, in the
north of Europe. In the British Isles great thicknesses of sandstone and
shale are present, and the same is the case in the mountains of Norway ; in
Sweden and the Baltic provinces the thickness rapidly diminishes, and
in the Silurian the limestone predominates more and more.

This fact has led American geologists to conjecture that the continent
which furnished these sediments occupied the site of the existing North
Atlantic Ocean. In the same way in England, Qodwin-Austen, and after
him Geikic, regarded the crystalline rocks of Scandinavia, with their
continuation into the Hebrides, as the remains of the Silurian continent,
and Hull has defended with great zeal the theory of a vanished Palaeozoic
Atlantis From the following, however, it will appear that this continent
persisted as such up to a very recent epoch in the history of the earth.

* E. Hull, On the Geological Age of the North Atlantic Ocean ; Trans. R. Dublin Soc.
1885, new ser.. Ill, pp. 305-820.



221


OH. v] THE NOBTH ATLANTIC CONTINENT

When we attempt to study in greater detail the manifold subdivisions
of the marine beds as they succeed each other in the east and west of this
primaeval continent, we are at once struck by the far more fortuq^te
position of the observer in America as compared with his colleague in
Europe. In the west, during the accumulation of these deposits, orogenctic
movements took place only in the Green mountains, and flat-bedded Palaeo-
zoic sediments still extend over vast areas far away up to Kansas and
Nebraska. Even where folding followed later, as in the east of Canada
and the Alleghanies, we have as a rule no difficulty in correlating the
stratified succession with that of the more distant parts of North America.
In Europe, on the other hand, as soon as we have crossed the narrow zone
of the Hebrides we encounter the Caledonian folds with their great over-
thrusts, and upon the ruins of these wom-down Silurian mountains the Old
Red sandstone lies horizontally. If we proceed further into the interior
of this continent we again find the ancient marine deposits still for the most
part folded and fractured ; it requires, therefore, a combination of persever-
ance, exactitude and sagacity, and these in no small degree, to establish
a correspondence between the members of the stratified series in regions
at all remote from one another. It is not till we reach Sweden and the
Russian plain that we meet with stratigraphical relations as favourable to
study as in the United States.

Let us again turn our attention to that region.

Tlie thickness of the Palaeozoic sediments decreases as we proceed from
the Atlantic Ocean towards the Mississippi. In the Rocky mountains also
it is trifling, but beyond them, towards the Wahsatch and Uinta, the
sediments thicken out again very rapidly, as they also do in the eastern
part of the Basin ranges, according to Clarence King up to about long.
117® 15' W., and then they disappear. In California only the Carboniferous
limestone is known. Beyond long. 117° 1.5' W. there thus lay in all pro-
bability a second continent, which bounded the Ocean on the west h

As early os 1859, James Hall had described in a masterly survey the
classification and distribution of the Palaeozoic beds in the east and centre
of the United States. The years which have since elap^d have confirmed
his results in ail essential points, and they form the basis of the comparisons
which follow here '. The investigations of Canadian geologists and those
carried out in the great ranges of the west complete the picture.

In Newfoundland, New Brunswick, and at Braintree, Massachusetts,
there are beds, chiefly shales, in which are found species of the genus
Conocephalites, both blind and provided with eyes, as well as. a number
of other Trilobites, which closely agree in general character with the

‘ C. King, U. S. Geol. Expl. 40th Par., I, pp. 127-248, map.

* J. Hall, Geological Survey of New York; Palaeontology, III, 4to, Albany, 1859,
pp. 1-96.



222 PALAEOZOIC SEAS [pA»rni

‘primordial’ fauna of Qinetz and Skrey in Bohemia*. In America also
they represent the oldest animals so far known. This group of strata is
ca^ed the St. John’s group. In the whole central part of the United
States they appear to be absent, and it is only when we reach the Wahsatch
and Eureka, in Nevada, that we again encounter them

In the east, from Labrador and Newfoundland as far as New York and
Vermont, and again in the west, in Utah and Nevada and in British
Columbia on the east border of the Rocky mountains, this group is
followed, according to Walcott, by a middle member of the primordial or
Cambrian series, the Georgia group, with an independent fauna. Limestone
plays a leading part in its composition ; this group again is not yet known
in the central part of the United States ^

The distribution of the last member, the Potsdam sandstone, is much
more extensive, and may be traced from Belle Isle through Canada down
into the north-east of the United States, through Pennsylvania and Virginia
and further to the south-west into Tennessee, where it becomes thicker and
alternates with dolomitic limestone; then in flat-lying beds still further
into Texas, and again to the north in an elongated zone which lies hori-
zontally on the south border of the Canadian shield from lake Huron
through Wisconsin and Iowa *. From Iowa, where, according to D, D. Owen,
several subdivisions may be distinguished, the zone of sandstone continues
to the west. It crops out in the Black hills from the plain of Dakota, and
then as an almost continuous border, sometimes gently inclined, sometimes
steeply upturned or even inverted, surrounds the Archaean ridges of the
Rocky mountains. Further west in Nevada the fossils of the Potsdam
group lie high above those of the earlier stages.

The stratified series of Eureka begins according to Hague and Walcott
with about 1,500 feet of brownish -white quartzite, the upper part
of which becomes shaly and calcareous; the first traces of the middle
Cambrian or Georgian fauna appear here. There then follows about
3,000 feet of grey limestone, containing the same fauna, to which, at the
summit, species of the upper Cambrian or Potsdam fauna are added. The

* G. F. Mathew, Illustrations of the Fauna of the St. John’s Group, Trans. B. Soc.
Canada, Montreal (in vols. 1, II, and III, 1884-1886) ; C. D. Walcott, On the Cambrian
Faunas of North America, Bull. U. S. Geol. Surv. Territories, 1884, No. 10, p. 49, pi.

’ A. Hague, Abstract of Report on the Geology of the Eureka District, Ann. Rep.
U. S. Geol. Surr. Ill, 1881-1882, by Powell, Dir., 8vo, Washington, 1888, p. 248 et seq.
C. b. Walcott (Palaeontology of the Eureka District ; U. S. Geol. Surv. Monograph VIII,
1884) has described this fauna and in particular the abnormal development of Olendlus
HoteelU.

^ Walcott, Second Contribution to the Studies on the Cambrian Faunas of N. America ;
Bull. U. S. Geol. Surv. Territories, 1886, No. 80, pp. 729-952.

‘ J. Hall, Note in Proc. Amer. Assoc. Adv. Sci., XXXI Meeting, held at Montreal,
8vo, Salem, 1888, pp. 63-65.



CH.V] THE PRIMORDIAL COAST 223

limestone is followed by 1,600 feet of shale, 1,200 feet of limestone, and
300 feet of shale. All these belong to the Potsdam stage.

A veiy singular picture is presented to us by this ancient Oc^n.
Shore deposits, with cracks produced by the diying action of the sun and
filled with millions of valves of Lingula, form the series known as the
Potsdam sandstone, which still lies flat on the south border of the Archaean
shield of Canada ; in Nevada, far to the west, these deposits swell out to
a great thickness, while limestone and shale take the place of sandstone.

Let us now turn to the Black mountains as described by Newton and
Jenney. The Potsdam sandstone, 200 to 300 feet thick, presenting at its
base a coarse bed of beach pebbles with auriferous sand, includes some
glauconite beds and a little limestone; it rests in discordance on the up-
turned edges of the Archaean schist. Here we have l)efore us an Archaean
reef of the Cambrian sea, which in the last stages of its existence was
completely covered with sand. Over the Potsdam sandstone, however,
follows — not the succeeding systems of the lower Silurian, upper Silurian,
and Devonian, but the marine deposits of the Carboniferous which lie
immediately on the sandstone and apparently in complete conformity
with it

In the Rocky mountains the Potsdam sandstone is similarly overlain by
these same deposits of the Carboniferous system.

Eight degrees of latitude further south and also further to the west is
the Grand caiion of Colorado, excavated in horizontal beds of Carboniferous
limestone. Powell and Dutton, however, state that the Carboniferous
series, 4,000 to 4,500 feet thick, rests on the edges of inclined beds, probably
Cambrian, which are cut off by the plane of transgression. This is an
example, exposed for miles along the cahon, of a plain of erosion produced
by the advance of the coast-line *.

Throughout the whole of Arizona also, the Carboniferous rests directly
on Archaean or possibly Cambrian rocks, and up to the present it is only in
Nevada that the western development as represented by the lower Silurian
has been recognized.

Thus the Carboniferous transgression circumscribes the region in which
it is possible to study the post-Cambrian deposits.

The oldest fossiliferous sediments of North America enable us therefore
to recognize the following: —

The St. John’s group, and the Georgia group, the two lower members,
are only known in the east and in the west. A wide interval separates
these two provinces. The third member, the Potsdam group, coivers them.

* H. Newton and W. P. Jenney, Report on the Oeology and Resources of the Black
Hills of Dakota ; U. S. Geogr. and Geol. Surv. of the Rocky Mountain Region, 4to, Wash-
ington, 1880, pp. 80-106 and 109.

’ C. E. Dutton, Tertiary History of the Grand Caiion District, p. 178 et seq.



224


PALAEOZOIC SEAS


[part m

both and extends over the whole region. In Nevada it increases in thick-
ness and limestone makes its appearance, but in Dakota and over the whole
of the north border, where it lies on the Archaean rocks of Canada, it is
without doubt a coast formation deposited in transgression. This example
shows that a strictly littoral formation, deposited in trani^ession, must be
regarded not as the sign of a negative phase, but, on the contrary, as a proof
of the advance of the sea on the land.

Notwithstanding the close attention which has been given to the
classification of the Cambrian beds in England, and the extreme precision
with which Linnarsson and Broggor have distinguished the several members
of this system in Scandinavia where they are less thick, yet I dare not
venture to make any parallel with the American beds beyond the correlation
of the St. John’s group with the deposits of Ginetz in Bohemia. A trans-
gressive littoral group, which might be compared with the Potsdam sand-
stone, has not been observed in Europe. Its upper limit, or the base of the
lower Silurian, is however expressed with equal clearness on both sides of
the Ocean by the change of fauna.

2. TJie upper limit of the Silurian formation. In the east of North
America the upper Silurian series begins with the Clinton group or the
Medina sandstone ; both show distinct signs of variable conditions and
somewhat shallow water. Over these beds lies the Niagara limestone,
very widely distributed and containing a rich marine fauna ; it is generally
regarded as the eqxiivalent of the Wenlock and Ludlow beds in England
and of the upper Silurian limestone E of Bohemia. This would represent
the middle phase of the Silurian cycle. Then follow beds deposited in
shallow water, so shallow indeed that layers of gypsum and rock-salt Wei's
formed over wide areas. These form the Onondaga saliferous group,
a sandy formation bearing the marks which attend the concentration of
sea-water, yet attaining a thickness of 1,000 feet. It presents itself with
these characters in New York State, particularly in the western part, and
proceeds with diminished thickness, on the one hand into the south-west of
Virginia, and on the other to Wisconsin, often broken up into patches by
erosion. In the interior of the continent, towards the Mississippi, this
member is characteristically absent, and the upper Silurian Niagara lime-
stone is directly succeeded by the Devonian limestone.

Here then we enter the open sea; but nearer to the ancient coast we
find the saliferous group passing upwards through many alternations of
sediment into a brownish-yellow dolomitic limestone known as the ‘ Water-
lime.’ This extends beyond the saliferous group into Illinois and Iowa, and
contains in some places the remains of the great Crustacea belonging to the
genera Eurypterus and Pteiygotus. This beyond all doubt is also a shallow
water formation.

Let us now investigate the upper limit of the Silurian in the north of



OH.V] SHALLOWWATER AT CLOSE OP SILURIAN 226

Europe. In the highest parts of the. Ludlow series we meet here and there
with a * bone-bed ’ containing numerous remains of fishes drifted together ;
then follow beds of variable character, but always littoral, which Murchison
describes as ‘ Passage beds ’ ; these are sandstones with Lingula,, or marly
shales with fish remains and great Crustacea, notably the gigantic Plerygotus
dnglicus; between these again are shales with Lingula and thin layers of
Sandstone. Where the earliest sediments of the Old Red sandstone are to
be seen superposed on the Passage beds, wo observe that remains of the
same fishes and Crustacea are continued up’ into .them, and thus the lower
part of the sandstone is often assigned to the Silurian ^

The Silurian concludes in England as in North America with an unmis-
takable and considerable diminution in the depth of the sea.

In the Baltic region as on the island of Oesel we find a similar condition
of things. According to F. Schmidt, in the uppermost bods of the Silurian,
a yellow platy dolomite, poor in fossils, makes its appearance,’ or a grey
sandstone containing many upper Silurian corals and other fossils. In tlio
platy dolomite Eurypterus again occurs in abundance, accompanied by
Pterygotus, but here, as in Gothland, the beds with Eurypterus are succeeded
by others still containing upper Silurian fossils

Finally, the same succession is repeated in the river valleys of eastern
Galicia and in the adjacent parts of Russia. F. Schmidt, who is so
thoroughly acquainted with the Silurian deposits of the Baltic, has him-
self visited , these’ regions and recognized the Correspondence. The upper

^ R. J. Murchison, Siluria, 4ih ed., 1867, p. 136; hj the same, On the discovery by
Mr. R. Slimon of Fossils in the Uppermost Silurian Rocks near Lesmahago in Scotland,
Quart, Journ. Geol. Soc. 1856, XU, pp. 15-25. For the ascent of the fossils into the Old
Red sandstone see R. Etheridge, Anniversary Address of the President; Quart. Journ.
Geol. Soc., 1881, XXXVII, p. 178. A visit to the habitat of horny-shelled brachiopods
led me some years ago to examine a great number of the facts quoted here. Horny-
shelled brachiopods have subsequently been found in deep water also. The fauna of the
deep sea has become known, and with this knowledge a complete alteration in the
previously accepted views of the Cambrian fauna of Bohemia. At that time elevation
and depression of the land was the accepted theory, but it was the progress of these
particular studies which led me first to doubt the correctness of the prevailing opinion,
next to recognize the extent of the Cenomanian transgression, and finally to results
which were no longer in accord with the traditional method of explanation. Ueber die
’W’ohnsitze der Brachiopoden ; Sitz. k. Akad. Wissensch. Wien, 1859, XXX VII, pp. 185-
248, and 1860, XXXVIII, pp. 151-206. An account of the Passage Beds and their
littoral characters occurs in the second part, pp. 189-191. In this, memoir the
recurrences of the lower Silurian in the United States (p. 182 et seq.), which are
not described in detail here, are also discussed; the comparisons made there for
the Utica shales are completely in accordance with the results of the admirable
.work of C. D. Walcott, The Utica Slates and related Formations, Trans. Albany
Inst., 1879,. X.

^ F. Schmidt, Revision der ostbaltischen silurischen Trilobiten nebat geognostischer
Uebersicht des ostbaltischen Silurgebietes ; Mem. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-P^tersb., 1881,
XXX, No. ], p. 49 et seq.

BOLLAB 11 • . . Q



226


PALAEOZOIC SEAS


[part in

Silurian ia again represented in the pame maimer as in England and the
Baltic provinces. Here also Eurypterus occurs in the equivalents to the .
Ludlow beds, and Silurian fossils appear to be present above the- beds
with Eurypterus*.

Wo are thus in a position to follow the beds with Eurypterus from
the centre of the United States as far as the Dniestr. In New York State
the saliferous group underlies the platy dolomite with Eurypterus, as .
though the latter no longer corresponded with the phase of maximum
depression of the coast-line.

In England the Eurypterus beds pass upwards into the lowest beds
of the Old Red sandstone. In Gothland, Oesel, and on the Dniestr, they*
are again succeeded by a few. beds with marine Silurian fossils. But
everywhere, from Iowa to Podolia, a zone of shallow-water deposits
distinguished by strange gigantic Crustacea makes its appeanmee towatrds
the upper limit of the Silurian.

In America this shallow-water zone thins out to the south-west, and the
marine upper Silurian limestone is directly succeeded by Devonian lime-
stone ; in Europe it is the same, but the thinning out occurs at a greater
distance from the original coast-line. In the best-known regions of the
interior, that is Bohemia, the upper Silurian limestone is also succeeded
by another limestone, which, according to recent investigations, we may
refer to the lower Devonian.

3. The Devonian System. In the British isles and in the 'Baltic
provinces the greater part of the Devonian system is represented by the
Old Red sandstone, which contains fishes (among them curious, heavily '
armoured ganoids), and here and there terrestrial plants, but no corals
nor marine shells. This red sandstone comprises divers subdivisions of
the Devonian; and in England, os we have seen above, its lowest beds
may be assigned to the Silurian.

In central Europe the case is difierent ; the red sandstone is absent,
and its place is taken by slates and quartzite, also even by limestone, with
a rich marine fauna. Our knowledge of this part of the stratified series
has been greatly enlarged by Beyrich and Kayser’s researches in the Hdrz.
Kayser has shown that the fauna of the limestones which are intercalated
with the lower Devonian ‘ Wieder Schiefer ’ of the Harz coiresponds to the
upper divisions of the Bohemian series, hitherto assigned to the Silurian.

It is on these fossiliferous localities of the Harz and Bohemia that Kayser
has based his Hercynian stage ^ •

' F. Schmidt, Einige Bemerkungen Uber die podolisch-galizische Silurformation und
deren Petrefakten ; Verb. k. rasa. min. Qea. St.' Peterab., 1876, 2. Ser., X, pp. 1-21, map.

* £. Kayaer, Die Fauna der altesten Devonablagerungcn des Harzea, Abb. z. geol.
Specialkarte v. Preuaaen, 1878, II, Heft 4, pp. 1-293, pi. ; and by the same, .Ueber die
Grenze zwiseben Silur und Devon (Hercyn) in Bobmen, Thiiringeu und einigen anderen



22r


OH. v] BED SANDSTONE OP THE NOETH

Ksyser justly compares the appearance of this new marine stage with
that of the different marine faunas, which, like the fauna of the Alpine
Trias, the Bhaetic,- and the Tithonian, are unknown, in northern Europe.
They are. the oceanic representatives of those periods, and their equivalents
in the north are either sublittoral sediments or non-existent. We may
trace the Hercynian stage, i.e. the formations of the open sea during the
lower Devonian period, from the Pyrenees, where it is represented by
argillaceous beds *, to the Harz, where it occurs as limestone included in
slates, and to Bohemia and the eastern Alps, where it is pure limestone.
In northern Europe it is not to bo found.

• • Having made these- general observations, let us return to the Euiy-
pterus- beds of northern Europe.

■ It is certain that in England Eurypteriis ascends into the lower beds
of the Old Bed sandstone, and that in general the relations of these lower
beds with the Silurian are so intimate that we must include them in that
system. The upper paxt of the sandstone has been subdivided, on strati-
graphical and faunistic evidence, in very various ways ; but all lead to the
conclusion that it represents a very large part of the Devonian, although
further to the south, in Devonshire, the Devonian already presents itself
as a marly and in part also calcareous series, with a fairly rich marine
fauna

The red sandstone extends in many patches of flat-lying beds over
the folded Silurian strata of the Caledonian chain into the extreme north
of Scotland ; it forms the Orkney and Shetland islands (Fig. 10, II,
P-78).

In the Baltic provinces the red sandstone is likewise superposed on the
uppermost Silurian strata ; but, according to the unanimous opinion of
English and Russian geologists, the fish remains of the Baltic sandstone do
not represent the lower, but the middle and upper beds of the British
sandstone, particularly as developed in Scotland Between the highest
Silurian with Eurypterus of Oesel and the red sandstone immediately
above it there is a gap, and the lower Devonian is not represented.

Wo have seen previously that towards the north this red sandstone
overlaps the several stages of the Silurian, so that between St. Petersburg

Gegenden, N. Jalirb. Min., 1884, II, .pp. 81-86. I here restrict the Hercynian to
the stage F, following 0. Novak, Zur Kenntniss der Fauna der Etage F/*„ Sitz. k.
bOhm. Ges. Wiss., 1886, and Freeh, Zeitschr. deutsch. gcol. Gest, 1886, XXXVIII, p. 917.
The position of remains for the present doubtful.

^ C. Barrels, Sur la faune de Hont-de-Ver (Haute-Garonne) ; Ann. Soc. G^I. du Nord^
1886, XII, pp. 124^144, pi.

^ Geikio, On the Old Red Sandstone of Western Europe, Trans. R. Soc. Edinb.,
1878, XVIII, pp. 345-452 ; E. Hull, On a proposed Devono-Silurian Formation, Quart.
Joum. Geol. Soc. 1882, XXXVIII, pp. 200-209, etc.

‘ Geikie, tom. cit., p. 362 ; Lahusen in Schmidt, Revision, p. 80, &c..



228 PALADOZOIG SEAS [part m

and Gatachins the upper Silurian is already entirely concealed, and only
a narrow band of lower Silurian 'remains visible ; at the point where the
Sja3 enters lake Ladoga the Cambrian is alone to be seen ; further to
the north, as far as the White sea, the sandstone rests directly on the
Archaean (II, p. 45), In an instructive series of charts representing the
transgressions to which Russia in Europe has been subjected, Karpinsky
has assumed that the patches of quartzite which occur at Onetz and at
Powjenez, north of lake Onega, as well as the unfossiliferous sandstone of
the island of Kildin, near the Murman coast, and of the peninsula of
Rubatsch, may also be assigned with considerable probability to the Old
Red sandstone Of more doubtful ago are the isolated patches of sand*#
stone in the northernmost parts of Norway; in Spitsbergen, however,
we again meet with the fish remains characteristic of the Old Red sand-
stone in the liefde bay beds, but no marine Silurian is yet known to
underlie it (II, p. 69). In Greenland also we have noticed patches of
red sandstone, unfossiliferous it is true, resting on the Archaean in the
peninsula separating the fjords of Sermilik,.Yunugdliarfiak, and Igalliko
(H. p. 73). •

In the peninsula of Gaspd, however, and in New. Brunswick, the
Devonian fishes of the red sandstone have already been found; here also
they are associated with terrestrial plants, and the correspondence of both
plants and fishes with those of Europe is, according to Dawson, beyond
doubt *. ■

It cannot be denied that in this northern region a certain resemblance
with the Indian Ocean exists, the red sandstone playing here the same
part as the Gondwfina beds do there.

The open sea of the Devonian period did not extend over Spitzbeigen,
nor over Gaspd, and it was probably excluded over the whole distance
from Gasp^ to Greenland. .The transgression of the middle Devonian
sandstone over the several Stages of the Silurian in northern Russia shows)
on the other hand, that previous to the transgression some parts of the
Silurian had already been worn away by denudation, as had also the'
Caledonian folds. .

Let us now pass to a somewhat closer consideration of the Russian-
transgression.

In Livonia and Courland a broad zone -of red sandstone with fish
remains occurs, which, according to Grewingk, is about 100 meters thick ;

* A. Karpinsky, Skizze der physiko-geographischen Verhtiltnisse des europ&ischen
Bossland in den vergangenen geologischen Perioden ; vorgetragen in der Offentlichen
Sitzung der Akademie am 29. Dec., 1886 ; Beitr. z. Kenntn. des Russischen Reiches,
11 [■ Folge, St. Petersburg, 1887, p. 14, note.

‘ W. Dawson, Canadian and Scottish Geology; Trans. Edinb. Geol. Soc., 1885,- Y,
pp. 112-122 et passim.



OH. v] DEVONIAN TRANSGRESSION IN RUSSIA 229

above it on the south follows a seriep of dolomite and limestone with
marine fossils, gypsum, and beds of marl containing pseudomorphs of
rock-salt. Tho thickness of this middle gtoup is estimated by Grewingk
at 70 meters. Upon it, forming a narrow zone, about 20 meters thick,
lies an upper bed of red sandstone^.

Near Kholm, on tho Lovat, in the government of Pskov, 300 kilometers
from the southern boundary of the Silurian zone, Karpinsky found the
Silurian once more cropping out from beneath this series of transgressive
beds, and it appears that here also there is the clearest evidence of a partial
denudation of the Silurian anterior to tho transgression, and consequently
•during the lower Devonian period

Tschemyschew and Wenjukow have studied the fossils of the limestone
and dolomite beds. They belong to the middle Devonian, and show that '
after the deposition of the lower sandstones, which are also assigned to
the middle Devonian, a period occurred during which gypsum and a small
quantity of rock-salt crystallized out in lagoons, but in some localities
there was deeper water inhabited by a genuine marine fauna. Then
followed once more a deposition of sandstone^.

To the east and south-east the sandstone gradually disappears ; its last
known traces are seen in Orel beneath the middle Devonian limestone. ^

The brief account by Tschemyschew shows this very clearly. Tho
upper and middle Devonian with a rich, marine . fauna occur in the
governments of Orel and Voronezh ; far to the north their presence
beneath the plain has been ascertained by borings. These facta have
been represented by Karpinsky in a diagram which shows wedge-shaped
beds of limestone thinning out into the sandstone towards the north. The
thinning out of the limestone may bo plainly seen on the Volkhov *.

To the north-east on the Uchta, which flows into the upper Pctchora,
we again encounter the middle Devonian, and above it the Domanik
shales.

These have boon described by Keyserling; the name is said to bo
derived from the Russian word ‘ dym ’ (smoke), for the quantity of bitu-
minous matter contained in the shale is so great that it bums readily with
a smoky flame. Petroleum exudes from tho ground. • Cake-shaped nodules

*’C.- Grewingk, Gcologie von Liv- und Kurland, 8vo, Dorpat, 1861, pp. 9-61; by
the same, Erl&uterung zur zweiten Ausgabo der gcognostischen Earte Liv-, Ezt- und
Kurlonda, Arch. Nat. Liv.-EHth-KurlandK, Dorpat, 1879, zer. 1, VIII, pp. 15 et seq.

* A. Karpinsky, Zur Geologic des Gouvernements Pskow ; Mel. phys. chim., 1886,

XII, p. 622. . •

* T. Tschemyschew, Materialien zur Kenntniss der devonischen Ablagerungen in
Russland, Mem. Com. G«5ol. Russie, 1884, I, no 3, pp. 77-81 ; P. N. Wenjukow, The
Fauna of tho Devonian System of No^h-west and Central Russia (in Russian), 8vo,
St. Petersburg, 1886.

* Karpinsky, Skizze, 'pp. 17-18, note 1.



280


PALAEOZOIC SEAS


[PABT m

of limestone occur in an intercalated bed of green marly clay; they
correspond with the upper Devonian Ooniatite beds of the Rhine dis-
trict*.

It is not until wo reach the Ural that the lower Devonian appears,
and the Hercynian limestone ; this corresponds to the gap* beneath the
Baltic transgression.

In .the same way we see in England and Scotland various regions of
the Old Bed sandstone ; then more to the south, in the fragments of the
folded Armorican aiid Variscan ran^^s, the Devonian system, of great
thickness and very diverse character ; consisting in Devonshire, the
Ardennes, on the Rhine and in the Harz, the Thilringerwald, and the
Sudetesj of quartzite, slates, and limestone in various alternations, it
reappears, with many similar characters, near Graz on the border of
the eastern Alps. In Bohemia the quartzites are absent and the thick-,
ness much diminished ; the Hercynian limestone rests on the Silurian
limestone. Within the eastern Alps also, in Styria, Garinthia, and
Camiola, the only representative of the Devonian system so far recog-
nized is the HercyUian limestone

' In these regions, therefore, the Hercynian transgression does not, as-
in Russia, afford definite proof of' its existence ; still, here also, in spite
of all subsequent disturbances, we plainly perceive from the distribution
of the sediments that the littoral formations predominate in the north,
and the pelagic in .tiic south?.

We may now emphasize the fact that, according to the marine remains
which have been found in the dolomite and limestone beds of Livonia and

’ A. Graf Keyserling und P. v. Krusenstern, WiBsenschaftliche Beobachtungen auf
einer RcIbc in das Pctschora-Land, 4to, St. Petersburg, 1846, pp. 396 ct seq.

* G. Stacbe, Ueber die Silurbildungen dor Ostalpon, mit Benierkungen fiber die
Devon-, Carbon- and Pcrm-Schichten dieses Gebietes ; Zcitachr. dcutsch. geol. Ges., 1884,
XXXVI, pp. 277-378.

* ‘ The thick lower Devonian slates and grauwacke deposits of the Rhine, Prance,
and Spain, in spite of their imposing development, represent only a local forma-
tion in western Europe, like the Trias formation of Germany, and indeed their petro-
graphical characters as well as their poverty-stricken uniform fauna, in which
Cephalopoda are almost completely absent, show that they must be regarded as shallow-
sea deposits. It was always to be expected that it would be possible in time to
point to the deep-sea equivalents of these shallow-water deposits ; as such the Hercyntan
series of the Harz and of Bohemia must be regarded.’ A. Kayser, Dio Fauna der iilte-
sten Devonablagcrungen des Harzes, p. 288. For the sake of completeness it may be
observed that, in the Alburs, Tietze met with the red sandstone beneath marine Devonian
deposits ; no organic remains were found ; Jahrb. geol. Reichs., 1877, XXVII, p. 389.
Opinions as to the littoral or lacustrine formation of the red sandstone have been •
discussed by Godwin-Austen, Rep. Brit. Assoc. Adv. Sci., 1869, p. 88 et seq. ; Ramsay,
Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., XII, p. 38, and XXVII, p. 241 ; Rupert Jones, A Monograph
of the Fossil Rstheiiao, Palaeogr. Soc. ; Hull, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., XXXVI, pp. 252-
274 : Gos^elet, Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 3* ser., I, pp. 409-417.



OH. v] DEVONIAN TRANSGRESSION IN CANADA 281

Coui^and, the maximum of transgression in these countries must be plac^
in the middle Devonian (Stringocephalus horizon). At this period the
Devonian sea attained its greatest extension in Russia. Immediately after,
both in respect of age find distribution, follow the upper Devonian Domanik
shales of the Petchora region (Goniatite shales); then marine formations
are seen no more until the beginning of the Carboniferous period.

Bearing this result in' mind let us turn our attention to North America.
Kayser has shown that the ‘ lower Helderberg group ' of New York is the
equivalent of the Hercynian stage. We need not "stay to dwell on its
limited distribution, the detailed classification of the succeeding scries,
or the complicated relations which arise in New York State from local
unconformities We will confine our attention to one particular group of
the Devonian beds of North America.

The middle Devonian is represented in New York State by the Marcellus
shale, the Hamilton group, and the Genessee shale. The Marcellas shale
below and the Genessee shale alx>ve present so many points of resemblance
. as regards their fossils that Williams regards the Genessee fauna as a
recurrence of that of the Marcellus i^iale. The intervening Hamilton
•group includes beds of limestone with numerous marine fossils, and one
in particular, the Tully limestone, irregularly distributed towards the
summit, contains RhyncoTiella cuhoides, a well-known middle Devonian
species found in England, Russia, and on the Rhine*.

In the Genessee shales of New York Shite, close to lake Ontario,
considerable quantities of bituminous matter occur, and Clarke has described
a particular bed, formed of millions of shells of Styliota fiamrdla, a little
Pteropod, scarcely to 2 millimeters long, which were washed up on the
coast by the waves ,of the Devonian sea ; among them lie trunks of Lepido-
dendron, Dadoxylon, and other trees which were stranded at the same time.
Similar beds of Styliola also occur in the Marcellus shales ®. ■

These three meitibers of the American scries are universally recognized
as forming the middle Devonian of North America ; they are the etjuiva-
lents of the dolomite and limestone beds of Livonia and Courland. Above
them lies the Naples shale, also containing bituminous bods in places, with

* For these complicated relations, cf. in particular J. Hall, Proc. Amer. Assoc.,
1883, p. 6G, and W. M. Davis, The folded Helderberg Limestones Fast of the Catskills,
Bull. Mas. Comp. Zool. Cambridge, 1883, GeoL, ser. 1, pp. 311-829, pi. A local uncon-
formitj already disturbs the relations of the upper Silurian Niagara Group with the
lower Silurian.

* H. S. Williams, The Recurrence of Faunas in the Devonian Rocks of New York,
Proc. Ame:^. Assoc., 1881, XXX, pp. 186-191 ; another recurrence of th^ same fauna
is even asserted to occur in the Utica slates ; also by the same. On the Fossil Faunas
of the Upper Devonian along the Meridian of 70° 30', Bull. U. S. Geol. Surv., 1884,
No. 3, pp. 55-86.

* J. M. Clarke, On the higher Devonian Faunas of Ontario County, New York;
op. cit., 1885, No. 16, pp. 41 t 120, pi.



282


PALAEOZOIC SEAS


. [PABT m

marine shells, fish remains, and terrestrial plants. Clarke found intercalated
with these a bed of nodular limestone with Coniatites, which enables us to
correlate this member with the base of the upper Devonian of Europe ; and
at the same time it corresponds precisely with the petroleum-bearing
Domanik shales of the Fetchora ^

Thus the chronological equivalents of the Russian transgression on the
other side of the Atlantic Ocean have now been determined.

But it is precisely these equivalents of the maximum of the Russian
transgression, i. e. the rocks of the Hamilton group, which have been
met with on the western border of the Canadian shield and in the valley
of the Mackenzie, extending far beyond the region of the Silurian forma-
tions of the United States up to the shores of the Arctic Ocean (II, p. 38).
We have seen that amongst all the fossils collected between the Clear-water
in lat. 56* 30' N. and the Arctic Ocean, Meek recognized none but species
of the Hamilton group. Above the calcareous Hamilton beds strictly
so called, lie petroleum-bearing shales with beds of Styliola Jiamrdla,
a continuation of the Gencssee shale of the south, and the organic remains
of these beds remain essentially the same through nearly thirty degrees of
latitude, from Rock island, Illinois, up to the Arctic Ocean \

Nowhere within the vast region which extends’ from the Clear-water to
the Arctic Ocean is the Silurian known to occur; future explorers may
perhaps discover it. Yet it is hard to understand how deposits elsewhere
of such wide extension, forming part of a flat-bedded series and lying near
the Archaean foundation, should escape observation, and again, why the
same members of the Devonian, and these only, should always have
attracted the attention of the observer.

In the present state of our knowledge we must conclude that the
Hamilton beds, together with the Overlying Gencssee shales, advance in
a great transgression over the western part of the Canadian shield ; thus
they form the western glint and insert themselves on the north into the
Silurian-Devonian-Carboniferous region which forms the Arctic archipelago.*
In what way these beds are continued within the zone of sandstone which
lies in this region beneath the Carboniferous sandstone is at present
unknown.

These transgressive deposits of western Canada are, as we have said, the
chronological' equivalents of the transgressive deposits of the Russian
Devonian. Thus vie arrive at the conclusion that a very considerable
extension of the Devonian seas took ylaxe simultaneously from, the Ural over

* The Naples shales occupy the lower part of the Portage Group ; F. Roemer refers the
Goniatite beds of Bttdeshcim and of Torbay in Devonshire to this horison ; Lethaea,
1880, 1, pp. 50, 53 ; Clarke, tom. cit., pp. 38, 30, 49. Cardiola retrostiiata, Buch; extends
through the whole of the Hamilton group and attains its maximum in the Goniatite beds.

* F. B. Meek, Trans. Chicago Acad. Soi., 1868, 1, p. 77.



233


op.'v] THE CARBONIFEROUS SYSTEM

the Bueaian plain towards the toest and north-west, and from the Rocky
mountains across Vie vaUey of the Mackenzie to the east. The correspon-
dence extends so far that the Domanik shales on the upper Petchora and
the contemporaneous Genessee shales on the Athabasca are both characterized
by the presence of petroleum.

The positive phase in the middle of the Devonian system thus manifests
itself on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean at the same time.

4. The Carhoniferous system. In .discussing the phenomena associated
with the formation of the great coal deposits I shall again confine myself
for the present to the North Atlantic region, using this term in the widest
seni^, to indicate that part of the northern temperate zone which extends
from the Ural in the east to. the Kocky mountains in the west or over
nearly half a circle of latitude. . In this region, throughout the whole
of the Carboniferous, so striking a correspoAJence prevails between the
most important members of the series on both '^ides of the Atlantic that
we may venture to consider the European and American areas together,
comparing them step- by step.

(a) The sediments of this period begin for the most part with a sandstone
deposit of variable thickness. In Scotland it is called the Ct^lciferous sand-
stone, in Ireland the Coomhola grit, in eastern Canada the lower Coal-
measures, in Pennsylvania, acconling to the nomenclature employed by
Rogers, the Vespertine and Umbfal series ; towards the west these beds
decrease in importance ; in Ohio they are known as the Waverley sandstone.
In Illinois, however, the clastic sediments derived from the land thin out,
and dolomitic limestone with marine fossils takes their place; the series
is then known as the Kinderhook group.

Just as the series thins out as it proceeds from east Canada and Virginia
towards the west, so it does in Europe When traced from Great Britain to
the east ; and iti the south of Russia there reappear in the lowest marine
beds of the Carboniferous some of the characteristic marine fossils of the
Kinderhook group of Illinois.

In Great Britain the remains of terrestrial plants, and in a few cases
of marine animals, are interspersed in this lowest scries. Kirkby has given
an exact account of the succession in the Calciferous limestone of Fife
in Scotland. Hero the lowest part of the scries is not exposed ; neverthe-
less we are able to examine a thickness of more than 3,900 feet. Within
the upper 3,400 feet — that is, the whole series with the exception of its
lowest part — there are about fifty thin beds of coal three inches and upwards
in thickness, many of them resting on beds of clay with Stigmaria, which
are regarded by most observers as the original roots of the forest growth,
or 08 a proof that the coal was formed in situ. Plant remains also occur
scattered through the sandstone. In addition, there are not less than
eighteen beds of shale or thin layers of limestone intercalated in this series



284


PALAEOZOIC SEAS


[part in

at various levels and containing marine shells. Thus, 3,280 feet below the
upper limit of the Calciferous sandstone an Encrinite bed occurs with 35-40
species of marine shells;' and numerous Crinoids, and this contains stems
of Ijepidodendron and Dadoxylon ^ - But if the underclay with Stigmaria
is to be recognized as the original soil, then the conditions favourable to the
growth of land or marsh plants must here have alternated often indeed
with periods of occupation by the sea.

On the Atlantic coast of Ireland the thickness of this series amounts,
according to Hull, to about 1,500 feet \

In New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, where the series attains a
prodigious thickness, the occurrence of workable coal is well known,
but intercalations of marine beds are absent. In the west, on the other
hand, in Illinois, the Kinderhook group is formed chiefly, of friable beds,
often dolomitic, which, as we have seen, contain marine fossils ^

In the Pyrenees and in Asturias the ‘Marbre griotte’ distinguished
by its Goniatites must be assigned, according to Barrois, to the lowest parts
of the Carboniferous system *.

(6) Above this lowest division of the Carboniferous there lies, in Europe
as in America, the Carboniferous limestone, which, by its abundance in
all kinds of marine animals and by the great- thickness it attains, indicates
the prolonged existence of the open sea over the greater part of the region
before us. Wo can scarcely otherwise represent the facts than by supposing
that after the singular oscillations which took place in Scotland during the
deposition of the Calciferous sandstone, just illustrated by an example,
pelagic conditions were established far and wide.

In England, according to Hull, the Carboniferous limestone increases’ in,
importance towards the south-east ; in Belgium it occurs with a thickness
of 800 meters ; it extends over a large part of Germany without acquiring
any great thickness, and then broadens out in a great sheet over the Russian
plain, extending far beyond the Ural and into tlie Arctic regions. It forms
a large part of the surface of Ireland, attaining there a thickness of 2,500
to 8,000 feet, and it occurs in France as well as in Spain.

Across the Ocean it appears in eastern Canada, with intercalations
of reddish shales accompanied by gypsum, an indication of interrupted

* J. W. Eirkby, On the Zones of Marine Fossils in the Calciferous Sandstone
Series of Fife, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1880, XXXVI, pp. 559-590 ; also B. Etheridge,
jun.. On our present Knowledge of the hiTertebrate Fauna of tho Lower Carboniferous
or Calciferous Sandstone series of the Edinburgh neighbourhood, op. cit., 1878; XXXIV,
pp. 1-26, pi.

’ E. Hull, Physical Geography and Geology of Ireland, 8to, London, 1878, p. 31.

* A. H. Worthen, Geology of Illinois, 1868, III, p. 115 et passim.

* C. Barrois, Becherches sur les terrains anciens des Asturies et de la Galicie,
Mem. Soc. G^ol. Nord, Lille, 1882, I, pp. 570, 576, and 583 et passim ; also Bol. Com.
Mapa geol. Esi^a, 1881, VIII, pp. 131-155.



CH. V] CULM AND MILLSTONE GRIT ' 236

deposition and the temporary existence of evaporating lagoons*. It is
absent in Virginia, where a great deposit of sandstone takes its place.
Beyond this region to the west, on the other hand, it begins to increase
again in thickness. In the south-west of Illinois it is 1,200 to 1,500 feet
thick. From this wo see that the Carboniferous limestone of the central
part of the United States was separated from the Atlantic region by
a deposit of sand, that is by a clastic zone occup 3 nng very nearly the
site of the existing mountain chains of the east, and that conseqjiently
communication with the Carboniferous sea of Europe could only have taken
place by a circuitous route. Nevertheless there is a close correspondence
between the faunas of the two regions, and with the progress of investiga-
tion the number of identical species continually augments

Several series have been distinguished .in the Carboniferous limestone ;
by Hull and Worthen in America, and by Gosselet and Dupont in France
and Belgium. De Koninck has made an attempt to compare these with
one another, as well as with those of Russia ^

(c) and (d) In Europe a stage now appears which has not been recorded
in -America; in typical localities it presents the character of a littoral
formation with a mixture of terrestrial plants and marine shells. This
is. the Culm, or the Yoredale beds. Its flora is widely «listributed beyond
the limits of Europe. ■ The Culm occurs in Ireland and England, in Belgium,
on the Rhine, in the Vosges, and in the Harz, and following the Variscan
folds it extends, not indeed without interruption, but with constant charac-
ters, as far as Moravia. It is known in France, F. Roomer has shown that
it occurs in Spain and Portugal, and Toula has discovered it in the western
Balkans *.

Some observers hold the opinion that close relations exist betweeii
the Culm and the unproductive sandstone or MiUstone grit ; a sandstone
deposit which occurs in some regions in great thickness and is absent
in others. Where the Culm is not present the unproductive sandstone
rests directly on the Carboniferous limestone. From Hull’s useful summary
wo see that the Millstone grit and beneath it the Yoredale beds attain the

* Dawson, Acadian Geology, in particular p. 278 et seq.

* e. g. S. G. Perceval, Paiaeacia cuneata, Geol. Mag., 1876, 2nd ser.. Ill, p. 267 ; Etheridge
and Nicholson, On Polaeacis, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist, 1878, 5th ser., I, p. 206 et scq. ;
G. A. Lebour, Note snr deux fossiles du Calcaire carbonifere de Northumberland, Ann.
Soc. geol. Belg., Liege, 1876, III, p. 21 et seq.

* L. G. de Koninck, Note sur le Spirifer Mosquensia ; Bull. Mus. Hist. nat. Belg., 1^3,
II, pp. 371-379.

* F. Roomer, Ueber das Vorkommen von Culm-Schichtcn mit Poaidonompa Becheri auf
dem Sodabhange der Sierra Morena, Huelva, Zcitschr. dcutsch. geol. Ges., 1872, XXIV,
pp. 589-592 ; and by the same, Ueber das Vorkomihen von Culmc-Schicbten mit
Poaidonompa Becheri in Portugal, tom. cit., 1876, XXVIII, pp. 354-360; F. Toula,
Geologisehe Untersuchungen im westlichen Theile des Bal^n, Sitz. k. Akad. Wiss.
Wien, 1878, LXXVII, pp. 249-317, and in particular pp. 253 and 307.



236


PALAEOZOIC SEAS


[pABi m

greatest thickness in south Lancashire ; indeed the first is estimated
at 3,500 to 5,O0O feet, the second at' 2,000 to 4,000 feet. In Yorkshire,
Derbyshire, and north Staffoi^shire the thickness is still considerable ;
then it diminishes in all directions somewhat rapidly, and only near Bristol
rises again exceptionally to about 960 feet •

The unproductive sandstone reappears in Westphalia and there rests on
the Culm ; von Dcchen gives confirmative evidence to show that these two
deposits are difiicult to distinguish, and several species of Culm plants
appear in the unproductive sandstone

Beyond the Ocean we see the unproductive sandstone, in Pennsylvania
1,000-1,600 feet thick, extending along the Appalachians towards Virginia
and Tennessee, and at the same time increasing rapidly in thickness towards
the west. The occurrence of the Carboniferous limestone in Europe as
in America, succeeded in both regions by the unproductive sandstone, is
so striking a fact that it was adduced by Dana as a conspicuous proof of
the contemporaneity of the changes which have affected both hemispheres *.

(e) We have now reached that series of deposits in which the greatest
quantity of- fossil fuel lies accumulated. Many unsolved problems are con-
nected with the origin of the coal, and it will be necessary to enter into
some detail.

Marino conditions are on the wane, but have by no means altogether
disappeared. In the mighty deposits composed chiefly of sandstone and
shale, that is, clastic sediments derived from the land, the coal beds as a rule
are repeated one above the other a great number of times. The coal-field
of Ostrau and Karwin in Moravia and Silesia includes two series of coal-
bearing formations of different age. Leaving ■ out of account the beds
under 15 cm. in thickness, the lower divisions contain 179 coal beds in
a thickness of 3,793 meters ; and the upper division, which is 415 meters
thick, includes thirty-nine coal beds ; or both together 218 coal beds in
a formation 4,208 meters thick, and on an average one meter of coal to
twenty-eight meters of sandstone and shale

In contrast to this wo see that in central Bohemia the coal-bearing
formations contain coal only in their lowest part, and the number of beds

* E. Hull, On the Upper Limit of the csBentially Marine Bede of the Carboniferous
Group of the British Isles and a^oining Continental Districts ; Quart. Journ. GeoL Soc.,
1877, XXXIII, pp. 613-650.

* Von Dechen, Erl3,uterungen zur geologischen Karte der Rheinprovinz und der
Provinz 'Westfalen, II, 1884, p. 220; D. Stur, Verb. k. k. geol. Reichs., 1876, p. 266.
Also Hull (tom. cit., p. 619) points out similar relations between the Culm and the
sterile sandstone.

° .1. D. Dana, Manual of Geology, 2nd ed., 1875, p. 394; also H. Martin Chance, The
Millstone Grit in England and Pennsylvania, Am. Journ. Sci., 1881, XXI, p. 134.

* Monogpiphie des Ostrau-Eorwiner Steinkohlen-Revieres, herausgegeben und bear-
bcitet Tom Berg.-TIfltt. Ver., Milhr.-Ostrau, 4to, Tcschen, 1885, Geognostischer Theil
von W. JiSinsky, p. 18.



CH. v] UNDEECLAY 237

over 15 cm. thick hardly amounts to more than eight or ten, of which
the lowest it is true attain an imposing, thickness. These measures are
followed by a very great accumulation of unproductive sandstone /ind
shales, and then by upper Coal-measures, perhaps of Permian age

The Coal-measures of Moravia and Silesia rest conformaldy on the
Culm, and a part of the Culm flora extends into their lowest beds '; the
Coal-measures of central Bohemia, on the other hand, rest in transgression
on Archaean and Silurian rocks. The first region contains marine inter-
calations, the second does not. This is the flrst example which shows how
manifold were the conditions under which the Coal-measures were produced.

Marine beds are not seldom intercalated with the Coal-measures.
It has often been maintained that the repeated formation of coal beds haS
been caused by so many oscillations of the solid land. In England especially
insistence has been laid on the fact that below most of the coal beds a clay,
the ‘ underclay,’ is present, filled with the still rooted trunks of the plants
which formed the coal, as we have already mentioned in speaking of the
Calciferous sandstone of Fife : the coal must thus have been formed in
place, and each particular bed indicates the occurrence of a fresh land
surface or marsh, on which a now forest growth arose. We will not
now inquire how often the whole solid crust of the planet must have been
moved upwards and downwards in order to form such series of beds,
but will first attempt, beginning in the west, to obtain a general survey
of the various types of development among the Coal-measures. It will then
be seen that above the marine fauna of the Carboniferous limestone
mentioned above there exists in the Culm and in the intervening beds
another, although not sharply differentiated, marine fauna, and that this
is followed later by yet another fauna, the marine fauna of the upper
Carboniferous or that of the Fusuliua limestone.

In Utah and Nevada, the most westerly part of the regions considered
here, the whole Carboniferous is represented by marine deposits which
attaiu an extraordinary thickness ; Clarence King gives for the Wahsatch
limestone, which contains lower Carboniferous fossils and perhaps extends
down into the Devonian, a thickness of 7,000 feet in the Wahsatch moun-
tains ; for the Weber quartzite resting on the limestone 6,000 feet, and for
the upper Carboniferous limestone 2,000 feet. The figures given for central
Nevada are not quite so large. It is worthy of note that in Nevada, in the
midst of masses of marine limestone, amongst corals and . brochiopods,
Walcott has discovered two species of air-breathing gastropods which must
evidently have been borne in from a distance K ,

* M. V. Lipoid, Das Steinkohlengebiet im nordwesUichen Theile des Prager Kreises
in Bohmen ; Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reiebs., 1861 and 1862, XIJ, pp. 431-525, pi.

* i%ysa priactt, Zaptychiut cationaria. Walcott, Palaeontology of the Eureka District,
1884, VIII, pp. 262, 263.



238 PALAEOZOIC SEAS [pabtiii

To the east, on the outer border of the Rocky mountains and as far as*
the Black hills, Dakota, the thickness greatly decreases ; but the deposits
are„all marine.

Still further to the east beyond the prairies, the Coal-measures begin to
make their appearance. At first, in eastern Nebraska, the coal beds accord-
ing to Meek are certainly very rare, small ‘and scarcely -workable; beds of
marine Fusulina limestone alternate with beds of shale which include the
scattered remains of half-decayed plants and some tree stems K

Beyond the Missouri in Iowa there are many workable seams, but always
associated with the marine limestone. The Coal-measures rest on the lower
Carboniferous limestone. In the south-^st, where there was open sea, the
Carboniferous limestone is everywhere visible beneath the Coal-measul‘es,
but towards the north, in Iowa and Illinois, the latter extend far beyond
the Carboniferous limestone, and often rest on Devonian or Silurian beds.
Towards the Appalachians the Carboniferous limestone is represented, as we
have seen, by sandstone, conglomerate and shales. During this transgression



Fio. 25. Section near Iowa city, after J. Hall.

Of Dovonian limestone ; b, coarse sandstone in wavy layers ; c, grey and greenish clay ; dj
small seams of coal, the lower part shaly, containing fish teeth.

it happened tliat the transgressive coal-bearing sediments penetrated from
above into cavities of the Devonian limestone, and formed within these
cavities little stratified deposits which even contain fish remains, and in one
place a little bed of coal. These facts, which have been described by J. Hall,
have an important bearing on explanations to follow ^ (Fig. 25).

The Coal-measures of this region are distinguished by the frequent
intercalations nientioned above of fossiliferous marine beds between the coal
seams ; Worthen describes a section at New Haven on the lower Wabash,
Illinois, in which twenty fossiliferous marine intercalations and sixteen coal

^ F. B. Meek, Report on the Palaeontology of East Nebraska (in Hayden, Rep. U. S.
Geol. Surv. Nebraska), 4to, Washington, 1872, p. 134 et passim.

^ J. Hall, in Hall and Whitney, Report on the Geological Survey of the State of Iowa,
8io, 1858, pp. 117, 130, 131. Richthofen saw the same thing in Shantung and Shansi;
cf. his China, II, pp. 203, 411, 437, 718; and in Newfoundland Carboniferous fossils
are found in the cavities of the Silurian limestone; Murray and Howley, Geological
Report, Newfoundland, London, 1881, p. 333, note.


CH.V] COAL-MEASUEES OP BRITISH ISLES 239

beds occur in alternation. Some of the ’marine beds attain a thickness of
thirty-five feet

These marino intercalations continue to Ohio and west Virginia in
Pennsylvania they come to an end. They are also absent in eastern Canada.
In the section of the south Joggins, on the northern arm of Fundy bay,
which was studied by Logan, Lyell, and Dawson, the Carboniferous forma-
tion is exposed along the coast ; there are eighty-one beds of coal, most of
them* resting upon underclay. We meet with stems of trees standing
upright, reptiles in hollow tree-trunks, air-breathing mollusca, remains of
fishes also, but no marine intorcalationh

In continuing this rapid survey of Europe we must now distinguish two
groups of Coal-measures. The first belongs to the outer border of the
Armorican and Variscan chains, or lies to the north of this border. It
comprises all the coal-fields of the British isles and of the north of France,
next those of Belgium and Westphalia, and then, after a long interval, those
of upper Silesia and Moravia. The second group lies south of the first; the
coal-fields on the Saar and in central Bohemia, and that of Schatzlar-
Waldenburg, belong to it. In the first groTup marine intercalations are
known to occur, in the second there are none or at most feeble indications.

Where the first group forms a part of the border of the folded ranges it
rests conformably on the next older deposits. The second group lies trans-
gressively on various rocks. This at least appears to be the rule from
Moravia onwards as far as the Rhine. .

The numerous isolated basins which contain the rich Coal-measures of
the British isles, arc probably only the remains of a once continuous forma-
tion, broken up by denudation and preserved owing to their tectonic
position. In the important coal-fields of the south-west of England, i. e.
those of South Wales, the Forest of Dean, and Bristol, the original con-
tinuity may be Ttiost clearly recognized. The coal-fields of Coalbrookdale,
south Staffordshire, and Warwickshire arc still perhaps connected under-
ground. The coal-fields of Ireland and of the great trough of Scotland
may also be regarded as parts of a single sheet. At the same time a very
great degree of variability characterizes the thickness of the underlying
coal-bearing sandstone, as well as the nature of the overlying beds.
The coal-field of south Staffordshire rests unconformably on the upper
Silurian ®.

Marine intercalations are found only in the lower parts of the- Coal-
measures; higher up they become rare, of trifling thickness, and present

* A. H. Worthen, Qcological Survey of Illinois, 8vo, Boston, 1875, VI, p. 2-5.

* Dawson, Acadian Geology, pp. 150-218. The whole thickness is quoted on Logan’s
authority at 14,570 feet, but it is doubtful whether the uppermost of these beds do
not belong to the Permian period ; Dawson, Quart. Journ. Geol. Boc. 1874, XXX, p. 209.

* A. C. Ramsay, The Physical Geology and' Geography of Great Britain, 5th ed., 8vo,
London, 1878, pp. 119-128.



240 PALAEOZOIC SEAS [part ra

a purely littoral character; still higher they disappear altogether.- In. a
general account of these intercalations by Hull, the lower subdivisions are
spoken of as the Oanniater beds \ ‘

. The Gannister beds, characterized by the presence of marine fossils, are
present in all the Irish coal-fields, with the exception of the Ballycastle
coal-field in Antrim, which belongs to a still lower horizon : they also occur
in Scotland, and in the various basins in England, whence they are con-
tinued into the continent. The same marine intercalations are found in the
Coal-measures of the north of France, as for instance near Auchy-au-Bois,
and at several localities in Belgium. In the basin of Charleroi the gaping
valves of a Mytilus still attached in pairs occur in groat numbers. This is
precisely what may be seen op a modem beach when mussels have quietly
decomposed : the adductor muscles give way first, then the shell flies open.
These beds thus mark undisturbed deposition \

In the Coal-measures of Westphalia there are numerous intercalations
containing shells; the lower of these are of purely marine origin, but higher
up they contain only species of the genus Anthracosia, the marine nature of
which is, to say the least, doubtful. Von Dechen has given the complete
succession of those beds

The presence of marine intercalations in the Coal-measures of upper
Silesia was first discovered by F. Boemer in 1863, and in 1870 ho compared
this remarkable series with the Gannister beds or ‘ Pennystone ’ of CoaK
brookdale and Carluke in Scotland. Kosmann has shown that they
repeat themselves at definite horizons and may render great service in
determining the succession of the coal beds. The shell-bearing beds are
partly of marine origin, doubtless indeed littoral, and contain such genera
as Phillipsia, Bellcrophon and Productus; others exhibit limnic characters,
and these contain Anthracosia and Modiola *.


* Hull, Upper Limit, &c., p. 616 et eeq.

’ C. Barrois, Notice sur la faune marine da terrain houiller da bassin septentrional
de la France, Bull. See. gcol. de Fr., 3* sen, II, 1873-1874, pp. 223-226; Gosselet,
Esqnisse gdologique du Nord de la France, 8to, Lille, 1880, p. 149 et seq. ; Briart et _
Cornet, Notice sur la position stratigraphique des lits coquilliers dans le terrain houiller
da Hainaat, Bull. Acad. Roy. Belg., 1872, 2" sOr, XXXIII, pp. 21-31 ; R. Malherbe,
Des horizons coquilliers du systeme houiller de Liege, Ann. Soc. G4ol. Belg., Liege„
1876, 111, p. Izvii et seq. Bods are here considered which, judging from the character
of the fossil ehells, are not indubitably of marine origin ; the gaping Mytilus are
described by C. Blanchard and J. Smeysters, Note sur quelques fossiles rencontrds
dans le systeme houiller de Charleroi, op. cit., 1879-1880, VII, M4m., p. 15.

* H. von Dechen, Erl&uterungen zur geologischen Karte der Rhoinprovinz, II,
p. 247 et seq.

* F. Roemer, Ueber eine marine Conchylien&nna im productiven Steinkohlengebiige
Oborschlesiens, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1863, XV, pp. 567-606; by the same,
Geologie von Oberschlesien, 8t6, 1870, in particular pp. 94, 95 ; Weiss, Zeitschr. deutsch.
geol. Ges., 1879, XXXI, p. 219, &c. ; Kosmann, Die neueren gcognostischen und



CH.V] COAL BEDS OF OSTBAU 2fl

The investigations pursued for many years by D. Stur, on the prolonga-
. tions of the upper Silesian coal-field into Austria at Ostrau and Karwin,
have established the following facts. The Coal-measures lie conformably
on the Culm, which contains terrestrial plants and at the same time marine
animals, as in Nassau. A part of the flora of the Culm ascends into the
lower division of the coal-bearing beds, and forms together with additional
species the upper Culm flora, the zone of Sphenophyllum tenerrimum, or
the Ostrau beds. This zone includes five groups of coal seams ; in the three
lower of these marine intercalations occur similar to those observed by
F. Roemer in upper Silesia. The most important of these lies between the
third and fourth coal-bearing groups ; Stur likewise believes that it repre-
sents the English Gannister. In the fourth and fifth groups we have only
the genus* Modiola, then Anthracosia in great quantity, and finally Eury-
pterus, Cypris, and Planorbis. The marine character has disappeared.

Now follows a higher division of the coal-bearing formation with a new
flora, the Scliatzlar beds; in these, marine intercalations are un known ^

These facts show that throughout the central part of the United States,
from Indiana and Iowa to western Pennsylvania, frequent marine inter-
calations occur between the coal beds, and these only cease in those eastern
regions where, as in the Alleghanics, the underlying Carboniferous limestone
is also replaced by sandstone and shales ; or where, as in New Brunswick,
the proximity of the shore is revealed by interbedded gypsiferous marls.
The intercalations are more considerable in the lower parts of the coal-
bearing formations, and there the marine origin is more clearly manifest,
while towards the upper part littoral characters become increasingly evident
and the intercalations are in general of slight importance.

Similar marine intercalations are present in the Coal-measures of
Scotland, Ireland, England, the north of France, Belgium, Westphalia,
upper Silesia, and north Moravia. Here also the lower beds contain
a fauna certainly marine ; these arc followed, either immediately or after
some previous alternations, by littoral mollusca or by mollusca of uncertain,
perhaps of lacustrine origin, such as the Anthracosia ; still higher in the
series, however, these intercalations are wholly absent.

Notwithstanding this apparent correspondence the intercalations in
Europe and America are not of the same age. Those of Europe are the
Gannister beds, which are closely allied by their fauna to the lower
Carboniferous; certain new species contribute an additional feature and
the more important groups characteristic of the open sea are usually absent.

palftontolofi'isclien AufschlQsse auf der EOnigR^rube bei KOnigshiitte, ObeT-Schlesien ;
ZeitBchr. f. Berg.-, Htttt.-, Salin., Berlin, 1880, XXVIII, pp. 305-340, maps.

* D. Stur, Die Culmflora der Ostrauer und Waldenburger Schichten ; Abh. k.‘ k.
geol. Reichs., 1877, VIII, p. 423 et seq. According to Stur the marine intercalations
here belong to Coal-measures lower in the series than those of Westphalia and Belgium,
whicii he assigns to the Schatzlar group.



242. PALAEOZOIC SEAS [parthi

The American intercalations, on the other hand, contain the. faunsi of the
upper Carboniferous, that is of the Fusulina limestone.

The case is otherwise in southern Europe.

In Asturias, according to Barrois,th6 Carboniferous limestone is succeeded
by beds containing the Culm flora, these by an alternating series of beds,
some containing plants and others marine mollusca, which ascend up to the
level of the intercalations met with in America on the horizon of the
Fusulina limestone, as is shown by the identity of a large number of species
Still more remarkable are the facts observed in the southern Alps. On
the Auemig and the Kronalp, near Pontafel in Carinthia, we find a frequent
alternation of yellow sandstone, which contains plants belonging to the
uppermost Carboniferous flora, and of dark limestone filled with Fusulina
and characterized by a marine fauna, which may be correlated with that
of the upper Carboniferous intercalations of. America. The sandstone is
associated with beds of quartzose conglomerate ; sometimes a few isolated
marine shells are found along with its plant remains 'K *

There is thus a complete correspondence between these sections in
Carinthia and those of the coal-fields of Illinois and Iowa. In Carinthia
the coal bods are represented by plant-bearing sandstone, but the alternating
facies is present in one locality ^ in the other.

In the south of Russia workable measures crop out on the Doneta.
Some difference of opinion prevails as to the succession of the strata in the
principal region, but on the north border of the basin near Kaluga, Tula,
and south of Rjasan, the facts have been completely elucidated by the
investigations of A. Struve

* Barrois, Asturies, pp. 582, 593, &c.

^ I have frequently stayed for a considerable time in the Ktthweger and Watschiger
HUtten and the Hiitte am Ofen in order to gain a knowledge of these beds. In 1879
I traced the succession in the Krone ; it appeared that the little patch of Coal-measures
with Productus, which is also mentioned by Stache, is separated from the series by
a dislocation. It lies higher than the yellow sandstone beds, which are distinguished
by large specimens of Spirophyton, and shows an alternation of sandstone and quartzose
conglomerates repeated four or five times, and of bluish-black Fusulina limestone. Plant
remains occur in the sandstone, which D. Stur has been kind enough to determine ; they
all belong to the highest division of the Carboniferous; among them are Annularia
sphenophylloides and Pecopteris longifolia. An occasional brachiopod may be found
with them in the sandstone. In the Fu^lina limestone, on *the other hand, we meet
with Phillipsia, Conocardium, &c. Most striking is a highly ornamented gastropod,
probably Naticopaia nodosa, Meek and Worthen, or the variety N. Wortheni, Barrois.
Stache many years ago recognized the American character of the beds in certain
localities of the southern Alps ; that he should take them for Permian was intelligible
at a time when the limit of the Permian had been placed too low even in the American
localities.

^ A. Struve, Ueber die Schichtenfolge in den Carbonablagerungen des sddlichen
Theiles des Moskauer Kohlenbeckens ; M4m. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-P^tersb., 1886,
XXXIV, No. 6, 106 pp., map. The highly important distinction between the beds with
Spirl/era moaquensia (Fusulina limestone) and those with Ftvductua giganteua (upper



COAL BEDS OP EUSSIA


243


CH. V]


It may be well to recall, however, befpro considering this district, that
very different effects may be produced by the same cause, according as
it acts in the rvighbourhood of the shore or at a point some distance from
it. In the proximity of the land the clastic sediment^ may attain a thick-
ness so great as to bring them nearly to the surface of the sea, but further
away an accumulation on a scale equally grand is not to be expected,
but only a thin calcareous deposit. Further, a pasitivo displacement, so
trifling that the growth of the clastic sediments is able to keep pace with it,
may give rise a tract of marshy land always advancing both inland and
seawards, while at the same time in the open sea the same displacement
will merely bring about ah increase in depth.

South of Moscow we again encounter the Fusulina limestone, but without
intercalated coal seams or plant-bearing beds. Beneath it lies marine lime-
stone with Productua giganteua, the highest horizon of the Carboniferous
limestone. Towards the base this marine stage includes two beds of lime-
stone containing Stigmaria and occasionally passing into sand and clay with
thin beds of coal. Beneath these lie the workable measures, and beneath
the measures, marine limestone beds, in their lowest part containing, as we
have already seen, a few fossils of the Kinderhook group of Illinois.

Thus in Russia also the alternation of marine beds and Coal-measures is
not wanting. The alternation, however, is less frequently repeated ; it does
not occur except in the lower horizons, far below the Fusulina limestone.

From these observations it appears that this kind of alternation is very
characteristic of the Coal-measures of the Carboniferous system. Wo see
it in the Calciferous sandstone of Fife, beneath the Carboniferous lime-
stone ; then in the Gannister beds overlying the Carboniferous limestone *
and extending from England as far as Moravia; finally, in the upper
Carboniferous horizon of the - Fusulina limestone in the United States,
probably in Spain, and certainly in Carinthia, where the coal beds are
represented by plant-bearing sandstone.

Far away from the regions considered here, in the coal-fields of north
■China, Richthofen has met with the same intercalations of marine beds ;
Slid there also the terrigenous clay of the coal-bearing series unconformably
overlaps the Carboniferous limestone, and, as in Iowa, fills the cavities
which have been excavated in the limestone by subaerial denudation;
in south China, however, marine beds of the upper Carboniferous rest
dfttectly on the Coal-measures *. •

Carboniferous limestone) is also to be found in Koninck, Bull. Mus. Belg^, 1883, II,
p. 371 et seq. In the lowest beds of the Carboniferous limestone of Russia, Struve
identifies several species as occurring in the American Kinderhook group. On the
Russian plant remains see Stur, Verb. k. k. geol. Reichs.j 1878, pp. 219-224.

* F. von Richthofen, China, II, pp. 205, 717, 782 et passim; p. 203, figure which
shows the intrusion of Cllrboniferous clay into the cavities of the underlying limestone.
Cf. note 2 on p. 238.


B 2



PALAEOZOIC SEAS


[fabt in


Although many thousands of men work day and night in our Coal*
measures, and although many acute observers are led by their profession to
make the study of these deposits the business of their life, yet the mode
of formation of the coal beds is still far from being satisfactorily explained.

In England, geologists, as we have observed, lay great stress on the
underclay with its Stigmaria, which they regard as the soil of a marshy
forest, possibly growing out towards the sea, like the mangrove stvamps of
the present day ; they take the Stigmaria for the roots, and point to the
upright trunks of trees, three to four meters or more in height, which here
and there may be seen in the sandstone standing above the coal. The
coal itself must consequently have been formed in the place where ‘it is
found, and lies at the foot of the trunks and over the tangle of roots, like
the litter of an existing forest.



Fro. 26. Font! Fvmta of the Carhmifmroua Period. ' At Tr6ve, new Saint-iltienno, after
Qrand’Eury. Vertical height about 12 meters.

/. CeUamitei; a. Ptaronius; j. Sigillaria; 4 . Cordaitea; /. Calamodendron.


But the upright trunks prove that the sandstone cannot have been
slowly deposited. Later on we shall point out that on the shores of the
North sea peat bogs are to be seen lying some feet below the level of mean
tide with the stumps of trees rising out of them; further, that sand dunes*
advancing inland, press down the peat below the level of the sea, and that
in the sand of the dunes, so long as it covers the peat, the trunks of the
buried foi^st may be seen, standing upright or more or less inclinedT.
Forests thus overwhelmed by the action of the wind were observed in the
Bermudas by the members of the Challenger expedition; the trees are
buried in fine calcareous sand, which hardens to a friable rock and encloses
the remains of the trunks still standing erect. A slow oscillation of the
strand-line would never bring about this result, the trunks would decay
and disappear ^ In some cases the phenomenon has been explained by

' Thomson and Murray, Narrative, I, p. 141, fig. 55 ; p.A42, fig. 56. It has been
supposed that the trunks had placed themselves vertically while floating and had



OT. V] POBBIATION OP COAL BEDS 24^

supposing that as the sediment grew upwards, the stems of the plants gave
off new roots laterally, but even in this case the whole thickness of the
sediment in question must have’ been deposited within the .lifetime of thpse
stems. The sketches of the sections to be seen in the open quarries at
Saint*£tienne and published by Qi^d’Eury show clearly how the vegetation
follows the deposition, and how fresh individuals again and again appear
in the new beds. It is true Qrand’Eury expressly points out that every
considerable growth of trees or roots is cut off above by a ‘ dessolarde,’
L e. as though shaved off by a plane, above which the next bed begins.

. Although the succession of the forests is so clearly displayed in the basin of
the Loire, yet Grand’Eury has been led by the consideration of the razed-
off surfaces, and particularly by a thorough study of the process of vegetable
decomposition, to return to the view that the coal beds have not grown in
place, but are the remains of decaying plants transported -b^ water, and
deposited in stratified beds one above the other \

Let us now glance once more at Fig. 25, p. 238, which represents the
intrusion of Carboniferous sediments into a hollow of the Devonian lime-
stone.* There is first a deposit of clay with fish teeth, and above this a thin
layer of coal ; but we can only account for the formation of the coal by sup-
posing that the whole cavity was once filled with muddy water containing
decomposing vegetable matter in suspension which afterwards collected
at the top of the cavity.

It is definitely asserted that in Illinois the coal beds do not rest upon
underclay, but directly on shale or limestone ; in these cases the transport
of vegetable mutter from some other locality must be admitted, and we
know that in Nebraska these coal beds pass into beds of shale, through
which only isolated fragments of vegetable debris are strewn

There appears to be no doubt that thick beds of coal may sometimes
split up into a number of smaller seams, which become separated further
and further from one another by the thickening out of intercalated wedges
of sterile rock.

In England several examples of this are known. Jukes has shown
that in south Staffordshire the main coal bed, twenty-five feet in thickness,
splits towards the north into nine seams, in such a manner that the sum of
the seams and the intervening bods amounts to 390 feet; One thin shaly


then sunk vettically into the sediments, but this can hardly be true of whole forests ;
H. Fayol, Sur I’origine des troncs d’arbres fossiles perpendiculaires aux strates du
terrain houiller, Compt. Rend., 1881, XCIII, pp. 160-163.

* F. C. Grand’Eury, Flore carbonifere du d^partement de la Loire et du centre
de la France, 4to, Paris, 1877, with atlas, pi. zxxir, and Mdmoire sur la forma-
tion de la houille, Ann. Mines, 1882, 8* s^i., M^moires, I, pp. 99-292, pi. ; 'Dessolarde,
pi. iii, fig. 6.

* A. H. Worthen, Geological Survey of Illinois, 1886, I, p. 70.



rAJUAJiiUZUlU S£|AS


[part in


parting swells out within a distance of one mile into a wedge of impro*
ductive measures 128 feet thick \ *

^The great bed of Commentry (Allier) divides, according to Fayol, into
six smaller seams which diverge farther and farther apart

In the United States this question has given rise to very searching
discussions. Andrews having maintained the uniform and continuous
extension of the coal beds, it was shown by Newberry and Stevenson that,
as a matter of fact, certain thick beds, owing to the swelling out of the
intervening masses, are divided towards the middle of the original basin
into several seams sometimes widely separated from one another. At the
period of the upper Coal-measures, i. e. during the formation of the chief
beds of coal, the eastern region of North America had already been divided
by the anticlinal of Cincinnati (I, p. 557) into two basins which unite
towards the south-west, so that Ohio, Pennsylvania, and west Virginia
show a certain independence in respect to Iowa, Illinois, and the western
regions, notwithstanding the correspondence in character otherwise so
marked between the marine intercalations. It is towards the bottom
of these two basins that the splitting up of certain of the marine seams
appears to become complete \

* I am therefore compelled to believe,’ writes Stevenson, ‘ that all the
coals of the upper coal group are offshoots from one continuous marsh
which existed from the beginning of the aera to its close, and which in its ,
full extent is now known as the Pittsburg coal seam. During the whole
time of the formation of the upper coal group the general condition was
that of regular subsidence interrupted by longer or shorter intervals of
repose. During the time of subsidence the marsh advanced up the side
of the trough, as new land was continually becoming fitted for its support.
During repose, deltas were formed in the bay, and the marsh pushed
outward over the newly formed land.’

In this way, step by step, we separate out the three elements which take
part in the formation of the coal-bearing sediments: these are (1) the
marine beds — as a rule limestones, sometimes shales; the limestones of

* J. Beete Jukes, The South Staffordshire Coal-field, find ed., 8ro, London, 1859, p. 87.

* A. de Lapparent, Traite do geologic, 2 " 4d., 8to, Paris, 1885, p. 841.

* E. B. Andrews, Some Conclusions, llieoretical and Practical, Bep. Geol. Surv.
Ohio, I, 8vo, Columbus, 1873, pp. 345-364 ; and by the same. On the Parallelism of
Coal Seams, Am. Joum. Sci., 1874, 3rd ser., YIII, pp. 56-59; J. S. Newberry, On
the Parallelism of Coal Seams, op. cit., 1874, 3rd ser., YII, pp. 367-369 ; J. J. Stevenson,
The Upper Coal Measures west of the Alleghany Mountains, Ann. Lyc. Nat. Hist.
N. York, 1873, X, pp. 226-252 ; and Note pn the Coals of the Kanawha Yalley, West
Virgihia, tom. cit., pp. 271-277, map; by the same. On the alleged Parallelism of
Coal Beds, Proc. Am. Phil. Soc. Philadelphia, 1874, XIY, pp. 283-295. Long ago the
same question was also eagerly discussed by distinguished American geologists;
Rogers insisted on the splitting of the coal seams, Lesquereux on their formation
in place, a theory which is evidently very inconsistent with the splitting.



OH.v] ' PABALIC COAL-MEASUEES 247

moderate thickness persistent over wide areas, the result of slow continuous
formation; (2) the beds of .sandstones or shales — swelling out. from paper-
thin ^partings into great wedge-like masses, sometimes showing signs^of
a rapid deposition, such as oblique lamination or pockets filled with sand ;
(3) the coal beds — some of them thick deposits formed off the shore, split-
ting up towards the sea through the thickening out of the unproductive
measures in the manner just described.

. A correct conception of the facts long ago led Naumann to distinguish
limnic and pamlic measures, namely those which indicate marshy surround-
' ingS and those which point to marine conditions. Naumann even at that
early time recognized that in the paralic regions numerous coal beds occur,
but that they are as a rule of trifling thickness ^ In like manner Giimbel
distinguishes autochthonous measures, i. e. those which have been formed in
place ; and allochthonous measures, those which have been produced by
drifted plant remains deposited in water

We must admit, as is shown by the observations on the splitting of
coal seams, that a thick limnic bed may subdivide into a number of paralic
seams, the latter being certainly allochthonous. The widely extended beds
'which occur in frequent alternation with marine sediments in the central
part of the United States belong to the paralic allochthonous formations.
It must be left to later investigations to decide whether the abundant
rainfall which perhaps characterized this period may not have brought
about the accumulation of vegetable detritus in shallow ill-defined lagoons,
and so produced the limnic beds (the view advocated by Grand’Euty and
shared by Saporta ®), or whether these beds may not after all be autoch-
thonous, formed from plants the roots of which still remain in place.

It is certain that during the Coal period the moist land was thickly
overgrown by a peculiar vegetation. The sudd of the Nile and the floating
mattresses of plants of the Mexican lakes bear witness to the luxuriant
development which may be attained by vegetation in a warm climate and
in fresh water. When Cameron was searching in 1874 for the outlet
of lake Tanganyika in the direction of the Lukuga, he travelled some miles
down the river until the masses of floating plants made furtlier progress
impossible. The lake rose, and in 1876 Stanley received from all sides
accounts of the occurrence. Palms, which in 1871 stood on the shore
at Ujiji, were now standing out in the lake 100 feet from shore. ‘ The .
whole country will be inundated and nothing will be left except the tops
of the great mountains,’ said one of the native chiefs. Stanley embarked
on the Liialaba, and describes the gradual hemming in of the river by the

* C. F. Naumann, Lehrbucli der Geognosie, 2. Aufl., Leipzig, 1862, II, p. 584.

’ G. W. von Gdmbel, Beitr&gezur Kenntniss derTexturverh&ltnissederMineValkohlen ;
Sitz. k. bayr. Akad. Mttnchen, 1883, pp. 111-216, pi.

’ G. de Saporta, Bull. Soc. geoL.de ¥r,, 1887, 3^ scr., V, p. 383.



248


PALAEOZOIC SEAS


[PABX m

floating masses of plants, which approached from right and left, until they
finally closed up round tranquil standing water.. The depth of the water at
thf wall-like barrier, which was covered with high reeds, was seven to
eleven feet. Pressing forward about twenty yards into the reeds he found
impassable mud, black as pitch, and seething with animal life. He foretold
the bursting of the dam. 'The accumulated waters of over a hundred
rivers will sweep through the ancient gap with the force of a cataclysm,
bearing away on the fiood all the deposits of organic ddbris at present
in the Lukuga creek.’ This rupture occurred no later than 1878. Shortly
after, the missionary Hore descended the current of the Lukuga, now set
free, which was then extremely rapid. When Lenz visited Tanganyika in
1886 the lake had fallen fifteen feet. Relict strand-lines were seen between
Ujiji and the lake, and in many other places

On the leeward side of the lesser Antilles, Agassiz met with leaves,
pieces of sugar-cane, and fragments of decomposing plants, ten to fifteen
miles from the land, and at a depth of more than 1,000 fathoms ; and near
some of the Polynesian islands the Challenger sometimes dredged a leaf or
a branch' from more than 1,400 fathoms. Notwithstanding these instances,
the wide dispersal of decomposed plant remains in sufficient quantity to
form seams of coal still remains a marvellous phenomenon.

As regards the questions under conside^tion, it is clear from what has
been said that we are scaiuely justified in assuming that every marine,
intercalation which occurs between paralic measures represents an oscilla-
tion of the strand. The splitting of the limnic coal definitely excludes
such a supposition. Only where beds certainly autochthonous alternate
with marine beds, or where littoral inundation manifests itself over a wide
area, can oscillation be regarded as proved.

When the paralic coal seams alternate frequently with marine beds,
as for instance in Illinois, and split up still further till they pass into
unworkable beds of vegetable detritus, then they approach more and more
closely to the character of those shaly partings which, repeated often
hundreds of times, divide our limestones into definite beds. Since these
paralic formations are known, both beneath the great mass of the stratified
Carboniferous limestone as well as above it, the question arises whether
the clayey partings between the bedding planes which determine the
stratification of the Carboniferous limestone itself may not have a similar
origin.

The processes which we have been tracing in their effects took place
very quietly, and were prolonged over periods of extraordinary duration.
Still it is incontestable that in the middle of the Coal-measure period
a number of great folded ranges were both elevated and worn down by

' H. M. Stanley, Through the Dark Continent, London, 1878; 0. Lenz, Brief,
Mitth. k. k. (!cogr, Gcb., 1887, XXX, p. 98.



THE PERMIAN SYSTEM


' 249


CH. v] .

denudation, and the younger measures passed in transgre^on over the
abraded surfaces of the folds into which the earlier measures had been
thrown. This is the case not only in Europe, but in all likelihood in Nova
Scotia also ^ In China, the folds of the Tsin-ling-shan involve the Car-
boniferous limestone, but on their denuded surface Richthofen encountered,
at a great height, transgressive Coal-measures.

6. The Permian tsyatem. It is difficult to form any conception of the
protracted period which would be necessary to accomplish the foldings and
the erosions of the Carboniferous period. The magnitude of the erosion
appears to its full extent when we take into account the Permian forma-
tion, during the deposition of which the sea again returned over regions it
had previously abandoned. .

Let us first consider Bohemia.

In the region of lower Silesia and Bohemia, according to Schutze’s
investigations, the complete series of the Coal-measures is represented,
from the Culm to the Rothliegendc. Five successive fioras may bo
distinguished, united it is true by only a few species in common. The
Waldenburg group at the base, approximately on the horizon of the
marine intercalations of upper Silesia, contains fishes, Estheria, and possibly
Modiola. But we can hardly regard this as representing the Gannister
beds, elsewhere of such wide distribution. A good deal of conglomerate is
intercalated with the beds

In central Bohemia, and thence beyond Pilsen and Merschan, the
Carboniferous lies horizontal and unconfoiinable on the edges of the
Silurian system. The latter, together with the associated subdivisions of
the Devonian, was already faulted down, and doubtless completely sepa-
rated from the other Silurian and Devonian ranges, at the time when the
Coal-measures were formed over its surface. Here, as we have seen, some
basal beds of the Coal-measures occur, which sometimes adapt themselves
completely to the slight inequalities of the older rocks lying beneath them ;
these are followed by a great thickness of unproductive clastic rock, and
above this come the uppermost measures, perhaps of lower, Permian age,
and the sandstone of the Rothliegende.

The Carboniferous mantle of central Bohemia dips to the north-west
under the Rothliegende, and its termination is not visible. To the south-
east, however, it is broken up by erosion into larger or smaller outliers,
and over considerable areas has been entirely destroyed.

This limnic trans^ession of the Carboniferous, however, extended

^ J. W. Dawson,' On the Upper Coal-Formation of Eastern Nova Scotia and Prince
Edward Island in its relation to the Permian; Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., dSTd, XXX,
pp. 2Q9-219.

* A. Schiitze, Geoffnostische Darstellunp; des nieder8chles.-b6hmi8chen Steinkohlen-
beckens ; Abb. z. Speciolkartc v. Preuss., 1882, III, p. 19.



250


PALAEOZOIC SEAS


[PABT m

further and further over Bohemia, first filling up the hollows and then
gradually levelling down the land itself. Hence we see isolated patches of
the. uppermost Coal-measures preserved in the marginal. fractures towards
Moravia and Bavaria, while they have been entirely swept away from the
higher parts of the Bohemian mass. The transgression continued during
the formation of the last- beds of coal and into the Rothliegende. Hence
a little isolated patch of Permian coal-measures still lies near Budweis in
the midst of the Archaean region, and the remains of the denuded covering
of Rothliegende crop out along the marginal fractures to the south-west as
far as B^ensburg, and to the south-east as far as Zbbing, near Krems.

The sea, however, did not follow these transgressions. They recall in
a striking manner the ridging upwards of the borders of the Pittsburg
marsh during the positive phase of the sea as conceived by Stevenson: To
me also it is difficult to imagine the progress of these limnic transgressions
without a simultaneous rise of the strand. They are everywhere repre-
sented in central Europe, first by the upper Coal-measures of the Carboni-
ferous (Radowenz or upper Ottweil group); then by the Permian measures,
and finally by the widely distributed Rothliegende sandstone and the
accompanying conglomerates. This sandstone also extends far over the
Russian plain, here and there accompanied by gjrpsum or rock-salt.
Finally the positive influence became so preponderant that the sea. re-
appeared over a considerable part of central Europe. This was the period
of the Zechstein with its impoverished marine fauna. From Russia this
formation extends across the whole of north Germany; dolomitic pro-
longations, the edge of the lens as it were, recuih England. Everywhere
it follows the Rothliegende, nowhere does it pass beyond, reaching at
most the extreme outer border of that series; thus it is well known in
Silesia, but not on the Bohemian mass.

The Zechstein marks a recurrence peculiar to central Europe and to
a part of northern Europe. It does not penetrate into the Alps. On the
other hand, it appears far away, in Kansas, represented by beds overlying
the Fusulina limestone and containing a fauna comparable with that of
the European Zechstein.

We have now reached one of the most remarkable phases of tl^e earth’s
history ; and, putting detail entirely aside, we will carry our survey beyond
the confines of Europe and the United States, and endeavour to obtain
a general view of the whole course of events.

Let us once more return to the base of the Carboniferous system, or
the Calciferous limestone of Scotland, the equivalents of which we have
already recognized on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean. The stratified
series of Fife, with its still-rooted Stigmaria standing between the marine
intercalations, affords clearer proof than any observations hitherto made
of repeated oscillations with a positive excess, a phenomenon not to be



OH.V] CARBONIFEROUS OSCILLATIONS 251

confounded with the alternation of paralic beds. In Illinois and the
south-east of Russia, the contemporaneous formations were purely ‘marine.
Perhaps the whole series of sandstone and coal beds which extends from
Banks land over the north coast of Melville sound to Baffin bay must
also be referred to the same origin.

The positive movement now conducts us to the most important pelagic
member of the period, the Carboniferous limestone, which reveals, not only
by its calcareous composition and its rich marine fauna, but above all by
its mighty transgression, the far-reaching changes in the geography of the
coast. It rests normally on the older Palaeozoic series from the far North
to Brazil and Australia, but at the same time exceeds their limits. In,
Ireland, England, Scotland, and Spitzbergen it lies as a purely marine
limestone on the Old Red sandstone, the only characteristic fossils, of which
are Ganoids and terrestrial plants; it extends at the same time through
the Parry islands into the highest known latitudes. In central and
southern Greenland it has not been observed. It proceeds through a
large part of the groat ranges of Asia, and in east China it rests on the
Devonian and Silurian of the Tsin-ling-shan, overlaps them north of the
Wei-Ho, and stretches along the sea from the north of Shensi to
Shan-tung and Liao-tung, resting everywhere within this ancient table-
land in apparent concordance upon the Cambrian beds. In like manner
in the east part of the United States it rests on Devonian, extending to
the west and south-west. In Dakota and the Rocky mountains of Colorado
it follows in deceptive conformity upon Cambrian beds as in north China ;
at the' bottom of the Grand Canon a great plane of erosion separates it
from the Cambrian or still older beds, but in the table-land of Texas,
Cambrian rock reappears, immediately overlain, and again in apparent
concordance, by the Carboniferous limestone. In California, so far as we
know at present, the Carboniferous limestone is the sole representative of
the entire Palaeozoic series.

This great transgression is succeeded, so far as we can judge from the facts,
by a very marked and extensive negative phase. The flora of the lowest
horizons of the resulting Coal-measures, i.e. the Culm flora, is known in
the Arctic regions, in Europe, at many places in Siberia, and as far as
Australia, where it is represented by several characteristic species. Thick
masses of clastic sediments overlie the Carboniferous limestone in the
United States, in the east of Canada, in central Europe, and in China ; in
central Europe the marine Gannister beds are intercalated with the lower
Coal-measures, and after a remarkable sinking of the strand the signs of
renewed ascent are revealed in the thickness of the sediments and the
continuance of the limnic transgression. •

This ascent finally led to a renewed appearance of the sea. It is the
upper Carboniferous sea of the Fusidina limestone. The plant remains



262


PALAEOZOIC SEAS


[PABX UI

determined by Stur— which lie in the shales between the beds of the
Fusulina limestone on the Kronalp in Carinthia — leave no room for doubt
as to the contemporaneity of this marine limestone with the higher Bado-
wenz or upper Ottweiler Coal-measures, that is with the uppermost
flora of the coal basin of lower Silesia and Bohemia. This new marine
deposit, however, does not extend nearly so far to the north as the Car-
boniferous limestone. In Illinois it alternates with the Coal-measures,
thins off towards Ohio and north Virginia, and does not reach Pennsyl-
vania or Canada. In Europe it is found in north Spain ; Meunier
encountered it on the Morvan ; in the southern Alps it alternates with
. plant-bearing beds ; then it reappears in the south of Russia ; Neumayr
has recognized it in the north-west of Asia Minor ; Teller in the island* of
Chios. Everywhere the sea appears to have come from the south. Simi-
larly, all the specimens of Fusulina limestone so far described by Schwager
from Richthofen’s collections, and the rich upper Carboniferous fauna of
Loping in the province of Kiang-si, lat. 27* 62' N., studied by Kayscr,
belong to districts which lie south of the Tsin-ling-shan.

Now came the extension of the Rothliegende over Russia and central
Europe, and even into some parts of the southern Alps ; then, the positive
movement still continuing, the Zechstein followed, extending fron^ Russia
through north Germany into England. It was a shallow sea ; salt and
gypsum crystallized out from it. During the period of this transgression,
which came from the north, and perhaps also during the Rothliegende, a
new fauna was introduced from the south, which has not yet received
a particular name. It includes Carboniferous and Permian species and
some new types, and is known to extend from the Salt range of India
through the great ranges of Asia, Afghanistan, Djoulfa, in the valley of
the Araxes, and past Artinsk in the Ural to Sicily. Its most northerly
representative is perhaps the fauna of the Bellerophon beds in the south-
eastern Alps ; these beds, however, like the Zechstein, rest upon the
Rothliegende

While submergence and emeigence thus alternate over regions of such
vast extent, the outlines of a great continent become disclosed to us, and
from the closing days of the Carboniferous this remains for a long period
one of the most prominent features of the face of the earth. On a previous
page (I, p. 387) it has been described as the fractured Indian continent,
or Gondwdna land. At the present day it is broken up by the Indian
Ocean, and comprises the peninsula of India, Australia, and a large part
of Africa.

* E. von Mojsisovics, Ueber das Vorkommen einer muthmasslich vortriadischen
Ccphalopoden-Fauna in Sicilien, Verb. k. k. geol. Reichs., 1882, p. 31; G. Stache,
Zur Fauna der Bcllorophonkalke Sfldtirols, Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichs., 1877, XXVII,
pp. 271-318 ; and 1878, XXVIII, pp. 93-168, pi.



ANCIENT GLACIATION


• '253


CH. V]

The investigations of recent years, and the discoveries made by Warth
in the Salt range, have helped to complete our knowledge of this continent.
Tn the Salt range erratic blocks transported by ice occur- at a hoifzon
which, according to Waagen, must be correlated with the highest sub-
divisions of the Carboniferous system \ They are the same accumulations
' which constitute the Talchir conglomerate, or the lowest stage of the
plant-bearing Gondw&na series, in which Blanford, Oldham, and Fedden
have recognized the influence of ice (I, p. 404); they also form, as the
Dwyka or Ecca conglomerate, the foundations of the Karoo formation in
Africa, and were long ago declared by Sutherland to be of glacial origin
(I, p. 389).

The same glacial beds also make their appearance in east Australia, as
the Bacchus marsh or Stony creek beds. There they alternate with marine
beds which are referred to the Carboniferous.

They are immediately succeeded in India, Africa, and Australia by the
long series of plant-bearing beds which ascend high into the Mesozoic
group. For a long time the whole region remained above the sea. Then,
during the Mesozoic aera, it gave way, breaking up piece by piece, the
process probably continuing down to a comparatively late period, and
large parts of it have not even yet been reached by the sea.

According to Waagen the glacial region extended from lat. 40° S. to
lat. 35° N. and from long. 18° E. to long. 135° E. Some typical plants of
the Culm flora are known in Australia, but the upper floras of the Carboni-
ferous of Europe and North America, have not been discovered on this
continent. Over the whole of Gondw&na land an independent series of
floras makes its appearance under the influence of a severe climate.

In Europe erratic blocks of wholly enigmatical origin have been met
with in the lower horizons of the Coal-measures, e. g. in proximity to
a marine intercalation near Ostrau. According te Bamsay and Gcikie
signs of. glacial action are to l)e met with in the Bothliegende of England.

Opinions as to what are the precise equivalents in Europe of the glacial
conglomerates of India arc not yet in absolute agreement. According to
Waagen, as already mentioned, they should be placed on the horizon of the
highest divisions of the Carboniferous ; in Australia, glacial conditions would
seem to recur in the Permian period.

The Carboniferous limestone of the far north contains a number of
species also found in the Zechstein ; its relations to the Zechstein do not
appear to me to Ihj as yet completely explained.

6. Survey of the Palaeozoic seas. The question whether the changes in
the. distribution of the seas can be explained by a secular rise and fall of
the continents may receive some illumination from the history of the
Palaeozoic seas.

' W. Waagen, Die carbone Eiszeit, tom. cit., 1887, pp. 143-192.



254


PALAEOZOIC SEAS


[PABT m

We have recognized the existence of two continents, of which fragments
only are visible at the present day. The first occupied' the position of the
noi^'h Atlantic Ocean, as is indicated by the nature and distribution of
the Palaeozoic sedimento in Europe and America ; Greenland is a remnant
of it. This ancient continent is the Atlantia.

The second continent, first clearly discernible towards the close of the '
Carboniferous period, is now represented by three fragments, Africa, India
wd Australia. As Greenland on the one hand, so the Indian peninsula on
the other projects into the Ocean which covers the subsided table-lands.
This continent is Oondwdna land.

The destruction of the two continents was accomplished later, piece by
piece, and we can follow the process through many stages. It must have
produced many negative movements and thereby have led to the abandon-
ment of other regions by the sea. Further, our stratigraphical in<}uiries
have so far advanced that it has become possible to recognize a number of
positive and negative displacements which affected very extensive areas in
a uniform manner.

At the close of the Silurian period the sea became shallower over a wide
region, from Illinois and Iowa to Wisconsin and New York, in England, the
Baltic provinces, and as far as the Dniestr. Then the Old Red sandstone
advanced pver a great part of the Atlantis. Evidence of its encroachment
may be observed in Scotland, England, the gulf of Finland, and as far as
the gulf of Onega and Spitzbeigen, perhaps as far as the south of Green-
land; and its equivalents, retaining the same characters, appear in New
Brunswick. Towards the middle of the Devonian, the marine transgression
extended over these continental or at most sublittoral deposits, and attained
its maximum. The limestone and dolomite deposits of the middle Devonian
extend over Orel and Voronezh to Livonia and Courland, and at the same
time the transgressive middle Devonian appears to form the western glint
of the Canadian shield from the Clear-water to the Arctic Ocean. In the
oil-bearing beds on the shores of the Uchta, in the region of the Petchora,
we recognize the oil-bearing shales of the banks of the Athabasca, which
'may be traced in North America from the valley of that river as far aS the
GaspA Then the shore again receded for a great distance, and the Carboni-
ferous period began.

From the limnic or littoral formations, which in some localities seem to
show signs of frequent secondary oscillations with a positive preponderance.
We pass to the Carboniferous limestone. Simultaneously with the appear-
ance of pelagic characters, the transgression is found to-advance beyond the
limits of earlier deposits; it occurs in regions the most. remote from each
other, as in China and Texas.

Once more the strand receded over a wide area, ahd then again advanced,
evidently from the south, but it did not proceed nearly so far ius during the



my] SOUTHERN SEAS '266

Carboniferous limestone period. This is the sea of the upper Carboniferous
or Fusulina limestone.

Yet another marine fauna made its way from Asia across the Arises,
pa^ Artinsk, to Sicily ; whether or not it is represented in the soui^-eastem
Alps is somewhat uncertain. It did not attain to the extension of the
preceding stage. It is not known in the United States. Simultaneously
with this fauna, the' sea came down from the north and spread out the
Zechstein over northern and central Europe.

Much no doubt still remains obscure. The Palaeozoic deposits of the
Sahara, Brazil, and other very extensive regions, can hardly be taken into
account in comparisons of this kind, and in the present state of our know-
ledge it is not possible to oppose in the Palaeozoic aera a compensatory
negative region against a given positive region. Nevertheless we can
already recognize three faunas which are foreign, to the north of Europe,
namely, the Hercynian stage, the. Fusulina limestone, and the stage of
Djoulfa. On the other hand the typical Zechstein is not known in the
southern regions.

Positive and negative movements alternate simultaneously over regions
of such vast extent, that they cannot be explained by a bulging or a sagging
of the lithosphere on however great a scale. During the Carboniferous and
at other periods also, considerable foldings of the lithosphere occurred, but
they have nothing in common with this phenomenon of 'general inundation
and emergence. The Armorican and Variscap folds arose in complete
independence of the transgressions, by the progress of which these folds
themselves were planed down and covered up.



256


CHAPTER VI

# ,

• MESOZOIC SEAS

The seas of the Trias. Positive movements in the Rhaetic epoch. 9°^^iii’i<ttion of
positive movements daring the Jurassic period. Negative phase in central Europe and
commencement of the Cretaceous period. Later transgressions and intermixture of the
Cretaceous faunas. The Cenomanian transgression. General survey of the Mesozoic
seas.

1. 8eaa of the Trias. In the east of the United State-s the marine,
Mesozoic series is absent until we reach the middle Cretaceous. The
Rhaetic and Lias lignites of the Appalachians clearly show that during
their formation this region was not covered by the sea. Towards the west,
however, first, marine upper Jurassic is met with in the Black mountains
of Dakota, then the marine Trios makes its appearance in the western part
of the Ba.sin ranges, and la.st the Neocomian in California.

In Brazil likewise, marine sediments are completely absent from the
beginrting of the Mesozoic aera up to the middle of the Cretaceous. Even
far to the west, in Jujuy and Salta, the northern provinces of the Argentine
republic, we still meet with Rhaetic plant-bearing beds. Still further to
the west, however, in the Andes of Chili and Peru, we encounter various
marine members of the Trias, the Jurassic and the lower Cretaceous.

In eastern Australia there is a similar absence of marine sediments
from the beginning of the Trias upwards, but the gap extends in this case
only as far as the lower Cretaceous ; the whole of this interval is repre-
sented by a few plant-bearing sediments only, such as the Jerusalem beds
in Tasmania and’ the Clarence river beds in New South Wales and Queens-
land. In New Zealand, on the other hand, the marine Trios is present as
well as marine members of the Jurassic. Here the series does not appear
to be quite complete, and some plant-bearing sediments again alternate
with marine beds.

In the north-east of China the marine serici^ terminates in general with
the Carboniferous ; not even the marine deposits of the middle Cretaceous,
elsewhere so widely distributed, have hitherto been encountered there.
But the marine Trias, together with some members of the marine Jurassic,
is known in the mountain-chains of Japan. In Yezo and Saghalin only
the middle Cretaceous has so far been observed.

In the arc of the Aleutian islands,' Trias, Jurassic, and Cretaceous are
represented by marine deposits.



OH. VI] THE OCEANS OP DIFFERENT AGE *267

• •

We may thus fairly conclude that in proportion as we approach the
Pacific Ocean that important part of the M^zoic series which is older
than the middle Cretaceous becomes more complete.

The Atlantic border differs completely. With the exception of the two
regions constructed on the Pacific type, the Antilles and the straits of
Gibraltar, perhaps also the outnumers of the chains as far as the Wadi
Draa and some parts of Europe, marine Mesozoic sediments older than the
middle Cretaceous do not appear at all on the Atlantic coasts. This is the
* case from cape Horn to beyond the mouth of the Orinoco, from Florida
to the Arctic Ocean and cape Farewell, and from the Wadi Draa to the
cape of Good Hope."

The Indian Ocean presents both types. On the shores of Arakan,
where the Pacific structure is the rule, the marine Trias is known to exist,
but it is not found anywhere else along the coast of this Ocean. Thus
here also a great gap occurs in the lower half of the Mesozoic series, but
it does not extend as far as the middle Creta(^u8, and indeed no further
than the middle Jurassic.

From this it follows that the existing Oceans are of different age.

The distribution of Psendomortotia Ochotica, one of the most charac*
teristic species, of the Trias, is of particular interest; discovered, as we
have already mentioned, by Middendorf in Mamg6 bay (sea of Okhotsk), it
is recorded in Teller’s tables as having been found subsequently at a great
number of other localities; at several places in Japan, particularly in the
bay of Sendai; on the island of Hugon; in New Caledonia; at several
places in the Alps of New Zealand; as a closely allied variety, on the
rio Utcubamba, between Chachapoyas and Cuelap, Peru; in Plumas
county, California, Humboldt mountain, Nevada, and at several other
places in these chains; near fort Itupert, Vancouver; in Moresby island,
Queen Charlotte group ; on the Peace river, on the east slope of the Rocky
mountains (lat. 50° to 57° N.) ; at cape Nunakalkhak, at the entrance to
the bay of Fovaluk, Alaska; finally near Verkhojansk on the Jama in east
Siberia (lat. 63° N.) ^ .

Thus the marine Trias engirdles the Pacific Ocean; it is continued
across Siberia from the mouth of the Olenek to Spitsbergen, but it does
not reach the Atlantic region by this route.

Mention has been made (I, p. 581) of the marine Trias of Arakan.
Its thick series of ‘sediments help to form' the great ranges of Asia, but
their connexion with the Trias of the Alps is still little known. Gries-
bach’s widely extended investigations in Afghan Turkestan .show that
Hcdobia Lommdi of the upper Alpine Trias recurs near Chahil, north-west

I

^ F. Teller, Die Pelecjpoden-Fauna Ton Werchojansk in OsirSibirien, in E. MojaisovicB
von Mojsv&r, Arktiscbe Triasfaunen ; M^m. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saini-P^tersb., 1886 , XXXIll,
No. 6, p. 103 et seq.

■OLLAS II


8



258 MESOZOIC SEAS [PAK ts

•

of Saighan in Torkestan^ But it appeara there aesooiated with plant*
beanng beds, which represent part of the Gondwftntf series of India> and
we have seen that a lower part of this series enters into the stmcture of
the great ranges near Daijiling (I, p. 577).

Further to the west information is wanting. In Russian Turkestan
the Trias is absent. In the Caucasus only plant-bearing beds are known
below the Lias, to which they are supposed* still to belong. Mpjsisovics,
who has rendered such great service in determining the sui^vision of the
Trias, believes he has found indications of the lower Alpine Trias above
the Permo-Carboniferous sediments of Djoulfa in Armenia; but it was
the collections sent by Russian geologists from the mountain of Bogdo on the
lower Volga, which first enabled him to prove definitely the presence of the
Alpine Trias in this region. In the north-west of Asia Minor, on the lower
Danube, in the Balkans, in the Carpathians, and in the Mittelgebirge of
Hungary, this formation appears with increasing frequency until we reach
the region of the eastern ^ps. From here the sediments of this group
extend to the Orisons, the southern Alps and Bosnia, and proceed through
the Apennines to Sicily; they are found, though not with the same
characters, in the northern slopes of the Swiss Alps and cross the Balearic
isles to the Ebro.

These facts reveal to us a sea which extended from the interior of
Asia over the south of Europe. It is this sea which the study of the
distribution of the Jurassic sediments disclosed to Neumayr, and it has
been named by him the ‘ Central Mediterranean

We have seen from three examples, namely from the Hercynian stage
of the lower Devonian, from the Fusulina limestone of the upper Car-
boniferous, and from the Permo-Carboniferous deposits of Djoulfa, that
calcareous marine formations occur in the south and south-east of Europe ;
while clastic sediments and the deposits formed in shallow water prevail
towards the middle or the north-'west. The same phenomenon presents
itself again in the Triaa Even in the regions where the system first
received this name (central and northern Germany, together with England
and a large part of France, including the Jura and the Ddpartement du
Var), it presents itself with a local and abnormal facies : clastic and sub-
littoral, lacustrine, and saliferous deposits assume far greater prominence
here than elsewhere, and its development in these regions as the triad
group, Bunter sandstone, Muschelkalk, and Keuper, afibrds a striking
example of a sedimentary cycle, with a lenticular mass of limestone as
the middle term. The Muschelkalk indeed is absent towards the north-

* C. L. Griesbach, Field Notes : No.5, to accompany a Geological Sketch-map of Afghaoi-
stdn and North-eastem Khorassan ; Bee. Oeol. Surr. India, 1887, XX, p. 97 et seq.

* M. Neumayr, Die geographische Yerbieitung der Juiaformation ; Denkschr. k. Akad.
Wiss. 'Wien, 1885, L, pp. 57-86, maps.



TRIAfl m SOUTH TYROL * 26 ^

west, namely in the western part of the basin of Paris, and in England ;
there the Eeuper rests directly upon the Bimter sandstone, often only with
difficulty to be distinguished from it. •

It was impossible to arrive at a correct interpretation of the most
important of these regions, so long as the horsts of the Rhine, the Black
Forest, and the Vosges were regarded as parts of an ancient coast. Benecke,
as early as 187’7, had liberated himself from this mistaken theory, and was
then led to formulate general views in respect to the west of central
Europe \ But if we follow in detail the descriptions of Benecke, Sand-
beiger, and other German investigators, we perceive the danger of a too
simplified and too generalized conception of the Trias as representing
a regular cycle. The Bunter sandstone is indeed a transgressive deposit
marking a positive period; it rests on rocks of very different age. But
the beds of various nature which are intercalated in this series, some-
tinjes containing marine shells, at. others terrestrial plants, and composed
in some cases of dolomitic limestone ; or again, the variegated gypsiferous
clays of the middle Muschelkalk, the various salt-bearing zones, and the
repeated interbedding of dolomite with the Eeuper, which includes here and
there, as far as north Germany, isolated marine mollusca, and near Wttrz-
burg even Myophoria Raibliana, so widely distributed in the eastern
Alps — all these -are only a few of the many anomalies, probably true
recurrences, which interrupt the cycle. At the same time, with the progress
of events, the sediments continued to increase in thickness, until finally, at
the close of the Eeuper, the littoral sediments of the Bhaetic, which forms
the next stage, extended beyond the limits of the Trias on to the older
rocks, indicating a higher level of the coast-line than had at any time
existed during that period.

^e calcareous deposits of the extra- Alpine Trias are always, wherever
they occur, intercalated between the two clastic members, the Bunter sand-
stone and the Eeuper. Their distribution corresponds in a striking manner
with that of the Zechstein, but is not so extensive. Here we have a cycle
accomplished in oscillations.

Contemporaneously, sediments of quite a different nature were deposited
in the eastern Alps. They are almost exclusively of pelagic origin and
distinguished by a rich fauna ; limestone and dolomite attain a considerable
thickness in this region.

A very singular development characterizes the Trias in south Tyrol.

F. von Richthofen observed that at certain horizons of the Trias in this
region vast masses of limestone and dolomite protrude, forming mountains
with steep slopes, and that between these masses and on their flanks clastic
sediments and volcanic tuffs have been deposited. He regarded them as

* E. W. Benecke, Ueber die Trias in Elsass-Lothringen and Luxemburg ; Abb. s. geol.
Speoialkarte v. Eliass-Lothringen, 1877, 1, Heft 4.



260


MESOZOIC SEAS


[PABT m

coral reefs. GUmbel raised the objection that corals are rare in these
limestones, and that for the most part they are stratified. The facts of the
case arc dearly set forth in the 'descriptions given by R'von Mojsisovics
and his fellow workers, H. Hoernes and C. Doelter \ Mountainous masses
of limestone and dolomite are buried up in t^e clastic sediments of the
Trias. The form of these ma^s does not correspond with that of the
mountains, except in those rare cases where the outer slopes of 'the re^f
have been exposed by denudation, and persist as the existing slopes of the
mountain. Most of the masses are stratified, but some not. Mojsisovics
thinks the unstratified masses are coral reefs. On the outer slojie of such
masses ancient accumulations of debris with ‘ overcast-bedding ’ are some-
times to be seen. That the expression ‘reef’ is justified can hardly be
doubted. In the lower- horizons we may observe between the Adige and
the valley of the Sexten two regions of reefs, a western and an eastern ;
in the intervening district the reefs are wholly missing. At a later period,
when the Saint Cassian beds had been deposited, these two regions of reefs
were united in a band which runs through Caprile, Pieve di Cadore, and
Auronzo, so that the area of deposition of the clastic sediments was
diminished. We may add that at a still higher horizon jof the Plattenkalk
the stratified beds extended over the whole region.

In the northern Alps massive or stratified limestones and dolomites
have been found in more or less continuous sheets. Wo will restrict our
attention to the upper beds, which are so intimately associated with the
Rhaetic stage.

2. Positive movements in the Bhadic period. Standing near the
Konigssee near Berchtesgaden, we may readily distinguish in the white
wall of cliffii above Sankt Bartholomae two well-marked subdivisions : the
rock below is grey, unstratified, splintery, and weathers into numerous
sharp cones ; that above is divided by regular bedding-planes and crowns
all the higher summits of the cliffs. But if, south of the lake, we ascend
the height of the Steinemes Meer, the eye sweeps over a panorama of
mountains which, as far up as the peak of the Watzmann, are traversed
by the same regular bedding-planes. This member of the Alpine limestone
immediately underlying the Rhaetic stage has received the characteristic
name of Plattenkalk. It has been traced from the Yorarlberg to the
eastern extremity of the Alps near Vienna, as well as through the whole
limestone region of the southern Alps, and, maintaining the same characters,
in the faulted-in band of the limestone which traverses Carinthia. We
may also include with it the stratified limestone masses of the Pachetein

* F. von Richthofen, Geognostische Beechreibung von Predazzo, St. Cassiim und der
Seisscr-Alpe, 4to, Gotha, 1860 ; C. W. Gdmbel, Bas Mendel- und Schlemgebirge, Sitzber. k.
bayr. Akad., 1873, p. 71 et seq. ; E. Mojaisovics von Mojsv&r, Die Dolomitriffia von Sttd-
Tyrol und Venetien, 8vo, Wien, 1879.



OH. Vl]


EHAEnC POSITIVE MOVEMENTS


261


m

numntaind, and regard Plattenkalk and Dachsteinkalk as synonymous
terms. The pale limestones, however, which overlie the richly fossiliferous
beds of the Rhaetic stage,' and in the western part of the northern ^’Ips
are usually spoken of as Dachsteinkalk or upper Dachsteinkalk in opposi-
tion to Plattenkalk, are only a recurrence of the beds of the Plattenkalk at
a higher stage.

That the shells of foraminifera form a large part of the substance of
these limestones was known long ago to Schafhautl and Giimbel ; in 1863,
Peters showed by an examination of thin slices that the limestone of the
Dachstein mountains and the Terglou abounds in micro-organisms But
they present many other instructive characters; a wide and attractive
field of invratigation opens out here, as yet hardly touched, and I can there-
fore only offer a few preliminary observations.


Schneibstein Watzmann Hachelatein



Fio. 27. View from the Oherlahrury ascent to the Funtenaee AlPf Steinemea Meer,


Let. us approach more closely one of the colossal limestone walls. We
may first call attention to the bright red shards which are strewn through
some of the beds. Sometimes these fragments are angular, and look as
though they had been broken off from a hard red bed ; sometimes they are
thinly laminated in red and yellow layers ; sometimes, again, we see lying
in the limestone one of the great shells of Megalodus filled with red
material up to a level line, above this either white limestone or calcspar.
This red material is the terra roesa of the Karst and of the emerged coral
reefs of Oceania, the residue left after the solution of limestone, and thus
scarcely likely to have been formed beneath the sea.

Next the behaviour of the corals must be considered. In the light
grey limestone, branches of great coral growths replaced by white calcspar
are visible, which owing to the difficulty of a closer determination are
generally described as Lithodendron. The radiating branches present
a rosette-like or nodular form ; sometimes, indeed, rosettes of this kind are.

* E. F. Peters, TTeber Foraminiferen im Dachsteinkalk ; Jahrb. k. k. geol. Bcichs.,
1868, XIII, pp. 293-298.



262


MESOZOIC SEAS


[part m

seen seated on the shell of a great Megalodns. But the lithodendron
corals are not only scattered through the limestone. There are some beds
which are entirely made up of them; their branches are more or less
vertical, the intervals between them being filled up with limestone. These
are true coral limestones. At the base these ,beds are separated by
a bedding-plane from the underlying limestone, but strange to say they
are similarly separated above from the next succeeding bed by a edntinuous
plane of division which may frequently be followed for a great distance
along the face of the cliff: their knoll-like masses and branches do not
extend into the next limestone bed, contrary to what, from the irregularity
of their growth, we might naturally have expected. I even remember to
have seen, several years ago, in the cliffs of the Schladminger loch in the
Dachstein mountains, two coral beds of this kind, separated by a trifling
interval, maintaining for an indefinite distance a constant thickness.
Whether the upper surface is a plane, of erosion such as is produced by
the sea on the borders of existing coral reefs, I am unable to say.

The beds themselvea vary greatly in character. Sometimes they are
grey, very splintery, and without a trace of organic remains, at others
pale yellowi^ or greyish white, breaking with an even fracture, and
occasionally rich in fossils. These beds of different nature occur in
repeated alternations.

They often contain over 40 per cent, of magnesium carbonate : there
can be no doubt that in these cases dolomite has been precipitated as such
from the sea ^

Beneath are beds which contain numerous minute organisms, and
outwardly bear no resemblance to a dolomite.

The internal structure of the beds is also very various. Some are
laminated, as is clearly shown by the weathered surfaces, even in the case
of the Gyroporella beds of the Bax Alp in lower Austria which belong to
a lower horizon. Others contain larger or smaller fragments of limestone
of a different origin, which are often only revealed by polishing. In the
Dachstein mountains, on the left side of the Karls-Eisfeld, beneath the
Schoberl, Bhynchondla ancilla is found in immense numbers. Freshly
broken out blocks of. the rock show, however, when polished, that the
Rhynchonellas are embedded in fragments of a light grey limestone, which
are derivative, forming foreign inclusions in this bed. The polished
surfaces also reveal fragments of a yellowish-white limestone, containing
other organic remains, and of an unfossiliferous grey limestone, as well

* Gambel has always maintained this view; the dolomitic intercalations in the
Potsdam Sandstone, the Waterlime of the upper Silurian of North America, the
dolomitic beds of the upper Devonian of Russia, those which represent the Zechstein in
England and those in the German Keeper, all of them more or less littoral deposits, are
so many examples of the direct deposition of dolomite.



OH. VI] THE PLATTENKALK 263

as parts which are coloured by red earth in bands of lighter and darker
tints.

A farther peculiarity is the incrustaMon of the included fragments.
It not seldom happens, and an excellent instance is afforded by the Earls-
Eisfeld rock, that each of these derivative components has been covered
with a thick crust of carbonate of lime, which was deposited before the
formation of the matrix. In sections this crust shows a radiate structure.
Qccasionally adjacent fragments are enclosed in a common crust. This
case differs completely from that in which carbonate of lime fills up the
interior of shells, as for instance the brachiopods of the Vils beds, and
replacing the rock forms in some cases the whole of the matrix as well, as
has been described by Rothpletz ^ ; it is the incrustation of the fragments
by sinter, followed by their cementation together, before the formation of
the matrix and the completion of the rock. It is not easy to understand
how this process could take place beneath the sea.

We have next to consider the mode of aeparaiion of the beds. In some
series successive beds are separated by sharply marked divisional planes,
but are not distinguished by any lithological differences; in other cases
a bed may consist of two or three layers clearly defined from each other by
differences of colour and texture, but yet not separated by any interruption
of continuity

It not seldom happens that a single bed consists of two or even three
layers, which are not separated by bedding planes but by a dark, acutely
denticulate line, not unlike a cranial suture. They have been described by
Oiimbel and Pichler ; Rothpletz describes them under the name of ‘ Sutures.’
They have not been 'formed by pressure, as has been supposed ; if, taking
advantage of thC thin film of clay which is seen in section as the dark
jagged line of demarcation, wo succeed in exposing the surface of separa-
tion, we perceive that it is a true stylolith formation, i. e. that numerous
particles of the upper deposit have sunk into the lower, forming a number
of cones

' A. Rothpletz, Geologisch'palftontologische Monographic der Yilzer-Alpen ; Falaonto-
graphica, XXXIIl, p. 66, pi. zv, fig. 17. Bischof has shown what weighty grounds there
are for the belief that carbonate of lime is not precipitated in the sea without the
assistance of organisms ; Loretz has observed foraminiferae in thin slices, surrounded in
like manner by zones of radiate structure ; Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Oes., 1878, XXX,
p. 412, pi. xviii, fig. 11.

* E. Suess uiid E. von Mojsisovics, Studien fiber die Gliederung der Trias- und
Jurabildungen in den Ostlichen Alpen ; II, Die Gebirgsgruppe des Osterhomes, Jahrb.
k; k. geol. Beichs., 1868, XVIII, pp. 167-200.

* These sutures may be seen in the polished faces of blocks of upper Jurassic and
lower Cretaceous limestone used in the buildings of upper Italy, but here, so far as
I have observed them, they only separate beds of the same nature. A bed is seen on the
Osterhom (No. 22 in the list in Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichs., 1868, p. 172) which consists, at
its base, of a reddish brown ; above, of a grey layer. The lower layer (a) contains many
organic remains, including corals, and the upper grey layer (b) penetrates from above



264


MESOZOIC SEAS


[PAKTin

We now come to the last and most important of these structures, the
partings. The bedding-planes are usually characterized by the presence
of fin. argillaceous matter, foreign to the rock. The localities where these
intercalations or partings occur are, however, somewhat difficult to reach,
and I cannot positively affirm that they are always present. On the
Osterhom, south of the Wolfgang-See, thin streaks of lustrous coal formed
of drifted stems of plants make a rare appearance here and the're in the
uppermost beds of the Plattenkalk, not far below the lowest beds of t^e
Bhaetic series. The partings are formed of black bituminous shale, con-
taining remains of Ganoids, and numerous scale-like leaves and twigs of
Arawsarites alpijius. Notwithstanding the occasional layers of coal dis-
tributed through it, the limestone with its pale colour, its Megalodon^ and
corals, presents a most striking contrast to the black shales with their
fishes and terrestrial plants. These intercalations are continued towards
the west. ■ Von Ammon has described them in detail from the neighbour-
hood of Partcnkirchen in Bavaria ^ At Seefeld in Tyrol petroleum has
long been obtained from these fish-bearing partings, and the drops of
‘ Saint Hubert’s oil ’ which are sometimes seen floating on the water of the
springs come from these beds. On the Osterhom these partings are
repeated several times in succession in the pale limestone ; a little higher
and then between the beds of this limestone we perceive the first calcareous
shales containing bivalves, such as in Swabia characterize the littoral
development of the Bhaetic series.

These beds themselves have at first more or less the ' character of
partings; they increase in thickness, but the pale limestone continues to
alternate with them in isolated bands; the whole series grows darker in
colour, the clastic elements increase in importance; step by step as we
ascend in the series, the mollusca of the deeper water preponderate more
and more over those of the coast, until at length we find ourselves in the
midst of the pelagic development of the Bhaetic series, yet once again
the white limestone with Lithodendron makes its appearance in two beds,
together 60 feet thick, and then finally the dark layers of the Bhaetic.

fairly deep into the cylindrical cavities of these corals. An analysis kindly made by
Dr. C. Natterer shows:


Water

. (a) 0-04

(6) 0-05

Insoluble in hydrochloric acid

0'26

1-64

Iron, traces of phosphoric acid

0-13

0-80

CaCOj .

. 55-76

55-10

MgCO,

. 44-18

42-76


100-32

99-85


The two beds, so different in appearance, are 'therefore both true dolomites and differ
only in the quantity of clay and iron they contain.

* L. von Ammon, Die Gastropoden des Hauptdolomites und des Plattenkalkes der
Alpen ; Abh. zool.*min. Ver. Regensburg, 1878, XI, pp. 46-55.



266


0 H.V 13 BONE BEDS IN THE PLATTENKALK

• .!

Thus we start. with the result thai the first Bhaetic intercalations in
ths white limettones and dolomites are not deposits of the deep sea ; they
are characterized on the contrary by a littoral fauna. • ,

Another' example of the succession, quite as , striking as that of the
Osterhom, has been described by Zugmayr in lower Austria K

Close to the mill at Waldegg in the Fiestingthal, where the thickness
of the Plattenkalk is estimated as at least 1,000 meters, reddish marl
appears as partings in the beds near the summit ; these fill up the trifiing
depressions in the upper surface of the beds, and sometimes unite together
to form thin continuous layers. They contain numerous scales, teeth of
Gyrolepis, Sargodon, Saurichthys, Acrodus, and other fishes, and represent
the bone bed which accompanies the Rhaetic series in its littoral develop-
ment. They are repeated four or five times at least between the hard
limestone beds. Next follows hard limestone, again with Megalodus,
then a parting nearly two feet thick, with Rhaetic mollusca of a littoral
character ; again limestone, and another reddish layer with a bone bed, and
then, after some closing alternations, the representatives of the rising
Rhaetic sea, increasing continually in depth. It would be superfluous to
multiply examples. The presence of the marls and red shards, the heaping
together, of the various kinds of limestone fragments, and perhaps also
the encrusting sinter, all combine to show that the surface of some
of the beds of the Plattenkalk was uncovered by. the sea, exposed for
a while to the air, and then again submerged. With the appearance
of the Rhaetic shells we observe an increasing proportion of detrital
sediments.

In the succession of the Osterhom several facies may be distinguished,
which represent so many different bathymetric stages in the Rhaetic sea.
The first of these is the Swabian facies: a bone bed, layers with Mytilus
and Taeniodon, with Avicvla contorta, but without brachiopods. It is
succeeded by the Carpathian facies with Avicula contorta, Terebratula
gregaria, Ostrea Haidingeri. Then comes the Kossen facies with
numerous brachiopods, such as Spirigera oxycolpos', and last of all the
Salzburg facies with Choristoceras Marshi and Avicula speciosa.

The first three members of this series are found also at several localities
in the north-eastern Alps. Schldnbach has described them at Kossen;
they occur on the slopes of the Scesa plana in the Vorarlberg, as is shown
by collections which Escher made in his time and presented to me, while
in other parts of Vorarlberg the Carpathian facies seems to close the series.
Stoppani has traced these deposits with great care along the whole of the
limestone zone of the Italian Alps, and has divided them into two groups —
a lower, consisting of shales and shelly limestones, the facies of which is

* H. Zugmayer, Ueber bonebedartige Vorkommnisae im Dachsteinkalke dea Pieating-
Uudes ; Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reicha., 1875, XXV, pp. 79-88.



266 MESOZOIC SEAS [p>BTm

purely Swabian ; and an upper, the beds of Azzarola, the facies of which
ia as distinctly Carpathian

, The Swabian facies, maintaining a distinctly littoral character, extends
far beyond the region of the Alps. At the most remote locality in Europe,
Linksfield in Sutherland, it is only known in scattered blocks. From
Scotland it extends into the north-east of Ireland, and is continued thence
across the counties of Nottingham, Warwick, Worcester, Gloucester, and
Somerset, to Dorset. Some obscure littoral patches occur on the coast of
Scania ; it is found over a large part of France, and the whole of central
Germany. The Carpathian facies is far more restricted in its distribution.
It scarcely extends beyond the region of the great folded mountains, but is
known in the Jura, throughout the whole course of the Alps and the
Carpathians, in the Apennines and in Corsica. It presents itself in typical
development at Meillerie on the lake of Geneva (Favre), near the fall of
NUnenen on the Stockhom (Brunner), and south of Hindelang between the
nier and the Lech (Escher and Merian). The region of the Ebssen facies
is still more restricted. It is found in the north-east Alps, at several places
in the Carpathians^ and extends as far as Bukowina^. Sometimes the
brachiopods of this zone lie together in dense masses in the light-red lime-
stone of the Starhemberg beds, which occur only in the north-east Alps,
as is the case also with the Salzburg facies, which has been less studied.

Thus in the Rhaetic scries of the Alps, the littoral beds occupy the
lowest position, beneath all the other subdivisions ; at the same time they
attain their greatest distribution over Europe.

The upper beds of the Flattenkalk in the Osterhom wore deposited
during a series of oscillations with a preponderant positive movement.
The preponderance, however, was so slight that the limestone was
uncovered by the sea after its deposition. It remained exposed to the air
during the whole of the negative recurrence and the corresponding part of
the next positive phase (—e/to + kl, II, p. 25). As the periods of sub-
mergence became more and more prolonged, terrigenous sediment made its
appearance, consisting, however, not of sand, but of clay, and with it a
littoral molluscan fauna. With the persistence of the positive movement
the Swabian facies was replaced first by the Carpathian, and then by the
Eossen facies, so rich in brachiopods. At the same time the whole of the
central European sea advanced further and further beyond its previous
bounds. While, in the Alps, beds with the Eossen facies accumulated in

* U. SchlOnbach, Verb. k. k. geol. Reiebs., 1867, p. 211 ; A. Stoppani, Essai sur les
conditions g4n4rales deg couebes k Avicula contorta et sur la constitution g^olog^que et
paleontologique speciale de ces mSmes couebes en Lombardie, 4to, Milano, 1861, and
supplement, 1863. Lepsius bas described a Cjrena of tbe Swabian facies from tbe south
Alps wbicb points to fresb or brackisb water; cf. bis Das westlicbe SQd-iytol, 4to,
Berlin, 1878, p. 860 ; tbe stratified succession, op. cit., p. 102.

* Its occurrence near Taormina in Sicily bas been recently disputed.



OH. VI] DEPTHS OP THE EHAETIC SEA 267

deep water over the now completely buried Plattenkalk, elsewhere, as on
the distant shores of England and Scotland, littoral beds were deposited.
These continually advanced inland, characterized by the same bone bed and
the same fossils as are to be found in the eastern Alps, where they occur
either in the partings of the light-coloured Plattenkalk, or in the beds
immediately above this stage.

If wo ascend the foot of the Osterhom to about 200 meters above the
first intercalation of the Swabian fabies, we shall still find ourselves among
comparatively deep-sea deposits, here represented by the layers rich in
brachiopods. The positive excess of the oscillations must consequently
have amounted to more than 200 meters, otherwise none but littoral beds
would have been deposited on the site of the Osterhom. Hence (Pos. -I- a
-H«r— Neg.)>200 meters (II, p. 220). This positive movement manifests
itself in the littoral regions by a transgression which has been traced by
Hdbert and Martin over the whole of the south of the Central Plateau of
France, from the valley of the Rhone through the departments of Ard^he,
Qard, Lozbre, Corrbze, and Dordogne, as well as over the north in the
Nibvre^ C6te-d’Or, and Sadne-et-Loire. This led Hubert to conclude that
the Central Plateau had undergone a gradual subsidence in the Rhaetic
period In England, also, signs of this transgression are not wanting, and
it may have left its mark in still more distant localities.

Thus, on the lake of Geneva we find, according to Favre, the Carpathian
facies l 3 dng at a higher level than the Swabian ^ ; in like manner in England,
the Rhaetic stage, where it is best known, as in Somersetshire and on the
borders of the Severn, as well as further north in Nottinghamshire, consists
of sandstone with one or more layers of bone bed, and it is not till we pass
a little above this that shales, thin seams of limestone, and the mollusca of
Swabian facies make their appearance \

Our study of the numerous observations made on the stratified succes-

’ E. Hubert, Les Mera anciennes et lean rivages dans le baasin de Paris, 8vo, 1857 ;
J. Martin,' Zone i, Avicttla coniotia ou l^ltage Rhdtien, 8vo, Paris, 1865, in particular
■p. 175.

3 A. Favre, M6moire sur les terrains liasique et keupdrien de la Savoie ; Mdm. Soc. phys.
et hist. nat. Geneve, 1859, XY, a, pp. 112 and 181.

* T. Wright, Monograph of the Lias Ammonites, 'Palae. Soc., 1878, p. 5 et seq. ;
E. Wilson, The Rhaetics of Nottinghamshire, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1882, XXXVII,
pp. 451-456. As early as 1860 Mr. C. Moore, of Ilminster, ivss good enough to send me
all the Rhaetic specimens of his collection, and Mr. T. Davidson, of Brighton, and
Mr. T. Wright, of Cheltenham, have kindly furnished me with much information on this
subject. A journey to England completed my acquaintance with the deposits of that
country. My object was to obtain a general idea of the' Rhaetic sea. A deeper know-
ledge of the facts served to enlarge the task ; my kind friends, Davidson, Moore and
Wright, as well as Escher and Oppel, are long since dead, and it is only noil that I am
at last able to give here my final results. Diacina Cellensia from the Bttiger-Alpe,
Mariazell, and Diaeina Toumakendi, Forbes, from Frome near Bristol, are identical.
Oppel also sent me specimens of this species from Reit im Winkel.



268


HESOZOIO SEAS


[PABT m

sion and distribution of the Rhaetic series has now advanced so f^r as to
enable us to form some idea of the processes whi(di accompanied the
apparition of this new marine fauna, and to recognize and distinguish the
signs of positive movement; on the one hand in the middle of the sea
basins, and on the other in the littoral regions. At the same time we
perceive that the dominant positive movement was not local, but extended
as far as it is possible to pursue our investigations. Neither was it a sudden
event, but oscillatory and slow.

The presence of the red shards, which reveal the influence of the
atmosphere, and the partings with fish and terrestrial, plants have not,
however, hitherto been observed except in the Plattenkalk. We do not
possess such evidence for all the beds, some hundreds in number, of which
it is built up. It is possible that each bed corresponds to an emergence
followed by a marine recurrence, but this is by no means certain. Indeed
certain important facts are opposed to such a supposition ; as for instance
the observations already made on the splitting of coal seams (II, p. 245).
The Carboniferous limestone beds are obviously formations of a similar
kind to those of the Rhaetic epoch. The Fusulina of the upper Carboni-
ferous limestone of the southern Alps have been drifted together into beds,
in precisely the same way as the Qyroporella of the Rax- Alp. The paralic
seams which occur between the beds of Fusulina limestone in the United
States occupy the position of partings, and it is asserted of them that they
unite together as they proceed landwards into larger, continuous, and
probably autochthonous beds. Observations of this kind point far more
to a periodic increase in the transport of sediment, than to extensive
displacements of the strand-line. The tranquil deposition of the Gannister
series, the marine beds 'of no great thickness or extent in which the gaping
bivalve shells have sometimes been found (II, p. 240), indicate on the
contrary, as it seems to me, a transitory positive phase.

Thus we are confronted by many an unsolved problem, and may almost
envy our successors the discoveries which are reserved for them.

The importance of a* careful study of the partings has at all events been
rendered clear. Walcott sees in the Galena limestone of Illinois and
Wisconsin the representative of the Utica slates, which were deposited in
the east and north of the Silurian region of the United States; the transition
is accomplished by the multiplication of the shaly partings in the lime-
stone ^ The Devonian limestone Og-^ of Prague is divided into numerous
regular beds by clayey partings, and Klvaiia regards the superimposed
Tentaculite shales Gg^ as merely the continuation of the partings of Og^ *.

* C. D. Walcott, The Utica Slates and related Formations ; Trans. Albany Instit., 1879,
X, 38 pp., pi.

* J. Klvana, Ueber die Silurfichichten der beiden Moldau-Ufer, sQdlich von Prag;
Verb. k. k. geol. Reichs., 1883, pp. 37-43. F. Xatzer has subsequently examined these



269


OH. VI] OSCILLATIONS IN THE LIAS

It thus becomes easy to understand why Drasche, in view of the prevailing
theories on coral reefs, was astonished to find the coralliferous limestone of
Luzon, which extends-up to considerable heights, divided into regular b^,
and it is not to be wondered at that he should even put the question whether
this apparent stratification, which also occurs in' reefs rising but a few feet
out of the sea, might not result from a periodic intermittence of the coral
growth \

The Megalodus limestone and the Rhaetic series are not known outside
the European area, except in the Him&laya and the outer chains of the
Hindu Eiish, in particular at mount Sirban, near Abbotabad. In addition, an
isolated Rhaetic fossil was found among the specimens brought home by
Payer from east Greenland. With the exception of the last-named locality
the marine beds of the Rhaetic did not extend beyond that region which
we will term, with Neumayr, the Central Mediterranean, or beyond that
extension of it towards the south-west of Europe, whic^ had already come
into existence as early as the Trias.

Plant-bearing beds of Rhaetic age, on the other hand, are known in
many places; e. g. in Siberia, Turkestan, Tongking, Australia, in the
Oondw&na and Karoo series, in the Argentine Republic, and in the eastern
part of the United States.

In the coast region of the Pacific, again, no marine Rhaetic deposits so far
as I am aware have yet been observed.

Indeed we have no knowledge at present of the occurrence anywhere
of a rich marine fauna of this period. The Rhaetic beds with which we are
acquainted contain a fauna of a somewhat restricted character. All those
various groups of cephalopoda which occur in the Trias and reappear in
the lias should also be found in the Rhaetic, but strange to say they are'
not, and we know not where to search for them. When, at last, in the
uppermost part of the series a cephalopod does make its appearance; it is
the singular genus Choristiceras.

3. Progress of the positive movement in the Jurassic period. We have
ascended step by step from the beds of the PJattenkalk through the
Rhaetic oscillations, until we have reached a state of things in which open
sea occupied the place of the eastern Alps, and the strand was gradually
moving outwards till it reached Scania and the north-east of Scotland.

Now, we propose to follow the further oscillations of the Lias and the
later stages of the Jurassic system. Neumayr, bringing to' his assistance
all the recorded observations at his disposal, has attempted to follow over

rocks, and owing to the absence of Tentaculites in these intermediate beds has not
confirmed this opinion, but the results coincide as regards the fact that the clay appears
in repeated interruptions; F. Katzer, Ueber schieferige Einlagen in deh Kalken der
Barrande'sehen Etage Oqx, Sitzber. k. bOhm. Oes. Wiss., 188'6, pp. 4C6-472.

* B. Ton Drasche, Luzon, pp. 39 and 43. The same occurs on Cebu; Abella, Isla de
Cebd, p. 127.



270


MESOZOIC SEAS


PABim


the whole face of the earth the geographical changes which marked this
period. The unexpected result of this laborious investigation was to show
that to the Lias a very limited distribution appertains, while the approach-
ing close of the middle Jurassic is marked by a transgression of surpassing
interest and extent ^

It is clear, to begin with, that the oscillations persisted into the Liiw,
Here the two regions in proximity to the ancient coast, i. e. Scotland and
Scania, again furnish important evidence.

In England, the further we advance' towards, the north, the more
frequent become the intercalations of detrital and plant-bearing sediment
in the Lias and other members of the Jurassic system, and they
attain their greatest development in the isolated fragments which are
preserved in Scotland, partly by faulting down, and partly by protection
beneath basaltic sheets. Rightly to interpret these downthrown remnants,
we must here, as in the Rhine valley, first admit that these now isolated
patches are the remains of a once continuous mantle, which extended high
over the whole of Scotland and its ancient horsts. Judd had already
adopted this view, as early as 1873, and was thus led by the same path as
Benecke in his study of Alsace, to a correct inteipretation of the -facts ^ '

In the west of Scotland, as in the isle of Skye, for example, the Limi is
still complete, but the argillaceous partings of the limestone beds have
become much thicker. To the north-east, in Sutherland, it is so no longer;
detrital, plant-bearing beds have taken the place of the lower subdivisions;
and only the upper part of the lower lias and the base of the middle lias
are represented by marine beds. It would seem, therefore, that it is these
two latter horizons which attained the widest distribution in Europe.

The case is the same in Scania; littoral beds of Rhaetic age are followed
by a series containing shells, which is only slightly littoral in character,
and these are the sole representatives of the basal part of the Lias : the
purely marine beds make their appearance on the same horizon as in
Sutherland ^

* M. Neumayr, Die geogtaphitche Verbreitung der Juraformation ; Denkschr. k. Akad.
Wiss. Wien, 1885, L, pp. 57-142, maps.

* J. W. Judd, The Se&ondary Rocks of Scotland, Quart Joum. Geol. Soc., 1878, XXIX,
pp. 97-197, and 1878, XXXIY, pp. 660-741, maps ; for the west, also J. Bryce, On the
Jurassic Bocks of Skye and Raasay, op. cit, 1878, XXIX, pp. 817-851.

* B. Lundgren, UndersOkningar Ofrer Molluskfaunan i Sveriges ftldre Mesozoiska
Bildningar ; Lunds TTniv. Arsskrift, XVII, 4to, Lund, 1881. The same horizons which
have the widest extension in Scotland and Scania also seem to be encountered in the
Alps as the material filling fissures in the Plattenkalk. OxynoUeeraa oxynotus is of
frequent occurrence in north Scotland ; cf. Qeyer, Ueber die liasisohen Cephalopoden
des Hierlatz bei Hallstatt, Abh. k. k. geol. Reichs., XII, 'No. 4, 1886, p. 218 et seq. ; by
the same, Ueber die Lsgerungsverh&ltnisse der Hierlatzschichten, Jahrb. k. k. geol.
Reichs., XXXYI, 1886, pp. 216-294 ; F. Wilhner, Znr heteropischen Differenzimng des
alpinen Lias, tom. cit, passim. The fissures described by Wright in the south-east of
England are of different age, as are the Tertiary fissures m, m. Fig. 84, 1, p. ‘257.



271


W Tx] OSCILLATIONS IN THS JURASSIC

• ?

We now enter the middle Juraanc. Lr Franconia and Swabia, the
marine sedimente follow one another, bed after bed, in unduturbed snocee-
aiom This region was not subjected to negative recurrences. Indications
of these are more evident in the north of France. H^rt commenced to
trace them out in. detail as early as 1857, and he then recognized that the
lias on the Sarthe 'is incomplete, and that at various horizons in the
Jurassic hard beds present themselves with a water-worn, and indeed
polished, surface perforated by boring shells, and he came to the conclusion
that the Jurassic sea had enlarged its bounds by oscUlatory movements up
to the epoch of the Kelloway stage In Normiandy, which I visited in
1866 under the friendly guidance of MM. Deslongchamps, the facts
have been very exactly described by Eugbne Deslongchamps. The Lias is
incomplete, and its lower zones, speaking generally, appear to have been
deposited in the north of the country only. Within the middle Jurassic,
however, we may observe at various levels beds with a worn and perforated
surface, known in the locality as ‘chiens,’ which indicate a temporary
withdrawal of the sea. As early as 1864 Eugbne Deslongchamps was led
to conclude that during the Lias the sea in this region gradually extended
its limits, and then, as the period approached its close, withdrew to a great
distance; after this shsillow water supervened, then another regressioif
(Trigonia navie), followed by a fresh extension {Harpocera$ Murchiaonae).
Above the beds of the inferior Oolite a worn surface, drilled by Lithodomus,
makes its appearance, and with this a new positive movement is indicated,
which continued, advancing by slow degrees, up to the great Callovian
submergence (Stephanoceraa max:rocep?iahi/m) ^

The Jurassic deposits are continued across the Channel to Dorsetshire.
The marine series in England is at first fairly complete, but towards the
north there appear, as we have already seen, intercalated beds of detrital
material, and these continually increase in thickness as they approach the
mouth of some river in the north. In Lincolnshire the infiuence of this
river has extended so far that one of the intercalations is to be seen filling
up channels of erosion in the underlying bed. In Yorkshire the thickness
of the detrital sediments has enormously increased, and a considerable part
of the marine middle Jurassic has been already replaced $y them. Ramsay
describes eight small seams of coal, each with an underclay, into which it

* Hubert assamed then that a retreat of the sea occurred after the Kelloway, i. e.
a negative movement, but this view was probably based on the appearance of the beds
which dovetail (?) into one another, and owing to the general denudation of the country
form concentric zones ; this arrangement was formerly regarded as an indication of the
diminished extension of the sea ; E. Hdbert, Les Mers anciennes et leurs rivages dans Ijs
bassin de Paris, 8vo, Paris, 1857. The grey limestones of Venice were obseryed on the
Sarthe; G. Boehm, ZeitsChr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1887, XXXIX, pp. 205-211.

* E. Endes-Deslongchamps, Etudes sur les dtages jurassiques infirieurs de la Nor-
mandie ; Mdm. Soc. linn. Norm., 1865, XIV, pp. 1-296, in particular p. 279 et seq.



272


MESOZOIC SEAS


[PABXm*

is said to send roots; these are interbedded in the plant-bearing series on
the horizon of the Inferior Oolite. Finally, in the west of Scotland the
whole series of the lower Oolites is resolved into a series of repeatedly
alternating fluviatile and littoral beds, and it is not until the Oxfordian
stage is reached that a marine deposit makes its appearance. In Suther-
land the marine development begins again with the Kelloway \

Let us now turn our attention to the south.

The deep borings made from time to time in London and its neighbour-
hood have shown that in this locality the Lias and Inferior Oolite are
absent; the beds immediately superposed on the Palaeozoic formations
begin with the Bath Oolite, which is followed by the Kelloway and the.
other marine stages of the upper Jurassic. It is precisely the same with
the series superimposed on the Devonian reef at Marquise, near Boulogne,
which also begins with the Bath Oolite (II, p. 92).

Scania tells us nothing relevant ; since the beds above the middle Lias
have been removed by denudation, some loose fragments of the Kelloway
have however been foynd.

The scanty exposures of Jurassic which present themselves beneath the
Quaternary deposits along the north coast of Germany reveal the presence
of Lias ; and it has been reached by borings near Cammin. Still further
'east only higher beds are kiiown, and in the boring at Purmallen near
Memel the Kelloway beds were met with 95 meters beneath the surface,
resting on red sandstone, which belongs probably to the Trias From
here the Kelloway extends towards Popilany, on the Windau in Lithuania.

Thus the traces of -a positive movement are manifest in the north of
Scotland, beneath London, near Boulogne, and in the Baltic provinces;
and we recognize a transgression beginning sometimes mth the Oolite,
sometimes with the Kelloway, and sometimes again with the Oxford stage,
but in every case the Lias and Inferior Oolite are missing.

We will return now to Franconia.

The Trias deposits, as we trace them to the south, disappear on the
western border of the Bohemian mass. The Lias is visible as far as
Regensburg. As ^n as we have passed the point where the Danube
fault approaches the border of the ancient mass, that .is, in the region of
the marginal fracture which runs from Regensburg to Passau, the Jurassic
series’ reappears, beginning with the lower stages of the Oolites. Beyond
Passau every trace of the Jurassic has vanished, and it is not till we reach
the far-distant locality of Olmiitz, north of BrUnn, that we discover

, ’ J. W. Judd, The Geology of Rutland, Mem. Geol. Surv. England and Wale8,‘870,
1875, p. 33 et seq. ; A. C. Ramsay, The Physical Geology and Geography of Great Britain,
5th ed.,8vo, 1878, p. 194.

* C. Grewingk, Das Bohrloch von Purmallen bei Memel ; Sitzber. nat. Gesell. Dorpat,

• 105. Sitzung, 8vo, 1878.



OH. VI] MIDDLE JURASSIC TRANSGRESSION 278

lying upon the Devonian a patch of Jurassic, the lowermost beds of which,
according to Neumayr and Uhlig, correspond to the upper Bathonian and
the Eelloway •

Again for a great distance every trace of Jurassic is absent from the
border of the ancient mass, and it does not reappear until we reach the
neighbourhood of Cn^w. Here and in the adjacent parts of Poland
the stratigraphical relations are very remarkable.* The Trias is present ; the
Rhaetic series is represented in one locality by plant-bearing beds; the
lias is missipg; sandstones and clays occur containing marine fossils of
the lower stagey of the Oolites. At Balin, west of Cracow, the faunas of the
Bath Oolite and Kelloway are richly represented, but it is the Kelloway
stage alone which is continued towards the east together with the upper
series of the Jurassic.

Next, let us enter Russia, and take for our guidance the works of
Nikitin *.

The transgression begins in Poland with the lower Kelloway; this
stage is found in the government of Kiev; in Ekaterinoslav, Kursk, and
Orel, the Kelloway has not yet been subdivided ; the lower Kelloway also
occurs at Elatma in the government of Tambov, in Riazan, in the north-
west of Simbirsk, and in parts of Nishni Novgorod ; it runs through the
east of Kostroma into the basins of the Vytchegda and the Petchora, and
thus reaches the Arctic Ocean. At the same time it extends through the
east and south-east from Samara to Orenburg.

Contemplating this long and comparatively narrow zone of lower Kelloway
we are led to conclude that the sea must have entered the eroded basin of
a great river. The extension of the Jurassic sea did not cease with this
stage, however ; the middle Kelloway extends still further, and enters the
governments of Moscow, Tver, and Yaroslav. To the west of Kostroma the
series begins with the upper Kelloway or the lower Oxfordian’. At
Kharkov the marine series, resting on plant-bearing beds, does -not begin
before the lower Oxfordian.

We will now leave Europe, to examine the far-distant and isolated
patches of Jurassic which are presented by the table-lands of Africa and
India.

* V. Uhlig, Die Jurabildungen in der Umgebong von Briinn; Beitr. pal. Geol.
OeBt.-nng., edited by £.* v. Mojsisovics and M. Neumayr, 4to, 1882, 1, p. ISO. These are
the ‘ beds of Zeitlam ' of the neighbourhood of Ortenburg, at the same time the equivalents
of the beds of Balin near Cracow.

* S. Nikitin, Ueber die Beziehungen zwischen der nissischen und der westeiiropiliscbeii ’

Juraformation, Neues Jahrb. Min., 1886, II, pp. 205-245 ; Neumayr, op. cit., 1887, I, '
pp. 70-88. '

’ S. Nikitin, Die Cephalopodenfauna der Jurabildungen des Gouvemementz Kostroma,
Verb. ruB8.-k. min. Qes. St. Petersburg, 1884, p. 74 ; and Allgemeine geologische Karte
von Rnssland, Blatt 71, M4m. Com. g4ol. Russie, II, No. 1, 1885, p. 200.

SOLUS u T



274


MESOZOIC SEAS


[PABiF.in


At the south foot of the Great Hermon, near Madjel-eah-Shems, in
Syria, the Jurassic system is limited to a very restricted area. The lowest
visible member corresponds, according to ifoetling, with the lower Ox-
fordian *.

The nearest locality at which the Jurassic is next^jenown to crop out
from beneath the great mantle of Cretaceous limestone is Antalo, in the
north-east of Abyssinia (I, p. 368). Aubry, who has somewhat recently
travelled through the region in which th’e Blue Nile takes its rise, has
furnished us with a detailed description of the geology. The sheet of
Cretaceous limestone which covers the north-east of the Sahara does not
extend into Abyssinia. It doubtless comes to an end near Khartoum, and*
the Archaean foundation is exposed throughout the Soudan, and accoi^ng
to Schweinfurth as far as the land of Niam-Niam. On the coast region it
is visible as far as Massowah. This Archaean region is crowned by the
high plateau of Abyssinia, consisting like the Sahara of flat-lying beds, but
with a different stratified succession. The lowest member of the series is
the thick aanddoTue of 'Adigrat, which extends in an arc from the foot of
the table-land, probably starting from Adigrat and entering the interior as
far as the sources of the Blue Nile. It is white or sometimes bluish, and is
overlain by a yellowish crystalline limestone, whi6h contains little bivalve
shells and intercalated gypsum and dolomite. This is succeeded by the
Antalo limestone, of Jurassic age, with marine fossils; Blandford dis-
covered it at Antalo ; it is visible again on the slopes of the valley of the
upper course of the Blue Nile, and probably also in the valley of the
Guibi^ in Kaffa. * Above this rest beds of 'sandstone and gypsum, not so
thick as the preceding, and the summit of the table-land, 2500 to 2800
meters above the sea, is formed of vast outflows of "lava ‘‘‘.

It is to this mantle of volcanic rocks that we are indebted in all
probability for the preservation of the Jurassic 'succession in Abyssinia,
represented in patehes which arc probably the remnants of once very ex-
tensive beds, and still even at the present day prolonged fairly far to the
south. The marine series, according to the comparative studies of DouvilH
again begins with the Bathonian stage, and probably extends into the
upper Jurassic as far as the horizon of the Kimmeridge.

To the southern extension of the Abyssinian series we may perhaps
refer the exposures of upper Jurassic made known by Fraas and Beyrich
at Mombassa on the coast of Suaheli (I, p. 400).

Another patch of flat-bedded marine Jurassic occurs at Cutch in India,
there also partly protected by a more recent mantle of lava. It is con-

‘ Diene’r, Libanon, p. 25 ; F. Noetling, Der Jura am Hermon, 4to, Stuttgai't, 1887.

\ Aubry; Observations g(iologii;[ues sur les pays Danakils, Somalis, le royaumo du Chou
et les Pays Gallas, Bull. Soc. gciol. de Fr., 1886, 3* ser., XIV, pp. 201-222, geol. map ;
H. Douville, Examen des fossiles raiipcrtes du Choa par M. Aubry, tom. cit., pp. 223-241.



276


CH.VI]. EXTENSION OP UPPER JURASSIC SEA

tinned in fi series of outliers far to the north-north-east in the plain of
Bajputana (I, p. 414). Waagen’s investigations show that the lowest
member of this marine series, the Putchum group, also corresponds - to Ijie
Bath Oolite ; Douvilld has pointed out the resemblance of the Antalo lime-
stone of Abyssinia to this group. Above it comes the Kelloway stage with
StqpihaTvocerm macrocephalum, and then a further series of marine stages
presenting a most remarkable correspondence with the upper Jurassic of
Europe. They are probably continued into the Salt range .

It is unnecessary to repeat what has already been said above regarding
the loss exactly known beds, probably of middle Jurassic age, which occur
in Madagascar and on the east coast of India; I will only recall the fact
that in West Australia the lowest marine deposits so far known also belong
to the middle Jurassic (II, p. 189).


Golgis. Abai’ or tlio Blue Nile.



Fia. 28. The valley of the Blue Nile (after Aubry).

I. Volcanic rocks, 300 meters thick ; 2. Yellowish crystalline limestone with Trigonia, 100
meters ; 3. Grey marly limestone witli Modiola aapera, Terebratula, Ceromya, 400 meters ;
4. Yellowish crystalline limestones, with layers of dolomite, gypsum, and small bivalve shells,
^0 meters; 5. White and blue sandstone, sometimes micaceous, with intercalations of
green and variegated clay, 500 meters.

The results of our inquiry may be summarized as follows : —

At the beginning of the Rhaetic period the sea, in the region wo have
had under consideration, occupied a narrow area confined to a part of the
Alps and the great ranges of Asia. Its level rose in Europe by a series of
oscillations ; its waters extended finally over a great part of central Europe.
The oscillations persisted throughout the Lias ;. at the opening days of the
Lias the domain of the sea was diminished, it was then enlarged and again
reduced. It gained nothing in the lower stages of the middle Jurassic ;
but, with the advent of the Bathonian, which no doubt is not over sharply
separated by its fauna from the Kelloway stage, the strand-line rose far
and wide. The Bathbni<an lies on the downthrown Armorican arc beneath
the soil of London, and on the Devonian at Boulogne ; with it commences
the great transgression over Abyssinia and the north-west of India. The
boundary of the sea enlarged still further during the deposition of the

* W. Waagen, Jurassic Fauna of Kutch : I. The Ceplialoi)oda ; Mem. Geol. Surv. India,
ser. IX, 1, 1873, p. 225.


276 ’ * MESOZOIC .SEAS [PABTm

•

Eelloway ; in the extreme north of Scotland ihis lies on the flnvjatile coal-
bearing beds of Sutherland, it extends over the -lower Jurassia stages of
Pcpaerania, proceeding towards Memel and as far as Lithuania ; and while the
Idas of Franconia already comes to an end at Regensburg and the other stages
of the middle Jurassic disappear in their turn, the sea of the lower Kelloway
stage extended from Poland past Kiev, forming a long belt on the western
side of the Ural and so reached the Arctic Ocean ; at the same time, passing
Orenburg, it encroached on the eastern side of that chain. At this epoch
the Jurassic sea extended from the Petchora on the one hand to Sutherland
on the other, to Abyssinia and Cutch^and much further still to the south
and south-east. Withal the transgressive beds have preserved a hori-
zontality as undisturbed on the banks of the Petchora as on the Blue Nile ;
and Stephanoceras macrocqahalvm maintains its horizon in the Eelloway
from Brora in Sutherland to Outch in India.

This extraordinary extension did not, however, mark the culmination
of the positive movement ; the coasts became increasingly remote, and this
renders the determination of the new transgressions more and more diffi-
cult. The succeeding stages occupy, as far as can be seen, not only the
whole region covered by the Bathonian and Eelloway, but in Europe they
even extend beyond it.

Near Olmiitz the Eelloway stage and lower Oxfordian reached the
summits of the Devonian zone of the Sudetes; the upper Oxfordian and
the lower Eimmeridgian ascended over the summit of the Bohemian mass
and advanced across it into Saxony. Some slight remains of these trans-
gressive deposits are now to be. seen pinched in by the reversed fault which
borders the southern edge of the Biesengebirge and the Isergebirge (1,

p. 212).

In like manner, during the Eimmeridge epoch the sea coveied that
southern part of the Russian Platform which is cut through by the upper
Dniestr (I, p. 181) in eastern Galicia, and extended over the Devonian red
sandstone at the same time ; it also reached the Dobrudja and deposited the
horizontal limestone beds of the Eimmeridge on the upturned green
schists of the mountain fragments of Matchin, Hirsova, and Chernavoda,
extending as far as the Black sea; the limestone beds in all probability
proceed still further beneath the Bulgarian plain (I, p. 476).

The investigations of Russian geologists lend support to the cpnjectui^
that in this Case also the transgression of the lower Eelloway does not
mark the highest level attained by the strand. We have already men-
tioned the later transgressions which seem to have occurred during the
upper Eelloway and the Oxfordian. Whether the Eimmeridge stage
covered great surfaces in Russia as it did in Galicia and on the lower
Danube, extending beyond the limits of the Oxfordian, is however not
known. This stage, as we shall see directly, marks the last recognized sub-



qp.vi] RECESSION AT CLOSE OP JURASSIC 2W

mergence known Uf have occurred before a great change of conditions set
in, and it may therefore have been exposed to denudation in a still higher
degree than the other stages. Favlow, who has rendered such admirable
service by his studies of the Eimmeridge in Russia, describes its occurrence
at several localities in Simbirsk, as well as in the neighbourhood of Oren-
burg ; it also occurs according to Qourow on the shores of the Donetz, and
according to Levisson-Lessing at Nishni Novgorod. The fauna presents-
precisely the same characters as in the contemporaneous deposits of western
Europe; Exogyra virgvla, the little oyster so abundant in the Jura as to
have led to the creation of an independent sub-group, the ‘ Virgulian,’ and
well known also in the Kimmeridge of Spain, England, the whole of the
north of France and Hanover, as well as in the platy limestones of Ulm,
now likewise appears in Poland and in the south-east of Russia in com-
pany with many other characteristic species of the Kimmeridge fauna of
western Europe *.

With the close of the Kimmeridge a complete change of conditions set
in and affected the whole of Europe. Everywhere the sea receded. In
Russia a new marine fauna, alien to the west of Europe, made its appear-
ance, advancing from the north ; it marks the Volga stage. In India the
case is similar. Above the Katrol sandstone, which corresponds to the
European Kimmeridge, plant-bearing beds occur; then species of a non-
European fauna present themselves, proceeding out of the south ; this is the
fauna of the Uitenhage series of southern Africa.

We will now briefly review, so far as the evidence, in many respects
very incomplete, permits, the emergence of a part of central Europe, and
then the fresh transgressions, first coming from the north, and then finally
' from the south.

4. Negative phase and the beginning of the Gretaseons period. The
extent and thickness of the fresh-water deposits which occur in Europe
at the limit of the Jurassic and Cretaceous systems are too great not to
have given rise to frequent discussions of a general nature. In 1872,

. R. Godwin- Austen, in giving a general account of these beds, offered some
very suggestive remarks, which strongly recall those ideas on the succession
of sediments in cycles to which we have made frequent reference. He
believed that we could recognize in the northern hemisphere a recurrence
of the same physiced conditions after extremely long intervals of time.*
The marine series is again and again interrupted, over large areas, by
continental deposits, like the .Old Red sandstone for instance, the Coal-
measures of the Carboniferous system, and the fresh-water deposits of the
Weald.

. »

' A. Pavlow, Note sur Thistoire de la faun^ Kimmeridgienne de la Russie, Univ. de
Moscou, 8vo, 1886, 16 pp. ; by the Bame, Les Ammonites de la zone a Aspidoceras
acanthicum de Test de la Russie, M^m. Com. geol. Russie, II, No. 3, 1886.



278 MESOZOIC SEAS [partiii

In support of his views Godwin-Austen appealed to several of the
Weaklen areas. A great lake covered the south-east of England, extending
o^icr Kent, Sussex, and Hants ; it was continued -across the Channel into
the Boulonnais, and has left its traces in Oxfordshire and the isle of Wight.
Godwin-Austen gave as the minimum size of this lake a length of 190
kilometers taken from Portland to beyond Aylesbury, and a breadth of
*320 kilometers from Portland to the Boulonnais. Taking into account some
small patches of Wealden in the anticlinal of the Pays de Bray, we obtain
for the line from Wiltshire to beyond Beauvais a length of 400 kilometers.
Other traces of the deposit have also been found in the departments of
the Aube and the Jura. In the -Charentes another lake existed about
as large as lake Ladoga. A third in north Germany, about 190 kilometers
in length, reached from Ibbenbuhren through Osnabrlick to Hanover
and beyond. Finally, certain isolated patches of plant-bearing beds lying
on the Belgian coal-field are also assigned to the Wealden series^.

Subsequent observations have brought to light many new facts, and
with their aid I will now attempt to trace in broad outline the course
of events in western Europe.

The sea reigned over the whole region of the Alps and the Carpathians
during this period^. Deposits representing the Weald are known in Spain
and Portugal, and we must not omit to take them into account.’ But we
will consider first the regions best known ; these extend from the south-
east of England to the Jura mountains, and from the west coast of France
to the Harz. We shall depend for our most important data on Judd,
Meyer, and Topley in England ; H. Credner and Struckmann in Germany ;
Pelliit, Loriol, Cotteau, Jaccard, and Maillard in the east of France and the
Jura; and on Coquand in the west of France \

' ^ R. Godwin-Austen, Address to the Geological Section ; Rep. Brit. Assoc. Brighton,
1872, pp. 90-96.

2 The only exception is perhaps mont Salvens, a idiain of foothills' of the Freiburg
Alps, where blocks in the lower Neocoinian and denudation of the upper Jurassic
limestone beds may be quoted as indications of an interruption; V. Gil Heron, ,
Aper^u geologique syr les Alpes do Fribourg, Beitr* geol. Karte Schweiz, XII, 1873,
p. 108 et seq.

* J. W. Judd, On the Punfield Formation, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1871, XXVII,
pp. 207-227 ; C. J. A. Meyer, On the Wealden as a fluvio-lacustrine formation, op. cit.,
•1872, XXVIIT, pp. 243-255, and op. cit., -XXIX, 1873, pp. 70-76 ; W. Topley, The
Geology of the Weald, Mein. Geol. Surv., 1875, 8vo ; H. Credner, Ueber die Gliederung
der oberen Juraforuialion und der Wealdenbildung in N.-W. Deutschland, 8vo, Prag,
1863, et passim ; C. Struckmann, Die Wealdenbildungen der Umgegend von Hannover,
Hannover, 1880; by the same, Ueber den Parallelismus der hannover'sehen und dor
cnglischen oberen Jui-abildungen, Neues Jahrb. Min., 1881, pp. 77-102; by the same,
Die Portland-Bildungen der Umgegend von Hannover, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1887,
XXXIX, pp. 32-67 et passim ; P. de Loriol et £. Pellat, Monographie paleontologique et
geologique de I’ctage portlandien des environs de Boulogne-sur-Mer, Mem. Soc. phys.
hist. nat. Geneve, 1866, XIX, in particular p. 136 et seq. ; P. de Loriol et G. Cotteau,



OH. VI] GYPSUM OF. UPPER JURASSIC 279

• •

(а) The Kimmendge stage extends from Portugal through the whole
of the region considered here as far as Orenburg.

(б) In western Europe the Kimmeridge is succeeded by another marine
member of the Jurassic, the Portland stage. This always lies conformably
on the Kimmeridge,. but in Hanover, where its fauna is veiy varied,
74 per cent, of the lower Portland species are known in the preceding
Kimmeridge beds. The limit between the stages is by no means well
defined ; some geologists do not admit its existence ; the course of events
was therefore fairly undisturbed. In the upper beds of the Portland the
connexion with the Kimmeridge is less marked, and in England, as in
Germany and the Jura, brackish- water species, or such as are less sensitive
to a change in the composition of the water, to a certain extent pre-
dominate. In the Charentc, as in England, Hanover, and the ^t of
France and throughout the Jura, the shells of Corbvla injlexit and Cyrena
rugosa cover in millions what was once the flat bottom of a shallow sea,
apparently somewhat less salt than the Ocean.

But on the nppec Dniestr we again discover a whole .scries of Portland
fossils, including abundant examples of Corbvla inflexa; and the facts
elicited by Alth in his study of this fauna forbid us to assume that
a barrier separating eastern and western Europe was in existence at
this time*.

We have now reached the upper limit of the Portland represented by
the beds which are known in Hanover as the ‘ Einbeckhau.scr Plattcnkalk.’

At this point the great change set in.

. (c) The sea, which extended beyond the Volga at the time of the
Kimmeridge, and at least as far os the. Dniestr during the Portland, was
now so closely restricted that it did not pass beyond the region of the Alps
and G^rpathians, and indeed did not retain its hold on the Jura. In the
territory it had abandoned lagoons remained in which clay and gypsum,
with here and there rock-salt, were deposited.

In England these gypsiferous beds, which are always very poor in
organic remains, (ire never exposed at the surface ; but when in 1874

. Monographic paleontologique et geologique de I’ctage portlandien du departement do
I’Yonne, Bull. Soc. aci. hist. nat. Yonne, 1868, 2* sdr., I, in particular p. 241 ct seq. ;
E. Fellat, Emersion du sud et de Test du hassin parisien a la fin de la periode jurasaique,
etc.. Bull. Soc. g^l. de Fr., 1875-1876, 3* sdr., IV, pp. 364-369 ; by the same, Le Terrain
jurassique ipoyen et superieur du Bas-Boulonnois, op. cit., 1879-1880, 3® ser., VIII,
pp. 647-699 ; Loriol ot A. Jaccard, Etude g4ologique et palContologique de la formation
d’eau douce infracrctacee du Jura et^en particulier de Villers-le-Lac, Mem. Soc. phys.
hist. nat. Geneve, 1865, XVIII ; G. Maillard, Inverttibres du Furbeckien du Jura, Mdm.
Soc. pal^ont. Suisse, 1884, XI, 156 ^p., map, supplement in 1885, XII; H. Coquand,
Description physique, g4ologique, etc.*, du d4partement de la Charente, 8yo, Besanfon,
1, 1858.

* A. von Alth, Die Versteineningen des Nizniower Kalksteins ; Beitr. palilont. Geol.
Oesterr.-Ung., edited by M6jsisovics and Neumayr, 1882, 1, p. 330.



280


MESOZOIC SEAS


[PABim

a Iraring was made near the middle df the Weald, they were encountered
with a thickness of over 100 feet. They lie at the bottom of a basin,
probably as a lenticular mass, completely buried out of sight beneath
mora recent sediments

In noilih Germany they are known as the Miinder marls, and they are
frequently exposed at the surface as a conroquence of the folding which
has affected this region. The salt-beds underneath the city of Hanover,
which were passed through by a boring, belong to this series. The marls
attain a thickness of over 300 meters. . The resemblance they bear- to the
Keuper has been pointed out by Struckmann.

' A map of the Purbeck deposits in the Jura -constructed by Maillard
shows clearly that the course of events was the same there as in England.
Gypsiferous marls, but only 3 or 4 meters thick, were deposited above
the Portland over a part of the region now occupied by the Jura mountains,
chiefly between the- Doubs and the lake of Neuch&tel, and somewhat
further to the north-east and south-west; but the succeeding deposits
have a much wider extension, particularly towards the south-west, and if
the region had not been folded, the gypsum would form a lens buried out
of sight as in England.

Far to the west also, on the Charente, the gypsum has been laid
down over the Portland. In this case, we have before us only part of
a basin ; the rest is concealed, on the one hand by the Atlantic Ocean,
on the other by the transgression of the middle Cretaceous. It corre-
sponds to the southern border of the Armorican horst, which is followed
by the several members of the Mesozoic series in such a manner that
, successively younger members make their appearance as we proceed to the
south or south-west. Above the Portland lies first a bed of cavernous
limestone, about 1*6 meters thick, then 35 to 40 meters of gypsum accom-
panied by clay, with fish scales and fragments of wood. This bed of
gypsum . crops out in a zone striking to the - north-north-west, from
Ch&teauneuf west of Angoulcmc for a distance of 40 kilometers, and it
may be traced in isolated exposures through Rochefort to the point de
Chassiron, the northernmost promontory of the island of Ol^ron ; so that
its total length is more than 100 kilometers. The Gironde and the Atlantic
conceal the greater part of this basin, and its outline is unknown.

The remarkable negative movement, which introduced sfoch a complete
change of conditionei also brought about the separation of eastern fi'om

' It is trae that by very close observation we may recognize the border of the synclinal
of gypsunl, sometimes indicated by corronon of the surface of the Portland, sometimes as
a thin layer of clay, or otherwise ; see Blake, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1880, XXXVI,
p. 221 -, Andrews, op. cit., 1881, XXXTII, p. 249, also Girardot, Bull. Soc. g4ol. de Fr.,
1884-1885, 3* s4r., p. 755. Perhaps the so-callcd middle Portlandian of Boulogne is
to be referred here.



OH. VI] IMPOVERISHED JURASSIC FAUNA 281

western Europe^ and for a considerable interval each of these regions was
the scene of independent events. This episode corresponds with the lower
part of the Furheck. The division of Europe marks its advent. ,

{d) -The basins in which the g}rpsum was deposited. began to be refilled.

In the Jura the sediments of this new stage, which consist of limestone
and marl, extend from Biel to the*south-west through the whole mountain
range and further still into the department of the Isferc. They are some-
times separated from the underlying beds by a cavernous dolomite, and
attain a thickness .of only 4 or 5 meters. At their base* is a layer con-
taining a mixed fauna of fiuviatilc and brackish-water shells, then a fresh-
water bed, and alx)ve that again brackish^water* layers. The upper
brackish-water bed is, however, of but trifling extent, and appears, at least
according, to existing observations, scarcely to pass beyond the region of the
gypsiferous clay, which lies deep below it. The fresh-water limestone-beds
reappear outside the Jura near Baume on the Doubs, above Besan^on, and
near Gray on the Sadne, so that a connexion appears to have existed with
the eastern side of the Paris basin. But in the department of the Yoiine
the beds above the Portland are already absent, as well indeed as every
trace of fresh- water deposits ; and the marine lower Cretaceous rests directly
on the marine Jurassic.

In north Germany, an imposing series of limestone beds, with marine,
brackish, and fresh- water shells, was .deposited during this period alwjve
the marls of Miinde : they are known, owing to the abundant occurrence of
Serpula coacei'vata, as the * Serpulito.’ The Serpulite also occurs near
Boulogne and corresponds, in England, with that part of the Purbeck
which lies above the gypsum. Oscillations were so frequent that Bristow
distinguishes in this zone as developed in the isle of Purbeck, the remains .
of four ancient forests, eleven fresh-water -beds, four brackish, and three
marine beds, succeeding one another in repeated alternations.

On the Charente a limestone bed with fresh-water mollusca also occum,
the ‘ couche de deux pieds.'

The marine or brackish -water mollusca of these beds fully maintain the
character of the lower beds ; many species are commoii to both ; wc have
here an impoverished Juraisaic fauna.

The later transgressions show clearly that at this time all the western
part of the Paris basin beyond the Pays dc Bray was dry land, while in
the east, from the Alps to England, the marine and frerfi-water faunas
vAriously alternate with each other.

(e) While the course of events had hitherto been uniform over vast
areas, now local differences began to make their appearance.

The strand rose still further; the regions lying nearest the* Alpine sea
were submerged, and the new marine fauna of the Valengian or lower
'Neocomian advanced from the south over the region of the Jura. The sea



282 MESOZOIC SEAS [PAOTm

•

penetrated into France, but towards the west its deposits do not extend far
past Vailly, north-west of Sancerre in the Cher. In the north of France,
hmvever, and in the whole of England the marine deposits of the lower
Feocomian are not known to occur \

It is true the sea did not at once enter into permanent possession. Here
and there occasional intercalations of fresh-water limestones m^y be met
with, but these at length cease as the sea acquired undisputed dominion.
Somewhat further north, in the Haute-Mame, a fresh-water bed is seen
again at a much higher level, the Urgonian stage of the Cretaceous.

Still further north, in Hanover and in England, fresh water persisted
longer than in the neighbourhood of the Alps ; indeed it was at this period
that the typical deposits of the Weald first began to be formed.

In nortli Germany the Serpulite is covered by a deposit of sandstone
.and shale, 200 meters thick, containing the remains of reptiles, fresh-water
inollusca, such as Unio and Cyrena, and beds of coal, many times repeated
in succession, as in the ancient Coal-measures. Tracks of animals on the
surface of the sandstone beds show how the surface of the fresh-water lake
grailually rose to a higher level, till it became stationary.

Similar sandstones occur in small patches near Boulogne ; in England
they lie above the Purbeck, as in Hanover, and contain numerous remaifis
of the great Iguanodon and fragments of terrestrial plants. The series is
known as the Hastings sands, and, as in Germany, the footprints of animals
•are foufid in it at various levels.

(f) In Hanover, as in England, there now follows the .upper WeaM clay.
Again the influence of the sea began to make itself felt.

In north Germany this member attains a thickness of about 60 to 70
.meters: by the side of numerous fluviatile inollusca, the brackish-water
forms of the Serpulite reappear, and among them* Corbula infleaaa. This
represents the still further impoverished Jurassic fauna, which during the
period of the Hastings sands had continued to exist somewhere in lagoons.
In England we meet with brackish-water intercalations in the fresh-water
clay, and 0«<mt distoHa once more gives rise to a bed which occurs close
to the summit of Ike Wealdeu. Thus under the most unfavourable con-
ditions the last survivors df the Jurassic period have succeeded in main-
taining their existence, a true relict fauna.

In England the thickness of the deposits increases rapidly towards the
west, and reaches 2,000 feet in the beds above the Pui'beck : possibly the
clastic sediment came from that direction. In Belgium there may be seen

’ Hebert has done admirable work in establishing these facts; an account of the
conditions in France is given by Lapparent, Traite de gdologie, 2* ed., p. 1034 et seq.
Price (Proc. Geol. Assoc., 1875, IV, pp. 269-278) and Gardner (Geol. Mag., 1877, 2nd ser.,
ly, p. :177 et passim) conclude from the nature of the deposits that the Gault sea of
England also became deeper.



CH.VI] DISAPPEARANCE OP WEA^DEN LAKES 28^

here and there, resting on the Coal-measures, beneath the later beds of the
middle Cretaceous transgression, patches of sand or clay which contain
remains of plants. These are the remnants ‘of deposits which accumulated
in hollows of the ancient surface; in 1878 the mines of Santa Barbara,
near Bernissart, not far from the French frontier, revealed, at a depth
of 822 meters below the ground, a mass of clay faulted down into the Coal-
measures ; this contained several skeletons of Iguanodon, with associated
fishes and plants of the same species as characterize the Englisli Weald

Brown clay containing plant remains occurs also on the limestone of
Charente.

(g) The sea advanced again still further to the north, and the period
of great lakes gradually came to an end. It is no longer the marine fauna
‘of the Valengian or lower Neocomian which accompanies the transgression
as in the Jura; but that of the middle Neocomian, the Hils or Hauterivian,
as we meet with it in Germany. At the same time the north of France
was submerged, and the south of England, was reached by the sea, for the
first marine intercalation of tlie Cret^eous lies very nearly on this horizon.
But in England fresh Water once more reappeared, and it was not till the
following stage of the lower Cretaceous that the region of the ancient lake
was at length permanently occupied by the sea. This stage begins with
the Punfield beds, which correspond to the Urgonian of French geologists*.

The positive movement proceeded in a series of oscillations. ’ It .first
carried the lower Neocomian fi*om the Alps ticross the region of the Jura
to France. In the middle Neocomian, i.e. at the time of the Hils stage,
a further transgression brought its waters over the north of France, the
north of Germany, the north Gennan Weald, and a large part of England.
In the following or the Urgonian stage, the series of fresh-water deposits
was brought to an end in England also. Wliile the sea of the lower
Cretaceous had already spread itself over the Purbeck area -of the Jura,
some brackish- water mollusca, the last remains of the Jurassic fauna, still
persisted in the Wealden area of England and Gennany, despite the north-
wards march of the sea^. Indeed, these Jurassic mollusca, already adapted
by repeated oscillations to Ijrackish- water conditiopijf, were much better
fitted to maintain their existence in the lakes arid estuaries of the period
than the new arrivals freshly introduced ‘by the waters of the Cretaceous
sea.

Having obtained these results, let us now cast a glance over the
peninsula beyond the Pyrenees.

^ Dupont, Bull. Acad. Roy. Belg., 1878, 2** scr., XLVI, p. 387.

, * In Germany also some fresh-water mollusca occur in higher marine deposits ;
G. Boehm, Beitrage zur geognostischen Kenntniss der Ililsmulde, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol.
Ges., Inaugural-Dissertation, Berlin, 1877, p. 10.

* This important conclusion was also drawn by Beyrich, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges.,
1880 ; and Neumayr, Verb. k. k. geol. Reichs., 1880, p. 290.



284


MESOZOIC SEAS


[part III

We have found hitherto that we could most clearly represent the’ course
of events by tracing them from the Alps through the Jura and on to the
north'West as far as the English Weald. We will pursue a similar course
in Spain, and follow the succession of the beds in a north-west direction
from the Balearic isles to the Atlantic coast.

In the Balearic isles, which we regard as the probable continuation of
the Betic cordillera, the stratified series, as in the cordillera itself, and as in
the Alps,’ is chiefly of a pelagic character. J^urbly marine deposits repre-
sent the upper Jurassic, which is overlaid by the lower Neocomian. On
the continent, we again meet with the lower Neocomian near Valencia, but
further inland it is not yet known to occur ; it is also absent in those parts
of the Paris basin which are most remote from the Alps. On the other
hand there appears on the coast, in the little mountain range of Atalayas
de Alcala, near Castellon, a lithographic limestone with Exogyra virgula,
and thus on the horizon of the Kimmeridge ; it resembles the lithographic
limestones which occur at the summit of the Jurassic in the south-east of
France, and from Ulm to Solenhofen in Bavaria, but these probably
represent the Portland as well as the ^rbeck, and Giimbel has shown that
in south Germany they bear the signs of numerous minor oscillations, such
as under different conditions we were able to recognize in the English
Purbcck. . The next sediments which are known above the lithographic
limestone of Atalayas belong not to the lower Neocomian, but to the
Urgonian stage

Further inland in Teruel, coal beds crop out,* alternating near’Utrillas,
with marine sediments; their fauna precisely coincides with that of the*
Punfield beds, which are intercalated with the highest beds of the English
Weald, and mark its close ‘. •

The fresh- water deposits of the W^ld occur still further to the north-
west in parts of Logroflo and Burgos, extending as far as the valley of the
Saja, in Santander, and attain the Atlantic coast. Palacios and Sanchez
have described them in the’ southern part of this region ; according to
Calderon’s account they attain a thickness of over 1,000 meters, and the
largest of the areas they occupy covers 1,200 square kilometers ; they may
be subdivided into Hastings sand and Weald clay, as in England ^

^ H. Hermite, ^tudea gdologiquos sur les lies Baldares, 8vo, Paris, 1879, p. 138;
Coquand, Sur Pexistence des dtages coiallions, etc., dans la province de Castellon de la
Plana, Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1867, 2® sdr., XXIV, pp. 462-471 ; C. W. Gambcl, Die
geognostischen Verhaltnisse des Ulmer Cementmergels, Sitzber. k. bayr. Akad., 1871, 1,
pp. 38-72.

^ £. de Vemeuil et G. de Loriere, Description des fossiles du Neocomien.superieur
d'Utrillas, 4to, Paris, 1868; the correspondence is emphasized by Judd, Quart. Jourh.
Geol. Soc., 1871, XXVII, p. 224.

* P. Palacios y Raf. Sanchez, La formacion Wealdense en las provincias de Sorio y
Logroho, Bol. Com. mapa geol. Espaha, 1885, XII, pp. 109-140 ; S. Calderon, Note sur



CH.VI] WEALD LAKES OF SPAIN AND PORTUGAL 286

The marine series of the Cretaceous begins everywhere in this part of
Spain with the Uigonian, which, as Carez has shown, extends over Catalonia,
north Arragon, Navarra, and Biscay

The correspondence with central Europe is remarkable; the Balearic
isles answer to the Alps, Santander to the south of England.

. Let us next turn to Portugal.

Many years ago Sharpe described an ‘ infra-Cretaceous ’ series of fresh-
water origin occurring in Portugal. Delgado recognized its correspondence
with the Weald, and it was subsequently described by Ribeiro; it is
shown on ihe geolo^cal map of Portugal as extending from Setubal to
Cabo do Espichel, and in many larger and smaller areas north of the Tagus
to Cabo Mondejo. Saemann TOirelated the upper parts of the Portuguese
Jurassic with the Portland of Boulogne ^

In the Serra de Cintra, according to Choffat, the Kimmeridge is sur-
mounted by a thick series of limestone beds, which contain some of the
species of the preceding fauna, and some fresh arrivals, including Cyrena.
Then follows the Valengian, next ‘the Hauterivian, i. e. the. marine lower
and middle Neocomian. But only 20 kilometers to the east, near Bellas,
west-north-west of Lisbon, the Valengian is replaced in this series by a
sandstone containing terrestrial plants and corresponding to the Weald ^ '
The series of events is thus essentially the same from the Harz to the
west coast of Portugal. Above the Portland, first the sea became shallow
or was replaced by fresh water, next followed a chain of evaporating
lagoons, extending from Hanover to the island .of Ol^ron, and then great
fresh-water lakes made their appearance over the area between Hanover
and the west coast of Portugal. The sea, which at first had completely
retired to the south, now, at the time of the lower Neocomian, extended
over ({he north of France as far as the Cher; in Spain- it only approached
Valencia, and in Portugal passed over some districts in the west. In the
Hils (Hauterivian) and the Urgonian, the strand-linC continually advanced
by oscillations until the whole region of the fresh-water lakes was entirely
covered by the sea. In many places the fresh-water beds, and in Charentc
the gypsum also, strike out against the Atlantic Ocean, proving that at this
epoch continental land extended beyond the existing co&sts.

le terrain wealdien da nord de I’Espagne, Bull. Soc. g^oL de Fr., 1886, 3” ser,, XIV,
pp. 405-407.

’ L. Carez, £tude dee terndns cr4tac48 et tertiaires du nord de I’Espagne, 8vo, Paris,
1881, p. 147 et seq.

■ * D. Sharpe, On the Secondary District of Portugal which lies on the north of the
Tagus, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1850, VI, pp. 134-201 (Sub-cretaceous Series) ; Ribeiro e
Delgado, Carta geologica de Portugal, fol., 1876 ; Saemann in Loriol et Pellat, J^tage
portlandien de Boulogne, p, 184; C. Ribeiro, Breve noticia acerca da constitui^io
physica e geoldgica da parte de Portugid comprensa entre os valles do Tejo e do Douro,
Jom. scL math. Ac. R. Lisboa, 1870, II, pp. 243-252 and 353-369, in particular p. 249.

* Choffat, in Act. Soc. helv. sci. nat. rdunie a Lode 1885, 8vo, NeufchUtel, 1886, p. 63.



286


MESOZOIC SEAS


[PABTnt

5. Further transgreseiona and intermixture of the Cretaceous faunas.
It will be seen from the foregoing that the maximum of the negative phase
must be placed at the base of the gypsum and salt marls, between the
Portland and the Purbeck, and from this time, in spite of all oscillations,
the preponderance of the positive movement -may be recognized up. to the
transgression of the Urgonian, which covers the whole of the Weald.

The greatest change in physical conditions did not therefore ox&ctly
coincide with the greatest change of the fauna, but slightly anticipated
it, for the upper Purbeck contains a fauna which is still undoubtedly
Jurassic.

First of all the question arises whether this negative phase may not
find in some other part of the world a complementary positive phase.
Indications of this are not far to seek. The Kimmeridge of the western
region extends, as we have seen, through Poland to the Volga and. beyond
it. But even in west Poland, near Tomaszow, on the Pilica, Mikhq-lski has
observed* the vestiges of a sea alien to western Europe, viz. the lower Volga
stage of Russian geologists (zone of Perisphinctea virgatus). Mikhalski has
described it, and doubtless with truth, as the first indication of a great
northern infra-Cretaceous transgression *. Nikitin places the Volga stage
in the period of the English Weald.

Since a considerable numbeb of species characteristic of the Portland of
western Europe still occur in east Galicia, the separation of Russia from
western Europe must be placed at the close of the Portland, i. e. precisely
at that time when the depasition of the gypsiferous marls begins, or at the
maximum of the negative phase in western Europe. While in the west
and .south thc.strand was in retreat, leaving behind the gypsiferous lagoons,
in the north-east on the contrary it was advancing, on the one hand over
Kostroma, Twer, Moscow, and Riasan, and on the other from Orenburg and.
Samara over Simbirsk.

The investigations Of Russian geologists, who of late years have brought
tb light so many new facts in connexion with this subject, hardly permit
us at present to trace in detail on the map the distribution of the several
subdivisions of the Volga stage, but there appears to be no doubt that in
the north of A.sia a great iramsgression corresponds to this stage, particularly
to its upper inemliers. The area affected by this traasgression includes,
according to Nikitin, the region west of the lower Ob southwards as far as
lat. 63° N., then a part of north Siberia, particularly the peninsula of
Taimyr, down to Dudinskoj on the lower Yenisei, then down the lower
course of all the rivers situated to the ea.st as far as the Jana, but not so
far south as the Arctic circle. There the deposits of the Volga rest in
patches on the marine Tria.s. The Jurasyic l>eds said to occur in regions

‘ A. Mikhalski, Notes sur les conchea a, Periiijihinctes virifatus de la Pologne ; Bull. Com.
gdol. Russie, 1886, V, pp. 363, 4.')6.



287


OT. vij VOLGA AND UITENHAGt! STAGES

more to the south ai« more or less doubtful ; the upper Volga beds, on the
other hand, appear to occur on the Amur and the Bureja.

The Mesozoic deposits of Spitsbergen, which rest on the Trias, as well
as those .of east Greenland, have already been assigned, on the evidence of
existing ‘observations, to the Jurassic (II, p. 69 ) ; it must however be
added that Lahusen, in his' latest investigations of the upper Volga stage
on the Yenisei and Lena, has observed much similarity between these beds
and those of Spitsbergen and cast Greenland

The. uncertainty as to the stratigraphical position of certain beds
characterized only by Aucclla, and the difference of opinion existing among
palaeontologists on this point, render it impossible to extend tliese compari-
sons to the Aleutian islands or the Queen Charlotte islands, where the
Volga stage is certainly represented. According to White it is very
probable that the. Aucella 'beds of California correspond with those of the
north ; possibly they extend to New Mexico In Arctic North America,
however, and as far as cape Farewell, nothing similar is known. In west
Greenland the lower Cretaceous is only represented by plant-bearing beds.

The genus Aucella can bo traced from the north to the Lofoten islands,
but it docs not proceed further into the Atlantic.

Some indications of similar relations may be observed in the southern
hemisphere.

In cast Australia there is evidence of a Cretaceous tran.sgreaaion, which
Neumayr places at about the horizon of the Aptian (II, p. 155). In the
south-east of Cape Colony plant-bearing deposits, which include marine
beds, the well-known Uitenhage series, rest on the older stratified formations
(I, p. 399). Near Sripennatur, on the east coast of Hindustan, some sand-
stones occur, which may be assigned to the Uitenhage horizon (I, p. 409). We
now reach the Jurassic region of Cutch. The various stages of the
European Jurassic may be distinguished up to the horizon of the Portland.
The Uinia group, which contains species common to the European Portland,
is a sandstone 3,000 feet thick. The greater number of marine fosiuh*).
chiefly Portland species, occur in a calcareous conglomerate near its base;
higher up, many terrestrial plants appear, and above^the plants we meet
with a few species of the Uitenhage stage.: Here, therefore, the. European
• Jurassic system is covered by the Uitenhage, a stage unknown to Europe ;
just as in Russia it is covered by the lower Volga stage, also with an alien
fauna. The Uitenhage fauna has come from the south, the Volgian from
the north. To complete the correspondence, we find in Cutch, above the

’ J. Lahnoen, Die Tnoceramen-Schichten an dem Olenek und der Lena, Mem. Acad. Imp.
Sci. Saint-Pdtersb., 1868, XXXIII, No. 7. Amalthnis Nathomti, Lundgr.,iof Spitzbergen
is also said to occur in the upper Volga stage on the Bureja.

* C. A. White, On the Mesozoic and Cenozoic Palaeontology of California ; Bull. U.S.
6eol. Surv. Territories, No. 15, 1885, p. 22 ct scq. •



288


MESOZOIC SEAS ^ C^Asrm

• ^ -

Uitenhage sta^, the* Aptian, with its European fauna {Hifplitea DeihaymU),
and the same stage (also ’containing H. Desha/^m) rests in Simhii^,
according to Nikitin, on the Volga stage. A species belonging to the
Apfian stage of Australia occurs Mrith the European Aptian in Cutch. *

We have thenin Simbirsk, first the European Jurassic, next the northern
Volga stage, and then the European Aptian stage; and similarly in Cutch,
first the European Jurassic, then traces of the southern Uitenhage stage,
and last traces of the European Aptian stage.

Wo have now advanced far enough to return to Europe, and there to
trace the events which mark the limit between the Jurassic and Cretaceous
systems, as well as certain phenomena in the succession and composition of
the marine Cretaceous fauna.

The marine Jurassic fauna, so far as we can trace 'its history, did not
give rise to the marine fauna which succeeds it. 'Some of the pelagic forms
of the Alpine area may have contributed direct descendants, but the fauna
of moderate depths was destroyed, first by the extensive retreat of the sea,
and next by fresh- water conditions ; some bracki8h-*water species may have
been. derived from marine forms, and have persisted for awhile; but the
new marine faunas came, for the greater part, from elsewhere.

The Valengian of the lower Neocomian, which extends but a slight
distance beyond the. pelt^c region of- the Alps, does not contain a rich
fauna, and shows foreign affinities.

The next stage is the Hils or Hauterivian, which possesses a much
wider distribution. When Neumayr and Uhlig described the Ammonites
of the Hils in 1881, they showed much more clearly than had been done
before the presence of northern elements in this member of the Cretaceous
formation. Subsequent investigators, among others Weerth and Marie
Pavlow, have shown that relations exist between the Hils fauna and forms
occurring in Bussia ; indeed some species of the Volga fauna appear in the
Hils. But Neumayr and Uhlig have shown that a close resemblance also
exists between some forms of the Hils and the Uitenhage fauna. The
period of transgression was also a period of intermixture of faunas, and
both northern and southern elements make their appearance in Europe.
Th'e isolation of the north-east by the negative movement, during the
continuance of which the development of the north Volga fauna was in .
progress, now came to an end K

* M. Neumayr and V. Uhlig, Ueber Ammonitiden aus den HilBbildungen Nord-
Deutschlaiids, Pal&ontographica, 1881, XXVII, p. 74 ; 0. Weerth, Die I^auna. des
NeocomBandsteins im Tentoburger Walde, Palftont. Abb., edited by Damee and
Kayeer, 1884, II ; Marie PSvIow, Lee Ammonites du Groups (Heostophanus venieohr,
BbU. Soc. nat. Mobcou, 1886, LXII, pp. 27-48. Neumayr bad inferred the noitbem
transgreBBion even much earlier, not only from the marine faunas, but also from .
Sandberg^r's statement that in the upper Weald the tropical lacustrine fanna is replaced
by one of North American character; Verb. k. k. geol. Beicha, 1873, p. 290.



CH.V1] SOUTH AMERICAN TYPES IN EUROPE 289

* -i

Hitherto but little has been said of the lower Cretaceous deposits of
the Alps, which succeed each other in unbroken pelagic development,
because indeed general transgressions or regressions can seldom be demon-
strated in folded mountains ; the case of the Purbeck in the Jura mountains
worked out by Maillard is a rare exception. On the other hand, we must
not neglect to take, into account the character of the faunas. If we look
for the pelagic representatives of the littoral deposits we find, immediately
above the equivalents of the Hils or Hauterivian, the BarrSmian stage in
the lower Rhone valley, and the Wemadotf shcUea in the Carpathians, and
again a new element appears in their fauna. The rich lower Cretaceous
fauna of Santa Fd de Bogota in Columbia, described in detail by Karsten,
sends numerous representatives into this stage. Coquand and d’Orbigny
recognized them in the BarrSmian of France, Hohenegger in the Car-
pathians ; Uhlig has shown the correspondence which exists between the
far-distant faunas of Bogota, the lower Rhone valley, and the Carpathians.
The genus Pulchellia is as typical of this immigration into Europe, os
Holcostephanus of the preceding transgression \

In the Aptian stage finally a uniform fiora appears to have extended
from Russia across Europe, and the few species so far known from India
indicate that they too once extended over this region.

Thus towards the close of the Jurassic period Europe once more
emerges from the sea, to again disappear beneath successive advancing
transgressions. The Alpine region i«mained constantly submerged. The
maximum of physical change, between the Portland and Purbeck, did not
coincide, in central Europe, with the maximum change in the faiina. Its
chief effect was to produce increased isolation and to prepare the way for
the extinction of the sublittoral elements of the fauna. The effects of the
succeeding transgressions on the faunas vary in importance in proportion
as, in each case, they establish new marine communications, and thereby
facilitate or promote fresh immigrations.

Nikitin has pointed out that in Russia the highest degree of indepen-
dence occurred at the time of the Volga stage, but afterwards in the
epoch of the Gault the universality of the faun^ was ‘ gradually
re-established even in the most distant regions.’ Neumayr has arrived at
similar results Phenomena of this kind cannot be explained by oscillations
of the continents.

The distinction between the Pacific and Atlantic regions now appears
still more sharply than before. Lower Cretaceous beds are known at many
localities on the east coast of America, from the Aleutian islands to cape

’ V. Uhlig, Die Cephalopodenfauna der Wemadorfer Schichten ; Denkschr. k. Akad.
Wise. Wien, 1888, XLVI, p. 158.

* * Nikitin, tom. cit., p. 239 ; Neumayr in numerous publications, in particular
Erdgeschichte, II, 1887, p. 366, and Neuea Jahrb. Min., 1887, II, p. 279.

SObLAS It u



290


MESOZOIC SEAS


[PABim


Horn ; also in New Zealand and Australia. On the border of the Pacific
they are folded; in the interior of Australia they lie flat. But on the
Atlantic coasts, except in the case of Europe, we seek in vain for repre-
sentatives of any of these deposits. Even in Europe the Weald advances
with its fresh- water deposits right up to the brink of the Ocean. Never-
theless a communication of the lower Cretaceous seas of Europe wh^h those
of the west of South America is indicated by their fauna. This com-
munication, however, can only have existed in the vicinity of those parts
of the coast which are constructed on the Pacific type, i. e. between the
existing Mediterranean .and the West Indies.

6. The Cenomanian transgression. As the long series of intermittent
positive movements from the Rhaetic stage on through the Lias was only
the forerunner, as it were, of the great transgression of the Bathonian stage
and the Kelloway, so all the oscillations of the lower Cretaceous seas in
Europe yet mentioned were only the preliminary warnings of a transgres-
sion of far greater importance, especially distinguished by the fact that
it affected the Atlantic cocusts also.

This transgression embraces the Cenomanian, Turonian, and Senonian ;
there are indications that its greatest extension coincided with the Senonian.
Since this subject has been discussed elsewhere we will now only give
a summary of the most impoiiant results

Tlie Cenomanian transgression has left its traces on the summit of the
Spanish meseta ; thence it may be followed to the north, across France, and
into the north of Scotland, where its deposits may be seen at several
localities. Isolated patches of the Senonian have been revealed by dredging
off the Norwegian coast, up to the highest latitudes (II, p. 67). The
transgressive Cretaceous is to be seen on the summit of the Bohemian
mass, as far as the Bavarian Jura, and further north in numerous patches
in Denmark and as far as Scania. Signs of the transgression also occur in
a part of the Baltic. It extended across Poland, and Karpinsky, who has
clearly recognized the difference in extension of the lower Cretaceous and
this new transgression, describes its northern limit as having passed some-
what north of Vilna and Mohilew through Kaluga towards Moscow, and
then somewhat north of Simbirsk and Samara towards Orenberg Thus
the northern half of Russia remained uncovered by the sea ; the southern
outrunners of the Ural on the other hand were submerged, but Herr Kar-
pinsky has kindly informed me of the remarkable discovery, made by
Herr Fedoroff, that Cretaceous beds with Baculites exist beyond the Ural
on the northern Sosswa in lat. 62° 30' N. These Baculite beds rest upon
fossiliferous strata, probably belonging to the upper Volga stage, and the
whole succession is horizontal.

' Entstehung der Alpen, pp. 104-117.

* Karpinsky, Uebersicht der physiko-geographischen Verbtlltnisse, etc., fig. 9.



OH. VI] THE CENOMANIAN TRANSGRESSION 291

The Cenomanian sea extended over the whole region of the Caspian
and the Ural ; and according to Bonianowski and Musketow it covered
the Kizil-Kum and all the plains of Turania up to the great mountain
chain, which no sea appears to have reached since the Palaeozoic aera ; for
the lower members of the Mesozoic series are represented in it either by
coal-bearing beds or not at all The Cenomanian sea eontinued further
into the basin of the Tarym, on the south side of which Stoliczka en-
countered, to his great astonishment, evidence of the Cretaceous trans-
gression.

The middle and upper Cretaceous also cover the whole region of the
central Mediterranean and even extend beyond it. Represented chiefly
by hard limestone, they pass from the south of Europe across Syria, cover
the whole eastern half of the Sahara and Arabia, and penetrate into the
valley of the Narbada, thus reaching India.

Marine intercalations of the Senonian ate found in the plant-bearing
beds of Disco in lat. 70* N. Patches of middle Cretaceous also occur on the
east coast of the United States, as in New Jersey, for example. From the
gulf of Mexico the transgression extended into the country to the west
of the sierra Madre ; it reached Chihuahua, Praesidio del Norte, and the
llano Estacado of Texas, and extended into the prairies through Kansas,
Nebraska, and Dakota into the basins of the Saskatchewan and the
Mackenzie up to lat. 65° N. and perhaps even to the Arctic Ocean.

At the same time the Cenomanian sea entered the valley of the Amazon,
crossed the whole breadth of South America to the Andes, and probably
reached the Pacific Ocean. Its sediments are seen at Piauhy, Ceara, and
as far as Bahia (I, p. 510). In the south the Cretaceous forms the under-
lying rock of the Pampas, and middle Cretaceous fossils are found up to
lat. 53° 80' S. in Patagonia (I, p. 526).

On the west coast of Africa from near the equator to Mossamides
(II, p. 134<) deposits of the lower Cenomanian occur, which some observers
refer to the Gault, but on the east coast they reappear with a different
fauna, which has been distinguished as the Indian type. This fauna
accompanies the transgression on the coast of Natal, again on the coast
of Trichinopoli, and finally in the Shillong plateau (I, p. 411). West
Australia is covered by transgressive middle Cretaceous beds, concerning
which, however, we unfortunately possess but scanty information.

The Pacific region has suffered so much from compression and folding
that it is unusually difficult to prove the existence of transgressions within
it. In Yezo and Saghalin the Cretaceous of Indian type reappears,
probably in transgression (II, p. 182) ; middle Cretaceous lies uncopformably
and horizontal in the foot-hills of California (I, p. 584).

* Q. Romanowski, Materialien zur Geologie von Turkestan, German edition, 4to,
St. Petersburg, 1880, p. 43.



292


MESOZOIC SEAS


[part III


Tilus the sea of the latter half of the Cretaceous period covered Tarania
and Irania, Arabia and the Sahara, the prairie-land of North America and
tivi great valleys of the Amazon and Parana: On the other hand a definite
area may be recognized which does not appear to have been reached by
the inundation. This embraces Oreenland, Spitzbergen, perhaps the north
of Scandinavia, northern Russia, Siberia, and the whole of northern China.
The conjecture might have been hazarded that the Cretaceous formation
had l)ccn removed from this region by ice, but the Tertiary leaf-bearing
beds are everywhere present, and rest on the Jurassic or Volga stage in
east Greenland and Spitzliergen, while the middle or upper Cretaceous is
not to be seen ; it is true, however, the Raculitc beds of the Sosswa lie
within this region. A groat part of Oondw&na land, broken up oven so
early as this period, also remained above water, for we see in the east as
in the west of Africa, that the Cretaceous beds only rest against the sides
of the plateau, or, as in India, at most extend into the valley of the Narbada,
without reaching the plateau itself. West Australia, on the other hand, was
submerged.

However this may be, it would appear, according to the present state
of our knowledge, that a considerable area of dry land extended around the
north pole, particularly on the Asiatic side, and more especially in the
direction of northern Chitia. In the lower Cretaceous period the Volga
stage came from the north southwards, the Uitenhage stage from the south
northwards, lx)th from polai* regions. The middle and upper Cretaceous
tran.sgi*essions, on the other hand, chiefly affected the equatorhil and
temperate zones; it is prolmble that the sediments in the valley of the
Mackenzie, the marine intercalations lietween the plant-bearing beds of
Disco, and the deposits in the deep water off the coast of Norway represent
outrunning arms of the sea. Whether this explanation will apply to the
bods exposed on the Soaswa, future investigation must decide.

The great extension of the middle and upper Cretaceoiis seas was followed
after the Senonian, as it was after the Portlandian, by an extraordinary
retreat. This negative phase will be discussed in connexion with the Eocene.

7. Survey of the Mesozoic sects. The transgressions covering the con-
tinents of the Mesozoic period, whether they came from the poles or the
equator, nowhere left sediments on the continents which would indicate
abyssal depths. The Kelloway, the transgressive beds of the lower
Cretaceous, and the Cenomanian a,ns composed of clastic materials, ac-
companied as a rule by numerous organic remains, and it is only in tho
Senonian that a sea of any considerable depth can be supposed to have
covered northern Europe. The Callovian of Ruasia and the Cretaceous
mantle of the upper valley of the Elbe may be cited as examples. These
mark merely temporary submergence of the land, and must not be confused
with the grejxt persistent abysses of the Ocean.



293


CH.VI] REVIEW OF THE MESOZOIC SEAS

!

Oar geographical maps show the outlines of existing seas, but some of
those are very deep ; others, on the contrary, as for instance the Arctic
Ocean, are of very trifling depth. A knowledge of the outlines does not
imply therefore a knowledge of the position of the great depths.

It is clear that the Trias deposits around the Pacific Ocean are lopre-
sented in the folded chains; in the Indian Ocean the evidence of a trans-
gressive border or overlap only begins with the middle Jurassic, and in
the Atlantic region with the middle Cretaceous. In the Indian and
Atlantic Oceans we observe liesides that the border is not folded.

In that part of the Arctic Ocean which washes the coasts of Asia as
far as the cost coast of Greenland, and the Lofoten islands, but not beyond,
certain features appear in connnon with the Pacific region. As far as

Spitsbergen the Trias is similarly present, but in Spitzbergen it is not

folded. Certain parts of the Jurassic system as well as the Volga stage

appear in these parts of the Arctic regions, but the middle and upper

Cretaceous are absent. Baffin Imy, on the other hand, shares the charactei's
of the Atlantic Ocean: the only marine deposit of western Greenland
l)elongs to the upper Cretaceous.

We will now leave the shore of the Ocean and cast a glance at the
stratified series of the Silakank in the Himalaya (I, p. 437). Where, as in
this case, the Mesozoic beds succeed each other uninterruptedly in per-
sistent pelagic development, for a thickness of thousands of feet, and even
overlie a similar series of Palaeozoic lieds, we seem forced to conclude that
a deep and long pemstent sea lay in the midst of the existing continent,
and that it was brought to an end by the accumulation of its own sedi-
ments, by negative movements of the strand, and by the folding of the
mountains. The easteni Alps aflbrd us examples which are no less striking,
and we must admit with Neumayr the existence of a central Mediterranean,
which extended as early as the Trias from Asia across the .south of Europe,
over part of the region of the existing Mediterranean to beyond Gibraltar.
That this sea passed acioss the Atlantic even before the deposition of the
Cenomanian on the coasts around this Ocean is proved by indications in
the Jura, and by chai’acters even more definite in thp lower Cretaceous
marine fauna of Bogota.

The enlargement of this central Mediterranean, which originally ex-
tended parallel with the equator, may have subsequently given bii-th to the
Atlantic by a succe.s.sion of subsidences. Even in the Weald the fresh-water
beds on tlie coast of Portugal and north Spain are cut off abruptly by the
sea. The occurrence in the West Indian islands of many corals charac-
teristic of the Turonian of Europe presupposes a coast-line, or at least
a number of fairly laige islands in the midst of the existing Ocean, to
render the migration of the corals possible (I, p. 281).

It is, therefore, probable that even before the time of the Cenomanian



294


MESOZOIC SEAS


[PABrin

the ancient sea which stretched from Europe to the West Indies had
experienced a considerable extension by the addition of fresh subsidences^
and that from this extended region the Cenomanian transgressions pro-
ceeded, but at the same time it is equally probable that since then an
increase has taken place by the occurrence of yet other subsidences.

The mutual encroachment of transgressions and tectonic processes
renders a complete solution extremely difficult, and we are compelled to
express ourselves with great reserve. Steinmann met with Cretaceous
sandstone in Bolivia, lying in horizontal beds at a height of 4,000 metres
above the sea. He was led to conclude that since its formation ‘the
surface of the sea must have moved so much nearer to the centre of the
earth

For the present we may content ourselves with the conclusion that the
existing oceans are of different ages, and turn our attention to another
question.

In the opening pages of this book the outlines of the continents, nar-
rowing away to the south, were described as the most striking feature on
the map of the world ; and it was further observed (I, p. 5) that any
attempt to comprehend the movements and changes of form of the earth’s
crust must take into account these great features of the planetary surface.

The wedge-shaped form appears in four typical cases: in South
America, South Africa, India and Greenland, and thus in the most diverse
latitudes. Other examples of less importance might be cited, such as the
peninsula of Sinai and the Crimea ; even in the interior of the continents
similar outlines may be seen, as for example in the Bohemian mass.

South America, formed in the west and south by the extremity of
a curved mountain range, in the east of alluvial land, deviates completely
from the other examples in structure, and may be left out of account. The
three remaining examples are table-lands. Greenland is a radial slice of
the Atlantic, the table-land of Old Bed sandstone : India is a similar
segment of the Gondwdna table-land : South Africa is another part of the
same table-land.

Greenland exhibits beds of the Asiatic Arctic type resting against its
eastern coast, and beds of the Atlantic type on its western coast. The
coast-lines of different seas meet in cape Farewell. These facts cannot be
explained by the elevation theory. Greenland is a horst of the first order
between two or more sunken areas of different age.

India rises in the same way between the bay of Bengal and the Arabian
sea, and South Africa between the two Oceans : in these cases the distribu-
tion of the Gondwdna formations and the lie of the thick plant-bearing
beds, which in the case of Africa boldly face the sea, are sufficient proof

‘ Steinmann, Compte rendu, 69*°* Session de la Soci4td helvdtienne ; Arch. scL phys.
et nat. Gen&ve, 1886, p. 93.



CH.V1] WEDGE-SHAPED OUTLINES 296

of the fracture. The various deposits resting against these masses indicate
the age of the different coast-lines (I, p. 418}. The elevation theory cannot
explain how a table-land of plant-bearing beds, such as this, which
never been covered by marine deposits, could have been raised from the
depths of the sea.

‘ In like manner the peninsula of Sinai, the Crimea, and the Bohemian
mass are bounded on the south by the convergent edges of regions of
subsidence.

Thus, as our knowledge becomes more exact, the less are we able to
entertain those theories which are generally offered in explanation of the
repeated inundation and emergence of the continents.



296


CHAPTER VII

TEBTIAEY SEAS AND BECENT LIMESTONE
FOBMATIONS

Negative phase at the close of the Cretaceous period. The central Mediterranean of
the Tertiary aera. The east coast of North America. The Tertiary region of Patagonia.
Recent limestone formations. Summary.

1. Negative phase at the close of the Cretaceom period. Towards the
end of the Cretaceous period events occurred similar to those which char-
acterized the later ages of the Jurassic period. The sea was reduced in
area. The prairie land of North America, from Canada down to Texas and
Alabama, was laid dry, and the Laramie stage, formed of alternating brackish
and fresh-water beds, corresponds to this period of the retreating strand.
The mammalian fauna of the Tertiary aera had not yet made its appear-
ance, but great reptiles were the most striking representatives of the
terrestrial fauna, as in the Cretaceous period. During the same epoch
the basin of the Amazon was abandoned by the sea : the brackish-water
deposits of Pebas are the only traces so far known of the influence of the
sea in post-Cretaceous times; they belong to the Eocene or Oligocene
period (I,*p. 612). Simultaneously the strand receded from north to south
in England, the horsts of central Europe were abandoned by the sea ; in
Russia the shore receded to the south. Far and wide fresh land made its
appearance.

When the negative phase, towards the end of the Jurassic period, had
attained its maximum, the sea occupied the central Mediterranean, in other
words the site of the younger folded ranges of western Eurasia ; but outside
this region, over an area extending up to its borders, as in the Jura for
example, deposits of gypsum were first laid down, and then an alternation
of fresh- water and marine beds which still bore a Jurassic facies.

Events followed much the same course towards the end of the
Cretaceous period.

From Spain through the south of France, and particularly in Provence,
we find, resting on the marine Cretaceous, fresh-water beds, which are
followed in certoin areas by a series with marine shells of Cretaceous type.
This is Leymerie’s Chtrumnian stage. It occupies the same position with
regard to the Cretaceous system, as the Purbeck to the Jurassic.



CH.vn] GARUMNIAN ST4GE 207

The Garumnian stage has been studied in Catalonia by Vidal, by
Mallada in Huesca, and by Leymerie, Matheron, and others in the south of
France ^

In the Jura wo found it possible, notwithstanding the folding, to deter-
mine the outlines of the several lacustrine areas, which were formed at the
.close of the Jurassic and the beginning of the Cretaceous period, and
similarly in the present instance, in spite of foldings and various sub-
sequent dislocations, we are already in possession of data, thanks to the
zeal of observers, which will enable us to ascertain the course of events
during this phase, equally negative, which marks the transition from the
Cretaceous to the Tertiary aera.

The lowest member, as in the Jurassic, is the most restricted in dis-
tribution. It consists of the lignitiferous fresh-water beds of Fuveau.
These rest on the upper Cretaceous, which has already acquired a brackish
water character: they occur only in the neighbourhoc^ of Marseilles,
extending westwards from this town as far as Martigues on the fitang do
Beire, and for about the same distance to the north and east. They were
probably deposited at the mouth of a river.

Above them come the fresh-water limestones of Rognac, distinguished
by Lychnus and other fresh-water genera, which do not pass upwards into
the beds above: the fauna, while purely fresh-water, is still thoroughly
Cretaceous; land reptiles of Cretaceous age are also present. Over wide
areas this division begins with a bed of bauxite (aluminium hydrate). It
extends from the Var across the Bouches-du-Rhdne, Vaucluse, Gard,
Hdrault, and Aude, and passes, in Ari^e, into continually closer relations
with the uppermost beds of the marine Cretaceous, which, in the Haute-
Garonne, loses more and more its fresh- water intercalations *. The Bognac
beds also occur in the north of Spain.

The third member consists in the east of layers of red clay, sandstone
and pebble beds ; to the west, on leaving the Rhone, the red clays increase
in thickness ; they are known as the ‘ argUes rutUamteB,’ their brilliant
colouring rendering them a conspicuous feature in the landscape; they
extend over H^ault and Aude, and reappear with the same characters
beyond the Pyrenees, still possessing a considerable thickness. They are
very poor in fossils. In Provence the upper beds contain species of Physa,
Lymnaea, and Planorbis, existing genera of pond and marsh snails ; these
continue into the succeeding beds. All Cretaceous types have now dis-
appeared, among them the genus Pyrgulifera, which however still main-

* We need only mention here the succinct account by P. Matheron, Note sur les
d^pdts cr^tac^s lacustres et d’eau saum&tre du Midi de la France ; Bull. Soc.g4ol. deFr.,
1875-1876, 8» s^r., IV, pp. 415-428.

* Croisiets de Laovivier, i^tudes g^ologiques sur le ddpartement de I’Ariege ; Ann. sci.
g4ol., 1884, XV, pp. 1-298, in particular p. 250.



TEETIARY SEAS


298


[PARTUt


tains its existence in lake Tanganyika. Above the clays follows firsts
fresh-water limestone, with Physa, and then the marine Eocene.

It is thus the red clays which mark the division between the faunaa.-
At their base the rich Cretaceous fauna of Rognac has disappeared, and
from this time onwards the younger forms prevail. Matheron has brought
this out in clear relief, and Boule, in his admirable description 'of the ex-
posures in Provence, has placed the limit between Cretaceous and Tertiary
at the base of these clays ^

The same interruption of the marine series between the Cretaceous
and Eocene is repeated in the region north and east of the Adriatic ;
Stacho’s investigations show that from Carinthia, through Istria, the
islands of the Quamero and a great part of Dalmatia, a varied group of
intercalated brackish or fresh-water l^ds appears on the horizon. Near
Sebenico the fresh-water limestone rests on an eroded surface of Cretaceous
limestone. A pre-Tertiary red earth also takes part in these formations.
The whole group of beds has been named by Stache the Liburnian btage,
and correlated, at least in its lower part, with the Garumnian stage

Thus at the close of the Cretaceous period the sea had again become
extremely restricted. We now reach the first great stage of the marine
Tertiary deposits. As we approach nearer to existing times the number of
recorded observations increases, but at the same time the immense variety
of facts becomes almost overwhelming, and description correspondingly
difiicult, since so much has to bo condensed. To give in a few pages
a fairly adequate account of the subject I must refrain almost completely
from citing the sources of my information, and I must restrict myself
to discussing the Tertiary and more recent marine deposits in three
regions only.

The first of these is that which we have already alluded to as the
central Mediterranean ; the second is that of the west Atlantic coast from
lat. 43° N. to the valley of the Orinoco; the third is formed by the Pata-
gonian plains from Parand to Tierra del Fuego.

With regard to Australia, especially the Bunda plateau, and the absence
of Tertiary deposit;^ on the east coast, I must refer to what has been said
already (II, pp. 152, 162), The Tertiary deposits of the Pacific coast are
unfortunately still little known. The T^jon group of California, which has
recently been assigned to the Eocene, contains Ammonites, and differs in
several respects from the European and the eastern American types. The
same is true of the deposits of the island of Quiriquina, in Chili, which are


* L. Roule, Recherches sur le terrain flavio-lacustre inf^rieur de la Provence ; Ann. sci.
g6ol., 1885, XVIII, in particular p. 129.

* G. Stache, Die libumische Stufe, Verb. k. k. geol. Reichs., 1880, pp. 195-209 ; by the
same, Ueber das Alter von bohnerzfUhrenden Ablagerungen am ‘ Monte Fromina * in
Dalmatien, op. cit., 1886, pp. 385-387 et passim.



299


OH. vn] THE CENTBAL MEDITERRANEAN

referred by some authors to the Cretaceous, by others to the Tertiaiy^
Folded Tertiary beds occur in the coastal chains of California, but their
exact age has yet to be determined. ^

2. The, central Mediterranean of the Tertiary aera. By the region of
the central Mediterranean we understand, according to Neumayr’s definition,
a broad zone embracing the Betic cordillera, the whole Alpine system, and
the larger part of the great ranges of Asia ; from the Trias upwards it is
distinguished by an uninterrupted series of marine sediments. When
towards the end of the Jurassic, a negative phase set in over a considerable
part of Europe, and the Purbeck and Wealden beds were deposited, this
region still remained covered by the sea. The same was the case when the
negative phase, which occurred at the limit between the Cretaceous and
Tertiary, made itself felt. In the central Mediterranean region marine
Cretaceous beds are covered by marine Tertiary beds, and both have sub-
sequently been folded. But this continuity is not confined to great folded
ranges ; Zittcl has shown that the marine Eocene beds of the Libyan desert
rest directly upon the marine Cretaceous The Garumnian stage in Spain
and the south of France, as well as the Liburnian stage in the region of the
Adriatic, only represent marginal deposits of this sea, which doubtless was
very much restricted.

The strand having sunk to its lowest level now began to ascend ;
through many oscillations the Eocene sea extended itself over the basin of
Paris and a part of Belgium into the south-east of England. Strange and
remarkable faunas appear and disappear, like those of the sands of Bracheux
and the limestone of Mons, until finally the typical beds of the French
Eocene, the Sables infdrieurs and the Calcaire grossier of the Paris basin,
were laid down. It is also evident that the Eocene sea, extending from
the Atlantic, invaded the valley of the lower Loire. At the same time its
sediments were spread out from the Carpathians and the Crimea over a largo
part of south Russia.

From the Betic cordillera the Eocene sea extended to north Africa ; it
embraced a large part of the eastern Sahara, then Syria, Arabia and Persia.
From the great ranges of India it spread over Cutc];i and Guzerat, and
over the plateau of Shillong.

Its sediments occur everywhere in the folded mountain chains, pro-
ceeding from the west through the Alps and Carpathians, the Apennines,
and through the Crimea to the Him&laya: between the inner chains of
the Him&laya a band of marine lower Tertiary has been, traced for a

^ C. A. White, The Chico-T^jon Series, Bull. 17.S. 6eol. Surv. Territories, 1885, No. 15,
pp. 11-17 ; B. A. Philippi, Ueber die Yeisteinerungen der Terti&rforiqation Chiles,
Zeitschr. geaamint. Nat., 1878, 3. Folge, III, pp. 674-684 ; near Quiriquina Plesiosaurus,
Baculites, Trigonia occur in these beds.

* K. Zittel, BeitrSge zur Geologie und Pal&ontologie der Libyschen Waste, 4to, Cassel,
1888, p. xc.



TERTIABY SEAS


300


[PARrm


«1istiince of 300 kilometers, and it rises above Leh to a height of 31,000
feet (I, p, 438). The further continuation of these sediments in the great
i-anges of Thibet is not known, but Eocene deposits are seen again in Luzon.
From the plateau of Shillong they extend into the folds of Burmah. The
older Tertiary beds of the Malay arc from Sumatra to Borneo are likewise
of marine origin : there is much difference of opinion as to their precise
age. Some traces of Eocene have been said to occur in Madagascar also,
but this statement has not yet received confirmation.

Notwithstanding the fragmcntaiy state of our knowledge it is evident
that sediments of the Eocene sea extend over the south of Eurasia in
folded ranges, and that outside these ranges outposts of flat-lying deposits
occur ; in the north, as far as England and over the south of Russia ; in the
south, from the Sahara across Arabia, Cutch, Guzerat, and to the Brahma-
putra. In breadth, this sedimentaiy zone, interrupted by islands, extends
from London to Khartoum, and from Kiev to the Indian Ocean.

Notwithutanding its wide exteixl, the sediments of this sea are nowhere
seen to ovcTstep the limits of the Creta4;eous area. In Europe its distribution
is more restricted than that of the Chalk ; in the whole of the south from
the Sahara to Guzei’at its sediments terminate in an escarpment, or, as in
Arabia, in steep cliffs, or again, as in Shillong, by a flexure ; they are every-
where superjKJSed normally and conformably on the Cretaceous, and their
southern shore is unknown.

In the west of Europe, where more detailed observations are at our
disposiil, a negative phase may again be recognized. The south of England
was laid dry, and the Hempstead serieJ^ was deposited in fresh water. The
valley of the Seine was also abandoned by the sea, and the gyps/am of
MontmaHre was deposited ; lieds of gypsum belonging to this period extend
into Provence and into the neighbourhood of MUhlhausen in Alsace. Over
northern Gennany, which was not covei’ed by the sea, a great formation of
brown coal accumulated. This negative phase marks the boundary between
the Eocene and Oligocene.

Once more Europe experienced a positive movement of the strand, and
the Oligocene sea njadc its appearance. The beds of Castel Gomberto in
the southern Alps, distinguished by a rich marine fauna and in particular
by numeTOUS corals, are known in many localities as far as Suez, as well
as in Armenia. They extend into the south of France, overlie the fresh-
water beds and gypsum of the preceding negative phase, arc exposed at
Bordeaux, then at Rennes, and, as the sands of Fontainebleau, enter the
liasin of Paris, where they extend to the south somewhat beyond the
boundary of the marine Eocene; they are represented in England only
l»y brackish-water deposits; finally we meet with them as the marine
.sjinds of Weinheim in the Rhine valley near Mainz, and even above this
city. These marine sands arc covered by blue clay, the septarian clay, or



OH.vn] THE OLIGOCENE TBAN3GRESSION 301

the Rupelian clay of Dumont. Opinions differ as to whether the marine
sands entered the Rhine valley from the north or the south, but the
northern origin of the superimposed septarian clay is indisputable \ The
corals of Castel Gomberto are rare near Bordeaux (Gaas); in the Ftiris
basin and at Mainz they have as good as disappeared, but the molluscan
fauna is still that of a warm temperate climate. In the clay, on the other
hand, species of boreal type predominate; this marine clay extends far
over north Germany, through Berlin to Stettin and Kiinigsberg; it is the
same as that already mentioned as extending, according to Karpinsky,
over the Russian plain, and on the east side of the Urals as far iis lat. 58® N.
(I, p. 322). About this time, therefore, the sea advanced from the north
over the region of the Obi, then south of the Ural to Europe, and extended
over Germany to Belgium.

Thus the course of the ancient marine transgressions over tlui Russian
Platform has been as follows : from the south in the Callovian, from the
north during the Volga stage, from the south in the Cenomanian, and from
the north in the Oligocene period.

The shores receded once again. The Aquitanian lignite measures and
the loAVcr fresh-wfitcr molasse of Switzerland were deposited in central
Europe. The succeeding positive phase, however, again falls within the
range of those events, which have already been discussed in our sketch
of the history of the Mediterranean.

The deposits of the Jirst Mediterranean stage extend fi'om the Azores
and Madeira through the south of Europe, across Asia Minor and Armenia
to Persia. In his latest travels, Griesbach found Tertiary beds, whicli may
be the continuation of this great zone, in Khorassan; they contain marine
shells which he regards as Miocene, and form a belt on the southern border
of the Aralo-Caspian area, passing through Badghis, Maimeni, and even
to beyond Taschkugan. Even across the Oxus, near Kilif, north of Balk,
this indefatigable investigator found inclined beds of limestone rising from
the Turkmcnen steppe, and containing Ostrea, Pecten, and Polyzoa: he.
assigns them to Abich's Salt formation

From these facts we perceive what a vast extension the ancient
central Mediteri'anean still possessed in the middle of the Tertiary aera,
when a fauna was already in existence closely resembling that of the
present Mediterranean. The shells collected in Persia show, however, that
the communication with India, which was still open during the Eocene*
period, now no longer existed.

' A. Andreae und W. Kilian, Briefwechsel fiber das Alter des Melanicnkalkes und die
Herkunft des Tertiiirmeeres im Rheinthale : Mitth. Comm. gcol. Landesuntcrsuch. von
ElsaBs-Lothr., I, 1885, jjp. 72“82.

* C. L. Griesbach, Field-notes from Afghanistan, Rec. Gcol. Surv. India, 1886, XIX,
p. 257 ; and by the same, Field-notes No. 5 to accompany a geological Sketch-map of
Afghanistan and North-Eastern Khorasisan, op. cit., 1887, XX, p. 199.



302 TEBTIABY SEAS [PARrm

In Europe the northern shore ran up the Bhone valley, induded a part
of the Jura; and proceeded from the south margin of the Black forest to
that of the Bohemian mass, and along the eastern side of the Manhart and
the Sudetes to Silesia.

In the East over a vast area evaporation next set in.

This was the time of the Schlier, the deposit of an expiring sea. The
salt beds of the Carpathians were then formed, and probably at the same
time the great salt beds of Persia and Turkestan. Communication with
the Bhone valley, across the existing Jura, had by this time ceased.

The blue marl of the Schlier is covered here and there by fresh- water
deposits: tectonic changes occurred in central Europe: then came the
second Mediterranean doge. By this time the greater part of the East
appears to have been abandoned by the Mediterranean, at all events its
asserted presence in Persia requires confirmation. To the north of the
Crimea it still persisted, even as far north as the valley of the Manytsh,
and has left behind some scattered deposits. In lower Austria and
Hungary it entered freshly subsided areas of great size lying in the midst
of the mountains, but Bavaria and upper Austria were no longer submeiged
by it.

A negative phase next followed, and isolated the Samxatian region; the
whole valley of the Danube, Qalicia, the south of Bussia, and the last
remains of the Aralo-Caspian area were now abandoned by the sea. The
Mediterranean was then restricted by another negative movement to
a space even much smaller than that it at present occupies. Its eastern
boundary probably lay near Corsica and Sardinia. At the beginning of
this period erosion of the valleys occurred, as in the Bhone valley, some
parts of western Hungary, and doubtless elsewhere : later on great inland
seas existed, in which the Cardium beds of the Pontic stage were deposited ;
but the arrival of marine fishes, which ascended the rivers to spawn in the
lakes, suggests that the negative period had already passed its climax,
which corresponds in fact with the erosion of the pre-Pontic valleys.
Up to the present we know of no true marine deposits of this period in the
Mediterranean region, and thus Neumayr was justified in supposing that
the strand-lim at this time was prohahly sUwded lower than at present
(I,p.336).

A gap occurs in the Mediterranean series at this point ; it marks the
culmination of the negative movement, and it is at precisely this horizon
that the limit is usually drawn on palaeontological grounds between the
Miocene and Pliocene.

It is true that a positive phase again followed, but the sea of the third
Mediterranean stage was far from attaining its former extent; its area
was even much more restricted than at present, although the strand stood
somewhat higher, since the subsidences in the region of the Adriatic, on the



<}B. yn} TEBTIAfiT BOBDER OF UNITED STATES 808

Syrian coast, and in the Aegean, had not yet occurred. Next came the
fourth Mediterranean stage, and the temporary northern immigration ;
this time, however, not from Siberia tow^s central Europe, as in the
Oligocene period, but from the Atlantic Ocean. Local subsidences folloiifed ;
the Pontus was annexed, and the present state of things established.

If we disregard the tectonic incidents, that which we observe is an alters
nation of positive and negative phases of different value ; in each succeeding
alternation the positive phase had less and less effect in extending the
confines of the sea, or its area, as compared with the preceding positive
phase, was reduced ; until the negative maximum supervened in the period
of erosion which preceded the Pontic lakes.

This gradual reduction was interrupted by a temporary transgression
of the boreal sea in the Oligocene period.

The gain due to the slightly higher level of the existing strand, and to
the addition of insunken areas, was by no means sufiicient to balance the
loss resulting from the decrease in amplitude of the positive movement,
and thus the existing Mediterranean has come to represent the remains of
an Ocean, which even at the commencement of the Tertiary aera still
extended over central Asia.

An oxcollont idea of the way in which these phases succeeded each
other may be obtained from Iwanow’s map of the government of Stavropol.
North of Pjatigovsk there rises a boss of quartz porphyry, surrounded by
sandstone belonging to some early stage of the Tertiary; the second
Mediterranean stage follows on the north, extending from Qiorgiensk to
beyond Stavropol; it is horizontally stratified and covers a considerable
area; towards the north, i. e. towards the Manytsh, it is followed in its
turn by the Sarmatian stage, also fiat ; this lies in a synclinal, and beyond
the Manytsh the other fiank of the synclinal makes its appearance : then
follows within this synclinal of Sarmatian, a second, of Pontic beds; in
this lies a third of Aralo-Caspian deposits, and in this fiows the river
Manytsh

8. The east coast of North America. With regard to this region a
number of facts of general importance have already been discussed
(I, p. 281) : a detailed description has been given of the stratified succession
in Antigua (II, p. 135), so that we shall be able to treat with greater
brevity the relations of the Tertiary beds on the west coast of the
Atlantic with those of Europe : the facts bearing on this subject are mostly
taken from Heilprin’s latest works *.

* Iwanow, Geologische Earte des Stawroporschen Guberniums ; Gornoi Joarn., 1887,
No.l

* A. Heilprin, Contribution to the Tertiary Geology and Palaeontology of the United
States, 4to, Philadelphia, 1884, map ; for the middle Tertiary beds of North Jersey, by
the same, Froo. Acad. Nat Sci. Phil., 1886, p. 851 ; farther, by the same, Explorations on
the West Coast of Florida. and in the Okeechobee Wilderness; Wagner, Free Inst Sci.



304


TERTIARY SEAS


[part III


The gradual retreat of the strand is much less clearly expressed on the
Atlantic coast of Europe than on the Mediterranean, because its outline is
broken by rias coasts and is in general much more diversified; on the
Gifadalquivir, in Portugal, and on the Gironde, however, the retreat may be
readily recognized. The American coast of the Ocean possesses a simpler
structure. On the island of Martha’s Vineyard (lat. 41“ 20' N.) a .zone of
marine Tertiary strata occurs, which rests regularfy against the continent
and bortlers the Ocean, proceeding through the peninsula of Florida and
the Antilles to the Orinoco, that is through more than 33 degrees of
latitude. Tliese beds rest conformably on the upper Chalk for great
distances, but are separated from it in the south by an ‘ co-lignite ’ stage,
and they are so disposed that successively younger members appear as we
approach the sea. From this we may draw two conclusions ; first, that this
has been a littoral region since the Cretaceous period, and next that the
coast-line has progressively receded.

Yet each of these results requires some modification.

Although for 33 degrees of latitiide the marine beds lie as they were
deposited since the middle of the Cretaceous, yet, apart from the early
Cretaceous fauna of Bogotti and the Cretaceous coi’als of Jamaica, thera is
such a close correspondence of the Oligocenc corals of Castcl Gomberto
near Vicenza and of the first Mediterranean stage near Turin with those
of the homotiixial deposits in the Antilles, that to account for the distri-
bution of these corals we are compelled to assume the existence of a series
of islands or a continuous coast-line, which as late as the firvSt Mediterranean
stage extended through the tropical zone.

The strand no doubt receded progressively, yet it is none the less
probable that here, as in Europe, the existing level is not the lowest which
has l>cen experienced. The bicts are »is follows : —

'I’he Tertiary selvage runs parallel to the coast from New Jersey
through both the Carolines and Georgia ; in Georgia it is nearly 260 kilo-
meters in brca<lth, ami its l»oundary l>ends in south Alabama gradually to
the north, extends beyond the mouth of the Ohio into the Mississippi, and
from there crosses the Rio Grande above Laredo to the south-west. All
the other inend)ers, including the Orbitoides limestone, follow the north
coast of the gulf of Mexico; there they are covered by the deposits of
a great inland sea, the Grand Gulf series, which is absent on the Atlantic
coast (I, Fig. 37, p. 284). At the same time, however, the Oligoccne and
Miocene, consequently the younger memlwrs of the Tertiary zone, proceed
to the south through Florida towards the Antilles. Thus Florida is, as it
were, one-.sided, since the supposed equivalents of the European Miocene
occur only along the Atlantic coast.

Phil., 8vo, Philadelphia, 1887 ; W. H. Dali, Notes on the Geology of Florida, Am. Journ.
Sci., 1887, XXXIV, pp. 161-170.



PLOBIDA STAGE


805


€tt VIl]-

But Heilprin has shown, in confirmation of Conrad’s statements^, that
while these representatives of the Miocene are present all along the coast-
line, from the north downwards, yet they are immediately followed Jby
beds containing a much younger fauna, very similar to tliat now existing,
and described as post-Pliocene, and further that as far south as Florida no
one has yet succeeded in discovering an equivalent of the European Pliocene.

In the gulf of Mexico, about the mouth of the Mississippi, the very
young, certainly post-Pliocene beds of the Port Hudson group, rest directly
on the limnic beds of the Great Gulf series (lat.29®-31°^N.). In south Florida,
on the other 'hand, new members make their appearance. On the river
Oaloosahatchie (lat. 26® 30-26® 40' N.) the Florida stage, rich in mollusca,
appears, which Heilprin is inclined to compare with the European Pliocene.
The existing sediments appear as the direct continuation of the very flatly
bedded sediments of the preceding period, and the gradual retreat of the
strand finds expression in the fact that the older beds were deposited in
deeper water, the younger in less deep. Dali, it is true, believes that here
also he has found traces of oscillations.

The younger zones of Florida are continued into the outer zone of tin?
Antilles.

In this important region of North America, where many questions
still await solution, investigation will certainly bring to light much that
is new: at present we may record the fact that in the region of the
European Mediterranean a regular negative maximum occuiTed between
the Miocene and Pliocene, from which we may conclude that the strand -
line in this region then stood at a lower level than at present, and that
on the other side of the Ocean, in about the same latitude and still a little
further to the south, a gap occurs between the supposed upper Pliocene
and the post-Pliocene, which overlies it : further to the south, however,
in Florida, this gap has not been shown to exist.

4. The TeHiary land of*Patagonia, The Tertiary beds which advance,
.south of Paranfi, through 20 degrees of latitude to the Atlantic coast,
differ from those of North America in two respects: in the first place
they include a series of terrestrial formations, with, which occasional
marine beds are intercalated; and next, these terrestrial deposits end
against the sea-coast, in such a manner as to show that the mainland
once extended much further to the east. In the north they proceed
a long way up the Paranfi, and towards the west nearly reiich the eastern
slopes of the Andes. The resemblance of the basin of the Paranfi to that
of the Mississippi is very striking.

These beds form the most extensive Tertiary land in the wo^’ld: their,
wide distribution in a north and south direction affords an excellent

’ T. A. Conrad, Catalogue of the Miocene Shells of the Atlantic Slope ; Proc. Acad.
Nat. Sci. Phil., 1862, p. 559.


SOLLAI 11


X



806


TERTIARY SEAS


[PABT in


opportunity for probing the questions with which we are now occupied.
The latitude of the strait of Magellan corresponds very nearly with that
of Cambridge and Birmingliam, and the latitude of Parani closely enough
with that 6f Alexandria : hence wo may hope to obtain some information
as to the nature of the events which happened in the southern hemmphere
contemporaneously with those in corresponding latitudes of Europe.

Our knowledge of this subject is chiefly due to d’Orbigny and Darwin,
Burmeister, Ameghino, and Doering, particularly to Doering, ’ whose
account 1 am now about to> follow

The Tertiary beds of Patagonia present no signs of dislocation. But
if we trace along the coast the level of the marine intercalation,
which is supposed to be Oligocenc, we shall find that it rises and
falls in a gently undulating curve from the mouth of the Parang to south
Patagonia : this is in correspondence with the fact that one flat basin lies
beneath the Pampas, another beneath south Patagonia, and that in some
places the Oligoccnc beds dip beneath the sea. The undulations throughout
this great distance are, however, so extraordinarily flat that we may perhaps
regard them as representing merely an original inequality of the sea floor.

The Tertiary beds of Patagonia repose on the Cretaceous. In this
case also the marine deposits are more recent as they lie nearer to the
coast; here also great and exceedingly uniform oscillations have taken
place, giving rise to an alternation of terrestrial and manne deposits;
and here, once more, the diminishing amplitude of the positive phases
conducts us to the existing state of things, while at the same time an
inequality of great interest occurs in the movements.

Upon the Cretaceous formation, and not sharply defined from it, rests
the unfossiliferous Chuaranilic stage: it is overlaid by a thick group of
red sandstone and sandy clay, with gypsum ; this occupies wide areas in
the west, towards the slopes of the Cordilleras {Pirn Peliuenche with
Mesotlierium Marshii). To this stage we must perhaps refer the lignites
of Punta Arenas. Next, for the first time since the Cretaceous period,
a positive phase occurred. The deposits of this marine stage are exposed
at many localities on the coast and in the interior; they everywhere
contain the same mollusca, over their whole extent, from Paranfi to Punta
Arenas, where they rest on the lignites {Piao Paranense. with Ostrea
Ferraresi) : they are correlated with the upper Eocene of Europe. The
strand again receded, and beds of sandstone were laid down, with remains
of plants and fresh-water mollusca, as well as mammals, among them
genera closely allied to Palaeotherium and Anoplotheriuin of the gypsum
of Montmartre (Piso Mesoptamico with Megamys Patagoniemie).

' rnforme ofivial de la Comision cientifica agregada al ezpedicion al Rio* Negro bajo
I’drden de General Don J. A. Roca, .4to, Buenos Airea, 1883, III, Qeologia, por el
D, Docring, pp. 401-530.



307


OH.vn] THE TERTIARY LAND OF, PATAGONIA

Then for the second time the strand rose, but the marine deposits did
not extend so far inland as in the preceding transgression : they probably
correspond with the Oligocene {Pirn Patagonico with Odrea Patagonig,).
The most westerly point at which the finst marine stage occurs is La^
San Martin, near the Cordillera (lat. 49“-50“ S., west of long. 72° W.), while
this second marine stage only attained, generally speaking, a half to one-
third of the distance which intervenes between the sea and the Cordillera.

Then the strand retiretl for a long distance a|id for a very long period ;
several stages of continental deposits follow one another, uninterrupted
by marine intercalations Great quantities of trachytic • detritus, which
in the south occur in the upper part 'of the second marine stage, are
continued into the lower part of the succeeding continental deposits.
These begin with sandstone and marls : they contain the genus Anchitherium,
indigenous in Europe during the lower Miocene (Piso Araricano). Then
comes the alluvial sand of the western Pampas {Piso Puelche ) : at the clotie of
this doge Doering jAaces the limit between the Miocene and Pliocene, which
coinddee with the greatest recession of the draiul. The continent then
extended much further to the east than at present. We have now reached
the Pampas formation, in the strict sense of the term ; it consists of clay
with numerous remains of terrestrial mammals, and is subtlivided into
tlirce stages— Pi«o Pampeano infen'ior with Typotheriwm, Protopithems ;
Piso Eolitico ; and Piso Pampeano lacwstre. It is supposed to_ represent
the Pliocene.

A vast sheet, of pebbles and conglomerate was now spread over the
Patagonian plateau: it probably came from the Cordillera, and sttmds in
some relation to the Glacial epoch. Erosion of the valleys then tOok
place, and not till this period did the sea appear for the third time (Piso
querandmo). It did not, however, extend far beyond the coast, least of
all in the north, and the fauna corresponds very closely with that of the
present day. This i*ecent post-glacial transgression is thus separated fi-om
the two earlier transgressions, which contain none but extinct species of
mollusca, by a great hiatus, an interval wholly unrepresented by Miocene
or Pliocene deposits. ,

Doering adds that to discover the missing members between the second
and third transgressions, we should have to make borings off cape Cor-
rientes beneath the sea.

In spite therefore of the great uncertainty as to the preci.se age of the
beds, there is a remarkable concordance between the results obtained in
three regions widely remote from each other by three able investigators,
working independently. Neumayr of Vienna finds that at the beginning
of the Pontic stage, which is generally recognized as the limit between
the Miocene and Pliocene, the strand in the Mediterranean occupied a
lower level than at present, and that in the Pontic period, or at the



808


TEBTIABY SEAS


[pAiffia

beginoing of the Pliocene, there is a gap in the seriM of marine beds.
Heilprin of Philadelphia says that on the Atlantic coast of the United
Stotes the Pliocene is not represented, and that the Miocene beds are
separated by a gap from Ihe succeeding and much younger shell beds.
Doering of Cordoba arrives at the result that on the coast of Patagonia
the strand must have retreated far from its present position, that the land '
must have attained its greatest extension at the limit between Miocene
and Pliocene, and that the Tertiary, probably Oligocene, marine beds are
separated from the post-glacial sheU beds by a great gap.

We will now return to the quer- Andinian shell beds. These are the recent
deposits which were so clearly described by Darwin. Doering, who has
traced the regular oscillations they record through 20 degrees of latitude,
has no doubt that such movements could not have been caused by dis-
placements of the solid land. A very remarkable peculiarity of the
movement is 'Ua increaae towards the eouth. In the bay of Plata the
quer-Andinian. shell beds occur at -h 20 to 30 meters; rising southwards
they reach + 100 meters in the extreme south, where they are surrounded
by terraces at + 300 to 400 metres. We shall revert to this fact later on.

5. Recent Limestone Formationa. Formidable difficulties are con-
nected with the question of the present deposition of limestone, and
particularly with the mode of formation of those coral islands, so fre-
quently ring-shaped, which rise from the great Ocean depths.

Darwin distinguished three different kinds of coral reefs : Siat, fringing
reef a, which adhere closely to the land or a reef of rocks ; next, barrier
reef a, separated ‘from the land by a deep channel ; and finally ring-c^haped
atolls, surrounding a lagoon, within which no land is visible. He attempted
to explain the transition from group to group by assuming a gradual ,
auhaidence of the aea floor. Dana also adopted this view, as the result of
very extensive observations of his own. Whatever opinion we may form
as to the subsidence theory of Darwiq, it needs no proof to show that
a rising of the sea in the torrid zone would meet the facts in precisely
the same way as a subsidence of the sca floor. Both Darwin and Dana
were well acquainted with a great number of apparently elevated coral
islands, and they sought to distinguish between zones or regions of elevation
and subsidence

Wilkes, the leader of the American expedition, which Dana accom-
panied, expressed himself against Darwin’s explanation, influenced appa-
rently by having seen a number of elevated reefs, i.e. reefs laid dry by
negative movement; and in 1855 J. C. Boss, who had lived for many
years on Cocos island (Keeling atoll), the starting-point of Darwin’s

1 C. Darwin, The Structure and Diatribution of Coral Reefii, 2nd.ed., 8to, 1874 ; J. D.
Dana, Corals and Coral Islands, Am. Joum. sci., 1885, 3rd ser., XXX, pp. 89-105 and
169-191.



809


€H. viij POBMATION OP CORAIi KEEPS .

obBervatioaB, opposed bis theory even 'more strongly. • In the first place,
Boss maintained that J)arwin’8. statements regarding recent subsidence on
Cocos island were incorrect; and subsequently H.‘ Forbes also assert^
that in this case Darwin had ‘been mistaken. The paper published
by Boss on this subject is marred by much obscurity of thought as
regards volcanic activity, and by other defects, which may be .lightly
passed over as the result of a lengthy residence on remote islands. On
tiie other hand, it contaiiis some .valuable observations ; _ Boss remarked
that all the elevated coral islands of the Pacific rise* to about the same
level, and that it appears ‘as if the whole surface of the Qcean had
suddenly sunk in consequence of the subsidence of one or several parts of
the sea floor towards the centre of the earth. He further points out that
Darwin represents elevation and subsidence as distributed in long separate
zon^, whereas elevated islands (reefs laid dry) and, according to Darwin’s
views, sunken islands (atolls) occur on the same line, close beside each
other, and in between each other. He concludes that the distribution
of coral reefs is determined by marine currents, which bring them
nourishment

Finally, Semper, Rein, and Murray have of late years questioned the
validity of Darwin’s subsidence theory, because, in the opinion of thede
. observers, the growth of the corals is always confined to the outside of
the reef, where food is to be found; while by the death of the interior
part ring-shaped forms arc produced, for which no subsidence of the ground
is irequired *.

This question, which has such an important bearing on the statics of
the sea, is discussed now because in various parts of the world limestones
of recent formation occur in association with others, which are of late
Tertiary age, and it is sometimes difficult to discover a strict limit between
them. Examples of this association are far from rare: on Antigua the
beds which reach the sea arc Miocene, and it ought not to be difiicult to dis-
tinguish them from the younger formations (II, p. 136, Fig. 16). The problem
is more complicated in the case of the limestone of Cura^oa, Aruba, artd

M

* J. C. Ross, Review of the Theory of Coml Formations set forth by C. Darwin, &c.,
Nat. TijiJschr. Ned. Ind. Ver. Batavia, 1855, VIII, pp. 1-43 ; H. Forbes, Notes on Keeling
Island, Proc. Geogr. Soc., 1879, pp. 777 et seq.

* G. Semper,* Die Riffe und das Leben im Meere, Zeitschr. wise. Zool., 1863, XIII,
pp. 563-569, printed in his Die Philippinen und ihro Bewohner, 8vo, WQrzburg, 1869,
pp. 100-109 ; by the same, Die natOrHchen Existenzbedingungen der Thiere', 8vo, Leipzig,
1880, II, pp. 39-98 and 261 ; J. J. Rein, Beitrage zur physischen Geographie der
fiermnda-Inseln, Ber. Senckenb. naturf. Ges. Frankf. am Main, 1869-1870, pp. 140-158 ; .
by the same. Die Bermudas-Inseln und ihre Korallenriffe, nebst einem Nachtrage gegen
die Darwin'sche Senkungstheorie, Verb. I. deutsch. Geogr.-T^ages zu Berlin, 8vo, 1882,
pp. 39-46 ; J. Murray, On the Structure and Origin of Coral Reefs and Islands, Proc.
Roy. Soc. Edinb., 1879-1880, X, pp. 505-518.



310


TERMABY SEAS


[PABT.m

Venmida, which has been, investigated by Lori^^ In Florida the. com*
plication is still greater. Species pass into. new forms or become extinct;
those corresponding with still existing species increase in number, and
the marine fauna of the West Indies is itself, like that of the existing
Mediterranean, an assemblage of elements of different age and origin. .

■ For. the purpose of a general survey it will be convenient first to refer
to some observations, in the Atlantic region, — Florida, the West Indies, and
the Bermudas in particular, and next to discuss the chief structural featuies
of the widely distributed coral reefs of the Pacific.

The peninsula of Florida in the north and north-west is formed, as we
have several times observed, of the middle Tertiary Orbitoides limestone,
which towards the Ocean rests against a zone of Miocene coming from the
north ; to the south younger beds of limestone appear, till in the Everglades
the surface of the plateau stands nearly level with the existing surface of
the sea. Still further to the south the plateau forms the ragged shore lin6
of the bay of Florida ; the shallow waters of the bay, only a few fathoms
deep, cover a broad horizontal surface of calcareous mud, a region where
. niaterial is at present accumulating for the formation of a new limestone
plateau, similar to that of the existing peninsula.

The bay of Florida, and Key Biscayne bay, its continuation to the
north, arc bounded on the Ocean side by a long series of low islands, the
Keys, which run in a regular curve from the southern point of Virginia
Key in the north, first to the south, then in an arc to the west up to the
bank outside the Marquesas, through .which it proceeds and reaches the
Tortugas. As early as 1863 E. B. Hunt showed that this curve is pro-
duced by the counter current coming from the north, which flows between
the land and the Gulf stream. The counter current limits the zone of coral
growth, since it drifts sediment from the north, and brings food to the
corals. Alexander Agassiz has given a highly instructive account of the
facts, and has shown how storm and waves attack the organic structures,
break off fragments, and grind them to a white impalpable powder, which is
driven during the storms along the Keys and through the gaps into the
broad quiet watenj of Florida bay, where it is spread out by the play of
the tides and accumulates pn the sea floor as a fine calcareous silt. On the
western side of Florida this accumulation of calcareous sediment alsQ occurs
and extends far to the north, covered above by a thin crust of corala These
are frequently killed by the stifling mud which finds its way into their
calyces. It is not, Agassiz remarks, that the sea floor has risen to a height
at which corals could settle on it, but that the sediments have accumulated
up to this height. As to the Keys, the Tortugas, and above all the
Marquesas, a more or less annular form, vhich marks them as true atolls,

' J. Lorie, Fossile Mollusken von Cuia 9 ao, Aruba und der KUste von Venezuela;
Samml. geol. Reichsmus. Leiden, 1887, 2. Ser., I, pp. 111-149, pi.



CH. vii] • SOMBRERO > 311

lias been .produced solely by the influence of the currents, which brings
nutriment to the, coral polyps h

Here then we have before us at once our first example of a limestone
plateau now in process of formation, and an illustration of the objectidns
which have been, raised to the theory of the origin of atolls by subsidence
of the sea floor.

Similar accumulations of calcareous mud and dead organic ddbris are
known over large areas in other parts of the West Indian, region, off Cuba
for example, and particularly along the Tertiary plateau of Yucatan.
Alacran reef (Scorpion rock) is a horseshoe-shaped atoll crowning recent
calcareous sediments ; it has doubtless arisen, like the Tortugas and Mar-
quesas, without any appreciable displacement of the strand.

In the West Indies signs of negative movement may be seen in many
places. I do not allude to the limestone beds occurring at some consider-
able altitude, the highest of which arc found in Cuba and Jamaica, for
although they hav'c been reganled as reefs of comparatively recent date,
their age is wholly unknown, and they nmy even belong to- the Cretaceous
period*; independent of these there are many indications of movement,
even close to the existing strand. Over the whole of the east coast of
Florida, nearly as far as the commencement of the Keys, lies a shelly breccia,
the ‘ Coquina of St. Augustine,’ which engirdles the coast and is regarded
as marking a negative movement of 10 to 20 feet. This deposit appears
in many islands of the Antilles : a well-known example is the Basse Terre
of Guadeloupe, which is surrounded by a recent coral reef. Yet it must
not be overlooked that the height above the sea of this last mark or last
level surface does not afford a trustworthy measure of the movements
which have taken, place during the existing phase (II, p. 25).

Among the regions now laid dry in consequence of these movemenfe we
must include the island of Somljrero, lying out to sea in lat. 18® 36' N.
between the Virgin isles and the lesser Antilles.

Sombrero, according to Sawkins, is a little more than a nautical mile in
length,and its greatest breadth is scarcely a third of its length. The whole
coast is bounded by a perpendicular or overhanging cliff, 26 to 40 feet high,
with 12 to 14 fathoms of water outside. The greatesl difference of level
in the interior amounts to 10 feet : the surface is scored with grykes or
fissures of erosion. ‘A more desolate or inhospitable spot can hardly be
found in the actual world or in the realms of the imagination.’

^ A. Agassiz, The Tortugas and Florida Reefs; Mem. Am. Acad. Sci., Centennial
Volume, Cambridge, 1885, XI, pp. 107-133, maps.

• W. A. Crosby, On the elevated Reefs of Cuba ; Proc. Boston Soc. Nat'Kist., 1882-^ ,
1883, XXII, pp. 124-130. The terraces of limestone lie at heights of 30 feet, 200-250
feet, and 500 feet ; even the limestone of the Yunque at a height of 1,800 feet, which is
entirely different, is considered by Crosby to form part of the sune group.



312


TEBTIABY SEAS


Epaqthi


The whole island is foimed



Madrepores *


Porites

Madrepores

Shells


Crystalline

limestone


Shells


Shells and
Madrepores


White limestone


Corals


Shells,

White limestone


Shells


Madrepores


(Sea-level)


Fig. 29. LimiatMM beds in Sombrero (after A. Julien).


of limestone ; the moUnsca en-
closed in the limestone belo^
to the existing fauna, with thei
exception of a very common
Bulla, which appears to be BvUa
granosa of .liie middle Tertiary
of the West Indies. Dykes of
phosphates occur in the lime-
stone, evidently derived from
vanished beds of guano. They
have been a source of attraction
to this barren island since 1866
a description of them has been
given by Alexis A. Julien

Six beds of limestone are to
be distinguished, resting hori-
zontally, one on the other; we
will indicate them from the sea-
level upwards by the letters A
to F. Qn the face of the cliffii,
however, only two bedding-
planes, as a rule, are at all con-
spicuous : they are distinguished
by partings of a different nature
which occur between A and B
and between /) and i?. A further
distinction is adbrded by the
colour ; D is decidedly grey, and
thus stands out in marked con-
trast to the other beds, which
are pure white. Beds of guwo
have been formed, according to
Julien, at three different epochs
at least: each of thesb beds, how-
ever, was subsequently removed
by the sea, leaving some remains
in the clefts of the limestone.

* Sawkins, Report on Jamaica, I,
p. 261 ; Cliere, Geology of the West
Indian Isles, p. 21 ; A. A. Julien, On
the Geology of the Key of Sombrero,
Ann. Lyc. Nat. Hiat. N. York, 1867,
VIII, pp. -251-278, pi.



m.my . ’ BBRMUDASL^ 813

Julien concludes from this, as Urell as from the character of the limestone
beds, that the ^island had been repeatedly submerged and again laid dry.
He has attempted to represent the o»iillations graphically by a curve, wd
even for the trifling number of beds here visible, was obliged to assume
eight elevations and nine subsidences of the ground.

The resemblance of these beds to those of the eastern Alps is evident.
Whether each single bed does indeed correspond to an oscillation or not,,
there can be no doubt that we have before us here formations ivhich bear a
striking likeness to the stratifled limestones of earlier epochs.

The limestone beds which rise within the encircling coral-reefs in the
West Indies are tunnelled by many large caves. In the Bahamas, where
a series of ancient strand-lines may bo recognized, such caves occur in many
placea Sharpies has described those of the Caicos idands in the neighbour-
hood of the Turk islands-: the floor is covered with red earth, gypsum, and
guano It seems to mo scarcely possible to doubt that these terraced lime-
stones, excavated by caverns, are older than the living reef around them.
Their great age is confirmed by the fact that Pomel and Cope have found
the remains of extinct species of terrestrial anirnak in similar caves in the
little island of AnguiUa, and from this the gfcat age of the negative move-
ment may be inferred.

We conclude then that small annular atolls without deep lagoons, such
as the Tortugas and Alacran, may be formed without any appreciable
positive movement of the strand. The existing Keys of Florida must have
been built up since the last negative movement. If a positive movement is
now. in progress it is so trifling that the sediment is able to keep pace with
it. The negative movements and the caves with remains of extinct ter-
restrial mammals date from a more remote period. It is not improbable
that the separation of the limestone into beds is duo to minor oscillations ;
Sombrero seems to suggest this, but in the bay of Florida a change in the
. nature of the sediment might easily be brought about merely by the closing
or enlargement of the openings between the Keys, by increased evaporation,
or in other ways, without oscillation of the strand.

In the Bermvdas we are afforded the rare opportunijby of observing the
submarine structure of a group of calcareous islands. They have been
described by Nelson, Jones, Rein,,the members of the Challenger expedition,
and Rice *. A recent outer reef clings close to the south-east side of the

* S. P. Sharpies, Turks Island and the Guano Caves of the Caicos Islands; Proc.
Boston Soc. Nat. Hist., 1884, XXII, pp. 242-252.

* R. J. Nelson, On the Geology of the Bermudas, Trans. Geol. Soc., 2nd sen, V, p. 103 ;
J. J. Rein, BeitrBge zur physischen Geographie der Bermudarlnseln, Ber. Senckenb.
naturf. Ges. Frankf. am Main, 1869-1870, pp. 140-158 ; J. M. Jones, Recent Observations
in the Bermudas, Nature, Aug. 1, 1872, p. 262 ; W. Thomson, llie Atlantic, 8ro, London,
1877, I, pp. 290-357; W. N. Rice, Tlie Geology of ‘Bermuda, in Jones and Goode,



314


TERTIARY SEAS


[PABT m


higher islands, but recedes from them on the south-west, as well ds on the
north, for a considerable distance, to form a broad oval ring, which thus
encloses all the higher islands and an extensive lagoon.. The islands attain
a height of 250 feet, and arc formed above the sea-level of drift rock, that
is, of organic ddbris which has been piled up to this height by storms, and
then either loosely cemented together, or converted into dense and compact
.limestone, by the rain. Bed earth covers the islands, penetrates into the
fissures of the white limestone, and forms the soil for -vegetable growth.
There arc caves in the limestone with stalactites hanging from the roof.
In some places indications of oscillations are to be seen ; at Stocks point
Bice describes a bed of beach conglomerate, formed of masses of drift
rock, with large sea shells and compact lumps of red earth. This con-
glomerate occurs as an intercalation in the drift rock, which contains
land shells.

At the mouth of Hamilton harbour submarine mining was commenced
in 1870, and, according to Jones, a cave with stalactites and red earth was
encountered at a depth of 6 fathoms. Excavations were continued later on
a larger scale, with a view to the construction of docks. At a depth of
— 25 feet, a calcareous mud was met with, 5 feet thick; beneath this loosely
cemented coral sand, with fragments of Diploporia and shells ; then followed,
at a depth of —45 feet, a layer of peat moss or rather old vegetable soil,
•with upright stumps of trees, land shells, and bones of birds. This lay on
ancient limestone.

We have here definite proof of positive movement: nevertheless Bice
concludes, with a high degree of probability, that no appreciable change has
occurred since 1609. If the movement is still in progress it must be very slow.
Bice bases this result on a number of ancient observations collected by him.

In passing to the Pctcific region we may mention first that here, at
least in the regions which border it on the west, there is no lack of evidence
in proof of continuity between the very recent limestone formations and
those of an earlier date.

Tertiary deposits play a large part in the formation of the archipelago
west of New Guinea, and recent limestone immediately follows patches of
Tertiary. The Aam archipelago, according to Biedel, includes twelve
large and eighty-three smaller islands ; all form part of a single limestone
plateau. Five very narrow channels of the sea, not broader than fairly
large rivers, separate the six principal islands, which form together a
plateau 180 kilometers long, with a slightly undulating surface, covered
with marshes, in which brackish-water mollusca live. . The south-east part
of the island, which is the highest, and rises to 50 meters, is formed of late
Tertiary beds (II, p. 166). . ' .

Contribution to the Natural Histoiy of the Bermudas, I (Bull. U.S. Nat. Mus., No. 25),
8vo, Wiiriiington, 1884, pp. 1-32.



OH. VII] RECENT LIMESTONE PLATEAUX . 316

The Bwnda plateau of South Australia shows to what dimensions an
exposed platform of Tertiary limestone may attain.

Tertiary fossils have been recorded even from Viti Levu, Fiji (II, p. 1^4).

In the. region of the Pacific coral reefs, as in the West Indies, there are
numerous traces of negative movement. Tabular limestone masses with
a horizontal surface rise out of the rings of living reef; sometimes they are
terraced ih steps, sometimes ruled along their steep cliffs with horizontal
strand-lines. Caves with stalactites run through them, sometimes for miles ;
and red earth occurs on their upper surface. Masses of limestone such as
these are met with here and there as far to the cast as Henderson (Eliw-
beth) island, beyond the Faumotu islands ; this, according to Beechey, is
80 feet high, with steep cliffs composed of limestone which breaks with a
conchoidal fracture like a Mesozoic limestone’. Nowhere, however, does
the height of the plateau appear to exceed 100 meters. We do not know
what part blown sand or drift rock plays in the structure.

In the south part of the Pelerv islands the negative" signs become so
marked that Semper was inclined to. attribute the origin of the group, not
to subsidence as Darwin did, but to an elevation of the sea floor. Tlie
limestone cliffs here attain a height of 250 feet, and end above in a perfectly
horizontal line ; towards the cast they ai’e 80 feet high, and again horizontal
at the summit ^

On the slopes of the islands in BougainviUe straits, in the Solomon
group, regular terraces occur, which Guppy regards as so many elevated
barrier reefs ^

One of the most striking examples is afforded by the Loyalty group,
which borders New Caledonia, like a second line of coast. The islands
form a long series. The first is Astrolabe, which is just awash. The
second is Uvea, a circular island foimed of coral limestone, rising in a single
step to a height of 1 5-18 meters. In the centre lies a lagoon with a very level
fioor and a maximum depth of 18 meters; the island is quite horizontal,
and terminates against the sea in an overhanging cornice.

The third island is Lifu’, this has no interior lagoon; it is a plateau,
rising in three horizontal stages to a height of 90«meters. For thirty
nautical miles, from one end to tlie other, each stage maintains precisely
the same level. Great caves are to be seen. The sides of the plateau
sink to unfathomed depths, as is the- case with all these islands. So
Chambeyron described it; Clarke, who gave an account of Lifu in 1847,

’ Captain F. W. Beechey, Narration of a Voyage to the Pacific and Beerings Straits,
4to, London, 1831 , 1, pp. 55-58 and 187. '

* Semper, Existenzbedingungen, II, p. 76.

* H. B. Guppy, Suggestions as to the Mode of Formation of Barrier Reefs in Bougain-
ville Straits, Solomon Group ; Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W., 1884, IX, Sydney, 1885, pp. 949-
969, pi.



316


TEBTIABY SEAS


[PABI Iil‘


found evidence of two elevations, ' one of 80, the other of 170 feet, or
together of 250 feet. Balansa mentions the red earth, without which
vegietation coUld not exist, and recognized four stages, of which the third
runs right round the island. There are wells in the limestone, 41 meters
deep ; it shows no stratification.

The fourth island. is Mar6’, it presents, according to Chambeyron, five
stages, all horizontal and still more clearly.defined than in Lifu ; the upper*



Fio. 30. Vvea, Loyatty Group (after Chambeyron).


most plateau reaches a height of 90 to 100 meters. Between the second and
third stage lies a broad plain. In the north-west of the island the plateaa
of the highest stage occurs ; here a peak of volcanic rock protrudes.

Towards the north-west the Loyalty group ends in the Petrie reef, and
to the south-east in the Durand reef and Walpole islftnd, the last an isolated
rock 95 meters high.



Flo. 31. Lifu, Loyalty Qfxmp (after Chambeyron).


It may be asserted that each of these islands, while maintaining its
horizontality, has been raised spasmodically to these heights; Mai^ to
90 to 100 meters, Lifu, 90 meters. Uvea, 15 to 18 meters, and Astrolabe
not at all. For my own part I cannot regard this as probable. I should
prefer to suppose that to begin with there was a continuous limestone
plateau, + 90 to 100 meters in height, and at this time the se.a-level stood at
least 90 to 100 meters higher than at present. Of the highest pftrt of this
plateau one fragment has .been preserved in Mard close to the volcanic peak,
and another in Lifu; the lower stages mark a cessation of the negative
movement or a phase of the positive reciirrence, or perhaps merely the
intercalation of a less resistant bed. The overhanging comice of Uvea


CH.vn] • METIA 317

shows how the breakers are engaged in their work of destruction toKlay,
as they have always been in the past

.'Finally> mention may be made of the island of Metia, which lies north
of Tahiti. According to Dana it is 250 feet high, and consists of coral
limestone with great stalactitic caves ; on its summit is a plain, similar to
the beach platform of existing coral islands ; isolated sea stacks show that
a part of the limestone has been removed by the sea. Two horizontal lines
run round the brow of the cliff ; along these caves are frequent ; the rock in
consequence presents a stratified appearance, and is divided into three
almost, equal parts. It appears to me a fact of great interest that of the
two specimens of the rock which Dana took from Metia,-one contained
38*07 and the other only 5*29 per cent, of magnesium carbonate. Here
dolomite and limestone have been deposited in the open sea, as in the Flatten-
kalk of the Alps. Dana regards Metia as the core of the deposits which
filled up a once existing lagoon, and thinks that the carbonate of magnesia
may have been precipitated in thisT lagoon as a consequence of evaporation

Far more numerous than these comparatively elevated islands are those
of inconsiderable height, particularly such as are bordered by an overhang-
ing comice, which rises no more than a- few meters above the sea-level.

Attempts have been made to explain the* inequality in height of these
islands by an unequal elevation or subsidence of the various regions in
which they occur. This is a view I cannot share. The existence of the
limit of 100 meters, which is rather strictly maintained, is opposed to it,
as well as the occurrence of repeated terraces or strand-lines.

These facts tend rather to show that all those limestone plateaux are
the remains of older formations, certainly older than the living reefs of the
present day; like the similar limestone plateaux of the Bahamas, which
are also excavated by caves and covered by red earth; and probably all
the negative movements to which they bear witness have affected uniformly
the entire region of these coral islands, and belong to a more remote period.
We do not know the age of these higher limestone plateaux. Dana has *
often expressed the opinion that the epoch of the Pacific coral reefs
embraces the whole Quaternary, and perhaps a part of- the Tertiary period.
Consequently it is not to these plateaux that we 'iShould turn for an
explanation of the existing state of things; this can only be obtained by
a study of the living reefs.

* Captain Chambeyron, Note relative a la Nouvelle*Cal4donie, BulL Soc. geogr.,' 1875,

6* i4r., IX, pp. 566-586 ; W. B. Clarke, On the Oeology of the Isle of Lafft, Quart. Joum.

• €leol. ^c., 1847, III, pp. 61-64 ; B. Balansa, Nouvelle-Calddonie : lea ties Loyalty, Bull.
Soc. gdogr., 1873, 6* s^r., V, pp. 521-534 ; Grundemann, Peterm. Mitth., 1870, XVI,
pp. 365-369. Chambeyron gives Lifu a height of 90 meters in thb text, of 60 mCters
in the diagram ; the first figpire corresponds with that of other observers.

* Dana, Coral Islands, pp. 193, 857; Bibonrt, Observations g4ologiques sur Tahiti et
'les lies basses de I'archipel des Paumotus, Bull. Soc. g^ogr., 1878, 6* s^r., XVT, p. 35.



318 TERTIARY SEAS . {rjja m

Darwin was well acquainteji with the more active growth on the ojiter
side of the reefs, and Dana even remarks that a coral reef is a limestone
plateau with a living edge. Nevertheless it appears from recent obsefva*
tions that the influence of the currents, which bring nourishment, is much
greater than Darwin and Dana Supposed. They may of themselves give
rise to annular reefs of no great size ; this is shown by the little atolls of
Florida, and we must probably refer to this cause the ^all atolls of Mahloa
Madhv, in the Maldives, which are grouped together into larger rings;
Darwin has fully described them. The little goblet-shaped reefs of Serpulite
limestone in the Bermudas belong to . this class. But Alexander Agassiz
himself has expressly admitted the difficulty of explaining lagoons of great
depth, without conceding a change of level ^ Semper, in a section through
Bahdthaub, the largest of the Pelew islands, has estimated the depth of the
lagoon at 50-60 fathoms, and numerous soundings in lagoons have reached
these figures. According to all observations so far made reef-building
corals cannot live at this depth.

This difficulty then stands opposed to all the theories advanced since
the time of Darwin and Dana, and still retains all its force as one of .the
weightiest arguments in favour of the so-called theory of subsidence. Two
objections might be raised to this theory : first, that it is not possible to
understand how so large a portion of- the earth’s surface could have sunk
so slowly and uniformly ; and next, as Ross pointed out, that among the
islands asserted to have subsided stand fragmentary plateaux, which have
apparently been elevated. But these facts will no longer appear strange,
as soon as we admit that it is not the land but the sea which the variable
elements

As regards the actual amount , of the positive excess of the oscillating
movement, no estimate, not even approximate, seems to me as yet to be
possible. The depth of the lagoons implies positive movement, but there
is a wide difference between the 40-60 fathoms of a lagoon (which may, it
is true, have been filled up to an unknown extent), and the very consider-
able depths which have been sounded, not indeed everywhere, but yet in
many places, in the immediate neighbourhood of atolls, and which reveal
very steep slopes. ''

That the atolls stand on a rocky base has never been .denied. Darwin’s
description of the relations of barrier reefs to atolls involves this, and the
many visible peaks of volcanic mountains t^tify to it.

Murray has shown -what vast quantities of pelagic orgtmisms with
calcareous shells occur in certain parts of the Ocean ; the shells after the
death of the animal fall like rain to the bottom, where they are dissolved
by the carbonic acid of the sea- water at groat depths, but accumulate in

* A. Agasfiiz, The Tortugas and Florida Reefs; Mem. Am. Acad. Sci., Centennial
Volume, Cambridge, 1885, XI, p. 121, maps.



aB. 3m] GUANO ISLAiqB 819

moderate and shaUow depths. I believe, however, that the cases are very
rare in which this kind of sediment plays an important part in the structure
of the substratum of atolla The mantling over of submarine mountains
^th limestone is ill suited, to explain the isolated atolls in the middle^ of
the Ocean, and volcanic cones would by this means very seldom reach the
zone of coral growth. Murray’s casual reference to Graham itiand (Julia
or Ferdinand^ island) seems to mo much more fortunate.

This island made its appearance in 1831 as an ash-cone on the south-
west of Sicily, in a sea 100 - fathoms deep. The waves attacked the mass
of loose material, and by the end of a few months a largo part had been
washed away ; the central pipe, filled with scoriae and ash, was exposed.
The sea continued its work, and after a short time nothing was left but
a slightly submerged bank, which, secure from the destructive action of
the breakers, persisted for a long time. In this way a foundation may be
prepared at a suitable depth for the settlement of corals. Then all those
processes would bo set in train which have been described by Semper, Rein,
and Murray, and most important the more active growth of those indi-
viduals which occupy the margin of the ring.

Some such explanation might possibly hold for the little guano islands,
lying near the middle of the Pacific. It is true -that some .of them, such as
Jervis, M’Kean, and Hero islands, are supposed to show signs of negative
movement, but the. only evidence for this is the presence of gypsum in the
lagoon beneath the guano.'

Jervis idamd (lat. 0 * 22' S. ; long. 159° 58' W.) was examined by Hague.
A ring-shaped rampart surrounded by a fringing reef rises to a height of
+ 18 to 28 feet. The plain within the ring lies at a height of -f- 7 to 8 feet ;
it consists of a layer of gypsum covered with guano. In its deepest part
gypsum and sea salt occur *. * *

On the other hand, Dixon writes of Malden island (lat. 4° 2 ' S. ; long.
154° 58' W.) that the sea-water percolates through the reef itself into the
lagoon, and there evaporates ; an outflow only occurs at very low water. *
Bare but violent showers of rain wash the salt out of the lagoon but leave
the gypsum behind. The rampart attains a height of + 21 feet. Ancient
kitchen middens are found on this island. Several conc^tric ridges, formed
of loose blocks of reef rock, succeed each other both on the north and south
side of the island ; they run parallel with the shore, antkhave been piled up
by waves of unusual power

Hot only the waves produced by storms, but those due to earthquakes,
which travel from time to time across the Ocean, must doubtless leave

I

^ J. D.. Hague, On the Guano Islands of the Pacific Ocean; Am. Joum. Sci. Arts, 1862,
2nd ser., XXXIV, pp. 224-243, in particular p. 230.

* W. A. Dixon, Notes on the Meteorology and Natural History of a Guano Island;
Joum. Roy. Soc. N.S.W.°, 1878, XI, pp. 165-175.



320 TEETIART SEAS [PAKim

t

their traces oh the strand. The occurrence ’of negative positive movement
in these isolated spots cannot therefore be regarded as ascertained.

It follows from the foregoing observations that the substructure of the
cofal islands is of various nature and age. Volcanos are still active, and
new bases for the attachment of corals are continually being formed. But
the settlement of the polj^ on the summit' of a few isolated ash-cones,
can only account for some of the reefs. Many may bo seen resting on
fragments of ancient continental land ; from others, the peaks of volcanic
masses project, showing that loose ash-cones have not formed the only
basis of support. The deeply eroded valleys of these peaks may in all
cases, according to Dana, be regarded as an indication of positive move-
ment. The rule that in the Atlantic Ocean the islands are arranged in
straight lines, and in the Pacific in arcs, has its cause deep in the original
structure of the globe (II, p. 205). It applies- as much to fragments of
folded conlilleras as to the alincment of volcanic series and the distributioti
of coral reefs. The volcanic lino of Fernando Po is straight, and the lines
of coral reefs in the Maldives and Laccadives are straight also. In the
west Pacific all the islands, whatever their constitution may bo, are
arranged in arcs. Thus the coral reefs disclose to us the plan on which
the heights beneath the sea are distributed, or, in other words, hy means of
tJie coral reefs an isohypds of tJte snhnerged mountains of the Ocean is
projected on its surface. This important fact affords, however, strong
support to the theory that the coral reefs have been produced under the
influence of positive movements, and there is nothing to indicate that the
peaks and crests of the submarine mountains arc of equal height. However
frail may be the arguments on which Darwin and Dana have based their
rough estimates of the thickness of such structures, yet it must be observed
that the figulres they obtained, viz. 1,150, 1,750, and 2,000 feet, are well
within the thickness of the stratified masses of limestone and dolomite,
which accumulated over a largo region of the Alps during the epoch of the
Plattenkalk alone, i.e..of an upper division of the Keuper. But that the
sea of the Plattenkalk, at least towards its close, was subject to oscillations
with a positive excess seems to me to have been established. Oscillations
may be deduced from the precise observations made by Rink on the
Nicobai: islands, by Junghuhn and von Richthofen on the reef of Udjqng-
Tji-Laut-urun on the south coast of Java, and by von Drascho in the
ricighbourhood of Paracali on the east coast of Luzon. In the last two
cases a dead reef may be seen separated from the land by a plain of coral
sand. Outside the dead reef is the living reef bathed in the wash of the
surf*. I regard all the tabular masses of dead coral rock, which rise to

’ H. Rink, Die Nikobarischen Inseln, 8vo, Kopenha^n, 1847, p. 82 et seq. ; Junghuhn,
J.ava, 111, p. 1442 ; Richthofen, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1874, XXVI, p. 240 ; Dtasche,
Luzon, p. 62, and fig. 14.



OH. vn] ancient 60RAL BEDS 321

i

a height of 100 meters and extend as far as the remote Henderson island,
as indications of ancient oscillations. Unfortunately, we do not possess
any detailed description of the organic remains found in these islands. In
the Atlantic, outside the region of the reefs and to the north of them, sedi-
ments have been laid bare in the same manner on the Azores and Madeira ;
and these have been referred to the first Mediterranean stage, i. e. to one
of the lower subdivisions of the Miocene. In Madeira (lat. 82° 48' N.) they
rise to a much higher level than the fragments of the Pacific plateaux,
attaining a height of 1,850 feet (I, p. 288).

Darwin, I think, went too far when he attempted to distinguish regions
of elevation from those of subsidence by plotting the distribution of
fringing reefs, barrier reefs, and atolls; Dana has already expressed the
same opinion, but the attempt which Dana also made to determine regions
of maximum subsidence according to the number and size of the atolls
does not rest on a surer basis. On the other hand, in spite of the extremely
valuable information accumulated by recent observers, I believe, in agree-
ment with F. von Richthofen, that we must still accept as a true explana-
tion the fundamental idea of the subsidence theory, according to which
the larger coral reefs have been built up under the influence of a widely
distributed oscillation of the strand, with a positive excess \

This movement, if it still continues, must take place so slowly as to be
lieyond the reach of measurement, so slowly indeed that little reefs, like
the Tortugas, the atolls of Mahlos Mahdu and other islets, may come into
existence without betraying any signs of its action.

Thus we have reason to believe that these re^s have arisen under the
influence of a predominant positive movement, and on the other hand
those who maintain that no movement is taking place at the present day
aire right, in so far as no such movement can be directly demonstrated.

It has been repeatedly asserted that Darwin’s views are not in accor-
dance with what is known as to the mode of occurrence of corals in ancient
marine deposits. I have maile a personal study of all the more important
and well-known coral formations in the Gosau beds, the Eocene of Cormons,
the Oligocene of Crosara and Castel Gomberto, yet notwithstanding the
abundance and variety of the corals, sometimes forming really large isolated
growths, I have never seen anything in these localities which could bo
called a true coral reef. The corals lie heaped together, with shells, in
tufis or marls, that is, always in clastic sediments. The loose nature of this
material renders the corals an easy spoil, consequently they are abundantly
represented in collections, and hence the reputation of these localities.
Coral reefs must be looked for in hard limestone, but in these late Neozoic
formations I know of no masses of limestone which could be termed reefs
in the true sense of the word. The only conclusion to be drawn from this
’ F. von Richthofen, Filhrer fiSr Forschungsreisende, p. 406 et seq.

Y


■OLLAS II



322 TEBTIABT SEAS [PAierin

is that at this period the requisite conditions for the growth of reefs did
not exist in Europe.

In the Rhaetic stage there are marly beds which lutve afforded corals,
aifd the Rhaetic zone of the southern Alps contains reef-building species,
such as Convexastraea Azzarolae, Thamnastriiea Meriani, and Asttxieo-
morpha Bastiani, which also occur in the northern Alps^. But these
species, buried in marl, do not form coral reefs. To discover anything
like continuous growths we must examine the underlying or intercalated
Lithodendron limestone ; here we may see masses 16 to 20 meters thick, or
perhaps even more, which are actually formed of the cylindrical corallites of
Lithodendron ; but these also, as far as I have been able to observe them,
have rather the appearance of thick beds than of true reefs. The arrange-
ment in beds is predominant, and the resemblance to the beds of Sombrero
or to the incrusting coral growth on the calcareous mud of Florida bay is
unmistakable. The evidence presented by these ancient sediments of the
deposition of dolomite, as such, directly from the sea is, however, of
the clearest nature. Agassiz says that the fine calcareous mud suffocates
and kills the corals. On the Osterhom corals occur in a white dolomite,
and their calyces are filled with dark coloured dolomite, which has entered
them from above

The existing structures which are most closely allied to the coral beds
of south Tyrol are perhaps the older tabular masses which now project
from the middle of recent reefs, but there is no reason to suppose that the
beds in south Tyrol were surrounded by similar reefs. With the exception
of those places where interbedding with adjacent tuffs occurs, and where
we appear to have to do simply with an interrupted formation of limestone,
these tabular fragments hod the form of islands.

6. General Survey. We have referred to only a very few of the remark-
able events which distinguish the history of the Tertiary aera. Towards
the close of the Cretaceous period, but before it had actually come to an
end, a great and progressive decrease in the extent of the sea began to
take place. In the middle of the central Mediterranean and in the Sahara
we can discern no trace of this ; there, marine sediments succeed each other
without interruption. But around these regions large areas were laid dry,
fresh-water formations accumulated : on the one hand the Qarumnian series,
which extended on both sides of the Pyrenees and into the valley of the
Rhone, on the other the contemporaneous Liburnian series, which covered
the region north of the Adriatic; these show how great the negative
movement must have been, and recall the conditions which prevailed at
the close of the Jurassic period. The Tertiary sea then advanced by

* ReuBS, Ueber einige Anthozoen der KOssener Schichten und der alpinen Trias;
Sitzungsber. k. Akad. WisB. Wien, 1864, L, pp. 153-168.

’ Cf. note 3, p. 263 of the preceding chapter on the suffocation of the corals.



REVIEW OP TERinABY SEAS


323


CH. vn]

repeated oscillations: in the Oligocene a temponuy connexion between
Europe and the far north was established along the east slopes of the
Ural; then with ever-increasing clearness we perceive the progress of
those events by which the ancient central Mediterranean sea was ^s-
membered and diminished. Its communication with India was destroyed.
Then it lost Irania, Turkestan, Asia Minor, and the western border of the
Alps; the communication, indicated by the sub-littoral fauna, with the
West Indies was broken up. Then the Sarmatian . region became separated
off; finally, not only the Aralo-Caspian region, together with south Russia,
but also the valley of the Danube was given up. Next came a period of
erosion, when valleys were carved out, and then the Pontic Cardium beds
were spread abroad as far as the valley of the Rhone. This is the epoch of
greatest shrinkage : the strand stood lower than at present. Then the sea-
level began to rise again, and at the arrival of the northern immigrants
it exceeded its existing height. Subsidences extended the area of the sea,
and the world became much as we see it now. The existing Mediterranean
is the residuum of an Ocean, which extended parallel to the equator, and
at one time, before the Atlantic came into existence, surrounded half the
globe.

There were other marine areas which maintained a protracted existence,
but have left no recognizable signs of the manner in which they opened
into the Ocean : these were situated over the regions bordering the North
sea in the south, in particular the north of Germany and the south-east
of England (I, p. 291); but in the whole region of the North Atlantic
coast, as well as in North America down to the fortieth parallel, marine
Tertiary deposits are wholly absent. North of the Lofoten islands, we
enter a region which, as we found when studying the distribution of the
Mesozoic seas, is more closely allied with the Pacific than the Atlantic:
the Tertiary molluscan fauna of this region, which reveals the temporary
advance of the sea across Spitzbergen to east Greenland, where it is
associated with the plant-bearing beds, may perhaps have come from the
Pacific Ocean by way of Mulfito on the lower Yukon. This is a point
on which we do not possess as yet any precise information.

The coast of North America, below the fortieth parallel, presents
a regular succession of marine Tertiary beds, resting on the Cretaceous,
which extends far towards the south; but here also there is a gap.
Certain upper members of the Tertiary group are apparently absent, and
on the other hand a very recent marine formation occurs in transgression.
Here, also, we may fairly suppose that in a late phase of the Tertiary aera
the strand-line lay lower than at present, and in the next succeeding phase
it again stood higher than it does now.

The Caribbean sea is also a remnant of that great Ocean which once
extended parallel to the equator, across the existing Atlantic. This is



324


TEBTIABY SEAS


[part m

shown by the presence of Enropean elements which continued to be in-
troduced into its successive marine faunas, up to the close of the first
Mediterranean age. Thus it appears that those tv)0 parte of the Atlantic
coast, which in corUrast with the rest possess the Pacific structwre, i. e. the
cordillera of the Antilles and the broken arc of Gibraltar, mark the areas
once occupied hy that ancient Ocean, the * Central Mediterranean' of
Neimayr.

In the interior of the United States the negative phase, which closes the
Cretaceous transgression, is represented by the Laramie stage ; great fresh-
water lakes existed here during the different periods of the Tertiary aera.

On the Patagonian border of the Atlantic extensive continental deposits
with two marine intercalations extend to the sea ; they show that the shore
was sometimes situated much nearer the cordilleras, sometimes further to
the east than the existing coast. The second transgression did not extend
so far as the first ; but a third marine formation follows the quer-Andinian
stage, with a very recent fauna ; it rises with continually increasing height
as it is traced towards the south. Between the quer-Andinian stage and the
last marine Tertiary formation a great hiatus occurs, greater, so far as we
can judge, than that of North America, and certainly much greater than
that of Europe : and here, also, we find on the whole that at a late stage of
the Tertiary aera the strand-line lay lower, and at a still later stage higher
than at present.

The Tertiary beds of Chili, of which Philippi has given instructive
accounts, 1 have not ventured to take into consideration. The increase in
the height of the quer-Andinian stage towards the south, which similarly
occurs in Chili, will be specially considered later. Owing to the fragmen-
tary state of our knowledge I have been compelled to refrain from a
discussion of the Tertiary deposits of the Pacific region, and their continua-
tion on the south border of Eurasia, in Java and Sumatra, along the Indus,
and in the Persian gulf.

Within the Indian and Atlantic regions the Cretaceous covers the east
of Brazil, and proceeds towards the coast without an accompanying Tertiary
border. The sea vrashes against a strip of Cretaceous, which extends, with
interruptions, from Piauhy to Bahia, and probably to the Abrolhos. It is
the same on the west coast of Africa, from the Elobi islands to Mossamides.
In Natal, also, marine Cretaceous deposits advance to the sea unaccom-
panied by a Tertiary border. The facts are the same in the north-west of
India, on the Narbada ; and off the mouth of this river lies the little island
of Perim, formed of Tertiary sand and gravels, with the remains of Dino-
therium, Mastodon, and giraffes — an evidently fluviatile deposit. Near
Pondicherry likewise the Cretaceous occurs without a Tertiary border.
But associated with these intervals of coast there are others of still greater
length, where neither Cretaceous nor Tertiary is seen, but ancient rocks



CH.VII] NO PROOF OP CHANGE IN PROGRESS 826

alone; this is the case in the south of Brazil, as far as and beyond Bio
Grande do Sul, in Africa for an unknown distance, in India from the
Narbada to cape Comorin, and from Pondicherry to the mouths of^the
Ganges. The Cuddalore sandstone in the south-west is of comparatively
very recent date.

According to all the evidence with which I am acquainted these coasts,
distinguished by the absence of an outer Tertiary border, are found chiefly
in low latitudes, forming a zone in the Atlantic and Indian regions.

The coral islands of existing seas exhibit in many places relict strand-
lines and relict fragments of ancient plateaux; they occupy a region
characterized by very extensive and extremely uniform oscillations of the
strand-line : the oceanic atolls have attained the surface of the sea owing
to the existence of the positive excess. In Florida the foundation of the
Keys has been formed by an accumulation of material under the influence
of a current. The continuance of a positive phase at the present day
cannot be demonstrated from the living reefs, nor is it susceptible of
measurement.

With the quer-Andinian stage we reach the most recent transgression
known to us : the coral reefs are the result of processes which came into
operation at a period immediately antecedent to the present, and are still
in progress. I am now obliged to interrupt for a time the historical
sequence of this account, in order to discuss certain special points, par-
ticularly the strand-lines of the north and the much-debated problem
of the temple of Serapis near Pozzuoli. Next, we must consider the
different behaviour of incompletely closed seas, such as the Baltic and
the Mediterranean, and then we shall be able to return to the most recent
transgressions.



326


CHAPTER VIII

THE STRAND-LINES OE NORWAY

From Tjoalma Vagge to the sea. From lake Tome& to the sea. Movement of the
ice contrary to the slope of the valleys. Origin of the glint lakes of Lapland. Ancient
strand -lines of the tjords. Origin of the seter. Comparison with Greenland. Vestiges
left by the retreating icc.

1. From, Tjoalma Vagge to the aea. The coasts of northern Norway
are marked at intervals by long terraces or grooves cut in the rock.
The origin of these terraces and grooves is a question that cannot fail to
suggest itself to any observer visiting this region. Since Leopold von
Buch’s memorable journey at the beginning of the last century, and
Bravais’ observations on the rise of the strand-line in the Alten fjord, the
problem has been made the subject of an extensive literature. The
strand-lines in their various forms are not the only problem which here
claim attention ; another and scarcely less disputed question is associated
with it — the origin of the fjords. A glance at the map shows us that un-
mistakable relations exist between the great lakes of Lapland and some
of the valleys which open into the fjords towards the west ; some of these
lakes theiAselves actually discharge their water into the Atlantic Ocean.
These facts show that we cannot hope to reach definite conclusions as to
the phenomena which occur at the mouth of a fjord without a knowledge
of its entire valley system from the existing watershed down to the sea.

I have already mentioned in a previous chapter that in attempting
a general survey of the connexion between these phenomena I should choose
as illustrations those valleys possessing outflows which unite in the Maals Elv
and discharge, above lat. 69° N., by a long estuary into the fjord of Malangcn
(II, p. 58). Leaving the two points we had reached on the watershed,
I will now attempt* to discuss, after a brief glance at the map (PI. I), the
peculiarities of the valleys and the features which characterize the shore

The Maals Elv is formed by the waters of three main valleys ; these are
the Buosta, the Divi, and the Bardo Elv.

* The heights marked with an asterisk were determined by means of an excellent
aneroid and compared with the observations of the meteorological station at TromsO.
The Director, Herr Hann, was good enough to make the calculations. Other data as to
height have been taken from the official map published by the Norwegian Government.
In this chapter measurements are frequently given in Norwegian feet ; this was almost
inevitable on account of the frequent use of whole numbers by the observers (1 Norwegian
foot s 0>8137 meter; 1 mile "* 11,295.8 meters).



CH. vin]


VALLEYS IN TROMSt) STIFT


32T


The Ruosta, which lies most to the east, is discharged from the glint
lake, Buosta Jaure; it flows at flrst in a gentle curve to the north-west
and west-north-west, and traverses the Lille Buosta- V^and, at the foot of
the Buosta fjeld (II, Fig. 6, p. 60). From this lake onwards the course of
the Maals Elv, so long as it maintains a westerly direction, should evidently
be regarded as the continuation of the Buosta. Beyond the bend of the
Maals EUv, the direction of the Buosta is continued in an unmistakable
manner through the elongated lake of Ands-Vand (153<7 meters) into the
Solberg fjord. Thus the waters of the Buosta are diverted under existing
conditions and flow through the lower Maals Elv into the Malangen fjord.

The middle river, the Divi, is connected by a secondary valley on its
right side, the Skakterdal, with the high plateau of Tjoalma Vagge, and in
that direction no watershed appears to exist between the river and the
glint lake, Tjoalma Jaure. A very remarkable feature is presenteil on the
left side of the Divi by two valleys, which descend at first in a direction
opposed to that of the Divi, and conclude by entering it, after swinging
round in a sharp bend; these arc the valleys of the Anavanda and the
Hogskar Elv. Near Overgoard, close to the Buosta Vand, the Divi
reaches the upper Maals Elv, which here, as wo have seen, is the continua-
tion of the Buosta, and its watei-s turn to the west almost at a right angle.
But the direction of the Divi to the north-north-west is clearly continued
in the chain of larger and smaller lakes, which includes the Fjeld Frbsk,
Tagvand (220 meters) and Sagelvand (90 meters), and terminates in the
Sdrkjosen in the Bals fjord and the Nord fjord in Malangen. Thus the
Divi, like the Buosta, is twice diverted from its original course ; the direction
of i^ich is continued by a chain of lakes standing at a higher level.

The third river, the Baixlo, includes two reaches, an upper and a
lower. The upper nins to the north-west, and its higher part is the glint
lake, 48 kilometers long, which ari.ses from the junction of the Ldnnes
Jaure (Lcjna Vand) and the Alte Vand (516 meters). This great sheet of
water, which is evidently only an enlarged river course, flows to the north-
west towards the Atlantic Ocean, but parallel to it and close be.side it lies
the Giovne Jaure, 16 kilometers long, which flows out^ towards the south-
east, like most of the glint lakes which discharge into the Baltic, but in
this case the outflow bends round in a sharp curve to join the Ldnnes Jaure,
and thus precisely repeats the behaviour of the lateral valleys on the left
side of the Divi. This upper reach of the Bardo receives the northwards-
flowing Sdidal Elv, which runs in a deep l)ed from the waterahed close to
the lake of Tomea. Near the parish of Bardo the north-westerly running
upper branch of the Bardo Elv terminates, and the valley takes a north-
north-east direction. At this place there is a very low col, which passes
from Bardo westward to the Salangen Elv, the upper lake of Salangen, and
the Salangen fjord. But the river itself now enters its lower reach below



328 THE STRAND-LINES OP NORWAY [paothi

Bardo, runs to the north-north>ea8t, and encounters almost at right angles
the direction of the Ruosta ; while the lower Maals Elv, together with its
estuary, proceeds to the north.

Thus our first glance at the map reveals a peculiarity of fundamental
importance in the study of this region, where mccesaive valley aystema have
been auperimpoaed one upon another. The river valleys are continued in
long troughs, which arc occupied by lakes and lie several hundred feet below
them ; thus the Ruosta is continued into the Solberg fjord, the Divi with
equal clearness into the chain of lakes which extend from the Tag Vand to
the Bale fjord, and the upper Bardo in all probability to the west, towards
Salangen. I may at once mention that these higher lying basins are all,
so far as I am acquainted with them, without exception remnants of
excavated glacier beds. The ice filled all the hollows of the mountains
and moved forwards in them, hxU the running umier which supervened
selected only a part of the glacial valley system, and deepened that oidy.
The remaining part, lying at a higher level, has been left tehind in broken
chains of lakes.

We are now able to interpret these valley systems, different in age and
disposed at different levels. The oldest and least known is the pre-glacial
valley system. Fragments of it are represented by Anavandene, Hogskar
Elv, and Gievne Jaure, where the ancient slope to the south-east is pre-
served. With the advent of the glacial epoch the ancient channels were
filled with ice, and enlarged after a plan which depended on the direction
and damming back of the ice, but not on the fall of the pre-existing valleys.
Thus the second or glacial valley system arose. The third is the existing
system, which the rivers are still shaping out.

Nearly the whole region of these valleys is included within the flat-
bedded ancient table-land, the structure of which has already been described.
The band of gabbro and cclogite, which strikes from Lyngen obliquely
across the valley of the Maals Elv towards the Istind in Bardo, appeal's
to have had no influence on the formation of the valleys. The table-land
terminates on the Swedish side in that steep descent we have termed the
Lapland glint, and,, the great lakes are true glint lakes lying across the
slope; thus the glint runs across the middle of lake Tomek, across
the Gievne Jaure and the Alto Vand. In the valley of the upper Divi the
ancient foundation, according to Pettersen, extends somewhat further to
the north ; on Tjoalma Vagge the glint is broken up into great bastion-
like table mountains (II, Fig. 7, p. 61), and thence it proceeds further to the
Ruosta Jaure. Thus these lakes, whether they discharge into the Baltic
sea or the Atlantic Ocean, follow the general rule and extend transversely
across the glint.

The movement of the ice, however, so far as I could discover, was
everywhere directed towards the Atlantic; more to the south it needed



329


CH. vin] ICE PORTALS OP TJOALMA VAGOE

the laborious investipiations of Horbye and his successors to show that the
highest level of the ice-mass lay east of the existing watershed ; but here
in the north the fact is obvious at first sight, and if any doubt were felt
it would be at once removed by the conspicuous blocks of red Swecfish
granite which have been carried in immense numbers across the glint, and
through its portfds, on to the Norwegian table-land.

Let us now examine the country a little more closely.

Our first traverse runs from Tjoalma Vagge through the Skakterdal
and Divi across the chain of lakes of the Tag Vand and Sagel Vand to the
Bals fjord. This is the same line as that we have already described, at
least as regards its more elevated part in a previous chapter (II, p. 60).

On the lofty barren surface of the Tjoalma Vagge we are surrounded
by a boundless labyrinth of low mounds of stones. Peat bogs and number-
loss pools of water broaden out between them. Low rounded bosses of
red granite projeet from the mass of ddbris, and reveal the fact that we
are standing on the foundation of the table-land. This is moraine land.
No one can say exactly where the watershed lies between the Baltic sea
and the Atlantic Ocean, the latter as the crow flies only 77 to 80 kilometers
away. In the season when the snow melts all this country is prol^bly
inundated ; nothing but a few stony ridges, higher than the rest, will rise
above the water here and there, and the direction of the outflow will
depend upon the wind.

Towards the north, west, and south-west rise like phantoms the great
cubical masses into which the glint is broken up ; far away the outlines
of the table mountains arc veiled in mist, and through the mist their
snowfields glisten. The foot of the nearest mountain, Store Jerta, is
surrounded by a terrace, about 15 to 20 meters high. Whether this little
cliff, which faces the labyrinth of stony mounds, indicates the border of
a once continuous and permanent sheet of water or of a temporary
inundation is a question I will not pretend to answer. (Upper edge,
7234 meters.*)

A chain of pools, united by a thread of water, extends towards the
portal between the table mountains Store Jerta and N^mna The breadth
of this is scarcely more than 800 meters, at the level of the route by which
we pass through it, and this is no great height above the bottom. Wo
stand here at one of the passages through which the ice advanced towards
Norway. To-day it presents the aspect of a glacier bed, scarcely changed.
Remnants of the moraines of Tjoalma Vagge appear to penetrate into the
portal ; they are broken up into baiTen isolated sand-hills with somewhat
steep slopes scattered here and there over the ground. Higher up on the
slopes of both mountains, particularly of the Namna, we see several long
mounds of sand, more like dunes than moraines, which evidently slope
downwards, that is, with the water drainage. At one spot we see five or



330 THE STRAND-LINES OF NORWAY [pabtih

six of these ridges on the Nanma, resting obliquely one against the other.
They are the vestiges of the last movement of the ice in the pass. Herr
Fettersen has ascended the Store Jerta and found blocks of the red granite
from Sweden on its summit ; there was thus a time when the great pylons
of the portal were overwhelmed by the ice.

Where the land widens out below and at the mouth of the pass,
hundreds of circles, two to four meters in diameter, are scattered over the
surface; this is enchanted ground, a dancing place for the elves; so such
spots figure in folklore : but in fact the circles are formed by colonies of
grass, which grow outwards at the margin and die away in the middle,
a sort of vegetable atoll K

We have now walked round the Store Jerta ; the finer ddbris, and with
it the fairy circles, is gone, and we stand on a broad glacier bed. In
a little hollow are seen the first stunted birches (599-6 meters*) ;_beyond]it
polished surfaces extend far and wdde. These are great moutonn^d
bosses of schist and quartzite, and although the whole region is flat-
bedded, yet violent local foldings are revealed on the polished surfaces of
the rocks. Over the roches moutonndes erratic blocks are scattered in a
strangely uniform maimer, we might almost say at equal distances. The
blocks consist chiefly of red granite : as a rule they are somewhat less than
a cubic meter in size ; some of them larger. They lie on and between the
roches moutonndes just as the ice has left them, and sometimes the pressure
of the hand is sufficient to send a heavy mass clattering down from the
summit of the boss on which it rests. The moutonnded surface may be
recognized on the slope at our right for a height of at least 100 meters
above us.

On this part of the glacier floor sand and small stones are rare, and the
regular distribution of the blocks on the roches moutonn^es does not
correspond with the ideas generally entertained as to the nature of a
ground moraine. While here everything looks so fresh and undisturbed,
on our right the brook which issues from the portal, and in the interval
has become the raging Skakter, has already excavated in the same rocky
ground a ravine more than 100 feet deep.

We now proceed along the gentle slope of the glacier bed, when it
suddenly comes to an end. A low cliff of flat-bedded quartzite follows ;
below this a spring, and then a steep wooded descent into the valley of the
Divi. At the bottom we see the eone built up of the material which the
Skakter has brought out of the ravine, and then the rushing Divi.

* Professor von Kemer tells me that Settsleria coerulea is the plant which generally
forms these fairy rings, and that the destruction of the vegetation within the green
border is produced in two ways : in the case of plants with radially extending rhizomes
the older parts of the rhizome die and decay at the centre, and new plants do not imme-
diately take their place ; secondly, the meadow grasses are killed by the mycelium of
a fungus which accompanies the radial growth.



THE DIVI EI,V


381


C!H. vin]


The Dividal is a rectilinear narrow valley ; its whole length amounts
to about 60 kilometers, of which 86 go to the reach below the mouth of
the Skakter valley. The hut of Frihedsli (187 meters*), stationed in the
virgin forest of the valley bottom, was the starting-point of our wanderings.
Here in August we found flowery meadows, a noble forest growth of birch,
butterflies, and in the short twilight even bats, and only the trifling height
to which the wood extends up the mountains reminded us that we were in
the latitude of central Greenland. The mountains which sui*round the
middle Dividal are 4,000 to 6,000 feet in height (Njunnes Vane opposite
Frihedsli, 1668'6 meters), and throughout the year are covered witli more
or less extensive sheets of snow. If we ascend the slope of the Anaskolo
above Frihedsli we find that both sides of the valley up to a certain fairly
uniform level are formed of a continuous sheet of d(ibris : I put its height
above the valley bottom at 200 to 250 meters. In this debris we also find
fragments of red Swedish granite : we might regard it as a marginal
moraine, but it nowhere rises in mounds from the rocky walls of the
valley.

Through the nairow valley bottom rushes the Divi Elv. I do not think
it would lie exaggerating to say that the volume of its waters is probably
six to eight times as great as would bo met with under similar conditions
of topography in a valley of the Alps. The liigh rainfall, the great
quantity of snow which accumulates during the long winter, and the
length of the day in summer are responsible for this extraordinary volume
of water, and explain the great and unusual power of erosion.

After a walk of some hours down from Frihedsli we reach a somewhat
broader valley bottom, and here the first settlements have been mode. The
river is bordered by regular terraces ; two or even three occur one above
the other. They have undoubtedly been formed by the river itself ; this
is apparent from the fact that ox-bow terraces, that is islands of alluvium
which have been left in place, occur on the older terraces. Such isolated
spur-shaped fragments of terraces can only have been left by ninning
water, and indeed by the displacement of the river bed. They overlook
the adjacent valley bottom ; several of the farms have^been built on the
terminal spur of one of these ox-bow terraces.

Towards the end of the valley the Divi enters a ravine ; on the left we
ascend a ridge, presenting in its lower part moutonnded bosses of schist
and quartzite ; above, an accumulation of blocks, probably part of a moraine,
which, however, lies higher than the valley bottom of the Divi ; on the
other side the road runs down towards Overgaard (58’6 meters*), where
the Divi joins the Maals Elv ; hero also river terraces occuu.

We cross the low-lying terraced river valley and enter the ancient
prolongation of the Dividal toward Bals fjord indicated by the lakes.
This, as we have seen, is a glacier bed. Pettersen has also recognized the



332


THE STRAND-LINES OF NORWAY [PARrra

fact that the ice which came down the Dividal crossed the valley of the
Maals Elv and proceeded towards Bals fjord, and consequently that
the valley of the Maals Elv has been deepened subsequently by erosion ;
hb showed besides that on the right side of this glacier bed blocks of red
granite occur nearly up to the summit of the Omasvane, and on the left
they cover the slopes of the great Mauktind, which is much' higher than
the Omasvane, to about 2,500 feet above the sea, or as far as it has been
examined The ice as it passed through this trough must thus have
been of great thickness. The terraces of the river valley have now dis-
appeared ; rochcs nioutonnbes surround us on all sidea Their smooth and
rounded summits protrude from the peat bogs which surround the green
waters of the Lompol Vand, and accompany us as far as the islet-strewn
waters of the Tag Vand (173*3 meters), which wash against the foot of the
Mauktind ; the rocky slopes, as wo can plainly see, are likewise polished to
a great height above us. Beyond the Tag Vand the country presents
peculiarly characteristic features. On the slopes of the Omasvane we
wade through high ferns ; a few beeches remind us of our own land : but
on the left lies the bare U-shaped, polished glacier bed with its rounded
bosses, and in between them innumerable little pools of water which drain
partly into the Tag Vand and partly into the Sagel Vand to the north ;
they are the most remote retreats to which the salmon ascend. No channel
of any depth is to be seen; travelled blocks are strewn around: it is
alsolutely impossible to suppose that this glacier bed can have been
covered by the sea since the retreat of the ice, and that the scene should
have remained so completely unchanged, the glacial striae so fresh, the
little hollows between the bosses unsilted up, and the scattered blocks
undisturbed, notwithstanding the play of the tides. And yet this glacier
floor here lies only 130 to 150 meters * above the sea, and descends lower
and lower as we proceed.

Above the farm of Myre, nearly 400 feet above the sea, we still find
the hard schists quite sharply marked with glacial striae directed down the
valley, and below the farms the roches moutonn^ and travelled blocks,
amongst them red granite, lift their heads above the peat bog, which
stretches away as far as the Sagel Vand. The bed of the glacier has
sloped gradually down to the level of the Sagel Vand (90 meters).

The Sagel Vand is the last lake that we meet with along this traverse ;
it is said to be 220 feet in depth, so that its bottom lies a little below the
existing level of the sea. On its right we observe what appears to be a bit of
lateral moraine, and at its lower end are indications of a terminal moraine,
but as to this I am not certain. With this lake the U-shaped valley comes
to an end. Recent alluvial land evidently forms a considerable part of its

’ K. Pettersen, Det nordlige Norge under den glaciate og post glaciale Tid: III,
Granitisk flytblokkestrdm udefter BalsQorden ; Tromsfi Mus. Aanh., 1884, VII, pp. 1--12.



333


OH. vm] FROM LAKE ^RNEA TQ THE SEA

lower termination, although rounded bosses of rock project from it. The
alluvial land, formed of sand and gravel, extends below the lake in a plain,
which broadens out downwards : we proceed along this plain for a distance
of 4*5 kilometers, and then before us lies the Bals fjord. We now find oirir>
selves on the upper edge of a slope, which towards the sea is divided into
two sharply defined terraces.

A result of great importance follows from all these obser\’’ations. The
ice-streams which entered the country from Sweden, flowing through the
portals of the glint and above them, had their bed at a higher level than
a great part of the existing Dividal and the existing valley of the Maals
Elv. We have traced this bed through the upper Skakterdal, as far as the
steep descent to the Dividal. Its continuation is seen in the U-shaped
trough of the Tag Vand, where it is much deeper than in the portal, but
still some hundreds of feet above the existing valley. The slope of this
glacier is directed towards the Bals fjord. Its jMlialied bed, after its level
has fallen to 90 meters, sinks beneath the waters of the Sagel Vand; this is
held up on the seauurd side by a dam, formed perhitps by a terminal
moraine, and cetiaiidy by the idluvial land, in which the teiToces of the
Bals fjonl have Ijeen carved out.

The terraces at the time I crossed them afforded some excellent sections,
exposed in the construction of a new road. They consist of angular sand
with pockets of small pebbles in considerable qxiantity. The pocket-like
intercalations arc obliquely inclined, and more steeply than the outer slope
of the terrace. Among the pebbles some well-worn fragments of the red
granite occur. Now and then a red block of some size may be seen ; Herr
Pettersen thinks tliat such blocks have fallen from the top of the slope.
The presence of small rounded pieces of carbonized wood in the sand
caused me the greatest surprise ; they prove the existence of trees during
the deposition of the sand. I could find no trace of marine animals.

Let us descend now to the sea.

2. From lake Tomea to the sea. At the northern end of the great lake
of Tome& (819>2 meters*) a fisherman’s hut, rarely occupied, is for miles
around the only shelter, with the exception of the temporary encampments
of the wandering Lapps. The hut is surrounded by & accumulation of
great blocks; gneiss, ancient schist, and even the red granite occur, but
the last is not so prevalent as in the region of the Divi. Tlie accumulation
looks as if it had been pushed out from the lake ; but, while in other cases
moraines occur as dams at the lower end of a lake, here the accumulation
is situated at the upper end. The promontory which projects into the lake
from its lower and northern side, south-west of the hut, consults of quartz-
ite, and forms part of the flat-bedded table-land, which surrounds this part
of the lake. We ride a little distance along the moraine to reach the ridge
of quartzite. Where it joins the land it is lower ; the depression is occupied



884 THE STRA2n).LINBs l)P NOR [PAWin

by an ftncient reindeer enclosure, strongly boilt, which bars the way.
Beyond it, quite rounded the ice, rises the isolated quartdte hill, Polno-
Boset, also called Bbs, the boundary point number 272 on the frontier of
8'weden and Norway ^ Directly below the BSs, in a deeply glaciated
hollow, lie pools of water, without exit, between rounded bosses ; this is
the watershed (390*5 meters*), only 71*3 meters above the lake. On the
right it slopes down to the lake ; on the left we look into the upper part
of the deep ravine which the Sdr Elv has sawn out in the glacier bed, and
through this it flings itself into the Sdrdal. If this torrent should also
succeed in cutting through the col below Polno-BSset, a task in which the
great masses of snow accumulated every year in this hollow will assist,
then lake Tome& will be added to the Atlantic region, like its higher lying
neighbours in the north-east.

The ravine of the Sor Elv is impassable, and we ascend the slope on its
right, which surrounds the northern end of the lake. Bounded hills of
ddbris, thinly covered with birch wood, are scattered over the slope. The
trees soon disappear, and we reach the summit of the Stagenuni pass
(782 meters*) high above the watershed. We And ourselves once more in
a U-shaped eroded trough ; roches moutonn^ surround us, and all the signs
of a glacier bed are present. The roches moutonn^es occur on the slopes
of the flat-bedded mountains of schist and quartzite up to a height of at
least 100 meters above us ; in the bottom of the glacier bed the S5r Elv
has cut its way. There can be no doubt that the ice moved to the north,
contrary to the existing outfall of lake Tomea, and, advancing against the
existing slope, crossed the whole region from the bottom of the lake up
to the trough of Stagenuni. Polno-Bbset and the watershed lie at a locus
of especially severe erosion ; but the threshold above the lake, that is the
bottom of the U, lies at least 200 meters above its surface. This height,
to which we must add the depth of the lake, must have been surmounted
by the ice.

Stagenuni also lies in a portal, which is distinguished, however, from
that of Tjoalma Vagge, not only by its great threshold, but also by its
greater breadth. The table mountains on both sides of the upper Sordal,
Bissovarre with the Duoddarats on the right, and Nunnis, Spikalomi, and
others on the left, stand much further apart; the Sdr Elv, however, like
the Skakter, has cut for itself a deep ravine. The destruction of the upper
part of the glacier bed by running water is very evident. Let us turn our
attention to the right bank. Below the high, well-stratifled, and rocky
peaks, a shoulder rises like a very broad shelf. It is the upper part of the

' At this point stone tablets bearing the royal monograms and the dates 1763 and
1827 have been inserted into a pyramidal pile of stones ; to right and left what forest
there is has been cut down along the line of the frontier, leaving a trail like, a broad
road — a peculiar sight in this wild country.



CBE.'Vnf]


guttincT op the «S5KDAL


886



j


polished glacier bed sharply marked
off from the precipitous slopes
above. It may be clearly seen
running from the north-west border
of lake Tornca, below and around
the summit of the Nunnis, and far
above the existing watershed into
the upper. Sordal. It represents
what is left of the U of the glacier
bed. Furthermore, between eveiy
two peaks lies a little hollow, and
in the hollow and on the shoulder
is a snowfield (a, 6, e, ti, Fig. 82);
out of each snowfield issues a brook;
and each brook becomes a roaring
torrent as it precipitates itself into
the principal channel of the Sor
Elv, wearing away and destroying
the shoulder between the two peaks,
and at the same time the snowfield
which feeds it. One of them,
broken up by the high fall, fills
a great part of the narrow valley
with clouds of spray. Thus the
first peak is surrounded by a fairly
broad shoulder which ends abruptly
against the ravine of the Sbr Elv,
and is cut back by the waterfall ;
the second peak is bordered by a
smaller fragment of the shoulder;
still smaller is the fragment be-
neath the third peak ; on the
fourth, the shoulder has practically
disappeared. The glacier bed is no
longer visible: its sole surviving
vestiges are heaps of debris and
occasional blocks of red granite
scattered along the valley walls.
From this point onwards the exist-
ing valley owes its origin solely to
running water and the weather.
In the same manner the great
slopes of d^ris which occur in the



336 THE STRAND-LINES OP NORWAY [pAwm

Dividal have no doubt arisen. Thus the U-shaped valley gives place to
a V-shaped valley lying at a much lower level, and at the same time the
table-land is resolved into a number of isolated mountains.

*• The Sdrdal cuts its bed deep. The first farm, Sorgaard, 17*4 kilometers
below Polno-Roset, and about 13 kilometers below the point measured on
Stagenuni, lies only 103*3 meters above the sea. At this point the glacier
bed, which has already disappeared far above Sdrgaard, was situated more
than 300 meters above the existing valley bottom. So stupendous has
been the work of running water since the retreat of the ice

About 25 kilometers below Polno-Roset the valley broadens out, and
we soon reach the Bardo Elv : now terraces occur, and the second farm,
Stromsmoen, stands only 61*5 meters above the sea



At Strfimsmocn wc meet the Bardo Elv in its course from the Alte
Vand ; terraces occur in great number, and where the river approaches
the Maals Elv a broad step, formed of fine sand, covers a wide area. In
this terraced valley we stand, as it weire, beneath the ancient glacier bed :
indeed, the indefatigable Pettersen has found roches moutonn^s to the
right of the valley, just below the parish of Bardo, where they reach
a considerable height on the mountain of Graahogden : blocks of the red
granite were observed by him as far up as 2,200 feet, and on the left side
of the valley at a height of 3,000 feet on the Store Ala

' In 1875, near Sdrgaanl, a mighty fragment, larger than a house, broke away from
the quartzite cliff and fell from top to bottom ; to the astonishment of the inhabitants
it rebounded from the meadow below far into the valley ; there it still lies completely
isolated.

* This number differs essentially from that of the Norwegian official map (341 feet =>
106*9 meters) ; it is the mean of three measurements made on different days. I must
leave the discrepancy to subsequent observers. If StrCmsmoen is situated at 106*9
meters, then Sbrgaard must necessarily lie higher than 108*3 meters ; here also my 6gure
is the mean of two closely concordant measurements.

' K. Pettersen, Dct nordlige Norge, etc. : YIII, Bardodalen and XT, Granitisk flytblok-



THE MAALS ELY


837


COLVIU]

The Maals Elv is likewise bordered by terraces, but in its lower reaches,
from Bakkehaug onwards, stiff blue clay in addition to sand and gravel
contributes here and there to their formation ; this is particularly the ease
at their base, near the river, below Moen in the parish of Maals- Elveft.
Below Maals>Eiven the terraces still present those bow-like excisions, so
characteristic of the windings of a river, which are known in America as
‘ ox-bends.' From here onwards the blue clay predominates ; near Guldh&v,
at the commencement of the estuary, rochos moutonn^s again make their
appearance; the glacier bed has reached the level of the sea and the blue
clay of the estuaiy lies over its hummocks. A long rocky spur extends
northwards into the sea as far as Maalsnas, and blocks of rock form so great
an accumulation on its slopes that we might almost imagine a moraine



Fig. 34. The Seven Sisiers,

A rock (nunatak) once projecting out of tho ice*shoet ; seen from the sea.


had here reached the sea. Some of the blocks consist of red Swedish
granite.

3. Movement of tite ice againbt tJie dope of the valleys. It is now well
known, as a result of the laborious investigations of Norwegian geologists,
the comprehensive studies of Kjerulf in particular, that the evidence left
by the ancient ice-sheet in south Norway, west of the Christiania fjord,
indicates an almost radiate movement directed towards the sea ; east of the
fjord the approximately radiate arrangement of the flow-lines is repeated,
but with another centre of dispersion At the same time a certain corre-
spondence between the direction of flow and the existing form of the
surface is on the whole unmistakable in this region. More to the north

kestrOm udefter Maalselv, Bardo og Salangsdal ; Tromsd Mus. Aarsh., 1885, pp. 1-4

and 23—88.

* T. Kjerulf, Om SkuringsmaBrker, Glacialformationen, Terrasser og Strandlinier ;
Univers. Progr. f. and. Halvaar 1872, 4to, Christiania, 1873, and in other publications.

■OLLA8 IX z



338 THE STRAND-LIEES OF NOBWAT [PARr m

the case is veiy different. There the ice moved for gredt distances in
a direction opposed to the existing slope of the vaUeys. The foot is so
remarkable that earlier observers thought a subsequent and imequal
elevation of Scandinavia was required to explain it

That the direction of the striae indicates a consistent system, which,
however, included a movement from, hdow upwards extending for a great
distance towards the existing watershed, was already known to Durocher,
although he attributed the whole phenomenon to floating ice * ; the facts
were admirably stated by Horbye in 1887*. Even at that time it was
recognized that from about lat. 62° N. onwards, the abraded rocks on the
southern slopes of the Dovrefjeld stood with their stoss* sides facing
towards the south, and the movement must consequently have been directed
to the north ; beyond the Stor Sjon, from lat 62° to 63° 30' N., the same
opposition between the direction of the existing water channels and the
ancient striae was observed by Durocher ; Suhrland showed that between
lat 65° and 66° N. the striae extend across the watershed towards the west
and north-west into the Vefsendal, which reaches the sea near the Seven
Sisters (lat 66° N.) ; he also observed striation running in a westerly and
north-westerly direction across the group of lakes of the Yalta Jaure,
which marks the watershed between the region of the Lulek-Trask and the
Tys fjord in lat 68° N.

At that time, when doubt was still felt as to whether the striation was
really due to ice, it was already clear that the effective agent, whatever its
nature, had moved from, hdow upwards over a great distance. To-day
these observations compel us to the conclusion that the summit of the
great ice cap lay east of the existing watershed and at some height
above it.

It is to this fact, as Hansen has shown, that the formation of terraces
and strand-lines on the slopes must be ascribed *. On the south side of
the Dovrefjeld, especially near the head-waters of the Glommen, we meet
with great horizontal terraces of alluvial land ; they lie from 657 to 1,090
meters above the sea, and are sometimes associated with a cutting back of
the solid rock. This ^chamfering does not produce true grooves, but

f'

^ J. Durocher, Etudes sur les phenom^nes erratiques de la Scandinavie ; Bull. Soc*
g^ol. de Fr., 1846-1847, 2® ser., IV, pp. 29-89 et passim.

* J. C. H6rbye, Fomsstte la^aggelser over de erratiske Fheenomener, Nyt Mag.
Naturvid., X, 25 pp., map ; and in particular by the same. Observations sur les ph^nomenes
d erosion en Norvege, public par B. M. KeUhau, Progr. de TUniv. de Christiania pour
le 1*^' B^m. 1857, 4to, 56 pp., maps, in particular pp. 23, 24.

’ As we have no equivalent in English to indicate the face of a rock which is opposed
to the flow of the ice 1 propose to adopt this term from the German ; it has become
almost as necessary as its correlative ‘ roches moutonnees.*— Note by Editor.

^ A. M. Hansen, Om seter eller strandlinjer i store h6ider over Havet ; Arch. Math.
Naturvid., 1885, X, pp. 329-352, map.



OB. vm] MOVEMENT OF THE lOE IN JEBfTLAND 389

faoruontal shelves not unlike narrow steps : they are called sdtr or s&tar,
that is benches or seats, and since I know of no other characteristic
expression for these features, I will adopt this term.

At heights such as those at which the terraces occur, the remains df
marine oiganisms have never yet been encountered. The high valleys
with their steps now lie freely open to all the country below, but their
seter and terraces are horizontal. There must, therefore, at one time have
been a temporary barrier closing them in.

The area characterized by striation directed towards the north, that is
up the valleys, and by the corresponding transport of travelled blocks,
is bounded on the south by a line which in the region of the Gudbrans-
dalen cmd Oesterdalen lies far to the south and south>east of the existing
watershed. When the retreat of the ice began, the uppermost parts of the
valleys, lying nearest the watershed, must have been the first to be exposed ;
since the summit line of the ice-sheet did not coincide with the watershed.
Lower down they were still closed by the ice ; thus high-level lakes were
formed, and in them the high-level terraces and seter. The diurnal changes
of temperature at the level of the water led to the formation of the
seter.

The phenomena of the Dovrefjeld arc repeated in Jemtland. Tdmebohm
has confirmed Durocher’s observations as to the direction of the striae;
Hdgbom has traced the direction with even greater precision. The move-
ment of the inland ice from Angermanland through north Jemtland was
towards the south, in south Jemtland towards the north. Thus two
opposing streams encountered each other somewhere between the eastern
part of the existing Stor Sjbn and the neighbourhood of Strom, and they
were diverted to the west and south-east. The direction of the striation
and the evidence of the travelled blocks combine to show that one especially
great movement proceeded towards the west, tliat is, obliquely across the
direction of the existing Kail Sjon into Norway. Although, as is shoum by
the transported blocks, many of the most considerable heights were covered
by the ice, yet the steep slopes, which bound the west side of the Stor Sjon,
have affected the lower part of its flow, and produced a somewhat sharp
deflexion of the southern ice-stream, turning it from the* north-north-west
towards the west : the chief movement has thus passed as it were through
a broad portal along the lower lying regions near Areskutan and across
the existing watershed ^

Here also, according to Hogbom, horizontal lines occur on the west side
of the Stor Sjfin : traces of terraces appear to surround Areskutan : these
may be clearly seen on the Kail Sjbn. Here also as the ice retreated the
watershed must have been exposed, when the valleys below were still

* A. 0. HCgbom, Glaciala och petrografiska laktaggelser i JemtlandB Llln ; Sver. geoL
UndersOkn. Afh., Ber. C, 4to, 1885, 38 pp., maps.



340


THE STRAND-LINES OP NORWAY [paotiii

closed by ice, and Hansen consequently accounts for these shelves in the
same way as those of the Dovrefjeld. .>

A good deal further to the north Svenonius has likewise found a terrace
situated at a height of about 2,270 feet above the sea at the north*westem
end of the Sitas Jaur in Lule, Lappmarken: it looks down towards
a completely open country, and Fredholm found two horizontal strand*
lines at a height of about 1,700 and 1,800 feet above the sea on the
Puollamt-J&kko near the Stor Sjofall. Svenonius adopts the same ex*
planation for these*.

It is scarcely necessary to add that the facts observed at the upper end
of lake Tome& completely accord with these observations: there also we
found that the ice, ascending towards the Atlantic Ocean, crossed the
threshold of Stagenuni as it passed from the depths of the lake ; and the
sand ridges, obscurely alined over the barrier which closes the lake, must
be regarded as representing the terraces of the Sitas Jaure.

These high-level terraces and strand-lines on the side of the mountains
turned away from the Atlantic are thus in no way dependent on the
height of the sea-level at the time of their formation: neither elevation
nor depression of the land can bo inferred from them. The origin of the
terraces is to be found in the retreat of the ice which exposed the cols on one
side m' the other of the valleys in descending oi'deri over these the lakes
probably emptied themselves into the adjacent valleys. The famous
parallel roads of Lochaber in Scotland similarly owe their origin to the
closure of the valley by ice, as was long ago maintained by Agassiz : they
correspond in height to the several cols of the surrounding hills.

Thus we cannot reasonably expect to find this group of lines at the
same height in different valleys.

4. Origin of the glint lakes of Lapland. The movement of the inland
ice contrary to the fall of the valleys characterizes, as we have seen, alt
that part of the Norwegian glint just considered, and in particular the
whole region of the glint lakes of Lapland. Conditions which are never
or scarcely ever met with in the Alps governed in this case the movement
of the ice. The existing glacier tongues of the Alps move down the valleys,
and they terminate almost without exception in free extremities. Where
narrows occur at the end of a glacier they generally take the form of
gorges excavated by the glacier river, like the ravine of the Moll in front
of the termination of the Pasterze, and probably also the gorge of the
Mas.sa at the foot of the great Aletsch glacier. At present they either
contain no ice at all, as is the case with the Pasterze, or they exercise
no important influence on the movements of the glacier. Even the
narrows and obstacles which do sometimes occur within the course

* Svenonius, Geol. FOren. Stockh. FOth., Sitzung vom 10. April 1865, VJI, p. 608, and
note in 1886, VIII, pp, 56, 57.



CH.vm] COLKS 341

of the Alpine glaciers can scarcely be compared with the portals of the
glint.

For this reason it is scarcely worth while to apply conclusions dra^tn
from the action of the free ice-streams of the Alps to those of the inland
ice of Norway. The better plan, it seems to me, is to start from the
general principle that ice moves like a viscous fluid, and to consider how
fluid bodies behave when subject to deflexion or when they meet with some
check in their progress. We know that glaciers move faster in the middle
than at the sides, faster on the convex than on the concave side of a bend,
and the rate of flow of the whole mass is accelerated by a narrowing of
the transverse section of the flow. Every river obeys the same laws ; it
attempts to maintain a constant transverse section, and at the same time to
establish a regular longitudinal profile, that is, a uniform fall which is on
the whole that of a flat parabola It is only exceptionally and over closely
circumscribed areas that a river works down below the normal line of its
fall, and produces a hollow or pit which is known as a pot-hole or colk.

Colks may be distinguished into $wirl colka (Wirbelkolke) and scape
coUcs (Staukolke)

Swirl colks are formed when the encounter of two currents sets the
water rotating with a screw-like movement which bores downwards. As
a rule they owe their existence to temporary causes, and fill up os soon as
these cease to act : sounding in a whirlpool is difficult to cany out and
uncertain in its results, so that 1 am not in a position to illustrate the
formation of swirl colks in rivers by numerical estimates of any value.
Colks of this kind are doubtless seldom produced by the glaciers of the Alps,
or only on a small scale ; on the other hand, they appear to be frequently
formed by the great fiows which proceed from the ice-mass of Greenland.
The * grydedale ’ which Komerup has described in the Sermilik fjord and
its tributary Alangordlia (lat. 63° 30' to 63° 40' N.) are great polished
caldrons hollowed out in the solid rock, and though this observer does not
regard them as ' giants’ kettles ’ ground out by the ice, this is simply on
account of their extraordinary size. They occur on the lee side of the
mountains, which were once completely buried up by* the ice-sheet, and
appear to have always been open towards the fjord or valley through
which a great ice-stream moved. Their form is that of a rotation para-
boloid with a vertical axis^. These characters are such as would be
produced by the rotatory boring out of a pot-hole. Grydedale are swirl colks.

* ‘ Stow ’ in the Anglo-Saxon sense of ‘ to hinder ’ might have been used as an imper-
fect equivalent of the German * Stan,’ but since the immediate cause of the formation of
the pit is the escape of the accumulated water, ‘ scape,’ the aphetic form of ‘ escape,’
seemed preferable ; * colk ’ is a genuine English word, originally meaning a ‘ hole. ’—Note
by Editor.

* A. Komerup, Geologiske lagtaggelser fra Vestkysten af GrOnland (62” 15'-64* 15' n.
Br.) ; Meddelelser om GrOnland, 1879, 1, p. 106 et seq.



342 THE STRAND-LINES OP NORWAY [PArara

Scape colks are produced by a constriction of the water channel. The
efforts which have been made in the course of the last few years to regulate
t^e course of some parts of the Danube and the Rhone have led to the
necessity of shutting off branches of one or other of these rivers, or even
the main stream itself, in order to force its waters into a new channel.
The construction of works for this purpose is beset with di^ulties. In
proportion as the transverse section of the stream is made narrower it
deepens its channel, and if the bottom cannot be rendered secure, either by
sinking great blocks of stone, or in some other way so as to provide a solid
overfall weir, the colk increases in size : and then it often happens that
human endeavour is unable to cope with the stream. Above the dam the
water rises ; through the opening not yet completely closed it rushes with
irresistible velocity, and strives continually to deepen the channel; its
movement is directed from the dammed up waters downwards, like a fall
over a weir ; and it hollows out of its bed an elongated basin, of which tho
deepest part occurs below the dam. This basin is the scape colk. When
the dam is completely closed then the deepest part of the colk lies below
the dam in the now amputated part of the river. When the stream
succeeds in breaking through the consolidated bottom we may see it tearing
out heavy blocks of stone, carrying them into the depths of the colk,
driving them upwards over its further slope to deposit them below the colk
over the shoals in a wide semicircular mound, and sometimes at a higher
level than the bottom from which they were tom.

The engineers, Messrs. Fanner and Taussig, were so kind as to furnish
me with some instances of colk formation in the Danube, and they in-
formed me that in every case their labours had been carried on uninter-
ruptedly and with the closest watchfulness, so that the stream was never
allowed time to complete its colk. I now give some of these examples.

When the ancient bed of the Danube was closed at Weidenhaufen
below Vienna it was necessary to work without securing the bottom ; as
soon as the opening had been diminished to 45 meters, the waters showed
a rise of 0*95 meter, and under this additional head the stream had already
produced a colk X8 meters deep, the normal depth of the river being
3 meters ; in other words, it had sunk a hole 15 meters deep.

At Fischamend a training wall, through which a branch of the Danube
had flowed without hindrance by an aperture of 162 meters, was closed in
1869. The depth of the colk increased in consequence from 8 meters to
14 meters, and reached the Tertiary clay beneath the alluvial sediments.

The dyke of Elend is on the right bank of the regulated part of the
Danube, and cuts off obliquely an ancient branch which proceeds from it to
the right. When after much difficulty the dyke had been closed, the dif-
ference in the water level on the two sides of the dam amounted to 1*10
meters; the colk below it was 11*3 meters deep, the normal depth of the



GH.?ran]


SCAPE COLES


343


river being 2*6 meters : a number of great blocks of stone, which had been
sunk for the purpose of closing the dyke, lay 60 to 80 meters below it, that
is beyond the colk, arranged in semicircles in the shallower parts of tl\e
river.

The case of the Neu>Haufen
another example.

Of the works constructed to
close the Alt-Rhein near Mannheim
an interesting account has been
given by Honsell. About a third
part of the total volume of the
water flowedaway by theAlt<ilhein,
which it was necessary to close.

After all preparations had been
made the work began on March 1,

1866, with the securing of the
bottom. On April 13 the dyke,
after much labour, was finished, and
the difference in the level of the
water above and below it amounted
to 48 inches. Two days after its
completion a subsidence of the
crown of the dam was observed ;
the work had been undermined,
and in a few hours the river had
made an opening 50 feet broad and
16 feet deep, through which it
poured with a roar like thunder.

When, after fresh efforts, this
breach was closed it was found
that a colk had been scoured out
to a maximum depth, so far as it
could be ascertained after the out-
burst, of at least 60 feet.

During the regulation of the Rhine in the grand duchy of Baden colks
were also observed, some of which had a depth of 30 meters ^

It is true that all the colks we have enumerated were excavated in
loose alluvial soil or clay; nevertheless they show that running water, when
its transverse section is compressed, has great power to scoop out and

I

^ M. Honsell, Die Correction der Miindungdes Neckarsin den Rhein, Allg. Bauzeitung.
1871, XXXVI, pp. 383-422, maps, in particular p. 401, pi. 67, figpi. i and iv ; by the same,
Die Correction des Ober-Rhein, Boitrftge zur Hydrographie des Grossh. Baden, 4to,
Carlsmhe, 1885, 3. Heft, p. 46.


dyke below Vienna (Fig. 35) affords



Scale 1 : 5760 (1" = 80®).


I w m

I. > ■■ ■■

Fzo. 35. Gosure c/ the Neu-ITaufen dyke^ Schuttau,
Regulation of the Danube below Vienna, 1882-
1883. After a sketch by Herr Baurath Taussig.

a, a, a Horseshoe-like mound of large blocks
of stone, tom from the foundation of the dam
and swept along out of the oolk. The mound is
lowest in the middle owing to the activity of
the current. •



344 THE STRAND-MNES OP NORWAY [PAKrni

deepen its bed, and there can be little doubt that given sufficient time the
effect produced in a few weeks or days in loose ground would also be pro-
duced in the solid rock. All the facts indicate that the inland ice of
Greenland possesses a similar power.

Jensen and Komerup have given us a detailed description of the rocky
peaks, known as Jensen’s nunataks and Dalsger’s nunataks, which rise
out of the ice above the isblink of Frederikshaab*. The former are the
summits of a mountain ridge, which is opposed like a dam to the movement
of the ice as it proceeds to the south-west. Immediately below these peaks
the level of the ice is 4,230 feet, and at some little distance above them
5,000 feet. The ice thus swells up behind the dam to the extent of several
hundred feet. A small part of the ice flows between the nunataks, and the

altered character of its surface reveals
an increased velocity. The greater part
moves around the nunataks to north-
west and south-east. On the south-west
side, that is on the lee side of the ridge,
we sec moraines disposed in great cres-
centic arcs, standing in the midst of the
inland ice. The arcs are convex down-
wards or in the same direction as the
movement of the upper ice-stream, and
they serve to define its margin. They
consist of blocks of olivine diabase, such
as is not known anywhere in the neigh-
lx>urhood, and are no doubt derived
from the ground moraine. At this spot,
where the ice must possess an enormous thickness, tlie effect of the dam is so
great that tlte grouiul nwraine is carried up from the bottom to tite surface
and spread out in an arc, like the Hocks of stone hdow the dykes of the
Danube. But where, so to speak, the dead point of the movement occurs,
on the lee side behind the central nunatak, there lies a circular lake 800
feet in diameter, 4000 feet above the sea, but 600 to 800 feet lower than
the surface of the ice ; and this Komerup compares to a * grydedal,’ that is
to a swirl colk.

The ice is dammed back in a similar manner at Dalager’s nunataks;
here it forces its way between these rocky masses ; in front of each of the
ice-streams the ground moraine is extraded in great horseshoe-shaped
curves, ranning from one nunatak to the other (Fig. 36).

The acceleration of the current in the portals between the nunataks, the
carrying up of the ground moraine from a great depth, and the formation

’ J. A. D. Jensen, Expeditionen til Syd-OrOnland i 1878 ; Meddelelsei om QrOnland,
1879, 1, pp. 17-76 ; Kornerup, tom. cit., pp. 115, 128 et passim.



Fio. 36. Lalager'8 Nunataks (after Jensen
and Kornerup). Compai-e Fig. 37, p. 368.



346


CH.vra] GLINT LAKES AS SCAPE COLKS

of a whirl on the opposite side of the ridge agree so completely with what
we have obse^ed in the case of running water, that we may safely affirm
we have here before us similar effects produced by similar causes. Running
water wouM produce a whirlpool and a swirl colk on the lee side, and we
may even assume that at the bottom of the ice below the lake the requisite
conditions exist for the formation of a gtydcdal. The upward movement
of the ground moraine corresponds with the carrying up of blocks of stone
from the secured bottom of a dam pass to the lower end of a scape colk,
and thus we may fairly assume that scape colks are produced by the ice at
corresponding points in its bed.

Helland, as a result of his observations in Greenland, has emphatically
maintained the glacial origin of the lakes and fjords of Scandinavia ; but
he has based his explanations of these local excavations, not on the con-
striction of the transverse section of flow, indicated by the mountains
themselves, but rather on the increased velocity duo to the entrance of a
secondary glacier into a main valley. This factor may be of great im-
portance elsewhere, but in the lakes of Lapland it never, or at least, so
far as I am acquainted with them, only very exceptionally, exercises any
influence \

Let us return to the glint of Lapland. We have seen that it forms
a high wall, the basset edges of the Palaeozoic table-land. It is interrupted
by a number of portals, in which lie the elongated glint lakes of Lapland,
at right angles to the rampart, so that its trace cuts through the largest of
them. Through these passages the ice entered Norway. Many of their
pylons were, for some time at least, submerged beneath the ice, as is proved
by the red granite on the summit of the Store Jerta. But just as at
Serimlik the striations at the bottom follow the direction of the fjord, while
on the summits of the surrounding mountains they diverge like a fan so
at the time when the ice was at its thickest the portals below determined
the direction of its deepest flow. Before the glacial period valleys existed,
which extended from Norway through the portals towards the gulf of
Bothnia. Hogskar Elv, Anavandene, Gievne Jaure, fragments of the
original valley system, have preserved their ancient f%ll up to the present
day. In all these valleys the ice forced its way upwards. Each of the
portals determined a mighty constriction of the flow, and at many of them
the conditions were realized for the formation of a colk. Below the dam,
where the colk should be, lies a lake. The ice has driven back the glint
and destroyed parts of it, but so great was the resistance it offered that the
ancient valleys were worn down and ground out into long deep lake basins.
It was not the threshold of Stagenuni, at the upper end • of lake Tome&,

’ A. Helland, Om Dannelscn af Fjordene, Fjorddalen, IndsOerne og Havbankerne ;
Ofvera. K. yet.-Akad. FOrh. Stockholm, 1875, No. 4, p. 25.

’ Korserup, tom. cit., p. 109.



846


THE STRAND-LINES OF NORWAY [pastiii

which determined the formation of the lake, but the glint which strikes
straight across its middle. How otherwise, shall we explain the disappear-
ance of the block of flat-bedded rock which corresponded with the breadth
of Ihe lake? How many parallel trough-faults should we have to assume
to explain the form of these lakes ? And why should the glint line run
right across them ? The portals of inferior size and simpler structure,
such as those of Tjoalma Vagge, show clearly enough that we have before
us a phenomenon of pure erosion.

The glint lakes of Lapland are scape colks.

6. Ancient strand-lines of the fjords. In the Norwegian fjords both
terraces and true seter occur. Their horizontality is extremely striking.
Sometimes these lines are so sharply drawn and accompanied by such
very regular terraces that their geometrical severity obtrudes itself on
the eye and disturbs our enjoyment of the manifold variety of the
landscape.

The accounts in our textbooks generally give a very .schematic repre-
sentation of these features, and explain them as the result of an oscillation of
the ground, scarcely comprehensible in the face of such extreme regularity.

The much debated oscillations of the Baltic at the present day then
readily come to be regarded as the continuation of the ancient oscillations
of Norway. This theory receives its death-blow by the very first visit
paid to one of the northern fjords ; near Bodo, at Tromso, and many other
localities close to the sea, we may observe a selvage of light yellow marine
sands, at a height of SO, or at most 40, feet above the strand ; thousands of
marine shells of existing species occur in it. This differs completely both
in colour and character from the sediment of the terraces, as well as by the
presence of included shells ; and there can be no doubt it is of more recent
age. It is the ‘ post-glacial ’ sand of Scandinavian geologists, and shows
that in these fjords the conditions which now obtain are not those which
existed during the formation of the terraces.

In those northern fjords which I had an opportunity of visiting, three
groups of recent deposits occur.

The first consists, of shell-bearing beds, which reach a height of 4-150
to 170 feet, and are regarded by some, Pettersen for instance, as possibly
interglacial. I have not had an opportunity of examining them myself.

The second group includes the sedimento of the terraces ; only towards
their base, as in the valley of the Moals Elv, are beds of blue clay present ;
all the rest is sand and gravel and small pebbles, in the midst of which a block
of larger size may be seen here and there. No shells are to be seen, at
least not in the upper terraces ; the colour is grey or brownish grey, and
the bedding, as far as it can be recognized, is oblique, suggesting rather the
action of a rapid river than the sea. We have already mentioned the pre-
sence of small pieces of wood and fragments of Swedish granite in one of



ALTEN FJOBD


347


CH. vm]


the terraces of the Bsls fjord (II, p. 888). These are precisely the characters
usually presented by alluvial land in the valleys of mountain ranges. The
glacial or fluvio*glacial origin of these accumulations is indicated by a
number of facts to which we shall refer later.

The third and most recent group includes the post-glacial shelly sands
of the coast already mentioned.

On the Christiania fjord, Kjerulf distinguishes older shell beds which
extend up to 200 feet It would thus seem as though the sea-level reached
here a greater height than in the north. The occurrence of arctic shells up
to 640 feet would indicate a sea-level of -I- 600 feet, which would correspond
to the highest terraces of the Christiania fjord *. Sweden does not enter
into consideration here : a continuous ice-sheet once extended over the whole
of Sweden together with the gulf of Bothnia and Finland, and flowed not
only towards the Norwegian valleys but far over Denmark, a large part of
Germany, and Russia. This was first maintained by Otto Torell, and has
been confirmed by numerous later observations

In the first place it must not be foigotton that both in the interior of
Norway and high up in the mountains, terraces and soter have been met with
which present precisely the same characters as the terraces of the fjords ;
and they were formed as we have shown during the retreat of the ice. We
must further bear in mind that the terraces of the fjords and the accom-
panying steps in the rock are older than the post-glacial marine sands.

The horizontality of the seter has been contested. Bravais, who spent
the winter of 1888-9 at Bossekop at the upper end of the Alten fjord,
thought he recognized two particularly well-marked lines extending from
this place to Hammcrfest, and the measurements which he made of the
lines at six points gave the following results in meters : —



I

II

III

IV

V

VI

Upper lino ....

674

565

51.8

49*6

4265

28.6

Lower line ....

27.7

24-5

20-5

18.3

1660

14-1

Difierence of level .

897

820

813

813

2603

14.5


From this Bravais concluded that the upper line iiad originally been
horizontal, and had then been tilted to the extent given above in the
difierence of the level; hereupon the second line had been formed, also
horizontal; and then both had been brought into the slanting position
which now characterizes them ^


* T. i^erulf. Die Geologie des sfkdlichen und mittleren Norwegen, German translation

by A. Gurlt, Bonn, 1880, pp. 2-23. ,

* Otto Torell, UndersOkningar Ofrer Istiden ; Ofvera. K. Vet.-Akad. Forh. Stockholm,
1872, XXIX, 10, pp. 25-66, and 1873, XXX, 1, pp. 47-64

* Rapport ear un M^moire de M. A. Bravais, relatif auz lignes d’ancien niveau de la
mer dans le Finmark, Compt. rend., 1842, XV, p. 838 ; also C. Martins, Du Spitzberg au



348 THE STRAND-LINBS OP NOBWAY [PAirrni

These observations were regarded in France, (Germany, and England as
a confirmation of the elevation theory ; but among Scandinavian geologists
they did not find equal recognition. The distance from Eaa Qord in the
most southerly part of the Alten fjord (point I) to Hammerfest (point YI)
amounts to 90 kilometers ; Talvig (point II) lies on the western side of the
Alten fjord, Leris fjord (point III) about 86 kilometers to the 'north*north-
east, on the eastern side of Yargsund, the continuation of the Alten fjord.
But since numerous horizons are indicated in this region, either by terraces
or seter, and since in the Kaa fjord (point I) alone Sexe recognized as many
as nine horizons between a height of 200 feet and the seadevel, there is
absolutely no proof that the lines measured by Bravais belong in reality to
the same two horizons *.

It will not now surprise us to find that Mohn, as the result of numerous
measurements made in the same fjord, was able to distinguish five groups
of horizontal lines instead of the two divergent and not horizontal lines of
Bravais ; these groups occur at heights of 186, 152, 128'5, 89*5, and 73«5
feet, or 68*3, 47*7, 40-3, 28, and 28 meters *.

A still more exhaustive account has been given by Herr Pettersen as
the result of observations, extending over many years, made in the adjacent
fjords of the Tromso stift. He arrived at the conclusion that towards the
upper end of the fjords, or as we recede from the sea, fragments of seter
occur at an increasing height : there has not, however, been an ascent of one
and the same system of seter from the sea towards the interior, but the seter
occur in completely independent horizontal fragments, arranged like a flight
of etepa at heights continually increasing from the coast inland. It looks as
though the conditions necessary for the fonnation of these lines were as a rule
realized at an earlier date in the inner channels of the sound than on the coasts

The restriction of the highest lines to the upper end of the fjords is

Sahara, Paris, 1866, pp. 127-136. In his report on Bravais’ observations E. de Beaumont
(tom. cit., p. 840) opposes the hypothesis of a temporary closure by ice, because, in
addition to a number of other difficulties, the surface of a glacier is not constant enough
to hold up water at a fixed level. On the contrary, he is led by Bravais' observations to
suppose that a fracture or fiezure of the crust occurs near Rastabynaes, where there is
a marked change in the inclination of the lines to one another. In the same report
Biot points out the possibility of changes in the local value of gravity (p. 846).

* S. A. Sexe, Om nogle gamle Strandlinier ; Arch. Math. Naturvid., 1876, I, p. 17,
map.

* H. Mohn, Bidrag til Kundskaben om gamle Strandlinier i Norge; Nyt Mag.
Naturvid., 1877, XXII, p. 41 et seq.

* K. Pettersen, Termsser og gamle Strandlinier, Tromsfi Mus. Aarsh., 1880, III, pp. 84,
36, 52 ; German translation by B. Lehmannj Zeitschr. Nat., Halle, 1^0, LIII, pp. 820,
821, 837. The particularly long stretches of lines occurring at Viken (101 feet),
Sandviken (113 feet), and Grepstad (123 feet) on the south side of the island of Kvalff in
the Malangen fjord were described by Pettersen as examples of the ladder-like succession
of linea ^e abrupt breaking off of the several examples of lines in the Alten Qord is
also discussed by Sexe, tom. cit., p. 13 et seq.



849


0H.vin] UNEQUAL HEIGHT OF THE LINES

universal : the seter of Trondhjem famishing a rare exception, to be dis-
cussed later. It is a general rule also that the coast of the islands which
looks towards the open sea is deficient in these features, and indeed that
high-level strand-lines scarcely ever occur on a coast facing the open sea.
These lines are almost exclusively confined to the inner sounds, the much
ramified arms of the sea behind the neighbouring islands, whore they
chiefly occur in narrow creeks ; and these facts, combined with the step-like
succession of higher and higher lines as we proceed towards the interior,
lead us to inquire whether the terraces and seter by the sea may not have
been formed in the same way as those on the high mountains.

Wo shall soon encounter other evidence which will leave little doubt as
to this fact.

Kjerulf, whose masterly investigations extend over seven degrees of
latitude and whoso opinion is of the greatest weight, maintains that lines
so sharply defined as those which may be seen on the coast of Norway can
only have been produced by intermittent and comparatively rapid move-
ments of the land. The same opinion had previously been expressed by
Keilhau. The mode of occurrence of most of the great terraces he regards
as sufficient by itself to show that they represent ancient deltas; the
succession of the terraces, however, shows that the elevation woe not
unifofi'ni but intermittent h

This theory of intermittent elevation of the land has been opposed by
Sexe, on the ground that the height and number of the lines in the several
fjords, even indeed in the several arms of the same fjord, are ivot constant,
and that in general on the coasts of the open sea and at great distances
from the mouths of existing rivers, terraces have not been observed. In
the several lateral valleys of the Hardanger fjord, Sexe remarks that the
number of steps is very variable ; in the Odda valley five steps are present,
in the Tyssedal two, in Kinsarvik five, in the Oyfjord two, and in Graven
four. Thus in the Odda, five of these sudden movements must have
occurred, which produced stages at heights of 293, 94, 80, 43, and 12 feet ;
in the Tyssedal not far off, only two, which produced stages at heights of
253 and 115 feet. But such a supposition is inadmissible

The want of uniformity in the terraces of neighbouring valleys has
been emphasized still more strongly by Gumaelius. This observer has
collected all the measurements of strand-lines and terraces in the region of
the Norwegian coast published up to 1880, and has tabulated all the figures

’ Kjerulf, Die Geologic des stidlichen und mittleren Norwegen ; German edition, p. 12
et pasnm. Bravais also aaaumeB spasmodic elevations which he believes to have been
more powerful in the interior than on the coast, but Kjerulf is pf opinion that ' no
inclined plane can be constructed from the lie of the terraces.*

* 8. A. Sexe, On the Rise of Land in Scandinavia ; Univ. Progr. Christiania, Ist Sem.
1872.



360


THE STRAND-MNES OF NORWAY [PAKcra

in successive groups of 10 feet As a result we find that between* 10 and
610 feet there is not a single group which does not include at least (me of
the measurements. As regards local peculiarities the folloMring comes out.
From the southern point of Norway to Jaederen no terrace is visible
below 90 feet ; thence to Trondhjem every decade from 19 to 609 feet is
i*epresented ; the highest terraces lie between 570 and 579 'feet. In
Hardanger fjord they do not extend beyond a height of 890 to 899 feet.
In the Sogne fjord all the measurements with two exceptions lie between
180 and 490 feet ^

Passing from south and central Norway to the fjords of the north we
find. that in Tromsd stift and Altenfjord only lower horizons are repre*
sented, and a height of 220 feet is scarcely ever exceeded The only
general result to be obtained from these facts is that in the south the
terraces and seter below a level of 90 feet appear to be absent; in the
north those above a level of 220 feet.

But this great diversity in height is manifest not only in a tabular
summary ; it occurs also within the individual fjords. Gumaelius, among
many o^er examples, gives the following: between the Eidfjord and the
EidQord Vand in the Hardinger, a fine terrace may be seen on one side of
the valley at a height of 860 feet, while on the other side five terraces
occur between heights of 10 and 300 feet. Such great local differences
<x>uld not fail to raise doubts as to the marine origin of these features.
Gumaelius expresses his scepticism in the most explicit terms.

Somewhat different from the results obtained by the Norwegian
geologists are those to which Hugh Mitler was led by a study of the
neighbourhood of Trondhjem. Between the sea-level and a height of 350
feet this observer distinguished not less than thirty-three to thirty-four
terraces, chiefly cut in clay and situated almost without exception in
sheltered places. Between a height of 850 and 580 feet ho observed nine
to ten terraces ; the highest lines are the two seter cut in the rock above
Ilsvike near Trondhjem, which will be discussed presently.

Hugh Miller regarded all the terraces as post-glacial, since the two
highest seter are cut in rock which has been rounded by ice ; but since the
marine remains, which arc known here up to a height of 880 feet, present
arctic characters, the water at the time of the high-level terraces must still
have been glacial If intermittent elevations really occurred they must
have been more numerous than is generally supposed ; it is also doubtful,
considering the great number of terraces which occur here, whether all
have been preserved, or whether many may not have been effitced by
storms or other destructive agents. The smaller steps resemble the lines

' 0. Gumaelius, N3.gra reseanteekningar fr&n Norge: II. Rullstensgrus, terrasser
och nutida bildningar af bergartsspillor ; Geol Fbren. Stockh. FOrh., 1880-1881, V,
pp. 175-207.



0 H.vni] SETEB OF TRONDHjBM 851

yrhi<jb may be seen at high tides, even when there is no periodicity of any
kind in the sinking of the water level

It must be observed that Hugh Miller applies this last remark to only
the smaller and lower terracea I have carefully exaniined the two great
lines above llsviken which were first described by Kjerulf. They occur
one above the other, are about one kilometer in length, and are cut partly
in schist, partly in a green granite. According to Sejersted their heights
are respectively 161-1 and 177*8 meters*. The lower line is the more
sharply defined, and presents the characters of a typical seter.

They run along a moderately steep slope, covered by low bushes and
isolated trees. At its foot lies a small alluvial plain,and on this s^nds the town
of Trondhjem; to the left is a part of the fjord, and to the right, that is towards
the interior, alluvial deposits of great thickness, forming regular terraces.

A few shallow water-courses run down the slope to the plain, and are
separated by broad flat ridges. The cutting back of the rock has proceeded
farther on the projecting ridges than in the farrows, where it is slight or
next to nothing, and as a result we have a horizontal causeway which
varies in breadth, attaining its maximum on the ridges, where it is some-
times as much as 30 meters across ; on the mountain side it is bounded by
a steep but not very high cliff. The cliff shows no trace of striation, but
presents a splintered and broken-up appearance. This shelf in the rock
has certainly not been produced during either a rise or fall of the sti'and-
line, but at a level which must have remained stationary at precisely this
height for a long time. The excavating action must have been rapidly
interrupted, otherwise the broad horizontal causeway would not have been
so perfectly preserved. So far we may accept .Kjerulf’s view, but not his
supposition that the cause of the rapid interruption was intermittent eleva-
tion. These remarks do not apply to the lower terraces, which are un-
accompanied by seter, and cut in soft clay.

A peculiar association of terraces and glacial formations was described
many years ago by Codrington, and subsequently in great detail by
Holland and Holmstrom *. The facts are as follows : — >

Ascending from the sea we first cross a series of terraces ; the upper-

* Hugh Miller, Some ResultH of a detailed Survey of the old Coait-Lines near Trondhjem,
Norway ; Brit. Assoc. 1885 ; Nature, October 8, 1885, p. 555.

* J. Sejersted, in B. Lehmann, Neue Bcitrdge zur Kenntniss der ehemaligen Strand-
linien im anstehenden Gestein in Norwegen, Zeitschr. Nah, Halle, 1881, LIV, pp. GO, 68.
Njerulf was the first to describe this line ; Om Skuringsmserker, &c., part II, Univ. Progr.
Christiania, 2nd Sem. 1875, p. 91. He gives as the heights 462 and 510 feet; Mohn
obtained 1^*7 and 178.5 meters.

’ T. Codrington, On the probably glacial Origin of some Norwegian Lakes, Quart.
Journ. Geol. Soc., 1860, XVI, pp. 345-347 ; A. Helland, Om Beliggenheden af Monener
og Terrasser foran mange IndsOer, Ofvers. K. Vet. Akad. FOrh., 1875, XXXII, pp. 53-82 ;
also Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1877, XXXIIl, pp. 165-172 ; L. HolmstrOm, Om morkner
och terrasser, Ofvers. K. Vet. Akad. FCrh., 1879, No. 2, pp. 5-47, pi.



852 THE STRAND-LINES OF NORWAY [Piorni.

most of these, sometimes forming a broad plain, ends towards the«interior
against a terminal moraine, which stretches across the whole valley, and so
to speak crowns the terraces ; we will speak of these then as wowned terrace$.

the other side of the moraine comes a lake,' recognizable as a true rock
basin ; its surface stands above the sea-level, its bed frequently descends far
below. In some cases additional terraces are to be seen beyond the lake on
the landward side ; these must be regarded as its marginal terraces.

The lake is thus dammed across by the terminal moraine, and the mass
of alluvial land in which the crowned terraces are cut stands in most
intimate relation with the moraine. Sexe pointed out many years ago that
the alluvium must have been transported into its present position during
the existence of the glacier, for it could not otherwise have crossed the site
of the moraine and lake.

Holland emphasizes the fact that this relation of the terminal moraine
to the terraces is repeated in nearly fifty of the largest lakes of Norway,
and in the most typical instances which he cites from the west of the
country, as in the Hardanger, the Sogne, and Nord fjords, the height of
these terraces scarcely ever exceeds 100 meters. The case of the Homing-
dais Yand, Nordfjord, is remarkable on account of the extremely great
depth of the dammed up lake ; its surface stands at -t- 54 meters and its
depth is 486 meters ; it therefore descends to —432 meters.

The moraine is not always distinctly marked; the lake then appears to end
directly against the uppermost terrace ; this is the case which has been dis-
cussed in connexion with the Sagel Yand, Bals fjord (II, p. 833). Pettersen has
described a peculiar example in Kvsenangen, where two small lakes, one
behind the other, are cut off from the sea by a similar barrier. Kornerup
has given a sketch of the south Kangerdluarsuk in Greenland, showing five
successive ten*aces crowned by a terminal moraine at a height of 400 feet.

I have not visited the Hardanger fjord, but it would appear to present
some very instructive features. Holland states that the lake Cravens Yand
is separated at its head from the sea by alluvial land with terraces at 9, 16’5,
and 41 meters. In the detritus of the middle terrace trunks of trees, cones
of Conifers, and also liazel nuts occur. The post-glacial shell beds extend as
far up as the highest terrace, i. e. 41 meters. This recalls the carbonized
wood of the terrace of the Bals fjord, and we must wait for further
evidence to decide whether these plant remains, and with them the alluvial
deposits, belong to an interglacial episode or not. The cutting out of the
terrace itself, judging from its height, which is identical with that of the
shell beds, may have commenced in post-glacial times

* K. Pettersen, Kvienangen ; et Bidrag til Besvarelse af SpOrgsmaalet om Fjorddannel-
sen, TromsC Mus. Aarsh., 1881, IV, pp. 1-3G, map ; Kornerup, MeddeleUer om GrOnland,
1881, II, p. 186 ; Helland, Ora en Stigning af Landet red Hardangerfjord i en geol.
Bserdcl. nasr Tid, Geol. FCren. Stockh. FCrh., II, 1875, pp. 120-125.



353


c|H. vni] GRANITE BLOCKS IN BALS FJORD

In all these cases the end of the glacier occupied the hollows now filled
by lakes, at the time the delta was formed ; and the upper surface of this,
often of considerable extent, stands to the lake in much the same relation
as the recent alluvial plains, raised and levelled by winding glacial brookS,
stand to some of the lakes in the Alps, as for instance the plain of Gschloss
below the Schlattenkees of the Venediger. The accumulation of the glacier
silt must be distinguished from the formation of the terraces, since the
latter are subsequently cut out of the former, even as the lines in the cliffs
have been cut out of the hard rock.

Sexe and Gumaelius, reasoning from local differences in the height of
the terraces, arrived at different explanations, which agree, however, in
regarding the terraces as due to deposition in stages, the result of varia-
tions in the quantity of transported material, or in the rate of melting of
the ice ; but theories of this nature will not explain the existence of lines
cut in the rocks, and I can scarcely believe that terraces of deposition
would present such sharp outlines ; wo have seen also on the Sagel Vand
that the irregular stratification of the terraces is more steeply inclined than
their slopes.

In certain fjords between lat. 08° 50' and 70° N. another kind of con-
nexion between the terraces and the events attendant on the close of the
glacial period, no less remarkable than the preceding, has been recognized
by Pettersen. In this region the ice has distributed over the land thousands
of erratics derived from a characteristic red granite in Sweden, and, as we
have already mentioned, Pettersen has met with erratics of this rock on
the slopes of the Store Ala in Bardo up to 3,200. feet, and on the Mauken
towards the Tag Vand up to 2,500 feet. In the immediate neighbourhood
of the sea the height at which these blocks of red granite occur suddenly
diminishes. It certainly appears as if the glaciers bearing with them these
erratics had pushed forwards, probably at a time when the retreat of the
ice was arrested, against the moraine which closed the fresh-water lake in
the Salangen and also, under similar conditions, over the Sagel Vand
towards Bals fjord, but in those localities the boulders have already sunk
to a level of some few hundreds of feet. On the coasts of the fjords them-
selves they are scattered up to a horizontal limit, wtich according to
existing observations does not extend above 200 feet in Salangen, 160 in
Malangen, and only 120 to 130 feet in Bals fjord. Pettersen believes that
these erratics were distributed by drift ice, at a time when the ice cap was
melting. The upper limit of the erratics in the fjords coincides with the
upper limit of the terraces

Here we may remark that the great and lofty islands off the coast, as

^ K. Pettersen, Det nordlige Norge under den glaciale og postglaciale Tid, Ilf Bidrag *,
XI, Granitisk FlytblokkestrOm udefter Maalselv, Bardo og Salangsdal ; TronisO Mug.
Aarsh., 1885, VII, pp. 23-38.


BOLLAt 11


A a



864


THE STBAND^LINES OP NORWAY [PAiwni

well as the most westerly parts of the peninmla itself, which in places, as
in the Lyngen fjord, still bears glaciers, were certainly not free from ice
during the glacial epoch. On the contrary they were the centres of inde>
{lendent glacier systems, which behaved towards the invading inland ice
of Sweden just as the existing local glacimrs of the western part of south
Greenland do towards the ice of the east Holm has shown that on the west
side from cape Farewell down to about lat. 60° 30' N. the land rises in
high mountains from which glaciers radiate out in all directions as in the
mountain groups of the Alps; in the east, however, the heights do not
exceed 3,000 feet, and a snow-covered ice-sheet, through which isolated
peaks protrude, mantles all the land; but even at the present day the
glaciers are increasing in size, and it seems as though they would ultimately
unite to form a continuous sheet. Similarly in Norway, Pettersen has
recognized that the Troms Tind, 3,970 feet high, situated not far from the
west coast, was passed by a mighty glacier tongue which once stretched
across the existing sound to the island of TromsO, and this it covered with
rocks derived from the Troms Tind *.

In the fjords of the Tromsd stift a certain subordination and connexion
of phenomena may be recognized. We see a mighty mass of ice coming
from Sweden and advancing towards the Atlantic through the poiials and
over the pylons of the glint, and the red granite blocks lie more than 3,000
feet above the existing level of the sea. In the region of the existing
fjords, this ice-sheet appears to have encountered the ice-flows produced by
a local glaciation, which proceeded from the heights and islands of the
west coast. The marine deposits observed by Pettersen in Lavangen at
a height of 150 feet and on Tromso at 170 feet were, he thought, possibly
interglacial, as may well be the cose, for they must be more recent than
the first great glaciation and older than the terraces situated at a lower
level.

After the first advance of the ice, the glaciers, although they did
not attain their previous dimensions, moved forwards a second time,
pushing their frontal moraines towards the upper end of the Salangen fjord,
the Bals fjord, and many other anns of the sea, where they deposited their
detritus. Then followed the formation of the terraces, which were con-
temporaneous with the second glacial episode or the latter part of it.
Finally the ice disappeared ; at a height of -1-30 to 40 feet the post-glacial
shelly sands were deposited on the coast ; the deepening of the valle3r8 by
running water commenced and still continues, as well as the formation of
new river terraces.

Lastly, we must mention that in the northern fjords continuous beds of

' G. F. Holm, Geogiafiske UndersOgelie af GrOnlands lydligite Del, MeddeleUer om
GrOnland, 1883, VI, p. 1 74 et seq. ; K. Pettenen, Det nordlige Noige, &c., IX, Tromsdaleii,
TromsO Hus. Aanh., 1885, VII, pp. 5-20.



Ottvin] PUMICE 866

pumice are sometimes met with: in Vai^gas, Bedemar describes their
oteurrence at Jupwik and on the coast of Kwalb ; Keilhau was acquainted
with beds of tliis kind ; Roberts records pumice at Hammerfost, 60 to 80
feet above the sea ; Pettersen found it near Tromsb, often at a height *of
30 or 40 feet ; near JBodo, in making an excavation numerous fragments
of pumice associated with Cardiv/ni edvle and lAttorina littorea are said
to have been met with at a height of 150 feet. Instances of pumice
occurring in the higher beds of the interior parts of the fjords are not
known to me. These waifs can only have been washed in from the
open sea \

As a result of these very various observations, we recognize the following
peculiarities as characteristic of these formations : the association of terraces
with sharply-cut seter; the horizontality of all the lines; the step-like
succession of lines at levels, continually increasing in altitude towards the
head of the fjord; the restriction of the highest lines to the head of the
fjord or its larger lateral valleys; the want of correspondence Itetween
the height of the lines in adjacent fjords, or in different parts of one and
the same fjord ; the occurrence, by no means rare, of a lake in the glacier
bed, closed at its lower end by a moraine, which, towards the sea, crowns
terraced alluvial land ; and the coincidence in some of the fjords of the
highest lines with the upper limit of the erratic blocks, which have been
distributed by drift ice. Finally, the rule appears to hold that in the
extreme south of Norway the lower horizons are not represented, while
the upper horizons are similarly absent in the north.

Several of these characters — such, for instance, as the step-liko succession
of the lines at continually increasing altitude towards the head of the fjord,
and the absence of higher lines towards its mouth, a rule to which there is
scarcely an exception ; or, again, the breadth of the seter, which points to
a rapid change in the relative level of land and water ; and, finally, the
inequality of the heights — cannot by any means be reconciled with what
we know of the action of the sea between tide levels. On the other hand,
there are a number of facts which point to the influence of ice.

Under these circumstances we must seek information in those localities
where similar conditions prevail at the present day. The existing ice-
sheet of Greenland presents itself along the west coast as the remains of
a once much more extensive mass which advanced a long way towards
Baflin bay, filling all the straits in front of the fjords and overwhelming
a great part of the adjacent islands. The largest of the existing glaciers
are but the relics of the far larger ice-streams -of the past. According to
Steenstrup’s observations, the glacier of Jakobshavn once filled the bay
of Disco; that of Torsukatak the Vaigat strait; 'the glacier in the fjords

’ Vargas Bedemar, Reise nach dem hohen Notden, 8vo, Frankfurt a. If., 1819, 11,
pp. 99, 289 ; by the same, Arktis II, Arch. Math. Naturvid., 1881, p. 476.

A a 2



366 THE STRAND-LINES OP NORWAY [pArara

of Umanak and Karat carried an immense mass of ice beyond Ubekjendt
Eiland ; the gneiss blocks of the mainland w6re dragged along and scattered
over the basalt table mountains which form the peninsula and islands of
the coast. Near the settlement of Nugsuak, at the extremity of the
peninsula of the same name, which projects into the sea towards the west,
the direction of the ancient striation runs from north to south, and this
fact, together with the immense quantity of foreign boulders on Hare
island and on the west side of Disco, appears to indicate, as Steenstrup
points out, that Baffin bay itself was once filled with ice Similar evi-
dence of a former far gi-eater extension of the ice is afforded by numerous
localities along the coast.

Terraces and shell-bearing sand occur in Greenland. It is true that in
the glaciated region which extends from cape Farewell to lat. 60“ 30' N.
neither ten*aces nor shells are mentioned by Holm: on the other hand,
between lat. 60* 45' to 61* 15' N., Steenstrup observed terraces up to a
height of 150 feet, but no shells, except at two places 10 to 15 feet above
high water From lat. 62“ 15' to 64“ 15' N., Jensen and Komerup observed
teri'aces up to 612 feet, and marine shells up to 35 feet, the latter only at
one place on the const. Further, shells of Myiilua ediUia and Mya tmneata
were encountered at a height of 35 feet on the shore of an inland lake near
Bjome sound. Komenip adds that the terraces in Arneragdla (338 feet)
and Ilivertalik (322 feet) have doubtless been fonned by the sea, since they
occur in an exposed po.sition ; but that it is scarcely likely the sea reached
the level of the single high terrace on the Bjome sound (612 feet) ; a valley
may frequently be barred across by a moraine, and in the Imsin so closed
alluvial Hats may be formed simulating a marine ternwe. Kornerup’s
account contains a particularly instractive description of the effect of the
tides on the mighty mass of sand and clay which the great Frederickshaab
glacier l)ears with it into the sea ; the planing down of the material in the
tidal zone is repeated twice daily. Between lat. 66“ 55' and 68“ 30' N.,
the same observer met with terraces up to a height of 380 feet, but shells
only in a single locality at a height of 20 feet. Finally, lietween lat.
69“ and 72“ 30“ N., Hammer and Stcenstmp found terraces up to 478 feet,
and shells up to 196 feet The shells in this case were observed at a single
locality only, at Pagtorfik (Umanak), where they lie in stratified basaltic

* K. .1. y. Steenstrup, Bidiag til Kjcndskab til de geognostiske og geografiske Forhold
i en Del af Nord-GrOuland ; Mcddelelser ou Granland, 1883, lY, pp. 213, 220.

“ 0. F. Holm, Geograllsk Undersdgelse af GrOnlands eydiigste Del, op. cit., 1883, VI,
pp. 149-192 ; K. J. V. Steenstrup, Bemoirkninger til et geognostik Oversigtskaart over
en Del af Julianehaab's Distrikt, op. cit., 1881, II, pp. 39-40.

’ A. Komerup, Gcologiskc lagttagulser fra Yestkysten af GrOnland (62° 15'- 64° 15' n.
Br.),op. cit., 1879, I, pp. 94-102 ; by the same, Geologiske Tagttagelser fra Yestkysten af
GrOnland (66° 15 -68“ 15' n. Br.), op. cit., 1881, II, pp. 181-189; K. J. V. Steenstrup,
Bidrag til Kjendskab, &c., pp. 227-286.



CH. VIII]


GREENLAND GLACIERS


357


sand, and, according to all accounts, Nordenskiold's in particular, they
would appear to date from a somewhat early period At Kugsuak (Disco
fjord), Steenstrup observed valves of Mya trumuta in a terrace 172 feet
high, and in the Nord fjord shells are found on both sides of the fjord
at a height of 70 to 80 feet. The other beds lie only 20 feet above the
sea, and the most recent formation, just above high water, is represented
by some beds with Mytilua edulis in the Disco fjord. Steenstrup discusses
the question whether the movement of the strand-line took place con-
tinuously or intermittently, and considers the latter more probable, since
the terraces are so sharply defined; he adds, however, that one and the
same terrace may present in one place a single uniform slope, and in
another a succession of subordinate steps, so that local influences must
have made themselves felt.

From the foregoing it would appear that at various localities along the
coast as far as Disco, and between 20 and 35 feet above high water, shelly
sands occur in a position similar to that occupied by the post-glacial sand
on the west coast of Norway, and that the marine shells met with at
a greater height have hitherto been found only in the most northerly of
these regions. The terraces reach far greater heights. At the same time
we must observe that the mollusca and Echinoids of the present day
always avoid fresh or muddy water in the neighbourhood of a glacier;
their presence indicates the absence of ice in the neighbourhood.

We may now compare the two great glaciers of Frederikshaab and
Jakobshavn.

For the former, we will again follow the accounts of Jensen and
Kornerup^. The end of the glacier, of great breadth and traversed by
radiating crevasses, advances towards the sea with a convex front, known
as the Frederikshaabs isblink*'; the flat land in front of it, formed of
material which it has itself transported, measures about 8*5 kilometers in
breadth. The isblink itself is the splayed-out end of a stream of inland ice
which flows from Jensen s nunataks towards the south-west. In its pro-
gress this ice-stream dams up on its south side a fresh-water lake, the
Tasei'suak, which lies at a height of +940 feet, and is covered by icebergs
given off at both ends of the calving glacier. The Greenlanders have
a tradition that the Tasersuak was once a tjord, and that before the ice
closed it, it could be entered even by the big boats used by women. This
indeed may well have been the case, although the traveller Dalager is said
to have crossed the lake as early as 1751. The lake communicates by

' A. E. Nordenskifild, Redogorelsc for en expoditionen till (Ironland, &r 1870 ; Ofvers,
K. Vet. Akad. Forh. Stockholm, 1870, No. 10, p. 1018.

J. A. D. .Tensen, Indlandsisen Ost for Frederikshaabs Isblink, 1878 ; Meddelelser om
GrOnland, 1879, I, map C.

^ The Danish spelling has been retained, since English navigators attach a different
meaning to the word * ice-blink.’ (Note by the Editor.)



368


THE STRAND-LINES OP NORWAY [paktiii

a canal in the ice with another and much smaller lake, situated at a height
of 640 feet, and from this a river flows into the upper part of Tiningnertok,
a deep fjord filled with fresh water, and completely separated from the sea
bjr the silting up due to the isblink.

Similar phenomena occur on the north side of the ice-stream. Two
fairly important fresh-water lakes are formed by a T -shaped extrusion of
the ice ; their height above the sea is not known ; like Tasersuak they are
covered with fragments of floating ice. Below them lies the Afajorarisat
fjord; in 1878 its communication with the sea was almost cut oftj and



Flu. 37. yrederikshaaba Isblink (after Hammer).

only maintained by a powerful current which undermines the inland ice at
its mouth. Majoransat on the north coiTcsponds with Tiningnertok on
the south aide.

Tasersuak is 33*8 kilometers in length, and 5'6 kilometers in breadth ;
here, we might suppose, the incessant drifting of the ice and the changes
of temperature should affbrtl opportunity for the formation of a line
or shelf in the rock. If the lake were then to be suddenly emptied,
a horizontal shelf would i-emain, which would be interpreted as the sign
of a spasmodic movement. We thus see that in Tasersuak a surface of
water exists at a level of 940 feet ; below it there is a small sheet of water
at a level of 640 feet ; on the north side another sheet, also above the level


GREENLAND GLACIERS


359


CH. VUI]

of the sea, at a height not yet determined, or fiiere may even be two sheets
of water at different heights, that is the two lakes above Majorarisat ; then
follow the silted'Up fjords and the open sea. It is certain that the ice also
carries sand and mud into the inland lakes ; if at any time these should
empty themselves even in part, then the conditions would be realized for
the carving out of terraces. ZViMs /rom 940 feet dmtm to the sea~levd, thei'e
occur at different leads all the conditions prdiminary to the formation of
Juirizontal lines and steps, without the intervention of oscillations either
of land or sea.

Tlie vast variety of the conditions created in this way will appear
still more clearly if we consider another example, the glacier fjord of
Jakobshavn.



Pio. 38. Jttkobshatns Jn/jord (after Hammer). On the aame acale as Fig. 37.

This was first desciilnid by Rink ; it was on the great glacier, which
here reaches the seji, that Helland made his observatiofis in 1875, when he
demonstrated, for the first time, the extraordinarily rapid movement of
this outflow from the inland ice ; the most detftiled desenption has been
given by Hammer’.

The calving of the glacier is always in progress; the height of the
vertical ice front amounts to about 200 feet, but towards the interior
the upper surface of the glacier soon rises to over 1,000 feet. Its mean
velocity, as estimatetl by Hammer, may be taken as 50 feet a day ; in the

’ R. R. J. Hammer, Understtgelser ved .Takobehavns IsQord og n^rmeste Omegn, Vinteren
1879-1880 ; Meddelelser om Ordnland, 1883, IV, pp. 1-68, maps.


360


THE STRAND-LINES OP NOEWAY [paotiii

illustration the line in the sea represents its termination as it was seen by
Rink in 1850; Holland in 1875 found the glacier calving in the middle of
the little bay on the south side ; the line drawn on the ice represents its
state according to Hammer in the autumn of 1879, and the map shows it as
it was in March, 1880: it had receded 4<2 kilometers since 1850. At
present the south side of the glacier closes the great fresh-water lake of
Nunatap-tasia The surface of this lake stands at 165 feet, and towards
the west, where Hammer bored through the ice, 5-6 inches thick, which
covered its surface, its bottom sinks to about 100 feet below the sea-level.
If the glacier should continue its I'etreat a little longer, then Nunatap-tasia
would be emptied and again become part of the fjord. If, on the other hand,
it should advance beyond its position in 1850, then it would soon reach
the narrow mouth of the great and much ramified fjord of Tasiusak, which
even now is generally filled with icebergs ; the outer part of Jakobshavn’s
ice-fjord likewise is so cumbered with ice, as to be unnavigable for the
greater part of the year, and as a consequence Tasiusak is generally reached
by a portage situated south of Claushavn. If Tasiusak were closed, and
if, at the same time, the slowly moving glacier arms of Alangordlek, which
only exceptionally bears moraines, and of Sarkardlek, which contains 387
grammes of sediment per cubic meter of water, were cut oft' from the sea,
then conditions would be realized here having an obvious resemblance to
those which determined many of the terraces of the Norwegian coast.
Below the termination of Alangordlek ci'owncd tciraces might arise. The
height of the water level in the whole region of the Tasiusak would then
depend on the height of the lowest (portage not covered by ice. The
portage of Claushavn, mentioned above, bears the lake of Tasersuak, which
lies in a hollow at a height of 102 feet. East of this lake the road leads
over a ridge, only 207 feet high, to the fjord of Kiakusak, which is a branch
of the Tasiusak. At the u2H)er end of the KUihusak, and thus in the region
of the TasiusaJe, terraces actually occur up to a, height of 200 fed. If the
isblink of Jakol)8havn wei’e to advance, then conditions would be again
realized for the formation of similar terraces at the same height, and
without the least alteration in the position of the strand-line^.

A word may be*added as to the Nunatap-tasia. It is now a reservoir
for the water produced by the melting of the glacier. Hammer has showui

’ When Rink, and afterwards ITelland, visited the south side of the fjord of Jakobshavn
f^Iacier, they thought they were in the bay of Tivsarigssok, a little bay on this coast,
which, according to the Greenlanders, contains seals, the flesh of which tastes like
reindeer meat. Hammer, however, believes that the ‘seals’ bay,’ Tivsarigssok, lies further
inland and was quite icebound, and that Rink and Helland were in the bay Kangerd-
lukasik. I mention this as illustrating the variation to which the glaciers in these
secondary bays are subject : A. Holland, Om de Isfyldte Fjorde og de glacialc Dannelser
i NurdgrCnland, Arch. Math. Niiturvid. Kristiania, 1876, I, p. 74, note, and Hammer,
inem. cit.



361


CH.VIH] OKIGm OF STEPS AND SETER

by investigations carried on during the period of severest cold, that fresh
water flows from the glacier the whole winter through, so that at certain
times it lies on the fimen surface of the lake. It is in autumn that the
water level is highest; in March it is alK)ut three feet lower; on April»l,
1880, the temperature of the air was found to be — 20'3®, and that of the
ice, six inches below the surface, — 19*6°. Thus slight oscillations of the
water level occur, and very great changes in the temperature to which
the rock is exposeil ; such circumstances, as may be easily supposed, must
be particularly favourable to the production of a permanent mark in
the rock.

Whether an advance of the Jakobshavn glacier would produce similar
phenomena by closing the fjord of Sikui-juitsok on its nortli sale is
doubtful, for, according to Hammer, this fjord is talrcady so overburdened
by ice that it would then, in all probability, become completely filled.

If the outflows of the inland ice were again to advance, as they did in
the past, through Karrat, Umaiiak, Weigat, Disco fjord and elsewhere, into
the sea, then behind IJbekjendt Eiland, Disco, and in many other places,
opportunity would occur for the formation of lines and terraces on a much
greater scale, and at heights and in situations of almost infinite variety.
For this reason all the seter and the great majority of terraces in the fjords
of western Norway must he regarded as momcments of the retreating ice,
and not as evidence of oscillation of the seadevel, and still less of oscillation
of the solul land.

No doubt negative displacement of the strand-line did occur during
and after the period of the greatest extension of the ice in Norway : the
repeated occurrence of marine shells above the existing sea-level is a proof
of this. It is equally certain that at present the Norwegian rivers are
still engaged in modifying their valleys, and are capable of creating new
terraces. The seter and terraces in the fjords, however, are generally
characterized l)y special features, which are met with neither in marine
nor fluviatile formations, but are precisely those which would result from
the conditions associated with the movement of the glacier tongues of
Greeidand.

The terraces and seter on the slopes of the Dovreljeld and in Lapland
beyond the Swedish watershed are therefore, despite their elevated position,
all members of one and the same series of phenomena, to which the terraces
and seter in the fjords also belong. The step-like succession of fragments
of horizontal lines whicli appear towards the head of a fjord at progressively
higher horizons, is thus simply a proof that the fjord has been completely
barred across by ice : at first there was a little lake at a high level, then as
the ice receded, a larger lake at a lower level was produced either by the
exposure of a lower lying col or ejde, or owing to the behaviour of the ice
itself ; and so on, again and again.



362


THE STRAND-LINES OP NORWAY [pjoirin

We may now distinguish between the various types of closure, such as
the occlusion of a valley on the retreat of an ice-stream which had pre-
viously moved towards the mountains (Dovrefjeld, Sitas-Jaur), or by the
passage across its mouth of an ice-stream, which may also have rested
simply as a mass of ice on the sea bottom, as was certainly the case in
most of the fjords ; or the same process may be repeated on a smaller scale
in transverse valleys, either by simple closure (Lochaber, Rofn, Maqalen,
Arandu in Basha) or double closure (Tasersuak on the glacier of Frederiks-
haab, Nunatap-tasia on that of Jakobshavn); or twin lakes with a
T-shaped barrier may arise (above Majorarisat) ; but everywhere in the
valleys of the Alps, the Him&Iaya, Scotland, and Norway, and in the fjords
of Norway and Greenland, we find essentially the same features which
have been left behind by the varying movement of the ice. All these
types of closure, and with them the crowned terraces, are only secondary
modifications of a phenomenon frequently met with in severely glaciated
lands, which indeed, as Nordenskiold pointed out in 1870, constitutes one
of their most marked characteristics, that is, the presence of a fresh- water
lake at the meeting-place of the ice and rock

During the glacial period, and even after it, the strand in Norway
stood higher than at present ; the terraces met with in very open bays, as
for instance in Christiania fjord, which is essentially different from the
narrow fjords of the north, may indeed be genuine vestiges of a sea-coast,
like the terraces of western Patagonia, which also occupy an open situation ;
but the seter are not so, nor are many of the terraces of the west coast of
Norway, especially those of considerable altitude. The crowned terraces
are cut in the d<5bris cones of valleys through which glaciers once moved,
for a time at least. The sheet of water which cut these terraces may have
been the open sea or a confined lake.

Those fjords of the north which I had an opportunity of examining
myself resemble in every respect submerged valleys. The great lakes of
upper Italy, Lago Maggiore, lakes Como and Garda, produce the same
impression. They are closed by alluvial land, like so many small lakes
at the heads of fjords, and since moraines stand at their exits the plain
of upper Italy recalls in a certain sense the crowned terraces in front of
the Norwegian lakes. Strapff compares the fragments of high-level lines
in the Tessin valleys with those of Trondhjem, and they may be of similar
origin. Omboni's description of the Etsch glacier squeezing its way below
Trient through a nari*ow valley, turning out of its course into the Sarca

* Nordenski()ld, Redogdrelse, p. 1007, fig. 2. Sudden eruptions of masses of water are
also known in Greenland, e. g. Kleinscbmidt, Meddelelser om GrOnland, II, p. 132 ; the
two fjords Tangnera and Mamak, which interaect the island Christian IV (lat. 60® N.),
are only separated from each other by a heap of debris 1,000 paces broad, probably a land-
slip ; Holm, op. cit., IV, p. 166.



368


CH.vm] TOT STRAKD-LINES OP NOBWAY

valley, and then uniting with the Sarca glacier to enter the fjord, now
represented by the lake of Qarda, brings to mind many a region in
Norway *.

In Norway, it is true, the ice ascended the valleys towards the mouft-
tains, first, in a broad mass, then along the wall of glint; next, issuing
with increased velocity, it deepened the valleys beyond the original
portals of the glint, until finally it reached the sea beyond the ancient
watershed. The deep hollows of the ejde afford another feature peculiar
to the north.

* F. M. Stapff, Strandbilder, Zeitschr. deutsch. geoh Ges., 1882, XXXIV, p. 53;
6. Omboni, Delle antiche morene vicino ad Arco ncl Trentino, Atti R. 1st. Yeneto, 1876,
5* ser., n, pp. 457-467.



364


CHAPTER IX

THE TEMPLE OF SEEAPIS NEAE PUZZUOLI

The north-^est coast of Italy. Situation of tlie temple of Serapis in the Phlegraean
crater. The temple up to the year 1538. The eruption of 1538. Excavation of the
temple and its present condition. Various attempts at explanation. Volcanic
phenomena.

Tiik north-west outline of Italy has lost by recent silting up much
of that variety which resulted from the destruction of the folded moun-
tains. Some of the ruins still rise from the sea between Corsica and the
coast of the mainland as independent rocky islands ; some, such as Monte
Argentario, are connected with the land by recent sediments, others by
marine deposits of somewhat greater age and situated at a greater height ;
others again are offshoots from the main trunk of the Apennines and
orographically continuous with it.

Among the post-Tertiary sediments of this region two formations may
be readily distinguislicd. A recent marine deposit forms horizontal plains
of considerable extent, about 15 to 20 meters above the existing sea,
but it also occurs on the slopes, where it attains a greater height ; and 'wo
may assign to it the marine jMnehina of Tuscany. It is generally crowded
with shells identical in kind with those of the existing sea, but it also
contains a small number of extinct species, among them Cyprina idamiica,
one of the northeni immigrants b Lotti observed this nr Aina in the
island of Ell»a at a height of from 20 to 25 meters, but in one locality it
rises to about 200 meters; in the island of Giglio its height is 15 meters;
in the island of Cerboli, to the east of Elba, 30 meters ; on the coast of
Leghorn, 15 to 25 meters, but in some places as much as 69 meters, and
near Campiglia 165 meters. T. Fuchs describes this deposit as forming
an extensive gently undulating country which, over the whole distance
from Orbetello to Biontalto, scarcely ever rises above 20 meters. Hollande
and Reusch mention its occurrence in Corsica at a height of from 15 to
20 meters^. This marine formation, as is shown by the various patches
still adherent to the slopes, corresponds to a fairly high level of the strand.

^ C. (Ic Stefani, Sediment! sottoinarini dell* cpoca post pliocenica in Italia ; Boll. R.
Com. Geol. Ital., 1876, VII, pp. 272-289.

" B. Lotti, Calcari marini quaternari lungo la costa dei monti Livorncsi, Boll. R. Com.
Geol. Ital., 1885, 2=^ sor., VI, pp. 54-56, 253; T. Fuchs, Reisenotizen aus Italien, Verb,
k. k. geol. Ucichs., 1^74, p. 223 ; Hollande, Geologic de la Corse, Ann. sci. geol., 1877, IX,
p. 103 ; also Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1875-1876, 3" ser., IV, pp. 86-91, and H. Reusch, op.
cii, 1882, 3‘* per., XI, pp. 53 67.



STAGNO D’OBBETELLO


365


CH. ix]

It is evidently of prehistoric ag^, and, except in those places where con-
fusion has been produced by kitchen middens, as in Corsica, it is always
sharply separated from the younger group, which comprises the low plain
formed by the most recent alluvium, together with the marshes, lagoons,
and spits of the present day.

This last group of deposits, still in process of formation, alone concerns
us now.

To gain a closer acquaintance with it, let us leave the Maremma rail-
way at the Orbetello station ; the road to the town runs along a narrow
tongue of land ; at the lower end of this the town is situated, and in the
middle the Stagno d’ Orbetello; continuing past it, a connexion, part dam,
part bridge, brings us finally to the Trias ranchwacke which forms the east
side of Monte Argentario. This mountain mass, as has been shown by
Cocchi, is an anticlinal, trending in the same direction os the Apennines,
and cut through by a strike fault From its wooded slopes we overlook
the Stagno. On our left towards the north it is separated from the open
sea by a long sand-bar, the Tombolo «lel Pino, which is continued in a wide
gentle curve from Monte Argentario to the rocky peak of Talamonaccio.
Another sand-bar similar to the first, but shorter, the Feniglia, l)Ounds the
Stagno on the south ; it unites the Argentario with the rock which bears
the Cyclopean ruins of Cosa. These narrow ridges of sand run like spun
threads from one fragment of the Apennines to the other; no unequal
movement of the earth's crust is conceivable, whether by tilting, arching,
or otherwise, which would not destroy this fragile structure.

Let us first examine the northern bar.

Impressed by the uninterrupted activity of the constructive processes
and the regularity of the bars and spits, Repetti long ago maintained that
neither elevation nor subsidence of the strand had occurred along this
stretch of coast. Nor are proofs in support of this assertion lacking. In
the north, where the Tombolo del Pino is narrowest, before it reaches
the rock of Talamonaccio, it is traversed for about 7 kilometers by the
Via Aurelia Nova, which originally led to Pisa : this road was continued
further to the north in the year 114 b.c. by Aemilius Scaurus, and after-
wards called the Via Aemilia. Thus no important ^ange has occurred
here for twenty centuries.

Spits or bars one after the other engirdle the coast of Tuscany, and
prove step by step as we proceed to the north the impossibility of any
unequal movement of the ground. In the neighl)Ourhood of Campiglia
the old Roman road again follows the outer bar close to the- sea. The
little harlxjur of Vada, the landing-place for Volterra, owes its existence
to two dry banks which project in front of it, and Repetti refers to the fact

’ I. Cocchi, Note ffeologiche sopra Cosa, Orbetello e Monte Argentario ; Boll. R. Com.
Geol. Ital., 1870, 1, pp. 277-309.



366 TEMPLE OF SEBAPIB NEAB PUZZUOLI [PAurm

that these same banks were seen by Rutilius Numatianus when he landed
at Vada in 415 or 420 A.D. ^

Space would fail were I to attempt to enumerate the various documents,
chiefly ecclesiastical deeds of gift, which from the beginning of the ninth
century onwards enable us to establish the existence in those early times
of many of the inland waters or salt-pans which are still to be seen along
this coast. A change of outline is of course chiefly noticeable in the neigh-
bourhood of the laiger riveis. There the new alluvial land advances to
the sea; successive series of bars or spits accompany the river in its
progress, but I cannot discover from the accounts before me any movement
of the strand-line, either in a positive or negative direction. In fact, the
advance of the rivere does not proceed gradually ; on the contrary, while
the destructive woi'k of the sea accomplished at the point of the projecting
alluvial land is fairly unifonn, except during storms, the constructive work
of the river takes place chiefly during high water, and is practically arrested
at low tide.

The thorough-going investigations of Stefani into the historical records
of the advance of the Amo and the Scrchio show that Pisa was 3*7 kilo-
meter's distant from the sea in Strabo’s time, that is, at the beginning
of our era, while at present the distance amounts to 12*36 kilometers;
but no change in the level of the strand can be deduced from this ^

We might raise the question as to why such a considerable growth of
alluvial land should have taken place in so many localities in historical
times, and often, indeed, it would seem as though the process had not been
so extensive in earlier periods ; but I believe the cause is to be found in an
interference with the course of nature, which everywhere accompanies
civilization, namely, the regulation of the I'ivers and the deforestation of
the hills. Importance has also been attached to the fact that in some
of the lagoons parts of the Roman road are submerged, but Stefani justly
points out that it is in precisely these regions that the stone foundations
of the railway so frequently sink in .* the Via Aurelia was also constructed
as an agyer, that is, a stone causeway

Let us return to Monte Argentario, and thence turn our attention to
the south. “

The ridge which closes the Stagno d’Orbetello on the south, the

' E. Kepetti, Colpo d' occhio sulle principali vicende firiche accadute prima e dope il
mille lungo il littorale toscano ; in hia Dizionario geografico fiaico-storico della Toacana,
8vo, Firenze, II, 1835, pp. 704-711; V, 1843, pp. 709-713 et paaaim; Art. Vada, V,

pp. 616 - 618 .

C. de Stefani, Geologia del Monte Fiaano, Mem. B. Com. Geol. Ital., 1877, III,
pp. 73-87 ; for the legenda connected with the course of the Serchio see his Auaer, Amo,
e Serchio in Pisa, Cosmos, ed. G. Cora, 1884-1885, Yill, p. 289 et seq.

* This is the case in the Lago Scarlino ; Sari has several times mentioned this
example.



THE DRAINAGE EXIT OP COSA


367


CH. IX]

Feniglia, rests at its landward end against the rock which bears the rains
of Cosa, the ancient city of the Volsci. On the Feniglia, Cocchi found the
remains of the ancient Etruscan road, which led from Cosa to the port
of Hercules on the east side of Monte Argentai*io. •

The rock of Cosa itself has been cut througli on its south-east side
by human agency, and the breach is now called the ‘ Bagno della Duchessa ’ ;
but, as was recognized by Movizzo and Cocchi, it is in fact a channel made
in ancient times to drain the marshes lying behind it, the Padule della
Tagliata and the Lago di Burano, which are separated from the sea by
a bar more than 20 kilometers long. This bar is a part of the gently
curved ridge of alluvial coast-land which leads to Civita Vecchia. The
marshes and the bar thus existed in ancient times, and the strand then
stood at the same level as at present, for the same breach still serves for
a drain, just as it did two thousand years agoh

As regards the land formed by the Tilier, the case is the same as that of
the Arno. When we consider for how great a distance this river follows
the northern slopes of the great tuff‘ cones which contain the crater lakes
(Maare) of Bolseno, Vico, and Bracciano, we shall readily perceive what
great effects must follow the deforestation of this region, and shall have
no difficulty in tracing the yellow colour of this river to its source. Ponzi
has collected all the information bearing on tlie growth of the delta since
the year 633 b.c. (when Ancus Martins foumled Ostia on one of the alluvial
spits) down to the present day ; and from this he concludes that an elevation
of the land has taken place. I cannot, ho we vxu*, perceive any signs of this ;
an elevation would have made itself felt in Rome by a deepening of the
river bed, but no such deepening has occurred *.

The Grotta della Capre, which occurs in the limestone of the promontory
of Circe, affords some very instructive evidence. In the cave we find, accord-
ing to Issel, first a zone of Lithodonius borings at a height of 7 to 8 meters,
and a second zone at 4 to 5 meters. The bottom of the cave is filled with
stratified material which forms a level floor at a height of 6 or 6-5 meters,

' Cocchi, Note sopra Cosa, &c.. pp. 291, 281, 282.

* (1) From the foundation of Ostia (633 b.c.) to the addition by Trajan of a reservoir
to the harbour of Claudius (110 A. d.), 743 years, advance 950 meters ; (2) up to the time
when Pius V built his tower (in 15(i9), 1459 years, 1750 meters; (3) up to the tower of
Alexander VII (built 1662), 93 years, 550 meters; up to the tower of Clemens XIV
(Torre Clementina, built 1778), 111 years, 450 meters; up to the year 1874, 101 years,
400 meters ; Ponzi, Boll. Soc. Geogr. Ital., 1875, XII, p. 523 ; and by the same, 11 Tevere
ed il BUG delta, Riv. Maritt., 1876, IX, pp. 1-40, pi. This observer, who has added so
considerably to our knowledge of Rome, even believed he could deduce from the level of
the water-gauge at Rix)etta that the ground of Rome had gradually and imperceptibly
risen to the extent of 0*971 meter between the yeai-s 1821 and 1871 ; but such a con-,
siderable alteration would certainly have been accompanied by a deepening of the river
bed; Ponzi, Sui lavori del Tevere e sullo variate condizioni del suolo romano, Trans.
Acc^. Lync., 1880, 3» ser., IV, pp. 203-208.



868 temple; OF SEBAPIS NEAB PUZZUOU [PAirrm

and so covers up the lower zone of borings. This infilling material consists
first of a layer of loose stones, among them pebbles ; this rests on a sheet of
stalagmite, and beneath the stalagmite lies red earth, in which the remains of
mummals, fragments of charcoal, and implements of the stone age are found’.

Thus not only the cave itself is older than the stone age, but also both
zones of borings — the lower, which lies at a height of 4 to 5 meters, being
the oldest. Consequently this zone can by no means be regarded as con-
temporaneous with the borings occurring at a similar height iii the temple
of Serapis at Puzzuoli, and just as little can we assign to the historic
period the Lithodomus lx>rings which are found at many other localities
on this coast, or not at least till we possess further evidence. Such zones
are known in the rock of Talamonia, Monte Aigentario, and cape Circe.
A zone at Gaeta which attains a height of 5 or 6 meters has frequently
been described, most recently by Bianchini^

We can now underetand why Strabo complained of the absence of
harbours at Volterra (v. 2. 6), Girceji (v. 3. 6), and elsewhere on the west
coast of Italy. Over the whole of this region we are presented with imme-
diate evidence that the existing state of things has remained unchanged
for centuries, as in the case of the ancient drain of Cosa : on the other
hand, positive evidence of any alteration within the historic period is
wholly wanting. The Roman remains which are met with here and there
beneath the sea outside the alluvial bars prove nothing in this respect.
Tliey are foundation walls built into the sea for baths, landing-places, and
other purposes.

The more clearly all the indications in tliis region witness to a long-
continued persistence of existing conditions, the more important it becomes
to exanpne into the evidence presented by the classic example of the temple
of Serapis at Puzzuoli.

1. Tlie situation of the temiile at Sempis. The Iwrings of marine
shells, which present themselves in a broad horizontal l>and on the pillars
of the temple of Serepis at Puzzuoli, arc adduced by numerous observers,
and in most of our textbooks, particularly in Lyell’s ‘ Principles of Geology,’
os a proof of the repeated elevation and subsidence of the solid land.
Nevertheless, Antonio Niccolini, the most competent authority on this
subject, whose observations have been made on the spot and extend over
many decades, has always maintained in his numerous contributions to
this question, that the land has remained stationary; that which has
changed is the level of the sea.

The importance which has been given to this case, the conclusions to
Avhich it has led, and the extreme complexity of the attendant circiim-

’ A. iHEiel, Le oscillazioni lente del suolo o bradisismi, pp, 205 -210.

E. Bianchini, DcIIe oscillazioni del suolo sulle coste di Gaeta ; Riv. Maritt., 1882, XV,
pp. 389-402.


Diagrammatic Representation of the Successive Eruptions in the Phlegraean Reids.



369


OH. IX} THE FHLEGRAEAN CONE

stances render, a detailed discussion necessary. ;•! shall first consider the
peculiar situation of the temple, and then pass in review all the accounts
known to me concerning the history of the locality, both before and after
the eruption of Monte Nuovo in the year 1688 . The last part of tife
chapter deals with the theoretical conclusions which various obfervers
have drawn from the facts \

In the Fhlegraean fields that radiate arrangement of the craters which
distinguishes the Lipati isles is absent. AH the Fhlegraean craters on the
mainland, with the exception of Monte di Frocida and the outermost parts
of the promontory of Misena, belong, as Both rightly observes, to a single
large and very flat conical mountain mass (I, I, Flate II) ; and this is clearly
shown on the hypsometric map published by the Boyal General Staff
of Italy

In the south-east, on the east side of cape Fosilippo, the foot of this
great tuff cone is washed by the sea, and consequently steep ; the steep
slope is continued through the Chiaja and below fort Saint Elmo into the
city of Naples ; then it flattens out to the north of the city. Towards the
north, in the neighbourhood of Marano, the outer border of the volcano
gradually disappears beneath the plain; towards the west it is indicated
by the lagoons of Licola and Fusaro, and from the southernmost pait
of the latter, the Aqua morte now lying dry, a depression runs to the
south-east towards the Mare morte of Misena, which clearly separates the
Fhlegraean cone from Monte di Frocida. Indeed, this depression, which
runs transversely acrass the south part of the promontory of Baiae, is of no
small ,impoiiancc. On both sides of it the hills lise with a gentle slope ;
in the north-cast the outer border of the Fhlegraean cone, and in the south-
west the slopes of Monte di Frocida. At the same time, both hilly ranges
break off abruptly on the averted side, the first towards the bay of Fuz-
zuoli, the second towards the open sea. Mdhte di Frocida, characterized
by the presence of leucitophyre, must be regarded as a fragment of the
neighbouring island of Frocida, as was long ago shown by Arcangelo
Scacchi in his excellent description of the neighbourhood ®.

The south part of the Fhlegraean cone lies beneath the sea. Its
diameter from north to south cannot therefore be determined, but from

’ In the course of many years I have succeeded in collecting the original writings on
this subject, which in many cases were published as mere fly-sheets, and are therefore
extremely rare ; but I have failed to obtain several of the most important works of a later
date. Some of these have been placed at my disposal by the University Library of Pisa,
and others by the National Library of Naples, through the kind intervention of Signor
Commendatore Menegbini.

'' J. Roth, Uer Vesuv und die Umgebung von Neapcl, 8vo, Berlin, 1857, p. 485 ;
Ordnance-map, 1 : 50,000, foglio No. 61, parte orientale, Napoli. ,

* A. Scacchi, Memorie geologiche suIla Campania ; Rendic. R. Ac. Sci. Napoli, 1849,
pp. 64 and 242.

R b


SOU.AS tl



370 TEMPLE OP SERAPIS NEAR PUZZUOLI [PA»rra

east to west, or from the city of Naples to the lagoons of Cumae, it measures
18 to 20 kilometers.

To the east this cone is cut through by the grotto of Posilippo; here
species of marine shells, such indeed as still exist, are found in its tuff. In
the north a very large elliptical crater lake (Maare) occurs in it, precisely
resembling lake Albano in the tuff mass of the Alban mountains, and of
similar dimensions. This is the Piano di Quarto ; the level plane within
it measures 2*4 to 4*5 kilometers.

On the west side a little mass of trachyte projects from the flank of the
cone and forms the rock of Cumae.

The Phlegraean cone rises with a gentle slope towards the interior, not,
however, in a single circular arc like the Soinma of Vesuvius, opposite the
atrium, but in a number of small crescentic subsidences, following one after
the other, and separated by spurs; the.se have often been taken for so
many craters, although many of them are certainly only caldron-shaped
subsidences. The result of this arrangement is that the conical surface,
rising gently towards the interior, attains its greatest height where it
approaches most closely to the centre, that is, on the spurs between the
subsidences, namely, at the monastery of the Camaldulas (455 meters) and
on Monte Barbaro (329 meters), which I ani also inclined to regard as
a part of the outer Phlegraean cone.

The inner fractured edge begins on the promontory of Posilippo, near
the island of Nisida, and extends thence to the first crescentic subsidence
near Fuorigrotta, somewhat north of the western exit from the grotto. Then
follow the two great subsidences of Soccavo and Pianura, separated by the
spur of Camaldula ; here the ‘ Pipemo ’ occurs interbedded in the tuff cone.
Beyond the caldron of Pianura another spur succeeds, then we meet with
smaller crescentic features, which form the slopes of the Montagna Spaccata ;
further on the caldron or crater of Campiglione, the ‘Gaurus inanis,’ is sunk
into the tuff cone, then comes the lake of Avemus and the semicircular
bay of Baiac.

Thus the walls of the subsidences bound an inner region, of which the
longer axis, taken from Fuorigrotta to the slopes above the Lucrine lake,
measures 11*5 kilometers^.

Within this outer rim, but restricted to the easteni side, rises a second
flat cone. This, starting from the low-lying foot of the rim, opposite
Nisida, gently ascends at Fuorigrotta, Soccavo, and Pianura towards the
centre (II, II, PI. II), and abruptly terminates along a second fractured

* When L. von Buch visited the Phlegraean fields for the second time, in the company
of Humboldt and Gay Lussac, he wrote : 'The Logo d’Agnano, the Quarto, Pianura, and
Soccavo resemble volcanic formations just as little as Capo di Monte and Posilippo.
Mere hilly surroundings are not sufficient to prove that the enclosed region is a crater.
Might it not be a subsidence ?’—Gesammelte Schriften, I, p. 458.



SUBSIDENCES IN THE CRATER


371


OH. IX]

edge of similar coniigaration. The greater part of the second ’ marginal
fracture contributes to the circular boundary of what was once the lake of
Agnano; towards the north and south respectively a smaller subsidenq^
occurs, and the spurs north and south of the caldron of Agnano (214 and
176 meters) are again the highest points of this ragion. The southern spur
bears the appropriate name of Monte Spina, and is distinguished by its
peculiar lava. The inner region is then still more constricted, and the
distance from the foot of Monte Spina to the slopes on the Lucrine lake
does not exceed 7 kilometei's. Within this space we see first an almost
level plain (Ilia, Ilia, PI. II), corresponding to the field of scoriae in the
interior of a great crater, and above this rise the ash-cones of Astroni,
Senga, and Cigliano. These have not been active in historic times (Illb,
Illb, PL II).

It is only when we proceed further to the south and west that we 1*00011
the latest traces of eruptive activity, the ash-cones of tlie Solfatara, said to
have broken out in the year 1198 — though there is some doubt as to this —
and Monte Nuovo, which was thrown up in the year 1.538 (IV, IV, PI. II).
Around these hills, from the Solfatara to Baiae, hot springs abound. The
Romans used to hollow out grottos in the tuff and fit them up as vapour
baths.

In the middle of this almost extinguished hearth between the Solfatara
and Monte Nuovo, is the Serapis temple of Puzzuoli. Its distance from the
crater of the Solfatara is only 1,500 mctei’s, and from the centre of Monte
Nuovo 2,800 meters.

If we compare the caldron-shaped subsidences of the Phlegraean crater,
such as lake A vemus or Logo d’ Agnano, with the caldron-shaped subsidences
of Kcanakakoi and Kilauca-iki, outside the crater of Kilauca, as described by
Dana, wo shall find such a degree of coiTespondenee as to suggest a similar
mode of origin The Avemus caldron, measured at its upper margin, has
a mean diameter of about 1,200 meters; and Kilauea-iki of about 850
to 000 meters. It is a question whether the great hollows on the slopes
(Maare), such as the Piano di Quarto, might not have been produced by an
invagination of tlie surface, consequent on a lateral r^ux of the lavas
towards the eruptive centre. In any case it may be assumed that the
volcanos of the Phlegraean cone are seated over a common subterranean
focus. There is in general a striking resemblance to the cones of the Alban
mountains, and there also it is conceivable that the great crater lakes of
Albano, Nemi, and Ariccia were fonned solely by the invagination of the
mantle after the escape of the lavas, particularly since Tucci has shown
that they arc simple subsidences, without any signs of independent eruptive
activity. I have myself, on three several occasions, visited these ‘ Maare ’

' Dana, Amer. Journ. Sci., 1887, XXXIII, pi. 1 et paasim.

H b 2



372 TEMPLE OF SERAPIS NEAR PUZZUOLI [PAiwra

and examined their margins, but have sought in vain for any signs of
eruptive action ^

It is otherwise with the formation of the ealdrons of the Pianura,
l^ioccavo, Agnano, and others resembling them. They were evidently the
walls of the active throat, even if not independent vents themselves.
Palmeiri states that in 1779, and particularly in 1872, Vesuvius, after the
eruption, fell Imck into itself so to speak ; that is, the walls of the chimney
sank into the evacuated cavity Thus great crescentic subsidences and
smaller caldrons may originate around the crater, and likewise great step
faults such as those which surround the crater of Kilauea.

In the bay of Naples, as on the whole coast of Italy, many traces of
negative movement are to be seen. On mount Epomeo in Ischia, the
younger Tertiary marine deposits attain a height of over 500 meters. It
is worthy of note that as early as 1849 Scacchi propounded the inquiry
whether Epomeo had been elevated along with these deposits, or whether
the whole surrounding country had subsided, and he was inclined to adopt
the latter alternative. On Capri zones of borings at a high level have long
been known. At Anacapri, Walther observed strand-lines with Lithodomus
holes at a height of about 200 meters ; these are, perhaps, connected with
the zones of Lithodomus borings, described by Verri and Meli, above Rome
at heights of 276 and 268 meteis, and assigned with , great probability to
the same age as the yellow marine sand of Monte Mario near Rome ^ ‘

Nearer the sea-level such indications are not rare. To the south-west
of Ischia, near the Punta dell’ imperatore, a hard breccia of pumice and
trachyte, containing marine shells, rises to + 10 meters, resting upon a rock
of trachyte ; they have been described by Scacchi. At a height of + 8 meters
and less, Walther noticed shells of Lithodomus and strand-lines on the first
of the Faraglioni of Capri. At the foot of Monte Olibano (a mass of
trachyte which proceeds from the Solfatara towards the sea) the following
observations were made in the year 1872. Lowest of all, on the right hand
lies a coai'sely stratified mass of yellowish white blocks of pumice with
an irregular eroded surface (a, Fig. 39) ; upon this, mantling over all the
irregularities, follows stratified brown marine sand, containing crumbling
shells — ^it extends to a height of about + 12 meters {h ) ; this is succeeded
by a fairly thick layer of large fragments of trachyte and scoriae (c, e),

' P. di Tucci, Saggio di studi geologic! sui pepenni del Lazio ; Mem. Accad. Ljme.,
1879, Anno 276, ser. 3, vol. IV, pp. 357-892.

^ Falmieri, Annali vesuviani, 1874, 2* ser., I, p. 55.

* J. Walther, Studien zur Geologic den Golfes von Neapel, Zeitschr. deutach, gfeol.
Ges., 1886, XXXVIII, p. S04; U. Meli, Sulla zona di fori lasciati dai Litodomi pliocenici
nella calcaria giurese di Fara Sabina, Boll. R. Com.Geol. Ital., 1882, 2 * ser.. Ill, pp. 149-
155. The characters of these zones of boreholes along the Italian coast are treated
in a suggestive manner by A. Issel, Le oscillazioni lente del suolo o bradisismi, 8vo,
Genova, 1883, pp. 99-101. Older observations in Boettger, Mittelmeer, p. 129.



OU.IXJ


MONTE OLIBAMO


373


with an intervening red layer (d) ; upon e rests the trachyte stream
from the Solfatara, and above this lie ashes, pumice, and some scoriae {g),
possibly the products of the eruption of the Solfatara, already referred to
as said to have taken place in 1198 aj).\ In the trachyte a Roman aque-
duct is cut ; consequently the shelly sand is much older than the temple
of Serapis, but at the time of its deposition the second Phlegraean cone
(II, PI. II) had already collapsed.

Scacchi describes as younger than the shell bed of the Punta dell’
Imperatore in Ischia, an accumulation of sand, pumice, and shells still
retaining their colour, which extends up to a height of about + 20 meters.
It is visible on the low cliff (evidently an ancient sea-maigin) l)etween



a Agglomeruto of puinico ; b niurino Mund ; d, e coarse lumps of trachyto and rod layer ;
compact trachyte proceeding from the Solfatara ; g recent ejectainonta.

Puzzuoli and Monte Nuovo, almost at the same height as on Ischia.
Storms or seismic waves may have helped to raise these l)eds.

These examples of negative movement, which might be multiplied,
all appear, with the exception {)erkaps of the last, to belong to the pre-
historic period, and must be included among those abundant vestiges of
high-level shore-lines which occur in the basin of the ^cditeiTanean, and
may be seen at hundreds of places between Gibraltar and the isthmus of
Suez. They must be carefully distinguished from the oscillations of Puz-
zuoli, which belong to the historic period, and are of so wide an amplitude
that if the movements had been general and uniform they would have left

* Ouiscardi baa given a drawing of this place in Atti R. Ac. Sci. Napoli, 1863, 1, No. 7,
eg. 8, and G. von Rath describes the shell beds in his Geognostisch-mincralogische
Fragmente aus Italien, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1866, XVIII, p. 614. The relation
of Monte Olibano to the Solfatara is explained by the section in Scacchi, Chmpania,
pi. i. Scacchi doubts the eruption of the Solfatani in 1198, because the crater in
Strabo’s time appears to have been precisely the same as at the present day.



374 TEMPLE OF SEBAPIS NEAB PUZZUOLI [part in

obvious signs of their existence in neighbouring localities, and would have
found a place in popular tradition ; but this is not the case.

It is true that in the lower parts of the city of Naples some signs
of positive movement since the Roman period may seem to exist ; but the
evidence afforded by baths close to the seasliure, in yielding alluvial
ground, covered by the rubbish of the town, is of little value. It is only
when we enter the Phlegraean crater that we discover conclusive proof of
oscillations within the last two thousand years. We may find it in the
first place on Nisida. Niccolini states that the mole of Nisida, like the
so-called ‘ bridge of Caligula ’ at Puzzuoli, rests partly on ancient piers, and
that these were built when the shore-line lay at a lower level ; he says
also that a cliannel inteiTupted by the adjacent cliff of the Lazaretto
Vecchio was originally a connecting path, and has now become a channel
of the sea\

Within the bay there are many places where Roman constructions may
be seen, which extend down to the water’s edge and even beneath it. The
long raw of stone piers which proceeds from Puzzuoli into the sea as the
bridge of Caligula — doubtless part of an ancient harbour— shows clearly
that the shore is now liigher than at the time the piers were erected, for
the top of the stone foundation and the base of the brickwork, as well as the
springers of the arches, are under water; on the other hand, some of
the piers are covered with Serpulae, and bored by Lithodomus to a height
of about + 3 meter's. Here, therefore, true oscillation has taken place, iraraely,
first positive and then negative movement ; but it remains doubtful whether
the existing submergence of the lower part of the arches is the result of an
uncompleted negative phase, or the beginning of a positive phase.

These columns are only about 700 meters distant from the temple of
Serapis.

The remains of tire temple arc situated just outside the town of Puzzuoli,
towards the north-north-west, on a low and narraw plain, the la Starza,
which stretches along the coast as far as Monte Nuovo, and borders the
low cliff already mentioned. The pavement of the temple of Serapis lies
somewhat below the existing sea-level. Three graat columns still stand
erect ; the Lithodomus boi'ings in these extend up to about + 5.8 meters.
On the island side, close behind the temple, is the hot spring of the
Cantardle,

If we proceed from the bay of Puzzuoli past Baiae towards the west, we
reach the coast of the Tyrrhenian sea. The shore is here formed by sand
dunes stretching in a long and uniform curve fram the west side of the pro-
montory of Misena to Gaeta, and continued thence further north along

^ A. Niccolini, Tavola metrics cronologica delie varie altezze tracciate dalla superficie
del mare fra la costa di Amalfi ed il promontorio di Oafita nel corso di xix secoli, 4to,
Napoli, 1839, p. 26, note 3.



CH.IX] TEMPLE OF SEBAPIS UP TO 1588 876

the edge of the marshes. This long ‘lido* separates several sheets of
water from the sea— the Lago del Fusaro, or the lake of Acheron, the Lago
di Licola, Lago di Patria, and others. Strabo describes lake Acheron as a
' muddy expansion of the sea ’ ; about forty years later Seneca had himself
carried over the lido of Cumae to the country house of Servilius Vacca,
situated near the southern end of lake Acheron : ‘ Like a narrow road,’ says
Seneca, ‘ the path is shut in between the lake and the sea.’ Niccolini con-
cluded, from the different description given by Strabo and Seneca, that the
lido must have aiiscn in the brief period of four decades ^ This conclusion
is not justified by the texts ; these long dams, constructed by sea and
storms in the course of thousands of years, are only a continuation of the
same alluvial strip which we have already followed from the mouth of the
Amo to Gaeta. They show that unequal movements of extensive tracts of
solid land have not occurred in this region for a vciy long time.

2. The tem-fie of Serapia up to the year 1638. Let us now return
across the promontory of Misena.

Tlie whole littoral region, from this promontory to tliat of Athene
(Sorrento), is called by Strabo 6 Kpartip. In the restricted sense which
geologists now attach to this tenn, the bay of Puzzuoli is, as we have
seen, in truth a crater. It was in the flowery fields of Puteoli, fiaiae,
and Misehum that, under the empire, at the expense of a subjugated world,
the most sumptuous festivals were celebrated, and ‘the dance in the
crater ’ was here, within the fractured margin of the Phlegraean cone, not
a metaphor but a fact. Here Cicero wrote his letters ; here Octavius cut
through the ancient barrier of the Lucrinc lake, led the sea into the crater
of Avemus, constructed locks, and created Portus Julius; here, in the
heart of the volcano, between Puteoli and Baiae, Nero attempted to drown
his mother in a treacherous boat ; and here the elder Pliny embarked in
A.D. 79, as he hastened on his way to observe the great eruption of Vesuvius.
These places are therefore very frequently mentioned by Roman writers,
but statements relating to the character and position of the strand arc rare

Almost the only important account of antiquity is contained in the
Puteolanic jHirietie faciundi of the year 105 B. c.^ This law deals
with the repair of a wall on the other side of the road beyond the temple
of Serapis towards the sea, and is so detailed as to leave scarcely any doubt
that at that time a road lay between the temple and the strand. This

‘ A. Niccolini, Descrizione della gran Terma Futcolana volgarmente detta Tempio di
Serapide, 4to, Napoli, 1845, parte geologica, p. 13 et seq.

* e.g. Strabo, v; Pliny, Hist. Nat. xxxi. 2; Suetonius, Aug. xvi; Dio, xlviii. 50;

Horace, Odes, ii. 17 ; Vergil, Ocoigics, ii. 161 et passim ; also K. Bchultess, Die
Nordkttste des Golfes von Neapel im Alterthum, Mitth. geogr. Oes. Hamburg, 1885-1886,
pp. 178-198. ,

* Quoted in lul. Caes. Capacio, Puteolana Historia, 4to, Neapoli, MDCIIII, fol. 21-23 ;
Niccolini, Oran Terma, pi. et passim.



376 TEMPLE OF SERAPIS NEAB PUZZUOLI [pabtui

would show that the strand<lme then lay considerably lower than at
present. The question, however, arises whether the great edifice, adorned,
as the existing inscriptions tell us, vrith costly marbles, at the command
first of Septimius Severus and then of Alexander Severus, the ruins of
which are now before us, is really the same as that referred to in the Lex
2 iarieti 8 jhciundi, framed moi'e than three centuries before these adorn-
ments. We shall in fact learn that beneath the pavement of the great
temple which bears these inscriptions, a more deeply-buried pavement
belonging to an older structure has been found. Fausanias (160 to 180 A. n.,
viii. 7. 3) says that near Dikaearcheia (Puteoli) hot springs well up out
of the sea, and that an artificial island was created by means of dams
in order to capture them for baths

The noble and spacious edifice, with the remains of which we are now
occupied, was, however, certainly not built below the surface of the sea.
It was connected with a hot spring ; this rose, as we have seen, on the
inland side behind the temple, it then flowed through and supplied the
baths within; in later centuries the spring attained a great reputation
under the name of le Gardarelle ; it still exists in its ancient place behind
the temple.

Then followed a period of decline and devastation : for many centuries
wc have no information whatever. The first reference I am able to cite
was discovered through the kind assistance of Professor von Mussafria
and the studies of Dr. A. (loldmann. Wc find indeed among the documents
of the sixteenth century relating to the hot springs of Puzzuoli the copy
of a remarkable strophe which rcfeis to the Canttirelle, and runs as
follows : —

Inter aquas pelagi fervens aqua manat: et ipsa
Ne fluat in pontum sectile claudit opus.

Cum mare ircmescit; locus oppugnatur ab undis.

Thus when these lines were written the sea extended inland beyond
the temple, and a wall had been built to protect tlie spring. The vei’ses
are part of a long panegyric on the Imths of Puteoli which was ascribed
to an ancient poet, said to be Eustacius de Matcra. Now Goldmann shows,
by an ingenious analysis of the epilogue and by various comparisons, that
the true name of the poet was Petrus de Ebulo, that the work was
dedicated to Frederick II, and composed in tlie yoai’s 1212 to 1220.

We must consequently conclude that a higher level of the strand
existed here as early as the beginning of the thirteenth century.

' Qualis in Euboico Baiarum litore quondam
Saxea pila cadit; magnis quam molibus ante
Constructam ponto iaciunt; sic ilia ruinam
Prona trahit, penitusque vadis inlisa recumbit;

Miscent se maria, et nigrae adtolluntur arenae.

Verg., Aen. ix. 710 714.



OH. IX] STRAND-LINE IN THE XVI CENTURY 877

A^n there is an absence of references, and this continues until the
middle of tiie fifteenth century.

Jorio, in his detailed treatise on the temple of Serapis, cites three legal
documents of the years 1441, 1491, and 1524, which relate to transfers df
property in the now-abandoned cliff, and in these the estates are described
as ivata litua maria or ivasta ripam. At that time, then, as in the
thirteenth century, the Starza lay under water

Three columns of the temple of Serapis were standing then as at
present, but they were buried to a great depth in the ddbris which covered
the fallen temple, and the exposed upper half of the shafts was probably
washed by the waves. Villano consequently writes of the Cantarelle
spring in the year 1526 : ‘ e prima nello lito che da Puzolo ua a Trepergole
che sta alo lito do lo mare done stanno le colonne V

The sea, however, must have extended beyond the temple, otherwise
Petrus Arctinus would not have reproduced in 1507 the ancient verses
referring to the Cantarelle in his little book on the sights of Putcoli ^

Thus it is not correct to say that there is a complete absence of written
testimony as to a higher level of the strand-lino ; on the contrary, we can
hardly doubt that during the thirteenth century and up to the beginning
of the sixteenth the Stanza was submerged as far as the hot spring behind
the temple of Serapis. At the same time it is highly probable that the
movement took place slowly in the course of preceding centuries ; at least
no writer of that time, so far as I am aware, mentions this change.

On the other hand, Jorio, quoting a document preserved in the
episcopal archives of Puzzuoli, mentions that on Octoljer 6, 1503, the king
and queen gave to the commune of Puzzuoli a plot of ground — ‘che va
seccando il marc intomo la terra’; and in like manner King Ferdinand
gave to the town on May 23, 1511, ‘quoddam Demaniale territorium mare
desiccatum circa praefatam civitatem Puteolorum in continentiis eiusdein
situatum.’ From thase expressions Niccolini concludes that the negative
movement liegan in the sixteenth centuiy; but this conclusion possibly
rests on an error. Cutnac, several times destroyed in the Middle Ages,
sank at length into a resort for thieves, so that finally, in 1207, as it

* A. de Jorio, Ricerche sul tempio di Serapide iu Puzzuoli (entratto dei Monumenti
inediti di antichita e belle arti, Napoli, 1K20, fuse. 1 c 2), 4to, pp. 53, .H.

* J. Yillano, Croniche de la inclyta citta di Napoli emendatiHsime, con li Ba^mi de
Puzolo 0 Ischia; novamente ristampate (ed. Leonard. Aatriuus, M.D.XXVI). Stampate
in Napoli per el medesimo M. Euangelista, fol. Ixzvii, b.

» LIBELLVS DE MiRABlLIBVS CIVITATIS PVTEOLORVM, &c., Fiuncisci
Aretini. Hoc opuscule p eunde Augustinu Tyfemu cursim reuisum & auctfi ; Impressu
eat Neapoli a Sigismundo Mair Alamano Regnantc Ferdinando Aragoneo Rege. Prima
lunii. Anno a dhica natiuitate M.D.VII, fol. 7, 6. In this copy, the earliest known to
me, fertile appears instead of the correct reading secMe ; e. g. F. Lombardo,'sYNO'Pl2
EORVM, QVAE De Balneis aliisq. miraculis Puteol. scripta sunt; Venet. MDLXVI,
p. 37, Scholia.



378 TEMPLE OP SERAPIS NEAR PUZZUOLI [PAurra

appears, the Neapolitans resolved to raze the place to the ground. This
was done, and from that time the civitas Pnteolana extended over the devas-
tated region of Cumae as far as the west coast. This explains, for example,
the expression occurring in a diploma of Frederick’s of the year 1489:
'In toto littore, scu maritima dictae Civitatis Puteolorum, usque ad flumen
Fatiiae.’ The flumen Patriae, however, lies far beyond the Lago di
Licola towards the north. Thus the deeds of 1603 and 1611 refer, most
probably, not to regions within the bay of Puzzuoli, but to the broad
silted-up stretches of the west coast in the ancient region of Cumae, and the
grounds for the hypothesis of a negative movement at this time disappear^.

3. The eruption of 1538. We have now arrived at a critical episode,
that is, the formation of Monte Nuovo, which occurred in the last days
of the month of September, 1638. We possess four contemporaneous
accounts of this event.

The first of these is by the distinguished physician and man of
science, Simone Porzio, who then occupied the chair of philosophy at the
University of Naples. It appears to have been written at the command
of the Viceroy, Peter of Toledo, with the design of dispelling, by a faithful
representation of the occurrence as a natural event, the illusions fostered
among the people by imagination and superstition

The second account was written by Marco Antonio delli Falconi, then in
the service of Bernardo Tasso, father of the great and xmhappy poet at the
court of Salcnio. Tasso had passed through Rome without visiting Pope
Paul III, and now sent Falconi with a letter of apology. On his journey
the latter witnessed the eruption ■*.

The third account is contained in a letter of Francesco dd Nero, who
was then representing the court of Tuscany at Naples*.

* On this point the best information is to be found in a paper printed in Naples in
1775 : Dissertazione corografico-istorica delle due antiehe distrutte citth Miseno c Cume.
Per lo rischiarimento delle ragioni del Regio Fisco contra la Universith di Pussuoli, 4to,
p. 182, &c.

* DE CONFLAGRATIONE Agri Puteolani, Simonis Portii, illustr. D. Petro Toledo, &c.,
&c. (The first edition appeared at Naples, without indication of date or place of printing,
in 1538 ; the second at Florence in 1551. ) Edited by L. Giusliniani, I tre rarissimi opuscoli
di Simone Porzio, di Girol. Borgia e di Marcant. delli Falconi, scritti in occas. della
celehr. eruzione avven. in Puzzuoli nell' ann. 1588, 8vo, Napoli, 1817, pp. 48-51. The
conclusion runs: ‘Haec igitur mi Maecenas scribenda duzi, ne Harioli, somniorumq.
interpretes, ac vulgares Astrologi alio tragant, quae natura duce proueniunt.'

* DELL’ INCENDIO DI POZZUOLO, MARCO ANTONIO DELLI Falconi all’ Illustr.
Sig. Marchesa della Padula nel MDX^VIII. Si venne per Marco Antonio Passaro
alii Fern Vecchi ; also Giustiniani, pp. 285-330.

* Letters di Francesco del Nero a Niccold del Benino, sol terremoto di Pozzuolo, dal
quale ebbe origine la Montagna Nuova, nel 1538; printed from the manuscript in
Archivio storico ital., 1846, IX, pp. 98-96 ; translated by Haagen von Mathiesen, Neues
Jabrb. Min., 1846, pp. 702-707, and by M. Neumayr, Der Bericht des Francesco del Nero
fiber die Bildung des Monte Nuovo bei Neapel, op. cit., 1888, II, pp. 45-51.



OH. IX]


ERUPTION OP 1688


379


The fourth and last occurs in a long poem t>y Girolamo Borgia, poet,
soldier, and afterwards Bishop of Massalubrense, who made use of the
opportunity to dedicate it to Pope. Paul IJI. The poem gives a vivid
picture, but is scarcely available for our purposes *. •

It is not clear at what time Simone Porzio visited the scene of the
occurrence, but Ids description of the fugitives on the road leads us to
suppose that he hurried thither in the early moiiiing after the eruption
had taken place, which happened between one and two o’clock. We know
that this was so in the case of Falconi, and he mentions that the viceroy
also hastened to the spot with a numerous following. On the fourth day,
when the eruption was renewed, Falconi was on board sliip in the bay
of Pimuoli. As for del Nero, he must have amved at Puzzuoli some
days later.

Fron» these accounts wc may educe the following : —

As early os 1488 (1458 ?) a violent earthquake occurred in the region
and caused a gi'eat loss of life. At the beginning of the sixteenth century
repeated shocks were felt. In the years 1537' and 1538 they became
increasingly frequent and violent. On September 27 and 28, 1538, they
s ucceeded eacli other without cessation. Then, says Porzio, the sea retreated
about 200 feet, and fresh* water springs burst out. The strip of land which
li es at the foot of Monte Barbara and extends to lake Avemus appeared to
rise and assumed the form of a rapidly increasing mountain. On the
following night this pile of earth {terrue cumulus) began to cast forth as
from a gaping mouth groat volumes of fira, pumice, stones, and ashes, with
a great noise, so that the surraunding country was covered up far and
wide. Falconi says nothing of an elevation of the ground. The sea, he
relates, retired ; hot and cold springs were revealed ; flames appeared on
the Sudatojo (on the sea-shore), and spread towards Tripergole ; there they
stopped in a little valley lying behind Monte Barbara and the hill called
‘ del pericolo ’ ; thraugh this little valley lay the way to lake Avernus ; near
the baths the fire attained a violence so great that in the same night the
earth opened up and ejected such quantities of ash and pumice mixed with
water that all the country was covered by it. Heavy block clouds and
others dazzling white bui-st forth. Tlie eruption continued for two days
and tw'o nights, and thus Monte Nuovo ai’ose on the rite of Tripergole.
The sea covered with pumice resembled a ploughed field, and the ashes
were carried as far as Calabria. On Thursday, October 3, the eruption
was renewed; on the 4th it was possible to aseend the new mountain
and look down into the crater, but on Sunday, October 6, many lives were

> INCKNDIVM AD AVERNVM LACVM HORRIBILE PRIDIK CAL. OCTOB.
M.D.XXXVIII. NOCTEINTEMPESTAEXORTVM.— AD PAVLVM III.PONT.'Opt.Max.
Hieronymi Boigii Conflagratio Averni Horrenda. — Neap. Idib. Octob. M.D.XXXVIII ;
also Giustiniani, pp. 233, 255.



aso TEMPLE OP 8ERAPIS NEAR PUZZUOLI [part hi

lost in one of these rash enterprisi*^, owing to the sadden outburst of
a fresh eruption.

Mention lias already been made, of the fact that the sea retired
two hundred feet. ‘ First the sea retired,’ says Porzio, ‘ evidently owing to
no other cause than this, that the vapours seeking an exit dried up the



SOSTO IL MONTB tlOVO SVA JL GASTELLO BT ALTRI
BDIFICI 01 TRBPERGOLB IL LAGO AVERNO
STADIBTROAL PREOETTO MONTE ET
PARTB DEL MONTICELLO DEL PE
RlG'OLO B RIMASTA SOTTO U
FAL06 DBL MBDESMO


Fift. 40. The Volcanic fJruption of Monle. Kwm and the ahore. abandoned by the sen, (M)pieil frr)ni tlio
iigiire ill * DelP incendio di Pozzuolo, Marco Autoiiiu dclU Falconi All’IlliistrisBiina MurchoHii
della Padilla nel MDXXXVIII.’

earth, which, thus renderctl thirsty as it were, .sucked up the water through
its fissures; and so it happened that a part of the earth which was formerly
submerged by the sea became, dry land, and the height of the shore was
increased by ashes and other eiedmunta.’ According to this account
there was no elevation, but emergence and the accumulation of ejected


CH. IX]


NEGATIVE MOVEMENT IN 1688


381


material on the newly exposed sea-floor. According to Falconi, however,
Uie emergence occurred ten hours before the eruption; and that a veiy per-
ceptible and persistent negative displacement of the stmnd actually occurred
IS shown most plainly by a rough woodcut which accompanied Falcolli’s
account. On this (Fig. 40) will be seen below Monte Nuovo and extending
towards Puzzuoti, exactly on the site of the cliff behind the Starza, the
words Termine del Mare de prima, and a ship stranded on dry land.
Only the extreme rarity of this work, which is scarcely known except in
the reprint of Giustiniani in ISir, without illustrations, has caused this
remarkable woodcut to fall into oblivion *.

This disturbance of the coast-line must have made a deep impression
on thoughtful minds. F. Lofiiedo, Marquis of Trevico,took up his residence
in Puzzuoli in the winter of 1569, for the sake of his health, and devoted his
enforced leisure to writing an account of the town. He describes the ruins,
and mentions the ancient shore of the Starza, close to which, as he says,
‘ the sea still extended fifty years ago.’ Tire Greeks, he thought, were not
driven from Falaeopolis, the town which preceded Naples, by the ascent
of the sea; at Baiae the sea then stood higher than at the time of the
Romans, since ruins might Ire seen beneath the water. Further, Lofiiedo
mentions three columns standing erect side by aide behind the garden of
Geronimo di Sangro, which arc supposed to have belonged to the portico
of the temple of Neptune, and to have fallen down from above, ‘since
there is no trace of an edifice worthy of them anywhere around.’ Thus
the temple was completely buried up in 1569, and of Cantarelle, the spring
behind, Loffredo makes no mention ®

TJic Cantarelle was completely choked up by the eruption of 1538.
Amidst the general terror and subsequent dejection no steps were taken to
protect the famous spring or to rediscover it, a fact lamented by Capado
in 1604. Many years later, in 1738, it was again brought to light by
accident in digging a foundation deep below the ground

4. Excavation of the temple and ita itresewt elate. In 1750, when fine
marble was sought for to adorn the new buildings in Casei’ta, it was resolved
to open up the pile of ddbris near the three columns and to lay bare the temple.
In the following account 1 .shall trust mainly to the sfJhtcments of Jorio.

I Giustiniani mentions a woodcut, apparently similar to that in the first edition of
Porzio, which appeared without any indication of where it was printed ; this I have not
seen ; strange to say, he docs not mention the woodcut in Falconi.

Le antichita di Pozzrolo et Ivoghi convicini ; novamente raccolte dall’ Illustr. Sig.
Ferrante Loffredo, March, di Treuico, &c. In Napoli, appr. Gius. Cacchiji M.D.LXX,
fol. 2, a.

* PVTEOLANA HISTORIA a lulio Caes. Capacio conscript. Accessit eiusd. de Balneis
Libellus, Neap., 4to, MDCIllI, apiiendice, p. 49 ; N. Lanzani, Brieve dissertdzione dell*
acqua nuovamente rinvenuta nell* anno 1738 in Pozzuoli, dagli antichi chiamata del
Gaatarello, 8vo, Napoli, MDCCXL.



382 TEMPLE OP SBRAPIS NEAR PUZZUOLI [PAirrin

Near the three upright columns, and lying high above the pavement
of the temple, the upper part of the shaft of a fourth column was found ;
but while the upright shafts are surrounded only by a band of Lithodomus
borings, this fragment, with the exception of the surface resting in the
d^ris, was perforated all over, even on the cross fractures. This piece
of column, thus lying as one fragment out of many among the d^ris in
the sea, shows that all the borings were unquestionably produced in place,
and that when the sea rose to this height the temple was already deeply
buried up. Further excavations revealed a great rectangular edifice
68 meters long and 56 meters broad, which turned one narrow end towards
the sea, the other towards the land, and contained in the middle a semi-
circular cella. Before the cella stood the four great columns already
mentioned. This rectangular structure, comprising many chambers, en-
closed a court in the middle of which rose an independent circular
building supported by columns.

Two lateral entrances were found in the eastern of the longer sides ;
they were blocked up with stones. The statue of Serapis had been taken
from its place and set in a comer with other sculptures. In several of
the chambers sculptures and fragmentary remains were found collected
together, some of which it is certain did not originally belong to the
temple. Two or three of these objects are evidently water-worn, and were
probably brought in from an exposed position near the shore. From these
facts Jorio concludes, doubtless with truth, that neither earthquake, nor
fire, nor hostile invasion caused this great temple to fall into disuse, but
the strict interdict pronounced against the Serapis worship by the emperor
Tlieodosius and his succes-sora When, therefore, in the fifth and sixth
centuries, the hosts of Alaric first, then of Genseric, and finally of Totila,
reached Puteoli, the temple was doubtless already deserted, but there are
signs of a later attempt to adapt certain parts of it to .some ritualistic
purpose by the addition of walls and other structures.

The hot spring rose behind the cella, and its waters were conveyed into
the interior of the temple by conduits. One of these, about one meter deep
and 0*5 meter broad, led to the sea ; through this the sea now enters the
temple. Niccolini iound beneath the first a second pavement, of great
artistic merit, and a second system of conduits, which belong to an earlier
stnicture situated at a lower level. These certainly indicate that within
the Roman period a displacement of the strand-line in the positive direc-
tion may have taken place to the extent of one or two meters In opposi-

' Jorio, Riccrche sul tempio, &c., pp. 40, 4.5 -48. In 17.57, before the cella had been
excavated, fra^jments of sculpture, bearing signs of having been worn by the waves, were
again carried into the temple from the shore ; John Nixon, An Account of the Temple of
Serapis at Fuzzuoli, Phil. Trans. R. S., 1757, L, part 1, p. 173. '

^ A. Niccolini, Rapporto sullc acque che invadono il pavimento dell’ antico edificio



OH. IX]


EXCAVATION OP THE TEMPLE


383


tion to Niccolini, Babbage, who in all other respects shows such deep insight,
hu maintained that this second pavement was only the floor of a bath ;
but this view is not tenable ^ In several of the chambers dark calcareous
sinter was observed in horizontal bands at different heights up to about
one meter ; but this sinter only shows that before the temple was submerged
by the sea, cavities existed among the ddbris which covered it up, and in
these spring or rain-water was able to accumulate. A fact of greater
importance, mentioned by Jorio, is that a late Roman grave was sunk in
the deposits of the cella, a proof of how quickly the ruin had proceeded.

Above the ddbris of the wall follows another layer of calcareous sinter,
of which the lower boundary is irregular, accommodating itself to the
surftice of the debris, while the up^r boundary is horizontal. Babbage
gives about 8 feet 8 inches as’ the height of the latter, and adds that the
sinter precisely resembles that of the Pimna mimbilis. This upper
incrustation, visible on the shafts of the columns, was examined under the
microscope by Ehrenberg, who recognized it as a fresh-water sinter *. At
the time of its formation a pool of rain or spring-water, held up either
by the ddbris or the wall of the great rectangle, must have stood for
a considerable period. This is the last formation previous to the entrance
of the sea ; so far, with the exception of the deeper and older pavement, we
have in my opinion obtained no chronological data, nor have we observed
any indications which cannot be explained as the natural con.sequences of
dilapidation

The entrance of the sea took place gradually. The remains of tlu;
brick walls which formed the rectangle are lower towards the sea, higher
towards the land ; the result, as Jorio rightly observes, of the action of the
waves. Sand with marine shells was now deposited, and the same bed of
marine sand is found in the neighbouring gardens ; towards the sea it lies
at a somewhat lower level.

About this time a wall of bricks and ancient dJbris was constructed
behind and somewhat to the side of the three upright columns and east of

detto il Tempio di Giovc Scrapide, lotto dal Presidentc della R. Accademia delle Belle
Arti, 25 Nov. 1828, 4to, Napoli, 1829, 46 pp., pi. ; and in the memoirs already quoted, in
particular in Cisterna e anticbe stufo del Tempio di Serapide, 'letter to L. Pasini, 4to,
1845.

* C. Babbage, Observations on the Temple of Serapis at Pozzuoli near Naples, with
Remarks on certain Causes which may produce Geological Cycles of great extent (read
March 12, 1834) ; Quart. Journ. Gcol. Soc., 1847, III, pp. 186-217.

^ Ehrenberg, Feststellung des Kalkttberzuges am Serapis-Tempel zu Puzzuoli bei
Neapel als Silsswasserkalk durch das Mikroskop ; Monatsb. k. preuss. Ak, INiss. Berlin,
Sitzung vom 18. Nov. 1858, pp. 585-602. A list of marine shells is given by Philippi in
Neues Jahrb. Min., 1837, V, pp. 285 292.

’ Babbage mentions a Serpula above the lower dark sinter of one of the chambers ;
this only shows that one of the cavities remained for a long time unfilled. I am unable
to infer from this that the sea had entered the temple before it was covered with ash.



384 TEMPLE OF SERAPIS mAB PUZZUOLI [PABrni

the cella, as a defence against the sea, and doubtless to protect the spring
situated behind it. This wall was built with a face sloping towards the
sea; it ran across three chambers of the ancient temple, then already in
ruins; its base stood 2 to 2*6 meters above the floor of the chambers^.
This is obviously the opu8 sectUe for the protection of the spring, mentioned
by Petrus de Ebulo in the thirteenth century; now we perceive the
appropriateness of the words : Cvm mare fremescit : locus opjpugnatur ab
urkdis.

It was at this time that the Lithodomus made its borings. So far as
the debris rose around the columns, so far were they protected from the
Lithodomus and from the action of the sea generally. I visited the
locality in April, 1872, and in August, 1878. On both occasions the socles
of the upright columns were under water ; at the second visit to the extent
of 0*658 meter. If the column is examined closely the lower part of the
shaft is found to be smooth and well preserved up to a height of 1*71
meters; then follows a band of sinter, here only 0*07 meter broad,
evidently formed just above the ancient ddbris of the walls, 2433 meters
above the pavement. Up to this height the shaft retains its original
diameter. Above the sinter a rough, somewhat weathered and corroded
zone is seen, varying from 0*53 to 0*65 meter, and presenting towards the
upper edge the chain-like borings of Vioa. Then follows, deeply corroded,
and with a perceptible diminution in the diameter of the shaft, the zone of
Lithodomus, the breadth of which varies roughly in inverse ratio to that of
the preceding zone, from 8*02 to 2*60 meters. The upper limit of the
borings was thus, in August, 1878, from 5*83 to 5*03 meters above the
surface of the water in the temple, and 5*983 to 6*688 meters above
the floor of the temple.

Above the borings comes a rough band of no great breadth ; the upper
part of the shaft has suffered a good deal from the weather, and seems
never to have been under water

Over the marine bed a fresh layer of ddbris was deposited ; this doubt-
less was produced chiefly by the eruption of 1538 ; after this event more
than two centuries elapsed before the excavation of the ruins. The fact
that the ash rests on the marine sand proves that the positive phase was
earlier than 1538.

' Jorio, Ricerche 8ul tempio, &c., p. 56.

* On both visits I was accompanied by younger colleagues ; the measurements were
made in my presence by Dr. Bittner. The shafts consist of white marble with streaks
of schist ; the Lithodomus may be seen following the limestone and generally avoiding
the schist, while on that part of the shaft which was exposed to the air the streaks of
schist are disintegrated by the atmosphere. The shafts arc slightly inclined. 1 have not
thought it necessary to lay particular emphasis on this circumstance. The floor of the
temple was raised about the year 1864 by order of the sanitary authorities. I cannot
assert that the water level observed by us coincided with the sea-level.


V



CH.IX] DIVEKS EXPLANATIONS 886

The question as to whether oscillations axe still in progress is not
definitely settled ; the observations known to me are inadequate. Niccolini
has collected a number of low-water measurements for the years 1822 to
1838, and infers from them a continuous rise of the sea ; Smith thought
they showed a sinking of the land; Mallet, in 1862, called attention to
possible sources of error. Guiscardi asserted that a place on the bridge of
Caligula where ships were formerly made fast stood on June 12, 1840,
-|-2>037 meters, and on June 9, 1865, -i- 2*386 meters above low water, and
concludes from this that a change of level to the extent of +0*349 meter
has occurred in twenty-five years ^

5. Divers explanations. The first observers who, after the excava-
tion of the temple, paid attention to the Lithodomus borings, perceived at
once the difficulties presented by the problem. Most of them, residents
as well as visitors, merely recorded the strange fact or expressed their
conjectures with the greatest reserve. Among the foreigners who visited
the ruins were Nixon in 1757, and Ferber in 1772*.

At first a temporary oscillation of the sea-level was thought to have
occurred. Towai'ds the close of the eighteenth century the learned S(‘ipio
Breislak was the leading exponent of the view that a high tide (mar^),
five meters high, must be supposed to have continued for several years.
After the impossibility of a high tide of so great a duration had been
represented to him, he abandoned this theory in the French edition of his
travels in Campania, which was published by Pommereuil in 1801, con-
fessed that no satisfactory explanation had as yet been discovered, and
inclined to the view that the land itself had moved first upwards and then
downwards (II, p. 12)

By the side of this view another very soon arose. It was conceive«l
that during the decay of the temple the d^ris had fallen in such a manner
that it surrounded a basin, and indeed the rectangle of brick walls sur-
rounding the great court would certainly tend to give this form to the
accumulation. If then, owing to storms or a seismic wave, sea-water should
have been driven over the ruin, a marine pond might have resulted, lying
over the d^ris, and in this the Lithodomus might have found a home
above the sea-level. This was the form of explanatiomgiven by Piid and
by Goethe. Brocchi took a middle course, and thought that the sea had

' Niccolini, Gtan Terma, parte geolog^ca, p. 5 et seq. ; J. Smith, On Recent
DepreBsions in the Land, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1847, III, pp. 234-240; G. Guigeardi,
Sul livello del Mare nel Golfo di Pozzuoli, Rendic. Accad. Sci. Napoli, 1865, IV,
pp. 203, 204; R. Mallet, Great Neapolitan Earthquake of 1857, 8vo, London, 1862,
II, p. 218.

* Nixon, An Account of the Temple, &c. ; J. J. Ferber’s Briefe aus Wtllschland fiber
natfirliche Merkwfirdigkeiten, &c., an Ign. Edl. v. Born, 8vo, Frag, 1773, p. 197*.

* S. Breiglak, Voyages physiques et litbologiques dans la Campanie, trad, par le
General Pommereuil, Paris, 1801, 11, p. 170.

C c


HOLLAS II



386 TEICPLE OF SERAPIS REAR FUZZUOLI [PAmm

once been somewhat nearer the mins, and the filling of the basin in the
ddbris did the rest \

Later, when the elevation theory, chiefiy based on the observations in
Sweden, celebrated its triumph, the shafts of the columns at Pnzzuoli were
regarded as typical examples of the result of repeated oscillations of the
land; but it is noteworthy that as late as 1839, James D. Forbes, after
a very thorough examination of the facts, though he admitt^ local oscilla-
tions of the land, yet thought it possible that a general change in the level
of the Mediterranean might also be in progress, and he expressly stated
that this question is still in need of investigation

In the account given by Forbes we perceive a tendency to regard the
local movements as rapid, the general movements as slow ; and about the
same time Capocd attempted to prove that the last emergence of the land
had taken place quickly, indeed during the emption of 1538. In support
of this view he referr^ to some of the accounts quoted here, and con-
sidered the movement to have been an elevation \ Babbage, whose careful
observations have been repeatedly mentioned here, supposed that the
elevations and subsidences of the ground were caused by a rise or fall of
the subterranean temperature in the locality.

There was probably no one who could bring to this discussion such
a thorough knowledge of the facts as Niccdini, whose investigations on
Puzzuoli begin with the year 1808, and whose publications extend from
1828 to 1845 *. Niccolini always maintained that the land had remained

‘ E. Hni, Spiegazione dello strano fenomeno che presentano i vermi marini annichi-
lati nelle colonne del tempio di Seiapide in Pozzuoli, Opusc.8celti 8.8cienze e 8. 8rti,4to,
Milano, XXII, 1803, pp. 94-117. Pini knew of Beismic floods from the works of
Krascheninikoff and Ulloa ; W. von Ooethe, ArchitectoniBch'naturhiBtoriBches Problem,
1823 (Zur Naturwissenschaft flberhaupt, II, pp. 79-88). Goethe made his observations in
Puzzuoli in 1787, Pini not until 1802, and did not publish until twenty years later.
Von Hoff adopts the same view, Geschichte natttrlicher Ver&nderungen, II, pp. 203-206.

‘ At certain places in the province of Pasinganam, north of Arayat, salt lakes are said to
occur in which, according to the statement of the priests, boring moUusca still exist, as
well as in many fresh or brackish water rivers of the same province ' ; Semper, Die
Philippinen und ihre Bewohner, 8vo, 1869, p. 100. Brocchi, Notizia di alcune osser-
vazioni fisiche fatte nel tempio di Serapide a Pozzuoli, Bibl. Ital. Milano, XIV, 1819,
pp. 193-201.

* D. D. Forbes, Physical Notices of the Bay of Naples : V. On the Temple of Jupiter
Serapis at Puzzuoli and the phenomena it exhibits ; Joum. Sci. Edinb., 1829, New Ser., I,
pp. 260-286, in particular p. 283, where reference is made to the alterations in the
Baltic. In favour of subsidence and subsequent elevation are : Bronn, Reisen, 1824, 1,
pp. 392-400; F. Hoffmann, letter in Karsten’s Archiv, 1831, HI, pp. 374-383 ; and, in
particular, C. Lyell and the repeated editions of the Principles of Geology.

* E. Capocci, Nuove ricerche sul noto fenomeno delle colonne perforate dalle foladi
nel tempio di Serapide in Pozzuoli, 11 pp. (in the Progresso).

* In 1829 Niccolini published a memoir, Alcune idee sulle cause delle fasi del livello del
mare, 4to, Napoli. The fundamental idea is that the sea does not' gravitate towards the
centre of the planet, but towards its own centre of gravity ; that the latter is altered by



OH. IX] NICXX)LINrS TABLE 387

unmoved, and that it was the sea which had changed its level ; this view
he bases chiefly on the following grounds

(а) All around Italy there are visible traces of great and uniform

changes of the same kind. *

(б) Numerous thermal springs have always existed from the Roman
period to the present day, and not only that of the temple of Serapis;
such, among others, is the hot spring of the baths of Nero; near* Gaeta
a cold spring still issues from an opening of Grecian construction ; any
distension of the ground would have destroyed these springs.

(c) A number of great tunnels have also remained intact from the time
of the Romans, for instance that from lake Avemus to Cumae, and the
grotto of Posilippi; twice a year the setting sun sends a beam through
their whole length.

(d) Even at the foot of Monte Nuovo the ruins of the temple of Apollo
still remain standing.

(e) The movements are too frequent for movements of the solid land.

At the same time we must mention with admiration that Niccolini

very sharply distinguished between the elevations of the mountains, dis-
tinguished by their inclined beds and the movements of the sea, which
leave horizontal strand-lines ; that the compensation of positive and nega-
tive movements was perfectly clear to him ; and that he regarded unifonii
movements of an heterogeneous crust as an impossibility.

The ‘ metric chronological table ’ which Niccolini drew up for the temple
of Serapis includes three phases ; these are : —

1. A positive phase, from the lowest harbour works of Nisida (b. 0. 200)
at —6 meters, to the lithodomus borings on the columns at -f 5*8 meters.
The maximum and termination of this phase are placed in this table
between the ninth and tenth century.

2. A negative phase, said to be proved by two ecclesiastical buildings
on the shore, down to about —1 meter; the latter level is given by the
deeds of gift of A. n. 1503 and 1511, which cite districts regained by the
sea in the neighbourhood of Puzzuoli.

3. A renewed positive phase, from a date shortly after A. D. 1511 up to

the present day, and still continuing. *

I will now attempt, in connexion with this table, to give the results of
my own inquiry. Niccolini has misunderstood the documents of 1503 and
1511, and has underestimated the importance of the event of 1538; he

subsidences, volcanos, &c. (i. e. by tectonic processes) ; and that the surface of the sea
must change with the displacement of the centre of gravity. As appears firom a letter
to Pentland, dated October 24, 1845, only a few copies of the ‘ Idee * were published,
and the author did not return to this view. The arguments which I have cited 'here in
favour of the stability of the continents are collected from the Desetizione de la gran
Terma Puteolona, 1845.


C c 2



388 TEMPLE OP SEBAPIS NEAR PUZZUOLI [PABrra

recognized only a driving back of the sea by the accumulation of ejecta-
menta, as Porzio had described it, whereas a displacement of the strand
actually occurred. It may also be seen, from the verses of Petrus de
Ebulo and later accounts, that in the thirteenth century and at the
beginning of the sixteenth the strand-line stood high. Thus we obtain
the following result : —

As regards ancient times, the harbour-works of Nisida, the bridge of
Caligula, the Lex parietie fadundi, and the double pavement in the temple
of Serapis, afford evidence of positive movement only ; and it is not im-
possible that this positive movement continued slowly through the whole
period into the thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, and the beginning of the
sixteenth century, when the strand-line stood at +5*8 meters, the sea
extended to the hot spring, and the borings in the columns of the temple
of Serapis and in the piers of the bridge of Caligula were produced. Then
on September 28, 1538, a sudden negative movement occurred ; the Starza
and the pile of ddbris of the temple were abandoned by the sea, and at the
same time the hot spring was covered with ash. We do not know the
amount of this negative movement, nor whether positive movement im-
mediately followed; the existence of positive movement at the present day
is maintained.

Hence it results also that the oscillations assiuned by Niccolini cannot
all be accepted as valid. We have certain knowledge of one positive move-
ment only, which was probahly in dow progress for a number of centuries,
and led to a high level which lasted from the thirteenlh century to 1538 ;
then a sudden negative movement during the eruption of 1538 or shortly
b^ore it. Nothing else seems to me to be proved. Further, these move-
ments were restricted to the PJdegraean crater, and the movements beyond
Nisida which have been correlated with them are of incomparably older
date.

We are dealing with a local phenomenon, in the middle of the crater,
and one which presents no resemblance to those extensive oscillations of
the strand-line previously discussed. The aiguments advanced against the
elevation theory by Niccolini, with as much penetration as boldness, can
scarcely be applied to the present case.

On the other hand, the argument based by him on the uninterrupted
existence of numerous hot springs from the Roman period to the present
must be admitted to have great weight. It is true that the hot spring
behind the cella exists to-day as it did two thousand years ago. Neverthe-
less it is precisely this part of the ground which in the course of this period
is said first to have sunk down about 7 meters, between the time of the
construction of the older pavement and the year 1538, and then in 1538 to
have again risen very rapidly, indeed in a few hours, to a considerable
amount, perhaps to the whole extent of 5-8 meters ; and this subsidence



CH.IX] OSCILLATIONS, VESUVIUS, 1861 389

and elevation are supposed to have altered the structure of the ground so
little that the spring is still flowing at the present day. This spring
existed when the strand lay low and the Romans built the temple; it
existed when the strand was high and the spring had to be protected from
the waves by a wall ; it was buried in ash, and in 1735 it was found again.
Such persistence is hardly conceivable except in stable ground.

Thus an examination of the facts confronts us with a singular problem,
for on the one side we see the locally restricted nature of the changes near
Puzzuoli, on the other the constancy of the springs and many other con-
ditions in the solid land make it difiicult to believe that the land actually
slowly subsided, then suddenly rose again, and is perhaps now once more
sinking.

On December 8, 1861, an eruption of Vesuvius took place, which was
instructive in many respects. Wo extract the following from Palmieri's
account ^ : —

As early as December 5, violent vertical oscillations were recorded by
the magnetic variation apparatus of Lamont in the Observatory ; the oscilla-
tions increased, the earth trembled, and on December 8, at three o’clock in
the afternoon, a great Assure opened on the .south-west side of the mountain
towards Torre del Greco at a height of 290 meters. Augitic lava poured
forth. Towards eleven o’clock in the evening the activity diminished ; on
the morning of December 9 there was a temporary increase, and the prin-
cipal crater of Vesuvius began to eject Itoinbs and scoriae. The Assures
were prolonged through Torre del Greco to the sea ; in some localities their
sides were •widely displaced with regard to each other ; they traversed
the lava of 1794, and many houses collapsed. On the 10th there was an
extraordinary increase in the outflow of the puVdic springs of Torre del
Greco. The carbonic acid poured out of the ground with such violence
as to raise the heavy slabs with which the streets are paved. The waters
of a little spring on the seashore increased in volume; in the sea itself
a long zone of violent commotion was observed. This, as it appeared later,
was caused by escaping carburetted hydrogen. On the shore below Torre
del Greco it was now observed that the eea-levd etood 1*12 meters lower
than a line of seaweed and shells which marked th^ former strand-line.
Palmier! thinks that this shows the ground had been raised. This eleva-
tion appears to have been the chief cause of the widening of the Assures in
Torre del Greco; and for this reason that part of the town built on the
ancient lava had snifered most, since the lava was broken up by the
swelling of the ground.

* L. Falmieri, Cronaca del Vesuvio, Ann. R. OBserrator. met. Veauviano, Napoli, 1862,
III, p. 1 et seq., and Compt. Rend., Faria, 1861, LIII, p. 1232; Guiacardi, tom. cit.,
p. 1235 ; Tchihatchef, Verb. k. k. geol. Reicba. Wien, 1862, p. 182 ; Ferrey, Note tur lea
tremblementa de terre de 1861, p. 104 et aeq.



890 TEMPLE OF SERAPffi NEAR F0ZZUOLI [PARrm

The eruption from the principal crater continued, while tiie vents
situated on the upper part of the new fbsture were emptied to an extra-
ordinary depth, notwithstanding the brief duration of the outflow.

*' Accounts exist which might lead us to suppose that during some of
the earlier eruptions, especially that of the year 1681, cm devotion of the
land had cdeo ocmrred, followed by a eulmdence. In 1861 the negative
movement did not extend as far as Qranatello, 4 kilometws to the north-
west ; and in Torre Sassano, 2-25 kilometers to the south-east, it only
amounted to 0*8 meter. A fixed point was therefore chosen at Qranatello,
and on December 81 a line of sight was established upon an islet between
this point and a reference mark on the raised shore near Torre del Greco.
On January 21 the reference mark was already found to be 0>64 meter
lower, on February 12 it was 0*186 meter lower still, but on March 8 the
reading had not changed ; by March 31 it had sunk 0^)41 meter further,
making altogether 0*241 meter since December 81. At the same time the
shore began to show signs of great heat; some springs on the beach
reached a temperature of 47° by the end of January. The vents which had
opened on December 8 had already long been closed, but the temperature
at Torre del Qreco and on the shore continually increased, until finally,
on March 2, a long stretch of ground had reached 30°, and began to give
off steam. Palmieti was of opinion that the liquid lava could not be more
than 500 meters below the town of Torre del Qreco, and it was expected
that a new eruptive centre would open at the surface. At the same time
the levelling apparatus indicated a continuous positive movement — inter-
rupted, it is true, at the. very beginning of March — which in this case
corresponded with a subsidence of the ground.

The volcanic eruption on Tanna, the most southerly of the New Hebrides,
on Januaiy 10, 1878, was accompanied by a negative displacement, the
exact extent of which, probably about 3 meters, cannot be discovered
from the accounts ; nor do 1 know whether it was followed by a positive
recurrence *.

These cases, particularly that of Monte Nuovo in 1588 and Vesuvius
in 1861, show a slow positive and a rapid negative movement. Ail the
facts might be mdltt readily explained by a decrease of gravitational
attraction consequent on the eruption, but calculations lend no support
to this suggestion.

In 1845 Bruchhausen published a treatise, in which he attributed the
rise of the sea during glacial periods to the attraction of the accumulated
masses of ice ; and Penck remarks that in 1846 the same author presented
Humboldt with a manuscript as a supplement to this treatise, in which

' Annalen der Hydrographie, Berlin, YI, 1878, p. 871. Captain Kilgonr says that
a rock in front of the harbour appeared to have risen three meters, and coral reefs were
raised out of the sea. Here also a seismic flood occurred.



801


OB.1Z] DioaNUTIOK OF ATTRiLOTION

1

he maintained that in oonsequenee of voleanic aetivhy a dumge may take
place in the local value of gravity, and therefore in the aea-level alao
Yerbeek estimated the maw of material ejected by Erakatoa in August,
1883, at 18 cubic kilometers, with a weight of 86 x 1012 kilogrammes.
Still higher estimates were given by Junghuhn in the case of the eruption
of Tambora in 1815 After the eruption of Monte Nuovo, Francesco del
Nero wrote : ‘What I cannot make out is the great quantity of material
which has issued from this vent . . . and God forbid that the cavity
should extend beneath Naples None of these masses, however, are
sufficient, according to the calculations of our physicists, to account for
the negative movements recorded.

Thomson and Tait calculate that we should have to assume a sub-
terranean spherical cavity of 8,000 to 4,000 meters in diameter to account
for a fall of one meter in the sea-level. Drygalski has calculated the cavity
for the temple of Serapis, but with the centre below Vesuvius^ Dr. Matgules
has had the kindness to undertake at my request a number of these
laborious calculations, and has arrived at results identical with those of
his predecessors. Thus according to him, we find first, in agreement
with Thomson and Tait, that a spherical cavity beneath the surface
of 190 cubic kilometers would be required for a subsidence of the sea-
level to the extent of one meter. If we assume a hemispherical cavity, its
volume would amount to 147 cubic kilometers ; and by assuming the most
favourable conditions this would be reduced to 104 cubic kilometers.
These figures are all disproportionately greater than the highest estimate
of the most voluminous discharges, and in the case of Monte Nuovo we
have a negative movement not of one, but of five or six meters.

The question, then, arises whether we must not return to the old theory
of Babbage, which attributes the swelling up to increase of temperature.
Palmieri appears to think that this cause has been supplemented by the
action of high-pressure vapours.

Whatever may be the true explanation, these movements which have
left their traces on the columns of the temple of Serapis ore completely
difierent from those of the Baltic sea, although they find a place beside

* W. Ton Bruchhausen, Die periodisch wiederkehrenden Eiszeftea und Sindfluthen, 8vo,
Trier, 1846 ; A. Penck, Schwankungen des Meerewpiegels, 8to, HOnchen, 1882, pp. 7
and 19 (printed firom the Jahresber. geogr. Ges. Mflnchen, VII). The fiust of the
constant elevation has not been established. Prof. Penck has been kind enough to send
me a copy of this MS.

* R. D. M. Verbeek, Rapport sommaire sur I’druption de Krakatau, lea 26, 27 et 28
aoht 1883 ; Arch. n4erland. sci. Harlem, 1884, XIX, p. 166.

* M. Neumayr, Der Bericht des Francesco del Nero fiber die Bildung des Monte Nuovo

bei Neapel ; Neues Jahrb. Min., 1883, II, p. 49. ,

* Thomson and Tait, Handbuch der theoretischen Physik, I, 2, 8to, Braunschweig,
1874, § 787, p. 342 ; £. von Drygalski, Die Geoid-deformationen der Euseit, Zeitschr.
Ges. Erdkunde, Berlin, 1887, XXII, p.



392 TEMPLE OF SEBAPIS NEAR PUZZUOLI [FA«rm

one another in onr textbooks as proofs of the theory of elevation ; in the
first place they are distinguished by their strict local limitation, and in
the second by the sudden spasmo^c character of the negative phase.
!niey have as little in common with the alleged universal and secular
oscillations of the continent as the oscillations of an inland sea with those
of the Ocean. They are changes above the surface of a scoria-covered
focus, and neither the fresh verdure of the hills and meadows, nor the
noisy traffic of the light-hearted inhabitants, nor historical recollections,
permit us to forget that Horace’s ‘ little comer of the smiling earth,’ the
promontory of Misena, looks down into the depths of an expiring
volcano, not yet absolutely extinct. An explanation of these phenomena
must be sought in active volcanos, on the slopes of Vesuvius, or still
better, on the * pahoShoe ’ of Eilauea, the lava field in the interior of the
great crater of Hawaii.



398


CHAPTER X

THE BALTIC AND THE NORTH SEA DURING THE
HISTORIC PERIOD .

Salinity within the Skager Rack. Mean level of the Baltic on the Oerman coast.
Oscillations on the coasts of Sweden and Finland. General survey of the negative
displacement Submerged forests and peat bogs of the North sea. The haffs and peat
bogs of the Baltic coasts.

1. Salinity within the Skager Rack. When, in 1807, Leopold von Bach
perceived the signs of a retreating strand in the gulf of Bothnia, he was
dominated by the belief that the whole surface of the ocean stands at
the same level, and that a local deviation from uniformity is a ‘matter
of impossibility.’ Out of this conception arose the theory of conti-
nental oscillations, with all its consequences, which has so profoundly
influenced the development of our science. Yet this notion of a uniform
level cannot be maintained ; apart from the very important disturbances,
still insufficiently studied, which are due to the attraction of the con-
tinents, it certainly cannot be applied to interior seas more or less separated
from the Ocean.

If we assume a complete equalization of level in the most distant arms
of the sea, we might with the same right imagine a similar equalization in
the salinity and density; which, nevertheless, does not occur. We must, on
the contrary, admit that the water in those bays or incompletely closed
arms of the eea, where the density is less than that of the Ocean^ stands at a
higher level, and in those where it is greater at a lower level than the Ocean.

Salinity is the most important element in determining the density of
the water. Temperature, except as a factor in evaporation, has less
influence, and its effect is less strictly localized than the diflferences in
salinity. When the estuary of a river is filled witlf fresh or brackish
water, then a higher column of the less heavy water in the estuary is
required to balance a column of the heavier water in the open sea. For
this reason alone the shore-line must be higher within the estuary than
outside it. The salinity and the level of the water in the estuary are
dependent on the quantity of fresh water brought down from the land, and
this varies with the seasons, so that we should expect to find the greatest
variations both in level and salinity in proximity to the mouths of 'rivers.

According to the data of the Deutsche Seewarte the North Atlantic
Ocean attains its maximum density in lat. 30* to 85* S., with a specific



394 THE BALTIC AND THE NORTH SEA [paktiu

gravity of 1*02768, and 3*63 per cent, of salts in solution ; both salinity
and density decrease to the north and south. In lat. 60* to 55* N. the
specific gravity is 1*02665, the salts in solution amount to 3*48 per cent.^
We must refer to these values as a standard in discussing the partially
closed arms of the sea.

In Europe there are two chains of seas in somewhat restrict^ com-
munication with the Ocean. The first of these comprises the gulf of
Bothnia, the gulf of Finland, the Baltic, Cattegat, and Skager Rack ; the
second includes the sea of Azov, the Black sea, the Bosphorus, the Aegean,
and the Mediterranean. In those most remote from the Ocean, that is
the ' wiek ’ or northern half of the gulf of Bothnia, the gulf of Finland,
and the sea of Azov, the same conditions prevail as in a great estuary ;
the salinity is at a minimum ; they should consequently present the highest
level above the Ocean.

In the northern chain the following members may be distinguished : —
I. The northern ludf of the gulf of Bothnia, or the wiek of Bothnia,
bounded on the south by the Quarken. It forms a shallow basin, which
sinks, it is true, to below 100 meters on the west side, between lat. 64°
and 65° N., and in one place even to 129 meters; but on the whole
the depth is inconsiderable. Towards the north-east there is less than
20 meters of water over wide areas, and the transverse ridge of the
Quarken nowhere appears to sink below 20 meters ^

The quantity of water which enters the basin bounded by this ridge
is always very great, but varies, with the seasons to an extraordinary
extent. The watershed on the west of the basin is situated far away
towards the Atlantic ; on the north it is almost equally remote, and only
on the north-east and east does it gradually approach the Quarken. The
vast volume of snow water set free by the sun during the long summer
days, which are scarcely interrupted even by twilight, flows into the wiek
of Bothnia. The greater quantity comes from the west. The whole of this
influx must pass out over the ridge of the Quarken, and chiefly over that
part of it which lies between Holmd and the coast of Sweden, an interval
only 16 kilometers in breadth. The result is an extremely low degree of
salinity. At Nieder-Kalix, near the northern end of the gulf, ^lund
found only 0*26 per cent, of saline constituents, at Skellefte& 0*35, and at
Ume2, in the waist of the Quarken, 0*39. Off the northern part of the
Finnish coast Struve found at Uleaborg and at Brahestad 0*34 per cent.^

* 6. Ton Boguslawski, Handbuch der Oceanographie, 8vo, Stuttgart, 1884, 1, p. 149.

* This may be veiy clearly followed on the bathometrical chart of the Baltic by
E. Ackermann and E. H. Wichmann in Ackermann, Beitrilge zur physischen Geographic
der Ostsee, 8to, Hamburg, 1883.

^ These are the figures reduced by Ekman to a common denominator; Ekman, Om
Hafovattnet utmed Bohuslftnska Kusten, K. svenska Vet. Akad. Handl., 1870, 2. ser., IX,
1. part. No. 4, p. 30.



896


OH.X] THE BALTIC CHAIN OF SEAS

n. The eowthem ha^ of the gvlf cf Bothnia. This extends from the
Quarken to the Aland islands. The islands are the summits of a broad
rocky ridge which extends from Abo towards the west, but terminates
before reaching the Swedish coast in an abrupt descent to an unexpectiid
depth. A narrowly confined trough is thus formed, with a bottom below
200 meters, and towards the south-east even below 300 meters; it is
situated at the junction of the gulf of Bothnia with the northern Baltic,
and is known as the eea of Aland.

Between the Aland islands and the Quarken the sea sinks in yet one
other place to a great depth; this is also on the west coast, in lat.
62* 63' N. ; soundings show .—271 meters. From this spot the depth rapidly
diminishes to the north, east, and south, so that the mean depth of even
this basin is by no means great.

The drainage basin which supplies this sheet of water is quite as broad
on the western side as that of the northern moiety of the gulf of Bothnia,
but on the east it is more restricted, and the influx of fresh water is far
less. Thus it happens that the salinity shows a general increase towards
the south, but on the coiist of Finland the increase is already felt more
to the north ; thus, south of Wasa, lat. 63“ N., Struve found 0-51 per cent.,
and at Kristinestad, lat. 62” 15' N., 0‘34 per cent. ; while on the Swedish
coast, at Hemosand, lat. 62“ 30' N., Edlund found only 0*42, at Soderham,
lat. 61“ 11' N., only 046, and north-east of Gefle, lat. 60“ 61' N., only 048
per cent.

III. The gvlf of Finlaml. This contributes a considerable quantity of
fresh water, which it receives from the east. The depth of the gulf
increases in a gradual and regular manner from the Nova to the Baltic,
and subterranean ridges, such as those of the Quarken and the Aland
islands, are absent. For the question now before us a closer description
of this gulf is not necessary.

IV. The gvlf of Riga, situated on the inner side of the islands of Dago
and Oesel, receives the drainage of the basin of the Dilna, and contributes
a certain quantity of fresh water.

V. The Baltic. This sea is divided longitudinally down the middle
by a ridge, which runs, with only a trifling inteftuption, from the
Kopparsten-ome and the island of Gotska Sando, across Gothland and the
Hoborg bank to the Mittelbank; that is, from about lat. 68“ 30' to 55“ 30' N.
Bornholm and the Bonne bank may also be considered, so far as the move-
ment of the water is concerned, as its continuation. Thus there arises
a German moiety of the Baltic, that is, the east, south-east, and south
part, and a Swedish moiety, that is, the west and south-west part. The
greatest depths in the German moiety occur east of Gothland, where the
sea wnlfH over a wide area to below 200 meters, and attains a maximum
of —249 meters; in the Swedish moiety they are found north-west of



396


THE BALTIC AND THE NORTH SEA [pakt ra

Gotska Sando, whore the deep region is less extensive, but deeper; a
sounding gives —323 meters, the greatest depth found anywhere in the
Baltic. It is very remarkable that throughout the whole distance from
tne latitude . of Gothland to the Skager Back such depths as these are
never again encountered.

The three passages by which the Baltic communicates with' the Skager
Rack differ in character. A depression, reaching a depth of more than
—20 meters and continued into the bay of Lttbeck, finds its prolongation
to the north-west in a channel which subdivides into the two Belts, the
Little Belt on the one hand, and on the other the Great Belt, the latter
proceeding to the still deeper waters lying north-west of Zealand. The
Sound presents towards the Baltic a broad funnel-shaped entrance, but its
depth between Copenhagen and Malmb is trifling, and only in the narrowest
part does it sink below —20 meters; the deeper channel in this place
grows broader beyond Helsingborg and enters the Cattegat.

The Baltic receives a number of German rivers from the south. To
this supply we must add the contributions from the gulfs of Riga, Finland,
and Bothnia. From the northern part of the Swedish coast, also, con-
siderable quantities of fresh water reach its basin; but, owing to the
distribution of the watershed, the southernmost part of Sweden docs not
receive the drainage of the higher mountains, the rivers diverging to the
south-east and south-west. Thus the southern end of the Scandinavian
peninsula fonns to a certain extent an independent hydrographic region,
and its contribution to the fresh water of the Baltic is comparatively
trifling.

We possess a large number of exact observations on the currents and
salinity of the Baltic, the result of the combined efforts of Swedish, Danish,
and Russian investigators, and as well of the invaluable work of the German
ship Pommerania and the Commission for the scientific investigation of the
German seas ; we can only quote a few examples

Let us first return to the trough in the sea of Aland. Here, Forch-
hammer found a salinity of 0-592 per cent, at the surface, 0-725 per cent, at
a depth of 50 fathoms, 0-747 per cent, at a depth of 100 fathoms, and 0-750
per cent, at a depth of 158 fathoms^. Thus in this isolated trough heavy
water lies at the bottom, and the lighter water streams away above. Since
the salinity increases on the whole towards the south, we encounter in this
direction surface densities which make a continually nearer approach to
the densities of the deep water further to the north in the sea of Aland.

^ Many of these have been collected by J. Roth, Allgemeine und chemisohe Oeologie,
I, Berlin, 1879, pp. 555 et seq. Of the older works I will only mention Baron A. F. Sass,
Resultate aus meinen Untersuchungen hbor die Variationen im Saizgehalte des Ostsee-
wassers; Zcitschr. ges. Erdkunde, Berlin, 1867, II, pp. 481-498.

* G. Forchhammer, On the Composition of Sea-water in different parts of the Ocean,
Phil. Trans., 1865, CLV, pp. 203-262 ; Ekman, tom. cit.



CH.Z]


EXCHANGE OP BALTIC WATER


397


At the same time, there is a good deal of variation according to the season,
the direction of the wind, and other circumstances. At the mouth of the
gulf of Finland (Forchhammer), and between Dago and Oesel (Qdbel), the
salinity is 0*69 per cent.; thence to beyond Bornholm the salinity (jf
the surface water varies from 0*71 to 0*76, or sometimes even to 0*78. In
the deeper water, however, the salinity is greater, and in the sea between
Jershbft and Bornholm, at —85 to —90 meters, a percentage of 1*633 was
observed. From the neighbourhood of Wamemiinde onwards the salinity
at the surface has already risen to over 1*0 per cent.

We now approach the entrances of the Baltic. The heavy water of the
North sea finds its way in through the deep channels of the Belts, while
the light water of the Baltic flows out over it ; but during calm weather
comparatively little water passes from the North sea through the Sound,
which is crossed by the shallows of Drogden, and turns its funnel-shaped
mouth towards the Baltic. An interchange takes place under special
conditions, which we must examine now more closely in the light of the
detailed and invaluable descriptions of Meyer and Karsten

The mean salinity at the surface in the regions east of Arcona, in the
island of Biigen, and of Ystad in Scania, may be taken as 0*75 per cent.,
off the coast between Biigen and Fehmam at 1*0 per cent., in the Sound at
1*25, off the coast of Schleswig-Holstein at 1*75, off the Danish coast of the
Cattegat at 2*33, at Skagens Bev in the Skager Back at nearly 3*0, and in
the adjacent parts of the North sea at 3*26 per cent. When high winds
blow steadily from the Cattegat for any length of time the undercurrent in
the Belts grows stronger, and the heavy water in the Sound passes over
the shallows of Drogden. A great quantity of salt water then accumulates
in the south-western part of the Baltic, and an increased salinity is per-
ceptible as far as Biigen, and even beyond. The subsequent fate of the
heavy water thus introduced is not known ; it probably descends into the
depths situated east and west of Gothland. Some years may then elapse,
the salt in the heavy water continually diffuses into the lighter, and this
process of extraction continues, till a fresh irruption of sea-water occurs
again.

In 1869, and again during the storms of October 31 to November 1,
and November 7 to 11, 1872, laige quantities of salt water were thus
driven into the Baltic, and could be traced to the east of Biigen. Then, on
November 13, there came out of the east and north-east the great cyclone,
of which wc shall speak later, and drove the water in the opposite direction

’ H. A. Meyer, Periodische Schwankangen des Salzgehaltes im OberflOchenwasser in
der Ostsee und Nordsee, IV. Bericht der Commission zur wissenschaftlichen Untersuchung
der deutschen Meere, VII.-XI. Jahig., 3. Abth., fol., Berlin, 1884, pp. 1-10; and
G. Karsten, Die Beobaebtungen an den KCstenstationen und Sebiffsbeobachtungen, tom.
cit., pp. 11-60.



398


THE BALTIC AND THE NORTH SEA [pabtih

into the North sea. In the winter of 1873-4 heavy water was again
introduced. Lohme in RUgen and all the stations to the west showed
an unusually high salinity. This decreased up to the year 1875 ; and from
t]iat time onwards the salinity in the whole of this part of the sea
experienced a much slower but continuous decrease, which lasted for seven
years. In the spring of 1882 heavy water again entered, but without
quite restoring the salinity of previous years.

The salinity of the Baltic, as Karsten observes, is thus at present
dependent on the periodic irruption of water from the North sea ; and east
of a line drawn from Rligen to Ystad, the Baltic presents the character
of a great brackish-water lake. Since its earlier communication with the
sea, a continual freshening of its waters must have taken place, and the
question arises whether this is still in progress, or whether a state of
stability has been reached. The gradual decrease in salinity during
a series of years, and the variations which regularly follow the seasons,
show the great influence of the rainfall ^

Karsten estimates the whole volume of the water in the Baltic at 75
cubic miles, and the annual contribution of fresh water at 1*5 cubic miles;
so that if the form of the basin were simple, and if its contents could be
completely displaced across the entire transverse section, fifty years would
suffice to fill the Baltic with fresh water. But, as it is, the freshly intro-
duced heavy water sinks to the bottom, and in isolated places of small
extent, as, for example, in Wittlings Kuhle in Kiel harbour, preserves
a high salinity for a long period. At the same time, a continuous influx
of water from the North sea, not sufficient, however, to render the salinity
uniform, enters through the deep channels of the Belts.

Under these circumstances a peculiar movement of the waters takes
place outside the entrances, in the Cattegat and Skager Rack. Three
currents exist. The first is the great oceanic stream, which washes the
west coast of Jutland, enters the Skager Rack, and may even be observed
on the Swedish coast opposite Skagen ; it then turns outwards and follows
the west coast of Norway. As far as this current extends the ebb and
flow of the tides are clearly marked, but further towards the Baltic they
become increasingly obscure. The second current branches off from the
first, and enters the llaltic as salt water in the way we have just described.
The third is the less saline outwards-flowing current of the Baltic, which
follows the Scandinavian coast to beyond cape Lindesnas. The numerous
rivers of the southern part of the peninsula open on this part of the coast
and assist in lowering the salinity.

The investigations of Ekman off the coasts of Bohuslan give a clear idea
of the existing conditions. Sometimes three layers of water may be dis-
tinguished on these coasts : an upper layer derived from the rivers, which

^ Karsten, mem. cit., p. 40.



399


OH.X] MEAN LEVEL ON GERMAN COAST

probably never extends deeper than 2 fathoms, beneath this the Baltic
current, and beneath this again the saline water. In the parts of Bohuslan
next the Cattegat we find at the surface of the Baltic current about
2 per cent, of salt, at a depth of 10 fathoms 2>5 per cent., and at abou^
15 fathoms 3 per cent. ; but further north on the coast bordering the Skager
Rack 2*5 per cent, is found at the surface. Where the Gotha-elv enters
the sea we first meet with 2*5 per cent, at a depth of 2 fathoms. The
water of the North sea may be recognized by its blue colour, and sometimes
the dividing lino is so sharp that at some miles from the coast water of
a difierent salinity may be found on opposite sides of a boat. This affords
the only explanation of the fact that on the Fjallbacka-Skargard in the
W^er islands, which proceed from north Bohuslan into the Cattegat,
Ekman observed a change of salinity during the night to the extent of
0*28 per cent.

As regards the Skager Rack, we may introduce here a transverse section
taken by the German ship Pommeran'ia. In the harbour of Arendal
a salinity of 1-083 per cent, was observed ; in the Skaren of the Arendal-
fjord, 1*572 ; 12 miles north-west of Skagen, 2*83 ; 10^ miles north-west of
Skagen, 2*95; 3 miles north of Uirshals in Jutland, 3*28 per cent.

2. Mean level on the Oerman coaet. The water of the Baltic is in-
fiuenced, as we have seen, by so many different circumstances that a long
series of observations and a careful examination of the data are necessaiy
before we can arrive at a determination of the mean level at any locality, or
form an opinion as to whether a positive or negative displacement of the
level is now taking place at any given point or not. From an examination
of a great number of observations, made at many places on the German
coast in the eighteenth century and up to the year 1875, Hagen arrived at
the conclusion in 1877 that no elevation or subsidence whatever was
taking place on this coast, but that the water sometimes maintains a higher
level than the normal for as much as a whole year, and that consequently
the Baltic has not always the same heights Additional infonuation of

* The difiScttlties attending investigations of this kind may be seen from the variety
of results obtained in the course of years by so exact an observer as Hagen. A first
comparison of the heights recorded by the tide-gauges on the Oerpan coast in 1810-1844
showed for Colbei^ermflnde a trifling elevation of the sea-level; for the neighbouring
town of Swinemttnde and all the harbours of the provinces of Prussia, on the other hand,
a subsidence of the level, increasing towards the east with a certain regularity. Doubt,
however, was felt as to the constancy of certain gauges ; in 1845 control levellings were
made, and in 1846-1864 these showed an actual oscillation of the sea-level at certain
places, but this was ascribed to the wind. At the same time the influence of the seasons
on the sea-level became apparent. With the ihrther continuation of the observations to
1875, Hagen maintained that lasting elevation or subsidence did not occur; that the
trifling deviations could be explained by alterations in the course of neighbouring
currents ; that in some years a higher level may be maintained (e. g. in 1874, 4-8 inches)
without being caused by the wind. We must, therefore, infer that the Baltic has not



400


THE BALTIC AND THE NOBTH SEA [^m

a very tnistworfchy nature is to be found in the two monographs by
Wilhelm Seibt on the mean level at SwinemUnde and Travemttnde. It
appears from the observations at SwinemUnde during the years 1826 to
1879 that the mean error of the probable change in the relative level is
greater than the observed change itself, and therefore that the constancy
of the level of the Baltic for this purpose must be regarded as proved. At
Travemilnde the mean error deduced from the series of observations made
in the years 1855 to 1884 approaches so closely to the change observed
that here also constancy may be inferred.

Further, the important fact has been observed that, in spite of the lower
salinity of this part of the Baltic, its mean level stands at the same height
as that of the North sea at Cuxhaven, or rather that the differences
observed are less than the mean error. As bearing on some remarks to
follow, it is important to note that this close agreement has been obtained
by leaving the station of Memel out of account. For while Pillau, as com-
pared with Cuxhaven, gave a height of + 75*9 mm. with a mean error of
+ 79*6 tnm., from which identity of level may be inferred, Memel, on the
other hand, gave + 221'1 mm. + 98-0. Thu6 Memel, which of all the German
stations advances furthest into the Baltic, certainly afibrds evidence of
a considerable positive displacement

We may conclude from these observations that the Baltic, all along the
German coast as far as Pillau, is able to maintain itself in equilibrium
with the Ocean through the Belts, though the water may sometimes
stand at an exceptionally high level for several years; but beyond Pillau
we have no proof that this is the case, and the mean level at Memel
stands at a greater height. Persistent displacement of the mean level,
either upwards or downwards, cannot be shown to occur in this part of
the coast.

3. OsciUatiom on the Swedish and Finnish coad. The opinion expressed
by Nordenanker in 1792, that the Baltic is an inland sea with an incom-
pletely open outlet, and that the oscillations of the strand-line are merely
the result of irregularities either in the supply or discharge (II, p. 10), has
been adopted by many subsequent observers. In 1823 Nilsson expressed
himself in its favoiir. Robert Chand)ers supported it in a paper which he

always the same height ; G. Hagen, Die preusaigche OstseekttBte in Betreff der Frage, ob
dieselbe eine Hebung oder Senkung erkennen l&sst. Abb. k. Akad. Wias. Berlin, 1865,
math. Abth., pp. 21-41 ; by the same, Yergleichung des Wasseratandes der Ostsee an der
prenssischen Kflete, op. cit., 1877, pp. 1-17, and Yergleichung der von 1846 bis 1875 an
der Ostsee beobachteten Wasserstande, Monatsber. k. Ak. Wise. Berlin, 1877, pp. 559 to
561. Baron Sass arrived at the same results; Untersuchungen fiber die Niveau-Yer-
schiedenheit des Wassenpiegels der Ostsee, Erman’s Archiv, 1867, XXY, pp. 320-348.

* W. Seibt, Das Mittelwasser der Ostsee bei Svinemfinde, Publicat. des k. preuss.
geodftt. Institutes, 4to, Berlin, 1881 ; and by the same, Das Mittelwasser der Ostsee bei
Travemfinde, op. cit., 1885.



401


CH. XI, COAST OF SWEDEN AND FINLAND

(k>mmiinieated to the Swedish Academy. On November 14, 1849, he main-
tained that the supposed constancy of level in the Baltic rested on no
sufficient proof ; on the contrary, by reason of its numerous affluents, this
sea must be regarded as a great estuary, its affluents may diminish ih
volume and its channels of egress become enlarged; a determination of
level was consequently indispensable. Two distinguished investigators,
A. Skrdmann and Levin, were prompted by this memoir to institute a fresh
series of connected observations. It seemed to them probable that the in-
terior waters stand at a higher level than the open sea, and that the wiek,
the gulf of Bothnia, and the Baltic form three basins rising out of the sea
in successive steps. Swedenborg, as early as 1719, had maintained that
these inland waters stand at a comparatively high level. Woldstedt, when
engaged on the triangulation of Finland, found that the sea-level at
Ule&bord stood 16 feet higher than in the gulf of Finland, and though
this value may perhaps err in excess, it nevertheless deserves attention ^
While the importance of fresh observations was thus becoming recog-
nized in Sweden, the subject received renewed attention in Finland.
Albin Stjemcrmtz, an experienced mariner, who a8.director of the pilotage
of Finland was peculiarly well qualified to form an opinion, declared him-
self strongly in favour of Nordenanker’s view. He at the same time gave
a description of the various currents of the interior parts of the sea ;
variable currents dependent on the wind occur at the surface, and below
these the great normal currents, which all tend towards the several exits of
the Baltic and depend for their sole motive force on a head of water
driving them into the Ocean *.

In the year 1850 systematic observations were commenced under the
direction of A. Erdmann, and regular daily measurements of level were
made at a number of lighthouses around the whole of the Swedish coast.
As early as 1855 a preliminary summary of the results was published, but
this revealed numerous sources of error L. Hclmstrom was then deputed
to visit all the stations of observation and to scrutinize the method
employed at each place. Next Forasman, making use of the series of
observations recorded from 1852 to 1875, attempted a fresh co-ordination

0

Q

^ Nilsson, Utkast till en geologiske Beskrifning 6fver Sk3.ne, Physiogr. Sallsk. Arsberiitt.
Lund, 1823, in particular p. 5 ; Erdmann och Lov4n, Osterq'Ons medelniveau, Ofvers. K.
Vet. Akad. FOrh. Stockholm, 1850, VII, pp. 36-49.

* Albin Stjemcreutz, Aiim&rkningar rOrande strommame i dstersjOn,; Act. Soc. Sci.
Fennicae, Helsingfors, 1861, VI, pp. 369-393, F5redrag, 1859.

* A. Erdmann, Om de lagttagelser Ofver VattenhOjdens och Vindames FOr&ndringar ;
Ofvers. K. Vet. Akad. FOrh. Stockholm, 1855, ny fOljd, I, a, pp. 247-303, map. The
position and other details relating to many of the points mentioned here have been
given by J. A. Fagerholm, Nivelliringar och undersOkningar af VattenhOjdstationerna
vid en del af Sveriges fyrar, utfor i sommaren 1878, Offers. K. Vet. Akad. FOrh., 1879,
XXXVI, pp. 21-37, maps.

B07.LA8 II D d



402


THE BALTIC AND THE KOBTH SEA [PAierm

of the facts, and obtained important results \ The work of Dr. Holmstrdm,
extending over many years, has not yet been published, but, with a rare
disinterestedness, he has had the kindness to furnish me with some of his
most important data ; in particular, the readings taken from thirty-three
gauges or marked rocks distributed round the Swedish coast ; he has also
provided me with a critical discussion of the relative importance and
value of the ancient marks of reference. I have also received much
valuable assistance towards the study of this phenomenon in Sweden from
my esteemed friend. Professor Nathorst of Stockholm.

Side by side with the work of Swedish investigators must be mentioned
the monthly mean levels recorded at eight stations on the coast of Finland,
some of which date from 1858. They have been published without
interruption by Moberg, and are of great importance in relation to this
question ^

As an essential preliminary, we must begin by distinguishing between
continuous series of measurements and occasional readings taken from
marks cut in the rocks.

Forssman gives tables of monthly means from 1852 to 1876 for thirteen
stations ; but five of these, it must be observed, are situated north of the
Aland islands, where, owing to the rigorous winter, no observations are
made during four to six months of the year. On the other hand, the
records kept in Finland, as far up as Rfinnskar, lat. 63° N., are complete
for each month.

As regards the occasional readings, a difiiculty arises from the fact
that wo have no knowledge of the mean level at the time they were
taken, and that the height of the water is affected by a number of local
and temporary circumstances. In Finland, transitory oscillations may
occur amounting to more than six feet in the course of a single year, that
is, to as much as the alleged negative displacement during a century and
a half. In connexion with this. Dr. Holmstrom writes, ‘ In the Cattegat the
so-called Tangrand occurs, that is, the highest continuous line on vertical
cliffs up to which Fucua veaictUosua growa The tang-line coincides very
closely with the level of mean tide, or that level which the people on the
coast call “ lagligt vatten.” It appears never to lie more than from 9 to 10
centimeters below the mean tide level, as directly observed at the light-
houses. In the Baltic, however, there is no tang-line, or at least it is not
well defined ; but on the other hand another line, the so-called Algrand,
is found there : this is the highest limit to which certain species of delicate
algae grow. In what relation this line stands to the mean tide level,

* L. A. Fomman, Observationer Sfver VattenhOjden vid Sveriges Kuster; OfVen. E.
Vet. Akad. FOrh., 1874, nj foljd, XIII, ii, 23 pp.

* A. Moberg, Om Finaka Kustens hejning under &ren 1858-1872 ; OfVers. Finska Vet.
Soc. Forh., XV, 1872-1873, pp. 118-128, and the tables in the following years.



•OH.X]


MONTHLY MEANS


403


or even whether it remains at the same height for several years, as the
tang'line certainly does, has not yet been determined.' Thus, not only
scientific observations, but the statements of the inhabitants on the shore
are of more value in the Cattegat than in the wiek of Bothnia. *

We now pass to the series of continuous observations. From these
Foissman has already obtained two very important results, which find
confirmation in observations made elsewhere.

The first is derived from the monthly means. ' Every year the mean
level of the sea fluctuates with the seasons ; it does so from the islands
of Aland to the coasts of the Skager Back, or indeed as far as the Swedish
coast extends. The curves are uniform, and the incomplete curves
obtained from the region north of the Aland islands, where wiAter
observations arc wanting, adapt themselves to the others. Towards the
Cattegat, however, the maximum is felt later than elsewhere. In the
Baltic low water occurs in April and May; then the level rises along
the whole east coast of Sweden, attains a considerable height in July and
August, and remains high until November or December, when it be^ns
to fall once more. In the Cattegat the maximum is reached somewhat
later — towards the end of September or the beginning of October, and is
more quickly over. The curves of changing level on the east coast corre-
spond, however, to the annual variations in the rainfall, as determined by
Bubenson h

In connexion with this question it may not be without interest to
observe that lake Ladoga, as shown by Woeikof’s tables, is as equally
subject to seasonal oscillations as the Baltic *. But even outside the Baltic
the influence of the seasons on the level of the water still makes itself felt
on the less saline stream of the Baltic water which flows along the west
coast of Sweden.

The monthly means show that as regards the seasonal oscillations the
Baltic stands as a middle term between the Bussian lakes and the Skager
Back.

The second result obtained by Forssinan is derived from the yearly
means. So far as yearly means have been determined, that is from the
lock of Stockholm to the station of Nord Koster in»the north of the
Cattegat, the yearly oscillations present a remarkable uniformity. In
1853 the level was everywhere low, in 1854 everywhere high; then it
sank ; in 1857 there was a low level from Stockholm to Ystad, but, as an
exception, this did not extend into the Cattegat ; the succeeding depression
of 1860, however, was felt on both coasts, and equally so the well-marked

I

^ R. Rubenson, Nederb^rdsm&ngden i Sverige, tom. cit., No. 10; of. in particular pi. i,
fig. 1, in Rubenson with fig. 1 in Forssman.

* A. Woeikof, Schwankungen dcs Wasserspiegels der grossen amerikanischen Seen und
des Lodoga-Sees ; Zeitsohr. Osterr. Ges. Meteor. Wien, 1881, XVI, pp. 287-290.

D d 2



404


THE BALTIC AHD THE NOBTH SEA^ [pabtox

mazimum of 1868, as well as the fall which occurred towards 1871, the
high level of 1878, and especially of 187A and finally the low level of 1876.
The curves for the Cattegat are of less amplitude.

We obtain a much better conception of the whole when we take into
account the observations made in Finland. Exceptional phenomena are
of special importance, by reason both of the perturbation they introduce,
and of the manner in which this perturbation is propagated. The most
extreme of these perturbations was the great fall in the yearly mean level
of 1874 to 1876; this I have attempted to represent on Plate III. The
fall on the Finnish coast at Rbnnskar (lat. 63° N.) amounted to 26<1 centi-
meters ; at L5k5 lotsplats (lat. 60° 64' N.) to 26.3 cm. ; at Ut6 lotsplats to
24*1 cm. ; at Jnngfrusunds lotsplats (lat. 69° 66' N.) to 28*8 cm. ; at Hang5
Udd’s inre lotsplats (lat. 69* 48' N.) to 25 cm. ; at Hang5 Udd’s fjrrbik, at
the entrance to the gulf of Finland, to 26*1 cm. ; at Porkala lotsplats to
25*5 cm. ; and at SSderskars fyrb&k to 24 cm. The northern stations
of Sweden are, as we have seen, summer stations, but the broken curves
given on Plate III for Maldm (lat 66* N.) and Svartklubben (lat. 60* 10' N.)
show that this group of stations reveals quite analogous movements,
though they do not embrace either the maxima or minima. This defi-
ciency is sufficient by itself to render them useless for the determination
of a mean.

These means gave a fall of 26*7 cm. for Malom in 1876, and for all other
stations of over 20 cm. ; the lock of Stockholm gave 22 cm. At the other
stations along the Swedish coast the records are broken, strange to say,
just at the minimum which occurred in April, 1876, as though the apparatus
had been inadequate to record so unusual a fall (Gronskar, Claud’s
Norre Udde, also Hallo in the Cattegat; Utklippan is only a summer
station). Ystad showed only 13*9 cm., Swinemilnde 4*88 cm., Travemilnde
6*76 cm., Winga in the Cattegat (lat. 67° 38' N.) 6'3 cm., Nord Koster
(lat. 68° 64' N.) somewhat higher, 8-0 cm., due probably to Hie influence
of the Norwegian rivers.

These data reveal the wide distribution of the disturbance and at the
same time its progressive exhaustion towards the so^ith. The latter
character plainly displays itself in the contrast betwe^ the steep curves
of the north (Plate III) and of the whole coast of Finland to Sbderskars
fyrbak, and the much flatter curves of Ystad or the Catt^at.

Further, a curve is given on Plate III, next to that plotted from
Moberg’s figures for Hangb Udd’s fyrb&k (1878 to 1876), to show the rain-
fall at Helsingfors according to the tables of Borenius. It will be seen
that in 1873 the minimum rainfall of February was not followed by the
minimum of level till March and April ; next, in October, 1873, there was
an unusually heavy rainfall of 139 mm., the effect of which was first
manifested as a high level in December and January, and subsequently.



West Coast


eH.x]


OSCILLATIONS OF THE MEANS


405


as the water flowed away, in a reduced minimum for 1874 ; and thus it
happened that in 1874 the minimum rainfall of February was not followed
till May by a minimum level, and then only by an exceptionally feeble
one ; at the same time the mean level for 1874 was unusually high, anti
indeed somewhat higher than that for 1873, the year in which the great
rainfall of October had occurred. In January, 1875, the curves for rain-
fall and water level were both low ; the minimum followed in March, but
the low value of the mean level for 1875 did not result from this minimum,
but from the very small amount of rainfall and the very low level of
water during the whole summer, autumn, and winter of 1875.

The drop in the annual curves from 1874 to 1875 is thus no doubt
dependent on the rainfall ; but it is precisely with this drop that Forssman’s
curves happen to end, and consequently the mean value of the negative
displacement as calculated by him is much too high.

It is believed that the annual means for 1852 to 1875 furnish evidence
of a general negative movement of the strand-line. This is no doubt the
case ; but if we divide the twenty-four yearly means into six groups of
four years each, we shall find a negative value for the first, a positive for
the second, and negative values for the remaining four groups.

Thus, in addition to the seasonal oscillations revealed by the monthly
means, there are others of greater amplitude and longer period. Although
we have no correspondingly long series of observations in the case of lake
Ladoga, yet, according to Tillo and Woeikof, oscillations of long duration
occur here also ; and in this connexion attention may be called to the fact
that the Neva alone contributes to the Baltic region an annual supply of
fresh water estimated to amount to about 94 cubic kilometers

Such, then, is the nature of the movement of the tstrand-line in the
Baltic. Apart from local or temporary influences, such as atmospheric
pressure, the driving force of the wind, and direct radiation from the sun,
there is, on the one hand, a seaeonal oscillation, largely dependent on rain-
fall and thaw, and on the other an oscillation of longer period effecting
the successive annual means, and characterized at the present day by a
preponderant, though not constant, negative value. Further, the oscilla-
tions have a larger amplitude in the north than in the^south.

It may be observed that the method of comparison hitherto employed
is not well adapted to the purposes of this inquiry, since the means are
given for the calendar years, and these embrace the second half of one
maximum and the first half of the next succeeding. Thus, as may be
seen from Plate III, the yearly mean for 1874 includes two maxima, one

I

^ A. Woeikof, Les Rivieres et les lacs de la Russie, Arch. sci. phjs. et nat. Geneve,
1885, 8® s^r., XIII, p. 45 et seq. ; A. von Tillo, Die MeereshOhe dor Seen Ladoga, Onega
und Ilmen, und das Oefftlle des Ladoga-Sees, Bull. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-P^tersb., 1886,
XXX, pp. 445-448.



406 THE BiLLTIO Aim THE NOBTH SEA [PA»rm

for 1878 to 1874, and the other for 1874 to 1875, and in the northern
stations this is especially marked. WoeikoFs Mini m.! means for lake
Ladoga are calculated by phases, i.e. from June to May.

' The uniformity now known to characterize the oscillations lends
increased importance to the long series of exact observations made since
1825 at the lock of Stockholm. In this series, also, we 'perceive an
alternation of positive and negative signs, but on the whole the negative
values are slightly in exoesa Thus out of the fifty differences between the
fifty-one annual means from 1825 to 1875 we find twenty-three positive
and twenty-four negative ; and three times only have the successive annual
means been equal. The sum of the twenty-three upward displacements
amounts to -M42 cm., of the twenty-four downward displacements to
—189 cm.; there thus remains a negative excess of —47 cm. But this
is only the difference between the two mean levels of 1825 and 1875. If,
as Forssman has done, we apply to the whole series of observations
a rectilinear equation, smd then proceed according to the method of least
squares, the difference is reduced from —47 to —18*7 cm., and this result
again is affected by the exceptional minimum of 1875.

These considerations show with what caution those data must be used
which rest only on occasional observations of marks cut in the rocks. The
value attaching to observations of this kind, however, lies in the great length
of the periods they embrace, since they indicate the positive or negative
character of the excess which remains after addition of the movements
of opposite signs, but the precise value of this excess cannot be determined
from them.

4. General account of the negative dieptacement. We will now attempt
to give a general account of the observations so far as they have been
recorded up to the present time ; we^shall consider the records both of the
stations where daily observations are made and of the summer stations
in the north ; and as well the isolated observations on marks, making use
for this purpose of the information so kindly provided by Dr. Holmstriim ;
we shall also take into account the results obtained in Norway and Finland.
The average negative displacement which may be deduced for each year,
on the assumption that the movement is uniform, will be given in centi-
meters and enclosed in parentheses.

In 1839, at the suggestion of Schive, a number of places on the coast of
Norway were provided with marks, and in 1865 Boll concluded from the
marks on the southern part of the coast that the mean level had risen.
The marks on the Atlantic coast, owing to the great range of the tides,
yielded no results of any value, but at each of the seventeen stations between
Stavanger and Moss, or along the whole north coast of the Skager Rack,
a fairly marked negative displacement was indicated ; it amounted on the
whole to 7 or 8 cm. in twenty-six years (about 0*3). Boll, however, expressly



GH.X] THE NEGATIVE DISPLACEMENT 407

states that the number of ob6ervati(m8 was too nnall to give any real
importance to this result \

On the east coast of the Cottegat are situated the three stations of
continuous observation, Nord Koster, Hallo, and Winga, previously
mentioned; reference has already been made to the correspondence of the
oscillations recorded by them with those on the Swedish coast of the
Baltic during the peri<^ 1825 to 1876. Some earlier marks also occur on
this coast, and Holmstrom obtained fresh measurements from them in
1886; according to his observations the results for 1847 to 1866 may
be regarded as trustworthy, and for this period a negative displacement
of 16 to 20 cm. (0>4-0*6) is found. The oldest mark on this coast was set
up by Cronstrand at Marstrand in the year 1770 ; it has often serv^ as
a reference. This gives for 1770 to 18^ a negative movement of about
66 1 cm. (0*47 1) On the Vaderbame (lat. 68° 86' N.), situated at some
distance from the coast, special conditions seem to be dominant. Forsell
established a mark in 1804; Lovdn in 1860 found — 69'61 (1*8 ?), and
later measurements by Holmstrdm gave for 1860 to 1867 — 18'6 cm. (0*79),
and for 1867 to 1886 — 18<6 cm. (0*7), indicating a greater negative dis-
placement than at the neighbouring stations. In this locality, Fjallbacka,
a place already mentioned, is situated, and in its harbour the rock of
Oudmundskaret, to which Linnaeus appealed in proof of emergence. In
1582 this rock was covered by the sea; in 1662 it projected a little, but its
exposed summit was then so small that it could be covered with a hat ; in
1867 Holmstrom found that it had attained a height of about 131 cm.
above the tang-line. This is certainly the most striking example on the
whole coast of Sweden.

Dr. Holmstrom points out that a perpendicular cliff, 250 feet high,
rises above Fjallbacka; it is traversed by a fissure about 2 meters wide,
opening down to a great depth, and certainly more recent than the glacial
deposits which crown its summit. This, he considers, indicates a dislocation
still in progress within the mountain moss, and furnishes an explanation
of the local inequality in the movement of the strand-line.

The fact may be recalled that it was precisely in the neighbourhood of
these islands, distinguished by so marked a negative movement, that Ekmon
encountered waters of different composition; a slight change in the pre-
vailing course of the currents might in course of time have helped to
increase the differences.

Near Varberg (lat. 67° 6' N.) we reach the last point at which measure-
ments have been made on this coast ; and no data have been obtained from

I

* Roll, Vandstandsobservationer, udgivet af den norske Gradmaalingakommission,
I. Heft, 4to, Christiania, 1882, p. 9.

* Two lines exist from 1770, the significance of which is not quite clear ; I follow
Holmstrdm’s interpretation.



408


THE BALTIC AND THE NORTH SEA [pabtih

Scania. The little island of Saltholm, near Copenha|;en, has long been
cited as a proof of the constancy of the sea-level; it is submeiged in
autumn and winter, and dry only in summer, and thus lies within the
limit of the annual oscillations ; yet we find it mentioned as early as the
year 1280 I am not aware of any recent examination into the facts ;
but it may be pointed out that the southern entrance of the Sound and the
Sound itself act towards the outflow of the Baltic in the same way as
the opening in a dam, and conditions other than those of an open basin, .
dependent on the pressure and velocity of the discharge, determine the
vertical height of the issuing water. Passing disturbances, such as storms,
arc lost for the greater part in the averages on which the curves are based ;
by these curves the correspondence between the oscillations on the east
coast and the west is brought to light, and by them also it is shown that
the oscillations must necessarily be propagated through the Sound, even if
they do not continue to maintain the same amplitude.

The accounts at my disposal with regard to Ystad are contradictory ;
on the coast of Blekingen a negative displacement of unknown amount
occurs. As to Skallb, near Kalmar (lat. 56° 41' N.), we learn that
Wikstriim, after making daily observations for many years with a view
to determining the mean level, placed a mark here in 1760 ; subsequently
Frigelius in 1802, and Siljestrdm in 1844, found that the mean level almost
exactly coincided with the ancient mark. It is, perhaps, hard to say
whether the conditions which prevail in the narrow strait of Kalmar
resemble those which seem to exist in the Belt, or what other significance
must be assigned to these ancient observations; it is certain that Holm-
stroni found a negative movement here also to the extent of 17 cm. from
1844 to 1886 (0*4). The values found by Forssman for Utklippan (0>67),
a summer station in lat. 55° 57' N., and for Oeland’s Norre Udde (0*23) in
lat. 57° 22' N., from the period 1852 to 1875, 1 will not venture to compare
with Holmstroin’s results, since they were obtained by calculation.

Towards the north, as far as Landsort (lat. 58° 45' N.), there was
formerly a general negative movement, but at the last-named place it has
been thought that of late years signs of a positive movement are to be
found ; the facts, hoij^ever, are not definitely established.

Stockholm (lat. 59° 19' N.) has already been discussed ; the neighbour-
ing stations, Grfinskar (lat. 59* 17' N.) and Yedlosa (lat. 59° 51' N.), give
results which correspond completely with those of Stockholm. According
to Nordenskiold and Forssman the movement at Stockholm from 1774 to
1825 amounted to —30 cm. (0*59), from 1825 to 1852 to —11 cm. (0-41),
and from 1852 to 1875 to —8 cm. (0*82), or altogether to —49 cm. in 101
years (049).

* K. von Hoff, Geschichte der natflrlichen Ver&nderungen, I, p. 439 ; Lyell, Principles,
11th ed., II, p, 181 et passim.



CH.X] SWEDEN AND FINLAND 409

Farther north on the Swedish coast we have now only marks and
summer stations^ At Djursten’s fyr (lat. 60” N.), Forssman calculates

for 1862 to 1875 only — 3 cm. (0<13) ; this point lies just above the sea of
Aland, but calculations based on the observations of summer stations
cannot be used for comparison. Whether this deep is a colk, perhaps
caused by ice, is a question that might be worth investigation. From this
locality the extent of the negative movement appears to increase towards
the north. At Ldfgrundet (lat. 60° 45^ N.), where a mark exists made by
Budman in the year 1731, the movement has already become considerable ;
it is particularly well marked in latitudes 63° and 64° N., amounting to
more than 1-0 cm. in a year, but since 1850 there has been a falling off.
The largest total difference is shown by the rock in Ratan (lat. 64° N.)
marked by Hellant; this gives —123 cm. for the period 1749 to 1869, or in
120 years. Here we are already within the Quarken. In Storebben (lat.
65° 15' N.) another mark was set up by Hellant in 1750 ; the observations
may be interpreted in two ways, giving for the interval 1750 to 1869
either —122 cm. (1*02) or —155 cm. (1*3). In any case, the movement at
this point is very considerable, but here again the readings show a falling
off during the last few decades. Malom’s fyr (lat. 65° 32' N.) has only
been under observation since 1852 ; the displacement calculated by Forss-
man is only —8 cm. (0*32).

On the west coast of Finland, Holmstrom lays special stress on the
marks erected by Klinzius in 1755 at Berg6 (Vaigo, lat. 63° N.) and
Bonnskar (30 kilometers further to the north-west) ; they indicate a par-
ticularly uniform movement ; thus the record of Bergd gives from 1755 to
1785, according to Schult^n, —43 cm. (1'43), from 1785 to 1797, accord-
ing to C. P. Hallstrom, —12 cm. (1*20), from 1797 to 1821, according to
Brodd, — 35 cm. (1-46), and from 1821 to 1852, according to Stjemcreutz,
— 11*5 cm. (0*35); or in all from 1755 to 1852 a movement of —96-5 cm.
(1-0). The record of Bonnskar from 1755 to 1797 is, according to Hall-
strom, — 50*6 cm. (1*20), and from 1797 to 1821, according to Brodd, -34*5
cm. (1*44).

At the castle of Abo (lat. 60° 25' N.) Gadolin determined the water-level
in 1750 ; in 1841 it stood 62*5 cm. lower (0*57). Jud^g from the oljserva-
tions for 1858 to 1872 and the position of the ancient marks, Moberg in
1873 concluded that a movement of 59*67 cm. in the century had occurred.
The steep, but yet uniform, curves obtained for Finland from the observa-
tions made since that date have already been referred to.

Moberg’s observations were made not only on the west coast of Finland,
but also over a large part of the north coast of the gulf of Finland. At the
head of the gulf, near the ch&teau of Monplaisir, not far from Peterhof,
F. Schmidt found distinct traces of a negative movement, and others not
quite so evident near castle Tolsburg, not far from port Eunda on the south



410


THE BALTIC AND THE NORTH SEA [PABTin

coast of the gulf. On the other hand, east coast of Oesel has not
furnished any definite evidence

Further south the movement appears to decrease, and after much fluctua-
tion of opinion it is now agreed that the long-continued observations on the
German coasts prove that in course of time the secondary oscillations com-
pletely balance each other, and consequently that there is no ^ntinuous
movement of the mean level either in a positive or a negative direction.

Thus, then, in Sweden and Finland there is everywhere negative move-
ment along the coast, but it was more marked in the eighteenth century
than the ninteenth. Still, even where it attained its highest value, and
where the evidence can be traced back for over a century, it does not
amount to more than — 1!23 cm. (Ratan, lat. 64‘ N.), or perhaps —155 cm.
(Storebben, lat. 65® 15' N.); to these loci of maximum movement we
may add Gudmundskaret near the Fjallbacka in the Cattegat, with a
probable value of — 160 cm., but this displacement may stand in some
connexion with local conditions.

It is in the north that the indications are most strongly marked.
At Stockholm the negative movement may still be clearly perceived, but it
is not so great as on the opposite coast at the entrance of the gulf of
Finland, whence so much fresh water is discharged. The movement is
continued along the coast of Sweden, with an unexplained interruption at
Calmar, wliich occurred during the earlier years of observation. It extends
to beyond Carlskrona, but from the south accounts are defective or uncertain.
In the Sound it seems to be far feebler ; then it reappears and continues
with great uniformity, though in diminished amount (except on the Vade-
roame), along the coast of the Cattegat, always accompanying the outflow
from the Baltic ; obscure traces of the movement also occur along the south
coast of Norway to beyond Lindesnas and towards Stavanger, or as far as
the less saline water of the Baltic can be traced as an independent current.

On the opposite coasts of Denmark and Germany not a sign of this
movement is to be detected; in this region a freer interchange of water
takes place through the Belts; as far as Pillau the Baltic stands at the
same level as the Ocean, and no movement, negative or positive, is to be
discerned. »

The question now arises whether it is possible to discover a ch'onological
limit to this great process. Browallius cites against Celsius the fact that
in west Finland very aged trees are to be seen at a trifling height above
the sea : the numbers he gives are taken from an account by Gadd. A pine,
310 years old, was to be seen at Biemfl, rooted two yards above the surface of
the water ; if the sea, Browallius remarks, actually sinks forty-five inches in

' F. Schmidt, Einige Mittheilungen ilbcr die gegenw&rtigen KenntniBse der glacialen
und post-glacialen Bildungen im silurigchen Gebiet von Eethland, Oesel and Ingerman-
land ; Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1884, XXXVI, p. 272.



OHBONOLOGIOAL LIMIT


411


oh.x3

a century, then this tree must have been seated under water for 220 years ;
similar conclusions were obtained from a pine near Hitis in the Kirchen
sund, 282 years old, one yard above the water, oaks 800 years old, three
yards above it, and from other examples K Although the measurements of
the height above the water are evidently only approximate, yet they give
fairly exact information as to a fact of great importance. The observations
have never been disputed ; on the contraiy, Lyell himself affirms that he
has seen extremely ancient oaks near Stockholm only eight feet above the
water Hdgbohm has made measurements bearing on the question in
Westerbotten, a part of the Swedish coast where the movement is greatest.
Here in sheltered spots the sea is bordered by a bare strip of land, which
marks the limit of the yearly- oscillation ; above this comes a narrow belt of
alders, then the fir woods. At Kallwiken, firs fifty-five to sixty years old
stand three feet above the belt of alders. Assuming that the annual
oscillations have remained the same, then the negative movement during
the last fifty years cannot have amounted to more than three feet, i.e.
89 cm.^ The readings from the marks lie within this limit.

Let us now return to the earlier observations, and take for example the
years 1730 to 1740 as the mean date of the most important observations of
Celsius, Linnaeus, and Browallius. At this epoch, Celsius estimated the
negative movement at 4*5 feet in a century, or 1*33 cm. per year. The
readings obtained from the rock of Ratan (lat. 64° N.) gave 1<14 cm.
per year for the years 1749 to 1774, and those from the rock of Storebben
(lat. 65“ 15' N.) gave 143 cm. for the yeara 1750 to 1785. On the west
coast of Finland the displacement for about the same period should be
1*2 cm. There is thus a somewhat close correspondence with the estimate
of Celsius. But it is impossible to reconcile the assumption of the per-
sistence of this movement in the remote past with the observations of
Browallius on the position of ancient trees. As early as 1700, Davidson
established a mark in the north of the gulf ; and in 1702 Hjame published
observations on a fall of the water level, which, according to contemporary
accounts, must have been very striking ; but during the last decennium of
the nineteenth century a general falling ofi‘ of this movement has made
itself evident. ^

Thus it would appear that the movement was particularly rapid at the
end of the seventeenth and the beginning of the eighteenth century, and is
now diminishing.

The conclusions to which Qrewingk was led as to the result of a study

* Browallius, Historische und physikalische Untersuchung, p. 241 et seq.

’ C. Lyell, On the Proofs of a gradual Bising of the Land in the Central Parts of
Sweden ; Phil. Trans., 1835, CXXV, p. 13.

* A. G. Hflgbom, Om sekulftra hcjningen vid Yesterbottens Kust ; Geol. FOren. Stockh.
FOrh., 1887, IX, pp. 19-25.



412


THE BALTIC AND THE NOETH SEA [PABTin

of some prehistoric remains are also worthy of consideration; they are
by no means opposed to the existence of a negative movement, but are
certainly inconsistent with the assumption of a constant rate. The signs
of negative movement at castle Tolsburg, on the sooth side of the golf of
Finland, have already been mentioned. Not far above Tolsburg, however,
there occurs at Kunda, 180 feet above the sea, a white calcareous marl,
the deposit of a fresh-water lake, containing abundant remains of a tribe
which lived by fishing and the chase, together with bones of a gigantic
pike. The age of the settlement is estimated at about 2,000 years, but
Judging from the rate of negative movement now in progress on the coast
of Finland, the lake of Kunda 2,000 years ago must have been submerged
beneath the sea, and even if we take only half the present rate we obtain
the same result. Rising near the river Salis, which flows from Bustneck
into the gulf of Riga, is a hill known as the Rinne, an elongated mound
of kitchen debris ; this affords evidence against any considerable displace-
ment of the strand-line, such as would result from the accumulated effects
of centuries. On the other hand, judging from the presence of oysters in
the kitchen middens, Baer has concluded that at the exits of the Baltic,
particularly in Zealand and Funen, the sea was salter than at present.
The castles of Werder (built 1284) and Arensberg (built 1221) give the
impression, according to Qrowingk, of a state of things which has suffered
no appreciable change for many centuries ^

Thus we arrive at the following results ; —

The Baltic, together with the gulfs of Bothnia, Finland, and Riga, is
supplied by numerous rivers with a vast volume of fresh water ; its com-
munication with the Ocean is more or less restricted ; and it consequently
possesses a very low degree of salinity. In its more remote parts the water
is fresh enough to drink. Strong currents move from the inner gulfs
towards the Baltic. In the Belts there are under-currents of salt water
and upper currents of less salinity which flow outwards ; salt water only
exceptionally passes through the Sound into the Baltic. A stronger current
of Baltic water proceeds &om the Sound along the coasts of Scandinavia
towards cape Lindesnas and the Ocean.

The sea along the Gennan coasts, except at Memel, stands at the same
height as the Ocean ; in the north no recent determinations of level have
been made ; the ancient observations show a considerably higher level of
the water in the gulf of Finland, and a still higher in the gulf of Bothnia.

A negative movement now in progress may bo traced from the wiek
of Bothnia and the gulf of Finland, along the whole coast of Sweden as

’ C. Grevingk, Die neolithischen Bewohner von Kunda in Esthland, Verb, geol.-
esthnisch. Gee. Dorpat, 1884, XII, pp. 1-133, maps; K. von Baer, Ueber ein neues
Project, Austernbilnke an der ruggischen Ogtseekttgte anzulegen, Bull. Acad. Imp. Sci.
Saint-P6tergb., 1862, IV, pp. 35-47.



418


OH.X] NOT ELEVATION, BUT EMPTYING

£ar as the Ska^r Back; it is perhaps continued along the coast of Norway
to cape lindesnas and Stavanger. It follows the current of less saline
water flowing out of the Baltic. On the coasts of Jutland and Germany
there is no movement. In the narrow parts of the Sound it appears to he
very inconsiderable.

The monthly means on the coast of Finland and the east coast of
Sweden show an annually recurring oscillation. The rise of the curve is
caused by the swelling of the rivers during the breaking up of the ice and
the melting of the snow and the fall of rain. The same curve is given by
the monthly means of the west coast, but with a somewhat later rise of
less duration. Off the coast three layers of water may be distinguished —
the uppermost, formed by the fresh water of the neighbouring rivers, as
much as two fathoms in depth, beneath it the outflowing Baltic current,
and below this again the heavier bottom water of the Cattegat.

The curves of the annual means for 1852 to 1875 reveal, according
to Forssman, a remarkable correspondence between the oscillations of the
east coast and those of the west, high yearly means on the east coast
always corresponding to a high level on the west coast, and so on. The
curves on the west coast are, however, not so steep as those on the east.
At the Fjallbacka some local influence makes itself felt.

Judging from the evidence afforded by ancient trees, the negative
movement must have been very pronounced towards the close of the
seventeenth century; it continued through the eighteenth century, and
is now diminishing. This negative phase can hardly have set in very
much before the end of the seventeenth century.

The conclusion to be drawn from these facts is, in my opinion, that
Nordenanker, Chambers, and Stjerncreutz have rightly interpreted this
phenomenon. It is a question of climatology and hydrostatics, not of
tectonic geology. That which happens is an emptying ovi of the water,
not a rise of the land. Even if we were willing to concede so extensive
an elevation of the lithosphere, we should still be unable to explain why
this movement should be restricted solely to the region of the Swedish
coast and of the outflowing Baltic current, while on those coasts where
there is a more active interchange of water, i.e. the coasts of Denmark
and Germany, it is absolutely imperceptible. The monthly means, with
their seasonal variations, show in an irrefutable manner that the level of
the water is dependent on the drainage from the land; and the annual
means of the east and west coasts of Sweden reveal a uniformity in the
continual oscillation of positive and negative displacements which is
absolutely irreconcilable with movements of the lithosphere.

Nordenanker left unsolved the question whether the deci’ease in the
volume of the water is due to diminution of the supply, or to an enlarge-
ment of the exits. If the latter were the case, then the volume of the



414


THE BALTIC AND THE NORTH SEA [pABrm

outflowing current should have increased at the mouth of the Sound ; but
it is decreasing, consequently there must be a decrease in the supply. The
abatement of the negative movement now in progress ought to find
e,xpres8ion in a gradual increase in the rainfall. Unfortunately we do
not possess trustworthy data on which to base an inquiry as to a secular
change of rainfall in this region. Rubenson finds that the older records
kept at neighbouring localities are contradictory, and consequently useless.
Blytt has been led by various considerations to conclude, and certainly
with good reason, that Scandinavia has passed through great climatic
changes, but we cannot determine with certainty the nature of the existing
phase. The data bearing on the Scandinavian glaciers collected by Heim
scarcely lead to any definite result. Svenonius has found traces of extinct
pine forests at many places in Lapland ; they occur even above the region
of birches, and sometimes extend many miles beyond the existing pine
forests of the present day. Places exist, which the Lapps call ‘ tsuoptsa,’
where a large patch of snow lies from year to year : in the heat of summer
the reindeer are driven to these spots. According to the statements of
the Lapps the tsuoptsa have been gaining in size and number within the
memory of man. It would seem, however, that certain climatic phases
affect the entire globe’.

The monthly oscillations attain their greatest range in the wiek of
Bothnia, owing to the influx of fresh water which pours in from the east
and west, and because the conditions are there least favourable to equaliza-
tion. The negative movement, which is disclosed as the final result of the
collective observations of a century, is strongest in the north because, under
the conditions already described, the general slope of the Baltic waters has
changed, and this finds its clearest expression in those parts which lie most
remote from the exits. It was at one time believed that the elevation of
the land continued to increase still further to the north, and was greatest
at the North cape ; but neither from the North cape nor from any other
locality on the north and west coast of Norway do I know of any con-
vincing proof of a negative movement at present in progress.

Special attention was directed to this absence of evidence by Erdmann
and Lovdn in 1850, when, in the remarkable treatise already mentioned,
they prepared the way for the new system of measurements ^ In their
opinion the Baltic must certainly be regarded as an inland sea, in which
the surplus of fresh water is obstructed in its outflow by land and islands,

* A. Blytt, On Variations of Climate in the coarse of Time, Christiania Vid. Selsk.
FOrh., 1886, No. 8, pp. 21-24, and in many other publications ; A. Heim, Handbuch der
Gletscherkunde, 8vo, Stuttgart, 1885, p. 517 ; Svenonius, Studier vid Svenska Jfiklar,
Sver. geol. UndersOk., ser. C, No. 61 (and Geol. Ffiren. Stockh. FOrh., 1884, No. 85, VII),
pp. 1 to 36, map.

* Krdmann och Loven, Ofvers. K. Vet. Akad. Fdrh., 1850, VII, p. 45.



DECREASE IN INFLUX


416


OH. Z]

and in which the level most probably does not coincide with that of the
Ocean; they discuss the question of a decrease in the influx and of the
slope, but conclude that the vast surface of the Baltic could scarcely be
influenced by these factors to the extent indicated by the marks. Under
any circumstances it is impossible to determine the extent to which the
land is elevated, until the value of the possible fall of the water level is
definitely known. The inequalities of the movement indicated by the
ancient marks must be referred to movements of the land itself, and may
perhaps stand in causal connexion with local earthquakes.

The results obtained by Dr. Holmstrom, to whom I am indebted for so
much valuable information, tend in the same direction, but are much more
definitely expressed. The di^lacements on the west coast of Sweden, as
on the coast of Finland, correspond so closely that they can scarcely be
referred to movements of the lithosphere. Yet certain facts are known
on the west coast of Sweden (Fjallbacka) which render it probable that
local dislocations of the earth’s crust, perhaps of the nature of faults, also
occur K

A local dislocation of this kind, whether it can be proved to exist at
Fjallbacka or not, is a vciy different thing from that uniform elevation of
the mainland extending to beyond the North cape which was imagined
by von Buch, or from that tilting movement of the whole peninsula which
Lyell thought he could recognize.

Thus, as regards the general secular elevation of the Scandinavian
peninsula, the source and origin of the theory of elevation, definite evidence
is entirely wanting. The uniformity of the oscillations, which, save for
rare exceptions, is ever being rendered increasingly apparent by the recent

* With re^rd to a second case to be referred here. Dr. Holmstrdm writes : ‘ Near
SOdra St&cket (lat. 59° 18' £., south-east of Stockholm) the Sound between VermdOn and
the continent was cleared in 1704 to facilitate navigation. A mark was then carved on
each side of the Sound at the same height, twelve feet above the surface of the water. In
1855 these marks were measured, and it was found that they were not at the same height,
but one of them was 1-16 feet (84-5 cm.) higher than the other, the two marks standing
respectively 14-95 and 13-79 feet above the surface of the water. A measurement made
in 1879 gave the heights as 14-73 and 13-67 feet, i. e. a difference of 1-06 feet (31-5 cm.).
The measurements of 1855 and 1879 are thus very nearly the same. If the measurements
in 1704 were correct, then these two points, which are about isfmeters apart, must have
been elevated unequally until 1855, i. c. the continent must have been raised 2-95 feet
(87 cm.) and the island 1-79 feet (52-25 cm.) in the course of 151 years, or, on an average,
0-58 and 0-35 cm. annually. From 1855 to 1879, on the other hand, no change of
importance took place in the relative position of the points, while their behaviour as
regards the sea-level indicates a subsidence rather than an elevation. These remarkable
observations on the unequal movement of points in such close proximity are so far
unique. ... No definite conclusion can be drawn from them.’ In anqther passage
Dr. HolmstrOm discusses the possibility of a fault. Erdmann believes that an error was
made in the original marking, and the probable source of the error is discussed by
BOrtzell in Ofvers. K. Vet. Akad., 1879, XXXVI, p. 87, note 2.



416


THE BALTIC AHD THE KOETH SEA [pabtux

daily observations, shows that the facts observed may be much better
explained by a diminution in the influx of this isolated basin, and the
evident dependence of the greatest disturbances of the water level on
exceptional variations in the rainfall clearly point in the same direc-
tion K

5. Submerged foretia and peat hogs of the North sea. The English
channel, that arm of the sea which separates England and France, is
broad in the west and grows narrower towards the east. Its depth
diminishes in the same direction, and near its narrowest part rises a sub-
marine ridge. The flood tide sweeps strongly into the Channel from the
west, and pours across the ridge into the North sea.

These facts led to the notion that the Channel itself was originally
a bay opening to the west, and that the tide, assisted by storms, had
destroyed a ridge of land which long ago united England with the con-
tinent. As early as 1717, Musgrave wrote: Concludimus . . . BrUanniam
non iam inde ah initio fuisse insulam, sed ex paene-insula factam : idque
ut videtur, a vento e saevioriJbus aliquo, cum maris aestu concurrente
et istUnvam perrumpente. Buache shared this view, and Desmarets
advocated it in an admirable treatise in 1761 ^

The Baltic has already shown us how difficult it is to pronounce with
certainty on events so remote, and also that a close examination of the actual
facts may bring to light a far greater complexity than might at first have
been expected. We have only to turn to the cliffs of Sangatte, near Calais,
to perceive that manifold alternations have occurred in the present case
also. At the top is a mixture of whole and broken flints in brown sand,
some three to seven meters in thickness; it contains no fossils. Below
is a bed fifteen to twenty meters thick, formed of chalk rubble with
irregular intercalations of sand; this has afforded Elephas primigenius,
Succinea ohlonga. Pupa, Hdix, and other fossils. We have here then
a terrestrial foimiation, with somewhat of a Loess fauna, exposed in the
cliffs along the coast and plainly indicating a fonner land connexion with
England. Beneath this bed, however, we find, according to Robbe and
Barrois, coarse marine sand with Purjmra lapiUus, LUtorina littorea,
TeUina baltica, and other species characteristic of the existing fauna of
the North sea. From this we must conclude that this region was occupied
by the sea before the land communication was established ; and we may

* E. Brttckner has recently come to the same conclusion ; Die Naturforscher, published
by 0. Schumann, 4to, Tubingen, 1887, pp. 291-293.

* W. Musgrave, De Britannia quondam paene Insula Dissertatio, Phil. Trans., London,
1717, XXX, pp. 589-632 ; N. Desmarets, L’Ancienne Jonction de I’Angleterre a la France,
on le Detroit de Calais, sa formation par la rupture de I’isthme, &c., Ouvr. cour. par
I’Acad. d’Amiens en I’anmie 1751 ; reprinted by MacKean & Go., 8vo, Paris, 1875,
map.



OIMBEIO FLOOD


OH. X]


417


observe in passing that the snoeession exposed here shows that the existing
marine fauna is older than the Mammoth \

Ancient tradition throws no light on the circumstances which led to
the isolation of Britain, for Vergil’s often quoted words, Penitus totb
ditrieoa orbe Briiannos, caxi scarcely be regarded as evidence. It is well
known also that about the year 830 ao. Fytheas of Massilia sailed through
the Channel. On the other hand, Nilsson thought he could recognize, in
the more important cases of inbreak and destruction on the coasts of the
North sea, traces of the Cimbric flood mentioned by many authors of
antiquity ; this catastrophe, which occurred somewhere about 360 to 850
ac., is said to have driven the Cimbrians to seek new dwelling-places, as
Florus writes: qwum terras .eorum Oceanvs inmuiassetK Many subse-
quent observers have supported Nilsson in this conjecture. England,
Holland, and the west of Denmark furnish us, however, with many records
relating to violent floods and irruptions of the sea which have occurred
since that time, and of which some traces still exist. They have sometimes
assumed the character of true deluges ; thus the flood of 1277, which gave
rise to the Dollart at the mouth of the Ems, destroyed forty-three parishes
and caused the death of 80,000 persons in Friesland ; or, again, the groaee
MandrankeL (great drowning of men) of September 8, 1362, which engulfed
thirty parishes, and tore away great parts of the islands of Sylt and F5hr.
The great flood of Christmas, 1717, drowned, according to the statements
of Arends and Eilker, 10,828 persons and 90,000 head of cattle. Such
numbers recall the terrible catastrophes in India ^

As regards the Zuyder Zee, Bakhuyzen and Pleyte give us the following
information : — The Flevus of Roman authors branched off from the Rhine
near Wageningen, below Arnheim, flowed through the bed of the Eem to the
Lacus Flevus, which consequently formed a part of the later Zuyder Zee,


* C. Barrois, Note sur la faune quaternaire de Sangatte ; Ann, Soc. gdol. du Nord,
1880, pp. 181-183.

* Nilsaon, Skandinaviska Nordens Ur-lnv&nare, I, Lund, 1838-1843, pp. 89-92, and
Sksndinavisk fauna, DSgs^ur, 2. uppl., 1847, Introduction, p. ix; Maak, Dio Dtlnen
Jtttlande, Zeitschr. f. allg. Erdkunde, Berlin, 1865, Neue Folge, XIX, pp. 204 et seq. ;
M. W. Fack, Die cimbneche Fluth in ihrer Einwirkung auf dewBoden von Kiel, Mitth.
naturw. Yer. Kiel, 1868, IX, &c. Tardy goes much further and attempts to prove that
opposite movements took place in the ninth oentuiy in the Flemish peat bogs and the-
buildings of Theodorich at Bavenna ; he even discovers a great flood in the twenty-third
century B.O., and identifles it with the Mosaic flood ; Compataison entre deux oscilla-
tions contemporaines. Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1874, 8” ser., II, p. 222 ; 1876, 3” s^r., IV,
pp. 326-329 ; and 1878, 3® s6r., VI, pp. 148-151.

^ For a list of ancient floods see Dumas- Vence, Notice sur lea cfttes de la Manche et
de la mer du Nord, Revue coloniale et maritime, Paris, 1876, XLVIII, p. 395 et seq. ; for
the east see A. Baudiasin, Blicke in die Zukunft der nordfriesischen Inseln, 8vo, Schleswig,
1867, pp. 55-78 et passim ; G. Eilker, Die Sturmfluthen in der Ostsee, 8vo, Emden, 1877,
p. 4 et seq. ; also p. 65 et seq., the history of the formation of the Dollart.

K e


■Ot.I,AS II



418 THE BALTIC AND THE NORTH SEA [PARrra

and then dischatged into the sea between Ylieland and Terschelling. The
enlargement of the Lacus Flevus proceeded bit by bit, and was certainly
far from complete in the year 1400. The remains of Roman constructions
tre situated about ten minutes’ walk beyond the dunes, near the mouth of
the Scheldt in Walcheren, near the mouth of the Meuse in Coedereede,
near the Altrhein at Katwijk, on the shores of the Flevus (Vlie), and
elsewhere. They are sometimes visible at very low water, showing that
the dunes have advanced further inland \

It is well known that in the course of years the wind and sea slowly
build up littoral embankments or bars, and that then the sea from time
to time breaks through them in a devastating irruption, again taking
possession of long tracts of the newly-formed land. With the knowledge
of these facts, however, a theory has arisen that oscillations of the solid
land have also occurred, and in support of this, attention is called to the
beds of shells, which indicate negative movement in prehistoric times, or as
still more convincing, the fact that at many parts of the coasts in question
forests and peat bogs, sometimes even a repeated alternation of peat and
marine sands, are now found lying beneath the level of the sea. Thus, in

1849, Godwin-Austen, with a view to showing that the English channel
owes its origin to a subsidence of the earth’s crust, elaborated a map on
which he indicated the numerous points at which, even at that early ^te,
forests and peat bogs were known to occur beneath the sea^ In 1872
Delesse expressed the opinion that the apparent subsidence of the coast
of the NetWlands was a result of the pressure exerted on the underl}dng
Tertiary clays by the gradual accumulation of alluvium ^ But tliis con-
jecture, as will appear directly, is not in harmony with the actual facts.
The phenomena, even at the present day, are still frequently regarded
as proofs of the subsidence of the lithosphere: they therefore demand
a searching examination.

It may be observed, to begin with, that these bogs and forests are much
more recent than the Sangatte beds mentioned above. They contain
Neolithic remains, numerous relics of the Bronze age, and sometimes even
traces of the Roman occupation. Worsaae, who has accomplished so much
in the study of this material, has called attention to the frequent presence
in the bogs of beautiful bronze vessels and other objects which have been
broken intentionally, and of swords also which appear to have been softened
and bent in the fire, as though they were votive offerings, rendered useless

* Bakhuyzen et Pleyte, Lettre a M. Faye; Compt. rend., Paris, 1883, XCVII, 1,
pp. 727, 728.

* R A. C. Austen, On the Valley of the English Channel ; Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc.,

1850, VI, pp. 69-97, map.

' Delesse, Les Oscillations des cOtes de la France ; Bull. Soc. g^ogr., 1872, 6“ 84r., Ill,
p. 14.



BOGS OF SCHLESWIG-HOLSTEIN


419


ca. z]


for secular purposes. As regards the submerged forests, Nathorst has
shown that on the coasts of the Baltic, as in western Holstein and the
Netherlands, they afford birch, fir, oak, and hazel, but never beech, which,
as is well known, was the last tree to establish itself in Denmark and
Scandinavia

Starting from Normandy these bogs and forests extend along the north
coast of Europe to Denmark, and they also occur at several localities in
the south part of the Baltic ; they are likewise visible at very many places
on the coasts of England and Ireland. The submerged bogs are frequently
continued inland with an upward slope and rise above the sea. The
depth to which they are known to extend below the sea-level is, as
a, rule, very inconsiderable, and seldom amounts to as much as eight or
nine meters.

To rightly interpret them wo must first turn our attention not to
submerged but existing peat bogs.

The mode of formation of lake bogs on the west coast of Schleswig
Holstein has been described by Maack. First of all, aquatic plants establish
themselves, such as Potamogeton, Nymphaca, and most important, Stratioten
aloidea. Their leaves form a thick coating on the surface of the water,
but this disappears in autumn. Next, however, a mantle of mosses begins
to form, and persists through the winter, increasing year by year in thick-
ness. This becomes overgrown by cranberry bushes ( Vacciniuvi oxycoccua),
and at length the alders root themselves in it. Thus the mantle of peat
moss fioats on the water of the bog. Such an unripe bog consists of
a layer of peat at the bottom, then the water of the bog, and a growing
layer of peat moss at the top. Not until the upper and bottom layer of
peat meet together is the bog ripe *.

Forchhammer gives a similar description; he speaks of the unripe or
quaking bog, which will scarcely bear the weight of a man, as a hammock
(Bangesacke) or see-saw (Schaukeln)®. Wo might almost imagine we had
here a reminiscence of the description written long ago by the unknown
author of the panegyric on Constantins Caesar: QuamqvMm Ula regia
divinia expediiionihua tuia, Caesar, vindicata atque purgata, quam obliquia
m&dihua Vaihalia interfluit quamque divortio aui ^Jienua amplectitur,

' J. J. A. Wonaee, Sor quelquea trouvailles de I’age de bronze faites dans les tour*
bieres, Mdm. Soo. roy. des Antiquaires da Nord, Copenhague, 1866, pp. 61 75 ; 6. A.
Nathorst, Om Sk^es NivStfSi-andringar, Geol. Fdren. Stockh. FOrh., 1874, 1, pp. 281-294.

* Von Maack, Das uigeschichtliche schleswig-hslsteinische Land ; Zeitschr. allg.
Erdkunde, Berlin, 1860, Neue Folge, VIII, pp. 1-30 and 112-140, map ; in particular
pp. 9, 14 et seq.

* G. Forchhammer, Om den forandrede VandhCide ved de danske Kyster ;'Nord. Univ.
Tidsskrift, Kjffbenh., 1856, 2. Aaig., pp. 1-23, in particular p. 7 ; trans. into German
by Sebald in Zeitschr. allg. Erdkunde, Berlin, 1856, Neue Folge, I, pp. 473-490>, in
particular p. 478.


£62



420


THE BALTIC AND THE NORTH SEA [PAiam

pome, vi cum verbi pericvlo loquar, terra non eet ; ita pemtvs aquie
imbuta permaduit ut non eolum qua memifeete paluetris eat ceded ad
niaum et hauriat preaaa vestigium,, sed etiam uhi patdo viddur firmior
pedum pulau temptata quatiodur et eentire se procud mota pomdae
testetur. . .

The Romans met with land o£ this kind on the lower Rhine. The
effects of an irruption of the sea into such a region may be easily con-
ceived. Even ripe bogs, however, contain a good deal of water, and it is
well known that when they are subjected to artificial drainage their
surface is considerably lowered. Skertchly has published some instructive
data as to this from the peat bogs of the Fenlands in the east of England.
The peat beds are in this case formed by Hypnum : Sphagnum is wholly
absent ; several successive forests are to be seen one above the other, and
some of the buried trunks belonged to trees of a century’s growth or
more. Draining produces great subsidence of these bogs ; thus a part of
Whittlesey mere, 5*5 meters in thickness, sank between the years 1848
and 1875 to the extent of 2'36 meters, losing not much less than half its
thickness

This tendency to sink after drainage is not confined, however, to peat
bogs; it affects also loose sediments saturated with water, such as occur
behind the littoral bars and beaches, and the drainage of such land is thus
sometimes beset with difficulties of a special chairacter. In the Dutch
polder farming the land is divided up into strips by long dykes and drained
by canala The water of the lagoons flows away to the level of low tide ;
where the range of the tides is considerable, the land I'eadily sinks below
the level of high water, and it requires careful management of the sluices
to prevent this. For want of this precaution the work of drainage begun
in the Lincolnshire Fens in 1814 at length reduced the land to so low
a level that it became permanently submerged, and somewhat heavy
showers of rain never succeeded in finding an outlet; consequently in
1867 it was found nccessaiy to resort to pumping. Similarly Count
Coronini describes the result of an attempt to drain the marshes of
Aquilegia. In 1765 four great polders with sluices were established, 4,410
yokes of land were thus reclaimed, and the sanitary condition of Aquilegia
was improved. This happy state of things did not last more than twenty
years. All the district has again returned to marsh with an average level

' Incerti Fanegyricus Constantio Caes. dictus, YIII. I write Vahalis after the ed.
Baehrens ; Gosselet and Bigaux quote the same passage and write Scaldis, following the
Codex Vaticanus, 1775; J. Gosselet et H. Rigaux, Mourement du sol de la Flandre
depuis les temps g^ologiques, Ann. Soc. g^ol. da Nord, 1878, V, pp. 218-226.

* Sydney B. J. Skertchly, The Geology of the Fenland ; Mem. Geol. Surv., London,
1877, in particular pp. 154-157; also Dalton, Subsidence in East Essex, Geol. Mag.,
1876, 2nd Ser., Ill, pp. 491-498, &c.



CH.X] SUBSIDENCE OF PEAT BOGS 421

of 0*79 meter below the high tide at normal springs, and of 0<16 meter
only above the low tide daring neaps ^

There is' yet another way in which peat bogs may subside, and to
even a still more considerable extent; this is by the yielding of theit
foundation.

Let us cast a glance at the picture given by Seelheim of the state of
things in the Netherlands. The peat bed at the mouths of the Scheldt
is a single layer, 0>7S to 2 meters thick, formed of marsh plants. It is
found over the whole of Walcheren, in south Bevelahd and Tholen, and on
the Flemish coast. It occurs at many places on the low coast of the
Netherlands, but chiefly about existing or ancient river mouths. In the
islands of Zealand it seems at first sight to be horizontal, but on closer
examination proves to have the form of a flat dome, being from 0*5 to 1*6
meters higher in the middle of the island than on the shores, where its
surface lies from 1*0 to 1*5 meters below mean tide, and only at a few
places reaches 0*3 to 0*4 meter above low tide. No doubt there has been
subsidence, Seelheim remarks, but it has been caused by the caving in and
lateral escape of the underlying sand. It is in consequence of this that
the peat bed of the islands possesses a convex surface, and is traversed by
fissures filled with dykes of sandy clay ‘as if it had had to act like
a mantle holding the masses of sand together*.’

The folds in the peat beds of the Fens, figured by Skertchly, are
probably to be explained in the same way.

In front, both of the Frische Nehrung and the coast of Pomerania,
the trunks of trees may be seen standing rooted in their natural position
down to six feet l)elow the level of the sea In the autumn of 1828, .
according to Hagen’s account, the shore in the vicinity of the fonner
communication of the Frische Half with the gulf of Danzig was violently
attacked by the .sea, and in those places where the dune sand was washed
away numerous roots and erect stumps of silver beech were to be seen at
the level of mean tide. Hagen supposes that the peat in the neighbour-
hood of the sea previously stood at a somewhat higher level, and was
overgrown with silver beech ; the weight of dune, in its advance towards
the interior, brought about a subsidence of the underling soil *.

' F. Graf Coronini, Ueber Boden-Meliorationen in GSrz; Eomers, Jahrb. Osterr.
Landwirthe, Frag, 1870, X, pp. 192-206, in particular p. 199.

* F. Seelheim, Beitrag zur Entetehungegeschichte der Niederlando; Verh. naturh.
Ver. preuss. Rheinl., Bonn, 1885, 5. Folge, II, pp. 381-403, pi. Seelheim has en-
countered colonies of Phiagmites in waters which contained more than 30 per cent, of
salt water; see his Sur les tourbi^res d’eau saum&tre. Arch. Nderland., 1878, XIII,
pp. 465-477. On the other hand Y^lain found Cardium edtUe, Cardium ruaticum, and
Solen living in water so fresh that the ship was able to use it for drinking water ; Bull.
Soc. g4ol. de Fr., 1878, 3* s4r., VI, p. 197.

* G. Hagen, Die preussische OstseekOste in Betreff der Frage ob dieselbe eine Hebung
Oder Senkung erkennen l&sst ; Abh. k. Akad. Wiss. Berlin, math. Abth., 1865, pp. 21-41.



422 THE BALTIC AND THE NORTH SEA [part m

Even from the little island of Qotska Sando, north of Gothland, an
^illustration has been given by Eisen and Stuxberg of a forest which has
thus been overwhelmed by the sand \

^ We recognize, then, three different ways in which subsidence may take
place, all of them depending on the nature of the bogs. Drainage, doubt-
less, seldom occurs in nature, and in any case only within the littoral
embankments ; isolated instances are, however, known in which a quaking
bog has slowly lost its water by permeation through adjacent sands, and
thus drained itself and subsided^. The caving in of the sand of the
islands occurs within areas lately invaded by the sea. The bogs and
forests forced downwards by the migration of the dunes are found on the
outer side of these moving sands. It is unquestionably true that in
England we often find above the peat a clay characterized by Scrobicularia
jjiperata, which only thrives in brackish water, or, as sometimes happens,
sand with Tellina baltica^ and indeed such beds not uncommonly occur
in repeated alternation with the peat \ It is also true that examples of
this alternation are likewise known in France, and that in the Wattenmeer
of Holstein the bogs, indeed even the quaking bogs, are covered with
a layer of mud often of considerable thickness. But the most dis-
tinguished geologists of the Netherlands, who have before their eyes the
most impressive results of the later incursions of the sea, have never-
theless not found in the situation of their peat bogs any evidence of
oscillations of the earth’s crust ; they have seen in these simply and solely
phenomena of the surface. In other lands observers have not been
wanting who ’ have regarded all these alternations of strata as a proof
of so many elevations and subsidences, often repeated, affecting the whole
rocky crust of the planet to a corresponding number of centimeters ; thus,
in particular, they have inferred from the submerged peat bogs a great
and general subsidence of all the coastal region of the North sea before or
during the Bronze age.

The following facts, however, must not be overlooked : —

(a) There are many localities on the coasts of the North sea where it
may be directly shown that the height of the strand has remained un-
changed for a period^of greater or less duration.

At the great sluices of Amsterdam the sea-level has been continuously
observed for centuries, and according to Bakhuyzen its constancy for

‘ Eigen 0. Stuxberg, Om Gotska Sandon ; Ofvew. K. Vet. Akad. FOrh., 1868, pi. V, fig. 2.

^ E. g. the Wilstermarsch ; Maack, Das urgeachichtliche schlcswig’holsteinische Land,
p. 14.

® E.g. C. E. Ranee, On the post-glacial Deposits of West Lancashire and Cheshire,
Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1870, XXVI, pp. 665“668; p. 659, from above downwards:
2>4 feet of sand with Bithynia tentaculata, 1 foot peat, 2 feet Tellina haltica sand, Saxon
and Roman coins ? ; 3 feet peat, 3 feet clay, above fresh water, below Scrobicularia ;

1 J feet peat ; rooted trees ; boulder clay from half ebb to the lowest tide level.



428


OH.X] ROMAN ANO VIKING REMAINS

this period has been proved to within 8 millimeters ^ The position of
Roman constructions outside the dunes renders it highly improbable that
any oscillation has occurred along the coast from the Scheldt to Ylieland
within the last two thousand years ^ notwithstanding the fact that coins
which date from 270 a.d. have been found in the peat beneath marine
sand between Dunkirk and Calais, in what was once the bay of the
lower Aa^ J. Girard does not believe that a continental oscillation is
to be inferred from this locality; in his opinion the alternation can be
explained without having recourse to such an hypothesis

The detailed investigations of Ormerod at Teignmouth, Devon, show
that no displacement of the strand-line has occurred there for a very long
period. Boyd Dawkins adds that the existing position of the Homan
Arbours indicates with equal certainty the unchanged position of the
strand on the south coast of England ^

Forchhammer mentions a rampart on the island of Homo, surrounded
by a foss, and separated from the sea by a flat marshy meadow. The
position is such as to' preclude the possibility of any change of level
having occurred since these intrenchments were constructed, that is, since
the time of the Vikings. Nevertheless a peat bog lies between Romo and
the mainland, alx)ut ten feet below the surface of the sea

(b) If the land had subsided slowly and uniformly, much in the way
it is customary to suppose Sweden is rising, then the advancing waves
would have destroyed the peat, and we should not meet with trees still
rooted in the soil. Forchhammer has given emphasis to this important
consideration, and although he is of opinion that a subsidence of the land
about the North sea actually took place in prehistoric times, yet for the
reason just given he believes that the event was in all probability sudden,
and that it certainly came to an end long ago.

(c) In those places where series of alternating peat and marine beds can

^ V. Bakhuyzen, Verliandlungen der Vll. allgemeinen Conferenz der europslischen
Gradmessung zu Rom, 1883, 4to, Berlin, 1884, p. 65.

* Bakhuyzen et Pleyte, Lettre a M. Faye ; Compt. rend., Paris, 1883, XCVII, p. 728.

* Here there lie : 0-2 meter marsh land, OS meter brackish clay with Eissoa ulmt ;
1*65 meters marine sand, bivalves in natural vertical position, at the base rolled Roman
remains; 1-3 meters peat with Gallo-Roman remains, sometimes treasures of Roman
age; coins up to 270 a.d., substratum of blue clay. Debray, Tourbieres du littoral
flamand et du d^partement de la Somme, Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1873, 3® sdr., II,
pp. 46-49, and Railway de Bourbourg a Dunkerque, Ann. Soc. geol. du Nord, 1876, III,
p. 88; in particular Gosselet et Rigaux, Mouvement du sol de la Flandre depuis les
temps geologiques, op. cit., 1878, V, pp. 218-226.

^ J. Girard, L’Affaissement du sol des Pays-Bas ; Bull. Soc. g^ogr. Paris, 1879, 6^ ser.,
XVIII, pp. 374-381.

^ G. Wareing Ormerod, Old Sea-Beaches at Teignmouth, Devon ; Quart.* Journ. Geol.
Soc., 1886, XLll, pp. 98-100; Boyd Dawkins, tom. cit., p. 100.

* Forchhammer, Om den forandrede VandhOide ved de danske Xyster ; Nord. Univ.
Tidsskrift, KjObenh., 1856, 2. Aai*g., p. 17.



424


THE BALTIC AND THE NOBTH SEA [pAsrin

be traced inland, the several beds of peat are found to unite together into
a single seam of greater thickness; a fact absolutely inconsistent with a sub>
mergence due to a general continental oscillation. The marsh of Dol, in the
ddpartement d’llle-et-Vilaine, north of Rennes, has been expressly described
by Durocher and Chbvremont as a proof of such oscillation. According to
Sirodot the land beneath the marsh is formed of alternating beds of peat
and marine sand; the peat beds maintain a constant thickness as they
proceed towards the sea, the marine beds increase in thickness in the same
direction, but towards the interior thin out altogether, so that the peat
beds come into contact and form a single seam from five to seven meters
in thickness,* which, keeping the same level, extends all round the margin
of the marsh. Sirodot is of opinion that continental oscillations will not
explain the facts, and that the several layers of marine sand correspond
to so many temporary openings in a bar Which once connected the islands
of Normandy with the mainland *.

6. Bars and peat hogs of BaMic coast. All the preceding obser-
vations favour the conclusion that a general displacement of the strand-
line, such as might result from a continental oscillation, has not affected
these coasts for a very long period, perhaps not since the Neolithic age ;
and further, that the submergence of forests and peat bogs must be
ascribed to local irruptions of the sea during storms. A continental
oscillation could scarcely have left the works constructed by the Romans
or the Vikings in their existing position; local irruptions, on the other

’ J. Durocher, Observations sur les foists sous-marines de la France occidentale et sur
les changements de niveau du littoral, Compt. rend., Paris, 1856, XL I II, pp. 1071-1074;
A. Cbevreniont, Les Mouvements du sol sur les eCtes occidentales de la France et parti-
culierement dans le Golfe Normanno-Breton, 8vo, Paris, 1882, pp. 225-436, maps;
Sirodot, Age du gisement du Mont-Dol, constitution et mode de formation de la pluine
basse dite Marais de Dol, Compt. rend., 1878, LXXXYII, pp. 267-269. The shell beds
described by Sirodot and assigned to the Diluvial period, occurring at a height of
14 meters, are much older than the phenomena discussed here. Peacock relates that on
the adjacent island of Jersey a wood is said to have subsided as late as the fourteenth or
fifteenth century, and its remains may be seen in the bay of Saint-Ouen. Until quite
lately taxes were paid for privileges connected with this wood; Geol. Mag., 1876,
2nd Ser., Ill, p. 130. From phenomena on the Somme a recent elevation of the land
to the extent of 220 meters has been deduced. The focts according to Mercey are as
follows: — The peat is 7-8 meters thick ; above it rise little bosses about 4 meters high,
the croupes de la Somme. Their nucleus is formed by a knoll-like mass of calcareous
tuff with Neritina fluviatilis, Pisidium amnicum, &c., and fragments of Gallic pottery.
On the irregular surfiice lies a covering of calcareous sand with numerous land and fresh-
water mollnsca, Roman pottery, and then Cardium edule, Mytilua edulis, and rarely llowdur
trunculus and Scrobicularia piperata. These reach a height of 19 to 20 meters, and are
covered by alluvium containing Unio. N. de Mercey, Note sur les croupes de la Somme
a Ailly-surSomme, &c. ; Bull. Soc. gdol. de Pr., 1877, 8* sdr., V, pp. 337-848. It has not
even been definitely established whether these shells are kitchen remains ; at any rate
they lie with relics of human industry in a freeh^eater bed, and if only for this reason
lend no support to the theory of negative movement.



STORM OF 1872


426


«s.x]

hand, might conceivably leave unaffected the intervening tracts of land.
The subsidences were rapid, otherwise the trees would have been up-
rooted; and rapid subsidence is what would happen in association with
local inbreaks, but not with continental oscillations. Wherever the facts
can be ascertained the peat beds which alternate with marine sand unite
together as they proceed towards the interior to form a single seam ; this
is just what would happen if the sea were driven at repeated intervals
over a quaking bog, but, generally speaking, oscillations could never bring
about this result

These supposed indications of continental subsidence encroach on the
domain of the alleged Scandinavian uprise ; we must now therefore follow
them towards the east

Nilsson and Lyell, starting from erroneous assumptions, believed that
Sweden is now experiencing a tilting movement about an axis situated in
the neighbourhood of Sbdertelje Forchhammer was of opinion that the
great Scandinavian region in which the elevatory phenomenon occurs is
bounded by a line drawn from the middle of the Nissumfjord to within
half a mile south of Nyborg, and thence further to the south-east But he
believed that this line should not be regarded as the axis of a tilting
movement, because no general subsidence can at present be discerned to
the south and west of it, whereas the uplift on the north is still in
progress. Indeed in that region where the two movements appear to
meet, as in the south of Sweden for instance, the subsidence can be showQ
to be anterior to the elevation.

Now that we again enter the region of the Baltic we may recall the
fact that this sea is also visited from time to time by violent storms,
which leave their signs upon the coast. The storm of November 12-
14, 1872, already mentioned, was the most violent that had occurred since
the year 1694, so far as we can judge from the marks left on the Blue Tower
at Liibeck. Baensch and Colding have each written a monograph upon it,
and from these we obtain the following general account ^ : —

’ £. Erdmann has supported this view. Nilsson’s statement as to subsidence, indicated
by a decrease of the land before the ' Staf-Sten ’ near Trelleborg in Scania, rests on a
printer’s error in Linne’s Skftnska Resa (Oeol. Fdren. Stockh.' FOrh., 1874, I, pp. 103,
104), and Lyell’s observations on Sodertelje have been disputed by Hisinger in 1840, Axel
Erdmann in 1868, and iinaliy by 0. Torell in his Traces plus anciennes de I’homme,
pp. 9-14.

* Baensch, Die Sturmfluth an den Ostsee-Kflsten des preussischen Staates vom
12. bis 13. November 1872, 4to, Berlin, 1875 (from the Zeitschr. f. Bauwesen, Jahrg.
XXV), 33 pp. and pi. ; A. Colding, Nogle UndersOgelsc over Stormen over Nord- og
Mellem-Europa af 12-14. Nov., 1872, og over d. derved frerakaldte Vandflod in OstersOen,
Vidensk. Selsk. Skr. KjObenhavn, 1881, 6 Bskk., I, Bd. IV, pp. 245-304, pi.' Also G. von
Bognslawski, Zeitschr. f. Meteorol., re^. von Jelinek and Hann, 1872, VII, pp. 408-410,
and note p. 396. For similar phenomena see Der Durchbruch der Insel Hiddensee,
Peterm. Mitth., 1868, pp. 377, 378.



426 THE BALTIC AND THE NOBTH SEA [PAierm

On November 12 an area of high barometric preasure was situated
over the north of Sweden, in the course of the next few days it moved
gradually away into north Russia; correspondingly there was a low-
pressure centre at Vienna on November 12 at midnight; on the 13th it
reached Eger, on the same day at midnight, Amsterdam. The maximum
thus moved towards the south-east, and the minimum to the, north-west.
With this displacement of the minimum the path of the winds towards
the centre was deflected, and the gale, which at first blew from the north-
east, now came from the east ; but these directions correspond so closely
with the lie of the Baltic that the winds were able to pile up enormous
masses of water, which they rolled before them from the northernmost
parts of this sea, first to the south, then to the south-west, and finally
to the west, and so right up to the exits.

On the 13th, at two o’clock in the morning, the storm reached Colber-
gcrmUnde, driving a mighty wave before it, the summit of which by six
o’clock in the morning had already reached Fehmam. Here the waters
mounted up, held in between Fehmam and Laaland. Behind them, between
Riigenwaldo and Swinemilnde the surface of the sea was concave, so great
was the pressure of the stonn ; with a rapid rise the sea rushed through
the belt of Fehmam, and at 3.40 p.m. attained a height of +3*17 meters
above mean tide at Ellerbeck, near Kiel ; it flung its waters over the top
of the lighthouse, fifty feet in height, at the mouth of the Schlei, and at
about 5.30 p.ni. rose to +3*5 meters at Arosund at the entrance of the
Little Belt ; long before this the force of the wind had passed its maximum,
and the great wave was carried onwards by its own momentum. Finally
the water was discharged through the Belt.

While this was happening on the coast of Germany, something similar
occurred in the Sound, though, as it seems, a little earlier. On November
12, at six o’clock in the afternoon, the level in the gulf of Finland stood
at —0*6 meter, between Stockholm and Fillau at zero, at Bornholm it was
already +0*95 meter, and at Ystad +1*27 meters. At Falsterbo it was
considerably lower, but rose towards the Sound, as well as towards Nyord
at the entrance to the Great Belt ; at this time indeed the storm from the
north-east which drove the waters of the Cattegat towards the exits of
the Baltic was still aV its height. The veering of the storm from north-
east to east brought more water out of the Baltic, but relieved the mouth
of the Sound, so that in the latter the highest level was passed on Novem-
ber 13 between midday and two o’clock in the afternoon.

This tremendous disturbance of the Baltic left its traces on the land.
Shores of clay were tom up, the clif& driven inland, beaches broadened ; the
dunes were overwhelmed, the land behind them inundated, and then as the
sea fell the imprisoned water flowed back and breached the dunes. Along
the western part of the German coast there is not much dune formation ;



427


OH.X] BAES DRIVEN OVER PEAT BOGS

a low bar or spit, thrown up by tho waves, usually accompanies the shore.
The effect of the storm on these depended on tho angle at which they
encountered the waves. Sometimes their height was augmented, some-
times they were destroyed for miles in length, and at various places on
the German .side of the Little Belt, where bars exist, they were driven
inland with remarkable regularity for a distance of about ten meters *.

In any case it is now obvious that in straits where a forced rise of the
sea may occur, extreme caution is necessary in studying the ancient strand-
lines, and it is precisely in those regions that we may expect to find spits
and bars abandoned by the sea, remaining, like moraines, to indicate the
maximum effect of former storms.

But tho evidence for a subsidence of the ground and its subsequent
elevation rests chiefly on tho existence of derelict bars and beaches
superposed on peat bogs.

Forchhammer adduces as signs of elevation remnants of such deserted
bars along the whole west coast of Denmark as far down as the month
of the Nissumfiord in the south, along tho east coast down to half a mile
south of Nyborg in Funen, along tho whole of the east coast of Zealand,
and parts of the east coast of Moen.

The coast of Scania has been studied by Nilsson, and later by E. Erdmann
and Nathorst ; at several places in the neighbourhood of Helsingborg a bar
occurs resting on a compressed peat bog; tho peat contains flint imple-
ments, and is continued inland beneath the bar. Nathorst describes
a part of this bar situated to tho north of Malmo; it lies 8,000 feet
away from the margin of the sea, but the intervening shore is certainly
very flat

The Sound is similarly bordered on each side by deserted beaches.

The beach near Trelleboig bears the name of Odravalle] the peat is
found there at two feet above the sea, and in some places, according to
E. Erdmann, as much as six feet. The beach attains a thickness of ten feet.
The fact that the beach is superposed upon the peat appears to me to show
that it has been driven inland, and Erdmann’s sketches accord well with
this view. The existing negative movement may, perhaps, produce a per-
ceptible effect here; indications of a preceding ^itive movement are
absent.

The remarkable sections in the harbour of Ystad have been described

> ' The sea baa carried out this work with great regularity, and when we contemplate
this remarkable growth, often extending for miles, it becomes intelligible that popular
belief, unable to explain such an effect, should ascribe tho formation of the Holy Dam
near Dobberan to a saint who erected it at the command of the monks in a single night
for the protection of the cloister.’ Baensch, mem. cit., p. 26. '

* E. Erdmann, Bidrag till Frfigan om Skilnes Niv&fbrilndringar, Qeol. FOren. Stockh.
FOrh., 1874, 1, pp. 93-104, pi. ; A. O. Nathorst, Om Sk&nes Niv&fOrilndringar, tom. cit.,
p. 281-294.



428 THE BALTIC AND THE NOBTH SEA [PABiin

by Bruzelius. Besting on a mass of morainic d^ris, the surface of
which lies 11 feet below the sea, are peat and a forest growth still rooted
in place, with associated remains of the Bronze age; the forest extends
from the harbour out to sea. The whole is covered up by a recent marine
deposit. At the south-west point of Sweden, three-quarters of a mile
outside Falsterbo-Bef, there occurs, according to Nilsson, a bed of peat
10 to 12 feet thick, with its surface 14 feet below the sea-leveL South of
Bornholm a pine forest occurs 30 feet below the sea. The occurrence of
alternate beds of peat and marine sand at Gothland has been described by
LdndstrOm

The existing position of deserted bars and beaches resting on peat beds,
such as we have just discussed, has no doubt been to a great extent deter-
mined by storms, especially in the case of those bordering the Sound. The
submerged forests, in the light of the knowledge we have acquired in
the North sea, show that certain parts of the Baltic were impounded
in a prehistoric period by natural dams. As to the extent of these
embankments, destroyed no doubt for the most part during the Bronze
age, I will not venture an opinion. They afford no evidence of a con-
tinental oscillation, and can only be regartled as terms in a great
series of littoral phenomena such as are presented on the shores of the
North sea.

Let us now briefly pass in review the results of this chapter; they are
as follows: —

Through the English channel the flood tide pours into the south part
of the North sea : on the north coast of the continent, from Calais to the
Horn of Skagen, a long line of bars, swinging in regular gentle curves,
has been thrown up by the united efforts of the wind and sea. Certain
fixed points of attachment were afforded them at the outset by the ancient
moraine land of Scandinavian origin ; the island of Texel is a good example
of such a point, and the Kurische Nehmng, as Berendt has shown, presents
two such points of attachment, one at its southern end, and the other
towards the middle, near Rossitten Under the shelter of these bars the
whole of the vast alluvial plain of the Netherlands, save for some parts
which consist of Scandinavian boulder clay, was built up slowly and in
the course of ages, without any apparent signs of elevation or subsidence.

’ N. (i. Bruzelius, l''ynden i Ystads Ilamn, Samlingar till Sk&nes Uistoria, 8vo, Lund,
1871. Sharing Nathorst’s doubts I have disregarded the asserted presence of a much
more recent artificial product below the surface; 6. LindstrOm, Om postglaciala
Silnkningar af Gotland, op. cit., 1886, VIII, pp. 251-281. De Geer’s observations on
a subsidence include no remains of human civilization, and therefore do not concern us ;
G. dc Geer, Om en postglacial Landsfinkning i sSdra och mellersta Sveriga, Sver geol.
Unders., 1882, ser, C, No. 52, 16 pp. (also Geol. Fflren. Stockh. Fftrh., VI).

* G. Beiendt, Geologic des Kurischen Haffes und seiner Umgebung, 4to, KOnigsberg,
1869, map.



CH.X] UNCHANGED LEVEL OP NORTH SEA COAST 429

Staring has shown, and after him Winkler, that in Groningen, the Drenthe,
and Friesland as far as the Zuyder Zee, Scandinavian moraine land occurs,
but that further on, in Over'Yssel, Oeldem, and the remainder of the plain,
the deposits are alluvial, formed of the sediments of the Rhine, the Meuse,
with others of mixed origin'^.

Smaller bars existed as far as Normandy, the south of the Baltic, and
along many parts of the English coast. When fresh water accumulated
behind them peat bogs were formed, often as ‘ hammocks,’ or quaking bogs
which floated on the surface of the bog water.

Violent storms have from time to time destroyed these structures, or
hurled the waves over the dunes on to the bogs. The Cimbric flood
perhaps corresponds to one. of these episodes, and similarly destructive
storms have continued down to our own times. In this way the great
irruptions into the Netherlands were brought about, and on the Dollart,
and so too the bar was tom to pieces, which once extended from
Eiderstedt, through Amerane, Sylt, and Romo, towards Fand, and Blaa-
vands Huk in Jutland, and cut off the existing ‘ Wattenmeer ’ of Holstein.
At the present day in place of the ancient lagoons we meet only with peat
lx)gs, which have sunk through the yielding of their base, or have been
overwhelmed when in the quaking stage ; and in front of the dunes lie
the peat bogs which the weight of the advancing sand has pressed down
beneath the level of the sea.

None of these examples, however, show any signs of oscillation of the
earth’s crust during the long period occupied in their formation; they
imply, on the contrary, a prolonged state of repose.

The North sea receives the overflow of the Baltic, an inland lake,
continually endeavouring towards an equilibrium with the Ocean, which
it never attains ; as is shown by its inferior salinity, and the constant flow
of its interior currents. Its monthly means fluctuate with the seasons;
rainfall, snow, and times of thaw exert a dominant influence on the Finnish
and Swedish coasts. The yearly means are likewise variable ; for the last
few decades they indicate on the whole a sinking level, though the move-
ment is subject to much interraption, and does not seem to have been in
progress for more than two or three hundred years; the explanation
which is least far fetched is apparently to be 4ound in a change of
climate.

From, Haparanda to Brittany there ia no eviderwe of elevation or
aiibaidence of the land since the Bronze age. The visible and obvious
modifications of the coast have been brought about sometimes by local
landslides, at others by local irruptions of the sea into districts protected

I

^ T. G. Winkler, Sur Torigine des dunes maritimes des Pays-Bas; Arch. Neerland.,
Harlem, 1878, XIII, pp. 417-427, map of the different alluvia.



430


THE BALTIC AND THE NORTH SEA [pact in

by littoral bars, or again by storms, and finally, as in the Baltic, they are
the result of a climatic change.

In the course of my investigation into the oscillations in the Scandi-
navian region, I was very early led to inquire whether any extension of
the movements observed in the Baltic could be recognized on the coasts in
the extreme north of Europe, where indeed it should be most obvious,
if, as is alleged, the elevation increases towards the north. Norway
furnished no information. The sole traces of existing negative movement,
and these questionable, occur in the Solmvetzky islanda in the White
sea. I am indebted for my knowledge of them to the great kindness of
Professor Inostranzeff. He has observed parallel beds of beach pebbles
on the little island of Andersky ; and is led to suppose that a negative
displacement still continues, by the existence of certain streaks or bands
at the foot of the sea-wall, which was built in 1799 below the cloister
of Solowetsky and close above the sea-level. Probably the White sea is
characterized by the same phenomena as the Baltic and Baffin bay, but
unfortunately continuous observations which might throw light on this
point do not exist.



431


CHAPTEIt XI

THE MEDITERRANEAN DURING THE HISTORIC

PERIOD

The sea of Azov and the Black sea. Locus of maximum depression in the surface of
the Mediterranean. The western Mediterranean. Venice. The Dinaro-Tauric region.
The south-east Mediterranean. Conclusion.

At Meissau in lower Austria, on the eastern slope of the Manhart
mountains, barnacles may be seen still attached to the wave- worn granite
bosses, on which they grew in the sea of the first Mediterranean stage.
On the eastern slope of the Kahlenberg, overlooking the city of Vienna,
we may pick up on the beach of the second MeditciTancau stage pebbles
which have been drilled by boring molluscs. High up on the limestone
cliffs of Capri may be seen ix)W8 of perforations produced by similar shells
at a later period. Finally on the existing shore or in its immediate
neighbourhood, far below all these relics of the ancient phases of the
Mediterranean, lie numerous ruined harbours and other monuments of
antiquity, serving to remind us that the successive shores revealed by this
series of vestiges belonged to that classic sea which has witnessed some of
the most important events in the history of civilization and which indeed
has in no small degree contributed to its beneficent advance.

Hero more than anywhere else we are afforded an opportunity of
investigating the question as to whether changes of sea-level have occurred
during the historic period, but here also mure than elsewhere caution is
necessary, lest we should confound evidence relating to prehistoric times
with that of later date.

1. The mi of Azov and the Bloch mi. From tlie month of the Don in
the sea of Azov as far as the Pillars of Hercules there extends at the
present day a chain of seas, which appear to discifarge successively one
into the other, and finally to pass in a united outflow through the strait of
Gibraltar into the Atlantic Ocean. Such, however, is by no means the case.
The sea of Azov overflows into the Black sea, and this, in spite of a contrary
undercurrent in the Dardanelles, overflows in turn into the Mediterranean.
But the Mediterranean, owing to excessive evaporation, which is not
compensated by the insignificant rainfall, loses such a vast (juantity of
water, especially off the north coast of Africa, south of Crete, that neither
the excess from the Black sea nor the supply from tributary rivers is



432 MEDITERRANEAN IN HISTORIC TIMES [pahi iii

sufficient to make good the defect. Consequently the heavy Mediterranean
water passes out over the bottom of the strait of Gibraltar, while Oceanic
water flows in, always striving to establish equilibrium, but never
succeeding in the attempt.

We may therefore describe the Black sea tc^ther with the sea of Azov
as active members of the chain, but the Mediterranean and in particular
its eastern half as a passive member. It is the insertion of this passive
member that constitutes the most important difference between this and
the north European chain of basins, which are exclusively active.

The sea of Azov is shallow ; its eastern extremity is the estuary of the
Don, and in the roads of Taganrog its waters are fresh. In the middle of
the sea, F. Gobel found a salinity of 1*188 per cent. (sp. gr. 1*0097), but
towards the west the long bar of Arabat cuts off a great lagoon, the Sivasft
or Putrid sea, leaving open a channel of communication only seventy-flve
fathoms broad. The Sivosh is intensely salt owing to evaporation ; Gbbel
and Hasshagen found a salinity of 17*374 per cent. (sp. gr. 1*13988), and of
15*197 per cent. (sp. gr. 1*13795) ; this is a good example of a sea which has
become passive by isolation

Levels taken by Guillemin many years ago, from the Black sea to the
sea of Azov, gave for the latter + 1*45 meters at Ak>Manai', but 1 can find
no detailed confirmation of these measurements \

The Russian government appointed a scientific commission to investigate
the sea of Azov and to ascertain whether its asserted decrease in depth
was actually taking place. The report drawn up by Baer in 1863 shows
that since the time of Polybius, and of Strabo, who wrote a very exact
description of the region, no change in the water-level at all worthy of
mention has occurred. The ruins of Tunis, a commercial city mentioned by
Strabo (xi. 2), have been discovered on the shores of a deserted arm of the
Don ; opposite Taganrog, outside the delta, the little low island of Tshere-
pacha, probably the island of Alopekeia mentioned by Strabo, may still be
seen, and what is most significant Strabo even describes the spit of Arabat,
and the Sivash, which he speaks of as a marsh separated from the sea on
the west ; but the opening at the northern end of the spit appears to liave
been much broader at that time. At the present day the island of Tshere-
pacha is still so low th it it is submerged during high winds

' F. Ocbel, Resultate der Zcrlegung des WasBen vom Schwarzen, Asow’schen, und
Kaspiachen Meere, Poggendorf’a Ann. Phjs. Cheni., Ergftnzungsband I, 1842, pp. 187,.
188 : A. Gcbel, Ueber die in dem Bestande einiger Salzseen der Erym vor sich gehenden
Aenderungen, Bull. Acad. Imp. Sci. St.-Pdtersb., 1863, V, pp. 290-299 (here alBO
Hasshagen’s rezults).

* J. Guillemin, Niveaux compares de la Mer d’Azof et de la Mer Noire ; Bull. Soc.
geogr. Paris, 1865, 5* s4r., IX, pp. 97, 98.

’ As to the assertion that the sea of Azov is becoming shallower, see the report of the
Commission appointed by the Academy of Sciences of St. Petersburg, written by Baer ;



THE BLACK SEA


433


OH. zi]


Sanufttian folds, ronning from the northern bonier of the Caacasns to
the northern border of the Crimean mountains (I, p. 474), separate the sea
of Azov from the Black sea.

The Black sea resembles the Baltic in many respects. The salinity of
the water is only a little higher than that of the sea of Azov and its level
is subject to seasonal oscillations like those of the Baltic. The oscillations
have been studied by E. von Maydell, and Briickner has shown that they
depend on variations in the river supply. The chief tributaries of the
Black sea, the Danube, Dniepr, and Don attain their highest level in the
months of April and May. The observing stations which are subject to
the direct influence of the rivers, those for instance at Otshakow, Odessa,
Kerch, Qenitshesk, and the mouth of the Dniestr, show the highest sea-level
in May, that is a little later than the rivers, while at the stations lying
further away from the rivers, namely Sebastopol, Yalta, and Poti, the
highest level occurs still later, i. e. in June. Thus in May and June the
sea stands +0*1 to +0*15 meter above mean level ; it then sinks as winter
approaches, remains at a height of —0*08 to — 0*11 meter from September
to March, and then rises again to the maximum. Thus the whole volume
of water in the Black sea fluctuates from season to season

In complete accordance with these results are Wrangell’s observations
on the density made in the autumn of 1878. The highest density observed
was off the west and south coasts of the Crimea, which are remote from the
rivers; it ranged from 1'0139 to 1*0145, with a maximum corresponding to
1*9 per cent, near the south point of the Crimea ; and off the coast of the
Caucasus, also remote from the great rivers, the density varied from 1*014
to 1*0148, with a maximum salinity of 1*87. Near the rivers, on the other
hand, the salinity decreases ; thus in the liman of the Dniepr it sinks to 0*6
per cent. (sp. gr. 1*0045), in the bay of Taganrog it is 0*78 per cent. (sp. gr.
1*0056)2.


Ball. Acad. Imp. ScL St.-P^tersb., 1863, V, pp. 72-105, map ; and O. von Helmeraen,
op. cit., 1867, XI, pp. 555-584. A full abstract of the first of these memoirs is contained
in H. Ritter, Die Verflachung des Asow’schen Meeres ; Zeitschr. f. allg. Erdk., Berlin,
1862, XII, pp. 305-826. The very remarkable Kossi, i. e. parallel tongues of land with
hook*shaped appendages on the inner side, are characteristic of the sea of Azov;
Helmersen has described in detail that of Berdftnsk. Hero doubtless lies the explanation
of those hook*shaped bays which Gilbert has figured in the basin of the ancient lake
Bonneville, U.S. Geol. Surv., 5th Annual Report, 1883 to 1884, pL XII ; Helmersen’s
sketch was taken at high tide.

* E. Brfickner, Die Schwankungen des Wasserstandes im Schwarzen Meere und ihre
Ursachen; Meteorol. Zeitschr., 1886, III, pp. 297-309. On the exchange of water in
the Bosphorus, see Makarof, Ann. d. Hydrogr., 1886, pp. 532-535.

* F. Wrangell, Einige Dichten- and Temperaturbestimmungen im Schwarzen und
Asow'schen Meere, in A. Kasp&rek, Studien fiber die physikalischen Verh&ltnisse des
Schwarzen und Asow’schen Meeres; Mitth. aus d. Gebiete des Seewesens, Pola, 1886^
ZIY, pp. 327-832, map.

V f


SOLLAS II



434 MEDITERRANEAN m HISTORIC TIMES [PAierm

Thus oscillations of the same character as in the Baltic occur in the
Black sea, but their sum does not give a negative value. Strabo, who, as
we have seen, described the spit of Arabat in the sea of Azov, has also
given an exact account of the existing spit of Perekop, which he speaks of
as ‘ The Course of Achilles ’ (vii. 8. 41), and a study of this has led the
Commission of the Russian Academy to the inference that no important
change has affected the level of the Black sea for 2,000 years.

Indications nevertheless exist of a movement which most have occurred
near the beginning of historic times, certainly after the glacial period.
The evidence is as follows : —

It has already been pointed out (I, p. 844) that the region now occupied
by the Aegean sea was previously a land-surface covered by fresh-water
lakes ; it suffered collapse, and the sea of the fourth Mediterranean stage
advanced across Milos, Rhodes, and the south part of the island of Kos.
Still later the subsidence was renewed and continued as far as the Black
sea, and then for the first time the Mediterranean entered the region of the^
Pontus and the sea of Azov. In the Dardanelles, however, Mediterranean
shore deposits lie high above the existing strand. As early as 1857, Spratt
recorded recent marine beds with oysters north of Meitos, as well as on
the opposite coast of the straits at a height of H-40 feet; and he thought
the sea-level must have stood about fifteen to twenty feet higher. Calvert
and Neumayr have confirmed Spratt’s observations, and from their account it
would appear that a flint implement has been found in the deposits \ Some
traces of these recent sediments, which are never raised far above the existing
strand and always retain their horizontality, are found even within the
Pontic basin; their fauna, which is that of the existing Mediterranean,
shows that the Pontus at this time, when its waters stood at a higher level,
was not as fresh as at present, but nearly as salt as the Ocean. Abich has
described these sediments as they occur in the straits of Kerch and in the
peninsula of Taman, and Tchihatchef has recognized them south of Samsun,
near the north coast of Asia Minor*. Thus it appears that at the time
when the Pontic region was in free communication with the Mediterranean
the level of the water was somewhat higher than at present. The sea

* T. Spratt, On the Geology of Varna, &c., Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1857, XIII,
p. 81 ; Frank Calvert und M. Neumayr, Die jungen Ablagerungen am Hellespont,
Denkschr. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1880, XL, p. 366 et seq. ; also C. Peters, Grundlinien
zur Geographic und Geologic der Dobrudscha, op. cit., 1867, XXVII, p. 198.

* H. Abich, Etudes sur les presqulles de Kertsch et de Taman, Bull. Soc. gdol. de Fr.,
1864, 2<’ ser., XXI, p. 270 et seq. ; Beyer’s observations, tom. cit., p. 279 ; P. de Tchihat-
chef, Ddpdts tertiaires d’une partie de la Cilicie Trachde, etc.. Bull. Soc. gdol. de Fr.,
1854, 2* ser., XI, p. 892. Tchihatchef gives 80-90 feet as the height of the shell beds,
but since they lie half a league away from the sea, and the height is merely an estimate,
which must have been very difficult to make from a distance, I have not attached much
value to these figures.



436


CH. XI] LOCUS OP MAXIMUM DEPRESSION

'entered with its full salinity; its shores were formed, then as now, to
a great extent of loess. Then freshening set in, accompanied by negative
movement. The sea of Azov enlarged itself by destruction of its shores ;
and finally the Sivash was shut oflf*. *

3. Loom of maxinvum depression in tits surface of the MedMerranean.
Wherever exact meaaurements have enabled us to compare the Mediter-
ranean with the Atlantic its surface has been found to lie below that of the
Ocean. The following figures are taken from the reports of the Inter-
national Geodesic Association and the communications made to it by


various European governments; —


Meters.

Swinemiinde — Trieste ....


-0-499

Swinemunde — Marseilles . . .


-0-664

Calais — Marseilles


-0-753

Brest — Marseilles


-1-022

La Rochelle — Marseilles . . .

=

-0-400

Bayonne — Marseilles ....

=

-0-856

Santander — Alicante ....


-0-668 2.


These negative values show that the Mediterranean is a passive region,
and Forchhammer’s chemical analyses lead to the same result. This investi-
gator found that the density in the Atlantic Ocean increased off the west
coast of Africa under the influence of the Sahara ; and that Atlantic water
entering the Mediterranean at Gibraltar has a salinity of 8*63 per cent.
But in long. 4® 3' W. the salinity has already risen to Z-7 ; between the
Balearic isles and Spain it is 3’8 and 3*88, at Malta 3'85 ; off the coast of
Greece, no doubt under the influence of the Bosphorus, it is slightly less,
falling to 3*8; the maximum which Forchhammer records was found in
samples taken between Crete and the coast of Africa ; it amounts to 8*93
per cent. The subsequent work of Carpenter confirms these results. He
found a density of 1*0271 for the inflowing water at Gibraltar taken at the
surface, and of 1-0293 (salinity 8-91 per cent.) for the outflowing water
in the undercurrent at a depth of 250 fathoms ; at the surface the density
off Sicily is 1-028 to 1-0284, between Malta and Crete 1-0284 to 1-0288, not
far from the gulf of Solum or Milhr (Mellah) on the eastern boundary of
Barca 1-0293 (in 1,650 fathoms 1-0294), and still neadlr the coast of Africa
1-0294 (in 365 fathoms 1-0302). The greatest density in the Mediterranean
thus occurs between the coast of Africa and Crete, where evaporation
reaches a maximum and the supply of fresh water falls to a minimum ’i.

’ C. Peters, Die Donau and ihr Gebiet, 8vo, Leipzig, 1876, pp. 838, 834.

* Yerhandlungen der permanenten Commission der Europ&ischen Gradmessung in
Hamburg, 1878, 4to, Berlin, 1879, pp. 62-66; and Verb, der VII. Conferenz, Berlin, 1884,
p. 270 et seq. The value - 0-664 m. for Swinemfinde— Marseilles was obtained by
levelling through Switzerland; through Amsterdam and Oztend -0-658 was obtained.

* G. Forchhammer, On the Composition of Searwater in different parts of the Ocean,

F f 2



436 MEDITERRANEAN IN HISTORIO TIMES [pABTnr

Hemmed in as the Mediterranean is by surronnding land, its level most
depend on the ratio between evaporation and supply and thus will neces-
sarily differ from that of the Ocean ; though certainly not to the extent
Assumed by Bianconi when he attempted some years ago to explain the
horizontality of the relict strand-lines’. Again, we may fairly conclude
that the levd of the Mediterranean is lowest between Crete and the coast of
Africa, since this ia the locus of maximum density. It is lower here than
even at Alicante, Marseilles, or Triest, where its height has been ascertained
by direct measurements. These measurements have given negative values
throughout ; but it is readily intelligible that in the northern part of the
Adriatic, which is subject to the influence of the Po, the negative value
should be slightly less marked, and in accordance with this Luksch and
Wolf have found a somewhat lower density on the Italian than on the
Austrian side of this region K

Carpenter’s observations show further that water with a uniform
temperature of 13° to 14° C. and with no appreciable signs of circulation,
occupies the western Mediterranean from a depth of about 100 fathoms
downwards, while the temperature of the Ocean at the same depth is much
lower; in the eastern Mediterranean, on the other hand, the heat of the sun'
certainly penetrates below 100 fathoms, but in this basin also stagnant
water is reached before a depth of 200 fathoms. This mass of deep water
appears to be undisturbed by currents and scarcely any interchange takes
place with the overlying layers. The temperature of the upper water
reaches 26-5° C. in the hottest regions, or even more, and the maximum
lies a little below the surface, the surface itself being cooled by rapid
evaporation.

Let us return for a while to that part of the sea situated south of Crete.
Although the negative values quoted above for the mean level on the south
coasts of France and Spain arc not altogether negligible and even reach
— 1>022 meters between Brest and Marseilles, yet the density in these
western parts of the Mediterranean is only a little greater than that of the
Ocean, and it is therefore probable that the fall of level is much more con-
siderable south of Cyprus and on the borders of Africa. This may be

Phil. Trans. London, 18^5, CLV, pp. 203-262 ; W. B. Carpenter and J. Owyn Jeffreys,
Report on Deep-Sea Beroarches carried on during the Months of July, August, and
September, 1870, in H.M. Surv. Ship Porcupine, Proc. Roy. Soc., 1871, XIX,
pp. 146-221; and Carpenter, Report on Scientific Researches carried on during the
Months August, September, and October, 1871, in H.M. Surv. Ship Sheaneater, op.
cit., 1872, XX, pp. 535-644. T. Fischer estimates the depth of water which yearly
evaporates over the Mediterranean at 3 meters at least ; Peterm. Mitth., 1885, XXXI,
p. 415.

’ J. J. Bianconi, Sur I'ancien exhaussement du bassin de la M^diterran^e ; Bull. Soc.
geol. de Fr., 186.5-1866, 2« s6r., XXIII, pp. 72-80.

* J. Luksch and J. Wolf in F. Attlmayr, Handbuch d. Oceanographie, 8vo, Vienna,
1883, 1, p. 360.



437


«H. zi] HEAVY MEDITERRANEAN WATER

inferred from the greater density. The density of the Atlantic water
flowing in ihrongh the strait of Gibraltar is 1<0271. In the gulf of Milhr
it is 1-0298 at the surface, and 1*0294 at a depth of 1,650 fathoms. We
will take 1,650 fathoms as the greatest depth and 1*02985 as the mean
density at Milhr. A column of water 1,690 fathoms high in the gulf of
Milhr would require a column of Atlantic water 6*6 meters higher to balance
it. But if we reckon from the maximum density, 1*0802, then we find that
a column of 1,000 meters of Mediterranean vxder at this density corresponds
to a column of 1,003 meters of AUantic water.

It is true we have no precise knowledge either of the form or the
depth of the wide funnel which forms the surface of the Mediterranean
in this region, but we may fairly assume that it is at such loci of maximum
depression that climatic changes would produce the most marked effects
on the height of the sea-level. Now it is a remarkable fact that the most
important movements of the strand-line which have occurred in historic
times have been observed precisely in this region on the south-west coast
of the island of Crete, and as far as Cerigotto.

In 1852 Leycester published an observation made by Lieutenant
Mansell, who had made measurements of a well-marked strand-line at capo
Krio, the south-west comer of Crete, and found a height of -i-87 feet
(11*24 meters). In the north-west of the island, opposite Grabusa, and
agun at cape Spadha, this line had sunk to about -f 20 feet (6*07 meters),
thence proceeding along the north coast towards the east it descended still
lower, and was met with in the bay of Sudha at a height of +6 feet
(1*8 meter). The case is similar on the south coast, where the line
descends towards the east to disappear against the plain of Gortyna^

So many different strand-lines and zones of perforations occur on the
coast of Italy, dating from various periods, that this account given by
Leycester for the first time must be received with great caution. *

In the year 1852 Captain Spratt announced that the whole island of
Crete was undergoing a tilting movement; the west had already been very
much elevated, the middle had not moved, the east was slightly depressed
He stated in particular that at Phalasama the whole of the ancient
harbour works stand on dry land, which would indicate an elevation of
22 feet 6 inches (6*88 meters). /

Some years later, in 1865, Spratt repeated his statements in detail. Many
of his observations relate only to strand-lines marked on rocks, and of
indeterminate age, but I may cite the following: hay of Suda (western
half of the north coast), minor strand-lines, boring shells in their holes,
up to 'f 2*07 or 2*12 meters; Kisamo (north-west coast), the ancieuf? mole
raised about 5*47 meters : cape Chubusa (north-west point), one of the

* E. M. Leycester, Some Account of the Volcanic Group of Hilo, Anti-Hilo, Eimolo,
and Polino; Jonm. Geogr. Soc., 1852, XXII, p. 227.



488 MEDITEBBANEAN IN HI8T0BIC TIMES [pabtiu

thtee Coiycaie islands mentioned writers of antiquity, now united to
the mainland, strand-lines occur up to -f&dS meters; Phalamrnd (west
coast), the whole foundation of the harbour on dry land, strand-lined up
to +6 or 7 meters. The strand-lines without any indication of historic
date reach a maximum with -i- 7*9 meters between Selino and lissos, near
cape Krio (south-west coast). A strand-line of this kind is also mentioned
as occurring at Zakro in the extreme east of the island.

The traces of positive movement are far less marked. The most
striking are : Metala (middle of the south coast), some tombs hewn in the
rock, partly covered by the waves ; cape Sidara (extreme east), partly sub-
merged buildings ; Spina longa (north-east, in the gulf of Mirabello), ruins of
a Greek town below water, positive movement 1-8 to 2*4 meters or more.
In the same locality, however, Issel found indications of negative movement

It will be seen, for reasons to be mentioned later, that the evidence in
the case of all these positive traces is very untrustworthy.

Here we are in presence of a problem which can only be solved by
investigation on the spot. onlp sigTia of Tiegative movement which
have been observed on monuments of the historic period^ Puzzuoli excepted,
occur arownd the locus of maximum depression, produced by climatic
influence. The movement indicated by existing observations is, however,
so great (about seven meters), that in the absence of further information
I can hardly venture to explain it by change of climate alone; fresh
measurements and further investigation of the facts are indispensable.

We will now examine some of the most important evidence presented
by the shores of the Mediterranean.

3. The western Mediterranean. As regards the character of the shore
in the gulf of Milhr itself I possess no information. The negative move-
ment, supposed by Hamilton to have occurred at Benghasi on the eastern
sidd of the gulf of Gabes, is explained by Stacey as the result of local
subsidence of the limestone plateau; other examples of such subsidence
are not rare in this district \ Stache calls attention to the fact that the
two islands of Kerkennah and Djarba, two little strips of land just rising
above the sea, were already known to Herodotus, and consequently no
important change can have taken place on the coast of the Syrtis minor

Vi

* Extract of a letter from Capt. Spratt on Crete ; Joum. Geogr. 3oc., 1854, EXIT,
pp. 238-239. These and the later statements of Spratt are contained, literally trans-
lated, and conveniently arranged in V. Baulin, Description physique de I’tle de Crhte,
8to, Bordeaux, 1869, II, pp. 681-691 ; for Spina longa see Issel, Oscillazioni lente del
suolo, p. 279.

* G. B. Stacey, On the Geology of Benghasi, Barbary, and an Account of the Sub-
sidences in its Vicinity ; Quart. Joum. Geol. Soo., 1867, XXIII, pp. 384-386. Hamilton,
Beechey, and Barth had inferred positive displacement. Also Beurmann, Zeitschr. f. allg.
Erdk., Neue Folge, 1862, XII, p. 409 ; and T. Fischer, Kttstenver&nderung im Mittelmeer*
gebiete, Zeitschr. Ges. f. Erdk., Berlin, 1878, XIII, p, ‘156.



439


OH. xi] THE WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN

since the time of the great historian^. Fartsch and Bolland agree in
showing that no movement has occurred during historic times at Tunis ;
this is proved, in particular, by the character of the lagoon Recent
marine deposits rest against the coast of Algiers ; thus Bleicher hc^
described the traces of an ancient sea which occur on the coast of Oran
up to a height of +150 meters, but indications of the strand become
increasingly clear as we approach the level of +40 to 20 meters. At
a height of +7 or 8 meters fairly regular bands of shelly sandstone are
met with ; the shells are all of living species ; but there is no evidence, so
far as I am aware, of a change during historic times \

The case is the same at O^^ibraltar; Smith and Maw observed a mass of
stratified sand on the east side of the Bock in the bay of Catalan extending
to a height of 700 feet (210 meters). Smith found Patella ferruginea in it.
Strand-lines have been observed on the slopes at various heights, but no
evidence has been discovered of movement in historic times

The fact that the town of Aiguea-Mortea {Aquae Tnortuae), west of the
delta of the Rhone, where Louis the Pious embarked in a. d. 1248 and 1270
on his crusades against the Infidel, now stands five kilometers from the
sea, has given rise to the notion that great changes must have occurred
in this locality at a very recent date. An important fact, however, has
been overlooked ; the king certainly embarked from Aigues-Mortes, but
the town was then as now situated within the region of the lagoons, which
Louis caused to be connected with the sea by a canal. Embarkation on
the great Genoese and Venetian galleys did not take place in Aigues-

' G. Stache, Die projectiiie Verbindung des algerisch-tuneBischen Chott-Gebietes mit
dem Mittelmeere ; Mitth. k. k. geogr. Ges. Wien, 1875, XVIII, p. 341. Barth had
inferred negative movement ; several authors have connected this with the formation
of the P(tlu8 Tritonis.

^ J. Fartsch, Veiilnderungen des KUstcnsaumes der Regentschafb Tunis in historischer
Zeit, Peterm. Mitth., 1883, XXIX, p. 201 et seq., and 1885, XXXI, p. 154; Rolland,
Compt. rend., 1887, CIV, p. 600. T. Fischer, who had expressed an opposite opinion, has
since accepted the views of Fartsch.

^ Bleicher, Note sur la geologic d'Oran, Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1875, 3" s^r., Ill,
pp. 187-195. Existing species of land shells are also found; some, such as Alexia
Algenca, occur at a level of 40 meters among the marine shells. These are the
concrete beds of Oran observed by Tristram ; G. Maw, Geological Notes on a Journey
from Algiers to the Sahara, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1^4, XXX, pp. 105 et seq.
T. Fischer has collected instructive observations on the CTOsive action of the waves
on the north coast of Africa, but supposes this action to be seconded by a positive
displacement of the strand, which decreases towards the east. The facts adduced do not
convince me of the necessity of this supposition. Fischer, KUstenstudien aus Nord-
Afrika; Peterm. Mitth., 1887, XXXIII, p. 5 et seq.

^ J. Smith, On the Geology of Gibraltar, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1846, II,^ p. 41 ;
G. Maw, On the Evidences of Recent Changes of Level in the Mediterranean Coast Line,
Geol. Mag., 1870, VII, p. 552; F. v. Hochstetter, Reise der Novara, 1866, II, p. 4;
and Ramsay and Geikie, Geology of Gibraltar, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1878, XXXIV,
pp. 521-525.



440 MEDITERRANEAN IN HISTORIC TIMES [PABxm

Mortes itself, but at a place which still lies, as it did then, on the open
shores of the sea, and still retains the name of Gran Louis.

Apart from this, however, the position of Aigues*Mortes and the
(Vhobrable account of it by Lentheric aflford an excellent opportunity for
additional observations on the formation of littoral bars.

In our study of the North sea we have already pointed out- how the
waves falling obliquely on its shelving shores spread out the sand and pile
it up before them, forming crescentic dunes or spits miles in length. The
wind contributes its action, and when, as is generally the case, the move-
ment is not directed quite at right angles to the coast lateral displacemmit
occurs. If now the mouth of a river is situated say to the east and the
displacement is towards the west, then a spit is formed to the west, and
this, if it increases till it joins the next fixed point, becomes a littoral bar.
Secondary circumstances, however, may somewhat alter the direction of
displacement. Then a new spit arises, and in course of time a new bar,
separated by a lagoon or marsh from the preceding, which now lies further
inland. It is asserted that even a large clump of trees may suffice under
certain circumstances to bring about a deviation. The shifting of a river
mouth in the delta is much more effective, since a new spit begins to grow
from the fresh source of sediment. Nature unaided accomplishes such
processes very slowly ; when, therefore, we find in the vicinity of a river
mouth successive bars visible one behind the other, separated by lagoons,
and when these lagoons show no signs of change beyond a gradual silting
up, i. e. when the whole series of bars rests on the same horizontal plane,
it clearly follows that since the formation of the oldest bar, or that lying
furthest inland, no important movement can have affected the level of
the strand.

At Aigues-Mortes four ‘ cordons littoraux’ or bars are visible one behind
the other ; towards the west they unite into a single tongue. Between
them lie sheets of water. The town stands between the second and third
bar. Qrau Louis, where the embarkation of the Crusaders took place, is
situated on the outer side of the fourth or outermost bar; and this, the
youngest of the series, was already in its existing state six centuries ago.
Since the fifteenth century, when the Petit-Rhdne was diverted from the
neighbourhood of Aigyes-Mortes to the east, and made to discharge by
a new mouth, another spit has formed, the beginning of a new bar, the
Terre-Neuve, and Martins calculates that this, if it continues to grow at
its present rate without interruption by storms, will reach the tongue of
land directed towards Montpellier, east of Aigues-Mortes, and so form a fifth
bar in the course of the next eighteen centuries.

The four bars of Aigues-Mortes rest on such a level base that in 1810 ,
at high tide, the river Rhone entered between all four bars, overflowed the
depressions, and washed against the walls of Aigues-Mortes, so that the



«H. xi] VENICE 441

gates of tiie town had to be closed, and large vessels were able to reach the
town from the Rhone

The great extension and uniform character of the bars to the west Of
the mouth of the Rhone bear witness to a long-continued stability in the
height of the strand-line. This has been clearly shown by Martins. Only
very trifling, perfectly regular and compensatory oscillations are com-
patible with this state of things, but even of such oscillations we have
here no signs.

In the south and east of the delta the growth of the land does not
proceed so regularly; in one place the land advances into the sea, in
another the sea gains upon the land, tearing away the greater part of the
material laid down by the river. Thus it happens that two redoubts
erected in the time of Louis XIV now stand out to sea at some distance
from the shore.

The stability of the spits and bars of western Italy, the position of
the Roman roads upon them, the ancient drain under the rock of Cosa
still serving its original purpose, as well as the phenomena at Puzzuoli,
have already been discussed.

The whole of the noestem Mediterranean has been searched in vain for
evidence of movement of the strand~line duriTig hidoric times; on the other
hand certain facts, such as the successive bars of Aigues-Mortes, d^nitdy
indicate a long-continued dahilUy.

4. Venice. The prominent part taken by Manfredi and Frisi in the
discussion of movements of the strand-line calls for some reference to the
phenomena observed at Venice.

The mouth of the Po is a very instructive region, and has been very
closely observed. Accounts of changes in the strand-line date back from
the sixteenth centuiy. At the close of the eighteenth century Zendini
definitely asserted that the sea-level was rising at Venice; more recently
Luciani, Issel, and Koratsch have collected together the various data re-
lating to this question But in this case also it is necessary, in order not

* C. Lentheric, Les Villes mortes du Golfe de Lyon, 8vo, Paris, 1876, in particular
pi. zii and pp. 351-383 ; see Martins, XJne Yille oubliee, Aigues-Mdrtes, son paasd, son
present, son avenir, Revue des Deux Mondes, 1874, 1, pp. 780-816, also Compt. rend.,
1874, LXXVIII, pp. 1748-1750; De Cossigny, Sur la cor|^tion qui cxiste entre les
oscillations du sol et la configuration des cOtes de la mer. Bull. Soc. gdol. de Fr., 1875,
3* sdr.. Ill, pp. 358-367. The last-named author has maintained the theory that every
bar indicates an oscillation; the construction of the fifth line taking place at the
present day contradicts this view.

* Of the numerous works on this subject I will only mention that of A. Zendrini,
Esami di alcuni fatti geologici giudicati da taluno, conducenti a dimostrare I’invariabilith
del livello del mare, Mem. R. Ist. Lomb. Veneto, 1843, II, pp. 213-226. The elevation
theory was only invoked here in later years ; see e. g. Bullo, Sopra la vulcanicitk ed il
lento abassamento del suolo nella Venezia maritima, 8vo, Padova, 1871 ; J. Luciani,
Movimenti litorali della provincia di Venezia, Boll. Soc. geogr. ital., 1881, XVIII,



442 MEDITERRANEAN IN HISTORIC TIMES [paktih

to be misled by facts of secondary importance, to consider the phenomena
as a whole.

' At the present day the Po transports its muddy sediments across the
outer border of the Lido and deposits them in the open sea. North of
the main part of the delta lies the lagoon region of Venice, and south of it
that of Comacchio. In addition to the Po, however, other important rivers,
such as the Adige and the Brenta, also discharge themselves close to the Po,
and the changes which have affected the lower course of these rivers have
not been without influence on the structure of the alluvial land. The Po,
at the time of the Romans, discharged a considerable part of its waters to
the south-east, in the direction of Ravenna, through the lower course of
the Reno, now silted up. Not till much later, since the year 1150 in
particular, when the Po had made for itself a new bed at Ficarolo, above
Ferrara, and since 1526, when the waters of the Reno above Ferrara were
diverted into the Po, did the waters of the latter unite more and more
together in the region of its existing mouths, whereas formerly a great part
of its sediments was carried into the lagoon of Comacchio. The Adige has
often changed its bed, generally moving towards the south. The mouth
of the Brenta has been shifted southwards by artificial means.

If now we tom to the charts, and the little generalized maps of Reyer
which show the facts very clearly, we shall see that three bars extend
side by side from the lagoons of Comacchio across the delta of the Po to
the lagoons of Venice, and so flat is all the intervening land, that the Po
and the Adige, making use of ancient openings, have been able to shift their
lower course transversely across the direction of the bars Of these bars
it is the innermost, i.e. the most westerly, which, as at Aigues-Mortes,
must be regarded as the oldest, and since its formation no important dis-
placement of the strand-line can have occurred in the whole of this region.
But this bar dates from a period far remote from all historic record.

If notwithstanding this a continuous subsidence of the ground is found
to occur at Venice, the cause must be sought in local conditions. Collegno
asserted many years ago that it was merely a matter of closer settlement
of the alluvium. The subsidence near the mouth of the Sile, which
between the eleventh and sixteenth centuries led to the submergence of
the flourishing town oif Ca di Riva, together with the fertile country
surrounding it, must probably be regarded as tbe result of a local de-
pression of this alluvial land. Not far away is the once important town
of Torcello, which in like manner, and possibly owing to a further exten-

pp. 576-585 ; A. Issel, Le oscillazioni lente del buoIo, o bndisismi, 8vo, Glenova, 1883,
p. 250 et seq. ; M. Eovatsch, Die Versandung von Venedig und ihre Uxsacben, 8vq,
Leipzig, 1882, p. 148.

' E. Reyer, Aenderungen der venezianisohen nnd toscanisoben Alluvialgebiete in
hUtoriseber Zeit ; Zeitschr. Gee. f. Erdk., Berlin, 1882, XVII, p. 128.



443


CH. h] mobility of the alluvium

sion of the same subsidence, was gradually converted into marsh-land, and
fell into decay. Koratsch states that a fresh-water spring wells up in the
cr 3 rpts of the principal church in this town ; this points to a continuance
of the movement. The broad basin of the Mille Campi near the present
mouth of the Brenta, which has come into existence since the beginning
of the seventeenth ceiitury, and is now covered by four to six feet of
water, must also be regarded as a local subsidence. Luciani believes that
although in many cases the cause is local, especially where buildings
subside unequally, like the towers of San Qiorgio dei Greci and San
Stefano, for example, yet a general movement of the strand-lino may also
be recognized, and he supports this view by observations on the rocky
coasts of the northern Adriatic. Reyer believes, like Collegno, that a
continuous settlement of the alluvium is in progress, and is inclined to
think that the whole mass of alluvium in coarse of time moves slowly out
towards the bottom of the sea.

How mobile the subsoil of the city is has been shown by the artesian
wells. After many futile attempts had been made at an earlier period,
Degous^ succeeded, between the years 1846 and 1849, in sinking numerous
deep bore-holes through the saturated land; some of them attained a
depth of 120 meters. The water thus reached rose above the level of the
streets; it was accompanied by vegetable matter, and frequently by vast
volumes of combustible gas, evidently a product of decomposition. In
course of time, however, the supply of all these wells has ceased or become
very much diminished, and the cause is supposed to lie in subterranean
movements of the ground

In some cases the spouting up of the water was accompanied by
veritable eruptions ; F. von Hauer has described an eruption of this kind
which occurred on April 11, 1866, near San Agnese. The boring had reached
a depth of about fifty meters, when a jet of mud, sand, and peat shot up more
than forty meters high, covering the roofs of the surrounding houses, and
converting the streets into streams of mud. The eruption continued with
intermittent force for several hours; the ground sank round about, and
the neighbouring houses had to be abandoned by their inhabitants K

* F. Paleocapa, Considerazioni sulla costituzione geolo^fica del bacino di Venezia
e sulla probabilita che vi riescano i pozzi artesian!, 8vo, Venezia, 1846; C. A. de
Challaye, Sur les puits art^siens a Venise, Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1847, 2" sdr., V,
pp. 23-26 ; J. Degous4e, Note sur les alluvions formant les lagunes v^nitiennes et sur
les puits art4siens de la ville de Venise, ex^utes par J. Degous4e de 1846 b 1849, op.
cit., 1850, 2* s4r., VII, pp. 481-484 ; T. A. Catullo, Materie terrose ottenute dalle per-
forazioni artesiane praticate nel Campo di S. Maria Formosa, Atti R. 1st. Veneto, 1858,
ser. 2, IV, p. 167. A general section of the borings after Degous^e and Laurent is given
by A. Tyloi, Formation of Deltas, Geol. Mag., 1872, IX, pL xi.

* F. V. Hauer, Wasserausbmeh bei einem artesischen Brunnen in Venedig; Jahrb.
k. k. geol. Beichsanst., 1866, XVI, Verbandlungen, p. 65.



444 MEDITERRANEAN IN HISTORIC TIMES [PABTm

The histoiy of Venice recounts many such incidents caused by the
peculiar nature of the subsoil. In A.D. 1105 Malamocca was inundated by
a great sea- wave, coinciding apparently with an earthquake, and after the
catastrophe the town remained under water, so as to be uninhabitable.
The bishopric was removed to Murano, as was the monastery of San
Gipriano, and in A. d. 1110 the Doge Ordelafo Faliero determined to re-
establish the town in a place better protected from the sea*. The year
1117 was distinguished by a aeries of extremely violent earthquakes.
Venice and Padua suffered much ; the cathedral of Cremona was thrown
down and thousands of persons lost their lives on January 18 of the
same year during an earthquake which was very violent at other places,
but less felt in Venice, the ground opened and sulphurous water poured
forth ; by this the church of San Hennagoras was set on fire and burnt
down

It would be superfluous to multiply examples, which show to what
high degree this alluvial land is saturated with water and combustible
gases. Under such circumstances stability of the strand-line is not to be
expected; and we have rather reason to marvel that the alluvium has
borne the heavy burden of great buildings in comparative repose for so
many centuries, and has thereby enabled so brilliant an example of human
culture to flourish on this spot.

It cannot be denied, however, that some evidence does exist in favour
of a positive movement of the strand-line, which is uniform, though trifling.
The most marked change is said to be visible at the foot of the Doges’

* It is not quite certain whether an earthquake was the cause ; most writers refer to
the chronicle of A. Dandolo ; he, however, writes (Muratori, Bemm Italicarum Scriptores,
XII, p. 260): ‘His diebus Mathemaucensis civitas similiter maris proflagrationibus et
incendiis devastata, tandem in totnm submersa est. Ez quibus angustiis Venetia, cuius
fama iam per orbem divulgata erat, in intimum conquassata est. Post haec terraemotus
immensis superveniens afflictis afflictionem adiunxit.’ Sanuto informs us in his Vitae
Ducum Venetorum (Muratori, XXII, p. 485) : ‘ In questo giomo la citth di Malamocco,
pel mare grande che venne, si sommerse ; e fn in Venezia un grandissimo tremuoto, che
rovind assai chiese e case . . . Nel 1110, neU’ ottavo anno del ducato di questo Doge,
svendosi compassione della chiesa episcopale di Malamocco e della citth dal mare
sommetsa, fii determiiuito di rifarla piii in qua sicura dal mare. . . .’

* L. A. Muratori, Annali d’ltalia, 4to, Milano, 1744, p. 384.

* A. Danduli, VenetorumyDucis, Chronicon Venetorum (Muratori, XII), p. 266 : ‘ XVmo
Ducis anno, die 13. lanuarii Indictione 10°** fiiit terraemotus, mitior, alicubi validior,
qui aedificia obruit, montes et rupes contrivit ; terra etiam aperitur et aquas sulphnreas
emittit ; et ez hoc combusta est Ecclesia Sancti Hermagorae cum adiacentis suis. Manus
autem Sancti loannis Baptistae divinitus illaesa ab igni permansit.' Sanuto says (op.
cit., p. 485) : ‘Nel 1117, in questi giomi a Venezia fn un grandissimo tremuoto, e venne
un’ acqua sulihrea, che appiced fuoco nella chiesa di Sant* Ermagora, e quella abbruccio.
Ma la man destra del glorioso S. Giovanbattista fh illesa trovata dal fhoeo, che hi
grandissimo miracolo a tutta la terra.’ The combustible gases of the spring in Campo
S. Polo were examined by Kauer and Bizio ; Sitzb. k. Akad. Wise. Wien, 1862, XLIV,
2. Abth., pp. 69, 70.



DINAEO.TAURIC COASTS


445


era. xx]

palaee ; it is very slight, and the statements as to its extent are conflicting.
But there can be no doubt that the repeated displacement of the river-
courses and their steady advance towards the sea must lead to some local
disturbance of the sea-level. Any diversion of the rivers from the lagoons
towards the south, and any improvements at their mouths, such as those
made in this century at Malamocco, must bring about a closer approxima-
tion of the sea-level to that of the Adriatic, or, that is, to a slight negative
displacement, while any neglect of these works might result in a slight
positive displacement If we possessed really exact information extending
over some centuries, as to the true mean level of the lagoons at various
times, then the influence of the regulating works would certainly find
expression in the record.

Ravenna is also built on piles ; parts of the floors of ancient buildings
are said to lie below mean tide, a fact susceptible of the same explanation
as in the cases just discussed

We are thus led to the following results : from time to time parts of
the alluvial land give way; the lagoons contain sometimes more, some-
times less water, but the position of the ancient bars shows that these
oscillations are not cumulative in their effect, and that no important dis-
placement has occurred.

6. The DinarO’Tawric coouAa of the MedUerra'tiean. While the whole
of the western Mediterranean from the Syrtis minor to Gibraltar lies
within one of the Eurasian arcs, the eastern is divided into two moieties :
a northern, which belongs to the Dinaro-Tauric arc ; and a southern, which
belongs to the northern border of the desert table-land. The northern
moiety is thus built on the Pacific type, the southern on the Atlantic ; the
northern includes Crete and Cyprus ; the southern, which is the foreland,
is represented by Malta ; and the two moieties stand in the same relation
to each other as the Caribbean sea to the gulf of Mexico. In America,
however, it is the northern part which is the foreland, and the delta of
the Mississippi, through which waters of the plateau are discharged,
corresponds to the delta of the Nile.

' The Spicilegium historiae ravennatae (in Muratori, Scriptores Rerum Italicarum, 1, 6,
p. 568) writes thus on the subject of the structure of the tem^ of Galla Placidia (a.d. 426) :

' Iterum Augusta sndibus locum implet super quos lapidetAundamenta componit. Erat
4 »nim palustris locus qui sua mobilitate structuram lapidum non admittebat.' Vitruvius,
ii. 9, writes on the piles : ‘ Est autem maxima id considerare Ravennae, quod ibi omnia
opera et publica et privata sub fundamentis eius generis habent palos ' (cf. supra, p. 8,
note 1). Further expressions of doubt occur in von Hoff, Geschichte der natUrlichen
Verftnderungen, I, p. 467 et seq., in particular p. 469 : ‘The supposed facts concepiing the
rising of the Adriatic sea are not all so definitelj con£nned as some Italians have wished
to represent them, and other learned men of this country who had an equal opportunity
of observing them, and had equally eyes to see them, have directly denied their
existence.*



446 MEDITERRANEAN IN HISTORIO TIMES [PAurm

A comparative study of seismic shocks felt at sea has led E. Rudolph
to the conclusion that these, like seismic and volcanic phenomena in
general, are much more frequent off coasts constructed on the Pacific type
than on the Atlantic ; and this applies not only to the coasts of the Ocean,
but also to the Dinaro-Tautic region of the eastern Mediterranean, for this
is much more disturbed by earthquakes than its foreland ; in like manner
the arc of the Antilles suffers much more than the gulf of Mexico \ This
important result requires some slight qualification, but only in so far as
that part of the foreland adjoining the Tauric chains along the great
fractures of Syria and beyond to the Dead sea is a region of frequent shocks.
In general, however, the contrast between the two regions is clearly
marked, and a striking example is afforded by the repose of Egypt as
contrasted with the frequent concussions in the Greek archipelago.

It is convenient, therefore, to separate these two regions, and we will
consider first the Dinaro-Tauric moiety, that is, the coasts and islands
which extend from Trieste to Antioch.

For this region we possess the masterly work of Puillon de Boblaye
on the coasts of the Peloponnesus, a work which though somewhat anti*
quated is a model of exact observation and unbiased inference; we have
also numerous scattered contributions; and recently two important and
closely connected regions, the Greek archipelago and the coast of Lycia,
have been described by Cold and Tietze respectively

On all these coasts the rivers are constantly transporting and depositing
their sediments, and large tracts of new alluvial land are in active growth.
This is the case from the mouth of the Narenta to the harbour of
Tarsus, already silted up in the time of the Romans. The writers of
antiquity were well acquainted with these facts. ‘ It seems clear to me,’
Herodotus remarks (ii. 10), ‘ that the interval between the ranges of hills
beyond the city of Memphis must at some time have been a bay of the sea ;
precisely resembling in this respect the land about Troy, and Teuthrania,
and Ephesus, and the plain of the Meander, to compare small things with
great; for none of the rivers which have built up these lands by their
deposits can be compared, as regards size, with even one of the five arms
into which the Nile is divided. But there are rivers which, though not
equal to the Nile in sii^, have yet accomplished great works. I should
like to name them ; among others not the least the Achelous, which fiows
through Acamania to the sea, and has already united the half of the
Echinades islands with the solid land.’

* E. Rudolph, Ueber Bubmarine Erdbeben und Eruptionen, Beitr&ge zur Geophysik,
edited by G. Gcrland, 8vo, Stuttgart, 1887, 1, pp. 188-365, in particular p. 244.

^ Expedition scientifique de Morde, II, 2, g^ologie et min4ralogie, par Puillon de
Boblaye et Th. Virlet, 4to, Paris, 1883, pp. 316-875 ; C. Cold, KttBtenverilnderungen im
Archipcl, 2. Au6., 8vo, Miinchen, 1886, map; E. Tietze, Beitrilge zur Geologic von Lykien,
Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1885, XXXV, pp. 367-884.



CH. XJ]


GROWTH OP DELTAS


447


Thucydides, Strabo, and Pausanias speak of the formation of land by
the Achelous. The river has been building out to sea for centuries, and
thus the broad lagoon of Missolonghi has arisen. Boblaye thinks it will
not be long before the current of the gulf of Lepanto sets a limit to the
growth of the land.

Similarly the Sperchios has slowly and steadily built up the plain of
Thermopylae, and the narrow pass is a pass no longer ^ ; in this way the
harbour of Milet has been filled up, and the island of Lade, lying in front
of it, united with the mainland by the Meander; and so, ^ally, by the
unceasing work of the rivers all those new tracts of land have been formed
which may be seen on the south coast of Asia Minor, but these it is
scarcely necessary to enumerate.

Not long ago a theory was advanced that all the great deltas are
situated over subsiding areas ; the discovery of peat and trunks of trees
at a great depth in the deltas of the Po, the Ganges, and the Nile was
adduced in its support. Since, however, deltas grow forward sometimes
by the formation of alluvial ridges on which the river fiows, and at others
by the spreading out of sheets of sediment, it is evident that such remains
as these may l>e deposited at great depths without any change in the
level of the strand. On the other hand, deltas have lately been regarded
as indications of elevation, but no sufficient evidence has been advanced
in favour of this theory I confess that I find it difficult to discover in
these formations anything else than the undisturbed progress of those
activities, which were familiar to Herodotus more than twenty-three
centuries ago, and to Strabo, who nearly nineteen centuries ago observed
and described them with the greatest accuracy and perspicuity. Their
growth may be hastened by deforestation, but they are proofs neither of
positive nor negative displacement of the strand; all that they indicate
is a state of repose.

In numerous localities recent shell beds are known, which contain frag-
ments of pottery ; they are no doubt ancient kitchen middens. Further,
perforations made by boring shells may be seen in Greece at various heights
above the sea ; in Asia Minor also such perforations are known to occur,
as at Marmaridjc, north of Rhodes, at a height of more than + 10 meters ^
I can find no reference to the presence of these bonngs in works of human
construction, and I believe that here, as in Itay, they date from pre-

* W. ViBcher, Erinnerangen und Eindrttcke aus GriechenlEuid, 2. Ausg., Basel, 1875,
p. 637 et seq. ; Bittner, Denkschr. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1878, XL, p. 19, pi. I, fig. 1.

* B. Gredner, Die Deltas, ihre Morphologie, geographische Verbreitnng qnd Ent-
stehungBbedingnngen ; Peterm. Mitth., 1878, Ergftnznngsheft No. 56.

’ C. Tezier, Asie Minenre, in L’llnivers Pittbresque, Histoire et description de tons
les peoples, 8to, Paris, 1862, p. 84. The statements'as to oscillations on Paros are not
proved; cf. Tietze, Verb. k. k. Geol. Reiebsanst., 1887, pp. 68-66.



448 MEDITERBANEAN IN HISTORIO TIMES [pAirr m

historic times. Indeed, with the exception of Crete, I know of no locality
which has famished evidence of any negative movement whatever within
the Dinaro-Taaric region. The volcanic ejectamenta of Santorin have no
relevance to this question.

At many places on the coast of Greece and Asia Minor mins and
monuments may be seen standing wholly or in part under water. , They
have been regarded as so ntany proofs of positive movement, but I thmk
we shall be able to show that a better interpretation for them is famished
by the writings of antiquity.

In the summer of 426 B.a, when a devastating earthquake affected the
shores of the gulf of Mali (bay of Zeituni), the alluvial land on which the
town of Skarphia was built broke away from the foot of the mountains
and sank into the sea. In 873 B. o., under similar circumstances, the coast
land on which Helike stood separated itself from the harder rocks, and the
town with its whole population was swallowed up by the sea. Neumann
and Fartsch have collected some very instractive accounts of these events
from the writings of ancient authors. Aegion, situated near the submerged
Helike, was visited by an earthquake in A. n. 23, and again in 1817 and
1861. Julias Schmidt has described in great detail how daring the esrth>
quake of December 26, 1861, the whole mass of alluvium separated from
the older formations along a fissure thirteen kilometers in length, and
gliding down was engulfed in the sea K

So, too, in July, 1688, Smyrna, and in particular the Turkish fort at
the entrance of the harbour, was submerged, and in the same way the
alluvium of Mytilene gave way during the earthquake of 1867*. This,
indeed, as Boblaye traly remarks, is the common history of all those
towns and harbours on the coasts of the Peloponnesus, the ruins of which
arc visible beneath the sea, as at Epidaurus, in the vicinity of cape Skili,
and of Nauplia, as well as various other places. It is the same process as,
in the earthquake of 1783, separated along a fissure several miles in
length the Tertiary land of Calabria from the ancient mass of Aspromonte,
as during the same year caused the harbour walls of Messina to sink
into the sea, in 1755 the great quay of Lisbon, and in 1692 the harbour
foundations and warehouses of Fort Boyal in Jamaica. Such subsidences
depend on many circumstances— on the steepness of the rocky slopes
against which the alluvial land rests, on the nature of the alluvial land
itself, on the underground water, on the mass and distribution of the load
due to buildings and other constructions, and finally, on the intensity and

* C. Neumann and J. Fartsch, Physikalische Oeographie von Oriechenland, 8vo,
Breslau, 1885, p. 321 et seq. ; J. Schmidt, Studien ttber Erdbeben, 2. Ausg., 8vo, Leipzig,
1879, p. 78 et seq.

* Fouque, Rapport sur les tremblements de terre de C^phalonie et de Hdtelin en
1867, 8?o, Paris, 1867, pp. 11, 13.



THE MAUSOLEUM OP MAKRI


449


OH. xr]

direction of the shock ; it is even conceivable that it is not the shock itself,
but the transitory unloading of the submarine slope due to the passage
of the seismic wave, which produces the effect. Such a subsidence may
indeed occur simply through overweighting, and independently of any
earthquake, as happened at Zug in Switzerland, where the alluvium
slipped down on the margins of a lake. None of these phenomena, how-
ever, are dislocations of the rocky crust of the earth, and they have no
connexion with oscillations of the strand-line.



Fio. 41. Tht Maitsolmm in the Bay qf Makri, After n photograph kindly communicated

by Dr. F. von Luschan.

The indications of subsidence recorded from ^e south coast of Asia
Minor appear to have the same origin.

The best known example is afforded by the bay of Mahri. Fellows de-
scribes a great mausoleum standing here in the midst of the water (Fig. 41),
and observes that a daily rise and fall of the water level is visible on the
side of the tomb ; this is caused by a regular change of the wind, and affects
a zone of about two feet. Fellows further points out that not only is
one side of the mausoleum broken open, as Js the case with most monu-
ments of the kind which have been visited by treasure-seekers, but the

ag


■OLLAin



460 MEDITEEKANEAN IN HISTORIC TIMES [part ni

massive cover has been displaced to one side, and from this he concludes
that the subsidence of the tomb, is the result of an earthquake. Spratt
and Forbes, on the other hand, referring to the same monument, state that
rt has been bored by marine animals up to a third of its height, showing
that the ground on which it stands once lay considerably lower than at
present, and that it is now probably rising. This would indicate oscilla-
tion of the strand. But Dr. F. von Luschan, who has examined the tomb
with very great care, kindly informs me that the description given by
Fellowes is correct, and that borings by marine animals are not to be seen.
This instance is therefore susceptible of the same explanation as that
found for the subsided buildings on the coast of Greece

In the latest general account of the evidence presented by the coast
of Lycia, von Luschan enumerates the following cases : the mausoleum of
Makri just mentioned, which stands in the water near Kekova, the sub-
merged coast road on the Klimax, and submerged foundations in Sand-
shakly and around Kekova, as well as at Tristomo on the island of
Kekova. The statements which have been made as to negative movement
or elevation of the ground rest on insufficient evidence \

With regard to the coast road on the Klimax, Luschan says we must
conclude that in the time of Alexander it was possible with a favourable
wind to march along the coast; at present this is no longer the case;
twice the rood ascends to a height over steep cliffs. Observations made

‘ C. Fellows, An Account of Discoveries in Lycia, 8vo, London, 1841, pp. 112, 118, fig. ;
by the same. Travels and Researches in Asia Minor, &c., 8vo, London, 1852, p. 302, fig. ;
Spratt and Forbes, Travels in Lycia, Milyas, and the Cibyratis, 8vo, London, 1847, II,
p. 189. Dr. Luscfafin writes: * In the present case it certainly appears as though Spratt
and Forbes, otherwise very trustworthy and acute observers, have been mistaken ; I at
least failed to discover a single place on the mausoleum which could be described as
bored by marine animals.” The strange statement ‘*to a third of its height,” which
leaves us ignorant whether the height referred to is its entire height above the surface
of the water, or the height of the Soros proper, the tomb beneath the cover, shows
that the observation in question was made in a hasty and superficial manner not usual
in these authors. I feel convinced that the mausoleum is uniformly weathered, certainly
more on the windward than on the opposite side. I have never seen rocks bored by
marine animals, and therefore do not venture to give a definite opinion, but I have
examined the mausoleum, particularly as regards these borings, with the book by Spratt
and Forbes in my hand, aTid I could find absolutely no other holes than such as are
everywhere produced by ero’tion in the limestone of Lycia. Fellows’ explanation of the
strongly weathered dark band at the existing water level appears to me entirely
satisfactory ; it certainly corresponds to the existinff, more or less, regular oscillations
of the water level.* Dr. Luschan estimates the submerged part at 2*1 meters at least,
to which we must add the original height of the structure above the water. Tietze
unfortunately has only seen the mausoleum from a distance ; Beitrilge zur Geologie von
Lykien, p. 294.

^ I borrow these statements from the proof sheets of Reisen in Lykien und Karien,
Bd. II, p. 46, note 2, placed at my disposal by the great kindness of Petersen and
F. V. Luschan.



CH. Zl]


AURA MARINA


461


at low water in Januaiy, 1885, show that ‘ the sandy ground at the foot
of these steep clifis, which formerly offered a practicable road, is now
covered by the sea to a depth of four meters/

All these examples of positive movement are of the same nature As
those local spasmodic subsidences which we have described as affecting the
coasts of Greece.

Benndorf and Niemann mention submerged walls at some other points
also, and in addition great rectangular excavations hewn in the rocky
coast about Kekova and in Jali bay, ‘immediately above the surface of
the water and extending below it’; these are believed to be quarries ^
Tietze shares this opinion, and thinks that they indicate positive move-
ment. The purpose of these works is not known; in Egypt also, near
Alexandria, in the consolidated calcareous sands of the outer bar at the
mouth of the Nile, similar rectangular excavations are to be seen which
extend some distance beneath the sea; but in this region a sensible dis-
placement of the strand has certainly not taken place.

Thus as regards the coasts of Greece and Asia Minor the observations
at our disposal do not enable us to recognize with certainty any displace-
ment of the strand-line within the historic period. The indications of
positive movement are probably everywhere the result of subsidences of
the alluvial land which rests against the rock; indications of negative
movement during the historic period are altogether absent.

On the other hand there are definite signs of a very long continued
repose. These consist of a plain of erosion and a line of sea caves which
are to be seen at many localities along the existing coast, particularly in
the Peloponnesus. ♦

The coastal zone, which is exposed to the influence of the waves and
surf, has been admirably described by Boblaye *. This region is termed
the aura marina. Its characters appear most clearly where the hard lime-
stone formed a rocky shore, and at such places a vertical series of several
zones of different colour may be distinguished. Close above the breakers
lies a dark band ; roughness, fissures, and cavities increase its sombre hue ;
its lowest part is covered by a green film. Above this baud follows bare
rock, in colour dazzling white, sometimes also reddish or yellow; above
this is a grey zone ; here the first green patches vegetation begin to
appear; finally, above the extreme limits reached by the waves, which
seldom ascend higher than thirty-five or forty meters, there begins a con-
tinuous mantle of vegetation. The restricted tidal zone which lies beneath
these coloured bands is hollowed out in the shore. It extends some mej^rs

* O. Benndorf and Q. Niemann, Reisen in Lykien und Karien, foL, Vienna, 1884, p. 28.

I am indebted to Hofrat Benndorf for much kind infi^mation on this subject.

* ExpMition scientifique de Horde ; II, 2 ; Gdologie et Mindralogie, par Puillon de
Boblaye et T. Virlet, pp. 837-346.


Og a



462 MEDITERRANEAN IN HISTORIC TIIOIS [parthi

above and below mean tide. Its submerged part is a plain of erosion
which at first slopes very gently out to sea, and then plunges abruptly to
a great depth. In the hard limestone its breadth is rarely so much as four
dr five meters, but in softer rocks it is much greater, i. e. at Marathonisi,
where the Tertiary beds have been so far washed away that a steep cliff
has been formed sixty meters in height, and from the foot of this a man
may walk out to sea for 200 meters without getting out of his depth ; this
is also the case near Aegina, and particularly near Modon, where at a dis-
tance of 200 meters from the shore the sea bottom sinks rapidly into
deep water. Where, as near Nauplia, the shore consists of breccia or
conglomerate the waves may undermine it to the extent of eight or ten
meters. The cliff thus comes to be undercut, overhangs, and is pierced by
rows of sea caves.

In the zone of erosion off cape Grosso, between the bay of Messenia
and the gulf of Laconia, there is a line of larger and smaller caves which
so frequently communicate with one another that the coast appears to
be almost continuously undercut ; the sea rushes into them with a roar
like distant thunder. This is the promontory which even in ancient times
was known as the Thyrides or Oatea of the Goad *. Similar caves also occur
at cape Matapan, on the rocky island in front of the harbour of Navarin,
and at other places. These sea caves are difierent from those formed in the
same limestone by percolating water ; they are never divided into stages,
but if joints are present may attain a not inconsiderable length; their
floor never extends far beneath the sea. Under such circumstances a long-
continued stability of the strand-line must be inferred.

In Asia Minor we meet again with similar features. Scherzer remarks
that in the bays of Agrilia, Sika, and Kalamaki, on the south side of the
peninsula of Tshesme, outside the gulf of Smyrna, ‘ the cliffs are undercut
by the play of the waves to the extent of several feet, so that some
isolated rocks look as though they had a head and neck, and give proof
that the sea-level has remained unchanged for many thousands of years V
Herr Bukowsky, who gave particular attention to this question when
studying the island of Rhodes, informs me that he could nowhere
find traces of movement belonging to the historic period, but in some
localities he observed^ that the undercut part of the cliff corresponded
with mean-tide level.^ Professor Benndorf has drawn my attention
to the fact that the lagoon in which the fish oracle of Apollo Surios
had its seat near Sura, north-east of Eekova, may perhaps still be
recognized, though now silted up. The spring mentioned by Artemidor
and Pliny is still visible near the ruins of the temple; it flowed into
a lagoon, in which by cutting through the bar the fish, as they entered

* Strabo, viii. 2. 2, 4. 4, 5. 1 ; Boblaye, op. cit., p. 339.

‘ C. V. Scherzer, Smyrna, 8vo, Vienna, 1873, p. 5, note.



CH. xi] BAGUSA 453

from the sea, were made use of for purposes of the oracle in the same way
as elsewhere for capture

If we follow on the map the site of the subsidence of the alluvial
deposits of Mytilene in 1867, and of the subsidence at Smyrna in 1638,
the undercut shore on the south side of the peninsula of Tshesme, the
Pholas borings at Mermeridje found at a height of over ten meters, the
undercut coast of Rhodes, and finally, the submerged base of the mausoleum
of Makri, we see clearly from the position of these localities how alleged
traces of positive and negative movement follow each other in close
alternation along the coast. The borings of Mermeridje can alone bo
regarded as genuine indications of a change in the level of the strand-line,
but these must date from a time long prior to the historic period ; within
the historic period there is absolutely no evidence of a displacement either
positive or negative; on the contrary, the character of the strand both
here and in Greece points to a long-continued repose.

Wiebel believes tliat the existence of ancient buildings beneath the
sea-level in the bay of Savws may be explained by subsequent sinking
of the strand after violent earthquake shocks. He describes the caves on
the coast of Cephalonia, in which the same singular effects of illumination
are produced as in the Blue Grotto of Capri, and concludes that ' all the.se
caves, the floor of which lies below or only a little above the sea-level,
have certainly been formed solely by the action of the waves \

It would be a useless repetition to cite all the several cases in which
the submerged remains of walls and mosaic floors, on the Dalmatian coast
especially, have been adduced as indications of positive movement®.
Dalmatia has frequently been visited by violent earthquakes ; I will only
mention that of Ragusa which occurred on April 6, 1667 ♦. During the
shocks the alluvial land on the coast was disturbed and in places sank into
the sea, as in Greece and Asia Minor.

Officers of the Austrian Navy have informed me that at some places
the limestone cliffs on the coast of Dalmatia have been deeply undercut,

’ 0. Benndorf and 6. Niemann, Reisen in Lykien und Karien, I, p. 31, note 1 ; II,
p. 46, note 1.

* E. W. M. Wiebel, Die Insel Kephalonia und die Meermtthlen von Argostoli, 4to,
Hambuiig, 1874, pp. 45, 47. Fouqu^ has given a simple explanation of sea colks in his
work on the earthquakes of Cephalonia quoted above. /

’ Von Hoff, Eloeden, and Morlot have collected examples of this kind; the last
enumeration is contained in Bol. R. Com. geol. Ital., 1874, V, pp. 37-60. Hofrat von
Waniek, director of the maritime works at the mouth of the Nabresina, told me that he
had met with no signs of a recent alteration of the strand in this region.

* During this earthquake peculiar movements of the sea occurred; an eye4ritness
writes: 'Ritirossi il mare, che per due braccia di altezza tre giomi stette fuori del suo
naturale*; Lettera de P. Vitale Andriasci, Min. Oss., Ragusa, 16 April 1667, reprinted
in L. Stulli, Sulle detonazioni dell’ Isola di Meleda, altera letters., 8vo, Bologna, 1828,
pp. 52-54.



464 MEDITEBRANEAN IN HISTORIC TIMES [pabtiu

but at the level of mean tide. I am indebted in particular to Fuchs and
von Milic, ensigns of the Royal Imperial Navy, for a detailed description,
of the Pettini di Bagusa (Fig. 42). A ridge of rock jutting out into the
sea has been worn into a number of comb>like denticulations ; the first
tooth is cut out at the level of mean tide, and rises to a height of
—0*1 meter; the second reaches the same height; the third and fourth
are shown in the illustration (Fig. 42). The undercut cliff also surrounds
all the succeeding teeth; it has not been formed by the action of the
waves, which ascend much higher, but lies in a zone where the sea-level
daily rises and falls in continual and gentle oscillation.



Fra. 42. The third and/ourih teeth the Pettini di Jiafusa,

(According to the measurements made by Herr von Hilic, ensign of the RoyjA

Imperial Navy.)


6. T/te south-eastern Mediterranean. After the analysis of the data
relating to the coast of Syria by Diener, I cannot admit that any change
of level within the historic period has been definitely established for that
region *.

The Dead sea lies in a fault-trough which extends northwards as far
as the Great Hermon, and consequently embraces the whole valley of the
Jordan, together with tK*) lakes of Tiberias and Huleh (I, pp. 368-886).
The important work of Diener has shown that north of the Great Hermon
the Bek4a forms a second trough joining that of the Jordan and striking
to the north-north-east, that Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon are horsts, and that
the great fractures, which determine the structure of the land, separate
in virgation east of the Anti-Lebanon.

* C. Diener, Libanon: Grundlinien der phyeuchen Geographie und Geologie von
Mittel-Syrion, 8vo, Vienna, 1886, pp. 90-103.


456


OH. zi] TEBBAGES OF THE JOBOAN LABE

The Dead sea, the level of which stands at —892 meters, sinks on its
east shore to a depth of 400 meters, and lake Tiberias, with a level of
—212 meters, is 250 meters in depth. Around this lake Lortet has dis-
covered terraces, which extend up to the existing level of the Meditei;-
ranean, and include the whole valley of the Jordan together with the
Dead sea. Hull has also met with terraces on the south side of the Dead
sea up to about the same height, and has shown that the uppermost of
the southern terraces and the higher terraces of the Jordan valley contain
living species of Melania and Molanopsis; Noetling, likewise, has found
existing species of Melania in the continuation of the same alluvium on
the south side of lake Tiberias, and has even discovered them beneath
one of the basalt flows which descend from the Djolan \

Hull correctly infers from his observations that a single continuous
inland lake must have extended from lake Huleh on the north into the
valley of the Arabah on the south for a distance of over 300 kilometers.
Noetling, however, has shown that at a later period basaltic lava from the
Djolan flowed into the trough between lakes Huleh and Tiberias, and that
this flow was afterwards cut through by the Jordan.

We may speak of this great inland water as the Jordan lake. It was
800 meters deep. Fresh-water mollusca lived on its shores ; and up to the
present day fish belonging partly to the fauns of the Nile, and partly to
that of the Euphrates, have maintained their existence in lake Tiberias.
The beds of gypsum and salt of Jebel Usdom began to be formed as
evaporation became accelerated ; with the fall of the water level the lake
became separated into two ; in the depression between lake Tiberias and
the Dead sea the course of the Jordan arose, and finally, in the region of
the deepest hollow, the briny residuum of the Dead sea was left behind.

In this way those horizontal terraces and strand-lines of the ancient
lake Jordan were produced which extend in a meridional direction for
nearly two and a half degrees. These terraces are due not to telluric
movement, but to excess of evaporation. All observations hitherto mode
point to the conclusion that the sea has never found an entrance into this
fault-trough. We do not know, it is true, whether the highest strand-lines
of lake Jordan are precisely on the level of the adjacent Mediterranean.
If such a correspondence as exists has been brought about by the discharge
of the waters of the lake into the Mediterranean, we should bo justified

* E. Hull, Mount Seir, Sinai, and Western Palestine, 8to, London, 1885, pp. 100, 106 ;
and by the same. The Surrey of West Palestine, 4to, London, 1886, p. 79 et seq. Hull
was the first to show that the Salt mountain, Jebel Usdom, really belongs to the recent
formations of the Dead sea. F. Noottling, Geologisch-palftontologische Mittheilv/ngen
aus Palftstina, I : Ueber die LagerungsrerhUltnisse einer qnart&ren Fauna im Gebiete
des Jordanthales, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1886, XXXVIII, pp. 807-823 ; and Geolo-
gische Skizze der Umgebung von el-Hammi, Zeitsdhr. deutsch. PalftstinarVereins, X,
pp. 59-88, map.



466 MEDITERRANEAN' IN HISTORIC TIMES [pAirrin

in concluding that the level of the Mediterranean has not sensibly changed
since the formation of the great trough, nor during the period of evapora-
tion through which this region has passed. On this point we must await
further observations.

We will now enter the table-land which extends between the Dead sea
and the Nile.

We have already mentioned that Hull found the traces of an ancient
strand near Suez at a height of about 200 feet (60 meters), that this level
very nearly coincides with the height of 64 meters which Schweinfurth
assigns to the upper zone of Pholas borings on the Mokattam hills
near Cairo, and that Zittel gives 64 meters as the height of the marine
deposits near the Pyramids of Ghizeh. These closely corresponding figures
were obtained for the shores of a sea whence a few Erythraean species
crossed into the basin of the existing Mediterranean (I, pp. 379, 380).
Near Chaza, Hull mentions marine beds at a height of 200 to 220 feet
(60-67 meters) *. Schweinfurth has lately met with the same deposits at
the same height of 60 to 70 meters near Ssedment in the Nile valley
(lat. 29" 20' N.), and thus placed beyond doubt a conjecture frequently
entertained that this valley had once been occupied by the sea

Thus the whole of lower Egypt is surrounded by traces of a sea,
the deposits of which rise from 60 to 70 meters aliove the existing
surface of the Mediterranean, and below these traces of the ancient strand
extends the alluvial land of the Nile, where man may look back further
than at any other spot into the past history of his race. But all the most
ancient records of Egyptian civilization, and all the still older remains of
the stone age which arc found in the same region, are more recent than
by far the greater part of the fluvial land, and conseqxiently incomparably
more recent than the traces of the ancient sea ; all the thousands of years
of human history give no parallax of time, not even the remotest indica-
tion which would help us to number the ages during which the hydro-
graphic conditions of this country have remained essentially the same as
at the present day.

These conditions are of a very peculiar nature.

West of the Nile and the town of Ssedment mentioned above, the de-
pression of the Fayflm lies in the desert, separated from the river valley
only by a narrow ridge.'^' In its north-western part lies Birket-el-Qerfin,

’ Hull, Survey of West Palestine, p. 74. Further north marine deposits were en-
countered up to 250 feet (76 meters) and even higher; cf. C. Post, On a Deposit of
Marine Shells in the Alluvium of the Latakia Plain in Syria, Nature, 21 August, 1884
(XXX) ; but Dicner assigns a greater ag;e to them, Libanon, p. 101.

' G. Schweinfurth, Reise in das Depressionsgebiet im Umkreise des FajOm im Januar
1886 ; Zeitschr. Qes. f. Erdk. Berlin, 1886, XXI, p. 100. The mollusca of the neighbour-
hood of Ghizeh are enumerated hy Kayer-Eymar, Zur Geologie Egyptens, Yierteljahrschr.
Naturf. Ges. Zttrich, August, 1886, XXXI.



CH. xi] PAYtTM AND RAYAN 467

the remains of the ancient lake Moeris. In April, 1885, its level stood
40 meters below that of the Mediterranean ; it is now slowly rising.
The chief town Medinet-el-Fayftm, near the ancient town of Arsinoe (Cro-
codilopolis), lies on a terrace at a height of 23 meters. The narrow ridge
between the Nile valley and the Fayhm was cut through in ancient
times to afford an ingress into the depression for the waters of the Bahr
Yusuf (Joseph’s Canal) which branches off, far above, from the main
stream. West and south-west of the Fayhm are other tracts of the desert
lying beneath the level of the sea ; in recent times they have been desig-
nated by the general name of the Ray&n ; this is the middle part of the
depression; it reaches a level of —19 to —20 meters. Cope Whitehousc
regards the Ray&n rather than Birket-el-Qeriin as the site of the ancient
lake Moeris^.

El-Lahun, in the Nile valley, is situated on the alluvial land, where
the Bahr Yusuf enters the Fayhm (at a height of about 27 meters).
A little to the south of it the marine deposits of Ssedment occur, as we
have seen, at a height of 60 to 70 meters, but Schweinfurth has not been
able to trace these marine deposits anywhere into the Fayhm or Rayd,n,
the borders of which seem to be formed of fairly horizontal beds of lower
and middle Tertiary age. We must therefore conclude, pending further
infonnation, that these two subsidences are related to one another in the
same way as the shotts west of Gabes, and the region of the Jordan. The
relict strand-lines extend from the Mediterranean nearly to the summit of
the threshold of Gabes, and yet in the shotts which sink below the existing
level of the sea no traces of a recent marine submersion are visible. For
this reason the inbreak is regarded as of no great age (I, p. 359). We
met with the same phenomenon on lake Jordan; it recurs, as existing
observations would seem to show, in the Fayhm and the Ray&n ; for these
depressions can only be interpreted as subsidences.

In the Ray&n Schweinfurth encountered no recent marine or fresh-water
sediments ; in the Fayfkm pale grey fresh-water marls with Melania and
fish remains reach a height of about forty meters above the lake, that is,
almost up to the level of the Mediterranean. Medinet-el-Fayfim, however,
stands on a deposit of Nile alluvium which has been carried into the
depression by the Bahr Yusuf. Ancient buildings of great size appear to
have been buried under this accumulation in th^ course of the last few
thousand years. The Bats, the northern of the two principal branches
into which the Bahr Yusuf divides after it has entered the Fayfiin, has
excavated its bed seventeen meters deep in its own alluvia.

We have now reached the site of one of the most magnificent works
ever executed by the hand of man. The overflow of the high-water Nile

’ Cope Wliitehouae, The Bahr J&suf and the Prophecy of Jacob ; Proc. Soc. Bibl. Arch.,
Nov. and Dec., 1885, with maps, et passim.



468 MEDITEBRANEAN IN HISTOEIG TIMES [pabtiu

was conducted from the Bahr Yusuf through the canal of Menhy, which
was furnished with sluices to the west and formed lake Moeris; lower
Egypt was thus protected from floods, and at the same time a part of the
desert was converted into a marvellous garden, famous many thousands
of years after the work was completed for its vines, roses, and olives. On
the canal lay the richly adorned and extensive structures of the labyrinth
with its flat roofs formed of great slabs of stone. Not far from the
existing Medinet-el-Fayftm, where the ruins of Arsinoe (Crocodilopolis) lie,
there rose on a space surrounded by the lake the temple of the crocodile
god Sebak ; crocodiles and a great abundance of fishes inhabited the lake.

We can readily understand and indeed share the admiration with
which Herodotus, Strabo, Diodorus, and Masiidi speak of these works.
The Egyptian manuscripts which have been freshly explained by Fletje
represent the Menhy canal as divided lengthways down its middle. On
one side fish enter, on the other they leave. They all belong to the same
species, which Dr. Steindachner recognizes from the description as Mor-
myrus cachive, Geofir. ; it is still common in the Nile. In addition to
the fish which mark the course of the water, we see a band of marsh-
dwelling birds, outside this a band of trees, and outside this again
(as shown by a second papyrus) the forty-two temples standing on the two
sides of the river ; each temple corresponds to one of the forty-two Nomes
of upper and lower Egypt as far as the nineteenth Nomos of Felusium,
at the eastern end of the delta, where at the present day the steamships
from the Mediterranean enter the Suez canal at port Said. A third
manuscript relates the creation of the lake; it was 52 1 kilometers long
and 5^ kilometers broad; the Birket-el-Qerfin represents its existing
remains '.

‘The waters of this lake,’ says Herodotus, ‘are not the spontaneous
production of the ground, which is particularly dry in this region ; they
come from the Nile through a canal and flow six months from the Nile
into the lake, and six months from the lake into the Nile ; during the six
months after the discharge begins the lake daily brings the royal treasury
a talent in silver as the value of the fish ; but at other times the daily
value is only twenty minac. The inhabitants of the country tell me also
that the lake empties its waters into the Libyan desert by a subterranean
channel which runs westwards towards the interior, along the bend
situated above Memphis^.’ The westerly position would correspond to
the KaySn.

Such was the beneficent character of the national treasure with which

^ W. Plejte, Over drie handschriften van papyrus bekend onder de titels van Papyrus
du Lac Moeris, du Fayoum et du Labyrinthe, Verb. K. Ak. Wetensch. Amsterdam, Afd.
Lettcrk., 1886, XVI, pp. 1-50, pi. '

’ Herodotus, Euterpe, ii. 149, 160.



LAKE MOEBIS


469


OH. zi]

Amunemha III of the twelfth dynasty, ‘the well-beloved of Sebak, the
lord of the island of beauties,’ presented his people. Its chief features,
namely, the formation and maintenance of the fiahr Yusuf, the turning
aside of this branch of the Nile towards the desert, and the worship of the
crocodile on the island of a lake abounding in fish, we recognize without
di£Sculty in the expressions of the prophet Ezekiel (xxix. 3-5), which
Dr. Adolf Beer has been kind enough to translate literally for me as
follows : —

8. ‘ Lift up thy voice and apeak, thus mith the Lord, the Eternal : I come
against' thee, Pharaoh, King of Egypt, thou great crocodile {animal of the
lake), who lieth in his rivers and eayeth : Mine is the river, and I have
made it foi' myself. 4. And I put a ring in thy jaws, and hang the fishes
of thy river in thy coat of scales, and I draw thee out of thy river, and all
the fishes of thy river which hang on thy coat of scales. 5. And I abandon
thee to the desert, thee, and all the fishes of thy sea, and on the plain thou
shalt lie, neilher taken up nor gathered togdher . . .

St. Jerome has compared this passage with that of Isaiah xix. 5, 6 :
‘ Et arescH aqua de mari, et fluvius desolabitur atque siccahitur et defi-
cient flumina, . . . ’ and concludes that it is not the open sea which is
meant here, but the lake Mareotis'. The passage refers to the great
national work of the Egyptians at lake Moeris, as is shown by the mention
of the crocodile (animal of the lake) and the fishes, and in particular by
the words, ‘ Mine is the river, and I have made it for mysdf'

When Strabo visited this region, about the year 23 B. c., he was still
able to be present at the feeding of the holy crocodile, and praised the
excellent oil and the fertility of the Nomos of Arsinoe^. To-day the
fertility is no more, the servants of Sebak have disappeared, but the Bahr
Yusuf still exists and still flows towards the depression in the desert lying
to the west. The forty-two Nomes which once woi’shipped their gods near
the canal of Menhy comprised all the country as far as the shores of the
Mediterranean, and nowhere is any other change of level to be seen except
such as has been caused by the increasing thickness of the Nile mud, or
by the accumulation of sand. We must therefore admit that this frag-
ment of the earth’s crust has maintained its stability throughout the
whole period.

The lowland below Memphis was formed by tile advance of the main
branches of the river into the bay on self-constructed dams, a process now
taking place on the Mississippi. While the dams were being extended
further and further forwards, the spaces on their inner side were silted
up, and so the delta originated. But the pushing forward of the dams
was not the only process. The fresh water, lighter than that of the sea,

* S. Hieronj^ Opera, ed. Vallars, l735, IV, p. 208.

* Strabo, xvii. 1. 85, 88.



460 MEDITEREANEAN IN HISTORIO TIMES [pAiain

spread out sandy mud in a very flat cone, which extended for a great
distance into the sea; upon and within this the dams stood. A day’s
journey from the land, says Herodotus, the sounding-line still brings up
mud from a depth of two fathoms, for so far does the alluvium extend \

The sea waves, coming in over this flat cone, have washed out the sand
from the mud and so built up the great crescentic spits of sand and friable
sandstone which stretch from one mouth to the next, connecting them
one with another, and which cut off from the sea the great lagoons, not yet
silted up, extending from lake Mareotis to lake Menzaleh. In the west,
as far as the ruins of Canopus, and perhaps as far as the island of
Nelson opposite them, the loose sand has been consolidated into calcareous
sandstone. Owing to the direction of the winds a slight movement to the
east prevails; this renders possible the high salinity of the sea west of
the Nile, and Spratt predicted that it would prove a difflculty in the
maintenance of the Suez canal ; but the formation of the spit in front of the
harboiir of port Said has shown that the effect is trifling \ Nevertheless
in the course of time it has sufficed to build up long narrow bars east of
the delta, extending from lake Sirbonis to the mountain of Casius, and from
this still further to the east.

The mouths of the Nile present just as complicated a structure as those
of so many other rivers, and here, too, wo must distinguish the accumu-
lations formed by the river, and advancing towards the sea, from the
crescentic sandy bars directed across the river dams. An extremely long
period was doubtless necessary to give rise to these natural growths, but
as far as even human tradition extends we And them already completed
and occupying approximately their existing position.

It is true that near Alexandria the sea may be seen to enter the tombs
excavated in the loose sandstone of the coast, as well as other cavities, and
near the coast the road may even lie here and there below the level of
low tide. Fraas has given an account of these facts *. But Alexandria was
founded twenty-two centuries ago on the site of the ancient Rhacotis, and
the neighliourhood was certainly as flat then as it was subsequently when
Strabo described the town, and as it still remains. Then, as at present,

* Herodotus, Euterpe, ii. 5. If Herodotus had travelled to Alexandria by the existing
line of mail steamboats heVrould not have encountered this, for the west winds do not
allow the mud to be carried so far west, and the great accumulation begins at the
Canopic mouth.

’ Captain Spratt, An Investigation of the Effect of the prevailing Wave Influence on
the Nile’s Deposits, Blue Book for 1859, with maps ; A. Lavalley, Communications sur
IcB travaux d’cxucution du canal maritime de Tlsthme de Suez, Extrait du Compte
Rendu de la Society des Ingenieurs Civils, 8vo, Paris, 1869, pp. 64, 80, 106, ISl.

’ 0. Fraas, Aus dem Orient, p. 174 et seq. According to Wilkinson the chief square
of the Frankish quarter, which lies low, is situated on parts of the harbour which have
been filled up ; Handbook for Travellers in Egypt, 8vo, 1867, p. 91.



LAOUS SIEBONIS


461


OH. zi]

there lay before the main body of the bar the famous island of Pharos,
and the Heptastadium which connected the island with the bar may still
be recognized. It is, therefore, impossible that a positive movement can
have resulted in any important displacement in the course of this long
period. Towards the north-east, where the spit projects as a promontory,
and where Her^lcum once stood, near the Canopic mouth, Paris landed
nearly thirty-one centuries ago, and there, according to Herodotus, Helen
and the treasures of Mcnelaus were taken from him at the command of
Ramses III ^

Through the mouth of the Bolbes the Milesians entered with thirty
ships in the time of Psammetich, and through the Pelusian branch the fleet
of Alexander the Great sailed towards Memphis. Thousands of yeara ago
the fresh-water canal flowed as at present through the Wady Tumilat, and
from the end of the Wady made a sharp l)end towards the Red sea. If
we open the works of Brugsch, Schleiden, or the many other investigators
who have attempted to determine the features of the fluvial network of
the delta as it existed in antiquity, we shall be constantly impressed by
the fact that the plan has remained fundamentally unchanged so far as
human tradition exists No perceptible elevation, bulging up, or other
disturbance of the fall has occurred.

This constancy is distinctive not only of the fluvial network. It is also
evident that the flat country east of Pelusium and the bar lying in front
of the Lacus Sirbonis as far as the Casius (Ras-el-Kasrfin) had the same
structure many thousands of years ago ns at the present day. In ancient
times this narrow bar aflbrded the chief route for traffic, indeed it appears
to have been the only road between Syria and Egypt. There are numerous
proofs of this. Herodotus describes the way along the coast over the
Casius as the only practicable road from Phoenicia, ' and at lake Sirbonis,
in which according to the legend Typhon lies concealerl, Egypt begins.’
Diodorus and Strabo give a particularly detailed description, and Polybius
already mentions the pitfalls {^ipaOpa) of lake Sirbonis. Diodorus further
relates that Artaxerxes, on his march to Egypt, lost a part of his men in
these holes owing to his want of knowledge of the country, and Strabo
states that during his stay in Alexandria the sea had exceeded its limits
and flooded the land, so that the mountain of Casius became an island, and
the land past it to Phoenicia was navigable for ships

These pitfalls, however, as may be seen from the descriptions, were

’ Herodotus, Euterpe, ii. 113; Schliemann, Ilioa, p. 186, note; Brugseh-Bej, op. cit.,
pp. 819, 824.

* H. Brugsch, Die Geographie des alten Aegyptens, 4to, Leipzig, 1857, 1, p. 84 et seq. ;
M. J. Schleiden, Die Landenge von SuSs : zur Beurtheilung des Canal-Projects und des
Auszuges der Israeliten aus Aegypten, 8vo, Leipzig, 1858.

* Diodorus, Bibl. hist., i. 80 and zvi. 46 ; Strabo, Oeogr., i. 3, 13.



462 MEDITEBRANBAN IN HISTORIC TmS [PArara

regions of treacherous quicksand in the lake which was in process of
silting up.

It has been repeatedly maintained that it was by this road to Syria
that the Israelites left Egypt. In recent times Schleiden has defended
this view with much vigour^. The most important evidence, however, has
been furnished by Brugsch, who has discovered a manuscript in the'British
Museum, in which an Egyptian official, three thousand years ago, reports
the pursuit of two 'fugitive thieves; they had escaped in an easterly
direction along the Syrian military road across the bar, and the same
stopping-places are mentioned as in the accounts of the Israelites ^

Ilius it would seem Pharaoh Meneptah in his pursuit of the Israelites
perished in the ‘ fidpadpa,' in the quicksands of lake Sirbonis, where also
the army of Artaxerxes suffered loss. The statement that the sea stood
like a ‘wall,’ i.e. like a protective rampart on both sides of the people,
would then signify that the Israelites went dry through the sea on the
narrow bar, i. e. on the high road to Syria. For this reason the song of
praise which must be regarded as the oldest account of this event
(Exodus XV. 1-21), extols in a striking manner not so much the miracle of
the division of the waters and the passage through the sea as the destruc-
tion of the pursuer

In this way, too, the variously interpreted passage in Isaiah xi. 15, 16,
perhaps finds its correct explanation ; in Beer’s translation it runs :

15. ‘ And Ood wiU cut off the tongue of the Egyptian sea, and lift his
hand against the river in the violence of hie anger, and smite it into seven
brooks that may he traversed dryshod.

16. ‘ shall be a path prepared for the remnant of his people, those
who are left of Asshur, like as it was for Israel in the day when he came
hither out of the land of Egypt.’

The tongue of the Egj'ptian sea must thus bo understood as the bar
traversed by the road which led to Syria*.

* M. J. Schleiden, Die Landenge von Su6b, Ac., p. 177 et eeq.

* H. Drugsch-Bey, L'Exode et lea monuments ^gyptiena, 8to, Leipzig, 1875, map. An
example of the dangers of the sands on the inner side of the bars is given by Berendt,
Geologic des kurischen Haffes, 4to, 1869, p. 22 et seq., where he tells how horses and
wagons have sunk in them. Cf. Exodus xv. 5, * The depths have covered them : they
sank to the bottom as a ston4»’ ; xv. 10, ‘Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered
them ; they sank os lead in the mighty waters.’ Pi ha Ehiroth of the Bible means
‘ entrance to the abysses.’

* This is emphasized by Dillmann, Die Bficher Exodus und Leviticus, fQr die 2. Aufl.
nach Knobel bearb., Leipzig, 1880, p. 153. Dillmann thinks the Israelites went over El
Ouis'r.

* 'I'he exegetes generally regard these expressions as metaphorical and interpret them
in various ways ; St. Jerome writes ‘ Et desolabit Dominus linguam maris Aegypti,’ ed.
Vallars, 1753, IV, p. 164; Schleid&n regards lake Menzaleh as the ‘tongue,’ op. cit.,
p. 198.



OH. h] STABIMTY op mediterranean coast 463

Let us recall the different opinions arrived at by Spratt and Lesseps
before the construction of the Suez canal, as a result of a close examination
of the movement of the sand on these shores. Experience has shown that
the lateral movement is slight. Nevertheless in conjunction with the
waves washing vertically against the shore, it had already built up many
thousands of years ago the bar in front of lake Sirbonis ; this still exists,
and still the waters stand like a protective rampart on each aide of the
ancient road. The slight positive displacement at Alexandria may easily
result from a different distribution of the volume of water in the branches
of the Nile.

The horizontality of the terraces of lake Jordan, the great age of the
bars and spits, the unaltered fall of the natural and artificial branches of
the Nile forbid us to suppose that the solid foundation land on the south-
east of the Mediterranean has experienced any important change of level
within the historic period.

7. Condnsion. There is abundant evidence to prove that the level of
the Mediterranean has I'emained constant for the last few thousand years.
The bar of Arabat in the sea of Azov, and that of Perekop, the ‘ Course of
Achilles,’ were in existence twenty centuries ago. The bar of the Mons
Casius outside lake Sirbonis is known to date from a still earlier time ; it
was traversed at the most brilliant period of Egyptian history by the only
militaiy road which led to the cast ; and it was in all probability by this
road that the Israelites entered the desert. The lagoon of Tunis shows that
the sea-level has remained unchanged for a very long period ; of equal force,
and perhaps applicable to a still longer course of time, is the proof
afforded by the uniform height of the foundation which bears the succes-
sive bars of Aigues-Mortes, west of the mouths of the Rhone. On the
bars of Tuscany lie the remains of a Roman road ; the ancient drainage
channel of Cosa still serves its purpose ; the Po traverses successive bars
at an equal height. In many places the coast is distinguished by undercut
cliffs or caves which have been excavated by the sea at its existing level.
In Egypt, which affords our furthest glimpse into antiquity, the fall of the
water channels, and consequently the slope of the land, has remained
so absolutely constant that the Bahr Yusuf still flows towards lake
Moeris on the line of the ancient canal of Menhy, and the fresh-water
canal of the Nile still bears its water through /he valley of the Seven
Springs.

Notwithstanding these striking indications of stability, among them the
undercut cliffs of rocky shores, which no observer could overlook, it has
been imagined that we must assume divers elevations and subsidences of
the ground. The sources of this error are of various kinds, and certainly
specious. To begin with, attention was directed to relict strand-lines and
Pholas borings, and these naturally suggested the idea that processes which



464 MEDITERRANEAN IN HISTORIO TIMES [pabtih

were active immediately before the dawn of history might be still in
progress and give perceptible signs of their existence. In the next place
but little was known even till very lately of what extensive areas may be
Qovered by kitchen middens, and every shell-bed which contains frag-
ments of pottery was regarded as a certain proof of recent elevation.
Again, even the slow and gradual progress of silting up by rivers has
sometimes been regarded as a mark of elevation of the land.

Furthermore, it was thought that subsidences might be recognized.
When the alluvial land of the shore is shaken by an earthquake, it fre-
quently becomes detached from its base and glides into the sea ; in ancient
times many towns were engulfed in this way, and even in our own days
such catastrophes have occurred, for instance, in 1861 , in Aigion, not far
from the spot whei^ twenty-two centuries before the town of Helike sank
beneath the sea. The recurrence of similar events has not led to the con-
clusion that the conditions must have remained the same ; on the contrary,
these submerged remains of walls, particularly of harbour foundations, are
alleged as proofs of a subsidence affecting the entire lithosphere. In the
same way trifling changes in the level of the lagoons of Venice, as well as
of those at Bavenna and Alexandria, have been regarded as indications
of subsidence, although here, apart from the mobility of the alluvial land,
an increased volume of the water delivered by a single arm of a river
would prabably afford a sufficient explanation.

In this way the curious result is obtained that rising, falling, and
stable regions change places with each other along the Mediterranean
coast according to no perceptible rule, positive and negative movements
often occurring close beside each other several times in succession, as, for
example, in the south-west of Asia Minor. Again, the evidence presented
by the temple of Serapis led to the inference that within the same
space elevation and subsidence may in the course of centuries succeed
each other, but its exceptional position in the middle of a crater was
overlooked.

A stricter inquiry removes these difficulties, and we perceive that the
level of the Mediterranean has remained unchanged during the last few
thousand years ; if there has been any change at all, it is so slight as to
bo beyond the power of observation to discover it. An exception is
furnished by the south-vest of Crete.

The measurements on which we can base a comparison of the level in
the Mediterranean with that of the Ocean, unfortunately still few in
number, lead us to suppose that the form of the surface of the Mediter-
ranean, apart from the influence of attraction, is that of a funnel, the
deepest part of which lies between Crete and the coast of Africa. Every
change of climate in the Medi^,erranean region ought to find expression in
the level of its waters. In the south-west of Crete, Spratt believes he has



to. XI] STABILITY OP MEDITERRANEAN COAST 465

observed signs of a considerable negative movement ; but this region most
be again investigated before we can arrive at any definite opinion.

It is surprising that the frequent earthquakes which visit certain
r^ons on the coasts of the Mediterranean have left behind no visible
dislocation. I, at least, am not acquainted with any well-authenticated
instance. But even the dislocation observed not long ago in New Zealand
(II, p. 28 ) is only represented by such features as will be obliterated in the
course of a few years. Should, however, some example be discovered of
a genuine dislocation afiecting the Mediterranean coast in historic times,
yet this would not invalidate the general result of our comparative study.
The Mediterranean region has so far afforded no proof of a seetdar con--
tinental elevation or mbddence within the historic period.


u h


tOLLAt It



466


CHAFTEB XII

STRAND-LINES OP THE NOETH

Diversity in form of the eurfiace of the Oceans. Western coasts of the North Atlantic.
Eaitem coasts of the North Atlantic. The north of Eurasia and the west coasts of the
North Pacific. East coasts of the North Pacific.

The superficies of the Baltic and the Mediterranean, owing to climatic in*
fluences, possess a form which is not that of the Ocean. In the Baltic we
have reason to believe that the surface falls from the most distant parts of
the gulfs of Bothnia and Finland towards the Belts and the Oere sound; in
the Mediterranean, on the other hand, it would appear that the place of
maximum depression must lie between Crete and the coast of Africa. Even
the surface of the open sea itself is not independent of such influences.
The salinity is frequently less in the vicinity of the coast than in the sea
remote from land ; temperature and the atmosphere also afiPect the surface.
Unfortunately actual observations on this subject are few in number, but
the admirable work carried out by the Norwegian North sea expedition,
and the investigations based upon it by H. Mohn, show how remarkable,
even apart from attraction, are the deviations from a supposed normal sur-
face as exemplified in that part of the sea which forms the connexion
between the North Atlantic and the Arctic Ocean. In fact Mohn’s graphic
representation of this region shows that here also the Ocean surface presents
a funnel-like form, the maximum depression occurring between Iceland and
Norway. From this point the surface rises towards the coasts, particularly
towards the south of Norway, so that at Christiania the rise is as much as
2*9 meters, but at Bodo and the North cape only 0*7 meter. This gives a
difference in the height of the sea-lcvel between Christiania and the North
cape of 2*2 meters. Mohn adds that on the coasts themselves the sea-level
may be influenced to a high degree by the retardation of the tide over a
shallow bottom, by the influx of fresh water, the state of the wind and other
local circumstances \ ^

Thus we see how difiicult it must be, under any conditions, even those
of the open sea, to demonstrate a movement of the lithosphere from slight
displacements of the strand-line.

The irregular form of the Ocean surface has also been shown by direct
measurement

' H. Mohn, Die StrOmungen dei europ&ischen Notdmeeies ; Peterm. Mitth., Eigfta-
snngdieft No. 79, 1885, pi. ii, fig. 6.



0H.xn] THE SUBPACE OP THE NOKTH ATLANTIC 467

In 1887 the English Oovenunent caused a mark to be put up at Poolb^
lighthouse in Dublin bay at a certain height above low- water. . Low-water
level was to bo the basis of the Irish measurement; but the deviations &om
it were found to b<i so great that this basis had to be abandoned and all the
observations were referred to a standard point.

A summary ojt the observations, which were very numerous, has been
made by Kinahan, who has shown that all around the island low-water as
well as high-water and spring tide correspond to undulating surfaces, not
to planes of equal level; this is particularly marked in the case of high-
water and spring tide, which, as Kinahan justly remarks, determine the for-
mation of terraces. The lowest mean of high-water spring tide above the
lowest mean level lies near Courtown (Wexford, east coast); the lowest
mean level is at Kilbaha, north of the mouth of the Shannon. If we exclude
the narrow bays, in which as a matter of course still greater deviations
occur, then we obtain the following result, taking the minimum near Cour-
town as zero : —

The mean level of high-water spring tide rises higher and higher north
of Courtown until at Ardglass, opposite the Isle of Man, it readies -1-1 >981
meters. From this point onwards to about the north-east comer of the
island it sinks gradually to -i- 0<805 meter at Ballycastle opposite the Mull
of Cantire. Following the coast, with the exclusion of sheltered localities,
we see these figures rise again, as we pass to the west and south, until at
Slyne head, the north promontory of Qalway bay, + 1*69 meters is reached.
Around the south-west comer, the level falls again till 0*61 meter is reached
at Cork; it then ascends towards Dunmore, where it is 0-92 meter, and finally
returns to zero at Courtown.

Thus the conditions which prevail around Ireland are extremely complex,
and Bavenstein observes that, according to the measurement of Ross Clarke,
the mean level at Bispond on the north coast of Sutherland is 0*529 1 meter
higher than that of Liverpool, but the mean level of Kilbaha is— 0*4895
meter as compared with that of Liverpool, and consequently the mean level
at Kilbaha is 0*9686 meter lower than at Bispond \

In this case it is the outline of the island and the direction in which the
tide impinges that mainly determine the height of the sea-level. Gene-
rally speaking, the deformations to which the surface of the open sea is
subject may be regarded as less exposed to variaifion than is the case with
enclosed seas. This of course does not hold trae of bays, and probably not
of the Arctic coasts, where the influx of fresh water from melting ice is in
places very considerable, and where consequently great local fluctuations
must be expected.

* Kinahan, Irish Tide Heights and Baised Beaches, Oeol. Mag., 1876^ 2nd Ser., Ill,
pp. 78-88 ; K O. Bavenstein, On Bathyhypsographical Maps, Free. Oeogr. Soc. London,
1886, VIII, p. 24.


H h 2



468 STBAND-LINES OF THE NOBTH * [pANin

With this short preface I will now endeavour to give a brief account of
the recent oscillations which have affected the coasts of the open seas. The
facts bearing on the subject are so numerous, and their value so different,
that we must confine ourselves to a few selected examples. To begin with,
the northern latitudes will be discussed, first the western and then the eastern
coasts of the Atlantic Ocean, including the adjacent parts of the Arctic sea,
next northern Asia and the western coasts of the North Pacific Ocean, and
finally its eastern coasts. The chapter will conclude with a general
survey of the results obtained in our study of these northern regions of
the globe.

1. Western coasts of the North AtlarUic Ocean. From this region we
possess a number of observations referring partly to positive and partly to
native movements, supposed to be demonstrable and in progress at the
present day ; the latter will be considered first.

The best'known example is to be found in the alleged tilting movement
of Greenland. In the extreme north, high-lying strand-lines have been
observed and recognized as indications of negative movement, or, according
to the terminology of the time, proofs of the elevation of the land. But we
do not know the age of these strand-lines ; some of them were doubtless
only produced by a temporary closure of the fjords by ice, and they are
found equally in the south, notably in the fjord of Igalliko, which contains
the supposed proofs of the subsidence of the land and consequently should
represent the other side of the swing.

The supposed subsidence of the land rests chiefiy on the statements in
a letter written by Dr. Pingel of Copenhagen in 1835

Pingel states that Arctander in 1777 and 1779 had already suspected
that the west of Greenland was in process of subsidence. He had observed
that a low rocky island in the fjord of Igalliko, about a gunshot away from
the mainland, was almost completely submerged at high tide, and yet there
were standing bn it the walls of a house 52 feet long, 30 feet broad, 5
feet thick and 6 feet high. When Dr. Pingel visited the island fifty years
later it was so far submerged that the ruins alone projected above the
surface of the water.

Subsequently Kane observed abandoned huts, with the sea washing
against them, at several localities as far north as Upemavik; the last
remains of this kind wod!d appear to occur in lat. 76° 20^ N. E[ane, who
knew that terraces existed in still higher latitudes and regarded them as
indisputable signs of elevation, concluded, as we have seen, that Greenland
was experiencing a tilting movement similar to that supposed by Lyell

* Letter {W>m Dr. Pingel, Proc. Oeol. Soc. London, November 18, 1835, II, p. 208 ; also
Poggendorff’s Ann., XXXVII, p. 446 et seq. ; earlier references to bibliography in Brown,
Physics of the Arctic Sea, 8to, 187^ p. 690 et seq., also Quart. Joum. Oeol. Soc., 1871,
XXVII, p. 692.



OH. zn] • THE TmnNG OF QBEENLAED 469

to be ftffeetiiig Scandinavia ; the neutral axis was placed in about lat.
IT N.»

This theory has passed into several of our textbooka

In an abandoned village, situated at the head of the ice fjord of Jakobs-
havn (lat. 69° T N.) and said to have once borne the name of Eaja, Nor-
denskidld found ancient dwellings, now chiefly recognizable from the
kitchen middens which surround them ; he estimated their age at 500 years
at most; they lie so near the shore that, in his opinion, either the water in
the fjord must have risen or the land have sunk, for it is not probable that
the villagers would have chosen a site so near the sea as to leave no room
in front even for a landing-place. Jensen likewise records, in agreement
with a statement previously made by Pingel, that in the mission of Licht-
enfels (lat. 63° 5^ N.), according to the assertion of the missionary Klein-
schmidt, it had thrice been found necessary since 1789 to remove the
supporting posts for the women’s boats, erected on the beach, further
inland ; this would give a subsidence of six to eight feet for the interval
between 1789 and 1878 ^

This does not agree with the views held by Steenstmp, who has devoted
so many years to the study of Greenland ; he writes in 1876 : ‘ As to the
question of subsidence I cannot deny that I am fairly sceptical with regard
to it. I have, it is true, seen the sites of houses destroyed by water in
several places, and it cannot be denied that at some spots the houses stand
nearer the water than any one would now think of building them, occasion-
ally indeed in the water itself ; but when we consider the abundant
evidence in a contrary direction pointing to an unchanged sea-level, to be
met with almost everywhere on the coast, I am inclined to believe that the
proofs of houses having been destroyed by the sea, which are indeed undeni-
able, may be explained by local causes, such as a change in the currents, or
other circumstancea’ To enumerate all the statements of natives and
colonists would not advance our inquiry. The ruins mentioned by Pingel
on the little island in the Igalliko i^ord are ill suited to serve as a proof of
the subsidence of the land, ‘ for, judging from descriptions of earlier date,
it is in precisely the same condition to-day as it was a hundred years ago.
Now as then the water at high tide reaches the walls. . . .’ In 1888,
Steenstmp gave a list of such dwelling-places as were then reached by the
sea or had already been destroyed by it, withou^drawing any final conclu-
sion, and with a reference to the extremely rapid progress made by silting
up in a number of fjords

* Ease, Atctic Explorations, 8vo, 1857, II, p. 692; Bessels, Die nordamerikanische
Polarezpedition, 8vo, Leipsig, 1879, p. 156.

* NoidensldOld, IMogCtelse om GrOaland, p. 1017; Account of an Expedition to

Greenland in the year 1870, OeoL ICag., 1872, IX, pp. 410, 418 ; Jensen, Heddelelser om
Grdnland, 1879, 1, p. 34. *

* S. J. y. Steenstmp, Indberetning om de i GrOnland i Aaret 1876 foret geologiske



470 STRANBwLINES OF THE NOBTH • [PAierm

We most thos leave oat of aeooont the observations which refer to high-
lying strand-lines and the mins in ^lliko fjord. Apart &om these it is
obvious that at many places the conditions have remained unchanged ; at
ot-her localities, Chiefly within the fjords or in the arms of the sea behind
the islands, there is evidence of positive displacement. But we must not
overlook the fact that scarcely any other coast of such great extent receives
so much fresh water under such peculiar conditions ; and that this influx
depends on the change of climatic conditions. Judging from the observa-
tions made in other seas we should expect to find here a number of stations
either entirely positive or entirely negative, according to the climatic phase
through which the country is passing, and between these stations other
points which are not exposed to the direct influence of the water flowing
from melting ice, and consequently where its effects are but feebly manifest
or not at all.

And this is in fact the case.

From an identification of the Ownbjom skerries of the older maps with
the ‘ sunken land of Bus ’ it has been concluded that evidence of the alleged
sinking of Greenland might be traced down to lat. 68** N. ; but the objections
raised by Major as to the troth of the identification show how baseless is
this conjecture

Robert Bell believes he has found traces of an active negative movement
in Hudson hay still proceeding at a fairly rapid rate. He quotes in con-
firmation the sayings of the inhabitants, and lays particular emphasis on
the rapid retreat of the strand at the mouths of the Nelson and Hayes
rivers. The same movement is said to occur in East Maine, and indeed all
along the coast from fort Churchill round the west of the great bay and
the whole of James bay. Near the ancient fort Prince of Wales the subsi-
dence is estimated at seven feet in the century. ‘ This retreat of the sea,’
says Bell, ‘may perhaps be ascribed to a general sinking of the sea-level
with regard to the land, and in part to the silting up of some parts of
Hudson bay, which interrupts the free course of the tides

It seems reasonable to suppose that the negative displacement in thb
region is the result of the same causes as act in the Baltic.

From New Brunsioick to Massaschusetts submerged forests and peat bogs
occur in several localities, and might lead us to suppose that a positive dis-

»

UndersOgelse, afgiv. 22 Marts, 1877. Scortryk af Tyllrog B til Rigsdagstidend. 1877-
1878, Kjobnhavn, 1877, p. 16; Meddelelser, 1881, II, pp. 40, 41 and 1883, IV, pp. 287-
242. Here the author states that in Julianehaab and Frederikshaab mooring rings stand
tar below the level of high tide ; this fact he regards as a sign of elevation, but adds
that in the cryolite quarry of Ivigtuk three mooring rings were placed below high tide,
because the rock above did not seem sufficiently secure.

^ Major, Proc. Geogr. Soc. London, June 23, 1873, XVII, p. 321.

* R. Bell, Geological Survey of OUnada, Report of Progress for 1878-1879, C, p. 24 ;
up. cit., 1877-1878, C, p. 36 and CO, p. 29.



OH.XII] NSW BBUNSWIOK TO S0UT9 OABOLINA 471

placement is at present in progress. The most detailed descriptions have
been famished by Dawson and Matthew; Cook, Qesner, and Qnyot have also
published similar accounts K Very many of the observations refer to the
coasts of the bay of Fundy, which, owing to its funnel-like form, compels t^e
entering tidal wave to rise higher and higher until at the head of the bay
the difference between low and high water amounts to more than sixty feet.
As a fact opposed to the view that the land is at present sinking, Dawson
himself points out that much of the flat country along tiie coast has of late
years been dyked in and that the tide has thus become still more conflned and
perhaps even diverted But the evidence most adverse to all the arguments
in support of the prevailing hypothesis has been furnished by H. Mitchell,
who, while making measurements on these coasts, has succeeded in showing
that there exist in this very region a great number of points fairly remote
from one another, where no perceptible change in the relative position of.
land and sea has taken place for the last three centuries. Such fixed points
are to be found from the gulf of St. Lawrence to Nova Scotia and as far
as Massachusetts. The proof is furnished sometimes by the unaltered
position of the salt marshes, which are still, as in 1609, covered twice a
month by the spring tides ; sometimes by isolated rocks such as the Isle
Perede (Pered rock) on the peninsula of Gasp^, which is connected with the
mainland at low tide, but separated at high tide by a passage through which
a boat may pass, and it has maintained this state since 1603. We cannot
therefore attach any importance to views of an opposite nature ^

Many writers, and among them Lyell, have supposed that a general
subsidence of the land is taking place in South Carolina. Tuomey has
investigated the facts and has shown in a convincing manner that such a
supposition is untenable. The coast is quite flat and marshy for long
distances ; by a subsidence of the land or a rise of the sea to the extent of
only two feet the rice-fields would be destroyed far and wide. The presence
of kitchen middens on James island in itself renders it improbable that any
considerable oscillation can have occurred in recent times ; yet none the less,
the remains of forests which have been inundated by the sea, with the
trunks of trees still projecting from the water, are certainly to be seen. In

’ Dawson, Acadian Geology, 8vo, 1868, p. 28 et seq. ; G. F. Matthew, Report on the
Superficial Geology of Southern New Brunswick, Geol(^cal Survey of Canada, Report
of Progress for 1877-1878, EE, p. 36 et seq. ; G. H. CooU; On a Subsidence of the Land
on the Sea Coast of New Jersey and Long Island, Am. Joum. Sci., 1857, 2nd Ser., XXIV,
pp. 841-354; A. Gesner, On the Elevation and Depression of the Earth in North
America, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1861, XVII, pp. 381-388, and in the Journal
de rinstitut, Paris, 1862, p. 120. '

* Dawson, Acadian Geology, p. 81.

* H. Mitchell, Notes concerning alleged Changes in the relative Elevation of Land
and Sea ; Rep. of the Superintendent of the UA. Coast Survey- for 1876-1877, 4to,
Washington, 1880, Appendix 8, pp. 98-103.



472


STRAinvUNES OF THE NOBTH . [PAKrm


some ;

ing a low-lying region which nature has dyked in by a bar ; in others* how-
ever, the cause is different. When during an exceptionally high tide the sea is
dpven over a q^ress swamp, the salt water soon kills all the growing plants,
and this leads to a sinking of the whole ground together with the trees it
supports. The water then permanently occupies the subsided region. ' There
is yet another process, which is illustrated by Morris island. Here we find
a line of dunes thirty to forty feet high ; within them is a great marsh, its
the dunes move inland they leave the roots of trees beneath exposed in great
masses on the seaward side ; the weight of the advancing dune causes tiie
marsh to sink, together with the trees growing on it ; outside the dune the
trees are brought to light again below the level of high tide; frequently
oysters may be seen attached to them K

We thus encounter in this region phenomena very similar to those
already described on the coasts of the North sea.

The basis which supports the Keys of Florida as far as the Tortugas
indicates a long-continued stability of the strand (II, p. 810). This stability
is also revealed by the structure of the Miasiaaippi dtMa.

The beds of Gnathodon shells to be met with at various heights above
the Mississippi, which were regarded by Lyell as proof of a recent elevation
of the land, are kitchen middens. It is true that at present Gnathodon is
seldom to be observed alive above Choctaw point (one mile below Mobile),
while fifty miles further up the valley extensive accumulations of shells
containing Indian pottery lie beneath two feet of soil and the remains of an
ancient forest*.

The Mississippi, unlike many other rivers, does not open into a deep bay,
forming so to speak a continuation of its valley, which must first be filled
up before it can push out its delta into the open sea. Even at New Orleans
the deposits of the Mississippi scarcely descend below — 37 or — 40 feet, and if,
as in other cases, we are able to speak of the head of the delta, yet this
cannot be placed higher up than the constriction between lake Pontchartrain
and the Grand lake. It is only the inner ‘bayous ’ or blind arms, such as
Atchafalaja and Plaquemine, which assist in the formation of the inland
parts of the delta, and the volume of water they contain is not more than
about one-twelfth that of the river. All the rest of the water of the Missis-
sippi, together with by fa^ the greater part of its suspended sediment, is

* Tuomey, Report on the Geology of South Caxoliaa, 4to, Columbia, 1848, pp. 190-
200. 0. Ideber subsequently thought that he recognised poative movement ehieOy
because oyster shells vrith ancient pottery occur as far as 80 miles up from the river
mouths. These appear to me to be kitchen middens behind recently formed land;
Lieher, Notes on certain Ancient and Present Changes alodg the Coast of South Carolina,
Am. Joum. Sd., 1859, 2nd Ser., XXYIII, pp. 854-859.

* Humphreys and Abbot, Report upon the Physics and Hydraulics of the Mi ss i ssi p pi
River, reprinted with additions, 4to, Washington, 1876, p. 464.



€B.zn] MOVEMENTS IN THE PASSE A L’OUTRE 478

carried out beyond tbe ancient coast-line, and not before this is passed does
dqiosition begin to take place. Then the various branches of the river build
up the long narrow mounds upon which they flow. From time to time,
without any seismic disturbance, a mud-cone arises from the depths near
the termination of those mounds which have advanced furthest into the sea.
An opening is formed from which brackish water, liquid mud and combus-
tible gases make their escape, sometimes gradually, sometimes in a sudden
outburst. At high water the activity of these ‘muddumps’ increases,
after some time the eruption comes to an end, but there remains behind
a new fixed point which aids in the advance of the pass ^

In addition to these singular, eruptions, movements of an altogether
difierent kind sometimes occur.

On April 18-14, 1876, as Forshey informs us, there occurred in the
Passe k rOutre a remarkable disturbance which rendered it necessary to
abandon dredging operations in this branch of the river.

In a single night the whole neighbourhood had changed its aspect;
a ‘ mud-lump,’ or some similar alluvial mass, had arisen out of a depth of
seven or eight feet of water; running obliquely across the channel of the
river, it stood in some places as much as nine feet above the water, extend-
ing over an area of seventeen acres, which had previously been submerged.
The movement, which resembled that of a glacier, was directed forwards,
and continued through the whole of the summer; it was accompanied by
elevation and subsidence of various amount and expressed itself in the form
of furrows and folds, which spread over more than a thousand acres. The
dredgers engaged in the pass found it impossible to maintain a passage over
the ridge, and in August they abandoned the attempt. It was definitely
ascertained that the movement was continuous and normal to the curve of
tire bar at the mouth of the pass K

This description suggests one of those gliding and folding movements
which sometimes affect the upper mass of a delta and produce bending,
folding, and shearing in its interior. The continuous, glacier-like move-
ment, the production of folds on the surface, the magnitude of the area
affected, the impossibility of checking it by human agency — these are
indeed the characters of such a phenomenon.

Thus then, the great mass of mud is subject to changes of divers kinds,
but, as at Aigues-Mortes and on the Po, the exiting bars prove that no
important displacement of the strand-line can nave occurred for a long

' Oeneial Hamphreys’ letter to Sir C. Lyell, op. dt., p. 648 ; E. Hilgard, On the
Geology ot the Delta and the Mud*liunps of the Paasei of the IfianMippi, Am. Jonm. Sei.,
1871, 8id Ser., I, pp. 357, 432.

* C. G. Fonhqr, Phydee of the Lower Hiannippi River; Proe. Am. A«oo. Adv. Sci.,
Twenty-sixth Meeting at Nashville, 1877, 8vo, &tlem, 1878, p. 153 note. Similar glacier-
like movements are mentioned by Hilgard on Petite Anse island ; Geology of Lower
Smitha Contrib. to Knowledge, 1872, XXIII, No. 248, p. 18.



474


STRAND-LINES OF THE NORTH. [part m

time past. An outer chain of bars, representmg the existing line along
which the river and the sea contend for mastery, runs in the east from the
Chandeleur islands to some distance outside of fort St. Philip, and in the
\rest from Timbalier island towards Atchafalaja bay. At the same time,
inside this chain of bars there is an older inner bar which runs a little out-
side Mobile bay towards Cat island. If in the course of the last few
centuries the strand-lines had been displaced to any considerable extent,
then this older bar would either have been buried beneath the sediments or
elevated above the existing bar. But it lies precisely at the same level
as the formations of the present day.

Let us now return to the north and direct our attention to those traces
of a displacement of the strand which have been preserved from remote times.

While all the statements made as to movements of the strand-line still
in progress are more or less doubtful or incorrect, yet of negative move-
ments which date from an earlier period, abundant proofs are to be met with,
both aroimd the North Atlantic and on the shores of the Arctic Ocean. Many
investigators, among whom Middendorff may be especially mentioned, have
observed that indications of elevation increase in number towards the
north pole. But after the results we have obtained in the fjords of Norway
we cannot accept without further examination every one of the numerous
high-lying terraces observed in the Arctic regions as a definite proof of the
presence of the sea at a higher level. Even the occurrence of small sea-
shells in isolated examples is not indisputable evidence ; many years ago
the distinguished naturalist Steenstrup showed the necessity for caution in
this matter, pointing out that the eider-duck brings up shell-fish from sur-
prisingly great depths, and even specimens of RhynconeUa peittac&i, the
shells of which it ejects from its crop on the top of the rocks ^

The unusually exact observations made in the south-west of Greenland
(II, p. 356) show clearly that the terraces extend to much more consider-
able heights than the shell beds. Unfortunately the accounts from the
extreme north are not always satisfactory ; attention has been too exclu-
sively directed to the terraces ; these have been taken ofifhand as so many
shore-lines of the sea ; it is seldom enough that we are in a position to
discover with absolute certainty to what height the shell beds actually
extend. There is besides the difficulty that in some places horizontal lines
of the most striking appearance, and slopes looking as though they were
entrenched, have no connexion with the recent terraces, but are produced
by the horizontal stratification of the Palaeozoic limestone, as, for instance,
in the case described by Sutherland at cape Felfoot (lat. 74” 3P N.,
long. 88” 20' W.)a.

* Nordenskiold also waras ua against this source of error ; Bihang k. svenska Vet.,
Akad. Handl., 1877, IV, No. 1, p. 19.

* P. C. Sutherland, Journal of a Voyage in Baffins Bay and Barrow Straits under the
Command of Mr. William Penny, 8vo, 1852, 1, pp, 286-288, and II, p. 284.



475


OH. zn] .TEBBAGES OF THE FAB NOBTH

Some examples of tenraees may now be enumerated, and particularly,
but not exclusively, such as are distinguished by the presence of sea-shells.

On the east side of Greenland, Payer has encountered terraces at many
places between lat. 2(/ and lat. 73° N. They occur in great numbem
on the north-east of Shannon idand, one above the other, reaching a
height of several hundred feet; they reappear on the south of SaMne
idand, on the coast between cape Broer Buys and Mackenzie bay

. On the north-west side of Greenland they are developed in an alto-
gether extraordinary manner, and extend into the extreme north, as far
indeed as man has yet penetrated, often accompanied to considerable
heights by sea-shells. Captain Feilden states that he found some indi-
cations of this kind at almost every point which he visited in Smith
sound, as well as north of the sound in Orinndl land, and on the opposite
coast of Greenland. Up to lat. 82* 85' N. marine shells were collected
from the terraced land high above the existing shore. In Discovery harbour,
Griiinell land (lat. 81° 45' N.), where the Discovery wintered during
1875-6, beds with Saxicava rugosa, Astarte borealis, and other Arctic
species lie a thousand feet above the existing sea-level. In Polaris bay
(lat. 81° 40' N.) driftwood and Mya truncata occur, according to Bessels,
up to a height of 1,800 feet above the sea. Hayes mentions that in all
the harbours and bays which he visited north of cape York, terraces were
to be seen, especially in Van BensseUm' harbour (lat, 78° 40' N.). In port
Fovllee (lat. 78° 20' N.) he observed twenty-three terraces rising one above
the other in a very regular series \

‘ I counted to-day,’ says Kane, * forty-one distinct ledges or shelves
of terrace embraced between our water-line and the syenitic ridges through
which Mary river forces itself. . . , Their breadth was either twelve,
twenty-four, thirty-six, or some other multiple of twelve paces. This
imposing series of ledges carried you in forty-one gigantic steps to'^n
elevation of 480 feet. . . . They are more imposing than those of Wellington
channel, . . . and reminded me of the parallel roads of Glen Boy. . . .^ ’

The indications in the south-west of Greenland have already been
mentioned (II, p. 856).

In Cornwall and Beechey idanda (lat. 74* 40'— 75 N.) in Barrow strait
and Wellington channel Sutherland observed shells belonging to living
species of Arctic marine mollusca a thousani^ feet above the sea, on
the highest points of the land. The terraced form of the coast is par-

* J. Payer, Die Ostcrreichuch-ungarische Nordpol-Ezpedition in den Jahren 1872-
1874, 8to, 1876, pp. 471 and 561.

* H. W. Feilden, The Post-tei^iary Beds of Grinnell-Land and North Greenladd, Ann.
Mag. Nat. Hist, 1877, 4th Ser., XX, pp. 488-489 ; also Heer, Quart. Jonm. Geol.Soc., 1878,
XXXIV, p. 66 et passim; Bessels, Bull Soc. g4ogr. Paris, March, 1875, pp. 291-299;
Hayes, Dae offene Polar-Meer, 8to, 1868, pp. 288, 34^.

' * E. K. Kane, Arctic Explorations, II, p. 81.



476 STRAND-UNES OF THE KOBTH* [paktih

ticularly well seen, according to Armstrong, on the smaller of the Princess
Royal ielands (Investigator strait) between Baring island and Prince
Albert land. In Baring idand itself, on the summit of Coxcombs chain,
H’Clure collected Chfprina idandica 600 feet above the sea; and in post
Kennedy, at the northern end of the peninsula of Boothia, Dr. Walker,
one of the companions of M’Clintock, found Saaicava rugosa,' Asta/rte
borealis, Oyprina idandica and other species at various heights, from
100 to 500 feet. At 150 feet lay the bones of a whale ^

In conclusion we may mention that Klutschak, Schwatka’s companion,
on his journey from the north coast of Hudson bay to King William's land,
found terraces at heights of thirty to forty feet, along the flat coast in
Simpson strait We will now leave the Arctic archipelago and turn our
attention to Hudson bay.

In the north part of Hudson drait, indeed along the whole coast
between Nain and Resolution island (lat 62° N.), Captain Ichabod Handy
observed high-level terraces, as for example at Nain, where an ancient
littoral formation occurs 300 feet above the sea, and in Resolution island,
where a similar formation is found at 200 feet with three terraces. The
terraces near Smyth harbowr in the north-east part of Southampton island
were seen long ago by Back, who was filled with astonishment at their
regularity. The recent marine deposits with Saadcava rugosa, Pectsn
idandicus, Rhyncondla psittacea, and other representatives of the existing
fauna do not pass much beyond the existing outline of Hudson bay;
R Bell found them on Churchill river, 96 kilometers above the mouth,
at a height of about 850 feet above the sea-level ; in the basin of the
Nelson river up to lat 66° 31' N. at a height of 200 feet ; along the Keno-
gami, a tributary of the Albany, about 450 feet, and on the Missimbi, in
the basin of the Oiignal river (Moose river), about 800 feet above the sea.
I^uth-east of Hudson bay, on all the islands and coasts of Ead Main,
traces of a relict strand are to be seen up to 800 feet, and Bell had no
doubt that further inland they exist at an oven greater height. Driftwood
lies here thirty, indeed even forty and fifty feet above the sea, but dis-
appears at greater heights under the action of the weather \

’ P. C. Sutherland, On the Geology and Glacial Phenomena of the Coasts of Davis’
Straits and Baffins Bay, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1858, IX, p. 800 ; Armstrong, Personal
NarratiTe of the Discovery hi the North>west Passage, 8vo, 1857, p. 267; Haughton,
Geological Account of the Arctic Archipelago, drawn up ftom Specimens collected by
Capt. M’Clintock, Geol. Soc. Dublin, Jan. 11, 1860, in Nat. Hist. Review, YU, 1860,
p. 156; also M’Clintock, Journal of the Voyage of the Fox, appendix.

* H. W. Klutschak, Als Eskimo unter den Eskimos, 8vo, 1881, p. 118.

* A S. Padcard, jun.. Observations on the Glacial Phenomena of Labrador and Maine,
Mem. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist, 1867, I, p. 226; Back, On the North-Eastern Shore of
Southampton Idand, Joum. R. Geogr. Soc., 1887, VII, pp. 462-466; R. Bell, Report of
Explorations on the Churchill and Nelson Rivers, Ac., Geological Survey of Canada,



CHAMPLAIN SERIES


477


OH. zn]

In Labrador, Hind observed terraces up to a height of 1,000 or
1,100 feet. Here, as in Norway, they are sometimes cut in the hard rock,
as for example in Strawberry harbour, where they occur up to 500 feet
according to Packard ; in Domino harbour they are cut in quartzite, in
other places in trap, arid they appear to be true setor. Particularly well
defined are the terraces on the two sides of Belle Isle strait. CUmmo
describes the regular terraces in the harbour of Aillick. In Newfoundland
Milne traced terraces up to 1,000 feet’.

The recent marine beds which we have encountered in the extreme
north, around Hudson bay and far away up to the valle 3 rs of the Albany
and Moose river, finally reach Kingston at lake Ontario, and, characterized
by all the signs of a transgressive marine formation, cover a not in>
considerable part of the country. These beds have been termed by Dana
and many other American geologists the Champlain aeries, since they are
particularly well developed around lake Champlain, south of Montreal ; by
Dawson and others they are spoken of as poat-Pliocene.

These marine beds lie above the drift and are consequently more recent
than the glacial period. Proceeding from New Brunsurick towards the
south, the series is seen overlying the boulder clay, and presents two sub>
divisions ; the Leda clay at the base and above it the Saxicava sand. The
Leda clay, according to Dawson, is of very variable thickness, attaining
a maximum of 100 feet ; in some cases it contains no other fossil than
Zeda arctica, and it closely resembles the deposits now accumulating in
the gulf of St. Lawrence; it was probably formed at depths of 20 to
100 fathoms. The boundary of the Saxicava sand is apparently not always
clearly defined.

There is no indication to show that the climate was more severe during
the Champlain period than it is at present. It is true that, according to
Dawson, the species of the existing Canadian fiora which are found in‘*nie
Leda clays of Ottawa are more especially those which are capable of
enduring a fairly severe climate, but Arctic forms do not occur. On the
other hand, we cannot fail to be surprised by the very frequent occurrence
of twigs and leaves of Popvlus balaamifera, now rare in the neighbourhood
of Ottawa; but these remains may have drifted. Bemains of Populua

Report of Progrew for 1878-1879, C, pp. 23, 28 ; Report on an Exploration in 1875
between James’ Bay and Lakes Superior and Huron, op. At, 1875-1876, p. 378 ; Report
on an Exploration of the east coast of Hudson’s Bay, 1877, op. eit, 1877-1878, 0, p. 86,
and CC, 12 ; also Trans. Boy. Soc. Canada, 1884, II, p. 241 et seq.

’ Hind, Observations on the supposed Glacial Drift in the Labrador Peninsula, Quart
Joum. Oeol. Soc., 1864, XX, pp. 122-130; A S. Packard, jun., On the glacial Phenbmena
of Labrador and Maine, Mem. Rbston Soc. Nat Hist, 1867, 1, pp. 228, 227 ; W. Chimmo,
Yisit to the North-East Coast of Labrador, Joum. Oeogr. Soa, 1868, XXXVIII, p. 271 ;

J. Milne, Notes on the Physical Features and Mineralogy of Newfoundland, Quart.
Joum. Oeol. Soc., 1874, XXX, p. 720b



478


STRAND.LINES OP THE NORTH* [PAier m

balmmifera still frequently occur in very high latitudes among the
drift<wood. The bison is mentioned by Lyell as occurring in these
deposits

« The Leda clay also contains remains of the Greenland seal, and of the
walrus; nodules of clay enclosing skeletons of the caplin {Mallotns
villoam) and the lump-fish (Gydoptervs lumpm) are also found in it, and
many foraminifera, all belonging to species still living in the gulf of
St. Lawrence. On the other hand, the great whale, BMtJbga VermoTiiana,
which was found in the Saxicava sand, appears to differ from all existing
species.

With regarrl to the rich molluscan fauna of the Champlain stage
Packard mentions the following facts : — ■

One or two species, Fubsua Lahmdormsia, and perhaps Bda robuata,
must be regarded as extinct ; all the others are still living, and their dis-
tribution is at present determined by essentially the same conditions as
existed during the Champlain period. Between the two regions of the
Arctic marine fauna represented by Greenland and cape Cod there now
exist two other well-defined marine faunas. The first of these, the
Syrterman or Labrador fauna, inhabits Hudson bay, Labrador and the
north coast of Newfoundland. It follows, however, in streak-like exten-
sions that branch of the cold counter-current which separates the Gulf
stream from the continent, and forming isolated eolonies on the sand-
banks of the coast it penetrates some distance towards the south. It thus
encroaches on the region of the southern or Acadian fauna, which depends
in its advance towards the north on the distribution of the Gulf stream.

The molluscan fauna of the Leda clay and of the Saxicava sand shows .
that during their formation the Syrtensian fauna inhabited the St. Lawrence
as far up as Quebec and Montreal, while east of the Saco river and at
Portland this fauna, together with the few intermingled Arctic species, was
replaced by the Acadian fauna.

From this Packard infers that at that time a branch of the cold counter-
current fiowed through the existing strait of Belle Isle and up the existing
St. Lawrence towards lake Champlain, while the eastern region was sub-
jected to the warming infiuence of the Gulf stream. Consequently a few of
the Arctic members of the Syrtensian fauna, such as Leda arctica, Pecten
groenlandicus, and othe^, extended further south than at present, but on
the other hand we find as far north as Nantucket some species in these
deposits, such for instance as Vmue mercenaria, which are typical of the
warm Virginian fauna K

* Dawson, Acadian Geology, p. 403 ; also. The Evidence of Fossil Plants as to the

Climate of the post-Pliocene Period in Cana^ Canadian Naturalist, 1866, 2nd Ser., Ill,
pp. 69-76. ••

* A S. Packard, jun.. Glacial Phenomena of Labrador and Maine, p. 210 et seq.



<m. xn] » AGE OF THE GULF STREAM 479

The beds of Nantucket were described as early as 1849 by Desor and
Cabot and since by Verrill and Scudder.

On Sankoty head, Nantucket island, the matted tubes of Serpula
diaTUhua form a bed of serpulite intercalated between two shell-bearing
beds; a similar grourth of the same species of Serpula may still be seen
between low- water and a depth of —8 fathoms in sheltered places along the
south coast of New England and as far south as Carolina. The lower of
the two shell-bearing beds just mentioned contains molluSca of a southern
type, such as thick-shelled specimens of Venus mercenaria, mentioned
above, then Modiola fuimata, Gumingia tdlinoides. Area stbbtnmsveraa and
others, while in the higher bed above the serpulite lies a northern fauna
with Suecimtm undaium, Astarte castanm, Cyclocardia boreaJte, Mya
trv/ncata, &c. According to Verrill a large part of the sand-banks which
here border the Coast of America must be regarded, like the shell beds of
Nantucket, not as deposits only recently formed by the sea, but as the
remains of the denuded Champlain series

The most important result, however, which follows from these investiga-
tions is that the Gulf stream already existed at this period.

The shelly sands extend up the St. Lawrence past Montreal to Kingston,
while even much further towards the interior we still see terraced land,
though without sea-shells. Dawson has given an excellent general descrip-
tion of this region and has determined the height of a groat number of
terraces. At three localities on the lower St. Lawrence, les Eboulements,
Petite Mai bay and Murray bay (lat. 47“ 40' to 47* 80' N.), the ancient
strand-lines may be seen as follows: — at the first locality, one line occurs at
a height of 274 meters, and below it six others ; at the second, there are six
lines, the highest at 228 meters; at the third, there are eight lines, the
highest at 13&5 meters. On the isolated hill of mount Royal (Mont ^l,
lat. 46* 30' N.) a few principal lines are visible and between them Utaiiy
subordinate ones. The lowest important terrace, known as Sherbrooke-
street terrace, lies at a height of 86-6 meters in the Leda clay ; the next,
Waterwork terrace, at a height of 67 meters, is excavated in the lower Silu-
rian limestone, and I am not sure whether it should not be regarded as a
seter. Three terraces occur at levels of 117'6, 134<1 and 143 meters; the
latter of these is accompanied by a very clearly marked deposit containing
pebbles and Saxicava arctica ^

In the south of Kew Brunswick, Matthew has distinguished terraces up
to a height of 106 meters, while according to Hind the highest strand-line

^ Verrill, On the post-Pliocene Fonils of Sankoty Head, Nantucket Island, with a Note
os the Geology by Scudder, Ain.^oum. SoL Arts, 1875, Srd Ser., X, pp. 864^375 ; Scudder,
Post-Pliocene fossils from Sankoty Head, Proc. Boston Soc. Nat Hist., 1876, XVIII,
pp. 182-185. *

* Dawson, Acadian Geology, p. 89.



480 STBAin)-LmES OF THE NORTH* [pABTxn

recorded in the bay of Fondy lies at 149 meters. On the coasts of Maine
(1st. 46* to 48* N.) the same terraces appear at intervals ; Shaler has
definitely ascertained that their height above the sea decreases towards the
south ^

The fact that the stranddines of this region decrease in height towards
the south has frequently been emphasized by Dana ; the following figures
taken from Dana’s lucid description may suffice to show this, for even if in
many cases the upper part of the littoral formations has since disappeared,
yet this will not destroy the correspondence.

On the lower St. Lawrence we found the considerable altitude of 274
meters, but shells are absent ; in the bay of Fundy 149 meters ; at Montreal,
where shells occur, 143 meters. On the shores of laJee Champlain (lat. 45*
to 44* N.) Dana mentions terraces at a height of 120 meters, containing
marine shells up to a height of 99 meters ; at point Shirley, near Boston
(lat. 42* 46^ N.), only at 22*8 meters to 804 meters ; at Nantucket (lat. 41*
ko' N.) at 26 meters ; finally on the south coasts of New England (up to
about lat. 41* N.), they are only 40 to 50 feet (12*2 to 15<3 meters) above
the sea-level

Much still remains obscure, and no doubt the height of a deposit does not
depend solely on the height of the sea-level, but on numerous other circum-
stances as well ; yet we may record as a provisional result that at high
latitudes in the east of North America recent shell beds occur at a great
height, and that the post-glacial Champlain beds, which are probably their
continuation, descend towards the sea-level as they approach the south, and
especially between the fiftieth and fortieth parallels.

The terraces which occur towards the interior, in the north of the United
States, are not all of the same kind ; many are river terraces, others, like
the Norwegian terraces, result from the damming up of a valley by ice.
DaVis has rightly illustrated the formation of these by lake Maijelen on
the Aletsch glacier, and even supposes that the terraces which are visible
200 to 800 feet above the existing level of lake Superior owe their origin
to comparatively small sheets of water which once lay between the shore
and the front of the receding ice *.

These phenomena need not detain us longer, and we will pass on to the
most recent marine deposits of northern Europe.

* Q. F. Uatthew, Report the Superficial Geologj of Southern New Brunswick,
Geological Survey of Canada, Report of Progress for 1877-1878, EE, p. 35 ; N. S. Shaler,
Recent Changes of Level on the Coast of Maine with reference to their Origin, Metn.
Boston Soc. Nat. Hist., 1875, II, pp. 822-341.

* Dana, Manual of Geology, 2nd ed., 1875, p. 550 ; also Depression of Southern New
England during the melting of the great Glacier, Am. Joum. Sci., 1875, Srd Ser., X,
pp. 409, 486 et passim.

* W. M. Davis, On the Classification of Lake Basins; Proc. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist., 1882,
XXI, p. 353.



THE GARONNE


481


CH. Xll]


2. Easte'im coasts of the North Attantic. James Geikie points out that
neither the Faeroe, the Shetland, nor the Orkney islands show any trace of
a displacement of the strand within the existing period ; in the Faeroe
islands caves occur which have been hollowed out in the basalt cliffs by
the breakers, but they all lie at the level of the existing strand and are not
found at greater heights ^

Nevertheless, on the coasts of western Europe indications of a change of
level are not wanting, but by far the greater part relate to submerged
forests and peat lx)gs. I will only mention the much-discussed case of the
coast of France.

The existence at the mouth of the Garonne of a continuous subsidence
of the soil, proceeding with considerable rapidity, has been regarded as
a definitely established fact. The following have been alleged as proofs :
the submergence beneath the tide of large areas which had previously
remained uncovered ; the discovery of prehistoric sites beneath the level of
high tide ; finally, the progressive diminution of the island of Cordouan
which lies to the west outside the mouth of the river, and the subsidence of
this island togetlier with the lighthouse which stands upon it. A critical
study by Artigue shows that all thase indications are deceptive. The tide
at present covers a larger surface in the region of the estuary, because with
the progress of deposition the depth of the river has diminished ; and at
the same time, owing to erosion, the opening by which the tide enters the
estuary has been enlarged from 4-7 to 6*3 kilometers since 1785. Through
this widened entrance a larger quantity of water passes at high tide, and in
consequence a larger surface is submerged. The prehistoric settlements are
eertiinly below high-tide level and arc daily covered by the sea, but they
lie on the outer l)order of the dunes. The land within the dunes lies equally
low and shows similar traces of prehistoric occupation ; here they are pro-
tected l)y the dune. The settlements outside the dune are thereforCTTrily"^
an indication of the advance of the dune, xvhUe the level of the mainUmd
lui8 reiiiained unchamjed. The island of Cordouan has not sunk, otherwise
the mnge of its light would have diminished, and this is not the case ; its
decreiise in size is the result of marine erosion \

Passing from this example of a displacement supposed to be still pro-
gressing, let us again turn our attention to indications dating from an
earlier period.

In Iceland, particularly in the south-west part of the island, a shell-bear-
ing clay occurs, and in one place near Reykjavik, tuff, which also contains


^ J. Geikie, On the Geology of the Faeroe Islands; Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh, 1880-
1881, XXXa, p. 263. •

^ H. Artigue, £tude sur Testuaire de la Garonne et la partie du littoral comprise entre
la Pointe de la Coubre et la Pointe de la N^gade ; '^Lctes Soc. Linn. Bordeaux, 1877,
4® s^r., 1, pp. 287-807, pi.

SOLLAS 11 I 1



482


STRAND-LINES OF THE NORTH. [pabtui

marine ahella A strand-line above them at a height of 40 meters marks,
according to Eeilhack, the sea-level of the period; the moUuscan fauns
resembles that of Spitsbergen ; the deposits rest on lava with a glaciated
surface ; they are correlated with the Champlain series of North America

Of a different character are the shell-bearing beds of Hdsavik in the
north of the island (lat. 66° 10' N.), which alternate with beds of tuff and
lignite ; they appear from Gardner’s description to reach somewhat greater
heights than those of Reykjavik, and their fauna is different (II, p. 182).
Morch and S-V. Wood believe that they are contemporaneous with the Eng-
lish Crag, particularly the red Crag; Owyn Jcfireys, who regards them as
more recent, points out that several species occur at Hiisavik which belong to
the existing fauna of North America, as for example, Mesodetma deauratvm,
Natica heron, and others. This fact is the more remarkable since the
existing marine fauna of Greenland presents a European rather than an
American character ; possibly it furnishes an additional indication of the
age of the Gulf stream

The marine deposits of Norway are known in greatest detail in the
Christiania fjord ; the descriptions of Sars, Kjerulf, and others furnish us
with the following facts.

Two different marine deposits occur; the strand of the older deposit
was situated at a height of about 600 to 620 feet (188 to 194 meters),
and that of the younger at a height of about 240 feet (75 meters).

The older fauna presents an Arctic character and is therefore generally
described as glacial, although the deposits are more recent than the great
ice sheet. Mya truncata, Saxkava ragoea, Buccinvm gi'oerUandicum,
Leda (Toldia) arctica, the last three with very thick shells, are among the
most characteristic species. In the fjord itself near Drdback great quantities
of dead specimens of Ocidina prolifera occur between —80 or —70 fathoms
'Slid .--8 or —7 fathoms, although at the present day this species does not live
above —100 fathoms, and extends down to —300 fathoms. On the little
island of Barholmen the clay with fragments of this coral reaches a height
of +30 feet. These are the deposits of the lower zones belonging to the
time of the older fauna ; the negative movement has produced a diminution
in the depth at which they occur, or has even left them exposed above
the strand-line. The older deposits also contain the ‘marleker,’ i.e. flat
nodules of marl, which, as Sars has pointed out, contain an Arctic molluscan
fauna, and in which Cloliett has discovered the remains of a large number
of Arctic and North Atlantic fishes, such as Gadue morrhua, MaUohus
vUloeus, Clupea hirengus, and others. These marleker apparently re-

' H. Keilhack, Ueber postglaciale Meeresablagerungdn in Island ; Zeitschr. dcatsch.
geol. Ges., 1884, XXXVI, pp. 145-160.

* J. Gwyn Jeffreys in J. St. Gau'dner, The Tertiary Basaltic Formation in Iceland ;
Quart. Joum. Gcol. Soc., 1885, XLI, table to p. 96.



NOBWAT AND SWEDEN


488


OH. xn]

semble in eveiy particalar the nodtiles containing fish found in the Leda
day of Canada, which in other respects dso presents the greatest similarity
wi^ the deposits oocarring in Norway.

The more recent fauna is distinguished by the waning of Arctia
characters ; Leda ardtca and Siphonodentalvum vitreum have disappeared ;
Pectm idandicua is rarer, the shells of Mya truncata and Saasicava
rugoaa have become thinner, and the place of Buccirmm groeidandicwit
is taken by B. undatum. Correspondingly such species as Cardiwm edvie,
LUtorina littorea, and MytUua edvlia now begin to preponderate. Two
immigrants from the Mediterranean even make their appearance. Tapes
decuaaoda and Pluolaa Candida, both inhabitants of shallow water, which
have not succeeded in maintaining an existence in Norway, and are now
foreign to its seas

Even as far as Trondhjem shell-beds with Arctic mollusca attain
a height of 380 feet (119 meters; II, p. 850) ; but further north all traces
of marine mollusca at high levels have disappeared ; as already observed,
I have not seen them in TromsO stift, and Pettersen regards certain shell-
bearing deposits, which here reach a height of 53 meters, as possibly
interglacial (II, p. 354). On the other hand, the more recent stage lying
at a lower level is clearly visible at several places on the shore up to and
beyond lat. 70“ N.

Many circumstances tend to confirm the view held by Pettersen and
others, that the absence of the higher and older horizons is to be ascribed
solely to the more prolonged glaciation of the north. Much caution is
therefore necessary in all deductions which relate to the former presence
of the sea over a part of Norway, first, because many of the high-level
strand-marks have not been produced by the sea, but by glacial lakes;
secondly, because observations in Greenland have shown that marine
mollusca are absent in the vicinity of a glacier owing to the great quftfitity
of fresh water it discharges; thirdly, because marine deposits could only
be permanently formed when the slopes were free from ice, or so long os
an inteiglacial episode existed.

Otto Torell, in his masterly classification of the more recent formations
in Sweden, published in 1876, has also distinguished two marine deposits
of veiy different age. The older of these consists of sand and clay with
Leda {Ycldia) arctica', it is more recent than the great glaciation, and
includes the shell-beds of Uddevallo, in which the Arctic characters are
not so striking. It was not until later, after the formation of the terraces,

^ M. Sars, Om de i Norge forekommende fossile Dyrelevninger fra Quartilrp^riod,
Universit. Programm for I. Halv^r, 1864, 4to, Christiania, 1865 ; Kjerulf, Die Geologic des
siidlichen and mittleren Norwegen, pp. 1-7 ; R. Collett, De i Norge hidtil fundne fossile
Fiske fra de glaciale og postglaciale Afleyringer, Nyt Mag. Naturvid., 1877, XXIII,
3. Hftfte, p. 12.


I 1 %



484


STRAND-LINES OP THE NORTH. [part in

aooordiiig to Torell, that the second marine deposit was formed; this is
assigned to the recent ^riod and contains Mytilus, Tellina, and the
existing fauna of the Baltic sea; it is the post-glacial stage of Norwegian
geologists^. Even as fat north as south Angerman land, Qumaelius mentions
Mytilw edvlis and TMvm haUica at a height of 250 feet (77 meters) ; but
in Finland Jemstrom did not succeed in ^ding the shell-beariiig at
a greater height than 60 feet ; in Oesel, Franz Schmidt records them as
occurring at between 80 and 60 feet above the sea, with a coastal wall
in the gulf of Finland at a height of 100 feet (31>3 meters); and this
trustworthy observer adds that they do not extend into the region of
lakes Ladoga and Onega, although Arctic shell-beds were encountered
by Murchison at Ust-Waga on the Dwina near the confluence of the
Waga®.

More to the south also, in Germany, these marine deposits attain but
an inconsiderable height ; Jentzsch has found Leda arctica in the Frische
Haff in west Prussia, and has described marine beds near Marienwerder ;
Berendt mentions a bed near Collbeig containing Cyprina idandica and
North sea mollusca; in Schleswig-Holstein a marl occurs with Cyprina
idandica in addition to Mytilus and Tellina. Nowhere, however, judging
from the observations so far made, do these marine beds extend very far
from the coast into the interior

Great BriUdn has furnished a large number of observations relating
to similar beds ; I will confine myself to the comprehensive account given
by Archibald Gfeikie. According to this observer Arctic marine mollusca ■
are known in Scotland up to a height of 524 feet (161 meters) ; other
shell-beds with a more or less pronounced Arctic character occur in many
places at a less elevation, as on the Clyde for example, where the strand
is supposed to have stood at a height of 100 feet (30*5 meters). Further
sotnur patches of shell-bearing sand have been found in a few localities at
much more considerable heights, e.g. near Macclesfield in Cheshire at
1,200 feet (365 meters), and on the summit of Moel Tryfaen at 1,350 feet
(411 meters; according to Ramsay about 1,170 feet =857 meters). The

* 0. Torell, Sur les traces les plus anciennes do I'ezisteiice de I'bomme en Subde ;
Compte-rendu du Congrbs archil, de Stockholm, 8ro, 1876, pp. 2-4.

* 0. Oumaelius, Sn&ckbankar i Angermanland, Geol. FOren. Stockb. Forb., 1874,

I, p. 238; JemstrCm, Om Finland’s postglaciale Skalgrusbaddar, op. cit., 1876, III,
pp. 133-140 ; F. Schmidt, Einige Mittheilungen Ober die gegenwftrtige Kenntniss der
glacialen und postglacialen Bildungen. etc., Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Oes., 1884,
XXXVI, pp. 248-278.

* e.g. A. Jentzsch, Die Lagerung der diluvialen Nordseefauna bei Marienwerder,
Jabrb. k. preuss. geol. Landesanst., 1881, Berlin, 1882,'’pp. 546-570 ; Berendt, Zeitschr.
deutsch. geol. (Jes., 1884, XVI, p. 188 ; Jentzsch, op. cit., 1887, XXXIX, p.492 et passim.
Dames, Die Glaoialbildungen der«noiddeutschen Tiefebene, Samml. gemeinverst. wise.
Vortrftge, 1886, Heft 479, contains a list of more recent works on this subject.



OBEAT BRITAIN


486


CH. xn]

latter locality has been described by Ramsay; the shelly sand lies partly
concealed bmieath a moraine. Geikie does not believe that the sea aetnally
reached these heights; he considers that the sands were carried upwards
by the ice. The whole of the ‘Bridlington Crag’ in Yorkshire, which
contains Arctic mollusca, is said to be merely an erratic included in the
boulder clay. In addition to these isolated patches at great heights, shell-
beds also occur in England at lower levels, down to the numerous ‘ raised
beaches ’ which border the existing coasts

The remarkable conditions under which these beds sometimes occur
have already been mentioned in treating of the coast of Sangatte near
Calais (II, p. 416).

If we disregard the high-lying patches in Cheshire and Wales, admitted
to be open to question, wo shall find that Arctic mollusca occur in Scotland
and in the Christiania fjord at closely corresponding levels. In Scotland
they extend in fact to a height of 161 meters, and in Norway to 520
Nomogian feet (163 meters) ; a sea-level of 188 to 194 meters is deduced
from the latter by considerations based on the depth at which similar
mollusca live at the present day. But it does not appear as though the
level descends in the direction of the Baltic provinces. The beds of
Finland and the Baltic provinces no longer present the strictly Arctic
characters of the higher levels, but resemble the lower stages of Scan-
dinavia, i. e. those containing the existing fauna, or in other words, it is
not that the height of the deposits decreases towards the east, but the
older and higher beds disappear, while the lower are continued at a more
or less constant level. How far the Arctic marine deposits lying at a great
height have been subsequently destroyed, or to what extent deposition has
been prevented by a long-continued glaciation of the country, must be
left to further investigation. ■ In any case there is no doubt that the
lower-lying and more recent beds may be recognized on the coasts of
Britain, as well as on those of Belgium and France. They indicate a
widely extended strand at this level at a time much more recent than the
glacial epoch. Even when the sea-level stood at 75 meters the Christiania
fjord harboured, as we have seen, at least two Mediterranean immigrants,
a fact suggestive of a climate milder than that of the present day, and
to this period we must refer the light-coloured shelly sands of BodO
and Tromsi}. ^

The question as to whether the height of these post-glacial marine
deposits decreases towards the south is thus, like so many other questions, not
so easily answered in Europe as in the United States. Nevertheless I believe
that this decrease also occupied in Europe. In the high latitudes north of

* A. Qeikie, Textbook of Geology, 2nd ed., 8to, London, 1885, pp. 897-904 ; A. C. Ramsay,
The Physical Ctoology and Geography of . Great Biifiun, 5th ed., 1878, p. 418. Arctic
shells ate also said to occur on the Wicklow hills in Ireland at a height of 1,800 feet.



486


STRAND-LINES OF THE NORTH' [pARrm

Europe traces of the sea are found at considerable heights, as will be shown
directly. In south Norway and in Scotland, beds with Arctic shells lie at
a height of 168 and 161 meters. More recent deposits, however, in which
•the Arctic character is less distinctly marked, possess a much wider distri-
bution.

It must not be forgotten that the appearance of northern imnugrants in
the Mediterranean probably marks the period of severest cold. This period,
however, is considerably anterior to the Leda clays and the equivalents of
the Champlain beds ; and these, although they contain Arctic mollusca,. are
certainly much more recent in Norway than the period of maximum
glaciation. For this reason their chronological equivalents in the shell-beds
of the Mediterranean probably lie at a lower level than the horizon in which
most of the northern immigrants occur. It is also very probable that at
the time of their deposition a larger area was covered with inland ice in
the Arctic region than at the present day, and that consequently the high-
lying shell-beds of this region are more recent than the Leda clays of Norway.

But let us leave these conjectures and again turn to the north.

8. The north of Euraeia and the west coast of the north Pac^ Ocean.
The terraces of Arctic America and of Greenland are repeated in Spitzbergen.
A remarkable fact may be mentioned here. Nordenskiold and Drasche
observed the shells of Mytilm ediUis on this island in great quantity at
a trifling height above the strand ; they had preserved their colour and liga-
ment This species, according to existing accounts, does not appear to live
at present in such high latitudes. The remains are evidently quite recent,
and the suggestion offered by some investigators, that they flourished
during the warmer climate of an interglacial period, which affected the
extreme north, does not suflice to explain them

The Austria sound, Franz Joseph’s land, is surrounded by shell-bearing
'^e&itUs in terraces which, according to J. Payer’s expression, look like
hypsometric curves *.

Middendorff has encountered similar terracing up to a height of 200 feet
and over on Wadsd in the Varanger fjord, on the peninsula of Bib&tschij
and the island of Kildin on the Mv/rman coast. Although no marine shells
are mentioned from these localities, yet the existence of a transgression is
scarcely open to doubt, since Murchison, as we have mentioned above, found
shell-bearing beds near t^e confluence of the Waga with the Dwina near
Ust-Waga; the sea has certainly covered the lower part of the existing
valley of the Dwina since the glacial epoch \

^ 0. Heer, Die Miocene-Flora und Fauna Spitzbergens, mit einem Anhang liber die
diluvialen Ablagerungen Spitzbergens ; K. svenska VeUAAad. Handl., 1870, VIII, No. 7,
p. 80 et scq.

* J. Payer, Die Osterreichisch-uagarische Nordpol-Ezpedition, 8vo, 1876, p. 272.

* A. Ton Middendorff, Andkiew, eino Insel im Eismeere, in der Gegend von Kola;
Bull. Acad. Imp. Sci. St-Pdtersb., 1860, II, pp. 158-158. It is probable from the



ABOnO EUBASIA


487


cm. zn]

In Nova Zemhla, Wilczek and Hofer observed terraced land with marine
shells np to a height of 800 feet (95 meters), and Nordenskidld found, in
addition to marine shells which had been carried by birds, subfoesil mollusca,
particularly an Area, in the bay of Bogatschefi', five kilometers from tl)p
existing shore at a height of 100 feet. While the negative movement is
revealed in this manner on the great double island, the deposits containing
mollusca of the glacial sea enter the lower part of the Petehora region, as
we learn from the observations of Keyserling which have been confirmed
by. Karpinsky; they appear on the lower Ob, and the investigations of
F. Schmidt, Lopatin, and Nordenskidld show that on the lower Teniaei also
and to beyond Dudino (lat. 69* 20' N., about) the same marine deposits
occur. They form the subsoil of the tundra, and Middendorff traced the
marine shells, particularly Mya truncata, above the river Taimyr up to
a height of 200 feet \

In Taimyr land, however, in addition to the shell-bearing beds, we also
see great quantities of tree-trunks arranged at definite intervals in long
horizontal rows. These are the so-called Noah-wood. ‘ A closer examina-
tion,* says Middendorff, ‘ would probably show, even at the present day, that
the Noah-wood is not distributed irregularly over the tundra, but lies in
regular strand-lines which descend in approximate parallelism one behind
the other to the sea, each single strand-line preserving for the whole of its
course a fairly uniform height above the surface of the sea.’ At the mouths
of the Lena and the KolyTna and in many other districts of these Siberian
coasts, the Noah- wood is mentioned at various heights above the sea. The
question as to the origin of these beds of wood, however, is by no means
solved ; Bunge and Toll have shown that the * wood mountains ’ of the New
Siberian islands belong to those plant-bearing Tertiary beds which present
so astonishing an extension in high latitudes

description that Asar exist on Rybatschij ; Murchison, Verneuil, and Keyserling, Russia
and the Ural Mountains, 4to, 1845, I, pp. 327-382.

^ H. H5fer, Graf Wilczek’s Nordpolfahrt im Jahro 1872, Peterm. Mitth., 1874, p. 802 ;
Wissenschaftliche Resultate der zur Aufsuchung eines angekttndigten Mammuth
Cadavers von der K. Akademie an den unteren Jenissei ausgesandten Expedition, M4m.
Acad. Imp. Sci. St P^tersb., 1872, XYllI, No. 1, pp. 17 and 48; A. £. NordenskiOld,
BedogOrelse.for en Expedition till Mynningenaf Jenissej och Sibirien, Bihang k. svenska
Yet-Akad. Handl., 1877, lY, No. 4, p. 69 et seq. ; A. T. von MiddendorfPs Reise in den
SLussersten Norden und Osten Sibiriens, I, p. 206 ; lY, p^61 et seq. Seebohm mentions
marine shells, * perhaps’ even 500 feet above the Yenisei; Proc. Geogr. Soc. London,
1878, XXII, p. 112.

* Bunge, Account in Peterm. Mitth., 1887, XXXIII, p. 255. Lindeman, for instance,
states that between the Lena and Bering strait traces of weathered driftwood occur in
some places fifty versts from ■the sea, ‘whither the waves have long been unable to
penetrate*; Peterm. Mitth., 1879, XX Y, p. 172. Similar distances on the tundra are
given by Wrangel in his Reise Iftngs der Nordktlsta von Sibirien und auf dem Eismeere
in den Jahren 1820-1824, 8vo, Berlin, 1839, p. 256.



488 STRAND-LINES OP THE NORTH ^ [pabtih

From the accounts descrihing the occurrence of marine deposits on the
lower course of the Lena, the Indigyrka, and the Kolyma, it appears to be
beyond dispute that the lower course of all the great Siberian rivers was
covered by the sea to a greater or less extent, and that at a time more
recent than the glacial epoch.

Recent shell-beds, such as are known on the Aleutian islands, are appa-
rently not absent in Kamchatka. On the slopes of the Kurile islands
terraces are known ; in particular near Furubets in Iturup, the laigest of
the Kuriles (lat. 44* 30' N. to 45" 30' N., about), where Milne describes
two stages, one at a height of 400 to 500 feet, the other at 130 feet. Else-
where in the Kuriles only the second of these has been observed. In the
neighbouring locality of Nemoro in the island of Yezo the same observer
mentions a stage at a height of thirty to forty feet

In this region the terracing of the shores generally appears to be very
striking. Pumpelly mentions recent marine terraces as occurring at various
places from Yezo on the coast of Japan, to as far as Kiu-siu and the
border of the great deltaic plain of China near Tshi-fu ; these stages are
especially well marked in the south of Yezo, and they also occur near
Yokohama. Volcano bay and the north coast of 'I’shugar strait arc sur-
rounded by terraces, according to Bickmore. North-east of Sendai in the bay
of Keinana-eura, Rein observed on a limestone cliff a horizontal band almost
a meter in breadth, perforated all over with holes in which hundreds of
shells of boring molluscs may still be seen ; from this he inferred that
a recent elevation of the land had taken place to the extent of nearly two
meters. Naumann has collected many facts bearing on this subject, chiefly
in the neighbourhood of Tokio and the Japanese archipelago in general, and
these also indicate displacement in the negative direction

Further south, indications of negative movement do not absolutely dis-
*1SppeB*?-but they Income less and less marked ^

' J. Milne, The Volcanoee of Japan ; Trans. Seis. Soc. Japan, Yokohama, 1886, IX,
pt II, pp. 151, 164.

* R. Pumpelly, Geological Researches in China, &c., Smiths. Contrib. to Knowledge,
1866, in particular p. 108 ; Godfrey, Geology of Japan, Quart. .Tourn. Geol. Soc., 1878,
XXXIY, p, 544; A. iliekmore, Some more recent Chang^es in China and Japan, Am.
Joum. Sci., 1868, 2nd Scr., XLV, p. 217 (at Tshi-fu, according to Bickmore, only a long
‘ sand-spit ’ with two older strand-lines a few feet above the sea) ; J. J. Rein, Naturwissen-
schaftliche Reisestudien in Japdiii, Mitth. deutsch. Ges. Natur- und Volkerkunde Ostasiens,
1875, 7. Heft, p. 29 ; E. Naumann, Ebene von Yedo, Peterm, Mitth., 1879, XXV, p. 126;
G. Davidson, Abrasions of the Coast of Japan, Proc. Calif. Acad. Sci., 1875, VI, p. 28 ;
this author mentions a terrace at a height of about 100 feet on the island of 06
(lat. 32° 25' N.).

’ It was the mode oi formation of the great plain whicli in 1874 led F. von Richthofen
to the conclusion that from the north down to the Tshu-san islands neg;ative movement is
taking place ; in the south, on the*other hand, positive movement ; Zeitsohr. deutsch.
geol. Ges., 1874, XXVI, pp. 957-960.



ESCHOLTZ BAY


489


CH. xn]


4. The eastern e^Msts of the North Paeifus Ocean. When Kotzebue was
detained on the west coaat of America (in lat. 66* 16' N.) by a violent
storm on August 8, 1816, his companions Escholtz and Chamisso found that
the hills near the shore consisted of ice covered by only a thin layer of earth ;
that this was ancient ice was shown by the number of mammoth remains
revealed by summer thaws. This fossil ice possesses so great an extension
that Chamisso did not hesitate to describe it as a geological fonnation
Kotzebue called the place Escholtz bay ; the fact has been subsequently
confirmed by Bcechey, Seemann, and other explorers; I follow here the
latest description by Dali.

Extremely ancient icc, assuming the characters of an independent rock,
extends with interruptions northwards to point Barrow, eastwards to Retuni
reef (where the ice-bed begins a1x>ut six feet above the sea), southwards to
Icy cape, and in isolated patches as far as Kotzebue bay. It is not frozen
ground but actual ice, not bluish-green like glacier ice, but dirty, often of
a stratified appearance and sometimes yellowish, like frozen liog-water.
Dali has examined it most closely at Elephant }K)int near Chamisso island.
Here it is accompanied by thin clayey beds with Sphagnum, shells of
Pisidium and Valvata; in some spots very evil-smelling patches occur in
the clay as though from putrefaction, precisely as in the neighl)Ourhood of
the mammoth and rhinocenjs remains on the Siberian rivers; numerous
bones of mammoths and niminants are also found in this locality. We have
here indeed a ridge of sohM ice rising several hundred feet alx>ve the
adjacent sea; it is higher than all the surrounding land and dates from
a period older than the mammoth. The surface of the ice ascends in ste])s.
The first clift' or ice-wall is about thirty feet high, counting in a superficial
layer of earth two or three feet in thickness, which forms the summit;
further inland rises a second ice- wall ; Dali was able to trace it for a distance
of four kilometers, and estimateil the height of the summit above tWT'^ at
eighty feet. From here onwards the ridge gradually increases in height
and assumes a rounded form; it consists entirely of ice and is nowhere
bounded by higher ground. From the character of the beds containing
Sphagnum, Dali concludeil that the ice mass is not subject to any glacier-
like movement. The overlying layer of clay attains a thickness of forty
feet, contains bones of eleplianis, horses and buffalos, but only occura up
to a certain height, and apparently does not reach the summit of the ice
mountain *


‘ 0. von Kotzebue, Entdeckungsi-eise in die SAdeec und nach der Beringstinas^, 4to,
1821, 1, p. 146, III, p. 170.

* W. H. Dali, Notes on Alaelfa and the vicinity of Bering Strait, Am. Joum. Sci., 1881,
XXI, pp. 104-111; Alaska-Forschungen im Sommer 1880, Peterm. Mitth., 1881, p. 46;
A. Penck, Die Eismaezen der Eecholtz-Bai, Deutiche gcogr. Bl&tt., Bremen, 1881,
IV, pp. 174-189.



490 STRAND-LINES OF THE NORTH • [PAirrm

Similar masses of ice have since been observed by Bunge and Toll on
the islands of New Siberia.

Middendorff was convinced that a general elevation, not only of Siberia,
but also of north-west America and the Arctic regions generally, had taken
place, but was deterred from drawing general conclusions by Pingel’s obser-
vations on Greenland. This observer also mentions that in Norton eownd,
Sagoskin found masses of Noah-wood on the summit of the island of Saint
MichaeP.

Dali too found trunks of trees in an advanced stage of decay arranged
in long lines, far above the highest level of the tides, over the whole
distance between Norton bay and Kotzebue sound; he regarded them as
proof of an elevation of the land which extends in his opinion from long.
150° W. through the whole of the peninsula of Aliaska. Terraces are
absent in the region of the Yukon and on the borders of the continent in
the neighbourhood of Aliaska, and Dali connects this circumstance with the
absence of indications of a general glaciation in this region

In addition Dali found barnacles, at a height of at least fifteen feet,
attached to the vesicular basalt of the island of Saint Michael mentioned
above, and Orewingk long ago collected data showing the originally higher
level of the strand in Aliaska, the Aleutian and the Pribyloff islands.
When Grewingk wrote (1850) the recent marine deposits, which furnish
the most direct evidence of these movements, were assigned to the latest
period of the Tertiary aera, while the elephant-bearing beds visible in so
many places, including those of Kotzebue sound, were regarded as diluvial.
But even at that time, as we have mentioned above, Grewingk pointed out the
striking similarity between the mollusca in these supposed marine Tertiary
formations, and those of Beauport near Quebec on the St. Lawrence ; the
beds are in fact the representatives of the Champlain stage of Canada

TR^y have been found by Wossnessenski, Postels, Beechey, and others in
various localities, as for instance on the island of St. Paul in the Pribyloff
group (lat. 57° N.) ; in nearly the same latitude on cape Tonki, in the bay
of Igatskoj, the east side of the island of Kadjak, i. e. on the north-east of
the peninsula of Aliaska ; the shells lie in volcanic tuff, forming a little cliff


* Middendortf, Reise in den aosBeraten Norden und Oaten Sibiriena, II, p. 262 note.
The deacription given by Cook of Denbigh peninaula in Norton aound has aometimes
been cited aa indicating eleveAion of the land, but it may alao refer to the formation
of land by ailting up ; A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean, 1784, II, p. 485. The reference
to a find made by Lamanon in Port dee Franfaie (lat. 58" 87' N.) of large fossil ahella
different from thoae living on the atrand reats on an error ; Voyage de la Pdrouae autour
du mondc, publ. par Milet-Mureau, 4to, 1797, II, p. 189.^

' W. U. Dali, Alaaka and ita Reaourcea, pp. 462, 465. '

" C. Grewingk, Beitrag aur Eenntniaa der orogpraphiachen und geognoatiachen
Beachaffenheit der Nordweatkflate*^ Amerikaa, 8vo, 1850 (from the Verh. rua8.*k. min.
Qea. St. Peterab., 1848-1849), p. 249.



CH.xn] ' UNALASHKA. VANCOUVER 491

one and a half fathoms high. West of Kadjak they appear on the east
coast of Aliaska ; but they seem to attain their greatrat development near
the extremity of the peninsula in Morshovsky bay, Moller bay, Pavlov bay,
and on the islanti of Unga (lat. 56* to 55° N.). In Morshovsky bay
(Walrus bay) in particular a horizontal bed of these shells lies fifty toises
above the sea-level, and above it follow horizontal beds of sand and clay
with a thickness of another fifty toises.

In UmUatihka they lie at the north-west foot of the volcano Makutshkin,
and on the north side of the island of Atka (about lat. &2° 30' N.) shells
of the same species occur thirty feet above the sea in beds of hardened clay
and friable sandstone ^

For many centuries, however, no marked displacement of the strand-line
has occurred on the Aleutian islands ; this is proved by Dali’s investigations
of the numerous and extensive kitchen middens which take us back to
a stage of human existence far anterior to that of the existing Innuit

Towards the south the indications of a higher sea-level become less
frequent, but are not altogether absent. At fort Simson (lat. 54° 34' N.) an
ill-defined terrace of loose material lies on the coast at a height of 100 feet ;
south of this point near Metla Katla it becomes clearly marked, at a height
of ninety-five feet above high tide. Dawson, to whom we owe most of the
observations on these regions, records that in Skidegate inlet (lat. 53° 10' N.),
which separates the two largest islands of the Queen Charlotte group, he
found sandy clay with Leda, Cardium, and Balanus resting on glacial
deposits.

In the strait of Oeorgia terraces are known at a height of 100 and 200
feet. Near Nanaimo in Vancouver, shell-beds with Saxicava rugom, Mya,
and Leda rest at a height of 170 feet on ancient glacial fonnations. Similar
shell-beds were found some time ago near Victoria by Blake, twenty feet
above high tide


* Orewingk, tom. cit., in particular p. 274 et seq., also p. 54 et passim. I feel seme
donbt as to the specimen from the Pribjloff islands figured by Pinart owing to its state
of preservation; Pinart, Voyages k la cOte nord-ouest de I’Amdrique, 4to, 1875, I,
p. 85, pi. A, fig. 7. Lutkd (Voyage autour dn mondc sur la corvette la Simiavine, III,
edited by A. Postels, 8vo, Paris, 1836, p. 27) describes the horizontal beds with shells
in Alaska ; the palaeontological determinations were made later according to Wossnes*
senski’s collections.

* Dali, Tribes of the Extreme North-West ; Contribu^ons to North American Ethno-
logy, 1, 1877 (Powell, Geogr. and Geol. Survey of the Rocky Mountain Region), p.'41 et seq.

'' G. M. Dawson, On the Superficial Geology of British Columbia, Quart. Joum. Geol.
Soc., 1878, XXXIV, pp. 97, 99; and Additional Observations, op. cit., XXXVII, 1881,
p. 278. Similar data in H. l^uermann. On the Geology tff the South-Eastern Part of
Vancouver Island, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1860, XVI, p. 202 ; Dawson, Report on the
Queen Charlotte Islands, Geological Survey of Cani|^a, Report of Progress for 1878-1879,
p. 110 B. I have not mentioned the shell-bed at a height of fifteen feet (p. 114 B
et seq.), because it recalls kitchen middens ; Blake, U. S. Coast Survey for 1867, p. 281 ;



492 STRAND-LINES OP THE NORTH . [partiii

As compared with the accounts we possess of relict shore-lines in some
regions, those from these coasts are scanty enough ; all the more striking,
therefore, are the full and precise descriptions which relate to the terraces
SQ. characteristic of all the valleys of the interior. These river terraces are
so sharply defined and extend to such great heights that no traveller has
omitted to mention them. In Puget sound, terraces are recorded up to
a height of 1,600 feet; they extend across the low watershed into tlie
Cowlitz valley; but as to the maximum height at which these terraces
afibrd evidence of the action of the sea, we have no knowledge

An admirable description of the inland terraces on the Saskatchewan,
the Athabasca, the Vermilion, the Upper Columbia, and the Fraser river has
been furnished by Hector ; lie recalls the fact that Logan had previously
observed terraces up to a lieight of 331 feet (100 meters) above lake
Superior, and from this he concluded that a submergence had affected the
whole continent up to a lieight of 3,000 feet above the existing sea \

Dawson observed a terrace of worn pebbles at a height of 5,270 feet
(1,606 meters) on the northern slope of the mountain Il-ga-chuz west oi the
Fraser river, and was disposed to admit a submergence to the extent of
4,000 or 5,000 feet. His latest accounts, however, seem to indicate that he
is now inclined to explain the inland terraces in connexion with extensive
lakes and fluviatile action. They have nowhere afforded remains of marine
shells \

These fluviatile terraces belong indeed to phenomena of another order,
and do not indicate a wholesale submergence of the land. In Europe there
are numerous examples of river terraces far removed from the region in
which oscillations of the strand-line occur. River terraces also occur on


•-“’opograj^^Jjical and Geological Features of* the North-west Coast of America, Am. Joum.
Sci., 1868, ‘Jnd 8er., XLTV, p. 248; Grant, .Tourn. R. Geogr. Soc., 1857, XXVIl, p. 285.

* J. S. Newberry, Surface Geology of the Country bordering the N. Pacific Railroad ;
Am. Joum. Sci., 1885, 3nl Ser., XXX, p. 344.

* J. Hector, On the Geology of the Country between Lake Superior and the Pacific
Ocean, Quart, .lourn. Geol. Soc., 1861, XVII, pp, 388-445. Hind deBcribes those on the
south Saskatchewan ; 0 ]>. cit., 1864, XX, pp. 122-130. A vivid description of the terraces
on the tributaries of the Fraser was given by Milton and Cheedle, The North-West
Passage by Land, 8vo, 3rd ed., 1865, p. 338 and pi. ; also Begbie, Proc. R. Geogr. Soc.,
Feb. 27, 1871. As early as 1882 Capt. Back observed 10-11 terraces on the Great Slave
lake, and on studying the outildiv of the lake in the Great Fish river he concluded that
the water level had sunk. This river, like Nelson river by which the outflow of lake
Winnipeg takes place, is interrupted by rocky cataracts; Back, An Account of the
Route and Appearances of the Counti 7 from Great Slave Lake in the Polar Sea, Joum.
R. Geogr. Soc., 1836, VI, p. 5.

•* G. M, Dawson, Quai-t. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1878, p. 21, and 1881, p. 283. An illustration
and numerous measurements referring to river terraces in Geological Survey of Canada,
Report of Progress for 1875-1876, p.V290, and 1877-1878, p. 168 B et seq. ; an illustration
of the terrace of the Il-ga-chiiz, op. cit., 1876-1877, pi. ii.



OH. XII]


CALIFORNIA


493


the lower course of the Columbia and in all the river valleys as far
down as the Sacramento, but we need not give further consideration to
them here.

The submerge 1 forests near the moutii of the Columbia river a^’e
explained by Dana as the result of local landslips Near the mouths of
the CoquiUe and Umpquah rivers and in Koos bay (lat. 44°-4S° N.) the
coast is described by Goodyear as a table-land, 200 to 800 feet in height,
with traces of oscillations ; two valleys are sunk into this table-land ; they
are several miles in length and the waves advance up them far into the
interior®.

With regard to the terraces along the coast of California, much uncer-
tainty prevails. North of fort Ross (al)Out lat. 38“-40" N.) a long terrace
occurs which, according to Becker, presents the characters of an ancient
beach ; borings of Pholos were observed here, in one place at a height of
about 100 feet (30-8 meters), in another at about twice that height

In the bay of Nan. Francisco and northwanls on the shores of San Pablo
bay (lat. 38“ lO' -17* 30' N.), traces of a negative movement of the strand-
line are clearly visible. On the north shoTO of Lobas creek, a little river which
descends from Mountain lake to the sea, Blake observed shells of existing
species and pebbles at a height of 80 to 100 feet ; similar remains are
known round San Francisco ; not only shell-beds but molluscan l)orings also
occur on the coast of the bay at various heights aljove the sea, but they
nowhere appear to extend above 100 feet (30*8 meters) ■*.

East of the town of Santa Cruz, south California (lat. 36® 56' N.),
according to Whitney, two particularly long and distinct terraces are visible
at a height of 64 and 263 feet (19"5 and 80 meters) ; the lower terrace
forms a fairly broad plain on which the town of Santa Cruz is built. The
Santiv Maria canon (alxiut lat. 34° N.) is teiToced at its mouth down to

' J. D. Dana in C. Wilkes, U. S. Exploring Expedition during the years 1838 to 1842,
1849, X, pp. 670, 677.

® W. A. Goodyear, Notes on the Geology of the Coast of Oregon ; Proc. Cal. Acad. Sci.,
1872, IV, pp. 295-298.

G. Becker, Notes on the Stratigraphy of California, Bull. U. S. Gcol. Surv., 1885,
No. 19, pp. 15, 16. Davidson mentions a horizontal terrace at a height of forty feet at
point Arena; Proc. Cal. Acad. Sci., 1871, IV, p. 179, and in particular, The Abranions
of the Continental Shore of North-west America and the supposed ancient Sea-levels,
op. cit., 1873, V, pp. 90-97 and pi. v. The same observer cites numerous observations
relating to terraces on the coast of California and in more northerly latitudes; he
believes that they have been produced by a univemil ice-mantle. I must refrain from*
making use of these data, because, as the .author himself admits, a great part of the
observations were made from the open sea. *

* J. Blake, On the Gradual Elevation of the Land in the Environs of San Francisco,
Proc. Cal. Acad. Sci., 1863, III, pp. 45, 46; Newberry, Reiiort on North California and
Oregon, 4to, 1857, pp. 13-15 ; Whitney, Geology California, 1865, I, p. 102 ; Amos
Bowman, On Coast, Surface, and Scenic Geology, Proc. Cal. Acad. Sci., 1872, IV, p, 244.



494 STRAND-LINES OF THE NORTH , [PARrm

t

the sea ; the highest of the four steps lies at a height of 148 feet (45 meters),
and Newberry confirms the presence of recent shell-beds at several localities
on this coast

, In the most northerly part of the gulf of California a number of most
remarkable changes appear to have occurred. According to Blake’s de-
scription there can be little doubt that this gulf once extendi much
further into the land to the north-west, that is, in the same direction as
that in which the chains of south Arizona, coming from the south-east,
meet the ranges of lower California. It is in this region that a consider-
able part of the Colorado desert now lies at or below the level of the sea.
Scanty remains of a somewhat curious marine Tertiary deposit are known
on its western border; they contain Ostrea, Anomia,'and Pecten. The
whole central part of the desert is now filled with an argillaceous fresh-
water deposit containing Anodonta, Planorbis, Physa, Amnicola, and
towards the south, Gnathodon also. Terraces occur here and there near
its margin.

The Colorado river flows above the level of the desert, of which it
forms approximately the eastern boundary, and from the neighbourhood of
its bed the country slopes gently towards the bottom of the desert basin.
Blake has shown that in all probability the finer sediments of the river
accumulated in the fresh-water lake which once occupied the site of the
desert, while its coarser sediments were deposited nearer its banks ; by the
mere growth of these deposits first the sea became shut out from the lake,
and next the lake cut off from the river ; the lake, desiccated by evapora-
tion, has now become the desert

The observations at my disposal concerning the southern parts of the
gulf are not of great importance.

Bemond mentions shell-beds in the neighbourhood of la Paz and at
Mazatlcn, which occur some meters above the sea, and contain existing

’ .T. D. Whitney, Geology of CalifoiTiia, I, pp. 165, 169. Whitney, quoting Dr. Cooper,
mentions terraces on the islands of St. Barbara and Cataline (lat. 34°-33° 20' N.) even
up to a height of 1,000 feet, but he has not visited the localities himself; tom. cit.,
p. 182. The strand-lines of Monterey are already mentioned by Blake, Beports of
Explorations and Surveys for a Railroad from the Mississippi River to the Pacific Ocean,
V, 1856, pp. 129, 186. Near San Pedro an elephant’s tooth is said to have been found
in the ancient littoral deposits. Oscar Loew believes that south California is rising at
present at the rate of five feet i^ the century; see Loew in Wheeler, Annual Report upon
the Geographical and Geological Explorations and Surveys West of the 100th Meridian,
8vo, 1876, p. 184. For meteorological reasons he further concludes that Mexico, Arizona,
and east California are sinking, while Utah and the Californian coast are rising. It
seems doubtful, however, whether it is possible to draw such conclusions from the
rainfall ; tom. cit., p. 178. '

* Blake, Pacific Raflroad Reports, V, pp. 228-240; see also Newberry in J. C. Ives,
Report on the Colorado River of the West, 4to, Washington, 1861, Geological Report,
pp. 19 et seq.



OH. xn] NEjOATIVE MOVEMENT IN THE NORTH 496


species.' Unless these should prove to be kitchen middens we here
encoimter signs of negative movement within the tropic of Cancer ^

Farther south data of this kind are wanting, but we soon meet with
an indication of an opposite character. According to the observations (^f
Lieutenant Qriswold, published after his death by Harper Pease, Olijypertofni
rock (lat. 10® 17' N., long. 109“ 19' W.) must be regarded as a true atoll.
A broad and continuous girdle of coral reef rises from a great depth to
about fifteen feet above the sea and encloses a lagoon. On the south side
of the lagoon there rises to a height of 120 feet a weathered splintery
grey volcanic rock tunnelled with caves and connected with the reef by
a narrow tongue of coral clinkers. The lagoon is a tranquil lake of
almost fresh water ; it measures two nautical miles in length and one in
breadth \

6. Conclusion. We have now passed in review the coasts of the
northern seas, and after rejecting the deceptive evidence afibrded by
kitchen middens, ice-dammed fjords, river terraces, and much else, we
recognize throughout these regions manifold evidence of a negative move-
ment of the strand-line. It is in high latitudes that the remains of sub-
fossil shells attain the greatest altitude, and towards the south the ^igns
of displacement become less numerous.

From the polar regions, proceeding along the west Atlantic coast, we
have traced these indications in the form of terraces and as the post-
glacial deposits of the Cliamplain beds ; Dana lays stress on their decrease
in height towards the south. At about the fortieth parallel they are no
longer of any importance.

In like manner we have traced them towards the south along the
coasts of the east Atlantic, where they encroach on the coastal region of
northern Russia, and then spread over the lowlands of Scandinavia into the
north of Qennany. Even as far south as Christiania it is estimated that ‘
the sea- level still retained a height of 600 feet, but a lower horizon which
occurs at a height of 120 feet contains a molluscan fauna closely approaching
that now in existence, and it is this stage which attains the widest dis-
tribution. Owing to the great complexity of the phenomena presented
by the Mediterranean it is difficult to say to what extent this negative
movement is revealed there. At the same time it most be borne in mind
that the presence of northern immigrants in the South probably corre-
sponds to the greatest extension of the ice, thal in Sweden the shell-beds
with Arctic mollusca are more I'ecent than this extension, and that further

' Bemond, An. Univ. Chili, 1868, XXXI, p. 416. ■

* Harper Pease, On the exietence of an Atoll near the West Coast of America, and
Proof of its Elevation ; Proc. CaL Acad., 1866, III, pp. 199-201. I have not been able
to understand how Pease deduces from Griswold’s description an elevation of the atoll
to the extent of 100 feet.



496 STRAND-LINES OF THE NOBTH, [PARrm

north the Arctic fauna of the high-lying shell-beds still maintains its
existence at the present day.

On the east coast of Asia we found terraces occurring at a moderate
l^oight in Japan, and following Richthofen we may place the limit of well-
defined displacements of the strand in about the latitude of the Tshu-san
islands (lat. 80’ N.).

More than fifty years ago Dana observed that traces of a great change
in the relative position of land and sea occur on the west coast of America
as far down as the fiftieth or even forty-fifth parallel, and that towards
the equator these traces grow rarer or altogether disappear, or indicate
displacement of an opposite sign

This conclusion that a displacement which was on the whole negative
has taken place about the pole, coincides with the results of Howorth (II,
p. 20) and other observers. The precise nature of the movements cannot,
however, be determined. It is difficult to say whether they were uniform,
spasmodic, or oscillatory; the last seems most probable. The bands of
‘ Noah-wood ’ indicate some extraordinary disturbance of the tides, which
was independent of the sea-level, whatever that may have been, and which
might even have occurre<l during a negative displacement moving at an
absolutely uniform rate. Even terraces do not afford a complete proof
of spasmodic displacement. Greater importance attaches to the fact that
in Sweden the lower shell-bed is sharply distinguished from the upper by
its fauna, and that in the north of Norway it may be recognised as readily
by its colour as its fossils. A fact even still more striking is that in the
Bermudas, i.e. within the region and within the period under consideration,
we meet with signs of positive movement (II, p. 313).

The first signs of the approach of a cold climate are furnished by the
northern mollusca, which make their appearance in the English ‘Crag,’
^ i.e. theu. highest beds of the Tertiaiy succession. An increase in the
number of Arctic immigrants followed ; then came the great glaciation.
This, however, was interrupted by oscillations, during wUch the ice dis-
appeared, a fairly temperate climate prevailed, and extensive forests and
great terrestrial mammals fiourished. The ice returned, but did not
advance so far as previously; now for the first time we recognize with
some degree of certainty the shores of a sea which rose around Scotland
to a height of about 200 meters, and from this time onwards we obtain
a clearer insight into theunovement, mainly negative, which has been
the subject of our study. The molluscan fauna still remained Arctic.
It is not until later, at a lower horizon, that a few southern immigrants
make their appearance in Sweden. In America we already see the
influence of the Gulf stream. The fauna of the shell-beds on the lower
Yenisei described by F. Schmid^ bears so great a resemblance to the existing
' Dans in Wilkes, U. S. Exploring Expedition, &c., 1849, X, pp. 670, 677.



497


OK zn] ip;<^ATiyE MOVEMENT IN THE NOBTH

Anstie Banna that we are»oompelled to regard them as identical. IVom
the same investigations it is plainly evident that the bodies of mammoths
which are found in the tundra were washed into lakes or marshes of more
recent date than the shell-beds, i.e. that a considerable part of the negative
movements had already taken place at a time when the mammoth still lived
.and flourished. Near Calais also we have found remains of the mammoth
above the existing marine mollusca (II, p. 416).

Whatever' uncertainty there may be in matters of detail, the general
conclusion seems clear that in all the northern seas the strand stood higher
towards the close of the glacial period than it does at present; indeed,
that long after the ice age had. passed away, and at a time when the
molluscan fauna had already assumed its existing character, a somewhat
higher level of the strand-line prevailed over the whole region; the
negative excess of the movement, which was probably oscillatory, was
considerable in the north, but decreased towards the south. But even in
these seas displacements susceptible of measurement have not occurred
within the historic period.



498


CHAPTER Xin

STRAND-LINES OP THE EQUATORIAL AND
SOUTHERN COASTS

Western coasts of the Atlantic Ocean, central and southern part. Eastern coasts of
the Atlantic Ocean, African part. Coasts of East Africa and Arabia. Coasts of India
and Further India. Coasts of the Polynesian islands and Australia. West coast of
South America.

1. Wedem coasts of the Atlantic Ocean, ceirUral and sovihet'n part.
Wc will begin at cape Hatteras. The Champlain deposits of the north
have disappeared ; the terraces have become much lower. In Sowth
Carolina peculiar phosphate beds occur which lie horizontal and extend
oveir a wide area ; they contain remains not only of Mastodon and Elephas,
but also of the sperm whale, and probably the walrus, as well as stone
weapons and traces of domestic animals ; Lcidy regaixis them as the accu-
mulations of a long period deposited over a low shore ‘.

The arguments which serve to disprove any measurable movement at
the present day in the Carolines, in Florida, and at the mouths of the
Mississippi have already been stated ; at the same time attention has been
directed to a shelly breccia which, reaching a height of ten to twelve feet,
occurs along the whole east coast of Florida, and is regarded as an
indication of a recent negative movement (II, p. 311).

As I.arly as 1853 Lycll drew attention to the striking regularity of
the S-shaped line which unites the trend of the Bahamas with that of
the Lesser Antilles, and Nelson’s descriptions have led us to suppose that
an ancient core exists within these islands. Gabb declared that all the
Bahamas, especially the higher-lying parts, are the separated but still
horizontal fragments of an oidginally continuous region. Hero and in the
Antilles an attempt has been made to distinguish as a separate formation
a more recent post-Pliocene littoral limestone, which Gabb proposes to call
‘Antillite’; I confess thAt the limit between the more recent marine
<lopo8its and the Tertiaiy formations does not seem to me to have been

' J. Lcidy, Description of Vertebrate Remains, chiefly from the Phosphate Beds of
South Carolina, Jonm. Acad. Sci. Philadelphia, 1877,' 2nd Ser., VIII, pp. 209-261;
Biylinski, Phosphates de chaux dc la Caroline du Sud, Bull. Soc. gdoL de Normandie,
1875, II, pp. 3-74; for a companion with the phospWe beds of the English Chalk,
see A. J. Jukes-Browne, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1875, XXXI, pp. 256-314.



490


CH. xm] ^ INDIES, GUIANA. BRAZIL

drawn with sufficient sharpness in this region. The observations made at
Sombrero seem to indicate repeated oscillation (II, p. 811); in Antigua we
meet even with Miocene beds, of the age of the Orbitoidcs limestone, which
project into the sea as reefs. The difficulties encountered in attemptii^
to distinguish the latest movements are the same here as in the Mediter-
ranean; we must, therefore, confine ourselves to the statement that at
present wo do not possess any proof of a sensible change of level, and
that the living coral reefs exclude all idea of an existing negative move-
ment ; nevertheless, there are abundant indications of previous negative
displacements, of which a more or less considerable part date from the
Tertiary aera ^

The coasts of Ouiamt are very unfavourable for observations of this
kind ; they are flat and extend in a gentle slope beneath the sea, as at
Georgetown, for example ; sand-dunes at a distance of several miles from
the coast-line separate this flat shore from the interior

On the north coast of Brazil the shore recedes to some distance beyond
the mouth of the Paranahyba. Da Silva Coutinho, who gives a vivid
description of this feature, ascribes it either to a subsidence of the land
or to an advance of the sea. The mighty stream of the Amazon, despite
its load of sediment, is unable to build up a delta ; the great islands at its
mouths, Marajo, Caviana, and Mexiana, do not consist of recent alluvium
brought down by the river, they are indeed fragments of the continent
which have been separated by the sea. They arc destined to disappear —
a fate to which so many other vtist regions have succumbed. From the
Parfi to the Maranhao the destructive advance of the waves takes place in
a network of canals and lagoons. When Da Silva Coutinho visited this
region in 1867 the sea already washed against two lighthouses which had
been built about thirty years before at a distance of 500 meters inland.
The tide enters the various arms and channels of the river with irjpsistible •

’ R. .1. Nelson, On the Geology of the Bahamas and on Coral-Formations generally,
Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1853, IX, pp. 200-215; C. Lyell, tom. cit., note, p. 202 ; W. M.
Gabb, On the Topography and Geology of San Domingo, Trans. Am. Phil. Soc., New
Ser., 1872, XV, pp. 103, 111 ; Gaussoin, The Island of Navassa, Am. Journ. Nat. Sci.,
1867, 2nd Ser., XLTI, p. 439. Anegada rifles only nine meters high, according to Cleve ;
the reefs have been described by R. II. Schoraburgk, Reniarks on Anegada, Journ. Roy.
Geogr. Soc., London, 1832, II, pp. 152-170. The recent land in Guadeloupe is described
by P. Duchassaing, Essai sur la constitution gcologique de la pai*tie basse de la Guade-
loupe, ditc Grandfi-Terre, Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1847, 2® ser., IV, pp. 1093-1100, and
Observations sur les formations modemes de Pile de Gifadeloupe, op. cit., 1855, 2® ser.,
XII, pp. 753-759 ; Darwin, Coral Reefs, p. 261 ; Schott, Die Kiistenbildungen des nOrd-
lichen Yukatan, Peterm. Mitth., 1866, XII, pp. 127-130; Qabb, Notes on Costa Rica
Geology, Am. Journ. Nat. Sci., 1875, 3rd Ser., IX, p. 203. Gabb describes inland terraces
on the river Mao easbsouth-eailt of Sabaneta, San Domingo ; they do not belong to this
series of formations ; cf. Gabb, loc. cit., p. 63.

^ J. G. Sawkins, Observations on British Guiana ; Qpart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1871, XXVII,
pp. 419-434.

K k 2



600 EQUATORIAL AND SOUTHERN OOXSTS [pabt m

force and takes permanent possession of the ground. Marine animals
establish themselves in places formerly covered by fresh water, and long
lines of mangroves advance towards the continent, while the flora of the
land recedes

Such is the order of events which may be followed here beneath the
equator ; but it is difficult to discover how much of this process must be
really ascribed to a positive movement of the strand, and how much to
the action of the waves.

The island of St. PatU, far out in the Ocean, has furnished no definite
results. At the edge of the breakers Wyville Thomson observed a red
band of encrusting nulliporos

East of the Maranhao lies the region of the Brazilian coral reefs’,
passing cape St. Roque, it embraces the group of the Abrolhos and reaches
Cabo Frio, thus extending from lat. 1“ or 2“ to lat. 22° or 23“ S. ; our
knowledge of this region is of recent date, and is chiefiy due to Hartt.
The species composing the reefs are almost all peculiar to this coast.
There are many forms representative of those of the West Indies, and
closely allied to them, but a large number of characteristic genera are
absept. The most important genera are Acanthastraea, Favia, Heliastraea,
Siderastraea, Pontes.’ Cabo Frio may be regarded as the most southerly
point at which they occur ; in the bay of Rio Janeiro, in spite of appa*
rently favourable conditions, there are only one or two species of Astrangia.
But as far as the Abrolhos, that is to about lat. 18° S., bands of true coral
reef are to be seen along the coast, succeeding one another at irregular
intervals. They are generally separated from the mainland by a navigable
channel ^

The observations relating to movements of the strand-line on San
Fernando de Noronha (lat. 3“ 50' S.) are most contradictory. The principal
mass of ., the island consists of basalt and phonolite, the little island of
Booby is formed of calcareous sandstone. The presence of an ancient
high-water line and certain eroded cavities in Booby island led Rattray
to conclude that the group had been recently elevated. On the other
hand, Buchanan, who subsequently visited the group with the Challenger,
points out that the stratification on Booby island lias been produced by
the wind, and as it extends beneath the sea, he concludes that the land
has sunk or is still sinking*.

' Da Silva Goutinho, L’Embouchure de I’Amazone ; Bull. Soc. gdogr. Paris, 1867, 5*8^r.,
XIV, pp. 321-834.

* C. Wyville Thomson, The Voyage of the Challenger, 8vo, 1877, II, pp. 105, 108.

’ C. F. Hartt, Remarks on the Brazilian Coral-Fauna, Trans. Connect. Acad., 1866-1871,
I, p. 864 (in the appendix to Verrill, Notice of the Corala and Echinoderms collected by
Prof. Hartt at the Abrolhos Reefs, tom. cit., pp. 351-364) ; also, by the same. Geology
and Physical Geography of Brazil, %o, Boston, 1870, pp. 189, 204.

’ A. Rattray, On the Geology of Fernando Noronha, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1872,



601


c5H.xm] M CORAL REEFS OFF BRAZIL

A fact of more importance for our inquiry ia furnished by the Eoccaa
group, which lies between Fernando de Noronha and the mainland;
according to Hartt’s account it presents all the characters of a typical
coral reef formed under positive movement of the strand-line. *

Along the coast the reefs of PernamJmco (1st. 8” S.) have been described
by Hawkshaw; he regarded them as indicating intermittent movement.
The reefs of Parahyba do Norte (lat. 7° S.) and the island of Itaparica, near
Bahia (lat. 12° 5(y S.), have been examined by Rathbun. At Itaparica
the base of the reefs is formed by corals ; above these come nullipores and
innumerable tubes of Serpula which are especially abundant about the
summit. The reefs are separated from the land by a channel, in which lie
dead corals encrusted by nullipores and Serpulae ; in the bay of Bahia all
the corals, with the exception of Mvsaa Harttii, appear to belong to still
existing species. A large part of the reefs is exposed at low tide ; Hartt
expressly mentions this, as, for instance, when describing the irregular
coral reefs which occur outside the town of Maceid (province of Alagoas),
and continue northwards to Pernambuco

In the AhroUm fringing reefs occur ; the island of Santa Barbara, for
instance, is surrounded by one. Hartt's detailed de^pription of the^efs
of lixo, lying to the north-west of the preceding, shows that these present
a horizontal surface of dead coral, traversed by deep channels, and rising
two feet above low water, though submerged at ordinary high tide. ‘ The
reef,’ says Hartt, ‘ grew as high as it could, and is now dead ; ... its height
must probably be ascribed to a recent elevation of the land.'

Along the coast of Brazil ‘ chapeiroes,’ i. e. sea-stacks fonned of corals,
rise from the Ocean ; they are only a few meters in diameter, but some-
times unite to form extensive reefs; the largest reefs are surrounded by
such stacks. As a rule, the reefs rise a little above low water, and ,
present a remarkably even surface ; sometimes, but rarely, they ar? covered
with soil \

These facts would seem to suggest that this part of the coast has been
affected by a negative movement which has exposed the coral reefs and
killed them.

The observations made by Hartt on the mainland accord fairly well
with this interpretation. Somewhat north of the Santa Cruz river large
areas are covered by dead corals which arc exposed at low water. At the

XXVIII, pp. 31-34. According to the statement of this author granite also occurs in
considerable masses ; Buchanan, in The Voyage of the Challenger, II, p. 119.

* J. Clarke Hawkshaw, Notes on the Consolidated Beach at Pernambuco, Quarts Joum.
Geol. Soc., 1879, XXXV, pp. 239-243; R. Rathbun, Notes on the Coral Reefs on the
Island of Itaparica, Bahia, an^of Parahyba do Norte, Proc. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist., 1878,
XX, pp. 39-41, and Am. Joum. Nat. Sci., 1879, 3rd Ser., XVII, p. 326.

* Hartt, Remarks on the Brazilian Coral-Fauna, 364; Liais, COmpt. rend., I860, L,
p. 762 ; and Marcel de Series, tom. cit., p. 907.



602 EQUATORIAL AND SOUTHERN COASTS [PARrnt

«

mouth of the Jequitinhonha, near Belmonte (not far from Porto Segoro),
ancient strand-lines are visible along the flat coast. Similar traces appear
on the Pao d'Aamcar near Victoria in the province of Espiritu Santo.

' For reasons already frequently mentioned, 1 do not attach much im-
portance to the presence of a submerged forest south of the mouth of the
Mucury river, west of the Abrolhos'. The conclusion which might be
drawn from it would be diametrically opposed to all the preceding
evidence.

At Caho Frio, and to the south of it, the traces of negative movement
increase, but the data must be carefully examined, since the* height of the
beds above sea-level is inconsiderable and kitchen middens occur, as well
08 the remains of sepulchral monuments and other indications of an ancient
settlement. Accounts even are in existence which attribute an artificial
origin to the bar at the mouth of the harbour of Cabo Frio

On the Maricas islands, between Cabo Frio and llio, Hartt observed the
empty cup-shaped holes of Echvmmdm MicJielini in the gneiss of the
clifls, and in the bay of Bio itself he found sand with recent shells several
feet above high water ; similar formations also occur in the marshes of the
province of SSo Paoly ^

At Laguna, Capanema mentions oystei-s adhering to the granite rocks
a little more than two meters above high water. All the ‘ sambaquis ’ or
shell heaps of this region must, however, be regarded as the relics of
human occupation. Above Bhenos Ayres shell-beds six or eight metera
alwve the level of the La Plata are worked as limestone quarries; they
contain remains of whales, but also of ancient pottery. This does not,
however, imply that indications of negative movement arc absent ; on the
contrary near Bosario, much higher up in this same river basin, Stelsner
, encountered brackish-water shells several meters above the water level

On the La Plata, between lat. 33° and 35° S., we enter that remarkable
terraced land which stretches with terraces progressively increa.sing in
height till we pass beyond the straits of Magellan. According to Darwin,
we may see in some places five terraces, in others seven or eight, perhaps
even nine. It is doubtful, however, whether the river terraces have in all
cases been sufSciently distinguished from the marine. This is the region
in which Doering’s quer-Andinian stage occuiu It is probably the equi-

' Hartt, Geology and Physictlt Geography of Brazil, pp. 220, 221, 224.

* Annalen der Hydrographic, 1878, VI, pp. 170-171.

* Hartt, Geology and Physical Geography of Brazil, pp. 35, 71, 506.

* G. S. de Capanema, Die Sambaquis oder Muschelhilgel Brasiliens, Peterm. llitth., 1874,
XX, pp. 228-230; Wiener, Mitth. k. k. geogr. Ges. Wien, .1876, 2. Sen, IX, pp. 486-489;
K. Rath, Globus, XXVI, p. 194 ; Heusser et Claraz, Essais pour servir h une description
physique et gdognostique de la Province Argentine de Buenos-Ayres, 4to, ZOrich, 1865,
11, pp. 108-139; Stelzner in Napp, Die Aigentinische Republik, 8vo, Buenos-Ayres,
1876, p. 84.



CH.xin] ' WEST COAST OF AFRICA 603

valent of the Champlain stage of the north. Both are crowded with marine
shells belonging to the existing fauna, and both rise to a greater and
greater height as they proceed towards the pole. In the bay of la Plata
these shell-beds h**) at a height of 20 to 30 meters, but in the extreme sou^
at 100 meters, and in the latter case the accompanying terraces rise to
a height of 300 to 400 meters (11, p. 308).

Roger and Ibar, crossing the mountains from Skyring water, found that
near the sources of the Rio Gallegos (lat. 51” 45' S.) the chain is suddenly
replaced by tabular hills; these are all of equal height, and like those
described by Captain FitzRoy on the Rio Santa Cruz look as though they
were the remains of a table-land wliich had been broken up by the excava-
tion of the river valleys *.

Thus we leant from the east coast of America that the terraces dis-
appear south of lat. 40° N. ; faint traces of negative movement occur in
Florida ; no definite infonnation is afforded by the Antilles, but the presence
of living reefs proves the absence of existing negative movement. Guiana
likewise furnishes nothing definite, but the terraces are absent. At the
mouth of the Amazon the sea encroaches on the land, perhaps owing to the
erosive action of the breakers. Then coral reefs begin to appear ; towards
the .south they are dead, probably owing to a negative movement, and at
low water they are exposed to the air.

(I'arther south the indications of negative movement become somewhat
clearer ; on the la Plata l>etween lat. 30° and 40' S. the terraced land of the
north again makes its appearance and the quer-Andinian stage rises higher
and higher above the sea as it proceeds to the south, just os the Cliamplain
stage and the terraces accompanying it increase in height towards the
north.

2. East Atlantic coast, Africa. The accounts at my disposal relating to
this coast are few in number, and for the greater part indefinite in character. *
According to Maw, an ancient strand-line is to be seen at many points on
the coast of Morocco ; it corresponds to a similar coast-line on Gibraltar ;
Maw observed it at heights of about 40 to 60 or 70 feet south of cape
Spartel in the bay of Tangisrs, and at Mogador. Further south from
ateut lat. 29° 30' to 28° N. the coast has been visited by Duro; in this
region it consists of interrupted cliffs formed of white and red sandstone.
The ruins of the Spanish fort, called by the natives Tagadir Rumi, which
once rose south of Cabo Non, are fast disappearing ; the projecting cliff on

' R. FitzRoy, Extracts from the Diary of an Attempt to ascend the Rirer Santa Cruz
in Patagonia, Joum. Roy. Oeogr. Soc., 1837, VII, p. 114; also Travels of the AdKenture
and Beagle, II : Darwin, as is well known, accompanied FitzRoy. Roger i Ibari Estudios
sobre las aguas de Skyring, por el Comandante i Oficiales de la Corbeta ‘ Magell4nes,’
8vo, Santiago, 1878, p. 66. Captain Masters also observed strongly marked terraces on
the Gallego ; less clear, but likewise recognizable,«re those on the Cnheyli, which flows
into Coy inlet; J. C. Musters, Unter den Patagoniem (German ed.>, 1878, passim.



504 EQUATORIAL AND SOUTHERN COAisTS [PAiwm

which it stood was undermined by the sea, and this — ^not^ as some observers
have thought, a subsidence — ^was the cause of its destruction. Similar
evidence is to be seen at the Wady Draa. On climbing the cliff we look
oyer the plain extending further than the eye can reach \

The Canary idavda also present signs of negative movement ; as such
I regard the remains of shells mentioned by Fritsch as occurring on the
island of Palma at a height of 4-20 to +40 feet; they are cemented
together by sand and clay and fill the joints and crevices in recent basaltic
cliffs. As to the high-level deposits which occur on all these Atlantic
islands, there is a difficulty as to their age ; they may be Tertiary, but it
is impossible to arrive at a definite conclusion from the existing accounts
At cape Blanco, according to Belcher, the atmosphere is densely charged
with sand ; of vegetation there is next to none : less than a month suffices
for the sand to bury large buildings out of sight. Marine shells are found
distributed in great quantities at a considerable height above high tide
Shell-beds of comparatively recent ago are found on several of the Cape
Verde islands ; they have been described by Darwin ; Fischer has studied
their fauna from collections made by Cessac, who obtained most of his
specimens from Sao Jago, where the beds lie at a height of + 18 meters,
intercalated between two sheets of basalt ; with two exceptions the shells
belong to living species ^

About the Mel islands [Bissagos islands] (lat. 12'' N.) coral reefs are to
be seen which descend steeply to great depths ; long bars and lagoons border
the coasts from long. V 15' to 1" 34' E. ®

^ G. Maw, Notes on the Geology of the Plain of Marocco and the Great Atlas, Quart.
Joum. Geol. Soc., 1872, XXYIII, pp. 85-97, in particular pp. 86, 87 ; G. F. Duro,
Eiploracion de una parte de la costa noroeste de Africa, Bol. Soc. Geogr. Madrid, 1878,
%IV, pp. 184-199; W. Arlett, Survey of some of the Canary Islands and part of the
Western Cdast of Africa, Journ. Roy. Geogr. Soc. London, 1836, YI, pp. 285-810.

^ K. von Fritsch, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1862, XIY, p. 547. Here even fragments
of coral and shells are mentioned at a height of 700 feet. I should be inclined to regard
them as Tert^y.

* Belcher, extracts from Observations on various Points of the West Coast of Africa,
surveyed by H.M.S. Aetna ; Joum. Boy. Geogr. Soc. London, 1832, II, p. 301. The coast
is described by Aube, L’lle Arguin et les pecheries de la cOte occidentale de TAfrique ;
Rev. marit. et col., 1872, p. 470.

* Darwin, Geological Observations, 2nd ed., pp. 4-6 ; P. Fischer, Sur les fossiles des
lies du Cap Yert, rapport^s par ]!ii|. de Cessac, Compt. rend., 1874, LXXYIII, pp. 503-506 ;
Baron von Barth, Primo Relatorio da CommissSo encarg. de explor. geol. de la Provincia
de Angola, Ann. da Comm, centr. perm, de Geographia, Lisboa, 1876, No. I, pp. 35-37.
In the South Atlantic, on Nightingale Island (Tristan d'Acunha gi^)up) Buchanan
observed a shore-line at a height of 10*8 meters, and the negative traces appear to extend
mtich higher ; Proc. Roy. Soc. London, 1876, XXY, p. 614. •

^ U. S. Hydrographic Office, The West Coast of Africa, 1873, 1, pp. 160, 190; Langhans,
Peterm. Mitth., 1885, XXXI, p. 211, fl. xi. At cape Palmas there can hardly be either
coral reefs or shell-beds of any size, for the senate of Palmas has offered a reward for the



cH.xra] f/ ‘ BAST COAST OF AFRICA 605

South of the Tiiouth of the Congo, Pechuel-Losche found limestone con-
taining oyster shells ; it forms cliffs along the coast twenty feet in height,
but I have no information as to their age \

There are numerous accounts treating of the structure of the wei^
coasts of Africa, but in general our knowledge of these regions is extremely
incomplete; even the shell-beds found a little above the sea-level at the
mouths of the Senegal and also, far remote from this river, in the lagoon
of Assini, which are described by Pomel as Quaternary, may possibly be
only ancient kitchen middens

The accounts at my disposal which refer to the more southern part of
the coast are quite inadequate, but in Colony the evidence of negative
movements is very definite. Clarke long ago recoi'ded the presence of
parallel strand-lines and of high-lying shell-lieds in the neighbourhood of
Cape Town; he considei*s that the district around False bay, as well as
Table bay, must have been covered by more than sixty fathoms of water,
converting the Cape into an island ^

We are thus in a position to state that, from Gibraltar to beyond the
Cape Verde islands, traces of negative movement are known to occur at
a moderate height above the sea; further south information is waiting
or inadequate ; but in Cape Colony signs of negative movement arc very
obvious.

8. Coasts of eastern Africa and Aralria. The traces visible at Cape
Town are repeated at many localities in South Africa. Stow, who has very
carefully studied the most recent marine deposits, includes among them
sloping surfaces of quartzite worn by erosion which occur in the neighbour-
hood of Port Elizabeth at a height of 180 feet (55*5 meters), and marine
sands in which shells have Ijecn found up to a height of 60 or 70 feet.
Again, at Reuben point, at the entrance to Delagoa bay, the recent marine
sands with shells lie, according to Cohen, at a height of 40 metei’s, and
extend 25 kilometers into the interior. Griesbach states that on the whole
east coast of Africa signs of a recent elevation of the land occur ; but since
remains of human occupation have been found in the supposed ancient

discovery of limestone ; SchOnlein, Zeiischr. dentsch. Ges. Erdk., Berlin, 1875, X, p. 431.
D. Dohm has kindly informed me that he noticed no traces of an altered strand-line on
Princes island ; nor does 0. Baumann know of anything similar at Fernando Po.

^ 0. Lenz, Petrefakten von der Loangoldiste, Yerh. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1877, p. 279.
From Zholnski on the lower Congo subfossil mollusca of, giving species are said to have
been obtained at a height of 200 meters ; Bull. Soc. beige G4ol., 1887, I, Proces-verb.,
p. 30. There may be some misunderstanding here ; Herr Baumann tells me that such
heights only occur at some distance inland ; he had climbed them but seen nothing of
the kind.

* A. Pomel, Le Sahani, p. 25.’*

M. B. Clarke, On the Geological Phenomena in the Vicinity of Cape Town ; Proc.
Geol. Soc., 1888-1842, III, p. 422. In the island of Kerguelen there is a continuous
terrace at a height of 6 meters ; T. Studer, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Oes., 1878, XXX, p. 346.



606 EQUATORIAL AND SOUTHERN CoAsjS [pabtiii

littoral formations at various localities close to the shore at Natal, at Inanda,
and at the mouth of the Zambesi, it is probable these beds are to a great
extent simply kitchen middens ^

, Griesbach believed he had observed elevated coral reefs more to the
north around the island of Marsha, and he ascribes the origin of the Baza-
rato islands to an elevation of coral reefs. The town of MozcCmbique is
built on a flat, low-lying coral formation, and the somewhat antiquated, but
detailed descriptions furnished by Lieut. Wolf of H.M.S. Zeven and Barra-
couta show clearly that, as we proceed towards the north, the coast becomes
increasingly fringed by true coral i*eefs.

Attention has frequently been called to the great depths to which the
coral reefs suddenly descend on the seaward side. In lat. 12° 20' S., near
Ibo, the reef is separated from the mainland by a lagoon. Cape Delgado
(lat. 10°41'S.) and the Querimba islands, the harbour of Quiloa, the islands
Mafia and Pemba are examples which illustrate tlie steep descent of the
sides of the reef to great depths. At Mombasa a lagoon lies between the
reef and the mainland. In spite of these indications it cannot be denied
that signs of negative movement also exist even on the very coasts which
are 4)ordered by barrier reefs. Burton states that the Mrima, i, e. the coast
north of Zanzibar^ shows signs of an elevation of the land extending from
Rufiji to Mombasa, and in places there are even distinct traces of two
strand-lines which are separated by a flat tcrnice. Thomson gives a pre-
cisely similar account of this coast at Dares-Salaaiu (lat. 6° 50' S.) ; he says
there are two, if not three, successive littoral zones ; between the first and
second the upward movement must have been temporarily arrested. Still
further north, opposite the island of Kiama (lat. 0“ 40' S.), Brenner found
that the coral formation extends more than 3 kilometers inland, and then
suddenly terminates in a range of wooded hills formed of dune sand

t.

‘ (j. W. Stow, Some Points in South African Geology, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1871,
XXVII, pp. 520, 522; the older work of Kraus even mentions oystei’s at a height of
600-700 feet on the grass riiggens between Uitenhage ami Grahams Town ; Ueber die
geologischen VerhS.ltni68e derOstkuste des Caplaiides, Aiutl. Ber. XX. Versamml. deutseh.
Naturf. und Aerzte, Mainz, 1842, p. 129 ; Bain says 20 to 300 feet, Trans. Geol. Soc., 1845,
2nd Sen, Vll, p. 191 ; K. Cohen, Krlauternde Bemerkungen zu einer Routenkarte, II.
tiahresb. gcogr. Ges. Hamburg, 1875, p. Ill; C. L. Griesbach, Geology of Natal, Quart.
Journ. Geol. Soc., 1871, XXVII, p. 67; the recent marine sand in Delagoa bay is
mentioned by Rehmann, Das^ TransvaabGebiet, Mitth. k. k. geogr. Ges. Wien, 1883,
XXVI, p. 389.

(Lieut. Wolf,) Narrative of Voyage to explore the shores of Africa, Arabia, and
Madagascar, performed in H.M.S. Leven and Barmcouta under direction of Gapt.
W. F. W. Owen, 8vo, London, 1832, I, pp. 187, 379, 425, 427 ; II, pp. 2, 6, 9, et passim ;
Darwin, Coral Reefs, p. 76 ; Burton, The Lake Regionj of Central Equatorial Africa,
Journ. Roy. Geogr. Soc., 1859, XXIX, p. 35 ; J. Thomson, To the Central African Lakes,
8vo, 1881, I, pp. 75, 94; R. Bredher, Peterm. Mitth., 1868, XIY, p. 362. The coral
ground of Zanzibar is described by v. d. Decken, Reisen in Ost-Afrika, 8vo, 1869, I, p. 22.



CH.XIII] • MADAGASCAR. SOMALI LAND 607

The presence of relict strand-lines on coasts boi*dered bj’’ lagoons and
barrier reefs with steeply descending walls can scarcely cause us surprise,
since, in the Pacific Ocean, we have become acquainted with fragments of
table-land which rite 100 meters above the sea, have Ixsen laid dry by nega-
tive movement, and are at present engirdled by lagoons and living barrier
reefs.

A large part of MadayaHcari^ surrounded by a barrier reef : according to
Wharton the Farquhar islands (Joao de Nova), north of Madagascar, form
an atoll with a lagoon ; in like manner, according to Coghlan's account, the
Abbd bank, north of Mauritius, forms an elongated atoll ; tliis, however, is
quite submerged, and its surface lies at a depth of —13 to —18 meters; in
this it resembles many other coral reefs to the nortli of Mauritius. Niejahr
states that the Cosmoledo islands are so disposed in a circle as to very
nearly enclose a lagoon \ All the islands surrounding Madagascar from
the Comorcs to the Seychelles as far as Rfhinion and Mauritius are, with
very few exceptions, surrounded by reefs; but on Mauritius in particular
indications are described of negative movement. On RodrUjiiez an ancient
strand-line may 1)6 seen at a height of twenty feet

Further north on the coast of Africa, beyond lat. lO"" N., the signs of
negative movement reappear in a most striking manner. From tlie evidence
afforded by the coast of Medjertines in Nurth Romal! land, Revoil lias
even attempted to reconstruct the Iwundary of the sea at the time it
extended over the north coast of the peninsula of Bender Gasein, Bender
Kli6r, and Meraja, Haggenmacher, travelling inland from Berbera, met with
weathered beds of oysters atid corals two to four hours' journey from the
existing coast

The indications observed on the south coast of the gulf of Aden are the
precursors of those traces of negative movements which everywhere sur-
round the Jtecl sea, and which long ago attracted the attention of ttavellers.

^ Gmndidier, Notes sur Ics cotes sud et sud-ouest dii Madagascar, Bull. 8oc. gcugr.
Paris, 1867, 5® ser., XIV, pp. 384 394; Sibrcc, llie (ireat African Island, 1880, p. 36.
The observations of Guillcurin as to a belt formed of fragments of bt^sali on the beach
probably indicate volcanic drift; Ann. Mines, Paris, 1866, 6° scr., X, p. 281; Comm.
Wharton (Shearu^ater), llydrogr. Notices, 1879, No. 1 ; Lieut. Coghlan, op. cit., 1877,
No. 6; Capt. Friedrich (Brig Ilennann Frieilrivh), Ann. d. Hj’drogr., 1876, IV, pp. 243-246.

* Darwin, Geological Observations, p. 33 ; G. Clark, Notes on the Geological Features
of Mauritius, Quart. Jourii. Geol. Soc., 1867, XXI 11, pp# 185-190 (a great mass of coral
limestone in the interior is said to be formed of species which do not iL ^ at present on
the shores of the island); R.von Dra8che,Dic Insel Reunion (Bourbon) : eine gcologische
Studie mit eineni Anhang iiber die Insel Mauritius, 4to, Wien, 1878, pp. 27,^ 72, 73
(alternation of lavas and beds of corals) ; Balfour, Gulliver, and Slater, Rodriguez, Phil.
Trans., 1879, vol. 168, p. 209; £. Behm, Die Insel Rodriguez, Peterm. Mitth., 1880, p. 287.

^ G. Revoil, Voyage au pays des Medjourtins, 1^11. Soc. geogr. Paris, 1880, 6® sC^r.,
XIX, pp. 254-269, and Voyage au Cap des Aromates, 8vo, Paris, 1 880 ; 6. A. Haggenmacher,
Reise im Somali-Lande, Peterm. Mitth., Erganzungsheft 47, 1874, p. 18.



608 EQUATORIAL AND SOUTHERN CoisTS [paotih

As early as 1762 Carsten Niebuhr observed at the wells of Moses that the
sea * appears to have retired to a great distance/ and Ke uoted the same
fact on the coast of Djidda. Very early, at a time when Darwin’s views on
the structure of coral reefs were but little known, Ehrenberg was able to
show that in the Red sea the distinction between barrier and fringing reefs
could not be maintained with the sharpness it was usually supposed to
possess ; this, as is well known, was subsequently shown by Dana to be
equally the case with the reefs of other regions. As early as 1838 Riippell
attempted to give a general account of the coral beds now exposed above
the sea. According to this, their height in the north amounts to + 30 or 40
feet ; they are continued far to the south, lying horizontally and resting
against the ancient rocks. From lat. 26” N. onwards, as at Djidda, Massaua,
and elsewhere, they do not attain a height of more than 12 or 16 feet.
There is definite proof ‘ that at one time the height of the sea with regard
to the land stood higher in the south by about 15 feet, in the north by
about 30 or 40 feet

Traces of ancient shores at even greater heights have since been found
in various localities, but I have quoted the now antiquated description by
RUppcll as a token of the deep impression which these long horizontal lines
make on a thoughtful observer. They are the same as those which were
previously described as marking the apposed or descending series at Suez
(I, p. 378). From Suez the line at 200 feet is continued to the Mokattam
hills near Cairo, and to Ssedment in the Nile valley; such lines cannot bo
produced by any movement of the lithosphere.

It is impossible in the present state of our knowledge to give a connected
account of the exposed beds or ancient strand-lines which at present sur-
round the Red sea. Only a few localities have been carefully investigated,
and most of the observations are unfortunately of too general a character.
It is around Suez and in the bay of Akabah — the places most frequently
visited — that the highest horizons are known ; there can be no doubt, how-
ever, that high-lying strand-lines are not of local origin, but have once
possessed a very wide distribution.

At Tudjurra, close to the entrance to the Red sea, Rocher d’H6ricourt
observed recent marine formations at a height of 40 to 50 meters ; Aubry
encountered two terraces of coral limestone at Obock, one at a height of
H- 15 to 25 meters, the other at 40 to 50 meters ; Courbon observed them
in the bay of Adulis at 4 height of 20 to 40 meters. A broad belt of
recent marine deposits has l)een described by Heuglin near Suakim and

* Carsten Niebuhr’s Reisebcschreibung nach Arabien und anderen umliegenden
lAndern, 4to, 1774, pp. 225, 277 ; Beschreibung von Aft.bien, 4to, Kopenhagen, 1772,
p. 403 ; Ehrenberg, Ueber die Natur und Bildung dcr Corallenb&nko des Bothen Meeres,
Abh. Akod. Wise. Berlin, 1832, XVItlct, pp. 381-432 ; E. Riippell, Reise in Abessynien,
8vo, Frankfurt a. M., 1, 1838, pp. 140 et seq., 183, 245, and U, 1842, p. 318.



OH. xm] . * BED SEA. PEBSIAN GULP 609

Tokar, and by Botta in Yemen. In Arabia, this belt, which is known as
the Tehcmay borders the coast as far as the strait of Bab-el-Mandeb \

It is to Carter that we are chiefly indebted for our knowledge of similar
beds on the south coast of Arabia. A Milliolite sandstone, composed qf
innumerable rhizopod shells, the cavities of which are filled with yellow
ferric silicate, borders the coast and extends to Kattyaw^r on the coast of
India; here it is called Purbunder-stone ; at Bhooj in Cutch it contains
iridescent bivalve shells, and is there called Gold-stone ; it is exported from
Kattyawfir to Bombay as a freestone for building.

This recent marine deposit, so widely distributed, is found plastered at
various heights on the prccipitoim coast of south Arabia, and has been
observed up to a height of 150 feet (45-7 meters). In one locality the occur-
rence of some loose blocks would seem to indicate that it even extended to
a far greater height. These, however, arc not the only traces of negative
movement; borings of Lithodomus may be seen at various heights, and
caves likewise, loth at the existing level of the breakei’s and far above it.
Thus a cave is described by Carter in the limestone of tlie R&s Hammar,
a part of the R&s Seger (Sejar) ; it is 150 feet in width and 50 feet high,
and the top of its roof is perforated by Lithodomus lorings ^

The traces of this displacement are also continued into the Persian gulf ;
Loftus states that traces of a recent marine deposit containing shells such
as still live in this sea may be followed far inland, and indeed that these
mollusca may be met with in the lowest beds of the recent alluvium even
400 kilometers away from the existing sea, i. e. 240 kilometers al)ove the
confluence of the Tigris and Euphrates. At their summit, however, these
marine deposits appear to pass without any sharp line of demarcation into
the river alluvium. Against the folded gypsiferous Miocene beds of the
outer chains of the Zdgros a recent marine deposit of upper Tertiary age
rests horizontally; this is Blanford’s Makr&n group; it extersis from
Bushire to cape Monze. A much more recent marine formation, the
^littoral concrete,’ borders the coast, generally at a height of 20 to 25

* Rocher d’Hericourt, Compt. rend., 1841, XII, pp. 732-735 ; Aubrj’, Bull. Soc. geol. do
Fr., 1886, 3® sen, XIV, p. 201 ; Courbon, Compt. rend., 1861, LII, pp. 426-433; T. von
Heughlin, Reise in N.-O. Afrika, 1877, I, p. 34; Lartet, Geologie de la Palestine, Ann.
Sci. geol., 1869, I, p. 263 ; J. Milne, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1875, XXXI, p. 8, and in
many other publications. On the existing fluctuations of the sea-level, see Klunzinger,
Zeitschr. deutsch. Ges. Erdk., Berlin, 1872, VII, p. 21. Malcolnison mentions fossil shells
from Aden at a height of more than 100 meters; V^laiif has not seen them ; C. V^lain,
Description g^ologique de la presqu'ile d*Aden et dc Tile de la Reunion, 4to, Paris,
1878, p. 9.

* H. J. Carter, Memoir on the Geology of the South-P3astem Coast of Arabia,i Journ.
Bombay Branch R. Asiat. Soc., » 1852, IV, pp. 21-96; Note on the Pliocene Deposits of
the Shore of the Arabian Sea, op. cit., 1853, IV, pp. 445-448, and Summary of the
Geology of India between the Ganges, the Indus, and Cape Comoiin, op. cit., 1854, V,
p. 312.



610 EQUATORIAL AND SOUTHERN COASTS [pabtiii

feet Bushire is built of it It forms cape Jishk in the golf of Om&n, In
some places the name is used to designate an exposed coral bed (I, p. ^5).
The eastern part of the island of Kh&rak is formed of the littoral concrete ;
it is surrounded by a coral reef, and the two formations are remarkably
similar. These beds are regarded by Blanford as a continuation of the
recent coastal deposits which we have just mentioned as occurring on the
coast of south Arabia and as far as Cutch

Relict strand-lines thus occur on the east coast of South Africa at
a considerable height; in Delagoa bay they still reach a height of -1-40
meters. Then a gap occurs in the observations, but further north, in Zanzi-
bar, and as far as the equator, distinct indications of an abandoned strand
are present, even in those places where lagoons and coral reefs with pre-
cipitous slopes bear witness to positive movement in the immediate past.
Negative indications arc also visible on the coasts of the Red sea, on the
south coast of Arabia, and in the Persian gulf.

4. Coasts of India and FuHlier India, In turning our attention to the
coasts of the Indian x»eninsula,we must first recall a remarkable peculiarity
in the sea-lcvel on the west coast. Towards the south, according to
Sow^rby, there is little or no tide ; in BoinVuiy it amounts to twelve feet, at
the mouth of the Tapti to nineteen, at the head of the gulf of Cambay to
twenty-eight feet. At this point the Indian tide reaches its greatest height.
Many rivera discharge into the gulf, and their sediments, driven back by
the tide, form a considerable accumulation on the south-east coast of
Kattyawfir, between Diu, Jafirabad, and Goapanath. The bar of the Tapti
owes its increase to similar causes. It would thus appear, according to
Sowerby's conception, as though Bombay were slowly rising, because new
land is formed on the seaward side which checks the entrance of the tide
and thus causes a sinking of the mean sea-level *

Apant fi’om this, iiccounts will be found in technical treatises of various
alleged elevations and subsidences on the coasts of India.

'L'hat the subsidences in Gutch are caused by the engulfment and slipping
of the moist alluvial land during earthquake shocks has already been
mentioned (I, p. 43).

Buist has described a submerged fore.st at Bomlay, more recent data
relating to it were collected by Ormiston during the construction of docks
at the port. The trees arc rooted at a level of —12 feet. Blanford

' W. K. Loltus, (juai't. .Joiirn! Ueol. 8oc., 1855, XI, p. 251 ; W. T. Blanford, Note on
the Geological Formations seen along the Coasts of Biluchistan and Persia from Karachi
to the head of the Persian Gulf, and on some of the Gulf Islands, Rec. Geol. Surv. India,
1872, V, pp. 41-45; Eastern Pemia, 8vo, 1876, II, p. 467 et passim; also Quart. Joum.
Geol. Soc.,. 1873, XXIX, p. 501 ; W. A. Stiffe, On thg Mud-Craters and Geological
Structure of the Mckran Coast, op. cit., 1874, XXX, pp. 50-53.

W. Sowerby, Memorandum on the Geological Action of the Sea on the South Coast
of Kattyawar ; Trans. Bombay Geogr. Soc., 1868, XVIII, pp. 96-104.



I


INDIA


511


OH. xm]


remarks in this connexion that the littoral concrete occurs at a distance of
no more than a mile from this place. Trees of the species which form the
submerged forest (Avicennia and Bruguieria) may be seen living at the
present day below the high-water mark ; the fact that they are perforated
by boring shells seems to indicate a salt lagoon. In my opinion, however,
the position of this forest is in no way connected with the movements which
laid bare the littoral concrete ; the case is comparable with that of the sub-
merged forests of Europe and North America, which owe their position to
a local slipping of soft alluvial land ^

The island of Vaypi^aa the coast of Malalmr,has been cited as a case of
recent elevation ; as a matter of fact it is a mass of marine sediment which
was driven into its present position during an earthcjuake in 1341 (I,p.96).

Disregarding the cases just mentioned, we perceive that quite recent
marine deposits, comparable with the Milliolite limestone and the littoral
concrete, occur, even if only in widely separated patches, all around the
Indian peninsula. This was already the conclusion of Buist ; it was sup-
ported by Blanford and has been confirmed by fresh observations. These
patches, which are always horizontally stratified, do not invariably occur at
the same height, but in many places the higher horizons have evidently
been destroyed. At cape Monze, oystei’s occur attached to the rocks ten to
fifteen feet above liigh tide Fedden’s investigations in Kattyaw&r show
that a narrow belt of upper Tertiary deposits Iwrders the coast as far as the
gulf of Cambay, and that outside this belt a zone of Milliolite rock occurs,
which extends to a height of over sixty feet, and appears to attain still
greater elevations in the interior. The north coast of the peninsula, next
the gulf of Cutch, is bordered by dead coral reefs ; in spite of the numerous
traces of negative movement mentioned by Fedden, I should be inclined to
attribute no great importance to this fact, owing to the various influences
to which the sea-level is here exposed **. ^

Under various forms the Milliolite rock and littoral concrete extend, as
we have seen, as far as Bombay. At various localities along the west coast,
and far to the south, there may be seen beneath the laterite isolated traces

* G. Buist, The Geology of Bombay, Trans. Bombay Geogr. Soc., 1852, X, p. 178; also
Evidence of a general Vibration or Descent and subsequent Upheaveinent of the Land ail
along the shores from Suez to Arracan, tom. cit., pp. 215-217. H. J. Carter (Notes on
the Geology of the Islands around Bombay; Joum. Bombay Branch R. Asiat. Soc., 1862,
XXI, p. 176) records a similar fact for Salsette; cf. also^op. cit., 1852, IV, p. 106; G. E.
Ormiston, Submerged Forest on Bombay Island, Rcc. Geol. Siirv. India, 1878, XI, p. 302 ;
and Medlicott and Blanford, Geology- of India, p. Ixxi, note.

* W.T. Blanford,The Geology of Western Sind ; Mem. Geol. Surv.India, 1879, XVI I,p. 184.

® F. Fedden, The Geology of the Kdthiawslr Peninsula in Ouzerat ; Mem. Geol. Siirv.

India, 1885, XXI, p. 58 et seq. » Here the Milliolite rock is mentioned far in the interior
of the country from the mountain of Chotila, at a height of 1,170 feet ; mollusca are not
mentioned here ; from another place land shells ate mentioned in the Milliolite rock.
Further investigation is therefore necessary.



612 EQUATORIAL AND SOUTHERN COAl^TS [tAwm

of beds lying veiy near the sea, which have been assigned, but apparently
without sufficient reason, to the younger Tertiary; finally, a calcareous
sandstone, with a somewhat wider distribution, is exposed near Quilon ; it
has been correlated with the recent Cuddalore sandstone of the east coast.
On cape Comorin, however, and beyond it, between lat. 8* and 9* N., the
negative signs are much more clearly visible. This region and Adam’s
bridge we will now consider in greater detail, in the case of Adam’s bridge
with the help of the observations of Foote, supplemented by those of
Christopher and Branfill, and by the ancient poems

We meet here, at various levels, with horizontal beds of limestone and
calcareous sandstone containing the shells of existing molluscan spedea
One of the most important areas is the Kudung Kulam plateau, situated a
little to the north-east of cape Comorin ; it is a table-land about three kilo-
meters in length, surrounded by sand dunes, and reaching a height of 48*5
meters ; this is, so far as 1 know, the greatest height, as ascertained by
measurement, at which these deposits occur in the south of the peninsula.
Most of the patches by which they are represented occur at very inconsider-
able heights, and Foote’s opinion that they were formed by a late phase
of t^e negative movement finds support in the observations made in other
places. Corals do not appear to occur in these deposits, but on the beach
itself and on some of the adjacent islands the upper part of the coral reefs
lies high and dry, covered with sand and soil. Precisely similar coral reefs
occur in some parts of the island of Ceylon. In the interior, says Richthofen,
they are not exposed at the surface, but the inhabitants often open up
quarries in the coral limestone beneath the fields. The north of Ceylon in
particular is said to be entirely underlain by coral formations^.

A dead coral reef, according to Foote, forms the island of Rameswaram ;
its surface reaches a height of at least + 3 meters and probably more.
This island forms one of the points of attachment of that remarkable bar
which is known as Adam’e bridge. From the dune-covered coast of the
peninsula this long mound proceeds first to the south side of the Rames-
waram reef, and in this part of its course there occurs near P4mbam an
artificially widened channel which has long served as a passage for ships.
So long ago as 1484 (1480?) the canal is said to have been destroyed by
a storm, as has since happened on several occasions; under the English
government it has been deepened. The friable calcareous sandstone of the

* K. Bruce Foote, On the Gliblogy of South Travancore, Rec. Geol. Surv. India, 1888,
XVI, p. 30 ; On the Geology of the Madura and Tinnevelley District, Mem. Geol. Surv.
India, 1883, XX, pp. 46 and 55-74, map ; Lieut. Christopher, Accounts of Adam’s Bridge,
Trans. Bombay Geogr. 8oc., 1846, VII, pp. 130-133; B. R. Branfill, Physiographical
Notes on Tanjore, &c., Journ. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, 1878, If^LVII, 2, p. 187.

* F. von Richthofen, Bemerkungen fiber Ceylon, Zeitschr. dentsch. geoL Gea, 1860,
XII, p. 529 ; also Schlagintweit, Rcioe in Indien und Hochasien, 1869, 1, p. 147 (elevation
of the whole of Hindustan).



I


ADAM’S BRIDGE


618


C&J^]

bar breaks up into great rectangular blocks, and this no doubt gave rise to
the belief that it is a colossal causeway of artificial construction. From
Bameswaram the mound curves to the south-east ; at first it is a sandy spit
sixteen kilometers in length, very flat and at the time of the south-eiu|t
monsoon partly submerged. Then a gap begins and continues for thirty
kilometers, but troubled by many banks of shifting sand ; on this follows
a broader bend which almost roaches the island of Ceylon. Everywhere it
presents the same friable calcareous sandstone. This bar is the scene of one
of the most beautiful episodes in the great epic of B&m&yana.

The hero Rama, accompanied by his true-hearted spouse Sita, endures
many years of exile in the woods and deserts of southern India. Then Sita
is carried off by R&vana, the king of Lanka (Ceylon). Baina goes forth to
wage war against Lanka and to recover his faithful wife; he will throw
a bridge across the sea ; the ‘ people of the forest who have the form of apes
and fight with trunks of trees and pieces of rock ’ are his numerous and
mighty allies. The host encamps on the strand. Lost in contemplation,
Bama with his army gaze on the vast ocean; disturbed and as though
kindled by the wind the world of waters resembles the sea of air, and the
air the Ocean ; far away on the horizon heaven and sea merge into^ one
another, the one adorned with stars, the other with pearls. For three nights
the never yet conquered Bama lingers in deep meditation on the strand
waiting until the god of the sea shall appear to him. Impatient, he seizes
at last his bow, and shaking the earth as it were, looses flaming arrows like
living fire into the abysses of the sea; so does Indra hurl his lightning.
The waves rise like the mountains of Yindhya and the monsters of the deep
fly terrified to the sea-god. The god appears ; his colour is like the dark
lazure stone, sparkling with gold. He speaks to Rama and says : ‘ It was
thine ancestor S&gara who hollowed out for me my bed ; therefore am I
called S&garidc, the Lord of the Streams. I cannot suffer a bridge across
my waters, lest others should see that I may be overcome. But if thou
wiliest to throw up a dam, the ape Nala may construct it ; neither the
creatures of the deep nor storms shall hinder thee, and I will hold back the
waves for thy sake and Nala’s.’

The command is given and hundreds and thousands of strong apes begin
the work. They tear up trees by their roots and throw them covered with
blUssom into the sea, and upon them bushes and creepers, and then great
blocks of rock and again trees and then again rqpks. 8o the dam is raised ;
Bama, his brother Laesmana, and with them Sugriva, Hanumat and .all the
other doughty warriors of the army of apes, march over the dam to the
decisive battle .

J

^ Foote, On the Geology of South Travancore, ReC|Geol. Surv. India, 1883, XX, p. 74;
Ramayana, Poema sanscritto di Valmici, tradutto per G. Gorresio, 8vo, Paris, 1856,

L 1


SOLLAB 11



614 EQUATORIAL AND SOUTHERN COASTS [PARTin

Thus, long before the beginning of our aera, the poet describes the origin
of the bar. As long as the Ocean endures, he says, so long will this dam
exist and the fame of Rama. Even at the present day a number of small
imlated islands arc called Nalasetu, i.e. the bridge of Nala; the nearest
town of India is called Rainnad and its governor bears the title of Setupati,
or governor of the bridge.

It is possible that some communication between the island and the main-
land may have once existed, and have been afterwards destroyed by one of
the mighty storms of the Indian Ocean ; this might easily have happened
independently of any change in the relative level of the strand. A broad
band of recent alluvium derived from the mainland has been depasited
against the north side of the bar. There is so much sand on this coast that
the dunes cover it far and wide. On the recent alluvium an important
river, the Vygah, is completely smothered up by its own sediments and does
not again find its way to the light till it is close to the sea. The town of
Ramnad stands on this same strip of alluvial land, which is evidently more
recent than the western part of the bar between the mainland and the
island of Rameswaram. The negative movement which left exposed the
corals of Rameswaram as well as those of Ceylon had perhaps begun to
make itself felt even before the formation of the existing bar.

The marine deposits of the littoral region were closely connected with
a calcareous sandstone which has hitherto only furnished fossil wood, and
which extends from here far to the north along the coast; this is the
Chulddlore sandstom. In Trichinopoli, north of Madras, and north of the
rapidly advancing delta of the Kistna we meet with shells of a brackish-
water character in deposits many miles distant from the existing shore;
a proof that the influence of the sea made itself felt far towards the interior.
On the shores of lake Chilka in the district of Ori&sa (lat. 19° 40' N.) beds
of Cyth^ea castu and Area granom are to be seen twenty to thirty feet
above high tide ; neither species lives at present in the lake ; C'jfiherea
eada still lives in the estuary further down the valley

Negative signs thus appear around the whole of the Indian peninsula ;
even the earlier observers perceived the magnitude of this phenomenon,
and in 1850 Buist concluded that the whole of the northern hemisphere
must have been affected l)y ‘ general vibrations ®.’

IX, lib. V, Sundaracanda, pp. 132, 141, 185 192 ; for the distinction between causeway and
bridge, p. 362, note 91. Here lam indebted to Professor Btlhler for kind information.

’ H. F. Blanford, Mem. Geol. Soc. India, 1862, IV, p. 19 ; Foote, On the Geological
Structure of the East Coast from lat. 15° N. to Mosulipatam, op. cit., 1879, XVI, p. 92
et seq. ;‘Schlagintweit, Zeitschr. f. allg. Erdk., alte Keihe, V, p. 163; W. T. Blanford,
Geological Structure and Physical Features of the Districts of Bancoorah, Midnapore,
and Orissa, Bengal, Mem. Geol. Surv. India, 1859, 1, p. 275, and Sketch of the Geology
of Orissa, Rcc. Geol. Surv. India, 1872, V, pp. 59, 61 et seq. Neumayr quotes Atva
grumm in fresh water from Yang-tfti-kiang; Neu. Jahrb. Min., 1883 b, p. 22.

' G. Buist, On the general Vibration or Descent and Upheaval which seems at a recent



515


CH. xiii] ^DAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS

On the east coast of the gulf of Bengal the negative signs reappear.
Apart from contradictory accounts relating to the immediate neighbourhood
of the mud volcanos . we find on the west coast of Chechihi a littoral forma-
tion and Pholas borinj:rs at a height of + 20 feet, and according to Richthofep
various signs of negative movement occur at Maidmein. On the volcanos
of Barren island and Narcondam nothing similar is to be seen, but on the
coasts of the southern A'ifidama7b islands, according to R. D. Oldham, relict
strand-lines are clearly marked. Notwithstanding this, the same observer
remarks that no perceptible displacement of the strand has occurred since
the time when the {kitchen middens near port Mouat began to accumulate,
that is during a period which must be measured by hundreds, perhaps oven
thousands of years

On some of the Nicobar islands exposed coral reefs may be seen ; Rink
describes one on Bambuca ; the negative movement must have amounted to
at least sixty feet ; towards the sea the reef terminates in a steep cliff ; its
foot is fringed by a living reef K

On the other hand the accounts at my disposal with regard to the
coahts of Sumatra are very doubtful \ For Java they are much more defi-
nite, but tfere the negative movement did not exceed + 10 or at moi^t 15
meters. Junghuhn has collected all the data referring to the south coast,
but the displacement in post-Tertiary times is estimated at not more than
twenty to twenty-five feet. For the exposed reef of Tji-Laut-urun (II,
p. 320) Richthofen gives a height of + 40 feet. On the east cojist Stohr
mentions a recent coral reef at a height of + 15 meters ^ Further cast it

geological Period to have occurred all over the Northern Hemisphere ; Joum. Asiat. Soc.
Bengal, 1850, XIX, p. 300.

^ F. von Richthofen, Zeitschr. deutHch. geol. (.res., 1862, XIV, p. 367 ; F. R. Mallet,
The Mud Volcanos of Kamri and Choduba, Rec. Geol. Surv. India, 1878, XI, p. 190 ; The
Volcanos of Barren Island and Narcondam, Mem. Geol. Surv. India, 1885, XXJ, 4, p. 15
(the supposed traces of recent elevation in Barren island are not really such) ; R. D.
Oldham, Notes on the Geology of the Andaman Islands, Rec. Geol. Surv. India, 1885,
XVIII, plp. 143-145.

* H. Rink, Die Nikobarischen Inseln, 8vo, Kopenhagen, 1847, pp. 82, 109; F. von
Hochstetter, Beitrage zur Geologie und physischen Geographic der Nikobar-Inscln :
Reise S. M. Fregatte Novara^ 4to, Vienna, 1866, II, j). 98.

^ Wherever the Tertiaiy formation has been studied in detail, as in the island of Nias,
no elevated coral beds are mentioned; e. g. Verbeek, Jaarb. Mijnw. Ned. 0. Ind., 1876,
IV, 1, p. 13. But according to Jack, Darwin has quoted them from Nias ; Coral Reefs, p. 178.

* Junghuhn, Java, 8vo, Leiden, 1850, II, 2, pp. 1486-}448; £. StOhr, Ilet rijzen der
oostkiist van Java, Natuurk. Tidschr. v. Nederl. Ind., 1867, XXIX, pp. 76-81 ; J. Hagcman,
Over het rijzen dcr kusten van Oostelijk Java en Madoera, op. cit., 1868, XXX, pp. 248-
284; Richthofen, Ueber Mendola-Dolomit, etc., Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1874, XXVI,
pp. 239-250; StOhr, Die Provinz Banjuwangi in Ost-Java, Abh. Senckenb. naturf.' Ges.,
1874, IX, p. 49 et seq. On the tipper course of the Serajoe river in the Dieng mountains,
Edeling has described terraces which he compares ^o the parallel roads of Lochaber ;
Staring has shown that they are the result of repeated landslips which blocked the
river ; Edeling, Natuurk, Tidschr. v. Nederl. Ind., 1865, XXVTII, p. 395 ; W. C. H. Staring,

h 1 2



516 EQUATORIAL AND SOUTHERN COASipS [PARrm

becomes more and more diffioolt to determine which of the numerous
obeervations refer to Tertiary, which to Quaternary , or even more recent
formations, since there is scarcely any indication of the of these deposits
sfter we pass the Miocene period. This is particularly true of the accounts
relating to Bvr^eo, Celebes, and the Bwnda islands. Even in the case of the
Mediterranean it is scarcely possible in the present state of our knowledge
to arrive at any definite conclusions as to the precise horizon which corre-
sponds to the high-level shell-beds of Sweden; the difficulties are still
greater in the West Indies, where, as in the Mediterranean, traces of negative
movement are visible one above the other, reaching back into the Tertiary
area; here, where exact investigation has scarcely commenced, and the
Tertiary beds similarly occur, we cannot venture at present to draw any con-
clusions It has been stated, for instance, that Aam is a great exposed
platform with mountains formed of late Tertiary beds rising from it; but
we neither know the exact age of those beds nor can we tell where to
place the recent platform among the many phases which, as Europe shows
us, have succeeded each other since the close of the Tertiary aera. It is
certain that at many places exposed coral beds occur here and also sub-
merged forests, produced, as in so many other cases, by a sliding down of
the coast land. Thus Junghuhn states that in 1820 , probably during the
long-continued eruptions of the adjacent volcano of Apea, a fragment of the
little island of Wai, which forms one of the Banda group, sank so far that
the tops of the trees growing upon it did not reach the level of the ground
which had remained standing '

Formations indicating negative movement are continued towards the
north; it will suffice to refer to the works published by Drasche and
Montano on the Philippines and by Richthofen on Formosa. But I see no
means of determining the age of these formations ; nor is it possible to make
any definite statement with regard to the height of the beds, since some
observers have certainly included Tertiary limestones among them ^

With regard to Siam we have no information ; the account of Pallegoix
adduced in proof of an elevation of the land refers, according to his own

Over oude mecr-oeverbanken op Java, Veral. on Mededeel. Akad. Amsterdam: Afd.
Natuurk., 1866, 2. K., 1, pp. 345-348.

* Information as to this region will be found in Reinwardt, Poggendorff’s Ann., 1824,
II, p. 444 ; A. K. Wallace, On the Physical Geography of the Malay Archipelago, Joum.
Roy. Geogr. Soc., 1863, XXXIIIj pp. 222 et seq. ; A. S. Bickmore, Reisen im Ostindischen
Archipel, translated into German by Martin, 8vo, Jena, 1869, pp. 71, 185, 288, 888.
l)r. A. B. Meyer, of Dresden, has had the kindness to send me his observations on
north Celebes.

2 Junghuhn, Java, II, 2, p. 1435.

^ Cuming, in Darwin, Coral Beefs, p. 178 ; von Drasche, Luzon, pp. 9, 47, 61 et passim ;
Montano, Arch, des Miss, scient., 1885, XI, p. 271 (elevation of the east coast of
Mindanao and of the gulf of Davdo) ; Richthofen, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1860,
XII, pp. 539, 545.



• SIAM. NEW CFDINBA


517


CIH.XlZt] .


statement, to the formation of land by silting up. The struetnre of the
alluvial land on the lower Mekong (II, p. 170) shows tiiat no impcnrtant
change has taken place in recent times. Bastian, however, mentions that
Schombuigk encountered specimens of existing marine shells at a height
of -f 60 feet close to Anghin on the lower Menam in the interior of the
country. According to Ratte, Bocourt found at a considerable height above
Bangkok marine shells, in particular Area granosa, associated with species
which occur at the mouth of the river, and the Abbd Montrouzier is said to
have observed marine deposits containing recent shells at some distance
from the sea. Whether in some cases these observations may have been
made on kitchen middens it is scarcely possible to say *.

With the exception of the regions just mentioned which are little known,
the whole coasts of India and Further India clearly reveal along their whole
course an originally higher level of the strand-line. This is particularly
true of the Indian peninsula, where a Tertiary border is absent; in the
immediate proximity of cape Comorin marine post-Tertiary deposits occur at
a height of -h 48'5 meters. Further east the traces of negative movement
still continue, even as far as the Philippines and Formosa, but in these
eastern regions and particularly around the sea of Banda a Tertiary bprder
is everywhere present and the precise age of the several beds is unknown.

5. Coasts of the PolyneMan idarule and Audralia, All that has been said
of the islands of the sea of Banda is equally true of New Quinea. Numerous
traces of negative movement are to be seen, but the recent deposits have not
been clearly distinguished from those of Quaternary or Tertiary age.
Wallace, who spent three months on Dorey, in the north of New Quinea,
states that this long and low promontory, is entirely formed by a recent
coral reef, and that coral reefs occur up to a height of + 200 or 300 feet
without any perceptible change in their structure. In Fergusson island,
close to the south-east coast, Moresby saw great masses of coral ree£ adjacent
to the volcanic rock, about 100 feet above the sea^.

These negative indications are continued on the adjacent islands, as may
be diown by a few examples : —

In Catharine bay, Nm) Ireland (lat. 3* 11' S.), the coast, according to

* Fallegoix, Description dn royaume Thai ou Siam, 8vo, PariH, 1854, I, p. 115;
A, Bastian, Die Hydrogiaphie Hinterindiens, Peterm. Mitth., 1866, XII, p. 457 ;
F. Ratte, Notes sur ITndo-Chine, Bull. Soc. g4ol. de Fr., 1876, 3^ s^r., IV, p. 519.

* A. R. Wallace, Notes on a Voyage to New Oaine|., Journ. Roy. Geogr. Soc., 1860,
XXX, p. 173; J. Moresby, Discoveries in Eastern New Guinea, op. cit., 1875, XLV,
p. 156. Miklouho-Maclay says that on the Maclay coast marine shells occur in greenish
clay; Wilkinson compares the clay with the Tertiary clay of Yule island ; according to
Brazier, however, only living species occur in the latter; N. de MiklouhorMaclay,
Evidences of the Rising of the Maclay Coast in New Guinea, Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S.W.,
Sidney, 1885, IX, p. 956 et seq. At Anuapata, New Guinea, mollusca, ‘ similar to the
existing mollusca,’ are said to occur at a height df 600 feet ; Stone, Proc. Roy. Geogr.
Soc., 1876, XX, p. 881.



618 EQUATORIAL AND SOUTHERN COASTS [paktih

«

Schleinitz, descends in ina>ny places sheer into the sea from a height of ten
to twenty meters. Cavities hollowed out by the sea may be clearly seen
about five to eight meters above the existing sea-level, and we * probably
have here, as in New Hanover and the western parts of New Ireland, an
elevated coral reef, although the colour and structure of the rock, so far as
can be recognized from some distance off, point rather to sandstone.’ The
strand-lines on the Solomon ielanda have already been mentioned (II, p. 815).
In the New Hebi'ides, according to Hosken, negative indications may be
seen on almost every island. Around Tanna a relict strand-line lies fifteen
to thirty feet above high tide, and the cliffs are frequently undercut. Along
the south coast of Erromango five distinct terraces extend as far as the eye
can reach ; Sandwich island ascends in terraces to the foot of the volcanic
mountains of the interior ; Deception, Hat, Lopevi, Star peak, Mota and
Saddle islands show similar features ; the lowest terrace on the island
corresponds to the flat country of the coast. Pentccoste does not exhibit the
terraces so clearly, but ancient coral rock is met with fairly high up towards
the interior of the island. The great terraces of the Loyalty islands have
already been mentioned, as well as the presence of marine Tertiary beds in
Viii^Lem. The western Tonga islands, according to Schleinitz, are all of
a tabular form, covered with vegetation, and present steep sides which are
undercut at the sea-level ^

The fragments of table-land, the terraces, and strand-lines thus extend
from the sea of Banda and New Guinea to those isolated tabular blocks,
surrounded by a barrier reef and a lagoon, which are met with here and
there in the midst of the Pacific Ocean, as far as the remote Henderson
island. Far in the north, too, ejeposed coral reefs are to be seen in Oahu,
and Honolulu is partly formed of coral rock *. Only very general oscilla-
tions of the strand-line could leave behind such extensive indications of their
presence*

Let us again turn our attention to New Guinea.

Tenison Woods has examined the mollusca from the friable yellow
limestone of Yvle idand, New Guinea, and describes them as more recent
than the middle Miocene of South Australia, but still Tertiary ; he points out
how strange it is that evidence of elevation of the land is so frequent in
New Guinea while absent from the east coast of Australia’’. But here it
must be remembered that the marine Tertiary deposits which extend from

«

’ Captain von Schleinitz, Die Expedition S.M.S. Gazette, Ann. d. Hjdrographie, 1876,
IV, p. 865 ; Lieut. Hosken, Remarks about the New Hebrides Group, Geol. Mag., 1876,
2nd Ser., Ill, p. 82.

’ Cf. Coan's statement ill Coral Reefs of Hawaii ; Note in Am. Joum. Sci., 1874, 3rd
Ser., VIII, p. 466.

* J. E. Tenison Woods, On a TAtiary Formation at New Guinea ; Proc. Linn. Soc.
N.S.W., 1878, II, pp. 125-128 and 267.



cH.xni]


AUSTRALIA


519


the south coast of Australia through Bass strait to the southern part of
North Gippsland have yet never been encountered on the east coast of the
Australian continent, nor on the east coast of Tasmania, and thus it seems
probable that a rec^'nt fracture extends along the whole length of th^
coasts (II, p. 1612).

The west coast of Australia, although as yet but little explored, has
already yielded shell-beds at Fremantle (lat. 32° S.) which indicate negative
movement. Their fauna is marked by tropical characters, a.nd in this con-
nexion it is interesting to observe that the existing fauna at Perth approaches
the Indian rather than the Australian type

The great development of barrier reefs which distinguishes New Quinea
and the surrounding regions is also a well-known characteristic of the
coasts of Australia. In the north-w^t the living coral reefs with their
steep slopes extend as far as Ritchie reef, the northern end of which lies in
lat. 20° 16' 8. ; and on the east coast. Wide bay, north of Moreton bay, marks
the entrance to the channel within the Great Barrier reef ; the reef-build-
ing corals extend here somewhat south of lat. 28" 8.“* So far as these
barrier reefs extend, both in the north and in the south, all negative move-
ment at the present day is excluded ; a movement in the opposite diijpction
seems more probable. All the traces of negative movement which occur
within the Imrrier reef are older than the reef itself. In north Australia,
however, such traces are extremely rare ; I know only of one instance, the
occurrence of sea caves in sandstone above high-water mark observed by
Rattray on Albany island in the extreme north-east. Insular formations
consisting of piled up fragments of coral limestone, but not rising more than
twenty feet above loy^ water, such as form the island of Raine, for instance,
cannot bo regarded with certainty as indications of negative movement,
especially in the light of what is known as to the height of the storm
beaches on atolls ^ Daintree states that no recent elevation of any impor-
tance is to bo recognized on the coasts of Queensland ^

In the south, wherever Tertiaiy deposits are present, we also have
accounts of comparatively recent negative movements. With regard to
Gippsland, observers agree in stating that at some late period, which is
termed Pliocene, the sea extended over a large part of the colony, reaching
according to Howitt a height of 800, according to Murray of 900 feet, and

* J. £. Tenison Woods, On the extra-tropical Corals of Australia, Proc. Linn. Soc.

N.S.W., 1870, II, p. 296. *

* Hy^ographical Notice, 1879, No. 14, Ann. d. Hydrographie, 1880, VIII, p. 156.

Elizabeth reef, 90 sea miles NNW. of Lord Howe island, lat. 29'* 56' S., is an atoll with
a lagoon ; Hydrographical Notice, 1878, No. 20, Ann. d. Hydrographie, 1878, ,VI, pp.
424-426. • •

’ A. Rattray, Geology of Gape York Peninsula; Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1869, XXV,
pp. 298, 803. *

* Daintree, Quart. Joum. Oeol. Soc., 1872, XXVIII, p. 278.



620 EQUATORIAL AND SOUTHERN COASTS [PABrm

fartiier, that since then the land has been laid dry by repeated oseillatoiy
movements which possibly still continue at the present day. The negative
indications in Victoria are so striking as to have impressed Brough Smyth
wjth the belief that the whole Australian continent is experiencing a tilting
movement, such as was supposed at that time to be also taking place in Scan-
dinavia and Greenland ; he thought that the south was rising and the north
sinking about a neutral axis situated somewhere near latitude 30° S. Wood
has collected many accounts of the strand-lines and terraces of the south ;
Rawlinson describes three stages one above the other on the coast of the
western district of Victoria, and a fourth is probably in process of forma-
tion

When Hochstetter, in 1859, made his observations on the terraces and
recent littoral deposits of New Zealand, he was astonished at their resem-
blance to those of Europe. ‘ We must admit,’ he wrote in 1864, * that the
complete concordance of the successive elevations and depressions, recognized
on both sides of the Atlantic, with the post-Tertiary movements in New
Zealand, is a fact remarkable and surprising in the highest degree, such as
cannot fail to give rise to manifold conjectures V

The description given by Cox of the inland terraces around lake Te
Anau, and that by McKay of the coast terraces of the east Wairarapa
district, testify to the resemblance of these terraces with those of Norway \
It is not necessary, however, to cite the numerous individual , observa-
tions, since they have been collated by Hutton in a general survey.
According to this author we find, as we proceed from north to south, the
following : — (i) on the river Thames, near Auckland, a seashore with shells
at a height of + 10 to 12 feet ; (ii) below the town of Tauranga, at a height
of about + 25 feet; (iii) at Taran&ki, beds with recent shells at a height of
150 feet ; (iv) littoral terraces at the mouth of Cook strait at a height of
* more than 200 feet ; (v) on the west coast of the South island comparatively
recent terraces at a height of 220 feet, according to another statement up
to 400 feet ; (vi) at Amdri bluff three terraces with recent shells at a height

^ Howitt, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1879, XXXV, p. 34 ; R A. F. Murray, Geological
Survey of Oippsland, Bussell's Creek Goldfield, Rep. Geol. Surv. Victoria, 1880, VI,
I>p. 89-47 ; R. Brough Smyth, The Gold Fields and Mineral Districts of Victoria, 8vo,
Melbourne, 1869, p. 11 ; J. E. Woods, Geological Observations in South Australia, 8vo,
London, 1862, p. 205 et seq.; T. E. Rawlinson, Notes on the Coast-Line Formation of
the West Districts and Proofs of the Uniform Conditions of Meteorological Phenomena
over Long Periods of Time, Trans! Proc. Roy. Soc. Victoria, 1878, XIV, pp, 25-34 (between
Wamembool and Belfast).

' F. von Hochstetter, Reise der dsterreichischen Fregatte Novara, 4to, Wien, 1864;
Geologiraher Theil, I, p. 265.

* S. H. Cox, Report on tbe’Geology of the Te Anau Distiict, Geol. Surv. New Zealand,
1877-1878, Wellington, 1878, p. 118; A. McKay, The Southern Part of EastWurapa
District, op. cit., 1878-1879, p. 85 ; Ciliwford, (Cook strait,) Trans. Proc. N. Z. Inst., 1884,
XVII, p. 342.



NEW ZEALAND


521


0B.Z1U] *,

of 600 feet; (vii) in north Canterbary marine shells up to 160 feet; (viii)
fine mud with isolated marine shells at a height of 800 feet on Banks
pen in su la , and (ix) at 600 to 600 feet at OamanL On the south-west coast
the mouths of the fjords are terraced as in Scandinavia up to a height of
about 800 feet. In the most northerly part of New Zealand, the height at
which such terraces are known to occur is but slight ; towards the south it
increases considerably.

Hutton had previously shown that the fauna of these shell-beds is very
dosely allied with that of the present day. New Zealand extends from lat.
84* to 47* S. and the existing mollusca of its north coast are altogether
different from those of the south coast. In Cook strait the forms are inter-
mingled, with a predominance of the northern species, i. e. those inhabiting
the warmer seas. The extensive shell-beds of Wanganui, Cook strait, which
are described as ‘ Pleistocene,’ have yielded ninety-one species, of which
eighty-one are known to occur in the existing seas of New Zealand ; fifteen
of these species appear to be absent from the coasts of Ot4go, but it is
probable that they still exist in Cook strait. On the other hand these shell-
beds contain Pecten ntdiaivs, a species which only exists at present in
Foveaux strait, and may be regarded as an immigrant from a colder region.
Beneath the shell-beds there lies blue clay regarded as ‘ Pliocene,’ with
ninety-eight species of mollusca, of which only seventy-seven live in the New
Zealand seas ; among the species which still exist are many from the north,
but with them the same Pecten radiatus and the little DrUlia laevis of
Foveaux strait, which is so small that if it occurs further north it may easily
have been overlooked

In considering the coasts of Australia and Polynesia we must leave out
of account the east coasts of Australia and Tasmania, which appear for
many reasons to be a fractured margin of recent age presenting no indica-
tions of negative movement. With this exception such indic«ttions are
everywhere present, often even within the barrier reefs. In many cases they
extend from New Guinea through the groups of islands to Henderson and
Oahu. If with Darwin we regard the living coral reefs as a proof of
positive movement, then we must admit that this is everywhere more recent
than the signs of negative movement. On the south coast of Australia,
particularly in Victoria, these negative indications are much more important,
and attain greater heights than on the shores of warmer seas ; it has been
definitely shown that in New Zealand a considherable increase of elevation
takes place as we approach the south.

6. West coast of iSouth America. In the volcanic group of the Oald-
pagoa the islands are separated from one another by considerable deaths.

* P. W. Hutton, Sketch of the Geology of New Z^and, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1885,
XLI, p. 212 ; Did the Cold of the Glacial Epoch extend over the Southern Hemisphere ?
Oeol. Uag., 1875, dec. 2, II, pp. 580-588.



622 EQUATORIAL AND SOUTHERN COABX8 [part iii

Poiirtales has observed several species of reef-building corals as far as the
southernmost island and beyond the region of the warm current; they were
always found to occur, however, as loose fragments, although the possibility
of drifting from a distance is almost excluded. T. Wolf emphatically denies
the existence of all signs of elevation of these islands, i. e. of any negative
movement \

On the coast of Evuador and as far as Peru the sea, according to Wolf,
has cut a plain of erosion in the sandstone 10 to 100 meters broad, which
serves as a natural road for long distances and renders it possible, at the
time of lowest ebb, to walk around the steep promontories. We have already
mentioned that Bibra, David Forbes, and Darwin himself, observed ancient
graves and buildings on the west coast of South America, so near to the sea
that no important change can have affected the strand-line in this region
for many centuries ; Wolfs statements relating to Ecuador confirm this
view as applied to the regions lying further north. A letter received from
this enthusiastic observer informs me that on the peninsula of Santa Elena,
province of there arc deposits containing marine shells of exist-

ing species, and bones of Madodon Andium. Thus indications of negative
movements in earlier times are not wanting \

Further south, throughout Peru, Chili, and as far as the southern
extremity of the continent, signs of negative movement, and particularly
terraces, present so striking an appearance that they have attracted the
attention of observers for many years past. The distinct terracing both
in the cast and west of South America led Darwin to the conclusion that
the whole continent from the south up to about lat. 30® S. was undergoing
an intermittent elevation, and he attempted us early as 1838, following the
views and observations of that time, to find some original connexion between
the volcanos, the earthquakes, and the terraces of South America (II, p. 15).
A. d’Orblgny concluded in 1843 that these terraces afford evidence of
a spasmodic elevation aftccting the whole continent, just as Kjerulf did
later in tlie case of Norway. In 1848 Domeyko also recognized the great
similarity between these terraces and those of Norway, and concluded from
it that the causes of the phenomenon must have been active simultaneously
in l)oth hemispheres (II, p. 17) ^

' Pourtales, Goiuk of the (lalapagos Isles, Am. Juuni. 8ci., 1875, 3rd Scr., X, p. 282 ;
T. Wolf, Zeitschr. f. d. ges. Natu^-w., 1880, LI 11, p. 281.

^ T. Wolf, tom. cit., pp. 282 et scq. J. S. Wilson believed ho had seen several low-
level terraces at the mouth of the river Esmeralda ; they are said to contain traces of
human occupation below high-water level, and from this he inferred a recent subsidence
of the land ; this observation, however, is regarded as doubtful ; Quart. Joum. Geol.
Soc., 1866, XXll, pp. 567 570. Cf. also Zeitschr. deiitsch. geol. Ges., 1877, XXIX,
pp. 412-415.

^ 0. Darwin, On the Connexion of Certain Volcanic Phenomena in South America (read
1888), Trans. Geol. Soc., 1840, V, pp. 505-510; A. d’Orbigny, Compt. rend., 1843, XVII,



PERU. CHILI


523


CH. xm] 0


It is particularly difficult to form any opinion on this question. Perma-
nent. elevation of coastal regions originating simultaneously with earth-
quakes has not been proved (I, p. 96). The presence of marine amphipods
in lake Titicaca, the discovery of corals having a very recent appearancoat
heights of from 2,900 to 3,000 feet, and the existence of salt lagoons at
between 7,000 and 12,500 feet have lieen adduced as so many proofs of an
extremely recent elevation, but the objections to this conclusion have already
been urged (I, p. .540). All these ((uestions may be regarded as definitely
disposed of, and we will now devote ourselves exclusively to a closer
consideration of the terraced land.

The first difficulty which confronts us liere is the presence of inland
terraces and marine terraces in the same region. The Huaraz and the
upper Maranon are bordered by river terraces, as are all the numerous
rivers which descend from the Andes; from Chiloe onwaivls the countiy
apparently reproduces all the most important features of the Norwegian
coast. The great ranges lie so near the sea that in many cjises their ddbris
extends down to the shore ; and the numerous observations of travellers on
the terraced land do not always enable us to discover whether they refer to
true strand-lines of the sea, or to the lower sttiges of tho.se inland tegTaces,
which may be traced far up the river valleys.

On other coasts the pre.sence of sea-shells has furnished us with a criterion
on this point. But this also must l*e used with caution, on the one hand
because, as David Forlres remarks, sea-shells are carried up to heights by
birds, a circumstance also pointed out by Steenstrup and Nordenskiold in
the north, and on the other hand because it is precistdy here, and more
particularly in the south, that kitchen middens occur on a large scale.
Marine animals, and especially shell-fish, still form the staple food of many
coastal tribes in the south-wc.st of America. On the coast of Llau(]nihue in ^
south Chili, as Captain Gormaz relates, crowds of women go down to the
sea, towards the time of low tide, provided with pointed sticks and
Itaskets.

At once the sea-birds flock together, uttering shrill crie,s. The hou.se-
dogs and pigs, frequently even the domestic fowl, come down to gather the
food which is oftere<l so liberally by the sea. In some islands, such as
Chilod and Nao, the pigs are employed, like truffle-dogs, to look for bivalves
buried in the sand. The men, however, only take part in this work just
before the times of the solstices and eijuino^s, which are well known to
them, with a view to providing a stoi'e for use during storms ; this they do
by making artificial beds of shells at the level of neap tide.s. A bed of
bivalve shells, covered thickly with vegetation, lx)rdcrs the strand noHh of

p. 401 ; Domeyko, Memoire sur Ic terrain tertityre et lea lignea d'ancien niveau de
rOc^an da Sud aux environs de Coquiinbo, Chili, Ann. des Mines, 1848, 4* s^r., XIV,
pp. 158-162.



524 EQUATORIAL AND SOUTHERN COASTS [PAmin

Coihuin, not far from Puerto Montt, at a height of about five meters above
the sea; this consists chiefly of the shells of Fsnus dneracea, a spedes
which still forms the daily food of the population, and it must certainly be
regarded as an artificial accumulation \

Such stores of food are called cholcheH. In Possession bay, Patagonia,
L. Agassiz came across a brine pool at a height of nearly 160 feet above the
sea ; its saltness was more than twice as great as that of sea-water, and its
depth in the rainy season from three to four feet. It contained marine
shell-fish, both living and dead. Agassiz concluded that at a very recent
period, i. e. within the lifetime of these animals, the land must have risen
150 feet. It seems to me, however, much more probable that the pool was
a cholchefi, notwithstanding its height above the sea

The inhabitants of Chilo^, according to Fonck, carry these shell-fish far
into the interior. In 1854, when some Germans who had settled on the
neighbouring continent for the first time visited the shores of lake Llan-
quihue, the country was covered for many miles around by a dense forest.
Yet they found kitehen middens of this kind, together with iron implements,
clay vessels, and other objects, beneath overgrown ground at a height of
300 fqct above the sea or even more. We know, however, that in 1688
a large part of the native population was carried off by an epidemic, and
Fonck conjectures that the remainder fletl into the interior of the country.
Thus the age of the forest, now covering the ancient settlements, cannot be
more than two or three hundred years “.

In all cases where these kitchen middens occur in a somewhat severe
climate, whether in south Chili, Oregon, or even Greenland, their site is
marked by luxuriant vegetation due to the presence of fertilizing refuse.
It cannot be denied that a number of the shell-beds cited by Darwin are of
^artificial origin. Darwin felt this himself and did not conceal his doubts.
As proof We may mention the bed of Venus and oysters which he observed
in Chili at a height of 350 feet in a black peat-like earth, covered by lofty
forest ; beneath it he found the horn of a deer, Cerws hv/mUis. The black
earth itself in which the shells are found in so many localities, especially
near Valparaiso, does not resemble a marine deposit; when crumbled
between the fingers it emits an evil odour recalling a mixture of soil and
guano, and its general character is that of a terrestrial soil. So careful an
observer as Darwin could not even at that early period overlook these facts,
but since a microscopic investigation of the earth revealed the presence of
numerous small fragmentary remains of marine animals his suspicions were

' Capt. Gormaz, Esploracion de la costa de Llanquih^, An. Univ. Chile, 1872, XLI,
pp. 235, 253, 361 ; Mem. dc la marina de Chile, 1872, pp. 263 et seq.

’ L. Agassiz, Nature, 1872, VI, p. 229 (in the New York Tribune).

’ F. Fonck, Naturwissenschaf‘tliche*Notizen fiber das sfidliche Chile ; Peterm. Mitth.,
1866, XII, p. 467.



CB. zml CHILI 625

allayed. This feet has not, however, the importance Darwin attiitiated
to it ^

When we have really succeeded in distinguishing inland terraces from
marine, and kitchen middens from shell-beds formed by the sea, we ^d
ourselves confronted by a fresh difficulty, as yet by no means overcome ;
this consists in the different age of the shell-beds, the determination of
which is associated on this coast with questions of a peculiar nature.

On the south-east coast of America, the Tertiary formations of Patagonia
extend in horizontal beds for more than twenty degrees of latitude, main-
taining the same characters from their boundary in the south up to the
basin of the Paran& in the north; marine deposits alternate with terrestrial.
According to Doering’s observations we have first a lower marine stage,
perhaps of Eocene age (Piso Paranense), then terrestrial deposits which
contain some mammalian remains resembling those of the Oligocene fauna
of Europe ; above this a second marine stage, perhaps of the upper Oligo-
cene {Pieo Patagoniea), then come the latest Tertiary deposits found in this
region, which are all terrestrial. Next follows an interval which corre-
sponds to a period of denudation, and this finally is succeeded by the post-
Tertiary or quer-Andinian marine stage, the deposits of which ascend
higher and higher towards the south above the existing 8ea-le>^el (II,
p. 807).

This series of deposits reveals oscillations of the strand-line of extreme
regularity extending over a long period. The existence of successive
terraces on the west coast would lead us to infer that similar phenomena
had occurred there within the limits of the Tertiary aera. But whereas in
the east there is an extensive plain of Tertiary sediments built up in alter-
nate series and extending far beyond the Pampas, in the west, on the other
hand, only small patches occur scattered in various latitudes and separated
from each other by wide intervals ,

In the existing seas the mollusca of the west coast of South America
differ completely from those of the east and from those of the Atlantic
generally. The south end of the continent now forms a definite boundary.
Nevertheless Alcide d’Orbigny found a species, Troc^us collari8,a,i Navidad
in Chili (lat. 33° 64' S.), which belongs to the Patagonian Tertiary of the east ;
some years later Sowerby identified in Darwin’s collection from Navidad
five or six species which also occur in the Tertiary beds of the east ; and
this number has been raised to nine or ten by ^Philippi’s investigations.

' C. Darwin, Geological Observations, 2nd ed., 1876, pp. 234, 242. H^n shares
Darwin’s doubts with regard to Chilo4 ; Hahn, Untersuchungen ttber das Aufsteigen und
Sinken der Khsten, p. 91. P. Germain even believes that all the shell-beds mentioned by
Darwin in this region are nothing but kitchen middens ; Germain, Observations sur les
monvements du sol dans I’archipel de Chilo4, Conipt. rend., 1883, XCVI, pp. 1806-1808,
The kitchen middens are also described by D. Levisato ; Appunti etnografici con acc.
geologic! suUa terra di Fuoco, Cosmos, edited by G. Cora, Vlil,' p. 97 et seq.



62 d EQUATOBIAL AHIIIrf [parfiu

While studying this western Tertiary deposit, however, Philippi, the
undisputed authority on the fauna of the Mediterranean, arrived at a very
remarkable result, for he found that the Tertiary nuMueca of OhUi preeent
a greater remnhUmce to those of the Meditwranean them to those now living
off the coast of Chili. Chenopus, Conus, Terebra, Cassis, Cypraea, Solarium,
Tliracia, Corbula, and many other genera which distinguish the Atlantic
region and particularly the Mediterranean sea and its Tertiary deposits,
are present in the Tertiary of Chili, but absent from its existing seas \

Ilius isolated, this fact may appear extremely strange, but it is con*
nected with a series of observations which have already engaged our atten-
tion. We have seen that the marine Trias while surrounding the Pacific
Ocean maintains a uniform character, in Chili the Jurassic presents itself
with European characters, so does the lower Cretaceous in Bogota, and the
middle Cretaceous in Jamaica ; in the Tertiary deposits of the West Indies
the Oligocene corals of Castel Gomberto occur, and the Orbitoides limestone
marks, there as in Malta, the base of the Miocene ; and finally even the first
Mediterranean stage of Europe is indicated in the same region by certain
Echinoids. These are the traces of the ancient central Mediterranean
which, during the Mesozoic and lower Tertiary aera, extended parallel with
the eefuator ; and the European stamp home by the Tertiary deposits of
Chili shows that the isolation of this region did not take place until com-
paratively recent times, probably about the middle or towards the end of
the Tertiary aera. It was Philippi who, more than half a century ago,
laid the foundations of our knowledge concerning the Tertiary faunas of
the Mediterranean ; he showed how the northern immigrants made their
appearance as the forms of a warmer climate retreated, and that the existing
fauna of the McditeiTanean is the most recent term of a series of antecedent
faunas. His work has served as a starting-point for those various investi-
*gations wjiich have slowly and gradually revealed the history of the
Mediterranean in its main outlines. After a lapse of many years the
opportunity was afforded him of applying his observations in the Mediter-
ranean to a study of the succession in Chili ; but in this case he arrived
at a very unexpected result. Instead of a serial succession of allied faunas
closing with the existing fauna as its last term, he found first a fauna of
Mediterranean afiinities, then a complete change of character ; the Mediter-
ranean fauna disappears and its place is taken by a younger fauna, described
as Quaternary, and this, though imperfectly known, is evidently identical
in its general characters with that of the coast of Chili at the present day ;
finally the existing fauna completes the series.

In Europe the prevalence of a cold climate is regarded as marking the

O

' R. A. Philippi, Die terti&ren uni], qaart9,ren Versteinerunges Chile’s, 4to, Leipzig,
1887, p. 257.



0


GH. zm]


ihi


Quatenuuy period. The gradual manner in which the northern species
increase in number in the English Crag renders it improbable that this
period commenced suddenly ; we know that great alternations of tempera-
ture occurred, and that the last negative movements are more recent than
the culmination of the glacial episode. The succession of the marine
faunas in Chili is characterized by an event of quite another kind, that is,
the disappearance of the fauna possessing a European character. As to the
cause of this disappearance we are at present very much in the dark ; it
may have been due to a negative displacement of the strand-line and con-
sequent isolation of the west coast, or possibly to the closure of the isthmus
of Tanama by volcanic eruptions, or it may perhaps have resulted from the
first appearance of the cold Humboldt current, which at present follows the
west coast, or some other circumstance may have been involved ; possibly
indeed it was the conjoint effect of more than one cause. It is not impos-
sible that this event may have actually coincided with the incoming of the
glacial epoch, but we have no evidence on this point, and thus it remains
an open question whether the terms Tertiary and Quaternary as applied in
Chili really possess the same significance as in Europe.

It is evident, under these circumstances, that the method of determining
the relative age of deposits by the percentage of living species dodls not
hold here, for all those sediments, which were anterior to the phase marked
by the disappearance of the European types, contain so small a number of
existing Chilian species that they must by this criterion bo assigned to the
Eocene. This in fact is the position accorded them both by Sowerby and
Philippi. The comprehensive works of Philippi give for the living forms
found in the Tertiary depasits the following results : at Coquimbo, which
has furnished 89 species, only 2*5 per cent., at Navidad (291 species) 1 per
cent., at Levu (153 species) l-h per cent. Thus at the present day the
ancient character has completely disappeared. But no exact determination
of age can be based on these facts.

On the east coast of Patagonia the intercalated terrestrial faunas afford
material for a classification nearly approaching that of Europe ; assuming
of course that terrestrial faunas which contain representative species of the
European are really synchronous with the latter. In Chili we do not
possess the means of determination ; not unimportant differences distinguish
the marine Tertiary faimas of different localities, as is the case with the
existing marine faunas in different latitudes. Of the 89 Tertiary species
occurring at Coquimbo and Guayacan (lat. 36° S.) only 7 to 10 occur at
more southerly points of the west coast, and we can hardly say 'whether
this is due to a difference in climate or age, or to some other circum-
stance. On the other hand Philippi lays stress on the fact that the deposits
at Santa Cruz, Patagonia (lat. 50° S.), clo^ly resemble those of the east
coast, as well as those of Navidad on the west coast (lat. 33° 54 ' S.). The



EQUATORIAL AND SOUTHERN COASTS [PAirrm

species in common appear to me to definitely indicate Doering’s Puo Fata-
goniee, which is doubtfully assigned to the upper Oligocene.

I am not aware of any attempt so far to discover an equivalent of the
European Miocene or Pliocene on the coast of Chili or Peru.

Now at length, after these various discussions on the earthquakes of
Chili, the irrelevance of inland terraces and kitchen middens, as well as the
significance of the terms Tertiary and Quaternary as applied to Chili, we
may venture to consider more closely some particular localities along this
extensive line of coast.

Between Mejillones and Antofagasta (lat. 23° to 28° 83' S.) an indepen-
dent segment of the littoral cordillera running north and south forms
a prominent feature of the coast. In the north it rises into the Morro de
Mejillones (885 meters) and in the south into the Morro Morena (1,250
meters) ; a belt of land not more than 60 or 70 meters in height unites
this mountain fragment with the mainland, or more precisely with the
Cerro Gordo, the moat westerly range of the cordillera. Some of the
channels eroded in the flanks of the Morro de Mejillones contain con-
siderable quantities of guano, and under the guano, on the lower slopes,
Wilhelm Krull has observed at various altitudes the relics of the ancient
shoreb, consisting of horizontal beds of sand with marine shells and rolled
pebbles, which sometimes form a discontinuous terrace ^ At my request
Herr Knill has been good enough to investigate all the traces of ancient
strand-lines on the Morro and to detennine their height. I extract the.
following from communications he has been so kind as to send me.

The Morro de Mejillones is a granite mass elongated meridionally;
seen from either north or south its outline is narrow and conical, but from
west or east broad and dome-like. This rounded mass is surmounted by
a broad ridge, elongated in the same direction, which descends in terraces,
especially. on its north-east and eastern sides ; at its foot lies a broad plain
some 200 feet above the level of the sea. It is in the ravines which furrow
the Morro at a great height that the guano occurs, covered over by ddbris ;
a circular railway runs round the mountain just below the guano pits at
a height of about 1,900 or 1,930 feet ; out of one of the ravines about 70,000
tons of good guano was extracted. Below the railway the first indications
of ‘ a periodic retreat of the sea or of an apparently spasmodic elevation of
land are to be seen.’ Kmll distinguishes several zones or shore-lines at
heights of 1,640 to 1,600, 1,430, 1,060 to 950, 730, 430, 360 to 860, 130 and
60 to 50 feet. Marine shells are said to occur up to a height of 1,480 feet

' Domeyko, Apuntes sobre cl deposito de guano dc Mejillones, sacad. d. 1. cartas
esuritas por el Doct. Don Guill. Krull, etc., An. Univ. Chile, 1878, p. 449. At Miguel
Diaz (lat. 24" 25' S.) Philippi observed shells at a height *of 280 meters: unfortunately
they arc lost ; R. A. Philippi, Die a^genanute Wttstc Atacama, Peterm, Mitth., 1856,
II, p. 56.



CH. xra] OERRO GORDO. COPIAPO. COQUIMBO 629

(485 meters). On the lower slopes the deposits of guano are inconsider-
able ; at present guano is in process of formation at the northern point of
the peninsula, quite low down at the sea-level.

Even if some of these successive strand-lines are not very sharply
marked or definitely established, yet it is clear from Krull’s observations that
in this locality, where there are no inland terraces whatever, the strand-line
once stood at a very high level, and was affected by a lengthy series of
displacements with a negative preponderance ; further, tliat the Morro was
in all probability a guano island at the time the strand-line stood at its
highest level. This accords with the fact that the avian remains found in
the guano are probably, as Philippi is inclined to think, those of an extinct
species.

Along the railway from Mcjillones to the Cerro Gordo, the height of
which is not far short of that of the Morro, Krull has found whole beds of
shells. Philippi states that Vidal Gormaz obtained Quaternary shells from
the Cerro Gordo at a height of 5(K) meters ; these all belong to living species
such as Solen Doml)eyi and the little shells Nwnda Orayi and VardiUi
Semen, three forms which are still found in the bay of Mejillones ; with
these, however, is Gardium ringens, which is at present foreign to the
Pacific Ocean and hoe its fu/me on the eoaste of Africa This isolated but
remarkable fact shows that the ancient beaches, which occur at a high level
on the Morro and the Cerro Gordo, were formed at a period when the
Atlantic fauna had not yet completely disappeared from the west coast.

Philippi also describes Quaternary shells from Mejillones, but without
any closer indication of the locality ; out of nineteen species only thirteen
are still living, so that the proportion of extinct species is far higher than
we are accustomed to find in Quaternary deposits.

The terraces of the Caldera near Copiapo (lat. 27° 4' S.) and of Coquimbo
(lat. 30” S.) have often been described. Remond states that on tlu} Caldera
they reach a height of 150 meters ; of the mollusca they contain, Philippi
has identified twenty -two living and two extinct species*. At Co(iuimbo
the Quaternary sediments begin at a height of 60 meters ; they rest on
Tertiary beds and extend, according to Darwin, somewhat higher than in
the surrounding country, namely to 300 or 350 feet (92-5 to 108 meters) :
Philippi describes forty-six living and eight extinct species from this locality.

Between the Caldera and Coquimbo lie the terraces which proceed from
the transverse valley of the Huasco, and these, a| shown by existing accounts,
are of inland origin. The valley of the Huasco, like all the transverse
valleys of this coast, rises steeply from the sea ; the terraces, which extend
as far as the shore, rise with it. As far as the town of Vallenar, thatds, to

' R A. Philippi, Die sogenannte Waste Atacama ; Peterm. Mitth., 1856, II, pp. 6 and 253.

* Remond, Apuntes sobre los terrenos terciarios i huaternarios de Caldem i Coquimbo ;
An. UniT. ChUe, XXXI, 1868, pp. 416-419.

M m


80LLAB II



sal EQUATOBIAL AND SOUTHERN COASTS [partiu

a distance of about fifty-three kilometers inland, the breadth of the valley
amounts to six or seven kilometers. Here, according to Mallard and Fuchs,
the terraces surround the town like a great amphitheatre, sixteen to seven-
tejpn kilometers in diameter. Vallenar lies at a height of 613 meters ; there
are five successive terraces, the highest at a level of 6504 meters. It is
supposed that a fjord filled with debris must have extended nearly to the
height of the uppermost stage ; during the elevation of the land, running
water produced one terrace after another. In connexion with this it must
be observed that the uppermost terrace does not rest directly against the
mountain, but is separated from it by a narrow valley, the bottom of which
corresponds to the second terrace. Consequently this uppermost terrace is
a spur, such as is not produced by the sea \

This does not imply that the strand did not once stand here at a very high
level ; even at Valparaiso (lat. 82° 2' S.) Darwin observed shells up to 1,000
feet, and with somewhat less certainty even up to 1,300 feet (400 meters) ; in
Cahuil (lat. 84° 29' S.) a Quaternary bed at a height of only four or five meters
contains, according to Philippi, five extinct along with thirteen living species.

The altitudes of all the terraces in Chili known up to the year 1860
have been tabulated by Domeyko, to whom our knowledge of this country
is so*largely due; his table includes both marine and inland .terraces.
Pissis has observed the necessity of distinguishing between these two
formations ; he assigns a height of only forty to fifty meters to the marine
terraces between the parallels of 31° and 33°. The inland terraces lie at
high levels and follow all the windings of the river valleys, while the
marine terraces are horizontal, contain sea-shells, and narrow away and
disappear as they pass into the transverse valleys But this last observa-
tion of Pissis is not incompatible with the existence of a high-level shore-
line, for the lower river terraces are more recent than the upper marine
terraces apd were partly formed at their expense.

The longitudinal valley of Chili, about TOO meters above the sea in the
north, sinks lower and lower towards the south, but no great river arises
within it to follow the foot of the Andes, like the Sacramento or San
Joaquin in California. Drainage takes place into the sea through the
numerous transverse valleys of the coast cordillera. The peculiarities
of the valley system, the traces of an ancient high-lying valley-bottom
in the north and its intersection by more recent transverse valleys,
as well as its continuation southwards to the Moraleda channel, have
already been mentioned (I, p. 617). Marine deposits, either Tertiary or

' C. Darwin, Geological Observations, pp. 261-263; Mallard et E. Fuchs, Notes sur
quelques points de la g^ologie du Chili, Ann. des Mines, 1873, 7* sdr., Ill, pp. 77-81,
pL ii, fig. 8. "

’ Domeyko, Solevantamiento de la^posta de Chile, An. Univ. Chile, I860, pp. 573-599;
Pissis, Provincia Aconcagua, op. cit., 1858, p. 60.



<5H. xin] Tm LONGITUDINAL VALLEY OP CHILI isi

Qtutenuuy.have never yet been encountered in this great excavation, lii the
sediments which occupy it, Maetodm Andivm and plant remains are found.
It was once a series of inland lakes separated &om one another by ridges
of ancient rocks, like the lake which now forms the southern boundary .of
the bay of Beloncavi.

Around the shores of these ancient lakes, however, and eastwards on the
slopes of the Andes, terraces are visible up to a considerable height.
Domeyko, in describing his ascent of the volcano Tinguiririca from San
Fernando, has given us a vivid picture of these inland terraces which rest
against the foot of the Andes ; three, and in some places four, level terraces,
covered with the richest vegetation, rise one above the other. Pissis has
traced them along the valleys and through the whole province of Colchagua.
He observed four stages in the valley of the Cachapoal from Bancagua to
the Bio Cortaderal; the lowest is formed by the plain of Bancagua at
a height of 550 meters ; the second begins at the confluence of the Bio de
Cola and rises to a height of 974 meters on the Bio Cuncle, where the third
stage begins ; this extends to the confluenee of the Bio dc los Cipreses, and
on this river it occurs at a height of 1,200 meters. The fourth stage finally
occurs in the upper region where the river takes its rise, and is cut though
by deep gulches. Thus these stages rise on the Cachapoal to a very con-
siderable height, and the origin of each stage corresponds, according to Pissis,
with the confluence of a tributary. This is also said to be the case on the
river Tinguiririca and on the Teno. The Cachapoal and the Tinguiririca
unite to form the Bio Bapcl, which enters the sea near lat. 84° S. in the
Tertiary region of Navidad. Only six leagues from the coast, terraces are
found in this river basin at heights of 271 and 207 meters, surrounding
a little isolated valley

Let us now turn our attention further south.

The eastern part of the Andes is bordered in the south by a long series
of lakes, the lost of which, the Lago Llanquihm, is situated between
lat. 40° 58' and 41° 20^ S. It lies only forty-three meters above the sea, and
is separated from the gulf of Beloncavi by a barrier of no great breadth ;
the gulf is the northern end of that arm of the sea which is bounded on
the west by the island of Chiloe and the Chonos archipelago, on the east
by the Andes ; it has long been regarded as the submerged prolongation
of the great valley of Chili.

The observations of Stolp and Fonck, an^ of Qormaz and Juliet, have
made known a number of remarkable facts relating to the Lago Llanquihue
and the gulf of Beloncavi, that is to say, the very region in which the exposed
part of the great valley ends and the submerged part begins. •

1 Domeyko, Estudio del refievo, &c.. An. Univ. Chile, 1875, XLVIII, pp. 51 and 60;
Domeyko i Diaz don Wencealao, Excursion jeolojlba, &c., op. cit., 1862, p. 23 ; Pisau,
Provincia de Colchagua, op. dt., 1860, p. 691.

Mm3



Ssi EQUATOEIAL. AND SOUTHERN COASTS [paktiii

Lake Llanquihue is bounded by the slopes of the volcano Osorno on the
east, and of the volcano Calbnco on the south-east ; between these volcanos
is a depression lying chiefly in the recent ejectamenta of Osomo. The
depression stretches from lake Llanquihue around the south foot of Osomo
to a second and somewhat smaller lake, the Lago de Todos Santos, which
flanks the east side of Osomo. The surface of the Lago de Todos 'Santos
lies about 171 meters above that of lake Llanquihue and consequently at
a height of 214 meters above the sea.

There is at present no communication between the lakes. Tlie Lago de
Totlos Santos discharges itself hy the rapidly flowing Rio Petrohue to the
south into the upper end of the long fjord of Reloncavi, while the Lago
Llanquihue sends its outflow westwards into the Ocean by the Rio Maullin.

The whole west and north side and a large part of the south side of lake
Llanquihue are formed of recent alluvial land containing no organic remains
and divided into stages. Gonna;! distinguishes six terraces at heights
of from four to eighty meters above the lake, that is, 47 to 123 inetei's
above the sea. Of these, the fourth terrace, at a height of 48*3 meters
alx)ve the lake, is the most sharply defined and the most constant. Juliet,
who Mcompanicd Gormaz, has shown that lakes Llanquihue and Todos
Santos and the broad marshy region of Nadi lying west of Llanquihue
probably once fomied a single sheet of water. Juliet ascribes the existing
difference in the height of the two lakes to the simple fact that the Rio
Petrohue possesses a hard be<l formed of volcanic rocks, and cannot cut its
way down it so rapidly' as the Maullin, which flows over less msistent
material *.

Here inland lake U^rraces reach the immediate neighbourhood of the sea.

From the eastern latitudes no Quaternary or more recent .shell-beds have
yet been made known; the beds mentioned as occurring in Chiloe and the
southern islands are either of Tertiary age or they are kitchen middens, or
at least suspected to be such. On the other hand, terraces are everywhere
well developetl ; whether there may be some among them in the formation
of which ice has played a part is not known, but there is in many respects
an evident resemblance between the features of this region and those of
northern Norway.

Even in the neighbourhood of Puerto Montt steps occur close to the sea,
sometimes cut in disintegrated granite, sometimes in volcanic accumulations,

1

' J. Domcykoi Nuevas investif^ciones acerca dc las gradas en que esta cortado el
terreno terciario de la costa de Chile, An. Univ. Chile, 1862, pj). 183-186, and map;
Vidal Gormaz, Llanquihue, Mem. de Marina, 1872, p. 280, and An. Univ. Chile, 1872^
pp. 301, 305, 314, 318, in particular p. 321 ; C. Juliet, Mevi. de Marina, 1872, p. 343, and
An, Univ. Chile, 1872, p. 383. In illustration of the preceding T refer the reader to the
map of the bay of Reloncavi by Guin. Cox in the Journ. R. Geogr. Soc., 1864, XXXIV,
p. 205, and to that of C. Martin, Peterni. Mitth., 1880, XXVI, pi. viii.



cH.xm] , ‘WEST COAST OF PATAGONIA 588

or again in Tertiaiy lignite-bearing beds. East of Puerto Montt, towards
Rio de Coikuin, the height of the stages has been measured by Qormaz and
Martin; there are three stages up to a height of 109*9 meters, then the
ground ascends gertly up to 126*7 meters; the uppermost stage, here fowl-
ing the highest part of the countiy, lies at a height of 149*7 meters Fonck
mentions that stages are not only visible on the island of Tenglo, but also
on both sides of the channel of Chacao, which is a transverse valley At
the head of the bay of Cadro, on the east side of Chiloe (lat. 42° 26' S.),
three distinct stages rise on both sides of the little river of Qamboa up to
a height of about 500 feet ^

That part of the coast lying further south now exhibits a very remark-^
able phenomenon. Not only is the line of the great valley continued
through the bays of Rcloncavi, Chacao, Corcovado, and still further through
the Moraleda channel to the straits of Magellan, but it seems as though
there were traces of an ancient system of transvci'se valleys. The fjords of
the cast, cutting deeply into the chain of the Andes, correspond to the
channels in the west. The channel of Chacao corresponds to the converg-
ing incisions of the Boca de Reloncavi and the Boca de Bohodahue. ‘ The
valley of Huemules,’ says Simpson, ‘corresponds to the Puluche e^annel,
the Aysen to the Agiiea, the Queulat to the Ninualaca, and the Palena and
Jictoc to the Huafo, as though in other times they had been straits of the
sea like those of Magellan

Contemplating the map of the Norwegian fjords we are almost tempted
to imagine that an approximation to the same arrangement may be per-
ceived there ; the manner in which the ancient glivcicr valley of the Divi,
for example, is continued to the Bals fjord, while the existing valley of
erosion toms to the west, is so strikingly similar as to arouse a suspicion
that some deeper connexion underlies the I'escmblance. ,

In lat, 46“ 40' S. lies the Lar/una de tktn llufael. The great peninsula of

'' Gormoz, Llanquihue, p. 198; Mem.du Marina, 1872, p. 198, and An. Univ. Chile, 1871,
p.70.

’ F. Fonck, NaturwissenschafUiche Notizen iiber das stidlicho Chile, Peterm. Mitth.,
1866, p. 467. I have passed over in silence the alleged subsidences within this region,
cited by many authors, since in the majority of cases it is only a question of landslips ;
in the best known example, that of the Laguna di San Ramon, in which a new lake is said
to have been formed, a spring seems to have appeared ; the case has been discussed by
Gormaz, An. Univ. Chile, 1872, p. 230, and Mem. de la Marina, 1872, p. 195.

’’ C. Darwin, Geological Observations, p. 235. *

^ E. M. Simpson, Esploracion hidrogrdHca de la Chacabuco ; Mem. de la Marina, 1872,
p. 379, and An. Univ. Chile, 1872, p. 427. Simpson, in describing his exploration of the
remarkable lagoon of San Rafael, which illustrates the cutting off of a branch of the sea
by a glacier, mentions the ^aces of recent subsidence in the uppermost parts of the
channel of Moraleda. The evidence is found in the submergence of a forest, but in this
labyrinth of streams secondary alterations of the ^ter level may be explained in various
ways ; Simpson, op. cit, p. 178.



634 EQUATORIAL AND SOUTHERN COASTS [pabtiH

Taytao is only connected with the mainland by an isthmus of recent origin,
formed by sediments brought down by the glaciers into the sea. Within
this isthmus is a lagoon, or rather a lake, of nearly circular outline and eight
to«nine nautical miles in diameter ; towards the north it opens into the sea
by a narrow channel, and on the east receives the glacier of San Rafael,
which advances as a long tongue of ice four and a half miles into the
water. The Jesuit Garcia visited the lake in 1766, and more recently
Captain Simpson has twice crossed it. The glacier is constantly ‘calving,’
and the fragments of ice fall down with a crash like thunder, awakening
echoes among the mountains. Its activity appears to be greater by night
than by day. The waves, says Simpson, retreat as before an earthquake,
and then break in surf along the shore. All around the lake the waves are
actively at work, and the destruction of its banks would be far greater if
these were not to some extent protected by vegetation. At a distance of
one nautical mile from the glacier the bottom of the lake was not reached
at a depth of 108 meters \

Within the narrow straits, terraces are seen at many places ; Coppinger
mentions those in the Fitzray cJtitnneL In one bay, seven nautical miles
west qf the bay of Mines, thei’e are two terraces so regular that they might
be taken for artificial constructions \

Thus the traces left by the sea do not give us so clear and connected
a picture on the west coast of South America as on the east. Almost on
the equator even, in Guayaquil, a shell-bed occurs containing Mdstodon
Andium. The observations made at Mejillones and on the Cerro Gordo
have revealed to us a strand at the height of 441 meters, with indications
of an even higher level, yet the few shells known from the beds at these
altitudes still indicate a connexion with the Atlantic fauna. The period at
^ which the faunas were separated and the existing fauna made its appearance
in the west is not known. In the remaining beds, described as Quaternary,
there are no European species, it is true, but the number of extinct species
is extremely great. Well-developed terraces may be seen at different
heights on the whole of the middle and southern part of the coast ; in the
fjords and channels of the south no Quaternary mollusca are known, but
the geographical features present a remarkable resemblance to those of the
northern coasts of Norway.

' Simpson, Esploraciones hech^s por la corbeta Chacabuco; Ann. hidrogr. Chile,
Santjago, 1875, I, pp. 32, 131, et seq. ; cf. map in Peterm. Mitth., 1878, pi. xxiv.

^ R. W. Coppinger, Visit to Skiring Water, Straits of Magellan ; Proc. R. Geogr. Soc.,
1880, New Ser., II, pp. 552-556.



636


CHAPTER XIV
THE OCEANS

The boundaries of the Oceans. Eustatic negative movement. Transgressions.
Eustatic positive movement. Inadequacy of eustatic movements. River mouths and
river terraces. General survey of comparatively recent strand-lines. Oscillations of
the Oceans. Alternating equatorial phases. The continents a result of subsidence.
No appreciable change of level in the historic period.

Thb Pacific Ocean is bonlered by long mountain chains, and surrounded
by volcanos as by a girdle of fire ; but no such boundary marks the margins
either of the Indian Ocean or the Atlantic. On closer examination the
mountains bounding the Pacific are found to be folded ranges, nut wholly
alike on the east and on the west, but in every case turning their folds
towards the abysses of the sea. In California and in South America
throughout its length we find, in front of the great ranges, the cordillera
of the coast distinguished by its singular stratigraphical succession. Tlie
east coast of Asia, on the other hand, is formed of a series of island festoons,
which, as a n^sult of a peculiar arrangement, proceed from the crowded
chains of central Asia and turn towards the north as they reach the borders
of the Ocean.

South America, as far as the isthmus of Tehuantepec, is a self-contained
unit ; North America is a second ; the independent arc of Alaska with the
Aleutian islands is a third ; eastern Asia, as far south as a line immediately
north of Timor, a fourth ; and, finally, Australia with New Zealand and
a great number of other islands fonns a fifth. The Antarctic region is as
yet practically unknown.

The Asiatic arcs strike into the mainland ; the most southerly of them
extends through Java and Sumatra, the Nicobar islands and the Andamans
to the coast of Arakan. This is the Burmese arc, the first of the series
which bounds Eurasia on the south. These bordering arcs reappear on the
north coast of the Persian gulf, and in certain parts of the Mediterranean,
to terminate in the sharp bend of Gibraltar. Many of the arcs are accom-
panied by linear volcanic series. It is only at Gibraltar and in the cordil-
lera of the Antilles that the outer border of a folded range reaches the
Atlantic Ocean. With these exceptions the whole outline of the Atlantic,
as well as of the Indian Ocean, is indepeildent of the strike of the folded
ranges, in other words it is a ‘ backland ’ ; in the Pacific, on the contrary.



THE OCEANS


[PART m


58 ^


the coasts are already determined by the folded ranges, and the Ocean
itself covers the foreland. Cape Horn and the mouths of the Ganges mark,
in the two great continents, the sharply defined limit between these two
contrasted tectonic systems.

The extremely complex structure of Europe may be resolved into three
principal folded chains, lying one behind the other, and all overfolded
towards the north. The northernmost range, the Caledonian, is of pre-
Devonian age. The second is composed of a western or Amiorican segment,
and an eastern or Variscan segment ; they meet in syntaxis in France, and
the junction may be recognized even on the outer border, in the re-entrant
angle which is formed near the Franco-Belgian frontier by the Coal
measures overthrust to the north. This second chain is of pre-Permian age,
but with posthumous foldings, the formation of which was continued at
least as late as the Tertiary aera. The third chain, which is the most
recent, includes the Pyrenees, the fragmentary arcs in the south-east of
France, the Jura, the Alps, and the Carpathians. Each of these chains was
dammed back in its course by the sunken ruins of the preceding cliain.
In the north of Spain we recognize in the basin of Asturias an arrangement
similar to that presented by the sharp bend at Gibraltar, but here worn
down lo the roots by prolonged erosion.

The course of the west coast of Europe is not determined by the trend
of the folded ranges, but cuts across it transversely, so that the Armorican
arc terminates in a rias-coast on the south-west of Ireland and in Brittany ;
neither in Galicia nor in Portugal does the orographic structure find any
expression in the course of the coast.

At the same time the folded chains of North America turn gradually
but completely round in an arc, so that on the lower St. Lawrence, which
marks the outer border, the direction of the folding force passes from west
'through nQrth-west to north-north-west, and the rias-coasts of Nova Scotia,
New Brunswick, and Newfoundland thus present a clase resemblance to
certain parts of the west coast of Europe ^

This contrast between the outlines of the Ocean basins and the structure
of the continents shows in the clearest manner that thene Ocean haisin» are
ureas of mbsidence, repro<lucing, but on a far larger scale, the subsidences
with which we have become familiar in the interior of the continents. This is
further attested in the case of the Pacific region by the presence of abyssal
depths close against the border of the mountain arcs, e. g. on the coast of
Japan and the west coast of ^uth America.

This conception is in closest harmony with the observations already
made in the Mediterranean. This basin has been shown to consist of

«

’ This resemblance is so great that Marcel Bertrand has not hesitated to draw
connecting lines across the Ocean ; Lif Chafne des Alpes et la formation du Continent
Europecn, Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1887, 3® ser., XV, p. 442, fig. 5.



OH. XIV] , • AGE OF THE OCEANS ^87

sevexal sunken areas of different age, and it is manifest that the tmUinee of
the great Oceana are aleo of different o/ge.

That such is the case is shown by the fact that it is not always the same
subdivisions of the Mesozoic succession which are visible on the border%of
the Oceans. Around the Pacific, marine deposits of the Trias are encountered,
as in New Zealand, New Caledonia, Japan, the Aleutian islands, the Queen
Charlotte islands, the west of North America and Peru. They are every-
where folded into the great ranges of the coast, and they appear to occur
also in Arakan, where the Burmese arc forms the boundary of the sea.
They are also present in the extreme north of Eurasia, and in Spitzbergen
they retain their original horizontality.

On the shores of the Indian Ocean, except in the north-east, where the
coast is constructed on the Pacific type, we do not encounter deposits of tliis
age. Here the series begins at the earliest with the middle Jurassic, and
the Mesozoic beds lie everywhere horizontal ; subsequent folding is nowhere
visible. The plant-bearing Gondw&na beds, which were certainly not formed
in the sea, face the Ocean in a denuded fault-scarp, as in the Quathlamba
mountains. On the summit of the vast South African table-land traces of
the presence of the sea have nowhere been observed, nor is it possible to
conceive in wliat way this lofty mass could have been raised out of the
Ocean.

Around the Atlantic Ocean — again excepting the fragmentary arcs of
Gibraltar and the Antilles, constructed on the Pacific type — the .series does
not begin before the middle Cretaceous ; this is the case from cape Horn to
Greenland, and from the Lofoten islands to the cape of Good Hope ; in we.st
Africa the series may possibly Ixjgin with a slightly older stage. In the
west of Europe, it is true, Lias and Jurassic reach the sea, but the existing
shore by no means corresponds to that of those pcriwls ; this is evident from
the fact that the mighty fresh-water depasits of the Weald in th# Charente,*
in Santander, and on the coast of Portugal, strike freely out to sea, like the
Gondwfina beds of the Indian peninsula, and the late fresh-water Tertiary
beds on the shores of the Aegean.

As soon as we recognize the Ocean basins as sunken areas, the conti-
nents assume the character of horsts, and the wedge-like ouUinee of Africa,
India, and Greenland, all pointing towards the south, find their exjilana-
tion in the conjunction of fiekls of subsidence which reach their greatest
ilevdopment in the same direction. In Greenland the difference in the
stratified succession shows that the two sides of the wedge are probably of
different age; that on the east being apparently older than that on the
west The wedge-shaped outline of South America is of different origin ;
in this the curved folded range of the Cordillera plays the essential part.

The crust of the earth gives way and fialls in ; the sea follows it. But
while the subsidences of the crust are local events, the subsidence of the



THE OCEANS



[PABi m


sea extends over the whole submerged surface of the planet. It brings
about a general negative movement.

As a first step towards an exact study of phenomena of this kind, we
mqst commence by separating from the various other changes which affect
the level of the strand, those which take place at an approximately equal
height, whether in a positive or negative direction, over the whole globe ;
this group we will distinguish as euetatic movements

The formaiion of the sea basine ‘produces spasmodic eustatic 'negcUvve
moveTnents.

Such movements have occurred at various periods and in different
degrees. The structure of Spibsbeigcn and Scotland shows what important
subsidences took place within the Palaeozoic aera ; the structure of Scania
illustrates the continuation of these movements through different stages of
the Mesozoic aera ; the recent history of Iceland shows that there a similar
formation of horsts and troughs is still in progress at the present day.
This fragmentation of the globe by great fractures of different age is, how-
ever, a phenomenon of wide distribution. The marine deposits of the Trias,
and with them the complete series of the marine Mesozoic, traverse the
greatest existing continent in a zone which coincides to no small extent
with tliat of the arcs forming the southern boundary of Eurasia ; and thus it
happens that great mountain ranges now rise over the site of the ancient sea,
and there, where further to the west lay its greatest depths, we now encounter
the eastern Alps ; this sea was continued across the western Mediterranean
and some parts of western Europe. The correspondence of the faunas in
the contemporaneous deposits of the West Indies, Bogota, and Chili, per-
sisting in Chili and the Antilles even into the Tertiary period, compels us
to suppose that an ancient communication, older than the northern as
well as the sonthci-n part of the present Atlantic, existed across this Ocean,
precisely in that region which, by exception, is constructed on the Pacific
type, namely the Antilles with their folded cordillera and girdle of volcanos.
This is the ancient sea, extending parallel to the equator, which Neumayr
has designated the Cerdrul Mediterranean.

If we now consider the succession of stratified systems in those parts of
the continents which have so far been closely investigated, we discover that
vast areas have been subject, during periods of extraordinary duration, to
marine transgressions, that is, positive movements which have been inter-
rupted by negative phases. ^ At the close of the Silurian epoch, the strand
receded across the whole region lying between Illinois and the Atlantic Ocean,
as well as in England, the north of Rassia, and the neighbourhood of the
Dniestr. The Old Red sandstone, containing no marine fossils, and shales of
the same age likewise of non-marine origin, were deposited over the whole of
the North Atlantic region, in the iast of Canada, Spitsbergen, Scotland, Eng-
land, and the north of Russia as far as the Dniestr. Then the sea began its



t


TRANSGRESSIONS


OH.XIV] ,

advance, and in the middle Devonian the transgression was established over
Russia as far as Livonia and Courland, probably also in western Canada, on
the Clear Water and the Mackenzie, and perhaps as far as the Arctic Ocean.
A fresh negative phr ce marked the lieginning of the Carboniferous peripd,
succeeded by another positive phase, which brought about the transgression
of the Carboniferous limestone in California, Dakota, and Texas in the west,
and in the cast over the Old Red sandstone region, which stretches from
Ireland across Scotland to Spitzbergen, and many other places, as well as
over much older deposits in the north of China. Then followed the oscilla-
tions of the upper Carboniferous period, which were felt alike in Illinois and
in many parts of southern Europe, until the negative movement was again
interrupted, and the marine setliments of the Permian epoch were deposited
over a restricted area in North America and northern Europe.

The Mesozoic seas of Europe were subjected from the Rhactic period
onwards to a positive movement, which, though interrupted by occasional
secondary phases of retreat, never failed to regain its ascendancy; this
movement gave to the sediments of the seas a continually inci'eosing exten-
sion, until finally the deposits of the middle Jurassic, encroaching on a
foundation of very various age, extended through Cracow, Kiev, Moscow,
and Orenburg, and northwards up the Pctchora almost as far as the Arctic
Ocean; covering at the mime time the north of Scotland in the west.
A very large part of Europe was thus submerged ; and indications of this
great transgression arc also found in Abyssinia, in Cutch, and even on the
west coast of Australia.

The submergence continued, and the Kimmeridge stage of the upper
Jurassic, maintaining almost constant characters throughout its course, may
be traced from Orenbuig and Simbirsk acrass central Europe into the
neighbourhood of Lisbon. Then the strand receded, and the sen was left
in possession of those regions only from which the transgressionp had pro- *
ceeded, principally the Alps, while from Hanover to the south of England,
on the Charente, in north Spain and Portugal, great fresh-water lakes came
into existence.

At this stage the Cretaceous epoch began. From the Alps, and the
Balearic isles which form their continuation, the strand gradually advanced
again across the region of the existing Jura into Spain. By degrees the
whole of central Europe, together with all the sediments of its great fresh-
water lakes, was again covered by the sea. the time when the previous
period of retreat had reached its maximum, Russia was converted into dry
land, but with this fresh advance from the south the sea simultaneously
extended from the north and crossed the Russian plain, bringing with it
a number of independent types of mollusca ; it first reached. Tomaszov on
the Pilica in western Poland, and subsequeSitly, during the deposition of the
upper parts of the lower Cretaceous, the two seas conjoined, and some



5ib


THE OCEANS


[PABT m

Buflsian types made their way as far as Hanover. The northern influence
then disappeared, while the southern sea steadily continued to gain in extent.
We thus reach the climax of the great middle and upper Cretaceous trans*
gipssion.

Then for the first time the Atlantic coasts were washed by the Ocean.
The sea covered the plains of Patagonia as far as the east border of the
cordillera, it advanced to the upper tributaries of the Marafton, perhaps
across the whole continent of South America ; from Texas it made its way
through the middle of North America as far as lat. 65* N. It left its traces
around the greater part of Africa, covered a very large part of Europe,
passing over the ancient horsts, and extending through the south of Russia
east of the Urals to lat. 62" 30' N. ; thence it proceeded over the Caspian,
the sea of Aral, Turania, Persia, Syria, Arabia, the eastern Sahara, the
coasts of India, and other vast areas. If we seek a region which was
unaficcted by this transgression we shall discover it in the north ; the east
of Greenland, Spitzbergen, north Russia and north Siberia (with the excep-
tion of the region just mentioned in the eastern Urals), and the north of
China have so far afibrded us no trace of the Cretaceous sea.

Once more vast areas were almndoned by the sea. Everywhere the
strand receded ; in Europe even to a greater extent than after the Jurassic
transgression, for tl>e fi'esh-watcr lakes which now came into existence lay
further south and close to or tipon the area of the ancient central Mediter-
ranean, from which the vaiious transgressions had proceeded; as, for example,
in the south of France, and more particularly in Istria and Dalmatia.

The Cretaceous epoch cotnes to an end and the Tertiary aera begins.
Now, however, the conditions become so complicated that it is no longer
possible to give a general and concise account of them. The Oligocene
transgression from the north, the gradual retreat of the sea from the heights
' of Persia ,and central Europe which took place within the limits of the
existing Mediterranean, and the partial extension of this sea by local sub-
sidences are some of the most striking features of this eventful period.

This recapitulation shows that the Iheoi'y of tsecvlar oacUlations of the
continents is not competent to explain the rejmiied inundation and emer~
gence of the lami. The changes are much too extensive and too uniform to
have been caused by movements of the earth’s crust. The middle Cretaceous
transgression presents itself on the Amazon, the Athabasca, the Elbe, the
Nile, the Taryiu, and the Narbada, in Borneo and Saghalien, and on the
Sacramento ; it marks a general physical change which affected the whole
surface of the planet. In this lies the explanation of the remarkable fact
that it has been found possible to mv[^j the same tei'minology to disAinr
guish the sedimentarg formations in aM parts ofithe vmid. This would
have been impossible if the limits of the formations had not been drawn
by natural processes simultaneously in operation over the widest areas.



OH. XIV] SYSTEMS DEFINED BY NEGATIVE PHASES «41

t

It has been fortunate for stratigraphical geology that its earliest develop*
ment took place in England, a region where the frequency of gaps in the
stratified series neither rises above nor falls below the mean, a region which
has at times been submerged beneath the sea, at others covered by fresh-
water lakes or left exposed as dry land. A whole series of marine faunas,
which are indigenous in more southerly regions, such as the Hercynian, the
upper Carboniferous, that of Artinsk and those of the various ssones of the
Trias, the Tithonian and the Neocoinian, are either entirely absent from the
stratified series in England or only imperfectly represented. The limits of
the fm'matwm e^ta^dished hj William Umith and his sweessors correspowl
for the mod part with negative phases. Where they have been moat precisely
studied, as in the case of the limit between the Jui'assic and Cretaceous, our
knowledge has been extended into details, and we now perceive that by a
movement in the negative direction arms of the sen l)ecome isolated and the
fauna impoverished, although its final extinction may l)o delayed till the
negative movement has passed its maximum.

In this also we find an explanation of the difficulties which were
encountered in correlating the stratified series whciv it attains its complete
marine development, as in the eastern Alps, with the succe.ssion established
in England. In this again we recognize the source of the opinion exiflressed
by many eminent investigators to the effect that this succession stands in
relation to certain cycles, i. e. a perpetually i‘*x5urring alternation produces
a periodic return of similar conditions.

As to the precise nature of these phenomena we can only hazard con-
jectures; the present state of observation does not justify any clefinitc
opinion. Some features may l>e clearly distinguished, others are still
doubtful. The analysis of the Bhaetic series in the Alps shows that the
positive movement, which carried the Rliaetic shore further and further
outwards till it finally extended across a large part of central ^uropc into *
the north of Scotland, must have been oscilhdo^'i/. The division of the lime-
stone into beds, the terrestrial or littoral remains in the earliest ‘ partings,’
the fragments of red earth in the white limestone, and other indications
point in a conco:^ant manner to this conclusion. Another example of the
HAITI <■ kind is furnished by the alternating series in the island of Purbeck.
The recent limestone Ixsds of Sombrero and tbe remains of guano between
them point in the same direction. On the other hand it cannot be denied
that the paralic seams, intercalated with the marine Carlx)niferons beds, are
extremely similar to the partings of the Bhaetic in the eastern Alps, and
that the union of such seams as they are traced landwards to form a single
thick bed cannot lie explained by o.scillatory movements in the light,of our
present knowledge ; but this question requires a fresh and detailed examina-
tion. Still, there can be no doubt that thetevidence afforde<l by the Bhaetic
series and by the Purbeck is strongly in favour of numerous subsidiary



THE OCEANS


54fi


[past ni


oscillations. Oscillations of greater importance may be recognized with
certainty, such, for instance, as those which caused the stages of the lias to
extend in transgression, some to a greater, others to a less distance ; this
may be seen from a comparison of the succession in the north of Scotland
with that of Scania and perhaps also with that recorded by the Hierlatz
beds of the Alps. These represent in other words secondary cycles 'within
the primary. The piincipal phases or the primary cycles reveal themselves
with even greater definiteness.

But it is a striking fact that in the best known of these primary cycles the
positive phase is of much greater duration than the negative phase which
follows it. In the present state of the question it is hardly possible to say
anything definite or conclusive on this point ; yet we must not forget that
from the Trias through the Rhaetic, the Lias, and the Oolites to the Oxfordian
— that is, through an extremely long period of time- -the strand gradually ad-
vanced across Europe, with a few interruptions of slight importance ; even as
late as the Kimmeridge the sea extended from Siberia across Europe to the
existing Atlantic coast, and then, in a period, as we may conjecture, of incom-
parably briefer duration, corresponding to the Portland and Purbeck,a general
emergence took phice, giving rise first to the lagoons in which gypsum was
deposited, and then to the . great lakes of the newly exposed land. The same
process is repeated during the Cretaceous epoch. In Europe a study of the
existing observations leaves the impression that during the first half of this
period the inundation proceeded from lx)th north and south, till the advancing
faunas met and intermingled. Later on, during the Cenomanian, it was
only the southern region which extended further and further towards the
nortli, but the movement continued into the Senonian, when the sea attained
an extraordinarily wide extension. At that time there was much less land on
the globe in the temperate and tropical latitudes than at present, although
' over large ^areas the sea was perhaps of no great depth. It is difiicult to
say whether the brackish-water character of the Laramie stage is to be
ascribed rather to the deposition of alluvial sediments or to a retreat of the
strand ; in Europe we witness after the Senonian a general withdrawal of
the sea, proceeding to all appearance with incomparably Reuter swiftness
than its previous advance, and to so great an extent that it gave rise to
fresh-water lakes in the south of France and in the northern Adriatic.

The extraordinarily slow rate at which some positive movements have
taken place is also indicated by the plain of erosion which may often be
seen at the base of an unconformable junction. It is probable that the
detailed study of cci-tain beds of phosphates possessing a wide distribution
might lead to the same conclusion.

The retreat of the sea at the close of the Jurassic period laid bare the
region on which the new flora ofidicotyledonous trees supplanted the older
vegetation. The Cenomanian transgression, as it advanced over North



CH.XIV] SLOW RATE OP POSITIVE MOVEMENT S48

•

America and Europe, buried up the remains of this new flora in its earliest
deposits. In like manner the post-Cretaceous emergence gave birth to the
land over which, in North America as in Europe, the higher mammals
distributed themselves.

There is no difficulty in perceiving how slowly the transgressions
advanced over the land ; the Cretaceous transgression, for example, begins
in Texas with sand containing Dinosaurs ; the Caprotina limestone of
Friedrichsburg and the Washita aeries which follow hardly extend beyond
the boundaries of this State ; even the Dakota beds which come next only
furnish marine species as far as New Mexico and Kansas, and in the latter
State these species are littoral ; in Dakota they are such as flourish in water
of less than the nonnal salinity ; and it is not until later that the influence
of the sea makes itself felt as far as Canada^.

Finally, the regular and uniform character of the movements may be
recognized from the concordant superposition of the more recent beds on
those of much greater age. Of this there are numerous examples. Murchison,
in describing the recent marine beds with Arctic shells at Ust-Waga on the
Dwina, has pointed out their absolutely conformable superposition on
the horizontal Permian sediments ; he has also shown how at other places the
latter sediments rest in perfect concordance on much older beds, so that
the stratigraphical relations offer no hint of the great gap which occurs at
the line of contact. That this should be the case may well be cause for
astonishment, for some degree of erosion, weathering, or other alteration of
the surface must have occurred in the interval, and I can scarcely help
thinking that even in this ease some kind of erosion, though feeble perhaps
in its effect, must at one time have been active.

The question now presents itself as to whether these positive movements
were likewise eustatic.

Material is continually being carried into the sea ; some, in mechanical •
suspension, sinks to the l)ottoni near the coast as clastic sediment ; .some, in
chemical solution, is transformed by living organisms into calcareous or
siliceous shells. There are besides volcanic products which accumulate in
the depths of the sea. The thickness of tlie ancient sediments and the
extensive denudation of the continents, amounting in many places to thou-
sands of feet, show how great is the bulk of material which has been carried
into the sea in the past. The oceanic regions are filled up slowly but vdthout
intermission, and their waters in consequence are gradually displaced; at
the same time the transgression which thus ^results is facilitated by the
progressive denudation of the land.

The formation of sediments causes a continuous, eustatic positive^ move-
ment of the ^rand-line. ^

’ C. A. White, On the Cretaceous Formations ol Texas and their relation to those of
other portions of North America ; Froc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, 1887, pp. 39-47.



544 THE OCEANS . [pABTm

f

We are thus acquainted with two kinds of eustatic movement ; one,
produced by subsidence of the earth’s crust, is spasmodic and negative ; the
other, caused by the growth of marine deposits, is continuous and positive
(<r, II, pp. 220, 267). This distinction may be best illustrated by a few simple
calculations, even though the results should be, as indeed they must, only
very roughly approximate. As early as 1848, the acute observer. Chambers,
attempted to estimate the extent to which the surface of the sea would be
lowered by a local subsidence of the sea floor ^ Let us take a region which
is known to have sunk down in comparatively recent times, as, for example,
the Qraeco-Lcvantinc sea together with the Pontus ; first let us suppose that
this area was not previously occupied by an inland lake, and further, that
the Oceans descend perpendicularly from their shores ; then, basing our cal-
culation on Kruramel’s estimate of the volume and mean depth of the Ocean,
we .shall find that the formation of the sul)sidence under consideration would
produce a eustatic negative movement to the extent of nearly fotur meters
over the whole surface of the planet. On the other hand, it would require
the denudation of all the continents to the extent of ten meters to produce
a eustatic positive movement of the same amount. According to Kriimmel
the mean depth of the Ocean is 3,438 meters, and the area of the surface
366 Of 368 million square kilometers ; hence the subsidence of a continental
.surface of something more than 100,000 square kilometem to a depth equal
to the mean depth of the Ocean would be required to produce a general
sinking of the sea-level to the extent of one meter.

If there were any reason to suppose that the quantity of water existing
on the .surface of the planet is not constant, but subject to increase or
decrease, as a result of general cause.s, whether telluric or cosmic, then the
rc.sulting phenomena would fall within the category of eastatic movements.
It is probable indeed that a diminution does actually occur in the formation
of new mineral silicates, and an increase also, us a result of volcanic

, f

eraptions.

The observations at our disposal, as to the extension of the ancient seas,
are, it is true, extremely incomplete ; and, so far as they go, they do not
seem to indicate that the eustatic movements are sufficient to explain this
extension. The existence of eustatic movements admits of no doubt ; their
action is shown by the rapidity of the great negative movements, particu-
larly at the close of the Cretaceous period ; in other words, we have good
reason to suppose that the limit between the Cretaceous and Tertiary which
corresponds with the appetfrance of the dry land on which the higher
mammals were evolved, was produced by an Oceanic subsidence. Proofs
are wanting for any particular case. On the other hand, there are other
phenomena which do not present the characters of^eustatic movements.

A close examination of the stratified series often leads us to suspect the
* Chambers, Ancient Sea Margins, p. 319.



CH. xrv] . TRANSGRESSIONS «45

o

existence of numerous smaller oscillations which are hard to reconcile with
eustatic processes.

We have no evidence as to the existence of Mesozoic sediments in high
southern latitudes, ^mce these are covered by sea and ice; in the Arctic
regions, the great Mesozoic girdle which runs from Prince Patrick's island
across the north-western part of Bathurst towards the islands north of
Grinnell island is almost entirely unexplored. Still, notwithstanding these
deficiencies, we have been able to obtain the following results : —

(1) The transgression which continued through the Rhaetic, the Lias,
and Jurassic, started in Europe from the central Mediterranean, i. e. from the
region of the Alps, and proceeded towards the north ; at the same time it
left its traces far towards the south in Abyssinia and Cutch ; (2) in the
lower Cretaceous period (Volga stage) a transgression made its way over
north Russia and Siberia, and indications of a similar transgression also
occur in the southernmost part of Africa (Uitenhage series), and in Australia
(Aptian stage), as well as far to the south in Cutcli and central Europe ;
(8) the Cenomanian transgression proceeded from the warmer zones towards
?the north and south, and, although very widely extended, it left unsub-
merged a laige region in the north (east Greenland, Spitzbeigen, north
Russia, parts of Siberia, and north China); (4) the Eocene transgressibn no-
where extended into the Arctic regions ; (5) the Oligoccne transgression, on
the other hand, probably came from the Arctic Ocean, and proceeding along
the eastern side of the Urals entered Germany. A certain contrast or com-
pensation appears to exist between the equatorial and the polar regions;
but all statements in this connexion must be regarded as provisional, liable
at any time to be confirmed or modifietl by the progress of discovery.

Let us now turn our attention from the ancient seas to the more recent
sediments which rest against the slopes of the existing coasts, and the various
traces left by the displacement of the strand. In addition to Iqpal sources *
of error, which have already been illustrated by examples, there are many
others of a more general nature. The first and most important, as I may
venture once more to point out, is to be found in the great difficulties which
attend a chron^ogical correlation of facts ol^served at widely separated
localities. In high latitudes the traces left by the ice afford evidence which
must be employed with great caution, for there has been more than one
glacial episode ; there is no proof whatever that the ice disappeared at the
same time in the north of Norway and in central Europe, while in Green-
land it still persists. In the tropics we ha^^ not even this criterion. It
becomes more and more evident that since the period of maximum glaciation
and the beginning of historical tradition (the latter also difibrent in different
parts of the world) coysiderable displacement must have occurred. But
there is no possibility of deciding whethenthe negative traces in the vicinity
of cape Comorin or at Mejillones, for example, are older or younger than

SOLLA8 It N n



54e


THE OCEANS


[part m

those of the extreme north, and we are reduced to conjectures. We only
know that the period during which these deposits were formed must have
been of great duration; on the coast of Guayaquil, Mastodon Andvum
occurs in a recent shell-bed, and at Calais, as well as on the lower Lena,
Etephas primigenius is of later date than the recent shell-beds which
contain remains of the existing fauna of the adjacent seas.

It must also be borne in mind that the employment of numerical data
lends to the whole of this branch of inquiry an appearance of exactitude
which it does not really possess. The boreholes of Pholas or an abandoned
strand-line may mark a water level with some approach to exactitude, but
as a nile our only evidence is afforded by shell-beds or other deposits, and
the height of these was obviously not that of the sea at the time.

Finally, cveiy attempt whieh has been made to correlate the displace-
ments observed in various latitudes is seriously affected by the disproportion,
as regards the chances of observation and examination, which exists in
favour of the traces left by negative as opposed to those left by positive
movements. It has been shown that even in the case of oscillations with
a considerable positive excess, the chances are that only a single negative
trace will bo observed (II, p. 25). As a rule the positive movement is
masked, and proof of the movement can only be obtained in the tropical
regions, where, according to Darwin’s theory, which in the main I am
inclined to accept, it is furnished by the upward growth of coral reefs. In
colder seas, where coral reefs are absent, there is no possibility of such proof,
and, in the north as in the south, if a positive movement were in progress,
proceeding at no greater rate than in the case of coral reefs, it would leave
no sign of its existence.

Attempts have sometimes been made to show that positive movement
may be inferred from the form of the submarine slopes off the coast. The
most important argument rests on the fact that at the mouths of a number
of rivers a furrow has been observed, which, as it were, continues the channel
of the river down to considerable depths below the sea.

The river Ilwlson, near New York, affords an example which has been
studied in some detail. Lindcnkohl shows that the submaiine channel first
becomes clearly expressed at a distance of about ten knots from the coast ;
in this case there is a clayey flat at -17 fathoms; the channel lies at —25
fathoms, and is therefore 8 fathoms deep. The depth, however, increases ; at
a distance of 20 knots the flat bottom lies at —27 fathoms, the channel at
—42 fathoms. At a distanc^ of 40 knots the flat lies at —48 fathoms ; the
channel is now less marked, and subsequently dies out. Soon, however, it
reappears in the form of a broad valley. At this distance from the shore
a very continuous and fairly steep submarine cliff, follows the coast and is
crossed by the valley which is very deeply excavated in it. At a distance
of 85 knots the channel again appears, and at 105 knots it has reached the



CH. XIV]


MOUTH OP THE CX)NGO


•647


foot of the cliffi In this part of its course, from knot 86 to 105 it lies first
at a depth of —60 fathoms, sinks within the first knot to —200 fathoms,
and ends in —474 fathoms. It is here 3 knots broad. The lower half of
this deep valley, which has been termed a ‘ submarine fjord,’ is bounded, by
slopes 2,000 feet in height and inclined at an angle Of more than 14° ; both
slopes and bottom are covered with a green sandy mud.

The existence of this submarine channel as a prolongation of the river
valley, and of a similar conformation on the coast of California, south of
cape Mendocino, has led to the conclusion that the surrounding land must
have experienced veiy considerable subsidence ^ As opposed to this view
we may first cite the observations of Hbmlimann, who has dii^vered
similar furrows in lake Constance at the mouth of the Rhine, and in the
lake of Geneva at the mouth of the Rhone. The ravine of the Rhine has
been traced to a distance of 4 kilometers and to a depth of — 125 meters ;
it is excavated in the sub-lacustrine deltaic cone, and where most strongly
developed it reaches a breadth of 600 meters and a depth of 70 meters.
That of the Rhone has Ijeen mapped for a distance of 6 kilometers ; 800
meters from the shore the height of its slopes is 60 meters. According to
Forel the rate at which sediment is being deposited over this region is so
great that every trace of the ancient form of the lake bottom must by this
time have been buried up. We must thus be dealing with a recent feature,
produced on the surface of the deltaic cone by forces which are still active.
According to Forel the ‘ ravine ’ is the result of erosive processes, and it
points to the existence of a current at the bottom of the lake. Forel attri-
butes the current to the lower temperature and the turbidity of the river
water as it enters the lake ; the action is probably strongest in spring *.

The grandest example of this kind, however, is that at the mouth of the
Congo described by Buchanan. Here there is a deep submarine cation with
steep walls of mud ; 20 knots above the mouth the river already exhibits*
the extraordinary depth of —150 fathoms, and the submarine furrow has
been traced to a distance of nearly 100 knots outside the mouth at depths
of — 1,000 fathoms ; 35 knots from the coast the cation is sunk 3,000 feet
deep in the submarine plain. Buchanan believes tliat there is an under-
current of sea water which forces its way into the river channel and pre-
vents the deposition of sediment along its course ; thus the cation owes its
existence not to excavation, but to the accumulation of sediment on cither
side ®.

•

* A. Lindenkohl, Geology of the Sea-bottom in the approaches to New York Bay, Am.
Joum. of Nat, Sci., 1885, XXIX, pp. 475-480, map ; G. Davidson, Submarine Valleys on
the Pacific Coast of the United States, Bull. Cal. Acad. Sci., 1887, II, pp. 265-268.

* F. A. Forel, Lcs Ravins^sous-lacnstres des fieuves glaciaires, Compt. rend., 1885, Cl,

pp. 725-728. •

’ J. Y. Buchanan, On the Land Slopes separating Continents and Ocean Basins,

X n 2



648* THE OCEANS • [pABTin

c

In any case these submarine valleys cannot be regarded as indications
of a positive movement.

The opportunity of directly observing positive movements thus seldom
or never occurs outside the seas containing coral reefis, but indications of
negative movement are to be found on all sides. In the higher latitudes
thiey are often accentuated by the masses of debris which were distributed
during the last stages of the glacial period or soon after its close. The
transport of sand or loose stones was so considerable that in North America
some valleys have been completely filled up and levelled over, and the
rivers have had to excavate for themselves new beds. Dana, Berendt, and
other observers have thought that the cause of these phenomena is to be
found in the rapid melting of ice or snow, occurring perhaps repeatedly,
and producing overwhelming fioods \

Not only are marine strand-lines cut in these and other accumulations
of like kind, but also terraces which occur far inland and even in the high
valleys of the mountains ; sometimes also they furnish material for littoral
bars and spits. Some of the terraces were formed in lakes, often probably
in glacial lakes; others owe their ori^n to rivers. We have often had
occasion to insist on the necessity of distinguishing between fluviatile and
marinb terraces. The mode of formation of most river terraces is as follows.
The water in its efforts towards equilibrium swings in serpentine curves on
the surface of the alluvial land. During high water, when the centrifugal
force is increased at the bends, the radius of curvature is diminished and
the river cuts terraces in its convex banks. As this work proceeds, the
river sinks its bed deeper, and the serpentine curves are displaced; the
radius becomes gradually less, and from time to tinie it happens that the
convex side of a bend comes into the vicinity of an ancient cliff, at a lower
level. It then forms a second terrace ; later, perhaps, a third, and so on.

'Thus the <^use of the terracing is the wandering of the meanders combined
with deepening of the bod. Hitchcock, as early as 1857, very nearly arrived
at this explanation. BUtimeyer, Miller, Miihlberg, and Nikitin successively
rediscovered it while studying the rivers of Switzerland, Great Britain, and
Russia ; it has long been known to the engineers who are Occupied with the
regulation of mountain streams

especiallj those on the West Coast of Africa; Scott. Geogr. Mag., 1887, III, p. 222.
Buchanan mentions other ravines of the same kind on this coast, and also records one at
the mouth of the Adour. ,

* J. D. Dana, On Southern New England during the Melting of the Great Glacier, Am.
Joum. Nat. Sci., 1875, 3rd ser., X, pp. 168-183 ; G. Berendt, Die Sande im norddeutschen
Tieflande und die grosse diluviale Abschmelzperiode, Jahrb. k. preuss. geol. Landesanst.
f. 1881, Berlin, 1882, pp. 482-495.

‘ E. Hitchcock, Illustrations of Surface Geology, Smithsefa. Contrib., 4to, Washington,
1857 ; L. Rtttimeyer, Ueber Thai- uncESeebildung, 8vo, Basel, 1869, p. 137 et seq. ; H.
Miller, RirerTerracing, Its Methods and their Results, Proc. R. Fhys. Soc. Edin., 1888,



oil. XIV] ^ • HEIGHT OP STRAND-LINES *640

Important displacements of the strand must affect the fall of the rivers
for a great distance inland, espedally in the absence of cataracts. But the
river terraces near the sea are. of course more recent than the latest move-
ments of the strand. An example is afforded by the Divi, with its regent
terraces in the midst of. the region of ancient strand-lines and the steps left
by the glacial lakes K This is the reason also why terraces are present in
all latitudes wherever there is a sufficient supply of loose material ; we have
already mentioned their occurrence on the Maraflon, Gabb describes them in
Haiti, but they are chiefly developed in the higher latitudes.

Having thus eliminated, as far as possible, the various sources of error,
we arrive at the following conception of the recent (illations of the
strand.

The Arctic coasts exhibit traces of negative movement at a height which
is at first considerable, but diminishes towards the south ; it depends on the
structure of the country, the simplicity of the coasts and their subsequent
denudation, whether this diminution appears with a greater or less degree
of continuity. The diminution, however, appears to take place at a different
rate on different coasts ; in North America, for example, the descent is more <
rapid on the east coast than on the west.

In South Africa, in the south of Australia, New Zealand, and Patagonia,
th^ are also traces of negative movement at a considerable height. In
New Zealand and in the oast of South America a decrease of this height
has been shown to take place towards the north. The east of Australia seems
to correspond with a recent fracture. The west of South America also
exhibits n^;ative traces in the higher latitudes, but there the case is com-
plicated by the existence of kitchen middens, terraces, supposed to be of
inland origin, and other sources of error. The other coasts (South Afnca
and West Australia) are so little known that the height of the negative
indications presented by them must be left out of account. •

On the west coast of South America high-level negative traces occur up
to lat. 27” S., but it is not yet certain whether beds such as those of Mejil-
lones and Cerro Gordo should not be assigned to an earlier period.

Whore negative traces occur up to a considerable height they are
interrupted, i. e. they occur at intervals, twice, thrice, or even ten times,
one above the other at different levels.

Native traces occurring at a moderate or trifling height are known also
in the tropics, e. g. close to the equator at Guayaquil and on the east coast

VII, pp. 268-806; F. MOhlberg, Dio heutigen nnd frflheren Verh&ltnisBe dor Aare bei
Aaxgan, Ptognunm Aaxg. Eantonascbule, 4to, Aaran, 1885, pp. 1-46, map; SiNibitiii,
Die Flnsstbaler des mitUeren Bussland, Mem. Acad. Imp. Sci. St.-F4tenb., 1884, 7* eOr.,
XXXII, No. 5, p. 19. f ^

* Terraoee fomed by tianspoitation are deaenbed by Dauese, Nouvdle note enr les
temuses aUnviales, Bull. Soc. g4ol. de Fr., 1868, 2* ser., XXV, pp. 752-762.



650 * THE OCEANS ’ . [PAirr m

of Africa. They are clearly exhibited around the whole of the northern
re^on of the Indian Ocean, especially in the Indian peninsula ; and they , sire
found up to a height of about 100 meters above the existing sesklevel through
a v^iy latge part of the Polynesian islands, in the midst of the Pacific Ocean
and its coral reefs.

Positive indications, such ac coral reefs with lagoons, only occur In the
warm seas. In the Pacific, however, it is obvious that tlie living reefs are
more recent than the tabular masses of limestone (exposed by negative
movement) which they surround ; this is also true of the West Indies ; and
in all these regions the latest movement was evidently positive.

Thus it appears that in the warm seas oscillations have certainly
occurred, and hence it would seem to follow that the interrupted negative
indications both of the northern and the southern regions are likewise the
result of genuine oscillations.

In the West Indies and the sea of Banda, as well as in several other
regions, difficulties arise owing to the presence of Tertiary limestones, q|
which the upper limit can scarcely anywhere be certainly defined ^

All the relics of ancient shore-lines of which we have made mention are
always horizontal and absolutely independent of the structure of the coasts.
They {Present the same characters in the Pacific as in the Atlantic region, on
the Archaean foundation as on volcanic superstructures, on stratified table-
land, or folded mountains, whether ending in rias coasts or not. In the
extremely rare cases in which recent tectonic accidents are found in the
same region as these traces — on the shores of Cook strait, for example —
the two classes of phenomena exhibit as complete an independence one of
the other as the inland terraces of the desiccated lake Bonneville and the
recent faults of the Wahsatch.

Although in regard to these questions so much still remains obscure and
‘calls for fu^her investigation, yet it is evident that of the h 3 rpothoses pro-
pounded to account for such movements, there is one series which cannot be
reconciled with the facts, as these are already known to us.

Movements like these, which present themselves as oscillations, and
extend around all coasts and under every latitude in cofhplete indepen-
dence of the structure of the continents, cannot possibly be explained by
elevation or subsidence of the land. Even as the transgressions of the
ancient periods are much too extensive and uniform to have been produced
by movements of the lithosphere, so too are the displacements of the strand-
lino in the immediate past. '

It is also impossible to reconcile these observations with the theories

’ That the higher horizons are continued from the sea of Banda into the Indian Ocean
is shown in particular by an observation made by Aldrich on Christmas island (lat. 11* S.)
south of Java ; Nature, XXXVII, Dec. 49, 1887, p, 204. The summit at a height of 1,200
feet is composed of coral limestone, and apparently three strand-lines are visible.



OH. XIV] ^ ‘ LARGE pSeiLLATIONS * isi

which assume an alternating accumulation of water at each of the poles in
turn as was suggested by Adhdmar. The development and altitude of the
n^ative indications in the higher latitudes, both of the northern and the
southern hemisphere, are directly opposed to such an assumption. ^

As far as wo are in a position to judge it appears much more as if that
which characterized the more recent movement was an accumulation of
water towards the equator, a diminution towards the poles, and as though
this last movement were only one of the many oscillations which succeed
each other with the same tendency, i. c. with a positive excess at the equator,
a negative excess at the poles.

Negative traces are to be seen in all latitudes. Wo may attempt to
explain them by means of eustatic negative processes, i.e. by great
subsidences, but this would presuppose a uniform sinking of the sea-level
to the extent of more than 1,000 feet in quite recent times. It is much
more probable that the negative traces at considerable altitudes in the tropics
dire not of the same age as those in high latitudes, and that an accumulation
of water occurs alternately at the poles and the equator. Among these
traces there may be one or more of a eustatic negative origin, but if so, we
have not yet learnt how to distinguisli them.

This result accords well with the oscillatory nature of the ancientfinove-
ments to which the alternation of strata so often points. It is equally in
harmony with that singular compensation which seems to find expression
in the distribution of many formations in Europe. Stratigraphical termin-
ology was created in a region which is, as it were, the field of inundation of
the transgressive central Mediterranean. This explains the number of
lacunae in the stratified series of England. The negative phases mark as
a rule the limit of fonnations, but which of them were produced by oscilla-
tion and which by eustatic movement, we cannot at present determine with
certainty. ,

These conclusions and conjectures are consistent with an opinion
expressed, by Penck, that the accumulation of ice in high latitudes during
the glacial period must have caused an increase of attraction But it is
only as one of many causes which have influenced the sea-level at difierent
times that Penck has called attention to this factor, and it is only as such
that it must be regarded ; it must not be forgotten that most of the strand*
lines which have engaged our attention are more recent than the maximum

extension of the ice. In addition to this we have also to take into account

•

’ A Penck, Schwankungen dee MeeressinegelB, Jahrb. geogr. Ges. Mttnchen, 1882, VII,
pp. 47-116 : A. de Lapparent, Le Nireau de la mer. Bull. Soc. gdol. de Fr., 1886, S” sen,
XIV, pp. 8^885 ; Hergesell, Ueber die Aenderung der Gleichgewichtaflclcbea der Erde
^nreb die Bildnng polarer Eismassen und die dadurcb verursaebten Sebwankungen dee
Meereaniveaus ; Oerland, l^trilge zur Geopbyaik, 8ro, Stuttgart, 1887, I, pp. 58-114;,
E. TOn Diygalski, Die Geo^-deformationen der E^eit, Zeitaebr. Gea. Erdk., Berlin, 1887,
XXII,T)p. 169-280. /



65a*


THE OCEANS


• ^ [part hi

the different degrees of attraction of the continental masses, the local
increase of attraction duo to the accumulation of sediment (a, II, p. 219),
a subject to which Zdppritz has devoted particular attention, and iBnally a
gre^t number of secondary circumstances, such as the direction of the shore
with regard to that of the tides, the influx of fresh water, the rate of
evaporation, and so forth.

Provided with these provisional results, let us now return to the move-
ments of the outer crust of the earth, and to the various kinds of dislocation
which arc produced by telluric stresses.

Our observations on dislocations, taken as a whole, cannot be reconciled
with any attempt to explain this class of phenomena by means of the
elevation theory, i, e. by an undulation of the lithosphere. Neither the
numerous small oscillations can be thus interpreted nor the great ones which
embrace the whole globe. Movements of the lithosphere do not explain why
the stratified scries presents the same lacunae in the United States and in
central Russia, nor do they explain the formation of long horizontal strand
lines in complete independence of the structure of the land

It is true that the earth’s crust has experienced tangential as well as
vertical movements ; mountain chains have arisen over long zonal areas, and
their (f^pearance has been accompanied by profound local disturbances, but
it is not on such processes as these that the general level of the Ocean
dependa Tliis is shown in the clearest fashion by the Alps; they rear
themselves over the site of the central Mediterranean sea, from which time
after time transgressions have set forth to pursue their way towards the north
and towards the south. As a result of tangential thrusts the sediments of this
sea were folded together and driven upwards as a great mountain range,
and the Alps have therefore been described as a compressed sea. But this
lateral folding has not produced any direct or perceptible effect on the level
*of the Occtin. The indirect result of folding when it takes place on dry
land is to increase the fall of the rivers and to accelerate denudation and
the transport of sediments. In the case of folding beneath the sea the
causal connexion between subsidence and folding must be taken into account,
and this will be discussed later on.

In rare instances a dome of somewhat greater amplitude may be produced
by lateral compression, and cases occur such as Diener has observed
between Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon ; but even this is of no great weight in
the balance when set against the other factors which determine the general
level of the Ocean

' This conclusion, that the elevation theory is inadequate or unsuitable, has already
found expression in many of the more recent textbooks, e. g. H. J. Klein, Physische
Geographic, p. 341 ; A. Suiian, Grundziige der physischen Erdkunde, 8vo, Leipzig, 1884,
p. 188 et seq.; B. Gttnther, Lehrbuch^der Geophysik, II, Ajio, Stuttgart, 1885, p. 455
et seq. \

’ V. Diener, Libanon, 188C, p. 398. The coincidence of movi.uents of the sea and of



CH. xivj^OSCJILLATIONS EQUAL AND OPPOSITE ^63

•

The essential problem of this volume has been to determine in what
manner and to what extent movements of the Ocean are dependent on those
of the earth. In all probability the Ocean is subject to an independent
movement which in the course of long periods causes an alternation of
positive and negative phases at the equator. We shall be able to discuss
this oceanic movement with greater certainty when the stmtified series in
high latitudes is better known, and when we are able to clearly distinguish
the terraces formed by glacial lakes from those of marine origin. Tliese
great oscillations are not, however, cumulative in time ; on the contrary they
are compensatory. The persistent continuance of a continental surface is
in the main the result of local subsidences of the earth’s crust, which time
after time open up fresh abysses for occupation by the sea, and lower the
general level of the strand. Every eustatic negative movement of this kind
increases the fall of all the rivers which enter the sea, stimulates afresh the
denudation of the dry land, accelemtes the transportation and deposition of
i^pdiments, and thus induces a heightened eustatic positive movement. The
oceanic oscillation has the same effect when it is negative, and even the
positive oscillation contributes to the formation of sediment, in so far as it
assists in erosion. Thus there is an alternate play of forces. The effect of
eustatic subsidences and the deposition of sediments is cumulative, «nd in
the course of geologic periods the eustatic negative movements obtain the
predominance. In this matter the folding of the mountain chains plays
only a seoondaiy part.

The structure of the Pacific shores shows that this Ocean was already in
existence during the Trias epoch, and since then it has continually lost in
extent. The structure of the regions surrounding the Atlantic shows that
its outlines were determined at a later period, but since the Cretaceous epoch
this Ocean also has been reduced in area. The Mediterranean is surrounded
by traces of negative movement which extend from central Europe to Persia;'
marking the alternating phases of progressive restriction ; its lowest level
was reached between the Miocene and Pliocene. It would be possible,
were it desirable, to enter still further into details, and v a look forward to
a time when th§ feeble development of negative traces in the regions of the
Black Sea and the northern Adriatic will serve as a datum for the more
exact determination of the age of those subsidences Thus the land has

the lithosphere suggested by LOwI leads to ingenious conclusions, but I know of no case
in which they could be actually applied ; Die Ursache der s&cularen Verschiebungen der
Strandlinie, Vortrag, 8to, Prague, 1886.

* On the coast of Istria deposits of red earth are encountered, into which beds of sea
shells and small pebbles are intercalated ; they occur, however, at so trifling a height
that the intercalation might have been produced by some disturbance of the sea; Staohe,
Terh. k. k. geoL Reichsanst^ 1872, p. 221 ; at Pola at a height of one or at most two feet ;
Marchesetti, BolL Soc. Amat., Trieste, 1882, VII, pp. 303, 304, note ; at the southern
extr^ity of Istria at a Jpight of one meter.



THE OCEANS


f


56 ^


^ARP m


become habitable owing to the preponderance of negative movements. It is
in the history of the seas that we discover the history of the continents. —

Our voyage of inquiry through libraries and literature is now at an end^
and we return to the sublime spectacle which served us as our starting-
point, the beach and the long inflowing roll of the Ocean waves. Still the
mighty chorus resounds ; still, and at the same level, the rising tide ptCusos
before it recedes, and the ebb before it returns. And at this same level the
ebb and flood have paused, without sensible change, as far back as man can
penetrate into the past of his own race.

We have l)een taught that it is not so, that extensive parts of the planet
are slowly rising by vertical upheaval, others as slowly sinking, while some
great fragments of the crust, such as Scandinavia, Greenland, Australia,
and New Zealand, are subject to a tilting movement ; that South America
and Norway have been elevated by jerks ; that these activities are still
in progress and arc accomplished at a measurable rate.

It is not, however, that Sweden is rising, but the enclosed Baltic aef,
dependent on climatic influences, is gradually emptying, as it passes through
, a phase of increasing diminution ; and it is from this cause that the strand-
line sinks lower and lower as it becomes increasingly remote from the
Baltic*cntrance. In the Igalliko fjord of Greenland the alleged displace-
ment cannot be maintained. The oscillations which have left their mark
on the columns of the temple of Serapis at Pozzuoli were produced by
local movements within the crater of an expiring volcano. They were not
felt in the city of Naples, notwithstanding its proximity, and have nothing
in common with the horizontal strand-lines which surround the shores of
Italy. While in case after case the convincing force of each individual
example is weakened or destroyed, on the other hand phenomena confront
us which testify to the stability of the existing state, which has endured
'since the remotest period of human tradition, or since a period even earlier
still ; in hundreils of localities the sea itself has graven its mark deep in the
rocks at the level of the tide.

For thousands of years the fall of the Nile has remained unchanged ;
the situation of its mouths is still the same ; the Bahr Yuslbuf continues to
flow into lake Moeris, sacred to the crocodile, and the Fresh-water canal
still traverses the valley of the Seven Springs. The bar extending from
the promontory of the Casius across which Moses probably passed with the
Israelites is still in existence. The spit in the sea of Azov, and that of
Perckop, known to antiquity d!s the Course of Achilles, were in their present
position thousands of years ago. The Roman roads lie on the littoral bars
of Tuscany, and the ancient emissary of Cosa still bears away the waters of
the lagoons. It is to a still more remote epoch that we are taken by the
older bars which lie in the midst of alluvial land beVnd the existing line of
the surf, in the delta of the Po and the Adige to tn^north of Coma<g<hio,



CH. xiv]"* W CHANGE IN HISTORIC TIME %66

•

outside the mouth of the Rhone at Aignes-Mor^, beyond Mobile bay at
the mouth of the Mississippi, as well as by that great accumulation built up
by the cold current from the north, which provides a foundation for the
Keys of Florida as far as the Tortugas. Vfilmiki, the poet of the Bimd*
yana, the inspired painter of animate and inanimate nature, and of the
human soul as well, has shown what mystery attached, even in his time, to
that long bar, the rent fragments of which extend at present from the main-
land to Ceylon. • Thousands of years of reiit were necessary to build up
the vast stretch of alluvial land which extends from Ph’nom Bachd along
the lower Me-kong, to isolate the gulf and convert it into inland lakes, and
to create the river Tonlesap which flows during one part of the year from
the Me-kong into the lakes, during the other part from the lakes into the
Me-kong and out into the sea. The regions described in the ancient Chinese
accounts do not extend as far as the sea border, but Richthofen’s study of
the Yil-king shows us that four thousand years ago the fluvial network of
1%e great plain presented the same fundamental features as to-day, and was
probably subjected to inundations fully as devastating as those of our times.
Measurable changes along the coast arc, therefore, apart from various ,
meteoric influences, confined to loss of land through the erosive action of
the sea; to gain of land from the deposition of sediment; to [ftidden
local subsidence of large tracts of alluvial land covered with forest or
buildings ; to local oscillations in the vicinity of volcanos ; and finally, but
only in rare cases, to true dislocations affecting the coast, as occurred in
Cook strait in New Zealand in 1856. •

Yet the level of the strand has often changed, and every grain of sand
which sinks to the bottom of the sea expels, to however trifling a degree,
the Ocean from its bed. But who would think of expressing in figures the
extent of this effect? A considerable lowering of the strand has taken
place around the North sea since the last retreat of the ice, bi^t from the*
Scheldt to the Vlie the remains of Roman walls lie at present outside the
dunes; they probably indicate the wandering of the dunes, but prove a
change in the height of the strand-line just as little as the fort of the
Vikings at Roiftd. But what are a few thousand years in the course of
planetary events? And when we see the ‘gates of the coast’ between
the gulfs of Messenia and Laconia still standing where they stood two
thousand years ago, how shall wo find a measure for the ages required by
the sea, supported though it is by the work of rain and rivers, to wear away
whole mountain ranges and entire continent^ and to deposit on the levelled
down folds thousands of feet of fresh sediment? Yet this it had already
accomplished, even before the Silurian epoch, in Texas, in northern 'China,
and in other vast territories. During the Carboniferous epoch, folded
ranges were elevated, cmpletely planed dcPwn and again covered horizontally
nKitl^carbonaceous s|pments.



spue, ;pQiiite to ^e p)svii£fc^iiiKn^'6lih«:(^^

we Mil^ Way. ^ere is no enkh inea^ ,bf 0 ^ Vrliieb

illustrate directly the great ien^' o£ cosnupmods, an^we do not
possess a unit with which such periods nu|^t he measured. The distance in
space of many stars from the earth has been determined ; for the distSbceih
time of the latest strand-line on Capri'or the last shell-bed On TVOmsS, .We
cannot suggest an estimate even in apprOsdmate figures. We hbld-ihe
organic remains of the remote*pa8t,in our hand and consider their phj^SlStd
structure, but we know not what interval of time separates their epoi^ fed#
our own ; they are like those celestitd bodies without parallax, which,
us of their physical comititution by their spectrum, but furnish no hliie
their distance. As Rama looks out upon the Ocean, its limits mingluoig and.
uniting with heaven on the horizon, and as he ponders Whether
might not be built into the Immeasurable, so we- look over the Oceaiji of
time, but nowhere do we see signs of a shore.


Oxford : Printed at the Clarendon Press by Horaob^art, M.A.
