The Face of the Earth, Vol. 3 (Eduard Suess (W. J. Sollas, trans.), 1908)
==========================================================
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.22197). Staged for the Tower of Babel library.

THE FACE OF THE EARTH 

(DAS ANTLITZ DEE ERDE) 


BY 

EDUARD SUESS 


TRANSLATED BY 

H1RTHA B. C. SOLLAS 

UNDER THE DIRECTION OF 

W. J. SOLLAS 


REVISED BY 

SIR ARCHIBALD GEllQE A. W. ROGERS J. J. H. TEALL 
T. W. E. DAVID W. W. WATTS R. D. OLDHAM 
T. C. CHAMBERLIN C. LAPWORTH 
T. G. BONNEY 


VOL. Ill 


OXFORD 

AT' THE CLARENDON PRESS 

1908 



HENRY FROWDE, M.A. 

PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD 
LONDON, EDINBURGH 
NEW YORK AND TORONTO 



PREFACE TO VOL. Ill 


As an indication of the esteem felt for the veteran author of 
the ‘ Antlitz der Erde,’ the revision of the translator’s rendering of 
this third volume has been undertaken by a number of geologists 
representative of all parts of the English-speaking world. 

England is represented by Sir Archibald Geikie, the Rev. Prof. 
T. G. Bonney, Dr. J. J. H. Teall, Prof. Charles Lapworth, and 
Prof. W. W. Watts ; North America by Prof. T. C. Chamberlin ; 
India by Mr. R. D. Oldham ; South Africa by Dr. A. W. Rogers ; 
and Australia by Prof. T. W. Edgeworth David. If it should seem 
that England itself plays too great a part in this list, a sufficient 
explanation will be found in the exigencies of time and space. 

Notwithstanding the assistance I have thus received, I have 
not relaxed my own efforts as editor, and I have found it necessary 
to make frequent re-revisions in order to preserve some continuity 
and uniformity of style. Thus my responsibility remains unim- 
paired, and whatever improvement may be discerned in the trans- 
lation of this volume must be attributed to the revisers ; any defect, 
on the other hand, to me. The task of turning German into 
English is a peculiarly difficult one, owing to a natural tendency 
df the English to revert to a Teutonic form. 

The reverence due to a great classic has restrained us in this, 
as in previous volumes, from taking any liberties with the text, 
whether by comment or emendation. Our sole aim has been 
a faithful rendering. The extraneous matter of this preface would 
not hifve been inserted had it been possible otherwise to make 
knewn the tribute which the work of the revisers is intended to 
convey. 

W. J. S. 

Oxstord, 

August , 1908 




CONTENTS 


PAET IV . 


The Face of the Earth 


PAGE 

Chapter I. Introduction. Analysis of the subject. Attempt to determine a plan 

o^ the trend-lines. General folding of the oldest rocks ..... 1 


Chapter II. The North of Siberia. Asia. The Amphitheatre of Irkutsk. The 
west Siberian plain. Transgressions of Turgai. Succession of rocks in the 
east Siberian tableland. The river Angara. Gondwana-land, the Tethys, and 
Angara-land. Marginal folds. Granite of Nishni-Udinsk. Stony Tunguska. 
Lower Tunguska. North Yenisei. The table-mountains of the watershed. 
Vilyui and Lena. Summary .7 


Chapter III. The Ancient Vertex. Introduction. Patomske Nagorie. Trans- 
Baikalia. Lake Baikal. Western shore of lake Baikal. Mountains south of 
lake Baikal. East Sayan. The Horst on the Yenisei. Summary. Minusinsk. 

West Sayan. Tannu-ola-Khangai. The Valley of the Lakes. Gobi- Altai. 

East Gobi. Conclusion ' 39 


Chapter IV. Peripheral Formations to the East of the Vertex. The water- 
shed of the Arctic Ocean. The Great Khingan. Plain of the upper Amur. 
Aldan mountains. Bureya mountains. The Little Khingan. Manchuria. 
Sikhota Alin. Hokkaido and Saghalien. Summary 109 

Chapter V. The Altai and the Altaides. Tomsk. Kusnetzkii-Alatau and Salair. 

Inner ^arcs of the Altai. Kirghiz mountains. Thian-shan. Bei-shan. San- 
sjan-tsy. Lun-shan. West Nan-shan. Syntaxis of Nan-shan and the arc of 
Yarkend. The Altaides 150 

Chapter VI. The Eastern Altaides. Ordos. The mountains on the Hoang-lio. 
Khara-narin-ula and Ala-shan. Bifurcation of eastern Nan-shan. Summary. 
Middle and eastern Kuen-luen. Separation of the Burman and Yunnan chains. 
Western branch. Mandalay. Mass of Cambodia. Southern branch. The 
Red rivtr. Summary. The Malay peninsula. Banda arc. Supposed fragments 

of New Guinea. Borneo. Celebes. Halmahera. Survey of the eastern Altaides 198 

# 

Chapter VII. ^The Varkand Arc, Iran, and Turania. The Yarkand arc, or 
western J£uen-luen. Himalaya. Safed-koh. Sewestan. Iran. Hindu-Kush. 
Turania. Amu-darpi. Sir-darya. The existing continent of Asia . . 270 



CONTENTS 


Jf*GE 

Chapter VIII. The Taurides and the Dinarides. Asia Minor. Tne arc of the 

eastern Pontus. Region from Heraclea to Amasra. Syntaxes in the west of 
Ara Elinor, T'he Aegaean islands. The Tertiary gulf of Albania. The domi- 
nant Matures of the Thnarides. The crossing of the Adriatic. Idria. The 
boundary cicatrice. The Carnic Alps. Transgressions. The more recent move- 
ments 316 


Chapter IX. Northern Europe. The watershed of Aral-Irgis. Relations of the 
Urals to the Caucasus. Ufa. Folded ranges between Ufa and the Arctic 
Ocean. The pre-Cambrian platform. Its continuation in the Baltic shield. 

Its continuation in south Russia. Relatione with the Sayanides. The Cale- 
donian lines. The Scandinavian overthrust. Theoretical considerations. 
Relations of Scandinavia to Scotland. Conclusion 368 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


PLATES 

PAGE 


I (= X). The mountains between the Brahmaputra and Yang-tse-kiang . .211 

II (= XI). The Philippines and the Sunda Archipelago 235 

III (= XII). Fragmentary trend-line s between the Kabul river and the Jhelam . 281 

IV (= XIII). Intercalated chains on the Amu-darya and the Sir-darya . 

To face page 299 

V (•= XIV). The Bassegi, Kvarkush, and the Poljudov Chains .... 367 
VI (= XV). Overthrusting in Central Scandinavia . . . To face page 388 

VII (-= XVI). Diagrammatic Representation of the Vertex of Eurasia . 


In pocket at end . 


FIG. 

1. Goletz, on the Chon-Choldoi-daban (Tunkin Alps) 8 

2. The Amphitheatre of Irkutsk 10 

3. Tertiary deposits of western Siberia 14 

4. The Island of Olkhon 62 

5. A goletz capped with basic lava 68 

6. High-level basaltic flows near the source of the Ospa (partly covered by snow) . 69 

7. Hokkaido and Saghalien 140 

8. Mountains of the Kirghiz Steppe, between Karkaralinsk and Bajan-aul . . 161 

9. The fault-trough of Ljuk-tshun 167 

10. The region of An-si-fan 175 

11. The Valley of the Winds 191 

1?. We6t face of the Hsi-tshou-shan 199 

13. Section from Koko-shili to the plain of the Tjertjen-Darya .... 210 

14. Section through the Tis-tag and Tekelik-tag 272 

15. The overthrust flakes (Klippen) of Chitichun and Baldchura in the south Hiindes 278 

16. View from the Uschova Saddle into the Miss-Valley 344 

17. 4)iagrafti to show the relationship of the tonalite-line to the Bacher Gebirge . 354 

18. *The three elements of the Urals 374 

19. The peripheral folds of eastern Asia 375 

20. 21. Hypothetical explanation of the Scandinavian overthrusts, after Holmquist. 

Symmetrical movement 396 

22, 23. Hypothetical explanation of the Scandinavian overthrusts, after Holmquist. 


Asymmetrical movement 397 




PART IY 


THE FACE OF THE EARTH 

CHAPTER I 1 
INTRODUCTION 

Analysis of the subject. Attempt to determine a plan of the trend-lines. General 
folding of the oldest rocks. 

We began our study of the face of the earth by imagining an observer 
to approach our planet from outer space and, pushing aside the clouds of 
the atmosphere, to contemplate the surface of the globe rotating beneath 
him. We then supposed that this observer, as he had previously pushed 
aside the clouds, was now able to remove the sea, so that he could gaze 
directly on the bare rocky crust and on the great abysses of the Ocean. 

Let our observer now turn aside his glance. Another globe, the moon, 
shines beside him, illuminated on one side only. In its case no clouds need 
to be displaced, no ocean removed, and although one half is averted and 
invisible, yet there is no movement of rotation to disturb the tranquil 
scene. Sharp shadows reveal the presence of gigantic walls of scoria on 
the borders of so-called ‘ seas ’ ; he perceives vast circular areas, such as the 
Mkre Crisium, and lofty ring-like forms, such as Aristotle, Copernicus, 
and a crowd of others which recall in some respects the terrestrial volcanos 
of Hawaii ; and on the greater circles there are seated, like parasites, 
smaller circles, evidently of later origin. Finally, our observer succeeds 
in discovering signs of the progressive solidification of the scoriaceous 
cru$t — fissures of contraction, crater rills — and he recognizes an increasing 
resemblance to the eruptive volcanos of the earth. 

At the same time he cannot fail to be impressed with the points of 
difference which distinguish the face of the moon from that of the earth. 

Not only are there no clouds or seas on the moon, but its surface, 
covered with glassy debris, reveals none of those changes which result 
from the action of an atmosphere and water. Of stratified deposits there 
is no sign. 

Again, the moon is without those long, tSntinuous systems of folds which 
form the moxintain Chains of the earth. There is nothing, for example, 

1 Revised by Sir Archibald Geikie, D.C.L., Pm. G. S., Sec. B-. S. 

80LIA9 HI B 



2 


INTRODUCTION 


[part rv 


which could be compared to the marginal arcs of Eurasia; find those Junar 
features which have been named after the Alps, the Apennines, and the 
farcasns are ramparts of scoria, having nothing in common with their 
terrestrial namesakes, save the name. 

So great is the part played by stratified deposits in the structure of the 
earth’s crust that we might be tempted to speak of the stratosphere of 
the earth in contradistinction to the scoriosphere of the moon. Yet on 
our planet also we see extensive regions covered by recent rocks, directly 
consolidated from molten material, as well as analogous rocks of greater 
age, such as granite, exposed over wide areas by denudation of the 
stratosphere, and the mutual relations between the molten rocks and the 
stratosphere present one of the most important problems connected with 
the structure of our mountains. 


The distribution of existing volcanos is alone sufficient to sho\£ this. 
It is obvious that the volcanos of the Aleutian islands, the Kuriles, Java 
and Sumatra, the Lesser Antilles, and others, are situated on circular arcs 
which are in a manner indicated by the course of folded mountain-chains. 
It is equally clear that the volcanic line of Mexico, the volcanic lines of Central 
America, and those of the Ethiopian fault-troughs, cut the folds of the adjacent 
ranges at all angles and maintain an absolutely independent course. 

We are thus led to recognize a distinction between longitudinal volcanic 
lines and independent volcanic lines, and so discover at the very outset 
the impossibility of considering folds and volcanos apart from one another. 

Nevertheless so great is the variety of the phenomena presented by the 
face of the earth that any endeavour to arrive at a general view of the 
whole necessarily involves some kind of classification. In a preceding 
chapter we arranged the dislocations of the crust in two classes one • 
containing those due to folding, the other those due to subsidence. 
Adhering to this classification, we shall treat in the following chapters chiefly 
but not exclusively of folding, while the closer consideration of fracture 
s earing and subsidence, as well as the relations of the molten rocks to the 
stratosphere, will be reserved for a later part of this work. 

The study of folded ranges by means of transverse sections has recently 
been marked by great progress, and attempts have even been made with 
more or !ess success, to reproduce by experiment the conditions as*they 
e presented in nature. The object of these experiments has always been 
to obtain sections mmdar to those which have been observed in the field. * 

even thfb mves % ati °n of nature itself has shown that 

stence of isolated fragments of recumbent folds, or ‘llmbeaux de 



PLAN OF THE TREND-LINES 


OH. X] 


8 


reftofcvrement/lthe word ‘ ^coulement ’ came into use to designate the kind 
of folding which has produced these structures. Finally, cases have been 
discovered in which the folding has become only a secondary phenomenon, 
the tangential movement having taken place along one or more extensive 
thrust-planes. 

A study of the mountain chains in transverse section is, however, only 
one part of our task : we must also investigate them in horizontal pro- 
jection, i.e. in plan. There was a time when every single anticline of the 
Jura was regarded as an independent axis of elevation; then it became 
elear that such a collection of parallel anticlines must have a common 
origin; next it was seen that there is a certain dependence between the 
Alps and the Jura ; finally, the influence of the obstacle presented by the 
Black Forest was recognized, and it became evident that the Alps and the 
Jura were only parts of the southernmost, innermost, and most recent 
of three crescentic systems of folds which have arisen one after the other 
across Central Europe since the close of the Silurian epoch. Thus with our 
increasing knowledge we are led to the conception of units of a continually 
ascending order, and the several anticlines of the Jura now appear to us as 
parts of an organic whole. 

To continue this method of synthesis, to group the folded ranges 
together in natural units of a still more comprehensive character, and to 
explain by means of a single simple expression as large a part as possible 
of the terrestrial folding — such is the task which now awaits the geologist. 
The plan of the trend-lines , written by nature on the face of the earth — this 
it is which he has to determine. 

In the southern hemisphere the space covered by the sea is so great, 
|ind our knowledge so incomplete, that we can scarcely expect to arrive at 
any important conclusions. The present investigation is therefore almost 
exclusively confined to the northern hemisphere, and more especially to 
that region which lies north of the southern boundary of Eurasia and of the 
Caribbean sea. 

Even in this case the task is difficult enough ! 

• * Such simple conceptions as those of tableland and chain, the con- 
trast between which forms the basis of many an excellent description of 
a country as regards its external aspect, certainly possess some morphological 
value ; but this contrast loses its sharpness when we proceed to a closer 
examination of tectonic characters. Great tablelands no doubt exist, such 
for instance as those formed of Cretaceous limestone or Karoo sandstone, 
but beneath these tablelands are to be found, always and everywhere, 
folded rocks. The folding may only oc^ur at a great depth, but that it 
is nowhere ^bsent appears from the fact that all the Archaean rocks of the 
#arth have suffered folding or an equivalent compression . 

As examples of this fundamental and well-known fact we may mention 



INTRODUCTION 


4 


[part IV 


the Baltic buckler and the Canadian shield, and the discordance to bet3$en 
in so many places of Cambrian sediments lying horizontally on previously 
folded rocks, as well as the unconformities which occur between the 
Hi-ara! members of the pre-Cambrian series. 

If folding involves compression, we might from this fact alone conclude 
that the planetary surface had suffered diminution. But it is not this 
circumstance which now claims our attention, but rather the fact that 
folded ranges had been already levelled down in times preceding the 
Cambrian. When these worn- down ranges are covered by undisturbed 
Cambrian strata as in the vicinity of St. Petersburg, we are compelled to 
conclude that the ancient folding has not been continued or renewed since 
an extremely remote period. In these regions, as compared with those 
where recent sediments are involved in the folding, it would seem that the 
earth is slumbering or as if the folding force had become extinct. 

From this we perceive too that the folding force ivas once active over the 
whole globe , but is restricted at present to particular regions . The plan we 
are seeking will therefore embrace fragments of different age, and it is 
even possible that we may encounter fragments of several dissimilar plans. 

In the preceding chapters we have only examined isolated portions of 
a plan of the trend-lines without bringing them into connexion, and it is 
their isolation which renders these fragmentary results so enigmatical. Of 
the results so far ascertained I will recall first, on account of its geographical 
importance, the contrast between the Pacific and Atlantic types of coast 
(II, p. 201). We ask by what strange peculiarity in the structure of the 
earth’s crust can we account for the fact that from cape Horn and Staaten 
island to Greenland, to the cape of Good Hope, and again to cape Comorin 
and the mouths of the Ganges, the coast of the mainland is nowher^ 
accompanied by trend-lines of folding, while from the mouths of the 
Ganges eastwards to cape Horn such trend-lines follow the coasts or 
determine their outline. We perceive plainly that the east coast of Australia 
exhibits the Pacific type of structure, the west coast the Atlantic type; 
similarly, the east coast of South America belongs to the Atlantic fype ahd 
the west coast to the Pacific. But this is not all : the arc of the Lessfei* 
Antilles and the arc of Gibraltar, lying almost symmetrically, are bent 
completely round as they approach the Atlantic region, as though s«me 
unknown and mysterious force prevented their entry into this domain. 

The basin of Asturias shows us indeed that before the formation of the 
arc of Gibraltar a similar recurvature occurred eight degrees further north 
(II, p. 128), and that the existing course of the arc of GiBraltar is 
a repetition of that of the older ^:e of Asturias. But it is hard to conceive 
how such a curve could be formed a second time, unless assume the 
existence of some kind of wave propagating itself freely through the crust 
of the earth. * 



oh. i] EUROPE 5 

i 

• More to thb north the state of things is altogether different. Folded 
chains advance to the Atlantic coast, but sink beneath the sea. This is the 

, case in Brittany and the south-west of Ireland ; and, on the other side of 
the Ocean, in Newfoundland and New Brunswick. The rias coasts of these 
regions afford a contrasting element to the recurved arcs of the south. 

These relations indicate a certain symmetry between the east and west 
of the Atlantic Ocean, though it is disturbed in a very remarkable manner, 
for two elements appear twice over on the European side, which are only 
represented once in America ; these are the rias coast of Brittany and that 
of the Pyrenees, and next the arc of Asturias and that of Gibraltar 
(II, p. 141). 

When we leave the coast for the interior of Europe we are first 
impressed by the repeated reconstruction of this extremely complicated 
par£ of the world. The gneisses of the Hebrides were folded and levelled 
down before the Torridon sandstone was deposited upon their remains. 
Over this sandstone the Caledonian mountain-flakes were thrust from the 
south-east in pre-Devonian times. Towards the close of the Carboniferous 
epoch the folding of the Armorican and Variscan arcs took place. When 
these arcs had been broken up into liorsts there occurred still further 
to the south, and hemmed in by these horsts, the formation of the Alps. In 
this way the structure of Central Europe has been renewed again and again, 
and at the same time its mountain border has receded further towards the 
south (II, p. 130). 

While, however, this repeated reconstruction, from the Caledonian up to 
the most recent folding, has always been produced in an almost similar 
manner by means of a movement to the north, and the old plan has been 
^constantly maintained and renewed, yet in the Caucasus this is no longer the 
case, but something quite opposed. The direction of this range is almost 
perpendicular to that of the Ural mountains, and towards the south it also 
diverges decidedly both from the trend of the Tauric and that of the 
Iranian arc. It runs obliquely past the syntaxis of these two great arcs 
(T, p. 495) with unchanged direction. In this case we can hardly speak of 
•xfnity of plan, and yet it is precisely the Caucasus which unites the branches 
of the^Thian-shan with the more recent trend-lines of Central Europe. 

• The scene changes when we pass to the sharp boundary which runs from 
the Wady Draa on the Atlantic coast to beyond Java, and separates Eurasia 
from the districts to the south. The arcs which form this limit, all bent 
towards the south, again indicate the connexion of the different parts of 
this vast? region : if we cast a glance over the east coast of Asia, over the 
successive island festoons and the arclypelagos, more numerous on this 
eoast than ^ny other in the world, then the conclusion is inevitably forced 
upon us that this engirdling of Asia must have been produced by some 
common cause. 





INTRODUCTION 


[part IV 

These examples and questions must suffice. They show t4at of therfacts 
we have been able to discover regarding the lie of the trend-lines, the 
great;.; part and the more important refers to Europe and the periphery of 
Eurasia. A combination of our fragmentary knowledge, however, or any 
kind of synthesis, was still impossible when the second volume of this work 
appeared, because those central parts of Asia where the junction of the arcs 
must be sought, namely Siberia and Mongolia, were almost completely 
unknown. It is only the latest discoveries of Russian investigators which 
have now made such an attempt possible. Even to-day, and notwithstanding 
the assistance of many eminent geologists, this attempt is made only with 
the express reservation that it will be subjected later to much correction. 

The nature of the task which now lies before us renders it inevitable, 
however, that the descriptions which follow should be very unequal. It 
will be necessary to treat less-known regions, especially such as have as yet 
received no general description, in some detail, while in other cases it will 
be sufficient to refer to documents which have already been published. 



7 


CHAPTER ZZ 1 

THE NORTH OF SIBERIA 

Asia. The Amphitheatre of Irkutsk. The West Siberian plain. Transgressions of 
Turgai. Succession of rocks in the East Siberian tableland. The river Angara. 
Gondwana-land, the Tethys, and Angara-land. ' Marginal folds. Granite of Nishni- 
Udinsk. Stony Tungusku. Lower Tunguska. North Yenisei. The table-mountains of 
the watershed. Yilyui and Lena. Summary. 

The uniform stucture of the Asiatic mountains has been recognized by 
all the most eminent authorities on this part of the world, and has been 
variously described according to the point of view of each observer. In 
Siberia, Semenow speaks of a succession of terraces; the Gobi together 
with the Khingan forms the highest step, the country of the Amur with 
Sikhota-Alin the second, the sea with its island-arcs the third. In China, 
Richthofen was impressed with the idea that the whole country sinks in 
great flexures to the Pacific Ocean. In Japan, Naumann compares Asia to 
an elevated dome-like protuberance surrounded by peripheral fractures. 
As one stands in front of the overfolded chains of the Himalaya, says 
Griesbach, there seems to have been a movement of the whole mass of Asia 
towards the south. 

Let us now unroll the map of Asia. 

Fragments of arcs are visible in the east, both on the coast and in the 
festoon of islands ; other fragments appear in the south ; and again on 
$he Ganges, on the Indus, and further towards the interior, in Persia and 
in the western Kuen-luen ; then follow the divergent branches of the Thian- 
shan. These arcs are of various degrees of curvature ; in some places they 
mutually interfere, and in others they are turned aside by intervening 
masses, but they are obviously harmonious, that is, arranged according to 
a uniform plan which rules the whole and leads us to suspect the presence 
•of a common vertex in the interior of the entire structure. 

This common vertex is situated close to a crescentic fracture which 
surrounds the region of Irkutsk like an amphitheatre. Near the eastern 
border of this amphitheatre lies lake Baikal. 

Let us once more attempt to obtain a general impression of the whole 
on the map. 

Proceeding from the folded arc of the periphery towards the amphi- 
theatre of Irkutsk we perceive that th^ typical forms of the mountains 
change as Jhey advance towards the interior. In such infinite and 

1 Revise <y>y Arthur W. Rogers, Sc.D., F.G.S., Director of the Geological Survey of Cape 
Colony, South Africa. 



8 THE NORTH OF SIBERIA [part iv 

marvellous variety has nature placed these peaks and chajns, that, just as 
no human eye can see them in their entirety, so no pen can adequately 
describe them. Yet we may distinguish on the outer border of the great, 
structure, in the neighbourhood of the Ocean, a large number of volcanos, 
the mighty Kliutshev, the slender Fusi-Yama, the funnel of Krakatoa, the 
double cone of Barren island, and further away Koh-i-Taftan and the other 
great cones of southern Baluchistan. Nearer the centre follow the dazzling 
white glacier-draped giants of the great ranges, Gaurisankar, Mustagh-Ata, 
and the chains of Thibet. Then come the long bare cliffs of the Gobi, 



Fig. 1 . Goletz, on the Chm-Choldoi-daban (Tunkin Alps). 
(After a photograph by Herr Jatschewski.) 


rising above the Bel, i. e. a horizontally stratified foundation, which 
surrounds these cliffs and is sharply contrasted with them in contour. 
When we reach northern Mongolia we enter regions which age has deprived 
of their charm. From the highest crests of the Altai to the south of lake 
Baikal and as far as the upper Amur and the shores of the sea of* Okhotsk, 
we see old mountain land whic*i has either been completely worn down 
or broken up into horsts of low relief, or which presents characteristic 
4 monomorphous forms/ as Radde calls them. These are blunt rounded 
cones, more or less isolated or disposed in groups which, rising from a 


EASTERN EURASIA 


9 


CH. Il] 


brbafi plain, leach high above the limit of forest growth. Debris and 
boulders, with streaks and patches of snow between, cover the slopes. In 
. Siberia they are called ‘ goletz,’ i. e. bald heads. The peaks of the Bjelucha 
in the Altai mountains, Munku Sardyk on lake Kossogol, Sokhondo, and 
many of the loftier summits of this ancient range, assume this form to a 
greater or less extent. Then, beyond the sources of the Vilyui, far out in 
the northern desert, we meet with extensive table-mountains, the foot and 
slopes of which are formed of horizontally stratified early Palaeozoic sedi- 
ments, while the summits are formed of sheets of basic lava. Sometimes 
these summits are as smooth as a table, sometimes they are broken up 
along joints and by erosion into a crown of wild fantastic crags around 
which the Tunguses weave their superstitions. Finally we reach the tundra 
with its flat Mesozoic transgressions, and the shores of the Arctic Ocean. 

fn such ways does the landscape change its form ; only if it were 
possible to colour in the outlines and compare the sunny gardens of 
Buitenzorg with the yellow and terraced landscape of the Chinese loess, or 
with the clouds of mist which cover the frozen graves of so many noble 
explorers at the mouths of the Lena, only then should we gain a somewhat 
clearer idea of the grandeur, the diversity, and the beauty of the subject to 
which this and the following chapters are devoted. 

The contrasts in the structure of the lands and the mountains are not 
less striking than those of the outward form. At the southern foot of the 
Himalaya lie overfolded late Tertiary beds ; north of lake Baikal we meet 
with undisturbed Cambrian sediments which extend as far as the Arctic 
Ocean. Lake Baikal indeed is situated near an important boundary; 
south of it extend curved chains, of which the arcuate form would appear 
^jtill more clearly if we were not accustomed to unite fragments of different 
ranges under certain traditional names, as, for instance, Stanovoi, Sayan, 
and Kuen-luen. North and west of the lake lies the region of but slightly 
disturbed beds and isolated table-mountains. Still further north, however, 
mountain arcs again make their appearance. There are only two of these, 
tKe arc of Yerkhoiansk and the very little know T n and doubtful arc on the 
•Tinman 

Thus we obtain a preliminary division of eastern Eurasia into the 
following regions; 1. the two boreal arcs; 2. the Siberian plain; 3. the 
great outer region folded in circular arcs. 

The boreal arcs are sharply defined towards the plain ; a part of the 
boundary of the arc of Verkhoiansk marks out, under peculiar circumstances, 
the lower course of the Lena. The Siberian plain is divided, as we shall 
see directly, into two distinct parts; the western moiety, the low region of 
the Obi, is covered* by recent sediments. It is far more difficult to describe 
the southern boundary of the plain, on account of its diversified character. 

It will facilitate subsequent descriptions if we insert here a brief 



10 


THE NORTH OF SIBERIA [part iv 

account of the southern boundary of the eastern plain! in the region 
between the Yenisei and lake Baikal. I cannot, however, deny myself the 
pleasure of first expressing my sincere admiration for the achievements of . 
our Russian colleagues iu Siberia. On many occasions I shall have to 
thank them for the information and assistance I have received. 

The Amphitheatre of Irkutsk. The southern boundary of the plain to 
the west of lake Baikal recedes southwards and forms a vast amphitheatre ; 
within it lies the town of Irkutsk. Within this region also lie (Fig. 2) the 



Fig. 2. The Amphitheatre of Irkutsk. 

Pr, Primorskii Khrebet ; On, Onotskii Khrebet ; M S, Munku Sardyk. 


course of the Angara, the Stony Tunguska, the upper course of the Lower 
Tunguska and that of the Lena. The association of the upper courses of 
so many rivers is alone a sufficient indication of the complete difference 
between this river system and that of the Obi, in which the several branches 
unite to form a single main stres*n. 

The amphitheatre is bounded by various elements : on the middle 
Yenisei by the Archaean masses (I, I) which are cut off 6y % a fracture 
along the river between its confluence with the Stonjr Tunguska and the 



AMPHITHEATRE OF IRKUTSK 


11 


i CH. Il] 

An§ata : these In ay be traced southwards in isolated patches south of the 
Angara ; further by the long folded range (II, II), the greater part of which 
•is called the east Sayan or Ergik-targak on the map, and which is continued 
near Krasnoiarsk for some distance beyond the Yenisei. The Munku 
Sardyk (M S) on lake Kossogol, the Alps on the Kitoia and the Tunka 
(III, III), form part of this range. The entire eastern part of the border is 
formed by the trans-Baikal mountains, which extend from the highlands on 
the Patom in the north (V) across the high plateau of the Vitim and its 
continuation in the south (IV, IV), and far to the east across the oft 
mentioned slope of the Yablonoi on the Ingoda and Tshita (VI, VI). 

To the west of lake Baikal there lies another narrow mountain belt ( Pr ) 
which is closely connected in structure with the trans-Baikal mountains. 
It terminates against a fracture a little west of the west shore of the lake 
( b , 6). This is the Khrebet Primorskii, or the Lake Chain. 

All the rocks forming the border of the amphitheatre of Irkutsk are of 
pre-Cambrian age. All are folded. It is these mountain fragments which 
form the southern border of the east Siberian plain. The southern border 
of the western plain is of an essentially different character. There the 
long branches of the virgation of the Thian-shan make their advance ; the 
outlying parts of the plain extend between them on the Ili, the Ishu, and 
the Syr Darya. They may be regarded as a southern girdle without 
drainage surrounding the great river system of the Obi. 

In front of the virgation of the Thian-shan a peculiar and independent 
folded range comes in, well marked west of the Irtish, and it increases in 
orographic importance in the Kirghiz steppes. 

Having made these prefatory remarks, I will now attempt to describe 
tie plain from the accounts at my disposal, and I shall first deal with the 
western part of it. The eastern plain or, more correctly, the eastern 
tableland, is relegated to the second place because its structure is more 
closely connected with the mountainous country to be discussed in the 
next chapter. 

*The iSoreal arc will be discussed much later, when we have explained 
the connexion between Alaska and the mountains of Verklioiansk. 

The West Siberian Plain . This plain is open towards the Arctic Ocean, 
and # in the south-west lies the passage through which there was, at least 
for a time, a connexion between that Ocean, the sea of Aral, and the 
Mediterranean region of Europe. The study of this vast region is thus 
particularly instructive in regard to the nature of the great transgressions. 

On our map the eastern Kirghiz steppe extends west of Semipalatinsk 
on the Irtish to Akmolinsk and far beyon^l. But it is too often forgotten 
that in Siberia the term ‘ steppe ’ as opposed to * taiga/ primeval forest, is 
used, regarjjltss of the form of the ground, for any region which is poor in 
rainfall and vegetation, especially forest growth. 



12 


THE NORTH OF SIBERIA [part iv # 

The eastern Kirghiz steppe is a wide mountain land Ivhich risSfe In a 
few ridges to over 4,000 feet. Its western part nearly shuts off the 
Siberian plain on the south-west, so that towards the southern Urals 
only a comparatively narrow passage is left over the watershed between 
the Tobol and the Irgis : this is the strait of Turgai . 

This strait has rendered possible temporary connexions between the 
waters of Turania and the Mediterranean. 

The western limit of the plain is formed by the Ural mountains : the 
eastern limit must be sought near the Yenisei. Jatschewski has shown 
that the Archaean rocks extend from the east as far as the Yenisei 
and disappear close to this river along a continuous fault which runs 
with a downthrow to the west from the mouth of the Angara nearly as 
far as the mouth of the Stony Tunguska (Podkammenaja Tunguska) 
(a, a fig. 2) \ 

The right bank of the river is steep and rocky ; it cuts off the ancient 
rocks, which strike to the north-west, at an acute angle. The left bank is 
flat, the ancient rocks have disappeared, and over the vast region which 
stretches as far as the Obi we see only isolated remains of a covering of 
friable Tertiary sandstone, now nearly completely destroyed, standing out 
from under the recent alluvial deposits. 

Just above its confluence with the Stony Tunguska the Yenisei becomes 
broader. Reefs of rock known as the ‘Seventy Islands’ rise above its 
waters. Near the village of Ossinovoi the ancient rocks reach the left 
bank, whence they strike away to the sources of the Taz. At this spot the 
downthrow terminates. 

Let us now turn our attention to the sediments which fill the basin of 
thfc QSbi. 

Passing over Karpinskies important work on the relations of the Ural 
mountains to the Caucasus to be discussed later, we must now mention 
some results bearing on the origin of the transgressions which we owe to 
the labours of Russian geologists. 

The middle Jurassic transgression extends from the Arctic regions acboss 
the Petchora into central Russia, and has been recognized at Cracow and as 
far as the most easterly part of Bavaria ; it stretches southwards from 
Russia through the Turanian depression to Baluchistan, and surroundi the 

1 L. Jatschewski, Short account of the mining district north of the Yenisei; Gornoi 
Journ. 1894, a, p. 127 et seq. The titles of works which have appeared in Russian are 
given here in English. In the case of independent works this is indicated by the 
addition of the letter ‘ r,’ in the case of periodicals this indication has been* regarded as 
superfluous. The abbreviation ‘Djel^Dor.’ refers to the accounts of geological observa- 
tions made along the Siberian railway. The transcription of place-names has given rise 
to much difficulty ; for $k, dj has been chosen. Where round numbers are given in 
feet the English foot is meant (=0-3084 meter). The verst (=105<%79 meters) is 
frequently employed. 



ch.ii] CRETACEOUS ON THE AJAT 13 

’ l~. 

shofl3Si of the Indian Ocean. This transgression is up to the present 
unknown in western Siberia. 

Nikitin has given a connected account of the facts and has shown 
conclusively that the sea of the Volga stage came from the north, while the 
transgression of the middle and upper Cretaceous came from the south and 
west, across the plains of European Russia 

Sokolow has shown that during the close of the Eocene period, and at 
all events during lower Oligocene times, there existed in southern Russia 
a wide sea which communicated freely with the lower Oligocene sea of 
north Germany, This sea retired before the epoch of the Poltava stage, 
i.e. before the time of the amber forests 2 . 

The last transgression of the Arctic Ocean which left traces in the most 
northerly parts of Russia was certainly of northern origin. It is more 
recent than a considerable part of the glacial period. 

The present course of the Tobol marks the direction of the ancient 
connexion of the waters through the strait of Turgai. The rivers 
flowing from the left to join its upper course show that the rocks of the 
Ural mountains still occur at a trifling depth far to the east of the mountain 
border and maintain their usual strike. At a considerable distance above 
Kustanai, and above the confluence of the Ajat, Krasnopolski observed 
porphyry, porhyrite, and Devonian rocks on the Tobol ; and on the Ajat, 
between Nikolaievsk and its mouth, porphyry, diabase, traces of Carboni- 
ferous rocks, Mesozoic plant-bearing deposits, and upper Cretaceous marine 
beds 3 . 

On the Ajat the Cretaceous rests horizontally on upturned Palaeozoic 
beds. It contains Ostrea vesicularis , Ostrea acut irostris, Bdemnitella 
Iqpnceolata , and other fossils. Its characters are completely European. 
But according to existing observations, it does not extend further than the 
Ajat, and in complete contrast to what occurs in central Europe, no certain 
trace of the upper Cretaceous transgression is so far known in any part of 
the Siberian plain, unless, and this is very unlikely, it should prove to be 
represented by an extremely remote outlier, of entirely divergent character, 
which is situated on the Sosva in the north-eastern Urals. We shall recur 
to this outlier directly. 

After the Cretaceous epoch the Tertiary seas advanced through the 
strait of Turgai. Wissotzki has given an instructive account of the 

1 S. Nil?itin, Traces of the Cretaceous period in central Russia; Mem. Com. geol. 
Russie, 1888, V, no. 2, maps. 

2 N. Sokofow, Die untertiiiren Ablagerungen Siidrusslands ; Mem. Com. g£ol. Russie, 

1898, IX, no. 2, maps. # 

* Krasnopolski, Account of the mining section in west Siberia in 1893 ; Bull. Com. 
g6ol. Saint-Petejsb., 1894, XIII, p. 181 ; and Geological observations in the basin of the 
Tobol; Djel. 1899, XX, 50 pp. and map. The dip of the Devonian is 60° directed 
SW. (255®), corresponding to a strike of NNW. (845°). 



14 


THE NORTH OF SIBERIA 


[part IV 

I 

distribution of their deposits in Siberia \ where they begin? as in Euiiopean 
Russia, with a later part of the Eocene represented by greenish coarse- 
grained iaud with glauconite, and containing teeth and vertebrae of fishes 



Fig. 3. Tertiary deposits of western Siberia. (After Wissotzki). 

3. Eocene and Oligocene marine beds; 2. and 3. Middle and upper Tertiary freshwater 
formations ; 4. Later river and lake deposits ; 5. Deposits with erratic boulders ; 6. Forma- 
tions of the last Arctic transgression. 

c 

and badly preserved remains of Pholadomya, Cyprina, Ostrea, and other 
organisms. These deposits ma^ be seen on the upper Tobol. 

1 N. Wissotzki, Survey of the Tertiary and post-Tertiary deposits^** west Siberia, 
Djel. Dor., 1896, V, pp. 69-94, map. 



ch.ii] CLOSURE OF STRAIT OF TURGAI 15 

•Tfee sediraeits of the lower Oligocene are chiefly argillaceous and have 
a wide distribution. They lie in isolated patches on the northern slopes of 
the heights of the Kirghiz steppe, and in the valley of the Irtish they even 
extend * as far as Semipalatinsk. They appear there as a laminated 
gypsiferous clay, violet-grey or variegated in colour, and contain Cyprina, 
Fusus gracilis , Fu ms multimlcatns , and other species. But they also 
extend far to the north. Federow has found them on the So3va beyond 
lat. 63° N., and they are visible east of this locality near Sureisk on the Obi, 
on the same parallel of latitude. It cannot be doubted that the lower 
Oligocene sea of Germany extended through the strait of Turgai east of 
the Urals, into the region of the existing Arctic Ocean. 

Towards the middle or end of the Oligocene 'period all connexion 
hetiveen the seas through the strait of Turgai came to an end . The marine 
clay^ begin to alternate with beds of lignite ; amber is found and white 
sands occur. Just as in south Russia, so here, the growth of the amber 
forests followed the retreat of the sea ; and from that time the European 
seas ceased to communicate with the Arctic Ocean through the strait of 
Turgai. 

The next horizon in western Siberia, perhaps already belonging to the 
Miocene, consists of thinly stratified gypsiferous clay of a brownish grey 
colour ; it contains salt water in some places, and even gives rise to bitter 
lakes. This deposit is only visible in the river valleys, but in these it 
extends, like the above-mentioned Oligocene beds, to beyond lat. 62°N. 

Then follow extensive freshwater beds of middle and late Tertiary 
age. The most widely distributed of these are flat-lying friable sand- 
stones with brown coal; their flora was described by Heer as Miocene 1 . 
These freshwater beds already make their appearance in the strait of 
turgai itself, and they form a very broad border in front of the slopes of 
the Kirghiz steppe, extending northwards to Yalutorovsk on the Tobol, 
then to Kainsk, and much further still into eastern Siberia. This may 
well include various Tertiary stages. On the Irtish a tooth of Mastodon 
tapiroides was found, 60 versts below Omsk. The sculptured Unios which 
Jscherski and Martens have described as occurring near Omsk belong to 
the Lev&ntine facies of southern Europe 2 . 

Jhe glacial deposits and the beds with Elephcts primigenius need not 
detain us. 

The stratigraphieal series in the south-west of the plain thus consists of 
marine beds which range from the Senonian to the middle Oligocene : they 
are the rsiics of the seas which occupied the strait of Turgai. Then follow 

1 0. Heer, Flora arctica, V, Mem. Acad. Imp. Sei. Saint-Petersb., 1877, 7 e ser. XXV, 
no. 6. 

2 E. v. Martens, Fossile Susswasser-Conchylien aus Sibirien, Zeitsclir. deutseli. geob 
Oes. 1874, Xjpfrl, pp. 741-751 ; F, v. Tscherski, Zur Frage iiber das Alter der in der 
Umgegend von Omsk vorkommenden Schichten ; op. cit. 1876, XXVIII, pp. 217-224. • 



16 THE NORTH OF SIBERIA [part iv 

freshwater beds which range from the horizon of the ambet forests ^ far 
probably as the Levantine stage. 

In tL ^ north 4 he case is quite different; the most detailed accounts of 
this region we owe to Federow 1 . From lat. 62° N., to nearly 64°, and 
probably still further north, green clay with geodes is exposed at the 
bottom of the river valleys, but seldom visible much above low water. 
Nikitin distinguishes two horizons in this clay according to the fossils 
which occur in them, namely, the upper Volga stage with Olcosteplianus 
Okensis and, above it, the Neocomian. At one place on the Sosva Federow 
found dark argillaceous shales, or plastic clay, with numerous remains of 
Baculites. This is the outlier which was referred to above as the only 
indication yet known in the north of Siberia of a deposit which can be 
assigned to the upper Cretaceous. It is hardly possible in the present state 
of our knowledge to compare it more closely with the southern Cretaceous 
of European type (II, p. 291). 

Freshwater sediments appear to be absent in this part of the northern 
region, which is covered far and wide by still more recent formations. 

The deposits of the last Arctic transgression are known as far as 
Obdorsk. 

Let us now briefly sum up all that is known as to the distribution of the 
seas. The Volga stage and the Neocomian are found only in the north. The 
upper Cretaceous of European type is only visible in the extreme south- 
west near the strait of Turgai ; and adjacent to it are the doubtful Baculites 
beds of the Sosva. The upper Eocene appears in the south-west. The 
lower Oligocene sea united the strait of Turgai with the region of the 
existing Arctic Ocean. The last Arctic transgression, like those of the Volga 
stage and the Neocomian, is recognizable only in the north. 

In the whole of this region there are no traces of a recent folding. The 
completely denuded folds of the Ural mountains descend on the west under 
the mantle of younger sediments, and extend beneath them for an unknown 
distance towards the east. 

Succession of rocks in the east Siberian tableland . The tableland of east 
Siberia differs completely from the broad basin of the Obi, which is uniformly, 
filled with recent sediments. Travelling eastwards from this basin,' "we meet 

t 

1 E. S. Federow, Note on the existence of Cretaceous sediments and deposits of erratic 
blocks in that part of north Siberia adjoining the Ural ; Bull. Com. geol. Russie, 1887, 
VI, pp. 439-450 ; Fresh observations on the geology of the. north Ural ; op. cit., 1889, 
VIII, pp. 7-17: for traces of the Jurassic, Gorn. Journ., 1897, II, p. 384. We may 
mention here that F. Schmidt quotes the isolated occurrence of a specimdh of Micro , - 
bacia coronula Goldf. in diluvial clay from the Korepovskoje Simovje on the lower 
Yenisei, and concludes that the CenSmanian possessed a greater distribution in the 
north; Mem. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1872, XVIII, no. 1, pp. 2, *1 25, 162, pi. 11, 
fig. 10. But I do not know of any other indication of this kind within t\^ whole Arctic 
region. 



can] EAST SIBERIAN TABLELAND 17 

with Archaean rocks on the Yenisei which belong to the border of the 
amphitheatre of Irkutsk (Fig. 2) ; and within this the eastern tableland 
commences. It is bounded by the walls of the amphitheatre on the south- 
west, south, and south-east, and by the arc of Verkhoiansk on the north- 
east. From the north-west the Taimyr range encroaches on it, and to the 
west and east of this range it reaches the Arctic Ocean in comparatively 
narrow strips. 

In the south of this region rise broad unbroken ridges, often completely 
covered by gloomy primeval forest and marsh; then come, particularly 
on the watershed between the Yenisei and the Lena, table-mountains 
with steep slopes, reaching as a rule a height of 600 to 700 meters above 
the sea. Still further north lies the limit of forest growth and the frozen 
tundra. 

Great rivers, heavily laden with ice, traverse this region, flowing west- 
wards to the Yenisei, eastwards to the Lena, and northwards to the Arctic 
Ocean. Probably the greater part of the basin of the Aldan must be 
regarded as an extension of this tableland. The valley of the Lena, 
excavated more than 300 meters deep over long distances, belongs to the 
tableland, with the exception of its lowest part, which is imprisoned, so to 
speak, in the folds of Verkhoiansk. The same is the case with the Olenek. 
The Anabar and Chatanga reach the Arctic Ocean direct from the table- 
land. The three Tunguskas represent the drainage of the west, and the 
Vilyui that of the east. 

From the border of the mountains south of Irkutsk (I at. 52° N.) to the 
mouth of the Anabar (beyond lat. 73° N.) this tableland includes more than 
21 degrees of latitude. 

Four elements take part in its structure. 

The first is a broad Palaeozoic platform which in all probability under- 
lies the whole region from the extreme south to the Arctic Ocean. It forms 
the lower part or even the whole mass of the mountains, and indications of it 
may be seen in most of the river valleys. It begins with the equivalents of 
the lower ©ambrian or Olenellus beds ; limestone plays a prominent part, but 
a ,se?ries of red sandstones and variegated marls, with gypsum and salt, may 
also be observed, which, according to Von Toll's investigations 1 , must be 
assigned to the lower Silurian ; they are thus distinct from the gypsiferous 
and salt-bearing beds which are exposed near Minusinsk outside this region, 
these latter being Devonian in age. 

The great platform is to some extent formed of absolutely horizontal 
beds. But # near the border of the amphitheatre true folding appears, and 

1 Baron Eduard von Toll, On the distribution of # the lower Silurian and Cambrian in 
Siberia, Verh. rujis. k. min, Ges., 1895, XXXIII, pp. 273-281, and N. J. f. Min. 1895, II, 
pp. 157-166 ; %ltr&ge zur Kenntniss des sibirischen Cambrium, Mem. Acad. Imp. Sci. 
Saint-Peterab., 1899, 8* ser., VIII, no. 10. 

SOLLAS III 



18 


THE NORTH OF SIBERIA [part iv^ 

it increases in intensity as the border is approached. Towards the *niddle 
of the amphitheatre the folding becomes very weak, and throughout the 
rest of the pbtform the beds are scarcely disturbed at all. According to 
existing observations the foundation underlying the Cambrian sediments 
is nowhere visible, except where it is exposed as a patch of altered clay 
slates, which Tschekanowski found beneath the Cambrian beds at Djedaisk 
in the eroded channel of the Lena above the confluence of the Patom. 

On this platform of Cambrian and Silurian sediments, especially over its 
southern half, rest several larger and smaller patches of plant-bearing beds, 
which are the second element in its structure. They show that the greater 
part of the platform has not been covered by the sea for a very long period. 
They consist of sandstone and conglomerate, more rarely of shales, and are 
frequently accompanied by workable coal measures. Asjdenium Whitby - 
ense is met with in very many localities, but it is by no means clesfr that 
all these outliers are contemporaneous. Oswald Heer assigned them to the 
middle Jurassic. Since then many opinions have been expressed as to their 
age ; the patches representing their prolongation to the south, which lie 
within the Altai mountains, reveal many points of resemblance to the floras 
of the Indian Gondwdna-land, and in this region Zeiller has assigned them, 
in part, to the Permian h 

Patches of these beds appear not only on the east Siberian tableland as 
far as the foot of the arc of Verkhoiansk, but also extend far into the interior 
of Asia. We shall be able to trace their various floras through Mongolia and 
over great parts of China and Japan. In the south of China the ‘ red beds ’ 

1 The literature is very extensive; I will only mention: O. Heer, Beitrage zur 
Jurafiora Ostsibiriens und des Amurlandes, Mem. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 7 e ser., 
XXII,. no. 12, and Nachtrage zur Jurafiora Sib iriens, gegriindet auf die von Herrn Richard 
Maak in Ust-Balei gesammelten Pflanzen, op. cit., 7 e ser., XXVII, no. 10; Schmal- 
hausen, Beitr&ge zur Jurafiora Russlands, Mem. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb. 1879, 
7 6 ser., XXVII, no. 4 ; 0. Feistmantel, Further Notes on the Correlation of the Gondwana- 
Flora with other Floras, Rec. Geol. Surv. India, 1880, XIII, pp. 190-193; C. Kosmovski, 
Bull. Soc. Nat. Moscou, 1891, nouv. ser., V, pp. 170-177 ; R. Zeiller, Remarques sur la 
flore fossile de P Altai, Bull. soc. geol. de Fr., 1896, 3 e ser., XXIV, pp. 471,487. — Mhipi- 
dopsis ginghoides appears here, also on the Petshora, in the Barakar beds of India, and 
in the province of St. Luis of the Argentine Republic ; Zeiller, Bull. soc. geol. de Fr., 
seance du 15 juin 1896, p. cix. Opinions as to animal remains are no less divergent ; 
Brauer, Redtenbacher, and Ganglbauer, Fossile Insecten aus der Juraformatiqii Ost- 
sibiriens, Mem. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1889, 7 e ser., XXXVI, no. 15. These authors 
find that the insects occurring at Ust-Balei on the Angara, and associated with the plants 
described by Heer, show the greatest resemblance to those of the Lias; one species is 
identified with a species from the Stonesfield slates. Rohon, Fossile Fische vom oberen 
Jenissei, Mem. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1889, 7 e ser., XXXVI, no. 13! places.fishes 
from Medwjesko, near Atshin, in the Devonian ; A. Smith Woodward, On a new Palaeo- 
niscid fish from Siberia, Ann. Mag. flat. Hist., 1893, 6th ser., XII, p. 286, has examined 
the same specimens and assigns them to the Permian or Trias; cf. also, Rojhpn, Ost- 
sibirische Fische, M 6m. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1890, 7 e ser., VXXVIII, no. 1 ; 
Becker, Ostsibirische Jurafische, is inclined to place Ust-Balei in the Lias. 

f 



ANGARA LAND 


19 


$H. II] 

of th& Red basin, and in the north of China the ‘ supra-Carboniferous sand- 
stone * of Richthofen, must be assigned to them. The latter extends above 
the snow-line in the Nan-shan, for the boundary of these continental sedi- 
# ments does not coincide with the boundary of the great mountain chains. 
They also reappear on an extensive scale in the west, as in Persia and on 
the east border of the Ural mountains, and they penetrate into Europe. 

This is not the place to discuss the question of the age of the several 
floras. Most of them probably belong to the J urassic formation ; some are of 
Rhaetic, others probably of Permian age. In Japan they extend into the 
Cretaceous formation. Generally speaking, our knowledge of these floras is 
now in much the same state as that of the various floras of Gondw&na-land 
once was, before their classification had been seriously attempted. 

Gofbthvdna-land is bounded on the north by a broad zone of marine 
deposits of Mesozoic age. This zone extends from Sumatra and Timor 
through Tongking and Yunnan to the Himalaya and the Pamir, Hindu Kush, 
and Asia Minor. It must be regarded in its entirety as the relic of a sea 
which once extended across the existing continent of Asia. It was termed 
by Neumayr the 'central Mediterranean/ and we shall speak of it in the 
following pages as the Tethys. The existing Mediterranean of Europe is a 
remnant of the Tethys 1 . 

The plant-bearing beds of China, Mongolia, and Siberia of which we 
have just spoken bear witness to the existence during Mesozoic times of 
a second great continent lying to the north of the Tethys. This ancient 
continent we may name Angara-land , after the important river which runs 
near its centre. And since very large areas of the plant-bearing beds occur 
on the margin of the river Angara and to the south of it, they will be 
terjned the Angara series . This is not intended as a new and final 
designation, but rather as a provisional and neutral term, without prejudice 
to the definite determination of the age of its various members. It 
comprehends the whole assemblage of the Permian and Mesozoic floras of 
this continent in just the same way as the Gondwana series includes the 
floras in the south. The classification of the Angara series and a chrono- 
logical comparison with the floras of Gondwana land must be left for future 
investigation. 

After the disappearance of the Tethys a considerable area of Angara- 
land, and in particular the whole southern portion of the east Siberian 
tableland, was never again covered by the sea. This is shown by many 
outliers of beds containing brown coal, which are accompanied by Tertiary 

1 Nat. Sci., 13 March, 1893, vol. II, no. 13 ; E. von Mojsisovics, Beitrage zur Kenntniss 
der obertriadischen Cephalopodenfaunen des Himal^’a, Denkschr. K. Akad. Wise. Wien, 
1896, LXIII, pp. 686-700 ; also Palaeontologica Indica, ser. XV, Himalayan Fossils, III, 
pt. 1, pp. 139~15^at passim. As regards the spelling of the name I follow a suggestion 
in Bittner, Ben^Srkungen zur neuesten Nomenclatur der alpinen Trias, 8vo, Wien, 
1896, p. 18. 


t 



20 THE NORTH OF SIBERIA [parti^ 

• 

floras. To these must be referred the flora of Simonovo on the ’fthlilym 
describe** by Oswald Heer. Such Tertiary deposits extend far into the 
valleys of the southern mountains, and even if they are not all of the same 
'age, yet their wide distribution proves the absence of the sea. They are 
the prolongation of similar deposits which occur in the region of the Obi l . 

The disappearance of the Tethys and the union of the ancient continent 
of Angara with the Indian fragment of Gondwdna-land gave rise to the 
existing continent of Asia . 

Standing in peculiar contrast to all the inland deposits which characterize 
Angara-land is the third element, namely that resulting from the trans- 
gressions of the Mesozoic seas, which at different times advanced from the 
north over the ancient platform. They contribute as little to the con- 
figuration of the east Siberian tableland as the Angara series, but they are 
not less interesting. According to our present knowledge, they reach their 
southern boundary on the middle Yilyui near lat. 62° N. Since, however, 
plant-bearing beds of the Angara series are known on the Lena in more 
northerly latitudes, we must suppose that some fluctuations occurred in 
the outlines of the continent during the Mesozoic period 2 . 

Toll has done much to increase our knowledge of these transgressions 
by repeated journeys in the Arctic Tundras. On the lower Anabara, north 
of latitude 72° N. and as far as the Arctic Ocean, he recognized the zone of 
Amaltheus margaritatus of the Lias, the zone of Gardioceras cordatum of 
the Upper Jurassic, the Volga stage, and the Neocomian 3 . 

The Trias deposits, which are greatly developed in the Verkhoiansk 
mountains, and crop out, as we shall see later, even as far as the mouth of 
the Olenek, have not hitherto been met with in the region of the Palaeozoic 
platform. Traces of the Arctic post-glacial transgression are scattered oyer* 
the whole of the most northerly part of Asia (II, p. 486). 

Finally, the fourth element in the structure of this tableland consists of 
very extensive outflows of basic lavas . Sometimes they hem in the rivers 
between high cliffs, at others they form long watersheds, or present 
themselves as the scarped ce/gs of table-mountains. They °frequ6ntly 

1 Oswald Heer, Mem. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1878, XXV, no. 6 ; on the diffi- 

culty of an exact determination of age see e.g. Schmalhausen, Bemerkungen uber die 
Flora des Buchtarma-Thales im Altai, Palaeontographiea, XXXVIII, p. 281. # 

2 There is doubtful evidence as to the occurrence of Ammonites further south, on the 
Tshedobetz, which is a tributary of the right bank of the Angara (about long. 98° and 
99° E.) and has its confluence in lat. 58° 40' N. ; the specimens were destroyed when the 
museum at Irkutsk was burnt down ; Jatschewski, Gorn. Journ., 1894, II, jp 805. 

s Baron E. von Toll, Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1894, XXX, p. 446 ; Geological 
Sketch of the islands of New Siberia and the most important problems of Polar 
Exploration, Mem. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1899, 8 e ser., IX, no. 1, pp. 10, 11. 
Nordenskiold brought back a great Belemnite, probably of Jurassic age, from the island 
of Preobrashenski ; B. Lundgren, Om en Belemnit fr&n Preobrasctfeaski-Sn, Ofv. K. 
Vet-Akad. Ftfrh. Stockholm, 1881, no. 7. 



BASIC LAVA-FLOWS 


21 


Vh. ii] 

exhibit* columnar jointing. The term c Siberian Trap 9 is often applied to 
them collectively, but they are as often spoken of simply as basalt. 

, Tschekanowski, who studied these basic flows on many long and arduous 
journeys, maintained their contemporaneity, chiefly on the ground of the 
uniform height reached by the table-mountains over great distances. 
Jatschewski has recently investigated the question and has also pronounced 
in favour of placing all these rocks, or at least a very great part of them, in 
a single system \ 

Correspondence in character and contemporaneity are, however, two 
different things, and the periods of time with which the sedimentary series 
make us acquainted are not defined by the same factors as those which 
determine the progress of great eruptive processes. Sometimes a certain 
chronoiogical correspondence may be admitted, as for instance in the middle 
Tertiary of Hungary, where different stages are characterized by different 
eruptive rocks. Sometimes, however, this is not the case, but rather the 
contrary. The basalts of western Greenland include representatives of 
floras which range from the Cretaceous to Tertiary times. The basalts of 
Vicenza were poured out at intervals through the protracted period which 
extends from the lower Eocene to the later part of the upper Oligocene. 
The basic rocks of the east Siberian tableland extend to the mouth of the 
Yenisei, and it is not at all improbable that they are related to quite 
similar basic rocks which play an important part in Franz Josefs Land 
and still further north in the Arctic regions. But it will be shown later 
that in Franz Josefs Land, King Charles’s Land, &c., and elsewhere in the 
north, these rocks are most probably of Jurassic age. 

, These mighty Siberian flows have in all likelihood a common origin. 
Inf some places at least their extrusion has persisted up to very recent 
times, but the date of their first appearance is unknown. 

Nowhere is a volcano of any importance to be seen. The presence of 
small ash-cones tends rather to confirm than to refute the view put forward 
in rqcent tjmes, especially by Michel-Levy and Archibald Geikie, that these 
gre^t flows do not take place from isolated throats bjut from a network of 
fissures. * 

In describing parts of the tableland we shall first deal briefly with its 
border in the south, and then pass on to the right tributaries of the 
Yenisei, the left tributaries of the Lena, the Lena itself, and finally 
the Arctic region. 

The Valley of the Angara . The border of the amphitheatre south of 
Irkutsk and all along the west side of the Primorskii Khrebet is no doubt 

• 

1 Diary of the Expedition of A. L. Tschekanowski to the rivers Lower Tunguska, 
Olenek, and Len^ in the years 1878-1875, published by the Russian Geographical Society 
(by F. Schmidt), 1896, pp. 171 et seq. ; L. Jatschewski, Nord-Jenisseisk, Gorn. Journ., 
1894, I, p. 136. 



22 THE NORTH OF SIBERIA [part it 

formed by a fracture. The Archaean rocks, as Tscherski recognfzed, are 
cut off across their strike ; and, as Tscherski also perceived, the Palaeozoic 
beds ol the platform lost their horizontality as they approach this fracture ; r 
they are thrown into folds which run more or less parallel with it and in 
its immediate vicinity these folds are sometimes very strongly marked. 

In front of the Archaean mass of the Elovskii Khrebet, south of Irkutsk, 
the Palaeozoic beds form a syncline striking east-north-east, and are 
inclined at angles up to 70°. 

North of the point where the Angara issues from lake Baikal the 
folding appears to be still more strongly marked. Near Kadilnaia (30 versts 
north of the Angara) the beds rise to a height of 711 meters above lake 
Baikal ; they descend so steeply to the lake that at a distance of 1,000 meters 
from its shore they are still 1,100 meters above it. These Palaeozoic folds 
bend from east-north-east to north and then to west-north- west, as though 
they would follow closely the western fracture of the Archaean mass of 
Primorskii Khrebet. North of this region, which lies north of the bay of 
Uluntui, there begins an overfolding of the Palaeozoic beds in a direction 
pointing away from the lake. On the upper Goloustna, which separates 
the Onot range (On, Fig. 2, p. 10) from the Archaean mass of Primorskii 
Khrebet, overfolding also occurs, and the folding appears to extend over the 
whole breadth of the Onot range \ 

In the valley of the Lena also, half-way between Vitimsk and Kirensk, 
Obrutschew found the Palaeozoic sediments slightly folded with a north- 
east strike 1 2 . 

On the other side of the amphitheatre, west of the town of Nishni 
Udinsk (407 meters), an isolated mountain of hornblende granite rises, 
from the Palaeozoic region and forms a landmark visible from far and 
wide. Its summit, Kruglaia, reaches a height of about 4,200 feet (1,280 
meters). Idjitzki has observed contact phenomena, and has shown that the 
granite is more recent than the surrounding Palaeozoic rocks ; he has also 
found another granite mass with its contact zone at a second locality 
about 100 versts to the north-west, in the region of Tumanshet (a tributary 

. '' 4 

* 

1 J. D. Tscherski, Report of the Geological Investigations on the shores of Lake t Baikal, 

part I, Izviestija Imp. Sibirsk. Otd. Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1886, XX, pp. 1-405; 
further, Material for the Geology of Russia, 1889, XIII, pp. 1-48, map, and in other 
works to be quoted later. Ritter, Asia, Geographical survey of Russia, published by the 
Russian Geographical Society (edited by Semenow, Tscherski, and Petz, I, 1894, II, 
1895, r), gives a number of data collected from monographs on the structure of the 
shores of Lake Baikal ; in particular, I, p. 158 ; II, pp. 94, 168, 176, 185, 588. I 

2 W. Obrutschew, Die altpalaeozctschen klastischen Gesteine des Lenathales zwischen 
Katschug und Witimsk, published by the Izviestija Sibirsk, Otd. Imp, ross. Geogr. 
Obsch., Irkutsk, 1892, 8vo, 212 pp., map ; Erman had already observed|these remarkable 
sections on the banks of the Lena in 1829 ; Reise um die’ Erde ; Berlin, 1838, II, pp. 206, 
216, 242 et passim. 



jh.ii] MARGINAL FLOWS 23 

on the* left of the Birjussa) \ We learn from the observations of Bogdano- 
witsch that the north-east boundary of the granite of Nishni Udinsk 
resembles a flexure, that the Palaeozoic sediments along this boundary 
dip towards the granite, that a patch of these sediments rests high up near 
the summit of Kruglaia itself, and that in the interval between the 
granite mountain and the Archaean border the sediments are thrown into 
folds 1 2 . 

The folds, however, are not restricted to the border of the amphitheatre. 

According to Bogdan owitsch, the flexure of Nishni Udinsk is followed 
towards the north by faults with a west-north- west trend and then by 
slight undulations which extend into the plant-bearing Angara series. 
These, however, do not retain the original west-north-west direction, but 
on approaching the river Angara gradually turn round and finally assume 
a north-east to north-north-east strike, so that they become parallel 
with the trend of the Onot range, on the other side of the amphitheatre ; 
the course of these younger folds is thus in the form of a horse-shoe, which 
roughly corresponds with the outline of the amphitheatre. Bogdanowitsch 
regards them as the result of a recent movement in an ancient direction, 
and thinks that a compressive force has acted from the sides towards the 
middle of the amphitheatre, i. e. in a general sense towards the Angara 3 . 

The folds bordering the amphitheatre we shall in future term marginal 
folds. They are characterized by a decrease in the intensity of the folding 
as we proceed from the concave edge of the amphitheatre towards the 
interior. In contrast to the folds of the great Asiatic chains, they are 
directed touurds the north. Strange to say, although overfolding occurs 
among them they do not form an independent chain. 

• The patches of Tertiary beds containing lignite always lie horizontally. 

A broad region occupied by the Angara beds extends to within a short 
distance of the border. Stretching eastwards from Nishni Udinsk, it 
occurs along the Oka as far as the trans-Siberian railway line, and it is 
traversed^by the river Angara for a considerable distance ne^ .Irkutsk. 
In Jbhis neighbourhood it extends along the shore of lake Baikafejf$i* a short 
distance, .and dies away northwards in isolated outliers on the Silurian 
platform. Patches of basalt and Tertiary beds re6t upon the Angara beds. 
Bog3anowitsch rightly supposes that a great inland lake existed within 
the amphitheatre during the Angara epoch of the Mesozoic aera. 

In the west the basic flows become more continuous. They extend, for 
example, in a long and narrow band north-westwards from Nishni Udinsk ; 

1 N, Idjitzki, Geological Exploration along theiSiberian Railway in 1894, Djel. Dor., 
1896, III, pp. 65-1Q4, map ; in particular p. 89. 

2 K. Bogdanowitsch, Material for the Geology of the Government of Irkutsk, Djel. 
Dor., 1896, II, pp. 1-284, maps ; in particular pp. 24-30 and section fig. 4. 

3 K. Bogdanowitsch, lgc. cit., p. 255. 



24 


THE NORTH OF SIBERIA [partis 

this is cut through by the Birjussa and is continued to Ransk under the 
^name of the K&nennii Khrebet, i. e. the ‘Stony Ridge.’ It has been 
described by Idjitzki \ A second and much broader band stretches, t 
according to Jatschewski s survey, from Nishni Udinsk in a north-north- 
'west direction. It keeps to the country about the rivers Tshuna and 
Biijussa up to their confluence, which forms the Tassejev 2 . This broad 
band is probably continued beyond the Tshuna and Angara to the great 
basaltic region of the Stony and Lower Tunguska. 

On the Yenisei, west of the lower Tassejev, between lat. 56° 30' and 
58° N., we meet with lignitiferous Tertiary beds only, which there cover 
wide areas. The border of the amphitheatre dwindles down to a few 
fragments along the Yenisei, but since in the neighbourhood of the village 
of Kergyn, south of the confluence of the Angara, we still see the Paleozoic 
limestone resting unconformably on mica- schist, there maybe an underground 
continuation of the boundary towards western Siberia in this locality 3 . 

The sections afforded by the river Angara are among the most instruc- 
tive of all that are known in the east Siberian platform. 

At Irkutsk the Angara traverses the plant-bearing series and then cuts 
its bed through horizontal Palaeozoic deposits, of which the lower member 
is limestone and the upper a great succession of sediments, of a prevalent 
red colour. 

This red series consists of sandstone associated with variegated marl, 
and sometimes with gypsum containing isolated beds of limestone. In 
these Lingula and Eophyton have been found ; at a lower horizon Obolus 
Apollinis has been met with. We agree with Toll in assigning the whole 
series to the Cambrian and lower Silurian. It forms the banks of the Angara 
for an extremely long distance from the neighbourhood of Balagansk (abo*it 
lat. 53° 45' N., long. 103° 20' E.) to Kamenka (lat. 58° 45' N., long. 96° E.). 
From this we must except the region comprised in the bend of the Angara. 
Here, from lat. 58° 30' N. downwards, as far as the rapids of Aplin in long. 
101° 40' E., there extends a more recent area of plant-bearing^ beds, # and 
a similar area reappears south of the Angara on the river Mura (long. 
99° E.). 

Jaworowski has travelled over the whole region from Bratzkii Ostrog 
(lat. 56° 12' N., long. 102° E.) downwards, and I follow his description, 
leaving on one side for the present the more recent plant-bearing beds 4 . 

Over the whole of the upper and middle course of the Angara the 

1 N. Idjitzki, Geological Exploration along the Siberian Railway in 1894, Djel. Bor., 
1896, III, p. 86. 

3 L. Jatschewski, Geological Exploration in the north part of the district of Kansk and 
along the Railway between Nishni-Udinsk and Kimilteisk, Djel. Dor., 1896, III, map, p. 10. 

3 L. Jatschewski, Gom. Journ., 1894, II, p. 312. v 

4 P. K. Jaworowski ; Geological Observations made along the river Angara in 1895, 
Djel. Dor., 1898, VII, pp. 99-112, map. 



BANKS OF THE ANGARA 


25 


fcCH. Il] 


Palaeozoic sediments lie very flat and are not much affected by faults. 
But as we approach the confluence of the Angara with the Yenisei, folding 
sets in and becomes more and more intense down stream ; at the same time 
the rocks show signs of increasing dynamic action, and are finally traversed 
by so many surfaces of dislocation in the form of reversed faults or 
thrust-planes that the folding is of comparatively small importance. We 
thus reach the zone of the marginal folds on the west side of the amphi- 
theatre. 

Although Bogdanowitseh mentions no volcanic rocks from the upper 
course of the Angara, they occur in great force, according to Jaworowski, 
below Bratzkii Ostrog and as far as the mouth of the river. Wherever it 
is possible to observe them closely they are found not to be dykes but sills 
intruded into the red Palaeozoic beds, which they alter above and more 
rarely below. They attain a thickness of over 200 meters, and may some- 
times be traced for a distance of ten versts. They are dark in colour, and 
stand out in strong relief from the less resistant red beds of the lower 
Silurian. Where the river crosses them they give rise to the numerous 
rapids for which the Angara is notorious. They consist of diabase and 
also of gabbro and porphyrite. 

Within the marginal folds from long. 96° E. to the mouth of the river 
the conditions become very complex. Dark slates take the place of the red 
rocks of the lower Silurian, then the more usual type of lower Silurian 
appears, containing masses of highly altered micaceous and garnetiferous 
limestones ; again normal trap comes in, and finally, quite close to the 
Yenisei, dykes of granite in limestone. Jatschewski has described and 
figured the granite intrusions : they belong to a larger granite mass which 
forms the rapids of Strjelka immediately at the confluence. This recent 
granite mass in the region of the marginal folds may thus be compared with 
that of Nishni Udinsk 1 . 

The continuation of the Archaean amphitheatre in this neighbourhood 
must lie west of the Yenisei, as the evidence at Kargyn also proves; we 
shall soon meet with it again north of the Angara, east of the Yenisei. 

Let us now turn to the superimposed Angara series. 

Kositzki, who sixty years ago published a geological map of the remote 
reglbn between the Angara and the Stony Tunguska, mentions that the 
island of Tshemaia in the Angara (lat. 58° 35' N.) is formed of volcanic ash, 
with crystals of augite. The ash is widely distributed as a tuff* further down 
stream ; it contains fragments of amber, and is associated with very thick 
conglomerates 2 . 

1 Jatschewski, Gorn. Journ., 1894, II, p. 315. * 

2 M. Kositzki, Geognostische Beobachtungen im Nord-Oestlichen Sibirien wahrend 
der Jahre 183£ und 1845, Verh. russ. k. min. Ges., 1848 (for 1847), pp. 23-63, map. 
On this map we must probably read gabbro or porphyrite instead of granite ; Kositzki 
rightly recognized the jjitrusive nature of these rocks. 



28 THE NORTH OF SIBERIA [pabtiW 

According to Jaworowski, the facts are as follows: — The series,' 'which 
J& fairly thick, begins ’here as a coarse conglomerate with pebbles of 
Wrse-g mined trap and Archaean rocks. The conglomerate becomes finer 
upwards; then follow layers of sand, and finally beds of a dark colour, 
resembling volcanic tuff, with white zeolites in nests and cracks. The lower 
and middle parts of the series are traversed by steeply ascending dykes of 
a rock identical with that of the sills in the lower Silurian, especially with 
the porphyritic variety. Thus the outflows of lava actually took place 
during the deposition of these lower and middle beds. 

In the upper horizons are coal-seams and plant-remains. Neuropteris 
and Sphenopteris occur, also a Lepidodendron and Rhyptozamites Goepperti , 
Sclimalhauseri, which was formerly believed to belong to the northern 
development of the Jurassic, but has subsequently been found in the^tage 
of Artinsk b 

This flora is identical with that which presents itself to the north 
on the Lower Tunguska, and on the south in the coal-field of Kusnetsk, in 
the Altai mountains. Some of the basic flows of the east Siberian table- 
land date from the period of this flora. It probably represents the oldest 
colonization of the tableland under continental conditions ; and may 
possibly correspond with the oldest flora of Gondwana land. 

The Stony Tunguska . North of the mouth of the Angara, the Archaean 
hills appear and continue nearly as far as the mouth of the Stony Tunguska. 
On the east side of these hills there lies, according to Jatschewskis 
observations, an intensely folded zone of greywacke, quartzite, and clay 
slate, which corresponds with the continuation of the marginal folds. This 
zone crosses the Pit and probably extends over the whole region. Here, 
however, an unconformity has been described in connexion with the trans- 
gressive red sandstone and conglomerate, which are themselves dislocated ; 
above them are limestones with Palaeozoic fossils. The highest point of 
this region is the Rnashimskii Pallccm, which reaches 4,000 feet; it is a 
stratified table-mountain and belongs to the interior of the amphitheatre 1 2 . 

Silurian beds are exposed over a very large part of the lower course^ of 
the Stony Tunguska. Schmidt and Toll, on the evidence of Jjopatins 
collections, record lower Silurian trilobites from its banks in long. 92° E. 
Toll believes he has recognized Cambrian sediments in an oolitic limestone 
even as far east as long. 98° 30' E. 3 . 

1 Jaworowski, Geological investigations on the Angara in 1895, Djel. Bor., 1898, VII, 
pp. 105-106. Seward suggests the possibility that certain Lepidodendro*-like forms 
found in South Africa associated with Glossopteris may be identical with Sigillarid 
Branll , a species characteristic of the^eds of Ottweiler. A. C. Seward, On the Associa- 
tion of .Sigillaria and Glossopteris in South Africa, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1897, LIII, 
prp. 830, 385. 

2 Jatschewski, Gorn. Journ., 1894, I, p, 133. 

3 F. Schmidt, Ueber einige neue ostsibirische Trilobiten, Buy. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint- 



ch.ii] THE STONY TUNGUSKA 27 

TRe upper course of the river, on the other hand, lies entirely in the 
basic eruptive rocks. Kositzki states that ,the tuffe, forming a band of 
great breadth, cross the watershed from the bend of the Angara to the 
Stony Tunguska ; he also mentions hard clay sla tes with trunks of Psaronius 
from the confluence of the Yuehtugun I with the Stony Tunguska (almost 
in lat. 60° N.), that is, in the midst of this volcanic region L 

Further down also, on the middle course of the Stony Tunguska and as 
far as its confluence with the Yenisei, Lopatin found the basic eruptive 
rocks largely developed. They penetrate the Silurian, alter it, and form 
table-mountains upon it. Chrustschow has described hundreds of specimens 
from the neighbourhood of the confluence of the Tshuna (long. 98° 30' E.) 
and of the Velme (long. 92° E.) with the Stony Tunguska, as well as from 
othe$ localities; he regards them all as plagioclase-pyroxene-olivine rocks, 
which have been evolved from one and the same magma, the glassy residuum 
of which possesses a uniform chemical composition. On the one hand they are 
crystalline, gabbro-like, or ophitic ; on the other, they contain residual glass 
which may sometimes form as much as two-thirds of their bulk 2 . 

The heights, which form the watershed between the upper course of the 
Angara and the Lena and come to an end in the region of the head waters 
of the Stony and Lower Tunguska, enclose the valley of the Him : their 
names, proceeding from south to north, are the Khrebet Beresovii, the 
Khrebet Ilimskii, and the Tunguse mountains. They have been described 
by Idjitzki. Their outlines are broad and rounded, and they all owe their 
form to the erosion of the Palaeozoic platform. From about lat. 57° N. 
onwards we meet with isolated domes of superposed basaltic flows. The 
most northerly part, the Tunguse range, which is covered with dense taiga 
«md bordered by marshy valleys, attains a height of 3.500 feet. North of 
lat. 58° N., Idjitzki found the tuffs mentioned above 3 . 

Lower Tungudca. The whole course of this river has been explored by 
Tschekanowski in two laborious journeys 4 . 

Pejersb., J.886, XXX, p. 501 ; von Toll, N. J. F. Min., 1895, II, p. 160, 164; Lindsfcrom 
correlates the corals with the Trenton and Hudson limestone of North America; Bihang 
Handl. K. Svensk. Vet.-Akad. Stockholm, 1882, VI, pp. 10-19. 

1 M. Kositzki, Verh. russ. k. min. Ges., 1848 (for 1847), r p. 52. 

2 t K. von Chrustschow, Vorlaufige Mittheilung liber die von Herrn Lopatin aus def 
Steinigen (Podkammenaja) Tunguska gesammelten Gesteine, Bull. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint- 
Petersb., 1892, nouv. ser., II (XXXIV), pp. 193-224. At one locality (61-62 versts above 
the 5th rapid of the river Velme) a leucitic rock appears ; Chrustschow, tom. cit., pp. 225- 
229. 1 

N. Idjitzki, Geological investigations in the government of Irkutsk in 1895, Diel. 
Bor., 1898, VII, pp. 113-153, map. 

Journal of the Expedition of A. L. Tschekancaivski along the rivers Lower Tunguska, 
Olenek, and Lena, &c. ; also Tschekanowski in Rottger’s Revue, 1877, X, pp. 170 and 178*- 
190, and Uebersicht der geologischen Verhaltnisse an der unteren Tunguska in Ferdinand 
Mhller, Unter TunguseP und Jakuten; 8vo, Leipzig, 1882, pp. 301-311. (Muller was 
IschekanowskPs companion on this second journey.) * 



28 


THE NORTH OF SIBERIA 


[fart IV < 

In lat. 58° N. its upper course approaches extremely close to that hi the 
Lena, brn, although the watershed is very narrow the surface of the 
Tongusba lies 249 feet higher than that of the Lena. Its bed is here 
excavated in red lower Silurian beds. Ever and again the ‘Krasnie jary/ 
i, e. red banks, make their appearance ; fossils are not infrequent ; the bedding 
is horizontal or gently undulating. In lat. 59° N. salt crops out, as it 
does also further north, in the valley of the Nepa ; and here too trap is met 
with for the first time. The red lower Silurian strata with gypsum and salt 
continue to border the river ; in places they are seen to be bent ; in lat. 60° 
15' N. an extensive area of basic eruptive rocks is met with for the first time, 
and extends without interruption nearly to the mouth of the river, i. e. from 
lat. 60° 15' N., long. 107° 50' E., to about lat. 66° N. and long. 88° E. Follow- 
ing the windings of the river, Tschekanowski travelled 1,800 versts amongst 
these basic rocks until he reached their termination near the mouth. From 
the table-mountain of Longashin (1 3 900 feet) on the upper course of the 
river, to the table-mountain of Kutinga (2,000 feet), the distance is 600 
versts in a straight line 1 . 

In certain cases we undoubtedly have to do here with true lava-flows in 
the form of covering sheets ; but Tschekanowskis description shows that very 
large masses of sedimentary rocks, which may even be 200 meters in length, 
are found floating, as it were, in the lava. Although steeply ascending dykes 
are by no means wanting, it yet appears as though what had happened here 
was a general and powerful swelling up of sheet-like bodies of intrusive rocks 
or sills like those on the Angara mentioned above ; the stratified rocks have 
been completely dismembered, broken up, and carried away in fragments by 
the lava, like the little Tithonian fragment of Fontana Fredda in the Euganean 
mountains (I, p. 147). ♦- 

Some of these blocks belong to the Silurian, as for instance the mass of 
garnet-bearing limestone near the Anakit (long. 91° E.) ; much more frequent 
are small and large fragments of the Angara series. They are met with 
from the upper course of the river down nearly to its confluence with the 
Yenisei. When lignite has been caught up with them it is often converted 
into graphite. The flora has been described by Schmalhausen ; it is £he same 
as that which we met with in the tuffs at the bend of the Angara 2 . Laurski 
has described the lavas as plagioclase-augite rocks, in part containing olivine, 
and he lays stress, as Chrustschow does, on their wide distribution 3 . 

It is only when we reach the lower course of the river, from about long. 

1 Muller, Unter Tungusen und Jakuten, p. 301. 

3 J. Schmalhausen, Jura-Flora der Vnteren Tunguska, Mem. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint- 
Petersb., 1880, XXYII, pp. 55-92. 

3 A. W. Laurski, Ueber die Diabase des Beckens der Unteren Tunguska, Sitzungs- 
Protokoll der Naturforscher-Gesellschaft der Universitat Easan, 1892-1893, XXIY, pp. 
9, 10. 



>ch.ii] THE LOWER YENISEI 29 

89° Ef onwards that Silurian limestone crops out over a considerable area. 
Folds soon appear which belong, no doubt, to the western system of marginal 
folds ; below the limestone, quartzite is visible and then metamorphic schists. 
Limestone again follows, at first horizontal, then forming an anticline which 
strikes north-west ; a limestone with Stromatopora appears at the mouth of 
the river. 

Thus the Lower Tunguska succeeds just as little as the Stony Tunguska 
in reaching the Archaean border of the great tableland. The region between 
the confluences of these two rivers with the Yenisei is little known. 
F. Schmidt mentions that the Stromatopora limestones alternating with 
argillaceous beds predominate along the Yenisei for about 100 versts above 
the confluence ofithe Lower Tunguska, and that, judging from pebbles, they 
must # be exposed on the tributaries as far up as the Bakta, the confluence of 
which is near lat. 62° 30' N. Thus all this part of the Yenisei must belong 
to the ancient tableland 1 . 

North of Turukhansk all traces of Archaean formations disappear, and 
we perceive that the districts east of the Yenisei, as well as the course of the 
river itself, belong to the tableland. 

It is obvious that the outcrops on the Kureika (the mouth of which is in 
lat. 66° 30' N.) precisely resemble those of the Lower Tunguska. Lopatin 
travelled 160 versts up this river. He met with Silurian limestone containing 
Orthoceras and Pentamerus, and olivine-diabase. In the now abandoned 
graphite mine of Pomonarevskaia in Sidorovo there are found, beneath the 
graphite, graphitic schists with traces of plant-remains, quartzite, and, 
judging from the lie of the beds in the banks, crystalline limestone; 
beneath these beds, again, fine-grained diabase occurs 2 . 

# At Igark (lat. 67° 20' N.) Silurian limestones crop out on the Yenisei and 
are traversed by dykes of porphyrite. 

On the Khantaika (confluence with the Yenisei in lat. 68° 15' N.) Lopatin 
found Silurian corals and an Orthoceras with a cochleate siphuncle. Schmidt 
mentions the occurrence of salt on this river. 

# The Sources of the Khantaika lie in the Siverma mountains to the east. 
According to Middendorff, this range runs from south -south-east to north- 
north- west and terminates on lake Paisino (lat. 69° 30' N., long. 88° 20' E., 
easfr of Dudinskoie). The Tunguses described it to him as wild and rockj^, 
and he conjectured, probably with justice, that it joined the mountains on 
the Lower Tunguska. That part of the range lying near lake Paisino is 
called the Noril Mountains . The foot-hills of these mountains have been 
visited frbm Dudinskoie by F. Schmidt. He found that they were tabular, 

1 F. Schmidt, Mammuth-Expediti on, Bull. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1872, XVIII, 
p. 16 (also XIII, p. 97). 

8 Lopatin’s Diary of the Expedition to Thuruchansk in 1866, published by M. N. 
Miklucho-Maklai, Zapiski, xuss. geogr. Ges., 1897, XVIII, no. 2, pp. 161 et seq. 



SO THE NORTH OF SIBERIA [partiv 4 

with a n almost uniform height of 500 feet, flat- topped, with precipitous sides, 
made of bedded rocks, and covered with a sheet of weathered trap. Little 
fragment? of graphite were also found. The distant view presents far and 
wide the same mountain forms \ According to Nordenskiold coal has been 
discovered in this region 1 2 * . 

The numerous islands of the Brechov group are formed of sediments left 
by the post-glacial transgression. After finding a few pebbles of Mesozoic 
rocks on the Irgak and the Khantaika, Lopatin met with the Inoceramus 
beds of the Volga stage lying flat between lats. 71° 30' and 72° N. ? on the 
right bank of the Yenisei. Still further north follow hills of melaphyre; 
this rock reaches the bank of the river at Krestovskoie in lat. 72° 15' N. :i 
According to Bodkin, the rocky islands of Korsakov lying close to the coast 
are formed of trap 4 . Yefremov Kamen, on the Arctic Ocean, is also formed 
of a basic eruptive rock. Here we are in the immediate neighbourhood of 
port Dickson, where the fine-grained diabase was found, which Tornebohm 
recognized amongst Nordenskiold’? collections 5 . 

Thus the various basic rocks on the right bank of the Yenisei reach the 
Arctic Ocean. Their relation to the basic rocks of Franz Josef’s Land, 
King Charles’s Land, and elsewhere, do not at present concern us. It can 
hardly be doubted that the great east Siberian tableland also extends to the 
shores of the Arctic Ocean, We see, then, that in many places, and often 
for long distances, the right bank of the Yenisei is bordered by rocks, while 
on the left bank lies the boundless tundra. We have mentioned the 
occurrence of rock salt on the Khantaika ; from this river, lower Silurian 


1 F. Schmidt, Vorlaufige Mittheilungen, &c., Mem. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1869, 
XIII, p. 120. F. Muller points out that among worn pebbles brought back by Midderv 
dorff from the Paisino and the Boganida, basalts also occur, and he concludes that the 
covering of trap must have possessed a wide extension, Unter Tungusen und Jakuten, 
p, 805. Also K. Chrustschow, Ueber eine Gruppe eigentiimlicher Gesteine vom Taimyr- 
Lande aus der MiddendorfFschen Sammlung, Bull. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1894, 
new ser., Ill (XXXV), pp. 421 431. 

f A. E. Nordenskiold, Redorgerolse for en Expedition till Mynningen af Jgnissei bch 
Sibii-ien, Bihang Handl. K. Svensk. Vet.-Akad. Stockholm, 1877, IV, no. 1, p. 80. c 

8 See the description of the Kairskii Gori near the Krestovskoje Simovje in«Lopatin’s 
Journal, p. 11, 72 et passim. Polenow describes the specimens brought back as mela- 
phyre; cf. also F. Schmidt, Wissenschaftliche Resultate der M ammuth-Exp edition ; 
Mem. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1872, 7 e ser., XVIII, no. 1, p. 9. — Kjellman, on an 
excursion from the mouth of the Yenisei to Dudinskoie, encountered only blocks of basalt 
and beds with Arctic Mollusca, and concluded that the foundation must resemble that of 
Iceland or the north and west part of Greenland; Kjellman in Nordensk^Olds Redo- 
gerOlse, Bihang. Hand]. K. Vet. Svensk. Vet. Ak. Stockholm, 1877, IV, no. 1, p. 70. — Op. 
cit., p. 62, a description of the yefremov Kamen. 

4 Compare the new and much modified map of the mouths of the Obi and Yenisei by 
Wilkitzky ; Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1896, XXXII, p. 180. 

5 A. E. Tornebohm, Under Vega-Expedition insamlade bergarter, in Nordenskiold, 
Vega-Expedition vetenskapliga Iakttagelser, 8vo, Stockholm, 1887, IV, p. 115. 



81 


yp.ii] YENISEI AND LENA WATERSHED 

fossils «dso are known. The Solenaia, which rises in about lat. 68° 30' N„, 
west of the Yenisei, and joins that river in lat. 69° 30' N., owes its 
name to the saltness of its water. Whether these beds of salt correspond 
to those in the far south, on the upper Tunguska, can hardly be decided 
from existing data. 

Close above the confluence of the Stony Tunguska the Yenisei enters 
the region of the ancient tableland, through which it flows to the Arctic 
Ocean, i. e. through twelve degrees of latitude. The fact that gold is 
searched for on the upper Taz, between lats. 62° and 63° N., renders it very 
probable that Archaean rock prevails here, but it may be conjectured that 
in the north the Silurian platform is continued beneath the plain west of 
the Yenisei, in the direction of Yalmal. 

The watershed between the Yenisei and the Lena. Numerous table- 
mountains rise between lats. 65° and 67° N., on the watershed between the 
Lower Tunguska and the sources of the Vilyui, and between the latter river 
and the Moneiro and Olenek. Their height here is also about 2,000 feet 
above the sea, and this remarkable correspondence with the height of the 
hills on the Lower Tunguska seemed to Tschekanowski an indication of 
contemporaneous origin. They consist of a cap of basic rock resting on 
horizontal Silurian beds. The Silurian beds are red, with intercalations of 
clay and gypsum, exactly as in the upper region of the Lower Tunguska, 
which lies 8 or 9 degrees further south. 

Tschekanowski, coming from the south, first met with the steep table- 
mountain Anaon on the south side of lake Sjurugna (622 meters high, north 
of lat. 65° N.). Up to this point his route from the Lower Tunguska had taken 
him across trap ; the Silurian, which lies beneath, being seldom visible b The 
Anaon is joined on the west and north-north-west by the table-mountains 
Yang-bur , which enclose the sources of the Moneiro. The red Silurian beds 
spread out to the east of these hills and lake Yakogna, and on the south side 
of the upper Olenek we reach the long table-mountain Ljutseha Ongoktom . 
Travelling over the region formed by the extension of this mountain and 
of the Kemnatik ridge to the east, between the affluents of the Olenek and 
thd&e of the Yilyui, Maak crossed the remarkable Tungus Yangy (mountain 
of the Ttlnguses), with its capping of basic eruptive rock, broken up into 
fantastically shaped needles and peaks, which the Tunguses believe to be 
the petrified remains of their giant ancestors 1 2 . 

It is to this assemblage of table-mountains that Maak has given the 
name of the Vilyui . They all seem to have the same character. A cap of 
basic rock*forms their summits, the Silurian beds occur below and occupy 

1 Tschekanowski, Journal, p. 129 et seq. * 

2 R. Maak, The circle of Vilyui in the province of # Yakutsk, 4to, Saint-Petersb., II, 1886, 
maps, p. 124. The surface rock is described by Polenow as olivine-diabase and placed in 
the Permian or Trias period ; op. cit., p. 847, r. 



32 THE NORTH OF SIBERIA [paktiv^ 

the low ground in their vicinity. The Silurian beds belong in part*to the 
upper Sil mi an. 

Nee** long. 104° £., the basic rocks of this region are probably connected 
with similar rocks which, according to Toll’s observations, separate the 
rivers Khatanga and Anabara ; near the forest limit, which is in lat. 71 °N., 
they should reach the transgressive Mesozoic of the north \ 

Cambrian and lower Silurian beds also border the Olenek. Among the 
specimens collected by Tschekanowski, Toll recognized Bathyuriscus 
IIcnvelM, Wale., of the middle Cambrian, from a locality north of lat. 68° N. ; 
and in a loose fragment from lat. 70° 30' N., F. Schmidt found a species of 
Agnostus. Tschekanowski met with the basic rocks again on the Tolobka 
(lat. 71° 30' N.) 1 2 . No doubt these lavas, as well as the undisturbed red 
lower Silurian beds, extend quite close to the sandstone with Inoceramus, 
which accompanies the outer border of the Verkhoiansk mountains 3 . 

Lena and Vilyui. As far as the confluence of the Viiyui and Chona 
(long. 111° 30' E.), the beds of these two rivers are excavated in the basic 
eruptive rocks. On the Chona, about ten versts above the confluence, stands 
a hill, the Toi Chain, which Pawlowski and May dell regard as an extinct 
volcano. It presents two summits of no great height, formed of basalt or 
trap which rests on a base of sandstone traversed by dykes ; successive 
streams of a dark vesicular lava which issued from this hill are clearly 
visible. Altered limestone also occurs, and in other places there is coal, 
with associated plant-remains 4 * . 

The uppermost part of the Vilyui shows similar signs of volcanic action. 
South of the table-mountains of the watershed, on the II and III Velyukan 
(about lat. 66° N., long. 108° E.), Maak observed conical summits, and 
thought he must be near a great centre of volcanic eruption 6 . 

Further east we reach the limit of the basic rocks. By uniting the 
observations of Maak and Pawlowski we arrive at results somewhat as 
follows. 

On the Olenek, at the confluence of the Tyraktach (lat. 67° 40' N., long. 
111° E.), the eruptive rocks again make their appearance, but from this 
point onw r ards to the south-east nearly as far as the Taz (lat. 66° N., &id 
long. 115° 30' to 116° 30' E.), only flat-bedded Silurian is to be seen. Here, 


1 Baron E. von Toll, Expedition of the kOniglichen Akademie der Wissenschaften to 
the Siberian islands and the coasts of the Arctic Ocean, Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. 
Obsch., 1894, XXX, p. 446. 

2 Tschekanowski, Journal, p. 164. This author mentions isolated folds in the midst of 
horizontal beds on the Olenek, pp. 156, 160 et seq. They are probably local disturbances. 

8 Tschekanowski, Journal, pp. 253, <268. 

4 Maak, Vilyui, p. 45 ; Pawlowski, Izviestija of the Siberian Branch of the Imperial 

Russian Geographical Society, 1873, IV, p. 39. 

6 Maak, loc. cit., p. 130. 



33 


,ch.ii] EAST BOUNDARY OF BASIC LAVA 

once iribre, we meet with diabase, but towards the south the Silurian sets 
in again. The Chainga and Markha flow between imposing table-mountains 
of Silurian beds, and it is not till we reach the watershed between the 
Markha and Ygetta (lat. 63° 45' N., long. 116° E.), that the region of basic 
rocks reappears \ 

This important boundary runs for the most part west of long. 116° E., 
so that on the east, towards the Lena, a wide area of tableland remains 
which is not covered by these basic rocks. 

The boundary extends even into the valley of the Vilyui. At the 
confluence of the little Botubuia (tributary on the right bank, long. 113° 30' 
E.), Cambrian beds appear 1 2 . Below the bend of the Vilyui in long. 116° 
30' E., the red lower Silurian, accompanied by beds of rock-salt and gypsum, 
is exposed over a large area. On the river Djeli lie the already mentioned 
most southerly representatives of the Mesozoic transgressions of the north, 
with Belemnites and Tancredia (lat. 66° N., about). Somewhat lower down, 
on the tributary river Kj am pends jaia, are the important salt springs of the 
Tunguses. At the mouth of this tributary there is an outcrop of brown 
coal 3 . 

The eruptive rocks on the Ygetta are described by Polenow as 
plagioclase-dolerite. They rest upon white clay, and come to an end below 
the confluence of this river with the Vilyui. Extending towards the 
town of Vilyuisk lies an expanse of loam with mammoth remains. 

Still further east, near the Lena, plant- bearing beds of the Angara 
series crop out ; Tschekanowski met with them on the river Nashim 
(lat. 66° 15' N., a tributary on the left bank of the Lena) and still further 
north ; Maak found them on the island of Socho Chaia, in the region about 
tfye mouth of the Vilyui. They belong to the zone which borders the arc 
of Verkhoiansk. 

It is a remarkable fact that, with the single exception already mentioned 
as occurring near Djedaisk, the deeply eroded valley of the Lena nowhere, 
so far as we know, exposes pre-Cambrian formations, and it is nowhere 
readhed by the sheets of basic rock. 

\)brutschew has published some observations on the lie of the beds along 
the upper course of the Lena to beyond lat. 59° N. Even near its source, 
close»to lake Baikal, the river bed is excavated in the Palaeozoic platform. 
The height of the land is here from 650 to 700 meters ; in lat. 58° N. it has 
fallen to between 450 and 500 meters ; further on the river has hollowed 
out its bed 300 meters deep in the platform. Disturbances of the beds are 

1 R. Maak, tom. cit., p. 108 et passim ; Pawlowski in Maak, pp. 89, 98 et passim. 

2 F. Schmidt, Ostsibirische Trilobiten, Bull. ^Tcad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1886, 
XXX, p. 501 ; E. von Toll, Beitrage zur Kenntniss des sibirischen Cambrium, I, Mem. 
Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1889, 8® ser., VIII, p. 32. 

* R. Maak, tom. cit., p. 319 et seq., p. 335 et passim. 

sollas m o -pi 



34 


THE NORTH OF SIBERIA 


[part IV/ 

sometimes visible; at Kirensk (lat. 58° N.)* they strike north-east, ai?d may 
perhaps be assigned to the marginal folds of the amphitheatre. The red 
lower Simrian beds cover a large area in this region \ 

Lower Silurian fossils liave been found at Krivoluzk, a short distance 
above Kirensk. But a little distance further on peculiar oolitic limestones, 
which Toll regards as certainly Cambrian, make their appearance beneath the 
red beds. The beds lie quite flat for a great distance ; but fossils are not 
found again till much lower down in the series, as at several places below 
Olekminsk. The fossils of this horizon include Ptychoparia, Microdiscus, 
Agnostus, and Kutorgina. Toll places the beds in the Olenellus zone or 
lower Cambrian. According to Tschekanowski these beds are continued, 
remaining almost horizontal, over the whole distance from the last-named 
locality down to Tabaginskaia, thirty versts above Yakutsk. Soon after- 
wards the Lena enters the plant-bearing beds of the Angara series 1 2 . 

Summary . The most remarkable tectonic phenomenon in the region 
we have just described is the marginal folding of the amphitheatre of 
Irkutsk. We have seen traces of the folds in the valley bottom of the 
Lena; they appear conspicuously on the west border of the Primorskii 
Khrebet and south of Irkutsk, as well as south of Nishni-Udinsk ; they are 
then, as will be shown in greater detail presently, interrupted in a peculiar 
manner as they proceed towards Krasnoiarsk, but wherever the inner- 
border has been closely studied they are found to reappear in the west, as 
at the confluences of the Angara, the Stony and the Lower Tunguska. 
The folding decreases in intensity towards the inner side of the arc. Still 
nearer the interior, north of Nishni-Udinsk, come the horseshoe -like folds 
of the Angara series, faintly expressed, but still concentric with the 
stronger folds. These marginal folds are distinguished from the folds of tfre 
mountain chains by the fact that they are not accompanied by a parallel 
band of older Archaean rocks, but follow the edge of a very extensive 
Archaean highland. 

In contrast to the great ranges of the south, the movement of the 
marginal folds is directed not to the south but to the north, # or rather 
towards the interior, and this suggests the idea that the amphitheatre lias 
been subjected to compression and constriction. * 

In some places intrusive granite masses appear within the mammal 
folds ; the most conspicuous is the Kruglaia, near Nishni-Udinsk. 

Strictly speaking, we should restrict the term tableland to the country 

1 W. Obrutschew, Die altpalaeozoischen klastischen Gesteine des Lenathales zwischen 
Katschug und Witimsk in Ost-Sibir^en, published by the East Siberian Branch of the 
Imperial Russian Geographical Society, Irkutsk, 1892, 8vo, 212 pages, maps. 

2 E. von Toll, Ueber die Verbreitung des Untersilur und Cambrium in Sibirien, N. J. f. 
Min., 1895, II, pp. 161, 162; also Beitrage zur Kenntniss des sibirischen Cambrium. 
1889, I, p. 21 et seq. 



W. II] THE TABLELAND 35 

beyond* the marginal folds and the folds of the Angara series ; but there is 
no definite limit. 

# The Archaean hills on the east side of the Yenisei, between the lower 
course of the Angara and the Stony Tunguska, do not form a main water- 
shed, but are part of the western border of the tableland and of the natural 
boundary between the tableland in the east and the recent plain in the 
west. 

The tableland consists for the most part of horizontal beds which extend 
from the Olenellus zone or the lower Cambrian through the red salt-bearing 
series of the lower Silurian into the upper Silurian 1 . In the extreme 
south-west there is Devonian also. From this period onwards only plant- 
bearing beds of various age occur in the south, while in the north the Arctic 
transgressions of the sea have left their trace. 

The Palaeozoic platform extends from the south of lake Baikal to the 
Arctic Ocean, and from the Yenisei to the Lena. It is probable, as will 
appear directly, that it also extends eastwards across the Lena into the 
basin of the Aldan. In the west the confluences of the Stony and Lower 
Tunguska still belong to the region of the marginal folds. On the north- 
west, towards the lower Obi and the peninsula of Yalmal, its boundary 
is still undefined. 

The western moiety of the platform is covered in many places with 
basic eruptive rocks. On the north outliers of these rocks extend along the 
Yenisei to the Arctic Ocean, which they reach near port Dickson, and they 
are also found on the lower course of the Olenek. In the east they extend 
to the meridian of 116 ° in the basin of the Vilyui, but stop short of the 
Lena; in the west they do not appear to cross the Yenisei. These basic 
roeks are sometimes olivine-diabase, sometimes plagioclase-basalts, and often 
again, especially in dykes, gabbro-like ; they are always of a somewhat 
varied character. Throughout the greater part of the basin of the Lower 
Tunguska, from lat. 60 ° 15 ' N. to its confluence, the intrusion of the 
principal mass was accompanied by a swelling up of the injected strata, 
including both the Palaeozoic and certain plant-bearing beds ; or the 
phenomenon might be described as a mighty intumescence produced by the 
intrusion of sills. True flows occur as well, and perhaps traces of volcanos 
also, i. e. definite centres of eruption. But the latter, like a large part of 
the flows, may be of more recent origin. 

The oldest of these basic masses cannot be younger than the terrestrial 
flora of thejbeds which overlie the conglomerate containing basic pebbles at 

1 The conjecture that Devonian occurs in the midst of this region is only supported by 
badly preserved specimens which Tschekanowski fo^nd in red sandstone near Padun, on 
the Angara, and in which F. Schmidt believed he recognized remains of Eurypterus. 
Schmidt, however, himself admits that the determination of the specimens is doubtful 
owing to their imperfect state of preservation ; Schmidt in Maak, The circle of 
Vilyui, II, pp . 365, 366. 



86 THE NORTH OF SIBERIA [part iv, 

the bend of the Angara. This flora corresponds completely with that of 
the graphb bearing beds enveloped by the basic rocks on the Lower 
Tnnguska. It is also identical, as, Schmalhausen discovered many years 
igjo, with that of the coal-field of Kusnetzk, in the Altai. 

The earliest flora of the Angara series, the Tungusian , is characterized 
by a peculiar mixture of older types, such as Lepidodendron, and younger 
ones, such as , have hitherto been regarded as exclusively Mesozoic ; 
a similar mixture characterizes the flora on the Petchora, and in certain 
horizons of the lower Gondwana, as well as at Bajo de Velis in the 
Argentine Republic. We may place it provisionally in the Permian period, 
in accordance with Zeiller’s views 1 . 

Thus it seems probable that the plant-bearing beds of Ust-Balei and the 
whole border of the amphitheatre of Irkutsk, belong to the more f recent 
divisions of the Angara series, and the same is true of those which 
accompany the arc of Verkhoiansk on the lower Lena. 

As regards the character of the Permian plants and reptiles discovered 
by Amalitzky in northern Russia, we may fairly suppose that, not- 
withstanding the existence of the intervening Tethys, there was a very 
similar development of organic life on the Gondwana continent in the south 
and the Angara continent in the north. 

After all that has preceded we are now prepared to recognize the 
difference which exists between eastern and western Siberia. It depends 
chiefly on the absence of basic eruptive rocks in the west and on the 
presence of a widespread covering of more recent sediments. 

The marine transgressions which made their entrance by the strait of 
Turgai are strangers to the east. First of all, the upper Cretaceous of 
Europe passed into the strait, but it seems to have covered only a sn\all 
part of the south-west. Then followed, by the same road, the marine 
transgressions of the upper Eocene and Oligocene, part of which, extending 
along the east side of the Urals, reached the existing Arctic Ocean. During 
the age of the amber forests the strait of Turgai was closed up, and from 
that time onwards no sea ever again entered Siberia through that portal. 

The transgressions of the Arctic region belong to other periods of* the 
Mesozoic aera ; of Tertiary transgressions, only one can be recognized, 
that of the Oligocene epoch, and this was merely an extension of the^strait 
of Turgai ; on the other hand this region was affected by the quite recent 
Arctic transgression. 


1 R. Zeiller, Remarques sur la flore foss. de PAltai a propos des dernieres decouvertes 
paleobotan. de MM. les Dr. Bodenbfnder et Kurtz dans la Republ. Argentine, Bull. soc. 
geol., 1896, 3 e ser., XXIV, pp. 466 487 ; especially p. 471 et seq. : Examen de la flore de 
1’AltaY et de la Toungouska inf. It is striking that Polenow, relying principally on the 
nature of the basic rocks, ascribes these to the Permian period or to the Trias; comp. 
Maak, Vilyui, Appendix to Vol. IT. 



ch.ii] THE RIVER SYSTEMS 37 

In Respect to the transgressions, the contrast is not so much between 
east and west Siberia as between Turgai and the north. 

Out of these various circumstances arises the peculiar arrangement of 
the river systems of north Siberia. All the drainage flows to the north, 
and it is not only the tableland of the east and the plain of the west that 
contribute to the large volume of fresh water which the Arctic Ocean 
receives, but a considerable part of the rainfall of the great southern ranges 
also enters that ocean, chiefly by the Yenisei. 

As regards the three most important river courses, the Obi, the Yenisei, 
and the Lena, we may note the following differences : — 

The western plain, covered by recent sediments, forms, apart from the 
smaller rivers of the north-eastern Arctic tundra, a single great catchment 
area for the waters which reach the sea by the Obi. On the other hand, 
the middle of the tableland in the east is a watershed, and its drainage 
flows either directly to the sea or to the east and west, so that the Yenisei 
and the Lena assume the character of marginal rivers in relation to the 
tableland. 

The great prairie of North America is formed by Cretaceous deposits 
which have spread over the depression from the south. Later on, the area 
within which the Tertiary sediments were deposited north of the gulf of 
Mexico became uniformly constricted around the same point in the south, 
and in this very place, whence also the transgressions from the south 
proceeded, now lies the mouth of the Mississippi (I, p. 284, Fig. 37). Thus 
a certain continuity of events becomes apparent, and the delta appears as 
a sequel to earlier formations. 

In the Sahara the case is similar. Although the position of the mouth 
of # the Nile is completely eccentric, yet it is obviously determined by the 
progressive narrowing of the curves which bound the distribution of the 
Cretaceous and Tertiary deposits (I, p. 360, Fig. 41). 

None of the great Siberian rivers present similar phenomena. The 
Arctic transgressions have left their sediments over the whole breadth of the 
northern Coast of Asia. 

The Obi, which in its regular course most closely resembles the Missis- 
sippi or the Nile, presents, in contrast to these rivers, deposits of trans- 
gression not only at its mouth, but also at the headwaters of its basin. 
In the south the transgressions proceeded from the strait of Turgai, 
following the existing slope of the Tobol. 

The Yenisei is a mountain river of composite character. At first, under 
the names 3£hua-kem and Ula-kem. it flows through the longitudinal valley 
along the northern foot of the Tannu-ola, then it cuts through the western 
Sayan and passes through portions of successive transverse valleys to 
Krasnoiarsk and its confluence with the Angara, which discharges the 
drainage of the Khangai ; it then proceeds along the western foot of the 



38 THE NORTH OF SIBERIA [part iv 

Archaean range and finally enters the most north-westerly part, of the 
Palaeozoic plateau, the western drainage of which it receives as far as 
Turukhfi'isk 

The eastern part of the tableland drains into the Lena. This river ' 
flows in a true valley of erosion which is doubtless of very great age. 
It is not confined by mountain folds except in the lowest part of its course, 
where the Khara-ulach hems it in, and in this region it is deflected together 
with the lower Olenek. It exhibits in a marked degree the characters of 
a marginal river but, from facts which will be adduced later, it would seem 
probable that the basin of the Aldan is a continuation of the tableland 
lying beyond the Lena 



39 


CHAPTER III 

THE ANCIENT VERTEX 1 

Introduction. Patomske Nagorie. Trans-Baikalia. Lake Baikal. Western shore of 
lake Baikal. Mountains south of lake Baikal. East Sayan. The Horst on the Yenisei. 
Summary. Minusinsk. West Sayan. Tannu-ola-Khangai. The Valley of the Lakes. 
Gobi-Altai. East Gobi. Conclusion. 

The extensive region we are about to discuss forms, by virtue of its 
position and structure, the most ancient vertex of the Eurasian folds. Its 
western limit is marked by the Yenisei below Krasnoiarsk ; in the east it 
is bounded near long. 120° E. by the continuation of the Great Khingan 
running to the north-north -west, the western border of which is crossed by 
the Argun at Nertchinskii-Samod and further north by the lower Shilka. 
In the amphitheatre of Irkutsk the vertex is surrounded by the marginal 
folds of the Palaeozoic tableland. 

The rocks and the folds of the vertex are extremely old. Granite, 
frequently containing hornblende ; gneiss and hornblendic gneiss ; and in 
certain localities a series, regarded as unconformable, consisting of mica- 
schist, chlorite schist, ancient quartzites, and crystalline limestones with 
flakes of graphite, form the greater part of its long ridges and its lofty 
hills or ‘ goltzi/ Associated with these are more recent granites, diabase, 
porphyry, porphyrite, and finally basic lavas, some of which are of com- 
paratively recent date. Here and there in the valleys are found freshwater 
Tertiary deposits with brown coal. 

The folds of the vertex are doubtless anterior to the Cambrian 
sediments of the Lena. Along the fracture west of lake Baikal ( b , b. Fig. 2) 
regions occur in which these folds strike at right angles to the fracture and to 
the marginal folds. It is doubtful whether the inner parts of the vertex 
were ever covered by the Palaeozoic seas, though indications of "such 
a submergence are supposed to be afforded by certain widely scattered 
outliers consisting for the most part of schists and quartzite. In vain do 
we Seek here that variety of fossiliferous marine deposits which distin- 
guishes so many other mountain regions ; but towards the outer periphery, 
especially in the south-e^st and south, these ancient folds merge into more 
recent folded ranges, and we encounter fossils of Devonian age. The 
marginal fracture of the amphitheatre is of great antiquity. 

As early as 1855 Meglitzki published* a sketch map of lake Baikal 
showing that for long distances the lake cuts obliquely across the strike of 

1 Revised by J. J. H. Teall, Esq., Sc. D., F.R.S. Director of the Geological Survey of 
Great Britain. 



40 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[part IV 

the rocks which form its mountainous shores 1 / Later on, Tschekaxowski, 
Kropotkin, and, above all, the indefatigable and acute observer Tscherski, 
added considerably to our knowledge of the mountains about lake Baikal ; 
apd recently the works preparatory to the construction of the Siberian 
iSiilway have opened a new aera in the geological study of these regions. 

Tscherski was aware that a narrow band of mountainous country lying 
west of lake Baikal represents the continuation of the trans-Baikal 
highland. He also recognized that the folds of the ancient mountains to 
the east and west of lake Baikal strike in opposite directions and converge 
towards the south. The north-easterly or east-north- easterly strike which 
exists east of lake Baikal he terms the Baikal direct ion , and that to the 
north-west or west-north- west, which prevails west of the lake, the Sayan 
direction 2 . 

Both in the west and in the east this twofold direction of the pre-Cambrian 
folds appears to reveal itself in the courses taken by many of the rivers and 
in the superficial form of the ground. A closer examination of the facts 
shows, however, that this is not the case, and that the existing configuration 
is determined by structural features of a totally different kind. 

Far aw r ay in the west, in the region of the upper or Black Irtish, 
Bogdanowitch long ago arrived at the conclusion that we must assign 
to subsidences and long fractures a far greater influence on the structure 
of the Asiatic mountains than had hitherto been supposed. Klemenz 
formed the same opinion from his studies of the Valley of the Lakes, in 
Mongolia. But it is the particular merit of Obrutschew^ to have shown 
that all the mountainous country of the trans-Baikal region is traversed 
by long fractures which sometimes form continuous troughs and give to 
a great number of the long mountain ridges the character of so many 
horsts 3 . 

These long fractures sometimes coincide for a considerable distance with 
the strike of the folds ; in other places they intersect the strike ; but on 
the whole, as we have observed above, they give rise to a configuration 
which recalls the course of the ancient folds. A deviation from this course 

c 

1 N. G. Meglitzki. Geognostische Skizzen aus Ost-Sibirien, Verb. rays. k. min. Ges. 
1855-1856, pp. 109-171, map. 

2 J. D. Tscherski, The structure of the mountains of east Siberia considered as jart of 
the north-west border of Central Asia, Travaux Soc. Nat. Saint-Petersb., 1886, XVII, 2, 
Report, pp. 52-58 ; Report on the geological investigation of the shores of lake Baikal, 
part I, Izviestija Sibirsk Otd. Imp. ross. Geogr. Obseh., 1886, XII, pp. 1-405 ; Geological 
investigation of the great highroad of Siberia from lake Baikal to the east border of the 
Ural, Mem; Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1888, LIX, supplement 2 (published under the 
editorship of J. W. Muschketow) ; Mater. Geol. Russ., 1889, XIII, pp. 1-48 and geological 
map of lake Baikal in two sheets, &c. f 

3 In particular, Obrutschew, Geological observations in Transbaikalia in 1896 ; Djel. 
Dor., 1898, X, p. 48, and Geological observations in south-west trans-Baikalia in 1897, op. 
cit., 1899, XVIII, p. 25 et passim. 



DISJUNCTION 


41 


CH. Ill] 


would •not afford conclusive proof of the presence of fractures, for in 
mountains of such great age erosion may be influenced in many ways. This 
is shown by the eroded transverse valleys of trans-Baikalia, and when 
we study the Alps of the Tunka and the Kitoi, west of lake Baikal, we 
shall see that special circumstances have rendered the valleys in that region 
independent of the structure of the mountains. 

Of still greater importance is the fact that the long fractures mentioned 
above are frequently accompanied by extrusions of eruptive rocks, such as 
porphyry and porphyrite with tuff and breccias, melaphyre, basalt, and 
sometimes also trachyte and rhyolite* 

Finally, in the best-known parts of the mountainous region, and 
particularly across the lower Selenga, we see undoubted subsidence troughs. 
Our Russian colleagues describe them by the very expressive term ‘ dis : 
junctive dislocations.’ Indeed it would be impossible to explain the 
formation of a series of sub-parallel fractures and troughs, the course of 
which corresponds for long distances with the strike of the ancient folds, 
without assuming a certain amount of tension, acting approximately in the 
direction of the ancient folding. This tension may result in disjunction, 
i.e. may give rise to fissures and also to the subsidence of long strips 
of land between these fissures. Eruptive rocks of different ages may 
then accompany the disjunction. In closely compressed folded mountains 
of comparatively recent date, such as the Himalaya or the Alps, such 
disjunction is not known. 

Patomske Nagorie.* Along the fractures and flexures which surround 
the inner border of the amphitheatre of Irkutsk a very considerable part 
of the western half of the vertex has subsided, and its place is taken by 
tfye Palaeozoic tableland of the Lena, the Angara, and the Oka. To the 
east, on the other hand, in trans-Baikalia, and to the south of lake Baikal, 
the features of its structure are clearly displayed, and there our study of 
the vertex may begin. 

We know that the Cambrian tableland is visible in the bed of the Lena 
neafly as* far as Yakutsk. At Yakutsk the red sandstone, the latest 
deposit here of Palaeozoic age, is covered by plant-bearing beds belonging 
either to £he Angara series or to the Tertiary group. 

When Middendorfl* made his arduous journey to the south-east from 
Yakutsk to Udskii Ostrog, he observed in the region between the river 
Aldan and the little Aim (a tributary on the left bank of the Maia, about 
lat. 58° N.) horizontal sandstone with conglomerate and thin seams of coal. 
Lying benSath these, exposed in the deeper ravines, are flat-lyiflg limestones 
and dolomite, which Middendorff correlate^ with the deposits in the bed of 
the Lena. It is not till we have passed beyond this locality more than 
four degrees of latitude south of Yakutsk, that the treeless range of Koch- 
kat appears, with its rounded summits of diorite and granite ; but even 



42 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[part IV 


these summits seem to be covered by red sandstone. Beyond the Ktoch-kat 
the horizontally stratified limestone again becomes visible, and above it the 
s&ndstore ; these extend from the river Utshur, up the river Uyan to 
the western foot of the rocky chain of the Aldan mountains \ 

Meglitzki travelled up the river Maia and reached the western foot 
of the Aldan mountains at a point situated about 230 versts north of 
Middendorff s route. He too encountered only horizontally stratified beds, 
limestone below, sandstone above, sometimes containing plant remains. At 
Nelkan we are still on the sandstone. The land certainly rises from the 
Lena towards the upper course of the Aldan, but the rise is not considerable, 
and where the flat-bedded sediments abut against the rocky foot-hills of the 
Aldan mountains, their tabular surface, although deeply cut up by river 
channels, clearly reveals by its uniform height the boundary between these 
sediments and the ancient rocks of the range 1 2 . 

The contrast presented by the landscape on the two sides of the Aldan 
mountains has been described by Bogdanowitscli. Coming from Uaskii 
Ostrog, i. e. from the south-east and following the river Nemerikan, he 
ascended the mountains under great difficulties. Looking down from a 
height of 4,000 feet in the direction of the sea, long parallel chains present 
themselves to the eye, while towards the interior a boundless primeval 
forest extends over the gently sloping sides of the range, and the water- 
courses bury themselves in deep channels 

If now we take Yakutsk as a centre, then proceeding for a distance of 
500 versts up the Lena towards Olekminsk, for about 700 versts on 
Middendorff s route to the upper Utshur, and for more than 600 versts on 
Meglitzki’s route to Nelkan, we meet everywhere, the ancient ridge of 
the Koch-kat alone excepted, with horizontally stratified sediments. Thus 
the basin of the Aldan may be regarded with great probability as an easterly 
extension of the great plateau of east Siberia, which inserts itself between 

1 A. Th. von Middendorff, Reise in den aussersten Norden und Ost-en Sibiriens 
wiihrend der Jahre 1843 und 1844, 1848, I, 1, p. 216; 1867, IV, 2, pp. 230? 827 ; Atlas, 
pi. X-Xil. 

2 N. G. Meglitzki, Account of the expedition to the Province of Yakutsk in 1851 ; 
edited according to the manuscripts, diaries, and collections of N. G. Meglitzki by M. P. 
Melnikow, Gorn. Journ., 1893, III, pp. Ill et seq. The leader of this expedition was 
General Agte. Meglitzki prepared the account in 1853, and died at Weimar in 1857 at 
the early age of 32, in consequence of the hardships he had undergone. It was not until 
long after his death that the report was published, and it has not yet, to my knowledge, 
been superseded by later works. 

n Bogdanowitsch, Some information on the progress of the work oi the mining 
expedition to the shores of the Sea of Okhotsk and to Kamtchatka (communicated by 
L. A. Jatschewski), reprinted fronUthe Izviestija of the Society of Mining Engineers, 
St. Petersb. ; meeting of the 9 Dec., 1896, pp. 5 et seq. The point at which Bogdano- 
witsch ascended the Diugdiur does not appear to be very far distant from the route by 
which Meglitzki crossed it. The latter also started from Aian. 



48 


ch. in] TEPTORO 

tlie are of Verkhoiansk and the but little known border of the mountainous 
region of trans-Baikalia ; it is separated from the sea on the east by the 
Aldan mountains. 

In order to reach the north border of trans-Baikalia let us turn our 
steps towards the west. Below its junction with the Vitim the Lena makes 
a bend towards the north beyond lat. 60°, and again returns to the south of 
this latitude. This bend is caused by an outcrop of Archaean rocks within 
it. The structure of this region was admirably described some years ago by 
P. Kropotkin x . 

Here the Lena has excavated its valley to a depth sometimes of almost 
1,000 feet, and its banks are extremely steep. High above the river lies 
a platform of red sandstone of lower Silurian age, the mean level of which is 
something under 1 ,400 feet above the sea, thus corresponding in height to 
the horizontal red sandstone encountered far from here, in the Kutshug 
mountains between Atchinsk and Krasnoiarsk. Beneath the sandstone lies 
the Cambrian limestone. The bend of the river, however, coincides with the 
margin of the platform. 

If we now leave the Lena, about fifty versts below the mouth of the 
Vitim, and proceed in a south-easterly direction for some distance, we reach 
steeply upturned beds of quartzose sandstone, schists, and ancient limestone. 
They probably represent a continuation of the marginal folds of the 
amphitheatre. About fifty versts from the Lena, we find ourselves at a 
height of 900 meters on a range of grey gneiss running to the north-east. 
Further to the east, beyond the great Patom, a still higher range appears, 
which Kropotkin has named Patomske Nagorie, i.e. the highland of the 
Patom. This also consists of Archaean rock. Its highest part, the granite 
and gneiss mass of the Teptovo , also called 4 Napoleon’s hat, reaches 
a height of 1,794 meters. It rises, covered with snow, above the 
surrounding country, which stretches far and wide in rounded bosses, 
striated and polished by glacial erosion. 

These rocks do not reach the Lena in the north-east ; on the other hand, 
they cros% the Vitim in the south-west. An extremely long band of clay 
slate borders the south-east side of the highlands and separates them from 
the mountains of the Olekma. It has been traced for a distance of 200 
versts, and its northern end nearly reaches the confluence of the Patom. Its 
strike is NE. (40° to 50°) 1 2 . 

Subsequently to Kropotkin’s investigations the lower Vitim was again 
studied by Obrutschew, who has kindly placed at my disposal a geological 
map of this Patomske Nagorie. Obrutschew discovered the surprising fact 
that there exists on the north shore of the^Vitim, south-east of the ancient 

1 P. Kropotkin and J. Poljakow, Report on the Expedition from the Olekma and the 
Vitim, Zapiski, Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1878, III ; in particular, pp. 191 et seq. 

2 P. Kropotkin and J. Poljakow, tom. cit., p. 214. 



44 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[part IV 

mass of the Patomske Nagorie, an extensive tract of clay slate, probably 
of pre-Cambrian age, associated with quartzite and altered limestone, and 
traversed .a places oy more recent granite; it is affected by numerous long, 
broad folds, which follow an east to west direction, with a slight divergence 
to the east-south-east; that is in a direction not in accordance with the 
general strike of the Archaean highlands. These folds are ^abraded. 
Obrutschew has named the highest of them Khrebet Kropotkina ; it reaches 
an altitude of 1,100 meters and forms for more than 100 versts the 
watershed between the tributaries of the Vitim, which here flows from east 
to west, and those of the great Patom and the Vatclia 1 . 

From the foregoing facts we conclude that the Patomske Nagorie 
represents a continuation of the trans-Baikal mountains lying beyond the 
Vitim, and that it possesses the normal Baikal strike (as defined by 
Tscherski). A solution to the problem presented by the divergent strike 
of the apparently younger folds of the Kropotkin mountains must be left 
to future observers. 

Vitim and trans-Bailcalia. Kropotkin’s travels, so fruitful in scientific 
results, were made in 1866. The route followed ran southwards from the 
Patom between long. 113° and 115° E., through the inhospitable region which 
extends to the southern slope of the Yablonoi. In the preceding year 
Lopatin had traversed the vast tract lying to the east of the northern half 
of lake Baikal. His collections were described by Polenow 2 . 

The eastern half of the vertex, which has been preserved for our 
examination, coincides substantially with trans-Baikalia. The works of 
Kropotkin and Lopatin referred to above are our most important sources of 
information as regards the north ; for the southern part, the investigations 
made in connexion with the construction of the Siberian railway. The 
region extending from the Selenga to the confluence of the Shilka and 
Argon has been studied by Obrutschew and his fellow workers, Gerasimow 

1 W. A. Obrutschew, Geologische Untersuehung des Gebirgslandes von Olekma-Witim 
und seiner Goldlagerstatten im Jahre 1890, Vorlaufiger Bericht, Izviestija Sibirsk, Otd. 
Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1891, XXII, pp. 1-71, maps; report by the same fbr 1891, op. 

. eit., 1892, XXIII, pp. 1-28. 

2 J. A. Lopatin, Diary of the Expedition to the Vitim in 1865, edited by W. K. 
Polenow; Zapiski, Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1895, 283 pp. and map; Polenow, Die 
massigen Gesteine vom nordliehen Theile des Witim-Plateau, Ostsibirien, Travatfts Soc. 
Nat. Saint-Petersb., 1899, XVII, pp. 89 482 ; Kropotkin’s collections were unfortunately 
burnt in a conflagration at the museum of Irkutsk. — It is very much to be regretted that 
little has been published concerning J. Martin’s arduous journey on the line between 
Olekma and Vitim. All the specimens collected have been lost; we only know that he 
encountered granite in the north, and from lake Amadiss onward schists and stratified 
formations. South of lake Netchatka a height of 2500-3000 meters is assigned to the 
watershed ; I have not been able to % ascertain any further details concerning this lofty 
range. Accounts also exist of an important chain on the Kalar, but these are also 
unconfirmed ; Voyage de M. Joseph Martin dans la Siberie Orientale, Compte rendu 
Soc. Geogr. de Fr., Paris, 1887, pp. 219-236, map ; in particular, p. 258. 



TRAN S-B AIK ALIA 


45 


CH. Ill] 


and Prince Gedroitz; the works of Obrutschew refer to the region from 
the Selenga to Tchita, those of Gerasimow to the middle part as far as the 
Onon, and those of Gedroitz to the east l . 

I take this opportunity of expressing my grateful acknowledgements to 
M. Obrutschew, not only for much information communicated in manuscript, 
but also for personal assistance in the composition of the following pages, 
rendered to me during lengthy and repeated visits ; all that is of value in 
the following account of the structure of trans-Baikalia must be ascribed 
to him. 

The Palaeozoic border which in the north and west separates the 
highland of the Patom from the Lena also appears on the lower Yitim, 
where it attains a breadth of forty versts. East of the border, as we have 
mentioned above, the Vitim cuts through the continuation of the highland 
that extends to the south-west. Somewhat further east, the folded ranges 
of the Kropotkin mountains make their appearance north of the Vitim ; 
their relation to the Archaean regions has not been clearly ascertained, but 
it is evident that they form the boundary of the highland. 

In the wild country to the south, which lies to the east and nortli-east 
of lake Baikal, Kropotkin recognized three independent tectonic elements ; 
namely the two ranges, north Mujskii and south Mujskii, separated by the 
broad valley of the Maia and the vast plateau of the Vitim, which extends 
on the south-east of south Mujskii. 

We will now attempt an analysis based in the case of the northern region 
on the works of Lopatin, and on those of more recent authors in that of the 
southern region. 

1. The range of north Mujskii consists of two parts: the Dellun-Uran 
mountains , formed to a large extent of syenitic granite, in the north, and 
the north Mujskii range, using this term in a restricted sense, in the south. 
The north Mujskii range is an anticline of gneiss striking to the south-west, 
with an axis of granite and great dykes of diorite : according to Kropotkin, 
it is directly continued to the south-south-west by the Bargusin range. This 
forms the north-east shore of lake Baikal, and its southern extremity is known 
as tfie Tshivyrskuiskii. It is connected, as Kropotkin also perceived, with the 
promontory of Swjatoi Noss, and is continued still further, crossing lake 
Baikal obliquely and reaching its western shore through the island of Olkhon. 

The south-east side of the Bargusin range, north of lat. 54° N., descends 

1 The accounts in question by Obrutschew, Gerasimow, and Gedroitz form pamphlets, 
VI, 1897. X % 1898, XVIII, 1899, and XIX, 1899, in Djel. Dor. The last part contains 
a geological map of the whole region. Obrutschew gave a brief description, with the 
sketch of a tectonic map, before the geographical^congress in Berlin, 1899 ; Verh. des 
siebenten Intemat. Geographen-Kongresses, II, 1899, pp. 8-11, map. Also in Apei^u 
des explorations geologiques et minieres le long du Transsiberien, publ. par le Comite 
geologique de RuBsie {Exposition Universelle de 1900 a Paris), 8vo, with map. In this 
work fractures in the east have bee^i assigned independent names (p. 142 et seq.). 



46 THE ANCIENT VERTEX [part iv 

precipitously in a mighty cliff to the river valley of the same n£me ; it 
; s formed fo v the most part, especially towards the south-west, of a 
porphyritk- granite, and to the presence of this rock we must doubtless 
ascribe the unusually jagged form of the summit. To the south, towards 
i ue town of Bargusin, there are foot-hills which present a greater variety of 
rocks, such for instance as syenite, augitic syenite, and crystalline limestone 
containing flakes of mica 1 2 . 

The broad valley of Bargusin is partly filled with freshwater Tertiary 
deposits. The depression is continued far to the north-east in the valley 
of a tributary river, the Djirga, and represents the north-easterly continua- 
tion of the southern half of lake Baikal . The watershed between the 
Djirga and the upper Zipa, as well as the upper course of the Zipa, were 
visited by Lopatin at a time when there was snow on the ground, apd are 
little known. The valley of the Zipa, however, follows closely the north- 
east direction of the Bargusin valley, broadens out, includes the great 
lake of Bauntov, and finally becomes a broad, marshy depression in which 
the Zipa, accompanied by many small lakes, continues its course. This 
depression of lake Bauntov and the Zipa forms the boundary between the 
south Mujskii range and the Vitim plateau. 

If we accept this view, and regard the valley of the Zipa as the con- 
tinuation of the valley of the Bsrgusin, then both the Mujskii ranges lie to 
the north of the boundary line thus formed. According to Kropotkin, on 
the other hand, the south Mujskii range is continued through the watershed 
between the Djirga and Zipa, mentioned above, into the lofty mountains of 
Argoda and Ilcat , lying east of the Bargusina. These mountains, which 
descend precipitously to the valley of Bargusin, are very different from the 
Bargusin range lying opposite to them : they are higher (2,000 meters), apd 
well-rounded domes of gneiss form their summits. 

2. The plateau of the Vitim is bounded on the north by a long scarp 
which runs from the region between the Vitimkan and the Vitim-her 
towards the north-east, and represents the southern border of the depression 
occupied by lake Bauntov and the middle Zipa. A broad and continuous 
zone of crystalline schists forms the connexion with the mountains of 
Argoda and the Ikat. On the inner side of this zone, the plateau consists of 
granite and syenite covered in places by freshwater Tertiary deposits br by 
sheets of basalt. 

The region lying to the west of the Vitim is traversed by ranges of low 
hills which run in a north-easterly direction parallel to the great mountains 
on the Ikat; within the bend of the Vitim, however, and further to the 

1 W. K. Polenow, Die massigen desteine vom nordlichen Theile des Witim-Plateau, 
p. 100 ; Schwarz had expressed a similar opinion as regards the north-east part of lake 

Baikal ; cf. Kropotkin. Report on the Expedition to the Olekma and the Vitim, 1873, 
p. 345 (r). 



THE VITIM HIGHLAND 


47 


CH. Ill] 


east, th8 surface extends without any considerable elevations at a mean 
height of 3,000 feet : it was within the bend that Lopatin discovered a vast 
tract of basalt, which he crossed for a distance of 400 versts. The surface 
is a dead flat, except where deep and extremely steep-sided ravines have 
been excavated in it by the Djilinda and the upper Amalat. Lopatin 
encountered small cones of scoria with circular orifices filled with water, 
which Polenow regards as the remains of solfataras b 

The mountains lying east of the valley of Bargusin, on the Ikat and the 
Argoda, as well as a large part of the plateau of the Vitim, extend still 
further to the south-west, and unite with the range of Ulan Burgassai. We 
thus reach the south-east shore of lake Baikal, a region which has been 
studied by Obrutschew and his companions. The spurs of Ulan-Burgassai 
or the # Kurbin mountains are cut through by the Selenga near Verkne- 
Udinsk, and are continued under the name of Khrebet Khamar-Daban ; 
these are joined by the short range of Kkambinslcii , the direction of which 
diverges to the south-south- west. 

The latter chains all consist of gneiss and ancient schists with isolated 
outcrops of granite. In the Kurbin mountains the strike is east to west 
and west-north-west, in places north -north- west and north-north-east ; 
masses of limestone run to the east-north-east. In the Khamar-Daban, on 
the left bank of the Selenga, the ancient rocks strike east-north-east and 
north-east ; thus the Baikal strike probably prevails, but there are already 
indications of a strike in the Sayan direction. The outline of the 
mountainous area is not determined by the strike of the rocks, however, 
but by a long zone of fracture which runs along its southern margin. 

The zone of fracture is not quite rectilinear. It begins with the trough 
at # the south foot of the Khambin range, in which lies the Geese lake . 
•The inbreak is accompanied by various eruptive rocks, and the Tertiary 
beds containing brown coal which occur in it are themselves dislocated. 

Before reaching the Selenga the lines of fracture on both sides of the Geese 
lake, which there run to the north-north-east, turn to the north-east and 
east-north-*east ; they cross the Selenga at Verkne-Udinsk, and then form, 
on tfie north of the Uda, the southern border of the Khamar-Daban and 
the Kurbin mountains; they are accompanied by numerous outcrops of 
basalt.* The Uda flows here in a long subsidence trough. Even as far as 
300 versts east-north-east of Verkne-Udinsk outcrops of basalt are still 
visible on the north side of this trough. Following the direction of the 
trough we reach the great lakes which mark the watershed between the 
Uda and the Vitim. A river channel, the Choloi, and afterwards the 
middle Vitim itself, continue this long straight depression still further, even 
beyond lat. 54° N. In this part of its course, according to Gerasimow, the 

1 W. K* Polenow, Die maseigen Gesteine vom nSrdlichen Theile des Witim-Plateau, 
p. 348. 



48 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX [part iv 

Vitim flows in a narrow valley of Archaean rocks. Here arid there 
freshwater Tertiary beds containing fossil fish occur in the valley ; they 
are covered by a sheet of basalt 15-30 meters thick. Further on, along the 
Ingur and Olnau, this horizontal sheet of basalt broadens out, and is 
doubtless connected towards the west with the great tracts of basalt on the 
upper Amalat. It is precisely in this locality, north of the Konda, a 
tributary of the right bank, that Gerasimow has discovered two volcanic 
cones. One of these, 5 to 6 versts distant from the Vitim, and situated 
on the rivulet Kakirtai, consists of loose scoriae and lava ; it rises to a height 
of 200 meters above the surrounding country, and has been named by 
its discoverer the volcano of Obriltscheiv . The second, named the volcano 
of Mu&chketow, lies 7 versts from the Vitim, near the little river Ingur, and 
rises from a platform of basalt to a height of 140 meters; its^ crater 
encloses a little lake. The basalt contains fragments of granite *. 

Thus we may regard the long line which extends through the trough 
of the Geese lake, Verkne-Udinsk, along the course of the Uda, the 
lakes of the watershed, the Choloi, and the middle Vitim, as a disjunctive 
line, possibly interrupted by Archaean rocks on the watershed, but con- 
tinuous in position and direction : it reproduces the features of the nearly 
parallel line of Bargusin-Zipa. 

In its south-westerly part this line, as we have seen, is diverted to 
the south-south-west in the trough of the Geese lake. The distance from 
the Geese lake to the Selenga amounts to 120 versts, and from there to the 
volcanos on the Vitim to about 450 versts, but even beyond this point 
the Vitim continues to follow the same direction for a great distance. 

3. To the east of the trough of the Geese lake rises the short 
range of the Monostoi mountains, which, contrary to the general rple, 
trends to the north-north-east : towards the east it joins the granitic range 
of the Zagan-Dctban , which extends in breadth from Verkne-Udinsk to 
Seleriginsk, and is continued to the east-north-east by the range of Chudun. 

Another trough borders the south side of this range. The whole 
course of the Tugnui, which enters the Khilok south of Seletiginsk, lies 
within the trough or zone of subsidence. It is accompanied by ihany 
eruptive rocks, and the granite horst of the Tugnui mountains rises out of it. 

The trough of the Tugnui is united west of Selenginsk with that 
of the Geese lake. A band of basalt 100 versts in length borders its 
northern edge, forming at the same time the southern edge of the Zagan- 
Daban ; then towards the east-north-east the trough becomes constricted, 
and only small traces of basalt indicate its continuation into the valley of 
the Kitshenga. 

1 The gold prospector Buiwid appears to have drawn attention to these volcanos 
and especially to the volcano of Muschketow, Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 
1898, XXXIV, p. 222. 



SAGANSKII HORST 


49 


CH. Ill] 


4. Tke horst next in succession takes its name from the Saganskii range , 
which is formed of gneiss and aiieiejit schists. It embraces in the south- 
west the mountains on the Djida and those whioh extend between this 
river and the Selenga, as well as the range which crosses from Mongolia 
and enters Siberia between Ust-Kiakhta and Troitskozavodsk. This last 
range, however, appears to be only a continuation of the southern moiety 
of the horst, the northern moiety having disappeared beneath a vast mass 
of basalt, the Khrebet asaltovii, 60 versts in length. This basaltic mass 
is of great breadth ; it is cut through by the river Tshikoi, and right down 
to the river only basalt is to be seen. To the east-north -east the Archaean 
range of Saganskii emerges from the basalt ; it is continued further to the 
east-north-east as the Zagan Kliunti. 

The south border of the Saganskii range also is accompanied by 
a fracture, the subsidence trough of the Khilok , which repeats in all its 
characters the troughs of the Geese lake and the Tugnui, and like them is 
constricted towards the east-north-east. Basalts border it on both sides. 
It seems to die out to the east-north-east, but Gerasimow has shown that 
this is not the case, and has traced its prolongation first as represented by 
certain basalts, and then by a very long band of porphyry. The latter 
turns gradually from east-north-east to north-east, and accompanies the 
chain of lakes which extends along the west side of the Yablonoi mountains; 
it passes these and, as Gerasimow has shown, continues even as far as the 
sources of the Yumargon (tributary of the right batik of the Vitim, lat. 
53° N.). The two horsts mentioned above as the Zagan-Daban and the 
Saganskii, lose their importance towards the north-east, at about 50 
versts south-south-east of the volcanos on the Vitim. 

5. The most important part of the next horst is formed by the Malkan 
m mountains. This range rises in the vicinity of Kiakhta from a veritable 

flood of eruptive rocks ; it increases in breadth to the east-north-east, 
describes a gentle curve as it passes into a north-easterly direction, and 
then becomes much narrower again. It is this narrower part of the horst 
of Malkan* directed; to the north-east or north- north- east, which forms, as 
it descends on the east to the valleys of the Ingoda and the Tchita, the oft- 
mentioned itoge of Yablonoi : this, according to Gerasimow, proceeds further 
in the «ame direction, following the left bank of the Karanga. 

The descent of the Yablonoi mountains to the trough of the Ingoda 
amounts to 800 or 1,000 feet; it presents itself sometimes as a dark 
cliff scattered over with broken patches of forest, at others as a slope of 
rocky debris. The Archaean rocks strike to the east-north-east and are 
cut across by the scarp which runs to the north-north-east \ 

The reason that the scarp of the Yablonoi has hitherto been regarded as 

1 A. P. Gerasimow, Bjel. Bor., 1899, XIX, p. 15 ; W. Obrutschew, tom. cifc., p. 108 ; also 
Djel. Bor., 1897, VI, p. 26 et passim. 

80LIAS III 


o 


E 



50 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[part IV 

one of the principal step-faults of Inner Asia is probably to be fourfii in the 
fact that all the horsts and ridges lying to the east of it are cut through by 
the Irgoda and then by the Shilka. The result is that a traveller coming 
from the west remains on high ground until he reaches the steep slope of 
the Yablonoi ; thence onwards, however, he crosses no further height, but 
continues his journey in a long river valley which through the whole of its 
course to the Khingan flows across the grain of the country. 

Space does not suffice for a detailed discussion of the succeeding horsts, 
all of which trend to the east-north -east. The first of these are : 6. the 

Ttsherskl range, and 7. the Danrian range ; a broad band of metamorphic 

schists is continued from Mongolia into their south-western part. The 
Borshtshevoshnii range is remarkable for its great length ; it is cut through 
by the lower Ingoda and upper Shilka ; and beyond Nertchini^k and 
Strietensk the Shilka range inserts itself on the east. Metamorphic schists 
and greywackes play a considerable part in the formation of the 
Borshtshevoshnii mountains ; lofty ridges and ‘ goltzi 9 of granite rise from 
them. Gedroitz traced a long narrow band of granitic outcrops in the 

Shilka mountains as far as Uriumskii (lat. 53° 45' N.), a point on the 

watershed to the Polar sea. To the Borshtshevoshnii range belongs the 
highest summit of trans-Baikalia, the porphyry mountain Sokhondo (2,516 
meters), situated at the south-west extremity of the range 1 . 

A broad band of low country with freshwater Tertiary deposits 
containing fish remains, and associated with basalts, extends from the 
south-west into the region of the Tarei lakes and thence into the valley of 
the Onon-Borsa 2 , Further to the east, as far as the Argun, comparatively 
recent volcanic rocks extend from Mongolia across the south-west extremity 
of the following bands: 9. The Gaslmnr-Onon ; 10. the NertchinsJ^ii ; 
11. the Klitchk ; and 12. the Argun range, which occupies the south-east part ' 
of trans-Baikalia. I use the term bands because in the majority of cases 
simple lines of dislocation appear to take the place of troughs. Their 
direction is the same as that of the horsts mentioned above, but they are 
shorter. In this eastern part of the vertex the ranges are accompanied by 
marine deposits of Devonian age and thus one of the most striking 

3 Radde has already described it in his Berichte fiber Reisen im Siiden von 0st-8ibirien, 
ausgefiihrt in den Jahren 1855 bis incl. 1859 ; Baer und Helmersen, BeitrSlge zur 
Kenntniss des russischen Reiches, 1861, XXIII, p. 456. Of the mountains at Akcha 
on the Onon a description has been given by Makerow : Geological sketch of the 
gold-bearing beds of the basin of the Amur, Izviestija Sibirsk. Otd. Imp. roes. Geogr. 
Obsch,, Irkutsk, 1899, XX, no, 3, pp. 45 and 55. ** 

2 These fossil fish (Lycoptera Middendorffi , Mull.) were discovered by Middendorff ; the 
deposits have also been described by Sergijew, Gorn. Journ., 1897, I, p. 71. Details are 
given by Gerasimow, Djel. Dor., 1899, XVIII, p. 88. Terraces occur on the border of the 
valley of the Lakes ; here there rises the granite ridge of Adon-tchilon, known for its 
mineral veins. 



TRANS-BAIKALIA : SUMMARY 


51 


CH. Ill] 


characters of the central part is lost. These Palaeozoic sediments extend 
to the Shilka. Metamorphic schists and greywackes then make their 
appearance, and from Strietensk and Nertchinsk onwards to the south-west 
attain a great extension in the region of the river Onon. Carboniferous 
sediments may also be present, and there are besides some gently folded 
beds which probably belong to the Angara series. 

The volcanic rocks extend from Mongolia along the Argun to the bend 
of the river near Alt-Tsurukhaita (lat. 50° 15' N.) ; then they again cross 
the Argun above Nertchinskii-Savod, and basalt, rhyolite, and trachyte 
appear over a large area. According to Gedroitz, not only sheets of lava are 
to be seen, but also isolated domes, volcanic bombs, and all the signs of recent 
eruptive activity. 

So^th of Nertchinskii-Savod the ancient rocks strike N. by E. (10°-20°), 
while north of this locality and particularly north of lat . 52° A r ., the strike 
of the rocks is entirely different and is directed to the north-north-west . We 
have now reached the Great Khingan, and with it the eastern boundary 
of the vertex. 

Among the most important results obtained by Gedroitz is the proof 
that the western border of the Great Khingan lies above the confluence of 
the Argun and the Shilka ; it reaches the Argun a little below Nertchinskii- 
Savod, and the Shilka between Gorbitza and Voskressinsk l . 

In a general way we may sum up the result obtained by Obrutschew 
and his colleagues as follows : — ■ 

In the whole region extending from the mountains north of the Baikal 
to the Argun, the folding strikes in the Baikal direction (east-north-east to 
north-east) ; it is only towards the southern end of the lake that the 
Sayan direction (west-south-west) makes its appearance in a few isolated 
localities. In the neighbourhood of the amphitheatre the folding is 
certainly of pre-Cambrian age ; on the other hand, in the south-east 
of trans-Baikalia, the Devonian, and perhaps even the Angara beds, are 
involved in it. We agree with Obrutschew that the folding stresses 
continued to operate in the south-east, though with diminished intensity, 
up to comparatively recent times 2 . 

The fissures or disjunctive lines follow the same general plan. With 
the exception of some short cross fractures which may be observed in the 
south-western part of the Zagan-Daban and the Saganskii horst, these long 
lines also follow on the whole the Baikal direction. If we include the most 
northerly regions, we see that the line from Olkhon through the valley of 
the Bargusin runs almost to the north-east; that from the north of the 
Geese lake, the Uda, and the Vitim, almost to the east-north-east ; and all 
the following lines up to the east side of the Daurian mountains present an 

1 Prince Gedroitz, Djel. Dor., 1897, VI, p. 124 ; 1899, XVIII, pp. 141 et seq. 

2 W. Obrutschew, Djel. Dor., 1899, XIX, p. 115. 



52 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[part IV 

arcuate course directed to the east-north-east, but with a slight convexity 
to the south-east whilst east of this point the direction is rectilinear and 
almost due east-north-east. 

In this way three successive wedge-shaped fields of subsidence originate 
along the troughs south-east of lake Baikal, namely at the Geese lake, 
oft the Tugnui, and on one part of the Khilok. 

These fissures are accompanied for long distances by eruptive rocks. 
The porphyries and their tuffs appear throughout to be older than the 
basalts. The fissures themselves are of various age, and the craters on the 
Vitim indicate a persistence of volcanic action up to a late period. 

The disjunctive lines and troughs find their sharpest expression in 
the western part of the region under discussion, and there folds of recent 
date do not exist. It seems as though tensions had arisen subsequently to 
the folding , and that these tensions manifested themselves in dislocations 
following a direction which, if not identical with that of the folds, was at 
least in the main the same, i.e. to the east-north -east or north-east. 

Lake Baikal. This lake is more than 600 versts in length ; if it were 
transferred to Europe it would extend as far as from Trieste to Prague. It 
attains a breadth of somewhat more than 80 versts. 

Its shores are formed in great part of steep cliffs ; its depth is very 
considerable. The works of Gybowski and Godlewski, as well as the more 
recent soundings of Drischenko, enable us to form an approximate idea of 
the configuration of this submerged abyss 1 . 

In the part situated to the south of the mouth of the Selenga, and 
particularly towards the shore lying north of the Angara, the depth of the 
lake over a considerable area amounts to more than 700 sagenes (1,493 
meters), and the deepest sounding hitherto recorded is 1,610 meters. Taking 
512 meters as the height of its surface above the sea, then the bed of lake 
Baikal descends 1,098 meters below the sea-level. Irregularities, however, 
occur in the depression. In the first place, the alluvial cone formed by the 
sediments of the Selenga is so immense that, from off the mouth of the river 
to beyond the central part of the lake, the depth does not exceed*200 to 300 
meters. To the south-west of the delta, between it and the deepest part of 
the lake, an isolated ridge rises from depths of 500 to 800 meters to within 
70 meters of the surface 2 . “ 

North of the delta considerable depths occur between Swjatoi Noss and 
Olkhon, and around Swjatoi Noss the bottom was frequently not reached at 
a depth of 1,000 meters. West of Swjatoi Noss, towards the middle of the 
lake, four little reefs of gneiss, the TJshkani , rise high above the* water from 
depths of 600-700 meters. Xhe northern part of the lake, so far as it is 

1 T. K. Drischenko, p. 227, Survey of lake] Baikal in 1896, Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. 
Obsch., 1897, XXXIII, pp. 210-241, maps. 

2 According to Diischenko, p. 227, it is probable that this ridge is at least 28 versts long. 



LAKE BAIKAL 


CH. Ill] 


53 


known, # is everywhere more than 400 sagenes (853 meters) deep, even almost 
up to its shores. 

Kropotkin, as was mentioned above, regarded the promontory of Swjatoi 
Noss and the island of Olkhon as continuations of the Bargusin range. All 
subsequent observations tend to confirm this opinion. Thus lake Baikal 
may be regarded as consisting of two fairly equal parts, joined together 
obliquely end to end. The south end of the northern basin lies in the Maloe 
More behind the island of Olkhon. The north end of the southern basin is 
continued by the valley of Bargusin. Lake Baikal is thus a tivin lake. 
While its breadth as a whole amounts to 80 versts, the greatest breadth of 
each part is only 50-55 versts. 

The Selenga, which is by far the most important affluent of the lake, 
enter^ it transversely, as it were, through the eastern shore ; the Angara, 
which is the outflowing river, similarly leaves it at right angles, and its 
course is not in any way indicated by the outline of the lake. The position 
of the two rivers causes the one to appear as the continuation of the other, 
as though they had once been parts of a single stream which was cut in 
two by the formation of the lake. 

Violent earthquakes which have visited this region in recent times have 
certainly been the cause of subsidences in the alluvial land of the delta 
(I, p. 32), but they have not produced any appreciable tectonic change. 

Georgi, who visited lake Baikal in 1772, showed great penetration in 
calling special attention to the steep shores, ‘ which reveal a section of the 
mountains ; the fragments of rock in the water ; the round, often closely 
adjacent islands separated by fissures and representing the ruins of ancient 
mountains ; and the appalling depths close to the cliffs.’ All this, he thinks, 
shows that the lake had a violent origin. The space it occupies he regards as 
the continuation of the valley of the upper Angara, which by some cataclysm 
of nature, such as a falling in of the crust, has become the bed of the lake l . 

Erman also regards the lake as an inbreak. Tscherski, who has con- 
tributed so much to its exploration, conjectured that it was originally part 
of an extremely ancient valley of erosion, modified later by folding. 
Obrutschew reverted to Erman ’s opinion, and thought that the lake had 
been formed by a disjunctive process ; in support of this view he referred 
to th% subsidence troughs of trans-Baikalia 2 . 

Lake Baikal is not a valley of erosion ; neither is it a trough, like the 
Rhine valley, let down along rectilinear step faults, nor a rectilinear fissure 
like lake Rudolf. The gently curving outlines of its two parts are related 
to the pre-Cambrian folding in such a way that in some places, as in the 


5 J. G. Georgi, Bemerkungen zu einer Reise im Russischen Reich im Jahre 1772, 
4to, St. Petersburg, 1775, 1, p. 150. 

2 Obrutschew in Izviestija Sibirsk. Otd. Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., Irkutsk, 1897, XXVIII, 
p. 14. 



54 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[part IV 

Maloe More, the course of the cliffs almost coincides with the strike of the 
folds, while elsewhere, as further to the south-west beyond the Buguldejka, 
the folds are cut by the coast transversely. On the other hand, we must admit 
tfeat the course of these steep shores closely resembles that of the disjunctive 
lires of the vertex. The fact that the two moieties of which the lake con- 
sists are so very similar to each other and so intimately related in position, 
is alone sufficient to show that they must have had a common origin ; it is 
probable, then, that the cause which produced them acted over a still more 
extensive area ; and lake Baikal itself, therefore, would appear to be the result 
of the same tensions as gave rise to the subsidence troughs of the Geese lake, 
the Tugnui, and the Khilok. 

An additional point of resemblance with these disjunctive valleys is 
furnished by the presence of deposits containing brown coal, probably of 
Tertiary age, on the east ''shore of the lake near the Malinovskaia, opposite 
the Angara. Jatschewski has described them ; their bedding is fairly 
horizontal h 

On the other hand, there are two fundamental points of difference. 

The first of these is the great breadth of the lake. Though the trough 
of the Ingoda is 10-15 versts broad — a breadth frequently attained by the 
disjunctive valleys — and though we find even wider troughs in the Selenga, 
yet none of them approaches that of lake Baikal. The liorst of Bargusin 
is reduced to the breadth of the island of Olkhon, as though large slices of 
it had subsided and disappeared. 

The second point of difference consists in the absence of eruptive rocks. 
Only in one locality, near Kultuk, at the southern extremity of the lake, 
does basalt appear. This, however, represents the end of a ffow which 
filled the ancient bed of the Irkuta, and forced this river, as has be a en 
shown by Tscherski, to hollow out its existing bed along a course directed 
towards the Angara. Herr Obrutschew informs me that in the con- 
glomerates of the Angara series above and below Irkutsk pebbles of 
porphyry and felsite, and of corresponding tuffs and breccias, are found 
in great abundance, although such rocks are not known in place within 
a wide radius. 

As regards the age of certain parts of the shore of lake Baikal, we 
possess the following data : the above-mentioned porphyries are possibly 
posthumous signs of an older disjunctive movement ; they are older than 
the conglomerates with which the Angara series on lake Baikal begins. 
Near the Angara this plant-bearing series breaks off steeply towards the 
depths of lake Baikal ; this stretch of coast is therefore more decent than 
the corresponding fragment of the Angara series. The south-east shore 

1 L. Jatschewski, Geological Explorations along the Siberian Railway south of lake 
Baikal, Djel. Dor., 1898, VII, pp, 20-22. The dip of the beds is 12° NW., and the 
elevation above the lake is inconsiderable. 



55 


ch. in] FAUNA OF LAKE BAIKAL 

near Malinovskaia is older than the brown coal which rests against it. The 
abandoned valley of the Irkuta, which entered lake Baikal at Kultuk, *is 
older than the stream of basalt which flowed into it. 

Hence we may conclude that the southern pai i of lake Baikal is more 
recent than the Angara series (apart from the pebbles of porphyry), and 
older than certain sections of the Tertiary series ; probably older also than 
the basalt of Kultuk. 

The fauna of lake Baikal presents a number of interesting features 
which have a special importance as bearing on the question of the age of 
the lake. 

Alexander von Humboldt called attention to the fact that seals are 
known not only in the Caspian sea and in lake Baikal, but also far east of 
lake Baikal, in the little freshwater lake of Oron on the Vitim, and he 
regarded this as an indication of the original continuity of these waters h 
Oscar Peschel explained lake Baikal as a Ifjord of the ancient glacial sea 
of Siberia ; the seals having been prevented from returning by an elevation 
of the land. This hypothesis was opposed by Tscherski. He emphasized 
the fact that the waters of the Arctic Ocean are not known to have 
extended further south in post-Tertiary times than lat. 67^° N., while 
Tertiary and post-Tertiary sediments, not of marine but of freshwater 
origin, extend far and wide around lake Baikal. The Angara may have 
extended in recent times into considerable lake-like expansions, and with 
such a configuration of the surface the seals might easily have wandered in. 

The question as to an ancient communication with the sea was again raised 
when Dybowski showed in 1884 that Lubomirskia bailcalensis, a sponge of 
lake Baikal, also lives in Behring sea 2 . It may, however, be pointed out 
that another sponge, Spongilla Cavteri , Bow., the original habitat of which 
is the Indian peninsula between Bombay and Madura, has also been found 
in great abundance in central Europe at Fured, in lake Balaton 3 ; we will 
therefore follow Tscherski’s suggestion and turn our attention to the 
freshwater forms. 

The investigations of Kessler and others have shown that the Siberian 
rivers possess in common a number of typical species, such as Accipenser 
ruthenus, Vhich are certainly older than many of the existing watersheds. 
Herr*Steindachner has been kind enough to remind me that not a few 
typical fishes of European rivers, such as Lota vulgar is, Cyprinus carpio , 

1 North of lat. 57° N. the Vitim broadens out like a lake ; this is connected by a strait 
towards the east with a second smaller sheet of water : the latter is lake Oron. 

3 W. DySowski, Notiz liber eine die Entstehung des Baikal-See’s betreffende 
Hypothese, Bull. Soc. Imp. Nat. Moscou, 1884, LIX, pp. 175-181. Here there is a detailed 
exposition of the views of Humboldt, Peschel, and Tscherski. 

8 Resultate der wissenschaftlichen Erforschung des Balatonsee’s, herausgegeben von 
der Ungarischen Geographischen Gesellschaft, 1897, II a, E. Vangel, Coelenterata, 
pp. 68, 69. 



56 THE ANCIENT VEKTEX [part iv 

Ourassius vulgaris, Gobio fluviatilis , Phoxinus laevis , Colitis tafoiia, and 
others, actuary penetrate into the basin of the upper Amur *. Dybowski’s 
investigations of the gastropods of lake Baikal led, on the other hand, 
to the instructive result that these do not possess a distribution like that 
of the freshwater fish mentioned above, but represent, save for a few 
exceptions, an independent colony in the midst of Siberia 2 . 

The observations of Heucle on the fluviatile mollusca of Nanking, and 
the discovery by Anderson of the great keeled Paludinas, which inhabit the 
lake of Tali, in Yunnan, became known almost simultaneously with the 
work of Dybowski ; and Theodore Fuchs at once recognized the importance 
of these new facts in relation to the freshwater Tertiary faunas of Europe. 
He declared that the character of the Levantine Paludina and Unio beds 
of Europe was Japano-Chinese. At the same time Fuchs observed that 
the Melanopsides, which play so large a part in the Pontic stage, do not possess 
corresponding representatives in eastern Asia, but are first met with in 
New Caledonia. He described lake Baikal as the £ most northerly outpost 
of a rich fauna of peculiar inland Mollusca, destined to populate the fresh- 
waters of the regions situated to the south and east of it * 3 . 

Shortly afterwards Szdchenyi and Loczy brought back a large collection 
of shells from the lake of Tali and Neumayr was thus able to confirm the 
unity of the freshwater Levantine fauna in Europe during late Tertiary 
times, and the fauna now living in eastern Asia and North America ; as 
well as the different distribution of the two genera Melanopsis and Congeria, 
which are characteristic of the Pontic stage 4 . 

Thus facts began to accumulate, all of which tended to show that the 
fauna of lake Baikal was derived, in part at least, not from the north, but 
rather from the south, east, or west 5 . 

Finally, shells like those characteristic of lake Baikal were found in the 
Tertiary deposits of Europe. Bittner was the first to discover them on 

1 B. Dybowski, Yorlaufige Mittheilungen liber die Fischfauna des Ononflusses und des 
Ingoda in Transbaikalien, Yerh. k. k. zool. bot. Ges. Wien, 1869, XIX, pp. 945-958 ; 
Zur Kenntniss der Fischfauna des Amurgebietes, op. cit., 1872, XXII, pp. 209-222 ; 
S. Herzenstein and N. Warpakhowski, Note on the fish fauna of the region oV the 
Amur and the adjacent regions, Travaux Soc. zool. Saint-Petersb. 1887, XVIII, p. 58. 
Nikolski has expressed the view that certain correspondences exist between the fish 
faunas of lake Balkhash and the Lob Nor ; Nikitin has opposed this view for geological 
reasons ; a fresh examination is much to be desired ; Travaux Soc. Nat. Saint-Petersb., 
XVI and XVIII, N. J. f. Min., 1887, pt. 1. 

2 W. Dybowski, Die Gastropoden- Fauna des Baikal-Sees anatomisch und systematise]! 
bearbeitet, Mem. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1875, 7® ser., XXII, no. 8, 73 pp. 

3 T. Fuchs, Ueber die lebenden Analoga der jungterti&ren Paludinen-Schichten und 
der Melanopsiden-Schichten Ost-Europa’s, Verh. k. k. geol. Reichs., 1879, pp. 297-300. 

4 M. Neumayr, Ueber einige Susswasser-Conchylien aus China, N. J. f. M., 1883, II, 
HP- 21-20. 

5 A similar view has also been expressed by R. Credner in 1887, Peterm. Mitth., 
Erganzungsheft No. 86, pp. 17, 59 ; and 1888, Erganzungsheft No. 89, p. 25. ■ 



ch. hi] AGE OF LAKE BAIKAL 57 

a fairl^ low horizon in the lignite deposits of Carinthia ; subsequently 
Brusina described the genus Baglivia (which is allied to Dybowski’s 
Liobaikalia) from the Pontic beds of Croatia, and afterwards Lbrenthey 
met with the same fossil in the upper Pontic sediments of South Hungary b 
R. Hoernes has shown that similar shells occur scattered through a 
fluviatile deposit which is intercalated with beds of Sarmatian age ; and 
remarks on the frequent presence of seals in these deposits. Thus Hoernes 
is led to conclude that lake Baikal has derived its fauna, not from the 
Arctic Ocean, but from the late Tertiary inland sea, although there may 
never have been any direct communication between the two 1 2 . 

The facts so far as they are now known may be summed up as follows ; — 
Shells of the Levantine stage have been found at Omsk. But the 
form resembling those of lake Baikal which occur in the valley of the 
Danube are found not in Levantine but in Pontic and Sarmatian deposits, 
and a few with less marked affinities occur at even lower horizons. At the 
same time lake Baikal contains many peculiar forms, and, among animals of 
other classes, a few species which indicate a marine origin. Forms obtained 
bv inheritance at second and third hand are united in lake Baikal. 

Thus we see that a few species of the Pontic, perhaps also of the 
Sarmatian epoch, have persisted in this part of Siberia down to the present 
day, and this in all probability is owing to the fact that the depths of lake 
Baikal afforded them a necessary refuge. Drischenko’s tables show that the 
temperature at a depth of 25 sagenes (53 meters) amounts to about 4° C\, 
but even at 500 sagenes (1,066 meters) it does not sink lower than 3-4° C." 

We must therefore suppose that lake Baikal was already in existence 
in the later part of the Tertiary aera. 

• These considerations, and in particular the relations between the faunas 
of Omsk and Tali, suggest a number of questions relating to the more recent 
history of the continent of Angara. 

Ferdinand von Richthofen believed that the site of the existing desert 

1 A. Bittner, Die tertiaren Ablagerungen von Trifail und Sagor, Jahrb. k. k. geol. 
Rei&is., 1884, XXXIV, p. 513. Ihjdrobia [Godlewsbia ?) sp., allied to Godleivskia turri- 
form is, Dyb#; p. 514, Voir at a (?) Rothleitnen , and a species the sculpturing of which 
remotely resembles that of Valvata baik(densts , Gerstf. ; Brusina, Spir. Fauna fossile 
terziafta di Markusavee in Croazia ; Glasnik, Soc. hist. nat. Croatica, Agram, 1892, VII, 
pp. 113 -210 ; K. Loerenthey, Neuere Daten zur Kenntniss der oberpontischen Fauna von 
Szegzard, Termeszetr. Fiizet. Budapest, 1895, XVIII, p. 320. Brusina found together 
with Baglivia and the typical representatives of the Pontic stage such as Melanopsix 
Vindobonensis and Congerta subglobosa, forms of the Caspian sea such as Caspia (Mem. 
cit., p. 119). 

2 R. Hoernes, Sarmatische Conchylien aus dem Oedenburger Comitat, Jahrb. k. k. geol. 
Reichs., 1897, XLVI1, pp. 74, 75 ; and Die Relictennatur der Fauna des Baikal-See’s, 
tom. cit., pp. 89-94. Here Penck’s distinction is appropriate between a relict fauna 
and a relict lake. 

8 T. K. Drischenko, Survey of lake Baikal in 1896, p. 241. 



58 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[PART IV 

of Gobi between long, 7b° 30' and 114° 30' E. (about) was once cohered by 
a sheet ot water, the length of which was approximately equal to that of 
the Mediterranean oi Europe. So great an extension would seem to imply 
an arm of the sea, and Richthofen connected this hypothesis with the 
Chinese name ‘ Han-hai ’ or dry sea. From the position of the sediments 
Richthofen was led to suppose that the coast line of this sea lay in the 
west, i. e. around Kashgar, Yarkand, and Kiria, at a height of about 1,500 
meters, and in the east at 1,200 meters 1 . 

Subsequent observations have shown that the extension of these 
sediments is even greater than Richthofen supposed, especially towards the 
upper Hoang-ho, and that they occur at still greater heights in the 
mountain regions. As a rule they are brownish red fine-grained con- 
glomerates, red and yellow friable sandstone, and red clay, together with 
gypsum and rock-salt, the presence of which served to support the 
hypothesis of their marine origin. A well-known example is the Masar-Tag 
on the Khotan-Darya, which rises about 500 feet above the middle of the 
plain. According to Prjewalski and Dalgleish, it is formed of two ridges. 
They consist of red clay and alabaster, and are without doubt the remains 
of sediments which originally possessed a very wide distribution 2 . In the 
eastern Gobi, the sediments of this group form the sharply defined hori- 
zontal sockels or bjel above which rise the remains of mountain ranges 
which must at one time have been surrounded by the waters in which these 
sediments were deposited. 

The deep furrow above Lan-tshou-fu, which the Hoang-ho has cut in 
these red, horizontal, gypsiferous deposits, sometimes 3,000 feet in thickness, 
has been described by Prjewalski, Loczy, and other travellers. Obrutschew 
has shown that these beds may be traced far up into the valleys of the 
Nan-shan, that they enter the Tsaidam, and towards the south extend to 
Min-tshou in south Kansu 3 . 

Organic remains are very rare in these sediments. Loczy has shown 
that in the Wei valley near Tsing-tshou (east of lat. 160° E.) they contain 
Stegodon insignia , a species of the Siwalik fauna, and in the ravines of the 
Hoang-ho, mentioned above, he has found existing species of Bithynia'and 
Lymnaea, as well as the remains of mammals. For this reslteon Ldczy, 
although he found not only gypsum and rock-salt but also ki<*serite, 
maintained the view that these deposits are not of marine origin. The 
whole of the highlands, stretching on the one hand to Ling-tsi-thang, and 
on the other far south of Yunnan, perhaps as far as Hundes, where the 

1 Baron F. von Richthofen, China, I, pp. 24, 25. 

3 E. D. Morgan, Orography of No Ahern Thibet, Supplementary Papers, R. Geogr. Soc., 
1890, III, p. 13; also Sven Hedin, Burch Asiens Wiisten, 8vo, Leipzig, 1899, 1, p. 328. 
It was north of these hills that Sven Hedin saw his caravan destroyed and nearly lost his life. 

Obrutschew, Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1894, XXX, pp. 98, 723, 727 et seq. 



ch. in] RHINOCEROS IN THE. GOBI 59 

high-lying freshwater deposits were described by Griesbach, was covered at 
the time of the formation of the red sediments on the upper Hoang-ho and 
the Wei by extensive lakes without outflow. Kuku-nor and the existing 
salt lakes of Thibet would be the remains of these lakes \ 

This conclusion has received important confirmation from a discovery 
made by Obrutschew ; on the way from Urga to Kalgan, near the plateau 
of Khuldyin-gobi and 25 kilometers south-south- east of the salt lake Iren- 
dabassun-nor (about lat. 43° 30' N., long. 112° E.), he found in deposits of this 
kind which form the butte Djadjin-Shanda the remains of a rhinoceros 
or Aceratherium of middle or late Tertiary age 2 . 

The freshwater deposits of such wide extension in the region of the 
Rocky mountains of North America have given occasion to great differences 
of opinion, to which Davis in particular has given expression. The presence 
of intercalated beds of gypsum is indeed an indication not of a damp, but 
of a dry climate, such as exists at present. It is certain that factors of very 
different kinds, running water, cones of debris, and subaerial influences, 
must have played their part, especially on the margin of the plain and 
perhaps on the ‘bjels’ of the desert mountains 3 ; this has been pointed out 
by Penck when proposing the term ‘ continental formations/ 

In Asia not only gypsum and salt, but even kieserite, occur as the 
extreme products of evaporation. On the other hand, it must be observed 
that the existence of great terrestrial animals implies vegetation, and 
consequently a certain amount of moisture. 

We are now in a position to conclude with some assurance that the so- 
called Han-hai or Gobi beds are not marine deposits ; that for a considerable 
period, especially during certain epochs of the Tertiary aera, large parts of 
Asia were covered by freshwater lakes of vast dimensions, together with 
numerous smaller ones, some of which were without outflow, and that these 
sheets of water were subject to fluctuations of level due to climatic changes. 
The magnificent Aralia leaves from the Tertiary beds of Greenland, which 
Nathorst has deposited in the museum at Stockholm, represent scarcely 
a greater contrast between past and present than the remains of great 
herblferous mammals in the horizontal marl beds of Khuldyin-gobi. 

Many jffoblems of great interest arise out of this subject; foremost 

1 L. fon Loczy, Ost-Asien, Reise des Grafen Bela Szechenyi, I, 1893, pp. 822-827, III, 
1899, pp. 212-215; C. L. Griesbach, Geology of the Central Himalayas, Mem. Geol, 
Surv. India, 1891, XXIII, pp. 82-87; the mammalian remains of Hundes lie about 
14,000-15,000 feet above the sea. 

2 E. Suess, Ueberreste von Rhinoceros sp. aus der ostlichen Mongolei, Verh. russ k. 
min. Ges., 18?9, 2. Ser., XXXVI, pp. 171-180 ; W. Obrutschew, Central Asia, North China, 
and Nan-shan, publ, by the Imp. ross. Geogr. Obseh., 4to, St. Petersb., 1900, I, pp. 88 
et seq. 

s W. M. Davis, The freshwater tertiary formations of the Rocky Mountain Region, 
Proc. Am. Acad. Arts and Sci., Boston, 1900, XXXV, no. 17, pp. 345-373; A. Penck, 
Morphologie der Erdoberflache, 8vo, 1894, II, pp. 24-36. 



60 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[PART IV 

among them is the general question as to the origin of red colofhtion, so 
especially important in connexion with the formation of the Rothliegende 
and similar deposits. With regard to the fauna our knowledge has so far 
advanced that we can now distinguish the following elements : — 

(a) The relict forms of lake Baikal, which have survived from Sarma- 
tian, Pontic, or even earlier times ; ( b ) the relict forms in the lake of Tali, ' 
which have survived from the Levantine period, as represented by the beds 
of Omsk ; (c) the European forms, which are associated with Chinese forms 
in the upper Amur ; and (d) the fauna of Inner Asia properly so called, with 
peculiar Cyprinides. 

West border of lake Baikal . The narrow belt of ancient rocks border- 
ing lake Baikal on the west, or at least that part of it which lies north of 
the Angara, is a horst of very peculiar character, for it is bounded Jby two 
fractures which differ both in age and origin. The western fracture is a 
true fault, dating from very remote, perhaps from pre-Cambrian times, which 
cuts through the pre-Cambrian folds in complete independence of their 
strike. The eastern fracture forms a part of the western shore, both of the 
northern and southern half of the lake : it appears rather as if it had been 
produced by tension and was not so completely independent of the strike 
of the folds as the western fracture. This narrow horst is the only 
fragment of the innermost part of the vertex which has remained visible, 
and at the same time the only spot where there can be any hope of obtain- 
ing information as to the mutual relations of the two directions of strike in 
the pre-Cambrian folds. 

Although there are numerous treatises on this region of more recent date, 
yet the work of Tscherski, in particular his geological map of lake Baikal, 
still remains our chief source of information 1 . , 

Let us first cast a glance at the structure of the shore. 

Near Kultuk, at the extreme south-western end of the lake, the shore is 
formed by Archaean rocks, except where the basalts previously mentioned 
occur. These Archaean rocks form the Elovskii Khrebet , a continuation of 
the Tunkin Alps ; they are traversed by the somewhat recently eroded valley 
of the Irkuta; and they form a narrow belt about the outflow of the 
Angara. 

The Angara series, which is directly superposed upon these roc&s, now 
reaches the lake. At its base lies gold-bearing conglomerate with boulders 
up to half a meter in diameter. The Angara beds rise to a height of 384 
meters above the lake, and end in steep cliffs which descend below the water 
to considerable depths. The dip of the beds is 50° to the South-south- 
west 2 . 

% 

1 Published under the editorship of Muschketow, Mater. Geol. Russ., 1889, XIII. 

2 Tscherski, in the Russian edition of K. Ritter, Geography of Asia, East Siberia, lake 
Baikal, and trans-Baikalia, 1895, II, p. 168, r. 



PRIMORSKII KHREBET 


61 


CH. Ill] 

Soon*Palaeozoic rocks appear, the continuation of the broad and lofty 
Onot range, and shortly after these give place to the Archaean rocks of the 
rugged Primorskii Khrebet , which now forms the border of the lake. This 
range forms the western horst mentioned above. It reaches a height of 
4,500 feet (1,372 meters) above lake Baikal, or 1,884 meters above the sea ; its 
slopes, descending rapidly below the surface of the lake, reach to the bottom, 
so that their total height amounts to 2,800 or 2,900 meters. The sources of 
the Lena lie close to its western edge ; the island of Olkhon, which rises to 
a height of 800 meters above the lake and forms a precipitous mountain 
range, branches off from it. 

Further to the north the breadth of the Primorskii Khrebet diminishes. 
Once more only a narrow belt of Archaean rocks borders the lake ; then, 
at cap^ Elodtin (lat. 54° 35' N., about), the Palaeozoic sediments reach the 
shore for the second time, but soon the Archaean rocks reappear and 
continue along the lake to its northern end. 

The following data as to the strike of the pre-Cambrian rocks are 
taken from the works of Tscherski, except in those cases where some other 
source is mentioned. 

In the Elovskii Khrebet, as in the Alps of Tunkin, the west-north- 
westerly strike of the Sayan mountains prevails. Even on cape Baklanii, 
not very far south of the Angara, Jatschewski found the direction to 
be NW. (320°-330°) in the gneiss, with the dip vertical ; then variable, 
sometimes almost due north and south with a dip of 40° E. ; then on 
the Angara the north-westerly strike shows itself again in beds of 
crystalline limestone l . 

Then follows the region north of the Angara, in which the Archaean 
rocks are not visible. When they reappear, in the southernmost part of 
the Primorskii Khrebet, the north and south direction becomes more and 
more marked. 

At the mouth of the Goloustna (40 versts north of the Angara) the 
gneiss runs in steep narrow folds with a north-north-west to north 
strike, and this direction is maintained for a considerable distance. 
Whdre the Primorskii Khrebet increases in breadth on the Buguldejka 
(100 verst* from the Angara) the east-north-east or north-east strike 
of th« Baikal region comes in, and from here onwards dominates the 
island of Olkhon and the whole of the east. 

The Baikal direction, as may be perceived from Idjitzki s observations, 
now appears all along the west side of the Maloe More 2 . Much further 
north, towards the northern end of the lake, Tscherski marks on the map 

1 L. Jatschewski, Geological explorations along trans-Siberia south of lake Baikal, Djel. 
Dor., 1898, VII, pp. 2-6. 

2 N. Idjitzki, Geological investigations in the government of Irkutsk in 1895, DjeL 
Dor., 1898, VII, pp. 113-153, map. 



62 THE ANCIENT VERTEX [part iv 

two trend lines striking across the lake, but in the region we are describing 
deviation • exist, which are perhaps only local, but sufficient to render it 
impossible to arrive at any definite plan of the west shore. 

If we confine our attention to the more precisely known tract which 
e;;tends from Kultuk to the northern end of the Maloe More, a distance of 
about 320 versts (343 kilometers), we shall find that it is divided into two 
principal regions : one on the west, characterized by the Sayan or west- 
north-west to north-west strike ; and the other on the east, characterized by 
the Baikal or east-north-east to north-east strike : the first of these 
includes the Elovskii Khrebet, the second the island of Olkhon, and 
between these two principal regions the folds become crotvded together and 
acquire a more or less north to south direction. 



Fig. 4. The Island of Olklion. ( After Obrutscliew.) 

1, 2, ii. Archaean rocks ; « to e 1 metamorphic schists ; /, Cambrian limestone. 
(The heights are given in feet above the level of the lake.) 


The course of the individual folds in the Primorski! Khrebet shows 
according to Tscherski’s map a very gentle curvature from north-east to 
east-north-east, so that starting from this middle region a direction is 
reached which is very nearly that of the island of Olkhon. We possess 
a recent description of this island by Obrutsehew. The bands of gneiss, 
ancient schist, and crystalline limestone reveal the presence of two long 
anticlines and two synclines striking obliquely across the lake to the east- 
north-east. They cross Maloe More and Olkhon at an acute' angle, and 
then reach the east coast and the mountains of Bargusin, south of Swjatoi 
Noss, as well as the promontory itself , precisely as Kropotkin had supposed. 

In Olkhon the folds are steeply upturned, and the syncline which 
strikes through Maloe More is, as recognized by Tscherski and confirmed 



ch. m] CONTRACTION TOWARDS THE INTERIOR 68 

by Obriffeschew, overturned to the north-north-west ; the beds dip to the 
south-south-east \ 

The facts furnished by the Primorskii Khrebet are of such importance 
that we will briefly recapitulate them. 

In this narrow horst the pre-Cambrian folds having the Sayan direction 
approach those having the Baikal direction. The prevailing rock is 
hornblende gneiss. As the folds converge they assume a more meridional 
direction, and in all likelihood unite 50 to 100 versts north of the Angara 
in a common north and south strike. This circumstance indicates com- 
pression towards the axis of the vertex. 

At the same time a syncline overturned towards the interior may be 
recognized in the island of Olkhon. 

Thg primitive folds of the vertex are therefore crowded towards the 
interior. They are cut off on the west border of the Primorskii Khrebet by 
a fracture running approximately north-north-east, which is completely 
independent of the strike of the folds of the vertex. This fracture, 
however, determines the strike of the Cambrian and Silurian marginal 
folds, which run strictly parallel with it in a north-north-east direction, 
and it is precisely in this region that they are overturned towards the 
interior, that is to the north-west. 

The marginal folds thus indicate a contraction of the surface, but the 
axis of this contraction probably lies further west, and corresponds with 
the axis of the amphitheatre of Irkutsk. 

The eastern face of the Primorskii Khrebet, which forms the west shore 
of lake Baikal, is, like the shores of the island of Olkhon, of much more 
recent origin, and belongs to the system of tension -fractures or disjunctive- 
lin^s of the vertex. 

Mountains south of lalce Baikal. Between the Selenga and the most 
southern extremity of lake Baikal, and thence further to the west as far as 
the great ranges north of lake Kossogol, a phenomenon is observed which 
is apparently unknown in those easterly parts of the vertex with which 
we have so far been concerned. This is the occurrence of fragmentary 
basaltic plateaux on the summits of many of the loftiest ‘goltzi.’ All the 
existing dafa combine to show that these plateaux are older than a consider- 
able pftrt of the existing valleys which have been cut deep into the Archaean 

1 K. Ritter, Geography of Asia, II, pp. 149, 232, 456, 464, 480; for the north, II, 
pp. 514, 589. While restricting the inversion to the syncline in the Maloe More, 
I follow the detailed description which Obrutschew has given of the folds in Olkhon ; 
Obrutschew, Qro-geological observations on the island of Olkhon and the west of the 
Pri-Baikal, Gom. Journ., 1890, III, pp. 429-457, maj>s. For the stratified succession see 
W. Obrutschew, Ein Ausflug in das goldfiihrende Gebiet der Fliisse Sarnia und Ilikhta 
im westlichen Baikal gebirge, Izviestija Sibirsk. Otd. Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., Irkutsk, 
1897, XXVIII, pp. 1-24, map. The author distinguishes a Huronian series between the 
Laurentian gneiss-granite of Olkhon and the Cambrian-Silurian series. 



u 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[part IV 

fidor. On the other hand, some observers, and in particular Jat&shewski, 
have shown that in certain localities streams of basalt have flowed down 
in$D existing valleys and have even spread over the gold-bearing alluvium 
of the valley bottom. These observations, apparently contradictory, may 
ooubtless find their explanation in the view already indicated that the 
period of the basic eruptions in Siberia was of considerable duration. The 
recent cones of scoria which are met with here and there do not permit us 
to suppose that this period is even yet concluded. 

In this manner the formation of valleys among these mountains has 
always been liable to disturbance and interruption. The stream of basalt 
already mentioned as occurring at Kultuk, near the south end of lake 
Baikal, and the deep and winding ravine which it has compelled the 
Irkuta to cut through the Elovskii Khrebet, are examples both of such 
an interruption and of the force of erosion. If we follow^ the course of the 
Irkuta and approach the entrance to the ravine from above, we reach a place 
where the valley broadens out, and towards the east the ancient bed of the 
Irkuta, now occupied by the Kultushna and interrupted by a low watershed, 
leads us out to Kultuk. Terraces occur in the broadened part of the valley 
up to a height of 214 meters above lake Baikal and 99 meters above the 
Irkuta. Along its margin sandstone is visible probably of Tertiary age and 
containing trunks of trees and pebbles of basalt ; this is capped by streams 
of basaltic lava which attain a considerable elevation above the lake. It 
was these lavas which, according to Tscherski, turned aside the Irkuta L 

The trans-Siberian railway runs from Irkutsk into the valley of the Irkuta, 
and, following a ravine, passes through the ridge of Syrkusun, in which the 
Archaean rocks strike west-north- west and north-west ; a sheet of basalt 
caps the highest dome of this ridge at a height of 1,610 meters (1,098 meters 
above lake Baikal). The railway then follows the original bed of the 
Irkuta, now occupied by the Kultushna, and at length reaches the south end 
of the lake 1 2 . 

From Jatschewski’s description of the valley of the Djida we perceive 
that a fault-trough exists on the north side of the lower course of this 
river. It forms in all likelihood the continuation of the united troughs 
of the Geese lake and the Tugnui. The Djida itself intersects a granite 
ridge 218 meters high, in order to reach the broad valley g£ the 
Selenga ; but on its north side, above the granite ridge, there is a caldron 
elongated from east to west, at the bottom of which lie the two lakes 

1 K. Ritter, Asia, I, pp. 128, 145 ; II, 2, 14 ; also Tscherski, The spur of Eiov, Izviestija 
Sibirsk. Otd. Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., Irkutsk, 1875, YI, no. 4 ; Velain marks the lavas of 
Baikal as augite andesite with Labrador felspar ; Notes geologiques sur la Siberie 
orientale d’apres les observations faites par M. Martin, Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1885, 
3 e ser., XIV, p. 164. 

2 L. Jatschewski, The tunnel of Syrkusun, Djel. Dor., 1899, XI. pp. 1-11. 



THE DJIDA AND THE SHIBE 


65 


CH. Ill] 


Ust-nur^nd Khoitu-nur. The surface of these lakes lies 40 meters below 
that of the Djida. Granite forms the south and porphyry the north side* of 
this caldron ; on the boundary between these two rocks a ridge of basalt is 
visible. 

The band of porphyry reappears 7 5 versts further up stream on the 
north side of the Djida 1 . 

A transverse section, made by Jatschewski from the upper Djida to the 
south shore of lake Baikal, affords the following instructive results. 

From the post-station of the Khamnei on the Djida (933 meters) we 
ascend the Khamnei on basalt. The higher mountains are formed of granite, 
porphyry, and a sort of wacke, together with limestone (strike NW. ; 
290°-320°). From the gneissose summit of Ulgyt (strike NNW. ; 330°) the 
country descends to the river Sanginc : in the valley bottom basalt occurs. 
The next pass, situated in gneiss (1,874 meters), is dominated by rocky 
‘ goltzi * which rise to a height of 200 to 300 meters above it ; a wall of 
gneiss extremely steep, 480 meters in height, leads down to the river 
Snechnaia, and crossing the upper course of this river we ascend with 
difficulty the valley of the Shibe to the Shihanskii * goletz 5 (2,041 meters). 
Here, in the valley of the Shibe, almost equally distant from the Djida and 
the lake, the strike of the gneiss is no longer in the Sayan , but in the 
Baikal direction , i. e. to the north-east . 

In the valley of the Shibe basalt is nowhere to be seen, but the summit 
of the 4 goletz ’ is formed by a sheet of this rock having a thickness, as seen 
on the north side, of 20-30 meters only. The distant view presents a 
number of similar isolated tabular summits which all rise to about the same 
level, and it is only as we look far away to the south-east (110°) that we 
catcJi a glimpse of a more elevated angular peak, the exact position of which 
lias not been ascertained, but which is known to the guides as the Khorin- 
Khoite-dolge, i. e. the ear of the black dog. The outpouring of basalt 
appears to have taken place chiefly in the southern valleys. Suffice it to 
say that from the Shibe onwards the Baikal strike is maintained, but that 
at one locality on the Khonkhobi-Daban gneiss with schistose quartzite, 
standing on end, strikes east and west. Further on along the river 
Studianka tLe strike is invariably north-east. 

J atsfchewski sums up his observations as follows : the range, descending 
gently to the south, and very precipitously to the north, consists of two 
sharply defined regions, a northern with a strike to the north-east , and a 

southern with a strike to the north-ivest 2 . 

• 

1 L. Jatschewski, Geological explorations along Trans-Siberia south of lake Baikal, 
Djel. Dor., 1897, VIJ, pp. 1 29, in particular pp. 6-^9. The depression must be very 
marked, for the Russian 40-verst map designates the east-to-west furrow which leads to 
these lakes ‘ Choloi,’ a name given, as will be seen later, by the Mongolians to channels 
of this kind. 

L. Jatschewski, loc. cit., pp. 9-14. According to the Russian 40-verst map the pass 

SOLLAfi III 



66 THE ANCIENT VERTEX [partiv 

In order t*> form a correct idea of the remarkable achievements of the 
Russian geologists, and at the same time not to lose sight of the scale which 
i nisi be maintained in our comparative studies, it may be pointed out that the 
length of this section, from the post-house of Khamnei to the south shore of 
lake Baikal, amounts to 130 kilometers, and is therefore approximately equal 
to the distafice from Pallanza to Lucerne. We must not forget that even 
further to the north, near the tunnel of Syrkusun, the strike has been shown 
to follow the Sayan direction. These observations show that there is little 
prospect of again encountering, south of lake Baikal, that innermost region 
of the vertex, distinguished by a north and south strike, of which probable 
traces have been described on the slopes of the Primorskii Khrebet. It is 
not possible at present to give an exact account of the manner in which the 
Baikal strike (north-east to east-north-east), which prevails throughout the 
whole eastern part of the vertex, and the Sayan strike (north-west to west- 
north-west), which distinguishes the whole of the west, are brought into 
relation in the region south of lake Baikal. It is clear from Obrutschew’s 
summary that the Baikal strike occurs in the Khamar-Daban on the right 
bank of the Selenga, and further, that it extends to the left bank of this 
river, appearing in the Khrebet Borgoiskii, which forms a continuation of 
the Sagan-Daban liorst : it likewise crosses the river in that other con- 
tinuation of the same horst which is represented by the mountains on the 
south side of the Djida. But at the same time it appears that deviations in the 
Sayan direction occur much further to the north-east, particularly in certain 
parts of the Khamar-Daban \ The mountains of Shondagar, which lie- 
south-east of lake Baikal, very nearly on the meridian of the supposed 
region of maximum compression, are, so Herr Obrutschew informs me, 
dislocated to so high a degree and in such a variety of ways that *it is 
impossible at present to make out any dominant direction of strike. 

The observations of Jatschewski cited above have enabled us to dis- 
tinguish two broad zones of almost equal extent lying between the southern 
end of lake Baikal and the boundary of Mongolia ; the northern zone being- 
characterized by the Baikal, the southern by the Sayan strike. The northern 
region is difficult to follow towards the west. Tschekanowski nowhere 
mentions gneiss with an east-north-east strike except on the middle Tibelti 
(right tributary of the Irkuta) ; but at Kultuk, as well as towards the 
north-west in the ravine of the Irkuta and towards the west not far from 
Tunkinsk, the Sayan strike everywhere prevails 2 . 

of Shibetskaia lies 05 versts from tlie nearest point on the Djida (near % the Karaula of 
Zakirskaia) and 60 versts from the nearest point on the shore of lake Baikal (east of 
Kultuk). w 

1 W. Obrutschew, Djel. Dor., 1899, XVIII, p. 25. 

2 Tschekanowski, in the Russian edition of K. Ritter's Asia, 1894, I, p. 108 ; further 
data concerning the ravine of the Irkuta, I, p. 127, for Kultuk, II, p. 13, &c. The 
statements regarding the valley of the Ospa are very divergent. 



EAST SAYAN 


67 


CH. Ill] 

The elbst Sayan range. The Sayan mountains are generally represented 
as a hook-shaped range of which the two branches, the east Sayan, or 
Ergik4argak-taiga. and the ivest Sayan , or Khabin-dabata, converge 
towards the north and unite a little to the east of the meridian of 96°. 
More recent observations do not accord with this view, and we shall 
treat the two branches as distinct and different ranges. As a matter 
of fact the east Sayan is continued as an independent range beyond 
long. 96° E., with a persistent direction to the west-north-west. The 
pass from the Kana to the little Agul, for example, lies on this continua- 
tion, and according to Idjitzki reaches a height of 2,393 meters. Among 
the snow-covered mountains on the upper Kana it rises into peaks of over 
6,000 feet; and then proceeds with a decreasing height, but still with a 
considerable breadth, in the direction of the river Maria ; it is crossed by 
the Yenisei a little south of the town of Krasnoiarsk, forms the heights of 
Gremjatschin on the other side of the river, and finally disappears beneath 
the recent deposits of the plain before reaching the high road near 
Atchinsk. 

Here the line of the east Sayan range, almost a thousand versts long, at 
last disappears from sight. 

In this place we shall not discuss the Kabin-dabata, but confine our 
attention to the east Sayan range, or the Ergik-targak and its continuation. 

The mountains are much higher than those of trans-Baikalia, but the 
rocks are similar. A lower division includes gneiss, granite, and horn- 
blende rocks ; an upper, in addition to gneissose rocks, contains mica-schists, 
talc schists, and chlorite schists, serpentine, and a granular limestone with 
pyroxene, known as Baikalite, which is very widely distributed. Intrusions 
of more recent granite and syenite, dykes of diorite. and in many localities 
basaltic lavas, also occur. 

From the neighbourhood of the goletz of Shibe, of which a description, 
based on the observations of Jatschewski, has already been given, high 
mountains forming the watershed between the Selenga and Irkuta extend 
to the west-north- west, and one of these situated near the northern end of 
lake Kossogol forms the highest peak of the east Sayan range, the Munku 
Sardykj 3,405 meters. The Nukhu-Daban, a branch of this range, which 
separates the Irkuta from the Oka, forms the connexion with the Tunkin 
alps. To the north-north-west the ridge of the Iltei Daban leads to the 
Kitoi alps. To the west-north-west the Ergik-targak is continued as the 
watershed between the Angara and Ulu-kem, in many places exceeding 
a height of ?,000 feet. 

Munku Sardyk is only accessible from# the south ; Radde arrived 
within 60 feet of the summit ; Peratoltschin ascended it in 1896* Basaltic 
lavas enter into the composition of its southern foot-hills. Part of a very 
extensive flow forms the table-mountain of Yangit ; strange to say, the 



08 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[part IV 

Baikal, or ^L-norfcb-east, strike occurs here in the ancient rocked Radde 
crossed the Yangit and observed limestone and granite ; at greater heights 
granite and syenite 3 . Jatschewski points out that the mountains east of 
lake Kossogol only rise from 200 to 250 meters above the lake, the level of 
which lies at about 5,300 feet (1,615 meters), while the mountains to the 
west are considerably higher. The western shore probably corresponds 
to a fault. The northern part of the lake lies in granite and crystalline 
schist, the southern in limestone, which as will be shown later, is continued 



Fig. 5. A goletz capped with basic lava . 

Right bank of the river Zagan-Chari ^left tributary of the Kitoi ; eastern group of the goltzi 

on the Ospa). 

(After a photograph by Herr Jatschewski.) 

for a long distance towards the Tannu-ola mountains. Basalt and trachyte 
appear at several localities near the lake 2 . 

1 G. Radde, Berichte iiber Reisen im Siiden von Ost-Sibirien, ausgefiihrtin den Jahren 
1855 bis inclusive 1859, in Beitriige zurKenntniss des Russischen Reiches, herausgegeben 
von Baer und Helmersen, 1861, XXIfl ; Asia, 1, pp. 46, 50. S. P. Peratoltsbhin, Ascent of 
Munku Sardyk in the summer of 1896, Izviestija Sibirsk. Otd. Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 
Irkutsk, 1897, XXVIII, pp. 270-279, map. 

2 L. Jatschewski, Report on the expedition Prein-Jatschewski, letter dated from the 
mission house of Mondin (Changinskaia Karaula) of July 5, 1887, Izviestija Sibirsk. 
Otd. Imp. ross. Geogr. Obseh., Irkutsk, 1887, XVII, pp. 212-221. 


CH . hi] HIGH-LEVEL BASALTS 69 

Tschdfcski long ago perceived that the topographic features of the great 
ranges lying in front of the Munku Sardyk, on the north, do not correspond 
with their internal structure. The valleys have been formed by erosion, 
and intersect the strike, which is directed mainly but not exclusively to the 
west-north-west or north-west. At the same time, however, the high 
ridges between the valleys are here and there serrated by secondary ridges, 
which cross them obliquely and correspond in direction with the strike 
of the rocks. In the Tunkin alps many peaks reach a height of 8,000 feet, 
and the Kitoi alps are still higher *. 

In the Kitoi, crowning the Mun!cu-Sagan-Kh</rdyk (or Ospinskii ‘ goletz ’), 



Fig. (>. High-level basaltic flows near the source of the Ospa. (partly covered by snow). 

(After a photograph by Herr Jatschewski.) 

Tseharski saw with astonishment for the first time the high-lying lavas of 
this region. , The ascent was attempted in company with Hartung. At 
a height of 945 meters they crossed the Ospa ; at 2,050 meters they 
reached the summer 4 yurtes ’ of the Soyotes. Passing over chloritic and 

1 So far as I can perceive from the data at my disposal, the presence of the west-north- 
west to north-west (Sayan) strike has been established in the ridge of Elov and the 
whole of the adjacent part of the alps of Tunkin as far as the lower course of the 
Djemtschug, above Tunkinsk on the slopes of the Sayan, and into the valley of the 
Bogdaschka (north of the Nilan-Saram) on the noith slope of the Kitoi alps. But 
in the valley of the Kitoikin (on the south side of the Nilan-Saram), in the valley of 
the Khon-goldei in the Tunkin alps, and in the whole transverse section of the Munku- 
Sagan-Khardyk in the Kitoi alps, there is divergence in the data, and still further west 
the north-east strike (Baikal) has been observed. 



70 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[part IV 

ialcose seiz'd*, rocks resembling greenstone and granular limes^>ne ? they 
reached two gullies at a considerable height, leading to a dark peak which 
hey had previously noted from the valley below. Here, at a height of 
2 ; 584 meters, a conglomerate of angular blocks, some of them formed 
of dark lava, rests upon the bassett edges of the limestone. Above the 
conglomerate follows basaltic lava, which forms the whole peak. The ’ 
horizontal stratification shows traces of at least eight flows. 

On a ledge formed by this lava, at a height of 2,640 meters, the 
travellers looked northwards towards the valley of the Ospa, and amidst 
the chaos of summits were able to recognize tabular mountains which once 
formed a common plain of horizontal lavas at a higher level than that 
at which the observers were standing ; now deeply excavated and broken 
up by the existing valleys. 

The height of the dark peaks was estimated at from 9,462 to 9,662 feet 
(about 2,914 meters). The highest summit of the mountain mass appears 
from a distance as a snowy dome surrounded by a crown of peaks 1 . 

It is the same spectacle as that with which we have already made 
acquaintance to the south of lake Baikal. 

North-west of this peak and of the Kitoi alps rises the lofty yoletz of 
Botugol , and in its immediate neighbourhood, in the midst of a lonely 
wilderness, lies the abandoned graphite mine of the enterprising Frenchman 
M. Alibert. Here there is an intrusion of syenite into limestone, and the 
graphite is found in the zone of contact 2 . 

South of this locality we observe at a great altitude the beginning of 
a longitudinal channel, traceable for at least 300 versts, in which the 
waters from the adjacent north slope of the east Sayan are collected ; it is 
crossed by secondary but lofty watersheds, and from the several parts so 
formed the waters drain into the great transverse valleys of the Oka, the 
Ya, and the Uda, which run to the north. 

Where the Oka forms a bend and passes from the longitudinal into the 
transverse valley, there lies the post -house of Okin, at a height of 4,300 feet. 

1 Russian Edition of K. Ritter’s Asia, I, p. 213 et seq. Although lake Iltcliir, 1 which 
is situated about 40 versts from here to the west-south-west, in the Kitoi mountains, sends 
its outflow to the Irkuta, it is also let down beneath these platforms of lava. The surface 
of contact on jfehe summit of the Munku-Sagan-Khardyk lies, as we have seen, at ’a height 
of 2,584 meters, and sinks to 2,266 meters; round about lake Iltchir, which lies in 
Archaean rock, 2,180 meters, and on a neighbouring table-mountain known as the ‘little 
table ’ it is^,148 meters. Tschersld, in Asia, I, p. 246. With regard to the erosion which 
has taken place in mica gchist to the extent of 300 meters since the Oligocene period, 
and for high-lying lams, compare Boule, Bull. Serv. Carte geol. France, Comptes rendus 
des collaborateurs poitf 1899, p. 1(^7. 

2 J. B. Auerbach, Bull. Soc. Imp. Nat. Moscou, 1856, XXIX, pp. 154-158 (mineralogical 
description of the graphite) ; Asia, I, p. 157 et seq. ; in particular L. Jatschewski, The 
bed of graphite described by J. P. Alibert on the Botogolskii ‘ Goletz/ Djel. Dor., 1899, 
XI, pp. 19-56. 



71 


ch. m] SOUTH SIDE OF THE EAST SAYAN 

Here, in the valley of a tributary, the Djambulak, between slopes of granite 
and limestone, a basaltic lava-stream descends from the mountains into the 
valley of the Oka, 25 versts from the post-house. At a height of 6,200 feet, 
near the head waters of the Khikuchka stream, whore the cliffs, 7,200 feet 
in height, are formed of limestone, and the valley bottom of lava, Kropotkin 
observed a cone of scoriae and porous lava 400 feet in height, with a funnel- 
shaped hollow at the summit. A neighbouring valley contains a similar cone. 
Kropotkin regarded them both as centres of eruption 

Further to the north-west the structure of the great ranges is little 
known, but judging from the foot-hills, so far as they have been studied by 
Hofmann and Idjitzki, in the region of the Uda,it is probable that here also 
the general strike is north-west or west-north- west 2 . Hofmann, in parti- 
cular, has met with the west-north- west strike (285°) far in the interior of 
the mountains, in the valley of the Kamenka, one of the upper branches 
of the Kula (tributary of the left bank of the Biriussa) ; this valley is 
formed of limestone, greenstone, talc schists, porphyry, and porphyritic 
breccias, and is situated between long. 96° and 97° E., i. e. near the region 
in which the east Sayan range has been supposed to make a bend to join 
the west Sayan 3 . 

The south side of the east Sayan is very different from the north. It 
does not present a Palaeozoic border and even a fairly continuous slope, such 
as occurs on the north side, is absent. It is true that in this region, east of 
the Khabin-dabata, three great drainage basins may be distinguished, but 
they lie so high that they look as though they were depressions lying in 
a common plateau which unites the east Sayan range with the heights of 
Mongolia situated further to the south. 

The first basin is that of lake Kossogol , which we have already 
described. Its waters lie, as we have said, at a level of 5,390 feet. In the 
second basin, surrounded by the southern slopes of the east Sayan range, 
and situated at a height of over 5,000 feet, lies the lake of Dod-nor with the 
smaller lake of Turgo-nor, both, according to Potanin, surrounded by 
basaltic lava, which does not, however, spread over the neighbouring 
country. Rocks of schist and limestone project from the lava and surround 
• 

3 A$ia, I, p. 24 et seq. Tscherski in his time contested this point of view; but since 
centres of eruption have subsequently been found at several places of inner Siberia I see 
no real reason for doubt. 

2 E. Hofmann, Reise nach den Goldwaschen Sibiriens, Beitrage zur Kenntniss 

des Russischen Reiches, 1847, XII, pp. 108, 117, 119, 123, 131, 140. N. Idjitzki, 
Geological explorations along the Siberian railway in 1894, Djel. Dor., 1896, III, pp. 80, 
84, map. * 

3 E. Hofmann, mem. cit., Beitrage zur Kenntn^s des RussiSehen Reiches, 1847, XII, 
p. 124. On the upper Biriussa a few observations have been made of a strike from east 
to west, but the predominance of the north-westerly direction has been placed beyond 
doubt. 



72 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[part IV 

i j . The Shichkil, i, e. the highest branch of the Yenisei, flows ove£ lava on 
leaving the jJod-nor 1 . 

The third basin, the broad expanse of Uriankhdi, is drained by the 
ti ibntaries of the Bie-kem, a river which flows through the Ulu-kem to 
join the Yenisei. This basin, which corresponds to the space between the 
east and west Sayan of the maps, has been made known by Krylow and 
Saitzew ; we shall return to it when we come to describe the upper course 
of the Yenisei. The principal range of the east Sayan here rises into the 
mighty mass of the U In-taiga with its scarped peaks ; Krylow saw it in 
August covered with snow down to its southern foot-hills. The foot-hills, 
so far as they are known, consist of gneiss (head waters of the Assas, 
2,214 meters) and of granitite (peak of Oiba-taiga, near the head waters of 
the Khamsar, 2,066 meters). On the heights of the Assas melaphyre is 
also exposed. Gneiss and granite extend far down into the valleys. In 
the lower parts of the basin (at a height of 1,122 meters) quartz porphyry 
forms many hills on the Assas ; basalt crops out on the river Yissuk 
(at a height of 1,167 meters). Gneiss is again seen on the lower Assas (at 
a height of 924 meters) 2 . 

The lofty mountains which, proceeding beyond long. 96° E. in the west- 
north-westerly or Sayan direction, form the true continuation of the east 
Sayan, and at the same time the watershed between the Tuba and the 
Kana, have been described in detail by Klemenz and more especially by 
Idjitzki. Towards the north, particularly between the rivers Agut and 
Kungurs, porphyry is somewhat widely distributed ; but the lofty ridges and 
* goltzi ’ running to the west-north-west consist chiefly of gneiss and horn- 
blendic granite. Quartzose rocks are recorded as occurring on the bare ridges 
of the Kanskoie Bielgorie (2,020 meters) and on the highest point which has 
been described, that is the pass from the Kana to the little Agut (2,#9& 
meters) 3 . 

The Odinskoie Bielgorie and their granitic extensions may be traced 
into the river basin of the upper Mana. Bogdanowitsch and his colleagues 
have published a map of this region. This shows that the west-north- west 
or north-west strike is continued across the Yenisei 4 . In this most 

1 G. N. Potanin, Sketches from the north-west of Mongolia, 1888, III, p. 172, r. All the 
basalts collected by Potanin on the Dod-nor and in the neighbourhood of lake K? ssogol 
are typical plagioclase basalts ; P. Wenjukow, On some basalts of the north of Asia, 
Travaux Soc. Nat. Saint-Pet ersb., 1885, XVI, pp. 287- 309, in particular p. 299. 

2 P. N. Krylow, Journey into the region of Uriankhansk in 1892, Izviestija Imp. ross. 
Geogr. Obsch., 1893, XXIX, pp. 274-291, map ; A. Saitzew, Petrographical specimens 
collected by MM. Krylow and Klemenz in the Sayan mountain! and the region of 
Uriankhansk, Izviestija Univ. Tomsk, 1896, IX, no. 6, 23 pp. 

3 N. Idjitzki, Geological investigations in the districts of Krasnoiarsk and Kansk, 
government of Yeniseisk, 1893, Gorn. Journ., 1895, II, pp. 53-93. 

4 C. Bogdanowitsch, On the geological investigations carried out in 1893, along the 
railway line of west Siberia, Gorn. Journ., 1894, II, nos. 9 and 10, and Bull, Com. geoL 



TORGOCHINO 


73 


CII. Ill] 

westei’ly^art of the continuation of the east Sayan, granites and por- 
phyries, possibly representing more recent intrusions, become increasingly 
abundant \ Beyond the Yenisei the granites are continued to the north- 
west and are finally concealed by recent sediments 2 . 

It is necessary to cast a glance at the marginal folds on the north 
of the east Sayan. 

The marginal folds occurring on the south side of the granite mass of 
Nishni-Udinsk have already been mentioned 3 . They are followed by 
a bordering series of rock salt deposits included in a red rock, which is 
regarded by several observers as Devonian. Later investigations must 
decide whether, as appears probable, they are to be classed with the 
Silurian deposits of other parts of the great plateau, or with the red 
beds equally salt-bearing which occur west of this locality, in Minuzinsk. 
and which are undoubtedly of Devonian age. Further on, in the direction 
of Krasnoiarsk, the border of the amphitheatre presents a slight inter- 
ruption or indentation ; and at the point where the north border of 
the prolongation of the east Sayan range is cut through by the Yenisei 
near Krasnoiarsk we come upon Cambrian limestone. It occurs both 
near this town and outside the otherwise fairly regular contour of the 
amphitheatre, near the village of Torgochiuo. 

According to Bogdanowitsch the limestone of Torgochiuo belongs to a 
long band which enters this region from the south-east, and is cut off by 
a fault on the Yenisei. The limestone, together with the subjacent grey- 
wacke, is thrown into folds striking to the north-west ; on the Yenisei 
itself, close above Krasnoiarsk, these folds assume a monoclinal structure 
with development of the southern limb. 

These facts would seem to indicate an imbricate structure with 
movement to the north-east, that is a continuation of the structure of the 
marginal folds. But I must repeat that these folds lie outside the boundary 
of the amphitheatre, and north of Torgochino we again see the Archaean 
rocks of the middle Yenisei. It may be an ancient fault-trough which 
gives rise to this interruption in the border., of the amphitheatre. Toll has 
shoWn that the limestone of Torgochino is of Cambrian age ; it contains the 
genera Oleisoides and Archaeocyathus 4 . 

Russie,»1894, pp. 229-280; geological map. The Palaeozoic sediments of this folded 
range are marked on the map as S 2 and D^ 

1 The mining district of Irbin belongs to the south slope of this folded range ; B. K. 
Jaworowski, Gorn. Journ. 1894, IT, and elsewhere. 

2 L. Jatschewski, Preliminary report on the geological investigations carried out in 
1893 in the government of Yenisei, Gorn. Journ., 1894, II, pp. 305, 315. 

I am still in doubt whether to regard the granite indicated on the map of Brusytzin, 
Djel. Dor., 1899, XIII, on the Tumanschet, as the trift border of the east Sayan, or rather 
as apart of the more recent granite described here by Idjitzki. 

4 P. Schmidt, Ueber einige neue ostsibirische Trilobiten, Bull. Acad. Imp. Sci. 
Saint-Pete rsb., 1886, XXX, p. 501 ; von Toll, Verh. russ. k. min. Ges„ 1892, p. 279, and 



74 THE ANCIENT VERTEX [partiv 

From th^ fact that the Sayan and Baikal directions co-exigt in the 
east Sayan rargc we may infer that this range is inseparably connected 
with the trans-Baikal fragment of the vertex. This connexion is also 
maintained, as regards the orography, by the mountains south of lake 
Baikal, by those of Elov and the alps of Tunkin and of Kitoi. The east 
Sayan range also presents Archaean rocks which, as far as our observations 
extend, are the same as those of trans-Baikalia ; broken through in the 
same way by more recent masses of granite and porphyry and overflowed 
by basic lavas which appear sometimes on the summits of the mountains 
and at others in the bottom of the valleys. 

One difference, however, there is : in the east the border of the amphi- 
theatre cuts across the folds, while here it coincides with the Sayan strike, 
and thus the course of the marginal folds, so far as it is known, corresponds 
with that of the Archaean folds. 

The east Sayan range, or Ergik-targak, is a still visible fragment of the 
south-western part of the vertex, and it joins the Mongolian mountains in 
the south in the same way as it joins trans-Baikalia. It is only in the 
western part of its continuation, near Krasnoiarsk, that phenomena occur of 
which the final interpretation must be left to future observers. 

These facts may be explained on the supposition that the amphitheatre 
of Irkutsk is an ancient inbreak of the vertex, and that the north-to-south 
axis of this inbreak lies west of the region where the encounter of the 
Baikal and the Sayan folds takes place. 

The importance assigned in our maps to the arc which is formed by the 
supposed union of the east and west Sayan ranges, probably dates from 
a period when in these remote countries the lines of the great watersheds 
were chosen as political boundaries ; thus the nomenclature has followed the 
frontiers. 

The horst on the Yenisei . Between Kansk and Krasnoiarsk, on both 
banks of the Kana, we meet once again with the gneisses, hornblende rocks, 
and granites of the east. Tscherski was already acquainted with the fact 
that ancient rocks with a north-westerly strike exist on the Kana. 
Bogdanowitsch pointed out that their mode of occurrence in broad ridges is 
different from that of the intrusive granites in the adjacent raiage south of 
Krasnoiarsk — here regarded as the western continuation of the east € Sayan 
range — and that it recalls rather that of the high mountains near the 
head waters of the Mana. These ancient rocks reach at length the Yenisei l . 

N. J. f. Min., 1892, p. 164. T. Tschernyschew, Materialien zur Kenntniss der devonischen 
Fauna des Altai, Verb. russ. k. min. Ges., 1893, p. 38 (Separat-Abdruck),*note I. Also 
Idjitzki, Djel. Dor., Ill, p. 66 ; and in particular, von Toll, Beitrage zur Kenntniss des 
sibirischen Cambrium, 1, Mem. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1899, 8 e ser., VIII, no. 10, 
pp. 16-20 and 33 -48. 

1 The geological map by Bogdanowitsch, in Bull. Com. geol. Russie, 1894, XIII, shows 
the distribution of these rocks on the lower Kana. 



ch. hi] HORST ON THE YENISEI 75 

It ia^o Jatschewski’s labours that we owe our knowledge of the 
remarkable contrast which exists, from Krasnoiarsk downwards, between 
the opposing banks of this great river. On the left, the Tertiary lignite- 
bearing beds extend far and wide into the basin of the Obi. On the right, 
the Archaean mass rises abruptly, and in the south it extends across the 
Yenisei in detached hills which rise^out of the plain. Further north the 
right bank assumes the characters of a fracture. 

North of the Kana the slopes formed by the ancient rocks on the banks 
of the Yenisei are about 100 meters in height, and above them the Archaean 
land rises gradually to the east till it reaches about 350 meters above the 
river, i. e. more than 400 meters above the sea. Granite and gneiss are to 
be seen, the latter vertical with a north-west strike (320°). The breadth 
of this ancient mass can scarcely be less than 50 yersts. Towards the east 
Palaeozoic sediments come in contact with it h 

Thus the ancient rocks approach the mouth of the Angara but do not 
reach it. On the right bank of this river, as we have already mentioned, 
folded limestone appears, striking to the north-west (335°), with dykes of 
more recent granite 2 . 

It has long been known from Hofmann’s investigations that on the Pit, 
and on the tributaries of the Stony Tunguska lying north of the watershed, 
gneiss and clay slate occur with a constant strike to the north-west ; but it 
was not until the publication in 1894 of Jatscliewski’s important account of 
the mining district of the north Yenisei that the connexion of these 
exposures and their significance as regards the structure of Siberia became 
apparent 3 . 

For a distance of 500 versts, from a point not far below the mouth of 
t^e Angara down to the village of Ossinovoi, above the mouth of the Stony 
Tunguska, all that can be seen on the left side of the Yenisei is recent 
alluvial land, while the right side is formed by a rocky slope generally 
about 100 feet in height. From the Yenisei eastwards the land rises in 
a broad ridge 200 to 250 versts across, which is succeeded still further to the 
east by a plateau of less height and different character. We have already 
mentioned the table-mountain Enoch iw skii Potlcan : it rises 100 versts east 
of the Yenisei ; its summit is the beginning of the watershed which 
seprftetes on the one side the Teja and Tchana, flowing northwards to join 
the Stony Tunguska, from the Pit and the other tributaries of the Yenisei 

1 L. Jatschewski, Geological explorations in the north part of the district of Kansk 
and along the railway of Siberia between Nishni-Udinsk and Kimilteisk, Djel. Dor., 
1896, III, pp. 1-24, map. 

2 L. Jatschewski, Preliminary report on the geological investigations carried out in 
the government of Yeniseisk in 1893, Gorn. Jourif , 1894, II, p. 315. 

8 Hofmann, Reise nach den Goldw&schen Sibiriens, pp. 155-209; L. Jatschewski, 
Short account of the mining district north of the Yenisei, Gorn. Journ., 1894, I, pp. 125- 
144 , map. 



76 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[part IV 

on the other Ynle. West of the Enaehimskii Potkan, in the vall^s of the 
Pit, the Kija, and the other tributaries of the Yenisei, we see gneiss, granite,, 
and granular limestone, striking north- west (330°-340°). It thus appears 
that in the western part of the vertex the Sayan strike turns from the 
west-north-west towards the north-west, just as beyond lake Baikal in 
the eastern part of the vertex the Baikal strike turns from the east-north- 
east to the north-east. 

These rocks, since they possess the north-westerly direction of the Sayan, 
show in the clearest manner that the east Sayan range belongs to the 
vertex. They form throughout its length that slope on the right bank of 
the Yenisei which Jatschewski regards as a fracture. Above Ossinovoi, 
near the ‘ seventy islands/ they cross the river and are continued beyond 
it, as was mentioned above, into the basin of the Taz : here too they strike 
to the north-west. The Yenisei, however, enters a transverse valley which 
corresponds in direction with the continuation of the fracture. 

The eastern slope of this broad ridge of ancient rocks, which we will 
call, following Jatschewski, the hortt of ilte Yenisei, is bordered by the 
marginal folds of the amphitheatre. We have already observed them at 
the mouth of the Angara, the Stony Tunguska, and the Lower Tunguska. 
To this same group of folds belongs the anticline, described by Meister, 
which strikes to the north-west near the head waters of the Uderei l . 

Summary. At the risk of considerable repetition, we may select the 
following points as of special importance. 

The visible parts of the ancient vertex which have hitherto been 
mentioned include the whole of trans-Baikal ia as far as the Great Khingan, 
together with the plateau of the Vitim, the highland of the Patom, and on 
the west side of the Baikal the Primorskii Khrebet : further, all the mountains 
on the south of lake Baikal, the mass of the Munku-Sardyk, the whole of 
east Sayan together with its continuation up to and beyond Krasnoiarsk, 
the Archaean rocks on the Kana and along the Yenisei, the horst situated 
north of the Angara on the Yenisei, and the region of the upper Taz. 

The highest summits are Munku-Sardyk and Sokhondo. 

The whole of this region is formed of Archaean rocks with here and 
there eruptive rocks and a few patches of more recent freshwater beds ; 
' with the exception of the Devonian beds on the extreme south-easterly 
margin it is devoid of all fossil if ero\|S marine deposits. 

The Archaean rocks are folded and the folding is of pre-Cambrian age. 
In the east the strike is to the south-west or west-south -west, and in the 
west to south-east of east^south-east ; the first direction is called the Baikal 
strike and the second the Sayan. The two directions are conjoined 

1 A. Meister, Basins of the rivers Uderei and Udoronga, Geological observations in 
the gold-bearing region of Siberia, gold-bearing region of Yenisei, I, 8vo, 1900, 
87 pp., map, r. 



SUMMARY 


77 


€H. Ill] 


towards^e centre. The Baikal strike has been recognized on the Lena, up 
to lat. 60° N., and on the Argun as far as long. 119 or 120° E., and the 
Sayan strike on the Yenisei up to lat. 66° N. (if we include Lopatin’s 
observations, up to lat. 68° N.) and as far as long. 93° E. Towards the soutli 
we have traced them down to lat. 50° N. 

On the west side of lake Baikal, in the Primorsk i i Khrebet, it appears as 
though the two directions, striking on both sides more and more to the 
north, would eventually unite in a mean north-to-south axis, and as though 
compression had occurred acting towards the centre. Consistently with 
this, the island of Olkhon reveals a syncline overfolded towards the interior. 
South of the lake, however, it appears rather as though the two directions 
merged gradually one into the other along a more or less circular arc, but 
here also the true state of things is by no means clear. 

The eastern portion of the vertex is divided by very long fault-troughs 
into more or less parallel horsts. These troughs sometimes follow the 
Baikal folds for very long distances, sometimes cut across them. It is as 
though tension or shearing had succeeded the ancient folding and had 
followed almost the same direction. Ptecent lavas and craters indicate that 
this process of disjunction is not yet terminated. On the Selenga three 
wedge-shaped fields of subsidence have been formed, namely on the Geese 
lake, the Tugnui, and the Khilok. The effects of the same process may be 
traced into the valley of the Djida. Lake Baikal itself consists of two 
basins which are separated from one another by £he prolongation of the 
Bargusin horst into the Swjatoi Noss and the island of Olkhon. It was 
probably formed by a similar disjunctive process during middle Tertiary 
times, indeed before the Sarmatian, or at least before the Pontic phase of 
ceptral Europe. 

The larger part of the western half of the vertex was faulted down 
at an early period, and thus gave rise to the , amphitheatre of Irkutsk. 
From the structure of the marginal folds of the amphitheatre it may be 
inferred that a subsequent compression affected this area at a much later 
date. This view receives important confirmation from the presence in the 
island of Olkhon of a fold overthrust towards the interior, although this 
fold belongs to a far earlier period. 

High up on the Archaean ‘ goltzi ; lie 4 fragments of basaltic sheets 
which are older than the valleys. Other basic lavas have poured down 
into the valleys. The wide extension of these lavas is a phenomenon 
common to the vertex and the tableland. 

MinuZimk and west Sayan . South-west of the mountainous tract 
which is here regarded as the continuation of the east Sayan range lies 
a region presenting a structure both different and peculiar. This region is 
bounded on the south by the west Sayan range; on the west by the 
Kusnetzkii-Alatau and its foot-hills. Towards the north-west, between 



78 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[part IV 

Atchinsk am* Mariinsk, it reaches the northern plain, with \^J*ich it is 
nc where else in contact. It is traversed from south to north by the 
Y« nisei, which receives within its boundaries two important tributaries, the 
Aktau on its left side, and the Tuba on its right. The town of Minuzinsk 
lies almost in the centre of this region. 

Even the configuration of the country is strange. Klemenz gives an 
excellent description of it as it appears from one of the foot-hills of the 
west Sayan range situated in about lat. 52° 45' N., on the right of the 
Yenisei within its second great bend. Towards the south we see broad 
ridges traversed by a labyrinth of deep valleys rich in water, covered with 
thick forest and dominated by the snowy peaks of the west Sayan. 
Towards the north, on the other hand, there broadens out on the left side 
of the Yenisei a vast steppe which, regarded from above, looks at first like 
a plain, and only on closer consideration resolves itself into undulating 
ridges. In the distance it is bounded by the blueish outlines of the hilly 
range of Saksar, which strikes obliquely across from the Alatau to the 
Yenisei. The immediate neighbourhood is clothed with luxuriant forest 
growth, its verdant foliage contrasting with the uniform yellowish green of 
the steppe. This is an isolated fragment of ‘ Mongolian landscape on 
Siberian ground ’ l . 

Numerous lakes, some salt and some bitter, and freshwater lakes also, are 
scattered both over the steppe And the region to the north of the Saksar. 

Such are the characters of the intermediate region of Minuzinsk, which 
separates one from the other two different elements of the mountain 
framework of Asia; the ancient vertex on the east, and the mountains 
belonging to the Altai on the west. These characters are determined 
chiefly by the Devonian transgression. In the stratified series which 
forms the plain, green shales, according to Klemenz, lie at the base ; on these 
red shales with conglomerate are superposed ; then follow calcareous beds, 
with Spirifer Anosoffi and the middle Devonian fauna, the resemblance of 
which to that of the Ural has been pointed out by Tschernyscliew 2 . These 
are covered by red sandstone, brown sandstone, and marl and clay with 
salt and gypsum ; the salt and bitter lakes belong to this horizon, the 
uppermost beds have afforded Lepi dodendron Vellheimianufn , Bornia 

t 

1 D. Klemenz, Die Salzseen ties Minussinischen und Atschinischen Kreises und die 
devonischen Ablagerungen am oberen Yenissei, Izviestija Sibirsk. Otd. Imp. ross. Geogr. 
Obsch., 1892, XXIII, pp. 28-83, in particular p. 49. 

2 T. Tschernysehew, Die Fauna des mittleren und oberen Devon am West-Abhange 
des Ural, Mem. Com. geol. Russie, 1887, III, no. 3, p. 194 ; the Devonian fossils from the 
Beia (tributary of the right bank of the Abakan) have been described by Stuckenberg, 
Materialien zur Kenntniss der devonischen Ablagerungen Sibiriens, Mem. Acad. Imp. 
Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1886, 7 e ser., XXIV, no. 1. Osteolepis and Coccosteus (?) from the salt 
lake of Kisi-kul, 50 versts west of Minuzinsk, have been described by Rohon in Mem, 
Acad. jimp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1889, 7 e ser., XXX (VI), no. 13. 



ch. iii] FOLDS ON THE YENISEI 79 

radiata, ^id other plants of the European Culm. It is not impossible that 
the salt deposits may belong to the Culm. 

The Devonian strata extend over the plain for a breadth of 100 versts. 
With the exception of the river terraces no deposits are known of later age 
than the Culm. Augite porphyrites and diabase porphyrites occur in the 
Devonian, but they do not extend into the Culm. 

The structure of Minuzinsk has been studied for many years by 
D. Kleinenz, who has been kind enough to render me very special assistance 
both by personal instruction and by the communication of extracts from his 
unpublished diaries relating to the west and south-west of the bordering 
regions b In addition we possess valuable works by Bogdanowitsch and 
Jaworowski 1 2 . 

The Devonian of the plain is thrown into broad open folds, which group 
themselves towards the north in arcuate lines having their eonvexity 
towards the south. North of the town of Minuzinsk, from the confluence 
of the Tuba with the Yenisei down to the mouth of the Sissim, i. e. in a 
distance of about 120 versts, Jaworowski counted seven of these horseshoe- 
like folds, which are cut through by the Yenisei. The course of the river 
never coincides with the strike of these folds, except in one instance, where 
it flows to the east-north- east in the northernmost part of the region. 

The arrangement recalls the horseshoe-shaped folds of the Angara 
series in the middle of the amphitheatre of Irkutsk. 

The western border of the country lying in the direction of the Kusnet- 
zkii Alatau is traversed by isolated spurs or branches of the main Alatau range. 

A long folded band of Devonian, with which granite is associated, runs 
from the Alatau almost due north into the region south-west of the great 
salt lake of Chir, that is nearly to the west side of the horseshoe-shaped 
folds mentioned above. 

Still more important is the mountain mass of Saksar, which rises 
according to Klemenz between the rivers Kamychta and Uljbat (tributary 
of the left bank of the lower Abakan, lat. 53° 15' to 53° 30' N.), its sharp 

1 The notes and sketches kindly placed at my disposal embrace the following regions : 
1. the uppei^ spring region of theKemtchik and Alach together with the north-east slopes 
of the Sailiugem (1886, 1887 et seq.) ; 2. the valley of the Tchuya and a part of the Katunj 
(1898)* 3. the region between the rivers Ssakssai and Zagan-gol (uppermost spring region 
of the river Kobdo) in Mongolia (1896) ; 4. Ulan-Daban, Barmen-Daban, lakes Uriu-nor 
and Atchit-nor (1895) ; 5. pass of Shabin-Daban in the west Sayan ; 6. bedding of the 
Devonian at Beiskoie on the Abakan ; 7. mountain bog of Sakssar on the lower 
Abakan. 

2 K. Bogdanowitsch, andP, Jaworowski, Preliminary report on geological investigations 
in Siberia in 1892 ; Gorn. Journ., 1893, II, p. 290 ; P. Jaworowski, On the geological 
explorations carried out in 1893 in the north-easf of the district of Minuzinsk in the 
mining district of Irbin ; op. cit., 1894, II ; K. Bogdanowitsch, Investigations along tl^e 
line of the Siberian railway in 1893 ; Bull. Com. geol. Russie, 1894, XIII, pp. 229-280, 
map ; Jaworowski, op. cit., 1895, XIV, pp. 195-228. 



80 THE ANCIENT VERTEX [paktiv 

outlines eonBvrtiag with the gently rounded hills of Devoniai^andstone 
surrounding it; It is described by Klemenz as a fragment detached from 
the Alatau. It consists of perpendicular beds of ancient schist striking to 
tij.i north-north- west, such as we shall also encounter in the Alatau. The 
Devonian folds of the neighbourhood unite with the outer border of the 
Alatau h 

Salt and gypsum and fossiliferous Devonian beds have long been known 
at Bejsk, Monok, and Arbat, on the middle and upper Abakan, and Klemenz 
even mentions Devonian on the Ada (left tributary of the Little Abakan, 
lat. 52° 30' N.). Klemenz has also pushed westwards up the valley of 
the Tachtyp to the watershed. This consists of the older rocks of the 
Alatau, but Devonian and Culm are still found fairly far np 1 2 . 

East of the Abakan the southern border coincides with the slopes of 
the west Sayan range. A belt of granite and syenite hills of more recent 
age lies at the foot of the Sayan. On the Tasskyl, between the Abakan 
and the Yenisei, Bogdanowitscli and Jaworowski found that the whole 
succession of rocks of the west Sayan is overthrust towards the north, so 
that on descending from the crest we see the younger rocks beneath 
the older. They consist of mica schists, chlorite schists, and clay slates, 
dipping to the south-east (150°-l/0°). This indicates an east-north-east to 
easterly strike, in contrast to the almost north and south strike of the Alatau 3 . 

Further, Klemenz lias also observed an east-north-east strike on the 
south side of the pass of Shabin-Daban, in the granite-veined schists on 
the little river Tossna. Here the mountains consist of two ridges, a 
northerly ridge or the Sayan range proper, which is cut across by the deep 
ravine of the Khantigyr (left tributary of the Yenisei), and the southern 
or Soyotes mountains, which form the watershed between the Khantigyr 
and the upper Ichkem 4 . 

In the whole of this region the sediments everywhere exhibit intense 
folding. The belt of granite hills at the north foot of the Sayan reaches 


1 Klemenz, manuscript notes and Die Salzseen der Minussinisclien und Atschinischen 
Kreises, pp. 47 and 72. The elongated mountain of Isykh described by Bogdanowitscli, 
which lies south-west of the town of Minuzinsk and is composed of Devonian and Culm, 
possibly also exhibits the stage of the Tungusian flora ; this is the only trace of more 
recent formations in the region of Minuzinsk which is known to me. The mountain 
belongs to the folded ranges of the west. The northerly continuation of the Devonian 
along the north-east slope of the Alatau to beyond Mariinsk has been described by 
Saitzew in Gorn. Journ., 1893, pp. 451-464, and op. cit, 1894, pp. 183-195. 

2 Klemenz, Sapiski of the west Siberian branch of the Imp. ross. Geogr. Obseh., Omsk, 
1885, VII, 2, p. 6 et seq. ; reports of the Session, p. 3. The watershed is formed of 
clay slate, quartz-conglomerate, quartz schist, and diorite. Similar rocks appear in 
the middle of the Kusnetzkii Alatau. * 

* Bogdanowitsch and Jaworowski, Gorn. Journ., 1893, IT, p. 291. 

4 Ary-kem, according to the 40-verst map ; lake But, which is said to lie east of this 
point, does not exist. 



THE WEST SAYAN 


81 


CH. Ill] 

the Yeni^i near the towns of Kalskoie and Osnatchennoie, only about 70 
versts south of Minuzinsk, and it is here but little developed. The folding 
is much less marked in the low ground than in the mountains. 

Let us cross the Yenisei. 

South-east of Minuzinsk, in the direction of the Sayan, we see similar 
broad folds of Devonian. Their general course is north-east (45°-8i0 o ), that 
is almost corresponding to the direction of the higher mountains, but with 
deviations to the north-north-west. ‘ Their orientation/ says Bogdanowitsch, 

‘ has evidently been determined by pre-existent tectonic lines/ 

In regard to the eastern half of the west Sayan two sources of 
information are at my disposal. 

The first is the journey made by the botanist Krylow over this part 
of the Sayan and into the region of Uriankhai to the south of it ; the 
rocks collected by him have been determined by Saitzew. The facts 
obtained from this source enable us to construct two transverse sections. 
The first runs through the whole region from north to south, approximately 
in long. 92° 40' E. ; the second is directed to the south-east from the middle 
Tuba up the river Amyl, and then down the south slope of the west Sayan 
through the valley of the Sistyr-kem to the factory of Skobielev on the 
bend of the Bie-kem (somewhere about long. 94° 6' E., lat. 52° 40' N.) h 

My second source of information is a personal communication from 
M. Jatschewski, which contains a list of the rocks collected by Colonel 
Baranow during his inspection of the Sayan frontier in 1897, with 
indications of strike and dip, and also a sketch map showing the localities 
where specimens were obtained. From this it appears that the bend of the 
Bie-kem extends much further north, and consequently that the Sayan, 
near the headwaters of the Ussa, is much narrower, than was previously 
supposed. I am greatly indebted to his excellency General von Stubbendorf, 
as well as to MM. Jatschewski and Baranow for this communication. It 
relates to the region lying between the two routes followed by Krylow 
mentioned above, and supplements and confirms Krylow’s statements. 

On collating these accounts we obtain the following result : — 

A*bout 100 versts south of the town of Minuzinsk, the spurs of the west 
Sayan are fcfrmed of granite. This is the case near the headwaters of the 
Kebesh$ in the Kultui mountains (1,411 meters, syenite and granite), and 
also further to the north-east at Kuchebar, on the Amyl (muscovite granite , 
307 meters) ; between these two points the granite is probably continued to 
the upper Ussa. Here the prevailing rock is coarse-grained biotite-granite. 
Further, amidst the foot-hills on the north an isolated and lofty mountain 

1 P. N. Kiylow, Journey into the region of Uriankhaisk in 1892, p. 274, map ; A. Saitzew, 
Petrographical material collected by P. N. Krylow in the mountainous region of the 
Sayan, and in the region of Uriankhaisk, Izviestija Univ. Tomsk, 1896, IX, no. 6, 
23 pp. 

60LL.AS III 



82 THE ANCIENT VERTEX [part iv 

of hornblend* -granitito (1,914 meters) rises oil the upper Oja. Tfyis granitic 
bolt is the same as that described by Klemenz west of the Yenisei. 

In spite of the wide extension of granitic rocks on the north side of the 
range they are not mentioned as occurring on the crest. This, together 
with the greater part of the mountains, generally consists of a rock which 
is frequently described as chloritic gneiss, and may possibly be identical 
with that which Jatschewski, perhaps more correctly, terms green schist. In 
the western part of this region, in the lofty foot-hills north of the Ussa, 
this green rock forms the upper basin of the Oja (1,555 meters), the valley 
of Aradan, the peak of Mirski Khrebet (1,926 meters), the valley of the 
upper Ussa (1,932 meters, on the Buiba ; the strike, in this region is NE. 48°), 
the west end of the Usun Arga mountains (strike ENE. 80°), the neighbour- 
hood of the high boundary mark on the Khrebet Semdjir (strike ENE. 80°, 
here green aphanite), that of lake Tchernoie (strike ENE. 75°) situated on 
the watershed, the frontier mountain of Irgak (strike ENE. 72°), and the 
watershed of the Amyl (1,276 meters). 

In almost all these parts of the north slope and along the crest of the 
west Sayan range the strike is constant to the east-north-east, corresponding 
with the course of the chain itself. All the more striking, therefore, is the 
fact that, beyond the crest on the south slope, a completely different strike 
prevails. The places where it has been determined lie east and north-east 
of lake Tchernoie, mentioned above, in the higher parts of the mountains 1 . 
It is as though the direction of the east Sayan was already making itself 
felt in this region. 

On the upturned rocks lie patches of red, white, and often dark violet 
sandstone and conglomerate which are the continuation of the Devonian of 
Minuzinsk. 

The first patch lies north of the principal crest in the valley of the lower 
Ussa (right tributary of the Yenisei, confluence close to the point where 
the Yenisei cuts through the Sayan range) ; it consists of violet con- 
glomerates accompanied by sandstone and porphyry (654 meters, east and 
west strike). 

The two other patches are much larger and belong to the south side. 

One of thetn occupies the middle course of the Odja. The third and 
largest fills the whole valley of the Sistyr-kem from the summit tof the 
Sayan down to the Bie-kem ; it is accompanied by porphyry, and this rock 
forms the peak of Yuttig-tasskyl (1,746 meters), which rises above the 
watershed between the Sistyr-kem and Amyl (1,276 meters), near lake 
Tchernoie on the crest of the Sayan. 

1 Mountain ridges between the little rivers of Kara-kem and Ulun-tashtyk, green schist, 
strike NW. 820°, dip 80° SW. ; summit of the mountain Kynsy-Made ; siliceous schists, 
strike NW. 291°, dip. 66° SW. ; rocks at the confluence of the river Tchogom with the 
Ut ; strike NW. 305°, dip. 14° SE. All these remarks are derived from the account of 
Colonel Baranow. 



THE WEST SAYAN 


€H. ni] 


88 


Let us now turn our attention further west. 

The mountain range wh^ch we ascend east of the gorge of the Yenisei, 
after leaving the Devonian patch on the lower Ussa, shows at first chloritic 
gneiss (green schists), but the highest part of the pass of Kurtchubin, on the 
Aspanski-Khrebet (2,317 meters), consists of clay slate, mica-schists and 
hornblende schist. The south slope is formed of clay slate. Far below, at 
the south foot of the range, the singularly jagged mountain of Khairkhan 
rises from the valley of the Ulu-kem. It is formed of white granular lime- 
stone traversed by dykes of brownish-red porphyry b 

Further west the strike in the whole of the west Sayan passes from 
east-north-east to east and west, and this direction prevails in the gorge of 
the Yenisei. On this river, just below the Mongolian frontier, Klemenz 
observed vertical limestone and chloritic gneiss, both striking from east to 
west. M. Karpinski has drawn my attention to the fact that Schwarz has 
met with talc schists on the Yenisei in lat. 51° 45' N. (Mongolian boundary), 
with a strike from west to east and a dip to the north ; in lat. 52° N., with 
an east-north-east strike to almost due east ; and in lat. 53°, with a strike 
from west to east, and a vertical dip 1 2 . 

The chief structural features of Minuzinsk and the west Sayan would 
thus appear to be as follows : — 

The principal strike of the west Sayan is, in the west, east-north-east to 
east and west ; in the gorge of the Yenisei, east and west ; and east of the 
gorge, east-north-east. The chain consists of sharply folded schists with 
patches of Devonian, similarly folded, resting on them unconformably ; the 
latter are associated in the east with porphyry. Near lake Tchernoie they 
reach the crest of the Sayan and pass over it to the other side. In the west, 
on the Tassl^yl, the Sayan for a certain distance is overfolded towards the 
north. 

A belt varying in breadth, of granite and syenite bosses of post-Devonian 
age, borders the north foot of the Sayan both in the west and east, and 
recalls to some extent the granite masses associated with the marginal folds 
of the amphitheatre of Irkutsk. 

Occupying the plain outside this belt the Devonian and Culm are 
thrown into broad folds, which bend round in their strike into the form 
of a lforse-shoe concave to the north. To all appearance a posthumous 
movement has occurred here corresponding to the inversion on the 


1 Potanin has also described the Khairkhan, Sketches from Mongolia, III, p. 120. 

2 The astronomer Schwarz long ago made observations in these regions, as well as 
throughout Siberia ; they have been combined for Minuzinsk by Grewingk in the first 
sketch of a geological map ; Otsch. Imp. ross. Gqpgr. Obsch., 1864, and elsewhere. 
Adrianow encountered talc schists directed 60° NE. at the confluence of the Abdyra with 
the Yenisei (lat. 52° 42' N.). Adrianow, Sap. Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1888, XI, p. 278. 
It is below this point that the most dangerous of the rapids, called Barka, occurs. It is 
formed of granite. 


G 2 



84 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[PART IV 

Tasskyl ar 1 directed northwards and inwards; whence there results 
a certain resemblance to the movements of the Angara beds in the amphi- 
theatre. 

From the west, i.e. from the Kusnetzkii Alatau, spurs and foot-hills 
advance obliquely towards the valley plain. 

The distinction between the west and the east Sayan is very marked. 
In the west Sayan we see nothing of the great development of the Archaean 
gneisses and hornblende rocks ; nor have the basalts of the east Sayan as 
yet been observed; the Cambrian marginal folds are also unknown. On 
the other hand, the Devonian transgression reaches to the tops of the 
mountains. The strike is east-north-east and east to west, while in the east 
Sayan it is west-north-west. 

Wherever the Sayan strike — as understood by Tscherski — is mentioned, 
the reference can only apply to the east Sayan. 

The east Sayan and the west Sayan are two absolutely distinct and 
different mountains ; the former extends to Krasnoiarsk and beyond. They 
should be designated by independent names. 

Tannu-ola. A study of the boundary region of Russia and Mongolia 
shows that between lats. 49° 30' and 52° 30' N., east and west of the 
meridian of 90° E., the chains of the west Sayan, striking almost east and 
west, and of the parallel range of Tannu-ola, encounter the ranges of the 
Sailyugem, which run almost due north and south. The zone where they 
actually meet forms one of the most remote and inaccessible portions of the 
mountain boundary, and even the topographical maps are not always 
exact. 

Here also we begin by taking Klemenz as our guide. 

The Yenisei just before entering the transverse portion pf its vajley 
receives on its left side the river Kemtchik, which derives its tributaries, 
on the left from the Sailyugem, on the right from the Tannu-ola. Klemenz 
has visited all the upper tributaries on the left, and following one of them — 
the Alach — to the west, has crossed the watershed in the direction of the 
Tchultcha, i. e. the watershed between the Yenisei and the Obi 1 . 

< 

In the valleys on the right descending from the Tannu-ola green schists 
and limestone, probably Palaeozoic, striking east and west* occur, but 
just at the entrance to the valley of the Alach clay slate makes its Appear- 
ance striking from north to south, and dipping 62° to the west ; dykes of 
porphyrite have been intruded into it along the strike; then comes red 
limestone with corals and shells, and still further west conspicuous sheets 
of green aphanite. Then for a short distance in the valley of the Alach 
the strike is east-north- east a^id east to west, and further up this valley, as 
well as in all the other valleys on the left side, there is a general strike to 

1 D. Klemenz, Journal; in part also, Voyage en Mongolie occidental, Bull. Soc. 
Geogr. Paris, 1899, 7 e ser., XX, pp. 308-314. 



THE TANNU-OLA 


85 


CH. Ill] 

the north-east in schists. Not until Klemenz had travelled 70-80 versts 
up the Alach towards the high mountains did he observe the strike N. 
20° E., in folded green schists beyond lake Karagol, v hile on the other side of 
the watershed above the lake of Tchultcha, as well as at the sources of the 
little Abakan, he observed talc schists with a north and south strike. 

Here we are on the meridional strike of the southern continuation of the 
Kusnetzkii Alatau, and only 60 versts east of the south end of the great 
lake of Teletzki. Generally speaking, we may, I think, infer that the 
heights lying east of the Kemtchik belong to the Tannu-ola ; that west of 
this river there is a broader zone of foot-hills, with a strike to the north- 
east, and belonging probably to the spurs of the Sailyugem like the little 
chains of west Minuzinsk ; and finally that near the crest the general 
meridional strike of this part of the Alatau is reached. 

The prevailing rocks are schists, with infolded Palaeozoic limestone on 
the lower Alach ; the isolated mountain mass of Taitaiga, which lies south 
of the Alach in front of the Sailyugem, is probably granite. 

Let us turn our attention to a more southerly part of the Sailyugem. 

From the mountain lake of Diulu-kul (lat. 50° 28' N.) the Tchulychman 
flows westwards to lake Teletzki and the Tom. On the north side of 
lake Diulu-kul the mountain mass of Shap-shal , the highest peak in the 
whole region, rises to over 10,000 feet. Adrianow has made the ascent 
over bare slopes of mica-schist. The northern ridge was covered with snow ; 
the crest consists of light grey fine-grained granite, the south side of mica- 
schist, the north of a dark compact rock. ‘ The Shap-shal/ says Adrianow, 
4 is a ridge extending almost from west to east (280°) and united with the 
longest of the high ridges of the Tannu-ola ; it stretches right away to the 
source of the Yenisei and separates Mongolia from the country of the 
Soyotes ?1 . 

Descending from the Shap-shal, Adrianow observed on the southern 
tributaries of the Kemtchik an east to west strike, which is visible in many 
places as far as the Yenisei. In addition to the shale, red sandstone also 
occurs. The wedge-shaped ridge which separates the lowest part of the 
Kemtchik from the Ulu-kem, i. e. from the upper Yenisei, bears on its 
highest pari a transgressive outlier of red sandstone. 

Tlftis far, therefore, the Tannu-ola completely resembles the west Sayan 
both in its east to west strike and in the transgressive outliers, which are 
almost certainly of Devonian age. 

From here to the east, the rocks of the Tannu-ola are known along 
three traverses. We will take them in order from west to east, and will 
follow each one in a constant direction, fron^ north to south. 

1 A. V. Adrianow, Journey to the Altai and the Sayan, Zap. Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 
1888, XI, p. 241 et seq. The height could not be determined by means of the aneroid 
Naudet which M. Adrianow carried. 



86 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[part IV 

Our knowledge or the first traverse is derived from the oft-mentioned 
labours of Krylow and Saitzew. It proceeds from the factory of Sharanov 
or the Ulu-kem (526 meters), crosses the river Diagol, and reaches lake 
Ubza in an east-south-easterly direction. During the ascent Krylow 
collected quartz-free porphyry (1,015 meters), and he found that all the four 
highest peaks of this part of the Tannu-ola (2,478, 2,571, 2,638, 2,707 meters) 
consist of quartzose sandstone and dark violet conglomerate. On the south 
slope, on the Tus-tag (1,484 meters), sandstone and conglomerate lie in flat 
or gently inclined beds. South-west of the Tus-tag (1,316 meters) a bed of 
rock, salt, previously recorded by Potanin, was observed in dark violet 
sandstone, perhaps associated with tuff. The sandstone continues further 
(1,023 meters), and on the south as on the north slopes of the range quartz- 
free porphyry is exposed. We come to the end of the traverse at the 
Ubza-nor (810 meters) \ 

All the specimens collected along this section of the Tannu-ola appear to 
belong to the Devonian system. 

The second traverse has been described by Potanin ; it runs almost due 
south from the confluence of the Ar-Torchalyk with the Ulu-kem to the 
Ubza-nor. Near the Ar-Torchalyk, on the north slope, Potanin observed 
fine-grained gneiss, fine-grained dark grey granitite, then grey limestone, 
some schists, dark red marl, and from the uppermost reaches of the river 
light grey and dark-colored sandstone. Some plant-remains which were 
collected in the Ar (or north) Torchalyk probably belong to the Culm, 
according to Schmalhausen. A steep ascent leads to the pass of Bainshagny, 
and thence, over the snow mountains which mark the highest crest, on to 
the south slope and so to the river Amryk. The walls of the narrow valley 
of the Amryk are formed of sandstone ; blocks of conglomerate lie in # its 
bed ; and the river flows from it into the south Torchalyk, by which we 
reach the rock salt and finally the Ubza-nor 2 . 

Let us return once more to the north foot of the Tannu-ola, i. e. to the 
valley of the Ulu-kem. East of the north Torchalyk the Devonian and 
Culm are followed by the Angara beds, which attain a considerable 
thickness. They consist of sandstone and conglomerate, dark shales also, 
and coal beds. On the right side of the Ulu-kem they occupy the valley of 
the Irbeck up to its sources ; on the left side they occur on the BaSn-gol 
and in the valley of the Eleges. Phoenicopsis august if olici and a species 
resembling Tchekanovskia rigida have been recorded on the Irbeck 3 . 

The third traverse, made known by the works of Krylow and Saitzew, 

1 P. N. Krylow, Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1898, XXIX, p. 274; Saitzew, 
Izviestija Univ. Tomsk, 1896, p. 11. 

2 G. N. Potanin, Sketches from th^* north-west of Mongolia, III, pp. 114-118. Klemenz 
has also studied this section. 

8 J. Schmalhausen, Pflanzenpalaontologische Beitrage, II, Pflanzenreste aus def nord- 
westlichen Mongolei ; Bull. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1888, XXVIII, p. 426. 



THE OTYG 


87 


OH. Ill] 


leads us through those deposits on the Eleges, which have been studied by 
Klemenz and Adrianow, across the Tannu-ola in a west-south- westerly 
direction to the Ubza-nor. The Angara beds extend up to a considerable 
height. Above them the mountains everywhere present soft outlines and 
few outcrops. Tuff or tuffaceous sandstone appears to form the subsoil. 
This is also true of the highest point, a rounded summit situated south of the 
pass (2,523 meters), which appears to consist of tuff. On the southern slope 
of the Tannu-ola, in the upper parts of the Ak-karasuk, we reach quartz-free 
porphyry, and lower down on the river (1,670 meters) dark violet tuff. 

On this line, as on the first, no rock has been collected older than the 
Devonian ; this presents the same characters as at Minuzinsk. 

Having thus glanced at the western part of the Tannu-ola, let us 
return to the Ulu-kem. The river assumes this name near the settlement 
of Safianov (long. 94° E.), where the Khua-kem, coming from the east-south- 
east, joins the Bie-kem, flowing in a great curve from the north (571 meters). 
Here the coal-bearing Angara beds are widely distributed, and appear to 
form the slopes both of the west Sayan and of the Tannu-ola up to a consider- 
able height. Between the Khua-kem and the Bie-kem, however, there rises 
a mountain mass, first described by Krylow, which rivals the Tannu-ola 
and the west Sayan in height : its loftiest summit is called Otyg. The 
great bend of the Bie-kem to the north is caused by it. Coming from the 
south-west, quartz-porphyry is encountered on the foot-hill of Atshallyg- 
art (2,091 meters), and on the upper Ulu-0 ; on the Meshelik (1,644 meters), 
dark violet sandstone, and on the most easterly peak of the Otyg (2,583 
meters), according to Saitzew’s determinations, syenite-gneiss altered by 
dynamic metamorphism, diorite, a rock containing epidote, and quartz- 
porphyry. Beyond the Otyg and proceeding in an east-north-easterly 
direction to the other side of the upper Bie-kem, we reach the southern 
slope of the east Sayan (Ergik-targak), and on the upper Assas we meet 
with gneiss ; basalt also occurs here. 

Let us now return to the Khua-kem. According to Potanin, reddish 
sandstone and clay slate are still visible at the mouth of the Belbej (about 
long. 95° E.), and, higher up in the valley of this tributary, quartz-porphyry. 
It is not uiftil we reach the river Djibej, lying 40 versts further up, that we 
meet *vith any important exposure of granitic rocks 1 . 

From this point for a considerable distance upwards the structure of 
the valley of the Khua-kem is unknown to me. Its highest part, the Shishkit 
or upper Yenisei , with the lake of Dod-nor and the smaller lake of Turga- 
nor, lies west of lake Kossogol, on the southern slopes of the Ergik-targak. 
We have already referred to these. 

The southern slopes of the east Sayan, therefore, like the northern, are 

1 G. N. Potanin, Sketches from the north-west of Mongolia, III, pp. 122, 146; 
Adrianow, Journey to the Altai, &c., p. 273. 



88 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[part IV 

characterized by Archaean rocks and numerous eruptions of basalt; the 
west Sayan, on the other hand, is distinguished not only by a different 
strike but by the Devonian transgression, which may be traced upwards 
from Minuzinsk. This transgression is marked by marine deposits of the 
middle Devonian, upon which rests rock salt, and then follows the horizon 
of the Culm plants ; it reaches the summit of the Tannu-ola and appears 
also in the depression of the Ubza-nor. At the same time the strike of the 
Tannu-ola, like that of the middle part of the west Sayan, is due east and 
west. The went Sayan thus resembles the Tannu-ola rather than, the east 
Sayan . The Angara deposits lie chiefly at the bottom of the valley of the 
Ulu-kem ; marine deposits more recent than the middle Devonian are not 
known in this region. 

All these points of resemblance persist as far east as about long. 95° 30' E. 
In the mountains lying further east, between the Khua-kem in the north 
and the Taz flowing to the Ubza-nor in the south, the prevailing direction — 
as regards the orography — is different, namely to the south-east ; the 
mountains are marked on the Russian military map as the Adjanchorun 
and Sangiles, and are regarded as an easterly part of the Tannu-ola; 
Potanin found grey gneiss on the north side, in the upper valleys of the 
Djibej and the Chargi, and on the south side in the high pass of Chodsul. 
It is tempting to suppose that these eastern mountains belong to the ancient 
vertex, and that they are related to the Tannu-ola much in the same way 
as the east Sayan is to the west Sayan ; but it is impossible at present to 
determine their actual relations. In long. 97° 40' E. these eastern heights 
give off, almost at a right angle, an important branch, the Khan-taiga. In 
the angle thus formed lies the lake of Ter-nor (1,225 meters). The western 
tributaries of the Khan-taiga flow through the Ter-nor to the Khua-kem, 
and the eastern through the Telgir Morin to the Selenga. 

Potanin has rounded the bend of the mountains above Ter-nor, crossed 
the Khan-taiga, as well as a subordinate but high chain which runs parallel 
with it (2,160 meters), and examined the river-basin of the Telgir as far as 
lake Kossogol ; he has also visited the above-mentioned lake of Dod-nor on 
the upper valley of the Yenisei, and the south side of the eastern chains. 
If we study his routes we obtain the following general results b * 

East of the outcrops of gneiss mentioned above, both in the south, to the 
east of the Khodsul Daban, and in the north on the river Chargi, Potanin 
encountered white limestone with flakes of iron glance on the bedding 
planes and traces of graphite. This limestone, which Potanin calls the 
‘ limestone of the Tannu-ola/ is continued from the river Chargi to above 
lake Ter-nor ; the jagged walls of the Khan-taiga, descending steeply to 
the lake, probably consist of the same limestone ; at any rate, it forms the 

1 G. N. Potanin, Sketches from the north-west of Mongolia, I, p. 265 ; III, p. 3 ; 139, 
146, 148, 153 et passim. 



THE KHANGAI 


89 


CH. Ill] 


whole of the pass. Beyond the pass to the east, in the adjacent river 
valleys at the foot of the Khan-taiga, the limestone rests on' granite and 
is traversed by dykes of orthoclase-porphyry. North -north-east from this 
point the Telgir Morin flows in limestone, and, bending first to the south 
and afterwards to the east, it forms the southern boundary of this broad 
limestone tract at a point due south of lake Kossogol and about 80 versts 
distant from the lake. At the south end of lake Kossogol stands the 
Mongolian post-house of Khal-gol ; here Potanin observed a strike from 
north-west to south-east. This limestone region, which joins the eastern 
Tannu-ola, probably embraces, as we have seen, the whole of the Khan- taiga, 
a part of the upper course of the Telgir Morin, the southern half of the 
shores of lake Kossogol, the Buren-Khairkhan south of lake Kossogol, and 
all the heights as far as the Telgir Morin, so that its breadth here from 
north to south may be estimated at about 120 versts. 

How this limestone region is continued, or in what manner it terminates, 
has not yet been ascertained. It is not known to extend into the valley of 
the Selenga towards the east. 

In lithological character the rock recalls the thick limestones on the 
borders of lake Baikal. 

We have now travelled from the Khan-taiga towards lake Kossogol and 
the Telgir Morin, i. e. towards the east. Potanin, however, also starting 
from the Khan-taiga, followed a route in a south-easterly direction across 
the Ikhe-chaldyn-daba (2,358 meters), and repeatedly met with red granite 
and limestone on both its slopes. In long. 99° E., on lake Sangin-dalai, he 
records the occurrence of rock salt : it would be interesting to know r 
whether the Devonian transgression really reaches this point b 

Khangai. Those parts of the vertex lying south of lake Baikal are 
most intimately connected with the vast mountainous region of Khangai 
which occupies the north of Mongolia. The waters of the Khangai flow to 
the Yenisei, but they follow different routes. The valley of the Yenisei, 
which has been considered above, starts from lake Kossogol and runs at 
first to the west : in the earlier part of its course the river is called the 
Khua-kem and then the Ulu-kem : as we have already seen, it cuts through 
the west Sayttn and turns to the north as it enters the region of Minuzinsk ; 
then, a»d not till then, it receives the name of Yenisei. 

South of the Ulu-kem, the Tannu-ola forms an orographical connexion 
which unites the Khangai and the ancient vertex in the east with the 
Sailyugem in the west, and thus separates the basin of the Yenisei from 
a region of depression which is without outflow, and covered with lakes. 
This region is bounded on the east by the Khangai, on the north by the 

G. N. Potanin, Sketches from the north-west of Mongolia, I, p. 274. Some bands of 
limestone run south-east and north-west, that is parallel to the chain itself and 
perpendicular to the river Shabir ; Sangin-dalai, p. 253. 



90 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[part IV 

Tamra-ola, - id on the west and south-west by the Gobi Altai; towards the 
south-east it is connected by a fairly narrow zone with the vast undrained 
I- gious o^ inner Asia. Piewtzow has named it the ‘ valley of the Lakes.’ 
It *s traversed obliquely by narrow and sometimes very high rocky ridges, 
arch as the Khankhukei, and between these ridges lie the lakes of 
Durga-nor, Kara-usu, Kirghiz-nor, Ubza, Uriu-nor, and others. 

The mountainous region of Khangai extends to the south to beyond 
lat. 46° N. Eastwards it merges into the Kentei and the mountain 
regions north of Urga, which have already been mentioned as continuations 
of the mountains , of trans-Baikalia. In a tectonic sense no boundary 
separates the Khangai from the Gobi, since the denuded remains of a similar 
structure may be recognized in the adjacent parts of the Gobi itself. 

The southern and eastern parts of the Khangai also send their waters 
to the Yenisei, but these tributaries mostly follow an easterly course to the 
Selenga, and only reach the main river by a very circuitous route through 
lake Baikal and the Angara. Lake Kossogol belongs to this system 
of easterly drainage, which extends westwards into the neighbourhood of 
the Uliasutai, close to the border of the valley of the Lakes. 

The Khangai is a southern part of the ancient vertex . 

If we regard the river Telgir Morin, south of lake Kossogol, as forming 
approximately the southern boundary of the limestone range which is 
connected with the Tannu-ola, then four degrees of latitude south of this 
boundary still belong to the Khangai. In the whole of the vast region 
between the river Orkhon in the east and the Dsapkhyn, flowing to the 
Kirghiz-nor, in the south-west, not a single pass, according to Klemenz, 
lies lower than 7,000 feet ; some attain a height of 10,000 feet, while the 
peaks do not as a rule rise more than 1,000 feet above them. An excep- 
tion is formed by the mountain mass of Orkhon-Khairkhan-Tengri, 80 
kilometers east of Uliasutai. It reaches a height of 13,000 feet and bears 
a small glacier. Its lower part consists, according to Klemenz, of granite 
and its summit of melaphyre ; it affords, therefore, another instance of 
high-lying lavas, such as distinguish the mountains around lake Baikal K 

For a knowledge of this region we possess, in addition to the section 
drawn by Obrutschew from Kiakhta to the east, beyond Ur^a 1 2 , a second 
section which has been studied by Potanin. This runs to the north^north- 
east across the whole breadth of the Khangai from the south border, in 

1 1). Klemenz, Izviestija Sibirsk Otcl. Imp. ross. Geogr. Obscli., Irkutsk, 1896, XXVII,. 
annual reports, p. 60, and 1897, XXVIII, p. 158, and Expedition to Mongolia in 1894, 
op. cit., 1894, XXV, pp. 126-129 ; also Voyages en Mongolie occidentale de 1885 a 1897 ; 
Bull. Soc. Geogr. Paris, 1899, XX, £p. 308-329, map, in particular p. 317. 

2 V. A. Obrutschew, Geological sketch of the caravan route from Kiachta to Kalgan ; 
Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1893, XXIX, pp. 347-390, sections ; also Central Asia, 
North China, and Nan-shan, 4to, St. Petersb., 1900, I, in particular p. 20 et seq., maps. 



THE EAST KHANGAI 


91 


CH. Ill] 

about long. 101° E., to the point where the Selenga crosses lat. 50° N. 1 . 
The fullest account has been furnished by Klemenz, who has traversed 
the Khangai in many directions. I owe most of my information regarding 
this region to personal communications which he has been good enough to 
make to me. 

Let us begin our brief survey in the north-east. 

In the south of trans-Baikalia a considerable part of the vertex dis- 
appears beneath the Gobi. Obrutschew recognizes in the ancient rocks 
south of Kiakhta the west-south-westerly continuation of the horst of 
Malkhan, the north-easterly continuation of which forms the Yablonoi range. 
Thus we have at once obtained an important result which we may connect 
with another remarkable fact. Near Urmuchtu, on the Shara-gol, hardly 90 
versts south of Kiakhta, Obrutschew came upon a band of steeply upturned 
clay slates striking to the north-east, with remains of Fenestella and corals 
probably of Palaeozoic age. This, so far as I know, is the nearest approach 
made by marine fossiliferous sediments to the middle region of the vertex 2 . 

It is probable that this fragment, wedged in amongst older rocks, is a 
spur from that region of metamorphic schists and greywacke which extends 
through trans-Baikalia from the south side of the Malkhan to the springs of 
the Ingoda, and includes the southern parts of the Teherski and the Daurian 
mountains. It is, however, only the forerunner of a much more extensive 
zone of similar rocks. 

The Devonian fossils of the Gasimur-Onon mountains have already been 
mentioned. Indeed the study of trans-Baikalia now enables us to recognize 
a very long band of metamorphic schists, greywacke, quartzite, and sedi- 
ments of known Devonian age, which begins at Strietensk on the Shilka, 
strikes to the south-west across Nertchinsk, and is traversed by the 
Ingoda above the mouth of the Onon ; then it suddenly expands to a great 
width on the line of the railway ; again constricted, it forms the mountains 
of Gasimur-Onon and Erman on both sides of the Onon, which lies in a fault- 
trough, and finally enters Mongolia still keeping the same south-westerly 
strike. Here too the river Onon probably marks its course, for Obrutschew 
has recognized the same zone at Urga, where it is very broad. It appears 
75 versts north of this town and extends perhaps 50 versts to the south of 
it. N«tr its southern border, at the settlement of Khadyn, Obrutschew 
found the remains of a Conularia 3 . 

1 Gr. N. Potanin, Tangutan-Thibetan frontier of China and central Mongolia, 4to r 
St. Petersb., 1898, 1, p. 481, 503 et seq., r. 

2 V. A. Obrutschew, Geological sketch of the caravan road, p. 354 ; also Central Asia, 
I, p. 10. 

M. Obrutschew has very kindly entrusted to me specimen of the rock, the surface 
of which presents a hollow cast of this fossil. The way in which the ridges cross the edge 
shows the correctness of the generic determination. The fossil resembles the Conularia of 
the Salt Range, but it is not possible to identify it more precisely. 



92 THE ANCIENT VERTEX [part iv 

This is the same schistose zone as that which Potanin encountered on 
trie Tuj (loug, 100° 27' E.) in the most southerly part of his section ; here 
it is covered in places by basalt h 

finally, M. Klemenz assures me that he has also recognized this zone on 
the r iver Baidarik (about long. 99° 10' E.), at the northern entrance to 
the valley of the Lakes. 

Thus after leaving the Shilka and traversing the eastern part of the 
vertex, this girdle of schist, which in part at least is of Palaeozoic age , 
surrounds the whole east and south of the Khangai and unites that 
region with the vertex. 

Still further west, even beyond the Baiderik, Klemenz observed that the 
river Shara-ussu (south-east of Ulianputai) follows a line of fracture 
striking to the east-north-east, along which Carboniferous shales and lime- 
stones are traversed and altered by red quartz-porphyry. 

The inner parts of the Khangai consist of gneiss and ancient schists 
frequently traversed by granite. The ancient schists are folded, and strike, 
so M. Klemenz tells me, for a long distance to the north-north- west, near 
meridian 101° E. With this direction they cut across the valleys of the 
uppermost part of the Selenga, Khanyn-gol, the Khoitu-Tamir and Urta- 
Tamir, which are therefore, without exception, transverse valleys, and only 
towards the south border of the Khangai, north of the Ongyn, which flows 
to the south-east to the Gobi, does an east and west strike occur. 

In several places patches of the plant-bearing Angara series appear ; thus 
Potanin mentions beds with coal in the most southerly part near the station 
of Udjun, and also in the north, on the Altata, which flows from the gently 
rounded ridge separating the lower Orkhon from the Selenga. 

The Khangai again resembles the vertex as regards the presencp of 
basic lavas. The high-lying melaphyre of the Orkhon-Khairkhan-Tengri 
has already been mentioned. Basalts which appear to be of recent age are 
present in many places in the river valleys. Potanin found basalt to the 
south on the river Tuj ; the entomologist Leder reached this locality from 
the north-east, and on his way discovered, among the ramifications of the 
great mountain mass of Subur-khairkhan, a, valley running to the west (and 
tributary to the upper Tuj) which is occupied by a lava stream*. This is in 
all probability a part of the great basaltic region, discovered by ESemenz 
between the headwaters of the Orkhon and the Ongyn 1 2 3 . These points lie 
close to the south-east border of the Khangai, but even in the midst of the 
border great streams of melaphyre and basalt occur. For example, the 


1 G. N. Potanin, The Tangutan-Thibetan Frontier, p. 514. 

2 H. Leder, Eine Sommerreise in der nOrdlicfcen Mongolei im Jahre 1892, Mitth. k.k. 
geogr. Ges. Wien, 1895, XXXVIII, p. 107. 

8 D. Klemenz, Report of Journey in IzvieBtija Sibirsk Otd. Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 
Irkutsk, 1896, XXVII, annual reports, pp. 15-19. 



93 


oh. hi] THE VALLEY OF THE LAKES 

Tchulutei (tributary of the right bank of the Selenga), according to Klemenz, 
excavates its bed in basalt for a distance of more than 100 kilometers, 
and in the basin of this river, near lake Terkhain-Zagan-nor , the same 
observer discovered two craters formed of scoria and lavas \ 

All these circumstances indicate a structure corresponding to that of the 
vertex, and lead us to suspect in this district the existence of similar 
disjunctive lines. It is a remarkable fact that the strike of the Archaean 
rocks in the long stretch of country explored on meridian 101° is directed 
to the north-north-west and consequently somewhat more to the north 
than the folds of the Sayan on the west of the vertex. It is true, however, 
that the north-north-westerly direction also appears further north on the 
Yenisei. 

The valley of the Lakes . The red and violet sandstones of the Devonian, 
often associated with porphyry, extend up to the highest peaks of the 
Tannu-ola which have yet been ascended, i.e. to a height of over 8,800 feet 
(2,682 meters). The Culm also extends to a great height. Then follows 
the south declivity. Close to the south foot of the mountains lies a vast 
plain, and in it the great lake of TTbza, It marks the northern end of the 
valley of the Lakes. 

From the western end of the Tannu-ola a lofty mountain range pro- 
ceeds stretching to the south-south-east. It is about 180 versts in length, 
bounded in a peculiar manner and isolated on the west, south, and east. 
It is crowned by two peaks of great height, the Turgun and Kharkira: 
the latter bears on its east side the glacier of Barun-Sala. We will term 
this range taken as a whole the Kharkira . 

The boundary of the Kharkira is formed in the following manner. 
Quj^e close to its union with the Tannu-ola, a deep caldron, in which lies 
the completely enclosed lake of Uriu-nor, has been formed by subsidence. 
South of this, the narrow but lofty range of Barmen (2,575 meters) runs 
west-north- west from the west side of the Kharkira to the Sailyugem. Then 
follows, on the west side, a much greater subsidence, that of the Atehit-nor, 
and from this lake flows the river Kobdo, the valley of which separates the 
west side of the Kharkira from the heights of the Gobi-Altai. On its east 
side the Kh&rkira slopes down to the valley of the Lakes. 

WMen Potanin crossed the Sailyugem from the steppe of the upper 
Tchuja he encountered at a considerable height on the east side of this 
range, which descends to the Atchit-nor, a white conglomerate characterized, 
like the ancient conglomerates of these mountains, by a matrix which is not 
calcareous but of the nature of kaolin. The conglomerate extends from 
the tributary Djilga through the valley of the Katu, then, associated with 

1 D. Klemenz, Account of two extinct volcanos in the mountains of Changai in 
northern Mongolia, Izviestija Sibirsk Otd. Imp. rosa. Geogr. Obsch., Irkutsk, 1897, 
XXVIII, p. 140 et seq., plates. 



94 THE ANCIENT VERTEX [part iv 

sandstone and dark slates, through that of the Bekom-bere, down to the 
plain in which the lakes lie. 

Beyond the plain Potanin ascended the mighty Kharkira. Its highest 
pj 'amid consists of red granite, but red slate ascends high up to the snow 
fields, and in the narrow high-lying valley of the Khartarbagatei, which 
runs down to the east between the two peaks Kharkira and Turgun, 
Potanin observed t^ofiglomerate with a kaolin-like matrix, and at the same 
time coal seams ; in the associated slates he found Bornia radiata, 
Cardiopteris frondosa, Lepidodendron Veltheimianum , and other plants of 
the Culm. 

Coal measures are known both on the south-west toward the Atchit-nor 
and on the east side of the Kharkira. 

The same conglomerate extends on the east down to the depression 
of the valley of the Lakes, and forms the range of hills of the Bomkhara 
on the south side of the Khankhukei, north of the Kirghiz-nor L 

From the lofty peaks of Kharkira and Turgun the high ridge of the 
Yamatei leads to that of Barmen, mentioned above, which separates the 
two lakes of Uriu-nor and Atchit-nor. Klemenz has ascended the Yamatei, 
and describes the view from it. Towards the north we see the deeply 
insunken Uriu-nor extending to the foot of the Tannu-ola, then Kharkira 
and Turgun and a part of the border of the Ubza. The favourable 
light enabled Potanin to recognize on all the peaks within sight bands 
of red rock which stand out in sharp relief from the dark underlying 
slates. Folds occur, and the red coal-bearing beds are also folded, but the 
strike of these beds is always a little different from that of the older schists. 
The strike of the latter fluctuates between north-north-east and north- 
north-west, while the red rocks strike east and west. Below, around 
the vsouth end of the Atchit-nor, phyllite is seen with a strike to the 
north-north-east. 

^Devonian and Culm extend in unconform able transgression from the 
high regions of the Tannu-ola to those of the Kharkira. They also clothe 
ptirts of the outer slope of the Sailyugem, and are found both at the bottom 
of the valley of the Lakes in the east, and of the Atchit-nor in the west. 
These facts show that the Kharkira is a horst. 1 * * 4 From the Barmen/ says 


1 G. N. Potanin, Sketches from north-west Mongolia, 8vo, I, St. Petersb., 1881, 
p. 304 ; III, pp. 8-48 ; Conglomerates from the Kirghiz-nor, p. 54 ; J. Schmalhausen, 

Die Pflanzenreste aus der Ursa-Stufe im Flussgeschiebe des Ogur in Ost-Sibirien, Bull. 
Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1876, IX, and 1877, X ; Pflanzenpal&ontologische Beitrage, 
II, Pflanzenreste aus der nord-westlichen Mongolei ; specimens collected by Potanin and 
Adriano w ; op. eit., 1888, XXVII, p* 426 ; Klenvmz also found coal measures and fossil 
plants on the Atchit-nor, in the plain of the Bukombere, which descends from the 

Sailyugem ; Izviestija Sibirsk Otd. Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., Irkutsk, 1897, XXVII, 

annual reports, p. 60. 



ch . in] THE VALLEY OF THE LAKES 95 

Potanin, ‘ we look down upon the Uriu-nor three thousand feet below ; 
no other caldron of Mongolia is so narrow and so deep V 

At this spot, then, we have before us a local, limited, and caldron -shaped 
inbreak. 

Having described these inbreaks on the west side of the Kharkira, 
let us next enter the valley of the Lakes itself. The configuration of this 
region presents a remarkable peculiarity ; this is the existence of a number 
of narrow high ridges, which run obliquely to the west-north-west or north- 
west from the slope of the Khangai to the Gobi -Altai and Kharkira : 
and a corresponding series of intervening, more or less independent, low- 
lying regions. In the west we were able to recognize a number of great 
subsidences even from the early observations of Potanin; here the situation 
is still clearer. 

Klemenz has shoiva that the valley of the Lakes 'is an area of subsidence 
and that the subsidence has taken place by stages along step-faults 1 2 . 

On the first , southern stage , in the latitude of the town of Kobdo, lie 
lakes Kara-usu (Ikliesaral, 1,170 meters) and Durga-nor (Kara-nor). The 
range of Khara-Argalintu , which comes far from the south-east and joins 
the south foot of the Kharkira, cuts off this stage to the north ; while it 
is itself broken through by the outflow of the Durga-nor. Its north border 
coincides with a fault. 

The second stage is divided into two parts : in the first or upper part lies 
the lake of Dseren-nor, close to the fault and 300 feet below the first 
stage. Up to this point Klemenz was able to trace the deposits of the 
Gobi, but they do not extend further towards the north. 

On a second and somewhat lower part of the second stage lies the 
Kirghiz -nor. This stage is bounded on the north by the lofty transverse 
range of Khankhukhei , which approaches the Kharkira south of Ulankom. 
We have already pointed out on its south side the conglomerates of the 
Bomkhara, observed by Potanin, which probably belong to the Culm and 
are traversed by long faults. Its north side, like that of the Khara- 
Argalintu, coincides with a fracture. Quartz-porphyry and felsite of 
Devonian or Carboniferous age are exposed along the fracture. 

We now arrive at the third and lowest stage. On this is situated the 
Ubza-nor (810 meters according to Kry low, only 721 meters according to the 
military map), the surface of which lies about 1,000 feet below that of the 
Kirghiz-nor of the preceding stage. 

Thus we reach the south foot of the Tannu-ola. 

1 O. N. Potanin, Sketches from north-west Mongolia, III, p. 15. Uriu-nor has no 
outflow ; its water is salt ; the official map of Russia gives it a quadrilateral form, with 
sides of about 12 versts; the plains which surround it at the mouths of the tributary 
streams appear to be quite small. 

2 D. Klemenz, Otschet Imp. ros 3 . Geogr. Obsch. for 1896, p. 96. 



96 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[part IV 

From th«*se observations it follows that the northern and inner stage of 
the valley of the Lakes is the lowest ; no process but subsidence could 
produce this result. We have here a broad inbreak, traversed obliquely 
by ^top-faults. But while the dividing ridges pass towards the south-east 
into the foot-hills of the north side of the Gobi-Altai, a long fault-trough 
lies between the latter and the south border of the Khangai. This extends 
in a broad curve from the middle stage of the valley of the Lakes, the 
Kirghiz-nor, to the Gobi, comprises the course of the river Dsapkhyn and the 
lakes at the mouth of the Baidarik, as well as that of other rivers coming down 
from the southern Khangai, and is accompanied on its north side along the 
Khangai, according to Klemenz, by a long belt of basaltic outcrops. This 
very long trough — typical of its kind — is the Dsapkhyn trough ; it separates 
the Khangai from the horst-like spurs of the Gobi-Altai. 

Gohi-AHai. The Kusnetzkii Alatau and Sailyugem run more or less 
north and south. They are the eastern members of a great mountain group, 
which, as will be shown later, undergoes a complete change of strike in the 
immediate neighbourhood of the Mongolian frontier. This group forms the 
Altai proper, or the Kussian Altai. The change of strike separates it, in the 
south, from the great Mongolian or Gobi Altai. The rocks are also different 
in the Russian Altai. Palaeozoic beds with eruptive cores prevail ; in the 
Gobi-Altai, on the other hand, gneiss and Archaean rocks predominate. 

Klemenz, coming from the south into the basin of the river Kobdo, 
extended his journey almost as far as the Russo-Chinese frontier. This 
indefatigable explorer reached the Zagan-gol, which flows down from the 
lofty goletz of Kiityn. This goletz marks the place where the watershed 
of the Gobi-Altai is crossed by the Mongolian frontier. Here schist with 
a west-north-westerly strike everywhere prevails, but on ascending the 
Sakssai to the Otshatai-Daban, which separates this river from the upper 
Kobdo, transgressive patches of dark red sandstone and conglomerate are 
met with 1 . 

We must therefore suppose that the Devonian transgression of the 
Tannu-ola and Kharkira extends as far as the headwaters of the Kobdo in 
the Gobi-Altai. The question might even be raised whether the horkt of 
Kharkira is not simply a part of the Tannu-ola. The long aharp ridges 
which run from the Kharkira to the south-east, and the long fractures 
which, following the same direction, break up the Gobi-Altai into similar 
long horsts, resemble in every respect the disjunctive lines of trans-Baikalia. 
The chains of Khankhukhei or Argalintu, which traverse the valley of the 
Lakes obliquely, recall the range of Bargusin-Swjatoi-Noss-Olkhon, which 
similarly traverses lake Baikal obliquely ; and the valley of the Lakes or 
the trough-fault of Dsapkhyn represents just as little as lake Baikal the 
boundary of a tectonic unit. 

1 D. Klemenz, Journal for 1896. 



THE GOBI ALTAI 


97 


CH. Ill] 

The Gobi- Altai is not a continuation of the Russian Altai ; it is only 
separated from the Khangai by the subsidences of the valley of the Lakes, 
and is a marginal fragment of the vertex itself \ 

In order to obtain an idea of the Gobi Altai we must proceed far to the 
north-west into the river-basin of the Black Irtish. 

South-east of lake Saissan rises the great mass of the Saur (3,633 
meters). Muschketow has shown that it is the extremity of a range which 
proceeds through the Tarbagatai and the Tchingis towards the north-west, 
as far as the mountains of the Kirghiz steppe \ 

In the south-eastern part of the Saur faults and subsidences occur. 
From the observations of Bogdanowitsch we obtain the following: — 

A section drawn from lake Orkhu, i. e. from lat. 46° N. to the north- 
north-west as far as the Saissan (lat. 48° N.), meets the hill ranges of Orkhun- 
Nuntag, Semistau (or Urkashar), Tarbagatai (at the place of its union with 
the Saur), and finally Monrak, which lies between Tarbagatai and lake 
Saissan. These ranges are bounded on the north by fractures, which cut 
across the strike of the beds ; Tarbagatai, which lies between them, is 
a horst, bounded by step-faults on the north and south. ‘ From the north 
slope of the Kuen-luen as far as the north foot of the Monrak on lake 
Saissan,’ says Bogdanowitsch, ‘ we may trace the series of faults and 
flexures which have accompanied the subsidence of the plains of Kashgar, 
of Dzungaria, and the Saissan V 

From the collections of Koslow, which have been studied by Obrutschew, 
it further appears that the whole east and north slope of the Saur 
mountains, using this term in its broadest sense, furnishes only basalt, 
melaphyre, and associated tuffs. This applies to the heights of Salburty and 
Kara*andyr-ula (both west of Bulun-tokhai), to the north slope of the lofty 
Saur, and to its western continuation, Monrak, south of the Saissan. 

Thus the depression of lake Saissan and also probably its continuation 
towards Bulun-tokhoi assume the characters of a fault-trough, and indeed 
more or less those of a coulisse-trough. A fact which affords confirmation 
of this view, and which indicates the recent date of the subsidence, is 
furnished by Ignatiew, who was sent to examine the lignite beds on lake 
Saissan, and found that they plunged with an almost vertical dip beneath 
the waters on the north side of the lake, near the promontory of Tchakul 1 2 3 . 

1 J. W. Muschketow, Turkestan, 8vo, St. Petersb., 1886, 1, and geological map, pp. 85 
and 86. A very detailed work on the region lying south-east of Balchash, and even 
a geological map of the Dzungarian Alatau, was drawn up by Wlangali as early as 
1849-1851, and published in the Gorn. Journ., 1858, II (with many appendixes). 

2 K. J. Bogdanowitsch, Geological investigations in east Turkestan. Results of the 
expedition to Thibet in 1889-1890 under th<e direction of M. Piewtzow, published by the 
Russian Geographical Society, 1892, II, 4to, p. 86, r. 

' Ignatiew, Coal measures in the neighbourhood of the outpost of Zaissan, Zapiski 
Sibirsk Otd. Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., Omsk, 1885, VII, no. 2, various communications, p. 7. 

30LL.A8 HI Ti 



98 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[part IV 

All subsequent observations tend to show that Bogdanowitsch had with 
great perspicacity found the right explanation. The whole of Dzungaria 
is traversed towards the east by escarpments which are sometimes ranged 
one above the other like gigantic stairs, and separated by long troughs, 
open or flattening out at both ends. The latter are frequently designated 
by the word Kholai. The * gateway ’ north of Santskhu also exhibits this 
structure. The same explanation applies to the long rocky horsts of the 
Gobi- Altai and of its western border. The Gobi- Altai itself is a horst 
situated between the valley of the Lakes and the subsidence of Dzungaria . 

That it is not a regular folded range is evident from the presence of great 
masses of gneiss at its western foot. 

Koslow has furnished an admirable description of the Gobi Altai as 
a whole. According to him the west of the range to about the meridian of 
Kobdo is broad, with many peaks rising above the know line; there is 
a sufficient rainfall, and convenient pasturage ; the east, which is of much 
greater length, is barren and poor in water. Up to the neighbourhood of 
the Khuduk-nor, i. e. to about long. 98° E., there stretches an important and 
continuous mountain range, the Altain-nuru. In the north, towards the 
valley of the Lakes, but more especially in the south, towards the desert, it 
is accompanied by parallel ranges. Beyond long. 98° E. the whole chain 
breaks up into ranges of this kind ; among them Ikhe-bogdo and Baga-bogdo, 
situated south-west and south-east of the Orok-nor, rise above the limit of 
perpetual snow. All these ranges adapt themselves more or less exactly to the 
crescentic curve of the Gobi-Altai. Koslow’s companion, Kasnakow, who 
traversed the south side of the chain, believes that the Gobi-Altai terminates 
where the eastern end of the range of Gurban-Saikhan flattens out, near the 
temple of Shjuljute (between long. 104° and 105° E.) \ 

Of Koslow’s work we only possess a preliminary report. Potanin has 
drawn four transverse sections across the Gobi-Altai which bear admirable 
witness to his devotion and perseverance. Three relate to the Altain-nuru ; 
the fourth runs across Ikhe-bogdo. We will discuss this great range in 
connexion with these sections. 

i 

In contrast to the Russian Altai, gneiss appears here in great force. 

Its importance is already shown by the first section from Bulun-tokhoi 
to Kobdo . The foot of the range consists of grey gneiss, and the upper 
course of the Black Irtish, so far as it lies in the mountainous region, as 
well as that of the river Krau with the Kharbagatai, is situated in gneiss. 
Here this rock has a breadth of at least 70-80 versts, and extends nearly to 

1 P. K. Koslow, Letter written % at the bivouac on the Ulan-nor, Nov. 20, 1899 ; followed 
by A. N. Kasnakow, Preliminary report on the journey from lake Chulmu-nor to lake 
Ulan-nor on the south side of the Altai, and W. F. Ladygin, Journey to the upper reaches 
of the river Urungu (Bulugun', Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1900, pp. 18-83, 
map. 



THE ALTAIN-NURU 


99 


CH. Ill] 


the pass of Urmu-gaitu (2,961 meters), where it is met by chloritic clay slate. 
Beyond the pass comes the lake of Dain-gol, situated at a great height ; 
the snow-covered summit of the Mustau rises on its western shore, and 
gneiss debris extends down to the lake. We next reach a zone of schists 
and granite mountains. The upper course of the Sakssai lies in green 
schists ; porphyry also occurs. Attave the Tal-nor and close to the ice of 
the highest crest a bl&ck r6ck appears with columnar jointing (basalt?). 
Many varieties of schist now succeed and continue as far as the pass of 
Terekti (3,200 meters). Once more grey gneiss becomes visible; the 
descent to the east into the valley of the Lakes takes place over formid- 
able granite cliffs ; Kobdo, on the west border of the valley of the Lakes 
(1,300 meters), lies in granite. 

We may add that Prjewalski also met with gneiss, besides bluish granite 
and schists on the upper Urungu, on the west slope of the Gobi-Altai (long. 
91° to 92° E.) \ 

M. Klemenz informs me that he has found marine Permo-Carboniferous 
fossils in the desert south of the Gobi-Altai at Nursu (likewise between 
long. 91° and 92° E., and more than 100 versts east-north-east of Gushen). 

Four hundred versts south-east of the first section lies the pass of Ulen- 
Daban (between long. 93° and 94° E.), across which Potanin drew his second 
section , following the road from Khami to Kobdo. 

This line runs with the meridian of Santochu ; starting from this place 
we descend to the north into the ‘ Kholai ’ (715 meters), which leads from 
Dzungaria into the eastern Gobi ; and within which Nursu appears to be 
situated. Beyond the Kholai there rises a long horst or scarp with the pass 
of Shar-nuru. This and its lofty prolongations to the west form a steep and 
continuous cliff on the north side of the Kholai, extending also east of the 
Shar-nuru. The pass is bounded by bare rocks of felsite-porphyry ; on the 
north side lies schist, which strikes to the east almost parallel with the cliff. 
Some blocks of white crystalline limestone occur which have probably come 
from the higher summits. The descent to the north is gradual. Then 
follows a steep limestone cliff with horizontal stratification. 

Efere traces of fossils, probably Devonian, have been found. Crossing a 
steppe, we rfcach the foot-hills of the Ehschtsche, formed of spilite and 
greenstone showing concentric exfoliation. Finally we arrive at the foot of 
the principal chain of the Gobi-Altai. 

At its foot exposures of gneiss occur. Ascending the river Barlyk, the 
gneiss is followed by intensely folded mica-schist, and this again, even 
before the summit of the pass is reached, and also on the pass of Ulen-Daban 
itself (2,819 meters), by chloritic clay slate rich in quartz-veins and other 
deposits of quartz such as we have already observed on the summit of 

1 Cf. N. Potanin, Sketches from north-west Mongolia, I, pp. 21-64. N. von Pijeswalski, 
Travels in Thibet, &c. German translation by Stein-Nordbeim, Jena, 1884, p. 18. 

H a 



100 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[part IV 

Urmugaitu Here also, on the north side of the pass, granite is intruded 
amongst the schists. The lake of Khulmu-nor lies in granite. Koslow has 
reached it from the west and estimates its height at 6,800 feet (2,072 meters), 
while east of it, also on the north side of the same mountain ridge, the 
Shargin-Z&gan-nor lies at a height of only 2,500 feet (761 meters). 

On the ridge of Nam-kotel, which comes next on the north in the section, 
are granite rocks of fantastic forms. Then follow chloritic slates again, here 
with interbedded limestone, and above the ridge of Detchen-Daban we 
reach the margin of the valley of the Lakes \ 

This section indicates that the horsts and steps towards the Dzungarian 
4 gateway ’ consist in all probability of upper Palaeozoic rocks, while the 
principal range of the Gobi-Altai exhibits on its west side first gneiss, then 
chloritic slate and granite. 

About 220 versts further to the east-south-east the principal range of 
Altain-nuru is crossed by the pass of Nur-kere (about long. 96° 20' E.), which 
traverses the Burkhan-ola on the way from Khami to Uliasutai. Its height 
is not known, but it is much greater than that of Urmugaitu (2,961 meters) 
and of Ulen-Daban. It is across this pass that Potanin's third sectio'n 
is drawn. The first or southern step forms a steep escarpment, facing 
south, called Eren-nuru. Here a hard green rock crops out. North of 
Eren-nuru the desert extends up to the long bare granite ridge of Adji- 
bogdo: at its southern foot melaphyre occurs. The slope of Adji-bogdo is 
steep ; towards the north it sends off several spurs. Descending these we 
meet with thick red conglomerates, in the midst of which an unconformity 
has been observed. Then, after crossing several secondary ridges, comes 
another deep depression, Buru, and finally we reach the foot of the Burkhan- 
ola, which belongs to the principal range of Altain-nuru. The first rjdge, 
Buren-khara, is formed of a black rock. Then comes chloritic slate with 
quartz veins. Diorite now appears, but the slate continues and forms 
precipitous isolated crags on the summit of the Nur-kere. Granite also 
occurs in this locality. Slates and granite form the north slope down to 
the Zizirin-gol. Then follows a belt of serpentine, and with this we reach 
the fault-trough of the lake Shargin-Zagan-nor. 

Here we must interrupt our description of the transverse section and 
cast a glance at the longitudinal extension of the range. 

Starting from Kobdo, on the south side of the Karu-usu, Koslow entered 
the depression of Dserga, which runs towards the south-east; it was within 
this depression that Potanin collected plant-remains of the Angara series, 
near Oeschi. Koslow’s route, following the north border of the Altain-nuru, 

hG. N. Potanin, Sketches, &e., i, pp. 114-11$. In this case, the traveller started from 
the nprtli. For the safke of uniformity, we shall continue to describe the formations 
from the south towards the north. Koslow, Letter written at the bivouac on the Ulan-nor, 
Nov. 20, 1899, p. 25. 



SH ARGIN-Z AG AN -N OR 


101 


CH. Ill] 

led him to the pass of Khongar-obonyn-daban (8,300 feet, 2,529 meters), not 
far from Potanin’s second pass, the Ulen-daban, and passing between cushion- 
shaped rocks of granite he descended to the lake of Khulmu-nor (6,800 feet, 
2,072 meters). A second pass attains a height of 7,400 feet (2,255 meters), 
then we reach lake Tunkul (6,200 feet, 1,889 meters); and further on, after 
crossing another saddle, the depression sinks to an unexpected depth in the 
Shargin-Zagan-nor ; this lake lies, as we have said, at a height of only 2,500 
feet (761 meters). Still further east the watershed between the Shargin- 
Zagan-nor and the Bagan-nor lies at a height of 3,700 feet (1,127 meters), 
and is formed of red clay and conglomerate. 

The Shargin-Zagan-nor (761 meters ), situated on the northern border 
of the principal chain , the Altain-nuru, but separated from the fault- 
trough of Dsapkhyn by the chain of Taishir , has therefore been let dmvn 
to a level almost corresponding with the surface of lake TJbza , the loivesi 
part of the valley of the Lakes. Each of these lakes is completely isolated 
and without outflow. 

Let us return to the transverse section. 

The north side of the deep valley is formed by the precipitous southern 
slope of the chain of Taishir mentioned above. It is of considerable height, 
and, like the south side of the valley, formed of serpentine. Towards the 
north the Taishir is formed of limestone, below which, however, serpentine 
is visible. Thus, at the residence of the Khan of Djasaktu, we reach the 
fault-trough of Dsapkhyn. On the north side of this trough we encounter 
the band of basalt observed by Klemenz, which here surrounds the 
Khangai h 

Between Potanin’s third and fourth section Ladygin travelled towards 
the south, from the east end of the Altain-nuru to Su-tchou. The chief 
facts that we learn from his journey are the following. In the whole of 
this region so many chains and ridges, with an east-south-easterly trend, 
are ranged one behind the other, that it would not be easy to find a definite 
orographical boundary between the foot-hills of the Gobi Altai and the 
chains following the same direction, which must be regarded as the con- 
tinualion of the Bei-shan. Here it is clear that a general change of 
direction takes place from south-east to east-south-east and from east 
to east-%orth-east ; this change of direction dominates not only the course 
of the Gobi- Altai but the whole region of the Gobi itself, and, as we shall 
see presently, even parts of the Nan-shan 1 2 . 

The end of the Altain-nuru bears the name of Gytshigin-ula, and has 
been crossed at a height of 7,000 feet. The range consists of schists and 

1 P. K. Koslow, Izviestija Imp. ross. Qeogr. Obscl?., 1900, p. 30; Potanin, Sketches 
irom north-west Mongolia, I, pp. 183-216 ; for fossil plants fronr iOeschi, I, p. 302, III, 
p. 87. 

2 Ladygin, Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1900, p. 174 et seq. 



102 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[part IV 

granite. Th*u follow towards the south two ranges running to the east- 
south-east Bvrgustin-nuru, and Ederyngin-nuru (4,500 feet, green schists, 
gold-bearing), and then a long depression, Nctren-khukhu-Gobi (1,100 feet, 
>85 meters). This is the deepest place for a long distance around. It is 
bounded on the south by the long hill range of Koko-tymyrty (pass 5,000 
feet high ; peaks about 6,000 feet) ; this range, as it turns from south-east 
to east-south-east, forms a connecting arc which extends across the whole 
of this part of the Gobi, and unites the Adji-bogdo of the Gobi- Altai on the 
north-west with the chains of Tostu, Dushe, and the lofty Noin-bogdo on 
the east, passing through Koko-tymyrty and a long series of other ridges 
which join it. 

The ridges which succeed to the south of the Koko-tymyrty cannot* 
however, be regarded as distinct from the Bei-shan. 

Potanin’s fourth section lies west of long. 101° E. and about 330 versts 
east-south-east of the third section It does not cross the Altain-nuru, as in 
this region the range is completely broken up. 

The lowest place on this meridian, Gash inn- nor, at the end of the Edsin- 
gol, lies probably no higher than 830 or 840 meters. North of it we meet 
with a series of long and frequently interrupted hill ranges. For information 
as to the southern ranges we shall make use of the recent observations 
of Obrutschew, and for the northern, which this observer has not visited, we 
have the descriptions of Potanin \ 

Leaving the shore of the lake, we travel northwards, and after crossing 
about 60 versts of desert reach the first ridge, Sukhomtu ; it consists of 
supra-Carboniferous sandstone of great thickness, striking east-north-east 
(80°) ; then, beyond a depression of no great breadth, comes a far more 
important range, formed of several parallel ridges ; in its southern and 
highest part these bear the names of Tostu, Dushe, and Noin-bogdo ; they 
have already been mentioned as forming parts of the arc proceeding from 
Koko-tymyrty. Sandstone occurs at the south foot of the range, but the 
black peaks above consist of melaphyre. Blocks of basalt and limburgite 
which are derived from a peak at the east end of the Noin-bogdo lead us 
to suspect the presence of a recent eruptive centre at this point. Still 
further to the east-north-east lies the ridge of Deng, and the ' mountain of 
Khongar-oba, both of which diverge from the general strike. They consist 
of porphyry and tuff and, in the east, of granite. 

Let us now turn our attention to Potanin’s section across the Dushe. 
The north side of the range is formed of supra-Carboniferous sandstone. 
A broad depression separates it from the ridge of Nemegetn. This is not 

1 G. N. Potanin, The Tangutan-Thibetan .frontier, I, p. 503 et seq. ; Obrutschew, 
Orographic and geological sketch of central Mongolia, Ordos, east Kansu and north 
Shensi, Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1894, XXX, p. 239 et seq. ; Central Asia, II, 
pp. 408-433. 



THE IKHE-BOGDO 


103 


CH. Ill] 


so high as the Dushe (1,836 meters), and its outlines are less jagged. On 
the pass porphyrite and, in some places, granite appear. In the eastern 
part of this range, Dsolin, the strike changes to 290° ; here porphyry 
and sandstone traversed by dykes of porphyry are met with. 

The depression, hardly 20-30 versts broad, situated north of the 
Nemegetu, is marked by the lowest point on this meridian (1,135 meters, 
Potanin), if we except the Gashiun-nor. Looking back, we see that both 
Nemegetu and the more distant but loftier Tostu present steep declivities 
to the north. 

The next range to the north, Bain Zagan (1,670 meters), consists of 
gneiss ; it rises gradually from the kholai, which it hems in with its 
foot-hills. It is of no great height, but remarkably broad ; towards the 
north it descends to a little river, the Leg (1,440 meters), where basalt 
again crops out 1 . 

Before crossing the Bain Zagan the traveller, coming from the Gobi, 
has enjoyed a view, startling by contrast, of the mighty Ikhe-bogd Jo, of the 
wreath of snow patches which engirdle its broad summit and the neighbour- 
ing snow-capped heights. No woods cover its slopes and small bushes only 
occur in its valleys ; the barrenness of the Gobi reaches upwards to the 
region of perpetual snow. The foot-hills, with steep declivities, advance as 
far as the Leg. The breadth of the Ikhe-bogdo amounts to 22 versts. 
Its north side is very steep and the pass difficult. Ikhe-bogdo consists 
of granite ; at one locality schist is mentioned with an intrusion of syenite. 
Above these older rocks sheets of basalt rise in steps, and at the highest 
point which has been reached (2,534 meters) Potanin found himself on 
basalt. Ikhe-bogdo reproduces, far to the south, the features of the 
basalt-capped goltzi of which Munku-Sagan-Khardyk has already furnished 
an 'example 2 . 

Towards the north the range sinks to lake Orok-nor (1,240 meters), 
which is surrounded on the north by the Chodsu, a spur of the Ikhe-bogdo. 
Then comes the fault-trough of Dsapkhyn, here hardly 20 versts in 
breadth. 

35ast of this section, in the Gobi- Altai, the hills of the Gurban-Saichan 
(Three mighty ones), ranged like steps, probably reach a height of 2,500 
metei^. 


1 M. Klemenz tells me that further east, near Chatun-Suntul, an isolated mountain of 
columnar basalt rises in the midst of the desert. 

2 The basalts of the river Leg, and the encampment of Kiachtu on the Ikhe-Bogdo, 
have been described by Wenjukow, Verh. russ. k. min. Gres., 1889, 2. Ser., XXV, p. 245. 
For the eastern continuation of the Ikhe-Bogdo, see the account by Klemenz in 
Izviestija Sibirsk. Otd. Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., Irkutsk, 1894, XXV, pp. 127-128. The 
continuity of the chains situated to the east (Arzi-Bogdo, Gurban-Saichan) has been 
established by Piewtzow. Further to the south-east they are joined by the Churchu, 
discovered by Prjewalski. 



104 THE ANCIENT VERTEX [pabtiv 

Such are the changes which affect the ancient vertex as we trace it 
beyond the K hanged to the south-west and south. In this outer region 
south of the T&nnu-ola the valley of the Lakes is let down ; and with this 
the breaking up of the border region into horsts, steps, and fault-troughs 
begins. Piece by piece, or rather strip by strip, the vertex descends to the 
Dzungarian 'gateway/ The Altain-nuru itself, the principal range of the 
Gobi-Altai, is one of these horsts. Although the lines of fracture and 
caldron inbreaks produce in places a veritable labyrinth of ramifying and 
intersecting ridges, of enclosed depressions and long open troughs, yet on 
the whole they are arranged on a common plan which marks them as 
appertaining to the peripheral disjunctive lines of the vertex; and the 
valley of the Lakes, with the trough of Dsapkhyn as well as the trough of 
Saissan, forms part of this plan. 

No doubt the future has many fresh discoveries in store. Klemenz 
believes he has found indications of overfolding towards the south in the 
southern part of the Russian Altai 3 . 

Eastern Gobi. In studying the relations of the vertex to the eastern 
Gobi we have only one source of information at our disposal, namely 
Obrutschew’s description of the line from Kiakhta through Urga to 
Kalgan 1 2 . 

South of Urga, where the region without outflow begins with a great 
number of enclosed basins and caldron -shaped hollows both large and small, 
the mountains reach a height of 1,400-1,500 meters. Then follows not 
a level desert but a succession of mountains and hills. The mean height 
gradually diminishes ; we reach the plain of Daitchin-dala (35 versts 
broad), which, as a rare exception, presents an open horizon on the east and 
west. We might almost suspect that it is a fault-trough. The ground 
sinks from 950 meters towards the centre to 850 meters at the spring of 
&ain-U8U, the lowest point on the whole line. But in this neighbourhood 
there are no mountains of any height, and extending onwards for a distance 
of 340 versts is a region which Obrutschew regards as the central 
depression of the eastern Gobi. The hills to the south do not exceed 900- 
1,100 meters as far as the mountains of Tabun-Tochun (1,300-1,400 meters), 
and the highest point is finally reached at the Great Wall (1,Q25 meters). 
A steep escarpment occurs near Kalgan. « 

The Gobi sediments rest unconformably on the denuded remains of the 
ancient mountains; they consist of fine-grained conglomerate, friable 

1 D. Klemenz, Bull. Soc. geogr. Paris, 1899, p. 315. 

8 Y. A. Obrutschew, Geological sketch of the caravan route from Kiachta to Kalgan : 
Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., t 1893, XXX, pp. 347-390, sections; Central Asia, I, 
p. 25 etseq., maps. Some observations may also*be found in Potanin, The road through 

Sain Ussu to Mongolia, Izviestija Sibirsk. Otd. Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., Irkutsk, 1893, 
XXIY, pp. 56-63. 



THE EASTERN GOBI 


105 


CH. Ill] 


sandstone, red and greenish marls, and white calcareous marls. The basalt 
mountain of Tchernaia-gora (Black mountain), situated a little south of the 
plain of Daitchin-dala, furnishes evidence to show that the Gobi sediments 
are in part older, and in part younger than the basalt \ Here these 
sediments are dislocated and strike to the east-north-east, that is in the 
same direction as the underlying formations. Further south a large part 
of the central depression is covered by horizontal sediments of the same 
kind, broken up into tabular patches. The discovery of the jaw of 
rhinoceros or Aceratherium m the white marl of the table-mountain of 
Khuldyin-Gobi has shown that the freshwater deposits are of middle or 
late Tertiary age. 

Starting from Urga, we will now follow Obrutschew for a certain 
distance in a rapid review of the ancient formations. 

The Palaeozoic zone which starts from the Onon follows the road with 
a north-easterly strike. It includes the pass of Khalti-daban (1,650 meters), 
through which we reach the region without outflow. Next comes a band 
of basalt, and in the south of rhyolite also, appai’ently of recent age, then 
a broad band of gneiss striking to the north-east, and again volcanic rocks 
of recent origin on the border of the plain of Sahir-uche. A long band 
of porphyry occurs on the eastern border of this plain ; in the south granite 
also appears. Then we reach the basaltic Black mountain, mentioned above, 
and the disturbed Gobi-deposits. At the spring of Gashiun (1,090 meters) the 
hills are of recent volcanic origin. Among them is a dome of rhyolite, which 
appears to mark a centre of eruption. Passing over crystalline limestone, 
schist, and granite, we reach the plain of Daitchin-dala and the point 
of lowest level. Beyond this plain the heights again consist of crystalline 
limestone and folded schists ; granite dykes occur. The strike is constantly 
nortfi-east. The ridge of Dolon-daban is gneiss ; its strike ill-defined ; on 
its south side lies the spring of Ikhe-Ude (or Udinsk, 930 meters), and in its 
vicinity the Russkaia stanzia 

Save for rare exceptions, the Baikal dr ike to north-east or east-north-east 
prevails throughout the whole distance from Urga to this point . ^Beyond 
Ikhe-TJde the direction is west-north-west or north-west. Although further 
on, as at Sadji-Chotu, the north-easterly direction sets in again, yet here 
also, according to Obrutschew’s statements, an important change affects the 
principal strike. Still up to this point the general direction of the strike 
agrees with that of the vertex ; there are similar ancient rocks with traces 
of Palaeozoic formations; and many exposures of volcanic rocks, though 
these perhaps are somewhat more frequently of acid type. As far as the 


T 1 V. A. Obrutschew, Central Asia, I, p. 69. - 

2 According to the official map of Russia* (I" = 40 versts), Ikhe*Ude lies in lat. 44° 29' N. 
and long. 111° 6' E. ; it is possible that recent surveys may lead to a slight modification 
of these figures. 



106 THE ANCIENT VERTEX [paetiy 

sprang of Ikhc-Ude at least , i.e. nearly as far as the middle of the Gobi, 
the vertex is without a perceptible boundary . 

As to the relation of the southern folds with a north-west strike to the 
i\ hingan it is not possible in the present state of observation to form any 
opinion. 

In the extreme south the route followed by Obrutschew enters the 
region of the basalt flows of south-east Mongolia. The escarpment at 
Kalgan, about 500 meters high, exposes this basalt at the summit resting 
on a great thickness of loose conglomerates and sandstones belonging 
to the Gobi-series, with trachyte at the base. Kalgan lies on trachyte. 

Conclusion . In order to bind the details together it seemed advisable 
to give a special summary of the first half of this chapter. The northern 
part of the vertex was surveyed throughout its entire breadth, from the 
cliffs of the horst on the Yenisei in the west to its junction with the 
northern continuation of the great Khingan in the east. We found that 
the eastern part of this vast region of Archaean 1 ’ocks is characterized by 
the Baikal strike, to the west-south- west or south-west, and the western 
part by the Sayan strike to the east-south-east or south-east ; and further> 
that both directions, at least as far as the existing accounts enable us 
to form a judgement, appear to unite in a north -to- south direction in the 
Primorsk ii Khrebet, a little west of lake Baikal. Finally, it was shown 
that an inbreak of a large part of this region had given rise to the 
amphitheatre of Irkutsk, which is surrounded by marginal folds. These 
folds belong to the Cambrian and Silurian platform, which extends as far 
as the Arctic Ocean ; and taken in connexion with the posthumous folds of 
the Angara beds they afford evidence of a reduction of the area originally 
occupied by the amphitheatre : while the disturbed position of the rocks in 
the Priinorskii Khrebet, and the overthrusting on the island of Olkhon, 
indicate a similar reduction of area in pre-Cambrian times. It was also 
made clear, however, that the folding movements in the ancient vertex were 
followed by disjunctive processes, which resulted in the formation of the long 
troughs and fractures east of lake Baikal, the troughs on the Geese lake, the 
Djida, and Khilok, and finally the two parts of lake Baikal. The basic* lavas 
lying at great heights were mentioned ; the age of some of the basalts was 
traced back to the Permian epoch, while the age of the others was 
shown to be very recent. 

The second half of this chapter has dealt with the extension of the 
vertex to the south. 

A broad zone of slates and greywacke, to which the Devonian outcrops 
of eastern trans-Baikalia belong, runs from the north-east into Mongolia. 
An outlier of this Palaeozoic* zone is ffgst met with 70 kilometers south of 
Kiakhta ; but the principal zone begins at Strietensk on the Shilka, 
becomes split up in its course to the south-west, then reunites, reaches the 



CH.HI] NORTH MONGOLIA, SUMMARY 107 

valley of the upper Onon, passes Urga, and comprises the whole mountain 
region of northern Mongolia as far as the mouth of thp valley of the 
Lakes; it proves beyond dispute that the Khangai forms part of the 
vertex. 

Even beyond this marginal region the normal strike of the Baikal 
to the east-north-east prevails as far as the springs of Ikhe-Ude in 
the eastern Gobi. 

In the western part of the Khangai we do not see the normal direction 
of the Sayan, east-south-east to south-east, but the strike, as far as we 
know it, is directed more to the south-south-east ; at the centre, towards 
the south border, it becomes east and west. 

That disjunctive processes have occurred in this region also is shown, 
not only by the numerous outcrops of basalt within the Khangai itself and 
by the recent craters on the Terchain-Zagan-nor, but more particularly by 
the structure of the marginal region on the west and south. The trough 
of Dsapkhyn, the valley of the Lakes, the deepest part of which — XTbza — lies 
furthest within the mountains, the troughs between lake Saissan and 
Buluu-tschoi, all the troughs of the outer border of the Gobi- Altai, 
extending far out into the Dzungarian desert, and finally the breaking up 
of the Gobi-Altai itself into long horst-like strips — all these phenomena 
show that disjunctive processes have operated in this region on a gigantic 
scale. In the valley of the Lakes the long narrow horsts which traverse 
it obliquely, such as Khankhuchei and Argalintu reproduce the features 
of Swjatoi Noss and Olkhon. These great disjunctive lines follow 
approximately the Sayan direction and the arc-like curvature which is 
seen throughout the vertex. 

# Nor are the high-level lavas absent. Melaphyre forms the ice-capped 
summits of the Olkhon-Khairkhan-Tengri, east of Uliasutai, and basalt 
crowns the Ikhe-bogdo, which rises on one of the detached branches 
of the Gobi-Altai, between the continuation of the Dsapkhyn trough 
and the Gobi. 

In the intervening region of Minuzinsk the case is different. 

The most striking feature here is the transgression of the Devonian, 
which is frequently associated with Culm. These rocks ascend far above 8,000 
feet, aftd they have been recognized not only on the summits of the Tannu- 
ola and of the Kharkira — a range which projects far into the valley of the 
Lakes — but also in some of the depressions of this valley and probably also 
around the sources of the Kobdo. The transgression as such, however, does 
not affect the tectonic features. The essential difference lies in the fact 
that the strike is different from that of the west Sayan and of the 
Tannu-ola, for in both of these ranges it is directed east and west or to 
east-north-east. Thus we find that the Yenisei, above Krasnoyarsk and the 
continuations of the east Sayan, cuts through a series of horseshoe-shaped 



108 


THE ANCIENT VERTEX 


[part IV 


folds of Devonian rocks, and these folds, according to existing accounts, are 
identical in character with the posthumous folds of the Angara beds in the 
dddle of the amphitheatre of Irkutsk. 

We may suppose that Minuzinsk represents another independent region 
in which contraction has taken place, and we may perhaps have here the 
remains of an independent vertex lying between the east Sayan and 
Kusnetzkii Alatau. Unfortunately many parts of the south are but little 
known, and such problems as the extension of the overthrust on the 
Tasskyl, and the structure of the eastern part of the Tannu-ola, must 
remain for the present unsolved. 

Over the whole extent of the regions discussed in the second part 
of this chapter the Mesozoic and the Tertiary aeras are represented solely 
by plant-bearing beds. 



109 


CHAPTER IV 1 

PERIPHERAL FORMATIONS TO THE EAST OF THE 

VERTEX 

The watershed of the Arctic Ocean. The Great Khingan. Plain of the upper Amur. 
Aldan mountains. Bureya mountains. The Little Khingan. Manchuria. Sikhota 
Alin. Hokkaido and Saghalien. Summary. 

The ivatershed of the Arctic Ocean. The first detailed accounts of the 
great river Helong Kiang, or Amur, and of the fertile regions which border 
it, appear to have reached Tomsk in the year 1636. They spread rapidly 
in Siberia, and in July, 1643, Vasili Pojarlcow set out from the newly 
erected town of Yakutsk to explore and subdue these regions. He 
proceeded with a considerable troop of ‘ promyschlenni ’ (hunters, chiefly 
sable hunters) up the Aldan, then followed the Utsliur, and next, travelling 
in a south-westerly direction, the Konam, where he was obliged to winter ; 
then he crossed the watershed, not far from the height of Atytchan, which 
will be discussed later, and finally reached the Amur by the Gilyui and the 
Zeya. The return journey took place across the sea of Okhotsk. 

In 1647 the ‘promyschlenni’ announced in Yakutsk that they had 
succeeded in finding a much shorter and easier route. This led from the 
Lena up the Olekma and its long tributary the Tugir. From the source of 
the latter it was easy, by following the river Urkan, to reach the Amur 
a little below the existing town of Amasar. In the same year the Cossacks 
erected a fortified station on the Tugir, and in 1649 the expedition of the 
Yerpfei Cltaraborv, so important in the history of the country of the Amur, 
took place from Yakutsk along this route. That this line was again 
abandoned on account of the difficulties it presented is untrue. In 1651 the 
route across the Tugir was followed by the Cossack Tchetchigin, and in 
1652 by Sinowiew ; along this route also a good deal of immigration took 
place from the upper Lena, many exaggerated reports having been spread 
of the prosperity of the new country ; it is recorded that Chabarow’s 
messengers Were able to reach Yakutsk from the Amur by this route in 
23 day%. 

It is true that from this time onwards the route across the Tugir fell 
more and more into disuse, but this was not on account of geographical 
difficulties. In 1654 Beketow for the first time reached the Amur from the 
west by the Ingoda and Shilka ; in 1655 an edict was issued that tribute 
was no longer to be sent to Yakutsk, but direct to Moscow. The attention 
of the central government was directed to the Amur, and from this time 

1 Revised by T. W. Edgeworth David, F.R.S., Professor of Geology in the University of 
Sydney, New South Wales. 



110 PERIPHERAL FORMATIONS [partiv 

onwards communication with Yakutsk and the road across the water- 
parting was abandoned. 

But affairs on the Amur did not develop favourably. Among the 
Russkun immigrants there were few inclined to settle permanently. The 
Cossack fortress Albasin was stormed by the Chinese, rebuilt by the 
Cossacks, and again besieged by the Chinese. Then in 1689 a congress 
assembled at Nertchinsk with the object of arranging matters amicably. 
The chief representative of Russia was Fedor Golowin; the Chinese 
ambassadors had brought with them the two Jesuits, Father Gerbillon and 
Father Pereira, to assist in the negotiations and to act as interpreters. 

Both sides were earnestly inclined towards peace, but they were in the 
midst of a vast wilderness, and were attempting to draw boundaries in 
a completely unknown country. Subsequently a Russian version of the 
discussions was published by the Imperial Academy in St. Petersburg, while 
report was furnished from the point of view of the Chinese by Father 
Gerbillon, in a very interesting memoir published in the work of Du Halde h 

The boundary in a meridional direction was not hard to find ; it was 
agreed to fix the Argun as the limit south of the Shilka, and the little 
Gorbitza as that north of the river. But the Chinese did not approve of 
the Amur as the east- to- west boundary. Consequently it became necessary 
to adopt its northern line of water-parting, which was at that time 
regarded as a mountain range. ‘ The promysehlenni, 7 says a Russian 
account of 1740, ‘ generally call the whole of this range Stanovoi Khrebet. 
They say that the range which has to be crossed on the way from 
Yeravna to Nertchinsk, and is there called Sablenoi (probably Yablonoi) 
Khrebet , is connected with this range in the direction of the source of the 
river Tchita, a tributary of the Ingoda, having an easterly trend 72 . 

In the accounts of the conference of 1689 these two names do not 
yet appear. 


1 Gescliichte der Gegenden an dem Flusse Amur von der Zeit da selbige unter russischer 
Oberherrschaft gestanden ; Muller, Sammlung Russischer Geschichten, II. 5. und6. Stuck; 
8vo, St. Petersburg, bei der kays. Academie der Wissenschaften, 1758, pp. 293-448* (also 
contains accounts of the movements of the Russians in the region of the Amur before 
1689) ; P. J. B. du Halde, Description geographique, historique, chronologique, politique, 
et physique de l’Empire de la Chine et de la Tartarie Chinoise, fol., Paris, 1733, maps ; 
IV, pp. 163- 251 : Second voyage fait par ordre de l’Empereur de la Chine en Tartarie 
par les Peres Gerbillon et Pereira, Missionnaires de la Compagnie de Jesus a la Chine en 
1’annee 1689 ; cf. also Gerbillon, op. cit., p. 57. 

2 (Muller) : Von dem Amurflusse, besonders von der nordlichen Seite deseelben und dem 
zwischen dem russischen und chinesischen Reiche bestimmten Granzgebirge, wie auch 
von der Gegend des Udflusses und deren iibrigen zwischen dem Ud und Amur in das 
Weltmeer fallenden Fliissen. Au£ Ihro Kays. Majestiit eigenhand. Befehl v. 1. Febr. 
1740, und Befehl aus dem hohen ding. Senat v. 8. Febr. dess. J. verfertigte Nachiicht. 
Reprinted in A. F. Biisching, Magazin fur die neue Historie und Geographie, II. Theil, 
Hamburg, 1768, pp. 483-518 ; in particular p. 487. 



THE NOSSE MOUNTAINS 


111 


CH. IV] 

In drawing up the treaty it was added on the Chinese side, in order to 
more closely define the east-to-west range, that it ended towards the 
‘ Eastern Sea ’ in a long rocky promontory. The Russian deputies, 
however, strongly protested, being unwilling that that question should be 
raised, for the Chinese, by their new wording, were proposing a continua- 
tion of the boundary along the watershed as far as Tchutchkoi Noss, which 
would have involved a loss to Russia of the districts on the Uda ; they 
were able to lay two maps before Father Gerbillon, from which they 
proved to him that this Noss lay very far to the north, according to their 
assertions almost in latitude 80°. This promontory had, in fact, been 
discovered by Deschnew in 1648, and subsequently several expeditions had 
been sent to the Anadyr and to Kamtchatka. Father Gerbillon saw the 
impossibility of maintaining his claim ; he therefore assumed that at the 
sources of the Gorbitza there were tv'o lofty rocky chains . One of these ran 
due east parallel to the Amur ; he proposed that the deputies from Moscow 
should accept that as the boundary. The second chain, which he called 
Noss&, ran towards the north-east ; between them lay the country on the 
Uda • . This hypothesis was made the basis of the treaty of Udinsk. After 
Father Gerbillon had succeeded in proving to the Chinese the extreme 
remoteness of the Noss, it was considered sufficient to employ very indefinite 
wording with regard to the eastern end of the watershed, and to make a 
reservation with regard to the Uda. 

The information given by Father Gerbillon about this part of Asia has 
been embodied in the great cartographical works of the Jesuits, and these 
works until quite recently formed, in a general way, the foundation of all 
the maps of the Chinese empire. 

.The existence of two mountain ranges north of the Gorbitza is no longer 
accepted. The political boundaries established at that time have likewise 
ceased to exist. These attempts, however, though in themselves praise- 
worthy as intended to bring about a peaceful settlement of a dispute 
over frontiers in an uninhabited and unknown land, gave rise to errors 
which have not yet entirely disappeared. One of these is the conception 
of that extremely long boundary range which Father Gerbillon, probably 
as the result of a misunderstanding, designated by the name of Nosse 
(Tchutchkoi Noss) ; this range was supposed to extend from the cape to the 
Tchita, and still appears on many of our maps under the general name of 
Stanovoi. Now this theory does not accord with the facts. 

The description by Middendorff may serve as the basis for an inquiry 
into the true state of the matter 1 2 . 

1 Pere Gerbillon, Second Voyage, &c.^ p. 198. «> 

2 A. Th. v. Middendorff, Reise in dem aussersten Norden und Osten Sibiriens wahrend 
der Jahre 1843 und 1844, 4to, IV, 1, St. Petersburg, 1867, maps; pp. 114, 140, and in 
particular p. 211 et eeq. 



112 


PERIPHERAL FORMATIONS 


[part IV 

According to this distinguished investigator the general name of ‘Stanovoi 
range ’ was conferred by the Cossacks, at the time when they conquered 
tl: country, on a mountain system 4,000 versts long which forms the main 
lint of water-parting from the cape of Tchutchkes to Dauria. In this long 
range, according to MiddendorfF, the following elements must be dis- 
tinguished : (a) The Aldan mountains ; (b) the eastern part of the dividing 
range, the Stanovoi mountains of Pallas or the Dseja (Zeya) mountains, 
from the affluents of the Silimdji and the Kureja (about long. 131° 30' E.) 
nearly to the head waters of the Olekma (about long. 121° 30' E.); {c) the 
western part of this dividing range, or the Olekma mountains, as far as 
the watershed of lake Baikal (long. 113° E. approximately); ( d ) the 
Yahlonoi from this point to the Gobi. 

MiddendorfF based this description on the accounts of his predecessors, 
and on observations made during long and arduous journeys along the 
southern slope of this central region. He did not cross the hypothetical 
watershed, but he brought the unexpected news that, in consequence of the 
vague wording of the treaty of Nertchinsk, thei'e was complete uncertainty 
as to the position of the boundary of China, and moreover that the Chinese 
had placed their boundary marks much further south than the Russians 
had ever supposed. 

The consequence of his accounts was that several expeditions were sent 
out to discover the watershed. Maydell has enumerated a 1 ! of them; 
Schwarz, the distinguished astronomer of the great expedition which 
travelled through Siberia in the years 1855-1858, even at that time 
expressed doubt as to the existence of such a long and continuous 
mountain range b 

Several years later an attempt was made to establish communication 
between Tchita and the gold-placers of the Olekma. Among those sent out 
to discover a new route was Prince Kropotkin. After many travels in 
these regions Kropotkin declared in 1875 that the long rampart said 
to extend to Kamtchatka was simply a ‘ product of the imagination/ and 
that such a continuous range as the supposed Khrebet Stanovoi, forming 
the watershed between the Arctic and the Pacific Oceans, did not exist, 
either high or low, steep or fiat 2 . * 

1 Baron Gerhard Maydell, Reisen und Forschungen im Jakutskischen Gebiet Ost- 
sibiriens, II ; Schrenk und Schmidt, Beitrage zur Kenntniss des russischen Reiches, 189G, 
4. Folge, II, pp. 164, 206, 274, 320 et passim. Important facts concerning the orography 
of this region are given in Fr. Schmidt, P. v. Glehn, and A. D. Brylkin, Reisen im 
Gebiete des Amurstromes und auf der Insel Sachalin ; Baer und Helmersen, Beitrage zur 
Kenntniss des russischen Reiches, 1868, XXV, maps. 

2 Kropotkin, Sketch of the Orography of eastern Siberia, Zap. Imp. St. Petersb. geogr. 
Obsch., 1875, V, pp. 1 -140, maps ; p. 56 et passim. The existence of the eastern Stanovoi 
range is most emphatically denied in the same author’s Memoiren eines Revolutioniirs, 
8vo, Stuttgart, 1900, II, pp. 10 14. 



113 


CH.IV] CHARACTER OF THE WATERSHED 

Kropotkin has furnished a very clear description of the mountainous 
mass of the Vitim. From Zipa onwards through three degrees of latitude, 
and for a long distance towards the east, the greatest uniformity prevails. 
A vast forest of larch covers the whole country. ‘The landscape/ says 
Kropotkin, * has lost all individuality ’ \ 

The picture presented by this part of the vertex is that of a primi- 
tive Archaean continent, long since deprived of its original form, cut 
through at variable distances by disjunctive lines marked by basalts 
and ^porphyries ; and furrowed by the ramifications of rivers which have 
cut back their channels both from the north and from the south. 
Travellers who have sought to follow the watershed of the two seas 
have not reached a long continuous mountain chain, but primitive 
forest, moss-covered masses of ruck and extensive morasses, interrupted 
here and there by lakes. 

Further east, however, so Kropotkin believed, from the sources of the 
Tchitchatka (a left tributary of the Amasar, long. 120° 30' E.) to those of 
the Gilyui (a right tributary of the upper Zeya, sources long. 125° 45' E.) 
the watershed on the site of the alleged Stanovoi is formed by ridges, 
similar and parallel to those of Gasimur, which approach from the desert of 
Gobi in a north-easterly direction. 

Later observations have confirmed this view. 

In the spring of 1883 J. Martin set out, from the localities where 
auriferous sand is washed on the south side of the Patomske Nagorie, 
to cross the Stanovoi. After a long and arduous journey between the 
Olekma and the Vitim he crossed the Tugir at a level of about 600 meters, 
then encountered on the Stanovoi rounded mountain masses, which here 
and, there reach a height of 1,300 to 1,500 meters, and after crossing the 
watershed in continual heavy snowstorms, followed the Amasar to the 
Amur. His wanderings through this wilderness had lasted nine months. 

‘ It is to be observed/ says Martin, ‘ that in the region traversed by me 
the Stanovoi shows a less marked relief than the watershed between the 
Vitiip and the Olekma/ 

In the following yean: Martin visited the line of the Stanovoi between 
the upper Olekma and the Zeya, and here encountered the same con- 
figuration of the ground. Here too he saw rounded ridges above which 
mountains in the form of sugar-loaves (goltzi) rose here and there to 
a height of 1,000 or 1,500 meters 2 . 

From this point onwards the works of Russian geologists afford us 
a fairly clear idea of the country. 

Gerasimow has placed it beyond doubt that the horst of Yablonoi does 

* 

1 Kropotkin, Olekma-Witim, p. 378, in his Orography of eastern Siberia, p. 63. 

3 J. Martin, Voyage dans la Siberie Orientale, C. R. Soc. geogr., Paris, 1887, 
pp. 226 et seq. 

aoiAAS ui 


I 



114 PERIPHERAL FORMATIONS [partiv 

nut form an eibow towards the east around the source of the Tchita, as 
asserted by the promvsehlenni in 1689, but that it follows a rectilinear 
course between the Vitim and Karenga l 2 . 

About two degrees further to the east Gedroitz advanced up the 
river Kuenga and its left tributary, the Aleur. So far as can be judged 
he did not quite reach the watershed, but the steep border of a plateau, 
perhaps the edge of a horst extending to the north. 

Still further east the Shilka range rises near Strietensk, north of the 
river Shilka. It maintains a north-north-easterly direction, and appears to 
be intimately connected with the Borshtshevoshnie. In this mass Gedroitz 
reached the heights of Urium (852 meters, lat. 53° 45' N., long. 119° 12' E.), 
between the upper course of the Tcherni Urium and that of the Amasar. 
Towards the north-west this ridge descends directly to one of the upper- 
most tributaries of the Olekma. Towards the east, in the upper part of its 
course, the Amasar is joined by the little river of Tchitchatka mentioned by 
Kropotkin . 

The next point of the watershed was reached by M. Iwanow on the 
Sergatchinskaia Sopka between the uppermost tributaries of the Uruschi 
and those of the Oldoi (lat. 54° 38' N.. long. 122° 40' E.). This region is 
a high plateau with isolated ridges and peaks ; the Sergatchinskaia is the 
highest of these, and rises 800 meters above the valley bottom. The 
plateau descends to the south-east to the great plain of the Amur, of which 
it forms the border. It consists of Archaean rocks, which strike N. 40°- 
60° E., and along its eastern margin towards the plain there is a zone of 
sedimentary rocks probably of Devonian age. Only traces of corals and 
Polyzoa have been found in it. M. Iwanow conjectures that this plateau 
reaches the Shilka towards the south-west, and is continued to the northreast 
across the Ur to the lower Gilyui. In any case, it is very similar to such 
ranges of eastern trans-Baikalia as strike to the north-east, or it may be 
the continuation of one of them. The junction would take place slightly 
north of the end of the Great Khingan, somewhere in the region of the 
Amasar. Thus the Sergatchinskaia indicates that the vertex is continued 
north of the Great Khingan. The inhabitants o£ the region on the Amur 
call it Yablonoi, following the ancient tradition, although if has nothing 
in common with the Yablonoi 3 . 1 

1 Gerasimow, Djel. Dor., 1899, XIX, pp. 14, 15. * The watershed . . . ,’ says Gerasimow, 
‘ does not consist of a single simple chain, but is produced by a whole series of un- 
important segments belonging to ranges tectonically distinct.’ 

2 Gedroitz, Djel. Dor., 1897, VI, pp. 88-127 ; p. 89, a description of the watershed. 
All the place-names given here are borrowed from the Russian map on the scale of 1"=40 
versts. This map itself requires revision in accordance with recent observations, and the 
names are only intended to aid the reader in a general localization. 

8 M. Iwanow, Geological observations in the basin of the upper Amur, in the region 
of the Zeya and Bureya, and on the west flank of the Little Khingan, Djel. Dor., 1898, 
VIII, pp. 51-79, maps ; in particular p. 54 et seq. 



115 


ch.iv]' THE KHREBET TUKURINGRA 

As early as 1856 Ussolzow travelled up the Oldoi, then turned to the 
right branch of the river, and crossing the desert found himself in a steep 
country covered with granitic debris. After long "wanderings attended 
by many hardships he reached the upper Gilyui, and at its sources the 
mountain group of Atytchan , which he regarded, in accordance with the 
conception of the time, as a continuation of the Yablonoi. He ascended 
the river Kudula to the watershed, which he found covered with marshes, 
the effluent streams from which took different directions. L nf ortunately 
his accounts furnish no further details 1 . 

Investigation of the gold deposits on the upper Zeya has produced 
unexpected results. Between the two tributaries of the river, the Ur and 
the Gilyui, near the region in which the continuation of the range visited 
by M. Iwanow is supposed to lie, an important mountain range, the Khrebet 
Tukuringra, trends from the north-west towards the valley of the Zeya. 
Makerow states that the valley of the Gilyui and the whole Tukuringra 
consist of red and grey gneiss, strike N. 290°-330° W., the prevalent dip 
being to the south-west, the bands being sometimes vertical, sometimes 
forming steep folds which occasionally pass, as on the upper course of the 
Chugdor, into imbricate structure. Towards the north-east, on the Ilikan, 
granite succeeds. On the south slope of the Tukuringra phyllite is present, 
also graphitic schist, striking N. 295°-300° W., and dipping north-east 2 . 

Here on the Tukuringra we have reached a region where the strike of 
the rocks no longer corresponds to that of the Baikal folds of the vertex 
and the Sergatchinskaia, but to that of the eastern chains. At the same 
time a folding towards the east makes its appearance. 

From the Denn (left tributary of the Zeya) brown sandstone with 
Cyatlkocrinus and Streptorhynchus is known 3 . 

Thus we obtain the following conception of the watershed between the 
Arctic and the Pacific Ocean : — 

The Yablonoi, which is a part of the horst of the Malkan mountains, 
coming in a gentle curve from Mongolia, does not bend to the east, but runs 
.in a straight line to the east-north-east between the Vitim and Karenga 
The horsts and mountainous belts lying further to the east, which all follow 

a north-north-east to east-north-east direction, form this part of the water- 

% 

1 Ussolzow, Journey to the sources of the Gilyui and the Zeya in the summer of 1856, 
Viestnik, Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1858, XXII, pp. 143-160. 

2 J. Makerow, Geological Sketch of the gold-bearing Beds in the basin of the Amur, 
Izviestija Sibirsk Otd. Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1889, XX, no. 3, p. 38. Middendorff has 
also seen the Tukuringra and recognized its connexion with the dividing range ; Reise, 
&c., IV, p. 217 note. Jatschewski has also visited these gold beds ; Mater. Geol. Russie, 
1889, XIII, p. 228 et seq., map ; also W. A. Jantehukowski, Gorn. Journ., 1890, 
I, p. 358. 

3 A. Stuckenberg, Materialien zur Kenntniss der Fauna der devonischen Ablagerungen 
Sibiriens, Mem. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1886, 7 e ser., XXXIV, no. 1. 



116 


PERIPHERAL FORMATIONS 


[part IV 

shed indirec t} , build 1 ’ rig it out of a series of great cross ridges. Probably 
they follow this direction, some to a greater, some to a less distance, into 
the Taiga and then die away, while between them or on their denuded 
ridges the rivers of the Pacific Ocean encroach from the south, those of the 
Arctic Ocean from the north. 

Among these mountain belts we must include the Sergatchinskaia, the 
border of which, probably of Devonian age, forms the north-west margin of 
the plain of the Amur. 

In the region of the Zeya, the Tukuringra, like the Great Khingan, 
lies outside the vertex. 

Kropotkin's views may be summed up as correct. The Olekma range of 
Middendorff merges into the spurs of the vertex. We shall attempt 
presently to analyse the eastern part of the watershed. The line of the 
Stanovoi and Yablonoi must disappear from our maps. 

It is evident that retrogressive erosion has deeply affected the position 
of the watershed in the region under discussion. This is also the case 
on the southern part of the watershed between the Yenisei and the Amur, 
but here on the broad Archaean ridges, which run to the Kentei, the 
tectonic lines have exercised less influence on the course of the rivers ; the 
rivers follow such lines in places, while in others they abandon them ; and 
it is thus that on the upper Tchikoi and upper Ingoda, for example, a perfect 
labyrinth of river lines has become developed, whence Gerasimow was able 
to trace the sources of the Ingoda up to the zone of schist on the south side 
of the Sokhondo. 

The Great Khingan. D. B. Iwanow has shown that the range of 
MvJcdja, which the maps mark as an outpost of the Great Khingan situated 
north of the Amur, and between this river and the Zeya, does not exist, but 
that the interval between these rivers is occupied by a broad plain b The 
existence of the range of Ilkhuri-Alin , marked as running in the same 
direction south of the Amur, is also unconfirmed by trustworthy accounts, 
and we only know that a watershed of some sort exists in these regions 
between the tributaries of the Nonni and those of the Amur. t 

The works of Gedroitz have acquainted us with the unexpected breadth 
of the Khingan on the Argun and the lower Shilka ; his* investigations 
extend along the Mongolian frontier nearly as far as the great depression 
of lake Kulun (lat, 49° N.). M. Obrutschew has kindly placed at my 
disposal a list of rocks collected by Kropotkin 3 and Manakin 3 on their 

1 D. B. Iwanow, The Watershed of the rivers Amur and Zeya, Djel. Dor., 1899, XII, 
pp. 31-64, map. 

2 P. Kropotkin, Description of the journey from the post-house of Staro-Zuruchaitu by 
the town of Mergen to Aigun on % the Amur, #ap. Sjbirsk. Otd. Imp. ross. Geogr, Obsch., 
Irkutsk, 1865, VIII, pp. 1-57. Andronnikow, who travelled from Staro-Zuruchaitu to 
Zizikar, brought back porphyry, melaphyre, and basalt. 

a M. Manakin, Description of the journey from Staro-Zuruchaitu post-house through 



THE GREAT KHINGAN 


117 


CH. IV] 

respective travels ; he has also examined the collections made by Potanin 
and Palibin in 1899 in the course of two journeys, reports of which have 
not yet been published, and has sent me lists of the rocks. Potanin's line 
runs from lakes Tarei, Kulun, and Buir, passes to the temple of Tchakyl- 
ssum^ in long. 118° E. and somewhat south of lat. 46° N., then crosses the 
Khingan in a south-easterly direction to the temple of Khan-tabyn-ssum^ 
(long. 119° 15' E., lat. 45° N.) : and finally runs along the east slope and back 
to the Argun in long. 118° E. The botanist Palibin came from Urga to the 
Kerulen, entered the region of the Khingan in long. 118° E. and lat. 44° N., 
crossed this range and descended to the river Sharamuren, reached the 
mission station Tun-tsia-in-tse (long. 118° E., lat. 42° 30' N.), and finally 
Kalgan. 

Neither of these itineraries reaches the Ilkhuri-alin ; a considerable part 
of their course lies in the more southerly part of the Khingan. 

The principal facts are as follows : — 

The Great Khingan is traversed by the lower Shilka and the Amur. Its 
breadth is from 180 to 200 versts, or about the same as that of the Alps 
between Lucerne and Como. Only the western part of the section is known 
in detail, but the early observations of F. Schmidt show that the prevalent 
strike is the same as in the east. Gneiss and ancient schists, then deposits 
probably of Palaeozoic age, with granite, porphyry, and diabase, form 
these mountains. Here, in the north, recent volcanic formations play but 
a trifling part. On the other hand, a great belt of granite ‘ of dioritic 
type ’ makes its appearance, and close to the north border runs down from 
the Shilka in a south-south-east direction to beyond lat. 52° N. Its breadth 
varies, and according to existing descriptions may well attain 30 versts. 

It is difficult to understand how this broad and mighty chain can 
terminate almost suddenly on the north of the Shilka as it approaches the 
Sergatchinskaia Sopka, which strikes to the north-east in the Baikal 
direction; yet the observations of Iwanow lead to the conclusion that it 
does so. 

The recent volcanic rocks which are to be seen near Nertchinskii-Savod, 
along* the upper Argun and on lake Kulun, must be regarded as a part of 
those very extensive eruptive outcrops, of comparatively recent age, which 
accompany the whole of the Khingan from this point onwards. 

According to Obrutschew the specimens which have been collected 
between the river Kerulen and the lakes of Tarei confirm the view that 
the rocks of south-east trans-Baikalia are continued to the south-west into 
Mongolia. 

Kropotkin left the Argun north of lat. 50° N., and crossed the Khingan 
in lat. 49° 30' N. ; Manakin’s route at first coincides with that of Kropotkin, 

the towns of Mergen and Aigun to Blagoviechtchensk on the Amur, Zap. Tschitinsk. 
Otd. Imp, ross. Geogr. Obsch., Tchita, 1898, III, pp. 1-70. 



118 PERIPHERAL' FORMATIONS [partiv- 

but he crossed the Khingan a little further to the north. Both travellers 
observed, no* only in the west but also on the summit of the Khingan, and 
in a great part of the eastern slope, clay slates and granite, in places 
porphyry and upturned red sandstone ; notwithstanding a suspicion that on 
ono of the two journeys granite and rhyolite were frequently mistaken 
for one another, yet we may fairly conclude that south of lat. 50° N. the 
general structure does not differ essentially from that to the north, and 
that here also ancient rocks form the greater part of the Khingan proper. 

Somewhat further east of the Khingan, beyond long. 123° 30' E., the 
case changes completely. If we cross the Khingan at the sources of the 
Nomin we encounter on the east side, according to Potanin, some parallel 
chains of granite and porphyry with an almost meridional trend and 
a particularly steep eastern declivity. The mountain of Sha ter at the bend 
of the Nomin is, according to Manakin, an extinct volcano, with a well- 
preserved crater b In like manner, according to Potanin, east of this 
volcano, towards the town of Mergen, the remains of a crater are to be seen 
at the union of the rivers Guila and Gan ; and north-east of Mergen on the 
road to Aigun, the rocks are strewn with blocks of vesicular lava. The 
mountain of Koronan on this route bears a crater. About 100 versts east- 
south-east of Mergen lies the mountain of Ujun Kholdongi (lat. 48° 40' N., 
long. 126° 27' E.), which according to Chinese accounts was in eruption in 
1720 1 2 . 

Thus the town of Mergen is surrounded by a volcanic region of recent 
date, which measures 200 versts from west to east, from the Shater to the 
dTjun Kholdongi. After passing the Koronan, as we journey from Mergen 
to Aigun we reach a ridge 557 meters high between the Nonni and the 
Amur, on which granite and diorite are exposed, but on the slope to the 
Amur we again meet with great blocks of lava. 

Even at Bibikovo, 60 versts above Blagovestchensk, recent lavas still 
appear, and Kropotkin thought he recognized traces of a crater. 

The volcanic region of Mergen forms an eastern extension of the 
volcanic rocks of the Khingan and at the same time a part of the border of 
the eastern Gobi. 

Another important volcanic region lies much further south, in the desert 
west of the Khingan. Lermontow reached it towards Amagolon-Khan 
(Bogdy-ola, lat. 43° 45' N., north-north- west of Dolon-nor), and it has been 
described by Muschketow. The highest part is formed of a conical peak 
with a horseshoe- shaped depression, resembling a crater. It consists of 
basalt, tachylite, limburgite, and other rocks. Its height above the sea is 

1 Diameter 400 meters, depth 3& meters, relative height 163*5 meters ; the crater opens 
on the west side. The walls descend at an angle of 45° to the marsh, which fills the 
crater. They are formed of grey and red lava and scoria ; Manakin, op. cit., p. 45. 

2 J. W. Muschketow, Physical Geology, I, St. Petersburg, 1891, p. 248. 



THE GREAT KHINGAN 


119 


CH. IV] 

2,266 meters, but since the steppe lies here at a level of 2,019 meters, its 
relative height is small. Nevertheless it forms a landmark for the caravans 
far and wide \ 

Potanin, coming from the north, encountered granite, porphyry, and clay 
slate down to about lat. 45° N. South of this latitude the existence of 
volcanic rocks at a great number of places on the eastern slope has been 
made known through the collections of Putiata and Borodowski, and the 
description by Muschketow. Basalts have been met with at a number of 
places east and west of long. 118° E., between lats. 43° 30' and 42° N. 
Trachyte appears at Ghu-antu-kat (north of lat. 41° N. ; long. 118° E.). 
The descriptions of these travellers confirm the statement that the Great 
Khingan possesses only an eastern slope, and represents as it were the 
landing at the head of a staircase. Muschketow has recently described it 
as the result of a fault : ‘ It is a high terrace/ he says, ‘ by which Mongolia 
descends to Manchuria, one of the gigantic steps by which eastern Asia 
gradually sinks to the sea ’ 2 . 

Prjewalski, travelling from Peking to the north, reached the Great Wall 
at Hu-bei-kou (221 meters). Thence he travelled for about 180 versts 
through valleys excavated in gneiss and granulite to the town of Dolon- 
nor (1,263 meters), on the slopes of the Great Khingan ; north-west and 
west of this town the Mongolian platform rises at once to over 2,000 
meters; on the summit the previously rocky character of the landscape 
disappears and we suddenly enter the monotonous Gobi 3 . 

The town of Dolon-nor lies on ancient rocks traversed by quartz veins ; 
then follows to the north-west quartz-porphyry, and the steps which take 
us to the summit of the Gobi appear to be formed of the same rock. 

It is, however, the southern end of the Great Khingan that is of special 
interest. It has been repeatedly pointed out by Ferdinand von Richthofen 
that the outer border of the faults and flexures of Shansi, which forms the 
western border of the great plain, corresponds in direction with the trend 
of the Great Khingan, In his famous attempt to construct a tectonic map 
of North China, Richthofen designated the hypothetical continuation of the 
chi£f fracture 4 the line of the Khingan J ; and he has recently pointed out 
that the mountains of north Tchili are probably connected in an arc-like 
curve*with the Khingan, to the north or north-north-east of Peking 4 . 

1 Geological notes on east Mongolia, Gorn. Joura., 1881, II, pp. 80-98, map. 

2 L. J. Borodowski, Materials for an account of the Expedition of Colonei v Putiata to 
the Khingan, Zap. Sci. Soc. of the district of the Amur, Vladivostok, 1894, III, 155 pp., 
map; Muschketow, Verh. russ. k. min. Ges., 1893, 2ser., XXX, p. 448. 

3 Prjewalski, Reisen in der Mongolei, &c., p. 88 et seq. (German by A. Kohn, Jena, 
1877). 

4 Richthofen, China, II, p. 520 and pi. VI ; beber Gestalt und Gliederung einer 
Grundlinie in der Morphologie Ost-Asiens, Sitz. k. preuss. Akad. Wissensch., Berlin, 1900, 
XL, pp. 888-925, in particular p. 900 et seq. 



120 PERIPHERAL FORMATIONS [paktiv 

Avoiding details which have already been given (II, pp. 229-238), we 
may sum up m follows: — 

Between lat. 53° 20' and lat. 52° N„ and between long. 120° and long. 

} E., folds of ancient rocks, on the west side accompanied by a great belt 

of granite, cross the lower Shilka and t^ie lower Argun obliquely. In this 
region their direction is south-east, but it soon becomes north and south. 
At Nertchinskii-Savod recent volcanic rocks rest against the west side of 
the great range. Towards the east, in the neighbourhood of the sources of 
the Nonni, near llergen, there lies an extensive region of recent volcanic 
activity. For a long distance the meridional continuation lies somewhat 
west of the meridian of 122° E. ; between lat. 50° and lat. 49° N., the great 
range bends in a gentle arc, first to the so^th-south-west, then to the south- 
west ; accompanied by volcanic rocks, it reaches the meridian of 116° E. 
not far from Dolon-nor, in lat. 42° N., and passes, as Richthofen conjectures, 
into the line of subsidence of Peking. Its lavas are probably connected 
with the great lava-fields of southern Mongolia. 

In the north, as we have seen, the Great Khingan is a very broad folded 
range ; on its east side, however, it sinks in a mighty step, resembling a 
flexure or fracture ; this is also the case to the south near Dolon-nor, and 
it is to this downthrow on the east that the lines of subsidence of Peking 
also correspond. In some places the Khingan appears to die away towards 
the east, but observations are still very incomplete, and we do not know 
whether this is due to a flattening out of the flexure or to lavas being piled 
up in front of it. 

The porphyries as well as the trachytes and basalts of the Khingan are 
of later date than its folding. On the horsts in the neighbourhood of 
Peking a transgression of flat-lying Cambrian beds is known to occur. No 
such transgression has been observed in the north. On the other hand, 
no trace of recent eruptive rocks has been recorded along the flexures 
of Peking. In fine, the great Khingan certainly represents a broad step 
between the high-lying land in the west and the lower land in the east, 
or, to use Richthofen’s apt expression, ‘ a great step in the country.’ How 
far it is also a line of ‘overflow’ (Ueberwallung) in Richthofen’s sense, 'will 
be discussed on a later page. «, 

Plain of the upper Amur. The north-west margin of the westerin' plain 
of the Amur is formed by the border, probably Devonian, of the Sergatchins- 
kaia range, which trends to the north-east, and M. Iwanow observes that 
along this border granites and syenites occur, accompanied by aureoles of 
contact 1 . 

The contrast in the directions of trend is here very marked. The ranges 

« 

1 M. Iwanow, Geological explorations in the basin of the upper Amur, in the region 
of the Zeya and Bureya and on the west flank of the Little Khingan, Djel. Bor., 1898, 
VIII, p. 63. 



121 


ch. iv] PLAIN ‘OF THE UPPER AMUR 

of trans-Baikalia maintain their north-east to east-north-east direction ; 
in the Khingan, on the other hand, the north-west direction prevails in the 
north ; still . further to the north-east the Tukuringra also trends north- 
west. 

It seems, however, as though this norths est trend belongs only to the 
more northerly regions ; the strike of the Khingan becomes due north and 
south, and soon begins to assume a north- north-easterly trend, which becomes 
more and mqgfe pronounced towards the scfuth, as though on the whole there 
were a tendency to return to the trend of the vertex. 

The structure of the plain north of the upper Amur is not quite simple. 
Close to the east border of the Khingan the Angara beds appear with 
Asplenium Whitbyense, Tschekanou'skia rigida, &c., and these beds cover 
the whole western part of the plain ; their outcrops can be traced on the 
Amur to beyond long. 126° E., and also to the north on the Ur and on the 
Zeya to just east of long. 128 c E. 1 . They are overlain by white Tertiary 
sands and clays with brown coal which cover the eastern part of the plain 
as far as the Zeya, and along this river, from its bend to its confluence 
with the Amur, they form the cliff of the White mountains or Bielgorie, the 
striking appearance of which was remarked by Milowanow as early as 1681. 

The Tertiary covering, however, is in places of very trifling thickness ; 
Archaean rocks crop out from beneath it, as, for example, on the upper 
Tygda, but they have no orographical significance. A remarkable mass of 
granite separates the Zeya from the Amur near Blagovestchensk. In long. 
126 30' E., at Zagaian on the Amur, the granite is capped by a patch of 
white Tertiary rock ; at this spot beds of lignite which have been on fire for 
many years attract the attention of travellers. 

In these scattered exposures of the Archaean foundation M. Iwanow 
recognizes the prevailing trend to the north -north- east. But even the 
Angara beds, which form the western part of the plain, do not, according to 
this observe)', lie horizontal, but along the Amur, in the region between tin*. 
Great Khingan and the first locality where the Archaean foundation again 
^ crops out, they exhibit folding with a north-north-east strike. The plain 
has been formed hy the denudation of these folds 2 . 

The Tertiary beds reappear beyond the lower Zeya. They are covered 
by stil? more recent alluvial deposits which form the immediate subsoil of 
these fertile prairies. This territory ends towards the south in an escarp- 
ment, which often stands a considerable distance back from the Amur. All 

3 F. Schmidt, Reisen ini Gebiete des Amurstromes, &c., pp. 21, 23 et seq,, and p. 173 ; 
0. Heer, Beitrage zur Jura-Flora Ost-sibiriens und des Amurlandes, Mem. Acad. Imp. Sci. 
Saint-Petersb., 1884, V ser., XXII, no. 12: M. Iwanow, Djel. Dor., 1898, VIII, p. 64, and 
1899, XII et passim. 

2 M. Iwanow, The watershed between the rivers Amur and Zeya, Djel. Dor., 1899, XU. 
pp. 41, 48, in particular pp. 56 and 61. 



122 PERIPHERAL FORMATIONS [paktiv 

the country the foot of this escarpment is exposed to the floods of the 
/great river. Finally this escarpment reaches the west side of the Little 
Kiimgan, and at Paskova (long. 132° 45' E.) the Amur cuts through the 
range in an erosion valley. 

The Little Khingan is one of those long mountain chains which converge 
in so striking a manner towards the north of the sea of Okhotsk. The 
folds just mentioned, which strike to the north-north-east in the plain of the 
Amur, are probably only the prelude to the great harmony of movement 
which dominates a large part of eastern Asia. 

It will be advisable to describe these chains in the order of their 
succession from the continent to the sea. The most important elements 
are : (a) the Aldan mountains on the west side of the sea of Okhotsk ; 

(b( the Turkana range, the Bureya mountains with the Little Khingan 
and the chains of Manchuria ; (c) Sikhota-Alin ; ( d ) Saghalien and Japan. 

The Aldan Mountains . This range reaches a height of about 1,200 
meters. In the east it descends sheer to the sea of Okhotsk ; its western 
slope gives rise to the river Aldan, which, as we have seen above, flows 
through an extension of the Cambrian platform of the Lena. Its direction 
is north-east, parallel to the coast ; yet in the south, north of the mouth of 
the Uda, it makes a bend from Jhe north-east to the east-north-east, and 
in places becomes due east and west. This bend accords with Meglitzkis 
statement that the western border marks the east side of the upper course 
of the Maia, and there passes to the west of Nelkan and further on runs 
between the Great and Little Aim. Still further to the south-west, 
according to the same observer, on the watershed, a patch of Angara beds 
rests on granite at lake Tok ; it is possible that this locality also belongs 
to the Aldan mountains 1 . 

In the southern half of the Aldan mountains the older observations have < 
been superseded by the works of Bogdanowitsch, from which we obtain the 
following abstract 2 : — 

The bend, in the south, is very distinct. On the lower Uda, between 

1 N. G. Meglitzki, Description of the expedition of Fakutsk in 1851, edited according «• 
to the manuscripts, diaries, and collections of N. G. Meglitzki by M. P. Melnikow, Gom. 
Journ., 1893, III, pp. 324, 326. Ditmar has also crossed the range betaken Nelkan and 
Aian, but unfortunately he has published little on the subject ; K. v. Ditmar, Bkisen und 
Aufenthalt in Kamtscbatka ; Schrenck und Maximowicz, Beitrage zur Kenntniss des 
russischen Reiches, 1890, 3. Folge, VII, pp. 71-77. 

2 K. Bogdanowitsch, Einige Mittheilungen iiber den Gang der Arbeiten der Ochotsk- 
Kamtschatskischen Berg-Expedition, Izviestija des Vereins der Berg-Ingenieure, St. 
Petersb., mitgetheilt von L. A. Jatschewski, Dec. 9, 1896 ; also Izviestija Imp. ross. 
Geogr. Obsch., 1897, XXXIII, pp. 43 et seq. (Letter from Aian of 15 Oct., 1896) ; 
Resultats des explorations et des recherches de Tor accomplies par l’expedition Okhotsk- 
Kamtchatka sur la cdte nord-ouest de la mer d’Okhotsk, published by the Department, 
of Mines, St. Petersburg, 8vo, 20 pp., map ; K. Bogdanowitsch und K. Diener, Ein 
Beitrag zur Geologie der West-Kiiste des Ochotskischen Meeres, Sitz. k. Akad. Wiss. 



ch.iy] DJUDGJUR, NEMERIKAN, PRIMORSKII 123 

the adjacent tributaries of Jana and Tuktan, there is a short independent 
mountain fragment, the Khrebet Tutkan, which runs to the north-west, and 
with the Saladjak, a foot-hill of the Aldan range, almost encloses a right 
angle. Perhaps the Tutkan must be included among the mountains east of 
the Uda, and the Uda does not reach the Aldan mountains at all. 

According to BogdanSwitsch three parallel chains may be distinguished 
in the region he explored, which extends from the south to the mouth of 
the Aldama. 

The first and most westerly chain, the Djudgjur , attains the greatest 
height and forms the watershed ; it consists of porphyry, granite, and 
gneissose granite. From this chain the porphyry pebbles are derived 
which Meglitzki and Ditmar mention as occurring on the western border 
of the mountains, though they repeatedly refer to the contemporaneous 
occurrence of comparatively recent eruptive rocks, including vesicular 
lavas. Meglitzki first met with garnets to the west of Nelkan, and at 
Nelkan itself and in the valley of the Vatam (south of Nelkan) he found 
glassy volcanic roc ks. 

The second range, designated by Bogdanowitsch the Nemerikan 
mountains, is formed of granite, syenite, and hornblende gneiss. In the 
south, on the bend to the west-south- west, it becomes broader ; towards the 
north-east it diminishes in orographic importance, sometimes so far as to 
lose the appearance of an independent range ; but it may be recognized 
throughout its whole extent by its peculiar stratigraphical series. 

The third range, the Primorskii Khrebet > is extremely rocky and 
descends to the sea in steep cliffs. It consists of quartzite, slates, and 
limestones, with bands of diorite and gabbro and some diabase. M. Bogdano- 
witsch very kindly sent me fragments of a hard sandy limestone from 
Aian ; it contains shells scattered through it in layers ; and Diener has 
recognized these as upper Devonian. I am inclined to think that the 
quartzite and diorites also belong to the Devonian. Meglitzki’s statements 
lead us to conclude that these ‘greywackes’ extend along the coast still 
further to the north-east. 

At cape Magdalinda, Meglitzki also observed a patch of horizontal plant- 
bearing bedsk As regards the north of the Aldan mountains my information 
is limited to the accounts of Erman, but these are still of value, though they 
date as far back as 1829 h 

Wien, 1900, CIX, pp. 349-369. I owe M. Bogdanowitsch hearty thanks for entrusting 
me with the fossils collected on these arduous journeys. 

1 A. Erman, Reise um die Erde durch Nord-Asien und die beiden Oceane in den 
Jahren 1829-1830 ; 8vo, Berlin, 1833-1848, atlas ; Abth. II, pp. 206-429, and III, pp. 1-96. 
As regards the plateaux on the Marekapka mentioifed in III as striking across to the 
east-north-east, and thus corresponding to the direction of the Verkhoiansk mountains, 
it is uncertain whether they are bedding planes or great dykes ; cf. the representation 
in the atlas. 



124 


PERIPHERAL FORMATIONS 


[part IV 

Erman leT* ihe valley of the Aldan at Aldanskaia (somewhat south of 
l&t 62° N.) and travelled east-south- east to the Okhota. It is not impossible 
tt * t his route lay partly in the foot-hills of the Verkhoiansk mountains. 
He had hitherto observed, as far as Aldanskaia, horizontal beds of limestone 
similar to those of the Lena. But beyond this point the limestone becomes 
affected by violent disturbances, and the country, hitherto low, rises to 
between 600 and 700 meters. At first, near Garnastach, only grey limestone 
was met with, dipping steeply to the south-west. The highest range is 
formed by the Sem Khrebti (Seven mountains) ; they consist of clay 
slates, also dipping to the south-west. Erman then reached the valley, 
several miles wide, of the upper Allachjuna (546 meters), which descends 
from the lofty range in the north-east; this forms an important line of 
demarcation between two petrographical regions, and is compared by this 
observer to the valley of the Inn, in Tyrol. 

To the east of the Allachjuna follow mountains formed of a different 
clay slate which dips steeply to the west ; boulders of granite are also seen, 
'and next come rock} 7 mountains (1,053 meters) of a grey eruptive rock 
with glassy felspar, believed to be phonolite. Then, just before gaining 
the watershed, we reach the highest point, the mountain of the Kopltan 
(about 1,200 meters). The ascent leads across steeply inclined flag-stones 
striking to the north-north -east, and from the summit we find that the 
broad mountain tract to the south and east assumes the appearance of three 
parallel chains which run to the north-north -east. The phonolite extends 
up to this point, and is associated with hard greywacke containing pebbles 
and with coarse quartz conglomerate ; there is a steep dip to the west. 
Boulders of granite also occur. 

The greywacke forms the watershed ; it terminates at the broad valley 
of the Ketanda. East of this valley rises another mountain range with 
jagged peaks: it consists of porphyry, and extends to the sea. Near 
Okhotsk granite is exposed along the shore and in a few islets. Granite, 
a laminated coal-bearing rock, porphyry, and trachyte have been traced 
east of Okhotsk and into the vicinity of the river Marekanka. The action 
of the eruptive rocks on the sediments has given rise, according to Erman, 
to the natural glass known as Marekanite . • 

Greywacke has also been mentioned as occurring on the east slop#. 

The conception we thus obtain of the Aldan range, more or less 
hypothetical, it is true, is as follows : — 

On the east is a rocky range formed of quartzite, limestone, and diorite 
which are, in part at least, Devonian ; it is broader in the south than in the 
north : this is the Primorskii Khrebet. 

Then comes the Archaean range of the Nemerikan mountains. To the 
north our knowledge of this range is very incomplete ; it is uncertain 
whether the granites of Okhotsk belong to it or not. 



ch.iv] THE LITTLE KHINGAN 125 

Then a great ridge of porphyry, associated with granite and also perhaps 
with recent eruptive rocks, runs from south-south- west to north-north-east 
through the whole Aldan mass. To this belongs the principal chain of 
Djugdjur. It is distinguished at several places, as well as on the Marekanka, 
by pitchstone and Marekanite. 

To the north-west, beyond the Ketanda, the Devonian probably crops 
out again and forms the range of the Kapitan ; it is accompanied towards 
the north-west by a grey eruptive rock (phonolite). 

The hills to the west of the broad valley of Allachjuna are probably 
distinct from the Aldan mountains. 

No curvature of the range from the north- north- east to north, such as is 
marked on the maps near Okhotsk, can be inferred from the foregoing facts. 
The bed of the Arka (left tributary of the Okhota) is still in the porphyry. 

Buveya range or Little Khingan. We have already observed that the 
short range of the Tutkan mountains to the north of the lower part of the 
Uda follows a north-westerly direction. To the east of this river also, 
between Tchumakan and the adjacent cape of Djuktchangra, Bogdanowitsch 
found clay slate, with beds of crystalline limestone which strike south-east 
(110° to 160°) ; it looks as if the closely crowded chains coming from the far 
south-south-west underwent a sudden deflexion to the north-west at the 
head of Uda bay h But only a little further to the east all signs of this 
disappear. On the island of great Shantar , Meglitzki found the strike to 
be north-north-east (30°), and on the adjacent coast north 75° east 2 . Thus 
the east border of the Aldan range, following the Devonian zone, appears 
to end in a longitudinal fault, but the south coast of the sea of Okhotsk 
is not the result of a transverse fracture ; it is a rias coast, the chains 
seedling to disappear downwards in a gently inclined transverse flexure. 

The first chain of importance east of the mouth of the Uda is the Tyla 
range , which forms the promontory of Tylskoi between the rivers Tyla and 
Torom. Next to it on the east is the lofty Ala range , which extends to the 
river Tugur, and is described by Bogdanowitsch as the continuation of the 
Little Khingan. It forms to the south the watershed between the Salamja, 
a large left tributary of the Zeya, the Niman, a left tributary of the Bureya, 
the Bureya itself in the west, and the Amgun in the east. It is continued 
beyond the peninsula of Dugandja by the Shantar islands. 

In the northern part the chains of this range consist of clay slates, 
phthanites, and sandstone, which are traversed and altered, according to 
Bogdanowitsch, by diabase and porphyrite as well as by microperthitic 
granite and quartz-porphyry. Tuffs also occur. It was in this series of 
rocks, on the west side of cape Dugandja, that Meglitzki and Bogdanowitsch 

1 Bogdanowitsch and Diener, Ein Beitrag zur Geologie der Westkiiste des Ochots- 
kischen Meeres, Sitz. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1900, CIX, pp. 353. 

2 Meglitski, Gorn. Journ., 1893, III, pp. 309, 319 et seq. 



126 PERIPHERAL FORMATIONS [partiv 

fo and Jurassiv fossils, while Middendorff found Trias fossils ( Pseudomonotis 
ocbjotica) on the east* side of the same cape \ 

C&pe Dugandja belongs to the north-west part of the mountains. 
Further south, granite, syenite, and extensive exposures of porphyry make 
their appearance. 

The same range was crossed by F. Schmidt further to the south. 

F. Schmidt came from the mouth of the Amur, that is to say from the 
north-east. He ascended the valley of the Amgun, then that of the Nemilem 
and the Kerbi, and reached the mountains in lat. 52° N. ; the crest of the 
range is not far from its east border ; it is about 6,000 feet high, and 
consists of granite; elsewhere mica-schists and clay slates were seen. 
Beyond the crest, which we must doubtless regard as the continuation of 
the principal range of the Ala mountains, lie the highest sources of the 
Bureya. In its valley, above the confluence of the Niman, and thus about 
lat. 51° 40' or 51° 30' N., the traveller entered a country of much lower 
relief, in which Angara beds with Asple ilium Dicksonia and other plant- 
remains were encountered, here, strange to say, associated with Ammonites 
and Belemnites. Down the valley follow coal beds with similar plant- 
remains and likewise Belemnites. The beds are folded, and the seams of 
coal are vertical. Now we reach at last the mouth of the Niman. The 
Angara beds extend along the Bureya ; but, a few days’ journey further 
down, the river again crosses a broad parallel range formed at hrst of red 
granite, afterwards of limestone with graphite, and finally of porphyry. 
Lignite-bearing beds rest against the porphyry to the south ; then we come 
to the Amur 

The range of granite, limestone, and porphyry, just mentioned, probably 
corresponds with the south-west end of the Turkana Mountains . ( 

These mountains form a range running parallel with the Little Khingan 
on the west. For nearly its whole length it runs west of the Bureya; 
it becomes lower towards the south-south- west and finally disappears ; after, 
as seems probable from the statements of F. Schmidt, it has again been cut 
through obliquely by the Bureya. It ends in broad ridges which sink beneath 
the plain, without reaching the Amur. M. Iwanow, wdio crossed the range 

« 

1 The two capes, Mali and Bolshoi Dugandja, are directed to the north, an& their 
continuation is the island of Feklistov, the most westerly of the Shantar group. On the 
west side of the peninsula of which they form the termination we see the little river 
of Byrrandja, and on the east side cape Nikta and the bay of Mamga. Meglitzki 
mentions Jurassic with Belemnites, Pecten, and Pholadomya from the locality of 
Byrrandja, that is from the west side. Middendorff, who visited the peninsula somewhat 
later, discovered the Trias with Psewlomonotis ochotica at cape Nikta and south of the 
bay of Mamga, that is on the east side. Bogdanowitsch found the fossils identified by 
Diener as Jurassic in the interval between the mouth of the Byrrandja and cape 
Dugandja. 

2 F. Schmidt, Reisen im Gebiete des Amurstromes, &c., pp. 144-168. 



ch.iv] THE GORGE OF THE AMUR 127 

140 versts to the north of the Amur, came on rocky ridges of muscovite 
granite with dykes of aplite, sometimes converted by pressure into gneiss, 
and, towards the Bureya, i. e. more to the east, he observed porphyry *. 

It will be seen from the preceding account that a Mesozoic transgression 
coming from the north entered the region between the Turkana range and 
the Little Khingan, but there is no evidence as yet to show that it extended 
further to the south. 

As regards the continuity of the mountain chains there can be little real 
doubt, since D. Iwanow, travelling from Khabarovska, i. e. from the south- 
east, proceeded somewhat further than lat. 50° N., and met everywhere 
with a constant strike. On the east side, the range (Khrebet Patchan) gives 
off* several parallel coulisses (Sungatchan, Diaki-unokhta, Mandan), which 
towards the Amur dip in isolated ridges beneath the plain. Belts of 
Palaeozoic rock traverse the range, and in one of them, exposed in the pass 
of Kulteka, east of the Khrebet Patchan, D. Iwanow found fossils which 
are to all appearance Devonian 1 2 . 

The southern part of the Little Khingan is the best known. It is cut 
across by two natural transverse sections. The first begins in the valley of 
the Great Bira , which crosses the mountains from east to west in lat. 49° N. ; 
it then proceeds westwards up the tributary Kichtan. Here, close to the west 
border of the Little Khingan, it is only separated by the pass of Lagar from 
the upper course of the river Khingan, which follows the western foot of 
the mountains. The course of this section affords a convenient crossing for 
the railway. The second section is formed by the eroded gorge of the Amur. 
This is 110 versts long, and, generally speaking, runs to the south-south- 
east, so that at its western end, near Paclikova, the section lies very near 
the ^rans-Siberian railway line, while its south-east end, near Ekaterino- 
1 Nikolsk, lies more than a degree of latitude distant from it. 

The gorge of the Amur, known also as the ravine of Kamnifyn, confines 
the great river, over some of its reaches, within a breadth of one verst ; it 
has been described by Schmidt, Anosow, and other observers. Batzewitsch, 
by comparing this section with that of the railway line on the Great Bira. 
has proved that the regular strike of the several zones is to the north-north- 
east 3 . • 

We % may remark first, that above the ravine, the western foot of the 
Little Khingan, from the lower Bureya to the river Khingan, is marked by 

1 M. Iwanow, Djel. Dor., 1898, VIII, p. 72. 

2 D. B. Iwanow, Geological observations in the region of the Amur, the basins of the 
Tunguska, Unma Kur, and Great Bira, Djel. Dor., 1897, IV, pp. 45-58, and 1898, VIII, 
PP* 21-50, maps. According to Lutugin the fossils are Mroductella sp . and Spirifer medial Is ; 

op. cit., VIII, p. 29. 

3 L. Batzewitsch, The Little Khingan beyond the Amur, and its eastern spurs, Djel. 
Dor., 1898, VIII, pp. 1-19; also preliminary report, op. cit., 1897, IV, pp. 8-11. 



128 PERIPHERAL FORMATIONS [partiv 

a long zo no vt basaltic mountains. These basalts and the zone of porphyry 
which lies next to them have led M. Iwanow to conjecture that they 
represent the margin of a sunken area 1 . 

The zone of porphyry, which is perhaps the same as that which has 
already been mentioned as occurring much further to the north, between 
the Little Khingan and the Turkana mountains^forms the whole west side 
of the Little Khingan. On the line of the railway it reaches the pass of 
Lagar : in the canon it covers the whole stretch from Pashkova to Radde, 
a distance of 36 versts, and is then continued into Manchuria. Where the 
porphyry occurs the bed of the Amur is very narrow and rocky. 

The porphyry is followed by a series of folds which strike to north- 
north-east, and exhibit granite, gneiss, and mica-schists ; these extend as 
far as the end of the gorge. Mica-schist, micaceous gneiss, and biotite- 
bearing sandstone occur above Sujusnia in a steep undercut cliff; in the 
west limb of a syncline formed by this sandstone there is an important 
bed of graphite. A few versts further down we meet with white crystalline 
limestone containing scales of graphite. It dips at first to the north, then 
forms an anticline and dips to the south-east, and then once more to the 
north. Finally beds of bidght-coloured quartzite crop out with a very steep 
dip and extend to the eastern border of the range. Somewhat north-east 
of Ekaterino-Nikolsk a zone of basalt also makes its appearance at the 
eastern foot of the chain. 

With the exception of the basalt these zones exposed in the river 
channel reappear on the line of the railway, where it follows the river Bira : 
the eastern border of the folded ranges, however, is covered unconformably 
by horizontal beds of the Angara series in precisely that locality where the 
railway line issues from it. The Angara beds are overlain near Krasnji- 
Jar by a horizontal sheet of red porphyry. Another long parallel band of 
Archaean rocks makes its appearance in the Schuki mountains ; and these 
also are bordered on the east by the Angara series. Finally we reach the 
margin of the eastern plain. 

We have now traced from the Shantar islands to the ravine of the 
Amur, i. e. over more than nine degrees of latitude , one of those long 
fascicles of folds which are characteristic of this part of Eurasia. I must 
leave others to decide which name — the Bureya mountains of Midftendorff 
or the Little Khingan — has the greater right to this group of folds 2 . 

5 M. Iwanow, Djel. Dor., 1898, VIII, p. 73. 

- The Chinese maps give the name ‘ Little Khingan ’ to another range which lies south 
of the Amur and comprises the eastern tributaries of the Nonni as far as Mergen. The 
Russian 40-verst map also places the Malya Khingan south of the Amur, following 
approximately the statements of the Chinese. # The southern border of the erosion valley 
of the Amur would thus still fall within the Little Khingan. When the Russians, 
following the Amur, reached this place they learnt that the heights south of the ravine 
ofKaminfyn were called by the Chinese the Little Khingan, and they naturally extended 



MANCHURIA 


129 


CH. IV] 

The folded ranges which run parallel with it along the Okhotsk coast 
down to the Amur present, so far as they are known, a similar structure, 
but they are much shorter. The microperthitic granite of cape Dugandja 
has been traced by Bogdanowitsch as far east as the lakes west of 
Nikolaievsk. 

As the ranges of thiS chain disappear towards the south, they give 
place to the vast depression, interrupted only by isolated ridges and great 
lakes, which extends onwards between the east slope of the Little Khingan 
and the valley of the Amur nearly to Khabarovska. Among the foot-hills 
which lie nearest the river, the isolated basaltic hill of AM, to the west- 
north-west of Khabarovska and on the lower course of the Tunguska, is 
regarded by Batzewitsch as an extinct volcano. 

Manchuria . The structure of northern and central Manchuria has been 
made known in detail by the very instructive works of Anert h 

We may first point out that Manchuria consists of two sharply defined 
regions: to the north-west, the plain on which the western bend of the 
Sungari deeply encroaches ; and to the east and south-east, the mountainous 
country which sends its waters to the Sungari and to the Mudan-dsjan,— 
an important tributary of the Sungari, opening into it at San-sing. 

The mean height of the plain amounts to 162 meters, and the river beds 
are excavated in it to a depth of 30 meters. On the border of the plain 
these channels reveal two groups of deposits, namely an upper horizontal 
group consisting of sandstone and laminated shales in which fish-remains 
are occasionally found, and a lower folded group formed of red and yellow 
clay with nests of argillaceous sandstone. The inclination of the beds in 

the designation to the whole range which confines the Amur. Meanwhile Middendorff, 

> coming from the north, gave the long range between the Bureya and Amgun the name 
of Bureya range , and Semenow has proposed the name of Dausse Alin , which is in use for 
a part ot the range in the north. The name Little Khingan, however, had meanwhile 
become so established among the Russian settlers, that in making surveys for the 
railway this name was again adopted, and during the recent political disturbances the 
range has been termed simply ‘the Khingan.’ In support of this choice it may be 
•mentioned that the little river Khingan flows at the entrance to the ravine on the north 
side of the Amur. The following facts must be borne in mind : the range is certainly 
continued to th£ south-south-west across the Amur, and thus actually comprises the 
extreme Eastern part of the range lying south of the Amur, and termed by the Chinese 
and by the 40-verst map, the Little Khingan. This end of the range is, however, 
different from the mountains of Mergen and the chief region of the Chinese Little 
Khingan, and the whole range is completely different from the very remote Great 
Khingan ; cf. Batzewitsch, Djel. Dor., 1898, yill, p. 11. On the diversity of application 
of the term Khingan among the Chinese see also Middendorff, Reise in den aussersten 
Norden und Osten Sibiriens, IV, 1, p. 214 note. 

1 E. E. Anert, Preliminary Report of the Manchuriai* Expedition of the Royal Russian 
Geographical Society, Geological part, *Izviestija Imp. rose. Geogr. Obseh., 1897, 
XXXIII, pp. 1 64-192. The older bibliography of this region will be found in Richt- 
hofen, China, II, pp. 65-68. 

SOLLAB 111 


K 



130 PERIPHERAL FORMATIONS [partiv 

this folded group may amount to 45° and even exceed 60°. The strike of 
the folds is north-east to north-north-east. 

; At about 50 versts above Bodune on the Sungari (lat. 45° 10' N.) sand 
begins to cover these deposits of the plain, and from here a sandy desert 
stretches away towards the south in the direction of Mukden, towards the 
West to the foot-hills of the Great Khingan, aifd towards the north-west 
in the direction of Zizikar. In the west and north-west this desert is 
bounded by the volcanic rocks of the Great Khingan and of Mergen. 

Of the northern border of the desert little is known except that north 
of the Sungari, between this river and the ridge of Tun-ni-vodzsi, another 
range of hills is interposed, called the Khei-shan or the Black mountains, 
and that one of the left tributaries of the Sungari brings down andesitic 
pebbles from these regions, thus confirming the conjecture that here too 
volcanic rocks form an important part of the border of the plain 1 . 

South of the Khei-shan, on the Sungari, the folds forming the basement 
of the plain maintain their general direction to the north-east and north- 
north-east. 

The mountains of eastern and south-eastern Manchuria have a mean 
height of somewhat more than 900 meters, and consist of a series of long 
parallel folded chains. Throe of these assume particular importance, 
namely : — 

1. The long range which under various names, such as Kentei-Alin , 
Tohan-lin-dosa , Loe-lin , and others, begins in lat. 47° N. and terminates 
in the region < south-east of Ninguta. It follows the general trend of 
the valley of the Suri and encroaches on the basin of lake Khanka. We 
may assume that the folds of the western Sikhota-Alin are continued 
in this range of hills, which, as we shall see directly, are cut through 
obliquely by the Usuri. 

2. West and south of the preceding, the mountain range of Dsjun-kuan- 
dsailan, which arises between the valleys of the Mudan-dsjan and the 
Sungari, and terminates west of Omosso or even further south. 

3. Still further to the south and west, the Lo-ja-lin , to the north-east 
of Kirin. 

In addition to these principal chains, however, there are many secondary 
ridges. They all consist of ancient rocks, such as gneiss, mica-schist, and 
clay slate, as well as black quartzite, granite, porphyry, and diorite. Fossil- 
iferous beds have so far not been found. Coal -bearing beds rest un- 
conformably against these rocks, particularly between the Lo-ja-lin and the 
Dsjan-huan-dsailan, north-east of Kirin, as well as in many other places, 
and coal is mined at one locality 150 versts to the south of Kirin. 

The mountains of Manchtiria form a natural group of parallel mountain 
ridges, but, as Anert has pointed out, they do not include any central chain 
1 This is also suggested by Anert. 



MANCHURIA 


131 


CH. IV] 


running through the whole length of the country. Their relations with 
the southern end of the Little Khingan are very clear. D. W. Iwanow has 
given a diagrammatic sketch on which he marks a gentle bend of the trend 
line, within the Little Khingan, passing from north-north-east to north-east 
and returning to north-north-east near the headwaters of the great Bira ; 
the range has the latter direction where it crosses the Amur h In Manchuria 
a similar deflexion of the strike takes place to the north towards San-sin : 
the result is that the Sungari, near this town, flows in a longitudinal 
valley, while the Mudan-dsjan intersects the folds obliquely. 

The mountains of Manchuria do not come into direct contact with the 
Little Khingan, which terminates not very far south of the Amur, but they 
form coulisses all running in the same direction. 

Their relations with the Sikhota-Alin are still closer. 

Anert observes that the coal -bearing beds, just as in the case of those on 
the border of the desert, present folds striking in a north-east to north- 
north-east direction. While, however, these younger sediments show 
everywhere a tendency to be folded along lines parallel with the direction 
of the high ranges, we see that the strike of the ancient rocks forming the 
cores of these ranges deviates more or less from this general direction. 

4 As a rule, the strike of the mica-schists, quartzite schists, clay slates, 
and sandstones/ says Anert, ‘ is very nearly identical with that of the 
ridges, but in addition there are frequent cases where the strike of the 
rocks is almost at right angles to that of the ridges, showing that 
complicated relations exist here. It is probable that before the formation 
of the folds, the denudation of which produced the existing ridges, these 
ancient rocks of the core possessed a strike which was quite different from 
that of the folds * 1 2 . 

This fact, in addition to the east- and- west direction of the folds of the 
Archaean rocks east of lake Khanka, which we shall discuss directly, is the 
more significant, since another observer, E. von Cholnoky, mentions the 
east-and-west strike as occurring again further to the south. 

It is true that Anert, on his journey eastwards to Ninguta, encountered 
four«parallel crests with a north-north-east strike, and the same direction, 
sometimes becoming north-east, also prevails between Omosso and Kirin ; in 
like Dinner, Cholnoky observed a north-east strike in the neighbourhood 
of Chun-tshun; but west of this place he observed the east-and-west 
direction in the mountain chain of Thushan, as well as further to the south- 
west in a chain which is connected with the Tshang-pai-shan. Besides 
these observations we have the important statement of Richthofen that to 
the south the fractures and flexures of Peking extend as far as Kai-ping, 

1 D. W. Iwanow, Djel. Dor., 1897, IY, *1. III. * 

2 Anert, Preliminary Report of the Manchurian Expedition, Izviestija Imp. ross. 
Geogr. Obsch., 1897, XXXIII, p. 190. 


K 2 



182 PERIPHERAL FORMATIONS [partiv 

<*,nd there make a bend convex to the south, while trending to the north- 
north-east parallel with the I-wu-lu-shan ; it is probable that a flexure 
follows the west border of the valley of Mukden K 

It is difficult to form an opinion in this case, not only on account of the 
incompleteness of the maps and observations, but also owing to the large 
area covered by comparatively recent lavas, of which the northern outliers 
have been described by Anert ; according to Cholnoky, these occupy the 
whole upper region of the sources of the Sungari, and only terminate 
on the road from Kirin to Mukden, where their escarpment has been taken 
for an independent range striking to the north-east. 

Mesas of basalt already make their appearance above the ancient rocks 
on the road from Vladivostok to Ninguta. They attain a great extension 
in the valley of the Mudan-dsjan, near Ninguta, where they attracted the 
attention of Younghusband, and also in the neighbourhood of Omosso 2 . 

A lava-flow with its scoriaceous surface still unweathered, and of later 
formation than the valley or the adjacent basaltic mesas, descends, 
according to Anert, from the western mountains south of Ninguta. It has 
filled the valley of a tributary, the Shitu-dsjan, and extends across* the 
principal valley, that of the Mudan-dsjan, so as to form an important lake, 
the Bel-ten (Bir-ten). The Mudan-dsjan on leaving this lake plunges over 
a waterfall into a gorge 32 meters deep, excavated in black lava 3 . 

In the uppermost region of the sources of the Sungari, in the bordering 
range of Korea, rises the volcanic mountain of Peik-tu-shan or Lao-pai-shan, 
the ‘ old white mountain ’ (lat. 42° N., long. 127° 40' E.). It has been 
described by Campbell. For nine months of the year it is covered with 
snow, and remains white for the rest of the year owing to its covering 

of pumice. In the crater lies a lake at an altitude of 7,500 feet; its 

« 

1 E. von Cholnoky, Kurze Zusammenfassung der wissenschaftlichen Ergebnisse meiner 

Reise in China und in der Mandschurei in den Jahren 1896-1898, Verh. Gres. f. Erdk. 
Berlin, 1899, pp. 251-261 ; and Vorlaufiger Bericht liber meine Forschungsreise in China, 
Peterm. Mitth., 1899. Owing to the incomplete condition of the existing maps, it is 
difficult to compare these statements, but as Cholnoky also asserts that the latter range 
is connected with the rocks striking east and west which reach the straits between 
Kirin and Mukden at Tje-lien-shan, this hypothetical range running east and west 
should lie in about lat. 42° 30' N. For Kin-tshou-fu and Mukden, cf. F. ^on Richthofen, 
Gestalt und Gliederung einer Grundlinie, &c., p. 904. «r 

2 Younghusband, Proc. R. Geogr. Soc., 1892, XIV, p. 158. 

3 Anert states that four streams of lava may be seen on the walls one above the 
other. The damming thus appears to have taken place in repeated stages ; Preliminary 
Report of the Expedition to Manchuria, &c., lzviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch,, 1897, 
XXXIII, p. 171. The botanist Komarow, who travelled through the country with Anert, 
describes the contrast in colour between the white foam and the black rocks; he 
mentions a crater in the west, and thinks it possible that the eruption may have taken 
place in late historic times ; he points out that the Manchurian chronicles mention an 
event of this kind which is said to have occurred somewhere in the neighbourhood of 
Ninguta, lzviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1898, XXXIV, pp. 139-143 and p. 181. 



SIKHOTA-ALIN 


183 


CH. IV] 

circumference, according to James, amounts to 18 kilometers. Volcanic 
formations extend from this point not only towards the north but also 
to the south, reaching far into the valley of the upper Yalu K 

The Peik-tu-shan is included by Campbell in the range of Tshang-pai- 
shan : it is not certain whether this range is the same as that mentioned by 
Cholnoky under the same name. 

Sikhota-Alin . A broad plain of recent alluvium borders the lower 
Amur ; sedimentary beds crop out from it, which are apparently of later 
date than the mountain chains, and at the confluence of the Gorin with the 
Amur (lat. 50° 45' N.) they have afforded fossils of the genus Aueella 2 . 
The isolated heights which occur within the vast depression between 
the Little Khingan and the Sikhota-Alin trend towards the south-south- 
west. The most important group, that of Cheehzir , rising like an island 
from the lower country, attains a height of 1,066 meters. It runs along 
the right side of the Usuri to its confluence with the Amur ; at its foot, 
at the very entrance to Manchuria, lies the town of Khabarovska. The 
Cheehzir consists of granite, ancient schists, quartzite, and crystalline lime- 
stone, overlain by younger beds, which extend to a great height, and belong 
probably to the Angara series. Towards the Usuri the Cheehzir terminates 
in a fault, along which the whole series of strata stands vertical. D. Iwanow 
regards the Cheehzir as a part of the Sikhota-Alin 3 . 

Let us turn our attention to this chain. 

Its northern extremity at once affords unexpected information. The 
Amur as it approaches the sea is compelled to make so sharp a bend that 
near Nikolaievsk its course is directed to the south-east. Its northern bank 
is rocky. The promontory which narrows the gulf of Tartary, north of the 
mouth of the Amur, forms on the south, cape Tabach, at the very mouth of 
the Amur itself, and towards the north, cape Puir. On the north bank of 
the Amur, as far down as cape Tabach, Batzewitsch observed high cliffs of 
a porphyritic rock with plagioclase and hornblende in a reddish matrix, and 
then going to the north towards cape Puir, that is on the west coast of the 
♦gulf pf Tartary, he found thin flaggy beds of greenish sandstone stand- 
ing on end. Still nearer cape Puir rises the Gora Polosata , or ‘striped 
mount^jn/ visible from afar ; even from Saghalien in clear weather, owing 
to its remarkable colouring. It is not an independent mass, but the last 
fragment of a long crest, and consists of vertical beds, warm brown, red, 
yellow, and white in colour, with thin layers of white and rose-red quartzite. 
The strike is due east and west 4 . 

1 C. W. Campbell, A journey through north Korea to the Ch’ang-pai-shan, Proc. 
R. Geogr. Soc., 1892, pp. 158 et seq. 

2 D. W. Iwanow, Djel. Dor., 1898, XVI, *>. 90. 

3 Batzewitsch, Djel. Dor., 1897, IV, p. 7 ; D. W. Iwanow, op. cit., 1898, XVI, pp. 44, 
45, 98. 

4 Batzewitsch, Gorn. Journ., 1890, III, pp. 134-143. 



134 


PERIPHERAL FORMATIONS 


[part IV 

More tr the soutli, at Mariinsk, a broad isolated ridge of trachyte domi- 
nates the surrounding country far and wide, and forms the northern 
boundary of lake Kisi ; out of the waters of this rises a little island also 
formed of trachyte. It is not till we go south of this place (about 
lat. 51° 35' N.) that we meet with the regular folded ranges of Sikhota-Alin, 
which extend in a south-west direction through more than nine degrees 
of latitude. 

Our knowledge of this chain has been very considerably increased by 
the works of D. Iwanow. He has crossed its north part several times, 
explored the greater part of the east coast, and endeavoured to give a 
connected account of its most striking tectonic features *. 

All the ranges so far known consist of Archaean rocks ; but there are 
belts of rock which are possibly of Palaeozoic age, and sheets of sandstone 
and conglomerate which are still more recent, and probably belong to the 
Angara stage ; fossils have not been found except in the extreme south. 
Eruptive rocks of very various ages also make their appearance. 

According to the observations of D. Iwanow the direction of the folds 
does not correspond exactly to that of the coast. From the north down to 
the bay of Saint Vladimir (lat. 44° N. about) the two directions certainly 
coincide, and the coast is everywhere bordered by very long ridges. But 
beyond the bay this is no longer the case ; the folded ranges strike out to 
sea, and may even be continued in the islands, since the bays become 
deeper off Vladivostok and a rias coast makes its appearance. 

It has long been ascertained that some of the bays of the east side, such 
as de Castries, are surrounded by basalt, but it now appears that a belt of 
recent eruptive rocks, continuous, as far as is known, from the mountain of 
Dieliesniak (lat. 45° 25' N.) to de Castries (lat. 51° 30' N.) i. e. for ‘more 
than six degrees of latitude, forms the border of the coast, so that there 
appear to be but few localities at which the Archaean inliers reach the sea 2 . 

Long erosion valleys traverse the mountains; the ridges frequently 
break up into ‘ goltzi,’ the loftiest of which do not exceed 5,000 feet (1,500 
meters). In the interior recent eruptive rocks are not absent, but they are# 
never more than sporadic. 

The west slope of Sikhota-Alin, as it sinks gradually to the*Usuri r is often 

1 D. W. Iwanow, The range of Sikhota-Alin, Djel. Dor., 1898, XVI, pp. 1-118, map. 

2 Thus Iwanow’s map marks recent volcanic rocks from this most southerly point for 
130 versts towards the north, and for an almost equally long distance north of cape 
Stalistnaia. The south and north parts of the region between Emperor bay (Imperator- 
skaia Gaban) and de Castries, embracing more than two degrees of latitude, are of recent 
volcanic origin ; the central part is unknown ; basalts and melaphyres are the most 
important rocks ; it appears, ljowever, that certain porphyries and even diabases 
surrounded by zones of contact must be regarded as an older phase of this great line ; 
cf. D. W. Iwanow, Beds of magnetic iron in the region of the bays of St. Olga and 
St. Vladimir. Limestone is described here, converted into white marble by porphyrite ; 
Gorn. Journ., 1898, no. 1, pp. 44-58, map. 



USUEI 


185 


CH. IV] 

broken up into comparatively low foot-hills and interrupted in some of the 
river valleys by wide plains. Our knowledge of this side of the mountains 
rests on the observations of M. Iwanow b 

The rocks are the same as those on the east side ; basalt-flows also 
emerge from some of the valleys. The vcdley of the Usuri , however , is not a 
longitudinal valley . Thfe appears very clearly between lat. 47° and 46° N., 
where its direction is almost that of the meridian. Travelling towards the 
south, and soon after passing mount Samur, composed of eruptive rocks, we 
reach the quartzite belts of the ridge of Zifaku, which strike to the north- 
east, and maintaining this direction form the Tiger mountains ; in thus 
passing from the valley of the Usuri into that of the lower Bikin they inter- 
sect obliquely the course of the Usuri, where they reveal the true strike, 
which is north-east or north-north-east. Even far up in the valley of the 
Bikin, as well as in that of the Iman, the north-east to north-north-east 
strike prevails. 

Somewhat further south, near the railway station of Usuri 1 2 , where an 
anticline of dark grey mica-schist is exposed, the north-east strike is found to 
have become almost due east and west, so that the Usuri here flows across the 
folds of the ancient rocks. This almost due east-and-west strike prevails in 
all those foot-hills on the east side of lake Khanka which consist of gneiss, 
gneissose granite, and mica-schist. From M. Iwanow’s observations, how- 
ever, it would appear that there must be two sets of folds which cross each 
other. On the east side of lake Khanka and extending far away to the north- 
north-east in the valley of the Usuri, a long series of isolated limestone 
mountains is to be seen, which belong probably to the Carboniferous ; they 
rest directly on granite and gneiss, and show signs of having been originally 
continuous ; but besides this we find more to the south a somewhat younger 
series thrown into folds which, in contrast to the nearly east-and-west strike 
of the oldest rocks, run almost due north and south. This is the case at the 
Rock of Lindonau, where at the foot of the great mountain of Bielzova the 
rivers Daubichd and Ullache unite to form the Usuri. This less ancient 
series consists of quartzite and clay slates, and is invaded by dykes of 
quartz-porphyry ; the Trias appears to form part of it. 

In the i^iost southerly part of the region, in the neighbourhood of 
Vladivostok, and especially on the west shore of the bay of the Usuri, upper 
Carboniferous strata characterized by Spiv if er fascifer and, on another 
horizon, by Productus cora } crop out. Tsehernyschew correlates these 
deposits with the upper Carboniferous of the Urals and the lower Productus 
limestone of the Salt range. The Trias also is represented by marine beds 

1 M. Iwanow, Report on Geological Observation in the region of the Usuri, Djel. 
Dor., 1897, IV, pp. 15-44, maps; Batze^itsch, op. cit., pp. 2-8. 

2 More exactly at the mouth of the Kuburche, somewhat south of the station of 
Usuri, south of the mouth of the Sungari, which flows out of lake Chanka. 



136 


PERIPHERAL FORMATIONS 


[part IV 

which consist Tor the most part of shales and sandstone ; these, according to 
M. Iwanow rest unconformably on older rocks. It is true that they have 
been subject to subsequent disturbances and dip sometimes to the south, 
ajiaetimes to the south-east or north-west, in accordance, as it would 
seem, with the curvature of the ancient formations. It is these Trias deposits 
which extend into the valley of the Daubichd anS appear to reach mount 
Bielzova 1 . 

Hokkaido and Saghalien. In our wanderings towards the east we have 
reached the sea, both in the region of Okhotsk and the Sikhota-Alin. 
Extended before us lie the island arcs, teaching us that the fundamental 
features in the structure of Inner Asia characterize likewise the adjacent 
parts of the Pacific Ocean. 

On an earlier page (II, pp. 175-185) we distinguished the following 
arcs : (a) Liu-kin , penetrating into the southern part of Kiu-shiu (b) South 
Japan , on the south continued perhaps towards China by the Tshusan 
islands; on the north, bent back in the Akaishi sphenoid towards the 
syntaxis in the great fault region ; (c) North Japan , proceeding from the 
syntaxis with a deflected trend in the mountains of Quanto, continued 
towards the north in the southern part of Yezo (Hokkaido) ; (d) Central 
Yezo and Saghalien , distinguished by the development of the Cretaceous 
formation; ( e ) Kuriles, continued into east Kamtchatka; (/) a fragment 
in central and western Kamtchatka. 

This conception of the leading tectonic features has been confirmed by 
a number of subsequent investigations ; at the same time, there are many 
points on which, thanks to recent discoveries, we can now speak with 
greater precision. This is particularly true in the case of Japan. 

The trend-lines which E. Naumann traced out long ago (II, p. 177) have 
been shown by the work of Harada and many other distinguished Japanese 
geologists to be correct in all essential points 2 . But* we see now more 

1 Karpinski, Geologische Untersuchungen des Herrn Margaritow an den Ufern des 
Golfes von Ussuri, nahe bei Wladiwostok, und T. Tschernyschev, Ueber eine Sammlung 
aus dem Carbon der Umgegend von Wladiwostok, Bull. Com. geol'. Saint-Petersb., 1889, 
VII, pp. 349, 353 et seq. ; D. L. Iwanow, Gorn. Journ., 1891, no. 8, p. 251; E.» von 
Mojsisovics, Sitzb. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1892, Cl, p. 376; K. Diener, op. cit., 1895, CIV, 
pp. 268-274, and Triadische Cephalodenfauna der ostsibirischen Kusten^rovinz^Mem. 
Com. geol. Samt-Petersb., 1895, XIV, no. 3 ; and D. L. Iwanow, Die Triasablagerungen 
im siid-ussurischen Gebiete, tom. cit., pp. 3-8, map ; A. Bittner, Versteinerungen aus 
den Trias- Ablagerungen des Sud-Ussuri-Gebietes, Mem. Com. geol. Russie, 1899, VII, 
no. 4. Mojsisovics distinguished two Cephalopod faunas, the more recent of which he 
correlated with the Muschelkalk ; the older and richer fauna (Proptychites-sandstone) is 
correlated by Diener with the Otoceras beds of India ; this accords with the results 
obtained by Bittner, who shows that almost all the bivalves correspond vyith those of the 
Werfen shales. Entirely different i r the locality of Rasdolnaja, a little north of Vladi- 
vostok, which belongs to the beds with Pseudomonotis ochotica. 

2 In particular Toyokitsi Harada, Die japanischen Inseln, eine topographische geolo- 
gische Uebersicht,*!* Berlin, 1890,-8°, 126 and maps; E. Naumann, Neue Beitrage zur 



JAPAN 


137 


CH, IV] 

clearly than was possible before how the volcanic chain of the Shichito 
islands enters the fossa magma — the line or fissure of the syntaxis. The 
classification of the fossiliferous beds has likewise made great progress. 
In the islands of Japan we are now acquainted with marine deposits which, 
disregarding an ancient group containing Radiolaria, represent the upper 
Carboniferous and very various epochs of the Mesozoic aera ; at the same 
time we have learnt, though so far only from a study of the floras, to 
distinguish several horizons in the coal-bearing sediments of the Angara 
series. The coal of Nagato, east of Shimonoseki, is associated with a 
Rhaetic flora 1 , that of Kaga is assigned to the middle Jurassic 2 , and the 
plant-bearing beds of the island of Shikoku would seem to belong to the 
period of the Weald or Neocomian 3 . 

Of particular importance in connexion with the island arcs are the 
investigations of Jimbo in Hokkaido 4 . Starting from the south-west, that 
is from Honshiu, we may now recognize as we proceed to the north the 
following elements in the structure of this great island. Oshima , the part 
lying farthest to the south-west, consists of isolated fragments of ancient 
masses of schist with occasional intrusions of granite. In the intervals 
between them rise volcanos ; such, for instance, are the islands of Koshima 
aud Oshima towards the south-west, and Esan and Komagatake on the east 
coast, the latter situated at the entrance of the almost circular bay of 
Uchiura (Volcano bay), which is itself only another of those caldron- shaped 
inbreaks, of which Gassan, Chokai, and others atford examples on the north- 
west coast of Honshiu (Fig. 17, II, p. 177). Thus this part of Hokkaido 
may be regarded as a continuation of Honshiu. 

The mountain group which rises north of the bay of Uchiura and 
appears on the map to form a second widening out of the island is almost 
entirely composed of andesitic rocks. Above them rise several volcanos ; 
the loftiest of these, Makkarinupuri (1,963 meters), stands in the centre. 

This great volcanic accumulation is called by Jimbo the mass of Shi- 
ribets . It is possibly continued towards the north as the andesitic mass of 
Mashike on the west coast, and even still further in this direction, as the 
island volcano of Rishiri. 

Geologi^ von Jsfpan ; Petenn. Mitth., Erganzungsheft No. 108, 1898, and the great 
special map of Japan published by the Royal Japanese Geological Institute. 

1 Matairo Yokoyama, On some fossil Plants from the Coal-bearing Series of Nagato, 
Journ. Coll. Sci. Tokyo, 1891, IV, pp. 289-247. 

1 Matairo Yokoyama, Jurassic Plants from Kaga, Hida, and Echezen, Journ. Coll. 
Sci. Tokyo, 1888, III, pp. 1-65. 

3 A. G. Nathorst, Beitrage zur Mesozoischen Flora Japans, Denkschr. k. Akad. Wiss. 

Wien, 1890, LVI1, pp/ 48-60, pis.; M. Yokoyama, Mesozoic Plants from Kozuke, Kii, 
Awa, and Tosa, Journ. Coll&Sci. Tokyo, 18^4, VII, pp. # 201-231. , A 

4 K. Jimbo, General Geological Sketch of Hokkaido, 8vo, Satporo, 1892, T& pp., and 
maps ; also Unsere geologischen Kenntnisse von der Insel Hokkaido in Japan, V&rh. 
russ. k. min. Ges. St. Petersb., 1894, 2. Ser., XXXI, pp. 805-311. 



188 PERIPHERAL FORMATIONS [partiy 

East of fch*- mass of Shiribets lies a deep subsidence. East of this again 
a zone of middle Cretaceous strata rises in a number of important outcrops 
i‘rom beneath the covering of Tertiary sediments ; it may be traced from 
Jrukava, not far from the southernmost extremity of Hidaka, in a 
northerly direction through the whole island to cape Zoya, its northernmost 
point, thus extending through more than three ^degrees of latitude. The 
beds are upturned, folded and in some places inverted ; their prevalent dip 
is towards the east. They consist of shales, sandstone, and conglomerate, 
and, as a rule, just as is the case in Saghalien, cannot be separated from the 
Tertiary beds which rest upon them. They have been regarded, ever since 
the first publications of Naumann, as the continuation of the Cretaceous 
rocks of Saghalien, a view which has now been confirmed by the discovery 
of Helcyon giganteus , a species so characteristic of Saghalien, in the zone of 
Hokkaido. The investigations of Yokoyama, the comparative studies made 
by Kossmat, and the presence of Gaudryceras Sacya and Tetr.agonites 
Timotheanus , species so characteristic of the lower Ootatoor group of India, 
have led to the conclusion that the stratified series extends down to the 
lower Cenomanian. Michael believes that he has recognized in Saghalien 
the equivalent of the Emscher marls (lower Senonian ) 1 . Thus within the 
island arcs also we discover evidence of the great Cretaceous transgression. 

East of the Cretaceous zone of Hokkaido rises a zone of Palaeozoic 
deposits and ancient schists, which like the Cretaceous may be traced 
through the whole breadth of the island : like it also striking regularly 
to the north and reaching the nortli coast only a little to the east of cape 
Zoya. In the south a long range of granite emerges from its midst, and 
trends likewise to the north: Jimbo names this southern part the Hidaka 
chain . It disappears towards the middle of the island beneath the andesites 
and rhyolites of the mighty volcanic group of Optateshike , and north of this 
it is extensively covered over by lavas or Tertiary sediments. 

It is to the Cretaceous and the Hidaka zones that the island of Hok- 
kaido owes its lozenge-shaped form. The first of these zones, as we have 
seen, forms cape Zoya in the north ; the second, cape Erimo in the south. 
The country east of the Hidaka zone differs in structure. Hitherto the* 
meridional direction has prevailed, but now, as was already recognized by 
Lyman, the line of the Kuriles (in Japanese, Chishima) enters Hoklfaido. 

Yokoyama has established the remarkable fact that in the extreme 
east of Hokkaido the Cretaceous formation with Inoceramus and other 
characteristic fossils again makes its appearance ; it occurs near the town 

1 M. Yokoyama, Versteiner ungen aus der japanischen Kreide, Palaeontographiea, 
1890, XXXVI, pp. 159-202; Kossmat, Jahrb. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1894, XLIV, p. 470, 
and Untersuchungun iiber die sudindische fereideform, Beitr. Pal. Geol. Oest.-TJng., 
1895, IX, pp. 119, 133; also R. Michael, Ueber Kreidefossilien von der Insel Sachalin : 
Jahrb. k. preuss. geol. Landesanst. fur 1898, pp. 153-164. 



SAGHALIEN 


139 


CH. IV] 

of Nemuro and even further away, on the island o| Shikbtan, which lies 
opposite the southern Kuriles. We should not hesitate to describe these 
Cretaceous outliers as remnants of the outer zone of the Kuriles, were it 
not for the remarkable fact that an andesite breccia occurs in them, and 
that consequently the volcanic activity in the Kuriles must date back to 
Cretaceous times. 

From Kunashiri, the southernmost island of the Kuriles, the volcanos 
run in a regular crescentic curve and, passing from west-south-west to west, 
traverse the east of Hokkaido till they reach, first the volcano of Nutapkau- 
shipe (7,500 feet, 2,285 meters), and finally the above-mentioned group of 
Optateshike (6,000 feet), which is seated on the granite range. In the valley 
of the Teshio also, Jimbo mentions contemporaneous andesite breccia as 
occurring in the principal Cretaceous zone, west of the range of ancient 
schist. 

This arrangement, and especially the position of the Optateshike group, 
leads to the conclusion that the volcanic line of the Kuriles actually 
encroaches on the folded schistose and granitic range of Hidaka , which 
runs at right angles to it. This, then, is the nature of the encounter 
between two important trend-lines, one of which is volcanic. 

Tertiary freshwater beds with brown coal, capped by Tertiary marine 
deposits, mantle around on nearly every side the mountain ranges mentioned 
above. 

We can now enter upon a more precise study of the relations between 
Hokkaido and Saghalien. Saghalien likewise consists of ranges of Palaeo- 
zoic or even older schistose rock, above which the stratified series begins 
with the Cenomanian or lower Senonian. The strike is the same. The 
number of parallel chains is greater. Volcanos are absent. 

The maps often mark a promontory in the south of Saghalien running 
off to the south-east and terminating at cape Aniva. This gives an 
erroneous impression. Glehn and Schebunin have shown that in reality 
there are three parallel mountain ridges striking from north to south and 
separated by longitudinal valleys b The first of these, lying to the east, 
terminates in cape Aniva, and on the north is cut off from the next by the 
bay Morton. Glehn calls it the range of the south-eastern extremity 
(VI, Fig. 7). The second meridional chain is named by Glehn the Soya - 
Sussnaya range (V, Fig. 7). Its south foot rises from the east coast of the 
bay of Aniva; it reaches a height of 760 meters ; its length, like that of 
the first range, is about 80 versts, and it terminates on the east coast. The 
third range we will term with Poljakow the great Saghalien range 

1 P. von Glehn, Reisebericht von derjnsel Sachalin, Baer und Helmersen, Beitr. £ur 
Kenntniss des russischen Reiches, 1868, XXV, pp. 191-300 ; map by Schebunin. A 
general map, in F. Immanuel, Die Insel Sachalin, Peterm. Mitth., 1894, XL, pp. 49-GO 
pi. V. 









ch.iv] SAGHALIEN 141 

(IV, Fig. 7). Beginning at cape Crillon, it is continued in a meridional 
direction as far as lat H 51° N. \ 

The two short ranges (V and VI), and the southern part of the Saghalien 
range (IV) consist, according to Glehn and Lopatin, of crystalline schists 
and marble, and are surrounded in places by white marls with fish-remains, 
the age of which is unkncftvn, but it is probably Tertiary 1 2 . 

The two short ranges do not extend into Hokkaido, where they would 
come within the region of the Kuriles. The junction must be sought across 
the strait of La Pdrouse, from Zoya towards cape Crillon. We know that 
cape Zoya is Cretaceous, and that the ancient mountains of the zone of 
Hidaka reach the north coast of Hokkaido somewhat further east. Never- 
theless this locality is still west of the meridian which passes through cape 
Erimo in the south. 

Either, therefore, the principal chain of Hokkaido has not a strictly 
meridional course, but is diverted a little towards the north-north-west, or it 
does not correspond to the great range of Saghalien, but to a fresh coulisse. 

The east side of cape Crillon shows white marls ; the west side consists 
of the same crystalline schists as the two eastern ranges. But just beyond 
the river Oko (lat. 46° 40' N.) a series of sediments containing brown coal 
rests against the rocks of the west coast, and follows it far towards the north 
in isolated patches. Lopatin crossed the island in a south-westerly direc- 
tion; starting from Nai Budschi on the east coast (lat. 47° 25' N., close to 
the northern end of the second, or Soya-Sussnaya, range), he encountered 
only metamorphic rocks with many quartz veins and little patches of 
Tertiary. He noticed, however, that the pebbles in the bed of the river 
afforded granite, porphyry, and diorite. 

Once the eastern ranges have disappeared, the great Saghalien range 
for a*great distance forms alone the bulk of the narrow island. After having 
already reached a height of 3,000 feet it sinks in lat. 48° N. to a height of 
700-800 feet, to rise again later. In the west, as in the east, beds of brown 
coal occur along the coast. In this region the ancient rocks disappear in a 
manner not yet ascertained, while the mountains apparently preserve the 
•same -direction; their place is taken by much more recent rocks. At the 
Pic de Martiniereor Ktous-pal (lat. 50° 15' N.), Schmidt found extending up 
to the sfummits, which reach a height of 5,000 feet, hard grey semi -crystalline 
sandstone, of Cretaceous or Tertiary age ; this, dipping steeply, everywhere 
forms the surrounding crests 3 . 

1 J. S. Poljakow, Reise nach der Insel Sachalin, translated from the Russian by 
A. Arzruni, 8vo, Berlin, 1884. 

2 Lopatin, Report furnished to the general Governn^pnt of East Siberia, Gera. Journ., 
1870, no. 10, p. 47 et seq. (for the south, sefc in particular p. 67). 

8 Schmidt in Glehn, Reisebericht von der Insel Sachalin, Baer und Helmersen, Beitrage 
zur Kenntniss des russischen Reiches, 1868, XXV, p. 253. 



142 PERIPHERAL FORMATIONS [partiv 

From about lat. 49° N. onwards a second chain, the Tym mountains, 
coming £r<m the east and clearly converging to the north, joins the great 
Saghaiien range (VII, Fig. ?'). In the south it bounds Patience bay ; on its 
inland side it is separated from the western mountains by the two longi- 
tudinal valleys of the Poronai and the Tym. Its northern end, which forms 
the * sugar-loaves/ is situated near lat. 52° N. e Poljakow, who travelled 
from the Alexander valley, near Dui (lat. 50° 50' N.), across the Saghaiien 
range to the river Tym, and down this river to the northern end of the 
Tym range, observed no other rocks than quartzite and grey sandy clay ; 
according to this observer, the valley of the Tym is a syncline, and the 
mountain ranges on the right and left, formed of steeply inclined 
quartzite and friable sandstone, are anticlines 1 . 

According to Lopatin, however, crystalline rocks also are to be seen 
on the Tym, and these form the east coast along the side of the Tym 
mountains 2 . 

It would appear that the lower course of the Tym, where it cuts off 
the Tym mountains, does not correspond to a transverse valley. Poljakow 
states that the eastern range is pushed aside as it were by the western. 
In fact both Glehn and Schebunin represent the great Saghaiien range as 
terminating on the west coast near Dui or somewhat north of it, in lat. 51° 
or 51° 3<y N., and from there onwards the country to the north assumes 
more and more the form of a broad irregular plateau of which the highest 
part, Engis p&l (2,000 feet), is the corner of a broad ridge, but not a true 
chain. This uneven plateau first takes the place of the great Saghaiien 
range in the west, and then that of the Tym range in the east, so that at 
last it alone occupies the whole breadth of the island. 

North of cape Khoindcho (lat. 50° 50' N.), which consists of crystalline rocks 
and the adjacent cape of Dui, close to the place where the end of the ‘great 
Saghaiien range is supposed to lie, a very varied series of steeply inclined 
and, according to some statements, even overfolded sediments is exposed on 
the west coast. These furnish the rich Cretaceous fauna of Saghaiien, 
described by Schmidt, which is so clearly allied to that of Hokkaido and to 
the Cretaceous fauna of India. The marine series begins with the middle 
Cretaceous. But Tertiary deposits, both freshwater and marine, are 
not wanting. Glehn has described the whole series of exposures*, which 
extends up to cape Uandi, a distance of about 70 versts 3 . It looks as if 
this whole zone of more recent sediments were cut off at an acute angle 

1 Poljakow, Reise nach der Insel Saehalin, pp. 23, 67. 

2 Lopatin, Report furnished to the general Government of East Siberia, Gom. Journ., 
1870, no. 10, p. 70. 

8 Gl§hn, Reisebericht von der Ipsel Saehalin, Baer und Helmersen, 1868, XXV, p. 242 
et seq. Marine cretaceous deposits rest on ^eaf-bearing beds with Alnus, FagUB, &c. 
Considering the surprising facts already brought to light by the study of the Cretaceous 
flora, I hesitate at present to speak definitely of overfolding. 



ch.iv] SAGHALIEN 143 

by the coast, and as though they were striking north-north-west, towards 
the gulf of Tartary. 

In the north, at Uandi, the crystalline foundation again crops out (lat. 
51° 35' N.), and is followed by steep beds of sandstone; further north, the 
whole west end of the hilly country, dominated by the Engis pal, is occupied 
exclusively, so far as we know anything of it beyond the tundra, by sand- 
stone, probably of Tertiary age, which extends to the brackish- water lake 
of Pronge (lat. 53° 45' N.). Batzewitsch has described the sand and friable 
sandstone of Pronge. The latter contains carnelian and chalcedony, as is 
everywhere the case with the Tertiary sandstone of the Amur. The dip 
indicated by Batzewitsch (hora 3 north-east, under 20°) indicates a north- 
west strike. The sandstone extends across the whole island from the west 
to the east coast, and contains no organic remains ; it is described as Pliocene. 
East of the watershed an anticline brings up beds of clay which contain 
petroleum ; this issues from them to form a little lake. On the east coast 
also petroleum is known b 

Once again a sharply -jagged crest arises. It curves in a peculiar bend 
to the north-west ; extends, 2,000 feet in height, into the western promontory, 
and terminates in the rocky cliffs of cape Maria (VIII, Fig. 7). A last range, 
similar to the preceding but not quite so high, follows it on the north and 
ends in cape Elisabeth, the most northerly point of Saghalien (IX, Fig. 7). 
The geology of these remarkable promontories is not known ; Glehn conjec- 
tures that the older plant-bearing beds of Khoindcho crop out at their foot, 
since coal is said to occur near Pilo, at the south foot of the southern range 1 2 . 

Thus it is not only in Hokkaido and in the Tym mountains, but in 
several other places also, and especially in north Saghalien. that the true 
strike appears to diverge from the meridian towards the north-north- west; 
in tfie north the great island terminates with the two hook-shaped rocky 
ranges which break off in the promontories of Maria and Elisabeth. Thus 
the east-and-west strike of the Tertiary sandstone in the Polosata Gora, 
north of the mouth of the Amur, acquires particular significance. It 
appears as though these outermost parts of the ranges which converge 
* towcfrds the gulf of Okhotsk were about to make a bend to the west. 

The most important alteration which it seems desirable to make in our 
enu mentation of the trend-lines of the island arcs (p. 136) affects the arc d 
(Hokkaido and Saghalien) ; this should be no longer regarded as an 
independent element. 

Both Naumann and Harada agree that the north part of Honshiu is 
disposed in successive zones. Harada expresses himself most decidedly on 

1 L. Batzewitsch, Description of the naphtha springs of Sachalin, Gom. Joura., 1890, 
III, pp. 129-150, pi. VII. 

8 Glehn, Reisebericht von der Insel Sachalin, Baer und Helmersen, 1868, XXV, 
pp. 219, 229, 251. 



144 


PERIPHERAL FORMATIONS 


[PART IV 

this point, and following him we recognize (Fig. 7), I, an inner zone of 
sediments, much broken up and mantled over by eruptive rocks ; II, the 
so-called nuclear zone, consisting of gneiss and crystalline schists; and 
III, the outer sedimentary zone. Great volcanos appear within the region 
of the zones I and II; a deep furrow, the so-called ‘median line’ of 
Harada, runs in this part of Japan across the zone III. 

This furrow reaches cape Shiriasaki at the northern end of Honshiu, 
and it is generally agreed that the deep depression which separates the 
eastern part of Hokkaido from the smaller western part of the island may 
be regarded as the continuation of the * median line ’ of Honshiu. The 
fragments of ancient rocks in Osliima, with the associated volcanos, the 
volcanic mass of Shiribets, that of Mashike (in so far as it does not belong 
to the Kuriles), and even the volcano of Rishiri, would thus correspond 
to zone II, and perhaps, in Oshima, also to zone I. The outer folded zone 
of North Honshiu (III), which is in part of Mesozoic age and includes 
Abukuma and Kitakami (Fig. 17, II, p. 221), does not appear in Hokkaido 
under this form. Since in Honshiu transgressive patches of middle 
Cretaceous make their appearance along this zone, we might conclude that 
the Cretaceous zone of Hokkaido should be regarded as the continuation of 
the eastern border of zone III. We shall see, however, that the relation 
may possibly be of an altogether different nature, and without, for the 
moment, expressing any opinion on this point, we will mark the Cretaceous 
zone of Hokkaido as Ilia. The chain of Hidaka, which is continued in 
the great Saghalien range, may be numbered IV. Putting the valleys on 
one side, and confining our attention to the mountain chains, we may give 
the number V to the Soya-Sussnaya mountains which run on the east 
of IV, and VI to the eastern coast-range. Still further east rises the 
Tym range (VII), and numbers VIII and IX indicate the short bent ranges 
of the northern extremity of Saghalien. 

From this it appears that the ranges nearest the exterior, those 
numbered VIII and IX, are at the same time the most northerly, and that 
two features dominate the whole structure — first, a peculiar echelon-like 
arrangement of the coulisses towards the north, and next, the geheral 
convergence towards the sea of Okhotsk. 4 

Owing to the prevalence of an almost meridional trend, the first oi 3 these 
features finds expression in the position of the northern end of the several 
ranges. The ancient rocks of II (or I) are visible as far as lat. 42° 40' N., 
and the accompanying volcanos, as far as Rishiri in lat. 45° 8'N. ; Ilia, 
the Cretaceous zone of Hokkaido, disappears with cape Zoya in lat. 
45° 30' N., and the ancient rocks of zone IV reach the sea south of Dui in lat. 
50° 52' N. Then follow the short ranges, in south Saghalien, V, extending to 
lat. 47° 35' N., and VI, to lat. 46° 48' N. ; then the Tym mountains, VII, to 
about lat. 51° 45' N. ; and finally VIII and IX, to lat. 54° 18' and 54° 22' N. 



ch.iv] PROLONGATION OF THE KURILES . ,145 

In this account we have disregarded the appearance of ancient rocks at 
Uandi, north of Dui, and we admit that the Cretaceous rocks between 
(Jandi and Dui do not belong to the same zone as those in Hokkaido. 

Whether the isolated occurrences of ancient rocks east of the Hidaka 
zone in Hokkaido are to,be regarded as the southern continuation of the 
short ranges V and VI cannot be determined from existing observations. 
But, in any case, it is clear that the line of the Kuriles enters the zones 
which run from Honshiu to Saghalien. 

There are even indications that this encroachment of the Kuriles on 
Hokkaido takes place to a far greater degree than the observations so far 
published have led us to suspect. Not only are the Cretaceous rocks 
of Nemuro, on the south coast of Hokkaido, followed by a basin of brown 
coal which strikes to the west-soutli-west, but Mr. Ogawa informs me that 
the same strike of the Kuriles is encountered in the Palaeozoic belts of the 
south-west as far as Oshima, indeed even near cape Shiriasaki and in 
the northernmost parts of Honshiu. At the same time indications of 
a recurvature to the west-north-west have been observed in the most 
northerly parts of Kitakami. Thus it would indeed appear as though 
an intercrossing produced during variable movement, and an ancient 
syntaxis with the Kuriles actually existed in the extreme north of 
Honshiu. 

Possibly this is also the case further south, in Kiu-siu. I owe to 
Mr. Ogawa the additional information that Mr. Sugawa has observed 
indications of the trend-lines of the Liu-kiu islands on the south coast 
of Kiu-siu, and that they may be recognized in older sediments even as 
far as the north coast of Kiu-siu. 

Further, the sericitic and semi-crystalline schists which form the Hidaka 
zone where it dips beneath the sea at cape Erimo have been discovered very 
unexpectedly on some small islands to the east off the outer coast of 
Kitakami. On the peninsula of Tshori in Quanto, near the north border of 
the great indentation in Honshiu, Palaeozoic limestone strikes due east 
Straight out to sea. These are the indicatipns, remote from one another, it 
is true, which show that the zone of Hidaka is continued into the syntaxis 
of cental Japah. 

Summary . The region discussed in this chapter extends over 25 
degrees of longitude, from the point where the lower Shilka enters the 
rocks of the great Khingan to the eastern shore of Saghalien, and over 
26 to 27 degrees of latitude, from the valley of the Okhota to the great foss 
of Honshiu near Fusiyama. 

The horsts of the ancient vertex have disappeared one after the other 
beneath the ‘taiga’ along the watershed of the Arctic Ocean. In the 
northern part of the great Khingan and in the Tukuringra a divergent 
trend makes its appearance, and we might imagine that a new tectonic plan 



146 


PERIPHERAL FORMATIONS 


[part IV 

was abom to supervene. This is not the case. Across the fertile plains of 

Amur, across the gloomy primaeval forests of the Turkana mountains 
and the Little Khingan, to the deserts of Saghalien and the great deeps of 
the sea off the coast of Japan, a common arrangement governs the trend- 
lines, and thi^, as the direction turns more and* more towards the north, 
finds its expression in the convergence of all the chains towards the north 
of the sea of Okhotsk. These chains are the Aldan mountains, the Turkana 
mountains, the chain of Bureya mountains and the Little Khingan, the 
chains of Manchuria and the Sikhota-Alin, and finally those of north 
Honshiu with Hokkaido and Saghalien. At the same time this region 
belongs to the vertex, since it is arranged on the whole according to 
a common plan. 

The picture we have presented grows even larger in the light of a 
discovery which has been communicated to me by Mr. Ogawa. Limestone 
containing Nummulites has been shown to occur in the Peel islands of the 
Bonin group . The Bonin islands form two separate zones which run 
south and north. The eastern zone, to which the Peel islands belong, 
is formed of andesitic rocks, probably of considerable age : it disappears 
towards the north. The western zone is a series of recent volcanic cones, 
in part still active ; these are : St. Augustine, Krusenstem, Sulphur island, 
St. Alexander, and Rosario. In the neighbourhood of St. Alexander a 
submarine eruption has been observed. This western zone also disappears 
towards the north, but it reappears in the line of Ponafidin, Volcano island, 
Aoga-shima, Hatshija-shima, and other volcanic islands, all of recent origin 
and for the most part still active ; this line enters the great foss of Honshiu 
near Fusiyama. 

It therefore becomes not improbable that the eastern zone of the Bonin 
islands represents the remains of a cordillera, and that the group possesses 
a structure like that of the arc of the Liu-kiu or of the Antilles, and should 
therefore be regarded as an independent island arc. Since evidence has 
been given which points to a continuation of the Hidaka zone to south 
Quanto, and since the Hidaka zone is the chief zone of Saghalien (IV, Fig. 5), 
we may even suppose that trend-lines so remote from one another as Bonin 
and Saghalien might meet in central Honshiu. ‘ « 

The bow-like arrangement of the Marianne islands, which also run 
north and south, renders it probable that these islands also represent an 
independent arc, the cordillera of which is not visible. 

If we could remove the sea, then these island arcs, all rising from great 
abysses, would appear as mighty mountain chains. Arc succeeds arc. In the 
direction of the Ocean we knpw of no limit to the wonderful arc-producing 
power which emanates from the vertex" of Eurasia . 

It certainly looks } however , as if the radii , towards the periphery of the 
structure , become too long . The arcs then divide by bending back upon 



BENDING OF THE FOLDS 


147 


CH. IV] 

themselves, and syntaxis often takes place between the resulting segments. 
The south-west end of the Aldan range is recurved ; recurvature may also 
be seen in the north end of Saghalien, as well as in the south. part of 
Sikhota-Alin, where the recurvature of the folds takes place in the 
neighbourhood of lake Khanka. The indent or syntaxis, which coincides 
with the fossa magma in # Honshiu, is probably due to the same cause. 

The long strike-fractures of the vertex are not absent in the periphery. 
One of them forms the rocky east coast of the Aldan mountains; to the 
south of the sea of Okhotsk, where we might expect a transverse fracture, 
a rias coast occurs. The second example is furnished by the east border 
of the Sikhota-Alin, with its long belt of accompanying basalts ; here too we 
find in the south, instead of a transverse fracture, a rias coast. In like 
manner basalt outflows border the foot of the Little Khingan, both on the 
east and west, in the neighbourhood of the Amur. These long lines belong 
to another category than those fractures which manifest themselves in the 
series of caldron inbreaks on the west coast of Japan, and to explain them 
we must have recourse to disjunctive processes similar to those which have 
affected the vertex. 

The fractures tend to follow a longitudinal rather than a transverse 
or any other direction ; yet it is to be observed that the longitudinal 
fracture of the Sikhota-Alin does not follow the bend of the folds in the 
southern part of the range . 

This fact must be regarded as important. Disjunctive lines resulting 
from tension may show a tendency to follow for a long distance a more or 
less rectilinear or gently curved folded range, but they do not follow a 
sharp bend. Anert points out that in Manchuria the recent but already 
denuded folds of the plain strike regularly to the north-north-east, while 
within the ancient rocks (i. e. within the mountains which, according to 
their outer form, also run to north- north-east) a divergent strike, running 
due east and west, occurs. We might suppose that the older bends are cut 
through by the straighter disjunctive lines, and that some disjunctive lines 
may determine locally the trend-lines of the posthumous folding. 

Startling as this conjecture may seem, it must not be forgotten that — in 
the amphitheatre of Irkutsk for example — the boundary of the Archaean 
determines the course of the marginal folds. 

The case alters as soon as we pass west of the Lido-ho from the folded 
regions of the coast and of Manchuria into the tableland of north-east China. 
There not only fractures occur, but also lines resembling flexures ; these are 
unknown in the folded mountains, where, however, it would certainly be 
difficult to establish their presence. More recent eruptive rocks are absent 
along the fractures of Shansi. But the fractures of the tableland not 
only correspond in disposition with trend-lines of the folded country, but 
also describe (I-wu-lu-shan to Hong-shan, Tai-hang-shan) precisely similar 



148 


PERIPHERAL FORMATIONS 


[part IV 

curves fr< the south-south-west to the west-south- west or west, with the 
game convexity towards the south-east as that described by the folds in the 
folded county (north part of the Great Khingan, north Saghalien, south 
Aldan mountains, lake Khanka) ; in the latter the movements are perhaps 
indicated in certain cases by the transition from fracture to rias coast (bay 
of Saint Vladimir to Vladivostok). That the bent folds may also be cut 
through by fractures is evident from what has already been said regarding 
the complicated relations in Manchuria. 

As we approach the Pacific Ocean the marine Mesozoic deposits make 
their appearance. The Trias of Usuri, the beds with Pseudomonotis 
ochotiea> the middle Jurassic of the coast of Okhotsk, the Aucella beds, 
which enter the valley of the Amur, and the traces of the Volga stage, all 
indicate communication with the north. We next recognize as far away as 
Saghalien the middle Cretaceous transgression to which, as represented in 
Europe and in its extension up to the strait of Turgai, we ascribe a southern 
origin. 

At the same time the plant-bearing beds, not only in Siberia but also 
in the plain of the Amur and of Manchuria, show us that a great continent, 
frequently covered by vast sheets of fresh water, has existed here for an 
extremely long period — in certain regions since the Carboniferous, in others 
at least since the Rhaetic period. 

This is the eastern part of Angara-land. It is affected by numerous 
lines of dislocation with the downthrow to the east. Yet notwithstanding 
this, the region of dry land has, in the course of ages, step by step extended 
itself towards the east ; had it not done so, the Mesozoic deposits would not 
be visible. Its growth may be explained partly by subsequent foldings, 
but chiefly by the fact that elsewhere subsidences on a much grander ^cale 
have taken place within the regions occupied by the ocean. 

This part of the world affords an exceptional opportunity for determin- 
ing with some degree of precision the permanence of a continent. In the 
whole course of the long period represented by the fossiliferous sediments 
of our planet, the phylogenetic thread of organic life has never been broken^ 
though the process of evolution has to all appearance been neither uniform 
nor continuous. Changes in the environment must have* had ^ great 
influence, especially the repeated changes in the extent and boundaries of 
the ocean. The denizens of the dry land and of fresh water react to these 
changes in a completely different manner from those of the sea. In the 
case of the former the uninterrupted continuity of the phylogenetic thread 
presupposes a long stability of certain places of refuge which for marine 
forms of life are never wanting. The extreme conclusions deduced from 
this principle, correct in itself, together with considerations regarding the 
great depth of the seas, have led to the doctrine of the universal stability of 
both continents and oceans, a theory which nature does not confirm to 



ANGARA-LAND 


149 


CH.IV] 

this extent. In Angara-land, however, we see a large area of the earth's 
surface, which from a very remote period has been apt to serve as a place 
of refuge for terrestrial and freshwater animals ; under favourable circum- 
stances, new colonies may have radiated outwards from it in all directions, 
as from Linnaeus’s island of Paradise. 

Angara-land is not the only region of this kind. 



150 


CHAPTER V 

♦ 

THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES 1 

Tomsk. Kusnetzkii- Alatau and Salair. Inner arcs of the Altai. Kirghiz mountains. 
Tljian-shan. Bei-shan. San-sjan-tsy. Lun-shan. West Nan-shan. Syntaxis of Nan- 
shan and the are of Yarkend. The Altaides. 

T^e undulating plain which extends to the east, and still more to the 
south of the town of Tomsk, is of great importance in the study of the 
Altai. Although covered for vast distances by continuous marshy forest, 
and in no way remarkable for its relief, it has become one of the best known 
parts of Siberia. This is owing to several circumstances, first among which 
must be counted the valuable local investigations of Professor Saitzew, of 
Tomsk; and next, the surveys for the Siberian railway, which goes through 
this region, as well as the special survey which is now being made of the 
Altai for the crown domains ; simultaneous with all these undertakings 
is the discovery of workable coal, which has given rise to a good deal of 
prospecting. 

From the sum of existing observations we may conclude that beneath the 
plain lying east and south of Tomsk are the ends of three mountain ranges 
which converge till they meet . The first of these ranges comes from the 
south-west and occupies the north-west and north of this region ; we will 
term it for the present the Kolyvan range . The middle range comes from 
the south-south-east, and further south bears the name of Salair . ‘The 
third or eastern range, almost parallel to the middle one, is the Kusnetzkii 
Alatau . This forms the boundary in the direction of Minuzinsk 2 . 

After crossing the steppe of Baraba, and passing Omsk and Kainsk, we 
reach ancient rocks on the right shore of the Obi above and below Kolyvan. 
At the confluence of the Inja near the railway these consist of steeply « 
upturned beds of slate and sandstone, striking north-east and pierced by 
granite veins. The granite also forms an island in the Obi. Derjawin has 
found similar rocks near Guseletova, above the confluence of the Berda, and 
Saitzew met with the granite much lower down, near Kruglikov ; so that 
these rocks, all striking north-east to north- north-east, have been traced 

1 Revised by Professor W. W. Watts, Sc.D., F.R.S. 

2 We may obtain a good general idea of this region by comparing the geological map of 
the districts between the lower Tofn and the Qbi drawn up under the direction of A. A. 
Inostranzew, and affixed to the ‘ Travaux de la Section geologique du Cabinet de sa 
Majeete III, Petersburg, 1898, with the geological map on the same scale by Krasnopolski 
of parts of the districts of Tomsk and Mariinsk, Djel. Dor., 1898, XIV. 



TOMSK 


151 


CH. V] 


down the Obi for a distance of more than 150 versts. The granite, 
according to Derjawin, is later than the slates and sandstone, and is 
surrounded by a zone of contact alteration 

The granite disappears ; Devonian rocks set in, and proceed, in the direc- 
tion of the trend of the granite outcrops, beneath the plain to Tomsk and 
beyond ; they are also viable to the east of this town. 

Such, then, is the Koly van range. Although it hardly ever attains any 
considerable height, it nevertheless forms part of an important tecfconi<j 
element. This is shown by its breadth, the constancy and independence of 
its strike, and the steepness of its folds. Towards the north-north-east, 
beyond Tomsk, the range, as we have seen, disappears beneath the northern 
plain ; towards the south-south-west it is in part cut obliquely by the Obi, 
and disappears along this river ; further away it disappears in like manner 
beneath the northern part of the steppe of Barnaul. Derjawin, however, 
considers that the hills bordering the steppe of Baraba, on the west bank of 
the Obi, also possess a foundation of ancient rocks; he also regards the 
strikingly parallel course of all the river-channels on the left of the Obi, 
below Barnaul, as an indication of the subterranean continuation of this 
range 2 . As to the true cause of the direction of these superficial river- 
courses I have no means of judging, but it may be observed that the 
continuation of the Koly van range will possibly be found in the mountains 
of the Kirghiz steppe, beyond the Irtish. 

To the south, beyond the Inja, there projects from the Koly van range a 
great dome of porphyry, the mountain of Bugashak, and a little further east- 
lies a long and completely crushed basin of Carboniferous limestone and coal- 
measures, quite close to the boundary of the Salair ; this is the coal basin of 
the Elbaslu It has been described by Inostranzew : its strike is directed to 
the *north-north-east ; the coal is anthracitic, and stands almost vertical. 
The post road from Tomsk to Barnaul runs along the east side of the basin. 
In the boundary zone between this district and the Salair, on the post road 
south of the river Berd, dynamo-metamorphic rocks make their appearance 3 . 

In regard to the northern end of the Salair unexpected information has 
>bee» furnished by the works of Derjawin and Inostranzew. This mighty 
branch of the Altai, after diminishing in height towards the north, termi- 
nates«abruptly, south of lat. 55° N., in a long transverse escarpment, about 
100 meters high, which bears the name of Tyrgan. The range consists for 
the greater part of beds which are probably lower Devonian ; they are 

1 A. Derjawin, Djel. Dor., 1896, I, p. 83 et seq., map ; A. Saitzew, op. cit., 1896, Y, 
p. 95 et seq., general map on p. 97 ; G. G. von Peetz, Travaux de la Section geologique, 
1896, 1, pp. 97-197 ; in particular Derjawin, op. cit., 1898, III, pp. 9-29. 

2 Derjawin, Travaux de la Section geol., 1898, III, p. 22. The fossils found near the 
town of Tomsk belong to the Devonian. • 

3 A. A. Inostranzew, Travaux de la Section geol., 1898, II, pp. 1-117 ; in particular 
pp. 16 and 18. 



152 THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [pahtjv 

accompanied by numerous bands of diabase ; on the Tyrgan, granite is 
exposed l . 

The western group of the Salair forms^ as we have seen, the coal-basin 
of the Elbash, which strikes to the north-north-east alongside the Kplyvan. 
Towards the east and north-east, upper Devonian rests upon the beds of the 
Salair, which are probably lower Devonian ; then follows Carboniferous 
limestone, and finally the lower beds of the great coal-basin of Kusnetsk. 
This whole series gradually passes from a north-north- west to a north-west 
and west-north- west direction, and envelopes the north border of the Salair. 
Since Carboniferous beds have also been discovered beneath the plain to the 
north of the Salair, at Nova-Isylinskaia, it is evident that the Salair is 
bounded on the north by an offset of the Kusnetzk basin, which runs towards 
the north end of the Elbash basin, and that the two basins thus unite north 
of the Salair 2 . 

As a further consequence, the Kolyvan range reaches on the. north the 
immediate neighbourhood of the Kusnetzkii Alatau. 

It was formerly believed that the great coal-basin of Kusnetzk, which 
lies between the Salair and the Kusnetzkii Alatau, terminated to the north 
at Balakhonka, on the Tom (lat. 55° 32' N.). But just as it is prolonged 
towards the north-west at the northern end of the Salair, so, as is shown by 
the excavations made near the headwaters of the Masatovskii Kitat, it is 
prolonged towards the north by a long narrow band which runs between 
the Tom and the Inja, and at length crosses the railway line. This narrow 
syncline, which is bordered on its south-eastern side by Carboniferous lime- 
stone, indicates the true boundary beneath the plain between the Kolyvan 
range and the Kusnetzkii Alatau 3 . 

Only a few signs of the northern extremity of the Kusnetzkii Alatau are 
visible north of the railway. It almost entirely disappears before reacBing 
the line, and what is to be seen is only its western moiety, that is the 
stratified series which begins with the lower Devonian and dips towards the 
west or towards the coal-field of Kusnetzk. Thus it happens that the 
Devonian still visible east of Tomsk belongs almost entirely to the range of 
Kolyvan. «» 

« 

1 Derjawin, Geological observations in the district of the Tom, Gorn. Journ., 1893, II, 
p. 110 et seq. ; also Djel. Dor., 1896, I, p. 75 et seq. ; Inostranzew, Travaux de la Section 
geol., 1898, II, in particular p. 5 et seq. ; also B. Cotta, Der Altai, sein geologischer Bau 
und seine Erzlagerstiitten, 8vo, 1871, map (refers to north Salair) ; and Neste rowski, 
Description geologique de la partie nord-est de la chaine de Salair, en Altai, Ann. Soc. 
geol. Belg., 1875, II, pp. 12-33, map. 

2 This bend around the end of the Salair and the outcrop of the Carboniferous deposits 

of Kusnetzk are described in detail by Polenow, Travaux de ia Section geol., 1897, II, 
pp. 98-130. 1 

3 Krasnopolski, Djel. Dor., 1898, IX, pp. 58-73 ; and Jaworowski, tom. cit.,pp. 8&-108, 
map ; also Krasnopolski, op. cit., 1898, XIV, pp. 1-96, map. 



cH.y] KUSNETZKII ALATAU 153 

We have now reached long. 86° E., and beyond lat. 56° 30' N. Further 
north, lies nothing so far as w% know. But plains, marshes, and primaeval 
forest. Up to this point, however, the elements tve have been able to dis- 
tinguish are : (1) the Kolyvari range ; (2) the coal-basin of Elbash, which must 
be regarded as a crushed syncline on the east side of the Koly van range ; 
(3) the Salair, which termftiates prematurely, thus enabling the syncline of 
Elbash to unite around its north end with the element next in order ; (4) the 
coal-basin of KusUetzk ; this forms the second syncline ; and finally, to the 
east of this syncline, (5) the kusnetzkii Alatau. 

Kusnetzkii Alatau and Salair, The Kusnetzkii Alatau, like the Salair, 
presents in the middle a band of altered rocks, which are regarded as lower 
Devonian, and on eafch side of this come zones of upper Devonian and Car- 
boniferous limestone. In several places granite crops out; in the lower 
Devonian long, broad bands of diabase are to be seen. Tschihatschew 
rightly regarded this range as the north-eastern boundary of the Altai. On 
the north its rocks strike to the north-north- west. Near Blago-Nadejini they 
still strike north-north-west (325°-330°), but according to the same observer, 
the trend of the range and the strike of the rocks turn round together, 
somewhat east of the source of the great Juss (Ussa, right tributary of the 
Tom), towards the south-south-west, to unite with the mountains of Teletzk b 

Thus the trend of the Kusnetzkii Alatau is not rectilinear, but the range 
forms an arc slightly convex towards the east. This explains how it is that 
Tschihatschew brings into connexion with this range all the south-south- 
west trending or nearly meridional chains situated between longs. 89° and 
90 E., as for example the Abakan mountains and the boundary range which 
extends beyond lat. 50° N. 

In this south-eastern part of the range, another bend in the strike un- 
> doubtedly occurs, whilst the form of the mountain ranges is affected by 
numerous intrusive masses of granite, syenite, and diorite. Malewski’s 
observations, made on his journey along the frontier from the upper Bukh- 
tarma, i. e. from long. 87° E. as far as the latitude of lake Teletzk, show that 
in this great range, running first apparently to the east and then to the 
noHS, the schistose rocks strike mainly to the north-east, paying no regard 
to the form of # the range or the position of the snow-clad goltzi 1 2 . 

1 P. de Tchihatschew, Voyage scientifique dans l’Altai oriental et les parties adjacentes 
de la frontiere de Chine, 4to, Paris, 1845, atlas, pp. 824, 408. 

Malewski, Report on an excursion along the south-east of the Altai mountains in the 
course of the year 1869; Gorn. Joum., 1870, II, pp. 72-95, geological map. P. 78: 
above Ussun Tabata (upper Bukhtarma), amphibolite schist, strike NE. P. 79 : Chinese 
picket Tchindagatna lies on granite ; the great goletz adjacent to it is formed of diorite ; 
on the watershed of the Bukhtarma dark schist resembling diorite occurs, as well as mica, 
and chlorite schists and clay slate, with irregular stratification; dip 77° NNE. (= strike 
ESE.).^ P. 83 : foot-hills of the ridge of Kurtchum ; siliceous schists, 'strike NE. P. 84 : 
schists run to N. and NE. ; source of the Oichor, Chinese frontier-stone Suak Ulan-doba 



154 


THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [partiv 

In like manner, Adrianow encountered vertical mica-schists with a 
nearly eas^north-&st strike (260°) beyond the headwaters of the Tchulysh- 
;ajp,n, where, on Mongolian territory (lat. 50° 18' N.) theKyndyk-Pup or Navel 
ncuntain rises from the midst of lake Kendykty (8,200 feet) and the Bukom- 
Bere flows south-east to the Atehik-nor 1 . 

The Kusnetzkii Alatau should reach the Gorb$ range on the east side of 
lake Teletzk ; the Sailyugem and the boundary range mentioned above would 
thus represent fragments of arcs lying further towards the outside. Never- 
theless the fact that all these ranges again make a bend near the headwaters 
of the Tchulyshman, the Bashka-ussa, and the Tshuya has a significant 
bearing on the structure of the Altai. 

The distance from the most northerly spurs of the Kusnetzkii-Alatau, 
in the plain south-east of Tomsk, to that point in the great range south-east 
of lake Teletzk, where the middle Tchulyshman in all probability cuts through 
the continuation of this range, amounts to five degrees of latitude, and 
thence to the southern outposts on the frontier is two degrees more. 

Let us fgain turn to the north. 

Against the west side of the Kusnetzkii-Alatau rests the coal-basin of 
Kusqetzk previously mentioned. Thanks to the works of Bogdanowitsch, 
fiterjawin, Werjukow, and others, it is the northern part of this basin which 
is the best known 2 . Apart from the narrow spurs in the north and 

% v 

(2,828 metiets, E. of long. 88° E.). P, 85 ; diorite and dioritic schists, also porphyry ; 
boundary mark, Zogan-borgosu, clay slates, limestone, feldspathic rocks; strike of the 
slates, N. ; here the road runs to Kobdo and Uliasutai. P. 85 : picket Suok (east of 
long. 89° E.), diorite and dioritic schists, also clay slates, chiefly vertical, strike NE. P. 87 : 
picket Kak-nor (2,520 meters ; here the range turns to the north above the steppe of 
Tchuiand is now known as the Sailyugem or western end of the Sayan), schists alternate 
with dioritic rocks, strike east ; on the way to the picket porphyry occurs. Th& data 
which follow, on p. 88, appear to refer to more recent Carboniferous deposits of the 
upper Tchuya, and are therefore omitted. P. 89 : picket I£araguija (north of lat. 50° N., 
west of and above the river Bukom-bere already mentioned), "black schists, strike NE. 
The peaks of the Sailyugem consist of granite and syenite, both flanks of schist. The 
' neighbourhood of lake Djuvan-kul, where the closest contact with Tannu-ola occurs, 
consists of granite and syenite ; the river Tchulyshman flows from this lake. P. $3 : a&. 
we approach the Tchultcha, black and green clay slates appear with an increasing 
development, strike NE. ; on the watershed of the Karasuluk syenite « occurs ; towards 
lake Kara-kul diorite, also on the pass of Sur-daba , which forms the watershefi of the 
Abakan. P. 94 : the few exposures on the rivers which flow down to the Tchultcha 
show schists, very steep, folded, strike SE. For an orographical description of the 
frontier range, cf. E. Schmurlo, The mountain passes of the south Altai, Izviestija Imp. 
ross. Geogr, Obsch., 1898, XXXIV, pp. 590-601. 

1 A. W. Adrianow, Journey to the Altai and the Sayan in 1881, Zap. Imp. ross. Geogr. 
Obsch., 1888, XI, p. 222. 

2 From the abundant literature t on this subject I will only mention : D. J. Bogdanow, 
Geological sketch of the north-west part of th*e Carboniferous basin of Kusnetzk ; Verh. 
russ. k. min. Ges., 1883, 2nd ser., XVIII, pp. 149-204, maps ; P. Wenukow, Geological 
explorations made in the summer of 1894 in the north part of the Carboniferous basin of 



COAL BASIN OF KUSNETZK 


155 


ch. v] 


north-west the major axis of the productive region, from Balakhonka to the 
south end of the basin, measures about 240 versts ; the breadth amounts to 
80 or 100 versts. All the beds lie conformably. Above the Carboniferous 
limestone, Derjawin mentions some traces of Culm, and then follow the 
coal-measures, usually with a very steep dip. According to the later 
investigations of Zeiller, £he coal-measures extend upwards till they reach 
the chronological horizon of the lower Gondw&na 1 . 

On the west side of the basin overthrusting sets in over an extensive 
tract from the direction of the Salair, so that the coal-measures dip towards 
the west, beneath the Carboniferous limestone. Then a larger syncline 
follows on the east towards the centre of the basin, and after this an anti- 
cline still further towards the east, in the direction of the Kusnetzkii Alatau. 
On its extreme eastern border we again see the beds steeply upturned. 
The term basin is therefore not quite exact. In the middle of the region 
considerable masses of melaphyre crop out. 

The river Tom flows through the whole coal-field, from Kusnetzk 
onwards, but its bed lies nearer the east border. At Kusnetzk it receives 
its important tributary, the Kondom, which comes from the south and 
south-south-west. On the banks of the Kondom we see how the basin 
becomes closed on the south. Inostranzew has made important observations 
on the tributaries of its fight bank, the Tylbess and Mundibash. Below 
Ail, on the Kondom, the Carboniferous limestone crops out from beneath the 
coal-measures. The succeeding parts of the underlying beds are altered by 
intrusive masses of porphyry and porphyrite. Rocks rich in epidote, garnet, 
and magnetite make their appearance, and form a zone running from 
north-north-east to south- south -west. Laccolites have also been observed 

1$ following the border region between the Salair and the Kusnetzkii 
Alatau, we have now approached the river Biya, which flows from lake 
Teletzk. Many years ago Helmersen observed with great acumen that 
the mountains which the Biya cuts across i between the lake and the head of 
the river at Sandipslcoje , are the continuation of the Salair 3 . 

Since Helmersen was aware that an easterly strike prevails further 
west, he was much surprised to find that it is only the short northern part 
of the Jiook formed by lake Teletzk which corresponds to a transverse valley . 


Kusnetzk; Travaux de la Section geol., 1895, I, pp. 55-87 ; A. Derjawin, On the coal 
basin of Kusnetzk, Djel. Dor., 1896, I, pp. 96-101, with a map of the outline of 
the basin. 

1 The entire bibliography of this subject is .to be found in B. K. Polenow, New ideas 
on the age of the coal-basin of Kusnetzk, Travaux Soc. Nat. Saint-Petersb., 1896, XXVII, 
pp. 288-298. 

2 A. A. Inostranzew, Geological excursions into *he district of the Altai in 1894, 
Travaux de la Section geol., 1895, I, p. 1 et seq. 

3 G. von Helmersen, Reise nach dem Altai im Jahre 1884 ausgefiihrt ; Baer und 
Helmersen, Beitr. zur Kenntniss des russisehen Reiches, 1848, XIV, p. 48 and 109. 



156 THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [partiv 

and that the direction of the larger part, lying, in the meridian, differs but 
slightly fmm the strike of the beds. In the north part of the lake he 
observed in the clay slates, first, a strike to the south-west, the beds being 
upturned and frequently vertical ; then along the whole of the east shore, 
and in particular on the slopes of the mountains of Gorbu, a strike to the 
south -south-west ; on the west shore the direction approaches still more 
nearly to that of the meridian \ 

The views of Tschihatschew on the direction of the Kusnetzkii Alatau, 
and those of Helmersen on the southern continuation of the Salair, are in 
complete accord. 

These ranges both strike , in their northern part , to the south-south-east 
and are separated by the coal-basin ; then in about the latitude of Kusnetzk , 
their strike bends gradually to the south- south-west, and with this the coal- 
basin is tilted up. In the southern frontier range the deflexion to the 
south-west is complete . 

The bend of the Altai . The bend of the Salair and the Kusnetzkii- Alatau, 
as well as the constant direction to the north-east, which was observed in 
the boundary range, are the beginning of an arc-like curve which dominates 
the whole orographic centre, and with this the highest parts of the Altai. 

We may first observe that in these great mountains, as well as in the 
whole western part of the Altai to beyond the Irtish, not a single band of 
gneiss of any importance is known to exist ; indeed this rock is seldom met 
with at all in these mountains, and never except as a strictly local 
occurrence, a remarkable contrast to what is found in other lofty folded 
ranges. On the other hand, we meet with schistose rocks in surprising 
abundance, mica-schist, chlorite schist, and clay slate, the last named with 
beds of limestone, and towards its summit Devonian or lower Carboniferous 
fossils, which are found at many localities. These schists, like those in the 
Salair and the Alatau, are pierced by granite, syenite porphyry, and 
diorite in dykes and bosses. In the contact-zones lie many of the famous 
ore-bodies of the Altai. The basalts of the ancient vertex have now 
disappeared. The intrusive masses seem to form many of the goltzi ; but 
by no means the whole of them ; and the conscientious observer Gefiler 
expressly mentions that no granite is to be found in the i^oraines of the 
glacier of the Bielucha, but only chlorite schists 1 2 . 

1 G. von Helmersen, Reise nach dem Altai, Beitr. zur Kenntniss des russischen 
Reiches, 1848, XIY, pp. 59, 95 et seq. 

2 F. Gebler, Ubersicht des Katunischen Gebirges, der hochsten Spitze des russischen 
Altai, Mem. Savants etrangers, Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1837, III, pp. 455-560, map ; 
in particular p. 509 ; for an idea of the landscape formed by the goltzi of the lofty 
Altai, see the description of the botanist W. W. Sapodjnikow, The Altai, 8vo, Tomsk, 
1897, with maps and photographs; cf. also^Branner, Results of the Branner- Agassiz 
Expedition to Brazil, IY, Proc. Washington Acad. Sci., 1900, II, p. 191, pi. X: An 
exfoliated peak of quartz-monzonite at Sete de Setembro, Rio Mucury. 



ch.v] BIELUCHA, KATUN J 157 

Gebler’s ancient map gives an excellent idea of the arc-like plan of the 
mountains, and this accords with the strike of the rocks. Coming from the 
east, that is from the plateau of the Tchuya, the range of Yik-tu is inserted 
between the Yassater and the Topolevka, its steeply inclined beds striking 
from east-north-east to west-south-west. Then it is cut through by the 
Argut, and west of this liSs the Bielucha and the vertex of the arc. The 
peaks of the Yik-tu reach a height of 4,000 to 4,200 meters, according to 
Sapodjnikow, and those of the Bielucha 4,400 and 4,540 meters 1 . In the 
tract lying between the Argut and the mouths of the Koksu and Katunj. 
the direction of the range passes first to north-west and then to north - 
north-west. 

Helmersen also lays great emphasis on the arc-like plan. He regards 
the Bukhtarma as the longitudinal valley of the foremost arc. While 
Malewski found that the strike was still north-east on the uppermost 
reaches of the Bukhtarma, near Ulan-Dabassu, Helmersen found that it had 
already become north-west in the middle course of the river. North of 
the Bukhtarma the mountains of Kholsun rise as the western fragment of 
a first arc. Then follows a great arc-like furrow, partly represented by the 
valleys of the upper Katunj, the Koksu, and Yassater, and north of this lies 
the highest arc of the Katun mountains mentioned above, with the Bielucha 2 . 

It would appear that the middle Katunj, from Ujmon to its union 
with the Argut, must also be regarded as the longitudinal valley of an arc, 
and that the Terektaiskii mountains may represent a fragment of a third 
arc. But, according to M. Klemenz, in the greater part of the valley 
of the Tchuya a north-north-west to north-north -east strike prevails, and 
so far the mountains of lake Teletzk, which are the continuation of the 
Sala'y and the Alatau, maintain their direction, 

Tschihatschew terms the Yik-tu the ‘ Chaine des Monts Arhhyte ’. He 
justly compares the long branches of the Altai with the Sierra Nevada of 
Spain, characterized by its broad monotonous ridge wholly composed 
of schists 3 . 

W. Sapodjnikow, Izviest. Imp. ross. Geogr. Obscli., 1899, XXXV, p. 508. 

2 G. von Helmersen, Reise nach dem Altai, p. 179 et seq. 

3 Th^ differenees in the nomenclature of the ranges are particularly great in the older 
works. The Russian ordnance map designates as Khrebet Saljugem, further north as 
Suilegem, the whole frontier range, from long. 88° E., round about the sources of the 
Tchuya and northwards as far as lat. 52° N. This view I have adopted. Gebler and 
Bunge confine this name to a narrower and probably to some extent different region ; 
they confer the Mongolian name ‘ Sailughem * on a moderately high range striking from 
south-west to north-east, which embraces both the sources of the Tchuya and those of 
the Bashka-ussa. The more northerly range with the sources of the Tchulyshman is here 
called ‘ Altum-tu.’ Tchihatschew terms the bend of the range, which surrounds the 
sources of the Tchuya, * Chaine dTrene Karagai,’ and the continuation to the north-north- 
east, 4 Chaine de Moun-goun-taiga ’ ; on the other hand, the name ‘ monts de Sailougeme 1 
is given to a short range north of the upper Tchuya. 



158 


THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [partiv 

Helmernen ascended the Katun range from Ujmon, near the union of the 
Koksu anu4he upper Katunj ; upon its western and south-western slope he 
travelled at a considerable height nearly as far as the sources of the 
Katunj, and of the glacier of the Bielucha. On the ascent he met with 
chlorite schists and some serpentine, and then, at several localities, with 
granite, syenite, and gabbro ; but the prevailing rocks on the whole were 
found to be schists, and the descent to the feeders of the Katunj, as well as 
the crossing of the southern part of the Kholsun range to the upper 
Bukhtarma, was made entirely in clay slates l . 

Schtschurowski, accompanied by Gebler, crossed the heights of the 
north Kholsun. Here also the range consists for the most part of clay slate. 
A mass of granite crops out from it between the White and Black Ulba and 
reaches the headwaters of the Turgussun. Dykes of porphyry traverse the 
slates in several places and towards the source of the upper or lesser Koksu 
porphyry sets in. The highest peak of the Kholsun, which has yet been 
reached, consists of porphyry and amygdaloid lava surrounded by clay 
slate 2 . 

If we leave the great ranges and proceed towards the north, in the 
direction of the steppe of Barnaul, or towards the west, in the direction of 
the Irtish, we see that the isolated outcrops of granite still persist ; the 
rocky columns on lake Kolyvan afford one of the best-known examples. 
At the same time Devonian and lower Carboniferous fossils appear in the 
stratified rocks. Towards the north there is a tendency to a northerly strike, 
while towards the Irtish the north-westerly direction generally prevails. 

Inostranzew met with a north and south strike in quartzite and chlorite 
schist on the north, close to the border of the steppe, near the village of 
Rutchen, on the Loktevka, where Carboniferous beds are involved in 
the folding 3 . There are numerous statements as to the occurrence of 
Devonian fossils on the west slope towards the Irtish, in the tract from the 
lower Bukhtarma down to the Ulba and beyond 4 . 

Below the confluence of the Narym the Irtish for a long distance cuts 
the direction of the clay slates at so acute an angle that its course may be 
taken to mark a longitudinal valley. Here, on the Irtish, a broad expanse 
of granite rests upon steeply upturned beds of clay sl^te. Hermann, 

1 Helmersen, Reise nach dem Altai, pp. 162-176 ; Gebler has performed the same 
journey. 

2 G. Schtschurowski, Geological Journey into the Altai, 8vo, Moscow, 1846, atlas, 
pp. 293-804. 

3 Inostranzew, Travaux de la Section geol., 1895, I, p. 30. 

4 Tschernyschew, Materialien zur Kenntniss der devonischen Fauna des Altai, Verh. 
russ. k. min. Ges., 1893, XXX, describes the lower Devonian of the Krjukowskii mine at 
Ridderskoje, and once more demonstrates the European character of the Devonian 
sediments of the Altai ; the localities at whict they occur are enumerated in von Peetz, 
The Age of the clay slate of the outpost of Verkhne-Udinsk on the Altai, Trav. Soc. Nat. 
Saint-Petersb., 1897, XXVIII, pp. 82-89. 



SARY-TAU 


159 


CH. V] 

G. Rose, Humboldt, Helmersen, Cotta, and others have mentioned this 
remarkable phenomenon, and attempted to explain it, sometimes by 
dynamic overthrusting, sometimes by flow. Bogdanow describes in detail 
a tract, six versts long, between the rivers Bareshnikov and Koslovka, in 
which white granite rests on the uneven surface of the steeply upturned 
clay slates b * 

The same clay slates and chlorite schists, with a north-west strike, form 
the Kalbin range, west of the Irtish. 

To the south-east, beyond the Narym range, lake Marlm-Kul (1,407 
meters), set deeply in the mountains, lies at the foot of the lofty Sary-tau 
and its offshoots. According to Struve and Potanin, the summit of the 
Sary-tau (3,268 meters) is a rounded granite mass, accessible on every side, 
with dykes of diorite. A series of valleys marks the boundary between this 
granite mass and the surrounding ranges, which consist of green schists. 
On the lake these schists strike north-west 1 2 . 

From this we may assume that the Sary-tau belongs to the Altai, 
possibly to the western part of its most southerly arc, which is very little 
known. 

The Russian Altai is absolutely distinct from the ancient vertex. This 
is shown most clearly by the course of the Kusnetzkii Alatau, which runs 
at right angles to the main direction of the western half of the vertex, and 
also by the advance of independent foot-hills of the Kusnetzkii Alatau into 
the intermediate region of Minuzinsk. 

The Russian Altai is distinguished from the Gobi-Altai by its deflexion 
and also by its composition. It presents us with thick masses of schists, 
in part of Palaeozoic age; the Gobi-Altai, on the other hand, is chiefly 
characterized by gneiss and Archaean rocks, and by long fault-troughs and 

1 B. F. Hermann (Beitrage zur Physik, Oekonomie, u.s.w. besonders der russischen 
und angrenzenden Lander, Berlin und Stettin, 1786-1788, III, p. 108) thought the 
granite was ‘ thrust up on to the schist .’ G. Rose (Mineralogisch-geognostische Reise nach 
dem Ural, dem Altai, und dem Kaspischen Meer, Berlin, 1837-1842, I, p. 611) first 
described the numerous intrusions of the granite into the schist, confirmed the super- 
position of the granite on the schist, and put forward two theories first conceived by 
A. von Humboldt. Humboldt stated that the granite had been poured out over 
a distance of ifcore than 5,000 meters in almost horizontal sheets upon the steeply 
upturned clay slates (Fragmente zur Geologie und Klimatologie Asiens, p. 3). 
G. von Helmersen (Reise nach dem Altai im Jahre 1834 ausgefiihrt) ; Baer und Helmersen 
(Beitr. zur Kenntniss des russischen Reiches, XIV, 1848), regarded the granite as an 
effusive covering. Cotta (Der Altai, 1871, p. 40 et seq., Figs. 10-12) believed that the 
facts could be explained by the oblique ascent of the granite ; a detailed description as 
well as a geological map of this part of the Irtish was furnished by D. P. Bogdanow, 
The mountains on the Irtish, Mater. Geol. Russia, published by the russ. k. min. Ges., 
1883, XI, pp. 145-166. * 

1 K. Struve and G. Potanin, Journey to Lake Saissan and in the basin of the Black 
Irtish as far as Lake Marka-kul and the mountain of Sary-tau, Zapiski Imp. ross. Geogr. 
Obsch., 1867, 1, pp. 363-428 ; in particular p. 414. 



160 


THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [partiv 

horsts. T T nj'ortunately the boundary of the two ranges is almost unknown. 
A teetoni 3 continuation of the Kholsun or some other outer arc of the 
Bussian Altai probably exists on the Mongolian frontier. It has been 
ifientioned already that the transgression of the Devonian, coming from 
the Tannu-ola and Kharkira, probably encroaches on the basin of the 
upper Kobdo. 

Plant-bearing beds of the Angara series occur on the upper Tchuya b 
Tertiary brown coal also appears on the Bukhtarma 1 2 . 

The Kirghiz steppe. The Kalbin range, which borders the left bank of 
the Irtish down nearly to TJst-Kamennogorsk, still belongs to the Altai, and 
the rocks of the Altai crop out in isolated hills still a long way further to 
the north-north-west. At the town of Semipalatinsk the Irtish exposes 
Devonian strata, and Wysotzki has indicated on both sides of the broad 
valley, to beyond lat. 51° 30' N., isolated outcrops of granite, porphyry, and 
diabase, Devonian, and Carboniferous limestone, which are visible beneath 
older marine Tertiary beds or beneath a still more recent covering. The 
range does not break off against a fault, but its denuded folds sink 
gradually beneath the plain 3 . 

Further to the south-west, in the line of lake Saissan and beyond it, 
we see a long range, striking north-west, and represented by the heights 
of Kandygatai (north of the road from Kolpekty to Sergiopol), Aldjan, 
Arkat, and Urdatau; before coming to long. 78° E. this range reaches 
the mountain of Degelen (921 meters), formed of granite and porphyry, and 
with it the junction with the mountainous country of the Kirghiz steppe. 

Still further to the south-west of lake Saissan there rises the long 
mountain range of Tarbagatai. With that gentle bend to the south which 
is characteristic of the branches of the Thian-shan, it trends to the north- 
west, continues beyond Sergiopol as the range of Tchingis, and then, on the 
other side of the watershed between the Irtish and the Balkhash, it becomes 
united, like the previous range, with the mountains of the Kirghiz 
steppe. The mountain of Kuu, formed, like Degelen, of granite and 
porphyry, appears to represent the true termination of the range .pf 
Tarbagatai-Tchingis. The mountains of Kuu and Degelen are connected 
by the Devonian ridge of Murdjik, which also strikes to the irorth-west. 

Long ridges of lower Devonian quartzite, with broad synclines of upper 
Devonian and Carboniferous limestone lying between them, pounded bosses 
of granite, and rocky heights of porphyry, extend through the land ; some 
of the ridges rise to a height of quite 1,000 meters above the surrounding 

1 Malewski, Gorn. Journ., 1870, II, p. 89. 

2 Schmalhausen, Tertiare Pfianzeea aus dem Thale der Buchtarma, Palaeontographica, 
XXXIII, pp. 181-216 ; whether this flora must be regarded as Pliocene or as the mountain 
flora of some other period of the Tertiary aera is left an open question. 

3 Wysotzki, Djel. Dor., 1896, I, pp. 21-88, pi. I. 



THE KIRGHIZ STEPPE 


CH. V] 


161 


country. This region is described as a steppe on account of the character 
of its vegetation, particularly its poverty in forests. 

Except for the junction, already mentioned, with the north-westerly 
trending spurs which radiate from the ranges of Central Asia, the contour 
of this mountain land is undetermined on all sides. It grows lower, 
breaks up into isolated hills, and disappears beneath the plains. Towards 
the north-east, it sinks in the direction of Pavlodar, under the low country. 
Krasnopolski has shown that in the bed of the river Seleta, between Omsk 
and Akmolinsk, the same rocks as those of the mountains may be recognized 
beneath the plain nearly as far as lat. 53° N. h Towards the north-west 



Fig. 8. Mountains of the Kirghiz Steppe , between Karkaralinsk and Bajan-aul. (After Wysotzki.) 
7, it, granite and porphyry ; t r', porphyry tuff ; d } Devonian ; c, Lower Carboniferous. 


lies Kokshetau, close to the border. Then the mountain land reaches the 
Ishim ;*but in tlie south-west, towards Turgai and the sands of Kara-kum, 
and in the south, towards the Hunger steppe or Bedpak-dala, as well as 
towards the north shore of lake Balkhash, the boundary is quite indefinite 
and for the most part but little known. 

The existence of ores and coal has brought many a mining expedi- 
tion to this region, notably that led by Theophilatjew in 1814, and 
more recently, that undertaken by Antipow. ■> The surveys made for the 

1 A. Krasnopolski, Geological investigations in west Siberia in 1896, Djel. Dor., 1898, 
IX, Seleta, pp. 78-81. 


80I.LAS III 


M 



162 


THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [partiv 

Siberian ^ilway by Krasnopolski in the north-west and north, by Wysotzki 
in the east (Karkaralinsk, Baian-Aul), and by Meister in the west (Akmo- 
|insk, Atbasar), afford us an insight into the general structure of the 
country \ Meister has given a summary of the results, as well as a 'map 
of the region between longs. 66° and 7 6° E. 2 . 

The country is formed of granite, porphyry, and diabase, together with 
Devonian and Carboniferous strata. The coal measures, which occur in 
several localities, lie, according to Krasnopolski, sometimes on Carboni- 
ferous limestone, sometimes on granite 3 . Since Asplenium Whitby ense and 
Phyllotheca striata are said to occur, it is evident that a part of the coal- 
bearing series must be more recent than the Carboniferous. 

As regards the folds, some strike to the north-west and others to the 
north-east. In the south-east, as far as the region between Karkaralinsk 
and Baian-Aul, the north-westerly direction of the Tarbagatai prevails. 
Wysotzki’s map of this region shows clearly how the Devonian range of 
Murdjik and its continuation, the Arkalyk, approach this region with a 
north-west strike, while the ridge of Ush- Katyn, which is also Devonian, 
advances with north-east strike ; it shows also how, north of the town of 
Karkaralinsk, these two directions of folding encounter each other. 

But towards the west the north-west direction soon disappears, and the 
north-east prevails, with very broad and open folding. A Devonian range 
of these folds forms the watershed between the Tchiderta and Ulenta, and 
a second range, the lofty Ermen-tau, separates the latter river from the 
Seleta. In the whole of the west the structure is clearly expressed in the 
configuration of the country. The folds, with a north-east strike, cross 
the Ishim towards the south ; one of them gives rise to the sharp elbow of 
the Nura. Beyond Akmolinsk the country about the Ishim becomes flat, 
and towards the south broadens out into a wide plain scattered over with® 
lakes. The Devonian sandstone is almost horizontal ; the Carboniferous 
limestone with Productus giganteus lies in a very shallow basin. Still 
further west a more important anticline rises up with a north-east strike. 
It forms the ridge of Djarkain Agatch , which gives rise to the sharp elbow 
of the Ishim, near long. 66° E. The ridge is formed of granite, flankecTon 

1 A. Krasnopolski, Coalbeds near the Irtish, Gorn. Journ., 1894,^11, pp. 2£9etseq. ; 
Work of the mining section in west Siberia in 1893, Bull. Com. geol. Russie, 1894, XIII, 
pp. 89-203; Report on geological investigations in west Siberia in 1895, Djel. Dor., 
1896, V, pp. 1-49. N. Wysotzki, Geological observations made in the year 1894 in the 
Kirghiz steppe and on the Irtish, op. cit., 1896, I, pp. 1-45, with a geological map of 
the east part of the steppe. A. Meister, Geological observations made in the year 1895 
in the Kirghiz steppe, op. cit., 1896, V, pp. 51-68 ; for the localities of ore deposits cf. in 
particular Antipow, Gorn. Journ., 1892. The distance from the mountain of Degelen to 
the Ishim, measured towards th€ west- north-west, amounts to about 850 versts. 

2 A. Meister, Geological observations in the Kirghiz steppe made in the years 
1894-1896, Djel. Dor., 1899, XV, pp. 1-180, map ; in particular p. 163 et seq. 

3 Krasnopolski, Bull. Com. geol. Russie, 1894, XIII, p. 200. 



ch. v] TARBAGATAI 168 

both sides by Devonian sandstone, and it extends towards the north-east 
as far as the hill of Agatch Bel, in la't. 52° N. 

In the same latitude another and similar anticlire, the Bektchentai, 
crops out on the Ishim. 

At the elbow of the Ishim all the observations at my disposal come to 
an end. The structure of the mountain land which rises further south, 
near the headwaters of the Ssari-ssu, is unknown to u&e. 

Let us return to the east. Here, but somewhat further north, it 
certainly appears from existing accounts that the north-westerly folds are 
cut across by the north-easterly folds. In the coal-basin of Ekibass-tus 
(lat. 51° 40' N., not far from long. 76° E.) there is a north-west strike, and 
a slight overthrust of the north limb towards the south-west. In any case, 
it is certain that between the branches of the Altai and the Thian-shan on 
the one hand, and the Ural on the other, there exists an independent system 
of folds— some of them no doubt but faintly expressed— which strike to the 
north-east ; these occupy the whole region between the Ishim and Karkara- 
linsk and encounter almost at right angles the folds of the Tarbagatai. We 
may name them the Kirghiz folds. 

There is an undeniable resemblance betw r een these folds and those of 
the Kolyvan, which also strike to the north-east, cross in front of the Salair 
at right angles to its trend, and then disappear on the banks of the Obi 
beneath the plain. We might assume with greater confidence some con- 
nexion between the folds of Kolyvan and Kirghiz, were it not that towards 
the west the latter appear to take a north-north-east direction. Krasno- 
polski, at any rate, marks the strike on the Agatch as hora 1-2 [30 to 60 
E. of N.]. Here, however, the saddles and folds flatten out to such an 
extent that it would be more appropriate to speak of undulations ; out of 
# the land formed by them the older rocks emerge in long ridges. 

The first of the great ranges lying in front of the Kalbin mountains is 
the Tarbagatai ; this is continued beyond Sergiopol in the Tchingis-tau, and 
forms the first of the arcs bent towards the south-west. We have seen 
alrgady that it advances towards the mountain mass of Saur in the south, 
and that the disjunctive lines of Dzungaria, and a tendency to the formation 
of fauli^troughs* make themselves felt as far as its east side, on the shores 
of lake Saissan. We have also explained how towards the north-west the 
Tchingis encounters the Kirghiz folds. 

In the wide interval between the Tarbagatai and the first branch of the 
Thian-Shan, slant in like a straying wave, as it were, the Urkatcher and 
the Alatau of Dzungaria. The direction of this mountain segment is 
divergent, and it possibly represents only the eastern part of an arc, the 
north-westerly branch of which is aborted. It # is cut through, however, in 
a characteristic manner by disjunctive lines which correspond precisely 
with this suppressed north-westerly direction and to the lie of the other 

M 2 



164 


THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [partiv 

mountain Jolds. They produce the remarkable trough of the Ebi-nor , in 
which are alined in succession, starting from the marshes of Shicho, the 
lakes of Ebi-nor, Djalanesh, Ala-kul, Ujaly, and Ssassyk-kul; the trough 
declines in height till at Ebi-nor it is only 700 feet (213 meters), and at 
right angles to the mountains of Dzungaria it opens out towards the 
depression of lake Balkhash. 

Now we have reached the Boro-khoro , one of the long branches of the 
virgation of the Thian-shan. As we have already introduced a description 
of this virgation, from the pen of the most competent authority on the 
subject, M. Muschketow (I, p. 264), no further discussion, apart from some 
remarks on the intermediate chains to follow later, will be necessary. In 
a work which has since appeared Muschketow has expressed his disbelief 
in the view formerly held that the several arcs follow two independent 
directions of elevation, with a trend to the west-north-west and north-east. 
These directions seem rather to represent fragments of arcs, the 4 results, 
produced simultaneously, of one and the same geological process.' At the 
same time he asserted that ‘ the whole of the Thian-shan, from Barkul to 
the Hindu-kush and to the Karatau, represents an assemblage of very 
numerous arc-like folds, differing in size, but uniform in direction, which 
are all convex towards the south and concave towards the north ’ h 

The virgation of the Thian-shan is not formed by the splitting up of 
a common stem. This common stem exists only in appearance, and is due 
to the close approach of the several virgae, which takes place in a more or 
less east-south-east direction. At the same time the several ranges, as well 
as the intervening depressions, like the valley of the Hi, are visible for long 
distances, and this would be the case to an even greater extent, were it not 
that here and there the north-east limb of one arc is overlain by the* west- 
north-west limb of the next, and thus an imbricate structure like a tiled roof* 
is produced. An image perhaps more apt would be that of very large and 
very flat drops clinging to the terrestrial sphere and overlapping one another. 

This structure may also be recognized on the outermost edge of the 
south border. 

In the region of the Khan-tengri (24,000 feet) the arcuate form ofthe 
south border is so strongly marked that, according to the* descriptions of 
Ignatiew, the strike from lake Kokshal onwards is due north-east. Clay 
slates and white marble, accompanied by bands of Carboniferous limestone 
with Productus gigcinteus , and broken through by masses of granite and 
syenite, form this highest part of the Thian-shan. Gneiss, even in the 
moraines, is much more seldom observed than is usual in mountains of 
such height 2 . 

1 J. W. Muschketow, Turkestan, 8vo, 1886, St. Petersb., I, pp. 32, 34, map. 

2 J. W. Ignatiew, Report on the expedition to the mountain group of Khan-tengri, 
Jzviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obseh., St. Petersb., 1887, XXIII, pp. 105 et seq., map. On 



KHAN-TENGRI 


165 


CH. Y] 

On the Khan-tengri itself, which represents the end of that branch of 
the Kokshal arc that strikes to the north-east, a re-entrant angle arises on 
the south border, and beyond it, north of the pass of Musart, the strike to 
the west-north-west sets in, and a new arc approaches the border. 

This new arc is of very great length ; it runs from the Karatcm, along 
the south shore of the Issyk-kul to the Musart ; reaching the south border 
of the Thian-shan, it bears the name of Khalyk-tau. 

In long. 83° E. this is replaced by another arc, which is termed at the 
place of its emergence Kok-tepe ; but this is simply a part of the long range 
of Knruk-tag , which extends beyond the Thian-shan and forms the south 
border of the Bei-shan. * 

Let us turn our attention to the north shore of lake Issyk-kul. 

The Alexander range extends along this shore in the Kungei-Alatau ; 
the same branch, according to Muschketow, forms the Ish-kilik, and finally 
the pass of Narat (long. 84° 15' E.) on the little Yulduss \ 

Now follows the depression of the Hi and the Kungess, running towards 
the east-south-east. This is also the direction of the long range of Boro - 
khoro and its continuation, the Iren-khabirgan. The Tshol-tag belongs to 
the further continuation of this line, and forms the north border of the Bei- 
shan. I do not know the structure of the watershed between the Bagrash- 
kul and the river Algoi, and therefore cannot assert that the Boro-khoro 
and the Tshol-tag are actually parts of the same chain, but the Tshol-tag 
may certainly be recognized west of the meridian of Urumtchi, as already 
within the domain of the Thian-shan. The section from Kurlja to the 
subsidence of Ljuk-tshun, published by Bogdanowitsch, which intersects all 
the connecting links between the Thian-shan and Bei-shan, shows clearly 
how <}Jose are the relations between them 2 . 

> The Bei-shan , inserted between the Kuruk-tau and the Tshol-tag, 
consists solely of elongated branches of the Thian-shan. 

the glacier of Djiparlyk, the steps of which hewn in ice form the most dangerous part of 
the Musart pass, a true kolk or Gryde lake is described (p. 127), like those which occur 
in Greenland below the Nunataks. South of the pass the strike to the north-east still 
se<JLjw to prevail in the foot-hills. 

1 The section which Muschketow drew after the earthquake of Vernoje (June 19, 
1887), from this t<*wn to the south across the Sa-Ili-Alatau and the Kungei-Alatau to the 
Issyk-kul, shows that longitudinal faults are present in this part of the range, Mem. 
Com. geol. Russie, 1890, X, p. 132, pi. IY. Further east, south of Djarkent, the beds are^ 
overthrust to the south-east, according to Brusnitzyn, so that granite rests on C&rboitb 
ferous limestone dipping to the north-west, Investigations in geology and mining in the 
province of Semiretschensk, Gorn. Journ., 1892, I, p. 459. 

2 K. Bogdanowitsch, Geological investigations in east Turkestan, Work of the 
expedition to Thibet directed by M. W. Piewtzow, II, published by the Russian 
Geographical Society, St. Petersb., 1892, 4to, pi. Y, i«g. 8. The passage of the parallel 
folds of the -Bei-shan into the Thian-shan, and the continuity of the two ranges, is 
emphasized by Obrutschew, Orography of Central Asia and its south-east border, 
Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1894, XXXI, pp. 253-344, in particular pp. 277-278. 



166 


THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [partiv 

East uLUrtimtehi, a coulisse running to the east-south-east rises to a 
considerable height., Its summit, the Bogdo-ola (5,100-5,500 meters) lies 
|lose to Urumtchi, and north of Turfan the same chain reaches a height 
6f 3,600-4,000 meters. The Bogdo-ola consists, according to existing 
descriptions, of metamorphic schists, quartzite, and black phyllites. But 
M. Klemenz tells me, that though he reached greater heights on the 
Bogdo-ola than his predecessors, yet he found nothing but melaphyre, 
volcanic tuffs, and breccias. 

It is the eastern part of this lofty chain which descends in steps towards 
Turfan and Ljuk-tshun and the north foot of Tshol-tag. This north foot, 
although penetrated by the coulisse of the Thian-shan, is distinguished by 
a deep horizontal fissure, which forms the south side of a long fault-trough. 

The brothers Grum-Grimailo found, in the autumn of 1889, that at one 
locality, south of Turfan, the surface of the ground lies below the level of 
the sea. A few w r eeks later this unexpected discovery was confirmed by 
Piewtzow. Measurements give a difference of 102 meters. The place is 
covered by a salt marsh \ 

We may observe at the outset that in this eastern region the strike of 
the Thian-shan has become east-and-west. 

We have several exact descriptions of the depression of Ljuk-tshun. 
All agree that it is a typical fault-trough, let down along parallel longi- 
tudinal faults and flexures ; and that not only the coal-bearing clays and 
variegated sandstones of the Angara series, but also the red conglomerates 
and friable sandstones of the Gobi series, are affected by the dislocation. 
Towards the north the border of the trough is formed by two ridges, the 
Djargess and the Tus-tag ; along the latter alone the subsidence amounts 
to about 360 meters ; the south border is formed by the north foot yf the 
Tshol-tag. « 

The transverse section, drawn by Bogdanowitch from north-west to 
south-east as far as the bottom of the depression, shows the Djargess con- 
sisting of ancient folded schists, overlain by patches of the Angara spries ; 
then, at a lower level, the same deposits forming a downthrown step with 
very much disturbed bedding ; and still lower and also very much disturbed, 
the Gobi beds 1 2 . , 

The brothers Grum-Grimailo have described the descent from the north- 
-east and given a remarkable illustration of the unconformable superposi- 
tion of the Gobi beds on the steeply inclined Angara series 3 . 

1 This figure is given by Roborowski, C. R. Soc. geogr. de Paris, 1897, p. 207 ; 
see also Obrutschew, in Hettner’s Geogr. Zeitschr., 1895, 1, pp. 274-277 et passim. 

2 K. Bogdanowitsch, Geological investigations in east Turkestan, pi. V, fig. 9. 

3 G. E. and M. E. Grum-Grimailo, Description of a journey in western China, publ. 
by the Russian Geographical Society, 4to, St. Petersb., 1896, map; I, Along the Thian- 
shan mountains, p. 284 et seq. 



ch.v] FAULT-TROUGH OF LJUK-TSHUN 167 

The accompanying section, taken along the meridian of 'ftirfan, I owe to 
the kindness of M. Obrutschew. It shows melaphyre and porphyrite at 
the south foot of the Djargess, a broken anticline or flexure in the Tus-tag, 
and downthrown lower Carboniferous beds at the foot of the Tshol-tag. 
This sketch also indicates that the faults are not of the same a g$. 

Towards the west thia remarkable fault-trough see#is to merge into the 
rapidly ascending valley of the river Algoi. Towards the east it is at first 
concealed by a thick accumulation of loose sand, the Kum4ag or Sand foun- 
tain, with a broad ridge which soon attains a height of 300 to 400 meters 
above sea-level. Obrutschew, as he proceeded from the south slopes of 
the Syr-kyn-tag to Pit-shan and the pass of Tchiktim-tag, observed on the 
north border of the Sand mountain, in the Angara beds and Gobi deposits, 
flexures and fractures which, judging from their position, correspond to 
the bendings and fractures of the Tus-tag (Fig. 9). At Tchiktim, where 
the Sand mountain ends, the bottom of the trough again becomes visible. 
From the lofty Thian-shan, which consists here of schists and diabase, the 



Fig. 9. The fault-trough of Ljuk-tshun 

Dev ., Devonian ; ca, Lower Carboniferous ; tr, Porphyry ; j f Angara beds ; G ., Gobi deposits ; 
a, b, faults. (After a sketch communicated by W. Obrutschew.) 

country sinks gradually towards the south, sometimes as a broad plain, 
sometimes in a series of steps. To the east of the Sand mountain, according 
to the descriptions of Roborowski and Koslow, there now appears along the 
foot of the Tshol-tag a desert tract, absolutely devoid of water, formed of 
Gobi deposits which are sculptured by the wind into fantastic forms. 
This is the ‘ devils valley ’ (height about + 300 meters). At one spot near 
the north foot of the Tshol-tag basalt is exposed. Finally the country 
sinks once again, along the north foot of the range, until it reaches a 
level of 36 niters, and according to some accounts, even lower. This is 
at a place close to long. 92° E., not far from the settlement of Sulgassar. 
The neighbouring lake Shona-nor (101 meters) receives the waters which 
flow down from the town of Hami (856 meters) l . 

1 W. Obrutschew, Central Asia, North China and Nan-shan, II, p. 536 et seq. I must 
here offer particular thanks to M. Obrutschew for his kindness in placing at my disposal 
abstracts of the several parts of his work on Central Asia, previous to publication. As 
I finish this page I have before me the abstracts as far as vol. II, p. 608. W. J. 
Roborowski and P. K. Koslow, Preliminary account of a three years’ journey in Central 
Asia (report by Koslow), Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1897, XXXIII, pp. 121-163. 


168 THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [partiv 

In this region porphyry, porphyritic tuff, and melaphyre play an 
important part in the structure of the foot-hills or terraces at the base 
of the Thian-shan. In the coal-bearing beds of Tash-kese, between Lao- 
and Hami, Obrutschew found remains of Phoenicopsis and Gingko 1 . 
East of Hami, on the north border of the strip of desert, which may 
be regarded as the continuation of the fault-trough, there rises a series 
of foot-hills, dominated by a new and mighty coulisse of the Thian-shan, 
the Karlyk-tag. Roborowski and Koslow describe the magnificent view 
which it affords. For a distance of 50 versts its snowy peaks rise one 
behind the other to heights of 4,500 meters, and the glaciers descending 
between them present frightful precipices. Its continuation to the east 
is the Emir-tag; then the great range breaks up into isolated rocky 
ridges, and far to the east extends the desert 2 . 

These eastern parts of the Thian-shan present us with Angara beds, 
porphyry, schists, and bosses of granite and syenite ; gneiss seems to be 
more widely distributed than in the west. 

The river Khaya, flowing southwards from the ice-fields of the 
Karlyk-tag across the desert and the foot-hills, is discharged, according to 
Obrutschew, into a lake, close to the north border of the Bei-shan or 
rather of the chain of Yo-shui-shan. In this lake a valley coming from 
the east opens; on the maps it is marked as the Protok-Yandunskii or 
river of Yandun . The level is higher than in the west ( 777 meters), and 
the configuration of the ground is so suggestive that G. E. Grum-Grimailo 
4s inclined to believe that a great river once actually flowed from east 
west between the Thian-shan and the Bei-shan into the depression 
oi Ljuk-tshun 3 . 

» « Obrutschew gives a detailed description of that part of the depression 
which lies east of long. 95 c E. A broad detrital tract extends south w*ards 

Koslow travelled from the mountains west of Hami to the south, and found a similar 
depression of the desert to the south as far as the border of the Tshol-tag, loc. cit., p. 159. 

1 P. Krasser, Die von W. A. Obrutschew in China und Central-Asien 1893-1894 
gesammelten fossilen Pflanzen, Denkschr. k. Akad. Wiss.,Wien, 1900, LXX, p. 149. Th£ 
beds with Phoenicopsis were also encountered in the Tyrkyp-tag, on the north border of 
the subsidence of Ljuk-tshun (loc. cit., p. 146). The plant-bearing beds of the Tung- 
sban, a spur of the Bogdo-ola south of Urumtsi, are older and contain Lepidodindron 
(loc. cit^ p. 143). 

2 Roborowski and Koslow, Preliminary account of a three years’ journey in Central 
Asia, Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1897, XXXIII, p. 156. The brothers Grum- 
Grimailo remark a prevalent direction to north-east on the road which runs from Ham! 
across the pass of Ulan-ussu to Gusten, as though the eastern end of the coulisse of 
Bogdo-ola were marked by a bend resembling that of the western coulisses of the Thian- 
shan; cf. Grum-Grimailo on the ridge of Tshoglu-tshai et passim, Description of 
a journey in western Asia, pp. 308, 428, 495 et passim. 

3 Grum-Grimailo, Description of a journey in western China, I, pp. 313 et seq., 
pp. 495, 496. 



THE BEI-SHAN 


169 


CH. V] 


from Karlyk-tag to this region; it is interrupted by rows of sombre 
foot-hills which consist of diorite, porphyry, granite, and black siliceous 
schists. South of the last foot-hills, the slope is continued to the hills 
about the spring of Utun-odsi (1,135 meters),* which are formed of Gobi 
deposits, resting on the denuded edges of ancient rocks. South of Utun- 
odsi, near the spring of ¥ ii-dd-tskuan (1,350 meters), the ground sinks to 
a level of 490 meters. Here, indeed, the depression completely resembles 
an ancient river valley, running from the east towards the lake into 
which the Khaya flows. I have no information as to the level of this 
lake. At this point lies the eastern end of the great depression. 
Obrutschew regards the whole feature, from Toksum and Turfen to the 
spring of Ya-dsi-tshuan, as a tectonic trough, and terms it the ^re-Thian- 
shan subsidence h 

Along the whole length of this trough, from long. 88° 30' E. to about 
long. 95° 30' E., the deeper part of the depression lies close to the southern 
side. In the extreme west it sinks to a level of — 102 meters, but in the 
east it is partly filled up, though to what extent there is no means of 
judging, by the debris brought down from the high ranges. The sand 
blown from the Kun-tag is alone sufficient to form, near the deepest part 
of the depression, a broad ridge which rises to + 300 to + 400 meters. 

Bei-shau. This range was first clearly distinguished from the other 
mountain groups by the brothers Grum-Grimailo ; as regards its structure 
it appears to be a broad zone of folds which strike between east and 
east-south-east; these proceed from the Thian-shan; they are accompanied 
both on the north and south for their whole length, or at least for a 
considerable distance, by fractures and subsidence, after the fashion of 
a horst, and they strike across the Gobi to the Edsin-gol and beyond. At 
the same time the more northern folds make a bend at their eastern, fen<d 
towards the east-north-east or north-east. 

The Bei-shan has been described as an ‘ intumescence/ but the manner 
in which its eastern end breaks up at the Edsin-gol into several fo^ed 
ranges, reveals its true nature. We have already seen how the folded 
range to the north, the Tshol-tag, as also that to the south, the Kuruk- 
tag, show themselves to be true branches of the Thian-shan. 

Tl*e depression of lake Bagrash-kul, which extends between these 
two ranges, interrupts the continuation of the inner folded ranges. At the 
same time the Bei-shan is much lower than the Thian-shan, and much 
poorer in water and vegetation : indeed for the greater part it is a true 
desert traversed by long, low rocky ridges. So far as its outer configuration 
is concerned, it has nothing in common with the glorious alpine landscapes 
which delight the traveller in the Boro-khoro ; but it is, nevertheless, 

1 Obrutschew, Central Asia, II, p. 528 et seq. ; also Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 
1894, XXX, p. 339, XXXI, pp. 294-301. 



170 THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [partiv 

a |>art of the same tectonic system. Perhaps this apparent contradiction 
will one day find its solution in the discovery that the Bei-shan is a 
fragment of the ruins of an older structure modelled anew, after a plan 
developed on the ancient lines over the region of the existing Thian-shan. 

Let us first consider a section in the west. 

^ M. E. Grum-Grimailo proceeded from the trough of Ljuk-tshun between 
long. 90° and 89° E. towards the south. The ascent across the Tshol-tag 
was made first over clay slate and then over a weathered surface of granite 
and quartzite (901 meters). From this point we look over a mountainous 
land, broad and barren. Just below (815 meters) lies a salt region, and 
bright red carnelians lie scattered like spots of blood on the salt. The 
surface, which has been subjected to intense deflation by the winds and is 
covered with splinters of rock, reveals granite, granular limestone, and green 
phy llites. Then mica- schist forms trains of rocky crags, alined east and 
west. Two-thirds of the breadth of the Bei-shan has now been crossed ; 
and before us the lofty granite mass of the Tjuge-tau (2,700 meters) 
dominates the landscape. The surrounding country has meanwhile reached 
a height of about 1,500 meters, and consists of diabase and marble. Beyond 
the diabase, vertical beds of sandstone and slate are exposed in a longi- 
tudinal valley. The north slope of the Kuruk-tag shows granite; its 
height appears to scarcely reach 1,200 meters; towards the south it slopes 
away to the hollow of the Lob-nor. 

Gobi deposits have not yet been observed ; the breadth of the Bei-shan 
amounts here to about 125 versts 1 . 

The next section traverses a region which lies much farther to the east ; 
Ubrutschew has taken it from Bulundsir, east of Ansi, along a line 
curving north-west to the spring of Ya-dsi-tshuan, at the eastern end 
of the pre-Thian-shan fault-trough. This section is distinguished by 
the * predominance of Archaean rocks in the south and centre. The 
bordering range of the south (1,600 to 1,650 meters) is not known here 
as the Kuruk-tag, but receives the name of Fusty nnii-Khrebet , i. e. 
the desert mountain. It is formed of granite, gneiss, hornblende 
schists, and quartz-schists. A longitudinal valley containing Gobi 
deposits separates it from the In-va-shctn ; porphyry appears near the 
Archaean rocks ; the heights exceed 2,000 meters. Coal* measures are 
met with and a patch with divergent strike, which belongs perhaps 
to the supra-Carboniferous sandstone. Archaean rocks again follow, 
and in the Dsi-ge-djin-dse (clay slates, quartzite, green schists, 2,290 
meters) we reach the highest part of the section. Gneiss again appears, 
and granite, which affords an illustration of the extremely destructive 
action of the wind. Hornblende-granite and syenite-porphyry follow, 
and extend as far as the neighbourhood of the Yo-shui-shan. This 
1 Grum-Grimailo, Description of a journey in western China, pp. 381-417. 



MOUNTAIN-ARC OP THE GOBI 


X71 


OH. V] 

chain, an anticline of mica-schists, clay slates, and quartzite, is the 
same as that which, in its continuation to the west-north-west or west, 
probably reaches the south border of the pre-Thian-shan trough. 

Within this range, judging from the directions of the strike, a bend 
from west-north-west to east-north-east appears to occur. This bend 
makes itself manifest the Utun-shan, which nevertheless consists of 
grey limestone and porphyry. Here we already see the snowy peaks 
of the Karlyk-tag, and a longitudinal valley appears to open out towards 
the north-east. Porphyry and porphyritic tuffs persist: then we reach 
the spring of Ya-dsi-tshuan and the eastern end of the trough l . 

Along a line from Sa-tshou to Kufi, the Bei-shan has been crossed 
by Prjewalski, Roborowski, and others, but the published accounts 
are brief. Here no considerable heights are reached, and the Bei-shan 
is divided lengthwise down the middle by a broad valley. 

Important information, as regards the relations of the chains, is 
afforded by the journey made by Ladygin from Dalan-turu (south of 
the Zagan-nor, in the valley of the Lakes) in an almost southerly 
direction to Su-tshou 2 . 

South of the spurs of the Altain-nuru, which, as we have learnt, 
is the principal chain of the Gobi-Altai, Ladygin crossed the Burgustin- 
nuru, Ederyngin-nuru, and the desert of Narin-Khukhu-gobi, which is 
bounded towards the south by lofty mountains. It sinks to a level 
of 1,100 feet (335 meters) ; this is the lowest point met with on this 
journey. 

The special value of Ladygin’s journey lies in the fact that he 
followed the mountains on the south side of this desert for long distances 
botfr to the west and to the east. Towards the west he went far enough 
to see in the distance the white summits of the eastern outposts of the 
Karlyk-tag, and towards the east he saw the lofty peak of Noin- 
bogdo, east of the meridian of the Edsin-gol. There he was able to 
make out that the Adji-bogdo (about 5,800 feet) and the Baga-bogdo, 
which are both included among the foot-hills of the Gobi-Altai, are 
united with the ridge of Noin-bogdo by the long Koko-tymyrty , which 
runs east of .Ladygins route towards the east-south-east and east, and 
extends into the desert. 

Hence it is clear that a mountain range , standing out in bold relief 
crosses the desert as a continuous arc , north of the lakes which lie at 
the mouth of the Edsin-gol (cf. p. 102). 

South of the Koko-tymyrty comes first the desert of Shjurten- 

1 Obrutschew, Central Asia, II, pp. 483-535. • 

2 Roborowski and Koslow, Izviestija Imp. ross. Cleogr. Obsck., 1897, XXXIII, 
p. 155 ; W. F. Ladygin, Preliminary report on a section of the Gobi from Dalyn-turu to 
Su-tshou, op. cit , 1900, XXXVI, pp. 169-197, map. 



172 THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [partiv 

kholy-gobi (2,000 feet, 40 versts broad) and then the Boro-ula, the first 
chain of tl <r Bei-|han. 

In the west, the pre-Thian-shan trough may be regarded, if not as 
a tectonic, yet as a superficial limit between the Thian-shan and the 
Bei-shan, and we might even be inclined to regard the angle at which 
the Metchin-ola meets the Karlyk-tag at Barkul ds the limit between the 
Thian-shan and the lines of Dzungaria, which rather resemble those 
of the Gobi- Altai ; here in the east, on the other hand, such boundaries 
disappear, and the whole group of chains shows an increasing tendency 
to form a single arc. 

The Boro-ula is formed of schists; the Khan-shui-nuru, which comes 
next, is the highest range of the Bei-shan, and is followed by two ranges 
of hills, which extend as far as the broad desert of Khunkyr-dsagyn- 
kholy. This stretches away to the west-north-west, and hills (Dsossytyn- 
nuru) rise out of it formed of red clay which probably belongs to the Gobi 
deposits. We then reach a low range of hills in which coal-measures 
occur, next the sands of Narin-khulussu, and finally the town of Su-tshou. 

We are indebted to Obrutschew for a section of the Bei-shan, which 
crosses it from south to north, close to the Edsin-gol, at its eastern end K 

In the south, a little north of Ting-tcha-hsi, we reach a belt of land 
along the river Lin-shui, which both to the east and west maintains 
tBfe character of a desert plain. It is regarded by Obrutschew as a 
trough separating the Nan-shan from the Bei-shan, and it forms a con- 
tinuation of the sands of Narin-khulussu previously mentioned. Then we 
reach the foot of the Bei-shan. Porphyry and porphyrite, and between 
them metamorphic limestone, are the prevailing rocks. At the same 
time granite also occurs. Somewhat further north comes a range of 
gneiss and ancient schist ; the general strike is now directed to the 
west-north- west or north-west, but a curvature towards the east-north- 
east and north-east begins to appear and becomes increasingly evident 
towards the north. Porphyry and tuffs again succeed, then calc-schist, 
which includes a small laccolite of diorite. Conglomerates of the Gobi 
series border the mountains. The mighty central range of the chain 
has been named by Obrutschew the Edsiu-ula. This presents first 
granite, porphyry, diorite, and crystalline limestone, then a wider® belt 
of limestone containing lower Carboniferous fossils ; the strike is already 
east-north-east and north-east. After an interruption of the range by 
the desert, we reach the most northerly branch of the Bei-shan, the 
Boro-ola, which is formed here of the same lower Carboniferous lime- 
stone. Already, further to the south, isolated ranges of hills are to be 
seen on the right bank of the °Edsin-goi which indicate the continuation 

:1 Ob^itBchew, Central Mongolia, Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1894, XXX, 
pp. 289-244, and Central Asia, II, pp. 362-397. 



SAN-SJAN-TSY 


173 


ch. v] 


of the Bei-shan and at the same time its curvature to the north-east. 
Two continuations of the Boro-ula now appear beyond the river, the 
mountain of Dserdjin-Yantshik, and the longer range of Koko-ula, directed 
to the east-north-east. 

The brothers Grum-Grimailo, and Obrutschew also, agree in the view that 
the branches of the Bei-shan unite, beneath the sands of the Ala-shan, with 
the spurs of the ranges on the Hoang-ho, which advance to meet them. 
This junction is indicated both by the deflexion at the end of the Edsin-ula 
and the Boro-ula, and by the continuation of the latter to the north-east 
beyond the Edsin-gol. It receives confirmation in the north from Ladygin's 
discovery of an arc winch starts from the Adji-bogdo of the Gobi-Altai and 
passes through the Koko-tymyrty to the Noin-bogdo. But the ranges of 
the Thian-shan proper are no longer to be seen; at their origin in the west 
we found that the two chief ranges of the Bei-shan issue from the Thian- 
shan itself, but towards the east they are differently related. Looking at 
the angle which the ranges of the Gobi-Altai (Adji-bogdo, &c.) make with 
those of the Bei-shan (Boro-ula, &c.), that is the western expansion of the 
region of the Shjurten-kholy-gobi, it seems as though the several coulisses 
of the eastern Thian-shan (Emir-tag, with Karlyk-tag, then Bogdo-ula, &c), 
constantly driven towards the west-south- west, pass out from it, one after 
the other, in a slanting series. 

San-sjan-tsy. This mountain fragment belongs to another chain of 
mountains, the arc of Yarkand ; we will discuss it here for the sake of 
obtaining a clearer conception of the whole. 

Koslow has given a description of his journey from the south-west along 
the south side of the Lob-nor. On the right lie the sands of Kum-tag, 
whjph form a broad zone bordering the foot of the Anembar-ula (Yarkand) 
mountains ; on the left rise the outlines of the Kuruk-tag (Bei-shan) grow- 
ing ever clearer and nearer. Between the settlement of Korot-bulak (about 
long. 91° 25' E.) and Atchik-Khuduk, which lies about 150 versts away, 
the aspect of the desert undergoes a change. The salt marshes vanish 
and the vegetation which characterizes the neighbourhood of the Lob-nor 
reappears. Kuruk-tag presents steep declivities. At Atchik-khuduk the 
depression w^ich corresponds to the prolongation of the Lob-nor becomes 
mucfi narrower. Finally the tongue-shaped ridges of sand, which the 
Kuruk-tag sends out towards the north, reach the foot-hills of the Bei-shan 
and close the depression towards the east. This depression is called by 
Koslow the 4 valley of the wild camels ’ *. 

From here Koslow crossed the sands towards the south-east and reached 
Sa-tshou. We will continue, however, to follow the route to the east. The 
sands, moving northwards to the Bei-shsfh, have built up a watershed, 

1 P. Koslow, Lob-nor, Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1898, XXXIV, pp. 00-116, 
maps, in particular p. 90 et Beq. ; Roborowski, tom. cit., p. 15. 



174 THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [partiv 

which cute the tributaries of the north-west Nan-shan from the Lob-nor 
and from the Yarkand-Darya, To the east, beyond the watershed, a series 
c£ smaller lakes soon Appears; finally there follows a vast region of lakes 
and marshes, which is termed lake Khalatchi, and receives what were once 
the tributaries of the Lob-nor, now dammed up, the Dan-khe in the south, 
and the Su-lei-khe (Bulundsir) in the east. Here* in the low cliffs on the 
south shore of lake Khalatchi, hornblende granite crops out *. 

These are the first signs of a long range of Archaean rocks, which 
further to the north-east, where it forms a rocky ridge, is crossed obliquely 
above Ansi by the Su-lei-khe (Bulundsir). This ridge, far to the south- 
west, separates itself from the north side of the Anembar-ula as a series of 
rather short coulisses, and only appears to attain continuity in the elbow 
of the Dan-khe, above Sa-tshou. From there, however, it extends for 
a distance of more than 200 versts, running constantly to the east-north- 
east, parallel to the branches of the Anembar-ula, across the Su-lei-khe into 
the immediate neighbourhood of the south foot of the Bei-shan. 

I know of no general name for this long rocky ridge ; Ldczy calls the 
northern parts, as far as the Su-lei-khe, Ta-pan-shan and Lo-an-shan ; the 
Russian map on the scale of 40 versts to the inch calls them the San - 
&jan-tsy. They were first visited by Michaelis, and the rocks have been 
described by Steuer 1 2 . 

According to L6czy this range is formed of naked, broken rocks, and 
culminates above Sa-tshou at a height of 2,045 meters ; on its north side it 
rises 300-400 meters above the surrounding wastes of debris, and on its 
south side sinks gradually beneath them. On the Su-lei-khe, above Ansi, 
it consists of grey gneiss, hornblende schists, mica-schists, and crystalline 
limestone, traversed by granite and quartz-diorite ; the strike varies 
between due east and west, and N. 60°-70° E. Ancient sandstone rests 
against the east slope 3 . 

The fragmentary ranges, which rise north of the Su-lei-khe, have been 
described by Obrutschew. They are formed of the same ancient schists 
and sandstones as those found by Ldczy on the east side. They strike 
N. 50°-60° E., in correspondence with the direction of the range itself. Then 
to the west of its north-east extremity we see a group of dark-coloured 
hills ; they are cloaked in debris formed of hornblende-porphyrite. ^They 

1 According to Koslow’s observation kindly communicated to me by M. Obrutschew. 

2 H. Michaelis, Von Hankou nach Su-tschou; Reisen im mittleren und westlichen 
China, 1879-1881, Peterm. Mitth., Erg&nzungs-Heft 91, 1888, 58 pp., maps. A. Steuer 
described chloritic-raicarschist from these naked masses of rock; Mittheilungen fiber 
Gesteine aus den chinesischen Provinzen Kansu Schensi, Hupe und Honan, N. J. f. Min., 
1895, Beilage-Band X, pp. 477-494, in particular p. 489. 

8 Die wissenschaftlichen Ergebnisse der Reise des Grafen Bela Szechenyi in Ostasien, 
1877-1880; Ger. Ed. (trans. by F. Schafarzik), atlas, 4to, Wien, 1878; Geologische 
Beobachtungen von L. Loczy, pp. 498-559 et passim. 



ch.v] THE DRAGON MOUNTAIN . 175 

do not lie far from the talus on the south border of the Bei-shan, that is of 
the Pustynii-Khrebet or desert mountain. Still farther west, and almost 
as close to the Bei-shan, there lies a broad worn-€own Archaean mass, 
composed chiefly of gneiss and quartz -schist, in which the strike appears to 
vary between N. 70° to 100° E. This mass, precisely like its continuation 
to the south of the Su-lei-khe, forms an inclined platform sloping gently 
towards the south and sharply broken off on the north, as though it were 
separated from the Bei-shan by a broad rent, now covered by the desert. 
The south foot of the Bei-shan, in this part of its course, does not follow 
a straight line, but runs in and out in promontories and bays ; two versts 



Fig. 10. The region of An-si-fan. (After Loczy.) 
gr, granite, diabase ; JV, Sandstone of the Nan-shan ; gn } gneiss, mica-schist ; 

• Ca , Carboniferous ; CaS> supra-Carboniferous sandstone x . 

from its foot, where its talus of ddbris begins to ascend, the height above 
the sea-level is 1,420 meters 1 2 . 

In this manner the most north-easterly coulisse of the Yarkand 
mountains, the range of the San-sjan-tsy, meets the Bei-shan. The 
depressions between its last heights are now occupied by salt marshes, 
but the ruins of frontier fortresses, and temples, and irrigation canals, 
now^ried up, bear witness to a former state of prosperity. It is a region 
where the forces of nature compel man to retreat. 

Lun-shan. Lying in front of the north foot of the Nan-shan is an 
elongated depression. It is separated from the sandy desert of Ala-shan on 
the north by a mountain chain. The rivers which descend from the snow 

1 This figure, as will be seen from the text, does not always agree with the results of 
recent observations ; but it is the only geological sketch-map, so far as I am aware, of 
any part of the San-sjan-tsy. 

2 Obrutschew, Central Asia, I, pp. 598-613, journey no. 8. 



176 


THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [pabtiv 

fields and <|iaciers of the Nan-shan, and especially the tributaries of the 
Edsin-gol, water the depression before they cross the mountain chain to the 
north, and are then lost in the desert. This chain has received many 
names ; by the people of the country it is generally called Bei-shan, i. e. the 
northern mountains, as opposed to the Nan-shan, or southern mountains ; 
but it is not the direct continuation of the Bei-shan beyond the Edsin-gol, 
as was recognized long ago by F. von Richthofen. Some parts of it are 
called Pa-lin-shan, Bo-shan, Tsa-jui-guan-shan, &c. ; the greater part of the 
eastern limbus fnown as the Lun-shan , i. e. the Dragon mountain, and we 
will use this name, following Obrutschew’s suggestion, for the whole range. 
The depression between the Lun-shan and Nan-shan hardly reaches a 
breadth of 60 versts, and is generally much narrower ; it forms the region 
of the oases of Kansu . 

The Lun-shan exhibits two very striking stratigraphical features, each 
pf which is met with again in the lofty Nan-shan. 

The first, which was originally pointed out by L<5czy, is the very general 
and obvious unconformity at the base of the upper Carboniferous. This 
formation is represented by rich coal measures and marine beds, the latter 
containing an abundant fauna, which corresponds throughout with the 
upper Carboniferous of Europe (Spirifer Mosquensis , Enteletes Lamarckii , 
Fusulina cylindrical &c.). Since its deposition, it has been subjected to 
violent movements ; in the Lun-shan, as in the Nan-shan, many of the 
greatest lines of dislocation are marked by pinched-in bands of coal 
measures l . 

The second feature is the mantling round of the mountains by thick 
beds of red, yellow, or brown sandstone, marl, or conglomerate, which 
compose the Gobi series, here often over 1,000 feet thick. Obrutschew has 
shown that, though as a rule this rests horizontally against the mountains, 
yet it is often profoundly dislocated, not only by faults but also by folding. 
The sandstone beds sometimes resemble the supra-Carboniferous sandstone. 

In the west, almost in the meridian of the town of Jui-myn, a broad 
independent ridge proceeds from the north foot of the Nan-shan; it is 
designated by Obrutschew the Pestraja Grjada, or mottled chain, and is 
formed by the many-coloured beds of the Gobi series 2 . According to 
Obrutschew, these beds are strongly distorted close to the foot of 
the Nan-shan and then strike N. 65° E. — a direction alien to that of the 
great range — through the Pestraja Grjada towards Tsha-tien 3 . Near this 

1 Loczy, Wissenschaftliche Ergebnisse der Reise des Grafen B. Sczechenyi, Band III : 
Beschreibung der fossilen Reste von Wirbelthieren und von Mollusken und die palae- 
ontologisch-stratigraphischen ErgebAisse ; in particular p. 207. 

2 In Fig. 10 these deposits are marked CaS (supra-Carboniferous sandstone) according 
to the earlier view. 

3 Obrutschew, Central Asia, I, p. 581. 



LUN-SHAN 


177 


CH. V] 


town gneiss is visible with a strike to N. 35°-40° E. ; it evidently forms the 
foundation of the Pestraja Grjada and of the whole range which stretches 
across the depression. Loczy thought it possible that this gneiss might 
represent an ‘ outpost ’ of the Archaean rocks of the Ta-pa-shan (San-sjan- 
tsy). The direction actually corresponds with that of the western Kuen- 
luen, and not with that of the Nan-shan 1 . 

About 30-40 versts south-east of Tsha-tien, Obrutschew crossed the 
range east of the Palin -shan. Only traces of ancient rocks are visible ; the 
thick masses of conglomerates and sandstones probably belong to the supra- 
Carboniferous sandstone. In the south-western part of the range the 
strike approaches an east-and-west direction, or even west-north -west, 
while in the north-eastern part it is N. 45°-80° E. About 25 versts further 
away we see metamorphic schists and sandstones, very sharply folded, 
sometimes, it would seem, overturned towards the north, and also traversed 
by dykes of syenite-porphyry. But here the strike has already turned to" 
the west-north-west or north-west. The range becomes a small ridge ; the 
Great Wall runs along its south side almost as far as the Lin-shui, which 
flows to the Edsin-gol. On the banks of this river we see crystalline 
limestone with flakes of graphite, dykes of aplite, and, further away from 
the water, granitic gneiss striking NW. 310° 2 . 

Thus, in this region the Lun-shan has assumed the prevailing direction 
of the Nan-shan ; this it maintains for a long distance, while it forms the 
north border of the oasis tract of Kansu. Secondary chains join its south- 
west side ; the range becomes broader and higher. 

At Shan-dan-sjan, about 230 versts east-south -east of the Lin-shui, the 
main range of the Lun-shan consists of a sharp anticline of Carboni- 
ferous 4 which forms the highest and most northerly pass, and in front 
*of this and to the south of it four parallel bands of green schist with 
isolated dykes of granite ; these are separated from one another by bands 
of Carboniferous, and become lower towards the south. The range is 
closely folded, and it must remain an open question whether these parallel 
strips have been produced by step-faults with subsidence towards the south 
or by repeated overthrusting. 

The general direction of the range is west-north-west or north-west, like 
that of the steep northern anticline, and of all the Carboniferous bands. 
We observe, however, that the Carboniferous rests unconformably on the 
green schists, which were folded before the Carboniferous was deposited ; 
the strike of the green schists in the most northerly and most important 
band is directly opposed to that of the Carboniferous, being at first NE. 


1 Ldczy, Die wissenschaftlichen Ergebni^se der Reike des Grafen B. Sz6chenyi in 
Ostasien, I, pp. 554, 644, 662, Tung*hoan-hsien ( * Sa-tshou). 

2 Obrutschew, Central Asia, I, p. 589 et seq. (for the section of the Lin-shui), I, 
p. 566 et seq. 

HOLLAS III 


N 



178 


THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [partiv 

45°; towards the south it approaches an east-and-west direction up to 
N. 87° E. ; in the more southerly bands it varies between east to west and 
West-north-west. 

From the north, as we proceed from the desert of Ala-shan, the Gobi 
deposits rise in flat-bedded and transgressive patches up the slopes of 
the Lun-shan ; according to Obrutschew’s observations they even reach a 
height which exceeds that of the pass of Lun-shan (2,320 meters) \ 

East of the region just discussed the parallel secondary ranges (Sin- 
khe-shan, Fin-shan, Bao-bu-dan-shan) on the south side of the Lun-shan 
increase in number ; they all possess the same structure as the main range, 
and only in the most southerly of them — the Tei-ehuan-shan, which extends 
furthest into the oasis tract of Kansu, and is also the highest — does granite- 
gneiss crop out, the oldest rock of the Lun-shan. In these foot-hills a strike 
from north-west to west-north- west everywhere prevails ; the transgression 
of the upper Carboniferous is very striking. — 

About 100 versts east-south-east from the section of Nan-dan-sjan, 
north of the town of Yuen-tshen-sjan, which lies about half-way from 
Ljan-tshou, the southern foot-hills of the Lun-shan have disappeared or 
else united with the main range. The Fin-shan runs north of Yuen-tshen- 
sjan, and is only separated from the Lun-shan by a narrow valley through 
which the Great Wall runs. The Fin-shan here consists of ancient sand- 
stone with dykes of syenite-porphyry and granite, the Lun-shan, however, 
chiefly of granite ; it is not certain that it is of Archaean age. Here the 
strike of the rocks, as of the ranges, is directed from west-north-west to 
north-west 1 2 . 

Finally, it is possible, thanks to the sustained efforts of Obrutschew, to 
study the continuations of the Lun-shan along the course of the Da-khe, 
below Ljan-tshou, at a place about 80 versts east-south-east of Yuen-tshen-» 
sjan, and more than 550 versts from that spot, where the ranges of the 
Lun-shan reach the northern foot of the Nan-shan in the Pestraja Grjada. 

In this part of the Lun-shan, which lies furthest to the east-south-east, 
it appears, according to the map, as though the range has made a bend 
in the direction of the mountains of the Hoang-ho, similar to that made 
by the northern ranges of the Bei-shan on the Edsin-gol* Indeed in the 
conjectured normal continuation of the Fin-shan and Lun-shan in the east- 
south-east direction, Obrutschew encountered no mountains along the banks 
of the Da-khe, north of Ljan-tshou, and it was not till much further on, 
towards the town of Tshen-fan, that the spurs made their appearance as 
long debris-covered ridges surrounded by the ‘ barchans 5 of the sands of 
Ala-shan. 

1 Obrutschew, Central Asia, I, p. 526 et seq. ; in particular p. 533, section of Shan- 
dan-sjan. 

2 Obrutschew, Central Asia, I, p. 512 et seq. 



THE NAN-SHAN 


179 


ch. v] 

The first of these, the Kun-ngeskan , is formed of numerous ridges of 
various lengths, which extend to the west-north- west, and are continued 
east of the river ; dark brown limestone is exposed ; the stratigraphical 
position of the beds is uncertain, the strike perhaps east and west or east- 
north-east. In the ddbris there are some traces of Gobi deposits and 
doubtful Carboniferous fossils. The second and the last ridge towards 
the north, Lojeshan , with a relative height of 120 meters (valley floor, 
1,430 meters), is also directed to the west-north- west L 

To sum up, we may describe the Lun-shan as a mountain range, 
running to the west-north-west, or north-west, which is inserted as a 
parallel coulisse between the Bei-shan and the Nan-shan, but is dis- 
tinguished from the Bei-shan by the fact that its western end beyond 
Tsha-tien and Pestraja Grjada, is bent in the direction of the arc of 
Yarkand i. e. to the south-west. 

North foot of the Nan-shan . The mighty range of the Richthofen 
mountains, which forms the north border along the whole length of the 
Nan-shan, possesses no definite limit towards the north, i. e. towards the 
oases of Kansu. To the north of the Nan-shan there is nothing that can 
be compared with the zone of Flysch or Molasse of the northern Alps, the 
Carpathians or the Apennines, or with the Flysch mountains of Arakan 
in Burma, or the Siwalik mountains at the south foot of the Himalaya. 
Nor is anything to be seen which resembles the fractured inner border of 
a great mountain arc, but, on the contrary, we see here and there foot-hills 
which strike to west-north- west or north-west, parallel to the main range 
of the Richthofen mountains, and also to the foot-hills of the Lun-shan, 
which lie opposite them on the north. It was this which gave Loczy the 
impression that the Ho-yen-shan (median part of the Lun-shan) was only 
* one of the foot-hills of the Nan-shan 1 2 . 

East-south-east of At-sa-kou, i. e. of the junction of the west Lun-shan 
with the north foot of the Richthofen mountains, the latter are formed 
mainly of ancient schist and sandstone, which extend for a great distance, 
and strike west-north- west to north-west. At about 70 versts from the 
junction, the range of foot-hills called Tshin-tu-shan shows Carboniferous 
and supra-CarJ)oniferous sandstone with the same strike, folded, but 
with tke beds dipping uniformly to the south-west, i. e. towards the high 
mountains. Even far out on the margin of the plain, the Gobi beds 
themselves dip at an angle of as much as 60°-65° in the same direction. 
Obrutschew conjectures that the whole series is overturned towards the 
north-east 3 . 

1 It must be observed that the position of the towil of Tshen-fan, as indicated on the 
maps, is incorrect. 

2 Loczy, Die wissenschaftlichen Ergebnisse der Reise des Grafen B. Szechenyi in 

Ostasien, I, p. 637. m s Obrutschew, Central Asia, II, p. 240. 

N 2 



180 


THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [partiv 

A little mo re than 90 versts further to the east-south-east, near Tsin- 
fcwsy, where the Da-kbe emerges from the Richthofen range, we see a 
hrbad granite mass, which rises rapidly from the border of the plain to 
a considerable height, and is separated from still higher chains on the 
south by an intervening band of coal measures l . * 

About 100 versts further to the east-south-east, we reach a crowded 
group of foothills, the Din-in-pa-pan-shan, which, advancing towards Gao- 
tai, narrow the depression of the oases of Kansu to a breadth of about 
25 versts. This group terminates towards the north in three distinct 
step-faults, which three times repeat the same series — ancient sandstone, 
Carboniferous limestone, coal measures, and porphyry T with tuffs 2 . 

About 80 versts still further to the east-south-east, near Nan-kou-tshan, 
where the foot of the range has receded, and the depression has widened 
out again to a great breadth, the beds dip towards the interior of the chain ; 
granite (or porphyry ?) is exposed in the midst of an older Palaeozoic series, 
which is covered unconformably by upper Carboniferous 3 . 

Not far east of this place a broad zone of melaphyre, with tuff and 
breccia, crops out at the foot of the range; it is likewise bounded on the 
south by coal-bearing Carboniferous rocks 4 . This extraordinary diversity 
no doubt suggests that the north border of the Richthofen range is not 
a simple and continuous tectonic line. At the same time it certainly 
follows the general strike of the Nan-shan; as do likewise its foothills, 
as well as those of the Lun-shan and the Lun-shan itself. Many of the 
existing features of the depression of the oases of Kansu, including its 
varying breadth, may have been produced by irregular trough-like sub- 
sidence along continuous longitudinal fractures. 

Western boundary of the Nan-shan. This mighty range is boynded 
on the north-west by parts of the arc of Yarkand (western Kuen-luen), 
namely the Altyn-tag, Anembar-ula, and their secondary coulisses. This 
is the interpretation given by Ldczy and Bogdanowitsch, and it is 
confirmed by all that we have said above as to the direction and position 
of the gneiss ridge of San-sjan-tsy. On the north-east, towards the oases 
of Kansu, no continuous tectonic boundary exists, as we have seen from 
our study of the north slope of the Richthofen range. To «the south-west 
we may draw the limit at will through lake Kuku-nor or from the 
Khaltyn-gol to the plain of Syrtyn, or along the north border of the 
Tsaidam ; all these boundaries are equally arbitrary and only chosen for the 
sake of more easily obtaining a general idea of the configuration ; none has 

1 Obrutschew, Central Asia, II, pp. 147, 151. 

2 Obrutschew, Central Asia, I, pi 545. 

8 L<5czy, Die wissenschaftlichen Ergebnisse*der Reise ... in Ostasien, I, pp. 543, 544 
(according to figs. 65 and 66). 

* Obrutschew, Central Asia, II, p. 144. # 



THE NAN-SHAN 


181 


CH. V] 

any basis in nature, for the direction of the folded ranges remains almost 
unchanged as far as the Prjewalski mountains, and the bend further to 
the south takes place very gradually. It is equally difficult to find a 
boundary on the south-east, and indeed, so far as I know, the attempt has 
never been made. 

Sheet XXI of the Russian map on the scale of 40 versts to the inch, 
prepared by Colonel Bolschew, gives a good idea of the relative heights 
in the west of this region. 

The Lob-nor lies at a height of 2,550 feet ; then rapidly rising towards 
the south, the Altyn-tag culminates in peaks of 13,000 feet or over, 
but beyond the Altyn-tag the slope does not fall with the same rapidity ; 
the plain of Tsaidam does not sink below 8,800 feet, and lies for the 
greater part above 9,200 feet ; the plain of Syrtyn is over 9,400 feet, 
and south of Tsaidam the plain of the two lakes of Kum-kul lies at 
a level of over 13,000 feet. 

Let us return to the level of 2,550 feet at the Lob-nor and follow 
the route taken by Koslow, already described, to the east-north-east 
on the south side of the Bei-shan. The country gradually rises to a 
height of 2,720 feet. Lake Khalatchi, beyond the watershed formed 
by the sand, lies at a height of 3,500 feet, but as soon as the San- 
sjan-tsy is crossed, beyond An-si, we find ourselves at a level of over 
5,000 feet, and the whole surface, south of Sa-tshou, between the 
San-sjan-tsy and the prolongations of the Anembar-ula, as well as the 
whole region of the oases of Kansu on the other side, lie above 5,000 
feet. 

Above the oases of Kansu the crests and peaks of the Richthofen 
mountains rise to a height of quite 20,000 feet, but south of this range 
all the valleys of the Nan-shan remain very high; the surface of the 
Kuku-nor is at a level of 10,500 feet, and that of the Khara-nor, dis- 
covered by Roborowski, at about 12,000 feet. Beyond the Nan-shan 
we reach that elevated tract of the Thibetan chains where for great 
distances no point lies below 15,000 feet. 

This mighty elevation of the ground, bounded on the south-west 
by the depression of the Yarkand-darya and the Lob-nor, constricted 
on t!ie north-east by the depression of Ordos, is a sort of intumescence 
composed of a number of very crowded more or less parallel folds. 
These folds, with the exception of their outermost western border, 
follow a west-north-west direction from the oases of Kansu to Tsaidam. 
A broad valley, which includes the Kuku-nor together with the fluvial 
region of Bukhain-gol, and in its continuation further the Khara-nor, 
and lies, as we have just seen, at a considerable height, divides these 
chains lengthwise into a northern and a southern group. The separation, 
however, is not complete, since both to the north-west and south east 



182 


THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [paetiy 

of the great valley, the chains join together so completely that the 
valley between them has no outlet. 

.* The breadth of the Nan-shan between the north border of the Tsaidam 
arid the south border of the oases of Kansu may be compared with that of 
the Alps between Biella and Freiburg, and indeed there is a rough corre- 
spondence between the extension of the Swiss Alps as a whole and the 
region generally included under the name of Nan-shan. But though the 
absolute height of the chains of Nan-Shan is greater than that of the 
Alps, so is that of the valley bottoms also, and thus the contrast of relief 
within the chains is diminished; yet at the same time the observer is 
brought nearer to the limit of perpetual snow. 

Many enterprising travellers, from Prjewalski to Roborowski, have at- 
tempted to determine the topography of this mountain land, but so far only 
two skilled geologists have taken part in its investigation and published 
their results. The first of these was L6czy, whose work, apart from that 
on the north border, is of chief importance in relation to the line from Lan- 
tshou to Ljan-tshou, the valley of the Si-ning, and the regions in the south- 
east. He was followed by Obrutschew, who has drawn several sections 
across the northern chains. In the course of a lengthy expedition Obrut- 
> schew first crossed all the chains near their north-western end ; then, 
following their trend, he reached the field of Loczy’s labours, on the south 
side of the Kuku-nor, and thence, travelling across the eastern part of the 
chains, again arrived at the oases of Kansu. 

Important as these achievements are, yet, when we consider the nature 
and extent of the country, they cannot be regarded as more than a first 
step. The geology of the middle portion of the Nan-shan in particular, 
that is the districts around the Khara-nor and the fluvial region o£ the 
Bukhain-gol, is almost entirely unknown, with the single exception of the 
south border of the Kuku-nor. Since, however, Obrutschew has crossed the 
lofty chains in the west, and those of the east, thanks to the united efforts 
of several observers, have to some extent become known, it is possible to 
perceive that although the strike is affected by isolated, and sometimes 
very remarkable, local disturbances, to which we shall recur, yet on the 
whole the trend of the chains and the strike of the rocks are jn fairly exact 
correspondence at both ends of the Nan-shan. 

In the meridian of Su-tshou, four lofty chains, striking uniformly to 
the west-north-west, rise between the oases of Kansu and the longitu- 
dinal valley of the Kuku-nor. These are the Richthofen mountains, Tolai- 
shan, the range of Alexander III, and a fourth chain but little known, 
which is separated from the preceding by the upper valley of the Su-lei- 
khe. In the continuation of the Alexander range to the west-north-west 
or a little south of this direction, rises the Da-sjue-shan b 
1 W. Obrutschew, Orographical sketch of the Nan-shan ; Izviestija Imp. ross. 



THE RICHTHOFEN MOUNTAINS 


188 


OH. V] 

The Richthofen mountains are here 50-60 versts broad and divided into 
several folded ranges, the first of which reaches a height well over 20,000 
feet. At its northern foot, near Tsin-fo-sy, south-east of Su-tshou, a granite 
boss shows itself, but although the granite rapidly attains some elevation it 
does not extend far into the mountains. It is followed by a coal-bearing 
band of upper Carboniferous beds, dipping to the south-west, next by 
lower Carboniferous with Productus 8triatus } then by red and green 
Devonian sandstone ; finally by quartzite and limestone, probably Silurian. 
Before reaching the first series of peaks we already find the folds dipping 
to the north, and all the remaining ranges of the Richthofen mountains 
may be regarded as closely crowded folds of similar Palaeozoic sediments, 
which either stand vertical or are overturned to the south. Imbricate 
structure also appears to occur. It is possible that one or other of the 
coal-bearing bands belongs to the Angara series. On the most southerly 
pass, the Tsin-nin-daban (4,220 meters), and even still higher up, the Gobi 
beds rest unconformably against the south border of the Richthofen 
mountains ; they descend in places at a very steep angle to the valley of 
the Khun-shui, which forms the boundary next the Tolai-shan. 

About 100 versts further to the west-north- west Obrutschew again 
encountered this zone of red Gobi deposits; they form a syncline, the 
beds of which dip towards each other on the two sides of the valley 
of Bei-jan-koi at an angle of 60° or over. This recent syncline must 
be regarded as the limit between the Richthofen mountains and the 
Tolai-shan. It shows that the Richthofen mountains become consider- 
ably narrower towards the west-north -west ; possibly a number of their 
northern ridges disappear in this direction in the form of coulisses. 

Still further to the west-north-west, towards the middle Su-lei-khcf 
red *and green sandstones crop out in the Palaeozoic series of the 
Richthofen mountains, and in the partings middle Devonian fossils 
occur 1 . On the south side the vast plain of the Tshou-ma-er oasis 
opens out. It is bounded on the south by the Tolai-shan, and is sur- 
rounded by red and yellow Gobi beds ; in fact it is simply the broadened 

Geogr. Obsch., 1894, XXX, pp. 42-112, nmp; Sketch of central Nan-shan, tom. cit., 
pp 709-764, mag ; Orography of Central Asia and its south-east border, op. cit., 1895, 
XXXI; pp. 253-344 (in particular pp. 316-331), with a sketch map of the Nan-shan by 
Obrutschew and Roborowski. Further, Obrutschew, Central Asia, passim. The valley 
of Tatung-ho of Ldczy is the Chagryn-gol of Obrutschew. In the latter Roborowski 
distinguishes Mo-mo-shan from Ma-ling-shan ; Chaji-shan L. (=Amasurgu) forms on 
Obrutschew’s map, together with the granite and gneiss range which adjoins it on the 
vfest, the L6czy mountains and Potanin mountains, the latter adjoining the south 
Buku-nor ; Maja-shan and Wu-so-ling L. = parts of Mo-mo-shan Obr. and Rob. ; North- 
letung Prjew. = Tolai-shan Obr. and Rob. ; South-^etung Prjew. — Tshin-shi-ling Obr. 
^nd Rob. • 

1 According to Tschernyschew Rhynconella alinensis , in another locality Spirifer etegans 
ind Spirifer Anoioffi ; Obrutschew, Central Asia, II, pp. 9, 10. 



184 


THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [partiv 

termination of the great band of these deposits, in part bent into 
a* syndic v which we have already traced from the Tsin-nin-daban 
pass, as the dividing line between the Richthofen range and the Tolai- 
4k& n. It is cut directly across by the middle Su-lei-khe. 

Beyond this river the Richthofen mountains still further diminish 
In breadth, change their direction, describe a broad arc in the north 
and west of the oasis of Tshou-ma-er, and finally turn completely to 
the west-south-west. This deflected mountain limb , bearing the name 
of the Shi-bao-shan , forms the first coulisse of the A nembar-ula. This 
coulisse lies east of the oft-mentioned gneiss range of San-sjan-tsy, 
which borders the Anembar-ula as a sort of foot-hill. 

It is easy to see that this bend made by the Richthofen mountains 
is similar tb that made by the Lun-shan as it approaches the Pestraja 
Grjada. Furthermore, it completely surrounds the end of the Tolai- 
shan (the second range of the Nan-shan), which has broken up into 
law hills. 

The Tolai-shan makes its appearance in the meridian of Su-tshou as 
a fairly narrow chain, but, like the Richthofen mountains, it rears its 
peaks high above the snow-line (here 4,400-4,600 meters). Ib is dis- 
tinguished from the latter by a zone of gneiss, which crops out at its 
south foot. The disposition of the succeeding beds, however, is, according 
Jbo Obrutschew’s account, very peculiar. As we travel from tire north 
we see, after crossing the intervening band of Gobi beds, violent folding 
of the thick Palaeozoic series. A local strike to the north-east and 
north-north-east comes in ; then the rocks resume the prevailing direction 
to the west-north-west, and finally the most recent stage, coal-bearing 
Carboniferous and Fusulina limestone, is seen resting upon the gneiss. 
The section at this point suggests not so much a transgressioh of the 
upper Carboniferous as an overthrust of the whole Palaeozoic series, 
carrying it to the south over the gneiss. 

A second section, drawn about 50 versts west-north- west of the 
first, shows that the gneiss zone of the south side has become much 
broader, and that even at a height of 4,530 meters the glaciers bring 
down gneiss from the summits. Thus gneiss contributes to the formation 
of the peaks ; an exceptional occurrence in the northern Nan-shan. 4 

If we follow this section from north to south, in accordance with 
Obrutschew’s description, we first encounter, south of the dividing 
syncline of Gobi beds, two bands of melaphyre with tuffs and breccia^ 
which rest on Palaeozoic rocks. They correspond to two step-faulty 
Then comes the series of great Palaeozoic folds seen in the first section! 
Close to its south border is the pass of Tye-daban (4,470 meters), which 
passes through supra-Carboniferous sandstone, and in the neighbourhood 
of the boundary, next the gneiss, upper and middip Carboniferous fossilsi 



185 


ch.v] CffAIN OF ALEXANDER III 

t 

have been found. But while the normal west-north- west or north-west 
strike is dominant up to this point, yet before we actually reach the 
boundary great irregularity sets in, the strike sometimes running even 
to north-north-east or due north and south. The gneiss is accompanied 
by hornblende schists and by successive intercalations of banded lime- 
stone; the strike is noAh-west 295°; and there is a steep dip to the 
north-east. 

Beyond the gneiss zone, towards the south border of the Tolai-shan, 
upper Carboniferous again appears, here accompanied by porphyry tuff, 
(strike north-west, 290°-300°, dip north-east, 40°) and apparently dipping 
beneath the gneiss. 

The gneiss zone is thus restricted to the south of the Tolai-shan; 
on each side of it we find exposed not the lower but the highest part 
of the Palaeozoic series, that is the upper, and probably the middle. 
Carboniferous; and it remains for later investigations to determine 
whether this succession has been produced by an overlap of the Carboni- 
ferous, followed by posthumous folding, or whether a more profound 
and general movement of the whole Palaeozoic series, resulting in 
imbricate structure, has taken place. 

The Tolai-shan is a shorter range than the Richthofen mountains, and 
breaks up towards the west-north- west, as we have seen, into low ridges, 
which, within the arc described by the north-west end of the Richthofen 
range, separate the oasis of Tshou-nia-er from the plain of Sua-dintse. 

The chain of Alexander III rises south of The broad debris-choked 
valley of the Tolai-guan, and is formed, as is shown by two sections 
taken at a distance of about 20 versts apart, of steeply folded lower. 
Palaeozoic beds passing towards the south into a great Carboniferous 
• syncline, which includes a vast thickness of supra-Carbonif erous sandstone. 
This syncline is so broad that the supra-Carboniferous sandstone rises 
within it in secondary anticlines, and so forms, in all probability, the peaks 
of U-ge-shan, the highest of the chain. 

The fourth chain has not as yet been crossed completely from side to 
side : it is separated from the preceding by the upper valley of the Su- 
lei-khe, and, as we have seen, probably slopes away southwards to the 
longiAidinal valley of the Bukhain-gol. It likewise is composed, at least 
in the part explored by Obrutschew, solely of Palaeozoic beds. It appears 
that the great syncline mentioned above, overturned towards the south 
and including all the Palaeozoic beds, is cut through obliquely by the valley 
of the Su-lei-khe, so that in the east-south-east the greater part of it belongs 
to the chain of Alexander III, while to the west-north-west it advances 
further and further beyond the v^ley of tffe Su-lei-khe into the fourth 
chain. 

The structure of these four chains of the Nan-shan, froiii the oases of 



186 


THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [part nr 

Kansu dow/v nearly to the valley of the Bukhain-gol, thus presents the 
flowing features : gneiss is visible on the south side of the Tolai-shan . 
and nowhere else; all the rest of the range consists of closely folded 
Palaeozoic sediments. Near the north border there are indications of an 
overfolding to the north ; in the interior of the range we observe a vertical 
position or a thrust to the south. The gneiss range is not accompanied, 
as we might suppose from the normal succession, by the lowest member 
of the Palaeozoic series, but by the upper Carboniferous. 

We now follow the course of the upper Su-lei-khe and return to the 
north-western part of the Nan-shan. 

The Da-sjue-shan is a lofty range, which is continued to the east- 
south-east, .either directly into the mountains of Alexander III, or as an 
independent range between these mountains and the next succeeding, or 
fourth, range. It forms the south border of the plain of Sua-dintse. Its 
direction is first west-north-west, then due west, and finally west-south- 
west (265°). At the vertex of this gently curved arc it forms Obrutschew’s 
Pik Poworotnii (Peak of the Bend), across which the river Da-kun-tse has 
cut its channel to the north-west. In the section thus afforded of the 
Peak of Poworotnii, Obrutschew found Carboniferous limestone, Devonian, 
and thick masses of clay slates, all overturned towards the north-west ; 
and then, high up, traces of wedged-in coal-bearing Carboniferous and 
metamorphic schists. 

On the right of the river the overttfmed series strikes west-north- west 
(290°-315°), and on the left east-north-east (50°-65°), so that a sharp bend 
is made from the west - north-west direction of the Nan-shan into the east- 
north-east direction of the Anembar-ula . Further west, in the bed of the 
Khai-khi-khe on the west side of the Pik Poworotnii, the west-north-west 
direction of the Nan-shan reappears. The structure of the Pik Poworotnii, « 
which runs to the end of the Shi-bao-shan, is unknown to me. 

On the south side of the Da-sjan-shan range diabase, porphyry, horn- 
blende granite, and spotted schists occur. They form the Khrebet Besi- 
manii (the Unnamed mountains), and here ancient quartzite and hornblende 
schists crop out with a strike to east-north-east (75°), perhaps as the first 
indications of the structure exhibited by the next range, the € Ye-ma-shan. 

The Ye-ma-shan forms an exception among the chains of the Nan-shan. 
Even its outer form shows the divergent direction east-north-east (80°) ; 
the chain is shorter than the others, with rounded summits, which do not 
reach the snow-line. It consists throughout of Archaean or at any rate of 
very ancient rocks, gneiss and granite, chlorite and hornblende schists, and 
quartzite. The strike varies between north-east (52°) and east-north-east 
(80°). The Ye-ma-shan is thus a cogilisse of the Anembar-ula rising 
between the branches of the Nan-shan. 

The Humboldt range is much higher than the ' Ye-ma-shan. Not only 



HUMBOLDT KANGE 


187 


CH. V] 

does it return, in its outer course and in the strike of its rocks, to the west- 
north-west or north-west direction of the Nan-shan, but it also swings 
round, even still more obviously than the northern chains, through a broad 
arc into the Altyn-tag, the longest and most important coulisse of which 
unites with the Humboldt range in the meridian of the Sa-tshou, i.e. in 
long. 95° E. 

On the north-east the Humboldt range is bordered by the broad longi- 
tudinal valley of the Shara-gol. Towards the north-west the Shara-gol 
cuts through the range near Baigur, where a coulisse coming from the east- 
north-east joins the Altyn-tag, and thus perhaps represents a bend of the 
Da-sjue-shan ; the Shara-gol then crosses the oft-mentioned gneiss range 
of San-sjan-tsy, and reaches the lake of Khalatchi. Its valley, north- 
east of the Humboldt mountains, is so broad, that Littledale, looking down 
on it from above, was filled with astonishment; from a distance, he 
wrote, it looks as though the Nan-shan were not connected at all with 
the Humboldt mountains ; a broad plain lies between them, with a scarcely 
perceptible slope \ 

Obrutschew has crossed the Humboldt mountains by the Ulan-daban 
(long. 96° E.). From its northern foot there rises a parallel ridge of red 
gypsiferous Gobi-beds, dipping towards the range, i. e., towards the south- 
west, and comparable in colour and form to a great tiled roof. The 
north foot of the Humboldt range is formed of syenite-porphyry, diorite, 
and probably granite also. These are soon followed by thick masses of 
grey schists with sandstone, described by Obrutschew as metamorphic, 
and for the most part phyllites. It is thrown into sharp folds, striking 
north-west (310°-320°), and is covered unconformably by reddish-grey 
and red sandstone with shales, which belong to the supra-Carboniferous 
•sandstone. This discordant series is also folded, with a similar strike, 
and forms first a patch at the north foot, then a broad syncline near the 
pass of Ulan-daban, and finally a second syncline within the southern 
slope. Thus, from a distance, says Obrutschew, we see steeply inclined 
red masses on a grey substratum, and from a still greater distance the 
chain appears to be wholly red. 

At some places along this section gold placers occur; the metal is 
probably derived from dykes of quartz in the phyllites. Since similar 
deposits occur in the Humboldt range, fairly far to the east-south-east and 
also the west-north-west, up to the region where the range makes its 
bend to the Anembar-ula, we may suppose that these auriferous schists 
contribute to the formation of the range for a great distance. 

On the south, precisely as on the north, the chain is accompanied by a 

» 

1 St. G. Littledale, A journey across Central Asia, Geogr. Journ., 1894, III, pp. 445-475, 
map, in particular p. 462. 



188 THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [paktiv 

ridge of Ojjbi beds; and on this side also they dip, though very gently, 
towards the mountains, that is to the north-north-east. 

, The longitudinal valley of the Khaltyn-gol, which follows the Hum- 
boldt range on the south, is hemmed in by the foot-hills of the Tsagangolu 
ridge (also called Tsagan-Obotu) ; here the metamorphic schist is so rich 
in quartz that the talus slopes look as if they were covered with snow 1 , 

The lofty Ritter range is in the main formed by one of the parallel 
coulisses of the Nan-shan. Towards the west-north-west it is resolved into 
two hill ranges which flatten out towards the plain of Syrtyn. The first 
of these is the Tsagan-golu, mentioned above ; the second and more 
considerable is called the Dakhyn-daban. 

The metamorphic schist of the Tsagan-golu strikes to the east-north- 
east and reaches N. 65° E., so that the strike of the rocks deviates from the 
east-and-west direction of the range, and this branch of the Ritter moun- 
tains reveals in the direction of Syrtyn a bend towards the east-north-east. 
On its south side hornblende granite, with dykes of porphyry, crops out. 

The Dakhyn-daban shows a strike to the north-west (295° to 340°) ; at 
its north foot Carboniferous limestone, dipping south, represents the 
beginning of a great syncline formed by the upper subdivisions of the 
Carboniferous ; at the summit of the pass itself (4,360 meters) upper 
Carboniferous occurs with Prodnctus fasciatus , Aviculopecten, and other 
fossils. The highest part of the range lying south of the pass is a steep 
anticline which brings up again the Carboniferous limestone ; it is followed 
by a second syncline of the higher beds, which abuts against steeply 
inclined metamorphic schists. 

With this we reach the side of a broad longitudinal valley which bounds 
the Ritter mountains on the south. Obrutschew calls it the desert valley 
(Pustynnaja dolina) ; it is one of those coulisse valleys which come from the* 
east-south-east and open out from the Nan-shan into the plain of Syrkyn. 
South of the desert valley a range comes in, cut ’through by subordinate 
transverse valleys, which bears various names (Bomyn-ula, Tsaidamin-ula, 
Kaktyn-daban), but is designated by Obrutschew the Muschketow range. 
It is of great importance in a study of the Nan-shan. Towards the east- 
south-east it is united by the Airik-khetren-ula with {he great^ south 
Kuku-nor mountains, and towards the west-north-west it is joined by 
several other coulisses, especially the Syrtyn-Makhain-ula ; these, hcrlvever, 
do not quite reach the chains of the west Kuen-luen. Thus the plain of 
Syrtyn is not completely separated from that of Tsaidam. 

The Muschketow range is followed towards the south by a longitudinal 
valley formed by many fragments of coulisse valleys, and therefore 
varying considerably in breadth ; it contains the lakes of Ikhe and Baga- 
Tsaidamin, and, towards the south, is partially separated from the Tsaidam 

1 The same fact is recorded at several localities at the foot of the San-sjan-tsy. 



ch.v] SYNTAXIS OF NAN-SHAN AND YARKAND 189 

by a series of shorter oblique coulisses, which Obrutschew designates the 
north Tsaidam chains . 

To the south of the Ritter mountains we thus recognize the Desert 
valley, then the Syrtyn-Makhain-ula, Muschketow, and Airik-khetren-ula 
as far as south Kuku-nor, then the coulisse valley with the Tsaidamin 
lakes ; further on, the zone of the north Tsaidam coulisses ; and lastly, the 
plain of Tsaidam. All these chains, south of the Ritter range, are distin- 
guished from the northern chains by extensive outcrops of the most ancient 
rocks. The greater number and the most important of these chains are 
formed of gneiss accompanied by a broad or narrow border of Palaeozoic 
beds which are chiefly but not exclusively of Carboniferous age. Generally 
there is distinct overthrusting to the south-west, i. e. in the direction of the 
plain of Tsaidam. The Ulan-udsur, a coulisse which advances from the 
north Tsaidam zone and runs between the two lakes of Tsaidamin, is tra- 
versed by two thrust-planes and thus converted into two overthrust flakes. 

Although important differences distinguish the chains separated to the 
north and south by the Desert valley — the southern chains predominantly 
gneissose, and, the northern mainly built up of Palaeozoic rocks and never 
presenting any large exposure of gneiss except at the south foot of the 
Tolai-shan and in the divergently trending Ye-ma-shan — yet, notwith- 
standing this, the Desert valley cannot be regarded as a true line of division. 
Indeed, according to the observations of Obrutschew, it seems much more 
probable, to judge by the pebbles brought down by the river, that the 
gneiss already begins to make its appearance north of the valley on the 
south slope of the Ritter mountains. 

Syntaxis of the Nan-shan and the Yarkand range . Having now 
followed Obrutschew’s description as far as the north-east border of the 
•Tsaidam, we may attempt to discuss the relations of the western Nan- 
shan to the Anembar-ula, i. e. to the eastern part of the great arc which 
surrounds the basin of the Yarkand-darya. 

With this object we will # again commence our survey in the region of 
the Lob-nor and the Khalatchi. 

On the south border of the Bei-shan, which runs here to west-north- 
west or due east and west, no indications of relationship between the Nan- 
shan and the Anembar-ula have as yet been recognized. 

The gneiss range of San-sjan-tsy belongs, as Prjewalski has already 
observed, to the Anembar-ula. It reaches, east-north-east of An-si, the 
south foot of the Bei-shan, without assuming the direction of this range. 
The two ranges remain completely distinct. With the range which follows 
the case is different. 

The Lun-shan, running west-ijorth-wesfc, parallel to the Nan-shan, 
separates the oases of Kansu from the desert of Ala-shan; it gradually 
bends from about Su-tshou onwards, away from the west-north-west, into 



190 


THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [partiv 

the west-south- west direction of the Anembar-ula, and, maintaining this 
direction, It reaches in the meridian of Yui-myn-sjan the north border of 
the Richthofen range, and at the same time bounds to the north-west the 
rdgion of the oases of Kansu. 

The much more important Richthofen range describes west of the 
middle Su-lei-khe the same curve from west-north-west to west-south-west, 
and under the name of Shi-bao-shan follows for a certain distance the 
direction of the Anembar-ula. The Tolai-shan flattens out before it accom- 
plishes the bend ; in this way the space situated within the bend of the 
Richthofen range comes to be divided into two parts, the oasis of Tshou- 
ma-er and the plain of Sua-dintse. 

The Da-sjue-shan extends further to the west-north- west, and undergoes 
in the Peak of the Bend a sudden deflexion out of the direction of the 
Nan-shan into that of the Anembar-ula. Somewhat further west the 
strike returns in a sigmoidal curve to the direction of the Nan-shan ; 
whether it is bent again before encountering the Shi-bao-shan is not 
known, but, judging by the course of the outer border of the Anembar-ula 
and the heights of Baigur, it seems likely. 

The Ye-ma-shan is a coulisse of the Anembar-ula formed of ancient 
rocks and advancing to the east. 

The Humboldt range makes a bend by which it passes completely into the 
main range of the Anembar-ula. But the bend is far gentler and more open 
than in the northern chains. For this reason the plain of Syrtyn, which 
it encloses, is broader and larger than the areas within the northern arcs. 

Neither of the north-westerly branches of the Ritter range is long 
enough to accomplish the bend, and both disappear in the plain of Syrtyn, 
like the Tolai-shan on the south border of the Tshou-ma-er. 

Even the elongated coulisse of Syrtyn-Makhain-ula, which continues 
the west-north-westerly direction of the south Kuku-nor and the Musch- 
ketow range, does not quite reach a junction with the Altyn-tag. The same 
is true of the northern coulisses of the Tsaidam. In this way the plain of 
Syrtyn is left in communication with that of Tsaidam. 

A long and very remarkable coulisse valley, the valley of the Winds , 
discovered by Prjewalski, unites the Tsaidam with the depression of the 
Yarkand-darya and reaches the latter south of latitude 38° N. Although 
this valley traverses the whole range, the great traveller describes it as 
a longitudinal valley. In the west the Tchertchen Darya issues from it : 
then the valley bottom rises and reaches a height of 12,900 feet ; towards 
lake Gass it again sinks to 9,300 feet 2 . 

3 Prjewalski, Fourth journey into Central Asia, from Kiakhta to the sources of the 
Yellow River. Exploration of the north border fcf Thibet and journey to the Lob-nor, publ. 
by the Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., St. Petersb., passim ; also Delmar Morgan, The Orography 
of Northern Tibet, Supplementary Papers, R. Geogr. Soc.,^ London, 1890, III, Part I, 



VALLEY OF THE WINDS 


191 


CH. V] 


The trend-lines of the western Kuen-luen, as sketched by Bogdano- 
witsch, show, however, that here too the same relations exist between the 
eastern and western range as further north. This is clearly revealed by 
the* angle formed in the direction of lake Gass, on the one hand by the 
Tshimen-tag, representing the western Kuen-luen, and on the other by the 
south Tsaidam, representing the Nan-shan ; though these ranges do not 
come into contact with each other. But the chains corresponding to the 
Nan-shan describe an arc similar to that of the Humboldt range ; thus the 
south Tsaidam (WNW.) turns towards the Dimnalik (WSW.), and the 
Columbus chain (Nargun-ulan) to the Ajalik-tag and the Tokus-dawan ; 
thus it happens also that the valley of the Winds is completely enclosed by 
parallel coulisses directed to the west-south-west. Thus again the elevated 



Fig. 11. The Valley of the Winds. (After Bogdanowitsch.) 

« , b Gneiss and crystalline schists ; 7 granite ; 5 diabase, diorite, &c. ; ir porphyry ; 
dj d x Devonian ; c Carboniferous ; /, / faults. 

region of lake Kum-kul is closed towards the north by an arcuate 
barrier. 

One of the sections, drawn by Bogdanowitsch through the western 
Kuen-luen, crosses the valley of the Winds. Here the first and most 
northerly chain, the Altyn-t»g, is formed of Devonian with intruded granite 
bosses, precisely like the Russian chain in the south-west. The second 
chain, the Yussup-alyk-tag, associated with Tshiman-tag, is a great range of 
gneias. The valley of the Winds corresponds to a Carboniferous syncline. 
As the section is continued, a little further west, towards the south it meets 
first the opposite limb of the Carboniferous syncline, next steeply inclined 
Devonian, and then the great granite mountain of Kysyk-ungu-inen-tjure, 
with Devonian again on the further side. Beyond this mountain rises the 
Ajalik-tag, where Bogdanowitsch found middle Devonian corals at a great 
height, and then the range sinks to the basin of the Ajag-kum-kul, which 

• 

pp* 69-76; and C. Diener in Peterm. Mitth., 1889, p. 34 et seq., map by C. Schmidt; 
and Bogdanowitsch, Mitth. Geogr. Ge s. Wien, 1895, pp. 516-574. 



192 THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [partiv 

lies at a height of 13,000 feet. Beyond this broad plain rises the lofty 
Prjewalski range (Akka-tag) trending east and west \ 

'Just as the Tshou-ma-er and Sua-dintse are a repetition of the space 
within the Pestraja Grjada, so the region south of the Da-sjue-shan, in the 
midst of which rises the Ye-ma-shan, is a repetition of the Tshou-ma-er 
arid the Sua-dintse ; the Syrtyn, lying within the arc of the Humboldt 
range, is a repetition of the Sua-dintse ; the Tsaidam repeats the Syrtyn, 
and the elevated Tbasin of lake Kum-kul repeats the Tsaidam. 

As the western Kuen-luen and the Nan-shan become more remote from 
one another towards the south, so these interspaces advance further and 
further towards the south-west, and at the same time the arcs become less 
pronounced. The vertex of the arc of the Lun-shan lies between lat. 98° 
and 99° E., that of south Tsaidam between lat. 89° and 90° E., in the 
Prjewalski chain the arc is but slightly curved. 

Many chains of the Nan-shan, such as the Tolai-shan, Ritter and north 
Tsaidam, do not reach the bend to the western Kuen-luen. But all these 
chains, trending to the north-west or west-north-west, belong to the Nan- 
shan and not to the western Kuen-luen. The chains of this range trend 
towards the border of the basin of the Yarkand-Darya and to the Mus-tag- 
ata, those of the Nan-shan to the east-south- east. 

Every chain of the Nan-shan which approaches within a certain 
distance of the border of the depression of the Yarlcand-Darya is deflected 
into the direction of the arc of the ivestern Kuen-luen and becomes a part of 
this range . Bogdanowitsch speaks, not unfittingly, of the ‘ drawn-in ends ’ 
of certain chains of the western Nan-shan. 

The relation of the two ranges to each other resembles that already 
described in the case of the ranges which meet on the Jhelam (I, p. 443, 
PI. IV). There certain folds pass over from the region of the Himalaya 
into that of the Iranian chains, and a re-entrant angle marks the line of 
encounter between the two directions of movement ; it is the same here, 
and the chief difference lies in the fact that the western part of these 
mountains is less developed, and that, owing to the divergence of the two 
parts, the syntaxis flattens out more rapidly towards the south. 

To one accustomed to consider the continuity of the folds as the basis 
of classification, it would certainly seem unnatural to assign the two halves 
of a continuous folded range, such as the Anembar-ula and Humboldt 
mountains, to mountain groups so different from one another as the western 
Kuen-luen and Nan-shan; but this continuity only indicates a certain 
common dependence in the formation of the folds. Bogdanowitsch thinks 
it probable that the folding was contemporaneous in the two ranges. This 

f 

1 Bogdanowitsch, Geological investigations ih east Turkestan (Works of the expedition 
to Tibet directed by M. W. Piewtzow, II), pubL by the Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1892, 
4to, pi. IV. 



SURVEY OF SYNTACTIC CHAINS 


m 


CH* V] 

is certainly true of the most recent movements, but there are traces of 
a more profound influence exerted by the Kuen-luen which are not yet 
completely understood. Ldczy has already referred to directions of strike 
crossing each other lattice-like in the Nan-shan * 1 ; in this connexion, 
according to Obrutschew, should be mentioned the c^ook or sharp sigmoidal 
flexure in the Peak of the Bend of the Da-sjue-shan ; as well as the 
divergent structure of the Ye-ma-shan, and of other chains remote from 
the region of syntaxis ; in the Tolai-slian, for example* where in the 
midst of the Nan-shan^ the east-north-east or north-east direction of the 
western Kuen-luen makes an unexpected appearance. One very striking 
example given by Obrutschew is afforded by the region of the Da-khe 
in the Richthofen mountains, where supra-Carboniferous sandstone, with 
a north-west strike (290° to 305°) and steep dip to the south-west, makes 
an elbow-like bend into a north-east strike (40°) and steep dip to the 
north-west, and then returns soon after to its original strike and dip 2 . 
This is a sigmoidal twist, in which the dip varies with the strike. In 
another case, in the eastern Richthofen range, deflexions from west-north- 
west to due west and north-east appear to occur in ancient Palaeozoic beds, 
but do not affect the supra-Carboniferous sandstone. 

Let us now pass the facts in review. 

All the mountain chains dealt with in this chapter fall into two groups. 
The first of these trends between west-north-west and north-west; the 
second, east-north-east. In many cases they are conjoined in arcs. 

The first group includes the Lun-shan, and all the chains of the Nan- 
shan, with the exception of the Ye-ma-shan, next the south Tsaidam, Marco 
Polo, and others. 

The second group includes the San-sjan-tsy, the gneiss chain of 
Tsha-tien with the Pestraja Grjada, the Shi-bao-slian, Ye-ma-shan, 
Anembar-ula, Altyn-tag, Tshimen-tag ; further, the Dimnalik, Tokusdawan, 
Russian chain, and others. 

The first group is connected by its disposition and direction with 
the Thian-shan and the Bei-shan. 

The second group must be included in the western Kuen-luen , and 
forms pfLrt of the* girdle around the basin of the Yarkand-dai'ya . 

The Altaides . Directing our attention to any single mountain chain, 
such as the Caucasus, Carpathians, Pyrenees, or Appalachians, we may 
inquire whether its structure is symmetrical or asymmetrical, on which 
side its foreland lies, whether it is divided into several coulisses, and so 
on. But the several ranges of the ancient vertex do not lend themselves 
to such an inquiry. They owe their outer form, as well as their internal 

1 L6czy, Die wissenschaftlichen Ergebnisse der Reise . . . ia Ostasien, p. 662. 

2 Obrutschew, Central Asia, II, pp. 145 and 163. The place lies on the brook 
Kammenistoi, east of the meridian of Su-tshou. 

SOLLAS III n 



m 


THE ALTAI AND THE ALTAIDES [partiv 

structure m a very general and extensive process of folding and subsequent 
disjunctive dislocation, and perhaps also in isolated cases to particularly 
Jong granite bands which reveal themselves in the relief of the country. 
In ' the east, as on the Gasimur, for example, where the discordant 
Devonian is folded, it is possible that posthumous folding may have taken 
place in addition. 

As a rule the chains belonging to the first group provide us with 
long processes running with the strike, and the obstacles which have 
checked the development of the folds are obvious. But in the mountains 
of the vertex there is much less independence. There are signs of 
back-folding towards the amphitheatre, and we observe on a still larger 
scale the march of a common folding towards the exterior, namely towards 
the south-east, south and south-west. 

The universality and the persistence of the folding movement are 
revealed not only by the horseshoe-shaped folds of the Angara series 
in the centre of the ancient vertex ; the same feature is repeated in 
Minuzinsk ; but even outside the vertex, in the basin of the upper Amur and 
in Manchuria, the plains themselves lying between the mountain chains 
everywhere present more or less obvious traces of folding. Such traces 
are to be met with extending upwards even as far as the Gobi deposits. 

With so extensive a movement it only remains, in tracing out the 
trend-lines, to discover the region where this general movement originated. 
I use the term region because, little as we know of the detailed structure 
of the ancient vertex, yet it is now quite evident that the movement 
issued neither from a point nor from a straight line, but in all probability 
from a region bounded by an arc convex towards the south, such as 
would connect the directions of the Baikal and the Sayan. 

But there exist in the interior of Asia other mountain chains, risirfg 
high into the region of eternal snow, which are more recent than the 
ancient vertex and different in direction. They are sometimes so closely 
crowded together that the bottoms of the valleys maintain over long 
distances an absolute height of 4,000 meters or even more, and they 
present stupendous and general elevations above which the relative 
height of the snow-peaks is comparatively trifling. The central Kuen- 
luen affords an example of this structure. But wherever these mighty 
mountain masses are cut into by deep transverse valleys, as between 
Min-tshou and the ‘ Red Basin,’ we only observe crowded folds ; and if the 
whole of the central Kuen-luen were worn down to the level of the sea> 
it would present on the whole an appearance similar to that of the 
ancient vertex, that is a great number of parallel folds, interrupted here 
and there by the enlarged base of «a granite mass. It is the same with 
the eastern Gobi ; this also is a sea of more or less denuded folda 

In these systems of crowded folds the separate chains do not possess 



195 


ch.v] FOLDS OF THE ANCIENT VERTEX 

the same degree of individuality as is observed in the Caucasus and 
similar chains; and thus it happens, as in the Nan-sban, for example, 
that we find, one after another, chains formed sometimes of gneiss, 
sometimes of sedimentary formations, the Carboniferous in particular; 
this is intelligible, directly we regard these chains as waves belonging 
to a common movement; but considered separately, their diverse com- 
position becomes incomprehensible. This unity of the movement accounts 
for the absence, within the chains, of a contrast, such as occurs in the 
Alps and the Himalaya, with an alien foreland of different structure. It 
is the difference which exists between the waves of the open sea and 
the breakers on the shore. 

In a remarkable lecture delivered on the 3rd May, 1886, Tscherski 
made known his views on the structure of Inner Asia, views which were 
far in advance of the theories of his time x . 

When he had fully recognized the convergence of the folded ranges 
of the Baikal and the Sayan towards the region of the southern Baikal, 
and had obtained a clear idea of the arc formed by these vast mountain 
tracts, he came to the conclusion that the western limit of this arc was 
to be found in about lat. 54° N., on the upper Kan, that is at the boundary 
between the east and west Sayan. From here onwards we again meet 
with a dominant direction opposed to that of the Sayan, or to the west- 
south-west and south-west. This direction is followed not only by the 
west Sayan but also by the western Altai almost down to lat. 50° N., 
especially by the Kusnetzkii Alatau and Salai'r. On the Bukhtarma 
and on the Irtish, towards Semipalatinsk, the direction turns again to the 
west-north-west. 

In a later passage Tscherski appears to distinguish not two, but three 
"arcs concave to the north, namely the Baikal arc, the Sayan arc (by w T hich 
we must understand west Sayan), and the arc of Altai. 

Tscherski’s keen glance penetrated yet further. He had heard of the 
recently discovered evidence that the chains of the Thian-shan are 
continued towards Europe, and he at once recognized that the Tarbagatai, 
Boro-Khoro, and all the other long ranges of the Thian-shan, follow the 
direction of th^ mountains on the Irtish. € It would thus seem/ Tscherski 
adds in a note, ‘ as though the folding forces, shifting gradually from east 
to west , had successively affected increasingly younger deposits/ 

We certainly perceive that towards the exterior, and consequently 
also towards the west, more and more recent marine deposits take part in 
the structure of the Eurasiatic folds. Correspondingly we recognize towards 
the interior indications of great antiquity. The folds of Archaean gneiss 

• 

1 J. D. Tscherski, On the tectonics of the mountainous country forming part of the 
north-western region of central Asia, Trav. Soc. Nat. Saint-Petersb., 1886, XVlI, Heft 2, 
pp. 51-58. 


0 2 



196 


THE ALTAI AND THE ALT AIDES [part nr 

on lake Baikal were formed and denuded in pre-Cambrian times, and 
towards the west the ancient vertex has arrested, like a horst, or, to use 
lacherski’s expression, like ‘ an immovable wall/ the further development 
of the eastern branches of the Altai. But that did not prevent the 
formation of posthumous folds within the spa^e bounded by the pre- 
Cambrian folds and their ancient fracture, nor the plication, far out on 
the Gasimur and near to Urga, of the unconformable Devonian sediments, 
and some perhaps even still younger, which are thrown into great folds 
parallel to the ancient vertex. 

In considering the relative age of these great unities of the earth's 
crust we will therefore use the terms c old ' or 4 young ' almost in the sense 
they bear when we compare the age of living persons. * 

Directly we adopt this point of view it becomes more important to know 
when these various tectonic movements have commenced than when they 
have come to a close. Considered thus, the displacement towards the west, 
conjectured by Tscherski, has actually taken place. 

The hypothetical axis of the constriction of the Archaean folds within 
the overfolded syncline of Olkhon lies in the Primorskii Khrebet, near 
Buguldejka, and nearly coincides with the meridian of 106°. 

The constriction of the posthumous folds of the Angara series within 
the amphitheatre may be said to coincide approximately with the meridian 
of 101°. 

The bend of the horseshoe-shaped Devonian folds of Minuzinsk, on the 
Yenisei below the Tuba, follows the meridian of 91°. 

If we include the bend of the Altai in the Bielukha in this comparison, 
then the centre of this bend is approximately marked by the meridian 
of 87°. 

The Altai rises ivest of the ancient Baikalian vertex and of the inter 
mediate region of Minuzinsk , as an independent and younger vertex. 
Towards the east and south its development has been checked. The most 
important of its eastern branches, the Kusnetekii Alatau, probably proceeds 
from the region north of the upper Katunj : it passes lake Teletzk on the 
east and, describing a very gentle arc, reaches the plain east of the town 
of Tomsk. It is probable that south-east of this branch come c other 
branches, slightly divergent from one another, which extend to the Saksar 
and the Izych, near the town of Minuzinsk. This quite exterior region of 
the Altai describes an arc to the south. In the middle of this arc stand 
the highest peaks. The western part presents on the Irtish a north-west 
strike, but it is not possible to assign a boundary on the south-west to the 
younger vertex . 

In order to obtain an approximate idea of the configuration which is 
thus developed, let us imagine the whole of that part of Asia which lies to 
the south-west to be covered with water. Let %n impulse originate from 



THE ALTAIDES 


197 


CH. V] 

the Irtish or the Tarbagatai and let us follow its effects towards the north- 
west. Numerous long mountain waves arise one behind the other ; at first 
they are more or less convex towards the south-west, as in the branches 
of the Thian-shan. They broaden out and elongate, or diverge from one 
another, where they find room enough, as on the Tchu and the Ili. They 
crowd together and rise, towering up, where the space grows narrower, 
as in the Nan-shan. Sometimes they sweep past obstacles, stiff and 
straight, as in the Tsin-ling-shan, continually seeking a lateral prolonga- 
tion; sometimes, on the contrary, they are impeded by these obstacles, 
bent and turned aside. At first the universally predominant direction 
is to the north-west or west-north-west. It is these folds or waves that 
we group together as the Altaides. 

In Europe folded ranges have collapsed, and within the outer frame of 
horsts new folded ranges have arisen. In Asia we witness similar events, 
though on this continent it is not peripheral chains which collapse, but 
parts of an ancient vertex. 

We will now inquire into the further effects of these processes. 



CHAPTER VI 


THE EASTERN ALTAIDES 1 

Ordos. The mountains on the Hoang-ho. Khar-narin-ula and Ala-shan. Bifurcation 
of eastern Nan-shan. Summary. Middle and eastern Kuen-luen. Separation of the 
Burman and Yunnan chains. Western branch. Mandalay. Mass of Cambodge. 
Southern branch. The Red River. Summary. The Malay Peninsula. Banda arc. 
Supposed fragments of New Guinea. Borneo. Celebes. Halmahera. Survey of the 
eastern Altaides. 

Ferdinand von Richthofen has shown that throughout the whole of 
northern China, from the lava-fields of Mongolia to the valley of the Wei, 
and even as far as the Hoang-ho near Hsi-ngan-fu, undisturbed Cambrian 
sediments rest unconformably upon folded Archaean rocks (II, p. 185). 
This region also comprises Shan-tung and Lian-tung, and, so far as existing 
observations extend, Korea as well. 

This feature is so remarkable that, in spite of the divergent strike, which 
prevails from the spring of Ikhe-ude to the south-east of Mongolia, the 
question might be raised whether the ancient vertex does not reappear in 
this region. To this question the answer is furnished by F. von Richthofen. 
To the east, in Shan-tung and Lian-tung, the strike of the most ancient 
granites and primitive gneisses is constantly north-north-west, and is there- 
fore not one of the directions of the vertex. On the other hand, in the 
regions off north Tshili and north Shansi, lying near the Gobi, where the 
most ancient tocks are represented by hornblendic gneiss and chloritic 
gneiss, gentle folding prevails with a strike to the east-north-east 2 . 

With regard to the latter region we may certainly ask whether the 
Baikal wing of the vertex does not actually extend into it. It is certain 
in any case that the Sinian mole represents a rigid element in the later 
development of the structure of Asia. 

F. von Richthofen, however, has also ascertained the following facts : — 
the grill of Peking, formed chiefly of ancient rocks, terminates towards 
the west in an area of subsidence. The western end of the Hsi-tshou-shan, 
near Hsin-tshou, proves this clearly, and the general relations show that 
the facts must be similar in the case of the Wutai-shan and Nan-tou-shan. 

The beds lie fairly flat, both those of the ancient Sinian stage, resting 
on gneiss, and those of the supra-Carboniferous sandstone. But wherever 

• 

1 Revised by R. D. Oldham, Esq., late Superintendent of the Geological Survey of India. 

2 F. von Richthofen, China, II, p. 706 et passim. 



HSI-TSHOU-SHAN 


oh. vij 


199 


the Sinian stage is preserved it occupies a higher level than the supra- 
Carboniferous sandstone. 

‘ This arrangement may be explained on the supposition that the plateau 
(of the supra-Carboniferous or plateau sandstone) marks the commencement 
of a deeply subsided area terminating in a straight line along that part of 
the primitive continent Which has remained in place. How far it extends 
to the west, and in what way the structure of the mountains is modified 
towards the region of Ordos, are questions which must be left unanswered * 1 . 

This was written in 1882 ; we now know that the whole of Ordos 
belongs to this sunken platform, and that the Hoang-ho, in the easterly 
section of its course marks, approximately, the border of this region, the 
general outline of which is almost rectangular. 

The series superposed on the Archaean foundation of the Sinian mole 
consists, as we have previously pointed out, of marine Cambrian (Sinian) 
sediments, then of marine sediments of upper Carboniferous age, then of 
coal measures, and the very thick plateau sandstone, or supra- Carbon i- 


N. 


Valley of the Hsin-tshou 


Hsi-t fehmJL- Skhau. 


S 



Fig. 12. West face of ths Hsi4shou-shan. (After F. v. Richthofen.) 


ferous sandstone of Richthofen. With this we reach the period of those 
varied terrestrial floras which characterize the Angara series in Siberia, 
Mongolia, and Manchuria. 

It is the younger members of this series which, as we have mentioned 
above, are to be seen let down near Hsin-tshou at the western end of the 
Hsi-tshou-shan^ It is these also which form, further south, the tableland 
of Shansi (with the exception of the Ho-shan) and itsstep-Uke lines towards 
the east and south (II, p. 190). Towards the west, however, beyond that 
part of the Hoang-ho which flows to the south, this tableland slopes away 
gently through north Shansi and Kansu beneath the vast sheet of loess 
which extends from south Ordos towards the valley of the Wei. 

Obrutschew has furnished detailed descriptions of Ordos. Stretching 
far and wide in the north are the # sandy pterins, and the sand is piled up 

1 F. von Richthofen, China, II, fig. 80, pp. 372, 390 et seq. 



m 


THE EASTERN ALTAIDES 


[part IV 

m vast ma w ob the north side of the Great Wall, south-east of Nin-sia- 
fu. South of the wall the loess spreads out over wide tracts towards the 
east ; the supra-Carboniferous sandstone and the coal measures may still 
tM traced beneath the mantle of loess and the gypsiferous deposits of the 
Gobi stage. The mountain ranges Lu-guan-lin and Bo-jui-shan which are 
marked on our maps have no existence, and towards the south the high 
plateaux of loess continually increase in breadth \ 

L. von L<5czy, who has travelled through the south of the country from 
Hsi-ngan-fu, i.e. from the south-east, in the direction of Lan-tshou, found 
the supra-Carboniferous sandstone and traces of Carboniferous underlying 
the loess. Near Ping-lean-fu he reached the ridge of Lo-pan-shan (long. 
106° 45' E., lat. 35° 45' N.), 25 kilometers in breadth ; it is an oblique 
syncline of intensely folded Carboniferous limestone and grey sandstone, 
with its axis dipping to the west. Elsewhere in Ordos the same rocks lie 
horizontal beneath the loess. 

Somewhat west of the Lo-pan-shan, chloritic schists appear for the first 
time ; they are again followed by loess for a distance of 280 kilometers, 
and then, a little to the south-east of the town of Lan-tshou, gneiss crops 
out in the rocky gorge of the Hoang-ho and strikes east-north-east 
(E. 30° N.) 1 2 . 

We may conclude, therefore, that a broad and level platform of supra- 
Carboniferous sandstone occupies the whole space within the bend of the 
Hoang-ho, extending to the Lo-pan-shan, where folding appears, and to 
the valley of the Wei. Measured in the meridian of 108° E., this gives 
more than seven degrees of latitude as the breadth of the platform. 

The platform is not bounded merely by the bend of the river. Every- 
where the Gobi lies higher than the Ordos, and the descent from one to the 
other is marked by a series of rocky chains, often steeply precipitous 
towards Ordos. These chains are mostly coulisses arranged one behind 
the other in echelon, and some of the coulisses cross over to the right bank 
of the Hoang-ho. To obtain a closer knowledge of them we will return 
to the north as far as the escarpment near Hsin-tshou, and then, turning to 
the north-north- west, we will proceed still further and cross the Mongolian 
frontier. 

The mountains on the Hoang-ho . If, as we proceed from Peking to 
Kalgan, we abandon the road near Hsuen-hwa-fu to take a westerly course, 
and then follow the Yang- ho on the road to Kuku-Khoto, we shall reach 

1 Obrutschew, Orographieal and geological sketch of central Mongolia, Ordos, east 

Kansu, and west Shansi, Izviestija Irnp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., XXX, pp. 231-253 ; Central 
Asia, I, pp. 188-266. f 

2 Ldczy, East Asia, p. 492 et seq. Subsequently Futterer crossed this isolated range ; 
Futtercr, Durch Asien, I. Geographische Charakter-Bilder, 8vo, Berlin, 1901, p. 471 
et seq. 



201 


gh. vi] THE MOUNTAINS OF THE HOANG-HO 

the edge of the basalt sheets of south Mongolia. We strike it near the 
Christian mission-station of Oerr-shi-san-hau, on the far side of the gneiss 
range of Kulu-shan, which runs to the north-east. From here onwards — 
more particularly from Kuku-khoto — long mountain ranges succeed each 
other, and border the n^rth bank of the Hoang-ho up to its north-western 
bend. # The most important accounts of these little-visited regions have 
been furnished by Armand David and Prjewalski 1 . 

A little west of Oerr-shi-san-hau (in about lat. 40° 47' N., long. 113° 18' E.) 
lies a sheet of water surrounded by lavas. David speaks of it as an ‘ etang ’ ; 
Prjewalski names it‘Kirnor.’ From amidst the lavas rises the chain of 
Shara-kkada , probably so called from its yellow limestone. It runs to the 
south-west towards Kuku-khoto. Fifty kilometers further west follows 
the parallel chain of Suma-khad«> higher than the preceding one, but, like 
it, rocky only along its borders, and formed almost entirely of granite : its 
foot lies at a level of 1600-1700 meters. North of Kuku-Khoto extends 
a long narrow range, perhaps a continuation of the Shara-khada; as it 
approaches the Hoang-ho it turns from a south-west to a west-south-west 
direction. On many maps it bears the name of In-shan . According to 
Prjewalski, this name applies to the whole of the mountains which border 
the west-to-east course of the Hoang-ho. North of the town of Bautu it 
runs like a high, steep wall along the Hoang-ho. David calls this range 
the Ouratau. It was crossed by this enterprising explorer as he travelled 
from Sertshi (a little east of Bautu) towards the north. After traversing 
a ridge of granite and porphyry he reached a fairly broad zone of coal 
measures and sandstone; beyond Tshe-kuen he crossed successively the 
gneiss and granite range of Ou-than-djo, the high plain of Ou-teuini-gol, 
the gneiss range Tshangini-ula (which runs parallel with the Ouratou), 
the arid plain of Mao-min-ngan ; and once again a range of gneiss. After 
this fashion is the mountain land north of the Hoang-ho broken up along 
parallel lines 2 . 

The In-shan (Ouratou) after a course of 250 kilometers ends suddenly, 
according to Prjewalski, in the rocky range of Muni-ula (Wula-shan of 
Rockhill), which appears to present the same characters. The most westerly 
partly of the In-shan, Syrun-bulyk, and Muni-ula consist of granite, gneiss, 
granulite, and hornblende rocks, together with porphyry and comparatively 
recent eruptive rocks. Muni-ula attains a height of more than 8,000 feet ; 

1 P. Armand David, Journal d’un Voyage en Mongolie, fait en 1866, Nouv. Arch. 
Mus. Hist, nat., Paris, 1867, IIP Bullet., pp. 18-96, and 1868, IV* Bullet., pp. 1-88, maps ; 
N. von Prjewalski, Reisen in der Mongolei, im Gebiete der Tungusen und den Wiisten 
Nord-Tibet’s, German trans. by A. Kohn, 8vo, Jena, i877, pp. 120, 134, 217 et passim. 

On the other side of the last gneiss ra*hge mentioned above David marks in vol. IV, 
pi. 2 (Journal d’un Voyage en Mongolie, &c.), a broad plain with two bitter lakes, and 
a more remote granite chain to the north of these. 



202 


THE EASTERN ALTAIDES 


[part IV 

it forms a sharply defined strip 100 kilometers in length and about 
25 kilometers in breadth, and terminates on the west just north of the 
Bo&ng-ho (long. 108° 30' E.). Its aspect is wild and alpine. 

^The oblique coulisse-like arrangement of the chains begins to be notice- 
able from the Kuku-khoto onwards, the eastern end of each chain over- 
lapping the western end of the one lying next to # it on the north ; but as 
we proceed from the point we have now reached this arrangement becomes 
still more clearly pronounced. 

On the north side of the western In-shan lies the short range of Shok- 
hoin-daban, i. e. limestone mountains, and north of this the Sheiten-ula 
forms another coulisse with a direction curving from west-south- west to 
east and west. Here begins the range of the 4 Black mountains/ Khava - 
tia rin-ula, 370 kilometers in length; it curves from a * west-south-west to 
a south-west direction, forming a vast arc, the concave side of which 
encircles the whole of the north-western elbow of the Hoang-ho. Prjewalski 
was acquainted with the steep descent of these mountains to the Hoang-ho 
and with their Archaean rocks ; but here, as in so many other cases, Obrut- 
schew’s observations furnish a new and very peculiar representation of the 
facts 1 . 

The mission station of San-to-khu, on the banks of the Hoang-ho, lies 
at a height of 875 meters. A very broad alluvial plain, traversed by 
abandoned arms of the great river, separates it from the foot of the 
mountains (930 meters). The relative height of the Khara-narin-ula 
amounts here to 1,000 or 1,200 meters only ; near by the chain is cut across 
by a long ravine, Gyr-obo-khundy, with a pass at a height of 1,580 meters. 
The mountains show gneiss and granite, ancient schists, and crystalline 
limestone ; but the strike of these rocks is north-north-east-, and thus does 
not correspond with the trend of the mountain arc. As a consequence, the 
chain is divided into a large number of ranges, crowded together, some 
of which, formed of granite and gneiss, possess rounded outlines, while 
others, formed of schist, weather into sharp peaks. Ravines running with 
the strike cut obliquely into the range, and tfie most important of these is 
the Gyr-obo-khundy. 

The notion, therefore, that there is a single drop from the Gobi towards 
the Ala-shan along the line of the Hoang-ho does not correspond with the 
facts. On the other hand, the formation in oblique coulisses of the In-shan 
and other chains north of the Hoang-ho is probably continued into the 
Khara-narin-ula, and shows that this part of the Gobi has undergone 
a folding movement, directed obliquely against the border of the Ordos 
plateau ; and to this the coulisses are due. 

( 

1 Obrutschew, Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1894, XXX, pp. 239, 243 ; Central 
Asia, II, pp. 434-476. 



KHARA-NARIN-ULA 


208 


CH. Vi] 

This conjecture is confirmed as soon as we pass beyond the Khara- 
narin-ula to those parts of the Gobi which lie towards the north-west. 
All this region stretching far away up to the outrunners of the Gobi- Altai 
is a folded land, Obrutschew has accomplished the journey across the 
Khara-narin-ula to the north-west, but it is impossible to enumerate all 
the ranges which he crossed. Starting from the north-west side of the 
Khara-narin-ula, Archaean rocks prevail for about 90 versts to the north- 
west, and the mountains diminish in height, declining from 1,400 to 1,000 
meters. Then comes a low-lying strip of desert (760 meters) running to 
the north-east, and thereupon porphyry, limestone, and supra-Carboniferous 
sandstone assume a larger share in the composition of the denuded folds. 
The strike is now east and west, and locally even west-north- west. The 
Mount Dsokhe (1,700 meters) shows intrusions of syenite; it is followed 
by many hills of porphyry ; not far beyond these lies the Khurku, and the 
eastern end of the Gobi- Altai is reached 1 2 . 

The difference between the Gobi and Ordos could not be more complete. 
The contrast between the Alps and their foreland, of which, so far, the 
Altaides, regarded as folds of the vertex, have shown no sign, now makes 
its appearance. We have reached the sharply defined border of the Altaides 
and their encounter with the foreland. 

The Khara-narin-ula is continued in the long ridge of Argalintai directed 
to the south-west. It departs further and further from the river, and, 
according to the earlier descriptions, was supposed to terminate at about 
lat. 38° 30' N. in the desert of Ala-shan. This, however, is not the case. 
Much further to the south-west, Kasnokow encountered the long ridge of 
Burguste-ula, which drops steeply in places, precipitously towards the south -. 
Still further to the south-west rise the Gori Yavarai, which were crossed by 
•Koslow. They are 100 versts long and 15 versts broad ; the pass of Oboto- 
daban lies at a height of 5,400 feet. Its south side, says Koslow, presents 
chasms, separating mountains with steeply broken off sides arranged in 
a linear series. This recalls the structure of the principal chain 3 . 

Thus the prolongations of the Khara-narin-ula extend far into the 
desert* almost in the direction of Kan-su and approaching to within 
120 versts of this town. 

As the Khara-narin-ula recedes from the Hoang-ho, new coulisses 
insert themselves in the interval. 

On the right side of the river a long range of chains running to 

1 Obrutschew, Central Asia, II, p. 434 ; at Zalagai, Palaeozoic corals, p. 447. 

2 A. N. Kasnakow, Preliminary report on the journey across the desert of Gobi from 
the temple of Dsurachai-Dazan to that of Tshortynt<yi (in Kansu), Izviestija Imp. ross. 
geogr. Obsch., 1900, XXXVI, pp. 153-169, map, in particular p. 165. 

8 Koslow, Report on the expedition, &c M Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1900, 
XXXV, p. 144. 



204 


THE EASTERN ALTAIDES 


[part IV 

the south rises in about lat. 40° 15' N„ ; in its northern part it is called 
Arbw-ula, and under various names (Oran-teshi, Kantageri, and others) it 
reaches Khara-khoto (lat. 39° 15' N.) ; but as it sinks lower, disappearing 
*4 last beneath the plain, the northern extremity of the lofty Ala skan 
range, also directed to the south, makes its appearance on the left bank of 
the river. 

The town of Nin-sia-fu on the Hoang-ho (lat. 38° 30' N.) lies at a 
height of 1,030 meters ; to the west of it the steep peaks of the Ala-shan 
mountains rise to a height of over 3,000 meters ; on the west flank of the 
mountains lie the sands of Ala-shan at a height of 1350-1500 meters. 

In this region, opposite Nin-sia-fu, the chain is formed of two ranges, 
one on the north, which bears more to the east, an<J one on the south, 
which joins the other on the west. Where these two meet is a pass 
(2,540 meters) which leads to Fu-ma-fu, in the desert. Obrutschew ascended 
this pass and made the unexpected discovery that the whole southern 
range is an anticline of supra-Carboniferous sandstone, coal measures, and 
Carboniferous limestone, overturned towards the east, i. e. towards the 
Hoang-ho. The thickness of the beds no doubt exceeds 3,000 meters ; on 
the east side the whole series is inverted, on the west side it is normal. 
The masses of Sinian limestone which form the debris of the higher peaks 
lead us to suppose that an overthrust occurs near their summits, carrying 
the limestone over the coal measures \ 

Prjewalski ascended the summit of Bugutui (3,300 meters), which lies 
more to the south, and came on quartz-conglomerate 1 2 . 

We now approach another bend of the Hoang-ho between lats. 38 u 
and 3 7° 30' N. Although the river cuts through the north end of the 
Nju-tou-shan range a little south of lat. 38° N., yet once more the bend is, 
on the whole, determined by the structure of the accompanying ranges.* 
For data on this region we must rely almost entirely on Obrutschews 
observations. 

Near Nin-sia-fu, the mountain range of Ayshan-ula begins on the right 
side of the Hoang-ho. It is probably an anticline of Sinian limestone 
partly converted into flow-breccia. In the above-mentioned range of 
Nju-tou-shan, which follows further up the river, the trenc^ is south-gouth- 
west, and corresponds with the change in direction of the river. 
t Still more remarkable are the features on the left bank. Towards the 
south the Ala-shan mountains meet the broad and less lofty range of 
Ye-tou-shan , which Obrutschew describes as a horst ; it is bounded on the 
south by an almost east-and-west fracture, along which the range of 

Nju-sha-shan appears to be let down. Both this and the preceding range 

« 

« 

1 Obratsfchew, Central Asia, 1, p. 809 et seq., in particular p. 326, map. 

3 Prjewalski, Reisen in der Mongolei, 1877, &c., p 4 232. 



oil vi] BEND OF THE HOANG-HO 205 

show beds dipping to the north of north-west ; the general direction of 
the Nju-sha-shan is south-west; it consists of supra-Carboniferous sand- 
stone. The latter also appears in isolated exposures on the Hoang-ho 
itself, which here flows nearly from east to west 1 . 

On the north side of^lhe river the south slope of the Ye-tou-shan, and 
its apparently downthrown foot-hills, stretch far away to the west. Below 
Tshung-wei, near the river, we see an anticline with a strike to south- 
south- west (210°). This completes the bend. 

Rockhill relates that he travelled still further to the west, as far as 
In-pan- shui (about long. 104° E.), along the south side of a range of hills 
called Hsi-shan , about 800 feet (relative) in height ; coal occurs here, and 
red sandstone 2 . Squth of this region lies the long range of Da-tso-bei-shan 
stretching to the west-south- west, with beds of supra-Carboniferous sand- 
stone, dipping uniformly to the south- south-east. 

Additional light may be obtained when the subject is studied in closer 
detail, but in any case it is certain that the broad bend w^hich the Hoang-ho 
describes between lat. 37° 30' and 38° N. corresponds to a deflexion of the 
chain and of the coulisses bordering the river. 

Ldczy had already conjectured that this bending round of the mountain 
ranges on the Hoang-ho stands in some relation to the eastern terminations 
of theNan-shan, and Obrutschew believes that the two chains unite beneath 
the sands of Ala-shan. Indeed, a closer examination of the eastern Nan- 
shan renders it impossible to reject this view. 

In the northern ranges of the eastern Nan-shan Palaeozoic deposits of 
great thickness are dominant, while the southern ranges consist chiefly 
of gneiss and ancient schistose rocks. On the north border of the 
Richthofen mountains a zone of melaphyre occurs in the meridian 
of the Kuku-nor 3 . On the line between Lan-tshou and Ljan-tshou, 
between lats. 36° 30' and 37° 30' N., two of the northern chains advance 
far to the east, covered with snow. The most northerly of these, the 
Mo-mo-shan, situated in th^ continuation of the Richthofen range, under- 
goes a slight diminution in height as it proceeds to the east, and then finds 
its further continuation in the lofty Shi-tshotse-shan. The next range 
whijjji follows gn the south is the Shi-slian ; Obrutschew named its eastern 
continuation the Pin-fan-shan. 


1 Obrutschew, Central Asia, I, p. 387, fig. 88. 

2 W. Woodville Rockhill, Diary of a Journey through Mongolia and Thibet, 8vo, 
Washington (Smithsonian Institution), 1894, pp. 40, 45. 

3 Somewhat further west, in the region of the Khyl-khe, at a locality which would 
correspond to the middle of the south side of the Richthofen range, Potanin long ago 
discovered lower Carboniferous fossils ; ft Wenjukow, The fauna of the lower Carboni- 
ferous of the river Bardun in south Mongolia, Verb. russ. k. min. Ges., 1889, 2nd ser., 
XXY, pp. 210-227. 



206 -THE EASTERN ALTAIDES [paetiv 

In this way the Nan-shan advances eastwards across the meridian of 
Lan-tshou. At the same time the direction begins to bend towards the 
\k-shan. The Mo-mo-shan, it is true, comes hither from the Nan-shan, 
with the prevailing east-south-east direction, but towards the east end of 
Shi-tshotse-shan, and especially close to the coal-pits of the Ta-la-pu, the 
general direction has turned to the east-north-east. Here, however, we are 
already on the meridian of RoekhilPs Hsi-shan, mentioned above, and close 
to that of the Da-tso-bei-shan \ 

The direction to the north-east or east-north-east is indeed visible even 
in the midst of the eastern Nan-shan, particularly in the Archaean rocks, 
which form the cliffs on the banks of the river Si-nin down to the mouth 
of the Da-tun 1 2 . But we do not see any continuation ,of this direction, in 
the adjacent chains ; they follow the general strike to the west-north- west. 
It is not till we go far to the east, and enter the gorge of the Hoang-ho, 
below Lan-tshou, that we again encounter gneiss with a north-east strike. 
Whether or not this locality corresponds to a deflected continuation of the 
Potanin- Amasurgu range of the Nan-shan system must be left to later 
investigations to decide. 

The south Kuku-nor chain, consisting of Archaean rocks, is one of the 
mightiest ranges of the Nan-shan, but towards the south-east it sinks 
rapidly to a trifling height. The Gobi deposits, which in the valley of the 
Si-nin, as in that of the Hoang-ho, are very thick and of wide extent, 
rest against the south side of the south Kuku-nor ; they lie flat at its foot, 
but further up the slopes attain a steep inclination (70°-80°). They prove 
once again the existence of movements at a recent period 3 . 

South of the town of Lan-tshou there rises, according to Obrutschew’s 
account, the range of Guan-shan, which consists of Carboniferous and supra- 
Carboniferous sandstone. (Pass at a height of 2,690 meters.) The strike • 
is variable, and, indeed, as often west-north-west as north-east. Beyond the 
Guan-shan, however, a broad plateau of Gobi beds, more than 60 versts 
across, extends to the south of the town of Ifci-dao and up to the foot of 
the Tshan-fan-shan mountains. It is more than 2,000 meters high; the 
river Tao and its tributaries have sunk their beds in it. Obrutschew 
considers the Tshan-fan-shan as the first of that group o/ chains \yhich 


1 Obrutschew, Central Asia, I, p. 359 et seq., for Shi-tshotse-shan ; on p. 364, an arc 
open to the north described by the strike of these beds is indicated south of Ta-la-pu, 
which possibly marks exactly the position of the bend ; p. 418 et seq., for a section of the 
Pin-fan-shan ; it consists (p. 400) of metam orphic schist, augite porphyry, and tuffs, and 
is only separated from the Shi-shan by erosion. 

2 Loczy, Die wissenschaftlichen i^rgebnisse der Reise des Grafen Bela Szechenyi in 
Ostasien, I, pp. 582 et seq., 605 et seq., 645 { for the relations between the Potanin 
mountains and the Kuku-nor see the little map on p. 603. 

8 Obrutschew, Central Asia, North China and Nan-shan, II, p. 97. 



VALLEY OF THE HOANG-HO 


207 


CH. Vi] 

proceeds towards the Tsin-ling-shan \ In any case, we have now reached 
a point south of the north-eastern deflexions to the Ala-shan. Possibly 
the plateau of Di-dao is continued towards the west into the plateau south- 
west of Bale-kun-gomi, which is bounded by the Koko-beili ; but it does 
not extend further in tl^at direction. 

In all probability this plateau marks the bifurcation of the chains of , 
the Nan-shan, that is, the separation of those folds which are arrested by 
the border of Ordos from those which maintain their direction undisturbed. 

Summary. — Ordos has disclosed itself as a plateau of the foreland; the 
Gobi of the Ala-shan, on the other hand, as a part of the folded region of 
the Altaides : the Hoang-ho, in its course from south to north and then 
from west to east 4 thus occupies a position similar to that of the Guadal- 
quivir in front of the Betic cordillera, or the Ganges in front of tlie 
Himalaya. The isolated coulisses, such as the Arbis-ula, which occur on 
the right side of the river, recall those fragments of Persian foot-hills which 
crop out at R6ri and Hyderabad, on the left side of the Indus. 

To the north-west and the west of this elbow of the Hoang-ho we may 
recognize , then , concordantly with what those explorers best acquainted 
with the country have supposed, an arcuate structure which belongs, 
indeed, to the Altaides, but in which the distinction between the ancient 
and more recent vertex disappears in a peculiar manner, or, in other 
words, in which the Sayanides and Altaides merge into one another. 

Starting in the west from the Adji-bogdo of the Gobi-Altai, and 
therefore from the ancient vertex, a long are advances into the desert ; 
it runs through Baga-bogdo, Koko-tymyrty, and a number of bare ridges 
of rock, to Tostu and Noin-bogdo, thus crossing the whole desert. 

South of this arc, in the Shjurten-kholy-gobi, we ought to see the 
coulisses of the Thian-shan ; but they have dwindled away in the form of 
a wedge, along with the Karlyk-tag and Emir-tag. 

In consequence of this disappearance the Bei-shan attains, on the 
whole, the east and west direction ; but its northern branches show, on the 
Edsin-gol, the characteristic bend to the east-north-east and north-east ; 
it is seen, for instance, in the Boro-ola, which crosses the Edsin-gol to 
become the Koko-ula, and in like manner in the Edsin-ula. 

Now a long range advances from the north-east into the desert. It 
comes from the elbow of the Hoang-ho itself, that is, from the spot where 
the crowding of the folds is at a maximum. It is composed of the coulisses 
of Khara-narin-ula, the Argalintai, the Burguste-ula, and the mountains of 
Yavarai ; it runs in the direction of the town of Kansu. 

Next the mighty chains of the Nan-shan approach from the west. The 
most northerly of these equally acjapt thenfselves to the great system, and 

* Obrutschew, Central Asia, North China and Nan-shan, II, pp. 352, 357. 



208 THE EASTERN ALTAIDES [part iv 

accomplish i-hp same bend as the northern chains of the Bei-shan, though 
somewhat further to the east, on the other side of the meridian of Ljan- 
tsfjbu. The first bend is effected in the line of the Richthofen — Mo-mo- 
shan^Shi-tshotse-shan mountains, on to the coal pits of Ta-la-pu ; the 
second bend in the Shi-shan and Pin-fan-shan. 

o 

It is impossible to say precisely how far this inflexion of the folds 
towards Ordos extends to the south ; possibly indications of it may still be 
observed in the gneiss of the Hoang-ho valley near Lan-tshou. But while 
on the east these chains have been bent back, on the west they remain 
closely crowded, and from the termination of the inflexion they pursue 
their course undisturbed to the west-north-west. This is also true of the 
chains south of the plateau of Di-dao, which probably marks the bifurcation. 

Thus the whole of the central Gobi, together with the desert of 
Ala-shan, may be regarded as the site of a system of folds, dammed up 
to the east against the foreland of Ordos ; continued towards the south 
in the homologous folds of the central Kuen-luen ; extending far towards 
the west, up to the syntaxis of the western Nan-shan with the Altyn-tag 
and Anembar-ula, and opening out towards the north-west beyond the 
Shjurten-kholy-gobi to make way for the vast virgation of the Thian-shan. 

Let us now cast a glance over the coulisses on the Hoang-ho, from the 
Khara-narin-ula through the chains of In-shan down to tfie north-easterly 
trending Shara-khada, east of Kuku-khoto. As regards position and direc- 
tion these chains seem to associate themselves harmoniously with the great 
ranges of the grill of Peking up to the Hong-shan and l>eyond, where the 
Cambrian strata are disposed in a platform. They are bounded by lines 
resembling flexures, and their beds show a general dip towards the north- 
north- west, i. e. towards Mongolia. Richthofen has suggested that these 
lines are bent near Kai-ping and continued on the west side of the valley 
of Mukden.; if this should prove to be the case then the resemblance 
would be yet greater, and there would be a transition to the direction of 
the Great Khingan. But I will not gainsay that comparison of these 
facts with what we know of the structure of the chains near the Hoang-ho 
raises the question whether we are dealing with true flexures produced 
by subsidence, or with lines of simple folding, as seems to be indicated by 
the prevailing dip of the beds to the north-north-west 1 * * . 

1 F. von Richthofen, Uber Gestalt und Gliederung einer Grundlinie in der Morphologie 
Ost-Asiens, Sitzb. k. preuss. Akad. Wiss., Berlin, 1900, XL, p. 17 et seq. The sections at 

Kalgan, which are known in great detail, afford no information on this point ; the Chinese 
mountains are here much higher than in the Gobi, which lies at a height of about 1,400 
meters, is deeply abraded and covered by more recent volcanic flows. The best definition 

of the word 4 flexure ’ appears to me tn be furnished by the expression employed by Heim, 

Tafeldbbiegung (E. de Margerie et A. Heim, L£s Dislocations de Tecorce terrestre, 8vo, 
Zurich, 1888, p. 26). Since the tendency to overthrust subsidences appears |n many 
localities, as we have already shown by examples and will illustrate further on a later 



ch. vi] THE GREAT KHINGAN 209 

The bearing of these observations is no less important as regards our 
interpretation of the structure of the Great Khingan. 

The distance from Yehol in the south to the Argun in the north 
amounts to nine degrees of latitude. It is true that over the whole of this 
distance the country west* of the Great Khingan is in general higher than 
that on the east. 

Unfortunately there is a dearth of trustworthy accounts from the south. 
Fritsche, travelling to the north, crossed the watershed between the Lan-ho 
and Lian-ho (1,237 meters) in long. 117° 52' E., lat. 41° 48' N., and reached 
a series of parallel chains which run from north -north-west to south-south- 
east; then crossing the Barin-dao (1,230 meters), formed of three dome-like 
heights, he found himself at the end of the mountainous country throtigh 
which he had travelled since leaving Peking, and in a region of plateau- 
like character. Here his map gives heights of 846 meters, 1,080 meters, 
1,630 meters, 1,208 meters, and so on 1 . 

From Kaigan to Fong-ning-hien (long. 117° 10' E. ; lat. 41° 13' N., 
604 meters) the direction of the mountains is mainly east-north-east, then 
rather north-^north-east and north, and finally, in the south part of the 
Khingan proper, north-north-west. The observations of Fritsche accord 
fairly well with the hypothetical inflexion near Kai-ping mentioned above, 
but from this pr% can hardly conclude that the Great Khingan itself is a 
flexure. We know that it sometimes presents a steep scarp on its east 
side, but we also know that in the north it is certainly a very broad folded 
zone; that there even the Angara-beds in the neighbouring plain of the 
Amur are affected by posthumous folding ; that the Gobi west of the great 
Khingan is a folded region ; and that rhyolite and basalts occur on both 
sides of it, but, strange to say, do not enter the grill of Peking. 

# Thus the hypothesis most in harmony with the existing state of obser- 
vation is that the Great Khingan is a folded range, similar to the Aldan 

page, an overthrust flexure may easily be produced, and it is quite possible that it is 
precisely this local combination of subsidence and tangential movement which has given 
rise to some of the greatest overthrusts. The difficulties are due to the outward 
resemblance of the simple oblique fold resulting from tangential movement and 
the flexure produced by subsidence, and this is doubtless the origin of the objections 
raised by Bittner (Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1887, XXXVII, pp. 404 et seq.). 
In this case the complicated processes which, according to Willis, should lead to 
an increased deflexion in the bend of the ‘stepfold/ are entirely disregarded (U. S. 
Geol. Surv., XIII, Report, part II, p. 273). In the case of long lines of this 
kind succeeding each other uniformly, I should be inclined to decide in favour of a 
flexure , and therefore for a predominance of subsidence wherever the subsidences take 
place progressively in a given direction ; and for folding where this progressive subsidence 
does not take place, and consequently tlje gentler 1 inclination of the longer limb 
compensates for the steeper inclination of the shorter. 

1 H. Fritsche, Ein Beitrag zur Geographic und Lehre vom Erdmagnetismus Asien’s 
und Europa’s, Peterm. Mitth.,i885, Erganzungsheft No. 78, maps, p. 10. 

80LX.AB III p 



210 THE EASTERN ALTAIDES [pabtiv 

Tange and Sikhota-Alin, which are also bordered by downthrows — incom- 
parably greater ones — on their east side, and follow a perfectly similar course. 

The Khara-narin-ula and Ala-shan face the tableland of Ordos, and 
represent the dammed-back outer border of the Altaides. The Great 
Khingan, in front of which lies the equally folded land of Manchuria, may 
be regarded as the final expression of this folding, which, coming from the 
Altai and embracing the whole south of the ancient vertex, now manifests 
itself in the peripheral chains of the east. 

Kuen-luen. This name, as F. von Richthofen has shown, appears in 
the book of Yu-kung, which dates from the twenty-third century before 
our aera. It claims the veneration due to age. But there is a difficulty in 
deciding where the mountainous country lay which was known to antiquity 
as the Kuen-luen. The majority of Chinese scholars, so Richthofen informs 
us, place the mountains of Kuen-luen in the region of the ‘ Sea of Stars/ 
near the sources of the Hoang-ho. To this we must conform 1 . 



Fig. 13. Section from Koko-shili to the plain of the Tjertjen-Darya . (After Sven-Hedin.) 
The part marked Randgebirge Kwen-lun corresponds with the arc of Yarkand. 


Accordingly, there can be no doubt that the mighty chains extending 
far to the west-north-west and east-south-east across the meridian of the 
Sea of Stars from the Arka-tag (Prjewalski chain) to the Tsin-ling-shan, 
and termed by F. von Richthofen the middle and eastern Kuen-luen, have 
also a claim to this name. Richthofen places the western limit of the 
central Kuen-luen in about long. 89° E. Our present knowledge of the 
western part of the Arka-tag would lead us to shift the limit to 87° or 
86° 30'. But as regards the range which lies west of 86° 30' later observa- 
tions seem to justify a different interpretation, which involves the separation 
of the western from the central Kuen-luen. 

Bogdanowitsch has laid emphasis on the continuity of the arc-like 
frame which surrounds the basin of the Yarkand-darya. This arc extends 
from the Mustag-ata mountains in the north-west to the gneiss range of 


1 F. von Richthofen, China, I, p. 225 et seq. 







212 THE EASTERN ALTAIDES [part iv 

San-sjan-tsy, near An-si, in the north-east. In the absence of a special name 
we will designate it the western Kuen-luen or Tarlcand arc \ 

To the north-west this arc is broad and formed of several lofty ranges ; 
its central part is high, but narrow, and cut through by transverse valleys ; 
towards the north-east it breaks up into long and high overlapping coulisses 
between which the rivers find room to escape. These coulisses, especially 
the Altyn-tag, Anembar-ula, and San-sjan-tsy, maintain the east-north-east 
and north-east direction of the arc itself, and all the several chains of 
the Nan-shan are sharply deflected on meeting them, as has been stated 
previously. Thus, as we have said, spaces arise, such as the Syrtyn, 
Tsai-dam,and that of the lakes of Kum-kul ; the angle of syntaxis becomes 
more obtuse, and almost vanishes as the Prjewalski chain finally attains 
a nearly rectilinear course. This lofty and imposing mass now reaches the 
south side of the arc in long. 86° 30' E., and probably merges with it for 
a certain distance to form a single morphological whole. But an examina- 
tion of the sections of Bogdanowitsch suffices to show that on the meridian 
of Kopa there is only one principal chain, the Russian chain or Akkar- 
tshelik-tag 2 . 

We regard the Arka-tag or the Prjewalski chain as that part of the 
central Kuen-luen which advances furthest to the west (between long. 86° 
and 87° E.). It is characterized in a remarkable manner by the presence 
of recent volcanic rocks. The earliest trustworthy record is furnished by 
Dutreuil de Rhins, who obtained vesicular basaltic scoriae from the range of 
the Atchit-nor 3 . Henri d’Orl&ms and Bonvalot mention volcanos and fields 
of scoriae at several places, but give no details. The same is true of 
Littledale’s statements. On the other hand, Sven Hedin saw tuff 
and lava-flows close to the west end of the Arka-tag in lat. 86°, and at 
several places on the south side of this range. According to Backstrom,* 

1 Richthofen has compared the Ta-pa-shan with the inflexion of the Dinaric arc 
against the south Alps ; Bogdanowitsch cites as parallel the relations of the central 
Kuen-luen with the arc of Yarkand and the Ta-pa-skan, Mitth. k. k. geogr. Ges. Wien, 
1895, XXXVIII, p. 518 ; cf. also Wegener, Entschleierung der unbekanntesten Theile 
von Tibet ; Festschrift fur Freiherm von Richthofen, Berlin, 1898, p. 414. It is with 
reluctance that I employ the terms Tarim range and depression of the Tarim, since, 
according to Prjewalski, Tarim as the name of a river is altogether unknown^to the 
inhabitants of the country. Tarim means tilled or arable land, and since the Chinese 
oflicials levy taxes according to the amount of water used in irrigation the term has 
been transferred to the river. 

2 In this connexion I should like to refer to the beautiful map by Hassenstein which 
accompanies Sven Hedin’s report in Peterm. Mitth., Erganzungsheft No. 181, 1900; cf. also 
M. Friedrichsen, Morph ologie des Tien-shan, Zeitschr. Ges. f. Erdk. Berlin, 1889, XXXIV, 
191 pp., map. 

s St. Meunier, Note geologique ?n J. L. Dutreuil de Rhins, Mission scientifique dans la 
Haute Asie, 1890-1895, 4to, Paris, 1898, if I, p. 295. It is true that -we haye data 
concerning volcanos in the south of the Prjewalski chain, but proofs other than those 
based on the form of the mountains are wanting. * 



■ch. vi] SECTION SOUTH OF DI-DAO 218 

the rock from a locality in long. 87° 30' E. is a bronzite andesite, and 
evidently recent 1 . 

Numerous chains, all running more or less to the east-south-east, join 
the Prjewalski chain, follow the south border of Tsaidam, and, bearing the 
names Sjan-si-bei, Ugutu^ &e., reach the Hoang-ho south of the plateau of 
Balekun-gomi. Prjewalski was aware that the chain of Djupar, east of the 
Hoang-ho, must be regarded as their continuation. Futterer journeyed 
from the range of south Kuku-nor across the Dabasun-Gobi and those 
eastern parts of the coulisses of the north Tsaidam which Obrutschew 
calls the Semenow range, and then southwards to the Hoang-ho. He 
found that the Semenov range, like the other coulisses, consists of ancient 
rocks, in front of which lies Carboniferous, and that it is continued in 
an east-south-east direction or towards Balekun-gomi. Further south 
he reached the Djupar-range, east of the Hoang-ho, and encountered, not 
only here, but as far as the watershed of the Tao, the same strike to the 
east- south -east. Thus these observations link on in a most satisfactory 
manner with those made in the valley of the Tao 2 . 

Among the many additions which Obrutschew has made to our know- 
ledge of the structure of Inner Asia one of the most important appears to 
me the transverse section which he has drawn from Lan-tshou to the Red 
basin, extending through nearly four degrees of latitude ; this has rendered 
it far easier to form an opinion as to the connexion of the western range 
with the Tsin-ling-shan 3 . 

The northern part of this section has already come before our notice ; 
it consists of the lofty plateau of Di-dao, formed of Gobi beds, and the 
Tshan-fan-shan, which is regarded as the most northerly of the chains 
running to the Tsin-ling-shan. The Gobi beds are upturned on its north slope, 
• precisely as on the south slope of the south Kuku-nor. On the same slope 
{according to the line of march, in about long. 103° 50' E., lat. 35° 9' N.) 
basalt appears, perhaps as a continuation of the recent volcanic outflows 
which are so characteristic of the Prjewalski chain 4 . The Tshan-fan-shan 

1 Sven Hedin, Die geographisch-wissenschaftlichen Ergebnisse meiner Reisen in 
€entral-A8ien, 1894-1897, Peterm. Mittk., Erganzangsheft No. 131, 1900; in particular 
JfcB^kstrom, Ueher jungvulcanische Eruptivgesteine aus Tibet, op. eit., pp. 375-378. 

2 K. Futterer und Holderer, Dritter Bericht iiber die Reise durch Central- Asien und 
China, Verh. Ges. f. Erdk. Berlin, 1899, pp. 142, 144. The appearance of the country 
is very clearly described by Futterer, Durch Asien, I, p. 318 et seq. 

3 Obrutschew, Central- Asien, II, pp. 304-361. This line is also remarkable in other 
respects ; the contrast between the valleys of the Tsin-ling, which are chiefly transverse, 
and the longitudinal valleys of the platform of Thibet has often been pointed out ; this 
line marks the boundary of the meridional transverse valleys, and already in some of the 
affluents of the upper Hoang-ho the characteristic direction to the north-west appears, 
•e. g. m the Ri-tshju and Rka-tshiu on Potanin’s map of Amdo, Izviestija Imp. ross, Geogr. 
Obsch., 1877, XXIII. 

4 Obrutschew, Central Asi^, North China and the Nan-shan, II, p. 352. 



214 THE EASTERN ALTAIDES [partiv 

consists of Jolded Palaeozoic beds, strike west-north-west (280°-300°) ; on 
the south side the beds have yielded Knorria and Lepidodendron. * : 

, In the chains which follow to the south the rocks present the same 
west-north-west or north-west strike for a distance of 200 versts, or till 
they reach the neighbourhood of the confluence pf the river Djorni with 
the Pei-shui (about lat. 33° 25' N.). This is the region in which the western 
mountains cross over to the Tsin-ling-shan. Nowhere along this line does 
Obrutschew mention any important band of gneiss or granite ; here and 
there ancient schists occur, but in general we have simply a series of closely 
crowded Palaeozoic folds, in which traces of Devonian and Carboniferous 
fossils have been found. These folds form, one after another, the ranges 
of Tshan-fan-shan, Sjao-shan (3,400-3,600 meters), the watershed of Ya- 
lin (2,810 meters) between Tao and Pei-shui, up to and over which the red 
Gobi deposits on the slopes of the Ya-lin-shan appear to ascend, and then 
the rocky chain of Min-shan (4,000 meters), which on the line of the section 
shows a syncline of supra-Carboniferous sandstone overturned to the 
south-west. 

From the exact data furnished by Obrutschew we may also infer that 
a little south of the above-mentioned confluence of the Djorni, and near 
the town of Tsy-tshou, a change occurs in the strike of the folds. Even 
above this locality, ancient chloritic and tourmaline-bearing schists become 
more frequent. Where the Pei-shui cuts through the range of Lin-jan-shan 
while making a bend, the direction of the folds becomes for a while east 
and west, with overfolding towards the south; then the strike turns to 
north-east (60-80°), returning to east and west in the Pa-nan-shan, and 
finally assumes in the Pi-shan a direction to north-east (60°), which persists 
for 50-60 versts up to the border of the Red basin. 

This north-easterly trending southern range is united by intermediate • 
folds with the folds striking to west-north-west. It consists in the north 
of ancient schist, especially chlorite schist and phyllite ; further south, in 
the Dali-shan, of Palaeozoic sediments, in fact tl upper Silurian or Devonian 
and Fusulina limestone. Here overfolding occurs to the south-east. Now 
follow in transgression the thick marginal conglomerates of the Red basin. 
The plant-bearing beds of this basin present signs of slight posthumous^ 
movement. 

The town of Lan-tshou lies west of long. 104° E. ; the section we have 
just described, across the north-easterly trending range, together with the 
Pi-shan and Dali-shan, lies between long. 105° and 105° 45' E. The trans- 
verse sections taken across the Tsin-ling-shan by Richthofen, Ldczy, and 
Obrutschew all lie between long. 106° 30' and 107° 30' E. 

We have already learnt from Richthofen's works (ii, p. 189) that this 
great range, although fairly regular in outward form, yet consists of two 
ranges running in different directions. The northern chain,, the T sin-ling- 



TA-PA-SHAN 


215 


CH« Vi] 

shan proper, extends from the valley of the Wei to the granite mass of 
Lju-pa-ting, and presents the structure of a normal unilateral range; it 
consists of a zone of gneiss, a second zone of ancient schist unconformably 
overlain by upper Carboniferous, and a Palaeozoic zone from which rises 
the granite mass of Lju-pa-ting, surrounded by a zone of contact. The 
Tsin-ling-shan runs west by north (282°). This direction corresponds 
precisely with that taken in the west by the folds which strike west-north- 
west from the Tshan-fan-shan to the confluence of the Djomi, and this 
group of chains must doubtless be regarded as the continuation of the 
Tsin-ling-shan. 

South of the Tsin-ling-shan and the granite mass of Lju-pa-ting there 
follows on the east a narrow zone, perhaps Carboniferous, which is wedged 
in and displaced by contact with other chains. 

Richthofen compares the Tsin-ling-shan to a heavy bar, laid on a cloth 
thrown into parallel folds ; it crosses them obliquely, and is pushed against 
them in a direction perpendicular to its axis, until they bend themselves 
round into complete adaptation to it l . This displaced zone might be com- 
pared with that much broader zone of the western section which extends, 
with a strike varying between west-north -west, due west, and north-east, 
from the confluence of the Djorni to the Pi-shan. 

Finally there follows on this eastern side the second range of Ta-pa - 
shan, striking to the east- north-east and formed of a zone of ancient gneiss- 
like schists, generally with a vertical dip, followed by Palaeozoic beds 
which are overthrust to the south, and driven into overriding flakes ; 
resting on the older rocks are the plant-bearing beds of the Red basin. 
The Pi-shan and Dali-shan of the western section are the direct continua- 
tion of this range. But in those mountains the strike has passed from 
.east-north-east to north-east, in consequence of contact with the ranges 
running to Yunnan. 

Let us leave aside for the present the range of Ta-pa-shan with its 
divergence to the south-west, and confine our attention to the Tsin-ling- 
shan proper. Although it represents a simple chain, asymmetrical towards 
the south, and elevated anterior to the upper Carboniferous epoch, yet 
towards the west-north- west we have a whole series of chains which cor- 
TespSnd to it— the Tshan-fan-shan, Sjao-shan, and Min-shan, and still 
further to the west-nqrth-west, the Djupar, San-si-bei, Ugutu, Amnje- 
matchin, besides Rockhill’s Caroline range and the Burkhan-buddha, all of 
them bordering the Tsaidam on the south ; then the Marco Polo mountains, 
and perhaps also the Columbus and the chains of south-west Tsaidam; 
south of these the Koko-shili, and finally the Arka-tag (Prjewalski range). 
These are in fact a mighty and almost rectilinear series of ranges running 
to the west-north-west across central Asia, and are entitled to bear the 
1 F. von Richthofen, China, IT, p. 638, 



21« THE EASTERN ALTAIDES [part iv 

ancient name of Kuen-luen ; as was recognized by Richthofen, a true 
pioneer, many years ago. 

A close examination shows that the terrestrial folds attain their supreme 
de\elopment in the centre and towards the west of this series. Here the 
mlley -bottoms attain a much greater altitude , even where they sink lowest , 
than the peaks of the Tsin-ling-shan , and this range, in spite of its 
length and height, is only an outrunner from that flood of chains which 
follow one after the other in the meridian of Tsaidam and Kuku-nor. 4 The 
highland of Thibet/ says Bogdanowitsch, 4 merges, in the central Kuen-luen, 
into the mountain region of the Nan-shan, and yet further on into the 
Bei-shan. Thus we pass through an almost continuous series of mountain 
chains, from the Kuen-luen system to the Thian-shan 1 \ 

We see, in fact, that all these mighty chains follow* the same direction , 
between ivest-north-west and north-west , as the chains of the Nan-shan. 
The latter, however, like the Richthofen range, Tolai-shan, Alexander III, 
and others, are sometimes represented by bands of folded sediments ; some- 
times they include gneiss, which is exposed on one of their slopes, or 
sometimes again they are formed, as in the south Kuku-nor, mainly of 
gneiss. Each of these chains may be regarded as a morphological unit ; 
yet not one possesses tectonic independence: they are all the transverse 
waves of a swelling tide of folding movement, which forces its way between 
the plateau of Ordos in the east and the arc of Anembar-ula (Yarkand arc) 
in the west. Some of the folds, dammed up by Ordos, have swerved back 
towards the Ala-shan. But as soon as the defile is passed the transverse 
waves elongate themselves in opposite directions. It is thus that the Kuen- 
luen proceeds from the Nan-shan. In this way the Tsin-ling-shan, folded 
towards the south, arises on the south border of the Sinian mass, and so, 
too, the mighty Arka-tag, on the north border of the Yarkand arc. 

The emergence of the western branches. Space would fail me were I to 
attempt to describe all the devoted efforts which have been made to deter- 
mine the course of the Thibetan chains. Potanin, H. Bower, Littledale, 
Bonvalot, Henri d’Orldans, Dutreuil de Rhins, Rockhill, and many other 
daring explorers, have in turn thrown light on various parts of the great 
coulisses which are deflected in the direction of the meridian. From the 
mass of data thus provided, naturally relating for the most* part merely 
the configuration of the surface, a master trend-liqe may be educed ; it is 
given by the band of limestone which, with a constant east-south-east 
strike, accompanied Rockhill on his way for many a day’s journey. This 
band, which, according to Rockhill’s map, may well exceed 500 kilometers 
in length, proceeds from the south side of the Dang-la, and reaches the 
road to Dshamdo, near the river Nashe-dshu (long. 93° E., lat. 32° N.); it 
probably forms, as it continues to the* east-south-east, part of the mighty 
1 Bogdanowitsch, Mitth. geogr. Ges. Wien, 1895, XXXVIII, p. 525. 



THE WESTERN BRANCHES 


217 


CH. Vi] 


mountain of Ramnon-gang-ri, beyond which it proceeds still further in the 
same direction 1 . Then a south-east, instead of an east-south-east, direction 
sets in; it is seen in the mountain ranges, find betrays itself also in the 
deflexion of the river valleys. Even near Draya, Rockhill still met with 
limestone mountains. Some 1-J degrees of .latitude further south, near 
Yarkala On the Me-kong (about lat. 29° N.), we reach the locality where 
Desgodins found upper Carboniferous (or Permian) fossils. Here a south- 
south-east strike prevails, and Loczy has succeeded in showing that the 
fossiliferous upper Carboniferous (horizon of Loping) of the ridge of 
Dengu-la (lat. 29° 10' N.), which is most probably connected with the upper 
Carboniferous of Yarkala, follows the Yang-tse-kiang with the same strike 
through more than three degrees of latitude. Near Tshung-tjen (lat. 28°) 
it is overlain by segments of Trias ; near I-yang-tang (lat. 26° 25') it con- 
tains Schwagerina craticulifera , and Ldczy has traced this remarkable band 
to a point south of lat. 26° N., north of Ta-li-fu. 

Precisely as in the oases of Kansu and in so many other mountainous 
regions of Eurasia, the upper Carboniferous rests unconformably upon an 
older folded Palaeozoic series ; it has itself been subsequently folded 

We now enter completely within the region of the bordering arc of 
Burma, and cross its several zones in a south-westerly direction. The 
band of Palaeozoic, and in particular of upper Carboniferous rocks, which 
we have just traced from Batang nearly down to Ta-li-fu, is bounded on 
the west by the range of Tsang-shan, which consists of crystalline schist. 
Beyond it there lies a broad zone of tlysch-like sandstone, and this is again 
followed, between the Me-kong and the Salwin, by a folded Palaeozoic zone. 
In this zone Ldczy found upper Carboniferous fossils at a locality east of 
Yung-tshang-fu, and between this place and the Salwin, near Pu-pjao, he 
came upon Silurian with traces of Trilobites and great plates of a Cystoid 
(Hemicosmites ? spec.). The strike is here no longer south-south-east but 
north and south 5 . 

The Siang-shan, which now follows, forms the watershed between the 

® • 

Salwin and Irawadi ; it runs from north to south, consists of gneiss and 
phyllite, and forms the commencement of an extensive zone of older, chiefly 


W. Rockhill. Diary of a Journey through Mongolia and Tibet, pp. 260, 267, 277, 
280, and also 294 for the general strike. In 1895 Littledale travelled from Tchertchen 
towards the south across the strike of the chains, to the Garing-tso (long. 89° E., lat. 82° 
to 31° 30' N.) and to the Tengri-nor, and mentions some volcanic outcrops with regard 
to which I have no further information ; from the Garing-tso to the neighbourhood of 
Leh, i. e. through eleven degrees of longitude, the map shows chains and valleys in the 
direction of the Himalaya: St. George R. Littledale, A Journey across Tibet, from 
North to South, and West to Ladak, Geogr. Joum., 1896, VII, pp. 453-483, maps. 

2 V Loczy, Die wissenschaftlichen Ergebiysse der rfeise des Grafen Bela Szechenyi in 
Ostasien, p. 692 et seq., in particular pp. 731, 736, 746, sections, figs. 142, 144, &c. 

3 Loczy, Ostasien, p. 767, and III, p. 21. 



21S THE EASTERN ALTAIDES [pabtiv 

granitic roe!*#, which extends from here down towards Bhamo. West of 
this zone there again occur, east and west of the meridian of 97° E., indica- 
t <ps of a Palaeozoic zone, believed by Noetling to be Carboniferous, and 
beyond it, according to the observations of Noetling and Griesbach, another 
zone of gneiss and similar rocks which extends to Mogaung and in the 
south to Htygaing (Tu-gaung ) 1 . * 

A glance at Plate I, however, shows that these numerous zones or 
coulisses are not quite parallel. In particular, there is an obvious deflexion 
to the south-south-east between Tshung-tjen and Tali-fu, while the western 
ranges run from north to south. Somewhat further south, between the 
Salwin and Irawadi, the divergence of the trend-lines becomes still more 
marked. 

The work done by the Geological Survey of India, particularly the 
investigations of La Touche and Datta in the north part of the Shan 
states, and those of Middlemiss in the south part as far down as Karenni, 
have rendered it possible to form a general idea of this region 2 . 

La Touche and Datta have traversed the district between lats. 23° and 
22° N. and longs. 96° and 98° E. The general strike varies here between 
north-north-east and east-north-east. The railway and road, which have 
been recently constructed from Mandalay to the north-east, through Thibau 
to the Kunlon ferry on the Salwin, run for long distances with the strike 
of the rocks. The oldest rocks lie to the west ; near Mandalay the lowest 
beds appear, possibly Cambrian, then lower Silurian, upper Silurian, and 
infolded red sandstone, and finally the recent plain of the Salwin, with 
slightly disturbed sediments possibly of Siwalik age. 

The Silurian, thrown into folds, presents a great diversity of character. 
Cystoid plates, found by Ldczy at Pu-pjao, lie in a yellowish-brown 
crinoidal limestone, and are striking objects on account of their great size. 
On first entering the limestone range in the east, Noetling likewise found 
his attention arrested by a gigantic Cystoid in red crinoidal limestone, and 
he named it Echinosphaerites Kingi. He correlated the deposits with the 


1 Noetling, Report on the Coalfields in the Northern Shan States, Rec. Geol. Surv. India, 
1891, XXIV, pp. 99-119; C. L. Griesbach, Geological Sketch of the t Country North 
Bhamo, op. cit., 1892, XXV, pp. 127-180. Among the publications of F. Noetling, the 
Geological map of north-east Upper Burma deserves special mention ; this appeared in 
conjunction with the treatise, Ueber das Vorkommen von Jadeit in Ober-Birma, N. J. f. 
Min., 1896, 1, pi. 1. This sketch map, in spite of certain deviations in topography, may 
be used as a supplement to Loczy’s maps. 

2 T. D. La Touche, Preliminary Report on the Geology of the Northern Shan States, 
Gen. Rep. Geol. Surv. India, 1899-1900, pp. 74-95 ; P. N. Datta, Notes on the Geology of 
the Country along the Mandalay- IQunlon-Ferry Railway Route, Upper Burma, tom. cit;, 
pp. 96-122 ; C. S, Middlenliss, Report on a Geological Reconnaissance in parts of the 
Southern Shan States and Karenni, tom. cit., pp. 122-158; and Griesbach, tom.' 
cit., 82-87. 



ch.vi] THE SHAN PLATEAU 219 

Echinosphaerites limestone of the lower Silurian of the Baltic K La Touche 
has discovered Graptolite shales also in the overlying beds. 

From the general strike of the beds between Mandalay and Kunlon, 
I think we must conclude that the Palaeozoic zone, which is cut through by 
the Salwin west of Yung-tshang-fu, strikes from here to the south-west 
and reaches the Irawadi near Mandalay, thereby diverging from the direc- 
tion followed by the mountains of Tali-fu. The trend-lines diverge from 
one another, probably in tht region of the flysch-like sandstone , which Loczy 
crossed between lots. 26° ami 25° N., between Tali-fw and Yung-tshang-fu ; 
and through which the Mekong flows in this region. 

South of Mandalay, Middlemiss acquaints us with the following facts : 
The general strike to the south-west can no longer be recognized; the 
prevailing direction is again north and south. East of the Irawadi gneiss 
again crops out in a range of imposing length, but of inconsiderable 
breadth. It rises steeply out of the alluvial plain, is not bordered by foot- 
hills, and is cut off on the west by a long north-and-south fault. Towards 
the east the gneiss is followed by a zone of crystalline schist, then comes 
a very broad limestone plateau, without water on the surface, but drained 
by subterranean rivers, and attaining in some places a height of 4,000 feet, 
in the Loi-sampu of about 5,000 feet. This is the Shan plateau proper. 
The limestone is folded, and the folds are worn down. The Silurian fossils 
of the northern Shan states have not yet been found in it. All the fossils 
yet discovered belong to the middle Productus limestone (Permian). 
Griesbach supposes that it is a continuation of the limestones of Moulmein, 
which are of the same age. Still further east we again meet with the red 
sandstone of the north in folded-in bands ; Middlemiss regards it as 
Tertiary. 

The range of gneiss which bounds the alluvial plain of the Irawadi in 
Karenni is evidently the same as that which reaches the vicinity of the 
sea at the mouth of the Sittaung. I think we must conclude that the 
Palaeozoic zone of Yung-tsl^an-fu is the same as that which runs east of 
Mandalay, that it is continued into the great plateau of the south Shan 
states and reaches the sea near the mouth of the Salwin. With this also 
njay be associated the outcrops of Carboniferous which Noetling has 
described at Therabwin, near Tenasserim, and possibly even those of 
east Sumatra 1 2 . 

A few years ago only insignificant traces of these occurrences were 
known (I, p. 456). We now see that the gneiss ranges marked on Plate I, 
between longs. 96° and 4 99° E., do not come down into the neighbourhood 

1 F. Noetling, Field Notes from the Shan Hills, U$per Burma, Rec. Geol. Surv. India, 
1890, XXIII, pp. 2, 78, 79, One specimen*attained 160 mm. 

2 F. Noetling, Carboniferous Fossils from Tenasserim, Rec. Geol. Surv. India, 1893, 
XXVI, pp. 96-100. 



220 


THE EASTERN ALTAIDES 


[part IV 

of the sea except along the Sittaung, and that the coulisses of ancient rocks 
which, placed obliquely one behind the other, form the Malay peninsula, 
txjtong to a more interior region of the collective structure; and in the 
north, on the fork between Tali-fu and Yung-tshang-fu, they do not occur. 

Ldczy, when he had crossed the upper Schweli r was surprised to find at 
Teng-jueh-tshou, while still in the midst of the ancient rocks, that he was 
surrounded by recent andesite. Noetling records two series of recent 
basalts in the valley of the Irawadi, which extend from the north of Bhamo 
up to about lat. 25° 30' N., and, further towards the north-west, basalt 
likewise appears near the nephrite mines of Sanka. Perhaps the basalts 
of Bhamo should be regarded as precursors of the long line of volcanos 
(I, p. 455), of which the northernmost, Ho-shuen-shan (lat. 23° 20' N.), has 
been described by Loczy 1 . 

Let us now attempt to obtain a general view of the region represented 
on Plate I. 

In the north-west of this sketch we see the eastern part of the highest 
gneiss summits of the Himdlaya (6,939 meters); towards the south the 
peaks become lower (3,679 meters), and where the river Dikrang leaves 
the mountains, deposits of the Gondwana series dip, according to Godwin- 
Austen (I, p. 450), beneath the gneiss, while below these deposits there 
disappear in turn the Tertiary beds of the sub-Him&layan group, which 
terminate towards the alluvium of the Brahmaputra in an escarpment 
900 meters in height. Near Sibsagar the surface of the alluvium lies only 
95 meters above the sea. 

South of this region, beyond the Brahmaputra, comes the east border of 
the Shillong-plateau (I, p. 410), which on June 12, 1897, was the starting- 
point of the mightiest earthquake of the nineteenth century, Its south 
and south-east border are formed, according to Medlicott and F. H. Smith, 
by a great flexure 2 . Here it consists of gneiss sloping gently away to 
the north, with superposed horizontal sheets of middle Cretaceous. Isolated 
domes of this mass of gneiss are visible north pi the Brahmaputra, a little 
beyond the western limit of our map, and extend even into the Tertiary 
foot-hills of the Himalaya. 

We now reach the outer border overfolded to the north-west of _the 
Ndga mountains, which are the northern continuation of the folded range 
of Arakan ; the Brahmaputra separates them from the Himdlaya, and the 
Dhansiri from the plateau of Shillong. Their north-eastern part has been 
described by Mallet (I, p. 411). What is known here as the 4 Axial Group 5 
is probably Cretaceous Flysch, or perhaps in part lower Tertiary sediments 

1 F. Noetling, N. J. f. Min., 1896, 1, p. 13 ; Bauer, ibid. ; Loczy, Reise des Grafen Bela 

Szechenyi in Ostasien, p. 771. • 

2 F. H. Smith, The Geology of the Mikir Hills in Assam, Mem. Geol. Surv. India, 1897, 
XXVIII, pp. 71-95, map ; in particular p. 73. 



oh. vi] UPPER BURMA 221 

highly altered by pressure 1 ; on the map (Pl. I) t e indicates an Eocene 
lignitiferous series ; a a a is a strike fault on the outer border. 

Those parts of the range lying to the south in the direction of Manipur 
have been investigated by R. D. Oldham (I, p. 452). In the north of this 
region the Axial group jyesents a north-and-south strike, and, as far as it 
has been traced, a vertical dip; in the south, where this zone is much 
broader, we see as we come from the west a dip to the east or east-south- 
east, which is maintained throughout its whole breadth, across the plain of 
Manipur and Tusom ; this would seem to suggest the existence of a series 
of overthrust flakes. From Tusom to beyond the band of serpentine the 
dip is in the opposite direction, namely west or west-north-west, so that 
the whole appears tp form an asymmetric fan. The structure of the lofty 
chain which runs from the east wing of the fan to the north-north-east 
(Saramethi, 3,815 meters) is unknown. 

The upper Tertiary beds (sub-him PI. I) rest uneonformably on the 
Axial group, but are carried up to great heights towards the centre and 
east of the range. Near Samaguting and Yemi bivalves have been found 
in the sandstone ; elsewhere plant- remains occur, and amber as well. In 
the east towards the Chindwin, where they form the Kachaophung (2,451 
meters), these beds terminate, with a dip of about 20° E., in the lofty 
escarpments of the Angokhim and the Kasom. 

We have now reached the field of Noetling’s labours in Upper Burma. 

The Irawadi group is a deltaic Tertiary formation in which remains of 
the Siwalik fauna are imbedded 2 . The next oldest series is the marine 
Pegu group, of Miocene, or possibly, as is indicated by the presence of 
Anthracotherium, of Aquitanian age. It rests on Eocene beds with 
Nummulites, and V elates Schmideliana. From the Tertiary lowlands the 
range of the Mainthong hills, formed of quartz diorite, emerges near 
Wuntho 3 ; and near the Hty-gaing on the Irawadi, north of the volcano 
Ho-shue-shan, we reach the border of the great westernmost range of the 
ancient rocks of the Burmaij arc. 

It is from this range that the Irawadi, bordered by recent eruptive 
rocks, emerges near Bhamo. 

rom this point onwards Ldczy becomes our guide, and we reach the 
long coulisses of gneiss, separated by closely folded-in Palaeozoic bands, 
and distinguished by the transgression of the upper Carboniferous 4 . We 

1 The older statement that fossils of the Trias period occur in this range rests on an 
error : R. D. Oldham, Manual of the Geology of India, 2nd ed., 1893, p. 144. 

2 F. Noetling, The Development and Subdivision of the Tertiary System in Burma, 

Rec. Geol. Surv. India, 1895, XXVIII, pp. 59-86. * 

s F. Noetling, Note on the Geology of Wuntho in Upper Burma, Rec. Geol. Surv. 
India, 1894, XXVII, pp. 115-124. 

* On PI. I it was necessary on account of the small scale to unite under the 



m THE EASTERN ALTAIDES [pabtiv 

cross the Mekong and thq region where the Ta-li chains diverge from one 
pother. We reach the Yang-tse-kiang, then the lake of Ta-li with its 
Faludinas of Levantine type, and the Trias deposits of Tshung-tjen. 
Coulisses of similar structure are repeated from Ba-tang up towards 
Ya-tshou-fu, and bend as a whole towards the- west- north-west, in the 
direction of Dang-la, Dumbure, and the other Thibetan chains. 

It is difficult to piece together the observations in these regions, owing 
to the fact that the geographical data on which they are based are some- 
what divergent. If in spite of this we attempt to insert in this sketch the 
results obtained by Prince Henri d’Orleans on his arduous journey from 
Yunnan to Assam we obtain the following outline \ 

The Francois Gamier peak, in about lat. 28° 1 5' N., rises west of the 
Mekong, in the chain which separates this river from the Sal win. From 
here towards the west it was shown that the most easterly and at the 
same time the longest affluent of the upper Irawadi, the Turong, scarcely 
extends beyond lat. 28° 30' N. ; and that the river- basin of the Irawadi 
is bounded on the north by the lofty and snow-covered chain of Zayul 
which runs west-south- west from the source of the Turong, and gives rise, 
to streams flowing southwards to the Irawadi and northwards to the Zayul 
Tshu (Lohit Brahmaputra). The Zayul chain has been supposed to form 
a continuation of the chains of the Himalaya, a conjecture which its 
direction seems to justify. But the structure of the valley of the 
Brahmaputra near Dibrugarh renders this view improbable, and I should 
rather be inclined to regard the Zayul as a continuation, beyond the upper 
course of the Dihang river, of that chain, which includes the above- 
mentioned Saramethi, and probably belongs to the Patkoi arcs. 

The Irawadi would thus lie entirely within the coulisses of the Burman 
arc, and the deflexion of these coulisses caused by the eastern Himalaya, as 
well as the direction to the east-north-east, would already make themselves 
felt in long. 98° 30' E. 

The separation of the chains . We haver already become acquainted 
with the divergence of the mountain ranges which occurs west of 
Ta-li-fu. A broad zone of sandstone, described by Loczy as resembling 
Flysch, is inserted in this region. The Mekong flows along its western 

abbreviation pal. limestones, which are probably of Silurian age, and phyllites, and 
under ca the marine upper Carboniferous and the associated sandstones ; in like manner 
granite, gneiss, and ancient crystalline schists are placed together. For divergent 
opinions on the stratigraphical position of certain occurrences (Permian or upper 
Carboniferous), see F. Freeh, Lethaea geognostica, 1. Theil, Lethaea palaeozoica, 2. Band, 
1899, p. 884 et seq. ; for the influence of these different opinions on our idea of the 
nature of a discordance, we may refer to what is said later (chapter VIII) in connexion 
with the peri-Adriatic region. 

1 The most detailed co-ordination of the facts may be found on the little map of the 
Geogr. Joum., 1896, VII, p. 303 ; cf. also op. cit., 1896, VIII, pp. 566-585. 



ch.vi] THE COURSE OF THE MEKONG 223 

border and turns towards the south-east. Near Meng-huating, south of 
Ta-li-fu, near the head waters of the Red river, Colquhoun observed a 
vast plain ; this is the same plain as that which Prince Henri d’OrMans 
struck south of lat. 25° N. on the Mekong, and it may extend as far as 
lat. 24° N. 1 . Further to the south-south-east lies the plain of Semao; 
Carey thinks it continues in the same direction to the plains of the French 
Laos, and these regions probably belong to the eastern branch of the chains, 
since west of Semao, Carey found the Mekong (672 meters) enclosed 
between mountain ranges 1,500 meters in height 2 . 

To understand the further course of the Mekong we must bestow some 
attention on that of the Nam-hu, which descends from the French Laos, 
and enters the Mekong at Luang- Prabang. The Mekong may, in fact, be 
divided into several parts. The upper Mekong, as far as Kjang-sen, on 
the boundary of Siam, follows the same direction as the other great rivers 
which descend from the Burman chains towards the south. The Nam-hu, 
with that part of the Mekong which extends as far as Muang-kan-tao, 
forms a second similar part. These two are united by the transverse 
channel from Kjang-sen to Luang- Prabang. A second transverse channel 
extends into the region of Patshum. Here begins the lower course of the 
river, at first following the direction of the cordillera of Annan, which 
borders the coast. It afterwards splits up into several branches and flows 
at large over an extensive plain. 

Near Lakon (lat. 17° 20- N.), according to Joubert, ranges of steeply 
dipping limestone strike N. 47° W., that is, fairly parallel to the river itself 
and to the cordillera on the east : they probably represent the foot-hills of 
the cordillera. Further up stream, above Patshum, a complete change takes 
place. Near Vienshang Joubert found the river hemmed in by steeply 
plunging, sometimes vertical, beds of sandstone and arkose and violently 
crushed shales, with traces of anthracite. Folded schists and quartz 
porphyry now border the Mekong ; talc schists predominate, and all strike 
to the north-east. The higher mountains consist of limestone. The banks 
maintain the same character as far up as Luang-Prabang 3 . 

Counillon has described the district in the elbow of Luang-Prabang. 
jjgje, too, a north-east strike prevails, corresponding to one branch of the 
bend. North of the town we first see grey limestone, almost horizontal, 
with Spiriferina, Rhynconella, Lima, and Avicula. Then follows, after a 
strip of alluvial land, red clay dipping first south-east, then north-west ; 
it contains plant-remains and bones of great reptiles, and is correlated with 

1 H. d'Orleans, Geogr. Journ., 1896, VIII, p. 571. 

4 F. W. Carey, A Trip to the Chinese Shan states, Geogr. Journ., 1899, XIV, 
pp. 378-394. 

3 Joubert in Gamier, Voyage d ’Exploration en Indo-Chine, 4fco, Paris, 1873, II, p. 95 
et seq. 



224 


THE EASTERN ALTAIDES 


[part IV 

the upper part, of the Indian Raniganj group. "Then follows limestone and 
gjpeywacke, dipping north-west, with plant-remains and small Productides ; 
Anally violet clay, with a conglomerate at its base containing limestone 
pebbles with Schwagerina, while its highest beds afford remains of 
Dieynodon. Further on, after some interruption of the section, hard grey 
limestone is met with \ 

With regard to the upper parts of the Mekong accounts are less 
detailed, but we know from Joubert’s journey that sandstone and shale, 
and in the higher mountains limestone, continue nearly up to Lim (lat. 
20° 45' N.), where navigation finally becomes impracticable owing to reefs. 
A continuous mountain land of greater height lies towards the west. 

We have seen that the Burman chains, elsewhere of such regular 
structure, are deflected in upper Burma, passing from Kunlon on the 
Salwin, across Thibau towards Mandalay in a south-westerly direction, 
and then continuing their course to the south. 

It is a very remarkable fact that the same bend finds expression in the 
course of the Mekong between Kjang-lun and Kjang-sen, and the prevailing 
north-east strike which has been observed down to the Vien-shan is in 
harmony with this circumstance. It shows us that the transverse sections 
of the course of the Mekong mentioned above are true transverse valleys ; 
that the upper Mekong as far as Kjang-sen, and the Nam-hu, together 
with that reach of the Mekong running in the same direction as the 
Nam-hu to Muang-kan-tao, do in fact, like the Burman rivers, correspond 
approximately, if not exactly, to the structure of the mountains. The 
folds on the Mekong run in the same direction between Kjang-sen and 
Vien-shan as between the Salwin and the Irawadi ; but instead of 
resuming a southerly course after the deflexion to the south-west , they 
gradually sink down and jincdly disappear beneath the plain of Siam . • 
A large number of the chains which rise above Kjang-sen may be con- 
tinued through the teak forests into the mountains east of Moulmein. 
This connexion may be recognized on Black’s uiap of Siam 1 2 . 

The structure of the heights north-east of Bangkok between lats. 14° 
and 15° N. is unfortunately unknown to me. Nor am I acquainted with 
the age and relations of the sapphire and ruby mines of the provin ce ^ f 
Battambang and the heights of Khantabun. But an important question 
arises in this connexion. From what has been said above it cannot be 
doubted that the whole basin of the Menam lies within the region of the 
folded ranges of Burma, here hidden from view. But the extensive 

1 Counillon, Documents pour servir a l’etude geologique des environs de Luang- 
Prabang, Cochinchlne, C. R. Acad, Sci. Paris, 1896, II, pp. 1330-1333, small map. The 
wandering solfataras described by Joubert (pf 102) from the region west-south-west pf 
Luang-Prabang are believed by Loczy to be burning coal measures. 

2 J. S. Black, Journey round Siam, Geogr. Joum., 1896, VII, pp. 429-452, map. 



ch.vi] THE MASS OF CAMBODIA '• 225 

occurrence of certain outcrops of granulite and granite, with which we 
have already made acquaintance in the plain of the lower Mekong (II, 
p. 168), indicates a structure different from that of the folded ranges. 
They are traces of an older mass which we will call the mass of Cambodia , 
The plains of Further Ipdia are therefore of two kinds. A more exact 
knowledge of the mountains mentioned as occurring to the north-east and 
south-east of Bangkok might throw light on the respective boundaries 
of thesfe two kinds of plain. 

Accounts of the geology of the valley of the Mekong are, as we have 
seen, disconnected and few in number, but they seem to be fairly harmo- 
nious. A separation of the chains, such as occurs west of Ta-li-fu, may 
also be observe^ much further south on the Mekong, between long. 103° and 
104° E. about, in the Neighbourhood of Patshum. The deflexion to the 
north-north-east, and even north-east, which we perceive to the north-west 
on the outer border of the Naga hills, where they slope away to the 
Brahmaputra, resembles that which occurs between Mandalay on the 
Irawadi and Kunlong on the Salwin ; and it is probably continued, though 
in a feebler degree, towards Patshum, in the region of the Mekong. 

In the region of the separation lies the mass of Cambodia. 

The advance of the eastern branches . In lat. 30° N., L<5czy crossed very 
high mountains between Ta-tsien-lu and Batang. The Gambu, west of 
long. 100° E., attains a height of 7,400 meters, and the peak of Dsara in 
Ta-tsien-lu is believed to be still higher. These mountains strike almost 
north and south, and consist of Archaean rocks, separated by strips of 
flysch-like sandstone 1 . Towards the south their height decreases, and 
they are cut through by the Yang-tse-kiang in a course which presents 
several sharp bends, and consists of successive reaches of longitudinal and 
•transverse valleys. Amundsen found that the river returns from the snow- 
covered mountains of Likiang to flow much further towards the north 
than is shown on our maps 2 . 

From Tai-ping-tshang, on^the boundary of Yunnan and Sztshwan, east 
of Yung-pei-ting, and thus from the eastern part of this range, Leclere 
obtained plant-remains which Zeiller correlates with those of the upper 
Gondw&na of India 3 . The bend east of the confluence of the Ya-long consists 
“ofTeptynite. Melaphyre with labradorite appears on the Yang-tse-kiang. 
In north Yunnan flows of porphyritic andesite are intercalated beneath the 
Carboniferous, and similar rocks occur also in the south. The observations 
made by MM. L^vy and Lacroix on the rocks brought back by Leclbre 

1 Loczy, Reise ... in Ostasien, I, pp. 692-726. 

2 E. Amundsen, A Journey through south-west Sechuan, Geogr. Joum., 1900, XV, 
pp. 620-625, and XVI, pp. 531-537, maps ; ( jn particular p. 532. 

s R* Zeiller, Sur quelques plantes fossiles de*la Chine meridionale, C. R. Acad. Sci. 
Paris, 1900, CXXX, pp. 186-188. 

SOLLAS XII 



226 


THE EASTERN ALTAIDES 


[part iy 

show that Archaean schists form the basis of a Palaeozoic series in the 
valley of the Red river from the north down to Yenbai (lat. 21° 30' N .) l . 
A coal-field, probably of Tertiary age, then occupies the river valley for a 
distance of 30 to 40 kilometers 2 . 

In the district of Sao-bang, in north-east Toi^gking (about lat, 22° 15' 
to lat. 23° N.), it appears from Billet’s description that the south-easterly 
direction makes itself everywhere evident, both in the hilly ranges and 
the valleys. The south-west part consists of ancient schist and quartzite ; 
here the heights are gentle and rounded. In the north-east part limestone 
predominates, often rich in corals; it is characterized by steep cliffs and 
crags, caves, and great caldrons 3 . Here we reach the border of the great 
limestone plateau of Yunnan, to be described later. 

Let us now turn to the west side of the Red river. 

Douviiy and Diener have shown that the Julian stage of the Trias 
occurs on the upper course of the Black river 4 . Joubert states that he first 
met with the border of the limestone plateau of Yunnan, on the upper 
Black river (Nam-l^-Papien). In coming from the west he crossed near 
the town of Pu-erh, still west of the Black river, first steeply dipping beds 
of anthracite, then sandstone and limestone with a fairly east-and-west 
strike. This chain is marked on Garnier’s map as the Ho-liem , and there 
appears as the deflected continuation of a longer chain coming from the 
north, which runs as the Ho-liem to the east-south-east, and then proceeds 
much further to the south-east. On the road from Pu-erh to Lin-gan 
Joubert saw a lofty range on the south which he believed to be at least 
4,000 meters in height. Judging from its position this could only be a 
continuation of the Ho-liem, but I have no further information regarding it 5 . 

Beyond Pu-erh, near Semao (Szu-mao-ting) there lies, according to 
Bons d’Anty, open country, above which rise isolated masses of limestone 
full of caves. This is the plain on the west of which, as we have already 
mentioned, the Mekong is bordered by south-easterly trending chains. 

* 

1 Michel-Levy, A. Lacroix, et Leclere, Note sur les roches crystallines et eruptives de 
la Chine meridionale, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 1900, CXXX, pp. 211-213. 

2 R. Zeiller, Sur des empreintes vegetales du bassin de Yen-Bai au Tonkin, Bull. soc. 

geol. de France, Dec. 4, 1893, p. cxxxv. n — „ 

3 A, Billet, Deux ans dans le Haut-Tonkin, Region de Cao-Bang, Bull. sci. de la 
France et de la Belgique, ed. par A. Giard, 1896-1898, 4 e ser., VIII, pp. 1-358, maps ; 
in particular pp. 48-54. On the railway running from Phu-lang-thuong to Lang-son, 
which probably cuts through the south-easterly continuation of the heights of Sao-bang, 
remains of Ammonites are known in black shale which probably belong to the lower 
Trias; Douville, Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1896, 3 e s6r., XXIV, p. 154. 

4 C. Diener, Note sur deux especes d 1 Ammonites triasiques du Tonkin, Bull. Soc. 
geol. de Fr., tom. cit. pp. 882-886^ Juvavites Tonkinensis , Diener. 

5 F. Gamier, Voyage d’Exploration en Iifflo-Chine, 4to, Paris, 1873, atlas, I, pp. 442 
et seq. A little map of the sources of the Red river is given by C. E. Bonin, Note sur 
les sources du fleuve Rouge, Bull. Soc. geogr. Paris, 1897, pp. 202-206. 



ch. vi ] THE RED RIVER 227 

Thus we have approached the western border of the eastern folds and the 
zone of bifurcation l . 

The connexion between these observations may be slight, but they 
lend support to the view advanced many years ago by Ldczy, and recently 
advocated by Lecl&re ; td the effect that a part of the lofty chains of 
Yunnan, deflected from south to south- south-east, and then to south-east, 
runs down through Tongking, with decreasing height, parallel to the 
valleys of the Black river and the Red river. Of the high chains between 
Ta-tsien-lu and Batang it is chiefly those lying to the west which attain 
so great a length. In the east the conditions become more complicated. 

Let us first return to the north. 

The Ta-pa-shan, which adapts itself to the south side of the Tsin-ling- 
shan, consists, according to Richthofen, of Silurian, Devonian, and lower 
Carboniferous rocks, overfolded towards the south and overthrust into 
imbricated flakes. On their abraded edges rests a transgressive series, 
coming from the south. This series begins with a limestone, some 360 
meters in thickness, believed by Richthofen to belong to the Permian or 
Trias, and above this follow the mighty red, yellow, and green coal-bearing 
sandstones which fill the ‘ Red basin/ The sandstones are cut up by 
step-faults, which hade towards the north-west, i. e. towards the great 
mountains (II, p. 191). 

Loczy observed similar conditions in the west. At the foot of the Nju- 
tu-shan (5,800 meters) lies the plain of Tshing-tu-fu, 120 kilometers in 
length, and only 480 meters high. At the same time the thick limestone 
disappears beneath the sandstone. Ldczy regards the plain as an area of 
subsidence 2 . 

The high mountains trend more and more to the south-west, and then 
13b the south, surrounding the town of Ya-tshu-fu (531 meters) in an arc. 
At the same time they sink in the Tauong-tin to 4,000 meters, and in the 
first range turned to the south to 3,200 meters. On the east border of 
this range, south-west of Ya-tshu-fu, are three parallel anticlines, in which 
the plant-bearing series is folded along with its Palaeozoic basement ; the 
higher mountains are formed of granite, traversed obliquely by a syncline 
jjjJii^J^rises to a height of 2,500 meters, and includes middle Devonian with 
Spirifer undiferns , and plant-bearing sandstone. Ldczy calls this first 
southerly trending range the Ta-shia n-liiuj ; it is a part of the eastern 
border of the eastern branches. 

Thus from the Ta-pa-shan across the Nju-tu-shan to the Ta-shian-ling 

1 P. Bons d’Anty, Relation d’un voyage dans la region situee au Sud de Semao, Ann. 
de Geogr., 1899, VIII, pp. 49-61, map ; in particular p.*57. 

2 Kreitner, Die wissenschaftlichen Ergebnisse der Reise des Grafen Szechenyi in 
Ostasien, I, p. 214 ; Loczy, op. cit., I, p. 690. Rosthom’s journey was made in the 
same neighbourhood, Mitth. gecgr. Ges. Wien, 1895, XXXVIII, pp. 285-320, map. 

Q 2 



228 THE EASTERN ALTAIDES [partiv 

there lies a mountain are concave to the south-east, which in its disposition 
somewhat resembles the Khara-narin-ula. 

■ F. von Richthofen has shown that the structure of the Ta-pa-shan 
again makes its appearance far to the south-east, near I-tshan on the 
Yang-tse-kiang. A great plateau of limestone, ©ambrian below and Car- 
boniferous at the summit, forms west of I-tshan a low broad arch with an 
east-north-east strike; within it metamorphic rocks and granite are exposed. 
The south-south-east limb dips very gently out of sight, the north-north- 
west limb is thrown into simple folds slightly overturned to the south- 
south-east ; towards Sztshwan the Mesozoic plant-bearing beds are included 
in the folding. This broad zone, cut through by the Yang-tse-kiang, runs 
west-south- west, directly into the lofty mass of Kuei-tshou and Yunnan 1 . 

In this manner indications are given of a second range, which would 
correspond to the Ta-pa-shan ; the c Red basin ’ lies between these two 
ranges, or, perhaps more correctly, is carried by the southern range. In 
the south-west of this region, Bourne travelled from Lu on the Yang-tse- 
kiang, first towards the south, across the frontier of the Kuei-tshou 
province, then towards the south-west, across Yunnan-fu into the region 
of the Mekong. The boundary of the Red sandstone is reached near 
Yung-ning (330 meters, lat. 28° 10' N.) ; here we arrive at a long and con- 
tinuous scarp which corresponds approximately with the boundary defining 
Sztshwan from Yunnan and Kuei-tshou ; it marks the commencement of 
an extensive region of limestone which is often weathered into the most 
extraordinary forms. A little south of this boundary the limestone rises 
to a height of 1,650 or 1,700 meters ; south-west of Wei-ning, in west Kuei- 
tshou, it reaches 2,350 meters, and it extends to Yunnan-fu with a height 
of 1,956 meters. Both in the sandstone of the Red basin and in the lime- 
stone, the beds are steeply inclined and folded. About half-way between 
the south side of the lake of Yunnan-fu and the Red river we encounter 
granite (1,652 meters). At this place we have already crossed the western 
boundary of the limestone 2 . *• 

We owe the most important contribution to our knowledge of the* 
limestone region to Leclere. His route led from Hanoi in a north-westerly 
direction to Mong-tse — where a future railway will have to ascen ^ lropn 
100 meters to 1,700 meters — from here to Yunnan-fu and Tali-fu, then 
eastwards to Kuei-yang, Kuei-lin, and across Nan-ning back to Hanoi. Not 
only Yunnan-fu, but Lin-gan and Mong-tse as well, belong to the limestone 
region. It is traversed, according to Leclfere, by great flexures, striking 

1 F. von Richthofen, Ueber Gestalt und Gliederung einer Leitlinie in der Morphologie 
Ostasiens, Sitzb. k. preuss. Akad. Wiss. Berlin, XL, 1900, p. 893 et seq. 

2 F. S. A. Bourne, Report of a Journey to^North Ssu-Chuan in South-Western China, 

Blue Book for 1883, China, no. I, Fol., 92 pp., maps. S. L. Litton also penetrated as far 
as Sungpan in the north-west ; Report of a Journey to North Ssu-Chuan, Blue Book for 
1898, Miscellaneous Series, no. 457, 48 pp., maps, < 



TRIAS IN YUNNAN 


229 


CH. Vi] 


to the north-north-east, which bring the whole region down, in a series of 
steps sinking to the east-south-east, from the mean height of 2,200 meters 
to 400 or even 100 meters. 

The results of this journey, and the works of Douvilte and Zeiller, based 
on Leclere’s collections, sijow how great is the rtratigraphical diversity of 
this region. Middle and upper Devonian appear in the neighbourhood of 
Lu-nan, east of Yunnan-fu, and various subdivisions of the Carboniferous 
and Permian have been met with as far as Kuei-lin, where upper Carboni- 
ferous occurs. A species allied to Lecanltes , psilogyrus of the Salt range 
was found not far from Kuei-yang. In the west, near Mong-tse, grey coral 
limestone occurs with Naticopsis declivis , Delphinulopsis Cainali, and 
other forms characteristic of Esino and the Marmolata, in Tyrol. The 
presence of Lias is doubtful ; on the other hand, plant- bearing beds, which 
Zeiller assigns to the Rhaetic stage, occur at many localities l . 

This great limestone plateau, together with the repetition of the Ta-pa- 
shan which appears near I-tshang on the Yang-tse-kiang, is cut off, in its 
northern and larger part, so Richthofen and Leclere concordantly affirm, 
by a fault or flexure which strikes to the north-north-east ; some difference 
of opinion exists as to the eastern end of the southern part. Richthofen 
emphasizes the very remarkable fact that the fracture at I-tshang cor- 
responds in position and direction with the flexure of Tai-hang-shan in 
Shansi, and also with the eastern scarp of the Tsin-ling-shan. Further 
south Leclere mentions a north-north- easterly trending ridge of prae- 
Cambrian rocks which rises along this line, near Hoai-juen, south-west of 
Kuen-luen, and a granite mass to the west, on the Si-kiang, accompanied by 
prae-Cambrian rocks. 

The relations of these ancient rocks cannot be determined from the 
•accounts so far at our disposal. We are hardly in a position to decide 
whether they form the foundation of the limestone platform, as at I-tshang, 
or whether they are parts of an ancient mass, which exists probably in the 
south-east of China as an independent foreland of the Altaides. 

The little which we know, through Madrolle, of the island of Hainan 
shows us in the centre the mountain of 8ai , formed of granite and schist, 
from which ranges extend in different directions. An argillaceous sandy 

yen '-mm ® ° J 

1 Leclere, Sur la g4ologie de la Chine meridionale, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 1900, CXXX, 
pp. 184, 185, and Sur la continuity tectonique du Tonkin avec la Chine, op. cit., CXXXI, 
pp. 966-969, map ; and Geographie generate des provinces chinoises voisines du Tonkin ; 
La Geographie, 1900, pp. 267-288, map. H. Douville, Examen des fossiles rapportes de 
la Chine par la mission Leclere ; C. R., 1900, CXXX, pp. 592-595. Lecanites psilogyrus 
belongs to the lowest horizon of the lower Trias of the Salt range. A more definite 
determination has been made which would extend the limit of the Mesozoic Tethys to 
beyond long. 107° E. and north of lat. 26° N. This ^enus, however, was also found by 
Diener in the Permian Bellerophon beds ef the South Alps. From a locality in Kuei- 
tshou, not definitely named, E. Koken has 'described a Trias fauna of the type of 
St. Cassian; N. J. f. Min., 1900, I, pp. 186-215. 



230 THE EASTERN ^LTAIDES [partiv 

formation* red in the north and yellow in the east, surrounds this 
^mountainous region 1 . 

i The delta of the Red river and the coast of Tongking have been already 
discussed (II, p. 170). I must confess with regret that I have not arrived 
at any opinion as to the connexion between the outcrops of the plain and 
those of the ranges of the Red river. From subsequent observations of 
Jourdy’s it seems as though above the delta, somewhere near Phu-lang- 
thuong, this connexion is established by a bend in the strike 2 . 

The cordillera of A nnam, which borders the east coast, is shown very 
clearly on the geological map of Indo-China drawn up many years ago by 
E. Fuchs 3 . Bel, starting from the Mesozoic coal-measures of Tourane on 
the east coast (lat. 16° 10' N.), crossed the whole breadth of the cordillera. 

It consists there of several coulisses, 600-900 meters high, formed of 
granitic and dioritic rocks, and then of gneiss and crystalline schists. It 
is bordered, but only on the western side, by more recent stratified rocks. 
It is extremely probable that the small mountain tract already mentioned 
as occurring near Lakon on the Mekong (lat. 17° 20') forms part of the 
cordillera 4 . 

Beyond Attopeu (south of lat. 15° N.) is an independent mountain mass 
in which Joubert observed an extensive development of basalt. It lies 
west of the cordillera towards the Mekong, and probably belongs to the 
mass of Cambodia (II, p. 169). 

Summary . Having once overcome the damming back caused by the 
Sinian mole (Ordos) in the east, and the constriction due to the Yarkand- 
arc (Altyn-tag, Anembar-ula) in the west, the mighty branches of the 
middle and eastern Kuen-luen extend themselves from the Arka-tag in 
a straight east-south-east line on the south side of the Sinian mole, as 
through the Tsin-ling-shan. Soon, however, a fresh constriction of the^ 
coulisses appears, caused on the west by the Himalaya, on the east perhaps 
by the action from afar of an older mass in south-east China, of which as 
yet but little is known; as the chains advance towards the south they 
become parted by the intervening mass of Cambodia. It cannot be deter- 
mined whether this mass really makes its influence felt towards the north, 
or whether the mere widening of the space is itself sufficient to determine 
the separation of the chains. 

The western group runs though Burma down to the Malay peninsula, 
and the eastern group through Yunnan and Tongking. The divergence of 

1 C. Madrolle, fitude sur Tiale d’Hainan, Bull. Soc. geogr. Paris, 1898, 7 e ser., XIX, 
pp. 187-228, map. 

* J. E. Jourdy, Note complementaire sur la Geologie de l’Est du Tonkin, Bull. Soc. 
g6ol. de Fr., 1885-1886, 3 e s<§r., Xiy, p . 445, map. 

3 E. Fuchs and E. Saladin, Ann. des Mines, *1882, 8 e s<h\, Memoires, II, pi. VI. 

* J. M. Bel, Mission au Laos et en Anfiam, Bull. Soc. geogr. Paris, 1898, 7 e ser. XIX* 
pp. 261-290. 



231 


ch.vi] THE LIMESTONE PLATEAU 

the chains is already obvious between Ta-li-fu and Young- tshen-fu, and it 
can be traced onwards in the region of the Mekong. At the same time the 
chains decline in height as they proceed towards the south. 

The damming back caused by the eastern end of the Himalaya finds 
expression in the arcuate advance of the Patkoi and Naga hills, as well as 
in the curve described by the mountains of Arakan. Further towards the 
interior this course is represented by the south-westerly direction which 
can be traced from Kunlun through Thibau to Mandalay. Then, in the 
Shan states of Burma, several of the coulisses which approach from the 
north and north-east disappear beneath a karst-like plateau of Palaeozoic 
limestone, which is folded and owes its tabular form to denudation. Fresh 
coulisses make their appearance in the south and form the Malay peninsula. 
A very long and extremely regular zone of disjunction runs down from the 
volcano of Ho-shue-shan between the coulisses of the Altaides, and in all 
probability extends to the Banda islands. 

The configuration of the eastern group is completely different. 

The Ta-pa-shan, driven in overthrust flakes to the south, adapts itself to 
the south side of the Tsin-ling-shan ; it is part of an arc concave towards 
the south-east, the western limb of which merges into the north and south 
coulisses of Yunnan. A fragment of a second similar range occurs west of 
I-tshan on the Yang-tse-kiang. The western part of the high coulisses of 
Yunnan is continued in the direction of the Red and the Black rivers; and 
the cordillera of Annam is, to all appearance, a member of this group. The 
eastern part sinks beneath the great limestone plateau of Kuei-tshou, south- 
east of Yunnan and west Kuang-si, in the same way as the coulisses of 
north-east Burma sink beneath the limestone plateau of the Shan states. 
In this case, as in that, the limestone is folded, and the plateau owes its 
form to abrasion. This was observed by Middlemiss in Burma and by Bourne 
in Kuei-tshou. Elsewhere, too, we perceive this cave-eaten limestone 
between the spurs of the range, e.g. in the plain of Sei-mao. Generally 
speaking, both the high-lyin j karst-land of the Shan states in Burma , and 
the great limestone region of south-ivestern China , appear to represent a 
mantle of folded sediments which has been room away from the high chains, 
but remains preserved i n the less elevated parts as abraded plateaux, beneath 
ufUtch the chains sink gradually out of sight 1 . 

In this way the mighty swell of the Altaides in Thibet subsides and is 
dispersed. The whole continent becomes lower. Many coulisses disappear. 
Only a few long branches are continued : on the east into the cordillera of 
Annam; on the west, always giving rise to fresh coulisses, through the 
Malay peninsula, and still further, to Java and beyond. 

The Malay Archipelago . We have noy arrived at one of the most 
instructive parts of the earth’s surface. § Four elements combine to form it : 

1 This has also been conjectured by Loczy ; Ostasien, p. 760. 



THE EASTERN ALTAIDES 


m 


[part IV 


the end wthe Burman are, the southern branches of the virgation of the 
Philippines, the spurs of the great cordillera of New Guinea, and finally' the 
Ipontinent of Australia, with the cordillera which marks its eastern border 
and crosses Torres strait. 

Let us consider the first of these elements in connexion with the preceding 
paragraph. 

The coulisses of this branch of the Altaides, in their furthest extension 
to the south-east, break up first into peninsulas and then into islands. The 
distance between the visible parts of the folded ranges continually increases, 
a feature often observed when a folded range reaches the sea. The islands 
and reefs become less numerous as their distance from the peninsula 
increases, until at last it becomes impossible to discover the trend-lines by 
which they are governed. But this does not always hold true for the 
volcanos. Very often we find that as a cordillera becomes concealed 
beneath the sea the volcanos increase in number ; and it may happen that 
the cordillera almost completely disappears, while curves of volcanos remain 
visible, and reveal the plan of the vanished structure. It is so in the case 
of the Aleutian islands, the Kuriles, the Liu-kiu islands, the Philippines, 
the Lesser Antilles, and, to some extent, in the Malay archipelago ; for this 
reason, it is always of particular interest to take note in such cases of the 
mature of the connexion between the volcanic lines and "the coulisses of the 
cordillera as they advance from the peninsulas into the sea. 

The Cretaceous and lower Tertiary zone of the Naga hills and the coast • 
of Arakan, with its long bands of serpentine, dips beneath the sea at cape 
Negrais and reappears in the Andaman and Nicobar islands 1 (I, p. 451), 
and the series of islands which lies west of Sumatra, from Pulo Nias to 
Engano (I, p. 457), may be regarded as its further continuation. 

Then follows the broad depression between this range and the Sit-taung, 
to which the basin of the Ira wadi and the Tertiary ridge of Pegu Yomah 
belong. The gulf of Martaban also corresponds to this elongated subsi- 
dence. 

It is as a continuation, not of one of the long folded ranges, but of this 
subsidence and the gulf of Martaban, that the long range of volcanos 
appears which extends from the Ho-shue-shan (lat. 23° 30' N.) through 
Puppa-doung (lat. 21°), the little trachyte rock of Chouk-talon (lat. 16° 22*1$.) 
to Narcondam (lat. 13° 24' N.) and Barren island (lat. 12° 17' N.) 2 (I, p. 455 ; 
II, p. 164). 


1 R. D. Oldham, Geology of the Andaman Islands, Rec. Geo 1. Surv. India, 1885, 
XVIII, pp. 135-145, map. Here the correspondence with the rocks of Arakan is again 
confirmed. 

2 A. Carpenter, Barren Island and Narconda^n, Rec. Geol. Sjjprv. India, 1887, XX, p. 46 
et seq. ; also Prain, Flora of Narcondam, £ourn. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, 1893, LXII, part 2, 
p. 39. * 



ch.vi] THE MALAY PENINSULA 283 

To the east, beyond the fracture on the Sit-taung, lie a number of 
coulisses, which are continued into the Malay peninsula (I, p. 456). 

Warington Smyth gives an excellent description of the extreme regularity 
and great length of these zones. West of the patches of upper Carboniferous 
which are known as far ^s Tenasserim,lies the first range of granite, which 
terminates at Jung Ceylan (lat. 7° 50' N.). It affords tin at several localities. 
Then comes a limestone zone on the east ; at Champa wn, on the east coast, 
(lat. 10° 30' N.) are isolated mountain bluffs which belong to it. They are 
continued in the rocky promontory of Sam Roi Yawt (about lat. 12° 6' N. ; 
619 meters) ; south of Langsuan the limestone cliffs reappear. The island 
of Antarong consists of folded limestone, and the limestone band as a 
whole corresponds to the basin of the river Bandon, which cuts through 
the peninsula obliquely* in a broad coulisse valley. 

East of this valley rises the second granite coulisse, likewise tin-bearing. 
It emerges from the sea in the island of Koh tau (about lat. 10° 6' N. ; 375 
meters), forms the hilly islands, Koh Pungum and Koh Samul (lat. 9° 45' N. ; 
676 meters and 691 meters), and entering the peninsula, becomes the 
Lakawn range, which thence onwards represents the axis of the peninsula l . 

Still further south this long granite range breaks up into isolated ridges 
and, associated with ancient sediments, reaches the sea near Singapore 2 . 
A series of cliffs and smaller islands reveals its continuity with the tin- 
producing islands of Banka and Billiton. 

Thanks to Verbeek’s detailed investigations the islands east of Sumatra, 
from Kaljan-gan in the west-north- west to Nangka in the east-south-east, 
i. e. for a distance of about 400 kilometers, belong to that part of the r 
archipelago which is most exactly known. The whole region is formed of 
very steeply upturned ancient sediments and intervening granite masses. 
•The sediments include quartzite and slates, also Radiolarian rocks, and are 
believed to be identical with the ancient schistose series of Sumatra, which 


1 H. Warington Smyth, Journeys in the Siamese East Coast States, Geogr. Journ., 
1898, XI, pp. 465 -489, map# North of Singora (lat. 7° 6') traces of another limestone 
band appear to be present in the east around the so-called ‘ inland lake ’ (p. 482). At 
the same time compare the older works of Low, Notes on the Geological features of 
.Singapore and some of the adjacent Islands, Journal of the Indian Archipelago, 
Singapore, 1847, I, pp. 83-100 ; J. R. Logan, Sketch of the Physical Geography and 
Geology of the Malay Peninsula, op. cit., 1848, II, pp. 83-138, and Geology of the 
Straits of Singapore, op. cit., 1852, YI, pp. 179-217 (also Q. J. G. S., 1854, VII. 
pp. 310-344, map) ; Logan, Notices of the Geology of the East Coast of Johore, Journal 
of the Indian Archipelago, Singapore, 1848, II, pp. 625-631. 

H. Lake, Johore, Geogr. Journ., 1894, III, pp. 281-297, map; also Louis, On the* 
River Telujpin, tom. cit., pp. 228 et seq., map. Some Mesozoic fossils of undeter- 
mined character were brought from ‘ Pahang trunk #oad on the Lipis liver. 1 Pahang 
lies on the south-east coast the peninsula; cf. R. Bullen Newton, On Marine Triassic 
Lamellibranchs discovered in the Malay Peninsula, Proc. Malacol. Soc., London, 1900, TV. 
pp. 130-135. , 



284 


THE EASTERN ALTAIDES 


[part IV 

is overlain* by upper Carboniferous. Their vertical dip is not dependent 
to the granite, which, according to Verbeek, is rather the consequence than 
the cause of the folding in the ancient sediments. In certain localities 
dykes of granite invade the sediments, and the contact phenomena show 
that much of the granite was intruded after the folding. 

The direction of the ancient sediments in the islands is not quite 
rectilinear. Even at Singapore we see clay-slates striking south-south-east 
(165°). In the little islands between Banka and Billiton we meet with 
a due east-and-west strike, and even east-by -north (75°) ; then at Nangka 
(lat. 2° 30' S., E. of long. 108° 30' E.) the strike is again south -south-east 
(165°). In spite of these deviations the series of islands maintains on the 
whole a direction to the east-south-east, and it is also along this line that 
the zone of ancient rocks exhibits its last outcrop ill the little island group 
of Karimoen djawa, north of Java 1 . 

The structure of Sumatra has been discussed on an earlier page 
(I, p. 457). Ancient schists and gneiss-like rocks form its foundation; 
their direction corresponds to the form of the island; they are covered 
uneonformably by a schistose mass of unknown age, but probably Carboni- 
ferous, then by the upper Carboniferous, richly fossiliferous, and by patches 
of Trias and Tertiary. • Here two disjunctive lines occur : along the west 
coast a line of andesite eruptions, which is of Tertiary age, and further east 
the long line of active volcanos. The latter runs along the east side of the 
Barisan range, which is formed of ancient schists, and extends through 
the whole length of the island. The east side of the island is low and flat. 
We might fairly regard it as the continuation of the depression on the 
Irawadi and the gulf of Martaban. A very slight rise of the sea-level 
would render this continuity apparent. Long after the upper Carboniferous 
had been known on the west side Volz found it on the east also, and 
discovered in addition the patches of Trias mentioned above 2 . 

Thus it looks very much as if the ancient schist range of Sumatra, cut 
through or cut off by these two disjunctive ljnes, formed part of an inde- 
pendent coulisse which is not visible in Burma. 

The whole region of the archipelago, as far as the continent of 
Australia — this, in contrast to the archipelago, is only affected by isolated 
transgressions — formed part of the Tethys, which extended from the* 

1 R. D. M. Verbeek, Geologische Beschrijving van Bangka en Billiton, Jahrb. Mijnw. 
Ned. O.-Ind., XXVI, 1897, XXI, and atlas. The tin occurs as an impregnation completely 
independent of the homstone in the zone of contact of the granite: it is associated 
with quartz veins, and is situated, in no small part, outside the granite in the region of 
the ancient sediments. 

2 W. Volz, Beitr&ge zur geologic chen Kenntniss von Nord-Sumatra, Zeitschr. deutsch. 
geol. Ges., 1898, LI, pp. 1-61, map ; L. Milch, Ueber Gesteine von der Battack-Hochfi&che 
(Central Sumatra), tom. cit., pp. 62-74; for a general survey, J. F. Hoekstra, Die Oro- 
und Hydrographie Sumatras, 8vo, Grbningen, 1893, 127 pp., map. 



Pl. II 



The Philippines and the Sunda Archipelago 

(After Drasche, Molengraaff, Hooze, Verbeek, Wichmann, Martin, Koto, and others) 



286 


THE EASTERN ALTAIDES 


[part IV 

continent Asia across Yunnan, and the marine series deposited over this 
area does not appear to present any important gap, from the time of the 
ujpper Carboniferous to the present day. The Mesozoic sediments exhibit 
a striking resemblance to those of southern Europe, as is the ease through- 
out the Tethys ; in particular the abundant presence of igneous rocks rich 
in magnesium silicates is characteristic of the Cretaceous formation and 
of many Flysch ranges both in this region and Europe. The great bands 
of Flysch in Arakan, which are at least in part Cretaceous, do not end 
with the Andaman and Nicobar islands (I, p. 455) ; even in the Mentawei 
islands peridotite and serpentine occur, as described by Traverso, who 
mentions amphibolite also 1 . After Martin had succeeded in showing that 
Orbitulina concava occurs in most intimate association with serpentine on 
the island of Java, Verbeek assigned to the Cretacebus formation not only 
the serpentines of the whole archipelago, but also the gabbro and diabase, 
as well as certain rocks hitherto regarded as amphibolite, and the green 
felspathic schists of the whole of this region 2 . 

It is not until the Tertiary period, during or shortly before the begin- 
ning of the first Mediterranean stage (Dep£ret’s Burdigalien) of south 
Europe, that the marine faunas lose their affinities with Europe and acquire 
an Indian character which renders a direct comparison with the European 
series more difficult. The limestone characterized by Lepidocyclina (Orbi- 
toides), attains considerable thickness ; Martin has termed certain of its 
subdivisions the Java stage ; it is certainly more recent than the Nummulitic 
limestone of the Eocene, and older than the continental formation containing 
the Siwalik fauna. In the southern Alps Lepidocyclina is found in the 
beds of Schio 3 . 

The active volcanos of the principal zone of Sumatra and Java continue 
eastwards to the island of Pan tar. From there onwards through Alor and« 
Kamping to Romang (Roma) only ancient craters are known, clearly forming, 
however, part of the same line, and beyond Romang active volcanos again 
begin. At the same time, proceeding from Flores onwards, the arc-like trend 
of the whole range becomes more and more pronounced. 

The case is so clear that the connexion between the volcanos beyond 
Romang, Damma, Teun, Nila, and Serua was recognized many years ago. 
The further continuation of the arc was sought, in accordance with what 

1 St. Traverso, Rocce di Sipora (I sole Mentavei), Atti Soc. Ligustica di Sc. nat. 
e Geogr. Genova, 1895, VI, p. 8. 

2 R. D. M. Verbeek, Voorloopig Verslag over eene geologische Reis door het Qostelijk 
Gedeelte van den Indischen Archipel in 1899, 8vo, Batavia, 1900, p. 15 ; also Verbeek et 
Fennema, Description g^ologique de Java et Madoura, 8vo, 1896, II, p. 928 et passim. 

3 K. Martin, Eintheilung der Tectiarschichten auf der Insel Java, Zeitschr. deutsch. 
geol. Ges., 1900, LII, Protokolle, pp., 2-8.* With reference to Douvilk’s work on 
Orbitoides in Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 18^8, 8 e s&r., XXVI, p. 595 et seq., Martin places 
the genus Lepidocyclina in the Oligocene. 



THE BANDA ARC 


237 


ch. vi[ 

was known of the facts at the time, in the island of Tuur, but erroneously ; 
the true continuation lies in Manuk and in the Banda group. Nevertheless 
its similarity in structure with the Lesser Antilles was even then recognized. 
Outside the volcanos in question an arc of non-volcanic islands was dis- 
tinguished ; and the Banda sea was compared with the Caribbean sea ; 
the Arafura sea, on the other hand, with the gulf of Mexico, i. e. the fore- 
land (II, p. 167). 

Almost at the same time Wichmann described the arc from Romang to 
the Banda islands. Martin and Kotd have also dealt with this question, and 
notwithstanding differences of opinion on points of detail, they agree that 
the Banda sea presents an arc of volcanos, which is open towards the west 
and surrounded on a the south-east and north by a girdle of islands, formed 
either of ancient rocks*or of Tertiary sediments l . 

This arrangement is shown very clearly on a map published by Wich- 
mann in 1899. A line of fracture is represented as surrounding the Banda 
sea and running from Wetar, through Romang and the volcanos already 
mentioned, to the south coast of Nusalaut and Amboina. The sunken side 
lies towards the interior, i. e. towards the Banda sea. A second fracture 
fairly concentric with the first is marked as running from Kisser, Moa, 
west of the Tenimber islands through Tuur, to the south side of Ceram 
and Buru, also with subsidence towards the interior. A third concentric 
fracture would seem to run in an arc east of the Tenimber and Kei islands 
to the north side of Ceram and Buru, with subsidence on the outside. Thus 
represented, we might regard the whole zone of the Tenimber, Kei, and 
Watubele islands, together with Ceram and Buru, as resting upon an arc- 
shaped horst, and this would be separated on the north by a trough subsi- 
dence from New Guinea, Misul, and Obi 2 . 

A somewhat divergent description is furnished by Verbeek, one of the 
most distinguished authorities on these regions. According to his conception, 
a connexion between the principal chain running through Java-Sumbawa- 
Flores and the Banda arc ef active volcanos is not admissible, on account 
of the greater age of the volcanos between Pantar and Romang. He 
regards the Banda arc as the border of an independent subsidence, and 
traces it through Damna, Teun, Nila, Serua, Manuk, the Banda group, and 

1 A. Wichmann, Gesteine von Kisser, Samml. geol. R. Mus. Leiden, 1887, II, pp. 183- 
201, pi. V ; also the sketch in Tijdschr. Ned. Aardr. Gen., 1892, 2nd ser., IX, tab. XIII, 
fig. 4. K. Martin, Die Kei-Inseln und ihr Verhaltniss zur Australisch-Asiatischen 
Grenzlinie, Tijdschr. Ned. Aardr. Gen., 1890, pp. 240-280; in particular p. 260 et seq. 
B. Kot6, On the Geological Structure of the Malay Archipelago, Journ. Coll. Sci. Tokyo, 
1899, XI, part 2, pp. 85-120, map. 

2 A. Wichmann, Der Wawani auf Amboina und seine angeblichen Ausbriiche, Tijdschr. 
Ned. Aardr. Gen., 1899, No. Ill, 109-142 ,• maj> ; also K. Martin, Einige Worte uber den 
Wawani, sowie iiber Spaltenbildungen und Strandverschiebungen in den Molukketi, 
tom. cit., pp. 709-742. 



m THE EASTERN ALTAIDES [partiv 

then mucL further still, west of the Tortoise and Lucipara islands, formed 
of limestone, to the volcano of Api, north of Wetar, and finally back to 
ifamna, so that it describes a closed ellipse 1 . 

We must first consider the configuration of the sea bottom. 

It has long been known that the Banda sea^in contrast to the open 
Ocean, possesses an equable temperature below a depth of 1,600 meters of 
about 3° C., and that the sea of Celebes, below a depth of 1,300 meters, 
down to the deepest parts of its basin, maintains a temperature of 3*7° C. 
From this it has been concluded that the lower and colder waters of the 
Ocean do not enter the deeper parts of these two seas. Weber's report on 
the soundings carried out by the Dutch ship Siboga shows that ridges 
actually occur bounding these greater depths 2 . 

The thousand-meter line unites Australia in a" broad arc with New 
Guinea and Halmahera. South of Halmahera the Obi islands form a long 
band, lying above the thousand-meter line, and only separated by a narrow 
interval from a further band which unites at a common level Bossi. 
M angola, and Taliabo with the Peling islands and the adjacent parts of 
Celebes. 

If, making use of Weber's data, we draw a section from the bottom of 
the Banda sea to east or south-east across the island arcs which here come 
into question, we obtain the following : (a) The Banda sea is here very deep 
and reaches 5,684 meters, (b) The recent volcanos, from Damna to the 
Banda group, stand upon a common ridge, (c) This ridge is succeeded 
towards the exterior by an arc-like furrow which presents depths of 3,000 
and even 4,000 meters, (d) Finally, we reach the line of the outer island 
arc, and with it the fragment of the cordillera. 

From this I think we may fairly infer that the principal fracture lies 
on the inner side of (d) and that the ridge (b) which separates the sub- 
sidences (a) and (c) consists of volcanic ejeetamenta. 

In addition, an independent elevation, the Siboga ridge, extends from the 
volcano of Api towards the north-east, and -embraces the Lucipara and 
Tortoise islands. Beyond it, towards the north -east, the sea bottom again 
sinks below 4,000 meters. 

If we could withdraw the veil which the Ocean extends over the abyss 
of the Banda sea, and thence to Sumatra over all the prolongations of 
the Burman arc, a most magnificent spectacle would present itself to 
our gaze. 

1 R. D. M. Yerbeek et R. Fennema, Description geologique de Javaet Madoera, 2 vols., 
8 v o, et Atlas, Amsterdam, 1896, pi. I et passim ; Yerbeek, Voorloopig Yerslag over eene 
geologische Reis door het Oostelijk Gedeelte van den Indischen Archipel in 1899, 
Extra-Bijvocgs. d. Javash. Courant, £Jo. 6 , Batavia, 1900, 48 pp., map. 

2 M. Weber, Die niederlandische £<& 0 ^a-Eipedition zur Untersuehung der marinen 
F&una und Flora des Indischen Archipels und einige ihrer Resultate, Peterm. Mitth., 
1900, XLYI, pp. 182-191, map. 



CHRISTMAS ISLAND 


289 


CH. Vi] 

The very steep slope, descending rapidly to depths of 3,000 and 3,500 
meters, which borders the west side of the Nicobar and Mentawei islands, 
draws close to the south coast of Java, and it is not till it has proceeded 
far to the east, and is approaching Sumba, that the sea bottom begins 
again to ascend ; here thp great slope turns to the south-east. At a still 
greater distance from Java the sea descends to below 7,000 meters in the 
Maclear deep, and beyond this subsidence, about 280 kilometers south of 
Java, rises a great isolated mountain, Christmas island ( + 356 meters); its 
flat summit rises as high above the floor of the sea as the peaks between 
Ta-tsien-lu and Batang above the surface ; if laid dry, it would surpass 
them in grandeur. 

For a great distance around the depths vary between 4,500 and 
6,000 meters. * 

Thus Sumatra and Java reveal themselves as the highest parts of 
a mighty mountain slope which forms the boundary between the lesser 
depths in the direction of Borneo and the region of the Burman folds, on 
the one hand, and the Ocean on the other; a slope incomparably more 
important than the boundaries of the same kind which are visible on the 
continent of Asia. It is true that the levelling action of subaerial denuda- 
tion does not here play so great a part, and that volcanic ejectamenta have 
also to be taken into account. Nevertheless a question may be raised as 
to how far the absolute or relative height should be considered, besides the 
breadth, in determining the importance of a folded range ; a question which 
involves many others extremely difficult to answer. We will disregard 
them for the present and turn our attention to Christmas island , of which 
Andrews has furnished an instructive description h 

Christmas island is one of an increasing number of islands which were 
formerly regarded as raised coral reefs, and are now known to consist of 
normal sediments of the Tertiary aera. In this case the mountain crowned 
by these sediments is no doubt an ancient volcano, and its slopes are so 
steep and uniform that depths of over 5,000 meters are met with at 
distances of about 30 kilometers in every direction. All around the volcano 
is covered by a mantle of Tertiary beds, once of much greater extent, and 
now cut off on all sides by cliffs ; an intercalation of trachyte occurs, and 
two later intercalations of basalt. An Eocene or Oligocene limestone 
extends up to a height of 250 or 300 feet (76-91 meters), and above it, 
up to at least 550 feet (167 meters) the same middle Tertiary limestone 
with Orbitoides ( Lepidocyclina ), which is so widely distributed in Java, as 
well as further to the north and east. The upper parts of the island are 
covered with dense vegetation and deep soil formed by the decomposition 

« 

1 .C. W. Andrews, A Monograph of Christmas Island (Indian Ocean), 8vo, London, 1900. 
(publ. by British Museum), in particular pp. 269-298, map. 



240 


THE EASTERN ALTAIDES 


[pakt rv 

of volcanic ash. Near the summit disconnected masses of limestone appear, 
containing indistinct organic remains, and to a great extent converted into 
dolomite. ' * 

On the summit itself (356 meters) the hard yellowish-white rock 
contains 40*02 per cent, of magnesium carbonatf . Here Andrews thinks 
he has recognized the traces of an ancient atoll. Small nodules are found 
formed of alternate concentric layers of calcium phosphate and manganese 
dioxide. The association of ancient guano beds, volcanic ash, sea-water, 
and limestone has afforded the requisite conditions for the formation of 
these mineral structures 1 . 

The formations of the summit are succeeded, in point of age, by the 
more recent deposits which form terraces on the slopes; some of these 
terraces have been produced by undercutting of the Tertiary beds, others 
are independent fringes of limestone. They descend to the sea in more or 
less well-marked steps ; the last but one, at a height of about 15 meters, 
is formed of coral limestone with a very fresh appearance ; the lowest lies 
only 2*7-3 meters above the sea. 

In discussing the Suez canal we distinguished an ascending (super- 
posed) and descending (apposed) series of deposits (I, p. 378). That the 
latter was formed during a mainly negative movement of the shore-line is 
certain : as to the former, the case is ambiguous. The limit between the 
two lies on the summit of the table-mountains. Similarly the dolomitized 
rock on the summit of Christmas island must be regarded as the last 
member of the ascending series, which belongs chiefly, or even entirely, to 
the Tertiary period, while the terraces are the visible expression of the 
intermittent negative movement. The deposits on the summit indicate 
the height at which this negative movement laid bare the then existing 
sea floor, and if it were certain that no tectonic movements had occurred 
subsequently, then this height would be 365 meters above the existing 
strand. But the Tertiary beds are intensely folded in pa,rts of Java, and 
it is not at all impossible that in Christmaq island also tectonic changes 
may have taken place since the Tertiary aera, simultaneously with negative 
eustatic movements of the strand 

This supposition becomes more probable if we turn our attention further 
east, where, between Sumba and Timor (long. 119° to 124° E.), a folded 
range emerges from the Maclear deep. 

Sumba , according to Yerbeek, is formed of ancient schists, gr$Mte,1and 
Cretaceous diabase; Rendjmva and Savu afford traces of Permian" and 
Trias; on Rendjuwa we see middle Tertiary beds, with Lepidocyclina 


1 C. W. Andrews, A Monograph of Chrisfemas Island, p. 290 ; E. W. Skeats, op. cit., 
p. 268. Gregory thinks it probable that the Tertiary limestone reaches the level of the 
plateau, op. cit., p. 208. 



TIMOR 


241 


CH, Vi] 

dipping at a high angle ; on Savu a steep anticline of Eocene, striking to 
north-east, and above it beds with Lepidocyclina which attain a dip of 40° 

Rotti and Timor reveal that varied series of sediments which were 
made known for the first time many years ago through the collections of 
Schneider, studied by Beyrich. Subsequently Rothpletz, from an examina- 
tion of Wichmann ’s collections, was able to show the existence of Permian, 
Trias, various stages of the Lias, and traces of higher subdivisions of 
the Jurassic; lastly, Boehm recognized Macrocephalites macrocephalue in 
Verbeek’s collection from Rotti. This series rests on Archaean rocks, the 
existence of which on the north-west coast of Timor had already been 
inferred by Beyrich from Salomon Muller’s observations; and we now 
know from Verbeek that it is overlain by Cretaceous eruptive rocks and 
Tertiary beds 2 . * • 

The structure of the little islands lying to the north-west of Timor is 
of importance because it shows that the cordillera of the Banda arc reaches 
here from Sumba and Timor . We learn, indeed, from Verbeek’s observa- 
tions that Leti consists of crinoidal Permian limestone, together with gabbro, 
and serpentine ; the latter are Cretaceous eruptive rocks and reappear in 
Moa , Kissar 3 , and Sermate ; Luang is formed of crinoidal limestone, and 
from Babar y Trias (?), a Mesozoic Lytoceras, and diabase are known ; the 
diabase also forms the island of Dai 

From Seera , in the Tenimber group, Martin mentions crystalline lime- 
stone, dolomite, and quartzite, while elsewhere in this group, as far as it 
has been studied, Tertiary beds prevail. Vordate is middle Tertiary, and 
Great Kei likewise ; the latter, perhaps, with Eocene in its lower parts 4 . 
Kwar consists, according to Verbeek, of ancient schists, which again 
crop out oh Tuur ; no volcanos occur on this island, but there are basic 
eruptive rocks of Cretaceous age ; and these are continued into Wcutabele 
and Manawoko. We have now followed the course of the arc to the 
neighbourhood^ Ceram; but before discussing that great island the 
following facfe may be mentioned. 

The evidence afforded by the rocks from Timor on to the Babar group 

■ 

1 R. B. if. Verbeek, Voorloopig Verslag, p. 18 et Eeq. 

1 E. Beyrich, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Gres., 1862, XXIV, p. 537, and Ueber eine 
Koblenkalk-Fanna von Timor, Abh. k. preuss. Akad. Wiss., Berlin, 1864, pp. 61-98 ; 
SchneMer, Bijdrage tot de geologiscke kennis van Timor, Natuurk. Tijdschr. voor Nederl.- 
lndi$, 1&#% XXV, pp. 87-107, und Geologische Uebersicht iiber den hollandisch-ostindi- 
schen Archipel, Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichs., 1876, XXVI, pp. 113-134, maps ; A. Wichmann, 
Bericht (lb ef eine im Jahre 1888-1889 ausgefuhrten Reise nach dem indischen Archipel, 
Tijdschr* Med. Aardr. Gen., 1892, IX, pp. 161-176; A Rothpletz, Die Perm-, Trias-, und 
Jura-Formation auf Timor und Rotti im indischen Archipel, Palaeontographica, 1892, 
XXXIX, pp. 57-106, map; Boehm, in Verbeek, Voorloopig Verslag, p. 48, and Reise- 
notizen aus Ott-Asien, Zeitschr. deutsch. geci. Ges., 1900, LII, pp. 554-558. 

3 Wichmann, Gesteine von Kisser (see above, note 1, p. 237). 

4 Martin, Die Kei-Inseln (note 1, p. 237). 

fiOLXiAS III * 



042 


THE EASTERN ALTAIDES 


[part IV 

proves conclusively that Timor belongs to the arc 1 . Some of the islands 
however (Kambing, Lirang, Wetar), lie to the north of Timor, the two latter, 
Indeed, almost due north, and consequently within that portion of the 
volcanic arc, running from Pantar to Roma, which is described by Verbeek 
as of greater age. Even west of this fragment we meet, according to 
Verbeek, with melaphyre in Alov , and traces of Lias or Trias in Kambing 2 . 
Lirang and Wetar are formed 'of ancient eruptive rocks, principally diabase. 

All these circumstances combine to emphasize the significance of that 
interruption in the series of active volcanos which occurs, as pointed out 
by Verbeek, to the east of Pantar ; they also show that in Sumba, Savu, 
Rotti, and Timor a new coulisse appears, and it is this which forms the 
cordillera of Banda. In accordance with this interpretation, the cordillera 
of Banda, throughout the whole of its course to Ceram, nowhere presents 
a single recent volcano. The older rocks and sediments lie towards the 
interior, while towards the exterior (Tenimber, Kei) Tertiary’ beds prevail, 
and still further towards the exterior the limestone platforms of the Aru 
islands assume the part taken by the Bahamas in the arc of the West 
Indies. In this way we perceive an increased resemblance between these 
widely separated island-chains. 

General results of no slight importance might be expected from a 
detailed investigation of the girdles of coral limestone, and the terraces, 
which are known not only on Christmas island but in Java and very many 
of the Banda islands, and again in Halmahera and New Guinea, where 
they attain a considerable elevation. The middle Tertiary beds with 
Orbitoides lepidocyclina are, as we have seen, folded in Java, Sumba, and 
other islands; on the other hand, an observer so well qualified as Verbeek 
declares that within the girdles no line of division can be drawn between 
the upper Tertiary (Pliocene), Quaternary, and recent formations, and that 
the existence of such a line of division is even improbable. But no one 
doubts that the existing coral and limestone formations are of the same 
nature as those of the girdles, and in direct, continuation with them, and 
that among these formations the highest are the most ancient. 

Here we have the opportunity seldom offered of comparing the effects 
of orogenic movements of the lithosphere with those of intermittent negative 
movements of the strand, and of estimating the relative importance of these 
effects. It is precisely in a case like this that the independence of the 
two movements is most clearly displayed 3 . 

1 So also Wichmann, Wawani, in Tijdschr. Ned. Aardr. Gen., 1899, 2nd ser.,*!XVI, p. 185. 

2 Schwager in Wichmann, op. cit. 1892, IX, p. 184. 

8 Verbeek mentions cases in which the uppermost limestone beds present a small 
inclination (5°-10°), the middle still smaller, while the more recent lie horizontal. 
I should be inclined to attach little importance to inclinations of this kind in the 
direction of the dip, because observation shows that they may arise from secondary 
causes, even from decalcification due to the flow of subterranean water. On the other 



oh. vi] PROLONGATIONS OF NEW GUINEA 243 

Probable prolongations of New Guinea . The group of islands which 
includes Ceram and Buru, Amboina, and the Uli&sser islands, has been 
described by Martin, and Verbeek has made a special study of Amboina 1 . 
Both Wichmann and Verbeek mark a fault- trough between Ceram and the 
islands to the south of it,«as though a splitting of the arc occurred there 2 . 

In Amboina we encounter, according to Verbeek, granitite and ancient 
diabase ; more recent than these is the peridotite, and the greater area is 
occupied by the norite-porphyrites for which the name Amboinite has been 
proposed ; these, as well as the peridotite, are regarded as Cretaceous. In 
any case, they may be considered, like a part at least of the rocks of the 
(Uiasser group and the island of Amblau , situated to the west, as the con- 
tinuation of those ba§ic rocks which we have traced to, Watabele and Mana- 
woko. A sandstone, probably of lower Mesozoic age, also occurs in Amboina. 

Ceram and Buru form, according to Martin, an imposing band of 
Archaean rocks, which runs east and west, and consists of mica-schist, 
associated with a limestone (the Buru limestone) of unknown age. On the 
south side of Ceram remains of an Ichthyosaurus were found, and in the 
north-west part of Buru, Belemnites and Aptychus are known to occur. 
At many localities in Ceram, as well as in Kelang and Manipa , the 
Cretaceous eruptive rocks appear 3 . 

Near the west coast of Buru, the Kapala Madang, probably formed of 
Buru limestone, reaches a height of 2,600 meters. 

It is, in itself, scarcely probable that the cordillera which comes from 
Sumba and Timor should reappear here in full development, after having 
broken up into a series of small islands and reefs. I am therefore inclined 
to regard the arc of Timor as uniting with another independent chain, 
striking east and west, and believe that Buru and Ceram should be looked 
upon as a continuation of the southern peninsula of New Guinea. 

Many circumstances support this view, which, owing to the very 

hand, disturbances of the course of the horizontal line would be important. Here the 
difficulties connected with the Alpenfjord are possibly repeated. Verbeek, Voorloopig 
Verslag, p. 37 et seq. 

1 K. Martin, Ueber seine Reise in den Molukken, dureh Buru Seram, und benachbarte 
kleinere Inseln, Verh. Ges. f. Erdk. Berlin, 1894, pp. 506-521, map ; Reisen in den 
Molujtken, I, Ambon und die Uliasser, 8vo, Leiden, 1897, maps. Ein Ichthyosaurus von 
Ceram, Samml. geol. R.-Mus. Leiden, 1898, IV, pp. 70-85 ; J. L. C. Schroeder van der 
Kolk, Mikroskopische Studien liber Gesteine aus den Molukken, I. Gesteine von Ambon 
und den Uliassern, Jaarb. Mijnw. Ned. 0. Ind., 1895, XXIV, pp. 1-57 ; R. D. M. 
Verbeek, Orer de Geologie van Ambon, Verh. k. Akad. Wetensch., Amsterdam, 1899, 
2 sect., VI, No. 7, pp. 1-26; and the works of Martin and Wichmann on the Wawani, 
quoted above. 

2 Wichmann also marks a third arc, which runs from the north-west coast of Australia 

across the Aru islands, the west coast of New Guinet, and the south coasts of Misul 
and Obi. * # 

3 For the older rocks in the north of Buru cf. also Schroeder van der Kolk, Samml. 
geol. R.-Mus. Leiden, 1900, VI, .pp. 77-127. 

R 2 



244 THE EASTERN ALTAIDE^ [partiv 

limited knowledge we possess of New Guinea, cannot be more closely 

cordillera of New Guinea bends completely into an east-and- 
west direction at its western extremity, and reaches the west coast in 
lat 4° S. under the name of the Charles Louis mountains. 

The same direction is followed by the Arfak mountains (about 2,400 
meters high) in the north peninsula. 

The M’Cluer inlet enters so deeply in between the two northern penin- 
sulas of New Guinea that it is separated from Gelwinck bay by a ridge 
only 25 to 80 kilometers broad. This ridge consists, according to A. B. 
Meyer, of limestone ; while in the north and south Archaean rocks, especially 
granite, are known, and from the Arfak range gneiss svlso 1 . 

The position of M’Cluer inlet corresponds to a zone of the ocean almost 
devoid of islands, which extends westwards to the east coast of Celebes ; 
this zone is bounded on the north by the islands of Misul, Obi-Besar, 
Manguli with Sula Bessi, Taliabo, and the Peling group, which are parallel 
to Ceram and Buru, and extend to Celebes. South of Obi the sea reaches 
a depth of 3,400 meters. 

For information on this chain of islands we must again turn to Verbeek’s 
observations. Archaean rocks, generally accompanied by granite, appear 
on most of the islands of the Peling group, also on Taliabo , Manguli y Sula 
Bessi , and, according to Wichmann and Kukenthal,on the Obi islands also. 

On the south side of Taliabo and Manguli, Jurassic beds also appear, 
which, according to G. Boehm, contain Stephanoceras Humphriesianum , 
Stephanoceras Brongniarti 9 and Belemnites Gerardi ; Cretaceous likewise 
occurs with Hoplites, Acanthoceras, Schloenbachia, and Inoceramus 2 3 . To 
the east, in Misul , the 1 Siboga ’ expedition met with Ammonites and 
Belemnites. 

The Cretaceous eruptive rocks, so often mentioned, are known at 
several localities in the eastern peninsula of Celebes — Bangui, both in the 
north towards the gulf of Tomini, and in the south towards the gulf of 
Tolo ; they reappear in Obi Besar, Obi Latu, and the little island of Tamat. 

Wichmann states that a band of olivine rocks may be traced from the 
south-east peninsula of Halmahera, through Fau near Gebee , and through 
Gag to Waigu) and Verbeek mentions these Cretaceous eruptive rocks from 
so many localities between Misul and Waigu that they probably form, 
along with Tertiary sediments, the greater part of the islands between 
Halmahera and New Guinea. 

1 A B. Meyer, Ausziige aus den auf einer Neu-Guinea-Reise im J. 1873 gefiihrten 
Tagebiichern, fol., Dresden, 187$,' p. 16 ; A. Frenzel, Mineralogiscbes aus dem ostindj- 
schen Archipel, Jahrb. k. k. geol. Beicbs., fl377, XXVII (Tschermak, Min. petr. Mifcth.), 

pp. 306-308. 

3 Boehm in Verbeek, Voorloopig Verslag, p. 48. • 


Investigated. 

* The great 



FORMOSA 


245 


CH. VlJ 

They also appear in Baianta , Salawati , as river pebbles on the north 
coast of New Guinea, and in the island of Boon in Gelwinck bay, which for 
the rest is formed of mica-schists. The natives search for the serpentine 
and make use of it, so Beccari states when referring to the neighbourhood 
of Humboldt bay \ # 

It is a remarkable fact that the whole of that part of the archipelago 
which runs east and west between New Guinea and Celebes is without 
volcanos. It is not till we reach the north, in the direction of Halmahera, 
that Wichmann and Verbeek mark a number of andesitic cones. These 
are, according to Verbeek: La-ivien (east of Obi Besar), Pi&ang, Kojmu 
(north of Misul), and somewhat further north, Klaarbeek. Wichmann 
regarded them as the continuation of a line of fracture starting from the 
south-west of Halmahera and convex towards the south-west; Verbeek 
marks two parallel and independent lines running in an east-north-east 
direction towards the north coast of New Guinea. 

Formosa (II, p. 175). The Liu-kiu group consists of two series of 
islands : one, lying to the west, volcanic ; the other, on the east, formed of 
the remains of the cordillera. We have traced the cordillera to Okinawa- 
shima (II, p. 176). Koto supposes that this cordillera reappears to the 
south in the Nambu-sho-to (southern) islands, but with a bend of the 
strike, and at the same time with a screw-twist as it were, so that its 
folding appears henceforth to be directed, not to the east, but to the west, 
and it so continues to Formosa 1 2 . 

This theory accords with Yamasaki’s statement that the Niitalca chain , 
the most important in Formosa, strikes in the north of the island to the 
west-south- west, further down to the south-west, and finally, in the south 
of the island, to the south, so that it forms part of an arc concave to the 
ocean. It first presents itself on the north-east coast of the island in a 
mighty precipice extending from lat. 24° 30' to 24° 10' N., rapidly ascends 
in Selsu (Sylvia) to 3,424 meters, reaches 4,145 meters in the Niitaka-yama 

1 0. Beccari, in Cosmos di G. (Jora, 1875-76, III, p. 371. 

2 B. Kot6, The Geological Structure of the Liu-Kiu Curve, Geol. Mag. Tokyo, 1897, V, 
No. 49, pp. 1-12, map. In addition to the zones mentioned above (II, p. 176) Kot6 
distinguishes an eastern, outer, and more recent zone, by which the resemblance to the 
Antilles is increased. It runs through Tanega shima, Kitai, the south-west part of 
Okinawa shima, Miako shima (with Lepidocyclina), and the southern part of Nishi 
Omoti. It consists chiefly of coral limestone. The bend in Nam-bu-sho-to was marked 
by Kot6 on the map, but has not yet been described ; no competent geologist has yet 
visited this island. We know that granite and gneiss occur in the north half of 
Ishigaki, but only from hand specimens ; the south half is Tertiary. Marine Tertiary, 
with coal occurring in a syncline, is described by Yoshishara from the north-west end of 
Formosa, op. cit., 1899, VI, No. 72, p. 333. A section across Formosa published by 
Ishii corresponds on the whole with tfce description given here. The Geological 
Magazine of Tokyo appears in the Japanese language, and I am indebted for the 
communication of these facts to Mr. Yamasaki. 



246 THE EASTERN ALTAIDES [partiy 

{Mount Mbirison), and then sinks towards the south beneath Tertiary 
deposits which form the whole southern promontory. 
r The Niitaka chain, so far as it has been examined, is formed of ancient 
schists and crystalline limestone. It is accompanied in the west by the 
Kali chain ; regularly stratified Tertiary sediments, Nullipore limestone, 
and sandstone with Lepidocyclina, form its parallel ridges, ‘ resembling a 
number of books shoved one against the other.’ 

The east side of the Niitaka chain is very steep; a sharply defined 
longitudinal valley runs along its foot from lat. 24° to 22° 45' N., and 
separates it from the narrow and parallel range of Taito , which forms the 
east coast of this region, and consists of Tertiary deposits, with andesite 
and tuffs. 

The most northerly part of Formosa is distinguished by the active 
volcanic group of the Taiton 1 . 

The statement that basaltic tuff occurs on the Pescadores is confirmed 
by Koto; three separate streams of basalt are to be seen (II, p. 176). The 
presence of lignite beds in the tuff may be noted. The little islands south 
of the Rover channel also consist of basalt. 

Kasho (Samasano), east of Formosa, is a conical mountain of andesite. 

Koto-sho (Botel-tobago) shows feldspar-basalt and andesite, and also 
gabbro and serpentine ; perhaps the basic rocks which attain so great an 
extension in the south commence here 2 . 

Kotd regards Botel-tobago, lesser Botel-tobago (Sho-Koto), the Forest, 
Belle, and Gadd reefs, the Batun and Babujan islands, as members of a chain 
which extends to the volcano of Cagua, in north Luzon. This view accords 
with Drasches results. As a point of great interest it may be observed 
that the volcano of Cagua, in north Luzon, stands not on a coulisse, but in 
a coulisse valley, which precisely resembles the line of Barren island in the 
gulf of Pegu. 

Borneo. The theory that tectonic relations exist between the Philippines 
and the Malay Archipelago is an old one. early as 1845 Earl drew up 
a map on which one volcanic arc is marked from the Liu-kiu islands to 
Formosa, and a second from Formosa to Luzon ; at Luzon the arc divides 
and runs to south and south-west in two arcuate lines which correspond 
almost exactly with the lines obtained by Centeno some years afterwards 
(II, p. 174). East of Flores these two lines again unite, and are continued 
through Java and Sumatra to Barren island, so that the Philippines and 
the whole Malay archipelago appear to be surrounded by a single volcanic 
arc. Another similar arc runs, according to Earl, from the north-west of 

1 N. Yamasaki, Unsere geograpfcischen Kenntnisse von der Insel Taiwan (Formosa), 

Peterm. Mitth., 1900, pp. 221-234. % • 

2 B. Kot6, Notes on the Geology of the dependent Isles of Taiwan, Joum. Coll. Sei. 

Tokyo, 1899, XIII, part 1, 57 pp., map. t 



ch. vi] VIRGATION OF THE PHILIPPINES 247 

New Guinea eastwards, through the Solomon islands and the New Hebrides, 
to New Zealand \ 

Unfortunately the author of this remarkable work was led by incom- 
plete observations to assume that the ancient rocks of Malacca strike 
across Borneo and the vcjcanic arc to Australia. And, just at the time his 
work appeared, Richard Owen, by his descriptions of the fossil marsupials 
of Australia, had seemed to confirm the conclusion that a connexion between 
Australia and Asia cannot have been in existence since a comparatively 
remote period. The views of Earl consequently met with opposition, and 
his work was forgotten. 

By others the question has been raised, whether it is not possible to 
discover from a study of simultaneous eruptions some intimate connexion 
between the volcanos which extend from the Sangi (or Sanguir) group, 
north of Celebes, to Mindanao or even to Luzon. Perrey has collected dam 
bearing on this subject 1 2 . 

The works of R. von Drasche have made us better acquainted with the 
virgation of the Philippines, which opens out towards the south (II, p. 171). 
This virgation reveals the points of junction with the Malay archipelago. 
Its dominant lines may be easily recognized by a glance at the map. The 
first is the Palawan line, which cuts off the south China sea. The second 
is the Sulu line, which bounds the Sulu sea; the third, the Sangi line, 
which bounds the Celebes sea. A fourth line occurs, but less obviously ; 
this lies to the north, off the west coast of Halmahera ; it is the line of 
Ternate. 

The first line is the most nearly continuous, the second less so, the third 
still less ; the fourth is a fragment. The first is represented by ancient 
rocks, the second by recent sediments, partly resting on basalts. The third 
is represented by volcanos ; it may be traced, especially with the help of 
Abell a’s observations, from the island of Biliran, as far as the great volcanic 
zone of the Albai, in the south-east of Luzon 3 . The fourth, likewise, is 
represented by volcanos; its northern continuation is not visible. 

In comparing these lines, which are in part coulisses (Palawan), and in 
part volcanic (Sulu, Sangi, Ternate), it may be observed that here, and 
particularly in Mindanao, the fact again becomes apparent that the volcanic 

1 G. Windsor Earl, Contributions to the Physical Geography of South-Eastern Asia 
and Australia. This memoir appeared first in the Trans. R. Geogr. Soc. London, 1845, 
XV, and then, with very important additions, in the Journal of the Indian Archipelago, 
Singapore, 1852, VI, pp. 248-277, map, and 1858, new ser., II, pp. 278-286. 

2 A. Perrey, Documents sur les tremblements de terre et les phenomenes volcaniques 

dans l’Archipel des Philippines, Mem. Acad. Sci. Dijon, 1860, 2 e ser., VIII, pp. 85-194, 
map, according to Hochstetter ; cf. also J. N. Aguilar* Mindanao, su historia y geografia, 
8vo, Madrid, 1894, p. 73. • # 

8 E. Abella y Casariego, La Isla de Biliran y sus Azufrales, Bol. Com. Mapa geol. 
Espana, X, 1884, XI, pp. 359-^69, map ; in particular p. 365. 



THE EASTERN ALTAIDES [partiv 

*n. , 4 

? ♦ 

lines cor JWpcmd more frequently to valleys between coulisses than to the 
%oulis$es themselves. * 

^ The north-east of Borneo corresponds to the breadth of the Sulu sea; 
to^y a few years ago very little was known of the structure of this great 
‘ island (II, p. 167). « 

, As regards the arrangement of the mountain ranges of the interior, it 
was supposed to resemble Halmahera or Celebes. Then the preponderant 
influence of the direction from north-east to south-west or from north- 
north-east to south-south- west received increasing recognition 1 * . 

We have since learnt from Molengraaffs explorations, to which the 
latest great advance in our knowledge of the island is due, that the centre 
of Borneo is occupied by broad zones with an almost due east-and-west 
strike *. A study of the observations at present at bur disposal affords the 
fallowing summary : — 

The island of Banguey in the Palawan chain is formed of serpentine and 
marble 3 ; a little south of it lies the small island of Malwalli, where a hot 
mud spring is mentioned ; then we reach Borneo. The two promontories 
which bound the bay of Marudu mark the beginning of the most important 
mountain range in the island. Towards the south-east a vast plain extends, 
reaching the hilly ranges which form the north side of Darvel bay 4 , but 
towards the south-west a range formed of sandstone and slates rises higher 
and higher until it culminates in the mass of Kinibalu (5,088 meters), 
Which is formed of syenitic granite, and dominates all the surrounding 
countiy. According to Spencer St. John’s account, extremely steep and 
lofty cliffs separate the granite mountain on several sides from a deeply 
furrowed range which surrounds it. The summit, or rather the crest, is 
about three kilometers long, and towards the north-east, separated from it 
by a deep fissure, extends a longer jagged ridge which is 3,000 to 3,300 
meters high. Another spur runs first to the south-west, and then to the 
south-south- west ; it soon sinks to 2,400 meters, but is at least 30 kilo- 
meters in length. At a distance of 45 kilometers the height of the passes 
sinks to 1,370 meters. Towards the west the height of the granite cliffs 

1 See the works of Dutch geologists in the south-east of the island, which will be 
quoted later, and T. Posewitz, Borneo, 8vo, Berlin, 1889, maps, p. 198. 

* G. A. F. Molengraaff, Die niederlandische Expedition nach Central-Bomeo in den 
Jahren 1893 und 1894, Peterm. Mitth., 1895, pp. 201-208, map, and Geologische 
Verkenningstochten in Centraal-Borneo (1893-1894) ; uitgegeven door de Maatschappij 
ter Bevordering van het Natuurkundig Onderzoek der Nederlandsche Kolonien, 8vo, 
XXI, Amsterdam, 1900, atlas and appendix. Hinde, Description of Fossil Radiolaria 
from the Rooks of Central Borneo, Leyden, 1899, 56 pp. 

8 F. Giordano, Una esplorazion^.a Borneo, Boll. Soc. geogr. ItaL, 1874, XI, p. 2Q9 r 
map of the island of Buguey. « 

4 It has been described by W. B. Pryer, Notes on North-Eastern Borneo and the Sulu 
Islands, Proc. R. Geogr. Soc., ^883, p. 90. 



ch. vi] BORNEO 249 

reaches thousands of feet, but the adjacent chains ^ sink so rapidly that at 
a distance of le|b than 40 kilometers we reach the sea-sholfe 1 . 

The trend of the crest of Kinibalu corresponds with Chat of the raiige, 
which, as Crocker recognized many years ago, runs first, with varying 
height, to the south-sout^-west and south-west, and reachdSl the mountain 
of Tjondong or Tidong in about long. 112° 25' E. In its course, from about 
lat. 1° 30' N. onwards, the range gradually bends into an east-and-west" 
direction, then to the north-west. On the upper Sikajam (long. 110° 20 / E.), 
where the bend to the north-west is most marked, masses of gtfbbro rise 
through the schist 2 ; finally the arc reaches the west coast of Borneo in the| 
schistose rocks of cape Datu and the granite of Gading, a neighbouring 
mountain (lat. 2° 5' N.) 3 . 

Such evidence as we at present possess seems to show that the sediments 
on the north side of this arc are characterized by great variety. The sand- 
stones appear to be widely distributed 4 ; long limestone zones appear, in 
which the well-known bird caves are found. In Sarawak one of the early 
floras of the Gondwana series was recognized by Tenison Woods (II, p. 168) ; 
some of the limestone bands are probably Palaeozoic, but from a limestone 
of another kind, on the banks of the Sarawak, R. B. Newton has described 
examples of Alectryonia amor, a species which occurs in the middle Jurassic 
of Europe 5 . Finally the Tertiary coal of the island of Labuan must be 
assigned to the outer border. 

It is this range to which Molengraaff has given the name of the upper 
Kapuas mountains : he has traced its southern slopes eastwards from the 
sources of the Kapuas to long. 114° E. The brilliant achievements of this 
explorer throw great light on the structure of the interior of the great 
island. 

The river Kapuas, of greater length than the Rhine, flows in a westerly 
direction ; it rises in lat. 1° N., and discharges into the sea a little south 
of the Equator. Its fall from Bunut, 738 kilometers from its mouth, to 
the sea, amounts to only 3% meters. At Bunut we are in the vast and 

1 Spencer St. John, Observations on the North-west Coast of Borneo, Geogr. Journ., 
1862, p. 219; O. Stapff, On the Flora of Mount Kinibalu in North Borneo, Trans. Linn. 
Soc., 1894, 2nd ser., Botany, IV, contains a collocation in pp. 70-78 of all the observations 
made on the structure of this mountain mass. 

2 C. J. van Schelle, Onderzoek naar Cinabar en Antimonium-glans in het Boven- 
stroomgebied der Sikajam-Rivier, Jaarb. Mijnw. Ned. O. Ind., 1884, XIII, pp. 128-141, 
maps. 

5 W. M. Crocker, Notes on Sarawak and North Borneo, Proc. R. Geogr. Soc., 1881, 
already marks on the map this deflexion to cape Datu. 

4 e. g., D. D. Daly, Explorations in British North Borneo, Proc. R. Geogr. Soc., 1888, 

pp. 2, 12, 15. # 

5 R. Bullen Newton, On a Jurassic Lan^llibranch and some other associated Fossils 
from the Sarawak River Limestones of Borneo* with a Sketch of the Mesozoic Fauna of 
the Island, Geol. Mag., 1897, Dec. 4, IY, pp. 407-415. 



250 


THE EASTERN ALTAIDES 


[part IV 

low-lying r%dlu vial plain of the Kapuas ; north of the river, great lakes 
fvroaden out. To the north of the plain and the lakes lies the range of 
^Kapuas ; it forms a gentle arc convex towards the south. Starting from 
Berau, on the east-north-east, it reaches a height of 1,767 meters in the 
mountain of Lawt, on the watershed of the Kapuas, and then forms the 
mountain of Tjondong (1,242 meters), previously mentioned. North-west 
of the great lakes (west of long. 112° E.) it sinks very low, then it rises 
again, bend sto the west-north- west, and reaches, as we have seen, cape Datu. 

The upper Kapuas range consists, in the region examined by Molengraaff 
(long. 112° to 114° E.) of lustrous phyllite with veins of quartz. It breaks 
off towards the south in a long fault running east and west, which separates 
it from the plain of the river. Out of the plain rise hills and ridges of the 
Danau formation, which includes marl, limestone, dnd occasionally diabase 
tuff with beds of jasper and Radiolaria, possibly, according to Hinde, of 
Jurassic age. These rocks are deeply let down along the phyllite chain ; 
they have been traced from east to west for a distance of 280 kilometers. 
Towards the south we encounter above them folded Cenomanian beds with 
Orbitolina concava. 

Above this faulted-down series a volcanic range of later date appears on 
its southern border ; Molengraaff terms it the Muller mountains. It begins 
in long. 112° 30' E. as a series of isolated andesite mountains, which run 
to the east, till their place is taken, in the same direction, by a broad table- 
mountain of horizontal volcanic tuffs, which are probably 1,200 meters 
thick, and contain silicified tree-trunks still in the position in which they 
grew, like those which have been discovered in the tuffs of the National 
park of the Yellowstone region. Still further east, taking the place of the 
tuff, we again see volcanic hills formed chiefly of very acid lavas. The 
Muller range also has been explored for 280 kilometers. Its eastern end 
is unknown. Further west isolated andesitic mountains stand in the midst 
of the plain of the Kapuas. It might well be asked whether the isolated 
volcanos formed chiefly of andesite, but in small part also of basalt, which 
occur further west, to the north-east of Bengkajiang, should not be regarded 
as remote outposts of the Muller range. Among these is Melabu (about 
lat. 0° 50' N., long. 109° 35' E.), long ago described ; the others are situated 
to the north-east, in lat. 1° N. 1 . 

The course of the volcanic rocks follows approximately the arcuate 
strike of the folded phyllite range. South of the phyllite range the united 
efforts of Dutch explorers have revealed as well the existence of sediments, 
of various ages, extending in a broad girdle which runs from the Muller 
range towards Bengkajiang, and corresponds to the downthrown band of 
the Danau formation and tht Cenomanian. 

t 

1 N. Wing Easton, Be Yulkanen Sitong en Pando ter Westerafdeeling van Borneo, 
Jaarb. Mijnw. Ned. O. Ind., 1889, XVIII, pp. 24-51, maps. # 



BORNEO 


251 


CH. VI] 

On the Boelit, a little tributary to the Kapuas near its source (about 
long. 113° 4 7' E.), and in the very midst of the tuff region of the Muller 
range, Molengraaff observed a dark-coloured limestone containing fossils, 
which perhaps belong to the genus Marginifera, and thus suggest an upper 
Palaeozoic age 1 . Far to* the west of this locality, between Loemar and 
Sepang, north-north-east of Bengkajiang, Wing Easton found Cephalopods, 
which Krause assigns to the Lias 2 . A series of outcrops of the upper 
Jurassic appears to run north of Bengkajiang in an east or east-south-east 
direction, from the neighbourhood of Kenda towards Buduk 3 . Then 
follows a series of outcrops of the Cretaceous, among which, however, only 
Cenomanian and Senonian have hitherto been observed. 

In 1889 Martin announced the unexpected discovery, based on specimens 
found by van Schelle/ that a part of the so-called ‘ancient schists' of 
western Borneo is of Cretaceous age. The Cretaceous schists often dip at 
a high angle, and run with an east or south-east strike through the above- 
mentioned regions of Boedoek and Sepang. They were also found north- 
east of Bengkajiang. Further, Everwijn also observed the Cenomanian 
with Orbitolina concava , mentioned above, far to the east, on the river 
Seberuang, and this horizon was also found by van Schelle on the river 
Bojang (long. 112° 30' E.). The middle Cretaceous probably exists along 
the whole outer margin of these scattered traces of a Mesozoic arc, until it 
disappears in the east beneath the volcanic accumulations of the Muller 
range 4 * . 

South of this downthrown band, which between long. 112° and 114° E. 
is occupied, as we have seen, by the plain of the Kapuas, the country 
assumes a different structure. Mighty beds of Tertiary sandstone occur, 
with no signs of folding, and form table-mountains. According to Krause’s 
investigations, they were deposited in brackish-water 6 . 

1 P. G. Krause, Ueber tertiare, cretacische und altere Ablagerungen aus West-Borneo, 
Samml. geol. R.-Mus. Leiden, 1897, V, p. 173. 

2 P. G. Krause, Ueber die Lias «von Borneo, tom. cit. 1896, pp. 154-168 ; K. Martin, 
Notiz fiber die Lias von Borneo, 1896, tom. cit. pp. 253-256. 

3 F. Vogel, Mollusken aus der Jura von Borneo, Samml. geol. R. Mus. Leiden, 1896, V, 
pp. 127-158 ; also Krause, Ueber die Lias von Borneo, tom. cit., p. 155. For the position 
of these beds see MolengraafFs map in Peterm. Mitth., 1895, pi. 14, and the atlas in his 
Central Borneo. 

Molengraaff, Central Borneo, p. 463 ; K. Martin, Untersuchungen iiber den Bau von 
Orbitolina (Patellina aut.) von Borneo, Jaarb. Mijnw. Ned. O. Ind., 1889, XVIII, 
pp. 86-108 ; Versteinerungen aus der sogenannten alten Schieferformation von West- 
Borneo, Samml. geol. R.-Mus. Leiden, 1889, IV, pp. 198-202 ; Krause, Ueber tertiare, 
cretacische und altere Ablagerungen aus West-Borneo, pp. 181-187. A fairly abundant 
iterature is already attached to these Cretaceous outcrops. Krause mentions a specimen 
r * ver Seberoeang which probably belongs to mLytoceras Sacya. 

Molengraaff, Geologische Verkenningstochten in Centraal-Bomeo, p. 444 et seq. ; 

m tertiare » cretacische und altere Ablagerungen aus West Borneo, pp. 188- 

o ; Martin has examined th^ fauna of the beds with Cyrena, which crop out in several 



252 THE EASTERN ALT AIDES [partiv 

On vfee river Embahu (long. 112° 20' E,, tributary of the left bank of 
the Kapuas) Eocene occurs with Cyrena borneemis, which accompanies the 
lignite beds of south-east Borneo. To the east, between the meridians of 
112° 40' and 113° 20' E., Molengraaff has drawn a section running souths 
wards to the sea, which cuts through all the heights south of the Muller 
range ; this we will now describe. 

We find ourselves on the south border of the plain of the Kapuas; 
Tertiary sandstone covers the ground ; above it rise isolated volcanic spurs 
of the Muller mountains ; below the sandstone we see here and there some 
folded Cenomanian, and possibly traces of the Danau rocks with Radiolaria. 
Then the Tertiary sandstone rises gradually in a broad platform towards 
the south. It is traversed by fractures running east and west, along which 
it is vertically upturned, but it soon flattens out again, descends slowly to 
the south, and forms the Modi plateau (up to 1,138 meters). Before 
reaching the Equator this plateau breaks off steeply towards the south. 
On its southern scarp we again see the folded Cretaceous beds. 

Here lies the upper course of the river Melawi. The Tertiary sediments 
may afford Cyrenas on various horizons; they again ascend gently in a 
broad platform towards the south, form the Schwanner range , and again 
break off steeply towards the south. This scarp, however, differs from the 
preceding. Granite forms its southern foot ; and the face of the fracture 
has probably been denuded back towards the north, so that it is no longer 
straight. Where it extends furthest to the south, the peak of Baja 
(2,270 meters), formed of granite and porphyry, dominates both the escarp- 
ment and the whole of the sandstone plateau. All the country south of 
the Raja must be regarded, according to Molengraaff, as faulted down; once 
more, in lat. 1° S. we see comparatively recent volcanic rocks lying in a 
fault-trough which crosses the river Samba, and then granitic rock which 
probably forms the foundation of the whole of the low-lying country down 
to the coast (lat. 3° 15' S.). 

Molengraaff’s section thus shows us the following : — 

In the north (down to lat. 1° 15' N.) there is a folded mountain chain 
(upper Kapuas range) with a gentle arcuate strike (east and west where 
crossed by the section). In the south (to the peak of Raja, in about 
lat. 0° 40' S.), a granitic foreland is visible from the coast upwards and 
further north is buried beneath sheets of lower Tertiary brackish-water 
sandstone (Schwanner range, Madi plateau). 

The whole border region between the mountain chain and the foreland 
is let down along faults striking from east to west. The downthrow of 

localities in the region of the *iver Melawi. They were formed in estuaries. The 
Melawi enters the Eapuwas north of the Schwanner range. K. Martin, Die Fauna der 
Melawigruppe, einer tertiaren (eoc&nen ?) Brakwasser-Ablagerung aus dem Innern vofi 
Borneo, Samml. geol. R.-Mus. Leiden, 1899, V, pp. 256-315. 



BORNEO 


258 


OH- Vi] 


the outer border of the chain is particularly great (lowland and lakes on 
the river Kapuas). On the south side of this great subsidence there once 
stood a chain of volcanos (Muller range), but the system of east-and- 
west fractures extends also into the foreland on the south, and Raja is 
perhaps a horst rising ii* the midst of the foreland. 

As far as I have been able to ascertain, this granite foreland attains in 
places to considerable heights, and, covered here and there by patches of 
Tertiary or gold-bearing alluvium, extends over a wide area. Molengraaff 
points to the granite of Soekadam in Matam (close to the west coast, 
lat. 1° S.) as corresponding with it. In fact it probably forms the whole 
south-west of Borneo, and towards the south, according to the older map 
of Gaffron, engirdles the whole plain which occupies the south coast of 
Borneo round to Bondjermasin and beyond, and extending far to the north 
in the valley of the Barito, it includes the depression of Bekompei. No one 
can predict what future discoveries may bring to light ; at present it looks 
as if the whole region, from the Schwanner range to cape Samban in the 
south-west, were an Archaean horst separating the folded ranges, somewhat 
after the fashion of the larger mass of Cambodia. 

The Natuna archipelago on the west of Borneo seems also to consist 
chiefly of granite \ 

Two further remarks may be added to these observations on central 
Borneo. 

Molengraaff has found on the slopes of the upper Kapuas range, lying 
on the phyllites, rolled pebbles of a dark limestone, in which R. B. Newton 
and Holland have recognized the presence of Discocyclina ; this is the first 
indication of a marine submergence, which, according to our existing classi- 
fication, must have taken place after the deposition of the Cyrena beds of 
the table-mountains 2 . 

In the next place, if we imagine Borneo in a state similar to that of 
many other parts of the Sunda archipelago, i. e. with the land covered deep 
by the sea ; then if the volcanos of the Muller mountains were in activity 
they would not define the course of the cordillera (upper Kapuas range), 
but of the accompanying fracture. 

The south-east of Borneo presents a different structure from that of those 
parts of the island we have just passed in review. We will begin our 
study of this region in the extreme south-east, following the detailed 
descriptions of Hooze 3 . 


1 Krause, Verzeichnung einer Sammlung von Mineralien und Gesteinen aus Bunguran 
(Gross-Natuna) und Sededap im Natuna- Archipel, Samml. geol. R. Mus. Leiden, 1898, V, 
pp. 221-236. 

2 R. Bullen Newton and R. Holland, On some Tgrtiary Foraminifera from Borneo. 
Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., 1899, 7th ser., Ill, pp. 24£-264. This contains a detailed list of 
earlier works on this subject. 

8 J. A. Hooze, Onderzoek naar kolen in de Straat Laut en aangrenzende landstreken, 



254 


THE EASTERN ALTAIDES 


[part IV 

The 'ittle island of Sebeku (long. 116° 23' E.), which stretches north and 
south, presents on its east side a steep and narrow ridge of serpentine and 
^diabase, directed north and south. Along its western foot this is bordered 
by a narrow strip of lower Eocene sediments with beds of coal. The 
middle and west of the island are plains whiclj extend to the strait of 
Djohor. 

In the northern part of this strait rises a reef of diabase, the Pulu 
Manti. On the other side of the strait lies the much larger island of Pulu 
Laut, which is traversed from its southern to its northern extremity by 
the imposing mountains of Sebetung, formed of diabase, and towards the 
west of serpentine. In the northern part of the island, where a direction 
to the north-north-east sets in, the serpentine disappears, and again a band 
of coal-bearing Eocene beds borders the west side* of the mountains ; the 
beds dip steeply to the west beneath the Laut strait. On the island of 
Suwangi, which lies in the middle of the strait (lat. 3° 25' S.), they reappear, 
but with a dip to the east or in an opposite direction, and to the west of 
them we again see serpentine. 

The northern part of the strait of Laut thus lies in a syncline of 
Eocene , which is bounded on each side by serpentine, and strikes to the 
north-north-east. Continuing in this direction, the Eocene beds once more 
appear in the promontory of Dewa and the adjacent group of islands, 
Nangka, where they are horizontally stratified, and belong, probably, to 
the centre of the basin. 

Still further away, on the promontory of Batu, lat. 3° S., we again see 
a long and narrow ridge of serpentine and diabase which bounds Klumpang 
bay. It may be the continuation of the serpentine of Suwangi, i. e. of the 
western margin of the Eocene basin. This ridge is likewise bordered by 
Eocene deposits, and indeed on each side. It runs along the sea coast to 
the north-north-east, and ends in Pamukan bay (lat. 2° 33' S.), where it is 
formed of diabase overlain on both sides by very steeply upturned Eocene 
beds. On the west side of the ridge inversion r and overfolding occur l . 

In this part of Borneo there are thus three coulisses of eruptive rocks 
separated by basins of lower Tertiary beds. These are : — (1) The eastern 
side of the island of Sebukut ; (2) the island of Laut ; (3) the western side 
of the island of Suwangi, continued, probably, as the ridge of Klumpang- 
Pamukan. The first coulisse strikes to the north ; the two others to the 
north-north-east. 

From the southern extremity of Borneo to a little beyond lat. 4° S., 
isolated reefs of gabbro, diabase-porphyrite, and serpentine crop out near 

Jaarb. Mijnw. Ned. 0. Ind., 1888, Xyil, pp. 887-429, maps. Nadere gegevens betreffende 
enkele kolenterceinen in Koetei, tom. ci£., pp. 481-466, maps. 

1 J. A. Hooze, Kolen aan de Oostkust van Borneo van de St. Lucia tot aan de Pamoekan- 
baA Jaarb. Mijnw. Ned. 0. Ind., XV, 1888, XVII, pp. 481-466, maps. 



BORNEO 


255 


CH. Vi] 

the west coast. According to Verbeek, they are of Cretaceous age. At 
cape Dewa, a little south of lat. 4° S., a ridge rises suddenly, the Goenong 
Bira (376 meters), which consists of the same rocks. Similar ridges join 
one to another ; and at last a continuous range striking to the north-east 
appears. The diabase porphyry dies away, and the range consists of two 
long serpentine ridges, the Bobaris mountains and the much more important 
range of Meratus. They are united by a lower-lying region of mica-schist, 
chlorite, and quartz schist, between which some serpentine ridges are 
inserted. The north-western ridge of Bobaris is joined towards the north- 
west by a fairly broad range of conglomerate, sandstone, and shale, which 
contains upper Cretaceous fossils. These are overlain further to the north- 
west by lower Eocene coal-bearing beds, middle Eocene marls, and Num- 
mulitic limestone. Hocee’s geological map of Martepura shows this regular 
succession, and a general strike to the north-east \ 

The difference between these coulisses and those hitherto mentioned 
lies in the appearance of schists, perhaps of Archaean age, between the two 
serpentine ridges, the presence of Cretaceous rocks, and the altered direction. 
The older works of Verbeek show, however, that somewhat further north 
the ancient schists disappear, while the two serpentine ridges unite to form 
the Meratus range, which at the same time bends to the north-north-east, 
and then almost to the north, continuing in this direction for a long 
distance 2 . This range is seen from Klumpang bay onwards (lat. 3° S.) ; in 
front of it, on the east, is a limestone range, the Bangkalaan mountains, 
probably formed of Nummulitic limestone. In its further continuation to 
the north it forms the inner boundary of the little sultanates of the east 
coast ; the rivers flowing into Adang bay bring down serpentine, together 
with mica-schist and quartzite. Even as far south as the lower course of the 
river Kutai (lat. 0° 35' S.) Hooze still found lower Miocene sandstone, which 
is there thrown into steep folds, and strikes north and south across the 
river 3 . In all probability the Meratus range and the meridional strike 
continue almost up to the Equator. 

The investigations of Hooze and Verbeek thus show that we must add 
to the coulisses mentioned above : (4) the elongated range of Meratus, and 
(5) the Bobaris mountains. The southern part of both these ranges exhibits 
a marked deflexion to the south-west. 

1 J. A. Hooze, Topographische, geologische, mineralogische, en mijnbouwkundige 
Beschrijving van een gedeelte der afdeeling Martapoera, Jaarb. Mijnw. Ned. O. Ind., 
1898, XXII, pp. 1-431, atlas. K. Martin, Ueber das Vovkommen einer rudistenfiihrenden 
Kreideformation im stidostlicben Borneo, Samml. geol. R.-Mus. Leiden, 1888, I, pp. 117- 
125 ; Die Fauna der Kreideformation Martapoera, op. cit., 1889, IX, pp. 126-197. 

2 R. D. M. Verbeek, Geologische Beschrijving der Distrikten Riam-Kiwa en Kanan in 
de Zuider- en Ooster-Afdeeling van Borneo, Jaarb. Mijj^w. Ned.O. Ind., 1875, IV, pp. 1-30, 
maps ; cf. in particular the sketch map, plate 1.* 

8 J. A. Hooze, Kolen aan de Oostkust van Borneo van de St. Lucia tot aan de Pamoek^n- 
Baai, pp. 439, 445, 447 ; also Qnderzoek naar Kolen in de Straat Laut, p. 400. * 



256 


THE EASTERN ALTAIDES 


[part IV 

As a whole, however, these coulisses converge to the north, and form 
It great virgation of kindred branches which, south of Bandjermasin, make 
k bend in the same direction as that of the folded range of north Borneo, 
that is, the upper Kapuas range of Molengraaff, which runs on the further 
side of the Archaean mass of the south-west, from the Kinibalu towards 
cape Datu. 

A general convergence of all the mountain ranges of Borneo to the 
north or north-north-east certainly appears to take place, but existing 
observations are not sufficient to show whether, or in what manner, the 
coulisses of the south-east, and especially those of the Meratus mountains, 
are continued across the lofty ridge which, according to the maps, runs 
south-east from the middle of the island to cape Mangkalihat. The data 
relating to regions north of these mountains are also very scanty. 

At cape Tinagat (lat. 4° 13' N., long. 117° 59' E.), in the bay of St. Lucia, 
which marks the northern boundary of the Dutch possessions, Hooze found 
a rock which Retgers compares with a hornblende porphyrite from Pengaron 
in the Bobaris mountains 1 . 

Near the mouth of the river Sibuku, Lehnert mentions coarse-grained 
granite 2 . 

In spite of a lamentable deficiency of information, it is possible to make 
out the way in which Borneo fits into the virgation of the Philippines ; and 
the resemblance between its south-eastern coulisses and certain parts of 
the Philippines is clearly apparent. At many localities in the Philippines 
gabbro, diabase, and diorite are covered by Nummulitic limestone, which 
there also surrounds long narrow cordilleras. There, too, we find Tertiary 
coal, and if this in all probability is of later date than the Eocene, it is also 
true that upper Tertiary coal beds are present likewise in Borneo. If we 
disregard the volcano on the Isla de Negros, then we see in that island, as 
in the neighbouring island of Zebu, first an ancient volcanic range, mapped 
as diorite, then, at all events in Zebu, Nummulitic limestone (II, p. 173), 
and finally coal-bearing beds. Centeno has further pointed out that the 
coal-bearing beds in these two islands dip towards one another in such a 
manner as to suggest that the intervening strait of Tanon occupies the 
middle of a coal basin. 

This is a repetition of what we have already described, some 13 to 
14 degrees of latitude further south, in the strait of Laut. In both cases 
the straits run to the north-north-east 3 . 

1 J. W. Retgers, Mikroskopische Beschrijving van Gesteenten afkomstig van de 
Oostkust van Borneo, verzameld door J. A. Hooze, Jaarb. Mijnw. Ned. 0. Ind., 1895, 
XXIV, p. 81. 

2 J. Lehnert, Um die Erde : Erdjimseglung S. M. Corvette ‘ Erzherzog Friedrich \ Bvo, 

Wien, 1878, p. 819. T. Frhr. von Oesterreicher writes, ‘granite country, 1 Mitth. k. k. 
geogr. Ges. Wien, 1876, XIX, p. 217. ' 

* J. Centeno writes concerning the coal measures of these islands: ‘that they all 



CELEBES 


257 


OH. Yl] 

Celebes is still to a great extent wholly unexplored ; but the evidence 
afforded by such investigations as have yet been made is sufficient to show 
that, like the peninsula of Chalcydice, it owes its chiragratic form to the 
union of a number of dissimilar fragments. 

The first of these is formed by the north-eastern promontory of Mvna- 
hassa. It consists of a number of closely set volcanos, and forms part of 
the volcanic zone which runs from south-east Luzon across Mindanao and 
the Sangi (or Sanguir) islands \ In the north, also, volcanos occur, as, for 
instance, Batu- Angus, Klabat, and others. Lake Tondano (lat. 1° 10' to 
1° 17' N.), according to Wichmann and Bucking, is bounded on the west by 
volcanos, on the east by a ridge of andesite, forming the Lembean moun- 
tains 2 . Towards the south volcanos again occur, and, according to Martin, 
a patch of Orbitoides limestone of middle Tertiary age. 

According to the observations of the brothers Sarasin, the volcanic 
region terminates in a line of depression, which runs obliquely across the 
peninsula, forming the greater part of the valley of the river Dumoga ; 
it cuts the north coast a little east of 124° E., and the south coast somewhat 
west of the same meridian. But already north of the basaltic platform of 
Mongondo, which marks the south-western end of the volcanic region, one 
locality (near Kottabangan) has afforded clay slates, with a dip to about 
north-east. 

The islands of Tagean and Una-Una, in the gulf of Tomini, are regarded 
by several observers as volcanos, and as forming the continuation of Mina- 
hassa; according to an observation of the brothers Sarasin 3 , there is 

form part of the same basin, which, appearing on the west slope of Zebu and the east 
slope of Negros, passes beneath the strait of Tanon situated between the two islands,' 
Memoria geologico-mineralogica de las Islas Filippinas, Bol. Com. Map. geol. Espaiia. 
1876, III, p. 31. Hooze, in Underzoek naar kolen in de Strat Laut, writes, p. 423 : * This 
coal formation (of Poeloe Laut) is continued beneath the sea . . . cropping out east and 
south of Soewangi, at Tandjong Dewa, in the Nangka islands, &c.' The more recent 
age of the coal basins of Zebu is evident, since Martin mentions Vicarya callosa , which is 
characteristic of the upper Miocene of Java, as obtained from them, IJeber terti&re 
Fossilen von den Philippinen, Samml. geol. R.-Mus. Leiden, 1895, Y, pp. 59, 66. 

1 The condition of the volcano in Sangui is described by L. Hoeke, Yerslag omtrent 
eene Reis naar de Vulkaan Awoe op het eiland Groot-Sangi, Natuurk. Tijdschr. v. Nederl. 
Indie, Batavia, 1898, LIII, pp. 162-171. 

2 P. and F. Sarasin, Reiseberichte aus Celebes, I, Zeitschr. Ges. f. Erdk., Berlin, 1894, 

XXIX, pp. 351-401, map ; in particular pp. 361, 400. Also a description of some of the 
volcanos of Minahassa, in W. Kiikenthal, Ergebnisse einer zoologischen Forschungsreise 
in den Molukken und Borneo, Abh. senckenb. naturf. Ges. Frankfurt a. M., 1896, XXII, 
p. 235 et seq. H. Biicking gives a geological sketch map of North Celebes in his Beitr£ge 
zur Geologie von Celebes, Peterm. Mitth., 1899, pp. 249-260, 273-280, pi. XVI. A. Wich- 
mann, Die Binnen-Seen von Celebes, Peterm. Mitth., 1893, XXXIX, pp. 227-231, map; 
F. Rinne, Skizzen zur Geologie der Minahassa in No~xi-Celebes, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. 
Ges., 1900, LII, pp. 327-347, map. ’ . 

s P. and P. Sarasin, Reiseberichte aus Celebes, Zeitschr. Ges. f. Erdk., Berlin, 1895, 

SOLLAS. Ill g 



THE EASTERN ALTAIDES 


258 


[part IV 


probably i*. small volcanic mountain on cape Api, which projects from the 
i south coast of the gulf, and this also would belong to the same zone. 

I The second fragment is Gorontalo , formed of a strip of Archaean rocks 
which stretch from east to west. On the east it includes the Bone moun- 
tains (1,400 to 1,500 meters), which consist, according to Sarasin, of a 
light-coloured granite with a mantle of gneiss ; north of these mountains 
comes the chain of Huntuk-Bulu-dawa b This is joined, in the north of 
the peninsula, by a longer granite range running east and west, which is 
separated by a depression from a shorter and less lofty granite range 
running fairly parallel to it on the south. The northern scarp of the 
northern range is very steep ; van Schelle and Wichmann agree in regarding 
the granitic chain of Gorontalo as a horst. According to Wichmann, the 
valley between the two ranges is a fault- trough Near Sumulata (long. 

122° 30' E.), according to Bucking, the veins of ore occur in a coarse 
conglomerate of eruptive rocks, which he describes as porphyrites. 
Diorite is also said to occur. 

Herr Hundeshagen, a mining engineer, has the kindness to inform me 
that the veins of ore in north Celebes occur in a rock regarded by him as 
diorite, which surrounds fairly large masses of clay slate. The strike of 
these beds west of Palell in the Bvool state is north -north-east and north- 
east. In the north-west corner of Celebes, 1 to 8 kilometers west of Tontoli 
and near the coast, Hundeshagen met with red and green ancient schists 
veined with granite, and so intensely folded and faulted that it was impos- 
* sible to determine a definite strike. In two or three localities a strike to the 
north was observed. From cape Stroonen, along the south coast to Sitjello 
and far beyond cape Dampelas, granite predominates. Volcanos are absent 3 . 

The lofty mountains which occur in the bend of the peninsula where 
it turns round to the south-west and south, and form the north-western 
boundary of the gulf of Tomini, have not been explored. 

At the head of the gulf, almost on the Equator, a deep subsidence runs 
across Celebes and separates the mountains on the north from those in 
the south. 


XXX, pp. 350, 352. Cape Api is also called Fire cape, and owes its name to the fact that 
combustible gases are supposed to rise on the coast. 

1 P. and F. Sarasin, Reiseberichte aus Celebes, Zeitschr. Ges. f. Erdk., Berlin, 1895, 
XXX, pp. 376, 392, 393 ; Bucking doubts the presence of gneiss. 

2 C. J. van Schelle, Opmerkingen over de Geologie van een gedeelte der Afdeeling 
Gorontalo, Jaarb. Mijnw. Ned. 0. Ind., 1889, XVIII, pp. 115-158 ; G. W. W. C. Baron van 
HoSvell, De Assistent-Residentie Gorontalo, Tijdschr. K. Ned. Aardr. Gen. Leiden, 1891, 
2 de ser., VIII, pp. 26-43, map ; Bijschrift bij de Kaart der Tomini-Bocht, op. cit., 1893, 
2 de ser., X, pp. 64-72, map; Wichmann, Peterm. Mitth., 1893, pp. 255-258, map of the 
lake of Limbotto. 

3 The red slates are mentioned^ by the brothers Sarasin as occurring in the Oleid^s 
chain ; P. and F. Sarasin, Reiseberichtfe aus Celebes, II, Zeitschr. Ges. f. Erdk., Berlin, 
1895, XXX, pp. 226-235, map. 



CELEBES 


259 


OH. Vi] 

Celebes was crossed by Wichmann in lat. 0° 45' S. ; starting on the 
west, we first meet with a belt of sandstone and conglomerate, then gneiss 
and some granite, which extend as far as the east coast \ 

This probably forms part of the cordilleras which the brothers Sarasin 
have followed from the squth-west end of the gulf of Tomini a long way to 
the south-east 1 2 . Successive parallel chains of mica-schist and quartzite, 
sometimes of greenstone and serpentine, run from the end of this gulf, first 
to the south and then to the south-south-east, to form the steep slopes 
along the eastern shore of lake Posso. This lake is more than 300 meters 
in depth, and must be regarded as a tectonic feature. 

The whole range then turns to the south-east and east-south-east. The 
tectonic line indicated by lake Posso now runs within the parallel chains, 
and upon it appears, Extended in the same direction, the deep lake of 
Matanna ; situated at a height of 400 meters, it is 480 meters deep, and 
consequently extends below the sea-level. 

When the chains have entered the south-east peninsula of Celebes they 
turn rapidly from the east-south-east to south-west; the tectonic line of 
the lakes also follows this new direction, and a little north and south of 
lat. 3° S. it crosses the lake of Towuti, which is the largest in Celebes. 
The brothers Sarasin call this series of great lakes the £ lake-trough.’ The 
mountain ranges probably continue to strike south-west or south-south- 
west in the south-east peninsula. . 

These same ranges reach the head of the gulf of Boni. Then follows, 
in the extreme north-east of the south peninsula, the mountain mass of 
Latimodjong , running to the south-east, with a height of over 3,000 
meters. 

The rest of the south peninsula has a very different structure. Even 
between lat. 3° 15' and 3° 45' S. the brothers Sarasin found only Tertiary 
deposits between the mountain of Latimodjong and the west coast. These 
consist of grey clay, with brackish or freshwater mollusca and terrestrial 
plants, overlain by white limestone. The whole series is folded, and strikes 
due east and west ; the limestones, which lie in the synclines, may attain 
a thickness of over 1,000 meters. On the rock of Loko a volcanic outcrop 
of Tertiary age occurs among them 3 . Since similar Tertiary beds extend 
from lake Posso to the gulf of Tomoiki, and the promontory west of the 
bay of Palos also appears, according to Wichmann, to consist of a Tertiary 


1 A. Wichmann, Tijdschr. Aardr. Gen., Amsterdam, 1890, 2 de ser., VII, pp. 985-998. 

2 P. and F. Sarasin, Reiseberichte aus Celebes, III, Zeitschr. Ges. f. Erdk., Berlin, 1895, 

XXX, pp. 311-852, and Durchquerung von der siidlichen Halbinsel, op. cit., 1896, XXXI, 

pp. 339-357, maps. ^ # 

8 P, and F. Sarasin, Reiseberichte aus Celebes*, IV, Zeitschr. Ges. f. Erdk., Berlin, 1896, 

XXXI, p. 11, map. 



260 THE EASTERN ALTAIDES [pabtiv 

eruptive rock and Tertiary sediments, it is probable that deposits of this 
' age mantle round the greater part of these cordilleras. 

Let us again turn our attention to the south peninsula. At a trifling 
height above the sea lie the lakes of Sidereng and Tempe. Towards the 
south the land rises; we owe our knowledge of it^structure to Wichmann 1 . 

The broad isolated mass of the Latimodjong (lat. 3° 45' S.), which rises 
north of the lakes, is possibly a volcano. Towards the south two mountain 
ranges extend, separated by a longitudinal valley ; the western range, on 
the side next the strait of Macassar, is much the more important, and 
reaches a height of 1,000 meters. It consists of basaltic, andesitic, and 
leucitic rocks, and Tertiary beds ; the eastern range is formed by higher 
subdivisions of the Tertiary series. The whole is folded, and the strike is 
due north and south, becoming west-north-west (300°) towards the extreme 
south-east. 

The gulf of Boni is regarded as a fault-trough. In the south both 
ranges are united by the mass of a great volcano, mount Bonthain (Lompo- 
Battang, 3,057 meters), which thus closes the longitudinal valley. Archaean 
rocks are only known as rolled pebbles in one of the river valleys. 

The elongated island of Saleyer , south of Celebes, is formed of volcanic 
rocks on its eastern side, which is the higher, and descends steeply towards 
the east ; the western side is formed of more recent marine deposits 2 . 

In respect to the southern portion of the south-east peninsula of Celebes 
I have no information. The eastern peninsula, situated between the gulfs 
of Tomoiki and Tomini, and traversed by the lofty chain of Tokalla, 
presents, according to Verbeek, numerous exposures of diabase, peridotite, 
and other basic rocks. 

Whether the islands which trend east and west (Obi, Taliabo, &c.) and 
lie in an east-and-west chain are continued into Celebes, and if so, in what 
manner, it is at present impossible to say. In view of the great dearth of 
information we can only give the following account. 

In Celebes long ranges of ancient rocks exist which are partly surrounded 
by folded Tertiary beds. The best known of these are : the fragment of 
Gorontalo, trending east and west, which may be regarded as a horst ; the 
region in the north-west of the island, where a strike from north-north- 
east to north-east prevails ; then the group of parallel chains which proceeds 
from the region east of the bay of Palos, runs with a frequent change of 
direction through the middle of Celebes into the south-east peninsula, 

1 A. Wichmann, Celebes, Tijdschr. K. Ned. Aardr. Gen., Amsterdam, 1890, 2* e ser., VII, 
pp. 921-982, maps, and Peterm. Mitth., 1893, pp. 278-282; also his Leucit-Gestein von 
Celebes, Natnnrk. Tijdschr. Ned. IncJ., Batavia, 1898, LIII, pp. 317-331 ; also J. W. Retgers, 
in Jaarb. Mijnw. Ned. 0. Ind., 1895, XXIV, p. 124 et seq. 

8 A. Wichmann, Zur Geologie der Insel Saleijer, Natuurk. Tijdschr. Ned. Ind.. Batavia, 
1895, LIV, pp. 236-268, map. 



HALMAHERA 


261 


CH. Vi] 

enclosing the lake trough on its way. Minahassa is of recent volcanic 
formation, and forms part of the Sangi zone. The whole of the south 
peninsula is built up of volcanic rocks of Tertiary age. The north-eastern 
peninsula is characterized by basic eruptive rocks. 

In conclusion, we ma^r mention the peculiar behaviour of the leucitic 
rocks. The long list of 121 volcanos situated in Java and the neigh- 
bouring islands, which has been published by Verbeek and Fennema, is 
headed by five volcanos geographically remote from the others, and also 
distinguished by the fact that they alone have hitherto furnished leucitic 
rocks. In age they certainly date back to the Tertiary period, although 
some may have again become active at a later time. They form a more or 
less arcuate series, which begins in the north-west with the island of Bawean, 
lying north of Java, and proceeds to the north-east coast of Java, south of 
the island of Madura. The most easterly of these volcanos at the north- 
eastern extremity of Java is Ringguit ; its crater measures 10£ kilometers in 
diameter, and is the largest in Java \ 

We may perhaps associate with this leucitic series the leucite-bearing 
rocks, also of Tertiary age, which Wichmann met with in south-west 
Celebes ; and thus it would appear that a leucitic arc, not without inter- 
ruptions, it is true, exists in this region. But at any moment a fresh 
discovery may show that this hypothesis has no better basis than the 
insufficiency of our data. 

Halmahera. Our knowledge of the structure of this island is based on 
the accounts furnished by Verbeek, not to mention the orographical descrip- 
tion by Campen. In addition, Kukenthal has published observations, chiefly 
referring to the north, and Retgers has described rock-specimens obtained 
from various parts of the island 1 2 . 

Verbeek distinguishes several volcanic lines; they belong almost exclu- 
sively to the west side of the island, and follow a somewhat bent course, 
which nevertheless runs mainly from north to south. The older volcanos 
are formed chiefly of hornblende andesite and mica andesite, more rarely of 
pyroxene andesite or basalt. In very many cases the crater has disappeared. 
One of these ancient lines begins in the North Loloda islands, west of the 
northern extremity of Halmahera. It runs down in a gentle curve off the 
west coast, through the South Loloda islands, then touches Halmahera, 

1 R. D. M. Verbeek and Fennema, Description geologique de Java et Madoura, II, 
p. 994. 

1 C. F. H. Campen, Het Eiland Halmahera, Tijdschr. voor indische Taal-, Land- en 
Volkenkunde, Batavia, 1883, XXVIII, pp. 240-313, in particular p. 247. The orthography 
Halmaheira is erroneous, according to Campen, p. 240. Kukenthal, Ergebniese einer 
zoologischen Forschungsreise in den Molukken, in particular p. 85 et seq. ; maps of 
Halmahera and Batjan with Kasiroeta ; Retgers, Mikroskopische Onderzoek van Gesteenten 
uit Nederlandsch Oost-Indie, Molukken, Celebes, Jaarb. Mijnw. Ned. 0. Ind., 1895, XXIV, 
pp. 107-124. 



m THE EASTERN ALTAIDES [partiv 

possibly coincides for a certain distance with the line of active volcanos — 
to be mentioned directly — which lie off the west coast, and continues through 
Kajoa, on the west side of the Patientie strait, to the south end of Batjan. 
There its direction is soutb-Bovth-east On the other side of theMmit, at 
the south end of Halmahera, a similar line begins^ with the same direction, 
which Verbeek marks as far as Kekeh (east of Obi-Besar), and from here 
another ancient line of volcanos runs east-north-east to the north-west 
coast of New Guinea. The islands lying off the southernmost point of 
Halmahera are basaltic 1 . 

A group of ancient volcanos formed of pyroxene andesite lies off the 
north-east coast of Halmahera ; the volcano of Galeda stands in the middle 
of the group 2 . From this region a line of recent and in part active volcanos 
runs south-south-west, with a slight convexity to the west, and so crosses 
the northern peninsula obliquely. It reaches the sea on the north side of 
Djalolo bay, and proceeds through the volcanos of the island chain, which 
begins with the islands of Hiri and Ternate, and ends with the island of 
Makian (lat. 0° 15' N.). It is in this latter region that the more recent line 
of Ternate and the older line of Loloda probably coincide. 

The more or less meridional direction of these lines suggests a connexion 
with the Philippines, but we know nothing positive on this point. The 
Talaur islands , as Herr Hundeshagen informs me, are entirely or in great 
part of sedimentary origin. Verbeek points out that in Halmahera the line 
of active volcanos (line of Ternate), as it proceeds from Djalolo bay 
onwards, diverges from a straight course to the Philippines, and runs north- 
north-east (towards Galeda), but he is inclined to believe that the older 
(Loloda) line is prolonged to the east coast of Mindanao; this coast is 
regarded as a fracture 3 . 

All the remaining parts of Halmahera, so far as we know anything of 
them, consist almost exclusively of gabbro, peridotite, serpentine, and other 
highly basic eruptive rocks. This is also true of the larger islands in the 
vicinity, such as Rau and Morotai in the nortji, and Batjan in the south- 
west. We have already observed how large a part is played by the same 
rocks in the structure of the islands situated to the south-east down to 
Waigoe, Batanta, and the coast of New* Guinea. Quite recently they have 
all been assigned to the Cretaceous epoch. 

Linck, who has examined the collections of Kiikenthal, mentions in 
addition gneiss which occurs in Batjan, ancient actinolite schist in the 


1 Verbeek, Voorloopig Verslag over eene Geologische Reis door hefc Oostelijk Gedeelte 
van den Indischen Archipel in 1899, p. 23 et seq. 

2 On this region cf. also A. Wicnmann, Ausbruch des Vulcans 4 Tolo ’ auf Halma- 

heira, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1897* XLIX, pp. 152-159. 

8 Verbeek, Voorloopig Verslag, &c., p. 33 note. 



oh. vi] SUMMARY 268 

southern extremity of Halmahera, and white Nummulitic limestone in the 
south-east . 1 

Recent coral limestone surrounds the greater part of Halmahera. 

Survey of the eastern Altaides. Before us lies the southern part of the 
ancient vertex, the vast Mongolian highland of the Khangai, It consists of 
Archaean rocks. A broad girdle of Palaeozoic greywaeke runs from trans- 
Baikalia through Urga nearly to its southernmost part, and it is here that 
the insunken valley of the Lakes begins. This step-like subsidence extends 
along the Dsapkhyn past Kobdo and Uliasutai, and its deepest part lies at 
its northern extremity in the Ubza-nor. It thus separates from the vertex 
the Gobi Altai, which presents the same structure as the vertex, and is 
indeed a fragment of it. 

Far to the north-west is the younger vertex, or the Altai, whence pro- 
ceeded those numerous waves which are first known as the Thian-shan ; in 
this system they adapt themselves more and more to the west-north- westerly 
direction, and then bear in succession the names Bei-shan, Lung-shan, Nan- 
shan, and central Kuen-luen. 

In the neighbourhood of An-si, on the Su-lei-khe, not far from the 
western end of the oases of Kansu, the San-sjan-tsy, a low range of gneiss 
running to the east-north-east, meets at an acute angle the Desert range 
which represents the southern border of the Bei-shan. This is the beginning 
of changed conditions, and from here onwards we see first the continuation 
of the Lung-shan, then the mighty Richthofen range, then all the several 
great ranges of the Nan-shan, such at least as are of sufficient length, 
bending themselves sharply round out of the west-north-west towards the 
east-north-east, into the direction of the Anembar-ula and the Altyn-tag, as 
though the latter ranges had been the seat of a folding force simultaneously 
active and of equal or even greater strength. This great turning movement 
affects all the chains from the western end of the oases of Kansu as far as 
Tsaidam and the high-lying lakes of Kum-kul, and as it is accomplished not 
only the chains, but the valley bottoms also, rise higher and higher above 
the plain of Yarkand-darya which lies in front of them. This is the western 
boundary. 

In the east lies the great Sinian mole, with its undisturbed Cambrian 
beds. Its western part, covered with more recent sediments, forms the 
foundation of Ordos. The north-western elbow of the Hoang-ho here marks 
its almost rectangular boundary. We now see that the general movement 
towards the south which dominates the Altaides also makes itself felt in 
the east. The great Khingan is certainly a folded range, at least for a certain 

1 Linck was inclined to regard the serpentine of east Halmahera as an altered andesite 
rock, possibly hypersthene andesite, and to compare in age to the volcanic outcrops of 
the north ; Kiikenthal, Ergebnisse einer zoologilchen Forschungsreise in den Molukken, 

p. 88. 



264 THE EASTERN ALTAIDES [partiv 

distance to the north ; the direction of its folds, however, cuts across that 
of the post-Devonian folds of the ancient vertex : very possibly it maintains 
'its folded character throughout its length. Towards Kuku-Khoto oblique 
coulisses, striking one after another to the west-south-west, form the 
In-shan and the arcuate range — completely rqpolved into coulisses — of 
Khara-narin-ula. 

We find ourselves once more facing the most southerly part of the ancient 
vertex, south of the desert of Ala-shan. The great ranges of the Thian- 
shan have reached their wedge-shaped termination east of the mighty 
Karlyk-tag, and only the comparatively narrow Shujten Gobi separates the 
Bei-shan from the south border of the Gobi-Altai, or rather from the range 
of Adji-bogdo, which is the fore-lying range of the Gobi-Altai. With the 
wedging out of the Thian-shan the folds of the AltaMes resume the direction 
of the arcs of the ancient vertex, and no boundary can be recognized between 
the two. Now the arcs coming from east and west encounter each other. 
The Adji-bogdo is prolonged into the Koko-tymyrty, and rocky ridges 
indicate the track of the range across the desert to Tostu and Noin-bogdo 
on the eastern side. The eastern extremities of the chains of the Bei-shan 
bend round in the same direction. The Khara-narin-ula, proceeding from 
the east, is prolonged into the Yawarai mountains far away in the desert. 
Even the ends of the great northern arcs of the Nan-shan follow, rather 
more to the east, the same bend. The range of Ala-shan, however, is com- 
pletely overfolded towards the east, and the flat, low-lying region of Ordos 
is its foreland. It is hard to say whether the deflexion of the Nan-shan 
chains towards the south extends as far as Lan-tshou-fu ; in any case it 
has reached its termination at Di-dao, on the other side of the Hoang-ho, 
for south of this place the chains of the central Kuen-luen run unimpeded 
in straight lines to the east-south-east, and there form the Tsin-ling-shan, 
on the south border of the Sinian mole. 

The constriction which the Altaides undergo in the east, under the 
influence of the foreland of Ordos, is essentially different in its nature from 
that produced by the Anembar-ula and Altyn-tag in the west; but the 
combined effect of the two is an extraordinary uplift of the whole mass of 
the Altaides, so that even the valley bottoms attain a height of 4,000 meters, 
and for a very great distance over the whole of eastern Thibet they do not 
sink below 4,500 meters. This mighty master group of closely crowded 
coulisses turns, however, more and more to the south, and it is only an 
isolated lateral branch which forms the Tsin-ling-shan. But the direction 
of this makes nearly a right angle with the direction of the main group, 
and it is possible that these two mountain ranges, lying almost perpendicular 
to each other, have both been carried towards the south-east ; for a secondary 
range, the Ta-pa-shan, branches off from the main body to the north-north- 
east, surrounds the town of Ya-tshu-fu in an arc concave to the south-east, 



SUMMARY 


265 


CH. Vi] 


and finally moulds itself on to the south side of the Tsin-ling-shan ; its 
eastern end being driven into overthrust flakes which look towards the 
south. At the rapids of I-tshan on the Yang-tse-kiang a similar movement 
directed to the south-east may again be recognized. 

Let us return, however, to the principal group. On the west it is 
again hemmed in by the eastern end of the Himalaya and the wedge-shaped 
fragment of Assam. When this obstacle has been overcome, the coulisses, 
which have hitherto been checked, advance in the Naga hills to the south- 
west and form the arcuate ranges of Arakan. Simultaneously with this 
escape from confinement or extension of space the Altaides manifest a 
tendency, as may be seen in the latitude of Ta-li-fu, to diverge from one 
another. This leads c to a separation into two groups — an eastern, directed 
toward Yunnan, and & western, directed towards Burma; and again 
simultaneously with the extension of the surface, there occurs a decrease 
of height both in the valley bottoms and the mountain chains. The sharp 
bends in the middle course of the Mekong betray the contrast in direction, 
which now becomes apparent; finally the two groups are completely 
separated, and between them the older rocks of Cambodia appear. 

In their further development these two groups are dissimilar. 

In the eastern coulisses of the eastern or Yunnan group the gneisses 
and ancient schists of the great chains gradually sink little by little 
towards the south, till they finally disappear beneath a continuous mantle 
of sediments. This is limestone of Palaeozoic and Mesozoic age; it is 
folded, but the folds are worn down, and what remains in east Yunnan and 
Kuei-tshou is a high tableland. The median coulisses of this group have 
also lost in height, but they are continued in the direction of the Red river, 
and form the chains of Tongking. The last of the western coulisses is 
prolonged to a still greater distance ; this is the cordillera of the east coast 
of Annam. 

Far away on the other side of the south China sea we see a mountain 
arc. It begins on the west coast of the gulf of Lingayen in western Luzon, 
and extends as far as the Sierra de Zambales nearly down to the bay of 
Manila. It is continued through Lubang, the Calamianes, and the Paragua 
islands, where it is joined by Kini-balu and the arcuate range of Sarawak, 
which extends as far as cape Datu in western Borneo. This arc very 
nearly corresponds in its lie with the cordillera of Annam ; it is at the same 
time the western branch of the virgation of the Philippines, separated in 
the south-west of Borneo by an older mass from the other branches of the 
virgation, which may be recognized on the other side of this mass in the 
Martapura range, and as far as the island of Sabekut, off the south-east 
coast of Borneo. Another branch of this virgation, represented by volcanos, 
runs from west Mindanao through tfie Shilu islands to Borneo ; a third and 
similar one runs from the volcano of Apo, in south Mindanao, through the 



266 


THE EASTERN ALTAIDES [paktiy 

volcano ofTButalan and the Sangnir islands, to the volcanos of north-east 
Celebes, and perhaps to those of the gulf of Tomini. A fourth range is 
Indicated by the volcanic line of Loloda close to the west coast of Halma- 
hera. The further out the trend-lines advance into the ocean the more 
distinctly are they indicated by volcanos. r 

In this manner the eastern group of the eastern Altccides comes to an end . 
All the coulisses have disappeared , with the exception of the most westerly. 
This , the cordillera of Annam , has described an arc convex to the east , and 
adapted itself to the curvature of the Philippine branches. 

In the westerly or Burman group of the Altaides we see the same 
general decrease of the heights which here also accompanies the extension 
of the folded area. Here, too, it is the eastern branches which first dis- 
appear. These are the ranges which run with the Mekong above Vien-tian, 
and they have already vanished near the headwaters of the Menam. So 
much the longer are the ranges which follow them. These proceed, east of 
the Salwin, through lower Burma, and form, as coulisses ranged one after 
another, Tenasserim, the Malay peninsula, and the islands from Billiton to 
Karimoen-Djavu, north of Java. In this way the course of the great 
Burman arc is first indicated. 

From Kunlon on the Salwin to Mandalay we now see a south-westerly 
direction of the chains, which becomes southerly further to the south, 
while in the Shan states a karst-land occupies a position similar to that 
of the limestone plateau of east Yunnan and Kuei-tshou. Between Sit- 
taung and the Irawadi lies the broad Tertiary band, which includes the 
Pegu Yomah, and is prolonged into the gulf of Pegu and perhaps into the 
flat eastern half of Sumatra. In the delta of the Irawadi a long and 
remarkable line of volcanos reaches the sea; it finds its continuation in 
Narcondam island and Barren island. 

As in the Yunnan group so in the Burman group of the Altaides, the 
western branches are by far the longest. It is they which advance in the 
Patkoi and N&ga mountains, and form the ,curve of Arakan and cape 
Negrais. To their outer border belongs the long series of islands which 
aline themselves between this promontory and Pulo Engano, west of south 
Sumatra. The Barisan range in south Sumatra exhibits a still greater 
coulisse, but volcanic formations become more and more predominant. In 
Java we find in addition to eruptive rocks some Cretaceous and Tertiary 
strata. The long arcuate coulisse dies away; then a last coulisse pro- 
ceeds from the west-south- west through Sumba and Timor, completes the 
curve around the Banda sea, and disappears. At the same time the sea, 
south of Java, attains a depth of 4,500 to 6,000 meters ; and the Banda 
sea descends to 5,600 meters. « 

The position of the Australia^ continent has evidently influenced the 
course of the great arc. It will be shown on a later page that the 



SUMMAKY 


267 


OH. Vi] 


Australian cordillera extends across Torres strait into the low lands of 
the Fly river, in New Guinea. Australia and New Guinea enframe the 
Banda arc. f 

Thus ends the ivestern group of the eastern Altaides. Once more the 
coulisses have all disappeared , except the most westerly . This runs out as 
a long arc into the deep sea, continually decreasing in importance as it 
proceeds. A short coulisse , that of Timor , is the last to join the group , and 
then the arc lends back upon itself gripped between alien horsts. 

The Banda arc does not come into contact with the conjectured 
southernmost outrunners of the Philippine virgation ; it reaches neither the 
volcanic line of Minahassa and the gulf of Tomini, nor that of Batjan and 
south Halmahera. A double line of east-and-west trending islands inserts 
itself in the interval between them : Misul, Obi-Besar, Mangoli, Taliabo, 
and the Peling group in the north, and Ceram, with Buru and Ambon, in 
the south, the last two being often assigned to the Banda arc. It is to be 
concluded that these two lines of islands are the prolongation of the two 
western promontories of New Guinea, and that the Ceram sea, which lies 
between them, corresponds with the gulf of Buru. 

The importance of this region lies not only in its trend-lines. In the 
mountains of Arakan occurs that remarkable series of eruptive rocks, partly 
of Mesozoic age, and for the most part probably Cretaceous, which spread 
over the Moluccas and numerous other islands, as far as New Caledonia and 
New Zealand, everywhere characterized by a high percentage of magnesium. 
The eastern branch of the eastern Altaides marks the region where the 
Tethys entered what is now the continent of Asia. Many different circum- 
stances, such as the damming back and overfolding of the Ala-shan range 
against the foreland of Ordos, or the enforced bending back of the Banda 
arc upon itself, leave no room for doubt that in this part of the earth also 
there are regions which have been actively moved or are still in movement, 
in contrast to resisting regions which have been little or not at all dis- 
placed ; and that the process of mountain formation has in no wise been 
uniform. 

If we attempt to follow the course of the trend-lines, it appears as 
though in some cases, long folds, seeking continuation in the direction of 
their length, had propagated themselves between the obstacles and along 
them ; such, for instance, are the Tsin-ling-shan or the Arakan range, while 
in others the folds have originated under pressure against an obstacle, as 
in the Ala-shan ; and between the two types there is evidently every stage 
of transition. 

A fruitful task of a special character awaits future investigators in 
these regions. Here, and especially in thg Moluccas, ranges including 
folded beds of middle Tertiary agfe, are engirdled by terraced belts of 
limestone, the highest of which date to all appearance from upper Tertiary 



268 THE EASTERN ALTAIDES [partiv 

times. Wife can form some conception of the mechanical process of folding, 
and likewise of a spasmodic sinking of the sea-level owing to an enlarge- 
ment of the marine abysses,* but it is difficult to frame a theory which will 
account for a spasmodic upthrusting of islands, or explain the occurrence 
of a second and dissimilar movement of elevation independent of the 
folding. But that folding movements have continued to take place in the 
midst of the great ranges, even up to recent times, is clearly attested by 
the continental Gobi deposits. 

These deposits lie horizontal in the basin of the river Wei ; they reach 
the north border of the Tsin-ling-shan : at Tshing-tshou, on the Wei, Ldczy 
obtained from them Stegodon insignis. Further to the north-west, near 
Kun-tshang-fu, on the upper course of the Wei, they clothe the broken 
outlines of the ancient mountains. West of Lan-hshou, the Hoang-ho has 
cut its bed deeply into them, and from here they extend to the Sin-nin, 
forming a broad tableland. South of Lan-tshou, in the direction of the 
Tao-khe, they advance to Min-tshou and as far as lat. 33° N., sometimes 
horizontal or resting with a gentle inclination against the mountains, at 
others fairly well folded to the west-north-west, the prevailing direction 
in these regions. 

But they penetrate also further to the west, extending as red saliferous 
deposits deep into the valleys between the lofty chains of Thibet. In long. 
93° E. } Rockhill found the whole valley between the Marco Polo and Kuku- 
shili mountains covered with brick-red deposits, and salt lakes extend over 
its floor. Beyond the Kuku-shili, in lat. 35° N., this traveller observed 
a table-mountain of red sandstone. Here we stand in the midst of the 
upswelling of the folds ; the valley bottoms nowhere sink below 4,500 
meters. Still further away, south of the chain of Dung-bure, Rockhill 
could see red sandstone, but no other rock, stretching away as far as the 
eye could reach. Even far down in the valley of the Yang-tse-kiang we 
meet with similar deposits ; in the pass of Rishod-la, for instance, west of 
Batang, where horizontal beds of red sandstone and conglomerate are 
exposed *. 

Thus these sediments, perhaps not everywhere of equal age, cover the 
land like a torn red veil, and bear witness to the latest movements of 
the ground. 

We may assume that the high-lying patches described by Rockhill 
were deposited in isolated basins at great heights. On the other hand, we 
have mentioned two instances from the Nan-shan which leave no doubt as 
to a later movement. The first of these is furnished by the extension of 
these beds from the oasis of Tshou-ma-er, towards the east-south-east, into 
the ancient longitudinal val?ey between the Richthofen range and the 


1 Rockhill, Diary, pp. 193, 204, 209, 330.] 



SUMMARY 


269 


CH. Vi] 

Tolai-shan ; they ascend in this valley to the top of the pass of Tsin-nin- 
daban and above it, i. e. to over 4,220 meters, and in the course of the 
ascent the beds, which at first lie flat, are bent into a syncline with steep 
dips on each side. Obmtschew justly observes that the valley must have 
become narrower. The second instance is afforded by the plain which 
extends south of the south Kuku~nor ; the beds, horizontal at first, become 
more and more inclined towards the great range, until they acquire a dip 
of 70° to 80°. 

These facts show that the folding movements in recent times were not 
confined to the outer border of the Eurasiatic mountains. Within the 
amphitheatre of Irkutsk the great Cambrian tableland presents a picture 
of undisturbed repose, but here also the folding of the border either 
persisted up to the days*)f the Angara flora, or was renewed at that time. 
Outwards from the periphery, and onwards to the depths of the Pacific 
Ocean, the signs of a general movement increase. From Kamtchatka, as 
from the Malay peninsula, the cordilleras step down, as it were, into the 
ocean, and away out to sea, as far as the Bonin islands ; we perceive that 
the arrangement of the volcanos is determined by processes of the same 
kind as those that determine the arrangement of the mountains. 



270 


CHAPTER VII 1 

THE YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA 

The Yarkand arc, or western Kuen-luen. Himalaya. Safed-koh. Sewest&n. Iran. 

Hindu-Kush. Turania. Amu-darya. Sir-darya. The existing continent of Asia. 

The Yarkand arc t or western Kuen-luen (I, p. 439). The Altaides, which 
are here represented by the Bei-shan and Thian-shan/maintain a complete 
independence in regard to the arc of Yarkand. They may be pictured as 
the chord of that arc. There is nothing to be seen in the western Gobi 
analogous to the denuded arcs of the eastern Gobi, or the fragmentary arcs 
of Ala-shan. The few hills that we meet with, such as the Masar-tag, are 
scarcely more than ‘ witnesses ’ formed by the gypsiferous deposits of the 
Gobi, and the Eocene ridges in the neighbourhood of the S&nju and of 
Yangi-Hissar have no connexion with the structure of the great arc. 

The works of Piewtzow and Bogdanowitsch have led to a complete 
revolution in our conception of the structure of this arc 2 . Its north- 
western segment is the range of Kashgar; west of this rises the lofty 
Mustag-ata. The range of Kashgar is joined towards the south by a chain 
to which the name of western Kuen-luen in a special manner belongs ; it 
ends on the river Yurun-kash. Here the Keria range begins, which in 
lat. 36° N. forms the most southerly part of the arc. From this point the 
general trend turns to east-north-east ; from Keria-darya onwards the arc 
is represented by the Russian range, or Akkar-tchekyl-tag, which consists, 
in fact, of two parallel chains, Astyn-tag and Usiu-tag, separated by a 
deep longitudinal valley. Beyond the Kara-muren these are joined by the 
Tokus-dawan ; further on the coulisses of the c Altyn-tag and Anembar-ula 

1 Revised by T. C. Chamberlin, LL.D., Professor of Geology in the University of 
Chicago. 

2 K. J. Bogdanowitsch, The north-west of Tibet, Kuen-luen, and Kashgar, Izviestija 
Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1891, XXVII, pp. 480-504 ; Geological investigations in east 
Turkestan (Works of the expedition to Tibet directed by W. M. Piewtzow, vol. II), 
published by the Russian Geographical Society, 1892, 4to, maps ; Observations on the 
Kuen-luen, Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1894, XXX, pp. 374-400, map; Some 
observations on the system of the Kuen-luen, Mitth. k. k. geogr. Ges. Wien, 1895, 
XXXVIII, pp. 497-526, map ; cf. also G. Wegener, Versuch einer Orographie des Kuen- 
luen, Inaug.-Diss., 8vo, Marburg, 1891, map; Die Entschliessung der unbekanntestenTheile 
von Tibet und die tibetanischer Centralkette (in Festschrift fur Ferd. Freiherr v. 
Richthofen, Berlin, 1893), pp. 387-418 < and K. Futterer, Die allgemeinen geologischen 
Ergebnisse der neueren Forsch ungen in Zentral-Asien und China, Peterm. Mitth., 
Eig&nzungshett No. 119, 1896, map, in particular p. 6 et # seq. 



TRANSGRESSIONS 


271 


CH. VIl] 

make their appearance, striking out far to the east-north-east, and at length, 
as we have already seen, making syntaxis with the ends of the chains of 
the Nan-shan. On the inner side, that is to the north-west of these 
coulisses, lies the oft-mentioned range of San-sjan-tsy ; also within the arc, 
and situated south-east of Khotan, lies the short range of Tekelik-tag. 

Above the gneiss and crystalline schist of these mountains Bogdanowitsch 
encountered a thick series of conglomerate, quartzite, clay slate, and diabase, 
frequently much altered. To this series no doubt the chlorite schist, 
frequently mentioned by Stoliczka, also belongs. Black coral limestone 
has been found on the south slope of the Kyzyl-unguinen-tiure, and also 
further east, at a height of 16,000 to 18,000 feet. Freeh has assigned it to 
the middle Devonian. The whole stratified series, from the summit of the 
crystalline schist upwards, must be included in the Devonian h It forms a 
broad zone, within which Stoliczka discovered, south-west of Sanju, some 
doubtful traces of lower Carboniferous beds 1 2 . The middle Carboniferous 
forms a long band of grey limestone in the north of the range. On the 
south slope of the Tekelik-tag Fusulina limestone was met with, and 
furnished specimens of Spirifer Mosquensis, Productus semireticulatus, 
and other characteristic species. 

On the river Gussass (left tributary of the Tiznab, which ends between 
K&rghalyk and Yarkand) Bogdanowitsch found a dark limestone full of 
Brachiopods lying discordantly on the older rocks. Diener has recorded 
the presence of Productus cancriniformis in this limestone, and has thus 
shown that it is probably contemporaneous with the Productus shales of 
Kumaon and Gurhwal, which, like it, are also defined by an unconformity 
at the base 3 . 

Bogdanowitsch has been led by these facts to distinguish two phases of 
transgression. The first is the transgression of the Kuen-luen , which 
seems to have been preceded by the formation of a plain of denudation. 
The earliest deposits are coarsely clastic sediments ; and the first fossilif erous 
beds are middle Devonian coral limestones. The second transgression is 
the Thibetan : it corresponds with the beds of Gussass, which appear to be 
represented by thick calcareous sandstone in the middle of the mountain 
arc 4 . On the Tekelik-tag the stage of Spirifer Mosquensis lies almost 
directly upon the gneiss. 


1 Beitrage zur Stratigraphie Central-Asiens auf Grund der Aufsammlungen von 
Stoliczka und K. Bogdanowitsch, Denkschr. k. Akad. Wise Wien, 1894, LXI, pp. 
431-465 ; F. Freeh, p. 445 et seq. 

9 Beitr&ge zur Stratigraphie, &c., tom. cit. F. Freeh, p. 452. 

Freeh, Beitrage zur Stratigraphie Central-Asiens, p. 454 ; and C. Diener, Himalayan 
fossils : Permian fossils of the Productus-Shales of Kumaon and Gurhwal, Palaeonto- 
logica Indica, Ser. XV, vol. I, pt. 4, pp. 31, §4. ® 

Bogdanowitsch in Piewtzow, Works of the ‘expedition to Tibet directed by W. M. 
Piewtzow, II, p. 59 et seq. 



272 YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [part iv 

In c ;x£ study of the structure of the Yarkand arc, we are provided with 
three transverse sections by Stoliczka, and eight more or less complete 
traverses by Bogdanowitsch. 

If we approach the inner arc of the system from Khotan and cross the 
foot-hills (probably Eocene), we at once encounter gneiss in the Tekelik-tag. 
Beyond the summit some granite follows, then a basin of grey Carboniferous 
limestone accompanied by Angara beds, 50 versts in breadth, and either 
faulted in or unconformable. South of this basin, in the second range of 
foothills, called Karangu-tag, gneiss again crops out 1 . This chain and that 
of San-sjan-tsy are, strange to say, the only localities where gneiss has yet 
been found on the inner border of the arc. A girdle of light grey Carboni- 
ferous limestone occurs, however, towards the west, at the foot of the great 

r* 



Fig. 14. Section through the Tis-lag and Tekelik-tag. (After Bogdanowitsch.) 
a. a gneiss and crystalline schists ; c Carboniferous with Spirifer Mosquensis ; i , i plant- 
bearing beds ; 7 granite ; q 8 talus and gravel ; /, / faults. 


range, or in the foot-hills south of Sdnju, also to the south-west of Karghalyk 
and west-south-west of Akka-aryk, near Yarkand, that is, in nearly the 
whole western sweep of the arc. 

Then follows the great zone of Devonian beds. It forms the mountains 
of Kashgar as far as the Mustag-ata, the western Kuen-luen (as understood 
by Bogdanowitsch), the chain of Keria, and the whole Russian chain up to 
the less lofty limestone mountains of northern Thibet which lie to the south, 
as well as many parts of the chains lying more to the east ; it thus includes 
almost the whole arc. Great bosses of granite rise out of this Devonian 
zone. They form many summits which attain or exceed a height of 6,000 
meters, as, for instance, near the pass of Taehta-korum, on the line from 
K&rghalyk to the Mustag, and in the Russian chain. There can be no 
doubt that these great bosses are related to the structure of the mountains 
in the same way as those which so frequently emerge from the midst of 
the Devonian in Cornwall or the Hartz. The Yarkand range exhibits 

1 Bogdanowitsch, Works of the expedition to Tibet directed by W. M. Piewtzow, II, 

pi. 2, fig. 4. 



oh.vhJ MUSTAG-ATA 273 

similar protrusions of granite in the gneiss, but not in the Carboni- 
ferous zone. 

South and west of the Devonian zone the conditions are different. The 
Russian chain ends abruptly on the south — both towards lake Dash-kul 
(Usiu-tag) and lake Shor-ljul ( Astyn-tag) —forming terrific precipices, and 
south of these stretch the folded limestone ranges of north-west Thibet. 
Towards the west, the boundary between the Devonian slates and the 
limestone range runs near Dong-lung over the upper Karakash (in Lingtsi- 
thang), and near Ak-tag, on the road to the pass of KAr£-korum (lat. 36° N., 
long. 78° 10' E.). In these limestone mountains of the south, Permian 
Ammonites are known to occur, as well as marine Trias and marine middle 
Jurassic beds 1 . , 

Further to the north-west the case changes. The limestone zone dis- 
appears, and the Devonian sediments, with their granite bosses, advance 
upon a great western zone of gneiss. 

This has already taken place on the upper part of the Yarkand-darya. 
In the southern part of the Kashgar range the gneiss is reached about 30 
versts to the east of the valley of Tagharma ; the Kok-mainak pass lies in 
a granite boss which is surrounded by gneiss. At length, south-west of 
Yangi-Hissar, the Devonian sediments abut directly, at a great altitude, 
against the gneiss of the giant peaks of the Mustag-ata. The section 
published by Bogdanowitsch shows at the place of contact a fold in the 
Devonian overturned to the east. 

4 The granites of Bolun and Tachta-korum/ says Bogdanowitsch, ‘pass 
into the granites of Kusserab, i. e. the Kashgar range, especially its eastern 
slope. The gneisses of the Mustag-ata may, in all likelihood, be brought 
into connexion with those of the central mass of the Mustag chain V 

These facts lead to the following results : — The interpretation given in 
an earlier chapter (I, pp. 439-443) is confirmed, in so far as the inflexion of 
the western Kuen-luen has now been established. The inferences drawn 
from the identity of the rocks &t Sanju and K&rghalyk have received further 
support. The syenite gneiss of the Yangi pass must be included amongst 
the syenite and granite bosses of the Devonian. On the other hand, how- 
ever, Stoliczka was mistaken in thinking (I, p. 449) that the Trias limestone 
of Aktash in the Pamir is continued towards the south-east into the 
fossiliferous limestones of the K&ra-korum district. We perceive, on the 
contrary, that the masses of gneiss which Stoliczka crossed between Balgun, 

1 Beitr&ge zur Stratigraphie Central- Asiens, p. 458; Mojsisovics, Permian with 
Xenodiscus of Woabjilga, p. 462, Uhlig, Kelloway of the upper Karakask. In addition 
Trias is represented in the Kara-korum by Heterastridies ; Belemnites are known from 
this pass. 

2 Bogdanowitsch, in Works of the expedition Tibet directed by W. M. Piewtzow, 
II, p. 83 ; cf. in particular map B ; Bolun and Tachta-korum lie far within the mountains 
towards the MuBtag. 

SOLLAS III rp 



274 


YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [partiv 

Tashkurgan, and Kanshubar (east of Aktash) are not only continued 
towards the north into the Mustag-ata, but in all likelihood also to the 
south, through the range of Tagdumbash to the high mountains of the 
Mustag. c From Tagdumbash/ says Iwanow, ‘ the range rapidly increases 
in height and passes into the peaks of the Kar^-koram-Mustag, which rise 
above the clouds to a height of over 20,000 feet ’ \ 

Thus we arrive at a scheme which differs still further from earlier 
conceptions. The Mustag-ata becomes a part of the gneiss chain of Baltistdn 
which runs through the Peak now Mount Godwin- Austen (8,610 meters), 
to the lake of Pangong in the south-east 2 . 

Sven Hedin has discovered a great number of instructive features in the 
structure of the Mustag-ata 3 . This mighty mountain mass does not 
terminate on the Ges, but continues beyond it with a trend still more to 
the north-north- west. It has long been known that the Pdmir consists of 
two parts ; one, narrow, situated to the east and running from north to south ; 
the other, broad, situated towards the middle and the west, and running 
from east to west. The resemblance between the relation of these parts 
and the syntaxis on the Jhelam has already been pointed out (I, p. 448). 
The mighty chain of Baltistdn turns completely to the north, extending 
even past lat. 39° N., and determines the course of the Altaides, which come 
from the north and are now continued further along the west side of this 
chain, precisely like the chains of the Nan-shan, which are now able to 
continue their development on the east side of the other end of the 
Yarkand arc. 

Thus on the east , as on the west , the Yarkand arc checks the long terrestrial 
waves which come down from the Altai. It is narrow throughout its length ; 
the western spurs of the central Kuen-luen (Akka-tag and others), as well 
as the mountains — in part Mesozoic — on its south side, separate it from 
the arc of the Himalaya ; on the other hand, it is connected with this arc by 
the inflexion of the principal chain of Baltistdn from north-west to north. 

On the northern slopes of its southern parts lie patches of the plant- 
bearing Angara beds, which attain so extraordinary an extension in Siberia. 

1 D. Iwanow, Journey to the Pamir, Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1884, XX, p. 44. 

3 This interpretation has already been given by Richthofen (China, map to p. 272), 
not for the western Kuen-luen but for the Mustag-ata (the mountains generally designated 
the Kyzyl-yart). Lord Curzon’s map of the Pamir (Geogr. Journ., VIII, 1896, p. 96) shows 
clearly the position of the points mentioned ; the independence of the Tagdumbash 
Pamir and its divergent constitution, which the author emphasizes on p. 33, are caused 
by the peculiarities of its structure, which have just been described. For the height of 
Mount Godwin-Austen, see J. T. Walker, Geogr. J oum., 1894, III, p. 339, and H. H. Godwin- 
Austen, ibid., p. 431. 

3 Sven Hedin, Forschungen ii^er die physische Geographie des Hochlandes von Pdmir 
im Friihjahre 1894, Zeitschr. Ges. f. l^rdk* Berlin, 1894, XXIX, pp. 289-346, maps ; Die 
Gletscher des Mu&tag-ata, op. cit., 1895, XXX, pp. 94-134, maps ; and Der kleine Kara- 
kul und Bassik-kul, Peterm. Mitth., 1895, LXI, pp. 87-92, map. 



ch.vh] HIMALAYA 275 

Here they come to an end. South of the Devonian and granite zone of the 
Russian mountains, but still north of the gneiss range of Baltist&n, their 
place is taken by the varied series of marine Mesozoic deposits. . 

We now enter the region of the Tethys. But our knowledge of this is 
confined to the boundaries of its sediments, and these only as determined by 
the imperfect data at our command ; they may be modified, therefore, at 
any moment by some fortunate discovery. The boundaries of the sediments 
do not necessarily coincide with the original limits of the sea. The plant- 
bearing beds on the north side of the arc of Yarkand have undergone 
posthumous dislocations, and the Mesozoic sediments of the south have been 
subjected to the most intense folding. Even in the very midst of the 
glaciers of the chains of Baltist&n, a zone of altered limestone runs at a 
great height for a longdistance through the gneiss, in which it appears to 
form a syncline or a wedge opening towards the south-west (I, p. 438). So 
far as outcrops of Mesozoic are known to me in this region, they nowhere 
present clastic or littoral characters ; but consist for the most part of lime- 
stone of various degrees of purity. 

The region has been the theatre of dynamic phenomena on so grand a 
scale that the ancient and doubtless very variable outlines of the Mesozoic 
sea are no longer recognizable. We must content ourselves provisionally 
with the following general observations : — Nowhere on the horst of the 
Baikal are Cambrian sediments certainly known to occur ; from this point 
towards the south Palaeozoic sediments exist, above them lie the plant- 
bearing beds of the Angara series, and finally, from the south border of the 
Yarkand arc onwards, the plant-beds disappear and are replaced by marine 
deposits of Mesozoic age. 

The eastern part of the arc of Yarkand has already been studied in 
connexion with the western Nan-shan. 

Himddaya . The Himalaya includes in its western part a series of 
mighty mountain chains which one after another, over their whole breadth 
from the alluvia in the south- up to the Mustag in the north, are folded and 
overfolded to the south-west (I, p. 434). 

The most important members of this range are : (1) The Tertiary foot- 
hills ; (2) Pir Panj&l and Dhauladar, formed of schist and granite ; (3) the 
upper Palaeozoic and Mesozoic basin of Kashmir; (4) the gneiss zone of 
Z4 nskfir; (5) the Palaeozoic and Mesozoic zone of Spiti and elsewhere; 
(6) the Eocene and basalt zone on the upper Indus ; (7) the syenite and 
gneiss zone of Ladakh; (8) the remains of a pinched-in zone of upper 
Palaeozoic and Mesozoic in Braldu and Baltist&n ; and (9) the gneiss zone 
of the Mustag and of Baltist&n. 

All geologists who have studied this great tange in detail agree that it 
has been produced by a succession of teclonic processes, commencing from 
a remote period and continuing into late Tertiary times, perhaps even up 



276 YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [part iv 

to the present day, but always governed by the same plan. Griesbach, in 
his account of the region between the Spiti valley and the boundary of 
Nepal, has given a detailed description of zone 5 (locally scarcely separated 
from zone 6), which lies on the north side of the loftiest gneiss range ; his 
description confirms the statement just made, and, in conjunction with the 
work of other geologists in India, leads to more definite conceptions of the 
course of events h 

In the Himalaya, as well as in Afghanistan, and as far as northern Persia, 
Griesbach obtained evidence which showed that great physical changes had 
occurred towards the close of the Carboniferous epoch. 

In Spiti, PainkMnda, and Yohar a marked unconformity occurs at the 
base of the Permian, as represented by the Produetus shales, remarkable 
here as elsewhere for their intensely black coldur. This unconformity, 
which, as we have already pointed out, probably coincides with the Thibetan 
transgression of the arc of Yarkand, was already known to Stoliczka. 
With it begins the c Zanskdr system ’ of Lydekker. 

As regards later events, we will only mention the fact that on the upper 
Indus one shore of the Eocene sea lay on the south side of the chain of 
Ladakh (zone 7), (I, p. 438), and the disposition of the beds seems to indicate 
that in post-Eocene times the coulisses approached each other during the 
general movement from the north-east. Perhaps a disjunctive line, on 
which volcanos were seated, existed here in the Eocene epoch. 

Finally the overthrusting of the Siwaiiks (zone 1) bears witness to the 
persistence of the movement. 

The extraordinary breadth over which the uniform movement towards 
the south-west has made itself felt led us to suspect that tangential dis- 
locations must exist in this region comparable in importance with those of 
the Swiss Alps, and recent observations have shown that such dislocations 
actually occur. They lie in zone 5, on the boundary between Kumaon and 
Thibet, and we possess accounts of them by two distinguished observers, 
Griesbach and Diener, who are completely in uccord as regards the facts 2 . 

In this region the Palaeozoic succession is visible up to the white 
Carboniferous quartzite. Above the quartzite lie the black Produetus 
shales, the long and complex series of Trias deposits, always black or dark 
grey in colour, the white or greyish white Dachsteinkalk, the thick black 

1 C. L, Griesbach, Geology of the Central Himalayas, Mem. Geol. Surv. India, 1891, 
XXIII, maps. For general questions of this kind see R. D. Oldham, Age and Origin of 
the Himalaya, Geol. Mag., 1891, pp. 8 and 70; and.C, A. McMahon, The Geological 
History of the Himalayas, Proc. Geol. Assoc., 1895, XIV, pp. 80-96. 

2 C. L. Griesbach, Notes on the Central Himalayas, Rec. Geol. Surv. India, 1893, 
XXVI, pp. 19-25, map ; C. Diener, Ergebnisse einer geologischen Expedition in den 
Central-Himalaya von Johar, Hundes i\nd Bainkhanda, Denkschr. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 
1895, LXII, pp. 533 to 607, maps ; Notes on the Geological Structure of the Chitichun 
Region, Mem. Geol. Surv. India, 1898, XXVIII, pp. 1~27. # 



277 


ch.vii] OVERTHRUSTS IN THE HIMALAYA 

Spiti shales which belong to the middle and upper Jurassic and in part to 
the horizon of Berrias, and finally, the flysch-like Gieumal sandstone. The 
two latter members form the plateaux of Chaldu and Kiogarh at heights of 
from 17,000 to 19,000 feet. 

This whole series is conformable, at least from the discordance above the 
quartzite upwards. It is surmounted by patches of a second series, some of 
them forming the isolated and shattered crowns of lofty summits. 

This second or superposed series differs from the normal series of Spiti. 
Its oldest member as yet discovered is a white limestone rich in Camaro- 
phoria, Loftusia, and other characteristic Permian fossils; this horizon is 
quite unknown in the subjacent series. It is succeeded by marine Trias, in 
which Diener has recognized two zones, and Krafft subsequently several 
others. The zone of Ceintites subvobustus (base of the beds with Spirifer 
JStracheyi of Krafft) is represented in these superposed flakes by red marble, 
while in the normal series of Spiti it occurs as a compact black limestone 
This is followed by light-coloured limestone, identical with the Dachstein- 
kalk of the lower series. Finally, as Herr Griesbach has had the kindness 
to inform me, Krafft has found Lias with Arietites in these flakes, a horizon 
which has not yet been discovered in the lower series. The flakes are 
associated with diabase porphyrite, which is also visible in dykes in the 
subjacent Spiti shales and Gieumal sandstone. 

The distribution of these flakes is independent of the folds of the 
foundation (Fig. 15), and although the schists beneath them are much 
crushed, yet in one case at least, that of the flake on Chitichun I, which 
has been carefully examined, the bedding would appear to be horizontal. 
Many little faults and slickensides traverse them, but the fossils are not 
distorted by pressure. 

Generally speaking, the flakes are found over a wide arc, extending 
from Chitichun I towards the Kungri-bingri, on the summit of which 
(5,843 meters) Diener found a block of white Permian limestone. 

The most remarkable fact in connexion with this subject is the differ- 
ence which exists between the upper series and the lower. It recalls the 
difference between the ‘ Brian^onnais ’ in the recumbent folds of the western 
Alps and the subjacent Helvetian formation. Thanks to the refinement 
which has been achieved of late in our subdivision of the Trias, Diener, 
after determining the fossils collected on the east slope of Chitichun I, was 
able to point out the horizon on which these fossils should be looked for at 
Spiti ; and Krafft actually found them there, but in a different rock. This 
fact alone shows that the upper and lower series must have been formed 
under different physical conditions, and at a great distance from each other ; 

it also proves that the flakes are not projecting anticlines, that they have 

* $ 

1 A. v. Krafft, Stratigraphical Notes on the Mesozoic Rocks of Spiti, Gen. Rep. Geol. 
Surv. India, 1899-1900, p. 204. 



278 YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [partiv 

not been moved vertically upwards by dislocation, and that they have not 
'been dragged upwards by associated eruptive rock; we seem, indeed, irre- 
sistibly driven to the conclusion that they have been brought here from 
afar off, as in the case of the recumbent sheets of Switzerland. 

The flakes have not come from the south ; the^general movement of the 
mountains from north-east to south-west is opposed to this hypothesis. In 
the north, however, lies first the Eocene zone 6, next the mighty gneiss and 
syenite zone of Ladakh, 7, and then only come the probable continuations 



Fig. 15. The overthrust f akes (‘ Klippen ’) of Chitichun and §aldchura in the south Hiindcs, (After 

JDiener.) 

The Thibetan frontier runs through the Utadhura (5,861 meters) and Kiogarh-Chaldu 
(5,815 meters) passes. Further to the north-east lies the lake of Manasarowar. 

of the pinched-in Mesozoic fragments of Brdldu, which, to judge from the 
strike, probably contain the wedge-shaped rootk of these recumbent flakes. 
But nowhere in the Trias of these regions, whether represented by the 
normal series of Spiti, or by the recumbent flakes of Hundes, or by the 
pinched-in strips of Brfildu and Baltist&n to the north, is there any indica- 
tion of shore deposits. We must conclude, therefore, that the sediments of 
the Trias once extended ova” the whole zone of Ladakh, and, as in the 
western Alps, were thrown into folds, ^together with the rocks below them, 
and subsequently denuded off. 



ch.vii3 SIAH-KOH AND SAF^D-KOH 279 

The eruptive rocks can only be regarded as a secondary or consequent 
phenomenon. 

Indications, such as we have just encountered, of tangential movement 
on the grandest scale lead us to suspect that many phenomena in the Hima- 
laya, hitherto unexplained, will find their solution in the theory of re- 
cumbent folds. We may refer to the isolated occurrence of a mass of black 
limestone with Nummulites Ramondi which overlies Palaeozoic quartzite 
on the summit of Z 4 (5,638 meters) near the pass of Singhe L& 1 , and 
also to a series of flakes more to the south ; in particular, to the gneissose 
granite which forms the mass of Kalogarhi nn British Garhwal, east of the 
point where the Ganges leaves the mountains. The precise descriptions of 
Middlemiss, and the amazement with which he saw the Tertiary sediments 
which surround this mass dipping beneath it, lead us to think that he 
would have arrived at another explanation from that he finally adopted, or 
rather that he would have held to his first impressions, if the recumbent 
sheets of Chitichun had been known at that time, or those facts which have 
since been brought to light in the Swiss Alps between the Aare and the 
Arve. The series which lies beneath the mass of the Kalogarhi includes 
Mesozoic sediments and Nummulitic beds; it forms a broad syncline; the 
gneissose granite rests immediately upon the Eocene, and there are no signs 
of transition 2 . 

Judging from what is actually known, it would seem probable that on 
the southern border of the Himalaya several very large flakes of crystalline 
rocks have been driven over the Eocene. 

Siahrkdh and Safed-koh. In the year 1892 Griesbach showed that the 
Saf^d-k($h, a lofty mountain range which runs east and west in about lat. 34° 
N., south of the Kabul river, must be regarded as an independent tectonic 
element, situated between the Hindu-kush and the Salt range 3 . The 
previous work of Waagen and Wynne led Griesbach to suppose that the 
Saf£d-k6h, notwithstanding the intervening plains, finds its tectonic 
continuation in the fragmentary arcs of Hazara, which approach the 
syntaxis on the Jhelum from the west. The subsequent investigations 
of Middlemiss in Hazara have confirmed this view 4 . 

Between the pass of Shutargardan in the west and Muzaffirabad in the 

1 La Touche, Rediscovery of Nummulites in Zanskar, Rep. Geol. Surv. India, 1888, 
XXI, pp. 160-162 ; Singhe La is in lat. 38° 58' N. long., 76° 58' E. 

2 C. A. Middlemiss, Physical Geology of West British Garhwal Rec. Geol. Surv. India, 
1887, XX, pp. 26-40, maps; also Crystalline and Metamorphic Rocks of the Lower 
Himalaya, Garhwal and Kumaun, tom. cit., pp. 134-143 ; p. 142 : ‘ a quaquaversal thrust- 
plane round the Kalogarhi centre, in post-nummulitic-limestone times.’ 

® C. J. Griesbach, The Geology of the Safed-Koh, Rec. Geol. Surv. India, 1892, XXV, 
pp. 59-109 ; cf. also The Face of the Earth, I, pt. IV.* 

* C. S. Middlemiss, The Geology of Hazara and the Black Mountain, Mem. Geol. Surv. 
India, 1896, XXVI, 302 pp., map. 



2$0 YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [partiv 

east wt |!nd ourselves in the presence of a mountain arc, divided, as regards 
its outer form, into several parts, which do not yet possess a common name. 

In the east the mountains of Hazara trend away from the syntaxis to 
the south-south- west, then to the south-west, and finally disappear beneath 
the alluvial plains of Haripur. All the mountains are folded or overfolded 
to the east-south-east or south-east, i.e. towards the syntactic axis. We 
have already seen that a long and important dislocation follows the general 
strike, and then describing an arc towards the west passes into an east-to- 
west direction, along which it may be traced even across the Indus to 
Koh&tand beyond. Along this line older sediments are overthrust towards 
the exterior across the middle Tertiary region of Rawalpindi (I, p. 444). 
This line of dislocation, however, is not the only one. Middlemiss found 
that the range of Hazara consists of four zones or * blocks/ which are 
sharply separated from one another by similar lines (thrust-planes). 

The first and innermost zone on the north-west includes the oldest rocks, 
gneiss and schistose beds in part highly altered. The second zone is formed 
of ancient schists, Mesozoic sediments, and the lower beds of the Nummulitic 
series. The third zone begins with Trias, and extends through the very 
thick Nummulitic series up co the Kuldana series, with which the Eocene 
terminates. Then follows the line mentioned above, running north of 
Rawalpindi. The fourth zone begins with the upper horizons of the 
Nummulitic series, and consists chiefly of Miocene sediments. 

This succession of zones, each commencing with sediments of earlier date 
than its predecessor, and the sharp separation of one from another by 
a long and continuous thrust-plane, testifies to a remarkable resemblance 
between the structure of Hazara and that of the north-eastern Alps. 

The descriptions which Griesbach has given of the region between Pesha- 
war and the Logar valley, taken in connexion with earlier accounts, and the 
latest observations made by Hayden in the mountains of Khaibar and to 
the south of the pass, enable us to recognize the following leading features 1 : — 

A main range of gneiss, mica-schists, and pther ancient rocks proceeds 
from Kunar, and probably from a point much further east, towards the 
west and traversing the lower course of the river Kunar, crosses the Kabul 
river not far from Jalalabad, and continues still further in the direction of 
Khurd-kabul. Between the two latter places it is called the Siah-k6h y and 
forms the watershed between the rivers Kabul and Surkhab. Possibly, 
however, it is continued still further to the south-west towards the Logar 

1 A B. Wynne, The Trans-Indus Salt Region in the Kohat District, Mem. Geol. Surv. 
India, 1875, XI, pp. 105-226 ; Note on the Tertiary Zone and underlying rocks in the 
North- West-Punjab, Rec. Geol. Surv. India, 1877, X, pp. 107-132, map; and Further 
Notes on the Geology of the Upper Punjab, op. cifc., 1879, XII, ^p. 114-133, map ; W. 
Waagen, Section of the Kabul river through Kushialgurh to Kalabagh, in Salt Range 
Fossils, IV, Palaeontologica Indica, Ser*XIII, 1898, p. 13 etseq. Holdich, Tirah, Geogr. 
Joum., 1898, XII, p. 337, gives a map of the eastern Safed-K6h to the meridian of Kohdt. 




Fragmentary trend-lines between the Kabul river and the Jhelam 

(After Griesbach, Middlemiss, Hayden, Wynne, and others’ 


282 YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [partiv 

valley, rln this range the beds dip to the north ; in the gneiss between 
Khurd-Kabul and the Logar valley, to the north-west. The whole range is 
overthrust towards the exterior, i. e. to the south and south-east, as are all 
the parts of the Safed-kdh, to be mentioned later. 

Towards the south the Siah-kbh is followed by a zone of sediments 
which are probably Carboniferous in age. In the east, towards the Khaibar, 
Permian beds also occur, and probably the whole Mesozoic series ; in par- 
ticular, limestones with Dicerocardium and Lithodendron. In the west the 
limestone range runs from Kunar across the river Kabul into the valley of 
the Surkhab, through the pass ? of Lataband, and probably also south of 
Khurd-kabul, south-westwards into the valley of the Logar. It is inter- 
rupted by masses of syenite and granite, and sometimes characterized by 
the presence of rubies. 

South of the Siah-k6h, however, this limestone zone appears to be 
followed by another zone of schist, and a second series of limestone moun- 
tains, until we reach the principal range of the Safed-koh. This rises from 
the plain about 15 kilometers west of Peshawar, and reaches its culminating 
point far to the west in the Sikar&m (4,816 meters). Its structure is very 
imperfectly known ; gneiss is not recorded ; in its highest parts large areas 
appear to be formed of schist, serpentine, and ancient limestone. 

A great dislocation, apparently indeed a thrust-plane with overthrust 
towards the south, separates the principal range from a Mesozoic zone 
which follows to the south. On the east, south of the Saf^d-kdh, Hayden 
encountered four parallel ranges formed chiefly of Mesozoic deposits, all 
overfolded towards the south \ On the west this Mesozoic zone has been 
met with in the pass of Shutargardan ; thence it runs to the south-west 
across the pass of Kalan (3,537 meters) towards the district of Kharwar and 
the town of Ghazni, which lies south of the upper Logar valley. In this 
western part of the zone also Griesbach has recognized the thrust-plane 
which bounds it on the north. In Urakzai the zone is broken up into 
flakes. South of it, near Kohfit, that great thrust-plane is reached which 
has been mentioned as occurring in the east, north of Rawalpindi, on the 
northern margin of the Miocene region. From Koh&t it turns towards the 
south-west, and reaches Thai, on the river Kuram. 

The lie of these parallel zones, the general overthrusting towards the 
south, and the widely extended thrust-planes, show how close is the corre- 
spondence between the structure of this region and that of Haz&ra. On 
the other side the zones approach the chains of the Sul&im&n range (I, p. 427), 
which trend due north and south. But Griesbach points out that the 
Sul&im&n range breaks up in the Waziri region into knots and isolated 
chains, which further to the nprth turn gradually round to the north-east 

1 H. H. Hayden, On the Geology of Tirah' and the Bazar Valley, Mem. Geol. Surv. 
Tndia, 1898, XXVIII, pp. 95-117. 



283 


cH.vn] SEWESTAN 

in the direction of the Urakzai mountains (north-east of Thai). This 
circumflex junction reveals itself also in the deflexion to the south-west 
exhibited by the line of dislocation between Koh&t and Thai, as well as by 
all the zones in the west which run towards the Logar valley or from 
Shutargardan towards Ghazni. 

The trend-lines just described are shown in Plate III, together with 
Waagen’s diagrammatic lines for the Salt range. They lie outside all the 
other lines. Waagen compares the Tertiary regions in the interval im- 
mediately north of the Salt range to the Molasse land of Switzerland, and 
the Salt range itself to the Jura mountains. We have already seen to 
what extent the proximity of the foreland makes itself felt in this 
locality 1 . 

The result of the laborious investigations which have been carried out 
in the region lying between the river Kabul and the Jhelam, and which 
redound so greatly to the honour of all who have taken part in them, 
is therefore as follows: — 

The whole region has been subjected to a general movement, directed 
in Haz&ra towards the east; near Jalalabad, first towards the south, then 
to the south-east ; and in the Waziri mountains to the east. The chains 
driven closely together on approaching the syntaxis of the Himalaya, i. e. 
towards the Jhelam between Muzaffirabad and Rawalpindi, diverge from 
one another on the west. The first group is formed by the Siah-kdh and 
the Safed-kdh, with their prolongations trending to the south-west. The 
second group runs through Kushalgar and Kohat, and turns sharply round 
in the Urakzai mountains and the vicinity of Thai into the meridional 
ranges of the Waziri mountains and the Sulaim&n chain. A third group 
is formed by the tectonic lines of the Salt range, which is divided into 
two arcs by its loop towards Kala-bagh. This range, thus represents the 
pre-alps of the Persian chains, and cannot, as I formerly supposed, be 
regarded as an irregular fore-chain of the Hindu-Kush. 

Sewestdn. West of Tha^ Wynne came on eruptive rocks. Somewhat 
further south, travelling from Rannu in the valley of the T6chi towards 
the west, Smith met with Siwalik conglomerates plunging steeply to the 
east beneath the alluvium of the plain, and followed regularly towards 
the west, first by the older members of the Tertiary series, and next by 
the Cretaceous 2 . Smith was astonished at the similarity between the 
structure of this region and that of the range lying 300 kilometers 
further south, west of Ddra-Ghazi-Khan. Further up, however, in the 
Tochi valley, serpentine and gabbro appear, then trachyte and amygdaloidal 

\ ^gen, Salt Range Fossils, IV, pp. 28 and 82. 

Smith, On the Geology of the Tochi Vflley, Rec. Geol. Surv. India, 1895, 
.II* PP* 106—110 ; H. H. Hayden, On*some Tgneous Rocks from the Tochi Valley, 
op. cit., 1896, XXIX, pp. 68-69. 



284 


YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [partiv 

basalt, winch range apparently from the summit of the Cretaceous to the 
middle Eocene. It is a noteworthy fact that eruptive rocks, belonging 
approximately to the age of the Deccan trap, should extend so far 
as this. 

The Sul&im&n chains (I, p. 427), the highest parts of which have 
recently been mapped by La Touche detach themselves here from the 
chief Iranian arc and surround the eastern side of a smaller, fairly inde- 
pendent region, which may be distinguished as the region of Sewestdn . 

The trend of the Suldimdn chains, which on the Takt-i-Sul&imfin is 
strictly meridional, turns towards the south-south-west even before reaching 
lat. 30° N. ; and between lats. 28° and 29° N. the outer border of the 
less lofty chains which form their prolongation passes into an east-and- 
west direction. From here onwards this border,’ frequently interrupted 
by projecting anticlines, recedes far to the north-west, describing a 
re-entrant angle, and then encounters those meridional chains which 
separate Baluchistan from the Indus. Through this re-entrant angle runs 
the road to the pass of Bolan and Quetta. 

Within the region thus bounded, successive folded ranges take the 
same turn to the west and rinally to the north -north-west and north-west, 
as is clearly shown on the geological maps of Thal-Chotiali 1 2 . 

These folded ranges are generally of simple structure, and it is only 
towards the south-east border of the region that overfolding seems to 
occur. Like the lofty Sulaiman chains, they consist chiefly of Tertiary 
and Cretaceous beds. The oldest bed visible is a massive limestone in 
which Lala Kishen Sing found Ammonites; Noetling has recorded the 
occurrence of Macrocephalites macrocephalus , and has established a correla- 
tion with Waagen’s Chari group of Khach 3 * * * * 8 . Noetlings investigations also 
show that the Neocomian with JBelemnites latus is succeeded here by the 
uppermost part of the Senonian; and the intervening deposits of the 
middle Cretaceous, which are so largely developed in north Afghanistan, 
are unrepresented. ♦ 

Mojsisovics, on the evidence of a loose fragment found in one of the side 

1 T. La Touche, Geology of the Sherani Hills, Ree. Geol. Surv. India, 1893, XXVI, 
pp. 77-96, map. On p. 93 there are some valuable observations on the syntaxis in the 
north. 

2 R. D. Oldham, Report on the Geology and Economic Resources of the country 

adjoining the Sind*Pishin railway between Sharigh and Spintangi, Rec. Geol. Surv. 

India, 1890, XXIII, pp. 93-110, map ; Report on the Geology of Thai Chotiali and part of 

the Mari Country, op. cit., XXV, pp. 18-29, map ; Griesbach, On the Geology of the 

Country between the Chappar Rift and Hamai in Baluchist&n, op. cit., 1893, XXVI, pp. 

113-147, map. 

8 F. Noetling, The Fauna of th% Kellawaps of Mazar Drik, Palaeontologia Indica, 
Ser. XVI, Baluchistan, Part I, 1896, and “Preliminary report on the Western Mari Hills 
and Zhob valley in Gen. Rep. for 1898-1899, pp. 50-63. 



ch,vii] AFGHANISTAN 285 

valleys of the river Zhob (North Sewest&n), has established the presence of 
the alum-bearing stage of the upper Trias 1 . 

Afghanistan and Iran . Let us turn our attention to the pass of 
Bolan and the neighbourhood of Quetta. It is not only the folds of 
Sewest&n, bent back towards the north-west, and those of the southern 
Indus chains trending towards the south, which meet together in this 
region. Griesbach’s map of the country between Sibi and Girishk shows 
clearly how chains and fragments of chains, all running parallel towards 
the south-west, follow one another up to Kandahar and beyond as far 
as the Helmand chain 2 . They probably proceed from the region between 
the Saf&l-kdh and the most northerly part of the Sulaim&n chains. They 
run obliquely across # the arc of Sewestan, bound this region on the north- 
west, and, still maintairfing their south-west trend, reach a point west of 
Quetta. They are equally independent of the meridional chains of the 
Indus (Mts. Hala, Khirthar, and Lakhe, I, p. 426). At the same time 
the first important chain north-west of Quetta, the Khojak, belongs not to 
them but to the chains of the Indus. 

The chains of the Indus join these ranges as a new fascies of folds 
which increases rapidly in breadth towards the south. From the instruc- 
tive observations of Vredenburg on the boundaries of the desert basin, it 
may be inferred that the southern prolongation of the Khojak chain lies 
east of Nushki. Measured from this point across Kelat to the alluvial 
land of the Indus, the breadth of the folded region already amounts to 
about 150 kilometers. The chain which starts from Nushki and, running 
to the south-south- west, forms the south-east border of the plain of Kharan, 
attains an altitude of over 9,000 feet. While in the pass of Bolan the 
predominant rocks are Eocene and Cretaceous limestones, in this range, on 
the other hand, we find Eocene Flysch. From Nushki onwards the chains 
diverge more and more from one another, turning at the same time to 
the south-west and west, and finally to the north-west, thus surrounding 
the Hamun-i-Mashkel in their southern bend. Other ranges describing 
a gentler and interrupted arc, divide this closed basin from the much 
larger desert region of the Goad-i-Zirreh and the Helmand, which lies to 
the north of it 3 . 

These chains have been formed by a thrust acting from north to south, 
and consist of folds having for the most part a very regular structure, but 

1 Didymites afghanicus ; E. von Mojsisovics, Beitrage zur Kenntniss der obertriadischen 
Cephalopoden-Fauna des Himalaya, Denkschr. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1896, LXIII, p. 611. 
The specimen was sent by M. Griesbach. 

2 C. L. Griesbach, Mem. Geol. Surv. India, 1881, XVIII, pt. I, in particular pp. 4^9. 

3 E. Vredenburg, Baluchistan Desert, Gen. Rep. Gegl. Surv. India, 1898-1899, pp. 63-68, 
and 1899-1900, pp. 50-52. A general idea of Jhe folds is given in the maps by T. H. 
Holdich, The Perso-Baluch Boundary, Geogr. Journ., 1897, IX, pp. 416-422, and An 
Orographic Map of Afghanistan and Baluchistan, op. cit., 1900, XVI, pp. 527-531, map. 



286 YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [partiv 

sometimes broken up into flakes. In certain cases, however, which were 
closely studied, Vredenburg found that when a depression occurs to the 
north of a fold the direction of the folding is reversed and is turned 
towards the north , i. e. tmvards the depression. 

Great intrusions of granite and diorite penetrate into the highest beds 
of the Nummulitic series, and in the associated Siwalik beds pebbles of these 
rocks are found. 

A. H. McMahon travelled through these regions at the same time as 
Vredenburg; the specimens he collected were described by C. A. McMahon 
and T. Holland. The intrusive rocks on the west slope of the Khojak 
range are hornblende granitite ; they are continued towards the south-west 
into the Sarlat range, and also occur in the mountains between Helmand 
and Mashkel. Quartz-diorite and mica-augite-didrite are associated with 
them, and were also met with at the most westerly locality visited (lat. 
29° 50' N„ long. 60° 55' E.), in the Persian chains running to the north- 
west 1 . 

In addition to these somewhat ancient eruptive rocks there are disloca- 
tions quite recent in age. 

The Khojak range is pierced by a railway tunnel ; on its west side lies 
the station of Sanzal. On December 20, 1892, a violent earthquake occurred, 
and near Sanzal a new and very long fissure opened along a furrow in the 
ground which corresponded to an ancient cleft. Griesbach has described 
the disturbances which affected the railroad where it crossed the fissure. 
The latter ran from north-east to south-west ; the railway officials did not 
discover its termination in either of these directions 2 . 

According to A. H. McMahon, the fissure, ascending obliquely and 
gradually, crosses the crest of the main chain at a height of 7,000 feet, 
then reaches a valley, cuts obliquely through the slopes of several spurs of 
the Khojak range, and follows the foot of the Sarlat range along its whole 
length to Nushki. There, after a course of 180 kilometers, its termination 
was still unreached. The fissure in some parts of its course looks like a 
railway cutting, and is used in places as a road. This is a true disjunctive 
line of recent origin . 

Volcanic ashes occur in the Sarlat range, west of the fissure. They are 
the first of a long series of outcrops of ashes, pumice, and lavas, chiefly 
andesitic, which show that the Chagai mountains between Helmand and 

1 C. A. McMahon, The southern borderlands of Afghanistan, Geogr. Journ., 1897, IX, 
pp. 393-415, map ; C. A. and A. H. McMahon, Notes on some Volcanic and other Rocks 
which occur near the Baluchistan-Afghan Frontier between Chaman and Persia, Quart. 
Joum. Geol. Soc., 1897, LIII, pp. 289-309, map; T. H. Holland, An Account of the 
Geological Specimens collected by t the Afghan-Baluch Boundary Commission of 1896, 
Rec. Geol. Surv. India, 1897, XXX, pp. ^25-129, map ; also ibid., pp. 252, 253. 

2 C. L. Griesbach, Notes on the Earthquake in Baluchist&n on the 20th Dec., 1892, 
Rec. Geol. Surv. India, 1893, XXVI, pp. 57-61. 



oh. vii ] VOLCANOS OF BALUCHESTAN 287 

Mashkel are in the main of volcanic origin, notwithstanding the presence 
here and there of older rocks. 

Our account of this region is fortunately continued by Blanford’s descrip- 
tion of the region between the coast and Kerman (I, p. 425). Several of 
the groups of parallel chains deflected to the north-west are accompanied 
by lofty volcanos. The Chagai mountains form only the innermost zone 
which trends east and west ; the other volcanic groups or ranges lie within 
the chains which run to the north-west. One of the first of these chains 
is that comprising the lofty volcanic cones of Koh-i-Basman and Koh-i- 
Naushada . The latter, which is also called Koh-i-Taf ten, has been ascended 
by Sykes; it is about 12,800 feet high — according to Holdich’s map, 
13,500 feet — and if/S crater, in 1894, was filled with hot sulphurous 
vapours l . A second z^e is formed by the volcanic mountains described 
by Blanford between Bampur and Bam. The lofty Koh Hazar , situated 
between Bam and Kerm&n, and 14,500 feet high, should perhaps be assigned 
to this zone. Here we reach the field of Stahl’s extensive investigations, 
from these we learn that no recent ashes and lavas have so far been 
observed in the range running from Kerman to the north-west, but that 
they occur at numerous localities in a chain situated further to the west, 
namely that which runs west of Behramabad and west of Yezd. They 
reappear repeatedly in this long chain, and extend even as far as a point 
a little beyond Kum (lat. 35° N.) 2 On Stahl’s maps we see besides that 
the long coulisses which proceed from Kerm&n and from the west border 
of the great desert Dasht-i-Lut, already present the north-westerly trend 
of the Z&gros chains. It would seem they are not a series of regular 
anticlines : one coulisse shows over long intervals a dip in one direction 
only, to the south-west, as though it were the half of an anticline ; another 
possesses a synclinal structure, and so on. 

The stratified series differs from that of the outer chains of Iran. The 
thick limestones with Nummulites and Alveolina which, superposed on 
the Hippurites limestone, descend from the pass of Bolan through the 
chains of the Indus, form the more southerly folds of Baluchistan and 
the greater part of the Z&gros chains as far as Mesopotamia. In the 
inner chains the Hippurites limestone is also present, but beneath it older 
sediments crop out with a considerable extension. Several members of the 
Jurassic system are known; and coal-seams with plant-bearing beds, and 
associated with marine beds containing Goniomya and Pecten, make their 

1 P. Molesworth Sykes, Recent Journeys in Persia, Geogr. Journ., 1897, X, pp. 568- 
597; also his note in Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1897, LIII, pp. 292, 293; Vredenburg, 
op. cit., p. 67, gives some details with regard to the more recent volcanos. 

2 A. P. Stahl, Reisen in Nord- und Centr^l-Pe^rsien, Peterm. Mitth., 1895, Erg&nzungs- 
heffc No. 118, and Zur Geologie von Persien, Geognostische Beschreibung von Nord- 
und Central-Persien, op. cit., 1897, Erganzungsheft No. 122. 



288 


YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [partiv 

appearance near Kerm&n, in the Durmanu mountains. These plant- 
tearing beds belong to that widely distributed Series — sometimes assigned 

different stages of the Lias, sometimes to the Rhaetic stage, and probably 
not always occupying precisely the same horizon — which extends from 
thi^ region across north Persia and the Caucasus, and is met with in the 
Balkans, in Servia, in the Gresten beds of the eastern Alps, on the other 
side of Bayreuth, and even still further west l . 

In the same coulisse, Devonian beds with Tentaculites and Spirifer • 
Archmci appear beneath the Cretaceous limestone south of Abdid (about 
long. 57° E. and lat. 31° 10' N.) 2 . 

In this latitude Palaeozoic rocks also occur on the inner side of the 
Zagros chains ; this we learn from Rodler’s travels,, in Luristan 3 : they 
extend to the north-west into the great schistose region of Irak. Isolated 
masses of granitite present themselves, and proceed as far as the great 
granitite mass of Mount Elwend, near Hamadan, and those regions which 
we have already discussed from the data furnished by Loftus, Tietze, and 
Wahner (I, p. 492). The constancy of the strike to the north-west receives 
further confirmation from the investigations of Freeh and Arthaber in 
Armenia 4 . 

As we have already seen, the Khojak mountains, north-west of Quetta, 
must be assigned to the chains of the Indus, the eastern branches of which 
follow the Indus in a meridional direction, while the western branches, 
diverging more and more to the north-west, sweep round the closed basins 
of Mashkel and the Helmand in a broad arc, and then proceed further to 
the north-west. To these north-westerly prolongations belong indeed 
the chains of Kerman and Yezd and, west of these, the whole of the Zagros 
chains, which extend along the Persian gulf to the syntaxis of Armenia. 
At the same time we are impressed by the remarkable fact that at the point 
where the curvature of these long chains reaches its maximum, i. e. in 
Baluchistan and Afghanistan, only recent sediments are known to occur ; 
and it is not until we reach the north-westerly prolongations, the coulisses 
of Kerman and Luristan, and others still further to the north-west, that 

1 A good summary in F. Krasser, Ueber die fossile Flora der rhatischen Schichten 
Fersiens, Sitzb. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1891, C, pp. 418-432 ; for their further distribution 
see the map by Pompeckj, Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1897, XLIX, p. 828. 

2 A. F. Stahl, Zur Geologie von Persien, &c., Peterm. Mitth., Erganzungsheft No. 122, 
pp. 63 and 68. 

s A. Rodler, Bericht iiber eine geologische Reise im westlichen Persien, Sitzb. k. Akad. 
Wiss. Wien, 1889, XCVIII, pp. 28-39, and Letter from Sultanabad, Anz. k. Akad. Wiss. 
Wien, Oct. 18, 1888 ; a map of the Bachtyaris in which the strict north-west direction 
of these chains appears is given by H. A. Sawyer, Geogr. Journ., 1894, IV, p. 481 et seq. 
Here also granite outcrops are mentioned and even a recent volcano. 

4 F. Freeh and G. von Arthaber, Ueber c das JPalaeozoicum in Hocharmenien und Persien, 
mifc einem Anhange liber die Kreide von Sirab in Persien ; Waagen und Arthaber’g Mitth. 
Palaeont. Inst. TJniversitiit Wien, 1900, XII, pp. 157-308. 



THE IRANIDES 


289 


CH. VIl] 


Palaeozoic and older rocks in general make their appearance. Kurachee 
(lat. 25° N.), situated near the delta of the Indus, by no means marks the 
most southerly parts of the arc of Baluchistan, for these are covered by 
the sea. Nevertheless this place lies eight or nine degrees further south 
than the outer zone of tfye syntaxis on the Jhelam. To this extent, then, 
reckoning from the Himalaya, has the Iranian arc advanced to the south. 
The outer zone of the Armenian syntaxis, i. e. of the conjunction of the 
Iranian with the Tauric ranges, lies in the region of Diarbekr, between 
lats. 37° and 38° N., and thus the parts of the arc which trend to the north- 
west retreat even further towards the north 1 than the meridional Sul&im&n 
and Indus chains have advanced towards the south. The Eocene arcs of 
Baluchistan consequently occupy an eccentric position, to the south-east, in 
the Iranian structure. 5n Iran, however, we perceive that in the extreme 
north-west a secondary arc , the Albourz-range , rises on the southern shore 
of the Caspian as an almost independent structure. 

From the descriptions of previous writers, especially Tietze, we were 
led to conclude that the Albourz is an arc of central Asiatic type (I, p. 492), 
thrust towards the south, composed of closely crowded folds, frequently 
traversed by faults, and crowned by the volcanic cone of mount Demavend. 
The works of Stahl afford more exact data concerning the western, central, 
and eastern portions of the range, but the structure of the regions inter- 
vening between thes# three portions is still completely unknown 1 . 

In the west, where the Albourz proceeds into the mountainous land of 
Ghilan, there rises, south of the mouth of the Sefid Rud, the broad volcanic 
cone of Dulfak; on its southern side, near Umom, lie volcanic bombs. 
Towards the interior it is followed by folded chains. On the south side of 
the Albourz, volcanic accumulations, which are more recent than the folded 
chains, again appear, and extend towards the interior of the Albourz as far 
as mount Demavend. At the same time, in the middle region the northern 
limbs of the inner anticlines remain turned towards the Caspian. On the 
east, the north side of the Albourz descends towards the plain of the lower 
Atrek along numerous fractures, which have broken up the folds. 

The cone of Dulfak in the west does not seem to mark the end of the 
folded range. On the contrary, its anticlines and synclines are continued 
through Ghilan and along the south side of the Kur valley ; the northern 
slope of the range is formed, according to Sjogren 2 and Valentin 3 , by 
anticlines of Cretaceous rocks. 

1 A F. Stahl, Peterm. Mitth., Erganzungsheft No. 122, 1897, in particular pp. 19 and 
42, and section VIII. 

2 H. Sjogren, Om bildningen af Kaspiska hafvets backen, Geol. FOren. Stockh. Forh., 
1888, X, pp. 49-74. 

8 J. Valentin, Bericht fiber meine Reise ,nac£ Tiflis und die Theilnahme an der 
Radde'schen Expedition in den Karabagh-Gau, Ber. senckenb. naturf. Gres. Frankfurt 
am Main, 4 1891, pp. 159-289, mag, in particular p. 197. For the lofty volcanos adjacent, 

•OLLAB III U 



290 YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [partiv 

I h this manner the western part of the Albourz is closely connected by 
its direction with the Zdgros chains and the other Iranian coulisses ; with 
the Z&gros chains the Karaghan forms a connecting link ; it trends north- 
west, and consists of volcanic rocks and folded middle Tertiary beds of 
Mediterranean ty^e. The eastern part of the ^rc, however, takes a com- 
pletely different direction, and stretches across the deserts of Khorasan. 

Thus the Iranian arc presents two concavities facing the north; the 
first of these corresponds with the desert of Registdn and the fluvial region 
of the Helniand; the second , situated much further to the north , corresponds 
with the southern portion of the Caspian sea. 

Hindu-kush (I, pp. 443, 469). This mighty arc which, issuing from 
the Pamir, thrusts forth its coulisses to the shores of the Caspian, and there 
gives signs of its connexion with the Caucasus, w&& raised up, according to 
Muschketow, by the same movement which produced the branches of the 
Thian-shan 1 ; and all the facts known to me support this view. But if so, it 
follows that the great phenomenon which we are accustomed to designate the 
virgation of the Thian-shan does not terminate in the northern prolongation 
of the Mustag-ata, but encroaches on the Pamir. We can even affirm that the 
whole of the central and western region of the Pamir belongs to this virgation. 

Curzon’s map of the P&mir marks the Hindu-kush as an independent 
chain running north-west of Chitral into the immediate neighbourhood of 
Kala-Pandsh, and, in agreement with Iwanow, this distinguished author 
assigns the pass of Baroghil (about long. 73° 30' E., 3,797 meters) also to the 
Hindu-kush 2 . When Stoliczka’s observations on the strike of the gneiss and 
ancient schist are represented on this map, we perceive that the north-east 
trend of the Hindu-kush, after running obliquely across the river Pamir, 
is maintained till it reaches the neighbourhood of Yol-masar, i.e. about 
half-way to lake Victoria ; on the other hand, on the Upper Ab-i-Pandsh 
a west-north-west strike prevails, as though north of the pass of Baroghil 
the Hindu-kush, or a northern chain parallel with it, entered into syntaxis 
with a gneiss zone coming from the Mustag* mountains in the south-east. 
This would be a repetition, in the Pamir, of the relations existing between 
the Nan-shan and Anembar-ula ; unfortunately we do not possess sufficient 
data to form a definite judgement on this point. In any case, it appears as 
though in a tectonic sense the sources of the Oxus lay outside the Hindu- 
kush, and at the extreme end of the Mustag 3 . 

H. Sjogren, Beitrage zur Geologie des Berges Savelan im Nord-Persien, Verh. russ. k. 
min. Ges. St. Petersburg, 1888, 2. Ser., XXIV, pp. 86-66. 

1 J. W. Muschketow, Sketch of the Geological Constitution of the trans-Caspian 
Regions, Verh. russ. k. min. Ges. St. Petersburg, 1891, 2. Ser. XXVIII, pp. 391-429, map. 

2 G. N. Curzon, The P&mirs aijd the Source of the Oxus, Geogr. Journ., 1896, VIII, 

pp. 15-54, 97-119, 239-264, map. # r * 

* W. T. Blanford, Scientific Results of the second Yarkend Mission, based upon the 
Collections and Notes of the late F. Stoliczka, Geology, 4to, Calcutta, 1878, pp. 88 et seq. 



HINDU-KUSH 


291 


CH. VII] 

The Saf&l-koh, as we have seen, comes with a nearly east to west trend 
from the syntaxis in Hazara (pi. XII) into this region. 1 Although it swings 
round 'to the west-south-west, yet the south-westerly direction of the Hindu- 
kush, as it comes from the Pamir, differs so much from this, that Griesbach, 
to whom we owe almost ^11 our detailed information on the region of Kabul, 
has often expressed the belief that an independent Archaean mass must lie 
somewhere between the Safed-kdh and the Hindu-kush. 

The Hindu-kush bends parallel with the great eastern concavity of 
Iran ; but opposite the western concavity, south of the Caspian, its 
prolongations maintain the independence vAiich is so characteristic of the 
Altaides. 

Hornblende granite and other eruptive rocks of Cretaceous age have 
repeatedly been mentioned as occurring in this region (I, p. 428 et passim). 
Precisely similar rocks crop out on the lake of Kabul, and form the heights 
north of this town h Griesbach has traced them up to Charik&r, near the 
valley of Ghorband, which follows the south foot of the main chain of the 
Hindu-kush. The south slope of this main chain is formed of light grey 
limestone, lying with apparent conformity on altered rocks, or on graphitic 
schists. 

The most easterly point of the Hindu-kush of which we possess, so far 
as I am aware, any geological knowledge was described by Lord in 1838. 
This refers to the south side of the Ghorband pass, which lies in the meridian 
of Kabul. As he ascended the slope Lord met with mica-schist at first 
dipping to the north-west, i. e. towards the interior of the range, and then 
becoming vertical ; next gneiss, and then again schist traversed by granite. 
The next day he continued on gneiss and mica-schist, sometimes inclined 
towards the interior of the mountain, sometimes vertical ; until finally, not 
very far from the summit of the pass, he reached lofty walls of granite so 
steep that the snow finds no resting-place upon them. White granite, with 
crystals of black hornblende which are sometimes agglomerated in roundish 
masses, forms at this point the core of the Hindu-kush 2 . The observations 
of *Griesbach beginning a little west of this region confirm this account. 

The summit of the pass of Chahardar (4,300 meters) consists of the 
same granite, which here contains an included mass of white granular 
marble. Hornblende granite, extending over a broad area, forms in this 
region also the principal range of the Hindu-kush. Mica-schist and gneiss 
are also met with, and the granite is intrusive into them. At the south 
foot of the second pass, the Kotal-Fazak, which succeeds the Chahard&r on 

1 C. L. Griesbach, Field-Notes from Afghanistan, no. 4, from Turkistan to India, Bee. 
Geol. Surv. India, 1887, XX, pp. 17-26. » 

P, B. Lord, Some account of a visit to the p&in of Kohi-Daman, the mining district 
of Ghorband and the Pass of Hindu-Kush, Journ. Asiat. Soc. Bengal, 1838, VII, pp. 521- 
537, in particular pp. 525-529. 


U 2 



292 YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [partiv 

the north-north-west, Palaeozoic limestone, possibly Carboniferous, occurs. 
The summit of the Kotal-Fazak (3,000 meters) consists of marble; Griesbach 
describes how, as we look from these northern parts of the Hindu-kush 
across the valley of the Surkhab towards the north, we see even on this 
side of the main chain the dark intrusive rocks^ traversing like a network 
the white limestone of the range opposite. In these ranges of the north 
side the only deposits known, as far as Haibak and Tashkurgan, that is to 
say as far as the valley of the Oxus, are Cretaceous and Tertiary. They 
are of great thickness, form broad saddles and basins, and end in a somewhat 
steep anticline against the plkin of the Oxus. 

Further west, in the passes of Bamian, the hornblende granite contracts 
to a narrow band, while the mighty limestones of the transgressive upper 
Cretaceous form the uppermost parts of the Hindu-kush. The sediments 
consist here of two groups separated by an ’unconformity. The basal 
member of the lower group, a dark limestone, has furnished Productus, and 
in other localities Fusulina; traced upwards, it alternates with greenish 
sandstone, containing plant-remains, which is correlated by Griesbach with 
the lower part of the Gondwana series. On the limit of the two groups 
lie altered conglomerates, and there is a good deal of intrusive trap, which 
here, too, seems to penetrate up to and into the unconformable Cretaceous 
limestones. This is the case, for instance, in the pass of Ak-Robat, in the 
neighbourhood of Bamian 1 . 

Somewhat further north, the narrow band of hornblende granite again 
crops out, accompanied by gneiss and mica-schist, which are regarded by 
Griesbach as altered sediments, metamorphosed by the granite. The mantle 
of Cretaceous limestone passes over these rocks and, still further to the 
north, bounds the passes of Bali-Gali (2,926 meters) and Shabanshak. In 
this region we again encounter, beneath the Cretaceous limestone, in the 
neighbourhood of Chel, the intensely folded lower group. It includes shales 
with Halobia Lommdi , and, above these, beds with Equisetites columnaris 
and other plant-remains, which correspond, according to Griesbach, with 
the flora of Lunz, in the eastern Alps, and, at the same time, with the middle 
part of the Gondwfina series. These are succeeded by thick beds of sand- 
stone and shales, in part plant-bearing, a few marine beds are intercalated : 
and the series probably includes the whole of the Jurassic formation. 
Finally comes red sandstone, which represents the Neocomian; and then 
the whole is covered by the discordant upper Cretaceous limestone, followed 
perhaps by some beds of Eocene. 

This succession of beds indicates a marginal region of the Tethys. It 
retains essentially the same characters throughout the whole breadth of 

1 See in particular Field-Notes from ^Afgljanist&n, no. 3, Eec. Geol. Surv. India, 1886, 
XIX, p. 235 et seq. ; and Field-Notes, no. 5, to accompany a Geological Sketch-Map of 
Afghanistan and North-Eastern Khorassan, op. cit., 1887^ XX, pp. 93-103, map. 



HINDU-KUSH. BAND-I-BABA 


2m 


CH. VII] 

north Afghanistan and as far even as the neighbourhood of Meshed. For 
the whole of this distance no rocks older than the Carboniferous are so 
far known, a sandstone affording a doubtful Orthis and equally doubtful 
Productus occurs in the pass of Dehrud, in the Binalut chain (east 
Khorasan). The plant-bearing beds above them play a large part in the 
structure of the mountain 1 ranges , as may be seen near Bamian. From the 
lower beds of this series Griesbach records a doubtful Vertebraria from 
Palezkar (south of the Band-i-Baba, north of Herat), and Glossopteris from 
the pass of Gaukharchang (north of the river Djam, east Khorasan). Then 
follows on all sides the transgression of the upper Cretaceous limestone. 

The region west of Bami&n does not appear to have been visited by any 
geologist ; but we know that the Kindu-kush is continued as the watershed 
of the country, and with heights exceeding 4,800 meters, into the Koh-i- 
baba, where it receives the names of Band-i-Baian and Safed-k6h. It is 
not certain whether it is continued at about long. 63° E. directly into the 
Davendar chain (east of Herat), or whether this chain forms an independent 
coulisse. From here onwards, however, Griesbach s data are so explicit 
that we can readily follow the deflexion of some of the most important 
ranges as they pass from a west to a north-west direction. 

The Davendar chain is the north limb of an anticline formed by the 
Carboniferous limestone and the plant-bearing series; its south limb is 
faulted down in such a manner that the Carboniferous abuts against the 
upper Cretaceous limestone along the line of fracture. The same feature 
is exhibited in the west by the Doshak chain (south of Zindaj&n, on the 
Hari-rud), and also by the Yaktan chain , directed to the north-west, and 
its continuation, the Binalut chain , which runs west of Meshed. 

All these chains belong to the same principal branch of the range ; they 
are a connected series of coulisses within which the bend to the north-west 
is accomplished x . 

A band of syenitic granite descends from the highest part of the 
Davendar chain through the valley of the upper Kurukh, runs, accom- 
panied by gneissose rocks, a little north of the town of Herat, disappears to 
the west, and crops out again in Khorasan, south of the Estoi chain, on the 
northern slope oj: the Djam valley ; it may be traced to Sangbast, south- 
east of Meshed, and, according to the observations of Russian geologists, 
somewhat further to the north-west. Griesbach believes it to be younger 
than the red sandstone of the Neocomian, and perhaps of the same age as 
the hornblende granite of south Afghanistan 2 . 

The Band-i-Baba (Parop&misus, B&rkhat-dagh 3 ) represents as a whole 

1 C. L. Griesbach, Afghan and Persian Field-Notes, no. 2, Rec. Geol. Surv. India. 1886. 
XIX, p, 50 et seq. • 

* h. Griesbach, Afghan and Persian Field-Notes, p. 64. 

3 In the nomenclature of this chain I am guided by a letter sent me by Herr Griesbach 



294 YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [part rv 

a very much compressed anticline of the plant-bearing series. In Zurmust, 
i. e. in the east, this chain is traversed on its south side by a great fault 
striking east and west. In the Marbich pass (west of the Baba pass, 
almost on the meridian of Herat) this fault passes over to the north side of 
the chain, disappears as it reaches the Tertiary, and is visible again in 
Khorasan in the Estoi chain, with a north-west Strike. In Kat-i-Shamsir 
hot springs issue from it \ 

In this way the Hindu-kush is resolved towards the west into long 
coulisses. The manner in which these coulisses join up with the Balkan 
and the Caucasus (I, p. 469) has been the subject of much investigation 2 , 
and I have had the privilege of discussing the matter with M. Bog- 
danowitsch and Herr Griesbach. From their concordant observations 
I arrive at the following results: — • 

The junction actually takes place, but in the following manner : — 

The most southerly of the coulisses in question, Davendar-Doshak - 
Yalddt-Binalut runs past Meshed on the west, but without reaching the 
Caspian. South-west of it are other ranges trending east and west, which 
Mugchketow describes as the f mountains of the Kibir desert ’ ; their trend 
diverges from that of the coulisses of the Hindu-kush, and they form the 
transition to ranges running to the south-west. I assign them wholly to 

from Camp Shadian, south of Balkh, on August 3, 1886, after the appearance of the first 
volume of the present work. He writes as follows : ‘ The classic name of Paropamisus 
has no significance at the present day. It was employed by Herodotus for the whole of 
the mountainous country between Persia and Ghazni. For some reason unknown to me, 
some of our Indian cartographers have given this name to the range which separates the 
valley of Herat from Badghis. For want of a better name I have retained this designa- 
tion provisionally in the notes of my travels hitherto published, but there can be no 
doubt that it will one day disappear altogether from our mapB. The inhabitants of the 
valley of Herat have no general name for this range ; its grandest ridge, however, is known 
as the Band-i-Baba . The Turkomans of Padjeh call the whole range BdrkJiat Ddgh , and 
the Russians have adopted this name on their maps. If any one of the chains is to 
retain the ancient name of Paropamisus it would be most suitable to apply it to the 
great watershed of Afghanistan, if it did not already*possess a good designation. But 
the little anticline which runs past Sarachs can lay no claim to this ancient name. 

1 C. L. Griesbach, Afghan and Persian Field-Notes, no. 2, pp. 56, 58. 

2 A Houtum Schindler, The Turquoise Mines of Nishapur, Khorassan, Rec. Geol. Surv. 
India, 1884, XVII, pp. 132-142 ; Die Gegend zwischen Sabzwar und Mesched in Persien, 
Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichs. Wien, 1886, XXXVI, pp. 304-314 ; K. Bogdanowitsch, 
Preliminary report on the oro-geological investigations in the mountainous part of the 
Transcaspian region in north Persia, Bull. Com. geol. Russie, 1887, VI, pp. 66-104 
(a German translation of the most important passages relating to the Kopet-dagh in 
Radde, Wissenschaftliche Ergebnisse der im Jahre 1886 allerhdchst befohlenen Expedi- 
tion nach Transkaspien und Nord-Chorassan, Peterm. Mitth., Erganzungsheft No. 126, 
1898, pp. 5-7) ; Bogdanowitsch, Note on the geology of central Asia, Verh. russ. k. min. 
Ges. St. Petersburg, 1889, XXVI, lt2 pp.; Application of the theory of gliding (Reyer) 
to the dislocations of the Transcaspian leg icfh, Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1895, 
XXX, pp. 27-34; and Muschketow’s Brief Survey, &c. 



oh. vn] KOPET-DAGH. TURANIA 295 

the Albourz. The town of Nishapur lies in the region where these 
gradually approach and join up with the coulisse of Binalut. 

The granite range of Davendar-Herat-Estoi does not extend far 
beyond Meshed. 

The coulisse of Ba,7id-i-Baba (Paropamisus) Estoi (Pusht-i-kuh-Djam) 
does not appear to reach Sie town of Meshed. 

On the left bank of the Heri-rud, between the mouth of the Keshaf-rud 
and the town of Sarakhs, a fresh chain lying still further north comes in ; 
it consists of numerous long folds striking regularly to the north-west and 
frequently traversed by longitudinal, or almpst longitudinal, faults. It is to 
this chain that the general name of Kopet-dagh is now usually assigned. The 
Balkhash and the mountains of Krasnovodsk are prolongations of the chain. 

On the north the I^opet-dagh is bounded to a great extent by strike 
faults. A vast desert, part of the Karakum, lies north of the fractured 
border ; and north of the desert lies a region having little or nothing in 
common with the coulisses hitherto mentioned, namely the Mesozoic platform 
of the Ust-Urt. Muschketow thinks it probable that a fracture also forms 
the edge of this platform, and points out that close by is the depression 
discovered by Lesar, which is believed to correspond to the Aria pains of 
the ancients. This is at least 100 versts broad, and near the wells of 
Mirsa Tchille it descends to a depth of 44-6 meters below the level of the 
Caspian. In the light of these facts, Muschketow regards the desert 
between the border of the Ust-Urt and the faults of the Kopet-dagh as 
a downthrown area which he names the ‘ fault-trough of Turkmen * \ 

Turania. The Tethys extended, for a great part of its existence at least, 
as a broad and rather shallow sea across the region of the existing Aralo- 
Caspian depression, along the south-west margin of the continent of Angara. 
We shall have occasion to mention marine deposits of the lower Trias in 
the mountains of Darwaz, and they also appear remote from this locality, 
on Mount Bogdo, in the steppe of Astrakhan 1 2 . I know of no evidence at 
present of the existence of middle and upper Trias in this region. The 

1 Muschketow, Brief Survey of the geological constitution of the Transcaspian region, 
pp. 31, 39. 

2 I have not succeeded in forming a definite opinion on the structure of the Great 
Bogdo ; existing data indicate very diverse directions in the dip of the beds ; on the 
whole the conditions are very complicated. The line from the Great to the Little Bogdo 
runs to the north-north-east ; perhaps some of the divergent directions in the dip may 
be caused by subsidences in the gypsum. Tschernyschew has demonstrated the strange 
fact that a part of the gypsum lies beneath upper Jurassic or lower Cretaceous sedi* 
ments. Among the works on this subject we may mention : J. B. Auerbach, Das Bogdo- 
Gebirge (publ. by Trautschold), Zapiski russ. Geogr. Ges., 1871, IV, pp. 1-81 ; and 
T. Tschernyschew, Einige Angaben fiber den geologischen Bau der Steppe von Astrachan, 
Bull. Com. Geol. Russie, 1888, VII, pp. 221-232# The great Bogdo lies in long. 
46° 5T 52" 5 E. Greenw., the lesser Bogdo in lat#47° 4' 30", Tchaptchatchi in 47° 55' 28" 5, 
and Bisstchocho in 48° 47' 3". 



296 


YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [partiv 

plant* bearing Angara series has been met with at several places, especially 
in the valley of the Sir-darya, and Rhaetic plants are known to occur near 
Derbent. The section at Mangyschlak, on the north-east shore of the 
Caspian has been described in detail by Andrussow and Semenow ; apart 
from the ancient folded rocks which form the core of the range, the lowest 
beds exposed are sediments containing badly preserved plant-remains, and 
some not very characteristic shells, which belong possibly to the Lias or the 
lower Jurassic. From the Kelloway stage upwards, however, there follows 
a very varied and continuous series of marine deposits which extend 
into the later stages of the Tertiary 1 . 

Semenow, judging from the nature of these sediments, concludes that 
an alternation of deep and shallow water conditions occurred in the middle 
of the basin, indicating a positive movement from the beginning of the 
Jurassic epoch almost to its close, a negative in the Valanginian, and then 
a second positive movement which reached its maximum in upper Turanian 
and Senonian times ; near the margin of the basin corresponding trans- 
gressions may be seen. We shall find the Kelloway stage in transgression 
at several places. Towards the south, in the Kopet-dagh, the lower 
Cretaceous is represented, as in the Caucasus, but in the north the 
Senonian alone occurs encroaching on the Siberian plain, which it enters 
through the strait of Turgai. In like manner, according to Romanowski, 
only the middle and upper members of the Cretaceous enter the valleys of 
the eastern mountains 2 . 

From the Cretaceous series we must separate the highest beds, or the 
Fergana stage, which is distinguished by Gryphaea Kauffmanni ( = Gry- 
phaea Esterhazyi) ; this we must correlate, according to the detailed 
investigations of A. Koch, with the lower Calcaire grossier of the Paris 
basin; but even so late as the period indicated by this stage a marine 
communication still existed, north of the Mustag-ata, between the Turanian 
region and the plain of Yarkand ; it extended as far as Yangi-Hissar, and 
into the vicinity of Sanju 3 . 

The horizon of Priabona is represented in the Crimea. Marine Oligocene 
sediments occur there also, as well as in the Ust-Urt. We have seen that 

1 N. Andrussow, Ein kurzer Berieht liber die im Jahre 1887 im transcaspischen Gebiet 
ausgefuhrten geologisehen Untersuchungen, Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichs. Wien, 1888, 
XXXVIII, pp. 265-280 ; W. P. Semenow, Fauna of the Jurassic deposits of Mangyshlak 
and Tuar-Kyr, Trav. Soc. Nat. Saint-P6tersb., 1896, XXIV, no. 2, and Fauna of the 
Cretaceous deposits of Mangyshlak and some other localities in the Transcaspian 
province, op. cit., 1899, XXVIII, no. 5. 

2 G. Romanowski, Materialien zur Geologie vom Turkistan, St. Petersb., 4to, 1, 1880, 
pp. 48 et seq. 

8 Beitrage zur Stratigraphie Central- Asiens, Denkschr. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1894, 
LXI, pp. 463-465 ; A. Koch, Ueber das Vorkommen und die Verbreitung der Gryphaea 
Esterhazyi , Pav., Fdldt. Kdszl., 1896, XXVI, pp. 324-330 in Hungarian, and pp. 360-366 
in German. 



ch.vii] SALT IN TURANIA 297 

even in the lower Oligocene period a communication with the Arctic Ocean 
still existed on the east side of the Urals 1 . 

To the north, beyond the strait of Turgai, remains of the amber forests 
occur above these marine deposits, and in the middle of the plain as well as 
nearer its margin there are vast deposits of clay with salt and gypsum. 
Although some of these *have been assigned by several observers to the 
Oligocene, and the precipitation of the saline deposits may indeed date 
from this remote period, yet many years ago Andrussow established the 
remarkable fact that some species characteristic of the salt formation of 
Wieliczka, i. e. of the Austrian Schlier, sueh, for instance, as Pecten denu- 
datus, occur in a dark clay with Meletta scales near cape Tarchan, on the 
sea of Azov. A section near Tjub-agal, on the north shore of the Kara- 
bugas, shows the presence on the east side of the Caspian of the dark clays 
with Meletta, here accompanied by gypsum ; towards the summit of these 
deposits repeated layers of gypsum are intercalated between beds with 
marine shells, which are certainly on the horizon of the second Mediter- 
ranean stage. The species, if we except Cerithium scabrum and perhaps 
Modiola discors , are, it is true, entirely unknown in the region of the 
northern Mediterranean or in the valley of the Danube ; but the existence 
of overlying Sarmatian beds removes all doubt 2 . 

In Persia the salt occurs above the first Mediterranean stage ; and this 
is also the case in Armenia. In the Crimea, on the borders of the Caspian, 
and further to the north and east, the first Mediterranean stage is so far 
not known. It is impossible, therefore, to determine at what horizon the 
salt deposits 'begin. On the other hand, it is clear that at least a part of 
these deposits must be assigned to the Schlier, and that the return of the 
sea at the time of the second Mediterranean stage must have been accom- 
panied by oscillations. The evaporation of sea-water must amount to 
eighty per cent, before a deposit of gypsum is formed, and thus the 
intercalation of gypsum with marine beds shows that these oscillations 
must have been very considerable. In the west similar conditions did not 
recur until the Sarmatian period. 

At the time when the beds of gypsum were being formed, a vast sheet 
of water having its surface below the sea-level must have covered these 
regions, and when the salt was being deposited its surface must have been 
lower still. The isolation of this water must have taken place through 
mountain-folding at some place far to the west ; but a dry climate must 

1 C. von Yogdt, Ueber die Obereocan- und Oligocan-Schichten der Halbinsel Krim, 
Verh. k. k. geol. Reichs. Wien, 1889, pp. 289-295. 

2 N. Andrussow, Ueber das Alter der unteren dunklen Schieferthone auf der Insel 
Kertsch, Verh. k. k. geol. Reichs. Wien, 1885, pp. 213-216 ; Geotektonik der Halbinsel 
Kertsch, Mater. Geol. Russie, 1893, XVI, pp. 6#-336, map, in particular p. 160; 
Bemerkungen iiber das Mioc&n der kaspischen Lender, Bull. Com. Geol. Russie, 1899, 
XVIII, pp. 340-369 et passim. 



298 


YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [part iv 

also be assumed to have existed' during the deposition of the Schlier, since 
saline deposits occur on this horizon, even beyond the limits of the region 
we are considering ; and, according to Depdret and Fourtam, the gypsiferous 
clay of the Jebel Geneffe, for ex£inpl&, near the Bitter lakes of Suez, lies 
between the first and second Mediterranean stages 1 . 

The salt deposits extend far and wide over TuVania, and they penetrate 
deeply also in teethe great mountains of the east. To tlieir horizon we must 
assign, for example, the steeply upturned gypsiferous beds and the numerous 
salt-lakes, which Obrutschew has described as Occurring In the foot-hills 
of the coulisses of the Hindu-kush, south of Sarakhs, especially between 
the Hari-md and the Kushk 2 . Perhaps they mark the? place where, long 
ago, the waters of Turania communicated with those of Iran. In the high 
mountains we shall have to record salt-beds even f&r above Garm. In the 
Pamir, on the margin of the Rang-kul, rock salt occurs in thinly laminated 
shales. The pass near the source of the Oxus, or Ab-i-Pandsh, is marked 
Baroghil on the maps, but Iwanow calls it Bor-agyl, i*e. the gypsum pass. 
Great quantities of gypsum are said to occur there 3 . 

The shelly limestone recorded by Romanowski between Tchimkent and 
Tashkent is also of middle Tertiary age, 0 street hern iglobosa Rom., from 
the neighbourhood of Garm, perhaps indicates the same horizon 4 . 

Sarmatian deposits are so far unknown on the other side of the Aral. 
They occur in the Ust-Urt. We have already pointed out that the Sarma- 
tian region, although its extension from east to west is known to equal 
that of the existing Mediterranean, nevertheless lies entirely outside the 
limits of this sea, as we now know them (I, p. 331). 

We need not stay to discuss the still more recent deposits of the Aralo- 
Caspian basin. 

The existing outlines of the plain of Turania date evidently from very 
various times. To the north-west along the Urals, the Cretaceous and 
Tertiary sediments, lying undisturbed, extend across the upturned and 
denpded edges of the ancient formations, pn the east, as a complete 
cont&st, the long branches of the Thian-shan make their appearance, and 
the same sediments, thrown into folds, rise to considerable heights. But in 
the interval between these long branches, there is developed in the east an 
extremely peculiar form of folded intercalary chain, unlike anything known 
to me in any other part of the earth, and deserving of particular attention. 

1 $**Beperet et R. Fourtau, Sur les terrains neog&nes de la Basse-lSgypte et de 
Pistbme de Suez, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 1900, CXXXI, pp. 401-403. * 

2 W. Obrutschew, Preliminary Report on Geological Investigations in the Transcaspian 
region % 1886, Bull. Com. Geol. Russie, 1887, VI, pp. 155-224, in particular pp. 194 et se&. 

% 8 D, L. Iwanow, Summary of geological observations in the Pamir, yerh. russ. k. min. 
Ges. gt. Petersb., 1885, XXII, p. f; Travel s # in the Pamir, Izviestija Imp, ross. Geogr. 
(fbsch., 1884, XX, in particular p. 44 et seq. 

4 Romanowski, Contributions to the Geology of Turkestan, II, 1884, p. 26. 






Intercalated Chains on the Amu-Darya 
and the Syr-Darya 

lAfter Muschketow, in the South-East after Iwanow and von Kri 

O So IOO 200 

, L - — J — 1 — A — J J Kilometers 

Lines of fracture in Darwas 




'U, 


I : I 




iSY&itpiu 

' Nauf , A 
_ \ Ura-tjube j 

‘aeJ v. / / 


Samarkando 

iffi Jr -L 


V, ' -A Y 

\rL 7 .~ f <H- \ j 







T „. T 

i?) c t a ti’ f & ^ 


\ s "}"' f / - . .< 

iKarata^y __/ Faisg&ad 

^ ^ 'A yfeiissar 


Kerki 



299 


ch.vh] MOUNTAINS OF THE AMU-DARYA 

On referring to PI. V, Yol. I, we shall see that the course of the Amu- 
darya lies between branches 8 (Hindu-kush, Balkan) and 7 (Ghissar- 
Chasreti-Sultan) ; the branches 7 and 6 (Alai-Nuratau) are separated only 
by the valley of the Serawshan, and may be regarded as parts of the same 
system ; on the other hand, the valley of the Sir-darya, between branches 
6 and 5 (Talass-Alatau-Haratau), is related to these ranges in much the 
same way as the Amu-darya is related to branches 7 and 8. We will now 
pipceed to discuss first the intercalary chains of the Amu-darya, that is, in< 
chief the mountains of Bokhara, and then those of the Sir-darya ba&in, 
particularly the mountains of Fergana. The conclusions/ as regards the 
northern parts of the virgation of the Thian-shan, will be self-evident. 
For both regions the work of Muschketow is of fundamental importance l . 

Mountains of the Amu-darya. The Cretaceous eruptive rocks, com- 
parable in some degree with the Teschenites of the Carpathians, that occur 
in Baluchistan, Afghanistan, the Hindu-kush, and even north of this "range, 
are not known on the other side of the Amu-darya. The unConformable 
Cretaceous limestone, which rises to great elevations in the Hindu-kush, is 
folded along with the Eocene, to form the foot-hills on the north of the 
main chain. Even south and south-west of Maimena these foot-hills, which 
trend nearly east and west, attain a height of 3,500 meters in the Band-i- 
Turkestan. A steep anticline of these Cretaceous and Tertiary rocks 
forms, as previously stated, the north border of the mountains in the 
neighbourhood of Sar-i-kul and Maimena. At its foot the folding is 
continued into the salt-bearing beds which Griesbach correlates with the 
middle Tertiary salt deposits of Persia. As far on as the south side df the 
ferry across the Amu-darya, near Kelif, this geologist still found shelly 
limestone of Tertiary age containing Pecten, Ostrea, and Polyzfta. 4 The 
indications of folding are so general that Griesbach was even Wcpto 
imagine that an anticline is now in process of formation in the alluvium 
of the Oxus, and that in time this would cut off the affluents on the left 
between Tashkurgan and Maimena 2 . 

Towards the east Griesbach’s observations extend as far as Gori on the 
Kundus. The broad plain of the Amu-darya, which marks the end of the 
eastern range, nearly reaches Rustak. 

Our study of the P&mir mountains lying to the north of the Hindu-kush 
must begin with the admission that our knowledge of their geology is very 
slight. Stoliczka has made some observations along the Pandsh, as far 
down m Kala-i-Pandsh ; and we have already stated that the lower half 
of the P&mir river ctfts» obliquely across the strike of a great gneiss range 
which forms part of the Hindu-kush or represents one of its foot-ranges. 

1 W. Muschketo#, Turkestan, I, 8vo, St. Peters^., 1886; with a geological map in 
six sheets by Romanowski and Muschketow? • 

2 Griesbach, Rec. Geol. Surv^fndia, 1886, XIX, pp. 257, 260. 



BOO YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [partiv 

This is’ the Wachan range of Iwanow; it borders the Pandsh on the 
north, probably enters the bend of this river near Ishka-shim, and may 
perhaps proceed towards the south-west into Badakshan. 

It appears, in fact, as though the Pandsh below Kala-i-Pandsh, the 
upper Shach-dara, on the north side of the Wachan range, the Ghund 
(Alitshur), and the Murghab (up to the meridian of the Rang-kul), are not 
the only rivers which follow true tectonic longitudinal valleys, and bend 
through an arc in the lower parts of their course more and more towards 
the south-west — as is clearly shown on Curzons map. The Jas-gulam, 
which assumes on the Russian maps a much greater importance than has 
hitherto been supposed, flows to the south-west throughout its whole course ; 
the Wsftisch likewise ; and both appear to occupy longitudinal valleys, as, in 
a word, do all the rivers which come from the P&mir and reach the Pandsh 
between the bend near Ishka-shim and Kala-i-Chumb. 

The convergent direction of these valleys shows, however, that in the 
north the great western chains of the P&mir undergo an increasing curvature 
in trend, which almost passes into the south-south-west direction of the 
Chodsha Mohammed in Baltist&n; with this they decrease rapidly in 
height, and their southern spurs reach Faizabad and the region west of 
lake Shiva. 

The structure of the Darwaz range confirms this view. This range 
describes an almost knee-shaped bend towards the south-south-west, and 
is even more sharply curved than the arc of the Pandsh above Kala-i- 
Chumb. Iwanow, coming from the north, crossed the range by the pass of 
Sagri-dasht (2,400 meters) in the direction of Kala-i-Chumb ; he met with 
red sandstone, covered by coarse grey sandstone and conglomerate in thick 
beds which ascend to a great height, but do not reach the south side. On 
that side we find crystalline rocks b 

Valuable information on the structure of the rest of this range is 
furnished by Krafft. The conglomerates of Sagri-dasht may be assigned 
to the Eocene ; further to the south-west thejj form lofty peaks (Chasreti- 
Shan, 4,000 meters), and are separated from the older range to the east, 
bordering the Pandsh, by a long dislocation. This dislocation curves from 
the south-west to the south-south-west, and the ancient range is bent in 
the same direction, but even more sharply 2 . 

The rocks of this range, described by Krafft as lower Palaeozoic, consist 
of mica-schist, ‘ para-amphibolites/ sericite schist, and eruptive rocks. They 

1 Iwanow, Summary of geological observations in the Pamir, p. 20. 

2 A v. Krafft, Geologische Ergebnisse einer Reise durch das Chanat Bokhara, 
Denkschr. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1900, LXX, pp. 49-72, map ; Mittheilungen iiber das 
ost-bokharische Goldgebiet, Zeitschr. f. prakt. Geol., 1899, pp. 87-43; W. Rickmer- 
Rickmers, Travels in Bokhara, Geogr. Journ., 1899, XIV, pp. 596-620, map. Rickmers 
was accompanied by A. von Krafft. Herr von Krafft has been kind enough to send me 
his maps, which contain some supplementary indications as regards the west. 



ch. vix] DARWAS. RANGE OF PETER THE GREAT 301 

form the axis of an anticline having a curved strike, which descends from 
the north-east through the valley of the Chumban into that of the Pandsh, 
and is known to extend along this river from Dshorf to Kala-i-Chumb and 
for about 40 versts further down ; until, striking in an almost southerly 
direction, it crosses to the east side of the river. With this direction, it 
w T ould arrive west of Fa&abad ; but it probably disappears beneath more 
recent sediments, before reaching this locality. 

Both on the east and west sides of the anticline Fusulina limestone 
crops out; then, nearer the axis, diabase, tuff, and sandstone. The western 
zone is very largely developed ; Siaku an<> Kugi-furush attain heights of 
about 5,000 meters. Traces of the Arta stage have been observed 1 . The 
next member which crops out towards the west is the lower Trias ; Bittner 
has pointed out its close resemblance to the Werfen beds of the eastern Alps 2 . 
Towards the north-west and west these older formations are cut through 
obliquely, one after the other, by the long dislocation mentioned above. 
The southern part of the dislocation also strikes to the south-south-west, 
and along its whole length it brings to the surface, instead of the older 
formations, the supposed Eocene conglomerate, at heights of 3,000-4,000 
meters. From here onwards the mountains descend rapidly towards the 
west and south. Muminabad, on their western border, lies at a height of 
1,140 meters, and somewhat further south, in the mountains of Chodja- 
Mumyn (1,280 meters), between Kuljab and the Pandsh, Regel has found 
rock-salt in great quantities 3 . We may assume that the axis of the anti- 
cline of Darwaz, after it has descended into the valley of the Pandsh, near 
Kala-i-Chumb, continues to sink rapidly to the south. The salt, however, 
may belong to the syncline which follows it in the west. The continuation 
of this syncline is represented by the syncline of the upper Chingau, which 
includes Eocene or Cretaceous deposits ; describing an arc, it separates the 
Darwaz mountains on the north from the range of Peter the Great (Piriok). 

Information on this last range is furnished by Iwanow. Before 
describing it, however, we mjist recall the fact that the great Alai valley 
is an ancient lake-basin, surrounded in places by terraces ; it was emptied 
by a ravine cut by the Kysyl-su running south-west across the Trans- Alai. 
The Kysyl-su, therefore, is not the natural head of the Wachsh. This must 
rather be the Muk-su, which comes from the P&inir and runs parallel to the 
upper Chingau. Between the two latter rivers rises the chain of Peter 
the Great 4 . 

1 A. Karpinski, Ein Hinweis auf das Vorkommen von permocarbonischen Schichten in 
Darwaz, Verh. mss. k. min. Ges., 1883, 2. Ser., XVIII, pp. 212-220. 

A. Bittner, Ueber von Dr. A. von Krafft aus Bokhara mitgebrachte jungpalaeozoische 
und altriadische Versteinerungen, Jahrb. k, k. geol. fteichs., 1898, XLVIII, pp. 700-718. 

* Muschketow, Turkestan, I, p. 572. * * 

4 Iwanow, Summary, &c., p. 17 et seq. ; cf. also the maps by Hassenstein, which are 



802 . YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [partiv 

According to Iwanow, this range owes the wild and jagged form of its 
comb to a dark limestone, sometimes containing Fusulina, which, with 
h thickness of thousands of feet, descends precipitously on the north side 
towards the Muk-su and parts of the Wachsh. 

This is succeeded by Mesozoic deposits, among them a limestone believed 
to be of Jurassic age, then by variegated Tertiary clays and sandstones 
with salt and gypsum. These Tertiary beds form a long belt bordering the 
mountains from Garm upwards along the south side of the Wachsh and 
the Muk-su, and salt is dug at several localities, even far to the east, in the 
hollow of the pass of Ters-ag&r (Altinmazar, long. 72° 15' E. on Curzon’s 
map), in the P&mir. The steep descent of the north side is again met with 
in the valley of Kandi. 

Let us now turn our attention towards the west. Iwanow mentions 
very high peaks (Suganaki, about 5,400 meters) even at some distance 
below the mouth of the Kysyl-su. From here onwards the north slope 
becomes broader and lower. When Iwanow crossed the range further to 
the west, starting from Garm, he found its whole breadth covered by 
Cretaceous or Tertiary sandstone and conglomerate, beneath which the 
Palaeozoic limestones are exposed in a few places only. 

Thus, in the chain of Peter the Great, all the pre-Cretaceous rocks 
disappear even more rapidly than in the Darwaz range, and, so to speak, 
in the bend itself. The chain, which has now become lower and is curved 
towards the south-west, is cut through below Garm by the Chulass (lower 
Chingau), and the Cretaceous anticline which Krafft marks between 
Baldjuan and the Wachsh is all that now represents it. 

From the preceding it follows as a general result that the Muk-su and 
(Surchab) Wachsh represent — save for the local bend south of Faizabad — 
a true tectonic trend-line which embraces all the folded ranges emerging 
from the Pfimir south of the great Kara-kul, and that probably all the 
valleys descending from the Pamir towards the west below Ish-kashim are 
true longitudinal valleys, which the Pandsh cuts off, until, for softie distance 
below Kala-i-chumb, it also follows a longitudinal valley. This part of 
the Pandsh, however, does not lie, like most or all of the other longitudinal 
valleys, in a syncline, but in an anticline. 

According to Muschketow’s map, it is probable that north of Garm the 
Karategin range describes an arc similar to that of the Darwaz mountains 
and the mountains of Peter the Great, and strikes down towards Faizabad. 
I have scarcely a doubt that the mighty range of Trans- Alai-Ghissar- 
Chasreti-Sultan (7, 1, PI. V), which has hitherto been regarded as one of 
the branches of the virgation of the Thian-shan, is also deflected towards 
the south-west. Krafffc, whoy starting from Karatagh, ascended Chasreti- 

based principally on Regel’s data, Peter m. Mitth., 1884, XXX, pi. IV, and XIII ; and 
Lipsky, Otchet. Imp. ross. Geogr. Gee., 1899, pp. 15, 16. 



KARATEGIN 


803 


CH. VIl] 


Sultan, observed a different series of rocks. South of the Mura pass 
(3,730 meters) porphyry and granite follow immediately on Eocene and 
Cretaceous with Acanthocerm Milletianum , and further up lie remnants 
of transgressive Cretaceous let down into fault- troughs. Beyond the 4 pass 
middle Devonian limestone with corals occurs on the Iskender-kul, and 
upon this, very thick dolomite of upper Devonian or Carboniferous age 
(Tursiill 5,000 meters) \ Far to the south-west of this locality, north of 
the town of Baisun, there rises from a sea of Cretaceous and Eocene folds 
the range of Tchuldair, in which Krafft observed sandstone with Rhaetic 
plants and dark limestone, probably Jurassic. The latter turns in a long 
sweep towards the south-south-west, and forms the ravine of the Iron Gate 
at Derbent. Here, too, it is co\ ered uneonformably by the Cretaceous, and 
is described by Muscfiketow as the direct continuation of the great range of 
Ghissar 2 . Still further in the same south-westerly direction lies Chatak, 
where, in the midst of the folded region of Cretaceous or Eocene beds, 
fossils have been obtained which Nikitin describes as Callovian 3 ; here also 
rises a long ridge which trends to the south-west and includes the Cretaceous 
anticline of Kukaityn-tau. The view from the summit is described by 
Muschketow. Far away extends the broad valley of the Oxus; beyond, 
still further to the south, rise the great mountains of Afghanistan. But 
near by, to the left, a second anticline is to be seen running parallel with 
the first to the south-west. It is called Itym-tag or Djity-tag, i.e. the 
Seven Hills, because it breaks up towards the south-west into a series of 
isolated masses. One of these projects into the Oxus, and bears the town 
of Kelif. The range crosses the Oxus, a succession of rapids marking its 
course, and then forms the two ridges of Cham-tag on the south side. It is 
here, in upturned beds, that Griesbach collected Mediterranean fossils ; and 
here, facing the foot-hills of the Hindu-kush, this long folded range, 
probably the continuation of the mighty Trans- Alai, disappears beneath 
the plain. 

The direction of the spprs of the range has gradually changed from 
south-south-west to south-west; between the Wachsh and Kelif, i.e. 
between the mountains of Peter the Great and Trans- Alai- Chasreti-Sul tan, 
the secondary folds insert themselves. Beyond Kelif their divergence from 
each other becomes still more clearly marked, and on the east border, 
facing Gusar and Karsh, the folds which form the hilly country become 
continually feebler. A few ranges even reach the Amu-darya. Muschketow 

1 A. von Krafft, Geologische Ergebnisse, p. 53. The strike of the downthrown 
Cretaceous segments on the Mura pass is directed to the south-west ; if it were a question 
of folds the deflexion might be regarded as proved. 

2 Muschketow, Turkestan, I, p. 560. Ancient schist and granite were also obtained 
from an intermediate region on the Sengri-dag. # 

3 Nikitin, Bull. Com. Geol. Russie, 1889, Vllf, pp. 82 <et seq. This locality lies seven 
versts north-west of Chatak. 



304 M YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [partiv 

describes a Cretaceous anticline, the Aggs-tau, which crosses the river at 
Chodsha-salar below Kelif ; another is the Felisidan-tau ; the direction turns 
to west-south- west, the folds become straighter and feebler; at Kerki, 
Muschketow found the last trace of folding on the Amu-darya 1 . 

Let us fix our attention on the line — convex to the north-west — of 
Muk-su-Wachsh and the conjectured curve banning parallel with it 
through the Mura Pass, the Iron Gates, and Kelif. The other curves flatten 
out towards the west, and the salt-bearing Tertiary deposits take a larger 
share in the formation of the corresponding ranges ; on the river Karsh, 
however, a re-entrant angle arises. North of this angle chains make their 
appearance with the intermediary or east-and-west direction, but formed of 
granite, ancient schists, and Palaeozoic limestone. They have been described 
by Obrutschew 2 . e 

The most northerly of these chains, the Kara-tjube, south of Samar- 
kand, exceeds 2,000 meters in height ; it slopes down towards the city 
and towards the great longitudinal valley of the river Serawshan ; 
north of this valley the chain of Nura-tau (Kara-tau), accompanied by 
secondary ranges, extends towards the north-west. Many isolated hills 
show that the range is continued still further beneath the desert. 

The valley of the Serawshan is one of the most remarkable features in 
the structure of the Thian-shan ; bounded on the south by the Kara-tjube 
and the Serawshan range, on the north by the mountains of Turkestan, it 
extends east and west in a straight line, and is deeply insunken between 
these lofty chains, which in the east give rise to numerous glaciers. Even 
at Pastigau, more than 180 versts above Samarkand, Muschketow found 
that the lower slopes are formed by a Cretaceous syncline. This 
investigator has also established the fact that on the north side, at the 
head of the valley, in the feeding-ground of the Serawshan glacier, the 
Turkestan range is the uninterrupted continuation of the granite and 
gabbro range of the great Alai ; while the southern range of Karategin 
(Ghissar) is formed of granite, gneiss, and metamorphic schists ; the inter- 
mediate connective group of Kara-muk consists chiefly of diabase 3 * * * * 8 . 

Since we know that the valley of the Kysyl-su, where the river issues 
from the valley of the great Alai, is a recent feature due to erosion, which 

1 Muschketow, Turkestan, I, p. 593 et seq. 

2 W. Obrutschew, Preliminary report on geological investigations in Bokhara and the 

district of Seravshan, Mater. Geol. Russie, 1889, XIII, pp. 167-184 ; The occurrence of 

graphite and beryl in the Kara-tjube range near Samarcand, Yerh. russ. k. min. Ges., 

1888, XXV, pp. 1-8. The more southerly of these branches are assigned to the Chasreti- 

Sultan. Perhaps this name applies to the upper part of the chains, which diverge from 

one another in the form of a fan. , 

8 Muschketow, Geological expedition to th£ glaciers of Seravshan in 1880 ; Izviestija 
Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1881, XYIII, pp. 1-25. The beds with Qryphaea Esterhazyi 
have not yet been distinguished from the Cretaceous deposits. 



305 


ch.vii] MOUNTAINS OF THE SIR-DARYA 

must be left out of account in determining the tectonic lines, it follows 
that these must be drawn across the Kara-muk and that the valley of the 
Alai must be regarded as the continuation of the Serawshan. In this 
region also Cretaceous and Tertiary sediments are known to occur, and 
Tertiary beds were found by Muschketow in the pass of Taumurun (3,400 
meters), at the eastern end of the Alai 1 . 

In the pass we reach the watershed of the Yarkand-darya. From the 
Serawshan to Taumurun an important line of division runs between the 
mountains; it corresponds probably with one of the ancient straits by 
which the seas were brought into communication. 

It is a remarkable fact that, notwithstanding the nearly straight course 
of this long east-and-west line, the mountains to the north of it do not 
possess a rectilinear ire^d The great Alai clearly runs to the west-south- 
west, as well as all its northern foot-hills as far as Margelan ; and in the 
meridian of Ura-tjube, somewhat west of the bend of the Sir-darya near 
Chodjent, the northern border of the range breaks up into great coulisses 
which strike to the north-west. The longest of these is the Nura-tau, of 
which we have already made mention. 

Mountains of the Sir-darya. The resemblance between the structure of 
this range and that of the Amu-darya is truly astonishing. In both cases 
post- Jurassic sediments, extending from the middle Cretaceous transgression 
upwards, are involved in the folding, notwithstanding their unconformable 
relation to the older rocks. In the Sir-darya intercalary chains running to 
the south-west appear between the arc of the Kara-tau in the north and 
that of the Alai-Nura-tau in the south, just as in the mountains of the 
Amu-darya they appear between Alai-Nura-tau in the north and the Hindu- 
Kush in the south. In both cases the river turns these foot-hills and 
receives the waters of the longitudinal valleys coming from the north-east. 
At Chodjent the river cuts through the end of one of these anticlines, 
precisely repeating the behaviour of the Amu-darya at Kelif. To the 
north-west, on the course of the river Aryss, a re-entrant angle is formed 
between the intercalary chains and the principal branch — the Kara-tau — 
which corresponds completely with the re-entrant angle of the Kursch. 

We will follow the masterly description which Muschketow has given 
both of these mountains and of the whole of Ferghana. First, however, we 
may recall the arc-like structure which prevails in the central Thian-shan 
(III, p. 164). The arcs are convex towards the south, with one branch 
extended to the west-south- west or south-west, the other to the west-north- 
west or north-west or even north-north-west. They encounter each other, 
and appear to mutually cut one another off, thus giving rise to the extremely 
peculiar disposition of the mountains, which # resemble moving waves or the 
tiles of a roof. In the next place, it may be observed that at its eastern 
1 Muschketow, Turkestan, I, p. 15. 


SOLL.AS HI 



306 . YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [pabtiv 

origin, south of the Gobi- Altai, the whole Thian-shan is a narrow wedge- 
shaped range, but as it proceeds towards the west it spreads out in a mighty 
virgation. The long branches of the virgation are, however, the north- 
western arms of the arcs. 

One of the arcs surrounds the south side of the lake, Tchatyr-kul. 
Starting from the Suek-tau, its north-western branch runs, under the name 
of the Ferghana range , along the east side of the depression of Ferghana, 
and thus crosses the direction of the great Alai range. Neozoic deposits occur 
in the furrow between these two ranges, and so sharp is the encounter that 
on the right side of the river Tlaldyk (south-east of Osh) the Tertiary con- 
glomerates, somewhat steeply upturned, strike to the north-west, but on 
the left side to the east-north-east h In the same way the foot-hills of the 
Ferghana range maintain their north-west direction io beyond the Narin, 
and near this river they also encounter folds trending north-east. The 
whole range, north of Namangan, Tchust, and Chodjent, is dominated 
by an almost constant south-west strike, which persists up to the Aryss 
near Tchimkent although occasionally, as for instance north of Namangan, 
the opposite or south-east direction also asserts itself. These chains, 
among which that of the Tchatkal mountains , terminating north of 
Chodjent, is the most important, consist to a much greater extent of older 
rocks than the south-westerly trending chains of Bokhara ; they are like- 
wise much higher, but here also they pass into Cretaceous and Tertiary 
anticlines as they proceed to the west, especially in the neighbourhood 
of Tashkent. In this region again the south-west trending anticlines 
occasionally diverge somewhat widely from one another. But we also 
observe, especially in the valley of the Badam, near Tchimkent, and to the 
south of this region, a somewhat unexpected recurrence of the secondary 
north-west strike which encounters the south-west trending folds in zigzag, 
and even gives rise perhaps to convex arcs, as on the mountain of Moisar 
and in the Alym-tua, between Tchimkent and Tashkent. 

Muschketow states that the south-easterly folds, Or ‘the folds of 
Ferghana,’ are slightly convex towards the plain of Ferghana, while it 
seems to him as though the south-westerly folds might be slightly concave. 
Some of the western spurs certainly are so, and in these consequently the 
resemblance to the folds of Bokhara is the most striking. It is possible 
that the principal south-westerly folds, and perhaps even the Tchatkal itself 
in its northern parts, enter the Talas- Alatau with a concave curve ; but we 
have no exact data on this point, and the junction is indicated on PL V 
by a dotted line only. 

These great south-westerly folds to the north of the Sir-darya, such, for 
instance, as the Tchatkal, are explicitly described by Muschketow as 4 folds 

« c 

1 Muschketow, Turkestan, I, p. 498 and elsewhere. 



INTERCALARY CHAINS 


307 


CH. VIl] 


of the Alai/ One fact in particular seems to support this view ; this is the 
existence of two recent tectonic lines, which bring the salt-bearing Tertiary 
beds to the surface and correspond at least in part to anticlines; they 
indicate the connexion of the Alai with the folded ranges of the north. 

The Mogol-tau, a coulisse facing the southern part of the Tchatkal, is 
cut through by the Sir-darya west of Chodjent. South of this spot, 
near Nau, the first of these recent tectonic lines detaches itself from the 
northern border of the great Alai, crosses the Sir-darya obliquely, follows 
its right bank as the Salt mountain of Ak-tsheku, and extends to Tchust 
as an elongated range of hills. The secdhd proceeds from Rishtan, runs 
south-east and east of Margelan and Andidjan, and probably meets the 
foot-hills of the Ferghana range in the Teke-bel. 

We have already stated that Cretaceous and Tertiary sediments occur 
near Osh between the Ferghana range and the Alai, and have also pointed 
out that Tertiary beds are exposed in the pass of Taumurun, at the 
east end of the Alai valley. We may now add that Muschketow has 
found Cretaceous and Tertiary beds at a height of 11,600 feet on the Kugart 
at Suek, in the valley of Tshir-tash, west of the Tshatyr-kul, as well as on 
the borders of this lake itself, and has convinced himself of the continuity 
and identity of the Tertiary conglomerates described by Stoliczka with 
those of Ferghana. 

Futterer, on the way from Osh to Kashgar, by Gulcha and Irkestan 
(below the pass of Taumurun), also observed these younger sediments, some 
Cretaceous probably, the rest gypsiferous Tertiary ; and he remarked at the 
same time a striking contrast between the north-and-south strike of the 
Palaeozoic, and the prevalent east-and-west strike of these Neozoic rocks l . 

Whatever, then, may be the case with regard to details, it may be 
accepted as an established fact that within these parts of the Thian-shan, 
north of the Mustag-ata, there was a marine communication in Neozoic 
times between the Aralo-Caspian region and that of Yarkand. Its existence 
during the deposition of th* lower Calcaire grossier of Paris is proved by 
fossils (Gryphaea Esterhazyi). 

Structure of the intercalary chains. The elevated and highly disturbed 
position of some of the Tertiary deposits forbids the supposition that this 
marine communication took place through a definitely bounded strait. On 
the contrary, we must suppose, with Muschketow, that during the deposition 
of the gypsiferous Tertiary beds the mountains were much less lofty, and 
that afterwards folding broke up the sediments, carried them upwards or 
pinched them in, and at the same time closed the communication. We 
have before us indeed a compressed sea-floor, such as is presented on a large 


1 K. Futterer, Geologisehe Beobachtungen am Terek-Pass. Verh. Ges. Erdkunde, 
Berlin, Sitzung v. 15. Februar J898. 



308 v „ YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [partiy 

scale by parts of the Tethys, or of which an excellent example is afforded 
by the Tertiary beds in the north of the western Alps (Rhone valley). 

The structure of the curved intercalary chains on the Amu-darya and 
Sir-darya is far more difficult to understand. Their mutual correspondence 
shows at once that the Hindu-kush really forms part of the same tectonic 
system, and that the great folding movement has propagated itself not only 
from the Altai to the north-western end of the Yarkand arc, but beyond it 
to the west, into the P&mir, and even further towards the south. This 
affords a fresh confirmation of the independence of the Yarkand arc as 
opposed to the flood of the Aftaides. 

One of the most striking features of these intercalary chains is the 
rapid abasement of so many mighty anticlines and the # fact that both in the 
basin of the Amur and that of the Syr they diverge from one another, on 
the north-west border, somewhat like a fan. It looks as though in this 
region the synclines were not the full complements of the anticlines. 

The free anticlines tend to prolong themselves . There are certain 
indications which suggest that a prolongation has actually occurred in the 
region under consideration. The Amu-darya and Sir-darya, apart from 
their upper course in the high mountains, flow through the area aban- 
doned in the last place by the sea or by some inland lake, and over the 
sediments deposited by these extensive waters, which have now either 
disappeared or been much reduced. These rivers are therefore the most 
recent occupants of their own basins. The first rudiments of their course 
on the surface of tfye sediments doubtless developed pari passu with the 
retreat of the lake or sea. Now, as we have seen, each of the rivers cuts 
through the south-western extremity of an intercalary chain. The surface 
of the flat-lying and most recent sediments may have been abraded by 
wind and other agents ; but not to so great extent as to lay bare the 
Cham-tag, which rises to a fairly great height on the left bank of the 
Amu-darya, opposite Kelif, nor the mountain of Shirin-ferchat, which 
stands on the left bank of the Sir-darya below Chodjent, 

These mountains are the natural extremities of the two most important 
south-westerly ranges of the intercalary chains; at Kelif — the chain 
coming from Derbent and probably that from the Chasreti-Sultan ; at 
Chodjent — the mighty Tshatkal (Mogul-tau). Possibly the Cham-tag, 
opposite Kelif, and the Shirin-ferchat , south-west of Chodjent , afford us a 
measure of the extent to which these two intercalary chains have beert 
prolonged in the direction of their axis in recent times l . 

1 The lateral prolongation of the folds has been most conspicuous in the Kuen-lun 
from Arka-tag to Tsin-ling-shan. t This question is so rarely investigated in Europe, 
because free ends of folds are so seldom t seen* there, though they are known, for instance, 
in the strata in the eastern portion of the Jura mountains, and in the folds of the Save, 
to be mentioned presently. # 



ch.vii] ZONES OF INTERFERENCE 809 

In both cases the connexion still existing between these heights and 
their axis on the other side of the Amu-darya and the Sir-darya is 
indicated by rapids. The same is true of the extremities of the Tertiary 
anticlines below Kelif, which are not completely sawn through by this 
river. The question of prolongation in one direction receives no light 
from the two Tertiary Xnes which cross the Sir-darya above Chodjent. 

While these facts, together with the folding of the saliferous beds, 
render evident the occurrence of recent movement, yet it must not be 
forgotten that indications of much older disturbances also exist, especially 
in the principal chains. One uf the mosV striking examples is the chain 
of Mangyshlak, where the whole Mesozoic series, from the Jurassic up- 
wards, rests unconformably and but slightly undulated on the intensely 
folded older phyllites. J3ut it is not merely that there have been movements 
of different dates. The undoubted interference of the folds striking to the 
north-east and north-west shows besides that there was not only a great 
and general movement of all the arcs of the Thian-shan, but that each one 
of the princip>al arcs (each disk-like segment, or, might we say, each tile) must 
have possessed or still possesses a certain degree of independent movement, 
which according to particular circumstances has found temporary expression 
and has produced interference by the formation of younger, secondary 
folds. In the region of the Amu-darya interference of this kind is not 
known. In the region of the Sir-darya, or at least in its western part, 
the folds striking to the north-west are younger and secondary. It will 
be seen, however, that these more recent north-westerly folds almost follow 
the direction of the main chain, the Kara-tau, while the more intense 
north-easterly folds follow very nearly that of the Alai ; in other words, 
the two systems of folds present the direction of the principal arcs, but 
the north-westerly direction corresponds to the western half, and the 
north-easterly direction to the eastern half of these arcs. The interference, 
therefore , is not the result of external influences , but represents the continued 
development of the principal arcs , perhaps also a slight displacement of the 
vertex of curvature, and perhaps only some kind of later adaptation and 
compensation. It is not in the centre of its arc, but towards its eastern 
extremity, that the Hindu-kush attains by far its greatest dimensions ; the 
intensity of the mountain formation evidently diminishes towards the west, 
and the western extremity of the range breaks up into coulisses. This is 
probably owing to the fact that it forms part of the Altaides. It is the 
same with the intercalary chains : all are much more grandly developed on 
the east and die away to the west. On the Sir-darya, where Muschketow 
has marked the intercalary chains as chains of the Alai, and where the 
two Tertiary connecting lines occur, they piay be regarded as the eastern 
moieties of the arcs of the Thian-shan, here corresponding in direction with 
the Alai. But towards the western border (Moisar), and perhaps in the 



810 . YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [part iv 

north also, towards the Talas- Alatau, arcs arise which are convex towards 
the north-west and diverge from the direction of the Thian-shan. We 
have already mentioned that Muschketow is inclined to assign a certain 
amount of curvature in the same general direction to all these intercalary 
chains. This is opposed to the similarity in direction with the principal 
chains, already pointed out. On the other han£, it affords an increased 
resemblance with the very peculiar direction of the intercalary chains of 
the Amu-darya and the long line of Muk-su-Wachsh, These, as we know, 
begin in the P&mir with an approximately east-and-west direction; and 
then describe an arc which is so*strongly curved to the north-west that as 
it proceeds further towards Kelif it becomes almost perpendicular to the 
trend of the foot-hills of the Hindu-kush ; and not till we reach the most 
distant and westernmost Tertiary anticline below Eelisidan-tau, does some 
approach to parallelism become perceptible. 

We must again direct attention to the prolongation of the arcs. There 
are two kinds of folds, to be sharply distinguished from each other. Of 
these the longer, which we have termed the principal chains, project 
towards the west-north-west or north-north-west, far beyond the others, 
and thus form the virgation ; but besides this we see in the case of the 
Hindu-kush how the enfeebled western end reaches as it were the opposite 
shore, and then forms the chord of the south Caspian arc. In a similar 
manner, though on a smaller scale, the chains of the Indus subtend the arc 
of Sewestfin. The boundary is sharply defined only towards the smaller 
western concavity of Iran ; in the great concavity to the east the Altaides 
appear to be as it were engulfed. 

The Danube, urging its way to the right, held fast by many rocky 
ravines, and describing its meanders in the intervals between, has been 
compared to a suspended chain. This image may also serve for the Hindu- 
kush, but as a comparison, not as an explanation. As a comparison it is 
still more applicable to the intercalary chains of the Amu-darya; from 
these we obtain the impression that originally, the folding force acted in 
the east with great intensity and in a normal direction, but that later, 
while the anticlines continued their growth, it diminished, during a definite 
phase indicated by the position of the knee-like bend; thereby freedom 
was given to the further extension of the anticlines in a divergent direction 
to the south-south-west and south-west. Carrying out the comparison, we 
may say that the more recent, western parts of the intercalary chains hang 
free, as, for example, that which depends from the Iron Gates at Derbent 
in the direction of Kelif. 

After what has already been said a further description of the more 
northerly parts of the virgatiop is hardly necessary. We have seen that 
the * lost ’ folds south of the Balkhaeh result from the predominant develop- 
ment of either the eastern or western segment of one of the tile-like arcs ; 



811 


ch.vii] THE EXISTING CONTINENT OF ASIA 

the re-entrant angle of Kara-tash, on the south side of the Utsh-Kara, is 
a repetition of what occurs on the upper course of the Aryss and of the 
Karsh ; the trough of the Ebi-nor is determined by disjunctive lines running 
parallel with the western segment of one of these arcs, and intersecting the 
eastern segment of another in the Ala-tau of Dzungaria. 

The Hindu-kush, the most southerly of the branches, cuts the direction 
of the Saf&l-kdh, approaches very closely to the direction of the outer arc 
of Iran, but runs across the southern arc of the Caspian. The Iranian arcs 
exhibit both to the east and west a marked intensity of folding, as is shown 
by the outcrop of ancient rocks, while is the centre none but younger 
sediments are to be seen. The Hindu-kush, together with the intercalary 
chains, and the whole southern part of the virgation, affords evidence of 
powerful movements ii\ the east only ; towards the west the decrease in 
intensity is very striking. 

The northern branches of the Thian-shan develop freely up to their 
encounter with the continuation of the Kashgar range and the Mustag-ata 
in the north. Then the folds flow down on the west side of the Yarkand 
arc like those of the Nan-shan on the east side of this arc. According to 
existing observations the region of this downflow on the west side corre- 
sponds much more closely with the meridian of syntaxis on the Jhelam 
than has hitherto been supposed (I, p. 448). 

The existing continent of Asia. We have now reached the end of our 
analysis of eastern Eurasia. We shall see directly that Asiatic folding 
reaches Europe, not merely along the line Kopet-dagh — Balkan — Caucasus, 
but, speaking broadly, that from the Arctic Ocean to the Mediterranean 
no natural boundary exists between eastern Eurasia and western Eurasia. 
But notwithstanding this tectonic indivisibility, the existing continent 
of Asia forms so vast a unit, particularly in its relations to all forms of 
organic life, that it is well worth while to cast a glance over its actual 
state. 

Great masters have already made the attempt : Alexander von 
Humboldt, starting from the mountains, Ferdinand von Richthofen from 
the plains, Muschketow with special reference to the recent communication 
between the Turanian sea (Aralo-Caspian) and the region of Yarkand. 

At the present time, the observations we now possess enable us to 
introduce the historical element in a somewhat greater degree. 

First of all, we see that all the ancient regions possess well-developed 
river systems and a free discharge to the sea. 

This is as true of Gondwana-land, in the Indian peninsula, as of the 
Sinian and the older part of the Angara continent, from the headwaters of 
the Selenga to the Arctic Ocean. Everywhgre in these ancient regions the 
great rivers come down from afar out ,-of the high mountains, where the 
action of their waters works backwards in enlarging their basins, as has 



* YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [part rv 

*.* 

been shown by R. D. Oldham, in discussing the steep south side of the 
Himalayan passes \ 

' The conceptions of ‘ central * and ‘ peripheral/ as Richthofen formulated 
them in the case of Asia, may be illustrated by two symbols, salt and coal. 
Salt, together 4 with gypsum, corresponds to the closed drainage system or 
the central position j 4 and coal, when it is formed as in Asia, in extensive 
freshwater basins, corresponds to the open outflow, without which no 
accumulation of water could maintain for long its original composition. 

In the Indian fragment of Gondw&na-land no saline deposits exist 
outside the Salt range ; and thejte they were formed at an early period of 
the Palaeozoic aera. Ever since the lower Gondwana, if not before, fresh- 
water conditions have predominated over the peninsula, and the great 
fault-troughs which stretched across the land after this period left them 
undisturbed; the Mesozoic transgressions are confined to the margins of 
the peninsula, and the river systems must have been in a state of continuous 
development, subject, no doubt, to frequent modifications, from the time of 
Glossopteris Broivniana, down to the present day. 

In the middle of Angara-land the case is the same. The salt deposits on 
the Vilyui are believed to be lower Silurian ; those of Minuzinsk belong to the 
upper Devonian, perhaps to the Culm, and they are the Jatest that exist in 
this region. From the time when the last of the Lepidodendrons flourished, 
termed in this region the age of the Tungusian flora, and probably almost 
identical with the lower Gondw&na, down to the present day, no salt was 
deposited on the east Siberian platform or on the ancient vertex, but coal 
in abundance, and besides this freshwater sediments only. The Mesozoic 
transgressions of the extreme north did not produce any permanent dis- 
turbance of these conditions. The Obi, flowing over recent sediments, is, as 
we now know it, a recent river, but the conditions which determined the 
development of the drainage system extend backwards into a past which is 
just as remote in the case of Siberia and northern Mongolia as in the Indian 
peninsula. For this reason rapids are rare, except when* they are due to 
basaltic lavas, as on the Angara. The supposition that the Selenga and 
Angara represent parts of the same river, and that lake Baikal is more 
recent than either, is in accordance with these facts. 

In the east, even where the Amur cuts through the Little Khingan, 
the case is not fundamentally different. Comparatively recent folding 
no doubt occurs, but we know that only a very small part of the plains 
of the Amur were reached by the Arctic transgressions, and that, on the 
other hand, both these plains and those of Manchuria are occupied by 
freshwater deposits, which date at least from the time of Aspleniwn 
Whitbyense . These freshwater r deposits even reach the existing sea-coast. 

1 R. D. Oldham, The River Valleys of the fiimalayas, Journ. Manchester Geogr. Soc., 
1894 . 



ais 


ch.vii] ANCIENT PERIPHERAL REGIONS 

Iwanow describes Tertiary beds with brown coal, which extend in isolated 
patches from lake Chanka south-south-west to the ocean , they occur at 
a height (465 meters) Which exceeds that of the existing watershed 
In the islands of Japan also, the Mesozoic series is interrupted by fresh- 
water deposits. 

Thus in the east, as Well as to the west, erosion na$ist have been active 
throughout a very long lapse of time. 

All the ancient continental masses now bear within themselves the 
characters of peripheral regions . Everywhere the coal is more recent than 
the salt. But the plant-bearing beds of th# Angara series extend also into 
regions which are at present shut off from the sea. Patches of them reach 
the northern margin of the Tethys, e. g. on the southern border of the 
Yarkand basin, and iiato the Turanian region, e.g. on the Sir-darya. 
These areas were once peripheral ; whether their drainage was discharged 
into the Tethys is not always susceptible of proof ; at present they are 
central. We have noiv entered regions where the salt is more recent than 
the coal . 

Two events have exerted a profound influence on the history of the 
existing continents; these are the development of the long folds of the 
Altaides, and the renewed invasion of the west by the sea. The latter 
has given to the west — the most important of Richthofen’s ‘regions of 
transition’ — a history of its own. 

The Tethys, crossing Turania and parts of Iran, attained a wide develop- 
ment in the west. Beginning with oscillations in the Lias, it increased, 
towards the middle of the middle Jurassic, to such dimensions that one 
arm extending along the west side of the Urals entered the existing region 
of the Polar sea, which was thus united with the Indian Ocean by a com- 
munication that stretched right across Eurasia. The middle Cretaceous 
transgression penetrated deeply into the region of the existing Thian-shan ; 
a communication with Iran existed across the site of the western Hindu- 
kush. At the time of the Eqcene the same sea still extended into the basin 
of the Yarkand-darya, and even during the Oligocene marine deposits 
were formed along the east side of the Urals and reached the extreme 
north through the strait of Turgai. At this time the whole of the west, 
so far as it was not covered by the sea, was peripheral. Then this sea was 
shut off from the qcean and dissipated by evaporation. 

It is scarcely possible to determine at what date the great period of 
salt formation began. It lasted up to the deposition of the Schlier and the 
beginning of the second Mediterranean stage, and at this time a sheet of 
salt water, lying below the normal sea-level, extended from the middle 

1 D. L. Iwanow, Gorn. Journ., 1891, III, pp. 2^8-304. Coal is worked by the side of 
the sea itself; Berg- u. Htittenmann. Zeitung, 1896, no. 36. Likewise in Sachalin and 
at different points of the easteiji coasts. 



314 


YARKAND ARC, IRAN, AND TURANIA [pahtiy 

Danube far to the east, possibly as far as Garm and Pandsh, perhaps even 
up ‘to the Rang-kul of the Pdmir and the Baroghil pass. Then signs of 
a communication with the ocean again set in : Pecten denudatus , found in 
the peninsula of Kertch, which came in during or immediately before the 
period of salt r formation, is one of the earliest indications ; still stronger 
testimony is afforded by the Spaniodon-beds* on the borders of the 
Karabaghas, which belong to the second Mediterranean stage ; and above 
all by the Sarmatian beds of the Ust-Urt. Then the communication was 
again cut off, and has not been restored up to the present day. 

In central and eastern Asia there are no Tertiary salt formations, at 
least not of the kind just referred to. The gypsum and salt deposits of 
the Gobi, so far as we are acquainted with them, have not been produced 
by the isolation of parts of an ocean, but by t&e evaporation of very 
limited sheets of fresh water supplied by inland drainage. The mammalian 
remains as yet discovered in these deposits point primarily to a relationship 
with the Siwalik fauna, i. e. to a period which is later than the Sarmatian 
stage, and consequently later than the period of the great salt formation 
in the west. But in this case also we do not know at what date these 
deposits began to be formed. All the Gobi salt deposits lie in areas which 
are bounded by mountain arcs. Here in the east it is the development of 
the Altaides which has played the leading part, while in the west the trans- 
gression of the sea and the closure of its communications at some remote 
spot, as a result, probably, of tectonic movements, were the determining 
factors. 

The influence of the mountain arcs has, generally speaking, been very 
different in different cases. The arcs of the Himalaya are broken through 
by numerous transverse valleys ; the marginal arc of Iran which adjoins 
them is, on the contrary, completely continuous. Although there would 
seem to be some deep-seated cause for this contrast, yet we shall not insist 
upon it now, since objections might readily be raised, such as the difference 
in climate, and, in the case of Iran, the great remoteness of the high 
snowy ranges 1 . 

1 It is well known that Medlicott in India, Hayden and Powell in North America, and 
Tietze, relying on observations in the Alburs and in the Carpathians, have, independently, 
arrived at the conclusion that the lines of the rivers are older than the folding of the 
region they traverse, and that their erosion has caused the folding to be cut through in 
proportion to its growth, * as the beam in motion is cut through by the saw.’ To this 
theory of ‘ antecedence ’ Emmons opposed the theory of * superposition,’ 1. e. the 
assumption that the mountains have been covered by more recent sediments which have 
now disappeared. In this work, for Kelif and Chodjent. antecedence has been supposed ; 
for the isolated Junction Peak in the proximity of the Uinta, superposition (I, 736); for 
the transverse valley of the Kysyl-su, the flowing over and away of the extinct lake in 
the valley of the Alai. In many cases there may be phenomena of retrogression. In the 
case of the transverse valleys in Hunza a larger idle may fall to the glaciers. But the 
antecedence theory presupposes that all folded mountains with such transverse valleys 



THE STEUCTUEE OF ASIA 


315 


CH. VII] 

In the structure and history of Asia we may distinguish then the 
following elements in succession : first, the ancient vortex with the Cambrian 
platform, the Sinian mole extending from Ordos to Korea and the Indian 
fragment of Gondwdna-land ; then the Yarkand arc ; finally, the younger 
vertex with the Altaides, which in the east as in the west meet the 
Yarkand arc in syntaxis, tind at the same time continue to extend them- 
selves further ; in the east streaming forth as far as the virgation of the 
Philippines and the Banda sea, in the west opening out in the virgation of 
the Thian-shan and penetrating into Europe, in the south-east merging 
into tfye Burman arc, and in the south-west ^uniting somewhat closely with 
the Iranian arc. Between the two regions which are separated by the 
horst of India, and as a continuation of the Yarkand arc, rises the 
Himalaya. • 

Apart from pre-Cambrian rocks and volcanic flows or tuffs, the stratified 
sheets which take part in this structure are of four kinds : (1) Normal 
marine formations ; (2) the products of evaporation, due to the isolation of 
parts of the sea (salt of the Salt range, the Vilyui, Minuzinsk, Iran, and 
Turania) ; (3) limnic transgressions (II, p. 249) represented by great sheets 
of freshwater (Culm in the Tannu-ola, coal-basins of Kusnetzk, the Angara 
series around the Angara, and the stony Tunguska, in the plains of the 
Amur and Manchuria and elsewhere ; Tertiary lignites of east and west 
Siberia, &c.) ; (4) desert formations. The Gobi deposits with their red 
colour, the accumulations of the Bel, the local formations of salt and 
gypsum, afford excellent material for a study of the Rothliegende in 
Europe. 

The outlines of the transgressive seas adapt themselves to the con- 
figuration of the surface, and this is affected by mountain formation, general 
denudation, the disposition of the river valleys, and other circumstances. 
The outlines of the limnic transgressions are similarly determined, but not 
those of desert deposits ; these depend on very different conditions, since 
they are more independent of, the relief. In the ancient land masses, those 
outlines which are determined by subsidence beneath the sea manifest 
a complete indifference to the strike of the folds, as is shown by the 
outlines of the Indian peninsula. In more recent mountains, inbreaks 
frequently conform themselves to the longitudinal disjunctive lines, as 
is shown by the sea of Okhotsk and the Sikhota-Alin. 

We pass over for the present Taimyr-land and the arc of Verkhoiansk. 

have originated on the dry land . It is better adapted to explain the preservation of the 
transverse valleys than their first formation. It appears indeed that, for instance, in the 
case of the cutting through of the Little Khingan by the Amur, antecedence since 
the period of Asplenium Whithyense may be taker^for granted. 



CHAPTER VIII 1 


THE TAURIDES AND THE DINARIDES 

Asia Minor. The arc of the Eastern Pontus. Region from Heraclea to Amasra. 

Syntaxes in the west of Asia Minor, f The Aegaean islands. The Tertiary gulf of Albania. 

The dominant features of the Dinarides. The crossing of the Adriatic. Idria. The 

boundary cicatrice. The Carnic Alps. Transgressions. The more recent movements. 

* 

From the Armenian plateau a great segment pf an arc sweeps through 
the Taurus and the adjacent chain of Amanus to the island of Cyprus. 
A second segment proceeds from upper Italy through the Dinaric chains 
to the island of Crete. Both segments are included in this work under 
the collective name of the Tauro-Dinaric are (I, p. 499). But the two 
most important elements ; n this structure— the Taurides in the east, and 
the Dinarides in the west — maintain a certain independence of each other, 
which finds expression along the western coast of Asia Minor in the 
re-entrant angle of a syntaxis. 

E. Naumann, in a very remarkable memoir, has sought to determine 
the trend-lines of the structure of Asia Minor. In his description he 
distinguishes three great folded arcs and parts of a fourth. The first, in 
the north-east, is the East Pontic arc ; it borders the south shore of the 
Black sea, extending from the east towards Sinope. This is joined by 
the West Pontic arc , the south-western parts of which (Phrygian zone) 
approach the inner side of the third great arc. This is the Tauric arc 
which surrounds the Lycaonian plain ; Cyprus forms part of it ; towards 
the west, according to Naumann, it joins in syntaxis parts of a fourth 
arc, that of the Aegaean , with which it forms re-entrant angles 2 . 

The previous work of Koch, Tschihatschew, and especially Abich, 
justify the separation of the East Pontic arc. On the lower Djorok it 
does look, no doubt, as though ranges trending from east to west and 
perhaps even to the north-west proceeded westwards for a great distance, 
yet here also, on the left side of the river, south of Batum, the south-west 
direction still prevails 3 . 

1 Revised by Professor Charles Lapworth, LL.D., F.R.S. 

2 E. Naumann, Die Grundlinien Anatoliens und Central-Asiens, Hettner, Geogr. 
Zeitschr., 1896, II, pp. 7-25; in part also in Vom Goldnen Horn zu den QueJlen des 
Euphrat, 8vo, 1893, p. 373 ’et seq. 

3 H. Abich, Geologische Forscllungen in den kaukasisehen Landern, 4to, 1882, II, 
p. 185 et passim ; also W. J. Hamilton, Rlisen in Kleinasien, Pontus und Armenien, 
German edition, 1843, 1, p. 197 et seq. 



THE TAUEIDES 


317 


CH. VIIl] 


Cretaceous limestone and serpentine take a very considerable share in 
the constitution of this arc. Above Ardanutsch the Djorok, almost as far 
up as its sources, may well be regarded as a longitudinal river. In the 
Ehiaur-dagh, north of Kelkit, lies the vertex of the arc, advanced towards 
the south. A broad zone of volcanic ejectamenta, which grows narrower 
towards the west, proceeds from the Araxes towards the sources of the 
Euphrates. At the sources of the Araxes itself rises the crater of the 
Bingol ; many other lofty volcanos emerge from amidst the chains formed 
of limestone and serpentine. In the valleys deposits of the first Mediter- 
ranean stage occur, steeply upturned. North of the sources of the Murad 
the Tchatin-(Schatin-)dagh (I, p. 495) stands out as though it were the 
first spur of the folded ranges of the Taurus, which trend west-south- 
west and south-west, in the direction of Erzerum, Mamachutan, and 
Erzingan, the Tauric ranges seem to me to separate gradually from those 
of the east Pontic arcs. 

According to Naumann, an inner zone of Tauric folds, coming from 
the north-east, runs within the bend of the Halys with a south-west 
direction towards the north-east of the Lycaonian depression, and breaks off 
against the border. Near Kaisarieh, east of this region, rises the mighty 
Argaeus (4,000 meters), and here begins the zone of volcanos which border 
the inner side of the Tauric arc in a regular semicircle *. 

Kotschy was already aware that the highest parts of the principal 
chain of the Taurus consist of limestone ; but we owe more detailed in- 
formation to Schaffer, who has crossed the range three times. The most 
northerly of his sections runs south-east from Bulghar-maaden across the 
Bulghar-dagh (3,145 meters) towards the Giilek-Boghas ; the second 
crosses the Aidost chain (3,550 meters), and the most southerly the 
Dumbelek pass (2,70Q_ meters). In all of them the north-western slope 
shows steeply upturned Eocene limestone, and probably Cretaceous also, 
while on the south-east and south side of the range are very thick lime- 
stones of the first or second Mediterranean stage. These show fairly 
undisturbed bedding, dip for the most part gently away from the range, 
and are also, perhaps, slightly bent to form a flat anticline ; at the same 
time they reach astonishing heights. On the east side of the Dumbelek- 
dagh such almost horizontal limestones are met with at a height even of 
2,300 meters. This mighty girdle of unconformable limestone forms 
plateaux with a surface recalling that of the Karst; it is continued 
towards the south-west and vest far away into the valley of the 
Calycadnus. 

On the north-west side of the Dumbelek an independent anticline 
makes its appearance* the Karabunar-dagl* which consists of Eocene or 

1 A good description of the eastern part in R. Oberhummer und H. Zimmerer, Durch 
Syrien und Kleinasien, 8vo, Berlin, 1899, in particular L. von Ammon, op. cit.,p. 330 et seq. 



318 I THE TAURIDES AND THE DIN ABIDES [partiv 

Cretaceous limestone and crystalline limestone also, together with serpentine 
and green schists ; the summit of the Aidost exhibits grey limestone and 
black mica-schist. Similar rocks appear further north in the Cilician 
gates, and we know from Tschihatsehew that in the Ala-dagh, still further 
to the north-east, serpentine occurs widely distributed b 

Within the mighty Cilician Taurus scarcely a rock of higher antiquity 
than the Cretaceous has hitherto been recognized with certainty . . 

A problem, not yet solved, is connected with the structure of this 
range. Generally speaking, the rocks, in accordance with the outer form 
of the chains, strike, it is true, to the north-east, parallel with the Vulcan 
range on the one side and the Amanus on the other : it is also clear that 
the Mediterranean beds of Tertiary age were deposited against a range 
folded in this direction. But Schaffer has found that in several localities, 
and especially in the plain between the foot of the Cilician Taurus and 
the Amanus, there occur long bands of crystalline limestone and siliceous 
marls, and also of Aquitanian plant-bearing beds; these, standing out 
at times in cliff-like forms, strike from north to south, thus diverging from 
the direction of the great chains. As an example, Schaffer mentions the 
lofty limestone cliff, 350 meters in height, which forms the castle-crowned 
hill of Sis. 

Russegger, Tschihatsehew, and Schaffer have obtained Devonian fossils 
from the Anti-Taurus; Blanckenhorn has also found Palaeozoic Brachio- 
pods on the Giaur-dagh, at the northern end of the Amanus. Further to 
the south-west, the same limestone rocks with gabbro and serpentine 
which form so important a part of the Tauro-Dinaric chains, crop out 
again both in the Amanus and Casius (Jebel Akra). 

Following Blanckenhorn, we may place the boundary between these 
chains and the Syrian tableland in the Tertiary gulf, through which the 
Nahr-el-kebir reaches the sea at Latakia 1 2 . 

The Kurd mountains, as well as the little range of hills which as 
cape Karatash projects into the gulf of Alexandretta, also belong to the 
Tauric chains. Their continuation lies in Cyprus 3 . 

Blanckenhorn has pointed out that in the valley of the Kara-su, 
between the Amanus and the Kurd mountains, there are recent lavas and 
a warm sulphur spring, and he has raised the question whether this valley 


1 F. Schaffer, Geologische Studien im Suddstlichen Kleinasien, Sitz. k. Akad. Wiss. 
Wien, 1900, CIX, pp. 498-525, and 1901, CX, pp. 5-18. 

2 M. Blanckenhorn, Grundziige der Geologie und physisehen Geographie von Nord- 
Syrien, 4to, Berlin, 1891, pp. 6-14, map, cf. p. 496, note 2. 

3 The rocks of this island were first described by Gaudry and subsequently by Bergeat. 
Not only are serpentine and a rock supposed to be Cretaceous limestone present, but 
also traces of Jurassic ; A. Bergeat, Zur Geologie der massigen Gesteine der Insel Cypern, 
Tschermak, Min.-Petr. Mitth., 1891, XII, pp. 268-312, map. 



WEST PONTIC ARC 


319 


CHAP. VIII] 


should not be looked upon as a continuation of the great Syrian fault- 
trough. Schaffer has visited the northern part of ohe valley, and concludes 
that the fault-trough actually extends to Marash b 

Here we will interrupt for a time our consideration of the principal arc 
of the Taurus, and again turn our attention to the north of the Lycaonian 
plain. % • 

Naumann mentions a fold at Angora overthrown to the east-south-east; 
and towards Polatly, further westwards, there is horizontal tableland 1 2 . 
According to the same observer, the Eocene beds lie horizontal in the whole 
region of the West Pontic arc. • 

For the stretch of country, more than 100 kilometers long, which 
extends from Heraclea to beyond Amasra, and is distinguished by the 
presence of coal measures, we have exact data from Ralli 3 . 

It presents us with three long and narrow parallel bands of Car- 
boniferous rocks — comprising Culm, lower Carboniferous limestone, and 
upper Carboniferous coal-measures. Their direction is more or less east- 
north-east (N. 70° E.). The country lying between these bands consists of 
nodular calcareous beds, chiefly Caprotina limestone [Cretaceous], but this 
is sunken as it were into the Carboniferous. Whenever the border of one 
of these bands is reached in working the coal seams, limestone is 
encountered below ground, and the seams are cut off by a fault. It is 
true that the coal measures within these bands are not only steeply up- 
turned in one direction but also thrown into anticlines ; yet the axes of 
the anticlines follow in so striking a manner the direction of the faults, 
even when these are bent in hook-like curves, that we are left in doubt 
as to how far the formation of the anticlines is due to dragging along the 
faults. 

This whole district exhibits the characters rather of a faulted-down than 
of a folded country. 

Nor are we able to assert that the shores of the gulf of Ismid or the 
Bosporus afford any further evidence as to the existence of a folded arc. 
The Devonian of the Bosporus is overlain unconformably, as Toula has 


1 Blanckenhorn, Die Structurlinien Syriens und des Rothen Meeres, in Festschrift fur 
F. Freiherr von Richthofen, 8vo, Berlin, 1898, pp. 115-180, map, in particular p. 178; 
Schaffer, II, p. 15. 

2 Naumann, Vom Goldnen Horn, p. 372. The fossils of the Lias described by Pompecki 
were also brought from the west of the Angara. Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Ges., 1897, XLIX, 
pp. 712-828. 

8 G. Ralli, Le bassin houiller d’Heraclee, Ann. Soc. g6ol. Belg., 1895-1896, XXIII, 
pp. 151-267, maps; also Schlehan, Yersuch einer geognostischen Beschreibung der Gegend 
zwisehen Amasry und Tyrla-asy an der nord-ost. Kiiste von Kleinasien, Zeitschr. dentsch. 
geol. Ges., 1852, IV, pp. 96-142, map ; and Garella and Huyot, Rapport sur les mines 
de houille d’H£racl6e, Ann. Mines, 1854, 5 e ser., VI, pp. 178-284. R. Zeiller, $tude sur 
la flore fossile du bassin houiller d’Heraclee, Mem. Soc. geol., 1899, No. XXI, 91 pp. 



320 ; THE TAURIDES AND THE DIN ABIDES [part iv 

shown, by the lower Trias, but the observed disposition of the beds of 
the Trias can hardly be connected with a West Pontic arc. The hori- 
zontal ity just mentioned as characterizing the older Tertiary beds of the 
west Pontic region is maintained up to the border of the basin of Adrianople 
and even farther towards the interior, where these beds rest on the 
Archaean rocks of the Rhodope mass 1 . /, 

Much more convincing testimony to the existence of a West Pontic arc 
is afforded by the steeply upturned stratified series which Naumann met 
with in the valley of the Sakaria, extending from Balaban upwards, past 
Lefke and Vezirkhan, but ever this is immediately followed on the east by 
the mighty tabular mass of the Giol-dagh 2 . 

But since the same far-travelled observer has, rendered certain the 
existence of a south-easterly strike in the mountains between Kutaya 
and Balikesri, we must admit that there the western parts, at least, of 
a West Pontic arc are to be seen. 

The Olympus of Brussa, as already known to Verneuil and Viquesnel, 
is an intrusive granite mass surrounded by ancient schists and serpentine. 
Near its summit there lies an isolated mass of white marble with 
garnets 3 . 

The region of the west Anatolian syntaxis (i. e. the encounter of the 
western ends of the West Pontic and the Tauric arcs with the eastern 
ends of the fragmentary Aegaean arcs) is placed by Naumann in the 
district south of the middle of the sea of Marmora, about long. 28 ° E. 
Yet at present we may still retain a doubt whether the mountain segments 
regarded as West Pontic are not merely the inner fragments of the great 
Tauric arc. Further investigations, especially in Paphlagonia, are necessary 
to settle this point 4 . 

1 F. Toula, Eine geologische Reise nach Kleinasien, Neu. Jahrb. Min., 1899, I, pp. 63- 
70 ; also Eine Muschelkalkfauna am Golfe von Ismid in Klein-Asien, in Waagen, Beitr. Z. 
Palaeont. OestenvUng., 1896, X, pp. 153-157, and Eine geologische Reise nach Klein- 
Asien (Bosporus und Siidkiiste des Marmara-Meere^), op. cit., 1898, XII, pp. 2-53 et 
passim. 

2 Naumann, Grundlinen, p, 15. 

3 K. von Fritsch, Acht Tage in Klein-Asien, Mitth. Ver. fur Erdk. Halle, 1882, pp. 101- 
139, map; and W. F. Wilkinson, Notes on the Geology and Mineral Resources of 
Anatolia, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1895, LI, pp. 95-97. 

4 Certain distinguished investigators, such as Douville, Comptes rend. 16 March, 1896, 
and F. Toula, Neu. Jahrb. Min. 1898, have conjectured that the Balkans are not continued 
by the Crimea but by Asia Minor. M. Douville bases his theory on the concordant 
succession of strata at Heraclea. I have thought it best not to connect myself with 
these conjectures. The structure of the countiy between Heraclea and Amasra con- 
tradicts them. Hochstetter says Boue had already pointed out that the conception 
of the Istrandja mountains as a south-eastern spur of the Balkans is erroneous, since it is 
separated from this range 4 not only geologically but also geographically ’ (Jahrb. k. k. 
geol. Reichsanst., 1870, XX, p. 390). The presence of the Alpine type of the Mesozoic 



WESTERN ASIA MINOR 


321 


CHAP. VIIl] 

But the question whether a syntaxis exists in the neighbourhood of the 
west coast of Asia Minor is of no small importance. For if it were 
answered in the affirmative it would follow that the Aegaean inbreak lies 
outside the Taurides, and belongs to the western or Dinaric region only. 

In order to discuss this question we will begin in the south-west. 

The ivestem part of A ^a Minor.* In a large part of south Lycia, from 
the lofty limestone masses of the Massikytos (Ak-dagh) across the Susuz- 
dagh, up to the south coast near the island of Kekova, Tietze found 
a persistent strike to the east-north -east or north-east (between hor. 3 
and hor. 5, chiefly 4). Perhaps, towards the western shore of the gulf 
of Adalia there followed a bending up of this strike towards the north. 
In these parts of Lyc^,, deposits of the age of the Schlier, or the second 
Mediterranean stage, ar§ carried up to heights of more than 4,000 
feet h 

Southern Lycia must thus be assigned to the western or Dinaric 
(Aegaean) arc, in which, according to Bukowski’s observations, we must 
also include the island of Rhodes 2 . The Cretaceous limestone runs from 
Crete through Kasos 3 , and reaches the extreme west of Rhodes with 
a north-east strike. This direction is continued to the Hagion Elias, which 
is situated in the middle of the northern half of Rhodes; but here the 
strike bends from north-east to east, and finally towards the south-east, 
and thus reaches the east coast in extremely contorted beds. Here, there- 
fore, a Tauric fragment really appears to be inserted in syntaxis ; but north 
of the Hagion Elias, however, a range with the Dinaric east-north-east 
strike continues in the direction of the mainland towards Asia Minor. 

Beyond this, the bay between the coast of Lycia and Rhodes lies on a 
transverse fracture of the outer Dinaric arcs ; the sea-bottom sinks very 
rapidly to great depths, and at a distance of 38 kilometers from the 
coast of Rhodes, and not much further from that of Asia Minor, reaches 
3,865 meters 4 . 

In Caria attention may first be directed to the two gneiss ranges striking 
to the north-west, which have been described by Paton. The first of these 

sediments has been established at several localities by fresh discoveries, such as the 
rich outcrops of Bosnia, the Trias of Balia Maaden, and the traces of the Trias in Greece, 
indicated by DouviM 

1 E. Tietze, Beitr&ge zur Geologie von Lykien, Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1885, 
XXXV, pp. 283-884, map. 

2 G. Bukowski, Grundziige des geologischen Baues der Insel Rhodus, Sitz. k. Akad. 
Wiss. Wien, 1889, XCVIII, pp. 208-272, map, in particular p. 220; also Geologische 
Uebersichtskarte der Insel Rhodus, Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1898, XLVIII, pp. 517- 
688J map. 

s G. Bukowski, Der geologische Bau der Insel Kasos, Sitz. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1889, 
XCVIII, pp. 658-669, map. ^ * 

4 J. Luksch and J. Wolf in Berichte der Commission zur Erforschung des bstlichen 
Mittelmeeres, III, Denkschr. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, LXI, p. 92 et seq., map. 

soliao m y t 



322 - THE TAUEIDES AND THE DINARIDES [partiv 

forms the greater part of the peninsula of Myndos (Halicarnassus) ; similar 
rocks occur towards the north-west of the island of Patmos, and towards 
the south-east in the eastern part of the peninsula of Cnidos, and are 
regarded as the continuation of this range. The second gneiss range forms 
the Latmos mountains (Beschparmak-dagh). It is parallel to the first, be- 
gins on the lower Meander and forms the southern watershed of this river 
nearly to Mugla. To the west of these gneiss ranges Paton found limestone 
in the north of Leros, in Kalymnos, Kos. in a part of the peninsula of 
Cnidos, and in the island of Syme 1 . 

According to Bukowski the same north-west direction determines the 
structure of the mountains far in the interior, from the Baba-dagh near 
Denizli (in which garnet-bearing mica-schist is visible) to the long anticline 
of phyllite which, as the Sultan-dagh, forms with its south-easterly pro- 
longations the western border of the plain of Lycia Akshehr beyond. 
Limestones of different ages form the greatest part of this region ; pebbles 
of Fusujina limestone have been found in Eocene sediments north of the 
Buldur-Gueul 2 . 

Continuing in the direction of Caria out to sea we remark in Nisyros 
the beginning of that arc of volcanos which runs through Santorin towards 
Aegina. 

In the south-east part of Kos, Neumayr observed a mass of phyllite and 
marble rising high out of the Cretaceous limestone ; its strike appears to 
describe an arc open towards the south, but the mass is too small to allow 
of any conclusion 3 . 

In Samos , on the other hand, we are able to trace the continuation of the 
Carian mountains. According to the observations of Nasse, garnetiferous 
mica-schists, associated with white marble, run transversely across the 
middle of the island with a north-west strike in the imposing mountain 
range of Ampelos ; similar rocks, accompanied by serpentine, diabase, and 
porphyry, form the hilly range of Kerki in the west, as well as the flatter 
country in the east of the island 4 . t 

Thence onwards the strike turns to the north. The collation undertaken 
by Teller of the older observations made by Strickland and Spratt in the 

1 W. R. Paton and J. L. Myres, Researches in Karia, Geogr. Journ., 1897, IX, pp. SB- 
54, map, in particular pp. 44 and 51. Tschihatschew has also crossed the Latmian 
gneiss range. 

8 G. Bukowski, Kurzer Vorbericht iiber die Ergebnisse der in den Jahren 1890 und 
1891 im siidwestlichen Kleinasien durchgefiihrten geologischen Untersuchungen, Sitz. k. 
Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1891, C, pp. 378-399, in particular p. 386. 

3 M. Neumayr, Ueber den geologischen Bau der Insel Kos, Denkschr. k, Akad. Wiss. 
Wien, 1879,, XL, pp. 213-314, map. 

4 R. Nasse, Ein Ausflug nach JSamos, Zeitschr. Ges. Erdk. Berlin, X, pp. 222-235, 
map ; also Spratt, Geology of the Island <jf Samos, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soe., 1847, Ilh 
pp. 65-67, maps, and Di Stefani, C. J. Forsyth-Major et W. Barbey, Samos, 4io, 1892 ; 
Lausanne, Aper$u geologique par Di Stefani, pp. 71-81. 



chap, vm] SPALMATORI AND CHIOS 323 

gulf of Smyrna with those made by himself in the little group of the 
Spalmatori islands and in Chios gives the following results : — 

At mount Tmolus, east-south-east of Smyrna, phyllites crop out, and are 
followed towards the west, at mount Corax, by dark-brown and greenish 
shales with sandstone. Grey limestone, with a strike almost north and 
south, forms the main mas£ of the promontory of Karaburun, and on the 
west side reappears the stratified series of the Corax, as a broad zone with 
a dip to the east. The group of the Spalmatori islands belongs to the axis 
of an anticline of phyllites, which strikes in a northerly direction between 
the mainland and the island of Chios. In Chios we find first the western 
half of this anticline and then a fold with a north to north-north-east 
strike. The rocks of the Spalmatori islands correspond probably to those 
of mount Tmolus, a lowc& series in Chios is equivalent to that of mount 
Corax and the west side of Karaburun, but the upper limestones of Chios 
correspond to the limestone of the heights of Karaburun. Within the 
lower members of the succession in Chios, in a horizon which probably 
corresponds with the upper subdivisions of the series of mount Corax, 
Teller has found limestone with Fusulina and Crinoids l . 

Two anticlines are therefore present, one striking to the north-north- 
east, which is exposed in the Tmolus at Smyrna; and a second, striking to the 
north, which runs through the Spalmatori islands. These are joined by the 
subordinate folds of Chios. In the superposed beds we are at present 
acquainted with upper Carboniferous and Cretaceous. 

Mitylene has been described by De Launay. Micaceous and chloritic 
schists, associated with marble, run through the eastern half of the island 
with a strike N. 15° E. ; they are evidently the northern continuation of 
the rocks mentioned above, but are accompanied towards the east and west 
by two bands of peridotite and serpentine ; perhaps that of the east is the 
continuation of a band of serpentine which crops out to the north of 
Karaburun. The western part of the island is covered by comparatively 
recent eruptive rocks, but beneath them we see traces of the ancient schist 
striking to the north-north-east as far as the extreme western shore 2 . 

Diller’s description of the southern Troad shows that the volcanic for- 
mations of western Mitylene extend beyond the gulf of Adramyti, and cover 
the whole south-west of the Troad. Further to the north, in the direction 

1 H. E. Strickland, On the Geology of the Neighbourhood of Smyrna, Trans. Geol. Soc., 
1840, V, pp. 893-408, map ; T. Spratt, Observations on the Geology of the South Part 
of the Gulf of Smyrna and the promontory of Karabournou, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 
1845, I, pp. 156-162, map ; F. Teller, Geologische Beobaehtungen auf der Insel Chios, 
Denkschr. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1880, XL, pp. 340-356, map. 

2 L. de Launay, Description geologique des lies de Metelin et de Thasos, Archives des 
Missions, 1890, 3 e ser., XVI, 48 pp., map. ICtudes gealogiques sur la Mer ^ gee, La Geologie 
des lies de Metelin (Lesbos), Lemnos, et Thasos, Ann. Mines, 1898, 9 e ser., XIII, pp. 157- 
319, maps. 


Y 2 



824 ; THE TAURIDES AND THE DIN ABIDES [partjtv 

of the Scamander, rises the Kara-dagh, which is formed of stratified rocks. 
On its northern slopes, towards Bonarbashi, Philippson met with a white 
limestone, fairly crystalline,* with a strike to N. 5° E., which forms the north 
border of the mountains towards the Trojan plain 1 . 

The structure of the west coast of Asia Minor is therefore the follow- 
ing ‘ « 

From Crete an arc runs to the north-east through Kasos to Rhodes,, 
where it meets a shorter segment coming from a north-west direction. 

The volcanic arc extends from Santorin into Nisyros. 

In the whole of the south-western part of the continent a north-west 
strike prevails as far as the coast of Caria and onwards to Samos : this 
is the western wing of the Tauric arc, which encloses the Lycaonian 
plain. * 

Between Smyrna and Chios a north to north-north-east strike appears 
and is maintained through the Spalmatori islands and Mitylene to the plain 
of Troy. 

While the western limb of the Tauric arc can be followed with tolerable 
certainty as far as Samos, we are not so sure that the ranges directed to the 
north and north-north-east should be included with it. This becomes even 
more doubtful when we discover, from Bukowskis investigations in Mysia, 
in the neighbourhood of Balia-maaden, that a band of Carboniferous 
deposits, striking to the north-east or north -north-east, probably exists 2 . 
Whether this band extends to Panderma on the sea of Marmora must 
remain an open question. On the continent of Europe the schistose ridges 
of Tekir-dagh and Kuru-dagh strike to the south-west on both sides of the 
depression which extends to the gulf of Saros, and we know from Hoernes 
that the island of Samothrace is a continuation of these ranges with the 
same south-west strike 3 . In Lemnos, however, according to De Launay, the 
strike of the folds becomes east and west, with a slight divergence to east- 
north-east and west-south- west 4 . 

These mountain sections do not, therefore, belong to the western wing of 
the Taurides, but to the eastern wing of the Dinaric group. 


1 J. S. Diller, Notes on the Geology of the Troad, Quart. Joum. Geol. Soc., 1883, XXXIX, 
pp. 627-636, map. A. Philippson, Geologisch-geographische Reiseskizzen aus dem Orient, 

Sitz. Niederrhein. Ges. Nat., &c., Bonn, 1897, p. 41. 

3 G. von Bukowski, Die geologischen Verhaltnisse der Umgebung von Balia Maaden 
im nordwestlichen Klein- Asien, Sitz. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1892, Cl, pp. 214-235, map. 
H. Coquand, Notice geologique sur les environs de Panderma (Asie mineure), Bull. Soc. 
geol. de Fr., 1878, 3 e ser., VI, pp. 347-357. In this exposure, however, which does not 
appear to be important, Coquandyhas observed a strike to the north-west. 

* R. Hoernes, Geologischer Bau de\ InsejJ Samothrake, Denkschr. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 
1874, XXXIII, 2. Abth., pp. 1-12, map. 

4 L. de Launay, fitudes geologiques, pp. 45-82, map t< 



chap, vin] TERTIARY GULF OF ALBANIA 325 

A syntaxis in fact does exist in the proximity of the west coast of 
Asia Minor. 

A north-east to east-north-east strike prevails on the European. main- 
land (Tekir-dagh, Kuru-dagh) and as far as Ssmothrace, and perhaps also 
in the Carboniferous band of Balia-maaden. In the south this direction 
is represented by the volcanic line to Nisyros, and further by the line 
passing through Crete and Kasos to Rhodes, and the lofty mountains of 
southern Lycia. These regions we include among the eastern ends of the 
ranges of the Dinaric arc. 

A north and south to a north-north-ea^t strike is met with on the 
southern border of the plain of Troy, in Mitylene, Chios, the Spalmatori 
islands, the peninsula qf Karaburun, and as far as Smyrna. These areas 
probably answer in part ,to the Dinaric arc and in part to the region of 
syntaxis. 

A north-west strike makes its appearance in the valley of the Sakaria 
in the neighbourhood of the Olympus of Brussa, then in the south-west of 
Asia Minor as far as Samos, thence to the coast of Caria and to a restricted 
part of Rhodes. These tracts are the western ends of the Tauric arcs. 

This enumeration, however, is not without considerable gaps ; connected 
observations are especially lacking in Mysia. Nevertheless the two directions 
— to the north-east and to the north-west — may be clearly distinguished. 
We perceive that in the south the Dinaric lines encroach toward the east. 
And, further, it is plain that the Aegaean inbreaks lie within the Dinarides 
.and hardly encroach upon the Tauric lines. 

The Tertiary gulf of Albania . The investigations of Neumayr, Bittner, 
Teller, and Burgerstein have shown that the folded ranges of the Dinarides, 
striking north-north-west, downwards from Thessaly, undergo a complete 
deflexion towards the east and proceed thus through the islands of the 
Aegaean sea, and through the island of Crete towards Asia Minor, 
{I, pp. 497-8). De Launay has published a general geological map of the 
Archipelago 1 , and Philippson, as the result of a large number of new obser- 
vations, has clearly determined the arcs traced by the trend-lines as they, 
cross from Epirus to Asia Minor 2 . 

At the same time the views held by Spratt and Neumayr as to the 
recent date of the Aegaean inbreaks (I, p. 344) have received confirmation. 
The Levantine deposits, formed in fresh water, are displayed on the shores 
of the inbreaks ; the deposits of the third and fourth Mediterranean stages 
mantle over the coasts of the southern series of islands and the Peloponnesus, 
-and invade the mainland in several bays. Philippson and Oppenheim 

1 L. de Launay, Geologie des lies de Metelin, Lemnos et Thasos, pi. I. 

2 A. Philippson, Die griechischen Inseln des Aegteischen Meeres, Verh. Ges. Erdk., 
Berlin, 1897, XXIV, pp. 264-280, map; La®Tectonique de l’figeide, Ann. Geogr., 1898, 
no. 32, pp. 112-141, map. 



326 : THE TAURIDES AND THE DINARIDES [part iv 

show that the mighty conglomerates which many years ago called forth 
the astonishment of the first investigators, Boblaye and Virlet, are younger 
than a part of the Levantine sediments \ and Bukowski describes the thick 
masses of fluviatile pebble-beds of Levantine date and unquestionably 
derived from the mainland of Asia Minor, which occur Upon the island 
of Rhodes 1 2 . 

While the only deposits, either freshwater or marine, thus known to us 
within a very extensive region, are such as scarcely descend lower than the 
third Mediterranean stage ; yet we learn from Hilber and Penecke that 
within the Dinaric ranges of Macedonia and Thessaly there occurs a very 
elongated basin of a wholly different kind 3 . 

4 According to the discoveries made up to the present by Hilber, this 
basin extends from the region south of the lakes of /)cKrida and Presba, and in 
particular from the neighbourhood of Goritza (Giortcha), towards the south- 
south-east, through Lapsista, Grevena, and Kastoria into the depression of 
Trikkala. The sediments begin on the horizon of the Castel Gomberto beds, 
in the upper Oligocene (Natica crassatina , Isastraea ajjinis) ; near Goritza 
these lower beds overlie lignites which rest upon hills of serpentine ; and 
further to the south, on the eastern border of the basin, north of Trikkala 
and elsewhere, they rest on ancient^schists. Aquitanian deposits follow, and 
to these belong the conglomerate rocks of the Meteora monasteries. Next 
above come marine deposits of the first Mediterranean stage, traces of the 
Schlier with Pecten denudatus , and north-west of Kastoria we even meet 
with the Clypeasteridae of the Leithakalk, which belongs to the second 
Mediterranean stage. Deposits of later Tertiary times are represented only 
by the conglomerates with Elephas meridionalis and E quits stenonis 
which Gorceix discovered at Lapsista. 


1 P. Oppenheim, Beitrage zur Kenntniss des Neogen in Griechenland mit einer 
geologischen Einleitung von A. Philippson, Zeitschr. deutseh. geol. Ges., 1891, XLII1, 
pp. 421-487. 

2 Bukowski, Grundziige, p. 285 et seq. 

a V. Hilber, Geologische Reise in Nordgriechenland und in Maeedonien, 1893, Sitz. k. 
Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1894, CIII, pp. 575-601, in particular p. 596 et seq. ; K. A. Penecke, 
Marine Terti&r*Fossilien aus Nordgriechenland und dessen turkischen Grenzl&ndern, 
Denkschr. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1897, LX1V, pp. 41-65. Boue had previously mentioned 
the Tertiary deposits of Trikkala, but without quoting fossil remains; La Turquie 
d'Europe, Germ, edit., I, p. 195. In 1892 Dreger described Natica crassatina and other 
species from the neighbourhood of Koritsa from specimens which had been sent to him ; 
in 1893 Hilber penetrated to Koritsa in Macedonia ; in 1894 Philippson and Oppenheim 
demonstrated the presence of sediments with Cerithium margaritaceum on the Macedonian 
boundary north of Trikkala, and they described an Area sent from Koritsa ; Terti&r und 
Tertiarfossilien in Nord-Griechenland sowie in Albanien und bei Patras im Peloponnes, 
Zeitschr. deutseh. geol. Ges., 1894, XLVI, pp. 800-822 ; Gorceix, who was the first to 
mention the bone remains of LapsistV cohjectured that these Tertiary deposits were 
continued towards the north. 



THE DINARIDES 


327 


CHAP. VIII] 

The configuration of the country might lead us to seek the connexion 
once existing between this greatly elongated basin and the sea in the 
south-east. But this direction leads into the Aegaean region, in which no 
trace of similar sediments is known. Both on the east and the west the 
basin is enclosed by lofty mountain chains. A communication towards the 
north-west, on the other Jiand, is indicated by deposits of the first and 
second Mediterranean stages, which were made known by Boud and 
Hoemes in the Albanian lowland, between Durazzo and Tiranna and close 
to Kruia 1 ; Tietze met with th^ continuations of these deposits nesfr 
Dulcigno 2 . 

While upon these grounds we recognize the existence of a marine gulf 
which opened into th^, sea south of Dulcigno, extended to the north-west^ 
and lasted from the middle Tertiary into the time of the second Mediter- 
ranean stage, yet somewhat further to the south the only marine deposes 
known up to the present time belong to the third Mediterranean stage. 
According to the statements of Baldacci and Simonelli, thick petroleum- 
bearing beds rest against the north-eastern slope of the hills which reach 
the sea at Yallona; these beds contain, together with numerous Pliocene 
marine shells in great abundance, the Sarmatian species Cerithium pictum. 
Coquand had already recognized this basin, which extends towards Berat 3 . 

The dominant features of the Dinar ides. In the south of Macedonia 
and in Thessaly our knowledge of the structure of the Balkans has been 
considerably extended by the works of Hilber, and in Thessaly and Greece 
by those of Philippson 4 . Other meritorious investigators have been active 
in the north ; Professor Cvijid, of Belgrade, has favoured me with many 
instructive communications. In spite of all the deficiencies in existing 
observations, two general results have already been won. 

The first of these consists in the recognition of the fact that on the 

1 A. Boue, Der albanesiscke Drin und die Geologie Albaniens, besonders seines tertiaren 
Beckens, mit einem Verzeichniss nordalbanesischer tertiarer Petrefacten von M. Hornes, 
Sitz. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1864, XLIX, pp. 179-193. The list includes species of the 
first Mediterranean stage ( Mytilus Haidivgvri , Pecten solarium) and of those of the 
second ; the material examined was derived from two places, the mountain of Gjp^^tz 
between Durazzo and Tyrana, and the mountain of SOrel (Zurel) between Tyrana and * 
the Mat (p. 184). 

2 E. Tietze, Geologische Uebersicht von Montenegro, Jahrb. k. k. Geol. Reichsanst., 1884/* 
XXXIV, pp. 1-110, map, in particular pp. 66 and 88. 

3 V. Simonelli, Le sabbie fossilifere di Selenitza in Albania, Bull. Soc. geol. Ital., 1893, 
XII, pp. 552-558 ; also earlier, Coquand, Bull. Soc. geol. de Fr., 1868, 2® ser., XXV, p. 20 
et seq., for the continuation in Corfu ; T. Fuchs, Die Plioc&nbildungen von Zante und 
Corfu, Sitz. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1877, LXXV, pp. 309-320. 

4 Philippson’s numerous writings on this subject are contained in the last volumes of 
the Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft fur Erdkunde zu Betlin and the Zeitschrift der deutschen 
geologischen Gesellschaft ; those of Hilber ma# be found in the Sitzungsbericbte and 
Denkschriften of the Academy of Sciences of Vienna. 



328 .THE TAURIDES AND THE DIN ABIDES [paktiv 

mainland, in spite of all the variations in the outer form of the country, 
the strike of the rocks, from Macedonia and Thessaly to the northern 
'boundary of Bosnia and even to Istria, follows with great regularity the 
direction north-west or north-north- west. The great Shar range (Ljubetes, 
2,510 meters) 1 runs throughout its length from Divra to Katchanik, to the 
north-east, but Professor Cvijic informs me thft over the whole of this 
tract the rocks strike to the north-north- west, transverse to the mountains. 
The Alps of north Albania extend north of Ipek towards the north-east ; 
but from Oestreich’s observations it appears that here also limestone and 
Flysch strike transversely acrc^s the range 1 . In like manner the lofty 
south-eastern watershed of the Kara Su (right tributary of the Vardar), 
runs to the north-east, but the mountains, according to R. Hofmann, are 
formed of trachyte 2 . * 

Off the Adriatic coast, however, there is a manifest tendency to diverge 
from the north-west to the west-north-west and even to the west. This 
shows itself in the alinement, Corfu-Salmastraki-Othonos 3 , in the Acro- 
ceraunian promontory and Saseno, then, north of the gulf of Albania, in 
a yet higher degree in certain Dalmatian islands. Thus the whole Adriatic 
coast presents a coulisse structure, which is even apparent on the map. 
But towards the north the coulisses continue to advance until finally they 
reach Istria. 

The second of these results is that towards the interior these Dinarie 
ranges occupy a very great breadth of country. The neighbourhood of 
Seres, perhaps also of Doiran, may still be claimed by the Archaean mass 
of Rhodope, but the whole valley of the Vardar , down to Salonica, or at 
least as far as lat. 41° 15' N., belongs to the Dinarides. R. Hofmann has 
shown that in this valley, south of the Tertiary basin of Uskub, schists, 
presumably Palaeozoic, crystalline limestone, serpentine, and then dolomite, 
probably belonging to the Trias, succeed one another with a strike to the 
north-west as far as the Flysch basin of Negotin, which farther down 
the valley again becomes bordered by dolomite # of the same kind. Beyond 
this we reach the chain of trachyte already mentioned on the south-east 
side $f the Kara Su ; and south of this river R. Hofmann found some 
badly preserved Mesozoic fossils. 

The Kara Su itself, in its course from Monastir, to the Vardar, runs 
chiefly over limestone, which belongs probably to the vast limestone region 


Oestreich, Reiseeindriicke aus dem Yilajet Kosovo, Abkandl. k. k. Geogr. Ges. 
Wien, 1899, 1, pp. 331-372, map, in particular p. 338 et seq. 

2 R. Hofmann, Antimon-und Arsen-Erzbergbau ‘Allchar 5 in Macedonien, Oester. 
Zeitschr. far Berg- und Hiittenwefiei^ 1891, XXXIX, no. 16, map, pi. VI. 

8 F. Partsch, Die Insel Korfu, Petert^. Mijth., Ergiinzungsheft, no. 88, 1887, 97 pp., 
map. 



THE KARU SU 


CHAP. VIII] 


329 


observed by Bou^ as extending from Siatista through Yeria to Niausta 
and Ostrovo ; it contains Rudistes, as Boue discovered 1 . 

To the west of this region rises a series of granite outcrops. Mica- 
schist is also mentioned, but further investigation is necessary before we 
can be sure whether we have here a complex of Archaeaft rocks or of 
igneous intrusions into % Palaeozoic schists. The upper parts of the 
Peristeri at Monastir consist, according to E. Naumann, of granite ; imme- 
diately to the south, the eastern side of the Neritshka Planina , near 
Fiorina, is formed of syenite, and still further to the south a rocky range 
of protogine extends up to the north-east shore of the lake of Kastoria 2 . 

No continuation of these rocks, either to the north or south, is so far 
known. To the north, above Uskub, is the Ljnbeten in the Shar range, 
which was ascended by Griesbach, Neumayr, and Burgerstein, Zujovic 3 , 
Cvijid, and Oestreich. Here, as in all the mountains north of Uskub, the 
stratified series presents first phyllite, next some quartzite, then a very thick 
mass of crystalline limestone which fqrms the summit of the Ljubetes, and 
is compared by Zujovic to the limestone of mount Athos or Olympus ; 
finally, towards the east, come calcareous shales and Flysch-like sandstone 
with massive bands of serpentine. 

Further west also, on the lofty mountain of Gjalifeh (Jalish), near the 
confluence of the Black and White Drin (south-west of Prisrend), Boue 
mentions marble and phyllite, and from this neighbourhood, according to 
Cvijid, these rocks run with a strike to south-south-east transversely across 
the Shar range, follow the east shore of the Black Drin, and form the 
heights which separate the lake of Ochrida from the lake of Presba. Both 
lakes correspond to meridional fault-troughs, and the east side of lake 
Ochrida obviously corresponds to a fissure, with solfataras and recent 
eruptive rocks 4 . From this point, Herr Cvijic further informs me, the 
zone of marble and phyllite strikes towards Kastoria, bordering the east 
shore of the upper Bystritza, and at length, slightly diverted to the 
east, reaches the mountains^ above Trikkala and forms their outer edge 5 . 
For a considerable distance this long track coincides with the eastern border 
of the Tertiary gulf of Albania, the breadth of which above Trikkala lies 
between 20 and 25 kilometers. 

1 A. Boue, La Turquie d’Europe, Germ. edit., Vienna, 1889, I, p. 178; Rudistes and 
corals between CardZilar and Ostrova. 

2 E. Naumann, Macedonien und seine neue Eisenbahnlinie Salonik-Monastyr, 8vo, 
Miinchen und Leipzig, 1894, 58 pp., in particular p. 46. 

3 J. M. Zujovid, Contribution a l’etude geologique de Tancienne Serbie, Annales 
geologiques de la Peninsule Balcanique, 1891, III, pp. 124-135. 

4 J. Cvijic, Die macedonischen Seen, ein vorlaudger Bericht, Mitth. Ung. Geogr. Ges. 

Budapest (Foldt. Kdzl), 1900, XXVIII, 16 pp., in articular p. 10 and communications 
kindly made to me in person. • 

6 Philippson, Reisen und Forschungen in Nord-Griechenland, HI, Zeitschr. Ges. Erdk., 
Berlin, 1895, XXX, p. 487, and map in 1896, XXXI, pi. 9. 



330 THE TAURIDES AND THE DINARIDES [partiv 

Here begins the deflexion to the east. The ancient schists enter into 
the structure of the Othrys mountains, strike across the southern part of the 
gulf of Volo, through Skiathos and Skopelos, and encircling on the south 
the whole of that region which Philippson designated the crystalline mass 
of the north 'Aegaean 1 2 they finally reach Samothrace and the phyllite 
ranges of Kuru-dagh and Tekir-dagh on the gujf of Saros. 

To the north-west of lake Ochrida, at the village of RodaMa, Cviji<$ 
found Jurassic limestone with Phylloceras. Beyond this rises a long 
and lofty range of serpentine which extends across the whole of Macedonia. 
According to Boud, the serpentine intrusions which occur between Prisrend 
and Scutari may be counted as among the largest in Turkey ; I do not 
know whether they are prolonged to the south. The^western shore of lake 
Ochrida is bordered, according to Cvijic, by serpentine and Rudistes lime- 
stone; the mountains run north and south; the strike of the rocks is 
north-north- west. The same long range of serpentine crosses the Tertiary 
gulf ; Hilber encountered it between Kolonia and Goritza, and over the 
whole mountain range up to the group of Smolitsa (2,574 meters) and as 
far as the Zygos pass at Metsovo (east-north-east of J anina) \ 

Here, at the Zygos pass, there occurs an important division of the 
mountains. Continuing in the direction of the long band of serpentine 
this rock disappears, and the lofty limestone mountains of the Thessalian 
Pindus come in with an almost identical strike. A range of limestone 
suddenly takes the place of a range of serpentine. According to Philippson’s 
interpretation, the limestone dips beneath the serpentine in a great 
flexure : Hilber appears to think, however, that the limestone range is 
deflected towards the west. 

This limestone range, the Pindus , forms the largest of the Dinaric arcs. 
It does not follow the eastern deflexion to the Othrys mountains. At 
first it strikes almost south-south-east, then runs to the south and, as the 
limestone Alps of Aetolia, reaches the gulf of Corinth. Here it appears 
to have undergone a slight displacement towards the east along a transverse 
line of disturbance, which, beginning west of the gulf of Salona, runs west- 
novth-west to the lake of Ambrakia 3 . The range is continued, however, 
in the Peloponnesus, and, according to Philippson, prolonged through the 
whole peninsula till it reaches the most southerly part of the gulf of 
Messenia. There its direction is south-south-east, and it turns through 
Cerigo and Cerigotto towards Crete and Rhodes. 

1 A. Philippson, Tectonique de l’Egeide, p. 117. 

2 V. Hilber, Geologische Reise in Nord-Griechenland, &c., p. 620. Isolated points were 
previously known to Boue ; their continuity has now first become clear. 

3 Neumayr, Denkschr. k. Akad. ^Vis^. Wien, 1878, XL, p. 112 ; Philippson, Zeitschr, 
Ges. Erdk., Berlin, 1897, XXXII, p. 278 ; Hilber, Sitz. k. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1894, CIII, 
p. 592 et passim. 



chap, viii] PINDUS. THE CYCLADES 331 

This great zone of limestone is bordered on the west, from its origin in 
the north to the south shore of the Peloponnesus, by a zone of more recent 
sandstone; on its east side also a similar zone of sandstone extends for 
a great distance. 

Owing to the divergence of the meridional zone of rnoifht Pindus from 
the south-east or east direction of mount Othrys, a broad intermediate space 
is formed inside the Dinaric arcs. In this space are inserted segments of 
arcs represented by limestone mountains, such as Oeta and Parnassus , first 
with a transitional strike to the south-east or south-south-east : then these 
also, as appears from the observations of# Bittner and Teller, complete the 
bend to the east and north and strike across Euboea. 

Further to the south, or rather further towards the exterior of the 
Dinaric system, ancient formations again emerge. Attica , south Euboea, 
Andros , Keos y and Thermia , and the succeeding islands as far as Syra and 
Siphnos , are formed of ancient schists and marble. The strike bends here 
to the north-east, in correspondence with the course of the great arcs. 
Already even in Syra and Siphnos albite gneiss appears as the foundation 
of the ancient schists ; in Tinos still older gneiss crops out with a strike to 
the north-north-east, and gneiss and granite gneiss form the greater part 
of Antiparos, Paros , and Naxos l . 

Philippson regards this gneissose mass of the Cyclades as an ancient 
mountain core, which has determined to some extent the position and trend 
of the arc. In the schists the trend in an arc is clearly evident, and its 
continuation should probably be sought in those older rocks which have 
been referred to as occurring in the region of the Tauric syntaxis with 
a strike to north-north-east or north, in Chios, the Spalmatori, and 
Mytilene. 

But, as appears from the description by Lacroix, a zone of ancient 
schists and marble also exists to the south of the gneiss of the Cyclades. 
To this zone the southern, non-volcaiiic part of Milos belongs, as well as 
Polykandros and the lime^one mountain of Hagion Elias in Santorin 2 . 

Amorgos , formed of dark limestone, strikes to the north-east in the 
sense of the syntaxis. 

It is a very remarkable fact that, far away from this region, in the 
north of the island of Cerigo, there exists, according to R. Leonhard's 
observations, a patch of ancient phyllite which strikes to the east-north- 

1 Philippson, Verh. Ges. Erdk. Berlin, 1897, XXIV, Sitzungsbericht vom 10 April 1897, 

Tectonique de 1’lSgeide, p. 119 ; and Baron von Foullon and von Goldschmidt, Ueber die 
geologischen Verh&ltnisse der Inseln Syra, Syphnos und Tinos, Jahrb. k. k. geol. 
Keichsanst., 1887, XXXVII, pp. 1-34, maps ; also F. Schafarzik, Geologische Notizen 
aus Griechenland, Jahresb. k.-ung. geol. Anst. (for 1893), 1895, pp, 177-192, especially 
p. 189 et seq. m 

2 A. Lacroix, Sur la constitution mintirale de Tile de Polycandros, Comptes rendus, 
1897, CXXIV, pp. 628-630. 



332 THE TAURIDES AND THE DINARIDES [partiv 

east. It is overlain unconformably by the limestones which there strike 
south-east ; and in the south of the island towards the east, in accordance 
with the course of the great arc which runs from the Taygetos towards 
Crete b 

The volcanic arc runs through Aegina, Methana , Poros, Milos , and 
Santorin to Nisyros. It therefore lies for the f greater part inside the 
region of the ancient schists, but leaves this region in the east to follow 
the course of the outer arc. 

The transition to this outer arc takes place first of all through the 
limestone mountains of Argolis «&nd Arcadia. In the neighbourhood of 
Sparta, Douvill^ has discovered indications of the Trias # . Thus we reach 
the great arc which sweeps from the Pindus mountains to Lycia, engirdling 
the whole archipelago. # 

The Pindus shows an easterly dip of the beds almost throughout its 
whole length, and the zone of sandstone which follows on the west shows 
a similar inclination ; from this fact Philippson justly concludes that the 
whole of the Pindus range is overthrust to the west. 

West of this range, in Epirus and the Ionian islands, follow other 
ranges of limestone and sandstone; Eocene, Cretaceous, and Jurassic have 
long been known in these regions ; in Epirus Lias has also been found 1 2 3 . 
These are the ranges, formed of Rudistes limestone, which run boldly out 
into the Adriatic sea as the Acroceraunian promontory. 

The Crossing of the Adriatic . From the neighbourhood of Elbassan, 
according to Bou^, a long wall of rock runs through Kruia towards 
Dulcigno. It forms the edge of the Albanian gulf. At Dulcigno, north- 
east of the border of recent Tertiary deposits, Tietze met with Flysch 
which strikes north-west out to sea 4 . Inside the Flysch, i. e. on its 
north-eastern side, there rises a long range of limestone mountains with 
steep scarps, possibly the continuation of the rocky wall mentioned by 
Bou& This range forms near Scutari the southern border of the lake 
of Scutari, reaches the sea in very steep cliflfc at Spizza, and proceeds 
towards the north-west far beyond Cattaro. Bukowski shows that from 
Spizza to beyond Budua this range is cut up into flakes which include the 
whole of the stratified series from the lower Trias to the lower Tertiary 
inclusive, and which are thrust over one another in a south-westerly 
direction, i. e. towards the sea 5 . At the same time there is intercalated 

1 R. Leonhard, Die Insel Kythera, Peterm. Mitth., Erg&nzungsheft no. 128, 1899, 
map, in particular pp. 7 and 10. 

2 Douville, Sur une ammonite triasique recueillie en Grece, Bull. Soc. g£ol. de Fr., 
1896, XXIV, p. 799. 

8 A. Philippson and G. Steinmann, JJeber das Auftreten von Lias in Epirus, Zeitschr. 
deutsch. geol. Ges., 1894, pp. 116-125. * 4 

4 E. Tietze, Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1884, XXXIV, pp. 59-69. 

6 G. von Bukowski, Ileber den geologischen Bau des, Nord-Theiles von Spizza in 



THE ADRIATIC 


333 


CHAP. VIIl] 

in the Trias a massive seam of norite porphyry <and associated green 
tuff and tuffaceous sandstone. These are Bukowski's Dsnrmani beds; 
they contain the characteristic fossils of Wengen and St. Cassian 1 . 

In the years 1862 and 1867 F. von Haaer described an eruptive rock 
from the island of Lissa , and some neighbouring reefs. Although the island 
consists of Cretaceous limestone, yet he pointed out that gypsum and tuffs 
also occur ; and at the same time he compared these beds with a series known 
within the Trias on the mainland of Dalmatia, south of Knin, and marked 
on his geological map of the Austrian kingdom the occurrence of Trias at 
Lissa. Tschermak distinguished the emptive rock as diallagite. Sub- 
sequently C. von Foullon described rocks from the adjacent islet of 
Scoglio Porno as augpte diorite 2 . 

Viola and Cassetti % have shown that monte Gargano is an anticline 
independent of the Apennines, exposing upper Jurassic along the axis and 
striking to the north-west 3 . 

The Pietre Nere, on the lago di Lesina, north-west of monte Gargano, 
consists of eruptive rock. This, as Viola and Di Stefano have shown, 
forms a dyke striking N. 25° E. in the direction of Lissa, and associated 
with a mass of Trias limestone which contains a fauna like that either of 
St. Cassian or Raibl. Gypsum also appears in the neighbourhood. The 
rock has been included among the lamphrophyres, under the name of 
* garganite * 4 . 

Siid-Dalmatien, Verh. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1896, pp. 95-191, Neue Ergebnisse der 
geologischen Durchforschung von Sud-Dalmatien, op. cit., 1899, pp. 68-77. 

1 G. von Bukowski, Zur Stratigraphie der Siid-Dalmatinischen Trias, Verb. k. k. geol. 
Reichsanst., 1896, pp. 379-885. The regular strike to the north-west exhibited by the 
mountains situated towards the interior is shown on K. Hassert’s Geologische Ueber- 
sichtskarte von Montenegro, Peterm. Mitth., Erganzungsheft no. 115, 1896, p. 1. At 
Trebinje (Herzegowina), according to Bittner, coal appeal's in the Raibl beds ; Verh. k. 
k. geol. Reichsanst., 1900, pp. 145-148. 

2 F. von Hauer, Verh. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1862, p. 257 : Prehnit von Comisa auf 
der Insel Lissa und Eruptiv-Gesteine aus Dalmatien, op. cit., 1867, pp. 89-91 ; Der 
Scoglio Brusnik beiSt. Andrea, op. cit., 1882, pp. 75-77 ; C. von Foullon, Der Augit- 
Diorit des Scoglio Pomo, op. cit., 1883, pp. 283-286. As early as 1867 F. von Hauer drew 
attention to the Pietre Nere, which had been described by Tscliihatschew. 

3 C. Viola e M. Cassetti, Contributo alia geologia del Gargano (Boll. R. Com. geol. 
Ital , 1893, XXIV, pp. 101-129, map). The question as to whether the Murga must also 
be included in Dalmatia is discussed in detail in F. Virgilio, Geomorfogenia della 
Provincia di Bari (reprinted from La Terra di Bari, delib. del Consiglio Prov. per 
l’Esposizione di Parigi del 1900, vol. Ill) ; Trani, 1900, 148 pp., map. 

4 C. Viola e G. di Stefano, La Punta delle Pietre Nere, presso il Lago di Lesina in 
provincia di Foggia, Boll. Com. geol. Ital., 1893, XXIV, pp. 129-143 ; C. Viola, Le roccie 
eruttive della Punta di Pietre Nere, op. cit., 1894, XXV, pp. 391-403, map ; G. di Stefano, 
Lo scisto marnoso con ‘ Myophoria vestitva ’ della Punta di Pietre Nere, op. cit., 1895, 
XXVI, pp. 4-50. We may add that Bittjier # has discovered an extensive mass of 
augite-diorite, gabbro, and diorite within ®the Trias on the Narenta ; Bittner, Geologische 
Mittheilungen aus dem Werfener-Schiefer und Tertiar-Gebiete von Konijica und Jabla- 



334 THE TAURIDES AND THE DIN ABIDES " [partiv 

Here the much discussed question again arises, whether the existing 
Adriatic sea was not partly occupied by solid land during some part of the 
Tertiary aera (I, p. 268). A large number of observations have confirmed 
the view expressed many years ago by Sfcache, that the island of Pelagosa 
is a remnant o¥ a sunken sea-coast which once extended from Stagno (in 
the peninsula of Sabioncello) towards Lagosta, tkence to Pelagosa and the 
Tremiti \ 

North of this line to about as far as Gorz and Udine no trace of marine 
deposits, either Miocene or more recent, has as yet been found. According to 
Tellini’s observations, the Cretaceous and Eocene limestones of the Tremiti 
are covered by deposits of the second and perhaps even the first Mediter- 
ranean stage 2 . The more recent marine deposits known in Pelagosa belong 
undoubtedly to the lower part of the third Mediterranean stage; nevertheless 
it appears as though Stache’s hypothesis might be extended. I regard the 
ancient coast-line Stagno-Pelagosa- T remit i as a continuation of the coast- 
line mentioned above , which coming from, the south-east reaches the existing 
sea at Dudcigno . This, however, corresponds to that north coast of the gulf 
of Albania which, as we have seen, once extended through Macedonia to 
beyond Trikkala. In this way we arrive at a boundary to the Adriatic) 
very different from that which it now possesses, but almost certainly in 
existence during the closing epoch of the Tertiary aera, or at an even yet 
later time. 

The strike of the Dalmatian island, passes now from west-north- west to 
due east. This latter direction prevails in Lesina ; Sohle found it predomi- 
nant in Brazza, and Kerner also in that part of the mainland near Trau 
which lies north-west of Brazza, and there the folds striking east and west 
are in great part overthrust to the south 3 . 

nica an der Narenta, Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1888, XXXVIII, pp. 821-842, in 
particular p. 834; C. von John, Ueber die Gesteine des Eruptivstockes von Jablanica 
an der Narenta, tom. cit., pp. 343-354. Traverso and Nicoli, judging from the nature 
of the sand at Ancona, Pesaro, and Ravenna, believed th«y could deduce the presence of 
a sunken eruptive rock, Atti Soc. ligust. sci. nat. e geogr. Genova, 1896, VII, pp. 139- 
141 ; Artini has disputed this in Rendic. R. 1st. lomb. Milano, 1897, XXIX, p. 800. 

1 Stache, Geologische Notizen liber die Insel Pelagosa, Verh. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 
1876, pp. 123-127 ; M. Groller von Mildensee, Topographisch-geologische Skizze der 
Insel Pelagosa, Mitth. Jahrb. k.-ung. geol. Anst., 1885, VII, 135-152, map (also I, p. 268, 
note 1). On the Adriatic in general, see also E. Cortese e M. Canavari, Nuovi appunti 
geologici sul Gargano, Boll. R. Com. geol. Ital., 1884, XV, pp. 225-240 and 289-304 ; 
M. Canavari, Osservazioni intorno all esistenza di una terraferma nell’ attuale bacino 
adriatico, Proc. verb. Soc. tosc. sci. nat. Pisa, 1885, V, p. 151 et seq. ; T. Fischer, 
Grundzuge der Boden-Plastik Italiens, Vortrag auf dem X. deutschen Geogr. Tage in 
Stuttgart, 1893, Verh. d. deutschen Geogr. Tages, pp. 39-53. 

2 A. Tellini, Osservazioni geologic!^ sulle Isole Tremiti e sull’ Isola Pianoso nell’ 
Adriatico, Boll. R. Com. geol. Ital., 1890, XXI, pp. 442-514, maps. 

5 U. Sohle, Verh. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1899, pp. 319-325, and 1900, pp. 185-187; 
F. Kerner, Geologische Beschreibung der Kuste sudlich von Sebenico, Verli. k. k. geol. 



THE TONALITE ZONE 


335 


CHAP. VIII] 

It is true that more to the north the normal direction to the north-west 
reappears over the whole breadth of the mountains and adjacent islands ; 
nevertheless we perceive that a considerable part of the Dinaric folds 
(Meleda, Curzola, Lissa, Lesina, Brazza, Trau) strikes out much further 
towards the centre of the Adriatic. But just as monte Gar^ano strikes to 
the north-west, completely abandoning the direction of the Apennines, so, 
according to Borcarelli, monte Conero forms near Ancona a Cretaceous 
anticline striking to the north-west 3 . 

Some of the Dalmatian folds mentioned above are unable to reach 
Istria; on the contrary, it is evident that tt large part of the gulf of Venice 
lies inside the Dinarides. 

At the same time,, all the Dinaric ranges situated further north become 
deflected over a great ^breadth of country into that mountainous region 
extending far beyond lake Garda which is formed chiefly of limestone, 
and is deeply influenced by the peri-Adriatic lines (I, p. 236). As they 
bend into it they present towards the west Cretaceous and Tertiary Flysch ; 
towards the east Trias limestone, for the most part with a basement which 
is presumably Palaeozoic. The overthrusts towards the Adriatic, which 
have been mentioned as occurring at Budua and Trau, are characteristic of 
this region also. We have already called attention to their existence at 
Fiume. In the region of the deflexion near Idria we may see, according 
to Kossmat in the mercury mine itself, flakes of Palaeozoic schist thrust 
over the Trias towards the south-west. Here also we see within the Trias 
that occurrence of eruptive rocks and tufts which is so very characteristic 
of the whole Dinaric region 2 . 

The Tonalite zone . The area upon which we are now about to enter 
offers a very remarkable problem to our comparative studies. The Dinar- 
ides, which are moved mainly towards the south and present as a whole 
characters distinctive of the arcs marking the southern boundary of 
Eurasia, here approach the Alps, which are moved mainly towards the 
north, though in this region they are deflected in the direction of the 
Apennines. 

Nature has here prepared a surprise for the geologist. The Dinaric 
region is constantly separated from the Alps by a continuous zone of 
profound dislocation more than 400 kilometers in length , and characterized 
over considerable tracts by homogeneous intrusions of tonalite . 

Reichsanst., 1898, pp. 864-387. For Trau and Bua, see Kerner, op. cifc., 1899, pp. 236-240, 
298-317,329-348. * 

1 Bonarelli, Carta geologica del Monte Conero presso Ancona, Boll. Soc. geol. Ital., 
1895, XIII, p. 2. 

2 F. Kossmat, Ueber die geologischen Verhaltnisse des Bergbaugebietes von Idria, 
Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1899, XLJX, pj* 259-286, maps; ‘Das Gebirge zwischen 
Idria und Tribusa/ Verh. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1900, pp. 65-78, small map. Here also 
the traces of negative movement or of irregular surface appear before the Raibl stage. 



836 jTHE TAURIDES AND THE DIN ABIDES [part iv 

On a map this z&me shows clearly along two lines only, namely in the 
direction of the Judicaria valley and in that of the Gail valley. The 
recognition of the tectonic unity of this great cicatrice has gradually been 
brought about as the result of many admirable investigations, and it would be 
difficult to say* to whom the merit of the synthesis is due. We were already 
able in the first volume of this work (I, p. 246) t$ discuss the tract running 
from the Adamello to the north-north-east, together with the bend near 
Meran, and its prolongations across the Brenner, as made known by Teller ; 
and we followed it from the lake of Idro to the Penser Joch (west of the 
Brenner), a distance of 128 kilometers. At that time it was already possible 
to deduce further from Teller’s work that the line of separation through 
Brunneck extended to Sillian ; this would give a length of 210 kilometers. 
In 1893 Freeh added to this the length of the Gai^ fracture, which amounts 
to 110 kilometers 1 , and the total length thus became 330 kilometers. In 
the same year Lowl published his observations on the tonalite range of the 
Rieser-ferner, and Becke, supported by the observations of Lowl, those of 
Geyer in the Gail valley, and those of Teller in the east, was able to 
demonstrate the unity of the arc from the lake of Idro, through Meran, to 
the Bacher range, i.e. for a total distance of 420 kilometers 2 . This unity 
was then made the subject of further observations, especially by Salomon 3 . 
I ought to add that the masterly descriptions of Teller and Geyer have 
proved of the greatest assistance to me in my attempt to present a general 
idea of this phenomenon 4 . 

The question may be asked whether this great line of dislocation actually 
terminates on the lake of Idro. 

At the south end of the Adamello we note (I, p. 240) the remarkable 
fact that the beds of the Trias are inclined in such a way that their 
youngest members dive beneath the eruptive mass, while the older ones lie 


1 F. Freeh, Die Tribulaungruppe am Brenner in ihrer Bedeutung fiir den Gebirgsbau, 
Festschrift fur F. von Richthofen, 8vo, Berlin, 1893, p. J00, maps. 

2 F. Lowl, Die Tonalitkerne der Rieserferner in Tirol, Peterm. Mitth., 1893, pp. 112— 
116, map; F. Becke, Petrographische Studien am Tonalitder Rieserferner, Tschermak, 
Min.-petrogr. Mitth., 1893, XIII, pp. 379-464, in particular p. 462. 

3 W. Salomon, Ueber Alter, Lagerungsform und Entstehungsart der periadriatischen, 
granitisch-kornigen Massen, Tschermak, Min.-petrogr. Mitth., 1897, XVII, pp. 109-176, 
map. For the Iffinger (apart from older writings) see U. Grubenmann, Ueber den 
Tonalitkern des Iffinger bei Meran, Vierteljahrschr. d. Naturf. Ges. Zurich, 1896, XLIb, 
pp. 340-353 ; Ueber einige Ganggesteine aus der Gefolgschaft der Tonalite, Tschermak, 
Min.-petr. Mitth., 1897, new series, XVI, pp. 185-196; E. Kiinzli, pie Contactzone um 
die Ulten-Iffingermasse bei Meran, op. cit., 1899, XVIII, pp. 412-442, map. Kiinzli sees 
contact phenomena only on the north-west border, and conjectures the presence on the 
south and south-west border of a posterior subsidence. 

4 In particular F. Teller, Erlauterijngen zur geologischen Karte, Blatt 20, XI, 
Eisenkappel und Kanker, und 20, XII, Prs&sberg an der Sann, Vienna, k. k. geol. 
Reichanst., 1898. 



337 


chap, viii] VAL TROMPIA 

more towards the exterior- In addition, Salomon has fliscovered, deep in 
the eruptive mass, fragments of Trias limestone *. Further to the south, 
towards Bagolino, Permian sandstone, quartz porphyry, and, finally, older 
phyllites, crop out from under the Trias and are continued to the west 
towards the upper val Trompia. At this point we have the very important 
observations of Bittner. It appears* from these that the Judicarian fault 
actually descends in a straight line to the lake of Idro ; its direction is 
south-south-west. But to the east of the fault we see some fractures which 
cut obliquely through the Trias mountains of the Etsch gulf (monte Gaver- 
dina) and follow a direction more to the south-west. One of these fractures 
comes down through the val Ampola, reaches the Judicarian line near 
Storo, and is continued south of the Adamello into the upper val Trompia 2 . 

Bittner, not without ^ason, describes the western part of this fracture 
as the tectonic equivalent of the J udicarian fault. It looks, however, so like 
a continuation of the fault of the val Sugana that we might imagine the 
latter had again come to life. South of the upper val Trompia other 
flexures, in part overturned, succeed, as they do south of the val Sugana. 

Further to the west, in the val Camonica, the Trias extends more to the 
north, but in the absence of data I can form no opinion as to the structure 
along its northern boundary. Generally speaking, there can be no doubt 
that the Mesozoic zone which spreads out along the southern border of the 
mountains as far as lake Orta is a direct continuation of that of the 
Etsch gulf and of southern Tyrol. A series of longer and shorter ridges of 
granite, granitite, and quartz diorite may be followed far to the west and 
south-west, and even into the neighbourhood of Biella. Whether these 
should be regarded as a continuation of the marginal cicatrice can hardly be 
determined with certainty at present, although their position is similar 3 . 
Towards the south they are accompanied by a zone of phyllites and gneiss- 
like schist ; these are followed by porphyry, porphyry tuff, breccia, and 
red sandstone, and these again by the Trias, which shows a tabular or block- 

• 

1 W. Salomon, Neue Beobachtungen aus den Gebieten des Adamello und des Sud- 
Gotthard, Sitzb. k. preuss. Akad. Wiss., Berlin, 1899, pp. 27-41, in particular p. 36. 

2 A. Bittner, Ueber die geologischen Aufnahmen in Judicarien und Val Sabbia, 
Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1881, XXXI, pp. 219-370, map, in particular pp. 220, 233, 
360 et seq. ; also 1883, XXXIII, p. 426. The sudden break in val Trompia is figured in 
my memoir, Ueber das Rothliegende im Val Trompia, Sitzb. k.. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1869, 
LIX, pi. I. 

8 A granite range of this kind comes down to lake Como near the frontier at Bellano ; 
E. W. Benecke, Erl&gterungen zu einer geologischen Karte des Grigna-Gebirges, Neu. 
Jahrb. Min., 1884, 3. Beilage-Band, pp. 171-251, map and description of the granite %y 
Cohen; T. Taramelli, Osservazioni stratigrafiche nella Valsassina e nella Valtorta, 
Rendic. R. 1st. lom]t)., 1892, ser. II, XXV, pp. 563-578. There are numerous observations 
referring to this region by Spreafico, Parona, Cjjilderini, Taramelli, Porro, Artini, and 
Riva in the last volumes of the Rend. R. i*st. lomb. Milano and in the Atti Soc. ital. 
Milano. 


80LLAS III 


Z 



388 :THE TAURIDES AND THE DIN ABIDES [partiv 

like bedding like tftat in the eastern limestone range, and is traversed by 
flexures, folds, and faults. 

From the west to this point we already see on the south border of lake 
Maggiore, then at Mendrisio, Lecco, and the lake of Iseo, the broad masses 
of Trias and Jurassic beds which are also well regarded as the beginning of 
the so-called ‘southern limestone zone of the Alps.’ In the Alta Brianza, 
says C. Schmidt, the structure is ‘ the result of a tangential thrust directed 
from north to south and a simultaneous subsidence of the southern parts of 
the mountains ’ \ The same structure prevails in the Grigna range, and 
further to the east the forward march of the Etsch lines makes itself 
evident as far as lake Garda. But on the other side of the Etsch lines 
Schmidt’s words hold true for the whole peri- Adriatic region. 

West of Biella the structure is very different. Here extremely close 
and intense folding prevails everywhere. Many years of arduous labour 
were accomplished, before the Mesozoic age of the Pietre Verde zone was 
established by the happy discoveries of Franchi. We must already assign to 
the Alps the great amphibolite band which comes from the north side of the 
lago Maggiore and reaches the plain near Ivrea. The contrast between the 
gentle lie of the Trias on the upper Italian lakes and the close folding which 
begins in the neighbourhood of Biella is precisely the same as that observed 
near Brunneck between the south and north of the Puster valley. 

The downthrow of the Trias on the Sesia has been described by Rasetti 1 2 . 

Granitite runs from monte Orfano and the well-known quarries of Baveno 
on the lago Maggiore, towards the south-west ; through Omegna on the 
north side of lake Orta, and through Cellio and Valduggia, it is cut through 
by the Sesia above Borgosesia, and is prolonged still further across monte 
Tovo in the direction of Biella. The ancient schists do not appear west of 
the Sesia. The broad zone of porphyry and red sandstone follows there 
immediately upon the granitite. Upon the porphyry and sandstone lies, 
east of the Sesia, the mass of monte Fenera (899 meters), let down in places 
along fractures into this foundation, but as a whole inclined towards the 
north-east. At the base lies dark limestone ; upon this, dolomite with 
Diplopores, 300 meters thick, and above it a platform of Lias. The dolo- 
mite may be seen much lower down, towards Grignasco (348 meters), in a 
little isolated patch near the south border of the porphyry zone. Even 

1 C. Schmidt, Zur Geologie der Alta-Brianza, Compt. rend, du Congres intemat., 
1894, pp. 503-518 ; E. W. Benecke, Erl§,uterungen zu einer geologiscben Karte des 
Gsrigna-Gebirges, Neu. Jahrb. Min., 1884, 3. Beil.-Band, pp. 171-251 ; also E. Philippi, 
Beitrag zur Kenntniss des Aufbaues der Schichtenfolge im GrignarGebirge, Zeitschr. 
deutsch. geol. Ges., 1895, pp. 665-734, map, and Geologie der Umgegend von Lecco und 
dee Resegone-Massiv’s, op. cit., 1897, pp. 318-367, map; H. Becker, Lecco und die 
Grigna, op. cit. 1897, pp, 690-692 et pfassim* 

2 G. E. Rasetti, II Monte Fenera di Valsesia, Boll. Soc. geol. ital., 1897, XVI, pp. 141" 

175, map. t 



<3hakviii] NORTHERN AND SOUTHERN TRIAS 889 

West of the Sesia, south-west of Borgosesia, a simila# little fragment of 
dolomite is wedged in between granitite and the porphyry zone. 

This is the western end of the Trias of the Lake region. Let us now 
turn our attention once more to Tyrol. 

As early as the year 1855 Emmrich recognized the fact that the lime- 
stone mountains of Liens* present diore resemblance to the distant north 
Alps than to the closely adjacent mountains of south Tyrol 1 . This has 
been confirmed by later researches. The marine Bellerophon limestone 
which in the south occurs above the Groden sandstone, is absent north of 
the boundary line which extends from the *Brenner to the Bacher. In the 
north we see the Bleyberg beds with Pinacoceras fioridum , in the south 
the Raibl beds witji* Myophoria Refer steini ; and although, even quite 
recently, some traces of*«loser approximation between the two types of 
development have been found, such as the occurrence in the southern 
mountains of the genus Tropites, previously known only in the north, and 
the discovery of the Oolitic rocks of the north in the southern area of Cadore, 
yet there still remain a number of distinctive characters which separate 
the stratigraphical series on the two sides of the great zone of dislocation 2 . 

That part of the zone of dislocation which extends between the Brenner 
and the Bacher, over a distance of about 300 kilometers , is not only 
characterized by long fractures and tonalite intrusions , brut cdso by the 
fact that it forms the boundary of the facies fon' several members of 
the Permian and the Trias . 

In contrast to the west, where the Adamello, Iffinger, and also the 
Rieser-Femer form considerable heights, the boundary in the east is fre- 
quently indicated by a valley or furrow. Over the valley rise up on the 
north and south the white walls of the Trias. They reveal no signs of 
a neighbouring shore. The tonalite rocks between them are younger than 
the Trias. Nevertheless certain members of the Trias present one facies in 
the north and another, very different, in the south. 

, v The southern facies persists towards the west and south-west to the 
Judicarian line, and beyond this in the south away through the region of 
thfc Lakes. In this western tract it is impossible to make any comparison 
with the northern facies. The Cretaceous formation already exhibits, in 
the inset mountains of the Etsch for example, the southern development 
in the form of a well-stratified white limestone, so completely different 
from the transgressive patches of the Gosau limestone which stretch away 
• 

* H. Emmrich, Nofciz fiber den Alpenkalk der Lienzer-Gegend, Jahrb. k. k. geol. 
Beichsanst., 1855, VI, p. 449. 

2 G. Geyer, Uber die Verbreitung und stratigraphische Stellung der scbwarzen 
Tropites-Kalke bei S. Stefano in Cadore, Verb. k» k. geol. Reich sanst., 1900, pp. 335-370. 
On the existence in the Raibl section of a facies recalling the Bleyberg beds, cf. Jahrb . 
k. k. geol. Beichsanst., 1867, Xyil, p. 580. 


7 . 2 



340 JTHE TAURIDEJS AND THE DIN ABIDES [part iv 

from here to Carintflaa. Here, where we are not immediately concerned with 
morphological classification but with the ground-plan of the edifice, we, 
must separate from the Alps all the mountainous country lying east of 
the Seda, east of the Judicaria , and south of the Gail , and assign it to 
the Dinarides. 

This mountain land presents the following structure. 

As the Dinaric ranges strike in from the south-east they are bounded 
on the north-east by the north-westerly continuation of those ancient 
ranges which run from the Rhodope mass through western Servia, and lift 
their last peak in the neighbourhood of Agram. The breadth of the space 
which the Dinaric ranges occupy between Agram and the sea-coast amounts 
to 120 kilometers, and far more if Istria and the* islands are included. 
About 70 kilometers north-west of Agram lie^fihe south border of the 
Racher range, which stands like a corner pillar on the edge of the Alps x . 
This broad opening between the heights of Agram and the Bacher moun- 
tains lies as it were in the shadow of the deflected Dinarides, as they swerve 
to the north-west. But through this opening there enter from the west, 
and as it were from the rear of the Dinaric chains, a number of long folds 
having the almost easterly direction of the great zone of dislocation; they 
proceed far out into the plain of south Styria and Croatia, and die away 
gradually beneath the Tertiary deposits. On the Save these ranges, accord- 
ing to Teller, are not folds except in small part, but steeply upturned strips 
which are bounded and separated by fractures. The .same direction may 
also be plainly recognized within the higher mountains towards the west, 
nearly as far as Krainburg; and it appears as though the great lowland 
north-west of Laibach must lie close to the contact of the Dinaric lines and 
the lines of the Save. 

The Dinaric strike in the peri- Adriatic region now turns from the 
north-west to the west, and finally to the south-west, while on the north 
border of the val Sugana fracture there rises up the horst of the cima d’Asta \ 
North of this, the mighty porphyry mass extends to the border at Meran 
(Fig. 29, I, p. 245). In the Etsch gulf, however, between the western edge 
of the porphyry and the Judicarian line, arises a series of flexures or knee- 

1 C. Doelter, Bericht iiber die geologische Durchforschung des Bachergebirges, 
Mitth. nat. Yer. Steiermark, 1892, pp. 2-23 ; F. Teller, Uber den sogenannten Granit 
des Bachergebirges, Verh. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1893, pp. 169-182; also Dreger, op. 
cit., 1894, pp. 247-250 and 1896, pp. 84-90 ; Teller and Dreger, bl. 20, XIII, Pragerhof ; 
Pontoni, Tschennak, Min. petr. Mitth., 1895, neue Folge, XIY, pp. 360-374; Ippen, 
Mitth. nat. Yer. Steiermark, 1892. * 

* I still hold with Kraflt that a greater age must be assigned to the granite of the 
Cima d’Asta. A. von K rafft, Das Alter des Granites der Cima d’Asta, Verb. k. k. geol* 
Reichsanst., 1898, pp. 184-189. Salomon regards it as much more recent, Periadriatrische 
Massen, p. 194 et seq., and Ueber das Atyer des Asta-Granites, Verb. k. k. geol. 
Reichsanst., 1898, pp. 327-332 ; the ancient schists of the Asta are discussed by Vacek, 
op. cit., 1896, p. 459 et seq. « 



THE PUSTERTHAL 


341 


CHAP. VHl] 

like folds overthrust to the east-south-east which runjdown parallel with 
the Judicarian line to lake Garda, and then form monte Baldo beyond the 
lake, diverge fan-like from one another towards Verona, and terminate on 
the fault of Schio (I, p. 253). In the north they lie in the Trias, towards 
the south they sink down into the Cretaceous — at least those # lying towards 
the east — and they die ou^ in the Tertiary ranges of Verona and Vicenza. 

These Etsch-lines present a certain resemblance to those of the Save, 
Both proceed with an independent and divergent direction, like rays, from 
the interior of the mountains. Both lose in intensity as they advance, and 
eventually vanish. Both are incompletely separated from the main region 
of the peri- Adriatic lines, the one by the cima d’Asta and the other by the 
heights of Agram. Finally both are influenced in their strike more by the 
Corresponding direction <;^ the great zone of dislocation than by the Dinaric, 
that is in this region, the peri- Adriatic direction. 

Both these systems, lying at the two extremities of the peri- Adriatic 
region, appear to be secondary effects of yielding which, as it were, issue 
through side gates from the region in which the greater dynamic activities 
have play h 

In the middle of the peri-Adriatic region, as far as its northern border, 
we meet with nothing that would correspond to the folds of the Etsch or of 
the Save. At Brunneck, as already pointed out, we are presented with the 
same contrast in the bedding as that which appears east and west of Biella. 
Here the extremes are brought to within a few kilometers of one another. 
The crushed folds of Trias on the Penser Joch (I, p. 247) lie directly north 
of the tonalite band which strikes from Meran towards the Brenner road. 
Similar crushed folds of Trias also appear east of the Brenner ; Teller has 
described one of these at Inner- Villgratten, and a second crops out at 
Brunneck. This stretches north of Toblach as a series of white ‘klippen* 
towards the east-south-east or almost due east. When from the heights 
above Toblach we look southwards across the Pusterthal on to the summits 
of the Croda di Antruilles? monte Cristallo and the Zwolfer Kofel rising 
boldly up from their broad foundations, we recognize at once the greatness 
of the sudden contrast. The Pusterthal lying at our feet marks the boun- 
dary between the Dinaric and the Alpine regions. 

1 The interest connected with a knowledge of the free ends has already been referred 
to, Chapter VII, p. 308, footnote. 4 Si nous considerons alors la surface, comprimee 
ainsi peu a peu entre des machoires a contours irreguliers, cette surface ne se plissera 
pas partout en meme temps. Les premieres rides se formeront tout d’abord dans les 
regions ou la compression sera plus forte. Ces rides s’etendront ensuite par un effet 
Evident, de continuity, des deux cdttfs du centre de plissement/ Zurcher, 4 Sur les lois de 
la formation des plissements de l’ecorce terrestre,* Feuille des jeunes Naturalistes, Paris, 
l 6r Sept. 1891, p. 2 ; also i Note sur la structure df la region de Castellane, 1 Bull. Serv. 
Carte g4ol. France, 1895, VII, p. 325 et se$» The example chosen is certainly on a small 
scale, but it would be equally true on the grandest, even for the lateral prolongation of 
the Kuen-luen. 



342 THE TAURIDES AND THE DIN ABIDES [partiv 

The crushed fol<$ above Toblach belongs to the Alps ; the array of white 
peaks in the south shows the broad, open, tabular bedding, and, at the 
same time, the southern facies of the Dinaric Trias. This is the edge of the 
peri- Adriatic caldron (I, p. 263). 

But, a3 Teller has shown, the compressed band of Trias ‘Klippen’ 
near Brunneck and Toblach is the same as that^ which opens towards the 
east, passing thus, probably along with the adjoined Trias range of Inner- 
Villgratten, into the mountains of Lienz , which form the western end of 
the Gailthal Alps. The surveys of Geyer have not only confirmed this 
hypothesis, but have given us $t the same time so exact a picture of this 
closely compressed and longitudinally fractured range that we are here able 
to recognize more clearly than anywhere else in the , eastern Alps the rela- 
tion of the ‘root-like’ bands to the continuous Trias’ masses. It may be 
that as a rule these ‘ roots ’ are, as in Switzerland, the crushed-in ends of 
synclines, but the fact that above Laas a band of Trias limestone, 10 kilo- 
meters long and only 400 to 500 meters broad, is split off along longitudinal 
faults of this kind and let down into the ancient schists of the foundation, 
shows that fault troughs ar3 formed also 1 . 

With this structure the Gailthal Alps , formed of Trias and Jurassic 
rocks, extend between the Gail and the Drau as far as Villach ; they then 
disappear for a very short distance beneath the floor of the valley and 
again crop out to the east of the mouth of the Gail. Their direction, origin- 
ally almost east and west, has here turned a little more to east-south- 
east ; later on it again becomes east and west. 

These resurgent limestone mountains are the northern Karawanken ; 
Teller shows that they are characterized by their northern facies and by 
long strike-faults, precisely like the Gailthal Alps 2 . They run nearly to 
Windischgratz, in south Styria. Here they break off against a basin filled 
with Oligocene deposits. But beyond the basin, near Ober-Dollitsch, is a 
great segment which clings to the south-west side of the Bacher range and 
is separated from the Archaean rocks by a shaij) fracture ; this still belongs 
to the Karawanken 3 . (Fig. 17.) 

From Brunneck onwards to the fracture between the segment of Ober- 
Dollitsch and the Bacher range, the length of this Alpine limestone chain 
amounts to 260 kilometers. The southern border of the Gailthal Alps and 
the north Karawanken is the southern border of the Alpine Trias . 

We have already seen that the boundary between the Alps and the 

1 G. Geyer, Em Beitrag zur Stratigraphie und Tektonik der Gailthaler Alpen in 
Karnten, Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1897, XLYII, pp. 295-863, in particular pp. 361, 
363 ; Ueber die geologischen Aufnahmen im Westabschnitt der Kamischen Alpen, 
Verb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1899, pg. 89-117 et passim. 

2 Cf. for example, Teller, Erlautemcgen zur geologischen Karte . . . Eisenkappel 
und Ranker, p. 78. 

8 Teller, Erl&uterungen zur geologischen Karte . . . Prassberg, passim. 



THE RIESERFEKNER 


3£3 


CHAP. VIII] 

Dinaric range lies near Toblach, in the Pusterthal. Ijpther at this point 
nor anywhere in the Gail valley is the boundary marked by intrusions of 
tonalite. The rectilinear continuation of the zone is represented in the Gail 
valley by a broad strip of ancient rocks and by the difference in the lie 
and the facies of the limestone mountains to the north and to the south 
of this band. The intrusion has gloved away from the boundary for a 
distance of about 9 kilometers towards the north ; it forms a long band of 
tonalite running east and west in the midst of the Alpine region . 

We have already had occasion to mention the older works of Teller and 
the later ones of Lowl and Becke on thisjbract of country. According to 
Lowl the tonalite band consists of two masses each 4 kilometers in breadth ; 
these are the core of the Reinwald and the core of the Rieser (Hoch Gall 
3,440 meters) ; they ’are^nited by a narrow neck. Patches of gneiss rest 
upon them, like the fragments of roof overlying a laccolite. The Zinsnock 
forms a small apophysis on the south. The Rieser core is produced into a 
long and very narrow range which extends a long way to the east. 

The total length from the western slope of the Reinwald core, at Taufers, 
to the most easterly extremity of the Rieser core, in the Defereggen valley, 
amounts to 37 kilometers. Here the tonalite vanishes, apparently owing to 
overthrusting from the south ; but some traces still persist much further to 
the east. Teller found such traces in the Iselthal and the Canaval, and at a 
yet greater distance, though still in the same direction, on the Graa-Kofel, 
in the Kreuzeck group l . This would give, measuring from Taufers to this 
point, a length of about 85 kilometers. It is worthy of remark that 
eruptive rocks of precisely similar character again appear in the extreme 
east. They ascend as far as the Aptychus shales, which are probably 
Jurassic, and also penetrate the Archaean rocks of the Bacher range 
itself 2 . 

Future discoveries will probably reveal the existence within the Alpine 
region of a second intrusive zone of tonalite, extending from Taufers 
eastwards to the Bacher mountains, 'parallel with the principal cicatrice. 

Let us return, however, to the main dislocation, i.e. to the Dinaric 
boundary. 

Teller's works give us a very clear idea of the manner in which the 
eruptive rocks again crop out in the eastern parts of the boundary 3 . 

1 F. Teller, Ueber porphyritische Eruptivgesteine aus den Tiroler Central-Alpen, 
Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1886, XXXVI, pp. 715-746, in particular p. 736 ; 
J. R. Canaval, Die Erzvorkomnmisse von Plattach und auf der Assam- Aim bei Greifen- 
burg in K&mten ui*l die sie begleitenden Porphyrgesteine, op. cit., 1895, XLV, pp. 103- 
124, in particular p. 104. 

2 E. Hussak, Ueber das Auftreten porphyritischer Eruptivgesteine im Bachergebirge , 
Verb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1848, p. 247 ; Baron von Foullon, Ueber Quarzglimmer- 
dioritporphyrite aus dem ostlicken R&rnten op. cit., 1889, pp. 90-96; F. Teller, 
Erl&uterungen zur geologischen Karte . /. Prassberg, p. 154. 

* Among recent works we may mention : E. Reyer, Reiseskizzen iiber das Smekrouz- 



’ 344 . THE TAURIDES AND THE DINAMDES {past rv 

The precise locality at which these rocks first emerge can hardly be 
determined, for in this region also it is masked by overthrusting directed 
to the north. First comes a narrow band of granitite striking nearly 
east and west ; this is joined on the south side by a band of schist greatly 
altered along^the zone of contact (Sf, Fig. 16) ; still further to the east, 
this is joined southwards by a bapd of tonalite often converted by 
subsequent pressure into tonalite gneiss. These three bands, of which 
the third becomes later the most important, now run, closely united, in 
a straight line first to the east and then to the east-south-east. Their 
greatest collective breadth is t 3-5 kilometers, and the total length, 
including an exposure near the foot of the Bacher range, is 58 kilometers. 
Towards the eastern extremity we find tonalite orjly. The granitite is 

Die Petzen SnireVoutr Kamen.Vrh Raducha. 



Fig. 16. View from the Uschova Saddle into the Miss-Valley. 


the later intrusion, and forms a second injection in the same zone of 
dislocation. The visible breadth, particularly in the west, is determined 
by the overthrusting. 

The total length of the fine from the Judicaria to the Bacher range 
amounts to 420 kilometers. Of this distance a length of about 193 kilo- 
meters is marked by intrusions of tonalite. These are as follows (1) That 
of the Adamello (43 kilometers), very broad, slightly displaced towards the 
west and north with regard to the line of disturbance in the east (Judicarian 
line), and that in the south (line of the val Trompia), but still situated 
within the Dinaric facies of the Trias, the boundary of which is here 
unknown, though it certainly lies west of the Judicarian line. (2) The 
band of the Ijjinger and the Brenner road (about 55 kilometers). This, it 

c 

Gebirge, Verh. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1878, pp. 296-298; H. von Graber, Die Auf- 
bruchflzone von Eruptiv- und Schiefergesteinen in Sud-K&rnten, Jahrb. k. k. geol 
Reichsanst., 1897, XLVII, pp. 225-29£, and the numerous publications of Teller on this 
subject, in particular Erl&uterungen zur geoiogischen Karte . . , Eisenkappel, p. 120 
et jseq., and Prassberg, pp. 18 and 136. 



THE CARNIC MOUNTAINS 


345 


CHAP. YIIl] 

would seem, faithfully follows throughout its course thfj dislocation and the 
boundary of the facies ; on the Iffinger it increases somewhat in breadth, 
but is narrow elsewhere. (3) That of the Rieser-Ferner (37 kilometers) 
is displaced about 9 kilometers to the north. With respect to the line of 
dislocation, it lies entirely in the Alpine region, twice increases in the west 
to a breadth of 4 kilometers (Reinwald core and Rieser core), but is very 
narrow towards the east ; if we include the isolated outcrops to the east, then 
its length up to the Kreuzeck group reaches 85 kilometers ; but these, how- 
ever; may belong to a parallel band lying more to the north. (4) The eastern 
tract , including the last outcrop near the facher range (58 kilometers) ; at 
first very narrow, it presents in the eastern moiety an almost uniform 
breadth of 1,800 meters ; accompanied on the north side for a great part 
of its length by a p'arajj^l and more recent intrusion of granitite, which is 
very narrow, but, east of Koprein, expands in places to a breadth of 
2 kilometers. 

This intrusion, extending in an almost circular arc for a distance of 
over 400 kilometers, must be regarded, by reason both of its litho- 
logical uniformity and its tectonic position, as a single phenomenon, 
of the same age throughout. Consanguinity, in Idding’s sense of the 
term, hardly comes in question, so uniform is the rock; its conversion 
into tonalite gneiss is due to subsequent movement. The later granitite of 
the east is doubtless derived from the same magma lake. In the east andesite 
also occurs, which is more recent than either the tonalite or the granitite. 

Many kinds of eruptive rocks have made their appearance within this 
region since the Palaeozoic diabases. For these a reference to Brogger’s 
observations may perhaps suffice b 

The Carnic mountains . In the neighbourhood of Sillian, in Tirol, the 
western end of a mountain range becomes visible which, although situated 
within the marginal cicatrice, is yet independent of the Dinarides, and, 
like the cima d’Asta, older than these mountains. A glance at the map 
in vol. I, p. 245, shows a broad region of ancient phy llites between the 
northern edge of the porphyry and the infolded Trias band near Brunneck, 
which comes from the mountains of Lienz. It is very doubtful whether 
these are the same phyllites as those which occur further east. Above 
Sillian, Geyer encountered on the north side of the valley, not far from 
the wedged-in Trias band, the above-mentioned western end of a Palaeozoic 
zone which soon attains a considerable breadth, extends as the Carnic 
mountains along the south side of the Gail valley for 100 kilometers, and 
is continued still # further to the east. South of the Rienz, above Sillian, 
this Palaeozoic series rests on quartzose phyllites, which, unlike the other 
rocks, strike to the south-east (Helmspitz* 2,450 meters, Eisenreich, 2,664 

1 W. C. Brtfgger, Die Eraptivgesteine des kristiania-Gebietes, 8vo, Kristiania, II, 
1895, p. 154 et seq. 



dm THE TAUBIDES AND THE DIN ABIDES [partiv 

meters, &c.), reach pomelico, and do not finally disappear till they have 
proceeded almost as far as Forni Avoltri. Towards the north, in the Gail 
valley, a zone of mica-schist and gneiss lies in front of the Palaeozoic zone. 
This is followed towards the north by the northern Alpine Trias of the 
Gailthal Alps/’ 

From Geyer’s works we obtain the r follo wing 1 : — 

In the south, at Sexten, the Dinaric Trias lies fairly horizontal. The 
quartzose phyllites (Helmspitz, &c., and Comelico) and the Palaeozoic strata 
of the Carnic mountains belong to one and the same tectonic unit, and 
form in repeated scales a mighty range overthrust to the north. The 
mica-schists and gneisses in the Gail valley form an arch similarly over- 
thrust, in places, towards the north. The Alpine Trias of the Gailthal 
Alps is also moved towards the north. , a ' 

Further east, however, the conditions alter ; "the quartzose phyllites of 
Comelico have disappeared; Fusulina limestone of the upper Carboniferous 
rests unconformably upon the abraded Carnic folds. 

The Carnic mountains are a chain , alien alike to the Dinarides and 
the Alps, with an independent strike , and of Variscan age ; they are folded 
toivards the north, and rise from beneath the Dinarides along the southern 
edge of the zone of dislocation . 

These ancient mountains have been made the subject of many admirable 
studies; Stache discovered the first graptolites ; Freeh has made many 
valuable researches, especially with regard to the Devonian ; Taramelli and 
his pupils have investigated the southern slope; and Geyer has made 
a detailed survey of all that region which is situated in Austria 2 . The 
evidence so far afforded by fossils has enabled us to recognize in this range 
traces of the lower Silurian, both stages of the upper Silurian of Bohemia, 
various stages of the Devonian (including the Clymenia limestone) ; and, at 
one locality further east (Notsch, near Bleiberg), the lower Carboniferous 
with Productus giganteus. Then follows the discordant upper Carboni- 
ferous 3 . 

< 

1 G. Geyer, Ueber die geologischen Aufnahmen im westlichen Abschnitt der Ear- 
nischen Alpen, Verh. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1899, pp. 89-117 ; Zur Kenntniss der 
Triasbildungen von Sappada, S. Stefano und Auronzo in Cadore ; op. cit., 1900, 
pp. 119-141. 

2 From the abundant literature on this subject I must content myself with mentioning 

the following: F. Freeh, Die Karnischen Alpen, 8vo, Halle, 1892-1894, map; T. Tara- 
melli, Osservazioni stratigrafiche sui terreni palaeozoici nel versante italiano delle Alpe 
Carniche, Atti R. Acc. Lincei, Rendic., 1895, pp. 185-193 ; G^ Geyer, Ueber die 
geologischen Verhaltnisse im Pontafeler Abschnitt der Karnischen Alpen, Jahrb. k. k. 
geol. Reichsanst., 1896, XXVI, pp. 127-234, map ; Ueber neue Funde von Graptolithen 
in den Siidalpen, Verh. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1897, pp. 237-252. On the relation to 
the eastern Alps in general : C. Dienbr, prundlinien der Struetur der Ostalpen, Peterm. 
Mitth., 1899, pp. 204-214. * • 

3 For the stratified succession : G. Stache, Die palaeozoischen Gebiete der Ostalpeti, 



347 


chap, viii] THE CARNIC MOUNTAINS 

In the extreme west, the lowest horizon of the palaeozoic series, of 
great thickness, and characterized by diabase 1 and green schists, forms the . 
northern slopes and extends far over on to the south side, while the 
quartzose phyllites disappear. The structure has been described by Geyer.^ 
The upper Silurian lies in synclines, opening towards the north. 

Somewhat further eas£ the Devonian limestone also becomes visible in 
the synclines and forms the peaks of Paralba (2,692 meters) and Konigs- 
wand (2,684 meters). The further we proceed to the east the deeper 
sinks the tectonic axis of the chain, for the lower members decrease, and 
the Devonian increases. Finally the whple of this older, closely folded 
structure dips beneath the horizontal transgression of the upper Carboni- 
ferous, upon which lies the Permian, and here and there, as on the 
Gartnerkogel, near tler^agor, an isolated patch of the southern Trias 2 . 

We may say that the whole range sinks towards the east, while to- 
wards the west it lifts itself out in the form of a wedge ; and it so happens 
that this uplift occurs close to the place at which the Trias mountains of 
Lienz rise towards the west, leaving behind only the ‘ roots ’ of Brunneck 
and Inner- Villgratten. 

Further to the east, from near Mauthen, in the middle of the Gailthal, 
to Hermagor and beyond, the following modification occurs. The lowest 
members, diabases and green schists, are no longer visible except on the 
north slope ; but while the range is folded from south to north, these lowest 
members plunge perpendicularly down towards the foot of this slope, or 
incline towards the north, so that the totality forms an arch overturned 
towards the north, and sharply cut off on that side from the mica-schists 
of the Gailthal. 

Yet farther to the east, a long and narrow zone of green schists and 
diabase makes its appearance to the north of the granitite band, between this 
band and the Alpine Trias of the north Karawanken. It should probably 
be correlated with the lowest part of the Palaeozoic series ; and there may 
be some reason for thinking that the schists with diabase, visible in the 
Missthal, somewhat further north, and in the midst of the Alpine region, 
should also be referred to the same horizon 3 . 

I, Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1873, XXIII, pp. 175-248, and II, op. cit., 1874, XXIV, 
pp. 135-274, map ; the members of the Silurian are given by Stache in Verb. k. k. geol. 
Reichsanst., 1890, pp. 121-126 ; also Freeh, Ueber das Devon der Ostalpen, I, Zeitschr. 
deiitsch. geol. Ges., 1887, p. 659, and II, op. cit., 1891, pp. 672-687, also op. cit., 1896, 
pp. 199-201 et passim. For Carboniferous and Permian see the many works quoted in 
the following notes. • 

1 Enstatite-porphyrite at one locality of the south side, according to Rosiwal, Verh. 
k. k, geol. Reichsanst., 1895, p. 436 ; Milch mentions quartziferous porphyrites rich in 
felspar (in Freeh, Karnischen Alpen, p. 185). 

2 In particular Geyer, Pontafeler Abschnitt, # pp. 127, 236 et seq., and Geologischen 

Aufnahmen, 1899, p. 90. * 

* F. Teller, ESrl&uterungen zur geologischen Karte der ostlichen Ausl&ufer der 
Karnischen und Julischen Alp%n, publ. in k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1890, maps, p. 46. 



348 THE TAURIDES AND THE DINARIDES [partiv 

But in the ea^b the typical outcrops of fossiliferous Silurian and 
Devonian are completely separated from the southern boundary of the 
Alps and the tonalite zone. They form, inside the Dinarides, a long and 
independent chain of hills which is nearly parallel to the tonalite line, but 
separated frofli it by the rocky ranges of Koschuta and TJschova, which 
belong to the Dinaric Trias. This Palaeozoic f chain (Steuneck-Seeberg- 
Wistra-Sattel) is formed of folds which are either normal or overturned to 
the north, and is surrounded, precisely as in the west, by unconformable 
upper Carboniferous. As a rule it is regarded as forming a part of the 
east Karawanken ; but under this name are included, from north to south, 
first an Alpine Trias range (Obir, Petzen, &c.), next the granitite and 
tonalite zone (Kappel, Schwarzenbach), then a Diparic limestone range 
(Koschuta, TJschova), and finally, this Palaeozoic ^phain with its border of 
upper Carboniferous. The merit of distinguishing the various members of 
the Karawanken must be ascribed to F. Teller \ 

The tract of country in which the presence of a folded Palaeozoic zone of 
greater age than the upper Carboniferous is known extends from Sillian 
to the Wistra Sattel, a distance of nearly 200 kilometers. It lies, with the 
exception of the doubtful outcrops in the Missthal, entirely within the Dinaric 
region, or in the region of the eruptive chain on its northern boundary. It 
is possible that the highly altered schists between the tonalite and granitite 
(at the bottom of the valley in Fig. 16) also belong to it. 

Transgression of the Dinaric sheet. In the Tsin-ling-shan, as in the 
oases of Kansu, and as in the whole region of the Variscan and Armorican 
arcs, we discover a profound unconformity, which is assigned sometimes to 
the upper Carboniferous, sometimes to the Permian. In the Yarkand arc 
an upper Carboniferous discordance presents itself in the Tekelik-tag, and 
further to the south, on the river Gussass, the unconformity has been 
placed in the Permian period as being probably contemporaneous with the 
discordance of the Productus shales which occurs over a considerable part 
of the Himalaya. We are now afforded a welcome opportunity of examining 
more closely into the nature of such a discordance. 

The first matter to determine is the succession of the beds in the 
younger series. 

We follow Freeh in the view that the stage of Spirifer mosquensis, 
which marks the beginning of the unconformity in Asturias, has not yet 
been found in the Carnic mountains at the base either of this younger 
series, or any higher horizon ; and again, following Fr^ch, we designate 
the lowest visible member as (A.) Auernigg-beds , or zone of Spirifer 
supramosquensis , corresponding to the Gshel stage in Russia, and here 
alternating with beds which c contain the flora of Ottweil (Pecopteris 

1 F. Teller, Die silurischen Ablagerungen der Ost-Karawanken, Verh. k. k. geol. 
Reichsanst., 1886, pp. 267-280 et passim. # 



cHAP.vm] THE DINARIC SHEET 849 

arborescens, &C. 1 ). They are followed here by (B.) bjack limestone with 
Schwagerina princeps. 

The third member is the light-coloured Fusulina limestone, frequently 
rose-red, in which, near Neumarktl in Carinthia, Schellwien discovered 
a rich fauna allied to that of Sosio in Sicily (Agathiceras, Scllcehinella, and 
others). We term this, wi|h Schellwien and Geyer, (C.)the Trogkofd beds 2 . 
These are followed (as may be gathered from Geyer’s observations on the 
succession), by that variegated quartz conglomerate (D.) the Verrucano , 
with an irregular distribution 3 . Above the Verrucano, and perhaps insepar- 
able from it, lies (E.) the red Groden sandstone. , often containing pebbles 
of porphyry, Permian plants (Walchia), and, in its upper layers, gypsum. 
This is covered by (F*) the Bellerophon limestone ; its fauna, first made 
known by Stache, is vsr^ peculiar ( Nautilus «, Spirifer vultur, and 
others) ; Diener has discovered Ammonites (Paralecanites) in it, but up to 
the present it has been found impossible to parallel it with other faunas 4 . 
It is succeeded by (G.) the Werfen shales , which doubtless belong to the 
Scythian division of the lower Trias. Above this lies the whole of that 
mighty series of marine Mesozoic strata which form the greater part of 
the Dinarides. 

A. The Auernigg beds creep over the abraded Carnic surface, and the 
intercalated plant-bearing beds reveal the proximity of the shore. But 
Geyer has found that the superposition is not absolutely regular. On the 
contrary, it appears that local overlap probably occurs in places, for the 
upper beds of this stage come into immediate contact with the Devonian 
limestone, and in such a manner as to suggest that resistent masses of this 
rock, which had survived denudation, rose at this time above the ancient 
surface 5 . At Schwarzenbach the Auernigg beds reach the tonalite range, 
without, however, anywhere entering the Alpine region. In an easterly 
direction they remain visible as the foundation of the Dinaric series 
throughout southern Styria, over a great tract within the lines of the Save, 
and Rolle recognized many years ago that the iron ores of Weitenstein 
contain Carboniferous fossils. 

Within the peri- Adriatic region the opportunity is frequently afforded 

1 Lethaea geognostica, I, Lethaea palaeozoica, 2. Band, 2. Lief, II, Die Steinkohlen- 
formation, von Fritz Freeh, 8vo, Stuttgart, 1899, pp. 354-364. 

2 E. Schellwien, Bericht iiber die Ergebnisse einer Reise in die Karnischen Alpen und 
die Karawanken, Sitzb. k. preuss. Akad. Wiss., Berlin, 1898, pp. 693-700 ; Die Auffindung 
einer permocarbonischen Fauna in den Ostalpen und die Fauna der Trogkofel-Schichten 
in den Karnischen Al^)en und den Karawanken : I, Brachiopoden, Abh, k. k. geol. Reichs- 
anst., 1900, XVI, pp. 1-122. 

8 G. Geyer, Uggowitzer Breccie und Verrucano, Verb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1899, 
pp. 418-432. • 

4 C. Diener, Ueber ein Vorkommen von # A.mnaoniten und Orthoceren im sudtirolisclien 
Bellerophonkalk, Sitzb. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1897, OVI, pp. 61-76. 

6 Geyer, Verh. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1898, pp. 251-252. 



850 THE TAURIDES AND THE DINAKIDES [partiv 

m of observing the superposition of the Dinaric series upon older rocks, 
but nowhere do we see upper Carboniferous of marine origin. Such an 
opportunity presents itself below the northern basset edges of the Trias 
f rom* Klausen onwards to the southern side of the quartz phyllites in 
Comelico, and^of Forni Avoltri, or again along the fault of the Val Sugana 
and next to the eruptive rocks which ^are associated with the Adamello in 
the east and south, and in their probable continuation to the Sesia. Further, 
the basement is exposed in a ‘ window ’ near the middle of the southern 
border of this region at Recoaro, and in the Valli dei Signori. This term 
‘ window ’ has been brought into use by our fellow geologists in Switzerland, 
and we shall adopt it in this work for those cases in which a subjacent 
tectonic element is brought to light by erosion — that is, where the local 
denudation has been sufficiently profound to cut through either a plane of 
unconformity or a thrust-plane. The superposition on the border of the 
Recoaro window has been made the subject of special study by Tornquist 1 . 
Finally, at several localities in the east, and especially between the mighty 
limestone masses of the Menina and the Steiner Alps (north-east of Stein), 
schistose and gneiss-like rocks are exposed to view along faults and by 
erosion. The complicated structure thus revealed has been described by 
Teller 2 . 

At none of these numerous localities surrounding the peri-Adriatic 
region has a trace of marine upper Carboniferous hitherto been discovered. 
Nor is the lower Palaeozoic series of the Carnic mountains any where visible. 
To the north, in the Alps, we find in the Stangalp and the Steinacher 
Jock (Brenner) terrestrial plants which, according to Stur, are of upper 
Carboniferous age, but they are not known to me within the Dinaric 
boundary at a distance from the Carnic mountains ; the outcrops of 
Assling, in upper Carinthia, belong to the neighbourhood of these ranges 3 , 
and those of Manno, near Lugano, are older, and are folded into the sub- 
jacent phyllites 4 . 

C. The Trogkofel beds . These are light- coloured limestones, rich in 
fossils, and attain a thickness of about 400 meters in the Trogkofel. In 
these mountains they show a tendency to pass along a particular horizon 
into a breccia of angular blocks 5 . At more distant localities we often 

1 A. Tornquist, Das vicentinische Triasgebirge, 8vo, Stuttgart, 1901, 195 pp., map. ; 
also A. Bittner, Berieht iiber die geologiscben Aufnahmen im Triasgebiete von Recoaro, 
Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1883, XXXIII, pp. 563-634. 

2 F. Teller, Der geologische Bau der Rogac-Gruppe und des Nordgehanges der Menina 
bei Oberburg in Siid-Steiermark, Verb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1892, XXXIII, pp. 19- 
134. 

3 D. Stur, Obercarbonisehe Pflanzenreste vom Bergbau Reiehenberg bei Assling in 
Oberkrain, Yerh. k. k. geol. Reichsaftst., 1886, pp. 383-385 ; Teller, op. cit., 1899, p. 399. 

4 C. Schmidt, Allgemeine Darstellung der«geologiscben Yerhaltnisse der Umgebung 

von Lugano, Eclogae Geol. Helv., 1890, II, p. 6. * 

5 Geyer, Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1896, XLYI, p. 152. 



351 


chap, vin] THE TROGKOFEL BEDS 

find, in place of the thick limestone, nothing but this fcreccia. Stache had 
perceived its significance and determined its stratigraphical position at the 
very beginning of these investigations, and he named it the Uggowitz 
breccia . Since reefs in place are seldom met with, even within a* very 
considerable distance, Teller unhesitatingly explains the breccia as due to 
breaking up of the limestone h * 

The distribution of these Trogkofel beds and the Uggowitz breccia 
follows very closely that of the Auernigg beds ; thus they extend eastward 
into the region of the folds of the Save, and do not broaden out any further 
to the south. The breccia, however, advarfees farther to the west. It was 
discovered by Hornes near Sexten in Tyrol, about 100 kilometers west of 
the most westerly reef, and the sections which Geyer has given of the 
structure in this locality*^ re in the highest degree instructive 2 . 

Upon the quartz phyllite, which forms the south-west side of the band of 
Comelico, and at the same time represents the lowest member of the Carnic 
mountains, there rests at one locality a dark limestone which corresponds 
perhaps to division B. ; at Matzenboden we see a distant but very small 
outlier of the quartz porphyry of Botzen, which occupies the north-west of 
the peri- Adriatic region. Over the porphyry lies the Uggowitz breccia, 
only 4—6 meters thick, and above this follow 150-200 meters of Verrucano, 
200-300 meters of Groden sandstone, gypsum, dolomites, and rauchwackes ; 
and finally the Bellerophon limestone. 

These facts enable us to fix the age of the porphyry, at least in part, 
with greater precision than hitherto. The outlier of the porphyry stream 
probably followed a line of depression ; with this the considerable increase 
of the Verrucano and Groden sandstone is in agreement : and the trifling 
thickness of the light- coloured breccia, which is not quite sharply separated 
from the Verrucano, becomes all the more striking. 

D. Verrucano and E \ Groden mudstone. The Verrucano occurs in 
several scattered localities, while the Groden sandstone broadens out over a 
wide area. We see it round the porphyry of Botzen and surmounting the 
heights of this rock (Bitten), in the Val Sugana, round about Adamello, and 
surrounding the window of Recoaro. Inside the Palaeozoic range, as for 
instance in the Achomitzer Berg, it rests directly upon the lower Silurian. 
There are few places in the whole region where the almost universal cover of 
Groden sandstone is not visible, and even beyond the Dinaric boundary it 
forms the foundation of the Alpine Trias in the Gailthal Alps. It is towards 
the east only, namely in the direction of southern Styria, that it thins out. 

1 In particular G. Stache, Die Stellung der Uggowitzer Kalkbreccie innerhalb der 
im Gailthaler- und Karawanken-Gebirge vertretenen Aequivalente der Permformation, 
Verh. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1878, pp. 310-315 ; Teller, op. cit., 1899, p. 410. 

2 R. Hoernes in E. von Mojsisovics, Di$ Dolsmit-Riffe von Siid-Tiroi und Venetien, 
8vo, Wien, 1879, map, p. 297 et seq. Geyer, Uggowitzer Breccie und Verrucano, Verh. 
k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1899, pp. 418-432. 



852 THE TAURIDES AND THE DIN ABIDES [pabtiv 

Th& Groden sandstone, however, is not a marine deposit. The only 
organic remains which it has furnished, and these chiefly at its base, are 
terrestrial plants, while above gypseous marls and gypsum frequently occur. 
The predominating characters are those of the Gobi series. They indicate 
a continental formation — deserts and pools without outflow. 

The great overcovering by the Groden sandstone corresponds to a period 
of retreat of the sea . It took place under conditions altogether different from 
those of the marine transgressions, and in particular under different relations 
to the relief of the land. 

F. The Belter ophon limestone When the sea returned later on conditions 

had completely changed, and the distribution of this stage differs therefore 
from that of the earlier marine deposits ; the extension towards the east is 
more especially wanting. + 

The Bellerophon limestone does not enter the Alps ; Diener defines the 
limits of its typical development as follows : to the west, Groden ; to the 
north, the Pusterthal ; Recoaro and the Yal Sugana to the south, and 
the neighbourhood of Tarvis to the east \ I know of no locality where in 
the absence of the Groden sandstones the Bellerophon limestone exists. Its 
distribution appears to be best explained by a southerly communication 
with the sea. 

G. Between the Menina and the Steiner Alps, and further towards the 
east, in the direction of the folds of the Save, the transgressive series begins 
with the W erf en shales , as in the greater part of the north-eastern Alps. 

At the head of a summary of the results so far obtained stands a 
general observation. The Dinaric sheet may begin with any stage , from 
the Auernigg beds to the Werfen shales , but from the date of this horizon 
onwards up to a comparatively late epoch no tectonic discordance is 
visible . Inequalities may have been caused by the flows of quartz porphyry, 
by the tuffs of the Wengen stage, and by other circumstances ; but a 
general mountain movement is not perceptible within the series. The 
patches of Neocomian on the Croda d’Antruille^, for instance, are let down 
in a fault-trough, but they stand in concordant sequence with their normal 
foundation, and this concordant sequence extends throughout the Etsch 
gulf into the beds of Schio. 

It is an obvious and very natural deduction that the transgression took 
place over an uneven surface . From the presence of the quartz phyllite 
in the window of Recoaro, and the absence of the upper Carboniferous 
transgression at this locality, Tornquist concluded that f Recoaro, even in 
the Palaeozoic aera, must already have formed a high-lying mass, as 
compared with. the northern areas, and this was perhaps prolonged into the 
Adriatic region. The age of the phyllite of Recoaro is unknown ; but we 

i 

1 Diener, Ammoniten in Belle rophonkalk® Sitzb. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 1897, CVI, 
p. 73, note. 



LATER MOVEMENTS 


353 


(MAP.vm] 

Can hardly avoid the conclusion that the mighty beds of Silurian and 
Devonian, the remains of which are preserved in the Camie mountains, 
had already been denuded away over a considerable area at a very early 
period. Upon the quartz phyllites of Comelico lie the porphyry anSt the 
Uggowitz breccia, while on the other side of the valley the same quartz 
phyllites are covered by the Silurian. Nor must it be forgotten that in 
the west, near Manno, the plant-bearing middle Carboniferous is folded 
conformably into the phyllites. 

The surface certainly appears to have presented considerable inequalities, 
and the northern region seems to have lain fit a lower level. In the light of 
existing observations we may recognize the following order of events : — 

First, the upper Carboniferous sea must have entered from the east 
between the range of Agt&qi and the Bacher mountains, and have formed a 
long gulf in the northern part of the existing Dinarides, partly surrounding 
and partly covering the Carnic chain, which bore upon its ridges the flora 
of Ottweil, and furnished from its quartz phyllites the white quartz of the 
upper Carboniferous conglomerates. When the Trogkofel beds were in 
course of deposition (i. e. at the time of the fauna of Scacchinello), the 
situation must have been practically the same, and if we may suppose that 
the Uggowitz breccia at Sexten is their direct continuation, it follows that 
the gulf had been elongated towards the west, and a part of the quartz 
porphyry had already poured out over the country. Thereupon continental 
conditions obtained, and the mantle of Groden sandstone and gypsum was 
formed as the floor of a desert. Next the sea of the Bellerophon limestone 
probably came in — apparently from the south — and this was succeeded by 
a preponderating, but not quite continuous positive displacement of the 
strand (during the deposition of the Raibl beds, for instance) which lasted 
for a very long period, and created the mighty sedimentary covering with 
its conformable sequence. 

Thus although the unconformity may begin at various horizons, from 
the stage of Spirifer supra# wsq ae nsis to the Werfen Shales, yet within 
this period no signs of any serious tectonic alteration can be perceived. 

Later movements . From the conformable sequence of the covering, it 
is also clear that the dislocations by which it is at present traversed must 
be comparatively recent. They are indeed not of great age, but they are 
of different ages, and they are also of different kinds. 

The question which first arises relates to the age of the tonalite 
cicatrice. Salomon has attempted, with no small degree of ingenuity, to 
show that the intrusion took place either during the Cretaceous epoch or 
at an early stage of the Tertiary aera, and has pronounced later in 
favour of its Tertiary age; whilst Lepsi\fe does not regard the hypo- 
thesis of so recent a date as well founded 1 . In the Adamello the only 
1 Salomon, Periadriatische granitkSrnige Maseen, p. 36; Neue Beobachtungen, 

80 LLA 8 lit A ft 



m THE TAURIDES AND THE DINARIDES [part nr 

certaif conclusion be obtained from a close examination of the facts is 
that the tonalite is more recent than a considerable part of the Trias. In 
the east we learn a little more. If, as is probable, the porphyritic rocks of 
PraVtoli in Carinthia are to be regarded as contemporaneous with the 
tonalite, the intrusion, according to Teller, cannot have taken place before 
the latter part of the Jurassic epoch. * Teller further shows that the Alpine 
limestone range of the north Karawanken breaks off transversely at its 
eastern termination near Windischgratz, in southern Styria, and that the 
Gosau limestone rests against the fracture in a manner which shows that it 
is of later date. This fracture does not, it is true, quite reach the tonalite* 
and Teller draws no further conclusion with regard to its age, but the condi- 



(Based on F. von Hauer’s sketch map of Austria and Teller’s detailed map, sheet Prassberg.) 

tions at the time of the Gosau limestone appear to have been already 
similar to those of the present day l . Finally the andesite of Smekrouz 
lies directly upon the denuded surface of the cicatrice. This andesite 
is younger than the horizon of Castel Gomberto, and older than the 
Aquitanian lignites with Anthracotherium magnum ; in the tuffs accom- 
panying it Anenchelum is found. The andesite forms one of a long train 
of andesitic outcrops, which begins close to the tonalite, and, running to the 
south-east, cuts obliquely through the folds of the Save (Fig. 17). 

That the movements are of various ages may be deduced from the 
behaviour of the Tertiary beds. In the midst of the t eastern limestone 

Sitzh k. preuss. Akad. Wiss., Berlin, 1899, pp. 35, 38 ; L. Lepsius, Ueber die Zeit der 
Entstehung der Tonalit-Masse in ^tid-Tirol, Notizbl. Ver. f. Erdk., Darmstadt, 1898, 
4. Folge, 19. Heft, pp. 50-55. « ^ 

1 Teller, Erl&uterungen zur geologischen 4 Karte . . . Prassberg, p. 154 ; also pp. 68 
and 146. 



chap. viii] THE TWO MOVEMENTS m 

range we find ingressions, which presuppose valleys ; m a rule they begin 
with the horizon of Castel Gomberto; in the fault-trough of Polschizzo, 
north-west of Krainburg, f have observed the underlying Laverda stage: 
Nevertheless, further east, Mediterranean beds have been carried high up 
and folded in the lines of the Save, like the Schio beds in the Etsch folds. 

But apart from these divergent lihes and apart from cross fractures of 
secondary importance, the whole region under consideration is dominated 
by two movements. 

The first is the sterp-like subsidence towards the Adriatic, and the 
tendency to overthrusting in the same direction. We may add to the 
description already given of these movements (I, p. 236) that they are 
equally manifest north*of the Asta faults, and on a grander scale than was 
then acknowledged. In^pa^ticular Salomon has found that the whole mass 
of the Marmolata is driven in overthrust flakes to the south x . 

The second, and completely different movement, is seen in the north, 
especially from Sexten and Comelico to far away in the east. It has already 
been mentioned that the ancient Caraic range is intensely folded towards 
the north. We* might almost imagine that the movement in this early 
direction had reawakened. It rules not only in the Archaean rocks of the 
Gail valley, but encroaches farther to the north ; and the Alpine Trias of the 
Gailthal Alps everywhere exhibits, according to Geyer, the effects of its 
action 1 2 . Even the eastern prolongations of the tonalite of the Rieser-Femer; 
in the Defereggen valley, are overthrust to the north 3 . The eastern continua- 
tion of the Camic mountains (Stegunek) is also overthrust to the north; 
and there too the movement is continued northwards across the Dinaric 
boundary ; the tonalite has assumed a gneissose structure, and at several 
places the Dinaric Trias is clearly thrust up from the south on to the 
tonalite. North of the tonalite, in the Vellach valley, near Kappel, the 
whole Alpine Trias is overthrown to the north. But in this valley, as we 
proceed towards the south, we perceive a knee-like bend in the Trias : the 
higher part is overthrust to* the north and dips to the south ; the lower 
part lies normally and dips to the north, so that at one place on the east 
side of the valley we see a dip to the north, and on the west side a dip to 
the south, as though the overthrusting had come from above and had only 
affected the upper beds 4 . 

1 W. Salomon, Geologische und palaeontologische Studien uber die Marmolata,, 
Palaeontographica, 1^5, XLII, 110 pp., maps. 

* Geyer, Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1897, XLVIII, p. 863 et passim. 

3 Teller, Porphyritische Eruptivgesteine, Jahrb. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1886, XXXVI, 
p. 736. 

* The knee-bend was described and figured in E. SuJss, Aequivalente des Rothliegenden, 
Sitzb. k. Akad. Wigs. Wien, 1868, LVII, p. 289, pi. ll, fig. ! * Teller has described the local 
contrast between the two sides of the valley in Erlauterungen zur geologischen Karte 
* . . Blatt 20, XI, Eisenkappel uAd Ranker, p. 77. 

a a 2 



356 THE TAUREDES AND THE DIN ABIDES [partiv 

TJius for a distance of more than 200 kilometers the northern border of 
the peri- Adriatic region is dominated by the movement to the north in 
complete contrast to the movement towards the south which prevails else- 
where. I may here repeat the conjecture that the movement to the north 
stands in some causal connexion with the inter-Carboniferous folding of 
the Camic range in the same direction. It nowhere appears to find expres- 
sion far southwards of this ancient range and its eastern prolongations ; on 
the other hand, it is undoubtedly propagated fairly far to the north, across 
the tonalite band into the neighbouring part of the Alps. 

The question arises as to the mode of encounter of these two opposed 
movements, the peri-Adriatic and Dinaric movement directed towards the 
south, and the Camic movement directed towards 't^ie north. We should 
expect to find a fan or something similar. Bnp tne actual arrangement is 
quite different. 

At Pontebba we see merely a very steep contact between the upper 
Carboniferous and the Trias (Zirkelspitzen, I, p. 266, fig. 36) on the south 
border of the ancient range ; and these formations are followed towards the 
south, on the other side of the valley, by the great peri-Adriatic limestone 
masses moved towards the south. This appears to be the case in the whole 
western half of the region ; it is otherwise in the east. In order to describe 
the structure let us take a section from north to south through the middle 
of Teller's map of Eisenkappel. 

In the north lies the Alpine Trias ; south of this follows a narrow zone 
of green schists, next comes the band of granitite, then the schists, altered 
by contact, and just a little east of this the tonalite also appears; con- 
tinning towards the south, we meet first a narrow band of Dinaric Trias, 
then the upper Carboniferous, followed by the unconformity, and beyond 
this the Silurian and Devonian of the ancient range, Stegunek-Seeberg, 
which belongs to the Camic mountains. All these zones are overturned 
towards the north . Against the south side of the Stegunek-Seeberg range 
is laid the first of the broad limestone segmaits of the south. These are 
the Steiner Alps . 

They form a typical limestone mass of Dinaric Trias, steeply bounded, 
about 2,000 meters high, and covering a square space of from 16 to 17 
kilometers in the side. The great fragment of Trias shown in the south- 
west comer of Fig. 17 belongs to this mass. Their broad northern side has 
followed the Silurian mbstratu/m,, and shows the effects of the movement 
towards the north . But their southern side is overthrusk towards the south , 
so that the Trias rests on an overthrow^ Tertiary series, at the base of which 
Ostraea fimbrioides occurs *. 

r 

1 I have found this Ostraea in the strata oi the fault valleys above Sidrasch, north of 
Ulricheberg ; it is usually accompanied by Cerithium margaritaceum. For the northerly 
movement, see Teller, Blatt 20, XI, Eisenkappel, pp. 4, UO. 



THE STEINER ALPS 


357 


CHAP* VIIl] 

On the north, therefore, this great limestone mass*Jias been driven like 
the Camic chain northwards; on the south, in the opposite direction, like 
the peri- Adriatic area. But in the process it has neither been extended nor 
compressed into a fan, Thtse movements cannot have taken place simul- 
taneously. The Steiner Alps were moved tirst as a fairty rigid mass 
towards the north, and then, at another time, towards the south. That this 
interpretation is correct appears from the fact that the northern boundary 
of the southward movement is not regular, so that west of the Steiner 
Alps, Teller has already found further to the north overthrusts directed to 
the south • 

The southward, peri-Adriatic movement was probably the more recent 
of the two, and it is extremely likely that the northward movement is even 
older than the transverse fracture of Windischgratz against which the 
Gosau limestone is deposited. But it is also conceivable that the two 
movements occurred alternately. 

These details show that the tonalite cicatrice, which coincides with 
the boundary between the Alpine and Dinaric type of the Trias, indicates 
undoubtedly very great mountain movements, but that nevertheless subse- 
quent movements have not been impeded by it in the least degree. 

1 Teller, Das Alter der Eisen- und Manganerzfuhrenden Schichten im Stem- und 
VigunSca-Gebiete, Verh. k. k. geol. Reichsanst., 1899, pp. 396-418. Here Aquitanian 
plant-bearing sediments are folded together with those of the upper Carboniferous. 



CHAPTER IX* 

NORTHERN EUROPE 1 

The watershed of Aral-Irgis. Relations of the Urals %o the Caucasus. Ufa. Folded 
ranges between Ufa and the Arctic Ocean. The pre-Cambrian platform. Its continuation 
in the Baltic shield. Its continuation in south Russia. Relations with the Sayanides. 
The Caledonian lines. The Scandinavian overthrust. Theoretical considerations. 
Relations of Scandinavia to Scotland. t Conclusion. 

In this chapter we shall endeavour to investigate the connexion which 
may exist between the trend-lines of northern Europe and those of Asia. 
The region we are about to study may be divided into three parts * the 
Urals, the Russian platform, and the faulted zone of Scotland and Scandi- 
navia. Each has already been described, the Urals in particular (I, p. 501), 
but our conception of the region, even as regards some of its principal 
features, has been modified by subsequent investigations, and hitherto we 
have not been in a position to discuss the relations of the Urals to the 
structure of Eurasia in general. The Archaean foundation of the Russian 
platform has as yet been scarcely considered, and important questions were 
left t>pen (II, p. 53) in regard to tectonic phenomena in the west of 
Scandinavia to which a more definite answer can now be given. 

Of the three parts, the second — the central Archaean platform — is the 
oldest; the Baltic shield, Sederholm’s Fenno-Scania, belongs to it. The 
glint round about the shield shows that its folds had already been denuded 
in pre-Cambrian times, precisely like those far away to the east on the 
margin of lake Baikal. In south Russia this ancient platform breaks up 
into fragments, between which the lines of disturbance described by 
Karpinski strike to the west-north-west (I, pi. V, m.m.) ; further west it 
sinks beneath the Carpathians (I, p. 187)‘ ; still further on it is concealed by 
more recent sediments, and its relations with the outer border of the 
Variscan arc cannot be seen. But the platform is undoubtedly older than 
this border, and towards the north-west it disappears under the pre- 
Devonian undulations of western Scandinavia. The strike of the folds, 
except in the Caledonian fragment of Scotland, is everywhere directed 
towards the ancient platform. It is therefore uncertain how far the 
platform itself, which can be traced as far as Bornholm, may extend 
towards Belgium beneath more recent sediments. At thq same time it has 
maintained its own pre-Cambrian folding, uninfluenced by any of the later 
movements which have taken place almost all around it. 

This ancient platform, though its orographic features are never 

1 Revised by the Rev. Professor T. G. Bonne^, Sc.D., LL.D., F.R.S., Fellow of St. John’s 
College, Cambridge. 



chap, ix] WATEBSHED OF AEAL-IBGIS S69 

important, occupies a larger part of the surface of Europe than any other 
tectonic element. 

The watershed of Araklrgis. — Karpinski’s beautiful map of the east 
slope of the Ural mountains shows clearly that the Uralian roc fee and 
folds, deprived by denudation of all the relief of a mountain range, still 
exist a long way towards |he east, where they may be observed in the river 
valleys beneath a thin covering of sediments, chiefly of Tertiary age l . This 
relation may be traced from the Tura to the Tobol, and if we refer to the 
observations of Krasnopolski, made along the course of the latter river, We 
•shall find that the remnants of the Urals a^e exposed along the banks of the 
Ajat and Tobol almost as far as the confluence of these rivers, where they 
underlie Angara and genonian beds 2 . 

In latitude 53° if. we can trace Uralian folding from long. 56° 20' E. to 
about long. 63° E., and, speaking generally, no boundai'y has yet been 
discovered towards the east . 

In connexion with this great extension in breadth there is a divergence 
in strike, opening out towards the south. West of Orsk, Muschketow notes 
a strike to the north-north -east in the older rocks ; in the Mugodjars the 
strike runs as a rule from north to south. In the basin of the river Ural, 
Stuckekberg observes frequent deviation to the north-north- west 3 ; on the 
Tobol, above the Ajat, Krasnopolski records a strike to north-north-west 
(355’ to 305°); the crystalline limestone at Troitzk runs, according to 
Melnikow, in a north-westerly direction 4 . This fact appears clearly enough 
on the maps, and again raises the question whether some connexion may not 
exist between the Urals and one of the branches of the Thian-shan virgation. 

This conjecture is not new. Even in the eighteenth century the 
range of ‘ Alginsk ' or ‘ Ayaginsk ’ was mentioned as the link connecting 
the Urals with the 4 Soongar range coming from India/ But this is shown 
to be an error by the scanty observations of Bardanes, said to be the only 
traveller wh<3 has seen this range, as well as the place where it is marked 
by Georgi, between the rivers Irgis and Ulkai-jak 

In more recent times Muschketow thought it probable that a broad fold, 
like that of the Tarbag-atai, occurs on the Aral-Irgis watershed (I, p. 501). 
Karpinski and Tschernyschew were inclined to regard as a slight indication 

1 A. Karpinski, Geologische Karte des Ost-Abhanges des Ural, 3. Bl., fol., 1884. 

1 A. Krasnopolski, Account of geological researches in the mountainous regions of West 
Biberia in 1893, Gorn. Joum., 1894, II, p. 53, and Geological researches in the basin of 
the Tobol, Djel. D<hr., 1899, XX, 50 pp., map. 

9 South part of sheet 189 of the geological map of European Russia; A. Stuckenberg, 
Bull. Com. gdol. Russie, 1896, XV, p. 249, 1898, XVII, pp. 172, 175, &c., passim. 

4 M. F. Melnikow, I, Geological excursion on tl$ rivers Uvelka and XJya in the circle of 
Troitzk, Mater. Geol. Russ., 1889, XIII, pp. 254-375. 

j * J. F. Falk, Beytr&ge zur topographischen Kenntniss des russischen Reiches, 4to 
St. Fetersb., 1785, 1, pp. 364 £nd 380. 



m ; NORTHERN EUROPE [pastiv 

q£ this |dn<i 1 some ranges of the Urals which strike to the south-south-east, 
among them the Ui-tash on the east side of the Ural-tau (lat. 54° 40' N.). 

Let ns now attempt to ascertain what indications of such a connexion 
are actually known to exist. • 

Towards the south, Borsczczow has traced the diorite of the Mugodjars 
to the river Tshegan (about lat. 4<J° 30' N., north-west of the sea of 
Aral) 2 . * 

Towards the south-east, Muschketow has travelled along the whole line 
to the point where the Thian-shan begins to branch. He traced a series 
of exposures of syenite, granite, and ancient schists from the steppe 
which extends south of Orsk to the settlement of Karassai (about lat. 
49° N., north-west of the town of Irgis). At that spot these traces of 
the Urals disappear beneath Cretaceous deposits, containing Protocardium 
hillanum , and bounded by a line which rurife from the hill of Aigyr- 
Baital (north of the sea of Aral) into the neighbourhood of the town of 
Irgis and the village of Djalabil, situated to the south-west of this town. 
Bocks of Cretaceous age, wherever the Tertiary deposits are absent, form 
the lower substratum of the desert which extends towards the Sir-darya. 

The continuity of the observations is interrupted by this clesert. Beyond 
it, some 40 kilometers north of Kasalinsk, the Cretaceous formation 
reappears: it may* be seen in the valley of the Sir-Darya between Kasa- 
linsk and Karamaktshi, as well as on certain hills lying north of the river. 
Then follows, as far as Perovsk, the great marsh of Bakaly-kon, on the 
north side of the Sir-darya ; and beyond it, east of Perovsk, we approach 
the mountains of Daut-Khodsha and Djitim-tiube, which are the most 
northerly spurs of the great Kara-tau, and therefore belong to the branch 
proceeding from the Thian-shan south-west of Aulieta (PI. IV) 3 . 

^The result of our inquiry is as follows : — 

The southern parts of the existing Ural mountains represent the 
western portion of a very extensive folded region, which ki the east i$ 
completely levelled by denudation and covered by the deposits of the 
west Siberian plain. Its folds run, towards the south, across the Guber- 
dinskii mountains and the Mugodjars, and north of lat. 46° N. sink, as they 

1 Karpinski and Tschernyschew, sheet 136, Mem. Com. geol. Russie, 1886, III, 2, 
82 pp., in particular p. 73. 

8 Tchagan, Tchegan, or Tchassan, cf. I, p. 501 ; Geological observations by N. Sjewert- 
zow and J. Borsczczow in the western part of the Khirgiz steppe in 1857, Gom. Joum., 
1860, II, pp. 300-318, in particular p. 310 ; also Suess, The Face of the Earth, I, p. 501, 
note 1. Even north of the Caspian traces of naphtha are mentioned at several localities, 
especially on the Uil ; Nikitin, Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch., 1893, XXIX, p. 630. 

3 Muschketow, Turkestan, I, pp. 324, 327. Sjewertzow says that neither mountains 
nor hills are to be seen on the Irgis. but the rocky banks of a river valley, Bull. Acad. 
Imp. Sci. Saint-Pete rsb., 1862, IV, p. 484. # Also Romanofski, Mater. Geol. Turkestan, 1880, 
I, pp. 45, 59, and Romanofski and Muschketow, Geologische Karte von Turkestan, 
sheet 1. 



chap- ix] URAL AND CAUCASUS 361 

decline in height, beneath the steppe and the platform of Ust-Urt. 
Certain parts of the zones which succeed on the east, now almost completely 
planed down, are continued along the river Or, a little north-west of the 
town of Irgis. In the salne direction, but separated by the Cret&ceous 
formation and the desert, the spurs of the Kara-tau appeaf in the south- 
east. The watershed of i^ral-Irgis marks the line of junction. 

Hence, as is shown by Muschketow’s observations, it is not impossible 
that one of the branches of the Thian-shan is deflected into connexion 
with the ranges of the Urals, which diverge one from another towards the 
south ; it may even be regarded as probable, but under existing circum- 
stances it cannot be directly proved. 

It is still more difficult to hazard any conjecture in regard to the 
possible relations between the Urals and the much more remote folds of 
the Kirghiz. Krasnopolslci’s accounts of the gold-producing districts of 
the mountains south of Kokshe-tau show that the most ancient rocks in 
that region exhibit a fairly constant strike of from 40° to 60° to the east of 
north, and thus diverge from all the directions hitherto observed l . 

We may r eg ard it as an established fact that for a very long distance 
north of lat. 53° N. the Urals cannot be separated from the foundation of 
the Siberian plain, which is folded in the same direction as themselves. 

Relations of the Ural mountains to the Caucasus . The apparent 
deflexion of the Kara-tau towards the watershed of the Aral-Irgis affords 
a striking contrast to the wide divergence between the directions of the 
southern Urals and the Caucasus. This contrast is still further heightened 
by the appearance of recent lines of disturbance, running from north to 
south, in the region between the Urals and the Caucasus. Nevertheless 
both the Kara-tau and the Caucasus must be regarded as radiating branches 
of the Thian-shan. 

In the first place we must mention the folding of the Yevgeni hills far 
away to the ^outh-west, for a detailed description of which we are also 
indebted to Muschketow 2 . • 

We may regard them as beginning at the bend of the Volga near ^aritzyn. 
From this place an anticlinal fold, running almost from north to south, 
extends through about 2% degrees of latitude, turning, however, rather to the 

1 A. Krasnopolski, Geological researches in the provinces of Akinolinsk and Semi- 
palatinsk, Djel. Dor., 1900, XXI, 317 pp., maps, in particular pp. 103 et seq. This 
important work did not reach me until I had gone to press. With regard to the bend 
of the Ishim we nifty refer to III, p. 162. I do not know the precise relations of the 
heights marked on Muschketow’s general map of Turkestan, north of lat. 48° N. and 
north of the Sary-ssu ; according to older data the Ul-tau consists of granite and 
contains lead ore ; G. de MeyendorfF, Voyage d’Ortnbourg a Bokhara, fait en 1820, 8vo, 
Paris, 1826, p. 98. # • 

* J. Muschketow, Geologische Untersuchungen in der Kalmucken-Steppe in den Jahren 
1884-1885, Mem. Com. g6ol. I^ussie, 1895, XIV, no. 1, 202 pp., maps. 



362 NORTHERN EUROPE [partiv 

south-eist, bo that jt reaches the Manytch at the hill of Tshalon Chamur 
(long. 44° 50' E.) with an easterly strike. At the same time several subsidiary 
folds diverging towards the south appear on the west side* Dark clay ifc 
expo^fed at the axis of the anticline, probably of early Tertiary age. The 
Sarmatian beds, at least in the south, are involved in the folding, which is 
older than the Aralo-Caspian sediments, and has, an east-to-west strike. 

The Caspian, at the time of its greatest extension, had for its western 
shore along the greater part of the distance between the Manytch and the 
existing site of Zaritzyn, the line of the Yergeni hills. 

The folded range of the Yergeni is succeeded towards the east by a 
long chain of lakes, which begins with the Sarpa lakes near the Volga ; 
the direction of this is first south-south-east, then south-east, and it ends 
by losing itself in the depression between Astrachafl and the lower Kuma. 

Another saddle appears on the Volga below Zaritzyn, near Kammeni 
Yar (Stony Bank). Here the clay, supposed to be lower Tertiary, forms 
a broad anticline with a denuded crown ; it strikes at first towards the 
south, and then turns, exactly like the Yergeni, towards the south-south* 
east. t m 

A little further down also, at Tcherni Yar (Black Bank) on the Volga, 
this older clay again crops out and indicates a connexion with the* exposed 
Mesozoic beds which characterize those parts of the steppe lying more to 
the east. 

We have already mentioned the difficulties which attend the hypothesis 
of a connexion between these isolated outcrops (III, p. 295, note 2). On the 
great JBogdo , which rises 171 meters above the neighbouring lake of 
Basskuntchak, lower Trias and upper Jurassic (or lower Cretaceous) are 
exposed. The little Bogdo, lying to the north-north-east, exhibits similar 
rocks. The hill of Tshaptshaptshi, further to the east, consists of gypsum 
surrounding a nucleus of salt. 

Still further east rises the range of Bish-tshosho (Five fiills). This is 
formed by three series of ridges, some of them several versts in length. 
The middle series, rising to a height of 60 meters, coincides with the axis of 
an anticline striking to the north-east, and is formed of grey marl, not unlike 
the lower Mesozoic rocks of the Bogdo ; the two other series are limbs of 
the anticline and consist of gypsum 1 m 

All these folds, from the Yergeni hills to the Bish-tshosho, whether they 
form a single system or not, are older than the Aralo-Caspian sediments 
which either rest against them horizontally or cover them. On the other 
hand, the Sarmatian beds in the south Yergeni are involved in the folding. 
We may recall the fact that the Sarmatian stage rests horizontally and 

: • • 

1 J. Muschketow, Geologisehe Untersfcchungen in der Kirgisen-Steppeim Jahre 1894, 
Mem. Com. g£cd. Russie, 1896, no. 5, 27 pp., map; on p. 21 a comparison with the 
Yergeni hills. ... • < • 



chap, ix] LATERAL BASINS OF THE URAL S6S 

unconformably against the folds of Mangyshlak, which, on the east side of 
the Caspian, follow the direction of the Caucasus, wAile in the Caucasus 
itself this stage has been subject to mighty movements. 

The southern end of the Yergeni certainly appears to swerve to the 
south-east, but we find it difficult to determine in what manner the more 
recent folds of the Urals and those of the Caucasus are related to one 
another, and whether they actually intersect. 

Karpinski has raised a suggestive question in connexion with these 
more recent movements. Leaving out of consideration the Palaeozoic seas, 
it can be shown that the seas of Europe* have reached the region of the 
existing Arctic Ocean sometimes by way of the western side of the 
Urals (Middle Jurassic, Volga stage, Neocomian), at others by an uninter- 
rupted extension alonj* the eastern side (lower Tertiary and perhaps even 
upper Cretaceous), and finally, during the glacial epoch, by a communication 
which was almost completely re-established on the western side. Hence it 
has been conjectured that the communication, now on the west, now on the 
east side, was produced by the development of long basins, sometimes 
parallel with the Urals, sometimes with the Caucasus, concomitantly with 
the formation of these two ranges 1 . 

By ilhis conjecture we are confronted with a number of unsolved ques- 
tions, and on thafc account we may expect to obtain fresh light from 
a further investigation. We must observe in the first place that, as Kar- 
pinski expressly points out, the origin of a considerable part of the 
Permian formation was not marine. 

Herr T. Fuchs has drawn my attention to Stirlings description of the 
skeletons of great aplacental mammals, which are found covered with 
incrustations in the Australian deserts. This recalls the skeletons of 
Saurians similarly incrusted which Amalitzky discovered in the Glos- 
sopteris stage in the region of the Dwina 2 . It also confirms the supposi- 
tion that for* this group of deposits the circumstances under which the 
transgression has occurred are completely different from those which 
commonly prevail. If we attempt to make a further comparison between 
the restricted peri -Adriatic region and the vast area of Russia, we perceive 

* A. Karpinski, Survey of the physico-geographieal conditions of European Russia 
during the geological periods. Discourse delivered at the public session of the 
Acad. Imper. des Sci. Saint- Pete rsb. on Dec. 9, 1886; supplement to vol. XXXV of the 
Memoires russes de PAcademie, no. 8 (also a German translation in the Beitrage zur 
Kenntniss des russifchen Reiches, 1887, 3rd series), and in particular, General character 
of the oscillations of the earth’s crust within the limits of European Russia, Bull. Acad. 
Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1894, 5th ser., I, pp. 1-19, maps. 

2 E. C. Stirling, The physical features of Lal|p Callabonna, Mem. Roy. Soc. South 
Australia, 1900, vol. I, part 2; V. Amalitzky, #On the excavations of the remains of 
vertebrates in the Permian deposits of l?orth Russia, Travaux Soc. Nat. Saint-Petersb., 
Proces-verb., April-May, 1900, # pp. 177-198. t 



364 NORTHERN EUROPE * [partiv 

at once the greater simplicity of the Dinarides, where the desert deposits were 
followed by a long, continuous, and conformable, series of marine sediments. 

The gaps in the Russian series, however, were not confined to Russia, 
and (She transgressions which are observed there are repeated almost 
without exception in distant parts of the world. But during the negative 
phases — or more correctly, up to that* moment $t which in a given place 
the strand-line has returned to a given distance from the centre of the 
earth — the form of the dry land is being altered (a) by tectonic processes, 
which also extend beyond the strand-line, and (b) by denudation, especially 
by the wind and the erosion of cgreat river valleys ; these processes being 
confined to the solid land, it is true that b is largely dependent on a, but 
it also does its work when tectonic processes are altogether absent. 

Therefore every new transgression (regression), in so far as the 
encroaching line of breakers itself has not denuded the land, will encounter 
an altered relief. The new outlines will be influenced by a and 6, or by b 
alone. Many communications of the sea, which previously did not exist, 
may be opened up by a renewed transgression, or ancient communications 
may be closed by tectonic processes. f ^ 

The distinction between the influences a and b is in each case a 
geographical problem which demands an exact knowledge of the local 
conditions. Many facts support the hypothesis that* during the* middle 
of the Jurassic epoch the west side of the Urals formed a coast line to 
a long gulf, and through this the transgression from the far north passed 
across Darvaz and Afghanistan to that sea which has left traces of a higher 
level of the strand-line at so many places around the Indian Ocean. The 
transgression itself is a general phenomenon of another kind, and not 
dependent on the existence of this connexion; the submergence of the 
corresponding part of Russia may have been caused by a and b. 

Ufa . In front of the western border of the Urals, extending north- 
wards from lat. 55° 15' N., lies a district designated by Valentine von 
Moller the plateau of Ufa, and its profound influence on the structure of 
the Urals has since become more and more clear \ 

It assumes in the south the form of an anticline 90 versts broad and 
about 360 meters high ; on the denuded summit the upper Carboniferous is 
exposed beneath the Artinsk stage. Towards the east, i. e. facing the 
Urals, it presents a steep escarpment, while towards the west its slope is 
gentle. It extends northwards for as much as 200 versts, but before its 
termination the breadth of the plateau is diminished to afcmt 7 versts. 

The folds of the Urals have been driven from east to west, and are 
dammed up against the plateau of Ufa. Such is the influence of this obstacle 

« 

1 V. von Mailer, Letter in N. J. f. Mift., 18^0, pp. 648-650; here the plateau of Ufa is 
already compared with the Timan mountains. On the question of the plateau of Ufa, 
Bull. Com. geol. Russie, 1886, V, pp. 285-237. • 



PLATEAU OF UFA 


365 


CHAP- IX] 

that for almost three degrees of latitude the westerh outline of the range 
curves backwards, and its folds are more densely crowded together. Not 
only the border ranges of Devonian quartzite, but also the crystalline Ural-tau 
which succeeds them in tlfb east, are concave towards the west. Sohth of 
the plateau of Ufa, however, where it terminates suddenly, etit off almost at 
right angles across its entire breadth, we see on the beautiful map of this 
district prepared by Karpinski and Tschernyschew how the folds of the 
Urals, bending almost at a right angle as they advance to the west, follow 
the south border of the plateau and then return to an almost north-and- 
south direction. Only those folded ranges which lie quite in the east, 
beyond the Ural-tau, retain an undeviated direction from north to south l . 

The most important of these ranges of the Urals, which are deflected to 
the west along the south border of the plateau and indicate the termination of 
the obstruction, is the Kara-tau. This presents steep slopes of Devonian 
sandstone facing the plateau. The same upper Carboniferous and Artinsk beds 
as those which form the plateau also share in the folding, not of this, but of 
other ranges of the Urals. Thus the Kara-tau cannot have formed a coast 
in upper Carboniferous or Artiijsk times, and the plateau behaves like a 
fragment of a concealed foreland, against which the outer border of the 
Urals is dammed back, or over which it may even be thrust 2 . 

There can be lifctle doubt that this checking of the folds, which though 
local is considerable, has influenced the divergence, mentioned above, of the 
southernmost branches of the Urals. The Devonian zone of the Urals sur- 
rounds the plateau of Ufa, advances, and reaches the river Ural west of 
Orsk; the long crystalline range of Ural-tau which, as we have seen is 
concave towards the west along the breadth of the plateau, joins it in the 
east, and then, striking from north to south, reaches the river Ural. Then 
follow towards the east other meridional zones of great length; some- 
times formed of diabase porphyry and tuffs ; sometimes characterized by 
granite ranges, or again by Palaeozoic sediments. 

Towards the east the aones have been so completely planed down by 
denudation that their limit in this direction cannot be seen, either across 
Vercho-turje or towards Shadrinsk, or on the Tobol. In this way the 
Urals diverge from the plateau of Ufa towards the south as far as those 
regions where we have sought in vain for their traces upon the watershed 

1 A. Karpinski and T. Tschernyschew, General geological map of European Russia, 
sheet 139, Mem. Com. geol. Russie, 1886, III, no. 2, map ; and Tschernyschew, sheet 139, 
Beschreibung des ®entral-Urals und des West-Abhanges, op. cit., 1889, III, no. 4; also 
Karpinski, Geologische Karte des Ostabhanges des Urals, 1884, 3 sheets fol. 

* Tschernyschew, Section through the Kara-tau in the Guide des Excursions du VII e 
Congrfcs G4ologique Internationale, 1897, III,p.9, ajid Geological Map of European Russia, 
sheet 139, p.379. The overthrusting of the foreland would render it no longer neces- 
sary to suppose that the folding in the K&ra-tau terminated earlier than in the adjacent 
ch&inB striking to the north-east. 



NORTHERN EUROPE 




[PART IV 


of Ar&l-Irgis, and where we have seen the Mugodjars disappear as they 
sink beneath the Ust-Urt. 

. It is difficult to say with certainty how farHhe effect of this obstruc- 
tion Ifas made itself felt in front, i. e. towards the west. Pawlow has 
conjectured th&t the deflexion of the Kara-tau on the south border of the 
plateau of Ufa may be represented even far to tlje west-south-west by the 
remarkable dislocation which is visible at Stavropol. Here the Djeg^uli 
mountains give rise to the sharp bend of the Volga. On their north side 
they are cut off* by a fault running to west-south-west. This dislocation is 
visible for about 140 versts, and is believed to be connected towards the 
east-north-east by way of B^gulma with the folds which advance on the 
south border of the plateau of Ufa. It is of later datethan the Eocene *. 

Perhaps we might carry conjecture so far as tb include the Yergeni 
mountains and the other disturbances on the lower Volga, and to sketch 
lines which would follow a course like that, for instance, of the Vachsh. 
Then the recent folds of the lower Volga would resemble those of K61if or 
Chodshent, the position of Ufa would correspond with the re-entrant angle 
of the Karsh or the Aryss, and a systen\ of intermediate iipes would lie 
between the Urals and Caucasus similar to that of Bokhara and Ferghana. 
Here, however, we will be content with the two inferences ; first, 4 that in 
this region also the dislocations most remote from the obstacle, the free ends 
(Yergeni), so to speak, are the most recent ; and secondly, that one result of 
the damming back at Ufa is to heighten the contrast between the direction 
of the Urals and that of the Caucasus. 

Folded ranges between Ufa and the Arctic Ocean . Moller has compared 
the plateau of Ufa to the Timan range ; Tschernyschew thought it had but 
slight orographic importance; Stuckenberg inclines to Moller ’s view, but 
only in regard to the tectonic relations 1 2 . 

North of this plateau the folds of the west side of the Urals proceed in 
a north-westerly or north-north-westerly direction, and if we conjoin 
Krasnopolski’s map of Perm-Solikamsk with that given by Krotow of the 
western border of the mountains extending to lat. 61° N. we see that in 
this region several branches of ancient crystalline rocks are detached suc- 
cessively at an acute angle in the form of coulisses. This indicates the 
existence of a deep-seated subdivision or dismemberment of the chain 3 . 


1 A. Pawlow, The peninsula of Samara and the Djeguli’s, Mem. Com. geol. Russie, 1887, 
II, No. 5, 68 pp., map ; p. 55 et seq., for the hypothetical line of connexion. 

2 A. Stuckenberg, Geological map of European Russia, sheet 12 1 , Mem. Com. g6ol. 
Russie, 1898,. XVI, No. 1, pp. 5 and 506 ; Philippson has represented the relations with 
the Urals in a diagrammatic sketch in Sitzb. niederrhein. nat. Ges., &c., Bonn, 1898. 

3 A. Krasnopolski, Geological map of European Russia, sheet 126, Perm-Solikamsk, 
Mem. Com. geol. Russie, 1889, XI, No 1, an<^1891, XI, No. 2 ; P. Krotow, Geological 
investigations on the west slope of the Urals in the regions of Tscherdyn and Solikamsk, 
op. cit., 1888, VI, No. 1 and No. 2, map. On the diagrammatic figure of the dislocations 




The Bassegi, Kvarkush* and the PoJjudov Chains 

After Krotow and Krasnopolski 
M, Metamorphic schists ; D, Devonian ; C, Carboniferous ; 


CP, Permo-Carboniferous ; P, Permian 


868 XORTHERN EUROPE [partiv 

Of tileae coulisses two are especially striking. The first begins between 
lots. 58° 3(/ and 59° ft., in the crystalline schists of the lofty mountain range 
of the Bassegi which advances towards the /western an arc, and is separated 
north^of lat Jv9° N. by a long band of Devonian from the axis* or rather from 
the west border of the following coulisse ; it then returns to the strictly 
meridional direction and terminates in, about lat. 59° 40' N. as a long spur 
of crystalline schists. The second coulisse terminates in lat. 60° 25' N. in 
the lofty range of Kvarkush ; this also is bounded in the east by an 
intercalation of Devonian. 

Krotow’s description shows tfyat a similar disposition occurs in the neigh- 
bouring region of Devonian ^and Carboniferous ; and more especially we 
may observe that the Poljudov chain which forms 9 the beginning of the 
Timan range is also only a divergent coulisse (I, p. <504). 

Possibly the long anticline of Devonian which begins east of Alexan- 
drovsk corresponds with this coulisse in the south. Krotow lays stress on 
the parallelism between the Kvarkush and Poljudov ; north of the Jasva 
the latter detaches itself from the range of the Soiotoi Kamen, loses in 
Height, and is thus interrupted for a shgrt distance, thei^ becomes com- 
pletely independent, and assumes further to the north-west the name 
Of the Timan range . 4 

Our knowledge of this range, or rather of this group of parallel ranges, 
has been considerably increased by Tschernyschew. His investigations are 
the first to show that no such syntaxis with the range of the peninsula of 
Kanin as had been previously supposed to occur to the north of the Timan 
range on the Sula really exists (I, p. 505), hut that the Kanin range must 
be regarded as the direct continuation of the Timan \ 

We are also made acquainted with the following facts : — 

Tschernyschew shows that the Timan range certainly consists of a 
series of parallel anticlines and synclines, which form marked orogra- 
phical features, but that unconformities occur within the$e folds. The 
oldest rocks are sericitic schists. Near the se^-coast, the upper Silurian 
rests unconformably upon them, and a little further south the discordant 
superposition begins with the upper Devonian, which everywhere forms 
the most prominent parts of the Timan range, especially the anticline on 
the upper Sula. It is associated with eruptive rocks. The Devonian is 
followed by Carboniferous, and the Permian also is involved in the 
folding. 

We learn from Grewingk’s diary, describing his very successful journey 

of the Urals which Earpinski has given in Bull. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-P&ersb., 1894, No, 1, 
p. 13, we recognize the emergence of flpurs which are directed to the north-west 
1 T. Tschernyschew, Investigations carried out in the Timan mountains in the year 
1889, preliminary report Bull. Com. g£ol. Russie, 1890, IX, pp. 41-84, map ; also 
Investigations in 1890, op. cit., 1891, X, pp. 95-147, map. p 



€Hak ix] NORTHERN COULISSES OF THE URALS m 

to Kanin in 1848 published in 1891, we learn that ihg sericitie schists of 
the Timan range are continued to cape Miklukin, through two little islands 
which separate, so to speak? the^gulf of Tchesskaia from the ^rctie Ocean ; 
in fact they form in the peninsula of Kanin a range running to the north- 
west from cape Miklukin to Kanin Noss, precisely as Keyserling repre- 
sented it many years ago op the map*of the Petchora region *. 

The northern parts of the Timan range are to a large extent buried 
under the sediments of the latest circumpolar transgression of the Arctic 
Ocean. Kanin also is mantled over by a vast sheet of similar sediments 
and other ddbris ; for this reason it is impossible to discover what rocks 
immediately follow upon the ancient schists in tlis peninsula ; Carboniferous 
and Permian have been* observed only at some distance from them. 

These facts show thht the line of Puljudov, Timan, and Kanin was 
already determined before tRe upper Silurian, and that posthumous folding 
occurred as late as the Permian epoch. The general map of Russia, published 
by the Comito g^ologique in 1892, shows, however, among other things, that 
the ancient schists of south Timan may not correspond exactly with the 
continuation o£tj*e same anticline*in the north, and that the Timan, as we 
have said, represents a whole group of parallel folds. 

The surveys of Fedorow show that the main stem of the Urals, north 
of Puljudov, possessed a purely meridional direction and a structure which 
recalls the geometric regularity of the Lushai mountains (I, p. 453, note 2) 1 2 . 

Fedorow describes a coulisse which dips beneath the surface and dis- 
appears near lat. 63° N. on the east border; in the south it consists of 
lower Devonian ; further north the zones of Stringocephalus Burtini and 
Rhyncondla cuboides occur, and finally on the river Nayssa plant-bearing 
beds of Carboniferous type 3 * * * * 8 . In like manner smaller independent anticlines 
rise on the western border: Tima-Is. in lat. 63° 20' N., Mertwaja-Parma in 

lat. 64° 10' to 64° 24' N. Fresh divergent coulisses appear further west of 

* 

1 K. J. Grewingk, Travels in the peninsula of Kanin, edited by Tscbernyschew, 

Karpinski and Nikitin, supplement no. 11 to the LVII volume of the Mexnoires russes 
of the Acad&mie Imperiale des Sciences, Saint-Petersb., 1891. On the map accompanying 
this work Tschernyschew has coloured geologically the north part of the Timan range 
according to the results obtained by the expedition of 1890. 

3 E, Fedorow, Geological explorations in the north Urals in the years 1884-1886, 
Gora. Journ., 1890, I, p. 196 et seq. (refers to lat. 60° 40' to 62° 20' N.) ; also Syenite 

gneisses of the north Urals, Bull. Com. geol. Russie, 1888, VII, pp. 15-81 (chiefly the 

range Tshistop, 61° 25' to 61° 35') ; also New data for the geology of the north Urals, op. 

cit., 1889, YIII, pp. 7-**7 (to lat. 63° 45'), further in many places in the Gorn. Journ. and 
in. particular the geological map of the north Urals from lat. 61° to 64° 45', Gorn. Journ., 

1897, HI. In the earlier of these works Fedorow supposes that the north-and-south 
direction of the existing Urals preceded in certain pa sts of the north other east-and-west 
folds of great amplitude (cf. Bull. Com. geol. Russie, 1888, VII, p. 24) ; since this view 
is not republished in his later works I have not discussed it here. 

8 Bull. Com. g£ol* Russie, 1S8% VIII, p. 7. 

80 T.LA 8 Ul B b 



870 


. NORTHERN EUROPE 


[part IV 

the principal chaiq. and the map of the Comity gdologique shows a very 
long Carboniferous anticline which, quite 120 kilometers west of the 
Urals, between lats. 65° 40' and 66° 40' Nl, or 1 thereabouts, makes, in the 
region of the Ussa, the same bend to the north-east as is described in these 
latitudes by the principal chain of the Urals. This fold, where intersected 
by the upper Ussa, is called the Adak range by E. Hofmann, and his map 
even indicates a little chain lying further west, the Pise-To , which also 
runs to the north-east 1 . 

These ranges and the curve which they describe parallel to the Urals 
show that what we can see of the principal range of the Urals is only 
a small part of a far broader zone of folds. 

Much further north still, beyond the back of .the Samoyede upland, 
formed of Mesozoic and glacial deposits, Keyserlirf’g and the ‘ general map ' 
show between longs. 56° and 5 7 Q E., near the Arctic Ocean, a Putkov Kamen 
formed of ancient schist; but I possess no detailed information concerning it 2 . 

East of this lies the great bay of Chaipudyrskaia of the Russian maps. 
Schrenk writes the name Hayodepadara. The Samoyedes apply this word 
to one of those small isolated groups of trees, which maintain themselves 
under favourable local circumstances in the desert, north of the limit 
of forest growth. The Samoyedes, however, regard these green islands as 
spots specially favoured by nature. They are to them* holy grove&f whither 
they bring their dead for burial from great distances across the Tundra 3 * * * * 8 . 
At the same time, when we recall the instability of the forest limit, and 
the persistence of such traditions associated with localities, as well as the 
extraordinary variations of climate which man has experienced during the 
glacial epoch, we may ask ourselves whether similar green islands may not 
have existed even at that time beyond the forest limit, and whether the 
native tribes of the present day may not connect with these sacred spots 
one of the tenderest recollections of the childhood of the human race, a 
recollection far older than that of the flood. # 

To the north-east, beyond the bay, lies Smjkin Noss, where Iwanow, 
Lutke’s companion, found beneath the horizontal Mesozoic beds low rocky 
cliffs on the border of the sea. This fact, together with a statement by 

1 Map to The North Urals and the coast range of Pae-choi, studied and described by 
an expedition equipped by the Boyal Russian Geographical Society, 4to, St. Petersb., 

2 vols., 1853 and 1856. (The text by E. Hofmann, the map by Kowalski and others.) 

The Adak mountains also in Keyserling and Krusenstern’s Journey into the Petchora 

country, Atlas, vol. I, p. 374, section of an anticlinal wing in 64° 2t)' N. 

2 Mentioned in A. G. Schrenk, Reise nach dem Nord-Osten des Europ&ischen Russlands 

durch dieTundren der Samojeden zum arktischen Uralgebirge, 1848, I, 8vo, Dorpat, 

p. 554 (Putkow Kamen). •* 

8 A. G. Schrenk, Reise, I, p. 314 ; th£ corpse is laid on its left side and the implements 
and weapons which are placed with it are rendered useless ; this custom was once very 
general in Europe, op. cit., 524. 



ISLAND OF DOLGOI 


871 


CHAP. IX] 

Linschoten in the year 1594, that the island of Mauritius (Dolgoi) is rocky 
as well as the name Goletz, wh^}h i^ borne by one of the islands, led Schrenk 
to conjecture that a rocky range runs parallel to the mountains, striking 
towards Vaigatz in a north-westerly direction from Sinjkin Nos«? across the 
long series of islands— Selenetz, Dolgoi, JMatvejev, and Goletz 1 2 . 

This conjecture has been Confirmed. Feilden and Pearson found that 
the island of Dolgoi, 50 kilometers in length, consists of limestone and 
conglomerate, which dip regularly to the east at an angle of 45° 3 . 

Thus we must ascribe to the Pae-choi well as to the Urals a far 
greater breadth than was formerly supposed. j 

Considering the great length which these ranges attain, it is not 
impossible that the Adak grange passes in a great curve, concave to the 
west, beneath the more recent sediments, forming the mainland hills of 
the Samoyedes, and reaches Sinjkin Noss, thus uniting the Pae-choi and 
the Urals ; but on this point we have no information. 

As regards the relations of the Urals and the Pae-choi, I have 
thought it necessary (I, p. 502), chiefly on the evidence furnished by 
E. Hofmann, to Hujppose the existence of a syntaxis near Konstantinov 
Kamen (lai. 68° 29* N.) ; though another view is supported by the 
distinguished authors qf the general map of the Comite g&dogique. On 
this map the Pae-ehoi slants away from the Urals somewhat south of 
lat. 68° N. and rui®3, from a point situated south of the summit of 
Gnetju, across the watershed between Kara and Ussa to the Yugor Shar. 
Thus the Kara district should indicate the separation between the 
Urals and Pae-choi. Since the above-mentioned watershed is covered 
with glacial debris, and the Pae-choi itself breaks up into low ice-polished 
hills, we cannot at present go beyond conjecture, but I do not hesitate 
to adopt this more modern view because it presupposes a junction similar 
to that known in ijie case of the Timan range 4 . 

It would be interesting under these circumstances to know how far 
the Urals extend to the north. Near lat. 68° N., in the mass of the 
Gnstju (1,307 meters, Hofmann) talcose clay -slates prevail, striking to the 
north-north-east; this is also the general direction of the range and is 

1 Linschoten in J. C. Adelung, Geschichte der Schiffahrten und Versuche, welche zur 
Entdeckung des nordOstlichen Weges nach Japan und China unternommen wurden, 
4to, Halle, 1768, pp. 155, 156 ; Dolgoi is the name employed here for Moritz island. 

8 Schrenk, Reise, II, 18&4, p. 42. We may mention here that, according to Feilden, 
the depth of the sea from the continent to Kolgujew never exceeds BO fathoms, and that 
Kolgujew according to Trevor-Battye and Feilden is only an accumulation of glacial 
debris and recent marine sediments, Quart. Journ. Geol. Joe., 1896, LII, p. 52 et seq. 

3 H. W. Feilden, Visits to Barents and Kara Seas wuLth. Rambles in Nova Zemlya, 1895 
and 1897, Geogr. Journ. 1898, XI, pp. 333-864, map ; in particular p. 350. 

4 Geological map of European Russia, edited by the Comite geologique, 6 sheets, 

St. Petersb., 1892. • 


B b 2 



372 NORTHERN EUROPE [partiv 

continued furthei # towards the Arctic Ocean by the mountains of Anaraha, 
Arkapai (Hofmann, — Horamagha, Schrejak), $ little west of this, Minisejpai 
(tlfe termifaal dome rock), and close to the latter the oft-mentioned round 
quartzite ridge of Konstantinov Kamen (I, p. 505). The Pae-choi, as we have 
seen, does not come into direct cqntact with the Urals, but its deflexion 
near the Yugor Shar from north-north-west f co north-west, and finally, as 
it approaches the Urals, to west-north- west, is recorded both by Hofmann 
and Schrenk. 

The Konstantinov Kamen descends sheer to the northern Tundra and 
is surrounded by Tundr^ lakes 1 : its distance from the seashore amounts 
only to 30 or 35 kilometers. The indefatigable traveller, Sujew, crossed 
this Tundra as early as 1772 2 * . E. Hofmann has described it in great detail. 
North of the Konstantinov Kamen there rise from it, one after the other, 
1 rocky hill ranges, stretching from east-south-east to west-north-west, and 
attaining a height of at least 150 feet above the surrounding Tundra/ Here 
we see clay slates, chloritic rocks, and schistose grey wackes, but the exposures 
do not permit us to determine the strike. Towards the sea hard pepper- 
coloured sandstone appears. ‘ These ranges of hills, which fie almost at right 
angles to the longitudinal axis of the Urals and nearly parallel to the sea- 
coast, may be compared to a series of dunes with intervening plains V 

It follows from this that fragments of mountakis are still visible 
beneath the Tundra north of the Konstantinov Kamen, but whether they 
belong to the Urals, or are oblique continuations of the Pae-choi, I hesitate 
to decide. Hofmann states that at this place the sea casts up fragments 
of coal and of sandstone with plant remains. Schrenk conjectures that 
the Urals are connected with the peninsula of Yalmal ; this peninsula 
lately received a passing visit from Nordenskiold’s expedition, but is almost 
completely unknown 4 . 

On the east side of the Urals, beneath the Tuntjra which extends 
between the Obi and Kara bay, Finsch has encountered rocks in place 
between lats. 67° 15' and 68° N., about 40 kilometers from the foot of 
the mountains ; among them are limestone and diabase and on the water- 
shed (Yangana-pai, 100 meters), between the rivers Shtutshaia and Podo- 
rata, quartz-porphyry. All these rocks, as well as the quartzites of the Urals 
and Pae-choi, probably belong to the Devonian system, which, together 
with the lower Carboniferous, forms the greater part of all these mountains* 
They indicate that here also the range is still very broad 5 . 

1 E. Hofmann, Der Nord*Ural, II, frontispiece. 

2 Sujew in Pallas, Journey through various provinces of the Russian kingdom, 4to, 
St. Petersb., Ill, 1776. On p. 2S& he mentions * black schistose beds dipping obliquely/ 

* E. Hofmann, Der Nord-Ural, Ik p* 2^4. 

4 Schrenk, Reise, II, p. 68. 

6 0. Finsch, Der Isthmus zwischen dem Karischen Meere.und dem Ob, Peterm. Mitth., 
1877, pp. 216-220, map ; Reise nach West-Sibirien, 8vo, 1879, pp. 436-447, 466. Erman 



PAE-CHOL YAIGATZ 


373 


CHAP. IX] 

In describing the Pae-choi we mentioned its deflexion to the north- 
north-west. An imposing secondary range, the Padaia, *lying to the west 
is separated from the main Jbodj| by the river Velikaia which discharges 
itself into the Yugor Shar. The range of Sinjkin Noss-Dolgof, lying still 
further west, must be regarded as a foothill. • 

Vaigatz is described b^ Feilden , as 300 feet high and formed of 
limestone and shales or slates ; the basset edges of the steeply upturned 
beds, striking to the north-west, extend over the surface of the island. 
NordenskiSld has stated that the vertical beds of cape Grebeni have a north- 
west strike. Tschernyschew and Jakowle^y have collected all the facts 
relating to this island ; and their investigations show that the fossils of 
cape Grebeni, which had been assigned to the upper Silurian, are really 
Devonian 1 * * * 

Tschernyschew’s journey \o Nova Zembla brought to light the unex- 
pected fact that a broad depression extends across the south island from 
Moller’s bay (lat. 72° 20 / -30' N., north of North Geese cape) on its western 
side to lat. 72° N. on the east coast ; it is possibly a fault-trough and is 
occupied by dego^ts belonging to the Artinsk stage 2 . 

From south to north we may trace the following directions of strike : 
Vaigatz , u^)per Silurian (Devonian) lat. 70° N., strike north-west according to 
Feilden and Nordensbiold ; the island in the mouth of the river Nedivatova 
with the greater j>art of the Kostin Shar (shale or slate, Devonian lime- 
stone, also porphyry) lat. 71° 10'-20 / N., strike 330°, also 345° (north-west 
to north-north- west), dip steep, north-east to east-north-east, according to 
Lehmann 3 ; shores of Goosela ud in the bay of Rogatshev and of the adjacent 
islands (Devonian, also intercalations of augite porphyry and amygdaloid 
rock) lat. 71° 30' N., strike north-north-west according to Hoefer 4 ; in the 
low-lying zone between Mailers bay on the east coast (Artinsk stage) lats. 72° 

has ascended the eastern foothills in lat. 67° 12' N. ; he found diorite divided into vertical 
plates strike N. 35° E., and at a greater height hornblendic rocks with transitions 
to gneisslike talc schists; A. E?man, Reise um die Erde, div. I, vol. I, 8vo, 1883, 
pp. 692 et seq., 702, 708, Atlas, pi. Ill ; also in Erman’s Archiv, 1842, II, p. 769. 
K. M. Derjugin describes the ascent to the summit Suchar-keu in the Travaux Soc. Nat. 
Saint-Petersb., Zool. div., 1898, XXIX, p. 58. 

1 T. Tschernyschew and N. Jakowlew, Die Kalksteinfauna des Cap Grebeni auf der 
Waigatsch-Insel und des Flusses Nechwatowa auf Novaja-Semlja, Verh. russ. k. min. Ges. 
St. Petersb., 1898, XXXVI, pp. 55-99, in particular p. 56 et seq.; cf. also Lindstrom in 
Bihang k. svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl. Stockholm, 1882, VI, no. 18, p. 4. 

2 T. Tschernyschew, The expedition to Nova Zembla, Izvest'ija Imp. ross. Geogr. 
Obsch., 1896, XXXII, pp. 1-26, map ; also in Ymer, Stockholm, 1896, pp. 129-149, map. 

8 Lehmann in Baer, Expedition a Novaia-Zemlja et en Laponie, Bull. Scientifique 
Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1838, II, p. 154 ; Tschernyschew and Jakowlew have 
published the instructive description of the river Neahvatova from Lehmann’s Diary and 
established the Devonian age of the fossils, IJie Kalksteinfauna, &c. p. 84 et seq. 

4 H. HOfer Graf Wilczek’s Nordpolfahrt im Jahre 1872, II, Uber den Bau Nowaja 
Semljas, Peterm. Mitth., 1874, p«303. 



374 NORTHERN EUROPE [partiv 

2<y-3&' and 72° N., strike 335° ( = north-north-west) according to Tscherny- 
sche#l ; Shar (older Palaeozoic rocks, ancient schists, gneiss ; on 

Black island also an alleged boss of pr^togine) lats. 73° 15' to 73° 25' N., 
general strike 345° to 360° (north, to a little west of north) according 
to Lehmann, confirmed by later observations ; Pachtussoff islands (probably 
upper Silurian) east coast, lat. 74°«24' N., dijp west, (strike about north) 
according to Feilden ; Behrens islands (upper Carboniferous, according to 
Toula, possibly Permian also k) lat. 76° 16' to 76° 25' N., beds vertical, strike 
north-east* according to Hoefer. These islands form only one part of 
a Carboniferous zone, which t accompanies the north-west border of the 
island and is known in j^aces from Berch island (lat. 75° 55' N.) to cape 
Nassau (lat. 76° 30' N.). Upper Carboniferous or Permo-Carboniferous, 
according to Nordenskiold, also crops out on e he outer margin of the 
island much further south, and even in the *north part of Gooseland 2 . 

Two independent strikes, according to Tsehernyschew, occur on Nova 
ZemCbla, one running to the north-west and one to the north-east. The 
uniform bending of the principal directions of strike from north-west and 
north-north- west in Vaigatz to an alnjost or completely 
meridional direction in Matotchkin Shar and the Pach- 
tussoff islands, and finally to north-easf in Behrefids islands 
corresponds with 4 the view already expressed^ that a 
uniform arc, corresponding in strike with the trend of 
the mountain chain, extends from *Pae-choi through 
Vaigatz to the north-east extremity of Nova Zembla. 

Thus from a study of these observations we are led to 
recognize three elements : (a) the Urals with two branches, 
namely (b) Timan-Kanin , and (c) Paechoi-Vaigatz-Nova - 
Zembla . 

The range of the Urals, recurved to the north-east 
in lat. 65° N., and folded along its whcAe length by a 
pressure acting from east to west, is dammed back in 
the neighbourhood of Ufa. But south of this region its 
folds advance, diverging widely in their course, and extend perhaps as far 
as the Yergeni, while in the north we see successive Parmas (coulisses) 
detach themselves from it ; Timan is a coulisse of this kind and perhaps 
Pae-choi also. The development of these frontal chains is not everywhere 
the same. In the north, at least in Timan, it appears to be predetermined in 

1 F. Toula, Eine Kohlenkalk-Fauna auf den Barents-Inseln (frowaja-Semlja N.W.), 
Sit zb. k. Akad. Wise. Wien, 1875, LXXI, pp. 527-608. 

2 A. E. Nordenskiold, RedogOrelse f5r en expedition til mynningen af Jenissej och 
Sibirien, Bihang k. svenska Vet.-A&ad. Handl. Stockholm, 1877, IV, no. I, p. 24 ; these 
outcrops may possibly be connected with tjie region described by Tsehernyschew. The 
facts concerning Nova Zembla known up to 1886 have been collected by A. Wichmann, 
Zur Geologie von Nowaja Semlja, Zeitschr.oleutsch. geol. fres., 1886, XXXVIII, pp. 516-550. 



Fig. 18. 



chap, ix] NORTHERN BRANCHES OF THE URAES 375 

a much older substructure, while in the south no indications of this kind 
can be discerned. But in neither case do we see any such sharp contrast 
between the mountains arid tile foreland as exists, for instance, on the 
northern border of the Alp# and Carpathians. Or^ the contrary, as w# shall 
see immediately, the oldest visible parts of the foreland strike in a similar 
direction to the mountain^ The folds of the Urals, in spite of the obstruct 
tion at Ufa, and notwithstanding frequent overfolding towards the west, 
are not isolated secondary folds which are checked by alien horsts and 
bent like the Banda arc. No sharply defined boundary is perceptible on 
their eastern flank, and in their western parts we still find a certain 



Fig. 19. 


resemblance to the foreland (I, p. 504). They are, as it were, the inner 
members of a common whole, of a greater and more ancient unit. The Ural 
chain, in its position and length, recalls the peripheral folds of eastern 
Eurasia, such as* the Djugdjur, Sikhota Alin, and perhaps also the Great 
Khingan. In fact, in this part of North Europe we recognize trend-lines 
which present uo small resemblance to certain parts of the island groups of 
eastern Asia. » • 

The two figures, 18 and 19, roughly indicate this resemblance. But 
we must observe that in Fig. 18 the lines of the Urals, the junction of 



sn 


NORTHERN EUROPE 


[PART IV 

which be correctly given on this scale, lie in much higher latitudes 

than those of Asia, and that the representations of them on our ordinary 
maps are thus very much distorted. We rf.ust &lso observe that in Fig. 19 
the afc of Verkhoiansk occupies an exceptional position and has not yet 
been described Liu-kiu is probably cut off from south Japan. In the same 
way the Kuriles are probably cut off «on Yezo, ljut the volcanic line enters 
the intersecting arc in the group of Optateshike (III, p. 138). 

The pre-Cambrian platfornt. In front of the Urals there extends the 
vast Russian plain. Its ancient foundation is not visible till we proceed 
a considerable distance to the west and south-west. In the folds exposed, 
both on the eastern slope the Urals and in the river valleys of west 
Siberia, Devonian and probably lower- Carboniferous # share in the' folding, 
and on the western border of the chain still rrioi^ recent sediments are 
involved. The folds of the foundation of the plain are far more ancient, 
and in the region surrounding the gulf of Finland we perceive that they 
were already planed down in pre-Cambrian times. 

N otovithstanding this difference of age we recognize a remarkable cor- 
resjfX) ndence between the direction of these undent folds andJhgt of the folds 
of the Urals . 

Karpinski, in his instructive treatise on the structure and geography of 
Russia, has endeavoured to represent the meridional (UralJ trend-lines of 
the country as opposed to the east-and-west (Caucasian) ljnes. The first 
of these lines is drawn from the Mugodjars along the Urals, then to the 
north-west in the direction of the Timan range towards Kanin Noss. This 
line, slightly concave to the west, is followed on Karpinski 's sketch by 
similar lines, extending with a gradual transition to the meridional direction 
to Finland and the Dnjepr 1 . 

The contrast, not only with the Caucasus but also with the Crimea, 
the Carpathians and all the trend-lines of Central Europe, is very clear 
and deserves close investigation. 0 

The east of the Baltic shield . The line fronv Kecholm on lake Ladoga 
to the north-east comer of the gulf of Finland separates the ancient 
rocks of this region from the recent sediments of the level country which 
extends southwards across the whole breadth of lake Ladoga and the 
gulf of Finland to beyond St. Petersburg. This line is regarded as a fault. 
The island of Hogland is regarded by Ramsay as a horst *. Nevertheless 
the gneiss has been reached beneath St. Petersburg at a depth of from 195 
to 200 meters 3 . • 

1 A Karpinski, Uebersicht der physiko-geographischen Verhaltnisse des europaischenr 

Russlands wahrend der verflossenen geologischen Perioden, Beitr&ge zur Kenntniss des 
russisehen Reiches, 3rd series, 1887. 9 

2 W. Ramsay, Om Hoglands geologist byggnad, Geol. FOren. Stockh. Ftfrh., 1890, 
XII, pp. 471-490, map. 

* A. Inostranzew, C’est le gneiss qui forme le sous-sol pjofond de Saint-Pet ersbo uvg, 
Travaux Soc. Nat. Saint*P6tersb., XXIII, pp. 45-51. 



377 


chap, ix] THE EAST OF THE BALTIC SHIELD 

Ladoga and Onega are also united by recent segments, and from the 
gulf of Bothnia to the White sea the Baltic shield appears to be separated 
from the region to the scfuth Its if it were a horst. Yet t^ere can be no 
doubt, according to Karpinski's statements, fchat the Archaean rocks 
cropping out in the south of Russia are continuations of the ancient rocks 
of the north h * * • 

Sederholm separates the pre-Cambian rocks of Finland into three inde- 
pendent groups. The most recent of these, the JoUthan division is scarcely 
folded or not at all; it lies unconformably on the older members, and 
consists chiefly of sandstone. The second or Jatulhm division, formed of 
quartzite, schists, dolomite, and basic eruptivf rocks, is folded. It probably 
corresponds as a wl^ole with the so-called * Algonkian.’ Below this there 
follows, also separated by t an unconformity, the Archaean group of which 
the greater part consists of granite gneiss -. 

We will begin north of lake Ladoga. 

In these regions the prevalent strike is north-north-west with local 
deviations to the north-west. Miklucha-Maklay encountered a strike to 
north-west, 31 5° to 330°, in the ancient schist 3 . Berghell records the same 
direction on the north coast 4 . At the north-east end of lake Ladoga, however, 
the western boundary of a great Archaean region begins ; it runs along the 
west dfiast of j;he 1?jalis-jarvi and the eastern end of the Ulea-jarvi to the 
north-north- we$t. East of this boundary the Archaean rocks, according to 
Sederholm, are thrown into folds striking to the north-north-west for 
a distance of 800 kilometers and over a breadth of 500 kilometers. The 
observations made more to the east by Russian geologists show that they 
extend over even a greater area. 

Lisitzin has observed the prevalence of the nortli-north-westerly direc- 
tion on the Pjalis-jarvi, and further aw r ay to Nurmes 5 , and Tigerstedt has 

1 In addition to the exposures in the government of Pskov (II, p. 229) Cambrian and 
lower Silurian Pediments have been described near Ravanitchi (between Minsk and 
Mohilev) at a much greater distance from the Baltic shield. Bork lias found lower 
Silurian at Yishny-Volotchek (government of Tver) ; A. Karpinski, Melanges geologiques 
et paleontologiques, from the Bull. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1892, 1, pp. 139-145 
(Bull, nouv. serie, III, p. 1). 

- J. J. Sederholm, Ueber eine archaische Sedimentformation im Budwest lichen Finland, 
Bull. Com. g6oL Finland, 1899, no. 6, pp. 1-254, maps; for previous interpretations, Om 
Bkrggrunden i Sodra Finland, Fennia, 1893, VIII, no. 3. 

3 M. N. Miklucha-Maklay, Geologische Skizze des Kreises Olonetz und der Inseln des 
Ladoga-Sees in der Umgebung von Walaamo, Mater. G-eol. Russ , 1897, XVIII, pp. 171- 
264, map, r. • 

* H. Berghell, Geologiske iakttagelser langs karelska jarnvagen, Fennia, 1892, V, 
no. 2, map. & 

5 G. Lisitzin, N&gra geologiska iakttagelser gj^rda i trakterna norr om Ladoga Sja 
sommaren 1889, Meddel. fr. Industristyr. i Fiqjand, Helsingfors, 1891, XIV, pp. 127-154, 
map. At Pitkaranta on the east shore £n extent of massive rocks makes it difficult to 
determine the original strike ; cf. Tornebohm, Om Pitkiiranta malmfalt, Geol. Fbren. 
Stockh. Fdrh., 1891, XIII, pp *313-334, map. 



378 


NORTHERN EUROPE 


[part IV 


recorded i4 to the w^st and south-west of the Pjalis-jarvi, where bands of 
* d^orite, from 20 to 50 kilometers in length, rim in the same north-north-west 
direction through ancient quartzite \ Finafiy Rdsberg has traced the strike 
of the rocks between thetmeridians 31° 30' andf32° 30' E. from lat. 63° N. 
onward to the shores of the Tuoppa-jarvi in lat. 65° 45' N. At Kallionemi 
(lat. 62° 45' N.,long. 31° E.) the gneiss shows a divergent strike of N. 50° E. ; 
this soon turns to a north-and-south direction, then somewhat more to the 
west, and the direction north-north -west to north, or in places north-west, 
prevails even up to the Tuoppa-jarvi. On the south-east border of this 
lake, however (lat. 65° 28' N.. long. 33° E.), a strike of N. 10° E. appears 1 2 . 

These observations servers a link with the extensive investigations 
carried out by Inostranzew between lake Onega and tfye White sea 3 . 

In this region, where the ground is not covered by glacial deposits, we 
find the same rocks as in Finland. Gneiss accompanied by bands of 
granite, which follow the same strike, as well as talc and chlorite schists, 
forms a large part of the foundation. Above it lies a quartz con- 
glomerate, quartzite, and quartz schist, then dolomite. According to 
Inostranzew, the superposition of the quartzites is unconfermable, but 
nevertheless they are folded in the same direction. This indicates dis- 
continuous mountain formation in extremely remote times. That these 
rocks correspond with Sederholm's Jatulian stage 4 can Rardjy be ddhbted. 

Inostranzew’s results may be summed up as follows : — m 

The north-north-westerly direction observed by Rosberg is continued 
through the whole western part of the mining district of Povjanetz and is 
most conspicuous in a great tract of quartzites, which, accompanied by 
ranges of eruptive rocks, runs to the south-south -east, across the Segosero 
and the region lying to the west of it. These, further to the south-south- 
east, are replaced by crystalline schists, which, also in association with 
eruptive ranges, form the shores of lake Onega for long distances. Gneiss 
also occurs north and east of the lake to beyond the Pudoshgorskii Pogost ; 
here, too, the strike is directed to the north-north-west, and in one place even 


1 A. F. Tigerstedt, Om traktens mellan Hoytianen oeh Pjelisjarvi geologiska och 
topografiska byggnad, Fennia, 1892, V, no. 10, maps. 

2 J. E. Rosberg, Ytbildningar i ryska och finska Karelen med sarskild hansyn till de 
Karelska randmoranerna, Fennia, 1892, VII, No. 2, maps, in particular pp. 17-27. 

3 A. Inostranzew, Geological survey of the regions between the White sea and lake 
Onega, 8vo, St. Petersburg, 1871, map ; Geological investigations in North Russia in the 
years 1869 and 1870, 8vo, 1872 ; Geological sketch of the district qf Povjanetz in the 
government of Olonetz, 8vo, 1877, maps (here in particular, p. 495 et seq.) also W. J. Ko- 
lenko, Geological description of the Cis-Onega region, Mater. Geol. Russ., 1885, XII, 
pp. 23-104, map. 

4 An older statement concerning tfie discovery of a Devonian coral in Olonetz gave 

rise to differences of opinion, but this disJoveiyfchas not been confirmed. R. Ludwig, Die 
Gegenden am Sauna- und Semtsche-Flusse im Olonetzer-Gouvernement, Bull. Soc. Imp. 
Nat. Moscou, 1874, II, pp, 108-127, map. • 



chap.ixJ THE EAST OF THE BALTIC S HIELD 379 

to the west-north-west. But almost north of the # town of Povjanetz on 
the little lake of Matkosero (about lat. 63° 10' N.) the direction changes and 
turns to the north-nofth-east. Glacial deposits no doubt mask large 
areas of the country to ftie north, but where tjie rocky foundation appears 
a strike to the north-north-east prevails, almost to the shores of the White 
sea. Talc and chlorite ^chists occur at the northern extremity of the great 
Bygosero, and gneiss on the whole seashore, both on the coast of Pomoria 
in the south, and up to the mouth of the Kem in the west. Here the 
north-easterly direction appears, even in the graphitic gneiss of the island 
of Warbarlud. • 

The archipelago of Solovetzkii, lying O* this coast, affords nothing but 
glacial deposits. 

It is highly probable that the direction to the north-north-east, of which 
Rosberg found indications at the end of the Tuoppa-jarvi, ought to be 
assigned to the region of Pomoria. This region, however, does not embrace 
the whole border of the gulf. West of the mouth of the Onega, on the 
Kusheretzkaia, the gneiss shows a strike to the east-north-east (260°), 
further away becoming 285°* but on the Kij Ostrov near Onega, which 
was visited by^ Murchison, we again encounter as in Finland the widely 
prev&lent direction to the north-west or north -north-west (320°-345°). 

The question %iow arises whether the north-north-east strike of Pomoria 
is maintained^in the gneiss and amphibolite gneiss which forms the greater 
part of the peninsula of Kola. Ramsay has published a table of the direc- 
tions of strike. Only at one place on the east coast, Karabelnaia Navolok, 
not far from Ponoj, does he mention a strike to N. 10° E. ; at Ponoj it 
is north and south ; further north, on the Swjatoi Noss and as far as 
Jokonsk, that is to beyond long. 40° E., it is north-north-west. Then, 
further west, the direction again becomes north-west and west-north- west. 
At Kola the prevalent strike is west-north-west and, according to Kudriazow. 
the rocks tfbtween Kantalaks and Imandra also follow the same direction 1 . 
The band of granulite, probably the greatest known, which crops out west 
of lake Imandra, at first follows this direction to the west-north-west, and 
continues to do so as it proceeds north of lat. 68° N., over a wide area 
through Sodankyla, where it has been described by Tigerstedt and Rosberg 2 : 

1 W. Ramsay, Geologische Beobaehtungen auf der Halbinsel Kola, Fennia, 1890, 111, 

no. 7, map ; gneiss however occurs, strike N. 20-80° E, on the eruptive mass of the 
Umpjavr, Rams^r, Das Nephelin-Syenit-Gebiet von Kola, Fennia, 1894, XI, no. 2, p. 70. 
Rabot’s studies on lakes Imandra and Enare, so important for a general knowledge of 
the country, contain no information about the strike : Explorations dans la Laponie 
Russe ou presqu’ile de Kola, Bull. Soc. geogr. Paris, 1889, 7 e ser., X, pp. 457-547, and 
Rabot et Velain, op. cit., 1891, XII. • 

2 A. F. Tigerstedt, Beskrifning af i|p gedlogiske formationerna i sydostra delen af 
Enare samt norddstra delen af Sodankylii socknar, Sallskap. f. Finland’s Geografi, 1884, 
pp. 1-24, map; J, E. Rosberg, Norddstra Sodankyla, Geograf. Foren. Tidsskr., 1891, 



880 NORTHERN EUROPE ’ '[partiv 

then its no^Siern bordej* meets the south-west end of lake Enare and bends 
further west in a very conspicuous curve to ^the north, maintaining this 
direction^ according to Jernstrom, up to the Tanajoki in lat. 70° N . l . 

The investigations of Jernstrom have contributed largely to our know- 
ledge of these northern regions. Sederholm, who visited the district south 
of lake Enare in 1898, confirms Jernstroiri’s observations^ Herr Sederholm 
also informs me that the Jatulian quartzite, coming from Kittila continues 
towards the south-east and reache's the river Kitinen north of the church 
of Sodankyla. It therefore rum in the same direction as the southern 
border of the granulite range, which is very clearly shown on Sederholm s 
map of Finland. h 

Thus in a great part of Finland and in the adjoining* region north 
of lakes Ladoga and Onega up to the islands of the* White sea, both in 
the Kola peninsula and in the barren regions between lakes Imandra and 
Enare, we see that the oldest rocks, including the discordant Jatulian series, 
are thrown into long folds, and already find it possible to recognize the 
trend-lines of some of these folds together with the ground plan of the 
primitive mountain ranges which they represent. In a general way we 
may say that the north-north- westerly strike prevails^ from the gulf of 
Bothnia to the south-east end of the Tuoppa-jarvi, beyond Ladoga and 
Onega, and somewhat north of Povjanetz, and that it* reappears, *after 
being hidden under glacial deposits, near the mouth of the^ river Onega. 
In the interval, however, is a region in which the strike is almost without 
exception north-north-east. This extends from the points mentioned on 
the Tuoppa-jarvi, and north of Povjanetz, to the coast of Pomoria, and 
nearly to the mouth of the Kem. Perhaps a trace of this strike reappears 
on the east coast of Kola, but in the interior of the peninsula the strike 
turns at once from the north -north-east to north, further west to north- 
north-west, and then west-north-west to beyond lake Imandra, and it 
remains west-north-west in the granulite band to the south of f iake Enare, 
where it again turns to the north. • 

pp. 1-51, map, in particular p. 25. The older description of the parish of Kuusamo by 
Holmberg does not indicate the directions of strike: Hydrographische und orographisch- 
geognostische Beobachtungen im nordlichen Finnland in den Jahren 1847, 1848, and 
1849, Verh. russ. k. min. Ges. St. Petersb., 1855-1856, pp. 1-62, map. The band of 
gneiss which Hummel thought he recognized in 1875 along the Swedo-Russian frontier 
(Geologisk 5fversigtskarta5fverdenkanda delen af Norrbotens l&n, 1875, in hisUnderd&nig 
berattelse om malmfyndingheter inom Gellivare och Jukkasj&rvi Socknar af Norrbottene 
lan, Sver. geol. Undersdkn., 1877) is not so clearly shown on the more recent maps of the 
region of the Muonio by Svenonius*and Stjernvall. Vast outcrops of granite make it 
difficult to determine the strike : F. Svenonius, Bergrundet i Norbottens Lan, in Sver. 
geol. UndersOkn., 1892, no. 126, map and H. J. Stjernvall, Bidrag till finska Lappmarkens 
Geognosi, Meddel. fr. Industristyrelsen iVinland, 1892, XIV, pp. 71-125, map. 

1 A. M. Jernstrom, Material till finska lappmarkens Geologi ; I, Utsjoki och Enare 
Lappmarker, Bidrag till K&nned. af Finlands Nat. och Folk, 1874, XXI, pp. 98-229, map ; 
and II, Kitinendalen i Sodankylti socken, op. cit., 1875, XXIV, pp. 49-76. 



chap, ix] PRE-CAMBRIAN TREND-LINES 381 

The directions mentioned above are the same as those of the Urals 
and the Pae-choi . ^ § 

The north-north-wdfet strike which prevails north of lakes Onega and 
Ladoga and in central inland, and sometime^ approaches very fclosely to 
the meridian, corresponds with the dominant strike of the Urals south of 
the Toll poss. The no^th-north-east strike of Pomoria, into which, accord- 
ing to Inostranzew, the north-north-west strike probably is gently bent 
north of lake Onega, is thus comparable to that in the more northerly part 
of the Urals. 

We have seen that in the peninsula, of Kanin upper Silurian beds rest 
unconformably on sericitic schist, the stride of which is parallel with Pae- 
choi. m Now the gy&nulite range of northern Lapland repeats in a remark- 
able manner the Nova Zembla curve. Tschernyschew has already pointed 
out the correspondence between Pae-choi, Timau, the northern border of 
the Scandinavian horst and of the peninsula of Kola 1 . The plan of the 
granulite range of Lapland takes us still deeper, even into the structure of 
the Archaean platform itself. It is as though the plan of a broader arc, 
which w*>ukl find a place ii^ Fig. 18 , had been already sketched out in 
pre-Jotnian or pre-Cambrian times. As, however, the question has a more 
direct bearing on the study of the island arcs, it may suffice to have 
suggested a % closer examination. 

The middle and west of the Baltic shield. Let us return to the boun- 
dary line of the granite- gneiss, to the north-east of lake Ladoga and the 
Pjalis-jarvi. This granite-gneiss is doubtless the oldest rock visible in 
Finland, and Sederholm compares it to the ‘Jerngneis/ or iron gneiss, of 
western Sweden. It never sends off veins into the adjacent rocks. The 
stratified rocks which rest upon it towards the west, first a broad zone 
of hornblende-schist with intercalated limestones, then mica-schist, quartz- 
schist, and the like, gradually approach the normal sediments. Rocks 
resembling gneiss are also present, and the strike of the folds appears at 
first to’ be fairly uniform and to extend towards the north-north-west into 
northern Sweden 2 . 

Then the state of things is changed. 

The region of the ‘ Jerngneis ’ mentioned above, namely the broad, 
monotonous region of the Swedish granite-gneiss, in part hornblende- 
gneiss, lies much further west. It is bounded on the east by a long meri- 
dional line, already recognized by Erdmann. This line begins on the south 

• 

1 Tschernyschew, Nowaja-Semlja, Izviestija Imp. ross. Geogr. Obsch, 1896, XXXII, 
p. 25. Beyond Nameless bay Tschernyschew has observed another strike which is 
a return to that of the Urals. The reasons why the whole of Nova Zembla is considered 
to be the continuous fragment of an # arc have already been mentioned. 

2 J. J. Sederholm, Ueber eine archaische Sedimentformation im sudwestlichen 
Finland, p. 211 et seq. * 



882 


NORTHERN EUROPE 


[part IV 

coast near Solvisborg, and runs, almost following the meridian 15° 20', E. 
towards the south end of lake Wettern, by tfye east side of lake Wenem, 
md then in the direction of the Klar-Elv to the gliftt. Its length amounts 
to 'aiore than five* degrees of latitude. o 1 

The district wfest of this line, namely, the eastern part of the gneiss region, 
is traversed by numerous long dykes of *hyperite, gunning from north to 
south, and the difference east and west of the long boundary is so striking 
that Nathorst once conjectured that it might possibly represent a great and 
very ancient fault with a downthrow on the western side *. 

The nature of this boundary ^has©not, however, as yet been satisfactorily 
determined. Detailed observations of recent date are in my possession 
only for a small part of the extreme south. After de Gepr had discoyered 
a conglomerate in the mica-schist near the supposed boundary north of 
Solvisburg, Backstrom showed that in this place at least the boundary is 
not so sharply defined as it is stated to be in the north. A band of amphi- 
bolite undoubtedly strikes along the boundary, while the halleflinta and 
the conglomerate-bearing series clearly diverge from it, but isolated 
bosses of granite-gneiss occur yet further oast without any sign of a 
meridional fracture ; possibly the latter lies further we*st. f If there is a 
fault, Backstrom thinks the downthrow is on the east 2 . 

Between these two lines, so remote from one another, i e. between* the 
lakes of Ladoga and Wettern, there lies, in the middle of the faltic shield, 
a region of divergent structure. While outside them, both to the east and 
the west, the most ancient gneiss and a uniform structure prevail, in the 
interval between them considerable variety exists, produced by the occur- 
rence of eruptive rocks, dating from various phases of the pre- Cambrian 
period, and by unconformities, also pre-Cambrian. The back of a great 
granite batholite occupies the middle of Finland, a second lies in Smaland, 
a third to the north of it ; between the last two granite masses we see a 
band of gneiss striking from east to west; smaller eruptive regions also 
occur. As in many other ancient abraded districts the strike is affected by 
the form of the batholites, and frequently we seem to have before us an 
arrangement like the concentric coats of an onion rather than the remains 
of original folding. 

Cohen and Deecke ascertained that similar granites form the foundation 

1 A. G. Nathorst, Ett forsok att ftirklara orsaken till den sharpen gransen mellan 
s3dra Sveriges vestra och ostra urterritorium, Geol. Fflren, Stockh. Ffrjji., 1886, VIII, 
pp. 95-102. 

2 G. de Geer, Om ett Konglomerat inom urberget vid VestanH i Sk&ne, Geol. F6ren. 

Stockh. Forh., 1886, VIII, pp. 30-54, map (German translation by Wahnschaffe, in 
Zeitschr. deutsch. geol. Gee., 1886, pp. 26fc~294) ; also Bladet B&ckaskog, the detailed 
geological map of Sweden, II, O. 40 and text ; B&ckstr8m, Vestan&f&lte en petro- 
genetisk studie, K. svenska Vet-Akad. Handl. Stockholm, 1897, XXIV, no. 4, 127 pp., 
map, in particular p. 104. * 



chap, ix] 1 Between Ladoga and wettern 388 

• 

of the island of Bornholm, and concluded from this that the meridional 
boundary line is continued west of Bornholm 1 . * 

We seek in vain fo* traces of the ancient plan in the diversified 
region between lakes Ladbga a^d Wettern, and can only *hope a£ain to 
meet with it in the gneiss of south-west Sweden beyoitd the western 
boundary. Since this central region includes a number of rocks which are 
more recent than the gneisses of the east and west, we must regard it in a 
tectonic sense as lying lower, whence it fellows that the boundary line in 
the west, if it is neither a fracture nor a flexure, must yet show a general 
inclination of the surface of the gneiss towards the centre, as is the case in 
the boundary of Finland. * 

In south- we$t Swpden the prevalent strike of the granite-gneiss itself is 
to the north ; this cTiftjction appears not only along the boundary line, in 
connexion with the dykes*of hyperite which have that strike, but also in 
the west, from west Scania through Bohuslan, and Dalsland to Wermland 2 . 
On Norwegian territory, however, the Finland strike to the north-north- 
west reappears and persists up to the fault-trough of Christiania, to lake 
Mjosen, an<j northwards to Trjsil (Klar Elv) 3 ; thus bringing us near to 
the ancient eruptive mass of the Dovre-fjeld. West of the fault-trough, 
howevfir, in Chnstiansand, granite again predominates. 

So'mth Russia.* In Volhynia and Voronesh we see at first only com- 
pletely isolated outcrops of ancient rocks, widely separated from one 
another by a covering of recent sediments. They are laid bare here and 
there at the edges of the river valleys ; then the exposures become more 
or less continuous, not so much in the north as on the upper courses of the 
rivers which flow southwards in the government of Cherson, between the 
Bug and the Dnjepr, but there they again disappear not far south of lat. 
48° N. North of the Dnjepr they are only visible at a few places, and the 
bend of this river separates a western from an eastern region which is 
better exposed and extends north of the sea of Azov. 

The rocks are the same as in the north ; gneiss intimately associated 

1 E. Cohen and W. Deecke, Ueber das krystalline Grundgebirge der Insel Bornholm ; 
in the IV. Jahresb. d. geograph. Ges. zu Greifswald, 61 pp., in particular p. 38 et seq. 
At Stockholm the strike is still due east: Svednark. Geol. FOren. Stockh. Forh., 1885, 
VII, p. 708. 

* G. de Geer, Om algonkisk bergveckning inom Fennoskandias gransomr&den, Geol. 
FOren. Stockh. FOrh., 1900, XXI, pp. 675-693. The author considers the fact that a mass 
of Jotnian sandstone extends from north to south in Dalsland to be an argument for 
a completely diffAent conception of the structure of the country. According to this 
view, it was the granite masses of the centre that produced those alterations (Umorien- 
tirungen) which gave their existing character to the gneiss regions in the east and 
west. This work served to elicit a very instructive discussion, op. cit., 1900, XXII, 
pp. 116-142. 4 • 

3 T. Kjerulf, Geologic des sttdlichen und mittleren Norwegen, German trans. by 
A. Gurlt, 8vo, Bonn, 1880, p.,89. 



384 NORTHERN EUROPE [partiv 

with gri&ite, and frequently described as granite-gneiss, forms the oldest 
^member, with which more recent stratified rocks are infolded, in particular, 
quartzites accompanied by iron ore; massive rocks also appear, granite, 
syenite, gabbrb, and others. f ' 

North of Skitomir, as well as between this town and Kiev, the river 
valleys contain ancient massive rocks described as labyadorites, for which 
Chrustschow has created the term perthitophyre 1 . The most westerly 
outcrop of Archaean rocks, so far known, lies at Shepetovka (about long. 
27° E. between the rivers Gorin and Slutsh) ; not far from there on the 
Slutsh, Laskarew found gneiss ^striking N.W. (300°) 2 . At Ostropol, in 
Yolhynia, according to MikluCha-Maklay, vertically upturned hypersthene- 
gneiss strikes north and south ; then, south-west of Shitomjr, to the north- 
north-west, and nearer this town to the north-west 3 . 4 

South of the Dnjepr, Domher found that the 'strike of the gneiss in the 
government of Cherson was north-west, ‘ or more correctly north-north- 
west V and the gneiss, according to Sokolow’s surveys, may be observed to 
strike north and south with deviations to the east, but much more 
frequently to the west, so that north-north-west is given as tlje prevalent 
direction 5 . Further away, on the shore of the Dnjepr between Novo- 
Georgievsk and Ekaterinoslav the Archaean rocks strike, according to 
Pjafcnitzki, almost without exception to the north-west 6 . 

The quartzites and talc schists of Krivoi-Rog, on the Inguletz, which 
are associated with iron ores, afford important evidence in regard to this 
strike. They lie in very long and narrow synclines wedged into the gneiss : 


1 K. v. Chrustschow, Ueber die sogenannten Labradorite Wolhynien’s, Tschennak, 
Petrogr. Mitth., 1888, new ser. IX, pp. 470-527 ; the strike is said to be directed to the 
north-west, except in a long strip on the river Uz where it runs to the north-east, but 
we have passed over these data because they concern massive rocks, in part also 
dykes. 

2 W. Laskarew, Geological observations on the watershed between the \ipper course of 
the Goryn and that of the Slutsh, Bull. Com. geol. Russia, 1899, XVIII, pp. 161-194, in 
particular p. 189. 

8 M. N. Miklucha-Maklay, Geological description of the districts of Novograd-Volinsk 
and Shitomir in the government of Volhynia, Mater. Geol. Russ., 1890, XIV, pp. 1-91, 
map, in particular, pp. 13, 14, 16. 

4 W. A. Domher, Preliminary report on the geological observations made in the summer 
of 1883, Bull. Com. geol. Russie, 1884, III, pp. 183-214, in particular p. 190. 

5 N. Sokol ow, Hydrogeologische Untersuchungen im Gouvernement Cherson, Mem. 
Com, geol. Russie, 1896, XIV, no. 2, p. 227 et passim, map. 

6 P. P. Pjatnitzki, Preliminary report on an excursion to the banks 6f the Dnjepr from 
Novo-Georgievgk to Ekaterinoslav, Travaux Soc. Nat. a PUniversite de Kharkow, 1886, 
XX, pp. 104-110. In the neighbourhood of Kamennopototzk an exceptional strike to 
north-east prevails ; at Krementchug, according to Lewakowski, both directions, north- 
east and north-west ; at the rapids between Krementchug and Ekaterinoslav chiefly 
north-west according to Krotow, Tektonik des tfnjepow’schen Krystallinischen Gestein- 
streifens, Kriehtafovitsch, Ann. g£ol. et min. de la Russie, 1897, I, pp. 30-37. 



SOUTH RUSSIA 


885 


CHAP* lx] 

and their richness in ore has led to a precise investigation of their course. 
Near the town of Krivoi-Rog they appear to bend gradually from a north 
to a north-north-east direction ^ according to Sokolow the bands separate 
towards the north, the majority curving to the north -nofth-wesff. As 
Monkowski has remarked, a meridional strike prevails north *)f the Krivoi- 
Rog, and an arc slightly 'concave to the west exists as a result of pressure 
acting from east to west on the Archaean rocks. These observations 
extend from north to south over a distance of about 60-70 kilometers K 

Near Alexandrovsk, on the bend of the Dnjepr, the strike of the rocks, 
according to Sokolow, oscillates between north-north-west and north- 
north-east 1 2 . 

To this observer, who has so greatly enlarged our knowledge of south 
Russia, rte are indebted! for a map of the western part of the Archaean 
land lying to the north ofHhe sea of Azov. It represents the strike as 
running generally, though not invariably, to the north-west or north- 
north-west. The ore-bearing quartzites also appear in this region, and 
their strike, south-west of Berdiansk near the sea of Azov, is north-north- 
west 3 . % # # 

Further east, in the district of Mariupol, Morosiewitsch found widely 
distributed massiv'b rocks, especially syenite ; he also made the unexpected 
discovery of lava fleers of basalt and andesite, together with andesite tuffs. 
They lie, with ohe exception, on the boundary between the Archaean region 
and the coal-bearing sediments of the basin of the Donetz; outliers of 
Palaeozoic sediments rest upon andesite laccolites. These post-Carboni- 
ferous eruptive rocks mark a zone of dislocation along the boundary of 
the Carboniferous. The gneisses west of this region are broken up into 
horsts and fault-troughs 4 . 


1 Krivoi-Rog has been frequently described ; I need only cite N. Sokolow, Geological 
observations in Hie north part of the ore-bearing region of Krivoi-Rog and along the 
xiver Sholtaja, Bull. Com. geol. Russie, 1896, XV, pp. 201-228, map; and T. Monkowski, 
Zur Geologie von Krivoi-Rog, Zeitschr. f. prakt. Geol., edited by Krahmann, 1897, 
pp. 374-378 (trans. by K. Milkowski; a little map in the text, p. 182). Monkowski 
thinks that the northern ranges may possibly have been displaced towards the west by 
a fault (flaw?). The map by Chimanowski, Gorn. Journ., 1892, IV, pi. ii shows a strike 
to the north-north-east. 

2 N. Sokolow, Hydrogeological investigations in the district of Alexandrovsk, Bull. 
Com. g4ol. Ru8sie, 1896, XV, pp. 157-223. 

3 N. Sokolow, General geological map of European Russia, sheet 48, Melitopol, Ber- 
diansk, Perekop; Beaislawl, Mem. Com. geol. Russie, 1889, IX, No. 1 ; Note on the deposits 
of iron-ore in the district of Berdiansk, Bull. Com. geol. Russie, II, pp. 123-144. 

. 4 j Morosiewitsch, On the lithological composition of the crystalline mass in the 
neighbourhood of the district of Mariupol in south Russia, Bull. Com. geol. Russie, 1898, 
XVII, pp. 27-167 ; Geological observations in the district of Mariupol, tom. cii., 
pp. 287-295, and Geological ohservationf in tne district of Beriansk, op. cit., 1899, 
XVIII, pp. 371-382. 

60LLAS 1)1 0 C C 



m NORTHERN EUROPE [part iy 

Summary. From this mass of details we arrive at the following 
results : — 

- The Russian platform, composed of denuded, pre-Cambrian folds, extends 
thorn Jhe Arctic ocean to the sea of ^zov, and as far as long. 27° E. 
Beyond this iVs western limits are indefinite. From its southern part 
northwards up to lake onega and beyond, its strike is f chiefly north-north- 
west or north-west ; indeed in Finland and the north generally the more 
nearly meridional direction to north-north- west predominates. But towards 
the coast of Pomoria on the White sea a north-north- east and even east- 
north-east strike appears. Th^ granulite range of lake Enare presents 
a crescentic outline, which imposition and trend resembles Nova Zembla, 
The general disposition of the trend-lines is similay to that which 
occurs in the much more recent range of the Urafe/and these ntountains 
may be described as a posthumous system formed on the, ancient plan. This 
is also true of the Timan-Kanin series. 

The southern portion of the platform is traversed by more recent 
dislocations, which, abandoning the ancient directions, run to the west- 
north- west in parallelism with the Caucasus. Karpinskiy no J only recog- 
nized this contrast long ago. but also perceived that the isolated Archaean 
fragments of the platform, standing like horsts, influence* the course of the 
more recent folds, and that the horst of Azov in particular has determined 
in all probability the bend from the Caucasus to the Crimed h 

These prolongations of the fractures running to the c west-north-west 
are called Karpinskis lines (I, p. 469, PI. V, m, m). We recognize in 
them movements which are later than the Cretaceous period. That we are 
dealing with dislocations extending to a great depth is shown by the unex- 
pected occurrence of anamesite at Rovno in Volhynia, and the presence of 
more recent volcanic intrusions on the north-east part of the boundary 
between the horst of Azov and the Carboniferous of the Donetz. 

The Caledonian lines. A fragment of extremely ancient foreland 
borders the Atlantic ocean, west of the groat Caledonian overthrusts 
(II, p. 75). It includes the western Hebrides, especially the island of 
Lewis, together with some of the promontories of western Scotland and 
several intervening islands (II, p. 78, Fig. 10). 

The most ancient rock of this region is the Lewisian gneiss. In loch 
Maree its folds are partly formed by ancient schists which have been cor- 
related with the 'lower Algonkian/ These folded rocks have undergone 
great denudation and on their irregular surface rests w^h a well-marked 
unconformity the red Torridon sandstone, with no trace of folding. Thus 
its position is similar to that of the Swedish Dal sandstone, the Jotnian 

* 

1 A. Karpinski, On the general character of the oscillations of the earth’s crust withia 
the limits of European Russia, Bull. Acad. hnp. Sci. Saint-Petersb., 1894, V, ser. 1, in 
particular p. 18, note 20. 



387 


chap, ix] CALEDONIAN GNEISS 

series in Finland, and perhaps Barrande’s stages A and B in Bohemia. In 
Sutherland and Ross, valleys, of erosion may be seen, 2,000 to 3,000 feet 
deep, in which this sandstone has been deposited 1 . 

Innumerable dykes, firmed ^chiefly of basip rock (strike west-north- 
west), traverse the oldest gneiss, and indicate a general* splitting-up of 
the region into strips. TJiese dykes are followed by another group of very 
basic dykes (strike from east to west), and these again by intrusions of 
granite and syenite. All these injections* are more recent than the folding 
of the gneiss and the ancient schists, and older than the Torridon sand- 
stone 2 . % 

The Caledonian flakes, described in the previous volume, are thrust over 
this foreland o& the IJebrides. They were driven from south-east to north- 
west. On the whole, the thrust-planes, on which this movement took 
place, are only slightly inclined towards the horizon but are sometimes 
suddenly upturned. From the fact that one thrust-plane is sometimes 
intersected by a second, and that volcanic intrusions took place in the 
intervals, it has been concluded that the movements were intermittent 3 . 

An importeyat advance was ipade in proving that within the Caledonian 
ranges rocks occur which have been produced by a transformation of the rocks 
of the yordand. * Charles Lapworth was the first to show that the eastern 
or Caledonian gneiss is a complex formed of the Hebridian gneiss, of 


1 Report on the recent work of the Geological Survey in the north-west Highlands of 
Scotland, based on the field-notes and maps of Messrs. *B. N. Peach, J. Horne, W. Gunn, 
C. T. Clough, L. Hinxman, and H. M. Cadell ; communicated by A. Geikie, Director- 
General, Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1888, XLIV, pp. 878-441 ; further, B. N. Peach and 
J. Horne, The Olenellus Zone in the North-West Highlands of Scotland, op. cit., 1892, 
XLVIII, pp. 227-242 ; A. Geikie, Annual Report of the Geological Survey for the year 
ending Dec. 31, 1892 ; 4th Report of the Science and Art Department, 1898, p. 259 et seq. ; 
Annual Report . . . for 1893, p. 262 et seq. 

2 A. Geikie, fhe History of Volcanic Action in the Area of the British Isles, Anniv. 
Address Geol. Soc. for 1891 avd 1892 ; The Ancient Volcanoes of Great Britain, 2 vols. 
8vo, London, 1897. 

* Report on the Recent Work of the Geological Survey in the North-West Highlands 
of Scotland ; Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., 1888, XLIV, pp. 412, 436. At first only overthrust 
flakes and no folding or overfolding were encountered ; from this it was concluded that 
different processes had occurred here from those observed on the borders of other folded 
regions. But subsequently great foldings were observed, especially on loch Carron ; 
Annual Report for 1892, p. 261 ; on this point cf. Cadell, Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh, 
XXXV, p.342 ; Marcel Bertrand, Les Montagues de I’^eosse, Revue generate des Sciences, 
III, 1892, pp. 81f-824; A Rothpletz, Gbotektonische Probleine, p. 100; A. Penck, 
Geomorphologische Probleme aus Nordwest-Schottland ; Zeitschr. Ges. f. Erdk. Berlin, 
1897, XXXII, p. 161 etseq. Discontinuity is naturally produced with the greatest ease 
along beds offering less resistance which correFg^ond at first with the direction of the 
thrust. Geikie has shown that such discontinuity may even occur along intrusive dykes 
when their inclination is favourable, aid that in this case these dykes may be crushed 
and the sedimentary rocks scared. 


C C 2 



mS NOJRTHEEN EUROPE [parti* 

sediment$fy fcoeks and latervolcanic rocks, altered by the movements \ In 
" like manner it has Been shown by the Geological Survey that parts of the 
Torridon groug have been forced in betweep the Caledonian flakes, that 
they pass into the 4 Moine f sehisis/ and contribute to the formation of the 
Caledonian roclfs of the east 2 . 

At a greater distance from the outer border pf the Caledonian flakes, 
the Scotch horsts are formed chiefly of dynamically metamorphosed rocks, 
which strike from the north-west r of Ireland to the North Sea. Archibald 
Geikie has given them the general name of ‘ Dalradian * 3 . In recent 
years a series of Silurian stages* has been distinguished in these highly 
altered rocks. The series, hojvever, contains numerous intercalations of 
diorite, epidiorite, hornblende schist, ‘ green 5 schist, and intensive dykes of 
diabase. The potstone which occurs here resembles tflat of Trondhjem, and 
here as there is used for building purposes. 

The presence of a great quantity of eruptive rocks, chiefly basic, within 
the lower Palaeozoic beds, and the decrease of these rocks from the upper 
Silurian onwards, is characteristic of these formations in Great Britain. 
In this they present a striking contrast to $ ie flat-lying Palaeoaoic beds on 
the Baltic shores. 

The Sca^idinavian overthrust (II, pp. 51-65). Great advanced have 
been made during the last few years in the study ofsthe region *which 
now comes under discussion, and it becomes necessary, for the sake of 
completeness, to repeat many facts which have already been mentioned. 

It is generally agreed that the Caledonian folds are ^continued through 
the Orkney and Shetland islands to Norway. Judd, who investigated the 
marginal fractures of north-east Scotland, even thinks it possible that the 
separation of Scandinavia from Great Britain took place after the appear- 
ance of man. Reusch, to whom we are indebted for an admirable map of 
the islands on the south-west coast of Norway, thinks that the Norwegian 
and Scotch folds certainly form a single system interrupted* only by the 
subsidence of the North sea 4 . * 

A glance at the map of Norway certainly shows that we can scarcely 
expect to find, at least in the southern part of the country, any con- 
tinuation of the outer zone of Eriboll, but only of such parts of the 
Caledonian structure a s lie to the east of it. These Norwegian ranges 
certainly exhibit many points of correspondence with those of Scotland, 

1 Charles Callaway, who at first regarded the eastern gneiss as an independent formation, 
afterwards adopted this view ; The Present State of the Archaean Confl-oversy in Britain, 
GeoL Mag., 1889, p. 828. 

% Annual Report for 1893, p. 264. 

8 A. Geikie, Anniv. AddreeB Geol. So# for 1891, p. 72. 

* Judd, Address British Association, Sect. C, Aberdeen, 1885, p. 1008 ; H. Reusch, Btfm- 
tnelden og Karin Sen med omgivelser geologist beskrevne, udgivet af den geologisk 
Undersogelse, 8vo, Kristiania, 1888, maps, in particular, p. J40. 




Overthrusting in Central Scandinavia 

• After A E.vTornebohm 


Basement rocks in the South-east. A, Archaean; Da, Dal Sandstone; Sp, Sparagmite; 

Si, Silurian; gssa Gabbro of the Jotun mountains. 

Folded mountains and overthrust flakes . A, Archaean; Sp, Sparagmite, ar, Ire-schists 
(forming together the Seve group) ; RGr, Roros schists. Overlying Cambrian 
and Silurian beds are not indicated by letters. 

Ekn, Ekne group (Devonian?); Younger Granite; E22 Eruptive greenstones; 
^ cu Brek schists. 



'chap, ix] • THE SCANDINAVIAN 0V1BTHBUST M9 
* • 

while there are also contrasts which are difficult to explain. On tSbe whole, 

tifey have suffered more from denudation than the Sdbtch mountains, but yet 

are not so completely levelled down as the folds of the east Urals ; indeed 

the denudation has beei^ carried just so far as to afford hopes of finding 

some evidence of the relations^ so seldom \ isible, between a folded range 

and an adjacent platform. The great merit of having paved the way to a 

better understanding of this subject is due to A. E. Tomebohm, who has 

put forward a remarkably bold interpretation of the facts 1 , 

A girdle of horizontally stratified Palaeozoic deposits, beginning with 
the Cambrian, runs from the gulf of Finland across the Aland islands and 
Upland, through Dago and Oesel, Gotland* Oeland and the western coast 
of Kalmar sound. The same girdle, brokdh up into f igments, appears in 
Scania (II, p. 47, fig* 5) ; blocks of it are let down in the fault-trough which 
extends from Christiania to lake Mjosen. Pre-Cambrian rocks are exposed 
further inland, but among them a Palaeozoic fragment appears here 
and there, preserved by subsidence from the general denudation, a 
fact which shows that the Cambrian and Silurian beds once covered 
the whole shield. Fracture and subsidence are often visible, but not 
folding, with the^ exception, perhaps, of a gentle anticline in the Aland 
islands 2 . Then, after crossing a large part of the breadth of the peninsula^ 
we r§ach the glipt, which runs from north to south throughout its length, 
i.e. for morfc than ten degrees of latitude, forming an escarpment of 
imposing appearance, although much broken up by erosion. 

Fossils prove the presence of Cambrian sediments in the glint 
for the whole of its length, or at least from Hardanger - Vidda 
(lat. 60° N.), into the Lappmarken beyond lat. 68° N. ; Silurian beds 
are known to overlie the Cambrian at many places, especially in 
Jemtland. Between lats. 61° and 64° N. the succession, according to 
Tornebohm’s precise statement (II, p. 53) is as follows : 1. At the base, 
sparagmite % i.e. sandstone containing felspar, reaching between Gud- 
brandsdal and the Glopcimen, a thickness of 900 meters, but Wm here 
onwards decreasing rather rapidly in thickness. 2. Above this the Biri 
limestone, often dolomitic, attains 300 meters, and in places even 500 meters. 
3. Then the upper sparagmite, which in Rendal is 1,000 meters thick. 
These three members, which, in all likelihood, are more recent than the 
Dal sandstone covering the most ancient formations east of the glint, 

1 A. E. T8rneboh.ni, Om fj&llproblemet, Geol. FOren. Stockh. F6rh., 1888, X, pp. 328-333 ; 
Om hogfj &llsqu«rtsiten , op. cit., 1891, XIII, pp. 37-44; FOrsOk till en tolkning af del 
no*dIigaste Skandinaviens fjallgeologi, op. cit., 1893, XV, pp. 81-94, and 1894, XVI, 
p. 161 et pas sim , and in particular the comprehensive work — Grunddragen af det Centrala 
S kan d ina viens Bergbyggnad, K. svenska Vet.^Akad. Handl. Stockholm, 1896, XXVIII, 
no. 5, 212 pp., maps. ' 

* C. Wiman, Ueber das Siiurgebieff des *bottnischen Hleeres, Bull. Geol. Inst. Uaiv. 
Upsaala, ed. by Hj. Sjogren, 1, 1892-1893, pp. 65-75. 



m NORTHERN EUROPE < <[pabtiv 

have as y£§ yielded no organic remains. Above them comes the blue* 
quartz conglomerate, which is closely associated with fossiliferous Cambrian 
beds, and this is overlain by the Silurian series. 'J'he last-named has been 
studied by Hogbom. and Wiman in Jemtland ! itsr subdivisions extend into 
the upper Silurian, and eveA into the graphite slates which lie above the 
Pentamerus limestone of Christiania 1 . f c 

It may be said that the Cambrian and Silurian sediments, exposed at 
the foot of the glint and in its outposts, present the same characters as the 
contemporaneous deposits of Christiania and lake Mjosen, as well as of the 
Silurian girdle of the Baltic, but include, at their base, great masses of 
sediments devoid of fossils. In the above-mentioned girdle, the beds lie 
flat ; this is also the case in front of and beneath the glint, and the series 
in both places rests uncon formably upon the ancient* formations of the 
shield. # 

Upon this normal succession of strata a second and very different series 
rests horizontally. It was formerly regarded by some observers as represent- 
ing a coast at the foot of which the normal Silurian beds had been deposited 
(II, p. 53) ; but this view has not been confirmed. It consists of quartzite 
and phyllite, often identical in all respects with the sparagmite, but also, 
over great tracts, of mica-schist, hornblende-schist, and gfnei&s. Toraebohm 
regards the latter as sparagmite altered by pressure, and f names it the Are 
group, calling the whole overlying series the Seve group. 4 

The superposition of these highly altered rocks upon nonfial Palaeozoic 
sediments is placed beyond doubt by numerous observations (II, p. 64, 
note 3) extending for a distance of 9 degrees of latitude and across a 
breadth of 90-100 kilometers 2 * . 

1 On this section see also C. Wiman, Kambriscli-siJurische Faciesbildungen in Jemtland, 
Bull. Geol. Inst. Univ. Upsala. Ill, (1896-1897), pp. 269-301, map. 

2 Several examples of the succession in the glint were given in II, p. 51 et seq. 
The following fresh data may be added : 1. Hardangervidda (lat. 60° N.) primitive forma- 
tions (granite and gneiss) ; 45-50 meters Alum schists* which have furnished the 
Dictyograptus flabelliformis of the Huulberg= Cambrian, zone 2e of Christiania ; 40 meters 
blue quartz ; 10 meters marble, probably =Orthoceras limestone = lower Silurian, stage 3 ; 
220 meters greenish grey phyllite, probably =Bjorlykke’s graptolite schist of the 
Gausdal— lower Silurian, stage 4 ; overlying this, as much as 300 meters thick, halleflinta, 
mica-schist, hornblende-schist, gneiss ; towards the north-east also sparagmite and quartz 
conglomerate. W. C. Brogger, Lagfolgen p& Hardangervidda, Norges Geol. Undersdg., 
1893, no. 11, and K. O. Bjorlykke, Graptolitftfrende skiferne i vestre Gausdal, op. cit., 
1891, pp. 1-10. 2. From the Storsj&n towards Offerdal and the Kallsj6n (lats. 63° and 
64° N.) primitive formations ; Cambrian and Silurian up to the Pentamerus limestone 
and the graptolite schists of Scania, horizontal or dipping towards the west, at Offeidal 
cleavage and traces of pressure ; upon this further west the Seve group (Are schist, 
garnet gneiss, &c.) f and upon these two great masses of sandstone and slates which are 
compared with the western Silurian of Trondhjem. A. G. Hogbom, Geologist Beskrif- 

ning dfver Jemtlands l&n, Sver. geol. Undersokn. 5kfb., 1894, Ser. C, no. 140, 4to, 106 pp., 

map. 3. In Noriotten from lat. 66° to 69° N. the series is similar. On the eastern 



i 


THE SEVE GROUP 


391 


CHAP. I*]* 

% The anterior border of the glint is frequently broken up into buttes 
(pi! *VI), which are crowned by the Seve group. • Sometimes the Seve 
group is interrupted by ^rosion or by inequalities in the foundation ; then 
gaps or windows are pr<^ducfed through which the normal succession of 
the basement beds is visible/ Jlln Jemtland, for instancy such windows 
form the hill-range t>f the Mul^-Fjall, west of Kali- Sj on, and south- 
west of this the long # range which terminates in Skarsfield. In the 
Areskutan, on the east side of the Kall^Sjon, the Are schists of the Seve 
group, formed of hornblende-schist and rocks resembling gneiss, are 1,200 
to 1,500* meters thick, and both in the east and west are seen to rest on 
fossiliferous Silurian. The Areskutan is thus an overthrust flake. 

Tomebohm has expressed the opinion, fdtmded on these undisputed facts, 
that the whole masfr of the Seve group has been thrust by an extensive 
ta agential movement, frfnn the folded range lying to the west over the 
normal Palaeozoic sediments of the east . 

Generally speaking, the rocks of the glint exhibit, as we have said, 
horizontal bedding. An exception occurs near the Storsjon in Jemtland, 
where the Seve group has been denuded away over a wide area ; here the 
normal Silurian of^ the foundation is closely folded ; these sharp folds are 
even •overfolded to wards the south-east. But a consideration of the 
section, published # by Hogbohm, showing the south border of the Ansatten 
flake in Offefdal (north-east corner on plate VI), impresses us with the 
belief that this folding has itself been produced by the movement of the 
superimposed flake (Dachschleppung, charriage). 

South of Gudbrandsdal the great ancient gabbro mass of the Jotun 
range produces complicated conditions, which are not yet explained, but 
here also the normal Palaeozoic sediments of the glint are met with. They 
reach the sea in the neighbourhood of Stavanger in the south. Thus they 
approach a second Palaeozoic series, which first emerges from the sea to 
the southwest in the island of Karmo, and presents all the essential 
characters of the great ^folded western range. 

Raman vare above the primitive formations there are 50 meters of Scolithus sandstone; 
15 meters greyish-green schistose rock with Hyolithus (Cambrian) ; 30 meters black clay 
slates, also quartz sandstone and phosphorite conglomerate ; 90 meters so-called Raman 
echist. Above it, chiefly receding towards the west, mica-schist and quartz-schist in great 
thickness, next light halleflinta gneiss and common gneiss, then a dark zone with horn- 
blendic rocks, then, forming the main mass of the hills, a phyllitic series associated with 
calc-mica-schist, &c. At the summit, hornblendic rocks with eclogite-like schist, gneiss, 
and white marbie. Bands of olivine ro$ks are intercalated. F. Svenonius, Om Berg- 
gr^nden in Norbottens l&n, Sver. geol. UndersOkn. Afh., 1892, ser. C, no. 126; also 
W. Petterson, Om de geolQgiska forh&llandena i trakten omkring Siangeli koppar- 
malmsfalt i Norbottens lan, Geol. FOren. Stockh. FOrh., 1897, XIX, pp. 296-306, 
map et passim ; for the intercalations of olivtne rocks, Svenonius, op. o cit., 1885, VII, 
pp. 205 and 1893, XV, p. 16 ; for tlae microscopic structure of the Areskutan mass, 
H. Reusch, En dag ved Areskutan, Norges Geol. Undersdg. Aarb. 1891 pp. 22-32. 



m NORTHERN EUROPE [partw 

While l^e C^brian and Silurian beds of the glint present the Baltic 
facies, the Western series is distinguished by a vast development of green 
faruptive rook, mostly gabbro-like, and of green tuffe. The more remote 
this readers their Resemblance with the sediments of the glint, the closer 
it brings them their representatives in Scotland. But a comparison of 
the faunas is very difficult, since, owing to extensile dynamic alteration, 
fossils are rare and their preservation imperfect. # 

From Karm5 dioritic rocks an$ green stratified rocks extend northwards 
across the islands towards Bergen. Reusch has described them, and has 
been led by fossils discovered at Bommelo and Storen to place ’them in 
the middle or upper Silurian. * Acid eruptive rocks also crop out! At the 
same time gneiss and mica-sctfist follow a divergent strike to the north- 
north-east in the direction of the Hardanger fjord/* At feergen a semi- 
circular bend of the strike occurs (II, p. 64) \ Further north, west of the 
Jotun mountains, recent observations are wanting. On the northern border 
of the Jotun we reach the region which forms the subject of Tomebohm’s 
latest memoir (pi. VI). 

A broad zone, the ruins of a great folded range, which extends from 
the Dovre towards the north-north-east, and beyond th^ end of the Snasen 
Vand, has been described by Kjerulf as the Tromlhjefu-f&Met. Tht only 
indication of the' original trend is afforded by the roots f of elongated syn- 
clines. Their axes, or the core lines, as Tornebohm calls them, converge 
to the north-north-east. One of these synclines lies north of Bettstatt 
fjord and Snasen Vand. The second is visible between Bettstatt fjord and 
Trondhjem fjord, and intersects the first where it noses out. The third, 
which is smaller, lies in the west-south- west arm of the Trondhjem fjord. 
The fourth runs from the shore of this fjord to the west-south- west, and 
merges in its northern part, east of Trondhjem, with the great main 
syncline which extends from the Gromminger, east of Sn&sen Vand, to 
the south-west into the neighbourhood of the Jotun range. € 

Between the synclines rise broad, flat, dome-Jike masses of Archaean 
rocks. It is an instructive fact that, notwithstanding the rounded out- 
lines of these broad masses, the mountains must nevertheless have been 
arranged, as appears from the synclines, in the form of coulisses. In the 
narrow synclines the rocks have been strongly compressed and generally 
stand almost vertical; in the great main syncline they apparently 
assume a more or less fan-shaped arrangement, the axis of the fan lying 
towards the eastern border of the syi\cline. c 

The group of the Are schists forms the lowest horizon of the folded 
rocks. Above them lies the Roros schist, which is sometimes a phyllite, 

* 

1 H. Reusch, Bdmmeloen og KarmOen nj^ed omgivelser geologisk beskrevne, udgivet 
af den geol. UndersOg., 8vo, Kristiania, 1888; mafSs ; a good general map in the N. J. f. 
Min., 1887, supplement vol. V, p. 53. f 



€HAK IX> # LONG BANDS OF MARBLE £93 

sometimes a siderite mica-schist or mica-quartzite, locally contains sheaves 
of nbmblende, and then forms a garben-schist. It is also encountered 
outside the folds, forming for example, the overthrust flake of the Ansatten 
mass. I am unable to give a detailed account of the several meifibers of 
the mighty series of shales and landstone, or of* the limestone in the upper 
Silurian which rests ftpon the Roros schist. Gabbro, containing biotite 
and hypersthene, occurs* in the Seve group ; and it attains greater im- 
portance in the lower Silurian, which alse exhibits a considerable develop- 
ment of green schists. These rocks are again met with, but more sparingly, 
in the tfjjper Silurian. They have alsy b^en influenced by the folding. 
No such dynamic influence is exhibited by the isolated outcrops of recent 
granite (marked black on pi. VI), which occur within the great syncline. 

At a few places fate see patches of greenish -grey sandstone (Tornebohms 
Ekne group) resting uncohformably upon the folds ; they are more recent, 
but their position is none the less disturbed. Possibly they are of Cale- 
donian age, and represent the Caledonian unconformity. 

We have already discussed in detail the continuation of the folded 
mountains towards the north (II, p. 54). Vogt has ascertained that, from 
lat. 65° N. onwards, white marble, associated with mica-schist, plays a 
much 4arger part in* the structure of the folds than might be supposed from 
the nature of the qpuntry around Trondhjem. Bands of this marble, some- 
times 1,000 mbters in thickness, appear with a north-north-east or north- 
east strike in 13,t. 65° 20 ' N. on the Val fjord, and extend into the mountains 
as far as Vefsen; they then run past Ranen through Dunderlandsdal, east 
of the Svartisen, cross the inner part of the Salten fjord west of Sulitelma, 
and again in lat. 68° 30' N. following the same strike, cut obliquely across 
the head of the Ofoten fjord \ 

North of lat. 67° N. we obtain an exceptionally clear conception of the 
facts, for here the held of Sjorgens investigations near Sulitelma 1 2 joins, 
towards the $ast, that of the extensive observations of Svenonius 3 , which 
were carried into the extreme north of Sweden ; Holmquist has described 
in detail the whole transverse section along the line Bodo-Sulitelma- 
Kvikkjokk 4 . 

1 J. H. L. Vogt, Norsk marmor, Norges Geol. Undersog., no. 22, 1897*, maps ; also 
Dunderlandsdalens jernmalmfelt, op. cit. no. 15, 1894, et passim. 

2 H. SjOgren, Om Sulitelmakisernas geologi, Geol. Fdren Stockli. Fflrli., 1894, XVI, 
pp. 394-487, and Nya Bidrag till Sulitelmakisernas geologi, Geol. Foren. Stockli. Forh., 
op. cit., 1895, XVH, pp. 189-210, map. * 

8 F. Svenonius, Om Berggrunden i Norbottens Lan, Sver. Geol. Undersokn. Afh., 1892, 
ser. C, no. 126, 43 pp.,*map; Ofversigt af Stora Sjdfallets och angr&nsande fjailtrakters 
geologi, II, Geol. FOren. Stockh. Fdrh., 1899, XXt pp. 541-570. 

4 P. J. Holmquist, En geologisk profil ftfver fjallomr&dena emellan Kvikkjokk och 
norska kuaten, Geol. Ftfren. Stockli. FoA., 1900, XXII ; also Sver. geol. UridersOkn. Afh. 
ser. C, no. 185, 100 pp., map.^ 



394 NORTHERN EUROPE 1 • [paktiv 

Accoitfjfig to Holmquist, a syncline of the first order, or, using the 
expression adopted in this work, a coulisse valley, formed of mica-seRist, 
And of extraordinary breadth, strikes inland of |Bodo to the north-north- 
easi stAight across the Salten fjord. At a^distance of only 50 kilometers 
feast of the se&> we first reach the parallel anticline ; it is a band of 
marble. This is followed by another syncline up to \he # shores of the Lang- 
vand. We now reach Sulitelma (1,877 meters) a mighty mass of olivine- 
gabbro. Near its southern foot •the strike of the folds has turned from 
north-north-east to due east, and here the stalks of Crinoids were found 
in the schists. Beyond the S\j r ed^sh frontier we enter the region*of over- 
thrust, represented by a great mass of mica-schist and quartzite. Though 
the overthrust mass is not so broad as in the south, yet its ^eastern margin, 
the glint, in the neighbourhood of Kvikkjokk, is &Rout 180 kitometers 
from Bodo. Here it is divided into numerous flit-lying overthrust flakes, 
and the thrust planes are inclined contrary to the movement, which thus 
followed a rising direction. In the flake between Sulitelma and Kvikkjok 
the movement was probably directed rather more from north to south, and 
has produced an east-to-west strike in the neighbourhood of Sulitelma. 

Once more we find along the glint, beneath this ^verthrust mass, the 
flat Cambrian beds of the eastern type (Hyolithus sSriefc), and thty rest 
upon the gneiss and granite of the shield. t » 

Some further details have already been mentioned. Vogt found the 
fragments of a great eruptive region in the Lofoten islanUs. The island 
of Flakstad, parts of Mosknason, and of Vestvaago, a great part of Lango 
with Oeksnas, and some parts of Hindo are formed of olivine-gabbro, 
labrador-rock and augite-syenite. The comparison drawn between the 
Lofoten islands and the western Hebrides, which was based on older 
observations (II, p. 56), is therefore unfounded. These parts of the 
archipelago, of considerable size, rather resemble the olivine gabbro of 
Sulitelma, and in all likelihood the Lofoten islands also belong to the 
coulisses of the great folded range h * 

A horizontal and unconformable covering of sandstone, devoid of foasils 
(Gaisa system of Tellef Dahll) extends from lat. 69° N. onwards, and conceals 
more and more completely the folded formations. It forms the greater 
part of the coast, from the Alten fjord up to the Varanger fjord 2 . 

Relations of Scandinavia to Scotland . Tornebohm’s interpretation of 
the structure of the western Scandinavian mountains as due to a great 
overthrust has raised the objection that an almost horizontal movement 

1 Vogt, Norsk marxnor, pp. 176-184. * 

2 It is to this sandstone that the observations of Reusch and S&rahan on the inclusion 
of glacial boulders refer. H. Reuscl^ Skuringsmerker og moreenegrus eftervist i Fin- 
marken fra en periode aeldre end ‘istiden’, Norges Geol. Unders., Aarbog for 1891, and 
A. Strahan, On Glacial Phenomena of ftilaeflzoic age in the Varanger Fjord, Quart. 
Journ. Geol. Soc., 1897, LI11, pp. 137-146, 



chap, ix] ■> > SCANDINAVIA AND SCOTLAND # 395 

of one flake of the earth’s crust upon another for a distance of nine to ten 
degrees of latitude, and in places over a breadth of l(t) kilometers, exceeds 
all our conceptions of the dyn^nic processes which affect the Satth. But 
our conceptions must confonn tnemselves to facts, and in •this mattef there 
is scarcely any important differelice of opinion.* On the contrary, we see 
clearly that what we Save before ns is only the ruins of a still greater 
structure. Brogger point? out that the highest-lying rocks are frequently 
the most profoundly altered 1 , and Herr Tdrnebobm draws my attention to 
the fact that at Sjiangili, south-west of Lake Tornea, a series of schistose 
rocks* with a violently squeezed granite at the very summit, rests upon the 
primitive formations of the shield, and on sparagmite, which presents 
scarcely any trace of compression. This sRows that a weighty load of 
superimposed mount^ki masses has been removed. We know not how 
far the glint has been dri\ten westward by denudation since the Devonian 
period, and thus we cannot measure the full breadth of the overthrust, nor 
its complete length either to north or south. 

But throughout the whole region in which the facts are visible the 
overthrust parts tend to pass westwards into a folded range formed of 
long coulisses with ji general direction to the north-north-east. In this 
range the anticlines* and synclines of the first order (coulisses) are fairly 
broad, tyit accompanied by many secondary folds, and affected by dynamic 
metamorphism * to a very high degree. In the overthrust part also we 
see compression* but indications of an extraordinary extension of the rocks 
(rolling out) predominate over large areas. 

Holmquist, whose section from Bodo to Kvikkjok we have already 
mentioned, has attempted a hypothetical explanation of the phenomena: 
this is illustrated in the diagrams given below (figs. 20 to 23) 2 . 

In the north the fundamental rocks of the shield plunge more or less 
steeply beneath the glint. The windows, which occur further south (pi. VI), 
lie, for the mqgc part, nearer the eastern border. In the west, in the deep 
valleys of the folded mountains and on the sea-coast, the shield is nowhere 
exposed. The dip of the beds in the coulisses, which, as shown by the 
bands of marble, is often very steep, suggests that its continuation must 
lie deep down beneath the existing west coast. 

Holmquist’s hypothesis starts with a trough-like symmetrical subsidence 
with mutual approximation of the two limbs (figs. 20 and 21). 

Since, however, the folding is known to become gentler in the west, to- 
wards Trondhjerg, and since throughout the peninsula the strongest dynamic 
effect is produced towards the east, an asymmetrical subsidence seems to 
be more consistent ^ith the facts (figs. 22 and 23). From this Holmquist 

1 Brdgger, Lagfolgen p& Hardangerv?dda, pp. 1?8 et seq. 

2 P. J. Holmquist, Bidrag till diskusskm o*n de sk and i n aviske fjellkedjans tektonik. 
Geol. Pdren. Stockh. Fdrh., 1901, XXII J, p. 51-71. 



MB NORTHERN EURbRE [paet iv 

* « , 

copclude^tliat, owing to the continuous subsidence of the eastern part 
$.e. of the shield or foreland) the overthrusting practically becomes an 
$ underthrvMing \ If 

Stffictly speaking, however, this explanaxion»does not solve the problem, 
but only removes it to *an unknown depth beneath the surface. This 
becomes clear if we attempt to apply the natural ifcale (100 kilometers) to 
the horizontal parts of figs. 22 or 23. Nevertheless, the representation 
harmonizes perfectly with the otherwise almost inexplicable subsidence of 
the entire mass in a single mighty curve directed to the north-west, such 
as has been described north of lat. 69° N. (II, p. 58, fig. 6). K, then, to 

Overthrusting * Overthrusting 



Fig. 20. 


Overthrusting Folding Overt hr tiling 



Hypothetical explanation of the Scandinavian ovei^hrusts, after Holmquist. 

Symmetrical movement. 

the older ideas, we add Tornebohm’s hypothesis, that Rismaalstind and 
Hattevarre are masses moved horizontally to the east, then it certainly 
appears as if the movement had come from below, or, as Holmquist thinks, 
that subsidence and underthrusting of the foreland have occurred. 

The movement to the east-south-east, which is exhibited by the Scandi- 
navian overthrusting, is contrary to all the great movements which, have 
occurred in western Eurasia. In its extension to the* south-south-west in 
Scotland, it has, however, turned completely round into the opposite direc- 
tion — to the west-north- west. Hei^ it becomes the first step in the repeated 

1 Holmquist, tom. cit , p. 67^. 



397 


chap, ix] • • HYPOTHETICAL EXPLANATIONS 

reconstruction of Europe and at the same time forms apart of the encircling 
frame, within which the more recent foldings describe tneir curves (II, p. 130). 

If we are prepared tojpusj^ Holmquist’s theory still further, we mufft 
either imagine a .fault-trc*igh, # the eastern part of which* is visible in 
Scandinavia, the western in Scotland ; or a second asymmetrical and 
inverse subsidence;, or finally a single contorted plane of dislocation 
extending over the whole region. t 

The pre-Cambrian gneiss mountains* of the western Hebrides are 
completely separated *by this zone of disturbance from the pre-Cambrian 
rock‘s*of t]je Baltic shield. The Eriboll stride-lines, if prolonged, run far 


3 

Infolding Overthrusting 



Folding Overthrusting 



Hypothetical explanation of the Scandinavian overthrusts, after Holmquist. 
Asymmetrical movement. 

west of the Scandinavian glint into the North sea. But the great fractures 
south of the glint, which divide up Scotland (II, p. 78, fig. 10) although in 
part of more recent age, assume a similar direction. Thus our knowledge 
of the inner structure of the Scotch horsts acquires a new significance. In 
the most southerly of these horsts, the Southern Uplands, Lapworth has 
succeeded, aftei* long-continued investigation, in classifying the rocks, 
notwithstanding the great mechanical disturbances they have undergone ; 
and a detailed description of the structure of this mass has been given by 
Peach and Home *. TJ 

1 B. N. Peach and J. Home, The Silurian Hocks of Britain, I, Scotland, Mem. Geol. 
Surv., 1899, 8vo, 749 pp., ma^ in particular p. 71 et seq. 



898 NORTHERN EUROPE [partiv 

?The rffite in the Southern Uplands is not quite parallel to the fracture 
' which runs South of Edinburgh, but is directed somewhat more to the north, 
r adjrrespondfttg with the general Galedoni^n strike. These Uplands, in 
their iibrthernhiost part, consist of the lower divisions of the iower Silurian, 
their central p&rt of the upper divisions, their south bordlr of upper 
Silurian. All the beds are very closely folded ; c some members, folded 
more or less vertically on themselves, attain a breadth many times greater 
than their thickness. The thicker beds of the lower Silurian form in the 
north a fan open above, the parts of which dip from north-west and from 
south-west towards the axis x anfi nearer the middle region a second' fan 
which opens downwards. Associated with these beds are many inter- 
calated layers of volcanic rocks, which have also suffered fyom pressure. 

These altered Silurian beds are continued towards Ireland, and the 
peculiar lava-flows and Radiolarian beds of r the Arenig group may 
be traced towards the south-west as far as Slieve Bernagh (north of 
Limerick, lat. 52° 45' N.). The dynamic alteration of the rocks by the 
Caledonian movement extends thus far without diminution ; then follows, 
stretching right across Ireland, the outer border of ,the Armorican 
mountains. 

It is true that in these inner and southern 
system, Cambrian and pre-Cambrian rocks are not entirely absent. But 
opinions differ in regard to many outcrops described as gneiss, and there 
is nothing corresponding to the great gneiss ranges which are encountered 
elsewhere on the inner side of important regions of folding and over- 
thrusting. The Southern Uplands, on the other hand, as well as the western 
coulisses of Norway are a good example of a folded region, formerly 
believed to consist of much older rocks, where patient investigations have 
succeeded in recognizing fossiliferous sediments in compressed folded 
zones h 

This fact may perhaps be cited in favour of Holmquist’s view. It may 
be taken as proved that throughout their course tirom the Armorican border 
in the south-west of Ireland (lat. 52° 30' N.) across the whole of Scotland 
and Scandinavia, and as far as those traces which are visible beneath the 
unconformable covering of sandstone in the most northerly fjords (up to 
lat. 70° 30' N.) the pre-Devonian movements must be regarded as mani- 
festations of a single tectonic phenomenon, which maintains a constant 
strike to the north-north-east, notwithstanding the fact that the movement 
is directed in Scandinavia to the east-south-east, and iniSeotland to the 

Q 0* 

1 e.g., C. Callaway, The Present State of the Archaean Controversy in Britain, Geol. 
Mag., 1889, 3 Dec., VI, pp. 319-825 ; On the Origin of the Gneisses of Anglesey, Quart# 
Journ. Geol. Soc., 1897, LIII, pp. 349-357 b Grenville A. J. Cole, On Metamorphic rocks 
in East Tyrone and Southern Donegal, Trans.^Roy. Irish Acad. Dublin, 1900, XXXI, 
pp. 431-472. « 


parfs of the Caledonian 



CONCLUSION 


399 


CHAP. IX]* 

w^gk-north-w est. Alike in the south and in the liorth, its end is burie^l out 
of sight, and it may not impossibly be continued into Spitzbergen, where 
the Devonian unconformity appears in the Liefde bay system ^11, p- 

Results . in Asia we I^veMistinguished : 1. The pne-Ghinbriafi vertex, 
which is prolonged eastward ms far as the # Pacific ootan in younger 
peripheral arcs, harmoniously arranged. 2. The Altaides, which proceed 
from the more recent ^vertex, the Altai, surround with their eastern 
branches the ancient vertex in the seftith, apparently fuse further to the 
east with the peripheral arcs of the ancient vertex, but split up towards 
th£ •west in the virgation of the Thityi-s^an. Finally, 3, the southern 
marginat arcs , the most easterly of which, the BurmafI arc, receives a 
branch of the pastern Altaides. * 

In eastern Europ!? the southern marginal arcs (3) find their continuation 
in the Tauro-Dinaric ar£ The Caucasus belongs to the branches of the 
Thian-shan(2). It thus appears that the Russian platform is a r parl of the 
ancient vertex (1), and , indeed , of the Sayan moiety . 

All its more important features point to this : its general position, its 
pre-Cambrian ^ge, the constant^ Sayan strike of the folds which run to the 
north-west or north-north-west in the south, and to the north-north- west 
in the north, uhtil^still further north they pass into a north-north-east 
direction, and fiddly its resemblance to the island arcs. The ancient 
foundation , which disappeared from sight on the ba nks of the Yenisei , now 
once more conies into view. At the same time we are again impressed by 
that extraordinary constancy of the strike which distinguishes the oldest 
parts of the earths crust and contrasts so remarkably with the diversity 
met with in later formations. This constancy attracted Richthofen's atten- 
tion in China; it was remarked by Tscherski in the mountains of lake Baikal, 
and Karpinski found it no less clearly displayed in the Russian platform. 

The western part of the vertex lies on the whole further north than 
the eastern jjp,rt. Towards its southern border the ancient structure suffers 
from disturbances produoed by the branches of the Thian-shan or completely 
disappears from sight. 

We sought in vain to discover whether the bordering mountains, arranged 
in coulisses advancing from the northern banks of the Hoang-ho, form a 
junction with the Great Khingan, or, in other words, whether this branch 
of the Altaides bends back into the eastern regions of the ancient vertex. 
Equally in vain did we follow Muschketow’s footsteps in his investigations 
as to a possibly continuation of tl*£ great Kara-tau along the watershed 
bgjaveen the Aral and the Irgis. In each case the question is really the 
same. Our objedf is to determine whether a branch of the Altaides, the 
Kara-tau, turns back into the ancient vertex. But whatever the future 
solution of this question may ljp, it/ is certain that the Urals present a 
structure in harmjny with the folding of the vertex, that in the valleys 



400 NORTHERN EUROPE i-« .[pahtiv 

of th& upper Arat, Tobol, and other rivers, these mountains disclose f#r 
to the east their denuded folds, and that towards the west they giv^off* 
cotwisses whiVh show that on this side also i/>ere ^xists a certain unity in 
tile sufefifcruciur^: « 

The TJrah art a group of posthumous folds of the ancient ve&ex. As in 
eastern Asia, the folding movement is directed towards the east, and in the 
boundary arcs towards the south, so in the Urals it Is towards the west. 
Yet the Urals can scarcely be described as a peripheral formation, because 
a considerable mass of pre-Cambrian— the Russian platform — lies to the 
west, that is, outside them. I£ is true that we do not know what ia*tfie% 
structure of the floor of the Pacific ocean where it lies between the island 
arcs, and if the Russian platform and the fluvial region of the Petchora were 
now submerged beneath the sea, as they once were during a long period, 
the Urals would completely resemble one of the peripheral arcs of the east, 
and Nova Zembla or the peninsula of Kanin would recall still more closely 
the island arcs of the Pacific margin. 

A great part of the ancient vertex of Eurasia is buried beneath the 
more recent sediments of the Obi ; it reappears in Europe ; in the extreme 
west we encounter the Scandinavian overthrusting. Strange as the ques- 
tion may appear, it may yet be asked, whether the daStem Carpathians, 
if denuded to an equal extent, would not likewise re^al through their 
windows either the ancient platform or its horizontal SiluKan covering 
(I, p. 188), and in the western Alps the relations of the cofnpressed syn- 
clines of the Brianfonnais to the recumbent sheets may well suggest 
a comparison with the tectonic phenomena of Scandinavia. 

In this way the vertex in the north, sloping out of sight beneath the 
surface, and the tonalite cicatrice in the south, bound the space from which 
one after the other the two terminal branches of the Altaides emerge in 
the west, first the Variscan-Armorican and then the Alpine branch. 

Thus, though it puts on one side a number of open que^ions, and is 
still vague or incomplete in many important respects, our description of the 
trend-lines has at last reached these regions. This part of the earth's 
surface does not coincide with the last prolongations of the western Altaides 
nor, as a consequence, with the western end of the Eurasian structure. It 
does not lend itself to a general survey of the whole of this great tectonic 
unity, but it marks at least the entrance to regions, where the trend-lines 
are better known and have already indeed been thoroughly established. 
We can, therefore, proceed more rapidly with our study of # the remaining 
parts of the plan, and shall be able to turn occasionally to questions dealjnfir 
less with the plan itself than with the further development of the folds ; 
until our return to the north of tke ancient vertex, and the junction Of the 
ranges of Verkhoiansk with those ofiAla^ka again renders it necessary to 
enter into fresh details.
