Memoirs of Maximilian de Bethune, Duke of Sully, Vol. 5 (Maximilien de Béthune, duc de Sully, 1638)
==========================================================
Sully's Mémoires (1638) - Henri IV's great minister on war, finance and statecraft; the classic ministerial memoir. The English translation (after Charlotte Lennox, 1756; 1760 printing), 5 vols. Vol. 5 of 5.

MAXIMILIAN DE BETHUNE,

DUKE os SULLY,

PRIME MINISTER OP

HENRY Tux GRE A T.

Newly tranſlated from the French. edition of:
M. de L'EcLvuss..

To which is annex ed,
The TRIAL of Francis RavailLLac,. fon
the murder of Henry the GREAT.

EN FIVE VOLUMES.

VOLUME. V..

4 4 5 * 5 4 s 1 | 2 1 + 8 3 ' 4 5 * 3 **
od otitis fat ar th res

E D. I N B U R G R

Printed for A. Do N AL Ds o N, at Pope's: Heads.
M:D.C C.L Xx.

N

F *

o mg © + *
'Y „ 1 * I

. 2 Ti

PEAS, ee OY e 4a, I

* . r ˙²˙üàyàI——I— pp7— AA ˙⅛ ö —ũaß⁰ éUͤnT— . . _ # — — — i. 4
b r S

. & * a . " * WS
5 | | — — I 3
S y 44
ko * 3 e 22
: 2 Trig. Fo nid * i»
— * * 2 9
—
p *
*
”
-
EF .
*
*
*
/
*
*

3

*

e

7 Continuation of the memoirs of the year 1610.

4

SUM M A R Y.
SUMMARY of Boo XXVII.

Remarks upon the aſſaſſination of Henry IV.

a a deſcription of his perſon: particulars relating to

7

his life; his character; his good and bad qualities.

Ihe ſituation in which his death left the Duke of
Sully: his reaſons for ſuſpecting the new coun-
cil: he ſhuts himſelf up in the Baſtile; but after-

wards goes to the Louvre: the gracious reception
given him by the Queen: he aſſiſts at the ceremo-

ny of the bed of juſtice. Mary de Medicis ſettles
a public and private council, in which the policy
and maxims of government are entirely changed:

—
S

At 2 u **

3
S 0 <x; 40 8 T
I - 9 a 3 N 23 —
n > A: 4 # J 4% Sn an. F Bp
r 1 N e „ N E 2 W
| ö C „ * 2 . 7 ol 0

FO

wa ip
»
* *

2 * — ö — a
8

0 6 Mb 7
f ed og mo 3

Sully's complaints of theſe proceedings: he is not
regarded. The Count of Soiſſons returns to court:
quarrels between him and Sully. Councils held
concerning the armament ſet on foot by Henry,
concerning the Duke of Savoy, &c. in which
Sully makes fruitleſs repreſentations againſt their
proceeding: he reſolves to reſign his employ-
ments, and to retire from court; his family op-
poſe this defign : he ſends Arnaud ro Conchini,
who receives with haughtinets his advances: he
unites with the Prince of Conde: the wile advice
he gives him; notwithſtanding which, this prince
joins his enemies. Other plots of the court; and
Sully's diſputes with the miniſters and courtiers.

A farther account of the affair of Cleves, and its
concluſion.

SUMMARY of Boox XXX.

Continuation of the memoirs of 1610, 1611,
A 2 ä The

—
— —-— —

—— — —

iv S U MM AK: TY.
The reaſons why the princes, grandees, and mi-
niſters, hated Sully: he oppoſes the unjuſt pro-
ceedings of the council: refuſes to ſign a .

tant at the Queen's requeſt. Quarrels in full

council with the Duke of Bouillon. Diſputes in
the court and council. Coronation of Lewis XIII.

Sully goes to Montrond, and is taken ill there:
eaſons for the Queen-regent and the miniſters.

recalling him: the reception given him by this
princeſs, who afterwards takes part with Conchi-
ni and the miniſters againſt him. His reſolu-
tion in oppoling the unjuſt demands of the gran-
dees, and the diſſipation of the royal treaſures ;
the uneaſineſs he ſuffers on this occaſion. He
quarrels with Villerot and D'Alincourt in. full
council. The princes, lords, and miniſters, en-
ter into a confederacy againſt him. He takes a
reſolution to retire for ever from. court : different
opinions concerning his retreat. Sully reſigns
the ſuperintendance of the finances, the govern-
ment of the Baſtile, &c. The prudent. advice
which he gives his ſecretaries: their obligations
to him. He prevents the artifices of his enemies
to ruin him : his letters to the Queen-regent for
this purpoſe, in which he juſtifies his conduct, and

his adminiſtration: the Queen's anſwers. The

King increaſes his penſion. He gives a general
account of his public and private conduct; of

his wealth; and of his domeſtic affairs: his faith-

ful performances of the promiſes he made to Hen-
7 * r

SUMMARY of Book XXX.

Diſcuſſion of the political ſcheme, commonly
called the great deſign of Henry IV. Prelimi-
nary conſiderations upon the Roman empire, upon

the eſtabliſhment of the French monarchy, wor
| 4

—

- + $1

:

> .
-

CC

S/U NM M A R TI. F.
the different governments of the three races of,
our Kings, &c. The poſſibility of the great deſign
proved: Henry with 2 makes Sully approve
of it: in what manner Eliſabeth and this prince
formed it. Favourable and unfavourable events.
The advantage of this ſcheme to all Europe.
That part of the political ſcheme which regards
religion, conſiſting in peaceably maintaining the
religions received in Europe, and in driving the
infidels from thence. The political part, which
conſiſts in eſtabliſhing fifteen equal monarchies;
in reducing the power of the houſe of Auſtria;
and dividing what it was deprived of among the
princes and republics of Europe. - Means of in-
demnifying himſelf, and of proving the equity of
his proceedings. The moderation and diſinter-
eſtedneſs of Pune in this diviſion. Eſtabliſh-
ment of a general council of the Chriſtian repu-
blics. Negotiations and other means employed
to induce the princes and ſtates of Europe to en-
gage in the great deſign. Account of the forces,
and the expenſes neceſſary for the execution of it.
The march and diſpoſition of the armies of the
confederate princes: the probable reſult of-it,

SUPPLEMENT to the Life of the
Duke of SULLYyY, after his retreat.

Conduct of the Duke of Sully in the aſſembly
of the Proteſtants at Chatelleraut; and of this
aſſembly with regard to the perſonal affairs of Sul-
ly: the part he has in the Duke of Rohau's diſ-
putes with the Queen-regent on account of St
John dq'Angely. The Queen-regenrs rehance
upon him; and the letters which ſhe writes to
him during the rebellion of the Princes and the
Proteſtants. Counſels which he gives her; and

Vol. V. A 3 the

4 S UM M A R x.
the ſervices he performs on this occaſion. He
is made Marſhal of France. His difcontent with
his ſon and grandſon. State of his family ; and
the diſpoſition which he makes of hiseſtates among
his children. His death. Honours paid him by
the Ducheſs of Sully. His tomb and epitaph. An
account of his domeſtic conduct, and of his private
Hife. Occupations of the Ducheſs his wife. The
Duke of Sully's ſentiments upon religion. His
public and private buildings.

The TRIAL of Frxaxcis RAVAILLAc,
for the murder of K. HENRY IV.

1 E M 0 RR 1

*
42
*.
2 ye j 3 5 5
* * y 4 2 a
Ae SIS = return 18
-

F . . .

so Ok xxvit.
; 11% render muſt not expect to ſee in theſe

# Memoirs a particular relation of that execra-
3 ble crime: my grief is renewed by the fad
2 remembrance, nor ſhall I ceaſe to lament it but with

4 my laſt breath. It is with aſtoniſhment that I be-

hold perſon? capable of hearing and talking with in-
- difference of the greateſt misfortune which ever be-
* fe] this kingdom: in me the thoughts of it are at-
3 tended with ſuch horror, that I turn my eyes as much
3 as poſlible from that deplorable object, and m wo
$ tongue refuſes to pronounce the name of the mo
abominable monſter*, who was the cauſe cf all our
9 miſeries; while inwardly 1 implore the divine ven-
F © g<ance againſt him, and againſt thoſe that armed
4 his impious hand; the public outcry directs us to
the authors of this deteſtable plot; nor can I hin-
der myſelf from exclaiming, with all the world,
3 aal a circumitance, of which no one is
* ignorant. After the parricide had perpetrated his
orie deſign, he was guarded with ſo little care in
ee houſe + to which he was fir it carried, that during

Francis Ravaillac. See a full account of this regicide in the

15 © tri-l annexcd to this volume.
a + In the hotel of Retz. L' Etoile ſays he was carried the next
day from the hotel of Epernon to the Concicrgeric,

Vor. V. B four

— ——

2 M E M OI R 5 ' Book XXVII.

four hours all ſorts of perſons were permitted to ſee
and talk with him; and certain perſons whom it is
unneceſſary to name here, made ſuch an imprudent
uſe of this liberty, that they were heard to call him
Friend, and bid him, I repeat their own words, take ©
care that he did not accuſe grod men who were innocent,
and good Catholics, becauſe that would be an unpar-
donable crime, and worthy of eternal damnation,
Some perſons, truly ſcandalized at what they ſaw,
loudly exclaimed againſt ſuch negligence ; which
obliged them afterwaids to guard the murderer with
more care.

Whatever may be in this, ſuch was the tragical
end of a prince, on whom nature, with a laviſh pro-
fuſion, had beſtowed all advantages, except that of
a death ſuch as he merited. I have already obſer-
ved, that his ſtature was ſo happy, and his limbs

„

formed with ſuch proportion, as conſtitutes not only ; 1
what is called a well-made man, but indicates =
ſtrength, vigour, and activity“; his complexion was 10 |
animated; all the lineaments of his face had that a- we :
greeable livelineſs} which forms a ſweet and happy |
phyſiognomy,
.
* «« Henry IV. ſays Le-Grain, was of a middling ſtature, ra- 8 «
*% ther tall than low; his forehead was broad, his noſe aquiline 4 «
« and royal, his mouth well made, and his lips red,” &c. Decade 1 o
de Henry le Grand, book 1. Morizot, being worſe informed, ſays.
on the contrary, that he was low, and of ſquare make; and aſ- 7 «
ſerts, that he dreſſed himſelf nearly in the ſame manner in xinter b
as in ſummer, chap. 49. 5 5 2
+ D' Aubignè informs us, that he had an extreme piercing ſight, 7 9
and (to make uſe of his own words) a monſtrous quick hearing; A
of which he gives this convincing proof. © The King,” ſays he, 6
„being in bed at La Garnache, in a large ſtate chamber; and his «
% bed, beſides the curtains, being ſurrounded with a thick frize; I
% Frontenac and I laid in the oppoſite corner of the room, in a IR n
* bed furniſhed in the ſame manner: and joking about the King. at

„ I having my lips cloſe to his ear, and lowering my voice as much FR
„ as poſlible, he often afked, What doſt thou ſay? The King an-
** ſwered, Deaf as you are, can't you hear, he ſays, I want to
make two friends by doing one good office? We g t off by de-
ring hm to go «0 flecp, for we had Bill a great deal more a 48

SP ' cc ay x &

.

we OF FULLY. 3

phy ſiognomy, and perfectly ſuited to that engaging
ceeaſineſs of manners whichy though ſometimes mixed
= with majeſty, never loſt the graceful affability and
ceeaſy gaiety * ſo natural to that great prince. Wilt
regard to the qualities of his heart and mind, I
* ſhall tell the reader nothing new, by ſaying that

4 ſay of him.” Vl. 3. chap. 21. The anſwer which the Duke
of Bellegarde made to this prince, is much of the ſame kind with
this. When both of them lying io the ſame room,. ſhortly after
the death of Henry III. Henry IV. waked Bcllegarde three or four
=> times in the night, to perſuade him to give up tome of the poſts
> heenjoyed, in favour of ſome perſons the King named to him;
Vill with all my heart, Sire,“ _ the malter of the horſe at
2 Hſt, © but for God's ſake, don't wake any more.” This taſte for
 raillery and joking, as is always the caſe on ſuch occaſions, from
> the prince's example paſſed to his courtters : and Siri, with ſome
appearance of reaton, blames Henry IV. on this account, c.ndemn-
ing it as a fault in a king; raillery never failing to create quar-
— rels amongſt the great, and always diminiſhing the reverence due
do the prince. He produces many examples of this. Mem. recond.
vol. 1. p. 550. |
he hiſtory of Henry IV. furniſhes innumerable inſtances of
huis turn for pleaſantry, and of his affable and popular manner of
= addreſs; which perhaps contributed more than his great qualities
=> to procure him the love of the people. The King,” ſay the
Mam. for the hilt. of France, vol. 2. p 277. going one day to
the Louvre, and meeting a poor woman driving a cow, he ſtopt
her. and aſked the price of the cow: the woman having told
him the price, Ventre-ſaint-gris I ſays the King, the is-not worth
= © that; I will give you ſo much. I ſee, replied the woman, you
are no dealer in cows. What makes you think fo ? ſays the
King, who had many noblemen with him? Don't you fſce all
i thele calves are fullowing me?” His gardener at Fontaine-
** bleau once complain ing to him, that he could not make any thing
= grow in that ſoil: “ Friend.“ fays. Henry, looking at the Duke
2X of Epernon, ** ſow it with Gaſccons, they vill thrive any where.”
A man who. was an extraordinary great cater being ſhewn him, he
== kid, * Yeutre-ſoint-gris ! if 1 had fix men like thee in my kingdom,
I ſhould hang them all; ſuch raſcals would ſoon create a famine.”
It is alſo related of him, that having one day boaſtcd to the Spa-
2X niſh ambaſſidor, that he would go to breakfaſt at Milan, hear maſs
= at Rome, and dine at Naples; that ambaſſador enivcred, “ Sire
2780 2 your Majeſty gocs fo faſt, perhaps you may go to velpers in Si-
== © cily.” He was never difplcaſed at any repartces that were made
d him of this kind. Nlatthicu ſays, none of his court were
= <qual to him in telling a ſtory. :

FI
.
*

B 2 he.

4 M E MOI R S Book XXVIII.

he was candid, ſincere, grateful, compaſſionate, ge-
nerous “, wiſe, penetrating; in a word, endowed
with all thoſe great and amiable qualities which
in theſe Memoirs he has ſo often had occaſion of ad-
miring in him. |

Ass a father he loved his ſubjects, and the whole
ſtate as the head of a family: this diſpoſition it
was, that recalled him even from the midſt of his

As to his enemies, he always ſpoke of thera with reſpect, even
while he was very young, how much ſovever he was offended with
them : he never named any one of his enemies without giving him
the title of Monſieur. Le-Grain's Decade, b. 8. Ali the foreſts
* in my kingdom would not be ſuſñcient,“ ſaid he, ** to furniſh timber
for gallows, if all thoſe who have wrote or preached againſt me were
to be hanged.” When he had been prevailed on to read ſome Jibels
on the late Queen his mother, he {ſhrugged up his ſhoulders, ſay ing.
O the wretch ! but as he returned to France under protection of
my paliport, no harm ſhall be done him“ Merc. Frang. ann.
1610. p. 438, He ſhe wed not the ſame indulgence where offence
was given to other perſons as in his own caſe. On twelfth-
day, as the King was going to receive the communion, M. de Ro-
22 judging this che fitteſt opportunity to pply for the par-

on he was defirous to obtain for Saint Chamand (Francis d' Hau-
te fort) his couſin, who had cauſed the Lieutenant-General de Tulles
(Peter de Fenis, Sicur du Teil) to be whipped, without any
reaſon, and for which his Majeſty had ordered him to be ex-
emplarily puniſhed, came to the King, and beſcught him to pardon
Saint Chamand, for the love of that God he was going to receive,
and who would only forgive thoſe who had forgave ſuch as offend-
ed them: whom the King anſwered, fixing his eyes on him,“ Be-
gone, and let me alone; I am ſurpriſed you dare make this re-

ueſt to me, when I am going to declare to God, my reſolution to
4 juſtice, and to aſk his pardon for not having done it.” Mem.
pour Phiſt. de France, vol. 2. p. 262. He replicd to M. le Grand,
who importuned him in favour of the ſon ohe Count de La-Mar-
tiniere, who was condemned to ſuffer death for having killed his
liſter; “ That after he was executed, he would grant him his
* aſhes. To another nobleman he ſaid, If he had been the father
of that wretch, he would not have interceded for him. He made
** a merry, though a Chriſtian reply to another; Ventre-ſaint gris!
% faid he to him, ſcratching his head, I have fins enough on my
head alrcady, without adding this to them ” L'Etoile, part 2.
p. 115. Somebody wanting to perſuide him to punith the author
of the Iſie des Hermaphrodites, © It would offend my conſcience,”
ys he, © to give any man trouble for only ſpeaking the
kruth.“

pleaſures 5

d
R 82 E

o
| {
<
1 *
_—_
E 4
\ 4
>
N:
1 1
4 *
4 Pl : q
a+ r
® 1
<5
% 7
% ;
£4 .
XS...
kT
*
3 1
= *
_ AF
e
|S
hs *
1
*
—
+4
*
14
PR
SO
£7
8
*
by
=.
*
of
Ta
1
4
=
J
*
3

—_ﬀ . I . 7
pleaſures, to the care of rendering his people happy,
and his kingdom flouriſhing : hence proceeded his
readineſs in projecting, and his induſtry in perfecting,
a great number of uſeful regulations; many I have
already ſpecified : and I ſhall ſum up all, by ſaying,
that there were no conditions, employments, er pro-
feſſions, to which his reflections did not extend; and
that with ſuch clearneſs and penetration, that the
changes he projected could not be overthrown by the
death of their author, which often happened in this
monarchy. It was his deſire, he ſaid, that glory

might influence his Jaſt years, and make them at

once uſeful to the world, and acceptable to God. His
was a mind, in which the ideas of what 1s great,
uncommon, and beautiful, ſeemed to ſpring up ſpon-
taneouſly : hence it was, that he looked upon ad-
verſity as a mere tranſitory evil, and proſperity as
his natural fate. He had drained fens, in order to
a greater work than any he had yet undertaken,
which was, to make, by canals, a communication”
from ſea to fea, and from river to river“: time only
was wanting to complete this noble project.

He often ſaid, that there were ten things which he
intreated God to grant him, from whence arofe that
faying, The ten wiſhes of Henry IV. He had not
the good fortune to obtain them all ; they were as
follows. 1. Grace, and ſpiritual bleſſings. 2. To
preſerve till death the uſe of a!l the faculties of his
mind and body. 3. To ſee the religion he had for-
merly profeſſed in a fixed and peaceful ſituation.
4. To be delivered from his wife (it is the firſt he
here means), and to find one whoſe temper ſuited
with his own, that would bring him princes whom

The author probably had in his view the communication be-
tween the ocean and Mediterranean, afterwards executed by
Lewis XIV. commonly called the Canal of Languedoc, which is
100 miles in length, which was carried over mountains aud-yalleys;
and even through a mountain in one place,

B 3 he

6 MEM O IR S Book XXVIII.

he might live to form and educate himſelf. 5. To re-
ſtore Frant to its ancient ſplendor. 6. To gain
from Spain, by conqueſt, either Navarre, or Flan-
ders and Artois. 7. To gain a battle in perſon a-
83 the King of Spain, and another againſt the

rand Signior; a piece of good fortune for which
he greatly envied Don John of Auſtria. 8. To bring
back to its duty, without being obliged to uſe vio-
Jent meaſures, the Huguenot faction, headed by the
Dukes of Bouillon, La-Tremouille, &c. And on
this ſubject he added a gth, To ſee thoſe two men,
and the Duke of Epernon, reduced to implore his
clemency. It was a long time before he would de-
clare the 1oth, which regarded the accompliſhment
of his great deſigns: and as in thoſe deſigns he had
two principal objects in view, it was neceſſary to
divide this wiſh into two; and firft, with regard to
religion, he was deſirous of reducing that prodi-
gious number of religions with which all Europe was
filled and divided, to three principal ones at leaſt,
fince it was not poſſible to reunite them all under
one common faith: the other was whotly political,
and related to the number, the territory and equality
of the European powers, of whom he deſigned
to compoſe that kind of great republic upon the plan
] ſhall give the reader preſently.

I ſhould deſtroy all I have now ſaid of this great
prince, after having praiſed him for an infinite num-
ber of qualities well worthy to be extolled, did I not
acknowledge that they were counterbalanced by
faults, and thoſe indee'| very great. I have not con-
cealed, or even pall:ated his paſſion for women; his
Exceſs in gaming; his gentleneſs often carried to
weakneſs; nor his propenſity to every kind of plea-
ſure: I have neither diſguiſed the faults they made
him commit, the fooliſh expenſe they led him into,
nor the time they made him waſte: but I have like-
wiſe obſerved, to do juſtice on both ſides, that his

Enemies

4
Fa. 2

7 * r : L
4 - ba n
0 l g
4 ** a 2 *
- my þ
; * 4 e 3 a
. / þ a e *
a to 2 N 2 *
HY 5 . 7 : 2 - 4 .
iy, 83 > my y :

7 - -
— 5
joey, Fo
_ - 9” 3

rr 7

| } enemies have greatly exaggerated all theſe errors.
If he was, as they ſay, a ſlave to women, yet they

never regulated his choice of miniſters, decided the.

> deſtinies of his fervants, or influenced the delibera-

; tions of his council, As much may be ſaid in ex-
* tenuation of all his other faults. And to ſum up
all, in a word, what he has done is ſufficient to ſhew,
that the good and bad in his character had no pro-
: portion to each other; and that fince honour and
1 fame have always had power enough to tear him
from pleaſure, we ought to acknowledge them tobe
3 bis great and predominant paſſions, |
l have a letter by me, which he made Lomenie
t : write for him, becauſe he had a {light hurt in his
] thumb; it is dated from Chantilly, April 8. but no
> year, I believe the reader will not be diſpleaſed to
» hear him ſpeak himſelf upon this ſubject. At
- the beginning of the letter he tells me, that his
8 reaſon for entering upon it with me, was the public
„ diſcourſe concerning him; for he uſed ta divert him-
Tſelf with hearing al! that was ſaid of him, from Ro-

. quelaure, Frontenac, Le-Rivicre, Du- Laurens,
y > CAuambure, Morlas, Salutte, La Varenne, Bon-
d niers, Du Jobn, Beringhen, L'Oſerai, Armagnac,
n Jacquindt, Perroton. and ſome others with whom

*

he converſed familiarly, and who often acquitted

t > themſelves very faithfully of the order he gave ther,
- to conceal from him nothing that was ſaid to his
t diſadvantage.

y lle began with telling me, that his enemies ac-
- > cu'cd him with having neglected and deſpiſed, thoſe
8 Oh, are his words, the greateſt and moſt deſerving men
oO in the kingdom; and conſuming, in vain and uſe—
- 7 leſs expenſes, that money which they alledged

*
F-£ Wa
n

would be better employed in gratuities to them “.
„Some,

5 * : They fay I am niggardly, ſays he; but I do three things
= OY inconſiſtent with avarice ; tor I make war, I make love, 9

8 Mr M OR s Book XXVIIL

© Some,” purſued he, “ blame me for being too
« fond of buildings and great works; others, for
„ liking hunting, dogs, and birds: one ſays, that
& that I have a paſſion for cards, dice, and other
“ kinds of gaming; another condemns me for my
& attachment to women, to the pleaſures of the table,
„to aſſemblies, plays, balls, running at the ting,

„ and other amuſements of that kind * ; where,

&« ſay they, I appear as gay and lively, wich my
« grey beard, and am as proud of having gained
* 0 ous and received a ring from ſome fair lady,
& as I could have been in my youth, or as the
« vaineſt young fellow of the court. I do not
„ deny (adds. he) but there is ſome truth in all
& this; but if I am guilty of no exceſles in theſe

& pleaſures, my conduct deſerves more praile than

& blame; and indeed ſme little indulgences I
&« ought to have, in amuſements which bring no
„ inconvenience upon my people, in conſideration
& of the labours 1 have endured from my infancy
« to fifty years old. I have heard you ſay, when
« any one cenſured your actions, that we are not
« commanded by ſcripture to have abſolutely no
& ſins and errors, becauſe there are ſome infirmities
& inſeparable from humanity z but only not to ſuffer
them to inflave us and control our wills: and
& this has been my endeavour, ſince I could not

T build. Le-Grain, book 8. Some looked on him as a cove-
tous man, but they could be only thoſe who knew not the great
neceſſities he had to ſtruggle with; which were even ſo great,
that, during the ſiege of Di-ppe, he could truly ſay, He was a King
without a kingdom, a huſband without a wife, and that he made
war without money. Merc. Franz. ann. 1610. P. 485.

* At feaſts he was lively; at tournaments as expert as any
one; he was gay over a bottle, though abundantly moderate; his
ſprightliacf, and the ſmartneſs of his repartees, furniſhed the moſt
>, part of the feaſt: he diſcovered as much addreſs and
courage at tilts, running at the ring, and in al! other gentleman-
like <xerciles, as any one of the young nobility: he even took
delight in balls, and ſom« times danced, though, to {peak the truth,
with more ſpirit than graccfulneſs, Pereſiaxe, p. 380,

(e do

EE of
R

—

1

* *
: *
LL
:

e 46
& do better“. You know that on many occaſions
& wherein my miſtreſſes have been concerned, (and
e my paſhon for women is, of all others, ſaid to
& have the moſt empire over me), I have ſupported
& you againſt them, and have gone fo far as to tell
& them, that | wouid rather loſe ten ſuch miſtreſſes
as they, than one ſuch ſervant as you: and this,
& I afſure you, you ſhall hear me ſay gain, if ne-
ceflary ; for when an opportunity offers for exe-
& cuting thoſe glorious detigns which you know
„ have long formed, you ſhall find that I can
% quit my miſtreſſes, dogs, horſes, gaming, build-
ings, and entertainments, to acquire honour and
fame; for I hold it to be my principal duty, next
to thoſe I have to God, my wife, my children,
my faithful ſervants and my people, whom I love
& as my children +, to make myſelf be eſteemed
* as a prince who is religiouſly faithful to his
« word,” &c.

It is now high time to reſume the difagreeable
narration of what happened after the murder of this
worthy prince: however melancholy the recital
may be to me, theſe Memoirs ought not. to con—
clude, until that period when I gave up having
any concern in the affairs of the government.

Amidſt the firſt tranſports of my grief at the
news of my dear maſter's death, I fancied, that
though mortally wounded, ſome little remains of
life might ſtill be left him; and my mind eagerly

* T every day, ſaid this prince, pray to God for three things;
firſt, that he would be caſed to pardon my enemies; ſecondly,
to grant me the victory over my paſſions, and cſpecially ſenſu-
ality ; thirdlv, that I may make a right uſe of the authority he

as given me, and never abuſe it. I would willingly do as they
fay, added he, ſpeaking of the remonſtrances ſometimes made ta
him by the biſhops and other ecclchiaſtics, but they do not think
I know of all chey do, Matthieu, vol. 2. p 838.

f I have only two eyes and two feet, ſail this good prince; in
what reſpect then do I differ from my ſubje cts, if it be not, that
I am inveſted with the power of executing juilice ?

| welcoming

w M E M OI R S Book XXVII.

welcoming this faint ray of hope and conſolation,
„Give me my cloaths and boots,” ſaid I to thoſe
that were about me, and ſaddle ſome of my beſt
e horſes, for I will not uſe a coach, and let all my
„ gentlemen hold themſelves in readineſs to ac-
% company me.” I bad then only a few of my
ſervants with me; for all the others, believing that
T was too much indiſpoſed to go out, or even to be
dreſſed, had diſperſed ſeveral ways; but the report
of the King's being wounded, which was ſoom
ſpread over all quarters of the city, had brought
them all together again before I had mounted my
horſe, and with them ſo many other perſons, who
were particularly attached to me, that J had ſcarcely
reached the houſe of Beaumarchais, when I had a-
bove an hundred horſe in my train ; which, in a few
moments more, was increaſed to an hundred and:
fifty; for as I advanced, I met ſeveral of the King's
faithful ſervants, who were coming to my houſe, to
aſk my ailvice concerning what meaſures they ſhould
take in this moſt miſerable conjuncture. The uni-

verſal grief “ and conſternation which I now be-
held,

The deſcription Pereſixe gives of it, p. 415. is quite aff. ting.
When the report of this tragical accident had been ſpread all
over Paris, and it was certainly known that the Ping, who at
firſt was thought to be only wounded, was actually dead, that
mixtyre of hope and fear, which till then had kept this great city
in ſuſpenſe, at once burſt forth in loud cries and violent groans;
ſome became motionl {s and inſenſible, through grief; others ran
about the ſtreets, quite trantic ; many embraced their friends with-
out ſaying any thing to them, but, Alas ! what a misfortune /
ſome ſhut themſelves up in their houſes ; others threw themſclves
on the ground: one might ſce women with their hair diſchevelled,
crying and lamenting; fathers ſaid to their children, What will
become of you? you have loſt your father. Thoſe who had.
| i apprehenſions for the future, and who remembered the

orrible calamities of the late civil wars, deplored the misfoi tunes
of France, and ſaid, that the fatal ſtroke which had pierced the
heart of the King, at the ſame time gave a deadly wound to.
every Frenchman, It was faid, many were ſo ſtrongly Wore
'Y

„ v es Hh > the

naw ! Boo. ates ie.

Il. .

9

held, was a proof how tenderly this good prince
was beloved in his capital. Nothing could be more
affecting than the different ways by which the citi-
zens and populace of this great city expreſſed their
affection and their ſorrow : groans, tears, loud cries

11

1610.

of grief, a mournful ſilence, arms raiſed towards
heaven, claſped hands; ſome ſtriking their bofoms,

| others ſhaking their heads with a melancholy air.

This was the ſpectacle which was every where pre-
ſented to my view 3 ſome of them looking dejected-
ly upon me, faid, “ Ah | Monſieur, we are all un-
« done, our good King is dead.“

As I paſſed through the ſtreet de Ja Pourpointerie,
a man whom I had not perceived before, paſſed
cloſe by me, and put a billet into my hands, which
I gave to ſome of thoſe who were neareſt me to
read; it contained only theſe few words: Mon-
„ fieur, where ate you going? it is done; I have
e ſeen him dead; if you enter the Louvre, you will
„ not eſcape any more than him.” This billet
gave me a dreadful certainty of what I was ſeeking
to know. I could not hinder myſelf from burſting
into tears: the fad truth was confirmed to me a
thouſand different ways. Du- John, whom I met
near Saint- Innocent, ſaid to me, Monſieur, our
& evil is without remedv, God has diſpoſed of
„% him; I know it; I have ſeen him ſpeechleſs :
„take care of yourſelf, for this ſtrange blow muſt
& have fatal conſequences.” On entering the
ſtreet Saint-Honore, another billet, like the for-

by this event, that they died on the ſpot, others in a few days
afterwards. In ſhort, it was not the appearance of a mouining
for one ſingle man, but as if the half of all mankind were dead.
One would have thought every one had loſt all his family, poſ-
ſeſſions, and hopes, by the death of this great king. All kings
and princes, adds the hiſtorian Matthieu, lamented his death.-—
The King of Spain, compelled by truth and graf, declared, that
the greateſt commander on earth was dead, — The Venetians ſaid,
Our King is dead, Ibid. p. 834. |

| mer,

22 M E M O I R S Bcok XXVIII.

mer, was thrawn to me; yet I fill continued my
courſe to the Louvre, My train was now increaſed
to three hundred horſe, when I met Vitry at the
end of the lireet; he came and embraced me, break-
ing out into lamentable cries, which it was not in his
power to reſtrain; never did | behold a man in ſuch
affliction! “Ah! Monſieur,” cried he, ** they have
% murdered our good maſter ; he is dead, France
e is ruined ;, as for me, I am perſuaded I have but
© a ſhort time to live; I am going out of France,
% never more to return to it; we muſt now bid
* farewell to that order and regularity you had eſta-
<. bliſhed. But, Monſieur,” ſaid he afterwards,
& where are you going with this train? they will
© not ſuffer you to approach the Louvre, nor to
„enter there with more than two or three attend-
« ants, which I would not adviſe you to do“; for

4 |

* By all the Duke of Sully's expreſſions here one may perceive
he thought it incumbent upon him to, juſtify himſelt againſt a
fault he is accuſed of having committed on this occaſion. — Nlare-
chal Baſſomyierre ſpeaks of it as follows: As we came out,
going towards Saint-Anthony's ſtreet, we met the Duke of Sully,
with about forty horſe, who, as he approached, faid to us with
a meiaricholy accent, Gentlemen, if your vous of ſervice to the
King, whom: uc have juſt now moſt unhappily loſt, have made
that im pre ſſion on your minds, which they ought on that of every
gon Frenchman, ſwear on the ſpot, that you will ſerve the King
his fon end ſucceſſor, with the ſame fidelity as you did him; and
that you will venture your perſons and lives in revenging his
death.“ I anſwered him, “Sir, we are obliging others to take
this oath, and have no need to be adviſed to perform what we
think ourſelves ſo ſtrongly bound to do.” „ Ii do not know whe-
ther my anſwer ſurpriſed him, or whether he repenicd of having
come ſo far from his fortreſs ; but he immediately turning about,
left us, and went and ſhat himſelf up in the Baſtile, ſending, at
the ſame time, to ſeize all the bread in the markets and bakers
ſhops. He alſo ſent in great haſte to M de Rohan, his fon in-
law, to make him come back, with fix thouſand Swiſ', who were
in Champaig-ne. and of whom he «2s Colonel-General, to march
——_—_ to Paris; which was afterwards made nic of as a pretext
to exclude him from the management of aff+irs: beſides this,
Meſſicurs de Praſlin and de Crequy, who came to ſummon nim for

| that

-

ma Q_ aw ==ss

a BW

—

— —
was

=o ©& mw &

"©

; #

1610. O F e. 13

I am greatly deceived if this plot ends here. I have
4 ſeen ſome perſons, who have fo little ſenſibility
*<« of the loſs they have ſuſtained, that they cannot
« even diſſemble the grief they ought to feel for it:

« this

that purpoſe, could never perſuade him to wait on the King, as
all the other great men did; nor did he go till the next day, when
the Duke of Guiſe, with difficulty, prevailed on him to go: after
which, he countermanded his ſon-in-law, with the Swiſs, who
had already advanced a day's march towards Paris.” Vol. 1 p.
300. L'Etoile only ſays, ** M. de Sully, more dead than alive,
came to wait on the Queen, who received him kindly, continued
him in all his poſts, and ſent bim to the arſenal to exerciſe the
duties of his office.” Mem. hiff. de France, p. 209. But his
© commentator appears to be of the ſame opinion with Baſſompierre,
from whom he quotes in the margin the paſſage we have recited
here. The author of L'Hiſtoire de la mere et du fils, inveighs
> violently on this account againſt M. de Sully, though without ma-
king mention of his ſeizing the bread, or recalling the Swiſs. Ile
only accuſes this miniſter of giving way, with tos much weak-
nels, to the fear he had conccived of his enemies about the Queen.
Some of his friends,” ſays he, did every thing in their power
to engage him to the performance of his duty, and to get the
better of his apprehenſions and fears: but as perſons of the great-
= eſt courage, on ſome occaſions, become fearful and timorous, it was
for ſome time impoſlible to inſpire him with reſolution enough for
this purpoſe. It was a long time before he could recover his cou-
rage Towards the evening, Saint Geran, whom he had obliged,
and who profeſſed a great friendſhip for him, coming to him, at
© laſt prevailed on him to quit the arſenal, and go to the
Louvre. When he came to the Croix-du Trahoir, his apprehen-
= hons ſcized him again, and fo powerfully, by reaſon of
ſome intelligence he reccived at that place, that he went
back, with fifty or ſixty horſe, who accompanicd him to the Baſtile,
of which he was captain; having deſired M. de Saint-Geran to go
and make his excuſes to the Queen, and aſſure her of his fidelity
and readineſs to ſerve her.” wol. 1. p 49.
* Viewing this account in the moſt unfavourable light, diſadvan-
= tageous as it is to the Duke of Sully, it can only give room to
blame him for having carried his precaution againſt any attempt
on his perſon (which was looked on as chimerical) too far; but
the hiſtorian Matthieu, the beſt informed of all thoſe writers,
acquaints us, that the fear this min ſter had conceived was not fo
& groundleſs as his enemies have repreſented He ſpeaks of this
matter in the following manner: © They had raiſed jealou-
ſies in the Qucen of the Duke of Sully and ſhe had been
= auviſed to ſecure his perſon, becauſe he had the Baſtile, the
VoL. V. C arſenal,

24 MEM O I R 8 Book XXVII.

this I have obſerved, and am ready to burſt with
rage at it: and if you was to ſee them, you
„ would think as I do. I am of opinion that you
* ought to go back; there 1s buſineſs enough for

« you to do, without going to the T.ouvre,”

This agreement of diſcourſes, billets, and advices,
ſtruck me at length: I ſtopped ſhort. and after con-
ſulting with Vitry, and ten or twelve of the princi-
pal perſons who followed me, | thought it was the
mot prudent way to return home; and accordingly
I coatented myſelf with ſending to offer my duty
and ſervices to the Queen: and to aſſure her, at the
ſame time, that ti! che acquainted me with her or-
ders, I would, with fill greater aſſiduity than before,
attend to the care of the Baſtile, the aiſenal, the for-
ces, and ordnance, and all the afiairs of my govern-
ment, and other employments.

arſenal, and the King's money, in his poſſeſſion. He had been
bathing that day, and being advertiſed of this unhappy accident,
he got on torſcback to go to the Louvre; but coming to the
Croix du-Tralivir, followed by about forty gentlemen, he re-
ccived lome advices which made him return. The Queen ſent the
Duke of Guile to fetch him to her, who found him in the great
walk in his garden, on the fide next to the Baſtile, and acquaint-
ed him with the Queen” s orders. He dclired to be excuſed, be-
cauſe he had notice given him that fome deſigns were formed a-
gainſt him. — The determination he came to, on conſulting with
the Duke of Guile, the Count of Bethune, and ſome other fricuds,
was to ſtay at hame the reſt of that day, and to ſee the Queen on
the day tullowing, „hen the Duke of Guile promiſed to come and
Fetch him, and aflured him, that he and all his friends would loſe their
lives before they would ſuffer any harm to be done him. —He went
back to the Queen, and got her approbation of the conſiderations that
detained the Duke of Sully, upon the promiſe he had made of coming

to wait on her the next day. Immediately afterwards the Duke of
Sully, with a good number of gentlemen, went into the Baſtile, where

he had cau ed all the bread to be brought that was found in the ba-
kers ſhops in Paris,“ &c. Hit. of Lewis XIII. p. 2. ond 3. If

we add to this, what the Duke of Sully ſays of the notice he had |
received from every quarter, that this blow would be followed by x37
terrible conſequences which were not expected, we ſhall perhaps Rt
be convinced, that it was only prudent in this miniſter to act 3

thus, for the ſake of the 4 uv;c W and his own ſafety.

*
. / / . . x

= 1610. O F r 13

i © 1 had but juſt entered the ſtreet Saint A/toine,
1 and the gentlemen whom J ſent with this meſſage
1 could not have had time to deliver it, when I ſaw
r a meſſenger from the Queen, who intreated me to

come inſtantly to her at the Louvre, and to bring
1 as ſew perſons as poſſible with me, having things of
great conſequence to impart. This propoſal of go-
- ing alone to the Louvre to deliver myſelf into the

hands of my enemies, with whom I knew it was

y full, was not very proper to remove my ſuſpicions.
y _ Beſides, I was that moment informed, that an ex-
e empt of the guards, and ſome archers, had been ſeen
r= at the firſt gates of the arſenal, that others had been
e, ſent to the temple, where the powder was lodged; and
2 ſome to the treaſurer of the exchequer, to ſtop al!
1- the money there, I drew ſo unfavourable an augu-

ry from all this being done without conſulting me,
that I did not heſitate a moment about the antwer !

en - ſhould fend to the Queen. I ſent a gentleman to tel!
at, ber, that I was very certain, when ſhe had heard
a what the perſon whom I had the honour to depute
he to her had to ſay, ſhe would enter into my reatons, :
cat and alter her opinion ; and that I would expect her
_ an(wer at the arſenal and the Baſtile, from whence
_ I ſhould not remove.

hh The Queen did not ſtop there: ſhe ſent to me im-
ds. mediately Meſſieurs de Monibazon, de Parſlin, de
4 Schomberg, La- Varenne, and after them my brother.
icir I knew nut what to think of this importunity ; but
ent when ſaw them all arrive within a quarter of an
8 hour of each other, my ſuſpicions were increaſed, and
I reſolved not to go to the Louvre that day: the con-
iere dition I was in was alone a ſufficient excuſe, The
_ effort I had made after my bathing in the morning,
pal and after a very flight repaſt ; the ſtate of my mind,
| by 2 far more painful than that of my body: both toge-
. ther had thrown me into ſo violent a ſweat, that
,, my cloaths were quite wet; and into fo great a

I C 2 weakneſs,

16 M E M OI R 5 Book XXVIII.

weakneſs, that I could no longer ſupport myſelf;
therefore as ſoon as I got to my apartment in the
Baſtile, whither I firſt went, I was obliged to change
my ſhirt, and go into bed, where I was reſolved to
continue till the next day. The Conſtable and the
Duke of Epernon came to viſit me, and offered me
their ſervices : and the manner in which they advi-
fed me to wait upon the Queen making me judge I
might do it without running any danger. I at length
128 upon the condition they ſtill inſiſted on, that

ſhould be attended only by a ſmall number of per-
ſons: and I reſolved to go to the Louvre the next
day.

Three hundred perſons on horſeback waited for
my coming out, that they might accompany me as
the day before; theſe were all either relations, friends,
or perſons ſeemingly attached to me from the ap-
pearance of the new favour I was likely to be in, or
perhaps from the ſhame of quitting me too precipi—
tately. I thanked them all, and told them my rea-
ſons for not admitting of an eſcort that might appear
in any degree remarkable, and for confining myſelf
to that ſmall number which uſually compoſed my
train. And accordingly it was with my own domeſtics
only, to the number of twenty, or thereabouts, that
I arrived at the Louvre, On my entrance, I percei-
ved the marks of a fincere grief in thoſe who had b
any employment been attached to the deceaſed King:
of theſe, the officers and ſubalterns ſeemed to feel,
with the moſt tender ſenſibility, the public loſs. As
I paſſed through the ſeveral gates, I could fee
them advance to meet and embrace me with tears
in their eyes, or groan as they ſaw me paſs, and ear-

neſtly conjure me not to abandon the children, after

having fo well ſerved the father.
It is with regret I am obliged to confeſs, that the
nner part of the palace, and what is called the

court, preſented me an object greatly different. —

3 bo
7
*
>
8
2
—
*
F Ne.
*
*
*
888
ii
1 ®
$
*%

U 43
4
22 + af
ro *

*
$ *

„

tr . 17

only ſaw faces either calm and compoſed, and
* which afflicted me ſo much the more, as they endea-
voured, but in vain, to appear aMicted; or faces fo
gap, as added indignation to my grief, When | came

into the Queen's preſence, all the Jittle conſtancy

with which I had armed myſelf ſo totally left me,

%

that I broke into tears and cries. She no longer
found in herſelf that fortitude with which the had
prepared to ſee me : and we together made up a
ſcene truly aftecting. She gave orders that the
young King ſhould be brought to me, whoſe tender
carefles gave a new aflault to my heart, which I
could with the utmoſt difficulty ſuſtain. I cannot
remember what this voung prince then ſaid to me,
or what I ſaid to him; all I know is, that they were
ſcarce able to tear him from my arms, in vhich J

held him cloſely embraced. ** My ſon,” ſaid the

Queen his mother to him, “this is M. de Sully,
„ you muſt love him well, for he was one of the
e beſt and moſt faithful ſervants of the King your
& father, and J intreat him to continue to ſerve you
in the ſame manner.” The Queen and I had
ſome other diſcourſe together, without being able
to ceaſe weeping for a moment: ſhe afterwards
ſaid, that it was the fight of me, and one other

| perſon in the court, with which the had been moſt

aftected.

A reception attended with ſuch marks of diſ-
tinction and confidence, reduced all the princes,
lords, and members of the council, who were near

the Queen, to the neceſſity of outvying each other in
proteſtations of ſriendſhip, ſervice, and attachment:
yet certainly they did not dective me, for I knew
their hearts as well as themſelves: I was convinced
already, that in the ſcheme they had formed of ta-
king advantage of the preſent conjuncture, to increase

their riches, and arrogate new dignities to themſelves,

thcugh at the expenſe of the good of the Nate, the

3 honour

13 NM E M © I X S Book XXVUL

honour of the King, and the public welfare, I might
be ſure of being the mark at which all their blows
would be aimed: becauſe they themſelves, in the
firmneſs of my mind, and the ſeverity of my regula-
tions, had reaſon to expect inſurmountable obſtacles
to their deſigns: of this they had already examples
ſo ſufficient to convince them, that the only part they
had to take was to endeavour to get me removed
entirely from the adminiſtration of affairs; therefore
when, in the ſequel, they raiſed all forts of batteries
againſt me in the Queen's opinion (taking it ſor

ranted that they had not done it before), when the
Jeſaits and their adherents made the nuncio ſolicit
the artet for my diſmiſſion, when my partners in the
council and the finances ſet Conchini “ and his wife
to work, to inſinuate to the two princes of the
blood, that they would never have any real authority
while I continued to be at the head of affairs; and
that if they removed me from the adminiſtration, it
muſt neceſſary fall into their hands: when they made
all the others believe, that to depend upon Conchi-

* Concino Conchini an Italian of mean birth, according to
ſ5me, but others reckon him a Florentine gentleman, better
known under the name of Marſhal D'AN C RE, to which title he
was afterwards promoted. He was the chief favourite of the
Qucen, and loaded by her with riches and honours. At his de par-
ture from Florence, one of his friends aſking him, what he was
going to do in France? he anſwered, either to make my fortune or
periſh; both which he performed. Vitry killed him in the Louvre
the 24th of Augult 1617, by order of Lewis XIII. at the ſolici-
tation of the nobility. His wife, the ſame Leonora Galigai [» often
mentioned in theſe Memoirs, was alſo put to death. No other
crime was alledyed againſt her, but that of bewitching the Quecn
her miſtreſs. ** I have never,” anſwered ſhe to her judpes,
** made uſe of eny witchcraft but my wit; is it at all to be won-
** dered at that I governed the Queen who had none?“ Cardinal
Richelieu, adds Amelot, owed his fi: ft promotion to this woman,
They were both puſſeſſed of the magic of eloquence. For further
E ſcaren the hiſtoriaus of Mary de Medieis and

ewis XIII. Some curious anccdotes may allo be gathered from
Baſſompierre.

ni

mg ds.  Atwrots nr

— C

CV od o OO

d o&

| -

b 1610. 0 F

ni was to be truly great; in a word, when I ſaw
them all labouring with equal ardour for my fall,
"nothing more happened than what I had foreſeen

4

. 19

and foretold.

The firſt thing the parliament proceeded to, aſter
the King's death was declared, was to appoint the
Queen-mother regent. It was thought necetfary that
the young King thould go thither in perſon, to hold
his bed of juſtice, and confirm this nomination +,
The morning after the King's aflaſſination was the

day appointed for this ceremony. It was ſcarce

light when 1 receved a meſſage from the Queen, de-
firing I would attend his Majeſty to the parliament,
I made every excuſe J could think of to avoid it;
I even feigned myſelf ſo much indiſpoſed, that it
would be impoſſible for me to get out of bed that
whole day. I felt indeed an extreme repugnance
againſt doing what they required of me; but it was
abſolutely neceſlary to give the Queen this ſatisfac-
tion, who importuned me inceflantly, The ſound
of the drums and muſica] inftruments giving new
force to my grief, and jui'ging that a face bathed

with tears would but ill ſuit with the cries of gratu-

lation and joy with which every place reſounded ; I
prefled through the croud, and was amoneſt the firſt
in the hall of the Auguſtins, where the parliament
was held.

Two or three cardinals, who, like me, had been

deſirous of avoiding the preſe, were, with ſome other

perſons, already in the hall, and had taken their
feats at the upper end of the bench deſtined for the

eccleſiaſtics, which was on the left fide of the throne

prepared for his Majeſty: the biſhops of Langres,

dee the form and particulars of this ceremony in the Mere.

Frang and other hiſtorians, anno 1610. In the council which met

to adviſe whether the Queen ought to go to the pa:liament, the
Duke of Sully only id. “ That as there was no law to forbid

i

. the Qucen's going to parliament, it was a matter of indiffetence
>»

whether ſhe went or not.“ Malt bien, ibid. p. 4.
Beauvais,

20 M E M O I R S Book XXVIII.

Beauvais, and Noyon, coming in aſterwards, theſe
gentlemen, who had taken it into their heads that
their quality of peers gave them a right to precede
the princes and cardinals in parliament, would not
fit below the latter, who they found had already pla-
ced themſelves, but went to the bench on the right
hand, and took their places at the upper end of it :
I found them there when | entered, and told them
with great civility, that it was not their place, and
adviſed them, as their friend, to go to the left fide,
ſince they could not expect that the temporal peers,
who would enter immediately, would ſuffer them
quietly to keep poſſefnion of the right fide. They
were going to ſtun me with their uſual diſtinctions
of peers of an older creation and ſpiritual peers,
which in their opinions raiſed them greatly above
the new dukes. The debate was not carried to any
length by me; I only told them, that they would
ſoon be convinced who was in the right ; which ac-
cordingly happened. The affair was inſtantiy deci-
ded, and they were obliged to ge over to the left
fide; where, finding the cardinals not diſpoſed to
give them the upper hand, they choſe to go out, ra-
ther than ſubmit to this regulation, and did not 20
at the ceremony. As for me, though 1 was preſent,
I interpoſed no farther in the diſpute. The Queen
had reaſon to be fatished with what paſted “: every
thing was granted her, without even collecting the
votes,

It was not long before I diſcovered, that although,
in appearance, they ſeemed to neglect none of the
formalities which are generally obſetved in the ſet-
tling a lawful regency, although they would have
the alterations, which they already luffered to be
perceived in the adminiſtration, paſs for the common

* Ses the hiſtorians quoted before, for the manner of this cere-
mony.

and

4

*
« 8
tr
14
—
a

—

1610. O F r 27

and neceſſary effect of a change of government; in a
word, although they ſtrove to make it be believed, that

their ſole view, by this manner of government, was

to give more ſtrength and grandeur to the authority
of an infant king: yet thoſe by whoſe advice the
Queen acted, thougat of nothing in reality but how,
under this maſk, to aggrandiſe themſelves, All that
ſhow of regularity vaniſhed upon a nearer view;
while, in its place, we beheld real violations of or—
der, which terrified the few, the very few good ſub-

jects ſtill remaining. I thought myſelf obliged, and

in ſome degree intitled to make them ſenſible that I
ſaw theſe abuſes, and that I diſapproved of them :
but the time of free remonſtrances, ich the grief
for the King's death the firſt day, and the diſtraction
of affairs the ſecond, ſuffered ſtill to ſubſiſt, was paſt
on the third : nor was it long before they entirely
ſhook off the yoke of conſtraint, and appeared no
more with a compoſure of behaviour, and an affec-—
tation of ſorrow, which had done too much violence
to their real ſentiments : ſtupidity, or the want of a
true ſubjeCt for joy, produced this effect in ſome ;
in others, their natural Jevity of temper ; and in
others, the mere movement of public and private
affairs; but, above all, the fear of diſpleaſing thoſe
perſons whoſe examples gave laws to the court.

Let us take a view then of this new world after

bday ays. Were we to ſtop at appearances,

and all that was done to ftrike the eves, the Louvre

might have been thought to have ſtill mourned; all

the refinements of melancholy pomp were ta be

found there; the hangings with which the ceilings,
the walls, and floors were covered; the furniture,

and all the apparatus of public mourning, made

the apartments of ſtate in this palace look like the

diſmal abode of death and ſorrow. But were we to
go a little farther, and conſider the countenances and
behaviour of thoſe who were appointed to do the ho-
| nours

22 M E M O I R Ss Book XXVII.

nours of this ſad ceremony, the thing might appear
a little doubtful: for if there were ſome among
them who ſhed real tears, and whoſe groans indeed
proceeded from the heart, there were others who gave
ſufficient indications of very different emotions. But.
if we deſcen from thence, and viſit the lower apart-
ments, which were called the ground floors, there
we may form a-trve notion of the diſpoſition all
hearts were in ; that magnificence which was ba-
niſhed from every other part of the palace, found an
aſylum there: gold, purple, embroidery, and the
moſt ſumptuous ornaments, made. this a ſcene of
pleaſure and delight; luxury was there in its utmoſt
profuſion, Myſelf, and a ſmall number of true
Frenchmen, never entered thoſe apartments, with—
out feeling our hearts torn with grief and rage; to
behold, in a place where every object ought to have
reminded us of the public lofs, all the appearance of
Joy, triumph, and exultation. I bluſh to fay, that
notwith{tanding the artitice which was uſed to con-
ceal this ſpectacle of inſenſibility and ingratitude
from the eyes of the public, yet it was too often diſ-
cloſed, by the burſts of laughter, the exclamations of
Joy, and the ſongs of gladneſs, which were heard to
proceed from thoſe places: nor indeed were they
filled with any but happy perſons, or thoſe that be-
lieved themſelves ſo. Here it was that the true
court reſided, and where the councils were held, as
well thoſe general ones which were called for ow,
and compliance with cuſtum, as the private ones,
wherein they knew how to render ineffectual all
the prudent reſolutions that had been taken in the
former,

The Queen admitted none into theſe ſecret coun-
cils, which were held at the moſt unſeaſonable
hours, but Conchini and his wife, the Pope's nun-
cio, the Spaniſh ambaſſador, the Chancellor, and
the Chevalier de Sillery, the Duke of 1

leroi,

*
*
5

* *
2
* *
&
:

"
© %* TY
= *
« *
5
2 : p
+4 »%
5 N
4

425 7
12 -
2
2
7

e

_s A c oc. oa ame

+

5 r : 1 $2

1610. O F

8 LL. 23

Jeroi, Jeannin, and Arnaud, (who, as well as Jean-
nin, from having been entirely devoted to me, be-
came no leſs attached to Conchint), Duret the phy-
ſician, (who, however, ſoon fell from this high degree
of favour), Dolle, and Father Cotton. It is not dif-

ficult to gueſs the ſubjects of their conſultations;

the union of the crowns of France and Spain, the
renouncing of all the moſt ancient alliances of the
crown with foreign princes, the repealing of all e-
dicts of pacification, the deſtruction of the Prote-
ſtants, the expulſion of all of them who were in place,
the diſgrace of tho'e who would not receive the
yoke of the new favourites, the diſſipation of the
treaſures amafled by the deceaſed King. and applied
by them to bribe the covetous and ambitious to

their intereſts, and to load with riches and authori-

ty thoſe who were going to be raiſed to tl. firſt dig-

nities of the ſtate; in a word, a thouſand projects as
pernicious to the King and the kingdom, as advan-
tageous to our greateſt enemies, made up the grand

| object of all their views.

Jo the public council, which was held punctual-
ly every day, were ſummoned the Prince of Conti
and the Count de Soiſſons, (the Prince of Conde was
not yet returned to France), the Cardinal de

Joyeuſe, the Conſtable, the Dukes of Maine and

Guiſe, and the Duke of Bouillon, as ſoon as he
ſhould arrive, Marechal Briſſac, Chateauneuf,
Pontcarre De- Vic *, Caumartin, and myſelf. Some

of thele gentlemen loudly exclaimed againſt altering
our ſyſtem of politics: but the ſubjects moſt fre-
* quently diſcuſſed by this council, were upon the

.

3% *

"IS
*

* 5

We
1

ws

o
*
f I
"#4
* * A
1
4%

means of increaſing the royal revenues, of diminiſh-

* Dominic De Vic, vice admiral, &c. who has been mention-
ed before: he died this year at Paris, ſoon after his return from
Calais, of which he was governor ; it was allerted, that his death
was occaſioned by the grief he was feized with, on ſceing again
the place to which he had ſcen the corpſe of Henry IV brought
after he was allaſſinated, Merc. Frang. ann. 1610. p. $29. :

ing

N
|
|
|

24 MEM OI R s Book XXVIII

ing the taille and other impoſts, and of augmenting
the penſions of the grandees, and procuring them

. ſeveral other advantages. The Prefident Jeannin,

ever loud and obſtinate, made himſeif be heard a-
above all the others. It was ſaid, this man had
been known to promiſe mountains of gold to
every one. Some perſons, who ſtil] retained
the candour and frankneſs of the old council,
and who could neither diſguiſe their own ſenti—
ments, nor flatter thoſe of others, joined their en-
deavours to mine, to ſhew the - graſs contradiction
there was in pretending to increaſe the expenſes,
while they were diminiſhing; the revenues.

I was defirous of avoiding the reproach of my
own conſcience, for ſuftering, by my ſilence, ſuch
maxims to gain ground: I at firſt combated them
by arguments, and flattered myſelf, that if the ad-
vantage was to remain on the fide of reaſon, we
ſhould have carried our point; but we ſoon found
that ignorance was but the leaſt of thuſe vices we
had to encounter. It was by the moſt magnificent
promiſes (of which, however, thoſe that related to
the people's relief were never performed) that the
new government ſought to make friends, and to ob-
literate, and even to bring into contempt, that wiſe
frugality to which the glory of the laſt reign was
owing. Jeannin, indeed, had a particular end to
anſwer by theſe meaſures ; his ſcheme being to get
the entire diſpoſal of the finances, what better me-

thods could be made uſe of to raiſe himſelf to this
poſt, than to inſinuate, that in the new ſuperintend-
ant they ſhould all find that facility and readineſs |

to oblige, which the grandees complained they had
not met with in the old one? It may be ſaid, that
he had not the abilities requiſite for this employ-
ment, which he at length obtained; but he knew 7

how to enrich himſelf, his relations and allies, by

F 3
2 4. 1

it, 4 A of

{+438
.
*s 5
Fes.

d-
ſs

d

at

1610. r Y. 25
2 eſpecially Caſtille *, with whom money muſt

; ON

4

certainly be of very little value, fince all thoſe
pieces of furniture which in other houſes are made
of iron, or wood, in his were of ſilver: in this
point of magnificence he was inferior to none but
*Conchini.

I was abſolutely convinced that I was offering re-

medics to voluntary ills, when I ſaw that my free-
dom of ſpeech which had at firſt been ſuffered as
being an habitual fault, began to appear ſo trouble-
Tome, that I eaſily read upon every countenance
the pain it gave them to reitrain themſelves ; and
that they would ſoon get rid of thoſe ſmall re-

mains of reſpect. From that time I looked up-

me
4

-

W

by

T4 5
0 I
8 —
3
9
8
oy *
* 5
1 „

on myſelf as a man who would vety ſoon become
ſomething worſe than uſeleſs, and feriouſly took up
a reſolution to diſengage myſelf by degrees from a
place where I could not ſupport my former reputa-
tion without infinite danger, or ſwim with the
En without total diſhonour : for, indeed, what
influence could the voice of one fingle man, who
had nothing but harſh things to ſay, have over a
Queen who was uſed to the alluring language and
ſervile complaiſance of flatterers and new favourites?

It is a thing ſo rare for a miniſter to ſupport him-

ſelf with his ſovereign, by ſuch ſentiments alone as
Jariſe from a veneration mixed with awe, (which
however will always be the caſe if that miniſter be

an honeſt man), that one ought not to expect ſuch a

miracle will happen in two reigns ſucceſſively ;

therefore when my relations, my friends, and my

: domeſtics, whoſe affection for me made them ſee

things in a very different light, united their endea-

vours to prevail upon me to continue my cares,
* which they aſfured me might ſtill be uſcful ; or even

when they repreſented to me that it was poſſible

Peter de Caſtille was comptroller- general, and ſuperintendant
of the finances,

>F OL. v. D ſome

derable ſums laid up in the exchequer, which the

26 M E M O 1 R s Book XXVII.

ſome good might be extracted from the new plan, 4
my uſusl anſwer wa, that the blow which God had RF
permitted, was fo plain a declaration that he had 1
delivered up 7 to her evil deſtiny, that to en-
deavour to hinder its effect, was to tempt his ven-
geance. One of my people, that very Arnaud
whom I mentioned a little above, had the inſolence
N ſay to me one day, when he ſaw me extremely

dejected with this thought, that I was much to
bien to aflict myſelf thus about what might hap-
pen; that for the future there might be very conſi-

great expenſes of the deceaſed King in buildings,
aming, dogs, birds, and miſtreſſes, rendered it im-
poſſible. to do while he was living, This ſpeech ap-
peared ſo criminal in his mouth, that, in the firſt >
emotions of my rage, I called him baſe, wicked,
and ungratefu] ; threatened to ſtrike him, and for-
bade him ever *» appear in my preſence again. It
was but too true what I reproached him with in
that moment, that his baſe compliances, and wicked
counſels, were going to open the firſt way to difli- h
pation and diſorder, *
The Count de Soiſſons was not at Paris during 1
theſe ttanſactions. Some diſguſt which he had taken Na
at the Queen's coronation, on account of the robes
which the King's natural * children were to appear
in there, furniſhed him with a pretence for retiring
to one of his houſes, ſo that he was not a witneſs kh.
of any thing that paſſed, either as to the King's gik
death, or on the following days; and did not come -q -
to Paris till after the Queen was declared regent, pb
and all the other diſpoſitions made. This was a new

*

ſubject for his complaints. He was greatly offended | 2 5

e
r
h

* It was on account of the Ducheſs of Vendome's robes. «3
The King had a great deſite that ſhe, like the other princeſſes of
the blood royal, ſhould wear them ſprinkled with flowcr-de-luces, 2 g th
which the Count de Soiſſons would never conſcat to. bat! aft

| t at | 3

= 7 610, 9 S U LL F. *
1 bat they had proceeded to a buſineſs of ſuch im-

0 Fortance as lettling the regency, without giving

Tim notice of it, and even without ſtaying till he
'* Could be preſent; for he affirmed, that this cere-
„ mony could not be performed without him : and
. taking it into his head, that, to make himſelf fear-

ed, it was only neceſſary that he ſhould bluſter and
y talk high, he found fault with many things in the
form of this ceremony, boaſting that no perſon
2” » Would have courage enough to ſay, in his preſence,
"that only a ſmall number of the preſidents and coun -

'© ſellors concurred in the nomination of the Queen
„ in the fiſt meeting of the parliament ; and added,
=

that on the following day, when the Ning, the-
5 princes, the cardinals, the peers, and other officers

pft the crown were preſent, being afraid that, if the
q, gueſtion was put to the vote, they ſhould meet with
7- oppoſition, they contented themſelves with a mere
It Eonfirimation of the act of the foregoing day. He
in Faw plainly that he would not be liſtened to, unleſs
1 pe could make his party very conſiderable, and, for

this purpoſe, he conſtrained himſelf fo far, as to
; Feek the friendſhip of ſcveral courtiers, with whom
| 8 had not the leaſt connection. But there were
two things which obſtructed his ſucceſs; his
s Leue and inſolent temper, and the preference the

-at courtiers thought their intereſt required they ſhould
nz ive to others, who they found were likely to have
c!s ne diſpoſal of all favours; and being as much diſ-
> > fiked by the*princes, and his own brother, the

ne Prince of Conti, as by all the reſt, he ſaw himſelf
nt, pbliged at length to yield.
Il was one of thoſe whom for ſome time the Count
dae Soiſſons was deſirous of calling friend, but it was
not long before he gave me every proof of his being
real enemy; and upon the following occaſion.
ces, he Count had often preſſed the late King upon an:
Affair of which I have already made ſome mention:
5 D 2 it

ture; and this was the greateſt difficulty they had to
5 | get

28 M EM O I R S Book XXVIII.

it was to make an agreement with him for ſome
claims, which he alledged he had in Pièmont, in
right of his wife, who was of the houfe of Montafke :
his importunity obliged Henry to remit the exami-
nation of this matter to me; and the profeſſion 1
have always made of ſincerity and attachment to
the intereſts of my king, forced me to repreſent to
him, that this ſtep would be attended with great in-
convenience to him; that he was going to engage
himſelf in proceſſes without number, and without
end, againſt the Pope, the apoſtolical chamber, the
Nuke of Savoy, and ſeveral cardinals, all of whom
had pretenſions upon theſe eſtates, and many al-
ready in poſſeſſion cf them; and that he would not
be able to extricate himſelf in leſs than ten years out
of that maze of different intereſts; and it being ne-
ceſſary, for the advancement of his great deligns,
that he {nould be well with the Pope and the Duke
of Savoy, he mult carefully avoid entering into any
diſcuſton which might make them his enemies.
There needed no more to make Henry lay aſide al!
thougat of it.

Upon the death of this prince, the Count de i

Soiſſlons reſumed this affair with the new council.

In every thing which might be conſidered as a mat-
ter of mere favour, he did not ſcruple to form any

intrigue which might procure him what he de—

manded, I am almoſt aſhamed to repeat the me-
thods he made uſe of to attain his ends. The Count,
with the - aſſiſtance of Conchini, counterfeited the
5 and made uſe of the ſeal of the deceaſed

ing; and thus gave an authentic form to a pre-
tended contract of ſale between King Henry and
him, for all the eſtates in queſtion. To make
this writing leſs liable to a ſuſpicion of an antedate,
they thought it neceſſary that my name ſhould ap-

pear there, which obliged them to requeſt my figna-

4 ng
-S 1X . l LE 2 Pe
.

BB ues B B = on w ao tw x x .a ww a tc rw.7zvc

, e
1 A

WS 4+

'" "Tn " % *
14 1 * S "= „ a.

. 4 bf 1610. O F . 29
1e | get over. They repreſented to me, that the mo—
ment was now come, which would abſolutely fix
the Count either as my friend or my enemy. I key

: brought a thouſand other motives to prevail uf on

7 me but I ſtill perſiſted, not only to refuſe my ſig-
to nature, but alſo to affert publicly, that this affair
to {having been begun and ended by Henry and myſelf,
no one could know better than I did that his inten-
ge tions were ahſoluteſy contrary to what they were now
ut endeavouring to perſuade me of; and I told them
le plainly, that they preſented me a deed falſely ſigned
m and fealed ; fo that, deſpairing to vanquiſh my ob-
1. _Fſtinacy, they drew up another contract like the for-
ot mer in every reſpect, except that my name was
ut omitted. :

e. The Count de Soiffons and I were upon the'e-
„ terms when he quarrelled “ publicly with his bro-
Bo ther. the Prince of Conti, and, on his account,
iy with the whole family of Guiſe, "The Queen fent
„for me to acquaint me with the expedients ſhe bad

11 thought of to accommodate all their differences,
+ which were to be tried when the council was met;

1. and, till then, ſhe intreated me not to efpoute the

il.

t. This quarrel arofe from the. coaches of thoſe two princes ba-
_ =” ring been drove-agaiaſt one another, and their ccachmen having

!y XR fought. The Duke of Gniſe going the day. after to the Prince of

E
e- j Conti, by the Queen's order, to endeavour to make up this dif-
>. 8 ference, went by the Count de Soiff.ns's palace, with about
wx twenty-five or thirty horſe. Nothing more was requiſite, to ſet
| the Count at variance with him aiſvu. And this double quarre]-

—
>
So.

8 . . * . : 8 —

53 2 raiſed ſo great an uproar in Paris, that the Queen, being afraid of

| RE 2 general inſurrection, gave orders that a'l the inbebitants ſhould
-. hold. themſelves in readneſs to put up the chains, and take arms

all over the city, at the firſt order; and ſhe ſent a captain of the

guards to keep near each of the two princes. We muſt look in

ce Baſſompierre's Memoirs, vol. 1. p. 308. & ſeqq: for all the parti-
e., eeulaers of theſe differences, ſince he himſelf contributed greatly to
, "£8 appeaſe them. See alſo L'Hiſtoire de la mere & du fils, vol. 1.

1
AE

£ XZ ?: 123. and Le Mere Frang. anno 1611, in which is contained.
a- we = Duke of Sully {aid to the Queen in favour of the Duke
6h Wc, .

ES /
b D 3 cauſe

—
— ———— ä lZ1— — -

30 MW E M OI R S Book XXVII.

cauſe of either party, that I might, with greater 8
propriety, act the part of a mediator between both My
when the time for it came; to which I readily a- 3 t
greed, Accordingly, when we were ſeated in coun- t
cil, where the affair was to be treated, and I had al- .
ready given my opinion favourably for the Count,
this prince ſent Briſſac to tell the Queen, in a whi- .
ſper, that he intreated her not to permit any of thoſe 0
perſons Who were held in ſuſpicion by him, to de-
liberate upon this matter, and that he excepted a— 1
gainſt me * in particular, as being a kinſman and c
friend to the houſe of Guiſe. He ought not to 0
except againſt M. de Sully,” replied the Queen a
aloud; * for there is no perſon in the council
& whoſe judgment has been fo favourable to him as
„his.“ I confeſs I was greatly ſhocked at this

treatment, and I couid not help ſaying as I roſe up, Iv
© Madam, I except againſt myſelf, fince he de- V
& fires it; and I am going this moment to offer T
* my ſervice to his brother, and to M. de .

« (uiſe.”

22 1 E
t#

The third quarrel I had with the Count de Soiſ- f,
ſuns happened, as the former, in the council, on
occaſion of the government of Normandy, which *Þ
he wanted to have conferred upon himſelf. The 0
Queen deſired to have my opinion, which I begged ® .
ſhe would diſpenſe with me from giving; but, nut t

being able to prevail, I told her that it was impoſ-
ſible for me to adviſe her to take from the deceaſed 7
King's children the offices and employments they
were already poſſeſſed of, to beſtow upon any other
perſon whatever. And at that time the Count de RE

* The author of the life of the Duke of Eperron informs us,
that the Count of Soiſſons carried his hatred to the Duke of Sully RRP?
fo tar as to ſolicit that Duke to ſuſſer him to get that miniſter al- e
ſaſſinated even in the Louvre; and that he took it much amiſs, WY
the Duke of Epernon refaſed him the aſſiſt-nce of the guards,
whom he command to ſtrike his blow. Page 249.

Soiſſons .

18610. nel L . 31
Soiſlons and Conchini were not upon good terms
with each other, and this prince had even oppoſed
the favourite's getting the poſt of firſt gentleman of
the bedchamber for himſelf, and the archbiſhopric

of Tours for his wife's brother“; but they were
 *Wrerconciled upon this occafion, becauſe they mutu-

o
1

Aa. aſſiſted each other; and by theſe means both
obtained what they demanded. "The ſame method
was uſed by all who had any pretenſions to vacant
a poſts and employments, and in à very little time
every thing was carried in the council by intrigue and
) cabal. The time of kings is over,” ſaid one to
1 another, “ and that of the princes and grandees is
1 come; and all they have now to do, is to ſet a
8 „ high value upon themſelves.”
3 All the moſt conſiderable perſons of the court

„ were ſummoned to an extraordinary council, which
* Was held to deli erate upon the uſe that ſhould be
r made of thoſe great armaments, ſet on foot by the
e Jate King, a little before his death, for the enter-

priſe of Cleves. The diverſity of opinions was in-
ſ. WMinite : ſome were for laying them totally aſide:
n others, and thoſe not the leaſt numerous, were for
h performing all the promiſes made by Henry the
12 Great to the German princes concerned in the af-
d Hair the greateſt number were for mediums between
ot theſe two opinions fo oppolite to each other: ſome

x. gadviſed that we ſhould keep only to the eight thou-

ed Wand foot, and two thouſand horſe, expreſſed in the
ey
er Stephen Galipai, brother of Leonora Galipat. He was then

de bbdot of Marmotticr. He had learned to read four years, ſays

. Etoile, and yet knew nothing of the matter; he was called the
raboon of the court, on account of his uplinefs and mean aſpect.
1 he monks would not accept of him as their abbot, ſaying, they
* ad been uſed to be under the command of princes, and not of
iaers, like him, who was juſt come from handling the plane.
Put it is certain, ſays Amelot, that the family of Galigal is rec.
Foned amongſt the noble families of Florence. He went back to
Py after the death of the Marſhal D'Ancre and his wife.

4 general

"I" I)
ws * *

3

2 8

**
3

2 MEM OI R S Book XXVIII.

neral contracts made by King Henry with his al-
ies: others, that we ſhould content ourſelves with
maintaining the two regiments of French cavalry

already in their ſervice : a third parity voted for im-
barking ſome foot ſoldiers at Calais ; theſe that we

ſhould ſend them no ſupplies of men, but aſſiſt them

with money ; thoſe that we ſhould keep our whole
army upon the frontier without acting, except in a
eaſe of abſolute neceſſity: and others, that we
ſhouid diſband the greateſt part of our troops, and
keep no more than was neceſſary for our own ſecu—
rity. All this was intermixed with overtures of a—
greement and pacification, to be made between the
contending powers, ſuch as juſt then occurred to
them. ;
It appeared to me that they all expected, with
ſome impatience, my opinion, becauſe I had been
more engaged in the affair by the Jate King, than
any other to whom he had communicated it, I
began by making what I judged a very juſt diſtinc—
tion between thoſe troops already drawn together
into the body of an army, and thoſe which were
fill levying; between thoſe deſtined for the held,
and tho'e which hal been ſent into Dauphine,

With regard to the firſt therefore I concluded, that

fince, according to all appearances, and from the
prefent ſituation of affairs, moit part of the deſigns
of Henry the Great would not be carried into exe
cution, it was neceſſary to ſuſpend immediately al!
levies not begun, ſtop thoie which were making,
and pay and diſmiſs all that were made, and already
upon their march; becauſe, ſince all this muſt be
done ſooner or later, it would fave the King fo

much money in the expenſes of ſending backwards

>
—

_—
e

—_—

and forwards, and the people ſo much trouble and

opprethon. The death of him whom I hai re-

garded as the great mover of this whole enterpriſe,
ſcemed in my opinion to have made fo great 2
change

"yy

470. .O F . 33

8 range in it, that I believe I ſhould have given the

fame advice, even though I had found no ill- inten-
$ tioned perſon amongſt us ; but neither could I con-
, form to the opinions of thoſe who were for betray-
ing our allies, with whom we were engaged by the
; moſt folemn promiſes; or deceiving them, by af-
. fecing to take ſteps to procure an accommodation
K between them, or by granting them feeble ſuccour,
F which would be of ſcarce any uſe to them.

This was the anſwer I made to the greateſt part
: of thoſe ambiguous opinions, which were for and a-
. 2inſt a thing at the ſame time. I made them ſen-
5 Tile that it highly concerned the glory of the late

K ing, ſince his greateſt deſigns could not be accom-
L ms which might in ſome meaſure give room
- For ſuſpicions that he had never really formed them,
g they (ould at leaſt have all their effect with regard
I to what he had declared, promiſed, and already be-
| gun: that it was for the intereſt of our own reputa-
: tion with the foreign powers, that we ſhould not ſuf-
fer them to believe the whole force of France was

| *concentred in one ſingle man, and that he had fo
. little reſpect for his memory. I concluded therefore,

„that it was abſolutely neceſſary to fend deputies im-
. _xzmetiately to the German princes, and to the Prince
„ of Orange, to know of them whether they reall

ſtood in need of the aſſiſtance of our forces to help
i them to reduce thoſe ſtates which we were defirous
el ſecuring to them: for I thought they might do
, without them, if that was not their fole motive for

5 A a taking up arms; and, if they had occafion for them,
5 | to know how many they demanded; and that upon
f * their anſwer thoſe ſupplies ſhould advance immedi-

—
c
Mo

3 ately under the conduct of good officers, taking their
route along the Maes, which was not indeed the moſt

— HH

, KR zgrccable, nor the ſhorteſt way, but was the moſt
a 1 ſecure, which was a matter of great importance; or
. elſe, that the whole army ſhould be diſhanded, ex-

IF cept
i |

24 M E M O I R S Book XXVII.

cept thirty thouſand foot, and ſix hundred troopers,
who, ſtrengthened by four cannons only and two
culverins, ſhould form a flying camp, ready to go
where ever there was any appearance of an aCtion :
and this I thought ſufficient to keep every place in
order: that, till then, it was neceſſary to put the
troops of Champaign into garriſon, after giving them
their full pay. |

gave much the ſame advice with reſpec to the
army of Dauphine, as it had been already raiſed to
ſupport the Duke of Savoy, who, in compliance with
our requeſt, had, or probably would, embroil him-
ſelf with all his neighbours ; therefore it might be
juſtly expected, that we ſhould either endeavour to
reconcile him with the King of Spain, or put him
into a condition to defend himſelf; and, as we could
not take any reſolution upon this head till we had
ſent another deputy to this prince, or perhaps till a
long time afterwards, I adviſed that this army
ſhould be likewiſe put into convenient winter-quar—
ters, (after making fo exact a review of them, that
no falſe mufter might be apprehended), till there was
occaſion for them, or till they were diſbanded alto-
gether,

I found that I was heard with attention: my rea-
ſons ſeemed to have made a general impreſſion: but
with this difference, that ſenſible and well diſpoſed
perſons did not ſcruple to diſcover this effect by thew-
ing ſigns of approbation, and even by applauſes;
whereas all the others not only carefully concealed
it, either through vanity, neglect, or rather through
jealouſy, but alſo combated my reaſons with eager-
neſs and heat. I took care to inform Bethune, my
couſin, of all this, who, in a letter he wrote to me,
deſired my advice upon the alteration which the pu-
blic loſs muſt neceſſarily make in his embaſly to the
German princes. I ſhall not tranſcribe his letter,
nor my an{wer to it, becauſe they contained nothing

eſſentially

-

5 7
= . &

_ , 5%. =
reren
„ N 4

_—

e * * 0 * ** * 4 * 5 © In] e's
5 N e 5 * 6.0: = = >

__— yer *

% . Wh = —
r

” - 4
1 he r
* *

nee

nr

1 >
4 7
2 Ga

"2 7

a @ oo Aww” SS AA as ew A wv £A amr tins as ob ob od coo A. on oh an

— — — —

1610. O F . 35

# Z eſſentially different from what has been juſt ſaid, ex-
*X cept perhaps that I examined more particularly the

good or bad effects of the advice I had given in the,
Council; this, for example, is a thing that merits to
be well obſerved, that which way ſoever it ſhall hap-

pen that a body of troops may find entrance into
Germany to join the confederate princes, that en-
trance would be accompanied with great hazard,
though the body conſiſted of ten thouſand men, un-
> leſs the allies on their fide facilitated their advance
by meeting them within ten or twelve leagues of
our frontiers. The ſcheme of imbarking them at
Calais, if that was choſen, would be likewiſe incon-
venient ; it would ſupply our confederates with foot
only, and that to no greater number than eight thou-
ſand ; and it was even neceſſary that we ſhould have
= a right underſtanding with each other. I forewarn-
ed Bethune with reſpect to a thing which required
the attention of him and his correſpondents, which
was, that France, by changing her maſter, had
changed every thing elſe ; and I ſhewed my aſtoniſh-
ment, that the princes who employed him ſhould
== expreſs their ſchemes, deſires, and reſolutions, in ſo
X unintelligible a manner, I left it to his diſcretion
to judge what uſe he ought to make of a letter,
in which it was neceſſary I ſhould avoid explaining
XZ myſelf clearly upon ſeveral things: as for advice,
I faid I had no other to give him, but to continue,
till he received new orders, to act as he had
done hitherto, and I promiſed him faithfully to
take care of his intereſts, This letter was dated
May 24.
l was called ſome days afterwards, to attend a
more particular council for this affair. M. de Jacop,
ambaſſador from the Duke of Savoy, ſuſpecting that
the reſolutions taken by the members of the new
council were not very favourable to his maſter's in-
tereſt, had preſſed the Queen-regent to declare her
| | intentions

-
y we :
e

* 15 on * 1
„

N
2.
"Wc
eee

„
* 1 *
Pt
_

"EY n a
* Be * 0 -
© ———— 2 4
A. 1 "uh.
_

3 M E M OI R Ss

that his Highneſs might take ſuch meaſures there-
upon as his affairs required. We were to conſult,

to this ambaſlador. When I came to the Louvre
in the morning, I found only the Conftable, the

and Lomenie had been there, but Villeroi had per-
ſuaded the Queen to ſend them away, for which
Gevres made bitter complaints. I ſuſpected, by the
{tudied ſigns and geſtures of this little aſſembly, and
by the winding diſcourſe which one of theſe gentle-
men began to make, that there was ſomething they
wanted to conceal from me.
Queen, with my uſual frankneſs, I know not for
what end you have been pleaſed to ſummon me
hither ; my preſence either hinders theſe gentle-

men from explaining themſelves, or elſe they are
come only to intrap one another,

cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
4
cc
«c
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
(e

for all true Frenchmen.
the King is indiſpenſably obliged to protect and

—— —

« which it is neceſſary ue ſhould attend to

_ — - - X * ——
— — — — — —
——„-—— ——— —-— ——— — ͥͤ — mẽꝰ·œP P —ßxxñůrxð 7˙²⅛˙V——xßxñ̃——xßñßÄ—7ð ⁊ »—T——ͤ —— m —

.
\ 2

Book XXVII.

intentions to him in a formal way as ſoon as bollible, | 3 |
therefore, upon the declarations proper to be made

Chancellor, and Villeroi, with the Queen; Gevres |

« Madam,” faidI to the

The bulineſs 3
[ perceive relates to the Duke of Savoy; it is well
known that I never was reckoned a friend of his :
however, ſince his intereſts are at preſent con-
nected with thoſe of France, and that he is (at
leaſt in proſpect) an ally of the royal family, I
have the ſame regard for him as I ought to have
I am of opinion, that

defend him; and that his Majeſty's honour, and 4
the glory of the kingdom, are both concerned not
to ſuffer the leaſt | injury to beſal either his perſon | *
or dominions.“ "3
I perceived the Queen to ſmile at my talking in| |
this manner, and whiſper Villeroi ; then, turning to
me, {he ſaid, . M. de Sully, it is true we are met 25
to conſult upon the Duke of Savoy's affairs; but RF
„ there are others of ſtill greater 5 *
ou 92
„ ſee what quarrels are riſen among many Y >
«© the!

pr 11

—
|

3
135
*

* TP »
*

I. 610. O F $0 I Io" YT: 37
e, . the grandees of the kingdom, whoſe ambition and
dc avarice, you ſay, are inſatiable. I 1ntreat you to
it, ze think of ſome remedy for this evil, that it may be
de propoſed in the firſt council. With reſpect to M.
ay de Savoy, theſe gentlemen and I, before you
he came, had talked of that buſineſs; and we are all
es fe of this opinion, that a reconciliation between
-r- *# France and Spain is moſt for our intereſt ; and
Cl) 4. for this purpoſe we are determined to ſend one of
he ge the princes of the blood to Madrid, on occaſion
nd ze of the death of my Lord the King, who ſhall be
le- 4 accompanied with a perſon well inſtructed in our
e s affairs, and upon whoſe ſecrecy we may ſecurely
he $ rely. He fall ſet on foot this reconciliation, and
tor tt propoſe an alliance between the two crowns by a
me ze double marriage, which I know the Spaniards
le- „ till wiſh for as ardently as they did for-
are ze merly; and while this affair is negotiating, in
els ze which I foreſee no great difhculty, or that it will
ell ze be long protracted, we muſt flatter the Duke of
18: Savoy in his firſt hopes and expectations, till we
on- can declare ourſelves without danger.”

(at This reſolution gave me great uneaſineſs, which
» 1 diſcovered by my filence and ſhrugging up my
ave ſhoulders. The Queen took notice ot it, and preſſ-
hat d me to tell her my opinion. I repreſented to her,
and that we could not, without expoling ourſelves to the
and FFeproach of having violated our faith, abandon a
not prince who had broken all his engagements with

ſon Ppain, and openly declared himſelf againſt that
crown “, at the perſuaſion of the deceaſed King;

in
8 in 1
r t9 £ 5

that,

* By the treaty of Bruſol, concluded the 25th of April. See Ne-

Pers's Memoirs, vol. 2. p. 880. The Duke of Savoy, being a-
pbandoned by the new council in France, could not eſcape the re-

entments of the court of Spain, but by the moſt humiliating ſtep a

\ a

* Fong

*
r
*

Fro ned head can poſſibly be reduced to. His fon came to throw him-
elf at the King of Spain's feet, beſceching him to take the Duke

bo
»
*
>

is father, and all his houſe, under his royal protection. He told

Vol. v. E the

—
x yon —
* 2

-
> EE IS Ru

= =
92 — -

— u
— ˙ N

i
|
x

ſages, no leſs certain to the diſadvantage of our al.

33 ME M O I R Ss Book XxVII.

.A
that, ſince we had altered our views, we ought to |
ive him notice of it, and at the ſame time conceal
this ſtep from the King of Spain, or rather make |

him believe we had acted very differently, till,

by a general reconciliation, we had put thoſe out of
danger who were brought into it by our means, :
Theſe arguments, however juſt and reaſonable, mai; ***
no impteſſion on the Queen and her counſellors, not
did they even approve of the medium my laſt words 5
had hinted at, but coldly told me, that this way woull 7
engage them in a train of tedious negotiations, | 8
replied with that confidence which a good cauſe in.
ſpires, that I found the ſacrificing the Duke of Savoy
was a point determined on, and appeared to me to
have been ſo before this conſultation. Þ drew pre.

lies, from all the looks and ſigns of intelligence,
which I ſurpriſed between the Queen, the Chancellor, 7
and Villeroi : but the new counſellors, and the con-
fidents of that princeſs, ſoon threw off all reſtrain; *&:
and declared their ſentiments freely. The deceaſe! .
King's government, fo wiſe, ſo gentle, and ſo glo-

rious for France, was condemned almoſt publicly,
and even deſpiſed and ridiculed ; at one time, the.
treated his deſigns as mere chimera's ; at another.
they repreſented him as a weak pufillanimou
prince, incapable of taking any noble reſolution. ||
was not enough to leave the death of this great princt
unpuniſhed ; they added to that neglect all forts |
Hutrages againſt his memory, and, unhappily for uz

the King, that he embraced his knees, that he had recourſe to hill
mercy, and that, with the moſt humble ſubmiſſion, he aſked b
pardon for the faults he had been guilty of againſt him, &c. S
certainly miſtakes his aim, if he pretends to make us admire 1:8
politics of the new council, by giving us ſuch inſtances as this
their proceedings. One muſt be as much prejudiced as that writ
againſt Henry IV. and the Duke of Sully, and as violent a parti
of the Spaniards, to approve of a manner of acting ſo oppoſite 'W
that juſtice and generolity which every nation proteiſes to ſtic w.

heaven

ar
9 *
7 2 -
© 4
. a6
* * »

Heaven, which reſerved to itſelf this vengeance,

to Muffered envy and ingratitude to triumph in their
cal Facceſs.
ak: I returned home much grieved at what I ſaw and
ill, peard. We are going,” ſaid I to Madame de Sul-
| of S , whoſe prudence 7 wal knew, „ to fall under the
ns. e yoke of Spain and the Jeſuits: all true French-
ade men, and Proteſtants eſpecially, muſt look well
no g to their ſafety ; for they will not enjoy tranquillity
rd long.“ This reflection kept me in a profound
ub very all dinner time. The Biſhop of Montpelier
tame to viſit me in the afternoon : he intreated me
in. Jo give him an opportunity of converſing with me
% in my cloſet, from whence, in about half an hour,
eto let him out by a private door; for he did not deſite
pre. go be known, and therefore hid his face with his hand-
r al Ferchief that none of my people might know him.
Nce, e have heard ſome news juſt now,” ſaid I to my
lor, 8 ife, and three or four perſons in whom I confided, .
o a ſecret council has been held at the houſe of the
ind 1 nuncio Ubaldini, at which were preſent the Chan-
aſec cellor, Conchini, Vilieroi, the Biſhop of Beziers, -
glo and another perſon whoſe vame was not known,
0 but he was thought to be the Duke of Epernon:
the * they condemned, they even ſpoke with ſcorn and
het, =X* contempt of the deceaſed King's deſigns ; nor was I
non treated any better by them. It was reſolved there to
5 19 F< change entirely all the maxims of our government,
egg and all our political alliances ; to write to the Pope,
S oi and promiſe to be guided wholly by his advice ;
üg to enter into a tric union with Spain, and as
RT foon as that was firmly eſtabliſhed, all thoſe who
a : = ſhewed any diſlike to it, eſpecially the Huguenots,
"2 {bould be removed from the adminiſtration, and
re th baniſhed the court. If I am wiſe,” continued I,
bis 1 ſhall quietly reſign all my poſts and employ-
ey ments, withdraw all my money, or as much of it

ite 9

EW, » |
aeg

—.

O F . 39

as poſſible; purchaſe ſome ſtrong hold in a diſtant
E 2 corner

40 M E M OI R S Book XXVII.
* corner with part, and reſerve the reſt for whatever YN
« ejſe may happen.” 72
While we were ſtill converſing upon this ſubject,
the Duke of Rohan, the two Bethunes, my brother,
and my couſin, my ſon, and two or three more f
my moſt intimate friends, came in, to whom I im-
parted what I had heard, and the reſolution I had
taken upon it. They maintained that the informa- *R
tion could not be true; that I was going to take a
ſtep which would draw upon me the reproach of
ingtalitude to the ſtate, and to the children of the
King my benefactor; that I might very eaſily con-
tinue in the poſſeſion of all my employments, and
the exerciſe of all my offices; and that it would ap-
pear weak and mean to yield thus to my enemies at
}

}

|

|

t

:

— Ac

19

|
|
k

the firſt encounter, I could not be convinced bj
their arguments, nor could I bring them to admit
of mine. It is your deſite then,” ſaid I at Jaſt,
that I ſhould ſacrifice myſelf for the public, my
family, and my friends; for I ſee plainly that
s your intereſt has great part in what you fay to

bs - 4 K —

＋
4 — " — 2 * *
rr, —— (KG «⁰ ͤw 7²˙üä Ä — ———I©UmI Oo RO O—_—__—O—2RNO Oe

; % me. [I will do fo, ſince you force me to it; but .
| remember what I now tell you; this conceſſion Wh
1 * will procure you no advantage, and will bring Me
| 6 great trouble, loſs, and even diſgrace upon me ; Mie
| and I am going,” added I, „to give you a ſpeci- 0 +

“ men of it this moment.“ - We
Obſerving that courtiers of high rank, and even WM
{ome of the proudeſt and haughtieſt amongſt them, 1
had not diſdained to make advances, and meanly |
court the friendſhip of him who appeared to ingroſs
the Queen's favour, I concluded with myſelf that it
would be very difficult to preſerve the ſame connec- .
tion, and the ſame good intelligence (in appearance
at leaſt) with the court, as I had formerly, unleſs I
expreiled ſome kind of regard for the new favourite.
J had reſolved, in caſe this thought ſhould hold, to
make uſe of Arnaud the younger for this purpoſe, who
| 0

ww

—

_—_— —

— « . —
— . ˙— Z1 11 — ——L—ũ— — —

——— TT ——

—

— 2 —

, r . — —
- — — —

M60. OF 8 UL L V. 4
1 of himſelf was but too much diſpoſed to worſhip the
Filing ſun. | had ſent for him in the morning, and

acquainted him with the commiſſion 1 intended to

give him ere long, to wait upon Monſicur Conchini,
Ind to make him offers of ſervice iv my name. I

pad already told him in what manner to turn his
Fompliment, which 1 ſhall here give the reader.” He
pas to tell Conchiniz that I bore him no ill-will for

*

the height fortune was going to raiſe him to, by gi-

ving him the ſame place with the Queen as I had

beld with the late King; that I looked upon this e-

vent as one of thoſe which happen too often in the
order of providence, to occaſion much furprite; that

*

ö

; "the Queen-regent, by this advancement of him, juſt-
a a repaid the attachment which his wife and himſelf

ad always ſhewn for her, and the good ſervices ſhe

-

Fad received from them; that, by chuſing him to
preſide over the adminiſtration of affairs, her Majeſty
doubtleſs expected: to give to the King her ſon, and

2 * PF . * .
to the whole ſtate, an able and a faithful miniſter, two

great qualities which are alone ſufficient to render
Za man, whoever he was, truly worthy of al} the be-

gnefits her favour could ſecure to him; that, be ing
=equally perſuaded of the Queen's laudable deſigus, and
of his diſpoſition to ſecond them, I freely and cordi-

ally offered to him all thoſe meaſures Which a long
experience had furniſned me with; an offer which
he would find worthy of acceptance, if he reflected,

2 J
#

that beſides the public good, which would neceſlarily

Freſult from it, he would reap ſome advantage to him-
ſelf, in not purchaſing the favours which in the fe.
quel would be ſhowered on him, with the jealouſy of

the nobles, the public hatred, the prejudice of af-
fairs, and the oppreſſion of the people; that the on-

ly return I demanded of him for thus entering into

his views of grandeur and intereſt, was to endeavour

3 to gratify them by following thoſe maxims of govern-

Y ment by which the late King had rendered his people

E 3 NAPPY? »

42 ME M OI R $ Book XXVIII. il
happy, and his kingdom flouriſhing. Of theſe ma-
xims, one which the preſent ſtate of affairs ſeemed
to make moſt neceſſary, was not to accuſtom the
men of buſineſs, and thoſe importunate petitioners |
that haunt the court, to depend upon obtaining all
they ſhould demand: that, upon theſe conditions, he
{ſhould find me ſincerely diſpoſed to unite myſelf with
him; and that from this moment I offered him my
friendſhip, and requeſted his.

Wen the nature of my compliment is well con-
ſidered, it will be granted that there were exceptions |
in theſe alvances which took away all fear of having
engaged myſelf too far: but, however, I believe it
will be allowed that they ought to fatisfy, and flat-
tec the vanity even of him to whom they were made.
Be that as it will, this meſſage appeared to me very
proper to produce that effect, of which I was endea-
vouring to perſuade thoſe who ſo obſtinately combat-
ed my reſolution. After having called Arnaud, and
given him his inſtructions in the preſence of theſe
gentlemen, “ Go,” ſaid I to him, „ to Monſieur

Concghini, and deliver the meſſage to him which |
gave you in the morning, and return as ſoon as
« poſſible. I am much deceived,“ added I, “if all
** theſe gentlemen,” addreſſing myſelf to them.
ho have fo good an opinion of the Queen, and
her private counſellors, will not find, by Conchini's =
*« anſwer, that there is nothing for me to expect.“

The company all ſtaid with me, waiting for an
anſwer to my mellage, which Arnaud about an hour
after brought us. and in a manner which confirmed
me in thoſe ſuſpicions I had before conceived agaiult
him. He began with praiſing Conchini for his great
abilities, and his knowledge in matters of ſtate,
dwelt upon his intereſt and powerful friends, an, WP
flightly paſſing over what it moſt concerned me to
know, he only told me, that he believed I had nothing
to hope for from him, un!efs I was diſpoſed to com 2 =

will

.
*
©

— — —

r

—
—— —

—

1

ey. —— —„—

— — — —
—ů — —

' Ü— ůwmP ðß——«Eßũ' ̃ Ü—wddi ̃ b A. D.—_—_

- — — — r >
— .

— . — àͤ ̃ y — — ,
£ —
— — —
—

— — — ——
— ——
8 q a PI
ey - —
v— — —
* -—_ 2
a 4 + dk — I _ p

O F $S U L F. 43

ith him in all things. * I fancy I underſtand

“ you,” ſaid I, with * a little rage I was not able to
he ſuppreſs, „but tell me plainly what you would be
ers c at, and let me know what you and he ſaid to one
all c another.” Then, as if forced to it, he gave us the
he Following detail, ſhaking his head and ſmiling ma-
ith "Aignantly as he ſpoke: That, as he entered Conchi-

my nö's houſe, he met the Prefident Jeannin and his
brother Arnaud, who were juſt coming out; that

n- they ſeemed concerned at ſeeing him there, but that
ons they did not ſpeak to him, nor he to them, which
ing 1 believe was not true; that a gentleman
it Whoſe name was Vincence, introducing him into
at- Conchini's apartment, ſaid to him, “ You belong, I

de, “ think, to M. de Sully; would to God that we
»

ery T were to follow his counſels, rather than thoſe of
ea - the two perſons who went from hence juſt now,
at-. and of ſeveral others ſtill worſe than they are! we
and © 4 ſhould not hurry things on at ſuch a rate as they
ile “ urge us to do; but the Queen's authority and out
our “ fortune would be eftabliſhed in a more laudable
ch | “ manner, and be far more certain and durable.“
as hat entering Conchint's apartment, he ſaid to him,
f al! 28+ What! Monſieur Arnaud, are you come to vitit
ein, F< me?“ That hereupon he made him the compli-
and ment, and delivered the meſſage I had fent by him,
ini's which he now repeated to us,

Ct.” Arnaud then pauſed again, and, after ſome heſita-
- an tion, ſaid, that the anſwer he had received was ſo
our very ſhort and dry, that he believed it was beſt not
med to repeat it, What ſtill remained for him to tell,
inſt Was preciſely that which I moſt wanted to know. After
reat ſuffering himſelf to be urged a Tong time, he at
ate, length told us, that Conchini, without exprefling a-
and, y acknowledgment for the civil offers he had made
to |

ling eM. de Sully hal a cuſtom of ſcratching his head, when any

* My 1 ching vexed him.
with BY him

1

4A M E MO I R S Book XXVIII.
him in my name, and even without ſeeming to give
the leaſt attention to what he had ſaid, replied in
very bad French, and in a proud and diſdainful ac
cent, ** How ! M. Arnaud, the Duke of Sully then
e expects to govern the affairs of France as he did
« in the late King's time; he is much miſta-
« ken; the Queen being Queen, it is for her
& to diſpoſe of all things as ſhe pleaſes, and I would
& adviſe him to be wholly. guided by her will:
„ as for my wife and I, we have no occaſion for
& the aſſiſtance or favour of any one; her Ma-
&« jeſty eſteems us, becauſe we have ſerved her
« faithfully: it is not in the power of any perſon
cc whatever to deprive us of her favour, or to hincer +
te the effects of it. If M. de Sully has any requeſts
© to make, he will have more oeccaſion for our aſſi-
« ſtance.than.we of his, which he has ſent you to
offer us; and poſſibly; if he knew how much we
“ are courted, he would be more reſpectful than he
„has hitherto been: there is not any prince or no-
te bleman of the court who has neglected to viſit us,
«© except him and one more.”

The company, who had not expected an anſwer
ſo rude and inſolent, flared upon one another, and
{ſhrugged up their (ſhoulders, but did not utter a word,
„Well, Gentlemen,” ſaid J to them, “do you {till
think it poſſible for me to keep my employment
*« with honour, and that they will ſuffer me to conti-
nue at the head of affairs as formerly?“ They ac-
knowledged that they had formed a wrong judgment
of the true ſtate of things. "This led us into many
other converſations which were very long, but of too
little conſequence to be related here. In the end,

however, it was concluded, that we thould allow. *
ſomething to chance, precipitate nothing, and ex- 3
pect what the arrival of M. the Prince of Conde
would produce, upon whom many others, as well as- 2
myſelf, — founded great hopes. ö

2 —

——
a — —

Bre

— - -
— —————

— — - _- —
— — +»
a — 2
” —

* _

5 > 1 5 - yu % 2
d S8 2 ö wh ems. res. wes wont... ae

LS e ot © OR FD * r n
gf , ky © SEES «> 4 F% 8
os he? k ö 5 a "CM
eee I EOS N ;

44
f
\ »
* q |
i
$
1
14
4
2 .
'N
1

|

—
—
— cz

—— eo -

— = «7 _ CR — PPP ˙ . MP RR —
— — . - -

— Ate be — unmet ac ai ave to wthe pada -

# 7 *
t A
- bY

IS y
*\ 4"
1
*

* 5 5 0

Neid. 0 f SU 6.4 45

I. i

ve 1 It was from Pallot that I received the firſt informa-

in Hon of this Prince's having entered the kingdom:

©. and he told me, at the ſame time, that, being not

en Fell furniſhed with ready money, I might make my
Fourt to him very ſucceſsfully, by paying him, with-

a. Fut waiting till he demanded it, one half-year of
er is penſion. Fortunately it was in my power to do
14 him this favour without incurring the reproach of
1: having diſpoſed of the King's money at my own

or eaſure, and without ſtaying for an order; for this
[2. m had been carried to account, though it was not
er et delivered to the Prince; becauſe the late King,
on DÞcing unwilling to let him know that he had ftill
er indulgence enough for him to continue his penſion,
ſts Paitedtill fome opportunity ſhould offer when 1
i- might ſend it him as if from myſelf, I had already
to Paid half the ſum to two perſons whom the Prince
we had commiſſioned to demand it, and remembering
he that they had told me about eight days ago that the
ow money was ſtill in their hands, I ordered the whole
us, m to be delivered to Pallot, who, when he paid it

do the Prince, took care to give him a juſt notion of
ver his inſtance of my attachment to him. In reality,
nd At that time it was one of the greateſt ſervices I

rd, Fould have done him; and he was ſo much obliged
Hl y it, that he declared publicly, as I was informed
nts dy a fon of M. D'Harcourt's *, that he would not
i- enter Paris till he had ſeen me, and aſked my advice,
1c. hich he was reſolved to follow. As I then ſaw
ent pyſelf ſurrounded with none but enemies, I was
truly rejoiced at having thus extinguiſhed that re-
too ſentment which the firſt Prince of the blood had ſo
nd, ſong borne me. He did me the honour to depute to
„ me, at different times, Meſſ. de Rieux, de Mon-

*,

x. tatalre, de Clermont, and other gentlemen, to ac-

nde. Duaint me with his ſituation, and his deſigns.

Peter de Harcourt, Marquis of Beuvron.

The

46 * E M On s Book xvi.

The Prince of Condé, upon the news of we.
King's death, had inſtantly ſet out for France, and
hoped, by making extraordinary haſte, to arrive
time enough to take advantage of the rights due to
his rank upon this occaſion, which was exactly like
that on which the King of Navarre, his great-
uncle, had endeavoured to gain the preference be-
fore Catherine de Medicis ; but being ſoon inform-
ed that the Queen, without ſtaying for him, or for!
any of the other princes of the blood, without fir{}
ſettling a council of regency as the laws directed,
or obſerving any of the uſual forms on ſuch occa.-
ſions, had been rather declared than choſen regent, ? Y
be found that he could no longer indulge a hope of,
obtaining the regency, and even began to entertain
ſome doubts about the treatment they were prepa -
ring for him at court, where, after this, his Me
could not fail of being unwelcome: but, as he ima- 8
gined that nothing was more likely to give weight? Cf:
to his demands, than. the reſpect and diſtin&ion® 1
which the nobles ſhould be 8 to pay him up
on this occaſion, he cauſed them to be ſounded,
and gave them to underſtand, that he ſhauid think
himielf obliged to all thoſe who ſhould come to

=

meet him, and eſcort him into Paris. 9
This propoſal was made to me as well as the |
reſt; but I thought the place I filled required that,
Queen's permiſſion, as ſhe now repreſented the per-
ſon of the King. She did not expreſsly forbid me
which ſhe received my requeſt. ſhe inſinuated that
I ſhould do her a pleaſure if I abſtained from ſhew-

before l complied with it, I ſhould obtain the! 8
5
to go and meet the Prince, but, by the manner in :

ing him that inſtance of reſpect. I alſo found, by Mx
the few words ſhe ſaid, that ſhe gave me, as wel py
as others, liberty to chuſe between her and the te
princes of the blood; for it was apparent that {he ÞFÞ
did not expect to be upon good terms with them. i

] 4 | :

\

88 UI. L F. 47
t was probable, likewiſe, that the coldneſs and
feſerve which appeared in her countenance, proceed-
ed from ſome reſentment ſhe entertained againſt me
ike © r having paid the Prince the money I have men-

**Foned ; for her confhdentshad diſcovered the affair,
be. Ind did not fail to inform her of it; and ſhe, with-
put doubt, had forgot that that ſum made an article
pf expenſe which had been inſerted in the accounts:
I is likely alſo, that the council which was held,
Ind which I forgot to mention till now, was one
FTonſequence of this reſentment. It was there de-
—Rermined, that, till a new order, I ſhould be conti-
**Mued to have the direction of the finances, particu-
arly of what related to the penſions of ſtate. I was
_ *=Epprehenfive that the Queen wanted only ſuch an
incident as this, to withdraw her favour from me
entirely: and I was reſolved not to expoſe myſelf.
to her hatred, for a thing which did not appear to
me to be of much importance. As to the Prince,
he diſpatched couriers upon couriers to prevail with

ed, * e to alter my reſolution; and at length he or-
ors ered the gentlemen before mentioned to afſure me,

that he was abſolutely determined not to come to

-

9 Paris at all, ſince I refuſed to accompany him in

thei his entry, and to confer with him upon thoſe affairs
bat, which would decide the part he was to take, and
the which he could only know from me.

8 Thus importuned, I again went to the Queen, to
: ſolicit her conſent that I might meet the Prince;

but I could obtain no other permiſſion, than ſuch a

er-

r in

hat one as plainly indicated her diſpleaſure at my aſking
vw. it. The choice I was to make was ſo much the
by more perplexing, as it lay between two parties
vel which from thenceforward muſt be looked on as

BE totally oppoſite to each other: however, I declared
= myleif openly for that which would conſider my
compliance as an effential ſervice, rather than the
ether, by whom it would be only acknowledged as
an

a8 NM E M O I R s Book XXIII.

an inſtance of complaiſance which would be ſoon

forgot. And I went to meet the Prince “, who,

notwithſtanding all that the Duke of Epernon could
ſay to him, would not ſet out from the place where

he had dined, till he knew that I was not far oſf.

I met him in the open road, and alighted to pay my
reſpects to him: but he was off his horſe almoſt as
ſoon as I, and came to embrace me with equal
marks of joy and deference. He began a conſe-
rence with me as we ſtood, which laſted a quarter

of an hour, though d'Epernon repreſented to him

that it would be late before he got to Paris: he ad-
dreſſed himſelf by the way often to me upon dif.
ferent ſubjects. I attended him to the gates of
the Louvre, where I left him to pay his compli-
ments + to the Queen, and returned myſelf to the
arſenal. |

It was very poſſible, that at the time when the
Prince of Conde ſeemed apprehenſive of meeting
with ſome ill uſage from the Queen, he ſecret]y
flattered himſelf with having a very different recep-
tion, when he reflected upon the good intelligence

* The Prince, ſays Matthieu, was at his houſe at Chateaurous:
and had ſeen the Duke of Sully, who adviſed him to return to
court, where his preſence would be of great advantage to the king,
&c. Tbid. 28. | f

+ The Prince came to Paris the 15th of July, accompanied
by about fifteen hundred gentlemen ; which greatly alarmcd the

\ -

Rr 7

k *

147

- of oa
3 *4

—

» FY q

«©, LY f

1 *

» **

Queen, who was afraid, as the artillery, the Baſtile, and the laue

King's treaſures, were in his power, by means of the Duke of Sully,
in caſe the parliament and people ſhould not prove faithful, he
might attempt things of very dangerous conſequence to the
King's ſervice. The Prince had no leſs miſtruſt of others tha
what they had of him. On his arrival, he had notice giver

him three or four times, that the Queen, at the inſtigation of

the Count of Soiffons, had formed a deſign to ſecure him and the
Duke of Bouillon; which was the reaſon, that, notwithſtanding !
the kind reception he met with from both their Majeſties, he
was up three nights, ready to quit Paris on the firſt notice be.
ſhould receive of any attempts being formed againſt him. Hi;

de la mere & du fils, vol. 1. P. 101.
they

7 ,

=” 4
vw
*
: +7
F

£35

. GE F 58 l. I. V. 40

3610.

- I

5anied
d the

je le

Sully,
ul, he
0 the
s than
given

on of ©
1d the
anding 3

es, he

ce he

Whey were in formerly: and perhaps he had, vpon

heſe expectations, formed a plan of conduct quite

Sontrary to that he laid down to me, and aſtured me
Sc would follow. It was the general opinion when
Je left France, that his diſcontent and his flight
ere the effects of that princefs's advice and per-
aſions, and the late King was told fo; however
that may be, the Prince, it he built any thing upon
Me former friendſhip between him and the Queen,
as ſvon undeceived, and knew by experience, that
was of no force againſt the jealouſy of abſolute
ower. The Queen ſeemed to have forgot the time
hen they gave the name of their common intereſt
the motives by which they were actuated : but
was not her entering into a recital of the affairs
f ſtate, and the government, which baniſhed paſt
enes from her remembrance; for ſhe communica-
d nothing to him upon thoſe heads, and confined
erfelf to a ceremonial ſo grave, fo cold, and teſer-
ed, that the Prince caine away from the Louvre,
reatty diſguſted with his reception.

All this I diſcovered by the diſcourſe we had to-
ether when he came to vitit me two days after-

ards, though he did not at firſt explain bimſelf
Ircely, and named no one. I waited for an expla-
ation of his ſentiments, before I would declare
mine; and till then I was till more reſerved than
e was: but at length he began to talk to me of
Wis deſigns in terms fo clear, expreſſed all at once ſo
much eſteem for me, and ſuch unlimited confidence
In my ſincerity, ſhewed ſo ardent a deſire to labour,
n concert with me, to find proper meaſures to hin-
Per that confuſion and diſorder with which the af-
Fairs of the Rate and the finances were threatened,
Pemanded fo fincerely my advice concerning the

onduct he ſhould purſue for the public good, in

Due midſt of thoſe obſtacles which jealouſy, hatred,

Hi, fand faction, were going to oppoſe to his deſigns,

Vor, V. ; that

. — =-

EE ET

4
{0
4

—

5o MEM O I R s BookXxXvin

that I thought I owed ſo much to his generous con-
fidence, and to the laudable motive by which he
was inſpired, as to open my heart to him freely
upon all that he had ſaid: to this I was more fully 8
determined by his telling me candidly, that amon g

all thoſe ro whom he communicated his carne:
wiſhes, that the political and domeſtic affairs of the

ate mi ght ſtill continue to be governed by the fame
maxims which the late King had purſued, there was
no Bs one who did not endeavour to make him alter
his Opin! on, and give him a diſguſt to the ſormer
adminiſtration. I was afraid that the view of difi-
culties either abſolutely unſurmountable, or which
could not he overcome without infinite hazard,
would throw him into the path they ſought to leal
him in.

After thanking him for the honour of his eſteem
and confidence, I made the following anſwer, 2nd
almoſt in theſe words: That thoſe perſons whom he
had conſulted upon the preſent oveſtion, were all

too much intereſted in it to give him ſuch advice

as might ruin their hopes and expectations; that
could offer him no other than ſuch as I would give
to his uncles, the Prince of Conti and Count ce
Soiſlons, and to the Queen herſelf, were they to
conſult me with any intentions to be influenced by
my reaſons, becauſe the real intereſt of all four, it
well examined, would be found to be the ſame;
and this advice was, to unite together to ſupport the
honour and grandeur of the King againſt the noblcs,

and againſt that croud of importunate, ambitious,
and felf intereſted men, with which the court was
filled ; ſince the defigns of all thoſe perſons were,
by methods the leaſt allowable, to take advantage
of a conjundture which has at all times been the

triumph of avarice and licentiouſneſs : That this
was the point from which they were to fet out;
and that they might not go aſide, or give an *.

85
—
we
2 —
C3

- — =

5 12232 b
Se. od EG

; 7 A 2
e —

*
ern

— *

„ Is A Ts

r ra mw TY www ww ca  . 4 HU a. 0

ER

5 $4
* wn 1Y 1 © "

i. * ih. os. a®& «&

__

III. 5 "OM rl. ST
on- ES mole to others which they themſelves condemned,

he 85 t was neceſſary that the whole kingdom ſhould be

ey informed, by a ſolemn declaration, that their fols

illy view in this union was the glory of the ſtate; and
spy the effects it produced, the people ſhould be
el: convinced that they were treating in the ſteps of a
the

King, all whoſe defigns and undertakings had been
mc Huſtitied by that ſucceſs they hoped to be favoured
vas with: That it was in''iſpenſably neceſſary to pro-
ter teſt frequently, and in the moſt public manner, that
"or Zthey were actuated by the ſame ſpifit by which that
n- great prince had found the ſecret of making a king-
Ich dom, plunged in miſery and deſpair, opulent and

rl, fouriſhing ; and that the mot effectual proof they
2a could give of their exact imitation of him, wes to

baue no ſelſiſh views, by refuſing all the unjuſt de-
m mands of a whole people of greedy courtiers : 1 did
8 not mean by this, that they were not to expect or

ne deſite any reward for themſelves ; on the contrary, it
all | was one of the advantages which theſe lour perſons
ice | would derive from this ſyſtem, that, by dieting
tl all affairs with wiſdom and prudence, they would
ire in one year accumulate more riches juſtly and with
ce Þ hondur, than they could in ten by any other me—
to] 7 thod; but that, however, they mult not ſuffer
by Þ themſelves to be tainted by avarice ; and this cau-
it | tion I repeated the oftener, becauſe that of all the

c; þ > virtues neceſſary to flateſmen, there is nct one ſo
ne Þ 2 Cifficult to practiſe as moderation, in the midſt of
cs, Þ > vaſt treaſures and unlimited favour. I added, that
us, Þ I knew already all the plans formed by each cf the
s | princes to enjov what they called the rights of their
re, | birth; but alſo, that, by preſerving themſelves from
2c | that dangerous ſnare, no power would be able to
e reſiſt them: were all the nobles and all the heads
of the different factions to be leagued againſt them,

t; de intereſt of the King, when ſupported by ſuch
* F 2 methods,

52 M E OT R 8 Book XXVII. 2

methods, would become the public and the gene- , 4
ral intereſt, and the impreſſion made by the royal . |

name would be then carried to its higheſt pitch,

Then I told the Prince, that what now remained

was to know, whether the Queen and the other two
princes of the blood, were diſpoſed to take ſuch
meaſures as were neceſſary for the ſucceſs of this

heme ; but that I was fo far from flattering him

with this hope, that I freely declared, he ought not to
reckon upon their concurrence : yet that this ſhou!d
not make him ſlacken his moſt earneſt endeavour;
to bring the Queen over, as well becaute it was ne-
ceſlary that, in a point of this conſequence, he
ſhould have no reaſon of reproaching himſelf with

any neglect, as becauſe this princeſs, being alreay |

in poſſeth n of the royal authority, he would have

2 for the ſtrongeſt reaſons he could urge, tof

iiſy to the public the extremities he would be

10 ered to come to: that, after this recaution
1 F
90 conſidetrati ion whatever ſhould hinder him om!

taking upon himſelf the diſcharge of a duty which
the Princes his uncles were not willing to ſhare with
bim; bus that, when thus deprived of all other
ſupport, he mult make his aCtiors ſeak for him:
theſe muſt thew a diſintereſledneſs fo determined,
a candor and probity ſo diſtinguiſned, as may ac-
cuſtom the people to look upon him as the true
iriend of the King, themſelves, and the itate : that

a man who employed only ſuch arms as theſe, in a
rank ſo elevated, would ſooner or later carry all he

fore him: that the Princes of Conti and Soiſſons
would be among the firſt who were ſenſible of it,
by comparing the honour which a procedure 6.
great an diſintereſted would reflect upon the rorval
blood, with the diſreſpect, the contempt, and often
the altronts they would be expoſed to when the pu-
blic ſaw them confounded with the reſt of the {clf-

uh, courtiers: that the Queen herſelf would finc
many

.

e

— —

—__ ws 0 *

tm

8

"eds OF. $V"L- EY; 57

We.

"nNe- 1 any arguments to balance her inclination to a con—

yal by. rary conduct, eſpecially if ſhe ſaw the princes of
the blood reunited againſt her: that, in a word,

ned believed I might venture to engage for it, that ne-

Weeſtity, confidence, and the force of the torrent,

two

uch would at length bring all over to his fide; and
this hat there would be no longer any connections,
him guarrels, reconciliations, and cabals, between the

t to ee, the princes, an the people in office, which
2uld would not turn to the advantage of his authority,
ours Þ from this moment, he would begin to form the
ne- T7 had ſketched out to him, and follow | it faith»
he t ully.
with Ihe extreme attention which the Prince paid to
-ady my diſcourſe, convinced me that I had found the
iave way to his heart, and that J had made upon it that
\ to ſrong impremon which virtue and juſtice con-
be! * ined makes on the ſame ohicel. What bas ſince
ion, I happened does not prove that J was then de-
" om teived; or 1f it does, it proves alſo that the Prince
Mich Feceived himſelf firſt; ſince it is certain, that the
with ce of my arguments ſu; ported him a long me
ther #24inlt the aſſaults he had on all ſides. Whatever
Oy ts were male uſe of by thoſe perſons that conti—
ned, J bually beſet him, the ſlighteſt attention to the pa-
c- tre of thoſe counſeis they gave him, muſt have
true men him very plainly, that they were dictated by
that {W#varice and ambition. How different were ſuch
in a ſentiments fro. « thofe I endeavoured to inſpirs him
be. Vith? He felt them, he was convinced; and yet he
ns Moefiered himſelf, like all the reſt, to be carried along
if it, "th the torrent. The Duke of Bouiflon contri-

— 4

eh buted more than any other to engage him in the
oval Waity of error“. I my ſelf repreſent, and probably
often | C gate,
| Pu- N

(-1f. The author of the life of the Duke of Bouillon, giving an

{ 10 7 Hunt Led the counſels that duke gave the Prince of Co nde- favs,
ail
lic adviicd him to cave the Que <1] tiic quality of een“, 10
1any EF
> red C6

Eꝶ6ü1nW „ ew” *

1

—— _

. —
—
—

— -

—

—

-

Tac" ><

2 67 <= 4

£=>s5

54 M E M O I R s Book XXVII.

exaggerate, every thing that can ſerve to juſlify this
prince, by candidly ackno! edging that it was not
difficult to paint, in the fineſt colours, thoſe mo-
tives by which they endeavoured to undermine my
principles; and that it ought not to appear ſurpri-
ſing, that a prince, young and unexperienced,
ſhoul] not have diſcernment enough to diſtinguiſh
anpearances from realities; nor firmneſs enough to
prefer what is uſeful to what flatters and pleaſes.
It was by the following arguments that they effa-

ced all the impreſſion which mine had made in his
mind.

They told him, that the reaſons I had urged to
him tended only to engage him in an abſurd ima-

reduce it to a mere title, which might ſatisfy her vanity; but t5
get all the actual authority into his own bands. He told then,
he knew an infellble way of bringing this to pats, which if he
would purſue, he could be anſwerable for the ſucceſs: that this
method conſiſted in his again making profeſſion of the Calviniit
religion, from which the late King had drawn him, and to de—
clare himſelt the protector of the Proteſtants in trance: thet
being, in conſequence of this ſtep, followed by the Calvinift nobi—
lity, "of whom he would be head, maſter of all the ſtrovg places
in the poſſeſſion of that party, (that ! is, if 103 towns and places
well fortificd), ſupported by all the Swiſs in France, of whom the
Duke of Ronan was colonel-ceneral ; ſecure of all the tres fes res
left by the late King in the Eaſtile, which the Duke of Sul!) ly, dit-
contented with the regent, could put into lis Hands: it covid
not, with all theſe great adv 'antapes, be any way dotbted, but 3
firit prince of the blood, as he was, during a minority, muſt be
in a condition to ſeize on all the authority, and make bitſelf e-
qually formidable within the kingdom as without. + God Cid rot
permit him to follow this advice of the Duke cf Bouillon; it be
had, the Calviniſts would have recovered all the advantages they
had loſt by the late King's converſion : in all probability, tic
kingdom would have deen divided between them ard the Catho-
lies; and their republic, which was treated as imaginary, would
at laſt have proved ſomething real.” Vol. 2. p. 30p. But many
imagined, as this hiſtorian himſelf afterwards. owns, that the
Duke of Bouillon did not feriov ſly moke this e niote
Prince ; that he was the firſt to divert him from it; and that «ll
his intent was, only to let the regent ſee, that he himſelf wild

2 a ſuſſic int ſecurity againſt all the miſchief he was able to do
ser.

ginary

4
£

— e

i

.

22

2.08 —

7 1610. O F nnr 55

oinary ſyſtem 3 that ſuch refined maxims neither
ſuited our times nor our manners; that probity
and virtue alone ſignified nothing; that the chi-
= mera's with which I filled his imagination would be
laughed at by all rcaſonable perſons; that by thus
*Z aſpiring to be the ſupport of the whole nation, he
would only incur a general hatred, and too late re-
® gret that he had not made a better uſe of ſo happy
a conjuncture: that the only wife part for him to
take, at a time when the royal treaſures were go-
ing to become a public prey, was to claim the beſt
and the largeſt portion of them for Fimſeif, as being,
after their Majeſties, the firſt perſon in the king—
dom “*; that he had profited but littie by the ne-
ceſſitous condition to Which he had been reduced,
if it had not taught him, that when an opportunity
offered to extricate himſelf from it, he ſhould re-
ceive it with open arms: that he might be aſ-
> ſured that it was more my intereit than his, that I
| > endeivoured to throw him into a Ceſperate party
that this was the only reſource I had left to ſupport
my ſinking credit: that by ſeeking to connect his
2 intereſts with mine, 1 ſhould drag bim down
the precipice with me: that the hatred of the nobles
and the miniſters againſt me was ſo great and in-
vincible, that the bare ſuſpicion of my having any
influence over him, was tufficient to ruin all his ex-
pectations and deſigns: that J had diſdained to offer
my friendſhip and ſervices to any one; and, in re-
venge, all were fo well agreed upon that one point,
my ruin, that there was no condition which they
would not accept from thoſe who were going to

AY

* 1 *
1
1
>; &3 *
*\ Fa.

g7

4

© 2 2

"a"
8
N

AD e

—
a

. * Ne would gladly, fays the ſame. hiſtorian J have juſt been
quoting, have contcſted the regency if he had dared; but he
was diverted from it by the kind treatment he met with. He had
a penſion of two hundred thouſand livres (about 8333 J. Sterling)
given him, together with the palice of Conti, in the ſuburb of
Sant Germain, for which a great ſum had been pad, the county
ol Clermont, aud many other gratifications.

have

—
pay

-
: „ A
8 me ̃ñ!K TE" FITC

50 M E M O IR S Book XXVII.

have the diſpoſal of all favours and rewards, provi-
ded my diſgrace was annexed to it.

Ou occaſions of this kind, when one has been
able to render the advice ſa peed, the adviſer is
not far from being hated : this was what they under-
took to accompliſh, and they ſucceeded. They
gave the Prince to underſtand, that it was abſolutely
neceſſary for the ſyſtem he was going to embrace,
that my ruin fliould be reſolved on: what I had
faid ro him myſelf, ce. niirmed it to bim; all my
own words were turned againſt me: fo that by a
ſtrange caprice of the mind (of which, however, po—
litics abound with examples) thoſe very ſentiments
whch but a moment before the Prince had atlmired
in my month, laid the foundation of that Hatred
he from thenceforward began to bear me, and of the
perfecution he raiſed againſt me. Then it was that
the reſolution was taken. not to ſuffer me to conti—
nue any longer in the miniſtry * than was neceſſ2ry
for their own ſchemes; and in the mean time to
undermine, by degrees, what power I Had ſtill Nefr;
and to withdraw, without any ſceming defign, all
the papers, memoirs, and F e „relating to
the finances, which were in m y hat till the mo—
ment arrived when 1 was to be prey ty for ever,
If the execution of this plot was d d till the fol-
lowing year, it wa only becauſe ſome untureſeen
diffcultics retaided it.

Probably I did not at that time know ail the plots
which were then ſecretly forming againſt me; but I
gueſſed at ſo many of them, as were neceflary to
confirm me in my former reſolution, and to which

All theſe intrigues amonęſt the princes, the courtiers, and the
minif!crs, to get the Duke of Sully removed, are related in ak
ticular memoirs, and elpectal'y in L "Hilloire de la mere et du
ſils, vol. 1 p.11. & ſcaꝗ. 120. 127, & fſegq. ; and in the Hiſtory
of the Duke of Bouillon, vel. 2. p. 313, & qq.

]

5h

- "af
a * .

—

. a | A
- 3 e 4
1

*
DD wo £© m e e bad

_—
, —
een

7

3 rr 323 —

17610. 0 F . 57

I pad endeavoured to bring my family to give
their conſent ; which was, to retire from court "He
© fore I ſhould appear to be forced away * : ] even

went ſo far as to mention my deſign to the Queen-

| regent, and intreated her not to oppoſe it. Al-
Fr by this propoſal, 1 was doubtleſs anſwering

all her views, yet ſhe uſed ſuch profound diſſimula-
tion in the anſwer ſhe made me, that even had I
' ſuffered myſelf to be deceived, yet I think none
could have accuſed me of too much credulity. Con-
chini and his wife had never more influence over
her than then: ſhe began to be wholly governed by
them; yet ſhe pretended to be as much diſguſted
with their proceedings as I was myſelf : ſhe endea-
voured to perſuade me that ſhe was fully ſatisfied
with my conduct; that the ſhould be greatly per-
plexe! if 1 abandoned her, at a time when the
King's coronation would give her ſufficient employ-
ment; ; and that it would take up all the remainder
of the year, to prepare for the change 3 which the
eiſmiſſion from my employ ments muſt neceflarily
make in affairs. 1 accommodated myſelf to her

will, without ſuffering my own to be aitered ; for
though I continued to perform all the duties of my

offices, yet I was ſo conſtantly upon my guard a-
gainſt the machinations of my enemies, that 1 would
not leave them an opportunity of ſpoiling me them-
lelv es,

They at length came to a reſolution with regard
to tie affair of Cleves : indeed it could not be longer
delayed. if they had any deſire to appear concerned
in it. The army of the confederates, joined to that
of the United Provinces, had laid ſiege to Juliers ;
and the Piince cf Orange, who commanded it,

| had taken ſuch meaſures, that the place muſt of ne-

This landable method has been frequenily copie! by the
Enpliſh miniſters, who finding they muſt turn out, ule the ho-

| nourablz method of RESIGNING,

ceſſity

58 M E M OI R S Book XXVIII.

ceſſity fall into his hands. Our ſupplies were
wholly uſeleſs to him, becauſe the houſe of Auſtria

had taken no ſtep, nor ſet any troops on foot, to

oppoſe her enemies: and after this exploit, the war,
as they propoſed to carry it on, muſt be ſoon at an

end. But the new council of the Queen, compoſed

of thoſe perſons I have already mentioned, thought
they ſhould ſhew a maſterpiece of policy, by grant-

ing them now more than what they had been ſo long |
and ineffectually ſoliciting. They knew the condi-
tion the beſieged city was in, and they were de-

ſirous of having the honour of taking it, as it could
not hold out long, after the arrival of our troops.

They likewiſe imagined, that this would be an in-

citement to the King of Spain to ſolicit an alliance
with us, for which they thought he did not ſhew
eagerneſs enough ; and they were aſhamed to make
all the advances themſelves. It was reſolved, there-
fore, that a body of eight thouſand foot, twelve
hundred horſe, and eight pieces of cannon, ſhould
be immediately ſent to Juliers ; and that the com-
mand of this army ſhould be given to the Marechal
de la Chatte.

When this determination was made public, and,
for form's ſake, laid before the general council, I
could not hinder myſelf from ſpeaking my ſenii-
ments of it freely. I deſired to know tor what end
they were at the expence of this army, again!
enemies who did not defend themſelves, and for al-
lies who no longer needed our aſſiſtance? I declared
my opinion of this unſeafonahle ſuccour, which was
not much for our honour. I repreſented to them
the difficulties and delays to which our troops weie
expoſed by this unneceſlary march: and indeed, to

perform it without having any thing to fear from

the enemies they might meet in their journey, the!
mult be obliged to go a great way about, and tra-

.

verie

> 2 "_

We *
K
+

1610.

= verſe rude, mountainous, and barren countries. Con-
chini, who had brought over the Count de Soiſſons
and the Duke of Bouillon to his opinion, and who.
was ſatisfied with his own ſecret reaſons, ſuffered
me to talk on, like a man whom they ſcorned to
© diſcloſe their deſigns to: and the departure of the
troops was reſolved on. However, to prevent any
* farther importunity from me, and to give me even a
perſonal intereſt in this armament, they granted my
! ſon-in-law (who had long ſolicited a diſtinguiſhing

+ I 4 7: 9 rn

O F e 59

employment in the German army) the poſt of Field-
Marſhal-General : which was likely to be ſo much
the more acceptable, as this quality gave him an un-
queſtionable right to command in chief, if any thin
happened to the general. It was not impoſlible
even that La-Chatre would, through ſome diſguſt, re-
ſign the command, as he had more than once been
upon the point of doing. The difficulty of the roads
alarmed him, as well as the dangers he might encoun-
ter in his march; and he allo uwned to me, and to
ſome others of the council, that the Jeſuits raiſed
great ſcruples in his mind about joining the heretics
againſt good Catholics, However, I gave him a lit-
tie courage, by telling him of a more convenient
route than that which he had deſigned to take ; and
he diſpoſed himſelf to begin his march.

The preparations for this armament which fell to
my charge, were made in ſuch a manner, that the
army was compoſed of the beſt troops we had then
on foot; they had a complete train of artillery, well

| ſerved ; and the fund for the expenſes was fo large,

that the treaſurer brought back an hundred thou-

ſand crowns. Prince Maurice acknowledged, that
he had not for a long time ſeen a body of forces
ſo fine and ſo well diſciplined: he expreſſed ſome
| ſurpriſe indeed, that the general, who by all appear-
| ances ſhould be one of our beſt ſoldiers, had but a

very

60 M E M O I R 8 Book XXVIII.

very ſlight knowledge of what was practiſed in ſieges,
and in other parts of war.

This is all that I (hall ſay of this expedition: the
hiſtorians“ have given a more particular account of
what happened in it, how our army paſſed into Ger
many, and how it returned, My tears of being too
ſincere upon this ſubject, and the very unuſeful part!

now began to act, obliges me to haſten towards the

concluſion of theſe Memoirs.

* See an account of the taking of Juliers, and this expedition,
in the. Merc. Franc. and other hiſtor'ans, ann. 1610.

The taking of Julicrs obliged the Emperor to lay afide is de-
Hon of ſequeſtering, into the hands of the Archduke Leopold of
Auſtria, the territories that were in diſpute; and the Dukes of
Brandenburg and Neuburg quietly ſhared the whole ſucceſſion be-
twixt them. The elector of Brandenburg had Cleves, La-Nark,
and Ravenſberg : and the Duke of Neuburg, Julicrs and Berg.
Philip-Lewis, fon of this Duke of Neuburg, had two ſons, ct
whom one continucd the branch of Neuburg ; and from the young-
eſt, the Counts of Sulſbach are 4deſecnded; in whom the two
branches are now going to be Tcunited, becauſe the branch cf
Neuburg will determine in the preſent Elector Palatine : and from
hence, an hundred ard thirty years after the death of Duke V |
liam of ſuliers, the fame eifhculties en this eventual ſrcceſlion te
again likely to ariſe ; the King of Pruſſia, of the houſe of Branden-
burg, being able to produce the following reaſon for his oppoliiton
to this reunion, that the two branches were ſeparated when the
treaty of 1666 was made, which ſcems only to ſtipulate for 4e.
ſcendents of the contracting parties ; and the Emperor, ont:
other hand, finding it his intereſt to ſupport the Prince of Sal
bach; becauſe if this young Prince ſhould happen to die without
iſſuc- male, he would make ufe of his old pretcnce, of the male
ficfs, as a reaſon for his taking poſſeſſion of Jnliers and Berg;
be ſides the intereſt he would have in it on account of the Princes
of Saxony, his allies.

There appeared a work in two volumes in 1738, wherein this
matter is diſcuſſed and very well explained. |

. Fr Y
t This was written Leſore the death of the laſt Emperer, _
lajt Elcotior Palatine,

BOOK

II. 2 1610. O0 F 8 U L L. Yo 6

ee.
e, Sa

BO O K XXIX.

the Þ 1

of HE affair of Cleves, which we have juſt now
er. FR mentioned, and the Queen's conduct with re-
too Þ gard to me, at length removed all my hopes of bring-
ing back the court to right ſentiments, on the two

che] *poipts of government, the conduct of foreign affairs,
and the management of the finances: on the contra -
ry, the changeableneſs of the Prince, what I percei-
ion, ved daily, and above all, the air of diſſimulation
Which in the Jaſt place they had recourſe to,
f convinced me that they would never get out
et | of that labyrinth in which the affairs of the coun-
| b--Þ cil ſeemed to be loft, but by ſuch an extrication as 1
vas always afraid of. In order to bring that about,
I ſome time was neceſſary; for connections ſo ſtrong
ung: and ſo well cemented as thoſe which the King had
©" | formed for the deſtruction of the houſe of Auſtria,
ion uith all thoſe of the princes intereſted in its deſtruc-
tion, are not broke all at once, nor ſometimes with-
cout a ſtruggle which has miſchievous conſequences.
ut] have no reaſon to doubt but that the Queen-re-
gent and her counſellors employed all their arts to
make them ineffectual]. That prejudice in favour of
what they called the party of religion; the hatred they
ent bore to all Proteſtants, whether French or foreign-
ers; a natural inclination, ſtrengthened by habit,
to unite with Spain, every impulſe of which they
could not help following publicly, when the deſigns
of Henry the Great becoming manifeſt, they were
convicted of ſupporting a cauſe at once odious and
deſperate : it could not be expected that the force of
theſe motives was abated, when, by an unexpected.
ſtroke, they found themſelves upon the point of ac-
compliſhing what they had ſo ardently deſired. My
religion, my engagements, the advice I had given to
OL. V. | Kea the

de-
Of

& M E M OI R S Book XXIX.

the late King, of which at leaſt the certain effect
would have been the free exerciſe of the Proteſtant
religion in France, and in all Chriſtendom, even the
death of that prince, which ſeemed to declare me the
only repoſitory of his ſentiments, and the executor
of his deſigns, all the glory and honour of which
muſt neceſſarily reflect upon me: theſe were their
motives for hatred againſt a man who had already
ſo many powerful enemies ; and, by the care which
Sillery and Villeroi took to enforce them, they could
not fail of having a ſpeedy effect.

Another, leſs openly declared, but probably ſtrong-
er than all the others, becauſe it directly attacked
thoſe private intereſts, united them all a ſecond
time againſt me. This was a too exact and too im-
partial adminiſtration of the finances, for perſons
whoſe avarice had already, in imagination, ingroſſed
to themſelves all the treaſures of the late King. |
have on this head, an infinite number of circumſtan-
ces to relate, which certainly will not do any honour
to the French name; but it would be to no purpoſe
to be ſilent, ſince they are generally known. The
reader then may here ſee ſome of the moſt import
ant of them: they will ſerve to give him an idea of
the court at that time.

I ſhall begin with the favourite of the Queen-re-
gent. He caſt his eyes at firſt upon the poſt. of firl
gentleman of the bedchamber ; not that this dignity
was capable of ſatisfying his ambition, but it was
neceſlary to begin by obtaining a rank which might
take away the diſproportion that had hitherto been
between him and the other courtiers. To this mo-
tive was added ſome perſonal reſentment againſt Bel-
legarde, the cauſe of which I ſhall not relate, because
it would lead me into too long a diſcuſſion, It was
highly flattering to the vanity of Conchini, that the
firſt ſtep he was ſeen to take at court, (ſhould put him

| pod

1610.
3 upon a par with his rival * : he therefore cauſed it
to be propoſed to the Duke of Bouillon, to treat with
him for this poſt, Bouillon, who really intended to

ſell it, readily accepted the propoſal, and was well
paid for his complaiſance; for, in the firſt place, he

„„ Gy

obtained a ſuppreſſion of the offices eſtabliſhed by his
Majeſty in the neighbourhood of Sedan, for levying

taxes upon all goods and merchandifes exported

and imported; ſo that this gratuity may, without
exaggeration, be ſaid to be worth more to him than

his whole principality, To this Conchini added ta

hundred thouſand livres, under a pretence that he had
been promiſed that ſum upon ſurrendering his city,
] repreſented to them, that the Duke of Bouillon

© had been exactly paid all that was promiſed him,

and if they looked into the account, they would be
convinced of it: but what I ſaid was not regarded,
and all the expenſe Henry had been at to get poſ-

ſeſſion of Sedan, ended in paying twice for the place;
which after all was ſtill in Bouillon's hands.“

Conchini, however, did not effect bis purpoſe ſo
ealily as he had imagined : the Count of Soiſſons, as
I have already hinted, oppoſed him, as well in that,
as in his ſolicitations for the archbiſhopric of Tours;

* but he did it in ſuch a manner as leſt him room to-

hope there was a poſſibility of gaining him; and Con-

chini ſoon found the means. He cauſed the govern- -
ment of Normandy to be given to him ; and to this
end did not ſcraple to take it away from the ſecond

ſon of France. The late King, that he might a-

void creating any jealouſy among thoſe who aſpired

to this government, (which I had refuſed, with tho

| condition-of changing my religion annexed to it), and

willing to oblige, Fervaques, who well deſerved that

The Marquis of Ancre (for ſo he began then to be called),
had a difference with the maſter of the horſe, the particulars -
whereof may be ſeen in the Hiſtory of the regency of Queen Mary

G. 2 he

de Medicis.

64 M E M O IR S Book XXIX.

he ſhould have this conſideration for him, had be-
ſtowed it upon his own ſon, It was not poſſible for
me to give my aſſent to this action of Conchini's, or
to the gratuity given by the council to the Count of
Soiflons, at bis Majeſty's expenſe, by purchaſing, at
a high price, ſome very inconſiderable claims which
the houſe of Montaffiè had in Piedmont, of which
mention has been already made. However, notwith-
ſtanding all my remonſtrances, the bargain was
concluded. It was now their cuſtom to ſuffer me to
talk, but to act without me.

Conchini found out a method how to diſpoſe of
part of the King's. treaſures, without its appearing
that the ſums raiſed-by thoſe means were received or
employed for his uſe. This was by perſuading the
Queen to continue the iſſuing of countants * as the
late King was uſed to do, She wrote the foliowing
letter to me upon this occaſion, dated the 1 5h
of June. |

4 Couſin,

I am reſolved, for one year more, to continue
© the countants for the payment of thoſe ſums
* which the late King, my Lord, ordered the trea-
& ſurers of the exchequer to depofite in his privy
© purſe: Beringhen ſhall diſtribute the money ari-
* ting from hence to the ſame perſons as formeriy.
© ] therefore ſend this to aquaint you, that it 13
* my delire you ſhouid direct the treaſurer of the

* The countants were orders for payment of money, or te-
ecipts for ſums paid by the King's order, without ſpecifying in
what manner the money ſo paid was employed. Henry IV. and
Lewis XIII. or their miniſters, ſeverely felt the abuſes that might
be made of them; but an infinite number of expenſes, which in-
tereſt of ſtate required to be kept ſecret, prevenred their being
aboliſhed. Cardinal de Richelieu determined to put an end to
them, but in lieu thereof to leave a million of gold in the King“
hands for his private expenſes, and to be diſpoſed of at his pleaſure
Teſt, Polit. part 2. p. 143. |

| & excheque!

F, $ UL L F. 65
| «© exchequer at preſent. in office, to pay into the

* « hands of the aforeſaid Beringhen, the iaid count-
e ani for the July quarter.“

The next day Puget and D'Argogues brought

one of theſe countants to me that J might ſettle it,
and write underneath an order for the payment. I
took it, and at the firſt glance did not obſerve that

it contained any thing. but a great number of ſums

which the late King cauſed to be paid in this form:
but the amount of the whole appearing to me to be

excellive large, inſtead of looking any farther, I told
the bearers, that it was true the conduct of Hen-

| ry IV. ſeemed to authoriſe this form, but that at pre-

ſent this writing did not appear to me to be any
longer a ſufficient diſcharge to him who fhould ven-

ture to give an order for its payment. I hey repli-

O

| ed, that, if I would take the trouble to read to the

end of che paper, I ſhuuvid find my objection re-
moved by a diſcharge fo valid, that I necd not have

| recourſe for it to any other perſon . I continued to

read, being curious to know how a paper, which
ſeemed to contain nothing more than the articles
of a countant, and that not very long, ſhould pro-

| duce a ſum of 900.210 livres 14 fols, which I had

ſeen by caſting my eyes upon the ſum total. My
curiofity was ſoon ſatisſied. The two or three firit
articles were followed by others with which I] was
not greatly pleaſed, and which ſeemed only inſerted
there, in order to prepare me tor a morſe] ſtill hard-
er to digeſt: This was a- ſingle article of four
hundred thouſand livres, with no other explanation
than theſe few words, which were not very likely to
baniſh my ſcruples: Paid into the hands of the
late King.”

I ftopped ſhort, and, looking earneſtly upon Pu-
get, aſked him whether this ingenious trick was of
his own invention; then reſolutely told him, that

K 3 che

66 M E MOI R S Book XXI%

the late King had never taken up ſo much money at
once for his private purſe: and that I had good
proofs of his having never received this ſum, either
in part or the whole. He ſtill continued to anſwer
with the ſame indifference, "That what I ſhould ſee
at the bottom would remove all difficulties. This
was four or five lines, written by the Queen herſelf,
and in theſe terms: We have examined the arti-
cles of the above countant, amounting - to
«© oo, 210 livres 14 ſols, and know-that- this. ſum
«© was really diſburſed by the command of the late
King, my Lord, to be paiked in the form of a
«© countant, as uſual, which he was prevented from
„ by death; We are ſatisfied that the ſaid articles
** are all juſt; and order an acquittance of countant
to be expediated, to ſerve as a diſcharge for Puget,
«. treaſurer of the. exchequer.” Gwen at Paris,
«. July 16. 1610. ſigned Mary.”

I did not recollect immediately what reſolution
it was proper-for me to take; but, after a moment's
reflection, Monſieur Puget,“ ſaid I, What I have
read does net explain to me for what reaſon ſo
large a ſum is demanded of me; for I can never
{© be. perſuaded that the late King received it. It is
in vain therefore that you preſs me to ſign it upon
that ſuppoſition : you-muſt therefore be ſatistte.
« with-this paper, ſuch as it is, for your diſcharge;
for, you may depend upon it, Iwill add nothing
„ to it.“ The affair did not reſt there: they re-
newed their endeavours to obtain myſignature with
as mueh obſtinaey as I refuſed it; for two whole
days I was perſecuted about this countant : ar laſt
they left me in quiet, and itremained among the
reſt of my papers; bet neither the Queen-regent ot
Conchini ever forgot it. The. favourite thought
this but a bad example for thofe- whom he, was en.
deavouring to-bring to a perfect conformity with all
his deſires :; as for. the Queen, her reſentment at my

| conduct

=—_y ©@ rH w $$ © © a £. ow BR as www vqMMMw ' a t#þÞiwo Tc * an” ain

4 4 ee. 20

—

1610. 0 F 8 UL. L T. e.

conduct on this occaſion was ſo great, that ſhe could
not, with all her art, conceal it; and if, till then,

ſhe had at times made ſome ſlight reflections upon

what the King her huſband had often. ſaid to her of
the great uſe I ſhould be to her in the adminiſtration.

of affairs, from that moment all remembrance of it.
was eraſed, and gave place to a ſettled reſolution to
beſtow my employments upon a perſon who would
be more tractable,

The- Chancellor gave me an example of that ſort
of behaviour they expected ; but, inſtead of follow-
ing it, I could not help reproaching. him one day
with a fraud truly unpardonable, on occaſion of 4

letter of exemption for the purchaſe of the regiſtry.

of the parliament, and of the chatelet of Paris,
which was ſhown in full council, as having been ex-
pediated and ſealed by the late King, although knew
that he had obſtinately refuſed to grant it, notwith-
ſtanding Villeroi had, at different times, uſed his ut-
moſt endeavours to prevail upon him. 'Thelaw-or--
dains, that when the King dies, his ſeal ſhall be
broken. This the Chancellor not only neglected to
do, but even dared to make uſe of it to authenti-

| cate ſeveral falſe regulations in favour-of Conchini

and ſome others, and continued this practice du-
ring five years after the-King's demiſe; for which he
had a double conveniency, as his ſon, who was ſe-
cretary of: ſtate, forged all thoſe writings, which he.
put the laſt hand to. Monſteur the Admiral“ re-
ceived the aſſiſtance it gave him as if it came from
heaven. He brought to be regiſtred in the parlia-
ment letters patents for Duke and Peer for the lord-
ſhip of Damville, in as good, and perhaps better form
— — they would have had if Hemy IV. had been
wing. |
I ind a:ſecond letter from the Queen regent of
the ſame date with the former, but it was on a ſub-
* Charlas de Montmorency, Duke of Damville.
ject.

es M E M O I R S | Book XXIX.

ject of leſs importance. It related to a breach
which was to be repaired in the fortifications lately
raiſed before the city and caſtle of Vendome, at the
deſire of the Sieur Jumeaux, who was governor
thereof.

It would have been very difficult, expoſed as [I
was to frequent quarrels with the miniſters and no-
bles, to have avoided one with the Duke of Bouillon,
who on all occafions gave me proofs that he had
not forgot or pardoned. my having always preferred
the King's intereſt to his, and who only waited for
ſome opportunity to ſhew his reſentment of it. He
one day propoſed in the council, that all thoſe who
were in poſſeſſion of the chief offices and employ-
ments in the kingdom, ſhould be required to give
in accounts of ' the. money received and expendeq,
to be examined there. The council conceived this
propoſal, in the ſame ſpirit with him that made it;
for, general as it ſeemed, yet it was levelled at me
alone; and Bouillon undertook to give me notice of
it, by ſaying to me, in full council likewiſe, that,
being a man who loved method and exactneſs, and
who was always deſirous of ſetting others a good ex-
ample, he did not doubt but that I would begin, by
laying befoie the council thoſe accounts that related
to my poſt of grand maſter of the ordnance, [I
replied, in an accent and manner which poſhbly he
did not expect, That whenever the King and Queen
were pleaſed to require it, I would lay my accounts
before them, and with ſo much the more willingneſs,
as I wes well aſſured they would find nothing in
them but what would be to their ſatisfa&tion, and
my honour: that, in a minority, the princes of the
blood repreſented the King's perſon likewiſe, there-
fore ] would give them the ſame ſatisfaction; but
that I was too well acquainted with the extent of
the rights and privileges of my employment, not to
know that, to make it accountable to any other 5

buna!,

a 2 QF K Ks —

-

| <<

rd Tire.

* bunal, was to debaſe it. Monſieur,” replied the
Duke, „it appears to me that the Conſtable and the
* «4 Marſhals of France having a right to take cog-
„' niſance of all affairs of the army, as they fall
immediately under their inſpection by the nature

* of their offices, ſo they may likewiſe of all poſts
« and employments relating to it; and yours is one
&« of the chief of that kind.” * I fee plainly,
© Monſieur,” returned I, without endeavouring to
conceal my reſentment at this procedure, “ that

„ you have long deſigned me this affront, and that

you are artfully ſeeking to ſupport yourſelf with
„M. the Conſtable, whoſe quality, merit, and years
& I honour and eſteem, and for whoſe friend{hip I
am greatly obliged, I do not apprehend that any
* diſpute will arite between him and me upon this.
© matter; but as for you and all the others, I de-
& clare that I do not think myſelf accountable to

you in what regards my office, but to the Kin
« alone.” At leatt, Monſieur,“ replied the Duke
* of Bouillon, “ you muſt acknowledge, that, your
patent being directed to us, it implies that we
have ſome degree of authority there.“ Mon-
ſieur,“ ſaid I, ** you have either read it very ſlightly,
or but ill underſtood what you read; ſince, it what
you aſlert to be true, I am likewiſe accountable to
the mayors, the ſheriffs, and the captains of the
city-gates, in what regards my employments,
ſince the patent. is directed to them as well as to
the marſhals and governors of France; but, if
you are really ignorant why thoſe clauſes are in-
ſerted, now know from me, that it is in order
that I may be aſſiſted by all thoſe perſons in what-
ever I require of them, which carries rather an

idea of ſuperiority than the contrary.”
The Queen, who found that the diſpute was
growing warm, and that it might produce a quarrel
ween us, impoſed ſilence upon us both, and
brought:

” M E M OI R S Bock XXIX.

brought another ſubject upon the carpet. Bouillon's
flattery to the Conſtable miſſed of the effect he pro-
poſed by it; for 1 was as much beloved by that noble-
men for the ſervices I had done hime in ſome very
difficult cirumſtances, as Bouillon, who had drawn
him into thoſe circumſtances, was hated by him,
When the council broke up, he told the Queen, in
Bouillon's preſence, that his claim was ill founded;
then, addreſſing himſelf to the Duke, he intreated
him not to make any more attempts to engage him
in his perſonal reſentments and ſchemes of revenge.
This quarrel made a great noiſe at court, becauſe the
friends of each party thought it incumbent upon
them to engage in it. It was not- here as in the
council: my party was now greatly ſuperior to his.
The families of Guiſe, Longueville, and many o-
thers, declared themſelves openly on my fide.
Conchini and his wife did not continue long on
d terms with the miniſters and the other chief
rſons of the ſtate. It is the fate of connections
produced by a ſpirit of intereſt, that the ſame cauſe
which gave them birth, deſtroys them with the
rome facility, Hence followed a thouſand ſcanda-
us ſcenes: they came openly to reproaches and
abuſes, which, from ſome remains of decency, ſhould
have been ſtifled. As the whole court was actuated
by the ſame ſpirit, it was ſoon filled with hatred,
jealouſy, and faction; none but baſe or criminal
methods were employed in diſputing for favours or
in obtaining them; ſome old grudge or ſome new
reſentment embittered every mind, and the bloodieſt
cataſtrophes were often apprehended among perſons
of the higheſt rank: it became neceſſary to watch
them continually,. to prevent the fatal effects of their
quarrels, The pubiic was not ignorant of the mo-
tives which animated one againſt the other, all the
princes of the blood, the conſtable, the maſter of

the horſe, the Duke of Epernon, and many more.
In

mm A wm pe rw awe ah

E
0

1610. e 71

In theſe diſſenſions Conchini had always the great-

; eſt part * : ſometimes, while the balance was held
between theſe illuſtrious rivals, the favours they diſ-
puted for fell into the hands of mean inconſiderable

perſons. Diſcord, confuſion, injuſtice, and fraud,

all che evils which follow the contempt of ſubordi-

nation, poured in like a deluge upon the court and
council, and more than once revenged the inſulted
memory of Henry the Great upon his domeſtic

| enemies, by thoſe very means which they had made
choice of to revenge themſelves.

There was not any of the European powers who
did not, by their ambaſladors, acquit themſelves

of what they owed to this great king: but it was

eaſy to diſtinguiſh among them, thoſe who were more

* {incere in their compliments of congratulation for

the acceſſion of the new king to the throne, than

in thoſe of condolence for the loſs of him whom he

ſucceeded, There were found Frenchmen baſe
enough to ſay to the ambaſſadors from the King of
bpain and the Archduke, theſe very words: *+ Your

tears need not wet your handkerchiefs much; it
vas a ſtroke of Providence that ſaved the King and

e the Catholic religion from ruin.” Iſhall ſay nothing
of the reception that was given to theſe ambaſſadors,

My heart was too much removed from every
ſenſation of joy, to allow me to have any part in the
ceremony of the King's coronation ; therefore,

| while every other took the road to Rheims, I ſet

out for Montrond, after having obtained the Queen's
permiſſion to go to one of my country houſes. I
carefully concealed my deſign of not returning again
to Paris, at leaſt while I ſaw the ſame diſpoſitions

* See the detail of theſe intrigues 2nd court-quarrels in Siri, vol.
2. P. 327. and in the other hiſturians of thoſe times.

+ The ceremony is very minutely deſcribed in the Merc. Frang.
the Royal MSS. P. Matthieu, &c. anno 1610. It was perform-
ed the 2th of October.

among

2 M E MO IR $S Book XXIX.

among the courtiers, and the ſame diſorder in af-
fairs: but I had really taken this reſolution, which
was confirmed by my being atttacked with a violent
illneſs immediately after I arrived at Montrond, and
which I] could attribute to no other cauſe, but to
the painful ſituation my heart had been in for four
months. It was here alſo, that to calm the diſ-
quietude of my mind, I compoſed thoſe two little
pieces of poetry, one of which is intitled, 4 paral-
lel between Cæ ſar and Henry the Great; and the
other, A farewell to the court *.

If this adieu was not the laſt, it was not my fault:
J faw very plainly that I could not remain there,
The ſecret council held at the houſe of the nuncio,
which I have already mentioned, was continually
recurring to my mind. To this I added ſome
words which a princeſs, my relation and intimate
friend, told me ſhe had heard ſaid to the Queen at
the ſame time. Many other circumſtances ot this
nature filled my mind with the ſtrongeſt forebo-
dings that the whole Proteſtant church was at the
eve of a perſecution. By a letter which Preaux
wrote to me from Chatelleraut, dated November
10. he ſeemed to be of the ſame opinion: “ Al-
ready,“ ſays he,“ I fancy I fee the theatre raiſed
* to renew our tragedies,” With this melancholy
expectation, my refolution was already ſettled, to
diſpoſe of all my employmenrs to thoſe perſons who
ſhould be recommended to me by Conchini and his
wife, as money ſeemed to be cheapeſt with them.
I intended to fend one third of the ſums raiſed by
theſe ſales to Switzerland, another to Venice, and
the remainder to HoJland, where I propoſed to re-
tire myſelf, when the ſtorm appeared ready to burſt,
with all the money that by good œconomy 1 had
ſaved out of my yearly revenue. Thus were my

* Theſe picces are recited in Sully's Memoirs, at the end of

aftairs

the tuſt volume, p. 46g.

= Bw

» TS © ©, == — — oy

.

m_—- FU L'-L-Y: 73

affairs regulated; and that I made any al:eration
in this plan, was owing to the following circuin—
| tance. |

That jealouſy and miſunderſtanding which ſuh-

ſiſted among the nobles and perſons in office, ren-

dered the ceremony of the coronati n fo tumu'tu-

* ous and diſorderly, that it was expected ſome dan-
| gerous conſequences would follow. I do not ſpeak
here of their diſputes for rank and precedence only,
The Duke of Epernon, who, for ſome years paſt,

appeared to be intimately connected with Conchini,

| yet one day, in concert with the Duke of Eguillon,
| uſed language to him equally ſevere, injurious, and
threatening, and this in public. The Duke of Ne—
vers, ſupported by the princes of the, blood, treated
| Villeroy, Sillery, and Jeannin, in the ſame man-

ner: they were ſeized with conſternation and fear:
they found that they had not power, and, doubtleſs,
felt they were not innocent enough to repel theſe

| reproaches z and now began to be ſenſible of the
| need they had of me. It might have dangerous

conſequences, if the princes an] nobles were ſuffer-
ed to go on in reproving the miniſters of ſtate.
] appeare.! to them to be the only man capable of
putting things upon another footing, by the autho-
rity, the reipect, and even the awe, which my
birth, my character, and my manners, had acquired
me in the council; and they fo earneſtly ſolicited
the Queen to make uſe of her influence over me,
to oblige me to return, that ſhe ſent me by an ex-
preſs the following letter.

©« Couſin,
© The coronation of the King, Monſieur my ſon,
being happily performed at Rheims, we ſhall in
* a ſhort time ſet out for Paris; and becauſe many
* affairs that require your preſence, on account of

* your employments, and the great abilities you
Vol. V. f

« haye

* — .

5
4
4
q
*
4

—

—

2 I x5
—— —

—- ——— —

74 M E M O I R 8 Book XXIX.

** have ſhew in the exerciſe of them, will be tranſ-
«© acted the latter end of this year, and the begin-
ning of the next, I deſire you will return to Paris
* with all poffible haſte, that we may find you
there upon our arival. So, in full aflurance that
you will not fail, I beſeech God, &c. Written

* at Rheims, October 10. 1610.
„ Your good couſin,

* MARY.”

I imagined, that by eluding this journey for the
preſent, they would think no more of it; thercfore
my anſwer to the Queen was conceived in theſe
terms.

« Madam, |
„My inclination, my duty, and the honour you
do me, by remembering me, are all motives
© equally ſtrong to engage my obedience to your
„ Majeſty's commands; but a dangerous illness,
from which J am but lately recovered, has leſt
me in fo weak a condition, and the certain know-
ledge I have, that my preſence in the council is
© not agreeable to ſeveral perſons, who have more
authority there than I have, oblige me mot
«© humbly to intreat you, not to be . that!
delay going to court till 1 have recovered my
* ſtrength ; and that when I do attend your Ma-
jeſty there, you will permit me, before thoſe per-
* ſons whom you ſhall pleaſe to appoint, to give
* youan account of my adminiſtration, to Jay be-
fore you the ſtate in which 1 leave the affairs of
the kingdom, and the form I think neceflary to
be obſerved to keep them in the ſame order and
e tranquillity they are now. I muſt beg your Ma-
« jeſty to believe that this will be the ſole end cf

*© my journey, and that I have no intention to 40
ute

1610. O F S$ U IL. L I. 7

es fire to concern myſelf any farther in the ad mini-
„ ſtration of affairs. I believe I have ſettled every
thing relating to my employments in ſuch a man-
„e ner as the ſecretaries of the exchequer and the
other officers can certify to your Majeſty, that
„ my preſence may be diſpenſed with till the
latter end of the year; at which time, if my
„health will permit me, I ſhall not fail to come
to Paris, and pay all poſſible obedience to the
„King's commands and yours; and upon this truth,
„ | beſeech the Creator, &c. From Montrond,
October 12. 1610.”

> This was not what the Queen propoſed to herſelt

> from the ſtep ſhe had taken to recall me; ſhe per-
# ceived, that by delaying my return to court, I was
only forming excuſes for appearing there no more;
or that if 1 came, the part I would act there would
not be very proper to oblige thoſe who had deſerted
| her favourite, again to ſolicit his friendſhip, which
was all ſhe had in view; and to effect this, ſhe
made uſe of all my friends“ my wife, my fon, and

my ſon-in law particularly: ſhe began by an infinu-

| ating and gracious behaviour to them; ſhewed ſuch
| an unreſerved confidence in me, added ſo many kind
| expreſhons, and promiſes ſo flattering to their hopes,
that they were now more than ever confirmed in

their belief, that I ſhould commit a great error by

laying down my employments. She afterwards ſent

them, one after the other, to me, charged with the

{| moſt obliging letters, and the fulleſt aſſurances of her

favour and confidence. I endeavoured, but in vain,
to make them ſenſible, that all this was deep art on

Bouillon had orders to go to him (M. de Sully) at Potie,

on his return from his count y-ſcat, and to aſſure him of the

„Queen's regard for him, and that ſhe would place the ſame con-
* fidence in him the late King had. He accepted the Queen's (*
fer, &c. Hijt. de lu mere et du fils, vol. 1. Pp. 112.

H 2 the

r

*

r »* $
3

— Gare mom

|
1
N
q

——
5 —

—

6 NM E M O 1 R S Book XXIX.

the Queen's ſide. Their ſolicitations, their intreaties,
became perſecution, which at length fatigued me ſo
much, that being deſirous of avoiding reproaches, to
which l ſaw no end, and conſidering likewiſe that
my compliance with requeſts thus earneſtly urged,
would expoſe me to no inconveniencies for the pre-
ſent, I refolved to throw myſelf, though fairly warned
of my danger, into all the ſnares that were laid for
me at court, and again poſtponed the execution of my
firſt deſign. |

I therefore ſet forwards to Paris, but ſhewed no
great hurry of getting there, ſince I did not reach
that city till the ſixteenth day after my departure
from Montrond ®. The next morning, as | was
preparing to go and pay my reſpects to the King
and the Queen-regent, I was informed, that the
King would paſs the whole ſorenoon in the Tuilleries,
and that the Queen was to dine at Zamet's, I did
not doubt but that my attending her there would be
very acceptable to her; and indeed ſhe received me
in the moſt gracious manner imaginable: the ſeve-
ral times repeated, with an air of freedom, and even
pleaſure, by which I myſelf was almoſt impoſed up-
on, that ſhe would follow no other counſels but
mine. She intreated me to attach myſelf to her ſon,
az I had done to the late King: ſhe told me that ſhe
would not ſuffer me to lay down my employment;
that ſhe would take ſuch meaſures, that I ſhould exe-
cute them in an abſolute independence: and delired
me to begin with the accounts of the finances for
the year 1611, as I uſed to do; none of the miniſters
having ſhown themſelves willing to take this care up-
on them during my abſence, and the herſelf being deli-

One of the Duke of Sully's eſtates, where he built a very ſtrong
fortreſs, reckoned impregnable, the fortifications being cut in the
rock; and had acceſs only by a winding path, alſo hewn in the
rock,

rous

r . / .

but, wy on; 22 wp „

m—_ = _ © mg o& - --

-L

th

r -8UL L T. 77
rous that I ſhould continue to diſcharge it. The Queen
continued her diſcour i till dinner was ferved : I can
relate only a ſmall part of it. When the roſe from
table, ſhe entertained me with the diſputes that had
happened during the coronation”: ſhe informed me,
that the nobles had mate an infinite number of de-
mands, but that ſhe had reſolved to conclude nothing
till my return: however, he avoided ſaying any
thing particular on this head, hut only told me, that
ſhe would talk to me more full) the firſt opportunity,
and would let me know what were the ſervices ſhe
required of me on this occaſion : theſe words ſeemed
wholly free from reſerve. The whole court 2ppear-
ed fo gay, that it was but too probable this ſerious
converſation was extremely diſagreeable; according.
ly it gave place to others more common: and at
three o'clock the Queen returned to the Louvre.

[ went thither the next day, to pay my reſpects
to the King, to the Princes and Princelies his bro-
thers and ſiſters. This part of the court was ſtill
untainted; the governeſſes, the nurſes, the other
women and officers, which compoſed the houſehold
of theſe young, princes, formed a kind of ſeparate
people, to whom the memory of King Henry was
ſill dear: the fource of their tears and tamentations
was not yet dried up; I wept with them, while
we talked of that good prince; they conjured me,
by every motive which they thought could make
any impreflion upon my mind, by the friendthip
Henry had for me, by my attachment to him, not to
abandon the children of a father to whom! had now
no other way of acquitting my'elf of what J, owe!
him, Their intreaties and their tenderneſs Could
add nothing to thoſe ſentiments of gratitude and at.
fection which filled my heart, and, to our mutual
misfortune, could not increaſe my power of ſerving
them, Upon my attentively viewing the three
princes, I Sooke 1 diſcoveted in the countenance

H 3 atd

3 M E M OI R S Book XXIX.

and behaviour of the young King, ſtrong indications of
thoſe happy diſpoſitions which time has ſince ripened
and diſcloſed. I imparted my thoughts to my wife
when I returned home; but it was with grief that [
judged, heaven would not give a long life to the ſe-
cond of theſe princes *. |
I was viſited by almoſt the whole court, with all
thoſe falſe ſhews of friendſhip, thoſe praiſes and ci-
vilities, which never ſo nearly reſemble the true, as
when the heart has the leaſt ſhare in them. Conchi-
ni, who had taken care to have it inſinuated to me by
Zamet and I Argouges, that he was the perſon to
whom I was moſt obliged for the gracious reception
] had met with from the Queen, and for her kind
intentions towards me, walted three whole days in
expectation that I ſhould acknowledge this favour,
by making him a complimentary vil:t; which the
courtiers had accuſtomed him to look upon as a tri-
bute due to his great influence and authority; or that
J ſhou!d at leaſt ſend ſome perſon to diſcharge this
duty for me. However, as he neither ſaw me, nor
received any meſlage from me, he condeſcended at
length io make me a viſit ; but that I might not a-
ſume too much upon a flep by which he conceived
that he degraded himſelf, he was very careful to make
me ien{ibie that he came only upon his own buli-
neſs: and indeed our converſation turned chiefly up-
on his poſt of firit gentleman of the becchamber;
upon his penſions, which the Queen had ordered
ſhould be carried to account in the ſame manner as
. thoſe of Bellegarde ; and upon a gift which he bad

* This prince died the 16th or 15th of November in the next
car, at the age of four yeais and an half: a quantity of water
was found in his head; the too great thickneſs of the ſcull ſtop-

ping the perſpiration in that part; which proved the innocence of

Le Maitre, phyſician to the children of France, who was acculed
of having poiſoned this y: ung prince. Merc. Frang. aun. 1011.
P. 158.

latcly

1610. O0 F r 79

lately received out of the offices of the gabelle in

Languedoc, for which he had a brevet, obtained be-
fore the late King's death; but this I did not think
| proper to mention to him, I thought my anſwers to
all this were not calculated to inſpire him with any
inclination to quit the ſubject he was upon, and for
which he ſaid he had come to me ; yet he could not
help it: but I believe it was not long before he repent-
ed it; for having flided in, by way of advice, that
the beſt thing 1 couid do, would be to comply with
the Queen in all things, and accommodate myſeif
| wholly to her will, (which was tacitly charging me
with ruining my own affairs by my obſtinacy), I made
him this ſhort and ſevere anſwer, That I would pay an
exact obedience to all the commands of the Queen-
| regent, when they were for the ſervice of the King,
the advantage of affairs, and the relief of the people;
| and when my honour and my conſcience told me I
| might do it, without prejudicing either. Every word

: ; 8
he uttered ſeemed to increaſe the averſion I had to

him : he added ſomething more, but with that cau-
tion which my behaviour to him ſeemed to authoriſe,
l anſwered with equal coldneſs and reſerve, and we
parted very ill ſatistted with each other; he, 1 be-
leve, with fewer hopes than ever of moulding me
to his purpoſe ; and I ful} of grief at the advance-
ment of thoſe misfortunes which this preſumptuous
inſatiable man, without abilities, without experience,
yet inveſted with an abſolute authority, was bringing
upon France,

After this day's converſation, things appeared to
me to be greatly changed. The 3 whom [
went to wait upon at the Louvre, ſeemed to have
lot much of her former frankneſs; yet the conftrain-
ed herſelf to preſerve fome appearance of it, that the
alteration might not be too remarkable, and to hin-
der me from imputing it to the converſation J had
tie day before with Conchini. She again mentioned

to

n -- Ard 2

— —-< EY, 2 .

„ eee le et ho

— ney & - RD. x 2.

he — —

So MEM OI R S Book XXF*.

to me the importunate demands of the grandees,
taxed them with extravagance, andſeemed refolved to
refer them to the council; at which ſhe defired [
would always be preſent, to take care that nothing
paſſed there contrary to the intereſt of the King and
the ſtate. She promiſed me, upon her royal word,
preſenting her hand at the ſame time to me,.that ſhe
would ſupport me there as ftrenucuſly as the late
King had done. I loſt all my ſuſpicions at this de-
claration; I flattered myſelf for a moment that this
princeſs, having ſeriouſly reflected on all that bad
lately happened, was become ſenſible of the danger
of purſuing thoſe meaſures they wanted to engage
her in; but I was ſoon undeceived.

Prepared as I was for irregular proceedings, l
could not, without extreme ſurpriſe, ſee, that ſcatce-
ly any buſineſs was tranſated in the council, but
what related to gifts to the nobles, to augmentations
of the penſions to perſons in office, the paying of
debts which had been aboliſhed, the abatement of
farms, and diſcharges of the farmers, and revocations
of the contracts made for the rents, regiſtries, and
domains ; creation of new offices, exemptions, and
privileges; in a word, a thouſand ſchemes to render
the people miſerable, inſtead of applying the treaſures
amaſſed by the late King to their felief, as in juſtice
ought to have been done; fince the circumſtances ot
affairs were fo changed, that the deſign for which
they were raiſed could not be executed ; but the ra-
paciouſnefs of the great lords would have ſwallowed
ſums far more conſiderable. Here follow the de-
mands, which the chief amongſt them endeavoured
to oblige the Queen and the council to grant them.
It muſt not be expected here, that this article can ex-
tend itſelf into a regular account, as I am afraid the
other will appear, though I have cut off the demand
of trebling and doubling the penſions, as a matter
common to almoſt all the articles.

At

I

rr ., 9 UV'L 'L YT. 87
At the head of this liſt T ſhall put M. the Prince,

who cauſed me to be ſolicited ſometimes openly,
{ ſometimes in a covert manner, to ſupport his preten-
ſions to the government of Chatcau-Trompette, to
that of Blaye, and to the principality of Orange, ex-
© tended as far as the borders of tie Rhone. The Count
of Soiſſons demanded the government of the old pa-
lace of Rouen, that of the caſtle of Caen, and that
an edict on linen cloth ſhould be created for his pro-
fit, which I have mentioned in its place. The Duke
| of Lorrain demanded the payment of the whole ſum
expreſſed in his treaty, although J had ſettled this af-
fair a long time ago, when it was agreed, that that
| ſum (hould be reduced two thirds, The Duke of

Guiſe ſolicited for a marriage between himſelf and
Madame de Mont,enfer ; tor the revocation of the

| rights of patents in Provence, and of offices for col -
| lecting the duties at the gates of Marſeilles: he de-

manded likewiſe that his debts ſhould be paid. "The
Duke of Maine demanded other ſums, beſides thoſe
expreſſed in his treaty : D'Eguillon, a gift of thirty
thouſand crowns ; the government of Breſſe, and the
city of Bourg; and the embaſſy of Spain, with ex-
ceſſive appointments : Joinville, the government of
Auvergne, or the firſt that became vacant. The Duke
of Nevers demanded the property of the gabelles of
Rethelois, with the governments of Meziers and
daint Menchout : The Duke of Epernon, a body
of infantry kept conſtantly on foot; the reverſion of
his government for his ſon; fortifications to be rai-
fed at Angouleme and at Xaintes; Metz, and the
county of Methn, taken from Montigny. The Duke
of Bouillon demanded a ſum of money, for the pay-
ment of old debts, which he pretended were due to.
him; the aids, tailles, and gabelles of the viſcounty
of Turenne, to his uſe ; and that the homage of this.
viſcounty ſhould be reduced to a {imple homage ; the
arrears of his garriſons and his penſions during bis

exile;

82 I E M OI R S Book XXIX.

exile; the right of holding general aſſemblies of the
reformed religion. The Chancellor demanded the
money ariſing from the petty ſeals, bis ſalary to be
doubled, and letters of nobility in Normandy, Vi]-
leroi demanded, that a garriſon ſhould be maintain-
ed at Lyons, the royal lieutenancy of the province ta.
ken from Saint-Chaumont ; a marſhal's ſtaff for his
ſon D'Alincourt, the repeal of a bargain which [
had made for the repurchaſe of the crown- lands in
that province, and the mortgages of his regiſtries and
upon the King's lands.

It will be eaſily imagined that Conchini's demands
were not leſs conſiderable than thoſe of any other;
a Marſhal's ſtaff, the governments of Bourg, Dieppe,
and Pont. de- Jarche; a donation of the money produ-
ced by the offices of the gabelle of Languedoc, paſſed
in the form of a countant ; the profit ariſing from
the reduction made upon public works, granted to
Moiſſet and to Feydeau ; this was his portion. Cha-
teauvieux, the Chevalier de Sillery, Dolls, Deagent,
Arnaud the intendant, Duret the phyſician, all the
members of the Queen's private council, who ſolicit-
ed ſo well for others, did not forget their own affairs,
It would be almoſt the ſame thing to enumerate all
thoſe perſons of any quality who had a ſhare in this
profuſe diflribution of penſions, gratuities, privileges,
appointments, &c. as to name thoſe who were com-
prehended in this liſt, for every one had ſome claim
there ; the princes, governors of provinces, the lieu-
tenants- civil, the prevot des marchands, and even
the ſocieties and ſovereign courts; all the officers of
the crown were to have their penſions augmented
24,000 livres each *; and the ſalaries of every mem-
ber of the council raiſed in proportion, and their
number, to be conſiderably increaſed. In a word,
there ſeemed to be a general conſpiracy to pillage

A thouſaud pounds Sterling.

the

1610. oO F: SUL L/. 83

the royal treaſure, which was now conſidered as a
lawful prize.

The indignation which I felt in myſelf againſt a
| licentiouſneſs that degenerated into an attempt upon
the royal authority, would not permit me to exa-
mine, whether the refolution I had taken, fingly to
| oppoſe this multitude of rapacious courtiers, was
| abſolutely prudent ; but this nothing could perſuade
me from doing while the place | held in the coun-
| cil authoriſed ſuch a conduct. My honour, my con-
| ſcience, my reputation, which I was called upon to
| ſupport z the intereſt of the King and the people,
| whoſe only defender I conſidered myſelf; would not
permit me to attend to my own ſafety: the laſt
| words, nay, tke intreaties of the Queen- regent, gave
me a right to oppoſe them; and though I was very
| ſenſible that ſhe did not defire I ſhould underſtand
them literally, yet, all things conſidered, J was go-
ing to render her a ſervice ſo eſſential, that ſhe
| could not, or ought not to diſavow it: and yet I had
another motive, which I will not ſcruple to declare,
lince I would have my moſt ſecret ſentiments known
to the reader, "I hat deſire of glory, that ſelt-love,
which, when under the direction of reaſon and
juſtice, has always appeared to me to have ſome-
thing great and noble in it; ſelf love, I ſay, dictated
to me, that ſince, ſooner or later, I muſt neceſſarily
be removed from the miniſtry, I ſhould riſk but little
by haſtening the moment of my diimiffion ; and
that I ſhould gain a great deal by giving a convin-
cing proof, that this diſgrace would not have hap-
pened to me, had I not oppoſed the unjuſtifiable
meaſures I ſaw purſued by the council, and diſdained
the ſervile compliance of the reſt of the courtiers:
there remains to unhappy virtue this Jaſt recompenſe
for the diſappointment of its good deligns, that it
ſhines with redoubled ſplendor amidſt oppoſition and
perſecution,

The

D MEMOIR S Book XXIX.

The Queen ſoon leſt me only this conſolation in
the painful labours I began to ſuſtain ; all her con-
duct ſerved to thew me, that ſhe had only recalled
me to Paris, and oppoſed me to the whole court at
this tumultuous time, to reduce me to the fatal al.
ternative of incurring the public contempt if I be-
trayed my duty, or particular enemies (which was
ſtill more to be dreaded) if I d\\{charged it. A de-
mand, which I had rendered of no effect in full
council, at the riſk of making myſelf a thouſand
crue] and implacable cnemies, was afrerwards pri-
vately granted as a gratuity by this princels and her
confident,

It is not my deſign to give a detail of all the
ſchemes that, during "this ſhort time, were {et on
foot in the council, nor of what was faid or done
to render them ineffectual ; it would be, | in reality,
to deſciibe ſo many ſuits, where, as in law, they
did not fail to make uſe of all the methods com-
monly practiſed to corrupt a judge too rigidly juſt,
and againſt which I was ſo much the more incited
to exclaim, as they attempted likewiſe to carry their
point, either by ſecret plots or by open cabals. [
ſhall give the reader one example, which will terve
to ſhew, that the evil was great enough to de—
mand remedies no leſs violent than thoſe | made uſe
of. The article relating to Villeroi, or rather his
ton D'Alincourt, is not the leaſt curious or impurt-
ant of thoſe which the reader has already had fume
account of, *

When D'Alincourt demanded, that a ſtrong gar-
riſon ſhould be placed in the city of Lyons. of which
he was governor, and maintained at the King's ex-
penſe, he had two ends to anſwer by it; one Was,
to increaſe his income, by the profits ariſing from
this garriſon; for indeed he had occaſion for great
riches, to enable him to live as he propoſed to do,
not merely as a marſhal of F rance, (a dignity which

E

—

1610. Seer v. 85

he expected to be raiſed to in a very little time), but
with the ſtate and retinue of a prince: vain
pageantty, and doubly ridiculous in one who had
only money to- ſupply the diſadvantages of a mean
birth. The other: was, to compel the Lyonnois,
by the terror with which ſo many forces would in-
ſpire them, to ſacrifice to him their moſt ancient
rights and privileges, which for a long time he had
a deſign to fall upon. As for the treaty made for
the redemption of the royal domain, which in that
province amounted to 1. 200, oco livres, he was in-
clined to demand the ſuppreſſion of it, becauſe thoſe
that were concerned in that affair ſecured to him a
preſent of 100,000 livres *, if he could by any
means hinder that redemption from taking place.
His deſigns, however, were croſſed by two vigi-
lant enemies; theſe were, the whole city of Lyons,
and St Chaumont, the King's lieutenant in that
province ; but to theſe he oppoſed the Chancellor
villery, and Villeroi his father, both very powerful
in the council, and in high favour with the Queen;
theſe he ſet on to ſolicit for him, and with the more
exzerneſs, becauſe he found by my diſcourſe, when
he came to intreat me to be favourable to his pre-
tenfions, that he could not depend upon me in the
council, before whom theſe demands were to be
aid; he ſaw plainly, that he would have occaſion
for all his batteries; but he did not doubt of his
ſucceſs, when he was informed that his father and
villery had brought over Conchini to his party, who

iterwards prevailed upon the Queen to eſpouſe it

ikewiſe, |
We were all aſſembled in the great cloſet, where
council was to be held upon this affair, when the
Veen came up and ſpoke to me in favour of D'Alin-
tourt. I told her Majeſty, with great frankneſs, that
be muſt not expect I would give my vote in favour
* 100,000 livres is L. 4166: 13: 4 Sterling.

Vol. V. 1 of

i
ä
:

.

U
"oy
\ n
. 7
.

*
*
35
”-

.
i;

*
o
.

U

4

*

y

, 1
4
.
1
{
\
15
6
0
af}
'$/

ul. 2" — of . bs bs. Þ " k — aa
pry

% M E MOI R Ss Book XXIX.

of two ſuch unjuſt propoſals; that it was not reaſon-
able the King ſhould loſe 1,200,000 livres, to put
100,000 in the pocket of M. D'Alincourt ; that this
was to open the way for every one elſe to get the
| like treaties for redemption of the domain, and other
parts of the royal revenue, which amounted to near
fiſty millions, revoked over all the kingdom: that
J would as ſtrenuouſly oppoſe his other demand, al-
though I knew it would be alledged, that the council
had no right to take cogniſance of it, and that it
was only laid before it to get the firſt authoriſed;
that by theſe meaſures we were going to expoſe
one of the chicf cities of the kingdom, hitherto well
affected and loyal, to the danger of violating their
allegiance, merely to gratify an unreaſonable re.
queſt, fince by the laſt treaty, which I myſelf had
concluded with Cardinal Aldobrandin for the Duke
of Savoy, his Majeſty being to keep poſſeſſion of
Breſſe, and of both the borders of the Rhone,
Lyons was no longer a frontier-city, and having no
more neighbours to fear, had no farther occaſion for
a garriſon in it.

The Queen ſeemed to be ſatisfied with theſe rea-
ſons, and turned towards Villeroi, as if to make him
approve of them likewiſe; but he was not ſo eaſily
repulſed, he gave her reaſons in anſwer to mine,
ſome good and ſome bad; and when he came to
the article of the garriſon, he told her, that it was
indeed true, the Spaniards and Savoyards were not
ſuch near neighbours of this city as formerly, there-
fore it was not againſt their attempts that it was ne-
cellary to ſecure the city of Lyons, fince they were
moreover upon the point of becoming our friends
and allies, but that the true enemies to be feared
were the Huguenots, who being now in a better con-
dition, had probably a greater inclination than ever
to make an attempt upon that city; he named Lel-
diguieres in particular, as one from whom moſt dan-
ger was to be apprehended. |

| Berengueville

T 8 JL F. 87

Berengueville overheard what Villeroi ſaid to the
Queen, and repeated every word to me: this con-
firmed to me the truth of what I had heard concern -

ing the ſecret council held at the houſe of Ubal-
dini, the Pope's nuncio. I ſaw with indignation,

that the ſole view of theſe gentlemen was to ſet the
Catholics and Proteſtants in France by the ears, as

well as in all Europe. I was no leſs ſhocked at
| Villeroi's accuſation of a man allied to my family
| and riſing up haſtily, I went towards the Queen,

who was ſtill liſtening to him, and told her, that I

| had forgot to forewarn her of a thing which I was
as well aſſured of as if I had been a witneſs of it; and

this was, that Villetoi, in his defign of rendering
her favourable to his ſon's pretenſions, cared but

little by what means this was brought about; and did

not ſcruple to make the moſt falſe and moſt malignant
repreſentations againſt the Proteſtants, without even
excepting one, whom a thouſand great and good
ſervices ought to place out of the reach of tuſpicion ;
that his malice went ſo far as to treat them as ene-
mies, whom France had more reaſon to fear than
Spain itſelf; that if her Majeſty, judging Villeroi's
arguments and mine to be of equa] weight, ſhould
reſolve to behold the Proteſtants and the Spaniards
in the ſame light, nothing remained for her to do
(and I looked ſtedfaſtly upon him) but to exclude
us both from the council. This was a ſevere ſtroke
upon Villeroi: but this man, who had neither abi-
lities to ſpeak in public, nor knew how to give his
vote in the council, had not a ſingle word to ſay in
anſwer to me; indeed his ſurpriſe, and the ſecret
reproaches of his own conſcience, might well ten-

der him dumb upon this occaſion : all he did, was

to go to that part of the room where the Chan-

cellor and the Duke of Epernon were conferring.

together; and the Queen alſo, quitting her place
without, anſwering me, went to join the Count of
12 Soiſſons

—
—

—ͤ ä — — — ſ mn = - ä —— — : - — EN
— — — — — — - — 2 - 2 => 7 C ” 1 2 7 — - — — — — - *
. — — — 2 _——_ = =" " - - — — e "> aan * — ap
5 La VE 2 - — k _ - 2 . —
7 4 — —— — — =>" * — — — w 2:7 L 2
— + > — 2 LO A — - _ _
e - — i ai 22 een — > - —
— = 4 ay. — — — — = * 2 Y
8 = * . — 1 wy * K 2 m => — _ * -- *
4 - — - i 1 * + 8 1
* 5 : . 83 > , .
s — 4. 2 — — 2 . 0 — . *
* 2 0 —_— > . . 4 > — - — "TE — -
* X — —. — — — — 7 * _ *
- 2 5 4 - — — a —_ — 4 = *

—
pa

-

% MEMOIR S Book XXIX.

Soiſſons and Marechal Briſſac, who were talking in
private. I forboded no good from theſe ſeveral con-
nections.

Nothing being done this day in D'Alincourt's af-
fair, and I ſometimes flattered myſelf that the mea-
ſures I had taken would hinder it from being reſu-
med; but it was only put off till his father and him-
felf, the Chancelor and his brother, by new cabals
with Conchini and the counſellors, ſecured all the
votes in their favour, even that of Bethune my bro-
ther, who came to me with an intention to make
one effort more to ſoften me: he repreſented to me,
that my oppoſition was in vain, and would have no
other conſequence but to bring every body upon my
back; that I ſhould have the mortification to ſce
that my example would not be followed even by my
neareſt relations. I replied, that I never expected
any thing elſe from him, but that I was abſolutely
determined to continue to the end faithful in the
performance of my duty. And I kept my word: for
in the firſt council that was held on this occaſion,
ſeeing that the counſellor to whoſe charge it fell
that day, was ready to make his report, I aſked him
haſtily, what was the buſineſs? he replied, that it
related to ſome propoſals which were to be made
concerning the domain in Lyonnois. I interrupted
him, ſaying, that I was well aſſured D' Alincoutt,
who was moſt intereſted in that affair, had formed
ſo ſtrong a party for him in the council, by the me-
diation of his friends and relations, that it was al-
ready reſolved on, even before it was laid before it;
but that I proteſted againſt it, as being abſolutely
contrary to his Majeſty's intereſt; and Pat I deſired

a certificate of my diſſent from the clerk, to ſend
it to the parliament to be regiſtered there, in
order that this writing might one day ſerve to
how the King the bad conduct purſued by bis

council

| ceſſor *.

1610. O F . 39

council after the death of the King his prede-

Theſe laſt words, which, it muſt be granted, were

very ſevere, had no other effect, than to ſulpend, for

A

This account perfectly agrees with what is ſaid in L'hiſtoſre
de la mere ct du fils. The Duke of Sully,“ ſays that hiſtorian,
continued to exerciſe his office for a fortnight or three weeks

| after the coronation was performed, at which time the düputes on

zecount of the Swiſs at Lyons, which I have ſpoke ot before,
were renewed, becauſe Villeroi wanted to have their pay charged

on the general receipts of that city. The Duke of Sully was fo-
much out of temper on this ſcore, that, not content with main—

taining, it was unreaſonable to load the King with ſo great an ex-
penſe, when the inhabitants of Lyons were ſaftieicnt to kery
guard themſelves, as they had always been uſed to do; he allo
treated the Chancellor, who {ded with Villeroi, roughly, tellmg.
him, they were all agreed amongſt themſclves to ruin the King's
affairs. As this was an affront to all theſe miniſters in common,

| they joined their endeavours to ruin the Duke, the harſtnefG of
whoſe temper was not to be ſoftened This writer afterwards +

relates the ſcveral ſteps that were taken to unite the miniſters wich
the Count of Soiſſuns, the Marquis d' Ancre, the Marquis of Cezuvrics,
and others, againſt tlie Duke of Sully. This author being an e-
nemy of the Duke of Sully, I quote him to prove whatthe Duke
alerts. that he might have kept all his poſts, if he had gone into
the meaſures of the new council; and that his perſ.verance in the
ſupport of juſtice, the public intcreſt, and the late King's plan of
government, was the cauſe of his diſyrace. All men of ſents
have not, however, given the fame judgment on his inflexibitiry
with the author I am (peaking of, though all the enemies of that
miniſter have agreed with him in it. In the appendix 10 tl. e
Merc. Fran for the year 1610, p: 9. we find an entire difcourt?
on this ſubject, which juttifies him in a manner extremely to his
honour. The Memoirs de Villcrei, vol. 3. p. 259. alſo ſpeak
of him in the following manner. © The change which the ſaid
dicur de Sully made in the condition of France, by retrieving her
from a (tate of indigence, and rendering her rich and opulent, by
his economy and induſtry, ſufficicnily proves his abilitics: lis free
remonſtrances to the King, and his oppoſition to all gicat men,
diſcover his probity; and his having been able to ſtand his ground
amongſt ſo many enemies, without fnking under his own ap-
pehenfions, or their threats, ſhews how great were his prudence
and courage: even thoſe uho envy him, are compelled to own,
hat he alone is more uſeful to the public, and has more know-
kdye of buſineſs, than all the reſt together; and provided he
would abate a little of lis auttcrity, be would. be a ſr vant wor-

13 thy

— —
» -V A -
1 — 8
* -
— 9

11
106457
4 488!
1
4 Mt
7 45
4 14
* [1 |
* |
us I: P
i 15
Wy 2
1140
WS |
\ 48}
A a 1
; 1 7
iſ 4

oo M E M O 1 R S Book XXIX.

a ſhort time, the deliberation they were preparing
for. No one replied; a general conſternation ſei-
zed all that were preſent: the Chancellor alone,
without ſhewing any emotion, ſaid to the Counſel-
lor, © Lay other papers before us, and Jet us pro-
„ ceed to affairs of a different kind; we ſha)! find
« a time for this when theſe heats and animoſities
« are over, as it generally happens in things that are
« moſt conteſted.” The Counſellor obeyed; the
other matters were diſcuſſed; D'Alincourt's de-
mand, when it was next laid before the council, was
granted without oppoſition: but this was not till!
myſelf was banifhed from the board; which hay-
pened in ſo fhort a time afterwards, that it may be
ſaid it was by this vigorous effort I finiſhed my
Career.

Nothing now remained for me, but to retire from
court; after having given ſuſſicicnt proofs to all
France, that it was not for want of the utmaſt efforts
on my ſide that the affairs of the ſtate were plunged
into diforder: it was become impoſſible for me to
ſtop the torrent of the increaſing evil. This no
one dou! ted of: I ſtruggled to no purpoſe ; and a
that I had for the price of my labours and my good
intentions, was the hatred of rhoſe perſuns whoſe
intereſt it would have teen to ſecond me: Conchin
employed his favour, the pr.nces of the bluod their
authority, the other perſons in office their credit,
only to render me odious. I ſaw nothing preparing
for me for the ſuture, but new mortifications ard
other troubles. All my actions, my words, ny,
even my ſilence itſelf, witnetled againſt perſons who

thy of your Majeſty. Though they endeavour to keep h m from
having any concern in the management of affairs, yet that can
not (top him from trecly ſpraking his fentiments of the little re-
ſpe paid to the memory of the Late King, and of the mall de-
ference ſheu to our young prince,” &c. Ses alſo the manuicitpt
diſcourſe cited by us in the preface to this wok.

were

Noty

coun
the (
artahl
hnan
Licu
Laue
caſt!,

, FT, 91

were inwardly ſtruck with the injuſtice of theſe re-
proaches. My poſt of ſuperintendant of the fi-
nances was eagerly coveted by two princes of the
ood, each of whom was made to hope that he
ſhould gain it when 1 was driven from court. By
ſtaying there too long, I expoſed myſelf to the _
ger of being violently diſpoſſeſſed of all my oth
employments. Thoſe of my friends who were wad
ſincere, and beſt knew the plots that were forming
againſt me, were continually giving me counſels
which I was convinced deſerved to have more weight
with me, than the ſolicitations of ſome of my rela-
tions, who were either carried away by a miſtaken
tenderneſs for me, or a regard to their own intereſt,
I therefore reſolved to defer no longer the ic ftgna-
tion of my two employments, of ſuperintendant of
the finances, and governor of the Baſtile, which were
the moſt panted atter, as by them they could diſpoſe
of the revenues and treaſures of the King, hoping
to purchaſe by this ſacrifice, which might have ſtil]
ſome appearance of being voluntary, the confirma-
ton of ail my other dignities * which it was not
in the power of my enemies to deprive me cf, eſpe—
cia'ly if, I took the precaution of removing for ever
out of their ſight an object which could never fail
cf reanimating their hatred, by the eff: of a
jealouſy unavoicable, while I continued amongſt

1611.

| "OA "PEGS.

—

—

2 — — 22 ho. = — _ a
2 ” —
— - a — = 2
— 4 — 9
— —
— — - =

—
©.
—

A * N * PR - U
. — — — 7
*

—
— = 8 * =
- — *

1 — 28 *

— —

— d

- r — -
2
= 1 x

— —
— — *
3 I:

. * 1 mw _

—

8

| * The Duke of Sully at that time bore the following titles:
| Maximilian de Bethune, Right, Duke of Sully, Peer of France,
Syyercign Prince of Hemichemont and Boiſbelie, Marquis of Roſuy.
Count of Dourand, Lord of Orval, Montrond, and St Amard,
) Baron of FEſpincnil, Bruyeres le Chaſtel, Villebon, La Chapelle,
Notvion, Baguay, and Bontin, Chancellor to the King in all the
conne'ls, Captain Lieutenant of two hundred gens d'armes under
1 the Queen's command, Grand Maſter and Captain-Gen-ra! of the
artillery, Surveyor-General of France, Superintendant of the King's
finances, to: tifications, and buildings, Governor, and the King's
- Lieutenant General of the provinces of Poitou, Chatellcraud, and
t Laudun, Governor of Mante and Gergeau, and Captain of the
calt!e of the Baſtile.

- | | them;

"WM
T4
TN
aff
4 '
" 4
wu
1
7
.
˖ |
W
'"
1
5
*
li 4
.
y 10
44%
4a
7
wi
.
19
1 1
1
* 11
64
{338
"
,
=
[ i

—— FR 2 = —
— Tn — — * _— > *

— = .

o2 M E M. OI R S Book XXIX.

them; and, that I might do all at once, I fixed my-
ſelf in a reſolution to quit the court, and Paris itſelf,
at the ſame time that I reſigned all further ſhare in
the adminiſtration of affairs.

] prepared to execute this deſign in the begin.
ning of the year 1611 *, The Queen appeared de-

ſirous

* Here follow ſcveral accounts of this event, very different one
from the other. The year 1611 was begun with the retirement
of M. de Sully, who, at the inſtigation, and by the intrigues of the
two princes of the Mood, was drove from the management of at-
fairs. The ſuperintendance of the finances, and the cuſtody of the
King's treaſures, were taken from kim. The Queen alſo took che
Baſtile out of his hands, and gave the guſtody thereof to M. de
Chateauneuf | it ſhould be Chatcauvieux]. The finances were put
under the Airection of Mefl. de Chateauneuf, the reſident De
Thou, and Jcannin; but the lat was alſo made comprtroller generel
of the finances, which threw the ſole management of them into
his hands, to the excluſion of the other two, who aſſiſted only in
the direction.“ Baſſampierre's Memcars, vl. 1. p. 308.

* The 24th of this month [Janvary] M. de Sully quittcd the
arſenal. There is a report that a brevet is iſſucd to appotat him
Marſhil of France, with a grant of tome thouſands of crowns as 2
recompenſe to him. He has voluntarily reſigned the direction of
the finances, tanguam e ſpeculs previdens tempeſiatem fuilirain.”
Journal de L' Etoile, p. 256.

** The Prince of Condé and the Count of Soiſſens ſpoke the
firlt of it to the Queen, the miniſters ſeconded them, and the Nier-
quis of Ancre gave him the finiſhing ſtroke. Thus he found Eim—
iclt.under the neceſſity of retiring in the beginning of February,”
&c. Hiſt. de la mere et du ils. vol. 2. p. 235.

© Some have written that the Duke of Sully, ſhortly after the
reconciliation of the Count of Soiſſous and the Duke of Guiſe, vo-
luntarily reſigned into the Queen's hands, as well the Baſtde as the
ſuperintendancy of the finances. Others fay, that making an offer
to the Queen to give up all his poſts, he was taken at bis word:
others have ſpoken differently of it. He himſelf fays the contrary
in the letter he wrote to the Queen, which was printed ſhortly at-
ter.” Merc. Franc. anno 1611.

This letter is afterwards recited, but is not mentioned in Sul-
l!y's Memoirs. The Memoirs of the regency of Mary de Medicts,

vol. 1. p. 57. differ alſo from the foregoing accounts, aſſerting, that
the Duke of Sully carneſtly ſolicited the Qucen to diſmiis him,
which the with great reluctance conſented to. The truth proba-
bly lies betwixt theſe two opinions: that is, the Duke without doubt
would have bcen glad to Keep his poſts, provided he could have "

| 393%

9

A
**
111 : 6 At ta

joye:
tisfad
purp«
him,
woul.
dant
n th
death
the ſ
and t
ruin.
from
This
woul.
of th.
readil
one ©
of th
drawt
difñcu
dice 1
Queer
bove t
him r
wife a
accorc
drew
ew:
him f
trom |

OC $ULLE 93

ſious of oppoſing it; but this was only for form”*
ſake. Here follows the letter ſhe wrote to me up-
on this occaſion.

&« Couſin,
& J hear, with concern, that you have taken are-
&« ſolution to diſcharge yourſelf of the care of the
« King my ſon's affairs, particularly of thoſe rela-
e ting to the finances, contrary to the hope I had con-
e ceived, that you would continue to perform the
« duties of that employment as you did in the time
« of the late King my Lord. I intreat you to _
„ wel

joyed them with the ſame authority, though not with the ſame ſa-
tisfation, as under the late King; but the efforts he made for that
purpoſe diſguſted the Queen, the great men, and the miniſters from
bim, and at laſt increaſed his chagrine as he found all his endeavours
would be in vain. There is nothing in Matthicu's account diſeor—
dant with this notion; on the contrary, he agrecs to what is ſaid
in theſe Memoirs. The Duke of Sully,“ Rye he, * after the
death of Henry the Great, immediately ſaw he ſhould not poſſeſs
the ſame authority under the new reign as he did under the laſt;
and that the ennuty of the Count of Soiſſons would bring on his.
ruin. As the direction of the finances had already been taken
from him, the Queen was adviſed to deprive him alſo of the Baſtile.
This was eſteemed ſo bold a ſtep, that it was ſaid Henry the Great
would not have darcd to have taken it for fear of ſtirring up thoſe
of the Duke's religion to reſent it. She, nevertheleſs, ſaw him
readily obey her command to reſign the Baſtile to Chàteauvieux,
one of her knights of honour. Had he made any oppoſition, ſome
of the great men at court, who were afraid his ſteadineſs might be
drawn into precedent, would have rendered this diſmiſſion more
difncult. As ſoon as he was ſtript of this office, he ſaw the preju-
dice reſulting from his having fo eaſily ſubmitted ; and deſired the
Queen's permiſſion to go to Roſny, ſaying, he would not ſtay there a-
bove three days. When he was there, thoſe of his religion cautianed
him not 40 go back to court, where he had been ſo ill treated. His
wife and brother on the cotitrary urged him to return, and he did ſo
accordingly ; but thoſe who had been of the oppoſite opinion with-
dtew themiclves from him, eſteeming it a meanneſs in him not to
hew a greater reſentment for ſuch ill uſage. The Queen received
dim favourably ; but the Count of Soiflons cauſed him to be kept
rom having any concern in buſtacſs, which had been ſo much under

his

o4 ME MO IR S Book XXIX.

« well of this deſign before you put it into execution,
« and let me know your laſt determination, that [
« may regulate mine upon it. So beſeeching God,”
&c,

Paris, Jan. 24. 1617. 2

My anſwer to this letter being ſuch as the Queen
probably expected, ſhe ſent Bouillon to me two days
afterwards with the brevets of diſcharge from my two
employments, of ſuperintendant of the finances, and
governor of the Baſtile, in the moſt authentic form,
and, at the ſame time, moſt advantageous for me. Her
Majeſty in theſe brevets declared, that it was at my
repeated ſolicitation ſhe had granted me leave to re-
ſign theſe places; and that 1 ſhould not hereafter,
upon any pretence whatever, be queſtioned concern -
ing my conduct while I held them.

To theſe brevets was added another, dated Janu-
ary 27. by which her Majeſty, in conſideration of
the ſervices the late King had received from me du—
ring a long courſe of years, and of which ſhe made
a moſt honourable mention, granted me a donation
of three hundred thouſand livres *, to be paid out of
the royal treaſury, free from the duty of the fifth ard
tenth penny, and the duty given to the order of the
Holy Ghoſt, from which his Majeſty was defirous [
ſhould be exempted. The letters I received the fol-

his immediate management in the late King's reign. Secing himſclf
thus fallen both from his eredit and employments, he went to Sully;
and not thinking himſelf in ſafety enough there, he retired into the
province of Bourbon.“ This writer adds, that one of the principal
motives which induced the Proteſtants to endeavour to increale his
diſcontent, was their deliie of having his great fortune engaged for
the advantage of the common cauſe : but that he ſubmitted to the

prudent advice given him by La-Vallce, the licutenant-general of

the artillery, who has been mentioned bethre, to keep himicli
nite retired, without having any concern in the quarrels which
don after happened. Ib. p. 22.
* 300,100 livres, is L. 12,50 Sterling

lowing

1611, O F . 95

lowing days from their Majeſties, either contained
orders to give up the caſtle of the Baſtile to the Sieur
de Chateauvieux, whom they had made King's lieu-
tenant of it; or acquittals for ſome jewels of the
crown which I had delivered back into their hands,
part of which conſiſted of a jewel called the Licorne,
and ſome other rings and jewels, for which a pro-
miſſory note of mine for ten thouſand livres was
lodged with Puget, who now returned it to me, and
part of three large rubies, for which I had given my
receipt to Madame Le-Grand, when I took them
out of her hands, where they were mortgaged.

The remainder of the time ] ſtaid in Paris was em-
ployed in regulating my domeſtic affairs, in a detail
of which the reader would find nothing to merit his
attention, except probably the counſels I gave to my
ſecretaries. I had generally fix principal ones, as well
for the buſineſs of my four chief offices of the crown,
as for any extraordinary affairs I might have to tranſ-
act with the court, and I found it necefiary to have
a great many other clerks or tranſc:ibers under them:
but thoſe I ſhall mention here were my chief ſecre-
taries, whoſe abilities and exact diſcharge of their ſe-
veral duties well deferved that I ſhould give them a
ſhare in affairs of importance, and my confidence in
nice and delicate conjunctures; among theſe, the four
brothers of the name of Arnaud were favoured in a
particular manner by me. The eldeſt died while he
was yet young, many years before the King was aſ-
ſaſfinated. I had ſo great a regard for the ſecond,
that from being my ſecretary only, I procured him to
be made counſellor of ſtate, and intendant ofthe finan-
ces: the third went into the army, and was made a
colonel of a regiment of horſe : and to the laſt I gave
the poſt of treaſurer of France, and that of overſcer of
the highways. All my other ſecretaries were provi-
ded for in proportion. U believe 1 ſhall not be accu-
led of having broken one of the laws of nature, which

directs

Mm —_——_—— + ˖ 2 .

% NM E M OI RS Book XXIX.

directs that the adherents to us, or perhaps we ſay
more properly, to our places, ſhould not be diſappoint.
ed of thoſe rewards, which it is in our power to be-
ſtow upon them according to their merit. Duret
was preferred to be a treaſurer of France, preſident
of the chamber of accounts, and comptroller-gene-
ral of the finances; Renouard was made auditor of
accounts; La-Clavelle overſeer of the bridges and

cauſeys; Du-Maurier, who had quited the Duke
of Bovilion's ſervice for mine, was employed in
-public affairs, to which his genius and inclination
Jed him, and has been fince ambaſlador to Holland ;

Murat was made treaſurer of the extraordinary of
war; La-Font, whom TI have often mentioned in
theſe Memoirs, acquired the favour and confidence
of the late King, who, among other benefits that he
beſtowed upon him, made him overſeer of his fur-
niture; Gillot was made ſecretary of the ordnance,
All theſe men were truly ſenſible how much they
were going to loſe by my retreat, and they omitted
no ſort of intreaties or methods to prevail upon me
to alter my reſolution. I will do moſt of them the
juſtice to declare, that I believe, by acting thus, they
thought they were ſerving my intereſt at leaſt as
much as their own : but as for the two Arnauds, the
eldeſt eſpecially, and two or three more, they were
but little affected with my purpoſe. They would
even have been grieved if | had altered my opinion;
yet it was they who oppoſed it moſt. Arnaud the
elder added, on this occaſion, hypocriſy to avarice
and ingratitude: meanly as he thought of Jeannin's
abilities for the office of ſuperintendant of the finan-
ces, for which he looked upon himſelf as much bet-
ter qualified, he was one of'thoſe who ſolicited Con-
chini moſt earneſtly to procure it for that miniſter,
who he flattered himſelf would leave the chief mana-
gement of it to him. 1

i. OF 8 UL I. V. 97

I penetrated into the inmoſt receſſes of their
hearts: I diſcovered views and deſigns which they
robably imagined were ſufficiently concealed ; but
| ſuppreſſed a reſentment unworthy of me; and,
taking them aſide one after the other, I gave them
ſuch advice as, from the preſent conjuncture of the
times, and the knowledge I had of their diſpoſitions, -
was moſt likely to advance their fortunes. I told the
elder Arnaud, that he had it in his power to make

his court very ſucceſsfully to the Queen, by the great

number of excellent memoirs upon the moſt impor-
tant affairs of the finances, which were lodged in his
hands; and, that this ſacrifice might loſe no part of
its merit, I adviſed him to offer it by Madame de
Conchini, ſeriouſly recommending it to him, at the
fame time, to devote himſelf faithfully to her ſer-
vice. I adviſed his brother to uſe his utmoſt endeavours
to obtain the favour of the Chancellor, of Villeroi,
Jeannin, and, above all, Conchini's, who was the
only oracle which it was neceflaryfor him to conſult
in the exerciſe of his employment; and 1 deſired
the Colonel himſelf to make his court to thoſe very
etſons.
F Duret, beſides -all thoſe, might apply himſelf to
the commander “ and to Dolle; and this I recom-
mended to him to do. Du-Maurier needed only to
be made known to Villeroi, by carefully cultivating
his friendſhip, which I aſſured him would be ſuffi-
cient ; and with the knowledge he had of foreign
affairs, joined to the talents he poſſeſſed of ſpeaking
well, and of writing ſtill better, he might eaſily ob-
tain of the Queen and the favourite, ſome honourable
employment. To Murat, who was accountable
for his conduct to the ſecretary of ftate, I recom-
mended my intereſts at court; but to diſcharge this
trult cautiouſly, and not without firſt aſking Villeroi's

Noel de Siflery, brother to the Chancellor,
Vor. V, . K conſent.

os M E M O IR 8 Book XXIX

conſent. As for La- Clavelle, his ſubtile wit and
proneneſs to flattery ſecured him all poſſible ſuccef
with the miniſters, and even with D'Eſcures, who
had more power. than any body elſe to block up his
way in the diſcharge of his office. La-Font's em-
ployment ſubjecting him wholly.to the Queen's will,
or rather to Conchini's, he had but one part to fol-
low, which I pointed out to him. The advice J
gave to Renouard, was not to ſeek any other recom-
mendation from his own court, except the impor-
tance which the force of his . underſtanding might
give him amongſt his aſſociates; and I defired he
would to this employment add that of taking care
of my domeſtic affairs at Paris. Gillot I placed
with my ſon, to ſuperintend the affairs of the ord-
nance; and, that every thing might be kept in the
ſame order in which I had left it, I gave to my in-
ferior ſecretaries and clerks ſuch. advice as I thought
- molt ſuitable to their humbler ſtation, and obliged
thoſe who ſhewed moſt reluQance to comply with
my meaſures, to confeſs at length, chat, in what!
had recommended to them, I had a particular view
to that neceſſity which ſooner or later would force
them to follow the rules I had preſcribed. This!
accompanied with a compliment to each, and an
. obliging command to follow my directions, which
had ſuch an appearance of ſincerity, that they yielded
to my arguments; and they have not, repented. |
had no intention, however, to keep no more ſecre-
taries .in my ſervice; but, being now out of place
myſelf, I had no occaſion for men that were in, for
this employment. I therefore, took two new ſecre-
taries into my family, whoſe chief buſineſs, in a ca-
binet no longer occupied with the affairs of ſtate,
was collecting and preparing theſe Memoirs for the
ublic. Y ;
; This done, and burying in eternal oblivion thoſc

hopes, deſires, reſentments, and regrets, which any
| | other

he

ofc
any
het

n FF S U L L Y. 99

other in my ſituation might have formed, I bid a
Jaſting adieu to the court, and with the ſame inditter-
ence as if it had not for ſo long a courſe of years been
to me the theatre of glory, wealth, and happineſs “.
Iloſt at one ſtroke a king who was my bene factor
and my ſupport, and with him my fortune, my
friends, and my'favour. This loſs generally brings
along with it ſo many other mortifications, that, to
thoſe who have ſuffered it, it appears but the leaſt
part of their unhappineſs. If this additional ill for-
tune is always the effect of particular enmities, cer-
tainly no one was more expoſed to them than my-
ſelf; yet hiſtory can furniſh but few examples of
miniſters and favourites in diſgrace who were as much
honoured and reſpeRed in their fall as | was: for it
fometimes happens, that public eſteem ſucceeds to
particular favour in ſupporting thoſe who are untor-
tunate only; and when it does not form a counter-
weight ſtrong enough to incline the balance to their
ſide, it is becauſe theſe ſuppoſed oppreſſed perſons
have always ſome weak place by which they may be
attacked, and which they find it very difficult to de-
fend. Acknowledged probity and innocence will
always have the advantage over envy, even at the
very time when it ſeems moſt to triumph. My e-
nemies therefore. (for I have a right to apply this
maxim to myſelf) could fatisfy but a ſmall part
of their rage againſt me, becauſe the victory they
had gained was one of thoſe ſhameful advantages

which it is thought neceſſary to conceal, and which

is not enjoyed wholly without remorſe: nor did
the ſatisfaction my enemies felt for my diſgrace,
hinder ſome true Frenchmen, who eagerly em-

On Saturday the 5th of February, the Duke of Sully left
Paris, after returning the grant he had received of 100,000
crowns: -» The Ducheſs of- Sully blamed his haughtineG and pride
in doing ſo. L"Etoile, ib. p.257. | |

K 2 braced

— —
* 2
— —
— —— TE
— — ” S
ws 7. AGAR

— — —

=

- —

— — ww.
m- 2 —
—
— aA —
=

: 7 4 = -—
— * - + © ow — q 5
— a — — — - CY
-— -Y _ — In — 72
= * 2 — — =

pp N
4 2 —
oy - 12
3 — — —
- b _
—- : - 7 "> 1 I
- —_— —

—

xo M E M OI R $ Bock XXIX.

braced every occaſion of ſhewing their reſpect for
the memory of the late King, ; honouring a
man who expected no more than to ſet out on
his exile in privacy and peace. I was attended,
at my leaving Paris, by more than three hundred
horſe. 2

It was not while I was preſent, and in a condition
to defend myſelf, that I expected to ſee my enemies
uſe their utmoſt efforts againſt me. Envy ĩ a paſſion
whoſe characteriſtic is cowardice, no leſs than ma-
lice and detraction. I was always perſuaded that
they would ſeize eagerly the advantages my abſence
afforded them. In effect, a few days were ſcaice
elapſed after my arrival at Sully, when the whole
court was filled with reports which tended not. only
to give a bad impreſſion of my conduct: in public
affairs, but alſo to render me enough. ſuſpected to
afford them ſome pretence for commencing a proſe-
cution againſt me, the ſhame and grief of which
was all they deſired I ſhould ſuffer *. On this oc-
caſion I took fuch meaſures as I thought every wiſe
man ought to take, which was to Jifarm envy the
moſt effeQuual way, by preventing, with frequent
letters, the minds of: their Majeſties from being pre-
judiced to my diſadvantage. | |

In the firſt, which I addreſſed to the King and
Queen, | complained that bad deſigns were formed
againſt me: Loftered to juſtify my conduct by every
method they could propoſe, and even, if neceſſaty,
by new ſervices: and, after giving their Majeſties

* © He had no ſooner.retired,” ſays the hiſto're de la mere &
dw fils, p. 128. but many prepared to purſue the victory over
him, in order to come in for a ſhare of his ſpoils — But the Queen
at laſt, with great-reaſon, changed her meaſures, it not being he'd
reaſonable” to treat with ill uſage a perſon whoſe ſervices had ben
ſo advantageous to France, without any other pretext, than that,
by his having been uſeful to the public, he had at the ſame time
len {0 to himſelf.“

the

— £4 ms OA / , , AS 165 Ax

© own

oo w

1671. O F U 1. L 1. 101

the ſtrongeſt aſſurances of obedience, fidelity, and
innocence, I repreſented to them with ſome freed »m,
that, if they had been as well perſuaded of that in-
nocence as they had given me room to believe, I
ſhould have received proofs of it ere now, by the

orders they would have been pleaſed to give for the

performances of the ſevera] promiſes they had made
me, with reſpect to my places, and to the gratuities
which the King had granted me: that the firſt arti-
fice practiſed by my enemies, had been to defer, and
afterwards to hinder, if they could, the effect of thoſe
promiſes, which, being ſo many proofs of their Ma-
jeſties good opinion of me, white they ſubſiſted, it
was dangerous to attempt any thing againſt me; and
it was for this reaſon that I was fo ſolicitous for their
being accompliſhed:

To this letter I. received an anſwer from the
Queen ſuch as I could have wiſhed.. She obſerved
in it, that my paſt ſervices, and my preſent inclina-
tions, were ſo well known to the King and to her,
that it was not in the power of any perſon whatever
to alter their ſentiments with reſpect to me: that
hitherto ſne had not preceived it had been attempt-
ed; but, if it ſhould, it would be to no purpoſe : ſhe
aſſured me it was not owing to any ill-will towards
me, but to chance alone, that ſome little difficulties
had been-found in performing the agreements be-
tween his Majeſty and me; but that they ſheuld be
obſerved with the utmoſt exactneſs. I his letter is
dated March 7. 1611.

It was not long before I ſent the Queen another
letter, of which 1. cannot: diſpenſe with myſelf from
giving the reader ſome account, becauſe what I there
declared concerning the ſtate of my private affairs,
was exactly conformable to the fituation'I found my-
ſelf in upon my retiring-from public buſineſs. ] be-
gan with recallingto her. remembrance the open pro-
ſeſſion I had always made of attachment to her per-

K 3 jon,

1.2 M E M O IR 8

Book XXIX.

fon, and the proofs I had given of it, as well before
as ſince her marriage: and here I mentioned certain
particular circumſtances, when I drew upon myſelf
ſome reproaches from the late King, for ſupporting
her againit him on occaſions when I thought I was
labouring equally for both their intereſts. This led
me to an elogium on the good qualities of the
(Queen-regent, on Which I founded the opinion!
was to appear in this letter to have entertained, that
ſhe had no part in the perſecutions raiſed againſt me
at court,

This article I treated at great length, it being
that for which the letter was chiefly written, I gave
the Queen to underſtand, that I was well informed
of the diſadvantageous reports which were ſpread a-
gainſt me in court; of the obſtacles my enemies
were inceſſantly railing to hinder me from ſettling
peaceably my private affairs ; and, ina word, of the
* perquiſites which their Majeſties propoſed to allow
me in the offices, of waich I could not be deprived,
I aflumed a right from the good intentions which
I ſuppoſed this princeſs had towards me, founded
upon the repeated affurances ſhe had given me cf
her eiteem, to complain to her of thoſe perſons who
rendered theſe intentions ineffectual. I inſiſted par-
ticularly upon the favour and protection I had reaſon
to expect from their Majeſties while I was making
that diſpoſition of my affairs, to which, for the ſake
of peace, I had facrificed my intereſt, when it would
have been ſo much the eaſier to have diſputed the
ground with my adverfaries, as the motives Uy
which they acted being almoſt generally known, I
had every advantage over them which I could de—
fire. I here laid down conciſely the principal heads
of my management, and my ſhare of that wealin
with which, by my labours and œconomy, I had

enriched thg kingdom till the year 1610, when |

ſaw all the meaſures I had taken to keep eve)
thing

1611. O F

ZU. 103

thing in the ſame ſtate of order and regularity, at once
overturned and deſtroyed ; adding, that time would
ſhow whether the kingdom had moſt obligations to
my enemies or to me.

took this opportunity to obviate ſome of their
moſt fpecious accuſations. I repreſented to the Queen,
the great folly and abſurdity they were guilty of in
exclaiming againſt me for the vaſt riches they ſaid
[ had acquired during the cuurſe of my favour with
the late King, when in their hearts they deſpiſed me

for not making greater advantages of ſo fair an op-
portunity, and were fully reſulved not to follow my

example. The narrow bounds of a letter would
not permit me to ſay all I could in my own juſtifi-
cation: TI only obſerved to the Queen, that it was
eaſy for me to prove that this wealth, which they
imputed to me as a crime, I acquired either by fru-
gality and ceconomy, or by the bounty of a maſter
too generous and too grateful to leave a miniſter
unrewarded who devoted himfeif, with an aſſiduity
rarely ſcen in a ſuperintendant, to continual labours
for the public good “: that it it was ſufficient for me
that all the gratuities I had received were from my
maſter only, which he laid his commands upon me
to accept; and this I could prove as clearly as the
uſe to which J had applied them, which was more,
I believed, than thoſe who were going to ſucceed me
would be able to ſay at the cloſe of their admini-
ſtration. I told the Queen, that I hoped 1 ſhould
not be charged either with vanity or malice, if I af-
hiimed that the wrong they were now attempting

* He retired loa den with riches, which the time he bad been

- —  —- —

One ſin le proof from an enemy, ſuch as the author of this hiſtory,
will counterbalaace a thouſand others,

to

— -
.

.

og M E M OI R S Book XXX.

to do me, was a real injury to the ſtate: that I ne-
ver deſired to be continued in the ditection of the
finances, but for the King's advantage; and that
having their Majeſties for judges of my actions,
upon whoſe equity and goodneſs I rehed to hinder
my enemies fr.,m commencing a pruſecution againſt
me, the pri-acy I was going to enjoy would no long-
er appear dangerous to me; but, on the contrary, I
ſhould find it f'> much the more pleaſing, as it be-
gan now to be ſuitable to my age, and would be in-
terrupted with no reproaches, nor embittered by any

remorſe. | |
Towards the cloſe of this letter, through which I
had occaſionally interfperſed many offers of ſervice,
aſſurances of fidelity, and all thoſe expreſſions of re-
ſpect and obe ſience, which I thought I owed to the
Queen, I told her, that before I ſet out for my go-
vernment, whither my affairs called me, I would
ive her notice of it, to receive her commands ;
and, if ſhe thought 1 could be of any uſe to her in
the aſſembly of the Proteſtants, to which I was ſum-
moned, I would go thither with the ſame diſpoſition
and readine's to ſerve her as the late King my
maſter. Such was the purport of this long letter,
which the Queen anſwered by another, dated April
24. It was conceived almoſt in the ſame terms as
her former letter: fhe left me at liberty to go to
Poitou, or to the afſembly of the Proteſtants, and
to act there as I thould judge proper, knowing
better than any other {thoſe were her: words) how
could be molt uſeful to the King in either of thoſe

aces.

2 But what completely ſecured me againſt all re-
verſes of fortune was, that her Majeſty being deſi-
rous to give a public proof of her eſteem for me, and
how little it was in the power of my enemies to
hurt me, granted me an augmentation of my pen-
hon, for which the brevet was expedited 1n le's
than

D TULLY, wg$

than a month after the date of her laſt letter. This
augmentation was 24.000 livres“; ſo that all
together my penſions at that time amounted to
48: 400 livres + a year, It was expreſſed in the
brevet. that this additional penſion commenced on
the firſt of- January 1611, although it was dated
the 20th of May; an! that her Majeſty thought
herſelf under an obligation to grant it to me, as well
in acknowledg nent for my paſt ſervices, of which
the moſt honourable mention was made, as to enable
me to continue them for the future. |
Notwithitanding this, I do not think myſelf diſ-
penſed with from proving that article of the ſore-
going letter, which regards my wealth. A ſuper-
mendant of the finances, and any man to whom-
the management of the public money has been in-
truſted, is accountable to the nation for all his ac-
tions; nor would I refuſe, if called upon, to lay be-
fore it my molt ſecret thoughts, ſince it has been al-
ways my ſtudy to regulate them in ſuch a manner,
that they would, if known, not only ſubject me to-
no cenſure, for this is an indiſpenſable ohligation
upon all men, but alſo that they might in ſome re-
ſpect ſeem worthy to ſerve for a model to thoſe who,
ſucceeding to my place, would have the ſame en-
gage ments to fulfil. Happy it I could have reaſon
to hope that this model would be effaced with one
more perfect. I ſhall continue therefore to give the
public ſuch an exact ſtate of my domeſtic affairs, fol-
lowing the method I began a few pages above,
that any other perfon may be as well. acquainted:
with them as I am- myſelf. To fpare my readers
the trouble of collecting together at too great a. di-
ſtance the articles of a broken calculation, and that
they may. view- the Whole with one ſingle glance, I

* A thouſand pounds Sterling.

+ 48. 400 livres ts L. 2016: 13: 4 Sterling,
ſhalt

ä

— [2 _ Wh
*
— —
a Es
” ” —
44
— c

7 —
7
* * — 2 Re

— —— D— —
. — — — ——

24222 ˙— —  _—_—

— —

— 2 6 — — < — * — —
by - * i — - , 4 * . _ - 2 =
3 2 * - : — we - — 8 "IS a
— — I ST. . anda 8 2 2 7 3 1 _
_— 0” 4 3 - — — — Tv - = . ow = > 2 : = = — 7 * 8
2 — = —_— = Fx. - _ G —; * - 4 C = 4 Þ
—— p > - — 7 _ ; 2 r : EIN oe PR. ö — ws
_ — == : — N - 2 i - 2 2 E a> — > — 2 =
* ——7² — — o + — m4 . . — = 4 R of — —
a — 2 — ==. 2 — 2 — — — — _ - _ s by * * 0
_—— — 2 4 "= — — * — — .. — - * * = = I - =
- N * 5 — Tn © a -
: of * — — > 1 — — *
* * — 22 - Ta — - 4

—
— —

if
7
bt
*
h
b
*
l N
1
1
"+
'
.

robs M E M O I RS (Book XXIX.

ſhall here lay before them all that has been ſaid on
that ſubject in different parts of theſe Memoirs, be-
ginning with a faithful account of my whole yearly
revenue, according to the order of time when I was
inveſted with thoſe offices, from whence the greateſt
part of it aroſe “. b |

I was in the firſt place, while Henry the Great
was yet but King of Navarre, preferred to the poſt
of firſt gentleman of his bedchamber, together with
that of counſellor of Navarre: the ſalaries of both
amounted to two thouſand livres a-year. When he
became King of France, he made me counſellor of
Rate, for which I had a like allowance, which,
with a penſion of three thouſand fix hundred livres,
increaſed myincome with the yearly ſum of ſeven thou-
fand ſix hundred livres. My company of men at arms
brought me in four thouſand livres a- year. The King
giving me afterwards two brevets, one for counſellor
of parliament, without ſalary, and the other for coun-
ſellor of the finances, three thouſand fix hundred
livres were on this occaſion added to my penſions.
His Majeſty having thought proper to fix the gratuities,
penſions, gifts, &c. which he deſigned to beſtow
upon me as a ſuperintendant of the finances, to a cer-
tain ſum, which ſhould be comprehended all in one
article, this ſum, which amounted to twenty thou:
ſand crowns, increaſed my revenue with ten thouſard
eight hundred livres a-year more; add to this the

The following memoir is an unanſwerable refutation of a fe-
flection caſt on the Duke of Sully by the Hiſtoire de la mere &
du fils, p. 130. and expreſſed in theſe words: “ In fine, if, during
his adminiſtration, he had managed the King's affairs well, he had
not forgot to take care of his own, This appeared more evidently
from his having come into office with only fix thouſand livres a-
* year, and going out with more than a hundred and fifty thou
* {and livres; which had obliged him to withdraw out of the «<x-
* chequer the rent-roll and inventory of his cſtate and cid,
* which had been regiſtered there, when he came into the ma—
% nagement of the finances, that it might not appear againſt him
under his own, band and ſcai, how much he had esriched him
elt out of the King's money.“ 5

produce

WFS UL L T. t0

produce of all my other dignities and employments;
the office of grand ſurveyor of the roads of France,
and ſurveyor in particular of the iſle of France,
brought me in ten thouſand livres a-year ; that of
great maſter of the ordnance, comprehending the ſa-
lary, profits, and penſions annexed to it, twenty-
four thouſand livres. I always placed under one ar-
ticle the ſums ariſing from the government of Poitou,
the ſuperintendance of the buildings, that of the for-
tifications, ports, &c. which all together amounted to
eighteen thouſand livres a- year. The government
of Mante and Gergeau brought me in twelve thou-
ſand livres; the Queen's company of gendarmes, of
which I was captain-lieutenant, five thouſand livres;
and the government of the Baſtile, two thouſand two
hundred livres a year. All theſe articles put together
make up the ſum of ninety-ſeven thouſand two hun-
ded livres a-year,

Each of theſe articles have been already mention-
ed in different parts of theſe Memoirs. What remains
tobe added to them are as follows : Forty-five thou-
ſandlivres in church- benefices, which his Holineſs was
ſo well ſatisfied that I ſhould enjoy under the bor-
rowed name of ſome eccleſiaſtics, that he generally
expedited the bulls gratis, when he was told that
ine abbeys were for me. Iloſt no part of this income,
when it was decreed that the eccleſiaſtics ſhould with-
draw all their benefices out of the hands of the Pro-
teſtants, becauſe by the Pope's bulls, in which this
regulation was expreſled, the eccleſiaſtics on whom
they were beſtowed, were to give the full value of
them to the firſt poſſeſſor. My own lands and poſ-
{efions compoſe a ſecond article, which I believe I
eſtimate juſtly, by making them amount to ſixty
thouſand livres a- year. Theſe two laſt ſums, added
to that of ninety-feven thouſand two hundred livres,
make a total of two hundred and two thouſand two
hundred livres a-year*,

* 202,290 livres is 8425 |. Sterling.

x08 M E M O 1 R S Book XXIX.

I ſhall prevent the explanation which may be de-
manded of me, with reſpect to the article of twenty
thouſand crowns in lands; and, in the firſt place, [
defire it may be remembered, that there was akind of
agreement made between the King and myſelt in the
year 1601, by which that prince, who did not-think
my labours in his ſervice ſufficiently rewarded by my
ordinary gratuities and penſions, and who 'Itkewiſe
was apprehenſive as well as I, that thoſe ſums which
His generoſity led him to give me in extraordinary
2 and gratuities, would produce bad conſe-
quences hereafter, by that appearance of profuſion
they might have, again ſettled his gifts and gratuities
in a new ſum of ſixty thouſand livres a year, which
was to take in all that I was to expect merely from
his bounty. "This donation was expedited by let-
ters- patent, that being known to the whole ki G-
dom, I might not be one day ſubjected to any diſho-
nourable impuiation on account of it. I enjoyed this
extraordinary:gratuity for eight years, which produ-
ced me the ſum of four hundred and eighty thouſand
livres, which I laid out, according to the King's de-
fire, in:making acquiſitions in proportion. I made
the ſame uſe of the fum of five hundred and thirty
thouſand livres ariſing from the following articles:
From money which I nave received, but which is
ſubiect to be'repaid, two hundred thouſand livres,
on the marriage of myſon: a hundred thouſand

livres which I received with my wife; a hunured þ

thouſand paid me by La Borde; as much by M.
Schomberg; and thirty thouſand which bis Majeſty
gave me for my fon D'Orval *, Theſe fums, I ah

whic

Francis de Bethune, the founder of the branch of the Counts
of Orval, was kvight of the Kting's dess, maſter of the horſe
to the Queen, ſurveyer- general of France, ſaperintendart of the

royal buildings, governo of st N aixant, camp matter of the re-

giment of Picardy, licutenant-general of the King's armies. At-
ter

261

whi
tho
I

two

Dol
the

owe
hun
land
a hu
by a
thre,
amo

ter t!
blood
Duke
eond

They
de Be
to the
penſe,
fime 1
war,

Charl
bellio
furpo
Junc

family
Sully,
grand
judge
Abbe

9

edit ioi
in ma
poſe t.
comte
ſtrate
vol 9
purch;
gethe
ſand }

thoug!

fol! 8
*

thouſand livres“, I laid out in the following manner.

1617. oO F $01 'L FT. 105

which added to the above, make one million and ten

I purchaſed one half of the eſtate of Roſny with
two hundred and ten thouſand livres; the iow of
Dourdon, which I bought of Sancy, who held it of
the Swiſs cantons, colt me, beſide the money he
owed me, a hundred thouſand livres; Baugy, one
hundred and twenty thouſand hvres 1. I had the
lands of Sully from the Duke de La- Tremouille for
a hundred and fifty thouſand livres; and Villebon,
by an ordinance, for one hundred thouſand. The
three contracts I made with the Duke of Nevers
amounted to two hundred and ten thouſand livres;

ter the death of Cæſar de Bcthvne, his brother of the whole
blood, who died unmarried, the eftates and lordſhips which the
Duke of Sully their father had ſettled upon the children of his ſe-
tond marriage (as we (hall relate hereafter) became united in him.
They were erected into a duchy and peerage, under the title of
de Bethune ; which was done in confideration of his ſignal ſervices
to the crown, and particularly in having raiſed, at his own ex-
penſe, a conſiderable body of forces, both foot and horſe, at a
tine when the King ſtood in great need of them, to carry on the
war, in which he was then engaged, with the Spaniards, Duke
Charles of Lorraine, rhe Prince of Condé, and others of his re-
bellious ſubjects. It is in theſe terms the letters-patent for this
purpoſe are expreſſed, which are dated at McJun in the month of
Junc 1652. The duchy of Sully devolved on this branch of the
tamily, in 1630, on the death of Maxtmilian, the fiith Duke of
Sully, in the perfon of Lewis Peter Maximilian de Bethune,
grand ſon of this Francis Count of Orval, to whom it was ad-
judged by the council of ſtate, he paying the value of it to the
Abbe Armand de Bethune his great uncle, atterwards Count of Orval.

* 1,010,000 livres is 42,083 | Sterling,

+ We muſt obſerve here, that the tranſlator of the London
edition of Sully, printed anno 1757, has been extremely careleſs
in making the A and whether the articles that com-
poſe the account, are right or wrong, the total is always made to
come out as in the original. ——— An example willhelp to illu-
firate this. In the London edition above mentioned, p 104. of
vol . where the Duke is giving a particular account of his
purchaſes, the article of Baugy, which coſt 120.000 livres, is. alto-
gethe omitted; and Culand is rated at eight, inſtead of eighty thou-
ſand Ilivres ; bur ſtill the total is made to be 1,113,000 livres, al-
though in that edition it wants this ſum of192,000 livres. he fore-
foil g pages of that tranſlation are allo deficient in point of arithmetic.

Vol, V. L namely,

110 ME MO I R S Book XXIX.

namelv, for Montrond, a hundred thouſand; La-
Chapelle, fifty- ſix thouſand ; and for Henrichemont,
fifty four thouſand. I bought the eſtate of Chate-
let of the Duke of Montpenſier for ſixty thouſand livres;
that of Culand, by an ordinance, for eighty thou-
ſand; and Des. Is, in Beauce, for ſeventy-five thou-
ſand livres. The whole of theſe purchaſes, which
amount to eleven hundred and ninety thouſand livres,
exceeding, as appears, that of the two ſums recet-
ved above Ly a huridred and nine thouſand livres,
this ſum will be found charged in the articles of re-
ceipt, which are placed after; for J am deſirous of
giving the reader full ſatisfaction, by carrying this
detail even farther than he has a right to expect; and
for this purpoſe I muſt flep a little aſide from the
ſubject I am treating of, and give an account of the
ſeveral ſums I reccived after the death of Henry the
Great, as an equivalent for my charges, in gratuities
from the young King, &c. even to the time that !
reſolved to diſpoſe of almoſt all the employments with
which I had been inveſted.

The three hundred thouſand livres which his Ma-
jeſty granted me by letters- patent, were at once a
gift from this prince, and a kind of tecompenſe for
the ſuperintendance of the finances, and government
of the Baſtile, which I reſigned into his hands. He
gave me ſixty thouſand livres for my company of

endarmes, for which I had refuſed two hundred
thouſand, J agreed with Fourcy to reſign to him the
ſuperintendance of the buildings for fifty thouſand
livres; which was the price ſet upon it by his Majeſty :
I refuſed to take more. I was offered three hundred
thouſand livres for the government of Poitou, which
I yielded to Rohan, who obtained the King's con-
ſent that he ſhould purchaſe it for two hundred thou-
ſand. I loſt in the ſame manner a hundred thouſand
livres upon the offices of grand ſurveyor of the roads,

and hereditary maſter of the canals and navigation ol
2 rv Cre.

16
riv
dre
wil
dre
dan
him
fifty
deſt
you.
proc
theſ
my
for r
by v
the!
ther
lowa
reco!
adbe
was
knew
the a
abbe,
of I.
and |
of I
ſums
thouſ.
applie
I b
coux,
Pallie
young
lonal
a larg
*.

9 Le

1620, tc

1611. OF 3. VL . . 111

rivers. The treaſurets of France paid me only a hun-
dred and fifty thouſand for them. His Majeſty like-
wiſe cauſed me to be paid again the ſum of one hun-
dred and fifty thouſand livres for the eſtate of Dour-
dan; and I agreed with the Prince of Conde to give
him back the lands of Villebon for a hundred and
fifty thouſand livres which he has fince paid me. I
deſtined theſe two laſt ſums for the portion of my
youngeſt daughter, for whom it was more difficult to
procure an eſtabliſhment than her eldeſt ſiſter. To
theſe ſums I add thoſe which aroſe from the fale of
my benefices : for I thought it was equally allowable
for me to take money for them, as for the eccleſiaſtics,
by whom they were purchaſed to give it me; or for
the Pope to permit it, as he did, by his bulls. I
therefore took, without making any ſcruples, an al-
lowance of eighty thouſand livres of an abbe who was
recommended to me by the Prince of Conde, for my
abbey of Coulon. Bethune, who, as well as his ſon,
was the moſt ſcrupulous Roman Catholic I ever
knew, purchaſed, under the ſanction of theſe bulls,
the abbey of Jard of me for forty thouſand livres ; an
abbe, a friend of the Duke of Rohan, bought thar
of L'Or at Poitiers of me for ſeventy thouſand :
and L*Argentier Vaucemain, or rather his ſon, that
of L'Abſie for fifty thouſand livres. All theſe
ſums together make a total of thirteen hundred
thouſand livres. Let us now ſce to what uſe it was
applied..

I bought of M. de Lavardin the eſtate of Montri-
coux, together with that of Cauſſade, from the Sieur
Palliers, for a hundred and ſixty thouſand livres. My
youngeſt daughter * having on account of ſome per-
lonal diſadvantages, as I obſerved before, occaſion for
a larger portion than her ſiſter to marry her ſuitable
to her birth, I gave with her to M. de Mirepoix four

* Louiſa de Bethune. She was married, on the 2gth of May
i629, to Alexander de Levis, Marquis of Mirepoix. .

L 2 | hundred

2 M E M OI R S Book XXIX.

hundred and fifty thouſand livres in ſpecie: the other
expenſes of this marriage, in jewels, furniture, &c.
formed an article of fifty thouſand livres more, which
in all makes up the ſum of five hundred thouſand
livres. I ſhall only ſlightly obſerve here, that ſuch
diſtinguiſhing proofs of paternal tenderneſs were re-
paid, both by my daughter and her huſban , with the
molt ſtriking inſtances of ingratitude.
ral cities, and to that of Rochelle in particular, more
than two hundred and fifty thouſand livtes, which,
by the ſiege and reduction of this city, and the wars
raiſed againſt the Proteſtants, I have almoſt: wholly
loft. The money I lent, at different. times, to. the
Marquis of Roſny, and the debts I paid for him, a-
mount at leaſt to three hundred thouſand livres; the
yearly incomes which came to me from Languedoc
and Guyenne, by the purchaſe I made of certain re-
giſtries and rents there, coſt me four hundred thou-
ſand livres; and the houſe 1 bought, in Paris two
hundred and twenty thouſand livres. By calculating

my accounts of the money I laid out in buildings and

other works, in furniture, in journeys, and other ex-
penſes of that kind, I find a capital of ſeven hundred
thouſand livres. The ſum total of all theſe ſeveral
articles amounts. to two millions five hundred and
thirty thouſand livres *, which-makes it ſuperior to
the total of: receipt, which precedes it, by twelve
hundred.and thirty thouſand livres.

The reader may have obſerved, from the begin-
ning of theſe Memoirs, that my application to my
domeſtic ceconomy extended itſelf to things which
it might be warns & expected would have been ex-
cepted from it; I mean in the military profits, ariſing
either from priſoners I had taken, from ranſoms, ot
at the ſacking of towns taken by aſſault, and on other
occaſions of the ſame kind, which it is not neceſſary
to give a minute account of here. When the peace

*: -,530,900 livres is 416 l. 23 8. 4 d. Sterling.

of

I lent to ſeve-

I 61
of \
whi
the)
tal

Ih.

wor
nitie
lar

al
livre
that
four
forr
pref
perf
bee:
em!
riag
mal
Lo
jeſt
ridi
nice
ture
tere
thin
bre
for
tri!

Ko 173.
of Vervins was concluded, I found that theſe profits,
which when conſidered ſeparately appear fo ſlight that
they ſcarce deſerve to be mentioned, yet made a to-

tal of one hundred thouſand livres, or thercabouts,

Ihe war of Savoy, which fell out afterwards, was

WW worth as much more to me in cannon, arms, ammu—

nition, &c. taken from the enemy, of which IL had a
large portion as great maſter of the ordnance. Of
all this I make an article of three hundred thouſand

WF livres. By calculating the value of-all thoſe preſents

that there were made me on different occaſions, 1

bund the whole amount to a ſum nearly equal to the

former. It muſt be obſerved, that I mean only ſuch
preſents as I received in the character of a public
perſon, and in occurrences when it would not have
been decent for me to have refuſed: them; as in my
embaſſies and negotiations; upon the King's mar-
riage from the Queen, and the Grand Duke; on the
marriage of the Princeſs Catherine with the Duke of-

DLorrain; on every new-year's day from their Ma—

jeſties and Queen Margaret. It would have been a.
ridiculous affectation to ſhew myſelf as ſcrupulouſly.
nice about theſe preſents, and others of the ſame na-

ture, as I did when they were offered to me with in-

tereſted views. However, 1 would not receive any

thing in this manner without its being expreficd in a

brevet, which 1 intreated his Majeſty. to grant me

for each of theſe gifts, which, though in jewels: and
trinkets, compoſed a-ſum of one hundred- thouſand *'
crowns. I fold again the lands of Dourdan for a hun-
dred and fifty thouſand livres; before my gratuities
were ſettled to twenty thouſand crowns, as ] have al-
ready mentioned, and which did not happen till the -
year 1601. The late King, hitening only to the.
dictates of his own generous mind, and to the friend-
ſhip with which he honoured me, ubliged me to ac-
cept many other Conations which have not beer par-
uculariſed here, and which, I believe, do not amount
L 3 to

* — — _— - N
—— — ——K4x. 2 — ——_
72 —

.

114 M E M O 1 R s Book XXIX.

to leſs than two hundred thouſand livres. Laſtly,
ſince my income was become fo conſiderable as the
reader has ſeen, it is not ſurpriſing that by ſtrictly
obſerving a maxim, which, from my earlieft years,
] had laid down as abſolutely neceſſary for the advan-
tage of my domeſtic affairs, namely, that one ought
never to ſpend the whole extent of one's income, I
{ſhould at the end of a certain number of years have
laid by a very conſiderable ſum. If we fuppoſe this
ſum to amount to three hundred and fifty thouſand
livres, and add it to the four former ones, we ſhall
find that it will, within a very little matter, make up
the twelve hundred thouſand livres, which is wanting
to produce a perfect equality between the receipt and
expenſe. [| think it unneceſſary to repeat here what
] have formerly ſaid, with reſpect to the current ex-
penſes of my houſe,

What I am going to relate concerning my tranſ-
actions with the Prince of Condé may appear as a
matter of mere curioſity only ; but I was not willing
to omit it, as it has ſome connection with my preſent
ſubject. When the war broke out againſt the Pro-
teſtants under the new reign, the Prince of Conde
being folicitous to remove me from his governments,
where J had ſeveral very fine eſtates, and ſome
ſtrong caſtles, propofed to me to ſell them all to him.
] was apprehenſive, that, if I refuſed to comply with
this propoſal, the war would furniſh him with preten-
ces to drive me from thence, which force would have
rendered valid: ] was ſenſible that his counſels had
not a little contributed to that reſolution they had
lately taken againſt us, and I was forewarned that
he was meditating ſomething worſe with regard to
me. I therefore agreed with him for the lands of
Villebon, Montrond, Orval, Culand, and Le Cha-
telet, and with the greater willingneſs, as he offered

me more than they had coſt me, and indeed more |

Acc. rdingly a contiact was

than they weie worth. |
x ſigned

6 „ O Fo 8 60 (L L. V. 1. ns

ſigned by us both, in which the Prince of Conde ob-
liged himſelf to give me twelve hundred thouſand
livres for thoſe N a : he did not pay me the mo-
ney down indeed; butT readily conſented to wait till

it ſuited his own conveniency,
However, I did not expect that, at the expiration
of a certain time, this prince would find out an eaſy
methad of diſcharging at once both the principal
and intereſt, by demanding of the King, that my
eſtates ſhoul4 be confiſcated, a practice which the
war made then very common. His Majeſty was fo
good as to remember me on this occaſion, and re—
jected with a kind of horror ſo infamous a requeſt,
When the peace was concluded, the Prince found
himſeif obliged to come to an account with me. His
inclination for the lands of Baugy increaſing, there
was a neceſſity for yielding him that likewiſe, as well
as all the others, in order that I might not on any
hde be his neighbour. He took a diſlike to the
lands of Villebon, which, together with thoſe of
Muret, he reſtored to me as an equivalent for the
eſtate which he ſo eagerly coveted. The exchange
was not diſadvantageous to me. This method of
paying me being moſt convenient for this prince, he
made over to me, one after the other, the lands of
Nogent, Montigny, Chanrond, Vitrai, . the mar-
quifate of Conty, Breteuil, Francatel, and La-
Falaiſe, inveſted with the ſame rights as the lands
that I had exchanged, the principal of which, in
my eyes, was the liberty of calling them, accor-
ding to the King's patent, a poſſeſſion which I held
by the liberality and the immediate grant of the King
my maſter. Thus I got out of the diſpute yrs
| tne

* Amongſt the papers containing the proofs of v hat M. de Sul-
ly here relates of his diſputes with the Prince of Condé which the
preſent

n6 M E M O I R S Book XXIX.
the Prince, who, it muſt be confeſſed, was guilty
of a double injuſtice in endeavouring to get pollef-
fion of my. cſtates by procuring them to be confiſca-
ted. | 925

* 1

ſent Duke of Sully has. done me the honour to communicate,
- find two letters, a hich i (hail give the reader : one is from the
Prince of Condé to the firſt Duke of Sully; the other from the
Prince of Co ty to the Marquis de Bethune (Maximilian Alpinus)
grandfather of the Duke of Sully now living.

Letter from the Prince of Cox D to the Duke of SULLY,

« MONSIEUR, |

hope to have the honour of ſteing you ſoon. The bearer
hercof will inform you from whence this comes, and explain the
contents of it ta you. You will find, from my actions, how much
I have at heart the. King's ſervice, the public good, and your
friendſhip in particular, which | paſſionately covet. I beg you
will aſſuredly rely on the truth of theſe profeſſions, I am prepa-
ring. in performance of our mutual engagements, to conclude our
bargain for. Villebon, and will let you know (begging you will
meet me for that purpotc) in what place I can have the honour of
converſing with you.

I am, Monſieur,

Your couſin, and
moſt humble ſervant,
HENRY. de BOUR BON. *?

Letter from the Prince of Cox rx to the Marquis of Bethune.
* MONSIEUR,

* I am extremely preſſed by the Count of Orval to conſent te
the agreement he is defirous of making with the Viſcount of

Meaux, for the eſtate of Chanrord ; and he even offers to give me.

ſecurity to indemnify me againſt the warranty my late father en-
tered into. I-would not however make bim any promiſe, after
having engaged to your mother-in-law not to do any thing in this
affair without acquainting you with it ; and, as it is for the bencfi!

of all parties, that this matte: ſhould be ſettled, and made an end of |

as ſoon as poſſible, I am willing to refer my pretenſions to the
judgment of the Count de Bethune your kinſman, and bey you will

do ſo too, and ſubmit to what he ſhall direct. The Count of Or-
val and the Viſcount of Rleaux are content to ſubmit their claims
to him, and abide by his determination. I make n+» dwubt of your |
conſenting to this propoſal, as oiherwiſe I ſhall be obliged go do |

what |

1611» G erer 117

I have been a vitneſs of very miſerable times ſince
the death of the King my maſter. The war which
I aw kindled againſt the Proteſtan's, filled me with
grief. I was incited by a thouſand different motives
to take part in it; but I egurage uſly refiſted this
ſnare: I never gave the King the leaft reaſon to
look upon me as a rebel, or an abettor of rebels.
] have punctually obeyed all his Majeſty's com-
mands; am always ready to preſent mytelf at court
whenever he is plea ed to require it: in a word, I
have had the good furtune to continue as faithful in
the performance of thoſe promiſes I made to the
King my benefactor, as in that of the duties of a good
citizen. |

what is de ſired of me, and accept of the propoſed ſecurity. I
earneſtly heſcech you not to make any difficulty of coming into
this agreement. In the mean time, I am

Your moſt affeRionate ſervant,

ARMAND de BOURBON.”
Toulouſe, r 9th of October
1656,

BOOK

2 = —— n —
— - >” 2 2 — — — 2
— —— I —
= N 8

—— 7A
8 9
= -. - -
* * *

1 ws
- *

— 2
— —

—

— =

« IRS

—
= — — —.
— —
. : =
wg *

— —
— x —
— —— — —
— * a
2 9

ME MOI R S Book XXX.

*

B O O K XXX.

Wherein is diſcuſſed the PoLIiTiICAaL SCHEME

Commonly called

The great defign of HENRY IV.

S this part of theſe Memoirs will be chiefly ta-
ken up with an account of the great deſign of
Henry IV. or the political ſcheme, by which he pro-
poſed to govern, not only France, but all Europe;
It may not be improper to begin it with ſome more
general reflections on this monarchy, and on the Ro-
man empire, upon whoſe ruins we know it has been
formed, as well as all the other powers which at this
— compoſe the Chiiſtian world.

f we confider all thoſe ſucceſſive changes which
Rome has ſuffered from the year of the world 3064,
which is that of its foundation *, its infancy, youth,
and virility, its declenſion, fall, and final ruin; theſe
viciſſitudes, which it experienced in common with
the great monarchies by which it was preceded, would
almoſt incline one to believe, that empires, like all
other ſublunary things, are ſubject to be the ſport,
and at laſt ſink under the preſſure of time. And if
we extend this idea {till further, we ſhall perhaps per-
ceive, that theyare all liable to be diſturbed or inter-
rupted in their courſes, by certain extraordinary inct-
dents ; which, for any thing that we can diſcover to the
contrary, may be termed epidemical diſtempers, that

The opinion now moſt generally received is that of Varro,
who places the time of the foundation of Rome near 200 years
later,

very

time
Hon
70
in 5;
Nou
the f
her 2
weak
this
table
arri v4
mark
tO WI

laſt I

TE.
Inſtead
under
the ſac

| lt
the Ea

N. 119

very frequently precipitate their deſtruction; and
their cure by this diſcovery becoming eaſier, we may
at leaſt recover ſome of them from thoſe criſis's which
threaten their deſtruction,

But if we endeavour to diſcover more viſible and
natural cauſes of the ruin of this vaſt and formidable
empire, we ſhall perhaps ſoon perceive they were
produced by a deviation from thoſe wiſe laws, and
that ſimplicity of manners, which were the original
of all its grandeur, into luxury, avarice, and ambi-
tion; yet there was, finally, another cauſe, the effect
of which could hardly have been prevented or fore-
ſeen by the utmoſt human wiſdom ; I mean, the ir-
ruptions of thoſe vaſt bodies of barbarous people,
Goths, Vandals, Huns, Herulians, Rugians, Lom-
bards, &c. from whom, both ſeparately and united,
the Roman empire received ſuch violent ſhocks, that
it was at laſt overthrown by them: Rome was three
times ſacked by theſe barbarians *“; in 414, under
Honorius, by Alaric, chief of the Goths; in 455,
by Genſeric, King of the Vandals. under Martian: and
in 546, under Juſtinian, by Totila and the Goths.
Now, if it be true, that, after this, the city retained
the ſhadow of what ſhe had been, if we muſt regard
her as diveſted of the empire of the world, when ber
weakneſs and the abuſes of her government made
this event to be looked upon, not ſimply as inevi-
table, but as very near, and, in fact, already
arrived; the epocha of her fall may then be
marked long before the reign of Valentine III.
o whom it will be doing a favour, to call him the
alt Emperor of the Eaſt + ; for ſeveral of thoſe em-

perors

_ * Theſe three epochas are not quite juſt; the firſt was in 410,

Inſtead of 414 ; the ſecond in 45s, or 455; and the third in 524,

nder Tegas, ſucceſſor of Totila and the laſt King of the Goths:
tbe lacking the city this laſt time laſted forty days.

y It would be unjuſt, ſarcly, to refu'e the title of Emperors of

tbe Eaſt to Valcntinian III. to Honorius, &c, The ay” 91

ere

— — — — — — — — —
— — *
— —- — -
—  --- — —_— 2 —

—

— — —
— ͤ SE. n — —
- G * E

* 3 FS. - :
* 4 * £ * —

— — = — —
—

—_

- mt = — — *
— = —
* _

— — — * _ — * — — — — — —— — _
* D' — — — IS. — — — —— — ——=— = <4 = — 8 — 2 — —
— — > =) - - — A : bj 2 : ——_ 2 — 7 —
1 2. — —— 777 2 nn. he = .
nt Tip Fr r - 4 ——— . — — — ——— n
a —— =”

— ͥ — —

— —

=

—
.

— —— —
— -

— 3 p —

— a> — wats rus 3
: & * * —
— — — — — —— gen my g — — -

———_
— — _-

2

* 20 ME MOI R S Book XXX,

perors whom he ſucceeded, were, properly ſpeaking,
no better than tyrants, by whom the empire was
torn and divided, and the ſhattered reminants left to
be the ſpoil of barbarians, who, indeed, by their con-
queſts, acquired an equal right to them.

Rome, nevertheleſs, by intervals, beheld ſome
faint appearances of a revival; tho'e of which ſhe
was moſt ſenſible were under the reign of the great
Conſtantine, whoſe victories once more united this
vaſt body under one head; but when he tranſported
the ſeat of his empire from Rome 10 Conſtantinople,
he, by that ſtep, without being fenſible of it, conti
buted more to the deſtruction of a work which had
coſt him ſo much labour, than all the ill conduct of
his predeceſſors had been able to etfect ; and this e-
ven he rendered irremediable, by dividing his empire
equally amongſt his three ſons. Theodoſius, who
by good fortune, or from an effect of his great valour,
found himſelf in the fame circumſtances with Con-
ſtantine, would not perhaps have committed the ſame
fault, had he not been influenced by the force of Con-
ſtantine's example; but this, in a manner, neceſlarily
obliged him to divide his empire in two; Arcadius
had the Eaſt. Honorius the Weſt: and from that
time there never was any hopes nor opportunity of
reuniting them.

According to the order of nature, by which the
deſtruction of one King becomes the inſtrument
for the production of others; fo, in proportion, 23
the moſt diſtant members of the empire of the Ezit
fell off from it, from thence there arofe kingdom: ;
tho gh indeed they did not at firſt bear that rank.
The moſt ancient of theſe (11s origin appearing 0

here uſcd by our author ſhould not be unde ſtood in their molt i.

go cus fene, but on'y as meaning an empire ucabentd, and 3.

proaching to its final deſtruction.

have

67 3 T . 121
have been in the eighth year of the empire of Ho-
norius) is, undoubtedly, that which was founded in
Gaul by the French, ſo called from Franconia, from
whence they were invited by the Gauls, who in-
habited the countries about the Moſelle, to afliſt
them in their deliverance from the oppreſſion of the
Roman armies. It being a cuſtom among theſe
Franks, or French, to confer the title of King upon
whatever perſon they choſe to be their leader ; if the
fiſt or ſecond of theſe chiefs have not borne it, it 1s
certain, at leaſt, that the third, which was Merovius,
and more particularly Clavius, who was the fifth,
were inveſted with it *, and ſome of them ſupported
it with ſo much glory; among others, Pepin and
Charles Martel, to whom it ould be doing an in-
juſtice to refuſe them this dignity ; that their worthy
ſucceſſor, Charlemagne, revived in Gaul an imperfect
image of the now extinguiſhed empire in the Eaſt,
This indeed was facilitated by thoſe natural advanta-
ges France enjoys of numerous inhabitants trained to
war; and a great plenty of all things ſerving the dit-
ferent neceſſities of life, joined to a very great con-
veniency for commerce, ariſing from its fituation,
which renders it the centre of four of the principal
powers of Europe; Germany, Italy, Spain, and
Britain, with the Low Countries.

wo

* The whole of what is here faid, may be allowed to be right.
According to Petau and Sirmond, the chiefs of the French bore
the title of kings from the reign of Valentinian II. which was
long before the year 445, when Claudian, by the taking of Cam-
bray, &c firſt eſtabliſhed himſelf on this fide of the Rhine. They
were ſettled on the other fide the Rhine, about the middle of the
third century, and extended themſclves, nearly from the Texel
as far as Franctort. This revolt of a part of Gaul againſt the
Romans, happened anno 434, in the twelfth year of the reign of
Valentinian III. and the author's opinion on the eſtabiiſhment of
the French in Gaul, is confirmed by a learned academic, who has
cleared up this critical point as much as it was poſlible (the late
Abbe Du Bos). Hiſt. Crit. de Þ et«b. de la monarchie Franz. dans les
Gaules, tom. 1. liv. 1. ch. 17. liv. 2. ch. J. 8.

Vol. V. M Let

122 M E M O I R 8 Book XXX

Let us here juſt ſay one word upon the three races
which compoſe the ſucceſſion of our kings. In the
firſt of them I find only Merovius, Clovis I. and
Clovis Il. ; in the ſecond Charles Martel, Pepin le
Bref, and Charlemagne, who have raiſed themſelves
above the common level of their race. Take away
tieſe ſix from the thirty-five, which we compute in
theſe two races, and all the reſt, from their vices or
their incapacity, appear to have been cither wicked
kings, or but the ſnadow of kings; though among
them we may diſtinguiſh ſome good qualities in
Sigibert and Dagobert, and a very great devotion in
Lewis le Debonnaire, which, however, ended in his
repenting the loſs of empire and his kingdom, to-
gether with his liberty, in a cloiſter.

The Carlovingian race having reigned obſcurely,
and ended fo too, the crown then deſcended upon a
third ; the four firſt kings of which, in my opinion,
appear to have been perfect models of wiſe and good
government. 'T he kingdom which came under their
dominion had loft much of its original ſplendor ; for
from its immenſe extent in the time of Charle-
magne, it was reduced to very near the ſame bounds
which it has at this day; with this difference, that
though they might have been deſirous to reſtore its
ancient limits, the form of the government, which
rendered the kings ſubject to the great men and
people of the kingdom, who had a right to chuſe,
and even to govern their ſovereigns, left them no
means by which they could ſucceed in ſuch an at-
tempt. The conduct, therefore, which they pur-
ſued was, to condemn arbitrary power to an abſo—
lute ſilence; and, in its place, to ſubſtitute equity
itſelf : a kind of dominion which never excites envy.
Nothing now wa* done without the conſent of the
great men and the principal cities, and almoſt always
in conſequence of the decilion of an aſſembly ef the
ſtates, A conduct ſo moderate and prudent put 7

en

O F L . 124
end to all factions, and ſtifled all conſpiracies, which
are fatal to the ſtate or the ſovereign. Regularity,
economy, a diſtinction of merit, ſtrict obſervance

of juſtice, all the virtues which we ſuppoſe neceſſary
qualifications for the good of a family, were what
characterized this new government, and produced
what was never before beheld, and what perhaps we
may never ſee again, an uninterrupted peace for one
hundred twenty two years. What theſe princes gain-
ed by it for themſelves in particular, and Which
all the authority of the Salic Jaw could never have
procured them, was, the  ayvan: age of introducing
into this houſe an hereditary right to the crown. But
they, nevertheleſs, thought it a neceſſary | precaution,
not to declare their eldeſt ſons their fucceſſors till
they had modeſtiy aſked the confent of the people,
preceded it by a kind cf election, and uſually by
having them crowned in their own lifetime, and
ſeated with them upon the throne.

Philip II. whom Lewis VII. nis father, cauſed
to be crowned, and reign with him in this manner,
was the firſt who neglected to obſerve this cere-
mony between the ſovereign an | his people. Several
victories, obtained over his neighbours and over his
own ſubjects, which gained him the ſurname of
Auguſtus, ſerved to open him a paſſage to abſolute
power ; and a notion of the fitneſs and legality of this
power, by the aſſiſtance of favourites, miniſters, and
others, became afterwards fo trongly imprinted in
his ſucceſſors, that they looked upon it as a mark of
the moſt profound good policy, to act contrary to
tho'se maxims; the general and particular utility of
wich had been ſo effæctually confirmed by experience.
And this they did without any fear, or perhaps without
any canception of the fatal conſequences which ſuch
a procee ling, againſt a nation that adored its liberty,
might, and even neceſſarily would incur; of which
they might eafily have become ſenſible, from the

M 2 means

124 NM E M O 1 R Ss Book XXX.

means to which the people bad immediate recourſe,
to ſhake off the) oke of tyranny wich which they ſaw
themſelves menaced. Ihe kings could never obtain
of their people any other than that kind of conſtrained
obedience, which always inclines them to embrace,
with eagerneſs, all opportunities of retellion. 'T his
was the ſource of a thouſand bloody wars. That b,
which almoſt al] France was ravaged by the Engliſh;
that which we had with Italy, Burgundy, Spain, all
of them can be attributed to no other cauſes, than the
civil diſſenſions by which they were preceded : and
here the weakeſt ſide, ſtifling the voice of honour,
and the intereſt of the nation,. conſtantly called in
joreigners to aſſiſt them in the ſupport of their totter-
ing liberties. Theſe were ſhameful and fatal remevies;
but from that time they were. conſtantly employed,
down even'to our days, by the houſe of Lorrain, in
a league, for which religion was nothing more than
the pretence. Another evil, that may at firſt appear
to be of a different kind, but which, in my opinion,
proceeds from the ſame ſource, was a general cor-

ruption of manners, a thirſt for riches, and a moſt |}

ſhameful degree of luxury: theſe, ſometimes lepa-

rately, and ſometimes united, were alternate cauſes

and effects of many of our miſeries.
I have thus expoſed, in a few words, the various

jpecies of our bad policy, with reſpect both to the |
form of the government, ſucceſſively ſubjected to the

will of the people, the ſoldiers, the nobles, the ſtates,

and the kings; and in regard to the perſons likewile |
ef theſe laſt, whether dependent, elective, heredila-

ty, or abſolute. Ig
From the picture here laid before us, we may be

enabled to form our judgment upon the third race |
of our kings. We may find a thouſand things to
allmire in Philip Auguſtus, Saint Lewis, Philip le

Bel, Charles le Sage, Charles VII. and Lewis XII.

But it is to be lamented, that ſo many virtues, or

gre: |

r 125

great qualities, have been exerciſed upon no better
principles. With what pleaſure might we beſtow
upon them the titles of great kings, could we but
conceal that their people were miſerable? Whar
might we not, in particular, ſay of Lewis IX.? Of
the forty-four years which he reigned, the firſt
twenty of them exhibit a ſcene not unworthy to
be compared with the eleven laſt of Henry the
Great. But I am afraid all their glory will appear

to have been deſtroyed in the twenty-four following;
wherein it appears, that the exceſſive taxes upon

the ſubjects, to ſati-fy an ill-judged and deſtructive
devotion “; immenſe ſums tranſported into the
molt diſtant countries, for the ranſom of priſoners ;
ſo many thouſand ſubjects ſacrificed ; ſo many 11-
luſtrious houſes extinguiſhed; cauſed a univerſal
mourning throughout France, and all together 2
general calamity,

Let us for once, if it is poſſible, {x our principles;
and being, from long experience, convinced, that
the happineſs of mankind can never ariſe from war,
of which we ought to have been perſuaded Jong
ago; let us, upon chis principle, take a curſory view
of the hiſtory of our monarchy. We wil! pats by
the wars of Clovis and his predeceilors, becauſe
they ſeem to have been, in ſome degree, neceſlary
to confirm the recent foundations of the monarchy:
but what ſhall we ſay of thoſe wars in which the
four ſons of Clovis, the four ions of Clotaire I. and
their deſcendents, were engaged, during the uninter-
rupted courſe of one hundred and ſixty years? and

ot thoſe allo, by which, for the ſpace of one hundred

ſeventy-two other years, commencing with Lewis
le Debonnaire, the kingdom was haraſſed and torn ?
What follows is ſtill worſe: The lighteſt know-

»The devotion here meant, was the holy war, which coſt
France much blood and trealure.

M 3 ledge

Pans FE
— — —

— — 2

— — — — — — — — — — * —
= 2 —_ — — — — — —
— 3 — — > — — — — — — _
— — — — — — 22 — —
5 — - - _— ——
— — 4 e — -
_= 2 — — — — a — — —
= Y — £ — £ = -
2 — - — 1 —— 2
— — — — ———obͤ4 ͤ — — -
= [1 *

—

8 3 * — . ”
- - _ — — — — - =
— == = _ — — — by = => — e *
— — — — — — -
- — — — =
 £2*= —2x= — nnmmt= Dn . — * . Þ
2 0 80 —— = — — > * 2
— :
q be 4 _— Py N oa &,- * ”- * *
— + - a I
— — —

5

U
3
g
4
iy

«6. ——_ 3

*

— -
ITY | —_
- © 4 — .
—

- > — =

®, Fig

- — As

EY

m6 M E M OI R S Böck XXX.

ledge of our hiſtory is ſufficient to convince any
one, that there was no real tranquillity in the
kingdom from Henry VIII. to the peace of Vervins:
and, in ſhort, all this long period may be called a
war of near four hundred years duration. After
this examination, from whence it inconteſtably ap-
pears, that our kings have ſeldom thought of any
thing but how to carry on their wars, we cannot
but be ſcrupulous in beſtowing-on- them-the title of
Truly Great Kings; though we (hall, nevertheleſs,
render them all the- juſtice-which appears to have
been their due: for I confeſs, (as indeed it would be
unjuſt to attribute to them only, a crime which was
properly that of all Europe), that ſeveral of theſe
princes were ſometimes in ſuch circumſtances as
rendered the wars juſt, and even neceſſary; and
from hence, when indeed there were no other means
to obtain it, they acquired a true and laſting glory,
For herein, from the manner in which ſeveral of
theſe wars were foreſeen, prepared for, and conduct-
ed, we may in their councils diſcover ſuch ma-

ſter-ſtrokes of policy, and in their perſons ſuch no-

ble inſtances of courage, as are deſerving of our

highett praiſes. . From whence then can proceed

the error of ſo many exploits, in appearance lo glo—

rious, though the effect of them has generally been |

the devaſtation both of France and all Europe?

] repeat it again, of all Europe, which even yet

ſeems ſcarce ſenſible, that in her preſ-nt ſituation,
a ſituation in which ſhe has been for ſeveral cen—

turies, every attempt which ſhall tend to her ſub- }

jection, or only to the too conſiderably augmenting |
of any one of her principal monarchies, at the ex- |
penſe of the others, can never be any other than |
a Chimerical and impoſſible enterpriſe. There ate
none of theſe monarchies, but whoſe deſtructon |
will require a concurrence of cauſes infinitely ſupert- |

21. to all human force. The whole, therefore, oi winat |
feems |

n

ſeems proper and neceſſary to be done, is to ſupport:
them all in a kind of equilibrium; and whatever
prince thinks, and in conſequence acts otherwiſe,
may indeed cauſe torrents of blood ſtream through
all Europe, but he will never be able to change herform.
When I obſerved, that the extent of France is:
not now ſo conſiderable as it was in the time of-
Charlemagne, my intention, moſt certainly, was
not, that this diminution ſhould be contidered as a
misfortune. In an age when we feel the ſad effects
of having had ambitious princes, from time to.
time, for our kings, were all to concur in flatter-
ing this fatal ambition, it would be the cauſe of ſtilh.
greater evils; and it may be generally ob.erved,
that the larger the extent of kingtom>, the more
they are ſubject to great revolutions and misfortunes.
The baſis of the tranquillity of our own, in par-
ticular, depends upon preſerving it within its pre-
ſent limits. A climate, laws, manners, and lan-
guage, different from our own ; ſeas, and chains of
mountains almoſt inaccetfible, are all ſo many bar-
riers, which we may conſider as fixed even by na-
ture, Beſides, what is it that France wants? will
ſhe not always be the richeſt and molt powerful
kingdom in Europe? It muſt be gran:ed“. Air
therefore which the French have to with or lefire, is,
that heaven grant them pious, good, and wiſe Kings;
and that theſe kings may employ their p wer in pre—

— —
—

”
'
1
a
:
| \
l
{ 1
+ 4
A
, *
,
*
11
be
-
[ ö
NP
| 1
1 7
f |
.H
»
4 : 4
« "
8
{

- r
\ — o
—— —

2 — —

=
— 8

* We cannot here agree with our author, that France will al-
„ ways remain the richett and moit powerful kingdom in Eu-
rope.” Were it poſſible this great man could now anno 1760)
ſurvey the operations of tne preſent war, he would. 1509 be un-
deccived, How has the naval power of France vaniſh.d, (O0
Conflins ! ): She bas loſt all North America, her icttlements in Af;5+
ca, and ſome of her ſugar-iſlands; har armics have. been beat,
| witneſs the plains of Roſb.ch and inden; her money is
| gone, her plate coined, and her (tate bankrupt —— How this war

| may end, God himſclf only kaows ;\ but we hope France will have
2v.longer reaſon to boaſt either of power or. zciches,

= . | _ — 1
— . —— — — ECT. :
- ” —
* * —
— hs —_ — = S

ITE. "i

ſerving |

1 M E II OI RX S Book XXX.

ſerving the peace of Europe; for no other enterpriſe
can truly be to them either profitable or ſucceſsful.
And this ex pla ins to us the nature of the defign
which Henry IV. was on the point of putting in
execution, when it pleaſed God to take him to him-
ſelf, too foon by ſome years for the happineſs of the
world. From hence likewiſe we may perceive the
motives for his purſuing a conduct ſo oppoſite to any
thing that had hitherto been undertaken by crowned
heads. Arid here we may behold what it was that
acquired him the title of Great. His deſigns
were not inſpired ty a mean and deſpicable am-
bition, nor guided by baſe and partial intereits. To
render France happy for ever, was his defire : and as
ſhe canmot peiiectly enjoy this felicity, unleſs all
Europe like te pat takes of it; ſo it was the hap-
pineſs of Europe in general which he laboured to
procure, an« this in a manner fo ſolid and durable,
that nothing (hould afterwards be able to ſhake its
foundations.
[ muſt confeſs J am under ſome apprenenſions,
leſt this ſcheme * thou!d at firſt be conſidered as one
of
* The Memoirs of Sally are the only monument which has pre
ſerved to poſterity an account of the great deſipu of Henry IV. Wee
find no tiaces of it in any of the hiftortans, authors of memoirs, or
other writers, that vere cotemporary with that prince: their ſilence in
this matter proceeded, no doubt, from their not knowing enough of !!
tolayanyrhing with certaintyabout it. Ihe world did not begin to de-
ſcant upon it ti the Memoirs of Sully, whereinit is ſo clearly deſcribed,
were publiſhed; and arnong all thoſe who have conſidered it ever
fince about the m ãdd he of the ſeventeenth century, 1 find ſcarce env
who have queftioned the poſſibilty of cxecuting it; doubtle(s, becavie
they lived near enough to the times in which it was formed, to bz
convinced, even from the mouths of thote who had been witnclics
of the prepara tions and difpolitions which were made, that all the
meafures had bm takers preciſely in the ſame manner as related by
the Duke of Sully; and conſequently, that it would have had but
few of thok obit aces to encounter which have fince been raiſed à“
ainſt it,
The anthor of a run uſeript diſcourſe in the Eing's library. which
to me appears to bethe molt ancient memoir we have of thi!

tine, ſccias not 33 the Icaſt to have doubted of ſucceſs in its cxccu—
tion.

. 129

of thoſe darling chimeras, or idle political ſpecula-
tions, in which a mind ſuſceptible of, ſtrange and
ſingular ideas, may be ſo eaſily engaged. Thoſe who

ſhall! thus think of it, muſt be of that fort of peo—

ple

tion. And NM. de Perefixe, u ho in the third part of his hiſtory of
Henry the Great, has given a ſhort but very accurate account of
the ſcheme, ſays phſitively that it would have ſucceeded ; and far-
ther confirms his aſſertion by proofs, which he gives, p 388 and
the following. The continuator of Thuanus, in what little he has
ſaid of it, anno 1609 and 1610, does not appear to have becn of
a different ſentiment. The Marechal de er alſo, in bis
journal, tom. 1. ſeems to be in its favour. To theſe authorities we
may alſo join that of the authorsof the life of the Duke d*Epernon,
and ſome others, who all ſeem to be of the fame opinion Indeed,
till the be. inning of the preſent century, all authors appear to have
been unanimous in this point; and ſeveral of our modern hiſto-
rians have joined them herein.

Vittorio Siri (Mem. Recond- tom. 1. p. 29 $14. tom 2 p. 47.
&c.) is the firſt that I know by whom this great enterpriſe has been
treated as abſurd and impoſſible : but the ignorance u hich hc ſhews
in the whole affair, even in thoſe points which are the leatt conteſt-
ed ; his attachment to the Spaniſh politics, and his diftance from
the perſons of Henry IV. and his miniſter, which is every way,
apparent in all he fxys on the ſubject, render him, in this reſpect
very juſtly exceptionable. His ſentiments have been adopted by.
the author of the hiſtory of the mother and ſon, tom. 1. p. 44.
and for a ſimilar reaſon of attachment to the Queen, mother of
Lewis XIII. But this writer, ſuch as he is, producing no better
authority for his opinion, than the age of Henry IV. who was
then near ſixty, appears alſo to have been fo entirely unacquaint-
ed with the affair, that we may, without ſeruple, pronounce, he
was ignorant of the diſpoſition which had been made for the com-
plete execution of it within the ſpace of three years, and that he
condemns the deſign without underſtanding it.

I have much greater reverence for the authority of ſome modern
politicians, who conſider it as a kind of impotttbility, thus to change
the face of all Europe, in the manner propoſed by Henry IV. and
who imagine, that in our days a much moie happy expedient has
been diſcovered, whereby to obtain the equilibrium of Europe, than
by reviving the ancient council of the Amphy@ions What I
mean, is the precaution now obſerved, of having all the principal
powers of Europe accede to, and become the guarantees of every
particular treaty. But all thoſe calamities which we have ſuffered
in conſequence of war, do but tog plainly evince its inſutnGienaey.
In regard to the main ſtreſs of the queltion, I agree with them, that

Europe

130 M E M OI R S Book XXX,
ple on whom the firſt impreſſions upon a prejudiced
imagina ion, have the force of truth; or thoſe, who
by their diitance from the times, and their ignorance
of the circumitances, confound the wiſeſt and no-
bleſt enterpriſes that have ever been formed, with thoſe
chimerical projects which princes, intoxicated with
their power, have in all ages amuſed themſelves in
forming. I conſeſs, that if we attentively examine
the deſigns which have been planned from motives

of vanity, confidence in good fortune, ignorance,
nay, from ſloth, and even timidity itſelf, we muſt

Europe could not now, but with great difficulty, be conſtituted
in the manner propoſed by Henry the Great : nevertheleſs I be.
lieve, without pretending to ſubject any one to my opinion, that
thoſe who treat this prince's deſign as a chimera, do not pay all
the neceſſary attention to the circumſtances of thoſe times, where.
in Europe, from her frequent dangers of being ſubjected to the
houſe ot Auſtrii, and by the bloody wars which a difference of re-
ligion had excited, and continued daily to excite, found herſelf
in 4 manner compelled to have recourſe to extraoidinary means to
put a period to her miſcries. .

I cannot finiſh this remark better, than in the words of N.
L' Abbé de Saint Pierre, in his Diicours ſur le grand homme:
« From hence we may perceive, that if Henry IV. King of
France, had executed his celebrated and welt proj} td denn,
whereby to render pcace perpetual and univerſal amonp the ſove—
reipns of Europe, he would have procurcd the greateſt ban ft
that it was poſſible, not only to his own ſ»bjetts; but to ali the
Chriſtian kingdoms ; and even, by a neeetiar y conſeguence, to the
world in general: a benefit of which all generations, p cſent and
to come, would have participated down to the lateſt time; a be-
nefit, by which we ſhould have been ex-mpted from thoſe ter-
rible and numerous evils, which are the effects of foreign and do.
meſtic wars; a benefit, which would have been the ſource of #1!
thoſe: ſweets which naturally low from an uniaterrupted and u-
niverſal tranquillity : if, I ſay, he had been ſo happy as to ! avs
executed this great deſign, it would have rendered him, beyond
all compariſion, the greateſt man the world ever has, or probably
ever will, produce.” After ſome farther reflections upon the
means of rendering this project ſill more practicable, this judicious
author adds: This prince, however, has always had the ho-
nour of being conſidered as the author of the moſt important in-
vention, and moſt uſeful dilcovery, for the benefit of mankins,
that has yet appcared in the world; the exccution of which
may, perhaps, be reſerved by Providence, for the greateſt and
moſt capable of lis ſucceſſors,”

be.

O F „ 130

be ſurpriſed to behold ſovereigns plunged blindly into
ſchemes, ſpecious perhaps in appearance, but which
at bottom have not the leaſt degree of poſſibility.
The mind of man, with ſo much complacency, nay,
even with ſo much ardor, purſues Whatever it fan—
cies great or beautiful, that it is ſorry to be made
ſenſible, that theſe objects have frequently nothing
real or ſolid in them. But in this, as well as in o—
ther things, there is an oppoſite extreme to be avoid-
ed ; which 1s, that as we uſually fail in the execution
of great deſigns, from not commencing and continu-
ing them with ſufficient vigour and ſpirit ; ſo likewiſe,
we are defective in the knowledge of their true worth
and tendency, becauſe we do not thoroughly and
properly conſider them in ail their dependencies and
con{equences, I have myſelt been me difficult to
perſuade in this matter, than perhaps any perſen who
ſhall read theſe memoirs; and this I conſider as an
effect of that cold, cautious, and unenrterp iling temper,
which makes fo cnliderable a part of my character.

I remember the firſt time the King {puke to me of a
political ſyſtem, by which all Europe might be regu-
lated and governed as one great family, | ſcarce paid
any attention to what he faid, imagining that he
meant no more by it than merely to. divert him'elf, or
perhaps to ſhew, that his thoughts on political ſub-
jects were greater, and penetta ed deeper, than moſt
others: my reply was a mixture ot pleaſantry and
compliment. Henry faid.no more at that time, He
often confe ſſed to me afterwards, that he had long con-
cealed from me what he meditated on this ſubject,
rom a principle of ſhame, which many labour under,
eſt they ſhould diicloſe deſigns which might appear
ndiculous or impoſſible. I was aſtoniſhed when,

me time after, he renewed our converſation on
is head, and continued from year to year, to enter—
1 Wh, . .

: an me with new regulaions and new improvements

u his ſcheme.

1

132 M E II O IRS Book XXX.

I had never thought ſeriouſly about this ſcheme. If te
by accident it came into my thoughts for a moment, _
the firſt view of the deſign, which ſuppoſed a reu- 4

nion of all the different ſtates of Europe; immenſe
expenſes, at a time when France could ſcarce ſupply ng
her own neceflities ; a chain of events which to me
appeared infinite : theſe were conſiderations which
had always made me reject the thought, as vain :
I even apprehended there was ſome illuſion in af
it: I recollected ſome of thoſe enterpriſes in which
we had endeavoured to engage Europe. I conſidered MY
thoſe in particular which had been formed by ſome
of our kings, from much leſs conſiderable mo- |
tives, and 1 felt myſelf diſguſted with this, from
the bad ſucceſs of all the former. The dif-
poſition of the princes of Europe to take umbrage Jj
againſt France, when ſhe would have aſſiſted them i
to diſſipate their fears from the too great power of h
Spain, this alone to me appeared an inſurmountable mn
obſtacle,

Strongly prejudiced by this opinion, I uſed ny WF .
utmoſt efforts to undeceive Henry; who, on his oy
fide, ſurpriſed not to find me of his ſentiment in ariy
-one point, immediately undertook, and readily ſuc-
ceeded in convincing me, that my thus indifcrimi- ge
nately condemning all parts of his project, in which l
he was certain that every thing at leaſt was not
blameable, could proceed from nothing but ſtrong .
prejudices I could not refuſe, at his ſolicitations, to |
uſe my endeavours to gain a thorough comprehen-
ſion of it: I formed aclearer plan of it in my mind:
I collected and united all its different branches: |
ſtudied all its proportion> and dimenſions, if I may
fay ſo; and I diſcovered in them a regularity and
mutual dependence, of which, when I only con-
ſidered the defign in a confuſed and careleſs» manner,
I had not been at all ſenſible. The benefit which
woul] manif-itly ariſe from it to all Europe, was
what moſt imaiediately ſtruck me, as being wy

tec

rei. 133

fect the plaineſt and moſt evident: but the means

to accompliſh ſo good a delign were, therefore, what
I heſitated at the longeſt. The general ſituation of
the affairs of Europe, and of our own in particular,
appeared to me every way contrary to the execution.
I did not conſider, that, as the execution of it might
be deferred til] aproper opportunity, we had all thoſe
reſources whereby to prepare ourſelves, which time
affords thoſe who know how to make the beſt uſe
of it. I was at laſt convinced, that however diſ-
proportionate the means might appear to the effect,
a courſe of years, during which every thing ſhould
as much as poſſible be made ſubſervient to the great
object in view, would ſurmount many difficulties.
Itis indeed ſomewhat extraordinary, that this point,
which appeared to be, and really was, the moft
difficult of any, ſhould at laſt become the moſt eaſy.

Having thus viewed all the parts of the ſcheme in
their proper point of light, and weighed them tho-
roughly, after ſuppoſing every accident that might
happen, I found myſelf confirmed in the opinion,
that the deſign of Henry the Great was, upon the
whole, juſt in its intention, poſiibte, and even prac-
ticable in all its parts, and infinitely glorious in all
its effects: ſo that, upon all pos oo I was the
firſt to recall the King to his engagements, and ſome-
times to convince him by thoſe very arguments
which he himſelf had taught me.

The conſtant attention this prince paid to all af-
fairs tranſacted round him, from an effect of thoſe
lingularly unhappy circumſtances, by which, in
almoſt every inſtant of his life, he found himſelf em-
barraſſed, had been the cauſe of his forming this de-
ſign, even from the time when, being called to
the crown by the death of Henry III. he conſider-
ed the humbling of the houſe of Auſtria as what was
abſolutely es Fe for his ſecurity ; yet, if he was

Vor. V. N not

134 M E M OI R 8 Book XXY,

not beholden to Elifabeth * for his thought of the
deſign, it is, however, certain that this great Queen
had herſelf conceived it long before, as a means to
revenge Europe for the attempts of its common e-
nemy. The troubles in which all the following
years were engaged, the war which ſucceeded in
1595, and that againſt Savoy after the peace of Ver-
vins, forced Henry into diffculties which obliged
him to lay aſide all thoughts of other affairs; and
it was not till after his marriage, and the firm re-
eitabliſiment of peace, that he renewed his thoughts
upon his firſt deign, to execute which, appeared

then more impoſtible, or at leaſt more improbable,

than ever,

He, nevertheleſs, communicated it by letters to
Eliſabeth ; and this was what inſpired hem with ſo
ſtrong an inclination to confer together in 1601,
when this princeſs came to Dover, and Henry to
Calais. What the ceremony of an interview would
not have permitted them to do, I at laſt begun by
the voyage which I made to this princeſs, 1 found
her dee ly engaged in the means by which this great

defign might be fucceſsfuily executed; and, not-
withſtanding the difficulties which ſhe apprehended }

* The preſent Duke of Sully is poſſeſſed of the original of an
excellent I: tier of Henry the Great, ſuppoſed to have been rote
by him to Queen Eliſabeth, though this princeſs is not named,
neither in the body of the latter, nor in the ſuperſcription, which 3
is in theſe words: Jo her who merits immortal praiſe. "The terms
in which Henry herein ſpeaks of a certain political project, which 8

he calls the moſt exceilent and rare enterfriſe that ever the human

mind conceived— a thought rather divine than human; the praiſes
which he beſt»ws upon this diſcourſe jo well connetted, and enn

ſtrative of what would be neceſſary for the government of empires aud

k'.igdoms-- on thoſe concepiions and reſolutions from which nothing |

leſs may be hoped than mg/t remarka{le iſſues uth of honc ur and ge.
All theſe poſſages can relate to none but Eliſabeth, nor mean
any other than the great deſign in queſtion; concerning which $

it from hence evidently appears, that the Queen of Englend had

by letters diſcloſed her thoughts to Henry. The letter from |
which theſe extracts are taken, is dated from Paris, the 11th ol

Tuly, but no year. Lettres de Henry le Grand,

pad 92

r

in!

0-7 . 135

© in its two principal points, namely, the agreement
aof religions, and the equality of the powers, ſhe
0 did not to me apppear at all to doubt of its ſuccels,
which ſhe chiefly expected, for a reaſon, the juſt-
8 neſs of which I have ſince been well convinced of;
n and this was, that, as the plan was really only con-
- W trary to the deſign of ſome princes, whoſe ambi-
d WF tious views were ſufficiently known to all Europe,
| IF this difficulty, from which the neceiity of the ce-
ſign more evidently appeared, would rather pro-
mote than retard its fucceſs. She farther ſaid, that
its execution by any other means than that of arms,
would be very deſirable, as this has always ſome-
thing odious in it: but ſhe confeſſed, that indeed it
would be hardly poſſible to begin it any otherwite,
A very great number of the articles, conditions, and
different diſpoſitions, is due to this Queen; and
ſufficiently ſhew, that in reſpect of wiſdom, pene-
tration, and all the other perſections of the mind,
ſhe was not inferior to any king, the moſt truly de-
ſerving of that title.

It muſt indeed be conſidered as a very great miſ-
fortune, that Henry could not at this time ſecond
the intentions of the Queen of England, who wiſhed
to have the deſign put in immediate execution; but
when he thus laid the foundation of the edifice, he
ſcarce hoped to ſee the time when the finiſhing hand
would be put to it. The recovery of his own king-
dom from the various maladies by which it was af-
ficted, was a work of ſeveral years; and unhappily
be had himſelf ſeen forty-eight when he began it:
he purſued it, nevertheleſs, with the greateſt vigour,
Thegegict of Nantz had been publiſhed with this
view, and every other means was uſed which might
gain the reſpect and confidence of the princes of Eu-
rope, Henry and I, at the ſame time, applied our-
ſelves with indefatizable labour to regulate the inte-
Gior affairs of the kingdom. We conſidered the
N 2 death.

136 NM E M O I R Ss Book XXX.

death of the King of Spain as the moſt favourable
event that cauld happen to our deſign : but it recei-
ved ſo violent a ſhock by the death of Eliſabeth, as
had like to have made us abandon all our hopes,
Henry had no expectation, that the powers of the
north, nor King James, the ſucceſſor of Eliſabeth,
when he was acquainted with his character, would
any of them fo readily. conſent to ſupport him in
his deſign as this princeſs had done. However,
the new allies which he daily gained in Germa-
ny, and even in Italy, comforted him a little for the
loſs of Eliſabeth. The truce between Spain and the
Low Countries may alſo be numbered among in-
cidents favourable to it.

Yet, if we conſider all the obflacles which after-
wards aroſe in his own kingdom, from the Pro-
teſtants, the Catholics, the clergy, nay even from
his own council, it will appear as if all things con-
| ſpired againſt it. Could it be imagined, that Henry,
in his whole council, ſhould not find one perſon,
| beſides mylelf, to whom he could, without danger,
diſcloſe the whole of his deſigns? and that the re-
ſpect due to him, could ſcarce reſtrain thoſe who
appeared moſt devoted-to his ſervice, from treating
what, with the greateſt circumſpection, he had in-
truſted them with, as wild and extravagant chimeras ?
But nothing diſcouraged Henry, who was an abler
politician and a better judge than all his council, or
the whole kingdom; andwhen he perceived, that, not-
withſtanding the many obſtacles, atfairs began, both
at home and abroad, to wear a favourable aſpect, he
then conſidered the ſucceſs as infallible.

Nor will this his judgment, when thoroughly
conſidered, be found ſo preſumptuous as, from 2
ſlight examination, it may appear to ſome. For what
did he hereby require of Europe? Nothing more
than that it ſhould promote the means by which he
propoſed to fix it in the. polition, towards which, by

nis

rr eb 137

his efforts, it for ſome time had tended. Theſe
means he rendered ſo eaſy to execute, that it would
ſcarce require what many of the princes of Europe

would voluntarily ſacrifice, for advantages much leſs

real, leſs certain, and leſs durable. W hat they would
gain by it, beſides the ineſtimable benefits atiſing
from peace, would greatly exceed all the expenſes
they would be at. What reaſon then could any
of them have to oppoſe it ? and if they did not op-
poſe it, how could the houſe of Auſtria ſupport it-
ſelf againſt powers, in whom the deſire and pleaſure
of depriving it of that ſtrength which it had uſcd oy
to oppreſs them, would have raiſed againſt it as mz
ny open as it had ſecret enemies ? that 1s, all e
entire? Nor would theſe princes have any reaſon to
be jealous of the reſtorer of their liberty; for he was
ſo far from ſeeking to reimburſe himſelf for all the
expenſes which his generoſity would hereby engage
him in, that his intention was voluntarily and ior

ever to relinquiſh all power of augmenting his domi-

nions, not only by conqueſt, but by a! other uit
and lawful means. By this he would have diſcover-
ed the ſecret to convince all his neighbours, that his
whole deſign was to fave, both himſelf and them,
thoſe-immenſe ſums which the maintenance of fo
many thouſand ſoldiers, ſo many fortited places,
and ſo many military expenſes require; to.
iree them for ever from the fear of thoſe bloody

cataſtrophes ſo common in Europe; to procure them

an uninterrupted repoſe; and, finally, to u-
nite them all in an indiſſoluble bond of ſecurity
and friendſhip, after which they might live
together like ee and reciprocally viſit like
good neighbours, without the trouble of ceremony

and without the expenſe of a train of A
which princes uſe at beſt only for oſtentation, and
frequently to conceal their miſery, Does it not in—
deed reflect ſhame and reproach on a people who

affect to be ſo poliſhed and refined in their manners,

* that.

M EM OI R S Book XXX.

that all their pretended improvements have not yet
(Lwill not ſay procured them tranquillity, but only)
guarded them from thoſe barbarities which they de-
teſt in nations the moſt ſavage and uncultivated ?
and to deſtroy theſe pernicious ſeeds of contuſion
and diſorder, and to prevent the barbarities of
which they are the cauſe, could any ſcheme have
been more happily and perfectly contrived than
that of Henry the *

Here then is all that could be reaſonably expect-
ed or required. It is only in the power of man to
prepare and act; ſucceſs is the work of a moie
mighty hand. Senſible people cannot be blamed for
being prejudiced in favour of theſſcheme in queltion,
from this circumſtance only, that it was formed by
the two potentates whom poſterity will always con-
ſider as the moſt perſect models of the art of govern-
ing. In regard to Henry in particular, I inſiſt that
it belongs only to princes, who, like him, have had
a conſtant ſucceſſion of obſtacles to encounter in
all their deſigns, Theſe, I ſay, are the princes
who alone are privileged to judge what are real ob-
ſtacles; and when we behold them willing to lay
don their lives in ſupport of their opinions, ſurely
we may abide by theit ſentiments, without fear cf
being deceived, For my own part, I thail always
think with regret, that France, by the blow which
it received from the loſs of this great prince, was
deprived of a glory far ſuperior to that which his
reign had acquired . There remains only to explain
the ſeveral parts of the deſign, and the manner in
which they were to be exccuted, We. will begin
with what relates to religion,

138

From hence we may diſcover what credit ſhould be given
to Siri, when he fays, that the ſole paſſion of Henry the Great

was to amaſs riches; that his miniſter forced him into the de-

ſin agaluſt his inclin ation; and that the Duke of Sully, whim
he believes to be the ſole author of it, was himſclf prepoſſeſſed
in its favour only from mcre obllinaey, or perhaps from motives
of ſelt-intereſt.

Two

K ”
- ö

„„ 139

Two religions principally prevail in Chriſtendom,
the Roman and the Reformed ; but, as this latter ad-
mits of ſeveral variations in its worſhip, which ren-
der it, if not as different from itſelf as from the
Roman, at leaſt as far from being reunited, it is
therefore neceſſary to divide it in two, one of which
may be called the Reformed, and the other the Pro-
teſtant religion. The manner in which theſe three
religions prevail in Europe is extremely various,
Italy and Spain remain in poſſeſſion of the Roman
religion, pure and without mixture of any other.-
The Reformed religion ſubſiſts in France with the
Roman, only under favour of the edicts, and is
the weakeſt. England, Denmark, Sweden, the
Low Countries, and Switzerland, have allo a mix-
ture of the ſame kind, but with this difterence, that
in them the Proteſtant is the governing religion, the
others are only tolerated. Germany unites all theſe,
and even in ſeveral of its circles, as well as in Po-
land, ſhews them equal favour. I ſay nothing of
Muſcovy or Ruſha. Theſe vaſt countries, which
are not leſs than fix hundred leagues in length, and
four hundred in breadth, being in great part ſtill
idolaters, and in part ſchiſmatics, ſuch-as Greeks
and Armenians, who have introduced ſo many ſu—
perſtitious practices in their worſhip, that there
ſcarce remains any conformity with us among them;
beſides, that they belong to Aſia at leaſt as much as
to Europe, we may indeed almoſt conſider them as
a barbarous country, and place them in the ſame
claſs with Turky, though, for theſe five hundred
years, we have ranked them among the Chriſtian
powers.

Each of theſe three religions being now eſtabliſh-
ed in Europe, in ſuch a manner that there ;s not the
leaſt appearance that any of them can be deſtroyed,
and experience having ſufficiently demonſtrated the
inutility and danger of ſuch an enterpriſe, the beſt

therefore

120 M E M OI RS | Book XXX.

therefore that can be done, is to preſerve, and even
ſtrengthen all of them in ſuch a manner, never-
theleſs, that this indulgence may not become an en.
couragement to the production of new ſects or opi-
nions, which ſhould carefully be ſuppreſſed on their
firſt appeafance, God himſelf, by manifeſtly ſup-
porting what the Catholics were pleaſed to call the
new religion, has taught us this conduct, which is
not leſs conformable to the holy ſcriptures than
confirmed by its examples; and, beſides, the un-
ſurmountable difficulty of forcing the Pope's au-
thority to be received in thoſe places where it is now
no longer acknowledged, renders what is here pro-
poſed abſolutely neceſſary. Several cardinals e-

ally ſagacious and zealous, and even ſome Popes,
as Clement VIII. and Paul V. were of this opi-
nion.

All, therefore, that remains now to be done, is

to ſtrengthen the nations who have made choice of |

one of theſe religions, in the principles they profeſs,
as there is nothing in all reſpects fo pernicious as a
liberty in belief; and thoſe nations whoſe inhabi-
tants profeſs ſeveral, or all of theſe religions, ſhould
be careful-to obſerve thoſe rules which they find

neceſſary to remedy the ordinary inconveniencies of |

a toleration, which, in other reſpects, they probably

experience to be beneficial. Italy, therefore, pro- 1

feſſing the Roman religion, and being moreover the
reſidence of the Popes, ſhould preſerve this religion

in all its purity ; and there would be no hardſhip in |
obliging all its inhabitants, either to conform to }
The fame regulation, very

it, or quit the country.

nearly, might be obſerved in regard to Spain. In
ſuch ſtates as that of France, where there is at leaſt
a governing religion, whoever ſhould think the re-
gulation too ſevere, by which Calviniſm would be
always ſubordinate to the religion of the prince, |

might be permitted to depart the countty. No new |
regulation

r. 141

regulation would be neceſſary in any of the other
nations; no violence on this account, but liberty
unreſtrained, ſeeing this liberty is become even a
fundamental principle in their governments.

Thus we may perceive every thing on this head
might be reduced to a very few maxims, ſo much
the more certain and invariable, as they were not
contrary to the ſentiments of any one. The Pro-
teſtants are very far from pretending to force their
religion upon any of their neighbours, by whom it
is not voluntarily embraced. 'I he Catholics, doubt-
leſs, are of the ſame ſentiments, and the Pope would
receive no injury in being deprived of what he con-
feſſes himſelf not to have poſſeſſed for a long time.
His ſacrificing theſe chimerical rights would be a-
bundantly compenſated by the regal dignity with
which it would be proper to inveſt him, and by the

honour of being afterwards the common mediator
between all the Chriſtian princes, a dignity which he
would then enjoy without jealouſy, and for which.
it muſt be confeſſed this court, by its ſagacious con-

duct, has ſhewn itſelf the moſt proper of any.
Another point of the political ſcheme, which al-
ſo concerns religion, relates to the infidel princes of
Europe, and conſiſts in forcing thoſe entirely out of
it who refuſe to conform to any of the Chriſtian
doctrines of religion. Should the Grand Duke of
Muſcovy, or Czar of Ruſſia, who is believed to be

the ancient khan of Scythia, refuſe to enter into

the aſſociation after it is propoſed to him, he ought
to be treated like the Sultan of Turky, deprived of
his pofleſſions in Europe, and confined to Alia only,
where he might, as long as he pleaſed, without any
interruption from us, continue the wars in which
he is almoſt conſtantly engaged againſt the Turks
and Perſians. |

To ſucceed in the execution of this, which will

not appear difficult, if we ſuppoſe that all Chriſtian.
Princes.

{
1
.Nf
l fl
> ol -
|
1
2
4
1
vi
i
i\H
of
.
1
}

e

-

Lo —

142 M E M O I RS Book XXX.

princes unanimouſly concurred in it, it would only
be neceſſary for each of them to contribute, in pro-
portion to their ſeveral abilities, towards the ſupport
of the forces, and all the other incidental expenſes,
which the ſucceſs of ſuch an enterpriſe might re-
quire. Theſe reſpective quotas were to have been
determined by a general council, of which we ſhall
ſpeak hereafter. The following is what Henry the
Great had himſelf conceived on this head. The
Pope for this expedition ſhould have furniſhed*eight
thouſand foot, twelve hundred horſe, ten cannons,
and ten galleys; the Emperor and the circles of
Germany, ſixty thouſand foot, twenty thouſand
horſe, five large cannons, and ten galleys or other
veſſels; the King of France twenty thouſan! foot,
four thouſand horſe, twenty cannons, and ten ſhips
or galleys; Spain, Britain, Denmark, Sweden, and
Poland, the like number with France, obſervin

only, that theſe powers ſhould together ſupply what
belonged to the ſea-ſervice in the manner moſt ſuit-
able to their reſpeive conveniencies and abilities
therein; the King of Bohemia five thouſand foot,
fifteen hundred horſe, and five cannons; the King
of Hungary twelve thouſand foot, five thouſand
horſe, twenty cannons, and fix ſhips; the Duke of
Savoy, or King of Lombardy, eiglit thouſand foot,
fifteen hundred horſe, eight cannons, and fix gal-
leys ; the republic of Venice ten thouſand foot,
twelve hundred horſe, ten cannons, and twenty-five
galleys ; the republic of the Swifs cantons fiftcen
thouſand foot, five thouſand horſe, and twelve can-
nons ; the republic of Holland twelve thouſand foot,
twelve hundred horſe, twelve cannons, and twelve
ſhips ; the Italian republics ten thouſand foot, twelve

hundred horſe, ten cannons, and eight galleys ; the

whole together amounting to about two hundred
and ſeventy thouſand foot, fifty thouſand horſe, two
hundred cannons, and one hundred and RON

up3

© F.::$8+U: LL!Y; 143

ſhips or galleys, equipped and maintained at the ex-
penſe of all thoſe powers, each contributing accor-
ding to his particular proportion.

This armament of the princes and ſtates of Eu-
rope appears ſo inconſiderable and ſo little bur-
denſome, when compared with the forces which
they uſually keep on foot to awe their neighbours,
or perhaps their own ſubjects, that were it to have
ſubſiſted, even perpetually, it would not have oc-
caſioned any inconvenience, and would have been
an excellent military academy : but, befides that
the enterpriſes for which it was deſtined, would not
always have continued; the number and expenſe
of it might have been diminiſhed in proportion to
the neceſſities, which would always have been the
ſame. Though I am perſuaded ſuch an armament
would have been fo highly approved of by all theſe
princes, that, after they had conquered with it
whatever they would not ſuffer any ſtranger ſhould
ſhare with them in Europe, they would have {ought
to join to it ſuch parts of Aſia as were moſt commo-
diouſly ſituated, and particularly the whole coaſt of
Africa, which is too near to our own territories for
us not to be frequently incommoced by it. The
only precaution to be obſerved in regard to theſe
additiona! countries, would have been to form them
into new kingdoms, declare them united with the
reſt of the Chriſtian powers, and beſtow them on
different princes ; carcfully obſerving to exclude
thoſe who before bore rank among the ſovereigns of
Europe.

That part of the deſign which may be conſidered
as purely political, turned almoſt entirely on a firſt
preliminary, which, I think, would not have met
with more difficulty than the preceding article.
This was to diveſt the houſe of Auſtria of the em-
pire, and of all the poſſeſſions in Germany, Italy,
and the Low Countries; in a word, to reduce it *

the

[1
+
|
Ti -
N |
— 14 + 4
v
|
19
ö
-
:
-
* my
y n
i”
17
11%
:
1 F
1 l : +
U
3
1
1
if :
it ,
| q*
4 * »
-
1
ti l
* F
i" 1
iT,
*
| K :
4 1!
9
!
L : 19
*
89
: iy
wet! | 6 187;
60
14 L
: : ,
| ©
f 10 .
[1 1 8
{4 15
*
: WH
: \ l
: 1
yy
: 0
"7 1
11
iy F
1 |
:
: y ,
1
i "
4 : th
14
1
1 ITE
11
1 -
p fy
- ' /
C 4 l ,
4
;
: ' *
LY! 4
S Wit :
$3
19
14
* :
l 1% |
| vo? |
1
fi
[ l
: nf
-

— — —
3 1 w
FLY Cr Rr —_
— —
— : .

744 M E M O I R S Book XXX.
the ſole kingdom of Spain, bounded by the ocean,

the Mediterranean, and the Pyrenean mountains.
But that it might, nevertheleſs, be equally power. 4
ful with the other ſovereignties of Europe, it ſhould
have Sardinia, Majorca, Minorca, and the o- x
ther iſlands on its own coaſts; the Canaries, the h

Azores, and Cape-Verd, with its poſleſhons in
Africa ; Mexico, and the American iſlands which P
belong to it; countries which alone might ſuffice :
to found great kingdoms ; finally, the Philippines, 4
Goa, the Moluccas, and its other poſſeſſions in p

Aſia.

From hence a method ſeems to preſent Itſelf, by F
which the houſe of Auſtria might be made amend; |
for what it would be deprived of in Europe, which 5
is to increaſe its dominions in the three other parts 6
of the world, by aſſiſting it to obtain, and by de- 0
claring it the ſole proprietor, both of what we do 7
know, and what we may hereafter diſcover in thoſe 5
parts. We may ſuppoſe, that, on this occaſion, it *
would not have been neceſſary to uſe force to bring ir
this houſe to concur in ſuch a defign z and, indeed, 4
even on this ſuppoſition, it was not the prince ot b.
| this houſe reigning in Spain, to whom theſe parts G
| of the world were to be ſubjected, but to different I:
| Princes of the ſame or of different branches, who, *
| in acknowledgment of their poſſeſſions, ſhould only 5
| have rendered homage to the crown of Spain, or, in
| at moſt, a tribute, as due to the original conque- þ
| rors. This houſe, which is ſo very deſirous of a:
| being the moſt powerful in the world, might here- b.
| by have continued to flatter itſelf with ſo pleaſing a k;
preheminence, without the other powers being en- 6
2 by its pretended grandeur. i bag
he ſteps taken by the houſe of Auſtria to arrive _
at univerſal monarchy, which evidently appears from hi

the whole conduct of Charles V. and his ſon, have
rendered this ſeverity as juſt as it is neceſiary ; = yy

K

. @ 0

„„ i: 4: ©.

145

J will venture to ſay, that this houſe would not have

had any reaſonable cauſe to complain of it. It is
true, it would be deprived of the empire ; but when
impartially conſidered, it will appear that all the
other princes of Germany, and even of Europe,
have an equal right to it. Were it neceſſary to
prove this, we need only recollect on what condi-
tions Charles V. himſelf, the moſt powerful of them
all, was acknowledged Emperor; conditions which,
at Smalcalde, he ſolemnly ſwore to obſerve, in pre-
ſence of ſeven princes or electors, and the deputies
of twenty-four Proteſtant towns ; the Landgrave of
Heſſe and the Prince of Anhalt being ſpeakers for
all of them. He ſwore, I ſay, never to act con-
trary to the eſtabliſhed laws of the empire, par-
ticularly the famous golden bull, obtained under
Charles IV. unleſs it were to amplify them, and
even that only with the expreſs conſent and advice
of the ſovereign princes of Germany ; not to infringe
nor deprive them of any of their privileges; not to
introduce foreigners into their council ; not to make
either war or peace without their conſent ; not to
beſtow honours and employments but on natives of
Germany; not to u'e any other but the German
language in all writings; not to levy any taxes by
his own authority, nor apply any conqueſts which
might be made, to his own particular profit. He,
in particular, formally renounced all pretences of
hereditary right in his houſe to the Imperial dignity ;
and, according to the ſecond article of the golden
bull, he ſwore never in his lifetime to recognize a
king of the Romans. When the Proteſtants of
Germany, after they had in a manner driven Ferdi-
nand out of it, conſented to have the Imperial
crown placed on his head, they were careful to make
him renew his engagements in regard to all theſe
articles, and to all theſe new regulations relative to

the free exerciſe of their .

Vol. V. As

T — b * — — —
. ent — — — — = ” 8 > 2 ,
- — n - — 2 * 3 —
— — Tn IS Bon
8 — -
Y 6 : 2 N 5 * 1 5 -
2 WE = -

1 A 8
„
2 and. 2 —5 11. ͤ ER Fo 1 — — ——— — — — — —
"4, 4% ala — — —
0 rel * . a * — — * *
- <— — — > 2 * —
r — - — — - — — —
— 8 7 — = „ — an = * =
4 — — — — = _ = ”
-_ ſ — * * — - — —— 27 J — 8 4 — — — —
- = -- — 2 — 2 = meme” z — > — —
— 2 = — i — — —
— — — = i - —_— —
— — A —— — — — — —
yo - - - — — — — — _ — — — — —
—_ — — — — a * — - 2 PS A —
— * — . * 4 — — — — — — — — * 2 — -

4 os —
= Tots
«

—

— —

—

146 M E MOI R S Book XXX.

As to the poſſeſſions of the houſe of Auſtria in
Germany, Italy, and the Low Countries, of which
it was to be deprived, not to mention here how
much it is indebted for them to a tyrannical uſurpa-
tion, it would, after all, be only depriving it of
territories which it keeps at ſo prodigious an expenſe
(I ſpeak, in particular, of Italy and the Low Coun-
tries) as all its treaſures of the Indies have not been
able to defray: and beſides, by inveſting it with
the excluſive privilege above mentioned, of gaining
new e{tabliſhments, and appropriating to its own ule
the mines and treaſures of the three other parts of
the world, it would be abundantly indemniſied;
for theſe new acquiſitions would be at leaſt as con-
fiderable, and undoubtedly far more rich, than
thoſe. But what is here propoſed mult not be un-
derſtood as if the other nations of Europe were ex-
cluded from all commerce to thoſe countries ; on
the contrary, it ſhould be free and open to every
one; and the houſe of Auſtria, inſtead of conſider—
Ing this ſtipulation, which is of the greateſt conſe-
quence, as an infringement of its privileges, would
rather have reaſon to regard it as a farther advan-
tage.

From a farther examination and conſideration of
thee diſpoſitions, I do not doubt but the houſe of
Auſtria would have accepted the propoſed condi-
tions without being forced to it: but, ſuppoſing the
contrary, what would a reſiſtance have fenihed !
The promiſe made to all the princes of Europe of
enriching themſelves by the territories of which this
houſe was to be diveſted, would deprive it of all
hopes of aſſiſtance from any of them.

Upon the whole then it appears, that all parties
would have been gainers by it, and this was what
aſſured Henry the Great of the ſucceſs of his deſign.
The empire would again become a dignity to which
all princes, but particularly thoſe of Germany, might

' aſpire ;

1611. . 147

aſpire ; and this dignity would be ſo much the more
defireable, though, according to its original inſtitu-
tion, no revenues would be annexed to it, as the
Emperor would be declared the firſt and chief ma-

iſtrate of the whole Chriſtian republic; and as we
may ſuppoſe this honour would afterwards be con-
ferred only on the moſt worthy, all his privileges
in this reſpect, inſtead of being diminiſhed, would
be enlarged, his authority over the Belgic and
Helvetic republics would be more conſiderable, and
upon every new election they would be obliged to
render him a reſpectful homage. The electors
would {till continue to enjoy the right of electing
the Emperor, as weil as of nominating the King of
the Romans; with this reſtritivn only, That the
election ſhould not be made twice together out of
the ſame family. The fult to have been elccied
in this manner, was the Elector of Bavaria, who
was alſo, in conſequence of the partition, to have
had thoſe territories poſſeſſed by the houſe of Au-
ſtria which joined to his own on the fide of Italy.

The reſt of theſe territories were to have been.

divided and equally diſtributed by the Kings of

France, England, Denmark, and Sweden, among

the Venetians, the Grifons, the Duke of Wirtem-

berg, and the Marquiſes of Baden, Anſpach, and
Dourlach. Bohemia was to have been conſtituted.
an elective kingdom, by annexing it to Moravia,

Sileſia, and Luſatia. Hungary was allo to have
been an eleCtive kingdom, and the Pope, the Em-
peror, the Kings of France, England, Denmark,
Sweden, and Lombardy, were to have had the
right of nomination to it: and becauſe this king-

dom may be conſidered as the barrier of Chriſten-

dom againſt the infidels, it was to have been ren-

dered the moſt powerful and able to reſiſt them:

and this was to have been done by immediately

adding to it the archduchy of Auſtria, Styria,
O 2 Carinthia,

14

4
by N.
1
by |
11% 3
1
Ws
.Þ
' |
a)
: þ
#1

_ —= So — — —

— "EAN
A

9
TAL af |

© —
1 — = = - — — — — — —
- . — 2 — — — —
. & 2 — 8 * = A 2 2 FA —
— — — — - . — — — POS 4 1 -
—_ a — — , _ _ —
IT". — —

—
2
——
- —

2
= *
>. 7.4 — ——— —— — æ—j — —— — —
bz: —é — — 2 —— — — . — —

— WV ES a
- -

2 _ 4 _ „ * 9 I,
. , > —— — —
* — — — — —

—— — —

— — —— 2 ̃ ꝗ ̃ꝗU— INS
=
— — — —
— 2 — --
- + * *
= —
1 8

F —— 2
— — N

148 MEMOIR Ss Book XXX.

Carinthia, and Carniola; and by afterwards incor-
porating with it whatever might be acquired in
Tranſilvania, Boſnia, Sclavonia, and Croatia. The
ſame electors were to have obliged themſelves,
by oath, to afliſt it upon all occaſions; and they
were to have been particularly careful never to grant
their ſuffrages from partiality, artihce, or intrigie ;
but always to confer the dignity on a prince, who,
by his great qualifications, particularly for war,
ſhould be generally acknowledged as moſt proper,
Poland, being from its nearneſs to Turky, Muſcovy,
and Tartary, in the ſame ſituation with Hungary, was
alſo to have been an elective kingdom, by the
ſame eight potentates; and its power was to
have been augmented, by annexing to it what-
ever ſhould be conquered from the infidels © ad-
joining to its own frontiers, and by determining in
its favour thoſe diſputes which it had with all its
Other neighbours. Switzerland, when augmented
by Franche-Comte, Alſace, Tirol, and other ter-
ritories, was to have been united into a ſovereign
republic, governed by a council or ſenate, of which
the Emperor, the princes of Germany, and the
Venetians, were to have been umpires.

The changes to be made in Italy were, that the
Pope ſhould be declared a ſecular prince, and bear
rank among the monarchs of Europe, and under
this title ſhould poſſeſs Naples, Apulia, Calabria,
and all their dependencies, which ſhould be indiſ-
ſolubly united to St Peter's patrimony; but in caſe
the holy father had oppoſed this, which indeed
could ſcarce have been ſuppoſed, the diſpoſition mult
then have been changed, and the kingdom of Naples
would have been divided and diſpoſed of as the e-
lectoral king ſhould have determined. Sicily was

to have been ceded to the republic of Venice, by

letters from the ſame eight principal potentates, upon
condition that it ſhould render homage for 1t to
every Pope, who (hall bear the title of Immediate

Chick

Chief of the whole Italian republic; otherwiſe, for
this reaſon, called The republic of the church. The
other members of this republic were to have been
Genoa, Florence, Mantua, Modena, Parma, and
Lucca, without any alterations in their govern-
ment : Bologna and Ferrara were to have been ren-
dered free cities; and all theſe governments were
every twenty years to have rendered homage to the
Pope their chief, by the gift of a crucifix of the va-
lue of ten thouſand crowns.

Of the three great republics of Europe, it ap-
pears, upon the Felt glance, that this would have
been the moſt brilliant and the richeſt. Neverthe- 6
leſs, it would not have been ſo; for what belonged .

— ů— —

— — — — —
— — —
— — 2 rr 2
— ü
—__ *
— —

— —

to the Duke of Savoy was not compriſed herein. | N
His territories: were to have been conſtituted one of |

the great monarchies of Europe, hereditary to males *
and females, and to have borne the title of the king-

dom of Lombardy: wherein, beſides the territory =.
ſo called, the Milaneſe and Mon ferrat would allo | |
have been compriſed; and the Duke of Mantua, . =
in exchange for theſe, was to have the duchy of 4
Cremona. An authentic teſtimony of the inſti— 91
tution would have been given by the Pope, the |
Emperor, and the other ſovereigus of the Chriſtian

—

republic. 4

Among all theſe different diſmemberings, we may We.
obſerve that France received nothing for itſelf, but | i
the glory of diſtributing them with equity. Henry -

had declared this to be his intention long before.
He even ſometimes ſaid, with equal moderation and
good ſenſe, that were theſe diſpoſitions once firmly |
eſtabliſhed, he would have voluntarily conſented 16 -
have the extent of France determined by a majority 1
of ſuffrages“. Nevertheleſs, as the dittricts of |

Arto:s,

*

— — — — — - _- —_- — — — — — —
2 — — —
— — — — —
— — — 7 2 - - — —
— — — —y„
= ——— ————̃ ̃ ˙— —ͤ — — — — Y 2
ö N ” — 5
: 0 1
. == —

— ͤ — — — — — —— — —— — —
PPP p ² . ²˙—⁵i ¹ꝛ]]˙ , oo — --

* What then does Siri mean, when he entertains us with the
deſign which he falſely affirms Henry the Great Fad to join
Lorrain to France, tom. 1. p. 555+? aud to get Savoy ceded to

0.3 him;

150 ME M 0.4.3 9 Book XXX,

Artois, Hainault, Cambray, Cambreſis, Tournay,
Namure, and Luxemburg, might more ſuitably
be annexed to France than any other nation, they
were to have been ceded to Henry; but to have
been divided into ten diſtin& governments, and be-
ſtowed on ſo many French princes or lords, all of
them bearing rank as ſovereigns.
In regard to England, it was preciſely the ſame:
this was a determined point between Eliſabeth and
Henry, the two princes who were authors of the
ſcheme, probably from an obſervation made by this
Queen, that the Britannic iſles, in all the different
ſtates through which they had paſſed, whether under
one or ſeveral monarchs, elective, hereditary, ma-
ſculine, or feminine, and among all the variations of
their Jaws and policy, had never experienced any
great diſappointments or misfortunes, but when their
ſovereigns had meddled in affairs out of their little
continent. It ſeems, indeed, as if they were con-
centeredin it even by nature; and their happineſs ap-
pears to depend entirely on themſelves, without
having any concerns with their neighbours, provided
that they ſeek only to maintain peace in the three
nations ſubject to them, by governing each according
to its own laws and cuſtoms. To render every
thing equal between France and England, Brabant
from the duchy of Limburg, the juriſdiction of
Malines, and the other dependencies on Flemith
Flanders, Gallican or Imperial, were to have been
formed into eight ſoveieign fiefs, to be given to ſo
many princes or lords of this nation.
Thele two parts excepted, all the reſt of the ſe-
venteen United Provinces, whether belonging to
Spain or not, were to have been erected into a free

him, tom. 2. p 61. What he ſays of the diſpoſitions, in regard
to the Pope and the Venetians, &e. tom. 2. p. 189. is equally
falſe. This writer ſecms indeed to have been in the pay of the
houſe of Auſtria.

an d

in r, - 268

and independent ſtate, under the title of the Belgic
republic; though there was one other fief to be
formed from them, bearing the title of a priticipa-
Jity, to be granted to the Prince of Orange; alſo
ſome other inconſiderable indemnities for three or
four other perſons. The ſucceſſion of Cleves was
to have been divided among thoſe princes whom the
Emperor would have deprived of it, as the means of
gratifying them at the expenſe of the houſe of
Auſtria, as well as ſume other princes of the ſame
diſtrict, to whom the Imperial towns ſituated there-
in, would have been granted. Even Sweden and
Denmark, though they were to be conſidered as un-
der the influence of the ſame law which England
and France had impoſed on themſelves, would, by
this diſtribution, have enlarged their territories, and
acquired other conſiderable advantages. An end
would have been put to the perpetual troubles
which agitated theſe two kingdoms ; and this, I
think, would have been rendering them no inconſi-
derable ſervice. All theſe ceſſions, exchanges, and
tranſpoſitions towards the north of Germany, were
to have been determined by the Kings of France,
England, and Lombardy, and the republic of
Venice,

And now perhaps the purport of the deſign may
be perceived, which was to divide Europe equally
among a certain number of powers, in ſuch a man-
ner, that none of them might have cauſe either of
envy or fear, from the poſſeſſions or power of the
others. The number of them was reduced to fif-
teen; and they were of three kinds: fix great here-
ditary monarchies, five elective monarchies, and
four ſovereign republics. The fix hereditary mo-
narchies were France, Spain, England or Britain,

monarchies were the Empire, the Papacy or Ponti—
fcate, Poland, Hungary, and Bohemia; the four
republics

Denmark, Sweden, and Lombardy; the five elective

— — = — —
— — — — — — Is
= . TY — — — — — OOO
—
—— — — ——
— *

|

0 —

152 M E M OI R s Book XXX.

republics were the Venetian, the Italian, or what,
from its dukes, may be called the Ducal, the Swiſs,
Helvetic, or Confederate, and the Belgic, or Pro-
vincial republic.

The laws and ordinances proper to cement an
union between all theſe princes, and to maintain that
harmony which ſhould be once eſtabliſhed among
them, the reciprocal oaths and engagements in re-
gard both to religion and policy, the mutual aſſu-
rances in reſpect to the freedom of commerce, and
the meaſures to be taken to make all theſe paiti-
tions with equity, and to the general content and
ſatisfaction of the parties: all thefe matters are to
be underſtood; nor is it neceſſary to ſay any thing
. of the precaution taken by Henry in regard to
them. The moſt that could have happened would
have been ſome trifling difficulties, which would ea-
fily have been obviated in the general council, re-
preſenting all the ſtates oft Europe; the eſtabliſh-
ment of which was certainly the happieſt invention
that could have been conceived, to prevent thoſe in-
novations which time often introduces in the wWiſeſt
and moſt uſeful inftitutions.

The mode! of this general council of Europe
had been formed on that of the ancient Amphyct:-
ons of Greece, with ſuch alterations only as ren-
dered it ſuitable to our cuſtoms, climate, and po-
licy. It conſiſted of a certain number of commiſ-
ſaries, miniſters, or plenipotentiaries from all tlie
governments of the Chriſtian republic, who were to
be conſtantly aſſembled as a ſenate, to deliberate on
any affairs which might occur; to diſcuſs the dit-
ferent intereſts, pacify the quarrels, clear up and de-
termine all the civil, political, and religious affairs
of Europe, whether within itſeif or with its neigh-
bours. The form and manner of proceeding in
the ſenate would have been more particularly de-

termined by the ſuffrages of the ſenate itſelt. Hens?
| Was

1!
te
t.
8
P
1
v
ſe
b
Ci
fc
N
V
dt
h.
. of
of

Cr

BB DD „ 2 rd FA = -£A .u

2 ro»

F.

L. 153

was of opinion, that it ſhould be compoſed of four
commiſſaries from each of the following potentates:
the Emperor, the Pope, the Kings of France,
Spain, England, Denmark, Sweden, Lombardy,

Poland, and the republic of Venice; and of two

only from the other republics and inferior powers,
which all together would have compoſed a ſenate of
about ſixty tix perſons, who ſhould have been re-
choſe every three years,

In regard to the place of meeting, it remained
to have been determined, whether it would be bet-
ter for the council to be fixed or ambulatory, divided
in three, or united in one. If it were divided in-
to three, each containing twentv-two magiſtrates,
then each of them muſt have. been fixed in ſuch a
centre as ſhould appear to be moſt commodiaus, as
Paris or Bourges for one, and ſomewhere about
Trente and Cracovia, for the two others. If it

were judged more expedient not to divide their aſ-

ſembly, whether fixed or ambulatory, it muſt have
been nearly in the centre of Europe, and would
conſequently have been fixed in ſome one of the
fourteen cities following: Metz, Luxemburg,
Nancy, Cologne, Mayence, Treves, Francfort,
Wirtzburg, Heidelberg, Spire, Worms, Straſ-
burg, Bale, Bizancon.

Beſides this general council, it would perhaps
have been proper to have conſtituted ſome others,
of an inferior degree, for the particular convenience
of different diſtricts, For example, were fix ſuch
created, they might have been placed at Dantzick,
Nuremberg, Vienna, Bologna, Conſtance ; and
the laſt, where ever it ſhould be judged moſt conve-
nient for the kingdoms of France, Spain, England,
and the Belgic republic. But whatever the number
or form of theſe. particular councils might have
been, it would have been abſolutely neceſtary, that
they ſhould be ſubordinate, . and recur, by appeal,

to

—— 2
Rene —
a —

—

— — — a_

- "Oy —— —
— 2 — 2 —
— —
— 2 —

— * * 4
—— —

% —
rr i= > «;
— — — —
—— — —

—

—

— — —
* *
— —
— — — =>

—

- — * A -
— = -

*

--
2: .
—  —— _—
== — —
2 e.

— —

—

— — — 7»

—
— —— A NN

&
— 2 —
—
— — —
— — — =
3 4 —

— — — —

—
— —

—_—_— — a —
—U— E —

893—:J«92
— —

* _
——IJ

* — —— — —
"I * -

— — N * — *
—— — . 4 _ A 4"
EEE — MI rr rr ===:
— — —

xx MEMOIR Ss Book XXX.

to the great general council, whoſe decifions, when
conſidered as proceeding from the united authority
of all the ſovereigns pronounced in a manner equal-
ly free and abſolute, mult have been regarded as fo
many final and irrevocable decrees.

But let us quit theſe ſpeculative deſigns, in which
practice and experience would perhaps have cauſed
many alterations ; and let us come to the means
actually employed by Henry to facilitate the execu-
tion of his great deſign,

To gain one of the moſt powerful princes of Eu-
rope, with whom to concert all his deſigns, was
what Henry always conſidered as of the utmoſt con-
ſequence : and this was the reaſon, that after the
death of Eliſabeth, who had indiſſolubly united the
intereſt of the two crowns of France and England,
every means was uſed which might inſpire her
ſucceſſor, King James, with all her ſentiments.
Had I but ſucceeded in the folemn embaſſy, the
particulars of which I have related already, fo far
as to have gained this prince's conſent to have his
name appear openly with Henry's, this military
confederacy, eſpecially if it had, in like manner,
been ſtrengthened with the names of the Kings- of
Denmark and Sweden, would have prevented the
troubles and difficulties of many negotiations : but
nothing farther could be obtained of the King of
England, than the fame promiſes which were re-
quired of the other courts; namely, that he would
not only not oppoſe the confederacy, but when Hen-
ry had made his deſigns public, would declare him-
ſelf in his favour, and contribute towards it in the
ſame manner as the other powers intereſted therein.
A means was, indeed, afterwards found to obtain
the execution of this promiſe, in a manner ſo much
the more eaſy, as it did not diſturb the natural in-
dolence of this prince ; and this was, by getting
what he heſitated to undertake in his own name,

| executed

O F 88 L L F. 1.55

executed by his ſon, the Prince of Wales, who, as
ſoon as he had obtained his father's promiſe, that
he would at leaſt not obſtruct his proceedings, pre-
vented Henry's utmoſt wiſhes; being animated
with a thirſt of glory, and deſire to render himſelf
worthy the eſteem and alliance of Henry; for he
was to marry the eldeſt of the daughters of France.
He wrote me ſeveral letters upon this ſubject, and
expreſſed himſelf in the manner I have mentioned,
He alſo farther ſaid, that the King of France might
depend upon having fix thouſand foot and fifteen
hundred horſe, which he would oblige himſelf to
bring into his ſervice whenever they ſhould be re-
quired : and this number was afterwards augment-
ed by two thouſand more foot, and eight cannons,
maintained in all reſpects at the expenſe of England
for three years at leaſt, The King of Sweden did
not ſhew himſelt leſs zealous for the common cauſe;
and the King of Denmark allo appeared to be equal-
ly well diſpoſed in its favour.

In the mean time we were indefatigable in our
negotiations in the different courts of Europe, par-
ticularly in the circles of Germany and the United
Provinces, where the King, for this purpoſe, had
ſent Boiſſiſſe, Freſne-Canaye, Baugy, Ancel, and
Bongars. The council of the ſtates were very ſoon
unanimous in their determinations : the Prince of
Orange fent the Sieurs Malderet and Brederode
from them, to offer the King fifteen thouſand foot
and three thouſand horſe, 'I hey were ſoon folluw-
ed by the Landgrave of Heſſe, and the Prince of
Anhalt, to whom, as well as to the Prince of
Orange, the confederacy was obliged. for being in-
creaſed by the Duke of Savoy; by all of the re-
formed religion in Hungary, Bohemia, and Low-
er Auſtria: by many Proteſtant princes and towns
in Germany ; in fine, by all the Swiſs cantons of
this religion. And when the ſucceſlion of Cleves,

which

156 ME MOI NX S Book XXX.
which the Emperor ſhewed himſelf diſpoſed to uſurp,
became another incentive to the confederacy, there
was then ſcarce any part of Germany that was not
for us, which evidently appeared from the reſult of
the general aſſembly at Hall The Elector of Saxo-
ny, who perhaps remained alone of the oppoſite
party, might have been embarraſſed in an affair, out
of which he would probably have found it difficuit
to extricate himſelf; and this was to have been
done, by ſuggeſting to him the branch of John
Frederic, deprived of this electorate by Charles V.
There were ſeveral of theſe powers, in regard
to whom I am perſuaded nothing would have been
riſked, by diſcloling to them the whole intent and
ſcope of the deſign. On the contrary, they would
probably have ſeconded 1t with the greater ardour,
when they found the deſtruction of the Auſtrian
grandeur was a determined point. Theſe powers
were, more particularly, the Venetians, the Uni-
ted Provinces, almoſt all the Proteſtants, and eſpe—
Cially the evangelics of Germany. But as too ma-
ny precautions could not be taken, to prevent the
'Catholic powers from being prejudiced againſt the
new alliance in which they were to be engaged; a
too haſty diſcovery, either of the true motives, or
the whole intent of the delign, was therefore cau-
tiouſly avoided. It was at firſt concealed from all
without exception, and afterwards revealed but to
a ſew perſons of approved diſcretion, and thoie on-
ly ſuch as were abſolutely neceſſary to engage others
to join the confederacy. The aſſociation was for
a long time ſpoke of to others only as a kind of ge-
neral treaty of peace, wherein ſuch methods would
be projected, as the public benefit, and the general
ſervice of Europe, might ſvggeſt as necciiary to
ſtop the progreſs of the exceſſive power of the houte
of Auſtria, Our amballadors and agents had orders
only to demand of theſe princes a renewal or com-
mencement

WF.0 L155 157

mencement of alliance, in order more effec-
tually to ſucceed in the projected peace; to
conſult with them upon the means whereby
to effect it; to appear as if they were ſent
only, in conjunction with them, to endeavour
the diſcovery of theſe means; but yet to ſe—
cond them, and according to the diipolition
in which they were, to inſinuate, as if, by acci—
dental conjecture, ſome notion of a new me—
thod more proper to maintain the equilibrium of
Furope, and to ſecure to each religion a more
undifturbed repoſe than they had hitherto en-
joyed. The propoſals made to the Kings of Eng-
land and Sweden, and the Dukes of Savoy and
Lorrain, for alliances by marriage, proved very
ſucceſsful : it was abſolutely determined, that the
Dauphin ſhould eſpouſe the heireſs of Lorrain,
which duchy {till continued, as before, to de-
pend on the empire.

But no precaution appeared ſo neceſſary, nor
was more ſtrongly recommended to our nego—
tators, than to convince all the princes of Eu-
rope of the diſintereſtedneſs with which Henry was
reſolved to act on this occaſion. Thus point was
indefatigably laboured, and they were convinced
of it, when, on the ſuppolition that it would be
neceſſary to have recourle to arins, we ſtrongly
proteſted, that the forces, the treaſures, and e-
ven the perſon of Henry, might be depended
on; and this in a manner ſo generous on his fide,
that, inſtead of expecting to be rewarded, or e-
ven indemnified for them, he was voluntarily
inclined to give the moſt poſitive aſſurances, not
to reſerve to himſelf a ſingle town, nor the
ſmalleſt diſtrict. This moderation, ef which at
laſt no one doubted, made a ſuitable impreiſion,
eſpecially when it was perceived to be ſo much
me more generous, as there was ſuffcient to

Vor. V. P excite

-

_ _—

—

— —ñ—ʒꝑ— —
=

_ ——_— | _

— . — — — = 8 5 p _ — —
— . ͤ — — — —— —
9 — — — — — *

—— — — — —— —_—_—
*

—

1B MEMOIR S Bock XXX.

excite and ſatisfy the deſires of all. And, in the
interim, before the ſolemn publication of this
abſolute renunciation, which was to have been
made in the manifeſtoes that were preparing,
Henry gave a proof of it, that was an abſolute
demonſtration to the Pope. |
No one being ignorant that as it was, at leaſt,
intended to deprive Spain of thoſe of its uſur—
pations which were the moſt manifeſtly unjuſt,
Navarre and Roufillon would infallibly rever,
to France; the King therefore voluntarily offer.
ed to exchange them for the two kingdoms of
Naples and Sicily, and at the ſame time to
make a preſent of both to the Pope and the re-
public of Venice. This, certainly, was renoun-
cing the moſt inconteſtable right he could have
o any of the territories of which this crown was
to be deprived ; and by ſubmitting this affair; as
te did, to the determination of the Pope and the
Venetians, he the more ſenſibly obliged them,
as both the honour and profit which might a-
riſe therefrom would be in their favour. The
Pope, therefore, on the firſt propoſition made
to him, even prevented Henry's intentions; he
immediately demanded, whether, as affairs were
then circumſtanced, the ſeveral powers would
2pprove his taking upon him the office of com-
mon mediator, to. eſtabliſh peace in Europe,
and convert the continual wars among 1ts {eve-
ral princes, into a perpetual war againſt the in-
tdels ; which is a part of the deſign he had
heen very careful to acquaint him with: and tie
Pope ſufficiently ſhewed, that he was deſirous
nothing ſhould be done without his participa-
tion, and that he he was ſtill leſs diſpoſed to re-
ſuſe the advantage offered to him.
paul V. when a favourable opportunity ofter-
ed, explained himſelf more openly on this head.
Ubaldini,

OY SU L JF. 1 59
Ubaldini, his nuncio, told the King, that his Ho-
lineſs, for the confederacy againſt the houſe of
Auſtria, would, on various pretences, engage to
raiſe ten thouſand foot, fifteen hundred horſe,
and ten cannons ; provided that his Majeſty would
promiſe to defray the neceſſary expenſes of their
ſubſiſtence for three years; would give all pol-
ſible ſecurity for the ceſſion of Naples, and the
other rights of homage, according to promiſe;
and would fincerely conſent to the other condi-
tion, 1n regard to the treaty which he ſhould think
neceſſary to impoſe. Theſe conditions, at leaſt
the principal of them, were, thar only Catholics
jhould be elected emperors ; that the Roman
religion ſhould be maintained in all its rights,
and the eccleſiaſtics in all their privileges and im-
munities; and the Proteſtants mould not be per-
mitted to eſtabliſh themſelves in places where
they were not eſtabliſhed before the treaty. The
King promiſed Ubaldini, that he would religiouily
obſerve all theſe conditions; and farther, he re-
linquiſhed to the Pope the honour of being the
arbitrator of all thoſe regulations to be made in
the eſtablithment of the new republic.

The removing of theſe difficulties in regard to
the Pope, was of no inconſiderable conſequence;
for his example would not fail to be of great
force in determining the other Catholic powers,
eſpecially thoſe of Italy. Nothing was neglect-
ed which might promote the favourable diſpo—
ſitions in which they appeared to be, by punc-
tually paying the cardinals and petty princes of
Italy their penſions, and even by adding to them
ſeveral other gratuities. The eſtabliſhment of a
new monarchy in Italy was the only pretence
theſe petty courts had for not joining the con-
federacy ; but this -vain apprehenſion would be

eaſily diſſipated. The particular advantages which
P 2 each

|
|

160 MEMOIR S Book XXX.

cach would acquire, might alone have fatisfied
them in this reſpect ; but if not, all oppoſers might
have been threatened with being declared, after
a certain time, diveſted of all right to the pro-
poſed advantages, and even of all pretenſions to
the empire, or the elective kingdoms ; and that
the republics amongſt them ſhould be converted
into ſovereignties, and ſovereignties into repu-
blics. There is but little probability that any
of them would even have demurred what to do,
The puniſhment of the firſt offender would have
compelled the ſubmiſſion of all theſe petty ſtates,
who were bheſides ſufficiently ſenſible of their im-
e But this method was not to be uſed

ut on failure of all others; and even then, no
opportunity would have been neglected of ſhew-
ing them favour.

And now we are arrived at the point to which
every thing was advanced, at the fatal moment
of the death of Henry the Great ; and the fol-
lowing is a circumſtantial detail of the forces for
the war, which all the parties concerned had,
in conjunction with him, agreed to furniſh.
The contingents of the Kings of England, Swe—
den, and Denmark, were cach eight thouſand
foot, fifteen hundred horſe, and eight cannons ;
to be raiſed and maintained, in all reſpe&s, at
their expenſe, at leaſt for three years; and this
expenſe, reckoning ten livres a-month for each
foot-{oldier, thirty livres for each trooper, the
pay of the officers included, and the year to be com-
poſed of ten months, would amount, for each
of the ſtates, to three millions three hundred and

ſeventy thouſand livres for three years; the ex-

penſe of the artillery, fifteen hundred livres a-
month for each piece, being alſo included.
'The princes of Germany, before mentioned, were

to furnilh twenty-five thouſand foot, ten oa
| | an

oF 1 1 SßͤE!!:Uůb ot. a a hn AL Me £- 70

twelve thouſand foot, two thouſand horfe, and
ten cannons : the expenſe twelve millions. Hun-
gary, Bohemia, and the other evangelics of Ger-

many, the ſame number, and nearly at the ſame

expenſe. The Pope, ten thouſand foot, fifteen

hundred horſe, and eight cannons. The Duke

of Savoy, eighteen thouſand foot, two thouſand

horſe, and twelve cannons... The Venetians,

twelve thouſand foot, two thouſand horſe, and
twelve cannons. The expenſe of theſe laſt- men-

tioned armaments the King himſelf had engaged

to defray. The total of all theſe foreign forces.
allowing for deficiencies, which might probabl
have happened, would always have been, at leaſt,
one hundred thouſand foot, from twenty to twen-
ty-five thouſand horſe, and about one hundred
and twenty cannons. >
The King, on his fide, had actually on foot
two good and well-furniſhed armies; the firſt,

which he was to have commanded in perſon, con-

ſiſted of twenty thouſand foot, all native French,
eight thouſand Switzers, four thouſand Lanſque-
nets or Walloons, five thouſand horſe, and twen-
ty cannons. The ſecond,” to be commanded by
Leſdiguieres, in the neighbourhood of the Alpe,
conſiſted of ten thouſand foot, one thouſand horſe,
and ten cannons; beſide a flying camp, of ſour
thouſand foot, ſix hundred Borte, and ten can-
nons; and a reierve of two thouſand foot, to par-
riſon ſuch places where they might be neceſſary“.

*

We

Fhere are ſome variations in our Memoirs in regard to tHe
number of men, both in the royal grand army, which, in different
Places, is ſaid to be compoſed of thirty, thirty-two, and thirtyaſix
thehtand foot, of fonr, five, fix, and eight thouſand bent,
Wer 18 75 bm

'0'S 0 EEE. oats
ſand horſe, and forty cannons: they had them-
ſelves computed the expenſe at nine or ten mil-
lions for three years. The United Provinces,

162 MEMOIRS Book XXX.

We will here make a general calculation of all
theſe troops.

The twenty thouſand foot, at twenty-one livres
a-month to each man, including the appoint-
ments of generals and officers, would, by the
month, require four hundred and twenty thou-
ſand livres, and by the year, five millions and
forty thouſand livres; the eight thouſand Swit-
zers and four thouſand Lanſquenets, three mil-
lions; the five thouſand horſe, at ſixty livres 2-
month to each, by the month, would require two
hundred and forty thouſand livres, and by the
year, two millions eight hundred and forty thou-
ſand livres: this computation is made ſo high as
ſixty livres a-month to each, becauſe the pay
of the officers, and particularly of the King's
white troops, compoſed of a thouſand men of the
firſt rank in the kingdom, who ſerved as volun-
teers, was therein included. The expenſe of
the twenty large cannons, ſix culverins, and
four demi-culverins, ſuppoſing all neceſlary fur-
niture for them provided, would amount to three
thouſand fix hundred livres a-month for each
piece; the thirty together would conſequently
require one hundred and eight thouſand livres.
Extraordinary expenſes and loſſes, in regard to
the proviſions and ammunition for his army,
might be computed at one hundred and fiſty
thouland livres.

And for expenſes, whether ordinary or extra-
ordinary, in ſpies, for the ſick and wounded, and
other . ee contingencies, computing at
the higheſt, a like ſum of one million eight hun-
from thirty to fifty cannons; and in that of the confederate princes
of Germany, ſometimes computed even at forty thouſand toot,
and twelve thouſand horſe ; ſimilar differences do often occur in
regard to thoſe of Italy, and the other confederate princes ; net-

ther are the calculations cf the expenſe always the ſame, nor quite
juſt in their eſtimates,
dred

hs — 6% Wis, — £4 — — — — — A 4 —

a r Www am

dred thouſand livres. To ſupply the deficiencies
which might happen in the armies of the confe-
derate princes, to pay the penſions, and to an-
ſwer other particular exigencies which might a-
riſe in the kingdom, three hundred thouſand
livres a- month; for the year three millions ſix
hundred thouſand livres. The army of Leſdi-
guieres would require three millions a- year; and
as much for each of the armies of the Pope,
the Venetians, and the Duke of Savoy. Theſe
four laſt articles together, make twelve millions
a- year; which, added to the preceding ſums, a-
mount in the whole to about thirty millions one
hundred and ſixty thouſand livres a- year.

It remains only to triple this total for the

three years, during which it was ſuppoſed there

might be occaſion for the forces; and the whole
amount will appear to be between ninety and
ninety-one millions, which might nearly be ne-
ceſſary to defray the expenſes of the intended
war; I ſay nearly, for in this calculation I have
not included the flying camp, nor the two thou-
{and men for garriſons. The firſt of theſe two ar-
ticles, at the rate of eighteen livres a-month to
each foot-{oldier, and fiſty livres to each trooper,
would require a further ſum of about one hun—
dred and thirty thouſand livres a-month ; which,
for a year, would be one million five hundred
thouſand hvres, and four millions five hundred
thouſand livres for three years: the ſecond article
for the three years, would require about twelve
hundred thouland livres.

On a ſuppoſition that the expenſe of France,
on this occaſion, would not have amounted to
more than between ninety and ninety-five mil-
lions; which ſuppoſition is far from being ha-
zardous, becaule we have here computed every
thing at the higheſt it would bear; it is eaſy

to

i
19 x!
14
dh
: a |
:
iin.
| |
14
1
| OTE
, *
i
11
11
I
1 L
it l |
$4 :
xt 1/48
114 *
e
1
187
9
5

—
— —

rl Mu . — —— _— — — —

on — a = — — —- — —— —

— Ju — — — — —

—_— — Ip — ——— — — >. —
— — - - — — — —

- * — —
ſl = —— — — — —

——— ů — —— — — - — =
- — — 2 — 1 — —

| 1
g

teen millions fix

M M E MOI R Ss Bock XXX.
to ſhe w, that, at the expiration of the three years,
Henry would have remaining in his coffers —

millions over and above what would be expen

ed ; the total amount of all the receipts from
the ſeveral funds, formed and to be formed for

theſe three years, being one hundred twenty-one -

millions five hundred and forty thouſand livres,
as appears from the three eſtimates which I drew
up, and preſented to his Majeſty.

The firſt of theſe eſtimates, which contained
only a liſt of the ſums actually depoſited in the
Baſtile, amounted to twenty-two millions four
hundred and fixty thouſand livres, in ſeveral
coffers, - marked, Phelipeaux, Puget, and Bon.
ehier + the ſecond was another liſt of the ſums
actually due from the farmers, partiſans, and re-
cetvers-general ; which might be conſidered a:
in poſſeſſion, and preigeed another total of eigh-
| hundred and thirteen thouſand
livres; theſe two totals together made forty-one
millions leventy-three tholtfand livres, which the
King would immediately have at his diſpoſal : to
acquire the reſt ofthefe: hundred and twenty-one
millions, I had no recourſe, in the third eſtimate,
to any new taxations. The whole remainder
would ariſe ſolely from the offers of augmenta—
rion upon the ſeveral royal revenues which the
farmers and partiſans had made for a leaſe of three
years, and from what the officers of juſtice and
the finances had voluntarily engaged to furniſh,

provided they might be permitted the free enjoy-

ment of certain privileges: ſo that in theſe one
hundred twenty-one millions, I had not compre-
hended the three years receipts of the other royal
revenues. And in caſe it were afterwards necel-
ſary to have recourſe to means ſomewhat more

burthenſome, I had given the King another c-

ſtimate, whereby, inffeas of theſe one hundred

4 4 | twenty-
N |

OF: er 165

twenty-one millions, it appeared that one hun-

dred ſeventy-five millions might have been rai-

ſed. I alſo demonſtrated, that, upon any preſſ-
ing emergency, this kingdom could open itſelf
reſources of treaſure that are almoſt innumerable.
It was very much to he wiſhed, that the ſums
of money and the numbers of men to be fur-
niſhed by the other confederates, would be equa]-
ly well ſecured by ſuch eſtimates : but whatever
deficiencies might have happened, having forty-
one millions to diſtribute where-ever it might be
found neceſſary, what obſtacles could Henry have
to fear from a power who was known to be
deſtitute of money, and even of troops? no one
being 1gnorant, that the beſt and moſt nume-
rous forces which 'Spain had in its ſervice were
drawn from Sicily, Naples, and Lombardy; or
elſe were Germans, Switzers, and Walloons.
Every thing therefore concurring to promote
ſucceſs, and good magazines being placed in pro-
per parts of the * the King was on the
point of marching, at the head of his army, di-
rectly to Mezieres; from whence taking his route
by Clinchamp, Orchimont, Beaureign, Offais,
Longpre, &c. after having cauſed five forts to
be erected in theſe quarters, and therein placed
his rwo thouſand men deſtined for that purpole,
with the neceſſary proviſions and ammunition, he
would, near Duren and Stavelo, having joined
the two armies which the princes of Germany
and the United Provinces would have cauſed to
march thither; and then beginning by occu-
pying all thoſe paſſages through which the e-

Juliers and Cleves, theſe principalities, which

quently have immediately ſubmitted to him, and
would have been ſequeſtrated, till it ſhould ap-
pear

nemy might find entrance into the territories of

were a pretext for the armament, would conſe-

—
—

—— --

.
Li
:
U
*
7
wa it
C
. $11 G
? l
:
| |
| a!
Li
: -
1 1
4
in
i
x :
Bt
4
-
j 11
. [1 :
7
7 7
+
WH.
= 1 =
: :
i3
*
1
0
0
— 1
*
"
:
141
:
a* l \
*
1
13
1
| |
: l
|
7
i}
|
4
mn
: 1
=
I
"
11
o

— —

2 - — —-„V—¼ TONE a _ * —_
— _ 4 — 4 4
— — - _ - — * — — —— — —2ↄ - —
— — * — — — = - — i — —
— — — - — — — ” — — — — —
800 8 —
— — * — 225 - - * - — — —_ -— — —
- — 2 - * oY — - — — 1 — — — - — —— — — —
— — — [wß — . ˙ © — Yn PE — * — — =
. = bs — a - —
3 - 7 — ay + by .
83 8 2 - > - ©

166 ME MOI RS Book XXX.

pear how the Emperor and the King of Spain
would act, in regard to the deſigns of the con-
federate princes.

This was the moment fixed on to publiſh and
make known throughout Europe the declarations,
in form of ee which were to open the
eyes of all in regard to their true intereſts, and
the real motives which had cauſed Henry and the
confederate princes thus to take up arms. Theſe
manifeſtoes were compoſed with the greateſt care;
a ſpirit of juſtice, honeſty, and good faith, of dil-
intereſtedneſs and good policy, were every where
apparent in them: and, without wholly diſcover-
ing the ſeveral changes intended to be made in
Europe, it was intimated, that their common 11-
tereſt had thus compelled its princes to arm them-
ſelves; and not only to prevent the houſe of Au-
ſtria from getting poſſeſſion of Cleves, but allo to
diveſt her of the United Provinces, and of what-
ever elſe ſhe unjuſtly poſſeſſed; that their inten-
tions were to diſtribute theſe territories among
ſuch princes and ſtates as were the weakeſt ; that
the deſign was ſuch, as could not ſurely give oc-
caſion to a war in Europe; that, though armed,
the Kings of France and the. North rather choſe
to be mediators in the cauſes of complaint which

Europe, through them, made againſt the houſe of

Auſtria, and only ſought amicably to determine
all differences ſubſiſting among the ſeveral prince;
and that whatever was done on this occaſion, ſnould
be not only with the unanimous conſent of all theſe
powers, but even of all their people, who were

hereby invited to give in their opinions to the |

confederate princes. Such alſo would have been
the ſubſtance of the circular letters which Henry
and the allociated princes would at the ſame time

have ſent to all places ſ1bje to them; that ſo ihe |

people being informed, and joining their ſuffrages,
an

%

—_—

TY TY = be. CY ID SO pm 0

LAS
ey

—

e. 167
an univerſal cry from all parts of Chriſtendom
would have been raiſed againſt the houſe of Au-
ſtria.

As it was determined to avoid, with the utmoſt
caution, whatever might give umbrage to any one,
and Henry being 2 to give ſtill more con-
vincing proofs to his confederates, that to pro-
mote their true intereſts was his ſole ſtudy and
deſign; to the letters already mentioned he would
have added others to be written to difterent courts,
particularly to the Electors of Cologn and Treves,
the Biſhops of Munſter, Liege, and Paderborn; and
the Duke and Ducheſs of Lorrain; and this con-
duct would have been purſued, in regard even to
our enemies, in the letters which were to be writ-
ten to the Archduke, and the Infanta his wife, to
the Emperor himſelf, and to all the Auſtrian
princes, requeſting them, from the ſtrongeſt and
moſt preſſing motives, to embrace the only right
and reaſonable party; in all places, nothing would
have been neglected, to inſtruct, convince, and
gain confidence; the execution of all engage—
ments, and the diſtribution or {equeſtration of
whatever territories might require to be ſo diſpo-
ſed, would have been ſtrictly, and even ſcrupu-
touſly obſerved; force would never have been
employed, till arguments, intreaties, embaſſies,
2nd negotiations, hould have failed: finally, even
in the ule of arms, it would have been not as ene—
mies, but pacifiers; the Queen would have ad-
vanced as far as Metz, accompanied by the whole
court, and attended by ſuch pomp and equipage as
were {uitable only to peace. |
| Henry had projected a new method of diſcipline
in his camp, which, very probably, would have
produced the good effects intended by it, eſpecial-
ly if his example had been imitated by the other
princes his allies; he intended to have FO

our

, Lot er

—— - ( —ä—ä4 - ay —— — = — — —
— — — 4 — — — - — —
— — — 4 —

— .
—
— —

— —— —
——
= —_—

168 ME MOI XS Book XXX.

four marſhals of France, or at leaſt four camp-mar-
ſhals, whoſe ſole care ſhould have been to main-
tain univerſal order, diſcipline, and ſubordination:
the firſt of theſe would have had the inſpection of
the cavalry, the ſecond of the French infantry,
the third of the foreign forces, and the fourth of
whatever concerned the artillery, ammunition,
and proviſions; and the King would have required
an exact and regular account from theſe two offi-
cers, of whatever was tranſacted by them in their
reſpective diviſions. He applied himſelf with equal
ardour to make all military virtues to be revered
and honoured in his army, by granting all em-
ploys and places of truſt to merit only, by pre-
ſerring good officers, by rewarding the ſoldiers,
by puniſhing blaſphemies, and other impious lan-
guage, by ſhewing a regard both for his own troops
and thoſe of his confederates, by ſtifling a ſpirit of
diſcord, cauſed by a difference of religions; and,
finally, by uniting emulation with that harmony
of ſentiments which contributes more than all the
reſt to obtain victory.

The conſequence of this enterpriſe, with regard
to war, would have depended on the manner in
which the Emperor aud the King of Spain would
receive the propoſitions and reply to the mani—
feſtoes of the confederate princes. It ſeems pro-
bable, that the Emperor, ſubmitting to force,
would have conſented to every thing: I am even
perſuaded he would have been the firſt to demand
an amicable interview with the King of France,
that he might at leaſt extricate himſelf with ho-
Nour out of the dihculties in which he would have
been involved; and he would probably have been
ſatisfied with aſſurances, that the Imperial dignity,
with all its rights and prerogatives, ſhould be ſecu—
red to him for his life. The Archdukes had made
great advances; they engaged to permit the King,
; WII.

oer. 189

wich all his troops, to enter their territories and
towns, provided they committed no hoſtilities in
them, and paid punctually, in all places, for what-
ever they required: if theſe appearances were not
deceitful, Spain, being abandoned by all, muſt,
though unwillingly, have ſubmitted to the will of
its conquerors.

Bur it may be ſuppoſed, that all the branches
of the houſe of Auſtria would, on this occaſion,
have united, and, in defence of their common in-
tereſts, would have uſed all the efforts of which
they were capable. In this caſe, Henry and the
confederate princes, by declaring war in form a-
gainſt their enemies, and depriving the Spaniards
of all communications, eſpecially with the Low
Countries; and having, as we have ſaid, united
all their forces, given audience to the princes of
Germany, promiſed aihitance to the people of
Hungary and Bohemia, who ſhould come to im-
plore it of them; and finally, ſecured the terri-
tory of Cleves : theſe princes, I fay, would then
have cauſed their three armies to advance towards
Bale and Straſburg to ſupport the Switzers, whe,
after having, for form's ſake, aſked leave of the
Emperor, would have declared for the union. The
United Provinces, though at a conſiderable diſtance
from theſe armies, would yet have been ſuſſicient-
ly defended by the flying camp, which Henry
would have cauſed to advance towards them; by
the arms of England and the North, to whoſe
protection they would be intruſted: by the care
which at firſt would have been taken to get pol-
ſeſſion of Charlemont, Maeſtricht, Namur, end 0-
ther places near the Meuſe; and, finally, by the
naval forces of theſe provinces, which, in con-
junction with thoſe of England, would have
reigned abſolute maſt. at ſea.

Vor. V. Q - *Thele

170 MEMOIR S Book XXX.

Theſe meaſures being taken, the war could have
fallen only in Italy' or Germany; and ſuppoſing
it to have happened in the former, the three ar-
mies of Henry, the Prince of Orange, and the
princes of Germany, quitting Franche-Compté,
after having fortified it in the {ame manner as the
Low Countries, by a ſmall body of troops, might

have marched with their forces towards the Alps,

where they would have been joined by thoſe of
1 eſdiguieres, the Pope, the Venetians, and the
Duke of Savoy, who then would have declared
themſelves openly ; the Duke of Savoy, by requi-
ring a portion for his Ducheſs, equal to what had
been given to the Infanta Iſabella; and the other
powers, by demanding the execution of the agree-
ment in regard to Navarre, Naples, and Sicily:
and thus, from all parts of Europe, war would be
declared againit Spain. If the enemy ſhould ap-
pear inclined to draw the war into Germany,
then the confederates, having left a conſiderable
number of troops in Italy, would have penetrated
even into the heart of Germany, where, from
Hungary and Bohemia, they would have been
ſtrengthened by thoſe powerful ſuccours which
were there preparing.

The other events, in conſequence of theſe diſ-
politions, can only be conjectured, becauſe they
would greatly depend on the degree of alacrity
with which the enemy ſhould oppole the rapidity
of our conqueſts, and on the readineſs with which
the confederates, eſpecially thoſe at the extremity
of Germany, ſhould make good their engagements.
Nevertheleſs, I am 4 that from the diſpo-
litions here as laid down, there are none but muſt
regard the houſe of Auſtria as penetrated by the
blow, whole force was for ever to annihilate its
power, and open a paſſage : the execution of the
other projected defigns, to which this attack .

only

(
r
C
t
ſ
C
b
a
d
n
w
a)

1

OFF SV . L. 151

only be confidered as the preliminary : I will add
too, (and here the voice of all Europe will vindi-
cate me from the imputation of partiality), that if
the force neceſſary to render ſuch an enterpriſe
ſucceſsful does always depend on the perſon of the
chief who conducts itz this could not have been
better conferred than upon Henry the Great. With
a valour alone capable of ſurmounting the greateſt
difficulties, and a preſence of mind, which neither
neglected nor loſt any opportunities of advantage;
with a prudence which, without precipitating
any thing, or attempting too many things at a
time, could regularly connect them together, and

erfectly knew what might, and what might not,
be the reſult of time; with a conſummate expe-

rience; and, finally, with all thoſe other great
qualifications, whether as a warrior or politician,
which were ſo remarkable in this prince; what is
there which might not have been obtained? This
was the meaning of that modeſt device which this
great King cauſed to be inſcribed on ſome of the
laſt medals that were ſtruck under his reign, Vil
fine conſilio.

Q 2 SUPPLE-

SUPPLEMEN T
19

LIFE of the DUKE of SULLY,

After his RETREAT.

HE firſt time we find the Duke of Sully
mentioned by the hiſtorians after his re-

treat, is at the aſſembly of Proteſtants, held at
Chatelleraur, in the year 1611. His mind was
till embittered by the treatment he had met with
at court; he was well informed, that the Duke of
Bouillon, who, contrary to his real intereſt and
character, was preparing to go thither to ſupport
the Queen's, rights againſt the Proteſtants, had
put himſelf at the head of his enemies, and was
enceavouring to deprive him of the government
of Poiton, and of his poſt of grand maſter of the
dnance, which the Queen-regent had promiſed
to beſtow upon him, in reward for the ſervices
the expected from him upon this occaſion ; it is
not thereſore ſurpriſing, that, in ſuch a conjunc-
ture, the Duke of Sully ſhould act there with vi-
gour and ſpirit. Thoſe who favour the Duke ot
Bouillon have, through reſentment that he ſailed
in his attempt, accuſed the Dukes of Sully and
Rohan of ſeeking to rekindle the war between the
Proteſtants and the Catholics ; but they are the
only perions who ſpeak in this manner. Al] a
OLNEY

2 AnWOEOanngtſfd 0 ©

2

ede“

„ A AQ Ao a — — 0 HH & AO 2

M E MOI X S, &e: ry

other writers agree that the conduct of M. de Sully
was wholly free from blame; and indeed his ene-
mies acted with ſo much heat and malignity againſt
him, that the author of the French Mercury“,
whom I ſhall follow in this period of the Duke of
Sully's hiſtory, condemns him for not taking the
only meaſures that remained to ſecure his repole.
Here follows a ſhort account of what paſſed, with
regard to the Duke of Sully, at the aſſembly of
Chatelleraut, or of Saumur; for his enemies, being
apprehenſive that he would he too powerful if it
was held at Chatelleraut, cauſed it to be transfer-
red to Saumur.. |

The Duke of Bouillon making no ſecret of his
intentions to reduce the Calviniſts his brethren,
and the Duke of Sully in particular, to the laſt
extremity, the common intereſt reunited the lat-
ter with Du- Pleſſis-Mornay and the principal Prote-
ſtant miniſters, who, till then, as has been ſeen
through the courſe of theſe memoirs, had acted
with great reſerve towards him, and great diſtruſt
of his ſentiments. They began by reſuſing the
dignity. of preſident of their aſſembly to the Duke
of Bouillon, and conferred it on Du-Pleſſis; and
made him ſenſible how much they were offended
at the part he had acted, by continually oppoſing
him; ſo that he could not obtain any of thoſe de-
mands which might probably have been granted
to an agent of the Catholie religion, which was a
convincing proof that the Queen-regent commit-
ted a great error when ſhe made choice of the Duke
of Bouillon to ſerve her on this occaſion. How-
ever, a kind of reconciliation was made between
him and the Duke of Sully, through the interpo-
ſition of Du-Pleſſis; and from that time the Duke
found no more obſtacies to hinder him from inter-

Anno 1618, p. 75+ |
Q 3 eſting

174 MEMOIR S Sup.

eſting the Proteſtant body in his particular cauſe,
which became one of the chief ſubjects of their
deliberations.

The aſlembly addreſſed. him, intreated; and in-
joined him (theſe are the terms made uſe of by
the French Mercury) net to reſign his employ-
ments, promiſed to ſupport him, &c.. To which
the Duke of Sully anſwered by a ſpeech, in which
he aſked the advice of the aſſembly upen four
things. iſt, If he ought to take no notice of the
proceedings of his enemies with reſpect to him?
2d, If, on the contrary, he _ himſelf to make
a demand of being again reſtored to his places
3d, If it was, more eligible to accept of a recom-
penſe for them? and, laſtly, If this-recompenſe
ought to be honour and ſecurity rather than profit?
For it was to conceal the deſign they had of ruin-
ing him entirely, that the court made a propoſal
to him to receive a marſhaPs ſtaff, or a conſider-
able. ſum. of money in exchange for his poſt of
grand maſter of the ordnance, and. his govern-
ment of Poitou. M. de Sully concluded this diſ-
courſe, in which he could not forbear minglin
ſome. complaints of the rigour which the counc!
of the Queen- regent uſed towards him, with ex-
cuſing himſelf. for not having ſooner laid before
them the hardſhips he ſuffered en account of the

reat difficulty he found to perſuade himſelf that
. were really ſuch plots ſormed againſt him,
as well as of his fears of difpleafing ſome perſons
to whom he owed all imaginable reſpect.

This diſcourſe. was as agreeable to the Prote-
ſtants as it was diſpleaſing to Bullien and the reſt
of the Queen's agents. In their anfwer they gave
indeed very high pratſes to the Duke of Sully's
adminiſtration ; but they taxed him with being
ungenerous, and of having entertained a deſign
to force the Queen to reſtore him to his place =

| the

> HW a A. = ct knJ ew a os

rr &5

O F SUL L I. 175

the miniſtry. M. de Sully anſwered this accuſa-
tion by another remonſtrance, in which he refer-
red his intereſts to the aſſembly. The Duke of
Bouillon perceiving what was likely to be the e-
vent, took off the maſk a ſecond time, and began
to cabal with all the Proteſtants, whom he thought
there was a poſſibility of gaining. In effect, he
drew over ſome ; but all his endeavours to gain
the Duke of Rohan were fruitleſs: and having

neither been able, with all his addreſs, to hinder

the greater number from adhering to the party

of his adverſary, or to ſuſpend the concluſion,

they paſſed on to their deliberations; the reſult of
which was, that they would aſſiſt M. de Sully, if his
adminiſtration was inquired into, by unlawful ways,
Bullion, and the reſt of the Queen's creatures,
put every thing in motion to obtain a recantation
or reſtriction. As for the Duke of Bouillon, he
broke out into rage and exclamation : he gave
the moſt violent counſels to the Queen, who con-
tented herſelf, however, with ſending letters in
the King's name to the aſſembly, which Du-Pleſſis,
for fear of the conſequences they might produce,
thought proper to ſuppreſs. They now had re-
2 to mediums and modifications. All the
other articles were amicably ſettled; and that
which regarded M. de Sully was ſuffered to reſt,
becauſe it was apparent to the whole world, that
they could not, with any ſhadow of juſtice, accuſe
him of being an unfaithful miniſter, much leſs
an enemy to the ſtate; and becauſe the Duke of
Bouillon, being diſguſted with the Queen for diſ-
appointing him in his expectations of reward, cea-
ſed on a {udden to act with the ſame heat and ani-
moſity. The Duke of Sully, therefore, remain-
ed in the ſame fituation as when he retired from

court,
The following year the war between the two
religions

. we —

176 MEMOIRS Sup.
religions was upon the point of being reſumed,
by an incident for which our Memoirs ſeem to
prepare us. Braſſac, whom his Majeſty had ap-
pointed to be King's lieutenant of St John D'An-
gely, after the death of Des-Ageaux, was driven
out of that city by the Duke of Rohan, whoſe
whole conduct, from that time, ſufficiently de- ec
clared that his ſentiments were very different from «c
thoſe of his father-in-law. Although the regent
was then in a condition to pro him law, and all
the Proteſtants: were greatly in fear of her; yet
this affair was terminated wholly to- the Duke's
advantage, who obtained all that he demanded.

M. de Sully ſigned the agreement, which was
made in the ſynod of Privas, between the Duke *
of Rohan on one ſide, and the Queen's agents on wy
the other. 'This was all the ſhare he had in this 5
great rupture. 8
The two following letters, which I have tran- 7
{ſcribed from the originals, in the cabinet of the _
preſem Duke of Sully, prove that the Queen-mo. 4
ther had recourſe to Maximilian on many occa- _
ſions, and that he laboured with great diligence *
to prevent or appeaſe the troubles which after. £
wards aroſe between the princes and the grandees 7
of the kingdom. 3
«c
A Letter from the Queen-muther to the Duke ci ce
Sully. ec
66
60 Couſin, 6
c
6] have ſent the Sieur de Bethune your bro- 4
cc ther to confer with you concerning the preſent -
ce occurrences, and hays chores him to aſſure >
% you of my affection, and of my reliance on ES
te the continuance of yours, for the ſervice of the 10
You may give abſo- >

King, Monſieur my {0 1 21
s Jute

O F SUL L I. 177

« lute credit to what he ſhall ſay to you on both
* theſe ſubjects, as you would do to the perſon

* of your good couſin,

Paris, Feb. 12. 1614. « MARY.”

It is ſuperſcribed, “ To my couſin, the Duke
« of Sully, Peer, and Grand Maſter of the Ord-
% nance of France.“

Another Letter from the Queen to M. de Sully.

6 Corufin,

“Having received your letter of the 1ſt inftant
© on thegth,I delayed anſwering it till my arrival
in this province, to the end that, being better
« informed of the particular things which hap-
« pened, and the ſtate affairs are in at preſent, I
« might tell you with more certainty my opi-
“ nion of them all in gener: but I have found
« here ſo much confuſion 4nd tumult, fo many
“ complaints and infringem ©7t< of the agreement
4 of St Menoult, that I co | know not where
* to begin, or what to dee % do for me
* upon this occaſion. 1 are every

«© where made, and aſſura -v: me of zeal
“ and fidelity for the {ervice 0 1! + gy ſon,
“ and the public good, aideed very
ce acceptable ; but I find ontrary to all
* this, that I no ſooner ©: uu any favourable
* hopes, than they vani un inſtant. I do not

« write this upon your 01 particular account;
for I depend upon vor affect on to the good
of your country and gur own happineſs, in pro-
portion to the cxpcrience I have had of it,
* and the aſſurance you have given me; but J
* write to condole, ith you upon the change-
** ableneſs and unccrtainty of ſuch oem

—

„ 2E

— 2

>.

— —

3 i r

—
— — * 5
— — — - -

—— —
9

— —

? *

178 MEMOIRS Sup,

J have within theſe two days received your laſt
« letter here; the bearer of this will tell you
« what I think of it.

«© do not doubt but that you have, with a
c freedom and zeal becoming a good ſubject and
«© an honeſt man, made thoſe remonſtrances to
«© my nephew the Prince of Conde, which you
% have given me an account of in your letter,
e and J am rejoiced to hear that he has taken
« them well of you: but, it he approves of your
ec advice, what hinders him from following it?
« By ſo doing he will get rid of thoſe perplexities
& in which you tell me he is involved; he will
& receive of me every reaſonable proof he can
« defire of my good will, and all the reſpect and
« deference due to his quality. If, to aſſure him
« of this, any thing depends upon me, I {hall be
cc _ to know it, and to have your opinion :
% but I have not yet received thoſe letters which
he told you he wrote to me upon that ſubject.
« I wiſh they may be ſuch as may give me that
« ſatisfactlion, both with reſpect to him and his
«« friends, for the ſervice of the King my ſon,
as he has often made me hope for, and even
« requeſt ; and, this done, I ſhall make him ſuch
« returns as he ſhall have juſt reaſon to be con-
« tented with : as likewiſe all thoſe who ſhall fol-
« low his example.

(© I have not yet ſeen the Duke of Vendome ;
« fothat I know not what I ought to hope from
« his obedience; for I have advice that he con-
« tinues to fortify Lamballe, and has engaged a
« great number of ſoldiers, who have ſerved, or
« rather diſſerved him during theſe laſt commo-
« tions, and eſpecially ſince the contract of St
« Menoult, to which the King my ſon and my-
4 ſelf are endeavouring to apply the neceſſary re-
« medies, by the advice of the ſtates of the coun:
=; Ws

ge
te
te
0
cc
c« +
460
40

_—_— _— | ny \ ed x.

te try, which we are to propoſe to-morrow. As
« J promiſe myſelf that you will always conti-
te nue faithful to the intereſts of the King my ſon,
& and that you will readily embrace every oppor-
« tunity of ſerving him, you may make what uſe
“ you think proper of this for that purpoſe ; and
“J beſeech God, couſin, &c. Written at Nantes,
% Auguſt 18. 1614.

« Your good couſin,
«MARY.

*

*

*

In the year 1616 the revolt of the Proteſtants
broke out. On this occaſion the Duke of Sully
gave a convincing proof that he preferred the
welfare of the ſtate to the intereſt of his party,
and even to his own particular intereſt; for, when
it was propoſed to him to reunite the party of the
prince of Conde with that of the Proteſtant, a deſign
which, according to all appearance, would have
ruined the kingdom, the Duke of Sully, whoſe
ſuffrage was of the utmoſt conſequence, refuſed
abſolutely to give it, and remained conſtantly at-
tached to the King. Let us ſee what Marſhal
Baſſompierre ſays on this ſubject in his Memoirs.
« Me de Sully, ever ſolicitous for the good of
the ſtate, maintained himſelf in the eſteem and
reſpect of both parties, and endeavoured to ſet
them right, as long as they could ſubſiſt in the
ſtate they were, by ſending informations ſome-
times to the Queen-mother, and ſometimes to
the Prince; and, on Auguſt the 26th, the Duke
of Sully demanded an audience of the Queen.
He then told her, that matters were brought to
ſuch extremity, that it was not poſſible they could
continue eight days longer in the ſame ſituation ;
that as the balance was now heid, the whole au-
thority muſt neceſlarily fall into the hands of the

Prince;

OF SULL V. 179

—
_ — — ——_

ä — — ——ä—ä —!— —— oo
2 —ñ — —

—

— _——— —
th —

— —
—_— ——

= — — —_——— —

—

180 M E MO IR S Sup.

E fy
*

prince; that it was {till in her own choice whe.
ther to keep or ſuffer herſelf to be diſpoſſeſſed of
hers. He declared, that ſhe was not ſecure in
Paris, and that ſhe and her children would be
ſafer in the field, with a thouſand horſe, than in
the Louvre, while the minds of the nobles and
people were thus enraged. He ſaid, that his duty
and the obligations he had to the deceaſed King,
required that he ſhould make her theſe remon-
ſtrances; and that, if there was no other reme-
dy for the preſent evils but the loſs of his life, he
would facrifice it willingly for the preſervation of
the King, herſelf, and the ſtate; then, taking leave
of her, he implored her to conſider well what he
hal ſaid : and added, that, if ſhe did not apply the
only, fit, and reaſonable remedy to theſe commo-
tions, ſhe would be anſwerable for all the conſe-
uences of them, ſince ſhe had been warned be-
forehand of what was likely to happen.”

The author of the Hiſtory of the mother and

ſon * renders, in ſpite of himſelf, this juſtice

0
cc
cc
40
cc
cc
60
ce
cc
cc
cc
cc
60
46
ce
40

the Duke of Sully. “ M. de Sully,” ſaye he,
demanded an audience of the Queen, that he
might confer with her upon an affair, which he
{aid was of no leſs importance than the preſer-
vation of the King's life and hers. The Queen

had taken phyſic that day 3 but, upon a mat-

ter of ſuch conſequence, ſhe thought ſhe could
not diſpenſe with herſelf from {ceing him. The
King happened, by chance, to be preſent ; as
were likewiſe the Sieurs Mangot and Barbin.
The Duke of Sully then made a ſpeech, in
which he expatiated upon the had deſigns of
the princes, and the inevitable dangers which
he foreſaw for the King. The Sieurs Mangot
and Barbin told him, that it was not enough to
diſcover an evil; he ought likewiſe to propoſe

Tom. 2 p. 61. 6a, c
4 10Mme

FUL L T. 181

ce ſome proper remedies to obviate it. To this
ce he only added, that the attempt was hazardous,
ce and that they muſt expect to lee very fatal con-
& ſequences ; then, quitting the Queen's cloſet,
« he ſaid, Sire, and you, Madam, I intreat your
% Majeſties to think well on what I have faid : I
«© have diſcharged my conſcience; would to God
« you were in the midſt of twelve hundred horſe:
“ fee no other remedy.” Saying this he went
away.

It muſt be confeſſed, that to the hatred which
this writer bore the Duke of Sully, is owing the
following recital * : © The Prince of Conde be—
« ing arreſted, the miniſters told the Queen, that,
« unleſs ſhe releaſed him, all was loſt. M. de
« Sully, whoſe vehemence of temper would noc
allow him time for reflection, nor to give his ad-
vice in the preſent exigence on what might be
„ apprehended for the future, without blaming
“ paſt proceedings, ſaid, that whoever had coun-
&« {elled the Queen to arreſt the Prince, had ruin-
« ed the ſtate. The Queen replied, that the was
“ aſtoniihed to hear him {ſpeak in that manner;
« and that he mult certainly have loſt his reaſon,
& {ince he did not remember what he himfelf had
* ſaid to the King and her but three days before,
„ 'Thele words threw him into {uch confuſion,
ce that he withdrew immediately, to the great
& aſtoniſhment of all the lords who were preſent.
“ His wife endeavoured afterwatds to excuſe him,
by alledging that 1t was the terrors he laboured
under at that time witch had forced him to
{peak ſo, having been informed that the princes
and nobles of the Prince of Conde's party had
reſolved to murder him, through a ſuſpicion
that he was the caule of the prince's detention.
by the diſcoveries he had made of their defipus.”

® Tom. 2. p. 94.

Vor. V. K WW: Tot

Lay

£c
cc
cc
(0
60
cc
cc

— — —— — -

88 ——ͤ̃ —
—

— _ — — ay —_—

— —

— — = —
— ——— —

A — — .

—

7

—_— ww — —
” — _

-
— 2
** -

- —

M——_
oy

— —
= 1 .

— —y—
—

"II
— ä oy
2 . — —

_ - =_ . <w-F

CO II

- Om CU —ä I, eons —

Ty —
A — _
— — -
- ——
E —— —
i. _< AM 2

182 MEM OI X S Sup.

Without examining here whether the Duke
of Sully contradicted himſelf in the advice he
gave the Queen at theſe two different times, we
hall grant that the reſolution they had taken to
arreſt the Prince of Conde, was both prudent and
neceſſary; and the inference I ſhall draw from
theſe circumſtances 1s, that this miniſter never
ſwerved from his attachment to the intereſt of
the King and the public good, on an occaſion ſo
favourable to the Proteſtant party, where he him-
{elf ran great riſks.

He obſerved the ſame conduct during the reſt
of his life. He was inveſted with the King's
authority in the aſſemblies of Rouen and Loudun :
he ſupported, like a good citizen and a loyal ſub.
3eR, his Majeſty's party againſt the Proteſtants,
"when the war was declared under the adminiſtra-
tion of Cardinal Richelieu: he was preſent at the
nege of Montauban and other encounters: he even
performed all the functions of grand maſter of
the ordnance at the ſiege of St Jean d'Angely,
and the train of artillery there was furniſhed and
conducted with the greateſt care. He kept this
oflice till his death, although the writer of the
Duke of Bouillon's liſe ſays that it was taken from
him. Lewis XIII. gave him a marſhal's ſtaff,
September 18. 1634. The preceding year Pope
Urban VIII. wrote him a letter in Latin, to which
NI. de Sully ſent an anſwer by his grandſon the
Prince of Henrichemont, and which produced a
iecond brief from the Pope, in Latin likewiſe,
dated July 16. 1633. |

ln the ſame year he Joſt the Marquis de Roſny,
his eldeſt ion, whoſe conduct had been a cont!-
nual ſource of affliction to him, not only becauie
the Marq1is followed none of the wiſe counſels
he gave him, and joined himſelf to the enemies
of the fate, but becauſe the Duke of Sully felt,

| in

|
]
]
]
(
J
r
n
t
h
fi

OF SU LL V. 183

in more ways than one, the extreme diſorder of
his ſon's affairs. And here it is neceſſary we
mould give ſome account of the Duke of Sully's
domeſtic concerns, which will ſerve to explain
ſeveral parts of theſe Memoirs where the Marquis

of Roſny is mentioned, and particularly what is

ſaid of him in the twenty-ninth book.

The Duke of Sully, beſides two daughters,
the eldeſt of whom was married to the Duke of
Rohan, and the youngeſt to the Marquis of Mi-
repoix, had three ſons; Maximilian de Bethune,
Marquis of Roſny, he had by his firſt wife Anne
de Courtenay; and Cæſar and Francis de
Bethune, by his ſecond, Rachel de Cocheti'c:.
The great eſtates he was poſſeſſed of being acqui-
red ſince his ſecond marriage, the children.by that
marriage ſeemed intitled to the largeſt ſhare of
them; nevertheleſs, the Duke of Sully thinking:
himſelf obliged to ſecure to the Marquis de Roiny
fuch an eſtate as might enable him to ſuport tbe
grandeur of his houſe, of which he was the eldeſt;
to the poſts of grand maſter of the ordnance,
ſuperintendant of the fortifications, and to the
zovernments of Mante and Gergeau, the rever-
ſion of which he obtained for him, and which he
eſtimated at ſixty-thouſand livres a-year, he added,
among other gifts, a donation of lands producing;
a yearly revenue of fifty thoutand livres, conſiſt-
ing of the duchy of Sully, the marquilate of
Roſny, the principality of Henrichemont - and
Boiſbelle, with all their dependencies, the proper -
ty of which, however, he reſerved to himſelf du-
ring his life. The deed of entail, which is dated
March 17. 1609, has in it this ſingular clauſe :
* That on the ſuppoſition that none of thole,
“ whether male or female, choſe to fulfil the
* aforeſaid terms and conditions, the ſaid Lord,
* who makes this ſettlement, gives, by the pre-

K 2 «ent

—
. wr
—

— — — —
— — —
rr —

a

= 1 — "I IELIT OE CIRC ERS.

—

9

184 MEMOIRS Sup.

** ſent writing, the above-faid lands to the King
or his deſcendents, according to their ſeniority,
on condition that the ſaid lands ſhall never be
% di{united from the crown; and that he who ſhall
„ polſeſs them, if he be not the King or the
King's eldeſt ſon, (hall be obliged, and his de-
«« icendents after him, together with his own
name and arms, to bear the ſirname and arms
of Bethune.” |
But afterwards being ſolicitous to prevent any
occaſion for diſunion in his family, M. de Sully
the following year made two other donations and
eonveyances of his other poſſeſſions in the ſame
form, and by an a& of the ſame kind, in favour
o! Cir and Francis de Bethune, his youngeſt ſons :
namely, of the land and lordſhip of Villebon to
Cœſar; and to Francis de Bethune, called Count
of Orva!, of the lands of Montrond, Orval, Bruy-
eres, Epineuil, Beaucheſal, La-Roche-Guillebaur,
and Le-Chatelet, in Berry. The value of each
of thefe donations is eſtimated at ten thouſand
livres a-year. It is there ſtipulated, that the for-
tifications, arms, ammunition, and furniture, as
well thoſe which were in all theſe caſtles when
the donation was made, as thoſe which ſhould be
found there at the death of the Duke of Sully,
ſhould be comprehended in the donation; and if
either of his two ſons, to whom they were made
over, ſhould die without heirs, his portion was to
go entire to the furvivor. This happened four
years after: for, Czlar de Bethune dying unmar-
ried in 1614, the Count of Orval reunited in him-
ſelf the two articles of conveyance. In 1620
his father married him to Jacqueline de Caumont,
daughter of the Grand Marihal de La-Force,
and grand-daughter of the firſt Marſhal Biron ;
and he confirmed, by the marriage-contraR, the
act of entail made in the year 1610.
Before

a a * *

Al

FA MS WS oO from ox oo a

Ae, T nt A — —

= T8 ©

5. OO FW . —O

* e. 185

Before and after the Duke of Sully had made
theſe diſpoſitions of his eſtates, the Marquis of
Roſny continued to hold his poſſeſſions jointly
with his father. This community of goods was
wholly to the advantage of the ſon, his mother's
eſtate alone being not ſufficient to ſupply his
expenſes: but it expoſed the Duke of Sully to
the proſecution of his ſon's creditors. The Duke
paid his debts ſeveral times; but they became fo
conſiderable, by the prodigality and bad manage-
ment of the Marquis of Roſny, that he took a
reſolution, at length, to leave him to himſelf.
Such was the beginning of his domeſtic troubles.

This was ſoon followed by others more conſi-
derable : for after the death of the Marquis of
Roſny, his creditors, taking the advantage of the
community of goods, made an attempt to ſeize
upon ſome of the poſſeſſions of the Nuke of Sully.
The Prince of Henrichemont *, his grandſon,
Joined with them to annul theſe conveyances ; in
which he was greatly aſſiſted by the circumſtances

the Duke of Sully was then in, who, to get him-

{elf clear of the Prince of Condé, had been obli-
ged to do and undo many eſtabliſhments, and had
gained, and fold, and gained again, at ſeveral
times, a great part of the lands contained in thoſe
conveyances ; ſuch as, Villebon, Montrond, &c.

This kept the Duke of Sully in continual per-

plexity with diſputes and law-ſuits, part of which,
however, were amicably ſettled by the marriage
of the Prince of Henrichmont with the daughter of
the Chancellor Seguier +, inthe year 1639; upon
which the Duke of Sully, who was then upon good

* Maximilian-Francis de Bethune, the third of that name, Duke
of Sally, Prince of Renrichemont and Boiſbelle, Marquis of Roſny,
lieutenant-general for the government of Dauphiny and the Paig-
Vexin, governor of Mante and Meulan : he dicd in 1661. T

+ Charlotte Seguier, daughter of the Chancellor Seguicr.

3 terms

— -+ 3 * _ -
— —ͤ— — —
= — — — muy ——_—rr_ = —
_ - — >

— —
—— — —

— —
— —— — —— —
- — — — —

——ͤ—

— ——

— —
—

— ” —
— —
— —— —

— — 0
—
——— 3 —
. -

186 MEMOIRS SUP,

termswith the Prince of Conde, having Villebon re-
ſtored, and all his other acquiſitions ſecured to him,
made over again, in the year 1640, a new convey-
ance, confirming the former, by which he gaveother
lands, in the place of thoſe that might be alienated.
The diſcontent of the Prince of Henrichemont
broke out again upon this new conveyance, and
he ſet on foot a law-ſuit, of which Lewis XIII. and
his firſt miniſter took the cogniſance to them-
ſelves, and which continued during the years
1640 and 1641. 'The petitions and principal pieces
of this ſuit have been printed. The Duke of Sully
complains there bitterly, that his grandſon, and
the Chancellor Seguier, who ſupported him,
ſought to take advantage of ſome failures in the
formalities of the ſettlements, unavoidable per-
haps in affairs ſo long and ſo complicated. But
it would be impropper here to enter into a diſcuſ-
ſion of this point of the law. Suppoſing that all
poſſible right was not on the fide of the Duke of
Sully, yet it muſt be confeſſed, that the voice of
nature, and a principle of gratitude, ought to have
carried 1t in favour of a man who had raiſed his
family to ſuch a degree of ſplendor : however
that may be, the Duke of Sully had the mortih-
cation to find himſelf, by a decree of council
given in December 1641, obliged to revoke his
conveyance of four of thoſe eſtates ' which had
been given in the room of the former, that had
been alienated. He was then eighty-two years
old; and it is probable, that, jealous as he was
of the paternal authority, and convinced in his
own mind, that in all he had done he had exaQ-
ly followed the laws of equity, this ſtroke af-
fected him ſo ſenſibly, that it contributed to ſhort-
en his life: he died eight days afterwards at Vil

Tebon, December 22. 1641.
His bowels were put into a kind of leaden Wh,

an

£24. wSiKLS * a@ri Gan as. ds. a A 4. 4 a7 ͤ . au dc od . Bromo i io i i "nt. a

*

OF SUL L x. 187

and depoſited in the vault of the collegiate church
of Saint-Anne in Villebon, and upon the vault
over it was this inſcription :

Here lie the bowels of the Moſt High, Moſt Puiſſant,
and Moſt Illuſtrious Lord, Maximilian de Be-

» thune, Duke of Sully, Peer and Marſhal of
France. |

His body was to be carried to Aumone, or Hotel-
Dieu of Nogent ; but the mauſoleum which was
erecting tor him there, not being finiſhed, it was
laid in a leaden coffin, and placed in the Duke of
Sully's chamber in the caſtle of Villebon, where
he died. The ceilings, the floors, and walls of
this apartment, were hung with black cloth: it
was left there expoſed to view, under a canopy of
black velvet, with bands of ſilver ſtuff, and the
arms of Bethune at the four corners.
In the mean time, the Ducheſs of Sully cauſed
a cloſet to be built in the lower gallery of the
caſtle of Villebon, in order to place a ſtatue in
it, which ſhe deſigned to erect to the memory of
her huſband; and for this purpoſe ſhe bought a
block of white marble, the fineſt that could be
procured, and ſent for one of the moſt excellenr
ſculptors of that ttme from Italy. In the front of
this cloſet is written, in large characters, the ten
commandments, as they ſtand in the book of
Exodus; on one of the ſides, the epitaph of the
deceaſed; upon the other, his coat of arms, with
all the enſigns of his office; the top, and all the
reſt of the cloſet, is filled with pictures, emblems,
and mottoes, which it is not neceſlary to deſcribe
here : it is enlightened by a long window, which
takes up the farther end. The ſtatue is placed
in the midſt of che cloſer, ſtanding upon a pe-
deſtal of white marble likewiſe; it is a little lar-
ger

—_ > . —
2 ———— ,
* . — < ey

=

188 MEMOIRS Sup.

ger than the life, and repreſents the Duke of
Sully, armed from his neck to his fcet, with a
cron of laurel upon his head, and the ducal
mantle on his ſhoulders; in his right hand, ſtretch.
ed out, he holds the marſhals ſtaff; and his left
is leaning upon his coat of arms: the marſhals
ſtaff, as well as his caſque, adorned with a plume
of feathers, which lies at the left fide of the ſta-
tue, are cut out of the ſame block. This whole

iece is ſo beautiful, and ſo highly finiſhed, that
it may vie with the ancient monuments of Greece
and Rome. Over the doof of the cloſet is writ-
ten, in cartouche :

Rachel de Cochefilet, Ducheſs-dowager 4 Sully,

after the death of Maximilian de Bethune,
Duke of Sully, her huſband, with whom ſhe
lived forty-nine years in marriage, to honour
his memory, and in teſtimony of her grief for
his loſs, has ereded this ſtatue, in the year
1642.

The body of this lady heing, after her death,
de poſited by that of her huſband, the mauſoleum
which we are going to deſcribe, was common to
them both. It is a round chapel, built on the fide
of that of Saint James de PAumone, or the hoſpi-
tal of Nogent, called from their name Nogent le
Bethune; it has no communication with the
church, becauſe the Duke and Ducheſs of Sully
were {o unhappy as to die in the principles of the
pretended reformed religion. Under this chapel
is a vault, where both their bodies are interred.
The walls on the inſide of this chapel are adorned
with the coats of arms and alliances of the houle
of Bethune; the dome is only coloured with a
plain blue, ſprinkled with flowers-de- luce: the
effigies of the Duke and Ducheſs are of white
marble, as large as the life; they are kneeling

upon

. 18g

upon a pedeſtal, three feet in height, with their
faces turned towards the eaſt: by an inſcription
upon the pedeſtal we are told, that this work,
which is very well executed, was the performance
of B. Boudin, in the year 1642. Behind the ſta-
tue of the Duke of Sully, is this inſcription :;

Here lies the body of the Moſt High, Moſt Puiſſant,
and Moſt Tiluſtrious Lord, Maximilian de Be-
thine, Marquis of Roſny, who fhared in all the
fortunes of King Henry the Great, among which
was that memorable battle which gave the crown
to the vittor ; where, by his valour, he gained
the white ſtandard, and took ſeveral priſoners of
diſtinetion. He was by that great monarch, in
reward of his many virtues and diſtinguiſhed
merit, honoured with the dignities of Duke, Peer,
and Marſhal of France, with the governments of
the Upper and Lower Poitou, with the office of
Grand Maſter of the Orduance, in which, bearing
the thunder of his Jupiter, he took the caſtle of
Montmeliar, til} then believed impregnable, and
many other fortreſſes of Savoy; he was likewife
made Superintendant of the Finances, which of-
fice he diſcharged ſingly with a wiſe and prudent
economy, and continued his faithful ſervices till
that unfortunate day when the Cefar of the
French nation loſt his life by the hand of a par-
ricide. After the lamented death of that great
king, he retired from public affairs, and paſſed
the remainder of his life in eaſe and tranquillity.

He died at the caſtle of Villebon, December 22.

1641, aged eighty-iwo years.—Here alſo lies
the Moſt High, Moſt Puiſſant, and Moſt Illuſtriotis
Lady, Madame Rachel de Cochefilet, his wife,
who died at Paris in the ninety-ſeventh year of
her age, in the year 1659.

The

— —

— —— —— ——
—— — — ——— — —
— —— *

— — —

_—

——— — —— —
— — * ——
3+ ” *

190 M E MO IR S Sup.

The way to this chapel is through a long court,
planted with a walk of elms; at the entrance of
which is a portal, of very beautiful architecture,
with the arms of the houſe of Bethune in raiſed
work, and all the additions belonging to the arms
of the Duke of Sully. The houſe of Bethune
bears, d' an gent, face de gucules, ſupported by two
ſavages armed with clubs.

Before Villebon was reſtored to the Duke of
Sully, he divided his reſidence between Sully, La-
Chapelle-d'Angillon, which is a very fine houle
and barony dependent on the duchy of Sully, and
Roſny, which of all his houſes, he moſt embel-
iſhed, as he reckoned upon this being always kept
in his family : he was building the wings when
he had the misfortune to loſe the King his bene-
factor; and, as a witneſs of his grief for that Jols,
he left thoſe wings imperfect, and in the ſame
condition they were in at the time of that fad
event. But when he became again poſſeſſed of
Villebon, the beauty of that caſtle, its ſituation in
a moſt agreeable country, its contiguity to Paris,
for Villebon is not more than twenty leagues di-
ſtant from that city, and the advantage of being
in the centre of ſeveral great eſtates which he
had purchaſed with the money ariſing from the
ſale of thoſe he had been obliged to part with to
the Prince of Condé: all theſe conſiderations de-
termined him to fix his {tay there during fix whole
months of the year, which were the autumn and
the winter : he uſed, in the ſpring, to make ſome
ſhort journeys to Sully; but that place was become
very diſagreeable to him, on account of the con-
duct of his eldeſt ſon: the reſt of the year he

alled at La-Chapelle-d'Angillon, at Roſny, and

is other eſtates.

The life he led in his retreat was accompanied
with decency, grandeur, and even majeſty; ſuch

| as

L. 191

as might be expected from a character ſo grave
and ſo full of dignity as his. Beſides a great
many gentlemen and pages, by whom he was at-
tended, and ladies and maids of honour about the
perſon of the Ducheſs of Sully, he had one com-
pany of guards, with their officers, and another of
Swiſs; and ſo great a number of domeſtics, that
there are but few examples of ſubjects who have
kept ſo grand and ſo numerous an houſehold.
Monſieur, the preſent Duke of Sully, has con-
verſed with the ſon of an ancient ſurgeon belong-
ing to his anceſtor the Duke of Sully, the laſt of
this branch, who died at the age of eighty-eight
years, and who,was about fourteen when the Duke
of Sully, of whom we are ſpeaking, died: this
man told him, that he had accompanied his father
in his viſits to the fick in the caſtle of Villebon ;
and had reckoned fourſcore of them, without per-
ceiving that the ſervice of the houſe ſuffered the
leaſt diſorder or delay upon that account.

M. de Sully always continued his cuſtom of
riſing very early in the morning. After ſome time
ſpent in prayers and reading, he ſet himſelf to
work with his four ſecretaries: this work conſiſted
in putting his papers in order, in digeſting his
Memoirs, in anſwering the ſeveral letters he re-
ceived, in regulating his domeſtic affairs, and,
laſtly, in taking cogniſance of thoſe which re-
lated either to his governments or his poſts; for
he continued, till his death, governor of the Up-
per and Lower Poitou and. of Rochelle, grand
maſter of the ordnance, grand ſurveyor of France,
and ſuperintendant of the fortifications. He u-
ſually paſſed the whole morning in theſe occupa-
tions; except that he ſometimes went out to take
the air half an hour or an hour before dinner;
they then, rung a great bell which was upon the
bridge, to give notice that he was going out; the

greateſt

192 MEMOIRS Sup.

greateſt ut of his houſehold ranged themſelves
on each ſide, from the bottom of the ſtair-caſe to
the door of his apartment; his equerries, gentle-
men, and officers, walked before him, preceded
by two Swiſs with their halberts; the Duke came
next, with ſome of his friends and relations on
each ſide of him, with whom he converſed; then
followed the officers of his French and Swiss

uards; and the proceſhon was always cloſed by
— Swiſs.

At his return, he went into the hall, where he
dined : this was a very large room, in which he
had cauſed the moſt memorable actions of his
own life, together with thoſe of Henry the Great,
ro be painted; at the upper end of the table two
armed chairs were placed for the Duke and Du-
cheſs; all his children, married as well as un—
married, of whatever rank or dignity, had only
ſtools; for, at that time, the ſubordination between
parents and their children was ſo great, that they
were not permitted to {it in their preſence, with-
out being commanded to do ſo. His table was
ſerved with taſte and magnificence; he admitted
to it none but the nobility in his neighbourhood,
ſome of the 13 gentlemen, and the ladies
and maids of honour who belonged ro the Du-
cheſs of Sully : except his gueits, all the com-
pany retired as ſoon as the deſſert was brought in.
After dinner they withdrew into a cabinet ad-
Joining to the hall where they dined : this was
called the cabinet of illuſtrious men, becauſe it was
adorned with the portraits of popes, kings, prin-
ces, and other great and celebrated perſons, from

whom he had received them; many of theſe por-

traits are {till to be ſcen at Villebon.

In another adjoining hall, magnificently fur-
niſhed, the captain of his guards had a ſecond
table, ferved with almoſt as much grandeur as the

4

ii. Ou 2

r oo oa

bp, 5 (YO — gs 22 — op fa, „ tin end hand

-w-- at e

b—
«

| 0:F B'V Li LY: 193
firſt; here ſat the younger ſort, and indeed thoſe -
only whom, on account of the diſproportion of
age, he choſe not to receive at his own table.
The preſent Duke of Sully has been told by ſeve-
ral perſons of quality, that when they have ac-
companied their fathers in the viſits they made to
his anceſtor, he kept only them ar his owa table,
ſaying to the young men, You are not old enough
to eat with us, we ſhould grow weary of one ano-
ther. |

When he had ſtaid ſome time with the com-
pany, he retired to his own apartment, where for
two or three hours he employed himſelf in the
ſame manner as in the morning. If the ſeaſon
and the weather permitted it, he took a walk in
the afternoon, attended with the ſame train as be-
fore: he often went into his gardens, and paſſin
through a little covered alley, which ſeparate
the flower from the kitchen garden, aſcended by
a ſtone ſtair-· caſe (which the preſent Duke of Sully
has cauſed to be deſtroyed) into a large walk of
linden trees, upon a terraſs on the other ſide of the
garden. It was then the taſte to have a great
number of narrow walks, very cloſely ſhaded with
four or five rows of trees or paliſadoes: here he
uſed to ſit upon a ſettee painted green, and large
enough to hold two perſons, and leaning his el-
bows upon a large grated window, which has been
lately taken away likewiſe, amuſed himſelf with
beholding, on the one ſide, an agreeable land-
ſcape; and on the other, a ſecond alley, on a
terraſs, extremely beautiful, which ſurronnded a
large piece of water, called the New Pond, and
terminated by a wood of lofty trees, called the
Great Park. In this park alſo he uſed ſometimes
to walk, and often was drove about it in his cha-
riot or coach, with the Ducheſs his wife. The
interval between theſe airings and ſupper, he

Vor. V. 8 ſpent

794 M E MO IRS Sup.

ſpent in the ſame occupations as the morning: at
ſupper, the ſame form was obſerved as at dinner:
after which, every one retired to their reſpective
apartments.

The Duke of Sully, on account of his relipion,
could not be admitted into any order: he there.
fore made one for himſelf. In the inventory of
his efteQs there were ſeveral diamond rings for
that uſe. He wore about his neck, and more
eipecially after the death of Henry IV. a chain of
gold or diamonds, to which hung a large gold me-
dal which had in relievo the figure of that great
prince. He uſed often to take this medal out of
his boſom, ſtop, and contemplate 1t, and then kits
it with the utmoſt reverence and affection: he ne-
ver would quit it, not even when he went to court,
any more than his ancient dreſs, which he always
preſcrved ; for he would not ſubject himſelf to the

change of falhions. It is well known what hap-
Pence. to. him one day when he went to court in
conſequence of a meſſage from Lewis XIII.
& Monfienr de Sully,” ſaid this young prince to
tim, © ſent for you, as erg ene of the chief
& miniſters of the King my father, and a man in
«& whom he placed g great confidence, to aſk your
% advice, and to confer with you upon ſome at-
& fairs of importance.” The Duke of Sully tee-
ing none but young courtiers about the King
who, to make their court to the [Conſtable de
Luynes, ridiculed his dreſs and the gravity of his
manners, made this aniwer : “ Sire, I am too old
10 change my habits, but for ſome good cau!e,
« When the Jate King your father, of glarious
«© memory, did me the honour to ſend for me to
«© confer with me upon matters of importance,
„the firſt thing he did was to {end away the bui-
% foons.” The young King ſeemed not to dit-

approve of this freedom: he ordered every one
to

FT SS VEL . 195
to: withdraw, and remained alone with M. de
Sully. | | |

The moſt exact order, ſubordination, and peace
reigned throughout his numerous houſehold : no
perſon knew better how to make himſelf be ſer—
ved, reſpected, and obeyed, than the Duke of
Sully. The Catholics in his ſervice ſaw no dil-
ference between his treatment of them and his
Proteſtant domeſtics, except the great care he
took to oblige the former to an exact performanc?2
of all the duties of good Roman Catholics. This
was one eſfect of that eſteem, and even inclina-
tion, which, in the eourle of theſe Memoirs, be
has always {ſhown for the true religion, and which
would probably have led him to embrace ir, bur
for the conſiderations he there mentions. Ihe
misfortune was, that, being perſuaded he could
work out his ſalvation in either of the two reli-
gions, he was too much governed by his own de-
licacy, which would not ſuffer him to have the ap-
pearance of being {wayed cither by ambition or
intereſt, in taking a reſolution which would have

ratified both in ſo high a degree. All his chil-
, Hogg except the Ducheſs of Rohan, died in the
boſom of the Roman church,

The Duchels his wife, although brought up in
the principles of the Roman-Catholic religion,
quitted it after the death of M. de Chateaupers
her firſt huſband, to marry the Duke of
Sully. The Lords of Villebon had, in the church
of that pariſh, which 1s a collegiate, a chapel on
the {ide next the caſtle, which they. cauſed to be
demoliſhed, and built in its place two galleries,
of which the lower one was ſo incloſed, that thoſs
who were within could not be ſeen by the con-
gregation ; and the one above, to which the a-
cent is by a little ſtair-cale of wood, is alſo ob-
icured by a grate, It is publicly known, has

2 dhe

296 MEMOIRS Sup.

the two Ducheſſes of Sully and Rohan, came of-
ten into the lower gallery to hear the pſalms
during the canonical hours. They waſhed with
their own hands all the linen that was uſed in
the ſervice of the altar. The preſent Duke of
Sully heard this circumſtance from Catherine de
La-Porte, one of his anceſtors. This lady, who
lived a long time with the Ducheſs of Rohan,
her aunt, heard from her an anecdote which no
one at that time was ignorant of, namely, That
the Duke of Suily always gave a moſt gracious
reception to the capuchins that viſited him, and
had ſo great an eſteem for them, that during
his laſt ſickneſs, and a few days before he died,
he deſired to confer with ſome of theſe religious;
but that, when they preſented themſelves for
that purpoſe upon the bridge of the caſtle, the
Ducheſs of Sully gave orders that they ſhould
not be admitted, and threatened to have them
thrown into the moat.

This lady employed her time in regulating the
interior of her houſehold ; in having leaſes drawn
out, and the accounts of the farmers and recei-
vers given in; and always viſited the feveral e-
ſtates of her huſband, when neceſſary. In her
leiſure-hours ſhe amuſed herſelf with working ta-
' peſtry and embroidery with her ladies and maids
of honour. The beauty and elegance of her
work is {till admired in ſome pieces of tapeſtry
that remain in the poſſeſſion of the Duke of Sul-
ly, out of a great number which have been ei-
ther loſt or carried into other families.

The works of the Duke of Sully are mere du-
rable. Beſides all the other monuments of his
liberality, of which we have had occaſion to
ſpeak, he has immortaliſed his memory by a great
number of fine buildings in ſeveral parts of the
kingdom, particularly in his government of Poi-

tou.

OF SUL L I. 197

tou. He would, if he had continued in the ad-
miniſtration till his death, have procured all the
roads in that province to have been made eaſy
and commodious for travelling. It was he who
cauſed that magnificent bridge and cauley to
be built at Chatelleraut, which is {till to be ſeen

there.
There was ſcarce one of his eſtates, thoſe eſpe-
cially which had caſtles on them, where he did
not leave marks of his magniticence, to which he
was chiefly incited by a principle of charity, and
a regard to the public good. He built moſt part
of the Hotel Dieu of Nogent. This city and
lordſhip, which was diſtinguiſhed by the firname
of Nogent Le-Rotrou, was, by the Prince of
Conde's erecting it into a duchy, called D*En-
ien; but, when it came into the poſſeſſion of
the Duke of Sully, it loſt both theſe names, and
was called the earldom of Nogent-le-Bethune,
He at firſt deſigned to carry on very conſiderable
buildings in the caſtle of this city, but he met
with ſo many obſtacles from the religious of St
Denis, that he was determined to turn all his
views upon Villebon. Meſſieurs D'Eſtouteville,
to whom that houſe had formerly belonged, had
left it built only up to the firſt ſtory : he raiſed
it and completed it after the model of the Baſtile,
of which he was governor, but with more beau-
ty. The front preſents three ſets of chambers,
covered with flates between the towers. The
towers have tiat roofs, covered with lead, with
pinnacles, and the battlements alternately round
and pointed; the ſpouts are of the ſame metal
with caſt cannon, and the inner ſpouts which re-
ceive thole of the corners of the houſe, are
likewiſe of caſt meta], eight feet high, termina-
ting in dolphins heads. The grand ſtair. caſe is
extremely large and luminous. At the firſt ſtory
83 18

198 MEMOIRS Sup.

is a large room, with the beams and joints gilt;
as likewiſe the chimney, which is of beautiful
workmanſhip. The apartments are very nume—
rous, and have their chimneys gilt, and the great-
eſt part of their pannels. The park is incloſed
with ſtone walls, and contains a great number
of pools and reſervoirs. The gardens, which
join the houſe on three ſides, the courts, and
court-yards, are all the work of the Duke of
Sully.

To give employment to the poor, who offer-
ed themlelves during a famine, and whom he
thought it no real charity to ſupport in idleneſs,
he made a pond about ſeven hundred and twenty
yards long, and a hundred and twenty broad.
This he called Chapel Pond. The earth which
was dug out, he threw up into four terraſſes pa-
rallel to the canal, which reach to the new pond,
another piece of water above the Chapel Pond.
Between theſe terraſles and the canal, were two
levels of turf, which the preſent Duke of Sully
has cut into ſquares, into graſs plats, and bowl-
ing-greens. All thoſe who offered were ſet to
work indifferently, even to little children, ſome
of whom did not carry, at a time, more than
half a pound of earth : and for this purpoſe an in-
finite number of hand-carriages of all ſizes had
been provided. To each of theſe poor people
was given in the morning a piece of bread ; at
dinner-time a diith of ſoup; and at fupper-time
another piece of bread ; together with wages in
money in proportion to their age and labour.
This work, which the Duke of Sully never would
have undertaken merely for the decoration of his
houſe, coſt him fourſcore thouſand livres.

Every body knows that he built the caſtle of
Roſny completely, ſurrounded it with dry ditches
extremely wide, where, when batteries were or

ced,

—

e 7 a 9 ”

OF SULLY. 199

ced, the ſhot croſſed each other in a ſurpriſing
manner; a- thing very rare at that time. He
raiſed that fine terraſs which runs acroſs the ſea
a to a prodigious extent, and thoſe great gardens
” Hiled with groves, and grottoes with water- works.
1 He embelliſhed Sully with gardens, of which
the plants are the fineſt in the world; and with
a canal, very long and broad, which is ſupplied
with freſh water by the little river of Sangle, whicli
he turned that way, and which afterwards is loſt
in the Loire. He erected a machine to convey
the water to all the baſons and fountains, of
which the gardens were full. The machine 1s
yet in being: but the water-works have been
ſuffered to go to ruin. With regard to the caſtle,
he had it covered with flates : he wainſcotted,
painted, and gilt, almoſt all the apartments, and
worked in the walls the galleries which paſs from
the little lodges, at the gate, tothe main caſtle ?
the court-yard, and a ſecond court-yard, which was
formerly called the Little Park, are likewiſe his
work. There are, in this ſecond court, ſeveral emi-
nences, or enormous heaps of earth, winch appear
plainly to be the work of men. This expenle,
which produced no good, and of which the effect
is even diſagreeable, might ſurpriſe thoſe who
do not know that the Duke of Sully had no o-
| ther way of ſupporting a multitude of poor people,
who demanded work in a time of ſcarcity. St
Ithier was anciently a little church, almoſt cloſe
bi to the caſtle : he removed 1t to the middle of a
= Ccity, where he built, at his own coſt, a very fine
7 church covered with flate. I ſhall not mention
ſeveral other works for which this city is obliged
to him: among others, an hoſpital, which he
founded there.
The principal apartment of this caſtle is that
which he fitted up in memory of Henry the ee
an

200 MEMOIR S Sup.

and which is called, for that reaſon, the King's
apartment. He determined to leave another
monument of his gratitude to this great prince,
in the great hall of Sully. This hall, which
next to that of Montargis, is the largeſt in France,
has a proſpe& of the Loire. Henry IV. is there
painted, in a picture of the firſt ſize, upon a very
fine ſorrel horſe. This is the moſt perfect, and
the moſt like, of all the pictures of that prince.
It is hung over the chimney, which is uncom-
monly large, adorned with carved work, and co-
vered, both on the front and ſides, with ſquares
of painting, containing each an emblem or a
device relating either to the King or the Duke
of Sully. One of theſe pieces has ſomething ſingu-
lar: it is in the front, where the ſun is repreſent-
ed caſting a weak and pale light, with the moon
below it, thining with extraordinary brightneſs ;
and lower yet, the earth, which ſeems obſcured
by the great brightneſs of the moon. This is the
only emblem that has no motto; and may be
therefore ſuppoſed to contain ſomething myſte-
rious.

The Duke of Sully likewiſe repaired and en-
larged the caſtle of La-Chapelle D built
by Mademoiſelle D' Albert: he embelliſhed it
with gardens and terraſſes, and a park about two
hundred and thirty acres, ſurrounded with ſtone
walls, which, though ſtrongly built, are now al-
moſt ruined by the negligence of his ſucceſſors.
Facing the meadow is a great terraſs, remark-
able for its height and length, all faced with
hewn ſtone, with pilaſters of brick and ſtone
ſrom ſpace to ſpace, which contributed at once
to the ſtrength and beauty of the work. Ar the
foot of this terraſs was a mean church, which
the Duke of Sully pulled down, and rebuilt, with

great expenſe and magnificence, at the *
| e

o be
* The N 2 ES SO , A | * * —
53% IRE FIReTTY

* : _
-
of 883
4 TRL ATT
« 4 9 5 2 _
—_ 133 . 4 4 4 25 „ „

OF S U LL T. 201

the citadel of La-Chapelle, of which he is con-
ſidered not only as the lord, but as the founder.

The caſtle of Montigny is indebted to him, a-
mong other embelliſhments, for a fine avenue of
trees; and, behind the houſe, a wall or kind of
court, very agreeable, with four rows of elms.
Io conclude, it was he that built, and cut in
the rock, the famous caſtle of Montrond, which
was long conſidered as impregnable. The way
to it was by a winding path, very broad, cut
likewiſe in the rock; as were alſo the outworks
of the palace, within which there was a well ne-
ver dry, and ſheltered againſt all violence from
without. The Prince of Condé, as has been al-
ready ſhown, obliged the Duke of Sully to give
him up Montrond, which, in the times of con-
fuſion, was his principal fortreſs againſt the King,
whoſe army was ſtopped by it eighteen months,
and at laſt took it only by ſtratagem ; after which
the fortifications were blown up, and the place
deſtroyed.

THE

* | T M E
VV
| o F
FRANCIS RAVAILLAC,
FOR THE

Murder of King Henry IV. 1610.

INTERROGATORIES exhibited to the pri-
ſoner accuſed of the murder of the late King, on
the 17th of May 1610, at the ſuit of the attor-

- "nep-general, by Achilles de Harlay, firſt pre-
fident ; Nicholas Potier, prefident ; John Cour.
tin aud Proſper Bavin, coumſellors of our Lord
the King in his court of parliament, commiſſioners
appointed by the ſaid court for that purpoſe.

HE priſoner is ſworn ; and aſked his name,
age, rank, and place of abode?
He ſaid, that his name was Francis
Ravaillac, born and dwelling at Angouleme, be-
tween thirty-one and thirty-two years of age.
He was afted if he was married?
He anſwered, No.
Whether he ever had been married?
He anſwered, No.
How he had ſpent his youth? and to what he
had applied himſelf?
He ſaid, chat he had been employed in ſoliciting
law-ſuits in this court. |
Whether he had been bred up to the practice
of the law. F,
He ſaid, that he had ſolicited law-ſuits for
fourteen years ; that he lodged at the Rats, op-
| PULLC

"The TRIAL of RAVAILLAC. 203

oſite to the Green pillar, in Harp-ſtreer, at a
cobler's; and near the Three Pair of Beads, in
Calender ſtreet. F

How long he had been in this city the laſt

Journey ?

He ſaid, about three weeks.
Whether he has had any intention to go back

again? |

He ſaid, Ves.

How far he had gone back?

He ſaid, he had gone beyond the town of d'E-
ſtampes, at the ſign of the Ecce homo.

He was zſked, what made him return?

He faid, adetire to kill the King.

He was aſked, what was his motive?

He anfwered, that amongſt other reaſons there
was this, that the King had not, as he was able
to do, brought back the followers of the pre-
tended reformation to the catholic, apoſtolic,
and Roman church. |

He was aſked, uhat other reaſons he had?

He antwered, that he was come to this city to
ſpeak to the King, and admoniſh him to bring
back thoſe of the pretended reformed religion
to the Catholic church; and for that purpoie he
had been {everal times at the Louvre to meet
with his Majeſty; that he had been at Madam
d' Angouleme's, to get ſomebody to introduce
him; and hkewile at the houſe of the Cardinal
Du- Perron, to whom he never ſpoke, but only
to his chaplains, whoſe names he could not tell,
but ſhould know them if he ſaw them; that he
{poke of it to Father Daubigny, a Jeſuit, in his
laſt journey, which was before Chriſtmas; he
1poke of it to the parſon of St Severin, and to
the Father Saint-Mary- Magdalen, provincial of
the Feuillants, |

204 The T R T A L. i

It was aſked him, where he ſpoke: to Father
Daubigny? .

He ſaid, he ſpoke to him in the church in Saint
Anthony's ſtreet, at the concluſion of maſs.

He was aſked at what time he talked to him?

He ſaid, that he ſet out from his own country
thirteen days before Chriſtmas; that he was
fourteen days in coming to this city; that three
or four days after his arrival, he went to the houſe
of the Jeſuits near St Anthony's gate, where he ſaid
Father Daubigny ſaid maſs; after which, he de-
fired one of the lay brothers to procure him
the means of ſpeaking to the ſaid Daubigny ;
which he did; and he told him ſeveral ven:
which had preceded the meditations that he had
made by the permiſhon of his provincial Francis
Mary Magdalen of the Feuillants.

He was aſked, why he uſed the expreſhon, My
provincial ? E

He ſaid, becauſe the ſaid Mary Magdalen had
received him as lay brother at the Feuillants.

It was aſked, how long he had wore the habit
of a Feuillant? and why he had quitted it ?

He ſaid, that he had worn it about ſix weeks;
and they had taken it from him, becauſe he had
viſions in his meditations.

On being aſked again about it, he ſaid he had
deſired it again, but it was refuſed him on account
of the ſaid meditations.

Upon this he began to weep, and ſaid, God had
given him that habit, and' his grief was, that
they would not reſtore it to him.

He was aſked, if he knew the ſuperior, and his
name ?

He ſaid, that he did not know him nor his
name; but that he had aſked for the habit again,
only becauſe it being our Lord's pleaſure that he

ſhould continue in the world, from which it was
his

bk R AVAI LI A. 2086

his wiſh to retire, he reſolved to ſerve as a lay
brother. |

This he uttered with tears.

He ſaid, that he had a great deal of uneaſineſs,
in not having ſtaid with the Feuillants in the fa-
vour of God.

He was asked, what viſions he had ſpoke of to
Father Daubigny ?

He ſaid, that he had told him, that while he
was a priſoner for debt at Angouleme he had vi-
ſions, repreſenting fire, ſulphur, and incenſe;
and being releaſed from priſon, the Saturday af-
ter Chriſtmas, having at night made his medita-
tion, as was his cuſtom, in bed, with his hands
claſped, and his fect croſſed, he felt his face and
his mouth covered with ſomething which he could
not diſcern, becauſe it was midnight; and being
in that ſtate, he felt in himſelf a deſire to ſing
the pſalms of David; he begun the pfalm, Dixit
Dominus, and ſung it through; and afterwards,
Miſerere, and De profundis, at full. length; and
that it ſeemed to him, that he had a trumpet in
his mouth, which made a ſound as loud as that
which is made in war.

The next day in the morning, as ſoon as he
got out of bed, having made his meditation on
his knees, and recollected in God, as his man-
ner was, he {at down in a low chair before the
hearth, and having combed his head, it being
not yet light, he perceived one of the {licks yet
on fire; and having finiibed dreſiing himſelf, he
found part of a bundle of twigs, which he put
to the {tick that had kept fire, and kneeling
down upon the ground, ſet himiclf to blow it,
when immediately, on both ſides of liis face, both
to the right and to the leſt, he ſaw, by che glim-
mering of the fire which was produced by bi,
breath, hoſts like thoſe which are uſed at the

Vor. v. ＋ communion

206 r.

communion of Catholics in the church of God;
and below his face, at the right ſide of his mouth,
he ſaw a roll of the ſame ſize with that which
the prieſt elevates at the celebration of divine
ſervice. Of this revelation he gave an account
to Father Daubigny, who, fearirg that his head
was diſordered, told him that he was not to think
of all this, but to tell his beads, and pray to
God: but that he was determined in his own
mind to addreſs himſelf to ſome great man to
ſpeak to the King. |

It was inquired, if he had aſked Daubigny, whe-
ther, if he ſhould have viſions that incited him
to kill the King, he ought to confeſs them ?

He anſwered, that he had ſaid nothing to him,
but what he had already told, except that his

urpoſe was to ſpeak to the King to drive out
all the followers of the pretended reformed reli-
gion, and convert them to the Roman-Catholic
church.

It was aſked, what Daubigny ſaid to this?

He ſaid, that he ſhould pur all theſe things out
of his head, ſay his prayers, and tell his beads.

It was aſked, whether he had no other con-
verſation with him? and whether he never ſaw
him bur that time?

He anſwered, No.

Why did he chuſe to addreſs himſelf to
Daubigny rather than to any other ?

He anſwered, that it was becauſe, when he was
turned our of the Feuillants, he had a mind to
become a Jeſuit, or to intreat him to ſpeak to his
E to replace him among the Feuillants;

ut that, not having found him the firſt time,
one of the lay brethren told him, that they ne-
ver receive into their houſe thoſe who had been
in another order.

He ſaid farther, that, not having been able to

ſpeak

:
A
*
SE!
Is
FR
OS
J

of RAVAILLAC. 207

ſpeak to the King, he went back to the Jeſuits
to ſpeak a ſecond time to the ſaid Daubigny, and
ſpoke to him as he has already faid, and ſhewed
him a little knife on which there was a heart and
a croſs, telling him, that the heart of the King
ſhould be diſpoſed to make war amongſt th
Huguenots. X
He was aſked, what hindered him from ſpeak-

ing to the King?

He ſaid, that it was the Grand Provoſt who
had given him the torture with the gun while

he was kept priſoner at the Hotel de Retz.

He was aſked, to whom he had applied himſelf
that he might ſpeak with the King ?

He faid, to the archers; and they carried him
to {peak to the Provoſt, who told him that the
King was ſick.

He was aſked, when he was at the Louvre ?

He ſaid, that it was after Chriſtmas ; and ſome
two or three days afterwards he met his Maje-
{ty near St Innocent's in his coach, and, deſiring
to ſpeak to him, he cried out in theſe words:
Sire, I ſpeak to you in the name of our Lord Je-
ſus, and of the holy virgin; but the King pur

him back with a little ſtick, and would not hear
him. He then conſidered of retiring into his own

country, and went away, And, being at An-
gouleme, he went to look for Friar Gilles there,
who had been formerly viſitor of the Franciſcan
friars in Paris; to whom he confeſſed his viſions
and meditations, telling him, that he ſaw it to
be the will of our Lord to bring back the fol-
lowers of the pretended reformation to the Ca-
tholic church: that the viſitor told him, he need
not doubt of it. A few days afterwards, and the
firſt Sunday in Lent, he went to maſs at the mo-
naſtery of the Franciſcan friars in Angouleme,
where he reconciled himſelf with God, made his

T3 confeſhon

—— ̃ ͤ.!p ̃ —

208 r
confeſſion to a friar of the order, whoſe name
he does not know, and in his confeſſton told the
voluntary murder.

He was deſired to explain what he meant by
the word voluntary ?

He faid, his meaning was, that he returned

into tkis city with an intention to murder the

King; which, nevertheleſs, he did dot tell his
confeſſor, who did not deſire the meaning of thoſe
words,

Upon being further queſtioned, he ſaid, that
he had then loſt that intention; but that, when
he returned to this city, he reſumed his intention.

He was aſked, when he came to this city?

He ſaid, that he travelled on foot, and arri-
ved eight days after his ſetting out.

He was aſked, how he had employed himſelf
curing his ſtay in Paris?

He ſad, that he lodged at the Three Half.
moons, in the ſuburbs St James; and after-
wards, that he might be near the Louvre, he went
to lodge at the Three Pigeons, in the ſuburb St
Honore ; from thence he went to take a lodging
at an inn near the guinze vingts, but, there be-

ing too many gueſts there, he was refuſed; upon

which he took up a knife that lay upon a table,

not upon account of his being refuſed a lodging,

but becauſe it ſeemed to him a very fit one for
the execution of his deſign, and he kept it for
ſome days, or three weeks, in a bag in his pocket.
He farther ſaid, that, having deſiſted from his
intention, he ſet out upon his journey home, and
went as far as Eſtampes; that, as he was walking, he
broke the point of the knife againſt a cart near
the garden of Chanteloup, and, coming oppoſite
to the Ecce homo of the ſuburb of Eſtampes, he
azun took it into his head to kill the King;
and, no longer reſiſting the temptation as by had
5 one

of RAVAIL LA c. 209

done formerly, he returned to Paris with that re-

folution, becauſe the Ring did not convert the

followers of the pretended reformation, and be-

cauſe he had heard it reported, that the King in-

tended to make war upon the Pope, and transfer

the ſeat of the holy ſee to Paris.
He was then aſked, where he lodged? and who

rocured him lodgings in this city ?

He ſaid, that he fought for an opportunity to

kill the King; and that, for this purpoſe, he
ſharpened, with a ſtone, the point of the knife,
which had been broke, and waited till the Queen
was crowned, and come back to the city, ſup ;
poſing that there would not be ſo much confu-
ſion in France, if he killed the King after her
coronation, as if he had done it == Bay :
He was told, that, ſince he deferred killing

the King through a hope that there would be

fewer commotions after the coronation, the ſaid
coronation could not prevent the troubles which
the King's death muſt neceſſarily bring along
with it..

He fad, tha the ſubmitted that to the will of God.

He was aſked, where he went to meet the

King?

He ſaid, that he went to the Louvre, where
he had been ſeveral times ſince he had reſolved

upon killing him; that he went there laſt Wed-

neſday, and intended to kill him between tle

two gates, as he was going into his coach; that
he followed him as far as St Innocent's, near
the place where he happened to meet him before,
when he would not ſpeak to him; and obſerving
that the coach was ſtopped by two carts, and
that his Majeſty turned: his face and leaned to-
wards that fide where Monſieur d' Epernon fat,

he ſtruck him twice in the fide with his knife,

paſſing his arm above the coach-wheel.

1 — 1 — — 2
— 12 3 La 0 jy
—_— Ez — —  ———

3 *
- ——— 2 1

1 | He

aro The T R 1 A L

He was aſked, what was his own opinion of
the action he had committed? *

He ſaid, that he thought he had committed
a preat fault, for which he aſked pardon of God,

the Queen, the Dauphin, the whole court,
and of every one who was injured by it.

We ſhewed him the knife, which lay before
us; it was double edged at the point, with
the handle made of a ſtag's horn. He ac-
knowledged it to be the ſame with which he
had ſtabbed the King, and that it was imme-
diately taken from him by a gentleman on
horſeback.

He was told that he could have no reaſon for
committing ſo wicked and traiterous an act, and
that he had certainly been incited to it by ſome
other perſon ?

He ſaid, that no perſon whatever had incited
him to do it, but the common diſcourſe among
the ſoldiers, who ſaid, that if the King, who
would not tell his deſign to any one, intended

to make war upon the Holy Father, that they
would not aſſiſt him, although they were to die

for it ; that for this cauſe he yielded to the temp-
tation which prompted him to kill the King, be-
cauſe he made war againſt God, in as much as
the Pope is God, and God the Pope.

He was aſked, what time it was that he heard
this diſcourſe amongſt the ſoldiers?

He ſaid, that it was after he went to lodge at
the Three Half-moons.

It was objected to him, that he was guilty of a
falſehood in declaring that to be the cauſe of his
committing the parricide, becauſe he had ſaid
before, that, having laid afide his defign of kill-

ing the King, he ſet out on his journey to his

own country; and that, when he came to Eſt *

1

a

-Y
F.
8
| *
z
2
4
„
k 2
i MM

of RA VAI L L A c. 211

he reſumed that deſign, upon the diſcourſe of
the ſoldiers.

He anſwered, that he had ſpoke to them be fore,

notwithſtanding which he had altered his inten-
tion; but, when he came to Eſtampes, he reſu-

med it, upon remembering what the ſoldiers had

ſaid to him.

He deſired us to ſhew him a paper, which he
had about him at the time he was ſeized, whereon
was painted the arms of France, with a lion on
each ſide; one holding a key, the other a ſword.
We ſhewed this paper to him, and he acknowled-

ed it to be the ſame which he had brought with
Fim from Angouleme, with an intention to kill
the King.

He was asked, whether, when he was at the
houſe of a man whoſe name was Beliard, he had
heard the ſaid Beliard ſay, that the Pope's nuncio
had told the King, in the name of his Holineſs,
_ if he made war, he would excommunicate

im? |

He ſaid, Yes; and alſo that his Majeſty had an-
ſwered, that it was his predeceſſors who had placed
the popes upon the throne; and that, if the Hol
Father ſhould excommunicate him, he would diſ-
poſſeſs him of it; whereupon he reſolved to kill
the King, and with that intention he wrote theſe
lines over the two lions:

Ne ſouffre pas quwon faſſe en ta preſence
Au nom de Dieu aucunne irreverence.

Do not ſuffer the name of God to be profaned
in thy preſence. |

He was asked, whether the knife, when he took

it off the table, had the ſame handle that it has
now?

He

-
«>

»

?

212 r

He ſaid, No: that the handle was of whalebone,

which being broke, he gave the knife to his land-
lord's brother, whoſe name was John Barbier, 2
turner by trade, living in the ſuburb of St James,
and deſired him to put a handle of horn upon it;
but he did not tell him why he preferred that to
any other. |
He was asked, if this Beliard was of the pretend-
ed reformed religion ?
. He ſaid, No; that he was a Catholic: never-

theleſs he held that diſcourſe with him which put

it into his head to kill the King.
le was told, that he ought not to have taken fo
wicked and abominable a reſolution upon the dil.

courſe of one man only.

He ſaid, he had taken a reſolution to kill the
King, not only upon what he had heard this man
ſay, but alſo upon the diſcourſe of the ſoldiers at
Paris, and that of the Sieur de St Gorges, among

others, who ſaid, that, if the King would make

war upon the Holy Father, he would obey him,

being thereto obliged; and that, if the King did

wrong, he only was to anſwer for it.
We ſhewed him a heart of coſtmary root, which
he acknowledged to have been taken from him ;

and he faid, it had been given him by Monſieur
- Guillebaut, canon of Angouleme, to cure him of

a fever, ſaying, that there was within it a little bit
of wood of the real holy croſs, conſecrated by
the capuchin friars, which had that virtue; and
for that purpoſe he had ſent Mary Moſeau, his

landlady, to the capuchins for it, and ever fince . Þ

he had wore it about his neck. .
We ordered it to be opened in his preſence; but
there was no wood to be found in the inſide.
Dpon which he ſaid, that it was not him who
was deceived, but the perſon who gave it him.
We ſewed him a pair of beads, which, he mw
15 | 12

* _— * > %
NE IE IL i ba. > TION a
8 A 5 A Pa . * - 4 —_
FL, D 2 . " .

n *
3

„ 1 . a 3

1

A 7 x 5 N hv 4 y a,
r e

* 0 * 8 4 n
” n j a. + I Toon ole oi 1 1
v <=# ä bl _ * — + „ *
m Aw; mips * <4 9 +
4 *. 5 * 22
2 —— BY © 0 wi w I” *

he had bought in St James's ſtreet feven or eight

days ago; that he has ſaid his prayers with them,

and wore them ever ſince conſtantly.
He was aſked, what perſons he kept company
with after he had reſumed his intention to kill the

king?

He ſaid, he kept company with none but the
friars of his own country, who are at the convent
of the Dominican friars, whither he uſed to go io
hear maſs and veſpers. |

He was aſked, what diſcourſe he had with them?
and if he had ſpoke to them of his viſions?

He ſaid, that he had told them what he had
told to others.

He was aſked, if he was acquainted with a man

whoſe. name was Colletet ? and what diſcourſe they

had had together? |

He ſaid, that he knew him only by lodging in
the ſame room with him ; that they lay —
but that he had not ſpoke to him of his deſign.

He was aſked, if he had had any diſcourſe with
any other friars ? |

He ſaid, not in this laſt journey. |

If he had had any diſcourſe with a Franciſcan
friar of Angoultme ?

He ſaid, Ves: but that he had not ſpoke to him
of his enterpriſe, and of his imaginations.

He was told, that he did not fay the truth ; for
that he had ſpoke to him of his imaginations
aſking his opinion whether he, who had ſuch ima-
3 ought to declare them to his confeſ-
or.

To this he anſwered, that he had not ſpoke to
a Pranciſcan of his own country, but to another
whom he met near Bourg de La-Royire, with
whom he joined company; and, becauſe he had
no acquaintance in this city, he gave him part of
his own lodgings, and carried letters from his

| friends

214 The 1 R7I A L.

friends to procure him admiſſion into the convent: |

that he allo carried his bundle for him; and that
the name of this friar was Le-Febure. |

It was obſerved to him, that during the reading
of his examination, when the wounds he had gi-
ven the King were mentioned, he had aſked par.
don of God for that crime, but that the true
means to obtain it, was to acknowledge the truth;
that his pretence for committing that action was
ſo flight, that he muſt certainly have been prompt-
ed to it by ſome one who was concerned in the
{ucceſs of that miſerable ſtroke, of which we ſeel
the effects.

He ſaid, that, ſince he has been under confine-

ment, he had been urged by ſeveral perſons to

make this confeſhon, and even by the Archbiſhop

of Aix; but that he had been prompted by no

perſon whatever, but by his own deſires; and that,
however he might be tormented, he ſhould never
ſay any thing elſe ; that, if torments could have
forced him to confeſs, he had ſuffered ſuſhciently
by the torture which a Huguenot of his own pri-
vate authority gave him, when he kept him pri-
ſoner at the Hotel de Retz, by which he had the

bone of his thumb broke.

He was told, that he had been choſe to com-
mit this action as a proper inſtrument of miſchief;
he whoſe whole life had been wicked, and who
had begun with uſing a father and a mother ill,
and reducing them to beggary.

He ſaid, that it would not be found. ſo; and
that his father and mother, who were {till living,
would witneſs the contrary, as well as the people

where he dwelt; that he had been indeed accuſed

and condemned for it; but it was by falſe witneſſes;
for he was innocent.
He was aſked when he was at Bruſſels? .
0

i

of RAVAIL LA c. 215

He ſaid, that he never was out of the king-
dom; and that he did not know where Bruſſels is.

This examination being read to the ſaid Ravail-
lic, he perſiſted in his anſwers, and ſigned his

name
RAVAILLAC.

pe examination taken next morning, at the palace,
by us the commiſſioners, the firſt preſident being
ſick.

$ 1 priſoner being ſent for as before, and his
f oath taken,
He was aſked, what was his rank and condition?
and if he had a father or a mother alive?
He ſaid, that he is a practitioner of the law,

and that, before his confinement, he employed

= himſelf in inſtructing youth; and that his father
is likewiſe a practioner of the law, and that his
mother is ſeparated from his father.

We having again ordered his examination to be
read to him, he perſiſted in his anſwers, without
adding or diminiſhing any thing, except only that
he omitted ſaying, as he did now, that he had
been carried to the commiſlion of that crime, be-
cauſe the King would not permit juſtice to be
done upon the Huguenots, for the attempt they
made laſt Chriſtmas to murder all the Catholics,
for which atteinpt many of the Huguenots had
been taken priſoners, and brought into this city;
yet, he had been told, by ſeveral perſons, were
not puniſhed.

He was told, that this was falſe; and that, al-
though he had heard it, he ſhould not have be—
lieved it, nor have been induced to commit a deed
ſo wicked and abominable.

He ſaid, that this was one of the circumſtances
which helped to ſtrengthen the temptation. 0

. 0

522 = Wa 2
. ͤͤꝗßs ... ok¼ʃC᷑— — Ä - "=

—

{
f

R 2.

.

> . 2499 4 22 2 ö
- — — 2 r
w— 9 s

1

v— — —— — —— — — —̃ —

216 E
He was told, that it was the advice and inſtruc.

tion of others which ſtrengthened it.

He ſaid, that no one was engaged in the deſign
but himſelf. |

He was asked, if he lived in the ſame country
with his father and mother?

He ſaid, that he had lived with his father and
mother, but that his father neither loved him nor
his mother.

He was asked, how he maintained liimſelf?

He ſaid, that he had eighty ſcholars, and that,
with what he gained from them, he ſupported
himſelf in the journeys he had made to this city.

He was asked, if his father and mother obler-
ved his conduct? | | |

He ſaid, that his father had not lived with them
theſe ſix years; that he hated him; and that he
had lived with his mother only, his ſiſters having
likewiſe left her.

He was asked, what means he had of living?

He ſaid, that his father and mother lived upon
alms, and he himſelf upon what he gained from
his ſcholars, one of whom gave him bacon, ano-
ther flelh, another corn, wine, &c. and by what
jus friends furniſhed him with.

He was asked, who were his friends?

He faid, that they were the fathers and mo-
thers of his ſcholars.

He was asked, why he did not ſtay in his own
country, ſince he could get a livelihood there?

He faid, that he thought he ſhould prefer the

Honour of God to all things.

He was told, that it was not for the honour of
God to kill his King, but that it was an act of the
devil. .

He ſaid, that it was a wicked temptation, which
did not proceed from God, but was 2 punichment
to him for his ſins. ;

: He

_ yorr » .
1 — SE 7 Hg ; * " "* TIM... IF
* 4 PET 2 2 SAT Ys. A our * * * * "© a T 9
1 * e * 2 1 Fa, n 2 8 * 2 9 22 0 Fa N ” *
5 , N _—_— 4 FIR 969 f K 3 bs — — *
n \ 9 8 _ 1 * — 0

-

He was aſked, if he was not filled with hor-
ror at the commiſſion of an act ſo abominable,
and of ſo fatal conſequence to all France? |

He ſaid, that he was ſorry for having commit-
ted it, but that ſince it was done, he implored
God to give him grace, that he might he able
to continue till death in good faith, lively hope,
and perfect charity; and that he hoped. God was
more merciful, and his will to ſave him more
powerful, than the act which he had committed
was to damn him. 8

He was told, that he could not be in the grace
of God, after having committed ſo wicked an
action.

He ſaid, that he hoped our all- powerful Lord

would not make him {uffer for it.

He was told, that he ought not to hope for
the mercy of God, unleſs he acknowledged the
truth, and declared who the perſons were who
had incited and perſuaded him to ſo wicked a
deed. |

He ſaid, that his only reaſon for committing
it was, what he had declared before at his exa-
mination.

He was aſked, if he had imparted his intention
to any one? |

He ſaid, that he had not to any perſon whatever.

He was told, that he was too mean and incon—
ſiderable a perſon to have conceived ſuch a de-
ſign, and that he muſt have been adviſed and
ſupported by others. | 5k
Ile faid, that no perſon had adviſed lim.
He was told, that he was ſo much the more
wicked, if he undertook ſuch an enterpriſe with-
out being adviſed to it; therefote he' would do
well to declare who were his adviſers. ,_

To this he anſwered, that the reaſon why he
did not declare this pernicious intention to prieſts,

Ps I U 15 and

—

— —

7
r

3 ͤ ——— ow”

4
pf

_
—
—y

—
-. 4
r

PPP — —
— ins, — — —

TSA — —— _ > 7

1 —

4
—

SY .
—_

Ro. ee ee. nd

z —— > le —

8 — 4 —

218 T AL

and men who have the care of ſouls, was, that
he was well aſſured if he had diſcloſed to them
his deſign of killing the King, it was their duty
to ſeize his perſon, and put him into the hands
of juſtice ; ſince, whenever the public is con-
cerned, prieſts are obliged to reveal all confeſ-
ſions; for this reaſon therefore he would not o-
pen himſelf to any perſon, through a fear that he
might be puniſhed with death, as well for his
intention of killing the King, as if he had really
done it, for which he aſked pardon of God.

He was told, that the church commands, that
all evil thoughts ſhould be revealed in confeſſion,
and to 5 it is a deadly ſin.

He ſaid, that he acknowledged this.

He was told, that he had mentioned it.

He ſaid, he had not.

He was aſked, if he had ſpoken of it to a Fran-
ciſcan Friar?

Tſe ſaid, No. 5

He was told, that he did not ſpeak the truth;
for that he had mentioned it to a Franciſcan
triar, aſking iim, whether, if a man had ſtrange
viſions, ſuch as to Kill-the King, he ought to de-
clare them in his confeſſion ?

He ſaid, that it was true he had conſulted a
friar upon this head, but did not tell him that
he would do it. |

He was aſked, who it was that he conſulted?

He faid, a young Franciſcan friar, named Le-
Febure, to whom he put this queſtion, Whether
if a man was aſlaulted with a temptation, ſuch
as to kill a king, and ſhould confeſs it to the pe-
nitentiary, he ſhould be under a neceſſity of re-
vealing it; but being interrupted by another friar,
he could not know the friar's opinion concerning
the caſe that he put to him.

He was told, chat he did not ſay the truth, _

: That

1 * een - £ _ by , — N 2 *
* 2 2 9 it Bu 1 7 x At 4,5 A * g 6.4 = a2 Pye” FP
je " ba 2 R - 1 X T- q © OY 4 3 WF - oF" 5 78 — „„ : 8 5 W 1 n
— 2 4 1 n . "NT — 8 Eb . 1 4 e ys _ * oy 4.” " £9 % * 1 * * 3 * wo — 3 af > *. . 2 5 {ug —
Wr Y : : . 1 ** * we Da bn . ' CITE > F r e * . þ
* " © " 4 * . 2 0 ka WU 4 W 29 n * "4 Cant oil ee 3 25 3 © WEL * 5 - * 1 2 * — 3 l CORE x 9 >

of RAVAILL AC. 219

that the Franciſcan did make him an anſwer ;
and he was aſked, if he would believe the Fran-
ciſcan if he owned it?
He faid, that he would not believe him; bur
that it was his opinion, that if the friar had gi-
ven him an anſwer, it was, that he ought to re-
veal his imaginations ; but he was interrupted,
and therefore would not give him an anſwer ;
neither did he, the accuſed, propole the queſtion
to him, as if he was the man who had the temp-
tation, but in general, as if it ſhould happen to
any man.
He was told, that he did not acknowledge the
truth, and that he did declare his intentions to
him. | |
He ſaid, that it was very unlikely that he
ſhould do ſo; that he had applied, as well to
lay men as to others, even to an equerry belong-
ing to Queen Margaret, whole name was Dc-
Ferrare ; he declared his viſions to him, aud
intreated him to procure him an opportunity to
ſpeak to the King ; that the equerry anſwered,
he muſt firſt have proofs that he was a good
man, and one who was fit to ſpeak to the King:
to which he, the accuſed, made anſwer, that he
thought he was good enough to ſpeak tothe King.
He added, that probably if he had ſpoke to his
Majeſty, he would have loſt his temptation.
That he afterwards applied to the ſecretary of
Madame de Angouleme, who told him that the
King was ſick; yet he went again to the houſe
of the Cardinal Du-Perron, where he had the an-
ſwer he formerly repeated, That he would do bet-
ter to return to his own houſe.

Ile was told, that that was good counſel, and

he ought to have followed it.

le ſaid, that it was true, but he was ſo weaken-
ed by his fins that he had no power over him-
U 2 ſelf;

*

—  -
=y

x
- —— — _ ad
-— Io 2

3

2 ,

a eat >». Cre — ]— I EGS
„ Is — — 5 woo uw . var - *

220 „ a We Me A 4d

felf; and that the devil made him fall into this
temptation. |

He was told that the devil made uſe of others
to tempt him. 5 Condon.

He faid, that no man had ever ſpoke to him
on the ſubject. t

He was told, that he could not hope for the
grace of God, unleſs he diſcharged his conſcience.

He ſaid, that he had ſome fears, but he allo
Dad great hopes of the grace of God.

He was told, that he could not expect it but
by declaring the truth.

He faid, that if he had been employed by a-
ny one in France, or by a foreigner, and ſhould
be ſo abandoned by God as to die without decla-
ring it, he ſhould not believe that he would
be ſaved, or that there would be any paradiſe
tor him, becauſe cbiffus abiſſiiut, &c. as he had
icarned of the preachers of our Lord; that one
abyls of fins leads into others; that it was to
double his crime, that the King, more eſpecially
the Queen, the whole houſe of France, the
court, the nobility, and all the people, ſhould,
on his account, be induced to offend God, while
their minds remained in a perpetual inquietude,
ſuſpecting, unjuſtly, ſometimes one, ſometimes
another of their ſubjects; none of whom, he
believed, were ſo imprudent, as to entertain a
thought of being difloyal to their princes.

He was told, that if that was his opinion, he
ought the more readily to declare who had per-
fuaded him to the crime. |

He ſaid, that no Frenchman, foreigner, or a-
ny other, had ever adviſed, perſuaded, or ſpoke
to him on this ſubje& ; neither had he, the ac-
cuſed, ever mentioned it to any one: he was not
ſo wicked as to have committed that deed for a-
ny other cauſe than what he had declared to us,

| namely,

of RAVAIL LAC. 221

namely, that he believed the King intended to
make war upon the Pope.

He was told, that this was a falſe pretence.

He ſaid, that he was very ſorry for what he
had done, and that he earneſtly begged of every
one to lay aſide their ſuſpicions of his having
been ſet on to murder the King, and to believe

that he only was concerned in that deed; and

that they would not look with an evil eye, or
bear any one ill. will, fince he alone was guilty.
He was aſked, if he had ever been in ſervice ?
He ſaid, that he had ſerved the late Monſieur
Roſieres, a counſellor of Angouleme ;. and that
he had lived likewiſe with ſome attorneys, who
were new dead. | |
He was aſked, if he had ever ſerved any noble-
man, as a page, footman, or valet de chambre ?
He ſaid that he had not ; but when he lived

with Counſellor Roſieres, as his clerk, he like-

viſe ferved him as a valet de chambre.
He was aſked, if he had ſeen the coronation
laſt Tueſday, and if he had followed the King 2
Ile ſaid, he had not.

He was asked, if he had been on the road to
Saint-Denis?

He faid not this laſt journey, but at Chriſtmas
laſt, when he went to beg alms of the bakers.
. He was asked, if he had been there lait week?
Ile ſaid, he had not gone farther than Saint |
Jeanin-Greve, and Le Pont Notre-Dame.
He was asked, if he had any magical charac-
ters about him? and who had given them to him?

He faid, he ſhould have thought it a wicked
thing to have them. | |

His examination being read to him , he perſiſted
im his anſwers, and figned his name
| ; RAVAILLAC.

-
n

1 Underneath

- _
Z 7 —--

—

FEEDS. mood Bc eee Yo ae. ww,

—

3 2

2 x

0
-

222 be T N I A-L
Underneath which he wrote theſe lines:

Dise totj ots en mon cœur,
Jeſius ſoit le vangqueur,

In my heart let Jeſus be always conqueror.

Father James Daubigny, prieſt of the college of
Jeſuits, was this day ſent for into court by us
the commiſſioners, in the preſence of Ravaillac ;
oy of them acknowledged the oaths they had

taken,

The faid Ravaillac acknowledged, that the
{aid Father Daubigny was the perſon whom he
had heard ſay maſs ſome time after laſt Chriſtmas,
in their church in Saint Anthony's ſtreet; that
having been told he was the friend of Father Ma-
ry Magdalen the Feuillant, he went to ſeek
him, to intreat him to procure his admiſhon
into that order ; that after maſs was over, he ſpoke
to him by the means of a lay brother, and declared
to him, that he had had great viſions and ima-
ginations, importing, that the King ought to
reduce the followers of the pretended reforma-
tion; and that he ſhewed the ſaid Daubigny a
little knife, whereon was a heart and a croſs ; be-
Heving, that the King ought to bring back the
followers of the pretended reformation to the
Catholic and Roman- church.

The ſaid Daubigny replied, that all this was
falfe, and that he had never ſeen the ſaid Ra-
vaillac.

The ſaid Ravaillac anſwered, By the ſame to-
ken you gave me a penny, which you asked of
one that was near you. |

To this the ſaid Daubigny anſwered, that the
priſoner was a very bad man; and after havin
committed

of RAVAIL LAC. 223

committed ſo wicked an action, he had fins e-

nough to anſwer for, without being the cauſe of
an hundred thouſand others, which might be
committed. -

The priſoner was then told, that if he had any
objection to make to Father Daubigny, he mult
make them immediately. |

He ſaid, that he had none; that he looked up-

on the ſaid Father Dauhigny to be an honeſt
man, a good religious, and that he wonld believe
him.
In like manner, the iaid Daubigny being told
of the ordinance, that he muſt make his objec-
tions to the priſoner immediately, for they would
not afterwards be received.

He faid, that he had nothing elſe to ſay, but
that the priſoner was a yery wicked man, and had
uttered ſeveral falſehoods.

The examination of the ſaid Daubigny bein
read in the preſence of the ſaid Ravaillac, he,
the ſaid Daubigny, perſiſted in his anſwers, and
declared that they were true. | |

But the ſaid Ravaillac declared, that he had

ſpoke to the ſaid Daubigny : that he went to look

for him when he came out of the Louvre, and
told him that he had temptations; and that when
he was 1n priſon making his meditations, by per-
miſſion of Father Mary Magdalen, his hands and
feet had ſent forth a ſtench of ſulphur and fire;
which were proofs of the exiſtence of a purgaio-
ry, contrary to the erroneous opinion of here-
rics ; that he had viſions of the facred hofts on
each fide of his face, having before ſung the
Pſalms of David ; and, in a word, that he had
related all thoſe circumſtances to him which he
had declared to us the day before in his exa-
mination : and that the ſaid Naubigny ſaid to
him, in anſwer, that he, the ſaid Rayaillac, ought

to

224 The T RI A L

to apply to ſome great men to admoniſh the King:
however, ſince he had not done it, it was more

proper for him to pray to God, he being of opi-

nion, that thoſe viſions he {poke of were mere-
ly imaginary, and the effects of a diiordered brain,
as might be perceived by his looks ; that he ought
to eat good ſoup, o to his own country, tell his
beads, 'and pray t cd. |

To this the ſaid Daubigny replied, that theſe
were all dreams -and hes. |

We having cauſed the queſtions that were put
to the ſaid Ravaillac concerning the ſaid Dau-
bigny, with his anſwers, to be read to him in
the preſence of Daubigny, the faid Ravaillac per-
ſiſted in his anſwers, and declared that they were
true. .

The ſaid Daubigny replied, that all which the
ſaid Ravaillac had depoſed againft him was falſe,
as he had before declared to us. |

Upon this, Ravaillac, being farther queſtioned,
replied, that he had never ſeen the. ſaid Dau-
bigny but that one time.

Their examination being read to them, they
perſiſted in their anſwers, and ſigned their names.

The examination taken. on the 19th of the ſaid
month of May, in the morning, at the palace,
by us the commiſſioners.

T ſaid Ravaillac being brought into court,
and his oath taken, he was required to de-
clare, who thoſe perſons were that had prompted
him to ſo wicked an undertaking.

He ſaid, that all which now remained for him
to declare was, his intention and earneſt deſire
to free himſelf from the load of his fins ; that
the whole nation. was, upon his account, led to
believe that he had been bribed by the *

0

—

8 L ©, „ 5 37 : . 7 s *
* n n 2
r

.

4 . _—— adit. gem PL Y

of RAVAILLAC. 225

of France to kill the King, or by foreign kings
and princes, who were deſirous of aggrandiſing
themſelves, as was too common among the kings
and preat potentates of the earth, who do not
conſider whether their motive for making war
is agreeable to the will of God; or elſe through
a covetous deſire of appropriating unjuſtly to
themſelves the territories of other princes : but
that the truth was, he, the priſoner, had not
been incited to that action by any perſon what-
ever; for if he could have been ſo wicked as to
have committed it for money, or for the intereſt
of foreigners, he would have acknowledged it
in the preſence of God, before whom he now
maintained the truth : that he therefore intreated
the Queen, the court, and the whole nation, to
believe him, and not to charge his ſoul with the
crime they commit, in ſuppoling he was prompt-
ed to that parricide by any other ; for that this
ſin would fall heavy on him the priſoner, for
being the cauſe of the uncertainty they were in
which gave riſe to their ſuſpicions; and he there-
fore implored them to lay thoſe ſuſpicions aſide,
ſince no one but himſelf was able to judge
of the fact, and it was ſuch as he had confeſſed.

It was remonſtrated to him, that ſince he had
neither been injured in his perſon or goods by
any command or ordinance of the King's, it was
not probable he would make an attempt upon his
ſacred perſon, whom he knew to be God's an-
ointed, unleſs he had been perſuaded to it by
{ome other perſons, and had received money from
them ; he being a poor man, in want of the ne-
ceſſaries of life, and the ſon of parents who li-
ved upon alms. |

He ſaid, that it is ſufficiently proved to the
court through the courſe of his examination, if
he had, through the force of money, or by the
dag perſuaſions

,_

226 The ; F:R 1 A 1.

perſuaſions of perſons who are ambitious of the
ſceptre of France, been prevailed upon to mur-
der the King, he would not have come three
times expreſsly from Angouleme to Paris, which
was a hundred leagues diſtant from each other,

to admoniſh the King to bring back the follow-

ers of the pretended reformation to the Catholic,
Apoſtolic, and Roman church, as being perſons
who acted contrary to the will of God and his
church ; for a man who could be fo wicked as to
ſuffer himſelf to be corrupted, through avarice, to
aſſaſſinate his prince, would not have come three
{ſeveral times to admoniſh him, as he had done;
and that, ſince he had committed this parricide,
the Sieur de La- Force, captain of the guards, has
acknowledged, that he, the priſoner, had been
at the Jouvre, and earneſtly intreated him to
procure him the means of ſpeaking to the King;
and that the ſaid Sieur de La-Force told him he
was a furious Papiſt, asking him if he knew Mon-
ſieur D'Epernon; to which he, the priſoner, re-
plied, that he did know Monſieur D'Epernon,
and that he himſelf was not a furious Papiſt;
but that, when he had taken the habit in the
monaſtery of St Bernard, Father Francis de St Pe-
ter was appointed to be his ſpiritual father; and,
ſince he was a true Roman, and Apoſtolic Ca-
tholic, he was deſirous of living and dying ſuch:
and he intreated the ſaid Sieur de La-Force to
bring him io the ſpeech of the King; for he
durſt not declare to him the temptation he had
ſo long had to kill the King; all he wanted was
to tell it to his Majeſty ; to the end that he might
no longer be troubled with this bad intention.

He was asked, whether, when he took thoſe
journeys io adviſe the King to make war upon
the followers of the pretended reformation, he
deſigned, in caſe his Majeſty had not Popes

wit

;
]
I
]
-

ER.

of RAVAILLAC. 227
Vith his deſires, to have committed the wicked
act he had done.

lle ſaid, he did not intend it in that caſe;
for he ſhould have laid aſide his deſign, and have
> thought that it was better to make him that re-
monſtrance than to kill him.

It was objected to him, that he had not chan-
ged his wicked intention; ſince, after his laſt
Journey from Angouleme, in Eaſter, he had
not ſought for an opportunity to ſpeak to the
King, which was a proof that he left Angouleme
with a reſolution to do what he had done.

He ſaid, it was true. 8

He was asked, if, from Eaſter-day to that on
which he left Angouleme, he had received the
holy communion ?

1 He ſaid, he had not; and that he received it
the firſt Sunday in Lent; but that he had, ne-

vertheleſs, cauſed the holy facrifice of the maſs
to be celebrated in St Paul's church at Angou—
leme, which was his pariſh-church, as acknow-
ledging himſelf unworthy of the moſt holy and
auguſt ſacrament, full of myſtery and incompre-
henſible virtue, becauſe he was troubled with the
temptation which prompted him to kill the King,
and would not in ſuch a ſtate approach the pre-
cious body of his God, |

It was objected to bim, that, ſince he perceived
he was not worthy of that myſtery which he call-
ed incomprehenſible, he could not aſſiſt with any
devotion at that holy ſacrifice celebrated by the
prieſt, of which all Chriſtians participate, re-
celving ſpiritually that which he who conſecrates
receives actually.

To this he was ſilent. He continued ſome
time penſive and in thought, and then ſaid, that
he did not well know what to anſwer to their re-
monſtrance; but afterwards he ſaid, that he re-
membertd

2 / — 4

© >: T-R 1A; L- W

membered it was his great affection for the moſt
holy ſacrament of the altar, which induced him to
have it celebrated; and that he hoped he ſhould
participate of the communion by means of his
mother, who was going to receive her God in that
ſacrifice ; becauſe he was always of opinion, that
ſhe was-more pious, and had more love for her
God than he had. Saying this he ſhed many
tears,

He was told, that he could have no reverence
for, nor any faith in the holy communion and
ſacrifice of the maſs, ſince he had, for a lon
time, been under the influence of the devil, an
been accuſtomed to invoke demons, whom he
cauſed to appear to him, when he lodged in this
city, about four years ago.

He ſaid, that he never had invoked, demons.
lle was asked, if he knew a man named Du-
Lois, born in Limoges? and whether they lod-
ged together in this city, and lay in the ſame
chamber? k

He ſaid, he did know him: that they lod-
ged together at the ſign of the Rats, oppoſite to
the Green Pillar in Harp. ſtreet.

He was asked, iff he would beheve what the
{aid Dubois ſhould ſay ? |

He ſaid, Yes, he would believe him.

He was asked, whether, as he lay in bed with
the {aid Dubois, he did not uſe ſome magical
incantation invoking the demons ? and in what
manner ? 158 |
_ He. ſaid, that this was ſo far from being true,
that he did not even lie in the ſame chamber
with the ſaid Dubois, but in a garret over the att.
room where he, the ſaid Dubois, lay: that, a- wh
bout midnight, the ſaid Dubois, repeating edo to
in Deum, earneſtly intreated him, ſeveral times, Ma
to come down to him; {aying, Ravaillac, my Le.

| I 2 __ friend, V

* Lu
wa * + ® A ©

8
* IA
s; * hf .
— 1 * .
- 5 0
.

22

3 <. * by 6. yt y . ; 8 — Ns :
a 4 ws * An v4 . . *
Mw 0 2 + 3 * . — : EN —
” ab WIDER 2,5 I. : * en

.
#2 @

of RAV AI L L A c. 229

friend, come down : and crying aloud, My God
have mercy upon me : that thereupon he, the
priſoner, would have gone down to him to know
why he cried out for help in ſuch a manner, but
he was hindered by ſome perſons in the room with
him, who were terrified with the cries of the
ſaid Dubois : but that he, the priſoner, going
down to Dubois ſome time afterwards, he told
him, that he had ſeen 'a black dog of a mon-
ſtrous ſize, and very terrible, which came and
Jaid its two fore-paws upon his bed; and that
the terror this viſion threw him into made him
utter thoſe cries, and intreat that he, the pri-
ſoner, would come into his room and ſtay with
him ; upon which he, the priſoner, adviſed the
ſaid Dubois to have recour'e to the celebration

of the holy ſacrifice of the altar, in order to

get rid of his horrible viſions, and to cauſe maſs
to be {aid the next morning; and that they
went together accordingly the next morning to
the convent of the Franciſcan friars, and cau-
= ſed the holy maſs to be ſaid, to draw down the
grace of God upon them, and to preſerve them
EY Hom the incurſions of the devils, the common
enemies of mankind.

It was objected to him, that it was not at all
probable that the ſaid Dubois ſhould have called
to him, who lay ſo high ; or that he thould have
=> heard his voice.
le anſwered, that nothing was more likely,

it being one of the properties of the voice to
aſcend; but that, ſince the court would not be-

== heve him, the truth of what he ſaid would be
= atteſted by thoſe perſons who were in the room
= where he lay, and who hindered him from goin

to the ſaid Dubois: that they were his landlady,
Mary Moiſeau, and a couſin of hers, named John

Le-Blond, who came into his room on account
Vol. V. X of

*
\

wot _ — - -_ 2 *
—_ TT, 5 8 * — -

— —:

wy

_ - 1 = . Py l ö 4 . pe A ne 2 —
FS. - — r CRT IN r E 22 — —_

2 2 3 — — gh "4 — — + roi
_ CC

230 The - T-R 1 4 1

of the great noiſe they had heard, and for whick
he had quitted the room of the ſaid Dubois, where
he had lain before.

He was told, that he had no deſire to get rid
of his temptation, and therefore would not re-
ceive the communion on Eaſter-day, leſt it ſhould
have the power to divert him from his purpoſe.

He ſaid, that his reaſon for not receiving the
communion was, that he had, on Eaſter-day, ta-
ken a reſolution to kill the King, and upon
that account he would not really, and in fact,
receive the precious body of cur Lord; but had
a deſire to hear the holy maſs before he ſet out,
helieving that the ſacrament, which his mother
received that day, would be ſufficient both for
her and him, as he then begged of God that it
might, and as he did now, and would to his
death implore him, that he might be made par.
taker of all the holy communions, taken by the
religious of both ſexes, by good men, ſeculars,
and others in the Catholic, Apoſtolic, and Roman
church, receiving, in the faith of our holy mo-
ther the church, the precious body ot our Re—
deemer ; and that, being thus received by them,
he might be made partake: of it, as believing
11m{ſelf a member of one only Jeſus Chriſt.

He was told, that, having reloived upon ſo
wicked an act, he was in the ſtate of mortal ſin,
and in danger of damnation, and could not par-
take of the grace of God, and the communion
of good Chriſtians, while he continued to have
this wicked intention; and that he ought to have
altered it, if he hoped to be in the grace of God
as à good Catholic and Chriſtian, as he would
be thought to be. FEE 36's

He ſaid, that he did not, in the leaſt, donbt
but that he was prompted to it by the motions of
| his

8

NN ' tus Gnnd fd Ah ice c.

of KAVATL- LAL. 271

bis own mind, againſt the will of God, the au-
thor of all truth, contrary to the devil, who 1s
the father of lies; but that now, through the

remonſtrance of the court, he acknowledged, that

he either could not or would not refiſt that temp-
tation, it being out of the power of men to hin-
der him from committing that wicked action;
tha: he now declared the whole truth, without
ſuppreſſing or concealing any thing ; therefore
he hoped, that God, who was all good and mer-
ciful, would grant him pardon aid remiſſion of
his ſins, he being more powerful to fave him,
provided he made confeſſion, and received ab-
ſolution, than men were to hurt him ; and that
he beſeeched the holy virgin Mary, Monſieur
St Peter, Monſieur St Francis, (here he wept),
Monſieur St Bernard, and all the celeſtial court
of Paradiſe, ro be his advocates and interceſſors
with the Moſt Sacred Majeſty, to the end that he
miglit interpoſe his croſs between his ſoul and.
hell ; and by that he hoped to be made partake
of the merits of our Saviour Chriſt's paflion,
moſt humbly beſeeching him that he would give
him grace to continue aſſociated with the me-
rits of all. thoſe treaſures he gave to the Apo-
ſtolic power on earth, when he ſaid, Thou art
Feter, &c.

His examination being read to him, he per-
liſted in his anſwers, and ſigned his name

RAVAILLAC

X 2 May

*
1 8
—— FT —

2

eee

2»ae, .
> — ä —

8 ps N

is.” A.

=

232 n

May 27. 1610, in the morning, at the palace.

The confrontation of the witneſſes before us, Achil-
les de Harley, Knight, firſt preſident ; Nicho-
las Potter, preſident ; Proſper Bavin and John
Courtin, counſellors, &c.

Aul Noſter, exempt of the guards, was
confronted with the priſoner ; both of them
acknowledged the oath they had taken.

The acculed ſaid, that the witneſs was the per-
fon who took him priſoner, and the witneſs, that
the accuſed was the priſoner whom he took.

The priſoner then was told, that, if he had
any objections to make againſt the witneſs, he
muſt make them immediately, according to the
ordinance of the realm.

He ſaid, that he had none

The depoſition of this witneſs being read to
him, he perſiſted in it; and the r acknow-
ledging that it was true, they both ſigned it.

The priſoner was then confronted with James
de Pluviers, Eſq; of St Michael.

The oath idem, &c. |

The priſoner was then confronted with Je-
rome de La-Robye, equerry to the King.

The oath idem, &c.

The priſoner was then confronted with Gama-
hel Edovart, one of the King's footmen.

The oath idem, &c.

The priſoner ſaid, that he knew him to he one
of the King's footmen, but that he did not know
if he was the perſon who ſeized him after he
committed the act; and, being put in mind of
the ordinance, he ſaid, he had no objection to
make to him.

The priſoner was then confronted with Peter
Dubois.

The

r N
1 e N .
— . 7˙———

66 „ &

of RAVAIL L Ac. 233

The oath idem, &c. |

The priſoner acknowledged, that what he ſaid
was true ; but that it was by his advice that the
witneſs had been to hear maſs at the convent
of the Franciſcan friars, at which he likewiſe
was preſent.

They both ſigned their names.

May 27. 1610, the court ſat in the afternoon in
the chamber de La-Beuvette,

* E the preſidents, and ſeveral of the coun-

ſellors being preſent, the priſoner, Fran-
cis Ravaillac, was brought in to court, who ha-
ving been accuſed and convicted of parricide com-
mitted on the perſon of the late King, he was
ordered to kneel, and the clerk of the court pro-
nounced the ſentence of death given againſt him;
as likewiſe that he ſhould be put to the torture to
force him to declare his accomplices.

His oath being taken, he was exhorted to re-
deem himſelf from the torments preparing for
him, by acknowledging the truth, and declaring
who thoſe perſons were that had perſuaded,
prompted, and abetted him, in that moſt wicked
action, and to whom he had diſcloſed his intention
of committing it.

He faid, By the falvation I hope for, no one but
myſelf was concerned in this action.

He was then ordered to be put to the torture of
the brodequin *; and the firſt wedge being drove,
he cried out, “ God have mercy upon my ſoul,
* and pardon the crime I have committed; I
* never diſcloſed my intention to any one.”

* The brodequin is a ſtrong wooden box, made in the form of
a boot, juſt big enough to contain both the legs of the criminal,
which being pat therein, a wooden wedge is then Crove with a
mallet between ! is knees, and aſter that is ſorced quite throvgh ;
a ſecond wedge, of a larger ſize, is applied in the fame manner.

3 | This

„ nenn At.

This he repeated as he had done in his interro-
gation. 5 |

When the ſecond wedge was drove, he ſaid
with loud cries and ſhrieks, “ J am a ſinner, I
&© know no more than I have declared, by the
« oath I have taken, and by the truth which 1
© owe to God and the court: all I have faid
ce was to the little Franciſcan, which I have
re already declared: I never mentioned my de-
« ſign in confeſſion, or in any other way: I ne-
« ver ſpoke of it to the viſitor of Angouleme,
% nor revealed it in confeſſion in this city. I
«© beleech the court not to drive my ſoul to de-
«. {nar : | |

The executioner continuing to drive the ſecond
wedge, he cried out, © My God, receive this
«« penance as an explation for the great crimes I
« have committed in this world : Oh God ! accept
ce theſe torments in ſatisfaction for my ſins. By
«& the faith I owe to God, I know no more than
« what I have declared. Oh! do not drive my
« ſoul to deſpair.”

The third wedge was then drove lower near
his feet, at which an univerſal ſweat covered
his body, and he fainted away. The exccution-
er forced ſome wine into his mouth, but he
could not ſwallow it; and, being quite ſpeechleſs,
he was releaſed from the torture, and water
thrown upon his face and hands. Some wine
being forced down his throat, his ſpeech return-
ed, and he was laid upon a mattreſs in the {ame
lace, where he continued till noon. When he
had recovered his ſtrength, he was conducted to
chapel by the executioner; and Meſſieurs Fille-
Jaſqs and Gamaches, two doors of the Sorbonne,
being ſent for, his dinner was given him; but
before the divines entered into a conference with
him, the clerk admoniched him to think of his
ialvation, and confeſs by whom he had been

| prompted,

—

hs * n

. 2
Km. 2 .
8 ** ” » - F 335
2 ** 1

.* ow Fs Þ,
Ds = fy" es

r ¾ĩ⅛ʃII——I—I—ʃ.. ] ] «.

: — r 1

of RAVAI L LA C. 235

prompted, perſuaded, and abetted in the wicked
action he had committed, and ſo long deſigned to
commit; it not being probable, that he ſhould of
himſelf have conceived and executed it, without
communicating it to any other.

He ſaid, that if he had known more than what
he had declared to the court, he would not have
concealed it, well knowing, that in this caſe he
could not have the mercy of God, which he hoped

for and expected; and that he would not have en-

dured the torments he had done, if he had any
farther confeſſion to make. He laid, he acknow-
ledged that he had committed a great crime, to
which he had been incited by the temptation of
the devil; that he intreated the King, the Queen,
the court, and the whole kingdom, to pardon
him, and to cauſe prayers to be put up to God for
him, that his body might bear the puniſhment
for his foul. And being many times admoniſhed
to reveal the truth, he only repeated what he had
{41d before. - He was then left with the doctors,
that they might perform the duties of their office
with him.

A little after two o*clock the clerk of the court
was ſent for by the divines, who told him, that
the condemned had charged them to ſend ſor
him, that he might hear and ſign his confeſſion,
which he defired might be revealed, and even
printed, to the end that it might be known to
the whole world; which confeſſion the ſaid doc-
tors declared to have been, that no one had been
concerned with him in the act he had committed;
that he had not been folicited, prompted, or abet-
ted, by any other perſon whatever, nor had diſ-
covered his deſign to any one; that he acknow-
ledged he had committed a great crime, for which
he hoped to have the mercy of God, which was
{t11! greater than his ſins, but which he could not
hope to obtain if he concealed any thing.
Hereupon

236 Tbe T N IT A L

Hereupon the clerk aſked the condemned, if he
was willing that his confeſſion ſhould be known
and revealed? and, as above, admoniſhed him to
acknowledge the truth for the ſalvation of his
ſoul. He then declared upon his oath, that he
had ſaid all he knew, and that no one had incited
him to commit the murder.

At three o'clock he came from the chapel; and

as he was carrying out of the Conciergerie, \the
priſoners, in great numbers, thronged about him,
with loud cries and exclamations, calling him
Traitor, Wicked IWretch, Deteſlable Monſter,
Damned Villain, and the like; they would have
ſtruck him, had they not been hindered by the
archers, and the other officers of juſtice, who
kept them off by force.
When he was put into the tumbril, the croud
was ſo great, that it was with the utmoſt difficulty
the archers and officers of juſtice could force
themſelves a paſſage ; and as ſoon as the priſoner
appeared, that vaſt multitude began to cry out,
as above Wicked Mieich, Traitor, &c.

The enraged populace continued their cries
and execrations till he arrived at the Greve;
where, before he was taken out of the tumbril to
mount the ſcaffold, he was again exhorted to
reveal his accomplices; but he perſiſted in his
former declaration, that he had none ; again im-
ploring pardon of the young King, the Queen,
and the whole kingdom, for the crime he had com-
mitted. |

When he had aſcended the ſcaffold, the two
doors comforted him, and exhorted him to
acknowledge the truth; and after performing the
duties of their fur: tion, the clerk approached him,
and urged him to think of his alvation now at the
clole of his life, and to confeſs all he knew; to

which he only anſwered as he had done before.
| The

—

F s
E "> * ; "oa 5
- * — Tn

rern

* — -
004,

. R þ - 9
. Tee. Hi HI N

F * ** n

N ub **
2 * ,

2 NO .

= OR a
5 8.” ol 9 *
e 2 3
* 2 . : $07 © 2

of RAVAIL LAC. 237

The fire being put to his right hand, holding
the knife with which he had ſtabbed the King,
he cried out, Oh God! and often repeated Fe/i

Marie! whiie his breaſt, &c. were tearing with

red-hot pincers, he renewed his cries and prayers;
during which, being often admoniſhed to acknow-
ledge the truth, he perſiſted in denying that he
had any accomplices. The furious croud con-
tinued to load him with execrations, crying, that
he ought not to have a moment's reſpite. Aﬀter-
wards, by intervals, melred lead and ſcalding oil
were poured upon his wounds; during which he
{hrieked aloud, and continued his cries and excla-
mations. | 2

The doctors again admoniſhed him, as likewiſe
the clerk, to confeſs, and we re preparing to offer
up publicly the uſual prayers for the condemned;
but immediately the people, with great tumult and
diſorder, cried out againſt it, ſaying, that no
prayers ought to be made for that wicked wretch,
that damned monſter. So that the doctors were
obliged to give over. Then the clerk remonſtra-
ting to him, that the indignation of the people was
a judgment upon him, which ought to induce
him to declare the truth, he perſiſted to anſwer
as formerly, ſaying, I only was concerned in the
murder.

He was then drawn by four horſes, for half an
hour, by intervals.

Being again queſtioned and admoniſhed, he
perſiſted in denying that he had any accomplices
while the people of all ranks and degrees, both
near and at a diſtance, continued their exclama-
tions, in token of their great grief for the loſs of
their King. Several perſons ſet themſelves
to pull the ropes with the utmoſt eagerneſs;
and one of the nobleſſe, who was near the crimi-
nal, alighted off his horſe, that it might be put 1

une

238 The TRIAL

the place of one which was tired with drawing,
him. At length, when he had been drawn for a
full hour by Se hories, without being diſmember-
ed, the people, ruſhing on in crouds, threw them-
felves pon him, and with {words, knives, ſticks,
and other weapons, they ſtruck, tore, and mang-
led his limbs; and violently forcing them from
the executioner, they dragged them through the
ftreets with the utmoſt eagerneſs and rage, and
burnt them in different parts of the city.

May 21. 1610.

Pac jailor cauſed the court to be informed,
| that he had heard the pnſoner ſay ſomething
of conſequence; upon which he was ſent for, and
the oath being adminiſtered to him,

He ſaid, That the evening before, carrying the
priſoner's ſupper to him, with one of his men, the
two archers who guarded him being preſent, he
aſked the priſoner where he was when the King
went out of the Louvre? to which the priſoner re-
ede that he was fitting in the hall among the

ootmen : and being again aſked, why he commit-

ted ſuch an ation? the priſoner an{wered, ** Be-
« cage of a great -— but I will not teil you, but
« J will tell the court to morrow; and could not
« help doing it, as 1 ſhall prove by my body.”

Then . . . . . . archer of the provoſt of ”hotel,
being ſent for, the oath was adminiſtered to him.

He repeated what the jailor had ſaid, adding,
that the pri oner ſaid, that his mother had a mark
like his; for which reaſon he could not avoid
doang what he did; and that perceiving the King's
coach to ſtop, he ſaw a viſion, which ſaid to him,
Now is the time.

Then was heard upon oath... . . . archer like-

He

- wiſe of the provoſt of Photel.

—

b WE." "5 3 2h r 4 4 r s 2
— ee 3 A 4 1 * A WT
_ $605: G J

of RAVAIL IL AC. 239

He alſo repeated what the jailor had ſad, add-
ing, that the priſoner ſaid, he was under the ne-
ceſſity of committing that action, by a mark which
he and his mother had, that it came from heaven,
and that he would declare it to the court, &c.

Sentence of death againſt Francis Ravaillac,
May 28. 1610.

Extracted from the regiſters of the parliament,

E Ne court, conſiſting of the great chambers
of the Tournelle and the Edict, being aſ-
ſembled, and having ſeen the criminal "Aegean 4
formed by the preſidents and counſellors in that
behalf, appointed by commiſſion, at the requiſition
of the King's attorney-general, againſt Francis
Ravaillac, a practitioner of the Jaw, of the city
of Angoulenie, pritoner in the Conciergene of the
palace; as alſo the information made againſt him,
the interrogatorics, con feſſions, anſwers, and croſs-

examinations of witneſſes, and the ſtate of the

caſe by the King's attorney general; and the ſaid
Ravaillac having been heard and examined by the
ſaid court, touching the matters laid to his charge,
and touching the verbal procels of the interrogato-
ries adminiſtered to him on the rack; which, by
order of the {aid court, he underwent on the 25th
of this month, for diſcovery of his accomplices :
On conſideration of the whole, |

The ſaid court hath declared, and doth declare,
the {aid Ravaillac duly attainted of the crime of
high treaſon, divine and human, in the higheſt
degree, for the moſt wicked, moſt abominable,
and molt deteſtable parricide, comnuited on the
perion of the late King, Henry IV. of good and
laudable memory; for reparation whereof, the
8 court

i
:
|
|
|

- % * — — — — wn 2 — — — —

2 „„ ———ůꝛ⁵s—:.ñ ̃¶ iiNR—Ä ˙ ü

3 2

240 W r N11 AHL

court hath condemned, and doth condemn him,
to make the amende honorable, before the principal
gate of the church of Paris, whither he ſhall be
carried and drawn in a tumbnl in his ſhirt, bearing
a lighted torch of two pound weight, and that he
ſhall there ſay and declare, that wickedly and
traite rouſly he hath committed the aforeſaid moſt
wicked, moſt abominable, and moſt deteſtable
338 and murdered the ſaid Lord the King,

y ſtabbing him twice in the body with a knife;
that he repents of the ſame, and begs pardon of
God, the King, and the Jaws: from thence he
ſhall be carried to the Greve, and, on a ſcaffold
to be there erected, the fleth ſhall be torn to pieces
with red-hot pincers from his breaſts, his arms, and
thighs, and the calves of his legs; his right hand,
holding the knife wherewith he commuted the
afore{aid parricide, ſhall be ſcorched and burned
with flaming brimftone; and on the places where
the fleſh has been torn with pincers, melted lead,
boiling oil, ſcalding pitch, with wax and brimſtone
melted together, mall be poured : after this, he
ſhall be torn in pieces by four horſes, his limbs and
body burnt to aſhes, and diſperſed in the air. His
goods and chatrels are alſo declared to be forfeited
and confiſcated to the King. And it is further or-
dained, that the houſe in which he was born ſhall
be pulled down to the ground (the owner thereof
being previouſly indemnified), and that no other
building {hall ever hereafter be erected on the ſoun-

dation thereof: and that within fittcen days after *

the publication of this preſent ſentence, his father
and mother ſhall, by ſound of trumpet and public
proclamation in the city of Angouleme, be baniſed
ou! of the kingdom, and forbid ever to return,
under the penalty of being hanged and ſtrangled,
without any farther form of proce's at law. "The

court has alſo forbidden, and doth ſorbid, his bro-
then,

— f . ĩ⅛—rNN -., SR Ts 2

of RAVAIL LAC. 247

thers, ſifters, uncles, and others, from hence-
forth to bear the ſaid name of Ravalllac, injoin-
ing them to change it to ſome other, under the
like penalties ; and ordering the ſubſtitute of the
King's atorney-general to cauſe this preſent ſen-
tence to he publiſhed and carried into execution,
under,pain-of being anſwerable for the ſame ; and
before the execution thereof, the court doth or-
der, that the ſaid Ravaillac ſhall again undergo
the torture for the diſcovery of his accomplices.

Pronounced and executed the

27th day of May 1610. VOISIN.

Extract from the regifiers of parliament.

TH court, coſiſting of the great chambers of

the Tournelle and the Edict, being aſſem-
bled, and proceeding to judgment on the crimi-
nal proceſs extraordinary, formed at the requiſi-

tion of the King's attorney-general, on account of
the moſt wicked, moſt cruel, and moſt deteſtable

parridile, committed on the ſacred perion of the
late King Henry IV. and having thereupon heard
the King's ſaid attorney-general; hath ordered,
and doth order, that, et the inſtance of the dean
and ſyndic of the faculty of divinity, the ſaid fa-
culty ſhall be aſſembled, as ſoon as may be, to
deliberate; and having heard the tenor of the
decree of the ſaid faculty of the 14th of Decem-
ber 1413, and the reſolution founded on the opi-
nion of one hundred forty-one dactors of the ſaid
faculty, ſince confirmed by the council of Con-
ſtance, That it is not lawful for any one, whoever
be be, to make any attempt on the ſacred perſons of
kings, and other ſovereign princes. The ſaid de-
cree thereon to be made by the ſaid aſſembly,
Vol. V. 1 na!!

f

242 TTR I.

ſhall be ſubſcribed by all the doctors of the ſaid
faculty, who ſhall have been preſent at the ſaid |
deliberations ; and alſo by all the bachelors, who
are members of the body of divinity ; which ſaid
decree being communicated to the ſaid attorney- |

eneral, and produced to this court, ſuch order
mal be made thereon as reaſon ſhall require.

Done in parliament, May 27. 1610.

INDEX.

1 . 0 © : 1 «
6 1 « be . : gels =o 7
c e

— — —
4

* 1
8

2

* *

To
4
q
:

*
755

a , Seal cn w* 4 LY
I * 5 *
— AMIE oe Nt oe den Ee

LEN 42

1 .. . *

A.

BBEYS taken out of the hands of the Proteſtants :
Sully diſpoſes of his v. 111. See Benefices |
Abjuration of Henry IV. i. 333. And other par-
ticulars relating to this ceremony 26. &c.

Abſolution of Henry IV. difficulty in prevailing upon the
Pope to grant it ii. 65, He grants it, at laſt, upon
certain conditions 65, Remacks upon this ceremony
67

Academy Royale, propoſed to be inſtituted by Henry IV,
iv. 366

34 Emperor of the Turks, ſucceeds Mahomet III.
Troubles at Conſtantinople during bis reign. Obtains

permiſſion of Henry IV. to have a reſident at Marſcilles
W. 429

Aerſins, (Francis), ambaſſador from the United Provinces
to France, carries on his negotiations with great ſuc-
ceſs iii. 76. Cardinal Richelieu's ſaying of him 10.
Henry IV. ſuſpected of having an intrigue with his wife
tb, Gives information of a ſuppoſed union of Spain
and England to invade France 1 46. iv. 25, Is depu-
ted by Henry IV, to the Duke of Bouillon 144. Makes
preſents to the King and Queen, and receives ſome
from them 189, Returns to Paris to finiſh his negoti-
ation 218

Africa, deſigns of Charles V. of Philip II. and the houſe
of Auſtria, upon that part of the world; and. obſtacles
they meet with iv, 122. Part of Henry's great deſign
relating to Africa, See Political Deſign

Ageaux, (Des), Lieutenant de Roi of St Jean d'Angely,.

ſerves Henry IV, at the battle of Coutras i, 140. Henry

refuſes to give his poſt to the Duke of Rohan iii, 437.

and beſtows it upon La- Rochebeaucourt iv, 166. See

Rohan, Rochebeaucourt

1 2 Agelle

E.

Agelle (Mademoiſelle d') beloved by Henry IV. i. 60

Agen taken by the Roman Catholics during the peace 1.
60, Taken a ſecond time ut. 106

Agouſt, Henry's opinion of this houſe iv. 260. See Bonne,
Crequy, Leſdignieres

Aides, abuſes in this part of the revenue corrected by Sully
iv. 2. 3. Regulations for this purpoſe, which make
part of the cabinet of ſtate iv. 370. See Cabinet of
{tate

Aiguebelle taken by Sully ii. 348. An adventure there,
by which Grillon became the friend of Sully iii. 402.
See Sully, Grillon

Aigues-Mortes pawned by the Prince of Conde to Prince
Caſimir i. 71

Aine, the paſſage of that river, and the advantage gained
there by Henry IV. over the Prince of Parma i. 273.
See Henry IV. Parma

Aix, (Lewis d'), his party in Provence i. 272, He attempts
to deliver up Marſeilles to the Spaniards ii. 30. See
Marſeilles

Albe-Royale, in Hungary, taken by the Duke of Mercceur
ii. 431, Retaken by the Turks iii. 65

Albigny, (Charles de Semaine d'), ſurprifes Geneva, and is
driven from thence iii. 63. See Geneva

Albret, (houſe of), alliance between that houſe and the fa-
mily of Rohan ii. 106. Which, on failure of children
in a direct line, are next heirs to the eſtates of Albret
i, 433. Henry IV. unites thoſe eſtates to the crown
iv, 229. Law-ſuit betwixt Henry IV. and the houſe
of Nevers for thoſe eſtates 239. See Rohan, Neveis

Aldegonde, (Philip Marnix de Saint), a Proteſtant officer,
the Prince of Orange informs him of the deſigned trea-

_ Chery at Antwerp i. 85

Al:lobrandin, (Cardinal), nephewand legate of Clement VIII.
comes to France to treat of a peace, Sully's reception
of him, and his prudent advice to him ii, 366. His
conferences at Lyons with the commiſſioners appointed
by Henry IV. 369. Breaks them off upon account of
the demolition of Fort St Catherine 371. Reſumes the
treaty with Sully, and concludes it 374, 5. His friend-

ſhip for Sully iv. 17. See Sully, Peace, Savoy
Alengon,

t N DUE X.
Alencon, Hertra ſeizes it for the Princes: they juin
their forces there i. 46. Taken from the league by
Henry's: forces 188. See Hertra, Heory IV.
Alexander (Father) a Jeſuit, endeavours to procure the re-
eſtabliſhment of his ſociety in France iii. 240
Alexandrini (Cardinal) called to the council, where they.
project the deſtruction of the Proteſtants i. 26
Algiers, Spain endeavours to get poſſeſſion of it 11. 208
Alibour, firſt phyſician to Henry IV. i. 207. A hu-
morous dialogue between Henry IV. and him, concern-
ing the fair Gabrielle ii. 33, His death, Some cir-
cumſtances relating to it 34, See Henry, Eſtrees,
Sancy
Alincourt, (Charles de Neufville, Marquis of), governor of
- Pontoiſe, attempts to ſurpriſe Mante i. 221. Con-
oludes a treaty with Henty IV. 382. Obtains the go-
vernment of Lyons 383. Henry refuſes to give him
the poſt' of grand malter of the ordnance ii, 165. The
ſum of money granted him by his treaty 244. Is fent
to Rome on occaſion of the deſigned marriage between
Henry IV. and Mary af Medicis 340. Gratuities and
favours which he received fram the Queen-regent y. 82,
A. great diſpute in the council between him and Sully on
the affair of Lyons 84 1
Allegre (Chriſtopher, Marquis of) takes Rouen for the
league i. 191. Aſſaſſinates Hallot iv, 252 E
Allymes, (René de Lucinge-Des), the. Duke of Savoy's
commiſſioner in the affair of Saluces it. 324, Endea-
vours to corrupt Sully by preſents 324, 5. See Savoy,
Saluces, Sully
Alpin (Saint) de Bethune, his example propoſed ta Sully
by Paul V. iv. 23, See Bethune .
Ambaſladors and embaſſes from Eliſabeth and the United
Provinces to Henry IV. Political diſcourſe of this
prince upon this occalion ii. :91, See Henry, Cecil,
Naſſau, Elfabeth, &, Of the Duke of Luxembourg
to Rome. See Luxembourg. Of Sillery. to Rome.
See Sillery, From the Grand Seignior to Henry IV.
See Multapha. From the Venetiaps to Henry IV. Sce
Venice. From the Archduke to Henry. See Archdukes..

> bs | Embaſy,

— |

1-0 .
Embaſſy of Canaye to Venice; of Bethune to Rome;
of Marſhal Biron to London, and to the Swiſs cantons.
See theſe names. A ſolemny embaſſy of the Swiſs
cantons to France. See Swiſs cantons. Marquis of
Roſny ſent ambaſſador extraordinary to King James I.
See Sully, James I. Ambaſſadors appointed by Henry
IV. during the war of Cleves iv. 468.

Ambliſe (Africanus d' Anglure d') defeated by the Duke
of Bouillon i. 266

America, deſigns of Charles V. and Philip II. upon that
part of the world, and the obſtacles they meet with iv.
121, 2. See Charles V. Philip II. Part of the great
deſign relating to this part of the world. See Political
Deſign

Amiens, Henry IV. makes his entrance into that city ii.
14. He ſtays there ſome time 89, His anſwer to the
depnties of that city 76. Taken by the Spaniards 140.
Diſquiet it gives Henry 26. His preparations to retake
this city 153. Begins the ſiege 161. Sully's endea-
vours to ſecure the ſucceſs of it 16. The Spaniards
unable to prevent its being taken 168, 9. Henry IV.
goes there to conclude the treaty of Vervins 209

Anchin,. (John de B{thune, Abbot d'), revered as a ſaint i.
5. See Bethune

Anchorage (rights of) eſtabliſhed, notwithſtanding the re-
monſtrances of Sully ii. 219 |

Andelot (Charles de Chatillon- Coligny, Marquis of) diſ-
putes Sully's priſoners with him i. 199. A quarrel
between them on that occaſion 201. Henry IV. de-
cides it for Sully 206, 7

——— (Francis de Chatillon- Coligny, Marquis of) his

three children all diod ar were. murdered at one time i.
8 |

——— — (Guy de Laval d') ſaved at the maſſacre of St
Bartholomew, and fled to Geneva i. 33

Andreſy, conferences upon religion held at this place i. 345.
Names of thoſe perſons who aſſiſted at. the conference,
and the ſubjects treated of 75.

Anfrcville, the Catholics drove from that place i. 188

Aafreville (N. d') taken priſoner by Sully at the battle of

IVry i. 197 3

* 0 _>
* 7
* >
p * * . ; 4 ,
2222 tinorghnn dont tn heb no hen of 4
* * TR .
0 .

I N DE Xx

Ange (. de Saint) aſſiſts the King's party in Limoſin ii.
106. Contributes to the taking of Bourg 341, 2. So-
licits for Marſhal Biron's pardon iii. 29

Angely, (St John d'), the poſt of King's lieutenant refuſed
to its governor in. 437. and given to La Roche-beau-
court iv. 166. Rohan obliges the regent to grant it to
him v. 176. See Rohan, Roche-beau-court

Angers, Prince of Condé fails in his attempt upon this
place i. 107, Henry IV. ſtays ſome time there in his
journey to Britany : the buſineſs he tranſacts there ii.
180, I. See Henry, Mercceur, &c.. |

Angillon, (La-Chapelle d'), a houſe purchaſed by Sully v,
110. The improvements he makes in it 200

Angouleme (Charles de Valois, Count of) and Duke of
Auvergne, See D'Auvergne

(Charlotte de Montmorency, Ducheſs of), proxy
for the Archduke at the baptiſm of the Princeſs Eliſa-
beth of France iv. 170 See France. Employed in the,
amours of Henry IV. 197. 263, 70 |

Anjou (cities in) taken by Henry IV. i. 54

(Francis de Valois, Duke of Alengon, fince Duke of )

otherwiſe Monſreur, Plots with the King of Navarre.

to ſtrangle the Queen-mother i. 12. Fhey endeavour
to procure a marriage between him and Queen Eliſabeth.

40. Joins the malecontents 41. Arreſted ib, Reco-

vers his liberty 45. Great enmity between him and

Henry III. 39. 44. Joins his forces with Henry IV.

and the Prince of Condé 45. Catherine diſunites them

from the Proteſtants by the peace of Monſieur 47.

Deſign of this princeſs to make him King of Algiers;.

Negotiations: to this effect 75. His character 78. See

Sauves. Goes to Flanders. Received into Cambray,

and takes the caſtle by aſſault. His treachery to the

governor 82. Goes to England 83. Returns to Flan-
ders, where he is crowned Duke of Brabant 16. En-
ter into à ſort of engagement with Eliſabeth 16. His
reſentment to the city of Antwerp 84. Diſobliges

Sully and the Proteſtants 86. He loſes. his army and

returns to France 87. Retires in diſgrace to Chateau-

Thierry, Sully viſits him there 971. Hs death 16. His

titles

IN D E X.

titles ib. Defigned to be married to the fiſter of Henry IV.

N, 27 4. Philip II. motives for engaging him in the en-
terpriſe of Antwerp iv. 361. See the names mentioned
in this article,

Anjou, (Gaſton John Baptiſt de France, Duke of), third

ſon of Henry IV. efterwards Duke of Qrleans, His
birth iv. 281. Henry propoſes to marry him to the
Princeſs of Mantua 355. His fondneſs for Sully v. 78
Anſpach, (the Duke of), Sully charged with holding a
criminal correſpondence with this prince ti, 426
Antichriſt, the Proteſtants gave this name to the whole

family of Medicis i. 18. The Pope Antichrift, a

tenet propoſed to the ſynod of Gap. Oppoled by Sully

tit. 223, Debates upon the fame tenet in the ſynod of

Rachelle iv. 200, 1

Anthony (N. de St), Henry IV. ſends him to the King of
England m, 195

Antonio, (Don Simon), deputy from Spain oppoſes a treaty
between Sully and Villars i. 365. The converſation
betwixt Sully and him at the governor's 385, Villars
obhges him to leave Rouen 386

Antwerp, the Duke of Ar jou is crowned there Duke of
Brabant i. 83. Inſurrection upon account of the Prince
of Orange being wounded there $4, Monſieur endea-
vours to ſeize it by farpriſe, and fails in his attempt
$6. Cauſe of the hatred the Dutch bore. him 84.
See Anjou, Orange. The Prince of Orange makcs
an unſucceſsful attack vpon this city iv. 215. Motixes

of the countel given by Philip II. againſt this city 361

Arambure (N. d') preſent at the battle of Aumale: at
the attack of the great convoy before Laon i. 410.
Attends Henry IV. in the campaign of Franche-Com-

pte ii. 62. 153. Treated wuh great familiarity by:

Henry IV. v. 7
Archduke of Auſtria,. (Albert Cardinal), loſes an opportu-
nity of beating the French before Amiens ti. 169, 70.
Bon-mot of Henry. on this occaſion 169. Signs at Bruſ-
ſels the treaty of Vervins for the King of Spain 209.
Goes to fetch the Archuucheis of Gratz to Philip II. and
conducts her rough Marſeilles 272, Marines * In-
| A anta

IN D E X.
fanta Iſabella, and is made governor of the Low Coum ·
tries 273. He loſes the battle of Nieuport 378. Be-
ſieges Oltend 392, Sends the Count of Solre ainbaſſa ·
dor to Henry at Calais 396, 7. Indiſpoſed-at Bruſſels
iii. 61. The diſpoſition and true political! views of the
Archduke in Flanders with regard to Spain and the houſe
of Auſtria 180; He favours the conſpiracy of the Eng-
lih Lords againſt King James 205. Bad ſucceſs in the
war againſt the Dutch 211. He concludes the treaty
of ſuſpenſion of arms between Spain and the United Pro-
vinces iv. 220. Endeavours — to bring about a
peace 323. His reception of the Prince of Conde after
he left France 405, 6. Treaty of a truce for twelve
years between him and the States - General, with the
treaty. of mediation of the Kings of France and England
416. He ſupports the intereſt of the Prince of Epernon
out of regard to Sully 419. The letter which Henry IV.
wrote upon his journey into Cleves, and the anſwer to
it 461. His motives for the little precaution he took
againſt Henry's great deſign 471. Sends an embaſſy in-
to France upon the death of Henry IV. v. 71. Permits
the troops of the confederate princes for the great de-
ſign to paſs through his dominions 168, 9. See Cleves,
Political Deſign, and the other names mentioned in this

article
Arxchdukes and Archducheſſes, Princes and Princeſſes of
1 that name. See Auſtria

Archprieſt, eſtabliſhed' in England by the Pope, the cauſe: |
of great troubles iii. 153. See Clement VIII. James J.
and: Jeſuirs

Ardembourg, the Archduke Albert fails in his attempt up-
on this place iii. 357

Ardres taken by the Spaniards ii. 64

Aremberg, (John de Ligne, Count of), ambaſſador from
the Archduke to King James iii. 99. Cabals in Log-

don 104. Audience refuſed him by the King of Eng-
land till Sully had his 120. Compliments and preſents
which Sully and he make each other 126. King James
complains of his conduct 133. Errors he is guilty of
in his negotiation 159. Goes to: Windſor 199. The
King

IN D E X.

King delays giving him his ſecond audience 204. Con-
tinues to cabal at London ib.

Argoulets, from whence called i. 109

Argentan, the Duke of Montpenſier takes this city for the

King, and defeats the Gautieres there i. 188. See

Montpenſier, League

Argenton, Henry IV. diſlodges the troops of the league
from this place i. 163

Argouges, (Florent d'), treaſurer of the Queen's houſehold
itt. 284. Brings a comptant to Sully, which that miniſter
refuſes to ſign v. 65 6

Ariat (N. d') ſuccours the inhabitants of Villemur againſt
the forces of the league i. 273. See Joyeuſe, Ville-
mur 2

Arleux, . Monſieur attacks this paſſage. Sully takes ſome
priſone:s-there i. 82. See Anjou, Sully

Armagnac (county of) erected into a preſidial ii. 175.
Law-ſuit loſt by Henry IV. to the Sieur de Fontrailles
for this county 7b | |

—— firſt gentleman of the bedchamber to Henry IV,

ii. 4. ii. 12 x

Armand, (Father), a Jeſuit, labours ſacceſsfully for the re-
eſtabliſhment of hat ſociety in France iii. 240

Arms (wearing of) prohibited ii. 213 EE

Arnai- le-Duc, (encounter of), in which the Proteſtants
have the advantage i. 2, Henry's difcourſe upon this
battle 3 |

Arnaud, (the eldeſt of four brothers), clerk of the council
of finances ii. 128 |

— (the ſecond brother), ſecretary to Sully. Marſhal
Biron's converſation with him upon the ſcaffold in, 28.
Informations given him by a canon of Canterbury upon
the intrigues of Spain in London 104. Mary of Medicis
makes him a member of her privy council v. 23. Sully's
reſentment againſt him 26. Sully ſends him to Con-
chini to make him ſome compliments in his name : what
paſſed upon this occaſion 41. 42. Favours beſtowed
upon him by the Queen-regent 82. She makes him in-
tend ant of the finances, Sully's advice to him 96. 97

——— (the third brother), Colonel, advice given him by

Sully gg

Arnaud,

7 —
2
*
*%* Sai Fi — wb —_— , N
PEE * .
5 * *

70

f
75
|

IND E X.

Arnaud, (the fourth brother), treaſurer of France, and o-
verſeer of the highways, makes his court to Conchini

v. 42. 43. Advice given him by Sully 95

Arnes, (N. d'), a Proteſtant gentleman, eſcapes the maſſa-

cre of St Bartholomew i. 27
Aro, the Proteſtant party of the Griſons hold an aſſembly

there ui. 375

Arpentis, (Lewis Du Bois des), governor of Touraine i. 105.

. Services which Sully receives from him 111
Arques (battle of) 1, 180

Arragon, (Admiral of), aſſiſts for the King of Spain at the

publication of the peace of Vervins at Paris ii. 210.
Commands the Spaniſh army in Flanders 273. Unable
to ſuccour Grave iii. 61. 62 -

Arras, Sully's anceſtors have the title of protector of the
church of i. 4. Marſhal Biron the cauſe that the at-
tempt upon this place failed u, 79. Henry reſolves to
beſiege it in form 80. 81. The taking of Amiens by
the Spaniards obliges him to lay aſide this deſign 147

Arſcot (Duke of) aſſiſts at the publication of the peace of
Vervins at Paris ii. 210

Arſenal of Paris, the Duke of Sully reſides there ii. 241.

Repairs it 320. Receives the King and Queen there
378. Interlude preſented there iii. 1. Works carried
on by Sully 344. and in the other arſenals of the king-
dom iv. 10. He eſtabliſhes a ſchool for military exer-
ciſes 104. Running at the ring, Henry's frequent viſits -
there 197, 8. and following, See Henry IV. Sully.
A large hall and amphitheatre built there by Sully
for theatrical repreſentations 257. He entertairs and
| lodges Henry there, who goes frequently to viſit him

12
Arfon, deputy to the Duke of Bouillon in the affair of Sedan
*. 239
Artois, (Counts of ), the ſovereignty of the earldom of St
Paul conteſted for by them and the Counts of Bologna
' m. 382. See Saint Paul |

Arts, a ſcheme for the improvements of them iv. 366.

See Cabinet of State
Arundel, (palace of ), Sully lodged there during his embaſ-
ſy to London iii, 107 FEET |
Aſcoly,

INDE X.

Aſeoly, Prince of), commands the Spaniſh troops in
Champagne i. 280. Suffers Noyon to be taken 1.
Aſia, deſigns of Charles V. of Philip II. and of the houſe
of Auſtria, upon this quarter of the globe, and the ob-
ſtacles they meet with. Part of the great deſign of
Henry IV. relating to that part of the world, Sce Po-

litical Deſigns

Aſtrology and Aſtrologers, an adventure of the Duke of
Sully with an aſtrologer ii. 84.8 5. The. ſcience of aſtro-

logy very much cultivated in the age of Henry IV. 288.
This prinee makes La- Riviere calculate the Dauphin's
nativity 408. See Hemy, Sully, La-Broſſe, &c.
Avantigny, a Proteſtant officer, Monſieur withdraws his
confidence from him i. 85. Preſent at the combat oi
Savenſe 168. At the battle of Arques 284
Aubagnac, agent to the Duke of Bouillon iv. 87
Aubepine, (Charles de l'), Marquis of Chateau · neuf, refu-
Ted the officer of grand maſter of the ordnance i. 165.
Called to the council to deliberate upon the affair of re-
calling the Jeſuits iii. 241. Upon the re-eſtabliſhment of
the public revenue 341. Upon the affairs of the United
Provinces iv. 217. Appointed by Henry one of the re-
gents 431. N e by Mary of Medicis into her or-
dinary council v.
Aubeterre, (N. d'), 8 raiſed upon account of Sully's
friendſtip for him iii. 425
Aubign&, (Theodore Agrippa d'), ill affected to the party
of Henry IV. i. 102. ü. 162. The methods uſed
by him to raiſe an inſurrection among the Proteſtants
189. Obſerves Sully's conduct in his journey into Poi-
tou iii. 3043. Lays the foundation of a Proteſtant re-
public in France iv. 68
Aubigny, ' (Father), a Jeſuit. See Jeſuit, Parricide, Henry
Auguſtus, the conformity between the reign of Henry IV.
and his iv. 269
Auguſtins (order of) 1aſtituted iu. 224 .
Avignon, a diſpute concerning the bridge of that city, be:
tween the Pope and the King of France, terminated in
favour of the King ili. 378

Avila, (D. John Alvares), admiral of Spain, killed in a na-

val fight with the Dutch iv. 219

Aumale,

. ==
_
-
«. 353». * a 5
„
£ cw a at 5 k . E.
1 ws X . < OY
's Pl

NY EA

Aumale, (battle of) i. 239. Prince of Parma's ſpeech
upon the battle 246

Aumale, (Charles de Lorrain, Duke of), aſſiſts the league
i. 178. Narrowly eſcapes being taken priſoner by Sully
188. Defeated before Noyon 219. 220. His wife
treats with Sully about his return to the King's party
363. Serves the Spaniards in Flanders iii. 211

——-- (Claude de Lorrain, Chevalier d'), fights for the
league at Ivry i. 197. Is killed at the attack of St
Dennis 266

-- (Mary de Lorraine, Ducheſs of) treats with Sully
about her huſband's returning to the King i. 363.

Aumont, (John d'), Marſhal of France i. 105. Takes an
oath of fidelity to Henry IV. after the death of Hen-
ry III. 176. Surpriſes Meulan 76, Attacks the ſuburbs
of Saint-Germain 186. The victory of Ivry partly ow-
ing to his valour 193, 4. Greatly careſſed by Henry
200, Confers with the King about his converſion 321,
His exploits in Britany ii. 15. His death 206.

Anncau, (defeat of the foreign troops at), accounted for
i. 148

Auſtria, (houſe of), the author's ſentiments of its origin
i. 4. From whence it deſcended. Diſtixtion between
the original and the ſecond houſe of Auſtria, Names
of the ſeveral princes of this houſe : errors in all theſe
reſpects rectiſied ib. See Habſburg, Eſtates brought
into the houſe of Auſtria by that of Bethune ii. 98.
That houſe hated by the Proteſtants of the north iii.
116. The complaints of King James againſt it, and
the project concerted between him and Sully to humble
it 148, Countries ſubject to it 75. See Charles V. Phi-
lip II. The neceſſity and means of humbling it 176.
Sully the firſt contriver of this ſcheme 255. Strength-
ened by 1ts alliances 368. Its deſigns of acquiring uni-
verſal monarchy iv, 120. Its firſt advancement, origin,
and greaꝭ ſucceſſes 121, Henry IV. and Sully think.
of means to put a ſtop to them 122. Alliance of the
houſe of Bethune with the houſe of Auſtria 425. See
Bethune, Coucy. Pre-eminence of the houſe of Bour-
bon over the houſe of Auſtria 16. See Bourbon. How

it got poſſeſſion of the earldom of Guelders 431. Death
Vor. V. 2 | of

.

of the Duke of Cleves, and the ſucceſſion of his domini-
ons; reaſons for endeavouring to ſet it aſide 434. Ser
Political Deſign, Cleves, Eliſabeth. States and princes in
Europe oppoſing the houſe of Auſtria on this occaſion 459.
Conſpiracy againſt the life of Henry IV. in which it is
cor.cerned 471. See Spain, Henry, Parricide, &c. Suffers
Juliers to be taken, and the ſucceſſion of Cleves to be
divided v. 60. The view of the grand deſign of Hen-
ry Iv. in regard to it 143. Juſt ſubjects of complaint for
all Europe againſt it 166. Conjectures on what mea-
ſures it would have taken with reſpect to the grand de-
ſign, and what would have been the conſequence of it
163, See Political Deſign, Spain, Rodolph

Auſtria, (Albert of). See Habſburg, and Auſtria (houſe of)

— (Albert, Cardinal and Archduke of). See Arch-
duke, Low Countries

— e. Cardinal of) lieutenant- general in Flan-
ders till the artival of the Archduke ii. 273

(Anna Maria Mauricetta of). See Spain (chil-

dren of)

——— (Catherine of), by her marrying into the houſe
of Nechune, it became allied tothe houſe of Auſtria iv. 425
——— (Don Carlos of). See Carlos, Spain, Philip II.

———- (Charles IV. of). See Emperor
(Charles of) Marquis of Burgaw, See Burgaw,

Cleves
> » —— (Ckire Ugenie of). See Spain (children of)
——— (Ernelt, Archduke of). See Erneſt
— —— (Ferdinand of). See Ferdinand, Emperor

—-—— (Ferdinand, Archduke of), beaten before Caniſe,
u. 431, 2

——— (Frederic III. of). See Emperors, Frederic

(D. John of). See John (Don)

(Iſabella of). See Spain {children of)

— (Leopold, Archduke of). See Leopold

— (Margaret of) Archducheſs of Gratz, marries

Philip III. ii. 272. Paſſes by Marſcillew273. See
Philip II. Philip II.

——— (Mary of) marries William Duke of Juliers iv.
435. See Cleves

(Matthias, Archduke of). See Matthias

Auſtria,

r

Auſtiia, (Maximilian I. and II. of). See Maximilian, Em-
perots

— (Rodolph, or Raoul of). See Habſburg, Auſtria,

houſe of ) |

— (Rodolph of) Emperor. See Rodolph .

Autun, taken by Marſhal Biron ii. 43

Auvergne, account of Henry IV.'s journey to that province
iv. 85. See Henry IV. Bouillon, Rebels

——— (Charles of Valois, Count of) preſent at the bat-
tle of Arques i. 182. Joins with the ſeditious ii. 154.
Sully watches and diſconcerts his deſigns 10. He tra-
verſes Henry's amour with his lifter 311. See Verneuil
(Marchioneſs of). His correſpondence with Spain 393.
Signs an affociation with Bouillon and Biron 423. - In-
cites the people to mutiny againſt Henry IV. 424.
Waits for an opportunity of ſeizing Saint Flour 425.
The reſolution of arreſting him taken at Blois iii. 2, He
is arreſted 23. Henry grants him his life, but impriſons
him 34. He is afterwards reſtored to liberty 25. Hen-
ry's motives for acting thus 35. Auvergne again be-
trays the King 35. His character 75, Continues his
intrigues 221, Loſes his ſuit againſt Queen Margaret,
for the ſucceſſion to Catherine of Medicis 295, 6. En-
gages with Spain in a wicked plot againſt the ſtate and
perſon of Henry 298. Demands his pardon cf the
King, and at the ſame time proceeds in his conſpiracy
with Spain 312. Meaſures uſed to arreſt him 314. His
fears and irreſolution 315. His letters to and from
Sully 319. How he was arreſted 321. Henry again
pardons him: the real and ſuppoſed motives for this
clemency 386. He endeavours to eſcape from the Ba-
ſtile 383, See Entragues. Favours granted him in
priſon iv, 3381. Involved in the parricide committed by
Ravaillac 512

B,

Abou de la Bourdaiſiere. See Eſtrees, Sourdis
Bacqueville employed in the affair of Adiienne de
Freſnes iv. 160

22 Bade,

IN D EX.
Bade, the Catholics of the Griſon league hold their aſſem-

bly there in. 377. See Grifons

(Duke of) and de Dourlak, Sully accuſed of hold-
ing criminal correſpondences with theſe princes ui. 426.
The ſhare they were to have in the great deſign v. 147

Bade ſou. See Saint Genics

Badet (company of) uſed as the forlorn hope at the battle
of Ivry 1. 193 |

Bailiwics, offices to be erected in them in caſes of neceſſity
Iv. 372

Baionne, the malccontents endeavour to ſeize upon this
place iv. 33 |

Balls and feaſts at Paris, during the winter of 1597 11,
148

Balagny, (Lamion Montluc de), Duke of Eguillon, and he,
rivals in amours. Is aſſaſſinated by the Duke, Indig-
nation expteſſed by Henry IV. and Sully on this aſſaſſina-
tion iv. 292, 3

— (John de Montluc de), Monſieur gives him the
goverament of the caſtle of Cambray i. 83. Heads the
forces of the league at the battle of Rouen 238. Made
Eovereign Prince of Cambray 395. The Spaniards drive
him from Cambray ii, 64. Bon- mot of Henry IV. upon
this occaſion 69. The ſum paid him for coming over
to Henry 244 +

Baltazar, his attachment to Sully, Memorial which he
delivered him upon the battle of Fontaine Frangois
ii. 56 |

Balzac. See Entragues, Verneuil

Banchi (Father Seraphin) diſcovers to Brancaleon the de -
ſign of aſſaſſinating the King i. 344

Bankruptcy and Bankrupts, Sully's ſeverity to Jouſſeaume.
See Jouſſeaume. An edict againſt fraudulent bankrupts
iv. 390

Baptiſin of the children of France, an account of prepara-
tions for this ceremony iv. 168. See the Dauphin and
Children of France .

Bar, (Henry de Lorraine, Duke of), his marriage with the
Princeſs Catherine oppoſed by the Pope and the clergy
of France ii. 275, See Princeſs Catherine, Oſſat, Cler-
gy. Her great expenſes ii, 239, Henry and he take

meaſures,

IN D E X.

meaſures, after the death of the Princeſs, to ſecure her
effects 239. Henry propoſes to marry him to the Prin-
ceſs of Mantua iv. 15

Far, ſuppreſſion of its officers ii, 390, Sully complains of
the luxury of the gentlemen of the law iii. 232. Re-
gulation upon the droit annuel iv. 370. Reaſons for
and againſt this regulation 1. Abuſes to be corrected
in it with reſpect to the judges, advocates, and attor-

neys 375

Barbary, Spain deſigns to invade it iii. 208

Barberini, the Pope's nuncio in France iv. 20. Employed
by Henry in adjuſting the differences between Paul V.
and the Venetians, and rewarded for his good offices.
157. His praiſes of Sully 229.

Barenton, an engineer ſent by Sully to demoliſh the caſtle
of Uſſon iv. 103. See Margaret de Valois

Barlaymont, (Count of), grants a paſſport to Sally i. 88

- (Counteſs of), refuſes her conſent to the mar-
riage of Mademoiſelle de Melun with the Marquis of
Cœuvres when deſired by Henry IV. iii, 439

Barnard, the Marchioneſs of Belliſle enters into the order
of the nuns of ü. 303, 4

Barnevelt, (John Olden de), principal deputy of the United
Provinces to James I. The firſt converſation which he
had with Sully at London; his confidence in Sully, and
the meaſures which they take together iii. 12 1. & ſeq.
Gives advice of the pretended union of Spain ana Eng-
land againſt France 142. Diſguſted with the Engliſh
miniſters 163. His conference with Sully upon this
ſubject, in which he intruſts him with the private reſo-
lutions of the States-General 164. His. conference
with Sully and the Engliſh minifters, in which nothing
is reſolved upon 164, 7. See Cecil. A quarrel be-
tween him and the Prince of Orange, occaſioned by the
truce w. 187

Barrault, (Emerick Gobier de), attempts to enſorce the
obſervation of the treaties iii. 209, Endeavours to find
out the treachery of La-Hote 257. An zaltance of his
boldneſs and reſolution 55. Kaſis informs him of the
treaſon of La-Hote 258, 9.. Gives advice to Henry IV.
200. Inſtructions given him by Sully iv. 214

Z 3 Barre,

*

IN D E X.
Barre, (Madame de la), gives bad counſel to the Princeſs
Catherine againſt Sully ii. 95.— 104
Barreaux, (Des), one of the members of the new coun-
cil of finances ii. 46. He ſupports the financiers, who
had been guilty of unjuſt practices 117
Barriere, or Barre, (Peter), his plot to aſſaſſinate Henry IV.
how diſcovered and puniſhed i. 344. Particulars re-
lating to this plot. The Jeſuits juſtified 20.
Bartholomew, (maſſacre of Saint), ſcheme of this maſſa-
cre 22. 23. Obſervations upon it 76. The manner in
which it was executed, How Henry IV, the Prince of
Conde, and Sully preſerved their lives 31. 33. Reflec-
tions upon this action 29. Names of thoſe who were
maſſacred, and other particulars 33
Baſkgnac, or Vaſſignac, (Gideon de), a Proteſtant gentle-
man, cabals againſt Henry at the fiege of Amiens ii.
162. Lieutenant and agent for the Duke of Bouillon
iv. 86
Baſte, (George), general of the Imperial troops in Tranfil-
vania, defeats Vaivodes, Battory, and Michael ii. 431.
A noble action of this general iii. 65
Baſtile, Sully made governor of it i. 428. Henry IV.
lays up his treaſures there; regulation upon this occa -
ſion iii. 332
Battles and encounters at Jarnac, at Arnai le- due, at Leu-
con, at Loudon, at Lepanthe, at Saint-Quintin; at
Meaux; before Beaumont, at Coutras, Saveuſe, Arques,
Dieppe, and Pollet, Ivry, Iſſoire; at the paſſage of
Aine; againſt the Gautieres, See Montpenſier. Of
Aumale. See all theſe names, Hiſtorians ſeldom agree
in the account they give of battles i. 245. Encounters
and ſkirmiſhes before Rouen 250.254. See Parma.
Of Villemur, of Villers Colerets, before Dourlens, at
Fontaine-Frangoiſe, at Nieuport. Naval battle gained
by the Dutch againſt the Spaniards, See Spain, the
Low Countries. See alſo Skirmiſhes, Sieges, and the
other names mentioned in this article
Battori, Vaivode of Tranſilvania, defeated by George
Baſte ii. 431, Ile continues the war again the Em-
peror iii. 64
| Bavaria,

/

IN D E X.

Bavaria, (Elector of), project to make him Emperor ir.

12

Baudelonis (Yvon) takes a Spaniſh ſhip, which Henry 1V.
cauſes to be reltored iv. 28

Baugy, agent to Henry IV. for the management of the
grand deſign v. 155

—---— (lands of), awarded to Sully. He viſits them
ii. 390

Bae e, the advice he gave to Henry IV. concerning
the Duke of Bouillon iv. 251

Bazeile (Sainte) taken by the Duke of Maienne i. 116

Bearn, the maſs aboliſhed there. See Navarre, The maſs
reſtored ; afterwards the Jeſuits iv. 307. The quarrel
with Spain relating to its boundaries, terminated to the
ſatisfaction of Henry 329

Beaudiſner, (Galliot de Cruſſol de), a Proteſtant gentle-
man i. 22. Killed at the maſſacre of St Bartholo-
mew 30

Beaufort, (Ducheſs of). See Eſtrees (Gabriel d')

_ Enemy to Sully at court in. 421

Beaugrard of great uſe to Sully at the taking of Loviers,
1. 224

Beaugency, one of the five cities which continued faithful
to Henry III. i. 159. Granted to Henry IV. as a place
of ſecurity and paſſage 162

Beaulieu, (convent of), where is delivered the edict of
ſixty- three articles i. 47. See Peace, Anjou

Beaulieu, Henry IV. refuſes him the poſt of Lieutenant de
Roi of Saint John d' Angely iv. 166

Beaumont, (Chriſtopher de Harlay, Count of), ambaſſador
from France at London, gives advice of the death of
Eliſabeth iii. 80. 81. King James is prejudiced againſt

him 96. He is of great ſervice to Sully in his embaſſy

102. Sully lodges with him 106, Denies his requeſt
in favour of Combaut 109. He diſſuades Sully from
appearing in mourning at his audience of the King of
England 127, Admitted to dine at the table with
King James 160. His eulogium upon Sully's embaſſy
186. He continues to give advice of the ſtate of affairs
in England after the return of Sully 199. His pratles

of Sully 200. Other important advices ſent him from
London

IN D E X.

London 203. He exerts himſelf in the affair of the
prohibition of commerce with Spain 352. As likewiſe
in the treaty between England and Spain 361. He
brings with him to France letters from King James
to Henry IV. and Sully, and gives an account of his
negotiation iv. 29, He praiſes the King of England 31

Beaune (inhabitants of) riſe againſt the Duke of Maienne,
and drive him from thence ii. 16

Beaune (Renard or Bernard de) of Semblangai, Arch-
biſhop of Brouges, receives the abjuration of Henry IV.
336

Beaupre, (Saint-Germain de), one of the heads of the diſaf-
feed Proteſtants i. 102. Made governor of Argenton for
Henry IV. 161. His intrigues during the ſiege of
Amiens ii. 162. He endeavours to get ſuppreſſed (in
the ſynod of Gap) the tener of the Pope's being Anti-
chriſt iii. 223. He oppoſes Henry's enterpriſe upon
Sedan iv. 127

Beauvais, (N. de), governor to Henry IV. perſuades the
Queen of Navarre and the Proteſtant chiefs to go to Pa-
ris i. 16. He is killed at the maſſacre of Saint Bartho-
lomew 30. A duel between his ſon and Uſſeau 73.

74

Beauvais-La-Nocle, (John de La-Fin de), deputed by the
Proteſtants to Charles IX. i. 14. He eſcapes the maſſa-
cre of Saint Bartholomew 27, He is partly the cauſe
of the defeat at Auneau 148 |

Beauville, firſt preſident of the chamber of accounts in
Provence iv. 273

Beauvoir, the Count of Garnache is made priſoner there
by bis mother 1. 126

Bec, (N. du), archbiſhop of Rheims ii. 23

Beholens, or Begole, a Proteſtant officer, attached to
Henry IV. i. 50,

Bell, (Jobn Le), a Jeſuit, involved in the proceſs of
Chatel ii, 42

Belgic (republic), eſtabliſhment of this republic in the
grand deſign v. 151

Beha, (Francis Faudoas d'Averton de Serillac, Count of),
governor of Paris for the league, made yriſoner by
Henry IV. at Arques 1, 181, Employs himſelf —

| y

I N D E KX.

fully for Henry in the affair of his converſion 32.
He is deputed by the Catholics to Henry 332. Another

deputation to demand a truce 350. He is inclined to ſur-
render Paris to Henry, upon which the Duke of Maienne
deprives him of the government of that city 395.
A decree of parliament highly honourable to him 76,
He is deprived of his places for ſurrendering Ardres ii.
64

Belin, (Geoffroi de Saint), Biſhop of Poitiers, his letters in
juſtiſ-zation of Sully, in the affair of the college of Poi-
tiers iii. 393, 7

Bellefond defeated at the head of the garriſon of Soiſſons,
11, 42. The government of Caen given him by Hen-
ry IV. iii. 221

Bellegarde, (Roger de Saint-Larry, Duke of) grand ecuyer
of France, acknowledges Henry IV. for King after the
death of Henry III. i. 175. Was one of the favourites
of Henry III. ii. 18. 154. He is refuſed the honour of
marrying Mary de Medicis, by proxy for the king 340.
Eis familiarity with Henry IV. i. 389. Is made
lieutenant for the Dauphin in Burgundy ii. 30. Is
made ſuperintendant of the mines iii. 57. Goes to his
government of Burgundy 209. His friendſhip for Sully
311, He is involved in the 1ntrigues at court 417.
Called to the council upon the expedition to Sedan iv.
135. Protects the Jeſuits 344. Conchin jealous of
him v. 62. His quarrels with the nobles and miniſters |
70

Bellemaniere, his company defeated by Henry IV. i. 134
ellengreville (Joachim de) made governor of Meulan i.
177, 8. Aſſiſts in defending Mante 223.— 226

Belles-Lettres, (eſtabliſhment for the improvement of), by
Henry IV. ii. 213

Bellezuns fight for Henry IV. at Coutras i. 140

Bellievre (Pomponne de) labours to convert Henry i.
321. Oppoſes the malecontents 402. Admitted into
the council of finances ii. 35. Provides for the ſecurity
of Picardy 178, 83. Signs the peace of Vervins, and
aſſiſts at its publication at Bruſſels 200. Manages,
with Sillery, all domeſtic affairs 238. Is made chan-
cellor, and the ſeals delivered to him 289. Made *

of

. IN A
of the commiſſioners for the King's marriage 315. As
likewiſe in the affair of the marquiſate of Saluces 323.
Oppoſes Sully's reaſons for a war in Savoy. Takes La-
Fin's depoſitions againſt Marſhal Biron 429. Adviſes
Henry to arreſt the heads of the diſaffected party iii.
8.9. Aſſiſts at the council when Sully received the
inſtructions for his embaſſy to London 92. His ſenti-
ments upon recalling the Jeſuits 242. Sully endeavours
to perſuade him to tolerate different religions 269. He

ſolicits a cardinal's hat for M. de Villars and de Mar-
quemont 271. His advice to Henry IV. concerning
the Marchioneſs of Verneuil 327. Made one of the
commiſſioners for the prohibition of commerce with
Spain 351. As likewiſe for the purchaſe of the earl-
dom of St Paul, Henry takes the ſeals from him :
his infirmities iv. 191. Particular circumſtances relating
to him : his eulogium 192. Summoned to the council
upon the affairs of Flanders : his death 308
B:llile (Antoinette de Orleans de Longueville, Marchio-
neſs of) takes the habit of a nun of the order of Saint
Barnard : cauſe of her retreat: her eulogium ji. 303, 4
Bellozane, (John Touchard, Abbot of), one of the chiefs
of the third party i. 287, Sully treats with him 203
Bellujon, propoſed for deputy-general of the Proteſtants in
the aſſembly of Chartelleraut iv. 60. but rejected 73.
Employed by Henry IV. in the affair of Orange and
Blaccons 78
Belly, Chancellor of Savoy, commiſſioner in the affair of
the marquiſate of Saluces ii. 323
Beneſices, Heury IV. propoſes to reform the abuſes in them
iv. 365. See Clergy, Cabinet of State, Abbeys
Benon (foreſt of), Sully defeats in this place a | ſquadron of
the Duke of Joyeuſe's army i. 133
Berault, a Proteſtant miniſter, his intrigues at Chatelle-
raut rendered ineffectual by Sully iv. 72
Berg2n-0p-z20m taken and loſt again by Du-Terrail iv. 27
Bergerac, treaty made with chat city. See Peace of
1577. Services performed by this city to Henry IV.
i. 226
Beringhen (Peter de), Henry IV. conſides to him the pro-
jects of the league and of the third party diſcovered 15
te

N p EX:

the papers intercepted by Sully i. 287. His ſcheme for
taking La-Fere ii. 77. He is of ſervice to Sully upon
his entering into the council of the finances 113. Made
comptroller of mines iii. 57

Bernet (Du-) King's advocate in the parliament of Bour-
deaux iv. 253

Berniers, counſellor of the parliament of Rouen for the
King ii. 89

Berney (Matthieu Brulart, de) his negotiations in Flanders,
iv. 186. He ſupports the intereſt of the Prince of
D'Epinoy with the Archduke 421

Berry, regulations for the marcchaufſces of this province,
Iv, 236,

Berſot, one of Sully's enemies at court iii. 422
Bertauville propoſed for one of the deputies for the city
of Pons iv. 203

Berthier, agent for the clergy. His obſtinate endeavours
to procure an amendment of the edict of Nantz ii, 282
Bertichere (La) aſſiſts the Duke of Sully at the attack
of Cahors i. 66. Cabals for the Proteſtants during the
ſiege of Amiens ii. 162

Beſſais, his intrigues with the Proteſtant party ii. 162
Beſſes a diſafſected Proteſtant ni. 306

Bethune, a city and ſirſt barony ct the earldom of Artois,
i, :

— (houſe of), its origin: alliances with the houſe
of Bourbon, Auſtria, and the principal houles of Eu-

rope; and the great men it has produced 1.4.5. Er-

rors upon this ſubject rectiſied 26. Eſtates brought by
this houſe into that of Auſtria ii. 98, Its alliances with
the houſe of Bourbon and Luxembourg 184. Piles
beſtowed upon it by Henry IV. 415. Deſcended from
the Counts of Flanders iv. 23. Its alliances with the
houſes of Auſtria and Coucy 425

Bethune, ſeveral perſons of this name, anceſtors to the
Duke of Sully 1. 3

— — (Antoine de) his actions i. 5.

| (Czar de) ſecond ſon of the Duke of Sully
v. 109, The ſhare which Sully gives him of his eſtate ;
his death 183

Bethune,

£ TS 2 — ,
a — -

3

- —— 2 — —
ea EL

r rr OS

— — — — eo Sen. —
— - - - pd
-

IN D E X.

Bethune, (Charles de). See Roſny (Francis de Bethune de)

— (Coëne, or Conon de). His great actions.
Made regent of the empire of Conſtantinople i. 5

(Francis de), See Roſny and Orval.

— 2 Jacqueline de) biſhop of Cambray i. 5

(James de) Archbiſhop of Glaſgow. See Glaſ-

—— —

ow

. (John de) Abbot of Anchin 1. 5

(John de) head of the branch. from whence the

Duke of Sully deſcended i. 5. Allied with the houſe

of Auſtria by that of Coucy iv. 425

(John de) grandfather to the Duke of Sully,
His alliances i. 6

— (John de) brother of the Duke of Sully. Sec
Roſny

———— (Lewis de), See Mirepoix (Marquis of)

————— (Margaret de). Sce Rohan (Ducheſs of)

(Maximilian de). See Sully (Duke of)

(Maximilian II. de) Marquis of Roſny. See

Roſny

_ — (Maximilian III. Francis of) Prince of Hen-
richemont. See Henrichemont

———— (Philip de) the Count of Bethune, brother of
the Dake of Sully, One of the favourites of Henry
Il. diſgraced 93. Diſconcerts the enterpriſe of the
Duke of Matenne upon Loudun 221. Sent ambaſſador
to Rome ii. 413. Henry refuſes to give him the poſt
formerly enjoyed by the Baron de Lux iii. 436. He
gives advice of the death of Clement VIII. iv. 16.
Praiſed for his conduct in Italy, and honours conferred
upon him by the Pope 18. Henry IV, admits him
into his council 200. He is again ſent ambaſſador in-
to Italy 468. Is deputed by the Queen-regent to

Sully 15. His advice to Sully after Henry's death 34.
Endeavours to perſuade him not to reſign his employ-
ments 40. Sully reſigns to him the abbey of Jard,
754

— (Robert de) __ of Sully, who bore this
name; and their actions i.

—— Solomon de . of the Duke of Sully, one

of the favourites 0 gy III. diſgraced i. 93. He

turns

NVU E X

turns Roman Catholic 16. Sully obliges him to open
the gates of the caſtle of Roſny to him 170. Is made
governor of Mante 206. Prevents this place from being
taken by the Duke of Malenne 221. His death ii.
166, 7

Beuillaque, (Marquis of), envoy from the Grand Duke of

Tuſcany, gratuities beſtowed upon him by Henry IV.
w. 227 |
Beyne, or Bays, defeats a body of troops belonging to
the league ii. 42 I

Beze (Theodore de), makes a ſpeech to Henry IV. at
the head of the deputation from Genoa, Their recep-
tion from Henry ii. 369. His death: his eſteem of

Sully; and the proofs which he gives him of it iv. 93

Beziers, deſigns of the malecontents upon this city iv, 47

Bicoſe, or Vigoſe, deputed by Henry IV. into the diſtricts
1.117. Lieutenant of the highways in Guyenne iii.
280 |

Bigot, agent for the Duke of Guiſe in his treaty with the
King ii. 21 |

Birague (René de) chancellor, adviſes the maſſacre of
St Bartholomew i. 26

Biron (Armand de Gontault, Marſhal of) deputed by
Charles IX. to the Proteſtants i. 3, Fortifies himſelf
in the arſenal during the maſſacre 33. Concludes a
truce with Henry IV. in Guyenne 51. Commands the
royal army 69. Attacks Nerac 72. Endeavours to
diſſuade the Duke of Anjou from the treachery medi-
tated againſt Antwerp 85. Submits to Henry IV. after
the death of Henry III. 175. His important ſervice
upon this occaſion 176. Good counſel given by him at
Arques 179. He brings forces to his aſſiſtance 1898s
Takes Evreux ih. Contributes to the victory of Ivry 201.
A bon-mot of his to Henry IV. ib. He unſcaſonably
attacks the fort St Catherine at the ſiege of Rouen 230.
Is accuſed of having endeavoured to ruin this enterpriſe
1b. Foments a ſedition among the Roman Catholics

234. An attack in which he fights valiantly 236.

Occaſions the raiſing the ſiege of Rouen 247. Henry's
reſpe& and conſideration for him ib. His malicious and
obſtinate diſpoſition 264. His ſpzech to his ſon 15.

Vor. v. A a Hrs

- .
Z — —— —
-
——— ww —
_ — $ —_— — — _

*

Nis bad advice to Henry 265. Beſieges Epernai, and
is there killed 277. His character and eulogium 16.
Biron (Charles de Gontault, Marſhal of), Henry IV.
ſaves his life i. 213. He defeats a detachment of the
Duke of Aumale's army 219, Attacks the Prince of
Parma's intrenchments, and carries them 253, 4. Em-
ployed in the converſion of Henry IV. 321. Affront-
ed by Grillon 353. Intereſted in the treaty with Ad-
miral Villars 367. Made Marſhal of France 381.
Defea's the grand convoy before Laon 409, His ar-
rogant and preſumptuous boaſts 411. Henry diſſatiſ-
fied with him, refuſes him the government of Laon
412. He makes Sully watch him carefully 413. Bi-
ron aſſiſts the inhabitants of Burgundy to drive out the
Duke of Malenne ii. 16. Takes Beaune, Nuys, Au-
tin, Dijon 43. Attacks the caſtle of Dijon and of
Talan. Motives of thoſe who perſuaded Henry to go
into Burgundy 43. Drives the league from Dijon and
Talan 58. His actions at the battle of Fontain-Fran-
coiſe 59, Occaſions the loſs of Arras 79. A ſpeech
of Henry's in his praiſe 177. Made Duke and Peer of
France, and aſſiſts at the ratification of the peace at
Pruſſels 210. His plots in Guyenne 307. One of the
commiſſioners in the affair of the marquiſate of Saluces
323. Takes the city of Rourg without intending it
341. Endeavours to deſtroy Sully in an ambuſcade
344. Gives bad advice to Henry 363. Informs
the Duke of Savoy of all that paſſes in the council and
in the army 365. Has a deſign to have Sully killed
before Fort St Catherine 367. Confeſſes to the King
his plots in Spain and Savoy 393. Aſks pardon of his
_ Majeſty : conditions of his treaty with Savoy 417.
Reſumes his plots 16. Henry endeavours to reclaim
him by kindneſs 419. Sully endeavours likewiſe, but
to no purpoſe 76. Sent ambaſſador to England: his im-
prudent diſcourſe with Queen Eliſabeth 422. Sent am-
baſſador extraordinary to Switzerland 423, His cha-
racter 5. Binds himſelf in a criminal affociation with
Bouillon and Entragues : renews his intrigues with
Spain and Savoy: raiſes an inſurrection : his deſigns up-
on the principal cities in France: relies upon La-Fin,

Vic

*
7
q
.
fl

IN D E X.

who betrays him 424. Sully mentioned in this cabal
427. Endeavours made uſe of to arreſt Biron iii. 4.
He comes to Fontainebleau 14. Refiſts all the counſels
of Sully 19. Arreſted 22. He is tried and beheaded
26. Particulars of his execution, his character, and his
family 26. 27. In what manner he ſpoke of Sully 27.
Solicitations of his relations 28, The exceſſes which
he allowed his retinue to commit when in London: the
occaſion of the hatred that nation diſcovers towards the
French; and the bad treatment Sully's retinue received
107
Biſtrith, a noble action of George Baſte's at the taking of
this place ii. 65
Blaccons, governor of Orange for the Proteſtants and the
Prince of Orange iv. 43. Is ſacrificed by the intrigues
at court to Leſdiguieres, notwithſtanding the repreſenta -
tions of Sully 77. See Orange, Chatelleraut
Blanc, (Francis Le), the Duke of Bouillon's agent at
London iii. 126 TS
Blancard (John de Gontaalt, de Saint), Biron's adyice to
him apon the ſcaffold iii. 28 e
(John de), ſteward to the Duke of Bouillon, diſ-
covers to Henry his ſecret practices iv. 90
Blanchefort a ſaying of Henry IV. upon this houſe,
iv. 260
Blancmeſail (Nicholas Potier, de) preſident of the parlia-
ment of Paris, draws up the proceſs againſt Marſhal
iron iii. 25
Blavet, or Port Louis, the Spaniards driven ſrom tbis
place ii. 183
Blaye beſieged by the Marſhal de Matignon, who fails in
hi attempt ii. 107. Marſhal Biron endeavours to ſeize
this place 425
Blerancourt, a gentleman in the train of the Duke of Sul-
ly at London iii. 108 ä
Blois, the ſtates of this city ſend a deputation to Henryl V.
i. 57. Duke of Guiſe murdered here, The views
and deſigns of the ſtate 156,7. See Henry III. Guiſe,
League. Sully negotiates there a union between the two
kings 160. See Mornai. Motives for Henry's journey
there 11. 307. A ſecond journey of his to this place,
Aa 2 and

IN D E. X.

and the reaſons for it iii, 2. Reſolutions taken there to
arteſt the leaders of the malecontents 3. See Bouillon,
Epernon, Auvergne, &c. Henry IV. takes a violent re-
folution at this place againſt the Queen and her Italian
domeſtics, but is diſſuaded from it by Sully 13. Henry

paſſes through it in his way to Auvergne iv. 91

Blood (princes of), their plots with the ſtates of Paris i.
314. See League, States of Paris, They make a
range propoſal to Henry IV. in prejudice of the royal
authority ii. 70. See Montpenſier, Sully takes from them
the farms of the King's revenues : the cauſe of their
hatred to him 252. They are diſguſted at the King's
giving the Ducheſs of Mantua precedence of them iv,
169. Their diviſions and quarrels after the death of
Henry IV. 294. They pay no regard to Sully's advice
v. 49. Quarrels among them, and with their miniſters
70. Grants which they extort from the Queen-regent
$1. They all conſpire to ruin Sully 87. They rebel
179. See upon this article Bourbon, Conde, Conty,
Soiffons, Montpenſier. See allo the French Lords, Sedi-
tions, &c.

Podillun aſſaſſinates Chilperic : the reaſons iv. 319.

Ecgile, one of the King's officers, his courage in the
taking of Bourg ii. 342, He declares himſelf in the
council for Sully's advice for the expedition of Sedan
W.135

Bc hemia, the view of the grand deſign of Henry IV. in
regard to this kingdom; accedes to the union v. 151.
Forces and money to be contributed by this crown 161.
See Deſign Political

Bois-Dauphin (Urbain de Laval, de), one of the four Mar-
Mals of France made by the league i. 309. The ſum

- Which he received from Henry IV. by his treaty ii. 244.
Sent ambaſſador to to Vienna iii. 2

Bois-Roſe (N. de Gouſtinel de), the ſurpriſing manner in
which he made himſelf maſter of Feſchamp i. 347.

He delivers the fort to the King 349. His ſhare 1a the

. treaty with Admiral Villars 367. His comical adventure
with '$ully at Louviers 388.

Boiſſec, ſteward of the houſehold to the Princeſs ii. 1 7

Boiſlecs

FN DE Ke
Boiſſec, a Proteſtant gentleman, eſcapes the maſfacre of St

Bartholomew i. 27
Boiſſiere (Chriſtopher de Lanoy, de La) brings fuccours
to the Puke of Maienne, but does not arrive till after
the battle of Ivry i. 199. Has ſome ſhare in the defeat
of the Duke of Aumale 219 |
Boſſiſe, the French agent with the hereditary Princes of
Cleves iv. 437. Acts uſefully in this affair 448. See
Cleves. Is ſent ambaſſador to Denmark and Sweden
v. 155
Bolduc, the Prince of Orange beſieges this place againſt
the advice of Sully, and raiſes the ſiege ii. 392. iii. 75
Bonacolſi, Lord of Mantua, killed by the Gonzagues iv.
169 |
Bongars, (James de), the French agent in Germany it. 263.
Informations given by him iv. 189. Henry IV. diſcon-
tinues to employ him, Memorial ſent by him to Sully
upon the ſucceſhon and the affairs of Cleves 431. A
bon-mot of him 444. See Cleves, Is ſent ambaſſador
to Germany v. 155 |
Boniface (Captain) receives the Duke of Sully into Fort.
St Catherine to treat with Admiral Villars i. 35 1
Bonne, a ſaying of Henry IM upon this houſe iv. 260.
See Leſdiguieres, Crequy
Bonnefort, engineer to the King iv. 251
Bonnet (N. de Saint) receives Sully into his houſe when
he went to treat with Admiral Villars i. 35 1
Bonneval, (battle of). See Saveuſe
Bonneral, a courtier, in great familiarity with Henry IV.
iv. 178 p
Bontempts gives in a depoſition relating to the eſſects of
the Ducheſs of Bar ni. 239 |
Bontin, Sully viſits his eſtates in this place i. 215
Boquemare, preſident of the parliament of Rouen, well diſ-
poſed to the King's party i. 383,.4
Borde (La) employed by Henry IV. to diſcover the in-
trigue between the Count of Sommerive and Madame de
Moret, and ill uſed by Sommerive iv. 289

Bordes (Des) propoſed at Chatelleraut for the deputy- ge-

neral of the Proteſtant party, and rejeRed iy, 73. Em-
Aa 3 ploy

N DU X.
ployed againſt the Jeſuits by Sully in the affair of Metz
8 N

15
Borgheſe, (Cardinal). See Paul V.
Borgia (D. Inigo de) commands the Spaniſh troops in
Flanders iii. 211 |
Bories (Des) unable to prevent the taking of La-Mothe-
Saint-Eloy 1. 132 |

Born (John de Durefort de) commands the artillery at

the ſiege of Roben i. 229. At the ſige of Laon 397.
Lieutenant- general of the ordnance ii. 318 |

oſtkay obliges the Emperor to grant him the lordſhip of

Tranſilvania iv. 226. See Rodolphus 8

Botheon ( illiam de Gadagne de) aſſiſts at the ratiſica-
tion of the peace of Vervins for the Duke of Savoy ii.
211 |

Pouc, (La-Tour de), a fort purchaſed by Henry IV. from
the Duke of Mercœur iv. 14
Bouchavannes, (N. de Bayancourt de), a Proteſtant Lord
1. 22. Charles IX. pardons him 30
Bouillon (principality of) given to the Duke of #ouillon
by his wife ii. 2, See Bouillon, (Duke of), ouillon,
(Ducheſs of) Sedan. Bouillon, upon this account claims
a right to precede the Dukes and Peers of France, but
is not regarded iv. 169

—— (charlotte de La- Mark, Ducheſs of), marries the
Viſcount of Turenne; political reaſons for this match
i. 225. Her death; the Duke of Bouillon informs
Henry of it ii, 2. His opinion of her will 12

——--- (William-Robert de La-Mark, Duke of). See
Marck, (La-)

---- (Henry de La-Tour de Auvergne, Viſcount of
Turenne, Duke of), enters into the party of the King
of Navarre i. 50. His hatred of Sully 16. Is challen-
ged to fight by the Prince of Conde 59. He fights with
him 63, With Duras 64. Reflections upon this duel
15. He diſconcerts the deſigns of the Prince of Conde
”1, Is taken priſoner before Cambray 81. Forms a pro-
ject for eſtabliſhing a Proteſtant republic in France 101.
His character 102. Commands a body of troops in
Guyenne 115. His troops behave ill in the battle of

Coutras 141. His deſigns after this battle 146. =

= WU . FT OF ©

I ND E X.

fails in his attempt upon Sarlat 1b. Takes Caſtillon
149. Deſigns to diſmember the monarchy 160. Raiſes
the German horſe 225, Marries Mademoiſelle de Bou-
illon 15. Political reaſons for this marriage 16. See
Marck (La-). Henry IV. uſes the foreign forces brought
by him at the ſiege of Rouen 227. Raiſes a mutiny a-
mongſt the German forces 231. Prevents the purſuit
of the Duke of Parma, after he had paſſed the Seine
261. Takes Dun and Stenia, and defeats the Sieur de
la Guerche 266. His ingratitude to Henry IV. ii. 1,
Informs the King of the death of his wife 2. Motives
which induced Henry to ſend Sully to him 3. He en-
deavours to intrap Sully in a converſation they have to-
gether 7. His intrigues and political projects 8. His
character and maxims 16. Refuſes to let Sully peruſe
the Ducheſs's will 12. Opinion upon the donations in

it 7. His deſigns in adviſing a war againſt Spain 38.

Commands the forces in Picardie 45. His jealouſy of
the Duke of Nevers, the occaſion of the misfortunes of
this campaign 51. His juſtification 26. Defeated be-
fore Dourlens 53. Different opinions upon his conduct
54. Juſtifies himſelf badly to the King 72. Sent am-
baſſador to London 73. The object of his intrigues
during the ſiege of Amiens 162, 3. Endeavours to raiſe
an inſurrection among the Proteſtants in Britany 190.
Reproached by Henry IV. 195. The ſubtile article
which he gets inſerted in the edit of Nantz, and the
purpoſe of it 282. His hatred to Sully upon account of
ſuppreſſing this article 286. He cabals with the lords of
the kingdom 373. and with Spain 389, His aſſoci-
ation with Marſhal Biron and the Count of Auvergne
393. Deſign of arreſting him: he artfully eludes
Henry's propoſal for continuing at court it, 6. His let-
ters to the King and Sully upon this- ſubject 40. 41.
He employs the Elector Palatine to ſolicit Henry for
him, but to no purpoſe 77. Sully is charged to make
the King of England acquainted with his practices 96.
Whom he wants to gain over to his intereſt 125. Con-
tinuation of his intrigues at the court of the Palatinate,
at London, and in the Proteſtant aſſemblies in France
272. and with Leſdiguieres 302. He fxes himſelf

at

INDE X.

at the court of the Elector Palatine 308. His deputies
excluded from the aſſembly of Chatelleraut iv. 60. 61.
Sully renders ineffectual his endeavours to eftabliſh a
Proteſtant republic in France 68. Henry IV. diſconcerts
them, by ſeizing his cities 85, and deſigns likewiſe to.
take Sedan 123. Artifices of the courtiers to ward off
the blow 125. Letters betwixt Sully and him upon this
ſubje& 130, 1. All the courtiers intereſt themſelves for
him 134. Sully makes public his behaviour to the
King 136. His hatred to this miaiſter 139. Other ar-
tices to prevent Henry from approaching Sedan 7b.
He at laſt ſubmits, and treats with Villeroi 145. Ar-
ticles of the ſurrender of Sedan 146. The gracious re-
ception he meets with from Henry, upon his paying ho-
mage 159, 3. He attends this prince to Paris 153. In-
ſiſts upon precedency with the dukes and peers 169.
Henry reſtores Sedan to him, and withdraws his garri-
fon 255. He renews his intrigues 298, Henry IV.
oppoles his taking the title of Sovereign Lord of Sedan
422. He returns to France after the death of Henry
the Great, and is admitted into the council of Mary of
Medicis v. 23. He diſengages the Prince of Conde
from Sully, whom he feeks to ruin 53. Oppoſes Sully's
advice, with regard to the armament of Cleves 59.
Mutual ſervices between him and Conchini 63. A quar-
rel between him and Sully in full council 68. Gratuities
which he procures from the Queen-regent 81. The
hatred he diſcovers againſt Sully in the aſſembly of Cha-
telleraur 172 |

Bouillon, (Robert de La-Mark, Duke of). See Mark,

La-)
oF (Ducheſs of), is in Sedan when Henry IV. went
to beſiege it iv. 146

—---- {Mademoiſelle de) propoſed for a wife for the
Marquis of Roſny iv. 259. Henry LV. prevents Sully
from accepting of it ib.

bovlaye, ( harles Echalard de La-), governor of Fontenai
for the King's party, attends Kevry LV. into Fran-
ehe-Comte ii. 62. His ſon marries Mademoiſelle de
Marais, daughter-in-law to -ully : preſents given, and

favours reſaſed him by Henry IV. iii. 335, 6

Boulogne,

IN DI X.

Boulogne, a conference in this city between the Spaniards
and the Engliſh, which produces nothing ii. 215

Boulogne, (Counts of), lords paramount of the earldom
of St Paul, with the Counts d*Artois iii. 382

Bourbon, (houſe of), its great apanages i. 6. Eſtates car-
ried into this houſe by the houſe of Bethune 11.98.
The alliance of the houſe of Rohan with it 106. The
neceſhty and means of uniting it with the houſe of Stu-
art, to humble the houſe of Auſtria, See Political De-
ſign, Re-union of all theſe eſtates in the houſe of
France iv. 229. Henry IV. forbids Sully to marry his
ſon into the houſe of Bourbon 259. See Roſny

Bourbon-Conde, See Conde |

Bourbon-Conte, See Conte

Bourbon-France, See France

Bourbon Montpenſier. See Montpenſier

Bourbon-Rubenpre. See Rubenpre

Bourbon-Soiſſon. See Soiſſon

Bourbon er de) ſecond ſon of Henry IV. and the
Ducheſs of Beaufort, legitimated ii. 217. Is baptized

as a ſon of France, and called Monſieur 218. Is re-

| ceived into the order of the Knights of Malta iii, 383.
See Eſtrees, Henry IV. Sully

——---- (Antony de), King of Navarre, See Navarre

——---- (Catherine-Henrietta de), daughter of Henry IV.
and the Ducheſs of Beaufort, legitimated ii. 293. See
Eſtrees, Henry deſigns to marry her to the Marquis of
Roſny iv. 259, But afterwards marries her to __

of the Conſtable 267. Preſents which he makes her
{Charles, firſt cardinal de), oppoſes the mar-
riage of the Prince of Navarre with Margaret de Valois
i. 25. See Henry IV. Margaret, The conference with
Catherine of Medicis after the day of the barricadoes
156. Is put in priſon at the death of the Guiſes: he
reproaches Catherine of Medicis ib. See Guile, Medicis,
Henry III. Deſigned to be made King by the league:
his death and character 222. See League
(Charles, ſecond Cardinal de), deſigned by the
third party to be made King i, 288, He treats with
Sully in fayour of Henry IV. 307. His marriage *
S

——

I N D E X.

the Infanta of Spain propoſed by the ſtates of Paris and
rejected 315. Endeavours the converſion of Henry IV.
Services rendered by him to Henry IV. 335. See Ab-
juration. Sully is deputed to him in Paris: their con-
verſation 294. He ſupports the Jefuits in their pro-
ceſs with the univerſity and curates of Paris 398. Let-
ters betwixt him and Sully 407, His death: regretted
by Henry ii. 17. His abbeys: his character 75, Hen-
ry IV. diſpoſes of his benefices 17. 18

Bourbon (Charles de), natural ſon of Antony King of Na-
varre, Archbiſhop of Rouen, refuſes to marry Cathe-
rine ii. 277. Pleaſant converſation between him and
Roquelaure upon this ſubject 278. See Bar, Madame,
Roquelaure |

Bourbon, (Henry de) Duke of Verneuil. See Verneuil

. (Madame Catherine de), See Madame

— (Mademoiſelle de), daughter of Henry I. Prince
of Conde, her death ii. 291 |

Bourdeaux, letters from this city upon the perſon of Hen-
ry IV. i. 8. It ſhuts its gates upon this prince 17

Bourg-en-Breſſe, taken by Marſhal Biron in ſpite of him-
ſelf ii. 341, 2. Strength of its caltle 372

Bourg, a manufacturer ſent for to Paris by Henry IV. iii.
227

(Antoine-Da-, Maine-Du-), defends Laon againſt
Henry IV. Refuſes to deliver up the Baſtile i. 397.
Laon ſurrendered ii. 14

— (N. Du-), the advice which he gives againſt Leſdi-
guieres 111, 302

Bourges taken by the Proteſtants i. 18. Delivered up by
La-Chatre to Henry IV. 350. Sum paid for its reduc-
tion ii. 244 .

Bourſault (N. de), a Proteſtant gentleman, adviſed by Joh
d' albert to go to Paris i. 16 ;
Bouvens, governor of Bourg-en Breſſe, he could not pre-

vent its being ſurpriſed, although warned ii. 342

Brabant, Jonſieur is declared Duke of it i. 83

Braconnier deputed by the city of Metz to the Duke of
Sully againſt the Jeſuits iv, 158

Brancaleon diſcovers the deſign of Barriere to aſſaſſinate
Henry IV, i. 344
- Brandenburg,

1 N-D-E X.
Brandenburg, 5 4a Frederic Elector of), his right to the

ſucceffion of Cleves iv. 433. Divides this ſucceſſion

with the Palatine of Newburg v. 60. See Cleves

(John George de), a war and proceſs between
him and the Cardinal of Lorraine for the biſhopric of
Straſburg, terminated by Henry IV. in. 70

——— (Marquis of), Henry's reception of him at Paris
iti. 2. He comes to fee Henry at Metz 70

Brandis, governor of Montmelian, delivers, up the caftle
to Henry IV. by capitulation ii. 365. in which his wife
has ſome ſhare 362

Braſſac. See Rochebeaucourt

Braſſeuſe a Proteſtant officer i. 123. Preſent at the bat-
tle of Arques 181. and likewiſe at Ivry 198

Breaute (Charles de) fights in the combat of twenty
French againſt a like number of Flemiſh ii. 379

Brederode, deputy from the Flemings to Henry LV. v. 155.
See Flanders, Political Deſign |

Breſſe taken by Henry IV. ii. 342. Ceded wholly to the
King by the Duke of Savoy 375. See Treaty of Lyons.
Ke-united to Burgundy 377. Oppoſed by the parliament
of Dijon iv. 233

Breſt beſieged by the Duke of Mercœur ii. 15

Bretauville an officer of the King's houſchold; much re-
gretted by Henry IV. iv. 253 |

Bretoline an Italian, a preſent made him by Henry IV.
iv. 176

Breton a fort, furniſhed with proviſions and ammunition by
the Prince of Orange iv. 27

Bretons, (Chevalier de), agent and commiſſioner for the
Duke of avoy in the affair of the marquiſate of Saluces
ll. 305, 24 |

Breton (Hector Le-) receives a gratuity from the King
iv. 12

Briare (canal of) begun by sully iii. 348, 9

Brigantin, one of the faction, implores a pardon of Henry

IV. iv. 88

Brigneux, governor of Bougency, delivers up this place
to Henry IV. i. 162

Brillant, a domeſtic of the Prince of Conde, tore by four
horſes i. 149

Briquemaut

IND E X.

Briquemaut deputed by the Proteſtants to Charles IX.
1. 14 |

Briſſac (Charles de Coſſẽ, Count of) governor of Angers
i. 106, His deſign of changing the form of government
in France, The Duke of Mercœur makes him governor

of Paris 375. Betrays his party 377. Made Marſhal of
France ii. 188, The ſum which he received for his
treaty 244. Called to the council upon the expedition of
Sedan iv. 135. 394. Named by Henry IV. one of the
regents 468, Mary of Medicis admits him into her
council v. 23 |

Briſſon (Barnaby), preſident of the parliament of Paris, is
hanged by the council of ſixteen i. 237. His eulogium
ib,

Britany, cities taken and military encounters in this pro-
vince ii. 13. Other military exploits on both ſides 106.
The Duke of Merceur's claims upon this province 177.
Henry IV. reſolves to go thither in perſon 198. Ob-
je& and conſequence of this journey 179. Sully cauſes
plans to be taken of all its fortreſſes and coaſts iv. 250

Brix (Saint), Catherine of Medicis has a conference there
with Henry IV. i. 60. Other conferences at this place
129, Henry in danger there 16.

Broc (Pu-) Lieutenant de Prevot, allows L'Hote to eſcape
I. 264 |

Broſſard (Father) a Jeſuit, his reception from Henry IV.
at Metz iii. 71 |

Broſſe (La-), his prediction with regard to Henry IV. and
Sully i. 100, 6 |

Broſher (Martha), a pretended demoniac. Deſigns of thoſe
who bring her in play. Henry's prudence in this affair
1. 288, Particularities concerning her 289

Brouage taken by the Proteſtants i. 3. Retaken by the
Duke of Maienne 58. 59. The Prince of Conde fails
in his attempt upon it 107 | |

Brunſwic (Duke of Lunenburg), atreaty begun by him be-
tween Spain and England ui. 124, Ambaſſador in
London 199. Henry's reception of his deputy iv, 422

Budos (Louiſa de), wife of the Conſtable Montmorency,

her death n. 292 |

Bufalo (Cardinal) Pope's nuncio: he concludes with Sully a

treaty

FN DE Xx.

treaty of commerce between France and Spain iii. 352
Is rewarded by Henry IV. 356. Sully informs hin ©
Henry's political deſign 371. His eſteem and p:- |
Sully iv. 16. et ſeg.
Buhy (Peter de Mornay de), his plot to carry the!
to Saint-Germain-en-Laye i. 41. He prejudices tic:
ry IV. againſt Sully 280 | |
Bullion (N. de) ſent by Sully into Dauphiny 165, 6. and
to Rochelle 204. Sent ambaſtador to Venice and Sa-
voy 468. Agent for the Queen-regent in the aſſembly
of Charelleraut v. 17 4
Buquoy (Count of) refuſes the alliance of the Marquis f
Cœuvres for Mademoilelle Melun iti, 439
Burgaw, (Charles of Auftria, Marquis of), his right to
the ſucceſſion of Cleves iv. 434
Burgundy (kingdom of), the northern proviaces deſirous
of reſtoring it iii. 116
the Duke of Matenne demands the ſovereignty
of it from Spain i. 283. which is agreed to ii. 15, This
province riſes againſt the Nuke of Maienne 16. The
ſucceſs which the forces of Lorrain, of Henry IV. and
of Marſhal Biron have there 42. Henry makes himſelf
maſter of almoſt all Burgundy, Diſobedience of its
parliament, upon account of La- Broſſe iv. 233
Bully D'Ambois (Lewis de Clermont de) in diſgrace with
Monſieur : his death i. 51
— ——— (René de Clermont de), wife of Balagny,
dies of grief for the loſs of Cambray 1. 68
Butrick, envoy from the Elector Palatine to the aſſembly of
Proteſtants in France i. 101
Buzenval, (Paul Choart de), French ambaſſador in Hol-
land ii. 211. Communicates to Henry IV. the deſigns
of the Prince of Orange 391. iii. 76. The United
Provinces” great regard for him 359, 64. \\ rites the
King particulars concerning the United Provinces iv.
182. Gives an account of his negotiations to Henry IV,
187. Continues to be of great uſe in the affairs of
Flanders 218. His death and eulogium 22 4
Vor. V. B b Cabinet

CG:

Abinct of ſtate, Henry IV. and Sully employ them-
ſelves in compoſing it. Idea and object of this great
and uſeful work iv. 364
Caen, Henry IV. viſits this place. He takes the govern-
ment of it from Crevecœur, and confers it upon Belle-
fond 11, 221
Cahors taken by Henry IV. i. 65. 68. 69
Calais acquired to France by the Duke of Guiſe i. 10.
Beſieged by the Spaniards ti. 64. And taken, notwith-
ſtanding all the cares of Henry IV. 69. Particulars of
this ſiege ib. Henry's journey thither, and his motives
for it ii. 393. Another journey ui. 61
(port and paſſage of) ſeized by Henry IV. i. 139
Calatagirone, (Bonaventure de), Patriarch of Conſtanti-
nople, exerts himſelf ſucceſsfully for the peace of
Vervins i. 179. Attempts to hinder Sully from being
a commiſhoner in the affair of Saluces, but fails ii. 327
Calderon, the offer which he made Henry IV. from Spain
i. 90 | |
Calignon, (N, de), employed in the compoſition of the
edit of Nantz ii. 163. Henry oppoſes an article in
that edit, which is obliged to be altered 283. Admit-
ted into the council held for the return of the Jeſuits iii.
241. As likewiſe into that for the proving of rents 341
Calveyrac (John de Sudre de) informs Henry IV. of the
plots of the malecontents ii. 425
Cambray, the Prince of Parma raiſes the ſiege i. 81.
Taken by the Spaniards, who drive out Balagny n. 64.
68. Sum paid by Henry IV. for its reduction 244
Campo {Alonſo del) defeated by the forces of Queen Eli-
ſabeth in Ireland ii. 430
Canada, a colony eſtabliſhed in oppoſition to the advice of
Sully uu, 225
Canals for the joining of rivers, very uſeful iii. 339. Ot
Brevie, See Brevie, Scine, Loire, Saone
Canaye (Philip) De-Freſny, ambaſſador at Venice ii. 413.
See Griſons. Giyes intelligence of the difference of the
Venetians

7
*
5

IN D E KX.

Venetians and Paul V. iy. 154. Inſtructions which he
gives Sully in this affair 156 | |

Caniſe taken by the Knights of Malta ii. 431, 2

Caniſy, (N. de), gratuities granted him by Henry IV. iv.
13. Regretted by Henry 253, 4

Canterbury, Sully's reception ip this city by the nobility
iii. 103. The advice of a canon to him 104. Hen»
ry IV. 's opinion of this advice 142

Capelle (La-) beſieged and taken by the 3 396.
Retaken 11. 5 1. 64

Capuchins deputed by the Pariſians to Henry It. at Char-
tres i. 155. Accufed of endeavouring to aſſaſſinate
Henry IV. 344. They embroil the Proteſtants with
the Catholics od Griſons iii. 71

Carces, (Gaſpard de Pontevez, Count of), his party in
Provence i. 272. Gives advice of the deſigns of the
Duke of Savoy ii. 298

Cardinals, promotion of French cardinals ii. 201. Sent
to the conclave after the death of Clement III. They
act well for France iv. 9. Promotion of 1606 143+

- Ther prerngatres in Italy 321

Carlos, (Don), Prince of Spain, Philip II. cauſes him to be
executed i. 15. Motixes of this action i. 270

Carmelites (bare foot) eſtabliſhed in France ui. 224

Carnavalet (Madame de) gives good advice to Henry IV.
1. 45

Caſaubon, Henry ſends for, ard fixes him at Paris ii. 214

Caſaux, (Charles), his party in Provence i. 272. Is killed
in endeavouring to deliver up Marſeilles to the Spaniards
li, 30

Caſe, (La-), a Proteſtant, his intrigues during the ſiege of
Amiens it, 162

Caſimir (the Prince) enters France with an army i. 45.
Is bribed to depart. See Medicis, Monſieur's Peace.
Cities given in pledge to him by the Prince of Condé
71

Caſtinet takes Bourg-en-Breſſe, though oppoſed by Mar-
ſnal Biron ii. 341

Caſtets, Marſhal de Matignon obliged to raiſe the ſiege ot
this place i 114

Caltile, receiver-general of the clergy, is aceuſed off a

Bb 2 | miſdemeanor

" N

IN D E: X.

miſdemeanor iii. 337. Is made comptroller- general af-
ter the death of Henry IV. Sully complaias of him
v. 25 |

Caſtillon taken by the Duke of Ma'tenne, and retaken by
the Duke of Bouillon 4. 149

Cateau-Cambrefis, the Duke of Anjou takes this place by
ſtorm i. 81

Catelet (Le-) taken by the Spaniards ii. 5 1. 64

Catherine (Fort de Saint) attacked improperly at the fiege
of Rouen i. 229. See Biron, Sully is received there as
he went to treat with Admiral Villars 348

—-- (Fort de Saint-), in Savoy, beſieged and taken
by Sully i. 367. Demoliſhed at the intreaty of the
republic of Geneva 369

Carholics of the party of Flenry IV. the moſt powerful in
his council 1, 214. Deſign to revolt at the fiege of Rou-
en: their views 233. Their oppoſition to the Prote-
ſtants occaſions the raiſing this ſiege 260, 1. See Biron,
Bouillon, Proteſtants, Refuſe to purſue the Prince of
Parma 262. Oblige Henry IV. to refuſe the offers of
the league 308. The wiſe conduct of Henry IV, with
regard tothem 343. Their jealouſy of Sully 345. They
murmur at his embaſſy to London iii. 8 3. The Catho-
lic power in Europe, compared with that of the Prote-
ſtants, and the power of each party 176. See Political
Deſign, James, Their intrigues againſt Henry IV. in
favour of Spain, See League, Pope, Spain, Jeſuits

Caudebec ſarrendered to the Prince of Parma, and reta-
ken by Henry IV. i. 252

Caumartin, (Lewis Le Fevre de), keeper of the ſeals, of
great ſervice to Henry IV. in thoſe diſtricts to which he
is ſent ii. 16. Appointed to aſſiſt at the conference at
Boulogne 215. To treat with the Swiſs ambaſſadors
iii. 59, Called to the council upon the affair of the Je-
ſuits 241. Commiſſioner in the affair of the purchaſe
of the earldom of Saint Paul iv. 25. Prepoſſeſſes the
Landgrate of Hefle againſt the Duke of Bouillon 63.
His good management in the diſtribution of the pay to
the Swiſs cantons 249. He ſerves the Prince d'Epinot
with the States-General 419. Flogium of his negotia-
tions in Swiſſerland, and with the Griſons 428. Ap-

pointed

X.
pointed ambaſſador to Switzerland 468. Admitted into?

the council of the Queen-regent v. 23
Cauſſe, one of the diſaffected, implores pardon of Henry

3 iv. 88
71 Cazal, (Alphonſo), deputy from Spain to the Criſon league
$ at Coire, but does not ſucceed ii. 377

Cecil, (Robert), ambaſſador from Queen Eliſabeth to Hen-
ry IV., his converſation with this prince ii. 190
Cecil, (William), ſecretary of {tate to Queen Eliſabeth ii

9 190. His character iii. 115, Viſits the Duk of Sully;

. and his opinion of him 119, 20. His ar tiſice to procure-

9 the favour of King James 139. See James, Confe-

9 rence between him, the Engliſh counſellors, and Sully, in
which he endeavours to ſurpriſe and deceive him 156. He:
is deputed to the Count of Aremberg 159. His attach--
ment to Spain 160. Diſcovers himſelf always againſt
the Dutch 163. His conference with Sully and the de-
puties from the United Provinces, in which he exerts all:
the craft of a ſtateſman 164. And his oppoſition to gi
ving ſuccour to the States-General 186. The King of
Fngland diſcontented with his conduct 185. He con-
tinues to affiſt the Spaniſh faction 203. At laſt declares.
himſelf, againſt his. will, for & treaty of alliance with
Fance 207”

Cenfors, a ſcheme for eſtabliſhing them in France for
the puniſhment of diſſoluteneſs and prodigality iv. 374

Chaligny (Henry of Lorrain, connſellor of) kills Chicot,
who had made him priſoner 1. 99. 351

Chamant (john and Anthony de St) employed by the
league in Languedoc and Limoſin, and sfterwards by:
Henry IV. ii. 106

Chamber of accounts, guilty of ſome diſreſpect to Hen-

b ry IV. ii. 171. Abuſes in it corrected by the Duke of
5 Sully 257. Oppoſes the eſtabliſument of a new Council: |
A ii. 341. Sully complains of that chamber, and ſubjects
E it to new regulations iv, 233. Other regulations made
in this chamber 314, 15 1
© Thamber of juſtice,. ettablied by Henry IV. fi. 152.
< Another in the year 1601, ard called the royal cham-
ber 386. Another in 1604 iii. 341, Another in 1607,-

B. b 3 contrar y

IN DU E

contrary to Sully's advice iv. 246. Reflections and rea-
ſonings of this miniſter upon theſe eſtabliſhments 246, 7

Chambert, ar Chambaret, one of the chief royaliſts in Lan-
gu2doc ii. 106, Contributes to the taking of Bourg
341, 2

Chambery, Henry IV. takes this city and makes entertain-

ments in it ii. 343

Chamier, a Proteſtant miniſter, behaves diſteſpectfully to
the Conſtable iv. 203

Chamnite, (Count of), governor of Franche-Comte, aſſiſts
the Prince of Joinville and other malecontents iii. 38

Champaign revolts againſt the Duke of Guiſe ii. 24, See
Rheims. The Spaniſh uſurpation upon this frontier
proved by Sully, who obliges them to make reſtitution
iv. 31

Chanlivaut (René Viau de) attends Henry IV. to Aumale
i. 238

Chantclerie (c a) is defeated endeavouring to 5 Noy-
on i. 219

Chanteloup, (N. de), one of Sully's priſoners at the battle
of Ivr

3 (Charles de Charbonniere de La), one of
the officers of the league 11, 106. Joins the malecon-
tents iv. 48

Charbonnieres, Sully lays fiege to it, notwithſtanding the
oppoſition of the courtiers : takes it with great trouble;
and prevents it from being plundered ii. 346

Charity (Chriſtian) given by Henry IV. for a royal ho-
ſpital for diſabled ſoldiers iii. 345

Charlemaign prevents the eſtabliſhment of too many reli-
gious houtvs in France iii. 383, Sully's judgment con-
cerning his reign iv. 340

Charles Martel, Sully's opinion of this King v. 122

Charles V. King of France, his reign propoſed as a model
of good government 11. 348. He ſubmits to the autho-
rity of the ſtates of the kingdom iv. 319. Remarks on
his reign v. 125

Charles VI. King of France, his reign called by Sully the
tomb of laws and manners iv. 320

Charles VII. King of France, the taille, in his reign,

| becomes

Page * 1
2 i. Sad © a *
ji : * *
„r. w
Iu

IN P E X.

becomes a ſettled tax iv. 320. Remarks on his reign
40

3
Charles VIII. his reign the ſource of the maleadminiſtra-

tion of the finances ii. 18. The value of the taille in
his reign iv. 320

Charles IX. King of France, his affection for Henry IV.

i. 9. Divides his favours amongſt the Princes of the
blood, the Guiſes, and the Conſtable 11. The deep
diſſimulation he makes uſe of to deſtroy the Proteſtants
13. An inſtance of his hatred to the Duke of Guile 10.

He draws the Proteſtants to Paris 15, 16. Eſcapes be-
ing taken by them at Meaux 18. He careſſes the chiefs
of the Proteſtants. See Coligny, Proteſtants. The ſe-
curity with which he inſpires them 22. Reflections up-
on his behaviour to Coligny 75. The maſſacre of St
Bartholomew : his ſeverity to the King of Navarre, and
the Prince of Condé 32. 33. His remorſe for the
maſſacre of St Bartholomew: diſavous it 35. 36. In-
ſtances of his cruelty 37. Favours the Proteſtants out
of hatred to his mother, whom he ſuſpects of having
poiſoned him 40. The grief he expreſſes at his death
for the maſſacre: his death: good and bad. qualities
42. 43. His treaty of commerce with the Engliſh-diſ-
advantageous to France iii. 95. Value of the taille in
his reign iv. 320

Charles IV. (Emperor) aſſiſts the houſe of La- Mark in ta-

king poſſeſſion of the duchy of Cleves iv. 431. See
Cleves |

Charles V. a bon-mot of his upon France i. 310. His

ambition: his project: his retreat ii. 264. He orders
that the kingdom of Navarre ſhould be reſtored to the
houſe of Albret 266. See Philip II. An abridgment
of his life : his ſcheme of univerſal monarchy 264, 5.
Sully's opinion of this prince iv. 340. His difhpations
of the eſtates of Cleves 435. His oppreſſion of the E-
lector of Saxony and the German princes 441. His
engagements with the Electors v. 145

Charney (Eleanor de Chabot, Count of) ſaves the Prote-

ſtants in his government during the maſſacre i. 37

Chartres, Henry III. retires there after the day of the

barricadoes ; what happened to him there i. 150.
Taken

Taken by the two kings 15 5. Taken by Chatillon 21 6.
Henry IV. crowned here 35

Chaſtes, (Aymar de), governor of Dieppe, promiſes to
receire Henry in it i. 179

Chataigneraye, (John de Vivonne, de La), priſoner to-
Sully at the battle of lvry i. 197. Account of his
death 199

Chateau Gay (Madame de) miſtreſs of the Count of Au-
vergne ni. 318

Chateauneuf, or Paſſava, taken and demoliſhed by the
Knights of Malta ii. 432

Chateauneuf, (Rene de St Marthe, de), one of the princi-
pal royaliſts in Languedoc ii. 106, Implores pardon for
Marſhal Biron ut. 29

Chateaupers, (Francis Hurault de), firſt huſband of the
Ducheſs of Sully i. 278

Chateau- Thierry given to D'Inchy by Monſieur 1, 83.
This prince dies there 92

Chateauvieux, (Joachim de), captain of the guards, takes
an oath of fidelity to Henry IV. after the death of
Henry III. i. 175. One of the diſafſected Catholics du-
ring the ſiege of Rouen 234. Sent by Mary of Me-
dicis to Queen Margaret iv. 101. Appointed one of the
council of the regent v. 82. Made governor of the Ba-
ſtile 95

Cbatel (Jobn) wounds Henry IV. with a knife ti. 40.
Particulars relating to his wicked attempt, trial, and
death 40. 41 |

Chatclleravt taken by Henry IV i. 162. The general aſ
ſembly of the Proteſtants held in this city, Reciprocal
deſigns of Henry IV. and the Proteſtants. Artiſice of
the latter. Subjects which ought to have been treated
iv. 34. Motives for {ending the Duke of Sully there:
the public inſtructions which he received 39. His pri-
vate inſtructions 44. His advice againſt the aſſembly.
See Margaret, Rodelle. Letters and artifices of the
Duke of Bouillon to make an inſurrection among the
Proteſtant party 49, The courage and wiidom of Sully
in declaring the King's intentions 53, He is not ap-
Pointed prefident 58, An arrogant and ſeditious letter

20 Bouillon intercepted 60. Sully renders ineffectual the

cabais

Pr om. .

We

IND E X.

cabals of the malecontents 67. He makes the memorial
for a Proteſtant republic to be rejected 68. Affairs re-
lating to the deputies · general terminated by Sully to the
King's ſatisfaction 71. As likewiſe thoſe relating to the
cautionary towns 76. His bold and wiſe ſpeech at the
cloſing of the aſſembly 81. Another aſſembly when the
Proteſtants ſupport Sully againſt the court and the
Queen-regent v. 172. Public works of Sully in this
city 197

Chatellier (father) a Jeſuit, Henry's reception of him av
Metz iii. 71

Chatillon, (N. de), Sully hinders his deputies from being
admitted into the aſſembly of Chatelleraut, and into the
Proteſtant ſynods iv. 57

— an engineer, ſupports the advice of Sully for be-

ſieging Sedan 135

Chatre (Claude de La) commands the forces of the league

at the ſiege of Rouen i. 238. Created Marſhal of France
by the league 309. Delivers up Orleans and Bourges to
Henry IV. 350. Sum of money received by him for
his treaty ii. 244. Conſulted by Sully upon the regu-
lations for Berry iv. 236. Henry's letters to him upon
the affair of Orleans 344. Commands the army ſent to
the ſiege of Juliers v. 58

Chaumont, (N. de), one of the courtiers who lived familiar-
ly with Henry IV. iv. 182

Chaux, (Viſcount of), his offers to Henry 1V. on the part
of Spain i. 337, 90. 341

Cheſy (the Abbot of) concerned in the converſion of Hen-
ry IV. 1. 321

Chevalerie, (order of), deſigned to be inſtituted by Hen-
ry IV. iv. 366 |

— (La), this name intended to be aſſumed by Sul-
ly upon his taking upon him the government of the Ba-

tile ii. 428

Chicot, the trick which he plays the Marſhal Lavardin 1,
99. His character and bons-mots 16. |

Chiſay taken by Henry IV. i. 121. Two remarkable ac-
cidents which happened at this ſiege 121, 2

Cbiverny, or Cheverny, (Philip Hurault of), chancellor,
the cogniſance gf the treaty of the Duke of Guiſe Ls

oc

IN D E X.

ken from him by Henry IV. ii. 23. Enters into the new
council of the finances 35. Favours the deſigns of the
Ducheſs of Beaufort 44. Employed in the articles of
paciſication with the Proteſtants 177. Aſſiſts the Ducheſs
of Beaufort in her endeavours to be made Queen 218.
Sum of money received by him for her treaty 244.
His death 289

Choirin employed by Henry IV. to diſcover the ſecrets of
the league i. 287 |

Clairvant (Claude-Antoine de Vienne de) ſolicits forces in
Germany for Henry IV. i. 120. Partly the cauſe of the
defeat at Auneau 148. Sree German horſe, Swiſs

Clan, (St Germain of), one of the Proteſtant chiefs, enemy
to Henry IV. i. 101. Endeavours to raiſe an inſurrection
in the aſſembly at Chartelleraut iv. 49. 60. Supports
the project of a Proteſtant republic in France 68. Sully
excludes him from the general deputation 73. Attempts
to divert Henry from the enterpriſe upon Sedan 127.
Employed by Sully in the affair of Metz againſt the
Jeſuits 158. Quarrel between this family and the family
of La- Force 294 | |

Clavelle (La) attached to rhe Queen iv, 184. His obli-
gations to Sully and his counſel to him v. 96

Clement (James) a dominican friar, kills Henry III. i.
171. Particulars relating to this action 76,

Clement VII. his conduct cenſured by Sully iv. 155

Clement VIII. makes difficulties in receiving the abjura-
tion of Henry IV. and granting his abſolution i. 336.
Elogium upon this Pope 400. Intereſts himſelf for the
Jeſuits in their proceſs againſt the univerſity 403.
Grants abſolution to Henry IV. the conditions 11, 65.
66. Eadeavours to procure a general peace 179, In-
elined to the diſſolution of the marriage of Henry IV.
with Queen Margaret 198. Refuſes a diſpenſation for
the marriage of Madame with the Duke of Bar 276.
Reſolves not to concern himſelf in the affair of the mar-
quiſate of Saluces 305. Agrees to Henry's marriage
with Mary of Medicis 340. Henry's deference for him
in the treaty of Savoy 377. Preſents made to his
chamberlain iii. 59. 60. Henry ſatisfied him with re-
gard to his armaments 75. Dilturbanees in England by

his

Ds WT.

Wk, 7 9, a Ad. dS M..

his endeavouring to eſlabliſh an archprieſt there 253. -
Reciprocal civilities between him and the King of Eng-
land 154. Intereſts himſelf for the recall of the Jeſuits .
into France: complains of the ſynod of Gap: eſtabliſhes
many religious orders 223, 4. Promotion of cardinals,
in which he has regard to the recommendation of the
Duke of Sully 271. See Du-Perron, Olivary, His
moderation to the Proteſtants praiſed by Sully 308. He
exerts himſelf for the concluſion of the treaty of com-
merce with Spain 352. Favours the deſign of Henry
againſt Spain 371. His death, Particulars of his death
and character: his affection for Sully iv. 16

Clergy of France, in the ſtates of Paris, unite with Spain,
in favour of the Duke of Guiſe, againſt Henry IV. i.
315. Their hatred to this prince 318. See League

| -- aſſembly of, in 1598 ii. 216, Oppoſe
the marriage of the Princeſs Catherine with the Duke
of Bar 275. as likewiſe the regiſtration of the edict
of Nantz, and make alterations in it 282. Project for
their reformation by Heory, See Cabinet of State

Clermont taken by Henry IV. i. 212. Danger of Ma-
dame de Liancourt in her journey to this place ii. 86

———- (N. de), commands the artillery at the battle of
Coutras i. 139. Advites the amendment of the edit of
Nantz 286

Cleves, (duchy of), motives to undertake a war with the
houſe of Auſtria iii. 181, See Political Deſign. Death
of its laſt Duke. Seve Cleves (William Duke of). Ac-
count of this principality : of the princes and princeſſes
of this name iv. 430. The German princes who have
claim to it, meet at Hall, and ſend a deputation to
Henry IV. 448. Henry begins to march his troops to
this place 461. An extraordinary council held by Mary
of Medicis upon this occaſion v. 31. See Sully, Sends
an army to the ſiege of Juliers 58. Concluſion of this
affair 60, Diviſion of its ſucceſſion ih, See Henry IV.
Sully, Medicis, (Mary of), Rodolph, Brandenburg,
Neuburg, Leopold

——- (Anne of), right of Philip Lewis, Count Palatine
of Neuburg, by her, to this ſucceſſion iv. 431

— —ä4—ä—kũä ũñ 1 — — —

Cleves

IN D E X.

Cleves (John William, Duke of), his death: his chil-
dren : his alliances : ſeveral princes claim a right to his
ſucceſhon iv. 431

Cleves, (John William of), ſon to the former, by his
death, his ſiſters become his heirs iv. 432

—— (Madeleine of), right of John, Count Palatine de

Deux-Ponts, to the ſucceſſion of Cleves, by this lady iv,
434

——- (Mary-Eleanor of), right of Albert Frederick of
Brandenburg to the ſucceſhon of Cleves, by her iv.

* (Sybile of), right of Charles of Auſtria, by her, to
the ſucceſſion of Cleves iv. 435

Clielle (La) yeoman of the mouth to Henry IV. w. 179

Clotaire I. and II. Sully's opinion of theſe Kings. Se:
Moravingiens (race of ) 3

Cloud, (Saint), Henry III. aſſaſſinated at this place i. 171

Clovis, Sully's opinion of this King iv. 340 2

Coaſts of France, Sully cauſes plans to be drawn of them
iv. 314

Cobham (Lord) viſits Sully at Dover 11. 399, One of the
diſaffected party in London iii. 115. His advice to Sul-
ly 142. Conſpires againſt King James 1 205

Coconnas (Annibal de) beheaded by order of Catherine of
Medicis i. 41

Coeme (Jean de) married to the Prince of Conty ii. 413.
See Montaffié

Cœur (Bartholomew) ambaſſador from the Grand Signior
ü. 395

„Ata, (Francis Anmbal d'Eſtrees, Marquis of), rea-
ſons for his hatred to the Duke of Sully iii. 420. The
relations of Mademoiſelle de Melun refuſe her in mar-
riage to him 438, 9

Cognac, one of the cautionary towns granted to the Pro-
teſtants i. 3. A conference held in it between Catherine
of Medicis and Henry IV. 130 |

Colas, ſeneſchal of Monthmar, defends La-Fere againſt
Henry IV. ii. 78

Coligny (Gaſpard de Chatillon, Admiral of) commands
the Proteſtant forces at Arnai-le-Duc i. 3. Refides at

Rochelle, after the peace of 1570 12. 13. Marries
| the

ar-

ro-
rine

oſt

nds
8 at
rries

the

N

che Counteſs of Entremont : magnificent offers made to
him by the court 14. See Charles IX. Medicis. Ap-
pointed viceroy in the Low Countries : other favours
conferred upon him by Charles IX. 256. Commands the
Proteſtants at the enterpriſe upon Meaux 18, Wound-
ed by Maurevert 22, Account of the proceedings of
Charles IX. with regard to him 26. Oppoſes the ad-
vice given him to leave Paris 27. His talents and great
qualities: killeC at the maſſacre of St Bartholomew 28

Coligny Charillon, (Francis de), ſon to the Admiral, ſaves
himſelf at Genera at the maſlacre of Paris i. 33. His
advice upon the entry of the foreign forces into France
not followed 122. Employed in the defence of Tours
167. Gains the battle of Saveuſe 168. Carries the
ſuburbs of St Germain 186, Takes Chartres 215. is
death 216. His elogium 26.

— (Henry de) grandſon of the Admiral,
killed at the ſiege of Oſtend: his great qualities: re-
gretted bys Sully, but not by Henry IV. ii. 405, 6

. - (Odet de), Cardinal of Chatilion i. 14.
— relating to his life and death 15

College (Royal) intended to be founded by Henty IV.
iv. 365. See Cabinet of State, Reflections upon col-
leges, and the inſtruction fit to be taught in them 366

Colony ſent to the Eaſt- Indies iii. 235

Colvil writes againſt King James I. and diſapproved of by

the Pope iii. 155

Coman, (Jacqueline Le- Voyer de), or bib. informs
Henry IV. of a conſpiracy againſt him iv. 477. Parti-
culars concerning this law-ſuit, and feat opinions
upon the whole of that affair 477. *t ſeq.

Combaut, Sully's ſeverity to him iii. 109

Come, a fort built upon this lake by the Spaniards, pro-
duces conteſts between them and the Griſons iii. 373.
See Fuentes, Griſons

Comedians (Italian) brought into France by Henry IV.
iv. 256

Comet in 1607, ſuperſtitious application of this comet to
the children of Erance iv. 253

Commerce ruined by war ii. 242. Abuſes in it corrected

by Henry IV. and the Duke of Sully 382, The treaty
Vol. V. Cc | of

— ũ ᷣ — —

N DUE N

of commerce between Charles IX. and Eliſabeth diſad-
vantageous to France iii, 90. Edicts deſtructive to
commerce granted by Henty IV. againſt the advice of
Sully 214. Maxims of commerce 235. Promoted by
the joining of rivers and making of public roads 339.
See Rivers, Roads. Commerce with Spain prohibited
244. Sequel of this affair 349. Eſtabliſhed by a trea-
ty 352. See Spain, Sully, Bufalo. Projects for the
improvements of commerce iv. 369. See Cabinet of
State
Commercy (lordſhip of) unjuſtly uſurped by the Spaniards
and the Duke of Lorrain; and reſtored iv. 313
Commiſhoners ſent into the provinces, regulations given
them by Sully iv. 234
Comptants, Mary of Medicis continues the uſe of them
notwithſtanding the oppoſition of Sully: diſputes on this
ſubject betwixt him and Puget v. 64
Conan, Conas, or Conac, (Baron of ), defeated with the gar-
riſon of Soiſſons ii. 42
Conchine, or Conchini, attends Mary of Medicis into France
ii. 378. Gives her bad counſel iii. 283. Henry's ha-
tred to him: the Queen makes him marry Leonor Gal-
ligai, and oppoſes the deſign of ſending him back to
Italy: abuſes the confidence ſhe puts in him: his ambi-
tion iv. 278. Secret motives for the jealouſy with
which he inſpires her againſt the King: his intrigues
with the court of Spain againſt Henry IV. 350. Henry
refuſes to ſend him ambaſſador into Florence 427. En-
. -deavours to ruin Sully after the death of the King v. 18.
Governs the Queen regent 22. Joins himſelf with the
Count of Soiſſons 28, is quarrels and reconciliation
with the Count of soiſſons 31. Adviſes an alliance with
Spain 39, Receives Sully's kind offers with diſdain 41.
See Arnaud 39. Particular circumſtances relating to
his life and death 18. The Queen-regent publicly de-
_ clares him. her favourite 57, Oppoſes the advice cf
Sully in the affair of Cleves 60, He treats with the
Duke of Bouillon for the poſt of firft gentleman of the
. beecramber 63. Supports the demands of the Count
of Soiſſons 16. Adviſes the Queen-regent to continue
e comptants 64. "Wally repevaches him for fraudu-
| lenti)

IND EX

lently uſing the deceaſed King's ſeal 67. He quarrels
with the nobility 50. Dares not attempt to banith Sul-
ly immediately 73. Viſits him: their converſation 78.
Polts and dignities conferred upon him by the Queen-
regent 82. Joins himſelf with Villeroi and Alincount
againſt Sully in the affair of Lyons 84. &c.
Conde, (Henry I. de Rourbon, Prince of ), preſent at the
encounter of Arnai-le-Duc i. 3. Marries Mary of
Cleves 14. Charles IX. uſes injurious language to him
at the maſſacre of St Bartholomew: obliges him to go
to maſs : detains him priſoner 34. Makes his eſcape,
and declared chief of the Proteſtant party 42. Brings
a foreign army into France, and joins with Monſieur
and the King of Navarre 45, Separates from them 5c.
Challenged by the Viſcount of Turenne. See Bouillon.
Endeavours to form a ſoxereiguty for himſelf: Hen-
ry IV. obliges him to lay aſide that deſign 71. Fails
in his attempt upon Angers 106. Upon Brouage 108.
Danger in his retreat 109. Brings his forces to Her
ry. IV. 122, His courage and conduct at the battle of
Coutras 139. Cc. His projects after this battle 143, 4.
His death 149, Particularities relating to it 26. Intend-
ed to have been married to Madame it. 295
——- (Henry II. de Bourbon, Prince of), his birth i.
149. Henry IV. ſupports his rights it. 93./ He joins
the diſaffected iii. 272. Grants made £04 ir. 255.
Henry LV, diſcontented with his proceedings: propoſes
to marry him to Mademoiſelle de Montmorency iv. 294.
This marriage determined : motives which induced
Henry IV. to it, contrary to the advice of Sully 349.
Quarrels which enſued between Renry IV. and this
Prince 395. Particulars upon the conſequence of this
Jealouſy 397. sSully's bold diſcourſe to him 399. Car-
ries the Princeſs of Conde into Flanders 404. Parti-
culars relating to this flight 75. His letter to Sully 408.
An account of this whole affair 405. Returns into
France after the death of Henry IV. and enters Paris, ac-
compamed by Sully v. 45. 46. 47. Received coldly
by the Queen-regent 48. 49. Follows the advice of
Sully 50. Afterwards becomes his enemy 53. Means
which he employs for that purpoſe 53. 54. Gifts beſtow-
Cc 2 eck

IN DB E X.

ed upon him by the Queen-regent 8 1. Eſtates fold and
exchanged between Sully and the Prince of Conde, which
he endeavours to have confiſcated 114. His revolt

.- B79

Conde (Lewis I. de Bourbon, Prince of) killed at the
battle of Jarnac i. 1. Commands the Proteſtants at
the ſkirmiſh of Meaux 18

Confeſſion, propoſals of the Jeſuits for confeſſion by let-
ters iii. 252 |

Conflans taken by Henry IV. ii. 343

Conſignations (receivers of), theſe offices united to the
domaine iv. 238

Conſtable of France, Sully refuſes that poſt, offered him
by Henry IV. iv. 263 4

Conſtant, a malecontent i. 298. Cabals during the ſiege 2
of Amiens ii. 162. Likewiſe during Sully's journey
into Poitou iii. 306. One of the ſchemers for a Prote-
ſtant republic in France iv. 68. Oc. A

Conty, (Francis de Bourbon, Prince of), brings forces to
the aſſiſtance of Henry IV. i. 147. Is defeated at the
battle of Craon 267. Made preſident of the council
during the war of 1597 it. 46. Slanders raiſed on ac-
count of his friendſhip for Sully iii. 425. His quarrels
with the Count of Soiſſons, and the Prince of Joinville
iv. 294. The Queen regent admits him into her coun-
eil v. 23. Quarrel between him and the Count of Soiſ-
ſons 29. Sully's advice with reſpect to him 50.

(Jean de Coeme, Princeſs of), employed to bring
about a marriage between the Duke of Vendome and
Mademoiſelle de Mercœur iv. 296. See Coeme, Mon-
taffie

Convents, hoſpitals, &c. built or repaired by Henry IV.
iv. 10

Corbeil taken by the Duke of Parma i. 213

Corbie taken by Henty IV. 1. 218 .

Coſſè (Artus de) Marſhal of France, defeated by the Pro-
reſtant army i. 2. Catherine de Medicis makes uſe of
him to deceive the Proteſtants 13

Cotron, (Peter), a Jeſuit, how received by Henry IV. at
Merz wi 751. Endeavours to procure: the eſtabiiſhment

of his ſociety in France 240. Viſits Sully 251, Joins
| the

ND, N.
the courtiers againſt Sully 391. A great quarrel between
Sully and him on account of the college of Poitiers, in-
which he is convicted of calumny 392. Henry reconciles
them: he deſerts Sully in the affair of Grillon 409.
Takes ſome indiſcreet ſteps in the affair of Adrienne de
Freſne iv. 160, Supports Father Seguiran againſt the-
Rochellers 205. Succeeds in his endeavours to bting a-
bout a marriage between the Duke of Vendome and'
Mademoiſelle de Mercceur 297. An imprudent letter
written by him concerning the news of the court 343.
Henry and Sully diſguſted with him upon this occaſion:
347. He is involved in the guilt of Ravaillac's parricide:.
his juſtification 497, 8. See jeſuits. Admitted into the:
ſecret council of the Queen regent v. 23

Coucy, (houſe of), allied to the ancient houſe of Auſtria,

and to the houſe of Bethune: great perſons which it has

produced iv. 425, 6 |

Coudrai (Du) propoſed for one of the deputies-general of-
the Proteſtant party, and rejected iv. 73. See Chatel--

0 leraut
wr Coulon, (abbey of), given to Sully ii, 74. He ſells it v.
111 |
Ce Council of ſtate and of the finances, alterations made in it
ls by Henry IV.: operations in the new council: quarrels
le amongſt the members ii. 35. A new council eſtabliſhed
4 by Henry IV. during the war of 1595, contrary to the
il advice of Sully 46. Their cabals againſt Sully. Abuſes:
committed by them. Henry's irreſolution to introduce
Ng cally into this council 108. but at Jaſt is received into
nd it 114. Their calumnies and artifices to deceive and
* ruin him 117.—126. Fully gains the ſuperiority in the
council 157. Henry diſgutted with their proceedings
V. 168, Sully reforms the abuſes . in it 228. An account
of the ſeveral councils in the reign of Henry IV. 236.
Sully quarrels with the Doe of Epernon in, full council
249, 50. New changes, by giving the poſt. of:ſuperin- -
ro- tendant to Sully.289, , Their hatred. of him iii. 420.
of They value the farms under borrowed names: this abuſe
corrected by Sully iv. 2. They oppoſe Henry's deſign:
. A of being made Emperor, and his political deſign. 30.
en

Their. views in accepting the propoſals made by the-
Cc. 3, United:

- Yo 1

1 N D E X.

United Provinces of ſubmitting to France. What paſſed
in the council upon this occaſion 216, 17. Sully's ſcheme
of a new council not approved of by Henry IV. 245, 6.
Of regulations for aboliſhing abuſes. See Cabinet of
State, See likewiſe Finances and Financiers, Miniſters,
Villeroi, Jeannin, Sillery, &c.

Council of regency ſettled by Henry IV. during the exe-
cution of his grand deſign iv. 468. See Cleves, Political
Deſign

Council of the regency, public, different from the ſecret
council, What is debated there v. 22. 23. Diſputes
and quarrels between the nobles and minifters there 70.
Affairs that are brought before it 80. They alter the
form of Henry IV. and Sully's adminiſtration, The
hatred which the members of the conncil bear to Sully
84. 89. Sce Medicis (Mary of), Conchini, Lords, Princes
of the Blood, Villeroy, Sillery

Councils, (extraordinary), reflections of Sully upon thefe
councils iii. 334

Council, general, of the Chriſtian republic v. 152

Coronation of Mary de Medicis, motives which induced
the malecontents to deſire it iv. 356. Henry IV.'s aver-
fion to this ceremony ib. He endeavours to prevent it
469. The Queen determined to have it performed
476. An account of this ceremony 482

Courts, (ſovereign), oppoſe the regiſtration of the edit
of Nantz ii. 281. Regulations to which they are ſub-
jected by Sully. Reflections upon them iv. 314. New
ones to be eſtabliſhed in caſe of neceſſity 369. Ses

Cabinet of State

Courtenay (Gaſpard de) engages in the intereſt of the

' Princeſs Catherine and Count de Soiſſons i. 358

Courtenay-Bontin, (Anne de), Sully marries her i. 94. 95.
He goes to her aſſiſtance during the plague 1 26, 7.
Expoſed to great dangers on account of the perſecution
of the Proteſtants 137. Her death; exceflive grief of
Sully upon that occaſion 170

Courtiers ſooth the paſſion of Henry for Mademoiſelle
d'Entragues in. 386. Cabal with the Jeſuits againſt
Sully 391. Likely to ſucceed in their endeavours 398.
Declare themſelves for the Spaniſh policy iy, 123. En-

& deavour

* 2 a> 2a»

IN D E KX.
deavour to prevent the expedition to Sedan 126. Fa-
vour the intereſt of Spain more than that of Henry 208.
The wiſe meaſures taken by this prince to ſtifle their
quarrels 268, 9. Other quarrels amongſt them 291.
| Spread a malicious report, that Henry endeavours to ruin

them by deep play 310. Their manner of thinking of
Henry and Sully 335. They ſpread malicious reports
of Sully, upon account of j+enry's natural children 392.
Diſſatisfied with the great deſigns of this prince 463.
Involved in the parricide of Ravaillac. See Henry IV.
Ravaillac. Endeavour to ruin Sully after the death of
Henry IV. v. 15. 80. 89

Coutras, Henry IV. and Chatherine of Medicis have a con-
ference there 1, 60. The United Provinces ſend deputies
thither to offer their crown to Monſieur 76. Battle of
Coutras 139. Faults committed at that battle; to what
attributed 143

Craon, (battle of), gained by the Duke of Mercceur a-
gainſt the Royaliſts i. 267

Criel taken by the two Kings i. 170

Crequy, (Charles de), defeated and taken priſoner at Ai-
guebelle ii. 15. Takes the city of Montmelian 343.
Supports Sully's opinion in the council 346. Made go-
vernor of Montmelian 365. Colonel of the regiment
of guards iii. 431. Treated with great haughtineſs by
the Duke of. Epernon 432. Henry. procures a marriage
between his daughter and the Marquis of Roſny : pre-
parations for it, Ingratitude afterwards to Sully iv.
260, 1. His exceſſive loſſes at play 310. His ſon pro-
poſed to be married to Mademoiſelle de Verneuil 344

Crequy (Frances de). married to the Marquis de Roſny:
preparations for this marriage: Sully diſſatisſied with it
iv. 260, L

Crevecceur (N. de Montmorency-) in Henry's party at the
battle of Ivry i. 198. The government of Caen taken.
from him iii 221

Criq, (Saint), a Catholic officer, burnt in Mirande i. 54

Crocans defeated at Limoſin by the Royaliſts ii. 106

Croiſic, a fort built by the Duke of Mercceur ii. 15.

Croix (La) killed at taking of Ham u. 52 TEE

$
f
.

%

IN D E X.

Cros (Da-) deputy- general for the Proteſtants at che aſ-
ane, of Chätelleraut iv. 74
— . one of: thoſe concerned in the conſpiracy
of La-Fleche iv. 414
Cryſtal, (manufaQtory of); eſtabliſhed by Henry IV. iv. 14
Cuman, an undertaker for the management of manufacto-
flies iii. 229
Cumberland, (Earl of), one of the diſſaffected Engliſh lords
111. 115
Curates of Paris, their law - ſuit againſt the Jeſuits i. 403, 4
Cures (Gilbert, Filhet de La-) attends Henry IV. to
Aumale i. 238, His eulogium 0. Preſent at the de-
feat of the convoy before Laon 410. His opinion of
this defeat 411. At the battle of Fontain-Frangoiſe,
praiſed by Henry IV. ii. 61. Great actions performed
by him before Amiens 169. Henry refuſes to give him
the poſt formerly poſſeſſed by the Baron Lux iii. 436
Cuſco (King of), his correſpondence with Spain iii. 208

D.
222 (Captain) of great uſe in affair of the revolt

of the Moors iv. 331
Danville (Admiral de) receives an important ſervice from
Conchini v. 67
Darius, an anecdote _— to this prince and Zopirus
8 3

80

409. Carried 3 þ Paris in his way to Saint - Ger-
main 410. The government of Burgundy given bim
by. Henry IV. .iii. 30. Brought to Fontainebleau, and
ſhewn in Paris 382, 3. His letters to Madame de Mont-

glat iv. 114. Medals preſented to him by Sully 46, D
Ceremony of his baptiſm 170. Queen Margaret gives

up to him the eſtates of Catherine de Medicis | 231, Sick D
at Noiſy 253. Intrigues at court to procure. a marriage

between him and the Infanta of Spain 354. Deſigned D
by Henry for the heireſs of Lorraine 76. See for what

remains of this article Lewis XIII.
Dauphiny, ſucceſs of the Royaliſts at this place ii. 42.
Fort: eſſcs

IN D E X.

Fortreſſes yielded up to Henry IV. by the treaty of

Lyons 375. Proceſs of the third eltate againſt the
clergy and nobility iii. 52 =o |

Dele taken by the Prince of Orange iii. 62

Delſin, ambaſſador from Venice to France ii. 396. Her-
ry IV. ſends him ambaſſador to Florence iv. 427

Denis, (Saint-), the forcesof the league defeated at this
place i. 266. Henry IV. makes his abjuration there.
See Abjuration. Grants a ſecond truce to the Pariſians,
and receives an envoy from Spain 339, 40. Eſcapes be-
ing aſſaſſinated there 344. Mary of Medicis crowned
there. See Medicis

Denmark (Anne of), Queen of England, her character and
conduct iii. 117. She comes to London in oppoſition to
her huſband 137. See James. Vaucelas is appointed to
deliver to her the letters of the King and Queen of
France 193. Preſents made her by Sully 187. Her ar-
rival in London 195. She changes all on a ſudden her
conduct and policy 203

——— (Chriſtera IV. King of), his ambaſſadors in Lon-
don iti, 119. Bad policy of this court 140. Enters in-
to the alliance againſt the houſe Auſtria iv. 459. Boif-
ſiſe ſent ambaſſader to this prince 468

Deodati ſends Beze's tranſlation of the New Teſtament to
Sully iv. 94

Deputies-general of the Proteſtant party at court iv. 38.
39. A practice only tolerated, The origin of this cu-
ſtom, and regulations to be made in it 41. Debated in
the general aſſembly at Chatelleraut 49. Terminated to
the advantage of the King 74. See Chatelleraut, The
ſame diſpured in the ſynod of Roghelle 200. See
Rochelle, In the general aſſembly at Gergeau. See Ger-
geau

Deſportes treats with Sully in the name of Medavy 1. 346.
Concludes the-treaty 362

Deſpuilles ſhamefully ſurrenders Saint-Bazeille i. 116.
Hts company defeated before Rochelle 133

Deveſe, (La-), a ſingular combar propoſed betwixt him and
Lavardin 1. 64 |

Deux-Ponts (John II. Duke of) viſits Henry IV. at Metz,

and marries there Catherine de Rohan iii. 70. Sully
accuſed

an war amr, 5

%

I N D E. X.

accuſed of holding criminal correſpondence with hin
426 |

Peux-Ponts (Ducheſs of), preſents made to her by Hen-
ry IV. iv. 15

Dijon taken by Marſhal Biron ii. 43. Its parliament diſ-
obedient to the King iv. 232. See Breſle

Dintevile, (Joachim de), governor of Champaign, treats
with the Duke of Bouillon about the ſurrender of Sedan
iv. 145. Regretted by Henry IV. 253

Dizimieux ſurrenders Vienne and Mondluel to the King
ii. |

Domaine of the King, abuſes corrected in it iii. 335. U-
ſurpations of it diſcovered by Sully iv. 1. Regiſters of
Languedoc re - united to it 232. Sully redeems ſeveral
paris of it 237. The principal riches of the King does
not conſiſt in his domaine 318

Donawert, the Emperor ſeizes this city iv. 334

Dourlach, Prince of Baden, accuſed of a criminal corteſ-
pondence with Sully iii. 426

Doutlens, the French defeated before this place ii. 53

Dreux taken by Henry IV. i. 206. Retaken by sully
328. The government of it denied him 330. He
intercepts papers belonging to the league 282

Droit-annuel, different opinions upon this eſtabliſhment
iv. 370

Ducks. edit of Henry IV. againſt them: ſentiments of
Sully upon this edict in, 58. His memorial upon the
origin, cuſtom, and the practices of different nations,
in duels. Henry's eaſineſs in pardoning them, the cauſe
of their being ſo frequent iv. 293, 4. Other-edicts a-
gainſt them, and what paſſed in the council on that oc-
caſion 391 |

Dunes, a French officer, goes into the ſervice of the Arch-
duke iv. 27

. Duras, (John de Durefort, Viſcount of ), one of the Pro-

teſtant chiefs i. 22. Charles IX. pardons him 30.

Goes over to the Catholic party 63. Fights a duel

with Viſcount Turenne; various opinions upon this
duel 64

Eaſt,

3
-

7 1

3 INS... oo
9 112 i *

9

He

= Res r

E.

AST, gully's opinion of this empire v. 120
Fauſe, taken by Henry IV. i. 53

Eclipſe of the ſun, in 1605 iv. 93

Edles built or repaired by Henry IV. iii. 92. sums
expended in theſe works iv. 231. In the city of Paris

0

Edm g ds, Queen Eliſabeth's agent in France, ſent by her
to Calais, to compliment Henry IV. ii. 397

Edward III. (King of England), ſentiments of Sully upon
this prince 1v. 340

Edouville (N. d') ii. 19. Defeats the forces of the league

1 (Amorald d') beheaded at Bruſſels i. 195

Egmont, (Count of), his valour at Ivry : killed there i.
195, See Ivry

Eguillon (Henry de Lorrain, Dake of) ſatisfies Henry
with regard to his brother iv. 285. See Sommerive,

. Moret (Counteſs of). Procures Balagny to be, aſſaſſi-
nated 291. See Balagny, (Damien). Quatrrels with
Conchim and the miniſters v. 73. Grants made him
by Mary of Medicis 81

Elbœuf (Claude de Lorraine, Duke of) commands the
army of the league in Normandy i. 98. Fights for
Henry IV. at Fontaine-Frangois ii. 60. 61. Sum recet-
ved by him on making his treaty 244. Artends Hen-
ry IV. ia his expedition to Savoy ii. 368

Eletors, Henry IV. 's deſign of reſtoring them to all their
privileges v. 147

Eliſabeth of "hd Queen of Spain, ſuſpected of having

been poiſoned by Philip II. i. 15

Eliſabeth Queen of England, negotiations to induce her to

marry Monſieur i. 15. Sends an army to the aſſiſtance

of Henry IV. 185. She demands Calais, which he refu-

ſes her ii. 69. Sends an embaſly to this prince to diſ-

ſuade him from the treaty of Vervins 182. Comes to

Dover 397, Beheads Eſſex: her converſation with

Marſhal Biron on this ſubject 422, Motives for her

Journey to Dover. Letters which paſſed between Hen-

, ry

T4 — 232 aan hs Er.

_ — —

%

IN D E X.

ry IV. and her upon this occaſion 397. See Political
Deſign. Subdues the rebels in Ireland 429. Congra-
tulates Henry IV. upon his quelling Biron's conſpiracy
ii. 43. Her death: Henry's grief for it: her elogium
80. 81. A treaty of commerce made by her with
| Charles IX. 94. King James endeavours to tarniſh her
= memory 127. Her policy praiſed 137. Supports the
Engliſh prieſts againſt the Spaniſh cabal 154. The
King of England ſpeaks contemptuouſly of her and her
council 161. See James. A ſaying of this princeſs upon
the union of France, England, Sweden, and Denmark
180. Debts contracted during the league by Henry IV.
to her iv. 8. Her ſhare in the contrivance and diſpo-
| ſition of the grand deſign v. 134

Embden, the Spaniards, in vain, endeavour to make them- Þ

| ſelves maſters of this place ni, 63. Cc.
F.mihon (Saint-) taken by Henry LV. i. 62 3
Empire and Emperor, their true policy with regard to FR
Spain iii. 177, 9. Henry IV. is ſuppoſed to aim at be-
ing Emperor iv. 30. Pretenſions of ſeveral emperors

upon Cleves 431. Cc. Henry's grand deſign in regard
to the empire and Emperor, Their true rights eſta-

bliſhed, See Political Deſign

England and Engliſh, the Proteſtants deliver Havre de
Grace to the Engliſh i. 18. An Engliſh army comes tro

the aſſiſtance of Henry IV. 185. Serve him at the ſiege |
of Rouen. See Rouen, The Engliſh aſſiſt Marſhal d'Au-
mount in Britany ii. 15. See Aumont, They jon
France againſt Spain m the war of 1595 39. but do no
great ſervice. A converſation between Henry IV. and
the Eogliſh and Dutch ambaſſadors 190. See Cecil.
Henry takes the farms of his revenues out of the hands
of the Engliſh 251. Piracies committed by the Eng-
liſh upon the French veſſels ii. 99. Sully inſulted by
their vice-admiral. 100. The character of the Englith
102. They hate the French 111. A continuation of
the character of that people 16. Jhe manrer in which
we ought to act with them 112. The EFogliſh jealous
| of the Scots 138. Pretended claims of England upon
| Normandy, Guienne, Poitou 143. The manner in
| which the King of England is ſerved at table 261. Op-
j | x poſition

N D E X.
poſition made by the Fngtith miniſterstocully'snegotiation,
und to the intereſts of the United Proviaces 164. Sully
complains of them to King James 171. Preſents made
by Sully to the principal Lords and Ladies of the Engliſh
court 195. A conſpiracy in London againſt King James
205. Henry gives penſions and preſents to the miniſters
and noblemen in this court 207, The Englith take ad-
vantage of the prohibition of commerce between France
and Spain 350. Treaty between England and Spain
| 364. State of the debts of France to Evgland during
= the league iv. 8, Another conſpiracy againſt King

James 190. Paul V. forbids the Engliſh to take an

dath of fidelity to King James 227. Debts of France

to England 230. Jeannin is appoiated ambaſſudor to

England during the war of Cleves 468. Part of the

great deſign relating to this kingdom, Forces and mo-

ney to be contributed by the Engliſh 142, 50. See

3 alſo the names mentioned in this article,

- X Enbalt (Prince of) brings the German forces to Henry IV.
at the ſiege of Rouen i. 228. It is propoſed to marry
the Princeſs Catherine to him ii. 275. He joins in the
great defign v. 155

Entragues, (Francis de Balzac d'), his intrigues with tlie
Catholics againſt Henry IV. 1. 293. He introduces the
Spaniſh ambaſſador to Henry IV. and Sully 341. See
Nugnes. He cabals againſt Henry 397. 402. Thwarts
Henry's love for his daughter. See Verncuil (Marchio-

. neſs of). Enters into an aſſociation with Fouillon, Bi-
ron, and Aurergne, and endeavours to raiſe an inſur-
rection ii. 423. His intrigues at the court of London iii.
125, 6. Farther account of his4ntrigues 27 2, 96. 311.
Procures a Marſhal's ſtaff 313. Arreited 319. Anec-
dote concerning Henry's love for his ſecond daughter
330. Motives which induced Henry IV. to pardon
him 385. &c. Defirous of. giving him his liberty 388.
Accuſed of being an accomplice in Kavaillac's parricide

w. 5

$ Entrees and Tithes, more reaſonable than any ether tax
n iv. 6. Regulations concerning them 370

n Epernai beſieged and taken by Henry IV. i. 277

- Epernon, (John Lewis de Nogaret de La Valette, Puke

Vor.. V. -D-d of),

1 ”

— 4 —_ » - . * — ** - TE 6 od 8 *

. — — - works 7 - — *
— — CEL - Hy = by 3-5

=

. A

<A.
—— ono b Moon —

OE tha — ad es

»
a - Pr a. — — —
— — =
5 8 +. *
1 *
— - . - -- my Jay Ln
— x' — — - — 2 =

1
— —

* .

I N PD E X.

of), the Rochellers refuſe to admit him into their city
i. 48. He adviſes Henry III. to ſuffer his guards to
aſſaſſinate the Duke of Guiſe 151. Made admiral and
governor of Normandy 155. Quits Henry IV. after
the death of Henry III. 176. His character; hatred
of Henry IV. and his behaviour in Provence 269. Bad
conduct of his forces at Villemur 273. One of the fa-
vourites of Henry III. ii. 18. Sully juſtifies bimſelf
againſt his complaints of him 25. Accufations brougbt 1
againſt him 30. 31. Leſdiguieres and the Duke of
Guiſe drive him out of Provence: he ſubmits to the
King 107. The ſum given him for his treaty 246.
His cruelty in Provence 248. Quarrels with Sully in
the council; Henry IV. obliges him to aſk pardon of
this miniſter 249, 50. Henry IV. writes to him upon the |
diſpute betwixt Du Perron and Du Pleſſis Mornay 332...
He oppoſes Sully in the affair of Savoy 346, 60. Sully ß
juſtifies him, and prevents his being arreſted in the af?
tair of Marſhal Biron : he gives him good advice, which
Fpernon follows iii. 16. 43. Obliged to take the go
vernment of Metz from the Sobeles 66. Treated fa-
vourably by Henry IV. 310. Friendſhip for him 16.
The affair betwixt him, Sully, and Grillon, for a colo- FR
nel's commiſſion 405. Terminated by Sully to Henrys
ſatisfaction 413. His exceſſive haughtineſs to the Mar-
quis de Crequi 432. He commands the King's forces
at Limoſin iv. 85. A rupture betwixt him and Sully,
upon account of the city of La-Rochelle 97. Summon-
ed to the council upon the enterpriſe of Sedan 135, Fa-
vours the Jeſuits in oppoſition to the city of Metz
158. His quarrel with Montigny 294. Loſſes at play
310. Obtains the privilege of having his coach driven
into the court of the Louvre 363. Oppoſes Sully with
regard to the armament of Cleves 450. Coman accuſes
him of being engaged in Ravaillac's conſpiracy 477. A
remarkable ſpeech of his to the Preſident de Harlay 5 10.
Makes an offer of his ſervices to Sully after the death
of Henry IV. v. 16. Mary of Medicis admits him in-
to her ſecret council 22. He votes for an alliance with
Spain, contrary to the maxims of the laſt reign 39. He
Þ3jtes himſelf with the Prince of Conde 48, Quarrels
with

ty
—

ty
—_

—

2

1 1. 7

IL N D E X. +

with the nobles and miniſters 70. With Conchini 13:
Grants made him by the Queen-regent 81. Oppoſes

-

Sully 89

Epinoy, ( William de Melun, Prince of ), Sully takes the
guardianſhip of him upon himſelf ii. 316. His brother
killed by Rambures iv. 196. Sully obliges the Princeſs
of Ligne to do him juſtice, and make reſtitution of his

eſtates 419, See Archduke, Treaty of Truce

Epignoy (Hippolita de Montmorency, Princeſs of ) brings
her childern to Paris, and puts them under the guardian-
ſhip of Sully ii. 316, 17. Refuſes her conſent to the
marriage of the Marquis de Cœuvres with Mademoiſelle '

de Melun iii. 438

guardianſhip of his children upon himſelf ii. 316 ,

FErard, engineer to Henry IV. tenders an unſcaſonable ſer-
: vice to the Elector Palatine iii. 222. Endeavours to

turn Henry IV. from the enterpriſe of Sedan iv. 127.

and Sully 139, 98

ly lamented by Sully iv. 251

Spain to the propofals made by the league and the Duke
of Maienne i. 284. The Spaniſh ambaſſadors and the
Pope's legate offer to ele him King of France in the
aſſembly of the ſtates of Paris 315

w

Masſhal Biron iii. 9. 16. and the Count of Auvergne

Sedan iv. 381. Receives a gratuity from Henry IV. 388
Eſſards (Charlotte des) miſtreſs to Henry IV. iv. 270.
His children by her ; and ſome circumſtances relating to
her life 16. Sully diſengages him from her 283. Gra-
tuity granted her by Henry 389 s
Eſſex (Robert D'Evreux, Earl of) brings ſome powerful
ſuccours to Henry IV. at the ſiege of Rouen i. 228.
Offers to fight Admiral Villars in a ſingle duel 250.
= Beheaded by Eliſabeth ii. 391
Eſſex, (Earl of), the friendſhip of King James for him iii,
422

of ff AX yu ah Ag. oa

Www OO WW ins

D d 2 Eſtampes

2

PP

(Peter de Melun, Prince of), Sully takes the

The cauſe of the diſcontent which he gives to Henry
the ſon of the before - mentioned Erard, his death great -

2 Erneſt of Auſtria, Archduke, anſwers for the King of

Eſcures (Peter Fougen d') of great uſe in the ſeizing of

312. 415, Summoned to the council upon the affair of

A

A” «

— — JO

2 ͤ ũ v

— 1 DSC

— —

—2— WERE WS. ——

— ——ů——ů —4ꝙ— -

.
- 2»; LY *
n —
- - 6.4 .

IN DEX:

Eſtampes taken by the two Kings i. 170. | Retaken by
Henry IV. 188

 Eftr6es (Gabricila d') called ſuoceſſively the fair Gabriella,

Madam de Liancourt, Marchioneſs of Monccaux, and
Ducheſs of Beaufort i. 219. Henry's paſſion for her
214. Leads his army into Picardy, that he may viſit
her 266. Her motives to wiſh for his converſion 331.
Kegrets the deuth of the ſuperintendant D'O ii. 20. A-
necdotes relating to her amours with Henry IV. and her

Marriage with M. de Liancourt 34. 35. See Liancourt,

Altbourt, Sancy. Her deſign of getting Franche- Comte
for her ſon 44. See Vendome (Cæſar de). She pro-
cures the government of La-Fere for him 79. The
danger the eſcaped in her journey to meet the King at
Amiens 86. She favours Sully's. admiſſion into the coun-
cl of finances 110. Obtains. the poſt of grand maſter
of the ordnance for her father 166. See Eſtrées (John
Antony d'). She lends money to Henry IV. 121. Her
motive for ſoliciting a pardon for the Duke of Mercœu
181. Sully diſſuades Henry from marrying ber 189. &c.
Her plots to engage the Pope in her intereſt 216. She
cauſes her fon to be baptized with the ceremony of a
fon of France 218. See Bourbon (Alexander de). A
quarrel betwcen her and Sully upon this occaſion :
Henry reconciles them 222. the takes advantage of
enry's ſickneſs to forward her deſign 224. Her great
weakneſs with reſpect to aſtrology, and the predictions
that are made her 292. An account of what paſſed at
her ſeparation from Henry IV. at Fontainebleau 293.
Her diſcourſe to the Duke and, Ducheſs of Sully: her
imprudence in fpeaking of herſelf 295. Circumſtances
relating to her death; different opinions on this ſubject
297. Henry's exceſſive grief for her death 301. Sully
endeavours to comfort him 16. Circumſtances relating
ro the life of the Ducheſs of Beaufort: her good qua-
lities 300. After her death, the diſſolution of Hen-
ry's marriage with Margaret earneſtly ſolicited 308.
She had been engaged in the intereſts of the Duke of
Savoy in the affair of the marquiſate of Saluces 324. Her
children by Heary iv. 270
Eſtrées, (John Antony de), father of the fair Gabriella i.
| | 214

of - ff. + dey © bud

F.

IN DE X.

214. Made grand maſter of the ordnance ii. 166.
Reſigns this poſt to the Duke of Sully, in whoſe favour
the King declares it one of the great offices of the crown

I
8 reflections upon the abuſes that prevail in it, with
regard to war, and upon its true policy iii. 112. Idea
and ſtrength of the different factions into which it is di-
vided 233. Deſigns of the houſe of Auſtria upon this
part of the world iv. 120, 1. See Charles V. Philip II.
Univerſal Monarchy... The neceſſity of changing the
political ſyſtem v. 126. Henry's views by his great
deſign: its utility for all Europe 132. The diviſions of
its ſtates and kingdoms 151. See Political Deſign

— ——— [UHU p

| F.
Arms, (large), Sully takes them out of the hands of
foreigners and the French lords: the method and
order he puts them in it. 251, i. 342. His labours
in this part of the government iv. 1. 2. 3. See alſo
Finances, Gabelle, Aides, &c.
Faye, (La-), a Proteſlant preacher,: Henry IV. 's anſwer to

4
—— — —

PAE ²˙ ̃ WͤV ³m ̃ . m w

him i. 332

Ferdinand I. of Auſtria, Emperor, Philip 11. endeavours to
deprive him of the empire 41. 265

Ferdinand of Caſtile, propoſed by Sully to Ienry IV. as
an example for him to follow iv. 447 ;

Fere (La-) taken by the Proteſtants i. 65. Retaken by
Matignon 71. A great canvoy of Spaniards defcatcd
near this city. See Laon, Biron Henry begins the
ſiege of it ii. 76. Circumſtances relating to this ſiege:
a great cauſey built: Henry ſeized with an indiſpoſi-
tion: the place ſurrenders 77

Feria (Laurent Suarés de Figueroa, Duke of); pleniponten-

| tiary from Spain to the ſtates of Paris: his plots, and
the errors he commits there i. 313. See League, States
of Paris, &c, Leaves Paris upon its ſurrendering to
Henry IV. 379. His ſpeech of Henry IV. and Henry's |
of him 76.

Fernandes (Edward) a Portugueſe banker lends money to
Henry IV. and the courtiers for play iv. 31o. The
debts: Henry owed him diſcharged 388

' Dd 3. Ferrand,

——

r

* — —

3

—

OT

—

LR 1 — — » -” 2 J* = -
” =+ SK Ee. :
. 8 <= .
= yy K | — => = "

— — — — —  —— CF —

* —

——

"*

INDE X

Ferrand, an officer of the chamber of accounts, proſecu-
ted by Sully iv. 387
Ferrier, a Proteſtant miniſter, one of thoſe concerned in

the ſedition iii. 223. (Du) deputed to Sully by the aſſem-

bly of Chatelleraut iv. 301

———— (William de Hautemer de Grancy de), Marſhal
of France, ſent to the court of Henry III. to demand
the Princeſs Catherine i. 46. 76. 80. Demands Made-
moiſelle de Sully in marriage for M. de Laval ii. 148.
See Laval, (Guy de), Bethune, (Margaret de), Sully's
friendſhip for him calumniated iii. 425, Summoned to
the council upon the defigned expedition to Sedan iv.
135. (ured of a dangerous indiſpoſition 313. Appointed
one of the members of the council of regency by Hen-
ry IV. 468.

Feſcamp taken by the league, and retaken in a very ex-
traordinary manner by Boiſ-roſe : a diſpute about this
fort i. 347, Cc. See Villars (Admiral de), Biron

Feydeau (Denis) farmer- general of the aides, his pro-
ceſs againſt the city of Lyons iv. 240

Ficfs maſculine and feminine, make a very important diſ-
tinction for the duchy of Cleves and the United Pro-
vinces iv. 431. &, See Cleves |

Fin (James de La), his character ii. 293. Betrays Biron
426. His examination and depoſitions, in which he im-
peaches Sully 16. Continues to deceive Biron ii. 16.
Du Perron ſolicits his return into France iv. 22

Finances and Financiers, diſorder in the finances, and a
new council eſtabliſhed i. 205. ii. 18. Rogueries of the
financiers, and cauſes of the abuſes in the finances ii.
35. 82. Hatred of the financiers to Sully, See Council.
"Their fraudulent practices 112. They endeavour to
impoſe upon him, but do not ſucceed 117. Sully's la-
bours in the finances 126, 7. He undertakes to produce
a reformation in the finances 228. A fine portrait of a

good manager of the finances 229, 30. See Miniſters.

The finances of France charged with exceſhve debts
242, 7. Foreigners excluded from any ſhare in the farms
251. The frauds committed in the finances examined
into: alterations made in the management of them 25 5, 6.
The polt of ſuperintendant of the finances eſtabliſhed

| in

«

F l

N
5
1

IND E X
in favour of Sully 289. Regulations made in this part
of the revenue, &c. 380. Againſt the luxury and exceſ-
ſive wealth of the financiers 386. Offices of the finan-
ces ſuppreſſed 389. Sully proſecutes the fraudulent
financiers iii. 52. Luxury and magnificence of the fi-
nanciers 232, Several operations of Sully in the finances
335. Cc. His great care and aſſiduity in the diſcharge
of this office 341. 421. His labours in the finances,
General abſtracts of them preſented by him to Henry IV.
iv. 178, 84. Other details and operations : the debts
owing to the contractors acquitted, &c, 233. New re-
gulations made by Sully in the finances 314. Memoirs
and ſchemes upon this ſubject. See Cabinet of State
365. Methods of raiſing money in caſes of neceſſity
373. Many different affairs and details of the finances
386. The form"of government in the finances totally
changed after the death of Henry IV. v. 23

Flanders, the Low Countries, United Provinces, Charles IX.
ſends an army thither : deceives the Proteſtants i.
15. Catherine de Medicis endeavours to obtain the
ſovereignty of the Low Countrics for the Duke of An-
jou 75. Origin of the revolt of the United Provinces
ib, They offer themſelves to the Archduke Matthias;
afterwards to Monſieur 75. 76. The expedition of that
prince to Flanders 80. "The treachery at Antwerp ren-
ders him odious 84. The Flemmings ſend fifty veſſels
to the aſſiſtance of Henry IV. while he is engaged in the
ſiege of Rouen 228. TI hey are very uſeful to him at
this ſiege 231. Unite with France againſt Spain in the
war of 1595 11.43. A converſation of Henry IV. with
their ambaſſador 190. See Naſſau, Nantz, &c. Philip IT.
gives theſe provinces as a portion with his daughter the
Infanta Iſabella. The Archduke Albert renews the
war 273, 4. Henry IV, ſuccours them privately 316.
Albert loſes the battle of Newport 378. Expeditions
during this war 379. The defeat of Spinola's ſquadron,
and a farther account of this war iii. 62. 76. The de-
puties from the States-General to the court of London
meet with a bad reception from James 120. Sully's
converſation with theſe deputies 121. See Barnevelt,
La- Fontaine, &c. A propoſal ſaid to be made by Spain
to

IN D E X
to the United Provinces, to unite themfelves with her

againſt France 145. Sully repreſents to the King of

England the neceſſity of ſupporting them 149. ; but the

council of this prince oppoſe his arguments 156. See.

Cecil, Several conferences on this ſubje& 163. Sully,
in a private conference with James, again inſiſts upon
this point 171. Methods propoſed for driving out the
Spaniards from the Low Countries 181. The King
of England promiſes to aſſiſt them, and receives their
ambaſſadors favourably 182. &c, Form of the treaty
in which the Kings of France and England provide for
their mutual defence. They reject the propoſals. made
them by Spain 189. Beat the Spaniſh fleet twice 207, 8.;
and likewiſe the Portugueſe galleys 211. Their concern
in the affair of thirty per cent. 355. They defend them-
ſelves bravely againſt Spain: the war very expenſive to
them : their obligations to France 356. Spain ſeems to
treat them favourably, with a view to make an agree-
ment with England 362,72. Malicious. report raiſed

againſt Sully, accuſing him with carrying on criminal

correſpondencies with the Flemmings 426. Debts con-
tracted by France to them during the league iv. 8.
Farther account of their wars with Spain 25. The fiiſt
propoſals towards a peace or a truce 186. Henry IV.
by advice of Sully, refuſes to receive their towns in ho-
ſtage, and other offers made him by the States 188.
The Dutch preſent the King, by Aerſens, their agent,
an account of the voyage they had lately made to the
Eaſt Indies 189. The United Provinces renew the of-
fers they had made to Henry IV. to ſubmit themſelves
to the French domination, and to give certain towns in
hoſtage, which Sully diſſuades him from accepting 216.
A great naval battle gained by them againſt the Spaniards
219. The treaty for a ſuſpenſion of arms concluded
220,23. A long truce negotiated 322. The ingrati-
tude of the Flemmings to Henry IV. 325, 6. The ſuc-
cours he gives them 415. Treaty for a truce, and the
mediation of the Kings of France and England 416.
Contains an article in favour of the Prince of Epinoy
419. The United Provinces join the confederate
Princes aſſembled at Hall upon the affair of Cleves

| 448.

8
8
LO
&
2
*
R
5 *
*
F
4
®
ba;
*
v3
—

Hs As "RS

1 N PD E X.

448.; and aſſiſt them in taking Jukers v. 57. That
part of the great deſign which related to them, conſiſted
in erecting them into a republic 141, 51. What forces

they agree to contribute towards its execution 161. See
Belgic (republic), Political Deſign, &c.

Fleche (La), Henry's journey thither ii. 208. He gives
that houſe to the Jeſuits iii. 252. His liberalities to
them iv. 159. He conſents that his heart ſhould be de-
polited in their chapel: a bon-mot on this occation-
207. A gratuity granted by Henry 1V, to this college
344. Another, denied by Sully 348. A conſpiracy
formed in this city againſt Henry's life 41 4
Fleſhogue, the hatred which the inhabitants of this place
bear to the Engliſh iii. 363
(Stephen), counſellor of parliament, deputed to
the ſtates of Paris, maintains there the rights of Hen -
ry IV. to tke crown of France i. 317. Employed in the
converfion of this prince 321. Diaws up the proceſs a-
gainſt Marſhal Biron iii. 25
Font (La), Sully's valet de chambre, procures him the ac-
quaintance of Mademoiſelle de Courtenay, and per-
ſuades him to marry her i. 94. Employed by Sully to
prevail upon Admiral Villars to treat with Henry IV.
235. He enters again into Sully's ſervice after the
death of Villars ts. 55. Employments and gratuities
beſtowed upon him by Henry IV. iv. 387. The advice
which Sully gives him upon his quitting the adminiltra-
tion v. 98.
Fontaine - Frangoiſe (battle of) 11. 58
Fontainebleau, Henry IV. in danger of his life there i.
344. A phantom, called the Great Hunter, appears
there ii. 261. Henry IV. firſt hears of the death of the
Ducheſs of Beaufort there. See Eſtrees (Gabriella de).

Gives a magnificent reception to the Duke of Savoy
there 322. A diſpute between Du- Perron and Du- Pleſ-
tis at that caſtle 330. Henry makes a diſcovery there
of L'Hote's treaſon iii. 257. Heonry IV. embelliſhes
that place iv. 16. Makes frequent journeys thither 99.
Orders the ceremony of the baptiſm of the children of
France to be performed there 170. New embelliſhments
made there by Hgory IV. 308

4" 7 —
3

. a ˙ w ET FE.

< by —
- 4
— —
= 2-7 — *
2 2 "WF. +

— —

—— —ê

—

Fontanges.,

8 of

IND *

Fontange, his daughter forcibly carried away: he beſieges
the caſtle of Pierrefort iv. 251 oy

Fontenay -Le-Comte taken by the Duke of Montpenſier
i. 41. Beſieged and retaken by Henry IV. A comical
adventure which happens during this ſiege 121, 2

Fontenelles (Guy-Eder de Beaumanoir, Baron of) broke
upon the wheel ni. 30 s |

Force (James Nompar de Caumont, Duke de La-) im-
plores a pardon for *"Marſhal Biron of the King iii. 29.
A quarrel between his family and that of St Germain
294. The ſervices he does the King in Navarre and
Bearn 381

Fortifications built or repaired by Henry IV. after the

peace of Vervins ii. 212. Sums delivered out of the

treaſury by Sully for that purpoſe iv. 231 |

Fountains built or repaired in Paris by Henry IV. iv. 175.
See Edifices

Fourges, a gentleman in-Sully's ſervice, cauſes Gizors to be
taken i. 214. His father is ſeized by Sully with a boat
richly laden 226

Fouſſac (Raymond de Sognac, de) ſolicites a pardon of
Henry IV. for ſeveral gentlemen concerned in the rebel-
lion iv. 86 :

France, the deplorable condition to which the civil wars
had reduced this kingdom 1i, 175, 6. The true policy
to be purſued by her 192. Henry labours, in conjunc-
tion with Sully, to reſtore her to her former grandeur
243. Policy of Philip II. with reſpect to France 265.
What her conduct ought to be with reſpect to England
iii. 112. Her provinces threatened by an union between
Spain and. England 142. The fertility and other advan-
tages of this kingdom 229. Arts and profeſſions to
be cultivated in it 233. Sully's opinion upon the cha-
racter and policy of ſome of her kings 348. Opulence
and plenty brought into France by Henry IV. iv. 7.
Uſages and cuftoms obſerved there in duels 105, 6. A
reſtitution of the uſurpations made on its frontiers by
Spain and Lorrain 313. Reflections upon her kings, her
different governments, &c. 319. Origin of her mo-
narchy v. 121. Advantages of her ſituation : judgment
upon her wars and government 121, 2. See France,

(Kings

3
4 1
1
n
on
N. o
go»
ow
*
We
=
.
*
*
*
1
.
4 19
be *
4 "i
k. *
4
4 3
4 4
gt:
<3 3
9 *
a
a $
's
as 7
1 1
3 1
«
*
b 2
4 3.
8
1.8
AT ,
4
WF.
*
+
*
3
33
1
s 2
LF \
Wa
7
8
—
5
7
5
154
Fi
Ly
k

es he

5
7
* 4
"©
ER
Y »
1
2 E
tt;
I”
*
FA
.
8
C42
"ET
WS.
=
2 4
®,
=
,
*
*
N
1
F
l my
* *
* + © &
L -
27 y
x b
$
=
* 7 :
4
*
= —
*
3
2 :
5
* d
»  ..
4
= a
1 *
Fi I * as
$
ih 4
* ny
4
*
3
-
K
3
>
S
—
7
4 5
189
*
PY
5
— .
0
$ -
A.

a * 3 hs

IN P E X.

(Kings of), Deſcent, Government, Police, c. What
policy fitteſt to be purſued by her 127. The great de-
ſign of Henry IV. conſidered with reſpec to this king-
dom 138. Her religion 139. And policy 149, Forces
and money to be employed on this occaſion 161. See
Political Deſign

-- (houſe of ), Sully's ſentiments upon the alliances of
this houſe with thoſe of the other princes of Europe iii.
368. See Bourbon (houſe of)

——-- (children of), the ceremony of their baptiſm iv.

168, Their reſidence at Noiſy 256. Henry's tender-
neſs for them 16. Their ſickneſs in the year 1608 304.
Henry's great tendernefs for them 13. Their fondneſs
for Sully v. 77. Women and officers about their per-
ſons, their grief for Henry's death 15. See the four
following articles ;

-- (Chriſtina of), ſecond daughter of Henry IV,
the ceremony of her baptiſm iv. 168. Henry deſigns to
marry her to the Prince of V ales 355

——-- (Flifabeth of) eldeſt daughter of Henry IV. her
birth ui. 60. She falls ſick : recovers 90. Ceremony
of her baptiſm iv. 168, Henry's ſcheme for her mar-
nage 355 |

——-- (Gaſton-John Baptiſte of), third ſon of Henry IV.
Duke of Anjou, afterwards of Orleans. See Orleans
(Duke of )

—— (N. of), ſecond ſon of Henry IV. Duke of Orleans.
See Orleans (Duke of)

Franche-Comte, the campaign made by Henry IV. in this

province reckoned ſuperior to all others: towns taken,
and other military expeditions during this campaign 11,
56. See Fontaine-PFrancoiſe, A reſtitution made of
the Spaniards uſurpations upon this frontier ; as likewiſe
of thoſe of Lorrain iv, 313

Francis I. King of France, the cauſe of his loſing the bat-
tle of Pavia ii. 78, Value of the taille under his reign
iv. 320. He aſſiſts the German princes againſt Charles IV.
441 |

Francis II. King of France, gives an uncontrolled power
to the houſe of Guile : his death: a ſaying of Francis

Duke

in 1
A
*
0
9
|
11
1
1
15

—

DIES. Ez Ez

—— — - — aw —

—

ne bn
* —

FW pang fp .

— 2 —

„ = — = ——— = _—
.
2 3 wo cen GA ů — gas Choe 9;

——
—

*

IN D E X.

Duke of Guiſe concerning this prince i. 11. Value of
The taille under his reign iv. 320

Franks, or French, origin of their ſettlements and of their
monarchy in Gaul v. 121

French, their character: their licentiouſneſs among foreign-

ers 11. 107. Their advantages over all other European
nations 229. Their paſſion for duels iv. 105, Their
character with reſpe& to government, policy, &c. 318.
See France

. (Adriana de) ſuppoſed to be poſſeſſed by a dæmon:

a quarrel on this occaſion between Sully and Father Cot-

ton iv. 160

(Peter Forget de), ſeeretary of ſtate i. 207. Made
one of the members of the new council of ſinances 35.
38. 114. Supports the fraudulent ſinanciers 117. Quar-
rels with Sully ii. 159. Devoted to the intereſts of the
Ducheſs of Beaufort 218. Cauſe of his enmity to Sully
iii. 420. iv. 38. Favours the Jeſuits on occaſion of the
diſpute which happened between the Rochellers and Fa-
ther Seguiran iv. 208. The letter he writes after th:
Prince of Conde's flight 411

Friers and Monks, they form themſelves into a regiment
at the ſiege of Paris i. 200. EFndeavour to ruin Hen-
ry IV. 344. See Jeſuits, Capuchins. A great oy
religious orders eſtabliſhed by Clement VIII. it. 224
Others who ſix in France 383

Frontiers, Sully cauſes plans to be drawn of them, d
obliges the Spaniards and the Duke of Lorrain to make
a reſtitution of thoſe places they had vſurped there
ir. 313

Fuentes {Count of) defeats the Spaniards at Dourlens
ii. 51. Oppotes the concluſion of the treaty of Lyons
376. Correſponds with Marſhal Biron it. 44. Takes

poſſeſhon of the marquiſate of Final 63. Continues to

cabal againſt France 210. The fort of Fuentes built.
See Griſons, Valteline (La): Miſearries at the aſſem-
Sly of Coir 377. His cabals among the Griſons iv. 225.
Dee Spain

£

G abelle,

680

IND E X.

G.

8 Henry Iv. occaſions ſome murmurs by his
deſign of eltabliſhing this tax over all the kingdom

iii. 2. Sully's maxims with reſpect to this branch of the
finances iv. 4. 5. Several regulations 234. Augmen-
tations to be made in it when neceſſary 391, 2. See
Salt, Salt-pits

Gadancourt (N. de) defeats the forces of the league ii.
42. Goes with Sully to London iii. 108

Galaty, a Swiſs colonel, the ſaying of Henry IV. to him
at the battie of Arques i. 182

 Galigai (Stephen) obtains the archbiſhopric of Tours v.
31. An account of his perſon and character 6,

——- (Leonora), comes into France in the Queen's train
ui. 378. See Italians. Henry IV. diſlikes both her
and her huſband iii. 283, 7. She marries Conchini:
Henry intends to ſend them to Italy, which the Queen
will not conſent to iv. 277. See Conchini. She enga-
ges in the conſpiracies againſt the deſigns and life of
Henry IV. 355. Gratuities procured for her by the
Queen 388. Admitted into the ſecret council of the
Queen-regent v. 22. See Medicis (Mary de) Whoſe
favourite ſhe is 57. She quarrels with the nobles and
miniſters of ſtate 97

Gap, (ſynod of), where the Proteſtants propoſe the doc-
trine that the Pope is Antichriſt in. 223. The doctrine
of Gap reſumed in the ſynod of Rochelle iv. 201

Garde (Baron de La) endeavours to ſeize Rochelle Ly
ſtratagem i. 17. Surrenders Caudebec to the Prince of
Parma 252

Garnache (Nemours de La) taken by Heory IV. 1. 126.

Taken again by that prince 160
— (Nemours de La), takes his mother priſoner,
and 1s taken by her in his turn 1, 126

Garnet, (Henry), a*Jeſoit, what ſhare he had in the con-
ſpiracy againſt the King of England iv. 190. 227. See
James, Engliſh

Gatine, (Philip de), tumult about the crofs of Gatine i. 15

Geneva, Sully viſits that city during the war with Savoy,
Vor. V. E e aud

and frees the inhabitants from their apprehenſions ii,
367. &c. Henry IV, permits them to demoliſh Fort
St Catherine 371. The Duke of Savoy fails in his at-
rempt upon this city, which is followed by a treaty of
peace through the mediation of the Swiſs cantons iii.
63. &c. Henry IV. takes Geneva under his protec-
tion, and forms magatines there iv. 226. Du-Terrail,
in endearouripg to ſurpriſe this city, is taken priſoner
and beheaded 423
Cergeau taken by the two Kings i. 170. General aſ-
ſembly of the Proteſtants held in this city: Sully does the
King great ſervice there iv. 301
Germain (ſuburb of Saint) taken by Henry IV. at the
firſt onſet i. 186. Fair of Saint-Germain: Henry IV,
loſes money there at play iv. 254 |
Germain-en-Laye, (Saint), the friends of the two princes
ra:ke an attempt to carry them off from that place, but
ful i. 21. Henry IV. builds Chateauneuf there it, 82.
Other works and embelliſhments made by him there iv.
109. Henry's reſidence in this caſtle ; and his indiſpo-
tion there 37. Sends the children of France to reſide
in it 253
Gorman horſe and foot, their march into France impru-
denily concerted i. 122. Defeated at Auneau 146, 8.
They and the Lanſquenets betray Henry IV. at the bat-
tle of Arques 181. Fire their pieces in the air at the at-
tle of Iviy 195. They are ſlaughtered 198. The Duke
of Bouillon makes a new levy of theſe forces 225. and
leads them to the ſiege of Ronen 227. Where they mu-
tiny 231. They refuſe to pu: ſue the Prince of Parma 242
Germany, its ancient dukes deſcended from the houſe of
Habſburg. See Habſburg, Aultria, Henry's deſign ad-
vantageous for the electors and princes of Germany iii.
176. Their true policy with regard to Spain and Au—
{tria iii. 179. They reſolre to unite with Henry 37 2.
Cuſtoms of duels in Germany different from thoſe in
Yrance iv. 109. Henry makes new allies 123. Debts
of France to the princes and cities in Germany diſchar-
d 230. Affairs of Germany, and the commotions
hat happen there 334. Henry engages the princes in
his intereſts 354. They ſend a deputation to him m_
Hall,

7 "I 4. i © Yb, 344 bo X 7 N K 0 * bes ie 4, e * = _ ae 4x TY * L 40). lt > 3
* „ * 3 prin! x 8 8 65-05 LATE * as mY * of 2 12 r 8 . 4 8 | 8 < .
P 5 * „ 3

75
29 »

IN D E X.

Hall, on occaſion of the ſucceſſion of Cleves 448. So
Cleves, They enter into a more ſtrict alliance with
France 459. Ambaſſadors appointed to reſide there du -
ring the execution of the great deſign 468. See Henrv,
Political Deſign, Rodolphus. Part of the great de-
ſign which relates to its princes and circles v. 148.
Forces and money to be contributed by them 142, 60

Giſors taken by Sully: he is denied the government of

it i. 214. Heary's kindneſs to the poor recciver there

ll, 176

Givry (Anne D' Anglure, de) attaches himſelf to Henry IV, |

after the death of Henry III. i. 176. His elogium

238. Defends Neuf-Chatel but indifferently 249. De-

feats the ſupplies which the Spaniards eadeavour to throw

into Laon 409. Aſſiſts at the defeat of the grand con-

voy ib, Draws the army into danger by ſome falle ad-

vices 413

(Cardinal of), lends money to Henry IV. iv. 229.
Is propoſed for the biſhopric of Metz 306

Glaſgow (James de Bethune, Archbiſhop of) recom-
mended to Sully by the Cardinal of Bourbon i. 400.
Anzcdotcs relating to his extraction and his life 301.
Henry IV. grants him his protection 405. Sully's let-
ter to him upon the acceſſion of King James to the crov n
of England iii. 91

Claſs — ry of) eſtabliſned by Henry IV. iv. 14

Gondy, (Peter, Cardinal of), Biſhop of Paris, the Pope
refuſs to give him audience when ſent to him by en-
ry IV. i. 319, He goes back again to Rome to Pry
obedience to the Pope in the name of Henry IV. 336.
Is made head of the council of reaſon ii. 144

Sontier, or Gonthery (father), a Jeſuit, his character
ini. 240. His plots at court to ruin Sully 391. See
Jeſuits, Courtiers. Henry IV. gives him a ſevere repri-
mand for his ſeditious manner of preaching iv. 344

Gonzague, origin of the grandeur of this houſe iv. 169.
Fee Nevers, Mantua

Gournay (Mademoiſelle de) gives information of the con-
ſpiracy againſt Henry IV. iv, 477. &c, See Coman,
Schomberg

Government after the peace of Savoy, Henry IV. and

Ee 2 Sulby

— 5
p ne aa at .

me * BIZ _ — 2 —

- Sooner ns nf EG Eee AE re AT

+ — =; = > 2 -

Cf we IE EEST EDS

ry = —_——— —

wa

- 8 & — ON

Sally apply themſelvelves afſiduouſly to the cares of it
ii. 380. Maxims and reflections upon government 386.
ni. 427. 112. 227. 371. The gentleneſs of Hen-
ry IV. 's government 434. The great difficulty of correct-
ing the abufes which had crept into it before his reign
iv. 240. Maxims for good government 317. Cc.
Schemes for a reformation in ſeveral parts of it. Sce Cabi-
net of ſtate, Judgment upon the different governments
which followed each other in France. Ser France (Kings
of), Defcent. See alſo Politics, Police, Finances, c.

Gorernors of provinces in their own right and hereditary
propoſed to Henry LV, ii. 70. See Princes of the Blood,
Lords, Montpenſier. Their rights in their governments
to quarters iii. 177, 9

Grain, regulations concerning it ii. 212

Grammont, (Antony II. de), Sully's friendſhip for him ca-
lumniated itt, 425, The ſpoils he takes from the
Spaniards iv, 214 :

Grands- Jours, (chamber of), held by Sully in Limoſin iv. 92

Grefles, edicts concerning them in favour of the Count of
Soulfors iv. 13. Sully reunites them, and the clerks
oftices, at the court of Languedoc, to thecrown-lands 232

Gregory XIII. Pope, rejoices at the maſſacre of St Bar-

| tholomew i. 29

Gregory X1V. ſends troops tothe aſſiſtance of the league i. 237

Grey, Lord, conſpires againſt K. James iii. 205

Grillon (Lewis Barton de) gives Henry III. good coun-
ic] onthe day of the barricadoes i. 150. Henry writes
a letter to him after the battle of Arques 182. His va-
tour, and the wounds he receives at the ſiege of Rouen
236. He rails at Marſhal Biron in the King's preſence
3509. Bon- mat of his upon the ſaperintendant D'O ü.
20. The adventure at Charbonniers which creates 3
tricudſhip between him and Sully iii. 202. His charac-
ter 401. An affair between him and Sully, relating to
the poſt of colonel of the guards, likely to be of danger-
cus conſequence to that miniſter 405, His whimſical
humour, and arrogant manner of ſpeaking to the King
406. The affair of the colonel's coamiſhon terminated
to the King's ſatisfaction iv. 431

Criſons, Herry IV. unites them with the Venetians ii.

60.

þ
_

FAS TX

60. Origin of their differences with Spain 372. See
Valteline, Fuentes. Farther account of theſe affairs :
they declare againſt Spain 376. They break formally
with that crown, and enter into a league with France
and the republic of Venice iv. 226, 7. The debts duc
to them by France diſcharged by Sully 230. The bad
conduct of Refuge, envoy from France to the Griſons
428. Caumartin ſent ambaſſador there 468. How con-
cerned in the great deſign v. 147
Guele (La) diſſuades Henry III. from having the Duke of
Guiſe aſſaſſinated i. 151. Kills James Clement 171
Guiche (Diana D'Andoins, Counteſs de La) beloved by
Henry IV. i. 90. Sends him forces at her own expenſe:
the anſwer made by her ſon to this prince 7h, Henry
preſents her with the colours taken at the battle of
Coutras 146. She favours the loves of the Princeſs
Catherine and the Count of Soiſſons 354. Gives bad
counſels to this princeſs ii. 95
Guignard (John) a Jeſuit, is hanged on account of his
being concerned in Chatel's conſpiracy ii. 42. An ex-
-amination of this fat 7b, See Jeſuits
Guiſe (houſe of), the true ſentiments of theſe princes.
upon religion i. 104. Their ambition and projeds 149.
150, 1, 2. Friendihip between them and Sully, and
the ſervices they mutually do each other iv, 180, Sully

Ls juſtifies them to Henry IV. 211. and does them great
„ ſervice 287. Henry's averſion to that family 294. Ser

IF the following articles, Lorrain

= GCuiſe (Catherine of Cleves, Ducheſs of) prevails upon her
ſon to return to his duty; procures him the favour of
Henry IV. her character and eulogium ii. 20. Henry
grants her a pardon for the Prince of Joinville iii. 39.
Agreeablneſ of her converſation 279. Friendihip be-
tween her and Sully iv. 180. She gives Sully informa-
tions of the new court v. 70 | |

Cuiſe (Charles of Lorrain, Duke of) makes his c{cape
from the cullle of Tours; a ſaying of Henry's con-
cerning this eſcape i. 225. His ſquadron is defcated
at Bar by this prince 239. and afterwards. at Yvetot,

254. His deſigns, plots, &c. with the ſlates of Paris

diſconcerted 314. Deſirous of returning to his obe-

E e 3 din

%

„„

dience ii. 20, Champaign riſes againſt him, and © ully
concludes his treaty z articles of this treaty 23. He
comes to court to throw himſelf at Henry's feet; his
receptiog from that prince 26. Sully's apology for the
treaty he had made for the Duke of Guiſe; praiſes of
his conduct in Provence 29. Reduction of Marſeilles,
and other brave actions, and circumſtances relating to
the life of this duke: Henry praiſes him 20. 31. He
drives out the Duke of Epernon from Provence 107.
The ſum of money he receives upon this treaty 24...
His reception of the Archdukes at Marſeilles 272, 3.
Attends Henry IV. in the campaign of Savoy 368,
This prince, in conſideration of him, pardons Joinville
11. 39. An adventure between him and Grillon 4or,
Sully takes his part againit Henry iv. 211. and juſtifies
him with regard to the difficulties raiſed to the marriage
of the Duke of Vendome with Mademoiſelle de Mer-
cccur 294, 5, The Queen-regent makes him one of the
membeis ot the new council of {tate v. 23. He quar-
rels with the Count of Soiffons, and is ſupported by
Sully 29. He continues attached to the Duke of Sully,
againſt all his enemies 70. Gratuities which he procures
f:om the Queen-regent 81. See Lorrain

Gu.ſe (Francis de Lorrain, Duke of) rekindles the war

between France and Spain i. 10. A ſaying of his upon
Francis II. 11. He is put at the head of the council
and the armies 15. In diſgrace after the death of
Francis II. 16. He forms the plan of the league 97. His
and the Cardinal of Lorrain's pretenſions upon Pro-
vence, Anjou, Metz, &c. 151, 2. See alfo Lorri
(Charles, Cardinal of)

Guiſe, (Henry of Lorrain, Duke of), Catherine de Medicis

unites with him i. 11. Charles IX, oppoſes his mar-
riage with Margaret of Valois; reſolves to have him
aſſaſſinated; and attempts to murder him with his own
hand 13. He ſorms, in concert with the Queen-m--
ther, the ſcheme of the maſſacre of Saint Bartholomew
26. Leads the aſſaſſins to Admiral de Coligny; pur-
ſues Montgomery 29. Friendſhip between him and ile
King ef Navarre 43. Henry III. hates him, and, con-
trary to his inclinations, concludes the peace of 5577

; ©: ,

—

* * £ IT"
* *
1 8
75 A 'T 1 2 i Av

3 W une . , my : UT CE | * 1
x N 5 £ 4 ** * . — * OE 8 *
* * < „ 4 x 3 * 5
*: . . 2 "I * wit
L 4 k L 5 Py. e r 7 „„ TION: *
2 4 3 . 1 4 22 23 / 2 wy %

IN D E X.

$9. The weakneſs of his party in its begmning 100.
See League. Accuſed of being indifferent about all re-
ligions 104. Defeats the foreign forces at Auneau 148,
Day of the barricadoes 150. Different opinions con-
cecning his views in this enterpriſe 10. A ſaying of the
Prince of Parma's upon this action; another of Sixtus V.
on the ſame ſubject: the reſiſtance he meets with from
the Preſident Har lay, Stafford, &c. ib. His conferences
with Catherine de Medicis 154. Henry III. cauſes him
to be aſſaſſinated at Blois 156. Particulars, and diffe-
rent opinions of this action /5, His character; his pro-
jets, &c, 16. See Lorrain

Guiſe (Lewis of Lorrain, Cardinal of) aſſaſſinated at Blois
i. 156. See the former article |

Guiſe, (Mademoiſelle de), Margaret of Lorrain ſolicits
Henry IV. in favour of her brother ii. 20. See Guile
(Charles of). Deſigned to be married to the King 200.
Her gallantries 25. She is employed in the marriage of
M. de Vendome with Mademoiſelle de Mercœur iv. 295

Guitry, (John de Chaumont de), author of the ſcheme
for carrying off the princes from Saint-Germain 1. 41,
Negotiates in Germany for the Proteſtant party 120.
Is partly the cauſe of the defeat at Auncau 148

II.

He (Raoul, or Rodolphus d') firſt author of
the grandeur of the houſe Auſtria 1, 4. The States
conquered by him iv. 121 . |

Harlay, (Achilles de), firſt preſident, his reſolute reply to
the Duke of Guiſe, after the action of the barricadoes
i. 153. He draws up the proceſs againſt Marſhal Biron
Ii, 25. Oppoſes the return of the Jeſuits 241. Ap-
pointed one of the council of the regency by Henry IV.
iv. 468

n delivered up to the Engliſh by the Pro-
teſtants i. 18, Taken by the forces of Henry IV. 188.
Surrenders to this prince 387. The ſum paid for its
reduction ii. 224

Heemſkerk, (Jacob), the Dutch vice- admiral, gains a great
naval victory over the Spaniards; killed in the battle

iv. 203

Henry

— 2 — _
— = = — Sy 2 _
She 2" OI. A —— — rener — „ hs — *
G = * *
. — — nance” — EE = ED — *

ä * — ů —

IN D E KX.

Heary II. King of France, a ſaying of his to the Prince of
Navarre i. 8. A rupture between this prince and Phi-
lip II. 10. He is killed in a tournament 11. Value
of the taille in his reign iv. 320. He ſuccours the Ger-
man princes againſt Charles V. 4441

Henry III. King of France, accuſed of being the author of
the Prince of Conde's aſſaſſination i. 1. The diſcourſe
of this prince to Miron, his firſt phyſician 23. He is
elected King of Poland, and raiſes the ſiege ot Rochelle
39. At his return from Poland, he declares war againſt
the Huguenots; raiſes the ſiege of Livron 44. Marrics
the Princeſs of Vaudemont 16. His averſion to Mon-
ſieur 16. He concludes the peace of 1577, out of ha-
tred to the Guiſes. His conduct a mixture of devotion
and voluptuouſneſs 59. Roſny deputed to him by Hen-
ry IV. Gives Monſieur, at his return from Flanders,
a cool reception 91. 92. Reproaches Henry IV. on
account of Margaret of Valois 91. He quarrels with,
and is afterwards reconciled to the league: forced to
unite with it 97. 98. Loſes an opportunity of reuniting
the Low Countries to France 100. Supports the league
through timidity 105, Beginning of the negotiation for
the union of the two kings 118. A ſaying of Henry III.
concerning the Proteſtants and the league 117. His con-
duct the cauſe that the foreign troops were defeated at
Auneau 120. Bad policy of his council 128. Cc. He puts
the Duke of Joyeuſe at the head of his army 131. Day of
the bat ticadoes: errors committed on this occaſion 150.
Converſation between him and Sully, whoſe advice he re-
jects 155. He cauſes the Duke and the Cardinal of Guiſe
to be aſſaſſinated; judgment upon this action 156. New
faults committed by this prince; the extremity to which
he is reduced 159. Sully negotiates with him for a union
between the two kings 163, 4. This treaty is conclu-
ded, and they have a conference together. Military
exploits in the neighbourhood of Tours 16. Henry IV.
praiſes Henry III. 167. The ſucceſs of his arms; he
beſieges Paris 170. Is wounded at St Cloud, and dies:
the friendſhip he expreſſes for Henry IV. 171, 2. Par-
ziculars relating to this event 15. The error he com-

| mitted,

IN D E X.

mitted, by giving the government of Britany to the Duke
of Mercœur 185. His favourites ii. 18. It is propo-
ſed to him to marry the Princeſs Catherine 274. Debts
contracted by him through the league iv. 8. Augmen-
tation of the taille under his reign 321

Henry IV. King of France, commands the Proteſtant
troops at the encounter of Arnai-le-Duc i. 3. Particu-
lars relating to his birth, his education, and his happy
qualities 7. Titles borne ſucceſſively by him 8. Other
accounts of his infancy and youth 16. His talents for
war 16. He is declared chief of the Proteſtant party;
the powerful enemies he has to oppoſe 12. Plot be-
tween him and the Duke of Alengon to ſtrangle Cathe-
rine de Medicis 16. He goes to reſide at Rochelle, af-
ter the peace of 1570 75, A project of marrying him
to Margaret of Valois 14, Overhears ſomething con-
cerning the reſult of the conference at Ba ionne 17.
Marries Margaret 24. Cannot be prevailed upon to
leave Paris 28. In what manner he eſcaped death at
the - maſſacre of St Bartholomew: Charles IX. obliges
him to change his religion, and keeps him priſoner 33.
Means made uſe of by the Queen-mother to embroil
him with Monſieur 44. Rejects with horror the propo-
ſal of murdering that prince: his friendſhip with the
Duke of Guiſe 45. 46. He eſcapes from court, and
joins Monſieur and the Prince of Conde 46. Is aban-
doned by Monſieur 47. Takes up arms again, but with
little ſucceſs 48. Loſes Marmande 51, Love carries
him to Bearn 52. He takes Eauſe by ſtorm 53, O-
ther military exploits 55. 56, A bold action of his at
Nerac 58. He quarrels with the Prince of Condé; and
cannot prevent the taking of Brouage 59. Has a con-
ference with the Queen-mother : propoſals accepted and
refuſed 60. His reply to Catherine de Medicis; his
gallantries with her maids of honour 60. See Agelle.
He takes Fleurence and Saint Emilion 62. His aſto-
niſhing valour at the ſiege of Cahors, which he takes by
aſſault 65. He renders the Prince of Conde's ſcheme
ineffeftual 51. Takes Monſegur, and ſhuts himſelf up
in Nerac 72, The friendſhip he conceives for Sully,
whom he reproves for his faults, and afterwards pardons

bun

IN U XX.

him 74. Catherine conceives a deſign of treating with
him for his claims upon Navarre 75. A converſation

reception he gives him at his return from that expedi-
tion 89, Sends him to court, to communicate the ad-

vantageous offers which had been made him by Spain at 85

F.
Is

Hagemau 90. and to obſerve the motions of the league
92. His anſwers to the ſharp letters he receives from
Henry III. 91. They give him poiſon, which produccs
no effect: he is again in danger, from Captain Michau
96. He makes preparations for reſiſting the forces of
the league : his indignation at the treaty of Nemours
98. His confidence in Sully 103. Deputies ſent him
from the court 104. His true ſentiments concerning
religion 16. His party worſted at Angers 106. Fights
againſt the three armies of Maienne, Joyeuſe, and Ma-
tignon 114. Goes to Rochelle 115. Takes Talmont
121. Chizay, Sanzy, Saint-Maixant, and Fontenai:
hindered by an accident from being informed of the ar-
rival of the foreign troops 121, 2. Takes Maillezais,
Mauleon, La-Garnache; loſes Nyort, Parthenai, ard
retires to Rochelle 126. He has conferences with the
Queen-mother at Cognac, Saint-Biix, Saint-Maixant
129, The anſwers he gives this princeſs : the danger
he is in at Saint-Brix 129. Joyeuſe takes Saint- Maixait
and Maillezais from him 132. The advantages he gains
over this army 124, He wins the battle of Coutias
139. Actions and ſayings of this prince, and other par-
ticulars relating to him, during this battle, and immedi-
ately after it 140, 1. The faults he commits, which
hinder him from deriving any advantage from this viclo-
ry 143. He goes to Bearn, and there makes a diſco-
very of the plots of the Count of Soiſſons 145. His
grief for the death of the Prince of Conds : juſtifies
Charlotte Catherine de La Tremouille 149. Offers bis
perſon and forces to Henry III. after the action of the
barricadoes 153. A ſaying of his upon the aſſaſſination
of the Guiſes 158. He endeavours to diſconcert the
deſigns of the chiefs of the Proteſtant party, falls ſick

at La-Mothe-Fielon; deputes Sully to Henry III. and
takes

|

between him and Sully, in which he foretells what will |
happen to Monſieur and him in Flanders 77. 78. The |

|

< % c l
1 + * | p ; p 1 8 22 Sf by 2 2 :
EC yo Cu Cr il IS |

as n a———ccc r m

„ a» OA ,

—
. mh i ets" Ga

I
takes Garnache and Nyort 160. ; and afterwards Cha-
telleraut and Argenton 163. Has a conference with
Henry III. after the treaty of Pleſſis-lez- Tours; the
counſels he receives, and a ſaying of his upon this ſub-
jet 165. Forces the Duke of Maienne from Tours
167. The ſucceſs of the arms of the two kings 170.
The great ſervices he does Henry III. and the danger
to which he expoſes bimſelf 16. Henry III. jealous of
him 170, 1. He viſits this prince when wounded : the
marks of affection which he receives from him 172. Ee
als advice from Sully 173. Henry IV. acknowledged
King of France by ſome of the chief officers in the roy-
aliſt party, and abandonedsby others: meaſures taken
by him in this juncture 175. His reaſons for going far-
ther from Paris: he ſurpriſes Meulan, takes Clermont
and other cities of Normandy 177. Gains a victory at
Arques; particular account of this battle 180. Bon-
mot of his upon this occaſion, and other anecdotes du-
ring and after this action 1d. He haraſſes his enemies;
the dagger he is in at Dieppe 185. He loſes Vernon,
and advances towards Paris; cauſes the ſuburbs to be
attacked, but without ſucceſs 186. Takes Eſtampe,
and ſeveral other towns 187, 8. Cauſes the ſiege of
Meulan to be raiſed 190. Not able to prevent the Joſs
cf Rouen 191. The battle of Ivry : particulars con-
cerning this battle, and the behaviour of this prince
there 193. Carcſles Sully highly, and confers the or-
der of knighthood upon him 202, 4. Takes Dreux,
and loſes Sens: cauſes ef his not taking advantage of
thts victory 206, He carries the ſuburbs of Paris, and
lays ſiege to the city 207, Raiſes the ſiege through
tenderneſs to the inhabitants 208, 9. Commits an er-
ror by poſting himfclf at Chelles 210. He takes Cler-
mont 212. ard purſues the Prince of Parma at great ad-
vantage: ſaves the life of the Baron de Biron 213. Goes
to Cœuvres to viſit the fair Gabriella 214. His party is
creaſed 75. He takes Chartres 217. and Corbie 219.
His paſſun for Mademoiſelle d'Eſtrees 16. A letter
from Henry IV. to > Sully 2 218. The taking of Noyon,
and other on antages gained over the [eague 219, Hen-
ry IV. 's preſence at ate is the cauſe of Sully's failing
in

— _

— N
.

38

— —
— Þ
<—F2.

$f
1
1
il
7
"1
.
4
.
Sj
*
|

* *
< a $2.4 2.7 ov
5 2 a

— T —
2

f
|

|
|

IN D E X.

in an enterpriſe he had meditated againſt the Duke of
Maienne 222. He ſurpriſes Louviers 223. Takes
poſſeſſion of one part of Normandy 224. Goes to Com-
peigny to viſit the fair Gabriella 225. His reaſons for
favouring a marriage between the Viſcount de Turenne
and Mademoiſelle de Bouillon 16. See Bouillon, Mark
(La). He undertakes the ſiege of Rouen 228. Errors
committed in the attack 230. Valour of this prince in
the aſſault 232. The Catholics in his army diſcontent-
- 233, 4. He goes to meet the Prince of Parma 236.

A ſaying of his upon the death of Sixtus V. 237.
Marches and encampments of this prince 238. He de-
feats a ſquadron of the Duke of Guiſe's 239. Bartle of
Aumale ; particulars relating to this action, in which he
is wounded 244, 5. He forces the Duke of Parma to
repaſs the Somme 246. Mutiny in his army 247. He
raiſes the fiege of Rouen 249. He offers the Prince of
Parma battle in vain 250. Divides his forces 251,
Joins them again, and defeats the advanced guard of his
enemies 252. Gains other advantages 253. Remarks

upon theſe expeditions, and upon the errors attributed

to Henry 254. The Prince of Parma makes his retreat
256. and Henry's army refuſes to purſue him 258. He
is greatly perplexed how-to keep them together 264.
Diſbands his army, and leads the Proteſtant troops into
Picardy 265. His ſecret motive for this journey 266.
He diſconcerts the plots of the Count of Soiſſons in Bearn
268, Henry IV. takes Epernay, and diſbands his troops
277. Sully difcontented with him; the occaſion of it

278. Diſcovers, by Sully's means, the ſecrets of the Þ

league, and of the third party 286, 7. The great con-
fidence he placcs in Sully, who is the chief author of his
converſion 290, Converſations between him and Sully,

herein the laiter urges him to change his religion; the
motives which determine him to it 293. Cc. Henry

vbliges the Proteſtants ro conſent to a negotiation with
the Catholics 2,8, Conditions propoſed to him by the
league 308. which he fejects 310. His claim to the
crown inconteſtable 314, 18. He raiſes the ſiege of
Selles 319. Ilis ambaſſadors rejected at Rome 10. He
endca ous to "grin: the Pope, and agrees to a conference

#
z
*
1
£ . 14
-
LES So
%
oe pes
3
2 1
ne
3
3
4
* e
4
= *
weed
5 «
we
q
A
\
*
N
—
14
i
)
-

W

r ß <

Will *

„

EEC Reo

ts,

* 5
n
*

I DE X

with the Catholics, which produces nothing 320, Sully
prevails upon him to come to a reſolution 325. He is
preſent at the conference held between the Catholics
and the Proteſtants 327. Beſieges and takes Dreux
328. The ſincerity of his converſion 331. His con-
duct towards tlie Proteſtants 332. The letter he wrote
to his miſtreſs on this ſubject 333. Particulars relating
to his abjuration : ſayings of this prince 335. He ſends
a deputation to Rome 336. The wiſe conduct he ob-
ſerves with Spain, with the league, and the Huguenot e
337, 8. He grants a truce to the deputies from the ci»
ty of Paris 339. Reccives a Spamiſh deputy 340. See
Nugnes, D'Entragues, Saying of his concerning his
abjuration 16. Deputes La-Varenne unſeafonably to
Mandoce 342. Bon- mot of La-Varenne 16. Plots of
the monks againſt Henty IV. 344. See Jeſuits, Ca-
puchins. He reſumes his conferences upon religion: the
Catholics jealous of the Proteſtants about his perſon
345. - He commences a treaty with Admiral Villars
346. Succours Feſcamp 350. Is received into Meaux,
Sc. ib, Is capable of ſupprefling his reſentment : an
anecdote on this ſubject 353. Cauſes himſelf to be
crowned at Chartres 354. Reconciles, by means of
Sully, the Duke of Montpenſier and the Count of Eoit-
ſons /5. and gets the contract of marriage out of their
hands 361. Villars ſubmits to him 374. He is recet-

/

ved in Paris, where he pardons all his enemies 378.
Particulars and bon-mots of his on this ſubject . Hz
reſtores order and regularity, and pardons the Duke ct
Montpenſier and Biron 381. Preſent made by him to
Sully 391, 2. His reception of Villas: {ereral cities
ſubmit to him 389. He goes into Picardy, where the
Spaniards had taken La-Capelle 396. Lays ſiege to
Laon 16. The great fatigue and labour he ſuſtains at
this ſiege 406. Prevents the Spaniards from {uccouring
Laon 408. Biron diſcontented with him 412, His army
in danger of being ſurpriſed by the Spaniards, which ob-
liges him to make his retreat 414. The military qua-
lities of this prince extolled 415. Jie conceals the
cauſes he has for complaint acainſt Bouillon, and deputes
Silly to him it, 2, 3. Laon taken: makes his entry in-

Vel. V. Ff to

IN D BX.

to ſeveral towns of Picardy: the ſucceſs of his arms in
the provinces 13.14. The Duke of Guile returns to
his obedience 20, Henry's obliging behaviour to him,
and the praiſcs he gives to the princes of that houſe
26. zo. The familiar manner in which this prince lives
with his courtters 27. His amours with the fair Ga-
briclla : 5 between him and Alibouſt upon
this ſubject 23. Change which he makes in the coun-
Cl of finances 35. He declares war againſt Spain 39.
Is wounded by Chatel : Particulars relating to this hor—
ri attempt, and to the baniſhment of the Jeſuits 40.
Firſt ſucceſs of his arms againſt Spain 42. He goes to
Burgundy 42. His amour with the fair Gabriclla 44.
:\ new council ſettled during his abſence 46. Conver-
ſatlon between him and Sully at Moret 47. The Count
f Soiſſons diſguſted 48. Campaign of Burgundy : bat-
ue of Fontaine-Frargois 54. Henry returns to Paris,
and with Sully deplores the misfortunes which happened
In Picardy 63, Conditions upon which the Pope grants
him a>{olution 65, Cannot prevent the loſs of Calais,
which he had refuſed to yield to Eliſabeth 69. He pro-
vids for the ſecurity of Picardy 70. He reproaches the
Duke of Montpenſier with the part he had in the crimi-
nal deſigns of the grandees 70. 71. Reproves the Duke
of Bouillo a, whom he ſends ambaſſador to London 72.73.
Is deſirous of ſending Sally with him, but he is unwill—
ing to go 74. He lays ſicge to La- Fere 76. Is ſcized
with an indiſpoſition 78. Lofes Arras: ſucceeds better
in other expeditions 79. Angry with his council for
ſuffering him to be in want of neceſſaries during this
campaign 81. 82. Henry gives audience to the depu-
fron Provence and Land guedoc 89. go, Com-
miſtons Sully to break off the marriage between the
Princeſs Catherine and the Count of Soiſſons 90. Is angry
with Sully upon this occaſion, and without cauſe ; but
makes him reparation 100, 1. The different fortuncs
of his arms in ſeveral provinces 106. After much irre-
ſolution, and many obſtacles, he obliges the council of
ſinances to receive Sully among]! dem 108. The Duke
of Malienne makes a treaty with 8 and comes to pay
him his obedience 114, He orders Sully to viſit the

diitricts 116. R. calls him, in copſequence of _
| „ Dad

oy as
er *

ue

2”

ENCE? EA

bad counſels he had received z dees him juſtice, rewards
and ſupports him agatatt Sancy and the council 120, 1.
His ſpeech to the aſſembly Des Notables 134. "The
prudent conduct he obſerves towards them by che advice
of Sully 138. Project for raiſing the ſiege of Arras
147. The great concern he expreſſes for the loſs of
Amiens 149. Sully direds him to the means of regain -
ing this place 150. An extraordinary council called
upon this occaſion 154, 5. He leaves Sully at the head
of the council, and departs for this expedition 157, ths
labours at this ficge + he caries his miſtreſs thithker :
lis ſolicitude for Sully's ſafety, whom he makes uſe of
to diſconcert the pernicious deſigus of the Proteſtunts
161, 2. He beſlows the poſts of grand maſter of the
ordnance upon d'Eftices, aſter having promiſed it to
Sully; to whom in recompenſe he gives the governmen

of Mane 166. Part'culars relating to the ſiege of A-
micas; it is taken, notwithſtanding all the cndeavor:s
of the Aichduke to prevent it 170. Letters of Hen-
ry IV. . Several military expeditions, in which he has
different ſucceſs 173. The King returns to Patis, and
makes preparatrons for his march into B:itany 177. A
fine ſaying of Herry's with regard to Marſtial Biron 75,
He liſteas to negotiations for a peace 179. Suffers him-
lelf to be moved in favour of the Dulce of 5Iercceur ;
the freedom with which Sully expatiates upon this er-
ror 181. He paciſes Brita y, and makes himſelf be
obeyed there 183. Labours for the edit of Nantz
188. A bon-mot of his upon Eliſabeth, the Archduke,
and himſelf 189. A fine converſation which he holds
with the Engliſh and Dutch ambailadors, upon the ne—
ceility of a peace 191. He puts the laſt hand to the
edict of Nantz 194. Speaks and acts with authority to
Bouillon and the Proteſtants 195, Reſides ſome time
at Rennes: a curious converſation between him and Sul-
ly upon the difſulation of his marriage 197. The ex-
treme weakneſs of this prince with rcſpeR to his mi—
ſtreſs 202, 4. He goes into Picardy 208. His pleaſant
eplies to thoſe that barangue him 75, Fe gas the
peace of Vervins at Paris: praiſes of this prince, aad a
bon · mot of his upon this treaty : other particulars re-
Ff 2 lating

— 2
n cs
4 -
* * þ
—

vs

4

7

n

FJ

N 0

% 4 =
1 N ;
1

4
e

-

EU

lating to the publication of the peace 209, 10. Henry

applies himſelf to the affairs of government; regulations
and eſtabliſhments which he makes in the militia, forti-
hcations, police, and the belles-lettres 212. He inter-
ets himſelf in the queſtion of the true or falſe Don Se-
bultian 214. Cauſes a conference to be held at Bou-
Jogne, between the deputies of Spain and England, and
names two cardinals 215, The Ducheſs of Beaufort
#buſes his indulgence m the ceremony of the baptiſm of
her ſecond fon 218. Henry ſupports Sully againſt her,
and reconciles them: a curious converſation between
them three 222. This prince dangerouſly ill at Mon-
ceaux 225. The poſts he beſtows on Sully 235. His
great confidence in him 237. Sums paid by Henry to
the chiefs and cities of the league at their treaties 243, 4.
He takes Suliy's part againſt d'Epernon 248. and the
grandees 252. Talents of this prince for government,

_ und his great knowledge in the finances 260. Marriage

of the Princeſs Catherine with the Prince of Bar, in
which he is ill ſerved by D'Offat: he cauſes the cere-
m1eny to be performed by the Archbiſhop of Rouen, not-
withſtanding the oppoſition of the clergy 275. Cc. Hen-
ry reforms the edict of Nantz 282. is prudent con-
duct in the affair of Martha Broſher 288, He makes
Sully ſuperintendant of the finances, buildings, and for-
i:Hhcations, and grand ſurveyor 289. Death of the
Nucheſs of Beaufort 288, 9. Henry's preſage of her
death 292. Eis exceſſive grief; is comforted by Sully
299. A bon-mot of this prince's to Father Ange 303.
Henry IV. goes to Blois: the occaſion of this journey
327, He writes to Margaret upon the diſſolution of
nis marriage with her, and cauſes this affair to be pro-
ſecured diligently 309. He falls in love with Made-
moiſelle D'Entragues 310. Is weak enough to give
her a promiſe of marriage 312. which Sully tears in
his preſence 313. His diſcontent when Sully informs
him that the treaty for a martiage between him and the
Princeſs of Tuſcany is concluded 315. An Italian

who attempted to ſtab him is ſeized 316. He gives |

the poſt of grand maſter of the ordnance to Sully 319.

His reception of the Duke of Savoy 321. Prefenis Þ
| made

: FEE
eee ee ee ah 8

1 ²˙²˙⁰“ A

22

—

* et. r
0 4 e
_ wt = ke Ls, 4

{ 4 ; 8 * 7 RT.
= ge, hs Wes TI ES 1 907, >

1 D E As

made by tlieſe two princes to each other 324. Henry
ſupports Sully againſt the commiſſaries, and avoids the
ſnares laid for him by the Duke of Savoy in the affair
of the Marquiſate of Saluces 328. Is preſent at the
diſpute between the Biſhop of Evreux and Du- Pleſſis
Mornay 333. The letter he writes to D'Epernon up-
on this occaſion 75, His departure for the expedition
of Savoy: takes the Marchioneſs of Verneuil along with
him 334. He is ſtopped by the artiſices of the Duke
of Savoy 337. Takes Chamberry, Cc. 340. Is mar-
ried by proxy to the Princeſs of Tuſcany i5, Relies
upon Sully for the management of this war 244 Comes
to the ſiege of Charbonniets 245. To that of Mont-
melian, and expoſes his perſon there imprudently 361,
The reception he gives to the deputies from Geneva:
cetemonies and particulars of his marriage with Mary
de Medicis 369, 70. IIl ferved by the commiſſioners
for the peace 371. His perplexity occaſioned by the
intelligence between his courtiers and the Duke of Sa—
voy 372. He concludes an advantageous treaty, and
returns to Paris, taking the Queen along with him 37 5, 6.
He carrects the abuſes in moncy and trade, Sc. 382

a — *
Prohibits the wearing of gold and ſilver ſtuſfs: the in-

zroduction of thoſe ſtuffs into France : the ſimplicity of

his own dreſs 383. Prohibits likewiſe the tranſporta-
tion of gold and ſilver coin out of the kingdom 384.
Eſtabliſhes a chamber of juſtice 386. from which he
draws but little advantage 388, HenrylV. 'sadvice to the
Prince of Orange; and the journey he takes to Orlcans
390, 1, Motives of his journey to Calais 393. His
ambaſſador at Madrid inſulted, for which the Pope
procures him ſatisfa&tion 294. The magnificent titles
which the Grand Signior gives him by his ambaſſadors
295. An embaſſy from the Venetians : his anſwer to
the Spaniſh ambaſſador 396. Reciprocal letters which
paſs between him and Eliſabeth : the reaſons which

hinder them from conferring together perſonally 397.
They are caluminated on this account 398, Ilenry
ſends Sully to Dover to confer with Queen Fliſaber}
399, He informs Sully of the birth of the Dauphin
407. Orders La-Riviere to calculate his nativity 408.

F f 3 sends

* 7 i * bs

Po — — is

. y - » Jn A. © an
* 8 3 — —
n

83 ——

4 4 *
0 —_—
"> —
Ps
— * — 2

> *
= — ” 1
. 2
— , ". 7 —
r P
K___ % **

* — -
= — 4 4 - . 8

e
9223 —— 2 — A A

1 1 *.
* _— 4 -

: — be

\ 2 - 0 A
on w — —

— -
"=, * *

— .

Od

& Þ

IN U XX.

Sends him to St Germain to be nurſed 410. Procures
a re'litution of the iſles of Pommégue, Oc. from the
Grand Duke 411. Appoints the court of Bethune am-
baſſador to Rome, though Villeroi and Sillery oppoſe it
413. Letters from this prince to Sully upon D'Orna-
no, and upon his ſtud of horſes at Meun 415, 16. En-
deavours to fix Biron in his allegiance 417. Gives him
a conſiderable gratuity 419. Sends him ambaſſador to
London, and to Switzerland 422, 3. Receives notice
of his conſpiracy againſt him 424. Letters which he
wrote to Suily, and the converſation he had with him
upon the depoſitions of La-Fin 425, 6. The amuſe-
ments of this prince at the arſenal iii. 1. Is attacked
by a fit of the gout : goes to Blois, and diſconcerts the
deſigns of Biron there 2. See Malecontent. A grand
council held to determine upon the manner of arrEiting
Bouillon, D'Aurergre, and Biron 4. Sully diſſuades
Henry IV. from arreſting D'Epernon 8. Another ſe-
cret affair between him and Sully, concerning the Queen
and the Italians 13. He ſhows himf{clf in Poitou, Li-
meſin, and Guyenne 14. He cauſes Biron and Au-

rergne to be arreſted: particulars relating to their de-

tention 17. 18. The trial of Biron 25. His ſpecch 10
the relations of this marſhal 29. Cauſes the Baron de
Fontenelle be executed, and grants a pardon to all the
other conſpirators 30. To Hebert and the Baron de
Lux 31. To the Count of Auvergne : his motives for
this clemency 34. To the Prince of Joinville, whom
12 put; under confinement 38. Ile endeavours, but in
vain, to draw Bouillon to court 40, Reproaches Spain
on account of Marſhal Biron's conſpiracy 44. Conver-
{ition between lim and Sully, upon the bound: he intend-
ed to put to his benefactions to him 16. Affair of the
advocates terminated peaceably 49. His adventure with
the attorneys, whom he cauſes to be whipt 52. Ope-
rations with regard to money: refledions upon them
53. Gold and filver mines diſcovered in France 57.
Edict againſt duels 58. His journey to Calais 60. Ben-
ry legitimates his ſon by the Marchioneſs of Verneuil:
1 10 :1difpoſed at Monceaux 61. Goes to Metz 67. Ba-
nithes the Soboles 69. Reconciles ſeveral German princes

who come to pay their reſpect to him there 70. Receives
: the

-

— 4 een
e e ”

> a Aa SS 4 Aa ning Au cM

, * fa 3
#4 7. . 5

1 r

the Jeſuits there favourably, and promiſes to repeal their
baniſhment 71. Frees the Pope from his apprehenſions,
on account of his armaments 75. Henry IV. continues
to ſupport privately the Flemmings againſt Spain 76. His
anſwer to the Elector Palatine, who wrote to him in
favour of Bouillon 78. Sully's letter to him on this ſub-
jet 80. His grief for the death of Queen Eliiabeth 8r,
His converſation on this ſubject with Sully, whom he
determines to ſend ambaſſador to London 75. His build-
ings 82. The private and public inſtructions which he
gives to Sully: the great importance of this embaſſy 87.
Henry dangerouſly ill at Fontainebleau: his great con-
ſidence in Sully: he recovers 88, Henry's letters to
the King and Queen of England 96, Letters between
the King aud Sully during his ſtay in London 99. In-
ſult given to the French flag 100. Sully removes the
King's apprehenſions on account of a ſuppoſed union be-
tween England and Spain 146. This prince's reaſons for
taking the part of the Engliſh prieſts 15 4. Sully acquaints
the King of England with the great deſign 173. See
Political Deſign, James. King James emulous of Hen-
ry IV. 183. The error of not giving a charte-blanch
to Sully 186. Form of the treaty of alliance between the

two kings 188. &c. Preſents made by Sully to the

King, the Queen, and the court of England 195. Hen-
ry careſſes Sully highly at his return from London 197.
Praiſes him in public, and juſtifies him againſt the mali-
cious aſperſions of the Count of Soiſſons 198. Secret
converſations on the ſubject of this embaſſy 201.
Meaſures taken againſt the intrigues of Spain at London
209, Remonſtrances made by Sully to Henry IV. up-
on the abuſes of ſmall edicts 213. He retracts a grant
which he had been ſurpriſed into by the Count of Soiſ-
ſons, and defends Sully againſt the reſentment of this
prince and the Marchioneſs of Verneuil 215. Cc. A pri-
vate agreement between the King, the miniſter, and the
ſovereign courts concerning theſe edids 7b, Sully receives
his Majeſty at Roſny: an accident occaſioned by the riſing
of the waters 220. Henry viſits Normandy 221, Is taken
ill at Rouen 1b. New diſcontent given him by Bouillon
and the Proteſtants 222. He gives the government of
Poitou to Sully 225. Eſtabliſhes ſilk manufactures:
converſation

d - *
-
— n 84 * * * - —
A
5 8 >
— £ A. >
——

7.8 1
*

1

— IS
PLS. „„

re
- =
2 2

*
>

=

* * "A N
— — 2 . K 2
2
—
. _ -
- 1 33
- — A *
.
—
:
"> *
. CY

—

IN D E X.

converſation on this ſubject between him and Sully, by
whom he cannot be diſſuaded from this deſign 227. His
great expenſes at play, for his miſtreſſes, &c. 234.
Sends a colony to Canada 235. Medals preſented to
him by Sully 236. Death of the Ducheſs of Bar: an
examination into the effects of this princeſs, made by
Henry and the Duke of Bar 237. A fine anſwer made
by Henry to the nuncio on this ſubject 75, He recalls
the Jeſuits 240. Notwithſtanding all the reaſons urged
by Sully againſt it 248. To whom he promiſes all ſorts
of ſatisfaction from them 249, He gives them La.
Fleche : makes Father Cotton his confeſſor: other fa-
vours which he beftows upon them 252. His ſtay at
Chantilly 716. He diſcovers the treaſon of L'*Hote, and
cauſes him to be purſued 256, 7. His treatment of
Villeroi 262. He reſtores him to favour, and comforts
him for what had happened 266. Henry ſends his
cardinals to the conclave 270. Promotion of French
cardinals 251, Makes frequent viſits to Sully at the
arſenal : his converſation with him upon his domeſtic
diſquiets 272. He is offended with Sully for his reſolute
oppoſition to him 274. Makes him an aplogy for it .
Confides to him his uneaſineſs, occaſioned by the Queen
and the Marchioneſs de Vernewl 276. Writes a letter to
the Marchioneſs full of reproaches zh. Demands from
her the promiſe of marriage, which ſhe refuſes 278.
The faults he attributes to the Queen 279, Cannot
follow Sully's advice 280. And prevails upon him to
try gentle methods 282. Sully procures a reconcilation
between him and the Queen, with whom he 1s again em-
broiled 284, 5. Cannot reſolve to act with authority
in his domeſtic affairs 286. His weakneſs with regard
to Madame de Verneuil, whoſe artifices put Sully in
danger of loſing his confidence 289, She attempts to
get the King's marriage with Mary de Medicis cancelled
293. His health endangered by theſe domeſtic troubles
294. Favours Queen Margaret in her proceſs for her
mother's eſtates 295, 6. Labours to prevent the plots of
the Count of Auvergne, with Spain and the Proteſtants
againſt him 297. Projects with Sully a journey to the

fouth of France, which the courtiers endeavour to dil-
ſuade

IN DEX.

ſuade him from 299. Calumnies ſpread againſt him
302. He ſends Sully into Poitou: honours paid him
by the Rochellers in the perſon of the governor he ſends
to them 304. Good conſequences of this journey 307.
Henry gets the promiſe of marriage, which had made
ſo much noiſe, out of the hands of Madame de Ver—
neuil 313. He cauſes the Count of Auvergne to be
arreſted : his reply to the Counteſs of Auvergne 321.
Likewiſe D'Entragues and the Marchioneſs of Verneull
322. Cannot reſolve to baniſh the Marchioneſs ; and
for her ſake pardons the two criminals 326, 7. Parti-
culars relating to this affair 26. The gallantiics of this
prince, and the dangers he runs by viſiting his miſtreſſes
330, Henry depoſites his money in the Baſtile: his
ſpeech in full council upon this occaſion 235. He un-
dertakes to have the rents regiſtered 340. Eltablithes
a chamber of juſtice 341. Other operations in the fi-
nances 343. and regulations in the militia, The royal
hoſpital for diſabled ſoldiers 244, 5. Talents of this
prince for government 347. His too favourable maxims
for war 16. He unſeaſonably prohibits any commerce
with Spain 249. He repairs this error by concluding a
treaty of commerce, for which he rewards Cardinal
Bufalo 353. &c. He continues ſecretly to ſupport the
United Provinces 358. His diſcourſe with the Conſtable
of Caſtile, upon the agreement between Spain and
England; and with Sully, upon the {ame ſubject 365.
The reception given to this ambaſſador 370. Germany
and Italy favourably diſpoſed toward his great deſign
371. The part he takes in the affair of the Valteline
374. See Grifons, Fuentes. He gets poſſeſſion again
of the bridge of Avignon 378. Henry purchaſes the
eaildom of St Paul from the Count of Soiſſons 380.
Procures his natural ſon to be received into the order
of Malta 383. His buildings for his manufactures 26.
The religious orders he allows to be eſtabliſhed in
France 16. He renews his correſpondence with the
Marchioneſs of Verneuil: pardons the Counts of Au-
vergne and D' Entragues, notwithſtanding Sully's advice
to the contrary 384. Quarrels again with the Queen
387, Permits the Jeſuits to demoliſh the pyramid:
particulars

*
2
&
, »
K
y p
,
:
-
1
P
=
= %
4
=
3
- 4d
F
"4
+Cf
*

REC CCA. 3 as 8
1 — 5 =
— ads. 7 1 2 * —
>. — > * * 2
— —

* a - <
A a 4 a wa "i
þ * = *
— 8
*
s -
2 Pg l RE,”
7 - * — 4
* 7

*
- -

„ 1 . 7 —
— .
* 2 *
r 3
— <q, 2
4 L * — *
1 "A+ = A

, -
—
7

— — —

IZ DX.

particulars of this affair 390. Does Sully juſtice in the
great diſpute he has with Father Cotton for the college
of Poitiers; and reconciles them 391, 2. His great
penetration and exact judgments of men 392. He re-
conciles Sully and D' Epernon 403. A diſpute with
Grillon about the poſt of colonel of the guards, in which
the caurtiers and Jeſuits give him ill impreſſions of Sul—
ly 405. Sully's letter to him, and his anſwer to it 41.
He diſcovers his error, and excuſes himſelf to Suliy
415. The intereſting converſation between them 418.
His too great propenſity to raillery and witticiſms 421.
And his credulity in believing falle reports 422. Ile
places all his confidence in Sully, and gives him the
ſirſt place in his friendſhip 428. Jullifies him againſt the
anders of the courtiers 431. Quarrels with kim, and
is again reconciled 434. Henry concludes a marriage
berween Mademoiſelle de Sully and the Duke of Rohan
ib, Gratuities and favours which he beſtows upon Sul-
ly 435. Denies him others, which he had ſolicited for
his brother and ſon- in-law 437. Orders Sully to de-
mand Mademoiſelle de Melun in marriage for the Mar-
quis de Cœuvres, but the offer is rejected by her re!«
tions 438. Great plenty and opulence in France 8
his reign iv. 7. An account of the debts of the ſtate
at his advancement to the throne 8, Pablic cdifices re-
paired or built by him 10, Order and ſubordination e-
{tabliſhed in the government 11. Henry's ſtyle in
writing his letters to Sully: donations to ſeveral perſons
12, le eſtabliſhes his ſilk manufaQures 14. Becomes
mediator between the princes of Europe; preſents
made by him to them 15, Has the principal ſhare in
the election of Pope Leo XI. and Pope Paul V. rej.i-
cings on this occaſion 19. Gives orders to Spinola, who
is paſſing to Flanders 26. Diſſatisfied with his ſubjedis
who ſerve in the Archduke's army 27. Cauſes fowec
prizes taken from Spain to be reſtored 28, His politics
diſapproved by his council 30. Thought to have a de-
ſign of making himſelf Emperor 10. Receives notice ot
ſome ſeditious plots againſt him 32. His uneaſineſs a-
bout the aſſembly of Proteſtants held at Chätelleraut; ;
determines to ſend Sully thither ; the general and parti-

culas

|
14
E
4
55
*
-

*

*
$4
7
”
#1}
;

— 655 — 1 r

*
8 — * . 3 2
FF *

I
3
1 #

:

4
IC
7
*
#þ
7
#\
7
:

r

cular inſtructions given to Sully 34. Cc. He is attacked
by a fit of the gout at Saint-Germain 38. Receives
ſome informations againſt the aſſembly at Chatelleraur
48. Letters from Henry to Sully 52. Sully explains
the King's intentions to the aſſembly 55. He is diſſatiſ-
fied with them for not making Sully preſident 58. Bouil-
lon makes an attempt to impoſe upon him, but fails 59.
He cauſes the Luquiſſes to be arreſted 65. Is very at-
tentive to the motions of the Proteſtant aſſemby 66.
Sully removes his apprehenſions of the plots of the fac-
tion 70. and terminates, to his ſatisfaQion, the debates
relating to the deputies-general 72. aud to the caution-
ary towns 76, Henry complies too much with the de-
ſires of Leſdiguieres in the affairs of Orange and Blac-
cons 77. The reception he gives Sully at his return
84, He makes preparations for his journey 1nto the
ſouthern provinces of France 85, The route he takes :
he ſeizes ſeveral fortreſſes belonging to the Duke of
Bouillon 86, Particulars and motives of this journey :
he cauſes the chamber des grand jours to be held by
Sully in Limoſin, and returns to Paris 92. He decides
in favour of Sully, in his diſpute with the Count of
Soiſſons for the quarters of grand maſter of the ord-
nance 95. His obliging behaviour to the deputies from
Rochelle 97. Sully, at his return from Limoſin, gives
him an account of his conduct 99. Du Laurens firſt
phyſician 100. Honours paid hy Henry to Queen Mar-
garet 101. He cauſes the ca(ile of Uſſon tò be dil-
mantled 94. His tco great indulgence for duels : his
blameable notion concerning the predetermination of rhe
laſt moment 110, 11. Several inſtances of good for-
tune which he had met with 112. John de l'Iſle at-
tempts to ſtab him; he pardons him 111,12. Sully
preſents medals for the year 1606 to the King and
Queen ; a converſation between them 112,13, Henry s
engaging and tender behaviour to his Queen 113. Sully
receives new-year's giſts from him 119. His converſa-
tion with Sully relating to the means of humbiing the
houſe of Aullria 120, Henry's intention of taking
Sedan 123. Creates Sully duke and peer, and honours
the entertainment he makes on this occation with his
preſence

IN U X.

preſence 124, 5. His irreſolution with regard to the
affair of Sedan 125, 6. le is at length determined by
Sully 130. whom he orders to write ſirſt to Bouillon

131. and to take proper meaſures with the Proteltants Þ*?

139. His departure, and the route he takes 16. Diſ.

poſitions made for the ſiege of Sedan 143. Conſent; |
to the conference propoſed by Bouillon 144. and con-
cludes a treaty unknown to Sully 146. Bouillon comes

to pay him homage 150. Sully endeavours to make

him turn his arms againſt the towns of the earldom of |

Saint-Paul, but cannot prevail 151, and offends the
King, by oppoſing his public entry into Paris 152. 4
ſaying of Henry upon the reduction of Sedan 153. He

ſupports the city of Metz againſt the Jeſuits 158. Hi

donations to them at La-Fleche 159. He blames x;
ther Cotton in the affair of Adrienne de Freſne 162,
Refuſes the clergy to publiſh the council of Trent 164,
His ſpeech on this ſubject 5. He reftrains the Pio.

teſtants alſo, and rerminates, by Sully, the difference

between them and the Catholics at Rochelle 165. Dil-
guſted with the family of Rohan 166. Ceremony ef
the baptiſm of the children of France 168. He fend;
them to Fleury 170. Eſcapes drowning at Neuilh
171. Henry's gaiety and ſprightly ſayings on this oc

caſion 16. Gratuities granted by him to Sully and oth

perſons 172. Regulations for the finances 173. E

expenſes for play 176. for public works 177.

converſation between him, Sully, and ſome of th:
cout tiers, upon different ſubjects 178. He aſks Sully“
advice concerning the affairs of Flanders 186. Ti:
calm and peaceable life of this prince 190. He take
the ſeals from Bellievre, and gives them to Sillery 191.
His tenderneſs for his children 192. Birth of his i:
cond fon 193. His fondneſs for hunting 76. He (tay

a long time at Fontainebleau 195. Bis friendſhip an
eſteem for Sully 196. tHe puts a ſtop to the prof:
cutions for the young d'Epinoy 7b, Quarrels with Sul!

but immediately after makes a reconciliation with hi
197, 8, Employs him in the ſynod of Rochelle, ani

in the diſpute between Father Seguiran and the Rochel

lers 200. A converſation between him and Sully, con
f Coeruing

a wp " date
* WF * 13
wel; F Cadet T + 4

edi RS re x
. r SEEDS

n

1 bo 1 3 E N.
— — N = N 9

5 „

* „ ** „ 3
ti. RR AC > *

IND E X.

cerning the plot: of the court in favour of Spain 193, 5.
His hatred of the family of Lortain: Sully reaſſurcs
him, and they labour together to ſuppreſs theſe cabals
212, 13. He conſents that after his death his heart
ſhould be carried to La-Fleche 207. He cauſes ſome
prizes taken from Spain to be reſtored 214. He follows
Sully's advice to refuſe the offer made him by the United
Provinces to ſubmit themſelves to the dominion of the
French, and to give him towns in hoſtage, Cc. 216.
The part he takes in the treaty for a truce between
thoſe provinces and Spain 221. Cauſes the fort of Rebuy
to be demoliſhed, and ſupports the garriſons againlt
Spain 225, Henry protects the republic of Geneva
226. and the Italian princes 75, Neconciles Pope Paul V.
and the Venetians 227. Reunites the finances of Na-
varre to thoſe of France, and pays the debts of tlie
nation 230. Puniſhes the diſobedience of the parl:-
ments of Toulouſe and Dijon 232. Amount of the
ſums expended in preſents till the year 1607 230. A

3

bon-mot of his upon l'Argentier, a ſarmer of the u-

venue 238, A ſuit at law between him and the houſe
of Gonzague for the eſtates of the houſes of Foix and
Albret 239, Diſapproves of Sully's advice to compoſe
the councy of the men of the ſword 245. and contrary
to his opinion eſtabliſhes a chamber of juſtice 247. He
reaſſures Sully againſt his accuſers 248, Afhſts Fon-
tange in the ſiege of Pierrefort 251, His great care
to beſtow public employments upon men of merit 253.
Gratuities to ſeveral perſons, debts diſcharged, and his
Loſſes at play 254. His expenſes in buildings and ma-
nufactures 255, Henry's frequent journeys to his a-
veral palaces, his indiſpoſitions, his tenderneſs for his
children ſometimes indiſcreet 256, 7. Quarrels between
him, the Queen, and Marchioneſs of Veracuil : his lettcrs
to Sully on this ſubject 254. He reſtores Sedan to rhe
Duke of Bouillon 255, Occupations and amuſements
of Henry IV. 256. He propoſes to Sully a marriage

between the Marquis of Roſny and Mlademoiſelle de

Crequy 259, Makes him great offers upon condition
that he will embrace the Roman - Catholic religion 262.
He reaſſures him againſt the artiſices of his enemies

Vor. V. 6 2 268.

—

n

”- wow *
+4 =

- 8 — N AJ "ou 4
8 *, * : ,
=. l e — —
* — 5 2 ” 0 . — - 1
4 1 * = * = *
1 4 <> 1 \- 7
— — ” \ * 2 > 4
— PI 2 4 * o o
7 * . -
— _— ;
2 „
hn, SD 5 2
.

go

-

—
—

— — : —
ay pe by 1
©
2

* — — 2
83

2 *
* *
nm +

I

268. The great wiſdom of this prince in diſſipating
factions 269. His amours and miſtreſſes 269, 70,
A long converſation of Henry's upon political and do-
meſtic plots formed againſt him in the Queen's houſe-
hold, by the family of the Marchioneſs of Verneuil.
Gc. 273, 4, 5. His reſpect for the Queen 258. Birth
of his third ſon 280. The friendſhip he ſhews Sully
upon this occaſion 281. Employs him in the cabals of
court 282, Baniſhes the Prince of Joinville for his
gallantries with Madame de Verneuil, whith whom he
quarrels, and is afterwards reconciled 286. Joinville
has another intrigue with Madame de Moret 287. He
diſgraces Sommerive for an intrigue with the ſame
lady 288. and D'Eguillon for procuring Balagny to
be aſſaſſinated 289. Other quarrels in his court,
occaſioned by his eaſineſs in pardoning duels 293, 4

He obliges the family of Mercœur to accompliſh the
marriage between Mademoiſelle de Mercœur, and the
Duke of Vendome 294. Receives informations againſt
the houſe of Guiſe, and a new faction 298, Scnds
Sully to the aſſembly of Proteſtants at Gergeau 301.

Henry's reſidence in his ſeveral palaces, the private lite

and indiſpoſitions of this prince, his tenderneſs for his

children 304. He gives the biſhopric of Metz to the
Duke of Verneuil 305. Demands made by the clergy,
ſome granted, others refuſed 307. Public works and
buildings in Paris 308. His expenſes for play: mali-
ciouſly reported that he endeavoured to ruin the noblo-
men by gaming 310. He relieves the people after the
riſing of the Loire 311. Diſpoſes of the biſhoprics
according to Sully's recommendation 312. He obliges
Spain and the Duke of Lorrain to make reſtitution of
their uſurpations upon his frontiers 313. Regulations
in the finances 314. Brevet for the taille expedited | in
full council 317. Oeconomy and diminution of the

impoſts under his reign 321+ His reception of the Duke
of Mantua 322. The part he has in the agreement
between Spain and the United Provinces 322.
pleaſant laying of his to Don Pedro 16. He follows
Sully's advice in this affair 323. He obliges Spain to do
him juſtice with regard to the boundaries of Naxrarte

1
1 P.

IND A

and Bearn 329. Refuſes to have any hand in the revolt
of the Moors 3 30. &c. Papers and medals preſented
to him by Sully 335. He ſtays two days at the arſenal
336. He accuſes Sully with indiſeretion concerning the
ſecrets revealed to him by Father Cotton 342. Gocs
tothe arſenal to communicate his uneaſineſſes to Sully:
a long converſation between them 348. &c, Upon the
public news, and upon his paſſion for Mademoiſelle de
Montmorency 350. Upon the plots againſt his life
diſcovered in Spain by Vaucelas 35 1. Upon thoſe cauſes
of complaint which the Queen gave him upon this ſub-
jet, Villeroĩi, &c. 353. Upon his deſigns of marry-
ing his childten 354. Upon the reſolution he takes
to renounce the Princeſs of Condé 357. Sully endea-
vours to remove his apprehenſions, adviſes him, ex-
cuſes the Queen, and labours to make her alter her
conduct 358, 9. Henry haſtens the execution of his
great deſigns 363. and employs Eimſelf with Sully in
compoling a cabinet of ſtate 364. Converſation be-
tween them upon the ſeveral methods of raiſing money
369. Eſtabliſhment of poſt-horſes and ſtage-coaches
369,70. Of the droit annuel: refleftions upon this
operation 370. Delign of reſtoring the office of the
ancient Roman cenſor 374. Of deſtroying all tricks and
unfair practices in the law, and other picces of the
cabinet of {tate 375. Another converſation upon this
ſubject 380. Henry's character of his three miniſters
383, 4. Debts diſcharged, and gratuities and expenſes
of this prince in play, buildings, c. 387. Edict a-
gainſt fraudulent bankrupts and duels 390, 1. He
chaſtiſes N —, Who had calumniated Sully 391.
Cc. The Prince of Condé and the King complain of
each other; high words paſſed becw2en them on ac-
count of the Princeſs of Condé 397. Plots againſt
Henry, for which his paſſion for that princeſs is the pre-
tence : Sully gives him notice of the Prince's deſigns
398. &c. Henry's grief for the Prince's flight: ſeve-
ral particulars relating to this incident 400. Falſe in-
formations given him againſt the Proteſtants 411. Con-
ſpiracy againſt his perſon at La-Fleche 412. This re-
port ill founded 414. Henry's journeys to his ſeveral

6 g 2 palaces

—— —
2 H

2 PF x bag
G ** — 4 —

x
— — s ” *
"od 3
-

:

— © FOI

wo =

'" *
1 8 * — _ * * 2 *
” + 80 A ISR

—

n
4 # p
j i
<4

= , * — "eta

EBV, 1
— — *
—
1

„

nn uo —
2
T's 7 * — 2
- I * -— we
— * 4 . - » i
WE DIS - > am.

— 2
5 „

8 b *

— — — —
—
— — ———ä— —Ü — — — —

INDE X.

palaces 415. Treaty, by the mediation of the Kings oi

France and England, between Spain and the United

Frovinces 416, Henry protects the rights of the Prince

of Epinoy 418. He objects to the title of Sovereign

Lord of Sedan aſſumed by the Duke of Bouillon 422.

and obliges the Grand Duke to do him juſtice with re-
gard to a fhght ſhewn to his ambaſſador 424. He con-
foles the Queen for the death of the Grand Duke 76,
and contracts a friendſhip with his ſucceſſor 426. Per-
mits the Grand Signior to have a refident at Marſcilles
429. A converſation between Henry and Sully upon
the death of the Duke of Cleves, &c. 430. The Em-
peior Rodolphus ſeeks his friendſhip, and promiſes to
aH{t the Princes intereſted in this affair againſt the houſe
„f Aultria 436. The plots of the courtiers to diſſuade
him from his great deſign 447, The princes of Ger-
many ſend a deputation to him: his converſation with
*ully upon this ſubject 448. He ſuffers himſelf to be
prejudiced 2gainſt the counſels given him by Sully: an-
cther converſation between them 453. The ſentiments
with which he endeavours to inſpire the Duke of Ven-
dome for Sully 458. Preparations made for thg exe-
cution of the great deſign 2: letter to the Archduke on
this ſubject 461. He talks of his deſigns indiſereetly
before his cohrtiers 463. Converſations and letteis
between hin wand Sully: other diſpoſitions and prepara-
tions for the great deſign 464. Conſpiracy againſt this
prince: the report) of it ſpread every where, and the
diſcourſe op-this ſubject 472. Pretended prognoſtics,
y's own foreknowledge of his approaching
death: converſations between him and Sully, and other
particulars 473, 4. Information of a conſpiracy given

by Schomberg, and the affair of La-Coman 477. Her-

ry aſhſts at the coronation of the Queen 441. Mall-
cious reports ſpread againit him concerning his motives

for making war 482. He ſends La-Varenne to the

arſcnal 485, He himſelf in his way thither is murder-
ed 487. Panticulars relating to him a few days before
is death: his prefages of his fate: the manner in which
this parricide was committed by Ravaillac 75. Sc. The
diitereut opinions concerning the authors, and the 1

| 0

LY ; EY R — a
„ n bs
4 ths © %J TY
EE „„ © Apts, . es. * 2
*

SM „ . = 7
* _ 2 Hh I A * hy

8 7 K
e *. —
N 7 *

INDEX

of this aſſaſſination examined into 492, Sully com-
plains of the negle& that was ſhewn in proſecuting them
v. 1. The character of Henry IV. His clemency,
his gaiety, his pleaſant repartees, his great. qualities,
and his faults 2, 3. The ten wiſhes of this prince
5. 6. His death greatly regretted 10. Different ſen-
timents of the courtiers upon his loſs 17. 18. The
new cotincil governed by maxims of policy very dif-
ferent from his 23. The great deſign broken by his
death 32. The ingratitude of the court and the mi-
niſters with reſpe& to him 38. Expoſition on his poli-
tical deſign. See Political Deſign

Henrichemont (Maximilian III. Francis de Bethune, Prince
of) grandſon to Sully, his undutiful behaviour the
cauſe of his death v. 186 |

Heſſe (William, Landgrave of) comes to viſit Henry IV.
at Metz iti, 70. Sully is accuſed of holding a criminal
correſpondence with him 426. Caumartin prejudices
kim againſt the Duke of Bouillon: he refufes to aſhit
him iv. 63. Gains France ſome allies in Germany 181.
His claim to the ſucceſſion of Cleves 434. See Cleves.
His anceſtors Philip and Maurice aſſifted by Francis I.
and Henry II. againſt Charles V. 441. He joins with.
France againſt the houſe of Auſtria 459, See Political
Deſign

Holland. Sce Flanders. Manufa&ory for linen cloth in;
Paris of the fame kind as that made in Holland iv.

255,6

Holſtein (Duke of), ſatisfaction which he gives Henry IV.
v. 16

Honorio (brother) a capuchin friar, gives Henry IV. in-
formation of a confpicacy againſt his life ii. 315

Hoſpital of the bridge of Avignon (ſerving brothers of)
miſapply the funds deſtined for it iii. 379.

Hoſpitals built or repaired by Henry IV. iv. 10. Scheme
for a regal hoſpital in the cabinet of late 366.

Holte (Nicholas !“) one of Villeroi's fecretancs, an ac-
count of his treafon iii. 25. Diſcovered by Raſis
258. They endeavour to ſeize him 262,. He eſcapes
264. and is drowned in the Marne 265.. Particulars.
relating to this affair 20. See Villeroi.

Gg 3 Howard.

$0: Ex:

Howard (Lord) Admiral of England, receives the Count
d' Aremberg iii. 104. Serves the Spaniſh faction againlt
Sully 114, 34, 84

Huberſon (Jane) and her couſin diſcover the conſpiracy
againſt Henry IV. carried on at La-Fleche iv. 413

Hugh-Capet, Sully's opinion of this King iv. 340

Hume (Lord) engaged in the Spaniſh faction at London
Iii, 114. Conducts Sully to Greenwich 147,71

Humieres (Charles d') brings ſuccours to the Duke of
Maienne after the battle of Ivry i. 199. He forces the
Spaniſh camp at Ham, and is flain there ii. 52. His
eulogium 7b,

Hungary, the Emperor Rodolphus makes war againſt that
people ii. 316. and againſt the Turks 379. Further
account of this war iii. 64. 65, Part of the grand
deſign relating to that kingdom iy. Sce Political Deſign

Fo
Acob, agent and commiſhoner from the Duke of Savoy,
in the affair of the marquiſate of Saluces, comes
to compliment Henry and Sully ii. 305, 24. Diſcon-
tented with the Queen-regent v. 35. See Saluces, Sa-
voy, &c.

James Stuart, King of Scotland, afterwards of England,
the great importance of ſecuring his friendſhip after the
death of Eliſabeth iii. 84. He caufes his acceſſion to
the throne of England to be notified to France 91. The
deſign of Sully's embaſſy to this prince 92. He is pre-
judiced againſt the Count of Beaumont 96. and againſt
Henry IV and Sully: his character and conduct 116.
The French Proteſtants endeavour to engage his pro-
tection 125. He ſends to compliment Sully upon his
arrival 126. Obliges him to alter his intentions of ap-
pearing at court in mourning 127. Gives him his fill
audience : honours which he pays to Sully, and the pu-
blic converſation between them 129. His invective a-
gainſt the King of Spain and his council 131. Praiſes
Henry IV. 15. His paſſion for hunting 132. The ter-
ror and hatred with which a ſuppoſed plot of the Jeſuits
inſpire him againſt Spain and the Archdukes 136. The
King of Spain endcayours to engage him to unite wy
| um

6 - *

. <4 *
ns W &

IND .

him againſt France 142. He gives a ſecond audience
to Sully, who gains his approbation of Henry's deſigns
upon Spain and the United Provinces 148. He promiſes
not to ſupport Bouillon 152. Complains of Henry's
having ſupported the Engliſh prieſts 154. Reciprocal
civilities between the Pope and him 155. He is diſfa-
tisſied with the Count d' Aremberg and the Spaniards 159.
He invites Sully to dine with him: particulars of this
entertainment 160. He promiſes Sully to give ſatisfac-
tion for the piracies of the Engliſh 162. He gives Sully
a third audience, and has a long converſation with him,
in which Sully diſcovers to him the artifices of his mini-
{ters 171. and diſcloſes to him the great deſign of Hen-
ry IV. Precautions taken by Sully on this ſubject, Cc.
173. See Political Deſign, James takes Sully's part
againſt his miniſters 185. and ſigns the form of a treaty
189, Sully has his audience of leave : the obliging be-
haviour of James to him, and the promiſes he makes
him 194. Reciprocal preſents made by the King and
Sully to each other 195. The tears of this prince apon
the arrival of the Spaniſh ambaſſador at London, and his
irreſolution 199. 203, His clemency in puniſhing the
con{pirators againſt his life 205. New troubles in his
court: he baniſhes the Jeſuits from his dominions 2b.
Sends the treaty ſigned to Sully 207. Henry makes
him a preſent of ſome fine horſes 16. A ſcheme laid by
the Pope, Spain, and the Jeſuits to dethrone him 253.
James takes advantage of the prohibition of commerce
between France and Spain 350. and afterwards endea-
vours to compoſe this difference 351. Is prevailed up-
on to make an agreement with Spain contrary to his
treaty with Henry 359. Cc. He gives the name of
Great Britain to his dominions: the bad conſequences
of his pacific diſpoſition 363. He procures a treaty be-
tween Spain and Flanders 215. Sully's enemies raiſe ma-
licious reports againſt him for his praiſing this prince
426. He again ſecks the aſſiſtance of Henry and Sully
againſt Spain iv. 29, His friendſhip for Sully 31. He
diſcovers and puniſhes a conſpiracy againſt his life 190.
He protects the preacher Melvin, with whom lens y is
offended 204. is bad policy in endeavouring to procure
4

— 2 -d
«2. * 2 4
p 4 a 23 8 + at
* 22 — _ * — I A 1 —
- A ag” - < — _— TY
d - *
-

. LY "EW Ras Sl
9 - — "+
"_ % my _ -
__— i. mas. Ce — —
3

—— 6 *
— wn * ”
. - 2 2
CE = Py
” — . . *
1 * 9
.
* — —

.

|
|
|
|
!

ND EX

a treaty for a ſuſpenſion of arms, and a truce between
Spain and the United Provinces 223. He obliges his
fubjects to take a new oath of fidelity to him 227,
Treaty of mediation of him and Henry between Spain,
and the United Provinces 416. Part of the great de-
ſign relating to him, See Political Defign, England,
Wales, (Prince of )
Janiſaries, they revolt againſt Mahomet III. ii. 432. and
oblige him to 'baniſh the Sultana-mother iii. 212

Jarnac (battle of) i, 1. Errors which the Prince of

Conde and Admiral Coligny committed there taken no-
rice of by Henry IV. 7
Ibarra, (D. Diego d'), one of the Spaniſh plenipotentiaries
to the ſtates of Paris : his plots ineffectual : his faults
i. 313. Afterwards plempotentiary from Spain and
Flanders iv, 221
Jeannin, (Rene), preſident of the parlament of Dijon, makes
propoſals from the league to Henry IV. i. 263. Me-
morial of the demands and offers he makes to Spain
from the league likewiſe 283. The anſwer of the Spa-
niſh council 285. He propoſes other conditions to
Henry 307. Who rejects them with indignation 311.
The oath wlich he is accuſed of having made to the
league againſt this prince 323. He is obliged to give
up Laon to him ii. 14. His advice to the Duke of
Maienne 15. Jutlified 75. He is employed in the com-
poſition of the edit of Nantz 194. Aſſiſts in Henry's
name at the conference of Boulogne 215. He and Wil-
Jeroi made ſecretaries for foreign affairs 237. Allows
an article in the edit of Nantz, which he is obliged to
alter 283. One of the commithoners for the treaty of
Lyons, in which he favours the Duke of Savoy 309.
Serves the King faithfully in Biron's confpiracy iii. 16.
Follows the King to Calais 61. Solicits him in favour
of the Jeſuits 71. He aſſiſts at the council in which
Sully receives his inſtructions for his embaſſy to London
96. Endeavours to procure the recall and eſtabliſhment
of the Jeſuits 241. 313. Is made commiſſioner for the
regiſtration of the rents 341. iv. 195. His ſervices in
Flanders in the affair of the ſuſpenſion of arms 218. lle
concludes the treaty of truce, and that of the ä
| 0

þ * 4 . PLE | +» Ys . *
N K If is , 3 e —

IN DE X:

; of the Kings of France and England 416. Ie ſerves
} Sully with the Archduke in the Prince of Epinoy's af-
A fairs 419, He prejudices Henry againſt Sully's advice
with regard to the armament for Cleves 453. Is ap-
pointed ambaſſador to Flanders and England 468. Mary
de Medicis makes him one of her fecret council, in
which he favours the new policy, and the diſſipation of
the finances v. 22. 23. He is put at the head of the
finances 24. He joins Conchini againſt Sully 43. Is
uſed ill by the Duke of Nevers and other Lords 73
Jeſuits accuſed of being concerned in the plot of Barriere,
and cleared 1. 344. Their proceſs againſt the univer-
ſity and the curates of Paris : particulars relating to this
affair: Sully's motives for ſupporting them 400. They
are involved in the proceſs againſt Chatel, and baniſhed
1.41, Examination of this affair, and their juſtiſica-
tion 42. The Pope requires Henry to recall them 67.
The council rejects their petition 215. Henry's kind-
nets to them, and the promiſes he makes them at Metz
ii. 71, Solicitations of D'Offat, Cc. in their favour 72.
Commotions raiſed by them in England in the affair of the
Engliſh prieſts 153. King James's averſion to them 195.
The affair of their re-eſtabliſhment diſcuſſed : councils
held on this occaſion: converſations between Henry and
Sully: reafons for and againſt the repeal of their baniſh-
ment : conditions upon which they are to be recalled, and
other circumſtances 240. '&c. They ſolicit Sully's pro-
tection 250. Reflections upon this head, and the eulo-
gium of this ſociety 252. The opinions of ſome Jeſuits
upon grace, upon the authority of the Pope, and upon
confeſſion 6. Henry gives them the college of La-
Fleche bh, Memorial againſt their policy 254. They
bdoment diſputes between the Catholics and the Prote-
ſtants among the Grifons 375. They obtain leave to
1 demoliſh the pyramid : their hatred of Sully, and other
= particulars 390. A great quarrel between them and
© 2 Sully on account of the college of Poitiers 391, Their
e cabals with the courtiers againſt Sully: they almoſt
procure his diſgrace 400, 20. They endeavour in vain

\ Wm ee

- | | to ſettle in Metz iv. 158. Preſents made them by Hen-
: ß IV, for their houſe at La-Fleche 159, The affair of
0

Adrienne

IN D EX.

Adrienne de Freſne prejudices him againſt them 160.
The part they have in the conſpiracy againſt the Ring
of England 190. See Garnet, Oldecorne, James. They
endeavour to get Father Seguiran a preacher received
into Rochelle 205. Henry IV. ſupports their college
of Poitiers 207, He conſents that after his deceaſe his
heart ſhould be depoſited at La-Fleche : a ſmart ſayin;
on this occaſion 207. They cabal at court and throuy}.-
out the kingdom in favour of Spain 208. The Vene—
tians refuſe to let them ſettle in their dominions. The
eſtabliſh themſelves in Bearn 228. Jeſuits mentioned
by name in a letter of Father Cotton's 243. They are
involved in the pretended conſpiracy of La-Fleche 414.
They ſerve the Emperor Rodolphus in the cruelties he
exerciſes upon the Proteſtants of Germany 459. They
are accuſed of having been concerned in the parricide
committed on the perſon of Henry IV. and cleared cf
that crime 498. Sully inſinuates that they were acco:-
plices in that crime v. 2. They endeavour to ruin 13
| miniſter 18. The Queen-regeat calls them into her ſe-
cret council 23. See Cotton, They uaite with the
Pope and Spain againſt the Proteſtants 39. They en-

deavour to diſſuade the council from the-expedition of

Juliers 59. See Council, Spain, League, Oc.

Jewels of the crown, ſums expended in purchaſing them
iv. 231 |

Jews, the offers they make to the Grand Signior to deſtroy
the holy ſepulchre ii. 262

If (ifle and caſtle of) uſurped from Henry IV. and reſto-
red to him again by the Grand Duke of Tuſcany ii. 411.
Deſign of Spain upon this iſland iii. 208. 11

Ignace Armand, provincial of the Jeſuits, Henry IV.
kindneſs to him at Metz, and the promiſes he makes
him there iii. 71. He endeavours to procure the re-
eſtabliſhment of his ſociety in France 240. An impru-
dent letter written to him by Father Cotton iv. 343

Ignorant Friars eſtabliſhed iii. 224

Illuſtrious men of antiquity, a converſation upon this ſub-
ject between Henry IV. Sully, and the courtiers iv.

339
Impolts,

Ir

In

0

2

„
*

by

NES Xx

Impoſts, reflections upon the nature of ſeveral impoſts iy,
3. 4. Diminution of the taille, and other impoſts. A
new regulation made by Sully in the levying of taxes
Cc. 6. Several impoſts in France: how eſtabliſhed :
reflections upon this ſubject 319. Accounts relating to
the taille, to the royal revenues, &c, 336. Memorial
upon the different methods of railing money 370. See
Taille, Royal Revenues, Finances, &c.

Incarville, comptroller-general of the finances, made one
of the members of the new council of finances ii. 46.
Supports the fraudulent financiers 117, 27, 28. Con-
cerned in the farms under borrowed names iv. 2,

Inchi (Charles de Guare d') receives Monſieur into Cam-
bray, for which he is afterwards bamſhed 1. 8x

Indies, the immenſe treaſures drawn from theſe by the
Kings of Spain, and the cruelties committed there by
Philip ii. 266. The deſign of this prince to prolubit
the commerce of them to all the reſt of Europe 269,
They exhauſt Spain iii. 178. Deſign and means of de-
priving Spain of the commerce of the Indies 181, See
Political Deſign. Sully oppoſes the ſettlement of a
colony there : obſervations upon this ſettlement 235.
Article in the treaty of truce, interpoſition, &c. rela-
ting to the trade to the Indies 416. See America, Aſia,
Oc. ̃

Infanta of Spain, (Anne-Maria-Mauricette of Auſtria),
her birth ii. 411. Plots in the Queen's houſehold to
marry her to the Dauphin contrary to Henry's deſign
iv. 35

Infanta of Spain, (Clara-Eugenia of Auſtria), the ſcheme

fy

5

2

of marrying her to the Cardinal of Bourbon rendered
ineffectual by the French lords i. 315. See League,
States of Paris, &c.

Infanta of Spain, (Iſabella of Auſtria), ſhe is married to
the Archduke, and made governeſs of the. Low Coun»
tries 1. 273

Invalid ſoldiers, an eſtabliſhment made for them it. 345

Invincible, a fleet of Philip II. ſo called, vanquiſhed and
diſperſed ii. 265

Joanaini, agent from the Grand Duke of Tuſcany for the
marriage of Mary de Medicis with Henry IV. iii. 12.

Cabals

2 * 4

-

. 3 2 WY; 5 £

ww, "og d
* 1
— —

9

r
5 * * 5 .
+ bv * p
2. 2 — *
* -

—
2 — £
4- 2 4

9

WES |
k 5
- .

_—_
.

MW.
K ?
+48 4

7
26
4 N
L
8 \

G bs
1
47
1
1

.
| =

*

— ee — — 8 2
> | $- r
*

— 14

—_
SS
*
LH

— — ——

—

* r *s *
_ - RY

— 2 K D —_—Y
A amo td.
*

K _ Fe * 3
- 9 % , - * 4 * - *
Tent -  S&E >. 3 r E b — *
— 4 — * — s
. F - - :
4 . © 3 G - * 5 q
8 — - l »- rl = =
2 - — 2 .
- — — - -
„ * „ * - - - * — — Ld

—_— * 1
— 52 - —
— N —

—̃ — --

ö *
—— — ** -
=

- 2

— : — -
—_ * © —
pl I. | 7

E 5

12.

— A

1 — — — ES -
=>
*
Pa

_——
CD -
2 2

» 7

LN D-:E X.

Cabals in the Queen's houſehold with the Spaniſh party
iv. 350. Sully's converſation, with him upon the inſult
received by our. ambaſſador at Rome, from the Duke of
. Tuſcany's ambaſſador 424
John (Don) of Auſtcia gains the battle of Lepanto i. g.
Lays the ſcheme of the league with the Duke of Guile

97
John I. King of France ſubmits. to the authority of the
ſtates of the kingdom iv. 319 5
13 Joinville, (Claude de Lorrain, Prince of), cabals wing
1 . Spain : is arreſted, and pardoned by Henry IV. at Sullys F
intreaty: his character iti. 38, Diſgraced for his gal-
lantries with the Marchioneſs of Verneuil and the Coun-1
teſs of Moret iv. 287. His quarrel with the Prince of
Conty 294. Grants which he procures from the Qucen-1 J.
regent v. 81
jon (Du) one of the courtiers whom Henry IV. allowed
to live familiarly with him v. 75. His advice to Sully
after the death of that prince 11
ſouſſeaume, receiver-general of the finances, arrcſted at
Milan by Sully's diligence, and hanged iii. 52 bi
Joyeuſe, (Anne Duke of), Marſhal of France, leads ile! —
royaliſt army againſt the league, and ſuddenly turns it

1 2
. „ 2

E . · MH

againſt the Proteſtants i. 98, His diſcourſe to Sully on Ix.
this occaſion 16. Leads the army of Henry III. and th:
league into Guyenne 114. Marches againlt Henry 1\'. I
into Poitou 127. The defign of Henry III. by giving
him the command of this army 131. He takes St Mai- LI.

xant, Maillezais, &c. 132. Sully defeats one of his ſqus-
drons, and narrowly miſſes taking him priſoner 10. lis WW
troops ill treated in his abſence 134. He returns ard
puts himſelf again at their head 137. An inſtance ot
his generoſity 138. He is defeated and flain at the bat -
tle of Coutras: the errors he committed there; and
the particulars of this battle 139. &c. He was one of i .

the favourites of Henry III. 11. 18 Y Jul

(Antony Scipio, Knight of Malta, afterwards Dux e
of), his party in Provence i. 272. He beſieges Vii- WF ©
lemur 273. ls defeated there and drowned in the Tarn Wt _ *)
276 J J ar

——— (Francis de) Cardinal, endeavours to juitify, at WW
| Rome. y

IND EX.

Rome, the aſſaſſination of the Guiſes i. 157. ls ſent
* by the Duke of Maienne into Spain 350. Commiſſioned
by the Pope to diſſolve the marriage of Henry IV. with
5 Margaret de Valois ii. 310, Adviſes Henry to give the
: government of Poitou to Sully ii, 225. Is ſent to Rome
&:1 to the conclave 2750. Sully confers with him upon the
** means of pacifying the two religions iv. 156. Is proxy
4 for Paul V. at the baptiſm of the Dauphin 170. Em-
= ployed by Henry to compoſe the difference between the
4 Pope and the Venetians 227. He prejudices Henry a-
gainſt Sully in the affair of the armament of Cleves 353.
Is appointed by that prince one of the council of the
* regency 468. Mary de Medicis makes him one of the
* public council v. 2
Joyeuſe, (Henry Count of Bouchage, Duke of), a capuchin
| Ffriar, and cardinal, one of Henry III. 's favourites ii. 18.
| Concludes a treaty with Henry IV. 79, 80. Sum paid
him at his treaty 244. He marries his daughter to the
Duke of Montpenſier, and enters again among the ca-
puchins: a {mart ſaying of Henry's upon him iv. 281.
His death 308 |
(Henrietta-Catherine de) marrics the Duke of
Montpenſier ii. 303
Ireland, Eliſabeth ſubdues the rebels thems: who had beœen
ſupported by Spain ii. 429, 30
Iſabella, her example propoſed to Henry IV. by Sully iv.

a" ** 1

a 3

44
Italy, part of the great deſign relating to it iii. 18 2. Hen-
ry IV. gains the friendſhip of the princes of Italy 371.
See Political Deſign. The debts due by France to Italy
= diſcharged by Sully iv. 230. The princes and ſtates of
Italy unite with Henry againſt the houſe of Auſtria 354.
Ambaſſadors appointed for Italy 468. Part of the great
deſign relating to Italy with reſpect to religion v. 15 36.
and policy 156. See Political Deſign
Juliers, duchy and dukes of this name, a diſpute con -
cerning the ſucceſhon to it iv. 430. See Cleves. Siege
and reduction of this place by the confederate princes
10
Jwariſdictions, offices to be created in them upon occaſion
iv. 373. See Bar, Bailiwicks, Sovereign Courts
4 Vor. V. H bh Ivry.

«*
of
+,
Ys
4

:
+F 9
7
=
4
=
*
,
*
1
12

«i. 1
*
* Py
: 9
4 9
„
, ö
% |
n
£44. v4
:
.

n

— i.

- * _D .
1 z po _ 8 *
1 — 8 We
" * 1 33
A >
2
3
— — —
: 2

IN

Ivry, (battle of), phznomena which preceded it i. 193.
Errors committed there: a particular account of this
battle 194

Juvigny, e Divigny, one of Sully's enemies iii. 42 1. His
memorial 424. Henry IV. puniſhes him 431

K.

Inlos, one of the Scotch faction at London iii, 114.
PDeputed to the Count of Aremberg 159. Favours
the French intereſt 205

L.

Ambert ſent to France by the Prince of Orange, to
break off the negotiations for a peace between Spain
and the United Provinces: his artifices iv. 324
Langlois, ſheriff of Paris, contributes to get Henry IV.
received into that city i. 378. Agent for Margaret de
Valois in the diſſolution of her marriage with Henry IV.
11. 309
1 deputies from this province to Henry IV. ii.
o. What paſſed between the two parties 106. Henry
transfers the ſtates to the Lower Languedoc 415. This
province an ancient ſief cf the crown : not alienated iii.
379. Its regiſters united to the domain: a difpure on
this ſubje& between Sully and the parliament of Tou—
louſe iv. 232
Lanſquenets, they betray Henry IV. at Arques i. 181.
Are cut in pieces at the battle of Ivry 198. They mu-
tiny at the ſiege of Rouen 230
Laon beſieged by Henry IV. i. 394. The ſuccours which
Ma'eane endeavours to throw into this place defeatct :
the great diligence and labours of Henry IV. at the ſicge
4,06. He refuſes to give the government of Laon t9
Biron 412. The Spaniards march towards it with al
their forces 416. But cannot prevent its being take
ü. 12
Larardin, (John de Beaumanoir de), Marſhal of France i.
49. Takes Sully's part againſt Frontenac and Bouillon
50. A ſingle combat propoſed to be fought betwern

bim

-

*

1

1

5

*

5
q
N

,

$

**
12

1

.
1
5
44
*
*
R

„ *
* *
A
*
ws
7.
B
4
2
5
1
44
I
*
1
2

4
N

— —— — 2 W

I X.

him and La-Devôſe 55, He quits the party of Hen-
ry IV. 63. A trick played him by Chicot 99. La-
Tremouille forces him to abandon the poſt of Coutras
139. He commands the King's forces in Burgundy
ini. 30. Is made governor of Perche and Maienne:
reſigns the government of Poitou in favour of Sully 225

League, (the), the cauſe of the great power of the Guiſes

i. 59. Raiſe the ſtandargl of rebellion 97. Its origin,
weak beginnings, and its progreſs 97, 98. The he: ads
of the league afſemble at Chaalon 100. Oblige Hen-
ry III. to join them, and diſpoſe of his troops as they
pleaſe 105. They ſend three armies againſt Henry IV.
p15. Towns and fortreſſes which they take and lofe
126. They defeat the foreign forces at Auncau 138.
The day of the barricadoes, on which Henry III. is
obliged to leave Paris: their inſolence before and aftcr
this action 150. The weakneſs and the errors of this
prince's conduct give them courage, and they obiige
him to grant all their demands 155, 57, He puts him-
ſelf under their protection, after che murder of the
Guiſes 159, 60. The ſucceſs of the arms of the two
kings againſt them 170. and of Henry IV. after the
death of Henry III. 185. Sixtus V. ſoretells their de-
feat ib. They loſe Mculan, and take Pontoiſe 189.
Seize Rouen 191. and are bcaten at Noyon: other loſies
ſuſtained by them 219. Henry deprives them of great
part of Normandy 223, 25. They ſend troops to the
ſiege of Rouen 237. They make propoſals and offers
to Henry IV. Their troops defcated at the attack of
St Denis, and at the paſs of La Vienne; but they gain
the battle of Craon 266. Leſdiguicres diſconcerts their
deſigns upon Provence and Dauphiné 271. Their
troops defeated at Villemur 275. Conditions propoſed
by them to Philip II. and his anſwer to them 283.
Their diſtruſt of one another 285. Sully negotiates
with them for lieory IV. 299. The conditions which
they want to impoſe upon the King 307. They diſagree
with the ſtates of Paris 3 314. Their plots, and the oath
they take againit Henry IV. 323. [hey ſend a depu-
tation to this prince 332. The wiſe conduct he ob-
ſerves with them after his abjuration 338. They em-

H h 2 ploy

” bh ws &... * 4 4 .
. — — : « —
OY "UM, >. - 2 3 << —
IE N FS.
4 4 * E 4 4 5 I =
N a ; *
— — - + * — 4
8 :
2 — - — a -
r

— 4 — 2 7 A
- - -
o * I A Y
N 2
_ w 8 -

=...

_ Sno, Tack > —_— dh

2
: . —
. da
*
a > O :.-
— ——
* — *
he "A. 2 * - — 2 4

3
— 5
P « at —

＋.

FF

ploy ſome monks to murder Henry 344. They retire
to Soiſſons at the reduction of Paris 379. Lyons, and
ſeveral other cities, forfake them openly 294. They
ſupport the Jeſuits in their proceſs againſt the univerſi-
ty, Sc. 403. Their partiſans for the Duke of Maienne
in Burgundy defeated ii. 16. They oppoſe the declara-
tion of war againſt Spain 39. Are driven out of Dijon
and Talon 56, Defeated with the Spaniards at Fon-
taine-Frangoiſe 58, They ſubmit to Henry IV. 78.
lilitary expeditions in different provinces ;. ſome ſuc-
ceſsful, others unfortunate 106. A liſt of the treatics
made, and ſams paid by Henry IV. at the extinction of
the league 244. Their partiſans ſet Martha Broſhere
to work 288. They murmur at Sully's embaſſy to
London iii, 83. A powerful faction in Europe conduct-
ed upon the maxims of the league 255. Adopted like-
wiſe by many perſons in the court and council of Hen-
ry IV. 392. Their motives for hating Sully 420. Debts
contracted by France during the league iv. 8. The par-
tiſans of the league cabal with the Spaniſh ambaſſador
2-ainſt the power of Henry, and his deſigns 208. Debts
contracted on account of the league paid by Sully 230.
Ihe averfion of Henry to the policy and favourers of
the league, and to their ſchemes 297. They labour to
diſſaade him from his great deſigns 447. See likewiſe
upon this whole article, Guiſe, Matenge, villeroi, Jean-
nin, Jeſuits, Pope, Spain, Courtiers, &c,

Lennox, (Earl of ), one of the Scotch faction at London
li. 114 37 £4

I. eo X. (Pope), his conduct blamed by Sully iv. 155

Leo XI. (Pope), great rejoicing in France for his advance-
ment to the pontificate : his death iv. 18. 19

Leopold, Archduke of Auſtria, the Emperor Rodolphus
gives him the inveſtiture of Cleves : his proceedings with
Henry IV. upon this affairiv. 436. See Cleves

Leſdiguieres, (Francis de Bonne de), Conſtable, commands
the forces of Henry IV. in Dauphiné i. 115. Diſcon-
certs the defigns of Spain and the Duke of Savoy in Pro-
vence 272. He drives the Duke of Epernon from P10-
vence ii. 31. Other exploits againſt the Duke of Sa-

voy and Epernon 106. He informs Henry IV. of the
| Duke

*
*
5 1
2 —
"5
*
* 8
a
4.
1
7
%

I
J

Li

* a OR
£ SE W e

.

Duke of Savoy's deſigns 321. His ſervices during the
campaign of Savoy 346. et /eg. Is made marſhal of
France, and governor of Piémont, by the advice of
Sully 373. Accuſed of correſponding with Bouillon
ii, 302. Thanks Sully for procuring the poſt of colo-
nel of the guards for the Marquis of Crequy : Sully's
complaints of him 431, 2. His deputies excluded from
the aſſembly of Chatelleraut iv. 44. 57. The rage with
which he acts againſt Blaccons in the affair of Orange
53. 77. Bouillon's jealouſy of him 62. His plots at
Chatelleraut for the eſtabliſhment of a Proteſtant repu-
blic, &c. diſconcerted by Sully 67. Henry IV. is ap-
prehenſive of his deſigns 82. 163. His conferences with
the heads of the Proteſtants under him ſuſpected 203.
The motives which induce Henry IV. for marrying the
Marquis of Roſny into this family: diſputes, plots, and
complaints, againſt Sully, on occaſion of this marriage
259. et Fb. Henry IV. reſolves to give him the com-
mand of the army in Italy 460. See Political Deſign.
Villeroi rails at him in the Queen-regent's council, and
Sully defends him v. 86. 87

Lewis, (Saint), his edict againſt duels iv. 106. He com-
mands his ſon to aboliſh the taille 319. Character of
this prince 340

Lewis Hutin, takes an oath, at his coronation, to ſub-
mit to the authority of the ſtates of the kingdom iv. 319

Lewis XI. character of this King iii. 340

Lewis XIII. his fondneſs for Sully v. 17. He holds his
bed of juſtice, and conſirms there the regency of Mary
de Medicis 19. Preparations made for his coronation
57. Quarrels among the grandees and miniſters at this
ceremony 73. The reception he gives Sully, his happy
diſpoſitions 77. He rewards Sully's ſervices, by giving
him the ſtaff of a marſhal of France 182. He is agaisſt
him in his proceſs with his grandſon, which is. the
cauſe of his death 186. Sully's auſtere reply to him
194

Lhaillier, (John), Lord Mayor of Paris, contributes to get
Sully received there i. 378

Libels, (fatirical) againſt the government, very cemmon in
the reign of Henry IV. iii. 421

Hb 3 Ligny,

4 — —
— a+ * A * *
* 2 7

* o <4 P — -
vs Tm Rs. n <> ba 3 8 * —
N "= == ns T4 a Ati - P — . 1 G — — — 5 E
2 E 8 = PE y. |
g * g W — 5
N =
-— <4 Ly — — "x 1 * — I
ag ” be 7 — . A 5 Io = \ =

——
— — 3302
—

— _—
a 3.—

i
1 7 *
LL Oe ——— —_
5 am. - —

I
s _—
AM
8

=

I N DE X

Ligny, (Mary de Melun, Princefs of), Henry IV. and Sul-
ly oblige her to do the Princes of Epinoy juſtice, with
regard to their eſtates iv. 418

Lille, (John de), a madman, who attempts to aſſaſſinate

Henry IV. iv. 111

Lognac, the affaſhn of the Duke of Guiſe, dies miſerably
Iv. 19. |

Loire, advantages from joining it with the Seine and
the Saone iii. 339. The canal of Briare 348. See
Briare. A great inundation of this river in 1608 iv.
311

Lombardy, (kingdom of), a project for eſtabliſhing it in

favour of the Duke of Savoy iv. 123

London, Sully's magnificent reception there iii. 105. The
hatred of the French to the citizens 107, Breaks out
on occaſion of the fact committed by Combaut 110.
Factions which prevail there: not cuſtomary to treat
ambaſſadors 129. The people rife againſt the Spaniards,
and praife Sully's conduct 137. Honours he receives
at his departure 195. The troubles owing to his (tay
204

Lorrain, the forces of Lorrain defeated, and Dun, Stenay,
Oc. taken by the Duke of Bouillon i. 266. Lorrain
ſeparates from Spain, and unites with France ii. 39.
Succeſs of the arms of Lorrain in the war of 1595 42.
Reſtitution made by Lorrain of its uſurpations upon the
frontiers of Champaign iv. 313. Heary IV, defigns to
reunite that territory to France, by marrying the heireſs
to the Dauphin 354. Part of the great deſign which
relates to Lorrain, - See Political Deſign. See alfo Lor-
rain, (Charles II. Duke of)

———— (Charles, Cardinal of), he forms the ſcheme of
the league at the council of Trent i. 97. 98. His real
ſentiments upon religion 104. His pretenſions upon
Metz 152

(Charles, Cardinal of) Biſhop of Straſburg,

Henry IV. puts an end to the war, and the proceſs

between him and the Prince of Brandenburg for this

biſhopric m. 70. His death iv. 307 |

(Charles II. Duke of), his plots with the ſtates

of Paris ufzleſs i. 314. His treaty with Henry IV. at
| the

„
2

END RX

the extinction of the league ii. 243. The Princeſs.

Catherine refuſes to marry him 274. He makes an
agreement with Henry for the poſſeſſions belonging to
the Ducheſs of Bar iii, 239. Comes to France, and
ſtands godfather to the Princeſs Chriſtina iv. 170.
Henry IV. obliges him to make a reſtitution of all that
he had uſurped upon the frontiers of Champaign 313.

His deſign of marrying his daughter to the Dauphin

354. Diſputes with him concerning the boundaries of
the country of Meſſin terminated 389. Grants made
him by the Queen regent v. 81

Lorrain (Ducheſs of) falls dangerouſly ill: compliments

made her by the King and Queen iv. 321,.2

Love, why this paſhon is dangerous to princes 111, 328

Luquiſſes, provincial geutlemen, their impriſonment and
proceſs iv. 65, Their punifhment 92

Lux (Edmund de Malain, Baron de) negotiates the con-
verſion of Henry IV. i. 321. The part he had in the
battle of Fontaine-Francoile ii. 59. He adviſes Biron
to go to court iii. 16, Obtains his pardon, after he
had made a free confeſſion to Henry IV. and to Sully
31. Is deputed by this prince to the parliament of
Dijon iv. 233

Luxemburg, alliances of this houſe with the houſe of
Bourbon and Bethune ii. 184

(Henry de) Duke of Piney, ambaſſador to
Rome ii. 216. His proceſs with the parliament iii. 49

Lyons ſeized by the princes 1, 18. Surrenders to Henry IV.
notwithſtanding the efforts of the Duke of Nemours
to prevent it 394. Its canous reſuſe to allow the Duke
of >avoy's claim of honorary canon ii. 322, Henry's
ſtay in this city in his way to Savoy 334. Henry ſo-
lemnizes his nuptials with Mary of Medicis there 369

— —

M.

is ſent back by Charles IX. to her brother i. 46.
Her taſte for diverſions 52. Her love for the Count
of Soiſſons 145. She is the cauile of his Journey tO

Bearn 268, She gives him a promiſe of marriage 245.
which

M Adame Catherine de Bow bon, Ducheſs of Bar,

3Y
+2
+ (£1
T PL
l 5 —
: :
: :
*.
FS.
6 7
5 v
*_
; TH
ii *
4
*
* * 4
0 *
1
I l
} yy
f *
AY
} -
4.3
+ 1
4 4
+ wh =
: -
» 1
* 0

„ -

, T rm

rl £

>» 3
— Faun CY
„ * _

- > - 4

—̃ —— a — -
- —

2

— — —ü)
a6 —

7 <p> — - 5 * -
py 4 -- „ 4A --
L * * *
=# PLEAS? —
a” . * * 2
x
-

——
e
3

1
= : 7
5 - —
1

WE - **

8

IN D E X

which ſhe afterwards puts into Sully's hands 361. Sully
is ſent to her by Henry IV. to break off this marriage :
converſations between them ii. 90. Cc. She endeavours
to deprive him of the King's favour 100, Henry takes
the farms from her which ſhe enjoyed in his name
251. Several matches refuſed by her : ſhe at length
conſents to marry the Duke of Bar: obſtacles raiſed to
this marriage by Rome and the clergy 274. A con-
ference is held to perſuade her to change her religion,
but to no purpoſe 276. She comes to viſit the King at
Metz, and receives him at Nancy m. 70. A diſpute
between Henry and the Duke of Bar, on account of the
ſucceſſion to her eſtates 237. Particulars relating to her
death, her character, and the diſpenſation for her mar-
Triage 10. |
Maes, the utility of joining this river with the Saone iii.
339

Mahomet III. his character: the janiſaries and the city
of Conſtantinople revolt againſt him ii. 432

Maienne (Charles of Lorrain, Duke of) takes Brouage
i. 59, Commands the army of the league in Guyenne ;
takes ſome towns there, but cannot furpriſe Henry IV.
114. Marches to Tours, where he narrowly miſſes
taking Henry III. and is driven from thence by Hen-
ry IV. 166, His troops defeated at Arques 182,
Forced to abandon Dieppe, and marches towards Paris
185. A ſaying of Sixtus V. upon him and Henry IV.
ib. He takes Pontoiſe, and loſes Meulan 189. Loſes
the battle of -Ivry 190. Faults committed by him
there: particulars of this battle 193. Encounters at
Noyon, Cc. where his troops are beat 219. le loſes
Mante and Houdan 220. He puniſhes the inſolence of
the ſixteen 237. Joins his forces with thoſe of the
Prince of Parma 249. His advice the cauſe of the
checks this prince meets with in the neighbourhood of
Rouen 251. Memorial of the propoſals made by bim
to the King of Spain, aud the conditions which he was
willing to impoſe upon the league, with the anſwers 10
them 283. The aris lie practiſes. againſt the Spaniſh
party and his own nephew, and the faults he comaits

at the meeting of the ſtates of Paris 312. The pz:la-
| | ment

=
64
3
*
*
3
" "=
=,
1
*
o
by
*

.

7

2

BD *
7

=»

WW

27

25

IN D EX.

ment eppoſe him 317. The meaſures taken by him to
exclude Henry IV. from the throne 318. He endea-
vours to render the King's abjuration uſeleſs 337. Op-
poſes the deputation from the Pariſians to this prince
339. Demands a new truce; which is denied him
349. Takes the government of Paris from the Count
of Belin, and gives it to Briſſac, by whom he is betrayed
375, 7. He baffles the deſigns of the Duke of Nemours

ib. Marches to the aſſiſtance of Laon, but cannot

hinder it from being taken 405. Endeavours to ſecure
Burgundy ii. 15. Which revolts from him 16. Errors
in his conduct upon that occaſion 575, He makes his
treaty with Henry IV. who treats him with great
kindneſs at Monceaux 114. Sum of money paid him
upon making his treaty 244. He gives Henry ſatis faction
for the behaviour of the Count of Somerville his ſon :
ſervices done him by Sully on this occaſion iv. 288.
Henry accuſes him with oppoſing the marriage between
Mademoiſelle de Mercœur and the Duke of Vendome
295. He refuſes to ſell his domain of Antibes to the
King 314. Henry appoints him of the council of the
regency 468. Mary de Medicis makes him one of her
public council v. 23. Grants which he procures from
the Queen-regent 81

Ma'tenne (Mademoiſelle de) Henry IV. refuſes to conſent

to her marriage with the Marquis of Roſny iv. 259

* Maignon, Sully's valet de chambre, gives him a ſeaſonable
aſliſtance at the ſiege of Paris 1.171. Saves his life at

» _ «
5 od | Sg
LETS ads Fi.

the battle of Ivry 195. Carries him in triumph to Rof-
ny 202. Of great uſe to him at the fiege of Rouen
232

Maiſſes (Andrew Hurault de), his ſervices againſt the re-

_ i. 402. Heis admitted into the council of finances

35. Where he unites with Sully 145. Is appoint-
" one of the commiſſioners in the affair of the mar-
quifate of Saluces 323. Preſent at the council where-
in Sully receives his inſtructions for his embaſſy to Lon-
don iii. 92 At the council for repealing the baniſhment
of the Jeſuits 241. One of the commiſſioners in the
affair of the earldom of Saint Paul 381

Mads, or Maio, (Laurence), a Jeſuit, labours to procure

the

1

. I $0 Dc. Ris ic,
= ERS
- - * - + * -
4 0 "3%
3

= e

+
- — —

+ a *
30
- . "
SS
zz”

——
— X —
1

*% 2 —ope

_
2 ,
. — *

* * 4

1

the ſettlement of his ſociety in France iti, 240. Hi;
promiſe to Henry IV. in the name of this ſociety 248

Malta (Kaights of), they take Caniſe, and deſtroy Paſia-
va ii. 432. Henry IV. procures his ſon Alexander to
be received into that order iu. 38 3

Mandoce (Bernardia de), propoſals and offers made by
him from Spain to Henry IV. i. 90. Other offers from
Spain made by d' ee 340. Henry IV. ſends La-
Varenne thither 3

Manicamp ( Philip Je 33 de), lieutenant for the
Duke of Vendome in the government of La-Fere ii. 79,
Sent to Flanders upon the Prince of Conde's flight iy,

410

Mansfield (Charles) leads a Spaniſh army into France du—
ring the fitting of the ſtates of Paris i. 313. Takcs
Noyon 319, ard La-Capelle 396. Unable to prevent
the loſs of Laon 405. Is defeated! by the Duke cf
Bouillon ii. 43. Loſes an opportunity of tighting with
the army of Henry IV. at Amiens 168

Mante, the government of it refuſed to Sully, and. given
to his brother i. 2060 The Duke of Maienne fails in
his attempts upon this city 220. Henry IV. reſides
there before the reduction of Paris 225. Conferences
upon religion held there 327. and an aſſembly of Pro-
teſtants 339. The value of this government in money
given to Sully ui. 227

Mantua, in what manner this principality paſſed into the
family of Gonzague iv. 169

—— — (Vincent de Gonzague, Duke of), brocher-in- -law
to the Queen, the reception given him by Henry “.
at Paris iv. 322

— tleonora de Medicis, Ducheſs of), godmother to

the Duuphin, comes into France to perform this cere-

mony : they give her the precedence of the princes ot

the blood iv. 168

(Margaret de Gonzague, Princeſs of), Henry IV.
propoſes a marriage between her and the Duke of Bir
ir. 15. She is taken ill iv. 2

Manufactures of ſine ſtuffs do not ſucceed at ſirſt at
Tours ii. 317. Reflections on this fubject 318. Hen

ry IV. e them contrary to the advice of K
; y

n F One"
Wenn n ©
e wr 12. Eat e

"Re Ce |
6K r

K r 4
EEO ORG: >

* * * 1 1 # 4 1 2 g
, e 4 Fe
* |» 26 EI bs hs. of ee OR

I1TN D E AX.

ly ni, 231. Sully oppoſes the re- erecting of buildings
for them 383

Mar (Earl of) one of the Scotch faction at London iii.
114. Deputed to Sully 156, 71

Marc d'or, a ſubſidy deſtined by Henry IV. for the main-
tenance of his houſehold ii. 173

Margaret de Valois, Queen of France, celebration of
her nuptials with Henry IV. i. 24. She leaves him, and

and brothers 90. 91. Negotiations for the diſſolution
of her marriage commenced ii. 198. Sully endeavours,
to procure her conſent to it by letters, which ſhe an-
ſwers favourably 206, 7. Particulats relating to her life
207. Her hatred to the Ducheſs of Beaufort 219.
The affair of the diſſolution of her marriage reſumed,
and completed: praiſes of her conduct on this occuſion,
Sc. 308. Henry IV. obliges the Count of Au-
vergne to do her juſtice with regard to the inheritance
of Catherine de Medicis: praifes of her moderation
and diſimereſtedneſs iii. 295. Sully goes to her, to
confer with her concerning the cabals of the diſ-
affected party iv. 46. She quits the caſtle of Uſſon,
which ſhe conſents ſhould be demoliſhed; and reſides
in the caſtle of Madrid: honours which the receives
there from the King and Queen: her great confidence
in Sully 100, Particulars of her life: her death: her
good and bad qualities 102. Preſents which ſhe makes
to the Duke and Ducheſs of Sully 119, 20. She aſſiſts
at the baptiſm of the children of France 170

Marine, the deplorable condition it was in at the time of
the peace of Vervins ii. 242. Regulations for its eſta-
bliihment iv. 250. Schemes for this purpoſe 367.
See Cabinet of {tate

Mark (La), earldom and counts of this name : how this
9 became united to the duchy of Cleves iv.

* WE] ee hs : * mh
i *4 4 : 6 Ae ”
D. a PIE 1 Bo wo DT nts ke gakuls W -

„

9 5 * * * . -
EC edit oo, ht ARES EL WO OD

.

*

ee

43
| pra (Lord) conſpires againſt the King of England
i. 205
A Pe Denis de) Archbiſhop of Lyons, endea-
| Yours to procuce a diſſolution of the marriage between
Ficary

returns to court, where ſhe quarrels with her mother

be .
2
:
RF
\'P

1
Wn

+
*
*
1
*
8
o

9

— — „ — 4
*
= „ Ne

7
——
2

<a I
=X
—
8 7
AR
Dd
*

—
-

*
*
- > whos
727
2 2
2
r

— —— —

— — — => An. _— Le .
= ww 27 246 cc ot.

"
4

q
i
{ U

1
*
ny

8 *

r

— a”

SS.
- ————

"— -
42

a; La
I =
<S-7 -

— — *
i 4

%-
— —
o w "ID

.
—

_

IN D E KX.

Henry IV. and Margaret de Valois ii. 198. Is refuſed
a cardinal's hat iii. 271

Marſeilles, its reduction by the Duke of Guiſe ii. 30. 31.
Deputation from thence to Henry IV. 90. Sum paid
at its ſurrendering 244. Biron's party endeavour to
get poſſeſſion of this city 425. Deligns of Spain upon
the iſles iti. 210. Inſurrections which happen there up-
on the prohibition of commerce with Spain 350,
Schemes of the diſaffected party to ſeize it iv. 33. The
troubles in this city paciſied 181

Marteau (Michael) de la Chapelle, traverſes Villeroi's
treaty with Henry IV. i. 365, 85. What paſſes be-
tween Sully and him with this governor 385. He leaves
Rouen 386

Marthe (Meſſieurs de Saint) friends of Sully: their letters
juſtify him againſt the calumnies of Father Cotton in
the affair of the college of Poitiers iii. 397

Martigues (Mary de Beaucaire, Ducheſs of) leaves the
Duke of Mercceur with Henry IV. ii. 180. Viſits Sully
184. She raiſes obſtacles to the marriage of the Duke
of Vendome with Mademoiſelle de Mercœur iv. 294

Matignon ( James de) Marſhal of France, he takes
Montgomery priſoner i. 42. Judgment upon his pro-
cedure 16. He commands an army in Guyenne ; loſes

Coſtets 112. Henry IV. eſcapes him 114. Joyeulc

fights the battle of Coutras without his aſſiſtance 138.
He refuſes to ſuccour Villemur 275. Henry makes
him one of the council of finances ii. 35. He defcats
the Crocans, and 1aiſes the ſiege of Blaye 106

Matthias, Archduke of Auſtria, the United Provinces offer
him the ſovereignity over them; but are afterwards diſ-
guſted with him i. 75

Maupeou oppoſes the re-eſtabliſhment of the Jeſuits il.
245. Appointed by Henry IV. one of the council of
the regency 468

Maurier (Benjamin Aubery du), his letter to Bouillon it.
43.79. The ſervice he does him in the affair of Sedan
iv. 131, Benefits conferred on him by Sully, and bis
advice to him after the death of Henry IV. v. 97

Maximilian I, (Emperor), Philip II. endeavours to deprive
him

£62 n

1X.

him of the empire ii. 265. His claims upon the Low
Countries conteitable iv. 432

Maximilian II. (Emperor), his diſpoſitions with regard to
the territories cf Cleves, Juliers, Cc. iv, 433- See
Cleves

Medavy (Charles Francis Rouxel de), one of the general
officers of the league i. 178. He commences a treaty
with Sully 346. Concludes it 362. Difficulties raiſed
to this treaty 364. The money paid him li. 245

Medicis (Alexander de) Cardinal of Florence, negotiates
for the peace of Vervins ii. 179. Sully receives him
at Paris, and at St Germain 227, He 1s made pope.

See Leo XI.

Medicis (Catherine de) Queen of France, unſucceſsful
in the war againſt the Proteſtants i. 2. Deceives them
by the peace of 1570 3. Favours the Princes of
Lorrain through her hated to the houſe of Bourbon
11, Occaſion of her interview at Buionne with the
Duke of Alba 17. Herr artiſices to draw the Hugue-
nots to Paris 18. The meaſures ſhe takes to ruin the
Proteſtants : maſſacre of Saint Bartholomew 26. Par-
ticulars and refietions on this ſubject 29. The gran-
dees join the Huguenots againſt her 29, Her ſchemes
for the eſtabliſhment of her children 40. Chailes IX.
hates her 16. Her artiſices to diſunite Henry IV. and
Monſieur 44. She deccives them both by the peace
called Monſieur's peace 47. Conferences in ſeveral
places between her and Henry IV. but without effect

60. Methods made uſe of by her to draw every one

of his officers from him 61. Her letter to the Prince

of Condé, in which ſhe thanks him for having taken
arms againſt the King 71. Her ſchemes to procure the
fovereigaty of the Low Countries and the kingdom cf

Algiers for the Duke of Anjou 75, Her treachery in

treating with Sully gr. 92. She loſes an opportunity

of ſuppreſſing the league, and of uniting the Low

Countries to France 100. Reflections upon her bad

policy 128, She goes into Poitou, and has ſeveral

conferences with Henry IV. Sully penetrates into her
ſecret deſigns 129, 30. A ſaying of hers which proves
that ſhe was very indifferent about religion 130, Se—

Vor. V. I veral

— — —
n — +
- Ep : * — , — * 8 1

r

122

AED,

3
12 I",

a

> 2

2

4

— *
—
8

*

— — —— —- —— —-— . —

E D EX.

veral negotiations between her, the Duke of Guiſe, &c.
after the afion of the barricadoes 150, 1. She recon-
ciles Henry III. and the Guiſes 156. Her death 158.
Diſadvantageous character of the princeſs 76. Her laſt
will in favour of her daughters iii. 295, The value
ef her eſtates 6. Margaret diſpoſes of her inheritance
in favour of the Dauphin iv. 231

Medicis (Come II. de) Grand Duke of Tuſcany, ſucceeds
Ferdinand : inſult given by his ambaſſador to the am-
baſſador from France at Rome, for which Henry obliges
him to give ſatisfaction iv. 424. Henry engages him in
bis intereſts 426

. (Ferdinand de) Grand Duke of Tuſcany, marries
ry de Medicis in the name of Henry IV. n. 340.

He ſurrenders the iſles of it to this prince 411. Plots of

his eg. at Madrid againſt the deſigus and perſun
of Henry III. « 352 His death 224. Henry IV,
comforts the en for it: inecch of Ferdinand to the

French ambaſſadors 76. .
——— (Francis Marie de) Grand Duke of Tuſcany,

marrizge of his daughter to Henry IV. propoſed and
ee il, 314

——— 05. John de) a baſtard, uncle to the Queen,

comes with her to Paris ii. 377. Stands proxy for
the Grand Ducheſs of Tuſcany to the Princeſs Chriſti:
na of France iv. 170. 254. He adviſes Henry IV. to
ſerd Conchini back to Italy, and the Quecn forces him
to leave France 277, 80. 427

AMcdicis (Mary de), a marriage prepoſed between her and
Henry IV. ii. 314. The Grand Duke marries her in
the name of the King 340. She arrives at Lyons, wher?
her marriage is completed 370. She comes to Fontaine
bleav, afterwards to Paris, where Sully entertains her

at the arfenal : Italians in her train 378. Goes to ke,

the jubilee at OiJeans 390, Becomes pregnant, and is

delivered of the Dauphin: a ſpeech of Hemy's to het
and ſume parriculars relating to the buth of the child!

407. He gives her Menccaux 411. She follows tl:
King to Blois itt, 2. This prince takes a ſevere reſc 5

tion again her and the Italians 13. He Ciſcloſcs to bi
his deſign of arreſting Bien 21. Buth of the Prince!

F

Rare

EN D E X.

Eliſabeth of France: Henry's extreme tenderneſs to
the Queen during her Iying-in 60, He takes her with
him to Metz 68. His advice to her when he thought
himſelf dying 89. Sully prefents medals of gold ard
ſilver to her, and receives preſeats from her in return
236. Unealineſs which ſhe gives the King by her jea-
louſy and bad temper 277. Sully adviſes her on this
ſubject, but ſhe will not liſten to him, and he endea-
vours to reconcile them 220, Grants which the pro-
cures from the King 224. Sully pertuades her ro wiite
a ſubmiſſive letter tothe King 285. They are reconciled,
and quarrel again by the artiſices of the Marchioneſs of
Vernzml 286. Mutual complaints between her and
Sully, who forbears to engage any more in their quar-
rels 229. Other quarrels between her, the King, and
the VIarchioneſs of Verneuil, Which Sully endeavour
to appeaſe 292, Preſents made to her by Henry IV.
and to the officers, and women of her houtehold iv.

She attends the King in his journey to Auictane, Se.
91. Viſits and honours paid by her to Queen Margaret
101. A curious converſation between her, the King.
and Sully, upon their diſputes 113. She makes com-
plaints of Henry 117 A pleaſant ſaying of this prince
to her, upon the birth of her ſecond daughter 75, He
tefuſes to take thoſe meaſures which Sully propoſes to
terminate their quarrels : : preſents made by her to Sul-
ly 119. She favours the Spanith policy agatalt that of
the King 123. Attends this prince in his expedition to
Sedan, and favours the Duke of Bouillon 139, Pro—
eures the Ducheſs of Mantua precedence of the princcs
of the blood 169. Eſcapes being drowned at Nenil}y
171. A familiar Haloge ue between her and the King
193, Birth of her ſecond ſon 193. New quarrels
between her, the King, and the Marchioneſs of Ver-
neuil: fhe pawns her jewels 255. Sully again endea-
vours to compoſe their quarrels : particulars and ance-
dotes on this ſubjet 271, Henry's complailance to
her. Birth of his third ſon 281, Che gives the King
dangerous advice againſt the Proteſtants 299. She gocs
to Chartres 344. Her friendilüp for Father Cotton
. Plots agaialt the life of Henry IV. carried on a-

i 2 mong

IN U E Xs

mong the people of her houſehold 356. She permits
the dukes to enter the courts of the Louvre in their
coaches 363. Grants which ſhe procures for Leonora from
Sully 388. Conſequences of her jealouſy of the Princeſs
ol Conde 395. Henry IV, comforts her for the death of
the Grand Duke 424. He appoints her regent during
the execution of luis great deſigns 468, She inſiſts up-
on being crowned in oppoſition to the deſires of Henry
469. Juſtification of this princeſs, and other particu-
lars relating to her in the account of Henry's aſſaſſination
479. She ſends for Sully to the Louvre: the reception
the gives him v. 16. 17. The parliament declare her
regent 19, Her ſecret council compoſed of perſons
whoſe maxims of policy are directly oppoſite to thoſe
of Henry IV. 22. The Count of Soiſſons endeavours
to get her regency annulled 26. 27. Difficulty of ap-
peating the quarrels between the princes of the blood
29. An cxtraordinary council held upon the affair of
Cleves, in which ſhe will not follow Sully's advice 31,
A particular council wherein, contrary to Sully's advice,
me takes meaſures againſt the Duke of Savoy 35. Her
pol:cy wholly oppoſite to that by which Henry IV. go-
verned himſelf 38. Bears Sully ill-will for his con-
nections with the Prince of Condé 46. She receives
this prince coldly, but afterwards gains him by gratuitics
49. 54. Her diſſimulation with Sully 57. She ſends

an army to the ſiege of juliers 58. She ſecretly deter-

mines to diſmiſs Sully 61. She ſends him a comptant,
which he refuſes to ſign 64. Her reaſons for ſending tor
Sully from Montrond 74. The gracious reception ſhe
gives him 76. Conchini gives her bid impreſſions of

him 79. A proſufion of gratuities, grants, and favours Þ
beſtowed by her upon the grandees 81, Mortifications ]

which ſhe gives Sully 84. She ſupports Villeroi and
D' Alincourt againſt him in the affair at Lyons 84. Sully

reſigus his employments of ſuperintendant of the ſinances f

and governor of the Baſtile : brevets and recompenſc:

_ which he receives for them 91. Different opinions up-
on his proceeding in this reſpect 02, Letters between]
her and Sully, wherein ſhe promiſes him her protection]
100, She gives him a conſiderable augmearation of I

penſion

„

8
— ** :
wr 77 . 1
A e e

«* &
2
$3

-
74

Meulan taken by D'Aumont ard Sully i 176.

IND EX.

penſion 105. She 1s obliged to yield to the Proteflants

in the aſſembly at Chatelleraut 173. and to the Duke «© t

Rohan in the affair of St John d'Angely 176. She aſks
Sully's advice upon the rebellion of the princes : her
letters to him 175, 7

Mercœur (Philip-Emanuel de Lorrain, Duke of) is by
Henry III. imprudently made governor of Britany i.
135. Defeats the Royalitts at Craon 267. His ſchemes
dilconcerted by Sully 283, His plots with the ſtates
of Paris ineffectual 314. His ſucceſs in Britany ii. 15,
106, Henry LV. makes preparations for a journey
into that province, to drive him from thence 178. A
bon mot of his with regard to his pretended claims
upon Britany 15. Methods which he makes uſe of to
obtain his pardon 180. His party in Britany ſuppreſſed
183. The ſum he receives upon making his treaty 244.
He goes into lungary to ſerve the Emperor in his wars
316. de is made heutenant-general there 379. He
takes Albe-Royale from the Turks 431. Particulars
rela ing to his death: his culogium iii. 64. Henry IV.
purchaſes the rower of Bouc fra bim v.14. His ſon
ſerves in the expedition of Sedan 143

Mercœur (Frances de Lorrain de) contracted to the Dake
of Vendome ii. 181. Great diſhculties in accompliſh -
ing their mariiage iv. 295

(Mary de Luxemburg, Ducheſs of),
thods ſhe makes uſe cf to move Henry IV. in favour of
her huſband ii. 180. Sully is reconciled to her 182.
Obſtacles raiſed by her to the marriage of her daughter
with the Duke of Vendome iv. 295

Metz, Henry IV. goes thither, and drives cut the Sobo-
les: other motives for tl.is, and the conſequences of it
ini. 67, Tc. Sully ſupports this city againſt the Jeſuits
ir. 158. The Duke of Verneuil is made biſhop of it:
right of this chapter 205

——

the me—

The
league make a fruitleſs attempt upon it: Henry IV. runs
great dangers in ſuccouiing it 189, 90. Other dangers
which he eſcapes there 344

1-3-3 Mey cube,

3 1
pu * E —
= — <4 2 * r „
* * * 1 * * _ — *
Os + > - Þ Z 1
— EL - —
— * „* * . a.
* L * -".

* ” &
.

n — — 2 —-—-

3 — *
- = 6
a
- ASS —

* „ ng
© k * *
» —— Aus... 4 .
— — — > >.
as

— -

-

"YT 2-4
— —P
.

"_—
&

2 5 * * *

.

= nn. 4 =

. SS > NC.
n

* 3 *
*
* ” wa

(up moe eu

8

3 J CS

IN DU EX.

Meyragnes, (Lewis D'Alagon, or Lagonia, Baron de), Ins
crime and puniſhment iv. 92

Michau (Captain) an adventure which Henry IV. has with
him i. 96.

Nignon (Nichole) attempts to poiſon Henry IV. his pu-
niſhment ii. 329

Military, (affairs and regulations belonging to it), part of
the troops diſbanded ii. 221. The miſerable condition
to which the civil wars had reduced it 242. Eitabliſh-
ments for the invalid foldiers, and other regulations iii.
345. Order in military diſciphne reſtored iv. 11. Schemes
tor this purpoſe 367. A uſeful regulation in militaty di-
{cipline projected by Henry IV. v. 167

ipiſters of ſtage, character of a perfect miniſter ii. 228.

What fort of perſons were then called miniſters and ſe-
cretaries of ſtate : the title of miniſter not much in uſe
227, Maxims of Sully upon this employment iii. 408.
How kings onght to behave to miniſters iv. 199, Faults
which they often commit, Qualities neccflary to be
poſſeſſed by miniſters of ſtate 368

7irepoix, (Louiſa de Bethune, Marchioneſs of ), her in-
gratitude to the Duke of Sully her father v. 112

Miſtreſſes of Henry IV. their names: the children he had
by them iv. 270

Money, that of Spain very common in France i. 346. Ab-
atcs in it corrected, and new regulations ii. 382, Fo-
reign money prohibited 383. The carrying of coin
out of the kingdom prohibited 385. The value of
it raiſed, and reckoning by livres eſtabliſhed iii. 5 3.
Maxims and reflections upon theſe operations 7b, F-
dicts concerning the coin, troubles occaſioned by them
45,
Momaſte (houſe of) in Piedmont, Sully diſſuades Hen-
ry IV. from purchaſing the eſlates of that houſe ii. 413.
A quarrel on this occaſion between the Count of Soiffons
and Sully v. 28, The Quneen-regent favours the Count
of Soiſſons in this affair 64

(Lewis, Count of) marries his daughter to the

Count of Soiſſons ii. 413
Montaaban, a cautionary town given to the Proteſtants 1. 2.
It maintains it privileges 38. Allembly of Proteſtants
held

— {#

—

Mf

L N D E x.

held in this city: tumults among them 181. Their
eulogium upon Henry IV. iii. 226, Taken by Lewis XIII.
Sully's ſervices at this ſiege v. 182

Montbazon, (Lewis de Rohan, Duke of ), the reception he
gives Sully i. 111, 12. Preſent at the battle of Saveuſe
168

Montbazon, (Hercules de Rohan, Euke of), Sully's friend-
ſhip for him cenfured wm, 425. Heory IV. lives with
him at Livry iv. 348. Appointed one of the regents
468. Involved in Ravaillac's conſpiracy 490. De-
puted to Sully by the Queen-regent v. 15

Monte, (Horace Del-), commiſſioner from the Pope for
the diſſolution of the marriage between Henry IV. and
Margaret de Valois ii. 310

Me ntplar (Lewis de Harlay de) firſt Reward of the houſe-
hold of Henry IV. he is ſent by that prince to meet the
foreign army i. 147. He is reſident from France in
Germany iv. 141. Appointed ambaſſador to the Porte
468

Montglat (Madaine de), gorerneſs to the children of France,
ſhews the Dauphin in Paris iii. 282, Preſents made her
by Henry IV. iv. 12. By Sully 114. Carnes the clul-
dren of France to Noifly 253

Montgomery (Gabriel Count of) kills Henry II. in a
tournament i. 11. Eſcapes at the maſſacre of Saint
Bartholomew 30. Returns into F.ance 42. Is taken
and executed : the opinion of the author concerning
the promiſe that was ſaid to be given him by Matgnon.
43

Montigny (Francis de la Grange de) preſent at the de-
feat of the grand convoy ſent to Laon 409. Henry IV.
is wounded by '.harel as he was giving him audience ii.
40. That prince refuſes him the poſt of grand maſter

of the ordnance 165, 6. Makes him governor of Metz,

and the country of Mefiin iii. 69. Sully's friendſhip for

*

2
wk — — . *<a bs 2 1
3 2 . 1 *
5 = EY .
» SE: 4
* « nth

232 — ” Es
ws =
— -
no . 7
= * o * — 0

1

him calumniated 425. A quarrel between him and the 3 5
Duke of Epernon iv. 294. The Quecn-regent declares 4 »

2 for Epernon againſt him v. 81 * :
 Montmarin erben for the government of Poitou for Sul- ih:

| ly iti. 226, Sent to the Griſons on the affair of La- .
: Valrclin 4

IN DU E X.

Valtelin iii. 377. Deputed by the King to aſliſt at the

ſynod of Rochelle iv. 202

NMontmelian, a converſation between the Duke of Savoy
and Sully, concerning this place ii. 323. Crequy takes
the city, and Sully makes preparation for beſieging the
caſtle 343. He lays ſiege to it, and obliges it to cupi-
tulate: the labours he endures, and the dangers he ex-
poles himſelf to during this ſiege 356

Montmorency, (Anne de), Conſtable of France : he 1e-
kindles the war i. 10. Is very powerful in the reign of
Henry II. an account of his miniſtry 75,

(Charles de), De Danville, admiral : an im-

portant ſervice done him by Conchini v. 67

— (the Chevalier de) ſeizes the Luquiſſes and

other rebels iv. 65

— (Francis de), called the Marſhal de Mont-

morency, ſent to Rouen to puniſh the injuries commit-

ted againſt the Proteſtants i. 13. Sent to London to

treat of a marriage between Qucen Eliſabeth and the

Duke of Alencon 16. Refuſes to come to court 28,

Charles IX. ſpares the lives of his brothers at the mal-

facre of St Bartholomew, that he might not provoke

tim 30

—_—

— (Henry de), called ſuceeſſively Marſhal de
Danville, Marſhal and Conſtable de Montmorency : ke
joins the Proteſtants i. 44. His opinion of the duel
between Turenne and Duras 64, He gives the Prote-

ſtants good counſel 103, Commands the troops ot

Flenry IV. in Languedoc 115, 22. Supports his party

in Dauphiné 2/2. Succouis Villemur 274. Is made

conſtable: his ſucceſſes in Dauphinè ii. 43. His rea- Fi

ſons for intreating Henry to come into Burgundy 26. He
oppoſes Sully's entrance into the council of finances 109.
He gives a ball at court 148. Sully gains his approva-

tion of his method of managing the finances 254. The Þ

death of his ſecond wife 291. He is appointed one of
the commiſſioners in the affair ef the marquiſate of Sa-
luces 323. And for the peace of Savoy, Serves the
King but indifferently on that occaſion 369, 70. Com:

mands the troops left in Piemont 376. He is ſuſpected

of being an accomplice with Biron iii. 30. Henry IV,

reſto1cs Þ

EO CT RIG

|
4
>
5
of
4
KW

IE N. DE X.

reſtores him to his favour at the intreaty of Sully 33. He
and his family intercede for the Count of Auvergne 24.
He does Sully a ſervice 60, He favours the repeal of
the Jeſuits baniſhment 241. Is employed in the prohi-
bition of commerce beeween France and Spain 251.
Henry cauſes the foreſt of I Aigle to be divided between
himſelf and the Conſtable iv. 13. He draws up the pro-
cels againſt the Luquiſſes 65. Henry IV. deſigns to
marry Mademoiſelle de Vendome to his fon 267. He
is apppointed one of the members of the council of re-
gency by this prince 468. He offers his ſervices to
Sully after the death of Henty IV. v. 16. The Queen-
regent makes him one of her council 23. He alkits at
it, and takes Sully's part againſt Bouillon 69. His quar-
rels with the grandees and the miniſters 70

Montmorency (Charlotte Margaret de), Henry IV. will

not conſent to her marriage with the Marquis of Roſny
iv. 259. but deſtines her for the Prince of Conde 295.
She is mariied to him contrary to Sully's advice: mo-
tives of this marriage, and the paſſion of Henry for this
princeſs 349. Henry promiſes Sully to renounce his
paſhon 357. Sully's prudent advice to him on this oc-
caſion 362. The plots and diſcontent of the Prince of
Conde 397. Her huſband carries her to Flanders :
particulars relating to their flight 402. Diſadvanta-
geous reports raiſed againit the honour of this princeſs

405

Montpenſier, (Francis de Boutbon, Duke of), raiſes the

ſiege of Livron i. 42. Attends Monſieur in Flanders
83. and endeavours to diſſuade him from the treachcry
he committed at Antwerp 85

— (Henry de Bourbon, Duke of) commands

25 is ©

the royal forces in Normandy i. 185. An account of
this expedition 224. Henry III. to blame in taking
the government of Britany from him 185. IIe loſes
the battle of Craon 267. Is wounded at the ſiege of
Dreux 329. Sully reconciles him and the Count of
Soiſſons 355. The party he has in the treaty with
Admiral Villars 367. Receives a recompenſe from
Henry IV. 381. He propoſcs to this prince to make
the governments hereditary, and ſoyereigntics i, 70.

le

»
2 ²ĩ damĩm—J——ů— 2 —

"I
'#. | as
- 7
= _ *: -
- D r —— -
3 —
Wi f ” "* 4 Þ « c 4 — » ow
be 2 9 — Dn . 4?
« Ly. & _ 4 4 5

. , - —

= : roar ww 8

o x.

wy -
2
8

4

—_—_

IN DEX.

ry IV. at the ſiege of Rouen i. 228. He defeats the
Count of Mansfield ii. 43

Navarre (kingdom of) uſurped by the Spaniards i. 9. De-
ſign of Catherine de Medicis to purchaſe it from the
houſe of Albret, and to exchange it with Spain 5.
Claims of the houſe of Rohan upon the eſtates poſleflcd
by that of Albret there iii. 435. The finances of Na-
varre are reunited to thoſe of France iv. 229, A dil-
pate concerning the boundaries of this kingdom terimi-
nated to Henry's advantage 329. Part of the great de-
ſign which relates to this {tate. See Political Deſig ign

Navarre, (Antony de Bourbon, King of) i. 1. His death
12. Particulars relating to his life 5b.

— (Henry d' Albret, King of), particulars relating to
this prince at the birth of his grandſon i. 7

— — (Henry de Bourbon, Prince, afterwards King of
afterwards King of France. See Henry IV.

— (Jane d'Aibret, Queen of) i. 7. Retires to
Rochelle at the peace of 1570 12. Motives which de.
termine her to go to Paris 14. Her death 26. Opinions
concerning it 70. Her hatred of Popes 10.

Nemours, (Charles Emanuel de Savoy, Duke of), flit,
for the league at Ivry i. 197. Defends Paris again
Henry IV. 209. His party in Provence unſucceſsful
272. As likewiſe his deſigns and plots at the ſtates ot
Paris 312. The city of Lyons ſurrenders to Henry“.
notwithſtanding his endeavours to the contrary : the
treatment he receives there 314. The Conſtable de
Montmorency defeats his troops, and takes his towns
1.43. Sum paid him at his treaty 244

Neuburg, (Philip-Lewis, Count Palatine of), his claim
to the ſucceſſion of Cleves iv. 433. He divides it wich
the Elector of Brandenburg v. 60. See Cleves

Nevers (Charles de Gonzague, Duke of) is wounded at
the ſiege of Buda: his eulogium i i1. 65. He ſerves in
the expedition of Sedan iv. 143. Proceſſes between hun
and Henry IV. for the eſtates of the houſe of Albret
239. He is ſent ambaſſador to Rome 306. The m
niſters treat him ill 73. Grants which he procures from
the Queen-regent 81

Nevers (Lewis de Gonzague, Duke of) makes himſelt
dread

}

EN DN.

dreaded by Henry III. i. 161. Attaches himſelf to

Henry IV. after the death of that prince 176. Brings

troops to the King, and endeavours to procure the chief

Tway in his council 214, Excites the Catholics to mu-

tiny at the ſiege of Rouen: the cauſe of another mit-

fortune which happens to the King at Bully 240, He

becomes one of the heads of the third party 287. His

plots with the ſlates of Paris 315. Henry IV. ſends

him to Rome, to pay obedience in his name to the Pope
236. He is made governor of Champaign ii. 23. and

head of the new council of finances 35. His quarrels

with Sully 37. He commands the King's forces in Vi-
cardy 45. Quarrels with the other commanders : his
ill ſuccefs 51. His death 20. Opinion of his con-
duct 16. |

Nevers {Ducheſs of) engaged in the intrigues of Hen-
ry IV. iv. 357

Noailles, (Francis de), the occaſion of his embaſſy to the
Porte 1. 75, He commands the forces at the fliege of
Pierrefort iv. 251

Nobleſs, Sully's reſlections upon the little reſpect ſhown to
them upon their unequal alliances, and degenerated
manners ii. 388. Schemes ct N IV. concerniug
them iv. 368. See Cabinet of itare

Normandy, places taken by the royaliſts in that province
i. 188, Military operations, Cc. by the Duke of Mont-
penſier 224. See Gautiers, Normandy ſends ſupplies
to Henry IV. for the ſiege of Rouen 228. Its towns
and governors ſubmit to that prince 374,88. Sully
ſupports the intereſts of this province 19474

North, (courts of the), their bad policy diſapproved by
Sully iii. 141

Northumberland, (Earl of), one of the factious lords at
London in. 115. He conduQts Sully to his ſirſt audi-
ence 129. His abilities: Sully cans his fiendſhip 135.
He receives ſome x74 of importance from him 25,
Sully is conducted by him to his fecond audience 147 7
and is appointed one of the commiſſioners to confer W TH
him 156. Sully makes him preſents 196. Ile inſults
Colonel Vere i,

Notables (aſſembly. of) at Rouen, mctives, deliberations,
Vor. V. K K and

—

r :
= — £4 x —

*
3
— *

4

5 8 1
* 2 2
vs ws. - OS
n —
22 4 — <= =
” * — —— -
2 »

r=ge

-

* * : N *
i as a 9
717323. . "es =
- + - 4
* q

—

— —
* — 8 Fa
-

2 TE

> BE
om. —

—_——
2

—
93

- —
2 —_—

_— =

a
* 3 9 ** > * - \ \ N 9
— — — —

a PR”
2 *

*
jv

— —

—
9

a-

n

— "EL
- * —
W x,

*

_

JJJ*⁵e 2L—g —
= .

. 2
8

* *
— rey

U 5 —
— *

„

I .

and the reſult of this aſſembly: Henry IV. 's conduct
there, and reflections on this ſubject ii. 129, 33. See
alſo General States

Notaries declared competent judges in all contracts, &c.
iv. 377

Noue, (Francis de La), Catherine de Medicis privately
countenances his defeat in Flanders i. 25. Eulogium
ot this officer 25. He takes the ſuburb St Germain
by aſſault 186. Henry's great generoſity to him 378.
iii. 11

Noue, (Odet de La-), propoſed for deputy- general of the
Proteſtants iv. 60. and accepted 7 3. He is againſt the
expedition of Sedan 138. Is employed by Sully in the
affair of Metz againſt the Jeſuits 158. Serves the King
in the ſynod of Kochelle 201

O.
() (Francis d') de Freſne, &c. ſuperintendant of the

finances, attaches himſelf to the ſervice of Hen-

ry IV. after the death of Henry III. i. 175. but go-
verns his finances badly, and ſuffers him to be in want
of every thing 205, Endeavours to have the chief
iway in his council 214. Hinders the Catholics from
obeying him at the ſiege of Rouen 234, and raiſes a
mutiny among them 262, 63. He becomes one of the
heads of the third party 287. Interpoſes in the affair
of Henry's converſion 321. Procures the government
of Paris 377. Oppoſes the Cardinal de Bourbon and
Sully 397. Solicits for the Jeſuits in their proceſs with
the univerfity 401. His profuſion: his vices ii. 18.
Particulars relating to his death 20. He rents the farms
under borrowed names iv. 2

Offices (new) created, offices of the finances and the bar
ſuppreſſed ii. 390. Creation of offices to be made upon
occaſion iv. 373

OMcers of the crown and others, Sully alters the form of
their payments and penſions ii. 251. Suppreſſes part of
them in the finances and the bar 390

©1:4corn, (Fdword), a Jeſuit, engaged in the conſpiracy of
the Euglith Lords againſt James iv. 190, 227

Oliva,

N Dr

©livari (Seraphin) Cazailla, his reply to Clement VIII.
who refuſed to give Henry IV. abſolution i. 337. Sully
procures a cardinal's hat for him iii. 271. Debts part
to him by Henry iv. 254

Oolt-Friſe (Prince of) ſupports Embden with the United
Provinces againſt Spain iii. 63

Orange, a diſpute concerning this place and Blaccons ir,
43. Henry IV. ſhews too much indulgence to Le!-
diguieres upon this occaſion 7b, See Charelleraut, Blac-
cons

— (William de Naſſau, Prince of) takes Mons from

the Spaniards i. 15, Lieutenant- general to the Arch-
duke Matthias 75, He eſcapes being murdered at Am-
werp: the Flemmings nie againit the French upon this
occaſion: he paciſies them 84. He foreſees and ren-
ders ineffectual the deſigned treachery at Antwerp 85.
Endeavours in vain to reconcile Monſieur and the Flem-
mings 16.

— (Maurice de Naſſau, Prince of) gains the batt]:
of Nieuport againſt the Archduke Albert, and railes th:
ſiege of that place ii 378. Endeavours to carry the:
war into the neighbourhood of Dunkirk 391. Takes
Rhimberg, and loſes Bolduc 292. Henry IV. ſecretly
grants him ſupplies 405. He takes Grave: other
operations ii. 61. Drives the Spaniards out of Vac-
tendock 75. Takes Cadſan: beſieges Sluys, which he
takes 357, Other military operations iv. 26. Intereſts
himſelf in the affair of Orange and Blaccons 43. Main-
tains his reputation but indifferently during the campaign
of 1606. His diſagreement with Barnevelt, one of the
principal cauſes of the truce 186, He loſes Antwerp
215. He oppoſes a ſuſpenſion of arms 224. and plots
in France to prevent it 323. but Henry IV and Sully

guard againſt him 224. He conſents to the treaty of

truce 416. He joins the German princes aſſembled at
Hall 448. See Cleves. Takes Julters at the head of
the confederates v. 57. His part in the great defign:
150. and the forces he contributes towards its execution
155. See Political Deſign

—— (Princels of) entertains Sully at ſupper ii. 294.

The United Provinces make her a preſent iii. 358. Eet-

K k. 2 ters.

err SENT) RE"
: 1 0 77 * 8 - =. N r
e Sams. + 7 Gen — >. —_— I
* 4 * : __, 35
7 f - > s 7 — ets 4 »„— ' . 2 —
*- © * T paper wn IN © . - 27> 4.3%, * A
— I. = % - - — —
= b how — — — 2 *
== * 2s - — — _—y _ _ — 2
" F =
1 1 - 7 »
= * 4

IN U Ei Ae

ters winch ſhe writes to Bouillon ou the part of Hen-
ry IV. on occaſion of the expedition to Sedan iv. 132.
She receives a letter from Henry IV. upon the ſurren-
der of Sedan 153. 278. Letters wrote by her to Sully,
on the affair of the truce between Spain and the States-
General 324
Order (new) of knighthood propoſed by Henry IV. to
be inſtituted iv. 366. Sully makes one for himſelf v.
| 194 | |
Orleans taken by the Proteſtants i. 18. Surrendered by
La-Chatre to Henry IV. 350. Sum paid for it ii. 244.

The King and Queen keep the jubiſes there 390. Hen-

ry paſſes ſome time there in his journey to Auvergne iv.
88. Troubles in this city 343

—— — (N. de France, Duke of), his birth iv. 193. Ile
is taken ill 305. Is contracted to Mademoifelle de
Montpenſier 355. Conchini takes the government of
Normandy from him v. 63. Sully preſages his death
62. | Cauſe of it ih.

Ornano, (Alphonſo d'), Marſhal of France, he gives Hen-
ry III. good advice on the day of the barricadoes i. 151,
He ſupports the party of Henry IV. in Dauphine 27 2.
Supports the L .nnois againſt the league 394. Helps
to defeat the troops of the Dukes of Savoy and d'FEper-
non ii. 107, 54. Services done by him to Henry IV.
after the death of the Ducheſs of Beaufort 294. The
King is diſguſted with him 415. He is concerned in
the duties ariſing from anchorage iu. 220. Sully's
friend{hip for him calumniated 425. Sully takes his

part againſt Epernon iv, 99. 253. He difapproves of

the outrageous ſermons of Father Gonthier 394

Orval (Francis de Bethune, Count of), Henry IV. makes
him a very conſiderable preſent v. 108. Receives ſome
ſervices from him: employments which he poſſeſſed:
the lands of Orval erected into a duchy in his favour :
the duchy of Sully goes into his hands 109. Kis ſhare
in the diviſions Sully made of his eſtates: other partt-
culais concerning him 183, 4

Offat (Arnaud d') cardinal, 3 of favouring the
league ii. 66. 67. Ancxamiaation into his conduct and
ſentiateuts 65. 66, Employed in the diſſolution of

Henry's

END E Xs
Henry's marriage with Margaret de Valois 198. and ob -
tains a diſpenſation. for the marriage of the Princeſs;
Catherine and-the Duke of Bar, which he was accuſed
of endeavouring to hinder 275. He ſerves Henry IV.
at Rome in the affair of Martha Broſher 289, Further
particulars of his negotiation for diffolving Henry's mer-
riage 309, The treaty which he makes with the Grand
Puke of Tuſcany for the reſtitution of the iſles, &c.
blamed by Sully 412. and juſtified 6. Accuſations of
this miniſter againſt him iii. 71. Mortifications which
he receives from Sully 73. He is made coadjutor of C7
Baieux 74. His opinion concerning the affair of the .--

.

—
. ——

a * 1 = > > * 3 — y - -
__ — 2 —_— * 2 — 7
b = — Fe * * — G
ati =o a — 4 - —_— — l - * — 2
— Ry. . > 7 - — — 22 . --
8 I — 2.2 T a - 4 :
wy he =- F E 2 - —
L — * =. . .
* = — 44 2
r —— —
4 * '% Jan = *
=» * — - > I 4 2 3 — -
> _ = 2 ww 1
U J | \ > :
4 OJ

Engliſh clergy 152. Sully preſents a memorial againſt. by |
him to the King 248. Heads of the accuſations con- # 1
tained in'this memorial 254. His juſtification 256 19
bo
P. 9
'#
Alatine (Elector), the heads of the Proteſtant party 1
form a deſign to make him the protector of the French 1
Proteſtants i. 102. Henry IV. withdraws the farms 1
from his hands 11, 25 1. And refuſes to pardon Bouillon W
at his requelt iii. 77. He continues to ſupport Bouillon, 58
and endeavours to procure him the protection of King 76 {
James, but in vain 125, 52. 222. His fears occaſioned. \
by the expedition of Sedan iv. 141. He writes a polite. Wn
letter to Sully 321 5

Par (Ambroiſe), ſurgeon to Charles IX. his converſation
with that prince concerning the maſſacre of St Bartho-
lomew i. 35

Paris, Huguenots maſſacred in that city. See Bartholomew
(Saint), The exerciſe of the Proteſtant religion forbid
within ten leagues round it. See Peace of 1577. Tranſ-
actions there on the day of the barricadoes 1, 150.
The general conſternation there, after the departure cf
Henry III. The Pariſians ſend a deputation to that
prince 155. The two kiogs inveſt Paris 170. Hen-

Iy IV. attacks the ſuburbs 186. Ke takes them by

aſſault, and beſieges the city: he raifes the ſiege in com-

paſſion to the ichabitants: the horrors of this ſiege:
other particulars concerning it 207, Cc. The ſtates

K.k. 3 are.

CE "44 " 8", 4 4
tes me CT ie £3 nn ud
- e 2 3 $ 2 ** Rn ”
5 ,” => * 1
dd 4 y *

* a - *

. * —

. - Os

1
* t _— —
—

—

—

* 5
—
».* —

e

— WES”
1

n
——

IN It E. X.

are held in chat city: their convocation, tumult, and
confuſion there 312. See League, Guiſe, Spain, Cc.
The cutates of Paris inflamed againſt ,Henry IV. 318.
Their joy at this prince's abjuration of his religion: the
Pariſians ſend a deputation to him, contrary to the in-
clinations of Maienne 339. The reduction of this
city; and particulars relating to Renry's. entry there
373. Proceſs againſt the Jeſuits carried on by the u-
niverſity 9 curates of Paris 403. Tranquillity
and order reſtored there ii. 148. The ſovereign courts
of Paris oppoſe the regiſtering of the edict of Nantz
282. which is altered, and at length regiſtered 287.
The reception given to the Queen by this city 378.
The Dauphin is carried publicly through Paris 410.
Preſents which this city made to the Queen on occaſion
of the Dauphin's birth 411. Public buildings in it by
Henry IV. iii. 82. iv. 10. A contagious diſtemper,
which rages in Paris, prevents the ceremony of the bap-
tiſm of the children of France from being performed
there iv. 170. The general grief and conſternation
of this city at the death of Henry IV. &c. See Par-
ricide, Ravaillac, Parliament

Parliament of Paris, the league cannot engage it in their
ſchemes on the day of the barricadoes, Cc. i. 155. It
oppoles the deſigns of Ma jenne and the league, upon the
{tates of Paris: adecree given by it upon the ſucceſhon
to the crown; what perſons had moſt ſhare in this de-
cree;z and other particulars relating to it 317. It is
recalled from Tours 381. Plots carried on in the pai-
liament in favour of the Jeſuits, againſt the univerſity
and curates of Paris 403. Sully is made honorary coun-

ſellor of the parliament of Paris it. 235. It is obliged

to alter the edict of Nantz, and to regiſter it after greit

oppoſition 287. The parliament ſupports its advocatcs

again{t the King iii. 49. Oppoſes the edits upon mo-

ney 53. And the recall of the Jeſuits 244. An artet

iſſued by it againſt the Prince of Conde iv. 410. Cor

duct of the parliament upon the death of Henry I.

Particulars relating to the proceſs againſt Ravaillac an

ethers, on occaſion of this parricide 495. ct 1

—
4

P.

a :

I N DE X.

The parliament confirm the regency to the Queen v.

18

Parliaments: of the kingdom: diſobedience of the parlia-
ments of Languedoc and Burgundy. See theſe names.
Sully complains of the parliaments iv. 233. His diſ-
putes with them 315. The droit annuel, Creations

of offices, and other regulations with reſpect to the par-
liaments projected. See Cabinet of State

Parma- (Alexander Farneſe, Duke of) raiſes the blocade

of Cambray, and makes a fine retreat 1.80. He forces
Monſieur to quit Flanders 87. A ſpeech of his upon
the barricadoes 1 52. He obliges Henry IV. to raiſe the
ſiege of Paris 208, G. Takes poſſeſſion of an advan-
tageous polt, and acts like an able general upon this oc-
caſion: a ſmart ſaying of his to the Duke of Maienne
211. He takes Corbeil with great difficulty 212.
Suffers ſome loſſes in his retreat 213. He repaſſes the
Somme, and comes to the aſſiſtance of Rouen: Henry
goes to meet him 235. He miiles taking this prince ax
Aumale 240. A faying of his upon this action 246,
He. repaſſes the Somme, and again takes the road to
Rouen 250, He avoids fighting, and arrives at Rouen
251. Henry IV. deceives him, and gains ſeveral ad-
vantages over him: he is wounded: he eſcapes the
purſuit of Henry IV. by a maſterpiece of good con-
duct at the paſſage of the Seine 256. A mutiny in the
army of Henry IV. prevents his being purſued 257.
He goes back to Flanders 267. Deſigns to return again
into France, but dies 277. Opinion concerning his death
ib, His ſchemes not purſued by the ſtates of Paris, to
the great advantage of Henry 313. See Spain, League,
Maienne

Parricide committed on the perſon of Henry IV. in what

manner this crime was executed iv. 488. Examination
into. the different opinions concerning the authors and
the motives of this parricide 491, Cc. Names of the
ſeveral perſons who were accuſed of being accomplices
in it 502 |

Paſithèe, a nun, who pretends to inſpiration iv. 162.

The faction in the Queen's houſehold make uſe of her
to ſerye their pernicious deſigns iv. 355
Payement

FNC DIE X

Pavement of Paris, regulations concerning it iv. 10. Sums
expended upon that account 231

Paul V. rejoicings in Paris for his advancement to the pon-
tificate iv. 20. His attachment to France: honours paid
by him to the French ambaſſador 21. See Bethune,
His great eſteem for Sully: his brief to him, and Sully's
anſwer to it iv. 23. He congratulates Henry upon the
expedition to Sedan 150. Origin and effects of the
diſpute between him and the Venetians 153. He ſtands
godfather to the Dauphin 170. His moderation with re-
ſpect to the Proteſtants 202. He forbids the Engliſh to
take the oaths of fidelity to King James 227. Henry IV.
terminates the diſpute between him and the republic of
Venice 16. Brief from Paul V. and this miniſter's an-
ſwer to it 229. He grants with ſome difficulty the bi-
ſhopric of Metz to the Duke of Verneuil 305, 6.
Preſſes Henry but in vain, to publiſh the council of
Trente 307. He agrees to the union againſt the houſe
of Auſtria, upon the promiſe that is made him of being
put into the poſſeſſion of the kingdom of Naples 460.
The Queen regent unites with him and Spain againlt the
policy of the laſt reign v. 37. His moderation towards
the Proteſtants 140, His part in the great deſign of
Henry IV. 153. Forces and money to be contributed
by him towards its execution. See Political Deſign

Paul (county of Saint) purchaſed by Henry IV. with too
little precaution: particulars relating to the homag:
paid for this county iii. 380. See Soiſſons (Count of).
Sully: cannot prevail upon Henry to attack the towns iv.
151

Paul (Francis D Orleans, Count of Saint) governor of
Picardy, one of the commanders of the King's forces
in that province ii. 45. He is defeated before Dourlens
52. And juſtifics himſelf to Henry IV. concerning
the aſſaſſination of the younger D'Epinoy iv. 196, Ile
forms a deſign to go into the ſervice of the Archdukes
290

Peace of 1 570 advantageous * the Proteſtants i.
That of Monſicur ill oblerved on both lides: N of
this peace 47

Pearls

p 4,0; #5 Js Ea =

Pe
Pe

+I -iN-cD 7.1E X.
Pearls (manufacture of falſe) eſtabliſhed by Henry TV, iv.

I

Palleys (Nicholas de), cardinal, he reveals the plots of
St Bartholomew i. 28, Propoſes a marriage between
the Infanta of Spain and the Archduke Erneft to the
ſtates of Paris: his plots unſucceſsful 315. See League,
Guiſe, States of Paris

Penny in the ſhilling, a tax imprudently eftabliſhed by the
aſſembly of notables ii. 138. Revoked by the King iii.
14. And changed into an augmentation of the taille
343

penſions of ſtate, Sully changes the form of them: his
labours in this reſpect ii. 251 |

Peres, (Antonio), miniſter to Philip II. diſgraced : this
prince's advice to Philip III. concerning him: the ma-
xims of this miniſter's government ii. 271

Peronne, (aſſembly of), the deſign of the league formed
there 1, 97, Henry IV. makes his entry into this city
ii. 14

Perron, (James David, Cardinal Pu-), one of the authois
and promoters of the third party i. 287. Conferences in
which Sully brings him over to Henry's intereſt 302. He
inſtructs this prince in the Roman-Catholic religion 331.
And has the chief hand in his converſion : he endeavours
to convert Sully 334. See Abjuration. He is ſent to
Rome by Henry IV, to pay obedience to the Pope, and

is made Biſhop of Evreux 337. Labours with Sully to

procure a reconciliation between the Duke of Montpen-
lier and the Count of Soiſſons 355. His conduct at
Rome blamed ii. 67. and juſtified 61. He labours to
procure a diſſolution of the marriage between Henry IV.
and Margaret de Valois 198. His public diſpute with
Du-Pleſſis Mornay : reciprocal letters between him and
Sully, and other particulars relating to this ſubject 330.
He ſerves the King but indifferently at the treaty of
Lyons 369. And ſupports the intereſts of the Jeſuits :
Sully's reproaches of him on this occaſion iii. 252. Sully
endeavours to make him approve of the tolerations of
religions 269. and obtains a cardipal's hat for him 271.
The friendſhip between him and Sully, and their letters

to each other iy, 17, His reſidence at Rome; he 3
Sully

—

3

„ „ $a -

PR * 4
2 a 3 y N 3
— 2 "1 E - Wo .. 4. 5.

—
— . ͤ[— —
* —— — — A > o - —
W B K Ac AS. —
= 4 Y 2 2 ——
2 - - = * — -

—

-

* —
Ae 22

— — *.
E 6 — 7 8 — DÄ2— —
2 4 = : | -
: : - 1 2 ns — — 3 IE 8
* * "— * . 2 —
_ — N HR — * - = DS — — «= 2
= - x 1 * is p — = - — — 9 v * —
- .- - : G - - k ==
4 5 0 —— — 9 ** — - i = * pe - > o 5 p =
— a, 2 „ mn Ie . WY l 5 8 — —=— = — 2 — — — — —— — — 4 - : _—
< q x - 7 * 7 w = y — - = 4 - = — - = - —— —ͤ—
os FS, — * be c 1 wy wane [21 = i _ 2 £* - * 2 1 «> - 3 282 * 3 — =
R. . 1 * ws — —T — -/ »- * n = - — _— — - = - _ - — — — - 5 — — "1 1 — — o - 2 = -
* _—_— - — — Err © > E855 K 2 _ "= 1 a” Pw. - > Sa n DT = =
=_ - : — - 0 = N — —_...- 8 * — * — * Y — - wo . -
ya 2 A * 1 2 4 — % * 12 > * * 0 + 4 by
a 2 ya 1 - = 9 4 % — p m A 2 J bl —_ Mt. n. - 5
2 4 N — \ - + V * . 2 My 2 - « = * *
( "> | LA — f F ” — — 4 32 » 2 — — 8
P » * 4 N * „ 7 2 — A * — *
. E n - =>, = . " — * 0 :
* n — 0 ' wh _— [ng *. =o 2
5 * af = 1 - þ 4

rl 7 222
5 I -<
2 2 — — n
23233 1
— — 118 "I
=. 7 —
5 n _— -
- 1 2 - I — — * 2 —
9 . *
ro _ 4 a 2
o . bs — Rt" _ . — uo
— * . 4 —
* — * - = — 1

.
1

* "Is m Ss *

=
—

FFP

nn x;

*
oy

I

LN D E X.

Sully ſome ſervice there 24. He congratulates this

miniſter upon the ſucceſs of the expedition to Sedan -

150. Converſations between them upon the means cf
pacifying the quarrels between the profeſſors of the tuo
religions 156. He is made Archbiſhop of Sens und
great almoner 158, He diſcovers the plots of the Spa-

mth ambaſſador with the courtiers to Sully 208. Per-

| ſuades Paul V. not to inſiſt upon the recall of the je-
ſuits with the Venetians 228. Cannot prevail on 8 ally
to change his religion 267. He is appointed of 1h:
council of the regency by flenry IV. 468

Perron (Du-) brother to the Cardinal, Sully makes uſe of
him to get the contract of marriage between the Princc!s
Catherine and the Count of Soiſſons into his own hand;
i. 358. A converfation between him and Sully in the
preſence of Henry IV. iv. 182. He diſcovers the plots
of the Spaniſh ambaſſador ar court to Sully 208

Perſia (Sophy of) fends an ambaſſidor to the Emperor
Rodolphus ti. 395, His wars wich Turky and Muſco-
vy ni. 334

Perſonio, (Robert), a Jeſuit, his advice to the Pope the

' cauſe of the troubles ia Fngland iii, 153. He is enga-

ged in the conſpiracy againft King James iv. 190

People not proper to govern a (tate 1, 333. See Govern:
ment, States-General, Policy

Phenomena ſeen the evening before the battle of Ivry 1,
192

Philip the Auguſt, King of France, by his exceſſive impoſts
raiſes a rebllion in his kingdom iv. 319. Sully's charac:
ter of this King 340

Philip le Belle, King of France, motives for the edict he
publiſhed againſt duels iv. 106. Sully's character of this
King v. 124 ;

Philip de Valois, King of France, occaſions a rebellion 11
his kingdom by his exceſſive impoſts iv. 319

Philip IF. King of Spain, cauſes of the war being rckindle!
between Henry and him i. 10. His offers to Hem y 1\.

90. His deſign of making the Duke of Savoy Court 0!

Provence diſconcerted by Leſdiguieres 272. Condition:
offered this prince by the Duke of Maienne and the

league, and his anſwers to them: his views by fuppoit
ing

Hir

LN: Dei.

ing the league 283, 4. His plots with the ſtates of
Paris ineffectual 310. Propoſals made by him to Hen-
ry IV. after his abjuration 337. Motives for his deſiring
a peace with France ii. 179. He is taken ill, and dies
262. His laſt will 264. Maxims of government, and
advice given by him to his ſon 16. Particulars relating
to his perſon, his character, and policy 265. He or-
ders an examination to be made into the uſurpation of
Navarre 266. A marriage between him and the Princeſs
Catherine propoſed 274. Proofs of his deſigns for uni-
verſal monarchy iv. 121. The cauſes that hindered
their ſucceeding 122. Motives for the advice he gave
to the Duke of Anjou concerning the treachery at Ant-
werp 361. See Philip III. Spain, League, Cc.

Philip III. King of Spain, inſtructions and advice given
him by Philip II. when dying ii. 267, He baniſhes
Mora, and gives his place to Doria 251. Marrics the
Archducheſs of Gratz 272. Supports the rebels in Ire-
land 429. He condemns the pretended Don Sebaſtian
to the galleys 430. Congratulates Henry IV. upon the
diſcovery of Biron's conſpiracy: Henry's anſwer iu,
43. 44. Takes poſſeſſion of Final, Piombino, Cc. with -
out any juſt claim 63. and endeavours to ſeize Embden,
but in vain 16. Favours the Duke of Savoy in his at-
tempts upon Geneva 64. Complaints and invectives of
the King of England againſt him 131. Pretended pro-
poſals for an union of theſe two princes againſt France

136. Conxerſations between King James and Sully,
upon the means of humbling the King of Spain 148.
His deſigns upon Barbary 208. Upon the coaſts of the
Mediterranean 7b. Ie ſends for the children of Savoy
to Madrid, and makes them grandees of Spain 209,
He reſumes his father's deſigns of univerſal monarchy

C-

_—

1
4

14 9.
7
U
7
« .
i -
1 «
1
«
9
”
0
0 ol
:
N
U
K.
. 6 a
by
* .
f *
1 »
+ V1
LS -
1 |
» 4
- «|
1 * 0
- »
* .
: 4
1 *
* * 1 |
: en |
:
1 Wo 4
„* f
*
4
*
»t 2
£m
* * 44
1
—
»
*
WW |
: U £4 |
*
*
"ao ",,
„
1 8 \
. 18 *
1
4 +
1 4 1
1
-
* 4
* *
0 *
"2%
4
* + * 1
F 7
„ L I
f „
* 4 *
- I ">
1
»
=
4
| k
.

ir. 120. He carries on plots in the court of France a- | i
gaioſt the life of Henry IV. 208. He ratifics the treaty for 4
4 a ſuſpenſion of arms with the United Provinces; and af- 8
terwards concludes a truce for twelve cars 222. Mary 3 v
de Medicis adopts his policy, and {cus is alliance v. 1
22. He ſends ambaſiadors to France tlie death 1
eo of Henry IV. 71. See Aultria (how. 0), Spain, 8
t. Flanders, James, Seditions, Parricide |

Wy Licardy,

IN PDP E KX.

Picardy, towns of this province into which Henry made his
entry ii. 14. The campaign of Picardy unfortunate for
France 51. Other expeditions of Henry's after the ta-
king of Amiens 173
Piercy (Lord) defeats the rebels in Ireland ii. 429
Pimentel, an Italian, Henry IV. admits him into his parties
of pleaſure : a comical adventure between Sully and him
iv. 257. His arts to win at gaming 310
Piſany (John de Vivonne de) deputed by Henry IV, to the
Pope, who refuſes to give him audience i, 319, Sent
to Rome to pay obedience to the Pope 366
Pius IV. Pope, degrades the Cardinal de Chatillon i. 1;
Pius V. refuſes to give a diſpenſation for the marriage of
Henry IV. with Margaret de Valois i, 24. Deplorcs
the maſſacre of Saint Bartholomew 29. His character
iv. 16
Plague, or a contagious diſeaſe at Paris, hinders the cele-
bration of the baptiſm of the children of France iv. 170
Plaiſance, (Cardinal de), legate, his plots with the ſtares
of Paris ineffectual i. 315. He retires to Soiſſons after
the reduction of Paris 379. Sce League
Poitiers, blocade of this city i. 267. It ſurrenders to
Henry IV. 394. Sum paid for its ſurrender ii. 24.
A great quarrel between Sully and Father Cotton, 01
account of a college in this city iii. 391. The citizens
make complaints againſt the Jeſuits iv. 206
Poitou, Henry's journey into this province ili. 14. He?
gives the government of it to Sully 227. Value ot
this government 10. His journey there: motives and
defign of this journey 300. Honours paid him there
304. He ſells this government to the Duke of Rohan
v. 110. Roads and public works made by him there
196
Police, Henry IV. after the peace of Vervins applies him.
ſelf to reſtore order in it ii. 212. Sully's maxims up-
on the police ii. 386. iii 231. Henry IV, reſtores it
in his kingdom iv. 11. Reęulations upon it 239. 9“
ther regulations and eſtabliſhments projected in the ca-
binet of ſtare 367
Policy (maxims of) ii. 192. Thoſe of Philip II. with

reſpect to France and other ſtates of Europe 266. .
thet

We (FF ©Q 39, y =»

D.

ther maxims upon war 377. Sully's political reflections
upon war, the nobleſſe, the finances, luxury, c. 387.
Upon England, and Europe in general iii. 113. Poli-
tical ſyſtem of Cardinal Richelieu, for humbling the
houſe of Auſtria, formed upon the deſigus of Sully
256. Fine political reflections upon government 335.
Others upon the ruin and weakneſs of (ſtates 347.
Policy examined with reſpect to religion iv. 54. Poli-
tical maxims of kings with regard to their miniſters 199,
The Queen-regent's council adopt maxims quite con-
trary to thoſe of Henry the Great v. 19, Remarks up-
on the political conduct of the Kings of France 117.
See alſs Governments, Kings, Princes, Miniſters, War,
GC.
Political Deſign, or the great deſign of Henry IV. This
prince correſponds with Queen Eliſabeth upon that ſub-
ject ii. 398. Sully goes to Dover to confer with her
399. The five principal points of this deſign 404. Sully
diſcloſes it to the King of England: a converſation be-
tween them on this ſubject iii. 173. See James I. Sully,
Sully imparts it to the Cardinal Bufalo 371. Plots at
court to hinder the execution of it iv. 208, Henry
and Sully endeavour to forward it 363. The ſucceſſion
of Cleves made the pretence 437. See Cleves. Means of
executing it 442. The deſign endeavoured to be blaſted:
converſation between Henry and Sully upon this ſubject
445. The princes and eleQors who unite with Henry
upon the great deſign 459. It is broken off by the
death of Henry IV. 215. Explanation of this pokocal
ſcheme v. 5, 32. Henry IV,'s general view in it 128.
The probability of its execution proved 120. In what
manner it was formed by Henry and Sully 152. and
concerted with Quzen Elifabeth 124. Its purport with
reſpect to religions 139, Means by which the inſidels
were to be driven out of Furope 141. Its purport
merely political, to humble the houſe of Auſtria 145
To eſtabliſh fifteen equal powers 146, Meaſures ta-
ken with the princes of Europe 154. And ſecret pre-
cautions 155. Detail of the forces, and the neccfiary
expenſes 160. Diſpoſitions and march of the armies
165. Manifeltoes 166. Regulations for the troops
Vor. V. LI

102
*

— i wx gn HH Yr

” - < * == —- : = — — . — — _
. bs O_o "= 4 Y 2 = : 4 E- Z
> BESS — r ©: -- 4&--- — == 3 — £- —__ 2
* a ©. 1 1 * * 2 2 * 3 a< =P. - —
= * —

—

L * —_—
.

— 1
<—— 4
— A
7 =
w.0

*

ODE, =
nts

——

—
">. I'>
—

*
" 4. —_

. r

2
PP

. co wen RAE.
*

1 — *.
1 >
_—_ 2 ” *
„ "x
8
\
*

IN D E X.

167. The reſult which might be expected from the
great deſign 168
Poland, Henry III is elected King of Poland i. 39. and
returns to France after the death of Charles IX. 45.
Sigiſmund King of Poland is driven out of Sweden by his
uncle ii. 316. Ancel reſident there from Henry IV.
468. Part of the great deſign relating to this king-
5 forces and money to be contributed towards its
execution. See Political Deſign
Pontcarré (N de) ſerves King Henry IV. at Paris againſt
the ſeditious party 1. 402. Summoned to the coupcil
held upon the reſtoration of the Jeſuits iii. 241. Ap-
pointed one of the council of regency by Henry IV. iv.
468. and admitted into the public council of the Queen-
regent v. 23
Pont-Courlay, a Proteſtant gentleman, his plots againſt
Sully in Poitou iii. 302. Henry IV. employs him to re-
concile Sully and Father Cotton on occaſion of the college
of Poitiers 399. He gives Sully ſome information con-
cerning the ſeditious faction iv. 298
Pontoiſe taken by the two kings i. 170. Retaken by the
league 189, Which ſettles a council there 220. Sum
paid by Henry at its ſurrender ii. 244
Popes, Leo X. Pius IV. Pius V. Gregory XIII. Sixtus V.
Gregory XIV. Clement VIII. Leo XI, Paul V. Ur-
ban VIII. See each of theſe names. Plots of the le-
gates and the partiſans of the Pope with the ſtates of
Paris i. 314. See League. Sully gives the Pope the
title of Holineſs, and is blamed for it by the King of
England iii. 134. True policy of the Popes with re-
gard to the King of Spain and houſe of Auſtria 178.
iow the great deſign of Henry IV. was advantageous
to them 182. The doctrine that the Pope is the Anti-
chriſt, propoſed by the Proteſtants at the ſynod of Cap;
and ſuppreſſed by Sully 223. Policy of the Pope uni—
ted wich Spain and the Jeſuits 237. The Pope exc!u-
ded from any right to the bridge of Avignon 378. True
policy of the court of Rome, with regard to the Vene-
tians iv. 155. Ihe Pope's nuncio admitted to the ſe-

cret council of Mary de Medicis, who embraces the

Part of the g great de-
13 4

nltramontane policy v. 22. 39.

Pr

Pr

IN D EX.

fign relating to the Pope: he is to be declared king, and
to have the kingdom of Naples 140. Forces and mo-
ney to be contributed by him to the great deſign 159,
See Political Deſign

Portocarrero (Hernando, Teillo) ſurpriſes Amiens, and
is lain there: a ſaying of his upon the great captains of
his time 11, 150

Portugal, Henry 1V. ſends La-Tremonille there to ex-
amine into the diſpute concerning the true or falſe Don
Sebaſtian ji. 215. Catherine de Medicis has a claim
upon this kingdam 21 4

Poſts, regulations concerning them: poſt- horſes eftabliſhed
iv. 369, 70

Prada ſecretary of {tate to the King of Spain, L'Hote
carries on a correſpondence with him iii. 257

Praſlin (Charles de Choifeul, Marquis de) captain of the
guards iii. 18. He arreits the Count of Auvergne
23. Sully's friendihip with him calumuiated 425.
Cratuity granted him by Henry IV. iv. 12. His letters
to Sully upon the fondneis of this prince for hunting
194. A converſation between them upon the Prince
of Conde's flight 402. Henry ſends him to Flanders
to demand the Princeſs of Conde 406. The Queen-
regent deputes him to Sully v. 15

Pre (Du), Du Rollet makes uſe of him to traverſe Sully's
treaty with Villars i. 368. Who orders him to be
hanged 373

Princes, the duty of princes in the adminiſtration of theie
government iii. 335. See Kings, Governments, Policy,
Oc.

Privas (ſynod of), the diſpute concerning Saint John
d' Angely terminated there v. 176. See Rohan

Profeſſion of faith made by Henry IV. the objections
to this writing removed by Sully: it is feat to Rome
1.3 |

Profethons and trades, regulations concerning them pro-

jected in the cabinet of fate iv, 365. See Cabinet of

ſtate. Artiſts, merchants, ſhepherds, and labourers, how
uſeful to the kingdom 367
Prognoſtics of the death of Henry IV. and this prince's
preſages of it iv. 432. See Henry IV. c
L135 Proteſtants,

„
. 2
— =

A _ _—
__ &
- 8
9 * .
*

. — 2 *
| pre — 15 8

— —

mein

* — 1
2 wy

IN U E X.

Proteſtants, the ſtate of their affairs at the peace of 1570.
Their ſucceſſes in the war i. 3. They ſuffer themſelves
to be deceived by Catherine de Medicis, notwithſtand-
ing many cauſes for diſtruſt: artiſices made uſe of to
deceive them 14. Their leaders greatly careſſed at
court 22. Many of them quit Paris 27. The maf-
ſacre of St Bartholomew, and the extremities to which
they are reduced 29. They re- eſtabliſh their affairs 38.
Take ſeveral towns, and become powerful by being
joined by Monſieur and Prince Caſimir 46. They con-
clude an advantageous treaty of peace 47. They again
take up arms 48. and loſe fome of their advantages at
the peace of Monſieur 59. They renew the war 63.
They undertake ſeveral enterpriſes with different ſuc—
ceſs: the advantages which they gain by the treaty of
1580 76. Aſſembly held at Montauban, and confe-
rences at St Paul de La-Miatte, in which their leaders
lay the foundation of a Proteſtant republic in France:
Sully oppoſes theſe ſchemes 101. Henry III. ſends three
armies againſt them 114. Councils held upon the arrival
of the foreign forces in France, in which they take bad
reſolutions 120, 22. A perſecution is raiſed againſt
them 135. The defeat of Auneau throw the party in-
to conſternation 143, The murd-r,of the Guiſes blaſts
the great deſigns of the league againſt them 156. The
counſels of their leaders of dangerous conſequence to
Henry IV. 160. Their quarrels with the Cathohics in
his army occaſion the raiſing of the ſiege of Rouen 248.
They retute to purſue the Prince of Parma after his
paſſage over the Seine: their deſigns 260. They loſe
the battle of Craon 267, And defeat the troops of
the league before Villemur 274. Sully ſhows them
the neceſſity of treating with the Catholics 299. They
reject the conditions offered by the league to Henry IV.
310. This prince obliges them to conſent to the con-
ferences with the Catholics 318. Their preachers bc-
tray their religion with flattery 331. Their leaders
dilcover more obſtinacy with regard to the articles of
Henry's abjuration ib, They conſent to it at length 20.

This prince's wiſe conduct towards them; they oppoſe
the truce 338, 9. and take meaſures contrary to che

royal

-

IND E

royal authority ii. 9. Their inſolent jeſts at the ce -
remony of the King's abſolution 65. Military opera-
tions between them and the party of the league, in the
provinces 64. Their frequent mutinies and ſchemes
formed by them during the ſiege of Amiens; they hold
aſſemblies on this ſubje& 162. Obſeryations upon the
edit of Nantz 163. Henry employs himſelf in the
compoſition of this treaty 177. The diſobedience and
plots of the Proteſtants 188. The advantages they
have over the Catholics by the edict of Nantz 194.
They inſert an article in it by ſtratagem, but are
obliged to ſuffer it to be ſuppreſſed 286. Their leaders
endeavour to prevail upon the King of England to
declare himſelf protector of the Proteſtant panty in
France, and the Elector Palatine his lieutenant iii.
125. A Proteſtant faction in Europe oppoled to the
Catholic faction; examination of theſe two factioas ;
their ſtrength, Cc. 176. See Political Deſign. Quar-
rels between the Engliſh Proteſtants and the Puritans
205, The French Proteſtants cabal at the ſynod of
Gap 223. Their rage againſt Villeroi on cccafion of
the treachery of L'Hote 265. A farther account of
the plots of their leaders; their oppoſition to Sully in
Poitou 297. This miniſter is accuſed of carryi52 3g
ſecret correſpondences with them 425. General aſ-
ſembly of Proteſtants at Chatelleraut : the defigns and
conduct of the two parties in this aſſembly iv. 34. See
Chätelleraut. Queen Margaret gives ſome information
apainſt the Proteſtants 47. The part they take in the
attair of Orange and Blaccons 77. The hatred of their
leaders againit den 95. t hey endea dur to render the
enterprite againſt Sedan incfeQual 128, Precautions
taken with them by Henry on this occaſion 130. and by
Sully in his letter to Parabere 137. Henry obſerve all
their meaſures, and will not permit them to hold a na-
tional ſynod 165. He is offended with them for their
conduct in the ſynod of Rochelle; but paciſied by Sully
200. They affect great contempt for this miniſter:
other errors in their condut 204. Murmurs and cabals

at court upon Henry's conduct towards them 208. See
Spain, Jeſuits, Courticts. Metheds made uſe of by
LI 3 them

|

INDEX.

them to break off the propoſed marriage between the
Marquis of Roſny and Mademoiſelle de Mercœur, and
to keep Sully in their religion 265, Farther account of
their plots; and Sully's prudent advice to Henry upon
this occaſion 298. General aſſembly of Gergeau. See Ger-
geau. The Moors offer to embrace the Proteſtant re-
ligion, and to come over to France 330. Falſe infor-
mations againſt the Proteſtants 411. Henry is made to
ſuſpe& them in order to turn him from his great deſign
447. Mary de Medicis declares herſelf againſt the Prote-
ſtant party v. 23. and ſacrifices them to her new connee-
tions with Spain 39. Bouillon adviſes the Prince of
Condè to eclare himſelf the head of the French Prote-
ſtants 54. They are threatened with a perſecution under
the new reign 87. Sully defends them in full council a-
gainſt the calumnies of Villeroi 86. Part of the great de-
pn relating to the Proteſtant religion 139. The Pro-
teſtants in Germany join the confederacy 1 55. The Pro-
re{tants ſupport Sully openly, in the aſſembly of Chate!-
leraut, againſt the court 173. War declared againſt
them under the adminiftration of Cardinal Richelieu 182
Provence, the King of Spain endeavours to put the Duke
of Savoy into poſſeſſion of this province i, 272. The
rebels make an attempt to ſcize the ſtrong towns in it
iv. 33
Puritans, quarrels between them and the Engliſh Prote-
ſtants iii. 205. Conferences at London between them and
the church of England 363

Q.
Uaſy, a Proteſtant gentleman, what happened to him
at Marmande i. 70
Quentin (Saint), the battle of St Quentin loſt by the Con-
ſtable Montmorency: an account of what followed at-
terwards i. 10. Henry goes to St Quentin to ſee Made-
moiſelle D'Eltrces 219, 19

R.

R (Jobn de Leyre, called) diſcovers the treaſon of
L*Hote iii. 258. Gives information of it to Bar-
rault,

R.
R.

DX.

rault, and eſcapes out of Spain 259. Comes to Hen-
ry IV. and gives him proofs of it: rewards which he

__ obtains for this diſcovery 20.

Raleigh, Sully ſees him at Dover ii. 399. One of the
malecontents at London iii. 205. Information given by
him to Sully 142. He conſpires againſt the King of
England 205

Rambures (N. de) murders the young D'Epinoy : Hen-
ry IV. and Sully ſuffer this affair to ſlecp iv, 196

Ratiſbon (diet of), where a conference is held between
the Catholics and Proteſtants upon the means of recon-
ciling the two religions 11. 431

Rawaillac, (Francis), the proceedings at his trial ſuppreſied
iv. 481. Other faults attributed to his judges, and re-
marks upon this conduct 20. A particular account of the
aſſaſſination of Henry IV. 488. Examination of the dif-
ferent opinions concerning the cauſes of the authors of
this par ricide 15. Ravaillac's puniſhment: particulars on
this ſubject v. 1. 2. His trial 202. Oc.

Reaſon (councii' of) eſtabliſhed in the aſſembly des no-
tables at Rouen ii. 137. The forming of this council
144. which aſterwards requeſts Henry IV. to ſuppreſs
it 16.

Receivers, general and particular, Sully gives them rules,
and punithes thoſe who act contrary to them iv. 233.
The regulations to which he ſubjeéts them 235. Re-
ceivers to be created upon occaſion 373

Refuge (N. Du-) agert in Switzerland iv. 249.
charges him with behaving ill there 428

Regalia (rights of) i 1alienable: in what it conſiſts iii.
37

Religion, Sully's refleQions upon policy reſpecting religion
1. 188. Part of the great deſign of Henry IV. rela-
ting to religion: diviſion of the ſereral religions, and
the means of keeping them in tranqualiny v. 139. See
Political Deſign. See 4% Sully, Pope, Catholics, &c.

Republic (a Proteſtant), ſcheme of eſtabliſhing it in France
formed by Admiral Coligny. See Coligny. The heads
of the party endeavour to put it into execution iv. 69.
Bouillon ſeeks to engage the Prince of Conde in the de-
hgny, 54. Sce Proteſtants

Sally

Retz,

—

| —— 2

a—_

— -
-—_—_ -

-
*
.

8

— 2 *

S

.
Ii 92 7.
> 8
— * g — _ —
— — *, -” pw . -
— 3 |
== *

*
2 0
Th Ld * 2 *
FT - —
.

e
*

4 N = :
—
—
*

OE Ts

ES
8 4 pr _— 3
9

_ PAC = - ll

: | I K
.
2 2 y .
* as "

Aa” *
Log.

n

= — #

—_—

I

— — -

122899

A”
IEA

IN D Xs

Retz, (Albert de Gondy, Duke of), one of the counſellors
of Catherine de Medicis i. 26. Henry IV. takes from
him the cognifance of the treaty with the Duke of
Guiſe ii, 21. and makes him one of the members of the
new council of finances 25. He is employed in the af-
fair of the iſles with the Grand Duke 412

Revenues (royal), eſtimation made of them in the aſſembly
des notables, and divided berween the King and the ſtate
ii. 137. See Notables, Reaſon (council of). Memo-
rial upon means: the augmenting them iv. 369. See
Finances, Forms, Taille, Impoſts, Ge.

Rheims revolts from the Duke of Guiſe, and ſurrenders
to Henry IV. ii. 25. The reception given by this
prince to the deputies from Rheims 16. This city re-
fuſes to admit the Jeſuits iii. 391, Lewis XIII. is
crowned there v. 71

Rhone, the borders of this river as far as Lyons, ceded
to the King by the treaty of Lyons ii. 372. Hen-
Ty IV. ſecures to himſelf this poficihon, i wu. 378, See

_ Avignon

Richardot (John de) preſident, employed in the affair of
a treaty of commerce between France and Spain ut, 353,
In the negotiations for a peace between Spain and the
United Provinces iv. 324. His inſtructions are ſtolen
from him 327

Richelieu (Francis du Pleſſis de) endeavours to injure Sully
during his journey to Poitou iii. 302. Henry employs
him to reconcile this miniſter and Father Cotton 399

Richelieu (Cardinal de) follows the political ſyſtem formed
by Sully for humbling the houſe of Auſtria iii. 256. He
occaſions the loſs of a law-ſuit to Sully, which haſtens
his death v. 186

Richeome, (Father), a Jeſuit, dedicates a book to Sully
ji. 400

Rignac, (Peter de), lieutenant for the Duke of Bouillon,
his plots in the Proteſtant party during the ſiege of A-
miens ii. 162. Sent by Bouillon to Henry IV. iii. 42.
Promiſes to defend his towns againſt this prince, but
abandons them iv. 86. 143

Rivet, a factious preacher among the Proteſtants iv. 201

Rochebeaucourt (La-) obtains the poſt of King's leur

tenant

>
©

—
©
C5

ITT D

tenant in St John d' Angely iv. 166. and is driven from
thence by the Duke of Rohan v. 176. See Ageaux
(Des)

Rochelle, a ſtrong town given to the Proteſtants i. 3. Ca-
therine de Medicis endeavours to get poſſeſſion of it by
ſtratagem 17. The Duke of Anjou is forced to raiſe
the ſiege of it 39. A treaty is made with Rochelle 20.
Honours paid by the Rochellers to Henry IV. 48. Per-
nicious deſigus of the Proteſtants aſſembled there againſt
Henry IV. 160. Henry praiſes Rochelle iii. 226. Ho-
nours paid by it to the King in the perſon of Sully 304.
Henry's kind reception of the deputies from Rochelle
iv. 97. Sully prevents their holding an aſſembly there
165. Terminates the differences between the Prote-
ſtints and Catholics in Rochelle 167. and obliges the
Rochellers to give the King ſatisfaction with regard to
the ſynod held in this town iv. 201. Sully ſupports the
Rochellers againſt the Jcſuirs in the affair of Father Se-
guiran 206. He loſes ſeveral great ſums which he had
lent them v. 112

Rochepot (Antony de Silly de la) is ſent ambaſſador ts
Spain: inſulted at Madrid ii. 39 4

Rocheſter, the hatred of its citizens to the French iii. 105
Rodolphus (Emperor), his wars with Hungary and the
Turks it. 431. The King of Spain deprives him of
Final iii. 63. An account of the war againſt the Hun-
garians and Turks 65, He feizes upon Donawert un-
pr iv. 334. Examination of his claim upon the prin-
cipalities of Cleves and juliers, Sc. 431. Sc. He gives
the inveiliture of them to the Archduke Leopold; and
endeavours to gain over Henry to his intereit 436. He
occaſions an inſurrection of the German Protettants by
his cruelties to them 459. Suffers Juliers to be taken
by the confederates v. 60. and ſhares the ſucceſſion of
Cleves between the Elector of Brandenburg and the Pa-
latinate of Neuburg 75. dee Cleves, The only part
left for him to take by the great deſign of Henry IV,
167. See Political Dclign. See al/7 Empire, Germany,
Auſtria (houſe of)

Rohan, (houſe of), alliances of this houſe, its claim to

the ſucceſlion of the houſe of Albret, for the —

—
_ 8

at x W * by —
RC —Cuk ꝗ ↄ ⁰ e ET 6 noni ec
* 2 bs FA CE,
; — Rr

—
_ *

— — W--.
4 4 = >
Fd
I-

— — r
A.

I I IE

IN D E X.

f Navarre, Foix, and Armagnac ii. 106. The pretend
ed heir of this houſe. See Tancrede
Rohan, (Henry II. Duke of), the Princeſs Catherine pro-
poſes a marriage between him and Mademoiſelle de
Sully 11. 106. Henry IV. gives his conſent to this
match iii. 221, 2. The Duke of Rohan's cabals in the
Proteitant party, and with the King of England 296.
His reception of Sully in Poitou 306. His claim 19
the ſucceſkon to the houſe of Albret, See Rohan (houſe
of). He marries Mademoiſelle de Sully: grants made
him by «nry upon his marriage 435. An account of
the fon pretended to be born by this marriage. See
Tancrede, Rohan, Margaret de Bethune (Ducheſs of).
Henry IV. refuſes the Duke of Rohan the privilege of
nominating the King's hentenant of Saint John d'An-
gely 437, Sec Ageaux (Des), Sully in the King's
name forbids the aſſembly of Chatclleraut to adnut his
deputies iv. 579, He obtains his pardon of tHenry IV.
166. and does the King ſome ſervices in detecting the
plots of the courtiers 213, 81. He commands the Swils
troops in Cleves 469, Oppoſcs Sully's deſign of reſign-
ing his employments v. 40. Is made Marſhal de camp
general of the army fent to the fiege of Juliers 50, Ma-
ry de Medicis makes uſe of his intereſt with Sully to
prevail upon him to leave Montrond 75. He purchaſes
the government of Poitou from Sully 110. and openly
ſupports his cauſe in the aſſembly of Chacelleraurt 175.
His diſpute with the Queen-regent about the King's licu-
tenancy of Saint John d'Angely 176
Rohan (Catherine de Parthenay, Ducheſs of) gives bad
advice to the Princeſs Catherine concerning Henry IV,
and Sully ii. 95. She alters her opinion, and favours
this miniſter 105, Her plots with the Proteſtant party
188
Rohan, (Margaret de Bethune, Ducheſs of), a marriage
between her and the Count of Laval is propoſed, and at-
terwards with the Duke of Rohan ii. 106. Henry IV.
approves of this marriage iii. 221, 2. and cauſes it to be
celebrated : gratuities given by him to the new-marricd
couple 435. An anecdote concerning the ſuppoſititious
ſon of this marriage. See Tancrede
Romaln

=>

| JE

»
2

t r / a nd cmns

= - 2
vv at. „ ene ak is

2
8

a (Wn — -

ge = =

2 * —
=

7 YO EL

Romain (Saint), a miracle related of this pious archbiſhop :
origin of the privileges of the canons of Rouen iv. 252,
See Gargouille

Roquelaure, (Antony de), Marſhal of France, one of the
heads of the Proteſtant party i. 50. His character: a
humorous dialogue between Henry IV. and him; ano-
ther between him and the Archbiſhop of Rouen, on the
ſubject of the Princeſs Catherine's marriage ii. 258. Cc.
He aſhſts in forcing Henry from the Ducheſs of Beau-
fort, when they were obliged to part 294. He is one
of the favourites of Henry IV. 389. and a friend of
Sully's iii. 226. Henry ſends him to compliment Queen
Margaret in his name iv. 102. He is ſummoned to the
council on the affair of Sedan 135. Quarrels between
the family of Roquelaure and Noaille, appeaſed by Sul-
ly 172

Roſan (N. de Durefort de) fights a duel with Turenne i.
64. See Duras, Bouillon

Roſny, caſtle and eſtate of Roſny belonging to Sullyfi. 3.
Where he receives the Duke of joyeuſe 98. A plague
at Roſny : Sully forces his brother to open the gates to
him 169, 70. Narrowly miſſes taking the Duke d'Au—
male priſoner there 188. Returns thither in triumph
after the battle of Ivry 202. Duting his ſtay there, is
informed of the death of the Ducheſs of Beaufort ii.
297. Receives and entertains the King there: an ac-
cident diſturbs the entertainment iii. 221

Roſny, (Francis de Bethune, Baton of), father of the Duke
of Sully, he retires thither at the neace of 1570 1. 3.
His alliances 4. State of his fannt and domeſtic aflairs
6. 19, He attends the Queen of Navarre 20. His ad-
vice not liſtened to 21. He makes his efcape at the maſ-
ſacre of St Bartholomew. His letter to his ſon on that
occaſion 32

Roſny, (Maximilian TI, de Bethune, Marquis of), eldeſt
ſon of the Duke of Sully: be begins to have a ſhare in
the affairs of (tate iv, 166, Henry IV. tends Du-Lau-
rens to him during his indiſpoſition 195, 6. Several
great matches propoſed tor him 258. The King mar-
ries him to Mademoiſelle de Crequy : uncaſinels cauſed
by this alliance to the father and the ſon 259, Co. Par-

ticulars

> —̃ — — 2.4 _
« =P +

— ny

_— — _ — —_— R
* N
"I" \
* —

* W 200
4 -—Y

5 EOS 2 2
* Rt once. — — x x — —
= _ — n =
— . ww = : 1
* — LAS a — *
ä — — 1 »* - uw
— — = — —— — —
2 3 - <<
4 4% 4 —
— IEEEESD -
* 2
n
% oe,
*

—_
_—

—
% wo WC _

*
3
2 ——
—

1
9
„ *
A]

1 *
0
+ 8+

l =
7”. 2
LN + \
=
,

3 fm ogg

2

3
1 * - —_
— OM RA IRS»

GY > _—
„ A
* 8 . 6
2

LOS 4 ot on

— —

— gn

4 ga _ ge

A
I N -
R £ I'VE
=y

— of 2
a> >
—

—̃—
L — 4
"i * = CSE
gn ' — — —
> — «

Iz. <6 = >;
——= - „

— —
n
4

1

IN D E X.

ticulars relating to this marriage, and to the private con
duct of Roſny: the King propoſes to give him Made-
moiſelle de Vendome in marriage 261. Cc. He refuſes
to change his religion 267. Henry IV. reconciles the
Duke of Vendome and him 458. He gives him the re-
verſion of the poſt of grand maſter of the ordnance: and
he commands the artillery in the expedition of Cleves
469. He prevents his father from reſigning his em-

ployments v. 40, Mary de Medicis makes uſe of his in-

tereſt to prevail upon Sully to leave Montrond 75. The
fortune he received with his wife 108, 9, Sully lends
him money, and pays his debts 112. The unealinc!;
which his diſſolute conduct gives to Sully 182, 3

Roubais (Mary de Melun, Lady de) refuſes to give her
conſent to a marriage between the Marquis of Cœuvres
and Madcmoiſclle de Melun in, 439

Rouen, the Proteſtants take poſſeſſion of it i. 18, and d'Al-
legte retakes it for the league 191. Henry IV. pre-
pares to inveſt it 225. He begins the ſiege, and makes
an unſucceſsful attack 226. 230. The trenches forced
at different times by that prince and Adm, Villars 231.
The vigorous defence made by this governor 235, 406.
Henry is obliged to raiſe the ficge 249. Villars treats
with Sully for the ſurrender of Kouen 366. And ſends
away the Spaniards and leaguers 38 5. Ceremony ot
its ſurrender 386. Sully makes another journey to this
city 11, 88. The ſtates, or the afiembly of des notabics
held there, See Notables. Sum paid by Henry tor
the ſurrender of Rouen 244. That prince goes to
Roucn, and is taken ill there: motives for this journey
WM, 2:1, Sully cauſes a bridge to be built there iv. 312

IS

vs

8 (John de Gontault de), his duel] with Roſan i.

64. One of the heads of the Proteſtant party ii. 185.
Solicits a pardon for Biron iii. 29. Ambaffador to the
Ottoman Porte 394

Salt-pits, Henry IV. is ſlandered with having intended t9
ſeize them iii. 3. Sully undeceives the people in ius
reſpect iÞ.

45
*

galie

„

S;

Sa

r ooo od as. ot

a.

2
2
£5

© ks 5

ILE NVU EX.

Salic law, an erroneous opinion of Sully's wa this
law iii. 368

Salt, the price of it increaſed to fifteen ſols three buſhels i ii.
152. The courtiers farm this ſubſidy under borrowed
names iv. 2. Edict upon ſalt in favour of the Duke of
Maienne 13. Regulations upon this part of che revenue
72. See Gabelle

Saluces (marquiſate of), a diſpute concerning it: this ar-
ticle not decided in the treaty of Vervins ii 209, Ar-
tifices of the Duke of Savoy to clude the reſtitution of it
304. Commiſſioners appointed to ſettle this affair 323,
Sully's reaſons for not giving up this fief 225, The
Duke of Savoy has recourle to many ſubterfuges during
the ſettling of this affair 328. Conditions upon which
Saluces is ceded to that prince 374. See Treaty of
Lyons, Savoy, Cc.

Sancy, (Nicholas de Harlay de), one of the heads of the
Proteſtant party i. 298. Serves Villeroy in his treaty :
his character, his ſervices ii. 32. His raillery and bon-
mots upon the fair Gabriella prevent his being made ſu-
perintendant of the finances 24. He does the King ſeve-
ral ſervices in Lorrain and Swiſſerland 38. His motives
for urging Henry IV. to march to Burgundy 43. He
refuſes to reſtore Calais to Fliſabeth 69. His quarrel
with Sully in the King's preſence 114. He leaves the
council of finances 157. The King of England blames
his conduct iii. 134. His hatred of Sully: his diflipa-
tion: Henry IV. purchaſes his jewels 422

Sardinia, a ſcheme for obtaining the ſovereignty of it for
the Duke of Anjou 1. 76 |

Sault (Chriſtian d' Aguirre, Counteſs of), her party in Pro-
vence i. 272. Favours that of the King's there ii. 31.
and aſſiſts in driving out the Dukes of Savoy and d'Eper-
non 107. She endeavours to procure a marriage between
the Marquis of Roſay and Mademoiſelle de Crequy ;
and to hinder Sully's converſion iv. 267. Engages in
Henry's amours 270. who refuſes her a grant which (lis
bad ſolicited 297

Suamur, one of the five cities which continued faithful to
Henry III. i. 159, Given 80 Henry IV, as a cauttonary
city by the treary between the two kings 163, Mornay

Vor. V. Mm obtaias

——_-— 2-4 no — —
WE So 2 — x

ET * EI ”
= = = = = =

_—

a qo cont

Gn. —
— —
— -— "I

.
| &

Ya

L * N

197
14
>
1
' I.
0 4

=
.
ry
5
»,
*&

IN DU

obtains the government of it, which had been refuſed te
Sully 75, "the Proteſtants there hold a mutinous aſſem-
bly 1m, 222. Du- Pleſſis Mornay puts himſelf to need-
leis expenſes to fortify Saumur iv. 57. The judge of
rhat city repiimanded by Sully 252. Another ailembly
is held thece, See Charelleraut
Savoy, Henry IV. carries the war thither, the taking of
towns and other particulars relating to this war: treaty
of peace ji. 375. Deſign of Philip II. to ſeize that
ſtate : part of the great deſign with reſpe& to Savoy iv.
122, See Charles-Emanuel, Lombardy, Political De-
tipn, Cc.
Savoy (Princes and children of ), their claim to the privi-
lege of honorary canon in the cathedral of Lyons denied
te Dukes of Savoy ii. 322. Philip III. ſends for the
children of Savoy to Madrid, and gives them the digni-
tics of Spain iii. 2
-(Charles-Emanuel, Duke of), he unites with Spain
and the league, and has bad ſucceſs in Provence i. 272.
His plots with the ſtates of Paris ineffectual 314. He
j:1ppurts the party of the Duke of Nemours in Lyons,
but cannot hinder it from being driven from thence 394.
Wictorics gained by Leſdiguieres over the Duke of Sa-
oy ü. 15. by the Conſtable de Montmorency in Pau-
plhuné and Lyonnois 43, Other encounters in which the
troops are defeated by Leſdiguieres 106. He ſigns the
treaty of Vervins at Chamberry 196. 209, He demands
the Princeſs Catherine in marriage 274. His artificcs
to avoid making a reſtitution of the marquiſate of Saluces
304.-- He reſolves to go to Paris for that purpoſe 306.
A ſaying of his concerning this journey 45, He artives
at Paris 321. Henry's reception of him at Fontaine-
bleau : informations given againſt him: his obſervations
upon the ill {ſucceſs of his journey 322. He is diſguſted
with his reception from the court of Lyons: reciprocal
complaints between him and the council of Madrid 25,
He viſits Sully at the arſenal, and endeavours to gain
zum over to his intereſt, and to corrupt him with gifts
,24. He gains over the courtiers, and the commithoncrs
appointed by the King, by his preſents : the magnifi-
ctalt len- year's gifts Which he receives from Henry af
an

1 N D E. X.

and thoſe which he preſents to the whole court 10. He
obtains a delay of three months contrary to Sully's ad-
vice 327. He returns to Savoy in diſcontent 329.
Breaks through his engagement 334. Suſpends, by new
artiſices, Henry's march againſt him 10. He is. com-
forted by a prediction that is made him 338. Towns
and forts taken from him, and a particular relation of
the whole campaign 315, His correſpondences with
Biron, the courtiets and commiſſoners, tending, to re»
tard the peace 365. Countries and forts given up by
bim, in exchange for Saluces, and purport of the trea-
ty made with him 375. See Treaty of Lyons. Con-
dition of the treaty between the Duke of Savoy and
Marſhal Biron 416. The manner in which Henry re-
ceives his congratulations upon the diſcovery of this con-
ſpiracy iii, 43. Fails in an attempt upon Geneva, whicls
is followed by a treaty of peace with that republic 64.
The true policy to be obſerved by the council of Savoy,
with Spain and the houſe of Aullria ; the — deſign of
Henry IV. ufeful to the Duke of Savoy 177 See Po-
litical Deſign. Charles Emanuel animar-s * Spal in againſt
France 210. He ſends his children to Madrid : dignitics
beſtowed upon them there 209. He puts an end to his
wars with the republic of Geneva 210. The part he
has in the diſpute concerning the bridge of Avignon 380.
He continues his plots againſt France iv. 24. Deſign of
Henry IV. to make him King of Lombardy ; and to
marry his daughter Eliſabeth to the fon of Savoy 123.
Preſents made him by his Majeſty 227, He congratu-
lates Henry upon the birth of the Duke of Anjou 327

An alliance between the two courts projected 354. 8 Sul⸗
ly's connections with the Duke of Savoy calumniared
422. He joins in the deputation ſent to the King by the

princes aſſenibled at Hall 448. See Cleves, He makes

a treaty of alliance with France 459. Bullion is ſent
ambaſſador to him 468. Mary de Mzdicis breaks all
theſe engagements, and betrays this prince, notwith-
ftanding Sully's repreſentations v. 35. The humiliating
meaſures which this procedure obliges him to rake with
the King of Spain 37. Part of the great deſign con-

cerning him: he is to be declared King of Lombardy

M m 2 142

28
.
:

«

—— *
Wt 8
— oe

*
—

— > F
— + 2
. 1 * — — 8
. „ Py — > - - —
I * *

bl *
1
1 *
u 9 9
1
"T8
4

— —— — — —— — — — —  — — —

IND EX.

142, 51. Forces and money to be contributed by bim
161. See Political Deſign, Lombardy, Cc. See al/s
Spain, Philip, and the other names mentioned in this
article

Sauves (Madame de) N. de Beaune de Samblancy : Hen-
ry IV, and the Duke of Alencon rivals for this lady
i. 78. She introduces Sully to Catherine de Medicis
91.; and informs him of her deſigns 130. Informa-
tions ſent by her to the Duke of Guiſe and the ſtates of
Blois 1 57

Schomberg (Gaſpard de) Count of Nanteuil: Henry IV.
corſults hin upon his converſion 1. 290. Makes him one
of the members of the council of ſinances ii. 35. 114.
which he leaves. His death occaſioned by a very ex-
traordinary ſick neſs: eulogium 163. He is employed
in the compolition of the edit of Nantz 194. laſerts
an article thete, which he is obliged to alter 283. His
death 289

(Henry de) Marſhal of France, Sully's friend-
ſhip for him calumniated iii. 425. He is appointed am-
baſſador to Germany iv. 468. Gives information of
Ravailiac's conſpiracy to Henry IV. and to Sully 457 7. Cc.
He is deputed to Sully by the Queen-regent v. 15

Schomberg (Theodore), a Swiſs colonel, tlain at the bat-
tle of Ivry : a fine ſpeech of Henry's concerning hum i.
200

Scotch guard acknowledge Henry IV. for King i. 175

Sebaitian (Don), Henry IV. intereſts himſelf in the de-
bate concerning the true or falſe Don Sebaſtian ii. 21 <,
Some remarkable circumſtances relating to the reſe:1-
blance of the pretended Don Sebaſtian to the true 430

Secretaries of (tate, how different from miniſters of [tate
11. 237 |

Sedan, Teity and principality of), given by the Ducheſs of
Bouillon to her huſband : motives for Sully's journey
thither ii. x. 2, Sully's opinion of this fortreſs 6. Hen-
ry IV. forms a deſign to take poſſeſſion of it: the cour-
tiers oppoſe it iv. 123. Sully fixes him in his reſolution
to attack it 120. and ſhows him the faults in the forti-
fications 135. The late Duke of Bouillon held it un-
der the title of protection from Francis II. 137. Pre-

parations

— —

TFT ND EX

parations made to beſiege it: a farther account of this
affair 139. which is terminated by Bouillon's ſurrender
of it to the King, and by the treaty of protection, Wo,
144. Cc. Motives which induce Henry to take the cog-
niſance of this affair from Sully 149. Sayings of Hen-
ry upon this expedition 153. Bouillon lays claim to a
precedence of the Dukes in the quality of Prince of Se-
dan; but is not regarded 169. Henry gives him back
this city, and withdraws his garriſon 255, He refuſes
to allow the Duke of Bouillon to aſſume the title of
Sovereign Lord of Sedan 422. Gratuities which Bouil-
lon receives from Mary de Medicis for this principality -
v. 81. See upon this whole article, Bouillon (Duke
and Ducheſs of), Mark (La-), Cc. |
Seditious Party (the) headed by Bouillon, Biron, D'Au-
vergne, D'Entragues, La-Tremouille, Du-Pleſhs-Mor-
nay, the Marchioneſs of Verneuil, &c. See theſe names
ii. 418. Writing of aſſociation ſigned by them 423.
Methods made uſe of by them to excite a rebellion a-
mong the people 424. They endeavour to ſeize {ome
towns 425. Council held at Blois for arreſting the
heads of the conſpiracy iii. 8. Henry IV. after the
death of Biron, pardons all the reſt 34. Their plots
with the King of England 272. Their cabals in France.
Motives for their hatred of Sully 420. Their cabals in
Spain iv. 27. Henry receives ſeveral informations a-
gainſt them. Sully's opinion of theſe informations 32.
Others ſent by Queen Margaret and Rodelle 46. Bou-
illon's artifice to enrage them againſt Sully 49. The
great wiſdom ſhown by Henry and Sully in preventing
and ſtifling their plots 268. A farther account of their
cabals 298, The wiſe counſel which Sully gives the
King on this occaſion 299. Their correſpondence with
Spain and the relations of the Queen 351. Other coun -
ſels which Sully gives Henry IV. upon this occaſion 358.
They make the King's paſhon for the Princeſs of Condé
ſubſervient to their deſign 401. See upon this article,
Epernon, Conchini, Conſpiracy, French Lords, Jeſuits,
Parricide, &c.
Seine, the paſſing this river by the Prince of Parma con-
lidered as a remarkable action i. 256. Utility of its
| Mm 3 being

EN

being joined to the Loire iii. 339. Canal of Briare
undertaken for this purpoſe 348. See Canals
Sidney (Lord of Stafford) ſent by Queen Fliſabeth to

Calais with letters for Henry IV, ii. 397. Is appointed

to receive Sully in London iii. 104

Sigiſmond King of Sweden dethroned by Charles his uncle
11. 316

Silk, * IV. cauſes it to be cultivated in France iii.
58. Sully's reaſons for oppoſing it 227, 32. Silk
manufactures eſtabliſhed iv. 14. See Manufactures, Fine
Stuffs

Sillery (Nicholas Brulat de), chancellor, deputed from the
court to Henry IV. 1. 104, 19. Oppoles Sully's ad-
miſſion into the council of finances ii. 110. and compli-
ments him upon his entrance into it 114, Quarrels with
him in the council 158, Labours to pacify Picardy
178. and concludes the peace of Vervins 183, Advites
Henry IV. to marry the fair Gabriella 205. Signs the
treaty of Vervins, and prevails upon the Archduke to
fign it 209, Is ſent ambaſſador to Rome, where he is
employed by Madame de Beaufort to folicit her marriage
with Henry IV. 216. Is made miniſter of ſtate. His
policy with reſpect to Spain contrary to that of Sully's
394. He endeavours to hinder the Count de Bethune
From being ſent ambaſſador to Rome 413. Labours in
the council and the court to procure a reveal of the Je-
fuits baniſtment iii. 242, His opinion concerning tole-
ration of religions, contrary to that of Sully 269. His
plots to procure two cardinals hats for Villars and Mar-
quemont, in oppolition to Pu- Perron and Olivary 271.
Henry IV. makes uſe of him to pacify his domeſtic
troubles 290. Sully obliges him to ſiga the treaty of
commerce with Spain 255. He is appointed one of the
commiſſioners for purchaſing the county of St Paul 381.
He unites with the courtiers and Jeſuits in the affair of
Grillon to ruin Sully 409, for whom he lays a great
many ſnares 415. | he cauſe of his hatred to Sully.
Henry IV. acquaints him with the advancement of
Paul V. to the pontificate iv, 19. and avoids employing
him in religteus attairs 35. He does the King many
fervices on cher occalions 53. His letters to Sully at
| the

I N B FE X.

the aſſembly of Chatelleraut 7 2. and of Villeroi during the
expedition of Sedan 145. He is made keeper of the
ſeals, and viſits Sully to tranſat ſome affairs relating to
this office 191. He oppoſes Sully's opinion concerning
the propoſals made by the Flemwings of piving towns in
hoſtage to the French 217. as likewiſe on occaſion of
the cabals among the Proteſtants 298. and has a debate
with him in the King's preſence 337. Henry IV. ac-
quaints him with the plots formed againſt his life 259,
He has another diſpute with Sully 382. Henry's judg-
ment upon his good and bad qualities 384, 5. He pre-
Judices that prince againſt Sully with reſpect to the ar-
mament of Cleves 450. His grave reply to the Queen
upon the death of Henry IV. 493. He is admitted into
the ſecret council of Mary de Medicis v. 22. and gives
her maxims of policy quite contrary to thoſe of Henry
the Great 36. He endeavours to ruin Sully 62. who
reproaches him with having made a fraudulent uſe of
the ſeal 67. He is ſeverely reproved by the Duke of
Nevers, and adviſes the Queen-regent to recall Sully
from Montrond 73. Gratuities from the Queen-regent
82, He ſupports Villeroi and d'Alincourt againſt Sul-
ly in the affair of Lyons 84. See Miniſters, Blood
(Princes of ), Lords, « |
Sixtus V. a bon- mot of his. to Cardinal Joyenſe upon Hen-
ry III. i. 59. He excommunicates the Proteſtants
and all that were enemies to the royal authority 98.
See Treaty of Nemours, A faying of his upon the bar-
ricadocs 152. He excommunicates Henry III. after
the mu der of the Guiſes: bis real ſentiments upon this
actiou, and upon the conduct of the heads of the league
161. His ſayivgs and predictions concerning Fenty IV.
the Duke of Ma'ienne, the Kivg of Spain, and the
Duke of Savoy 185. Henry's ſpeech upen the news of
his death 237. His character: a bot-mot upon him
iv. 16
Soiſſons (Charles de Bourbon, Count of) joins Henry IV.
and takes the Duke of Mercaw's baggage i. 135. He
behaves brav<ly at the battle of Coutras 141. but
binders Henry from taking advantage of his victory
144. His deſign of marrying the Fiinceſs Catherine
contrary

4
— —
les ws

—

SS

_

————— — —

=

—_—

2 — _
.

. =

„

—
— A — *
4 yo -
— ..

17

1 0b
— = =. wb 4 8 — LS — "Dy „ _

IN D E X.

eontrary to the will of Henry 145. He quits him af-
ter the barricadoes, and offers his ſervice to Henry III.
153. by whom he is received very coldly 155. He
endeavours to prevail upon Sully to quit the party of
Henry IV. 164. and advances ſlowly to the aſſiſtance of
that prince at Dieppe 185. Goes to Bearn with an
intention to marry the Princeſs Catherine, but does not
ſucceed 267. His character 268. He becomes one
of the heads of the third party 287, His views and
plots with the ſtates of Paris 315. Sully reconciles
him with the Duke of Montpenſier 354. and gets the
contract of marriage paſſed between him and the
Princeſs into his own hands 358. &c. He defeats the
troops which the Spaniards were endeavouring to throw
into Laon 305. He is made great maſter of the houſe-
hold to the King after the death of the Duke of Guiſe
1H. 23. He demands to be made preſident of the coun-
eil of finances, but is refuſed, and is obliged to attend
the King into Burgundy 45. 46. and afterwards quits
him 48. His officers inſult Sully 49. Sully endea-
yours to break off his marriage with the Princeſs Ca-
therine 91. Cc. He diſcovers the plot of Mignon to
poiſon the King 329. Oppoſes Sully's opinion with
regard to the war of Savoy 346, 60. and bears him
a grudge on account of his having diſſuaded the King
from purchaſing his eſtates in Piedmont 413. He is
ſummoned to the council held at Blois, concerning ar-
reſting the heads of the ſeditious party iii. 8. He is
reconciled to Sully 92. but blames in a covert man-
ner his negotiations at the court of London 197. He
quarrels again with that miniſter, whom Henry ſup-
ports againſt him on occaſion of an edi& obtained by
ſtratagem 218. Heory purchaſes his earldom of St Paul
380. A donation made by his Majeſty to this prince
iv. 13. His quarrels with the Prince of Conti 53.
He quarrels again with Sully on occaſion of the quar-
ters deſtined for the grand maſter of the ordnance : his
unjuſtiſiable proceedings in that affair 94. He refuſes
to be preſent at the reception of Sully in parliament
upon his being made duke and peer 124. He declares
himſelf of a contrary opinion to Sully with reſpect 2

5

IND EX.

the expedition of Sedan 135. 217. He diſcovers his
diſcontent publicly 294. and unites with the courtiers
and Jeſuits 345. He prejudices Henry againſt Sully
in the affair of the armament of Cleves 453, 62. He
quits the court in diſguſt on the Queen's coronation 483,
He returns, and is made one of the members of the
public council of Mary de Medicis v. 23. whoſe regency
he endeavours to get cancelled 27, He ſeeks Sully's
friendſhip, but quarrels with him afterwards, and uſes
his utmoſt endeavours to ruin him 27. 28, His quarrels
with the Prince of Conti and the Duke of Guiſe 29.
He breaks with Conchini, but is afterwards reconciled
to him 31. Sully's advice to him, and the other princes
of the blood 50. He combats Sully's opinion with re-
gard to the ſiege of Juliers 59. Conchini gains him by
procuring for him the government of Normandy, and
other favours 63. Gratuities which he procures from
the Queen-regent 81

Solre (Count of) ambaſſador from the Archduke to Hen-
ry IV. the anſwer of that prince to him ii. 397

Sommerville (Charles Emanuel de Lorrain, Count of)
Defends Lyons againit Henry IV. i 397. Surrenders
the place to him ii. 13. Is baniſhed by the King tor his
amours with the Counteſs of Moret iv. 288

Sorbonne (the) hates Henry IV. i. 318. Oppoſes the re-
gi tering of the edi of Nantz ii. 281. Hates the Jeſuits
iii. 252, See Univerſity

Sourdis (Iſabella Babou de la Bourdaiſere, Marchioncſs
of) miſtreſs to the Chancellor de Chiverny ii. 160.
Procures a Cardinal's hat for her ſon 216. Seconds
the Ducheſs of Beaufort's plots to bring about a mar-
riage between her and Henry IV. 219

Southampton (Earl of ) eſcorts Sully to London iii. 105.
In great favour with the King of England 140. His
quarre] with Lord Grey 205

Spain, The Spaniſh army join the Duke of Maienne i.
191. They behave well at the battle of Ivry 194.
Make propoſals of union with Henry IV. 262. De-
feated at Craon 267. Worſted in Provence and Dau-
Phiné 271. Aſſiſt the league 283. Their plots in the

aſſembly

—

IN DE Me

aſſembly of the ſtates at Paris 212. They endeavonr
to render ineffectual Henry's abjuration 337. Their
policy with regard to religion 16. The ſnares laid by
the council of Madrid for Henry IV. 340. They offer
him the Infanta in marriage 341. They leave Paris
379. Villars obliges them to leave Rouen 385. They
ſend ſuccours to the Duke of Nemours. They beſiege
and take La-Capelle 395, 6. Aſſiſt the Jeſuits in their
proceſs with the univerſity 403. Their grand convoy
defeated before Laon 408. Unable to hinder the place
from being taken 413. Their expeditions into Britany
ii. 14. They endeavour to eſtabliſh Burgundy into a
kingdom for the Duke of Maienne 16, Driven from
Marſeilles by the Duke of Guiſe 30. Henry IV. de-
clares war againſt them 39. They endeavour to aſſcaſ-
ſinate him 40. They take Le-Catelet and La- Capelle
51. Defeat the French at Dou lens 6. See Nevers,
Bouillon, Villars. They enter Franche Comté, and
are defeated by Henry IV. at Fontaine-Francoite 59.
They ſurpriſe Amiens 149. Retaken by Henry IV,
168. They are driven out of Britany 183. See Mer»
cœur. Diſcontented with the Duke of Savoy 321. Re-
fuſe to give him ſuccours againſt Henry IV. 377,
Continue the war againſt the Dutch 378. Henry diſ-
guſted with them: they inſult his ambaſſador 393, 4.
Offended with Henry's journey to Calais 396. Support
the French rebels 425. as likewiſe thoſe in Ireland 429.
Continuation of their war with the Dutch m1. 61.
Their ſquadron defeated by the Dutch 62. Their ex-
pedition into the Low Countries 75. Their plots in
England after the death of Queen Eliſabeth 82. They
endeayour to gain James 104. Spaniſh faction ia
London 114. James's hatred and jealouſy of them
131. He accuſes them of conſpiring againſt his life
136. They make him great offers to induce him to
forſake France 142. They ſupport the Engliſh prieſts,
and endeavour to dethrone him 153. An idea of the
Catholic faction in Europe 177, See Political Deſign,
They foment the conſpiracy of the Engliſh lords againſt
James 198, Their fleet defeated by the Dutch 207.
Continuation of their war againſt the Dutch 210. X he

are

N.

hare they have in L'Hote's treaſon 257. Henry un-
wiſely prohibits trading with them 344. Continuation
of this ſubject 349. Continuation of their war with
the Dutch 356. They endeavour to procure a peace
with England 360. which is at laſt concluded 365.
The origin of the grandeur of this crown 368. See
Auſtria (houſe of). The beginning of their difference
with the Grifons 374. See Fuentes, Valteline. Con-
tinuation of their war in Flanders iv. 25. New pilots
carried on by them againſt James 28. They build a
new armament of galleys 65. The Queen and courtiers
promote their intereſt 123. Continuation of their war
with the Dutch 185. Propoſals for a truce 186. They
plot againſt Henry in his court 208. He orders a cap-
ture to be reſtored to them 214. Continuation of the
war in Flanders 215. A great naval fight gained by
the Dutch 219. Suſpenſion of arms 220. The aftair
of the Valteline and Griſons 225. Sully obliges them
to make reſtitution of ſome incroachments made by them
on the confines of Champaign 313. Negęotiations for
a truce with Holland 322. The weakneſs of this
crown in fixing the boundaries of Navarre and Bearn
329. As likewile in the revolt of the Moors 76. whom
they oblige to leave their ſtates 334, Their deteſtable
plo:s againſt the life of Henry IV. 351. A ireaty of
truce concluded between them and the Dutch 416. A

farther account of their plots againſt Henry IV. 445,

The Qucen-:egent ſecks their alliance v. 23. and unites
herſelf to them 37. They ſend amabaſſadors to Paris
upon the death of Henry IV. 71. The object of the
great deſign with regard to that crown 139

Stuart (James VI.) King of Scotland, the Princeſs Ca-

therine refufes to mariy him ii. 93. He congratulates
Henry IV. upon the diſcovery of Biron's conſpiracy iii.
43. See james King of England

Stuart (Arabella) propoſed for a wife to Henry IV. i.

199 |
Sully (Maximilian de Bethune, Mayquis of Roſny, after-

wards Duke of), particulars relating to his ancettors, his
family, and his birth i, 3. He is brought up in the re-
formed

- — — — —

*

— =- A

=FY

—
0
\
*
7 1
*
—
.
4
"|
: 3
Ll
13
.
* —
1 4
oy ih,
[i N
Fe
* + iy
+ Vac!
* :
bs.
\
I 1
24
"I .
WW.
' J
”
\ q
p : 7
1
17
1 A
ö 11
HF :
*
1
y I. o
$:4 1
[
* '
1 d
, 4
4 wx
|
- +6 TEM
TT F =
— 14 1
5
r
14
? 8
_ 1444, RES
4 "64
. 1-4
” ;
7 0 *
Li 4
0 "ts /
8 1 *
„, if
an e
e
i 0%
* *
p G
bf *
* *
1
4 þ *
44 .
IS
7 1
4
F - $4.8
« A
- *#} 4
; » 4
Ly
_ .
LANE
i |
j 4
! vi |
- O53 -
by N
i
4%
15
” r
if # <<
wh
TY :
x «
l :
|
_-
#7 I .
: 4A *
i * 175 a
1 „ 7
4 |
1 FOE 7
—_—_ |
U
11
*'48
* of
3 11
f
1 N N
{ 1 5 7
” *
12 -
N

th
N.
4
17 Wnt
1
"1
=”
|
A
1
ww
i b
0
-

— —

IN X.

formed religion: goes with the court of Navarre te
Paris 19. Is preſented to the King of Navarre : his
ſtudies 21, Sully eſcapes the maſſacre of Sr Bartho-
lomew 31. His education 34. His firſt exploits in
arms 46, He defends Perigueux and Villeneuve : he is
in danger at the ſiege of Ville-franche, Cc. 48. 49.
He quarrels with Frontenac and Turenne 50. Follows
Henry IV. to Bearn: his economy : he is well re-
ceived by the Princeſs Catherine 52. He 1s at the ta-
king of Eauſe; at the battle before Mirande; that
before Nerac ; and other encounters ; where he is often
in danger 53. Cc. His behaviour during the junction of
the two courts of Catherine de Medicis and the King of
Navarre 61. He is in danger at the reduction of Ca-
hots 65. and before Marmande 70. He defends Monſe-
gur 73. Is made counſellor of Navarre, and chamber-
lain in ordinary to Henry 76. His motives for going
with Monſieur into Flanders : converſation betwecn
Henry and him upon this journey 76. 77. He enter-
tains ſeveral gentlemen in his train 80, What betel
him at Cambray 82. Roubais returns his civilities with
rudeneſs /h. Monſieur: refufes to give him his intereſt
with reſpect to his ſucceſhon to the eſtate of the Vil-
count de Gand, which occaſions a coolneſs between that
prince and him 84. 85. Advice given lum by the Prince
of Orange, of the tteachery of Antwerp 85. He te-
turns to Monſieur : obſervations upon the duties of a
prince 87. His reception from Madame de Maſtin 83,

Honours paid him by the burgeſſes of Bethune 89. He
returns into France : his reception from Henry : he
goes to the court of Henry III. to acquaint that prince
with the propoſals made by Spain to the King of Na-
rarre 89. 90. He goes to viſit Monſieur at Chateau-

Thierry out of curiofity 91, Sally continues at court
to obſerve the motions of the league: he finds his bro-

thers out of favour there 92.93. Falls in love with

Mademoiſelle de Saint-Meimin 93. and marries Ma-
demoiſelle de Courtenay 95. His domeſtic employments
during the firit year of his marriage /. He returns

20 the King of Navarre, and carries him a ſupply ot
moncy

IND EX.

money 96. He receives the Duke of ſoyeuſe at Roſny
98. He gives good counſel to the Proteſtants in the
aſſembly 103. Returns to Paris, and commences a
negotiation there 105. He goes to Guyenne: dangers
to which he is expoſed in this journey 108. The King
of Navarre, by his advice, makes head againſt three ar-
mies in the neighbourhood of Rochelle 114. He throws
himſelf into Saint-Bazcille 116. Is deputed to Saint-
Maur to Henry III. to negotiate a union of the two kings
118. He treats likewiſe with the Ewils; and for the
uſe of the foreign troops in France 120. He is preſent
at the ſiege of Talmont 121. and at that of Fontenay
123. A comical adventure which happened to him during
the ſiege 125. He goes to his wife during the plague
at Roiny 127, Reflections upon the meckneſs of Hen-
ry III. 128. He penetrates into the deitgns of Cathe-
rine de Medicis 129, Defeats a ſquadron belonging to
Joyeuſe 132. and takes advantage of his ablence to ha-
raſs his troops: ſervices which he docs his brother 133,
He goes to Paris to the aſſiſtance of Madame de Roſuy:
dangers to which he 1s expoſed there 126, 7. He re-
turns to the King of Navarre, and ſerves Lim in the
battle of Coutras 138. Cc. Anecdote on this ſubject
142. His wile advice after this battle 147. Lully is
deputed to the Prince of Conti 148. Returns to Ber-
gerac 149. Reflections upon the action of the barrica-
does, and the conduct of Henry III. 150, 1. He ac-
companies the Count of Soiſſons to court 154. His
converſation with Henry III. 155. Reflections upon
the weakneſs of that prince 159. He ccmes to make
his report to the King of Navarre, and goes back again
to conclude the treaty between the two kings 160. His
ind:{pofition : Du- Pleſſis Mornay deprives him cf the
honour of concluding this treaty : his diſcontent 163,
His advice to Henry IV. upon his interview with Hen»
ry III. 165. He helps to defend Tours 15. The part
he has in the battle of Saveuſe 168. He goes to the aſſiſt-
ance of his wife: his exccthre grief for her death 169, 70.
He returns to the army of the two kings, where he ex-
poſes himſelf to the greateſt dangers 171. Henry IV.
tells him that Henry III. was wounded, an | takes him

Vor. V. N n w.th

i
13

3

%

PT —

. >

E

— — —
_ — 2 = -
— — :

FFF EY : :
OOO Oba = WF CC

IND EN.

with him to Saint Cloud 171, 2. He aſks Sully's advice
upon the death of this prince 173. Services which he
does to Henry IV. by retaining the leaders of the royaliſt
army 174, 5. He ſeizes Meulan 176. the government
of which is denied him 26. Fails in his attempt upon
Louviers for want of ſuccours 178. Goes to recon-
noitre the Duke of Maienne's army 179. Preſent at the
battle of Arques, where he is in danger 182. Fails in
his attempt upon Vernon 185. Storms the ſuburbs of
Saint-Germain 186. Preſerves the country of Mante
a gainſt the troops of the league 188. His motives for
writing his memoirs 16. He contributes towards rai-
{ing the ſiege of Meulan 189. Defends Paſſy 192. Pre-
lent at the battle of Ivry, wounded there, and takes
{creral priſoners 196, 7. D'Andelor diſputes them with
him 199. Sully is carried in triumph to Roſny 202.

Henry IV. carefles him, and makes him a knight 204,

Sully is diſcontented, on account of being denied the
government he aſked for 206. He is preſent at the
fiege of Paris 209. and at the operations after the
raiſing of this ſiege 213. He retires in diſguſt 215.
fle {aves the life of Clermont-Tonnere at Joigny 216.
flis adventure at Chartres, where he narrowly eſcapes
being ilain 217. Receives a letter from Henry IV.
from Saint- Quentin 218. This prince begins to truſt
him with his ſecrets : Henry 1s the cauſe of an enter-
priſe failing which he had projected at Mante againſt
the Duke hoy Maienne 220. He viſits Madame Cha-
reaupers 226, Scizes a boat riehly laden 25. Attends
Henry IV. to the ſiege of Rouen 227. Oppoſes Biron's
opinion concerning the manner of attacking the place
229. Is preſent at the attack of the trenches 231.
Makes remonſtrances to the King, upon the dangers to
which he expoſes his life 233. Converſation between
them, concerning the mutinies of the Catholics in his
army 234. He endeavours to procure the ſurrender of
Rouen, by a correſpondence within 235, He goes with
Henry IV. to meet the Prince of Parma 236. The
remonſtrances he makes him upon the dangers to which
he expoſes his hfe 239. He complains of the Duke of

Nerers's conduct at Bully 240, ls preſent in the
| Wenke

IN D EX.

battle of Aumale 242. and at all expeditions in the
neighbourhood of Rouen 251 He dcclares kimfelf
for purſuing the Prince of Parma, after his pallage o-
ver the Seine 257. He marries Madame de Cha-
teaupers 278, Sully retires to his feat in diſguſt 75,
The Preſident Seguier undeceives him 280. He inter-
cepts ſome papers dclooging to the league and the third
party; ſubjedt of them 282. He carries them to Men-
ry IV. 287. The confidence this prince places in him
upon this occaſion 288. Mocives which cblig ge him to
conceal this confidence 289. Converſation between
them, and Sully's arguments to induce Heary to charg-
his religion 293. The true ſentiments of this mini—
{ter upon religion 265. He prevails upon the Proteſts
ants to treat with the heads of the Catholics upon th's
ſubject 298. His converſations and negotiations with
Bellozane 300. with the Durets 302. and with Du-
Perron 75, "The part he has in the reduction of Dreux
328, His confeſſion in favour of the Catholic re-
Jigion 330. He votes contrary to the inclinations cf
the Proteſtants in their aſſemblies 333. His anſwer to
Du-Perron, who exhorted him to change his religion
334. The laſt ſervice he does Henry IV. in the af-
fair of his abjuration 335. He procures a ſecond truce
for the Pariſians: and preſents a Spaniſh envoy to the
King 340. He oppoſes the deputation of La- Varenne to
Spain 342. Je alouſy of the Catholics 345. He com-
mences a negotiatiun with Adm, Villars, Medvay, &c,
346. Hs firit journey to Rouen on this occaſton 351.
He reconciles the Duke of Montpenſter and the Count
of Soiſſons 355. and withdraws the contract of marriage
between the Princeis and the Count 356. &c, He
treats with the Ducheſs of Aumale for hei huſhand's ſur-
render 362. with Medavy 364. with Adm, Villars 366.
Difficulty in concluding this laſt treaty 367. Which
is done at length 368. Sully returns to Rouen, and re-
ceives in the King's name the homage of Villats and the
city of Rouen 383. A pleaſant adventure which hap-
pened to him with Boiſroſe 388, His delicacy with
regard to the gratuities and preſents beſto wed on him by
kis Majeſty 290, He ſerves in the ſiage of Laon 297.
N n 2 ; The

—— "om
N =
— k
— w_
. _

4
5
= 4 #4
4
4
*
-
.
. j
448
by
i 4
0
71

-_

— — K —
. „
— 2

_ Ss — =
SS ISS
3 *

7 =” ———

.

*

— ==

— —

— — —

. 8 Cries oo 2 A

—

IND EX.

The affairs of the government oblige him to return to
Paris: his converſation with the Cardinal of Bourbon
398. He diſcovers the deſigns of the ſeditibus party
302. and ſuppreſſes the proceſs of the Jeſuits againſt
the vaiverſity 403. He returns to Laon to give an
account of his proceedings to the King 405. Aſſiſts
in defeating the great convoy 408. Is employed to
dilcorer Biron's deſigns 412. Gives notice of the
apyroach of the Spaniſh army 415. Other ſervices
performed by him upon this occaſion 417. Henry
ſends him to Rouen 11, 3. and afterwards to Sedan:
motives of this journey 4. His converſation with Bou—
illin 6. In which he diſcovers his character, and the
aim of his policy 10. And gives an account of it to
the Ring 12. The affairs of the ſtate again oblige him
to return to Paris 18, He is employed in the treaty
with the Duke of Guiſe 22. Which he concludes :
his apology for this treaty, and his accuſations of the
Duke d'Epernon 23. 31. His ſenizments concerning
the abuſes in the finances 36. His quarrels with the
Duke of Nevers oblige him to quit the council of fi-
nances : he is made ſecretary of {tate 37. Sully op-
poſes the declaration of war with Spain 39. Is near
Henry at the time of his being wounded by Charcl
40. Returns to the council, from whence the bad
conduct of the counſellors obliges him to retire 46
Hs diſpute with the officers of the Count of Soiſlo,
49. Henry IV. at his return from Franche-Conic,
comes to confer with him at Moret 63. The conduct
of d'Oſſat with reſpect to Sully's accuſations examined
65. 66. Another converſation between Henry and
Sully upon the diſaſters which happened in Picardy 74.
He refuſes to go with Bouillon to London; and diſco—
vers the ſnares laid for him by the council 74. 75. He
goes to Paris to provide for the ſubſiſtence of the troops
during the ſiege of La- Fere 76. 77. Contradicis thoſe
who were of opinion that this fortreſs migh: be laid
under water 78. He goes to Amiens to attend the
King : a comical adventure which happened to him with
an aſtrologer : thhe fair Gabriella in great danger upon

the road 83. &. He is deputed to Rouen to the Duke
ot

A RZ{®ZQG«<e& S

IN D E X.

of Montpenſier 88. Afterwards to the Princeſs,
break off her marriage with the Count of Soiſſons: con-
verſations which he has with this Princeſs, whoſe re-
ſentment had like to have occaſioned his diſgrace 91.
Sc. Henry IV. does him juſtice 103. He is likewiſe
reſtored to the favour of the Princeſs 104. Who
conhdes entirely in him 105. Oppoſition made by the
financiers to his entering the council 108. and the
King's reſolution thereon : he is at length received into
the council 113. He takes a journey into the diſtricts:
the defign and effects of this journey 116. Calum-
nies againſt Sully oblige Henry to recall him 120.
The kind behaviour of this prince to him at his re-
turn 121. His quarreis with Sancy 122. In what
manner he diſcovered the frauds of the council of
finances 126. Sully's reflections upon the general ſtates
of the kingdom 130. Others upon impoſts and govern-
ment 136. The wiſe counſel he gives the King in the
aſſembly des notables, and the reſult of it 138. His
labours in the finances 144. He comforts Henry for
the loſs of Amiens 150. and contrives the means of
retaking it 16. Which he communicates to the King
153. and the King to the council 154, He is made
head of the council during this expedition, and makes
himſelf be obeyed 156. His great application to every
thing that might contribute to the ſucceſs of the ſiege of
Amiens 161. and in diſconcerting the cabals of the
Proteſtants during it 162. Henry's great care and
ſolicitude for the ſafety of this miniſter in the dangers
to which he expoſes himſelf at Amiens 161, He pro-
miſcs to give him the poſt of grand maſter of the ord-
nance ; which he afterwards bettows upon d'F.ftrees 166,
He gives him the government of Mante in recompeaſe
for it 167. An account of the letters from Henry IV.
to Sully 170. He oppoſes the beſiegirg of Dourlens
174. The freedom with which he reproves Henry
for his indulgence to the Doke of Mercur 182. His
ſtay at Kennes: the preſent made him by that town:
his wiſe regulations there to pacity Britany 185, He
prevails upon Henry to make peace 191. A curious
converſation between them: in which Sully ſhcws Hen-
Na 3 17.

|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|

IND E X.

ry the neceſſity of his marrying again; and diſſuades
bim from the deſign he had entertained of marrying
his miſtreſs 197. Cc. Sully prepares Margaret de
Valois for the diſſolution of her marriage 206. and
returns to Paris 208, The ſhare he has in the ſeveral
regulations in the government 212, He endeavours
in vain to break off the conference of Boulogne 215.
He traverſes the ſchemes of Madame de Beaufort to
make herſelf Queen 218, Henry liſtens to his argu-
ments, and ſupports him againſt his miſtreſs ; with
whom he reconc:les him 220. He viſits the King when
he lay ill at Monceaux 225, Receives the Cardinal
of Florence at Paris and Saint-Germain 227. Under-
takes to make a reformation in the finances 233, His
character: his diſpoſitions : his eulogium 756. The
portrait of a perfect miniſter 230. He gives an ac-
count of his eſtates : of his abilities 234. of his em-
ployments, Cc. ib. of the diſtribution of his time,
and his daily occupations 236. Henry IV. makes
him bis firſt miniſter 237. His great confidence in
him 240. His praiſe of his good qualities, and his
talents 16. He attends to every part of the govern-
ment 241, He proſecutes extortioners, and thoſe
who are guilty of any embezzlement 246. Quarrels
in full council with d'Epernon, againit whom he is
ſupported by Henry 248. He takes the management
of the farms of the ſtate out of the hands of the nobles
and foreigners, and continues firm to all their com-
Flaints : a converſation on this ſubject between him
and the Conftable 251. Other labours in the finances
255. Calumnies are fpread againſt him 260. He
accuſes d'Offat of oppoſing the marriage of the Princeſs
Catherine and the Duke of Bar 275. Sully aſſiſts at
a conference for the converſion of the Princeſs 276.
He prevails upon the Proteſtants ro conſent that an ar-
ticle in the edit of Nantz ſhould be altered 283. The
ſuperintendance of the finances is eſtabliſhed in his
favour 289. - He is alſo made ſuperintendant of
the fortifications and buildings, and grand ſurveyor,
with a very conſiderable gratuity 290. Madame de
Beaufort's endeayours to engage him in ber intereſts,

but

IN D E X.

but in vain 294. He is informed, of her death 297.

He condoles with Henry IV. who was exceſſively grie-
ved at it, and comforts him 279. Sully with great
firmneſs reſiſts the Duke of Savoy, who ſought to cor-
rupt him 305. He attends the King to Blois: mo-
tives of this journey 307. Prevails upon Henry to
marry again, and endeavours to diſpoſe Margaret of
Valois to conſent to it 309. His courage and reſolu-
tion in tearing, before Henry, the paper which con-
tained the promiſe of marriage to be given to Made-
moiſelle D'Entragues 313. He concludes the marriage
with the Princeſs of Tuſcany, and brings Henry to a
reſolution in this reſpect 314. He takes the guardian-
ſhip of the Princeſs of Epinoy's children upon himſelf
316. He is made grand maſter of the ordnance 319.
And appointed commiſſioner for the affair of the mar-
quiſate of Saluces: his converſation with the Duke of
Savoy when he came to viſit him at the arſenal 322.
Another converſation on the ſame ſubje& between him
and Des-Alymes, who endeavoured to corrupt him
with preſents 324. His firmneſs in oppoſing the other
commiſhoners 326. His counſel not followed 328.
He is preſent at the diſpute between Du-Pleſhs and
Du- Perron: letters which paſſed between him and Du-
Perron: a bon-mot of his on this ſubject 307. Sully
prevails upon Henry to march to Savoy 334. Con-
yerſation between him and Bellievre upon this war
336. The great care he took to ſecure its ſucceſs
337. Biron Jays ſnares for him, and the courtiers
raiſe. new obſtacles to his deſigns 344. He beſieges
Charbonnieres 346. and takes it, notwithſtanding the
oppoſition made by the grandees, Cc. 352. He takes
kewiſe the caſtle of Montmelian : his labours, and
the dangers he is in, at this ſiege 335, 6. His recep-
tion of Cardinal Aldobrandim, and his wiſe counfel to
him 366. He takes Fort Saint Catherine, Goes to
Geneva, and reaſſures that city 367. Attends the
King to Lyons for the ceremony of his marriage 370.
Embarraſſed about continuing the war 372. He re-
ſum+s the treaty with Cardinal Aldobrandini, and con-

cludes it; purport of this treaty 375. He receives
| the

IN D E X.

the King and Queen at the arſenal 378. He reſumes
the direction of the affairs of the finances and the go-
vernment 380. Eſtabliſhes fix per cent. in the place
of eight per cent. 38 3. Prohibits the currency of foreign
money in France ib. as likewiſe the uſe of gold and
ſilver ſtuffs 384. and the tranſportation of the gold
and filver ſpecie 5. Eſtabliſhes a chamber of juſtice, but
without much effect 386. Maxims of this miniſter
upon the noblefle 387. Upon the financiers, and
againſt luxury and unequal alliances 388. His advice
to Henry IV. with regard to the Prince of Orange 391.
The other miniſters oppoſe his policy with reſpect to
the houſe of Auſtria 294. Preſents made to Sully by
the Grand Signior 395. He goes to Elifabeth at
Dover : the diſcourſe he has with her concerning the
great deſign ; the praiſes he gives to this Queen 399.
Oc. He regrets the death of the young Chatillon ; but
dare not uſe his intereſt in favour of the family 405,
6. Henry acquaints him with the buth of the Dauphin
407.; and with the {tate of his own health, and that of
the Queen 408. He refules to become a ſecurity in
the affair of the iſles 411. He diſſuades the King from
purchaſing the eſtates of the Count of Soiſſons 413.

Obtains the embaſſy to Rome for his brother the Count
of B&thune, notwithſtanding the oppoſition made by
Villeroi and Sillery 413, 14. Letters from Henry
to him upon different ſubjects 415, A letter from
Sully to Biron; and a converſation in which Sully en-
deavours to bring him back to his duty 417. He is
commiſhoned to interrogate La-Fin: letters and con-
verſation between Henry and him upon this ſubjedt:
his name is mentioned among the conſpirators 425.
He takes meaſures for arreſting Biron, and is made
governor of the Baſtile 428. An interlude and ball
given by him at the arſenal iii. 1. The wound in his
mouth opens afreſh 16. His reception of the foreign
princes 2. He accompanies the King to Blois 76,

Clears the Duke of Epernon, and oppoſes his being
arreſted: a grand council held upon this occaſion : he
gives good advice to D'Epernon 3. 4. Henry intruſts
him with a violent reſolution he had taken againſt the

Queen

t

N

neen and the Italians, from which Sully diſſuades
hin 12. The precautions he takes with reſpect to
Burgundy ; and Biron's reſentment againſt him 15.
His advice to the King concerning the manner of ar-
reſting Biron : Sully has a converſation with this mar-
ſhal, in which he endeavours to recall him to his duty;
but in vain 16. His part in the ſeizure and impriſon-
ment of Biron and Auvergne 22. He has them con-
ducted to the arſenal 24. Takes meaſures to prevent
Biron's eſcape 24. 25. He is brought to a trial 25,
Sully's reaſons for refuling to ſpeak to him : Biron's
declaration in favour of him 27. 28. Sully obtains leave
that the place of his execution ſhould ve changed 29,
He prevails upon many of the conſpirators to implore
the King's pardon 30. De-Lux comes to him, and
confeſſes his crime 31. He prevails upon Henry to take
gentle methods, and juſtifies the Conſtable 33. A con-
verſation bet n Henry and him upon his motives for
pardoning the Count of Auvergne 34. He intercedes
for the Prince of ſoinville 38.; and endeavours, but in
vain, to perſuade Bouillon to come to court 40. A
curious converſation between Henry and him, upon the
bounds which he propoſed to ſet to his gratuitics to him
45. Hs diſcontent at the + LN that p |
to ſome of his deſigas; and the pre |

ga:nit his enemies 46. 47. His difcowle to Sigogne
on the affair of he advocates 50, Is icrerity to the
fraudulent financiers 52. He railes the value of the
gold and ſilver coin, and eſtabliſhes the reckoning by l-
vres 53. Reflections upon on operations; and mas
xims with regard to money 54. 55. Sully's ſentiments

of the edict agaialt ducifieg 58. He «eats with the
Swiſs ambaſſadors 59. He attends Henry to Calais 60.5
but not to Metz. Ile complains of D'Offat 71. To
whom he refuſes the payment of his penſion 73. The
King gives him the abbey of Coulon; letters which he
wrote to this prince at Metz upon ſeveral ſubjects 74.
Sully removes his apprehenſions of the cabals of the ſe-
ditious 78. 80. Secret converſations between them,
upon the death of Eliſabeth, in which Sully's embaſſy
to London is reſolved upon, notwithſtanding the oppo-
ion

1
: —  -

1 N

ſition of the courtiers 81. The importance of this em ·
baſſy for which Sully is authoriſed by a ſecret paper from
his Majeſty 83. He viſits Henry when indiſpoſed at
Fontainebleau: he receives many marks of friendſhip and
eſteem from that prince 88. Purport of the inſtructions
he received in full council for bis embaſſy 92. He im-
barks with his train 94. Is inſulted by the Engliſh vice-
admiral 100. ; and received but indifferently at Dover
102. The impoliteneſs of the Engliſh to him 26. His
reception at Canterbury 103. ; at Rocheſter ; at Lon-
don 105, 6. The hatred ſhown by the Londoners to
the Frenchmen in his train 107. The order and regu-
larity he cauſes to be obſerved in his houſehold : his ſe-
verity in the affair of Combaut 109, 10. His obſerva-
tions u pon the character of the Engliſh; and upon the
manner in which the French ought to behave to them
111. Other obſervations upon France; upon the Eu-
ropean powers; and upon war 112, 13. State of the
court, and of the Engl'ſh government 114. The diffi-
culties he found in this negotiation 75, Character of the
King and Queen of England 116. 17. Sully's firſt con-
ver ſation with Cecil: the character and ſecret deſigns of
this ſecretary-119. Another converſation with the de-
puties of the United Provinces; and the meaſures which
they concert together 121. Another converſation with
the Venetian envoy, who informs him of the ſteps taken

8 by Bouillon with the King of England 125. Civilitics

which paſs betwixt him and the Count of Aremberg 1 25.
Preſents which he receives from James ib, His uncalinc's
that he cannot preſent himſelf to this prince in mourning
127. An account of what paſſed at his firlt aadicnce
129. His conduct praiſed by the Londoners 137 The
obſtacles he meets with in his negotiation 138. He pe-
netrates into the deſigns of the northein courts 140.
His opinion of the pretended propoſals made by Spain
to the King of England, againſt France 142. He ad-

viſes Henry to take care and ſecure his provinces 147.

He has a ſecond audience with James, and a private
converſation with this prince, in which he makes him
approve of his plan and his arguments in favour of the

United Provinces 148. His conference with the Engliſh
minilters.

L _ * w

courſe at dinner 160. He has a conference with Barne-

IN DEX

miniſters. Cecil's breach of faith 155. Sully is invited
by the King of England to an entertainment: their diſ-

velt 163. Another with the Engliſh miniſters and the
Flemmiſh deputies : the obſtinacy of the Engliſh : the
reſolution ſhown by Sully in this conference 163, 4.
Sully's third audience of the King of England, in which
he has a private converſation with him, and acquaints
him with the conduct of his miniſters 171. He explains
to him the great deſign 175. See Political Deſign, And
makes him reliſh it 183. The kindneſs ſhown by this
prince to Sully 187. Purport of the form of a treaty
concluded by Sully with King James. The fault com-
mitted by Henry in not giving him fuller power : the
ſucceſs of this negatiation, and praiſes of it 188. Diſ-
patches are intercepted 191, Audience of leave, Ci-
vilities and honours paid by King James to Sully : pre-
ſents made by Sully to the King, the Queen, and the
Lords of the Englith court 195, Sully imbarks for
France: he is in darger du ing his p:ſſage 196. He
goes to Henry at Villers-Coterets : his reception from
the King: public converſation upon his embaſly 197.
Praiſes given him by Henry, who takes his part againſt
the Count of Soiſſons 201. Private conver tations be-
tween the King and Sully on the ſame ſubject 202. The
King of England ſends him the treaty ſigned, with great
praiſes of his conduct 206. He reſumes his labours in
the finances 212. He makes remonſt:ances to the King
vron the abuſe of granting too readily a great number
of ſmall edits 213. Henry ſupports him againſt the
reſentment of the Count of Soiſſons, the Marchioneſs of
Verneuil, Cc. on this occaſion : his ſteadineſs and reſo-
lution praiſed 215, 18. He receives and treats the
King at Roſny : the entertainment is diſturbed by an ac-
cident 220, 1. He endeavours to appeaſe the mutiny
among the Proteſtants, and to get the doctrine of the
Pope's being Antichrilt ſoppreſſed 223. He is made
governor of Paitou 225. Oppoſes the eſtabliſhment of
lilk manufactures 227. Reflections upon this ſubject ;
and upon luxury, and upon arts neceſſary to be cult-
vatcd in France, Ce. 229, He blames Heory's great

expenſes

END EX

expenſes in gaming, miſtreſſes, &c. 234. and oppoſes the
ſending of colonies to Canada 235, He preſents gold
and ſilver medals to their Majeſties 236. Sully is em-
ployed to ſettle the claims of the King and the Duke of
Bar to the effects of the late Ducheſs of Bar 238. He
votes in the council againſt the return of the Jeſuits,
and difſuades the King from conſenting to it 240.
but to pleaſe the King, he afterwards favours that
ſociety 250, 2. He preſents a memorial againſt D'Oſ-
ſat, and inveighs againſt the policy of the miniſters
and courtiers, who were in the intereſt of Spain 25 4.
He is the original author of the political ſyſtem of
Cardinal Richelieu for humbling the houſe of Auſtria
256. He afhits in making a diſcovery of L'Hote's
treaſonable practices 257. His behaviour on this oc-
caſion to Villeroi 260. He compoſes a memorial con-
cerning a toleration of different religions 269. Du-
Perron and Olivary obtain each a cardinal's hat through
his influence 271. A curious converſation between
Henry and him, in which the King acquaints him with
the uncaſineſs given him by the Queen and the Marchi-
oneſs of Verneuil. Sully's courage and reſolution in
ſpeaking to the King, who excuſes himſelf to him for
the violence of his temper 272. &c, Sully gives advice
to this prince, which he docs not follow 280, but
employs him to pacify theſe troubles. Sully's reſpect-
fal behaviour to the Queen; and the deference ſhown
by that princeſs to him 282. He reconciles the King
and the Queen, who afterwards quarrel again 285.
He endeavours in vain to inſpire Henry with a reſolu—
tion neceſſary for the occaſion ; and draws the Queen's
hatred upon himſelf 286, 7, He is ill uſed by that
princeſs 289. and forbears to concern himfelf in her
quarrels with the King, for which he is in danger ct
loſing his favour 290. He makes an attempt to perſunde
the Marchioneſs of Verneuil to diſengage herſelf from
the King, but does not ſucceed 292. Reciprocal praiſcs
between Queen Margaret and Sully 295. He labours
to prevent the cabals of the malecontents 296. and
ſolicits Henry to ſhew himſclf in the provinces 299.
He goes to Poitou 302. Honours paid him chere:

the

t ONE Ep CY 1 W

„

9 yy.

IN VU N X.

the great utility of this journey 308. Services which
he does for D'Epernon 309. He takes meaſures for
arreſting the Count of Auvergne 314. Letters between
him and that nobleman 219. He reproaches the Mar-
chioneſs of Verncuil when he was commiſſioned to in-
terrogate her 323. Cannot prevail upon Henry to fend
her ont of the kingdom 327. An anecdote on this ſub-
jet 76. He depoſites the King's treaſure in the baſtile;
a regulation for this purpoſe 232. Some fine refleftions
upon government, and the duty of kings 334. Me-
thods for raiſing money 336. Sully undertakes to
prove the rents 340. Eltabliſhes a chamber of jultice.
Other regulations upon the finances 341. Upon the
army; an eſtabliſiment for diſabled ſoldiers 344, 5.
Cauſes of the ruin and decay of ſtates 247. His maxims
of government too aultere 248. He begins the canal
of Briare 349. Oppoſes the edict for thirty per cent.
and afterwards repairs this fault by a treaty of com-
merce with Spain 16. He obliges Villeroi and Sillery
to ſion the treaty of commerce 356. and ſecretly favours
the Flemmings 358. The King of England acts con-
trary to the treaty paſſed with him 360. Sully's ad-
vice to Henry againſt the Spamiſh policy 367. H.
ſentiments concerning the Salic law, and the alliances
of the houſe of France 268, He diſcloſes Henry's
great ſchemes to Cardinal Bufalo 371. Supports the
Grifons againſt Spain, in the affair of La-Valteline 375.
Puts the King in poſſeſſion of his rights with regard to
the bridge of Avignon 378. Dilinades * from pur-
chaſing the earldom of St Paul 380. and endeavcurs to
hinder bim from erecting buildings for his manufactures;
and from encouraging too great a number of religious
orders 383. Diſapproves of the pardon granted by this
prince to D'Entragnes and D' Auxergoe 384. Keſuſes
to concern, himſelf in this affair with the Marchioneſs
of Verneuil 386. and endeavours to appeaie the Queen
388. Ile oppoſes the demolition of the pyramid : he
is hated by the Jeſuits and the courtiers, who plot a-
gainſt him 200, A great quarrel between him and
Father Cotton, on account of the college * Poitiers
391. * himfclf 393, 5. and 15 re ecopcited to Father
Vol. V. 0 0 Cotton

1 1D) r

Cotton 399. He is concerned with D'Epernon and
Grillon in a diſpute relating to the poſt of colonel cf
the guards, in which he runs the danger of being diſ-
graced : a particular account of this incident 400. The
courtiers and Jeſuits enter into a combination to ruin
him 408. Letters between Henry and him, and the
Fervice which he receives on this occaſion from the houſe
of Lorrain 411. Henry repents of his procedure with
regard to this miniſter 476. A long and intereſling
eonverſation between them, in which they are reconciled
418. The artifices of his enemies: their libels againſt
him 420. Sully convicts them of calumny 428. Henry
puniſhes his enemies, and loads him with careſſes in the
preſence of the courtiers 431. He puts an end to the
diſpute concerning the poſt of the colonel of the guards,
to the ſatisfaction of the King 432. He quarrels, and
is again reconciled with this prince 432, 3. Different
judgments concerning this conduct 433. He marrics
his daughter to the Duke of Rohan 434. and his wife's
daughter to La-Boulaye : preſents made by Henry to
the new- married ladies: favours granted and refuſed by
him to Sully 435, 6. He endeavours to provide a mar-
riage between the Marquis of Cœuvres and Mademoi-
{elle de Melun, but does not ſucceed 438. His labours
in the finances iv. 1. Reflections upon the taille and
gabelle 2. The debts of the ſtate diſcharged, and
plenty and good order reſtored to the kingdom: praiſes
of Sully on theſe accounts 9. 10. Letters between
him and Cardinal Du- Perron: Cardinal Bufalo's friend-
ſuip: he is held in great eſteem in the court of Rome 17,
Paul V. writes a complimentary letter to him : his an-
ſwer 22. Services done by him for Du-Perron 24. His
opinion of Spinola's arrival at Paris 25. Letters be-
tween the King of England and Sully 29. Henry trults
tim with a ſccret of great importance 30. His reply
to this prince, who propoſed to him as a queſtion, whe-
ther he ovght to get himſelf declared emperor 2b.
Sully removes Henry's apprehenſions concerning the de-
ſigns of the Proteſtants aſſembled at Chatelleraut, and
is appointed to go thither to act for the King 24, Pur-
port of the public inſtructions he received on that c-

cullon

IN D E X.

caſion 38. and of his ſecret and particular inſtructions
44. He viſits Queen Margaret: information which ſhe
gives him: his opinion concerning theſe ſeveral informa-
tions contrary to that of Henry 46. Meaſures taken
by Bouillon againſt him in the aſſembly of Chatelleraur
50. His firſt ſpeech to the aſſembly concerning the
principal points upon which they were convened 55.
He refuſes to be made preſident of the aſſembly 58.
and penetrates into the deſigns of the Proteſtant chiefs ;
diſconcerts them, and frees Henry from his fears 62,
He terminates the diſpute concerning the deputies- gene-
ral to the ſatisfaction of Henry 72. and that relating
to the towns of ſecurity 76. His advice with reſpect
to the affair of Orange and Blaccons not followed 77.
He diſmiſſes the aſſembly, and returns to give an ac-
count of his conduct to the King 81. whom he adviſes
to take a journey into Limoſin and Auvergne 85, He
attends the King in this journey: holds the chamber
des grands jours there, and cauſes the malecontents to
be puniſned 92. Theodore de Beze dedicates his
book to him 94. He quarrels with the Count of Soiſ-
ſons, on occafion of the quarters aſſigned to him as
grand maſter of the ordnance 95. and with D'Epernon,
on account of Rochelle 97. A bon- mot of his con-
cerning the King's firſt phyſician 100. Queen Margaret
aſks his advice concerning her journey to Paris 7b.
Memorial upon the cuſtoms, and ſeveral forms of duels ;
an adventure which gave occaſion for it, and his advice
to Henry upon this ſubject 105. A converſation be-
tween the King, Queen, and Sully, on his preſenting
medals to them; a method propoſed by him to put an
end to their diſputes 113. New-year's gifts from their
Majeſties to him 119. Another convecſation between
the King and him upon the means of humbling the
houſe of Auſtria 121. He is made duke and peer :
ceremony of his reception in parliament 124, 5. He
confirms Henry in the deſign of beſieging Sedan, not-
withſtanding the oppoſition made by the courtiers 125, 6.
An uncommon circumſtance with rezard to the wound
in his neck and mouth 129. Eis letters to Bouillon,
and the anſwers to them 132. An9o:ter letter which
O O 2 | he

——
— —_—

'
:
*
%
*
*
-
F?
*
=
: 0
L
+
:
4 if
#i3/t}
4
Af
+ 7
4
i b
Li =
31M
4
4
+ $48
#
Fr l
WA
TTY,
1

-
Y « b a * -
3 —³˙;W *

: -
— —
— WE
:

Ld
7 * —
1

I. E.

he wrote to Parabere concerning the enterpriſes upon
Sedan, with a deſign to have made it public 137. The
Duke of Bouillon's hatred to him 139. Letters which
he received from Henry during this expedition 142.
His complaints againſt Villeroi, for making a myſtery
to him of the treaty with Bouillon: Heary's motives
for this conduct 147. His reception of that prince 149.
He viſits Sedan 150. He cannot prevail upon Henry
to turn his arms againſt be carldom of St Paul 151.
and endeavours to diſſuade him from making a public
entry into Paris 152. He gives good advice to the
Venetians, upon their difference with Paul V. reflections
upon the true policy of theſe two powers 153. Does
ſome ſervices to the Cardinal Barberini and Du-Per-
ron 156. He ſupports the city of Metz againſt the Je-
ſuits 158. Quarrels with Father Cotton in the affair
of Adrienne de Freſne 160. Sully paciſies the quar-
. tels between the Catholics and Proteitants on account
of religion 164. and reſtores the Duke of Rohan to
the King's favour 166. He is made captain- lieutenant
of the Queen's company of gendarmes : other gratuities
beſtowed upon him by his Majeſty 172. Regulations
on the finances 16. Friendſhip between him and the
Ducheſs of Guiſe 178. Converſation on ſeveral ſub-
jects between the King and him in the preſence of the
courtiers 180. He gives Henry the abſtracts of the
general accounts 184. His advice to the King con-
cerning the war of Flanders 186. The wound in his
mouth again opens, and the other miniſters do bulineſs
with him at his houſe 191. Henry's letters to him
upon the birth of a ſecond fon of France: upon his
children and the chace, &c. 193. His great coniidence
in him 195. He ſuppreſſes the proſecution upon ac-
count of the murder of his nephew Epinoy 196. Hen-
ry IV, diſguſted with him, but ſoon after reconci-
led 197, 8. Maxims upon the manner in which a
prince ought to live with his miniſters 199, Sully re-
preſents to the Proteitants aſſembled at Rochelle his
Majeſty's complaints againſt them 200. He ſupports
this city in the affair of Peter Seguiran 205. but refit»
ſes to interfere in the diſpute of the Jeſuits with the in-

habitants

*

IND E

habitants of Poitiers 206. Converſation with Hen-
ry IV. upon the intrigues of the Spaniards at court 208.
He ſatisfies the King upon this head, and juſtifies the
houſe of Lorrain 211. He inquires into the capture
made by Grammont 214. He induces Henry to refuſe
the offer made by the United Provinces of ſubmitting to
the dominion of France 216. His opinion of the
treaty concluded between Spain and Holland 221. Pre-
ſents made by him in Italy for the king 227. Briefs
ſent him by Paul V. and his anſwer to this Pope 229.
Operations in the finances : debts diſcharged
Improves the eſtates ceded by Queen Margaret to the
Dauphin 231. Reprimands the parliaments of Tou-
louſe and Dijon 232. Eſtabliſhes order in the cham-
ber of accounts 233. in the gabelle and the maré-
chauſſtes 236. in the domaine 237. is fcheme for
compoſing a council of the army, robe, &c. rejected
by Henry 245, 6. He oppoſes the eſtabliſhment of a
chamber of juſtice 247, Warns the King of his enc-
mies 248. Regulations for the artillery, c. 250. He
condemns his Majeſty's exceſſive expenſes in manufac-
tories, buildings, and furniture 254. Henry's letters
to him upon his domeſtic quarrels 254. Theatrical
entertainments exhibited at the arſenal 257. A comi-
cal adventure between him and Pimentel 26. Calum-
niated by his enemies 258. His fon married to Made-
moiſelle de Crequy 260. which is productive of un-
eaſineſs to him zh, He is offered the poſt of conſta-
ble, &c. which he refuſes 263. Means employed by
the Proteſtants to prevent his accepting of them
265. He is ſupported by Henry againſt his enemies
268. Nis caution in mentioning the foibles of this
prince 269. His converſation with Henry on the Queen,
the Marchioneſs of Verneuil, &c. he endeavours to
make up the quarrels 271. Henry's obliging letter
to him on the birth of his fon 281. Employed by
Henry in the affair of Joiaville and the Marchioneſs of
Verneuil 283. as likewiſe in that of Sommerive with
the Counteſs of Moret 298. In the aſſaſſination of
Balagny by Eguillon, and ſeveral other quarrels amongſt
the courtiers 292, Ib the marriage cf M. de Ven-
O03 don:

IN D E X.

dome with Mademoiſelle Mercœur 295. He oppoſes
the violent counſels againſt the Proteſtants 298. and
concludes the aſſembly at Gergeau to the ſatisfaction of
his Majeſty 301. Henry's letter to him upon his health
and that of his children 304. His generolity to the
family of Miron 308. Builds La-Place-Dauphins and
the bridge of Rouen 309. He complains of Henry's
extravagance at play 310. Devaitation made by an
inundation of the Loire 311. Grants made him by the
King 312. Orders plans to be taken of the coaſts of
France, and a reſtitution of the uſurpations made by
Spain and Lorrain 313, Regulations in the finances
314. Exhorts Henry to be preſent at the conſultations
of his miniſters 316. Memoirs and reflections upon the
raille, impoſts, and the different forms of our govern-
ment: his opinion of feyeral of our kings 318. Cc. He
receives the compliments of foreign princes 321. Hen-
ry follows his advice upon the accommodation between
the Spaniards and Dutch 322. Medals and memorials
preſented by him to Henry 335, 6. Different opinions
of him 336. His diſpute with Villeroi 337. He en-
rertains his Majeſty at the arſenal 338. Diſputes be-
twixt him and Father Cotton, occaſioned by an impru-

dent letter wrote by that father : their hatred oi one
another 242. Henry imparts to him his diſquiztudes :
a long converſation between them on the public news

348, Upon this prince's love for the Princeſs of Con-

de 349. Upon the plots againſt his life by the Queen's
family 350. Sully's opinion of theſe plots, and his
wiſe advice to the King 358. He haſtens the execu-
tion of the grand deſign 363. Obtains the permiſhon of
entering the Louvre in his coach 363. Henry and he
employ themſelves in compoling the cabinet of ſtate 364.
&c. His converſation with the King on the different
ways of railing money 369. Edict for eſtabliſhing the
droit annuel, and different opinions about this tax 370.
Other regulations of this miniſter againſt luxury, chi-
canery, Gc. 374. Cc. Converſations betwixt him and
Heniy upon this ſubject, and the oppoſition of the mi-
niſters 380. Henry's character of Sully 2383. Opera-
tions in the finances 8. He reproaches Henry on his

ror

|

|
{

|
|
8
a
;
]
{
I
3
|

ENU
great expenſes 387. Edict againſt fraudulent bankrupts-
and duels 390. Intrigues of the court upon account of
the children of France 392. Letters of the Prince of
Condé: letters and counſels of Sully upon this occaſion,
as well to the Prince of Conde as to Henry 395, He
clears Du-Pleſſis Mornay, and other Proteſtants, of falſe
informations againſt them 412. Informations given him
upon the conſpiracy at La-Fleche 56. His obligation to
Henry upon account of his nephew Epinoy 418. The
great elteem he is in with foreign princes 422, The
alliance of his houſe with that of Auſtria ; his ſpirited
converſation with the Florentine envoy 425. His re-
proof to De Refuge 428. Memoirs and other details
on the ſucceſhon of Cleves : converſation between Hen-
ry and him upon the means of humbling the houſe of
Aultria 430. &c. The courtiers inſpire Henry with
ſuſpicions againſt him 453. Negotiations with the princes
of Europe, and other preparations for the grand deſign
459. See Cleves, Political Deſign. The liberty he
took of pulling Henry who ſpoke inconſiderately of this
affair 463. Henry's converſation with him upon his
preſages of his approaching death 472. &c. Sully en-
deavours to perſuade the Queen to delay her coronation,
but ineffectual 476. Schoroberg informs him of a con-
ſpiracy, Sc. 477. See Coman's conſpiracy, He is in-
diſpoſed at the arſenal : where the King ſends La- Va-
renne to him 485, He receives the firlt account of this
prince's aſſaſſination there: his behaviour and ſpeeches
upon that occaſion 487. His complaints againſt the
author of this murder, and upon the negligence with
which he is guarded v. 1. &c, A ſketch of the character,
and of the good and bad qualities of this prince 2. Oc.
Sully's reaſons for not. going to the Louvie : examina-
ation of his conduct upon this occaſion 10. He at laſt
goes : his reception from the King and Queen-mother
16.17. The hatred and plots of the courtiers againſt
him 18. He affiſts at the ceremony of a bed of j ju-
ſtice 19. His complaints of the court and council of
the Queen regent 20. He is no more regarded, and
reſolves to withdraw himſelf: his family and friends op-

poſe his giving vp bis employments 24. The Lone
0

IN D E X.

of soiſſons ſeeks bis friendſhip, and afterwards be-
comes his enemy 27, Other ſubjects of complaint

betwixt this prince and him 29. His opinion with
regard to Cleves not followed 32. His advice to the
Count of Bethune, ambaſſador at Rome 25. His ad-
vice with regard to the Duke of Savoy, and the other
allies of the crown, not followed 36. He again re-
ſolves to deliver up his poſts, and again hindered by his
family 40. Conchini behaves with great unpoliteneſs
to him 39, He is reconciled with the Prince of Condé:
goes to meet him, and attends him in the Louvre 48.

Counſels which he gives him; notwithſtanding which
he joins with his enemies 52. He oppoſes the coun-

cil in the affair of Cleves, but not regarded 57, He
oppoſes the grants promiſed to the Duke of Bouillon 62.
As likewiſe thoſe to Conchini and the Count of Soiffons
63. Refuſes to ſign a comprant ſent him by the Queen-

regent 64. Blames Sillery and Conchim 67. His

diſpute in full council with Bouillon 68. Thoſe who
fide with him 70. He retires to Montrond during
the coronation of Lewis XIII. and there falls ſick 72.

Motives which induced the Queen to recall him, and

the reception he meets with 73. Viſits the children of
France: his judgment of them 77. Conchini viſits
him: prejudices the Queen againſt them 78. His in-
dignation of the propoſal made to the council 80.
His reproofs to the Queen-regent 85. He oppoſes
Villeroy and Alincourt in full council, upon the affair
of Lyons 86. Eulogium of his boldneſs and honeſty 89.
He gives up his poſt of ſuperintendant and captain of the
baſtile 91. His titles 16. Brevets and recompenſes
which he receives 94, His advice to his ſecretaries
95. Honours paid him upon his quitting Paris 100,
He prevents the cabals of his enemies at court : letters
betwixt him and the Queen-regent on this occaſion 206.
The King gives him a brevet for the augmentation of
his penſion 104. He gives a particular account of his
eſtate, and the improvements he made in it, with the
proviſion he makes for his children &c. 106. His
diſputes with the Prince of Conde, who endeavours to
have his eſtate confiſcated 114. The fidelity mw
wht:

Su

— Ya — — a ... a 1 0 en ens TR

af @

———
—

8 we

*

N DUDEN

Which he obſerves his engagements with Henry the
| Great 117. His ſhare in the grand deſign 118. &c,
See Political Deſign. The aſſembly of Proteſtants at
Chatelleraut ſupport his intereſt againſt Bouillon and his
enemies 172, The part he takes in the affair of Saint
John d'Angely 176. and in the revolt of the Princes:
the reliance of the King on this occaſion, and his ad-
vice to the Queen-regent 106. Other ſervices in the
war againſt the Proteſtants : recompenſed with a mar-
ſhal's ſtaff 182. State of his family, and his diſquie-
| tude upon account of the Marquis of Roſny, and the
Prince of Henrichemont 183. Cc. His death 186,
Honours paid to him by the Ducheis of Sully: his mau-
ſoleum: his epitaph 187. His reſidence at Villebon :
at Sully, &c, State and government of his houſe : the
employment of his time, Oc. 188. Cc. His buildings
196. Cc.

Sully (Ducheſs of) Rachel de Cocheſilet, Sully afks her
in marriage i. 226. Married to him 278. She is be-
loved by the Princeſs Catherine ii. 104. The ſinan-
ciers endeavour to gain her by preſents 158, Her
converſation with the Ducheſs of Beaufort 295. She
gives a ball at Chambery 343. She exerts herſelf with
Madame de Brandis for the ſurrender of the caltle
of Montmelian 362. Her return to Paris 274. She
goes to Baugy 390. Delivered of a fon at the mo-
ment of Marihal Biron's arrival at the baſtile iii. 24,
Preſents ſhe receives from their Majeſties 237. Gives
the Queen good counſel with regard to Conchini iv.
278. Henry IV. compliments her upon the birth of
her ſon 281. Sully informs her of the diſpofition of
the Queen- regent, and of the council to him after the
death of Henry IV. v. 39. She oppoſes his giving up
his poſts 40. The Queen-regent employs her to en-
gage her huſband to return from Montrond 75, The
ſum ſhe brought Sully at her marriage 108. She ex-
cuſes her huſband to the Queen-regent 182. The
mauſoleum ſhe cauſes to be built for him 187, Her
life and domeſtic occupations 195. Ge.

Sweden, a revolution in that kingdom ii. 316, The bad

policy of that court iii, 141, 2. Part of the great deſign
relating

|
|
|

— 22. — —-—⁵ — — —ů — —

|
|
|
|

IND EX.
of Soiſſons ſeeks his friendſhip, and afterwards be-

comes his enemy 27. Other ſubjects of complaint

betwixt this prince and him 29. His opinion with
regard to Cleves not followed 32. His advice to the
Count of Bethune, ambaſſador at Rome 35. His ad-
vice with regard to the Duke of Savoy, and the other
allies of the crown, not followed 36. He again re-
ſolves to deliver up his poſts, and again hindered by his
family 40. Conchini behaves with great unpoliteneſs
to him 39. He is reconciled with the Prince of Condé:
goes to meet him, and attends him in the Louvre 48.

Counſels which he gives him; notwithſtanding which
he joins with his enemies 52. He oppoſes the coun-

cil in the affair of Cleves, but not regarded 57. He
oppoſes the grants promiſed to the Duke of Bouillon 62.
As likewiſe thoſe to Conchini and the Count of Soiſſons
63. Refuſes to ſign a comptant ſent him by the Queen-

Tegent 64. Blames Sillery and Conchim 67, His

diſpute in full council with Bouillon 68. Thoſe who
ſide with him 70. He retires to Montrond during
the coronation of Lewis XIII. and there falls ſick 72.

Motives which induced the Queen to recall him, and
the reception he meets with 73. Viſits the children of

France: his judgment of them 757. Conchini viſits
him: prejudices the Queen againſt them 78. His in-
dignation of the propoſal made to the council 80.
His reproofs to the Queen-regent 85. He oppoſes
Villeroy and Alincourt in full council, upon the affair
of Lyons 86. Eulogium of his boldneſs and honeſty 89.
He gives up his poſt of ſuperintendant and captain of the
baſtile 91. His titles 1. Brevets and recompenſes
which he receives 94. His advice to his ſecretaries
95. Honours paid him upon his quitting Paris 100.
He prevents the cabals of his enemies at court: letters
betwixt him and the Queen - regent on this occaſion 76.
The King gives bim a brevet for the augmentation of
his penſion 104. He gives a particular account of bis
eſtate, and the improvements he made in it, with the
proviſion he makes for his children &c. 106. His
diſputes with the Prince of Condé, who endeavours to

have his eſtate confiſcated 114. The fidelity yo
wht:

Su

E

- Which he obſerves his engagements with Henry the
Great 117. His ſhare in the grand deſign 118. Cc.
See Political Deſign. The aſſembly of Proteſtants at
Chatelleraut ſupport his intereſt againſt Bouillon and his
enemies 172, The part he takes in the affair of Saint
John d' Angely 176. and in the revolt of the Princes:
the reliance of the King on this occaſion, and his ad-
vice to the Queen-regent 1b. Other ſervices. in the
war againſt the Proteſtants : recompenſed with a mar-
ſhal's ſtaff 182. State of his family, and his diſquie-

| tude upon account of the Marquis of Roſny, and the
Prince of Henrichemont 183. Cc. His death 186,
Honours paid to him by the Ducheis of Sully : his mau-

ſoleum: his epitaph 187. His reſidence at Villebon :
at Sully, &c. State and government of his houſe : the
employment of his time, Oc. 188. Cc. His build ings
196. Cc.
fully (Ducheſs of) Rachel de Cocheſilet, sully aſks her
in marriage i. 226. Married to him 278. She is be-
loved by the Princeſs Catherine ii, 104. The ſinan-
ciers endeavour to gain her by preſents 158. Her
converſation with the Ducheſs of Beaufort 295. She
gives a ball at Chambery 343. She exerts herſelf with
Madame de Brandis for the ſurrender of the caſtle
of Montmelian 362. Her return to Paris 274. She
goes to Baugy 390. Delivered of a fon at the mo-
ment of Martha] Biron's arrival at the baſtile iti, 24.
Preſents ſhe receives from their Majeſties 237. Gives
the Queen good counſel with regard to Conchint iv.
278. Henry IV. compliments her upon the birth of
her ſon 281. Sully informs her of the diſpofition of
the Queen-regent, and of the council to him after the
death of Henry IV. v. 39. She oppoſes his giving up
his poſts 40. The Queen-regent employs her to en-
gage her huſband to return from Montrond 75, The
ſum ſhe brought Sully at her marriage 108. She ex-
cules her huſband to the Queen-regent 182, The
mauſoleum ſhe cauſes to be built for him 187, Her
life and domeſtic occupations 195. Oc.

Sweden, a revolution in that kingdom ii. 316, The bad

policy of that court iii, 141, 2. Part of the great deſign
relating

D

relating to Sweden v. 142. Forces and money to be
contributed by that crown 160. See Political Deſign.
Sweden (Charles, King of) dethrones Sigiſmond his ne-
phew ii. 316. and confirms himſelf in the throne iv.
181. Himſelf and his ſon enter into a confederacy
againſt the houſe of Auſtria 259. Boiſſiſe is appointed
| 1 to this court 468, See Sweden, Political
Deſign.
Swiſs, They prevent Charles IX. from being taken at
Meaux i. 18. They grant troops to Henry III. 118.
Sully treats with them for this purpoſe 119. They
march into France under ſeveral diſadvantages 122. and
take part with the league, to avoid being cut to pieces
at Auneau 148. They are diſarmed on the day of the
barricadoes 150. They fight bravely for Henry IV. at
Arques 181, but refuſe to fight at Ivry 196. They
mutiny in Henry's army after this battle 205. They
bring him ſuccours at the ſiege of Rouen 227. and re-
fuſe to purſue the Prince of Parma after his paſſage over
the Seine 262. Their valour at the attack of the great
convoy before Laon 409. They unite with France
againſt Spain in the war of 1595 it. 39. 43. The
Swiſs troops are diſbanded after the peace of Vervins
211, 12. Sully will net allow the Swiſs to have any
ſhare in farming the revenues 251, A ſolemn embaſſy
from the thirteen cantons to renew the alliance: their
reception at Paris iii. 59, France levies ſoldiers in
Switzerland 60. Their diſpoſitions and true policy
with reſpect to the houſe of Auſtria 179. In what
conſiſted the advantages they were to have by the de-
ſign of Henry IV. 182, See Political Deſign, They
become mediators between the Duke of Savoy and the
republic of Geneva 209. Abuſes in the diſcharge of
the debts due from France to the Swiſs 338. The part
they have in the affair of La-Valteline and the Griſons
372. Sully ſlandered with carrying on a criminal cor-
reſpondence with them 426. Debts contracted by
Henry IV. with them during the league iv. 8. The
Swiſs join the Griſons againſt Spain 225. Sully pays
the debts of the ſtate to the cantons 230, 49. The
Swiſs enter igto the confederacy againſt the bo of
Aultria

"A 2

9 w)

Th

T DEX.

Auftria 460. Caumartin is ſent to them in the quality
of ambaſſador 468, Part of the great deſign relating
to this republic : advantages for them in it y, 151.
Forces and money to be contributed by them 161,
See Swiſs, Political Deſign

gun (clipſe of) iv. 93

Synods of Proteſtants, they raiſe a rebellion ii. 162, 88.
Sully forbids them in the King's name to receive de-
puties from the factious lords iv. 59. See Chätelleraut
(aſſembly of). Aſſembly at Rochelle 165. See Gap,
Rochelle, Proteſtants

=

Aille, Sully labours in this part of the revenue ii.
255. Part of it is remitted to the people : abuſe
and vexations iv. 2. Reflections upon them, and upon
the means of remedying them 16. Regulations upon
the taille 315. Brevet of the taille expedited in
full council 317. Faults in this reſpect tectiſied 318.
Origin and changes of the taille in this kingdom 319
Tancrede the pretended heir to the houſe of Rohan in,

. (Flemiſh), ſent for to Paris iv. 255.
See Manufactures

Tardieu, a commiſſary reprimanded by Sully iv. 236

Tarn, the Duke of Joycuſe is drowned there i. 276,
See Villemur, Joyeuſe

Taxis, (John Baptiſt, Count of), one of the Speniſh ple-
nipotentiaries to the ſtates of Paris: his pluts unſueceſſ-
ful: faults which he commits there i. 313. The of-
fers made to him by Henry IV. atter his abjuration re-
jected 337. See Spain, League

Terrail (Da) commands che light horſe in the army of
the league at the batile of Ivry i. 195. Goes with
Sully to London iii. 108. Enters into the ſervice of
the Archduke : takes Bergen-op-zoom, and loſes it
again iv. 27. Fails in an attempt upon Sluys 290.
Endeavours to ſurpriſe Geneva: is taken there, and
beheaded 423 £17

Third party, names of thoſe that compoſe it: they are

' accuſed

IN T

accuſed of endeavouring to get rid both of Henry IV,
and of the Duke of Malenne i. 287
Thou (James-Auguſtus De) Preſident, a converſation
between him and Montagne, upon the characters of
Henry IV. and the Duke of Guile i. 104, Conſulted
by Henry IV. upon his converſion 290. Employed
ia compoſing the edict of Nantz ii. 194. Inferts an
article in it which he was obliged to ſuppreſs : his ſen-
timents with regard to religion ſuſpeted 283. He
votes in the council againſt the repeal of the Jeſuits
baniſhment iii. 244. The Prince of Conde's letter to
him afier his flight iv. 408
Tilenus, a Proteſtant miniiter, his diſpute with Du-Val
ii. 276. His oppoſition to the expedition againſt Sedan
*. 127
Toleration of religion adviſed by Sully iii. 269
Toulouſe, its reduction ii. 79. Sum paid for its treaty
244. The chamber of requeſts ſuppreſſed by its parlia-
ment iii. 220, Henry IV. diſguſted with its parliament
223. Its ancient counts, vaſſals to the Kings of France
380
Tournelles, Henry IV. eſtabliſhes his filk manufactories in
the incloſures of this caſtle, contrary to the advice of
Sully iii. 234
Tours, one of the five citics which continued faithful to
Henry III. i. 159. The treaty of Plcihs les- Tours
negotiated by Sully 163. Concluded by Du-Pleſhs
Nornay 16. The two kings have a meeting near the
city 165. Duke of Maſenne inveſts it, and obliged to
retire by the two kings 166. The Duke of Guile e-
ſcapes from the caſtle of this city 225. The firſt ma-
nufactories of rich ſtuff do not ſucceed ii. 317
Tremouille (Claude, Duke de La-) takes Talmont 1, 120.
Fights at Coutras, where his troops behave ill 141,
Gives bad counſel to the Prince of Conde 143. Has a
great ſhare of the victory gained at Fontaine-Frangois ii.
60. Plots amongſt the Proteſtants during the ſiege of
Amiens, notwithſtanding the remonſtrances of Sully
162. Is ſent by Henry IV. to examine into the affair
of the true or falſe Schaſtian 215. Makes an article to
be iaſgrted in the edit of Nantz, Which is afterwards
ſuppreſſed

„

ſuppreſſed 284. Is ſaſpeRed of being amongſt the ſedi-
tious iii. 4, He quits the court 6. He engages with
Bouillon 78. His intrigues with the King of Fngland
221. and amongſt the Proteſtants againſt the ſtate 296.
Sully viſits him at Thouatrs, and -diſconcerts Bis ſchemes
307. His death 309

Triennial (officers) eſtabliſhed ii. 152. Sully diſpuro; with
the council upon this account 157

Turks and Turky, they carry on a war in Hungary it,
379. The Grand Seignior's embaſſy to Henry 1V. the
magnificent titles they give him 395. Continuation of
their war in Hungary 431. iti. 65. See Rodolphus,
Mercœur, Sc. They give ſuccour to the Moors in
Spain iv. 333. Montglat ſent ambailador to this court
468. The grand deſign, fo far as it relates to them
v. 141, See Political Deſigu, Mahomet III. Achalet,
Conſtantinople

Tyber, a great overflow of this river ii. 262

V.
9 the Spaniards driven from this place by
the Prince of Orange ut. 75
Vair (William Du-) counſellor of the parliament, his
opinion for the hereditary ſucceſſion of the crown i.

17

Vaivodes of Tranſilvania defeated by George Paſte ii. 431

Val (Du) his diſpute at the conference with Tilenus ii.
276

Valentia (the council of), edict againft duels iv. 196

Valentia in Spain, an inſurrection * upon account of
the expulſion of the Moors ir. 33

Valentinian II. Emperor cf the Lal. Sully's judgment of
himv.113

Valentinian III. Sully's opinion of this emperor v. 119

Valette (Bernard de Nogaret de La) adiniral of France,
particulars of his life, and of his government in Pau-
phiné: killed at the ſiege of Roquebrune i. 271. One
of the favourites of Henry III. ii. 18

Valteline, the ſituation of this canton: diſpute upon ac-

count of it between the Spaniards and Griſons iii. 372.

Sequel of this difference iv. 215
Vor. V. P p Varenne

— — ——
= — —
—

— —äͤ— —
„ at — bY

—
—

2 _ a _ — i
— 4 * — —yy— — — A a 4

— th

_
- —
—

—

dg et raw — . —
. ²˙-!n—Üi n —— N a
.

—

IND EE X.

Varenne (William- Fouquet de La-) imprudently ſent by
Henry IV. to Mandoce i. 343. Particulars relating to
his fortune: a bon-mot upon this ſubject 342. Ser-
vices done by him to the Princeſs Catherine ii. 103.
Henry IV, recommends the Ducheſs of Beaufort to his
care 294, His letters to Henry IV. and to Sully upon
the tragical death of this lady 299, Heary's affection
for him 289, He is employed in arreſting the Marſhal

« Biron and Auvergne iii. 23, He preſents the Jeſuits of
Verdun to the King at Metz 71. This prince makes
nſec of him in accommodating matters betwixt Sully and
the Count of Soiſſons 218. He is inſtrumental in the
recall of the Jeſuits 241. He is ſent by Henry IV. to
the Marchioneſs of Verneuil 322. He joins with the cour-
tiers and Jeſuits to ruin Sully in the affair relating to the
poſt of colonel of the guards 409. He is deputed by
Henry IV. to Queen Margaret iv. 46. His letters to
Sully during the expedition to Sedan 145. He informs
him of the concluſion of the treaty with Bouillon 152.
His ſervices to the Jeſuits at La- Fleche 160. A preſent
made him by Henry IV. 177. He ſupports Father Seguiran
and the Jeſuits againſt the Rochellers 205. The part
he acts in the quarrel amongſt the courtiers 289, His
attachment to the Jeſuits 345. Gives information to
Henry IV. of the plots of the Spaniards againſt his per-
ſon 351. 404. This prince ſends him to viſit Sully the
day he was murdered 485. His ſpeech to the Jeſuits
upon the death of this prince 503. Sent by the Queen-
mother to Sully v. 14

Vaucelas (Andrew de Cochefilet, Earl of ) ſent by Sully
to the Queen of England i. 193 Diſcovers in Spain
the plots of the Queen's party againſt the life of Hen-
ry IV. and informs him of it iv. 351

Velaſque (John Ferdinand de) Conſtable of Caſtile, ſent
ambaſſador extraordinary from Spain to London in, 134.
Plots againſt Henry IV. 204. Employed to conclude the
affair of thirty per cent. 353. Concludes, at London,
the agreement betwixt Spain and England 262. Hen-
ry IV. 's reception and converſation with him at Paris
365

Vendome (Cæſar de Bourbon, Duke of), ſon of Henry Wy

an

I

and the fair Cabriella, legitimated ii. 34. Deſign of
giving him the ſovereignty of Franche-Comté 44. He
is made governor of La-Fere 79. Betrothed to Made -
moiſelle de Mercœur 181. Demands M. de Melun for the
Marquis of Cœuvres, but refuſed him iii. 438. Sent by
Henry IV. to viſit Queen Margaret iv. 102. Diſſiculties
in accompliſting his mariiage with Mademoiſelle de Mer-
cœur 295. He accuſes Sully of oppoling his legitimation
392. Henry IV. reconciles him with Sally and R- ny
458. His appreheniions of the plots agault this prizce
488

Venice no longer concerned in ſarming the revenues ii.
251. The reception and preſents made its ambaſſador
396. Umites with the Grifons againſt Spain iii. 60.
See Valtcline, Sully's conference with the Venetian re-
ſident at London 125. Its advantage in the execution
of the great deſign 182. See Political Deſign. Their
great vencration for a ſuit of armour given by Henry IV.
to their reſident 212. The intereſt they had in the af-
fair of Valteline 376. See Fuentes. Preſents given by
Henry IV. to its ambaſſador iv, 16. Their famous
quarrel] with Paul V. The cauſe of this difference:
the wiſe advice given them by Sully; and the true po-
licy of this ſtate 153. See Canaye, Their union with
the Griſons againſt Spain 225. Their difference with
the Pope terminated by the mediation of Henry IV.
227. Confederacy between France and this republic
355. They join the deputation ſent this prince by the
German princes aſſembled at Hall 448. See Clzvcs.
Bullion named for this embaſſy 468. The grand de-
ſign ſo far as it regards this republic v. 142. The ad-
vantages they would have from its execution 151.
The forces and money they were to have contributed
161

Ventadour (Anne de Levis, Duke of) made priſoner be-
fore Cambrai i. 81. His ſucceſs againſt the league in
Languedoc ii. 106, He intercedes with Henry IV. for
the Count of Auvergne w. 36. Sully calumniated up-
on account of his friendſhip for him 425. Debts of
the King to him diſcharged iv. 13. He complains of
Sully 282

P p 2 .-.-* Wore

W

IN D E X.

Vere (Colonel), the Earl of Northumberland gives him a
blow upon the face iii. 205
Verneui! (Henry de Bourbon, Duke of) iii. 56. The \
King gives him the biſhopric of Metz : the difficulties
raiſed by the Pope upon this occaſton iv, 305. Particu-
| lars of his life 16.
verueuil (Catherine-Henrietta de Balzac d*Entragues,
| Marchioneſs of), miſtreſs of Henry IV. the beginning
| of her amours with this prince n. 310. Her charac-
| ter 16. Her artifice to make him give her a promiſe of
| marriage 311. She follows him to the campaign of
| Savoy 334. ls delivered of a dead child 16. She pro-
| cures to the Count of Auvergne pardon and liberty iii.
| 35. Heary pives her the caſtle of Verneuil 60. and
| legitimates the children he had by her 61. See Verneuil V.
| . (Henry de Bourbon, Duke of). Her hatred of Sully,
| whom Henry ſupports in oppoſition to her 215. Pre-
| {ents which ſhe receives from this prince 235, Her
plots with the malecontents 272. Her unequal and
| bad temper 317. Henry reproaches her in his letters:
| ſhe haughtily refuſes to deliver him his promiſe of
| marriage iii. 277. Her converſation agreeable to the
| King 279. The Queen's hatred to her 285, Her
great artifice in fomenting quarrels between the King
and Queen, and endeavours to ruin Sully 286. The
Marchioneſs forms a deſign to get the marriage cancelled
between the King and Queen: the weakneſs of this
prince for her 292. He at laſt obliges her to deliver
up the promiſe of marriage 313. She is arreſted : Sully
employed to interrogate her: her reproaches to this
miniſter, and other particulars relating to this incident
322. Henry will not allow of her quitting France
326. Anecdotes upon this ſubje& 326, 7. She makes
the King pardon Auvergne and Entragues, and dictates
her own conditions 386, Cauſes of her hatred to V
Sully 420. Other quarrels between the King, Queen, |
and her iv. 254. Her children by the King 270.
This prince communicates to Sully his uneaſineſs upon
her account 276. And makes him judge in her in-
trigue with Joinville 283. Her ſon made biſhop of
Metz 205. A bon-mot of hers upon the 8 4
0 4

r

IN DUE X

of the Prince of Condé 398. Coman accuſes her of
being engaged in the parricide of Ravaillac 478

Vic (Dominique de) defears d'Aumale, and attacks St
Denis i. 266. Vice-admiral of France ii. 163. Ap-
pointed to treat with the Swiſs ambaſſadors iii. 59.77.
His reſentment of the affront offered by the vice-admi-
ral of England 100. Summoned to the council upon
recalling the Jeſuits 241. Employed in the affair of
thirty per cent. 351. Ambaſſador to the Griſons 377.
Approves of Sully's advice for the expedition to Sedan
iv. 135, 98. Demolithes the fort of Rebuy 225. Ad-
mitted into the public council of the Queen-regent v.
23 His death, occaſioned by his grief for the loſs of
Henry LV. 26.

Villars (Andrew de Prancas) Admiral of France, makes
preparations for the defence of Rouen agaiuſt Hen-
ry IV. i. 228, His vigorous defence of this city 232.
233, 4. Sully endeavours to begin a negotiation with
him, but does not ſucceed 235. See Font (La-).
Other great actions of this governor, which obliges
Henry to raiſe the fiege 247. Refuſes a challenge
from the Earl of Eſſex 250. The beginning of Sully's
negotiation with him 346. Broke off 350. Reſumed
351. Character of this governor 352. The condi-
tions of his treaty with the King 366. His rage againſt
Sully 370. His elogium 386. Ceremony obſerved
at the ſurrender of Rouen 387. He comes to court :
praiſes upon his diſintereſtedneſs and conduct 393. Com-
mands the King's forces in Picardy ii. 45. His bravery
before Dourlens 52. He is killed 54. Examen of his
behaviour upon this occaſion 156. See Bouillon. Henry's
great grief for his death 64. The ſum of money he
received for his treaty 244. Henry IV. diſcharges a
debt due to his family iv. 13
Villeroi (Nicolas de Neufville de), miniſter of ſtate: he
makes propoſals from the league to Henry IV. i. 263.
One of the chief of the third party 287. His real
ſentiments of the league, of Spain, and of Henry IV.
298, Other conditions offered by him to Henry IV.
from the league 307. Rejected 310. Accuſed of
making the heads of the league take an oath ayer

ED.

this prince 322, 3. Juſtified 5. His treaty with the
King 382. Juſtified from the reproaches thrown upon
him by Sully 25. A bon-mot of Henry IV. upon him
383. He oppoſes Sully's entrance into the council of
the finances ii. 110. Diſappointed of being made grand
maſter of the ordnance 166. Endeavours to procure
a treaty with the Proteſtants 177. Defends Picardy
178. Adviles Henry IV. againſt marrying again 205.
Manages foreign affairs 238, "The ſum he received
for his treaty 244. One of the commiſſioners for the
marriage of Henry IV. with Mary ef Medicis 31<,
and for the marquiſate of Saluces 323. Oppoſes Sully
during the campaign of Savsy 354. Commiſhoner for
the treaty of Lyons 369, His policy with regard to
the houſe of Auſtria different from that of Henry IV,
and Sully: he defends the treaty made by d'Oſſat
with the Grand Duke of Tuſcany for the iſles of If
412. Oppoſes the embaſſy of the Count of Bethune
to Rome 413. Receives the IN and examines
the papers of La-Fin 426, 7, 8. Summoned to the
ſecret council held at Blois, for arreſting the heads of
the ſeditious iii. 8. Attends the King to Metz 68.
His ſolicitations for the Jeſuits and connections with
d'Offat, condemned by Sully 71. Summoned to
the council in which Sully receives his inſtructions for
his embaſſy to London 90. Sully's ſuſpicions of his
clerk, upon occaſion of ſome of his diſpaches being loſt
192, Solicits the recall of the Jeſnits 241. Treachery
of Nicolas L'Hote his clerk, examination and juſtification
of him upon this occaſion 260. Henry IV. excules
and comforts him 264. Letters to and from Sully up-
on this ſubje&t 263, Demands a cardinal's hat for M.
de Villars and Marquemont : refuſed 271. Signs the
treaty of commerce between Spain and France 356.
Adviſes Henry to purchaſe the earldom of St Paul
381. Endeavours to ruin Sully in the affair of Meſtre-
de-camp 409. His hatred to this miniſter 415. Com-
poſes the public inſtructions given to Sully for the al-
ſembly of Chatelleraut iv. 38. Letters between them
during the continuance of this aſſembly 7 2. Other let-
ters between them during the expedition to Sedan 139.
Concludes

V

Vi

IN D. E. X.

Concludes the treaty with Bouillon: Sully's complaints
of him upon this occaſion 143. Henry ſends him to do
buſineſs at Sully's houſe 191. 200. His ſentiments up-
on the law upon ſhipwrecks 214. Oppoſes Sully in the
council upon the offers made by the Dutch 217. Henry
makes uſe of him to perſuade Sully to change his re-
ligion 266 and to accommodate the diſſenſions among
the nobles 288, His oppotition to Sully upon the plots
among the Proteſtants 298. His letters to the Pro-
teſtants aſſembled at Gergeau 301. [Employed in the
truce between Spain and the Dutch 323. Favours the
Spaniſh policy in oppoſitien to the deſigns of Henry IV.
353. This prince's difidence of him: and conceals
from him the advices he receives of plots againſt his
perſon 359. Diſputes betwixt him and Sully 382.
Henry's judgment of the good and bad qualities of
this miniſter 385. He reproves him for ſupporting the
ſecret enemies of Sully 391. Circular letters written
by him after the Prince of Condé left the kingdom
410. His ſervices to the Prince of Epinoy with the
ſtates of Holland 421. Inſpires the Queen-regent with
a policy quite oppoſite to that of Henry the Great,
with regard to the houſe of Auſtria, the Duke of Sa-
voy, and the other allies of the crown v. 36. Endea-
yours to ruin Sully 39. He is affronted by the Duke of
Nevers and the nobles, and adviſes the Queen-regent to
recall Sully from Montrond 73. Gratuitics which he
receives from her 82. A great quarrel between him
and Sully in fully council, upon the affair of Alincourt
and the city of Lyons 84
Villiers a Proteſtant miniſter, the Prince of Orange in-
forms him of the intended treachery at Antwerp 1 85
Vitry (Lewis de L'Hopital de) employed in the converſion
of Henry IV. i. 321. Suirenders Meaux to the King
350. His ſpeech to the Duke of Maienne 75, He
promotes the treaty with Villars 366, 83. Attends the
King to the campaign of Franche-Comté ii. 62. The
ſum of money he received for his treaty 244 He
arreſts Marſhal Biron iii. 23. 317. Services ren-
dered by him to the ſtate, upon the death of *
| e

IN B E X.

the Great iv. 489. Ce. His great grief upon this oc-
caſion. The advice he gave to Sully v. 12
Univerſity of Paris, its proceſs againſt the Jeſvits i. 403.
It oppoſes the recal of this ſociety iii. 252
Urban VIII. this Pope's brief to Sully, and anſwer v.
171. 182
W,
Wis (Prince of), his character iii, 118. Preſents
made him by Sully 196. His fondneſs for Hen-
ry IV. iv. 181. Henry's deſign of marrying his eldeſt
e to him 355
Veſtminſter (panes. of), Sully receives here his audience
" leave of the King of England in. 194
Whale, a large one taken on the coaſts of Holland ii.
262
Wirtemberg (Duke of) no longer concerned in farming
the revenues ii. 251, Henry's politeneſs to his ambaſ-
ſador iti. 372, Sully accuſed of holding a criminal cor-
reſpondence with him 426. Henry IV. protects him iv.
189
Wymmes (Thomas) governor of Dover, his brutality to
Sully iti, 102
Z.
Amet (Sebaſtian) makes propoſals to Henry IV. from
the league i, 263. Of great uſe in the converſion
of Henry IV. 321. ii. 112. Henry recommends the
Ducheſs of Beaufort to him 294. who is taken ill at his
houſe, and dies 297. Particulars relating to his for-
tune and family 298. Henry's affection for him 389.
He employs him to accommodate matters betwixt the
Count of Soiffons and Sully in, 218. He often dincs
at his houſe, Sends him to Sully in the affair of the
poſt of colonel of the guards 407. Grants made him
dy this prince iv. 177, 98. and debts which he pays
him 230. Informs the King of plots againſt him, car-
Tied on by the Queen's ſervants 351. Debts diſchaged
389. Sully viſits the Queen-regent along with him v.
76
Zamet the younger adviſes Henry IV. of the, plors is
Spain againſt his perſon iv. 351

11
