Memoirs of Maximilian de Bethune, Duke of Sully, Vol. 4 (Maximilien de Béthune, duc de Sully, 1638)
==========================================================
Sully's Mémoires (1638) - Henri IV's great minister on war, finance and statecraft; the classic ministerial memoir. The English translation (after Charlotte Lennox, 1756; 1760 printing), 5 vols. Vol. 4 of 5.

MAXIMILIAN DE BETHUNE,

D UE of SULLY,

PRIME MINISTER OP

> L.N-R-Y TE GR EAT.

Newly tranſlated from the French edition of
M. de L'EcLusx.

IN FIVE VOLUMES.

VOLUME Iv.

E DIN —--6--:

Printed for A. Do Nx AL DSO x, at Pope's Head,

MD CCLX.

S UMM A R V.
SUMMARY of BoOoR XX.

Farther memoirs of the year 1605. Details

of the finances and of government. Re-
gections of the author upon the taille, la gabelle,
&c. Debts of France; diſcharged. Flouriching
ſtate of the kingdom. Henry IV.'s application to
the affairs of ſtate: his letters to Roſny. Death
of Clement VII. Leo XI. owes his exaltation to
the protection of Henry: his death. Paul V.
Pope. Panegyric of the embaſly of the Count of
Bethune. Brief of Paul V. to Roſny: the eſteem
in which this miniſter is held at Rome. Farther
affairs of Spain, Flanders, and England. The

Kings of France and England diflatisfied with

Spain. Affairs of the Proteſtants : informations
given to Henry of their bad defigns : Roſny's opi-
Dion of the preſent ſtate of this body. Indiſpoſi-
tion of Henry. Aſſembly of the Proteſtants at
Ch-telleraut: the views of Henry and the Hu.
guenots in calling this aſſembly: Roſny ſent thither
on the part of the King : his public and private
inſtructions: his converſation with Queen Mar.
garet. Intrigues of the Duke of Bouillon and

his party againſt Roſny : his wiſe conduct in the

aſſembly : his bold ſpeech at the opening of it:
he refuſes to be preſident of this aſſembly. |

SUMMARY of Book XXII.

Farther memoirs of the year 1605. Continu-

ation of the account of the aſſembly held at
Chitelleraur, New r of the Duke of Bouil.
2 lon:

* . Co way — — ou

iv .

lon: his letters to the King and aſſembly. Im-
priſonment of the Luquiſſes. Different advices
given to Henry IV. concerning the ſeditious: Roſ-
ny's opinion of theſe advices. Roſny diſconcerts
the ſchemes of the Proteſtants at Chatelleraut :
he concludes every thing at that aſſembly to the
advantage and ſatisfaction of the King. The af-
fairs of the deputies-general: that of the caution-
ary cities, &c. His advice is not regarded in the
affair of Orange: diſmiſſes the aſſembly; declares
the King's pleaſure to them; and returns to give
an account of his proceedings to his Majeſty.
Henry's journey to Limolin : Roſny accompanies
him thither. Turenne, and the other places be-
longing to the Duke of Bouillon, ſurrender to
the King. His Majeſty's return. Roſny holds
the chamber Les Grands Fours. Myrargues, and
the two Luquiſſes beheaded. Death of Theodore
de Beze. Roſny quarrels with the Count of Soiſ—
ſons, on account of ſome privileges annexed to
the poſt of grand maſter of the ordnance : with the
Duke d'Epernon, upon account of the city of
Rochelle: Henry's reception of the deputies of
this city. Roſny's return to Paris: account of his

roceedings. Queen Margaret arrives at Paris ;
ler reception from their Majeſties. Memorial
of Roſny upon duels, wherein he explains the
origin, and the difterent cuſtoms of duelling.
Henry's blameable indulgence in this reſpect : the
good and bad fortune of this prince.

SUMMARY of Bookx XXIII.

Memoirs of the year 1606. Roſny preſents
medals to the King. The King and Queen
confer with Roſny on the ſubject of their quarrels.
Converſation between Henry IV. and Roſny upon

politics, in which they concert meaſures to hum-
: ug ble

SUMMAR Y. U

ble the houſe of Auſtria. Roſny is made Duke
and Peer of France. The expedition to Sedan:
intrigues at court upon this occaſion. Letters
from the Duke of Sully to the Duke of Bouillon:
his advice to Henry: diſguſted upon account of the
treaty of Sedan: complains of Villeroi. Sully's
advice to Henry to ſeize the fortreſſes in the earl-
dom of St Paul; which is not liſtened to: Henry
offended with him upon account of his entry into
Paris. Differences of Paul V. with the Venetians.
Henry gives good advice to hoth parties. The
city of Metz has a diſpute with the Jeſuits: new
favours granted them by Henry. Adventure of Fa-
ther Cotton on the ſubject of Adrianne De- Freſne.
> Diſputes upon religion; with the clergy, on
1 the ſubject of the council of Trent; between the
Catholics and the Proteſtants of Rochelle. Cere-
mony of the baptiſm of the children of France.
* Regulations upon the gabelle and the elections.
Other operations and regulations in the finances.
Private life of Henry: his amuſements: converſa-
tion between him and the courtiers. Military af.
fairs in Spain and Flanders. Reflections upon this

war. Other foreign affairs. Conſpiracy againſt
the King of England.

SUMMARY of Boox XXIV.

Memoirs of the year 1607. Occupations and
> letters of Henry IV. Death of the Chancel-
lor Bellievre. Birth of the ſecond ſon of France.
> Henry's friendſhip for Sully, and his great con-
** fidence in him. A quarrel between them, in
which Henry firſt ſeeks a reconcihation. Sully
does the King great ſervice in the aſſembly of
the Proteſtants at Rochelle, in the diſpute between
> Father Séguiran and the Rochellers. New grants
made by Henry to = Jeſuits, Plots carried on

3 by

ST ts ia de ts nn.

93 * . * 44 *

4 3 . - 1e.
*s, ne, oe r Wan 7” LET y * N oY we % WM „ *
2 * * ——— :

vi SUM MAR V.

by Spain, in the court and the council, againſt
Henry and Sully: a converſation between them
on this ſubject; and Sully's advice to the King: he
does the King other ſervices in the quarrels which
happen at court. A farther account of the war
between Spain and the United Provinces. Sully's
ſentiments concerning the offers made by the
Flemmings to the King: a council is held on that
occaſion. The Flemmings gain a naval victory
over the Spaniards. Conferences for a ſuſpenſion
of arms, and for a truce. A farther account of
the diſputes of Spain, the Griſons, and La-Valte-
line. Affairs of Germany, England, and other
foreign ſtates. The quarrel between the Pope
and the Venetians terminated by the mediation
of Henry. Brief of Paul V. to Sully. Sully's la-
bours in the finances, the police, and other parts
of government. Artifices of the courtiers to ruin
him: he forms the ſcheme of a new council, which
is not carried into execution. Other affairs of
the finances, government, &c. Henry's expenſes
in gaming, in manufactures, &c. His private life
and domeſtic uneaſineſs. He reſtores Sedan to
the Duke of Bouillon.

SUMMARY of Book XXV.

Memoirs of the year 1608. Interludes and
balls at the arſenal. A pleaſant adventure
between the Duke of Sully and Pimentel. Great
offers made by Henry to Sully, which the latter
refuſes. The amours and miſtreſſes of Henry IV.
An intereſting converſation between him and Sully,
on the uneaſineſs he ſuffered from the Queen, the
Marchionels of Verneuil, and their creatures: he
employs Sully to paciſy them. Birth of the third
{on of France. Sully is made umpire between
the King and the Marchioneſs de Verncuil. .

| rels,

1 * < wy

r
bd , a 8 3 - 2 A G. A

„

1 ee 8
k 4 0 UT STPRITAT

and

ture
Jreat
latter
y IV.
zully,
„ Ile
;: he
third
ween

Quar-

rels,

_— |

= 6 2 3 N „ten
n ity W e e ww ; 13 ME * r
3 $ no A 2 ä » 2 * N = 2 N .

* Ty - WE Sa s

Ca, EA. ts .
*

* * 2

SU M M AR V. vn

rels, in which the Prince of Joinville, the Count
of Sommerive, and the Duke of Eguillon, are con-
cerned ; with other court- intrigues. Difficulty in
concluding the marriage of the Duke of Vendome
and Mademoiſelle de Mercœur. A ſedition a-
mong the heads of the Proteſtants; and the affairs.
of that party. Services which Sully does the King
in the aſſembly of Proteſtants at Gergeau. Private
life of Henry. He gives the biſhopric of Metz to
the Duke of Verneuil. The clergy obtain ſome
grants of the King, but are denied others. Henry
carries on public works at his own expenſe: money
which he loſes at play. A great riſing of the Loire.
Affairs of the finances; of the police; and other
parts of the government. Sully's memorial upon
the taille. Reflections upon the changes which
have been made in the government of this king-
dom. The Duke of Mantua comes to Paris. A
farther account of the affairs of the United Provin-
ces. The truce 1s concluded: the part Henry has
in it. The weak condition of Spain. The revolt
of the Moors, and their expulſion from Spain.
Affairs of Germany.

SUMMARY of Book XXVI.

Memoiis of the year 1609. Papers relating
to the finances: a debate on this ſubject be-
tween the Duke of Sully and the Chancellor de Sil—
lery. Sully entertains the King at the arſenal,
Father Cotton indiſcreetly reveals a {ecret, for
which Henry blames Sully : an important conver-
ſation between them, upon the plots carried on by
the court and by Spain, againſt the life of [enry,
upon his paſſion for the Princeis of Conde, &c.
Sully's advice to the King. Scheme of a cahinet
of ſtate, to be uſeful for every part of the govern-
ment, Different methods of raiſing monev, when
necellary.

Fit SUMMAR Y.

neceſſary. Regulations againſt luxury, and
abuſes in the law; and other pieces of this cabinet.
Henry's deſcription of his three miniſters. Other
3 of the finances, and of the government.

ict againſt fraudulent bankrupts. Another
edict againſt duels. Plots of the courtiers againſt
Sully. Flight of the Prince of Conde; and other

rticulars of that affair. Henry receives falſe
mformations againſt the Proteſtants. A diſcovery
of a conſpiracy formed at La-Fléche againſt Hen-
ry's life.

SUMMARY of Book XXVIL

Continuation of the memoirs of 1609—1610,
Foreign affairs. Treaty fer a truce between Spain
and the Umited Provinces, and of the media-
tion of the Kings of France and England. Ar-

ticle in favour of the Prince of Epinoy. Henry

obliges the Grand Duke of Tuſcany to make him
reparation for the affront offered to his amhaſſa-
dor. Other affairs of Germany, Italy, and Swit-
zerland. Death of the Duke of Cleves. An
hiſtorical and political memorial upon the diſputes
for this ſucceſhon. The German princes put
themſelves under the protection of Henry IV. A
converſation hetween Henry and the Duke of
Sully upon this ſubject; and upon the execution of
the great deſign. Henry entertains ſuſpicions of
Sully. Succels of the negotiations in the ſeveral
courts of Europe. Henry's indiſcretion in diſclo—
ſing his deſigns: converſations between the Kin
and his miniſter upon this expedition. A e
of regency eſtabliſhed ; and other preparations
within and without the kingdom. Preſages of the
approaching death of Henry IV. converſatiens be-
tween him and Sully upon this ſubject. Informa-
tion of a conſpiracy ; and the affair of *
elle

P Y 8 þ 3 2 4 * ME 2.
— 2 W * * , „ d l _ , -
vx "= - n - TE S i. * *
ons TIE; Fa DST IEEE gas ox Sg -

. ry

SUMMARY. ix

ſelle de Coman. Ceremony of the Queen's corona-
tion. Parricide committed on the perſon of Hen-
ry the Great: Sully's behaviour on receiving the
news of it: particulars of this aſſaſſination, and
upon ſome of the latter days of Henry's life. An
account of the affairs of the ſtate and the court
after Henry's death. Judgment of the different
opinions concerning the cauſes and authors of the
King's aſſaſſination.

MEMOIRS

=.  * W = iy ov "© TV of Ov. Wu ie owe on os

PIRIE ater. *
, R

* 4 * *

.
———— a tr A EAA OO Tone — —— — — —ͤ—ä—ͤ— — — — —

—— — - — —

—

[
bs",
BY
2
» 5
7
rl”
5
8
1

M E M O I 8

BOO K XXI.

| A LL choſe diſquiets which I was obliged to

endure, as being effects of the King's
relapſe into doubts and ſuſpicions of my

conduct, incroached upon part of that time 1
© uſed to devote entirely to the adminiſtration of

the finances; but they never leſlened my attention
to che duties of my ſeveral employments in that

department. I laboured this year to prove the

allenations and incroachments that had been made

upon the crown-lands; and to ſpecify and ſettle at

2 certain ſum all the penſions upon the tailles,
gabelles, decimes, aides, and other parts of the

revenue; as well as all the debts contracted either

by the King, or by the cttics, countries, and com-

munities. Upon calculating cheſe ſums, I found
that the alienations, penſions, and debts, from the
time they: were firſt fettled aud contracted to the

*. *
£

by dif:ncumbering the mortgaged crown-lands from a charge of
Ba B an

> preſent year, had coſt the kingdom above an
hundred and fifty millions *. It is ftill more ex-
1 traordinary,
1

. Nothing leſs than the inſurmountable courage of the Duke

C2 ©

f Sully was ſufficient to retrieve the diſorders of the revenue,

Vol. IV.

2 M E M OI R S Book XXI.

traordinary, that all the money ariſing from thoſe
taxes with which the ſtate was oyerburdened, with-
out any viſible advantage gained to the public
from them, had for the molt part been either un-
Juſtly ſeized by thoſe perſons who were at firſt
employed in regiſtering and ſettling them, or
divided, fold, and alienated by them to others.
'The King would: not believe this; but I made it
plain, by. means of two papers which fell into my
hands. The firſt was, a liſt of thoſe perſons who
had been concerned in the farm of the ſalt,
during the leaſe of Champigny and Noel de Here.
The number amounted to twenty, from Paris, the
court, and even the council, and each had from
fifty chouſand livres to one hundred and fifty thou-
ſand crowns aplece, the whole amounting to nine

millions ſeven hundred and thirty-eight thouſand
livres. The other paper, dated October 27.

1585, is an agreement between the ſuperinten—
dant D'O and thoſe who farmed the ſalt, for a
tith part: D'O prevailed upon Antony F aſchou,
a notary, to lend his name as ſurety for that
whole tum to the two farmers juſt mentioned.

By ſimilar practices his Majeſty was defrauded
of almoſt all the revenue ariſing from the aids, and
eſcheats, and fines. Gondy had prevailed with In-
carville, and the other members of the council
with whom he was a partner, to have that money
aſſigned to him, for the payment of ſome debts
which he pretended were due to him from the
King. Difficult as it was to find out theſe frauds
and e connivances, I made ſuch ſtrict } Inquiries, that

an hundred millions, by pay ing off Gas. and leſſening others of
the debrs of the crown, &c. He always ſe conded the King in the
lorious deſigns of evfing his people. Political eſſay on commerce,
chap. 19. M. Claudius de LeIfle ſpeaks of him in the ſame manner,
and with the greateſt encomiums, in the Abridgment of Iys un-

verſal hiſtory, dor 5 P- 301. |

5 1605. 'O0-F-:-$-U TF. 3

I ͤ diſcovered to the extent of three millions of
them, which was an additional income to the trea-
' fury. As it was merely with a view to relieve the

people, that I thus from time to time ſtripped

the uſurpers of money that did not belong to

them, according to my diſcoveries, I made very
conſiderable abatements in the King's name upon
the taille, that perpetual ſource of abuſes and
vexations of all kinds, as well in the aſſeſſment as
collection. It is greatly to be wiſhed, though
hardly to be hoped, that one day or other the
fund of this part -of the King's revenue may bc
wholly changed “. :

* Theſe abuſes and vexations are ſo flagrant and apparent, that
our kings and their miniſters have frequently attempted to nd
ſome remedy for them, by entirely changing the form of tis
branch of the revenue of France; but the difticuitics mentioned
by the author have always interven:d, and rendered their endea-
vours fruitleſs. However, one attempt has been made in our
days, which ſcemed to promiſe a more happy ſucceſs, though hi-

* therto its progreſs has not been very rapid: I will take the li-

berty of explaining the nature of it here.

An unhappy prejudice prevails in this kingdom, and I believe
in all monarchical governments, which we cannot be too h
citous to deſtroy ; the minds of the people being thereby kept in
a perpetual ſtate of diſtruſt of every thing that comes from their
ſovereign. From this diffidence alone great part of the ſame mil-
chievous effects ariſe, which an abſolute ditobedience might produce,
The prejudice I mean is, that the good of the people is never the
motive of the actions of kings; but that, on the contrary, no
changes are made in their ſituation, but ſuch as tend to render
them more miſerable.

It is impoſſible but ſo conſiderable a change as is propoſed to
be made in the taille, muſt, from its own nature, be ſubject
to great difficulties. Now, I apprehend it will not be ſufficient

that theſe difficulties have been overcome in the minds of the

few who have formed and perfected this ſcheme, but they mult
alſo be cleared up to thoſe whom it is neceſſary to employ in the

execution of it; for the manner of executing a work of this na-
ture is in no degree analogous to that in which a building may be

erected : the latter being effefted by the mere mechanical co-
operation of the hands. of the workmen with the deſign of the ar-

clutect: whereas to carry on and complete the tormer, it is ab-

B 2 ſoluicly

4 M EM © I R 5 Book XXI.

I place the gabelle, or exciſe on ſalt, after the
taille, tallage, or ſubſidy. I never thought 3
thing

ſolutely neceſſary that the nature of it ſhould be as clearly con-

©cived by thoſe who are to put it in execution, as by thofe who

formed the plan. But two things ſtand in oppolſition to this,
which it will become neceſlary to remove, the one by the means
of intormation, the other by puniſhment : theſe are, the want of
Knowledge, and the want of diligence in the ſubaltern othcers;
the latter making them diſobey the orders of their ſuperiors, and
the former, though their intention be ever ſo good, oecaſtoning
them to execute every thing wrong.

This reaſon alone would Be ſufficient to prove, that the ſettling *

of the tallage or ſubſidy proportionally in the diſtricts, ought not
to be intrulted to the aſſeſſors and other officers of the intendants
of the finances; I dare not ſay, to the intendants themſelves, and
thoſe acting in immediate ſubordination to them, who are gene-
rajly taken by them at random, out of the officcrs of the police,
or the revenue; and who having other buſineſs of their own, can-
not ſpare the time neceſſary for duly proportioning this tax. But

as artificers are ſent for trom the metropolis, when any work is

to be performed exceeding the capacity of common work men; ſo
the council ought to chute and appoint in the ſeveral diſtricts,
commiſſioners of integrity and capacity, ſufficiently authoriſed
and perfectly inſtructed in the nature of their buſineſs, and who
Mould be allowed all the time and expenſes that are requiſite. If
they are too much hurried, part of the remarks neceſſary for
them to make on the different particulars of the buſineſs of the
provinces will eſcape their oblervation ; and if their ſalaries are ill
paid, or not to be received by them without difficulties, neceſſity
may induce them to betray their truſt. This important work
certainly demands all poſſible attention.

When one conſiders how powerful an influence the bonds of
kindred, friendſhip, focicty, or even mere neighbourhood, have on
mankind; bow ttrongly they. are affected by different intereſts,
as well perſonal as ſocial; the fear of diſpleafing, the defire of
vbliging, the ambition of being honoured and careſſed by their
countrymen, the dependence on a ſuperior, who, according to
his caprice, can make his dependent ſenſible of his ſuperiority, by
depriving him of his office, or by unjuſt reprimands; and the in-
rumerable other motives which tie up a man's hands in the midit
of his family and countrymen ; a thouſand reaſons will appear a-
gainit employing the ordinary officers in the buſineſs of the new
tallage or ſubſidy. This aſſertion is contirmed by the teſtimony
of ſcveral perſons, who having with great application conſidered
what were the defigns of the council, in conſtituting this kind of
opcration, and afterwards kept a watchful eye on the manner in
which it daily appears to be executed by the ofkcers in their __

t | > 4 *

„
— *
> 6 a8

r YA WF. I”: 2.

_ —

—

* 1605. 0-7-8 4-1 ET, 5

thing more capricious and tyrannical, than to ob—
lige a private man to buy up more ſalt than he is
willing or able to uſe, and then hinder him to ſell
the overplus. I once expreſſed my ſentiments of

this practice freely to the King, who deſired me to

give him @ circumſtantial memorial upon it; as
for example, the prime colt of the falt at the falt-
pits, of the expences till it was ſold, of its diſtribu-
tion into granaries, and other queſlions relating
to it : his Majeſty did not tell me what ule he in-
tended to make of this memorial. I drew it un
with the utmoſt expedition, and as near the truth
as I was able; for, on account of rhe reaſons
I there gave, it was hardly poſſible to fix the true
value of things. However, this memorial pro-

ral diſtrifts, have with great concern found, that, out of fifty of
theſe officers, there is perhaps not one whoſe manner of exe-

cuting his buſinc ſs does not render the new method more odious

than the old.

Theſe motives and theſe difficulties, a perfet knowledge of
. de Vauban's plan, the ſmall difficulty there was in eſtabliſhirg
it when trial was made of it, the happineſs thoſe few pariihes ſtill
continue to enjoy which have found the means of pr: ſerving it
amongſt them, the experience every day furniſhes that the di-
eme or tenth penny (which in its own nature is but a species
of the dixme or tithe) has* every poſſible advantage over the
tallage or ſubſidy, and other taxes; all theſt, I fay, muſt convince
every judicious man, that it will be found abſolutely neceſſary to
1ecur to the eſtabliſhment of the royal dixme or tithe, as being
of all methods the moſt ſimple, the leaſt expenſive, and the leaſt
burdenſome to the people ; and that when it was propoled by this
able and virtuous pati iot, it was not received with all the regard
it merited. The maxim, that enabling the people to live at their
eale will endanger their revolting, is as falſe as it is cruel. It moſt
certainly is allo the intereſt of the people, if well underſtood,
that the King ſhould be perfectly acquainted with the true value
of what they poſſeſs, and conſequently the real ſtrength of his
kingdom; that, without regard to exemptions or any unjuſt pri-
vileges, all his Majeſty's ſubjects ſhould be equally taxed ; and
that commerce and induſtry ſhonld meet with all poſſible encou-
rage ment. As to any further reflections which may be made on

this matter, we will refer to that excellent work itſelf, compoſed
by M. Vauban, and intitled, Dixme Reyalc, &c.

B 3 | duced

6 ME M O I R S. Book XXI.

duced no conſequences, every thing remained in
the ſame ſtate as before; which ſhews how diffi-
cult it is to reform abuſes, which the 1gnorauce,
precipitancy, and ſhort-ſightedneſs of thoſe an-
cients who are propoſed to us as infallible guides,
have introduced into the firſt regulations, even
when other impoſts, far more reaſonable, ſuch as
the tenth penny and cuſtom of import, ſeem both
to point out the way, and make it eaſy *, -

The debts contracted by the provinces, town-
houſes, and corporations, were not lets trouble-
tome to the King than his own. I was continually
ſoliciting him to call on me to review and ſettle
them, in the ſame manner as I had done the o—
chers. I prevailed at lait, and his Majeſty left me
he choice of what meaſures I thonzht molt like—
ly to attain this end. The commiſhoners I named
lor this purpole were ſelected from among thoſe
perſons, whom I knew to be moſt faithful, and

* It is well known what is the net prodnce to the King of the
2abelle, or ſalt-duty, after all expences paid; and it is not, con-
ſe quently, difficult to diſcover, to what thoſe expences amount on
each minot of falt. Why ſhould not the King at once take the
pric2 of each minot of falt on the firſt ſale, and at the ſalt—
pits themillves ? Why ſhould not the fame de done in the caſe of
the aids ? This queſtion, ſimple as it is, has been afked long ago.
Cardinal Richelieu, in this reſpe&, following the opinion of his
predeceſſor in the miniitry, Teſt. Politique, part 2. chap 9. $ 7.
Perefixe, the author of the Eſſay on Commerce, chap. 5. and many
other able politicians after him, unanimouſly pronounce ſentence
azainſt an impoſt like this, not only burdenſome from the manner
in which it is levied, but becoming ſtill more unjuſt, from the
unequal manner in which it is aſſeſſed. It is true, they perceive
great difficulties in altering it; but this alteration being once made,
one of the principal ſources of the eaſe, and at the fame time of
the opulence, of the nation, would be opened thereby. The Car-
dinal de Richelieu, who thus ſpeaks of it, adds, that he had
fund, from the moſt knowing amongſt the ſuperintendants of
the finances, that the produce of the duty on alt, if levied at
the pits, would be equal to what the King of Spain receives from
the Indies, Scc allo on this ſubject the Dixme Royale of Il. de
Vauban.

capable

>
.

7
4

1605. 0 F 8 U L L. Ts: 7

capable of the greateſt application to buſineſs, in
the ſovereign courts, among the maſters of re-
queſts, the trcaſurers of France, and other ofli-
cers; but as this work could not go on to expe-
ditiouſly as the former, 1 hall defer giving an ac-
count of it till I come to relate the effects it pro-
duced.

And here a reflection occurs to me, not more
common than juſt, which -1s, that regularity and
economy muſt certainly have infinite advantages;
for notwithitanding the ordinary expenics of the
ſtate, and the extraordinary ones his Majeſty was
at in his kingdom; notwithitanding that three or
four millions were ſent every year out of the kivg-
dom to be diſtributed in foreign countries; not-
withſtanding the ruinous and exhauited condition
in which the King, at his acceſion to the throne,
found France, his finances, and his treaſury, and
many more difficulties almoſt inſurmountable; yet
the government had already an appearance of 0-
E and ſtrength, which banihed all remem-

rance of its former indigence. Could it be poſh-

ble for any perſon to imagine ten years before,
that, in 1605, the King would find himſelf as rich
as he really was; if they reflected, that the ſums
which were demanded of him when he was aC-
Knowledged pcaceable poſſeſſor of the crown, and
thote that were owing from his exchequer, with
all the intereſt and arrears, did not amount to lets
than three hundred and thirty millions; and that
all which could be paid of this enormous ſum,
ſuch as the mere debts, ſhould really be dope;
and fuch meaſures taken with regard to the pen-
lions and aflignments, that they mould be regular—
ly paid, without exhauſting the treaſury, or in-
curring the leaſt inconvenience? Yet all this was
actually effected. And probably the reader has not
yet found any thing in theſe Memoirs lo jutereſting
a3

8 M E M OI R S Book XXI.

as the following general account of the particular

ſums which made up the whole. |
There was due to Queen Eliſabeth at the time
of her demiſe, for ready money lent to Henry in
his neceſhties, advanced by her to the German
troops and the army ſent into Bretany, as well
as for all the other ſums, to which the mainte—
nance of thoſe ſupplies that Henry was furnithed
with by the Englith, amounted ; conſiſting of men,
vetlels, and provitions, for the ſiege of Dieppe,
and that of Rouen, and during the war with the
league; the ſum of ſeven millions three hundred
and ſeventy-eight thouſand and eight hundred li—
vres: To the Swiſs Cantons, for their ſervices and
their penſions, comprehending” che intereſt due
upon them; thirty-hve millions eight hundred
twenty-three thouſand four hundred and feventy-
feven livres and fx tols: To the States-General,
for money lent, for pay due to their troops, and
for the furnithing veſlels, powder, proviſion, am-
munition, &c. during the league hkevile; nine
million two hundred ſeventy-five thouſand and four
hundred livres: To leveral French noblemen,
colonels,. and other officers, for ſervice, pay, pen-
ſions, falartes, &c. during the civil wars; {1x mil-
lions five hundred and forty-{even thouſand livres:
To the farmers of every part of the revenue; to
princes, Cities, corporations, and private perſons;
comprehending the falaries, appointments, and
— 7h of the officers of the King's houſchold,
of the police, and the finances, and the civil ma-
ug x. by ſeitled accounts, twenty-eight mil-
ions four hundred and fifty thouſand three hun-
dred and ſixty livres: To ſeveral private perſons,
according to-their bills, draughts, receipts of the
treaſury, orders, royal warrants, &c. almoſt all
in the reign of Henry III. twelve millions two
hundred and thirty-fix thouſand livres: Mortgages
0¹

&
,

td ts nnd vw „ tals = & &@at% tf oy, KkKinfggy A cm © JyJoſ ty . AS tw aw oo cw

VL

. g 1605. 0 F S UV bb L F. 9

of the crown-Jands, compoſitions of penſions,

where the principal. being exorbitant was mode-

rated by the creditors themſelves, or deducted by

his Majeſty ; one hundred and fifty millions:
Treaties made at the abolition of the league,
which have been calculated already, thirty-three
millions one hundred and fifty thouland nine hun-
dred aud twenty-four livres *.

It is certain, as I have already obſerved, that,
upon the examination of theſe different demands
upon the exchequer, many that were fuund to be
unjuſt were totally annulled ; others were com-
pounded for with the creditors, and athers were
got clear of by ſeveral expedients, ſuch as thoſe
upon the tallage, and the crown-lands; but it
may be eafily imagined, that there remained a
very conſiderable number of debts to be dilchar-
ged. And here I muſt anticipate an obſervation
to thew, that good examples are not always effi-
cacious; for after Henry's death, thoſe that were
placed at the head of affairs, began their admini—
ſtration by deſtroying part of that oeconomy, and.
aboliſhing many of thoſe regulations which he
had cſtablfiſhed This 2 while it wore an
appearance, and only an appearance of lenity and
compaſſion, gave me reaſon to apprehend, that,
under the new reign, the national debt would be
increaſed rather than leſſened. But to quit this
lubje& for the preſent, I ſhall content myſelf with
barely mentioning here, as an cternal monument
of Henry's glory, the flouryhing coudition into
which the wiſdom of his government had already
brought France this year. Both foreign and do-
meſtic payments were regularly made, and no.

hardihip was ſuſtained by any of his ſubjects, ei-

$ There is a miſcomputation of about a million, in the Old
Memoirs, as well in the account of the contracts of the league, .
4 in the ſum total; but this is of ſmall moment.

ther-

1
1
i}
1
= |

10 M E M O I R Ss Book XXI.

ther from thoſe payments, or the expenſes of the
current year, though the King ſtill continued to
lay out very large ſums in rebuilding, furniſhing,
and adorning his palaces; repairing the old forti-
fications, and raidng new ones; erecting public
buildings * ; rebuilding churches, hoſpitals, and
convents; in funds for repairing pavements, moles,
and bridges; in building a great number of palleys
upon the Mediterranean; in filling his magazines
and arſenals; redeeming the jewels of the crown,
and purchaſing more; and after all this, there ſtill
remained, at the end of the year, a conſiderable

ſum to depoſit in the treaſury at the Baſtile +.
But

* Henry the Great cauſed the chapel of Fontainebleau to be
painted and gilt, cut avenues through the foreſt, and in many o-
ther reſpects decorated this royal palace. He finiſhed the Pont-
neuf, built the ſquare and ſtreet Dauphin, repaired many ſtreets
in Paris, built wharfs, &c. Beſides what is ſaid in theſe Ne-
moirs, ſce the detail of all thoſe buildings, in the Mercure Fran-
Coils, ann) 1610, p. 404. Le Grain's Decade, b. 8 Morizot,
chap. 46. and others who have written deſcriptions, or the hiſto-
ry, of the antiquities of Paris, &c. No one is ignorant that this
great prince, through the repreſentations of the Duke of Sully,
repaircd the highways in almoſt every quarter of the kingdom ;
built many cauleys and bridges in places before impaſſable, e-
ſpecially in Berry, which might vie, in point of beauty, with the
works of the Romans; but which, for want of being kept in
order for a hundred and thirty years paſt, are at preſent iu a very
indifferent ſtate : that, by his order, elms and other trees were
planted along the ſides of theſe roads, ſome of which are (till
growing in different places, where they are called Roſnys. There
are many ordinances made by this king on this ſubject, and fome
others, by which the converting arable land into paſture is for-
bidden, and vineyards are ordered to be ſtubbed up. "Theſe build-
ings and works, and this application to render his kingdom fl-u-
rithing, contributed, perhaps as much as his milicary exploits, to
pa Henry IV. the title of Great, which was conferred on

im in his lifetime, and, as it appears, about the year 1602.

+ The ſhare the Duke of Sully had in all theſe things, gave
him a juſt claim to the following fingular elogium in the Mercure
Frangois, anne 1606, p. 10. As he executed theſe offices
and employ ments in a manner more for the benefit BY emo-

lumen

. g 1605. O F SU L* L-Ys:* 11

e But what is ſtill more valuable than all theſe
0 treaſures, Henry acquired them not only without
. increaſing the people's poverty, but even lighten-
. 2 .
1 ed the weight of their former burthen, as has
c been ſhewn in theſe Memoirs. He always re-
4 gretted that the preſent ſituation of affairs would
I not permit him to carry this tenderneſs ſor his
'S ſubje&s farther. If the enemies of his govern—
8 ment will not conſeſs this truth, if in their wri-
h tings they have allerted the contrary, yet it is ab-
I] ſolutely certain, that plenty and affluence began
@ - now to be felt over the whole kingdom; the no-
bility and ſoldiery were delivered from their ty-
it rants in the revenue; the pealant {owed and reap-

ed in full ſecurity *; the artiſt enriched himſelf
by his profeſſion ; the meaneſt tradeſman rejoiced
in his profits; and the nobleman himſelf impro—

t- ved his eſtates. Some examples of ſeverity,
ts which his Majeſty had been obliged to make,
4 were ſo far from diſturbing the tranquillity of the
" kingdom, that 1t was never more fully eſtabliſhed,
j- nor never more ſincerely enjoyed. The licentiouſ-
8 nels which had been corrected in the army,
h procured the people a real advantage, without do-
. ing any prejudice to the officer and ſoldier, who
e were paid with the utmoſt exactneſs, rewarded in
: proportion to their ſervices, aud eſteemed, ho-
e noured, and careſſed, as their merits and valour
x delerved. The medals which I preſented as uſual
e ll.

5 * lument of the crown of France than any of his predeceſſors;

. all true Frenchmen readily acknowledged his merit in this re-
. ſpect, as well in the lifetime of his Majeſty, as ſince his death:

N * and though he eould not eſcape the calumny of thoſe who en-
A _ * vied him, it muſt neverthcleſs be allowed, that he was the
| * Joſeph both of our king and of France.”

a - * 'The affeQtion this good prince bore to his people, appears
iſ from this ſaying of his, which has been preſerved as a kind of
4 tradition,“ That he would make the poo;eſt peaſant in his do-
4 ** minions able to eat fleſh all the weck long, and to put a fowl
t in his pot beſides on Sundays.“

to

#4 MEMOIRS Book XXI.
to his Majeſty, had a lily ſhooting out a bud on

each ſide, pointing to two ſtars which repreſented '

the polar ſtars, with theſe words, Hi fines. It 1s
by actions like theſe, that a king may aſpire to
the glory of anſwering this motto.

I thall not repeat here what I have ſaid before,
concerning the letters I received from Henry. I
had ſo many this year, and on all forts of ſubjects,
the finances, trade, policy, that I ſhall not attempt
to produce. them. Several of them contained or-
ders for preſents to different perſons; thirty thou-
ſand livres to the Queen for her new-year's gift;
nine thouſand livres to the Counteſs of Moret *;
fifteen hundred livres to the Queen's bedchamber-
women; and a like ſam to be diſtributed by Ma-
dame de Montglar, among the nurſes of the King's
children upon different occaſions ; four thouſand
to the family of the commandeur de Chaſtes ;
twelve hundred livres to Prafltin; a like ſum to
Mereus; three thouſand livres to the Count de
Saint-Aignan, to indemnify him for the money
He had expended on his father-in-law Montigny's
company; two thouſand four hundred livres to ſe-
veral penſioners in Burgundy, paid them by Hec-
tor Le-Breton his commiſſioner in that province;

* Jacqueline Du Beuil. The King, towards the end of the
preceding year, had cicated her Counteſs of Moret, ſhe baving
revived the (paſſion of love in his heart, which had, in a manner,
died uich his Marchioneſs: he had alſo married her to a gentle-
man called Chanvalon. In L'Etoile's jjurnal there are ſome a-
necdotes relating to this matter, but they are too licentious for us
to repeat, aun 1604. Mademoiſelle Du-Beuil or De-Bevil is rc-
preſented, in the writinys of that time, as a lady who was not on
an equal footing with Mademoiſelle d En ragues in point of beau-
ty; but in recompenſe for this detect, her look expreſſed wit and
penetration, her temper was extremely gay, and her converſation
full of ſprightline(s, which qualifications Henry IV. greatly ad-
mired. the Queen did not appear to take the (me umbrage at
this lady, or to have that averſion to her, as ſhe thewed againſt
the Marchionels de Vernevil. | |

f

1 *

2

— — —ͤ 2 — 2 —

2 — on ny wo .

£

£

1605. r 13

a penſion of four thouſand livres, to Lognac *, a

1 *

reduced captain, in reward for his ſervices ; forty
thouſand livres, which his Majeſty thought a juſt

reſtitution to Villars, faying, that this family had
loft above {1x thouſand livres of intereſt, fince this
ſum became due to them; ve hundred livres to
the Duke of Ventadour, who had advanced them
for ſmall expences, to ſhew, ſald Henry, that nv
on loſes any thing by ſervirg me; the Sieur de

Caniſy reccived a like reimburſement; ſeventeen

thouſand one hundred and thirty-etght livres to
La Livre his apothecary : his Mijeſty had been in-
debted to this man, ever ſ nee the year 1592, and
was partly the cauſe of his ruin; for his creditors
arreited him, and threw him into priſon, but the
King indemnified him for all ; nine thouland five
hundred and forty-one livres to Jehn Sellier, a
merchant of the city of Troyes, who made this
demand upon his Majeſty for a certain public
building. |
7 i

In this ſummary of expences, I do not include
the hundred aud fifty thouſand livres given to the
Count of Soiſlons, the edict of prefles, rolls or re-
giſters, and another edict, creating a ſmall tax:
upon falt for the benefit of the Duke of Maienne,
nor of many other gratuities and juſt payments.
Zamet obtained of his Majeſty, the two offices of
Tecelvers at Rouen for two thouſand crowns each.
Henry cauſed the foreſt of L'Aigle to be divided
by law, between him and the Conſtable. But to

prevent any diſpute, he purchaſed the other part,

* This is not the perſon whom Henry III employed to ſtab
the Duke of Guile, at the holding of the ſtates at Blois. Having
rcqueſted that prince to beſtow a government on him as a recom-
Pente for the ſervice he had done him, and his requeſt being re-
tuf-d, he retired in diſcontent to Guienne, where very ſoon after
be was p *oled by a gentleman in his neighbourhood, with
r he had a quarrel, Cayet's chronol. novenn. vel. 1. b. 1.

133

| VoL. IV. C and

14 M E M OI RS Book XXI.

and ſettled himſelf the time for cutting down the
trees. He relerred to his council, the offer that
had been made him of twelve hundred thouſand
livres lor the grant of an edi concerning the four
deniers. He tent Nargonne, with his company,
to guard the tower of Bouc, which he thought a

place of great UNPOrtance, But the Duke of

Mercœur, to whom tis ſortreſs belonged, railed

ſome difficulties, which deter mincd his Majeſty to

treit with him for it, either by way of exchange,
or by purchating it.

Creat part ot the letters J received from this
prince, turned upon his buildings, thoſe of hi;
new ſilk manufactures e. pecially, which he ftill
carried on with the fame ardour; his green houte
in the Tuilleries was the place he ſer apart for
breeding the ſilk-worms, the eggs having been
{ent him from Sz. ain, and he haſtened the building
of it for that purpoſe. I laid, by his order, t! c
foundations of the new edifices for his tapeltry.
weavers, in the horſe-market; which, requiring 2
larger extent of ground than could be procured,
Wit out incroach ing a little upon a garden belong.
ing to Montmaguy, who oppoted it ſtrougly, tlie
King ordered that he ſhould be paid the ſum he
demanded for his ground, repreſenting to him,
however, that when the public utility was in que—
ſtion, an individual ought, on {uch occaſions, to
refer his claim to the decifion of men of {kill no.
minated for that purpoſe. His Majeſty tient for
Comans and La-Planche, from other countries
and gave them the care and ſuperintendance 0!
theſe manufactures: the new directors were no!

It appears alſo from the writings of that time, that a manu.
facturer of Provence called Serran, attempted to make ſtuffs of
the fineſt parts of the bark of mulberry-trees : that the making
of glaſs, looking glaſs plates, and exact in itations of pearls, 1
many other manufaGuies, which the celebrated M. Colbert hi
ſince cariicd to ſo great perfection, were then ſet on foot.

long

11605,

\» BY SE. 2h 5 3 1 EC 15

Jong hefore they made complaints, and diſſiked
their ſitvation, either becauſe th cy did not 6nd the
profits equal to their hopes and expectations, or
e having advanced confiderable ſums them—
ſelves, they {aw no great probability of getting
then in again. The King got rid of their impor—
tunity by referring them to me, commanding ine

to act in ſuch a manner by them that they ould

ſuffer no lots, but Hikewiſe that their gains inould
not be too cxorbitant.
The attention of this prince in conciljating the
good-will of the neighbouring powers who might
poſſibly engage in bis great actigns, appeared like-
wile in his letters, as well as in 17 whole conduct.
Whether we conſider his extreme {olicitude to ful-
fl all the laws of civility, and all the forms of ce-
remony, the obliging manner in which he treated
their ambaſſadors and env oys, the ſeaſonable pre-
ſents he made them, or what is a benefit ſtill more
Conſiderable, the care he took to reconcile them
ond themſelves, by determining their difter-
ences; and thus beginning, with reipect to them,
to exerciſe the office of the arbitrator of Europe.
His Majeſty ſent me q letter of compliment un—
ſealed, which he thouglt himlelf obliged to write
to the Ducheſs des Deux Ponts, commanding me
to ſend it to her by one of my gent tlemen, and
with it a pre:ent of twelve or fteen hundred
crowns, at leaſt; a favour which that Prircels ac-
knowledged with Neben gratitude and reſpect, in
the letter ſhe wrote to him 10 return. Ihe Duke
ol Bar having covſulted Henry about his deſigned
marriage with the Prince's of Nantua, which had
been kept ſecret 2 long time, this prince took up-
on himſelf to vive the Duke of Mantua notice of
It, and difp patched 1 Immediately a courier extranr-
ginary to that court; though, upon this article, he

rarricd his economy fo ſar, as to reproach his
C 2 anibailador

16 MEMOIR S Book XXI.

ambaſſador at Rome, for ſending him couriers too
frequently, and wrote to him to do ſo no more.
The Venetian ambaflador took leave of his Maje-
ſty in November, and received from my hands
a very conſiderable preſent. I likewiſe gave ano-
ther to his ſecretary, Nor did Guinterot the Duke
of Holſtein's ambaſlador return leſs ſatisfied to his
maſter; I ſhewed him the arſenal, and all the
King's magazines; and that he might have a token
to remember them by, I gave him, by his Maje-
ity's orders, one of his fineſt ſuits of armour to
preſent to his maſter.

Clement the Eighth died “ on the 3d or
ath of March this year. The news of his death
was brought to France by a courier, whom my
brother diſpatched to the King then at Chantilly,
and by letters from the French cardinals whom
Henry had ſent to Rome the year before, and

* L*Etoile, who cannot be ſuſpected of partiality when he
fHeaks well of the Pope and the Catholics, confirms whatever NI.
de Sully has ſaid in different parts of theſe Memoirs in praiſe of
Clement VIII. “A pacific Pope,” ſays he, © and a good French-
„ man: even the Proteftants did not hate him, he having al-
« ways treated them with great gentleneſs, beyond any of his
©+ predeceſſors, even fo far as to grant them paſlports to go and
* come freely to and from Rome, which was never done before
" by any Pope. When he died, and long before his death, he
** was nothing but a maſs of corruption, having totally loſt the
'* vie both of his limbs and underſtanding ; even his hands being
** putrefied and burſt, inſomuchi that when any one came to kits
his feet, which ſtunk as much as the rcſt of his body, they
« were obliged to hold vp his hands, to enable him to give the
* benediftion.” Journal of the reign of Henry IV.

Peter Matthieu ſpeaks of him with the higheſt praiſe, vol. 2.
b. 3. p. 328. and book 3. p. 696. as all the reſt of our bel:
writers alſo do, who find no fault with bim, but for his being a
little too much attached to his family. It was ſaid of him, Clc-
ment VIII. was a good man, a good prelate, and a good prince;
in oppoſition to his three predeccſſors, Pius V. Sixtus V. 20d
Gregory XIII. the firſt of whom was (id to be only a good pre-
late, the ſecond only a good prince, and the third a good prelats
and a good prince. Amelot de La Hehe, nate 3. on the 31110
ef Gaicinalt t letters,

who

hy ed YES band — wh

— — — — — — —

—

* 1605. r ND. 17

who were followed by Cardinal Du-Perron, the end
of that ſame year. |

There having always been a great intimacy be-
tween this cardinal and myſelt, we correſponded
by letters regularly, during the whole time that

he continued on the other fide of the Alps. He

gave me notice of his arrival at Rome, in a let-

tcr dated the 28th of December 1604, and wrote
me another the 6th of February following. If he
is to be believed, I had gained the friendſhip of
the whole Roman conliſtory, who could not help
praiſing my conduct towards the clergy, and in e-
very thing that concerned the affairs of the church.
In Cardinal Buffalo particularly, ever fince the
treaty we had managed together, I had a zealous
panegyriſt at Rome; after his departure from Pa-
ris, I had written him a long letter, which he
ſhewed to every body, as valuing himſelf upon the
ſentiments he knew I entertained of him. I ſhall
not repeat here thole praiſes, too flattering to my
yanity, with which this letter of Du-Perron's was
filled; thoſe l have mentioned were introduced
with no other deſign, but to ſhew (what I thank
heaven for) that I wag never tainted with that bit-
ter and furious zeal, which the difference of reli-
gion inſpires. The change of mine was the ſub-

ject of frequent converſations between rhe card1-

pals and Du-Perron, who all wiſhed for it with
equal ardour. Cardinal Aldobrandiu often decla-
red that he never ſaid maſs without remembering
me at the moment. The Pope expreſſed himſelf
almoſt in the ſame terms to Du Perron, when be
was conducted to audience, by my biother. He
had a long converſation with him concerning me,
and particularly upon the means of working (what,
in the language of Rome, was called) my conver-
ton. It is indeed an extraordinary thing, that a
p:!nifter cannot, from his own countrymen, ob-
| C 3 taln

8 M E M O I R S. Book XXI.

tain the ſame juſtice, which foreigners, who ſure—
ly have no lels reaſon to hate him, are capable of
doing to the difintereſtedneſs of his conduct, aud
the rectitude of his intentions. Du-Perron con-
cluded his letter with telling me, that he, no leſs
earneſtly than the other cardinals, wiſhed to ſce
me completely united to perions who eſtecmed
and loved me ſo much, “ fince I had not” (theſe
are his words) © more friends at Geneva, than at
Rome.“

My gratitude was equally engaged by the teſti—
mony he gave of my brother, alluring me, that
he had gained fo ſtrongly upon the affections of
the Italians, that no Frenchman had, for an hun-
dred years paſt, acquired an equal reputation iu
Italy “. He acknowledged himiclf highly obligcd
to my brother, for his politeneſs, in coming with
an bonourable retinue of the French and Roma:
nobility, to meet him, niue leagues from Rome.
The King had, in an eipecial manner, recom-
mended it to the French cardinals, to have ſtrict
attention to the interc{t of the nation, in the ay-
proaching election of a pope 4; and this injunc—
tion was again repeated to them, when he was 1n-
formed by the rival of another courier from
Rome, 01! the 28th of March, that, according to
all appearances, there would be hiph debates in
the cOnciave, ou account of the great number of
candidates, cach of whom indeed was worthy of
the pontiſicate. However, thele difficulties were
ſo lvon removed, that, on Friday the iſt of April,
winch was two days after che arrival of this cou-

®* This commendation feems not at all extravagant. P. Wat-
thieu, ſpeaking of the ſerviecs the Cemii of Bethune did the
King at Rome, calls him a man of preat abiltites tor that cnt,
vol. 2. b. 3. p. 681. Siri every where {jeaks of kim in the
me manner.

+ Sce the particulars of the two ſubiequent conclaves in Matthieu,
ibid. 693, and other hiſtorians,

*

_— 4.
2 ii 3

— — —

* ed

«WE O07 3:0 E-LY. 76

Tier, the holy ſee was filled by the Cardinal de
of NIedicis, otherwiſe called the Cardinal of Florence,
ind who took the name of Leo the Eleventh. The
on- choice falliug upon a wan related to the Queen,
els and of the ſame name with her, was a certain te-
ice ſtimony that his Moſt Chriſtian Majeſty was well
ied ſerved bv the lialians *.
cle The King, when the news came to Paris, gave
at public demon{trations of his joy, which he was de-
Jirous ſhould be as gencral as it was fincere. He
ſti- wrote to me not to ſpare his ordnance, and to
lat ſend orders to my government, and to every other
of part of the kingdom, to follow the example I
n- Jjhould ſet them in Paris. The Archbithop of Paris,

in the governor, the Preſident Bellievie, and the
cd King's countchors of partament, the other bi-
itn Shops, and all perſons in a public character, recei-
al ved orders to have Te Dei ſung, and hreworks
le. layed off, in every place under their juriidiction.
m- . may be truly faid, that never bad the advance-
ict ment of any perſon to the Papal dignity been ce-
p- lebrated with greater mag nificence. However,
ICs this could not prolong a momeut the duration of
in. Leo XI. 's pontifcate, who lived but a feir days af-
"mn terward:, and probably was dead at the very time
to hey theſe honours were payivg lim in France +.
in His Majeſty was in ſome degree confoited for
of the loſs of this Pope, by the perſon whom the con—
of clave choſe for his juccetjur ; this was Paul V. for-
r meriy Cardinal Borgeic. Two things concurred
il, to his election, which made it highly agrceable to
Us his Majeſty, the favour the French nation ſbewed
him by her cardinals, and his own perſonal merit,
fat-
the * The making Teo XI. Pope,” ſays Du- Pleſſis-Mornay,
irt, ſpitefully, „coſt the King 300,000 crowns.” Life of M Du-
the Pieſjis- Mornay, b. 2. p. 305. h
t He vas taken i on the i th of April, on his return from
eu, the proceſſion to St John de Latcran, which is made ov the new

Pope's taking poſſeſſion of his dignity, and died the 27 ch.
ra
. , WIe h

20 M4 MM: 01K - S Book XXL

which rendered him worthy of that diſtinction,
and which they hoped to ſee rewarded by a happy
21 0 Two cardinals thus ſucceſſively placed

y his Moſt Christian Majeſty on the Papal throne,
leſt Europe no room to doubt of the high eſteem
he was in with the Italians, The King was ſcufi—
ble of it himſelf, and the extreme fatisfation it
gave him was ſufficiently ſcen by the orders he iſ-
ſued, immediately after receiving the news of the
new pontiff's advancement (which was on the 25th
of May), to celebrate it with the ſame rejoicings
as Leo XI.'s had hecn, except only, that no
fireworks were playcd off. The reaſon his Majeſty
ove for this omiſſion, to thoſe who might poſſibly

e offended at it, was, that this piece of reſpect
had been paid to the Cardinal of Florence as an
ally of the royal family. As to the reft, all was
performed with the fame ſplendor, and the King
himſelf was preſent at the Te Deum which he or-
dered to be {ung at Fontainebleau. I received on
this occaſion three letters from his Majeſty of the
fame date, which were merely ceremomial upon
my different offices, and as a perſon in a public
character; he likewiſe addreiſed to the Chancellor
Sillery, and to me, a diſcourſe, in which he gave
a relation in form of what had juſt paſſed in the
conclave.

Paul V. did not diſappoint the hopes that were
conceived of his pontificate, The Roman coun-
cil ſeemed to purſue exactly the fame mealures
they had done undet Clement VIII. Nothing was

reſcribed to Barberin!, who was ſent into France
in the quality of nuncio, beyond what had been
done to Cardinal Buffalo; and he was ordered by
Cardinal Aldobrandini, and by his Holivels Iike-
wiſe, to addreſs himſelf only to me, in whatever
affair he had to ſolicit. I know not what Cardinal
Buffalo (from whom this advice certainly cane)
COU

„ «„ «„ „ „ „ „ . wy, ww EAA = KW y_yz © yg gf oo 2 kw

*

. 21

n, could have ſaid to my advantage, in preference to
py fo many other perſons, who carried, even to ſer—
ed yility, their reſpect and attachment to the holy
je, fee. My brother, in a letter he wrote to me at
m that time, told me, I could not too highly ac-
{i- Fnowledge the obligations I was under to this car-
it ginal, or repay with too much warmth of friend-
iſ. ſhip, the regard and eſteem he expreſſed for me.
he This letter of Bethunc's is dated November 12.
th for be was {till at Rome, although he had depend-
gs ed upon returning to France immediately after the
no Pope's inſtallation; but ſome new orders which he
ty had received detained him, and he did not return
ly Bll ſeveral days after the date of this letter. His
*& Holineſs ſo much regetted his being recalled, that
an he would have wrote to the King, to intreat he
as would continue him as ambaſſador at Rome, if my
ng brother had pot prevented him He had entirely
"r= got rid of that appearance of timidity, reſerve,
on and perhaps coolneſs, which he had ſhewn at the
he beginning of his negotiation; and as ſoon as he
on nas accuitomed to the buſineſs tranfacted at the
ic Roman court, had changed it into a wiſe and pru—
or deut confidence, ſrom. whence be drew all the ſuc-
ve ces he could hope for, in thoſe affairs which were
he üntruſted to him. The Pope continued to pay him
the higheſt honours, and gave orders, that he
re Fhiould be received and treated with the moſt diſ-

n- Tiguiſting marks of reſpect, in all the cities of his
es dominions through which he paſſed. All this I
as advance with {o much the more freedom and ſecu—
c& tu, although upon the faith of Cardinal Du-Per-
en ron my friend, who thought himſelf obliged to
by Write to me upon my brother's departure, as this
e- Cardinal gave the fame account to the Ring, and
er Teprefented to him that no one was better qualified
al tian Bethune, lor a place in the council for foreign
0) altairs, in what regarded Iialy; as he had a full

10 and

22 MMO INS Book XXI.

and perfect knowledge of all that related to that
country *.

In this letter Du-Perron thanked me, for ha-
ving ſupported his intereſt to his Majeſty, againſt
tho!e who had endeavoured to difappoint him in
his expeaations of the poſt of great almoner,

which had lately been promiſed to him; as atio ,

for {ome tritling ſervices his brother had received
from me. He added an article relating to La-Fin.
This man, who has been mentioned in Marecha!
Biron's proceſs, had, by an effect of his natural
levity of temper, left France, and embraced the
Proteſtant religion. The King, who obſerved him
heedfully, as he did all who had once given room
for ſuſpicion, cauſed him to be arreſted in Italy,
and impriſoned in the tower of Nonne. La-Fin
applied to Cardinal Da-Perron, who had formerly
been his friend, to procure him the favour of be-
ing carried into France, and tried there, if it ap—
peared that there were any juſt grounds for com—
plaint againſt him, or if not, that he ſhould be
ſet at liberty; and this was the favour which Du—
Perron intreated my intereſt with the King to ob-
tain for La Fin.

»The letter which, of all that I received from the

other fide of the Alps, deſerves molt notice, is
that the Pope took the trouble to write me with his
own hand. I ſhall only give the ſubſtance of this
brief here, as it 1s very long. As in appearance the
Pope wrote to me on my brother's account, he
began with praiſing, in the higheſt terms, his

Cardinal D'Offat himſelf, though, according to all appeer-
ances, far from being ſatisſied with VI. de Suliy's behaviour in re-
gard to him, ſpeaks in the molt advantageous terms of that am-
baſlador, in his letter to the King, of the roth December 1681,
82 to ML, de Willcroi, ot the 2d December 1802, and ſome
Others.

condut,

-
501,

rr 23
conduct, his piety, and his behaviour, full of re-
ſpect and deference for all the cardinals, and him-
ſelf, beſore he was advanced to the pontificate,

From this bis Holineis patled to the regret he felt,
that the obſtacles I raiſed to my converfion, hin-

ered him from reſigning himfelf as openly as he
would otherwite have done to the friendſhip he
had for me. His piety and his zeal furniſhed him
with a thouſand motives to perſuade me to change
my religion. He aſſured me, that if he was not
with-held by the ſtation he filled, he would, with—
out heſitation, come into France, and labour him-
ſcif to convert me. He propoſed to my imitation
the examples of the ancient Counts of Flanders,
my anceſtors, particularly that of Saint-Alpin de
Bechune, for whom he had been told I had a great
vencration. To thele he added the examples of
the fir{t laints, and moſt illuſtrious kings of France;
which naturally nitroduced the eulogium of the
pretent King, and afterwards that of Clement VIII.
on account of the ſervices I had done that Pope, lor

wich his preſent Holincls thanked me with great

warnth of affection, as well as for all «the good
offices which the apoſtblical legates and nuncios of
his predeceilors and his own had reccived trom me.
I's brief, which was every where filled with pa-
thetic exhortations to change my religion, con-
cluded with the moſt ardcut prayers for that
event.

| anſwered this obliging letter with all the re-

ſpect and deference it deſerved, without ſaying

any thing upon the article of my change of re-
Jivion, I was fatisfied with prailing the virtues

aud great qualities of his Holineſs, with afluring

him of my profound reſpect for his perion, my
readineſs to ſerve him, and ardent deſire to be
uſcſul to him. My whole letter was filled with
the molt grateful ackuowledgments for the ſenti-
| Ents

9

—_ - — 5
— — — WF. 22
— — ——

- — —
2.
—— — ö ——_—
*

Oo nn —— —̃—k:! —

dl
ny
"1
1
1
1
7
1
N
1

24 M E M OI R 8 Bookxx.

ments he profeſſed ſor me, and the moſt earneſt
withes for his proſperity; and, without affecting
my religion, I forgot no inſtance of re ipect due to
the character of a ſovereign prince, and to that
in particular which a whole chu: ol ges to the
Pope; and therefore did not ſcruple 40 make uſe.
of the + exprefion of kiſſing his feet; —_—_ doubt.
leis would have di plcaſed my brethren the Pio.
teſtants. Paul V. upon his receiving this letter,
ſaid publicly, that it gave bim more pleaſure than
any thing which had happened during his pontin.
cate. He read it twice over ſucceſively, ſaying
each time, that I had done him too much honour
He laviſhed many en omiums upon the ityle and
turn of expreſſion, and (aid, that my praiſcs of him
had robbed him of ſome of thole he had defigned
to give me. He was eager to thank me by a {c-
cond brief, if Du-Perron himſelf had not oppo!cd
an excels of 1 which miglit have produced
ſome inconvenience to me. This cardinal was
witnels of all the Holy Father's emotions; for my
letter being written in French, he was fent for by
his Holneis to interpret it. Du-Perron (till con:
tinued to reſide in Rome, which drew him into
very coultderahle expenſes; he obſerved to me,
that, in the ſpace of one year ouly, he had Jus
out above twenty thouland crowns, in the expen—
ſes of his journeys, his entry, the conclave, fur—
niture, and habits for himſelf and his houtehold;
all which had reduced him to ſuch ncceſſity, tha.
he intreated me to oblige the farmers of his able,
of Lire to pay him, they have refuſed to make chen
uſual remittances, under pretence of a decrec c
council relating to the claims he had upon ceriail
woods.

All the reſt of Italy began to entertain the ſame
favourable diſpoſitions for France as the holy fee,

except the Duke of Savoy, who was ſtill influenc 1
N y

48

r 2 „ „ „e TCTYFRRTOOTR

-

..

ame

1ccd | mrough the French territories.
by

, | Sor »

ty the Spanihh policy, as may be conceived by the
pew intrigues carried on this year for the Duke's

h 25

Intereſt, by a man named Chevalier, With re-

ard to Spain, France ſtill continued upon its for-
mer footing with her in ſeeming peace, but not
without ſuſpicious diſtruſt, and reciprocal com-
plaints of each other.
The negotiations which had commenced be-

4

tween the Spaniſh court and the States of the U-

pited Provinces proving unſucceſsful, hoſtihties

were renewed as ſoon as the ſeaſon permitted them
to take the field. The King of Spain ſent to the
Swiſs cantons, to demand a paſſage through their
territories for the troops he ſent into Flanders,
that they might avoid taking their route by Pont de
Creſfin, which would have greatly retarded their
march. To obtain this requeſt, he told them,
that his troops ſhould paſs through their ſtates by
twenty at a time, and that their number ſhould
Dot exceed two thouſand. He added, however,
another thouſand afterwards. The Kg, when
be received this advice from Caumartin, elieving
that Spinola, who was to command their troops,
would take the ſame route, thought it would not
f impoſſihle for Prince Maurice, at the head of a

arty of French ſcouts, ſo exactly to chuſe his
tine as to {ſeize upon this generaPs perſon,
& which,” ſaid Henry, “ will be worth one victory.“
He wrote to me to communicate this hint to Aer-

us, and through him to the Prince of Orange;
butl was informed, almoſt immediately afterwards,
by a Spaniſh courier, who paſſed through Paris in
dis way to Flanders, that Spinola had altered his
Toute, and would arrive in Paris in three or four
ys: which produced ſuch a change of meaſures,
that his Majeſty thought himſelf obliged to render
is paſſage as ſecure to him as if he had paſſed
Spinola requeſt.
ing the honour of an audience of his Majeſty, this
Vox. Iv D prince

1

LI

— 4

= *

——  — —
T
KS. 2 <C — —

— HS;

26 E Y

prince believed that he had orders to make him
ſome new propoſals. This, however, was an in.
ference not made by me; and when Henry men.
tioned it to me, I replied, that Spinola, thinking
the road through Paris the orten as well as the
ſecureſt, he conceived it his duty at the fame time
to pay his reſpects to his Majeſty; and that I wa;
pertuaded he would taik to him only of general
things, though perhaps he wiſhed to have it other.
wile believed in Flanders. Accordingly it hap.
pened as I conjectured.

Spinola divided his army into two bodies,
he gave the command of one to Count de Br.

quay, with orders to paſs the Rhine with it be-

tween Cologne and Bonne, where he afterward:
threw up intreuchments to hinder other troop:
from attempting this pals. Whatever was the de.
ſign of the Spaniards by this motion, it ovght v
have rouſed the German princes from their lethar:
Ty. The other body Spinola reſorted to himſch
and led towards Frieſland, where the allied arm;
kept cloſe by it for a long time. The repor.
which was ſpread in July of this general's death,
was no better founded than that of his being beat
en, which prevailed in September. It was fort
{cen that he had a deſign upon Linghen, althoug
this was a very ſtrong place; and accordingly |:
marched thither aud inveſted it. By meaus ot :
mole which was cut by Prince Maurice, Sp1n0-
was himſelf beſieged in his quarters, and |:
trenches laid under water; ſo that it was believe
he would be obliged to abandon his enterpriſe;
which caſe it might be expected, that the Prins
would beſiege and carry Fort Patience. Yet, 10:

withſtanding this, Linghen ſurrendered in S
tember, which was all that was donc this ca!
paign. Spinola was, on the 24th of Septemne;
Kill before the place he had taken, and had c

lie.

Book XXI.

6

n grg 7“. ̃ ?!!...““ß“ß)ß7wÜ“,«—«« . ]˙—.“—A—.«§«§«]— (ꝗỹ̃àỹ. 0 ẽům_PkW a... c cs ̃‚rT!̃!Ü K K , ²˙ N . oe. a.

*
„ ⁰ ⁰m mw. — -ům ra. i it :. ̃ ÜI:T ] a. — — PU don . ww -W ASL

Xl os. OF. SU LL V. 27

bim ed his views no farther than to put himſelf out

MM pf a condition to be attacked. The troops of *
men. poth parties were greatly diminiſhed Prince Mau—
King rice, on his ſide, threw juccours into Couiocrden
S We ind Breton, which covered and ſecured Frie{land.
ume a-Terrail, in the mean time, at the head of ſome
| was upplies ſent him by Spinola, attacked and fur—
new priced Bergen-op-zoom, but he was repulled with
ther. Tome loſs.
hap. This man was a French officer, and one of the
ſeditious cabal; he thought proper to retire to
ICs, Antwerp, and offered his ſervice to the Archdukes.
Be. Fly Majeſty was not fo much offended with this

IL be: procedure, although he had promiſed him, in a
a * he wrote exprelsly for that purpoſe, that he

roc? Fould do nothing contrary to his duty, as he was
IC de. For his having corrupted Dunnes, the younger
mane Nangis, and Chef.boutonne, who, it was reported,
ta: Frere preparing to £0 thither with a whole com-
nch pany. A footman belonging to Du-Terrail was
arm) arreſted in Auvergne, whither he had brought
"EP me packets, but all of little conſequence. He
lcath Indeavoured to prevail upon his wife to come to
ben. Him in Antwerp, by highly extolling the friend-
toi Ship and civility he received there. Ihe fame ex-
1008: ample had been ſet by Saint-Deuis-Mailloc, and
Ty * nM other gentlemen, who had offered their ſer-
e Fice to the Archdukes: in which they certainly
pin. peither attacked like good politicians, nor dutiful
d Fubjecs, ä
lic va. This was but one of the leaſt cauſes of complaint
1c; Fhich Henry had againſt Spain. The ſupport
Pra frhich that crown gave to the French mutineers ;
t, % He part the had in their meetings in the Limoſin
1 7 And Perigord; the enterpriſes which, in concert
| Cit With them, ſhe meditated upon the towns and coaſts
:m" of Provence; were grievances of a higher nature :
dae incl all well weighed together, his Majeſty was of
1e BS 1 „opinion,

28 ME M-U.1T1-:K 3. or XXI;

opinion, that he ought to ſpare himſelf the
trouble of making them uſeleſs reproaches, or of
doing himſelf juſtice by ſuch means as would have
given the Spaniards reaſon to reproach him in their
turn. He was even more ſolicitons about the {ſtrict
obſervation of the laſt agreements he had made
with them on trade, than, after ſuch a conduct,
they could have expected. Captain Yvon Baude.
lonis brought a Spaniſh veſlel into Rochelle, which
the commander alledged was Dutch, and belong.
ed to the Prince of Orange. The Rochellers
thought it their duty to acquaint the King with it,
who, in his anſwer, praiſed their conduct, quoted
to them the article of the treaty on that ſub.
ject, which was in expreſs words, and cauſed the
{ame ſatisfaction to be given to Spain as if it had
been demanded by her ambaſſador.

The council of Madrid, ſtruggling between
their natural haughtineſs on one {ide, and a con-
ſciouſneſs of their own weakneſs, and the need they
had of our aſſiſtance, on the other, knew not in
what manner to behave to us. The ſame {pirit
ctuated them in all their proceedings, and made
them, at one time, endeavour to diſunite us from
the States; at another, complain vehemently,
that, under pacitic appearances with reſpect to them,
we acted as their real enemies. They afterwards
affected a ſtrict correſpondence with England:
but none of their artifices ſucceeded, The King,
ſecure in the ſecret knowledge of his own ſtrength,
deſpiſed their threats; and for my part in parti.
cular, I was too well acquainted with the diſpo!t-
tion of the King of England, to believe that he
would ever do more for them than he could be
prevailed upon to do for us.

They were, beſides, upon ſuch ill terms wit!
his Britannic Majeſty, that it was not poſlible tor
them long to ſave theſe appearances, For, as the)

*

L <3
q * +»
—_=

ese! |

4 0 ©t 202 wu rmxw Hog ww

OO uM ——ů— ——— w*$ we A & 2 Wl 2 wy

— —
— —

1 2

AL,

the
r of
lave
heir
trick
ade
uct,
Ade.
nich
ng.
lers
Eat:
Jed
ſub+
the
had

een
On-
hey
t in
}1rit
ade

Om

5605.

„ 9 i 0 lp 29

pever ſtaid a conſiderable time in any country,
without giving proofs of that ſpirit of cabal which
they exerciſed throughout all Europe, James had
potice of ſome of their ſecret practices in his do-
minions, which inflamed him with rage againſt
them. Indeed there needed no leſs than ſuch a diſ-
govery to recall this prince to his firſt engagements.
with me, which he had begun to counteract the very
pext year, from that fatal prejudice in favour of
pacific meaſures which IJ have already mentioned,
er rather from a real timidity. Beaumont, whole

embaſly was at its cloſe, was furpriſed to find James

reſume this ſubje& himſelf, and talk to him in
germs very different from thoſe he commonly uſed..
He gave him letters for Henry and for me, and
acquainting him with their contents, he kewiſe
charged him verbally, that when he gave an ac—
count of his negotiation to the King of France,
be ſhould inſiſt particularly upon that article which
tcgarded the ſucceſſion to the empire, which was
hat he dwelt upon moſt iu his letter to Henrv.
le exhorted him to join from that moment with
kim in endeavours to reſtore to the electors, be-
forc the death of the preſent emperor, the free-
tom of election, with all their other rights; and;
eſtectually to exclude the ſon, brother, or moſt
Qiſtant Kinſman of his Imperial Majeſty, ſrom a.
pollibility of gaining the empire, by preventing any
dne of them from being named King of che Ro-
mans; and, laſtly, to have it decreed, that the
perion, whoever he might be, that was to lucceed:
tic Emperor, ſhould. renounce all pretenſions to-
the kingdom of Bohemia. |
> Beaumont, when at his return to Paris he exe-
ented the commiſſion given him by his Britannic
Ayjeſty, told the King that he had a letter from
Wis prince for me, which, as I was then at Cha-
Klleraut, his Majeſty opened. IIe was deſirous of
* try ing:

TN

30 M E M OI RS Book XXI.

trying if this new policy would find any favourers
at court; and for that purpoſe he communicated
this ſcheme of King James with regard to the em.
pire to two or three of his miniſters, but with
ſome reſerve, and by way of conſulting them upon it,
taking care not to give them any hint of his great
deſigus. On this occaſion Henry found no flat.
terers: there was not one of them who did not
give a proof that he was capable of oppoſing 1
icheme which appeared to him unreaſonable and
unjuſt. Henry ſtopped there, and waited for my
return, to examine it more cloſely with me. Put
as this Converſation turned upon many particulars,
which appeared of ſuch conlequence to his Alu.
jelty, that he made me ſwear not to diſcover it to

any perſon whatever, that oath ſtill obliges mc to
lilence *.

Henry,

* I do not know whether the uncertainty wherein this prince
for ſome time remained, whether be ought not to get him{it
declared Emperor, was not at leaſt a part of the ſecret. He even
thouglit it neceſſary to ſubmit this deſign to the examination cf
his three miniſters, whom he called together to give their ohr
nions on it; as appears from the 8.474th vol. of the MISS. in th:
Fing's library, where thei: deliberations on this matter are e
Jated at large. It is remarkable, that thoſe three, ſcarcely in any
one inftance, happened to be of the ſame ſentiments: in the pie.
ſent caſe, one adviſed him to get himſelf elected Emperor; tit
ſ:cond diſſuaded him from it; and the third (more favourable to
the houſe of Auſtria) would have perſuaded him to act in favour d
the Archduke Matthias. The King,” adde the author, * wiv
* had attentively liſtened to this laſt, roſe up, and opening ti"!
„ window to let in the frcſh air, raiſed his eyes and hands to
* wards heaven, and faid aloud, May it pleaſe God to form art
© crcatec in my heart the reſolutions I ou_ht to take on what yu
„ have laid, and men hail execute them. Adica, Gentlemen, |
« muſt take a walk, Thus ended this conference.” Though thi
project did not abſolutely claſh with his grand d- ſign, there is ne
verthelefs a reaſunable foundation for doubting v hether he actuch
ly ever formed it. In all probability the whole was only a fein
concerted between him and the Duke of Sully, to put bis coundd
en a wrong ſcent, in regard to the great armaments he yr of

wg |

:

ke. At

:
0

— We a. 4 A Wd au —

en é

A
at
*«s as

|

XI.

Irers
ated
em.
with
n it,
TE
flat.

not

1] 8 1

and
my
But
lars,
Ra-
it Lo
C [0

ry,

brinet
im{cit
even
ion ct
ö opi.
an the
A
n a! 7
ec pre-
„ the
ble {0
out of
* who
ng the
ds ta
n ard
it you
jen, |
Il this
1s ne-
actual
ſe int,
oundd
s ma
king

1
k
?
*

4 605.
* Henry, when he gave me my letter from King

T7 ST LL TY; 31

James, read it to me himſelf. His Britannic Ma

jeſty chere informed me of the propoſal which he.
Bad injoined Beaumont to make to the King, and
gepreſented to me the intereſt I had in ſupporting
It, in a manner which, though general, had ne-
vertheleſs ſo direct a view to the reflections I had
made to him on this ſubject, that 1 could not doubt
Þut he would, from time to time, be more con-
vinced of the reaſonableneſs and utility of that
plan of policy I had ſketched out to him. 1 ſhall
not repeat the aſſurances of friendihip and eſteem
with which this letter was filled: Beaumont was.
commiſſioned to make me many more in his
name; neither was that ambaſſador lümſelf ſor—
got. King James beſtowed ſo many prailes upon
his perſonal merit, and his ſcäll in buſineſs, as.
maſſed bim highly in Henry's cfteem. If this
prince had been ſtill ignorant of the confidence

bis Britannic Majeſty placed in me, his letter was
ſufficient to convince him of it: he indeed ap-
peared much pleaſed with it, and commanded me
to cultivate his friendihip carefully; a command

which I received with great chearſulneſs.

We have now ſeen the political ſtate of almoſt
all Europe except Germany; there are perhaps
ſome obſervations ſtill to be made upon the ſeveral
Germanic cantons; but that little which is necel-
lary to be known of them, with reſpect to our af-

fairs, is of itlelf intermixed with what I have to ſay

of the ſeditious cabal in France. This article will

ae 4 g l a
4 bring in many particulars, as it was the occaſion of

my journey into Poitou this year, and of his Na-

jeſty's to the Limoſin; which took up ſour of the
2 tineſt months of the ſeaſon.

| king. The Count de Beaumont, his ambaſſador at London, ac-
4 cording to Siri, ibid. 166. eudcavourcd to inſpire him with this

b * otion.

The

32 ME M OI R $S Book XXI.

The reader has doubtleſs, by this time, reflected
upon the extravagance of an atlociation, compo!ed
promiſcuouſſy of Roman Catholics and Proteſtants;
the Roman Catholics, Spaniards, and the Pro-
te{tants, French: a party acting upon intereſts {0
oppoſite, that nothing but continual violence could
conciliate them; a body of which the Duke of
Boulllon was the head, and Spain the foul. In
this flight view it appears fo fingular and mon—
{trous, that the reader cannot apprehend any dan-
gerous contequences from a confederacy ſo ill
compoſed and ſuited. I had indeed always that
opinion of it: but as all factions which include re.
peated acts of diſobedience againſt the fovercign
cannot but be very prejudicial ro the ſtate, ever
ſuppoſing that they are diſappointed in their prir-
cipal aim, it muſt be acknowledged, that good po-
licy requires we ſhould make uſe of every method
to hinder their formation, or when formed to ruin
them. The rebels were in this cate; they had
neither prudence in their reſolutions, nor much ap-
pearance that they would ever produce any thi!
much to be dreaded. However, as it was not |

ir
Os,
12
_—_

to ſuffer ſuch attempts to be made with 1mponity,

his Majefty neglected none of the informations he
received, and which this year were more oumcr-
ous than ever. Marat, Lientenant-General of
Riom, wrote to me, in the beginning of March,
that he had very lately been informed of ſome
particulars to important, that though he could nu!
anſwer for the truth of them, yet he thought hin
ſelf obliged to communicate them to me; an!
that I might be better able to judge of them, he
had given the ſame perſon from whom he received
them, the charge of delivering his letter to me.
As ſoon as I began to examine this man, I pes
ceived, from the firſt queſtions I aſked him, that
2is depoſition would involve ſo many perſons ©:

L SV

.

. g. s ©, gg.

S. SS.

Al,
ted

wed
nts;
Pro.
8 lo
2uld
e of

In
101-
lan-

III
that
re-
ian
ven
rin.
po-
hod

uln

e higheſt quality at court, that, without going

iny farther, I judged it of con{equence enough to
xequire that his Majeſty ſhould be preſent at his
Namination. The King was then at Saint-Ger-
pain; I wrote to him, and in cyphers which he
ply underſtoud, marked the names of theſe per-
ns. The King came to Paris immediately, to
amine this informer himſelf, who aſſured him,
pat all thoſe perſons (and he named them) held
rreſpondences 1n the chief cities on the coaſts of
rovence and Languedoc; all which he ſpecified,
mely, Toulon, Marſeilles, Narbonne, Bayonne,
laye, and ſome others; that the Count of Au—
vergve was upon the point of making an attempt
won Saint-Flour when he was arreſted; that all
ele ſecret practices were favoured by Spain, and
be money diſtribured for that purpoſe, furniſhed
this crown. According to this man, the con-
pirators had already received ſeveral thouſand pi-
oles from the Catholic King, expected ſtill more,

.

ad even depended upon ſome ſupplies of troops;
mg however, he ſaid, would not be ſent, until
they had openly declared themſelves enemies of
e ſtate, by the invaſion of thoſe places before
mentioned, and of many other maritime forts.
The truth of theſe acculations appeared very
pubtful, from a circumſtance which 1t 1s apparent
ud not eſcape Murat; and this was, that the in-
former had been a domeſtic of Calvairac, in whoſe
houſe he might indeed have heard ſome converſa-
non on theie ſubjects ; but why advance as cer
tain, what had been there propoſed as merely
poſſible? He had reccived ſome bad uſage from lus
Waiter, and doubtleſs the deſire of revenge ſtimu—
lated him to this proceeding. What cannot that
Motive do, joined to the hope of gain? which it
is well known would be great, or in proportion as
the formations which were given mould eat
| | 0

— —
— IEEE

4 - — *
=- - = — _— — -
— , — 9 — — — — — 2 — C —
— —gZR—Ü — — — . ä OI _ u 0 — * — —
- — —— — ” ——— — 4 — — — — - 8 2 2 —
p 2 2 4 . L - 7 2 2 a
— — — ” N N = * —— oy - — *

34 MEMOIR S Book XXI

of conſequence to his Majeſty. There needed not {
many conliderations to induce him to aggravate
matters beyond the truth.

I can, with much more certainty, relate what
paſſed in the ſynods and other particular aſſemblics,
which where held by the Proteſtants in Poitoy,
Saintonge, Angoumois, and the neighbouring pro-
vinces. The ſpirit of peace waz not always the
motive of theſe aſſembiies. Among other very
bold propoſals, which I omit, it pailed by a plu-
rality of voices, that his Majeſty's permiſſion
ſhould be aſked to call a general aſſembly of the
Proteſtants, without explaining to him the motive
of this requeſt, or the ſubject to be treated in the
alle mbly. The King, to whom their petition was
actually preſented, did not refuſe to comply with
it, but declared (as he had a right to do) that he
would preſcribe to them the place, the matter, and
form of this aſſembly, and ſend tihuther a perſon to
repreſent himſelf. Chatelleraut was the place he
appointed “; and myſelf the perſon who was to
appear there, with a commiſhon, to take care ol
his Majeſty's intereſt. The Proteſtants, thole |
mean who fomented the feditions in this body,
would rather, I believe, have had their reque!!
denied, than granted upon ſuch conditions. They
alledged, that, if I Joined the title of the King“
repreſentative to the quality of governor of the
province in which this aſſembly was to be held,
nothing could ſhield them againſt the authorig
which I would certainly aflume in the meeting. |
It may be imagined, that, on thoſe occalions, ny
brethren uſed me worſe than the moſt deteſtavic
Papiſt.

The method to which the ſeditious among then
had recourle, was to preſent another petition to

* Life of Du Pleſſis Mornay, b. 2.

his

+ =
* *
_—
1
—
9 4
— *
7

, , re

4 TT. K

#4
*

„„

Ot {0

Vate”

What
lies,
ton,
Pro-

the
very
Plu-
fon
" the
Otive
1 the
1 Was
with
at he
, and
2N to
e he
1S [0
re of
ole |
dy,
queſt
They
ing“
f the
held,
rity

2 1
„ *
Li „ 2
3%
*
50
' *
0 1
*

is Majeſty, ſigned by two or three hundred per-
ſons at leaſt; in which they declared, that, upon
more mature deliberation, they found it neceſſar y
Fo intreat he would defer calling this aſſembly.

ting.

|
, mM)

ſtable

them
IN to

his

ha

„ 0: 1-4 --26 35

As ſoon as Henry was informed of this diſpoſition
ot the Proteſtants, he had expected to receive an-
other petition from them, and, in a letter which
he wrote to me from Fontainebleau, dated March
30. he deſired I would adviſe him what to
do upon this occaſion. I had received the ſame
information as his Majeſty, and uſed my utmoſt
endeavours to diſcover the true ſtate of things
Jor which purpoſe, the journey 1 had taken the
preceding year into Poitou, was of great {ervice to
me. Nothing, however, appeared to me very po—
Jitive, except that three or four of the moſt ſedi-
tious amongſt them had endeavoured to raiſe ſome
diſturbance, but with fo little ſucceſs, that the fires
they had kindled evaporated in ſmoke. I may
venture to aftirm, that my letters and diſcouile to
the leaſt prejudiced perſons in the party, with my
ſolicitude in other reſpects, had greatly contributed
to reduce matters to this point. Upon this turn—
ed the advice and the anſwer the King demanded
ol me.
It is certain at leaſt that his Majeſty never
heard more of this ſecond petition which had made
Jo much noiſe, and by that he was able to gueſs
the nature of all thoſe other reports. But he fill
continued 10 receive, in the beginning of April, ſo
many new informations, and thole of {ſuch conle-
quence, and in appearance ſo well founded, that
he ſuffered himſelf to be carried along with the
torrent. It was reported, and that even by the
firſt preſident of Toulouſe, and many other per-
Hons 10 Guienne, that the Proteſtants, both in that
province and in Languedoc, had Litered the moſt
dilreſpectful ſpecches againſt his Majeſty, They
added,

4 N S — —— — — —— — —
= bs
— — — — * - — — —
‚ꝶ—OOOOOUU iD V y — V— — ———4—e — ͥꝑꝗQkIl— —

36 NI E M O I RS Book XXI.
added, that theſe people had reſolved to ſend a a

de putation, to prevail upon him to recall his grant

for holding the aſſembly at Chatelleraut. In an-
other letter, dated Holy-Thurſday April 7. Henry
ordered me to come to him the day after Eaſter,
to ailiſt him in taking a reſolution upon theſe ney
letters, and to be preſent at the reception of the Pro-
teſtant deputies; and laſtly, to explain to them lis
intentions in ſuch a manner as became his
Majeſty to uſe with ſubjects who, in ſome meaſure,
preſumed to give laws to their ſovereign, It is cer.
tain, that although this prince had been willing
to take the trouble of doing this himſelf, he was

not in a condition. For, during this whole month,

he was afflicted with frequent returns of the gout,
which had obliged him to have recourſe to a re.
medy that never failed: this was a. proper rep!-
men, which he obſerved with great ſtrictneſs du-
ring part of the month of May. Of all his coun-
cil, he had no one about his perſon but Sillery,
and him his Majeſty did not think fit for ſuch a
com miſſion.

All theſe circumſtances I relate from Henry's
letter, which he concluded with telling me, that
he would permit me to return to Paris as {oon 33
this affair was terminated. In my anſwer, which
I wrote to this prince while I waited his orders for
my departure, I repreſented to him two things, to
which, in my opinion, no reply could be made;

and theſe were, that if his Majeſty would not be- |
heve, what however was abſolutely certain, that

all thoſe informations which were given him, eci—
ther with great myſtery or great noiſe, were no-
thing but the murmurs of ſome perſons hired cx-
1 for that purpoſe in the provinces, he was
then much to blame to ſuffer his peace to be thus
diſturbed, when it was in his own power to reduce
theſe rebels to ſilence. It was upon theſe - tran!-
, | actions,

7 —— — 3 -

„„ „ wy 96 © wy © oo» wo „ @ A fy wy oy Woo cs wn fwd „„ eu wy js Wy , two ww co cv. co. c. _J7wH_—_ eR— R

d 4

XI. : , 606.

tions, that my enemies hy. * thoſe ſuſpi-

.

ant

an.
nry
ter,
ne v
Pro.
Is

Is
ure,
cer.
ling
Was
nch,
Out,
re-
eg
du-
oun-
ery,
ch 2

I1y's
that
n 35

hich

s for
8, to
ade;

t be-
that

„ ei-
no-
J ex-

> W45
thus
duce
ranſ-
1015,

1 2

r

37

tions of me to his Majeſty, which produced that

diſguſt of which T have given an account in the

former book: and it may be eaſily imagined, that
awhile that diſguſt continued, he had no incli na-
tion to chuſe me either for his confident or his
agent with the Proteſtants. My return to favour
happened in the manner I have already related:
he told me, that he could not give a more con-
vincing proof of his being perfectly cured of all
his ſuſpicions, than by contirming me in the em—
ployment he had at firſt deſtined for me. I in-
treated this prince to {end any other perſon rather
than me to Charelleraut, inveſted with his autho-
fity, becauſe I was apprehenſive of affording,
without deſigning it, ſome new matter for calumny.
But Henry reaſoned in a quite different manner:
he believed, that, after what had paſſed, he owed
to himſelf, to me, and to my accuſers, ſuch an
inconteſtable proof of his good opinion of me, as
the ſhewing me to the public in a poſt, wherein
the ſacrifice he expected I ſhould make him of my
neareſt Intereſts, would ſet my innocence in the
cleareſt point of view, and filence all malice and
detraction ; and added graciouſly, that my ene-
mies themſelves had juſt put him upon his guard
againſt their inſinuations, therefore I had nothin

to fear. Then, after twice embracing me, with
all his uſual expreſſions of tenderneſs, he ordered
me to return to Paris, to put all affairs in ſuch or-
der, that they might receive no prejudice from my
abſence; to draw up memorials of all thoſe which

| Tclated to my commiſſion ; and to compoſe myſelf

the inflruRtions which 1 was to receive in writing

r his hand, and with the advice of his coun-
ci

The King, in the mean time, went to paſs part

ac E . "Ie .
ot June at St Germain's. In the beginning of this

VoL. IV. L. month,

month, a defluxion of humours fell upon his foot *,
which he hoped to diſperſe by the exercile of
hunting, taking the precaution to have his boot
cut open upon the part affected. While this tit
laſted, he was not able to apply to any bufinels, al.
though, as he wrote me word, the preſervation of
one half of his kingdom ſhould depend upon it.

33} MEMOIR s Book XXI

22 1

„

When his diſtemper was abated, he returned tof

Paris, where he prepared for his journey to Non.

ceaux, after giving all the necetjary orders for wy}

departure.
I put down on paper, all the queſtions I deſired

to be relolved, with regard to the {ſeveral parts off

my function as repreſentative of the King; the an.
{wers to which were to make up the ground of the
inſtructions upon which 1 had juſt agreed with lus
Majeſty. This paper I ſent to Villeroi and Freſue,
who returned it with an{wers to cach queſtion, add-

ing, that if I found them ſatisfactory, I might ie.

duce them to ſuch a form as I judged proper. |
was reſolved to have two of thele papers, one more
general, and the other in the form of a particular

memorial, joined to the former: theſe two paper;

regulated the manner in which I was to ſpea
and act with the Proteſtants, as I am going to
ſhew..

The occaſion of the aſſembly at Chatelleraut,

did not at firſt view appear of ſuch importance a

it really was, either with reſpect to the King or

the proteſtant body, being granted for no other

* © I went to the arſenal,” ſays Henry IV. ſpeaking of one df
his fits of the gout, * with my wife; M. de Sully ſaid to me.
Sire, you have money, and never fee it:“ which really is tr:
* enough; for I am ſatisficd with knowing I have money, withou!
* amuſing myſelt with the pleaſure of looking at it. We went te
* gether to the Naſtile, and he ſhewed vs what was doing the!
* 1 aſſure you, at that inſtant I was attacked by the gout, which
brought to my wind the proverb, Thote who have the gout
© have riches.” Matthicu, vol. a. b. 3. p. 613. 7

| purpoic

> of

15605.

bt!

18 fit

„ al.

n of
1
d to
Ton.
ry

ſired

ts oiÞ

e an-
che
h his
elne,
add-
LIC»
3

more

cular

aper;
ſpeak

8 [0

raul,
ICC 2
ng ot
Other

one of
to me,
is true
without
vent (0.
thee!
uhich
le gout,

urpolt

bly as this was likely
examination, we ſhall find, that the real aim of

them.

VF i

39

no ages but to examine the deputies ſent by this
body to his Majeſty, the term of whoſe offices was

expired, and to appoint others to ſucceed them,
an affair which did not require ſo {olemn an aſſem-
to be. But, upon a cloſer

ſome of the click heads of the Proteſtant party,

was to take advantage of this allembly, to extend

their rights, and to procure the grant of new fa-
yours and privileges; a deſign which his Nlajeſty
could not better return, than by ſeizing hkewile

this opportunity to reduce them, with more ſo—

Jemnity, to the obſervation of the old regulations,
the wiſdom and utility of which were Fficiently
evinced by the effects they had produced; and, in-
ſtead of ſuffering them to he infringed, to give
them new force, and exact a more ſtrict obe-
dience to them; ſo that after this, the Proteſtant

body in France, being perſuaded of the rectitude

of the King's intentions, and of his firm reſolution
to maintain his rights, mult either reſolve openly
to deſpiſe his authority, or return with ſinceri—

ty to their duty. This was the principal point of

my commiſhon.
To attain this end, I was injoined to fix their
view principally upon the edi& of pacification 1{-

ſued at Nantes, as a fundamental writing, which
might ſerve them equally for a rule to judge of

their conduct towards the King, and of his towards
[ was to fſhew them, that this edi, which
had ſuffered ſo many miſinterpretations, being the
baſis of their liberty, the proof of their fidelity 10
their king, of their attachment to the public good,
and of thoſe ſentiments with which their religion
Itlelt ought to inſpire them; if they obſerved it ex-
actly, they would neither ſwerve on one fide or

Jie other, any more than Henry had done, who

id fo religioully fulfilled all his obligations, as to
2 2 torecloſe

.
$2 122 #*>c

Y
vif

UI
7
4 1
—
4
U

—
——
—

— 2

— — —
— _

- - or -
— — 8 5 8 =
9 1 I —
— ===. —.— — FERC q b
5 _ — — 22 - __
— — — 0 2 »

— - — —
— — — OS — ae — _
. 2 — — - —— —
8
— —

ä
—
—

— —
— — —
6— . WW
4
*
2 A =

— co — — —

- — - - —
. _—
— — —
r *
— — —
-

— - © : *
5
— * ——
2233 ==
Az — — 2
— — — — .
-
E — . — —
— 2 —ʃ—
= £ — —
— — ——— —

—
— —

40 M E M O IR S Bock XXII

forecloſe every objection againſt him on that head,
The free exerciſe of their religion, the undiſturb-
ed enjoyment of their eſtates and employment;
the gentleneſs of the government, the peaceabl;
and folid ſituation of affairs daily confirmed and
corroborated, the ſecurity of thoſe promiſes mad:
by the prince, well known by a long train of ef.
fects; and laſtly, the ſatisfactory aniwers he hal
given to every thing of importance exprelled in
their memorials; all theſe were ſo many pledge

of faith in him, which the Proteſtauts ought to

return by ſuch inſtances of ſubmiſſion and gratitude,
as a good and 1ndulgent prince has a right to e.

act from his ſubjects. Their own 1ntereſt likewiſe

made it neceſſary to conduct themſelves by this
plan; fince, if they maturely conſidered the true
{tate of things, they only run any hazard from th
violation.

The inference to be drawn from all theſe conſi.

derations, and which I was ordered to repreſent to

the aſſembly, was, that they ought to appear a.
verſe to every deſigu tending to demand any al-
teration in the edi&t of Nantes, ſuch as that of
being empowered to chuſe themſelves a head, ei-
ther within or without the kingdom, any other
thau the King himſelf, who on many accounts
merited that title from them. As it could not be
foreſcen what ether demands the Proteſtants would
bethink themſelves of making, they left it ro me
to chule proper arguments either for denying, or
eluding them. TI was only ordered to ſignify t0
them in plain terms, that for the future they mult
not expect ſuch general aſlemblies would be per
mitted; and that this, which his Majeſty had con-
ſented ſhould be held, that they might altogether
be told their duty, and be exhorted to perform it,
ihould ſerve them inſtead of that which they had

reſolve,

«<< a a oo =-*s © .,X£Xv _ tc 9

„% % . — ww R89VP _<- 7 . ww wy” rr” lj: - ,jP@þ/T© -£= = kk 22

XVI

lead.
turb-|
ents, |

eable
| and
made
pf el.

had
ed in
edges

ut to!

tude,
O c.
ewiſe
y this
true
n tlic

-onſ1-

nc ion
ar 2-8

ny al-
lat of

1, ei-

other
oun!
ot be
vould
o me
87 Cl
ity to
muſt

e Pets
con-
ether
rm it,
7 had
lech

1605.

DA WW 0 HF 41
reſolved, in the laſt ſynod of Gap, to intreat his

Majeſty to grant them.

*

The reaſons for this ceſſation of extraordinary aſ-
ſemblies were ſufficiently plain; for they were con-
veued, either on account of ſome affairs relating
to the diſcipline of the church, ſome matters of

J:w and police, or, laſtly, for ſome favour they

wanted to obtain of the King. For the fiſt, the
Proteſtants. have their provincral ſynods, upon:
which his Majeſty, by aboliſhing the extraordinary
allemblies, made no incroachment Alf he de-
manded with reſpect to them, and certainly no-
thing could be more juſt, was, that they ſhould
confine their deliberations to religious affairs;
whereas, under this pretence, they often treated
of ſuch as related merely to the civil government.
If the deſign be to ſettle ſomething relating to
the adminiſtration of Juſtice and the police, there-
js no reaſon for excepting them from the general
rule, by which all controverted matters oi thoſe
two kinds are referred to the tribunals of the
judges and ordinary magiſtrates. And Jaſtly, thoſe
which are matters of favour, and depend merely
upon the King's indulgence, ought to be treated
by way of petition and ſupplication. Nothing is
more unneceſſary than the great buftle which an
extraordinary aſſembly occaſiens, for an affair ge-
nerally in itſelf of little importance and expenſe,
There was another reaſon for ſuppreſſing theſe
alemblies, which, although T was not to diſguiſe,

1 was to {often a little, by barely ſaying, that they

|,

often gave occaſion for judgments not very fa-

vourable for the Proteſtant party; ſor the public
are willing enough to {hut their eyes vpon wile:
and prudent determindtions, though not to the in—
trigues of the diſaffected, who, in theſe tumultu-

bus allemblies, remain confounded with more e-

Quitable perſons, and are always more noi!y than.
"Wc they.

42. MEMO1R $ Book XXI.

they. If it happened that any of theſe articles, or
others of the fame nature, ſhould be conteſted at
Charelleraut, it was left to me to put an end to
them in whatever manner I judged beſt; and!
was even permitted to take thole advantages which
the profeſſion of one common faith afforded me,
to merit their confidence and engage their votes.
It was only in caſcs of obſtinacy and declared dit-
obedience, that I was obliged to inform his NMa-
jeſty, and ſuſpend all refolutions, till I had re.
ceived his orders; as likewiſe not to ſuffer the al.
ſembly to break up without his leave.

With reſpect to the article of the deputies, it is
necellary to inform the reader, that the Proteſtants
always kept two men of their party at court, one
for the eccleſiaſtic order, the other for the ſeculur;
they were to treat with his Majeſty's miniſters, or
with the King himſelf, upon all affairs neceſlary
to be communicated to him, and to receive his or.
ders concerning them. Thele deputies entered
upon their office by election, which was renewed
every three years, when others ſucceeded to their
place. If we go back to the ſource of this inſti-
Lution, we {hall not find that the Proteftants had
any legal title to this pretended right of reſidence
and no nination of the deputies, which they al-
ſerted ſo {trenuouſly. It was not mentioned in the
edicts, nor even in the writings that contained
cheſe tivate articles, which were ſometämes ſepa-
rate from the treaties. It was only a cuſtom
merely tolerated, and firſt introduced on account
of the reſiſtance ſome ſovereign courts made to
regiſtering the edict of Nantes, and only to be
continued till that was done. However, his Mz-
jeſty had no inclination to deprive the Proteſtants
of this privilege. All he required, and this was
one of the principal points of my commiſhon, was,
that, for the nomination of theſe e

u

Xl,

, Of
d at
d to
1d [
nich
me,
Ts.

dit
Na-
Fre.
e ale

it 15
tant
One
ular;
3, Or
tary
s or-
tered
ewed
their
in{ti-
s had
lence
ey al-
n the
ained
{epa-
Atom
count
de to
o be
$ Na-

ſtants
3 Was
„ was,

they
ſhould

1605.

ſequel.

O F D. 43

ſhould adhere to one of the two methods preſcri-
bed by him to their deputies, when they deſired

leave to hold the allembly, and if poiſidle to the
ſecond of them, by which his Majeſty expected

that the Proteſtant ſhould preſent to him the
names of ſix perſons choſen from their body, out
of whom he ſhould name two of the moſt agree-

able to hiniſelf.

It might poſuibly happen, that the heads of the
party would endeavour to elude thols regulations
which his Majeſty propoſed to get received in the
allembly, and for that purpole affect to confine:

themſelves to this fingle queſtion : This artifice 1

was likewiſe-to prevent. As to the affair of O-

range, which it was certainly expected would be

brought upon the carpet (as indeed it was), I had
orders to repreſent to them, that Henry had la-
boured in vain to manage it, ſo as that this city,
which he could not refuſe to reſtore to the Prince
of Orange, night by him be left to the French
Proteſtants, All therefore that could be done upon
this occaſion, was to prevail upon Naurice, that in
the room of Blaccons, who commanded there, and
Who himſelf defired permiſhon to leave it, he would
place a Proteſtant officer as his heutenant, whom

they might oblige to take the oath of obedience

I ſhall reſume this affair in the
Such were my general inftri ons, da—
ted July 3. 1605, and figned Henry and Forget.

All the difference between theſe general inſtruc-
tions, and the particular memorial joined to them,
tonliſted in this, that the latter made no mention
ol the declared ſubjeR of the aſſembly, but was con-
ned to ſome other queſtions which might pro-
dably be diſcuſſed there, and tended to prevent
Wioſe deſigns from being effected, to which it was
ſulpected the heads of the cabal would endeavour

bo get the multicude to give their approbation.
This

to his Majeſty.

This particular, which was not inſerted in the firſt

writing, becauſe there was a probability of its being

needleis, was however of great uſe to me; and it

was upon that account,. that I made a ſeparate me-

mortal of theſe inſtructions.

They imported, that I ſhould not ſuffer the af.
fembly, either in their debates or in writing, to
advance any thing injurious to the Pope, or to {tir
up again that triffing doctrine of Antichriſt, worthy
of the ſynod. of Gap, where it was firſt broached;
that no perſon ſhould have a ſeat in the aſſembly
in the quality of a deputy, from any individual
whatever, not even * Leſdigmeres himſelf;
that they ſhould not, as they had done in that
ſynod, receive letters from foreign princes,
particularly from the Duke of Bouillon. It feem-
ed of importance to his Majeſty, that an ungrate-
ful ſubject, ſuch as Bouillon, ſhould be publicly
known to have rendered himſelf unworthy of any
favour from his ſovereign. The manner 1n which

others, who might be ranked in this claſs, ſhould |

behave in the aſſembly, was to-regulate the treat-
ment they were to receive from me.

If the quality of preſident of the aflemhly,

which his Majefty earneſtly wiſhed they would con-
fer upon me, and which, on this occaſion, he
would not have been offended with me for accept.
ing, thould not be ſufficient to give weight to whit
E faid to them, I was to join to it the authority of

vernor of the province. And, as opportunities
offered, and the diſpoſition of their minds required,

I might give them to underſtand, that the King i

was not ignorant of the deſigns of the {editio:s
Proteſtants ; provided that from thence they did
not conglude, he was allo informed of the places

of their ſecret meetings.
There was ſo much the more appearance that
the article of the cautionary towns given to the
| Proteſt a!

„% ME M OT R Ss Book XXI.

„„ or SULL Y. 45

1 Proteſtants would be diſcuſſed, as the term, to
7 which the poſleſſions of theſe places was prolonged
by his Majeſty, was now near expired. And if
his ſhould happen, I was to hint, either to the
<1 Iaembiy in general, or the deputies in particular,

that, provided his Majefty found in them that rea-
dincis to comply with his meaſures as he required,
rv be would willingly agree to a farther prolongation.

had orders not to give them any abſolute aſlu-
„ Tances of this favour, but to mention is as what
„might be granted, and to promiſe I would obtain
of his Majeſty; although I had then in my poſ-
ſeſlion the letter of grant for that prolongation.
rt A was only bound by his Majeſty to keep it ſecret,
ll I had his orders to uſe it.

4s to thoſe fortified towns which had been given
do the Nuke ol Bouillon, aud which from thence
„ borward were to have no ſhare of the funds deſtined
„ | by the King for their maintenance, they were to
de declared for ever excluded from that advantage,
d ED likewiſe from all hope of ever being paid the
„ Jim promiſed by the edi& of Nantes for the ſup-
port of their garriſons. This ſum, at that time, a-
15 E to five hundred ſeventy three thouſand:
. ur hundred and thirty-two livres, of which ninety
e Viouſand livres had been deducted before. Nor
vere they to expect a, new appropriation for thoſe
it funds which had been afligned them. I had already
of | E ſome petitions upon theſe ſeveral ſuppreſ-
e: ons; tO which I always aniwered, that I thought
1 | Bus proceeding of his Majeſty abſolutely juſt.
' © Liſtly, by this writing I obliged myſelf to do no—
» thing without Henry's advice; wich whom, from
that moment, I began a regular intercourſe of let-
« | 5, moſt of them very long, and ſeveral in cy-
_ Ea. This memorial is dated July 4. ſigned by
s Majeſty, and counterſigned by Villerol, Two.

be s afterwards I ſet out on my journey.
Queen

46 MEMOIR S Book XX!

Queen Margaret's reſidence at the caſtle of UU

ſon, gave her frequent opportunities of hearing
news of the rebels; and as ſoon as ſhe was inform.

cel that I was upon the road to Poitou, ſhe thought» *

herſelf obliged to acquaint me with all the particu.
lars that had come to her knowledge. She had
Ihkewiſe ſome affairs of her own to 1mpart to mt,
which I thall mention after I have related thode
which concerned my journey. For this purpoſe ſhe
came from Udon to Toury, from whence the
wrote to his Majeſty, telling him the motive
which had 1nduced her to take this ſtep, and the
earneſt deſire ſhe had to confer with me. I had
left Paris, taking my route through Roſny and L.
vinville, two. days before the meſſenger who
brought this letter for his Majeſty, and another
for me, arrived. The King ſeeing by his own
letter, and by mine, what this princeſs deffred of
him, ſent La-Varenne after me, on the ꝙth of
Jah, to deliver me a letter from him, in which

e told me, that he ſhould be glad if I would vift
Queen Margaret, though I ſhould, for that pus
pole, be obliged to go off the road to Chatelle-
raut, as far as Orleans. La-Varenne gave me the
letter Queen Margaret had wrote, dated fron
Toury, July 2. by which J learned that this prin-
ceſs waited for me hetween Paris and Orleans; aud

that I might not fail to meet her, ſhe ſent Rodelle
her maſter of horſe, to deſire I would come as far!
as Orleans, if I did not meet her before on the
road. But {he ſpared me the trouble of going ſo far; |
for, upon my arrival at Cercote, I was informed
that the was there likewiſe, My wife having accon: þ

panied me to Roſny and Lavinville, I brought her
to Cercote with me, that ſhe might take advantage
of this opportunity to pay her reſpects to this princels.
It was {till fo early in the morning when I ar
rived at Cercote, that Queen Margaret was no!
up:

* 7

b wii ite

"» ; however, ſhe ordered me to be admitted into

r chamber, where I had the honour to confer
lich her a full hour before ſhe arole. We reſumed
ur converſation after ſhe was drefled, and ſpent

he whole day in the ſame manner. I ſhall not

tf pcat the polite and obliging things this princeſs
Bid ro me: but what 1 had been told in general
Murat, concernivg the civil factions. was mi-
tely particulariſed to me by her and Rodelle.
They named a great number of perſons of the firſt
quality in Provence and Languedoc, and even ſome
bf the relations of the Duke de Nlontpenſier and
Cardinal Joyeuſe, who were engaged in the con-
Piracy. Some of theſe perſons had been in the
&Ecret of Marechal Biron's deſigns, and had after-
Wards joined themſelves to thoſe whom they found
gctermined to purſue them. Revenge for that
larechal's death, was not one of their leaſt mo-
Þvcs; and they made ule of the {ame methods he
ad done to cxcite a rebellion among the people.
Þelides thoſe towns which, as we have ſeen, the
Fonſpirators endeavoured to ſurpriſe, they had
views likewiſe upon Beziers, 8 and Leu-
uc. All theſe informations Queen Margaret and
Rodelle offered to ſupport with evidences ſo clear,
s would not, they ſaid, leave me the leaſt room
doubt of their certainty. I gave his Majeſty an
act account of what I had heard, in a letter I
Frote to him from Cercote, dated July 14. I
Þxewiſe ſent him a liſt of the conſpirators names,
5 I had received it from Queen Margaret and Ro-
gelle; but J (ill perſiſted in'my former opinion
bor, by all they had faid to me, was I convinced
hat I ovght to alter my ſentiments.
+ It is certain, however, that theſe informations
were too circumſtantial and well ſupported not to
merit ſome credit; for Rodelle had been himſelf

bt the cabal, and had left it, only through a re-

flection

. —

A
38 MEMOIRS Book XXL
flection upon the raſhneſs of all their meaſures,
He told me, that La-Chapelle-Biron, and above
thirty gentlemen more of his acquaintance, hal
taken the {ame reſolution to leave the cabal, and.
inform his Majeſty of all they knew, provide
they could be {ure of obtaining the pardon the
would implore of him: that they had applied to!
him to take this ſtep in their favour; and this he
proved by the letters they had written to him
for that purpoſe. He added, that they had vis.
lent ſuſpicions that my journey to Poitou conceal.
ed a ſecret deſign of ſeizing them: that they hal
prevailed upon Queen Margaret to declare thei
intentions to me, and the carneſt deſire they hal
to efface the remembrance of their error, by ther
future fidelity and ſervices to his Majeſty. All this Wc
was ſufficiently clear, and I had no 8 of it re.
maining: But they endeavoured in vain to per. ge
ſuade me that the whole kingdom was in a flame, 1
while I ſaw only an inconſiderable number of ral
zealots, whom it was eaſy for his Majeſty to cru,
whenever he would condeſcend to treat as a fer. h
ous matter, a deſign which deſerved only deriſion Mi:
and contempt. For what remained, as often as | pe
attempted to examine ſtrictly into theſe inform» i
tions, in appearance of ſuch weight, and ſupport Þ
ed with ſuch proofs, I always found that there wa *Wr
much more falſehood than truth in them.

In this, however, Henry was of a contrary opi.
nion. He thought the ſſighteſt diſturbance with:
in his kingdom merited all his attention, “ be-
% cauſe,” ſaid he, “the French were ever fond a
* novelties, and eagerly admit every change.” He
often complained, in his anſwers to my letters,
that ſome of his other miniſters had as ſlight a no:
tion of the preſent evil as myſelf. He was mort BR
confirmed in his apprehenſions, when a memo
from Vivant fell into his hands, which exactly .

grec

10114]

Ay

grecl

=
E. *
» CL

Margaret and Rodelle.

om that place.
more

0
Freed with all that had been told me by Queen

Mee 3B. . "hd 49

He diſpatched orders im-
ediately to Vivant, to ſend him the perſon from
hom he received thoſe informations; and to me,
> make, in concert with Vivant, as ſoon as I ar-

© vcd at Chatelleraut, the ſtricteſt inquiries into e-

Fery thing that concerned this cabal. Vivant be-

M72 one of the Proteſtant deputies to the aſſembly,
mis quality might poſſibly render me ſuſpected by
im. The King, however, had taken care to ob-
Fiate this difficulty, by writing to him that he

night place an entire confidence in me. The let-

r paljed through my hands, with a precaution that
Fivant ſhould not be named in the affair, leſt, by
pſing his credit with the Proteſtants, he ſhould

is Mot have it in his power to ſerve his Majeſty cftec-
ally with them.
Fentlemen before mentioned, Henry approved of

As to Rodelle, and the other

he reſolution I had taken with Queen Margaret to

nd them to him. He heard what they had to
Ay, gave them his orders, and ſent them back to
Wc ſpot, that they might there carefully promote

His ſervice. This prince never repined at the ex-

* 9, nf

denſe which all thoſe emillaries and informers coſt
bim.

Some of them had intercepted the copy of a letter

ritten tothe Duke of Bouillon, by one of his con-

Nents, whom they ſuſpected to be Saint-Germain- de-
Elan, and brought it to the King: this perhaps was the
Eaulc of his extraordinary vigilance. I ſhall give
zn account of this letter here, that the reader may
de able to judge whether the inferences that were
Jrawn from it at Monceaux were altogether juſt.
made part of the packet which Henry ſent me
Saint-Germain, or whoever this
Correſpondent of Bouillon's was, by this letter en-
wcavoured principally to perſuade him, that it was“

wccellary he ſhould ſend ſome perſon in his name
2 YoL, IV. : to

4

ning of this letter were urged with the utmol

3

50 NM E MO IRS Bock x

to the aſſembly of Chatelleraut, who might I 8
port his intereſts there; or write at leaſt a Jettcr,
which his friends might produce. The very con. >

7
2 2

ſiderable part the Duke acted among the Pro

1

teſtants, the neceſſity of proving his innocence?
and the advantage to be acquired from ſhe win,
how much he 5 2 for the common cauſe, tb
per Intereſt of the whole party, his own c
It to be maintained with foreigners, the ſolemn

ty of this aſſembly, and the example of that d.

Gap, were ſo many motives which in the begin

earneſtneſs in order to put Bouillon in motion.

The relt was a confuſed maſs of conjectures, is
ferences, and precautions, on the ſubje& of th
aſſembly; all wtended to prove, that the Protect Wc
ant church had nothing to hope or expect bu
from his efforts alone. The author of this lette: n
ſuppoſes, that Henry had totally forgot all his fo:
mer promiſes; and that he openly ſacrificed i
Proteſtants to their moſt cruel enemies. As proc“
of this, he alledged the connection between tit i:
King's council and that of Rome, the immenk
ſums which he ſaid were expended to make a Pop,
the rejoicings for his election, and the favour it r
Jeſuits enjoyed, ſufficiently tſhewn by the demos Me
tion of the pyramid. He afterwards conſiders
what, in the preſent circumſtances, might be t le
reſult of the aſſembly; and preſaged nothing bit Er.
misfortunes, as well on account of the timidity {Wn
the party, as the artifices the King would uſe 4 t
gain his ends in that convention. | Kal

Here I began to appear upon the ſcene, and Pur
may be eaſily gueſſed what fort of part they in Her
puted to me. According to the author of this 1
ter, I had propoſals to make, which could not . p
of removing all difficulties; among others, that pt
prolonging the time for the potleflion of the d,

| 10017

3 505. . 51
ob nary towns. Saint-Germain hoped contrary
tte Þ bis firſt hopes, or rather, to encourage Bouil-

con, n, relied on the failure of all my artifices with
Pro ſpect to the choice of the deputies; and reaſoning
nce, s own way upon the ſtruggles he ſuppoled I hould
vi ee in my mind between my couſcience, which
the. Puld not yield to adopt the policy of the coun-
ce Il, and my ambition, which would not ſuffer me
mii, h make the Pope aud the Papiſts my enemies;
t o ie ſometimes faw no probability that I would
gin Ake upon myſelf a commiſſion which I could not
mol 2Fecute to the King's ſatisſaction, without betray-
Ig my religion; nor ſerve my religion, without
„i 2&poling myſelf to unavoidable diſgrace. He like-
tu, Wile ſaw nothing but obſtacles and difficulties in
telt Ich a commiſſion, which I ſhould never be able
ſurmount. As he did not know that his Ma-
ee Wt y, beſides leaving the general places of ſecuri—
; for to the Proteſtants, would conſent allo that the
| 1: dividuals of that body ſhould keep thoſe of which
roch ey were at preſent in poſſeſſion; and believing thar .
1 Wis circumſtance alone was ſufficient to alienate their
zen Mections, he triumphed in my perplexity and con-
op. Witon. He alledged, that the King had ſaid, the
r erſon whom he ſhould ſend in his name to the
embly, would have nothing to do but to declare
dec s will there. Upon thele words, he affirmed
e 2Widly, that rather than go to any place in my go-
7 bt fernment where the people would not pay me the
ty Ponours I thought due to me, nor even allow me
e i be preſent at their conſultations, I would find
| Falons to get mylelf excuſed from taking that
ind Parney; or at the worſt, if I-ſhould go, Saint-
vin Fermain engaged to the Duke of Bouillon, that
1s my authority ſhould not hinder his letter from a
t epectful reading, or his deputy an honourable re-
hat eption in the allembly.
2 (3 I: F 2 | The

ove

-— ad

52 MEMOIR S Book XXI.
The mifortune was, that the weakneſs of thi;
Duke's partiſans was a point ſo generally known,
that, notwithſtanding all this ſhew of confidence,
and oſtentation of power, his friend was obliged
to wave that ſubject. He owned the coldneſs of the
nt e- and neglect of the party to himſelf; an |
aving thus ſpared the Duke's confuſion by theſe WM
ſoftened expreſſions, he approved of the caution x
which Bouillon had been the firſt to adviſe ſhould pp
be uſed when he was mentioned, which was, r
not to make any demand for him in his name, i
which was the leaſt liable to oppoſition ; but con-
fine themſeves to remonſtrances from the Pro-
teſtant body in general, upon the depriving him
of his places, refuſing him juftice, his baniſhment,
and the perſecution to which he was expoſed on

account of his zeal for Proteſtantiſm. He aſks
what danger might be apprehended from a letter +
written in this form to the aſſembly, and finding
none, although they ſhould even pay no regard eto,
it, and, ſuppoſing the worſt, tho? they thould facritice 9
it to the King; he exhorted the Duke of Bouillon to
write ſuch a one, only giving it as his opinion,
that it ſhould not be made public at firſt; that be-
ing read on a ſudden to the aſſembly, ſome ad-
vantage might be derived from thoſe firſt emo- “
tions of compaſſion which it was likely to excite. Þ
He reckoned it a maſterpiece of politics for the e
Duke, if the letter, inſtead of being preſented to fei
the aſlembly by one ſingle perſon, could be or
brought thither by the deputies from the Upper Vo
and Lower Guyenne, where his fortreſſes were lit ¶ Fe
ated; or if they ſhould appear to have undertaken the I h

commiſſion of themſelves, or, what was ſtill better,
by the orders of their countrymen.
This was the letter which made ſo much noiſe
at court. To the packet his Majeſty ſept me,
Sillery thought p:oper to add a letter from himſelt
| upon

*

WY *

Jn = box

1 bo. O F r. 53
2 don this ſubject alone. Sillery was the perſon

n, nom Henry kept about him, and who was then
de, nployed, as well in reconciling the Prince of
ed Ponti and the Count of Soiflons, at that time
be variance with each other, as in the affair of O-
olf Boze, which, according to the advices his Ma-

e ty received from Leſdiguieres and others, was
on king an unfavourable turn. When I read the
id Z@py of this letter to the Duke of Bouillon, I was
25, Envinced that the court would take a falſe alarm
ic, tit. I ſaw nothing in the contents which did not
n- byonfirm me in my opinion that the ſeditious party
'0- has very inconſiderable, careleſs, unſteady, deſti-
im > te of all relources, and far from any intention
nt, p undertake any enterpriſe of importance; and

on mat Bouillon, who had more experience than the
{ks F(t, would not engage in ſuch extravagant ſchemes
ter g were ſucceſſively propoſed to him, ſchemes with-
nz | gut order or connection, and leading to no fixed
to! end, fince there was nothing but confuſion to be

ice gx pected from them. In a word, amidſt chat falſe
do Wourage which is inſpired by great preſumption,
2p, | nd notwithſtanding that affectation of fine policy,
thought I could plainly perceive diſunion among
1d. | We members of this body, and deſpair in its leader.
10- | therefore perſiſted in my former opinion, and
te.] feclared my ſentiments freely in the anſwer I ſent
he do Monceaux ; although probably, by doing fo, I
to ÞFendered my fincerity a little doubtful. But I com-
be Jorted myſelf by the reflection that thoſe ſuſpicions
zer Fould laſt no longer, at moſt, than till the diſco-
ta- Fery of this myſtery, which would be effected by
the dhe aſſembly at Chätelleraut. ä
er, 1 As for the other aſſertions in this letter, I can 1
allure the reader that 1 never felt thoſe ſtruggles
iſe (nd perturbations of mind, which the writer of it,
ne, and many other perſons, ſuppoſed I ſhould have on
(elf the choice between ſerving my prince, aud my re-
on if ligion;

8
Mt

© ME MO0!'1:R $

foundation for ſuch an alternative. It is a common

aud prevalent prejudice among all feds of religion, ©
that a man is never ſuppoſed to be ſincere in the

profeſſion he has embraced, unleſs he ſupports it

obſtinately, even in ſuch points where it is moſt

WC
viſibly wrong. Upon this footing, I confels, ile

method IL was determined to purſue might, by the
author of that letter, and thoſe who judged like
him, draw. upon me the epithets of ſalſe brother,
deſerter, and, if they pleaſe, traitor. However,
It was not the approbation of ſuch as thoſe that!
propoſed to obtain, but of perſons who, of what-
ever party or religion they were, would, in their
judgment of my conduct, preſerve the balance of
equity and diſintereſtedneſs. If ever religion ad-
mats of the aſſiſtance of policy, it ought to be ol a
policy pure, ſimple, and upri
other may indeed appear to ſerve it, but does not in
reality, and ſooner or later never fails to ruin 1t.

Having determined to be guided by no other prin-
ciple in my tranſactions with the aſſembly, I thought
I could not too carefully avoid all appearances
of aftectation or diſguiſe in my conduct; that those
who were influenced by an imprudent zeal, ot
actuated by a ſpirit of cabal, might have no hops
of gaining or ſeducing me: therefore, from the
beginning, I thewed myſelf ſolicitous to ſupport,
on this occaſion, that character by which al
France was to know how I would act on ever)

"gat as itſelf; any

other ; that is, of a man as ſincerely attached i

the true principles of the Proteſtant religion, 3
incapable of drawing the falſe conſequences which
many of the Proteſtants did, or of approvin}
their irregular proceedings. The ſpeech I made
at the opening of the aſſembly, which laſted hall

an hour, was wholly calculated to produce ti: =

effect, without troubling myſelf to conſider ws
ther

H ws

:
* .

© N *
7 F
5 „
7 .
= x Fe
* * —
">
N
*
1 =
n

ligion; ſince in reality, in this affair, I ſaw no RY

_—
as FI 1 |
*
m = .

——e—

E ol Lok #
£2" "nd
* 1

_—_

Pos. 0 r $UL I. Y. 55

na

er it would give pleaſure or offence to the ma-
n rity.
l, I began by repreſenting to them, that, among

p many perſons blindly devoted to the will of the
it prince, the choice of a perſon to treat with them

|; ZFo0uld not have fallen upon one whole unſhaken
« *Fonſtancy to his religion was ſo well known, if
'c Mis Majeſty had been more ſolicitous to ſupport or
ie Ancrealſe his rights, than to perſuade their judg-

r, ments and pain their hearts. That this reaton
„ Pas ſuſncient to make them place an abſolute con-
1: Fdence in all that I ſhould fay or do, fincelI certain-
t- Ay had not waited for this moment baſely to Letray
it my religion. But I declared to them, at the ſame
of time, that they muſt expect, to fee me as zealous
d ſor the intereſt of my prince, when it did not in-
jure what J owed to my religion and the general.
1y _ Food, iince it was incumbent upon me to juſtify, to
in pis Maje(ty himſelf, the choice he had made of
it, me; and to ſupport, in the view of the whole
n. kingdom, the reputation of a prudent and upright
ht miniſter; which J flattered myſelf I now enjoyed.
©, A invited them to ſhare this honour with me, ob-
je  Merving, that here honour and good policy were
or the ſame. Of his point indeed 1 found moſt dit-
x3  culty to perſuade them; and when they heard me
he allert, that their cantionary towns had no fence but.
rt, their own good inclinations, inſtead of taking my
all words literally, they looked upon them as a para-
dox, or an oratorial figure.

Nothing, however, was more certain. And to
Whew the Proteſtants, that the firſt foundation of
their policy was falſe, I entered upon the diſcuſ-
ion of this principal point; that is, the keeping of
their towns, in which they fancied their greateſt
itrength conſiſted, and concerning which, as I was
- Wutormed, they were incited to make very earneſt
aud very bold repreſentations to his Majeſty. I
7 thewed

55 MEMOIRS Book xX
 ſhewed them, that the great number of little pal.
try places which they held under the title of fen.
ced towns, was ſo far «from being advantageous to
them, that they would haſten their ruin, if ever =
they were attacked by a King of France, the
preſent King eſpecially, to whom many of their
officers were attached; becauſe there being no fort.
reſs ſo mean, or governor ſo inconſiderable, * |
not pretend to the honour of making {ome reſiſt. 8
ance, it mult neceſſarily happen, that their toler. 4
able cities, which were about ten or twelve in 8
number, muſt ſuffer greatly from this uſeleſs difper.  F
ſion of their ſoldiers and ammunition, and muſt
from time to time fall into the hands of their ene.
mies. I did not even except Leſdiguieres, their Mc
Achilles, provided that he waited for this extremi-
ty, to ſeparate himſelf from them. In reality,
without judging too raſhly of this officer, it might |
be confidently aflerted, that the only religion ca.
_—_ of fixing him, was that which could ſecure |
um in the polleſſion of his riches, and the autho-
rity he had always exerciſed throughout his pro.
vince. Some other proofs of his being but ſlightly |
attached to the doctrine of the Proteſtant church,
might be produced. I am obliged to diſcover in
this manner the real principles of Leſdiguieres, be- | ®
* cauſe it was one part of my commiſſion, to ſhev |
that the moſt ſecret diſpoſitions of the party wen
not unknown to me. |
The conduct of Du-Pleſſis was very different, but Þ
ſtill more to be pitied. This man, in whom an ar- Þ
dent zeal for his party held the place of exp. þÞ
rience and military virtue, had taken it into 5 e
head to fortify his caſtle of Saumur, and did it in the
ſuch a manner, that to defend it would require 21
arriſon of eight thouſand men, with ammunition =
in proportion. I deſired to know where Du- Pleſſs d
would procure all this, ſhould he be attacked un-
expected!y;

tl. Nos. 0 F Ss UL IL V. 57
5 a

al. pectedly; and added, that what I ſaid to them
Ne . Ws not by way of information, ſince I was not ig-
to Aprant that they were condemned to know this

er Furth, by the reſult of the deliberations iu their

he Povinces, as well as by their own loſles; but only
-ir @ lhew them, that the King's council reaſoned
rt Itly upon their ſituation; and that if, notwith-
1; anding this knowledge, they were ſuffered to live
(tf. peace, that conſideration ought to increaſe their
er. Fatitude and affection for the prince their bene-
in Mctor.

er. I then proceeded to acquaint the deputies with
ut by; Majeſty's intentions, in a manner that would

ne. mit of no doubt or equivocation. That they
\cir Mere for the future not to receive in their ſynods,
mi- | even in their houſes, any deputies or letters
ty, om foreign princes, cities, communities, or

oht ench Lords; namely Meſſicurs de Rohan, de
2 . . . A
3. | Tpuillon, de Leſdiguieres, de La-Force, de Cha-
ure Wlon, and Du-Pleſſis, becauſe the King would not
bo. © Wer any affairs of importance to be tranſacted in
"0. Is kingdom, without his participation. That,

1tly han no pretence or reaſon whatever, would they
ch, Ser henceforth be permitted to hold an aſſembly
r in | We thoſe they had formerly held; but if they had
be. þ @y requeſt to make to his Majeſty, they were to
new! 15 to the deputies, who were allowed to ſtay
vert K court for this purpoſe, and that it ſhould be ex-
frelſed in the record of the deliberations of their
but Þ 13 I declared to them, that if they pre-
Far- Kuded, in this allembly, to take reſolutions con-
«pe- Vary to theſe orders, beſides the other incanveni-
) his cles to which they would expole themſelves,
it in Hey muſt expect to ſee me make uſe of all the
re: Peer anvexcd to my commiſlion, and all the au—
ition Abo:iry granted to a governar in his province, to
lefis N Nduce to their duty ſuch as ſwerve from it. This
| un Vs the ſubſtauce of my ſpeech to the aſſembly.
dy; i The
.

*
by.
: "I

YI P

58 MEMOIR S Book XXII
The affair of the deputies, and of the cautionai
tonws, I left to be ſettled at their leiſure. 43
This ſpeech, and 3 the declaration
with which 1 concluded it, gave great offence u
many deputies of the aſſembly. It occaſioned f.
veral warm diſputes in their private conſultation;
and four or five deputations to me. Thoſe whoſ:!
intereſt it was that the allembly ' ſhould not pro.
ceed to more necellary buſineſs, deſired no better
than to waſte the time in this kind of prehminuy Þ
queſtions, and protracted them on purpoſe. Bu
with a little induſtry, and ſome addreſs, I put a
end to this uſeleſs prelude. The King highly re.
ſented their not chuſing me Preſident of the}
aſſembly ; though afterwards, altering his opinion!
on that head, he had adviſed me not to accept of
it. He thought, that, upon ſeveral conſiderations,
I merited this honour from them; and ſaid publicly|
with great reſentment, that on this occaſion the
Proteſtants had given an equal proof of their di.
regard to the public good, and of their jealouſy of
me. But it 1s certain, that I was the firſt, and
even the only perſon, who made any objection to
it, and this for reaſons which I wrote to the
King, I would tell him perſonally, and which, II
made no doubt, would have his Majelty's apps
bation.

£

*

B O O K XXII. 1

1 E King received a letter from the Duke ci de
Bouillon, which was brought to thim fron
Germany, by a man named Ry, after the gene- $
ral aſſembly of the Proteſtants at Charellerauc vs
already opened. In this letter Bouillon acquainted e
his Majeſty, chat a league was actually forming
among the German princes, of whom, however, |:

| none

055-3 V:4* LY: 59

ne was named in the letter, againſt the houſe of
*Mvuſtria; and that theſe princes, being deſirous of

ion Prengthening themſelves with the power and aſ-
- 1 Iſtance of France, had fixed upon him to be a
. Þcdiator between his Majeſty and them. On
one, heir part, he promiſed a full ſecurity to the Kin

10% ind kingdom; and on his own, he offered, wit
pro. In effuſion of the nobleſt ſentiments, to afliſt this
tre: Wchon with his perſon and forces, expreſſing great
an Þy at his having found the opportunity ſo often
Bu Winted at by Montluet, when in writing to him by
- an Sis Majeſty's orders, he told him, that it was by
| Fea] and efſectual fervices, and not by words only,
hat his prince could for the future be perſuaded
bion f the purity of his intentions.
t a Henry, at the receipt of this letter, was neither
ond uch moved in favour of the Duke of Bouil-
licht Pn, nor greatly pleaſed with the pretended
ſcheme. Far from accepting an offer in appear-

the! | ;
di zncc fo favourable to his deſigns, he was appre-
y of Penſive of raiſing an unſurmountable obſtacle to

he execution of them by too great precipitation.
Beſides, the ſnare which Bouillon laid for him, was
too thinly diſguiſed to produce the effect for which
At was deſigned. Nothing could be more impro—
o. Sable, than that the German princes ſhould chuſe
Bouillon to act the part of a mediator and recon-
Filer, who was himſelf conſidered by the council

oi France as a criminal. Henry therefore con-
tented himſelf with telling Ruſly, in anſwer to this.
letter, that the Duke's informations were too in-

-e of Leterminate, and came too late. Bouillon would
from Lertainly have expected very little ſucceſs from
ene Ibis artifice, if he had known, that a letter, which
| lie had written to the Proteſtants aſſembled at Cha-

and!

3
utel elleraut, fell at the ſame time into his Majeſty's
ning ande. This letter was a kind of anſwer to that

yer, Nbich, as we have obſerved, had been lately ſent
100% to

ng 4
,

& MEMOIR s Book xxi
to Bouillon by Saint-Germain de-Clan, and it .

well known was deſigned for him; though, in on

part of it, he mentions Saint-Germain as a thirl?

perſon. By the contents, it was plain, that th
letter he wrote his Majeſty from Germany, wa!
done with no other view but to induce the King

treat him more favourably in the afſembly, and u

hinder his Majeſty from ſuſpecting the true mo
tives of his conduct.

The Duke of Bouillon, in his letter to Sin:
Germain, did not loſe fight of his quality of hen
of the party, ſince it was written with an inter
tiou to regulate the proceedings of the aſſembly
The nomination of the deputies was the article fi!
and priucipally conſidered in it. He gave his 6
pinion of each of thoſe perſons who might pre
tend to this office, ſuch as La-Noue, Du-Pleſi

Bellujon, and Saint-Germain himſelf, in who;

favour he gave his vote for continuing him in h

employment, though his turn was now to bf

changed, and intereſted himſelf ſo much in it as!
exhort the Proteſtants to unite their endeavours!
make the election fall upon him. He beſtow:
great praiſes upon La-Noue, but recommended
to them to give the preference to Saint-Germain,

the office which the firſt exerciſed at Geneva {|

uſefully for the party, affording a plauſible pr:

tence for excluding him from the deputavo

without giving him offence. He ſpoke of D.
Pleſſis, as of a man too obſtinately attached to |
own opinions, and, beſides, capable of gaining i!

attention and reſpect of Leſdiguieres; which to
Duke ſcemed ſo important a point, that he coil

dered the want of that power in Bellujon almoſt ®

2 crime. Bellujon, he allowed, had underſtanding

8 and addreſs, and next to Saint-Germall
ad the beſt claim to the deputation. The pe.

fe agreement between thoſe two might inde
N proguc

On

th
Wai
g
d ll
mo

41nt
hex
UC
ably
fart
11s 6

pre.
leſſt
vho'%
in by

o b

as M
Urs h
Oweih
led i}

nai

va i

e pre
41100,

De

to hi
18 it

to Ws
co

0ſt x
n di ng
mal
* pete
indeed
roduc

„ or sul rv.

hüt in in his character whic

61
oduce miracles; but Bellujon's attachment to
/diguiercs was, in the yg of Bouillon, a

could not be effaced.
e would have done better to have owned freely,

Pat he was jealous of the reputation Leſdiguieres
Kd acquired in the party. Another fault which
"Fouillon attributed, equal!

and without excep-
on, to all the candidates for the office of deputy,

Has that attention they diſcovered to their own in-

reſt, which however he conſidered as no objec-
gon, becauſe of its being ſo genera]. |
Bouillon next proceeded to {peak of himſelf;
nd here vanity dictated every word. He informed
$aint-German, that it was reported in Germany,
Kt the King was deſirous of being reconciled to
im, and that Parabere or Montluet would be ſoon
nt to him for that purpoſe ; and, to remove all
©(picions of the truth of this affertion, he ſent him
letter which he faid Montluet had written to him,
which he deſired him to apply to ſome perſons
ho might be able to effect a reconciliation be-
een Henry and him. From all this Bouillon
grew a thouſand conſequences, upon the reſpect
ey had for him in Germany, the great advan-
ges which the Proteſtant party received from
im, and the fears with which he inſpired the King
ind his council. He was not willing to leave his
rethren in doubt, that he would not hear all the
propoſals his Majeſty made to him, through an
pprehenſion that they were only ſnares which
rere laid for him, to deprive him of the authority
e had acquired among the people. He lightly
alled over the article of ſending ſome perſon in
is name to the aſſembly, and ſpoke of it as a
hing liable to difficulties ; and upon which Leſdi-
weres, Du-Pleflis, and Saint-Germain, muſt ne-
Ecllarily be conſulted.
; Vor. IV, G But

62 ME MOI R -S Book XXI

But he dwelt with a peculiar ſatisfaction upon the
ſolemn allemblics which were held at his houſe
compoſed, as he faid, of all the moſt diſtinguilke
perſons in Germany, allerting, that the Proteſtan
religion muſt necetlarily receive the higheſt bene.
fit from them. By the reſentment he here diſco
vered againlt Leſdiguieres, it was judged that tl:
latter had declared his ſentiments of theſe ſo mud
boaſted aſſemblies a little too freely; but the Dube
of Boinllon, to give a juſt idea of their extrem
utility, aſſurcd his party, that the ſole apprehen
fon of what might be reſolved upon there, un
more than lufficient to diſturb Henry's repole, an:

to make him try every method to gain him. I.

added, that he had been often reproached by tht
2 who compoſed theſe aſſemblies, with no

aving made the court of France ſufficiently er-
ſible of the advantages he polleſſed, and had rt;

ceived offers from them to take this trouble upd

themſelves; but that he had oppoſed this effect of
their zeal, by repreſenting to them, (with won

derful modeſty), that the jealouſy which Henn

entertained of him, being the true cauſe of the di

ference between them, their interceſſion wou!:
have no other conſequence but to augment thi

jealouſy, and hurt themſelves, without ſerving
him. The only method by which Henry cou

be brought to reaſon, (which he inſinuated va
the opinion of this whole aſſembly of friends,

well as his own), was Lo reduce him, for fear

the conlequences, to a neceſſity of granting then
all their demands.

All the notice this very ſingular letter deſerve
(if it be granted that it deſerved any), was to mai
ule of it to prevent ſome demands which it wi
probable might be made in the allembly ; for,
to the reſt, on whom could Bouillon expect to 1

pole ſuch arrogant boaſting? There 1s no A
| a

2
- .
"= "TY
=
I E.
1
.

©
l
;

"
==
_ -
3
0
4 g J
4

the F ſeeking any other proof than what theſe ridi-

Jule
he
(tan
Ehe.
Ilco.
F Lt
Nu!
Juke
rem
hen.
Wy
an
He
y Lit
| BO
{ens
d ref
up0i
ct off
Ol
len
e di
VOul:
tha

mmon and general intereſt,

malice, and falſchoed.

50 5. cod r rde Le . 63

lous rhodomoutadoes afford, that the ſeditious par-
had made no preparations, either within or

Without the kingdom, for a revolt; and that they
Id vot yet underſtand each other's ſchemes, vor

d come to auy explanation concerning their
With regard to
is new pretended league in favour of the Proteſt.

W1ts; there was good reaſon for thinking of it
& Lce\diguieres did; in one word, that It was a

. . . . — .
ere invention of Bouilloß. Caumartin never

Peutioned it in his letters to the King, although
de had a conference with the Landgrave of Heile,
Foncerning every thing that related to the Duke
$f Bouillon; and all the Landgrave defired to
Know of him was, if the King had really employ-
2d Monluet in the expreſſes his Majeſty had ſent
o Sedan.
grave of Helle to aſk this queſtion, was a report

'The reaſon which induced the Land-

hich had been ſpread in Germany, that his Moſt
hriſtian Majeſty was endeavouring to get poſſeſ-
jon of Sedan by ſurpriſe, and to aboliſh the re-
rmed religion there. It was plain that this re-

dort was raiſed by Bouillon himſelf, who, takin

pecaſion from that to pratily his hatred of the

King, inſinuated at the fame time, that his city

as ſo {trong, that Henry could have no hopes of
aking it but by a ſtratagem. This was, indeed,
o polſeſs the art of uniting together preſumption,
All the Duke of Bouillon's
talents might he reduced to a great fertility of in-
vention, and conſummate dexterity in ſpreading
reports to the diſadvantage of his enemies. That
K hich prevailed concerning the reſolution taken
dy the Swiſs aflembled at Baden, contrary to the

Intereſts of France, proceeded from the fame per-

1 It occaſioned, {or a ſhort time, ſome appre-
heuſions ia the Kingdom, as the bulinels mention-
. G 2 ed

ed in the former year, in which the leagues of
the Griſons were * {till remained unfiniſh.

#

:

ed; but when it was found that Caumartin, who

would not have failed to have informed the King
of it immediately if it had been true, was wholly
ſilent concerning it, there was ſufficient room to
believe, that it was only an invention of thoſe who:
intereſt it was, to have it believed that our affairs
were not in a good way in thoſe cantons.

7 *

I could have wiched, that his Majeſty had they |
the ſame contempt {Sr the informations of thoſe |
mercenary ſpies, whoſe numbers began to increaſe |

to ſuch a degree, that they became chargeable to
the government; and I freely own, that I regretted
thole large ſums which were diſburſed, to pay this

kind of ſervice, which, on account of the 1nteret |

thoſe from whom it was received were governed
by, either with regard to themſelves, to augment
the garriſons of a city, or to procure a conlider-
able gratuity, was greatly ſuſpected by me. 4
certain man gave information of an aſſembly which
was beld at Puy-Laurens iu the Upper Languedoc;
he gave in a memorial of what palled there, and
likewiſe aſſured us, that he himſelf had been pre:

ſent. Another officer or ſoldier of Quercy prevail. |

ed upon Vivant to ſend him to the King, becaule
he ſaid he had been ſolicited by a friend of his at
Sarlat * to ſcize Domme; and declared the names
of thoſe who had ſpoken to them both upon this
ſubject: this determined Henry to fend Themmes
thither to ſeize the perſons accuſed. All theſe in-
formations were afterwards found to be either falſe,
or exceſſively exaggerated. It was not my op.
nion that al precaution ſhould be neglected; on
the contrary, I was the firſt to adviſe the King to
ſend ſome truſty perſons to reſide in Perigord and
Quercy. The King, to whom I was not accuſtom-

* In Perigord.

ed

*

— —

2

og IP OR 7
*

*

64 M E M O I R $ Book XXII = |

,

oF?
"RC

*.. .
; i © ALE > "F 2 N 0 7 : 2 . , 2 =P % 52 . .
1 i an tht. alt. 8 i aw a a. dS |_ Ya, + Awa gs om. — —

*

RA
i

%s. OF $SULLY. 65
e ed to ſpeak in this manner, conceived great ap-

prehenſions from it, and I was obliged to aſſure
him that I had received no bad news from either
of theſe provinces.

*

But the method I would have preferred to all

theſe little inquiries, as being both the ſhorteſt and
* moſt ſecure, was to give, from time to time, and
as occaſions offered, examples of ſevere puniſh-
ment, ſuch as the arret againſt the two Luquiſſes,
gentlemen of Provence. It was reſolved at the
'arſenal, that, before I went away, an attempt

ſhould be made to ſeize them; for which purpoie,

the King made uſe of Ranchin, phyſician to the

Conſtable, who amuſed theſe mutineers fo artfully,
that the Chevalier Montmorency ſeized mine or
ten of the faction all together, with their two lead-
ers, and confined them in the priſon of Aiguef-
mortes. They were ſo indiſcreet, that, amidſt the
: confuſion cauſed by their firſt ſurpriſe, they con-
 felſed themſelves guilty of carrying on criminal
* correſpondences with Spain. Henry, fully reſol-
ved to puniſh them, ſent the Chevalier de Mont-

morency and Ranchin, at their return from this

expedition, to Chantilly, to tell the Conſtable that
| he muſt come the next day and prepare matters

tor their trials, It was this plot which made his

Majeſty renew his deſign of raking a journey this

year towards Provence. The report of an arma-
ment of palleys being fitted out by the Spaniards
at Naples, was a ſecond inducement. However,
I ſaw no greater reaſon for taking umbrage at this
armament now than before, the Spaniards making
almoſt the ſame preparations every year, on ac-

count of their trade to the Levant. |
The King was likewife informed, that ſome of
the leading men in the aſſembly, ſought only to
prolong the time in uſeleſs debates, that I might
quit it through wearineſs, or that affairs of another
G3 kind

=

66 ME M O I R S Book XXII.
kind might ſuffer by my abſence; and to effed
this, had reſolved to make uſe of ſeveral preten.
ces, ſuch as ſending the deputies directly to the
King to propoſe their demands, or to bear their
general thanks, as if the aflembly were reckon
uſeleſs. Henry ordered Parabere, who was 95.
ing to his government, to confer with me con.
cerning this report, relying wholly upon my dil. d
8 to diſpatch the buſineſs of the aſſembly wih!“ d
peed, but at the ſame time completely. For this} i
purpoſe, I had already reſolved to take meaſures f
to much the more likely to ſucceed, as they fla. u
tered the vanity of the deputies. His MajcityÞ - f
allo commanded Parabere to aſſiſt me in my ch.! 1
deavours to diſcover the authors of theſe intrigues
but he would not venture to truſt him with the fe.
crets of moft conlequence; and even when he
ſent him to me to act in concert upon a certain
memorial, he thought it neceſſary to {end me this
memorial by another hand, that I miglit have time
to examine it, and take ſuch mea{ures as I thought
proper, before the arrival of Parabere. Henry
did not act in this manner through an apprehen-
ſion of his failing in his duty; but Parabere had
one fault, which is only ſo with reſpect to politic,
he could never believe ill of any one; and another,
which is generally joined to the former, a read.
neſs to contract triendihips with all forts of men, Þ a
whether ill or well affected to the government,
He was never moved with any thing that was fad i
concerning the French faction; and as often r
the King mentioned the Duke of Bouillon in his
preſence, he never failed to juſtify his innocence,
and attributed all the crimes that were alledged a-
gainſt him to the malice of his enemies. It was
this prepoſſeſſion that made his Majeſty, though he
diſcovered all his diſpleaſure againſt the Duke to
Parabere, aſſign his former practices againſt hin
| as

—

Derne r e (ns ay

„

3 = 0 #18: 0+ 1-15) 67

s the cauſe, without giving any hint to him of

the more recent proots he had of his diſobedience;
it was my part alſo, to regulate my conduct with
Parabere upon this knowledge.

A
*
4
#
*

4

But ſetting aſide all chat was reported to the

King, let us ſee what really palſed in the aſſem-

bly, The firſt meetings were as tumultuous and
ditorderly as I had expected they would be. The
diſaſfected party aſſiduouſly applied themſelves to

imbitter the minds of others, and prepare them
for ledition, becauſe they thought it would be
more difficult to inflame them afterwards, if they

ſuffered the atlembly to take a peaceable turn.
They therefore had recourſe to their uſual arts,
and indultrioully confirmed the falſe reports they

had rajied, that the King was going to aboliſh their

privileges, abrogate their ſynods, and to take ad-
vantage of the preient allembly, to declare all the
penſions he was accuſtomed to give to the mini-
ſters of the Proteſtant religion ſtruck off from the
accouits of his revenues. Henry, when he com-
laincd of the averſion of the Proteſtants for him,
and for thoſe whom he employed in affairs of
ſtite, uſed ſometimes to lay, that they deſerved
to be deprived of their penſions, offices, and go-
vernments. Iheſe words were reported to the
allembly, as proceeding from a fixed reſolution,
and were conſtrued into a poſitive declaration.

As I was not ignorant from what ſource thoſe
invenomed allegations proceeded, atter having
repreſented the falichood of them, I reſolutely
oppoſed their making any demands in this aſlem—
bly. in the name, or on the part of Bouillon,
Leidiguieres, and Du-Pleſſis; nor would 1 ſuffer

| any perſon to peak there, but thoſe that had a

claim to that privilege, by their quality of depu-

| tics ſrom the provinces, I cauſed it to be private-

ly intimated to Du-Pleſſis, that 1 left it to his

choice,

© #4" 2A gle? '
r
4 e —

68 ME MOI R S Book XXII.
choice, either to ſtay voluntarily from the aſſem. 3
bly at Chatelleraut, or to come there as a mere
ſpectator, and as a private man. This mortified Þ
him extremely; but he took the firſt part, either | #
becauſe, deſpairing of ſucceſs, he was willing to | 3
avoid the blame of any reſolutions taken in his | Ml
abſence, although contrary to all his ſchemes, or | #
becauſe he promiſed himſelf a remedy, or per. | 4
haps a revenge, by procuring an inſurrection in |
the aſſembly in his favour. In effect, he ſo fixed |
the deputies from Dauphiny in his intereſt, that | e
they cried out, nothing could be done without ft
him. But I took my meaſures ſo well, thati | *&
made the preſence of Du-Pleſlis as unneceſſary as |
that of Bouillon. I expected no leſs than ſuch an | f.
inſtance of reſentment from Du-Pleſſis: but that U
Leſdiguieres ſhould debaſe himſelf fo far, as to | de
act, by his emiſſaries, the part of a clamourer, in F ®
favour of a man ſo juſtly in diſgrace with his Ma- ot
jeſty ; he who lately had received a diſtinguiſhing | f.
favour for Crequy, his ſon-in-law : this was an in-] ne
ſtance of meauneſs and ingratitude that I could | le
with difficulty pardon in him. On all thele occa | N
fions I ſaw the utility of having taken proper ſteps, | 1
long before the meeting of the aſſembly, to ſe- dc
cure to myſelf the beſt part of the votes. 2

In proportion as I faw my party increaſe in le

ſtrength, I exerted my authority. I cut ſhort al
trifling and ſubtile queſtions; I inſiſted upon ther di

22 to buſineſs, and, above all things, to þ
ok upon every thing which related to the royal it
authority as ſacred. The violation of that was po
what Henry moſt apprehended, and indeed his th
fears were not wholly groundleſs. It will be an e. 2
1.

ternal ſtain upon the reputations of Bouillon, Du-
Pleſſis, 1'Aubigne, Conſtant, Saint-Germain, and de
ſome others, more eſpecially Leſdiguieres, that pl:
they ſet their hands to a paper, the ot -

whic

-
BET
" 1 & 1

*

Shich has been but too well proved, wherein they
Jay the foundation of a Calviniſt republic, free and

* Abſolutely independent of the ſovereign, in the

Heart of France. Theſe expreſſions, indeed, are
not uſed in the writing; they ſeem to have indu-
ſtriouſly avoided them; but expreſſions are of no

- onſequence where the thing is plainly meant,

And J aſk thoſe very perſons, what was to be un-
derſtood by the eſtabliſhment of a body, the
leaders of which were as cloſely connected with
each other, as ſeparated from every one elſe, and
from the provincial councils, to which the ſupreme
general council gives laws? What was meant by
the aſſiſtance they there endeavoured to procure
from foreign powers, the obligation they impoſed
upon all governors and men in public ofiices, to
take certain oaths which were preſcribed to them,
and, laſtly, by their excluding the Roman Catho-
lics, and officers particularly attached to the King,
from any poſt, diguity, or employment in the
new party? Du-Pleſſis, who had apparently ſome
reaſon to be apprehenſive of my declaring to his
Majeſty the part he had in this writing, thought
it neceſſary, when the reſult of the aſſembly ren-
dered the ſcheme ineffectual, not to incur the dan-
ger of being filent upon it; therefore, when he
ſent an ako to the King for not being preſent
at the embßz „ he added a formal diſavowal or
diſclaimer of every thing contained in that paper.
This ſcheme was one of thoſe whoſe execution
it 13 necellary to hinder with as much caution as
poſſible. J was willing, therefore, to know whe-
ther a great part of the Proteſtant body were made
acquainted with it, and continued to adhere to it.
| mentioned it to the deputies, but in general
terms, under the title of an afloczation, and com-
plained of reſerve and diſtruſt, which however I
made them ſenſible was not wholly e ine
ame-

- *
> 's

» M E M OI R s Book Xxnt

blame. Their anſwer was, that if Henry cou
live for ever, the Proteſtants, ſatisfied with hi:
word, would, from that moment, renounce al.
precauijon, refign their cautionary towns, refuse
all offers of aſſiſtance from foreigners, and con.

der all particular regulations for the preſervation}

of their community as uſeleſs ; but that their fean
of finding very different ſentiments in bis ſucccſ.

ſors, obliged them to take meaſures for their owf
ſecurity. This bold conteſſion gave me more plex þ

g O |
ſure than an artful anſwer would have done ; tor

if the allembly had been concerned in the projed,
they would not have confined themſelves to aniwer
only the literal ny of my words, but, ſtruck
with the ſecret reproach contained in them, woul
have endeavoured to juſtify themſelves by repeated
proteſtatious, and an abſolute denial.

I was convinced therefore, that hitherto the
contagion of ſeditious diſcourſe and wicked ex-
amples had ſpread no farther than thoſe 11x or
feven perſons whom I have named. But it was not
fo cafy to make Henry believe this, or to remove
his apprehenſions that the evil would ſoon become
general; he ſuffered himſelf to be greatly affected
with that blind facility with which the populace
received every Impreſſion given them by tho
whoin they looked upon as their leaders and de-
fenders, and the fatal conſequence which might
enſue from it, if, unfortunately for France, be
ſhould die while the Dauphin was yet a child. He
ſometimes told me, that, on this occaſion, m.
particular intereſt was ſtrongly connected with that
of the public, as being one of the chief officers 0
the crown, and appointed Lieutenant to the com.
pany of his ſecond fon, if Cod ſhould give him
one, as it ſoon after happened. But all things
conlidered, what could Bouillon wandering and
deſpiſed, Du-Pleſſis with his pen, Conſtant and

s D'Aubigte

* 0

*
©
I f
£Y
*
2

gre

_
. ©
: *
Fa
' N *
2

DF 3-0 VL 1. xi 71
'Aubigne with their tongues, be capable of do-

3 ng againſt an authority ſo ſolidly eſtabliſhed, as
hat which Henry was at preſent in a condition to
Jcave to his ſon? The uncertainty of the royal

ucceflion had always been, in my opinion, almoſt
the only danger he had to fear.

1 mentioned this affair to the deputies of the
allembly as opportunities offered, without poſtpo-

ping the principal one which I had brought firſt

upon the carpet, which was, the nomination of

the particular deputies. The Proteſtants claimed
a right to nominate theſe deputies themſelves, al-
ledging that his Majeſty was not concerned in it:
but I convinced them of their miſtake, by repre-
ſenting to them, that his Majeſty, as King, ought
to bave the principal part in an affair aich had
ſo neceſlary an influence upon order and tranquilli-
ty, and was ſo cloſely connected with the civil go-

vernment, that, upon the character of the depu—
tics who were choſen, depended, in great meaſure,

the good or bad intelligence between the two reli-

gions; and this I {npported by an cxample drawn

from the thing itſelf, which was, the artful and

diſingenuous conduct of ſome of thole who had for-

merly been 1n that office,

To decide this difference of opinions, I propoſed
that the aſlembly ſhould confine themſelves to a cer-
tam number of perſons proper for this office, out

of whom the King fhould chuſe two; and, not-
withſtanding the repugnance I perceived they had

ſtill to this expedient, I did not deſpair of getting
it approved, as I had very conſiderable gratuities
to diſpoſe of to thoſe who acted conformable to his
Majeſty's intentions. But here Henry was very
near raiſing an obſtacle, without intending it. He
lad judged, by the unanimous oppoſition the aſſem-
dly made to this point, that I ſhould never be able
to carry it; therefore he wrote to me to —

at

1

72 MEM OI RS Book xX e
that the two deputies ſhould he propoſed, ani Wo
choſen in concert by him and the Proteſtants; ; 0
conceſhon which ouly increaſed the obſtinacy d t.
the aſſembly. For whether his Majeſty declarel K.
publicly the contents of his letters, or that tho{t}
to whom he confided them did not keep his ſecret,
all the intentions of this prince were as ſoon and“
as perfectly known in the aſſembly, as in the coun.
cil itſelf. Villeroi ſent me notice of it, but || ke
knew it before: for this cauſe, I inſiſted tha Fee
Sillery and he ſhould always write to me with their ÞÞ'
own hands; a precaution which I obſerved mz.þ pat
ſelf, and was ſometimes ſo much fatigued by i, Þ 3
that I was obliged to refer them both to the lettenÞ Yu.
I wrote to his Majeſty, which I took care after. Þ Pu!
wards to burn. However, I carried my point n Pc:
the aſſembly; ſix perſons were to be propoſed uf ti
his Majcſty, out of whom he was to chuſe the tuo &vi
deputies. And I likewiſe managed it fo, as that .

„

in theſe ſix there ſhould not be one who had giver
any public marks of diſobedience or mutiny, #1
Henry looked upon this ſucceſs as one of the mot No
important ſervices I was capable of doing for him, V

Some of the deputies addreſſed for the creation Fn
of a third deputy, and this deputy to be always kon
one of the Proteſtant miniſters. It was faid, tin L.
Berault uſed his utmoſt endeavours to obtain thi
office, and intended to come to the aſſembly for {Wl
that purpoſe, though he was not one of the pro- Bel
vinctal deputies. He had alſo, it was confident!y
aſſerted, many ſchemes to accomplith, eſpecially
in favour of the Duke of Bouillon; and he was the
perſon who prevailed upon the aſſembly at Maure-
fin , to write to the Duke, to aſſure him that
the Proteſtant party in France had ſtill, in all
their proceedings, an eye to his perſon and inter
eſt. However, Berault, bold as he was, du

| * * In Armagnac. =

not

ik: OO $O0ELW $4

ni Pot fſhew himſelf upon this occaſion, and the pro-
„ Soſa! was abſolutely rejected; as was likewiſe an-
of Fther, which three or four perſons ventured to of-
rel r, that the Proteſtant party ſhould chuſe deputies

oe! Wemlelves, which were not to reſide near the
er King, but in ſome parts of the chief provinces in
ini} ne kingdom, and correſpond immediately with the
un. YQcpuries-general at court. If this ſcheme had ta-
iI ken place, there would have been a neceſſity for
hab Fedoubling our attention to the conduct of theſe
dei Jubordinate deputies: but it was only a guſt of
my. q aſſon, which I eaſily diſpelled.

# His Majeſty never made any objection to the
ten! Fuality of the deputies, provided they had the re-
ter putation of being men of probity and lovers of
rn Þcace ; and upon this, he carefully avoided every
| oÞÞ King that had the appearance of conſtraint, as was
to Evident when it was debated whether governors of
tha ſortreſſes might be appointed deputies; the King
ven Ficlded to the arguments urged by the aſſembly for
inv. he negative; as he did alſo on the ſubject of La-
not! Noé and Du-Coudrai, whom the Proteſtants
m. {ould not have put in the liſt, alledging the ab-
tion Fence of the firſt, and the employment of the ſe-
vas tond; however, they all afterwards agreed upon
tha La-Noue. As for me, I pave my vote for exclu-
fing Saint-Germain, notwithſtanding the extreme
Welire they ſhewed to have him continued with
Pellujon as his coadjutor. The King neither ap—

pro. 6
otly roved of the latter, nor even of Coudrat z but
ally reing willing to ſhew ſome reſpect for Leſdiguieres,
the e was inclined to chuſe the deputy from the pro-

Muce of Dauphiné. Des-Bordes and Marabat were
Ao propoſed 3 his Majeſty had a long time wiſhed
o do ſomething for Marabat, although I aſſured
um he was one of Bouillon's creatures; but he
altered his intention, when Marabat, by 1mpru-
pently ſending his two children to the Duke of
Vox. IV. I Bouillon,

7 MEMOIR s Book Xx
Bouillon, leſt him no room to doubt of the tru

of my aſſertions; and this alone was ſufficient u

exclude him from the deputation. Of all thy
were propoled for this office, there was not on!
who ſo much merited to have all the votes in hiF q
favour, as an advocate of Caſtres, named La-D:#
veſe : but the reputation he had juſtly acquired q
virtue and impartiality, was alone ſufficient to ren}

der him obnoxious to his brethren ; he gained ns.
thing but the honour of having merited the conf:

dence of his king, who wrote him a letter, whic
I delivered to him with the utmoſt ſecreſy, leſt i

Would entirely ruin him in the opinions of the
Proteſtants. When I became better acquaintel
with him, I looked upon him as a man, whok
knowledge and abilities might be of great ule t
me. The remainder of July was ſpent in propoſing,
chuling, rejecting, or approving ſeveral candidates

nc anal

The choice of the deputies continued to be de

bated with the ſame heat, during the firſt part d
the following month. The aſſembly renevel
their ſolicitations in favour of Saint-Germain and
ſeveral others, to whom Henry would have even

preferred Marabat; but as a detail of theſe dill

pou is not ſofficiently intereſting to deſerve any

onger lime ſhould be taken up with it, I ſhall co.

clude it at once, by ſaying, that La-Noue having
promiſed his Majeſty by Roquelaure and me, tha
he would break with the Duke of Bouillon, and
recall his children from Sedan, the King choſe hin
out of the three perſons propoſed for the nobility,
and for the clergy Du Cros, wha had Leſdiguiere
to ſolicit for him. This choice, which was ver
agreeable to Henry, and highly praiſed by |
miniſters themſelves, was made very feaſonab]y t0
{top the mouths of ſome flanderers, who reported
that the King, after receiving a letter ſrom me,
appeared ſo greatly enraged, that it was

il

om 4 .
VII by

ut!
t u
hat
Ole,

hf

De

Wl

"Ell.
110.

nf.
Nel

ſt tf

the
Let
10k
CY
ing,
te;
de.
t ol
Wel
and
ven
dif
any
(on.
ving
tha
and
him
lity,
1eres
very
bis
Y to
wed
me,
dent

5

>

0 5-

oO FF S8 UL LY; 75

deſign did not ſucceed well under my manage-

Went. A trifling anonymous letter was the me-
od uſed to propagate this ſtory. In my anſwer

& Villeroi, who ſeut me a copy of it, I told him,

at there were no perlons who gave ſo little cre-

Ir to this report as thoſe who ſpread it.

As to the ſucceſs of this affair, the glory of
ich was attributed entirely to me, without af.
ating a miſplaced modeſty, | ſhall freely own

pat 1 accomplithed my defigns, by convincing the

Peateſt part of the Proteſtant body, that they

might ſafely rely upon Henry's intentions and ſen-
ments with reſpect to them, for the preſervation

heir perſons and eſtates; and that thoſe few

Ramples of ſeverity, or rather juſtice, which they

pmplained of, were greatly diſproportionate to the
juries he had received from them. I would not

ave it imagined, that, by ſpeaking in this man-
er, I gave the Proteſtants the leaſt hint of thoſe
vourable deſigns for the party which Henry at
hat time entertained: To ſerve a prince at the
Spence of his ſecret, 1s to betray him. I was
% particularly cautious upon this article with

Ws Majeſty's miniſters ; and I don't know that I

Fer mentioned it in any of thoſe letters 1 wrote to

Henry himſelf, except one, in which I made ſome

Elections upon the embally to England, that were
eceſſaſy to the ſubjeR I wrote upon. However, I

neſtly intreated him to burn that letter, leſt

We ſame accident ihould happen to it as he knew

Jad befallen ſome of the reſt.

[What gave his Majeſty moſt cauſe for com-
amt in the affair of the deputies, was, that his
tention of appointing them himſelf, in the man-
er we have juſt ſeen, being ſignified to the afſem-
ly, ſeven Proteſtant provinces met together, and
it to conſult Du- Pleſſis upon this reſolution, a
Wit which Henry, with good reaſon, a-tributed:

4 ro

under conſideration. Although the term of eight

2 N E M O I R $ Book xX

to Conſtant and D*Aubigne. The laſt requel
which was made by the Proteſtants on this ſubjcd
was, that the duration of the deputies attendance
about his Majeſty ſhould be regulated by them, and
be expreſſed in the King's warrant for the election,
or at lcaſt in the act of election itſelf. Had thi,
been granted, there would have been a neceſſity
tor renewing this ceremony every year, and 0
calling an aſſembly for that purpoſe. ITheſe ver
motives induced the King to refuſe it, for which}
had already prepared them. At length they ref
ceived the warrant as it ſtood, but not without fe.
veral times reſuming the debate.

The affair of the cautionary towns came neu

* 1

0

years, expreſſed in the warrant of Auguſt 1598,
given in conſequence of the edict of Nantes, wanted
yet a year of being expired, yet it was neceſſary
to bring it upon the carpet this year, to avoid
giving the Proteſtant party a pretence for holding
an aſlembly the next. It is certain, however, that
it would not have been propoſed at Chatelleraut,
on any other terms than to have this matter let
entirely to the King, without requiring a promie
for three or four years, or a new warrant from bs FT.
Majeſty, had not the atſembly been informed, ng
the ſaine way I have juſt mentioned, not only tha
they might expect every reaſonable indulgence
trom Henry, but alſo that J had actually at tha
Line in my poſſeſſion a warrant from his Majelty
for three years, and another for four. And 1t
was upon this account, that the King found him.
{elf obliged to grant them a prolongation for four
years. It may be alledged, that a year more ct
jeſs was a very inconſiderable matter; and indect
Henry had no other view in laying a ſtreſs upon
it, than to accuſtom them not to obtain whatevel

they ſhould take it into their heads to demand, and
| 19

b f '3'v Liv. >

vel be contented with thoſe favours he voluntarily
TY anted them. As for what remained, there was
ict ching more certain than what I had ſaid to them
zue, the beginning of my ſpeech to the aſſembly
"> n regard to thoſe forts. Henry permitted me
— inform the deputies, that it was at my ſolicitation

| rranted them this favour. | |
(9 | The two queſtions of the greateſt importance

„ah Finz decided, the aſſembly might be reckoned at
cl] end. But, as there were alterations to be
ae in the warrants, of which I was the bearer,
die s Majeſty would allo have an article added, by
ich be declared, that the firſt eight years were
"© g commence from the day on which the edi& of
Nn antes was regiſtered in the parliaments. Some
5955 ie therefore was taken up in compoſing theſe
Na o brevets, and ſending them to Chätelleraut.

About this time the affair of Orange grade noiſe

vo ough to afford a ſubje for public diſcourſe. In
* der to reſtore this place to the Prince of Orange
tat lawful maſter,” it was neceſſary to withdraw
— WÞ$accons *, who held it fur the Proteſtants ; and
boy ere the King made uſe of Lefdiguicres, but fo
11

u aſouably, that I believe all the difficulties
"WS bich were found in the management of this

2 ſtair, owed their riſe to this choice. Any one
_ Leſdiguieres, whom Blaccons had: reaſon to-
ha unk tis mortal enemy, might have eaſily effected
eſt Blaccons, who had long expected orders 10
4's ave Orange, wrote to me, that nothing could
bim MF Eval un him to neglect obeying his Majcſty's
tour eamands immediateiy, but the mortification aud
* Eggrace of being obliged to yield his poſt to a
dee a io would make that ceremony an occaſion
;pou p! wumph over him. In my anſwer to this offi-
cer, chought I was intitled to give him hopes that:
and

Hector de La-Fortt: de Blaccons.
3 his

78 M E M O f R Ss Book XXII. Z

his Majeſty would alleviate the bitterneſs of thi;
order; and I flattered myſelf, that if I had been u
court, the affair would have been terminated o.
therwiſe; but Henry did not write to me on tle:
ſubject, till he had ſent Boullion and Bellujon with}
the orders to Leſdiguieres, of which he informetÞ 2
me in his letter, and at the ſame time deſircdIÞ
would fend the neceſſary orders for carrying ſome
cannon towards Orange. I ſuſpected what ha
happened when I received this letter, and inſtant}
acquainted the King with what I knew of Blac
cons ſentiments. I adviſed, I even intreated his
Majeſty to fend only an exempt of his guards u
Orange upon this occaſion, and not thus to {et uf
Leſdiguteres againſt his enemy. 1
My advice came too late; Leſdigujeres, making av
uſe of the power the King had given him, liſten
to nothing but his hatred of Blaccons, and in u t!
imperious manner knitted his Majeſty's 0: ders e
the governor and inhabitants to deliver up the tl
place to him, addipg, of himſelf, that if he did rf
obey them, he would give the King notice of ih:
immediately. In the mean time, he wrote to h
Majeſty, on the 24th of July, that he need not be b.
under any apprehenſions, becauſe he knew how e Ty
reduce the governor of Orange, without railing l
any commotions in the province, May it not be Jin
ſaid, that Le{diguieres was afraid he ſhould not fu ic:
reſiſtance enough? Blaccons, who did not exped m
ſuch an inſult, inſtantly diſpatched two couriers, Wi
one after another, to the King, to aſſure him, tha .
he was ready to reſign the place to any perſon ht
Majeſty thought proper, even although he were to!
a Catholic. His views, by taking this ſtep, were, Miſc
to prevail upon the King to alter bis reſolution of Wiſe:
ſending Leſdiguieres, by the advice of thoſe whol WW"!
intereſt with his Majeſty he relied upon, and on
ſuſpend Leſdiguieres's march, who he did not on pa
| wos

— - = 2 2
re,, ,, pry

_ —_ 4
"IM
Il, : 0

bu
1
0.
tle}
'1thÞ
nel

du

violent counſels that were ſuggeſted to him, would:
not proceed ſuddenly to extremities with Blaccons.
He anſwered him, by ſending an exempt of his
guards to bim, who was a Proteſtant, and three
wor four archers of the guard, who . to him,

)me
had
ntly
Lace

by

to
t up

Ning
encd

n 08

8 00
the
| NO!
of 1:
0 *
t be
W [0
ling
t be

find
Kped

riers,
that
n his
welt
were,
on dl
whoſe
nd to
doubt
wobl

ſure he ſhould put the place as a de po
Hands of the exempt, and come himſelf to court,
where he might depend upon receiving from his.
ev. the moſt honourable treatment, and all

605. O F

in mim as ſoonb a8

S Lr F. „ 2
ſible. Blaccons

ad more enemies at court than friends; they
Fhought this procedure an indication of fear, and
Fhat it ſhe wed aſtrong diſpolition to rebellion ; and
hey inſpired Henry with the ſame opinion, which
as certainly ſaid entirely without proof.

The King, however, notwithſtanding all the

hat, till further orders, it was his

gelte plea-

t into the

the ſatisfaction he could deſire. Henry at the
ame time ordered Boullion to tell Leſdiguieres,
hat, if Blaccons ſubmitted to this laſt order, he

was to ſtay peaceably at Grenoble, and was not to,
hape recourſe to force, but in caſe the governor
Ziovld refufe to obey. For this purpoſe, he ſent

bim commiſſions to raiſe ten companies, conſiſting:
of one hundred men each; to make uſe likewiſe

of five companies of Du-Bourg's regiment, and to
Wincreaſe chem from ſixty to two hundred men, and

(cannon in proportion. All theſe preparations were

made in conſequence of the courtiers perſuading

his Majeſty, that Blaccons would not ſubmit to

bis propolal. Leſdiguicres, who had already ſent

the King word, that the cannon of his province
gol Dauphine had no carriages, deffred ſome might
be ſent to him; or rather, becauſe that would
take up too much time, that he ſhould, be furniſhed
with cannon from the arſenal of Lyons, which
might be eaſily ſent down the Rhone. It was ap-
parent, that he had no 1nclination to {trip his own

f fortreſſes.

|
|

Juſtice on his fide; ſo that the late of affairs wa WF

© MEMOTR S Book XXII.
fortreſſes of their warlike ſtores. Accordingly the
King wrote to me'to ſend orders to the Licite. oF
nant-General of the artillery of Lyonnois ard FF
Dauphiué, conformable ro the demands of Leſdi-
gp It muſt be confeſſed, that tle King, in
us, tranſactions with the. Proteſtants, took ſuch
meaſures as might make it appear to them, that Þ
he was wholly guided by juſtice and moderat:on, | F;
Bur I could not approve of theſe extraordinary Þ2
preparations, nor this needlelſs expence ; therclorc, |
though I paid al] the reſpect I ought to do to the
orders his Majeſty gave me, yet I thought jt wy
duty to oppole the deſires of Leſdiguieres, cſpe-
clally in what related to the cannon of Lyons,
which ſcemed to he much better in that city thay
m any one of Dauphine.

It appears ſtrange to me, that Henry ſhould be
ſo long without perceiving that Le{diguieres on
fought to be authoilied in puriving, with the ut
moſt rigour, a man againſt whom he had ay il.
will. He did many things of his own autho:ity,
as ſoon as he thought he had ſome appearance of WY |

6— td

uite altered before his Majeſty's couriers arrived
e was already at the head of a body of troops, Wh,
within two leagues of Orange, from whence be
haughtily ſummoned Blaccons to receive hin jute [
the city. Boullion, when he returned from Da-
Eurer endeavoured to juſtify Leſdiguicies for u. Wh,
ing this precipitate ſtep, (to call it no woch
faying, that he did it with an intention to begin
immediately to make proper regulations iu tie
caſtle, to diſband part of the garriſon, and ſend
away ſome ſoldiers levied by the officers of te
Prince of Orange. It was not indeed ſurpriſing,
that Leſdiguieres ſhould thus exceed his comma
fion ; Blaccons no longer viewing him in any other
light, than as an enemy who proſecuted his one
particu

„ OF $UEL „. 97
Articular quarrel with him, gave him ſuch an an-

Per as obliged him to retire in ſome diſorder to.
0 Montelimart. Leſdiguieres, fired with reſentment
5 t the diſgrace this retreat brought upon bim, ob-
| &rved no regard: to truth in the letters he wrote

P bis Mijeſty to inform him of all that had paſſed,
cut accuſcd Blaccons of every thing his rage could:
Sogelt. Blaccons likewiſe {ent a courier to his
jeſty, with complaints againſt Leſdiguieres. He
Kccuſcd him with having for a long time ſought to
bake himſelf maſter of Orange, by means of a
| prreſpondence he carried on with a miniſter na-
"/Þ Þed Maurice. The friends of Le{diguicres re-

© | Þrted this crime upon Blaccons, which they faid;
">| icy could prove by a letter he had written to his.
2 brother-in-law, at the very time that he was ma-

ing proteſtations of obedience to the King; and

wat while he ſent a polite meſſage to Leſdi-
eres, alluring him he was ready to receive bim
1 b the city, he was forming reſolutions directly
"| fontrary. I would not anſwer for the truth of Cl»

„der of theſe acculations.

A | However that may be, the aſlembly of Chätelle-
i was dilſolved, While this diſpute retarded the
e $onclufion of the affair of Orange, the arrival of

* e two warrants, which his Majeſty had ordered
1 mo to ſend me, gave great ſatisfaction to the al-

100 WEcmbly, They were dated Auguſt the 4th 1605,
A k appeared, by their tenor, that the King grant-
WW them to the Proteſtants as a favour which

aht ro confirm them in the reſpect and fide-
g they owed him. When I delivered them to

8 e allembly, I declared that it was his Majeſty's
2 eaſure they ſhould break up, after firſt hearing
em me the King's laſt intentions, that the peo»
ling ie might be no longer kept in ſuſpenſe in the pro-
05 Iuces, where I was ſenſible the different reports

Pucerwng the reſult of the aſlembly, gave occaſion.

one for

cual

2 MEM OI R Ss Book XXI. YG

for commotions equal to thoſe when two parties are
ready to come to blows. I injoined the deputics, Þ

when they returned to their previnces, to give a
ſincere and candid repreſentation of the manner in
which the King and his miniſters had acted and
treated with them; and carefully to avoid that ar.
rogant behaviour, and that propenſity to flander,
which they had ſhewn in the allembly of Gap. |
made a recapitulation of all the King's orders and

demands, and juſtified each. I prevented their |
compoſing, in their receſs, a new memorial of de.
mands; and, in the King's name, expreſsly for.

bade them to call any general aſlembly without

permiſſion. I told them, that his Majeſty would
never refuſe them that favour when the occaſion

Fequired it; but I made them ſenſible, at the fame

time, that they muſt not expect them to be 6

frequent for the future as they had been. I for.
got not to add, that Henry did not thereby intend
to prejudice in any manner their right of holding
their ordinary conferences and {ynods, confined
merely to affairs of religion ; and I concluded with
repeating my prohibition to them, to hold any cor-
reſpondence with perſons ſuſpected by his Majeſty.
I was entirely ſatisfied with the inclinations I per-
ceived in them; and was not deceived in my con-
jecture, that the aſſembly would propoſe to fend
a deputation to his Majeſty, to thank him for the

my I

6

* EEE » TR

indulgence he had ſhewn them, and to affure bin

of their inviolable reſpect. They were defirow
of firſt knowing, whether this ſtep would be agree.

able to his Majeſty ; and the anſwer they received Þ

being ſuch as they wilthed, the deputies appointed
for that purpoſe ſet out for Paris io execute the
commiſſion.

I left Chatelleraut the ſame day that the aſlen-
bly broke up, the King having ordered Sille!)

to acquaint me that 1 might do ſo; and having
Oltch

"==
= I
*

:

"NF
* .

- *
1505.
1

ner LY; 83

often in his letters expreſſed his wiſhes for my re-

e
turn, and how neceſlary my preſence was to him
Jin the affairs of his council. This prince graciouſly
n rote me once more, purely to praiſe and thank
dme for the ſervice which he ſaid I had done him.
But however ſolicitous he appeared for my return,
r, | Jet he gave me permiſſion to viſit my eſtate in
| | Berry, which I did not then think proper to do, be-
d cauſe I would ſuffer more buſineſs to accummulate
ir | than I was able to diſpatch. Such was the itlue of
& | the aſſembly, which had ingroſſed the attention of
Dt. the whole kingdom, When I ſtriftly examined
ut! my own ſentiments concerning it, I found, that
ud dhe deſpair into which my proceedings there had
on | Wrown ſome of my brethren, did not interrupt the
ne | Joy ] felt for my ſucceſs; becauſe I was convinced,
ſo hat I had more effectually ſerved my religion and
or. hem by moderate and peaceable meaſures, than
nd hey could have done by their blind and impetuous
ing | Feal. Du-Pleſſis might poſſibly have felt the force
ned | pf theſe reaſonings in the letter I wrote to him;
nh | Rough my principal view in writing was to ſhew
cor- | dim his errors. He juſtified himſelf in a very ela-
ty, | Porate letter, which he likewiſe ſent to the King,
per- | Wong with mine, to ſhew that he had not left one
con- | pf the heads of my accuſation without a ſatisfying
ſend ſwer.
the Þ I went immediately to give an account of m
him Fgondu&t to the King. His Majeſty when he left
row Monceabox, where he had ſome ſlight fits of the
rree- Þ Rout, had returned to Paris the letter end of july,
-1ved ind from thence went to Saint-Germain to paſs the
inted ] Keginning of Auguſt ; he was there afflicted with
their defluxion which fell upon his cheek and teeth,
t was cured immediately by having his gums
em- nced : this indiſpoſition obliged him to drink the
lle I Waters, and obſerve an exact regimen, which was
aving Es moſt effectual remedy, I found him at Fon-
ole tainebleau,

him, that Leſdiguieres, whoſe troops, forts, mones,

% MEMOTR Ss Book XNA

raineblean, whither he had come from Saint-Ger.| "@
main. He embraced me twice with great tender.
neſs, and permitted my ſecretaries and all my re.
inue to pay their reſpects ts him; and after once
more folding me in his arms, he led me into thi
long gallery of the pine-gardens, where we had iþ
converſation which laſted rwo hours. 9
His Majeſty began it by informing, me of al
the intereſting news he had received from forcion
countries, and afterwards of every thing that hat
paſſed during my abſence, either in the council, in
the affairs of the finances, or in the court, where hi
domeſtic quarrels, which were reſumed with more
violence than ever, made him often wiſh, he {aid
chat I had been with him. He queſtioned me, 1
My turn, upon ſeveral particulars of my journey,
eſpecialy concerning the diſpoſitions the Proteſtant
churches and ſome of the heads of the party whon
he named to me, as l might now have a full Kno
Jedge of them. I gave him great joy by the proche
I brought him of a voluntary ſubmiſſion from that
e which ſecured to him an unavoidable of
edience from every one elſe. I made it plain i

and capacity, were greatly exaggerated, who d
turbed the tranquillity of his maſter, through:
fear that his equivocal conduct would terminate Il
open rebellion, was nevertheleſs ſo weak in ever
reſpect, that if his Majeſty, with an army only d
{ix thouſand men, marched directly to bim with
out ſtopping at any place, he would drive bin
immediately to his laſt intrenchment, where 00
thing could prevent his falling into his hands. At
preſent it was not proper to proceed to ſuch e,
tremities with Leſdiguieres, as he had not yet g.
ven ſufficient cauſe for it. I repreſented to tt
King, that it was now time, and of the ut moſt col
ſequence for the extinction of the rebellion, to ,.

dertibe

05. O F . 85

Ertake ſomething againſt the Duke of Bouillon,
uſing only the precaution of not putting Pro-
ant heutenants into his towns, in the room of
ice} thoſe who were leaving them. 1 engaged my
the] Ford, that there was not one of thole fortreſles
di Which would give us the trouble to raiſe a battery
_F Wainlt it. |
u Theſe conſiderations determined Henry, al-
ae Bough ſtill with a little difficulty, to defer no
nad lnger his pages into the fouthern provinces of
u Fance, which has already been mentioned. His
hu two motives for this journey, and for taking his
107e ' wh through Auvergne and the Limoſin, were to
ſ&zc all the towns belonging to the Duke of Bouil-
u leon, and make ſuch ſevere examples of thoſe who
ney Fre convicted of conſpiring againſt the ſtate, as
tan Pould ſtifle, for the future, all feeds of rebellion.
& to the firſt, he ſent commiſſions to the Duke of

now Wernon for levying three thouſand foot: he add-
rocked a like number to his regiment of guards, and
choc re orders that a ſquadron of eight or nine hun-
lc ed diſciplined companies of houſehold troops and
in u ht horſe, ſhould be got ready to accompany

Wm. As to the ſecond, he propoſed to hold an
Etraordinary court, the decrees of which he de-
ned to have publiſhed, and executed by a cham-
Er of juſtice, which he carried along with him,
Wat nothing might retard the courſe of his juſtice,
Heſe terrible preparations were indeed abſolutely
Ecellary in the provinces, where it ſeemed as if the
ntaglous air of civil broils was concentred, when it
entirely diſſipated every where elſe. This ſtep
Fewiſe was neceſlary to bring the buſineſs of O-

ch ee to a concluſion ; nor could it be made in a
ect g ee favourable time, the affairs of Flanders and
20 hid affording him a reſpite this year, but
t corn might not be of long continuance.

to {+ obſerved to the King, that ſince it was neceſ-

VoL. IV. 1 ſary

— — ry - 8
2 1
2— _ 2 — — — "I

86 MEMOIR S Book XXII.

ſary this journey ſhould be over before the month ©
of October was expired, it ought not to be delay. |
ed a moment longer. Henry ſtill thought I prell. !
ed him too much: however, at length he reſolyved

upon every thing. It was agreed between us,
that his Majeſty ſhould march along the Loire
with his troops, both horſe and foot; while I, with
a train of artillery, conſiſting of two cannons, two
culverins, and two demi-culverius, ſhould march by

 Montrond, which is the direct road. TI left to

Henry's directions every thing that related to the
troops, and returned myſelf to Paris, to ſettle the
affairs of the council with all poſhble expedition,
and to name the members of the chamber of thi
grands jours, or 3 7 ſeſſions extraordinary,
whom it was neceſſary to ſend away firſt.

At court, and in the council, it was ſuppoſed this
journey would terminate in the ſame manner as
that of Provence had done the year before. The
orders which were given for ſo {udden a departure,
in a ſeaſon (till farther advanced, furniſhed the in-
dolent and ſcnſual courtiers with a thouſand new
arguments againſt it; but when they law that
Henry was inflexible, they prepared to follow him,
often curſing the man who they ſuppoſed had gi.
ven him the advice: but it threw the Duke of
Bouillon's partiſans into the utmoſt conſternation,
who had not, as may be eaſily imagined, uſed any
endeavours to divert the ſtorm. La-Chapelle-
Biron, and Giverſac, who were moſt faitlifilly
devoted to him, as having received the moſt Spa-
nith gold, intreated the Sieur de Fouſſac to go to
court, and aſſure his Majeſty that they were ready
to give him any teſtimony of their obedience
which he ſhould require: The people of Turenne
only made any ſhew of reſiſtance. Ripnac and
Baſſiguac threw themſelves into that place, pro-

vided it with ammunition, and lodged all we. ar-
tillery

-

1605. „„ ot Rk Ib 1 87

—

üllery in it upon the platforms. Theſe advices
vere ſent his Majeſty by Fouſſac and Baumeville,
„who diſpatched the Senechal de Brive with
1 14 them; but all this was executed with fo much
terror and diſmay, chat the King, who had given
* | © &Epernon and Roiſſy orders to advance thither be-
fore him with their troops, did not thiuk it necet-
OF fary to ſtrengthen them with the regiment of
) guards, as he had at firlt intended.
OF  Fouthac gave alto ſome other informations, a-
©F grecing with what had been ſaid by Rodelle, con-
: cerning the {tate of the rebellion in the provinces
"| of the Limoſin, Perigord, and Quercy. By him it
k was diſcovered, that the true cauſe why a great
[ many gentlemen did not come and throw them—
IJ elves at his Majeſty's feet, as they had intended,
3 | was, that I Aubagnac had been ſent from Sedan,
do diſſuade them — taking that ſtep; and that
many of them had alſo lately received conſider-
dle ſums of Spaniſh money by the way of Guienne.
- F The Duke of Bouillon, in whoſe name this money
1 was given, recommended it to them, at the ſame
t | time, not to be diſcouraged or alarmed at the pre-
» | parations which were making againſt them, ſince
„be engaged his word to make things take another
f turn are October; and that his friends (thoſe
ly were his terms) ſhould ſee him fooner than they
y hoped, and his enemies ſooner than they deſired.
| fhcle founding words effectually impoſed upon.
y them. Fouſſac, however, aſſured the King, that
6 there had not ceme more than ten or twelve thon--
0 land crowns from Spain. But Bouillon always ſup-
y plying the want of money with confidence, had
© I given them to underſtand, that this ſmall ſum was
IC lent to them to be diſtributed amongſt their ſubal-
4 tern friends, and that other ſums far more conſi-

| derable were reſerved for them. They were ſimple
cnough to believe him, and after this no longer
| TY talked

*» -

88 MEMOIRS Book XN N.
talked of foliciting for a pardon. The King e
dered two hundred crowns to be given to Foul
for the expenſes of his journey, and ſent him bac
to continue on the ſpot.

He left Paris himſelf on the 15th or 16th of Se
tember“, eſcorted by the regiment of guards, ay!
the ſquadron I have already mentioned, and bega
his march towards Orleans, while I took the row: 3
before concerted. He had not got farther th T
Hallier, before he ſaw the good effects of his jo,,
ney. Two gentlemen of Quercy named Care ant
Brigantin, came to meet him at that place to in.
plore a pardon for themſelves, and a hundred an!
twenty other gentlemen; and that they miglt in|
ſome degree merit it, they offered to diſcover, it
a court of juſtice, all that they knew of Bouillon
proceedings, aud maintain the truth of thei
depoſitions with the points of their {word
and at the expenſe of their blood. Theſe two de.
wties revealed likewiſe all the plots of Rignac and]
Raſſgnac, in the Duke of Bouillon's ſavour; «|
mong others that of ſeizing Ville- neuve in Agenois, þ © c
for which Bouillon had not the leaft plauſible pie.
tence. It being at this place that his Majeſty hd!“
firſt received notice of the attempts made by}
D'Entragues, to deliver the Count d' Auvergne f:on
his confinement in the Baſtile, as I have related in :
its proper place; he deſired me to meet him! .
Orleans, which he expected to reach the next day,
being Saturday, September the 24th, adviſing me
to ſend the artillery in the mean time to Argen-
ton, through Sidch place he propoſed to paß.
Theſe orders, however, were not executed, l.

— —
— — ——— — _ = .

—— — — — — -
21. _— "5. _
— — -

r

® In regard to this journey of Henry IV. to the Limoſin, ſce
De Thou, b. 24. the Mercure Frangois, anno 1605, and the origi» WW ©
nal of a letter wrote by Henry IV. to N. de Roſny. Lettres ©
Henry le Grand, |

being

W605:
Scivs impoſſible for me to go to Orleans. His

*

en.

9 1 DLL i414: 89

$1ajeſty approved of my reaſons ; and I gave him
In writing the advice he demanded: of me, which
vas conformable to thoſe meaſures I had always
ſolicited him to purſue with regard to D'Eu-
Jragues. j | |

Kenry arrived at Orleans on the appointed day,

Ind left that city on Monday the 26th of Septem-

per. Ile avoided the road through Berry and So-
Jozne, on account of the ſcarcity. of proviſions in
hat barren country, and the diſeaſes which he was
201d prevailed there. He therefore marched to-
wards Blois, and from thence to Montrichard, a-
gain nn a meeting with me at Loches,
Xxpreſliing an earneſt deſire to confer with me
perſonally upon the preſent ſtate of affairs. Ui-
therto he had. not received any marks of ſubmiſſion
ſrom the Duke of Bouillon; on the contrary, the
raſiſtance of Rignac and Baſſignac in Turenne, and
*Sinceral, was confirmed. From Metz he had ad-
vices, that Bouillon might poſſibly have athftance
*from avother quarter. The Elector Palatine, it
was laid, had, upon the report of the King's expe-
dition, ſent for his colonels and captains, . and the
- governor of Luxemburg was making preparations,
and atlembling forces. D'Epernon inceſſantly
| prelled the King to advance, and.demanded, with
ſome kind of anxiety, officers and proviſions for
the recruits, which he ſaid he had raiſed with great
difficulty. His Majeſty referred this buſineſs to
me, deſiring that 1: would give proper directions
thereupon to D'Eſcures, or the other officers and
inhabitants of thoſe places. And with regard te

Bouillon, he held himſelf prepared for reliltance,
although hitherto he ſaw no appearance of it.

In effect this prince had ſcarce reached Blois,
before. he received a courier from the Duke of
Bouillon, who brought him a letter dated from Se--

bs I 3 dan,

dan, September the 2oth, in which, after makin

his Majeſty, and of his intentions to repair hi
fault at the price of his blood; he declared, thy

he had never entertained the leaſt thought of di.
obeying his orders, or reſiſting his perſon: Thu
he had given an ablolute command to his lieutef

nants to receive him in all his towns and caſtles,

o M E M O If R 8 Bock XX

his uſual proteſtations of grief for having offende z

-

a needleſs order, he added, ſince there was not one]

perſon belonging to him who did not look upon hi
Majeſty as his ſovereign maſter : That he deſirel
nothing more ardently than to have brought hin

the keys himſelf, and, with the utmoſt humility,

implore to be again received into his favour. The
King appeared fatished with this procedure 0

Bouillon. However, he repreſented to him, tha;

he onght to have {ent Rignac and Baſhgnac, .
2 whom ſuch heavy crimes were alledged, to

ave juſtified their conduct perſonally. BlancharlF

was the man whom Henry was moft defirous df
ſeeing, as there was no perſon in the world who
had a greater ſhare of Bouillon's confidence, be
being his ſteward, or was better acquainted wich
the ſteps of the whole party; but he did not 4.

pear. Henry therefore thought he ought not o,

. diſcontinue his march, at leaſt till he came to
Limoges, that he might fee how far the Duke d
Bouillon's heutenants would carry their obedience.
However, Blanchard arrived at Blois before Js
Majeſty left that city; and what added to the
King's ſatisfaction, he came voluntarily, and witl
an intention to obtain his pardon, by making ?
faithful confeſſion of all he knew,

In effect, Blanchard unfolded the whole myſter}
of the plot. He acknowledged, that, ſecond!!!
with all his power the bad intentions of the Dube
his maſter, he had been always obliged to hate
recourſe to the mean artifice of 2 facts

enlarging

A
p.

&nlarging views, and making promiſes a thouſand
times greater than he well knew could ever be
perſormed; ſo that the execution of their deſigns
Had always been as remote, as they had affected to
Hay it was near. Blanchard's depoſition appeared to
His Majeſty to be of ſuch conſequence, that he or-
dered him to give it him in writing. And now he
began to be convinced of the juſtneſs of my
opinion, which he had ſo long oppoſed, namely,
that the Duke of Bouillon's party made all this
noiſe, only becauſe they could do nothing more.
Notwithſtanding this, Henry would neither ſtop
vor lay down his arme, till his will was complied
with without any reſtriction. It was reported to
him, as ſaid among the Proteſtants, that the places
the Duke of Bouillon poſſeſſed did not belong to
him, but to the whole party, having been given
as cautionary towns, and held as ſuch by officers of

the reformed 1eligion. He feared therefore that

he might make ule of this pretence to keep them,
and thought it the ſecureſt way not to diſband his
troops, till Villepion, whom he had appointed to
take poſſeſſion of Turenne in his name, had been
[received into that capital of Bouillon's. I had

ritten to La-Caillavdiere that he might diſband
the cavalry, His Majeſty made me recall that or-

der, and, in the beginning of October, left Blois,

and proceeded to 'I ours, having again altered his
; deſign of marching through Montrichard and
Loches,

The conveniency of the river and caftle of
Pleſſis, determined the Queen, who had attended
his Majeſty to Blois, to proceed to Tours. he
King, when he communicated to me this new al-

teration of his march, wrote me, that as ſoon as
this princeſs had left him to return to Paris, he
would continue his route through La-Haye as far
| 3 Chatelleraut, where I had appoiutcd to meet
| him.

92 MEMOIRS Book XXII. q

him. As faſt as his Majeſty advanced, all difficul. |
ties fell before him: Villepion was received with. |
out the leaſt diſturbance into Turenne ; and before |
Heury reached Limoges, all the other towus de.

pending on the Duke of Bouillon, were yielded in
the fame manner to the officers his Majeſty len
thither to repreſent his perſon. All this was con.
formable to the Duke's example, who continued
to declare loudly, that he had no hand, in the
commotions of the province, and that he had becn
| accuſed through mere calumny. Baſſignac diſtin.
uiihed himſelf by his obſtinacy; for, cutting his
— and diſguiſing himſelf, he fled through Ge.
neva to Sedan. 15 145 |
Nothing more remaining tobedone by arms, the
chamber the grands jours,or general ſeſſions extruor
dinary, began the exerciſe of its office. The King
would not ſtay for the concluſion; he was weary
of Limoges, after a ſtay of eight days there, and
rode poſt to Paris. He left me in this province,
inveſted with his authority, as well in criminal
matters as for di ſbauding the troops, which kept
me ten days after him. We went back to tht
ſource of the rebellion, by cadeavouring to d.
cover the firſt authors of it; and fo fucccifil
were our inquiries, and the effects of them, tha
all remained peaceable for the future. It was
thought ſufficient to behead ten or twelve of the
moſt active of the rebels; among whom, thole of
greateſt note were the two Luquilles, gentlemen
of Languedoc, who have been already mentioned;
and“ Meirargues, a kinſman of the Joyeuſes; the
| latter

Lewis d'Alagon, or rather Lagonia, Baron of Mecirargues,
was arreſted at Paris, in the monalte:y of Saint Germain, togt-
ther with the Spaniſh ambaſſador's ſecretary, and beheaded on the
19th of December; his body was quartered, and fixed. over the

principal gates of the city, and his head was carricd to 3
| whe

n.
1cd
the
cen
tin.
bus
Ge⸗

the
107-
ing
tary
and
nce,
una!
kept
the
Wikis
Skil
that
3s
F the
le of
emen
oed;
the

latter

argues,
, kose
| on the
ver the
ir (called,

whe!s

rr - 98

Slatter for having undertaken to ſurrender Mar—
ſeilles to the Spaniards, and the former to Nar—
bonne. I have no reafon to doubt, but that, after
theſe examples of rigour, the hatred of the Pro-
teſtants againſt me was wound up to its utmoſt

pitch, I cannot but complain of this unjuſt pre-

judice, which however did not extend to all.

Theodore Beza was my friend, and his approba-
lion alone was ſufficient to comfort me for the
*cauſcleſs malice of a thouſand others.

This venerable old man, who exerciſed the
function of a miniſter at Geneva, was ſeized with
am illneſs towards the latter end of this year, in
the eighty-feventh year of his age. His diſtemper,
that before the eclipſe * of the tun, which has ren-
dered this year memorable, was but very flight,
grew fatal from that moment, and a few days af-

where it was faſtened on the head of a pike over the chief gate.
The King ordered the Spaniſh ſecretary to be ſet at liberty, with-

out waiting for the determination of the queſtion, at that time

ſtrongly debated, whether it is right to give up to the courſe of
juſtice, an ambaſſador, reſident, or any other foreign miniſter,
who violates the law of nations. MSS. Koyoux, 8477. See allo
the diſcuſſion of this queſtion, and Henry V. 's diſcourſe on this
:occalion to the Spaniſh ambaſſador, Mem. de Nevers, vol 2.
p. 858. Matthieu, vol. z. book 3. p 689. and other hiſtorians.

* This ecliple happened on the 2d of october, according to M.

de Thou, and on the zd, according to the Mercure Frangois, at

one o clock in. the afternoon ; it contivued two hours, and for
| half an hour it was as dark as poſſible. Le Grain fays, that for
an hour and an holt, one could not, without difficulty, read or
E write without a candle. L'Etoile was freer than M. de Sully
© from the popular prejudices, in regard to eclipſ's: “ Many
> ſtrange maladies of diflerent kinds,” ſays he, © raged in Paris at
that time; and, together with the celipft, which happened on the
> 2dof this month, celipſed many perſons who have never been ſeen
ſince. Dy ſenter ies, eſpecially, were very dangerous and mor-
„tal to thoſe who happened to be attacked by them, and wore
in other places than at Paris; few of them eſcaping.” Anno

1 The ſame author ſays, that Beza died the day after the
} ap e. :

ter

94 M E M O I R S Book XXII.

ter put a period to his life. He preſerved, till
the laſt moment, the full force and vigour of his
mind, in a body weakened by infirmities and *.
hauſted by age. He ordered his attendants to lik |
him out of his bed, and then, with the utmok |

fervour, he offered up his prayers to God, and in
the moſt earneſt and pathetic manner, exhorted
all thoſe who. were preſent to. a performance of the
duties of religion and holineſs ; after which, be
was again laid in bed, where he expired without
pen, nature being quite worn out in him. He

id not forget me 1n his laſt moments; and think.
ing that he owed me ſome acknowledgment for
the viſit I paid him at Geneva, and the ſervice [
did him, when I preſented him to his Majeſty at
the head of the other deputies from his city,
he deſired Deodari to preſent a book to me in his
name, intitled, A treaſtire of piety. This was the
New Teſtament, tranſlated by him, with notes,
which, together with the other verſions, both an-

cient and modern, formed a complete work. This

he inſcribed to me, and in the epiſtle dedicatory
gave free ſcope to the favourable ſentiments he
entertained of me. Deodati punctually performed
Beza's commands, and in the month of November
ſent me the book, with a letter, from whence theſe
circumſtances are taken.

I ſhall conclude my relation of his Majeſty's
journey with that of a quarrel which happened be-
tween the Count de Soiſſons and me, followed by
another with the Duke d'Epernon. The Count
having taken offence at ſomething which the King
had done or ſaid to him when he left Paris,
thought proper to. revenge himſelf upon me. |
had, as has n obſerved before, left my train of
artillery, to take the direct road to Limoges, tha!

I might meet his Majeſty at Chitelleraur, The
Coun!

ble. 95

ount de Soiſſons ordered his harbinger to go to
the quartermaſters, who were then employed in
marking out the King's lodgment, and alk them
which was reſerved for me, and to take poſſeſſion
of it for him, in ſpite of all oppoſition. This was
not ſo eaſy to be done as ſaid. A great number
of gentlemen of the province, who knew the rights

'of a governor as well as myſelf, being preſent
when the Count's barbinyer was preparing to exe-
cute his orgers, they prevented him, without eveu
acquaimting me with what they had done. The
Count did not fail to complain to the King of this
indignity, which he ſaid his honour was concerned
to reſent; and, as an aggravation, added, that I
had cauſed his harbinger to be beaten.

The King, who knew his humour, gave him
but little ſatisfaction. But the Count made ſo much
noiſe, and aſſerted the fact ſo poſitively, that Hen-
ry ſent D*Eſcures to me to know the truth. All I
knew of the matter, which I told him, was, that,
upon receiving information of what was doing, I
went to the place deſtined for my quarters, we Hue
I found above fifty Poitevin gentlemen, whoall to-

4 þ gerber exclaiming againſt the unjuſtitiable proce-

dure of the Count's harbinger, had at moſt made uſe

y of threats to prevent his going farther. The

Count of Soiſſons ſtill infiſted, that it was an inſult

won him of my contrivance, and demanded juſtice

'* I of the King. He found none to take his part;

by and Henry, by all the arguments he could deviſe,

„ endeavoured to convince him that his complaint

Was groundleſs. He told him, that all governors
have a right in their provinces to take place of

Q „ bow — „„

r
*

.
ps —x

Joey one but the King; and that I, as grand ma-
if ber, had the additional right of claiming the next
vat quarters to the King, when he marched in the
nc bea of the army; therefore it could be no in-

coachment to have only part of thoſe quarters,
| when

N
22
_ -

— —

—— —— moo —_— k — — * —
— — * V
And oy *
*
-

—

my E
— — —— — —

—

9 M E M OI R S Book XXII

when the whole is at the diſpoſal of the grand ma.
ſter ; no one pretending any right, or fixing on any
art of it for himſelf, without my permiſſion ; and
or this reaſon the quartermaſter had put to mine
the accuſtomed mark which ſecures lodgings for
the King; which is theſe words, For the King:
the Count de Soiſſons's harbinger therefore ought
through reſpect to have abſtaincd from meddling
with them.

None of theſe reaſons having any weight with
the Count de Soiſſons, there was a neceſſity that
Henry ſhould think of {ome expedient to fatisfy u
both; and this expedient was, that when I came,
as uſual, to pay my reſpects ro the King, I thould
make my compliments likewiſe to the Count, and
offer him, through mere politeneſs, my quarters;
which the Count, returning my civility, ſhould refuſe.
This was accordingly done, but it was on my part
only; for the Count, making uſe of a mean artifice,
from whence he afterwards derived a ſtill meaner
occaſion for boaſt, ſuffered me to make all theſe
advances, without any return on his fide, and took
poſſeſſion of my quarters, becauſe I could not de-
cently unſay what I had ſaid. But this joy, and
the railleries which enhanced it, laſted no lonyer
than till the next day. |

As he was paſſing through the ſtreet where |
lodged, followed only by two gentlemen, (for he
was going a-hunting along with his Majeſty), he
found the ſtreet filled with gentlemen, to the num-
ber of two hundred, who were waiting allo for me
ready mounted, and who, as ſoon they faw Jin
at a diſtance, crouded together, as if for diverſion,
ſo cloſe, that they left no paſſuge for the Count;
and his equerry, not being able to open him one,
was obliged to cry out, Make way, Gentlemen, male
way for the Count. But they, raiſing their voices

all together, talked ſo loud, and to confuſed
| that

1605. her. 97

that the equerry could not make himſelf heard;
1 Þ ſome of them muttering at the ſame time, that
d it was never Known that a governor of a province
e | was diſpoſſeſſed of his lodgings in a place where
r he repreſented the King's perſon. The Count

vas obliged to wait a quarter of an hour before
It he could get room to paſs ; and for a farther ag-
g *gravation of his misfortune, not one of theſe gen-
*rlemen ſaluted him. This was a new ſubject for
th complaint to the King. His Majeſty told him,
at he was ſorry for what had happened, but could
do nothing for him, ſince he muſt not expe,
e, MW that, in complaiſance to him, he would make in—
14 quiries among four or five hundred gentlemen for
nd {MW the perſons who offended him, when he could
s; point out no particular man; they at the fame
ſe. time ſuppoſing they had ſome right to take this
art T revenge upon him, for an inſult 1njurious to them
ce, all.
ner 1 The Count de Soiſſons found no one to take
ſeſe part in his reſentment but the Duke d'Epernon,

oe ho was luimſelf then violently enraged againſt

de- ne on the following occaſion. The Rochellers
and WF hearing that his Majeſty would pals near their city
ger in his march, ſent a deputation to him of their
chiefeſt citizens, as a mark of their gratitude and

e | {Wrelpet. I was the perſon to whom they applied;
r he Wh therefore the King ordered me to conduct them to
he audience, which he gave them in the preſence of
um- che whole court. They told his Majeſty they
* me WW vere come to intreat he would honour them with
him lis preſence in their city, ſince he was fo near it;
on, Willuring him, that although he was at the head of
unt; Tu army of Catholics, he ſhould not be received
one, WF "ith leſs reſpect and ſubmiſſion, than when he

make N came formerly at the head of the Proteſtant troops;
01ces ad that if their gates were not wide enough io

nit him aud his train, they would throw down
that Vor. IV. K three

gs MEMOIR S Book XXI.

three hundred fathoms of their wall, ſince his re.

11 N bounties had enabled them to rebuild it,
hey then preſented the keys to him, with fuch

ſincere expreſſions of joy and affection, that the |

King was melted even to tears, embraced then
thrice, and afterwards, entering into a familiar
. converſation with them on the times paſt, allired
them, that in him they might always depend upon
finding a protector of their liberty, and a zealon
preſerver of their privileges.

As I was going away at the concluſion of this ce.
remony, I met the Duke d' Epernon, who comin?
to wait upon the King, aſked me what was doing!
and I, without reflecting upon his - queſtion, an.
ſwered it directly. But I was ſurpriſed to ſee, that,
at the recital J made him, his countenance was 6-
verſpread with rage and diſdain; and, a moment
afrer, to bear him afk me, haughtily, whether!
allumed any right in the government of Rochelle!
and by what claim I took upon myſelf to preſent
the deputies from that city to the King? I never
thought it any meanneſs to give my friends ati
faction, in caſes wherein my conduct might appear
doubtful to them. I therefore told him, that l
was in the quality of an ancient friend of that city,
and by his Majeſty's command, that I had preſent-
ed the deputies to him. He replied, with the
lame emotion as at firſt, that Rochelle being con:
prehended in his patent for governor, the King
the Rochellers, and I, had equally injured Jun.
I could not help telling him, that the Rochelle!
would look upon his pretenſions as very fingular;
but that it was from them, or rather from the
King, that he was to deſire an explanation, au
not from me, ſince I had only ated by his Mat
{ty's orders, and without any intention to incroz!
upon any perſon's right.

Saying this, I quitted him coolly, and he *

*

0
.
I
|
-
;
f
U
U
b
a

—_— — 77 TT.

to Henry to tell him the cauſe of his diſcontent.
He returned more diffatisfied than he went, and
all the reſource he had was to mingle his grievan-
ces and complaints with thoſe of the Connt. The
malicious things they ſaid of me on thts occaſion,
of which IT lad convincing proofs, was tlie cauſe
that in a quarrel which happened between D*Eper-
non and Ornano, while'the Kirg was at Limoges,
took part with the latter. This increaſed. D'E-
pernon's rage; and a third diſguſt which he recei-
ved from me, completed our eſtrangement from:
each other. He demanded aſſignments for the
payment of the ammunition-bread, ſurnimed by
the cities and large towns for the ſoldiers he had
levied. I thought it my duty to acquaint the King.
before I complied with this requeſt, who, knowing
as well as myſelf, that this money would remain
in D'Epernon's purte, inſtead of being delivered to
: thoſe to whom it belonged, gave me orders to re-
fuſe him. This was the rock upon which were
* ſplit and deſtroyed our reconciliation, our mutual
promiſes of friendſhip, and all thoſe connections
which had formerly bcen capable of giving um-
brage to the King.
At my return from Limoges, I went to give
his Majeſty an account of the uſe 1 had made of
t that authority with which he had intruſted me.
We had now a longer converſation together, than
at my return from Chatelleraut, and upon the
very ſame ſubject, policy, and the quarrels at court.
I found him this time alſo at Fontainebleau, whi-
ther he had come to paſs the month of Od'ober
and part of November. The Queen was likewiſe
there; the King. and ſhe met as they entered the
court, ſhe in her litter, and he on horſeback, for-
he had rode poſt. He loſt La- Riviere, his firſt
| pliyſician there, whom he greatly regretted. He
| K 2 gave

100 ME M O I R S Book XXII. b

gave his poſt to Du-Laurens “, who was alread
firſt phyſician to the Queen; and looked out forÞþ
another for that princeis. I did not {tay long t!
Fontainebleau; a thouſand different affairs called Jp
me to Paris, where Henry had conſideration e. Tye
nough to leave me a long time, without command. © Ca
ing my attendance on him. do

I have yet mentioned but ſome part of thoſe af.
fairs Queen Margaret had to communicate to me, {c1
in our interview at Cercote. As ſhe propoicd to ca
quit her caſtle at Cfon and reſide in Paris, the was Wit,
deſirous of having my advice upon this occaſion, N co
aud to know if ſhe thould be well received u nc
court; whither it was neceſſary ſhe ſhould go, o | ev
prove that ſhe did nothing without his Majeſty's N
conſent. . I aſſured her, that their Majeſties would he
receive her with the utmoſt reſpect; for I ww mn
well acquainted with their ſentiments in regard to ch
her. A bare aſſurance would not ſatisfy her; (le m
inſiſted upon my engaging my word as a ſecurity, T

which I did without any heſitation; and ſhe, on MW i:
her fide, promiſed to be governed wholly by my 3!
advice. After theſe mutual engagements, we ſe. Wt ©!

parated. I took the road to Chatelleraut, aid WW ©
Margaret that to the caſtle of Madrid, where ſhe Ii
intended to lodge. .

Henry, beſides the inclination he had to oblige e
this princeſs, who well deſerved that he ſhould IF *
contribute to her ſatisfaction, had another reaſon l

a]

* Andrew Du-Laurens was the fourth principal phyſician,

whoſe death Henry IV. had teen ſince his acccfſion to the crow?;
and as he alſo died four years afterwards, Petit a phytfician ct A
Gien, who ſucceeded him, was the fifth. M. de Sully being in- I
tieated to procure Du-Laurens's office for Turquet, one ol tlic 0
phyſicians in ordinary to the King, who was a Proteſtant, an- *
iwered, I have taken an oath never to recommend either 2 phy* 1
fielen or a cook to the King.” U

for 1

nr, wh

For conſenting that ſhe ſhould Teave Ullon “. He
as extremely deſirous of having this old caſtle in
bis own poſſeſſion, as its ſituation, in a very ſu—

I>cacd country, might make it one day a con-

venient retreat for the rebels, as the caſtle of

Carlat had been. The King propoſed. to throw
down this caſtle if it ſhould be judged not worth
preſerving. For this purpoſe, he ordered me to
{end a faithful and intelligent commiſſary to the
caſtle of Uſſon as ſoon as Queen Margaret had left
it, and to give him an exact information of the

condition it was in at preſent, but that he ſhould
not diſcover with what intention he went. How-

ever, La-Varenne, coming ſoon after from Queen
Margaret, declared to Henry that it would give
her great trouble, if the caſtle of Uſſon was de-
molithed ſo ſoon after her departure; upon which
the King wrote to me to defer {ending the com-
millary thither till he had ſeen that princeſs.

This ſecond order would have come too late, if
happily the perſon whom I had refolved to em

ploy, and who was one of the beſt engineers in
the whole body of the artillery, had not been in- -

| Giſpoled, which obliged him to- defer his journey
| tor {ome days. |

The arrival of. Queen Margaret, and the kind

reception Henry prepared to give her, occaſioned

ſome of thoſe idle flanders which the fooliſh popu-

| lace are ſo fond of propagating, The wiſeſt way
being to ſeem ignorant of them, the King made no

alterations in thoſe honours he was refolved to

* She had lived there near twenty years. On her leaving
Agen, from whence ſhe made her eſcape di{ouiſed in the habit ot
n ordinary, citizen, riding behind Lignerac, ſhe went to live a:
Carlat, a caſtle belonging to a gentleman called NMartas. The
Marquis de Canillac carried her off from this caſtle, and ſhut her
wp in the caſtle of Uſſon; which place pleaſed her ſo much, that
lhe fixed her abode there, though the was left at liberty to quit it
vhencver (he thought proper.

—

K. 3 pays

102 MEMOIR S Book XII

pay her. As ſoon as ſhe came to Paris, he ſen |
de Vendome and Roquelaure, to pay his com.

pliments to her, till he could viſit her in perlon, He
for he was then at Monceaux; the Queen alfo ſent f.
Chateauvieux in her name to this princeſs. Ou ec
the 26th of July, Henry went in perſon to viſt Þ *
her, to Bois de Boulogne *, where the then wa, I

having it
ſa
From thence ſhe went to live in the palace of Sens near the t

Ave-Mary : ſhe afterwards hired a palace in the ſuburb of Saint i 1
Germain oppoſite to the Louvre, where ſhe continued till he: |
death. This princeſs has been ſo much abuſed in the libels cf te
that time, that one might be induced to accuſe M. de Snl'y f th
partiality, in the praiſe he every where beſtows on her in his h,
Memoirs, if his teſtimony were not confirmed by our beſt hiſto.
rians. The author of L'hiſtoire de la mere & du fils, on thir cl
authority, ſpeaks of her in the following manner. “ Her de. {y
„ gradation in point of rank, was ſo amply made up by her B
« goodneſs, and the royal virtues ſhe poſſeſſed, as to render ha
« {till greatly reſpected. Like a true heireſs of the illuſtrious WF &'
* houſe of Valois, ſhe never beſtowed a gift on any one, without WW cc
w making an apology for giving ſo little; ſhe was the refuge of BW
„men of letters, loved to hear them talk, her table was conltant-
ly ſurrounded with them, and ſhe learned ſo much from con-
* verſing with them, that ſhe ſpoke better than any woman df th

her time, and wrote more correctly than moſt perſons of her Pt
** ſex are capable of doing. In ſhort, as charity is the queen df h
« all virtues, this great princeſs crowned hers by giving alm P

« which ſhe did with ſo liberal a hand to all who ſtood in need of dn
them, that there was not a religious houſe in Paris which d re
not feel the effects of her bounty, nor one poor perſon who hat fe
recourſe to her that did not meet with reliet ; therefore G

« out of his mercy, repaid her with uſury, for that which ib: WF ©
** ſhewed to his people, giving her grace to make a truly Chriſtian WF m!
„end.“ &c. vol. 1. p 326. This is ſurely ſufficient to com-; for
penſate for a ſinall number of levities and human weakneſſs Wi
which are the utmoſt that ever could be laid to the charge of thi
princeſs. If any one is deſirous of ſeeing further what has been to
written for or againſt her on this head, let him read Meſſieurs

de Thou, Dupleix, Mezerai, Father Daniel, Father Hilarion ve 8
Coſte's elogium of illuſtrious ladies, Baſſhmpierre, M. Bayle' de
e

dictionary under the word Uſſon, and an infinity of other vin.
ters. She died on the 29th of March 1615, at her palace in tht h
Fauxbourg-Saint-Germain, which has ſince been demoliſhed ; te ben
was interred in the church of the reformed Auguſtins, ſince called

- the Little Auguſtins, which had been fouuded by her. She 7 of K
| | ” grea: |

.

1005.

O F SUL L .

103
m having only paſſed through Paris. His Majeſty
vent ar ſeven o' clock in the evening, and return-
n, Jed at ten. This interview paſſed with equal fatil-
an Þ faction on both ſides. The King ſpoke of the
) Þ | caſtle of Uſſon to this princeſs: ſhe conſented to
t * what he propoſed; and, in that whole affair, he
6, never did any thing withour firſt knowing whether
g it would be agreeable to her. On the 28th of the
fame month the came to Paris, to pay her reſpects
the to the Queen, who came to the Louvre to receive
ber. She afterwards, on the 4th of Auguſt, went
to Saint-Germain to ſce the Dauphin, and ſtaid
there four or five days with their Majeſties. Henry
„ bad no greater pleaſure than the company of his.
ter children, as his frequent journeys to Saint-Germain
e ſuffciently proved. Queen Margaret returned to
ber Bois de 1 on the 11th of the ſame month,
2 greatly pleaſed with the obliging and gracious re-
won ception of their Majeſties.
e of By the orders which ſhe gave to her officers who
9 remained at Udon, Barenton, who was ſent tht.
an of ther by his Majeſty, found no oppoſition, and was
f be put in immediate poſſeſſion of the caſtle. He drew
70 Ap a memorial of the ſtate in which he found it,
aims, | . 0 „ . .
cela and brought it to the King, who, perfiſting-in his
ch d reſolution of diſmantling this caſtle, ordered me to
on fend an engineer or commiſſary of artillery there
ch es ſoon as poſſible for that purpoſe. IT was com-
ria WWF miſhoned to thank Queen Margaret in his name,
, br the chearfulnefs with which: ſhe had made this
ns Kacrifice, and to pay her the full value of all tlie
as been ſtores and ammunition which were found: at Uſſon,
＋ greatly regretted,” ſays the Memoirs of the regency of Mary
Bayle de Medicis, “ being a princeſs abounding in goodneſs of heart,
er wi <xgerly fond of the welfare and repoſe of the ſtate, who did no
e in te harm to any one beſides herſeli.” Theſe few words, I appre-
d; ſte hend, are ſufficient to give us the perfect idea we ought to form of
e called] der character, and ſufficiently agree with what VI. de Sully ſays
She was ok her.
greatly which

1 NM E M,O;I-R 8 Book XXII

which Margaret had deſtined for the payment of the
garriſon ſhe maintained there; unleſs that princei; ft
choſe rather to give her ſoldiers theſe ſtores and.
proviſions as they ſtood. | 1
I thall conclude the memoirs of the preſent yer g.
with an article, which I am already certain ill W «
have the approbation and acknowledgments ot all
juſt and ſenſible perſons. In all the principal © Wt!
ties of the kingdom, eſpecially. thoſe which have e
arlenals and academies, | there are alſo {chools for MW ©
the young nobility, . in which are taught all kind“
t ſports and exerciſes, as well military, as tho{
deſigned merely to form a graceful carriage, an! WW
give ſtrength and activity to the limbs: and theſe
exerciſes are no where more carefully cult. WE
vated than at Paris, where the ſpacious courts ce.
the arſenal, deſtined to this uſe, are full almost
every hour in the day, I was always of the fame
opinion as Henry concerning thele exerciies: he
often aflerted, ' that they were the moſt ſolid tout-
dation, not only of diſcipline and other military
virtues, but allo of thoſe noble ſentiments, and
that elevation of mind, which give one nation the
pre-eminence over every other. I uſed to be pre-
{ent at them myſelf, when I could {teal a moment
from buſineſs, as well through the taſte I had tor
ſuch amuſements, as becaute I thought my pre.
ſence would excite a laudable emulation among!
the youth. | :
One afternoon in carnival-time, when this
ſports were molt frequent, I left my cloſet to ſhe-
myſelf to this aſſembly of young men. I came
very ſeaſonably to prevent the conſequences of tig
quarcels, which, from that miſtaken notion !
honour to which France has made herſelf a fare
were likely to have been very fatal. Theſe qu
rels had taken their riſe from a trifle, as it gene
rally happens with the greateſt part of thole 1 ber
12)

— OT $U0 LL x; 7

he Have been followed by the moſt bloody cata-
es ſtrophes. But the King (I am grieved to fay it)
na took ſo little care to enforce the obſervation of
the edits publiſhed by ſome ot his predeceſſors, a-
ear painſt that barbirous cuſtom of duelling, that every
#11 diy much blood was ſhed in very frivolous quarrels,
all I thought it my duty to endeavour to convince
d. theſe young men who crouded about me, ofthe error
are of their opinion of true valour: © It is,” ſaid 110
for them,“ in ßeldsof war, and in actions who'e aim
aß is the ſervice of our country, that courage is per-
oe “ mitted to be ſhown ; that which arms us againſt
and “our friends, or countrymen, in contemjt of
fe all laws, as well divine as human, is but a brutal
alt WE fierceneſs, madueſs, and real puſillanimity.“ T
; of Wherceived that the moral J endeavoured to incul-
not {cate appeared very ſtrange to theſe young men,
ame Who were carried away by the heat of blood and
: he erdour of youth. One of them, who, it was ap-

Je 4 5 ſought to give himſelf conſequence with
ay is fellows, replied, that princes having at all

times permitted, nay authoriſed duels, they had be-
come a cuſtom, by continuance as ſtrong as a law.
| contented myſelf at that time with making the
Fouth ſenſible that he ſupported his argument upon
laſe and erroneous principles, and with prevent-
vg the challenge from proceeding any further;
put as ſoon as | rctired, I gave free courſe to my.
ſelections upon the fingularity of an abuſe un-
own to the molt polithed, and at the ſame time
vet people. Theſe refleQions, when thrown

and
|
the

pre.
nent
d for
pre-
zo

theſe

che

came bon paper, compoſed a kind of memorial, which
f r088 thought it my duty to preſent to the King.

20 00 Duels, it is true, are of long landing in France,
dare, d indeed in Europe, but in that part only that
qe been over-run by barbarians, from whoſe
nie this hateful cuſtom takes its date, and appears,
which kercfore to be derived from them; and if hifto»

na ries

106 ME MO I R S Book XXII.

ries of times more remote, ſuch as that of the
Emperor Ocho. the Firſt, and that of the divorce of
Lothario, give ſome inſtances of ſingle combat,
they may be oppoled by prohibitions of equal an-
tiquity, both eccleſiaſtical, as that of the council
of Valentia in 855, and ſecular. We have in
France a very ancient edict, which forbids them
in all civil cauſes, and in criminal cauſes limits
them to five caſes; high treaſon, rape, houſe- burn.
mg, murder, and nightly thetts. Saint Lewis“ af.
terwards took away all reſtri&tion; and when Philip
the Fair, his grandſon, ſeemed to reſtore them in
1303, in acculations for ſtate-crimes, rapes, and
houſe- burning, to. which he reſtricted them, he was
induced to this only from the motive, at once de-
ſerving praile and cenſure, of aboliſhing inſenſibly
this murderous and bloody cuſtom, which had ga-
thered new ſtrength in his time, by confining it to
ſome rare caſes expreſſed in a poſitive law. To
make thi; more evident, he forbade all manner of
perſons to allow them, by receiving what was called
pledges or challenges to fight, aud declared that
right reſerved to himſelf alone.

To (hew, by explaining the difference between the
ancient duels and thoſe of our time, what a number
of nameleſs abuſes have crept into a practice, which
itſelf was from its firſt original a corruption, it will
de ſufficient to give a plain relation of rhe circum-
ſtances and formalities oblerved.in thoſe times.

In the firſt place, no body, however offended,
might revenge himſelf, and, as it is now practiſed,

* On the ſubject of theſe edicts of Saint Lewis and Philip the
Fair, as alſo of the origin, manner, and whatever has relation to
ſingle combats, conſult the writers ho treat of it; ſuch as Paul
de Montboucher Siear of la Riyaudiere, in his treatiſe on the cete.
monies and laws of challenges and ſingle combats, &c. in 1658
John Savaron Sieur de Villars, in his treatiſe againſt duels, with the
edict of Philip-the Fair, in 1610; Brantome, in the tenth volue

cf his memoirs, intitled, Touching Duels; D*'Audiguicr, Du Pies,
Ruauld, Baſnage, &c. and many other ltalians.

i

* - 4," ASS

— ) ”—. n aum n 1 th

cu fuk ow. a5 @Gyoed fwd om ac

1e. O F EY 4b Fo 107

; in the firſt emotion of caprice and paſſion, and much
e Þ | leſs in a mere bravado, which, in my opinion, is of
ff all things the molt contrary to the laws of fociery.
t, They had their judges, before whom he that
- F thought himſelf 1njured in his honour, was to give
il an account of the wrong he ſuffered, and demand
n | permiſſion to prove, in ſingle combat, that he did
n not accule his enemy falſely. It was then con-
ts ſidered as ſhameſul to detire blood for blood.
Ne The judge, who was commonly the lord of the
= place, made the perſon accuſed, appear likewiſe
ip W before him; and never allowed the deciſion of
in battle, wliich was demanded by throwing a glove,
ad gauntlet, or ſomæ other pledge upon the ground,
as hut when he could get no other proof either of
e. guilt or INNOCENCE.
ly The pledges were received, and the judge de-
4 ferred the deciſion of the quarrel to the end of two
t0 months; during the firſt of which the two enemies
To were delivered cach of them to common friends,
of! W vpon ſecurity for their forthcoming. Their friends
ed endeavoured by all forts of means to diſcover the
at T perſon criminal, and to give him a fenſe of the in-
juſtice of maintaining a falſchood, from which he
he could expect nothing but the loſs of his reputation,
der of his life, and of his foul ; for they were perſua-
ich ded, with the utmoſt degree of certainty, that hea-
vill ven always gave the victory to the right cauſe;
im- and therefore a duel, in their opinion, was an ac-
tion of which the event could be determined by no
ec, luman power. When the two months were ex-
cl, pired, the two rivals were put into a clole priſon,
the and committed to the ee who employed
* every argument to deter them from their deſign.
cere- ß, after all this, they ſtill perſiſted, a day was at laſt
68; hxed to decide their quarrel.
hv When the day was come, the two champions

vere brought faſting in the morning before the
ſame

PE NT TD DR DO nnd — — ——

1638 MEM OI R Ss Book xx

fame judge, who obliged both of them to declare

|
upon oath that they ſaid the truth; after which! «
(

they ſuffered them to eat; they were then armes
in his preſence, the kind of arms, being likewiſe

{ettled. Four ſponſors or ſeconds, choſen with the

Tame ceremonies, {aw them undrefled, and anointed t

all over the body with oil, and ſaw their beards and 0
hair cut cloſe. They were then conducted into a: [
incloſed field, and guarded by armed men, havinz WW t

been made to repeat, for the laſt time, their a. !
ſertions and accuſations, to ſee if they perſiſtcd in 0
them without variation. They were not even tha! ®
ſuffered to advance to the combat; that monmeit t
their ſeconds joined them at the two ends of the W
field for another ceremony, which of itſelf was e. *
nough to make their weapons drop from their tt
bands, at leaſt if there had been any friendihip be- 10
tween them. Their ſeconds made them knee ©
_ down in this place facing each other; they made WW"!
made them join hands, with the fingers of one pu d.
between the fingers of the other, in form of 1 if lo
croſs, they demanded juſtice from one another, !
and were conjured on each fide not to {upport 1 We!
falſity; they ſolemnly promiſed to act upon terms WV

of honour, and not to aim at the victory by fraud
and inchantment. The ſeconds examined ther u
arms piece by piece, to ſee that nothing was want la
ing, aud theu conducted them to the two ends of 9p
the liſts, where they made them ſay their prayers, WF *
and make their confeſſion ; then aſbing each te
them whether he had any metlage to fend to bs be;
adverſary, they ſuffered them to engage, which WO:
they did at the ſignal of the herald, who cricd ken
from without the liſts, Let the brave combataiits g.
After this, it is true, they fought without mercy» Ny
and the vanquithed, dead or alive, incurred all the 5
"=

infamy of the crime and the puniſhment ; he v3
'drazged upon a hurdle in his ſhirt, and aſterward
| hangt

i | F 1605. DF. :.2.-06 LT: 109

„ hanged or burnt, while the other returned honour-
ed and triumphant, with a decree declaring him to
ai have gained his ſuit, and giving him all manner
of ſatisfaction.

e! There is throughout all this ceremony ſome-
ching wild and ridiculous, but, however, the voice
„of reason, authority, aud prudence, is ſtill heard,
„ though its dictates are utterly miſtaken ; whereas
„chere 1s nothing but monſtrous unreaſouableneſs

in the practice of thoſe {mart youths, who with-
in draw ſlily into a field to ſhed the blood of one an-
„ocker, with hands impelled by no better infliuet

en chin that which inſtigates a beaſt of prey. If men
e vent to fight with the ſame coolneis and delibera-

bon as 10 former times, can it be 1magined that
rt chere would be the hundredth part of the ducls that
be. vo happen? But it has been thought neceſſary to

ech dismiss conſideration from that action, which is ſe-
14: nous above all others. Some ruſh blindly into this
dau dunger, others pleaſe themſelves with being born
bor the deſtruction of their fellow- creatures; others
det) revive the hateful trade of the gladiators, and are
rt: indeed more dreadful and contemptible than the
rms men that bore that name were heretofore.

and The forms of duels in Germany, have no re-
heir markable diflerence from thoſe in France which J
hire deſcribed. They were likewiſe received in

5 Spain and England; only he who yielded to his
ers, Arerfary upon a ſingle wound was reputed infa-
1 of nous; he could not afterwards either cut his beard,
\ bis bear any office, wear a weapon, or mount a horſe.
Vick On the contrary, he who died in a courageous de-
ric ſence was buried honourably. Another ſingulari—
'; 00. , hich muſt have kept duels from being com-
ery, ou in Germany, was, that there were only three
1 the {WPiices where they could be fought, Witzburg in
un Frapconia, Uſpach, and Hall in Swabia.

Vor. IV. L 1

yards
nocd

|

— — — —.,. — 2 — .

110 M £ M0: 1.;K $5 - Book e

[ could not wait for his Majeſty's return to Paris
to communicate to him the memorial of which!
have now mentioned the contents; to inform
him of the accidents to which this practice gave oc.
caſion; and to deſire him to put a ſtop to an eri
which was every day ſpreading, by his indulgence,
J intreated him in a letter which I wrote to him,
to attend to the counſel which I had preſumed to
give him, to renew the edits againſt duels, to 2g.
gravate the punithment conſiderably, and execute
It levereiy; and to forbid all men to proſecute auy
word of injury or offence otherwile than by court
of law; but to manage fo, that the juſtice obtain.
ed might be ſpeedy and ſatisfactory; to make the
complainant caſy, and the aggreſſor penitent; and,
laſtly, to have this new order fixed up, at the be.
ginning of every year, in the courts of the Louvre,
the palace, the arſenal, and in other places that
were molt frequented *. It is certain, as I repre
ſented to his Majeſty, that a reputation for per.
ſonal valour, fuch as this prince had eſtablillied,
was able to give to an edit concerning due!s,
twice the authority that it could derive from mere
royal pleaſure; but the pleaſure of the King
of kinge, a power far ſuperior, bad not reſerved
the glory of extirpating that abuſe tor the reign 0i
Henry the Great.

It may be laid, without pretending to juſtify thi
prince, that his caſiueſs with reſpect to duels pro-
cecded from a habit contracted by his long wars, by
which he ſaw bloodihed without emotion; aud
that he was likewiſe not much lets indifferent abou!
his own blood. He had always ſome notion that

If we attentively read what Cardinal de Richelieu has (:14 04

this ſabjeR, in his Political Teſtament, part 1. chap. 3. & 2. the
title whereof is, Of the means to prevent duels; we muſt on. that

great miniſter ſeems to have drawn all his reflections on this mat-
ter from this and other parts of theſe Memoirs where ducls art
mentioned.

the

* x

l
th
d T

OP OL EL-T.:

1 . . .
the laſt moment was inevitably predetermined.
This opipion he dilpuiled to himtelf, under the

Chriſtian notion of reſignation ts the will of God.
There was jent me from Rome, about that time,
an account of a conf{piracy againſt the ſtate, and
an attempt upon the life of the King, which I
thought it my duty to dilcloſe to him, though it
ſeemed to me worthy to be deſpiſed, as indeed he

deſpiſed it. He told me, on that occaſion, that he
was convinced of its being beſt for his happinets to:
pay no manner of regard to intelligence like this “,

and that otherwiſe his life would be worſe than
death ; that. the calculators of nativities had threat-
enced him, ſome, that he ſhould die by the ſword
and others by a coach : but that none of them had
ever mentioned poiſon, which ſeemed to him the
eaſieſt way to {patch him, becauſe he eat a great
deal of fruit of all kinds that were offered him,

without having them taſted; therefore, upon the

whole, he reſigned himſelf ro the Lord of his lite
and of his death.

It was not poſſible but ſpeaking in this manner,
Henry reckoned a little, without perceiving it, up-
on the good fortune that had accompanied him as
well in the dangers that particularly threatened his
perfou +, as thote which regarded his kingdom and

happinets.

Let him alone,” (aid this prince to thoſe who perſuaded him
to puniſh a man who had been engaged in a conſpiracy againſt
him, © he is a wicked wretch whom God will puniſh, without
my interfering,” Matthieu, vol. 1. B. 2. p. 359.

f Henry IV. cſcaped one, on Monday the igth of December;
of which M. de Perefixe gives the following relation. The
s lame day on which Mairargues was exccuted, a poor madman
„ him with a poignard in his hand, as he returned trom hunting
© over the Pont-ncuf. His Majeſty's footmen running up obliged
* him to quit his hold, and were going to beat his brains out 'on

5 the (pot, had not the King forbid them, and ordered him to be
| impriſoned in Fort-L'Eveque. His name was John De-Liſle,

2 44 2

4 ==

made an attempt on the ſacred perſon of the King, ruſhing on

—_— 22

112 M E NM 0 Il R S Book XXIII.

happineſs. Of eight perſons from whom he had
molt to fear in this latter reſpe&t, he remarked
that ſome favourable planet had freed him from {x
of the molt conſiderable; that one was dead in thc
hangman's hand, and two others of ſickneſs; the
fourth was actually in priſon ; the fifth was gone
into voluntary haniſhment ; the ſixth was reduced
to flatter him whom formerly he endeavoured to
deſtroy. For the other fort of good fortune, we
have ſeen examples throughout this hiitory : bur,
alis! this good fortune was not permanent; bu
an unhappy moment for France, as well as for tlie

rince, has wholly effaced from our memories the
idea of that proſperous ſtate.

WO AXUL
'S by the firſt day of this year the King ard

Queen were at Paris, and 1 went to the Los-
vre in the morning, to pay my reſpects to them,
and offer the nſual preſents. I did not find the
King in his own chamber; LOferai and Arimay-
nac told me, that he was in bed with the Queen,
and that, probably, both were ſtil] aſleep, becaute
the Queen's indiſpoſition had kept then awake al.
moſt the whole night. I went on to the Queens
apartment, to inquire of La-Renouillere and Ci-
therine Selvage the ſtate of their Majeſties health;
and knocked at the door as foftly as poſſible, tnt

a native of Vineux near Senlis. He was immediatcly after-
Wards examined by the Preſident Jcannin, who could not get
any rational anſwer from him; for he was entirely out of his
** ſenſes. He fancied himſelf to be king of all the world, and (41d
„Henry IV. had uſurped the kingdom of France from him, 1d
be was therefore going to chaſtiſe him for his temer!!y-
** Whereupon the King thinking him ſufficicntly puniſh d by his
** maineſs, commanded he ſhould only be kept in priſon, Khele
de dicd ſoon after.“ Hiſtory of Heury the Great, part 3.

yo

GE O07 $VELY. m1

d might not wake them. I found that the courti-
ders were already admitted; tor ſeveral voices, which
*I knew to be thoſe of Roquelaure, Frontenac,
be and Beringhen, aſked all at once, Vo is there ?
he and when I anſwered, I heard them ſay to

the King, Sire, it is the Grand Maſter : © Come
jn, Roiny,” ſaid his Majeſty to me; © you will
WW © think me lazy, till you know what has Kept us
"WW © ſo late in bed: my wiſe, who believes the is in
h WW © her eighth month, having had ſome pains as
„ ſhe was going to bed, I was apprehenſive that
ic WW © the would have a dangerous labour; but towards
lic *« the middle of the night they proved to be on-
« ly the effects of the colic; and ſhe growing

„ caly we fell aſleep, and neither of us waked till

* fix o*clock this morning; but ſhe, with groans,

e fiplis, and tears, for which ſhe has aſſigned i-

„ maginary cauſes. I will tell you what they are

"i WW © when ſome of theſe people have left the room;
for you will not fail ro ſpeak your ſentiments
freely, and I believe your advice will not be
unuſeful on this occaſion, any more than on

m, T
le WE ©

& WW © many others of the ſame kind. But, in the
„mean time, let us fee what you have brought
* us for our new-year's gifts; for 1 perceive you -
al. 00

have three of your ſecretaries with you, each
* loaded with a velvet bag.“ “J remember, Sire,“
repliedT, “ that when! laſt ſaw the Queen and your
1 Mijeſty together, you were both in very good
: humour, and believing that I thould find you
A ſtill ſo, aud in expectation of another fon, I
vet have brought you a great many new-year's gifts,

* . — f 24 x
i” which, from the pleaſure with which they wall
1 5 be received by thoſe perſons among whom [ ſhall
1. BY diſtribute them in your name, will afford you

vs Wl © yrs ſatisfaction ; and I could wiſh this might
be done in the preſence of your Majeſty and the
(W Þ Qeen.,” „ Though the fays nothing to you,”
| L 3 replicd

114 ME M O I R S Book XXIII. 60

replied the King,“ and pretends to be aſleep, as WW i
*© uſua], yet J know lhe is not; but ſhe is offended “
both with you and me. We will talk of this!“
* when only you, Renoullere, Beringhen, aud!“
“Catherine are preſent, for they know ſomething “
« of the matter—but let us fee your giſts,” “
** Theſe preſents,” {aid I to his Majeſty, ©* are not “.
expreſiive of the ſtate of a grand matter of the WW ©
ordnance, nor are they ſuitable for rhe tren!“
ſurer of a rich and powerful monarch; but, W*©

La

64
40
cc

* ſmall as they are, they will nevertheleſs ge “
more joy to thoſe on whom they are beſtowed, 1“
« and will produce you more acknowledgments, 1“
fame, and praiſes, than the exceſſive gifts you WF"
“ laviſh upon perſons who, 1 am well aflured, make “
10

you no returns but in complaints full of ingr- WF"
« titude.” © J underſtand you by half a word,” WF
replied Henry, © as you ſumetimes ſnew you do -
*« me: but let us ſee your preſents, and talk no WF

% more of your intention in making them.” 43

I then ordered my three ſecretaries to approach. Wt ©
* Sire,” faidI, © here is Arnaud the elder, who cat.
„ ries in this bag, which holds the papers of the “
council, three purſes of gold medals.” I few.“

ed them to the King, and explained the motto, “
which expreſſed the affection of the people for his
Majeſty. One of theſe purſes, Sire,” continued
I, © is for yourſelf, the other for the Queen, aud
* the third for the Dauphin ; that is to ſay, ſor
« Mamanga *, if her Majeſty does not keep U
e herſelf, as the always docs. In this bag I;kewile
are eight purſes of filver medals, ſt ruck in the
* ſame manner, two for your Majeſty, two lot
Madam de Montglat, whom the young Prince called fo. In

the 9138th vol. of the King's MISS. which is entirely filled with
original letters of Henry IV. the Queen, and Madam Eliſabeth

of France, to Madam de Montglat, there is one from the young *
2 to his ſiſter, in which he tells her, he kiſſes Mameng** ly
ands. | ,

10 the

1606. e. 115;

the Queen, and four for Renouillere, Catherine.
„ Selvage, and ſuch other ladies of the Queen's.
% chamber as you ſhall pleaſe to give them to.“

% Arnaud the younger has in his bag five and.
„twenty purſes of Reer medals, to be diſtributed
„by the Dauphin, Madam de Montglat, Madam
ot © de Orou, and Mademoiitclle de Piolant, among.
ie che nurſes, and other women attendants on
a. © your children, and among the Queeu's maids.
it, “ And iu the third bag, which Le-Gendre carries,
ic „there are thirty little bags, of a hundred crowns
d, “each, in halt-franks, all new truck, and ſo

ts, large that they look like whole ones ; thele are.
on MW © for preſents to the Queen's maids, and the wo-
ke “ men of her chamber, and thoſe belonging to
a. © che children of France, according to your or—
i” W © ders. I have left two large bags in my coach,

do to the care of my ſervants, full of dorzzains *,

no WF © all new likewiſe, and each bag worth a hundred

% crowns, which make twelve thouland ſous; theſe.
ch, are to be divided among the poor invalids who
ar- © are upon the keys of the river near the Louvre,

he “which I am told are almoſt full. I have ſeut
thither twelve of the moſt charitable men in
10, W © the city to range them in order, and diſtribute
the preſents. You cannot imagine how much
ued “ theſe trifling new-year's gifts, in little pieces
new coined, will pleaſe theſe poor men, and
the Queen's maids and women of her chamber,

0 It They all declare, that they do not regard theſe
viſe “ gifts for the value, but as being inſtances of
the “ your regard for them; eſpecially the Queen's

maids, who fay, that what 1s given them to
6 RR py 17
purchaſe cloaths they mult lay out as directe,

In
with
beth Pieces of one ſou. They are now of copper ſilvered over
oung Iwenty of them make one livre, worth about ten pence halfpenny

n ga's

the

Engliſh; but in Henry LV.'s days the money, M. de Voltaire
ys, was double its preſent value, |
«© bur

xs MEMOIR S Book XXIII

but theſe hundred crowns they may lay out iq
& what trifles they pleaſe, which is more to their
„ taſte,” But, Roiny,” ſaid his Majeſty to me,
% will you give them their new-year's gifts with.
* out making them kits you for them?“ © Truly,
. replied I, * {ince you once commanded
* them to kits me, I am under no neceſſity of uliny
* prayers and 1ntreaties, they come very will! 5
& iy; and Madam de on, who is ſo devout,
6 only laughs at it.“ © Ah! Roiny,” COntituuel
Henry, with the ſame gaiety, © ſince it is (6,
« pray tell me truly, who killes you moſt willig
* ly? and which of them do you think the hand.
& {omelt?” “ Faith, Sire,“ returned I,” I cannot
cen tell you; I have no leiſure to think of gallantry,
« and I believe they take as little notice of my
&« beauty as I of theirs: I kits them as we do te.
« Iics when we preſent our offerings.” The King
could not help laughing aloud; and addreflng
himſelf to thoſe who were preſent, % What de
« you think,“ faid he, “of this prodigal ftuancier,
&« who make ſuch rich preſents out of his malter's
pocket for a kils?” After diverting bimtelf 2
few moments with this thought, “ Go to break
& faſt,” ſaid he to the courtiers, «and leave us t0
« confer a little upon matters of more 11 port
*” ance,”
Every one retiring but Reuouillere and Cache.
rine, the King gently p pulling the Queen, “ d.
* Wake, you dormoule, ſaid he, give me a kits,
« and be peevith no more, for all our little qual:
« rels are already forgot on my fide ; I am loi:
* cltous to kcep your mind ca y, leſt your heat
ſhould ſuffer during your pregnancy. You inn
gine,“ purſued he, ie that Roſny favours me i
our little diſputes ; but you would be undecei-
ved, if you knew with what freedom hc ſome-

times tells me my faults, And though I oftet
(6 re (ent U

1606. O F n 117

e reſent thoſe liberties, yet I am not really offend-
„ed with him for them; on the contrary, I
e ſhould believe he no longer loved me, if he
« ceaſed to make me {uch remonitrances as he
« thought were neceflary for the honour of my
„ perſon, the good of my kingdom, and the hap-
e pineſs of my people; for be aſſured, my dear,“
added lie, “there are none ſo juſt and ſo upright,
KK who would not wholly fall, if, when they be-
gan to ſtumble, they were not ſupported by the
« good counſels of prudent friends and faithful
« ſervants. And to convince you of the truth of
« what I ſay, know that Roſny has been continu-
„ally telling me, for theſe fifteen days paſt, that
% you are in your eighth month, and that I ought
not to diſcompoſe you, for fear of hurting your
„ ſon, for a {on he infiſts upon it, it is *.“

This good prince, aſſuming an air ſtil] more ten-
er and dune aß Intreated her to tel] him, before
ne, what was the cauſe of her waking, ſighing,
ier and in tears. The Queen at laſt, turning to him,
(rad, that her grief was occationed by a dream,
zich ſeemed to confirm what had been predicted
eber a few days before, but that her mind had
been relieved by weeping. She then, in her turn,
treated the King to ſpare her any farther uneaſi-
nels, at leaſt while ſhe was with child, and to a-

the. Nod 3 vent to ſuch expreſſions, © which,” {aid
. Ws, © make me, as well as others, believe, that
kifs you are happier in the company of other per-

| * The aſtrologers had foretold it, ſays L'Etoile's journal,
and that tlie Queen's life would be in danger. She was happily
ſroupht to bed of a daughter on the roth of February. Henry
PV. in order to comfort the Queen, (fer the puſlionately defired
b have a ſon), ſaid to her, with his uſual gaicty, that if this
GW):ter ſhould not happen to nicct with a proper match, there
would be many others in the ſame condition; and that if her mo-

|
er had not bore a daughter, ſue would not have been Queen of
Trance,

«ſons

21% M E M OI R S Book XXIII.

ſons than in mine, and thoſe too,“ purſued lhe,
« who | well know are not only unfaithful ie
you, but hate you in their hearts; I know the
«& reaſon alſo, and i appeal for the truth of this
& to M. de Roinv, whole word:I will take.”

I avoided. this explanation, by anſwering in x

general manner, that it gave me great joy to ſce
their Majeſties open their minds thus frankly upon
their little quarrels; that 1 found it would not be
difficult to put a final end to them for the future,
if they would. ſeriouſly refolve to yield to ſuch
means as would be uſed for that purpoſe, by per
ſons who choſe rather to ſerve their true intcreſt
than ſooth their: reſentment. This propoſal was
accepted immediately, and they deſired me to pro-
poſe thoie means; the Queen laying, that ſhe was
_ refolved to comply with them, and. the King
that they would be highly agreeable to him. [
then declared to their Majeſties in plain terms,
(having firit convinced them, that any other re:
medy would end only in talking and acting to n0
purpole, as had hitherto been the caie), that there
was only one way of getting rid at once of all the
occaſions of thele quarrels; that ſince they had
reaſon to diſtruſt their own ſteadineſs, in taking
and keeping reſolutions, they ſhould make choice
of {ome perſon for this buſineſs, who while this
deciſion was depending, and. aſter it was deter-
mined, ſhould take the whole upon himſelf, and
act as if the King and Queen were abſolutely with.
Out concern in it. I adviſed them to chuſe a man
ſteady enough not to let himſelf be ſhaken by anz
conſideration, and capable of ſuch pure and hone:

affections, as to ſerve tlem, when the calc re-

quired, by oppoſing their inclinations,

I diſcovered not the leaſt inclination to be em-
ployed in this buſineſs, which indeed was not vc
agreeable ; but I aflured their Majeſtics, that t!

Was

a MS. a. En —

— PRA Pw  . ds WAS

1

—_ FP LL IF, 119

ge. vas upon me they caſt their eyes, they muſt be-
ein by being abloimely ſileut with reſpect to the
means they ſaw me make uſc of; and that, to
lie ive me a fecurity that my work ſhould not be
WW deſtroyed by any return of diſguſt, they ſhould
oblige themlelves, in the moſt ſolemn manner,

105 not to oppoſe any thing I thould do, nor to pre-
o berve any retentment againſt me, although one of
be dhe parties, and perhaps both, muſt, by admitting
re, the remedy I ſhould ule, do ſome violence to their
uch inclinations. believe they gueſſed what this re-

medy was “; and 1 may venture to aſſert, that if
ret they had agreed to my propoſal, no human con-
ideration thould have hindered me from purſuing

Ws | |
ro. u; but I had good realon to fear they would not
„„ luſter me to proceed thus far. However, the
ins King replied, that he was ready to ſign this en-

| W 2-geimevt ; but the Queen, finding herſelf preſſed,

durſt not venture to make any promiſe. She ſaid
he would conſider of it; or otherwiſe, I muſt tell
her what it was I intended to do. Yet ſhe knew
my intentions as well as the King, but was afraid
of the conſequences of a compromiſe. So we did
nothing afterwards but talk ro the wind on this
lutject ; for ſuch it is to diſcuſs with a ſerious air
he trifling projects of the court, Which have been
uready lo often exhauſted, It was through com-
plaiance for their Majetties that I conſented to en-
gage in this buſinels, they having earneſtly preſſed
ne to it, I withdrew upon the Queen's calling for
ler {hitt, and the King for his cloaths.

The King and Queen made my wife and me ve.
yy conſiderable preſents, in return for my new-
jear's gifts; we likewiſe received fome preſents

"Ms,
e.
) 10
gere
the
had
king
Oice
this
eter-
and
vith⸗
man
; any
onelk

E.
en * M. de Sully has acquainted us with it before, and in the
5 8 Wiice he gave the King, to ſend four or five perſons over the
very

& mountains, and the like number over the ſeas, as he expreſſes

Was

from

—— — —— <= wp

0 - MEM 0 -/J7--R:.S-Bbot XXIE

from Queen Margaret. All the time the King
ſtaid ja Paris was ſpent in balls, maſquerades, and
diver{tons of every kind. January the 1oth this
prince came to the arienal *, it being very fine

weather, to lee a courſe at the ring, for which

great preparations were made.

When the entertainment was over, Henry led
me into the great walk in the gardens, where,
leaning againſt the fide of the balcouy, I heard

him with plcaf re begin a ſcrious converſation up.
on his political deſigns; the motto of my medals,
with which he was greatly pleaſed, had turned his
thoughts upon that ſubjcct. I had before perceived
for jvine time, that Henry began to be more and
more perſuaded of the neceſſity and importance of
this political plan; and that he every day removed
{ome obſtacle to the execution of it. He uſed of:
ten to {ay to me, that Philip III. had not proffted
by the wile counſels of Philip II. his father, to look
upon all thoſe vain-glorious ideas of univerial mo-
narchy, with which his predeceſſors heads had
been intoxicated, as ſo many idle chimera's. He
added, that this prince, by all his proceedings,
had made it evident he had not renounced them,
and that there was not one among all the prince
of Chriſtendom, who would be exempted from the
attacks of this proud and inſolent monarchy, til
it was made to feel its own impotence of power
by that great blow, the deſign of which I had Fit
hinted to him, and to the King of England; aud
which, as he owned, had not made all the im-
preſſion on his mind it ought to have done. I be—
beve the proceedings of the chamber of the gra:
jours, or general ſeſſions extraordinary, in the for-
mer year, contributed moſt to this firmnels cf
Henry; for this diſcovery of the ſecret practices ol

* De Thou. Merc. Fr. ann. 1696,

Spain

ain

n 121

Spain againſt him, greatly increaſed his natural
enmity againſt that kingdom.

may venture to afh:m alſo, that the converſa-
tion we had together upon this lubject had a great
ſhare in the reſolution he had now taken. And
indeed it was not poſſible ſor a prince, though he
were ever {o inattentive to his own glory, to re-
fe& upon all that an inſatiable avarice and bound-
leis ambition had in theſe latter times induced the
houſe of Auſtria to undertake, without being
lcized with indignation. That Raoul de Habl-
burg, whoſe nobleſt exploits, when his election
to the empire was declared to him, had been to
lead ſome ſoldiers into the neighbourhood of Baſil,
during the factions of the Etoiles and the Pape-
qu41s, was never eaſy till he had divided Allace be-
teen himſelf and the city of Straſburg ; and af-
terwards increaſed his little domaine with the
duchies of Auſtria, Stiria, Carinthia, and other
hereditary lands, which are {till poſſeſſed by his
fa:nily in Germany. From the beginning of the

fourteenth century, when this happened, down to

our own times, how many ſtates, what an im-
menſe extent of country, has not this all- ingroſſing
houſe devoured? the kingdoms of Spain; thoſe of
Naples and Sicily in Italy, with the 1fles of Sardt.
nia, Majorca, and Minorca ; Bohemia and Hun-
pary in Germany, Burgundy, Flanders, and all the
Low Countries. Add to theſe, the acquiſitions ſhe
has made in the Eaſtern Indies, and in America,
equal almoſt in extent to all that is diſcovered of
the three other parts of the earth. Can we till
doubt then whether Charles V. who raiſed her to
ſuch an exalted pitch of power, 1utoxicated with
luch ſuccels, did not ſeriouſly think of ſwallowing
up all the reſt of Europe, Aſia, and Africa?

[5 ihere a neceſſity to bring avy other proofs of

this vain ſcheme for nniverial monarchy than the

Vol. IV. NM deſtruction

122 M EMO I R S Book XXII.

deſt ruction of the German Proteſtants, the coy.

ueſt of Tunis and Algiers, the invaſion of France,
o openly declared by the jrruption made into
Provence, and by the famous ſiege of Metz; en.
terpriſes formed at one time by that haughty mo-
narch? And if we have ſeen this project blaſted, to
what can we attribute it, except to different cir.
cumſtances, and obſtacles raiſed againſt himlelf
by the precipitation of a mind which, in the in-
toxication of ſucceſs, thinks every thing poſſible?
Charles V. undertook too many things at once,
and thoſe greatly beyond his ſtrenpth; he engaged
in thoſe enterpriſes without caution, and almot
without any preparation; he braved earth, ſca,
the elements, and ſealons. Soliman, who made
head againſt him in Europe, Aſia, and Africa,
Francis I. Henry VIII. the Pope, the Kings cf
Navarre, Tunis, and Algiers, were enemies he
deſpiſed, and of whom he ſcarce took any notice.
He knew not how to manage the only reſources
which remained for him; his own ſubjects rebelled
againſt him in Spain, Flanders, and Sicily. At
length, when he acknowledged his error, he found
no other remedy for it but in a fit of deſpair to
bandon all, and confine himſelf to the gloom of a
cloiſter. I never drew this picture to Henry will
out adding, that Philip II. as ambitious as his H.
ther, but a better politician, had reſumed all bt
defigns, and might poſſibly have ſucceeded in
them, if his private views upon France, England,
and Ireland, had not been croſſed by the luck)
chance that had brought together two ſuch able
heads, as thoſe of Henry and Elitabeth “*.

* Tt could only be with a view to invaJe France in general, ot
ſome part of it, that Philip II. intended to poſſels himſclt of the
Duke of Savoy's dominions, by giving the Duke fome of his 0%
in exchange for them. Matthicu the hiſtorian informs us of this
circumſtance, vol. 2. b. 3. p. 240.

%. .

$3 ev *V

1s

7

4
4
be. 3

1606. O F

.

* I had always been apprehenſive of the effects of
the ſuggeſtions of the courtiers, and the perſua—

123

ſions ot the Queen. This princels was continually

repreſenting to the King her huſband, the advan-
tages of a double aliiance with Spain.

She at-

* firmed, that if France was united with Rome, and

which had prevailed at court for ſome time, no
longer affected him; and if he ſometimes heard

the two Auſtrian branches, it would be an effectual
way to extin2utlh all factions in Europe, and that
policy as well as religion dictated this method.

Henry aſſured me, that this fort of converiation,

and anſwered ſuch diſcourſe, like one who fought

to convince himſelf by making ſolid objections,

it was only to hinder thoſe perſons from pene-
trating into his deſigns, and to flatter them with
the hope of gaining him over to theirs, till a pro-
per time came for taking off the maſk. We agreed

that matters were not yet ripe enough for that ;
and this converſation concluded, as many others

on the {ame ſubject had done, by agrecing, that,

till that moment arrived, it was Henry's part to
continue his endeavours for drawing into this
allociation the princes of Germany and Italy, the

dukes of Bavaria and Savoy, the former eſpecially,

by the proſpect of gaining the Imperial crown, au
the latter by the hopes of acquiring Lombardy, and

the regal dignity granted in proſpect of a marriage

betwixt his cldeft ſon and the eldeſt daughter of

France.

The King could think of no other means to re-
move thole obiſlacles which he had reaſon to cx-

pet the Duke of Bouillon would raile, than to re-

| cuce him to reaſon, by ſeizing the city of Sedan.

This expedicut Heury's own mind ſuggeſted to
him; aud he reſolved upon it ſo much the more

willingly, as he could undertake this expedition
without creating any ſuſpicion of his other deſigns.

2

/

He

DR "44 OP ae
Sr EST —

—

| 3 —

— e

23 I...

> >
—

22 4 - n 2
— +. — an —
— —
7 3 > 7 — - 6 =
o — —_— TED! 1 —
— — CBS — Cog —
2 — 1 by 4 — *

124 ME MOI R S Book XXIII.

He ordered me to prepare immediately a train of
artillery, proportionable rather to the reputation
of that place, than its real ſtrength, which this
prince did not know quite fo well as myſelf. He
declared to me, that he was reſolved to march rh.
ther in perſon, unleſs he was prevented from it by
the goat or ſome other indiſpofition, in which calc
he would commit the conduct of this enterpriſe to
me; and that I might join together the authority
and dignity ſuitable to the high employments I ex.
erciſed, his Mijeſty offered me that moment, and
indeed commanded me to accept the rank of duke
and peer, deſiring me to tell him from which cf
my eſtates I would chule to take my title, that he
might order Villeroi to make out the patent im-
mediately. |

I had refuſed this dignity before when the King
ſent me ambaſjador to England; but, fince that
time, the repeated bounties of this indulgent ma-
ſter had removed the obſtacle which hindered me
from taking advantage of his favourable intentions;
and finding hkewile that this prince wiſhed me t9
be raiſed to this rank as much for his own intereſt
as mine, I accepted this new favour with the high-
eſt acknowledgment. I named the lands of Sully
for my title, and the patent for it was figned 04
the lach of February, ſealed a few days afterwards,
and regiſtered on the laſt of the {ame month“.
All the lords of the court, and the greateſt part of
the grandees of the kingdom, were pleaſed to ac-
company me when I went to the parliament for
the ceremony of my reception, which was {t1]] tur-
ther honoured by the preſence of all the princes
of the blood, except the Count de Soiſſons. The

* De Thou, b. 36. and almoſt all the hiſtorians, mention
the diſtinguiſhed manner in which this dignity was conferred on
the Marquis de Roſny. Henry IV. had before made him bono-
tat caunſcllor of the parliament.

great

cc 1
the
of t

the g

Hz
in th

ther

train

had

and!
I 161
be re

a0quy1

hum

4 na
the

nigh

* 1606, O0 F S U L L I. 125
great chamber, the hall, all the galleries, and the
very courts themſelves, were ſo full, that there was
ſcarce room to move. I carried ſixty perſons of
the higheſt quality home with me to the arſenal,
where a ſumptuous entertainment of fleſh and fiſh
was prepared for them, and was moſt agreeably
ſurpriſed to find his Majeſty, who went thither
during the ceremony without giving me notice of
his intention. Grand Maſter,” cried the King,
as ſoon as | entered, J am come to the feaſt with-
out being invited; ſhall I have a bad dinner?“
« It is poſſible you may, Sire,” I replied, © ſince I
© did not expect to be honoured with your pre-
e fence.” © I aſſure you I ſhall not,” returned
the King, preventing my acknowledgments ; “ for
© while I waited your return, I vifited your kit—
* chens, where I have ſeen the fineſt hh imagi-
„ nable, and ragouts in my own taſte ; and be-
% cauſe you ſtaid too long, I have allayed my
hunger with ſome oyſters, and drank ſome of
* your wine of Arbois, which I think is the beſt

cc : | ＋ * | 121
| ever taſted,” The King's gaiety heightened

the pleaſure of the entertainment; and the reſt.

of the day was palled to the entire ſatisfaction of:
the gueſts.

His Majeſty ſent for me the next morning, and,
in the preſence of all the courtiers, aſked me whe-
| ther I had remembered to make a. memorial of the
train of artillery for the attack of Sedan which he
had mentioned to me. It was already drawn up;
and when I left my cloſet, I put ir into my pocket.
I vow preſented it to the King, who cauſed it to
be read aloud, by which means the courtiers were
zequünted with the King's deſign; who afterwards
humorouſſy ſaid, that the Duke of Bouillon, though
a naturaliſed German, had not probably forgot
the French language, but that if it was ſo, we
night teach it him in a little time by this method.

M 3 His

* £Y..Z l . £— =
= Sm 4 Fa
- . 1 — -

— —— 2. ip . * 7 * . * on 8 —
— — —— — 4 —
— — — 8 ; .

SS = g
„„ ugy᷑„V—U —_—

"04 21
Ro, 2
„

*» »
o
\
1
199
4
=
„ | =
:
l
j .
-
4
-
„
bag!
ip ; 4
' *
1
4
: 23-7
7
+4
;
1 9
=
A
* * 4
-
Li
FS 13
© 3
4.
1
1110
1 1 *
1
R >
4 +
oy
£42 1
* 7
4 : o
18 *
f
4
f J
|
9
ES | ,
2 9
„
4,
„
o
- 4 *
* +
7 *
o
*
- 4
4
o
11
: N
* *
1 5
4 *
1
1 *
- * ,
4 1
'4 N * }
' >, ; a y
19 OD
= >
AS
N
Vea.
K. *
2 £ 1
18 3
, * 1
o
- * i
a >
144
1
*
al
N
'
3 & o
N
1 1
t | 3
=”
: = *
#43 4 3
4 e
1
7 1
C
— -
* 1 |
b I c-
+28 +»
* *
3 az
*J 4 "+ :
4 14 8
i 1 7
| n YL
WY
, : *
1 | '
: « £
1 2 o
: T*
rx 4
{4 5
1 q
N *
5
; p |
. e.
, * k
TE
"El :
2 a
„ wo
! F -
1
*
'
1

y
4

*
i

*

.
' 1
*

— — -
—

126 M E M OI R S Book XXIII.

His Majeſty then ſeeming to expect my advice
concerning this war, 1 told him, that 1 did not
think the Duke of Bouillon had ſo little judgment,
as not to be ſenſible of the vaſt diſproportion be.
twist his Majeſty's forces and his own, or ſo in.
prudent as to expoie himſelf to the danger of
knowing it by experience; that I had a long time
foreleen his city would not hold out againſt can.
non; and as he knew this better than any other, ]
was aſſured that, if he made any ſhew of reſiſtance,
it was only in hopes that, during that time, he
might employ more ſucceſsfully the arts of negoti-
ation, Yet that I took the liberty to advile his
Majeſty to write once more to the Duke of Boull:
lon, and let him know, that, in the preſent con-
juncture, he might come with full ſecurity and
throw himfelf at his feet, and be very certain that,
upon this ſubmiſſion and more exactneſs in keeping
his word for the future, his pardon would be grant-
ed and himſelf treated as formerly ; but that if he
refuſed this laſt favour, he muſt no longer exped
to be received upon any terms of capitulation,
After this I continued to give the King an account
of the preparations I had made. The King ap
proved of the hint 1 gave him, to ſend away only
the body of the artillery from Paris, and to take
up the ammunition and other neceſſary proviſions
in places nearer Sedan, to fave the expentcs 01
carriage.

This affair was not puſhed on ſo vigorouſly as |
had expect:d it would, on account of the great
oppoſition it met with at court, where the lealt
preparation for war ſeemed to give as much alarm
as it could do to the enemies themſelves. Noting
was now the ſubj<& of converſation but the df.
culties to be encountered helore a town, the fort.
ficarions and ſituscion of which every oue exif
geratcd to Heury, and the inconvenicucics w. *

wou

”” Jo!

160

Wool

be.

heai

rial

fall

ſurd
ſtyle
with
was

Bou:
ner,
Suu
teſta
ſtrar
the |
ſtooe
{anc
ſhe w

be v.

ſons

17
was 1
preſe
uns
to pe
hand
It 15 «
have
ecu
his fr
What
Carry
dient
King
but t.
fearft
him:

16667. O #F 8 VL) L I. 127

would attend a ſiege as long as that muſt inevitably
be. To hear them, one would have imagined that
heaven and earth were intereſted in favour of Bou—
ilon and his city. They contrived that a memo—
rial on this ſubject, in the form of a letter, ſhould
fall into his Majeſty's hands, full not only of ab-
{urdity, but impertinence. The King thought the
ſtyle of it reſembled that of the Duke of Bouillon,
with ſome ſtrokes of Du-Picſhs and Tileuus. It
was not ſurpriling that the particular friends of
Bouillon or the Proteſtants ſhould talk in this man-
ner, ſuch as Montluet, La-Noué, and the two
Stnt-Germains, who might think the whole Pro-
teſtavt body concerned in this buſineſs; but it was
ſtrange that perious who had no connection with
the Duke of Bouillon, and even others who under.
ſtood fortification, as the engincer Erard for in-
ſtance, ſhould never mention this deſign but te
ſhew the 1mpoſhbility of its execution. It would
be very difficult for me to believe that theſe per-
ſons withed well to the undertaking.

The King himſelf fell into an irreſolution which
was wholly incomprehenſible to me. I oſten re-
preſented to him, but in vain, that he would, by
this procedure, give all the advantage of the cauſe
to perſons who, having neither arms, hearts, nor
hands, depended upon this re{ource alone. And
15 certain, that the Duke of Bouillon would not
have ſeen matters carried ſo far as they were, but
becauſe he perſuaded himſelf upon the report of
his friends at court, who pave him intelligence of
What paſled there, that his Majeſty would never
| WT carry bis deſigns into execution. Another expe—
dent practiſed by thoſe perions, was to tell the
Hog, that the Duke had no intention to reſiſt him,
but that he could not reſolve to appear weak and
fearful before perſons, who, inſtead of making
bim a faithful report of his Majeſty's intentions,

ſeemed

128 M E M O I R s Book XXIII

ſee med ſolicitous to widen their difference by
threats and inſults; that if, inſtead of thoſe per:
ſons, (and here 1 was certainly meant), his Majeſty
would be pleaſed to treat with him, by men pro.
per to inſpire him with a confidence iu his promi.
fes, he would be ſoon convinced of the truth of
their afſertions. Montluet and La Noue, among
others, boaſted that they would, without any dit
ficulty, bring him back to his duty ; therefore tlie
King thought the beſt tlung he could do was to de.
ute them to him. They brought back nothing
— words, and thoſe general and ambiguous ; vet
this did not open Henry's eyes, becaule they like.
wiſe repreſented to him, that Sedan, by the nes
fortifications which were raed there, was abſolute.
ly impregnable. I know not whether they really
were deluded by this talle opinion, or only affected
to appear ſo. But Henry, inſtead of haſtening his
reparations after this an{wer from the Duke of
Bouillon, diſcovered more plainly, that he thought
the ſuccefs of this attempt very doubtful.

I likewiſe reflected ſeriouſly upon the diſpoſition
in which Lſaw the King, and began to tear, that
when by ſupporting him againſt the general cit.
ery, and againſt his own apprehenſions, I thould
have imbarked him in the enterpriſe; upon ſome
unforeſeen difficulty which might probably occur,
or by not having influence enough over his mind
already ſtrongly prepoſſeſſed, he might abandon it
after great noiſe and expenſe, or poſſibly liſten to
propoſals for an accommodation with the Duke, up-
on conditions neither ſuitable to his perſon or dig-
nity ; in which caſe it would be better either not
to engage in the attempt, or to deviſe, while it
was yet time, ſome other way to fave his Majeſtys
honour.

making an uſeleſs armament, would be imputed to
me alone; that I {hould-be accuſed of having done

£90

1 was very ſure, that the reproach of

1 60(
too 1

cont!
chars
was 1

The!
alter:
trate

that

Duke
mind,

upon
retraë
agalut

| fall uf

oppre:
them
alread

belief

or tha

100 fa
ſons v

der te
the ar
by the
and n
ſine |]
till ſo
tre wh

W 16066 OF 8 UL L I. 129

too much or too little, and that faults abſolutely
| contraditory to each other would be laid to my
charge by the ſame perſons. I concluded, that it
was neceſſary Henry ſhould of himſelt come to
ſome determination; and I was willing to {ce what
would be the reſult of his own reflections.
began therefore to ſpeak leſs frequently, and
with more coolneſs than before of the enterpriſe
of Sedan, and obſerved the ſame conduct in public.

The King was one of the fi{t who perceived this

alteration z and as he did not endeavour to pene—-

trate into my realons for this behaviour, or thought
| that I had changed my opinion concerning the
Duke of Bouillon and Sedan, it came into his
mind, that, having mylelt reflected more deeply
upon the advice F had given him, I now tacitly
retracted it, perceiving that the blow I was aiming
| 2041u{t one of the heads of the Proteſtants might
fall upon the whole body, by opening a way to
| oppreſs, one after the other, all who ſupported
them in France. From this thought, which was
already firmly eſtabliſhed, Henry caſily paſled to a
delief that I had no great reliance upon his equity,
or that my attachment to my religion carried me
too far. He declared this ſuſpicion to ſeveral per-
ſons whom he knew to be my friends, and in or-
der to have it cleared up by myſelf, he came to
the arſenal, I was then confined to my chamber,
by the wound I had formerly received iu my mouth
md neck, from whence iſlued a ſplinter of bone,
bone lint, lead, and ſome grains of gunpowder,
ſill ſo frech and {o. little altered, that they took
kre when laid on ſome burning coals,

Henry turning the difcourſe upon the Duke of
bouillon, 4 I think,” {aid he, “ you are not ſo
„iolicitous about this affair of Sedan, as you were
dome time ago, nor lo firm and ſteady in your
relolutions concerning it as I have known you

ITY Lo.

130 MEMOIR S Book XXIII.

& to he on other occaſions, where far greater dif.
&« ficultics were to be expected; what is the mean.
« ing of it? tell me freely, I intreat you, and do
« not conceal any thing Nom me.” This prince,
from the livelineſs of his temper, did not give me
time to reply, but proceeded to diſcover the no.
tion he had entertained of my alarms and appre-
henſions with reſpect to the Proteſtant body in
France. He proteſted with great earneltnels 3.
giinlt the ſuſpicion of his labouring to ruin the
chief Proteſtants one after the other; he appealcd
to the knowledge I had of his ſentiments, aud al.
ed whether it was not true, that it was generally
known, tha: in whatever concerned the {ervice of
his perſon and his table, he choſe rather to troll
himſelf in the hands of the Proteſtants than the
Catholics; and he aſſured me alſo, that he had no
perſonal hatred to the Duke of Bouillon; that he
would require nothing diſhonourable of him; ing
word, that he would make me judge of the man-
ner in which he ought to be treated, ;

I was overjoyed to hear the King ſpeak in tus
manner, and aſſured him, that I was well convin-
ced of his favourable ſentiments for the Proteſtant:
in general, and for me in particular; yet I ownec,
that the ſuſpiciou he had entertained of me wich
regard to the affair of Sedan had given me uncali-
nels I declared to him the true cauſe of that

coldneſs with which he taxed me; and, having af.

terwards exhauſted all the reflection which the
mind could ſuggeſt on this occaſion, I difcloied

oue to him which had occurred to no one but wy-
ſelf; and this was, that the expences Bouillon had

been at in fortilying Sedan having entirely ex
hauſted his funds, and probably involved him m

great debts, this might be the real caule of his not
yielding to his Majeſty's deſires, ſince, if he wo

0
1

L118

ſigned Scdan to him, he would deprive himic

* 1620

the 0
on t]
10 bt
offer
his d
givir
mig}!
cond.

{ix b
mam

than

tive
of wa

to de.
the v.
crow.
of Fi
great
Majet

of hay

thing

2 Kine

me 11
to the

et me
ceſs of
We tho!
patche:
Wholly
me, '
" cept

, 1656. Ur 131

the only reſource he had to reti1eve his affairs; and
on this ſuppoſition, perhaps all that was neceſſary
10 bring the affair to a happy concluſion, was to
offer the Duke of Bouillon a tum ſufficient to pay
his debts. I repreſented to the King, that if, by
giving Bouilion two hundred thouiand crowns, he
might be prevailed upon to accept all the other
conditions, his Majeſty would be till a gainer of
' fix hundred thouſand, fince the expenſe of the ar-
mament he was preparing could not àmount to leis
than eight hundred thoutand crowns. A new mo—
tive ſor treating Bouillon with the utmoſt rigour
of war, if he obliged the King to attack him, was
to declare not only the principality of Sedan, but
the viſcounty of Turenne likewiſe reunited to the
crown; although he pretended to hold them both
of France in the ſame manner, as they do the
great fiefs of the crown. I added, that unleſs his
Majeſty did this, he would have the mortification
of having made advances, for which afterwards no-
thing could make amends. It ſhould ſeem that it was
2 kind of foreſight of what happened, which made
ne iuſiſt fo earneſtly upon this alternative, either
to ſhew an extreme indulgence before the enter-
priſe was begun, or, when we had once taken up
ums, an inflexible reſolution.

The King replied, that to enter into a negoti—
mon with Bouillon, would be to confirm him in
the opinion, which it appeared by the leuer alrea-
ay mentioned he entertained, that his Majeſty
durſt not attack him. Ile contented, however, to
et me try this method in concert with the Prin-
cls of Orange, who was then at Paris, and that
we ſhould ſend Da-Maurier to the Duke with diſ—
paches, the purport and terms of which he left
Wholly to me. But you muſt likew?!ic promiſe
" me,” added Henry, “ that, if he mould 10: ace
" cept the offers you make lim, you will ſerve

cc me

. —
po.
" 2
—
—
—

7
==
9
*
—
—
he — "ling —_—
my 4 py —
_ *< -

: |

40
Tt
5
kf

2 Ws

”

1

* 6 of

*

132 M E M OI RS Book XIII.

« me impartially in this affair, and in the manner
* you have done before,“ purſued he, inſtancing
the ſiege of Amiens, the campaign of Savoy, aud
other enterpriſes of the ſame kind. This I faith.
fully promiſed. “ It is enough,” ſaid Henry, tz
king my hand; “ I ain {atisficd, and will rely en.
* tirely upon your capacity and fidelity.” Saying
this he left me.

] went the next day to the Princeſs of Orange,
and concerted with her the manner in which we
ſhould both write to the Duke of Bouillon. We
ſcrtied the deputition of Du-Maurier, and the
matter of the inſtructious which were to be piven
him. This is che ſubſtance of the letter I wrote
to the Duke. I began by calling to his remem.
brance the power and perſonal abilities of the pre-
ſent King, beth as well known to himſelf as to
me; and I intreated him to reflect well upon the
advantages they gave him, ſince this was the ſureſt
way to avoid the dangers with which he was
threatened, and to prevent being blinded by his
own prejudices, or carried away by the violence
of his paſſions, This was not indeed to flatter,
but, as I told him, it was to give him a clear no-
tion of what he might expect, and to prevail vpon
him to follow the advice offered him by the Prin
ceſs of Orange, and by a man who ſolicited Jum
as a friend, not to reduce himlelf to the neceſſty
of yielding to force, what nothing but his own
obſtinacy could hinder him from granting to con.
ditions dictated by the utmoſt gentleneſs. | did
not enter into a detail of the propoſals, but in.
formed him, that Du- Maurier was commiſſioned
to make them to him perſonally ; beſides which,
we had reduced to writing all that he had to lay
to him in our names, that nothing might be for

ot or miſtaken. TI prevented the objections which
I ſuppoſed he would make, that his Majeſty we
* 5

*

2 es wa, AY oy a, © © as tows

Saas, bans - a gp ON A —

CY — —— — AL

ch
id

01

1606, 0 -F::.-5 v.61 To 132

not appear to have any part in the propoſals we

made him, by giving him my word of honour,

and even offering to become ſurety, if neceſlary,

that his Myeſty would ratify whatever ſhould be
agreed on betwixt us; adding, that I was willing
to be branded with the names of baſe, perfidious,
and dichonourable, if every article was not per—
formed. I concluded with earneftly 1ntreating
him not to ſuffer matters to come to extremity,
This letter, which exactly agreed with that writ-
ten by the Princeſs of Orange, was dated the 1ſt
of March.

The Duke of Bouillon anſwered this by a letter,
dated the ath of the fame month. He told me,
that he had received a letter from me, as likewiſe
one from the Princeſs of Orange; that he had
heard what Du-Maurier had to ſay, and had read
his paper attentively, but that he had reaſon to
complain he ſhould be obliged to purchaſe the King's
{1vour by a meannels which would render him un-
worthy. of it; that what was promiled him was only
by a writing, which could be made known but toa
ſmall number of perſons, while all France would
be witnels of his humiliation, and the little regard
the King would afterwards have for him ; that his
friends whom he had conſulted, and who were not
o inconſiderable for their number as has been re-
ported, were all of his opinion; that his Majeſty
was very far from having thoſe favourable thoughts
of him with which he had been flattered, ſince he
diſtruſted his fidelity ſo much as not to allow him
to keep a place of ſo little ſtrength as Sedan. And
here he added, but with more confidence, and in
contradiction to what he had juſt ſaid, that he was
well informed there were perſons who attempted
to 1mpole upon his Majeſty, by promifing to make
him maſter of Sedan in leſs than a month, and

| *1:hout the loſs of one _ man. Bouillon, no

Vol. IV. doubt,

134 M E MOI RN S Book XXIII

doubt, applauded himſelf here on the ingenious
way he had found to give me the lie in ſpeaking
to myſelf. The whole letter was in this 5155 of
complaints without foundation, and proteſtations
of innocence, equally vague and uncertain. He
took care to avoid making any confeſſion or pro.
miſe; and all that he ſaid to the purpole, after
this idle preface, was, that if he had given the
King any cauſe to be offended with him, rather
than aggravate his fault by denyipg, he was ready
to make a frank confeſſion of it, and to ſubmit to
any reparation his Myjeſty thould require, pro.
ded it was not expected the return of his favour
and confidence ſhould coſt him his poor inconti-
derable city, which he was ready, in an authentic
manner, to declare that he held only from his
goodnels ; but that if the King perſiſted in his re.
{ſolution to deprive him of it, he ſhould be forced
to believe, that though his words expreſſed kind-
nels, yet his actions teſtified hatred,

Bouillon's Jetter to the Princeſs of Orange was
conceived almoſt in the ſame terms; and what Du.
Maurier related from himielf having nothing more
ſatisfactory in it, che King began to conſider the
Duke of Bouillon as wholly untractable. I thought
it necelſary, however, to anſwer his letter. I told
him that his Majeſty was difpleaſed at the manner
in which he had refuſed the offers he had made
him by me: That he had thought his letters full
of diſtruſt, doubts, and expreſſions very diſreſped.
ful to him; beſides his affectation of not anſwering
preciſely to what was propoſed to him. I adced,
that [ was truly grieved my advice ſhould have 10
other effect but to imbitter his mind, as it had bap-

ened formerly, when I wrote to him upon the
impriſonment of Marechal Biron; but that the
time would come, and perhaps it was already near

when he would be ſenſible that the countel 1 had
| gen

And
lence
wan!
ſent}
Mte!
amo
that
ces

T_T? $4 VU LT. ITY

given him was in the preſent conjuncture the beſt

that could be offered; and I warned him, for the
laſt time, to think ſeriouſly of it, and earneſtiy in-
lreated him to take ſuch a reſolution ts would be
molt for his true intereſt, fince nothing (whatever
he might tliink to the contrary) could give me.
wore ſatisfaction.

In the mean dime I had found means to get a
plan of Sedan drawn, both of thc perlpective and
-ronnd-plot, The King came to the arfenal to.
* at it, and brouglit with him the Count de
Soillons, the Duke of Epernon, the Marechals
B:ilac, Fervaques, Bellegarde, and Roquelaure,
Don John de Medicis, De-Vic, Montluet, La-
Nove, Botfle, Nereſtan, D*Eſcures, Erard, and.
Cha illon, who had drawn the plan, but whom L
had expreſsly ordered not to give his opinion be-
fore ſo many witnctſes. The fituation of the
place, its ſtrength, and the form of the attack,
were ſubjects for endle!s debate among ſo many
perſons : Montluet, La-Noue, and Erard, main-

F rained with great obſtinacy, that it was 1mpreg-
nable, and could only be reduced by famine. All
| this while J fcarce made any anſwer, though they
generally addreſſed themſelves to me, and though
i the King often aſked my thoughts of thoſe terrible
fo és, all cut in the rock, for ſo they alledged
they were.
| The allembly ſeparating without taking any re-
ſolution, I waited upon his Majeſty the next day.
And after telling him my reaſon for keeping ſi—
lence the day before, which was, that among fo-
wany perfons ſecrecy is but ill kept, I made him
ſenſible, that none of thoſe diligent obſervers had
atended'to any of the defects in the fortification,
among which were, the valley of the fountain,
that of Ginmenés, the foſes, which in ſome pla-
ces were not defended bv the natural rock, but
I 2 | flanked

136 MEMOIR s Book XXII.

flanked with earth brought thither for the pur.
pole; and the two approaches by the river-lide,
one above and the other below, fo ſpacious, that
J allured his Majeſty I would lodge, and that with
very little danger, all the troops within about two
hundred paces of the city, and even under the
counterſcarp of the artificial ditches, becauſe tha:
the turning of the valleys would cover them tro:
the diſcharge of the {mall arms, while the beſie.
wed would not be able to flew themſelves upon
their parapets, nor ſcarccly in any other place,
without being perceived "Ba the eminenccs in
the field, which fo abfolately command the wnole
body of the fortification, that we might have a
full view of the inſide of the lodgments, from be-
fore, behind, and of each fide. And I gave his
Myeſty my word, that wi-hin the eighth day after
the batteries were raiſed, I would put bim in pot-
ſeſſion of Sedan.

The King now believed me, and in the jay that
tranſported him he flew to impart it to NMeflieurs
de Medicis, de La-Force, De-Vic, de Nereitan,
and Boëſſe, of whoſe diſcretion he was well allured,
and who greatly praiſed my caution. After th!s,
Henry no longer heſitated whether he ſhould at.
tack Sedan, but prepared to ſet out as ſoon as fo“
{:ble, at the head of s body of cavalry, and fon
companies of the regiment of guards; while I, in
the mean time, aſſembled the” reſt of the troops
in a body, and ſent away the artillery before; t2-
king care that the country-people and citizens
ſhould receive no inſult, or ſuffer the leaſt 1ncon-
venience, by the quartering of ſo great a number
of troops.

The deſign of attacking the Duke of Bouillon
could not fail to raiſe murmurs among the Proteſt.
ants; and it is probable, that the Duke depended

vpon 2 general inſurrection in his favour. If this
Wes

1606. GO SV: Lb 137

was the caſe, he was deceived in his expectations;

to which, I confeſs, I contributed. I took occa-
ſion, from a letter that Parabere wrote to me up-
on this ſubject, to give in my anſwer à kind of
manifeſto, which might juſtify to the Proteſtants
the King's proceedings, and ſhew that the Duke
of Bouillon ſuffered only through his own fault.
It was for this reaſon that I took much more pains
in the compoſition of this letter, and extended it
to greater length, than I ſhould have done, if I
had intended it for Parabere only; for I ſuſpected,
and with reaſon, that it would be made public.

[ began with enumerating the chief favours
which Bouillon had received from his Majeſty,
who had preferred him to the Prince of Conde
himſelf, made him Marechal of France, firſt gen-
tleman of the bedchamber, and raiſed, before a-
ny other of the Proteſtants, to all honours and
dignities, rewarded with penſions and appointments
much larger than what were given to the others,
his penſions, ſalaries, &c. amounting to one hun-
dred and twenty thouſand livres a- year. Beſides

this, his Majeſty had married him as advantage-

ouſly as he could have done his own fon or bro-

| and, after the death of the Ducheſs his wife, ſup—

ported him with all his power. Of this particular
| was myſelf an ocular witneſs, and I ſpoke of it:
as ſuch. Theſe acts of kindneſs, and theſe re-
peared. benefits, I contraſted with the ingratitude
with which Bouillon had behaved to Henry; his
ſecret practices, his ſeditious conduct at the ſiege
of Amiens, his retiring from court when Marechal
Biron was arreſted, and his leaving the kingdom,
which was attended with circumſtances more than
Iuficient to condemn him. I took Parabere to
witneſs, that, notwithſtanding all this, himſelf,
Couſtaut, and I had been greatly inſtrumental in

ther; favoured him in the ſucceſhon of Limeuil,

N 3 ſoliciting,

1 - pu * — Me yu
1 "2 - k —
; — — ——
= wt r —_— — — 2 1 7
1 2 : * C * — na %
i SD 45 A 2 + 4, — *

—

K Er

— —
oc gh = .
= - = + To — = be — — be I» =
. - , ry -

—

—
—
*

=
— w——_—
LY

- _ = i 8
— . bl _ -
- = —

2E — — — .

RO

9 —— — —

133 ME M OI R s Book XXII.

ſoliciting thoſe favours which his Majeſty had
ſince been ſtill willing to beſtow upon him. I oh.
ſerved to him, chat Bouillon had in ſome fort con.
felled himſelf guilty of high treaſon, by his re-
queſting a full and general pardon ; and when his
Majelty appeared ready to grant it, eluded all ty
a ſubterfuge which was in itſelf a crime. For he,
though a ſubject and domeſtic of the King, from
whom alone he held the principality of Sedan, re.
fuſed to hold it upon the {ame conditions of pro.
tection which the late Duke of Bouillon had ac.
cepted from Francis II. of whom he was neither
a ſubject nor domeſtic.

I afterwards enumerated all the conciliatory me.
thods which ſome of his chief friends had ſent Du.
Maurter to propole to him, with full aſſurance that
his Majeſty would conſent to them, namely, that
it ſhould be propoſed to the King, that Sedan
thould be confidered as one of the cautionary cities
given to the Proteſtants; that the Duke thould
tel] it to the King; or if not, that Lo-Noue {hould
be made governor of it, the ſovereignty, and even
property, remaining to the Duke. But that white
the King offered him more than he had reaſon to
expect, he would liſten to nothing, and, by his ill
timed obitinacy, obliged us to draw our {words 4-
gainſt each other, and to reduce the church of Se—
dan to the extremity in which it would be ſhortly
feen. That his Nlajeſty was ſo greatly affected at
this misfortune, that he had reſolved, and cven
faithfully promiſed the deputies from the church,
to make no change, or introduce any Innovation in
the religion of Sedan, atthough he ſhould take It
by itorm. I concluded with earneſtly intreating
Parabeie to do me juſtice in public, as to the pu-
rity of my intentions, and my grief at behoiding
onc, who profeſied the fame religon as mylc!l,
Funuing to blindly upon bis deſtruction.

Henry

1666 , Q F 8 U L L F. 139

Henry thought it neceſſary to uſe the ſame pre-

*
* —

made, by -La-Noue, ſome propoſals not fit to be
received, the King publiſhed and anſwered them
by a writing which was diſtributed among the

Duke's friends, though at the hazard of confirm-

ing both him and them in their belief, that his
Majeſty was deſirous of ending this affair by gentle
meaus; and they accordingly gave out,. that the
King now deſpaired more than ever of the ſucceſs
of his enterpriſe. To this Bouillon added, (as be—
ing reported to him by La-Vieville, D*Arion, and
Du-Maurier, who were deputed to him at diflc-

rent times), chat it was | who thus raſhly engaged

his Majeſty, againſt his inclinations, iu a war; and

that I one day boaſted to this prince, I would take

Sedan in three months, by attacking it on the ſide

and made che King begin to reflect upon the pre-
tended fidelity of thoſe he had admitted into his
councils; for when thoſe words efcaped me, there
were none preſent but the King, Don John, and
Erard, Bouillon accordingly conſidered and treat-
ed me as one of his molt dangerous enemies, who
endeavoured to ſuppreſs every favourable thought
which aroſe in the mind of his Majeſty for him,
It was the King's part to aniwer this reproach,
and he did it in the manner I wiched; and as for
Mole other reports, which were {lil} more 1n10-
lent, he reſolved to force Bouillou ſoon to change
his ſtyle.

| Hts Majeſty left Fontainebleau the latter end of
March, carrying with him the Queen, who would
go part of the journey *, notwithſtanding the bad-

| nels

The Oveen only made this journey, according to De Thou,
the Mere. Frang. and the moſt authentic memoirs of that time,
n order to obtain the moſt advantagcous conditions that were
poſlible

caution with the Proteſtant party. Bouillon having

of Fer-a-Cheval. This laſt report indeed was true,

17
*
| :
3 11
& 4 ?
*
. %
.
LI

14

.
* A”

2 — —

"OT % *
p 4 PR 2 m
Y 1 x $_
_—Y SE; 8
= -
— — — -
*
-

140 MEM O IR S Book XXII.

neſs of the roads; and took his route by Rheims,
Rhetel, Mezicres, Doncheri, and Mouſon. 48!
did not ſee his Majeſty again till the whole affur
was concluded, I thall take the relation I give of
it from the letters he wrote to me, and t}1ofe
which by bis orders were continually ſent me by
Villeroi and La-Varenne.

Bouillon kept up his firſt arrogance as long as he
could. He boaſted to Du-Maurier, that on the
firſt ſummons he ſhould get by a trumpet, he woe
beat down the arms of France from his gates. The
King, while he purlved Bouillon with arms, was
deſirous alſo that preparations ſhould he made {or
his trial, which he commanded me to puſh on vi
gorouſly before I ſet oat to join him. The Nike
timpered fo ſucceſsfully with four of his Majeſty”;
gunuers, that they ſuffered themſclves to be pre-
vailed on to deſert him, making ule of the hor:
he ſent them to La-Fere in Tartenols for that pui-
pole; a crime which well delerved an exemple
puniſhment. Although the Ducheſs of Bouillon
never left Sedan, yet he managed with ſuch art,
that thoſe whom his Majeſty employed to bring
him an account of every thing that was doing
there, reported that ſhe had retired to German,
to avoid the inconveniencies ſhe might be expo
to in a beſieged city. The Duke was heard to
boaſt likewiſe, that by ſtamping his foot npon the
ground, he would bring four thouſand men into
Sedan; and would have had it believed, that he
had the abſolute diſpoſal of ſeventeen companies
of horle, and ſome regiments of foot, which were
in Luxemburg; and that he (ſhould. procure 2
powerful ſupply from the Swils cantons. The molt

0-049 hae the Duke of Bouillon, who had engaged her in his
wtcre

circumſtantial

1 1606. S8 DU L I. 14

ecircumſtantial advices we received were, that be-
© fore the 20th of April he expected to be reinforced
by five or ſix hundred ſoldiers, whom he had
cauſed to be levicd iu Gaſcony, and in the neigh-
bout hood of Limeuil, and ordered to be imbark-
ed at Bourdcaux. A nephew of Rignac, and a man
named Prépondié, raifed them, under colour of
being recruits for the war in Flanders. His Ma-
jeſty, before he left Paris, had received notice of
this from Pucharnaut.
| Theſe advices, upon anearer examination, were
ſound greatly exaggerated. It was Known that
Germany did not offer to {tir iu the Duke of Bouii-
© lon's cauſe, The King was well atlured by Bon-
gars, that the archdukes teſtified more fear of our
armament for themſelves, than inclination to de-
clare againſt us. Spain thought the occaſion too
| fight to break the peace with France. And Eng-
land had not the ſmalleſt conſideration for Bowl.
E lon, Three or four hundred Swiſs adventurers,
were all he could depend upon, and this number
vas likely to be leſſened, ſince our levies againſt

„bia were carried on in thoſe cantons without an

” WW oppoſition. Montglat had not yet ſeen the Elector
> Palatiue, but he wrote from Straſburg, that this
F prince thared in Bouillon's fears, avd the Land-
„gases ſent letters to France to notify his intentions
: to us.

0 As for the Duke himſelf, every one knew that
4 he had not more than twelve hundred ſoldiers in
; Sedan. And we were afterwards more particularly
„ formed, that he had, in reality, but ſeven or
: eight hundred, citizens and adventurers to-
q gether, part of whom alſo ſeemed to have

a inclination to leave the place before the ap-
proach of the King's army. It was reported that
douillon himſelf had retired with fix others into
1 eraany, eſcorted for ſome leagues by his .

00,

11s

142 M EM O I R 8 Book XXIII.

fon, and had been ſeen near Baſcogne by ſome
foldiers who knew him, and to whom he- ſpoke,
Some paiticulars with regard to the orders he had
given in Sedan for the caſtle and town, gave room
to believe that he did not deſignu to return. Bi
this news, which the governor of Ville-Franche
came expreſs to relate to the King, was found 10
be falle. The Duke of Nevers, who was hetter
informed, wrote the King word, that the Duke of
Bouillon had indeed marched out of the town, at
the head of three or four hundred men, but it was
to meeta German prince, with whom he returned
to Sedan the night after. Although the ſeveral in.
formations given his Majeſty by his agents did not
exactly agree in every circumſtance, yet it ws
known from. very good authority, that Bouillor
was not far from his city. This German count,
whom it was faid he had brought into Sedan to
undergo a fiege there, was the third of the counts
of Solms. The eldeſt was grand maſter to
the Elector Palatine. We have ſeen the ſecond
with the Sieur Du-Pleſſon. And as for this third,
he had no great character either for knowledge
or experience.

The K ig was bad of a cold at Nanteuil, but it
did not hinder him from going to the chace as
ſoon as he began to ſpit. He wrote me from that
7 on the 27th of March, that he had miſled of

is ſtag, hut to make amends for that, he bad
taken two wolves, which he looked upon as a fl.
vourable augury. Ar Freſne he found four com.
panics of the reziment of guards, already recruited
with ſeven hundred men, whom he permitted t0
ſtay there, tilt the firſt of April, to raiſe all the
recruits they wanted, It was ealy to perceive the
heart of Henry expand itſelf, and a martial ardvur
apprar in his countenance, at his reſuming his fill

glorious occupation. He went two leagues fro
Freſuc

*

®
9
1
+:

—
v

0

0 FF 50 E LY, 143

Freſne to dine, and from thence to attend the
ſervice called the ténebrés at Rheims. Here he

continued for his Eaſter-devotions till the Weds

_— —

ne {day following, when he was joined by the Duke

of Mercœur, and all the nobility of the country.
There alſo he ſaw Du-Maurier, who came from
Sedan, commiſſioned by the Duke ot Bouillon, to
tell him, that he conſented to receive a perſon
there, in the King's name, provided that he was

inveſted with no authority, and that his garriſon
ſhould remain there, commanded by his own offi-
cer; that he was ready likewiſe to receive his

| Majeſty into Sedan with what retinue he ſhould

think proper, and all whom he choſe to de-
pute to him, but that he perſiſted in his reſolu—

tion to be ſole maſter of his own city; and rather

than reſign it, he would he contented to loſe bis

eſtates, his children, and his life. But in propor-
tion as the danger came nearer, the Duke's pride

* abated.

The King, without returning any anſwer to this
propoſal, ſent the Duke of Nevers to Mouſſon, to

aſſemble what cavalry was come thither, and hin-

der thoſe ſuppoſed troops of the Duke of Bouillon
from entering Sedan. The whole number amount-

ed but to three hundred men, Swiſs and Germans
included; and there was no appearance that any
| more ſupplies would be ſent him, his Majeſty being
| then in a condition to prevent them. The King
| dilcovered great impatience to advance towards this
| city, but he had yet only his regiment of guards
| with him. The recruits of light horſe arrived in

good order, but the remainder of the troops were
not to join him till the 4th of April. The King
did me the honour to write to me twice from
Rheims, on the 24th and 26th of March, preſliog
me to come thither to him with my jon. He pro-

poled to {et out on the 27th for Rliètel, aud to be

at

. 8 — — —
2 3 gr — =
— - : _ = —ͤ T
_—_ 81 >>
= * = *
—

= IE *
—
4 *
= a *
2
. 9 *

N
N
12
1
-
b
N
1.
1
*
*
&T 1
\ by
1
3
. *
1X 1
1
by ©
7
1
*
4
10
«fx!
ih
4.
f
bh
» : G
+ |
p „ k
.
.
$ Og
: 1 x
L
! AH
"4% | |
> þ4
1
__—
> \ 7
e
19 2
aL
*
4
"1
Y -
2
81
G
*,
1
i
*
'
i
19+
. * 1
'
# he
\
”y P
1
ö
"
|
4
4
f
*
*
"1

——

——
IA I

, ro_ 4
"> > —_— OS
= > 4”

144 MEMOIR S Book XXIII.

at Mouſſon on the goth, which was the day be
appointed for the rend-zvous of the regiment of
guards, although the roads were rendered al mot
1mpatjable by the rains. His Majeſty wrote to ue
alſo to fend him ſome officers and horics, with 1
convoy of pick-axes, ſhovels, and mattocks, aid
ſome pieces of cannon of a moderate ſize, to for.
Uty his camp

Nevertheleſs very little dependence was to he
Had upon all theſe appearances, as, notwith{tand'ng
the preparations for war, ſo many perſons wer
la50u-1ng to conclude the aftiir by way of nepotiz
tion; and in effect, the party that was for pcace,
in a thort time prevailed. His Majeſty, however,
was but ill fatisfied with the laſt propoſals which
Du- Maurier had brought from Bouillon, and which,
by the King's order, were communicated to the
keeper of the great ſea! and to me. His Majeſty
was yet more o.fended with the memorial, in which
It ſeemed as if the Duke wanted to treat with Her.
ry as his equal. D'Arſon, of his own accord, «
to Bouillon after Du-Maurier preſented this im.
pertinent memorial to the King. But Bouillon,
after this ſacrifice to his vanity, comprehbended
that it was at laſt time to change his language,
which all ofa ſudden he ſoſtened very much. In
conſequence of this, he depured Netancour to 1t-
treat his Mijeſty to ſend Villeroi to confer and
treat with him. To which the King conſented,
on condition that the conference ſhould be held at
Torcy, in the dominions of France. The laſt
act of extravagance of this man, who certainly de-
'ferved worſe than what actually beſel him, was to
ſend back Aerſens, who, with Henry's leave, had
been with him, and to declare by him, that he dif-
claimed Netancour, and that he could do without
Viilerol, |

Henry muſt have had ſome powerful ran,

| thong

rbt
tho
aft
” ord:
"of t

it a}
nor
me

his

ſam
had
Vill
had
and
thir
not

beg

rect
whe
Ho.

Ile «

Ins

con

acg!
Th
the
A
me'
wro

Boy

with
Whi
a8 4
ving
ſide
ra
me!
ers,
00

V

og! unknown to me, which made him depute,
FH he did after all this; Villeroi and Dinteville, in

order to throw che whole blame of the miſcarriage '

of rhe accommodation upon Bouillon. With then

it appears that Bouillon ſhewed neither ill-hamour,

nor 2 diſinelination to treat. Villeroi himſelf wrote

me what palled between them, and ſubjoined to

his letter a Jon memorial, which he wrote the

ſame evening, Peine the zoth of March, after he
bad returued to Donchery. If J was to believe

Þ Villeroi (for we thall immediately [ee the reaſons I

nate doubt his firiceriry), be found Bouillon fo dark

and irreſolute, that he could not anſwer for apy

not only concluded and ſigned the treaty, but allo
begun to execute it. Now how hall we able to
reconcile this with what follows Immediately after?
where he ſays, that it ſeems as 1t the Duke of Bou-
jon was coming to reaſon, but, by ſuppoſing that
be could nor help throwing out ſome dark hints of
„ ii knowiedge of the treary being much nearer a
| conclufior} than he cared to-rell me. He further
acquainted me, that à ſecond conference was to
j be held the next- morning, which would oblige
the King to ſpend another cy at Donchery.
a As a Proof chat Vinleroltdid vor communicate to
we the whole of this affair, La Warenne, who
rote to me: at the {awe time, informed me, that
Bouillon had pteſei ted himtelf at the conference
wirn the air of a man who aſbed quarter. For
which conduct, ſays he, he had very good reaſon,
as After having made his” utunott eto after ha-
ving exlracted his {mall territory levies on all
des, he cond rail e no more than 1 hundred”
ri men, none of whom had ever ſcen an engage-
ment, with a few French and German ſoot-{o}di-
ers, and only twenty-five Swils, all the reſt of his

65 [9028 being 1 In 4 moſt wretched condition, excepr
VoL. IV. 0 ſome

— . *

. ir sI L L Y. 115

ching till another interview, nay until Bouillon ha 4'

— —ů—

« :
*
*
13
1 1
= =
\
G
4 : \
| .
© BY
*
33 Na þ
.
*
* 13
: TS) -
l if
' 11 oF
. - 7
1 „
529. >
4 *
5 *
: 1
: 3 ,
ix 4 5.
1 *
7
4 4
*
x » 4
[1 d 9
tt
7 =
' LN
4: : "4
v4
: »
* 1
Ws, 1]
-
1
a
*
_—_
N
* 7
*
* »
* © nt
*
*2 }
+ +1
.
9
*
"4

4
[1 +
* 1
TY |
i * 1
1
1 7

? *
* .
4 2
7 i
1 1
*
* ,
1
* * 7
"7
-

—
— —

146 M E MO I-R S Book XXIII.

ſome Flemings from Frankendal and the neigh.

bouring country. Therefore, if in this, extre mii
the Duchels of Bouillon had not yet left Sedan,
there was no reaſon to doubt but that her huſband
had relolved to accept of any conditions whatever,
ſo that the treaty might be reckoned as in a ma-
ner concluded, it being only to fave his character
from the reproach of fo haſty a capitulation, that
the Duke had demanded, as a favour, a reſpite till
the next morning. a

All was accordingly concluded in this ſecond con.
ference. Villeroi was, in appearance, very eager to
acquaint me with the news, ſince he wrote to me
immediately aſter, as he had done the day before:
but he took care to conceal part of what had paſ—
led, as we {hall ſoon ſee. In this ſecond letter,
however, he promiſed to ſend me the treaty itſelt,
as ſoon as it, was fairly tranſcribed and ſigned,
which was to be done the next morning. Iu the
mean time he ſpecified the principal articles. The
treaty was intitled, Ar tictes of the protection of Se.
dan, and Raucourt, and dated April 2. 1606, and
to remain in force four years. By this treaty,, the
Duke of Bouillon conſented that the King ihould
place a governor In the caſtle, with.a company of
fifty men; and that the inhabitants of Sedan hould
take the oath of fidelity tothe King, which Bou-
illon alfa engaged io do himſelt. Villeroi fill
ed up the reft of his letter with the pralles
which he ſaid his Majeſty publicly beſtowed ou m)
vigilance, and the advice 1 had given on this oc.
caſion. Vet ſurely this was unneceſſary, for all
my endeavours and all my coupliels produced no-
thing. Therefore I was not to be dazzled by
Villeroi's flattery, nor could I alter my opinion of
his proceedings. 1

I had.no reaſon to doubt, that his Majeſty ſin-

cerely deſired to give me ſome part in the cone
| 100

'

8 1606, O:F' SU L L Y. 147
| Gon of this affair, aſter the aſſurances J had recei-
ved from him, and the letters he wrote to me for
vo other purpoſe but to preſs me to come, that
nothing might be done without me. I do not pre-
tend to know Villeroi's rea'ons for thinking io dif—
ferently from his Majeſty in this reſpect. Perhaps
he was afraid I ſhould deprive him of the honour
of this treaty; or probably, he thought Bouillon
might, by my interpoſition, obtain terms more
advantageous, iu which cate, our fricudchip woud
unite us againſt his policy, which was to keep the
moſt conſiderable Proteſtants at variance with
each other. This, however, was certain, that he
preſſed the, concluſion of the affair ſo much the
more carneſtly, as his Majeſty appeared ſolicitqus
for my being preſent, and repeated his invitations
to me to come; and to effect this purpoſe, did not
ſcruple to make uſe of a little artifice. Henry ha-
ving given him the letters before mentioned to be
diſpatched to me, he committed them to the care
| ofa ſervant, whom he ordered to ride ſowly into
Amiens, Saint-Quintin, and Rheims, that I might
not receive them till I had got another letter from
his Majeſty, which he wrote to me cight days af—
terwards, and was bronght to me by a courier lent
expreſsly with it. My aſtonilhweyt may de eaſily
magined, when, by theſe laſt difpatches, I found
that his Majeſty was under great uneaſineſs on my

$ account, fearing that I was indiſpoled, fince he
/ had received no an{wers to letters he had wrote to
' me eight days before, winch was the caule that e-

very thing had been concluded without me. In
this letter, which was dated Saturday, April the
It, Henry deſired me to delay no longer, but to
leave my heavy baggage at Chalons, and meet
bim on Monday following at Cazine, whither he
vent to ſee the Queen, |

O 2 1 Having

*
2 —

—
, — a — — 4
1 E — — n n ———
— a — PRE,
* * = _ 1 _ FLIRT 8 * 33 ws
. — — = — 4 S 4 - - —
> ys 2 - Ta.” "FT 2 22 - — —
2 | 6, 2a * — == 32 *
4 — | A A q © OV
me Tar ae. _ ad . 1 P I

248 MEM O E R S Book XIII.

» Having received theſe two letters both in one

day, I jaw I had not a moment to loſe, if I wou
meet his Majeſty at the place appointed. I found,
by the reception he gave me, that, after a littk
reflection, he would caſily pardon the fault Villersj

had committed with regard to me“. This prin
10 Ait ft L. eil & treated

4

De Thou, in the account he gives of this expedition of Se.
dan, b. 136.” ſhews but a fmall degree of inclination to the
Duke of Sully, but a- great one to the Duke of Bouillon. g.
would perſuade us, that Henry IV. having been convinced, during:
this journey, that NI. de Sully perſecuted the Marechal de Eoui-
lon only from a perſonal enmity to him, he was glad to take the
opportunity his abſence afforded, to determine this affair by;
treaty, becauſe in reality his conneQions with Rleſſicurs de Bitin
and d' Auvergne had not extended to any thing criminal. The
evidence of the Merc. Frang. of almoſt all the hiſtorians, and gf
the author of the Apology for the Duke of Bouillon himſelf, who,
on the contrary, ſpeaks more favourably on this accaſion of the
Duke of Sully, than of the Duke of Bouillon; and the other
proofs interſperſed through theſe Memairs, inconteſtably evince,
according to my judgment, the invalidity of what M. de Thos
bere aſſerts, of the opinion Henry TV. formed of the Puke af
Pouillon's ſentiments and diſpoſition. A quite different degree of
credit is due to facts eſtabl.ſhcd on the evidence of origin letters
and diſcourſes, as the greateſt part of thoſe produced in the Dube
of Sully's memoirs, and the prefent in particular, are, than to
ſuch as are founded only on the teſhmony of public 1eport. And,
it 1 am not miſtaken, it would not be difficult to convince XI. be
Thou. that he is inconſiſtent with himſelf in'what be ſays on this
ſubject. > . ih n

it may be aſked, what was it then that occaſioned that preck
pitation in coneluding the treaty, tht appearance of favour vt.ici
is manifeſt in it, that myſtery which M de Sully himſelf infow
ates the King made of it to him? I ſubſcribe to the reatins Mar:
ſolier gives: firſt, that Henry IV. bad no mind to zuin the Duke
of Bouillon, but only to make him ſcuſible of the weight of lis

wer, to contain him within the bounds of his duty for thc furwe,
Secondly, that the Duke of Bouillon ſeeing the inſtrument of hi
alſociation wh Nleſſieurs de Biron and d'Auvergne in the h+nds of
M. de Villeroi, thought it high time to make his ſubmiſſion to the
King in carneſt, in oder to obtain his pardon, v hich bis havgh-
tineſs preventediliim from aſking, fo long as he could flatter him-
lelf his machinations were concealed. Thirdly, that, on due it

kQion, Henry IV. concluded the Duke of Bouillon would 0

able

.
3

*
1

JF
N
Ws.

Ws DF. $0 LET: 149

treated me with more than uſual kindneſs and

reſpet, ſuppoſing perhaps, that 1 reſented his
not — for me. © You are welcome,” faid

he to me aloud, “I have provided a ſupper and 2

bed for you; you (hall have good accom meda-
tions.“ “ Can you guess,“ ſaid he afterwards in
a low voice, and leaning towards me, “ why J
„ have made ſuch haſte? it was becauſe I knew,

ee that, as ſoon as you arrived, you would be for
«© viewing every thing, and throwing yourſelf into

the molt dangerous places, ſo that L was appre-
„ henſive of ſome accident happening to you; and

« ] would rather Sedan was never taken, than ha-

E © zard ſuch a misfortune, for | have need of you

1 5

*« for affairs of much more conſequence.”
Aſter this, any reflections I ſhould make upon

this agreement, and the whole conduct of the af—

r

fair, might poſſibly not be free from partiality.

AJl I hall ſay therefore, is, that the Duke of

Bouillon had reaſon to think limſelf very happy

chat he got off at ſo ealy a rate, after having ob-

iged his Majeſty to ſet an army on foot, and

bring a train of artillery of fiſty pieces of cannon,
| vitliin fifteen or twenty leagues of Scdan, while
he himſelf advanced almoſt to its very walls. All
this Henry acknowledged, and ſometimes he was
| greatly enraged at the Duke's conduct; but his.
| natural clemency prevailed. He made his entry

able to do him Icfs miſchief at Sedan than any vhere elſe; and
that for this reaſ-n he was ſo far from driving him from thence,
that he ſent him back thither in a month's time afterwards. As
to M. de Villeroi; whoſe behaviour on this occaſion the author
condemns, he certainly acted only in obedience to the King's or-
ders, and in contormity to his intention; and he iy therefore
greatly commended en account of this negotiation, in the 84th
volume of the royal MSS. See the hiftorians, and eſpecially the
Mere, Frang. anno 1606. No writer has given ſo minute a rela-
non of this fact, as is contained in theſe Memoirs.

0 3 into-

15
1

r

PA k > — =w * 6

— .
e
* i p : * 1 - — *

—

150 M E M OI R S Book XXIII.

into Sedan on the 2d of April, and left there fifty
men, with Netancourt at their head. Bowlluy
came afterwards to pay homage to his Majeſty,
who {cat for me to be preſent at this ceremouy,
which was performed in the King's chamber 9
early in the mornivg, that the Duke found his
Majeity ſtill in bed *.

I vilited the town the next day, where, inſtead
of thoſe powerful ſupplies which were to come'trom
all parts of Chriſtendom to the Duke's aſſiſtance,
three hundred miſerable Laniquenets, aud twenty.
five Swils, were all the foreign troops I aw there,
All the reſt was in proportion, the cannon in very
bad order, with four or five untkilful gunners to a-
tend them, no place likewile fit to receive them,
no faſcines, gabions, pick-axes, or planks; in 4
word, none of the uſual preparations for a defence
of the place. It was not poſſible for me to reſtrain
my from expreſling my aſtoniſhment to the Duke
of Bouillon, who was preſent at the ſurvey, and
who, not being pleaſed either with my obſervations
or the freedom of them, began a debate, which he
ſupported with more heat than was neceſſary. But
however ingenious his vanity might be, the ine.
quality of the two parties was ſo palpable, that he
pete among our neighbours, to have - prevented
bis total ruin by an implicit ſubmiflion, Cardinal

Du- Perron ſent me a letter of congratulation
from Rome, in which he fays, quoting an ancient
author, wars ought to be carried on with vigour
and rapidity, for by that means we fave both time
and expen'e. Thole conqueſts which are made by
the terror of arms, are more expeditious aud ex.
tend farther, than thoſe which are gained by arms

* Henry IV. obligingly anſwered him, that it was not ſo much
his city of Sedan which tempted him, as the good ſervices he
expected from him perionally. MISS, ibid,

themſelves.

*

1606. Gere. 151

© themſelves. The Pope ſpoke publicly of this ex-

| pedition in very advautageous terms; and I was

convinced, that, in all other countries, people
thought of it in the ſame manner as they did at
Rome. This allurance, that the reputation of our
arms did not ſuiter, gave me ſomę con{olation.

[ propoled lache to indemnity ourſelves in
ſome mealure for the expenſes of this armament;
by reducing to his Majeity's ſubjection the fortreſl-
es of the county of Saint Paul. Aud here it is ne-
ceſſary to remember what I have already ſaid eon-
ceruing the acquilition of this county in 1604, that
when Guillouaiie came from the Count of Soulons
to propole this bargaiu to the King, his Majeſty

intruſted the management of the affair, in my ab-
WW {ence, to Meſteurs Bellicvie, Villeroi, Sillery,
aud Maiſſes; and that upon the difficulties which I
| W. bowed this prince in the affair, he cauſed a con-
tract to be drawn up in the name of a third perſon,
| W. util the King, on taking poſktion of theſe forts,
„night be dec iaced rightful purchaſer of them.

When Henry propotcd to me to pay the troops
and diſband them: “ How ! Sire,“ replied J,“ dif-
> © band them, what then will become of your

„contract for the county of Saint Paul? Have yon
3 © forgot the reiolution you tormed when it was
made? Since you have been at the expenſe of
mailing an army, what now remains but to em—
u © Ploy it that way?” I reprelented to his Majeſty,
dat it would be the work of filteen days only.
ic The Spaniards had not the leaſt expeRation of ſuch
y We" attempt ; and when it did happen, could have

vo juſt cauſe to complain, ſince the King only
made uſe of that power granted by treaties to the
Counts of Saint Paul, to make their election be-
ch WF een France and Spain, which thould be declared
be de the council of Madrid at the {ame time that we

ſt forward, © 1 am convinced,” ſaid Henry,
8 alter

—

4
|
!
' '
n
| 4
*4
ä
:
14
"1%
4 4
ou be |
Vt )
3 * p
. 4 1
-
, f
l
"
N 1
1 1
z %
4 np
1 *
1
T: N "
7 14 80
| \
LN b £7
1 ,
4 {
: 4 4 2
1 ,
1
y =
3
.
1
i
p *
* =
1 Gy
[Lal þ
, 8
' :
15 '
944
: : 1.
1
.
J U »
38 TY "#
3 * F
48g
4
[ : F
1 +
- 4
47 : | y
4 | yl
N 4 *
"4 +
5
13
* 4
r . %
= 1
b i
1 3 Ly
19
*4 *
i
J [1
Go -
4
#4 «<3 SE
150 5
1. 3
1
N # * 1
1 70
1
*
=
| L
:
.
* # : 1
.

„
50

*
8
REN
0
1
14
* p

90
1

—

gr —U —

152 ME M O TI R S Book XXII.

aſter having heard me attentively, “ that you are
„ in the right, but it requires ſome deliberation
% before we engage in this affair; and I fhould
% chule to mention it to the principal perſons here
& with me, and to my ordinary council.“ I knoy
not with whom his Majeſty confulted, or what
advice was given him; but two days afterwards
this prince took me aſide, and endeavoured to
perſuade me, that at preſent it was belt to let this
affair fleep. I confeſs, when I quitted the King,
I could not help faying, with tome impatience,

„Well, egad, I find we are going to lay afide

* our ſwords: with fo fine an army, and ſo fayour.
* able an opportunity of employing it, we art
“preparing to diſhand our men.” I was not able
to alter the King's reſolution; the troops were
paid and diſbanded, and I fent back the artille.y
to Paris.

The King having a deſire to enter this city with
a diſcharge of all the ordnance, La-Vir nge, by
his order, came to acquaint me with it. What
„ does the King mean, Monſieur La-Varenne!”
eried I, ſurpriſed at the propoſal, 4 we have not
4% drawn our ſwords, nor fired one ſingle volley
*« of cannon, and ſhall we play the victors? iQ
& who in two reſpects are the vanquiſhed, for we
« have bought with too great credulity, what tic
„King ought only to hold by his own courage, aud
«. afterwards have been afraid to publich our on
, acquiſition. I was always apprehenfive that
« things would be managed thus; tell the King
c that all the world thinks as I do on this occs-
« ſion, and would laugh at us if we fired the can-
4 non.” I probably carried my freedom a little
too far, hut the grief I felt at what had happened
was the cauſe of it. The King could not ne
this anſwer without great emotion; he concealed
it from no one but myſelf. Praſlin, and afterwards

on Bethunc,

, cc LS... ite NE.

-

%
-

ES ar Lo

16060C( oO F JS U L L. V. 1753

Bethune, oame back immediately, to tell me from

him, wich great gentlenels, that there was nothing
anreaſonable in what his Majeſty required of me.
And I, in my turn, thought { was able to convince
them of the icontrary. Henry began now to be

© extremely enraged with me, gave wy reſiſtance

very harth names, and ſent me an abſolute com-
mand to obey him: which 1 !did with ſuch expe-

dition, and with fo great a noiſe of the artillery,

| that he was appeaſed immediately, and ſent for

me to come and embrace him “. Bouillon was in
the King's retipve when die made Tus entry. He

| would: certainly bave injured his Majeſty greatly
10 have feared: from him any appearance of con-
* tempt. The King reſumed bis former familiarity

with bim; and if there was any change in his
Majeſty's bebaviour, it was only io greater kind-

© nels and reſpec for the Duke.

About this time broke out the famous quarrel
between Pope Paul V. and the Venetians. Ittook
its riſe long before, on occafion of ſome pretend-

cd eccleſiaſtical rights which the Holy Father, at a

very unſealonable time, undertook to maintain a-

gainſt this republic; who, on their fide, oppoled

The journal of Henry IV. makes no mention of this dif-
pute, but, on the contrary, ſays, that M. dc Kofny was at the
King's fide, cornverfing with him, and ſhewing him ſome beevtifit
I. dies; and that the Marechal de Bouillon was very plainly dreſſ-
ed and mounted, and his look very forrowful. A letter wrote
by the King to the Princes of Orange on the ſurrender of Se-
dan, is (et forth in this jc urnal in theſe words: „ Covfin, I may

sey as Cafar did, Veni, vidi, vici; or as the ſong does, Three

" days my love will la”, and in three days is paft : fo much
* was | io love with Sedaa. You are now able to judge whe-
® ther I was 'n the tight or not; and whether I did not know

the condition of that place better than thoſe who wanted to

make me believe I (houid not be able to take it in leſs than

” three years,” Kc. M. de Thou is alſo miſtaken, when he

buys, ibid. that the Duke of Bovitlon did not arrive till three days.
| attes, Sce the Mer. Frag where a deſcription of his Majeſty's

© FKITy into Paris is givcu.

them

154 M E M O I R $ Book XXIII

them by very firm decrees “. Freſne-Canaye, our
amballador at Venice, had given me notice of it

in the month of October. Theſe decrees, joined 5
to the 1mpriſoament of the two eccleſiaſtics by a WE (
decree of the ſenate, | the interdict fulminated by WF ©
the Pope upon their refuſal to revoke thole de. e\
crees, and to do him juſtice with regard to their WW "
impriſonment; and laſtly, the proteſtation lately *
made by the republic agaiuſt this excommunica. *
tion, had, on both ſides, brought matters to c. i
tremity. | 3-4
To ſpeak candidly my ſentiments of the affii, WW ©
I thought the proceedings of both parties much 0
the ſame, equally violent and imprudent. I have b
ever had a real refpe& for Paul V. and have pro- a]
felled ro honour hiin greatly; nor do I think what _
I am going to lay has any thiug in it contrary to 1
theſe ſentiments. We live not now in thoſe times ie
when the popes exerciſed that ſpiritual authority 8.
from which. they thought, and with reaſon, theit ry
* By one of the decrees, of the 1oth of Janvary 1603, it is pl
forbidden to build any church without leave from the govern- NI
ment; and by a ſecond, of the 26th March 1605, ecclchiuftics, L.
and perſons holding in mortmain, are reſtrained from making di

any acquiſition without ſpecial authority I thall not enter into a
diſcu(Gon of theſe points of law, there being an infinity of tres.

tiſes wrote at that time on each ſide of the queſtion : the chief th
are thoſe which came from the pen of Cardinal Baronias, on the th
file of the Pope; and of Friar Paul Sarpi, a monk of the order of tc
the Scrvites, for the Venetians. All theſe may be ſeen in !.

De Thou, the Merc. Frang. Matthieu, an 1606, and other hiſt» M.
rians; and in particular in the writings upon this famous diſpute. lat
The Jeſuits, the Capuchins, and a few other monks, were that Wa
paid any obedience to the interdict, and thereby got themſchves L
expelled the Venctian territories. The excommunication was *.

treated with contempt by all the other orders in the republic, and
divine ſervice continued to be performed as before. It is repolt-
ed that the vicar- general to the biſh»p of Padua, ſaying to the
governor, that he would act on this occaſion as the Holy Ghoſt
ſhould infpire him; the governor made anſwer, That the Holy
Gh-ſt had already inſpired the council of ten, to order all the
to be hanged who ſhould refuſe to obey the order of the ſenate
Preate!

16006. O F 8 U LI. T.! 155

reateſt advantages were derived, and exerciſed it

in ſuch a manner, as gave them, in reality, a ſo-

2 power over the princes and ſtates in

Chriſtendom. At preſent, their uſurpation of

temporal authority is clearly krown and diſtin-

guied, and 1s ſtrongly conteſted with them. I
may almoſt venture to ſay, that they are diſabled
with regard to their ſpiritval power; at leaſt it is
certain, that the Proteſtants deprived them of two
thirds of it at once; an example ſo recent, and ſo
ealy to imitate, that it was certainly very injudi-
cious in the Roman court, to expole the republic
of Venice to ſuch a tempration, ſurrounded as it is
by provinces who have thook oft the yoke of the
apoſtolical fee, and who would receive them with
open arms as foon as they had done the like.
Theſe 1 ſpeak of were the Lutherans, the Pro-
teſtants of Germany, Switzerland, Bohemia, Hun-
gary, Auſtria, and Tranſilvania; to whom may be
added, the ichiimatic Greeks and Turks, Rome
mould reflect upon the ravage made in her em-
pire, by three or tour mooks only; and that this
mifortune happened through the ill-timed pride of
Leo X. and Clement VII. too like what Paul V.
diſcovered in the preſent conjuncture.

The Veuctians, it is probable, run greater riſks.

than the Pope, by making him their enemy. All
tele diſcuſhons, which at firſt the contending par-

les pretended to regulate and guide by the judg-

ment or award of conſcicuce, terminate, ſooner or
later, in being ſupported by arms; when, as it al-
ways happens, arguments, far from being reliſhed,
fave rile to proceedings more and more violent.

and there was nothing which this republic ought.
lo carefully to avoid as war, ſince the may be con-

nnced, that if the Emperor and the King of
ain do not proſecute their claims upon her do-
muions, which they ſcarce cver conceal, it

es 1s

” a — . — 92x * — — * — -
. . — — 2 - K *
E . f 2 > —
Lr 2 — Ä— == — —
2 — * —
— ˖ — —

— — —

7  -— at 2
of "OO i F
F __ v . G
— — 3
= : L

p a}
— — — bo * —
. ng . 22 —
8 SS, 999
1 4 — 2 ⏑ -
- tp 2 —— 88 - «

-- — = einn ——
r
FA "4 - N * wn Le

—
* \ 4 _ _ * *s >,
E 4 * _— 1
— « 2
W
*
=

—
Dr

>
a 8 a.

— GR 1
: *
1 *
"yn — * + *
OTE
- — *
—

. M E M O I R S Book XXIII. f
is certainly becauſe they have not pretences in rea.

dineſs, or want opportunities, It is the part of the f
Veneriau policy, therefore, to aim continually at p
maintaiuing the republic and all Italy in the {tate v
they are at preſent: for them no change can he e
advantageous, and any revolution fatal. I have |

ofrety examined this matter in my converſations a
with the Cardinals de Joyeuſe and Du-Perron, and ir
laboured with more candor than is generally ſa
thewn by a zealous Huguenot, to find out m
means to. prevent the new religion from getting a a1
tooting either in Italy or Spain, provided that ul
they, on their fide, would promiſe, that the Pope, 21
who was the head of Italy, mould ſpare himiclf ſe
the trouble of taking any intereſt in that part of pl
Europe with which he had no connection. For it re
has been always my opinion, that the true ſyſtem ne
of politics which may give and preſerve tranquility th

to Europe, depends upon fixing her firmly in this of

qual balance. | th
Could they have thought in this manner at me
Rome and at Venice, every one there would have thy
conſpired to ſtifle the preſent quarrel in its birth; an
and for this a ſedfonable and mild diicuthon had N.
becn ſufficient. Affairs in appearance the molt in- I.
tricate and perplexed, are ſtill capable of being M:
happily tempered by proper management, and me
this more than many others. We cought to con- bel
ſider them without any regard to the conſcquen- wa
ces, wich which it is wrong to he alarmed, for ar
one muſt not take the alarm at every pothbiuty ; ing
but they had delignediy increated the difficultics, We;
by propoſing things which always rendered the tio!
prudence of the ableſt mediators Ineffectual. The in
malicious inſinuations of thoſe perſons who ſought 1
to take advantage of this diſunion, had allo ſome oht:
ſhare in heighrening it. If there is a perſon in the ſent
world who, amidſt the 'emotions of anger, 15 ct out

pable

166.0 F 8 U I. L. F. 157

pable of liſtening to the voice of reaſon, I ſhould
adviſe him then to diſtruſt the diſcourſe of thoſe
perſons who, when thus agitated, offer to affiſt his
veugeance. It is on ſuch occaſions that hatred and
ny lay their moſt dangerous ſnares.

anaye, when he conſulted me upon what, as
ambaſſador from France, it was fit for him to do,
in the preſent poſture of affairs, thought it neceſ-
ſary, for my better information, to {end me a lon
memorial of the grievances and complaints, an
arguments uſed by both parties. I made no great
ule of this paper; for to examine their reaſons,
and pronounce upon each, would not have been
ſerving them effectually. I therefore told Canaye
plainly in my anſwer, that, without having any
regard to-the foundation of the quarrel, the Ve-
netians had no other part to take, but to refer
themſelves to arbitrators, who might perform the
office of '4 common friend to both, b pacifving
their reſentment, not judging with rigour. I na-
med the King of France, as being, in my opinion,
the only one who was likely to produce this effect;
and recommended to them to make uſe of the
Nuncio Barberini, of whole wiſdom and integrity
| was well aſſured, to make a report of all to his
Majeſty.” They followed my advice, but not im-
mediately ; paſſion had aſſerted its uſual dominion
before. However, during the reſt of the year, it
was confined to writings, wherein invective was

r carried to great exceſs; but happily, the contend-
3 ing parties were the two powers in Europe who
Sy vere'floweſt in declaring war, and in this diſpoſi-
e tion of the other each party relied. We ſhall ſee
je in the following year the event of this quarrel.

Ot It was of ſome uſe to the Nuncio Barberini to
ne Otain for him a Cardinals hat, which the Pope
he ent him upon making a promotion of Cardinals,
” out of the uſual order of time. His Majeſty, to
JL

Vor. IV. P | whom

-
— -

ens = x 2 2 : 4
Sn "4 -
— _ —
= —

* — —— —
— 2 2 — .
. * _
_——_ 3
— —

Br 9 «
— — > — -= — = —
5 : £=

. w
COT Cd «
= 5&5 ">
_— — o> *
— F 1 .
- * EF -

"= — . =
. ⁵ w ar.
* Y

—

.
% -
* = - 9
= — . 8 — 828 *
— —-— —
I - n ” —_, 2 4 —
= 8 —— —
- =
_— OY”; OO
: 22 — 8
8 9 2 _ * — — n
n . « [4 8 * 8 - a. 2 "4 | - -

2
«2.

— —

158 M EI M O I R#S (Book XXIII. 16

whom he was chiiefly obliged for this dignity, con- ted
gratulated him upon it. Barberini oſten declared, to
that he had a good friend about the King in me; teſt
Cardinal Du Perron thought likewiſe, that my in- wot
tereſt had been of ſome ule'to him, with regard the
to the -archhilhoprick of Sens, and the poll of MW no
Great Almoner:; both which were beſtowed upon que

tim by his Majeſty. He made his acknowledy- C10!
ments to. me for this ſervice, and intreated me to A
procure him, during his abfence, the enjoyment who
of all the privileges of his office. bis;
The citizeus, of Metz received a ſervice of ſtill whe
greater importance from me, on occaſion of the the
diſpute they had about that time with the Jeſuits, fer 1
"Theſe fathers had two years before made an at- of t
tempt to procure a ſettlement in Metz, the inha- mad
bitants of which avoided the blow by an applica- ter,
tion to his Majeſty, which I ſupported. The Je- they
ſuits returning to the charge, I again encouraged aue
the. people, Rodiee them an account by Saint- powe
Germain and Des-Bordes, and afterwards by La- In
Noue, of the King's opinion of the matter. But WI firiki
at the beginning of this year their fears were again Am
awakened, by the Jeſuits raiſing new batteries WI Merz
ſtronger than before, obliging the clergy, and all ent
the Catholic burghers, to pare; with them. They dolle,
had likewiſe ſecured the Duke D'Epernon's vote, egal
who was governor of Metz, and arrived there on een
the 15th of April, to put the laſt hand to the es!
work; at leaſt, this was what the people appre- br tt
hended, and that the governor afted in this affair land j
ouly by the King's 54 Dy Alarmed at his arrival, WW von,
they fent me a letter, the next, day, which was bis h
followed by another, dated April-25: and deliver- kro.
ed to me by the Sieur Braconnier, ho was ſtrick⸗ ble t
ly charged to urge al! the arguments that had in- lere a
duced me to undertake their ee which they —
c

were afraid I ſhould forget. They likewiſe __
| | |. +1. TE!

$7! f & U LY. mh

ted two of their countrymen; one after the other,
to court, to attend this affair; not, ſaid thoſe Pro-
teſtants, that they. were apprehenſive the Jeſuits
would turn them from their faith, but becauſe
they were perſuaded the ſociety, by its intrigues,
would cauſe. ſome revolution at Metz; the conſe-
quences of which, ia city fo lately annexed to the
crown,” might be fatal. 2 8

I had uſed that argument wich his Majeſty,
who likewiſe knew the importance ot this city to
his great deſigns. I filled the inhabitants with joy
when J ſent them word by their laſt deputy, that

the King had granted their requeſt, and would ſuf-

fer no innovation to be made. in their city; and
of this L aſſured them in the King's name. They
made (me greater acknowledgments in a third let-
ter, dated the roth of july; but I could perceive
they were not quite freed from their fears, their
adverſaries boaſting, they ſaid, that it was in their
power to alter the King's determination. 20

In effect, the ſeſuits received every day ſuch
ſtiking proofs of the King's favour and protection,
8 might well authoriſe the fears of the people of
Metz. This very year Henry made them a pre-
ſent of one hundred thouſand crowns for their
college of La-Fleche alone, and condeſcended to
regulate the diſpoſal of it himſelf, in the follow-

res for biilding the college, twenty-one thouſand
or the purchaſe of the ground, ſeventy-five thou-
land in lieu of church-lands, which were ſeized
Won,” in order to erect a perpetual revenue for
bis houſe ; for as theſe lands were poſſeſſed by.
ferlons who were not eccleſiaſtics, it was allow-
ble to compel them to fell, (and that ſtep was
ere actually taken), .ypon, giving them an equiva-
it in money; twelve. thouſand for a 8 |
wuſe: for the fathers, three thouſand to purchaſe

.

P 2 books

ing manner: one hundred and fixty thouſand li-

7
*s
:
: :
l
:
*
c
: =
- X
=
© $8
4 wn
*, Li
y 9
4 bl l
r
11.3
1
\
_ XN.
> *
1 8
I! *
-
: *4%
| :
2
—
.
g *
11
* =
i .
18
mT.
\ *
any | y
hy b
0+
*
4 *
J o
q [1
ol 'Q
ot
WE)
1
Zz TEES
1
9
114 if
4 =
y l
*
U „
FA
\
. =
* II
4
: = 1
. I
1
1 2
. =
5
*
1. + ks
5 N .
1 FS
7
1
'
1
4
1

Le
: 1

566

169 MEMOIR S Book XXIII.

hooks for them, as much for the decorations of
their church, {fix thouſand for their ſubſiſtence for
the preſent year, (for Henry forgot nothing), and
fifteen thouſand, which had been lent hem by
Varenne after they came to La-Fleche, of which
this prince kept an account. 'The paper was dated
October 16. and ſigned by the King.

But here follows another much more extraordi-
nary. A-counſeltor of parliament, named Gillot,
had, in the year 1603, lent a book to Father Cot-
ton, which he could not get again, though he had
ſeveral times aſked the 2 for it. At length
he ſent a ſervant to demand it, with orders not to
leave him till it was returned. The Counſellor
getting his book by thele means, happened, in

ning it, to find a ſheet of paper between the
leaves, which had probably been forgot by the Je-
fair, and was written all over, as he fuppoled,
with his own hand. This paper ſeemed to him to
be worth my notice; he brought it to me, and al-
ter obliging me to promiſe that I would not name
him in the affair, he left the paper in my hands,
to make what uſe of it I thought proper. After
convincing myſelf that it was the hand-writing of
Father Cotton, which it was eaſy to do, with the
aſſiſtance of ſome letters he knew 1 had received
from him, we accordingly compared them, and
found them exactly the ſame. The following 13 4
tranſlation of it, for it was in Latin, and contain-'
ed a long lift of queſtions which the Jeſuit deſigu-
ed to aſk the devil, when he exorciſed a certain
perſon who was poſſeſſed, and who made much
noiſe at that time *: the reader will find eons

= 60

* Her name was Adriana de Fre ſne; ſhe was born in the village
of Gerbigny, near Amiens; afterwards ſhe ſettled at Paris, in
Saint Anthony's ſtreet : ſhe drew to the convent of Saint Victor,
where ſhe was exorciſed, almoſt as great a concourſe of people,

25 Martha Broſſier had done to Saint Genevieve De 9

*

6. 0 F 8 U II LI. 265

of every kind in it, thoſe merely of curioſity,
ſome triffing, and even ridiculous, and others up-
on ſubjects into which it is not fit for me to exa-
mine. The writing begins thus. 2

« By the merits of Saint Peter and Saint Paul,
apoſtles; of Saint Priſca, the virgin martyr; of
« Saint Moles and Ammon, martyred ſoldiers; of
« Saint Antenogenus, martyr and theelogian; of
« Saint Voluſian, Bihop of Tours; of Saint Leo-
« hard the monk, and of Saint Liberata the vir-

« pin.”

Klier this follow the queſtions which the exor-
ciſt deſigns to aſk the demon; they are without.
method or connection, the author having, no
doubt, juſt thrown them on paper as they occur-
red to his mind; and {ome are expreſled. in ſuch a
manner, as makes it impoſſible to gueſs what he
means,

& All. that God permits me to know” (obſerve
that it is Father Cotton that ſpeaks) “ with regard
to the King and Queen; with regard to thoſe:
© who live at court; with regard to public and
« 3 admonitions; with regard to the news of
« life, and the right way; with regard to thoſe who»
* converſe with princes; with regard to Laval, di-
vine ſervice, the knowledge of the Greek and He-
brew tongues, vows, ceremonies of conſecra-
* tion, and caſes of conſcience, converſion of ſouls,
* and.cauonization ; and if it. may be permitted me

who did not ſuffer this piece of hiſtory to paſs unnoticed, ſpeak ·
ing of Father Cotton as one of her principal exorciſts, according
to his cuſtom, treats that father's-curiolity on this occaſion with

eat ſeverity : he further obſcrves, that Henry IV. earneftly'de-

ed the Duke of Sully to prevent this writing from becoming
Public : and that the contrary, either through imprudence, or by
lome other means, having happened, he pretended to treat the-
thing as a matter of no moment before his court; though in-
pardly be, was much diſpleaſed with Father Cotton... De Fhox,
132.

23 © to-

(0

162 M E MOI R $ Book XXIII.

*

to inſiſt farther, wich regard to the war againſt
«c

the Spaniards and' heretics, the voyage to New

« France, and all the coaſts eppoſite to America;
«c

10

order to perſuade, men with efficac y, ſo as to iu-
« duce them to relinquiſh their fins. To know
«.fromijthe devil what danger it may he in my
te power to prevent, and that he would inform me
what. I the perſon poſſeſſed hath been
baptized; if ſhe be a religious; if any foul play
hath been meditated, by the malice of Clarengal,
againſt Mary de Valence *, or againſt the foul of
“ La-Faye. To alk the demon when Clarencal
will go from home, the time, and the means,
« and if it will he at night; if I have any con-
% cealed danger to apprehend; if languages are
« inſpired from God; by what means Chamieres-
% Ferrier ... by what means, or by reading what
% books, we may render, ſermons. moſt uſcful;
« what is my greateſt danger; what reſtitution
« his Majeſty is obliged to; what he (the demon)
«. would have me to {ay to Dame Acharia +, Du-
Jardin, and the brothers and ſiſters; what was
« the apparition that was ſeen in Languedoc ; if
« 1t be convenient that mother, Paſithea + fhould
come, and ſiſter Anne de Saint Bartholomew go
« to Pont a-Mouſſon; and if he would inform me
« what I ought to know, with regard to the King
« and M. de Roſuy; what hopes may be formed
« of his converſion; what Proteſtants at cout
Ware moſt eaſily converted; if no danger may
* befal him who is protected by demons; if I am
* not threatened on that occaſion mytelf; what
„ hinders the found uion of the college at Poi.
tiers; what are the duties of a niece; what pal-

One of Father Cmyton's devotecs. Ws
+ Another devo 1 | ot Father Cotton's.

A

4
cc
cc

IA nun, who webe mentioned again in theſe Memoirs.

age

and with regard to the means 1 ought to uſe, in

« ſage of ſcripture is moſt clear and moſt effi,

« cacious to prove purgatory, the invocation of,
« ſaints, and the power of the Pope; where the a-
« nima!s drank in Noah's ark; what ſons of God
« loved the daughters of men; if the, ſerpent
« walked, on fect before, Adam's fall; how often
« our. fathers had been in heaven in the ter-
« reſtial paradiſe ; what ſort of ſpirits ſtand: before
« the throne of God; if there is a king of the
« archangels; what ought to be done to eſtabliſh
« a ſolid peace, with Spain; if God will be pleaſed
« to inform me when the hereſy of Calvin will be
« extinguilhed ; of my father and his condition;
« of my brothers John and Anthony; how many
« pallages of faith have been corrupted by here-
tics; of the Geneva plagiary; of the voyage of
« the father-general to Spain; of the brief, and
« father-geperal, with regard to Vacqueville, and.
| „ the young man who lives near Notre- dame;
| « when animals firſt migrated into the iflauds; and
| « when the iſlandswere firſt inhabited by men; where

« 15the terreſtrial paradiſe ; how the King and Queen

Lay

*
'
*
'
-
, =
ee ,
«7
1
4
:

&F! 7
4 7 \i
\ \
81 N
. le
Us PT;
1
.

1 4
ES
2262.
,
*
i

=
1
. 5
*
: 4
94 4
i® Z
Wo
4 i
*
4
#
A
"0
. 7
id
a»?

; « of England, and all the Engliſh nation, may be moſt

f « eaſily converted; how to conquer the Turk, and |

| * make converts of infidels; what part of the angels 1

) « fell; what adoration the cherubims pay to the *Y

: * Supreme Being, and what are his ea of it; -

7 * how I may correct my errors of writing, print- 1

* ing, aud preaching ; what embarraſſes the de- 4

t mon and his companions in the ceremony of ex- 4

y * orcifing ; what hath ſo often occaſioned the 4

n . prelervation of Geneva; what he knows touch- 1

t ing the King's health; what may unite the 9

|- grandees of the realm with him; how one may 1

. : alliſt the Sieur de Verdun, and what his motives 1
1 of action are; on the hoſtage- towns; on Leſ- 1
- diguicres and his converſion; on the honour of Mp

. my relics; on the letters written to Madam de 3

« Clarencal ;

#*4 MEMOIR Ss Book XXII.. 1

«-Clarencal; to be more than commonly particu- tu
lar with regard to that lady; what obſtructs the be
t“ college of Amiens abd Tours; of the duration bo
& of hereſy.“ | | ed

The King, when he returned from Sedan, ſtaid mi
a few days at Paris, and towards the end of April th

went to Fontainebleau, from whence he wrote to pu
me, that, by his phyſicians preſcriptions, he was tit
beginning a ſtrict regimen, that was to continue no
for ten days at leaſt ; upon which account, he de- thi
ferred for fo long the ceremony of the feaſt of be
Whitſontide, and ſent orders to his council not to de;
attend him for fifteen days. He permitted me to up
pats this interval at Sully, provided I ſometimes He
came to viſt him. By this remedy, together with of
9 his health was greatly mended in
he affairs of greateſt importance, in which biz me
Mijeſty was employed at Fontainebleau, were nel
thoſe which related to religion. The clergy oj via
France aſſembling at Paris, renewed their ſoli- hin
citations for the publication of the council of ſen
Trent“; the public peace being concerned in this dec
propoſal, as well as in ſome others of the tame na- bod
5 9 mat
* In the Merc. Frangois, anno 1606, may be ſeen the remon- him
france which the clergy got Jerome de Vilkars, Archbiſhop of :
Vienne, to make to his Majetty, with this anſwer to it by Hen- ng
ry IV. Lou have mentioned a council to me, I defire one may ſo
© be called; but, as you rightly obſerve, the conſiderations of rent
„this world frequently claſh with thoſe of heaven: ncvertheleß, ed
I ſhall always be ready to ſupport the good of the church, and 1
the ſervice of God, with the hazard of my blcod and life. As part
to ſimony, and the holding benefices in truſt for others, let the
4 thoſe who ace guilty, by their own reformation, fer others an offic
* example to do the like. In the clections you fee my manner 0
proceeding; I am proud of the footing on which I have placed fille,
them, which is greatly different from what it was, &c.“ The
King., notwithſtanding, in conſequence of their complaints, iſſued *]
two cdidts, preſcribing many ccclcliaſtical regulations, which were 1
confirmed, the one in 1608, the other in 18009. See allo M. De | *

Thou, b. 134. a
i 15 7

— WW WB

„% GO. a MY

1666: W r 8b L. IL I. why

ture, which it was reſolved in the aſſembly ſhould
be made to the King. His Majeſty oppoſed them
both with his arguments and authority, and treat-
ed the Proteſtants in the ſame manner, who, in i-
mitation of the clergy, ſeemed diſpoſed to abuſe

their privileges. Some provinces wrote to the de-
puties-general at court, to ſolicit the grant of a pe-
tition they ſent the King for holding a national ſy-
nod, while at the tame time in other provinces,
they laboured to procure particular afſemblies ta
be held, wherein 1t was the cuſtom to appoint the
deputies of the ſynod, and to draw up inſtructions
upon the affairs which were to he treated there.
Henry had ſent me orders by Villeroi, on the 22d
of March, to take proper meaſures on this occaſion
in conjunction with my fon, to whom he allowed
me to give a {hare of almoſt every part of my buſi-
neſs, and that I ſhould afterwards confer with Ser-
vian the deputy from Dauphine. He wrote to me
himſelf from Fontainebleau, defiring that I would
ſend for the deputies- general, and oblige them to
declare what were the intentions'of the Proteſtant
body,” and to render their project ineffectual. I
made him entirely eaſy on this head, by affuri
him, that, if I could not hinder the ſy nod from be-
ing convoked “, I would at leaſt contrive to have
ſo many faithful ſervants of his there, as ſhould
render them maſter of all the debates. It appear-
ed neceſſary likewiſe to uſe this precaution in the

the Preſident Parquet that he might not ſuffer bis
office, which he was deſirous of reſigning, to be
flled by any of che fattious party, 1 ſent Bullion

* In the royal MSS. fee the original of a letter from M de
1 dated the z 0th of May. 1606, directed to the Proteſtants of
the proyince of Bargundy, by which he endeavours to diſſuade
them from this notion of holding a ſynod at Rothells, _

W into

i
HT
= — — —
—

* -

4. —_— —

particular aſſembly of | Dauphine; and to farisfy

— — —
> P — 0:
— 2. : 2
—̃ä —

—
2

—
* —— —

—— 2 — — 2 —
WII - —

ä — HK — oo is Ws —ů *. —
— — ret _ -_
_ 4 —
ä
— 7 i. a

==
_—_——
rr

— £3 4
b R — "
— - o — 2 2 —
4 % - *
A
& 4 -

— —

—

—
OE Ee nee

—
—

—

22
. —
—

——

88
OI 1 _- «1
— r cu aurwce
A G . —

— —

x
IE IRE ET — nn,
_—

_"—_ OO — &

-- Ka. = =

-

* a —
- — —
— - 3 wh — *
* * —
— —— —
— —— —
—— <p — — 1

— TIE

—
LIE

166 M E M OI R & Book XXIII.

into Dauphiné, and Eſperian into Guyenne, with
proper inſtruetions how to act.

. Des-Ageaux dying this year, his poſt of King's
Lieutenant of Saint-John-& Angely, was immedi-
ately ſolicited hy ſeveral perſons, and among o-
thers by Beaulieu and LRoche-beaucourt; the
former had had a brevet for it before Des-Ageaux,
but the Duke of Epernon, Parabere, and all the
burghers of Saint-John, uniting in favour of La-
Roche-heaucourt, his Majeſty ordered me to {end
for him, and to give him all the neceſſary inſtruc.
tions for the faithful execution of this office, which
he had determined to intruſt to him. I took care
not to ſpeak for the Duke of Rohan, Soubiſe“ and
he at that time not ſtanding well in his Majeſty's
opinion, on account of ſome ſteps taken by them
which others perhaps would tax only with impru—
dence, hut I, who on ſuch occaſions. am not ac-
cuſtomed to be ſparing in my expreſſions, ſhall not
ſcruple to call diſobedience. Rohan applied to me
to reinſtate him in his Majeſty's favour, as ſoon
as he ſhould have returned to Paris, towards the
cloſe of the year. The King, to whom [I wrote, had
the Ax to give me hopes that he would pardon
the Duke, and even furniſhed me with the mean of
improving this pardon, by bringing the criminal
to him, after having firſt inſtructed him by my ſon,
either at his own or ſome other houſe, in all that
be was to do to render his ſovereign favourable 10
him, provided that Rohan did not put/off till then
2 public acknowledgment of his fault, and forrow
for havipg committed it. As to the manner un
which he thould treat him, and how he ſhould for
the ſuture expect him to act with the Proteſtants,

* * . — o 8 @ & i
4c ITT yT tz gre 513-2 PM 4604)

'* The Dike ef Souliſe' was, one” of the principal leaders of be,
Calviniſtical party ig France, during t religious wars in the ole,

lowing reign.

166 O F 8 U BLiY. 167

he deſerred explaining himſelf till he came to Pa-
ris. With regard to Soubile, as ke had demanded
the King's permiſhon before he went to Flanders,
his Majeſty conſented that he ſhould. wait for him
at Paris, or come:to him at Fontaineblean.
At La. Rochelle new quarrels aroſe between the
Proteſtants, and the Roman- Catholic clergy of that
city, upon the extent aud exerciſe of thole privileges,
which the latter were to enjoy there. Both parties
made reciprocal complaints of each other; the ec-
cleſiaſtics, that their adyerſaries often attempted to
do themſelves juſtice by force of arms, which was
always forbidden ; the Proteſtants that the clergy
conſtantly ſuppretied the decrees of council, to
authoriſe; their incroachments; and both deſired
a deciſive decree. The King, conceiving that a
decree would increaſe their animoſity, inüilted up-
on my undertaking the office of mediator upon this
occaſion. I began by hewing them ſeparately,
what were their real intereſts; and, after J had at-
lured my ſelf of their obedience, dictated to them
the following articles of accommodation, which
will explain the cauſes of their diſputes.

That the Proteſtants ſhould not prohibit the ec-
clefiaſtics from viſiting the hoſpitals and priſons,
or from hearing confeſſions, provided all this was
done without any pomp, eſpecially that of carrying
the ſacrament to thoſe places. That the clergy
had no right to aſſiſt at lairials avid public ceremo-
nies, to carry the croſs there, or attend criminals
to the place of execution. That the eccleſiaſtics
ould receive no had treatment, either in word or
decd, when they paſſed through the ſtreets in the
habit of their order. That the Proteſtants ſhould
tot make any oppoſition to the building of their
church there; nor to the commiſſioners appointed
by them to mark out the place, provided this
pace was neither inconvenient, nor ſuſpected 17

L cus

f

168 MEM OI R s Book XXII.

the city, in either of which cafes they ſhould aſ-
ſign them another, or leave this point to be de-
cided by the King and his council. I regulated
Uke wile ſome other articles relating to the police:
that the Catholics ſhould, be contented with the
ſhare they; had in the public poſts and offices to
which they thould be raiſed by a plurality of votes,
and the ulyal methods; but, with refpe& to me-
chanic trades and corporations, as there was no
realon why they ihould be excluded trom them,
the "de dane, by driving away their youth from
the ſhops of the Catholics, had ſet an example of
violence to thoſe cities where the Catholic party
was the ſtrongeſt. D:- 0012-51434]
In the mean time, at Paris, great preparations
were making for the ceremony of the baptiim of
the Dauphin, and the two Princeſſes of France.
The Ducheſs of Mantua, who was to have the
principal part in this folemnity, ſet out from Italy
with a retinue of two hundred horſe, and two hun-
dred and fifty attendants. + She arrived at Nancy
in the beginning of June, and from thence her
retinue, and thole belonging to the Duke of Lor-
rain, ſent to know of his Majeſty, if, at the end of
eight days, which ſhe propoſcd to ſtay at Nancy,

the might continue her journey. This requiring

ſome conſideration, Henry wrote to me, for I was
then at Sully, to come to Paris on the 4th or
5th of June; adding, that he would come thither

himſelf the latter end of lay, and till I arrived
make ſome ſhort excurſions to Saint Germain to
Ke his children, and likewiſe that he thought it
neceſſary to ſend ſome perſon to Nancy with his

orders. A kind of debate aroſe upon the manner
in which the Ducheſs of Mantua ſhould be rece!-

ved, which was at length decided in the Queen's |

favour; who alledged, that this princeſs coming

iuto France only to oblige the King, and do ho-
. nour

r & ads ans

FP

Dr UL LT 16g

nour to an extraordinary ceremony, too great re-
ſpect could not be paid her. Accordingly nothing
was omitted: {he had the precedence not only of
all foreign princes, but alſo of the princes of the
blood; at which the latter were ſo diſguſted, that
they refuſed to aſſiſt at any ceremony where the
was preſent, alledging, that it was a very extra-
ordinary thing for princes of the moſt auguſt houſe
in Europe, to be preceded by a Duke of late date,
deicended from a citizen of Mantua, who, after
killing Bonnacolſy his Lord, procured the admini—
tration of Mantua to be confided to him, and al-
terwards uſurped the ſovereignty of it. But, not-
withſtanding all that could be urged, the King
would not make the ſmalleſt conceſſion on this
point, conſidering only in the Duchets of Mantua,
the title of an ally to the royal family, and eldeſt
ſiſter of the Queen. |

The Dake of Bouillon endeavoured to get this
example made a precedent for him, but in vain.

He had been appointed to carry the regalia in
tie ceremony, and would have taken place of the
Dukes, claiming this privilege as Duke of Bouil-
lon and Prince of Sedan, and appealing to the ex-
amples of ſome of the Princes of Sedan to whom
he had ſucceeded. He was told, in anſwer to theſe
pretenſions, that the difference between them and
bim was, that they were really deſcended from
lorercign princes, a quality which in effect gave
them the firſt rank, while he was only deſcended
from a private gentleman. |

On the 2oth of July, the Ducheſs of Mantua
arrived at Villers-Coterets, where the found the
King, expecting her. From thence they were to
go by Monceaux to Paris, where I was employed
u cauſing, ſcaffolds to be built in the church of
Notre-Dame, in the palace, and in the ſquare of
lhe manufactures, and in making all the other

You. IV. Q preparations,

— —— —

— 2 of -

— 2 8 —
= - ww oo TC
: bh er” : — 7

44

2 — WES
— — — —

-7

— —
TS

22 3 2 > 2
a c—_—— —
— — Da a

15 N E M O IR S Book XXIII.

preparations, when we were informed that a con-
tagious diſcaſe had broke out in that vaſt city“;
for which reaſon the King, after conſulting the
Duchels, reſolved that the celebrated baptiſms
ſhould be at Fontainebleau. The teuruaments,
and all the ſhews and diverſions, which were to
have been exhibited at Paris, were ſet aſide by
this new plan, and the expenſes were neceſſarily
reſtricted to what is uſual at the baptiſm of the
children of France, and the robes of his Ma-
jeſty and the royal family. The nuncio waited
upon the King at Fontainebleau, as did al-
{o Queen Margaret. The chapels of the caſtle
being too {mall for ſuch a ceremony, and that of
the monaſtery unfiniſhed, I propoſed that the floor of
the latter mould be ſpread and the walls hung with
tapeſtry, or that they ſhould make ule of the

great ſaloon + for that purpoſe. ;
The King himſelf took the trouble to examine
the palace of Fleury, and cauſed it to be prepared
for the reception of the Dauphin when the cere-
mony was ended; for the contagion in Paris, in-
{tead of ceaſing, had ſpread itſelf into ſome of the
neighbouring places; nor was Fontainebleau -
| tirely

* The plague, or rather the King's frugality, ſays L'Etoile
maliciouſly, deprived the city of Paris of this honour: an af-
ſertion without any foundation, and contradicted by all other hi.
ſiorians. :

+ It was perſormed in the court called Cour du Donjon, which
had been prepared for the purpoſe. The Cardinal de Joyeule,
the Pope's legate, repreſented Paul V. as godfather, with the Du.
cheſs of Mantua as godmother to the Dauphin. The elde
Madame of France was called Eliſabeth, after the name ef
the Archduchcſs, her godmotber, wife of the Archduke
Albert, and grand-daughter of Henry II. repreſented by Jg.
dam d'Argouleme without a godfather ; and the youngeſt Mi
dame of France had for godfather the Duke of Lorraine in per-
ſon, and for g»dmather the Grand Ducheſs of Tuſcany, whoſe
proxy was Prince John de Medicis; ſhe was called Chriſtine. Ste
in the Mere. Fran anno 1606, and in P. Matthieu, vol. 2. b. 3.

the deſeription of the manner of performing this ceremony, 2

We F 20'LE FT 177

tirely free from it. Henry“ wrote me, the latter
end of September, that of fix perſous who had
becn ſeized with the diſtemper . only one had re-
covered, but that now no more relapied. He with-
drew the regiment of guards from Melun, where
he had been told ſome families were infected wit
the diſtemper. It was about this time, that their
Majeſties, crofling the riger of Nevilly in a ferry-
boat +, were in danger of being drowned, which

was

the magnificence and rejoicings which preceded and. followed it.
See allo vol. 9361. and 9364. of the Royal MSS.

* It is obſerved, in the journal of Henry IV. that no more than
uſual dicd in Paris this year, which are therein computed at eight
in a day; , whence the author concludes, that people gave way 19
z groundleſs panic,

+ © On Friday the. ninth of June,” ſays the ſame journal, “ as
« the King and Queen were croſſing the water in the ferry boat
„ at Neuilly, on their return from Saint-Germain-en-Laye, the
„ Duke of Vendome being with them,, they. were all three in
great danger of being drowned, eſpecially the Queen, who was
* obliged to drink a great deal more than was agreeable to her;
„ and had not one of her footmen, and a gentleman called La-
4 Chataigerate, who caught hold of her hair, deſperately thrown.
« themfclves into the water to pull her out, fhe would inevitably:
„have loſt her life. This accident cured the King of a violent
tooth- ach; and after having eſcaped.the danger, he diverted Him-
„ ſelf with it, ſaying he had never met with fo good a remedy for
„that diſorder before, and that they had cat too much ſalt meat
at dinner, therefore they had a mind. to make them drink after.
CN |

This accident happened, according to the Mere. Fran, becauſe
as they were going into the boat, which probably had no rail-
work round it, the two fore horſes, drawing towards one fide, fell
over-board, and by their weight dragged the coach, in which
were the King, the Queen, the Duke of Vendome, the Princeſs
ef Conti, and the Duke of Montpenfier, whom the rain had pre-
vented from alighting with them. © The gentlemen who were on
* horſeback,” ſays that kiſtorian, “ threw themſelves into the
* water, without: having time to take off either their cloaths or
* ſwords, and haſtencd towards the place where they had ſeen
„the King, who, being ſaved from the danger, notwithſtandin
ell the intreaty that could be made to the contrary, returne
into the water to afliſt in getting aut the Queen and the Duke.
* of Vendome. As ſoon as the Queen had recovered a little
„breath, ſhe gave a ſigh, and afked where the Eng was. She.

| Qa te ſtific d

{= — 8 — — 3 2
— - — 7 9 — —
— > — — « — 2 2 * —

. —
It ERR ETD

2 = — DS — 5% "i - cn
PS; oe —— gr men . ⁵ĩð2— 8
. ——— rg — — Ek — —
1 * 2 — — R N — 2 8 «i
e — 4 _ P : _
— —— ——— A — — ot
* "A 4 KA _ _ 6 — - l _— —_ —
** = — * 2 — be =_ — 8 3 — *

21 -
—

— 1g
— — — —

— —
— —
—
—
9
2

— . —

= — — —

— e —

— — hy —
— — us
— —

—
——
—

— ——
—
=

5 —— Hs — .
— — 4 4
— — —
2 8 K
= - — * = S-4 =. * 2
IT m — wc —_—
- 2 — Þ 2 . m

— — —
— —— —y—
— —

— «. Buds 4 6 — . *

172 ME M O I R S Book XXIII.

was the cauſe that a bridge was afterwards built
there. *

I ſtaid longer this time at Sully than uſual. The
King, who was informed that I continued indif.
poled at Briecomte-robert, wrote to me on the
29th of Auguſt, and defired to Know the late of
my health. This prince made me captain lieute-
nant of the company of gendarmes, which was
formed in the Queen's name, and, at my intreaty,
granted a full pardon to La-Saminiere, Theſe ta-
vours alone gave him a right to require and ex-
pect every thing from me. He was much afllicted
to find, that the marriage of the ſou of Noailles
with the daughter of Roquelaure, inſtead of uniting
thole two families, proved only a ſource of dijcord
between them. Henry ſo often and ſo earneſtly
preſſed me to attempt to reconcile them, that !
uſed my utmolt endeavours for that purpoſe. It is
the part of a good prince, to keep all who are a-
bout his perfon united; and of a wile one, to ef-
fe@ this union rather by the interpolition of others
than by his own. |

I was likewiſe well rewarded for my labours in
the finances; the contractors giving his Majeſty an
hundred and fifty thouſand livres, and the conti—
nuance of the leaſe of the ſalt for fix years pro-
duced him likewiſe a gratuity of fixty thouſand
crowns. The King diſpoſed of theſe two hundred
and ten thouſand livres in the following manner:
Eighty thouſand livres were ſet apart for the pur-
chaſe of Moret, and thirty-ſix thouſand for ſome
occaflons of his Majeſty ; the Queen had twelve
thouſand, the Duke of Nemours thirty, Verlenal
cighteen, and myſelf thirty thouſand. - I lkeulle

* teſtified her gratitude to La Chitaigneraie, whom ſhe had ob-
* ſerved to be particularly inſtrumental in ſaving her, by « pre-
, ſent of jewels, and a yearly penſion.” Anno 3606, De Thu,
„ Ws p :
receive,

161677 n Fe $ U LIL FT. 123

ſum in different gratuities.

received during the courie of tie year, twice this
To execute the edicts, the court of aids ſent

every year a deputation of , couniellors into thoſe

diſtricts where the exciſe, was levied upon falt, in,
order to make a, diſtribution and reg alion there-
on; to lay fines upon thoſe whom they found ex-

erciſing the trade of felling ſalt without licence.

Nor was this the only realon for ſending thoſe
commiſſioners; for the Lieutenant-General of Blois
{ent me word, that two of the commiſſioners that
were appointed to levy the excile upon. falt and
the other taxes for the different officers of the
diſtrict, were guilty of many crimes in the dil-.
charge of their employment. To which I anſwer-
ed, that he was in the wrong to make a complaint
without {pecifying any particulars; but that, how-

ever, I had ſent him a regulation with regard to
thaſe two points, in order for him to ſhew to the.

commiſſioners, which if chey diſobeyed, I promiſed.
to give him ample ſatisfaction. |

This regulation bore, that the exciſe upon ſalt
ſuould not for the future be augmented merely
won the diſtricts, but that the particular pariſhes

ſzould be ſpecthed in proportion to the number of

chimneys, at the ſame ume caſing the poorer pa-
riſes of an equal ſum. With regard to the con-
traband traders in falt, it was my opinion, that there
was a diſtinction to be made. The dealers in
contraband ſalt could not be puniſhed too ſeverely ;
but thoſe who only purchaſed, it from the unli-
cenſed traders, merely becauſe they got it cheaper
than the other ſalt, deſerved to be treated with

more lenity, eſpecially when they were not taken

in the fact.

As to the tax upon tlie oſſicers of the finances,

there are two kinds of it; one upon all the officers
in general, into which the King had thought pro-
| Q 3. | per.

—

"I: 4. - cds —

— . 2 -_ 1 -
— — — —ñũ—— — —
—_ my -- 2 — WS -- - > . _
> —— — — — — — — — —
— — —
4 8 2
— — — —ů — = — — — —— — —
T 1 — :
© — — 2 — — 8 = — —
a — a
P -
r — 22 2 —
- by

- —_—— -- —— ——
I”

EI OP
— — 2 — N
_ - —
- - — — . .
— *
—— —— — —
— - we we 0
r
— a ————— — —
2 8 MS A __ TD -

—
o

—

__ _ _

o
:
:
:
:
,

4
|
5
=

-
F:

by

H

if
F
14
20 f
49
*
9
j ;
11
1 c

LS 1.

14
1
in
E
0
g

AF
9
4:
1
4
+
h
9
.
1
}
N
4
"|
þ

—

1

—ů 1 am.
1 =

—

« op -- + 4, 4 9 _ D
7
— — VN
— * A 5 ——
— — 2
— _ —
22 4 — —
— —
> * — * 8
2 '

174 ME MO IRS Book XXIII.

per to convert the inquiries begun againſt them;
and the other upon the general aſſeſſors of the re-
venue in particular, fouuded upon the re-eſta-
bliſhment of their rights, taxations, and exemp-
tion from the tallage and alternate ſervice. It
was eſtabliſhed by the regulation, that the firſt
of theſe taxes ſhould not be exacted for the future
but by mutual conſent; fo that they who ſhould
declare before the officer that gave them notice of
it, and afterwards before the judge or notary of
the place, that they did not intend. to take advan-
tage of the King's abolition, ſhould not be com-
pelled to pay it; but in tha caſe they were ſubject
to a criminal proſecution, if they were diſcovered to.
have failed in the execution of their truſt, The
ſecond tax was the ſame ; thoſe aſſeſſors- general who.
hked better to give up the privilege of their office,
were dilcharged from it; but they were obligedto
repay whatever they might have received under
that title, contrary to the edits and ordinances of
the King and the ſtates.

The commiſſioners ſent to Rouen gave it as their
opinion, that it was but reaſonable to diſcharge
the province of Normandy of eleven thouſand
crowns of their taxes. The treaſurers of France
were to write to me upon. this head, and had pre-
pared to ſend deputies to the King, in order to

obtain his approbation of this diminution I an- |}

fwered them, that there was no need ſor ther

taking this ſtep, for that I would undertake to ob-

tain the conſent of his Majeſty, who was already
ſufficiently inclined of himſelf to give them much
greater marks of his affection, if the ſtate of his
affairs, and the donations he was obliged to make

to a number of inſatiable courtiers, had. permitted

kim. I further promiſed, that I would join with
them, in order to eaſe the provinces of a much

greater ſum than this, from which the poor er ;
| ob tan

6. O0 E S W LIL IJ. 8

obtain but a very ſmall relief. I perceived the
reaſonableneſs of the promiſe I had made them,
when I ſaw a ſum of two hundred forty-fix thou-
and three hundred and eighty- one livres joined to
the tallage of that province, though it had nothing
to do with it. id; F866 a

This ſum conſiſted of the following articles:
Thirty-three thouſand livres for the bridges and
cauſeys of the whole province, which extended
both to Rouen and Caien: Fhirty-{even thouſand
ve hundred hvres for the ſupprefſiou of the edict
on linen cloth in thoſe two diſt ricts: Twenty-two
thouſand five hundred: livres for the maintenance
of the bridge of Rouen, raiſed by an aſſeſſment on
thoſe two. diſtricts ; although on this account ſeve-
ral ſums were levied upon Paris and other cities:
Fifteen thouſand livres for the bridges of Mantes.
and Saint-Cloud : Thirty thouſand livres for the
canal of communication between the Seine and the
Loire: And eight thouſand three hundred. and
eighty-one livres for the grand. prevoit of the
province. I repeat it again, that all theſe diffe-
rent collections were toreign to the rallage.
And it was not reaſonable, that perſons who re-
ceived no advantage from the public repairs, ſhould
be obliged to. ſurniſi money for them. For ſome
years palt they had conſiderably augmented theſe
fums, which, in appearance,, were deligned for that
ue ; but which, in reality, remained in the purſes
of ſome individuals, wrhout one penny being re-

turned to. the King.

{ obliged: the receiver of Angouleme to be an-
ſwerable for ſome money which he alledged was
not now in his hands. Had that been true, he was
not the leſs liable to pay it, becauſe it could not
lave been legally demanded of him without letters»
patents from the King. Although it might hap»
den that ſome things eſcaped me, yet Henry let

nothing

—

— —— — —

j1
rd |
' :
:
| wii
„ wo!
144
o
4
{ :
—
.
0 Hf
E
:
mM
l
08
1; Ut
i! :
I.
1
1
{411 818
164
$53
1416
» 4s
14 da
:
*
=
*
"mT
[21 l
*T+
Pi
1:3:3K
10 i
v.44) 'T
*
4 £1
1%: 8
119
4
19 a
*
1 :
f
i% 1
4
4.6
11
17
14
9
'4 j
5
LP
LIST a.
* i
IN | 1-8
: 8
14
44 f
it
1:97.38
[7 |
1
inn

D NM E M O I R S. Bopk XXII

nothing: paſs unnoticed. Ile had been informed

that ſome powder had been embezzled, and he de.
fired me to have thoſe who were guilty of that mil.
demeanor proſecuted for it; it being abſolutely
necellary for the fecurity-ot the ſtores in the ma-
azines, that ſuch practices ſhould be. puniſhed, as
eing a matter of great conſequence with reipect
to all the magazines in general. He dilcovered
that there was carrying on in my ablence a com-
miſſion for recovery of the ſums omitted to be re.
ceived, andot falſe ſeizures. He wrote immediately
to the chancellor, that the affair ſhould be ſuper-
feded, becauſe as | muſt certainly have been ac-
quainted with it before I went away, I ſhould have
taken ſome meaſures about it, if I had thought it
would have been brought into queſtion.
His expenſes this year were as great as uſual; !
don't mean in preſents of jewels ſuitable to ſo o-
pm a prince, for in theſe Henry did not fhew
imſelf prodigal. As for example, deſigning to
make a preſent of a jewel to an Italian lady, he
was deſirous that it ſhould not be mean; but at the
ſame time, that the price might not exceed a thou-
fand or twelve hundred crowns: and he wrote 10
me to. look out for a ring for him, with the dia-
mond cut in the form of a heart; or in any other,
rather than ro be cut table-faſhion, becauſe the
expenſe would be leſs and the thew greater. But
his perſonal expenſes, and thoſe at play eſpecially,
always made. up a very conliderable article. |

| often received meſſages, like that of the 11th of

December : Henry having loſt all his money 2!
play, ſent me word in a billet, of which Lomente's
nephew was the. bearer, that Morand muſt bring
him that evening two thouland- piſtoles. L had
then exceſſive large accounts to ſettle with Parfait,
for the extraordinary expenſes of his houſchold:
On the 4th of ORob | |

eighty-five thouſand five hundred and four livres

er he ſent me orders to pay

ro 8

1606. 0 F SS UiL}tL 2. 177

to Mademoiſelle Du-Beuil, for which that billet alt
was to ſerve for a receipt. He had remitted to {| NEV
{amet, as payment of the remainder of an ac— 140

count he was indebted to him. for the year 1602, 1
1
els of ſalt; but as this tax did not now ſubſiſt, I 1

was obliged to pay Zamet, this year, thirty-leven 6,
thouſand four hundred and nincty-two lieres, to I | 1
which that old account amounted; and to pay him 1

the tax of two ſols, {ix deniers, upon three buſh-
|

belides, thirty-four thoutand two hundred and tl
twenty livres, which he had ſince leut to his Ma- 1
jeſty, or diſburſed for him, Be made La-Varenne Wl

a preſent of a thouſand crowns. Villeroi, by his 1
orders, wrote to my fon, that I muit pay a debt 1
which this prince owed to Balbani, who was con- |
fined in Fort-PEveque; and that I muſt endeavour 1
to procure his releaſe. TM 1

Among other expenſes, which did Henry more
bonour, I take in thole for repairing the gates of "nn
WH Siint-Bernard, and the Temple, and the fountains Wh | -

WT bctore the palace, and the croſs du Tiror. His 1
Majeſty had written to the Mayor of Paris, that 1
e deſired this work might be finiſhed before Mid- 1
) ſummer. The council, I know not for what rea- i *
bs, gave a decree afterwards which rendered this 1
WM oider ineffectual, by applying the money deſigned. \ lt
cor cheſe fountains to paving the ſtreets of Paris, 8
WM coutrary to their firſt intentions, when, in the con- 1
„ nnd vith the paviors, it was ordered, that the? 1
1 um neceſlary for this purpoſe ſhould be levied up- N
t en the inhabitants of the city, according to the 10
11 WU uber of feet in the pavement before each door; F
's k is Majeſty, however, inſiſted upon knowing the

„ eon why theſe works were delayed, and of that“

.d ol take of the council. $4.44 -- r

t, This prince had often deſired me to give him

d. general accounts, which ſhould contain à detail of

1 wry thing relating to my three priucipal OC

x78 ME M O I R S Book XXIII.

of ſuperintendant of the finances, grand maſter of
the ordnance, and ſuperintendant of the buildings
and. fortifications. I took an opportunity, when
he was at the Louvre, and when I thought he had
but little buſineſs upon his hands, to carry him
theſe papers. But although it was very early in
the morning when I left the artenal, yet when!
came to the Louvre, I found that his Majeity waz
already gone abroad. I therefore {ent all my pa-
pers back to the arſenal, except a very ſhort ab-

ract, which I intended to thew him; and: went to
walt his return, at Madame de Guiſc's, the having
often intreated me to dine with her.

It was to make a party for the chace, that Hen-
ry had riſen ſo early that morning, and he was re-
ſolved to dine upon the partridges he ſhould take in
hawking. He uled to ſay, that he never though:
them fo tender and good, as when they were ta-
ken in this manner; and eſpecially when he could

ſnatch them himſelf from the hawks. Towards

the. middle of the day Henry returned, extremely
well ſatisfied with his morning's diverſion, and in
a pgaiety of humour, which his good {tate of health,
and the happy ſituation of his affairs, contributed
greatly to increaſe, He entered the great hall,

olding his partridges in his hand, and cried aloud

to Coquet (who waited there for his return, and

was talking to Parfait at one end of the hall). Co-
« quet, Coquet, you muſt not complain of Roque-
“ laure, Thermes, Frontenac, Arambure, and me for
« want of a dinner, for we have brought ſomething ?
46 to treat you with; but go immediately and or-
« der them to be drefſed; give them their ſhare, I
« but let eight be reſerved for my wile and me;
« Bonneval here ſhall carry them to her from me,
* and (hall tell her, that I am going to drink her
&* health; but take care and keep thole birds that
« are. leaſt bit by the, hawks for me; thee ae

66 three

1806. rr 179

« three very fat, which 1 took from them myſelf,
« and which they have ſcarce touched,”

As Henry was diſtributing his partridges, La-
Clielle came in, and with him Parfait, tringing in
a large baſon, gilt with gold, and covered with a
napkin: “ Sire,“ cried he twice, “embrace my
« knees, for 1 have brought you a great many,
and very fine ones.” *© Sce how rejoiced Parfait
«js, ſaid the King; “ this will make him fatter
« by an inch upon the ribs; I find he has brought
« me ſome good melons; I am glad ot it, for I
am reſolved to eat my fill of them to-day. They
« never hurt me when they are good, and when
eat them while I am very hungry, ard before
© meat, as the phylicians direct I will give each
«of you a melon before you have your partridges,
* when 1 have firſt choſen out ſome for my wife
„and myſelf, and for another perſon to whom J
have promiſed ſome.” The King then going to
his own apartment, gave à couple of melons to
wo boys who were at the door, whiſpering ſome-
thing in their ear at the ſame time; and as he
ame out of his long cloſet to go to his aviary,
perceiving Fourcy, Beringhen, and La-Font, the

— — _—

latter bringing ſomething covered up in his hand,
1a Font,“ faid Henry to him, “ are you bring-
| Wl ing me a ragout for my dinner?” © Yes, Sire,”
- Wl replied Beringhen, “ but theſe are raw meats, fit
only to feaſt the eyes with.” “ That is not what
want,“ replied his Majeſty, © for I am exceſ-
7 Wl fively hungry, and would rather have my dinner
chan any other thing: but, La-Font, what is

it you have wraped up ſo?” © Sire,” ſaid Fourcy,
"he has got patterns of ſeveral ſorts of ſtuffs, car-
pets, and tapeſtry, which your beſt manufac-
" turers have undertaken to make.” © Oh!” re.
Pied Henry, © they will afford us ſome amuſement
"after dinner; I will ſhew them to my wife, and

c to

28% M E M OI R S Book xxm Ml !

to another perſon, whoſe opinion and mine do
« not always agree, eſpecially when we are talk.
ing of what he calls baubles and trifles: I believe,
« Fourcy,” added he, © you gueſs whom 1 mean; F
« I thould be glad to have him preſent with my
« wite when you ihew us theſe ſtuſfs; it will bring
« {ſomething to my remembrance which I want to
* communicate to them when they are topether,
that | may have their opinions. He often tells
* me,” purſued his Majeſty, {till ſpeaking of me,
but without naming me, “that he never thinks
« any thing fine or good, that coſts double it;
« real value; and that I ſhould be of the fame oyi.
nion with regard to all goods extremely dear, [
% know what he hints at, and why he talks in this
manner, although I pretend to be ignorant; but
« we mult ſuffer him to talk, for he is not a man
« of few words. Fourcy, go for him immediate.
« Iy ; or that he may be here the ſooner, {end
* one of my coaches for him, or your own.”
The: coachman meeting one of my footmen,
whom I had ſent to the Louvre to inquire if his
Majeſty was returned, he came to the Duchels of
Guiſc's, where I had juſt dined. I ſurpriſed his
Majeſty when I came in, for he did not expect to
ſee me fo ſoon, “ You have made great haſte,”
ſaid this prince to me when I entered the room,
where he was ſtill at table; “ you could not pol-
« ſibly have come directly det the arſcnal.”
When I told him where I had dined; “ That
* whole family being related to you,” {aid he,
ce and loving you ſo much as they do, for which |
* am very glad, am perſuaded that while they fol.
«© low your counſels, as they ſay they are detcr-
* mined to do, they will never do any injury ei.
te ther to my perſon or ſtate.” Sire,“ returned
I, your Majeſty ſays this in a manner fo. unreler-

é ved, that I ſee you are in a good oor; and
| „ hettcl

fle

16667 O Fir S8 OL L X. 181

0

LY

better ſatisfied with me than you have been theſe
« fifteen days.” * What! you ſtill remember that
« they,” interrupted Henry; © I aſſure you, I
« do not; you, know that our little reſentments
« ought never to laſt more than a day. I am
« very ſure that yours would not hinder you from
« undertaking, the very. next day, to do ſome-
« thing for my advantage in my finances. I have
« not,” continued Henry, with great gaiety,
« found mylelf ſa hight and ſo ealy theſe three
« months as this day. I mounted my horle with-
« oat help; I have had great pleafure in the
« chace this morning; my hawks have flown, and
« my greyhounds bave run to well, that the for-
„ mer have taken a great number of young par-

i « tridges, and the latter three large hares; one of
« the belt of my hawks, which I thought loſt, has

LN * 55 S 7

„been found, and brought back to me. I have a

very good appetite, have eat ſome excellent me-
« lons, aud they have ſerved me ap ſome quails,
„che fatteſt and tendereft I have eyer eat. By
is WY lecters from Provence,” continued the King, to
of Wh fie me that every thing conſpired to his happi-
vic nes, “ J am informed, that the {editions in Mar-
o ſeilles are entirely quelled ; and from ſeveral
other provinces I have news, that there never
m, “has been ſo fruitful a ſeaſon, and that my peo-

of- « ple will grow rich, if I permit them to export
1” W © corn. Saint Antoine writes me word, that the
hat “ Prince of Wales is always 120 of me, and of
be, “che friendhp which he promiſed you he would
hig“ ever preſerve for me. From Italy Jam inform-
ſol- “ed, that affairs there are in ſuch a ſituation, that
ter- I [hall have the honour of reconciling the Pope
ei- and the Venctians. Bongars writes me from
nel “ Germany, that the new King of Sweden is up-
er- Jon better terms with his ſubjects; and that the
and “ Landgrave of Heſſe acquires every day new

VoL. IV. R BE. friends

—̃—
> 2 -
op <-
- — - — - — .—- *
—_ ” 4 — 7
">. . —

ne 4 * "Y 2
—
3 "IX
» —_— -.- * «
l <Xz - 4 ah 2

—
_
—

.
— wg
4 Fs —

.

—

—
*

— —
wine
— —
*

"a 5

7 2

_—
_— — —
= 2
- m ©

182 M E M O I R S Book XXIII.

**

friends and allies. Buzenval has written to Vil-
“ leroi, that both the Spaniards and Fleminps are
* brought ſo low, that they will ſoon be obligcd
* to liſten to propoſals for a peace, of à truce, of
*f which I muſt neceffarily be the - mediator and
e protector: and thus begin to render myſelf the
« arbitrator - of all the differences among the
„ princes of Chriſtendom. And for an'increaſe
of ſatisfaction,“ {aid this prince gaily, “ hehold
* me here at table, ſurrounded with all theſe per-
« ſons you ſee,” (for he had with him Du-Laurens,
Du-Perron the younger, Gutron, Des-Yvetaux,

*

Chaumont, and the Fathers? Cotton and Gonthier),

of whole affection for me I am well aſſured, and
* who, as you know, are capable of entertaining
* me wich uſeful as well as agreeable conver-
& {ation ; which mall not, however, binder me
from talking; of buſineſs as ſoon as I have dined;

« for then I will liſten to every body, and will a-

* tisfy all, if reafon and juſtice can do it.”
I found by fome other things his Majeſty ſaid,

that the company had turned the converſation up-

on him in particular, and had alike praiſed him for
his great qualities, and congratulated him upon his
ood fortune. It would be difficult, I faid, to find
Deer fudges than they were. However,” ſaid
Henry, “ I did not ſuffer all they ſaid to pals
ce without contradiftion.” And he confeſſed, that
all their praiſes of him could not deſtroy his con-
{ſciouſnels that he had many faults 3 and as to their
compliments upon his good fortune, he told them,
that if they had been with him from the time 111
father died, they would have been ſenſible that
part of thoſe compliments might have been pared,
for that his miſerable moments had far ſurpaſled
his happy ones. This !ed Henry to a reftect on he
uf-4 often o make, that hehid not yet ſuffered e
much by hi; declared enemies, as by the ing n
A al

fi
x.
2
5 F
"eh
.
2

16806.

and deſertion of many, who, he ſaid, were ei-
ther bis friends, allies, or ſubjects. The young
Du-Perron, who, in theſe laſt words, found ample
matter for his eloquence to diſplay itſelf, began
to treat this ſubject like a divine or preacher, and
even a myſtic : Tou have delivered your ſenti-
* ments,“ laid I when he concluded, “ in fo lofty
& a ſtyle, that nothing can be added to your diſ-
« courſe.” Ithen maintained to him, as well as
to all the company, agreeable ro what his Ma-
jeſty had juſt ſaid, or rather to what I had myſelf
ſcen, that this prince had enjoyed leſs tranquillity
during the peace, than he did in all-the troubles
and alarms of war. Rofny,” ſaid the King to
me, © if you will put a few words upon this ſub-
e jx& on paper, I will thew it to {ome incredulous
« perſons.” I replied, that-it required ſome ume
to do that, and likewiſe might not be received
favourably by every one. Te this I added ſome

other plain truths upon religion and policy; and
the miſery with which France. was threatened if
ihe ſhould loſe her king; which I believe was ſtill -
leis pleaſing to the courtiers than what I had faid |

before. ;

This converſation, which, from being gay and
lively, had taken a very ſerious turn, was 1nter-
rupted by the Queen, who had left her chamber,

and was going to her cloſet... The King, riſing

from table, went to-meet her, ſaying, *+* Well,
* my dear, were not the melons, partridges, and
* quails I ſent you very good? It your appetite
has been as keen as mine, you have dined ex-
* tremely well; I never eat ſo much as I have
done to-day, or was ever in a better humour;
* alkRoſnhy, he will tell you the occaſiom of it, and
* will acquaint you with the news I have recei-
ved, and the converſation we have had.“ The

deen, who was likewiſe more than, uſually chear-
R 2. ful,

OD S8 UD  Y 369:

=”

— *
IK. 8 I wg
4 28 * 1
2 8 « L 2 1 2 ==
4 — A 2 — — 2
—— 2 — . — — 4 p 3
— 2 = - PP 2 7 - p — rn 1 - *
r* = 2 EP . L l br . - * P — w =
0 — 9 * 1 — 2 — 6 —
# 4

— ne

8 — =

*

5 8

2 i. =

- CY
a —
=
—— -

184 M E MO F R S8 Book XXIII.

ful, replied, that to contribute, on her ſide, to
divert his Majeſty, ſhe had been making prepara-
tions for a ballet and an interlude of her own in—
vention; the ballet was to repreſent the felicity of
the golden age; and the interlude the amuſe—
ments of the four ſeaſons in the year. “ I do not
© fay,” added ſhe, © that I have not had a little
4 aſſiſtance; for Duret and La-Clavelle have been
„ with me the whole morning, while you were at
© the chace.” How charmed am I to fee you
% in this humour, my dear?“ faid Henry to
her; © I beſeech you let us always live together
,in this manner.” Fourcy was then ordered to
ſhew the patterns for the ſtuffs and tapeſtry. The
King deſired the Queen to tell him her opinion of
them; and turning to me, © know what yours
« 13 already,” ſaid he; © but now let us ſee your
« abſtraQs of accounts?”

Of theſe there were three, the ſame number
with the general acconnts: and contained a plain
general ſketch of that great labour. In the rſt,
which regarded the ſuperintendency of the build-
ings and fortifications, the King found what was
contained in the general account; iſt, a memorial
of all the fortifications made in the frontiers ſince
the direction was in my hands; 2d, of all the
buildings and royal houſes; 3d, of all the move-
ables, hangings, gold and filver plate, which !
had collected for him. The ſecond abſtract,
which related to the finances, was an index tothe
memoirs; iſt, of the changes and improvements
which 1 had made in all the different parts of the |
King's finances and revenues; 2d, of all the gold
and filver money actually in the treaſury ; 3d, of
the improvements which I had {till to make, and
of the ſums which I hoped to add to the former. |
The third abſtract, which related to the office of

the grand maſter, ſhewed the particulars of the pe |
* neal F

— „ . n

1606. O F n ©: 8

neral account; 1ſt, of pieces of {ix different bores,
repoſited in my arſenal, and of all that related to-
the cannons; 2d, of the number of bullets, with
the means of Keeping all the train of artillery,
and employing them 1n good order ; 3d, of the
quantity of three ſorts of gunpowder commonly
uled ; 4th, of the quantity of arms, tools, and 1n-
ſtruments of the train of artillery; sch, of tlie
number of ſoldiers, as well gentlemen as volun—
teers, whom the King could tet on foot, reckoucd
according to the divition of the Kingdom,

That the reader may the better underſtand what
has been faid a little higher, with reſpect to Spain
and the United Provinces, it is neceſlary to ſee
what palſed this year in Flanders *. The Spaniards,
to whom the army deſtined for the expedition of
Sedan had given great umbrage, finding that they
had nothing to apprehend from that quarter, the
Marquis Spinola fet out from Genoa on the 6th
of May, that he might arrive in Flanders on the
19th. The ſiege of Rhinherg, which the Spa-
mards undertook this year, was the only couſider—
able action pertormed this campaign: at tuft the
beſieged defended themſelves with their uſua} vi-
gour, and made ſeveral fallies, by which two Spa-
nich colonels loſt their lives; the name of one of
them was Thores, and the other commanded the
new terſe +, which came from Savoy. This bold
defence made the event of the ſiege appear very
doubtful, at beſt it was thought that it would be
protracted a long time; Spinola was of this opi-
nion, and the King ſuppoſed that Rhinberg would
not ſurrender before the 20th of October: how-

. Conſult De Thou, the Mere. Fran anno 1606, and Sn i,
ibid. on this ſubject.

+ The word ter/e, which is made uſe of in two or three places

of Sully's Memoirs, Ggnifies a battalion, or ſeveral companies of
loot, forming one corps,

R 3 Weever,

186 WE M OI R S Book XXII

ever, they capitulated the beginning of that
month. If. the-courier was to be credited, who,
the next day after the reduction of this city, was
ſent by Spinola to carry the news to Madrid, aud
who paſſed through Paris in his way, the beſieged
had not more than ſtx tons of powder left: but it
muſt be confeſſed, chat the Dutch did not, upon
this occaſion, exert the valour they had done in
the preceding years; they were then indeed di-
ipirited and weary of the war. The parri on,
which was left by the fenate to its own condutt,
were ſatisfied wich obtaining, that they ſhould be
permitted is march out with all marks of honour,
fuch as carrying away their cannon, &c. They
threw all the blame of their ſurrender upon the
Prince of Orange, who they ſaid would neither fuc-
cour the place, nor give any diſturbance to the
Spanilh army. This reproach was not wholly
without cauſe ; Prince Maurice's reputation ſuffer-
ed greatly from his 1nation during this ſiege, ard
indecd through the whole campaign.

Indeed the conduct of the United Provinces can-
not be {urprifing, if we conſider that they were
reduced to ſuch extremities, that it was not pol-
fible for them to carry on the war much longer.
All the letters from Buzenval and Berney con-
firmed this truth ; and public report did not exag-
gerate things in this reſpect. It was no leſs cer-
tain, that Spain was no longer im a condition to
take advantage of their weakneis. The ſitges
of Oſtend and Sluys had opened two wounds which
they had never been able to cloſe. In Flanders 1
peace was the ſubject of public converſation, aud
thoſe who till then had ſhown: themſelves moſt a-

ainſt it; were, to their own aſtoniſhment, in{en-
fibly brought to approve of it. They now left of
ſoliciting with ardour the aſſiſtance of France, Or

to have that reliance upen our promiſes as m”
12d

SD 47 e

1606. ee. 187

had formerly. I am perſuaded, that the ſtill re-
cent remembrance of all the obligations they lay
under to his Majeſty, was one ot the chief cauſes
of a delay of a pcace or a truce, which, but for that
conſideration, would have been concluded this
year. A mituuderſtanding between the Prince of
Orange and Barnevelt, which divided the council
of the States into two parties, contributed allo to
this delay; the former would not hear of a peace,
and the latter cried out againit a war. This op-
poſition was the caute likcwiic that the council of
France could take no ref{olutions with reipect to
the affairs ot Flanders, nde it was not pothble to
ſerve one party without ditobliging the other.
Buzenval returned to Paris the beginning of
December, charged with a. great many propotals.
His Majeſty not well knowing what reſolution to
take, ſent him to the arienal, where I was con-
ined to my chamber, to covter wich me upon
them. I coufefs 1 was no leis perplexed than the
Kaz; I faw plainly, that, if there was any reſolu-
tion to be taken, with re{peet to the peace. be-
teen Spain aud the United Provinces, this was
be time for it. But in what manner ſhould we
att, or how ſecond the deſigus of a people without
frenoth, without union amongſt themfelves, and
o deltitute of advice, that, as it was plain, not
deing able to agree upon the choice of the depu-
ties to be tent to his Majeſty, our own agent to
them was obliged to take this commiſſion upon
limſelf? Shall we-prevail upon theſe provinces to
ſubmit to the French government, and ſo make
their quarrel our own ?. Bit is not this to engage
tahly in a war with tbe whole houſe of Auſtria,
the event of which would be ſo much the more
Wubtful, as the countries neceſlary to be poſſeſled
Vere at the greater diftance from our own; as we
lad yet no preparations made ſor entering the ter-
ricories

188 M E MO I R S Book XXIII.

ritories of our enemies, or vellels to invade them
by ſea, but thoſe belonging to the States? Shall
we be contented with receiving a certain number
of towns, either as a ſecurity, or in perpetual po.
ſeſſion, to indemnify us for what money and ſtores
we had advanced, as Buzenval offered in thcir
name? This propoſal has all the inconveniencics
of the firſt, without any of its advantages ; we
ſhould beſides have numerous garriſons to main-
tain, becauſe theſe towns would be doubtleſs upon
the frontiers, where the Flemings would behold
us with almoſt as bad an eye as the Spaniards
themſelves, of which we have a very recent ex-
ample, in their behaviour to the Englich in the
like circamſtance. In whatever manner we dit
guiſe any reſolution which necetlaiily leads to a
War with Spain, it will as infallibly bring Eng-
land upon us, as ſoon as we ſeem deſirous of enter-
ing and making a ſettlement in the Low Coun.
tries. But that we might have ncthing to fear
either from the one or the other, it was neceſtary
that our firſt attempt ſhould be to make ourlelves,
by one ſtroke, maſters of the ſea againſt the Spa-
niards, and in a caſe of abſolute neceſſity, agaiuſt
the Englich tkewiſe. I believe I could then have
engaged my head, that having nothing more to
attack or defend but on the ſide of the Meulc,
Spain would have entirely loſt the Low Countries.
But what great ſums muſt be expended, and what
prodigious efforts muſt neceſſarily be made, ere
this could be accompliſhed? I am ſtill perſuaded
that we might, without giving umbrage to our
neighbours, and without ſuffering any greater in.
convenience from Spain, than complaints and
murmurs, have ſtill continued ſecretly to favour the
States, as we had done formerly. Bot beſides that
the ſums we advanced for them, muſt be increaſed in

proportion as their power and ſtrength diminihed,

all

— wr —

lat

zur
m-
1nd
the
hat
in

15 0 r s 9 NAY, 185

all the advantage we could Hope ſor from it,
would be merely to retard the peace for ſome
years. In the preſent ſtate of things, there was
no other alternative, but an accommodation be-
tween Spain and the United Provinces, or a war
between us and Spain. With reſpect to this ac-
commodation, there were ſtill two parts tor us to-
take, either to ſuffer it to be made without our
interpoſition, or to appear to be the mediators of
it; the ſecond was the moſt reaſonable, and this
was in the end embraced. But at the time of
which I am ſpeaking, the King was very far from
approving this ſtroke of policy; and in one ſenſe,
it was the meaſure which met with moſt oppoſi-
tion.

Theſe were almoſt all the reflections I made to
the King, who defired to know my opinion of
Buzenval's deputation. I put them in writing,
becauſe I was not able to wait upon his Majeſty.
It was not my fault, if this paper was not entirely
ſatisfactory, We left it to time to bring matters
to a concluſion, but they continued in the ſame
doubtful ſtate till the following year. The United
Provinces made ſome ſmall preſents by Aèrſens to
the King and Queen, for which his Majeſty fent
them his thanks, and made a preſent, by the
Queen, to Aerlens's wife, of four hundred crowns
in jewels. - Aerſens, by his maſters orders, pre-
ſented the King with a relation of a voyage which
the Dutch had lately made to the Eaſt Indies.

I have nothing more to ſay of Germany, than
that the Nuke of Wirtemberg found the good ef-
lects of the King's protection. Montglat was his
Majeſty's agent in that country; for as for Bon-
Bars, who was there alſo, and who had written 4
etter from Metz to me, which Henry read, be-
caule it was open, this prince would not permit

him

790 M E M OI R S Book XXIV.

him to ſtay in that city, nor in any other place,
he ſaid, where he might preach his doctrine.

All England was rhrown into a conſternation,
by the diſcovery of a plot, carried on by the ſe-
fuits Garnet and Oldcorne, with ſeveral other
Engli hinen, againſt the King's perſon; the con-
ſpirators having reſolved to blow up his Majeſty
and the chief Lords of the kingdom, when they
were all atſjembled in the parliament-houle, under
which they had lodged barrels of gunpowder, aud
bad trains prepared,

BOOK XXIV.

HE interior affairs of the kingdom were

this year ſo free from diſturbance, that they
afford ſcarce any event remarkable, or pat ticular
to our oblervation. But to compenſate for this,
they preſent us with a ſcene which, notwith{tand-
ing its uniformity, is more ſtriking than uncom-
mon cataſtrophes, in which the writer or the read-
er is only entertained with repeated acts of inhu—
manity or corruption, ſuch acts as can excite no |
other motion than thoſe of horror and dil2uft. |
This ſtriking ſcene 1s the plenty and tranquillity ö
which all France enjoyed. Never were there 0
known ſo many pleaſures and diverſions as appeared
this winter in Paris and at court; and the ſame
tokens of a happy reign were diſcovered likewvile
over all the kingdom. This happineſs, which de- k
rived its ſource from the benevolent diſpoſition of .
Henry, reflected in its turn upon him, and gave :
him back part of the benefits he beftowed. Difen-
gaged from the hurry aud tumult of war, till the
time came preſcribed by himſelf to complete the
glory of his reign, he had little elſe to do but to

reign himſelf to the calm pleaſures of a proves
liCy ,

#9 OF S U L L V. 191

life, amongſt his faithful ſervants, and in his dif-
ferent palaces, which he viſited ſucceſſively one
after the other. He was at Saint Germains on the
firſt of January, whither I could not go to pay
my accuſtomed compliments to their Majeſties ;
the wormd I had formerly received in my mouth
opened by an impofthume, which confined me to
my houſe. His Majeſty had the goodneſs to write
to me, to let me know how greatly he was
| concerned for my indiſpoſition, and ſent two or
his miniſters, whom he chictly employed, to confer
with me upon the affairs of government, the plan
of which he always formed in the beginning of
the year. Theſe two miniſters were Villeroi and
the keeper of the ſeals; for Sillery, whom 1
have already diſtinguiſhed by this title, had been
alociated by his Majeſly with Bellievre in the

ſhould fill the employment alone. Bellievre, once
remarkable for the ſtrength ef his underitanding,
lad been for ſome time ſo greatly altered, that it
was neceſlary to give him a fucceſior, while he was
ſtill alive. He bore this aflociation ſo impatiently,
aihough Sillery behaved with the utmoſt pohte-
neſs to him, as afforded a new proot of his incapa-
city to act alone *. His weaknels increaſed daily;

8 and

* * You ſte,” ſaid he, to M. Baſſompierre, * a man going to
* ſeck his grave in Paris. 1 have ſerved as Jong as I was able,
and now, When I am found no longer fit for ſervice, I am ſent
to my repoſe, and io tek care of the ſalvation of my foul,
* vhach the doing other people's buſit:cfs did not give me time to

© Gary without drugs” Torrnel de 3aſſemperre.

When Penry IV required the ſeals of M- de Pellievre, in or-
der to beſtow them on Silkery, taking the opportunity for this
fu poſe of his dep? ture on hej urney te the Limofin, whitker the
Feat 480 and in fi- nity of Bellievre de not pern't im, to follow bis
Najelly, the Chancellor taid, ** 1t his Mueity would not 2 3

; « (pals

office of chancellor, till by the death of that mini-
iter, which, it was foreſeen, was not far-off, be

think of before: a chanc«!lor without ſeals is like an apothe-

—

—
—

—

—

— — —

— - — —— * . _
Ez 2 —
— 28 — — Dd * =
ay. — — — _
— 3 — =
- I *
—. = - — -

—

—

—
-—-
—

— — .
: -——

— —
— 7 5

3

—
—

—
— 4 8
1 wa

34922 ME MW OI R S Book XXIV,

and returning again to a ſtate of infancy, he paid
at length the laſt tribute to nature, alter having
paid almoſt all others. . E
The King came to Paris on the+2d, of | January,
with a delign to carry the Queen to Vigny; but !
dilluaded him from this journey; and he coutented
himſelf with making a tour to Fontainebleay,
from whence he returned to Paris towards the end
of February, in order to go to Chanully, - which
was his ordinary reſidence during the month of
March, it being very pleaſant there in that ſea-
ſon. In a letter he wrote to me from that place,
dated March the 8th, he tells me, that the wea.
ther there was very fine; that he was every day
on horſeback, and paſſed his time very agreeably,
He fixed no where, till, after returning to Paris
on the 20th of March, he ſet out immediately for
Fontainebleau, where he ſtaid the ſpring. He
had fine weather during his journey from Paris to
Fleury, whither he went to viſit his children wio
were in that palace; but from thence to Fontaine-
bleau the rain accompanied him all the way. In
the letter in which his Majeſty gave me a derail of
this journey, be hkewile informed me, that the
Dauphin had come a league to meet him; that he
thought him very handiome, as likewiſe his other
children; that the Queen, who was then with
child, was very well in health; aud that they ex-

„ ſeals ride poſt, he would take care to deliver them in time
* where ever his Majeſty ſhould be — Lou ſecm, Sir,” alded he,
* to be afraid there is not ground enough in Guicnne to bury
„% me: I am in good health, and have no deſire to live longer
% than I can be of ſervice to you; but I ſhould think life a bur-
„den to me ſhould you think fit to diſmiſs me.“ P. Matt.
tom. 2. liv. 3. p. 688. This great chancell r, whoſe probity ard
ſteadineſs were univerſally acknowledged, had ſerved under five
Kings. He was the author of many uſeful regulations in the
chancery. Ile died the 5th of September, in the following yer,
aged 38 years. He was born at Lyons.

pected

a. a a a

HY ©  whoas „W RT wa  ' Sw—__—_ a o-a Mm DD. AO .,»  o&

hr =»5 £©ZI ww, ..

— — —
nm ad th A

$07. OF 8 UL L V. 193

« me the news of the city,“ ſaid this prince, in
a letter dated the 1ſt of April. My wife and I
« are in good health, as are likewiſe my fon and
« the rett of my children, who are the prettieſt
« creatures in the world, and give me infinite
« ylea{ure *.

| The Queen was delivered on the 16th of April,
| at eleven o'clock at night, of her ſecond fon, who
was afterwards called the Duke of Orleans +.
Montmartin brought me the news of it 1mmedt-
ately in a billet from his Majeſty; and almoſt in
the fame moment received a ſecond letter from
him, in which he commanded me to caule the
cannon to be fired. The birth of this Prince re-
R doubled the joy of the royal family; the King,

- who had intended to return to Paris in the begin-
. ning of May, wag. no longer of quitting Fon-
0 tainebleau, from whence he only took one jour-
0 ney to viſit Madam de Moret.

Hunting was, as uſual, his favourite diverſion.
Althongh this exerciſe is not in my taſte, yet I
hall not venture to pronounce that it is not a very
agrecable amuſement, fince fo many perſons find
an invincible attraction in it. The account that
Prallin gave me from Fontainebleau, of the parties
in which his Majeſty had engaged, was not very
likely to alter my len e it. In one of his
letters he gave me a relation of the manner in
winch his Majeſty had ſpent one day. All the
morning he had paſled in fowling, hunted the

* Perefixe ſays, © He loved ail his children, legitimate and
natural, with equal affection, but with different confideration :
be would not ſuffer them to call kim Monſieur; a title which
" ſeems to eſtrange children from their father, and to denote
ſervitude and ſubjection; but ordered them to call him Pappa, a
name of love and tenderneſs.”

He had no Chriſtian name, dying in his fifth year, before
ke was baptized.

You. IV, 8 wolf

pected to be very ſoon at Fontainebleau. “ Send

— —

A - > -
„ = —
— —

1
pl
*
\
5 [
*
=
18
N
1.
:
oy
1
*
1
4 1
1 1
:
*
U
2
mT.
h \
*
; _
*
*
[
"7
| —
* 4
1
"nl 4
* 1
„4
1”
9+ 9
* o
C0 d
175
RY
1
1
: 13 Þ
Me.
* R
{ *
oF
!
:
l b
:
j
[
1
1
{0
i.
.
*
1
U

-

194 MEMOIR Ss Book XXIV.

wolt in the afternoon, and concluded the day with
the chaſe of a ſtag, which had laſted till night,
and in the midſt of a ſhower of rain that laſted
three or four hours. They were then ſix leagues
from any place where they could lodge, and were
obliged to ride from thence wet through with
rain, except the King only, who changed all his
cloaths before he came to Fontainebleau, where
he arrived a little fatigued indeed, but in high
ſpirits, and perfeckly ſatisfied, becauſe he had that
day taken all that he had attacked. This 1s what
princes call diveiſion; but we muſt not diſpute
their taſtes or pleaſures. The preceding day's fa-,
tigue did not prevent Henry from employing him.
{elf all the next morning iu viſiting his workmen,
and running from one work-room to another,
«« It is certain,” added Praflin, “that at his re.
** turn from the park he felt ſome flight touches
„of an ague; but this was nothing to him.”
Henry, when he wrote to me on this ſubject,
ſhewed himſelf a true ſportſman; for he always
ſlightly paſſed over his fatigues, and dwelt upon
what he called his ſucceſſes; for example, he wrote
to me, on the 2oth of May, that he had hunted
the day before wich infinite pleaſure, and had not
been incommoded with the heat; that he had
taken his {tag very early, dined at Ponthierry at
ten o'clock, and at half an hour after two return-
ed to Fontainebleau, where he found the Queen,
who had come to meet him. Another time he
ſays in one of his letters, “ I have Juſt taken 2
'« ſtag, amidſt great heat, and with great ſatisfac-
e tion.” Predominant paſſions are always thought
cheaply gratitied, be the purchaſe ever ſo dear.
This prince, however, was not fo much in-
roſſed by his pleaſures as to negle& any of his at-
n but as at that time they gave him but very

little trouble, all he had to do was to write to me,
| or

1607. O F DLL. 195
or ſend for me to Fontainebleau, when he had
any important affair to communicate to me. He
ſent for me and the Preſident Jeannin on Eaſter-
Wedneſday, and ordered his council to attend him
there on the Monday after Low Sunday. He ne-
ver forgot to reward any additional trouble, by
new inſtances of his bounty: © I will not,“ wrote
he to me, wait for requeſts from thoſe by whom
«I am ſerved with diligence and fidelity; you af
« fiſt me ſo well in my affairs, that it is fit I thould
te ajhft you likewite in yours; I therefore aſlign
« you twenty thouſand crowns out of the money
« arifing from the extraordinary branches of my
« revenue. Cauſe the neceſſary order for it to be
made out.” In another letter he ſays, „I hear
you are building at La-Chapelle, and making a
* park there; as a friend to builders and as your
„good maſter, I make you a preicnt of fix tliou-
* tand crowns, to help you to do ſomething hand-
ſome there.” | |
There is another ſort of letters which I received
from Heury, that are far higher in my eſtimation,
lince the confidence of ſo great a priuce ought by
a faithful or affectionate miniſter to be preferred
to preſents; ſuch are thoſe in which he opened his
heart to me, and confided to me his deareſt inter-
eſts. In one of theſe letters he thus expreſſes him-
ſelf. 4A chought has occurred to me this morning,
* which makes it neceſſary for me to fee you, and
© conlult you, as the moſt faithful and affeQionate
* of all my ſervants.” It was the ſame with every
thing that happened to diſturb his quiet. My fon
happened to hurt himſelf, in endeavou ing to break
7 horſe; his Majeſty ſent a courier expreſsly to
know the ſtate of his health, writing to me, that
as 4 father and a maſter, he took all imaginable

ILeceſt in it. My ſon was ſtill more dinperouily
ll in November; andthe King, not farisfied will

82 lending.

£32

-» "xt
— 7

— dan

——

” * — 2 E a -
F *
— n - Ac -
* w Pr: *

——

*
— — *
*

12
—

==
7.5

16. M E M O I R Ss Dock XXIV;

ſending Du Laurens his firſt phyſician to him, and
recommending him in the moſt earneſt manner
to his care, wrote to me, that I was {o dear to
him, that if he imagined his preſence was in the
leaſt neceſſary, he would come himſelf, to give
me this proof of his affection; and with great
goodneis allowed me not only to defer my jour-
ney to Fofitainebleau for two days, but for all the
time that I could he uſeful to my lon.

In the unhappy affair that happened at Amiens,
where Rambures murdered my nephew D'Epinoi,
the King being informed of the exceſſive affliction
into which this cruel accident had plunged the
brother of the deceaſed, ſent a. perſon to viſit him
in his name, and three ſeveral times afterwards,
ſent him. compliments of condolence. Some in-
cendiaries had endeavoured to animate the whole
family of Epinoi againſt the Count of St Paul,
whom they accuſed of having had a hand in the
aſſaſſination of my nephew. Saint Paul, juſtly of-
tended at theſe reports, came to his Majeſty, and,
with all. that generous confidence which innocence
inſpires, cleared himſelf of the imputed crime, by
proving that he was in Calais when it was com-
mitred. He ſpoke of the unhappy victim of this
cruelty and artifice with praiſes, and with a grief
ſo ſincere, that I myſelf regretted. he was not at
Amiens, where he ſaid he might have prevented
this accident. He proteſted that he would will-
lingly have ſhed part of his own. blood to have
preſerved the unfortunate D'Epinoi. He after-
_ wards complained that his enemies, beſides the o-
ther injurious reports they had propagated, gave
out that his Majeſty had reſolved to have him ex-
amined in a court of juſtice, and had. promiſed to
treat him with great ſeverity ; that I had dete!-
mined to behave to him with contempt, and get

him prohibited from coming to Paris while 3 was
; : : there.

%, OF $8 UL LY: mz

there, Saint Paul ſtaid three whole days in Paris,
to remove the {ſuſpicions that had been conceived»
of him. 1 thought he behaved dike a brave and
gallant man, upon this occaſion. and I believe he
was very well ſatisfied with the manner in which
treated him, Henry was as much intereſted in
this affair as if it had concerned him perſonally:
he cleared up the whole conduct of Safnt Paul to-
me; and in a letter he wrote to me at that time,
deſired me not to give credit to any reports that
ſhould come from the Baſtile, where my enemies
had no other view but to join a ſecond misfortune
to the firſt... He ex horted me to take advantage of
the confidence Saint Paul ſeemed to have in me, to
revent the affair fram having any bad conſequence.. .

I was ſtill confined to my houſe by this unfortu-
nate accident, when the King came to me one day
to confer- with me about ſome affairs of gallantry, .
which l have forgot; all I remember, is, that I
expreſled mylelf in very ſevere terms againſt Ma-
dame d' Angouleſme and another perſon, who
were principally concerned in it; and that I was
bold enough to repreſent to Henry, that amours,
which ſo little ſuited with bis age and dignity, were.
ſo many baneful wounds to his glory, and pro-
bably would end in ſomething ſtill more fatal.

My freedom, often graciouſly received; pt oduced |

nothing this time but an extreme en Henry,
and drew upon myſelf the molt lively reproaches:
from him. He leſt my chamber in ſuch wrath,
mat he was heard to ſay aloud and with great e-
motion, „It is impoſſible to bear with this man
„any longer; he is cternally contraditing - me,

* and approves of nothing I propoſe: but, by
* heaven, I will make him oc me; he ſhall not
appear in my preſence theſe fifteen days.” My dil--
grace appeared to all that were preſent as a thing
alolutely reſolved on. My fervants were all af-

| 8 3. fifted; -

193 MEM O I R S8 . Book XXIV.

flited; but many others, I believe, inwardly re.
Joiced al it.

At ſeven o'clock the next morning, the King
came to the arſenal, with five or fix perſons
whom he brought with him in his coach. He
would not. allow my people to give me notice of his
arrival; but walked up to my apartment, and tap.
ped at my cloſet-door himſelf Upon my aſking,
«© Who is there?” he rephed, “ It is the King”
T knew his voice, and was not a little ſurpriſed at
this viſit. © Well, what are you doing here?”
ſaid he, entering with Roquelaure, De-Vic, Za-
met, La-Varenne, and Erard the engineer; for
he had occaſion to ſpeak to me about the fortifica-
tions of Calais. I rephed, that I was writing let-
ters, and preparing work tor my ſecretaries. And,
indeed, my table was all overſpread with letters
and ſtates of affairs, which I was to lay before the
council that day. © And how long have you
„ been thus employed?” ſaid his Majeſty. “ Ever
« {tnce three o'clock,” I replied. © Well, Ro-
« quelaure,” ſaid the prince turning to him, © for
% how much money would you lead this life?”
Faith, Sire, not tor all your treaſures,” replicd
Roquelaure. Henry made no anſwer; but com-
manding every one to retire, he began to conter
with me upon matters in which it was impoffible
tor me to be of his opinion; and this he eaſily per-
ceived when I told him coldly, that I had no ad-
vice to give: that his Majeſty having, doubuc!s,
taken his reſolution after mature deliberation, all
that remained to be done was to obey him, {ince
he was difpleaſed when my ſentiments happencd
not to agree with his. © Oh, oh,” ſaid flenry,
{miling, and giving me a little tap an the check,
you are upon the reſerve with me, and are an-
« gry at what happened yeſterday : however, I am
Jo no longer with you; come, come, enden
& : me,

70 7.7.3 DB LY; 199
« me, and live with me with the ſame freedom ay
*« uſual; . for I love you not the leſs for it: on the
« contrary, from the moment that you ceaſe to
« contend with me on occaſions where I am con-
« vinced you cannot approve my conduct, 1 ſhall
believe you no longer love me.” ;

It is circumſtances like theſe that ſerve to diſ-
cover the bottom of Henry's character; and, in-
deed, to relate them is to ſhew him in his faireſt
light. It is common enough to ſee the miniſters
and favourites of princes fall into diſgrace : it is
likewiſe common to ſee them deſerve ſuch uſage
by a criminal conduct. On theſe occaſions, can
it be ſaid that the puniſhment is the conſequence of
a fault? this is ſeldom the caſe. That which
ought to be done, merely upon principles of ju-
ſtice, is often the effect of caprice, levity, and ill
humour; for reaſon ſeems to be equally incapable
of procuring audience, when ſhe oppeſes the paſ-
ons, or when ſhe joins with them.

The King afterwards converſed with me upon
afairs not proper to be related here; then em-
bracing me, he bid me farewell. As he went out
of my cloſet, he told De-Vic that he had pro-
vided for the fortifications of Calais ; and railing
his voice, There are people,” ſaid he, © fool-
* 11h enough to fancy, that when I (hew any re-
« ſentment againſt M. de Sully, I am really in

they are greatly deceived ; for when I reflect
that he never makes me any remonſtrances,
or contradicts me but for my honour, my gran-
deur, and the advantage of my affairs, and-with
no view to his own intereſt, I love him the
more for his freedom, and am impatient till I
tell him that I do.” A prince who underſtands
ms own intereſts, ſhould thus from time to time
g've ſtriking marks of his eſteem or the miniſter
: he

earneſt, and that it will hold a long time; but

— 2 —— 5
— —
*
f -
— - Ls

_—
—
Be

a0 M E M OI R S Book XXIV.

he has choſen, provided that choice be really.
good, it will likewiſe ſecure to him the public c-
eem, which is a very eſſential point.

I now return to thoſe affairs on which Villeroi
and Sillery were, by the King's order,. to confer
with me. One of the moſt important related to
the Proteſtants. The King having in the pre-
ceding year granted them permiſhon to hold a
convocation in this, they. were ſummoned to mcet
at Rochelle ; and the deputies of which it was to
be compoſed, were appointed in the provincial
aſſemblies. It was from ſome of theſe very de-
puties his Majeſty received notice that the article
of the convocation at Gap concerning the Pope, of
which ſo much has been already ſaid, was exprell-
ed in their. papers. However ill affected a part of
thoſe who bore the greateſt {way in this atlembly
might be, they judged it neceſſary to ſend thice
deputies to his Majeſty, as well upon this affair,
as fome others which they knew would not be a-
8 to him. The matter was this: they had

etermined to bring again under examination the
queſtion which had been already diſcuſled with ſo
much warmth at the aſſembly of Chatelleraut,
concerning the nomination and: number of the
Proteſtant deputies-general, and. the duration of
their office, as the time for which the preſent two
were to he employed was-near expired:

The King by ſending the private deputies to
me from Fontainebleau, where he then was, fol-
lowed his uſual cuſtom on ſuch occaſions, whicli
was to make me acquaint the aſſembly. with his In-
tentions as. from myſelf; and from a principle
affectiom for my brethren, reſolving, if he could
not ſucceed by. theſe means, to make uſe of bis
authority. On the 27th of April, my brother was
ſent by his Majeſty to confer with me; but, as |
was till in expeQation of ſeeing the King himſclt

a5

55. be AM HF Od, Fn

Q v

—
—

1607. . 201

at Paris, I kept the deputies two or three days without
giving them an anſwer, which I ſheuld have been
glad to have concerted firſt with his Majeſty. On
the 5th of May, I had a letter from him, in which.
he told me that he had altered his. deſign of comin
to Paris, and ſeemed impatient to know what
had done with the deputies. *© I know already,”
faid he, “ all they could fay to you in anſwer to
« thoſe repreſentations, which, in the letter I ſent
« you by your brother, I directed you to make
«them. M. de -La-Noue, to whom I ſpoke
« yeſterday in the preſence of M. de Villeroi, re-
« peated to me the greateſt part of what palled.
« He tells me, he never ſaw ſo many fools in
« one ſet of men, and named Rivet among others.
* It cannot be doubted but that the deputies, be-
fore they ſaw you, conſulted firſt with M. du
« pleſſis, who inſtructed them what to ſay.”

I wrote ſuch a letter to the aſſembly as his Ma-
jeſty required of me: I exhorted them not to ar-
ropate to themſelves any power, with regard to
the article concerning the general deputies, which
belonged to che police, or the government, I re--
preſented to them, that the offices of the general.
deputies ought to laſt three years, leſs time not
being ſufficient to give them a thorough. know-.
ledge of affairs; and that they ought not to con-
tent themſelves with naming two deputies only:
becauſe, as the choice was not confirmed by the
general aſſemblies till private ones had been firſt
conſulted, (a formality that took up a great deal
of time), if any accident happened to one of theſe
deputies, the party would want an agent with the
king; therefore it, inſtead. of two, they always
propoſed ſix to his Majeſty, the vacancy would be
lwplied immediately by his naming oue of the fix
unte to him in the liſt. With regard to the
ope, I remouſtrated to them, that by again ur-

ging

202 M E MO I R S Book XXIV.
ging a queſtion which had been already pronoun-
ced uſeleſs and diſreſpectful to the Pope, who by
his gentle and pacific character merited a quite dif-
ferent treatment, they ran the danger of loſing,
through their own faults, and for a trifle of no
conſideration, that calm and happy fituation
which had fo long been the end of their wilhes.
I referred them to the ſentiments they had for.
merly acknowledged, and concluded my letter by
repreſenting to them, in the moſt forcible manner
J could, that diſobedience of any kind to their ma-
ſter was dangerous; but that an unjuſt and unrea—
ſonable diſobedience would infallibly end in their
deſtruction.

I likewiſe got ſome other perſons, whoſe intiu-
ence with the party I was ſenſible was greater than
mine, to write to them in the ſame terms, and
intreat them to hear, and conſider with attention,
the arguments Montmartin had to add to theirs,
J fixed upon him to be the bearer of this letter;
and his Majeſty on this occaſion thought him qua-
lifted: tocbe the interpreter of his will to the af-
ſemvly, 1 Hkewiſe made uſe of another motive to
influence their reſolutions, which his NIajeſty
expected would have ſome weight; and this
was, that as the Rochellers had lately ſolicited the
grant of two thouſand: livres for their college, I
gave them to underſtand that his Majeſty would
judge, by the reſpect and deference which they in-
duced their brethren to pay to his orders, whether
they merited this ſavour from him. Some days
afterwards, I received a letter from the King, in
which he informed me, that Montmartin and the
deputies ſent by him had been indeed tolerably
well received by the aſſembly ; but that they had
not (hewn all the reſpe& they ought to have done,
either to the ſpeeches of the firlt, or to my let-
ters, and thoſe that were added to them, 35 au-

* 10 8

5
5
A
„
1
4.4
_
of
+ 4 *
*
* 2
"Ry wo.
®;
6

four ſeers of the church.

thors of which had been ſtyled in deriſion, The

The accounts Mont-
martin ſent from time to time of the diſpoſition of
the aſſembly, were not more to Henry's ſatisfac-
tion. If this holds,“ fays he in a letter to me,
« they will be kings, and we the aflemblies.”
However, that party which was for the King car-
ried it at laſt. The zeal Montmartin exerted in
this aſſembly was rewarded by the King with a
penſion, although it could not be ſaid that his
{ucceſs was complete with regard to the obſtacles
he had ſurmounted : yet he 5 he had done
all that was poſſible to be done, ſince he was able
to declare to his Majeſty that his will had been
obeyed. Montmartin,” ſays Henry in a letter
to me, “ has taken great pains in this affair,
* though to little purpoſe, which he will not be-
© lieve, He has brought the ſhadow, but the ſub-
e ſtance remains; the article of Gap having no
„more than two voices.“

The church of Pons gave an inſtance of great
boldneſs, when, by ridiculouſly applying to herſelf
the manner of governing in religious affairs by
deputies-general, ſhe took the liberty to name
three perſons to the King, Verac, Longchamp, and
Bertauville, to be inveſted in quality of particular
deputies, with the government of that city. Hen-
ry anſwered ouly by his edifts: but he was not
lels offended with this inſolence, than at the in-
formations he received of the private conferences
held by Leſdiguieres and Murat; as likewiſe of the
diſreſpect ſhown hy the miniſter Chamier to the
Conſtable, in paſſing through Montelimar. I af-
terwards made this miniſter clear himſelf to Henry
of the faults that. had been charged upon him.

Towards the cloſe of this year, the Rochellers gave
the King another cauſe of offence againſt them,
y WrILing in a body, without his Majeſty's know-
ledge

wa M E M OI R S Book XXIV.

ledge or mine, to the King of England, to demand
the liberty of a Scotch miniſter, named Melvin, |
who had been 1mpriloned in the tower of London
for having publiſhed ſome injurious writings againſt
the King and his council. The Rochellers had
nothing to ſay in their own defence, againſt a fact ]
which the miniſter Primroſe himſelf, who. had car.
ried their diſpatches to England, confeſſed to his . r
Majeſty, and was, in contideration of this con- c
feſſion, permitted by the King to exerciſe the mi. t
niſterial functions at Bourdeaux. But what ren— i
dered the Rochellers ſtill more criminal, was, that b
they attempted to give this prifoner a retreat in
their city, and to allow him to preach in their
churches ; which carried in it ſuch an affectation
of independence as was wholly inexcuſable. The
King of England did not require much intreaty to
grant to a city for which he had an affection ſo
ſmall a favour as the enlargement of a ſtranger he
was glad to have out of his kingdom; nor am!
certain but that the council of London found a ſe-
cret ſatisfaction in making the King of France
ſuch a preſent. But Henry, beſides the conſidera-
tion of his authority, which was wounded by ſuch
a procedure, had the fame reaſon for not receiving
him into his dominions, as King James had for
driving him out of his. He ſent Bullion ro confer
with me upon this affair, which was alſo the ſub-
JeR of many letters I received from bim, or from
Villeroi by his orders. I was hkewiſe commilſion-
ed by the King to demand from the Rochellers an
explanation of this conduct, to reproach them
with their temerity, and to prevail upon them to
implore a P og for it of his Majeſty, who ap-
peared perfectly ſatisfied with every ſtep I rook in
this affair.

Among many real faults charged upon that

city, it was found that there were {ome ont
an

— Fe TS UEL'L r.. - 265

and unproved imputations. The Jeſuits being de-
ſirous of ſending one of their ſociety to preach in
Rochelle, La-Varenne, Father Cotton, and ſome
others, choſe Father Seguiran for that purpoſe;
and, that they might not hazard a refuſal from
his Majeſty, they applied to Beaulieu and Freſne,
the two ſecretaries X ſtate, who by their own au-
thority, and without mentioning it to his Majeſty,
delivered to this father letters by which he was in-
titled to preach in Rochelle. The Jeſuit accord—
ingly —— himſelf at the city- gates, and be-
ing aſked who he was, replied boldly, “ 1 am Se-
« puiran of the company of Jeſus, who, by vir-
tue of the King's letters, am come to preach in
« this city.” “ Go back again,” ſaid the centi-
nel very diſreſpectfully, „we know very well that
« Jeſus had no companions, and that you have no
* letters from the King.“ The Rochellers, with-
out hearing more, obliged the father to go back.
Seruiran in a rage threatened to complain to the
King, and did not fail to keep his word. He was
ſo well ſeconded by his partiſans at court, who,
concealing all or part of the truth from his Ma-
jeſty, exaggerated the diſreſpect that had been
lhewn to his orders, in ſuch a manner, that Henry
in a billet, which expreſſed great rage and impa-
lence, deſired I would immediately attend him at
Fontainebleau.
| I found the court in an uproar, and the King
ſurrounded by perſons who ufed their utmoſt en-
deavours to keep up his reſentment. * So,” ſaid
he as ſoon as he ſaw me, “ your people at Ro-
* chelle have acted in a ſtrange manner: ſee the
* reſpe& they fhew me, and the gratitude they
* expreſs for the friendſhip I have — for
* them, and the favours they have received from
* me.” He then related the fact to me, with an

ar that ſhewed he was determined to chaſtiſe them
Vol. IV. T for

LEES i.

— —— *

—
2„ͤͤ EO cf 14-4

——

————
3— --

- 144 N
j
WH
vii
i
1 o
7
fl |
3 ©
: : 1
l : "
k
V1 I}
1.00 1
; o
; ,
: \ 4
"
i „
| 4
1 \
4114 j l
in. U
nf 4 17
: 110
* [7
/ 0
1 :
: 4 l
+ *
5 » to
Wy! 4
74.15, T
a *
. p R
1
1 0 '
J. 5
of — 14 " I
a p 4
U 4 *
® v LL
FM K .
iN? : :
y :
4
it
U * b 4
1 :
4 4 T %
4 2 q -
* (73s : ,
i v F : * i
1 is
z 3 | WW |
447 | .
(1 * 4
1 | We
ö 9 .
15 l
15 nn...
» [ 4
14 *
1174 1%
| : 2
17%) 1
£ Ft 1
1
1
1
U *
v2 *
FL) :
: )
11
tf 14
54
N.
19
1 7
9 j 3
1
71 117 :
| [3
p
9
1
4 - -
1 14h
| 1
: 1 4
"W N
& :
110 1
4 *
1
i 4 7
., \
1 5 o
11 «
UT 4

bh —
2 — —— —
© 8 3 yaw." 2 *

* N 2 * p -
* _ ma cd — — * —
. 8 HS —
« — 5 18 . — 22 * %
„ — — . TM; *

* ˖— · r EI AE r *
Z N r — x
= — — — ä —— 0 2
— 0 — * * — — 5 p — —
* D FEY — : *

206 M E M O I R 8 Book XXIV.

for the fault; but afterwards taking me aſide,
« ] have been obliged to appear angry,” ſaid he,
% to ſilence thoſe who are ſolicitous to find
© ſomething to blame in my conduct. But the
« Rochellers have not been entirely in the wrong;
© for I neither gave orders for thoſe letters, nor
« was informed of their intention to procure
« them ; if I had, I ſhould have taken care to
« prevent their being granted. However, you
cc muſt think of ſome means to ſettle this matter,
% without diſcovering what the ſecretaries of {tate
« have done; for that will produce bad conlc-
« quences for all their other diſpatches.“

Alter ſettling with his Majeſty what was fitteſt to
be done, I wrote to the Rochellers, that it was ab-
ſolutely neceſſary they ſhould make fome {ubmil-
ſion to the King, and aſſure him of their forrow
for having offended him. I inſinuated to them,
that by a little obedience this affair would end ad-
vantageouſly for them. I aſſured them, that the
letters had been granted without his Majeſty's
knowledge, but that they ſhould have no farther
trouble of that kind, and that the King would put
an end to this without incroaching upon their pri-
vileges; and laſtly, that I would take all ima-
ginable care to manage their intereſts, together
with two or three of their beſt and wilelt citi-

zens, whom I deſired them to ſend to me. The.

method I took, was to procure Father Seguiran
other letters ſigned by his Majeſty himſelf, by
virtue of which he preached at Rochelle a few
days, at the end of which he was recalled; a mc-
dium with which the Jeſuits themſelves did not ap-
pear dillatisfied.

But it was extremely difficult to find one that
would content the city of Poitiers. From the time
that this city had been conſtrained to admit the

Jeſuits, I was wearicd with repeated complaints ot
ele

. — Dt 1

2.

—— OO S8. U L L . 207

theſe fathers from the biſhop, the lieutenant-
general, and the rig, inhabitants, either ſe—
parately or in a body, Theſe complaints, which
were not made by the Proteſtants only, but even
by the Catholics themſelves, turned chiefly upon
the great number of partiſans the Jeluits had gain-
ed at Poitiers, who, on their arrival, had given
them poſſeſſion of a college, and expended great
ſums of money upon houſes and furniture for
them, and had even endowed them with the
richeſt benefices in that diſtrict. Yet that theſe.
fathers, who had been ſettled amongſt them up-
wards of two years, and during that time had
the moſt part of the youth of the city com-
mitted to their care, had been of no advantage
to them; a misfortune of which they were more
ſenſible, having had before, as they alledged, good
colleges, and excellent maſters. To thele they
added complaints of more conſequence, . acculing
the Jeſuits of ſowing diſſenſions in the city, and in
the whole province; and earneſtly intreated that
they might be recalled, and a royal college found-
ed. It was not poſſible for me to do them much
ſervice with Henry, who had lately carried his
complaiſance for the order they complained of ſo
far, as to grant, at their ſolicitation, that his heart
ſhou'd be depoſited in their college of La-Fleche,
inſtead of the church of Notre Dame, where it
was the cuſtom to depoſit the hearts of our de-
ceaſed kings. It was upon this occaſion that 2
canon of that ehurch, meeting a Jeſuit about the
time that this diſtinction was granted to his ſociety,
aked him which he would rather chuſe, to put the
king's heart into La-Fleche, or an arrow into the
King's heart *.

Notwithſtanding the favours his Majeſty was e-

* This is another inſtance that a pun cannot be tranſlated.
| T 2 | very

208 ME M O I R S Book XXIV.

very day ſhowering upon the Jeſuits, this ſociety
doubtleſs thought themſelves ſtill more obliged to
the King of Spain, fince he continued to {upport all
their deſigus; deſigns which they carried on in the
kingdom, and even in the midſt of the court it-
fell. The Spaniſh ambaſſador freely diſcloſed to
the great number of friends this crown had 2,
mongſt us, that his Catholic Majeſty was reſolved

to prevent, by every method in his power, a king

ſo ambitious, ſo prudent, ſo able a general as Henry
was, whole reputation was ſo high, and who was 0
clotely connected with the Proteſtants, from exc.
cuting thoſe great ſchemes, which the money, the
arms, and ammunition of all kinds he was amaſſing,
gave but too much reaſon to believe he had pro-
jected; that it was neceſſary, therefore, to prevent
his taking wing, ſince nothing could reſiſt him in
his flight, and find him coffcient employment
within his own Kingdom, by making uſe, for the
lame purpoles as they had done during the league,
of the enmity there was between the tio relt-
gions eſtabliſhed in France: that this was the bu-
Uneſs of all the Catholics in Europe, whote fears
were ſo much the more reaſonable, as Henry bad
ihewn by the protection he had granted to the
United Provinces, that he knew how to. weaken
the only power capable of making any great ciiort
in their favour ; and that it was, therefore, necel-
iary to act in the fame manner towards him, by
endeavouring to conſume his forces before the)
undertook openly to procure ſatisfaction.

In theſe diſcourſes I was ſtill leſs ſpared than any
other perſon. It was faid, that I had prevailed
upon his Majeſty to undertake greater things than
any other King of France had attempted for theſe
five hundred years, and that my chief aim was the
deſtruction of the Catholic religion. This alt

charge is the only one I deny; and it is, indeed,
| abſolutely

>>» — 9 ame a a ** * af

rr OULEEDY: 209
2 falſe. But they thought themſelves
ſufficiently authoriſed to load me with it, as it
was the moſt likely to make ſome impreſſion. I
alledge nothing againſt the Spaniſh ambaſſador
without foundation. Some of the eccleſiaſtics,
to whom he had confided theſe ſecrets, had ſtill
tove enough for their country to be offended with -
ſuch diſcourſe. - They thought they ſatisfied ſuffi-
ciently their conſcience, and their honour, by
obliging Cardinal Du-Perron and his brother, to
whom they repeated what had been ſaid, to {wear
by their faith, and the holy evangehits, that they
would not name them... It cannot be imagined,
that the two Du-Perrons would forge an impoſture:
all was too circumſtantial... They repeated but the
words of the ambaſſador, who had likewiſe aid,
that the affair was already ſo far advanced, that it
was no longer to-be called a mere project only.
For that many good eccleſiaſtics, and friends of
his Catholic Majeſty, had, and did {till labour fo.
efleually for its ſucceſs, that a happy revolution
was ſoon to be- expected. Beſides, it was not only
in his court that theſe informations were given to
the King. He received them from all foreign
courts, where the Spaniſn ambaſladors publicly de-
clared, that the balance began to lean too much
on the fide of France to make ut poſlible for a
peace to continue long between the two crowns.
It was likewiſe added, that the Spanjards ſup-
ſ ported. theſe diſcourſes by the moſt ſtrenuous en-

deavours, and the practice of every kind of arti-

* N 9 -
nr} entree Iran 3
8 = we _— =

— — 2 —

& — ——

+ 4. 6-5

1
;
U
+
13
T : *
7
1 - |
4 „
1 . *
i
„
j [
7 [i
} :
1 | ?
: :

1 o
. 2
[1 ”

9
# MW.
= I . 0 £
: :
(1 4 +
. | 1
y . : [
: , [|
l r
n [ *
4
9 | 4 . 1
10
ö
TH 'S
1 n 0
.
740 in f
17 „ 1 ,
', : D \
l :
41 14 nk
1 f
* BE 1
: 4 of * .
11 p o 8
q Ty
wi +
168 : 1 0
14 4
4 \ „ *
1 7 6
1 | *
n : - 7
117 A 1 4 9
479 1
: þ .
| it - k
1 *
444 =: i
* »,
R +
| 4 '
4 ' i
1117 * *
111.
Fj
4} *8} }
| >
1
1 1
[i
7 1
4
by % - 4
1
; :
wh!
WE
Wal
'
IT ; 1
1 19
— .
HY
| 1
* 9 1
17 =
: '
il
4 J
#344 7
1
| j
A's!”
vil 2
: * 4
*
Ts. *
[1 e.
*
4 *j
*

— _
. 4 w 4 5 * A
- wow — — 5

— by 3 * =

4
5

y lice, to deprive France of her friends and allies.

: Henry, alarmed, as he had good rtaſon to be,
1 vith theſe informations, which multiplied on eve-
e ry ſide, had from the latter end of the laſt year
e talked of them to me; and ſent La-Varenye for
me one morning fo very early that I found him in

| bed. As ſoon as he was dreſſcd, he took wy hand,
! T'3 laving,

210 MEM OI R $ Book XXIV.

ſaying, „My friend; I want to confer with yon
© on {ome matters of importance. We will po
into my library, that we may not he ſoon inter-
i rupted; for, although I have ſome touches of
* the gout, I ſhall continue to walk as uſual if
** poſhble,” After relating to me the advices he
had received, © Well, confeſs freely,” ſaid he,
that you are not grieved to find, by what I have
„told you, your opinion confirmed, that it is
** necellary great kings ſhould reſolve to be either
* hammers. or anvils, when they have powerful
„rivals, and never depend too, ſecurely upon a
uy Pn tranquillity. 1 do not deny. but that I
have often conteſted this point with you; but
„ {ince it is now clear that you were in the right,
let us, at leaſt, endeavour, to reduce theſe
« rivals to ſuch a condition, that when I am dead
* they may not carry their deſigus into execution,
* which probably they will then find it eaſter to
% do than during my life, who am well ac-
« quainted with all their arts. I am nor fo ſtu-
« pid,“ continued Henry, “to take vengeance at
* my own expenſe upon your Huguenots for the
ce tricks they ſometimes play me; they decelvc
«« themſelves greatly if they imagine I know not
© thedifterence between my Gan and thcirs, and
that it is eaſy for me to deſtroy them whencver
“ pleaſe; but I ſhall not for a trifling oftence, 0r
« to ſatisfy others, weaken my ſtate ſo much by
& ruining them, as to become a prey to my che-
« mies. I would rather give them two bloss,
e than receive. one from them. Thereſore,“
purſued: he, riſing in his temper as he ſpoke,
« ſince the malice of theſe raſcals is fo great, *
© muſt endeavour to prevent it; and by heaven
% ſwear,. for they have kindled my rage, if they
& purlue their plots againſt my perſon aud u

4 ſtate, for I was informed yeſterday that there
« 416

r 00 F $8 U . am

« are deligns laid againſt both, if they once ob-
„lige me to take up arms, I will do it in ſuch a.
« manner that they ſhall curſe the hour in which
e they diſturbed my quiet. Therefore make all.
« the necellary preparations, and provide arms,
* ammunition, artillery, and money in abun-
© dance, and conſider of ſome motto for this ap-
« proaching, year 1607, that may expreſs the re-
« {olutions- we have juſt taken; that if they
% make war upon us like foxes, we will make it.
« on them like lions.“ I. was charmed to hear
the King talk in this manner, and. obeyed his or-
ders with joy. Upon the gold medals, which I
preſented him with on the beginning of the year,
was repreſented the temple of Janus; a lily ſeem-
cd to keep the door ſhut, which was ſtill fur-
ther explained by this motto: Clauſi, cavete re-
cludam. Henry was pleaſed with the invention,
and thought I had ſucceeded very well in expreſſing
his reſolution not to ſuffer himſelf to be ee
by his enemies.

It was with great difficulty that he could help
regarding as ſuch ſix or ſeven perſons of his court,
againſt whom, among many others, he was conti—
nually receiving informations. Ihe whole houſe
of Lorraine was comprehended in theſe informa-
tons, which was the caule that Henry, in a letter
he wrote to me one day, made uſe of this expreſ-
ſion: © All the crofles of Lorraine are falſe, and
* 1 am afraid the flowers-de-luce are not free from
the contagion.” To theſe complaints his Ma-
jeſty often added reproaches on me, for appearing
publicly to have ſtronger connections with thoſe
princes, than was conſiſtent between perſons
whoſe principles were ſo different. Though J
looked upon the injurious reports that were made
of the princes de Lorraine to be abſolutely ſalſe;
yet I thought I owed ſo much complaiſance to my

prince,

.
212 M E MO T R S Book XXIV.
prince, as to mention them to one of the family,
who might give him the moſt cauſe for uneaſinets.
J did ſo, and in return received aſſurances of obe-
dience and attachment ſo apparently ſincere, that
thought myſelf under an obligation to undeceive
his Majeſty in this reſpect. I intreated him to do
me the jultice to believe, that l would, without he-
ſitating a moment, break off any connection which
appeared to me in the ſmalleſt degree prejudicial
to his authority; and ſince he permitted me to
offer him my advice upon this head, I repreſented
to him, that even his own intereſt required |
ſhould not abandon the perſon of whom he com-
plained. For although it ſhould be ſuppoſed, that
he concealed from me ſome part. of his ſentiments,
yet, while I continued to preferve ſome influence
over him, I was very certain he would never car-
ry his diſcontent ſo far as ro be guilty of any
breach of his duty towards him; and that it ap-
peared abſolutely neceſſary to me to be ſilent, and
wait for a full diſcovery with patience, to preveſt
giving any umbrage to perſons who would be the
more affected with the imputation of difloyalty the
leſs they deſerved ſuch a reproach.

With regard to thoſe other perſons who were
comprehended in this accuſation, the King told
me nothing of which I had not been informed be.
fore him; but whenever Jendeavoured to {earch into
the bottom of theſe reports, I was always convinced
there had been but little foundation for them. 1
was likewiſe fo well acquainted with the motive tha!
had induced theſe hars to propagate their ſ}anders,
that at length I took a reſolution to give credit to
none of them; and heard them without reply MW
name ſeveral perſons whom they found a malig: Wt be
nant joy in abuſing. Not but it was certain, that WF or
the Spaniſh party at court was very conſiderable; ef
I have been the firſt to acknowledge this trat, WF Vi

nd

A
$4

1607. OO 7:9 U0 - 1: 213

and none knew better than myſelf thoſe who pro-
felled themſelves friends to it. But what probabi-
lity was there, that in this aſſociation, which the
would endeavour to keep ſecret, they ſhould in-
troduce perſons who were known to have a long
and invincible averſion to it? |
To this Henry anſwered, that it was ſtill very
dangerous that there never ſhould be any conſpira-
cy againſt the ſlate, in which the conſpirators did
not entertain hopes of engaging the nobleſt and
greateſt part of the court; and again repeated his
importunities, that I would diſcover and prevent
thoſe ſuppoſed plots. Although I agreed with him
in his maxim, yet I oppoſed it by another which
| ſeemed no leſs inconteſtable, that he ought not
to think of puniſhing thoſe crimes, as yet. barely
tormed in the imagination, and carried no farther
than wiſhes; but only to be ſtrictly attentive to
prevent their maturity, by ſeparating, as if with-
out deſign, thoſe feeds that give file to them. And
this ought always to be the buſineſs of the miniſter
rather than the maſter. But at moſt; what could
theſe people, repreſented in ſuch dreadful colours,
| be able to perform? It was by this reflection that
re WW. | endeavoured to calm the mind of the King: Was
d vot his ſingle perſon more formidable than a thou-
de- fand of cheirs? and were not his ſervants, whom
o de knew to be faithful, a ſecure defence agaiuſt
ed bis enemies? Henry had no enemies among them
[{W& vhom he could not, at that time, by a ſingle
bat WW ord fet a;trembling : and during his life the peace
rs, WW ©! the. government could not be diſturbed by the
% apprehenſion of auy revolution.
bh his is almoſt all that paiſed on the occaſion,
lg between his Majeſty and me, either by meſſages
het or letters, which he often ſent me by the Duke
| of Rohan. Henry at length followed the ad-
| vice I pave him, which was to trace this buſineſs
ö , through

—

4 1 ,
n
— —

n
a - — 4 . *

2 Q
2
-
———_—
— n> | By
i

a te

— = FR 4 2 — 0
P — — * f
— * "in... :
l S 1 2
WM — 2 n 7

—U— —

. 9
7
2
Ls ?
| !
+
+

— 3
£7” 5 4

* . 3

—

|
1
|
[
.
|

2 NM E M OT R 8 Book XXlv.

through by- paths, and act with policy rather than
force. I did not look on this employment in the
ſame light with ſome others that the King had
intruſted to me iu his court, I took ſeveral jour.
neys thither on this account, and neglected no-

thing which I thought might diſſipate theſe ma-

glinant vapours. I even offered his Majeſty to
devote to it all the time he permitted me to ſpend
at my country-houles, and conſtantly to purlue
my inquiries near him. I agreed with him that
the letters I ſent him on this ſubject ſhould be
written in a cypher which it was not poſſible for
any other to underſtand, or counterfeit. I ſent
eſcartes to Barrault to give him inſtructious con-
cerning every thing it was neceſſary he ſhould do
and ſay at Madrid, both upon this ſubject and ſe-
veral others. |
His buſineſs related chiefly to a memorial pre-
ſented by the Spaniſh ambatſador to the King at
Fontaineblau, on the 5th of April, in which his
Majeſty was requeſted; to give orders for reſto-
ring to the Spaniards a certain capture made by
Grammont, ang of which he had refuſed to make
reſtitution, without an expre{s order from lis
Majeſty. To ſettle this affair, all that was necel-

. fary was a perfect knowledge of the law relating

to hipwrecks; for the capture was of that nature.
The Spaniſh miniſter maintained that this law had
nothing to do with veſſels and pieces of ordnance,
which belonged immediately to kings and love-
reign princes, and of which they were actually
making ule. Neither the law which was quoted,
nor the matter in diſpute, ſeemed ſo clear to the
council, as Spain would have had it. Villerol re.
plicd, that when the famous fleet ſent by the de-
ceaſed King of Spain againſt England was diſper.
ſed in the channel, they had, indeed, procured

the wrecks. that came to Calais to be e
| 1

$9. 0 BULLY. - ay

but that this reſtitution was looked upon as a mat-
ter of favour rather than right. The King refer-
red it to me to decide this queſtion, by the autho.
| rity and examples of the archives of the monar-
chy. |

| The proceedings this year in Flanders, between
Spain and the United Provinces, will appear to be
of much greater conſequence to us. From the he-
gining of the campaign, ſome hopes were con-
© ceived, that a peace would be ſtill delayed for a
> conſiderable time longer. Du-Terrail attempted
to ſurpriſe the town of Sluys for the Spantards.
He opened himſelf a paſlage by a petard, and ad-
vanced ſo far at the head of the ſoldiers, which had
been given him by the Archduke for this enter-
priſe, that he would, doubtleſs, have taken the
place if he had been better ſupported. But his
ſoldiers being ſeized by a ſudden panic, fled : and
thus abandoned he was obliged to retire, without
drawing any advantage from his afſault. The

» {Wi rince of Orange attacked Antwerp, and ſucceed—
no better. So much puſillanimity ſerved only
eto ſhew that both parties had forgot how to make

is var; and gave more weight ro propoſals for a
peace, which were then publicly made. An a-
erſion ſo deeply rooted as that of the Dutch for
c. pain, inſpired them with a deſire to make a laſt
ad ettempt (by the fame method they had uſed
be preceding year) to prevail upon us to make
c. heir cauſe our own. And this was the renewing
Vith greater earneſtneſs the offer of a certain num-
ed, ber of their beſt towns in hoſtage.

ne I believe I have not related what paſſed in the
re: Council upon this occaſion. It was there alledged,
de. Phat it was unreaſonable to expect the King ſhould
er. Very year expend two millions for the ſervice of

red e ſtates, without drawing any advantage from it:
ed;
but us

+
R

Put the example ſer by Queeu Eliſabeth afforded

— —

* - ”
* _ — 2 Car * — * 4
> 8 : : : : p
- : = * 4 3 2 — & ©.
— 3 4 2 8 1 ** xv > * * .
ei ee SG . l

l þ
— n » > -
1 — 4; 1
4 my Ln a= 14 on 4 "y

. r —

8 n m_
— meer oy 7
. _— n
8 p
3 N

216 M E M OI R S Book XXIV.

us a very uſeful leſſon: and that the Dutch had
reaſon to think themſelves happy, if we aſſiſted
them upon the ſame conditions. There was nothing
ſurpriſing in this opinion of the council, except
| its being ſupported, as it was obſerved, only by the
| zealous Catholics; thoſe very Catholics who would
| have ſacrificed every thing for the ſucceſs of their
| project to unite France and Spain. Probably it will
|

not be eaſy to gueſs what end theſe counſellors pur-
ſued by meaſures in appearance fo contradictory to
each other, But I ſhall explain it: they were far
| from believing the offers of the Dutch ſo ſincere
| as they really were; and, in their opinion, there
needed no more to create diſcord between the King
and the ſtates, than to accept their propoſal, It
was, therefore, reſolved to accept it, while I diſ.
| covered no otherwiſe my diſlike of this meaſure
| than by refuſing my voice.
| However, it fell out quite contrary to their ex-
| pectations. The council of the United Provinces“
received this overture gladly, and conſented to
2 the King tix towns in hoſtage, which he
mould chuſe himſelf, provided he furnithed them
with two millions, and a certain quantity of pow-
| der, and favoured as formerly their levies of ſol-
| diers in France. Buzenval, as has been alrcady
| obſerved, being returned the preceding winter,
| ſignified this reſolution to our counſellors, who,
| in the perplexity they were caſt into by it, knew
no longer either what to ſay, or how to detci-

Py
: *
1 a *
* *
| |
7
1
75
YI
iS 74
A
*
3
b
4
|

p 2 on

* There can be no doubt but the United Provinces, at that
| time, really defigned, not only to put themſelves under the pro-
| tection of France, but even to ſubmit to its ſovereignty. 5cc
| their deliberation on this affair in Vittorio Siri (Mem. Recond.
vol 1 p. 418). But fince it was neceſſity alone which compelled
them to it, this diſpoſition could not be very ſincere ; not
would they have continued in it long. I apprehend the belt mes:
ſures which could be followed, were thoſe the Duke of dul
prevailed on the council to take,

A oo rd. af nt.

mine.

* 3
AC" 8

; , 2 RF CF
; >» + . * n

-

180. OF 8 UL L I. 217
mine. And I am of opinion, that inſtead of mor-
tifying I did them a rea] ſervice, by ſhewing them,

as I did in full council, with what precipitation
they had formed their former reſolution. I con-
vinced them, that the different ſupplies granted
voluntarily each year by his Majeſty to the States,
did not amount to near fo large a ſum as that they
now demanded of him, and that the towns they
offered were not upon examination a ſufficient ſe.

curity for our money. In a word, I taxed; with ſtill
more ſatisfaction on their part than my own, al!
their arguments with ignorance and abſurdity.
This was an extraordinary council, compoſed of
the King, the Count of Soiſſons, the Chancellor
Bellievre, Sillery, Chateau- neuf, Villeroi, Cha-
teau-vieux, as captain of the guards, and myſelf.
No one having any thing to reply, it was no
longer debated whether the towns offered ſhould
be accepted; and we confined ourſelves to the
former terms of friends and allies of the United
Provinces, both offenſive and defenſive ; the pre.
text for which, (for the States would have one),
as expreſſed in the treaty, was to make peace
between them and the King of Spain. <7
The States, to whom this artful management
gave a fair colour for throwing the blame upon
us, would not admit the change ; but abſolutely
declared, that ſince they were refuſed the money
for which they had occaſion, after having been
promiled it, they were reduced to the neceſſity of
making peace with their enemy, and that we
ſhould fee it concluded immediately. This was
not what his Majeſty expected, who had promi-
led himſelf he ſhould be able to keep thin gs as they
vere a confiderable time longer, by giving the
Dutch the ſame ſupplies and aſſiſtances as uſual;
and had for that purpoſe advanced them the ſum
of fix hundred thouſand livres at the beginning of
Vor. Iv. U the

— —
— —
=y

4 * 4

* : 1 S FOI
8 1 — p
CIS
I 42 bd * —

218 ME MOI RS Book XXIV.

the year: but they took his money without alter.
ing their deſign of a ceſſation of arms. And it
was apparently to prevent the reproaches they had
reaſon to expect from us, that we were again im.
portuned with the ſame propoſals of towns given
in hoſtage, and of ſubmiſſion to the French go.
vernment, which they knew we had no inclination
to accept. They likewiſe endeavoured to pet a
more conſiderable ſum of money from us. Aerſens,
on his return to Paris the beginning of April, had
the aſſuranee to demand a farther ſum of two
hundred thouſand Jivres. Henry had his revenge;
but, although he refuſed Aerſens, he neglected
no other means to prevail upon the States to ſuf.

nd their reſolution of an accommodation, not-
withſtanding, he ſaid, that from that moment it
was but too clear to him that the point was al-
ready determined amongſt them.

Preaux and Ruſly had already been commiſſion-
ed by the King to make ſome repreſentation to
the States upon this ſubject. His Majeſty, who
looked upon it as a piece of neceſſary policy to
have ſome perſon, on his part, to aſſiſt at the ge-
neral aſſembly of the States, which had been ſum-
moned to meet on the 6th of May, and in which
they were to appoint deputies to acquaint him
with their motives for agreeing to a ceſſation of
arms, thought proper to order me to ſend Buzen-
val thither again with the utmoſt ſpeed, and aſſo.
clated Jeannin with him in the commiflion, Their
inſtructions differed but little from thoſe which
had been given to La-Boderie on the ſubject of
the ſuſpenſion of arms. I delivered to Buzcnval
his own appointments, as formerly, for {ix mont!:s,
comprehending only what Franchemen, his {c-
cretary, might have expended in Flanders during
his maſter's abſence. tl

Affairs were in this ſituation when we heard the ue,
neh

-

1607. 07 SL: L-Y. 219

news of a great naval! victory gained, on the 25th
of April “, by the fleet of the United Provinces,
over that of the Spaniards; and almoſt immedli-
ately after, Buzenval ſent us a relation of it, which
was as follows. Alvares Avila, the Spaniſh admi-
ral, was ordered to cruiſe near the Streights of
Gibraltar, to hinder the Dutch from entering the
Mediterranean, and to deprive them of the trade
of the Adriatic. The Dutch, to whom this was
2 moſt ſenſible mortification, gave the command
of ten or twelve vellels to one of their ableſt ſea-
men, named Heemſterk, with the title of Vice-
Admiral, and ordered him to go and reconnoitre
this fleet, and attack it. Avila, though already
near twice as ſtrong as his enemy, yet provided
a reinforcement of twenty. ſix great frips, ſome of
which were of a thouſand tons burden, and aug-
mented the number of his troops to three thou-
ſand five hundred men. With this acceſſion of
ſtrength, he thought himſelf ſo ſecure of victory,
that he brought a hundred and fifty gentlemen
ö along with him only to be witneſſes of it. How-
; ever, inſtead of ſtanding out to fea, as he ought
$ to have done, with fuch certainty of ſucceſs, he

polted himſelf under the town and caſtle of Gib-
n raltar, that he might not be obliged to fight bur
f when he thought proper.

1- Heemskerk, who had taken none of theſe pre-

cautions, no ſooner perceived that his enemy
ſeemed to fear him, than he advanced to attack
bim, and immediately began the moſt furious bat-
tle that ever was fought in the memory of man.
It laſted eight full hours. The Nutch Vice-Ad-
miral, at the beginning, attacked the veſſel in

* Other hiſtorians ſay, Monday 3oth of April: there are als
ſome other differences in the accounts of the action; but of lit-
tle moment. See De Thou, book 138. Le Merc. Franc, anus
1507, and other hiſtorians, h

U2 3 which

220 MEMOIR $ + Book XXIV.

which the Spaniſh Admiral was, grappled her, and
was ready to board her. A cannon-ball, which
wounded him in the thigh ſoon after the fight
began, left him only an hows life; during which,
and till within a moment of his death, he conti-
nued to give orders. as if he felt no pain. When
he found himſelf ready to expire, he delivered
| his {word to his lieutenant, obliging him, and all
that were with him, to bind themſelves by an
oath, either to conquer or die. The heutcnany
cauied the fame oath to be taken by the people
in all the other veſſels, where nothing was heard
but a general cry of Vidory or death. Ar length
the Dutch were victorious. They had Joſt only
two. veſſels, and about two-hundred and fifty men.
The Spaniards loſt ſixteen ſhips: three were cor-
ſumed by fire; and the reſt, among which was the
Admiral's ſhip, run aground. Avila, with thirty.
five captains, fiſty of his volunteers, and two
thouſand eight hundred ſoldiers, loſt their lives
in the engagement. This memorable action was
not only the ſource of tears and affliction to many
widows and private perſons, but filled all Spain
with horror. ;
This, indeed, was finiſhing the war by a glo-
rious ſtroke ; for the negotiations were not laid
aſide, but were probably puſhed on with the great.
er vigour for it. At firſt, they would have had
them conſidered as meaſures propoſed only by the
Marquis Spinola, or, at od by the Archduke,
without any mention made of the King of Spain:
and ſome perſons were weak enough to believe,
that the whole affair was conducted without the
participation of his Catholic Majeſty. But a very
ittle reflection would have convinced them, that
Was not at all probable, that either Spinola or the
Archduke would have ventured to negotiate with
the mortal enemies of Spain, either for a pcace of

-

166. 0 F 8 UL L I. 221

a truce of any length, for both were mentioned,
without, at leaſt, the ſecret conſent of the King
| of Spain, or of thoſe that governed him. This
prince had already reſolved upon it, as afterward:
appeared: and if any perplexity was obſerved, it
proceeded either from the nature of the buſineſs
itſelf, or from the dilatorinelſs of the council ot
Madrid; or, perhaps, from thole to whom, for
form's ſake, he thought himſelf obliged to com-
municate his reſolution, which, to ſay truth, was
not without ſome danger for Spain, and which
conſequently was only the effect of urgent ne-
ceſſity. N
That this peace would, and would not be a-
greed to, was obſtinately debated in France till
the very moment that it was concluded. The
King wrote me his opinion of the diſpatches he
received from the Low Countries, and ſent them
regulary to Villeroi, Sillery, and me, to be exa-
mined in a kind of council. The moſt important
of theſe diſpatches was that which he received the
latter end of May, importing, that in Flanders
they waited for nothing to conclude the articles,
but a promiſe from the King of Spain to ſatisfy
whatever ſhould. be determined by the Archduke, .
or by Spinola and the Dutch agents: that the
Marquis's ſecretary, who had paſſed through Paris -
ſome days before, was. gone to require: this en-
gagement, with the revocation: of Don Diego
| IVIbarra, which it was ſaid he had actually pro-
: cured, To the account which Henry gave me.of

cy thoie- proceedings, in a letter he wrote to me from

2 Monceaux, the 24th of May, I an{wered, . that he
ry might look upon the - ratification of Spain, and

al

conſequently the peace or a long truce, as a thin

abſolutely certain: that probably it would be un-
der chis laſt title, as moſt proper to conceal the
lame of the Spaniards, that the agreement would

U3

222 M E M OI RS Book XXI7,

be made. To which I added, agreeable to what
I had ſaid before, that Spain yielded to neceflity,
taking it for granted that ſhe did not, under this
ſtep, conceal a ſnare by which ſhe hoped one day
to regain all that ſhe now. ſacrificed to the exi-
gence of her affairs. rin 2
Spinola's ſecretary had no commiſſion for the
ſcheme of ratification, as had been reported ; for
otherwiſe it would certainly have arrived in Flan-
ders, and even at Paris, before the end of July,
as Henry had expected. Fither new obſtacles
were raiſed, or Spain, for other reaſons, though:
proper to delay it for ſome time longer, ſince it
appeared not to be dated till the 18th of Septem-
ber. I was among the firſt that knew it, from the
Archduke's 4394 A who afterwards cauſed the
report to be ſpread at Paris, with circumſtances
very favourable for the Spaniards, which Henry
would not believe. The Spaniards, ſaid he, if it
had been true, would not have been ſo long wich-
out telling it. I wrote htm at Fontainebleau, an
account of what the ambaſſador had ſaid to me
upon this ſubje&.; and my anſwer to him, the

1 of which highly pleaſed. his Majeſty.

he firſt diſpatch that was expected from Holland,
and: which came, at length, on the 14th of Octo-
ber, ſhewed us exactly what we ought to think 0!

this paper, which was expected with ſo much im-

patience.

By this deed his Catholic Majeſty not only ap-
proved of the treaty {or the ſuſpenſion of arms,
which had been made by the Archduke, but like.
wiſe engaged bis royal word to- ratify all that
ſhould be concluded-by this prince, or his agents,
Wich the council of the United Provinces, either
for a peace or a long truce, leaving the choice tt
them, as if it had been ſettJed and concluded by
himſelf, He promiſed to uſe his whole authority

45

wy Crs BI — £3 r r amr” ow: tm. / A ˙ : aac aca. Ez

— £3

k.
bo
+ . 1

*

xa: -.10F7 $1VUcL/LiY;,. arg

in enforcing the ſtrict obſervation of it through-
out all his dominions, under a. great penalty;
providing only, that if nothing ſhould be conclu-
ded by the negotiators, the preſent treaty ſhould
be deemed null, and neither of the parties be
capable of demanding any other right from it,
than that: which they had before; and that every
thing ſhould remain in the ſame ſtate they were
at the time of the preſent ratification. It was
written and ſigned in Spaniſh, Yo el Rey, and in
a placart, with which the States were offended.
But they were well enough ſatisfied with the form,
except only that they ſtill objected to theſe words;
without prejudicing the rights of the partics, which
were expreſſed upon the ſuppoſition that nothin

would be concluded. They raiſed ſtill more dif-
ficulty about its being ſtipulated, that the preſent
regulation ſhould take place, as well with regard
to religion, as to policy and government ; behe-
ving that this clauſe was inſerted to diſpute with
them the rights of real ſovereigns of the eccleſi-
aſtic police. But the treaty was, by the deputies
from France and England, whoſe advice they
aſked concerning it, judged fit to be received.
Jeannin, who ſought to make the name of his
maſter as conſiderable as he could, told him, that
the King would never be brought to approve, that
after they had acceded to every thingy, they ſhould
break off the treaty. for a trifle, when, if the mat-
ter was well conſidered, it would be ſound, that
they engaged for nothing more than what they
had themſelves a deſire to do. Therefore it was
his advice to them, that all the favours they grant-
ed to the Catholics in their republic, ſhould: ap-
pear rather to proceed from themſelves, or thro?
the interpoſition of his Moſt Chriſtian Majeſty,
than by virtue of a contract made with the Arch»
dukes and with, Spain. 04665143 e

| | This

-

224 MEMOIR S Book XXIV.

This was the ratification that made ſo much
noiſe*. Henry, when he {ent me a copy of it by
oung Lomenie,. wrote' to me in theſe words,
„% Time will unfold to us what advantages either
6 party will draw from it. Prince Maurice al.
& ready talks as if he would not receive it; and
© that it would likewiſe be rejected in Zealand,”
The truce, in which this negotiation ended at laſt,
was neither completed nor publithed til] the be.
pinning of the year 1609, many different obſtacle;
aving kept it ſuſpended during the whole courſe
of the year 1608. But not to anticipate matters,
let us content ourſelves with ſaying that in this
year it produced a total ceſſation of hoſtilities,
during which they ſeriouſly negotiated. a peace,
The King {til kept Jeannin and Prieux + in Hol.
land. The King of England had alſo a deputy
reſiding there. His conduct with thoſe people
ſufficiently ſhewed his character to be ſuch as | have
already painted it. There was nothing to hinde
him from humbling a power which was odious to
him. France, although ſhe could ſubſiſt without 7
her neighbours better than any other crown, point ſ
ed out the way to him, and offered to ſhew the e. ©
ample. But what can be expected from perſons WF *
who neither know how to ſeize opportunities a We b
they offer, to execute any thing boldly, or even K
to defire any thing with fteadineſs? H
Upon notice given by De- Vic, that in contempt
of treaties, and notwithſtanding repeated declars

P " . 5 n * *
=Y p 9 R. "rk. 4 10 3 r * * 22 wn — » K
— « N F 7 * * mY we”. 72 *

— 25 — i * * i * 9 * n * 4

** * 8
$A” * Y

-

= © a a, 4 = war. ood wa

® Sce De-Thou, Le Merc. Franc, and other hiſtorians, ane
2607 ; and alſo the 998 iſt vol of the King's MSS. which contain
many curious pieces on the affairs of the United. Netherlands.
+ Moni. de Buzenval died at Leyden, the 23d of September;
man of great reputation, as well in France as in other nation
* To do honour to. his worth and merit, fay: the Memoirs
„de Phiſtoire de France, the States General, defrayed the er
*. penſes of his funeral, which was performed with the ſame po?
2 and ceremony as the Prince of Orange's had been, non

rfe;: 170 F SWL LF. ang

tions from the Archdukes, our neighbours continu-
| ed building the fort of Rebuy, which would be
| ſoon in a condition of defence; the King ſent
orders to that vice-admiral to ſend {ſome troops
E thither, who ſurpriſed the workmen, and threw
| down all that they had built, without killing or
| wounding any perſon whatever. Our neigh-
© bours,* ſaid Villeroi, in a letter to me, © have
e reaſon to be offended : but it is better that they
„ ſhould be petitioners and complain, than that
„ we ſhould.”

© The Griſons, at length, determined to ſhew the
© Spaniards. ſomewhat leis reſpect, after having too
long ſubmitted to ſooth and court them. The ef.
ſorts which were made by the mutineers amongſt
them, to baniſh the Proteſtants, and reduce the
whole country to the Spanish yoke, ended in a real
e ſedition, in which the ſenate diſcovered, that the
de Count of Fuentes had made the Biſhop of Coire
er ind his adherents play the chief parts, by means of
% two penſioners of Spain, who bore all the puniſh-
out ment. They were ſeized, and delivered upto the
n. ſecular power, which performed a ſpeedy and ex-
ex. emplary piece of juſtice upon them. The leagues,
ons at the fame time, cauſed the articles of Milan to
sabe publicly cancelled, the ſole tie that could
ven keep chem bound to Spain, and ſolemnly confirm-
ed their alliances with France, and the Venetians.
After this bold ſtroke, the Griſons became more
than ever ſenſible how neceſſary the advice and
aſſiſtance of his Moſt Chriſtian Majefty was to them.
The courier, who came to make theſe two requeſts,
brought this good news in lix days after his depar-
ture from the Valteline.

Although the Count of Fuentes, in public, talk-
ed of nothing but revenging his nod wy and af-
| fefted to make great preparations in Germany and
Switzerland; yet France was not alarmed, being
perſuaded,

226 M E-MOIRS Book XXIV.

perſuaded, that if, by theſe vain threats, he could
drive off any deciſion concerning the affair of the
Valteline, he would not inſiſt very obſtinately on
that of the two penſionaries, and of the cancelled
articles. The Emperor had ſufficient employment
upon his hands in his own dominioas. Upon his
attempting to deprive the Proteſtants of Tranſil.
vania of liberty of conſcience, a Tranſilvanian,
named Boſtkay, had put himſelf at their head, and

handled the Imperial troops fo roughly, that the

Emperor, being apprehenſive that the malecon.
tents would be joined by the Turks, found him-
ſelt obliged to leave thoſe people in quiet, and
to grant to Boſtkaythe lordſhip of the country.

With regard to the Swiſs cantons, Spain had
reaſon to believe, that the leagues would not have
acted in the manner they had done, without the
concurrence of thoſe cantons which were in alli-
ance with the duchy of Milan.

The King gave the Griſons to underſtand, that
he would nor abandon them. He made the fame
promiſe to the little republic of Geneva, which he
thought might be of ſome uſe to him in his great
deſigns; he ſent her money to maintain her forces,
and to make a plentiful proviſion of ammunition,
His Majeſty did ſtill more; for he ſent letters to
Geneva, filled with expreſſions of his regard for
that city, by Boiſe, colonel of the regiment of
Navarre, and governor of the city and caſtle of
Bourg, and offered them this officer to aſſiſt them in
the conduct of their enterpriſes; and did not ſcruple
to communicate to them his deſign of making Ge-
neva a magazine of cannon, and all kinds of war-
like ſtores; as well to ſerve their occaſions, 45
thoſe which his Majeſty might have for them in
thoſe cantons. On the 21ſt of April, the republic
returned the King an anſwer full of ackmowledg-

ments for the teſtimonies- he gave them of h
goaduels,

%
45 *

*
2
%
4
3
,
*
1
3
K
"sf
1
.
*
A.
*
>;
* *
1
.
4
>
4
13
—

gooaneſe, and promiſes of giving him the moſt ex-

act informations of whatever their common ene-
mies might practiſe againſt them. Notwithſtand-
ing theſe mutual good offices between the King
and the republic of Geneva, Henry d1d not break
with the Duke of Savoy; but, on the contrary,
the Count of Garmare, envoy from this prince,
having taken leave of the King at Fontainebleau,
the latter end of October, with an intention to re-
paſs the Alps, with the Marquis De- Beuillaque, en-
voy from the Grand Duke of Tuſcany, without
taking their route through Paris, (at leaſt as the
King thought), his Majeſty wrote to me, deſiring
that I would ſend him two crotchets of precious
tones, each valued at a thouſand crowns, to give
to them in preſents.

England was not without her troubles this year.
Wis Britannic Majeſty, afier putting to death the
two Jeſuits, Garnet ard Oldcorne, the chief ac-
tors in the plot laid againſt his perſon, which has
been already mentioned in the preceding year,
thought it neceſſary to haye the oath of fide.ity a-
8 adminittered to all his ſubjects; which was

one with ſome circumſtances derogatory to the
honour and power of the Pope, on whom this
prince laid the blame of the plot. This ſo highly
oſfended his Holineſs, that he ſent a brief into Eng-
land, by which all the Catholics there were pro-
hibited from taking this oath.

The holy father was juſt then happily delivered
from the perplexity into which his quarrel with
the Venetians had thrown him. 'The King termi-
nated this affair to the ſatisſaction of both parties,
by the interpoſition of Cardinal Joyeule, who, in the
month of April, jent hisequerry to his Majeſty, with
the news aud the conditions. 'Lherepubuc * , ma-

king

According to other hiſtorians, the Doge and ſenate would not

give

228 MEMOIR S Bock XXIV. 1

king the firſt advances, as became them, reſigned,
through the interpoſition of the French ambaſſa.
dor, the two ecclefiaſtics who were priſoners, into
the hands of a perſon appointed by the Pope to
receive them, without any proteſtation that could
be diſpleaſing to his Holineſs. They likewiſe
revoked all they had done againſt the interdig,
vpon his Majeſty's aſſuring them, that the Pope
would afterwards recall this interdict in the moſt

racious form. All this was effected by Cardinal
Toyeule, without any farther interpoſition of the
Spaniſh ambaſſadors, than what he thought fit to
allow them; which greatly enhanced the glorr M7
his Majeſtyſacquired bythis reconcthation “. Hen.
ry, being deſirous of giving ſome gratuity to C.],
dinal Aldobrandin, left the manner of it to me. Þ © 1
As I had ſome reaſon to believe that his Eminence
would be better pleaſed with money than ring!

ive the Pope any ſatisfaQtion ; nor receive abſolution, much leſs
the for it. And Paul V. was extremely mortified at the indiffer-
ence wherewith what he would have had eſteemed as ,
was received at Venice. Freſne-Canaye ſaid, on his returning from
his embaſly, that the Pope was treated with no more reſpect i
Venice than at Geneva. 't is certain, at leaſt, that all his ende-
vours to reſtore the Jeſuits were uſeleſs. * This affair,” fays
Monſ. de Perefixe, © retarded the accommodation for ſome months
« andwas near breaking it off entirely : for the Pope, conſidering
they had been driven out on his account, abſolutely inſiſted,
„ that the ſenate ſhould reſtore them their houſes and effech
« the ſenate, on the contrary, were obſtinately reſolved to rik
every thing rather than conſent to it. At laſt, the Pope, perſu-
*« ded by the eloquence of the Cardinal de Perron, conceived !
« would be more adviſeable to make ſome conceſſions in this point,
than to run the hazard of embroiling all Chriſtendom ; © tha
« they remained baniſhed fro the Venetian territories, 1 opt
Alexander VII. by his intereeſſion, has re- eſtabliſhed them there,”
"Perefixe, Journal de PEtoile, Memoires pour I hiſtoire de Franc
Merc. Fran. Matthieu, &c. anno 1607.

*« It was 1,” ſaid Henry IV. © who made the peace of Italy
The Merc. Fran. obſerves, that Francis de Caſtro, and Don 1"
de Cardenas, miniſters from Spain at Rome, in vain endeavourt

to prevail on the Pope to appoint Cardinal Zapula aſſociate to @
dina) de Joycuſe, anno 1607.

*-

2271

1607. OF SULLY. 229
and Jewels, I decided for a penſion rather than a l

reſent. l
: Cardinal Barberini, returning to Rome from his 0
nunciatnre, thought himſelf fo much obliged to i
me for the ſervices I had done him, that he talked
of them publicly in terms of the higheſt acknow-
ledgment, which, in the month of November,

Xt

: WT procured me a moſt obliging brief from Paul V.
His Holineſs, at leaſt, made this a pretence for
1 5 writing to me, and recommending the perſon who

was to ſucceed Barberini to my favour, who wasthe
c(elu of the church of Mont-Politian. I ſhall not re-
late here either the acknowledgments made me by
his Holineſs, or the praiſes, kind offers, and other
civilities with which his letter was filled, ſince this
would be only to repeat what | have alrcady ſaid

helen MF

3-4 3 pF" IS

8 on occaſion of the brief ſent me formerly by Cle-
a ment VIII. both which contained the moſt carneſt

intreaties, and moſt pathetic exhortations, to in-
e duce me to embrace the Roman Catholic religion.
ger. anſwered Paul V. in the fame manner as I had
an done his predeceſſor, in terms the moſt polite, re-

an ſpectful, and ſatisſactory, 1 could imagine; except

_ only, that T obſerved a profound ftlence upon the
mn WY 31ticle of my change of religion.

eric WET But let us now return from this detail of foreign
105 affairs to thoſe of the government, and begin with
„nne finances, after having premited, in the firſt

criu- place, that the finances of Nararre * were this

—_ ear reunited to thoſe of France; ſo that we ſhall
) * 4 :
” f * The author here vndoubtedly means to ſpeak of the edi,

cho it was not paſſed till 160g, whereby the demeſnes, and all tic
Feſiztes which belonged to Henry IV. as King of Navarre, and
Be bich, till that time, had always been kept ſeparaie from the
crown of France, becauſe that prince had granted the income al
Wſhereof to his ſiſter Catherine, were united io it in an unalienated

there.
Fran,

bu
' Italy:
on 1100p
av oute

eto Ur

ard

by uns. i

230 MEMOIRS Book XXIV,

no longer treat of them ſeparately. And, ſecondly,
that the long ſtay his Majeſty made in his palaces
without Paris, and at a diſtance from his council,
was the cauſe that almoſt all buſineſs was tran.
acted by letters. His Majeſty choſe rather to take
this trouble upon him, than to oblige his ſecre-
taries, and other people in office, to do buſineſs
near his perſon. He likewiſe granted the ſame
indulgence to thoſe whoſe employments, though
of another kind, required their attendance on him,
Iiis Majeſty's ſervice was never leſs troubleſome
or expenſive to the inferior officers of the crown,
The King, at a viſit he made me in the arſenal,
ſpeaking of the regulations to be made in the
finances for the preſent year, deſired I would give
him a ſummary account of all the money 1 had
paid ſince J had governed the finances, to the
perſons named in the following calculation, which
I preſented to him, eight days afterwards, in this
form: To the Swiſs cantons, and leagues of the
Griſons, ſeventeen millions three hundred and
fikty thouſand livres; debt to England, in money
given to the United Provinces, {ix millions nine
hundred and fifty thouſand livres; to ſeveral prin-
ces of Germany, four millions eight hundred and
ninety-ſeven thouſand livres; to the Grand Duke
of Tuſcany, and other Italian princes, eigliteen
thouſand livres; to Gondy, Zamet, Cenamy, and
other contractors, for debts due upon ſalt and the
large farms, four millions eight hundred thcuſand
livres; for debts contracted during the league,
thirteen millions ſeven hundred and ſeventy thou
ſand livres; for debts due to the provinces of
Dauphine, Lyonnois, Languedoc, &c. paid on
of the money ariſing from the gabelle, four mil.
lions ſeven hundred twenty-eight thouſand livres;
debts to ſeveral perſons, paid from the mone/

ariſing from any branch of the royal **
ü four

- PETE * n 4
y N "» . * 1
— 883 & 4 A » 8 . **
— a y * IT 5 —_ . . 7 * =
es Lame 2 y * "af bor ar” fo "— . 4

11 ²˙ dw: , SER 8

| Fo IS x Aa ow ora ts

_ Du Bs * 4 a
p N - " . CE NIB
a 1 a. 4 . my *
WI as.” + 7 — 4 5 *
9 * . ih” I a

1607. e $ U*E-L"Y: 231

four millions eight hundred thirty-ſix thouſand fix
hundred livres; to others, comprehended in a
different account, four millions thirty-eight thou-
ſand three hundred livres; in preſents made by
his Majeſty, ſix millions forty-two thouſand three
hundred livres; for purchaſing arms, ammunition,
and furniture of ordnance depolited in the maga-
zines, twelve millions; for churches, and other
buildings, fix millions one hundred and fifty thou-

ſand livres; repairs and fortifications of towns, five
millions ſeven hundred and eighty-five thouſand

livres; for pavements, bridges, cauſeys, &c. ſour
millions eight hundred and fifty-hve thouſand
livres; jewels and furniture purchaſed by his Ma-

jeſty, one million eight hundred thouſand livres;

total, eighty-ſeven millions nine hundred and

two thouſand two hundred livres.

Queen Margaret had inherited, ſrom the Queen
ber mother, very conſiderable eſtates“, of which
ſhe made a ceſſion to M. the Dauphin. The an-
nual rent of theſe eſtates, at the time ſhe reſigned
them, amounted to twenty-four thouſand three

hundred and ſeventy livres: in letting out leaſes,

L increaſed them to thirty thouſand three hundred
and ſixty livres. I alſo recovered a capital of one
hundred and ſeventy thouſand three hundred
livres, which produced yearly the {um of thirteen
thouſand and three hundred livres, that had been
alienated, either by the deceaſed Queen, or by
Margaret herſelf. I could have wiſhed to have
recovered another part of thoſe eſtates, worth
nnety-four thouſand livres, bringing in annually
the ſum of eight thouſand three hundred and
nnety-five livres; but it had been abſolutely ſold,
or given away, by theſe two princeſſes.

The particulars of theſe eſtates have been enumerated before,

in ſpeaking of the ſuit between Queen Margaret and the Duke of
Angouleme,
X 2 , 1

9 *

N . 5
TS *— > A - nm, Su Rs Ia
: —— . —
A - - y mw — 2
i 25 — 8

2

1
7
*
.
G
6
z
o
*
5
»
*
1,2
-
* L
=
V
vb
11
20
Tx
Y
4]

oa MEMOIR S Book XXIV.

I undertook to reunite to the crown-Jands, all
the regiſters and clerks offices at the courts of
Languedoc, which had been altenated. This de.
ſign was no ſooner known, than La-Foſſe, and
ſeveral other contractors, came to make me offers,
The part I took was, to allow thoſe farmers to
redeem them, on condition that, at the expiration
of a certain number of years, during which it was
agreed they ſhould enjoy them, they thould reſtore
them quite cleared to his Majeſty; a praiſe-wor.
thy, and, in ſome degree, neceſſary ceconomy,
and authoriſed by all the laws of public and pri-
vate juſtice. The contracts made with the pur-
chaſers imparted expreſsly a power of perpetual
redemption for their own court; an obſervation 1
make here, becauſe the parliament of Toulouſe,
in regiſtering the letters-patent expedited for
this treaty, thought proper to except their offices
and thole of the city. I wrote to the firſt preſi-
dent, Verdun, that the King was juſtly incenſed
at this contempt of the laws, which was ſtil} more
extraordinary in perſons appointed to maintain
juſtice and order; and that he would have cited
the whole bady, if ſome friends of that parlia-
ment had not ſuſpended the effects of his anger,
by promiſing him an entire obedience : for, in-
deed, what right had the parliament of Languedoc
to deſire their offices ſhou}d be excepted from 2

eneral rule for the whole province? and, if it
was the kind of treaty that diſpleaſed them, why,
ſince the proprietors of theſe offices were allowed
to ſell, alienate, infeof, and transfer them to
others, in the ſame manner as if they had been
part of their own property, would they attempt
to deprive his Majeſty of this right, who was be-
come proprietor of thoſe eſtates? To this no reply
could be made; and the parliament of Toulouſe te-

mained convicted of partiality from the fact wok

Sunn ws vc .M©—_ >

: : ln. apo hes *
cr : 2

1607. PF SUSSF 233

The parliament of Dijon conſented to purchaſe,
for the ſum of ſixty thouſand crowns, a grant for
the juriſdiction of Breſſe. However, they gave
themſelves no trouble about raiſing this ſum ; which
determined his Majeſty to augment the gabelle
in this province, which would, at leaſt, procure
him a part of it. The parliament preſumed to
ſuppreſs this augmentation by an arret, which was,
indeed, cancelled by the council; but at the ha-
zard of raiſing a ſedition among the people, who
had not before murmured at this impoſt. The
Baron de Lux was commiſſioned by the King, to
declare to the parliament of Burgundy how high-
ly he was offended at this procedure. I adviſed
his Majeſty to preſcribe to that parliament a cer-
tain time for the payment of the ſum that had
been promiſed by them; and, if they did not ſa-
tisfy him, to declare, without any other form, the
juriſdiction of Breſſe transferred to the parliament
of Dauphine. The word parliament carries with
it an idea of equity, and even wiſdom; yet, in
theſe bodies, we meet with ſuch inſtances of irre-
gularity, that one cannot help concluding, that,
if infallibility may be hoped for among men, it
will be found rather in one than a multitude,

I have been always ſcandalized at the chambers
of accounts, which, though eſtabliſhed merely
that the proccedings between tle principal di-
rectors of the revenue, the different perſons ac-
countable, and the other receivers, might be car-
ried on with method, integrity, and truth, have
been of no other effe@ than to teach all the par-
ties concerned to cheat and ſteal, by allowing, in
the accounts which they palled, a thouſand articles
which were equally known to be falſe on one fide
and on the other. My ſcheme was to declare all
the accounts which had been given in from the
year 1598, excluſive, ſubje& to review, I writ a

3 circular

234 ME MOI RS Book XXIV.

circular letter to the chambers of accounts, the
1it of April, in which J told them, that, in con-
formity to the pleaſure of his Majeſty, who deſired
to be ſatisfied concerning the conduct of all the

perſons intruſted with his money, I had made an

exact ſearch ſor the accounts audited in the coun-
ci] from the year 1598, and not having found ſuch
and ſuch receipts for ſuch and ſuch years, which
I particulariſed to each of the chambers, in the
fearch that I had made into their ſeveral accounts,
one of thoſe things muſt have been, either that
the perſons who were to pay in the public money,
had neglected to give in their accounts, or that
the council had omitted to keep the extracts or
copies. To know which of theſe was true, I in-
Joined theſe chambers to have the duplicates of
theſe accounts laid before them, to compare them
with the papers of the King's council, and to draw
up an extract of all that which they found con-
trary to the form which the King preſcribed them,
and which was expreſsly {ent them every year,
that no difficulty might embarraſs them. I did
not forget to explain to them how that extract
ought to be made, with exact incluſion of all re-
ſidues, falaries, coſts, charges of accounts, wages,
exemptions, taxations, receipts, and other things
of the like nature: I ordered them to make e.
tracts of the accounts, not only of general, but ot
particular receivers; becauſe his Majeſty had been
told, that the accounts of particular receivers, not
being uſed to be audited by the council, were
thoſe which gave room for moſt of the illegal
proſecutions on the part of the chambers. I con.
cluded the letter with telling them, that, in order
to ſet this inquiry on foot, I ncither ſent them an
edict, nor particular commiſſions, becauſe the)
were able to do it by virtue of their oſſice: but, !!

they thought farther powers neceſſary, they oe
Ul

.
> PE > 0" 7 e 9 2 P 3 F 4 Tn 3 1 1
„„ CL ARSTRRES : x Fm 7; T *
PF wh * 4 7 % « . "Hy" a

——— CT ——_ ——

4 = P 6 8 .
* 4% 905 8 5 E i " | as IE Ys "hy p wa .
1 * &* & 6 2 ms wt. 0 y 2 5 =
-. 0 Gs e ot . 5 e
8 „ Oe nun OO . * a

1607. OF SU LL. T. 235

but aſk them; and that they ought to think them-
ſelves oblized to his Majeſty, that, inſtead of the
rigorous 1 of a chamber of juſtice, or
an appointment of commiſhoners, he employed
only his ordinary officers to correct abuſes; and
that it was their buſineſs to requite this goodneſs,
by ee the higheſt proofs of exactneſs and
honeſty.

This was an affair likely to cauſe a diſpute be-
tween the chamber of accounts, and the treaſurers,
receivers, and other perſons employed in the pay-
ment of the revenue, who endeavoured to turn
aſide the ſtroke by two means: firſt, by drawing
the whole office upon the chamber of accounts;
ſecondly, by declaring that the King had made
them purchaſe a ſecurity, both for themſelves and
their under-agents, againſt any retroſpective in-
quiry, by a tax of ſix hundred thouſand livres, which
had, in effect, been paid. There remained yet ano-
ther refuge in the chamber of accounts, where
we were oppoſed by dificulties of another kind.
Thoſe bodies pretended, as they always do, that
the ſovereign authority with which they were in-
truſted in all affairs of the revenue, intitled them
to zive the laſt audit to all accounts, without be-
ing ſubject to any examination, even of the King
limſelf. I conſidered this objection as no ſurther
valid than as between the chambers and myſelf;
and I ſhewed his Majeſty, that I was willing to
undertake theſe ſovereign courts, provided that
he, on his part, would give to me, to them, and
the council, the neceſſary orders. It was not my
fault that the affair ſtopt here.

Notwithſtanding the regulation which had been
made, the foregoing, year, for the direction of
the commiſſioners ſent into the provinces, I {till
received frequent complaints againſt them. Ha-
napier preſented his againſt the commiſſioners 2
the

236 MEMOIR S Book XXIV,

the ſalt· office at Buzancois. I had ſome of them
cited before the council, where a very ſevere re.
primand was given to Tardien. | could never
make theſe fellows underſtand, that by haraſſing
the people for the tax, for inſtance upon ſalt, un-
der a falſe appearance of zeal for the King's profit,
he loſt more than he gained upon the whole, by
the inſolvency to which debtors were reduced;
and, to tell the truth, they took this pains only
for the farmers of the revenue. There was a ne-
ceſſity of reviving, with yet ſtronger injunctions,
the regulation of the gabelle, that which regards
the diſtribution of ſalt among the provinces; that
which regards the tax, and that about the ſale of
uncuſtomed ſalt: for there was no reaſon why the
condition of collectors of the taille ſhould be made
worſe, ſince it was an office in which nobody
entered but by force, and which almoſt nobody
quitted but with ruin. I likewiſe forbid the
commiſſioners to uſe any extraordinary meaſures
apainſt the regiſters, notaries, ſerjeants, gaugers,
and other public perſons ; or to oblige any public
officer to pay the tax of his collection, without
firſt tending to the commiſſioners- general at Paris
the complete ſtate of thoſe taxes to be examined
and authoriſed. I forbid them, likewiſe, to de-
cide any controverted caſe without applying to
the council. When theſe diſpoſitions were formed
upon ſuch views, it was nor my intereſt that they
ſhonld be kept ſecret, as they commonly are, bc-
tween the miniſters and the perſons intereſted.
By the ſame act which obliged Du-Monceau the
commiſſioner of Berry to obſerve them, I made
them known likewiſe to Marechal de la Chatre,
and to the treaſurers of France, with whom I or.

dered him to act in concert.
This province appeared to me to want ſome
regulation with regard to the marſhalſeys; *
0

ww

* a 2 Mg: * 28 . by 3 U 2 2 1 *
my 3 6 SHY NR * —

1607. OF SUL L'Y. 237

of the revenues appointed for their maintenance
being embezzled, or returned to the office of the
recciver-general, the remainder was ſcarce ſuf.
ficient to ſupport a ſmall number of archers:
places where they were ſent to reſide, were choſen
with ſo little judgment, that in ſome, where they
were moſt neceſſary, none were ſettled, as in Va-
tan, Iſloudun, Argenton, Chateauroux, La-Chatre,
and Saint Amand, where the royal authority was
not well reſpected, and at the ſame time the mid-
dle of the province, where they were almoſt uſe-
leſs, was quite over-run with them. After con-
ſulting the treaſurers of the province about a new
method of diſtributing theſe guards, I fent them
my regulation on this-head. The court of election
of Saint Amand being partly for Bourbonnois,
they granted to the vice-ſeneſchal of this pro-
vince a right of placing there a lieutenant and a
brigade, as being of little importance for the pu-
blic good, on whom this privilege was conferred.

] obliged thoſe who had been ſecurity for the
receivers of the depoſits of the parliaments of
Paris and Bourdeaux, to bring in, within four
months, the declarations of thele receivers to the
office of Meffieurs de Maiſſes, Pont carre, Cau-
marten, and Maupeou, appointed for that pur-
pole; aud 1 declared, with their confent, theſe
offices reunited to the domaine ſixteen years aſter
that date.

Cuſſe and Marigne, appointed for the reim-
burſement of the tix hundred thouſand livres lent
to the King, in the year 1598, by the province of
Brittany, {ent me their final account of receipt
and expenſe; or rather an abſtract, and an in-
accurate abridgment, by which 1 found, that, for
reimburſing fix hundred thouſand franks, they ac-
knowledgec to have received and given out near
one million three hundred and forty Wen

| vres.

238 MEMOIR S Book XXIV.
livres. I was already informed, by the complaints
that were ſent me from that province, of the na-
ture of that eſtimate, and ſeverely reproved thoſe
by whom it was given in. I allo proſecuted ſe—
veral perſons for thefts which Vitry diſcovered to
me in Guienne *. |

When it was known that the King deſigned to
redeem ſeveral parts of his domaine, many con-
tractors came and offered themſelves for that pur.
pole: one of them ſent to inquire, whether the
council would admit him to treat for a ſhare of a
hundred and fifty thouſand livres: but he would
neither diſcover his name, nor declare what part
of the domaine, nor even the conditions that he
would treat upon, only that thoſe conditions were
very advantageous for his Majeſty ; becauſe he
neither deſired a leaſe for a long time, nor any
new regulations, but to take every thing upon the
footing it was at preſent. He made it an expreſs
condition, that, after he had declared himſelf, no
one ſhould be allowed to outhid him without pay-
ing him two hundred thouſand livres. The ſingu—
larity of this propoſal did not hinder the council

One of the principal acts of juſtice againſt the financiers, du-
ring the Duke of Sully's miniſtry, was the impriſonment and pu-
niſhment of the famous contractor L'Argentier. The Memoirs of
the hiſtory of France, after having related (vol. 2. p. 271) his
miſdemeanors and embezzlements, adds the following ſtory.
The laſt time the King was going to Fontainebleau, L' Argen.
« tier coming to take his leave of his Majeſty, told him, he would
„ ſoon follow him thither to kiſs his hand, and receive his com.
„ mands; and added, that journey would colt him ten thouſand
* crowns. Ventre ſaint gris, anſwered his Majeſty, (his uſual oath),
* that is too much for a journey from Paris to Fontaineblcan.
* Yes, Sir, replied L'Argentier ; but J have, with your Majeſtys
leave, ſomething elſe to do there: for I propoſe to take a mode
„of the front of your houſe, in order to have one of mine in
1 gp xp buile on the ſame plan; at which the King laugh-
* ing, took no further notice of it at that time: but when news
was brought him of L'Argentier's impriſonment in the Chatelet.
* How, ſays he, he is going to take a model of the front of the
« Chatclet 2”
ſrom

2 7 k 8 + . 2 Wa .
.. . ²˙ AA
1 . * 4 * 1 * _— * k

* 8 —
E N 1 * 3 „„
$ bh : ” Pre «it «2 r 1 T+ 0 — — 1 on.
= 1 * L y 3 'S:
„6 de Is HY e 5
* * * * ; TE

167.0 F SULLY. 239

from accepting it; but the King inſiſted upon this
perſon's giving in his name, and explaining him-
ſelf, at leaſt to the time and nature of the re-

demption, to him, the Chancellor, and me. His

Majeſty was apprehenſive, that this unknown con-
tractor might condition for a part of the domaine
which was in the hands of ſome perſons from
whom it might not be convenient to take it. A
man, named Longer, preſented likewiſe, on this
ſubject, a long memorial, which the King ſent
me, as well as the propoſals that were lately made
him by the farmers of the aids at Fontainebleau,
ſaying, that he ſuſpected, that thoſe who came in
this manner to make him propoſals, in my ab-
ſence, deſigned to impoſe upon him.

The Duke of Nevers preſented a petition to
the council for ſuppreſſing the ſalt-office eſta-
bliſhed at Rethelois, at the ſolicitation of the
Ducheſs his mother, to whom the King bad given
the profits of this office, for a certain ſum agreed
on between them. I was obliged to apply to the
treaſurers of Champagne to come at a certain
knowledge of this affair, which had not been
tranſacted in my time; and I found, without much
difficulty, the original grant to the Ducheſs of
Nevers. The King, when he ſaw it, was of opi-
nion, that this family could have no farther de-
mand upon him. However, he ſent it to me with
orders to make an exact calculation, and if any
money remained due to the Duke of Nevers, to
pay it; and propoſed, inſtead of ſuppreſſing this
part of the revenue, to improve it as I had done
the others. His Majeſty had two Jaw-ſuits with
this houſe for the inheritances of thoſe of Foix
and PAlbret, each party having a claim of mil-
lions upon the other. This affair was thought to
be very perplexed : but, when I pot the writings
into my hands, I drew up a memorial ſo —

an

— 6 ˖ͤ —ᷣ— — — . — ü——ĩ — —

240 MEMOIR S Book XX1v,

and clear, that the King was ſoon convinced I had
not been miſtaken when I offered it as my opi.
nion, that each party would be obliged to come
reatly down in his demands.
The people of Lyons had hkewiſe a process
in the council againſt Feydeau. They repreſent.
ed to his Majeſty, that the counciPs refuſing

to deliver them an arret, which they had alre2-

dy obtained, was a mortal injury to their trade,
The 8 referred them to me, and I ſoon did
their buſineſs. The good or ill done to ſuch a

city as Lyons, is of importance to the whole

kingdom. For this piece of ſervice, the city of
Lyons ſent me her thanks by the mayor and
ſheriffs. ;

Upon a report ſent me by the treafurers of
Beziers, of the manner in which the tax of the
marc d'nr was levied, I cauſed an arrct of coun-
ci! for ſuſpending this levy to be granted. |
know not what the King was made to believe
concerning it: but his Majeſty wrote to me nt
to let this arret be ſigned; or if it was, not '9
give notice of it without an order from hi;
not that he intended to authoriſe the abulcs that
were committed in levying this tax, but he was
willing, at leaft, to know what they were. Han
ever, thoſe abuſes ſo ſtrongly affected the mo-
ney ariſing from it, that 1 was perſuaded if the
King blamed us for any thing, it would he for
having ſo long delayed to provide ſoinc remedy
againſt them. |

But I was afterwards charged with a fault (till
more prievous in relation to the council: My
enemies endeavoured to perſuade the King, that
I introduceck none into it but perſons who, 4
they taid, neither merited nor had any regard
to the duties of their employment; and that 1115

procedure occaſioned great confuſion in "”
Vis council.

© T2
3 .
mY . 1 .

On) mw __ c ——_ am We

1607.

F 8ULL T. | 245

council. If what they had alledged had been true,
I confeſs I ſhould have deſerved ſometlüng more
than thoſe reproaches his Majeſty made me, as
1 ſhould have baſely abuſed that confidence with
which he had intruſted the whole management
of the finances to my care. As I examined in-
to the occaſion of ſuch a report, I judged that
it could only be the ſcheme I had formed of
joining to that great number of maſters of re-

queſts, and other men of the robe, of whom the

council was generally compoled, ſome men of

the ſword, choſen from among thoſe who had
commiſſions to be preſent at them upon extra-

ordinary occaſions.

And it 1s certain, that I ne-

ver had an opportunity of talking on this ſub—

ject to the princes, dukes, peers, and other of-

ficers of the crown, in whom J obſerved a ſtrength

of judgment and capacity, and that I did not
endeavour to m{pire them with an mclination
for this employment, which, through a blind
prejudice, they thought unworthy of their birth,
He only is a truly great man who knows how
to be uſeful to his country at all times, and on
all occaſions : and what is baſeneſs but tarniſh—
ing by a ſoſt and effeminate life, {ſuch as pertens
of quality in France lead during the peace, ail
the glory which they had been able to acquire

in war?

Far from ſuppoſing that I bad done wrong by
endeavouring to undeceive all thoſe uſeleſs vo-
luptuaries of the court, 1 avowed to the King,
that it had been my intention, and thought it my
duty, to ſettle this matter with his Majeſty, al-
though by letters; and, conſequently, with no
I drew out a plan of a new
council, and fent it the King, in which four
men of the ſword were to fond
as many

Vor. IV.

great conveniency.

©

ply the places of
counſellors out of the eight of which
Y it

—— — En... ©

—— nd
— —

I, —

— - 2
— — — —
———

— ——— — — YR. —

— — — —

246 MEMOIR S Book XXIV.

it was compoled. To introduce this change in
rhe moſt effectual manner, it was neceſſary to

2ve a liſt of thoſe perſons in the kingdom beſt
qualified for ſuch an office, who had exceeded
thirty years of age, out of which twenty ſhould
be choſen, which, allowing five for each quarter,

would always keep the council complete. Theſe

were to attend conſtantly three mornings in 3
week where the council was held; and if they
failed, were to be blotted out of the lift, and
their places given to others. What immenſe
difference between a body thus compoled, and

an aſſembly where every member conducts him.
elf by arts which have been the whole ſtudy

of his life.
1 hall not enter here into a particular detai]
of all that I deſigned to do. I only obſerved
to the King, that if this prozect gave him as much
rhe as it did me, he would be ſtill more ſa-
isfied with that general rule, which I believed
q could {0 well regulate, as to make it poſſible
for all the ſecrets of rhe ſtate to be ſafely depo-
ited with ſo many perſons of different tempers,
underſtanding, and ſtations. The King was go-
ing to hunt when he received my letter. He
read! it, however, twice over, and ſent me word
he would conſider of my propoſal : but all my
endeavours to bring him over to my opinion
proved ineffectual. The authoriſing great abuſes
K not the worſt conſequences of a bad cuſtom ;
for thoſe may be at all times oppoſed with {uc-
ceſs: but it is the giving credit to certain abuſes
leſs pa]pable, and concealing them under 2
maik of wiſdom and an appearance of public vt!-
lity, ſo as to draw the approbation ot princes
of the beſt underſtanding. Theſe can not be
deſtroyed but after a long chain of reflection
and applying remedies to them flow! Y, and! on

9 ;
*

*
. *
N
"IE
7
+ 4
Firs
+
4 =
> |
- *
*

Fo ——— —-- Dad ©

r
4 e 28 2
Re Fs: 4

S 3
.

1607 r

after the other: but the life of man is too ſhort
to afford him leiſure for rooting up all of them.
This was not the only occaſion on which his Ma-
jeſty was not of the ſame opinion with me. He
had been perſuaded to erect a new chamber of
jaſtice againſt the financiers, a work that long
experience had pronounced uſeleſs and liable to
abuſes : but ſtill highly agreeable to this prince,
who not chuſing to apply any part of his ordi—
nary revenues to his expenſes in play, buildings,
miſtreſſes, and other things of that nature, which,
as J have already ſaid, were very conliderable,
was glad to find them ſupplied by a ſum of monev
ready provided to his hand, and which the in-
tereſted courtiers always repreſented much greet-
er than he found it to be. I was io prieved to
ſee Henry ſtill the dupe of thele people, that !
newed my reſentment of it in full court; my
plainneſs threw the King into ſuch an extreme
rage with me, that my enemies conceived great
hopes of my diſgrace. The adventure of tht:
2lenal, which 1 have already related, added to
this, raiſed them {till higher. But, notwithſtand-
ing all this, I could not hinder mylelf from o-
penly reproving the commiſiioners of this cham-
ber, when I ſaw chem pretend ignorance of the

chief criminals, and puniſh, with no lets oſten—

ation than ſeverity, ſuch as were guilty of flight

miſdemeanors.

Mingot, one of the commiſſioners, acting as
King's counſel, having delivered an opinion

1 Certainly nothing can be truer than what the author ſys
"TC; nor can any thing be more happily imagined chan this pro-
ject, to deſtroy thoſe prejudices which (til fubſiſt amongſt the no-
bility of France, even in this enlightened age. Why ſhould the
"ances, trade, or other functions becoming a good patriot, be
deemed more degrading, than an acquuintance with the belles
(tres, which the nobility are not aſharned to cultivate ? We may
re time will remove theſe prejudices,

* contrary

248 MEMOIRS Book XXIV.

contrary to particular orders he had received
from the King, upon an affair which I have now
forgot, I made him ſenſible, that in me he had
an overſeer who was determined to let nothing
paſs. He complained of me to his Majeſty, and
prevailed upon his brethren to join with him,
at leaſt ſo it was reported to me; and with cir-
cuinitances ſo poſitive, that I could have no res-
{on to doubt the truth of what I was told. The
king did not, indeed, mention the affair to me;
bat this was far from being a proof that he had
not been informed of it. I, therefore, thought
it necellary to give his Majeſty a full relation cf
all I had ſaid to Mangot, that I might not {ut-
fer his reſentment to go ſo far as I had fome-
times experienced, I had told Mangor, that!
would not ſubmit to thoſe pretended orders from
the King unleſs they were ſhown to me, It was
not difficult to give a bad turn to theſe words.
When I wrote to his Majeſty, I thanked him for
not giving credit to the reports my enemies had
made to. him of me: I aſſured him, that the heat
I diſcovered on that occaſion proceeded only
from my grief at ſecing his orders diſobeyed by
people who expected that he ſhould deſpoil him-
{elf of his whole authority in favour of them, and
his intereſts ſacrificed to every conlideration.
concluded with earneſt intreaties that he would
vardon me, if, contrary to my intention, I hat
done any thing to diſpleaſe him.

However, I had been deceived in ſuppoſing, he
had heard of the affair: he told me in his an-
ſver, that he was greatly ſurpriſed to hear the
firſt news of this quarrel from myſelf ; that |!
thoſe men had ſpoken to him, he would have
replied, as a maſter who loves his ſervant; that
all this was only an artifice to inflame me, and
force me to complain, and by that means vr

om

160%. OF SU L.L XI. 249

ſome miſunderſtanding between us.“ I ſwear
« to you,” added Henry, “ that I have never
« heard this affair mentioned: your temper is a
« little precipitate, and I perceive by your let-

« ter that you believe all that has been ſaid to

« you. However, report is an abſolute har :
« moderate your reſentment, and be not ſo ea-
« ſily prevailed upon to believe all the ſtories

« that are brought to you. By indifterence,

« you will revenge yourſelf on thoſe who en-
« yy and hate you, for the affection I bear you.
« 'This is the firſt time that I have taken a pen
« into my hand ſince this laſt fit of the gout. My
« reſentment againſt theſe ſlanderers has fur-
« mounted my pain.” |

Caumartin had managed with ſuch prudence
and ceconomy the money he was intruſted with
to diſtribute among the Swiſs cantons, that he
found means to reſerve thirty thouſand crowns
each year, with which he cleared other debts, by
making a compoſition with the creditors. Suc!:
an example ot juſtice and probity ought not tt»
be paſled over in filence ; and is ſo much tlic
more laudable, as that if he had ſought a plau-
ible pretence ſor turning part of this ſum to hi;
own profit, nothing was more eaſy than to make
the Swiſs murmur at his parſimony. I did not
Jail to mention this conduct with all the praiſes
it deſerved to Du- Reſuge, who ſucceeded Cau.
martin.

There had been lately raiſed by the King a
company of gendarmes, to be commanded by
ne Duke of Orleans. His Majeſty thought then
ſo fine, and fo well mounted, when he came to
review them, that he ordered them a year's pay,
and as much to the Queen's company. He let:
to my choice to take the two hundred thou-
and livres, which this muſter coſt him, out of
. tlie

1 1 b — 1 1 ba. » N
* * 4 g 4 0 — * < -
a ab + , 8 on © — r 2 „ :
- e 5 2
= — — 3 — IY 22 — — 3 > =”. 1 *
43 4 * 2 *
8 " m_ — 8 — *
1 ä 17 2

3 "=
— 9 ow.” 4
ae. att. 4 a 4 6.
— 2 I

5 1 - *
* = 7 : 2 —
— N al »

* 3 8 : |
— .

20 MEMOIRS Book XXIV.

the ſix hundred thouſand which were every year
brought into the treaſury from the profits of the
taille; or that the treaſury, deducting that ſum
from the money appropriated for the ordinary
expenſes of war, ſhould reimburſe it at the uſual
time of paying thoſe companies.

With regard to the duties of my other em-
ployments, the moſt conſiderable, relating to the
ordnance, was providing the neceſſary furniture
for an armament of galleys; a work with which
the King was highly pleaſed. However, I was
willing to ſpare him part of the expenſe. In
{earching amongſt the old papers of my prede-
ceſſors in the poſt of grand maſter of the ordnance,
I found, that in the former reigns, many pieces
of artillery had been piven to the captains of the
gallcys, which they had obliged themſelves to re-
itore when required ; but had not done it. The
council, to whom I communicated this diſco—
very, agreed with me, that we might commence
a Jaw-ſuwit againft the heirs of thoſe captains, and
force them to make reſtitution of the pieces of
ordnance lent to their predeceſſors: but as ſeve-
ral perſons of quality were intereſted in this pro-
ſecution, I ſent the Duke of Rohan to his Ma—
jeſty to aſk his permiſſion for it; ſending him at
the fame time, a paper 1 had drawn up con-
cerning this affair. The King conſented that
the ſuit ſhould be begun, but not proſecuted too
rigorouſly ; which rendered all my trouble fruit
leſs. It was always my opinion, that it would
have been more proper for Henry to have ſcem—
ed ignorant of the fact, than to have made at-
tempts to have recovered thoſe pieces of ord-
nance, and afterwards to drop it.

I ordered plans to be taken of all the fortreſic;
and coaſts of Britanny, which I ſent to his Ma-
jeſty, that he might fee what was necetliry 5
| +

18 Or SULLY. 251

be done there. We loſt this year two excel.
lent engineers, Bonnefort and the younger F-
rard, who was already not inferior to his father:
their deaths grieved me extremely. I intreated
the King not to diſpoſe of their places, for which
ſolicitations were immediately made, until the
capacities of the candidates were well examined.

The forcible carrying away of the Sieur de
Fontange's daughter, with which I begin the
article of the police, relates alſo to my employ-
ment as grand maſter, ſince I received orders
from his Majeſty to ſend ſome cannon before
the caſtle of Pierrefort, which Fontange, afliſt-
ed by his friends, beſieged in his purſuit of the
raviſher. The expenſes of a ſiege ſoon reduced
him to great diſtreſs, and obliged him to have
recourſe to the King. Henry, moved with the
juſtice of his cauſe, which, beſides, as the com-
mon father of his ſubje&s, he could not avoid
intereſting himſelf in, referred the petition and the
bearer to Sillery and me, writing to me that he
had juſt given orders to ao, and Nereſtan*
to hold their companies in readineſs to march
thither: ard commanded Noailles to advance
with his, 1n order to execute what I ſhould judge
fit to be done in favour of Fontange: but that
ifI was of opinion he ſhould be at all the expenſe
of the ſiege of Pierrefort, he recommended it
to me to follow the moſt prudent methods I
could in this affair, that it might be as little bur.
thenſome as poſſible to the people. Henry alſo
referred Baumevielle to us, who had propoſed an
expectent to him, which, he ſaid, had more va-
nity than ſolidity in it; and having employed
Vanterol to ſeize a man who was fuſpected of

| d Philibert de Nereſtan, captain of the King's guards, and ap-
pointed by his Majeſty, the following year, grand maſter of the
order of our Lady of Mount-Carmel and St Lazarus, ;
| having

252 MEM O IRS Book XXIV.

having entertained ſome traiterous deſigns, he
ſent him to me to be paid the expenſes of his
Journey.

The good order of the police appeared to me
likewiſe to be wounded by the judge of Saumur
taking upon him, of his own private authority,
to prohibit the exportation of grain out of the
kingdom, and of ſelling it within the extent of
his juriſdiction of Saumur. I got the council
to cancel this ſentence, even before his Majeſty
was informed of it; and the officers of juſtice,
by whom it was publithed, were ſummoned to
appear and anſwer for their conduct.

The parhament of Rouen granted two arrets,
which by ſome perſons were pronounced to be ve—
ry good, and by others extremely unjuſt: one
was upon the ſhrine of St Romain, which is main-
tained in the privilege of giving a pardon for any
aſſaſſination, however atrocious it might be“:

the

In favour of William de la Mothe-de-Pehn, an accomplice in
the murder of Francis de Montmorency, Lord of Hallot, the King's
Leutenant- General in Normandy, committed ſixteen years before,
in a very atrocious manner, by Chriſtopher Marquis of Alice,
Henry IV. calling this affair before his council, changed the pardon
granted to La-Mothe, into a ſentence of baniſhment for rine
. ; and to pay ſeveral fines, &c. The puniſhment in al! probs.

ility would have been more ſevere, if the youth of the crimins!
had not in ſome depree alleviated his crime. The King, ever ſme
the year 1597 had greatly abridged the privilege of which thechap-
ter of Rouen is poſſeſſed. This procets, which at that time made
a great noiſe, occaſioned a more ſtrict inquiry into the nature ©
this queſtion, M. De Thou, vol. 4 p. 166. Nicolas Rigau:t,
the continvator of De Thou, and all other men of learning, ſo {ar
as one can judge from what is faid on this ſubject in the Merc. Fran.
anno 1697, p. 179. made no difficulty to eſteem as fabulous the
pretended miracle whereby St Romain, Archbiſhop of Rouen, deli-
vered that city from the ravages of a monſter or ſerpent, common
ly called the Gergoville : being aſſiſted in the enterpriſe by 2 criml-
nal impriſoned for murder : from whence this privilege had its or:
gin. The evidence by which it was endeavoured to prove that th“
privilge wes really granted by ſeveral Kings of France, could
ſtand the teſt of a (tric ferutiny; but was found full of errors,
ſapp {1t 105

NS is en
5 Re" ;
*

= . 7 J 0

. bo 1 3 3 " a
* 3 4 * 8 * 2 5 3, Er BETSY.” "Is -
dA . „„

AS * BY

1607. . 253

the other upon the marriage of a man named
Drouet, auditor of the chamber of accounts, whole
hiſtory merits no place here. |

The firlt preſident of this parliament being ſei—
zed with a dangerous diſtemper, of which how-
ever he recovered, his Majeſty ordered me to tel!
Jambeville, whoſolicited for this dignity, that he
always deſigned it for him, but that he was not plea-
ſed with the eagerneſs he thewed to enjoy it. The
office of Advocate to the King in the parliament
of Bourdeaux becoming vacant by the death of the
Sieur de Sault, Queen Margaret and D*Ornano
requeſted it for the ſon of Du-Bernet, counſellor
in that court; but the King reſuſed them, not
being willing ro give this place, the importance
of which the late troubles had ſufficiently ſhewn,
to any one whoſe character he was not thoroughly
acquainted with: but the picture I drew of Du-
Bernet Fred him the favour of Henry, and a
grant of the place. His Majeſty greatly regretted
the loſs of Dinteville and Bretauville; as like-
wie that of two officers of his houſehold, Saint Ma-

ſuppoſitions, and falſities, in the times and dates. It is conjectured,
that this pious fable had its origin from a true miracle performed
by this archbiſhop ; but that it was by ſtopping an inundation;
which poetical licence, according to cuſtom, transformed into à
monſter, beſides adorning the ſtory with many others of its uſual
figures, The word hydra, which was eaſily altered into /erpext,
has ſo ncar a reſemblance to the word which in Greek _—_ an
:nundation, that this alone might eaſily occaſion the miſtake. To
recite all the reaſons contained in the pleadings and writings of
that time, or in the different diſſertations wrote ſince then on this
ſubject, for and againſt the privilege of the canons of the cathedral

church of Rouen, would take up too much room here. It 15 no won-

der there ſhould have been ſo great an outeryagainſt an act of devoti-
on ſo ſingularas this, whereby an action the moſtunjuſt, and tending
to authoriſe what is highly criminal, is made the mot eſſential
part of the commemoration of a ſaint. The ceremonies obſerved
on this occaſion (for they ſtill ſubſiſt, and are performed every
year at Rouen on the fea of the aſcenſion, being called the cle u

tion of the ſorive) are deſcribed in the Merc, Fran, and in many
other places,

rie,

2544 MEMOIRS Book XXIV.

rie, and Canify. As he had created their poſts
only in their favour, they were ſuppreſſed at their
deceaſe. |

That exactneſs which I have preſcribed myſelf,
obliges me to give an account here of ſeveral
ſums of money, which, by my papers, I find to be
paid thts year, by the orders, and for the private
expeniesof his Majeſty. Thirty-{1x thouſand livres“
toDon John de Medicis : the King made me take
them upon the hundred thouſand livres placed in
the fate of finances of the preſent year, to the
account of his uncle the Grand Duke of Tuſcany,
Three thouſand to Cardinal Givry, and the {ame
fum to Cardinal Seraphin, which remained of the
revenues of the abhey of Clerac, due before tlic
contract made with thoſe of St John de Lairan,
Three thouſand two hundred and twenty-five livres
to Santeny, who had lent that fum to the King.
Eighteen thouſand andſixty livres tothe Biſhop of
Carcaſlonne, which had been long and 1mportu-
nately ſolicited by him, as being due to him by his
Majeity, to whom he propoſed expedients without
number for the payment. The King ordered me
to require a ſword enriched with precious ſtones,
and, ſome papers from this biſhop, which he had
pledged with him as ſecurity for this ſum, Many
conſiderable ſums were loſt by Henry at play;
but I ſhall not ſet them all down here. He {ent
Beringhen to me for nine thouſand livres, which
he had loſt at the fair of St Germain, in lite
jewels and trinkets ; writing to me, that the mer—
chants were very prefling for their money. Be—
ringhen came again ſome days afterwards for live
thouſand two hundred and fixty-hve livres; three
days after that, I gave him three thouſand more;

A livre is about ten pence Sterling; and in reducing French mo-
ney to Sterling, we always reckon a livre ten pence,
+ .

and

1607. . 255

ind at another time, three thouſand {ix hundred
livres.

I do not mention here the ſums that were given
by the King to the Prince of Condé, to enable him
to make the tour of Italy ; Henry could not be at
too much expenie to inſpire this prince with pro-
per ſentiments; thoſe which it coſt him to repair
the baſtions of the gate of St Antony and Ja Place-
Royale; thoſe which wete paid to redeem the
Queen's rings from Rucelay, to whom they were
pledged; nor thoſe which he expended in buildings
for his manufaQures “, which were very conſider.
able, and, in my opinion, very uſeleſs. Ihe un-
dertakers would have thrown down, for that pur-
poſe, all the houſes on one fide of La Place-Royale;
but Henry, according to the plan of the comptrol-
ler Donon, ordered them to be ſatisfied with erect-
ing before thoſe houles a kind of gallery, which
preſerved on that fide of the ſquare a uniformity
with the others.

It was a diſhcult matter to agree upon a price
with theſe celebrated Flemiſh tapeſtry-workers,
which we had brought into France at ſo great an
expenſe. At length it was reſolved in the pre-
lence of Sillery and me, that a hundred thouſand
(ranks ſhould be given them for their eſtablith-
ment. Henry was very ſolicitous about the pay-
ment of this ſum, „having,“ ſaid he, © a great
* defire to keepthem, and not to loſe the advan-
* ces we have made.” He would have been bet-
ter pleaſed if theſe people could have been paid
out of ſome other ſunds than thoſe which he had
rezerved for himſelf : however, there was a neceſſi-
ty for ſatisfying them at any price whatever,

His Majeſty made nfe of his authority to oblige
| De Vienne to ſign an acquittal to the undertakers

The tapeſtry is here meant.

ſor

——— — — — —— — — — — +

256 N E MO IRS Book XXIV.

for linen cloth in imitation of Dutch holland.
The King ordered a complete ſet of furniture to
be made for him, which he ſent to me to examine
ſeparately, to know if they had not impoſed upon
him. Theſe things were not at all in my taſte,
and I was but a very indifferent judge of them:
the price ſeemed to me to be exceſſive, as well as
the quantity, Henry was of another opinion: af.
ter examining the work, and reading my paper,
he wrote to me that there was not too much, and
that they had not exceeded his orders ; that he had
never {een ſo beautiful a piece of work before,
and that the workman mult be paid his demands
immediately.

Henry did not leave Fontainebleau till the end
of July, when he went to Monceaux, wherehe ſtaid
three weeks. Towards the cloſe of Auguſt, he
went to St Maur, where he was detained {ome
days by a flight indiſpoſition, during which time
the Queen drank the waters of Vanvres. The King
ſtaid at Paris all the month of September; he went
thitheragainin December, having returned to Fon-
tainebleau about the middle of October, and paiſed
the autumn there. The Conſtable went thither
likewiſe, and was very graciouſly received by his
Majeſty when they met at Bouron.

It was one of this prince's higheſt enjoyments
to be with his children, all of whom he loved wich

* He was attacked by the gout on Whitſun-eve. The fit was
violent, ſays Matthieu, the pain moſt ſevere ; but his courage and
the ſtrength of bis conſtitution would have overcome it, had he nt
taken a greater liberty in eating fruit than his phyſicians thought

roper to allow him. He took no care of himſelf, but continued
2 uſual exerciſe ; and about the 21ſt of May, being in bed vith
the Queen, and perceiving a new fit coming on in one of his fect,
he removed into another bed; and finding the motion in his re-
moval of ſervice to him, he got up and ordered himſelf to be car-
ried to the great canal, where he walked till he had tired him-
ſelf to ſuch a degree, that when he come back, he tell allcep;

end on waking again felt himſelf free from pain, F
iy

j 0" FL

a "Or" SV LLY. 252

the moſt tender affection “. Hearing in the
month of Auguſt that the effects of the contagious
air began to be perceived at St Germain, he wrote
inſtantly to Madam de Montglat to take the chil-

tell me that he depended upon my care and dili-
gence to provide coaches, litters, and waggons ne-
ceſſary for this removal. Monſieur the Dauphin
falling ſick at Nolfy, his Majeſty inſtantly writ me

* N

) . . . ; .
an account of it, as he did likewiſe of his recovery
for he never failed to give me notice of every
„ alteration in his health, whether for the better or

s © worle; as likewiſe of all the reſt of the royal family.
It was judged that the children of France might

d return with ſafety to St Germain in the month of
d November; but Henry not willing to run the leaſt
e hazard in a matterof ſuch conſequence, writ to me
Fo and Madam de Montglat, to ſtay at Noiſy, the

whole month +. They were accordingly not re-

moved till the iſt of December.

that tranquillity which was ſo often diſturbed by
the pride and folly of women; on the contrary,
thoſe domeſtic diſorders increaſed every day: great
part of the converſation J had with his Majeſty in

* Henry TV. has been blamed for ſuffering the great aſſection
he had, for both his lawfat and natural children, to blind him
ſo far, as to prevent his ſecing their faults, and acting with his
uſual prudence in what related to them. This I find him re-
proaches with in the book called Hiſtoire de la mere & du fils,
vil. 1. p. 43. But I do not know whether the ancedotes it con-
tains are as full of truth as they are cf curious matters: I find an
appearance of prejudice in it for certain perſons, and againſt others,
which givesone reaſon ſuſſicient to lay no great ſtreſs on its evidence.

The comet which appeared this year in the month of Septem-
ber, gave occafion to take all theſe precautions for the health of the
children of France; becauſe the aſtrologers gave out that it threat-
ened their lives. Henry IV. fail to Matthieu his hiſtorian, who
relates it, that the comet had ſhed its influence on the daughter
of the King of England; and that, through God's mercy, the
aſttelogers had been miſtaken. Il. 2. book 3. f. 769,

Vor, IV. 2 bis

dren to Noiſy; and ſent Frontenac poſt to me, to

Time did not bring to the family of this prince

- ; 8 5 : ” 29
9 4.6 .
52 — e =» : ©- 4 vu *
E nn MO Soon

254 MEMOIR S Book XXIV.

his library turned upon this ſubject. Henry in-
treated me, in terms ſuch as one friend would uſe
to another, to interpoſe once more between the two
perſons that cauſed all his uneaſineſs. I ſhall treat
this ſubject more fully in the memoirs of the fol.
lowing year; all I ſhall ſay concerning it now,
being only to explain the meaning of ſome letters
J received from this prince. One of theſe letters
is dated from Verneuil, near Senlis, April 15. He
there complains, that after having promiſed him at
the Louvre to uſe my utmoſt endeavours to brin
about an accommodation, yet I had ſuffered fit.
reen days to paſs without doing any thing towards
:t. © TI ſee,” purſued he,“ that the intreaties of a
friend are not ſufficiently perſuaſive, and you
*« will reduce me to the neceſſity of requiring your
** obedience as a king and a maſter, Do not fail
then to perform your promile, if you love me,
and deſire that I ſhould love you; for I am re-
*« ſolved to extricate myſelf from all theſe in-
« trigues, which, as you well know without my
*« ſaying it, are but too often renewed; and will
put an end to them whatever it coſt me.
Adieu. You are very dear to me; but I mul
* be equally io to you, which I ſhall be convin-
*« ccd of if you render me the ſervice I deſire of
«Cc you.“

] find another dated from Fontaincbleau, in the
3Inonth of Oꝗober, conceived in theſe terms.
Something has happened in my family, which
has given me more pain than any thing of the
©: kin® 1 have ever yet met with. I would pur
*© chaſe your preſence at almoſt any price ; lor
* you are the only perſon to whom I can open
my heart, and from whoſe advice I receive the
« oreateſt conſolation. This affair is neither 0!
6 love nor of jealouſy; it is a matter of ſtate.
«+ Diſpatch your buſineſs quickly, that you jou

COIL

1 R 2 Yi —_Y ac. 8 =

1607. O UL T. 25 5

&« come to me as ſoon as poſſible. I employ M.
« Sillery; but he is unequal ro the taſk. You
« may gueſs what it is in which I want your
« aſſiſtance: this obſtinacy and inſolence will at
length become inſ{upportable.” “ For my pri-
« yate uncaſineſs,” he wrote me ſome days after-
wards, “ it will laſt ſor ever: if you were here,
« you could not reſtrain your anger, but would
« ſpeak your ſentiments freely.” The reader, I
do not doubt, greatly pities this good prince;
and it was Ama! all that I could do for him.
The Duke of Bouillon received a ſtriking in-
ſtance of the goodneſs and gentleneis of Henry,
when he reſolved to yield Sedan again to lum,
and truſt the guard of it to himſelf, by withdraw-
ing Netancourt and the company he had placed
there. The Sieur Gamaliel de Monſire, commit-
ſary in ordinary of war, was ſent thither for that
purpoſe. His inſtructions, which were dated the
laſt day of December in the preſent year, import-
ed, that although the term-'oi four years, during
which the royal garriſon was to remain there, was
not yet expired; yet his Majeſty thought proper,
tor {ufhcient reaſons, to withdraw it, and to put
the Duke of Bouillon again in poſſeſſion of this
city; that Monſire mould give this company their
pay tor the remaining four months of the preſent
year, after which it ſhould be diſbanded; and
that this commiſlery thould take care that the ſol-
diers paid all the debts they had contracted among
the townſpeople. It being the King's intention
to fulfil exactly the article of the act of protec-
non of April 2. 1596, by which his Majeſty en-
2aped to maintain there a certain number of of-
ficers and troops for the ſecutity of the city, Mon-
ure was directed to make thoſe officers and ſol-
ters who were placed in Sedan in the room of
ole that were commanded to leave it, take a
It: 2 2 £ particular

þ

=> £
nn

- *

*
=

_—
— : —
—— 2
—
- .

9

p Sf * — 1

©

v3

it
1

MEMOIRS Book XXV.

38 oath to his Majeſty, beſides that which
by the treaty they were obliged to take four times
2-year at their quarterly payments. Theſe officers
and ſoldiers bound themſelves by oath to ſerve the
King for and againſt all perſons whatever, even
againſt the Duke of Bouillon himſelf, if he ſhould
neglect to fulfil! the conditions of the treaty of
1606: and, laſtly, Montire was ordered to oblige

256

the burghers of Sedan likewiſe to take the oath

expreſſed in the act of protection, which differed
from the other only in this, that they were re-
leaſed from that taken to the Duke of Bouillon,
and by his own conſent, if he ſhould ever be ca-
pable of engaging in oppoſite intereſts to thoſe of
his Majeſty. All this was exactly complied with,
The original iuſtrument of this tranſaction was
executed before the notaries of Sedan, and pro-
ved as well as the two oaths taken by the burghers
and ſoldiers, which were reduced to writing, and
dated one the 22d, the other on the 23d of Ja-
nuary 1608.

DDG R .

8 HIS year's memoirs, as thoſe of the former,
will contain none of thoſe extraordinary
events, which cannot be read without aſtoniſh-
ment or horror: I ſhall continue in them my uſual
details of the government, court-intrigues, aud
the private life of Henry as well as my own. The
winter was ſpent in diverſions more varied and
more frequent than ever, and in ſhews prepared
with great magnificence. The King had ſent for
ſome comedians from Italy, in whoſe per form-
ances he took much delight: he had them often
at Fontainebleau to play before him, and in mY

abſence ordered my {on to pay them their 2
, vel

Or Su L K. 20

very punctually. The arſenal was generally the
place where thoſe plays and ſhews were exhibited,
which required ſome preparations. The King,
ſometimes when I was abſent, came thither to run
at the ring ; but he never thought there was the
fame order and regularity preſerved, as when L
was there: and the Queen, and the whole court,
thought no other place ſo agreeable and conve-
nient for theatrical repreſentations. For this
purpoſe I had cauſed a ſpacious hall to be built
and fitted up, with an amphitheatre; and a great
number of boxes, in ſeveral galleries ſeparated
from each other, with different degrees of height,
and particular doors belonging to them. Two of
theſe galleries were deſtined for the ladies: no
man was allowed to enter with them. This was
one of my regulations, which I would not ſuffer
ſhould be reverſed, and which I did not think it
beneath me to enforce the obſervation of.

One day when a very fine opera was repreſented
in this hall, IL perceived a man leading in a lady,
with whom he was preparing to enter one of the
womens galleries: he was a forcigner, and I ea-
lily diſtinguithed of what country by the ſwarthy
colour of his ſkin. © Monſeur,” 121d I to him,
you muſt {eek for another door it you pleaſe ;
« for I do not imagine, that, with ſuch a com-
„ plexion, you can hope to paſs for a fair lady.“
My Lord,” anſwered he in very bad French,
* when you know who ] am, I am perſuaded you
vill not refuſe to let me fit among thoſe fair

ladies, as ſwarthy as I am. My name is Pi-

mentel; I have the honour to be very well
with his Majeſty, who plays very often with:

me.” Which was, indeed, too true; for this

oreigner, whom T had already heard often men-
toned, had gained immenſe ſums ſrom the King.
How, Ventre-de-ma-vie,”” ſaid I to him, affect
2 ing

258 MEMOIRS Book xxV

ing to be extremely angry, “you are then that
fat Portugueſe *, who every day wins the King's
« money. Pardieu, you are come to a had
© place; for I neither like, nor will ſuffer ſuch
« people to come here.” He offered to ſpeak,
but I would not hear him. “ Go, go,” faid J,
puſhing him back, “you ſhall not enter here : 1
* am not to be prevailed upon by your gibber.
“ iſh.” The King afterwards aſking him how he
liked the opera, and if the dances were not exqui-
litely performed, Pimentel told him that he had
a great inchnation to ſee it, but that he met his
grand financer, with his negative front at the door,
who turned him hack. He then related his ad-
venture with me, at which the King was extreme-
ly pleaſed, and laughed heartily at his manner of
telling it; nor did he forget to divert the whole
court wich it afterwards.

I ſhal} not here have recourſe to the artifices of
falſe modeſty, to inſinuate that the affection the
King ſhowed for me, and the confidenee he pla-
ced in me, had riſen to ſuch a height, that if 1
had been capable of aſpiring to the ſuperb title
of favourite, I might have obtamed it. The
reader may judge of this by the offers his Majeſty
made me this year: but it is neceſſary to trace
this matter a little higher.

Among the many calumnies which in the year
1605 had brought me to the brink of ruin, my enc-
mies by private informations endeavoured to pe!-
ſuade Henry, that I intended to procure ſo ric:
and ſo powerful an alliance for my fon þ, as m'giit

®* Pimentel was not a Portugueſe, but an Italian.
Maximilian de Bethune, Marquis of Roſny, eldeſt fon of the
Duke of Sully, by Anne de Courtenay his firſt wife. He was fi-
perintendant of the fortifications, governor of Marite and Ger-
eau, and maſter-general of the ordnance in reverſion, after the
death of his fahle, but died before him in 1634.
| on!

1608. 07 3 V*L-L-'Y: 259

one day render him formidable to his Majeſty
himſelf : that ſeveral perſons, either by my de-

S ſire, or to make their court to me, laboured ſo
” earneſtly for the ſucceſs of this ſcheme, that al-
ready I had it in my choice to marry my ſon ei-

ther to Mademoiſelle de Bourbon, de Maienne,

de Montmorency, de Bouillon, or de Crequy, or
into any of the richeſt private families in the king-

dom, it [ preferred a great eſtate to a noble name.

This was one of the principal points of that long

and ſerious converſation I had with his Majeſty

the preceding year in his library, and of which I

' promiſed to relate all that I was permitted to diſ-

cover, as opportunities offered. Henry aſked me
what were my views for my ſon, and whether there

| was any truth in thoſe reports that he had heard

concerning his marriage with one of thoſe ladies

have mentioned. I acknowledged to this prince,

that it was indeed true. Each of thoſe families
had made me offers very capable of dazzling an
ambitious man; but that my conſtant reply had
been, that it was from his Majeſty alone 1 would
receive a wife for my ſon.

The King appeared extremely well ſatisfied with
this anſwer, and theſe ſentiments; and opening

lis heart entirely, he told me, that with regard

o me, there were two things which would give
him equal uneaſineſs: one of which was, if, know-
ing the extreme concern it gave him to ſee the
clief of his nobility mixing their blood with that

of a burgher, or a plebeian, I thould ever dream of
| marrying my ſon below the dignity of his birth;

andthe other, if, erring in the contrary extreme,

EI ſhould chuſe a wiſe for him either out of the

louſe of Bourbon, or of Lorrain, but more eſpe-

| cially that of Bouillon. Therefore, among the
| five young ladies propoſed for Roſny, he faw only
Mademoitelle de Crequy on whom he could fix

his

260 MEMOIR S Book XXy.

his choice; for every one knew the honſes of
Bonne, Blanchefort, and Apouſt, to be of the
loweſt claſs of the nobility, although otherwiſe
diſtinguiſhed as much by brave examples of perſon.
al valour, as by the moſt ſhining dignities of the
ſtate. Henry, confirming himſelf in this thought,

added, that he would not have the propoſal come

from any but himſelf; and that he would take 3
convenient time for it, which he did almoſt im-
mediately aſter.

Leſdiguieres and Crequy were not hard to be
perſuaded: I may even ſay, that the eagerneſs
they ſhewed for the concluſion of the match did
not abate, till they ſaw the articles not only drawn
up, but ſigned. I may affirm, likewiſe, with equal
truth, rhat in the conditions they found no arti-
fice on my fide : I ſought rather to acquire tender
friends, than relations ſtill nearer connected. No-
thing fell out in the ſucceeding years, that did not
confirm me 1n the thought, that I had ſucceeded
in my endeavours to procure this happineſs. Thoſe
years were full of glory and proſperity for me, but
they are paſt : thoſe friends ſo affectionate have
diſappeared with my favour; thoſe allies ſo re-
ſpectful have vaniſhed with my fortune: but what
do I ſay, have they not endeavoured to complete
my misfortune, and that of my ſon, by giving me
cauſe to deteſt on a thouſand accounts the mol
unhappy of all alliances? Why had I not the power
of reading hearts? But perhaps I have reaſon to
thank heaven ſor my error and my credulity : the
temptation to which I ſaw myſelf a thort time a-
terwards expoſed, might have then been too
powerful for conicience to have ſurmounted.

Although the marriage“, thus ablojutely ap
ve

It was not celebrated till the month of OQober, in the fol
lowing year, at Charenton, by M. Du Moulin, a reformed *

1608. De. 261

ved on, was not celebrated immediately, as both
parties left it to the King to fix the time for it,
from that moment I looked upon the tie, which
united the family of Crequy to mine, as indiſſo-
luble; and I was fo far the dupe of the fincerity
and tenderneſs of my own heart, as to make this
alliance one argument for not ſuffering myſelf to
be influenced by the inchanting proſpect that was
ſuddenly offered to my view. It was at the latter
end of this year, which was ſome months after the
. © treaty with the Crequy family had been conclu-
ded, that this temptation was thrown in my way;
and in the beginning of this, when I was more
ſtrongly aſſailed by it. But before I explain my-
| ſelf, it is neceſſary to obſerve, that it was ſtill by

gan effect of the moſt refined malice of my ene-
mies, that I ſaw myſelf in a ſituation wherein it

g depended only upon my own choice to reach the
t bigheſt degree of greatneſs and ſplendor that any
4 WW fubje& could arrive at.
e F Then it was my enemies began to inſinuate to
it the King, under an appearance of zeal both for
e him and me, which he thought very ſincere, that
. he had not yet done enough for me; that he
2 ought not to delay offering and obliging me to
te accept all that his munificence was able to beſtow,
e vithout requiring any thing more of me than
Fr what indeed appeared moſt eſſential and indiſpen-
er MW fably neceflary; namely, to quit the Proteſtant
o and embrace the Catholic religion. It was,
ne WE doubtleſs, far from their intention to procure ſo
if. many advantages for me; and I ſhall eaſily prove,
* ter. The lady was only nine or ten years old: ſhe was called
| Frances, daughter of Charles de Blanchefort de Crequy, Prince

ol. of Foix, and afterwards Duke of Leſdiguieres, by his marriage
od nich Magdalen de Bonny de Leſdiguieres, daughter of the con-

ſtable of that name. he Marquis of Roſny had iſſue by her,
Maximilian Francis de Bethune Duke of Sully, &c, and Louiſa
de Bethune, who died unmarried.

that

PR „— - 99
- < ab p r _—_
meas Wu. F es > ll
ee * 2 ic,”
SOS" 2 * » l _—__ _ 8 8 —

22 1

E . #
0 5 6 -
. ” bt = oe 2 —— — oa ct —_y
- . __— \ —

————

N E mT OL ny 39 5

— —
1 ˙ . te

|
||

262 MEMOIRS Book yy. |

that the object they had in view was diametrically
oppolite to that which they appeared to have by
the propoſals they made. They had inwardly ſo
good an opinion of me, as to believe that I would
not purchale any advancement at the price of
quitting my religion. From my refuſal, there.
tore, they hoped to perſuade the King, that he
had every thing to fear from a man who waz
capable of making his religion triumph over hi
intereſt, which it was generally found no con.
ſiderations, whether ſacred or profane, were able
to reſiſt. The King, pleaſed with the proſpett of
advancing me, received this propotal with inten—
tions ſo different from thoſe by whom it was
made to him, that I cannot preſerve a too grate.
ful remembrance of his goodneſs. |
Accordingly he- ſent for me one morning to
the Louvre; and ſhutting himſelf up alone with
me in his library, Well, my friend,” ſaid he,
«« you have been 1n preat haſte to conclude the
« treaty for your ſon's marriage, though I cannot
« conceive why; for in this alliance, neither for
« blood, riches, nor perſon, can I ſee any ad.
% vantage for you.” Henry, it is apparent, had
forgot that I had done nothing in this affair but
by his expreſs commands. I have reſolved,”
continned he, © to employ you with more au-
* thority than ever in the adminiſtration, and to
& raiſe you and your family to all ſorts of ho.
„ nours, dignities, and riches ; but there is a ne-
& cethty that you ſhould aſſiſt me in the execution
« of this deſign: for if you do not contribute b
& 1t on your ſide, it will be difficult for me to 40
% compliſh my intentions, without prejudice to
mp affairs, and hazarding great blame; con,
* ſequences, which, I am perſuaded, you wou!«
„be unwilling I ſhould draw upon myſelf. My
« deſign, then, is to ally you to mylelf, 9) 25
| vin

| ST
7, 40
. 5 at
(
5 a 10

Sack,

40
(0
4e
(0
44
＋
40
T
TT
e.
| 60

(
40
(
ec
(0

1608.

15

De.

263
ving my daughter Vendome “ in marriage to

your ſon, with a portion of two hundred thou-

ſand crowns in ready money, and a penſion of
ten thouſand a- year: the government of Berry
to your ſon, to which I ſhall join that of Bour-
bonnois after Madame de Angouleme's deceaſe;
and the domaine ſhe poſſeſſes there, by reim-
hurſing the money it coſt her. I will likewiſe
give your ſon the poſt of grand maſter of the
ordnance in reverſion, and the government of
Poitou to your ſon-1n-Jaw, for which I ſhall give
you that of Normandy in exchange; for I ſee
very plainly, that poor M. de Montpenſier + will
not hive long, any more than the Conſtable,
whoſe office I likewiſe deſtine for you, and will
give you the reverſion of it now. But to fa-
vour all this, it is neceſſary that you and your
{on ſhould embrace the Catholic religion. I
intreat you not to refuſe me this requeſt, ſince
the good of my ſervice, and the fortune of your
houſe require it.“

The relation I have now made of this propoſal

is ſo proper to excite and to flatter vanity, that,
to aroid fo dangerous a ſnare, I will not give way
to any reflections upon it, not even to ſuch as
muſt neceſſarily ariſe on the goodneſs of a prince,
who enforced his intreaties with acts of the higheſt

* Catherine-Henrietta de Vendome, legitimated daughter of
| Henry IV. by Gabrielle d' Eſtréecs. She married Charles of Lor-
nun, Duke of Elbauf, and died in 1663.

Henry de Bourbon, Duke of Montpenſier. actually died in the
wonth of February in this year, after languiſhing two years, du-
ding Which time he lived only on womens milk; having prepared
bimſelf in a truly Chriſtian manner for his death. Henry IV.
L being informed of it, ſaid alond, © We ought all to pray to God to
grant us as much time to repent as this prince had,” Mueatthier,
. 772. The Duke of Montpenſier was only thirty-five
eld. The branch of Bourbon Montpenſier was extinct in
for he left only one danghtet, who was contracted in marriage to

he Duke of Orleans, ſccond fon of Heory IV.

.
nm ;

munificence.

264 MEMOIRS Book XXV.

munificence. My anſwer was conceived, as!
remember, in theſe terms. I told his Majeſty,
that he did me more honour than I deſerved, and
even more than I could hope or deſire: that
it was not for me to decide concerning the two
propoſals he had made for my ſon, ſince his ſet.
tlement in the world depended entirely on his Ma.
jeſty, and he was arrived to an age that rendered
him capable of ſerious reflections upon religion,
and might therefore direct his choice himſelf
but with regard to me, the caſe was quite difterent,
I aſſured him, with the utmoſt ſincerity, that |
could not think of increaſing my honours, dig.
nities, or riches, at the expenſe of my con.
{cience : that if I ſhould erer change my religion,
it would be from conviction alone; neither ambi.
tion, avarice, nor vanity, being able to influence
me: and that if I acted otherwiſe, his Majeſty
himſelf would have good reaſon for diſtruſting:
heart that could not preſerve its faith to Goc.
« But why,” replied Henry, with a cordiality tht
ſenſibly affected me, . why ſhould I ſuſpect you,
« fince-you would not do any thing that | have
& not done before you, and which you yourlel!
% adviſed me to do, when I propoſed the aftai
& to you? Give me, I beſeech you, this fati-
& faction: I will allow you a month to confider
& of it: fear not that I will fail in the perform
& ance of any of my promiſes.”
J replied, that I did not in the leaſt queſtion l
word, which I reckoned inviolable: 1 deſire no-
thing ſo ardently as to pleaſe you ; nor will I ever
negle& any opportunity of doing it. I promi
to think ſeriouſly of all that you have been ple
ſed to propoſe to me, (till hoping I (hall fati
your Majeſty, though not perhaps in the matic!
you expcet,

The Proteſtants hearing that I iateuded to break
| | 4,

£5 =— a>

1608. r . 265

1 of my propoſed alliance with Leſdiguieres, and
| to marry my fon to Mademoiſelle de Vendome,
por this report was immediately ſpread every
where, now believed they were going to loſe me

entirely. They had long, with the ſevereſt re-

a i
ny E proaches, accuſed me with having laboured to
„ ruin the Proteſtant party in France, by amaſſing
op ſuch conſiderable ſums for the King, and pro-
", viding ſuch an abundance of warlike ſtores, which
c. their fears repreſented to them would be firſt
+ employed againſt them. In vain did I endeavour
o convince them, that they had no reaſon to ap-
g. prebend ſuch deſigns frem a prince like Henry.
. Their prejudices made them always return to
, their former ſuſpicions of me: in theſe they were
bi. Confirmed by the affection the King ſhewed for
ce Roſny, calling him often hs ſor ; the: free acceſs
y which all eccleſiaſtics had to my houſe ; the care J
o: took to repair churches, hoſpitals, and convents,
00, in which I every year expended a conſiderable
hi: Wo fum of the royal revenues; the brief of Paul V.
ou, We of which ſeveral copies had been taken; and I
ve Wo know not how many other circumſtances, which
reit all at that moment concurred to perſuade them
Fai of my breach of faith.
ot The chief perſons amongſt the Proteſtants,
der eſpeclally their clergy, ſeemed to be moſt uneaſy
orm: at this report, not only becauſe of the triumph
E Witch their enemies were going to have over
n his {WF tem ; but becauſe they were perſuaded, and they
2 no- even ſaid it publicly, that if I was once prevailed
ever WF upon to abandon them, I ſhould not act with in-
nic difference towards them, but become their moſt
ple: BG Zealous perſecutor. For a long ſpace of time, I
ati beard nothing but exhortations, remonſtrances,
anuck and harangues, from that party, which were not
| likely to be very efficacious after what the King
brei dd faid to me, if 1 had rot happily found the

61 You, IV. 1 ſtrongeſt

ä

|
4
*.

7 oy
3
1

1
1;

39
\

> t&&

N $

Li

:
!
o

=
— 2
_

- — panty
SITY 2
* — 2
1 * F
4 th

—

- +
22 „ =
_ 9 4

— —
1 4

% > PR

— — "We —

r
. +4 we x

8 —

* 2.

266 MEMOIR S Bock XN.

ſtrongeſt ſupport within myſelf. The Counteſs of
Sault, Leſdignieres, and the Crequy family, ex.
erted themſelves, in the mean time, with the ut.
moſt vigour, to hinder the marriage with Made.
moiſelle de Crequy from being broken of, and
that with Mademoiſelle de Vendome ſrom going
forward: they endeavoured to perſuade the Queen
to intereſt herſelf in their cauſe, and complained
to her of what was deſigned to their prejudice,
But finding that ſhe would do nothing in the af.
fair, they renewed their ſolicitations to me, ma.
king uſe of every method they thought capable c
keeping me on their fide; aſſiduities, afſurances,
promiſes, oaths, all were employed to diſſuade me
trom a deſign I had never entertained.

I left Paris during theſe tranſactions in order
ro vitit Sully, and my other eſtates ; and imme-

diately upon my return, which was at the end ee
ren or twelve days, his Majeſty ſent Viltcroi to g
me, to receive my anſwer upon the propoſals he WE ;

had made to me. I was not ſorry that he ha.
deputed a perſon to me, before whom I col! WW a

declare with the utmoft freedom, thoſe ſcni- ve
ments which reflection had but the more con- th
ed. I told Villeroi, that I moſt humbly thans nm.
ed his Nlajeſty for all the honours he had con- {o;
ferred on me: that I could never conſent to be no
inveſted with the offices of perſons ſtill living: Muse
and that, although they ſhould become vacan, Wen
J did not think myſelf intitled to them, being ne.
already pofleſſed of as many as I deſired : thus vo

tor what regarded my fon, I ſhould never have auf
ocher counſel to give him, than to obey the Hu,
and to do nothing againſt his own contciency:

] had particular reaſons for being ſtill leſs ©: 0
plicit upon the articles of my change of re:1g-01: al
therefore | only told Villero!, that Cardina: Hu. iter”

. ?
if

1 "TY,
os.

Perron thould bear my anſwer to his NI)
His Eminence, as well as Henry, thought tiefe

* 1.

1608. OF S8 ULLI. 267

W was great meaning in theſe words: the King re-
nted them to Du- Perron, declaring that he en-
tertained ſome hopes from them. And ſoon af-
ter this, the Cardinal came to viſit me, and in-
treated me to open my whole heart to him. My
& anſwer had both ſtrength, and even theology e-
nough in it to convince Du-Perron, that he had
been deceived in his expectations: neither his
learning nor his eloquence could move me; and,
et his return, he told the King that 1 was in-
BS fcxible.

His Majeſty, who was deſirous of making one
„ eſtort more, ſent for me again; but although

— as

_

A 3 OI. fills o- 42

.

e he made uſe of no other arguments than what:
the gentleneſs of his diſpoſition, and his affec-
er tion for me ſuggeſted, and, if I may be permitted

e. to ſay fo, ſuch ſolicitations as became our an-

o! WE cient friendſhip, yet I was perſuaded, the dan-
o ger would not ſtop there, great as it was even

and called my conſtancy aud firmneſs obſtinacy
and a certain ſign, he laid, that I no longer lo-
u. ved him. At length, he told me, that this was

. the laſt time he would ſpeak of this matter to
nb. ne; and that he expected I ſhould give him my
* ſon at leaſt, To this I again replied, that I would
de not deny him; but that I could not conſent to
1g: ue the authority of a father to make my ſon

embrace the Roman-Catholic religion. His firm-
| # —

nels was equal to my own; and the King, who
would not beſtow his daughter on any of the prin-

q powerful, reſolved to marry Mademoiſelle de
E \cndome to the ſon ofthe Conſtable. The Coun-

ces of Sault took this opportunity to renew her
011: aſuces for the accompliſhing her grand-daugh-
u. ers marriage.

All that now remained to be dene, was to
A 4 2 guard

he then, eſpecially when lie began to reproach me,

ces of the blood for fear of rendering them too

r

-

— n — — 17 ma — 2

—
A. =
n

c — — —

1
9
4
1
3
1
» :
-
FO
[4
1
*

ws . 3 N = , *

2 th 3 Ju . l
*
W n _ 22 3 ” =

— 4

=;
» a
„

268 MEMOIRS Book Xxx.

guard againſt the counter-blow of my enemies;
and this I did not neglect, when I found that they
were buſy in preparing it for me. I took tha:
opportunity to write to the bus telling him
that I was not ignorant of any thing that was
reported to him to give him a bad impreſſion of my
thoughts, words, and actions: that they impu.
ted to me what I neither thought, ſaid, or did.
I earneltly intreated him not to forget the pro-
mile he had made me, to declare to me him-
{elf his will, and what cauſes of complaint he hat a.
gainſt me. His anſwer was wholly calculated to
reſtore my quiet, and ſecure me againſt all ap-
prehenſions from my enemies: he told me in it,
that I, in common with all perſons in power,
excited more envy than compaſſion. * You know,”
added he, © whether I am exempted from it
« from the people of both religions. This then ig
« all you have to do; that {ſince I take your
« advice in all my affairs, do you take alſo mine
« in every thing that relates to you, as that of
e the moſt faithful friend you have in the world,
„ and the beſt maſter that ever was.”

It was not without ſome reaſon that Henry
brought himſelf as an example. He likewiſe had
his uneaſineſſes, and his ſecret enemies: - for al.
though we no longer, as formerly, ſaw feditions
ready to break out in the kingdom, becaule the
exertion of the royal authority had obliged in.
ſolence and mutiny to keep themſelves concea!-
ed; yet it was but too certain, that in court, and
among the moſt conſiderable perſons in the King
dom, the ſame rurbulent and reſtleſs ſpirit, the tam?
eager panting aſter novelties, which had to long
kept the ſtate in diſorder and anarchy, were per
ceived, That ſpirit now ſhewed itſelf in din

lions amongſt families, and quarrels between pit
ticaln

» *
1
* „

ä

8 * 9 .
N. 2 1 : 1 PLS 1 E ?
r PP

* n

1608. OF. SUE LY; 269

ticular perſons, which Henry lahoured to com-
& pole by oy method in his power, looking up-
on them as ſeeds from whence nothing but the
= moſt dangerous fruits could proceed: and it gave
him great pain when he could not always ſuc-
# cced to his win. The reign of Henry IV. which

nin many reſpects bore a great reſemblance to that

|
. of Auguſtus, had likewiſe this in conformity

- W- vith his, that it was diſturbed by quarrels among
„his nobility ; and on theſe occaſions, the example
of Auguſtus was what Henry commonly propoſed

to himſelf to imitate. Aquitate non aculeo was
the motto, which, by his direction, I put on the

i, gold medals ſtruck this year, which repreſented
i, a {warm of bees in the air, with their King in
„be midſt of them without a ſting. I preſented
it WT theſe medals to Henry, as he paſſed through
Hjhis little gallery to that which leads to the Tuil-
ur We leries, where we walked together a long time,
* diſcourſing upon the ſubject I have juſt mention-
0

ed, and thoſe domeſtic quarrels which imbitter-

%, ed the life of a prince too gentle and too good,

| whole unhappineſs I have fo often deplored.
The reader may perceive, that, in my memoirs
120 of the late years, I have faithfully obſerved the
- WE promiſe I had formerly made, to entertain him
= no more with the weakneſtes of Henry. I care-

fully goncealed from my ſecretaries, and all per-
| ons whatever, all that paſſed between Henry and

85 me npon this ſubject, in thoſe many long and ſecret

aun converſations we had together: except the Du-

*. cheſs of Beaufort and the Marchioneſs of Verneuil,

ber the name of no other woman has been mention-
5

ed in theſe memoirs, with the title of miſtreſs to
che King. I *huſe rather to ſuppreſs all the
trouble E have ſuffered in this article, than make
Fit known at the expenſe of my maſter's glory:
| probably I have carried this ſcruple too far. The
Aa 3 public

„ NE
»

*
—— 2 —

——
— —

AMC'S
—
RE —

2
Rr

a odd Soo
ee Ee a. Ae ² MALES

i
f
A

bk
*
*
4
:
*
4
bo
*

250 ME MOI RS Book XXV.

public has heard ſo often the names of Madame
de Moret*, Mademoiſelle des Eſſarts, old Ma-
dame d'Angouleme, the Counteſs of Sault, Mel.
dames de Ragny, and de Chamlivault, two of m

relations, the Commandeur de Sillery +, Ram-
bouillet, Marillac, Duret the phyſician, another
phyſician who was a Jew, and many of the moſt
conſiderable perſons at court, all differently in-
tereſted in theſe adventures of gallantry, either
as principals or as parties concerned; that I migit
relate a great deal without ſaying any thing neu,
which would be indeed but a cold repetition of
little debates and love-quarrels, ſuch as tho
which I have already lightly mentioned. The fol.
lowing circumſtance I have excepted from this

Jacqucline Nu-Beuil, Counteſs of Moret ; Charlotte des Ef-
1:rts, Counteſs of Romorantin; two of Henry IV.'s miltrei-
Ls, By the firit he had Antony Earl of Moret, killed at the bat-
tle of Caſtelnaudary. in 1632: and by the ſecond he had two daugl-
ters; one Abbets of Fontevraud, and the other of Chellcs. ly
other tuo ladies, the Ducheſs of Beaufort, and the Marcl:ionels of
Vernewl, who ſucceſſively had openly the title of the King's m. +
reis, he had eight children, which were all ke legitimeted. Pe-
(Jes theſe, he was in love with Mary Babou, Viſcountefs of E-
mauges, two couſins of the fair Gabrielle, and many others, Sc?

— Hua — — wm n n — as *

{Hiſtoire des amours du Grand Alcandre. 4

After the death of Henry IV. Mademoiſelle des Effarts ſccretly tl
married the Cardinal of Guife, Lewis of Lorraine; the Pope h. te
ving granted him a diſpenſation for that marriage, and, at the lame -

time, empowered him (till to hold his benefices. This is prov ed by
the very contract of marriage, found amongſt the Cardinal's papers
after his death, executed in the moſt authentic form. Mention
is made of this in the Mercure Hiſt. and Polit. April 1688. Fron
this marriage, two ſons were born; one Biſhop of Condom, «4
the ſecond Earl of Romorantin ; and two daughters, one of whom
married the Marquis of Rhodes. Charlotte des Effarts atterv 4?
married Francis Du Hallier- de-I'Hofpital, Marſhal of France, Earl
of Roſnay, &e. The commentary of Les Amours du Grand 4“
candre remarks only, that ſhe was the Cardinal of Guile's maltrelts;
and afterwards of N. De-Vic, Archbiſhop of Auch. She was the
natural daughter of the Baron of Santor, in Champagne. J
du regue de Henry III. printed in 1720, vol. 1. Pp. 277.

+ Noel de vilicry, brother of the Chancellor, arnbaſſador 3
Rome.
rule,

1608. O F . 271

rule, as it is of a nature that ſeems to require I
ſhould juſtify my part in it to the public.

On one of thoſe occaſions when the Queen's
uneaſy temper had greatly affected Henry, it was
reported, that he had quitted her with ſome emo-
tion, and ſet out for Chantilly without taking
leave. This indeed was true : he took the arſenal
in his way, and there opened his whole heart to
me upon the cauſe of this diſpute. The King
purſued his journey, and I went in the afternoon
to the Louvre, attended only by one of my ſecreta-

ries, who did not follow me to the Queen's little

cloſet, where the was then ſhut up. Leonora
Conchini was at the door of this cloſet, her head
bending down towards her neck, like a perſon

' who was ſleeping, or at leaſt in a profound reve-

8 .
ry. I drew her out of it, and ſhe told me, that

the Queen would not ſuffer her to enter her clo-

ſet, the door of which however was opened to
me the moment I was named“.

found the Queen buly in compoling a letter
to the King, which the allowed me to read: it

The Queen, for a long time, placed a great confidence in M.

de Sully, The author of L'Hiſtoire de la mere & du fils, ſays,

that princeſs having reſolved one day, by the advice of Conchini,
to inform the King, that certain of the courtiers had had the bold-
neſs to make love to her, ſhe was deſirous of previouſly taking the

Duke of Sully's advice in regard to it, who perſuaded her not to

execute that reſolation, by repreſenting to her, That ſhe was

1 going to give the King the ſtrongeſt and juſteſt ſuſpicion a ſove-

I T

reign could have of his wife; ſince every man of common

$ © ſenſe muſt know very well, that it would be highly improper to
entertain a perſon of her rank on the ſubject of love, without
& © previouſly being aſſured, that it would not be difagrecable to
E © her, or from her having made the firſt advances: and that the
bing might imagine, the motives which had induced her to make
8 ** ſuch a diſcovery, were either fear that it ſhould have been made
| © by ſome other means, or that ſhe had taken a diſguſt againſt
| © the perſons accuſed, by mecting with ſomebody elſe more agree-
| © able in her eyes; or, in fine, through the perſuaſion of others,

„ho had influence enough over her to prevail on her to take this
* refolution,” J. 1. 2. 10. |

| breathed

LEE
—

Arn
_ "= 2 * —

4
*
4
|
4
1
4
*
of
"A
:
j
f

"Om oy ur” — — 3

Pm rio oC os IDE. —

1

" = 4 * -
$4 — 1 . — of

—
*

272 MEMOIRS Book XXV.

breathed an air of ſpleen and bitterneſs, which
muſt unavoidably have had very bad effects. 1
made her ſo ſenſible of the conſequences it was
likely to produce, that ſhe conſented to ſuppreſ;
it, though with great difficulty; and upon condi.
tion that I ſhould aſſiſt her in compoſing another,
wherein nothing ſhould be omitted, as ſhe ſaid, of
what ſhe might with juſtice repreſent to the King
her huſband. There was a neceffity for comply.
ing with this requeſt, to avoid ſomething worſe.
Many httle debates aroſe between us, concerning
the choice of expreſſions and the force of cach
term. I had occaſion for all the preſence of mind
I was capable of exerting, to find out the means
of ſatisfying this princeſs, without diſpleaſing the
King, or of being guilty of any diſreſpect in ad-
dreſhng him. This letter, which was very long,
I ſhall not repeat here. The Queen complained
in it of the continual gallantries of the King her
huſband ; but declared that ſhe was excited to this
only by the earneſt defire the had to poſſeſs his
heart entirely. If therefore ſhe appeared to inſiſt
too abſolutely upon his ſacrificing his miſtreſs to
her, her quiet, her conſcience, and her honour,
the intereſt of the King, his health and his life, the
ood of the ſtate, and the ſecurity of her childrens
fucceſſton to the throne, which the Marchionels
de Verneuil took pleaſure in rendering doubtful,
were ſo many motives which reduced her, (|
ſaid, to the diſagreeable neceſſity of making ſuch
a demand, with ſome degree of peremptorinels:
to awaken his tenderneſs, and excite his compa!-
ſion, ſhe added, that ſhe, together with the chi!
dren ſhe had by him, would throw themſelves at
his feet: ſhe reminded him of his promiſes, and
took God to witneſs, that if ſhe could not prevail
upon him to keep them, ſhe would, on ber 1
renounc

renounce all other vengeance againſt the Mar-
E chioneſs de Verneuil.

All my caution was ſcarce ſufficient to avoid the
extremes the Queen would have run into; and it
is apparent, however, that I failed either in ad-
dreſs or invention: for the King, when he recei—

7}
\

iT
7

# Gs . be +. * .
c . He *

; ved this letter, was highly offended with it, and
- © { much the more as he inſtantly perceived that
it was not in the Queen's manner. I had a note
from him immediately, conceived in theſe terms.
„ VM friend, I have received the moſt imperti-
nent letter from my wife that ever was wrote.
lam not ſo angry with her, as with the perſon
4 „that has dictated it; for I ſee plainly that it is
0 *« not her ſtyle. Endeavour to diſcover the au-
. © thor of it: I never ſhall have any regard for
„ bim, whoever he be; nor will I ſee him as
J bong as live.“ However ſecure I thought my-
r elf, 1 could not help being alarmed at this billet.
i. Ihe King, on his arrival from Chantilly three
s or four days afterwards, came to the arſenal. I

0 W_ 25 ſufficiently perplexed by the queſtions he
| alked me concerning this affair; for it was ex-

a preſsly for that purpoſe that he came. Well,“
e id he, “ have you yet diſcovered the perſon
who compoſed my wife's letter?” Not yet
„ eertainly, replied I, making uſe of ſome little
, adress, but J hope to give you this ſatisfaction
ne ung two days; and probably ſooner, if you will
ch ell me what there is in it that diſpleaſes you.
c- : Oh,” replied he, © the letter is mighty well
uri; full of reaſons, obedience, and ſubmiſ-
- Fon; but wounds me ſmiling, and while it
_— x flatters piques me. I have no particular ex-
nd . ception to make to it; but, in general, I am
rail „ oſſended with ir, and ſhall be the more fo if ir
ts. comes to be public.” But, Sire, replied I, if

de ſuch as you ſay, it may have been written with
Fl

274 M E MO IR S Book XXy.

a good intention, and to prevent ſomething {ti!!
worſe. *©* No, no,” interrupted Henry, it is
« malicioully deſigned, and with a view to in.
„ ſult me. If my wife had taken advice from
“you, or from any of my faithful ſervants in
« it, I thould not have been ſo much offended.”
What, Sire, reſumed I haſtily, if it was one of
your faithful ſervants who had diQatcd it, would
yon not bear him ſome ill-will? “ Not the leaſt,”
returned the King; © for I ſhould be very cer-
*« tain, that he had done it with a good inten-
*« tion.” It is true, Sire, ſaid I; therefore you
mult be no longer angry; for it was I that dic.
tated it, through an apprehenſion that ſome.
thing worſe might happen: and when you know
my reaſons, you will confeſs, that I was under
a neceſſity of doing it. But to remove all your
doubts, I will ſhew you the original, written in
my own hand, at the fide of the Queen's f1!:
intended letter. Saying this, I took the paper
out of my pocket, and preſented it to him.
The King, as he read it, made me oblerve
ſome words, in the place of which the Queen,
when ſhe copied the letter, had ſubſtituted others
far leſs obliging. Well,” ſaid he, © ſince
ce you are the author, let us ſay no more of
« it: my heart is at reſt. But this is not all,
added he, taking advantage of the aſcendant
which on this occaſion I ſeemed to have over the
mind of the Queen; © there are two ſervices
* which I expect from you.” Llittencd to the Ring
with great attention, and without once inter.
rupting him, although he ſpoke a long time;
and [ thall here relate his words, which I teck
down in writing .at the time. It is by this kind
of familiar converſations that the heart is bett
known. © I know,” ſaid he, © that my wile

. ; |
© came twice to your houſe, while I was 4 the
„ chacè:

; os
*
#
y 5
15
4 *

18

*

.
3

1608.

00
«
cc
cc
40
6
40
«
40
«c

16

40
cc
10
160

60
at
e
=7
ce
Ee

te

BY,
; ((

is an excellent quality.

„ 275

chace: that ſhe was ſhut up with you in your
wiſe's cloſet, each time above an hour; that
at her coming out from thence, although her
colour ſeemed to be raiſed by anger, and her
eyes full of tears, yet ſhe behaved in a friend-
ly manner to you, thanked you, and appeared
not ill ſatisfied with what you had ſaid to her.
And that you may know I am not ill informed,
I ſhall not hide from you, that it was my
couſin de Rohan, your daughter, who related
all this to me; not for the ſake of telling ſe-
crets, but becauſe ſhe thought I ſhould be glad
to ſee my wife and you upon ſuch friendly
terms. It muſt certainly be, therefore, that
my wife has ſome buſineſs of conſequence with
you; for, notwithſtanding all the queſtions 1
have aſked her, ſhe has never ſaid a ſingle
word, or given the ſmalleſt intimation of theſe
two conferences. I] forbid you likewiſe, upon
pain of my diſpleaſure, to ſay any thing of
this matter to my couſin de Rohan : you will
ceprive me of the pleaſure I have in ſeeing
her here, and ſhe will never tell me any thing
more, if ſhe knows I have repeated this to
you. Although I laugh and play with her as
with a child, yet 1 do not find in her a childiſh
underſtanding. She ſometimes gives me ve

ry good advice, and 1s extremely fecret, which
| ] have told her many
things in confidence, which I have been con-
vinced ſhe never mentioned, either to you or
to any other perſon.

“Tut to :eturn to theſe two important ſer—
vices, Which you alone, in my opinion, are
able to undertake, I have already ſaid, and a-
gain repeat it, that you muſt be extremely
carcful to avoid giving the leaſt ſuſpicion, that
Jon have concerted with me what you are t»
«c do

276 MEMOIR S Book XXV.

% do and fay in theſe affairs: it muſt not a2».
« pear, that I knew any thing of your intcrpo. Wi
6 {ition, but that you act entirely of yourſelf; MW
% and you muſt even feign to be apprehenſive
« of its coming to my ear. One of theſe ſer.
<< vices regards Madame de Verneul : it is with
« her you muſt begin, and this will ſmooth your
% way to the other. You muſt tell this lady,
ce that as her particular friend you come to vive
« her notice, that ſhe is upon the point of lo.
6 {ing my favour, unleſs ſhe behaves with great
76 prudence and circumſpection: that you have
«« diſcovered, that there are perſons at court who
% are endeavouring to engage me in affairs of
% gallantry with others; — if this ſhould hap. WF ,,
pen, you are fully perſuaded, that I ſhall rake *
ce her children from her, and confine her to: 5
«& cloiſter : that this abatement in my affection WF ,;
& for her is, in the firſt place, apparently cauſed „
« by the ſuſpicion I have entertained that the MF ,,
& no longer loves me; that ſhe takes the libe- WF ,,
ce ty to ſpeak of me often with contempt, ande. 4
« ven prefers other perſons to me: ſecondly, WF ,;
c becauſe ſhe ſeeks to ſtrengthen herſelf wit! WF ,,
« the intereſt of the houſe of Lorrain, as it ive
&« was deſirous of {ome other protector than me;
cc but, above all, her connections and familis
& rities with Meſſicurs de Guiſe and de Joinvile
« offend me tothe laſt degree; being fully con-
« yinced, that from them ſhe will receive on!y
% ſuch counſels as are dangerous both to my per:
& ſon and ſtate; as likewile from her father and
& her brother, with whom, notwithſtanding m)
c prohibition to her, ſhe {till correſponds, whe!
ce ſhe might have thought herſelf happy, that,
& at her intreaties, I ſpared their lives; that fe
« ſends meſſages to her brother by his wife,

% whom I have allowed to viſit him: but .
a 71

OT $UVELY. 277

e the chief cauſe of my eſtrangement from her
= « js her inſolent behaviour to the Queen.“
# Henry then told me many circumſtances con-

e cerning the Marchioneſs, which I have already
related. If,” continued he, © either by an effect
n WW © of your induſtry or good fortune, you can
„ prevail upon her to alter her conduct in all
„( theſe reſpets, you will not only free me from
e great uneaſineſs, and ſet my heart at reſt with
- W © regard to her, but you will likewiſe furniſh
(„ yourſe]f with the means of diſpoſing the Queen
' „ to accommodate herſelf to my will, which is
0 the ſecond ſervice that I require and expect
mn

% from you : you muſt remonſtrate to her, {till
5. © as from yourſelf, that it is abſolutely neceſ—
ke « fary ſhe ſhould do ſo, if ſhe would engage me

"We © to give her the ſatisfaction ſhe demands, That,
„ among many other cauſes of diſguſt which ſhe
i © gives me nothing is more inſupportable to
ſhe * 5 1

me than that abſolute authority ſhe ſuffers Con-
„ © chini and his wife to have over her; that theſe
e people make her do whatever they pleaſe, op-
5 “ poſe all that they diſlike, and love and hate
„ as they direct her paſſions; that they have at
length exhauſted my patience ; and that I often
"We © reproach myſelf for not following the advice
„given me by the Ducheſs of Florence, Don
John, Jouanini, Gondy, and even what my
| © own judgment ſuggeſted, which was to fend

' ;
. „them both back to Italy from Marſeilles. I
. vas deſiroue,“ purſued the King, “ to repair
mis fault through che interpoftion of Don
M 60

John; but I ſoon perceived it was too late:
for ſcarce did Don John enter upon the ſub-
ject with the Queen, to whom he propeſed it by
way of advice, than ſhe entered, as yon know,
into ſuch an exceſs of rage againſt him, that
there was no ſort of reproaches, inſults, and
Vor. IV. B b 6. threats,

40

7
m7
T
10

_— —— — — — —

278 M E MOI R S Book XXV.

« threats, which ſhe did not uſe to him; ſo that,
not able to endure them, he quitted France,
« notwithſtanding all my endeavours to retain
«© him. But before this happened, the Princeſs
« of Orange thought of other expedients for
«© removing theſe two perſons, and propoſed
« them to me by Madam de Verneuil, who
« thought to prevail upon the Queen, by this
% complaiſance for her favourites, to permit her
« to ſee her, and come freely tothe Louvre. 'Theſe
« expedients, to which I conſented, becaule I
« found you did not oppoſe them, were to marry
% Conchini to La-Leonor, and afterwards to {end
« them hack to Italy, under the honourable pre.
« tence of living with ſplendor in their own coun-
«< try, upon the great riches they had acquired in
« France; but all this, inſtead of ſoftening my
« wife, or engaging her to alter her conduct,
« has only taught her to oppoſe my will with
« more obſtinacy than before; and the Conch1-
* nis, both huſband and wife, are now become
« fo inſolent and audacious, that they have da-
« red to threaten my perſon, if I uſe any vio—
& lence to their friends.”

It was not eaſy for the King to quit this article,
through the rage with which he was agitated a-

ainſt this whole party. Among many others,
7 recounted the following circumſtance, which
till then I thought he had been ignorant of,
My wife, knowing that Conchini had a deſign to
purchaſe La-Ferté-au-Vidame, which was worth
two or three hundred thouſand crowns, ſhe thought
ſuch a conſiderable eſtate would give occaſion for
murmurs that could not fail of reflecting back
upon the Queen herſelf, on account of tie
protection ſhe was known to grant them. She

did not heſitate therefore a moment about
| : waiting

A ea + os ae.

cire

ſaid

1608, . 05 -TF6 279
waiting on the Queen, to repreſent to her, that

it was her intereſt to hinder Conchini from puſh-
ing this matter any further. The Queen recel-
ved this advice very graciouſly, and thanked my
wife for giving it her: but as ſoon as ſhe ſaw
the Conchinis, they knew ſo well how to make
her alter her opinion, that ſhe exclaimed in a
ſtrange manner againſt Madame de Roſny, and
would not ſee her for ſome time. Probably her
reſentment would have laſted much longer, had
ſie not reflected, that both herſelf and her favou-
rites had always occaſion for me. © I have been
« told,” added Henry, “ that Conchini had the
« 1mpudence to reproach your wife upon this oc-
« cation, and uſed expreſſions ſo full of infolence
« both againſt her and me, that I am ſurpriſed
“ ſhe did not anſwer him more ſeverely : but,
« doubtleſs, ſhe was reſtrained by her ſears of
“ breaking entirely with my wife. You cannot
“ imagine,” purſued Henry, not able to ceaſe
his invectives againſt this Italian, “ how great-
ly I was provoked to fee this man undertake
to be the challenger, at a tournament, againſt all
the braveſt, and moſt gallant men in France,
2, and this in the Grande rue St Antoine, where
my wife and all the ladies of the court were
preſent; and that he ſhould have the good
* fortune to carry it : but nothing ever gave
* me greater pleaſure than I had at this courle,
* when I ſaw M. de Nemours, and the Marquis
* de Roſny your ſon, arrive, mounted upon two
* excellent horſes, which they managed with
* Equal grace, and uncommon juſtneſs.”

arcumſtance that had given him ſo much plea-
lure, renewed his former ſubject. “ Be careful,“
aid he to me, „to manage thoſe two affairs I
have recommended to you, cautioully ; proceed

2 « le1{urely,

Henry, after dwelling ſome time longer upon a

n :

—
3

1 ' a 5 At ——_
"> . ²˙ ü ˙ ö—ñ OR

, Ca th a
- is. 9 er”
:

28 MEMOIR $S Book XXV.

« leiſurely, and as opportunities offer, without

« hazarding any thing by too great precipita.

* tion: in a word, act with your uſual prudence,
« reſpect, and addreſs. I proteſt I ſhall eſteem
« thele two ſervices more than if you had gained

« me a battle, or taken the city and caſtle of

« Milan with your cannons; for my heart ſup.
« peſts to me, that this man and woman will one
« day do. great miſchief.: I find in them deſipns
% above their condition, and abſolutely contrary
to their duty.” Again I aſked this prince, why
he referred to me an affair the ſucceſs of which,
in my hands, was ſo doubtful ; whereas, if he would
undertake it himſelf, it would coſt him no more to
execute it, than to pronounce to two women, with
a reſolute tone, theſe few words, will have it /6,
His reply to this, and the debates that followed,
were the ſame with thoſe which the reader has al
ready too often ſeen in theſe Memoirs. Ar lal
he went away, ſaying, with an embrace,“ Adiey,
« my friend: I earneſtly recommend to you these
« two affairs, for they are very near my heat:
& bur, above all, be ſecret.”

All that by my utmoit endeavours I was abe
ro do for the tranquillity of this prince, procured
him only ſome ſhort calms, amidſt the long and
often repeated ſtorms he was obliged to ſuffer ; i
ſuch an unequal viciſſitude did he paſs the fer
days that Heaven ſtil left him. One of his longel
intervals of quiet was during the Queen's lying:
in. She had followed the King, who went in tie
beginning of March to Fontainebleau. Ir i
not poſſible to carry tenderneſs and ſolicituce
farther than Henry did. While ſhe was in ts
condition, he often writ to me from Fontaine
bleau, and in every letter gave me an accoul
of the Queen's health. I thought,” faid de

in one of theſe letters, “ to have ſent you i
[4 nen

0 $VLEY. 281

« news of my wife's being brought to bed; but
« ] believe it will not be this night.” In ano-

„ ther, © My wife imagines the will go to the end
m of the month, ſince ſhe has paſled yeſterday.”
d The Queen was delivered of her third ſon * on
ache 26th of April. |

[2 The King ſtill continning to write to me as

* uſual, in one of his letters ordered me to acquaint
him how the news of his ſon's birth was received.
Not by you,” ſaid he, © for there I have no
4 doubt; but by the public.” I keep with great
ch, care the following letter, which his Majeſty ſent
uit WE me by the Duke of Rohan, upon hearing that my
% wife had lain in of a ſon about the ſame time that
ih {WF the Queen did. © I do not believe, that any of
' ſo. WF © my ſervants have taken greater intereſt in the
ved, “ birth of my ſon d' Anjou than you; and I would
sa. © have you likewiſe believe, that J ſurpaſs all
lat © your friends in joy for the birth of yours: you
ieh WE © will be ſtunned with their flatteries ; but the
hee WE © aſſurance I give you of my friendſhip, ought to
art: WWE © be more convincing than all their ſpeeches.
Remember me to the lying- in lady +4.”

| —
—
*

abe The Queen was more indiſpoſed after this lying-
urel in, than ſhe had ever been before; but proper
and remedies being uſed, ſhe was ſoon reſtored to
r ; 11 Wperfe& health. The King took all imaginable
> fen care of her. He came to Paris the beginning of
noel Ray, but returned almoſt immediately after to
ing Fontainebleau; and the joy the Queen ſhewed
in eat his return filled him with a real ſatisfaction.
3
i Y mo * Gaſton-John-Baptiſt of France, then called Duke of An jou,
citud end afterwards Duke of Orleans : he died in 1660. Siri makes
n chi Flenry IV. ſay, before the birth of that prince, that he would de-
Nane. Wicate him to the church, and that he ſhould be called the Car-

inal of France. Ibid. 568.

cc 2 I ſhould be glad,” ſays Henry IV. ſpeaking of Sully,
aid If | God had ſent him a dozen wide for it would be a great pity,
ou the that from ſo good a ſtem there ſhould not be ſome offsets.”

Mem, biſt, de Frame, wid.
Yb 9 =

— p
s = 4 —
r —— —

*
.

2
1
.
*
»

1

282 MEMOIR S Book XXV.

He allowed, at the requeſt of this princeſs, tha
ten or twelve thouſand crowns ſhould be expended
on buildings at Monceaux, and ſent me orders to
that purpole. It is from theſe letters of his Ma.
jeſty chat I collect all theſe circumſtances. 'This
order he repeated when the maſter-builder, who
had undertaken the work, informed him, that he
had been obliged, through want of money, to
diſmiſs his men. I had given him an aſſignment
upon a reſtitution of money to be paid by the
nephew of Argouges, which he had not yet done,
retending, to gain time, that he owed nothing,
he King ſent me orders to preſs him for the
payment, and to advance the maſter-builder the
money out of other ſunds, without referring hin
to Freſne, who could not be forced to pay it.
Being apprehenſive that I ſhould give credic to
the reports which were made me of the Queen's
being diſguited, and that ſhe ſought a pretence
for quarrelling with me, he, in another letter,
for a proof of the contrary, related to me in what
manner this princeſs had taken my part again:
M. and Madame. de Ventadour, who had made
ſome complaints of me to their Majeſties.

One could not give Henry a more ſenſible
pleaſure, than by conforming one's ſelf to that
complaiſance which he had for every body witl
whom he lived in any degree of friendihip or
familiarity. I received from him a gracious ac.
knowledgment for ſome ſervices rendered to M..
dame de Verneuil and Madame de Moret, and
for the methods I made uſe of to free him from
Mademoiſelle des Eſſarts. This young lady began
to be extremely troubleſome to him; ſhe had ule
preſumption to expect ſhe ſhould have the ſame
aſcendant over him as his other miſtreſſes. A
laſt, however, ſhe ſeemed willing to retire inte

the abbey of Beaumont, and named . con-
Lions,

1

#
— 4
4
£3

$

I

ä * 1 9 a * ef, * * * " 2 8 4 4 — 9 2
hu Foy yy — — — % ˙F e ²A uU; !

1666. OF 8 U L L V. 283
ditions,” upon which Zamet and La- Varenne were

i

4 © offen ſent by Henry to confer with me. He gave
o © himſelf the trouble to write to the Preſident de
. Motteville, concerning the place of a Maitre-
des Comptes at Rouen, which the young lady re-
o © queſted from one of her friends ;3. and to Mont-
ec MW. auban, to advance the money for the purchaſe.
o There was a neceſſity likewiſe for giving her a
t chouſand crowns, and five hundred to the abbey
e of Beaumont, which the had choſen for her re-
e, treat“. Both theſe ſums the King demanded of
g. me, in a letter dated the 12th of May: happy
e indeed, to get rid of her at fo eaſy a rate!

e He likewiſe deſired my advice, as to the man-
m ner in which he ſhould behave to avoid a quarret
it. with the Queen, on an occaſion when Conchini
to became a competitor with Madame de Verneuil,
n's W for a favour which that lady had obtained a pro-
ce mile for two years before. “I love,” ſaid he
er, in his letter, „Madame de Verneuil better than
112 WW © Conchini,” Which indeed was not to be douht-
nt ed: but at that time he was obliged to act with
de great circumſpection towards the Queen. This

gave riſe to an intrigue at court, that afforded
L ou pleaſure to ſeveral perſons; which I cannot
better explain than by the following letter the
King writ me from Fontainebleau.

o WE © Although I have parted with Madame de
ac. © Verneul upon very bad terms, yet I cannot
M. © help having ſome curioſity to know, if there
and WW © be any foundation for the report which pre-
om WF © vails here, that the Prince of Joinville viſits
gan * her: learn the truth of it, and give me notice
he ein a letter, which I will burn, as you muſt do

„this. It is this that retains him fo long, ſay

* She did not retire thither; or, at leaſt, if the did, ſhe did not
ſtay long there,

«© money.”

| © they: you know well it is not for want of

— 8

—

. | — - Bhs =
n —— . —

1
SD e -
—

a8 4˖ MEM O IRS Book XXV.

« money.” The report was indeed true. Join.
ville had ſuffered himſelf to be captivated by the
charms of the Marchioneſs, who, as it was faid,
did not let him deſpair. For a long time, no.
thing was talked of but their intimacy, and the
very paſſionate letters which it was pretended
they writ to each other; and it was at laſt con.
fidently reported, that he had offered to marry
her: it muſt be obſerved, that all this I repeat
after the court and Paris. Trifling as this affair
may ſeem, there were in it ſome circumſtances
relating to the — of ſuch conſequence as to
make a profound {ſecrecy neceſſary. If matters
had really gone fo far between the two lovers as
people were willing to believe, Madame de Ver.
neuil, notwithſtanding all her experience, was
here the dupe: ſhe was not ſufficiently well ac-
quainted with the diſpoſition and conduct of a
young man, ſtill leſs amorous, than raſh and heed-
leſs: promiles, oaths, privacies, letters, all, in a
very little time, ended in a rupture, which was
equally imputed to both. However, to fay the
truth, the fault Jay on Madame de Vi!lars *, who
appeared too beautiful in the eyes of Joinville to
leave his heart faithful to its firſt choice. = ©

Madame de Villars did not at firſt appear ſo t
eaſy a conqueſt as her rival had been: proud of WF
her alliance with the blood-royal, ſhe treated hin WW t
with diſtance and reſerve. Joinville, repulſed, WW
and in deſpair, extorted from her a confeſſion of
the cauſe of her rigour. She told him, that after
the correſpondence he had, and ſtill continued to
carry on, with a lady ſo beautiful and witty 3
Madame de Verneuil, it would be dangerous to
rely on his fidelity. Joinville defended himſelf;
It is not neceſſary to ſay in what terms. She te-

„ Juliet-Hyppolita VEſtrecs, wife of George de Brancas, Mar-
quis of Villars,
ſuted

| 6 "ES
* WE. * MTs ;

. K = * 4 * 2 5
_ a 1 . mne nem a a PO" OO A.

hs — —— — —

Lon

hwy 22

1608. O F SUL LY. 285

Z futed him, by alledging their interviews, and let-
ters; one in particular from Madame de Verneuil,
more tender and paſſionate than the reſt. On
© ſuch an occaſion, it is a cuſtom to make, to the
beloved lady, a ſacrifice of her letters who was
abandoned. Joinville reſiſted as long as he was
able; but, at laſt, put into the hands of Madame
de Villars that pretended letter: (I ſay pretended,
” becauſe it was far from being certain that this let-
ter, which he was prevailed upon with ſo much
difficulty to ſhew, ever came from Madame de
© Verneuil). But be that as it will, for the uſe Ma-
dame de Villars intended to make of this letter, it
| was indifferent to her whether it was forged or not.
* This woman had an inveterate hatred to the
Marchioneſs of Verneuil : the moment ſhe had the
letter in her poſſeſſion, ſhe flew with it to the

king. It was not difficult, with ſuch a proof, to
d. force belief; and the made ſuch an artful uſe of
1 it, that this prince, hitherto ignorant, or willing
ay to ſeem ſo, of the greateſt part of the intrigue,
ge came inſtantly to me, with a heart filled with
do grief and rage, and related to me I know not
o how many circumſtances, which to him appeared

as certain proofs of her guilt ; though I thought
{6 them far from being convincing. 1 told him, for
kit was neceſlary to treat this affair methodically,
in that he oh. x to hear what Madame de Verneuil
4, could ſay for herſelf, before he condemned her.
of We © Oh! Heavens, hear her,” cried Henry, © ſhe
cx WW. has ſuch power of expreſſion, that, if I liſten
to do her, the will perſuade me I am to blame,

and that ſhe is injured: yet I will ſpeak to her,
| © and ſhew her thele proofs of her perfidy.” In
| Elle, he went away breathing nothing but ven-
| geance, Joinville's intrigues with the governor

| of Franche-Comts ſeemed to him not half fo cri-
| Minal,
The

| 4
(+
$3
1

1

.

y N
ö [
|
ſi

286 MEMOIR S Beck XXV.

; The Marchioneſs of Verneuil, long accuſtomed
| to theſe ſort of tranſports, was not much alarmed,
| and maintained to the King, that Joinville had
| been wicked enough to forge this Jetter. Henry,
ſoftened by a circumſtance which had not entered
into his head before, became almoſt entirely fa.
-tisfied, when ſhe propoſed to him, to ſubmit it to
my judgment, whether the hand-writing was hers

or not, ſenſible that no colluſion could be ſuſped. +
ed between us; ſhe not having an excels of con.

fidence in me, nor I too much eſteem for her. :
Accggdingly the papers were put into my hands,
and a day fixed for the deciſion of this cauſe,
which was to be determined at the houſe of the
Marchioneſs. I went thither in the morning, |
and was introduced into her cloſet, where e
waited both for her accuſer and her judge, in 1
undreſs that expreſſed great negligence. *

I had already begun to queſtion her, when Hen.

ry came in with Montbazon: I am not permitted
to relate the reſt; for the King would not {utter WF *
any of thoſe that came with him to be preſent at 7
this conference: however, they heard us talk ver
loud, and the Marchioneſs weep. The King went .
from her apartmemt into another, and deliring .
all that were there to withdraw, took me to one

of the moit diſtant windows to examine the pa
pers with him more exactly. This was not done
ſo calmly, but thoſe that were without might hear
us diſcourſe with great heat; and that I went ol.
ten backwards and forwards, between the Lady's WF.
cloſet and the place where the King ftood. Te
concluſion of this ſcene was, that the King well
away entirely ſatisfied with his miſtreſs . As for WF.

| 25 5 | Joinville, Win

eln the Memoirs of Baſſompierre, vol. 1. p. 92. I find the fol. »
lowing account of this intrigue. © A few days afterwards happen

* cd the difference between Madam de Verncuil and the _
4 *

© 1608. Oer 3 U LL: Y>: 287
© Joinville, whatever part he had acted, it was hap-
© py for him that it was Henry with whom he had
to do; and the more fo, as he engaged, almoſt
immediately afterwards, in another 1ntrigue of the
E fame nature with Madame de Moret *, which T

vas not acquainted with,
0 |
$ £
bo „ which had its origin from Madam de Villars having ſhewn the
. = « King ſome letters which Madam de Verneuil had wrote to the
prince of Joinville, and which he had given her. The affair
o « was accommodated by the Duke of Fguillon's bringing to the
J King a clerk of Bigot, who confeſſed that he had forged thoſe
> letters; and the Prince of Joinville was baniſhed.” Our Memoirs
4 mention this to have happened this year ; but it was in the year
1e 1603, upon the return of Henry IV. from his journey te Metz.
rp, * The Memoirs for the hiſtory of France gives this account of
de it. “ The Prince of Joinville having made his addreſſes to one
= © of the King's favourites, ſhe, to excuſe herſelt, alledged the
mM a © Prince had given her a promiſe of marriage. He there-
by incurred the Fing*s diſpleaſure, who commanded him
n cither to banim himſelf, or marry the lady. At firſt, he
„put on the appearance of being willing to marry her, and to go
ed on with what he had begun: but at laſt he declared, that he
fer had never any ſuch intention; and ſaid aloud, that, the King
at only excepted, if any gentleman, or any one of whatever quality,
had given him ſuch language, he would have ſet both his feet
on his neck. The Count de Lude hearing of this, ſaid it was

the ſentiment of a hangman. Madam de Guiſe, in tears, came
and threw herſelf at the King's feet, and, as if ſhe were in the
extremeſt deſpair, begged of his Majeſty to kill her. To which

Nc © the King anſwered, | have never killed any ladies, and I do not

pa- = © know how to go about it. Thoſe, adds he, who were eſteemed

ns to be the moſt knowing at court, gave out it was the King him-
ſelf who had induced the Counteſs to do what the did.“

gave notice.“ ſays Baſſompierre in his Memoirs, vol. 1. p. 205.
to the Prince of Joinville, and Madam de Moret, of the deſign
the King had to ſurpriſe them together. They were not found
together; but the King diſcovered enough to forbid Mon. de
Chevreuſe, the game the Prince of Joinville then bore, the
court; and would have done the ſame by her, had ſhe not been
on the point of being brought to bed: but time made up this
* difference.“ Henry gave orders to take the Prince of Joinville
into cultody ; but he eſcaped out of the kingdom, and did not re-
turn till atter the death of Henry IV. his family having never been
ible to prevail on the King to recall him. Galanteries des Rois

zppeN- | 6c t rance, {

We | — 000

238 MEMOIR S Book Xxv.

The Count of Sommerive * was likewiſe hardy
enongh to become the rival of his maſter, and to
make the Counteſs of Moret the object of his pal.
lantries, with whom he began by a propoſal of
marriage; and it was believed, that he had given
her a promiſe in writing: for to a young man
tranſported with paſſion, the one coſts as little as
the other. The King, when he was informed of
it, approved of the match, and employed La-Borde,
a gentleman whom he knew to be more faithfully
devoted to him than any of thoſe that reſorted to
the Counteſs's houſe, to diſcover if they were fin.
cere on both ſides, and to take care to prevent the
To from tranſgreſſing the bounds of his duty,

a-Borde's report was not very favourable to the
Count of Sommerive, who, at firſt, had ſome
thoughts of murdering this troubleſome Argus;
and meeting him one day as he was coming trom
church, he fell upon him ſo furiouſly, that La.
Borde, to ſave his life, was obliged to have recourſe
to flight. The King commanded me to examine
into this fact, which, in his fury, he called an a.
ſaſſination. The time Sommerive had choſen for
it, and the diſreſpect it ſhewed for the King, ren.
dered him till more guilty.

However, it being neceſſary to obſerve ſome
caution, tho' it were only in conſideration of Lt
Borde; for the King was ſenſible, that Sommerive
was a far more dangerous perſon to deal with than

oinville; La-Varenne came to me from his Mz
jeſty, to conlult upon proper meaſures for mani
gingrthis affair, without wounding his own author.
ty; and we agreed, that the beſt expedient was, !0
prevail upon the Duke of Maienne himſelf to do
the King juſtice, with regard to the offence his!01

* Charles-Emanuel de Lorrain, ſecond fon of the Duke of
Maienne. 2
14

4 | ww ya LED — 2 8 _— 3 1 8

IM.!

1608. OF SU Lee. 289

had committed againſt him: I was charged with
) this meſſage, and the conduct of it left wholly to
my judgment. I found the Duke of Maienne ſo

c ill with a fit of the gout, which was attended with
high fever, that there was no poſſibility of ſpeak-
ng to him, eſpecially upon ſuch a ſubject. The
s W& Duke of Eguillon “, Sommerive's eldeſt brother,
told me, that this action of his brother was not
J more deeply reſented by any perſon than by his
y own family; that it had been the cauſe of his fa-
o WW. ther's illneſs; and wilked himſelf dead, as well as
n. this unworthy brother, rather than to become the
de reproach of their relations. He added, that the
v. King himſelf knew but too well how Sommerive
he treated them all, though, for the honour of the fa-
ne MW fiily, they concealed his behaviour from the public:
s; hat this laſt offence gave them inconceivable af-
m fiction. And after intreating me to aſfiſt him
a MW& vith my advice, he declared that he would go him-
re ſelf, if his Majeſty required it, to receive his or-
ine ders, and would execute them, whatever they
a. vere, upon his own brother: and that, for kimſelt,
for he would rather loſe his life than fail in the oath

en- he had taken, to obey his maſter with all the fi-
delity and zeal of a ſervant and ſubject.
me To conceal from D'Eguillen that I had been

Ly commiſſioned by the King to come thither, I told
ive him, that I would not adviſe him to go to his Ma-
han eſty, becaule I did not knew whether he was yet
Me informed of the aflair; but that, in twenty-four
ans hours, I would give him ſuch advice as I thonght
jr: moſt for his intereſt, (tor fo long it required to {end
;, to deo Fontainebleau to know his Majeſty's inten-
o do ons). I, therefore, contented mylelf, at preſent,
son ich repreſenting to him the atrociouſneſs of Som-

n Lorrain, Duke of Eguillon, and afterwards of
Maienne. 0

1
1
5
14
}
|
49
Fr
10
*
1
fy

Vol. IV. 76 merive's

290 MEMOIR S Book XXV.

merive's crime, and the fatal conſequences that
might attend it. He exclaimed againſt it himſelf,
with a ſincerity which I thought it my duty to re.
preſent to his Majeſty, telling him, at the ſame
time, that he had only to pronounce what ſatisfac.
tion he required, the family fearing nothing ſo
much as the loſs of his favour.

Henry ſent me notice, by Villeroi, that he was
ſatisfied with what D'Eguillon had ſaid to me, al.
although he was convinced that all this rage 2.

ainſt Sommerive would not hinder them carrying
it with a high hand in public, as they had already
done upon other occaſions of the ſame kind: he
ordered me to make the whole houſe of Lorrain
jenſible how greatly they were indebted to his in-
dulgence, in referring to them the chaſtiſement
of Sommerive; that he expected they would im.
mediately oblige him to retire, though it were only
to Soiſons, as being unworthy to ' 5 in a place
where his Majeſty was; that D'Eguillon ſhouid
come and tell him what reſolution they had taken,
in the mean while, till he ſhould himſelf name the
puniſhment; offer to be ſecurity for Sommerive's
appearance, and even conduct him to the Baſtile,
if ſuch was the King's pleaſure: or make hin
!eave the kingdom, and not return till aſter
the expiration of two or three years. Henry i.
{inuated, that it was this laſt part he {hould take,
although it required ſome conſideration on se-
count of Sommerive's intrigues with Spain. He
King had been told, that this voung nobleman had
endeavoured to prevail upon the Count of St Pati
to go with him to Holland, with an intention d
enter into the ſervice of the Archdukes; that it
had taken the advice of Du-Terrail, and, as 100!
as the fat was committed, had ſent ſome of 1
ſervants to Flanders. It was neither to that cou
try, nor to any other dependent upon the Span-

als,

e @ a-

1608. SUL. 2041

ards, which his Majeſty choſe he ſhould retire to;
but towards Nancy, from whence he might paſs &
& the Emperor's court, or into Hungary; that coun-
try being moſt agreeable to his Majeſty.

. To this letter of Villero's was added a ſhort
o bdillet, addreſſed to me, by the King, and con-
* tained only theſe few words : “ J muſt tell you,

x & © that the beſt of the whole race is worth but lit-
. © tle: God grant I may be miſtaken.” How-
. ever, he was not diſpleaſed with D'Eguillon's be-
1: haviour, when he waited on him at F ontaine-
dy bleau : his Majeſty only thought that he ſnewed
he ſome little affectation in endeavouring to extenuate
in his brother's offence. The King told him, that it
n. was his will Sommerive thould retire to Lorrain,
tand not ſtir from thence without his permi on.
m. I was commrſhoned to notify this order to rhe
ily We Duke of Maienne, his Majeſty being willing, ar
ice the intreaties of D'Eguillon, to ſpare him the
ul ungrate ful taſk.

en, D' Eguillon did not make a proper application
the of the leſſons the King gave him in relation to
rs WWE lis brother. No one was ignorant of the affec-
ile, don his Majeſty had for Balagny *: he had lately
bim even a proof of it, by maintaining him in the
ſer poſleſſion of the repiſter-office at Bourdeaux, of
in- We ich the contractors endeavoured to deprive him.

D*Eguillon had the imprudence to quarrel with
him upon ſome affairs of gallantry indeed, and the
baſeneſs, ſome time after, to attack him when he
Vas almoſt alone, while himſelf was accompanicd

Pall WF ith a body of armed men. The prejudice Henry
n 10 WE *lready had to this family, increaſed the indigna-
the don he felt for this attempt. In the firſt emotions
(001 |

; |'; WE * Damien de Montluc, Lord of Balzgny, ſon of John Prince
* or Cambray, and of Renee de Clermont de Buſly d'Amboiie : he
„, et that time, only twenty-five or twenty-ſix years old, and
pa! Warricd,

as Cc 2 of

292 MEMOIR S Book XXy,

of his anger, he writ to me, that being reſolved
to puniſh D'Eguillon for it, he earneſtly | INtreat-
ed me to forget the friendſhip I had hitherto had
for this family, fince I ought to ſet a much higher
value upon that of my King. This letter aford-
ed me a proof of this prince's great knowledge of
mankind: he predicted to me, that all the ob.
gations I ſhould confer on D'Eguillon would he
forgot, if, through any change 'of oy {ortune, !
mould be incapable of adding to them: and (his
prediction has ſince been fully ese ned
However, I was then perſuaded of the contrary,
and liſtening only to what my friendſhip for the
whole houſe of Lorrain ſuggeſted to me, the King's
letter, which his courier, meeting me at Montzr.
Fin deli vered, on my return from Sully, did not
inder me from an{wering his Majeſty i immed—
ately, and that only to do the very thing he had (or
bid me, which was the foliciting a pardon for B) E.
zuillon, without deferring it till I went to cout
which I propoſed to do immediately after wards
My letter was not unuſeful to D'Eguillon, when
he came before his Majeſty to clear himſelf of the
charge. The King wrote me, May 22. as follows.
« Your letter came very ſeaſonably ; for he arti-
ved this night, and talked to me in ſich a man-
« ner, that I was ſcarce able to reſtrain my anger
{© Certainly this youth grows very infolent.”
did not however abandon his intereſt. Wien |
went to Fontainebleau, I found the King's reſent
ment ſo violent, that there was a neceflity for al
the perſeverance the warmeſt friendſhip is capable
of to vanquith it. I obtained, at length, that this
affair ſhould he left to me, to make up in the be elt
manner I could. I ſurmounted, with the ſame
ſteadineſs of friendihip, many other dific culties,
which were not inferior to this; and believed te

all was forgotten on both ſides, congratulating
myle/t

1608. OF SUL. 297

myſelf upon my ſucceſs, when I heard in what

public, and the gratitude he expreſſed to me for it.

Yet this man, without faith and without hums-
nity, diſhonoured himſelf and me, a ſhort time
afterwards, by completing the crime, which I hac.
ſo lately obtained his pardon for attempting, and
procured - Balagny to be aſſaſſinated. The letter
his Majeſty writ to me upon it, will give the
reader the trueſt notion of this crime. My
« friend, you have doubtleſs heard of the wicked
« action committed upon Balagny: I would not

LAM At vw

« parties are not to be believed. Things are-

« worſe than you can imagine: he has violated
00

„„
„dice and cruelty of falling upon a fingle man
of WL
l, 44

1 action. The bearer will tell you the particulars.
N 2 The relations of both have attempted to hight;
5 but I have taken care to prevent it. Adieu. I love
1 you ſincerely, and with this truth I conclude.”
5 But Henry (for I felt too much Horror at this
en indignity to dwell on it any longer) was hiniſelf
in fact to blame, ſince it was through his eaſineſs

| of temper, - that the rage of duelling had ſpread
| tlirough the court, the city, and over the whole
kingdom“; and to ſuch exceſs was it carried, that
t gave me, and even his Majeſty himſelf, infinite

ir fatigue and trouble, to compoſe differences, and to
el hinder, each day, the diſputants from proceeding
me

ice, * Leomenic computed, in 1807, how many French gentlemen

had been killed in duels, ünce Henry IV. came to the crown,
The number was found to be full 4000, Mem. hiſt. de Fr: ibid.

Le 3 to

manner D'Eguillon talked of this good office in

« write you an account of it, till I had heard al]!
« the informations; for, on ſuch occaſions, the

the promiſe he made to you, and irreparably
wounded his honour, by the extreme cowar-

with numbers. I had rather a ſon of mine were
dead, than that he ſhould be guilty of ſuch an

* > — — ——— eD— 2 m—_ 1 — — — — 0 —

|
|

204 ME MO IRS. Book XV. Þ

to the laſt extremities. Before the affair of Balagny
happened, the Baron de Courtaumer came to tel]
me, that he was buſy in reconciling his two ne.
phews, the Prince of Conti, and the Prince of ſoin.
ville. Montigny quarrelled, for no cauſe, with
D*Epernon, whom J was ordered to pacify. © For
% you know,” ſaid Henry in his letter, “that he
* will always be the maſter.” The forcibly car.
rying away of a young lady occaſioned a combat
between the families of La-Force and St Germain,
St Germain, the ſon, who was the raviſher, being
ſent for by the Chancellor, in the King's name,
left Paris, inſtead of obeying, and went to li
father; which made his Majeſty apprehenſive that
he would divulge, amongſt foreigners, ſome im.
portant orders which he could not be ignorant that
he had given to La-Force.

This eaſineſs of temper in the King was the true WF J
cauſe of that licentiouſneſs and ſedition which had
infected the court and the kingdom, and which !
his Majeſty ſo deeply lamented : the gentry hal WF b
taken it from the nobility, and the nobility from te
the Princes of the blood. The Count of Soiſſons WF
publicly ſnewed his diſcontent. The Prince of IWF 2
Conde, by indiſcreet ſallies, ſome indeed only
worthy of laughter, and others of conſequence
enough to give great cauſe of uneaſineſs to l
Majeity, almoſt exhauſted his patience. It was
believed, that marriage would cure his impetuc-
ſity and wildneſs; and Mademoiſelle de Montme-
rency* was the wife the King choſe for him. I
was this marriage that completed Henry's dome:
ſtic troubles, as we ſhall ſee in the following ye

The difficulties that aroſe concerning the Mm
riage of Mademoilelle de Mercceur, increaſed ls
diſlike of the whole houſe of Lorrain. She bac

Margaret Charlotte of Montmoresey. been

1608. Go F 30 LD T1 295

been contracted to M. de Vendome, in the year
1598, when the King took a journey to Britanny.
The parties were now of age to conſummate the
marriage; but the mother and grandmother of
| the young lady, had taken care to inſpire her
with ſuch an averſion for M. de Vendome, that
ſhe would not ſuffer him to ſpeak to her. 'The

6
1

A
ud
7

3

.
„ "1
* *
5
*

would have been a more agreeable match, in all
their opinions; but ſince that could not take place,
the Ducheſs was unwilling to let her daughter's
large eſtates go out of the family. The Kin

could not help thinking, that the Dukes of Guie
and Maienne contributed to ſupport this lady in
her obſtinate reſiſtance to his will. I often com-

+ W bated this opinion, and repreſented to his Maje-

| ſy, that, on this occaſion, he did not do them
e juſtice z which 1n the end he had reaſon to be con-
ii W. vinced of, by the little oppoſition they made to
ch his intentions, when they were declared to them

al MW: by the Marquis D'Oraiſon, whom they had ſent
NM WE [0 his Majeſty.

ns WE The readieſt and the ſureſt way for Henry to
of W 2ccomplith this marriage, was to have aſſumed his
ny authority, and given them an abſolute command

io ſulfil the contract: but this prince * had leſs
unclinzüon to take {ſuch meaſures on this occaſion

vas chan on any other. It only remained then, either
n0- to endeavour, by gentleneſs and perſuaſion, to
mo- prevail upon the ladies, or to have recourſe to the

I: WF <ecifion of the law, which muſt undoubtedly have

Henry, in his anger, threatened the Ducheſs de Mereœur to
| make her pay two hundred thouſand crowns for damages, beſides
| the * of a hundred thouſand for breach of covenant. The

Ducheſs, on her part, caufed the King to be told, that he might
not only take the hundred thouſand crowns, but all her eſtates
belides, if he was intitled to them, Her daughter retired to a
dünner of eapuckins, with intent to take the. vail, Mem. hiſt. de

F, tid,
been

prince of Conde, who was not then married,

4 9 1 TY PTS... 4 — wo” — — — — — —
W at Cafe oe”; . He. - . "Og _
2 Yor” " * N * *
. of 3 * — oa} — . . ST ES

DOTS >, Il nee

8

1

296 MEMOIR S Book XXV.

been his favour, were his Majeſty to be treated
with the ſame impartiality as any private man:
but this was to draw it out into length, by the
delays and tricks of the courts of juſtice. It would
take up a conſiderable time to bring up only the
Tetters of attorney from Lorrain, without which
the proceedings could not be begun; and it wo
be two months before the affair could be termi.
nated, although his Majeſty ſhould interpo'c his

authority, to oblige them to diſpenſe with the ac.
cuſtomed formalities in his favour. However,
gentle methods were far more eligible, ſince
not only the union of two perſons; but that of
ſeveral families, were concerned in it. There
ſtill remained many reſources for a young woman
forced from her relations, and obliged to marry,
in ſpite of herſelf, to regain her liberty, althouph
all the ceremonies were performed that (hou!d
ſeem to have deprived her of it, eſpecially if ſhe
could not be prevented from privately receiving
bad counſels. For thele reaſons, therefore, I ad.
viſed his Majeſty to try gentle methods, in the
long letter I ſent him in anſwer to his.

For this purpoſe many conferences were hell
at the houſes of the two Ducheſſes, at that of the
Ducheſs of Guiſe, aunt to the young lady, and at
the Princeſs of Conti's; during which time M. de
Vendome was kept at a diſtance, his Majeſty ha.
ving ſent him under the conduct of La-Vallce in.
to Britanny. As for me, I thought no perſon bet-
ter qualified to manage this negotiation than Fi
ther Cotton. I adviſed the King to employ him,
and he ſucceeded fo well, that at the time when tic
King was moſt fully perſuaded” he ſhould never
terminate this affair, but by the ordinary cour:t
of law, and had already writ to the firſt preſident
on this ſubject, this father, on a ſudden, gave num
hopes that it would be concluded by other _

1608. rr. 207

4 The art of directing conſciences, in which he ex-
' WE celled, gave him up immediately the firſt point,

© and not the leaſt eſſential. They began to ceaſe
their invectives, which only nouriſhed hatred and
diſguſt. Father Cotton did not fail to go as often
ss he could to the King, to give him an account

of the progres he had made; and his Majeſty,

from time to time, {ent him to the Chancellor and
me to take our advice, and was highly pleaſed

with the ſervice he did him upon this occaſion.
The mother and the daughter were the firſt

| that were prevailed upon; but not without the

Ducheſe's giving ſuch free ſcope to her reſentment
againſt the King, her relations, and all the world,

E that Henry believed he ſhould never find a favour-

© The grandmother, and ſome other confidents of

able moment to obtain her conſent, but exhorred
ris, if ſuch a one ever offered, not to let it eſcape.

the Ducheſs's, as La-Porte the confeſſor, continu-

ed a long time obſtinate: but, at length, all were

appealed, and the marriage was celebrated“. The
King was not quite freed from his ſuſpicion, that
the Guiſes, and all the princes of the houſe of

Lorrain, ſought, in reality, to deceive him, un-

der an appearance of the greateſt reſpect and de-

ference; for which reaſon, when the poſt of firſt
E preſident of the chamber of accounts in Provence
became vacant by the death of Beauville, and the
Duke of Guiſe ſolicited it for one of his friends,
as likewiſe the Counteſs of Sault for one of hers,
| te denied them both. They have both been
| * ſupporters of the league,“ ſaid he; and this
| Vas all the reaſon he gave me for it, when he

The 2th of July in the year following. « The nuptials,” ſays
the Memvires de Þ hiſt. de France, „ were ſplendid and magnifi-
" cent: the King ſhone all over with jewels of ineſtimable value;
ke run at the ring, and ſeldom failed of carrying the prize.”

VWxit

We III

222234 — —
. n

—

298 M E MO IRS Book Xxv.

writ to me to conſult with the Chancellor about
filling up this place with one more fit ſor it.

Not all the arguments I uſed to the King, could
prevent him from giving, if I may uſe the expreſ.
ſion, a right to every one to diſturb his quiet, by
continually bringing him informations againſt the
moſt illuſtrious perſons in the kindom, as well
Catholics as Proteſtants. Sometimes he was told,
that the Duke of Bouillon, Du-Pleſſis, and other
heads of the reformed religion, were levying
troops; ſometimes that it was agreed upon be.
tween them, M. the Prince, M. the Count, and
even all thoſe that had been the greateſt {upport.
ers of the league againſt them, to take polleſion
of ſeveral towns. Another time, it was {aid, that
the Duke of Roannais held aſſemblies in Anjou,
which Pont- Courlai writ allo to me: but nothing
ſo much alarmed his Majeſty as the advice he
received from a gentleman of Poitou; for tl
province was always made the feat of rebellion,
This man ſaid, that he had been preſent at aſlem-
blies of a great number of gentlemen, who added
in the names of almoſt all the grandees of the
kingdom, beſides the Proteſtants, in which le
was a witneſs, that they had fixed upon a day for
ſeizing a great number of towns which he named,
and had delivered out money for the making pro
viſion of ſcaling-ladders, petards, arms, and all:
munition, neceſſary for the enterpriſc.

The King was at Fontainebleau without 23)
train, and only with a deſign to make ſome pat.
ties for hunting, when this informer was preici
ed to him: he ſent him back to Paris, wit. or-
ders to wait on Sillery and Villeroi, to whom 6

ave ſuch exact memorials, that the King was 10
Pan in doubt of the truth of his report, aud,
full of apprehenſions, returned inſtantly to Pars

through Melun, and entered the city at tlie go

17608. OF SULLY. 299

st Antoine. He ſent St Michael immediately
for me, having matters, he ſaid, of the utmoſt
| conſequence to communicate to me. My wife
and my children being then in the city with all the
coaches of the houſe, I was obliged to wait till
one was ſent me by Phelipeaux.
I found the King ſhut up in the Queen's little
cloſet; with him were that princeſs, the Chancel-
© Jor, and Villeroi, buſy in examining thoſe papers
which had heated the hvely imagination of Henry.
„Well, Monſieur Obſtinacy,” ſaid he to me as
[ entered, “ here is the war begun.” So much the
better, Sire, ſaid I; for it can be only againſt the
Spaniards. © No, no,” anſwered he, it is de,
much nearer neighbours, ſupported by all your
„% Huguenots.” All the Huguenots! returned I;
ah, Sire, what makes you imagine ſo? I will an-
ſwer for many, that they do not entertain the
E leaſt potion of it, and J am ready to anſwer for
# almoſt all the reſt, that they dare not. Did I
not tell you, my dear,” {aid his Majeſty, turn-
ing to the Queen, “ that he would not believe
E © this? According to him, no one dare give me
the leaſt offence, and it depends only upon my-
or WE © {elf to give law to all the world.” © It is
ed, WE © true, Sire,“ I replied, “ and fo you may when-
r0- ever you pleaſe.”
uw WE Villeroi and Sillery attempted to ſupport his
Majeſty's opinion, that this was a moſt dangerous
17 WW con piracy. I repreſented to them, that it was
1ar- Wet weakneſs to ſuffer themſelves to be intimi-
„ed thus by mere trifles: I took the paper out
or- el their hands, and could not help ſmiling when
be bound, that, of this formidable body of rebels,
n0 ay ten or a dozen poor inconſiderable gentle-
„en and foldiers were mentioned, whoſe perſons
ais knew, being, in reality, in my government;
7 220 bye or fix villages, as La-Haye in Touraine,

„ S.,95 1

2 —
. 2

300 MEMOIR S Book XXV.

St John d' Angle, La-Rochepozai, St Savin, and
Chauvigny-le-Blanc in Berry. Pardieu, Sire, re.
ſumed I with ſome emotion, theſe gentlemen
mean to jeſt both with your Majeſty and me, by
making theſe idle reports of conſequence enough WL
to affect you with any apprehenſions, and ind
cing you to take meaſures to prevent what will ne. W+-
ver happen. The whole myſtery is this: one of

your ſubjects has an inclination to get an hu.
dred crowns from you. |
« Notwithſtanding all you can ſay,” replied the MW |
King, „I am convinced that there is a neceſſity !
« for my going thither, or elſe that you iloull e
ce ſet out in two days, and give proper order WF 1
«« there for keeping every thing quiet.” If you WW ©
would conſent, Sire, replied I, after liſtening h. !
tiently to a long detail he made me of the artille. I.
ry, ammunition, and other warlike ſtores necellary 0
for this expedition, to let me manage it n+y own WF !
way, I will engage to bring this aftair to a con- WF
cluſion, without much trouble or expenſe. © Pr. WW ©
c dieu,” ſaid Henry, “ you are the moſt o o
« nate man I ever ſaw; well, what would you WF ©
% {ay?” I only aſk, Sire, rephed I, the Prevot 2
Möret, with twenty archers, and I engage a
bring you a good account of them. You vi! Wi
% have it fo,” ſaid Henry, vanquiſhed by m
perſeverante; “ but if any accident ſhould ha) WF !*
„ pen, you will have all the blame.“ Howeve!, i ba
the King's fears were wholly groundleſs. e
whole army conſiſted of twenty horſe, wich wil Wl VI
I ſeized all thoſe perſons that had been accu the
very few of whom were punithed, his Mae ws
finding moſt of them innocent, and that the o By
were not worth troubling himſelf with. Þ ;
The aiſenibly of Proteſtants, which it was he. x
ceſſary ſhould be held this year, for app!"
the two deputies-general, ſeemed to the King“ \

mellt

1608. OF. 5:U 4+ LI. 301

4 :
& merit ſtill more attention, on account of the pre-
ſent ſituation of affairs. He ordered me to afliſt

E with the greater conveniency, the aſſembly was
* ſummoned to meet at Gergeau, of which I was
overnor, and where I could direct every thing
9 my eſtate of Sully, which extended to the
zates of that city. I hall be filent as to the ar-
ticle of my inſtructions. On the 4d of October,
when I wrote for the firſt time to Villerol, the aſ-
ſembly had not yet taken any form, although the
members had met {ome days before ; for they till
expected ſome of the provincial] deputies. When
I found, that, by one ſingle word, I had put all the
diſaffected to ſilence, I took upon myſelf to anſwer
for it to his Majeſty, that nothing would be done
in it contrary to his will; which, however, he
ry could not be perſuaded to beheve. All the letters
w MW 1 received from the King and Villeroi were filled
. ith complaints of the Proteſtants. © Send back
7. my courier immediately,“ {aid the King in one
1, We of his letters,“ there are people at Gergeau with
n © viiom there 1s no dealing: they have treated
you like a Catholic; I knew they would do ſo:
o and four days ago I ſaw a letter from Saumur
$11 WF © which preſcribed the manner.“
Iltis certain, that there was, at firſt, ſome tumult
ab. in the aſſembly, and upon this account in particu.
cr, kr, that his Majeſty had ſent two Catholic gover-
nors into the cities of Montendre and Tartas,
which they alledged had been yielded to them by
| ihe King. They ſupported their demands by the
tenor of the edicts, and complained that Caumont
had been taken from them in the ſame manner.
| Chambaut, Du-Bourg, and Du-Ferrier, were ſent
| by the aſſembly to me at Sully, with meſſages full
| of ſubmiſſion to his Majeſty, to whom they had
likewiſe reſolved to depute two or three of their
Vor. IV. D d budy

at it for the third time; and that I might do ſo

202 MEMOIRS Bock XXV.

body upon the ſame ſubject. As I knew his Ma.
jeſty would not receive this deputation favourably,
 endeavourcd to diſſuade them from that de ſign:
I repreſented to them, that I had no commillion
from the King to treat upon this article; but that
I would write about it to him. I excuſed mylelf
from having any tling to do with regard to Mon.
cenis, a place upon which they had the ſame pre.
tenſions as the two former, becauſe it belonged
to M. the Count.

I writ toVilleroi what the aſſembly had propoſed,
charging him to repreſent to the King, that, if he
was willing this affair ſhould not be protracted, it
would be neceſlary to ſatisfy ſuch of their demand;
as were juſt, or promiſe, at leaſt, io do fo, when
he ſhould return an anſwer to them: to which hi
Majeſty conſented. This article diſpatched, which
was one of phe eight propoſed by the afembly, 1
told them, that, of thoſe that remained, fve were
to be brought before the council, as falling under
the cogniſance of that tribunal; and that they
ought now to ſettle the principal affair, which was
the appointing the two deputies. His Majeſty n0-
tified his intentions to them on this ſubject, which
were conformable to what he had declared to them
before, as has been {een when I treated of the ge.
neral aſſembly held at Chatelleraut : and this i
fair was likewiſe concluded to the entire fatis/ac-
tion of both parties, by means of a propoſal 1
made to the King to appoint Villarnou to be de.
puty for the nobility, and Mirande for thoſe of
the ſecond order. The former would have been
choſen the preceding year, if he had not been
propoſed in a manner contrary to the form pte.
icribe{ by the King. He went immediately t
recelve his orders, bearing a letter from me 10

the King, who ſummed up to him, in a few ven
|

1608. OF-SU-L LY. - 303
dee duties of his office, and ſeemed very well ſa-
© tified with his choice.

The aſſembly after this continued no longer

: © than was neceſſary to receive the brevet of the
n &. deputies acceptation, and all was over before the
t firſt of November. His Majeſty, in every letter
f WW he writ to me, recommended to me, in particular,
to be ſpeedy in ſettling this buſineſs; to return to
e. bim as ſoon as poſſible; and always concluded with
ld bis uſual expreſiions of kindneſs. The laſt courier
that I diſpatched to him found lim at the arſenal,
d, from whence, as Villerol informed me in his letter,
ie he returned at ſeven in the evening, making hin
it WW: write to me at eight, not being willing to do it
4G We himſelf for fear of keeping the courier too long.
en When I returned, I gave his Majeſty a more
hz particular account than | had done by my letters,
< of all that had paſſed at Gergeau, and of the paci-
„Ife diſpoſitions in which I had found a great num-
ere ber of the beſt and moſt conſiderable perions of
ler the Proteſtant body. Nis Majeſty was then at
ey Fontainebleau, where he ſtaid as long this year as
vas any of the former ones: he had returned thither
no- me middle of May, after that ort journey to
ich Paris which I have mentioned, and ſtaid there all
zen WWF June and July; in Auguſt he went back to Paris,
ge. from whence he went to St Germain, and after-
; if WF Vards to Monceaux, where he ſtaid fifteen days;
ſac- and, paſſing through Fontainebleau, came to Paris
al 1 the beginning of October, while I was ſtill at Ger-
de. Leau; in the middle of October he went again to
eo Fontainebleau, where he ſtaid all the remainder
deen of that month, and part of November, and then
been i teturned to diſpatch his affairs. I have already
pre- oblerved, that this manner of living was only
* 10 i fatiguing to himſelf and a few of his principal
ge to miniſters.

He was not this year afflicted with any dangerous
D d 2 diſtemper.

304 MEMOIRS Book XXy.

diſtemper. In a letter he writ to me from Fon.
tainebleau, dated June 2. he ſays, © I have had
« a fever which has lafted two days and a night,
« hut it only proceeds from a cold, which, by the
«« help of God, I hope will not have any bad con-
% ſequences. I am reſolved to take more care of
% my health than I have done hitherto : this you
« may depend upon, as alſo upon the aſlurance
« I gave you of my affection for you.” Yet he
{till continued the fatigue of the chace. From
St Germain he writ to me, that he had taken a |
{tag in an hour: that he went afterwards to bed,
where he lay another hour, and then went to walk
in his gardens, and to viſit his manufacturers.
Henry, while this cold in his head continued, vet.
eight or ten handkerchiefs in a day; he had, at a

A

the fame time, a defluxion in his ears and throat, N
which was very troubleſome to him. And after.
wards preparing himſelf by purges, to drink the e
waters of Spa, he was ſeized with a looſeneſs, from WWF d
which he ſuffered violent pains for two days, and L
which left a weakneſs upon him for a conſiderable b
time afterwards. This was a diſorder that pre. h
vailed not only over all that diſtri, from whence iſ £
his 'Majeſty wiit to me, that he had with him te N
good man Villeroi, and above a hundred pentle- N
men of his court, who were afflicted with it, but WM tl
Þkewiſe in Paris, and all the neighbouring parts. Wi
Almoſt all the children of his Majeſty were tics WF q
during the month of May. In his letter to me, de
in which he ſent me an account of it, his paternal N
tenderneſs made him enter into the ſmalleſt d..
cumſtances relating to the ſtate of their health, WF
none of which indeed were indifferent to me. lu ;,
his letter he ſen: me from Fontainebleau, dated BF ti
Way 16. he ſay © I am in great afflict on, 0
ce having all my children ill here: my d ughte' ,
« de Veri.eull has got the meaſles; my on, tie Tf

„ Lauplil,

4608. ar 8301 L 7. 305

% Dauphin, vomited twice yeſterday ; he has a
a «© fight fever attended with a drowlinels, and a

„ © fore throat: from theſe ſymptoms the phyſi-
„„ cians think he likewiſe will have the meaſles.
„ < Laſt night my daughter began to have a little
ff « fever: my ſon d'Orleans has a continued one;
U « hut it 1s more violent one day than another.”
0 This prince's illneſs was moſt dangerous, and laſt-
e ed longer than any of the other. © Judge,” con-
m tinued he, whether, with all this, I muſt not
; & © ſuffer great uneaſineſs. I will every day give
, &« you an account of my childrens health.“ Hap-
K pily they all recovered. © Whatever it mall pleaſe
" « God to do with them,” ſaid this prince to me,
et © I will ſubmit patiently to his will; all the diſ-
t © penſations of his providence are good.” He in-
it, W quired, with his uſual goodneſs, how my ſon did,
r. who, he had been told, had the {mall-pox. He
ne choſe Noiſy for the place of his childrens reſi-
mn MW dence during the ſummer, and would nor ſuffer
nd them to be removed to St Germain till Novem-
le ber, at which time he ſent me orders, as uſual, ro
re. have them carried thither, with Madame de Mont-
ce glat, in the coaches and litters of the Queen
ie WE Margaret; ordering me to tell Madame de Ver-
le. neuil to ſend hers thither likewiſe, the {mall-pox
bt then raging at Paris.

s. The ſon of this lady, who was called the Mar-
ick quis de Verneuil *, was, by the King his father,
ne, deſigned for the church; and the biſhopric of
nal WWF Metz becoming vacant, he had fome thoughts of
cir»

th, * Heory de Bourbon, Marquis, or, according to others, Duke of

. Verneuil, afterwards Biſhop of Metz. If Paul V. ſhewed himſelf
0 difficult on account of the biſhopric of Metz, Innocent X.

cel l ſhewe himſelf much more ſo: for he poſitively refuſed to give
on, the purple to this prince. He enjoyed more than four hundred
ter thouſand livres a- year in benefices, when he gave them all up in

© 2668, to marry Charlotte Seguicr, widow of Maximilian Francis,
| third Duke of Sully. He died in 16982,

D d 3 giving

306 MEMOIR S Book XXV.

iving it him; but the procuring this prince to
e nominated, the illegitimacy of his birth, and
his youth, for he was yet but a child, were three
obſtacles to his advancement to this ſee. It wa
in the power of the chapter of Metz to remove
the firſt, by admitting the young prince as a can.
didate ; or, if that was too difficult to be granted,
to appoint the Cardinal of Guile either to he
biſhop or adminiftrator, becauſe, from his hands,
it might afterwards eaſily paſs into thoſe of the
young De Verneuil. This chapter having both:
right to chuſe themſelves a biſhop, in caſe of a va
cancy, by reſignation, or death, and of giving
the adminiſtration of the revenues of the hilhop-
rie to any perſon they pleaſed, there was no ne.
ceility for uſing many perſuaſions with them; for,
as ſoon as they perceived that it would pleaſe the
King to have his ſon appointed, he was admitted BF :
and choſen unanimoutly. |
But it was the Pope alone who conld grant tte
neceſſary diſpenſation on the other two articles, WW '
the birth and age of the young prince. His Mz BF «
jeſty, to prevail upon him to grant this favour, WF ?
ſent the Duke of Nevers to Rome“. Valerio !
the courier from Rome, was received in a mok t
obliging manner at Paris, and retained there ui!
the end of March. The Marchioneſs of Verneul
neglected nothing to ſecure the ſucceſs of u
affair. However, all that could be obtained fron WF
the Pope, was a diſpen ation for the birth. He
refuſed the ſecond requeſt, as being abſolutey
contrary to the canons and diſcipline of itt
church; but, by the force of intreaties and 1%
licitations, they drew from him, at length, dh
kind of approbation, which, in the Roman ſtyle,
is called expedative, and that the young prince

* The Memoirs of thoſe times take notice of the magnificent
entry and reception cf the Duke at Rome,
might

* * *
*

1608. T SUL. 307

V.

to might bear, at preſent, the title of Biſhop of
nd Metz. Valerio brought the news to Fontaine-
ce bleau the latter end of April, and, by the King's
az command, I acquainted Madame de Verneuil with
ve it immediately.

in. The little complaiſance which Paul V. on this
ed, occaſion, ſhewed his Majeſty, was well repaid b
he him, when, at that Pontiff's requeſt, the r
de, and prelates of France renewed their ſolicitations
the to Henry, that the decrees of the council of

2 Trent might be publiſhed in the kingdom: the
va. King, without ſuffering himſelf to be moved by
ing ! their repeated attempts on this head, replied,
of. That fince they could not get this council ap-
ne. proved by Francis I. Henry II. and Charles IX.
for, although they had not the ſame obligations to
the the Proteſtants as he had, nor had granted them
el fuch favourable edicts as he had done, they muſt
not expect that he would ever give his conſent to
the It. He ſhewed them the milchief ſuch a grant
ley vas capable of doing in the kingdom, and de-
Mi. clared, that he had no inclination to eſtabliſh the
our, inquiſition in France; and that he thought it very
cio, ſurpriſing, for he was aware of that objection,
that ſuch a ſtrange claufe thould be made one of
the conditions of his abiolution. All therefore
that they conld obtain from his Majeſty was, that
the mals ſhould be permitted in Bearn “.

fron WE This year the Roman college loſt the Cardinals
He BF de Lorrain and Baronius. The Duke of Florence,

utch WIE and the famous Scaliger dicd alſo about the ſame
ie

a (0-6

The exerciſe of the Catholic religion had been re-eſtabliſhed
1 at Bearn, ever ſince the time of the edict of Nantes There is
3 therefore a miſtake here in theſe Memoirs; and, inſtead of the
naß, it ſhould be read the Jeſuits 5 thoſe fathers being eſtablifh-
I ed there this year, by the King's cdict of the roth of February.
| They were obliged for this to the ſolicitations of the Biſhop of
4 Clleron. Nic. Kigault, bogk 1. Merc. Fr. 1608, Gt. :

| Ame:

—

300 MEMOIRS BookXvy,

time: and, in France, the Chancellor de Bellieyre,
Father Ange de Joyeule, and Miron “.

Some new embelliſhments were made at Fon.
tainebleau and Monceaux. The bridge March,

* Francis Miron, maſter of requeſts, ſuperintendant of the 90.
vernment of the iſle of France, preſident. of the great council,
, provoſt of Paris, and lieutenant-civil within the provollſhip there.
of, &c. died in the month of June, this year, extremely regrets
on account of his probity, and other good qualities. His party
eſteemed him ſo much for the ſteadineſs with which he had op.
poſed the ſuperintendant, on occaſion of the order of council
which had been made the year before, for the ſuppreſſion of the
annuities of the Hotel de Ville, and of the bold remonſtrances he
made to the King on that behalf, that they got together in a body,
-and came, in a Editious manner, to defend his houſe again{l the
threatenings of the council. Peretixe, from whom I have this
fact, agrees, that the inquiry into the caſe of the annuitants uz
in itſelf moſt juſt; and yet blames the authors of it:“ Becaule,”
ſays he, © the greateſt part of thoſe annuities having paſſe
* through ſeveral hands, or been divided, _ families mult be
„ put to great trouble by it. Miron,” adds he, * earneſtly re.
« queſted the citizens to retire, and not to make him criminal;
-«« aſſuring them they had nothing to fear: that they had to d
« with a King as great as wiſe, as gentle as equitable; and who
« would not ſuffer himſelf to be influenced by the advice ef eil
- « counſellors.”

For my part, I do not ſo much admire this gentleman, who,
notwithſtanding his probity, ſuffered himſelf to be ſo far tra
ported with paſſion, as to make ſome odious compariſons. * Ne
indeed,“ ſays the ſame writer, „with the King's perſon, bit
« with ſome of his council;” as 1 do the King himſelf, whore:
ſiſting the perſuaſion of thoſe who would have prevailed on him h
ſeize him by force, and ſeverely to puniſh his boldneſs, ge.
„ cjouſly received,” continues M. de Perefixe, the excuſes nd
*«* moſt humble ſubmiſſions of Nliron; and, beſides, forbid tit
* proſecution of the inquiry into the annuities, which had mac
« ſo much noiſe” I am ſurpriſed no notice is taken of any pi

of this tranſaction intheſe Memoirs.

But another action, which does real honour to M. de Sul
(taken out of the Memvires pour Philt. de Fr.) was, his folict
ing Henry IV. on behalf of the Preſident Miron, brother of (it
deceaſed, who had reſigned the office of licutenant-civil to him,
and afterwards to his ſon. The King ſaying to him, “ em {ut
« priſcd you ſhould defire my favour for perſons whom you 0

* merly ſo much hated.” „ And, Sire,” replied Sully, „14
« more ſurpriſed to find you hate people you formerly ſo me
„loved, and who love you, and have done you good ſethes,
The Qucen, at the recommendation of Conchini, procurcd th
office for Nicholas Le-Geai, the King's attorney of the on

: \ 1 . J
J 8
unn 1

—

:
l
|
\
|

— 2 2·˙ 2 — — * : —

V.

re,

2
-
4

on.
ch.

- J0-
nel,
nere.
ettel
part

] 4
uncl
f the
cs he
body,
{t the
> this
s Wa
wie,”
paſſe
uſt de
ly re-
ninal;
to d
d who
of evi

; who,
trand-
« Net

Mn, but

(ho fe-
him t9
5 Ne-

ſes and

bid the

1 mats

ny fat

e Sulf
ſolicit
| of he
to him,
am ſut.
you tot:
_ [| an
ſo mud
er ide.
red this
_hatelet

al

SDL.

1608. O F 309
and * was built at Paris, in the place of that called

the bridge Arx-Merniers. I gave the King a de-
ſign for La-Place Dauphine, by which, leavin

the fund to be managed by the undertaker for his
own advantage, it might be finiſhed in three years,

It was offered to the firſt preſident, and to the
parliament. I alſo drew a plan for the bridge

of Rouen; which my ſon preſented to his Ma-
Helty, for I was then at Rouen for that purpoſe.

Henry thought nothing could be better contri-
ved for the conveniency of the ground. The

bridge of Mante was finiſhed this year. In Bour-
Ponnois, I depoſited ſeveral pieces of artillery,

which procured me the thanks of that province
by St Geran.

EZ Theſe works of neceſſity, or of public utility,
might have been carried much farther, if the King
had been willing to follow the advice gave him,

to ſacrifice ſome of his private expenſes to ſuch
Jaudable undertakings. The money he loſt at

play only, would have anſwered thoſe purpoſes.

* * So called after the name of Charles Le-Marchand, captain

of the arquebuſicrs and archers of Paris, who undertook, with
the King's permiſſion, to build the ſaid bridge at his own coſts

and expenſes, on certain conditions, which were granted to him,

end, amongſt others, that it ſhould bear his name.” Journal

We L Etoile, ibid.

bis bridge, which formerly was called Port-aux-Colombes,

Tthe pige

Nerds th

on bridge), becauſe pigeons were fold on it, had after-
e name of Pont-aux-Meg-iers, (the Millers bridge), be-

uſe there was a mill under every arch. It had been broke down
er lince the year 1596, by a flood, on the 22d of December, be-

=

cen five and fix o'clock in the evening, cruſhing under its ruins

evards of five hundred perſons, who were for the moſt part, as

Was ſaid, of the number of thoſe who had curiched themſelves

Wt the maſſacre of St Bartholomew; and it had, ever ſince, conti-

- Bit unrepaired, It was begun this year, and finithed the next.

Wt took fire twelve years after, being of wood, and was burnt down,

ſoge her with another bridge, called Pont-au-Change, which was
W lt with ſtone in 1639: and the two bridges were united in
Pie. which, at preſent, is ca led Pont au -· Chauge. See the authars

the Antiquities and Deſcriptions of Paris, 1

310 MEMOIRS Book XXV.

I was ordered to pay Edward Fernandez“, a Por.
tugueſe, at one time thirty-four thouſand piſtoles
which he had loſt to him. This order is dated
Auguſt 27. He often ſent me others for two or
three thoufand piſtoles +, and many more for ſum
leſs conſiderable. However, it muſt be confeſſec,
that this paſſion for play never hindered him fron
agreeing to every propoſal in which the public
good was concerned.

* This Edward Fernandez is taken notice of in the Memoirs gf
Baſſompierre, as being a rich Portugueſe banker, who lent money
to the courtiers for play, on pledges, and at large intereſt.

+ *I do not know,” ſays M. de Perefixe, ** what anſxer h
% make to thoſe who charge him with being fonder of cards m!
dice, than was becoming a great King; and that beſides he pl.
« ed ill, being eager to win, timorous when large ſums were de.
pending, and out of temper when he loſt.” It requires no 2.
ſwer, I ſhould tell this writer; for it muſt be owned, that it h
blot in the life of this great prince. How can one juſtify a paſo
for play, when puſhed to the degree it was by Henry IV.? iu WW
can be more pernicious in the maſter of a whole nation? V1! ne
example can be worſe? What can have a ſtronger tendency «
the ſubverſion of order, and the corruption of manners ?

= of „ we gy” de IG A If a an ey.

We find, on this ſubje&, in the Memoirs for the hiſtory &
France, a ſtory as pleaſant as it is merrily told. M. de Crequy,
« afterwards Duke of Leſdiguieres and Marſhal of France, lk
« ſo much money, that one day, coming from the King's, in!
% manner out of his ſcaſes, he met M. de Guiſe, who waz goin;
« to the caſtle, to whom he ſaid, Friend, friend, where are tt
% guards placed to-day? On which M. de Guite, ſtepping back
two or three paces, Excuſe me, Sir, ſays he, I am not of ti
„country; and immediately went to the King, who laugbel
-« heartily at the ſtory.”

The Marſhal de Baſſompierre ſays, that Pimentcl, the fore gm
mentioned in the beginning of this book, “won upwards of i?
„hundred thouſand crowns, which he carried off; ard ca
„ back to France the following year, where he reaped ano!
« good harveſt.“ It is reported, that the ſtratagem he made Ws
of to win ſo much, was to get into his hands all the dice wil
were in the ſliops at Paris, and ſubſtituting falſe dice, wii
had got made, in the place of them. But what ſome people hare
ſaid, that Henry IV. was informed of the cheat, and countenant®
it, with deſign to impoveriſh his courtiers, and thereby to make
them more ſubmiſſive to him, ought to be looked upon as 2
ſtroke of ſatire. The Duke of Epernon loſt conſiderable fun
and all his jewels. The Duke of Biron alſo loſt, in one year, met
than five hundred thouſand crowns,

.

or.
les
ted
) Or
ums
led,
ron

1blic

irs of
noney

rer 0
Is and
e plat
4 P
re de.
no als
it 11
paſſon
Wbn
Vhg
ney td

tory d
*requy,
ce, lo
8. in 1

3 going
are tht
19 back
of thi
[2ughtd

rreionet
of 199
d came
anout
ade uſ
. which
nich le
le hae
enance
140 make
a mei
le ſums
ar, mor

a

1

r UL L . 311
A dreadful devaſtation * was made by the Loire

En the month of October. In my journey from
KOlivet to Orleans, I expeRed to have been in-
Evolved in it. This whole paſſage was one conti-
Sued ſea, in which the hoats ſwam over the tops

bf the trees and houſes the water had yet left ſtand-
5 However, no accident happened to myſelf;

put the boat which carried me ſtuck in its return,

and fell in two pieces, but fortunately all the paſ-
ſengers ſaved themſelves by ſwimming. The de-

Wolation was dreadful, and the damage ineſtimable.

In the petitions of the injured towns and villages,

5 only a total wor of all taxes was de-

nanded, but likewiſe a ſpeedy and effectual ſuc-

our, at leaſt, for their moſt urgent neceſſities,
Without which moſt part of the lands muſt remain
milled, and the houſes be deſerted. “ God,”
4

1 This devaſtation laſted twenty-four hours, and came in an in-
4 Had not the banks broke down, the city of Tours muſt

ave been laid under water, and Blois ran a great riſk. M. de Sully,
ho was then at Sully, with great difficulty ſaved himſelf: both
e and his whole duchy were in great danger. Mem. bit,

= Fr. Did.

According to Le Mercure Francois, this misfortune happened
Nice this year in the Loire: once towards the end of winter, after

W froſt; the ſecond time, in the beginning of ſummer, by the ſud-

en melting of the ſmow on the mountains of Velai and Auvergne:
uy places none of thoſe floods in the month of October; in which he
W& miſtaken. 1 he loſs,” ſays he, of men, women, children,
WE cattle, caſtles, mills, houſes, and all ſorts of goods, was ineſti-
F mable. There was not a bridge on this river, which has a
E courſe of more than five hundred leagues, which had not ſome
of its arches broke down. The force of the water made breaches
in all the banks. The low grounds were overflowed quite to the
E (&irts of the hills; the lands, which are very fruitful there, were
bora long time under water, there being no vent for its running
ef: ſo they became quite barren, being covered with ſand and
ones, which the water had brought from Auvergne.”

This year was called the year of the hard winter, that ſeaſon be-
g nanſually ſevere. * Henry IV. ſaid, his beard froze in bed
wich the Queen by him.“ He had ſome frozen bread given him
the 234 of January, which he would not ſuffer to be thawed,

Uetth, vol. 2. 5. 3. P. 771.
| ſaid

212 MEMOIRS BookXxy.

ſaid Henry, in his anſwer to a letter I writ to him,
upon this terrible accident, © has given me ſub.
c jects, that I may preſerve them as my children,
& Let them meet with tenderneſs and charity from
« my council. Alms are always highly accept.
cc able to God; and in cafes of public miſery
“ more eſpecially ſo. It would lie heavy on my
e conſcience if I neglected to do every thing!
« can for their relief.“ I ſeconded, with all my
power, the King's pious intentions.

In the ſame letter I obtained three little gratui-
ties for different perſons: the profits of a mill at
the gates of Paris, for one; the remainer of ſome
trees that had been cut down, for another; and
the timber which remained for repairing the (tone.
bridge at Mante, for the third.

The merit and learning of Meſſieurs Fenouillet
and D*Abeins, ſo well known throughout the whole
kingdom, encouraged me to requeit, for the fit,
the reverſion of the biſhopric of Poitiers; and, for
the ſecond, the firſt bi ſhopric which thould hecome
vacant, both which were promiſed me. I went
that inſtant for Sully; but had ſcarce left his Mz-
jeſty, when news was brought him of the Bithop of
Montpelier's death; of which he fent me notice
ſoon after. I was of opinion that I ſhould make
ſome alteration in the favour I had obtained ot
the King. I therefore writ to him, that Montpe-
lier being full of Proteſtants, it ſeemed to me to
require, that a man as eloquent as the Abbe Fe-
nouillet ſhould be made biſhop of it; and that the
mild and moderate diſpoſition of the Abbe d'Abe1ts
rendered him abſolutely fit for the biſhopric 0
Poitiers, that province having many hot and v10-
lent ſpirits. in it that required tempering. Hent)
read my letter to the courtiers about him, and,
filing, aſked them, whether the Catholics code

have

är © Vi —- HS”

1608. O SU L . 313

have made a better diſpoſition *? Fervaque was
ſo dangerouſly ill, that 1 adviſed his Majeſty to
think of diſpoſing of the very conſiderable poſts
he held in Normandy. But he ſoon undeceived
us in the opinion of his danger, by writing, tome
days afterwards, that if a commiſhon was ſent him
to hold the ſtates of that province, he found him-
© ſelf able to preſide at the aſſembly.
” Thetreaty of 1564, between France and Lorrain,
daily ſuffered from new difficulties relating to the
limits of the country of Meſſin, which determined
© the King to fend commiſiioners upon the ſpot.
© Theſe were choſen by the Chancellor and me, ont
of the council and elſewhere. Another work, no
less uſeful, and much more conliderable, was to
order a report to be given in, upon exact views,
of all the incroachments made by our neighbours
in different parts of the frontiers, and eſpecially
upon the confines of Champagne, with Franche-
Comte, and Lorrain. Chatillon the engineer, to
whom I committed this taſk, executed it with che
utmoſt exactneſs. He made it clear, that the King
| of Spain and the Duke of Lorrain had unjuſtly
{ appropriated to themſelves a great number of
fiefe, and even whole villages, as the village of
Pierre-court, the town of Paſſeran, the lordihip
of Commercy, and many others, which would be
tedious to enumerate here.

ener

k WARTS | »
AT Ws 5 1 4
*"W COS M

a”  - le," *
Ao

* Techixe relates this fact ſomething differently. „ The bi.
© lnopric of Poitiers being become vacaut, Roſny cut neſtly recom-
mended one Fenouillet to him, who was eſteemed a man of learn-
ing, and a good preacher. The King. notwithſtanding this re-

*

of i commendation, gave it to the Abbot of La-Rochepoſai, who alſo
bio- Bi page many good qualities; an! veſides, was the ſon of a fa-
mer, who had ſerved equally well with his fword in the wars,
ary : ad with his genius in embaſſics, Some time after, the biſhopric
ind, | * Montpelier became vacant ; on which the King, of his own
duld | 3 tent for Fenouillet, and gave it to him; but on condi-
in, that he ſhould take it as an obligation to him alone.” Ibid.

nav 9. 312. 5

Vor. IV. E e This

p ” — = = *
A. a EC. —_ cdl Ot * SS. k > * _
12 8 9 45x 2 5 - — — — ——
P l - ” - 4 W—_— - » * * *
1 * PEE « >
8 5 E —
* — 4 — *
> **
# | — - . * * CD — * — ”
1 | 4 * . — 2% > LY 4 * La
T ”

— 82
. , we th * -
_ 4 N 8 9 2
1 2 - S
+ 4 * — #5, -
* ST * Py - EC, —i 1 he <
* S432 a Wo, we * 0 = _ -
—
- BU pu — 2 8 AIST

-— *
> —

— 22
3
—

— — —
n 8
—— MERE. ©

_—_— =
2 n
— "is 4
— 4 Pin S234
— — * I oy -
<- as ket af and — 2

— — 7

314 MEMO 1 R S Book XXV.

This work was but a ſmall part of what, by his
Majeſty's orders, I had undertaken. The moſt
exact plans of all the coaſts and frontiers of France
were to be drawn. The Duke of Maienne and
the inhabitants of Antibes having put to ſale the
lands they had in the neighbourhood of that city,
the King was deſirous of becoming the purchaſer,
which, when known, was fufficient to make them
ſet ſuch a price upon thoſe lands as diſguſted hi;
Majeity, who ordered them to be told, that they
might {ell their land to whomfoever they plealed,
but that he would put a governor into Antibes,
who might probably make them repent of their
injuſtice to him.

Let us now come to the finances. There was
new regulation made, directed to the treaſurers of
the exchequer, of the private expenſes, of the
polts, of the Swiſs league, of the ordnance, of
the extraordinary of the wars, and the extraordl-
nary. on this ſide the mountains, and the rel,
which preſcribed them ſtill a more exact method
for giving in their accounts, and placed them in
the loweſt dependence on their ſuperintendamt,
without a precept ſrom whom they had ſcarce tie
power of doing any thing. This regulation wa

<tended, likewile, even to the regiſters and te
ſecretary of the council. I put in the ſame {ub
jection thoſe who acted under me in every 0ine:
huſineſs: J obliged Lichani, under whoſe ire
tion the ſtreets of Paris were paving, to cone
cvery Wedneſday and Saturday noon, to g1Ve ne
zn account of the payment and employment 0
lis workmen.

By a circular letter ſent to all tie accountans
of the finances, I forbid them to place any m0
in their accounts, ſuch articles as had been o
rej-cted, or reduced by the council, Jeaving
mean; to recover them but that of petition; 20

1
[{)%

.
5
1

. ; N bat --,
AS. n 2 9.

.

_

1608. e. 315

that they might not plead the want of rules, I ſent
them forms drawn up with clearneſs and exact—
neſs. They were obliged even to quote the date
and the ſignatures of the patents and edits of
council that were there mentioned. The regu—
lation of the fees of the chamber of accounts,
and another concerning the money embezzled by
the treaſurers of France, and the receivers-ge-

neral, was joined to the former. 'This new ſcheme
brought the King, at preſent, an hundred thou-
8 ſand crowns profit, which would be doubled, when
it came to be perſectly obſerved. The chamber
BE of accounts did not part with its fees but with a
great deal of trouble, not even when it was made
8 appear upon how falſe a ſuppoſition they had been
Jeſtablihned. I was obliged even to pet a formal
S order from his Majeſty, to obtain from them 2
delivery of the regiſters, for which I had occa-

Hon. I had a great deal of trouble with the pro-

curer-general, and the preſidents of that chamber,
to make them verify an edict with reſpect to thoſe
who paid their rents, and for the extinction of

Horty-eight thouſand livres of rents ſettled by

compoſition.

I declared to the ſovereign courts, and the of-
mice of finances of Languedoc, the reſolution of
che King upon ſeveral queſtions which they had
Went to me, reſpecting rights of preſence, feudal
pr ſeigneurial rights, ſupplement of the crown-
Lands, new purchaſes, the crown-lands of Navarre,
Fights of traite foraine et domaniale, payments
pon cloths, and particularly the taille reelle,
pon which the council determined, with one
Foice, that the prince, the officers of the crown,

nd the King himſelf being obliged to pay it, for

Wie lands which they poſlefled in that province, it
Muſt be paid by every one elſe, both cities and

ommunities, I ordered Mauſſac to carry letters
5 E e 2 concerning

316 MEMOIR S Book XXV.

concerning all this to the parliament of Toulouſe,
the treaſurers of France, and the farmers of the
gabelles. I directed the ediR for the repurchaſe
of the regiſters to M. de Verdun, firſt preſident
of that parliament, that he might ſee it regiſtered,
which he did without any difficulty or ſubterfuge,
He wrote at the {ame time, that he had proceeded
to make a compenſation to the regiſters of the
ſeveral courts; and aſſured me of the exact ſub.
miſhon of the parliament to the King's will. To
this he added ſome perſonal acknowledgmentz,
and thanked me, among other things, for having
{ent ſuch a commifſioner as Colange, a man of (ot;
addreſs, and inſinuating behaviour.

I do my beſt to ſuppreſs all particularities, which
muſt naturally be tedious ; and ſhall therefore ſay
nothing of the letters which I wrote to the proct-
rer- general of Dauphine, to the Sieur Marion, and
to the treaſurers of Burgundy, upon the repurchatc
of the domaine, upon the late regulations, and up.
on every other ſubject *.

When I ſaw the year drawing to an end, I wrote
to the King at Fontainebleau, that his preſence
was neceſſary for a general view of the finances:
that I wanted his orders for a thouſand things,
ſuch as his garriſons, his troops, the galleys, lle
ofiicers of the Dauphin's houſehold, and of the
children of France; that, by his abſence, mal)
other affairs were left unſettled, which, by thole
who had them in charge, were confidered as mere.
ly of my invention, and indifferent to him. 1 hal
tonefily conſeſs, that I have always endeavoured
to join his Majeſty with his miniſters in the m.
nagement of buſineſs, becaule, in reality, the bel
regulations come to nothing, unleſs it plainly 4.

* of”
1 1

* All the letters in the old Memoirs of Sully, of this ff
1808, may be conſulted on this ſubject, vol. 3.
peat

1608. . 317

pear that negle& will be puniſhed by the dif-
pleaſure of the prince.
= The brevet of the taille had never been made
in a manner ſo ſolemn as it was now for the year
1609. His Majeſty came on the 16th of Auguſt,
and took his {eat in the council, attended by ſe—
veral princes, dukes, peers, and officers of the
crown; and an edi& of the council was pailed in
EZ his preſence, by which it is ſaid, that the King
n Ibaving examined the calculations of receipts, and
expenſes for the preſent year, and heard the re-
ports of his council, and the ſuperintendant of his
Fnances, was very deſirous to ſhew his regard to
the remonſtrances which they had made him, by
Idiſcharging his people from part of the taille; bur
that the debts contracted by his predeceſſors, and
the diſorder in which he found the finances, obli—

ged him to increaſe it inſtead of diminiſhing : but
e that, however, he was contented to impole, for
„the next year, only the ſame ſum as for the year
Faſt, with the augmentation but of twenty thou—
fand ſeven hundred and fifty livres ten {ols and

even deniers, which were to ariſe by an appro-
prlation of the ſame ſum, which the commiſſioners
had always charged upon the pariſhes for ſome
petty expenſes of each province, which charge
vas from henceforth ſuppreſſed. |

I ſhall give an account, with ſome ſatisfaQion,
le of a memorial which I preſented to the King,
e. concerning the taille, becaule, by the particu-
l WWarities and reſlections contained in it, it may
pals for an epitome of the hiſtory of the taille in
France.

It is certain, that no ſtate whatſoever, ſubject
o the government of many, or of one, can be
Without paying taxes: for though we thould ſup—
: ofe it content with the power which it now has,
out endeavouring after more, it is however
3 Ee 3 impoſſible,

:| ”

1
3
= .
1 2
*.
[]
">
CY
' -
7 *
1
*
.
1
1
=
5 *
"%
\ l
- e
—
1 .
1
1 3
* *
+3
: 1
.
# % - 1
4% 1
.
4
4
8
*
* 3
4 .
\ '3$
4 —
.
4
4 :
: 4
. *
BL
: EX

1 255

4

1

— 1

. Tx
q

i
4
|
4
i
4
:
*
y

—

—

.
22 ?

-— wg”
2 -

| * fn
2 &*
Lg ewes abs
— ISSY
LY

* f *
1
is * 8 INT — _——
TE — —

—— —

* "- -
, en
. I

318 MEMOIR S Book XXy,
impoſſible, but that, from time to time, it muſt

have outrages to revenge, and rebels to repreſs, e
Innumerable neceflities, riſing within itſelf, mut MR »
be indiſpenſably ſupplied by regular expenſes, e
which, however, muſt be ſometimes greater, j
ſometimes leſs. Theſe expenſes, as well ordi. e
nary as extraordinary, were, in this kingdom, p
for a long time, raiſed upon the lands belong. Ne
ing to the King, or to the crewn, by taxes, un. t
der the name of voluntary afliſtance, laid and g
allotted by a general determination of all the or. Er
ders of the kingdom, which are called the ſtates, MR ri
They were however almoſt nothing to the in. u
menſe ſums to which we have ſeen them ie i
ſince, becauſe, in thoſe times, they confined then. r
{elves to things barely neceſſary, as well in, as ot
of the kingdom. It is a remark, which I knov e
not whether any man has made, that of all our WR'S
Kings of the third race, down to Charles VIII. nat a
one appears to have engaged in diſtant conqueſts, d

or even to have made a formal declaration of WT tl
war againſt any neighbouring prince. With ms
ſpirit of moderation and frugality they never
ſound themſelves in want; but were able to di
charge all expenſes without mortgaging or alle-
nating their lands; and were therefore, in reality,
notwithſtanding that appearance of poverty, much
richer than their ſucceſſors in the midſt of all thei
treaſures, which they have obtained by boundles
Fower and abſolute authority. This is no pil
dox. The prince who can do much, he think
he can do every thing, and undertakes every thing
witkout perceiving a capital error in the compir
tation of his ſtrength, the impoveriſhment aud
ruin of his ſubje&s, which is always aggravat
as his deſires increaſe, and at laſt reduces lim
total weaknels.

1608. OF 3 U'L-L 'Y. 319

I ſay nothing of the troubles ariſing from en-
deavours to ſatiate an avarice in itſelf inſatiable.
ne taille, which of all arbitrary impoſts is in-
diſputably the moſt pernicious as the moſt un-

*

„juſt, as under that name are comprehended all
capitations or aſſeſſments raiſed arbitrarily upon
„particular perſons, furniſhes us with many ſtriking
. examples of its bad conſequences. How many
. © © times has it brought the royal authority into dan-
ger? Its firſt conſequence was to turn Childeric,
the father of Clovis, out of his throne; and ſome
ume afterwards it coſt Chilperic his life: for he
vas aſſaſſinated by Bodillon, a French gentleman,
ein revenge of ignominious treatment which he
received from the prince, for having repreſented,
t WE with a little freedom of ſpeech, the danger of an
exorbitant tax which he was going to eſtabliſh.
Such another tax, under Philip Auguſtus, produced
an inſurrection of the nobility, which defeated the
„ deſign. Others, who have ſucceeded better in
this undertaking, have afterwards felt ſuch violent
Z⁵qremorſe of conſcience, that they have been forced
eto ſet themſelves at eaſe by an abſolution from

the Pope. St Lewis left no injunction fo forcible
to his ſon, as that of railing no money upon his
ſubjects againſt their will, and without their con-
= ſent. Philip de Valois, who got rid of all ſuch
ſcruples, found the conſequences of raiſing taxes,
and ſaw his chief cities in arms againſt him. He
aſſiſted, before he was King, at an aſſemblee des
* notables, in the reign of Lewis ſurnamed Hutin,
in wich it was decreed, that every king ſhould,
when he was conſecrated, take an oath to lay no
© new taxes upon his people without the authority
of an aſſembly of the three eſtates. To this de-
& crce John I. and Charles V. ſubmitted, and made
= modeſt demands of ſupplies, which were granted
Y them.

o
_ — —— 1 _ A Ju _ — — _— - —
— —— —— 2 — — — — — + — - —
= » meets 2 8 * 4 97 * * * A >: * * 8 5 — r 9 2 ES — — — 8 —
* — 8 = —
. 1 n d . EE "ITS 4
, as > 1 136 > 5 W 2 0 S 4A of
— 2 . F 2 o — —
— — * — — | ” 4 ms — Fe — 5 —
7 = — = E — — 4 * * 2
" — 2 > — * 3 Pa 1 — RE 2 — .
= 7 * - 2 — - A 2 + V
4 ;

— —

* * = £ :a&; *
he CLIS A 4A $: -
. - Ic; e

288 . - ——
3 —

I IIB —

— _
* —
—

FITy.
— —

—

— IR
. 8

aha” 3 8 -

S

— -
=>.
— - — — —

3
— — —

*

_
= = — —
- * -
3 — = — —
_ — —

* — —
— —— ———ꝛꝛ — ꝓ—U — —
— — x

——

—

SE Las —= wh = =

: — —
—
e —— —

- —

FE STRESS
_— —
—

—
—

=

= —. . 6
- —

to our time.

320 MEMOIR S Book XXV.

them. A tax aſſeſſed upon particular people,
without an aſſembly of the ſtates, or conſent of
the nation, was looked upon as not the leaſt eyil
in the reign of Charles VI. a reign ſo full of un.
fortunate events, that it may be called the grave d
of the French laws, and the French morals. Un- fc
der Charles VII. who had the Engliſh to drive ont Ii
of his country, that neceſſity which leſſencd e di

murmurs of the people, increaſed the evil. He hi
had the addreſs to change that tribute into a ſtated ce
and ſettled payment; which, from being a per. n
ſonal aſſeſſment, had the name of taille. It us ii
however eſtabliſhed, in different provinces, in dif. {WTF ar

ferent forms: in ſome it was called à poll-tax, in
others a tax upon eſtates, in others a mixed tax:
it was fixed by Charles VII. at one million eight
hundred thouſand livres. Let us now fee what
progreſs it had made from reign to reign, down

Lewis XI. augmented the taille to ſour millions
ſeven hundred thouſand livres. In the year 1498,
at the time of the death of Charles VIII. it ap.
pears, that there were paid into the exchequer,
when all expenſes were deducted, four millions
four hundred ſixty-one thouſand fix hundred and
nineteen livres; in 1515, at the death of Lewis XI.
four millions eight hundred fixty-five thouſand {ix
hundred and ſeventeen livres. It made at once
a prodigious advance under Francis I. who left it
at his death raiſed to fourteen millions forty-ſour
thouſand one hundred and fifteen livres. Henryll.
left it at no more than twelve millions ninety-ciglit
thouſand five hundred and ſixty-three livres. It
continued to ſhriak in the two following reign"),
being in the time of Francis II. only eleven mi.
lions one hundred and four thouſand nine hun.
dred and ſeventy-one livres; and in that of

Charles IX. but eight millions ſix hundred thiny
| eigll

—

668. OF SULLY. 321

eight thouſand nine hundred and ninety-eight
W livres. The reign of Henry III. favoured it much,
if we take a view of it, not as it ſtood at the time
when he was ſtripped of pou part of his king-
dom, as about the year of his death, but in 158r,
for inſtance, when it brought in thirty-one mil-
lions ſix hundred and fifty-four thouſand four hun-
d red livres. Henry the Great, inſtead of ſuffering
© himſelf to be carried away by a bad example, was
content, though he had immenſe debts to clear,
and great charges to ſupport, with receiving only
ſixteen millions clear money, half from the tailles,
and half from the farms.
If, notwithſtanding all this, Henry found means
to put twenty millions into his coffers, as we ſhall
find he did, he owed it to a frugality which was not
known in thoſe reigns, and which would pro-
E bably have been looked on as ſcandalous. Fo-
reigners could no longer meddle in the finances
nich impunity. This year the Elector Palatine
£2 vrote to me from Heidelberg, earneſtly preſſing
me to procure him the re-imburſement of {ome
money, which, he ſaid, he had lent to the King,
and for which, in eight years, he had only drawn
one fingle aſſignment. Carl-Paul, a counſellor,
and gentleman in ordinary to this Elector, was
ſent to me with great offers of ſervice from his
E maſter, to proſecute this affair. The place I held
often procured me compliments from foreign
EZ princes. The Duke of Savoy, when he {ſent the
Sieur Jacob to his Majeſty to congratulate him on
the birth of his third ſon, ſent me, at the ſame
ume, a very polite and obliging letter.
+ The Ducheſs of Lorrain's ſickneſs brought the

„

into France. This princeſs was ſo ill aſter her
hing. in, that the phyſicians long deſpaired of her
q life: the had had but one on y daughter, wha
4 Was

| | Duke of Mantua into Lorrain, and from thence.

oct - * —_— * — . — _ - — — —
— N * * — +2 of *2% 4 ”
*< bat: ar At a ki; 2%
n — . eee —
#2 2x p 1 - * * os. : — wy
7 * ,

— LP 7; 2 n

7 8 :
-"Þ 1 ” Y * -
_ 33 I, 1 —

41a

*
1

— — .
I r

— * 4
L — — — 1
+ * 2
_ "Re CIS l
—— * 2

322 M E M OI X S. Book XXV.

I
was in good health, and the mother at length alſo b a
recovered. Their Majeſties appeared to be great. n

ly intereſted in her recovery, and neglected no. K
thing to make the Duke of Mantua's ſtay in tt
France agreeable to him: they amuſed him with MR J:
fine operas, and ſplendid entertainments, for tl
which the King paid a ſevere penance, by the re

great quantity of medicines he was obliged st
take afterwards. The Duke of Mantua did na ſc
repaſs the Alps till the middle of October, carry. Wat

ing with him a large ſum of money, which he hal .
won from the King at play. There were til] four tb
thouſand piſtoles due to him when he went away, Wer:
which, at parting, he deſired Henry to pay to lis e
commiſſioner. His Majeſty ſent me an order for tir.
it in a billet, which Edouard brought me. Nei.
The negotiations for a peace, or a Jong truce, e
were {till continued in the Low Countries at the e
Hague, the place choſen for the conferences, bu Wa
in ſuch a manner, that it was long believed the WY:
mark, which had been thought fo near, would be Wc:
removed for ever; ſuch difficulties aroſe througi Wo!
diſtruſt, enmity, and a diverſity of intereſt. 4%
certain Spaniſh cordelier, who was employed se. e

ry much in this affair by his Catholic Majeſty,
paſſing through Paris, had the honour to be pre-
{ſented to the King, whom he endeavoured to per
| ſnade that the peace would be ſoon concluded.
Don Pedro * cauſed a report to be {pread thro

a

* Don Pedro was ambaſſador from Spain at the court of Fran:
his preſence there was far from being agreeable to Hen) V.
ſince he was not unacquainted with that miniſter's cabals, to e024
his council in the Spaniſh intereſt. See Vittorio Siri, Mem. Fecuu
vo. 1. Le Grain, Decade de Henry le Grand, 5. 10. L'Etaile, ans
other hiſtorians, Le Grain relates the following repartee from
Henry IV. to Don Pedro, who ſaying to him, he ſaw no body 19
ill lodged at Fontainebleau as God, Henry made anſwer, © Ne
« Frenchmen lodge God in our hearts, not between four wh

1608. OF SU LLY. 323

all Paris, that the couriers who were to carry the
news of it to Spain, would ſpeedily arrive. The
King, and all thoſe who were informed of the

3 true ſtate of things, by the diſpatches ſent ſrom

Jeannin, and the reſt of his Majeſty's agents in

the Low Countries, could not give credit to theſe
reports; and with reaſon, ſince from that time,
till the end of September, and of October, and
ſo on all the remaining part of the year, nothing
vas effected. It is not certain, that the obſtacle

proceeded from the Spantards. It is the ſafeſt way,

therefore, to leave this point doubtful. As for
Ithe Archdukes, they laboured in earneſt for the
peace. His Moſt Chriſtian Majeſty, though con-
Wrrary to his own intereſts, gave alſo the moſt pa-

Ecific counſels: but things were brought to ſuch a

5
1

be

1

A

point, that this was the only part Henry thought
We ought to take.

With reſpect to the Prince of Orange, if he

Vas not the ſole enemy to the peace, he was, at

eaſt, the moſt declared one. Theſe are the rea-

Hons and pretences made uſe of by him and his
partiſans, to prevent its taking place: that what-
gever deſire Spain might appear to have, either for
a peace or a long truce, yet the would never agree
to it, with the condition of renouncing, formally
end expreſsly, all ſovereignty over the United

rovinces; and yet, without this clauſe, theſe pro-

vinces could have no dependence upon treatics,
ſnce otherwiſe the Spaniards would ſtill have a
ight to ſecure the harbours, forts, ſoldiers,
and ſailors; would draw to themſelves all the

-
.
*

5

like you Spaniards; and I ſhould have 2 doubt, if you were even
do lodge him in your hearts, as we do, he would there be in à
TY lodging of ſtone. But don't you fee, ſays he, afterwards, ſmi-
S | ling, that my chapel js not yet ſiniſhed? I do not intend to leave
E. t in the condition it now is; there are few gentlemen in my

kingdom, who have not a chepel in their houſes; 1 do not

-
.4
4
:

2, deſign mine Hall want one.“

trade,

.
Py R * K = ww 2 —
* 8 CAE! bu” e
2 ys o -

, vo dens. Em
AA

—— — — —

x 7a *
6
"=

bs *
rs
—

* — 5 *

*

4
— 4

— Wy 4
: 4. ET
— — Jy t 5+ | OY

I — —
W.

324 MEMOIRS Book XY.

trade, and open, a ſecond time, the way to ty.
ranny: that during the truce they would find

means to lull all the beſt and wiſeſt of the people

into a lethargy, and put the diſaffected and mer. t.
cenary among them into motion; that the Catho- t
lic party in thoſe provinces, having already a n

ſtrong inclination for the Spaniſh dominion, woull e.
riſe, declare themſelves openly, and bring all, ot u
the greateſt part of the country into their meaſures; Mi
ſo that when the truce was expired, Spain would
have an opportunity to finiſh the war at one blow;
that the peace, if the treaty might be called ſo,
had no ſecurity in a truce, which the King of
Spain would break whenever his deſigns were ripe
for execution. The Princeſs of Orange wrote to
me ſoon after in almoſt the ſame terms, except
only, that, although ſhe obſerved to me that the
troops, the towns, and even whole provinces were
of her ſon-in-law's opinion, and faithfully devo.
ted to the whole houſe of Naſſau, yet ſhe could
not diſſemble, that the contrary party was at leal
as ſtrong as theirs.

Prince Maurice, who thought in the ſame man-
ner, did not fail to uſe his endeavours to gain the
King. In October he ſent Lambert, the ſon, with
a letter to his Majeſty, in which he told him, be
might give abſolute credit to whatever he {hould
ſay to him in his name. Lambert highly extollel

his maſter's deſign: he endeavoured to perſuad o
the King, that things were brought to ſuch: ee.
point, that the Marquis Spinola, the Preſident Mil
chardot, and the Spaniſh commiſſioners, had bee War
thanked and diſmiſſed on the firſt of this mont!. Neis
All this ſo much the more ſurpriſed his Majeſty's io
counſellors, who were preſent at this report 0 Wed
Lambert, as Berny, in the diſpatches he had en

* Spain, in reality, renewed the war againſt the Flemings m0 *
vigorouſly than ever, in the year 1621, when the truce Expires: * ak
beter, 48 \

1608. OF SULLY. 225

W before, had acquainted the King, that the equi-
pages of theſe Spaniſh deputies, and themſelves
WT likewiſe, were expected at Bruſſels the 4th of Oc-
tober. They would have perſuaded his Majeſty,
mat now both his. friends and his enemies would
 WSthink themſelves happy, to receive from him what-
erer conditions he ſhould be pleaſed to impoſe
t opon them. This was what Villeroi wrote to me

|

ben he gave me a full account of this whole af-
fur; ſending me likewiſe to Gergeau, where I
den was, a copy of the Prince of Orangc's letter.
„ hut the King was not fo precipitate : Lambert's
iſcourſe appeared to him, from ſeveral circum-
e ſtances, very doubtful. He ſaw no letter from the
0 Wicouncil of the States. That from the Prince ſeem—
ed full of reſerve and artifice. Maurice himſelf
e had hitherto acted in a manner ſo little conform-
re Eble to his profeſſions, that chere was ſufficient
0 WeTeaſon for holding him ſuſpected. When Lambert
| added, that Zealand would rather come under
be dominion of the Englith, than conſent to an

Agreement with Spain; and that the Dutch 1n-
Ns reated his Majeſty would at leaft keep himſelf

he eutral, if he would not afiiſt his allies as former-
tl WP”; lince, if they only remained poſſeſſed of theſe

Towns, they would ſtill find employment ſor the Spa-
Piards fifty years longer. Henry, in theſe worde,
aw nothing but an extravagant boaſt full of falſe-
Wood, or at leaſt of very groſs artifice; which ap-
peared plainer when Lambert advanced a thcuſand
ther things, that, if true, Jeannin could not
Pave been ignorant of, and of which he had not
een the ſmalleſt hint to his Majeſty. According

7% Lambert, Barnevelt and Aerſens were diſgra-

Fed, and even in danger of being proſecuted; and

In ſeveral towns of the States it had been delibe-
led in their councils, whether they ſhould not
ge ea reſolution to ſubmit themſelves to the
You, IV. 33 French

326 MEMOIRS Book XXV.

French ſovereignty. Strange! how all this could
be carried on ſo ſecretly, that in Flanders people
Mould be wholly ignorant ſuch deſigns were form.
ing: but indeed the diſcourſe of Lambert did not
always agree with the letter he brought ſrom the
Prince of Orange.

I am of opinion, that if his Majeſty had ſeen
probability in any of theſe propoſals, ſuch, for
example, as that of receiving the Dutch under hiz
protection, he would not have needed any {pur ty
animate him to the undertaking ; for he fone.
times could not hinder himſelf from being a lit
tle offended with Jeannin, for not turning his
views that way : but at length Henry took a wiſe
reſolution, which was quietly to hear and ſee all
that paſſed, without appearing either willing to
retard, or ſolicitous to accompliſh the peace; and
{uffer them to agree in whatever manner they ple
ſed, without interpoſing in the affair. He orderec
Jeannin to conduct himſelf by this plan; and wil.
ing to have my advice, he ſent me an exa 2.
count of every thing by Villeroi, and ſent Lan.
bert to me likewiſe. This agent talked to mei
the ſame manner as he had done to his Majelty;
but I had, in the Princeſs of Orange's letter alone
a good preſervative againſt his arts. He could fn
nothing to anſwer me, although probably he 3
not well pleaſed with my ſincerity ; nor with Ut
.epithets of baſe and ungrateful which I ſo itt
ly beſtowed on the States. |

I anſwered Villeroi only by letters; and in thei
I did not diſcloſe all my thoughts, but retercs
him to my return for a fuller explanation. It
to the King alone that I chole to declare ny
ſentiments of all that paſſed in Flanders 088
Prince Maurice had not always exactly {0110 BR +
the plan of conduct he had ſaid down, and e
even ſometimes very viſibly departed from it;

OY * . . f a N <4 3 ater ad * 8
— : N 4 "7 * 7 a . _ e . * p h 8 *
* 3 — a
— — * ' V * 23 hw. 4 — Oo n „ N

s. OF s uv I. L V. 327

it was neither ſtrange nor ſurpriſing, that he ſhould

WT endeavour to ſupport, even to the laſt extremity,
: Na reſolution in which his honour could not but be
"= deeply intereſted : but as to Henry, it did not be-
come a great captain, and a powerful monarch,
to intrude himſelt into affairs where his mediation
- vas not ſought for; his dignity required, that he
mould examine well what was propoſed, and not
: act precipitately. Wich reſpect to the States, if
1 lit was with their concurrence that Maurice made
0 tmeſe offers, it was done too late and unſcaſona-
"bly: they had committed faults againſt his Maje-
2 ty, which they ſought to repair; or rather they
„ Jed ro that ingratitude they had ſhewn to the
> Ring, the ſhameful deſign of making him ſtill their
" ape : the offer of Zealand to England was a mere
x able, and all the reſt colluſion, deceit, and arti-
: ce; to which it was not fit his Majeſty ſhou!d

nſwer any otherwiſe, than by continuing to in-
Merpoſe in the affairs of theſe provinces, juſt as
wch as was convenient for his intereſt and his
Flory.
1 It was partly on this account that Henry ſo
earneſtly wiſhed for my return from Gergeau. In
Flanders every thing continued in a ſtate of doubt
and uncertainty, of which all the advices that
ame from thence partook. It happencd, that the
Original of the inſtructions given by the Arch-
Lukes to the deputies, when they were ſent to the

7
ret + . p

Hague, fell into the hands of the Prince of O-
dee unge. Fither the paper had been . by the
on reſident Richardot “*, or was ſtolen from him;

or he ſuffered it expreſsly to be ſeen to pleaſe the
Catholics, to whom thoſe inſtructions were very
Hrourable. Maurice exclaimed loudly againſſ it,

* . . 91 *

ohn Richardot, preſident of the privy council in the Low
elcles, was a good negotiator ; and concerned in the treaty

We Vervins, He died the next year, |

F f 2 and

{
y
;
a
*

323 MEMOIRS Book Xxy,

for renewing the war as ſoon as they could doit
with any probability of ſucceſs. If therefore

Certain.

and often made uſe of it to animate his partiſans;
the conferences often languiſhed, but were not
interrupted: war was become impoſſible, and coy.
ſequently an agreement was abſolutely neceſſary,
This only was paſt a doubt, that whatever fince.
rity both parties might ſeem to profeſs, yet they
{ought carefully to prevent a true interpretation
of their words, that they might not want a motive

France loſt a favourable opportunity for hum.
bling her rival, ſhe had reaſon to expect that a
much better would preſent itſelf, provided, that,
till then, the took care to manage her ſtrenth,
I am ſtill of opinion,” thus writ his Majeſty to
me, that in this affair God will ftrike a bloy
« which men little expect, and which will bl!
„alt their deſigns. Thus have I ſeen it happen
« during thirty years, and always to my adyat-
« tage: may it {till be ſo; and I intreat with my
« whole heart, that my faults and ingratitude
% may not hinder it.“

By able politicians another obſervation was made,
ſtill more important than the preceding; wich
was, that the power of Spain was now beginning
to decline. If they judged thus, it was not {ure-
ly on account of the reſpect ſhewn by the King of
Spain and the Archdukes for his Majeſty's agent,
particularly Jeannin; the reſtriftions ſhe Key!
with regard to the Dutch made it evident, that
ſhe (till poſſeſſed the fame arrogance and ambition
and that ſhe either would not confe!s, or 8
herſelf ignorant of her weakneſs : but when !
ſtate is ſeen to want ſtrength and good condut},
when fortune and opportunities are let fp, “
decline is then no longer on the foot of a me!

yy Y

conjecture, but may be pronounced abfolute)

4 1608.
ot this, however, we had other prools from
chat paſſed upon the frontiers of Navatce and
earn. The Spaniards having renewed the! ; for-
mer quarrels concerning the boundaries of theſe
two kingdoms, Henry, who was determined to
eire up nothing, writ to me to confer. with the
Cuancellor about this affair, and to ſend one of the
privy counſellors to talk of it to the Spaniſh am-
baſſador, rather to clear himſelf of the conſequen-
ces this quarrel might produce, than with any ex-
ppecdation that it would be compoſed by that me-
tod. His Majeſty, with the ſame view, writ to La-
Force, to whom alone all the authority over that
Frontier was intruſted, to ſupport his rights by
the moſt ſpeedy and efficacious means he could
think of; and as it could not be expected that the
| W-Snhabitants of that country could furnith him with

—

ereat ſupplies, I received orders to reimburſe to
„bim all the expenſes he had already been at, and
o provide him with a ſufficient fund for the fu-

However, theſe precautions were all uſeleſs.
Vpon the firſt complaints made by La- Force to the
VLiceroy of Arragon, he was promiſed a ratifica-

tion of all that he ſhould demand, and, contrary
to the cuſtom of the council of Madrid, without
any delay. The kingdoms of Navarre and Arra-
„ on were full of diſaffe cted perſons, who, upon
ny appearance of a rupture, were ready to join
the enemy; and the council of Spain was not ig—

; WDorant, that many of them had already offered
beir ſervice to France. La Force, to whom they
i applied, gave his Majeſty notice of it; and add-
ged, that although he was convinced no great de-
pendence could be placed on the reſtleſs and un-
ertain temper of theſe people, yet an opportuni-
ty now offered which could not fail of giving ſuc-
Neeſs to their deſigns, provided only that it was
| 3 immediately

OF 4300 L LI. 329

1 822 =
= =
— *
„ + — ws ,
* i a we,
OS — rn — 2
— —

32 2 a £ E —
a MX. * p en nos 27
„ * — — 4

| 3
2 2

. 15 42 "

a" ” w *

*

3

Sd

* —
« a” As r AR A
y — 24 0 3 Py -
SPY — 3 0 * v
FY » * i 4

8 —

— 2 2 — 1 3 —
. * 2 :
"> WF
—

» 4 Wy n —
"ae

>, - A ST

330 M E MO IR S Bock XXV.

immediately made uſe of: that the Spaniards, with
all their art and ſkill, could not conceal their
weak and exhauſted condition, which no one was
any longer ignorant of; and that the affairs of the
government were in the utmoſt confuſion. La.
Force had. never before writ either to his Majeity
or me in terms like theſe; and he was more like.
ly than any other perſon to know the true ſtate
of things, as well with regard to this as to ano.
ther faction, which gave great apprehenſions to
the council of Madrid, though it was formed only
by the wretched remains of a people almoſt who.
iy extirpated ; I mean, the Moors.

To make this underſtood, it is neceſſary I ſhould
give a place here to a tranſaction which I could
not introduce elſewhere without interrupting the
narration. Henry, when only King of Navarre,
was ſtrongly perſuaded in his own mind, that he
thould one day aſſiſt himſelf againſt Spain with
theſe domeſtic enemies, leſs confiderable indeed
for their number, than the deep reſentment they
were believed to preſerve againſt their oppreſſors,
The Moors, on their ſide, learning by public re.
port that the Proteſtant party, which they kneu
to be very powerful in France, and always oppo-
ſite to Spain, had a King of Navarre at their
head, that is, a prince, from two powerful mo-
Lives, the enemy of that crown, began again to po.
licit the intereſt of all thoſe perſons who could
be uſeful to them in procuring his protection; and,
among others, they rde to Meſſieurs de &
Geniés, and D'Odou, promiſing them to excite
an almoſt general inſurrection in Spain, provided
they were ſure of being ſupported. All they de-
manded was a general, and ſome good officers, to
whom they promiſed an abſolute obedience. The)
offered to furniſh all the money that was neceſſary

for this enterpriſe, aſſuring them that they won
are

1608. OF SUL L . 331

have reaſon to be ſatisfied, both with the number
of their ſoldiers, and their courage and reſolu-
tion. An aſylum in France, with the free enjoy-
ment of their effects, and the liberty of their per-
ſons, were all the conditions annexed by them
to this treaty. As to religion, they ſeemed di-
poled to a very eaſy compoſition, ſince they of-
fered to embrace that which was profeſſed in the
kingdom; not the Roman- Catholic religion, for
the tyranny of the inquiſition had rendered this
ſecond ſervitude more inſupportable than the firſt,
but the Proteſtant. They found that it would be
no difficult matter to accommodate themſelves to

2 form of worſhip unincumbered with images and
ceremonies, and of which one ſole God, equally
adored and invoked by all, was almoſt the only
object.

St Geniés and D*Odou did not fail to make a
faithful report of all this to the King of Navarre,
when he took that journey into Bearn and
Foix, which we have already mentioned. Henry
ordered them to get exact information from the
Moors, what forces they could muſter, what arms
they had occaſion for, what money they could
= promiſe to contribute, and by what methods they
E propoſed to begin an enterpriſe of ſuch conſe-
quence, Theſe two gentlemen employed, at firſt,
only one perſon in this negotiation, who was an
olicer, called Captain Danguin; but in proportion
das their correſpondencics increaſed, they employ-
ed twelve others; and the ſecret, tho? intruſted to
ſo many perſons, was ſo carefully kept, that the
| Spaniards had not the leaſt ſuſpicion of this con-

piracy, till they received notice of it from Ni-
| cholas L'Hote, Villeroi's ſecretary, whoſe hiſtory
| has been already related. They afterwards made

a full diſcovery, and the affair appeared to be of
v much the more importance, as it was proved
that

* 1 vo” wed FITY —
a _ r J * *
AA +7 r 3 "=

1

.

332 M E M O I RS Book X
that this party, at firſt very inconſiderable, ne
then joined by more than five hundred thouſand RX
perſons. Two things had concurred to make it

ſo formidable; firſt, the ſuccours they had tie Þ Pp⸗
addreſs and leiſure to procure from the Turks, *

the great enemies of Spain; and, ſecondly, the on
intereſt that many natural Spaniards took in the tio
affair. 4
The council of Madrid, upon the firſt notice of he
this rebellion, having deliberated whether it Win
would not be proper to clear the country of thee er

Moors, by obliging them all to repaſs the ſes,
communicated this reſolution to the nobilig WT
and gentry of the kingdom of Valentia, where t rev.
was received ſo ill, that a ſedition was railed in
ſeveral provinces, the nobility of which keeping
many of the{e Moors in ſlavery, could not conſent
to their baniſhment, without loſing, at the ſame Wi
time, one fourth part of their revenues. They me
thereiore took up arms againſt thoſe who cane not
to ſignify to them the new order of the council the
of Spain. The Viceroi thought to have appealed read
this firſt tumult, by ſending the principal officer cout
for the adminiſtration of juſtice to the mutineers, allt
whom the chancery called the regent. Tis bad
regent was a proud old man, who, ſeeing hin- had
ſelf inſtantly ſurrounded with arms and a furious root,
mob, fell dead in the midſt of them. effor
In ſuch a conjuncture the Spaniſhi council could alt
no longer diflemble their weakneſs. It was in- was
deed but too palpable, by their tainely ſuffering befo
for along time, a revolt in the midſt of the king: ere
dom, without uſing any efforts to quell it. The lt u
Moors, who had not expected to be ſo cautiouly p
dealt with, became more bold. They renevcs WF _
their ſolicitations to Henry, who could not no, ue 5
as when he was King of Navarre only, evade WG thus
their requeſt by alledging that he was too — *
a

1 1608. OF SUL LI. 333

nd had too many difficulties to encounter, to make
ny great efforts in their favour. The Moors,
etermincd, at all events, to ſhake off the
Spaniſh yoke, intreated him only to receive
hem into the number of his ſubjects, on whatever
conditions he pleaſed : but the ſame conſidera-
tions which hindred Henry from openly eſpouſing
the party of the United Provinces, on an occaſion
herein he was more nearly intereſted, forbade
Him likewiſe from declaring himſelf the deliver-
er of a people that were more immediately the
ſubjects of Spain, at a great diſtance, and who de-
manded a navalarmament, (for the centre of the
revolt was in Valentia, Murcia, and Granada“);
without taking in many other reaſons drawn from
the character of this people, and without laying
any ſtreſs upon the uſual viciſſitudes of war, which
adiſtance always conceals, or partly diſguiſes.
All this conſidered, his Majeſty certainly could
not be blamed for not anſwering more favourably
the deſires of the Mooriſh nation. I leave the
reader to judge, if, during this whole time, the
council of Madrid, which was well informed of
all that was projecting, could be very eaſy. They
had ſuffered for five years, a malady which they
had but too great a certainty of, to take deep
root. At length they thought proper to make an
effort, and reſumed their deſign of ſhipping off
all che Moors that were in Spain; a deſign which
was now believed more difficult to execute than
before, as 2 report was ſpread, that the Turks
= vere cruiſing near Majorca to prevent the blow.
lt was therefore neceſſary to fit out a fleet to
oppoſe theirs. October came without any ching

= * Theſcthree provinces, Valentia, Murcia, and Granada, lie along
Z the coaſt of the Mediterranean ſea, from Barcelona to Malaga;
Y : that to give effectual aſſiſtance, the fleet muſt be ſent into thoſe
; cas.

appearing

244 MEMOIRS Book XW. iſ.

appearing either on one ſide or the other; and
the whole year paſſed, during which no motion
was made by the Spaniards, who knew that the
barbarians waited for them with a body of ten
thouſand foot, and five thouſand horſe, fully de.
termined to defend themſelves bravely. 'T:
battle however proved favourable to the Spantards,
and time furnithed them with the means of total.
ly ridding themſelves of an enemy * who had ng
longer any reſources. This however could not
be done without the loſs of five hundred thouſand
ſubjects to Spain +; for that was the number of
pertons ſhe baniſhed out of her ſtates, after depri.
ving them of all their effects.

The Emperor treated the town of Donasen,
in Germany, as ſeverely, and without any ſhadoy
of right. He ſeized it, although it was an Ine.
rial city, deprived the inhabitants of the liberty
of con{cience, and the greateſt part of their privi
leges. This violence created abundance of heart:
burnings, and many diſorders.

* The Moors, with one Barbaroſſa attheir head, gave battle to
the Spaniards, in which they were defeated, and were oblige! to
leave Spain the year after, Sce Le Merc. Fran. and ot lier hilto-
Hans.

+ Others make them amount to ſeven or eight hundred then.
ſand; a wound to Spain which has never yet been heated; but
from whente no benefit accrucd to us, though it was caſy tor
to have had advantage from it : for though we had not given aſlift
ance to thoſe unfortunate people, as Cardinal Richelicu atters-5
did to the Portugueſe, on a dar occalion, we might, at leall,
have given them an aſylum in France, had it been only in tis
moors of Bourdeaux, where they in vain, as it is {aid, debut
leave to ſettle. This falſe ſtep of the government is judicioulf
pointed out by the author of LE/ſai pe far le commerc.
© To cultivate barren ground,” ſays he on this ſubject, 5
« conquering a new country without prejudice to auy one,”
may be ſaid, that the ſame reaſons which made it expedientte
drive the Moors out of Spain, were equally ſtrong againlt theilt
reception in France. But it would have been eaſy to take tot
advantage of the miſerable condition they were in, to have .
poſed on them whatever terms might have been thought expe

dicat, 5 00 K

I!

LES

0 T SUEL TT. 335

Ne a N —_—
1 8 * of
—_—

ä

B O O K XVXVI.

Ccording to annual cuſtom, I went, on the
| firſt day of this year, to make a preſent of
ſome gold medals to his Majeſty. The ſubjects
were the glory he had acquired in reconciling
the Pope and the Venetians, the Spanjards and
the Dutch, and other ſtates of Europe. After a few
moments of converſation upon indifferent matters,
Henry took me aſide to a window to tell me,
that he deſired I would compoſe for him four
© ſtates of accounts, in the manner of ſeveral others

had already given him: the firſt, of rhe equi-
valents gathered in the twelve generalitics of
the kingdom; the ſecond, of all the claims and
duties which make part of the royal revenues;
the third, of the principal levies of the taille,
called the ordinary levies, from the year 1599 to

* 1609, including both theſe years; the fourth, of
the levies of the taille called the great increaſe,
or extraordinary increaſe, during the eleven Jaſt

| years, I want, ſaid Henry, to ſhew them to ſome
perſons who think they have great {kill in the fi-
nances, althouph tliey know nothing at all of
the matter; and to others who admire their me-

thod, defective as it is.

+ There was no neccſiity for this prince to make
any excuſe to me for this demand; the pleaſure
it gave me to ſee him enter with me into all the

= particularities of the government, left me no in-
clination to examine into the motive of this
W <tcntion. I perceived that he had, for ſome
ume, ſtudied my manner of conducting affairs,
well general as particular; and that by aſking
me ſometimes for a ſtate, ſometimes for a memo-
na, one day for ſome inſtructions, the next for
- an

=.

*
m___ 2 * , N fl 4 a= — - >» : » r 9
2 — Y — — g N
128 - by * py > L 2 > 2 oP
——— 2 — — 0 of . _ - —I TY - — < *
2 8 . - 7
* x. - a * — y —
by - = * - & — 7

. FI
—
_— — <
4 8838

336 MEMOTR S Book XXVI.

an explanation of them, all theſe pieces would |
ſoon compoſe a complete ſyſtem of the finances, |
and other parts of the ſtate. But I had no un- |
eaſineſs upon this account; for whether Henry :
did this for his own inſtruction, or that he had a
deſign to form other ſtateſmen upon my maxims, Þ
through a fear that I ſhould not always continue Þ' «c
faithful to him, or whether he had an intention
to employ me in other affairs, either within or Þ 1
without the kingdom, which would not give me .
leiſure for theſe, the manner in which he behaved FF: ;
to me * gave me no reaſon to imagine that there :;
was any thing in this procedure, but what wa i
wiſe, good, and even advantageous for me. h
When he came to the arſenal, at the end of tlie m
month, I gave him thoſe four ſtates, which I ſhall c
not tranſcribe here; but only content myſelf with
obſerving, that the total of the firſt made it ap- n.
pear that the equivalents amounted to one hundred 25
and fifty-one thouſand ſeventy three livres, a ſun 42.
greatly inferior to what many perſons imagined, gd.
who had ſuggeſted to the King, that he ought 0 CN
get a ſol in the livre by all. In the ſecond, no t
withſtanding the great application I had given 0 7

If we give credit to the author of L'Hi. de la mere & α
Hils, we ſhall find Henry IV. had other motives for this beh+ W'< I
viourtothe Duke of Sully. © He was,” ſays this author, © fa Wow)
from being pleaſed with the conduct oft M de Sully, al 7
„bad a wind to take the management of the finances out ot
„ his hands, in order to put them under the direction of ram
naud. He had often told the Queen he could no longer bear mar
© with his ill-humours. His diſcontent with the Duke was fits
c ed, and he was reſolved to ſtrip him of his office ; but the
time for it was not yet proper,” &c. But the reſt of ttüiß un,
book will furniſh us with fo ſtrong proofs of the great confidence le
Henry IV. had in M. de Sully, that we may conclude this auth! |
was taken in the trap, which, another writer of thoſe times IF.
forms us, this prince and his miniſter frequently laid for tb. one
that were too credulous, when, in order to do their buſineſs re |
better, they thought proper to aſſume all the external appcarance :
of a real miſunderſtanding, which made the courticrs fay of then
Like maſter lite man. :

1609. QF: 8 VE & To 337

it, ſome articles had eſcaped me, which the Kin
could not underſtand; but I promiſed him to make
it complete within the year. The total of the
third was one hundred and ſeven millions four
© hundred forty-five thonſand three hundred and
= fifty-three livres ſixteen fols eleven deniers : that
of the ſourth, fifty-two millions one hundred forty-
four thouſand feven hundred and ſeventy-nine
r © livres twelve ſols fix deniers“. Henry only
e Jocked at the titles of theſe papers then, and pave
chem to La-Varenne, with orders to return them
e io him when he returned to the Louvre, and was
ain his library with Berenghen. I likewiſe gave
him a liſt of all the particular accounts, which.
made part of the general account of the finances,
er was inſerted in that account.

As Henry went to Chatillon two days after.
wards, I did not ſuppoſe he had examined, with
2ny great degree of attention, this long lift ol
accounts, Which gave riſe to a little debate. One
E diy, when his Majeſty was diſcourſing with the
Chancellor, Villeroi, and me; and that the conver-
lor {ation had turned upon this ſubject, I happened
oh o ſay, that, beſides thoſe accounts which I Icit
to the care of my ſecretaries, there were above
ch. a hundred which I was obliged to write with my
« tx Wown hand, at the beginning of each year. Ihe
king ſeemed aſtoniſhed, and Villeroi likewiſe. © I
fu m perſuaded,” ſaid Sillery, in his foft gracious
ben manner, that there muſt be a great number;
Put I cannot conceive how there ſtould be a
 itÞLundred, I think 1 have a little knowledge of

dong le matter.“ Your have done well, Monſieur, re-
. lied I, to fay ſomething; but you would have
wen one ſtill better to have ſaid nothing, ſince you
. 4 hre talking of matters that you can be informed
f them * Theſe three ſums make 159,41, 20 livres, which is

a 5.655.883 I. Sterling.
ty N Vor. IV. G 8 of

338 MEMOIR S Book Xxvin

of by no body but myſelf. There needed no more
to prove which of us was in the right, than juz
to look into the liſt I had given the King, where.
in thoſe, and only thoſe, were comprehended.
Having a copy of it in a bag of papers, which
one of my ſecretaries had brought with him,
ordered him to draw near: Sillery himſelf read
the paper, by which his Majeſty was convinced!
had ſaid no more than the truth.
While the King was at Chantilly, he wrote me
the following billet, dated Wedneſday, March
25. My friend, I mount my horſe, after din.
«ner, to go to Luſarche, where I intend to le de
« this night. To- morrow I ſhall come very ear n

« to Paris; and, as I intend to dine with you the
« provide for twelve perſons, and let us hae 2
ce ſome fiſh. Adieu, my dear friend.” He camel lim
accordingly, and I gave him a dinner to his taſte, Me!
After the table was drawn, I ordered cards an le.
dice to be brought, and laid a purſe of four thou. ten.
{and piſtoles upon the table for his Majeſty, an! C00]
another, with a like ſum, to lend to thoſe Lord ”
that accompanied kim, and who, not expecting 4a
bett.

to play, might not have money about them. Henr R
was pleaſed with this ceremony. © Come hither, W-*
4 Grand Maſter,” ſaid he to me, “ and embrace
ce me; for I love you, and ] have reaſon to do fo, [
eam ſo agreeably ſituated here,” added he, that

« am reſolved to ſup and he here. I have ſome Bc
* reaſons for not going to the Louvre to-day,
ce which you ſhall know after we have done play;
& and, in the mean time, order three coaches t
ce be got ready to carry me an airing, after hic
« you and I will bave ſome diſcourſe together:
ec hut do not admit any company while I am here,
ce except thoſe I ſhall ſend for. I expect to find
« no one here at my return.” The King having

paſſed the whole day entirely to his ne
| 6

71,11609- e. 339

he deſired that I would give him a dinner the

re . o .
next day likewiſe. He continued great part of

uit : ;
9 the morning ſhut up with me in my cloſet, diſ-
40 ourſing upon many things which I am not at li-

erty to mention. His Majeſty read the accounts
bad given him with great pleaſure, and ſaid to
je aloud, as he went out of the cloſet, “ You

2 have given me papers with which I am highly
e pleaſed ; but there are ſtill many particulars
neh which you muſt explain to me in writing: ſor
I ſhall not remember all you have ſaid,”
All the company gathering about the King, he
ge declared publicly his deſign of paſſing, in the
5 ſame manner, two or three days cach month at
15 the arſenal. He commanded me to have a hall,
e a chamber, a wardrobe, and a cloſet, fitted up ſor

him, without incroaching upon any of the apart:
ze ments of my family; telling me, that whenever
he came, for the future, he would neither be at-

nd . . 2
„ended by his own officers, nor bring any of his
cooks along with him; but that 1 ſhould treat him

Jas now: adding, in a moſt obliging manner, that
every way, he was of opinion, he couid not be
better than in my hands ; but that as it was not
juſt this confidence {ſhould bring an increaſe of
jexpenſe upon me, he would give me a gratuity
bot {ix thouſand crowns a-year for that purpole
only: and this he repeated again at dinner.

heſore we ſat down to table; the converſation,
between the fifteen or twenty perſons who were
pn the King's retinue, happening to turn upon
Roſe great men whole actions are celebrated in
Wiſtory, Henry aſked me which of them all I moſt
ied he ſhould reſemble. It was not eaſy to
pnſwer this queſtion by a ſingle word, and the ra-
her as Henry added, that I muſt not only have
regard to their conduct and perſonal merit, but
lxewiſe to every thing that a man might reaſon-
Gg 2 ably

349 MEMOIR S Book xX

ably wiſh for; ſuch as the qualities of the body, NO
health, and that concuyzrence of circumſtance; $2
by which a man is pronounced happy. To decide} “
this queſtion, it was neceilary to examine and F*
compare thoſe heroes one with another; and, twþ F*
ſay the truth, I. was not ſorry that ſuch an op. “
portunity offered to cover with ſhame ſeveral per“
tons in the company, for their abſolute ignoranceÞJ*
of things, which every man of birth and figure *
mould have, at leaſt, ſome flight knowledge of“
The King comprehended my deſign, by the tum“
of my compliment to him, in my firſt reply o“
his queſtion. * I find,” ſaid he, © that you are no:
« going to appear a man of few words; but | .

& am reſolved to hear all you have to ſay, which
« will be full as pleaſing, and more advantage.
& ous to me, than if I had gone, as I intended, d
& to {ce them play at mall till your dinner wa 1
« ready.” bt:
Accordingly I began to give an exact repreſen. ü
tation of all thoſe whom antiquity ſtyles illuſtrious lo
men, among whom 1 did not forget ſuch of our he
monarchs as had been dignified with that title; 3 pl
Clovis, Charlemagne, Hugo Capet, Philip Au. ſe
uſtus, St Lewis, Charles V. Charles VII. and OF
en XII. The quality of enemies of France f1
did not ſeem to me a ſufficient reaſon for exclu- MW
ding the great names of Edward III. and Charles V. I H
I named none without making their characters m
known to the company, at leaſt, in general, by WF ©
ſtrokes, which, though flight, for the take of bre.
vity, yet diſplayed their good and bad qualitics, MW Y
and the happy or unfortunate events of thei WF m
reigns. It is now your part, Sire, ſaid I, (after! ©
had finiſhed this enumeration, which had obliged “
me to continue {peaking a long time), to declare
which of theſe great kings you would chuſe to re-
{cmble, and to examine whether you would 14
ole

e 99 e

Doſe by the compariſon; you who, in many things,
ave certainly ſurpaſſed them all. © Before I
decide this point,” replied his Majeſty, “ it is
F* neceſſary I ſhould confider more attentively
“„ what you have ſaid, as well good as ill, con-
e cerning each of theſe princes: but your dinner,
% which is ferved, (for indeed we were informed
ec that it was time to place ourſelves at table), will
ce not afford us leiſure for it now; therefore we
ee muſt defer ir till another time. However, I de-

"Mic fire you will reduce your diſcourſe to writing;

e after which I will tell you what J think of it, as

© well as of your laſt words, which you only add-

ed,“ faid this prince with a gracious air, “ to
% make your repaſt more agreeable.”

While we were at table, {ome of the company,
to ſhew their reading, renewed the {ſubject we had
juſt been treating; and mentioned ſeveral circum-
ſtances in hiſtory with great oftentation : but, at
the ſame time, confounded perſons and things in
ſo ridiculous a manner, that the King could not
help laughing at them, while he made me a com-
pliment upon the ſtrength of my memory. I ſut-
fered the King to remain in this advantageous
opinion of me till we roſe from table, when I told
mum, in private, the fortunate accident to which it
was owing ; for I happened, three days before, to
meet with an extract of the lives of illuſtrious
men, which I had made during the time that |
employed myſelf in the ſtudy of hiſtory; and, that
very day, had made it the ſubject of converſation
with ſome of my friends, which had recalled all
my former ideas, and furniſhed me with thoſe
| circumſtances I had related. This learned ſcene
| was {ſucceeded by cards, dice, and piſtoles. |
vent, in the mean time, into rhe hall, where!
ſpared his Majeſty the fatigue of giving audience,
he being employed more to liis taite; for he

y

g 3 gained,

342 MEMOTR S Book XVI.

g. ned, that afternoon, two thouſand five hun-
dred piſtoles, and came out in very good humour
to take an airing in the coaches I had ordered to
be qo for him, as he had done the evening
before; after which he returned to the Louvre,

Five or {ix days after I had the honour to treat
and lodge the King at the arſenal, he was inform-
ed that ſome reports were ſpread in ſeveral pro-
vinces relating to things, which, he imagined,
were only known to himſelf and me : for, indeed,
he had imparted them to me with the utmoſt ſe-
crecy. For ſome days he ſuſpected that I had
been indiſcreet in divulging theſe ſecrets, while
I, though he*often aſked me who were thoſe in-
timate friends I had in Bourbonnois and Berry,
had not the leaſt doubt of his ſuſpicion. At
length, he called me to him one day,“ Come
« hither, Grand Maſter,” ſaid he to me, * and
% anſwer truly to the queſtions I am going to
&« aſk you.” I promiſed faithfully to do ſo; but
with this condition, that if his queſtions related
to any thing, wherein, by anſwering, I might dif-
pleaſe him, that he ſhould command me abſolute-
ly to ſpeak my ſentiments freely, and promite
not to be offended if I obeyed him. He replied,
that his queſtions were not of that nature; and
then opening his whole heart to me, I juſtified my-
ſelf by oaths, which perfectly convincing him of
my innocence, his vexation was fucceeded by a
ſurpriſe which I felt in no leſs a degree that
himſelf.

However, it was not long before I unravelled
this myſtery. A letter, written by Father Cotton
to Father Ignatius, a Jeſuit at Moulins, was
brought to me in a packet that came from Bour-
ges, and laid open the whole affair. Wich this
jetter, which filled me with a real joy, I went to
walt upon the King, who was arrived at the

Louvre

— SED . Ys ¼ OE OY PE. oO ,

1669.70 F

|

Louvre with the Queen, whom he had gone as
far as Anet to meet. After ſome converſation
upon Anet and Chantilly, I ſaid to him, “ Sire,
the other day, you ordered me to {wear that I
would tell you the truth : do not be offended if I
intreat you, in my turn, to tell me whether you
have never mentioned, to any other than me,
thoſe things you accuſe me of having revealed:
if you have not, certainly there are ſome perſons
about you who have a familiar ſpirit, and can dive
into the molt ſecret thoughts.“ The King ſmiled,
and lightly tapped my cheek; then embracing
me, „I am too deſirous that you ſhould be al-
« ways ſincere with me,” ſaid he, © ro give you
« an example of inſincerity. I confels then,
© that I have mentioned thole affairs both to Fa-
„ther Cotton and Beringhen; but I can anſwer
for the laſt, that he has never revealed them.”
« Neither is it he, but the Jeſuit,” ſaid I; © and
4“ this letter,” giving it into his hands, will
% prove it.” His Majeſty read it; and here fol-
lows an exact copy.

% Rev. Father, Pax Chriſti. I never wrote ſo
ſeldom before, or deſired to write ſo often.
Your Reverence may, if you pleaſe, lay the
fault upon my buſineſs, particularly at this
«ume. M. de Citeaux will be ſatisfied with an
abbey near his own, which 1s, at preſent, in
the hands of a canon of the holy chapel, ſeven-
ty years old; and, in return for the ſaid abbey,
will procure to be granted by a general chap-
ter, which will be held after Whitſuntide, what-
ever we deſire of Bellebranche. There is a
diſturbance at Orleans about the buſineſs of
the college, by ſome ſecret practices; but God
* will direct ali. The King has written to the
mayor and aldermen, to M. d'Orleans, M. tho
« lcutenant-

344 M E MOI R S Book XXVI.

« ljeutenant- general, M. the prevot, to his at.
ec torney, and to M. de La-Chatre. I join my
c letters to M. D'Eſcures, who ſets out to-mor-
4% row, and promiſes to bring every thing to a
& concluſion. The King has allo given thirty
&* thouſand livres to La-Fleche, upon the advice
« which I communicated to your Reverence.
& His Majeſty goes to Chantilly on Tueſday, and
« the Queen, fo our days afterwards, to Chartres,
« who will go and meet him at Anet, and then
& come here and to Fontainebleau. That paſ-
* ſion you know of ſtill continues; notwithſtand-
“ ing which, the marriages of M. the Prince and
« NI. de Vendome will be celebrated after Es-
& ſter. All is again upon a good footing with
« the man of the arſenal, whatever endeavours
& have been uſed to prevent it. The cldeſt fon
« of M. de Crequy is to have the young de Ver-
& neuil; and the treaty of marriage between the
_ Marquis de Roſay and the eldeſt daughter of
te that nobleman {ſtill goes forward: for the fa-
6e ther will not hear of enn it off. M. des
4 Yveteaux is employed in the affair. The Sicur
& Collin has demanded permiſſion to ſtay in the
* college du Mont till the middle of Auguſt;
« but M. Savary will not agree to his ſtaying
“longer than till Eaſter. The edit againſt
« duels is loudly called for. The preachers have
ce done their duty concerning it; but Father
« Gontery diſguſts the King from time to time,
% though I am endeavouring to ward off the
* blow. He ſays, that his ſermons are ſeditioue,
« and that they will one day give riſe to a ſchiſn
& jn our religion, or in the church. NI. Bremont
« js reſolved to enter into our ſociety. You will
« {ee his laudable inclination by the incloſed let-
ce ter, with one from the Reverend Father de La-
Tour, which I found upon my table without
6c knowing

{
{
(
0
(
0
0
(

ad Th.

Q cry we TU 71: we

* ©"

«
60
00
«cc
(c
64
(0
00
60
(6
60
6
40
(4
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
«
cc
«c
10
40
«c
«
«c
00
cc
(c
(c
«
00
cc
00
>
(c

0.7
knowing how it came there.

SU LLC: Th

well ſatisfied, and has loſt nothing by his
change. It is given out, that Father Changer
has changed; a thing that Jas been long dread-
ed. I am reconciled to M. the Count of Soiſ—
ſons, and upon better terms with him than
ever; but I have had neither victuals nor mo-
ney {ince January. The Queen took me with
her to Chartres, and places greater confidence
in me than uſual. M. de La-Varenne fays,
that he is very willing to ſerve your brother ;
but not in the way yon propoſe : for it is im-
poſſible to introduce the uſe of keeping horſes
to let, without hurting the relays and poſts ;
but he offers to do any thing elſe for him that
is in his power. The Reverend Father Rai-
mond has been here, and has brought the ſum
of four hundred livres for alms, without the
materials of Talan for ſome part of them, which
M. Le-Grande promiſed him. Our brother
Paran is now diſcharged from the exerciſe of
this office; for I had an anſwer from Rome,
by which I have been informed, that the union
has been approved by our holy father the Pope,
and the alms given by his Holineſs ſolely upon
my account, quaſi fuit ejus benevolentiae. I
have delayed reviſing and printing my book
till the ſummer, or till after autumn. The
truce, for nine years, in Flanders 1s almoſt de-
termined. Ten of our fathers have been taken
coming from the Balearian iſlands to Spain, by
Simon Danſa, a Dutch corſair, who has a wife
at Marſcilles. The King is endeavouring to
procure their freedom. Notwithſtanding ſome
little ſallies of ill humour, he favours and loves

the ſociety. Quod ſupereſt, I am in great need:

« of

345
M. de Bourges
told me this day, that Father Sallian is very

: «
* „„

* —— my
— -
- o r

— ——

8
3 3

—
=
22 2

— —_
on TI - — ” 2 —
+: + >
r - nn — — .
ro ˙— ⅛f1212131. . .
22 — — 2 —— —— — b
— —

346 MEMOIRS Book XXVI,

« of ſpiritual ſuccours ; oraque pro paupere, who
« js your Reverence's moſt affectionate

« And moſt humble ſervant,
Paris, Marth 18.
1609. « PETER COTTON."

P. S. The Marchioneſs de Meſnelay is re.
c“ ſolved to take the veil, notwithſtanding all the
« intreaties of her friends to the contrary. M.
& Avias, rector of the chief church, lies at the
« point of death: his diſtemper 1s a ſpotted fe.
« yer: he is a good prieſt, a faithful friend, and
« 1s going to his God.“

Henry read this letter twice from beginning to
end; and although he concealed from me great
part of his thoughts; yet I read in his countenance
the uneaſineſs it gave him. I muſt confeſs,” {aid
he to me, that there is more prudence and fide-
« lity in your actions, and more truth and fince-
« rity in your words, obſtinate Huguenot as you
© zre, than in many Catholics, and even Eccle-
„ ſiaſtics, who make profeſſion of great piety and
© regularity of conduct.“ Upon the approach of
M. the Count of Soiſſons, he left me to go to this
prince, to whom I believe he related all, and
even ſhewed him the letter, in which he had 2
place as well as others. I was extremely glad that
I had kept a copy of this letter; for his Majeſty
would never return me the original.

Father Cotton was very unealy at the accident
which had happened to his letter; but he com-
forted himſelf a little, when he was told, that !
had neither ſhewn it, nor mentioned the contents
to any one but the King. He thought he owed
me ſome acknowledgment for this moderation ;
and likewiſe, that ſome trifling juſtification was

neceſſary.

1609. e 347

© neceſſary, A letter I received from him, at his
return from a journey he had taken into one of
the provinces, was calculated to ſerve both theſe
purpoſes. His letter was dated from Fontaine-
= bleau, where the court then was, and ſent to me
at Paris. He took occaſion to praiſe the goodneſs
of my heart, and the ſweetneſs of my temper ;
ſince all the endeavours that had been uſed to
give me a bad impreſſion of him, had nor, he ſaid,
been able to make any alteration in my kindneſs
to him. He acknowledged, that a man, leſs ge-
nerous than myſelf, would have made this letter
'W x pretence for preſerving {ome reſentment againſt
him. He did not ſay why; for doubtleſs, in his
opinion, the terms in which he had expreſſed him-
ſelf concerning me were not a ſufficient cauſe for
the anger of a generous man : nor, indeed, would

[ allow myſelf to be offended by them. Father
Colton muſt certainly underſtand his own mean-
ing better than any other perſon; and if he was

* W& conſcious of having intended any injury to he
man of the arſenal, he would not have had the
confidence to intreat him, as he did, in this let-
ter, to remember the building of the Jeſuits
church, and the apartments deſtined for their
claſſes at Poitiers, 5 verifying the accounts in
which ſuch expenſes as theſe were comprehended.
Here he again introduced an eulogium upon my
charity, followed by an ardent prayer that God

x
18
K+
A

5 ”—

m—— oP —

| ſentiments of the good religion “.
| Not

From what follows, as extracted out of the Hiſtory of France,
it will appear M. de Sully did not ſo readily forgive Father Cotton.
| © Towards the end of this year, the Telaits, having obtained a
gift from the King of a hundred thouſand francs, to finiſh the
building of their chapel at La-Fleche, came to M. de Sully for
payment of it, Father Cotton told him, with his uſual ſmooth-
- vels, that his Majeſty had made the ſocicty a ſmall preſent of

all |

| would finith his work by inſpiring me with right

. — — — —
* r
— — —⁊ͥC11 —ꝛĩ˖Xꝗ . 8 |

—

— =
pas =
—— FE — 2

5 w -_ — .
—
”> 23 ">
—

—— —

<= -

" Y
p —

— =
Rr ”
— — .
*

” 2 2

3

248 MEMOIRS Book XXVI.

Not long after this affair, I plainly perceived,
that ſome new, and more conſiderable cauſe of
uneaſineſs had been given the King; for all his
endeavours to diſſipate his diſquiet, ſerved only
to diſcover, and probably to increaſe it. He
ſtaid eight whole days out of Paris, indulging his
1 in places where it could not be ob.
ſerved, at Livry, and another houſe belonging
to Montbazon. When he returned, he paſſed moſt
of his days in hunting, doubtleſs, that he miglt
be longer and more frequently alone. This, how.
ever, was not the true remedy for his diſeaſe.
He came, at length, to the arſenal to ſeek ſome
comfort in diſcloſing his thoughts to me. He
came up directly to my cloſer, without permitting
any one to inform me of his arrival, and tappe!
at my door himſelf. I opened it, expecting n0-
thing leſs than ſuch a viſit, and was yet in my
morning-dreſs, with my night-gown and cap on.
He bid me good morning; aſked me what I was
doing; then, ordering all that were preſent -to
withdraw, he came into the cloſet with me, and

*© a hundred thouſand livres for the chapel of La-Fleche. Vow,
« ſays the Duke of Sully, do you call a hundred thouſand Itvres
* a ſmall prefent for you? The King gives peu too much; bit
« you will get nothing of me. Father Cotton deſired to know
the reaſon of this refuſal. I do not think myſelf obliged, ar.
« fwercd the Duke, nor will I give any to you; but I hall gie
my reaſons for it to the King. Father Cotton compleined et
* this to the King, who, to ſatisfy him, publicly chid the Puls
for it; and told him he would have his commands obcycd. N.
de Sully, nevertheleſs, did not do what the King had orders,
« jn regard to the Jeſuits chapel at La-Fleche,” The fame auto
obſerves, in another place, that it was very well known, at t
time, that when the King and his miniſter thus appeared ot 07:
poſite ſentiments in public, it had often been privately concertcd
between thein. What gives one, reaſon te belicve that had bei
the caſe then, was, That his Majeſty,” as this writer adds, 4
this very time, gave the Duke thirty thouſand crowns for a new
bs 8 gift, inſtead of twenty thouſand, which he uſed to ge
him before; with which the Jeſuits were not all plcal:s.'
Ann 609.

ſlvit

*

1609. 07 $ UL: L. 349

ſhut the door; while I, with a fixed attention, be-
held his unquiet motions, now ſeating himſelf,
then riſing, and walking haſtily about the room,
all ſigns of the apitation of his mind, as well as
the vivacity with which he talked for more than
two hours that we continued alone. I ſhall have
no reaſon for diſguiſing the ſubject of this agita-
| tion, or concealing our diſcourſe ; which might,
| likewiſe, be eaſily overheard by thoſe without.
| His Majeſty thought they had all left the little
| hall, and were gone to walk either in the great
| one, the courts, or the gardens : but ſome of
them ſtaid at the door of the cloſer, excited by
their curioſity to liſten; for the melancholy of
| this prince had been obſerved by every one.
Thole, therefore, that ſtood at the door might
hear almoſt every word that paſſed,

At firſt, he talked only of news relating to the
| Emperor, ſome Princes of Germany, the Arch
| dukes, and the Preſident Richardot; after which,
Henry confeſſing that there was ſomething clſe
which lay nearer to his heart, began a long dif
WW courſe, during which I did hardly any thing elfe
but liſten to him. As his Majeſty believed that
ber, as well as the whole court, ſuppoſed the new
aan quarrels, between him and the Queen, were Oc-
„ WW calioned by the paſſion it was publicly ſaid he had
at conceived for Mademoiſelle de Montmorency, 2
tew days ſince married to the Prince of Cond,
was with this article he began, which had a-
Ways given me infinite uneaſineſs.

When I firſt perceived this growing inclination
in Henry, I foreſaw much greater inconveniencies
rom it than from any of his former attachments,
on account of the birth and relations of the younz
lady; and I uſed my utmoſt endeavours to prevent
the progreſs of it; endeavours which, tho? Ho—
wtely fruitleſs, I renewed again, when the King
Vor. IV. J bh propoicd

359 MEMOIRS Book XXVI.

propoſed to me his deſign of marrying her to M.
the Prince; for I had no reaſon to expect that
Henry, upon this occaſion, would exert that ge-
nerous {elf-denial which ſome lovers have ſhewn
themſelves capable of, when they have taken this
method to impoſe upon themſelves the neceſſity
of renouncing the object of their paſſion. Indeed
it was the very contrary which I apprehended;
and this belief offering nothing to my view but
deep reſentment, rage, and exclamation, from the
injured Prince, the relations of the Princels, and
the Queen, I therefore neglected nothing which
I thought could diſſuade him from taking this re.
ſolution. I intreated, I remonſtrated, I threw
myſelf at the feet of Henry. I not only impor-
tuned; I fatigued, and haraſſed him; but all in
vain : the fatal marriage was reſolved on *.
Theſe circumſtances the King himſelf recalled
to my remembrance, to convince me, he ſaid,
that although I had foretold pretty juſtly the ef-
feds which love and jealouſy might produce, yet
J had not foreſeen all that the malignity of his
enemies was capable of ſuggeſting to increaſe
thoſe fatal effects. This prince, part of whoſe
character it was to pay an inviolable regard to
truth, though he expoſed his own failings by it,
would not pretend to deny that there was ſome
foundation for the public clamour. And, indeed,
the paſſionate manner in which he talked of the
high birth, the wit, and beauty of Mademoiſelle
de Montmorency, was ſufficient to betray his ſen-
timents ; but it was not to thoſe mean and inſo-
lent Italians, ſuch as Conchini, Vinti, Guidi, Joan-
nini, that he was accountable for his actions, w10

It was celebrated at Chantilly without any pomp. The Mer:
chioneſs of Verneuil ſaid. The King had made this watch to
% fink the heart of the Prince of Conde, and to raiſe his head.

Mem, hiſt. de Fr, anng 1609, .
i juſtly

1609. 0 T'. VU L:L- . 351

juſtly deſerved to be puniſhed for daring to exag-
gerate what little faults there might be 1n his con-
duct, in order to enrage the Queen, and force
her to take violent reſolutions, which might give
ſome colour for their pernicious deſigns. It was
theſe deſigns which Henry was informed of from
all parts, which filled him with apprehenſions and
diſquiet, and hardly left him one moment of tran-
quillity. He had mentioned ſomething of them
in his letters to me, while he had yet only mere
ſuſpicions of their tendency : but theſe ſuſpicions
were changed into an abſolute certainty, by the
letters that La-Varenne and Zamet had communi-
cated to him ; by what he had been told by the
younger Zamet at his return from Italy and Spain;
and, laſtly, by the informations he had received
from Vaucelas, his ambaſſador at Madrid. We
ſhall ſoon ſee that my brother-in-law was not a
ſuſpected witneſs.

His inſtructions “, when he was {ent ambaſſador
to Spain, were ſuch as rather ſhewed an intention
to keep open the difference between France and
the houſe of Auſtria, than to come to an accom-
modation with it. He was a witneſs of the in-
trigues that the Queen's agents carried on at Ma-
drid, which they did in a manner ſo public and
unreſtrained, that he could not imagine it was
unknown to the King, or even without his orders
that they ated. Theſe proceedings at firſt ſur-
priſed, and afterwards mortified him to the laſt
1 for, believing that the council of France
had abſolutely changed its ſyſtem, without ac-
quainting him with the new reſolutions they had
taken, it muſt neceſſarily be, that his Majeſty had
withdrawn from him his uſual confidence, leaving

* The titles given in theſe inſtructions to the Count de Vau-
celas, are counſellor of ſtate, &c. campmaſter of the regiment
ad companies of infantry of R Vol. 8955 MSS. Royaux,

H

2 him

— . -

>)
—
8

——— - — —

* > —

— — —

— 8 Sr —
* — as

— —

TE
N i
if
{> l
KAZE
* :
* A
' J

- 2»
2 —

22 "=

—

2352 MEMOIR S Book XXVI.

him only the vain title of ambaſſador, while he
intruſted to ſome other perſons his important
ſecrets, and the management of his. moſt eſſential
affairs. Full of this thought, he ſuppoſed, that,
if the King ſeemed, in appearance, not to have
changed his opinion of him, or altered his beha.
viour, it was through his reſpect and regard for
me, that he might ſpare me the e of
knowing he deſpiſed my brother-in-law,who would
not have failed to expreſs his uneaſineſs to me,
if he had not endeavoured to free him from ſuch
an opinion.

Poſſeſſed with this belief, Vaucelas determined
to inſinuate in two words to La-Varenne, and
through him to the King, that he had reaſon to
fear he had loſt his Majeſty's favour; but in his
letter to his brother-in-law, which was much long.
er, he opened his heart freely, and intreated him
to diſcover the cauſe of his diſgrace, and to re.
preſent to his Majeſty, but with all poſlible re.
ſpect, that it was unjuſt, and in ſome degree in-
jurious to his ambaſſador, to employ one of a
foreign prince preferably to him: it was the am.
bailador from the Duke of Florence whom he
meant; and, indeed, he treated about theſe affairs
at Madrid, either without the knowledge, or with
the conſent of the Spanith council, with ſo much
authority, that it is not ſurpriſing Vaucelas ſhould
be deceived. He, therefore, intreated his Ma.
jeſty, by his brother-in-law, to reſtore him to his
good opinion and confidence; and to believe,
that no conſideration of friendſhip or alliance
ſhould ever prevail upon him to diſcloſe the ſecret
of his maſter to me, which was what I had my-
ſelf recommended to him to obſerve with inv10-
lable fidelity.

This letter gave the King a clear knowledge

of thole things of which he had hitherto had bu!
confuſcd

„ 8 n 2 0 .
„ * a * A "I" RE po * 5 * I SB A * * pt £ * A > 9 - * * 7 4 4 N 1 3 4
= 1 0 _ EE Gu BB... 2 OF . N . hats +, 1 jþ Wo, = Y þ, 4 © ”7 1
„ — 1 * * : n
* Raw +
- | -» WA —— A — 1 „ »- . al ons "OY ads Gt NA ——— I. 8

2

160g. OF $U LL Yo 353

confuſed notions, and doubtful con jectures. His
ſurpriſe was extreme; and, indeed, who could
have imagined, that one half of the council and
court ſhould dare openly to diſppoint the deſigns
which the King had avowed, without being ap-
prehenſi ve either of his reſentment, or the infamy
which, on any other occaſion, mult have attend-
ed ſuch proceedings? Certainly this was a circum-
tance very uncommon in politics, and very dit-
ferent from all its maxims. They formed a party
by methods, which, in any other caſe, tended to
deſtroy it; to obtain their end, they pretended'
they had already obtained it; and ſecrecy was
what they had leaſt concern about. This, however,
is to be underſtood only of their behaviour, and
the appearances they gave to things, and not of
their deſigns, and the real methods they took to
carry them on; for, after the King had returned
Vaucelas fuch an aniwer as was proper to remove
his ſuſpicions, he could not, with all his induſtry,
diſcover the bottom of this myſtery, nor many
particular circumſtances which he endeavoured to-
find out. All he knew was, that, by theſe intrigues,
it was deſigned to blaſt his Majeſty's deſigns againſt
the houſe of Auſtria, by bringing him, either
willingly or by force, into an union with Spain:
that the Florentine ambailador correſponded witli
certain perſons of the Queen's houſehold, whom
he named, upon this ſubject ; and with others of
higher rank, whom reipe& forbade him to men-
tion: the reſt he was wholly ignorant of.

Part of theſe curious circumitances which Henry
now told me, I knew not before: this prince”
added, that he did not doubt but thofe perſons
whom his ambaſfador would not name, were the
Queen and Villero!i., All the converſation they
had with him tended only to this end; and the laſt:
advices he had received, relating to the double

Hl 3 marriages,

14

*
=
l
3
s
.
*
7
4
U
*
1
0
*
”
1.
16
17
19
:
A "|
$62 i
= * *
"E
* *
1 +
*
=
To,

—

W
8282 !—
8

a:

* — —
—ẽ — —

—
* 3 2
RS N 1 N

354 M E MO IRS Book XXVI.

marriages, could have their riſe only from them,
ſince the perſons employed in negotiating theſe
alliances had, it was ſaid, gone ſo far with the
council of Madrid, as to declare, that they had
the means in their power of obliging the King to
conſent to them, even with the clauſe, that Spain,
by giving the Infanta to the Dauphin, ſhould re-
ſerve to itſelf all the rights that this marriage
might afterwards inveſt her with“. This it was
that aſtoniſhed, and even terrified Henry. He
might have been able to find a meaning in ſuch
ſtrong and pofitive affirmations, if his defigns a.
gainſt the houſe of Auſtria were as little known,
and as undetermined, as they were three or four
years ago; but that they ſhould talk in this man-
ner in a court where they could not be ignorant
that he had already taken a quite contrary reſolu-
tion, and that nothing would ever make him al-
ter it while he lived; this it was that gave him,
- {pite of himſelf, the moſt dreadful apprehen-
ons. |

It is certain that all Europe knew he was en-
deavouring to ally himſelf to the Duke of Savoy,
by marrying the Dauphin to the heireſs of Lor-
rain, that he might one day unite this ftate witl!
France; and that it was partly to fupport this claim,
that he attached to his intereſt, by ſo many act.
of kindneſs and munificence, the German princes,
who could affiſt him in this enterpriſe againſt all
thoſe who might attempt to traverſe it. It was

One would be ſurpriſed, after this, to find Siri, Mem. Recon,
vol. 1. p. 187. advance, that Henry IV. wiſhed for nothing ſo
much as the marriage of the Pauphin with the Infanta of Spain.
Nothing further is neceſſery to prove this ſtranger took his in-
formation of the tranfactions of the council of France, at that
time, from hearſay only. I alfo think him ſtill more blameable
for that partiality C diſcovers, almoſt every where, agaialt the
perſon and politics of this prince.

known

< © Sn 88 8

160g. OF 8 UL L I. 355
known likewiſe, that he intended to marry his
ſecond ſon to Mademoiſelle de Montpenſier *,
and that they were already contracted ; to give
| his eldeſt daughter to the Prince of Wales +,
| whom, upon my report, he preferred to all the
| princes of Europe; and, laftly, to bring about a
| marriage between his third ſon and the Princes
of Mantua, grand-daughter to the Duke of Sa-
voy, to give him a reaſon or pretence for a foot-
ing in Italy. I believe it will be eaſily granted,
that his Majeſty, by poſſeſſing Mantua and Mont-
| ferrat, with a free entrance into theſe two little

lately become poſſeſſor of the Milaneſe, and ha-

him from giving law to all Italy, without, as this
prince ſaid, incurring the guilt of detaining un-
juſtly the poſſeſſions of another.

Henry took ſo much pleaſure in talking at
length of his political ſchemes, that he forgot he
was ſpeaking to a man who knew them all as well
„ himſelf: but he returned again to the Spaniſh
cabal, and to his own apprehenſions, which their
I: Waiting as if they were aſſured he had but a very
„ bort time to live, gave riſe to. Whatever might
be the foundation of this ſulpicion, it was ſtrength-
8, ened and increaſed, when he reflected that in-
11 Wounerable prognoſtics were every where ſpread
a3 mongſt the people, which fixed his death in the
ffty- eighth year of his age; a prediction which
Was given out to be a divine inſpiration, becauſe it
vas zealouſly ſupported by a certain nun, then in
great veneration. Paſithea, for chat was the name
of this devotee, had been ſome time in France:

* Mary of Bourbon, daughter and ſole kcireſs of Henry Dake
ef Montpenſier, who died the year before.

} Prince Henry, eldeſt ſon of K. James I. of England. 4
a

| ſtates, and by being aſſured of the Duke of Savoy

| ving a firm dependence upon the Venetians, our
| inſeparable allies, nothing could have hindered

r

Fr
_

— nz:
—

—
_— — —-—- 88
— = > — OLE. Cha at 2 0.
- . 1

— —

* — —— a

4 — Dom — —
» k 8 — — —
424444 A 2 — C 2
8 — — —
— 27 " — — — —

EY r
5 7

a —— —— *
252K 2 >. at — —

2 33 - oo *
— . *

1

-

35 MEMOIR S Book XXVI.

and when ſhe left it, continued to correſpond, by |
letters, with the Queen. And it was this nun whom j
the faction made ule of, to perſuade that princeſs MW 1
to be crowned with all the magnificence and all W 1
the ceremonies neceſſary to preſerve to her the W
authority which, they ſaid, ſhe would have occa. e
ſion for after the death of the King, which was?
not far off. They likewiſe talked publicly of bring-
ing back this enthuſiaſt.
This deſign, theſe diſcourſes and preſages, were
continually in Henry's thoughts, kept his fears and
ſuſpicions always awake, and filled him with me-
lancholy and diſmay. “ I do not deſire this,”
faid he to me, ſpeaking of the coronation ; and
here I ſhall relate his own words, which are but
too remarkable: Neither,“ continued he, can
J endure, that this Paſithea ſhould return again
& to France. My heart tells me, that ſome di-
& aſter will happen to me, or that the govern-
4 ment will be thrown into diſorder, if my wife
& obſtinately inſiſts upon her coronation, which,
4 J am told, the Conchinis adviſe her to, and
& likewiſe continues her deſign of bringing back
4 Paſithea. It is certain we thall quarrel on both
« theſe accounts; and if I diſcover more colt
& cerning her deſigns in Spain, I fhall be provo-
„% ked to the laſt degree againſt her.” I Kknou
not whether this prince was miſtaken in his op!
nion of the Queen his wife; bur I confeſs, I was
ſtruck with the reflection he afterwards made, that
this princeſs did not proceed to ſuch extremities
with him on account of Mademoitelle de Mont
morency,. and other ladies, whom he bad been,“
fond of, from any motive of jealouſy; but becaulk
her wicked counſellors perſuaded her, that ſhe 19 H.
occaſion for a pretence for being upon ill term © to
with .the King, or, at leaſt, to appear {o : aun, g
gave the public this excuſe for want of rap ©. wo
thi!

% | —— i He ——

with her converſation, that lad
mong the number of his miſtreſles the preceding
| year, and Mademoiſelle de Montmorency in this,
| that the opinion of the court and the public, con-
| cerning his eſtrangement from the Queen, might
be ſtill kept up, which it was neceſſary to do, at
any price whatever: and from thence he conclu-
| ded, that all his endeavours to put a {top to theſe
reports would be fruitleſs; and that, if he ſhould
even reſolve to ſee the Princeſs of Conde no more,
yet that would not ſilence the malicious reports
of people who had ſuch ſtrong reaſons for pre-
| venting all accommodation between him and his
wife. He declared, that he would never attempt
to obtain any favours of the Princeſs of Condé, to
the prejudice of her honour; that, if he could
not ſubdue his paſſion, he would, at leaſt, reſtrain
its cliets, and reſpect the ſacred tie, which he
| had only formed to impoſe ſilence on his own

1609. 07 8: UV LL Y; - 357

that myſelf, and every one elſe, had attributed to
jealouſy what was, in reality, the effect of a moſt
refined malice. I make here very ſhocking diſco-

veries, if it be true, that the Queen's confidents
made uſe of this damnable artifice, to conceal and
carry on deſigns too black and horrible to name.

But to convince me that I had no reaſon to

| doubt it, Henry reminded me, that upon ſo ſlight

a foundation as that of ſpeaking oftener than u-
ſua] to the Ducheſs of Nevers, and ſeeming pleaſed
was ranked a-

wiſhes. He ſaid this“ with great ſeeming ſince-
rity,

* The Marſhal de Baſſompierre, to whom Mademoiſelle de
ontmorency was offered in marriage, amongſt other diſcourſes

on this ſubject, relates the following from] Henry IV. to him.

He anſwered me, with a deep ſigh, Ba ſompierre, IT will ſpeak
to thee as a friend. I am not only in love, but madly, deſpe-
' rately, in love>with Mademoiſelle de Montmorency. If thou
* ſhouldſt marry her, 1 ſhould hate thee : ſhould ſhe love me, thou
„ wouldſt hate me. It will be beſt to prevent the n

6+ 15

h
k

- _-_ _- & 4 — —— * _ Ss = a
— —y—-̃̃ , — 3 5

— —

> "7 wr omg 41 Os
* * —

358 MEMOIR S Book XXVI.

rity, and I ſhould abſolutely have relied upon this
aſſurance, if 1 had not known how eaſy it was for
a heart. tender and paſſionate as his, to be de.
ceived by itſelf.

The King continued till to talk of the Queen's
counſellors, and, among others, of Conchini and
his wife. He told me ſeveral circumſtances con.
cerning theſe foreigners; after which I could no
longer look upon them but as monſters : he {aid,
that they hindered the Queen from eating of any
thing that he ſent her, and perſuaded her to make a
kitchen of their apartment. But why did his Ma.
jeſty inveigh thus alternately againſt theſe Italian
and the Queen, and do no more? I agreed with
him, that the former deſerved the ſevereſt punih.
ments that could be inflicted ; and that it was,
indeed, very ſurpriſing, that this princeſs ſhould
make friends and confidents only of thoſe perſons,
who, at the time of the third party, had given
the moſt violent counſels againſt his life ; or with
others who were now not leſs his enemies. But
what was I able to do for his deliverance, when
he would not aſſiſt my endeavours? Would any
one imagine, that thislong diſcourſe, which I am
perſuaded every reader muſt feel himſelf intereſt
ed in, ſhould end only in repeated intreaties t0
be attentive to the arts of the Spaniards, and 10
undertake again to perſuade the Queen that ſhe
ought to ſacrifice the Conchinis, and all the rel:

this becoming the cauſe of a breach of our friendſhip ; for !
love thee with great affection, and by inclination. I am reſo
„ ved to marry her to my nephew, the Prince of Conde, and to
* have her in my family : ſhe ſhall be the comfort and entertain-
ment of my old age, which is coming on. I will give my ne-
*« phew, who loves hunting, a thouſand times better than the ladies,
* a hundred thouſand livres a- ycar to amuſe himſelf with. I (ball
« deſire no other favour of her but her affection, without pretend:
ing to any thing further.“ Vol. 1. p. 229. But in the end,

this paſſion, as M. de Sully had foreſcen, hurried Henry far beyond

the bounds he had himſelf preſcribed,

FR —— —

wha

Ee Ren -..

CN OED SI ele a.

©. - —/ a ﬆ*ﬆ * mn r 1

2 —

who diſturbed their peace, to the aſſurance he
gave her by me, that, if ſhe required it, he would
never viſit any woman more, married or unmar-
ried? “ For it is not juſt,” ſaid this too good and
too gentle prince, “that I ſhould deprive myſelf
« of all my pleaſures to ſatisfy her, unleſs ſhe
cc will do the ſame for me; or that 1 ſhould con-

« {ent to all her deſires, while ſhe continues to

t oppole all mine.”
He permitted me to communicate to Sillery

what 1 thought proper of this converſation ; but

not to Villeroi. “ I will go to dinner,” ſaid he,
for, indeed, it was very late, “ and leave you at
« liberty to reflect on all I have ſaid to you. I
ce roſe this morning by break of day; for I ſlept
none all night, my mind was ſo much diſ-
& turbed with theſe thoughts; nor ſhould I have
tc had better reſt this night than the preceding,
6 if I had not diſcloſed them all to you.” His
Majeſty then got into my coach, which I had or-
dered to be made ready for him, ſaying to me in
the preſence of a great number of perſons who
were in the court, Farewell, my friend, I love
« you moſt affectionately; continue to ſerve me
« always thus, and remember all the converſa-
« tions we have had together; for you are as
& dear to me as you can, or ought to defire.”

I believe I have formerly juſtified, by the moſt
ſolid reaſons, my perſeverance in the opinion that
all theſe plots, half foreign, half domeſtic, a-
gainſt his Majeſty's life, were neither real, nor
greatly to be feared. I confeſs, however, that
there were ſome moments wherein the force of
my attachment to my prince would not permit
me to hear, with indifterence, all that was report-
ed on this ſubject; nor could all my firmneſs hin-
der me from being terrified at what I knew to be
à mere phantom, My mind was in this ſtate all
the

— — — _ 2 _

_— — —Ujñ

— — —

— — CC wr — —

i:
«1
0 n *
14
50
wh
15
lah þ
1 *
+
FF IJ
% 7
ay
s
3
*
4
.

——

360 MEMOFRS Book XXVI.

the time that Henry continued ſpeaking to me,
and after he had left me. It was pretty remark-
able, that, during the whole time Henry ſtaid. with
me, I liſtened to him with a profound ſilence; not
uttering one word in anſwer to what he ſaid.
When I fat down to dinner, the 1 of my

heart, and the dark ſuſpenſe which clouded my
mind, threw me into a dejection and. faintneſs,
which gave me a loathing to every thing that was
placed before me. Certainly there was no neceſ-
ſity for Henry's deſiring me to make reflections on
what he had ſaid to me; Igave myſelf up entirely
to them. I carried my views as far as J was able,
that I might foreſee every poſſible danger, and
trace the remoteſt cauſe for ſuſpicion.

Yet, when this firſt tumult of my thoughts ſub.
fided, and more calm and ſettled conſiderations
had taken place of thoſe confuſed ideas that per-
plexed my mind, I was obliged to conclude, as!
had always done, that it was Henry's apprehen-
lions which had given riſe to mine, and that his
had no certain foundation. 'The council of Ma-
drid, ſeeing that the King began to advance in
years, and had already felt the attacks of ſome
dangerous diſtempers, were willing to begin, in
time, to make the Queen and the French coun-
cil reliſh a piece of policy, to which they might
owe their ſecurity. The Spaniards found perſons
among the French who were ſtrongly inclined to
enter into their meaſures, and they made uſe of
them to carry them on, that they might ſpare
themſelves the ſhame of making demands which
were likely to be refuſed. If this was really the
caſe, the Spaniſh council might reaſonably be
ſuppoſed. to feign the contrary for a long time,
and deſtroy or abate the ardour of the allies of
France deceived by this appearance. There was

nothing in this conjecture which did not agree

With

J Tc ccCMEMcMca.cc<c.DC EE

— —

1609. OF $U LEY; 36r

with the character of the Spaniſh nation, eſta-
bliſhed by an infinite number of the like proceed-
ings. When Philip II. urged Monſieur the Duke
of Alengon to engage in the enterpriſe againſt
Antwerp, an enterpriſe which ruined his affairs
and blaſted his reputation, this was all that he ſe-
cretly promiſed himſelf by it, while, in appear-
ance, he ſeemed to look upon it as a neceſſary
ſtroke, to ſecure to that prince the ſovereignty
of the Low Countries, which was the lure he
threw out for him. But is this a fſuſhcient foun—
dation for ſaying, that Spain was endeavouring to
become miſtreſs of the King's hte? How many
motives rendered the perſon and intereſts of this
prince dear to the French nation, and even to
thoſe very courtiers whom, as it ſhould ſeem, the
Spaniards had engaged in their party? But to
what exceſſes may not the human heart be car.
ried when impelled by a violent paſſion? I am
ſeized with horror at the very idea of actions,
which theſe apprehenſions muſt ſuppoſe perſons
to be guilty of, whoſe birth, education, and ſen-
timents reſtrain them from atrocious crimes, and
black attempts, although they leave them capable
of ſome tranſient weakneſſes. Ought I to account

t for my thinking and ſpeaking thus, from the re-
2 ſpect I owe to certain perſons, the delicacy of my
9 ſentiments, or merely from the deteſtation I feel
f for wickedneſs, and the rectitude of my own heart? |
e However that may be, it is certain, that, after all |
h theſe reſlections, I found my mind in the ſame +
le | calm ſituation it was beſore the King ſpoke to me; 1
be and if that gentleneſs of diſpoſition, which he was [
e, too well known to poſſeſs, gave me, from time to 5
of ume, reaſon to be apprehenſive, that hicentiouſ- ;
ras {© neſs would gain ground through the hope of paſſ-
ee ng unpuniſhed; yet I did not fear any of thoſe

8 2 C 32554 . 0

ich Vor. IV. 11 dread ful

362 M E MOI R S Book XxVI. MM:

dreadful blows * which bring with them a ſudden
conſternation. | & 1
With regard to the other part of his Mjeſtys W t
diſcourſc, it would have been more proper tor this Mt.
prince to have put an end, at once, to all reproach. t
es from the Queen, by beginning immediately o 1;
diſengage himſelf from thoſe pleaſures, which Mt fi
| were but little ſuitable to his years; or, at leaſt, Wi 11
in theſe ſallies, to preſerve his reaſon ſo far un. E
clouded, as to avoid any attachment which might n
bring an amour into an affair of policy. Thee S
, . . *
gallantries which Henry had been engaged h, d.
were always deſtructive either to his glory or hs ci
intereſt, and certainly to his quiet. However, n at
the Princeſs of Condé, love laid the moſt da cl
gcrous ſnare for him it had ever done: all the tc
conſequences were juſtly and greatly to be feared, ſt
| ft is manifeſt, from reading the Memoirs of that time, thi! 5 ]
| the fam number of Henry IV.'s ſervants, who had an unzcigne: Wl Y
ailefticn for him, did not make uſe of all the precautions try Wl of
might, to guard againſt the unfortunate accident that happened i |
him. Perhaps no ſolid anſwer can be given to thoſe who mi
call this ſentiment a judgment after the fect: and it muſt alio be
allowed, that if all the dark and ſecret plots mentioned in an g th
finite number of places in theſe Memoirs, though nothing cle! 4 thi
and poſitive touching them was ever diſcovered, were rex}, as tc Wa th
cvent ſeems to have proved, they could not fail of producing tex :
effect, from the averſion this prince was known to have to . hi:
rity and revenze. Thoſe who from ſuch examples draw rl tri
ments to turn the minds.of ſovereigns to deſpotiſm and cricity, ca

merit the utmoſt degree of liatred from mankind. |
The manner in which the Duke of Sully here lays open te A

/ UB . 5mm OS OT RX BITS > > 9 —⁰r ' TE — ß ß — —O CO zg ͤ ꝗw—

bottom of his thoughts and opinions of thoſe plots, abſolutely de. the
itroys a doubt ſome who ſeriouſly conſidered the tranfactions d int
N thoſe times, have made, viz. That the Duke was perfectly -_

formed of whatever was intended againſt the perſon of Henry . Wh
but that having uſed his utmoſt endeavours to prevail on th ſel
prince to exert his authority to fruſtrate ſuch deſigns, and finding rer
that all the advice he had given Henry thereon, through his wen.

neſs, was always rejected, he was inwardly convinced this unhap! to
py King could not avoid his cruel deſtiny: therefore he determ. Wit
ned not to increaſe his apprehenſions without cauſe; but og Wa:
previ! on him, as ſoon as poſlible, to leave a city where he va ]

t xpoſed to ſuch imminent dangers,

Fron

.

. 1609. r 363

n E From theſe reflections it may be conceived
what anſwer I made to the King, when, according

5 to his orders, I waited on him five or ſix days af—
þ terwards. He had left his chamber, and was gone
through the great gallery to walk in the Full-

o lieries. We walked together, in the firſt gallery,
þ 9 for more than an hour. I removed his apprehen-
, fions, and reſtored him to his former tranquillity,

„Hie took a reſolution to redouble his efforts to ba-
ht b niſh, if poſlible, from his council and court, all this
panic policy; and promiſed to educate his chil-

| dren, and the young prince, who was heir to his
crown, in his own maxims. To bind the Proteſt-
{ ants to their King and their country, by the
| cloſeſt ties; and endeavour, with equal ſolicitude,
to baniſh all foreigners from having any hand in
ſtate-affairs; theſe were, in his opinio 1, the two
principal maxims to be purſued, and the moſt like-
ly to ſecure the public tranquillity againſt the rite
= of all domeſtic troubles.
The natural inference from all this was, that
Henry ſhould make immediate preparations for
the execution of his great deſigns; tince to defer
ler WW them to an impotent old age, would be to hazard
their ſucceſs: and accordingly, from this moment,
re WO his application to every thing which might con-
tribute to them, increaſed every day. He now
came oftener than ever to the arſenal, and I was
vue almoſt every morning and evening with him at
ae the Louvre, where my coach was allowed to drive
| into the court. The King granted this privilege,
J. which only two other dukes enjoyed beſides my-
ſelf, on conſideration of my indiſpoſition, which
rendered walking on the ſtones very troubleſome
be ©0 me: he having occaſion for me to be often
n with him, and, I believe, his friendſhip for me
Was another ſtrong motive.

He went on to make me draw up ſchemes and
ron 112 memorials,

Ls a OOO *

5
is

if

—

. * * —— * 3 h
hen." MS S *
1 m 8
- - * w - * =—_ by 8 2

—

„

|

364 MEMOIRS Book XXVI.

memorials, to form a complete cabinet of policy,
and of the management of the finances ; and that
nothing might be wanting to the completion of
his deſign, which he now laid fully before me, he
ordered that I ſhould have a great deſk or cabinet,
contrived full of drawers and diviſions, each with
a lock and key, and all lined with crimſon ſatin,
in ſuch number as to contain, in a regular diſpo.
fition, all rhe pieces that were to be there depo.
ſited. The labour of this deſign was almoſt im.
menſe, though it does not appear ſuch at the fir
glance.

To give ſome idea of it without repetition, the
reader muſt image to himfelf all that has any
relation, either near or diſtant, to the revenue,
to war, to the artillery, to naval power, to com.
merce, to policy, to money, to mines; in ſhort,
to ail parts of the government, either within the
kingdom or without it, whether eccleſiaſtical or
civil, whether exterior or domeſtic. Every one of
theſe parts had its diſtinct allotment in this ca.
biner of ſtate, which was to be ſet in the great
cloſer of books in the Louvre, furniſhed witl
all poſſible conveniencies, that all the pieces
under each of theſe heads, how numerous ſoe—
ver they might be, ſhould appear at a fingle
glance. On the fide appointed for the finances,
was a collection of different regulations, memo.
rials of operations, accounts of changes made
or to be made, of ſums to be received and paid:
a quantity, almoſt innumerable, of views, me.
moirs, of abſtracts and ſummaries, more or lcls
compendious. All this is more eaſily imagined
than repreſented. Any letters of conſequence
which his Majeſty had written to me, were theret-
led and numbered, with an index pointing ol
the contents of each,

A

oY VI_ On WF a2 WE EI ꝗ« nJ7 8

1609. O:F-.S UL T. 365

As to military matters, beſides the accounts, 1
liſts, and memoirs, which were to ſhew the pre-
ſent ſtate of the forces, there were all the regu- [
lations and papers of ſtate, books treating of the 1

e
t arrangement of armies, plans, charts, geographi- 5
h cal and hydrographical, both of France and of x
n, different parts of the world. Theſe ſame charts, 1

upon a larger ſcale, mixed with different pieces 4
ol painting, were to be placed in the great gal- \
lery. Upon this his Majeſty and I conceived a
thonght of appropriating a large room, with its
© firſt range to make a magazine of models, of
he W whatever is moſt curious in machinery, relating
to war, arts, trades, and all forts of exerciſes, 1
ue, noble, liberal, and mechanical; that all thoſe fi
m. who aſpired to perfection, might improve them= 1
It, BW ſelves without trouble in this Lent {chool. The þ
the lower apartment was to hold the heavy pieces of 1
or workmanſhip, and the higher was to contain the
: of lighter. An exact catalogue of both was to be
cone of the pieces of the great cabinet “.
ca Among the pieces relating to the eccleſiaſti- 1
vith cal government, the moſt curious was a liſt of j
ces all the benefices of the kingdom, with the qua- 14
lifcations which they required; and a view of 4
all the eccleſiaſtical orders, ſecular and regular,

ce from the higheſt prelate to the loweſt curate,
110- WW with the diſtinction of natives and foreigners of
nde both religions. This work was to he imitated in

ad another relating to temporal government, in
* which the King was to ſee, to a ſingle man, the
A |
ined n |
9 The death of Henry IV. put a total ſtop to the execution of
enc all theſe deſigns, which deſerve all the praiſe that can be given
ref. them. It is alſo a parent, that bowever defective this ſtate- mu- 3

ſeum remained, it has, neverthcleſs, given birth to many noble J
| and uſeful eſtabliſhments, which have done honour to ſueceeding |
miniſters, This book will furniſh many other ſubjects for ſuch l
reflections. | N

11 3 number 8

366 NM E M OI RS Book XXVI.

number of gentlemen throughout the kingdom,
divided into clailes, and ſpecified according to
the difterences of title and eſtate. In this ſcheme
the King had the more pleaſure, as he had, for
a long time, formed the plan for a new order of
knighthood, with an academy and hoſpital, on.
ly for the nobility ; which mſtitution, however
glorious and uſeful, would have been no expenſe
either to the people or the revenue *. He had

propoled,

This deſign of the Duke of Sully admits of a further cxtcn,
ſion. It has long bcen a jult cauſe of complaint, that the public
method of educating youth in the colleges of France, and in ce.
ry part of Europe, ill retains the barbarity of the moſt uncut
vated times: the manner in which children are indiſcriminately
brought vp, ſeems intended to qualify them only for the prieft
hood and the profeſſion of theology. Latin and Greek, a fyftem &>
rhetoric, fit only to deprave the taſte and pervert the mind: :
courſe of philoſophy, which requires the application of two whol:

ears to learn things ſo dry, tedious, and futile, that as much time
would be neceflary to drive them out of the mind, as were lot
1a acquiring them, did not the manner and language in which
they are taught, themſelves produce that effect: a courſe of la,
that follows, of ſtil] greater length, and in which, with the ſame
inconveniencies, the ground of the French law is what is lea

* . * 2% 4 "9 2 >, mY :
— — 1 nh at "EE "Ip" * 3 v

taught. We ſce here in what particulars this method of educr e
tion conſiſts; the unhappy conſequences of which are, that at g
time when reading a number of good books, upon al! ſubjects, x
ought to form a taſte for the arts 2nd ſciences, and teach the prin- %
ciples of them, young men ale not only held from making a pro» 5
greſs, but ſent into the world, fraught with prejudices againſt al 1
kind of literature, and full of diſguſt to all books, from having We -
been tedionfly confined to ſo ſmall a number; a diſguſt which, 3
in many inſtances, is never removed, or removed only ſo as to ac By
mit of reading, for mere amnſement, atan age in which the mind a
has abated of that vigour without which the matureſt judgment -
only as an uſeleſs talent. 0
Would it, therefore, be impoſſible to ſuppreſs, at leaſt, one h to

of this prodigious number of Latin colleges, and convert the fe to
into ſuch as are more adapted to the diſſerent profeſſions for 11 v
your? are intended? to dedicate the firſt years of infancy to Wo 4
earning the principal duties of religion and virtue? to e, 15
write, and account well? to remove children from hence to? cat
ther colleges, where, along with a ſlight acquaintance with t *
learned languages, for thoſe who are not intended to make 40 A.
reat uſe of them, they ſhould be taught to ſpeak and write vB au.

in our own language, to familiariſe themſelves to its diffcrc cye

ſtyles, the epiſtolary in particular; and to underſtand the

£4299

1609. OS”. 01-3 £7 367

propoſed, at the ſame time, and with the ſame
advantages, to eſtabliſh a camp, or ſtanding bo-
dy of ſix thouſand foot, a thouſand horſe, with
ſix pieces of artillery completely fitted out : and,
to keep the ſame proportion in the naval force,
twelve ſhips, and as many palleys, were always
to be kept ready for a voyage.

As ſchemes of improvement and reformation, in
every reſpect, had one of the chief places in this
cabinet, belides the general plan by which Hen-
ry had contrived to change the face of all Eu-

i. rope, and which was laid out and particulariſed
ve WW in the cleareſt and moſt extenſive manner, there
. were diſtin projects upon all iorts of ſubjects ;
in thoſe, for inſtance, that related to war, me-
ad thods were laid down for preſerving an exact di-

| ſcipline, not only in time of actual war, but like-
une Wite'in peace, by which the perſons oi the tra-
der, manufacturer, ſhepherd, huſbandman, would
a have been preſerved inviolable from the ſoldiers.

ſame |

fel guages of, at the leaſt, ſome of her neighbouring nations, with
_ > whom we have the moſt concern? to let theſe ſchools be ſuc-
ny ceeded by others, where the elements of the moſt neceſſary parts
* of mathematics, geography, and hiſtory, ſhould be taught? where
Py tactics, politics, laws, and commerce, laid down in a clear and
oy & conciſe method, ſhould be made uſe of by the maſters, to diſeo-
* ver the bent of their pupils genius? and by the pupils to deter-
av

lich mine them in the chaice of ſuch (tudies as they are moſt diſpoſed
11" WW and attradted to by nature ?

= This ſhort view of the ſubject can ſcarcely be deemed more
& than a very rough ſketch of a better project. It, nevertheleſs,
# ſeems to me ſufficient to point out the road which ſhould be taken,
to inſpire youth with a zeal for true glory, labour. and application,
to prevent their falling into idleneſs and debauchery; and, in ſhort,
do ſupply the (hte with the moſt excellent ſubjeQs of every kind.
We, every day, ſee inſtances, that the knowledge of this truth

= determines many parents to prefer a private and domeſtic educ1-
. 1 tion for their children to the public one of the colleges. One
5 + <2nnot find fault with them for this, notwithſtanding the advan-
it! N

tages of the one over thoſe of the other are ſo confpicuous, This
conſideration makes it only more to be regretted, that public e-
ducation has not yet been carried to that perfection, amongſt us,
eyery one perceives it is capable of, and ought to be. ;

Theſe

366. MEMOTRS Book XXVI.

Theſe four profeſſions, by which the ſtate may
be truly {aid to be ſupported, would have been
completely {ſecured from all outrages of the no.
bility, by other regulations there laid down, with
relation to the domeſtic adminiſtration of go-
vernment. The diſtinction of conditions, and
the privileges ot each, was fo exactly laid down,
that none of them would have been able, for
the future either to break from their ſubordina-
tion, or make an ill uſe of their power. The
deſign of the papers, relating to the clergy, was
to engage all the ecclefiaſtics to make ſuch ule
as the canons require of revenues which, pro—
perly ſpeaking, are not their own; to forbid
them to join together livings of the yearly va-
Jue of fix hundred Jivres, or to have any one
that produced more than ten thouſand livres;
upon the whole, to acquit themſelves worthily
of their employments, and to conſider it as their
firſt duty to ſet a good example.

I will not enter into more particulars, having
had occaſion to treat of theſe ſubjects in different

parts of theſe Memoirs *. I ſhall likewiſe refer
the

* This kind of filent ſchool for the finances, war, commerce,
Kc. appears to nre ſo happily contrived, that, in reality, I ſee no
bounds to the extenſion of the utility of it. What is the reaſon
thoſe who are employed in the adminiſtration of the different
affairs of the government, are continually falling into ſo many
miſtakes? Becauſe there being no poſitive rules, no written principles,
they can conſult, or whence they can either draw the information
they ought to have, or correct their on ideas; they generally go on
as chance conducts them, and often wander from the proper road.
From hence, in every reſpe&. it happens, we arrive ſo late at the
intended point, and that very often we miſs it entirely. No
body or community can ſubſiſt for two or three ages only, with-
out the help of ſome fundamental rules of conduct, which can,
on every emergency, be re ſorted to by thoſe who have the di.
rection of it. How then can the ſtate, which comprchends all
leſſer communities, be conducted without them? ow otherwiſe
can thoſe who ſucceed in poſts and employments, form any judg-

ment, whether different circumſtances require any alteration *

2 2 5 * x a” a * * 9
: * 2 » * 1 % —% ä . & 23
4.64 "vw 5 ; 25 N * N E 4
* 2%" ON, ts r r 2 3 R 8 1 1 *
1 Ty 1 Ae - Su So FRM 4 F 5 ö a F * IF; > 4

=o. - 4 Sana - am... ane. ..

—

1

* — a anti *
* Y _—_— ms ** 1
by v8. n
a”; "= *
* A ” *
e

4
*
#4.
7
* *
I
1%
*
2
>
9
{
4

1609. OF 3D LS LE: new

the reader to all that he has ſeen, or ſhall fee,
in this book, upon the head of morality, and prin-
ciples of juſt and wiſe governments, which had
alſo their place in that collection. I cut off
thus an account which I could have drawn to

great length, becauſe how much ſoever I might

have diffuſed it, I could never have ſhewn the
whole; at leaſt not without tediouſneſs and
trouble, which would have been the greater as
the account would have contained nothing ab-
ſolutely new. Among other memorials relating
to the finances, there was one upon the methods
of raiſing money, which ought to be diſtinguiſh-
ed from the other pieces that are paſted over
without mention. By this ſcheme a hundred mil-
lions might be raiſed in three or four years. The
only caution which I recommended, was not to
make uſe of it without neceſſity; and to begin
by the moſt eaſy and gentle, of the different ways
there mentioned. They were laid down in the
order which I ſhall here give them, though this
is only a mere epitome of the plan *.

A new regulation was to be made with regard
to the preſidents of ports and havens, the officers
of the crown-lands, and of the cuſtoms, the tolls
of rivers, and the duties paid at their mouths
with a new valuation of theſe claims, and a new
creation of officers for the collection. Another
regulation reſpected the maſters that bought and
{old cattle, wine, and other liquors, fiſh freſh and
falr, wood, hay, and other commodities. Ano-
ther related to the poſts, in which were compre-

the principles by which their predeceſſors were guided ? For want
of ſuch rules, fuch permanent laws, many uſeful projects, which
could not be Len into execution at the time of their in ven-
tion, have periſhed with their inventors; and many bad ones,

adopted by raſhneſs and ignorance, have been perpetuated.
© There is another ſtate of this account in Sully's Memoirs,
vol. 4. p. 9g. LI baye reduced both theſe into one.
hended

370 MEMOIR S Book XXVI.

hended the poſtmaſters and comptrollers, the
maſters of the King's tables, the couriers, bank.
ers, and their commiſſioners, the ſtage-coaches *,
the foot and horſe meſſengers, and all carriages
by land and water. When [ read this article to
the King, he ſaid, © I commend you to La-Va.
renne, and all the people of the ſtable: I will
% fend them all to you.” Another ſcheme rela-
red to the markers of leather, the gaugers, the
keepers of coffechouſes, the retailers, commiſſa-
ries, aſſeſſors, and collectors, the keepers of lod.
gings to let, and many others. Right,” ſays
Henry, you muſt do all this for us; for not a
« day. paſles but I am teaſed to make a grant of
% {ome or other of theſe.” Another was upon
the fourth and eighth aids, the entry and exporta-
tion of goods, whether from city to city, or from
province to province; a creation of new officers
for the magazines of ſalt, with an augmentation
of taxes paid by them and by retailers; an aug-
mentation of a crown upon every minot of ſalt,
and other regulations reſpecting both the ſalt-
works and the fale of the ſalt which is got from
them. © This,” ſays Henry, “ ſhould like well;
« but you mult begin with your own goveri-
« ment, or elſe we thall have great clamour.”
The parties caſuciles, and the droit annuel +. Ile
ö ſecretaries

* Poſt-horſes and ſtage-coaches were firſt ſet up in the reign of
Henry IV.

+ This is the firſt and only time the droit annuel is mentione
in theſe Memoirs. This is the more furpriſing, becauſe this hun,
by which offices of juſtice, made ſalcable in the reign of Francis |
are made hereditary, was eſtabliſhed un er Henry IV. and theretors
M. Sully was probably the principal author of it; and becavie
when the edict for its cſtabliſkment was made, nothing was heard
but murmurs and complaints; that the purchaſe of thoſe offices
being, by means of this new law, raifcd to ar exorbitant price, the
nobility and people of merit would be totally excluded from them,

and they could, for the future, fall to the ſhare only of mobel
men,

* n A , * 4 N
| . - :
4
LAS. +... "he on . 4 ud 8

-
n

- — - En n a a 1

— —

7609. 07 $VLELTF::'- 598

ſecretaries of the King were to be augmented to
ſixteen. A tax was to be ralſed upon ſalt, in the

form

(
ſ
[
0
|

men; whereby the vexations, in the adminiſtering juſtice, would
be increaſed, inſtead of being diminiſhed.

Cardinal Richelieu, convinced by the good reaſons M. de Sully
had for acting thus, and which he had from that miniſter's own
mouth, employs the firſt ſcction of the chapter of his Political
Teſtament, part 1. to prove, that neither the ſale nor inheritance
of offices of juſt ought to be aboliſhed in this kingdom. The
WR «© late King,” ſays he, „by the advice of a very good council, in
: = « the time of a profound peace, and in a reign free from want,

added the cftibliſhment of the right of inheriting of offices of

« juſtice to the right of ſelling them. It is not to be preſumed
he would have taken this ſtep, without a mature conſideration,
« and without foreſceing, as far as human prudence is able, the
« conſequences and effects of it. Nothing contributed ſo much
„to enable the Duke of Gu'iſe to render himſelf powerful in
« the league, againſt the King and ſtate, as the great number of
« officers he had, by his intereſt, brought into the principal poſts
„of the kingdom. I have been told by the Duke of Sully,
« that this conſideration was one of the chief motives with the
« King for cſtabliſhing the dro anne, Ge |

After this, the Cardinal de Richelieu maintains, that it is better
thoſe offices ſhould be bought, than given to poor and indigent
people, or be carried off by ambition and intereſt. * Inſtead,”
ſays he, „of opening the door to virtue, it would be opened to
* cabals and faQions, and the great offices would be filled with
« ofhicers of low extraction, often better ſtocked with Latin than
« riches. Low birth ſeldom produces in men the qualifications
« neceſſary to form a great magiſtrate. Wealth is a great orna-
ment to dignities, and they are ſo much heightened by cxterior
luſtre, that one may boldly fay, That of two perſons of equal
merit, the preference oughit to be given to him who is in the
molt affluent circumſtances: beſides, rhe fear of loſing all he
is worth, will be no ſmall reſtraint againſt miſbehaviour to an
officer, who has engaged the greateſt part of his eſtate in the
8 © purchaſe of his office. If,“ ſays he further, “ offices could
be obtained without money, commerce would be abandoned by

zoned WR © many, who, dazzled with the ſplendor of dignities, would rather
s hu, © puſh themſelves into offices at the expenſe of being ruined, than
cis l © acquire wealth for their families by employing themſelves in
rector! ln © commerce.”

ccae Bn He proves the particular uſefulneſs of the droit annuel, from the
carl conſideration, that, without it, all the old ofticers would reſign their
offices I offices, „when experience, and the ripeneſs of age, had made
ce, the them moſt capable of ſerving the public.” He ought, I think,
them o have added this further reaſon, That a young man who is in-
oncyed tended ſor the enj oyment of one of thoſe poſts, will receive from

his

372 MEMOIR S Book XXVI.

form of the taille, to make a fund appointed for
the wages of the different officers, ſovereign and
ſubaltern, particularly of the courts of juſtice:
another reſpected the offices of lieutenants, comp-
trollers, and treaſurers, as well general as provin-
cial, to be dignified with new titles, and ſet over
the artillery, bridges, and cauſeys: another ſcheme
reſpected the employments of bailiwicks, elections,
and magazines of ſalt, to increaſe them by new

rants of wages and privileges, out of the money
raiſed upon the taille, even to five ſous in the
livre. To eſtabliſh new elections in Guyenne,
Languedoc, Britanny, and Burgundy: the King

* - - WY "I |
r c ES. 1 FR bo —
n *

2

4

his parents an education ſuitable to that ſtation of life they know
he is deſigned to fill. The advice wherewith our author finiſhes
this article, is to fix the value of theſe offices at a moderate price,
« which ſhould not exceed,” ſays he, „the half of what, from
« the extravagant humour of the people, is now given for them.”
He does juſtice to Henry IV. on this head: “ The late King,”
fays he, * foreſeeing this evil, had inſerted in the edict he made
« on this ſubject, clauſes able to prevent it; not only excepting
« from the droit aunuel, the offices of the chief preſidents, and the
« ſolicitors and attorneys- general; but moreover reſerving to him-
« ſelf the power to diſpoſe of thoſe offices which are ſubject to it,
« when vacant, on paying previouſly to the heirs of the poſſeſſors
« of them the price at which they ſhould be valued. The mi
« chiefs, which the droit annuel at preſent occaſions, do not pro-
« ceed ſo much from any faults in the nature of it, as from the
«« reſtriftions this great prince had ſubjected it to, having been im-
« prudently taken off. If the cdict had continued in the purity ef Pe

„„ ep an ws 6 1

* \ 4 L ;
r ee rr BIRT Hb ed nt.

« its original inſtitution, the value of offices would never have Be a
* riſen to that exceſſive height it now is at. It is, theretore, at
only neceſſary to reduce the edict for the droit aunuel, to the ;

*« bounds of its firſt form.” We IN

Theſe words fully juſtify the Duke of Sully, againſt all the im-
E that have been caſt on him, on account of the counſel
e gave Henry IV. touching the famous edict of the droit aunnel
By virtue of this edict, the officers of juſtice were compelled to pa
the ſixtieth part of the produce of their offices, which continued
to be done every ninth year till 1970, when they were obliged te
buy off this charge. See le Journal de L'Etoile, anno 1605, whe
this edift was made, De Thor, Mezerai, &c. The exceſhve num.
ber of the officers of juſtice, &c. is the principal and the true
cauſe of all the other miſchicts men of (ſenſe find to arite fron

this edict.

foreſau,

1609. » 2 A. BK 1 BY fk th 377

foreſaw, that, in theſe provinces, there would be
much murmuring. New treaſurers were to be crea-
ted in the offices of the finances, two at Sens and
at Cahors, ſix in Britanny, and three elſewhere.
Henry faid, that the number of theſe harpics
ſhould be rather leſſened than increaſed.
I propoſed to create, in times of neceſſity, ſtill
a much greater number of offices among the trea-
# curers, payers of rents and wages, receivers, and
other officers of the tailles, ſecretaries and under.
officers of the great and little chancery, as well
as to make new prants to the offices already in
being: to appoint two principal commiſſioners
over all the offices in the revenue. To particu-
larize all this, would take up too much room. The
virtue of the King repreſenting to him, what was
| yet a mere project, as already put in execution,
made him cry out againſt ſuch a number of regu-
B lations, in which I agreed with him, that the
| people were not to be charged, but in caſe of
ö
|
\

-
- 2 iy
Mo, 3

——
ö 1 EY
- I x
e

great neceſſity.

To make an end, it was propoſed, that ſove—
reign courts ſhould be ereQed in different cities,
ſuch as 2 parliament, chamber of accounts, and
court of aids, at Lyons and Poitiers, ſuppreſſing.
the court of aids at Montferrand. As it was pro-
= poſed that the aids ſhould be extended to Britanny,
a court of aids was to be created there, another
at Bourdeanx, with a chamber of accounts, a third
I Burgundy, and a fourth in Provence. At this
zm. the King ook his head, and ſaid not a word. I
ſhall not repeat here what I have already faid in
many parts of theſe Memoirs. The averſion which
1 have ſhewn, with regard to whatever is ſtyled
luxury, will make it be thovght, that all mad and
8 fuperfiuous expenſes were heavily taxed, and fo
indeed they were; and I ſhall honeſtly declare,
hat if my credit had been ſufficient, beſides cut-
Vor. IV. K k ting

x. D r OS,

374 M E MOI RS Pook XXVI.

ting off a great part of thoſe expenſes which are
inconſiſtent with the preſſing neceſſities of the
{tate, I ſhould have ſuppreſſed, likewiſe, coaches
and other inventions of luxury, except in ſuch
conditions of life as ſhould have gratified their
vanity at a high price.

If it is neceſſary to lay this check upon luxury,
of which the contagion has ſeized inſenſibly on all
parts of the community, it is yet of more import-
ance to ſtop its fatal conſequences in thole to
whom it is not merely an occaſion of negligence
and ſoftneſs, but a cauſe of corruption and ruin of
families. Againſt this, proviſion was made by
another ſcheme, placed likewiſe among the pieces
of the cabinet of ſtate ; nor was it one of the leaſt
m'sfortunes occaſioned by the untimely death of
the King, that it buricd in the grave with him ſo
many uleful deſigns at the moment of their birth,

According to another regulation, an edict would
have paſſed to oblige the advocates and attorneys
general of the parliament, to proſecute and pu-
niſh, in an exemplary manner, all thoſe who, by
the example of their diſſoluteneſs and prodigali-
ty, Injured the public, themſelves, or other peo-
ple; and to this they were bound, under penalty
of an{wering themſelves, for all the diforders
which their negligence or connivance might pro-
duce. The way by which this was to be put 1n
their power, without rendering their offices bur-
denſome beyond meaſure, was to join with them,
in every juriſdiction, three perſons publicly ap-
pointed under the titie of cenſors or reformers,

choſen every three years in a public aſſembly, and
authoriſed by their ofice, to which was joined e-
very kind of exemption, not only to lay before
the judges informations againſt all fathers, or chi!-
dren of families guilty of diſhonourable diſſolute.

" nels, and of ſuperfluous expenſes, to a degree "
von

£3 uy

fe

1609. 07 SULLY. 375

Fond their fortune; but likewiſe to force the
judges themſelves to puniſh theſe exceſſes in the
manner preſcribed: or, on failure, to call them
to an account, as partners of the crime. Every
proſecution was to be preceded by two warnings;
but, at the third, an action was iſſued out, by
which the perſon accuſed was put under tutorage,
and ſaw the management of his affairs conſigned
to other hands, who were to leave him only two
thirds of his revenue, and apply the other part to
the payment of his debts, and for the repairs of
his eſtate: and this was to laſt till evident tokens
were given of a real reformation, and a return to
2 more reaſonable way of thinking and acting.
From this law no condition was excepted; and
it is likely that no member of the community
would have eſcaped this judicature, becauſe it was
itſelf aniwerable ro a higher tribunal, and even
the officers were fixed down to their duty by the
dread of puniſhment equivalent to diſgrace,

It would have been decrecd, at the ſame time,

ED . Cot et Rene 5.
r tt tab .

9 , 1 .
* rn 58 3 4 Dre

„ "OE CI et INS

57 WW to cruſh this evil in the bud, that no perſon, of
„whatever quality or condition, ſhould be allowed
0- W to borrow a ſum which, compared with his eſtate,
could be deemed conliderable; and that no other
5 WE ſhould lend it him, on pain of loſing it, unleſs it
0- WW was, at the ſame time, declared in a contract or
In 1

obligation, to what uſe the money ſo borrowed
ſhould be employed; what debts the borrower al-
ready had; to what perſons, upon what ſecurity,
and what revenue was ſtill left him; as well to
ſecure the debt as to maintain his family. With
the ſame intention every father of a family, and
every perſon who acted in the character of a fa-
ther, were forbidden to give to one of their chil-
dren, at ſettling them in the world, a larger for-
tune than juſtice allowed, upon a due conſidera—
uon of their preſent means, and of the number of
1 K k 2 FAD their

376 MEMOIR S Book XXVI.

their children born or likely to be born, excepting
only, that the authority of a father was ſecured, by
allowing him to puniſh a vitious or unnatural ſon,
But even 1n this caſe the offence was to be clearly
proved, and this arbitrary diſpoſition was to extend
only to moveable goods, or their own acquiſition, Wt ;
This regulation of domeſtic œconomy, was Wn
but a piece of the general regulation with reſpec Wt *
to the whole, and principally with reſpect to trial;  :
of cauſes, of which, I believe, the reader will
be pleaſed with an account ; for the intereſt which
every one has in ſeeing the innumerable abute:
of the courts amended, is great, general, and
univerſally known. The deſign of Henry wa
to impart it, at firſt, to the preſidents of the
different courts of juſtice, and the King's coun-
{el in the parliaments; not to be diſputed, but
that they might give intelligence, and adviſe
upon the ſuppoſition, chat, concurring in the
ſame deſign, they might diſcover ſomething uſle-
ful for the contraction of proceſſes, and the de.
ſtruction of the deſpicable art of chicanery. When
theſc articles of regulation had been finally drawn
up, according to the opinions which were thought
beſt; his Majeſty was reſolved to bring them into
parliament, written with his own hand, to have
them regiſtered. The reager has already {cel
thoſe which we had previouſly drawn up, which
would probably have paſſed with little alteration.
In all ſuits between relations, counted near!y
according to the canonical degrees of conſan- g
guinity and affinity, as well temporal as ſpiritual, (a 1
the plaintiff was obliged, in the firſt place, on
make an offer, ſrom which he was not to de-
part, of referring all the differences to the a. fn
hitiation of four perſons, two choſen by eaci
party, among their friends or relations; to name
theſe two arbitrators on the ſpot, and bp ſet
| | | OWN,

l. | 2609. OF SUL LY: 377

g down, in diſtinct articles, ſigned with his own
„hand, all his pretenſions and demands, to which
1, he was not allowed to make any additions. The

ly SY ſame thing was to be done by the defendant,
14 FX who had only a month allowed him to name
n. his arbitrators. In another month the arbitra-
tors were to be in poſſeſſion of all the proofs and
4K writings of both parties; another month was al-
s lowed the arbitrators to pronounce judgment;
ill and a month after that was allowed to a {uperior
<> MT arbitrator, to determine thoſe points on which
e the voices had been equally divided: for all o-
nd ther points were to be confidered as determined,
and came not under the cogniſance of the ſupe-
he rior arbitratur. The fame regulation took place
m. with the judges : they could not call back the
u main cauſe before them, nor make any inquiry
ie into the fundamental queſtion ; but only give

ſentence according to judgment, good or bad,
e. of the arbitrators upon the pieces laid before
de. them. The ſovereign courts had, in this reſpect,
en no higher privileges than ordinary juriſdictions:
un ; they could neither appoint a new 1nquiry, nor

ght receive new proofs; and they were allowed on-
to ly a mouth or fix weeks to make a decree, which,
are it they exceeded that time, became void, and
ten the judges themſelves were condemned to pay

the loſſes and damages of both parties.

an The notaries were declared principal and com-
:
{

petent judges of all contracts, tranſactions, obli-
gations, transfers, grants, exchanges, ſales, and

ual, leaſes; ſo that the opinion given by them, upon
10 the ſenſe of any contract brought before them,
de- was proviſionally eſtabliſhed, notwithſtanding a-

„ny oppoſition or appeal; and the ſuperior judges

ach could not proceed, upon that ſentence, in any

other manner than as upon the tentence of a
court of eſtabliſhed judicature. The precaution
: K k 3 by

|

4783 MEMOIR $ Book XXVI.

by 1.0 the knavery of the notaries was oh.

viated, was, that, firſt, every act muſt have paſl. 8
ed in the preſence of two notaries, or of one v
notary. and two witneſſes ; in the ſecond place, 0
the contracting parties were obliged to bring Ne
each of them an advocate to the aſſiſtance oft
the notaries, whoſe advice the notaries were tot

take, and ſet down their names in the deciſions, . p
This act, and the ſentence thus paſſed, could ne- k
ver afterwards be falſified, if it was for a ſum

exceeding a hundred livres. 3 f
The ſummons could not be brought before z. t
ny other judge than that of the defendant, and, t
as I have ſaid, it was to contain all the claims MT i
of the plaintiff, in a manner ſo general, that, af. WT 1
ter that, nothing was to be done beſides 1na- WT a
king an an{wer to the allegations of the defend. We f
ant, under a penalty upon the judges, advocates, f
and ſolicitors. Theſe advocates and ſolicitors t
were immediately to put the cauſe into fucha Wt a
ſtate, that it might be determined; and till i WW a
was in ſuch a ſtate, they were forbidden to plead d
it, or bring it into court. The moſt confiderable t
cauſes, thoſe in which there were to be many rt
writings and much evidence, could not be delay-
ed more than three months; and here, as in all WT g
other bills of importance, bills of review were n
not allowed, and the only recourſe was to let WT 2
ters patents diſpatched in the council of ſtate, P
and (caled with the great ſeal. f
This regulation extended, in its particulars, toe
every ſingle point of law, or cuſtom that requi- We
red to be reQified ; ſuch as the rules, which are WT 1
already made mention of, upon the bad cecono- WF |
my of the inhabitants, upon the common right 2
of poſſeſſion between huſband and wife, and 0 ©
'thers; which I do not mention, with reſpect toe

perquiſites, falaries, vacations, and, other char.
ges;

-
:
by N
*

1609. O FF $:0U- 6 9 F: 379

ges; as well as of the different ſubterfuges of chi-
canery, and all the abuſes of the courts of juſtice ;
with reſpe& to pleaders and writers, and many-
other things, of which every body hears loud
complaints. The King could find nothing bet-
ter to be done, than to refer all thoſe particulars
to the diſcretion and regulation of twelve men,
picked out from amongſt thoſe who had moſt
| knowledge of buſineſs, and were men of the
a | greateſt wiſdom and equity, who were to purſue
the deſign in the following method. They were
to write down, in the form of a memorial, all
the formalities, generally abſurd, without omit-
ing any: in the next place, thoſe which they
thought the public good required to be left out:
and, laſtly, that which they thought beſt to ſub-
ſtitute in their place. This work being ſo far
EZ finiſhed, was to be expoſed to a careful examina-
ton of three of the King's principal miniſters
and counſellors, who were to give their opinion
it about it: after which the King was likewiſe to
ad declare his ſentiments, and to give it all the au—
le thority neceſſary to make the future practices of

L.

=

Ny 8 the courts invariable and uniform.

When we had once begun to compoſe this
all general inventory of ſtate, it became one of our
re moſt uſual ſubjects of converſation, and the King

appeared extremely impatient. to have it com-
te, pleted. He ſent one of the pages of his chamber

for me one morning, when the weather was ex-

to ceſſive hot; for I think it was in the month of
-. : E. I went directly to his cloſet; but I found
he had juſt left it, and was already in the Tuil-

n0- {We leries. I could not overtake him till he was got
ꝛs far as the terraſs, belonging to the capuchin
friars, near a little door, through which he enter-
ed their chapel to hear mais. As foon as he
law me, at a diſtance, followed by that 1 ot
clients

T * . > a 2 Wu a
4 : a * e *
3255, 1 e

* 7 * .
4. SE S
.

- *

380 MEMOIRS Book xXVI.

clients who ſeem to gueſs every place where mi-
niſters are likely to be ; “ Go,” ſaid he,“ and tell
„ the capuchins, that they muſt delay maſs a
«& little; for I muſt confer with M. de Sully,
«© whois not a good maſs-man : if he would take
« my advice as to that affair, I ſhould love him
& ſtill more than I do, and there is nothing
« which he might not expect from my friend.
ce ſhip: however, ſuch as he is, I have a ten-
« der affection for him, and receive great ad.
« vantages from his ſervices.” His Majeſty then
took my hand, which he held in his; and,
during two hours that we walked together, he
talked to me only of ſome new memorials, which
he aſked me for, to add to his cahinet of ſtate,
At parting, he bid me aloud to be as exact and
diligent as poſſible in this work. © Let there
c be few words,” ſaid he, “ and much matter.
« However, all muſt be plain and clear; for!
&« would communicate ſome part of it to two
« or three of my ſervants, whoſe names I will
« tell you.” I replied, that his Majeſty muſt
give me a little time to execute this taſk, ſince
he required method, brevity, and clearneſs at
once. Do it then as ſoon as you can,” fad
Henry; “you know my ſtyle, and I know yours;
& they agree well together.“

I ſent a meſſage to the Chancellor to let him
know that I could not attend the council; and!
ſhut myſelf up all the reſt of that day, and part
of the night, looking over books and papers;
nor did I even fit down to ſupper. At ſeven 0
clock, the next morning, the King came to the
arſenal], attended by thole perſons whom he had
mentioned to me the day heſore. Theſe were
Meſſieurs d'Ornano, de Boëſſe, Dubourg, de Lille,
de St Andre, de Montpelier, de Pilles, de For-
tia, de St Canard, de La- Buiſſe, de n

6 lere

Lo he 7 * As $4: r I; p 1 r ">. 4
—_— 0 REST ot tors ...!. ˙Üb. .

e

THO or

F080 $4 n -
r

.

EIS · VV ona?

diately.
nephew, and my niece Biron, whom they want

*

he

SEES

1609. 07-30. B 1: 1+: 381

There were likewiſe Meſſieurs de Vitry, de Vic, de
Nereſtan, de St Geran, La-Varenne, D'Eſcures,
Erard, and Chatillon, engineers, (for part of
ſome affairs, relating to their profeſhon, made
the buſineſs), Bethune my couſin; and, laſtly,
ſome foreigners, ſent by Leſdiguieres and
the Duke of Bouillon, and another, named Pu-
charnault, from La-Force. My cloſet was al-
moſt full. I had not been able to draw up the
memorial in queſtion ; and the reaſon I gave his
Majeſty for it, who had aſked for it immediately,
was, that I had received ſome diipatches from
La-Force, concerning a new diſturbance raiſed
by the Spaniards in Bearn, and the Lower Na-
varre, which it was neceſſary to anſwer imme—
I likewiſe writ to him, ſaid I, about my

to get divorced, which will be a fine piece of
work; for ſhe believes ſhe is with child; and
ſne really is ſo. ©. This,“ replied his Ma-
jeſty, © is one of the ſtrangeſt caſes I ever
« knew, and the moſt ridiculous: I am decei-
* ved if ever you will be able to bring theſe
people to e Finiſh your diſpatches,” add-
ed this prince, after telling me, in a low voice,
ſomething he had to communicate to me, “ and
„ finiſh likewiſe our papers as ſoon as poſſible,
and do not go to the council to-day.” © That
cannot be, Sire,” I replied ; “ for {ome af-
fairs of conſequence are to be laid before it,
which were not examined yeſterday on account
of my abſence.” © Well do the beſt you can,”

aid he, “ and adieu; for Iam going to the

Lad

Tuilleries.“
I laboured with ſo much induſtry at the memo-
rial, that it was ready the next morning, when

bis Majeſty again ſent for me to the Tuille-
nes. 1 gave my ſecretary thele papers to car-

1

382 MEMOIR S Book XXVI.

ry, incloſed in a looſe ſheet of paper, and ſeal.
ed. I found Sillery and Villeroi with the King,
and we all four continued to walk, during almoſt
two hours; diſcourſing upon the ſcheme of
theſe memorials, with ſo much heat and action,
that it was eaſily perceived by thoſe at a di.
ftance, that we did not agree in our opinions. [
was going away without taking notice of my pac.
ket to the King, when he called me back, and
aſked me for it. I ſhewed it to him in my ſecre.
tary's hands, whom I afterwards ordered to pre.
ſent it to his Majeſty when he had an inclina-
tion to read it; but to take care that he brought
it back with him ſealed again, in the ſame man.
ner it was now. What had paſſed in our con-
. verſation, made it neceſſary for me to uſe this pre-
caution, which my ſecretary afterwards exculcd
himſelf for to Henry, by alledging the poſitive
commands I had given him. He followed the
King, who went to the capuchins to hear mais,
and rook this opportunity to go to breakfaſt,
for it would not have been eaſy to have found
another. The King ſeeing him when he came
from maſs, „ Follow me,” ſaid he, © to the
Louvre, and do not go away from thence till
© I have fpoken to you.” As ſoon as he came
to his cloſet, he aſked him for the packet. My
ſecretary then told him the orders I had given
him. Well,” ſaid his Majeſty, “ be it ſo ; but
„ again I tell you do not leave the Louvre.“
He then went into his library to leave the pac-
ker there while he dined. The court was not
very full, becauſe it was later than uſnal. The
King hardly ſpoke to any one, and appeared to
be in deep thought, often ſtriking his knife upon
his plate. f
My ſecretary believed he was going to be dit-

miſled, when he ſaw the King rife from ny
5 an

a a. = 3a, , . ·˙ FP See

(0
(e
7
(0
40
180
{ 60

be *
= CC
ay

„ OF SULL I. 383

and return to his cloſet, and heard himſelf call.
ed for about half an hour afterwards : but ſome
princes and lords of the court coming in that
moment, with whom his Majeſty ſeemed to have

entered into converſation, he withdrew into a

corner with La-Varenne and Beringhen. The
place where they ſtood was very dark, fo that it
was not eaſy to perceive them, eſpecially if they
took a little care to conceal themſelves, which
they did, Longs without any deſign. Some mi-
nutes afterwards they ſaw Henry advance, with
two or three A the company whom he had ſe-
arated from the reſt, and came ſo near them
that they could hear what he ſaid, although he
did not ſpeak very loud ; they redoubled their at-
tention, and they heard him ſay theſe words:
« I am fatigued with walking ſo long this morn-
« ing; for I have been converſing more than
two hours, upon matters of great importance,
« with three men whom I have found as contra-
& ry in their opinions, as they are in their tem-
« pers and inclinations. Any other than my-
« {elf, perhaps, would find it difficult to employ
chem; but I am ſo well acquainted with their
whims, that I even draw advantages from their
debates and oppoſition, which ſerves to make
all affairs they are engaged in ſo plain and
clear, that it is eaſy for me to chuſe that me-
thod which appears to be beſt. You know
them well enough without my naming them.”

His Majeſty continued to draw the pictures of his
& three miniſters in the following manner. I ſhall
be candid enough not to make the leaſt altera-
tion in his words, even where myſelf was con-
= cerned, and it was with me that he began.

Some perſons,” ſaid Henry, “ complain, and,
indeed, I do myſelf ſometimes of his tem-
per: they ſay he is harſh, impatient, and ob-

RE „ ſtinate:

384 MEMOIRS Book XXV.

ce ſtinate: he is accuſed of having too enter. £
« priſing a mind, of preſuming too much upon “
« his own opinions, exaggerating the worth of WW *<
« his own actions, and leſſening that of others; "
« as likewiſe of eagerly aſpiring after honours + ©
« and riches. Now, although I am well convin- E7
«« ced that part of theſe imputations are true, ©
5 and that I am obliged to keep a high hand! “
% over him, when he offends me with thoſe | “
6“ fallies of ill humour, yet I cannot ceale to“
love, eſteem, and employ him in all affairs of! *
& conſequence; becauſe I am Very ſure, that WT ©
« he loves my perſon, that he takes an interelt “
« in my preſervation, and that he is ardently (0. MW ©
6“ licitous for the honour, the glory, and gran “

% deur of me and my kingdom. I know allo +
6 that he has no malignity in his heart; that he ing
< 1s indeſatigable in buſineſs, and fruitful in ev. “
“ pedients ; that he is a careful manager of “
& revenue, a man laborious and diligent, who WF ©
&« endeavours to be ignorant of nothing, anc to
& render himſelf capable of conducting all at We ©
& fairs, whether of peace or war, who writes and
& ſpeaks in a ſtyle that pleaſes me, becauſe it !5
cc at once, that of a ſoldier and a ſtateſman. 1
& word, I confeſs to you, that, notwith{tand-
« ing all his extravagancies, and little allies 0 WE p
© paſſion, I find no one ſo capable as he is
& conſoling me under every uneaſineſs.“ I {hall
not here expatiate upon the praiſe or blame
which is conveyed in theſe words; but candidly
confeſs, that both the one and the. other ] may
deſerve. The part of an honeſt man, upon fucl
an occaſion, is to profit of both, that he may
daily rectify his heart and his manners.

« The ſecond,” purſued Henry, {peaking ob the
Chancellor Sillery, © is of a compliant dilp0!!

tion, not eaſily offended, wonderfully inf.
35

1609. re . 385

eating in his behaviour, and cautious in his ac-
« tions: he has a good underſtanding, is well
„ yerſed in ſcience, and the buſineſs of his pro-
Y feſſion; nor is he ignorant of others: he ſpeaks
| well, with method, and clearneſs: he is not
„e capable of. forming ary black deſigns againſt
« others; yet he is extremely ſolicitous to ac-
« cumulate wealth and titles: he 1s never with-
« out news, or perſons in his pay, to make dif-
„ coveries for him: he is not of a humour to ha-
„ zard, lightly, either his perſon or fortune for
„„ others. His virtues and his faults being thus
„ balanced, it is eaſy for me to ule the former
> © advantageouſly for myſelf, and guard againſt

. 8 * the bad conſequences of the latter *.
MF © As to the third,” continued the King, ſpeak-
ing of Villeroi, © he has been long practiſed in
.&_ © buſineſs; is thoroughly acquainted with the
( tranſactions of his own times: he has, from his
( earlieſt youth, been employed in ſtate-affairs
more than the two others: he obſerves great
. order and regularity in the execution of his
4 office, and judgment in diſtributing thoſe pa-
0 pers which belong to his employment: he is
© © generous, and his abilities appear by his mode-
„ ſty and ſilence, and his reluctance :o ſpeak in
public þ ; yet he is obſtinate and cannot bear
cc to

This chancellor did the ſtate three ſignal ſervices ; by em-
Playing part of his wealth in retaining the Swiſs in our alliance;
ſet the peace of Vervins; and in negotiating the King's marriage.
Ihe Chancellor de Sillery was a man of no learning. Henry IV.
* uſed ts ſay of him, and the Conſtable, Henry de Montraoren-
c, that with his chancellor, who did not underſtand Latin,
and his conſtable who could neither read nor write, he could
execute the moſt difficult affairs '” Amelot de La-Honſſiye, rote
en the 195th letter of Cardinal D*0got.

= 7 Of all the places in theſe Memoirs, where M. de Villerai is
Fentioped, we ought to fix on this as the principal one, to give
E* © Proper inſight into the character of that miuiſter, and chiefly
3 vor, Iv. LI from

— —— — =

CC —— Ce a re co _—__— = =

384 MEMOIRS Book XXV.

ce ſtinate: he is accuſed of having too enter.
priſing a mind, of preſuming too much upon
his -own opinions, exaggerating the worth of
his own actions, and leſſening that of others;
as likewiſe of eagerly aſpiring after honour
and riches. Now, although I am well convin.P

46
66
<c
<c
44
«c
cc
4c
cc
140
cc
46
«c
«c
<c
cc
£c
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc

ced that part of theſe imputations are true,

and that I am obliged to keep a high hard
over him, when he offends me with tho

fallies of ill humour, yet I cannot ceale t9
love, eſteem, and employ him in all affairs q

conſequence; becauſe I am Very ſure, tan
he loves ny perſon, that he takes an interei

in my preſervation, and that he is ardent] y (6

licitous for the honour, the glory, and gra ö

deur of me and my kingdom. I know ali

that he has no malignity in his heart; that |;

is indeſatigable in buſineſs, and fruitful in eg

pedients ; that he is a careful manager of n|

revenue, a man laborious and diligent, with

endeavours to be Ignorant of nothi1g, and t
render himſelf capable of conducting all a
tairs, whether of peace or war, who writes al
ſpeaks | in a ſtyle that pleaſes me, becauſe 1t !
at once, that of a ſoldier and a ſtateſman. 1
Rog 1 confeſs to you, that, notwithſtand

all his extravagancies, and little fallics g &

os, mp I find no one ſo capable as he is
conloling me under every uneaſineſs.“ Þ

not here expatiate upon the praiſe or blirk

which is conveyed in theſe words; but candu 1 |

2 4

confeſs, that both the one and the. other I m.
deſerve. The part of an honeſt man, upon !u
an occaſion, is to profit of both, that he mi
daily rectify his heart and his manners.

The ſecond,” purſued Henry, {peaking oi!

Chancellor Sillery, « js of a compliant dif

tion, not eaſily offended, wonderfully in

66 all

10n
Pro

L,

1609. OF: 8 JUL T. 385

W< ating in his behaviour, and cautious in his ac-
„ tions: he has a good underſtanding, is well
verſed in ſcience, and the buſineſs of his pro-
feſſion; nor is he ignorant of others: he ſpeaks
well, with method, and clearneſs: he is not
capable of. forming ary black deſigns againſt
others; yet he is extremely ſolicitous to ac-

. I _ —e

= Av

ii F cumulate wealth and titles: he is never with-
„out news, or perſons in his pay, to make dife
„ coveries for him: he is not of a humour to ha-
of zard, lightly, either his perſon or fortune for
WIS others. His virtues and his faults being thus
re balanced, it is eaſy for me to ule the former
e advantageouſly for myſelf, and guard againſt
ran F the bad conſequences of the latter *.

ug © As to the third,” continued the King, ſpeak-

tg of Villeroi, © he has been long practiſed in
dei buſineſs; is thoroughly acquainted with the
{ nÞ-4 tranſactions of his own times: he has, from his
vi. carlieſt youth, been employed in ſtate-affairs
nd 3 more than the two others: he obſerves great
order and regularity in the execution of his
s uf office, and judgment in diſtributing thoſe pa-
it pers which belong to his employment: he is

1. 1 generous, and his abilities appear by his mode—
{any ity and ſilence, and his reluctance :o ſpeak in
lies public þ ; yet he is obſtinate and cannot bear

e ( set

1 thi ;

plan This chancellor did the ſtate three ſignal ſervices ; by em-
des part of his wealth in retaining the Swiſs in our alliance;
Aae e peace of Vervins; and in negotiating the King's marriage,
- ] 11 ke Chancellor de Sillety was a man of no learning. Henry IV.

on ſu

5 ed ts ſay of him, and the Conſtable, Henry de Monttmòren—
81

| that with his chancellor, who did not underſtand Latin,
d his conſtable who could neither read nor write, he could
ecute the moſt difficult affairs Amelot de La-Honſſeye, rote

*
—
mY

0 ob 1 pF the 195th letter of Cardinal D*Ofjot. |

disse or all the places in theſe Memoirs, where M. de Villeroi is

W toned, we ought to fix on this as the principal one, to give

Y ne pr opcr inſight into the character of that miniſter, and chiefly
„ 20 L, IV. LI from

15
723
1
x F
"IM
*

j
|

—

36 MEMOIRS: Book XXVI

* to have his opinions contradicted, which, Le
thinks, ought to ſerve for good reaſons: yet
« he will temporiſe a while, and wait with pa.
« ticnce till the faults of others have proved him
to be in the right, which I have ſometimes
« found my advantage in.” This diſcourſe of
his Majeſty was addreſſed to perſons of the firſt
quality, who, although they had probably 1ncli.
nation enough to an{wer it, yet continued ſilent:
and the King ſome moments afterwards, percei-
ving my ſecretary, ordered the papers to be given
him, which he brought back to me ſealed as he
was ordered.

Before we leave theſe general affairs of the f.
nances, it is neceſlary to {ee what there is parti.
cular on this article for the preſent year. Denis
Feydean and his aſſociates had got the genera!
ſarm of the aids adjudged to themſelves, by of.
tering two hundred thouſand livres a-year more
than the former farmers. I foreſaw what really
happened, that Feydeau would not be able to get
in his money. Accordingly he preiented a pet.
tion to his Majeſty, praying to be diſcharged ef
theſe two hundred thouſand livres. 1 thought theſe
tarmers ſuffered no more than what they juſtly e de-
terved, ſince no unforeſeen accident had happen
ed, nor had any obſtacle been raited to their quict
pollzNon; | and what increaſed my anger was, that
the imprudence of theſe ncw-co mers had depr.
ved us of farmers who were able to pax, to ſub-
ſtitute others in their room who were inſovent.
However, I prevailed upon his Majeſty to agree
to this diminution under the title of a grant, with
out which they would be expoied to a bankruptcy,
and the additional trouble of ſetting the aids .
t1om tne opinion Henry IV. had of it. One ſingle original ac
count, like this, deſerves more credit than all urcertain rc park

or ſuch as are diQated by prejudice, avion, or 2 ſpirit of per!
r1 F
8 tl;

0 $VELY. 587

gain to ſale. I judged only, that it ought not to

take place till the iſt of January 1610, or at
leaſt, till the 1ſt of October this year, that his
Majeſty might not loſe, all at once, the ſum of
four hundred thouſand francs.

I cauſed Ferrand, firſt {erjeant of the chamber
of accounts of Paris, to be prolecuted. He was
deprived of all the offices and commiſſions he es-
erciſed in this court, which his Majeſty, even be-
fore judgment was given, beſtowed upon La-Font,
who has been mentioned in theſc Memoirs: he
was already intendant, and the King, as a far-
ther reward for his fidelity, made him a preſen;
of the furniture of the Conciergerie. M. the Count
of Soiffons, and the other officers of the King's
houſehold, preſented likewiſe a petition againſt the
treaſurer Pajot, which was ſent to me. Puget, ap-
other treaſurer of the exchequer, having the
year before, by the orders of his Majeſty, given
a favourable declaration for Placin, formerly his
clerk, which the King was guaranty for, and was
depoſited in my hands, his Majeſty wrote to me
to give this paper to Puget, as he himſelf had en-
gaged ſhould be done, in caſe the {uit winch was
between theſe two financiers, could not be termi-
nated without it.

His Majeſty, after firſt aſking my advice, orde:
ed a brevet to be granted to Mortier Choiſy, by
which he was declared releaſed from the reſidue
of his farm for fiſty thouſand livres; half to be
paid immediately, and the other half in fix months.
He likewiſed ordered to be delivered to Zamet the
acquittances of the two officers of arrears in Nor-
mandy, amounting to five ti ouſand crowns, with
the writings neceſſary for the payment, likewiſe

of the ſum of forty-nine thouſand nine hundred

and odd livres, for which he had given an aſſign-

ment, the laſt year, upon the two ſols and ſix
y L

Il 2 doniers

r

p — —U—ÿñö . — — — —ů —

teaux, a relat on of

388 M EMO I R S Book XXVI.

deniers upon each meaſure of ſalt for a like ſum,
which Zamet had advanced him. Henry likewiſe
gave twelve thouſand livres to Montigny, ſix
thouſand to D'Eſcures, and two thouſand four
kundred livres to different penſionaries in Burgun-
dy, which were delivered to them by M. Le.
Grand, and paid the Preſident Tambonneau his
penſion for the laſt year. Theſe circumſtances I
collect from letters his Majeſty writ to me with
his own hand.

I received alſo {ome letters from the Queen,
dne of which related to her releaſing certain
rights which had been made over to her, and
were charged on lands belonging to Queen Mar.
garet, to whom they had been granted by brevet.
In another the deſired that I would pay the wife
of Conchini twenty thouſand crowns, which the
King, to oblige the Queen, had given her upon
the preſidents eſtabliſhed in the office of finances,
Leonora, having ſo great intereſt in the affalr,
had perſormed her part {o well, that the money,
as the Queen told me, was ready to be paid.

The ſums, the principal ones at leaſt, which!
carried to the account of Henry's private expenſes,
are, firſt, twenty-two thouſand piſtoles, which, on
the 18th of January, he ſent to tell me that he
had loſt at play; a hundred thoufand livres at one

time, and fifty-one thouſand at another, which |

he loſt likewiſe at play to Edouard Fernandes, 2
Portugueſe. He ordered me to take up this laſt
ſum, of fiity-one thouſand livres, upon ſixty thou.
ſand which was to return to him upon the oflice of
adyocate-general at Rouen, after the death of
Marguerit, to whoſe children he gave the nine
thoutand remaining, in conſideration of the good
ſervices he had received from their father in this
parliament, and he 27 the office to Des- Vue.

e deceaſed; for play a tho,
fan |

4a. D

1609. > OF. SULL FE 389

{and piſtoles more. Henry, at firſt, ſent only for
tue hundred; but Beringhen came afterwards for
the other five hundred. I carried him a thouſand
. © piſtoles for play likewiſe, when I went with the
Chancellor to wait on him at Fontainebleau, where
te was taking phylic after the Eaſter holy-days.:
my journey thither was occaſioned by ſome diſ-
1 & patches which Preaux had brought from Jeannin.

I The King, beginning to reflect more ſeriouſly up-

on the exceſs to which he carried his paſhon for
, gaming, became ſenſible of the neceſſity there
vas to correct it, and often afterwards promiſed
d me that he would moderate it, if he could do no
more. He continued to lay out great ſums upon
t. buildings, and ſent Zamet * from Fontainebleau
ſe to inſpect them, when he could not go himſelf.
16 I find likewiſe, in my accounts for this year, an
n ©. 2cquittance from Marcade for four thouſand ſeven:
1 hundred and forty livres, for eleven hundred and
ir, fxteen pearls which Henry had made a preſent of
„ 0 Mademoiſelle de Vendome, his daughter; an-
other of three thouſand to Mademoiſelle Des
1 Effarts; and another of three hundred livres to
es, Saubion. her ſervant.
on! Ihe Chancellor and I were directed to name
he commiſſioners to treat with thoſe of the Duke of
ne Lorrain, about ſettling the limits of the country:
ich ef Meflin, which every day gave rie to {ome new
2 conteſts. I ſent the comprroller of the lortiica-

1.04 ions to Calais, with a ſum of money to repair”
ou. the damage which had been lately done by the
«of lea to the Riſbank.. I was informed of it by Vice-

This rich officer, at that time, took the titles of Baron of
une Murat and Billy, Counſellor of the King in all the councils, Go+
vernor of Fontainebleau, and Comptroller of the Queen's houſe-
hold. He died at Paris in 1614, aged about 65, leaving one ſon,
£22 camp-marſhal, who was killed at the ſiege of Montpelier; and an-
aher, Biſhop of Langres : he had th: ſe ſons by Magdalen Le-
Clerk Du-Tremb!ai, and got them legitimated,

. 1 Admiral.

390 MEMOIR S Book XXVI. |

49

dmiral De-Vic, who could have wiſhed that the
government had been at a more conſiderable ex-
penſe for this town, and who formed ſeveral
ichemes, as well for its conveniency and ſecurity,
as to prevent the inundations to which this place
and the neighbouring parts were expoſed.
There never was a more uſeful law made“, than
that which appeared this year againſt the fraudu-
lent bankrupts: it decreed, that ſuch bankrupt:
ſnould be puniſhed with death, as being robbers
of the public; that all donations, grants, fales,
and aſſignments made by them, to their children,
heirs, friends, and ſuppoſititious creditors, ſhould
be annulled, and thoſe that accepted of them
puniſhed as their accomplices, if it ſhould ap-
pear to the judges that all this was done with an
intention to defraud the true creditors. By this
regulation all perſons were forbid, on pain ol
being proſecuted as accomplices likewiſe, to give
a retreat to theſe bankrupts, their ſecurities, clerks,
or factors; as alſo to receive any of their goods,
papers, or efte&s; or to afford them the leaſt a“

ſiſtance: all perſons were permitted to detain then

without a warrant, and to bring them to Juſtice,
notwithſtanding any arret and cuſtom to the con.
wary : and, laſtly, the true creditors of the bank:
rupts were forbid to make any agreements or con.
tracts with them, or any perſons acting for then,
upon pain of loſing their debts, and even of hu.
ving a criminal proſecution commenced againſt
them. An action at law was the only way left o.
en for thei. This appeared to me to be almoſt
all that could be done to ſecure the public trade
and tranquillity, both equally intereſted in ai
abuſe which was now become very common.
This edit was followed by another again
duels, which 1 had long earneſtly ſolicited for

* Jlerc, Franc, and other hiſtorians, a2 1609.

At

+

eK l

1609. OF SULLY. 391

4%

An extraordinary council being aſſembled for this

2 purpoſe in the firſt gallery at Fontainebleau, his
* Majeſty, who was reſolved to examine into this

matter thoroughly, deſired to know the origin of

wee different forms and cuſtoms uſed in duelling.
2 His counſellors gave him no cauſe to compliment

them upon their erudition : all remained ſilent,
and myſelf, as well as tlie others; but with ſuch

enxpreſſion in my looks, as made the King eaſily
5K _ perceive that I only wanted his command to
„ ipeak. His Majeſty then turned towards me, and
, {aid, © Grand Maſter, by your looks, I gueſs,
d © you know more than you pretend to know; I
u © intreat, nay, I command you to tel] us your

d- © thoughts.” I {till refuſed through reſpe& ; but
being again preſſed to declare my ſentiments, I
Is made a ſpeech, which I ſhall not repeat here,
of Þ © ſince it contained nothing more than what I for-

merly {aid in thele Memoirs, when I treated that
ſubject. I took care to {end the edict againſt
* duels “ immediately into my government, and
to have it obſerved there with the utmoſt frid-

nels.

To this account of the affairs of the govern-
ment, it will not be improper to add {ome intrigues
of the court. Upon the advices I have mentioned
of certain factions in ſeveral provinces, the King
{reſolved to fend thither ſome perſon in his name,
and N — was the man he pitched upon for this
purpoſe, one who will neither be pleaſed nor of-
© tended at ſeeing himſelf mentioned here. I could
not approve of this choice, knowing that the
ade hatred he bore to ſeveral perſons there, would in-
an duce him to lay crimes to their charge they never
* | * This edit, which obliges' thoſe who have been offended in
point of honour to have recourſe to-the Marſhals of France, or

ſor. their ſieutenants, for reparation, inflicts very ſevere penalties;
| famy, loſs of nobility, and even death. P. Mathicu, vol. 2.

Leck 4.
had

———— — 7 ˖˙*˙²¾⅛ũ —— —

had the leaſt intentions of committing. I, there. 4

92 MEMOIRS Book x.

fore, told his Majeſty, that, if N — was the!
perſon employed by him, I would ſend no one!
thither from myſelf, becauſe 1 did not chuſe tf
act with ſuch an aſſociate. N——, diſappointed
of this employment, reſolved to revenge himlelfÞ 7
on me by every method he could think of; and!
offered thoſe courtiers whom he knew to be my!
enemies, to ſerve them as the inſtrument of allÞ
their deſigns againſt me. |
Accordingly he went one day to the MarquizÞ
de Coeuvres, and after obliging him to lecrecy,
it being, he ſaid, his zeal only which induced hing
to make the diſcovery, he affirmed, that I wa
one to the parliament under pretence of having
3 buſineſs there; but in reality, to withdray
from the regiſter”s office the letters of legitimation
of M. de Vendome, which had been carried
thither to be regiſtered in parliament. De
Coeuvres went immediately to make this report
to the perſon whom it moſt concerned, and M.
de Vendome went alſo as haſtily to complain of
it to- the King. His Majeſty asked him the name
of the perſon who had given him this information;
bur M. de Vendome, without diſcovering the
impoſtor, an{wered for the truth of his report, u
ſuch a manner, that the King could no longer
doubt of it; and when he ſaw me the next morn-
ing, aſked me whathuſineſs I had at the parliamet.
I replied, (which was true), „That I had gone
« thither to take copies of ſome papers in the regs
6 ſters for whichTIhad occaſion.” Was it for am
« thing that concerned my ſon de Vendome!”
returned Henry. © No, Sire,“ faid I; and, {it

pri'ed at the manner in which he ſpoke to me
& why ſhould you think M. de Vendome us
concerned in it?” * | know why,” replied tis
prince coldiy. Two or three other words, equally

. myſteriou-

+

yſterious, which eſcaped his Majeſty, gave me

Fo underſtand, that he had ſome ſuſpicion in his

ind. I intreated him to tell me what it was,

Which he did; and! ſoon convinced him that ca-
Jumny had here played its uſual part.
That ſame day, in the afternoon, the King
peing at the houle of the Counteſs of Moret, a

ittle boy came there with a packet, which he
delivered to the firſt footman he met. Madame
de Moret, to whom it was brought, found a billet
In which the fame informations were piven her
concerning her children, as De Coeuvres had re-
teived with regard to M. de Vendome. She be-
gan to weep; and the King deſiring to know the
teaſon, the gave him the billet to read. Henry
aſked for the boy who had brought it; but he was
ot to be found. Madam,” ſaid he to the Coun-
tels, with a thoughtful and gloomy air, “there
is ſome malice here on one ſide or the other.“
e then endeavoured to make ſome diſcoveries:
toncerning the author of theſe ſtories. The boy
Fas ſoon found out; and, by what he ſaid, the
ing gueſſed that N------ was the perſon : for ha-
Wng in vain defired De Coeuvres to name him, he
jamed him himſelf; and De Coeuvres, in his ſurpriſe,
Gould notdenyhe was the man. However, he gave
mediate notice to N------ of what had happened.
-- ---, Who ſaw that this affair was likely to be-
me very ſerious, wentto Villeroi, and, throwing
mſelf at his feet, intreated him to ſupport him a-
inſt the effects of my reſentment. Villeroi, who
oupht there might be ſome danger in defending
m, at leaſt if he did it openly, would not make hin,
Ny promiſe; but contented himſelf with hazarding,
Nen any opportunity offered, a few favourable
rds for N., which his Majeſty received with
Ich an air, as made him repent of his com-
bUlance for that impoſtor.

Henry

| juſtly ſcandalized at the irreverence with which he faw the March!

394 MEMOIR S Book XXV.

Henry had juſt then diſcovered two other in.

ſtances of this man's malignant diſpoſition, which

ſnewed that he was capable of failing in reſpect to
Majeſty itſelf : one was, that he had had the impru-
dence to propagate publicly a feigned tale of an
amour between Henry and a certain girl, whom
he named, and the malice to inform-the Queen of
It; and the other, that he had encouraged Father
Gonthier, a Jeſuit, to continue his outrageous
manner of preaching, which had already mad
ſome noiſe, by affuring him, that one of his (er.
mons, which he quoted, and which was one ef
the moſt furious, had been generally admire!
and praiſed by the lords of the court, naming,
in particular, the Marſhals de Briſſac and D'Orn
no *. Thishe was unfortunate enough for N--....

Father Gonthier, a Jeſuit, in the preſence of the King,
* who attended his ſermons in St Gervaſe's church, on Fridq,
«+ Chriſtmas day, Saturday, and Sunday, made continual declims
tions againſt the Huguenots, whom he ſeveral times called ve
„% min, ſcoundrels : and ſpeaking of the new articles of their con.
feſſion, in which they call the Pope antichritt ; “ If it is true, Sire,”
fays he, © that the Pope is antichriſt, on what footing ſtands you
marriage? Where is the difpenſativa for it? What will be
„ come of M. the Dauphin?“ Marſhal D'Ornano ſaid one dy t
the King. If any Jeſuit had dared to preach before me i!
*« Bourdeaux, as Father Gonthier did in your Majeſty's pretenc,
*« J would have ordered him to be thrown into the river he
„ moment he came out of the pulpit.” Mem, hiftoire de Fran,
aun 1699.

All the ſermons ef thoſe times are filled with expreſſions, who's
boldneſs and fingularity, not to eall them by a worſe name, uu
be extremely ſhocking to ns at preſent, The heretics were out!
2 in their ſatires, and too often the preachers, in their ſermons

aunched out into the moſt extravagant declamations. A coten-
porary hiſtorian, Peter Matthieu, book 3. nevertheleſs, gives th
teſtimony of the Jeſuits: ** That there was more regulani!),
« modeſty, gravity, and moderation, in their ſermons, than 5
„% many others.” Sauval alſo ſpeaking of Father Gonthict,
preaching, greatly commends his eloquence and apoſtolic 20
He relates, that Henry IV. being one day at the ſame church 0
St Gervaſe, when Father Gonthier was preaching ; that preachef,

906

=
-
4
-
=
*

LE
hs nr

5 1 l
e ZOOS CD A airs gs
2. . pon * 1 p 7 ” * — — ey «+ OT OT

RS
ay * XR
* Py Mi. py

CY
»”-.
— 47

Jer or S8 ul 1 1. 355

for theſe two gentlemen being preſent at the re-
2 primand the King gave Father Gonthier, they
likewiſe ſpoke to the father, and charged with in-
ſolence and falſehood, the perſon who had dared to

's.

1
.

gay, they had approved of a diſcourſe ſo full of
'F © impertinence. All this {oirritated Henry againſt
the impoſtor, that when I went the next day to
'F deſire he would do me juſtice, *I have diſcovered
the whole myſtery,” ſaid he to me; it is the
malicious wit of N. .- that has invented all
| it theſe ſtories ; but, for your ſake, I banith him 4
. from the court:” and the order was accordingly 1
ſigniſied to him. This affair was much talked of,
as may be well imagined: I confeſs I was ten
4 whole days in perplexity and uneaſineſs about
it. |
lis, however, was a trifle compared with the
confuſion which the Prince of Conde occaſioned.
The marriage of this prince with Mademoiſelle
de Montmorency, was ſo far from ſtifling the re-
ports at court of an intrigue between Henry and
the Princeſs, that it did but the more increaſe
them, as I had always apprehended it would.
Two thonſand crowns given by his Majeſty for
wedding-cloaths for the young lady; jewels to
the value of eighteen thouſand livres, purchaſed for
ber, by Madame D*Angouleme, of Meſſier a jewel-
Jer, who lived upon the bridge Au-Change, and
F110'e receipt, of the 29th of May, was publicly

4
ou boeſß of Verneull, and other ladies of her company, talk, laugh,
tre and endeavour to make his Majelty laugh, turned towards that
nonk, rince, and ſaid to him, ** Sire, will vou never leave off coming, ac-
* = companied by a ſeraglio, to hear the word of God, and of giving
$ 1s

o unedifying an example in this holy place?” That the King,

arl'\ etcad of ſending the preacher to the Battile, as all thoſe ladies

129.11 egged of him to do, went again the next day to hear him

hier? reach; and that meeting with him as he was going into the 1
2c dulpit, he told him he was ohliged to him for his correction; W
eh þ nd that he had nothing to fear but only delired he would not | 1.
_ drove him again in public, by
arch known 1

_ — — — —

m6 ME MO IRS Book xXXVI.

known; a great number of other preſents and

ratuities in money, given to the Prince of Con.

& on account of this marriage, were conſidered
as ſo many proofs of the corre{pondence between
the King and Princeſs, although, to ſpeak can.
didly, there was nothing in all this which might
not be juſtified. But as I would avoid, likewile,
falling into the other extreme with the flatterer;
of this prince, who affected to maintain in public,
that he had not the leaſt regard for the young

rinceſs, I continue firm in my firſt ſentiment,

his, indeed, was a medium between both, which
very few perſons kept. The Queen and the Prince
of Conde, who were moſt concerned in the affair,
being inflamed with rage at all theſe reports con.
tinually whiſpered in their ears, ſoon put the
whole court into an uproar. All my endeavour
to calm the Queen were fruitleſs : the was quite
furious; and the Prince, who did not reſtrain him-
ſelf from ſhnewing his diſcontent publicly, medi.
tated from that moment the 1mprudent ſtep which

he took {ome time afterwards.

Henry received the firſt notice of his deſign,
in a billet which was ſent him to Fontainebleau,
whither he went to paſs the Eaſter holy-days, and
he diſpatched it immediately to me at Paris. This
was the purport of the billet: That the Prince,
accompanied by his phyſician, had left Fontaine:
bleau the day after Eaſter, and came to lodge at
Paris in the houſe of a Spanith penſionary; that
all the night had been paſſed in deliberating, with
Great agitation on the Prince's ſide, whether he

ould not make his retreat inſtantly to Spain,
which his hoſt had prevented him from doing, by
makin him ſenſible of the fatal conſequences
that would attend ſuch an action; that the ne
morning a purſe of one thouſand doubloons Ws
brought to the Prince, who {till lay conceales at

ho
La

*. n x
% "I .

2 = "» by n
Wa ee A tp T4 Ca 5

— 2

* OY RR 4 ag er

ft 9 hes 4 ©. A _ ens fan: end A. ani wet.” dd cm

S

1609. OF. V6 Lb T5: 297
chat houſe, with an aſſurance that the remainder,
which was apparently ſolicited for by his phyſician,
Z ſhould be ſent him in a little time. This man haz

been accuſed of managing the whole affair, be-
cCdauſe he had already laboured to get the marriage
broken off, and make up a match between the
Prince and Mademoiſelle de Maienne. He was
brewiſe, it was fad, connected with another phyit-
„cian, a Genoeſe, who had been with Don John,
and fix weeks before was gone to the Count Spi-
„nola, at the Hague, from whence he was to go to
1 W7 England. This billet agreed with another, which
©W © had been ſent to Beringhen, already mentioned,

„where it was ſaid, that the Prince of Condé had

obtained letters from the King of England to the
e States of Holland.

All theſe informations, which Henry was in-
treated by the authors to keep very ſecret, could
not make him believe the Prince was capable of
committing ſo great an error. His Majeſty came
to Paris at the beginning of May, and, after a ſhort
ſtay, returned to Fontainebleau, whither M. the

5 Prince followed him. It is certain, chat his beha-
n viour, and his diſcourſe in public, gave room to
1 believe that he only went to brave his Majeſty.
11s

My friend,” ſaid Henry in a letter to me, dated
ce, WW June the 12th, © M. the Prince is here; but he
acts like a man poſſe ſſed: you will be angry
and aſhamed at the things he favs of me: I
mall loſe all patience with him at laſt, and Jam
n reſolved to talk to him with ſeverity.“ The

he Ring, to puniſh him, ordered me not to pay him the
* April quarter of his penſion, and to give reſuſals
_ o his pourveyor and all his creditors, who, know
1

ing the pratuities which his Majeſty had beſtow-
Ed upon this prince on occaſion of his marriage,
Fueled theinſelves to me as to the diſpenſer of
em. © If this does not keep him within bounds,”
I You. IV, Mm tail

with which, to a perſon of his rank, one wou

when he knew I was not gone to the council.

398 MEMOIRS Book Xx.

faid his Majeſty, “we muſt think of ſome other
* method ; for he ſays the moſt injurious thing;
«« of me. We will conſider together what is t
«© be done, when you come hither *.“
Nlonſieur the Prince fixed upon me to impart
his grievances to: but in what quality, is not caſy
tor me te declare; fince, if I may flatter my(el{Þ
that my advice was not indifferent to him, yer,
on the other hand, I may have reaſon to {uſpet,
ehat, in thoſe aſſurances of reſpect and attachmen

{often the freedom of diſapproving his condud,
he ſought for a pretence to advance afterwarl
with ſome appearance of probability, that I ci
not oppole his deſign of leaving the Kkingdon i
It is this which obliges me to give an account of
the converſation I had with this prince at ny

houſe, whither he came on Wedneſday afternoo,

He entered my cloſet, bearing in his count
31ance all the marks of the diſturbance of his mind
] was not ſurpriſed, that, without any other ie
lude, he began to talk to me of the rea{ons !!
had to complain of the King. In my anfwer,.

* The Memoirs for the hiſtory of France ſpeak of t lis in !!
tollowing manner. © The King being deſperately in love with ti
« Princeſs of Conde, ſet every body at work, even her lnſbant
„ mother.“ The Prince complained of this, and defired leaves
his Majeſty to retire with his wife, to one of his country-hou!s
The King refuſed his requeſt in a rude manner, and went fot
as to affront and threaten him. It is ſaid, the Prince made a hauch |
reply, and made uſe of the word fyrauuy; that the King, 1111
hold of that word, ſaid, © I never in my life was guilty cf
act of tyranny, but when I cauſe you to be received for wit
«« Fou were not.” The Prince was in a paſſion with his mode
tor ſuffering herſelf to be employed as an inſtrument to cor
zhe chaſtity of his wife, It was ſaid, that the Marchioneſs d
Verneml, who commonly ſpoke to the King not as to her mafle
bat as fie would to her footman, bantering on this ſubject, id!
him: „Are not you a ſad wretch, who want to lie with your
ile? for you know you have told me he is your ſon?”
remind

dog. r 399

reminded him of the many obligations his family
in general owed to the King; and added, that
* himſelf in particular had received favours from
his Majeſty, which not only deſerved that he
EZ ſhould ſacrifice to them a little reſentment, con-
# ceived upon a mere ſuſpicion and an imapinary
) luronge ut alſo a juſt diſcontent. The Prince,

6
*
N
7
A"
e.

poſed, Henry had formed againſt him; all which
7] attributed to the inquietude of his mind, and to
10 Huſpicions carried too far: and theſe I thought to
i aiſpate, by repreſenting to him, in ſuch a man-
ner as left him no room to doubt of my ſincerity,

eo me with 1 know not how many deſigns, hie ſup—

imat his Majeſty was fo far from having a deſign
"=o proceed to any extremities with him, that he
0 ould reflect that he was his near kinſman, only
u to add to that natural {weetneſs with which he

treated every body, a particular ſriendſhip and
diſtinguiſhing reſpect for him. And I remember,
bat inſtead of allowing, through complaiſance
6 po the Prince, that Henry was capable of oppre//-
eis aun innocent perſcri, words which were indeed
ſten repeated to me, I told him plainly, that it
vas commonly thoſe who were moſt guilty that
abuſed the word 72mocence, notwithſtanding which
ey could not avoid meeting with the punilh-
ment they merited. ;
M. the Prince, who, after ſo ſree a ſpeech,
pught to have been upon his guard againſt me,
vid not ſcruple to declare that he was reſolved to
cave France. Theſe imprudent words appeared to
me as the effects only of an inconſiderate rage;
nd, if I oppoſed him with firmneſs, it was be—
dae aufe I thought, that, on theſe occaſions, firmneſs
iht to accompany the advice which is given.
told him, that I could not believe he was ca-
Fable of betraying, in ſuch a manner, his King,
Ml M m 2 his

who could not relith my arguments, entertained

409 MEMOIRS Book XXYT,

his country, his honour, and his duty; that the
kingdom, and even the court, was the only fit

reſidence for princes of the blood; that every

where elſe their grandeur ſullied their reputation;
that it was even imputed to them as a crime to
remain too long in any other place, without ha.
ving obtained his Majeſty's permiſſion for it. The
Prince replying that ſuch a reſtraint ſuited nei.
ther with his birth nor rank, I anſwered, that the
laws of the {tate obliged the children and brother
of the King to as great, or perhaps, greater (tri.
neis of conduct, than the meaneſt of his ſubjeds;
and this I proved to him by examples drawn from
the Hiſtory of Lewis XI. the late Duke of Anjou,
and of Henry himſelf. It was not in this manner
that the Prince wiſhed to hear me ſpeak. I per.
ceived that his intention was now, by giving:
ne turn to his words, to convince me that I had
brought him over to my opinion; but, from {0
ſuadden an alteration, I drew the moſt certain
prof, that he had really taken that very reſoli.
tion which his laſt words would have perſuade
me he had abſolutely given up.

I had fo little doubt of it, that when J was 1n-
formed the Prince, aſter he quitted me, appeared
to be wholly calmed ; that he had even complain.

ed to the Qucen of the report that was ſpread d

his having a deſign to quit the court, and aflured

this princeſs that he had not the leaſt intention

do fo, adding theſe words, © IT am very well con
& tented with his Majeſty ;” and ſpoke in tit

ſame manner almoſt publicly; I would not deſeg

a moment waiting on the King, whom I allure
after faithfully relating all that had paſſed betwee!

the Prince and myſelf, that he would not be

* + $94 nt».

France eight days longer. Henry was ready P

treat me as a madman, there was fo little appe:_

ance, he ſaid, that he could live in a foreign cou!
100

m
0,
ler
er.
91
had
1 {0
210
oll.

Cel

Ih»
arel
Lain.
1d df
ured

on 0

colt
1 tt
deſer

Jurech E
tween
be
ady U
ppect
con

ir

4 LA

1809 or . 401

try like a prince, without the aſſiſtance he received
from him; ſince it was impoſſible he ſhould be able
to carry away any of his effects ſo privately, but

that he might be caſily prevented. To theſe rea-
| ſons his Majeſty added what the Prince had juſt
{aid to the Queen. All that you tell me, Sire, re-

plied I, cannot make me alter my opinion; but

rather confirms me in it the more: you may be an-

gry with me, and accuſe me of obſtinacy; but time

and the event will ſhew you that I am not miſta-

ken. I ſee ſeveral perſons, purſued I, who are in

the ſecret, and who deceive you, although they
are more obliged to you than tlie Prince: but this
| ought not to ſeem ſurpriſing, fince you help to

deceive yourſelf. © You do not name any perſon,”

© ſaid his Majeſty, ſuppoſing that it was the Queen's
$ domeſtics of whom I ipoke, “but I know whom
you mean.” This was not very difficult to diſ-

cover. There were more, beſide the King and me,
who ſaw that the cabal played a ſtrange part here;
for they not only ſpread a thouſand falſe ſtories
about the King and the Princeſs of Conde through
the court, affirming them to be abſolutely true,
Which was indeed the effect of their ordinary ma—
lice; but to theſe they added that deteſtable arti-
fie, not caſy to be deſcribed, by which they
made theſe falſehoods {erve to render the King in
me higheſt degree hateful to the Queen, and for-
ed this princeſs to abandon herſelf entirely to
heir conduct: hence proceeded thoſe plots to
F'1iich, without her knowledge, they dared to give

he authority of her name; hence the motives of

thouſand new inſtances, not to defer the cere-
Dony of the coronation any longer.
There was but an interval of four days between

e converſation | had ich King, on the ſubject
he Prince ol Condé, and the flight of that

N Mm 3 prince.

,

*
— — — —
44 << ——

-
i
fr

2

— -
. 6

53 — —

” yd wo

0 — We —

2
= .

-

= 4
—

— voi —

PSS

IOC. =
—— — —
Oh — —

—

=

4 MEMOIR S Book XXV.

prince. On the 29th of Auguſt *, at eleven
o' clock at night, Praſſin entered my chamber juſt
as I was going to bed; he told me, that the King
wanted me, and that I muſt attend him immedi.
ately. © What can the King mean, couſin?”
ſaid I, in the firſt emotions of my anger, and
without giving him time to explain himſelf, * par.
« dien, he torments me to death: I cannot live:
«« cannot fleep. I muſt,” purſued I, with great Þ 7? «

A
*

impatience, ſappoſing this ſummons was upon n
account which, for very good reaſons, I might © «
diſpenſe with myſelf from obeying, © I muſt rie! «
« at tiwvee o'clock to-morrow morning to real “
«© letters and accounts, which I have receive!
*« and muſt be anſwered immediately: I muſt 60
« make a memorandum of all that I am to do to- ce

6% morrow, of what is to be tranſacted by the

»The laſt of November, not the zoth of Auguſt, as theſe Me.
moirs erroneouſly ſay. The Prince,” ſays Marechal de Bafſom-
pierre, left the court, and went to Muret, which he quitted, ac-
„ companied by Rochefort and Touray, a valet de chambre, who
* carried the Princeſs his wife behind him on horſeback, Made.
„% moiſelle Da-Certean, and a chamber-maid called Ii
and went to Landrecy. The King was at play in his little cloſet,
„u hen firſt D*Elbene, and afterwards the Chevalier Du-Gurt,
» brought him the news of it. I was neaeſt to him. It
** ſaid to me, in a whiſper, My friend Baſſompierre, I am undone:
this man has carried his wife into a wood, I do not know whe
„ther with deſign to kill her, or to carry her out of France: tale
care of my money, and go on with the game, whilſt I go t0
learn more particular news. Every body gave over play, and!
took an opportunity of returning the King his money, whic
„ he had left on the table. I went to him, and never in my lift
** ſaw any one ſo diſtracted, or in ſo violent a paſſion.” Baſſon-
pierre afterwards relates what paſſed in the Queen's chamber, ans
the advice M. de Sully gave the King, in the ſame manner thelt
Memoirs do. Henry IV. gave ſuch violent ſigns of grief and e-
ſpair on the Princeſs of Condẽ's being thus carried away, that ſome
ill-informed writers, ſuch as the author of Lhiſtoire % Ia mere d
du fils, have advanced, that the war he was going to enter 170
in Flanders, when he was aſſaſſinated, was partly intended to oblige
the Archduke to deliver up that princeſs to him. See alſo Mee, (
and other hiſtorians, |

«« councih

ha at So cath cn chai rr es a ern .

3”

—

„ ,
—

.
1

:
5

1609. © F: 3 U L . 403

60
6c
40
60
60
6

R X a
_ · ·

A «
Lay *

10
10
«
«

council, of what I am to ſay to the King, what
directions I am to give my*clerks, my ſecreta-
ries, and all thoſe who have any offices under
me: I cannot get all this done before eight
o'clock in the morning, at which hour I go to
the council ; judge then whether I have any
time to loſe, and if I can go now to the Lou-
vre, from whence I know 1t will be impoſſible
for me to return till two or three hours after
midnight: I ſhall have no leiſure for employ-
ing mylelf in my cloſet; for the whole day
will be taken up in giving audience, and in
conferences with the clerks of accounts and o-
ther officers, who have buſineſs with me.” © 1
know all this,” ſaid Praſſin,“ nor is the King ig-
norant of it; for he ſaid aloud, before all the
company, that I ſhould make you angry by
coming for you at ſuch an unſeaſonable hour,
and at the only time when you have leiſure to
take any reſt to relieve both your body and
mind: but there is no help for it, Monſieur,

„ you muſt come: this is an affair that concerns

„him nearly, and he is perſuaded, that, if there
is any remedy for the evil, it is you only who

.
-
3

|

1

3
*

;
Y

4
*
{
4

of
*
H

N

«
40
40

10
40

couſin; I am ready.“

can diſcover it. The man you know of, is

fled, as, the King ſaid, you foretold ; and, what
is worſe, has taken the lady along with him.”
Oh,” replied I, “is this the buſineſs then for

© which he has {ent for me? truly there will be a
i

little anger on his fide : for, L doubt, we ſhall
not agree in our opinions.” I know, added I,
that Mars and Venus are often in very good
intelligence; yet, if we would have good ſuc-
ceſs in affairs that depend upon the former, the
latter muſt ſomerimes yield to him; and this
poſſibly may furniſh us with ſome good reaſon
for haſtening our buſineſs: therefore let us go,

When

n
A
—

„3 ˙ A3

404 MEMOIR S Book XXVI.
- When I came to the Louvre, I found the Kin

in the Queen's chamber, walking backwards an

forwards, with his head reclined, and his hands
folded behind his back : with the Queen-were pre.
fent Meſſieurs de Sillery, de Villeroi, de Gevres,
de La-Force, La-Varenne, and {ome others, lean.
mg againſt the hangings, and at ſuch a diſtance
from each other, that they could not converſe
but aloud. “ Well,” ſaid Henry, taking my hand

as ſoon as I entered, “ our man is gone, and hu

% carried all with him: what ſay you to this?”
« TI ſay, Sire,” replied I,“ that I am not ſurpriſed
&« to hear it; and, after what he ſaid to me at
ce the arſenal, I expected this flight, which you
& might have prevented if you would have helie.
& ved me.“ I knew you would ſay this,” re.
plied the King; “ but we mult not ſpeak of things
cc that are paſt; let us think only of the future,
& and let us confider what is to be done now:
% give me your advice; for I have yet applied to
« no other perſon.” © Sire,” returned I, “I an
« not yet ſufficiently well informed of all the cir
«© cumſtances relating to this affair, and hare
« not reflected as much upon it as is nece{liry
& T ſhould: I intreat you to let me ſleep upon i,
& and to-morrow I will attend you, and will en-
ce deavour to give you the beſt advice I can:
& hut, if you preſs me now, I ſhall ſay nothing to
e the purpoſe ; for my judgment is a little mud.
« dy at preſent.“ © No,” interrupted his Majeliy,
& this is not true; I know you too well: tel! me
de your thoughts immediately.” It is impo-
« ſible, Sire,” ſaid I; © and, if you perſiſt in prel
te ing me 10 earneſtly, I repeat it again, I ſhall
« fay nothing to the purpole : I beſeech you cx:
© cuſe me till to-morrow.” © Indeed I will not,
faid Henry; © you muſt fpeak now: thc eforete!
& me what I ſhouid do.” © Nothing at all, Site,“!

| replied;

2 —

4
A
4
;
!

1

1609. „ 405

replied ; © for I was obliged to ſpeak. © How!

% nothing?“ exclaimed he; „this is not advice.”

« Pardon me, Sire,” reſumed I, * it is, and the
« heſt that you can follow: there are maladies
« which require time rather than remedies, and

ce ] believe this to be of ſuch a nature,” © This

« declamation is unſeaſonable,” ſaid Henry with
the ſame impatience ; “ I muſt have reaſons.
« Are theſe yours?” I have no good ones, Sire,“
anſwered I, “if theſe are contrary to your incli-
« nations. In my opinion, however, the affair
« does not admit of much doubt about what ſhould

2 © be done: it is neceſſary to wait for further

« particulars, before any thing is undertaken,
« that you may fix upon the beſt expedients, and
& till then, Ithink, it ought to be talked of as
little as poſſible; nor ſhould it appear of any
© conſequence to you, or capable of giving you

the leaſt uneaſineſs.“

I ſupported this opinion by a reflection which

: ſeemed to me abſolutely juſt; and this was, that
the good or bad reception which the Spaniards
would give the Prince, depended upon the im-

preſion his flight made upon the Ring; fo that
it was not impoſſible but that they would receive
the Prince with contempt, to ſpare the expenſes
they would otherwiſe be obliged to, eſpecially if
we could make them entertain a ſuſpicion that

*
1
*
＋

:
!

: x
1 r , De” 1

this flight of the Prince of Condé's was a thing

concerted between his Majeſty and him. What,”
laid the King, ſhaking his head, © would you that

I ſhould ſuffer a petty prince, my neighbour,
to give a retreat contrary to my inclinations

4 to the firſt prince of my blood, without ſhewing

any reſentment of it? This is a fine advice in-

| . deed! I ſhall not follow it; Praſlin ſhall ſet

6 Out,

** . — TED 1; 4

a _— _— _—_ "> OR. 7 IE %
ow 4 a * — — bo ol

= = = - = -
| —_ —— ——— — —— _ —
— _ = — :

406 MEMOIR S Book XXVI.

« out ®, in a few days, to ſignify my intentions,”
* I told you, Sire,” ſaid I, “ that, not having
« conſidered this affair, I ſhould ſay nothing to
« your ſatisfaction. Another thought has juſt
« occurred, which will not be of any prejudice
« to what you propoſe. to do; but I cannot tel]
« 1t you till two days hence: however, I am
« ſure you will be better ſatisfied with it than my
« firſt propoſal.” His Majeſty conſented to this
delay, and, embracing me, ſaid, * Return home
« and go to bed; fleep till eight o'clock : for!
& had rather the council ſhould not be held to.
« morrow, and my ordinary affairs be poſtponed
« one day, than your health ſhould ſuffer the
« {malleſt prejudice.”

I was not deceived in my conjecture, that the
other propoſal I had to make to his Majeſty, con-
cerning the Prince's retreat into Flanders, would

*

*

=

* «« Praflin actually went; but the Archduke made anſwer, thit
* he had never violated the law of nations on any occaſion what-
„ever; and that he would, on no conſideration, begin in the calc
« of the firſt prince of the blood-royal of France : and foon after
*« ſent the Prince a ſam of money, and an eſcort to conduct lim to
«« Bruſſels.” Nen. pour Uh: Foive de Francs, £1110 1629.

The Marechal de Baſſompierre in his Memoirs fays, the Arch.
duke was ſo much ſtaggered with M. de Praſlin's declaration, that
he ſent to deſire the Prince would only paſs through his domi riot,
without making any ſtay in them, though he had before promiſe
to receive him; but that afterwards he again changed his reſold
tion; by the advice of the Marquis Spinola, and treated the Price
with the higheſt honours. Baſſompicrre”'s Memoirs, vol 1. F. 28.

Father Daniel in his Hiſtory of France, in 4to, vol. 10. p.437
has thrown new kghts on this incident, from the letters in the l.
brary of the Abbe d' Eſtrees, by which it appears, that Hury IV.
ſecretly ſent the Marquis de Cocuvres to Bruſſels to endeavor
to carry off the Princeſs of Conde, and that the attempt miſca-
ried only by the King having diſcovered this deſign to the Quee\,
who immediately diſpatched a courier to inform the Marquis Si.
nola of it ; on which the Princeſs of Conde was removed into a
apartment in the Archduke'ꝰs palace.

pleak

e ̃ͤ ö.. yy a 35s
CY Gand
a

» oy 2 © we

1609. r 8 er. 407

* pleaſe him better than the former. He came to
” the arſenal three days afterwards to know it. We
continued ſhut up an hour in my cloſet; but it is
not proper to reveal what paſſed there on the ſub-
jet. The King, at parting, ſaid aloud, * Adieu,
« my friend; ſtay at home and finiſh my buſineſs :
© but, above all, labour for the ſucceſs of the
« propoſal you have made me; for I approve of
« jt much more than the advice you gave me in

„% my wife's chamber at the Louvre.”

* The Prince of Conde, thinking it neceſſary to
© juſtify his late action, fent a letter“ ſome days

| aſterwards

Ow” an. 4 *
c
—

— th

%% The Prince wrote to the King, that it was with the utmoſt
+> * regret, and in order to preſerve his life and tenour only, that
he had retired from the court, and not with any intention ever
| to be otherwiſe than his Majeſty's humble ration, fatthful ſubs
e jet, and ſervant.” Headds, © I will never engage in any thing
> * contrary to your Maieſty's ſervice, unleſs I am compelled to h;
and beg you will not take it amiſs, if I refuſe to ſee or receive
any letters which ſhall be wrote to me from court, by any one
= © whatever, except thoſe your Majeſty may be plcaſed to honour
1 5 „ me with.” Mem. for the hiſt. of France, anno 1612, Siri, who

%

0 gi res a very minute account of this retreat of the Prince of Conde,

in the Mem. Recond. vol. 2. p. 82. et ſeq. adds many other parti-
hy ;<ulars to thoſe here mentioned; but the greateſt part of them, in
my opinion, deſerve little credit; as where he raſhly aſſert s, on
"5, the foundation of popular report, that the only motive that indu-
0b ced Henry IV. to undertake the war againſt the Spaniards, was to
la- oblige them to ſend back the Princets of Conde; and that finding

ce them, in ſpite of his menaces, perſiſt in refufing ſo to do, he repent-
| Sed cf having puſhed matters ſo far. He adds a reflection on the
7: ; hour of that princeſs, as if ſhe had been a party concerned in
'k | this deſign againſt her huſband, whom ſhe diſliked on account of a
. natural or acquired infirmity, which would have been ſufficient to

Penn their mariiage : that ſhe was extremely deſirous to refuru

our |

a France: that, during her reſidence at Bruſſels, ſhe continued
en, eccive letters of gallantry from Henry IV.: that the Prince of
cri. onde was ſo well acquainted with her difpoſition in regard to him,

chat he could not conceal his reſentment at it; and that, on his
| in, he talked publicly of obtaining a divorce from her. The
eenteſt truth Siri peaks on this ſubject, is, that the King obſti-

aately

— ä — . -
.

408 ME MOI RS Book XXVI.

11
afterwards to the King. He likewiſe ſent ano. 1
ther, at the {ame time, to M. de Thou, much MK ;
fuller and more circumſtantial, in which, among 1
other things, he inſinuated, that I was the cauſe 5

of his leaving France. He ought to accuſe hi; MW. ;
« own malice, and that of many other perſons 0
% who adviſed him to it,“ ſaid the King, © ad 6
ce not you. I defire you will write to him, and <.
% give him a fair repreſentation of all that has
« paſſed; and that you will tell him, with the re. ;1
« ſpect due to his quality, not to his perſon, the .
« plain truth, and the miſery he will infallibly MW” ;þ
% expoſe himſelf to, if he does not return to bh
e duty.” © I will go home then, Sire,” ſaid , ©
(for we were then at the Conſtable's houſe), 4d
& and draw up the heads of my letter, and will i pe
« bring it to you.” “ No, no,” replied his Ma. K.
jeſty, “ you muſt write here; I will make then e
bring you ink and paper.” * But, Sire,“ 1e.
ſumed I, © this letter is of conſequence : it is ne. 7;
„ ceſſary I ſhould reflect well upon it, and cx eg
&f mine it attentively before I ſend it; for, it for
& rite what will ſatisfy you, I muſt alſo conſidet Wc
c what ſuits with the Prince's quality and my |
e own, that no perſon, either in France or elle
& where, nor himſelf, who, you fee, ſeeks for oc.
ce cafjons to accuſe and blame me, may find any
ce thing there to authoriſe him. I am not preps
& red to write ſo {uddenly.” Notwithſtanding
all I could alledge in my excule, I was obliged t0
wrue this Jetter inſtantly in his Majeſty's pre-
ſence ; and at one end of the table, near which
vr were ſitting. This letter, though writ ſo hat

rately rej ted all the rational advice given him on this occaii!
by the nuncin, ſome of his counſellors, and particularly the Duke
of Sully, whom he alſo commends for his reſolute and {rec malte
of ſpeaking and wiiting to the Prince of Conde.

by

1609. SUL 409

y ly, was approved of by the King; and here follow
© the contents.
Ü began with complaining to the Prince, that, |
| bu believed he had reſpect enough for me not |
to make me a viſit with any other intention than
do ask my advice, yet he gave me occaſion now to |
1 bow? that viſit was only to draw me into the il
| commifion of {ome error or imprudence. As to
me reſt, he knew better than any one elſe how 1
Hoch in vain he had laid that ſnare for m me; and |
ebhere I related, lefs for him than the public, all l
dat had paſſed in the converſation we had toge-
ter at the arſenal, which the reader has already

l feen. After this 1 owned to him, without any

„ lifguile, that having, notwithſtanding all his art, |
I eee into his deſign, I had informed the 4
king of! It, who might have prevented him from 1
n esecuting it, if he had believed me, or been leſs |
© ood and” indulgent. I made no apologies to the |
e. Prince for the advice J had given to his Majeſty |

KB again! t him, ſince it was for th e good of the ſtate,
ſor the Ring's advantage, and for his own, kow-
crer little he might attend do it. I laid before s
his eyes the conſequences of the imprudent ſtep
be had taken: I asked hiin, vhat he had to expect
from the Archdukes and the Spaniards, who, con-
ny ering him as a uſcleſs burden upon them | would
pr Wanſule him by their haughty an :d infolen it beha-
ing our, and fecretly applaud themſelves ſor it? J
10 tonjured bim to reflect on what he owed to the
pre- WE 0ni:deration of his honour, his virtue, his birth,
nch ind duty; and exhorted him to im pore the King's
alu: paerdon 46 ſoon as pojhble. Lo theie intrea aries, 1
aded offers of ſervice, which would prove to him
— y zeal for his intereſt, aud ettachiucnt to bis
Due . on.
It will be eaſily g granted, that ſich a letter waz
ern extraordinary | from a man who, in the ſup-
Vo. lv. Nu poſition

410 MEMOIRS Book XXVI

3 of having connived at his flight, miglit
1ave been ſtruck dumb with a ſingle word in an-
ſwer from one of ſo high a rank as firſt prince of
the blood. Yet I went farther : I told the Prince,
that the civilities, praiſes, and acknowledgments,
with which he had loaded me at the arſenal,
were, to my great regret, but ill repaid by the
neceſſity his letter had reduced me to, of dech.
ring the truth in ſuch a manner as perhaps he
might think inconſiſtent with the re{pe& I owed
him: that he ought, in his own mind, to render
ine the juſtice J deſerved ; but that he would now
be convinced, that the hrſt ſtep any man takes
contrary to his duty, by a neceſſary conſequence
makes him violate all the laws of ſincerity : laſt.
ly, that whatever his intention might be in thus
endeavouring to involve me in his crime, I had
always held it my glory and my honour to be
thus treated by the enemies of the King and the
{tate ; and implorcd Heaven to inſpire the Prince
with ſuch ſentiments as might efface all remem-
Drance of 2 fault which had, with too much ju—
{tice, deſerved thoſe two epithets. This letter“
was publiſhed ; but it produced no anſwer, which
entirely deſtroyed, even in the opinions of my
enemies themſelves, all ſuſpicions ariſing from
the Prince's inſinuation.

A diſpute aroſe between Villeroi and De-Fre'ne,

on account of the letters + which the King order.
cd

e The Prince. of *** refaſed to receive the letters the Dube
** of Sully wrote to him, telling thoſe who brought them, that lle
** would receive nothing that came from him.” LE Ii, ibid.

+ In vol. 9772. of the royal MSS. we find the ſummons delivered
to the Prince of Conde at Bruſſels, in the month of Fetru!)
1610, by Meſſ. de Berny and Manicamp, in the King's name, reg
ring him to return to France, under the penalty of becoming guilty
of high treaſon; and the Prince's refuſal to obey it. The pa
ment paſſed an arret againſt him, by which he was condemn t9

" lard
LNG)

IR, ai reds ates — _ 44. Saas — ty ;+ ;

1609. OF SU Lb F. 4
ed to be ſent into the provinces, two days after
the flight of the Prince, to ſignify his intentions
concerning this event. Villero! compoſed a form
for thele letters, which he would have had all
the other ſecretaries of {tate to have followed.
De. Freſne thought the expreſſions he uſed unwor-
chy of the dignity of him from whom they were
ſuppoſed to proceed, which indeed was true; and,

,&_ azhe was generally allowed to write quite as well
as his brother ſecretary, he was afraid of ſome ca-
weils by ſending this letter, as written by himſell,

to thoſe perſons with whom, by his office, he was
connected. He imparted his perpiexity to me,
,F and intreated me to extricate him out of it.

I have nothing to ſay concerning the affairs of
the Proteſtant body, except that they ſupported
» themſelves happily againſt all the calumnies
ewhich were invented againft them, and which

« ©: tlicy brought even to his Majeſty's ear, by advices

ei 22d diſcourſes of all kinds. A letter was addreſl-
„ edto the King, dated the 3iſt of July, ſuppoled
„to be written from Rochelle, in a counterfeit hand,
and fallely ſigned Emantel de La- Faye, in which
Jj he was informed, that, in an allembly held at St

Maixant, the miniſter of Blois, who was called
PViguier, had preſented a book, intitled, 49!!ch17/%
= /played *, ſcandalous, it was ſaid, and outrageous

| undergo whatever puniſhment his Majeſty ſhould think fit to in-
ict on lim. Henry IV. went ia perſon to parliament, to ſolicit
the paſſing of this arret; and, as a mark of his grief, he went

whe > without ſtate or train: he ſat down in the chief preſident's place
be without canopy or footſtool, the hall being only guarded by the
| A uſhers of the parliament, inſtead of the King's officers.

red be ſupplement to the Journal of Henry IV. printed in 1736,
ay WT fakes notice of this book, and ſays that Father Gonthier, in a
1. {WT {<rmon he preachedbefore the King, havingrmade violent invectives,
yon this account, againſt the Huguenots, the King reprimanded

Ilz him, and ordered the bock to be ſappreſſed; which, in reality, bas
never appeared ſince. Arno 16:9,

7
N'2 TO

—— ——— — — ——— ¶P—ũ—äG — 5

412 MEMOIR S Book XXVI.

to the laſt degree: that, in this aſſembly, it was
reſolved the book ſhould be printed, after it had
been examined by the academy of Saumur: and
that this book was then actually in the press,
notwithſtanding his Majeſty's public prohibition.

This letter is filled with ſo many minute particu.
lars, and paſſion and prejudice appear every where
ſo ſtrongly in it, that the reader will not, I be.
lieve, be diſpleaſed at my ſuppreſſing it. The
author certainly flattered himſelf, that he ſhould
make it be believed that the Rochellers fortified
their city, upon a ſuppoſition that they ſhould
ſoon have a ſiege to ſuſtain; and that an aſſembly
was held at Marſeilles, to oblige the King 10
call a convocation of the ſtates of the kingdom,
Du-Pleſſis was, as they alledged, the author of
theſe plots, all abſolutely without foundation,
except indeed {ome murmurs againſt the gabelle
in Mirebalais and Loudunois, in which however a
very {mall number of Proteſtants had any part.
With regard to Du-Pleſhs, he was the very man
who ſent the firſt information of it to his Majeſty;
and I thought myſelf obliged in honour, though
my enemy, as till then he had ſhewn himlelt to
be, to give teſtimony to his innocence, when!
convinced the Ring, who inſiſted upon my taking
a journey into Poitou to repreſs the rebellious dc-
ſigus of the Proteſtants, that his real enemies en-
deavoured to keep themſelves concealedby brand-
ing thoſe with that guilt who did not deſerve it.
Du-Pleſſis thanked me in a long letter, which
contained a juſtification, in form, againſt all the
heads of the accuſation,

The following information, which was given
me by a gentleman of unqueſtioned honour, a5.
peared to me more circumſtantial, and more wor-
thy of attention. In one of the ſtreets of

La-Fleche called the four winds, and near an Inn,
WIE

0

1609. 66 SULLY. 413

with a ſign of the ſame name, there had lodged,
for ſome months, a man, whoſe name was Meclor,
a native of Avranche, with a widow, called Jane
Huberſon, who boarded ſcholars of reputable fa-
milies, that were under the care of Medor. A
niece of this widows, about twenty-ſix years of
age, named Rachael Renaud, who lived with her
aunt, and a couſin called Huberſon likewiſe, go-
ing one day into Medor's ſtudy, found a book
there which excited her curioſity: it was finely
gilt, and tied very neatly with blue and carnation
ribands, and very thick. She opened it, and ſaw
that half of it was written, partly with ink, and
partly with blood; that it was full of ſignatures,
almoſt all in blood, among which, ſurpriſed as ſhe
was, ſhe deſtinguiſned that of Meédor, of a man
named Du-Noyer, who lived in a village in the
neighbourhood of Paris, near Villeroi, and of ano-
ther man named Du. Croſs, from Billon in Auvergne,
who had formerly belonged to the Nuke de Mer-
coeur. Theſe two men ſhe knew, becauſe they
had often come to viſit their lodger.

| As ſhe was going out of the cloſet, with an in-

| tention to carry this book to her aunt, ſhe met

Medor, who, ſnatching it out of her hands, asked

her, in a rage, what ſhe was going to do with it.

She told him ingenuouſly, that it was ſo pretty

ſhe was defirous her aunt ſhould ſee it; and then

asked him the meaning of thoſe ſignatures of blood,

which the had ſeen in it. Medor, fearing that ſhe

had carried her curioſity ſo far as to examine the

writing, at the end of which were thoſe names

ſubſcribed, and which contained an aſſociation of
con{pirators againſt the King's perſon, told her,

that it was an oath, which, ſor the intereſt of their

religion, a great many zealous Catholics had ta-

ken to continue faithfully attached to the Pope.

| This anſwer did not hinder the girl from ſpeaking

b N n 3 of.

* —
- —
— F
— * — * 0 * -
2 =

_ o —
*

n
—

414 MEM OI R S Book XXVI.

of the book to her aunt and couſin, who were the!
only Proteſtants in the houſe. They thought the
diſcovery of ſuch conſequeyce, that, after getting?
all the information they could from the girl ofÞ *

what ſhe had ſeen, they related it to the perſon,

who gave me notice of it, with all the circumſtan.f

ces neceſlary to make a fuller diſcovery.

The book was immediately taken out of Nc. 5
dor's chamber, and carried, as Huberſon and the!

girl believed, to Du-Croſs, whoſe direction they

gave. He lodged with a man named Druille:Þf
who lived in a houſe without the city, near the!
gate of St Germain, on the right fide. With this
Druillet everal children of quality boarded, and

particularly of the province of Britanny; because

he likewiſe had been in the Duke of Mercceur'f
ſervice, Du-Crois was the. {ſoul of this cabal.

An aſſembly at the Jeſuits college, in which he
held one of the chief places, and where he wi
often employed to deliver public diſcourſes, gave
him all the oportunities he could deſire, to aſſoc.

ate a great number of perſons into his black de-

I
-4
"_

ſigns: and here it was that he became acquaintetÞ

wich Mc<dor and Du-Noyer |

* * * * 8

To theſe informations were added all thoſe that

J was able to get mylelf. The morning after!
received the billet, which was on October 19.
] ſent a perſon, on whom I could ſecurely depend,
to ſearch the bottom of this affair: but althoug?
all his diſcoveries ſerved to confirm what ha been

wrote to me, and that the girl herſelf offered t
maintain her depolition before any perſon wi
ſhould chuſe to hear her, and even in his Majeſty"
preſence, the credit and artifice of thoſe who were
concerned in this accuſation were exerted will
ſuch ſucceſo, that an affair, which certainly merit

ed a farther examination, was buried in filence

Domeſtic diſſenſions, and inteſtine plots, es
the

=
I

14

1609. OF 5V L LY: 415

the two evils which purſued Henry, after he had
2 extricated hiinſelf from the dangers of war, till
the laſt moment of his life. The Count of Au-
vergne continued ſtill impriſoned in the Baſtile :
he obtained permiſſion of his Majeſty to be remo-
ved for a change of air, on account of his indiſpoſi-
tion, and he was carried to a pavilion on the water,

?
0
4

; during the whole time he ſtaid there. He alfo

which was at the end of the gardens belonging
to the arſenal ; but guards were placed upon him

obtained leave to {peak to the Sieur de Chateau-
morand,

!. Henry's health was this year only interrupted

N

2 with ſome ſlight fits of the gout. He did not

drink the waters, becauſe they were of no ufe
to him. M. the Dauphin, and all the children
of France, enjoyed likewiſe a good ſtate of
| health. Henry made as long a ſtay as uſual at
Fontainebleau: he paſſed the whole autumn
there, after a ſhort excurſion to Monceaux, and

returned to Paris at the beginning of winter.

„ XXVII.

A LL that remains for me to ſay of the tranf.

actions of this year relates to foreign affairs,

uhich I ſhall begin with thoſe of the United Pro-
vinces. The King granted them, in the month

of April, the ſum of three hundred thouſand li—
vres. Preaux was ſent to the States with this a-
grecable news, and I received orders from his
Pn to ſend the money to Dieppe, where it
Was to be ſ\ipped on board a veſſel belonging to
che republic. Henry thought himſelf obliged to

reward, by this laſt inſtance of his bounty, the
Woelpet the council of the United Provinces had
ucwn for him, in giving him the principal part

*

In

416 MEMOIR S Book XXVII.

in their accommodation with Spain: for in this
year was at length concluded the truce “, which
had been ſo long in agitation, and equally defired
by all, even by thoſe who had at firſt appeared
moſt againſt it: and the Prince of Orange him-
ſelf at laſt agreed to it.

I ſhall not here tranſcribe the treaty which was
drawn up at the Hague, the uſual place for hold.
ing the conferences; but only that of the inter. |
vention of the Kings of France and England as |

uarantees for the execution of it. This piece i-
dated June 27. 1609, and was iigned, like the for. 1G
mer, at the Hague, in the preſence of Meſſire Peter N 1

0
a

Jeannin, Chevalier, Baron of Changy and Mon.
treu, one of the counſellors of his Moft Chriſt.
an Majeſty in his council of ſtate, and his ambaſ. 7
ſador extraordinary to the States; and of Meſire Wer C
Elie de La-Place, Chevalier, Lord of Rufly, Vi.
count of Machaut, member of the King's coun.
cil of ſtate, gentleman in ordinary of his bed-
chamber, and his ambaſlador in ordinary ; both
of them in the name, and as having authority
from the Moſt High, Moſt Powerful, and Mol:
Excellent Prince Henry IV. &c. Afterward ſol-
lowed rhe names of his Britannic Majeſty's two
miniſters, with the ſame titles of ambaſſadors in
ordinary and extraordinary: and after them the
names of the counſellors and miniſters of the fe.
veral provinces of the Low Countries, with 2 fe.
ciprocal obligation to cauſe the contents of it
ſaid treaty to be ratified, within two months, h
the reſpective partics.

It will be proper, as well on the negotiations of this fam
truce, as on all the affairs of Flanders mentioned in theſe 1*W
moirs, to conſult the volumes of the King's MSS. marked 97%
9981. 9005. le Merc. Franc, Matthieu, Vitiorio, Siri, and the g
ticular hiſtories of that republic, |

1

1609. O F 8 UL L T. 417

The intervention and guarantee are expreſſed

in the following manner: That the two Kings,
notwithſtanding all their endeavours, having been
unable to procure a firm and ſolid peace between
the two warring powers, had at length propoſed
to them a long truce, to which likewiſe many ob-
ſtacles were raiſed, which would probably have
> blaſted the ſcheme, if their Majeſties, for the
ood of the parties, and the ſecurity of their
flares, had not conſented to have been guarantees
and ſecurities for it; and therefore that they pro-
miſed, and engaged themſelves, to afliſt the U-
nited Provinces with all their forces, not only in

| cale of any infraction of the truce by Spain, but

| alſo if their trade to the Indies ſhould be inter-
rupted, or ſuffer the leaſt injury, either from his

e Catholic Majeſty, the Archdukes, their oflicers,
or ſubjects. This extended as well to thoſe whom
dhe States thought proper to aſſociate with them
d. in this trade, as to the countries where it was car-
h ried on; provided, however, that the republic did

not pretend to be judges themſelves of the 1nju-
ries they received in this reſpec, but left them to
the deciſion of their Majeſties in a common coun-
o cil, wherein they were to be allowed a vote: in
in caſe the judgment ſhould be too long delayed, they
the vere to give orders in the mean time for the ſe-
e. curity of their ſubjects. That, in conſequence of
re- hich, the contracting parties ſhould renew and
ne confirm the private treaties made the preceding
„dear, one on the 23d of January, between France
and the United Provinces; and another, on the
©, of June, between England and the ſame
Frovinces, by applying to the truce the ſame a-

0" WPrecements, promiſes, and obligations, which theſe
e eaties expreſſed during the continuance of a
ce race, Which was then believed to be upon the
* foint of concluding. That, in ah

—

—

— —
>

= > ©. - - .
rr
— . \

—

m
IS
2 3 — — *

418 M E MO IRS + Book XXVII.

for the guarantee of the two mediating, Kings,
and for the aſſiſtance which the States-Gene ral had
received from them, they engaged to make ro
treaty or agreement with the Archdukes during
the twelve years of the truce, without the advice r
and conſent of their Majeſties; who promiſed, on WT 1
their ſide, not to enter into any alliance prejudi. ce
clal to the liberty and fafety of their friends and 61
allies: for theſe were the titles given by the two ge
princes to the States. i.

The Archdukes, that they might not give of. eſt
fence to the King of Spain, refuſed their conſen it,
to its being mentioned in the treaty for a trace, D
that the Dutch ſhould be ſecured in their trade v
the Indies: they only undertook, of their own 2c.
cord, acting under his Catholic Majeity, to allor
the exerciſe of it: therefore the republic, who
ſought a ſecurity againſt a new breach of fan
from the Spaniards, had it, at laſt, made one of th:
poſitive articles of the treaty for the mediation ol
the Kings of France and England. Henry was na
ſorry, ſince the war between Spain and Flanden
was to end, it thould end in this manner.

I ought not to omit mentioning an obligation,
which, on this occaſion, I received, rather indeet
from Henry, than the council of the United Pro
vinces, which regarded my nephews D*'Epinoy.
His Majeſty, who had often liſtened to my com.
plaints of the injuſtice which theſe children ha
ſuffered from the Count and Counteſs of Ligne
and who, from the time that they were broug
to me in France, had given them many proof d
his kindneſs, which I believe I have mention}
ſomewhere or other in theſe Memoirs, was dk
ſirous of doing ſomething more for them. Jane

| 1;

* There is a letter in the cabinet of the preſent Duke of Sul
from the late Dyke to the Prefident Jeannin, in which, aftc!
79 El

8 NC
DV1N
nep
d to
une

rr 3ULLY. 419

# had orders to confer with the Archduke Albert
upon their affairs, to endeavour to engage him

in their intereſt, and to do them juſtice. Either

he or Caumartin delivered to this prince a memo-

[| rial which I had drawn np, and which explained

the claims the family of Epinoy had to the ſuc-

EZ cefion of that of Melun. The Archduke's an-

wer, which he ſent the King in the year 1610,
gave me reaſon to hope for ſucceſs. Accor-

dingly this prince, finding that his Majeſty inter—

eſted himſelf in the affair, took ſo much part in

Hr, that, by a proviſional agreement, my nephew

$D'Epinoy, who by the death of his brother was

the {ole heir, obtained a reſtitution of great part

of thoſe effects which had been forfeited by his

father. This agreement, which, through the in-
Qereſt of the King and the Archduke, 33 a
Arriting of great importance, was afterwards the
peſt the Princeſs of Ligne could make uſe of, to
prove that all the reſt of this eſtate, which ſhe had
pot been deprived of, had been granted to her.
I thought of an expedient to put an end to theſe
es and artifices, which was to obtain the

onſent of the council of the United Provinces to
nlert, in their treaty of trace, an article by which
his queſtion was decided in favour of the young
D'Epinoy. My requeſt, which I made privately,
Fas granted with great willingnels ; the article was
Wicried, and expreiled, chat upon the refulal
lich the Princeſs of Ligne had given to the
Puncihof the United Provinces, to make a reſti—
nion oſ the eſtates of the houſe of Epinoy, which
de unjuſtly enjoyed, two arbitrators ſhould be

g notice of the then preſent ſtate of the affairs of the United
DVvinces, and thoſe of Cleves, he recemmends the intereſt of
nephew, the Prince of Epinoy, to him. lis letter is tœo

to be here tranſcribed: it is dated at Fontcincbicau, the 15th
June 1629,

named

*
2

— co
n * *
>"
_

Fiz”
—

=
1 th.
i

* *
... IC
2 . ” +» *. * =

—

- ——
—
> — I. 4 <a

„

2

5 7
= * I
1 ＋ 220 = = —_— 0 »
— — —

— . — ; J = as — * 2
— A G s — eee — 2 = 5 = — — — 1 25 : y
- 2 ON 2 — 4” _ x . I — - - * . 13 LE. _ „ = -» pat L 7 5
— ae if woe x — | — Bi | * 2 5 8 =

2 — II :
— —
* . — _— —
IT -
= 5
4 v p «3 ? y > Þ
= >» bow nid U ˙ oeeREGedtee—no , ‚—·‚ ⁰-·mů; —oT

— 4
* * *
— —_

420 MEMOIR S Book XXVII.

named for his Moſt Chriftian Majeſty, and two
for the Archdukes, who ſhould meet at Vervins to
give a definitive judgment: that, if the votes were
divided, they ſhould appoint an vmpire; and, if
they could not agree upon the choice, his Nof
Chriſtian Majeſty ſhould be this umpire, to whoſe
ſentence the Princeſs of Ligne, and all the other
reſpective heirs {ſhould ſubmit; and the Archdukes,
of whom thele cſtates were held, ſhould permit
the execution of it: and that, in the mean time,
the eſtates of the houle of Vaſſenard, and u 9.
thers belonging to the Prince of Epinoy, within
the extent of the Dutch provinces, ſhould be re.
ſtored to him.

The Princeſs of Ligne uſed her utmoſt endes.
vours to clude the deciſion. This laſt clause ve.
priving her of all hope, ſhe appealed to the agree.
ment before mentioned. She alledged, that par
of thoſe eſtates which were required of her, bin;
in the province of Holland, had been charged wich
heavy taxes; for which the demanded compent
tion. When ſhe found herſelf preſſed, the affe.
ed to abate of her obſtinacy, and only reque!te
that the affair might be terminated hy any oth
metkod than a rigorous judgment, and propolei
ſeveral herſelf, eſpecially when the perceive that
her nephew was inclined to purchaſe an agreement
with her by the facrifice of tome of his juſt claims
The Archduke ſeemed to enter with her into a
the expedientsthat could be thought on to mate
deſiſt; for I was the perſon whom, on this ccc.

ion, they looked upon to be the real adver 27

A marriage wes propoſed between my nephe'y 9
the Princeſs cf Ligne's ſecond daughter, 181
expedient was happily enough imagined, if Li
mother had been a reaſonable woman: but be
would not give this daughter a portion equal !
that ſhe had given with the eldeſt. I left it d

z *

"=

LI -
* = — « —
— 4 — —

*
3A

T.

*

1

1609. rr. 421

her choice, either to reſign twenty-five thouſand
livres a-year to D'Epinoy, as a portion for her
daughter, or to make him a reſtitution of his

© whole eſtate. Though my nephew by this offer
loſt conſiderably, yet it was rejected with diſdain.
he remainder of the year was paſſed in making
and refuſing propoſitions, which all amounted to
nothing.

There was again a neceſſity that his Majeſty

ſunould interpoſe, which he had the goodnels to

23

o, by writing a letter, dated October 19. to the

Archduke, in which he complained of the Princeis

f Ligne's proceedings, and of the little ſolici-

tude he himſelf thewed for the fulfilling that ar-

icle of the treaty relating to the Prince of Epinoy.

As to the agreement which Madame de Ligne laid

uch ſtreſs upon, the King obſerveqd, that, beſides

that nothing can be oppoled to a determination
Fecorded in a treaty made between ſovereigns,

it was the opinion of his council, and couform-
ble to the laws of his kingdom, that the autho-

pity of any prince which is added to a contract,
Ihould not hinder the ſubje& who is injured by it
ſrom claiming his right. He deſired him to hear
hat Berny and Preaux had to fay, whom he had
brdered to acquaint him with every circumſtance

'»

f the affair: and, repeating his inſtances in fa-

Vor. IV.

your of Epinoy, he declared that he would an-
er for the fidelity and .obedience of his new
Failal. He owned, that D'Epinoy was willing to
Furchaſe an agreement and union with his aunt,
che expenſe of a ſmall part of his eſtate; but
Pat himſelf had been one of the firſt to adviſe him
got to liſten to her while the continued to be ſo un-
Faſonable in her demands. This letter was more
the ſtyle of a friend than a King; and in almoſt
P! thoſe which Villeroi and Jeaunin wrote by his

der to the States, the affair of Epinoy was men-
0 tioned

* *
7 —— — öX— . —¶
,

422 MEMOIR S Book XXVII.
tioned with great warmth. I likewiſe urged it on
in the letters I writ to Preaux, from whom, upon
this occaſion, I received ſervices which I promi-
ſed him ſhould not go unrewarded. |

This year the Duke of Bouillon obtained letters
of naturalization for his children born at Sedan,
The King did not obſerve, that in theſe letters,
and in the petition preſented on this occaſion to
the chamber of accounts, Bouillon had aſſumed
the title of ſovereign of Sedan; and therefore
made no oppoſition to it by his attorney-general,
But his Majeſty repaired tlüs failure, by ordering
Jerome L'Huillier, the attorney-general, to de.
mand an a&, by which it was allowed, that his
compliance with this petition, and his filence with
reſpect to the titles there aſſumed, ſhould not in-
youu his rights, if he ſhould be able, at any time,

y his papers, claims, or records of the treaſury
of archives, to make appear that Sedan was an-
ciently a fief depending on that of Mouſon, which
was part of the crown-lands. This act, of the 11th
of April, is inſerted in the regiſters of the cham-
ber of accounts.

His Majeſty ſent the Duke of Lunebourg-Brun!-
wick's deputy to me for the payment of ſeven
thouſand crowns, which the King-ordered me to
piveim, without making farther inquiry into ii,
as the ſum was ſo moderate. I obeyed his com-
mands, and, at the fame time, treated him with
the utmoſt degree of politeneſs. Henry, by ſuck
inſtances of kindneſs and reſpect, endeavoured i
attach the German princes ſtill more to his interelt
J likewiſe rendered ſome ſervices to the Duke d
Savoy, which produced a letter from this prince!
me, and a viſit of thanks from M. de Jacop, |!
ambaſſador. This deference, added to the viſits!

was obſerved to pay to the Duke of Savoy's 3"
baſſador in return, appeared to my enemics "ll

co

court a ſufficient foundation for ſuggeſting to the

King, that the Duke of Savoy made the {ame uſe

of me as he had done of Marechal Biron. Henry
took care not to tell them that he was acquainted
with all my proceedings, and approved of them;
but thanked them for their information, and wrote
me an account of all they had ſaid, deſiring me,

had received from Turin the next time I attended
him.

Another attempt was made upon the city of Ge-
neva this year, under the direction of Du-Ter-
rail *, the ſame who has been ſo often mentioned
in theſe Memoirs. He ſucceeded ſo ill in it, that
he was taken priſoner there, and without any form
of trial put to death. He was a man of great
& underſtanding and courage; but giddy with am-

dition, and abſorbed in vice: therefore the King
7 WE was not diſpleaſed that juſtice had overtaken him.

u. As ſoon as it was known that he was impriſoned,

his Majeſty was wearied with ſolicitations in his
favour; but the news of his death followed that
of his detention ſo cloſe, that he was not long em-
barraſſed. We have a happy riddance of him,”
aid this prince to me; © he was a danper-

—
2

a „*
13 1

viſiting and haunting you as uſual; and after

* Lewis de Combourſier, Lord of Terrail, a gentleman of
ED auphiny, and a relation of Leſdiguieres. The Memoirs for the
Piſtory of France ſpeak of him as Sully's do. The King,” ſay
ed 088 ey, © whoſe natural ſubje& he was, had granted him four ſeveral
pardons; but he had no ſooner got a pardon in one pocket, as
the King ſaid, but he had a ſcheme for a plot ready in the other.”
he pardon the King would have granted him could not have
oed his life. He, and La-Baftide, a gentleman of Bourdel, who
Fas taken with him, were beheaded at Geneva on the 29th of

bil,
Oo 2 & that

7609 OF SULLY. 423

at the ſame time, to bring him the laſt letters 1

g ous man: ever ſince I oblerved that he left off

7 „ -
——

— — — -_ — - — —
N -&, rr
- - ; — 7 = ”.
— . » = -
l J — . hey w
— —
8 > 22 —

8 —
1
2
*

424 MEMOIR Ss Book XXVI.

« that murder“ he committed in the view of us
« both, as we ſtood together upon the balcony,
I loſt all hope of him.”

The Duke of Florence, after the death of the
Duke his father +, having ſent an ambaſlador ex.
traordinary to Rome to pay his obedience to the
Pope, he either by his maſter's orders or from his
own inclination, or perhaps through contempt, vi.
fired the Spaniſh ambaſſador before ours. Henry,
when be was informed of this affront, reſolved
to take vengeance for it, and began by revoking
an order, which, upon the repreſentations made
him by the Chevalier Guidi, he had given for the
payment of a hundred thouſand hvres, which
were ſtill due to the Grand Duke. Jouanini, thi;
prince's agent, who foreſaw all the conſequences
of this affair, aſſembled his friends and partifans

„N

WP P *** =
e l ä
R 8 .

* «« On Tueſday the Sth of Auguſt, Le-Terrail, in the Kinz'
* ſight, before the windows of the gallery of the Louvre, killed
*« Mazancy, a brave Gaſcoon officer, whom his Majeſty had jul
deen ſpcaking to. The King was ſo much affected with fecing
this action, that he was obliged, as it was ſaid, to change his
«« ſhirt twice upon it.” Mem. for the hiſlory of France, anno 1606.

Du-Terrail was obliged to leave the kingdom after this aſſaſſins

tion.
+ Ferdinand de Medicis, Grand Duke of Tuſcany, who, in

1587, ſucceeded his brother Francis Maria de Medicis, dicd the
year before. The King,” ſays L'Etoile, or the author of tit
the Supplement to his Journal, © in order to acquaint the Queen
% with his death, without ſurpriſing her, told her, as he was get—
ce ting up, he had dreamed he ſaw the Grand Duke dead. The
« Queen at firſt was ſtruck with it; but recollecting herſelf, ſhe
« ſaid it was only a dream. But, Madam, replied the King, 1 an
« afraid my dream is true; we are all mortal. He is dead then
« Yes, added the King; here is the letter that informs me dl
« his death.” This death occaſioned a ſuſpenſion of the uſus
diverſion of the carnival, Cc. It was this Ferdinand who made
anſwer to our ambaſſador, when remonſtrating to him on account
of his connections with Spain; 4 Had the King but forty galley!
« at Marſeilles, I would not have done what 1 have.? Como l
de Medicis bis fon, is the perſon here in queſtion, | 4

1609. O F . 425

to conſult together upon the methods they ſhould
uſe to prevent the reparation we had a right to
exact, from extending to any inſult upon Spain;
and as I was thought to be the man, who of all
the counſellors was moſt capable of inſpiring the
King with a firm reſolution on this head, they
agreed that it would be proper for Jouanini to
apply to me, and endeavour to {often me.

I readily complied with his intreaties, not to
ſpeak or act upon this occaſion any otherwiſe than
merely to execute the King's orders. There was
no neceſſity for urging Menry to {upport his juſt
claims, and this Jouanini knew as well as myſelf.
I told him, however, that T was much ſurpriſed
that a petty prince, ſuch as his maſter, ſhould pre-
ſume to regulate the rank of the kings of France
and Spain. Joutnin1 received theſe words as any
other ambaſſador would have done upon the like
occaſion; and, to thew me that I ought to treat
his maſter with more reſpect, he entered into a
long diſcourſe upon his great qualities and his
genealogy, niiking him allied to the houſe of
Auſtria, whoſe culogium he was going to begin.
I interrupted him, ſaying, that every other per-
ſon was as capable as himſelf of ſettling the true
degree of grandeur of the Duke of Florence,
ſince it had commenced in our own times; and
as for what regarded the houſe © .uſtria, I had no
occaſion, for any informations; I who reckoned
among my anceſtors a daughter of that houſe *,
who died a hundred and fifty years ago; but that

it was impoſſible to make any compariſon between

that family and the auguſt houſe of France.
This

John de Bethune, Lord of Vandeuill, Locres, &c. firſt of

that branch from which the Duke of Sully was deſcended, married
Jane de Coucy, allied to the houſe of Auſtria. Enguerrand VI.
of Couſay, or, to ſpeak more properly, of Guienes, bearing the
name and arms of the houſe of Coucy, which was extinct, married
Catherine of Auſtria, daughter of Leopold, who is the lady here

O03 meant

—
8
——

9

9
—
= — — 3 2

—

EA. £1
—_ 1 — —

—2 =. _— -
> *

ES

XD

MI > : wy
— >. 0 5
oy” — — -
7 _ * wn -
Fra. 44
— 7 —
.

n

426 MEMOIR S Book XXVII.

This affair gave riſe to much artful managr-
ment at court, in which the Queen ſeemed to
carry too far her tenderneſs for her relations,
The King reproached her ſeveral times for it with
{ome leverity, and the made me ſenſible that ſhe
accuſed no other than myſelf for it. However,
this affair produced no worſe conſequences. The
Duke of Florence, upon the firſt complaint the
King made to him, proteſted that he had no part
in this imprudent procedure of his ambaſlador ;
and declared, that he was willing to make any
reparation for it which his Majeſty ſhould require.
He recalled his ambaſſador, without waiting for
the King's requeſt, and commanded him, before
his departure, to make an authentic acknowledg-
ment of the fault he had committed, which was
publiſhed in Rome and in France. Henry was
ſatisſied with this apology, and, to convince the
Grand Duke that he had forgot every thing, he
aſſured him that he would preſerve the ſame ſenti.
ments of friendſhip and af hs for him as for the
deceaſed Duke, and gave him the firſt proof ot
them by ſending to congratulate him upon his
advancement to the throne, as all the other princes
of Europe had done.

Spain had choſen Cardinal Zapata to perform
this cermony, and Henry thought proper to make
uſe of a cardinal likewiſe, that he might avoid an
affront like the former : for it is well known what
perſonal prerogatives cardinals enjoy at the courts
meant by M. de Sully. He would have ſpoke more correctly hal

he ſaid ſhe came into the family of Coucy, to which his became
allied. He has alſo made another miſtake in point of chronology;

for, inſtead of ſaying a hundred and fifty, he ſhould have ſaid tuo

hundred and fifty years: this Enguerrand de Coucy, the huſband

of Catherine of Auſtria, having been killed at the battle of Cre

in 1346. See the MSS. of S. Marthe, Du-Cheſne, Anſelme, and

other genealogiſts. See alſo our foregoing remarks on the hovk
of Auſtria,

of *

n

3 . wy - © 5
r

1609. O F SUL VL V. 427

of Italian princes. I named the Abbe de La-Roche-
foucault to him, who was going to Rome to take
poſſeſſion of that dignity ; but his Majeſty for
that very reaſon did not 14 6 of him, as he
was apprehenſive that this abbe, who they were

ſenſible was not yet named a cardinal, nor would

leave France expreſsly for this embaſſy, would not
be as well received at Florence as an ancient car-

.

dinal: therefore Cardinal Delfin was pitched up-

on by his Majeſty, who gave him two thouſand
crowns for his expenſes, his Eminence not being
very rich. Conchini had aſpired to this honour,
| and would have obtained it through the Queen's

*

intereſt; but, for the conſiderations before men-

= tioned, he would not have acquitted himſelf of
this commiſſion at ſo ſmall an expenſe : Henry,
therefore, was pleaſed at his diſappointment, as
well on account of his hatred to the man, as from

a principle of frugality.
Policy and the intereſt of his great deſigns,

had perhaps more part in the King's complaiſance
to the Duke of Florence, than the conſideration
of his alliance with him. Thoſe two motives

vuere ſufficient to prevent him from ill treating,
or even neglecting the molt inconſiderable prince.

The hundred thouſand livres was again ordered

to be paid to the Chevalier Guidi, the King only

:
C
%
.
3
a
C

requiring that, in the Grand Duke's receipts,
ſome conſiderable ſums ſhould be deducted, which

.

* had advanced to Don John de Medicis. With

this money, Guidi carried to Florence a gold chain,

valued at fix hundred crowns, which I preſented

him wich in his Majeſly's name. Henry, likewiſe,

| ſnewed many other civilities to this Italian; for,

ꝓuhether he remained beyond the Alps, or was

gain ſent to France by his maſter, the King

thought it neceſſary to gain his friendſhip.
f | De-Reſuge

—— —

*
ä
—  * * 23 —

| Ac

x
AS
=

of + %* - 2 — Ex >,

CE

— — . —— — yt rt AP rn I

4223 MEMOIR S Book XXVII.

De-Refuge continued ſtill among the Swiſs and
Griſons in the quality of our agent; but executed
this employment ſo ill, that I thought myſelf ob-
liged to reproach him by Villerol for his inatten-
tion to the buſineſs he was ſent to tranſact. He
durſt not anſwer me himſelf; but to Villeroi he
excuſed his negleR, in not ſending the account of
the diſtribution he had made of the money, which
was the firſt complaint I had againſt him, by al.
ledging that theſe accounts ſhould have been ſent I
to me by the two clerks, 4 whoſe hands |

the two former diſtributions had paſſed, beſides
thoſe more particular ones, which the treaſurer;
of the leagues were to furniſh me with; and that
IT ſhould certainly receive from them thoſe of the
next diſtribution. With regard to the redemption
of debts, which was my ſecond charge againt We
him, he, without coming to particulars, told Vil. Wt
leroi, in his anſwer, that he had diſcharged fome WT
at different times; nor did he give more fatisf2c- We

tory replies to the other reprimands he received.
After Villeroi had ſhewn me his letter, I wrote WT (
to him myſelf, as I believed the place I filled gave 7 ©
me a right, and even obliged me to do. I tod 3
him, that I had not received the four accounts WT ©
from the clerks he mentioned to Villeroi ; but e
that, if I had, ſuch accounts were not ſufficient; ti
ni

but that, fince the ordinances for payment came
only from him, it belonged to him likewiſe to th

draw up accounts, wherein every ſum of money Wt 2*
ſhould be ſpecified ſeparately, and authenticated
him: that he was obliged to anſwer for the ex
actneſs of the treaſurers, and to inform me if the
had any blanks in their accounts, which was what 22

was always done by Caumartin, his predeceſſor
and likewiſe, that he ſhould not fail to ſend me
every quarter, the accounts of the receipts give
by the treaſurers of the leagues, with that "i

he *
my

the: 0-7 #0 L-ET. a

the diſtribution he had made, divided into chap-
ters. He was continually propoſing new me-
thods for diſcharging of debts, for managing
his Majeſty's money, and for confining his em-
ployment ſolely to the finances, in conſequence
of which he demanded an exact correſpondence
with the ſuperintendant. It was not poſſible for him
to find an excule for the ſilence he affected with
me; nor were h:s excuſes for having not paid any
debts during his adminiſtration any better. The
thing was not more difficult for him, than the per-
ſon whom he had ſucceeded. I deſired him, there-
fore, to ſatisfy me as ſoon as poſſible, not by uſing
many words and juſtifications, that had no force;
and which, in affairs relating to money, could
not be received, hut by juſt reaſons and good ef-
fects; otherwiſe I could not diſpenſe with myſelf
from repreſenting him to his Majeſty as a man
unworthy of the truſt he had confided to him.

It was ſuggeſted to the Grand Signior to have a
reſident at Marſeilles for the conveniency of the
Granadines who paſſed through that city. The
Grand Vizir mentioned it, by his order, to our

ambaſſador at the Porte, and conſulted the Aga

> eſtabliſhment, a man who, in a very ſhort ſpace of
time, had acquired great authority, and many dig-
= nities at the Porte, and mentioned me to him as
the only perſon at the court of France to whom
it would be proper to addreſs himſelf. The Aga
Muſtapha was directed to aſk this favour of the
King, in the name of Sultan Achmet, by a let-
ter, to which was added one from Salignac to me,
and both were brought by a Granadine whom the
Grand Vizir choſe 2 this employment. Salig-
nac gave me information of all that had paſſed
rt the Porte upon this ſubje& ; and added, _
5 0

*
3 ERC ̃

| of Cairo, named Aga Tbrahim-Muſtapha, upon this

— — _——
=

* Nr 2

«2 a” 202 Wo — . — 4 *
"> p 49 a2 * 1 "as — - mg =. 5 ">
ö — — 5
. AAA 8 *
Aa oe REA © 8 . ; - TOS AY — ” kr -
Ly = - — 2 A - _—— => 1 *
= — _ . » — TH _ "EN
* i - 2
2 1 2 E : 8 . \

> : *
8 |
"I % * —
— Sow — 3
1 Rs

430 MEMOIRS Book XXVII.

the Grand Signior would think himſelf highly
obliged to the King for the grant of this favour,
which could be productive of no inconvenience
to him; and that he could not diſpoſe of the
place to any one more fit for it than the bearer,
whoſe probity and good ſenſe were well known
to him, and who had formerly paſſed ſome time
at Marſeilles.
One of the moſt remarkable and intereſting e.
vents that happened this year in Europe, was the
death of the Duke of Cleves, which happened a.
bout the beginning of it. The news of this no ſoon-
er reached the ears of Henry, than he came to the
arſenal, where, having barely inquired for me in
the firſt court, he paſſed on to the garden, with.
out entering my apartment. When he was an.
ſwered, that I was writing in my cabinet, he turn.
ed to Roquelaure and Zamet, and faid to them,

mr tling cc

area rr tity. Did not yul imagine, tnat they were

« going to tell me, that he was either hunting,

& dreſſing, or with the ladies? Go, Zamet,” fait
this prince, after having given ſuch praiſe to my
diligence as does not become me to repeat, © g,
& tell him that I am gone up the great walk, and
« deſire him to follow me immediately to thee
« large balcony, where we are not wont to be

& ſilent; I have much to ſay to him: for I hate

% heard,” continued his Majeſty openly, © tha
cc the Duke of Cleves is dead; he has left all te
&« world his heirs; the Emperor and all the prince:

& of Germany claiming the ſucceſſion.” Zame
met me coming out of my cloſet, having bee!
already told that the King had paſſed by. Ti:
news of the day, and every conſequential ind,
dent, afforded matter for above an hour's enter
tainment in the balcony. His Majeſty thought th
a ſubje& well worth my pains to compoſe, upon
what I had to ſay on this head, a memoir, whit f

:;

I ſhall here inſert, with the addition of ſuch in-
8 formations as I received a few days after from

to be ſtrictly watchful of our intereſt in Germany.

I ſhewed it all to Henry; nor do I believe the

reader will be diſpleaſed to find an event which
all Europe, attentive to his Majeſty's deſigns,
looked upon as a ſignal of a general war, treated
vith that perſpicuity it deſerves, both with reipect

Ito its juſtice and expediency.
Baut it is firſt neceſſary to explain how this little
ſtate, made at the Jaſt Duke's death out of four
or five great fiefs, all having the titles of princi-
pality, was formed. A count of Juliers, who li-
ved about the year 1130, united this county to
hat of Berg, by marrying an only daughter of a
count of that name. The county of Gueldres was
E&frerwards united to it in the year 13 50, by the mar-
age of Reynold, or Renould, firſt Duke of Guel-
f Ares with the heireſs of William, firſt Duke of
„ uliers. About the ſame time, one Adolphus de
a-Mark reſigned the archbiſhopric of Cologne,
Ind the biſhopric of Munſter, to ſupport his pre-
+. uſions as heir of my his mother, Counteſs of
1 Fleves, againſt his couſins, D*Erkel and Perweis,
Tho were alſo ſons of Cleves, but on the female
m de; and ſucceeded in his claims, either by pur—
mo ling the right of the ſecond fon, who was near-
of kin by one degree than-him, or by the afliſt-
ce of the Emperor Charles IV. and the ſtates

dhe country.

Ti The duchy of Cleves having thus paſſed into
e houſe of La-Mark, thoſe of Juliers and Berg
ere afterwards reunited to it in the perion of
| dhn Duke of Cleves, Count de La-Mark, who,

Ll þ . .
ws. 1496, married the daughter of William Duke
lich Juliers and Berg. The duchy of Gueldres was

chat time diſmembered, becauſe that Arnold
D' Egmont,

1609. 07 #SVUVTELY. 431

Bongars, who at that time had a particular charge

— —
*. -- ©,

n

238
—

— 8 =
* at ——
. — 4 ang ne 2
* —
1 " x "

432 MEMOIR S Book XXVII.

D*Egmont, who poſleſſed it in right of his mo-
ther, Mary D'Erkel, daughter to N------ IVErke]
and Jane of Juliers and Gueldres, had ſold it, in
1472, to Charles of Burgundy, with whoſe daugh.
ter it went to the houſe of Auſtria; a diſpoſition
that was vainly conteſted by William of Juliers,
to whom it was left by will by Charles D*Egmont,
grandſon of Arnold, the houſe of Auſtria main—
taining itſelf in poſſeſſion of the duchy by force
of arms. This cuſtom of feminine fiefs received
in all the cantons, ſupports the opinions of thoſe
who believe that the ſeventeen provinces of the
Low Countries, which fell into the houſe of Au.
ſtria, by the marriage of Mary of Burgundy with
Maximilian, are not the only female fiefs.

The Emperor would not allow that Cleves, Ju.
hers, Berg, La-Mark, Ravenſburg, and Rave-
ſtein, of which John-William died poſſeſſed, were
female fiefs ; on the contrary, the claims which
he pretended to theſe fiefs, were founded only
upon proofs, which he was ſaid to have had, of
their being all maſculine fiefs. This conteſt was
not a point abſolutely new. The contradiction of
the diſpoſitions of the different ſovereigns of ts
Iittle territory, which at different times had beet
received by their ſubjects, to the declaration ol
ſome of the emperors upon this head, had long
made it a diſputed point, the entire deciſion df
which had been by both parties referred to the

death of the laſt male heir of that houſe, which WR
length happened. To canvals this point of rigit

more properly, it ;isnecellary to fearch into the 4.
chives of that principality, by which means vt
ſhall be acquainted with the ſtate of the laſt Dube
family, and fiad out with what truth Henry fa,
that the Duke of Cleves's ſucceſſion belonged
almoſt all Germany. |

tee

The arguments urged in this affair, by de ig

* 1609. O77 SU Li kh I. 433

© tereſted princes againſt the Emperor, were drawn
from the many teſtamentary and matrimonial pa-
pers, as well as ſeveral other writings, both pu—

* blic and private, which received their authority
from the ſolemn acceptation of the ſtates of the
country, the chief of which were theſe : Firſt,
an ordinance of Adolphus the firſt Duke of Cleves,
Count de La-Mark, &c. received in all his towns,
anno 1418, whereby the principality was given
to the Duke's eldeſt ſon, and to him only, his bro-

© thers being excluded from any ſhare in it; and,

in default of male iſſue in him, to his eldeſt daugh-
ter, excluſive of other daughters. There was 2
ke edid of William Duke of Juliers and Berg,
Count de Ravenſburg, John Duke of Cleves,

. Count de La-Mark in 1496, on account of the
union of their territories, by the marriage of
e Mary, only daughter of the firſt of theſe princes,
Vith John, ſon of the ſecond. There was another
ordinance of the ſaid John of Cleves, and Mary of
Juliers, in 1526, about which time there was a
a8 arriage between their eldeſt daughter Sibylla to

John Frederic, Count, and ſince Elector of Saxony;
do which diſpoſition William himſelf, fon of John
en ind Mary, ſubſcribed in 1542. In the year 1572,
e William Duke of Juliers and Cleves“, &c. father

bug pf the laſt Duke, accompliſhed a match between
00 bis eldeſt daughter Maria Eleonora and Albert
de Frederick of Brandenburg, Duke of Pruſſia ; and
nuf ze, in the marriage- articles, r-{erved the entire
i"! Wcceſſion to her in the ſame form, in caſe of the
Kintion of the male line in his family. Two

ears after, Anne, ſiſter of Maria Eleonora, eſpou—
es d Duke Philip Lewis, che Count Palatine at
fa, gewburg, with the fame reſpect to the rights of
d (0

erlhip in the female line. The contract was

* Fe died in 1592,

ue or. IV. P p concluded

934 MEMOIR S Book XXVII.
concluded at Deux ponts, and ſigned by the

Count Lewis, afterwards Elector Palatine, by
William Landgrave of Heſſe, and Duke John,
Count Palatine. The ſame contract was rati.
fied a ſecond time in 1575, by the tame Prince
William; at which time, Duke Philip Lewis com.
plaining that two hundred thouſand florins, which!
was the portion of the younger ſiſters, was too!
flight a recompenſe for renouncing ſuch a ſucceſ.
ſion, his kinſman, the Duke of Cleves, inſiſted Þ ]
upon an augmentation of one hundred thoufand Þ + <
for each of them; on which condition Anne of u. J
tiers made a ſolemn renunciation of it the iame 1 1

year. Duke John, Count Palatine, de Deux- pont, 1 11
about four years afterwards married Magdalen, b.
the third daughter of William of Juliers, making .
the ſame renunciation in favour of the eldeſt af; Jil

his three ſiſters, as Duke Philip Lewis, his eldet M
brother, had done: Lewis, EleQor Palatine 7 be
William Landgrave of Heſſe, Philip Lewis, Coun: te.
Palatine of Newburg, alſo agreed thereto. Ih
was the fourth renunciation of che Duke ©
Newburg. Laſtly, Sibylla, the fourth of the: Ju!

princeſſes, married Charles of Auſtria, Marquis *
Bargaw; upon which occaſion it was natural to wm
WES, him

{uppoſe, that the Prince their brother would ne
have forgot to inſiſt upon the Auſtrian Princes“
making the ſame 1enunciation with his cle
three brothers-in-law ; nevertheleſs, partly it 4
peared, that becauſe this prince, who had no ch
dren, was become a valetudinarian ; partly, tid
the portion- money was not ready; and, laſtiy,

* .
-

cauſe the government was managed very ſtrange
ly ; the Duke of Cleves died, before bis tou
brother-in-law had made the {ame renunclaue

as the reſt. Such were the rights of the lo

He died at the age of ſorty- even.

Prince

1609. rr. 435
Princes, the Duke of Brandenburg and Pruſſia,

© the Count Palatine of Neuburg, the Count Pala-

tine de Deux-ponts, and the Marquis of Burgaw.
The Emperor alledged the following examples
in his ſavour. In the year 1483, imagining the

duchies of Juliers and Berg were, by the death

of Duke William, fallen to the empire, he be-
* ſtowed them, by his own abſolute will, on Albert
Duke of Saxony, to reward him for his ſervices.
Maximilian, the firſt ſon of Frederick, ratified and
extended this donation to the perſon of Erneſt,
* EleQor of Saxony, brother of Albert, in the year
1486. He confirms it again in 1495, as at that
time he ſtood in need of the Princes of Saxony:

but this conſideration no longer ſubſiſting, in the
year 1508, the Emperor left William of Juliers at
| liberty to diſpoſe of his own eſtate, either to

Mary, or ſuch other of his daughters as he liked

# beſt. William dying in the year 1511, the Elec-
tor of Saxony intended to take advantage of the
| Emperor's donation, and deprive the Duke of

Cleves, who had married the heireſs of it, of

juliers: but when he endeavoured to fix Maximi-
lian on his fide, that emperor, who ſeared no-
thing ſo much as the Duke of Cleves throwing
himſelf into the arms of France, refuſe:! to inter—
ere, and adviſed the EleQor to patience, giving
him only. general promiſes that he ſhould loſe
nothing thereby. Moreover, when John Frede—
Wick, Elector of Saxony, married Sibylla, daugh-
ter of John Duke of Cleves and Juliers, in the

Fear 1526, Charles V. expreſsly confirmed the

night of that princeſs, and acted in purſuance
Sicreof: for when in 1546 he made peace with

uke William of Juliers, whom he had vanquith-
Fd, on condition, that the Duke ſhould marry
Mary of Auſtria, daughter of Ferdinand King of
e Romans and Hungary, he allowed in the mar-
4 p 2 riage-

436 MEMOIR S Book XXVII

riage- contract of this princeſs, who was his niece, |

that her daughter ſhould fucceed to the duchies

of Juliers, &c. in caſe the ſhould have no ſons; Þ
which was alſo admitted after him by Maximili. F

an II. in 1566. It is true, that the reigning Emperor,
though ſtrongly ſolicited, m 1602, by the Duke of

Newburg to confirm that conſtitution of his pre.

deceſſors, conſtantly refuſed it; and the only rea.

fon he gave for ſuch refuſal was, that he could not!

pretend to prejudice any per ſon's right.
After this, the reader will eaſily diſcern a very

diſtinguiſhing difference between the juſtice off

the pretenſions of the two parties, much to the
advantage of the lawful heir, but very unfavour.

able to the Auſtrians ; the former grounding theirf

claim on a ſeries of regulations unanimouſly and
uniformly received ; the latter only producing
grants of pure power, which do little honour t

the. Aulic council, and moreover, by their var.
ation and contradiction, ſo unſtable as ſcarcely to

found any right.

However, the Duke of Cleves was no ſooner
dead than each party began to think ſeriouſly d
maintaining its right. The Emperor Rodolphu
2 the inveſtiture of Juliers- and Cleves to the

rchduke Leopold of Auſtria, a ſtep he woulp, :
not have taken, had it not been to be beforehanlÞ

with his Moſt Chriſtian Majeſty. This ſtep wa
made in the name of Leopold, who declared by
deputy to the King, that his intention in enter

ing upon Cleves, was neither to do any thing tha ka!

could be in the leaſt prejudicial to his Majeſty

intereſt, nor yet to treat the princes, his con

petitors, with rigour; that he ſhould be contentec

provided they behaved to his Imperial Majeſty aj a
they ought upon this occaſion, and intreated id

King not to enter into a diſcuſſion of an affair i

which he himſelf was alone concerned with then
Henri

n

r609. OF SULLY. 437
neral terms. He was ſurpriſed, that all this time
he had heard nothing of the other princes, who

ought to have been the firſt to addreſs him; nor

was he leſs ſo at the information received from
Hottoman, that none of them thought of levying
troops, as if they could ho
* otherwiſe than by force of arms; but they ſoon
* ſaw what part they had to take: and if it was true

to obtain any thing

7

their ſilence, took the firſt ſtep, they followed it
ſo well, that, having invited Boiſſiſe, Bongars,
and the King's other agents to their council, they

appointed an ambaſlador to intreat his Majeſty,.

in their name, to ſupport them againſt the Arch-
duke, or rather againſt the Emperor, which
ambaſſador had good reaſon to be ſatisfied with:
the ſucceſs of his commiſſion. But, before we give
a detail of enſuing; fats, let us make ſome reflec-
tions upon. the real political intereſt of France at
this juncture.

> Theſe fix cantons or ſmail provinces, Cleves,
Juliers, Berg, La-Mark, Ravenſburg, and Rave-
Mein, were ſo far from being indifferent to France,
that ſhe was rather intereſted in them in a very

peculiar manner, for ſeveral reaſons, of «which:

their ſtrength and riches were not the leaſt. They
Jay upon our frontiers; the competitors for then:
were net only near, but formidable neighbours ;:
at leaſt the Emperor was o. "This was a reaton to»
take care into whoie hands they fell. The war,
a their poſſeſſion, may become general

throughout Europe, conſequently reach us àgainſt-

pur will. This would certainly be the caſe, were
e United Povinces, whom they particalarly and“
peceſſarily influence, only concerned; their con-
icction being ſo evident, that giving the'e dil-
Puted provinces to our friends, is, as it were, ta-
Pp 3 king,

Henry's anſwer to this deputy was in very ge-

* that his Majeſty, in ſlightly reproaching them for

5
2 1 7 a” FREY > — P
— — — yg PREY . g — Le. 5 28
* " ** A mn Mw *
_ - = - ” +
— LY 2 mY
> \ —
Y * 4 @

= WP Los

2 -
— —

>. <= Hs 1 . 2 q CI I* - 12 — = .*
— rere 8 =
* by _— 5 — * 2
— — ——
_ : — a)

> *
*

— ———
— — . —

— — 28 :
— ——7˖—l ———ů — 2
g 22
— +

Fo

438 MEMOIR S Book XXVII.

king all Flanders from our enemies; as, on the
contrary, leaving them open to the invaſion of
the houſe of Aultria, were to expole the whole
United Provinces to deſtruction: for I know not
how otherwiſe to call the neceſlity to which they
would be reduced, had they none but enemies for
their neighbours, whoſe favour they muſt court by
repeated {acrifices, which muſt terminate abſolute.
ly in their ruin. The truth of this was never more
fully proved thau from the diſadvantages under
which the States laboured, when the Duke of
Cieves, even but privately, ſupported the Spa.
niards. Is it prudent to ſuffer ſo uſeful and fo ex-
penſive a work to be deſtroyed, when about to be
completed? and let me add with ſincerity, a work
which, in ſpite of all our efforts, has, by the laſt
treaty between Spain and the States, been not 1
little ſnocked.

If from this point of view we paſs to his Moſt
Chriſtian Mjeſty's vaſt deſigns upon all Europe,
what better means is there of engaging 1n them
thoſe powers, who could not be otherwile recon-

|

|
ciled to them? This is the ſureſt way of attach. 5
ing to us all the princes of the empire, of reſto- |
ring the liberty and dignity of the Germanic bod, a
giving a mortal blow to the Imperial authority, f
and ſtriking the whole houſe of Auſtria with coi- W t

ſternation: and this advantage, which France, for ſ
her own private intereſt, ought at any rate 0 I

have pur chaſed, ſhe ſuall enjoy, as the effect of d 0
intereſted generolity towards perſecuted prin cez r
without either jealouſy or envy. ir
. To this it may be obje&ed, that theſe prince fi
have hitherto ſhewn themſelves very averſe to e tl
raining theſe notions of us, if we may judge front vw
their evident unwillingneſs to be obliged to, at

even when forced to allow that, without our aft

ance, they can do nothing: but, after all, this U
0

e
k
iſt

L 4

of
Pes
EM
'Olls
1Cl-
to-
ody,
rity,
CO-
„ for
te 10
du

ase
Dees

rinces
to en-
> {roM
to UH
l afliit
this!

MW
T4

0.75 EY; 439

no more than what unavoidably happens in the
beginning of a difficult complicated affair, where-
in many perſons are concerned; for, in ſuch
{chemes, their firſt conſideration is to weigh their
intereſt with their powers. Even when we know
what is to be done, we are not agreed with reſpect
to the manner of doing it; eſpecially in confede-
racies, where opinions multiply in proportion to
the number of parties concerned: beſides, I inſiſt,
that this irreſolution of the German princes, from
whatever motives 1t proceeds, ought not to pre-
vent his Majeſty from taking part with them. I
lay it down as a maxim, That in all important af-
fairs, which tend to the general good, it 1s to the
cauſe only, and not to the perſons we mult he at-
tached: for the former preſents but one ſingle
view, and that always the ſame; whereas the lat.
ter is ſo ſubject to change, and preſents ſuch a va-
riety of hateful objects, that, cloſely to conſider
them, would give us a diſinclination to the moſt

; Uſeful and neceſſary enterpriſes. Politically ſpeak-

ing, we ought always to be content with having
removed obſtacles, without being deterred from
proceeding, by any dithculties that may remain,
and time of itſelf will remove: but with this re—
ſtriction, that I ſpeak of deſigns whereof the con-
trivers need not be aſhamed; ſuch as was ours in
ſupporting the heir to the Duke of Cleves, and

ſettling the balance of Europe. We have then

only to begin; each moment will furnith us with
ſreſh reſources: the princes, now ſo backward and
ITelolute, will acquire courage from time and the
tlulh of ſucceſs; and the ardour of war will inſpire
them with thoſe ſentiments of our generoſity,

which they are to be condemned for not having
dà at firſt entertained.

Behold a motive in favour of thoſe who, though

chey approve of our generoſity, yet are reduced

perhaps

a49 MEMOIR S Book XXVII

perhaps to wiſh that it may not be merely gratui.

rous on our fide. Whatever ſucceſs our arms may

have in conjunction with thoſe princes who form
pretenſions on the ſucceſſion of Cleves, yet ſtil
theſe princes have certain fears, that, one day or
other, they ſhall be diveſted of all their poſleſiion;
by the Emperor, whenever the ſituation of things
comes to change. Is it a raſh concluſion to ima.
gine, that this fear, joined to the reflections they
made, on the difficulty of preſerving provinces di.
vided amongſt them into ſo many fragments, ſo
little conducive to their reſpective utility, ſo de.
ſirably tempting to their enemies, eſpecially to 1
King of France of an enterpriſing nature, ſhould
not induce them, one day or other, to enter into
an accommodation with his Moſt Chriſtian Maje.
ſty, whether they received the value of theſe ter:
ritories in ready money, or in ſome equivalent, in
tracts of land, for example, in the heart of France,
as in Berry, Bourbon Marche, and Auvergne!
Now, ſuppoſing this to happen, what advantage:
muſt accrue to France in this double connector
of intereſt and dependency, which will unite pan
of Germany with her for ever? And what cannot
be denied, is, that the preſent ſuccours, which his
Majeſty ſhall grant to theſe princes, will be:
pledge to them to demand them for the future, i
order to preſerve themſelves in their new acl
fations, a requeſt which the King can pay on de-
mand. Miny people may think, that what I have
been ſaying is purely chimerical; and perhaps |
may ſurpriſe ſeveral, by informing: them that tic

thing, far from being abſolutely tznpoihble, as ha

been imagined; had been long in agitation by
third perſons; and that on the day it produce
itſelf, by the concurrence of cauſes ſo favourabie,
was on the point of being propoſed to the prince
concerned, and might very probably have veel
accepted by them.

me
5
-

7 1609. O07 SUL LY. 441

Hut to leave theſe public and private conſidera-
tions, let us conſider the thing more ſimply. The
|| | King of France had already engaged himſelf to
| Þ | undertake the ſupport of thoſe princes, had neg-
lected nothing to attach them to him; had of-
;

;

ſered them his aſſiſtance at all times; had decla-
red in terms ſufficiently high, that he would allow
. no one to uſe them ill; and had alſo ordered his
j| troops to advance to the frontiers; ſo that it was
a point of honour and juſtice of long continuance,
oÞ and it was inconſiſtent with his character to re-
- cede. Our Kings have been rarely inſenſible to
this impulſe of generoſity, which induces them to
4 ſupport unfortunate princes. This was not pre-
cely the preſent caſe. The perſons in queſtion

e. had rendered real ſervices to his Majeſty, and
„ fhewn, on all occaſions, that nothing but want of
in power hindered them from performing greater.
© It became Henry therefore, as a friend and as one
:& obliged, to recollect all that they had done for
© him in his days of diſtreſs. When Francis I. aid-

ar ſent, to reſtore Duke Ulric to the poſſeſſion of the
0% duchy of Wirtenburg; when Henry II. joined
hs Maurice, Elector of Saxony, to deliver the Ger-
wan princes oppreſſed by Charles V. their perſon-
al honour only, and that of their crown, induced
them to take theſe ſteps under very conſiderable
de: Inconveniencies. They had fewer inducements
ave than Henry the Great; the motive of affection and
s 1 gratitude only, more powerful indeed than any
te others.
And here I may poſitively contradict thoſe who
complain of involving his Majeſty, out of pure
Bine a in a war with Spain, capable of infla-
ble, ung all Chriſtendom, merely on account of ſome
1c foreign intereſt, which might be adjudged with-
ce but drawipg the ſword. Theſe are equally igno-
I rant

ed Philip Landgrave of Heſſe, uncle to the pre-

442 MEMOIR S Book XXVII.

rant of the nature of the thing, and the conſe. !
quences of the undertaking. They will at length! ;
allow, that, in the preſent conjuncture, the en.! 7.
terpriſe, which has for its object the aſſurance of Þ 1 6
the ſucceſſion of Cleves to the true heirs, is an af. Þ ? ;
ſair of ſo prompt execution, that the public vilÞ © ;:

hardly know of it, but by the effects: that Spain, | 5
by making peace with her proper ſubjects, a peace] 10
by which, ſuch is their ruinous ſituation, they are] ©,

bettered in no reſpect, hath afforded us a proof cl
ſuch a political weakneſs, and exhauſted cond. ] rh
tion, that ſh2 muſt ſubmit to the laws of an impo. Þ |
ſed neutrality : that the Emperor is no longer n
a condition to diſpute with us, he being defraudedÞ *
of his ſuccours from one part of Germany; ad ie
we, on the other hand, having more means to.atÞ „

g to
than we had for a conſiderable time. In ſhort, it 1
is a ſcheme which ought to coſt France little mor? =
than to ſay ſhe will execute it. The event ha 40

juſtified all this beyond contradiction. '

This therefore is properly an affair of no cos.
ſequence, if we conſider it as reſpecting only tl: .
buſineſs of Cleves, and they who talk in another the
manner, do it certainly only for this reaſon ; that =
ſpeaking according to the rules of politics, it
only an introduction to another more illuſttos pf:
and extenſive, which Europe has obſerved to,
formed by his Majeſty, for the depreſſion of u 44
houſe of Auſtria, I am fo fincere as readily , pb
allow that buſineſs muſt be done at once; and [ui

Fe
was the advice I gave to my maſter, who was And
the ſame opinion with myſelf. Of this I can o pf f

convince thoſe who, like me, will examine d
affair without paſſion or prejudice ; and of 1110!
men I hold myſelf certain, becauſe their 01110
will be the reſult of every reflection that can e
made upon the different ſchemes by which tl
deſign may be carried on. I will give an accol

@ ww. 4

nt
Ly
*

1

:
: j tions.
?

1609. 0 7.3 ULLY: 443

of them, ſuch as they roſe in my own mind, when

IJ was molt deeply engaged in thoſe contidera-

The firſt opinion, and the leaſt plauſible, is to
| fit quiet and fee the parties concerned fight out
| their quarrel, or at leaſt aſſiſt our friends only with

our counſels, As policy will always direct us not
to ſtand unarmed to look upon thoſe that are at
war, it would be neceſſary to keep a body of
troops upon the frontier, if for no other purpoſe
{than to take advantage of every change which an
moment might produce. By taking this ſide there-
fore we make no alteration in our expenſes, but
that we are obliged to continue them enger, than
if, by engaging vigorouſly, we thould put an end
to it at a blow.
1 fay the ſame thing of the ſecond ſcheme,
which appears on the firſt view ſufficiently ſpe-
cious, that is, to ſupport the princes againſt the
Þ ouſe of Auſtria not openly, but by ſecret means,
as we have already done in the war of Flanders.
The peace ſubſiſting in other reſpects among all
the other powers of E urope, there. was reaſon to
fear, left theſe private ſuccours ſhould be too
Freak to enable our allies to reſiſt the two branches
pf the houſe of Auſtria united againſt them, which
3s the end to be kept always in view, as is gene-
rally agreed; and, in this caſe, we hould have been
| pbliged to keep at all the three points of land
here their conteſted country bordcrs upon France
Ind Flanders, 2 body of forces conſiſting at leaſt
pf four thouland foot, and eight hundred horſe,
Advantageouſly poſted upon our own ground, or
the neutral country; where however they were
have performed no act of hoſtility, but only
re guarded the paſſages, kept the enemy at a
| iſtance, and prevented the total ruin of thoſe in
Fnole favour we engaged: in this caſe the ex-
b penſe

:
1
5
i #2
8
44
3
1
_ 7.
14
1
Bi
1
r 4
Ll
1

4, —_— 2
- _ — A

—

8

444 M E MOI RS Book XXVII.

penſe would have been great, and its conſequence
only the protraction of that war, which, by ta.
king it vigorouſly in hand, might be finiſhed at a
blow. It is ſaid in a political proverb, He that
gives ſoon gives tices To;,which I ſhall add ano.
ther, He that gives only half gives twice, and gives
nothing. Of this we have a Jate example in the
revolt of the United Provinces, that this manner
of ſupporting an ally, which upon the whole iz
equally chargeable with a quick and powerful
aſſiſtance, has no other effect than to force them,
ſoon or late, upon an accommodation, when ve
might have withdrawn them all at once from the
dominion c: Spain. If this be all the advantage
which our alliance will procure to the princes of
Germany, we oblige them bur little, or not at all;
there heing this difference berween them and Ho!.

land, that under whatever pretenſions a treaty i

offered them, it can only be intended as a Jure,
by which the Emperor will draw them within hi;
power, and deſtroy them; and who can tel] that

we ſhall not ourſelves ſeel the conſequences? It
was a juſt expreſſion of Bongars, That Leopold n
Tuliers; is a ferret in a warren. This ſcheme iſ

therefore is of no other ule than to ſave the King
a little perſonal trouble, who at moſt would be un-

der no neceſſity to go farther than Chalons oF

Rheims.

| Between this plan and that of a general combi.
nation againſt che houſe of Auſtria, another ha

been contrived of a middle kind, of which the lal

Savoy expedition may be given as an Inſtance.

In this it is laid down as a ſuppoſition, that th

allies on each part act as if they had agreed +
mongſt themſelves to ſupport the cauſe only 1
far as may be neceſſary to gain the point open

debated, and without pretending to infringe wi

they had promiſed for themſelves in the tre!

01 5

1609. df s LL VL 445

of Vervin?. If this is not a mere ſuppoſition, it

* appears at leaſt to be a ſcheme of meaſures that

would be long, expenſive, and perplexing, which
muſt begin by a diſcuſſion of the proportion of
troops which each of the allies miſt furniſh; and
then an inquiry after funds that may ſupport theſe
troops for two years at leaſt, of which the firſt
ear, and the three firſt months of the next, will
be ſpent in going and coming, and ſettling opera-
tions. The winter 1s rough in that country where

the war is to be carried on; and, that the army

may not be ruined, the cold mult be at an end
before any action commences. In an enterpriſe
where the King will not he at the head as chief
of the army, it will be ſufficient for him to put the
troops deſigned againſt Cleves under a prince, or
a marſhal of France; but he muſt, nevertheleſs,
make the proper preparations, and advance the
neceſſary money, of which the greater ſums will
be required, as he will have the appearance, how-
ever he may endeavour to avoid 1t, of ſupportin
all this burden alone, or nearly alone. He will
be likewiſe obliged to keep three thouſand men in
Dauphiné, and the ſame number in Provence, in
Languedoc, and in Guienne. I can then fee no-
| Ping better to be done, than to chuſe a certain
dumber of places ſo ſituated as to be able to de-
fend one another, and to ſerve as a chain to join
the country of Cleves with France and the United
rovinces; and to fortify theſe cities, which will
gain be a conſiderable expenſe. |
Thus all theſe reflections bring us back to the
_rſt expedient, as the moſt efficacious, to keep
ealures no longer with Spain; to treat the
oule of Auſtria as the general enemy of Europe;
raiſe it rivals and adverſaries on every fide; to
ur ſtrong armies upon it; to claim back the
Wuntry of Cleves; and when we have made the
Vor. IV. Q q | demand,

_—_

— _ * o
— "ab ; -—————
” - * Fa
- . — ; >
— 4 -—_
2

Py " 3 83 *
* 4 — 5

E · OED
» 3 A —

4.46 M--E-M-O TR 8 Book XXVII.

demand; to do ourſelves juſtice, by ſeizing upon
it, and upon all the places which ſhall be judged
COOL for the common cauſe, upon the ſide of

uxemburg, Limburg, Aix, &c. at the ſame in-
{tant to extend our forces, and cover the fron.
tiers of the Alps and Pyrenees: in a word, to {et
up the ſtandard, and ſhow to all the world that
the day is at laſt come, for which the King of
France has been preparing ſo many years, and
with ſo much care; that this prince will {low
himſelf now proceeding under the direction of
honour, armed to revenge one part of the world,
for the attacks of an unjuſt and haughty power;
and who then will refuſe to follow him? We are
aſſured by our correſpondents of almoſt all Italy
and Germany; we take along with us the United
Provinces, thowing them their enemy by our
power removed from their frontiers ; we {ill
untie the hands and the tongues of thole powers
who are now reſtrained by fear; and, if our en.
deavours are not equally ſupported on all ſides,
the general reſentment, which we may now make
ule of, will ſecure us from being thwarted by
-more than a very {mall number.

It muſt be expected, that the houſe of Auſt *
will put heaven and earth into commorion 0 Ht
put aſide, or to ſuſtain a blow that threatens ther ar
ruin; but when an exact view is taken of all de 1
ſupport which ſhe can be ſuppoſed to have, eite wi
from herſelf or her allies, if it be generally com
feſſed that Europe is in a ſtate of apitation fron
which it cannot be ſet free, but by long and cru
wars, which will perhaps reſtore its liberty, a
pernany take it away for ever; can ſhe chulc hy

etter time for the determination of her fate t
this, when the hazard 1s leaſt, and the ſucc
moſt likely? This is what I have now to (:ha*

without anticipating the particulars which 1 1:48
pro.

promiſed to give of the great deſigns of Henry IV:

and the manner in which they were to be put

in execution.

It was the partiſans of Spain, the ſupporters of

the old league, the enemies of the Proteſtants,
and the difaifeed French, jealous of the King's
glory, and the kingdom's proſperity, who uſed
their utmoſt endeavours to diſſuade his Majeſty
from engaging in thoſe great deſigns, which he
had formed; but, finding that all their efforts had
proved ineffectual, and that he was upon the point
of carrying them into execution, they exerted
all the arts which yet remained. They took ads
vantage of Henry's propenſity to pleaſure, and
ſought to raiſe a conflict in hk mind between his
deſire of fame and thoſe inclinations which made

aloft and voluptuous life too alluring. Again they
; endeavoured to fill him with fuſpicions of rhe

whole body of Proteſtants in general, and of me
in particular: they placed before his eyes his

kingdom torn to pieces by factions, who eagerly

expected a war, at a time when they might act
their treaſons with impunity; and the pripces his
allociates, as artful deceivers, who laughed at his
vain projects. There were ſome moments when

Henry, though upon his guard againſt this ſort of

jartihec, ſuffered himſelf to be ſhaken by it; and

21 myſelf perhaps contributed to diſcourage him

without knowing it, by repreſenting to him, that
a prince who had expanded his heart to entertain

Welizns ſo noble, ought to begin the execution of

them, by {hutting out all fondneſs for trifling a-

muſements, and expenſes, which had only mere
Toavenience in view: that, on a like occaſion,
Ferdinand, and Iſabella of Caſtile, and ſeveral of
ur own Kings, had leflened the expenſes of their

zoufehold; as likewiſe thoſe of the Queen. In a

ora, I told him, that he ought no more to think

Qq2 of

EY LET. 417

| '
|
|

448 MEMOIRS Book XXVIL

of pleaſure, but in vanquiſhing his enemies; or at
leaſt, till victory was his own.

It happened very fortunately to fix the waver.
ing mind of Henry, that the German princes, of
their own accord, and in oppoſition to the Em.
peror, held an aſſembly at Hall, in Suabia, to
deliberate upon the means of reſtoring the circles
to their former liberty. They met there on the
day appointed, to the number of eighteen or twen.
ty *. The Venetians, the Prince of Orange, the
States of Holland, and the Duke of Savoy, who
had at laſt taken a reſolution to engage in the
common caule, ſent deputies thither to repreſent
them; the manifeſtoes, which were carefully cir.
culated, joined to the public diſcourſe z and what
was privately intimated by Boiſſiſe, and other a.
gents of his Majeſty, had fo good an effect, that it
was publicly dehberated to ſtop the progreſs of
the houſe of Auſtria; and it was reſolved, that
ambafladors ſhould be ſent to his Moſt Chriſtian
Majeſty, in the name of the aſſembled powers, to
offer him all their forces, and to demand a promiſe
of his, when required. Theſe ambaſſadors were
appointed, and ſet out directly.

Henry bad juſt given them their firſt audience,
when he came to the arſenal to tell me all they had
{aid and offered, and to conſult with me upon the

anſwer he ſhould give to their propoſals. He

deſired me to conſider the matter attentively,
while he went to dine at Zamet's; adding, that

he would return, and paſs part of the afternoon

in my garden, where he appointed me to meet
bim.
We met there accordingly; and Henry, taking

gee the names of theſe princes, M. de Boifliſe's ſpeech, tis

mannerand reſolutions of thisaffembly, in vol. 9765." MSS. R.; Men.
detat de Villeroi, vol. 3. p. 230. & ſeq. ; Merc. Frau. 8::10 160%

Siri, ib. vol. 4. . 68. :
| Wy

a 90 8101 LY; 449

my hand, ordered every one to retire, and went
to the terraſs, which was the place where we
uſually held our moſt ſerious converſations.
« Well,” ſaid his Majeſty, “ what do you think of
« our affairs? for ſome are of one opinion, and

> © © ſome of another.” This appearing to me a
s © favourable opportunity to confirm him in his re-
e ® ſolution, I ſkewed him plainly, that thoſe who
- # oppoſed it were doubtleſs excited to do ſo by ſe-
e ©. cretmorives, which I ſeemed to be ignorant of;
o fſince, if we examined things in three principal
e points of view, namely, with regard to his own
nt perſon, the ſtate of affairs within his kingdom,
r- #2 andof thoſe without, there were no difficulties to
at be comprehended : for, without flattery, he was,
a in the opinion of the French nation, ſuperior to

it the greateſt warriors and ſtateſmen of his age;
ot and that ſuch a ſchool could not fail of producin
at men excellent in both capacities, as it had already
ian done, who would afliſt him in bearing the weight
o of a new burden he was preparing for himſelf
ule and them. With regard to the affairs at home,
cre there were neither princes, grandees, nor cities
in his kingdom, which were in a condition, who
ice, were difpoſed, or had the means of retarding his
enterpriſe, much leſs preſume to attack him, when
the ] they ſaw him at the head of all the forces of
tie Europe: and, beſides this, he was going to open
ely, a theatre where thoſe braggarts would find occa-
ſions of ſignalizing themſelves much more glori-
1001 oully than in dark plots, where nothing was to be
mee guned but infamy : and, laſtly, as to the affairs
 [ithour the kingdom, the difficulty of uniting ſo
king ! many powers in the ſame deſign, which had hither-
to been conſidered as the only one to be ſeared,
5, Fould be happily removed in a very ſhort time.
16 . And now, Sire,” ſaid I, “all that remains to be
conſidered, is, whether you have the means of

A continuing

©

U

+ att — 7 * 8 0 0 «42
e
% pu A. |

we

— EIT

_ 3 —
— — —
—

Ty

450 M E MO IRB Bock XXVII.
« continuing the war as long as it is neceſſary
upon the {ame foot as you are going to begin
« it; ſor ſee plainly, that France is the hinge
«© upon which all muſt turn: therefore,” purſued
I, „I think it fit to tell your Majeſty, that witli
* regard to the chief point, which is money,
provided your war continues only three years,
and that you have not occaſion for more than
« forty thouſand men, I will ſupply you with mo-
“ ney ſufficient for them, whhout laying any
© new tax upon your people; and as for other
% things, ſuch as proviſions, ammunition, and
*« artillery, I will ſhew you ſuch a quantity of
« them, that you ſhall acknowledge there is
enough; and then, I believe, we ſhall make
% war in ſuch a manner, that of the three ſtan-
« dards, white, black, and red “, we ſhall not
* need to diſplay any bur the firſt, and that once
©« forall: the fate of thoſe who firſt reſiſt will be
« leſſon for all the reſt.” * But not to inter-
4% rupt you,” ſaid his Majeſty to me, “ pray, how
« much money have I? for I never yet knew
% exactly. „How much do you think yon have,
« Sire?” replied IJ.“ Have I twelve millions?”
ſaid he. A little more,” ſaid J. How!
fourteen?” reſumed he, going on {till augment-
Ing it two millions more each time, becauſe my
conſtant anſwer was a little more, till he came to
thirty millions. Oh! I ask no more,” cried
he, embracing me in a tranſport of joy. I have
« drawn upa ſcheme,” ſaid], * by which your Ma-
% jeſty will find that you may depend upon 2
« new fund of forty millions extraordinary, with-
out incroaching upon the uſual expenles of

* Ry this expreſſion, the author means, that no prince or ſtate

would refuſe to join their forces to thoſe of the confederates, after

their intention was once made, and after they had puniſhed the firſt
who ſhould endeayour to oppoſe then.

| | . 66 your

|
a
{
(
]
<
<
c
6
0
6
c

-— © EX. a In. Ron br

189.0 F 8 U L LIV. 451

«your houſehold and the ſtate, upon a ſuppoſt-
& tion, however, that my ceconothy is not tra-
e verſed.” And where is this paper?” ſaid Hen-
ry precipitately. “ I will give it you, Sire,” I repli-
ed, „whenever you pleale, written with my own
ian i Loo SOLE, ien 7
- T afterwards ſhewed his Majeſty a way how to
be aſſiſted, both m men and money, by his allies,
provided that he would continue fixed in this part
of his deſigns, in purſuance of which, as we had
agreed, he would enrich them with all the con-
queſts he gained from the houle of Auſtria, with-
out reſerving any thing for himſelf. How !”” faid
Henry, © would you have me&expend-fixty mil-
“% lions in conquering, territories for others, and
« keep nothing for myſelf? and pray what is
% to become of Spain? you ſay nothing of her.”
«& Spain, Sire,” I replied, “ is to remain as (he
* is: we muſt not take any thing from her King:
“ ſhe muſt ſerve to keep all thoſe whom your li-
te heralities have enriched under the ſhadow of
« your protection, a king of Spain being always
« powerful enough to oppreſs them ſeparately;
« when no longer ſupported by you, they will
« never fail in the gratitude and reſpect wy
© owe you.” I likewiſe, without having recourſe
to that general maxim, That too great extent of
territory rather weakens than {ſtrengthens a go-
vernment, eaſily brought Henry to acknowledge,
that many inconveniencies would attend his appro-
priating the conquered countries to himſelf ; that
it would be a ſubject for eternal hatred and jea-
louſy; and, all things conſidered, the greateſt
and moſt ſolid advantage he could acquire by his
conqueſts, if he diſtributed them with equity,
was a right of being regarded as the ſole bene-
factor and arbitrator of Europe. | 1815
What I moſt earneſtly recommended to him,
V1 ' a Was,

# 9

.

* —

A ME'M/O I/'R $S (Book XVI.
was, to guard againſt every poſlible reverſe of for-
tune; —1 — example, if he ſnould be abandoned or
betrayed by his allies, to have it always in his power
to bring back his armies into his own kingdom,
not only without danger, but honour, to facilitate
which nothing was more neceſſary than to build
forts at proper diſtances on the road of Cleves.
To this piece of advice, I added another, which
was to provide great plenty of proviſions in the
neighbourhood of thoſe provinces ; fot, beſides
that it was not eaſy to carry them through a
country ſo incloſed and croſſed by rivers as that
was, the whole canton was divided among ſeveral
lietle princes, who had already gathered in the
fruits of the preſent harveſt, great part of it being
„ before: that it would be ſcarce poſſible
r an army to ſubſiſt there fiſteen days, without
being obliged to have recourſe to the magazines
of thoſe princes, where every thing would be ſer
at ſo high 2 price, that all his money would
ſcarcely ſuffice to purchaſe what was wanted. I
therefore told his Majeſty, that I would, if he
conſented to it, ſend for the merchants with whom
I uſed formerly to treat, when 1 had any great
enterpriſes in hand, and would agree with them
for every thing we had occaſion for at a reaſon-
able price. 12 2 |
The King, at parting, collecting in one view
all that I had ſaid to him, told me, that he was
ing to conſider of the reſolution it was proper
or him to take, and deſired that I would not neg-
le& to examine every thing with the deepeſt at-
tention ; that he would come very often and con-
fer with me; and that I might begin to make all
thoſe preparations I had mentioned; by which I
concluded that I had obtained part, at leaſt, of
what I deſired. THT"
I ſent for the merchants of Liege, Aix, 1
: an

I
a
i
d.
ſe
ba
H
4
ſ⸗
ſe
of
d.
th
m
de
in
in

tO

160 . OF SUL L I. 4583

and Cologne, with whom L made the following a-
reement: that they ſhould furniſh me, in the
eee of three months, with all ſorts of ammuni-
tion, proviſions, forage, and warlike ſtores, and
ſend them to that part of the frontier near Cleves,
which I ſhould appoint. I had drawn up an exact
liſt of every thing which was neceſſary for an
army of twenty-five thouſand foot, and five thou-
ſand horſe, at the ſame price they bore in the pre-
ſent fair the month of October: that I, on my
ſide, ſhould advance them the ſum of fix hun-
dred thouſand .crowns, which ſhould remain in
their hands a year at leaſt, giving them at Paris a
million for ſecurity of this ſum, which was to in-
demnify them for the expenſes of purchaſe, ſelb
ing at loſs, waſte, and other accidents. |
he King was ſo well pleaſed with my proceed.
ings, that he ordered me to put the finiſhing hand
to them, and, in the overfiowings of his joy, re-
counted all to Sillery, Villeroi, and Jeannin, and
afterwards to the Count of Soiſſons, Cardinal Foy«
euſe, the Duke of Epernon, and ſeveral others;
ſome of whom applied themſelves with ſuch ma-
lice and dexterity to make him believe that I had
drawn him into my ſnares, by ſending thoſe ma-
gazines out of the kingdom, which I had long
wiſhed for an opportunity of doing, to appropri-
ate them to myſelf, that this prince, though al-
ready prejudiced againſt every thing which came
from them, at ** ſwallowed the poiſon; and
when he ſaw me, fome days afterwards, aſked me
if the contract for proviſions was ſigned. I re-
plied it was not; becaufe I thought it a thing of
too much conſequence to be done without a pre-
vious application to the council, which had not
met ſince. Henry, who in this procedure ought
to have found nothing but exactneſs, thought it
had an appearance of falſchood and artful pres
R caution,

452 MEMOTR SS Bock XXvIT.
caution, which confirmed his ſuſ] picions, and there-
fore bid me not conelude the bargain till Thad an
order from him. Sire,“ replied I, {tilt igno.
rant of his meaning, “the merchants will not
« ſtay.” „ If they will not ftay,” reſumed he,
with the fame drineſs and reſerve, © they may
« go their ways.“ This opened my eyes, and
anger being now rouſed in my breaſt as well as
his, „I begin to perceive, Sire,“ faid I, “that
« you have ſomething in your thoughts which I
“ am not to know: F tha)! ſend the merchants
& back, fince you will have it fo; but you will
© be pleaſed to remember this affair another
4 time.“ Saying this we ſeparated with great
coldneſs on both ſides. | | LUED

No more mention was made. of the: proviſions
till a long time after, when the King coming to
the arſenal to confer with me upon other affairs,
before {ome of his courtiers, as uſual, took me
aſide, and ſaid, „I have been informed, that the
“% States of Holland will ſend ambaſſadors to me
«in a few days, to fettle all that we are to do:
« inthe mean time, let us make the neceſſary pre-
* parations, that nothing may be wanting on our
« part.” This was all he ſaid then. The de-
— arrived ſoon after with letters from the

rince of Orange and the council of the States,
for his Majeſty and for me. Henry opened them
all, and finding that they aſſured him they would
anſwer for the ſucceſs of his enterpriſe, pro-
vided he would take the precaution to have all the
neceſſary proviſions upon the ſpot, giving him
the ſame advice on this occaſion. as I myſelf had
done, he began to be diſabuſed, and, cloſing my
letters again, gave them to L'Oſerai to carry to
me. I found out this artifice immediately, and
thought it allowable to return it with another,

*

for as good a purpoſe. I ſealed my letters, as

= @, ww Tm

| «& ed,” ſaid he, „that there are ſome for you.”
© T-have not got them, Sire,” replied I. You
will have them ſoon,” reſumed the King;
for J have 1 orders to have them brought
to you, and mine alſo: but, in the mean time,
let us talk about the proviſions; for we ſhall
go at a time when there is none to be got.”
4 J foreſaw this long ago, Sire,” ſaid I, “ and I
« would have given proper orders for every thing
that was neceſlary: you yourſelf not only ap-
& proved of my diſpatch, but even commanded
“ it. However, you have, by the malice of my
& enemies, been perſuaded to alter your reſolu-
«& tion, the inconveniency of which will, I am
& afraid, fall heavy upon you; for that which
“ might have been had eaſily, and at a moderate |
Ir te price, at that time, which was the ſeaſon of
_ % harveſt, will be very dearly and with difficulty

& purchaſed now; and, what is ſtill worſe, I |
© know not whether any one will be bold enough |
© to undertake to furniſh with proviſions an army i
« of more than a hundred and fifty thouſand
“ men, and thirty thouſand horſes.” © Who
« wil undertake it?” replied Henry; „why you,
“ unleſs you have an inclination to offend me.”
4% I would rather die than offend you, Sire,” ſaid
I; “ but you ought not to lay your commands
upon me.to do what is now become impoſſible,
ſince you would not permit me to do it at a
proper time.” * Let us ſpeak no more of
* what is paſt,” reſumed the King; © think *

| 7 if

K

ECC ͤ ͤ bd rd
N.

ww ww So
oY
oy

> (3 coo
Lay
ay

% & Fg

$56 MEMOTR S Book XXVII.
« of the future. Tou muſt undertake this affair
& yourſelf, and, to yonr other poſts and employ-
ments, add that of ſuperintendant of provi-
« ſions. I defire, as a friend, that you will ac-
* cept of this office; for I know, it you act as
« you have always done, you will acquit yourſelf
eee his Majeſty very fer

J repreſented to his Majeſty very feriouſly, that
J had already ſufficient bulinef upon my N in Nr
the care of the artillery, which alone, and in the n
preſent conjuncture eſpecially, 17. — employ four
perſons; beſides which, I had all the ordinary ex- | ©
| #7559 of the ſtate to provide, thoſe of his Maje-

y*'s houſehold, the Queen's, and their children;
as likewiſe of the fortifications, buildings, and
other public works; and laſtly, for all his troops,
Either at home or abroad. How?” interrupted
Henry, “do you really refuſe then to grant a re-
« queſt, which I make you as one friend would
« another? If you continue thus obſtinate, I ſhall
te believe that you no longer love me; and that
« you really nouriſh thoſe 7 which, for a
« Jong time, endeavours have been uſed to per-
4 ſuade me you do.” What, Sire,” ſaid I ha-!“ f
ſtily, (taking advantage of the words which had
_ Eſcaped him), © am I then indeed fo unhappy, end
« that, when I ſacrifice my life for your ſervice, [com
« your honour, and your fame, you ſhould ſtill!“ }
« return, and on the lighteſt ſuggeſtions, to ſu-F'* fu
c“ ſpicions of my fidelity? This, I confeſs, wounds
ec me cruelly, deprives me of all courage to ſerveſſ* w.
tc you, and will at length put an end to my life.“ all
“ Well,” reſumed Henry, who had reſolved to
expoſe me to all kinds of affaults, “ fince you
« think in this manner, I ſhall eaſily find a reme-F

« dy for all theſe difficulties : we muſt break off ma
e our journey, pals the time as well as we can, lig
& and live in peace with all che world; agre 3

| 66 Wi | OL

ec with all parties, and give them money to make
& them eaſy: for we have amaſſed a great quan-
& tity, and we will uſe it for that purpoſe.” “It
& js well reſolved on, Sire,” replied I; © and,
& for mylelf, I declare, that I am fatisfied, ſince
“e jt will free me from many vexations, watching,
& labours, reproaches, and dangers.”
Henry interrupted me here with an emotion of
rage he was not able to reſtrain, and reproached
ne with being a diſſembler. © I know,” ſaid he,
„ chat what you have ſaid, is far from being your
„ real thoughts or deſires: it is you who would
0 be moſt grieved if we do not make war, which
& you have fo long and ſo earneſtly preſſed me to
d & do.” © It is true, Sire,” rephed I, “ that I
& think fortune preſents you with a favourable

ce opportunity to acquire honour and fame, if you

©. are diſpoſed to improve it; but, if not, it is fit
aa!“ that your ſervants ſhould pretend not to ſee
an!“ it.” I added, * that his great deſigns not only
lat turned upon his own perſon, but alſo depende d
ra!“ fo entirely upon himſelf, that, as he alone
er- J“ would ſecure the ſucceſs, fo likewiſe, by one
ha-“ ſingle geſture, or word imprudently uttered, he
© might ruin them for ever.” At wt. having

py, endeavoured to bit upon a medium which might
ice, {compoſe the difference between us, * If your Ma-
tin“ jeſty,” ſaid I, “ will be pleaſed to commit the
u- ſuperintendance of the proviſions to Meſſicurs
“ Teannin and Caumartin, I promiſe to aſſiſt them
vel“ with my advice, my labour, and my credit; and
fe. alſo with men and money, with a ſolicitude as
great as if my life depended upon it: but, if I
© undertake the office alone, you will never be
F perſuaded to believe, that the difficulties which
„off may ariſe have any other cauſe than my neg-
can, F ligence or want of attachment to you.” © Well,
yreeffeplied Henry, „I ſhall ſee what is to be done.
with Vor. IV. Rr “However,

% MEMOIRS Book XXVII.

« However, if thoſe perſons will not engage in
ce the affair without you, you mutt prepare to la-
« bour in conjunction with them, unleſs you re-
«& ſolve to ſee me break off my journey.“ L'Oſe-
ral entering that moment with the letters, he re-
ceived a ſevere reprimand from* the King, for
neglecting to bring them to me before. |
3 this time his Majeſty was continually em-
ployed in making preparations for his great enter-
riſe. The councils which were held from thence
orwards were kept very ſecret, and moſt frequent-
ly met at the arſenal. The King always admit-
ted M. de Vendome to theſe councils ; and labour-
ed to inſtruct him, as well in all affairs of ſtate,
as of war. He perceived, that there was a
little coldneſs between this prince and me;
and, being reſolved to reconcile us, took the
following method to effect it: I have been in-
4 formed,” ſaid he to me one day, „that my
4 ſon de Venddme, and yours, are at variance
« with each other. I am deſirous of reconci-
«& ling them: ſend for your ſon to-morrow morn-
& inp at eight o*clock into your cloſet; I will
« bring my ſon thither at that hour, and talk to
% them both.” Accordingly, when we were
met, Henry took the young men, each by the
hand, and ſaid to them, ** You fee how greatly
« T love M. de Sully, and with what freedom!
« live with him. I would have you two on the
« ſame terms with each other, and follow our
c advice, we who are old and experienced, to
cc the end that your youth may ſupport itſclf
« withthe prop of our age. And you, my ſon,
ce honour and reſpect the Duke of Sully as myſelf;
c and often viſit him, that you may learn from
ce him the art of war, and method to be uſed in
ee buſineſs of ſtate: through his affection for me,
he will communicate his knowledge to you as
6 « freely

++ RAD . . axauaoofrwc} £©@COCOS

3-22 $8 TSS B-y

* * 3 *

ohne

1609. OF SU LL V. 459
c freely as to his own ſon, whom I deſire you
« would love as your brother; and I command
% you both to bury in oblivion , whatever may
* Live occaſioned any abatement of your former
« friendſhip.” |

I ſaw with pleaſure ſome new obſtacle removed

every day. The alliance which had been pro-
8 to the Duke of Savoy“, and which had

een already mentioned, was eagerly accepted.
The King of Sweden offered himſelf as an ally to
France; and, to connect the intereſts of hoth
crowns more ſecurely, gave the King to under-
ſtand, that it would be in France where he would
ſeek for a wife for the Prince his ſon, who, young
as he was, courageouſly ſeconded all his brave re-

ſolutions. The Kings of England and Denmark

were already above half gained. The Proteſtants
of Hungary, Bohemia, Moravia, Sileſia, and the
Upper Auſtria, ſtimulated by our agents, and yet
more determined by the cruelties which the Eni-
peror's miniſters, excited by the Jeſus, practiſed
upon them, had lately aſſured us, that, as ſoon as
the war ſhould be declared, they would make a
powerful diverſion in thoſe borders of Germany.
We found, by letters from Bongars, and the Land-
grave of Heſſe, that the Elector of Saxony would
not be prevailed upon to take part againſt the

See the treaty concluded this year between France and Savoy,
in Nevers's memoirs, vol. 2. p. 832. and the definitive treaty ſign-
ed at Bruſol, the 25th of April, in the year following; by which
the King of France engages, amongſt othe things, to put the
Duke of Savoy in poſſeſſion of the Milaneſe, ib.p. 880. This treaty
is ſet forth, according to the Italian original, by Vittorio Siri, tb.
vol. 2. p. 236. But this writer contradits himſelf, by ſaving,
vol. 1. p. 512. that it was the Duke of Sully who negotiated this
agreement between France and Savoy; and aſſerting afterwards,
p. 566. that it was the Duke of Sully's intention the Duke of Savoy
ſhould reap no other advantage from it, than only to obtain the
protection of France. | |

Rr 2 Emperor;

460 MEMOIR S Book XXVII.
Emperor; but, to make amends for this bad news,
the EleQor of Bavaria entered into an unlimited
engagement with us, upon condition that he

ſhould be choſen to ſucceed the Emperor, and ac-
tually named King of the Romans. The Swiſs
cantons appeared very favourably diſpoſed to-
wards us. In a word, none could reſiſt the allure-
ments of thoſe conqueſts, which all were made
to expect. The Pope himſelf, the moſt difficult
in appearance to be gained, ſhewed he was not
inſenſible: upon my telling the nuncio one day,
that I intended to make his maſter a King, he
thanked me for this news, which, he ſaid, was the
beſt he could ever impart to his Holineſs.

But a reſource ſtill more certain, which we had
begun to make uſe of, in caſe of a refuſal from
the Sovereign Pontiff, and all the little ſtates of
Italy, as Florence, Mantua, Montferrat, Modena,
Urbino, Genoa, and Lucca, was to march with an
army into the Milaneſe, and force them all either
to join, or contribute, at leaſt, ſome ſums of
money to the common armament. Leſdiguieres
had been commiſſioned to ſet on foot a body of
twelve thouſand foot and two thouſand horſe,
with a train of artillery conſiſting of twelve pieces
of cannon ; and, while he was employed in ma-
king theſe levies, I ſet apart every month a fund
of a hundred thouſand crowns for their mainte-
nance, the aſſignments for which were expedi-
ted and already ſent. I expected that the Duke
of Savoy, the Venetians, who were the moſt zea-
lous for, as indeed they were the moſt intereſtedin
this part of the ſcheme, and the Pope, in caſe we
could prevail upon him to declare himſelf, would

each furniſh as much. |
The ſtorm began now to gather towards Germa-
ny. They had actually levied, for the great army
which was deſtined for Cleves, twenty 1 any
| | oot,

GD

Ws OF 3 1 L I. a6

foot, four thouſand horſe, and got ready à train

of artillery conſiſting of no leſs than fifty cannons:
the carriages, horſes, mules, and all the reſt of the

| baggage in proportion, were alike well furniſhed,

and jn a fit condition for ſervice. The levies fi-
nithed, the army began to file off towards Cleves.
Although the war was not yet declared, the com-
pany of two hundred gens d' armes, called the
Queen's, of which I was captain-lieutenant, recei-
ved orders to be at Meézieres, on the laſt day of
July, complete and fully equipped.

The King, who delayed to ſet up his ſtandard
nll the next ſpring ſhould afford a proper time to
take the field, reſolved to avoid every thing that
might look like invaſion till within ten days of his
ſetting out. He wrote to the Archduke, acquaint-
ing him, that, being ſolicited by the lawful heirs
of the Duke of Cleves to aſſiſt them * cer-
tain perſons, who, ſupported by ſeveral powerful
princes, attempted to poſſeſs themſelves of their
dominions, he could not refuſe to aid them; and,

as the road his army was to take lay through his

territory, he intreated him to conſent to his
marching through as a friend; that he would
commit no act of hoſtility, unleſs forced to it;
and would keep his troops under exact diſcipline.
The Archduke's anſwer, which did not arrive till
after his Majeſty's death, was to this effect.

« My Lord, It is in the quality of one of the
* humbleſt of your ſervants, that I intreat you
% will march through my territories: my gates
* ſhall be open to you, and proviſions at your
“ ſervice, relying upon the aſſurance your Maje-
* ſty will, I hope, be pleated to give, that no
« a& of hoſtility hall be committed during your
« march.” |

Such was the ſtare of affairs in France at the
concluſion of the year 16cg, the laſt months of

r 3 which

'-

462 MEMOIR S Book XXVII.

which Henry had ſolely employed in bringing his
{ſcheme to perfection. The beginning of the fol-
lowing year produced no change in his reſolu-
tions, nor intermiſhon to his labour: he was ſo
entirely ingroſſed by them, that he often made
very indiſcreet confidences. On new-year's day,
when I went to make him the uſual compliments
and preſents, he was ſo well pleaſed with the de-
vice of the medals I brought him, that he put
two of them in his pocket to ſhew to ſome of the
courtiers. Upon theſe medals was repreſented
the globe of the earth, ſelf-balanced in the midſt
of an atmoſphere, and aſſaulted, in vain, by winds
and ſtorms; with theſe words in Latin upon the
exergue of the medal, Suo ſe pordere fulcit *;
altogether expreſſing the analogy between this
emblem and the condition of our affairs, which,
by the wile government of Henry, was capable of
triumphing over all the efforts of our enemies.
His Majeſty, at his riſing from dinner, found the
Count of Soiſſons and the Cardinals de Joyeule
and Du-Perron converſing together in his library:
he ſhewed them the medals ; and theſe gentlemen,
to pleaſe him, enlarged upon the praiſes he be-
{towed on me, ſaying, that I was ſo much the more
worthy of them, as, that, in men of quality, a taſte
for the belles lettres was ſeldom found united
with the talents neceſſary to form a complete
ſtateſman and ſoldier. _

I was preſent at this diſcourſe, together with
many other perſons, who had followed the King
into the library. He ordered all to retire, except
M. de Vendome, that he might converſe with
thoſe I have firſt mentioned. La-Varenne and Þ<-
ringhen ſtaid likewiſe; but kept near the door.

I was extremely uneaſy when I heard his Majeſty
begin to talk of his great proje& before ſeveral
* Suſtains itſelf by its own weight; i. e. Jelf balanced.

ms perſons

> Gals on co aA Yoo oaoÞp AE oc c- ww ta cz

”". I” wn  PUY ow mx IF. EP” WPF !|

It hp poten Cu bu WG: Bo Yo Wo Ge WE Yo SD VO np Ie EY

— hs CD CY .Y_ we. =

» 0 a

ws; Or BULLY: © oy

perſons who I knew were not all equally well
affected to his intereſt ; and my uneaſineſs increa-
ſed upon his ſaying, That he would give Spain
and the houſe of Auſtria ſuch a blow, as would
prevent them, for the future, from being conſi-
dered as formidable enemies by France, whatever
change might happen, either with regard to the
royal family, or in the form of his government.
Thele words were ſufficiently imprudent; but he
did not ſtop here, and was upon the point of be-
traying his ſecret, by diſcovering circumſtances
of great importance. He no longer remembered
what he had often ſaid to me the year before, That
he was beſet with men who were continually lay-
ing ſnares for him, to penetrate into the bottom
of his heart, and whoſe curioſity, on this occaſion,
could not but proceed from a very bad motive.

I took the liberty to pull him by the cloak, with-
out any one's perceiving it, which he underſtood
ſo well, that he ſtopped ſhort as if he had for-
got ſomething : © My memory,” ſaid he, grows
« extremely bad: I cannot recollect the names
« of perſons, cities, and countries. I intreat
« you,” purſued he, turning to me, “to draw
« up memorials of all my deſigns, their cauſes,
«© and the expedients neceſſary tor effecting them:
& as likewiſe to give me in writing the fubſtance
% of all the converſations we have had together
& on theſe ſubjects, as far back as you can recol-
« lect, that, when my memory is refreſhed, I
&« may communicate all to ſuch of my ſervants
« hom I judge moſt worthy of my confidence.”
Thus did he extricate himſelf from the neceflity
he was under of ſaying more, ſince he had faid
ſo. much. I replied, that I would not fail to give
him thoſe memorials he required; but that the
work was not ſo ſhort, nor ſo eaſy to be executed,

as that I could promiſe to ſatisſy him, unleſs I had

prepared

464 MEM O I Rs Book xxvn.
prepared thoſe papers long before: notwithſtand-
ing which, I was apprehenſive that they would be

defeRive in many circumſtances, which I could
only know from his own mouth, and upon which

we had only had ſhort and interrupted confe.

rences. The converſation ended in this manner.

The King took part of the courtiers with him
to hunt, and I went home to collect my papers, and
put them in order. Some of thoſe upon the affairs
of the finances were of great importance; but
did not directly relate to his Majeſty's vaſt deſigns.
J ſet apart ſuch as I judged moſt neceſſary, and fix
days afterwards carried them to his Majeſty, tell-
ing him, when I preſented them, that thoſe per-
ſons who looked with an evil eye upon his project,
would be much more mortified if they knew what
Ihad to ſhew him. © What?” ſaid the King, © have
you then concealed any thing of importance up-
« on this ſubject from me? I know not how to be-
« lieve it.” I anſwered, that was not the caſe ; but
that a thonſand things, which, mentioned ſeparate-
ly, aredifficult to be remembered, when collected
together ſtrike the imagination more forcibly.

Among the papers I left with his Majeſty, thoſe
which related to his deſign were only general
ones. When he had examined them, he came to
the arſenal, and ſhutting himſelf up with me in
my cloſer: «I have read your memorials,” ſaid he,
„ ſeveral times; there are many good things in
« them eafily to be underſtood and executed; but
« there are others that require ſome conſidera-
« tion, and in which I do not think you will find
« your account.” expected, Sire,” replied I,
te to hear you ſpeak thus; but, before you go any
* farther, I beg you will allow me to tell you,
te that I have two other papers to ſhew you, which,
J am perſuaded, will clear up all your doubts,
and ſatisfy you entirely.” © Oh, have 12
It © 10;

1610. OF S UL L Y. 465
& fo?” ſaid the King : Well, give them to me;
« J will read them at my leiſure, and then tell
« you my ſentiments of them.” In effect, theſe
ſecond memorials contained only ſome explana»
tions of the former, and ſatisfactory anſwers to
the doubts which might be. raiſed, or difficulties
that might be alledged. In theſe, likewiſe, the
King found how great a number of ſoldiers it was
neceſſary to raile for the execution of his yaſt
deſigns, and what money it would require to main-
tain them.

The King was eager to ſee theſe other papers,
and came himſelf for them to the arſenal. He
took his reading-glaſs, which lay upon a table in
my cloſet, and read them quite through with great
attention, declaring afterwards, that the memo-
rials I had given him, eight days before, were
ſufficiently explained by theſe; and that he now
began to entertain hopes of ſucceſs, ſeeing that
ſuch vaſt ſums were at preſent amaſſed, or might
be very eaſily. For, provided we have money,”
ſaid he, „I know TI ſhall not want ſoldiers, cou»
te rage, or diligence.” “ I am ſure of it, Sire,”
ſaid I; “ and there is nothing too great for you
« to perform, or above what I expect from you.
« But here,” added I, ſhewing him a little paper
written and ſigned with my own hand, * is ſome»
„ thing which will remove all your doubts.”
Henry looking upon it, and perceiving that it was
an account of what ſums were then actually in his
cofters, which amounted to thirty-ſix millions,
embraced me eagerly three times; then, folding
it up carefully and riſing, © Theſe two papers,
faid he, “ have given me great pleaſure. I ſee
« there is a ſecure fund for my expenſes.” © You
« muſt not think, Sire,” replied 1, as we came
out of the cloſer, ** that this is all I am able to
„ do; no, in a caſe of extreme neceſſity, I may

perhaps

—

466 M E MOI RS Book XXVII.
« perhaps find the means of producing you as
% much more: your kingdom is ſo fertile and o-
«- pulent, that it cannot be drained, provided good
% management be uſed; and that the money de-
« ſtined for the war be not applied to other pur-
«& poſes.” I ſhall not give the reader the trouble
of examining all theſe accounts in this place, as I
pore to inſert them exactly, in the expoſition
ſhall ſhortly make of Henry's great deſigns.
His Majeſty went again to Fontainebleau at the
beginning of March; but he ſtaid there only fif.
teen days: and, by the letters I received from
him during that time, it was plain he never loft
ſight of his project. They all turned upon circum-
ſtances relating to the war: in one, he mentions
recruiting the five companies of the regiment of
Piemont to two hundred men each : in another,
a company of light horſe, which he had command.
ed Saubiſe to raiſe, giving him twelve thouſand
livres for that purpoſe; and ordered me to carry
it to account immediately: in another, he direct-
ed me to confer with the Chancellor Villeroi and
=. about all that was neceſſary for furniſhing
is troops with proviſions, and to chuſe the maga-
Zines along the Maes preferably to all others: in
another of his letters, he laid down the order that
was to be obſerved in levying his ſoldiers, their
march to the place of rendezvous, their inrol-
ment, and many other details of the ſame kind.
This letter was addreſſed more particularly to me,
becauſe it related to the levies which were to be
made in my government.
1 ſhall ſuppreſs, as uſual, ſeveral other letters
like thoſe of the former years, which turned whol-
ly upon ſmall payments, and affairs of the finan-
ces; and ſhall tranſcribe only one, which the King
thought proper to ſend me, in anſwer to ſome
words that had eſcaped me, concerning the Pe
g Sh 0

1610. OF SULL IJ. 467
ke took in hunting, and in reſiding at Fontaine-
bleau. - * My friend, I have heard what you ſaid
| i © upon my hunting, and my ſtay here; but do
„ not imagine, that the pleaſure I find in either
„ ſhall leſſen my attention to make the neceſſary
„ preparations for our journey, or the railing my
1 © army, in all that depends upon me: do you
1 i © only take care to provide money and artillery,
« that nothing may be wanting; but more eſpe-
e © cially proviſions: for, according to the account
f. you have given me of the ambaſſadors neceſſary
n to be ſent to the foreign courts, the Preſidents
t Wl © Jeannin and Caumartin muſt be of the number.
i. MW © The others I leave to your choice; for to you
s 1 ſhall apply on every occaſion. I have often
f © conſidered what you ſaid to me concerning my
r, wife and another perſon, and the promiſes you
1. Wl © exact from me. I ſhall ſpeak to you more ful-
d“ ly on this ſubje& when I ſee you, which will
y © be in two days. Adieu, my friend. Fontaine-
+. „ bleau, March 15.”
id Henry, at his return from Fontainebleau, em-
ig ployed the remainder of March, and all April
a- entirely, in putting the finiſhing hand to every
in ching that ſtill remained to be done for opening
at che campaign, which he was reſolved to do as ſoon
ir as poſſible. He came frequently to the arſenal,
öl- and remained many hours {hut up with me alone.
d. The time paſſed away very ſwiftly while we difſ-
e, WW courſed upon the accomplithment of his great de-
be Wl figns; and a thouſand conſiderations, which, at
the eve of ſo important an enterpriſe, preſented
rs Wl themſelves to his mind, boch with reſpect to fo-
reign aftairs and the neceſſary diſpoſition of thoſe
at home, that no inconvenience and diſorder might
attend his abſence. For this purpole, the King
ordered me to compole a long memorial upon war
and affairs of ſtate, which, after we had together
| examined

a6 MEMOIR S Book XXVII.
examined every particular, he took pleaſure in
correQing with his own hand.

His Majeſty appointed the following perſons to
reſide in the quality of ambaſſadors in the ſeveral
courts of Europe, while he was employed in the
execution of his great deſign. My brother was to
be ſent to Rome, and the other principalities and
republics of Italy, who had not yet declared for
the confederacy ; Bullion to the Venetians, and
the Duke of Savoy ; Caumartin to the Swiſs can-
tons, Griſons, and their allies ; Schomberg to the
Dukes of Saxony, Bayaria, and Brunſwick, the
Marquis of Brandenburg, and the other princes
and cities of Germany, which had not yet enter-
ed into the alliance ; Bongars to Hungary, Bohe-
mia, and Tranſilvania; Boiſſiſe to Denmark,
Sweden, and the cities ſituated upon the Baltic;
Jeannin to Great Britain and the United Provin-
ces, and the heirs of the principality of Cleves;
Ancel to Vienna and Poland; Preaux to the Arch-
dukes, and Montglat to Conſtantinople.

The government at home was deſtined for the
Queen, with the title of Regent, aſſiſted by a
council without which ſhe could not conclude any
thing ; and which his Majeſty compoſed of the
Cardinals de Joyeuſe and Du-Perron ; the Dukes
of Maienne, Montmorency, and Montbazon ; the

Marſhals Briſſac and Fervaques, Meſſieurs de Cha-

teauneuf, keeper of the ſeal of the regency, de
Harlay, de Nicholai, de Chäteauvienx, de Lian-

court, de Pont-carre, de Gevres, de Villemontce,
and de Maupeou. This council was not only
obliged to act conformably to the inſtructions
which were given them, but were alſo ned up
from determining any thing upon affairs of great
conſequence, till they had firſt in formed and con-
ſulted his Majeſty upon them. This great coun-
cil had under it fourteen ſmaller ones, me

eac

e e et rms Wl a I.

vv . yt aWweaMtfF oe HO = yy ny fy My po op Mp PIO hey

9
Weng » W .£ . WOE"
wi oF S UL 36
each of five perſons choſen out of the clergy, the -
nobleſſe, the lawyers, the financiers, and the ma-
iſtrates of the city of Paris. The number of
eſe little councils was regulated by that of the
provinces, or governments into which the king-
dom was divided, in' the following order : The
Ie of France, Brittany, Normandy, Picardy,
Champaign, Burgundy, Breſſe, Lyonois, Forez,
Beaujolis; and Auvergne, Dauphine, Guyenne,
Poitou, Aunis, Xaintonge, Angoumois; and Li-
moſin, Orleans, Anjou; and Touraine,. Maine,
+a Berry, Bourbon, Nivernols, and La-
che. | |
About this time, preparations of a very diffe-
rent nature were making in Paris, which Henry
:> beheld with a deep regret ; I mean, the ceremony
Jof the Queen's coronation. He had fo ſtrong a
1- reluctance to it, that no motive, leſs powerful
; MW than his complaiſance for the Queen, could have
l- forced him to conſent to it. That princeſs, as
ſoon as ſhe had obtained an order for this cere-
ie mony, hurried on the preparations with che ut-
a moſt eagerneſs. I have already mentioned the
1y EW reaſons her creatures urged for her ſpeedy corona-
ne tion; reaſons which muſt appear very extravagant,
es MW or highly criminal. Henry propoſed to leave
Paris immediately after the ceremony; and, as
la- this could not occaſion a longer delay than fifteen
days, orders were iſſued for all the troops, both
n- W horſe and foot, to begin their march directly to
e, MW Champaign. The ſix thouſand Swiſs, which the
ly W King had cauſed to be levied, were conducted to
Mouſon by the Duke of Rohan, who had gone
to the frontier to receive them. I ſent away all
the ordnance. Never before had France ſeen a a
train of artillery ſo complete and ſo well furniſhed ;
and perhaps never will again. My ſon put himſelf
at the head of it, by virtue of his poſt of Grand
Vor. IV. S Maſter,

470 MEMOIRS. Bock XXVII.
Maſter, which his Majeſty had been ſo good to

give him the ſurvivance of. I prepared to fol.
ow ſoon after with eight millions of money.
At length the King gave the ſignal of his de-
parture to the foreign powers, by the letter he
wrote to the Archduke; and here it follows, ſuch
as it was compoſed by me, and ſuch as the Duke
received, if Villeroi, through whoſe hands it paſſ-
ed, as ſecretary of ſtate, did not alter it, which
he had a great inclination to do.
4 BROTHER, ee ße STIR

ee Since I cannot refuſe, to my beſt allies and
« confederates, the aſſiſtance they require of me,
«« againſt thoſe who diſpute with them the ſucceſ-
« ſton to the duchies and earldoms of Cleves, Ju-
% liers, La-Mark, Bergh, Ravenſburg, and Ra-
*c yeſtein, I am preparing to march thither with
«© my whole army; and, becauſe my road lies
e through your territories, I am willing to give
*« you notice of it, and know of you whether I

« am to enter your country as a friend or an ene-

© my; ſo, in expectation of your anſwer, I be-
« ſeech God,” &c. |
I know not what judgment ought to be formed
of a report which prevailed at that time, and was
- confirmed to the King, at Fontainebleau, by Gi-
rard, who arrived at Bruſſels on the 7th of March,
that, in the court and dominions of the Archduke,
people were perſuaded the King of France pre-
tended to have great deſigns, only with a view to
rike terror into his enemies; and they were ſo
certain that this was the ſole aim of his armament,
that they made not the leaſt preparations for op-
oling him. The latter part of this news might
e true, as in effect it was; yet the Archduke
Vas not ſo eaſy as he pretended to appear, other-
wiſe be would have thought very differently from
by | 18 every

So ap ==u ru rs

28772

r f + _— Cc a a.

1610, OF SULLY. 471
every other 1 had an intereſt in Spain
and the houſe of Auſtria. Their conſternation
was inexpreflible ; for, while their adverſary's
party, which at the foreign courts was called the
rench faQion, wore an air of joy and triumph,
which ſeemed to ariſe from an aſſurance of ſuc-
ceſs, the Auftrian party was ſilent, dejected, and
inactive; the objects of the public deteſtation,
and trembled leſt they ſhould ſoon be the public
victims likewiſe. No poſſibility appeared of a-
voiding the thunder, which was preparing to burſt
upon their heads. But, alas! why do I exult this
unſeaſonably? they had but too many reſources *;
it
It is out of doubt,” fays Perefixe, © that mere were many
conſpiracies againſt the life of this good King ; ſince he had no-
tice of it from different quarters ; fince printed accounts of his
death were publiſhed at Spain and at Milan; fince a courier paſſed
through the city of Liege, eight days before he was aſfiſſinated,
who ſaid, he was going with news, to the princes of Germany, of
his being killed ; and fince, at Montargis, a note was found on the
altar, containing a prediction of his approaching death, by a me-
thod determined upon,” &c. Pp. 4c9.

The Archbiſhop of Embrun, Honorius Dn-Lawrens, = other.
of the King's firſt phyſician, being.in company with other pre-
lates, faid, at the very time the King was murdered, © It is im-
poſſible but ſome miſchief muſt happen to the King from the pre-
ſent fituation of affairs; perhaps at this very time we are talking
of him, ſome diſaſter happens to him.“ Letter 1. of Nicholas Paſ-
quicr. A priefl of Douay ſaid, at the moment of his aſſaſſina-
tion, they were murdering the greateſt monarch on earth The
ſiſter of Villar Houdan, governor of Dieppe, a nun at St Paulin
Picardy, ſaid to her abbeſs, ** Madam, order prayers to be ſaid for
the King, for they are murdering him:” and, a moment. after,
« Alas! he is killed.” Matthies, ib. p. 835. Paſquier ſays further, in
the ſame letter, that La- Font, Provoſt of Bayonne, in 16, came
to the King to give him notice that there was a defign ſorm-
ed againſt his perſon ; and that, two or three days before this
prince was ſtabbed, the ſame La-Font again told the Chancellor,
that he who was to kill the King was actually in Paris ; thatit had
deen revealed to him, Sc. This fact is the ſame mentioned by

. ; 812 Dus

CE

472 MEMOIR S Book XXVII.

t was not by intreaties, nor a noble deſpair, with
which they were inclined to oppoſe a prince
whom Europe had choſen to defend and avenge
her. The head which gave motion to this great
body, muſt be laid low, and that by a murder,
Never had treachery, poiſoning, aſſaſſination,
228 a triumph ſo infamouſly great; a triumph
o ſhameful, ſo deteſted, that no words can ex.
preſs all its horror. With grief I proceed to ac-
quaint the reader with the particulars of that fa-
tal accident, the remembrance of which till
draws tears of blood from my heart.

What ſhall we think of thoſe black preſages,
which, 1t is but too certain, this miſerable prince
had of his cruel deſtiny? they were indeed dread.
ful, and ſurpriſing to the laſt degree *. I have

already

Du Pleix, p. 411. under the name of a gentleman of Bearne. Paſ-
quier adds, that a merchant of Douay, writing, fifteen days be-
fore this murder happened, to a merchant at Rouen, aſked if it
was true that the King was killed. One of the principal inhabi-
tants of Cambrai ſaid, eight days before, This old man has grezt
defigns, but he will not go much farther ;”” and many other cir-
cumitances of the like kind. There are alſo ſome particulars men-
tioned in the firſt volume of the life of Mary de Medicis, p. GS.;
and in many other writings.

* © Marſhal Baſſompierre ſpeaks of it in his Memoirs, vol. f. p.
292. & ſeq. in the ſollowing manner. He ſaid to me, a little be-
fore that Ume, I do not know, Baſſompierre, what is the matter
with me; but I cannot perſuade myſelf I ſhall ever go to Germany,
nor can I believe thou wilt go into Italy. He often ſaid to me and
others, I believe 1 ſhall die foon.---The Queen had a violent in-
clination to be crowned before the King's departure for Germany;
but the King was no way deſirous of it, as well to avoid the cx:
penſe, as becauſe he was not at all fond of ſuch great feſtivals”
It is highly probable this prince carefully concealed from every
one but M. de Sully, the true motives which induced him to be
againſt this ceremony. Nevertheleſs,” continues this writer,
as he was the beſt huſband in the world, he conſented to it,
and deferred his journey to Germany, till after ſhe ſhould have

made her public entry into Paris. The coronation of the Que
f N

oed eee e . o ol. oc

1610. 8 r 8e. 473

already related with what reluctance he permit-
ted the cermony of the Queen's coronation to go
forward; the nearer the moment approached,

the more his terrors increaſed. In this ſtate ot

overwhelming

was performed with the utmoſt magnificence it was capable of:
The King was unuſually gay during the ceremony. The King ſaid
to her, the Duke of Guiſe, and to me alio; You none of you kr.oiw
me thoroughly : but I ſhall die one of theſe days; and, when you
have loſt me, you will find what I really was, and the difference
between me and other men. I ſaid to him, Good God! Sire, will
you always diſquiet yourſelf thus, and continually talk of your
dying ſoon? Theſe expreſſions arc not proper. You will {till live,
pleaſe God, many happy years. There is no happineſs comparable
to yours: you are in the flower of your age, in perfect health and
ſtrength of body; more loaden with honours than any other
mortal; enjoying, with the greateſt tranquillity, the moſt flouriſh»
ing kingdom in the world; loved, and even adored by your ſub-
jects; poſſeſſed of great eſtates, and money in abundance; fine
hou'es; a beautiful wife; handſome children, growing up apaces.
What can you wiſh for more?” He, ſighing, anſwered, © My
friend, I muſt loſe them all ſoon,” Cc.

It was obſerved,” ſay L'Etoilc's Memoirs, “ that, on throwing
gold and filver medals among the people, according to cuſtom,
there was no cry of God ſuv the King, or, God ſave the Queen.”
* 1 ſhall paſs over,” continues this writer, “the dreams, it was
reported, both his Majeſty and the Queen had that night, of a
houſe falling on him in the ſtreet called La- Ferronnerie, &c. It
is an indiſputable fact, that, about ſix months ago, the King being
at Zamet's, and having dined there, he retired alone into a room,
ſaying he would lie down and ſent for Thomaſſin, who was e-
ſteemed the moſt celebrated aſtrologer o that time, and it was e-
ven laid he dealt with the devil, to come to him chere: and his
Majeft y having put ſeveral! queſtions to him, on different matters,
relating to his perſon and kirgdom, 'Thomaſlin told him, he muſt
take care of himſelf in May 1610; and even pointed out to him
the day and hour in which he would be killed But the King ma-
king a jeſt of him and his aſtrology, ſometimes polling him by the
lair, and ſometimes by the beard, made him take two or three
turns round the room, and ſent him away in this manner. He de-

ves to be commended for this, and much more, had he not
litened-to him at all, and baniſhed all ſuch peſts from his court

| and kingdom? Anno 1610, See alſo in Mezerai's hiſtory in 4to,

$13 Pais,

4
7

i
3
T4:
1
6 *
*
1 9
*
=
h „
it
1
F \
7, l
vir
F 4
4 »
=
1
=—T
1
14
[ * 1
1
L
l : z l
?
30 8
A1 70
! | L
o} 4
+ o
1
iT,
= #
p * *
1 3 a
N. Wy | \ =
4 :
* 5
1
. q
"Ti
if
>
e ? .
i
N >
* 0
9
* 1
*
4
,
1
. 1
1
be? : 27
# 0
4 =
"i
nt
a4 :
+19
1
* 1
+
# 4
- 1 *
12 3
:
?
*
i i
*
-
[
F
is | ” <
Ls i ,
1
{
.
.
4
11
90
Fr
.
: at 7
4
167
i,4
U
4
!
19
==
4 =
1
4
—
4
*
Ny
. _—
1 1 ,
„ [
27
5
4 4
ie 8
i! ; \
1
. * $
# +?!
: 4
:
: 0
—
—
4 :
7 =
7 .
| F 7
97 '% l
v4 , ©
SE
' Ch
7 *
þ -
:
' +
l \
4
*ki * [1
1
4
_— 4
*
1+.
89 „
11 __
194 [ITN
| » 4
\ n
ty y”—_7
\ a 1 U
14 fl 1
q * 2 14
1
k
4.184
1 1
h 12S
1+
j 1
_ : ;
KN
=
Py —
- }
: 4 ;
Ml. |
1

474 MEMOIR S Book XXVII.

overwhelming horror, which at firſt I thought an
unpardonable weakneſs, he opened his whole
heart to me: his own words will be more affed.
ing than all I can ſay. © Oh! my friend,” ſaid
he, © this coronation does not pleaſe me: I know
*© Not what is the meaning of it; but my heart
« tells me, ſome fatal accident will happen.”
He ſat down, as he ſpoke theſe words, upon a
low chair, which I had cauſed to be made on
purpoſe for him, and which was kept always in
my cloſer, and reſigning himſelf up to all the
horror of his melancholy apprehenſions, he
rope the caſe of his reading-glaſs hard between

is fingers, and continued in a profound revery;
then, ſuddenly ſtarting up, and ſtriking his hands

Paris, anno 1667, vol. 3. p. 1447. the different prognoſticetions
of this prince's death, which came to the knowledge of the public
at that time, and ſince.

P. Matthieu obſerves, that the Queen waking in the night, in
great fright and agitation, ſaid to the King, who inquired the
cauſe of it; 1 was dreaming ſome body ſtabbed you with a knife,
on the ſtaircaſe.” „Thank God,“ replied the King, it is only
a dream.” The ſame writer, to theſe predictions, adds ſeveral ex-
preſſions of Henry IV. as ſo many inſtances of that ſecret preſage
which ariſes in the mind on the approach of ſome inevitable ca.
taſtrophe, or what at leaſt is deemed ſo, after the event has hap-
pened ; ſuch are thoſe he made uſe of to the Queen: My dear,
if this is not done on Thurſday, after Friday is once paſt, you will
ſee me no more; no, on Friday 1 ſhall bid you adieu.“ Anotlier
time,“ Go on, go on, Queen Regent.” To the ſame, retiring to her
 devotions ; © My dear, make conteſſion for yourſelf and me too.”
"To the courtiers, ſhewing them the Dauphin: “ This is your
King.” Speaking of the Queen's public entry: © I have nothing
to do with it; I ſhall not ſee it.” --© Let us not laugh ſo much on
Friday, for we ſhall weep on Sunday,” &c. Fel. 2. book 4. P.
810. & ſeq. Morzot obſerves, that, at the Queen's coronation,
the painter, inſtead of enamelling her coat of arms argent, which
the houſe of Medicis bears, through ignorance painted it cheſnut,
the colour of widows; and, inftead of palms, he incircled it
with twiſted cords, another mark of yidowhood, Hen. Nat..

51, | |
* together,

41

==r

1610. 0 F $ U LI I. 475

together, he exclaimed; © Pardieu, I ſhall die
in this city; they will murder me here; I ſee
« plainly that they have made my death their
« only reſource. Oh! this curſed coronation,
« jt will be the cauſe of my death.” © My God,
Sire,” ſaid I to him one day, “what a thought
« have you entertained? if you perſiſt in it, it
« 1s my opinion, that you ought to break off this
coronation, your journey, and your war; if
« you wiſh it ſhould be ſo, it is not difficult to ſa-
« tisfy you.” © Yes,” ſaid he at length, after
I had ſeveral times made the ſame propoſal to
him, “ yes, break off this coronation, and let
« me never hear more of it; my mind will then
« be freed from thoſe apprehenſions which the
% advices I have received have given riſe to: 1
« ſhall then leave this city, and have nothing to
ae |! fas

I would not yield to your ſolicitations,” added
he, © but that it has been foretold to me I ſhould
« be murdered at a public ceremony, and in a
« coach; and hence proceed my fears.” *© You
never mentioned this to me, Sire,” replied I;
* and I have been often ſurpriſed to hear you
« cry out when in a coach, and ſeem ſo much
* alarmed at a danger fo inconſiderable; you,
“% whom I have often beheld unmoved in all the
rage of war, amidſt volleys of cannon and muſ-
* ket ſhots, and environed by {words and pikes.
* However, ſince this notion affects you to ſuch
* a degree, I would adviſe you, Sire, to depart to-
* morrow: let the coronation be performed

without you, or defer it till ſome other time;
and let it be long ere you return to Paris, or
get into a coach. Shall I ſend directly to Notre

ame and St Denis, to put a ſtop to the pre-
parations, and ſend back the workmen?” 1

60

vould conſent to it willingly,” ſaid the RE ;
1 <=: ous

s MEMOIR S Book XXVII.

& but what will my wife, who has this coronation
« ſtrangely in her head, ſay to it?” Let her ſay
& what the will,” reſumed I, finding my propoſal
had greatly pleaſed the King: © however, I can.
« not believe that ſhe will continue obſtinate,
« when ſhe knows what apprehenſions you have of
« ſome diſaſter happening.”

I did not wait for any other order, hut ſent im.
mediately to put a ſtop to the preparations for the
coronatich. It is with much regret that I am
obliged to confeſs, that, notwithſtanding all my
endeavours, the Queen would not give 8 hut.
band this ſatisfaction. I ſhall paſs over in ſilence
the prayers, intreaties, and arguments, with which,
for three whole days, I endeavoured to move her“.
It was Henry's part to yield; and, as in certain
moments he was the firſt to condemn himlelt for
his fears, he left off ſpeaking to me of the coro.
nation, or by me to the Queen. The prepare.
tions again went forward, and again his appre-
henſions returned. It was in theſe words, which
he had perpetually in his mouth, that he exprell.
ed thoſe apprehenſions. Ah! my friend, 1 ſhall
« never go out of this city: they will murder me
4% here: this curled coronation will be the cauſe
« of my death.” I hall never forget thole {ad
words.

In this affair, there are ſome private circum-
ſtances, which I think it my duty to ſuppreſs. I
would carry my filence ſtill further, if 1 did not
think it needleſs, in things which my domeſtics
and other yer'ons had ome knowledge of. The
following fact is of that number. Schomberg,
who lived with me in fo great a degree of intima-

his overthrows Matthieu's aſſertion, in oppoſition to all o.
ther hiſtorians, that the Queen was not at all deſirous of being
crowned. Ibid. 824. ,

| ,

— — —

In

1610. erer. 477

cy, that ke ſeemed one of the family, had a billet
brought to him by a page, as he ſat at table one
day, which I obſerved, as it was fd into his hand
very myſteriouſly, I rallied him upon the biller,
alledging that it came from a miſtreſs. He an-
ſwered, that he would aſſure me without reading
it, that it was not what I imagined, and promiſed
to ſhew me the contents, of what nature ſoever
they were. As ſoon as he roſe from table, he went
to a window to read his letter: it was very ſhort ;
he put it into my hands, ſaying that it came from
Mademoiſelle De Gournai; a name that would re-
move all ſuſpicions of gal antry: adding, that ſhe
intreated him to come to her immediately, ha-
ving ſomething of the utmoſt conſequence to im-
part to him. He promiled to return directly,
and acquaint me with the affair; and accordingly

he came back in half an hour.
This lady had been informed by a woman, who
had belonged to the Marchioneſs de —— 5
that

»The author means Jacqueline Le-Voyer, of the village of
Orfin, betwixt Epernon and Ablis, wife of Iſaac de Varennes,
Eſq; Lord of Coman, D*Eſcoman or Eſcouman. She is moſt known
by the firſt name. Her hiſtory is an incident, in the proceſs againft
Ravaillac, of too much importance to be paſſed over in filence; we
ſhall have occaſion to recur to it more than once. She made a
declaration in writing,” fay the Memoirs for the hiſt. of France,
p. 357. © which contains a very circumſtantial account of Ravail.
lac's conſpiracy and deſigns, and named the Duke of Epernon,
and the Marchioneſs of Verneuil, as the contrivers of them. Nei-
ther the King, the Queen, or any of thoſe ſhe addrefſed herſelf

d do, in order to make a diſcovery of what ſhe knew, would liſten

to her; but treated her as a mad woman. On Tueſday the 25th
of January 1611, for this proſecution was not determined before
the following year was far advanced, the chambers of the parlia-
ment met for the examination of La-Coman, when ſeveral perſons

ere ordered to be taken into cuſtody, and others to attend in
perſon, La Villiers Hottman, the wife of the Preſident St Andre,

and

478 MEMOIR S Book XXVII.

that there was actually a conſpiracy formed againſt
the King's perſon ; and, inquiring who were the
perſons concerned it, the woman named the Mar.

chioneſs de Verneuil, herſelf, Monſieur N——,
| and

and Charlotte Du-Tillet her ſiſter, appeared. La-Coman ſpoke
well and ſenſibly, with great reſolution and firmneſs, and without
varying in her anſwers and accuſations ; ſhe confirmed what ſhe
ſaid with ſuch powerful reaſons, and ſtrong proofs, that her judges
were aſtoniſhed at them. She had formerly been in the ſervice of
Queen Margaret, to whom ſhe applied with intent to make a diſco-
very to her of this important conſpiracy and deſign; whereof the
Queen Regent being informed, ſhe called her a wicked woman,
who accuſed every body; and ſaid, ſhe did not know but fhe
might at laſt accuſe even her. The reflections ſhe and Du Fillet
caſt on one another on being confronted, on account of their
irregularities, were diverting enough. Had La Coman ſtopt there,
- ſhe had been ſafe enough; but to go ſuch lengths as ſhe did, is too
dangerous : for thoſe who accuſe the great, often loſe both their
eftates and life in the attempt, which puts me in fear for her.“
There is this note in the margin on this Du Tillet. Charlotte
Du-Tillet, a woman of intrigue, and confident of the Marchio-
neſs de Verneuil, was the perſon who informed Madame D'Eſco-
man of Ravaillac's deſigns.”

« On Sunday the 32th of January the Marchioneſs de Vernenil,
on the depoſitions of La-Coman, was examined by the chief pre-
ſident at his own houſe, where 1 had ordered her to be ſummoned
to attend for that purpoſe, which examination laſted from one
o'clock till five in the afternoon.” Another marginal note on this
place ſays, ** She was accuſed by Madame D*Eſcoman, and was
only ordered to attend to be examined, though the matter in que-
ſtion was no leſs than the aſſaſſination of the King, and the high-
eſt kind of treaſon.

« On Saturday the 5th of March, the court ſat on the cafe of
La-Coman, and the other priſoners accuſed by her of being con.
cerned in the aſſaſſina tion of the King, when an arret was made,
which was ſaid to be like the ſentence of the Areopazites, who,
when they found a cauſe too full of difficulties to be determine)
by them, put off the giving judgment on it tor an hundred years:
thus the court, finding no ſmall difficulty in this caſe, ordered it
to ſtand over for judgment till a more convenient time; in the
interim, opening the doors of the priſon to the accuſed, and

keeping La-Coman alone there, who in appearance ought to have
been

> accuſe

with
Mader

© mitted

She u:;

Telati 5
ſeen,

160, OF SUL L V. 479

and ſome others; upon which Mademoiſelle de
Gournai reſolved to give the King notice of the
plot, by informing the Queen of it, through one
of the women of her chamber, named Catherine

| de

been ſet at liberty before any of the reſt; but the times would
not permit it: and the chief preſident himſelf, who was preſent
when this order was made, was of this opinion, out of reſpect
for the parties accuſed, who nevertheteſs were not acquitted by
this arret ; which was no ſmall matter of diſquiet both to them
and the ſtate.” There is this note in the margin, © This arret
ordains, that a further information ſ.ould be taken in this mat»
ter; and that, in the mean time, Stephen Sauvage, valet de cham-
bre to Monf. D'Entragves the elder, and James Ga din, accu-
ſed an priſoners in the Conciergerie, ſ}ouk! be ſet at liberty.
Adefinitive ſentence was yiven on the 31ſt of July following,
whereby the larchioneſs de Vernevil, Madame Du-Tillet, Gau-
din, and Sauvage, are declared innocent, and acquitted of aſſaſ-
finating the King; and Mademoiſelle NEſcoman is condemned, as
- guilty of falſe accuſation, to be impriſoned for life, all her goods,
chattels, and eſtates, to be ſeized and confiſcated, without re-
; ſtitution. It is further ordered, that all other profecutions on
| this account ſhall ceaſe. This puniſhment, if D'Eicoman's ac-
cuſation was groundleſs, is very gentle.” Ib. p. 36i. This ſen-
tence againſt her, was under the conſideration of the court ever
ö fince Saturday the 23d; and the judges were divided in opinion,
: nine againſt nine. p 377. |
Ihe account the Merc. Franc. anno 1611, p. 14. & ſeq. gives
af this affair of D'Eſcoman's, is directly contrary to L'Etoile's ;
and, as that account is ſupported by an unq eſtionable evidence,
one cannot refuſe giving credit to it. It is here proved, that this
= Woman, on account of her infamous manner of life, having been
> ſhut up in the Hotel Dieu, and being afterwards impriſoned in
the Chatelet, where even ſentence of death was pronounced on
her, in order to obtain her liberty, and procure herſelf an inter-
eſt in Queen Margaret, ſhe invented this calumny ; that having
accuſed the Marchioneſs of Verneuil of ſending Raveilla to her
with a letter, deſiring her to pro ure him an interview with
E Mademoiſele Du-Tiilet, and charging Du Hillet with having ad-
nitted that afſ+fſin into her room when ſhe herſelf was preſent.
She was convicted of having been guilty of mvny falſchoods in the
relation of theſe facts; and, amongſt others, that ſhe had never
een, and did not even know Ravaillac; that ſhe had not inde« 15
| m

ff

46 NM E MO IRS Book XXVY,

de Selvage. Mademoiſelle de Gournai, after fur.
ther reflection, thought not this ſufficient, and
caſt her eyes upon M. de Schomberg as a man who
might mention the affair directly to his Majeſty,
M. de Schomberg, after he had acquainted me with
theſe circumſtances, confeſſed to me that he was
7 perplexed in what manner to act, and de.
ired I would give him my advice. The thing was
too important to be concealed, and too dangerous
to be deſpiſed: but, on the other hand, by diſ.
cloſing it to the King, we expoſed him to the
neceſſity of making implacable enemies of all thoſe
who were involved in the accuſation; for we kney
this prince would not fail to mention them public.
ly. My wife alone was preſent at our conſults.
tion.

We agreed, at length, that Schomberg ſhould
mention it to the King, but with all poſſible cir
cumſpection; and, if his Majeſty ſhould defire to
know who the accomplices were, he was to refer

much as heard his name before he was brought to the Conciergerie,
which is proved from this woman's own words; that Gaudin, on
being confronted with her, abſolutely confounded her; and in
ſhort, that there was not one of all thoſe that were confronted with
her, but proved her guilty of falſehood, impoſition, and ſlander
The author of L/hiſftoire de la mere & du ſils, injuſtificationd
the arret of theparliament, which appears ſoblame- worthy to L.
toile, ſays, That auguſt body would have condemned her to
** be publicly burnt, had the falſe accuſation, of which ſhe wi!
found guilty, been of any other nature; but in caſes where the
life of kings is in queſtion, the fear of ſhutting the door agaivl
% ſuch diſcoveries as may be made, cauſes the rigour of the h
* to be diſpenſed with.” Vel. 1. p.154. See a paper reprinted i
the 4th vol. of L'Etoile's new memoirs, p. 256. intitled, Itcrr0g%
tions forthe examination of Madame de Coman, and her an fever ht.
to ; in which this letter to Mademoiſelle de Gournai and Count
Schomberg is mentioned: She knew fo well how to manage I
«« diſcourſe, and ſupported her acuſations in ſo reſolute a manne
that they did not find ſufficient grounds to put ker to death“

Mers. de la reg. de M. de Medicis, vol. 1. P. 74.

hin

FE Cxam!

Oſiere

Fevre
elmon
u hoſe

eau,
bf, th.
Wuring
_

gr

Whe he

ould
Foo it

* Vo

Vor. IV. 1

him to the two women already named, as beſt
able ro inform him. No one is unacquainted

with the event. The woman from whom Made-

moiſelle de Gournai heard all that ſhe had re-
lated ro M. de Schomberg, being interrogated,
firmly maintained her depoſition, and perſiſted
in it to her death. This 1s a circumſtance which
will never be forgot by thoſe who endeavoured to
draw ſome inferences from the great care that was
taken to ſuppreſs all the papers * relating to
the trial of the horrid parricide.

The

* This ſuppreſſion of the proceedings in the trial of Ravaillac, by
the parliament of Paris, is a fact univerfally known. To the reflec.
tions thrown on his judzes on this account, it has been further
added, that none, or, at leaſt, a very ſmall and flight examination
wasmade by them into the manner of the death of ſeveral perſons
confined, on this account, in the priſons, which to many appeared
to be unnatural; that they neglected to ſummons and interrogate
many other perſons who were capable of giving great lights into
this matter; ſuch as the mother of the murderer, who knew very
well that he left Angouleme, on Eaſter-day, before he had perferm -

ed the devotions of that feſtival; many ofhis relations, whom he

had named in the courſe of his examination; the pariſh-prieſt of St
Severin; Father St Mary Magdalen, ofthe order of the Bernardines;
the capuchins of Angouleme, who had given him a heart made of

coſtmary root in a reliquary, with ſome wood of the true croſs,

at leaſt they made him believe ſo; and which, they told him,
would cure him of a fever he had then got; that they alſo had not

(xaminedthe Sieur Guillebaut, a canon. of Angouleme; FatherGilles

Oſieres, ancient viſitor of the order of Cordeliers at Paris; Le-

Fevre, another young cordelier; ſeveral of the Cardinal Du- Perron's
zmoners, whom Ravaillac ſaid he knew very well by fight, but

hoſe names he did not know; certain perſons called Beliard, Bre-
Nau, Colletet, Du Bois, de Limoges, &c. It was alſo complained
bf, thit Ravaillac had been ſo careleſsly guarded in priſon, that,
Puring the thirtcen days he continued there, all who had a mind

| E admitted to ſee and talk with him. Another complaint of

Nil greater weight, if the fact be true, is, that at the firſt pull of

we horſes at his execution, Ravaillac having defired ſome one

Tou take his confcflion as of a dying man, the clerk Voilin, who
Took it, wrote it ſo ill, that though it is ill in being, (as it is ſaic ),
a BO

r

* « -
mY — — „ —
; - x ax"
5 ab Vs — - "Ss
——— -—4 = i eg 3

*
1
. |
l :
*
1
-
:
0
d *
1
f (
*
P17
a
? F $ 0
| bi p
4
\
£ o
4 1
4
« 2}
: : :
: _
14
— 1
1 "
*
44 4
:
1 : :
:
C * 4 .
*
IS f
N. *
i
: =
bf) : „ -
-
FI. +
"4108
. F%
: :
. £
, -
*.
: =
1
-
=
N ;
7
*
*

42 MEMOIR Ss Book XXVIr

The ceremony of the Queen's coronation was
performed in the mean time, with all the magni.
ficence uſual upon ſuch extraordinary occaſions, Þ ,
It was to Jaſt ſeveral days, and to be terminated 1 ,
by the moſt ſplendid ſhew of all on Sunday the Þ |
26th of May“. The King had ſo much complai. Þ

lance J 1

= oo: wa: oo

no worn notary or ſcrivener has yet been found ſkilful enough to
decypher a fingle word of it. ed
All theſe conſiderations make an infinite number of people con. ch
clude that the parliament acted in this manner out of fear, that, in wI
caſe the truth had been diſcovered and made public, they won |
have been neceſſitated to proceed with the utmoſt rigour again
too many, and thoſe too powerful perſons. It would be labow
loſt to endeavour to perſuade all thoſe people of the contrary. But
after all, ſince, by the ſuppreſſion of the proceedings in this aff,
there do not atprefent remain ſufficient lights whereon, with ce.
tainty, to form any judgment of the truth, which, even at thit
time, could never be cleared up, it muſt be owned, that one cas
not, without raſhneſs, pretend to determine any thing in thi;
matter at the diſtance of an hundred and thirty years, which hae
\ince elapſed; and God forbid 1 ſhould expoſe myſelf to ſuch are

proach. If, in obedience to the lawspreſcribed to every author « y;
Alemoirs, I have ſubmitted to join to my text here, and at thr en « fh
of this hook, whatever I could recollect, from the moſt creckhe an
hiſtorians, relating to this particular fact, as 1 have conſtantly cor This
in reſpect to every hiſtorical relation given in this work, my jul WW st 0
fication, ſuppoling any to be neceſſary in fo plain a caſe, will be «© (44
that I have ſtated both ſides of thequeſtion with equal impartialiti: . the
and on the other ſide, in anſwer to thoſe who may complain, th, We « tio
after all that has been ſaid, nothing is clearly decided, I would WY bee
it is no fault of mine that nothing but conjectures can be con, h
inthis matter, and that even thoſe conjectures ſhould frequent! Who o
deftroy one another. 4 Ka.
* The ceremony of the coronation was performed at St Dan = wor

on Thurſday the 13th of May. Le Merc. Fran. Matth. 1 « -
936: vol. of the MSS. royaux. and other hiſtorians, give a (8 » «
of the mayniticence and manner of it. Preparations were navel | « hey

the Qucen to make her public entry on the Sunday folloni77i % him
with a pomp ſurpaſſing even that of the coronation. Henry BT: wor
ſaid on Tueſday; „u ill lie at St Denis on Wedneſday, 1“ baut

return from thence on Thurſlay; 1 will put my attirs in 01" 4 long
on Friday; on Saturday I vill run at the ting; on Cvncl

10}

1610. 9 VL: Ys 433

ſance for the Queen as to aſſiſt at a ceremonv

which pierced him to the heart; but, when it

was over, he thought he ſhould have nothing more

to keep him: and Monday, May 17. was the day
appointed for his departure. I ſhould not have
ſtaid at Paris fo long, but a violent pain which I
ſelt in my neck and throat, occaſioned by a wound
Thad received there many years before, obliged
me to have recourſe to my phylicians, who order-
ed me to bathe three mornings ſucceſſively in my
chamber. I did not envy the happineſs of thoſe
who, having protracted their departure out of cu—
i riolity to ſee the ceremony of the Queen's corona-
non, ran eagerly to the ſhew : the deep concern
it gave to Henry rendered it almoſt as odious to
me as to him. The Count of Soiſſons alledged,
„chat there was ſome failure in the ceremonial with
:W reſpe&t to him; and made ule of this pretence to

quit the court in diſguſt *.

'F The

"© wife ſhall make her entry; on Monday my daughter Vendome
nd * ſhall be married; on Tueſday we will keep the marriage-feaſt ;
"WW © and on Wedneſday to horſe and away.” Matth. ib. p. $54.
Une This hiſtorian, ſpeaking of the ceremony of the coronation at
„ St Denis, ſays, „Henry IV. was ſurpriſed at the Spaniſh ambaſ.
df © fador's not taking off his hat in the church. Cicogne told him,

that the late King of Spain only juſt took off his hat at the eleva-
bon of the hoſt, and immediately put it on again, as if he had
* been faluting a gentleman of five hundred livres a-ycar. On
© © which the King ſaid, If we had thoſe ſentimen#s of religion we
© ought to have, we ſhould ſhow ftill greater reverence to thoſe
© myſteries than we do; for we ought to believe, that, after the

ca © words of conſecration are pronounced, till the communion, Jeſus
- 4 Chriſt is always preſent on the altar.” ;
= * © This retreat was differently ſpoke of by different perſons:

ec | "* nevertheleſs it is certain, that his Majeſty, after having granted
nim every thing he deſired, againſt his own inclinations, ſent him
© word that whatever he had promiſed him he would perform;
1. but he might be aſſured, at the ſame time, that he would no
* 1 longer hold any place in his favour; and that, having compelled

3 T « him

—

”

l þ
—

K = * — —— - ” — — — 1
- -— — = *
— . > — —
* 1 — ——— 2 — 2
_ — : —
: | a 8 4 - | —— > —
. * * 2 * "IT. — * - 22 —
0 — A „ SA © Ws i = a - — — —
a a —— wy *
-
a. 6 © * : :

-
— 2 4
. Mi abs

— GA ib ee rs eo —ü—ä— r5ñ;ñt˙rX i EEE 2

* TV

—

—8 »
a

— * — 14
T

119

pe „„
— — —— —

A

484 M E MO IRS BookXXVI.

The ceremony for ſome reaſon or other being
ſuſpended, on Friday May the 14th, that moſt
miſerable day for France, the unfortunate King
had deſtined part of it to be ſpent in conference
with me, as it was the laſt interview we were like.
ly to have before his departure. I was not igno-
rant of what he had to ſay to me. A malicious
report had been ſpread, that, while in appearance
he was preparing to fall upon the houſe of Au.
ſtria with ſuch formidable forces, he had private.
ly entered into an agreement with them ; not on-
ly to proceed no farther, but alſo to betray all
his allies, provided they would conſent that be
ſhould keep Cleves for himſelf, and the entire
ſucceſſion, which had been the occaſion of the
armament. To this his enemies added another
condition, which they ſaid he demanded ; namely,
that Spain ſhould put the Prince and Princels of
Conde into his hands *. Henry was deſirous of

convincing

4 him to grant what he did not approve of, he ſhould never {et
** him again with pleaſure; which meſſage being delivered to the
% Count, he immediately mounted his horſe, and, taking the
«« Princeſs his wife with him, retired to one of his country-ſcats.“
Me. pour ſer vir a Phiſt. de France, anno 1610.

* « The nuncio finding himſelf at laſt cloſely urged by tis
Majeſty, who was inquiring of him what was thought at Rome
and in Italy of the war he was going to undertake, anſwered,
That thoſe who had the beſt information were of opinion, that
the principal ſubject of that war was the Princeſs of Conde, whon
he wanted to have back. When the King in violent anger, and
{wearing, not ventre ſaint gris, as uſual, but by ------, cried out,
Yes, moſt certainly I do want to have her back, and I will hate
ker back; no one can or ſhall hinder it, not even God's lic ute.
nant on earth.” Mem. pour Phiſl. de France, anno 1610. Thet®
words ought not to prevent us from conſidering, as a calumny,
the report to which ſome writers have too lightly given credit,
that the chief inducement Henry IV. had to commence 1o in-
portant a war, was to oblige Spain to deliver the Prince or rat!!

the Princeſs of Conde, up to him ; which ſeems to me = i
and

1610. r $SU-L LY; 48;

convincing me that this report, ſo injurious to
his reputation, was abſolutely falſe. It had been
likewiſe inſinuated to him, that the reluctance ] diſ-
covered to take upon me the charge of furniſhing
the proviſions, was becauſe I had flattered myſelf
that he would, of his own accord, and without
my ſolicitation, ere& the poſt of mar{hal-general
of the camps and armies into a preat office of the
crown, and inveſt me with this high dignity :
however, I {olemnly declare, that I never enter-
tained ſuch a thought. The friendſhip this great
King expreſſed for me, and the confidence he

placed in me, which towards the cloſe of his life

was greater than it had ever been, makes it no
preſumption in me to declare, that I believe, if
ſuch had been my deſire, he would not have re-
fuſed me a favour which, great as it was, was ſtill
leſs conſiderable than others he had offered me;
nor will IJ ſcruple to aſſert, that he thought me
very capable of ſuch an employment: all that I
am doubtful of is, whether he really had any ſuch
intentions with regard to me, and whether he
was not diſſua led from them by the artful infinua-
tions of my enemies, who affirmed that I had re-
ſolved to quit the care of his finances, as ſoon a3
I was raiſed to this eminent dignity. |
It was therefore, I preſume, to make me ſome
new inſtances with reſpect to furniſhing the provi-
tions, that Henry {ent La-Varenne, on Friday
morning, to tell me I muſt mcet him in the Tuil-
lenes, where he had a deſire to walk with me a—
lone. La-Varenne found me bathing, and per-
ceiving that I was preparing, notwithſtanding, to
obey his Mijeſty's orders, he prevented me, ſay-
ſtand in need of any proof. No less unjuſt and malicious is 11;
other charge, that this prince had agreed with the court of Spain
not to puſh his defign any farther, on condition it would give up
the ſtates in conteſt to him :
St 3 175

_—
3

4
+ Py
!
4
,
=
| *
,
*X
»
*
. *
*
1
1
15
p 0
4%
„ $14
\ :
bs
; |
j ©
! =
1 2
(+) 4
.
1
*,
- 4
il
4
.
ST” L
4
# x
+
1 S;
i -
o
*
7 5
& »
14 G
:
"%
+
:
10 N
*
5
.
.
3
T4
0 iy
r -
o
0
T ©. 4 -
47
.
TL *
** 0 *
1 N .
0 71
[2

iy
N
1
ED
!

486 MEMOIRS Book XXVIL

ing, he was very ſure that the King would come
himſelf to the arſenal, when he knew I was indiſ-
oled ; and that he would be very angry with me,
if I expoſed mylelf to any danger by going out,
when there was no neceſlity for it. Only ſtay,”
added he, “till I have ſpoke to him, and 1 will
return immediately and tell you what he ſays.”
Accordingly he came back in half an hour.
«« Moniieur,” ſaid he, © the King defires that you
« will finith your bathing, and forbids you to go
« abroad to-day; for Dr Du-Laurens aſſures him,
© that your health will ſuffer if you do. His
«« Majeſty is going into the city, for which he
„% will tell you his reaſon to-morrow * morning
« at five o'clock, when he will be, without fail,
eat the arſenal to ſettle all affairs with you; for
«« heisreſolved to ſet out on Monday at any rate.
« He ſays, that what you faid to him concerning
*« his paſlage, and every other part of his delign,
re 1s juſt; and that nothing ſhall have power
4 to alter his intentions, but ſome misforine
© either to your perſon or his own (thoſe were lis
% very words). And he commands you,” con.
tinued La-Varenne, “ to receive him to-morrou
in your night-gown and night-cap, that you
«« may not ſuffer any inconvenience from your
* bathing: he declares, if he finds you dreſſed, he
* will be very angry.“ La-Varenne, aſter he
had thus delivered the King's meſſage, added
from himſelf, that his Majeſty had taken my ad-
vice, and ſent away the letter which had been
written to the Archduke, although he thought l

an uſeleſs piece of formality. © For I am reſo

ved,“ ſaid this prince, ** to make myſelſ be

Henry Iv. in reality did not intend to go to the arſenal ti
the next morning; but he unfortunatcly changed that intent:0!
zu the afternoon,

« believed

- *

ordit
to k.
to hi
ſtop
to ta
collec;
he h
with
Matt
out ©

on th

Pierre
Into t
Mont

a

1610. 07-3 VL Y;- 487
te believed one way or other.” My ſervants have
ſince told me, that, when La-Varenne quitted my
apartment, they obſerved an unuſual ſadneſs up-
on his countenance, the cauſe of which they could
not comprehend ; nor indeed could he himſelf
account for it.

At four o'clock in the afternoon, as I had juſt
entered my wardrobe, I heard Caſtenet, and af.
terwards my wife, utter a great cry, and that in-
ſtant my whole houſe reſounded with this mourn-
ful exclamation: “ Ah! my God, all is loſt!
« France is undone!” I went out precipitately,
undreſſed as I was. Ah! Monſieur,” cried they
on all ſides, “ the King has juſt been danger-
% ouſly wounded in his fide with a knife.” It
was not poſſible for me to doubt a moment whe-
thor the dreadful news was true. St Michel * en-
tered immediately : he had been a witneſs almoſt
of the blow, and brought the knife with which
it was given, ſtill reeking,with blood.“ Oh!“
cried I, raiſing my hands and eyes to heaven,
in a diſtraction no words can deſcribe, “ this is
« what this poor prince always apprehended :

* St Michel was one of his Majeſty's gentlemen in
ordinary, who had followed him. He had drawn his ſword
to kill the aſſaſſin, when the Duke of Epernon called out
to him, and to the footman, who had the ſame deſign, to

ſtop at the peril of their lives: to ſecure his perſon, but

to take care not to do any thing more. The Duke re-
collected,“ ſays the hiſtorian of his life, © the diſpleaſure
he had conceived at, and the fault that had been found
with thoſe who killed James Clement,” &c. p. 238. P.

Matthieu adds, That St Michel only ſnatched the knife
out of Ravaillac's hands: that Count de Cur ſon ſtruck him
on the throat with the pommel of his ſword; and that La-

Pierre, exempt of the guards, ſeized him, and put him
into the hands of the footmen, who delivered him up to

« Oh

Montigny.“

f
14
Ki 1
.

[2

7 '%

f

14 1
N "
* Az,”
I.
. +
My

-

3

I!
1.

|

i

'

.
17
18
4
: \
38%
IJ
oY

. *
r
2

23% MEMOIRS Book XXVII.

& Oh! my God, have pity upon him, upon us,
cc and the ſtate: it is done; he is murdered. —
« God would not have permitted ſo cruel an
& accident, but to let looſe all his wrath upon
«& France, and to deliver her into foreign hands *,”

* One would imagine, that upon a fact ſo public and
To recent as the aſſaſſination of Henry IV. there would be
found a perfe& conformity in the hiſtories and memoirs
of that time; yet many of the cotemporary writers do not
agree either as to the number of the perſons who were in
the coach with this prince when he was affaſhnated, the
wounds he received, nor many other circumſtances no leſs
eſſential. In order therefore to make this recital in a man-
ner equally faithful and complete, it is neceſſary to colled
and join together what has been ſaid on this ſubject by
Meſheurs de Pérẽfixe, Matthieu, L' Etoile, the continuator
of De Thou, and the French Mercury for the year 1610.

« The night before this moſt unhappy day his Majeſty
could take no reſt, and was in continual uneaſineſs. In
the morning he told thoſe about him, that he had not ſlept,
and that he was very much diſordered. Thereupon M. ce
Venddme intreated his Majeſty to take care of himfelt that
day, and not to go out; for that day was fatal to him.”
« Iſee,” anſwered the King * that you have conſulted the
alm in ick, and have heard of the prediction of La-Brofe,
from my couſin the Count of Soiſſons: he is an old tool,
and you, who are young, have (till leſs wiſdom.” “ The
Duke of Vendòôme then went to the Queen, who likewik
begged the King not to go out of the Louvre that Cay;
but he made her the ſame anſwer.” H. de L'Etoile.

& His Majeſty afterwards went to hear maſs at the con.
vent the Barnardine monks, whither the infamous par-
ricide followed him with an intention to murder him; and,
as he has ſince confeſſe.!, would have given him the {trok:
in - chapel, but A. de Venddme coming unexpected!j
between, he was p:evented,” bid.

&« Tt was obſerved, that the King was more fervent tha
uſual in his devotions, and continued longer in prayer that
very day than he was acculjom:d to do: even in the nig
IS preceding

n
5
FE
2
act
+
A -

5
*
2
*
*
*
by '

160. .

he was upon his knees in bed at prayer; and, as ſoon as he
roſe, retiring to his cloſet for the ſame purpoſe, they, think-
ing he ſtaid longer than uſual, interrupting him, he was
angry.” © Why will theſe men,” ſaid he, © always oppoſe
what is for my good?” hid.

« After dinner the King lay down upon his bed, to try

if he could ſleep; but, not being able to reſt, he got up

again, penſive, melancholy, and diſturbed. He walked
a little about his chamber, and again threw himſelf upon
his bed; ſtill reſtleſs and unquiet, he roſe and aſked the ex-
empt of the guard what hour of the day it was. The ex-
empt told him the clock had ſtruck four ;” and added,
« Sire, I perceive your Majelty is penſive and uneaſy: you
would be better if you would take the air.” The King
ſeemed pleaſed at this motion, and replied, © You have advi-
ſed well: order my coach to be got ready: I will go to the
arſenal to ſee the Duke of Sully, who is indiſpoſed, and
bathes to-day.” bid.

Matthieu recounting his diſcourſe, both before and after
dinner, adds, ** He could not ſtay one moment in any place,
nor conceal his irreſolution and diſorder : and, in the midſt
of thoſe agitations, he ſaid to the Queen, „I know not
what to do: I have no great inclination to go to the arſenal,
becauſe I ſhall put myſelf into a paſſion.” “Do not go
then, Monſieur,” ſaid the Queen; “ ſend ſome other thi-

ther; you are now in a good humour, why ſhould you go

to make yourſelf uneaſy ?” He went towards the window,
and, ſtriking his forchead with his hand, My God,” ſaid
he, c there is ſomething here which ſtrangely troubles
me: I know not what. is the matter; I cannot go from
hence,” „ Ravaillac, hearing that he inquired if his coach
was ready, muttered to himſelf, I have thee, thou art
If.” P. Matthiea.

As he was going into his coach, M. de Vitry #proach-
ed, and aſked his Majeſty if it was his pleaſure that he
ſhould attend him.“ No,” replied the King; but go
whither I have orde::4 you.” permit me, Sire,” ſaid
Vitry, „ to ſend the guards with your Majeſty.” “ No,”

returned the King, I will neither have you nor your
© guards: I will have none about me.”

Thea entering his
coach,

48g

preceding it, when his attendants thought he was aſleep,

%; MEMOIR S Book XXVII.

coach, and reflecting, as it is ſuppoſed, upon the fatal pre-
dictions of the day, which they had put into his head, he \
alked what day of the month it was. Sire,“ ſaid one, r
« it is the 13th.” No,“ ſaid another, © it is the 14th.” a
% You are right,” ſaid the King; “ you know your al- In
t.

tl

manack better than him;” and laughing, Between the

13th and 14th,” ſaid he, and then ordered the coach to

go on.” L'Etoile. nu
« He ſaid to the coachman, Carry me but from hence. in

When he came over againſt the Hotel de Longueville, he # #4

fent back all his attendants; and, being aſked where the

coach ſhould go, he ſaid to the Croix-du-Tiroir; and, ® pe

when there, he ordered it to drive to the church-yard of it,
St Innocent. Ravaillac ſtaid a long time at the Louvre, H
fitting upon the ſtones at the gate, where the footmen wait | ce.
for their maſters. He deſigned to have given the blow be- tw
tween the two gates, the place where he ſtood affording ® pa

him ſome advantage : but he found the Duke of Epernon {pc
on that ſide where he expected the King would have been,” | ing
Matthieu. litt
This prince was ſeated on the back part of the coach, Þ | Hi:
and unfortunately (the weather being very fine) would have © Ep
all the curtains drawn up, that he might ſee, as he paſſed, | ing
the preparations which were making all over the city for Þ | pe:
the Queen's public entry. On his right hand fat the Duke Þ O.
of Epernon: the Marſhals de Lavardin and Roquelaure Þ vin,
were near the right boot of the coach; the Duke of Mont] her
bazon and the Marquis de La-Force on his left hand; and thof
near the left boot, oppoſite to him, ſat the Marquis de] ever
Mirebeau, and Du- Pleſſis Liancourt, his firſt maſter of the] faire
horſe. Vitry, the captain of his guards, was, by the King's | fixe
order, gone to the palace to haſten the preparations fort] ding
the _ entry, and had left all the guards at the Lou-Þ the!
vre; ſo that his Majeſty was attended only by a fmall num. from
ber of g lemen on horſeback, and ſome of his footmen. / deep
Perefixe, Matthieu, L' Etoile, N. NRigault, ibid.
Ihe coach turned from the ſtreet St Honore into that? murd
called Feronnerie, which was then v.+ y narrow, and made] Eper
more ſo by the little ſhops erected againſt the wall of def It
eburch-yard of St Innocent. A little embarraſſment wa that!

gccaſioned by the meeting of two carts, one loaden wile =
WIL With

1610. o r SULLY.: 4on

wine, the other with hay ; ſo that the coach was obliged
to ftop in a corner of the ſtreet, overagainſt the ſtudy of

a a certain notary, whoſe name was Poutrain. The foot-

men took a nearer way, that they might with leſs difficul-
ty come up with the coach at the end of the ſtreet; ſo that
there were only two which followed the coach, and one of

' theſe went to make way for it to go on, while the other

in the mean time took that opportunity to faſten his garter,
Bid.
Ravaillac, who had followed the coach from the Louvre,

perceiving that it ſtopped, and that there was no perſon near

it, advanced to that fide where he obſerved the King far,

His clock being wrapt round, his left arm ſerved to con-

ceal the knife, which he held in his hand; and ſliding be-

tween the ſhops and the coach, as if he was attempting to
paſs by, like others, he ſupported one foot upon one of the
{pokes of the wheel, and the other upon a ſtone, and, draw-

ing a knife edged on both ſides, gave the King a wound a
little above the heart, between the third and fourth rib.
His Majeſty had juſt then turned towards the Duke of

Epernon, and was reading a letter; or, as otheis ſay, lean-

ing towards the Marſhal Lavardin, to whom he was » hi-
ſpering. Henry, feeliug himſelf ſtruck, cried out, © I am
; wounded ;” and in the ſame inſtant, the aſſaſſin pereei-
ving that the point of his knife had been ſtopped by a rib,
he repeated the blow with ſuch quickneſs, that not one of
' thoſe who were in the coach, had time to oppoſe, nor

| even to perceive it. Henry, by railing his arm, gave a
fairer aim for the ſecond blow, which, according to Péré-
| fixe and L'Etoile, went directly to his heart; and accor- .

ding to Rigault and the French Mercury, near the auricle of

the heart; ſo that the blood guſhing out of his mouth, and
from his wound, the unhappy prince expired, breathing a
deep ſigh; or, as Matthieu aſſerts, pronouncing, with a
Maint and dying voice, theſe words: It is nothing.” The
murderer aimed a third ſtroke at him, which the Duke of
Epernon received in his ſleeve. bid.
It is the opinion of the author of the French Mercury,
that Henry IV. died at the firſt blow, “ which,” ſaid he,
entering between the fifth and ſixth rib, pierced the vein
thin, roundthe auricle of the heart, ard reached to the
vena

n2 MEMOIRS Book XXVII.“

vena cava, which, being cut, that great prince was in an
inſtant deprived of ſpeech and life, The ſirſt ſtroke only
grazed the ſkin, and made no impreſhon,” French Mor-
c. . x i

The writer who has given us the life of the Duke of
Epernon, thinks, it muſt be confeſſed, in a manner very
ſingular. He aſſerts, but without any proof to ſupport his
aſſertion, that the Duke of Epernon, who ſaw the ſecond
blow aimed at the King, raiſed his arm to pary it, and re-
ceived it, in part, upon the ſleeve of his coat, which was
cut, He doubtleſs meant to exalt his hero by relating this

circumſtance ; but certainly he judged ill to add, that the]

aſſaſſin, after this ſecond blow, had time to (trike a third,
more dangerous than the ſecond; and that the King recei-
ved it full, Strange! that the Duke of Epernon ſhould
ſo plainly perceive the firſt of theſe blows, as to be able to
pary it in part, from himſelf, and the reſt who were in the
coach, and yet could not prevent the following blow. The
hiſtorian here bas proved too much, and but that, happily

for him, it is ealy to convict him of his error, his account]

might well be turned into an accuſation of the Duke of E-
pei non. Life of the Duke of Epernon, part 2. p. 238.

* It is a molt amazing thing, that not one of the Lords
who were in the coach with the King, ſhould have ſeen the
aſlaſſin give the blow; and, if that infernal monſter had
thrown away his knife, they would not have known whom
to charge with it: but he ſtill held it in his hand, as if to
ſhew it, and gloried in the greateſt and moſt horrid of al
aſſaſſinations that ever was perpetrated,” Perchxe fays
the ſame; and this conduct of Ravaillac's is more conform-
able to the character we have of him, than what the con-
tinuator of De Thou relates: That it was the extreme a.
gitation and diſorder of his mind, which prevented his fh.
ing, or dropping the poignard. He confeſſed,” lays
Matthieu, ** that he ſtruck his knife into the King's body,
as into a bottle of hay.” L'Etoile, ibid.

« The fix Lords who were in the coach got out imme:
diately with ſuch precipitation, that they hindered cach o-
ther from ſeizing the parricide, One of them perceiving
that the King ſpoke no more, and that the blood cam:

guſhing from his mouth, cried out, The King ts nas F
£351 Thi =

q The
peop

near
* may,
non
Was
deſir
eage
peop
were
dreſſ
cc
© firſt ]
to th
turni
I rod
guare
Gran
aw!
ſtate,
croſs
God.
fide \
wvoun
him
' cried
as ſoc
held
threw
bitter
[&c. /
Ry
| broug
ly to!
ved of
Cl, ar

|

)

1610. r 3 VEL th 493

7 Theſe words immediately occaſioned a oreat tumult. The
people who were in the ſtreets, threw themſelves into the
| neareſt ſhops, one upon another, with ſuch terror and diſ-

may, as if the city had been taken. The Duke of Eper-
non ſuddenly bethought of bimſelf of ſaying, that the King
was only wounded)\ and had fallen into a fwoon. They
deſired ſome wine; and, while ſome of the inhabitants ran

| eagerly to get it, they ſnut up the coach- doors, and told the
people, that the King was only wounded ; and that they
were Carrying him in haſte to the Louvre to get his wound
dreſſed French Mercury, ibid.

6 ran like one deprived of reaſon, and, mounting the

* firſt horſe I found, galloped to the Louvre, When I came

to the Hotel de Longueville, F met M. de Belancourt re-

turning from the Louvre, who ſaid to me, © He is dead.“

I rode on as far as the rails, where the French and Swiſs
guards were then placed; their pikes lowered M. Le-
Grand and I got through, and ran to the King's cloſet, ard
Haw him extended on his bed. M. De-Vic, counſellor of
ſtate, was fitting by him on the ame bed, and had laid his

croſs of the oider upon his mouth, putting him in mind of
Cod. Milon, his firſt phyſician, was e ncar the bed-
ſide weeping, and the ſurgeons who attended to dreſs his
wound; but he was already dead, We forced we heard
him Goh, but it was wind; upon which the firſt phyſician
*cried our, © Ah! it is over; he is gone!“ V. Le- Grand,

as ſoon as he entered, heeded at the ſide of the bed, and
held one of his hands, which he kifſed, As for me. I
threw myſelf at his fect, which 1 held embraced, weeping
t bitterly, M. de Guiſe came in allo, and embraced him,”

&. Memoirs of Baſympicrre, vol, 1. P. 207

* The Queen was in her cloſet when this fad news was
brought to her, and, wild with grief, came out immediate -
ly to ſee him whom ſhe honoured moſt in the world, depri—
ved of life; but M. the Chancellor, who was then in covn—
eil, and had heard the news there, going up to her apart-
ment, met her as ſhe was coming cut, and ſtopped her.

* Alas !” ſaid ſhe, as ſoon as the ſaw him, „the King is

dead.“ He, without betraying any emotion, replied, © Your
{Majeſty mult pardon me, the Kings of France never die“

Then intreating her to return to her cloſer, © We mu}

Vor. IV. Uu

tale

4% MEMOIRS Fock XXVIL

take care,” ſaid he to her, © that our tears do not ruin our
affairs; we mult reſerve them for another time: we have
need of remedies, and not of grief. French Mercury,
ibid.
c At five o'clock in the evening it was no where cer-
tainly known, except at the Louvre, that the King was
dead, not even in the quarter de La-F&ronnerie, where
he was killed : they thought he had been wounded only,
The report reached the Auguſtins before audience was
over; the noiſe and confuſed murmurs of the perſons
.who came into the court oppoſite to the hall of the great
chamber, increaſed every moment ; and at length reached
the ears of M, de Blanemeſnil, ſecond preſident of the
great chamber, who was at that time hearing a cauſe
pleaded in the hall: ſtruck with this-noiſe, he roſe up as
if to collect the opinions of the judges upon it; but, in-
ſtead of ſpeaking to them on this ſubject, he went back to
the great chamber : the reſt, perſuaded that this noiſe was
occaſioned by ſome fatal accident, roſe from their ſeats,
and broke off the pleadings. Immediately they ſent for
the King's counſellors of parliament, and deputed them to
the Louvre to know the (tate of affairs, and the will of his
7Aajelty : in the mean time, the princes, dukes, and great
lords, who were at Paris, haſtened to the Louvre to at-
tend the King as uſual The Sieur de Vitry was ordercd
to aſſemble all the deceaſed King's children in a chamber,
particularly the young King ; and to ſuffer no one to ap-
proach them. The Dukes of Guiſe and Epernon were di-
rected to get as many of the nobility as they could find,
to mount their hortes, and ride through the city ; and tell
the people, that the King was not dead, but only wound-
ed. Le- Jay, lieutenant-civil, and Sanguin, the Jord
mayor, had orders to ſhut all the city-gates; to poſſcſs
themſelves of the keys; raiſe all their officers; and to pre-
vent all emotions and mobs in the city. The guards whicl
were in the ſuburbs, received orders to come and pol
themſelves upon the Pont Neuf, in the ſtrest Dauphin,
and near the Auguſtins, in order to ſurround the pailiz-
ment, and to force them, if neceſſary, to declare the
' Queen Kkegent. The King's counſellors of the parliamen!,

returning from the Louvre to the à ſenal, found M. A
$101

2
*
|
C
Ly
*

ee eo oo „ wh ..

5
5
'þ

15610. r 495
P firſt preſident there, who had been brought in a chair; to

whom, and to the chambers aſſembled, having confirmed

the report of the King's death, they began to conſult up-
on the requeſt brought them by the King's counſellors,
M. de Guiſe and M. d'Epernon came afterwards into the
great chamber, being ſent by the Queen to ſee what was
doing there, &c. L'Etoile, Perefixe, ibid.

« About nine o'clock the ſame night, a great number
of the lords rode through the city, and, as they paſſed,

faid to the people, The King is coming; he is well, God

be thanked for it, It being night, the people thought the
King was in that company, and cried aloud, Vive le Roi.
This cry ſpreading from one quarter to another, the whole
city reſounded with, Vive le Roz. It was only in the
quarter of the Louvre, and that of the Auguſtins, where
the truth was known,” [bid,

At night they dreſſed the King's body, and waſhed him
with the ſame ceremovy as if he had been alive. M. Du-
Maine, gave him his ſhirt, M. Le-Grand ſerved him, and:

> I likewiſe was ordered to ſerve him, and to repreſent M.

de Bouillon.“ M. Baſſompierre, ibid.

„ Saturday, May the 15th, the King's body was open-
ed in the preſence of fix and twenty phyſicians and ſur-
geons; alk the parts of which were found to be in ſo good

| W 2 ſtate, that, according to the courſe of nature, they judged”
„be might have lived thirty years longer. His heart was
- W ſmall, but thick, and of cloſe texture, and ſurpriſingly
ſound : his ſtomach, as the phyſicians and ſurgeons ſaid,
„vas the ſtrongeſt that had been ever ſeen: his lungs were
grown a little to his left ſide.” Baſſompierre, ibid.
His intrails were ſent immediately to St Denis, with-
d out any pomp, The Jeſuits demanded the heart, which
they interred in their chapel of La-Fleche; the body em-
-bdalmed and laid in a leaden coffin, incloſed in another of
wood, and covered with cloth of gold, was placed under
2 canopy in the King's chamber, with two altars on each fide,
n which maſs was ſaid during eighteen days ſucceſſively,
2 which it was carried to St Denis, Cc. Perefixe,
ibid. |
dee in the ſame hiſtorians ſeveral other intereſting par-
= ticulars, as well with reſpect to what paſſed in the par-
5 Uu 2 | hament,

*
Y
1
a
5
:
"I

_

= =.
Lat ===

mp *

<<
——

—

2 —

— ITS. i

— 5.
-

—

3

> J on
— ths — —
— 2

—

— 2 4 * Pug «
: " 2 2 & — - — —
— — — _ — Ry 4 2 — =
My 7 — =X* ——— - — —
— — — 3 * —
6 1 LY — M92. a Y »
% — - — - ; 2a * _ > + : ö — =
_ — — — * * » *
-
—

— — a
*

— Bo nc
— —
.

5

wr —— —

I

496 MEM. OI R S Bock XXVII.

liament, and in different parts of Paris, as upon the fu—
neral ceremony obſerved on this occaſion, Upon this laſt
article, conſult alſo the royal MSS. vol. 9361.

The memoirs of that time afford a great number of ob-
ſervations, and curious particulars, relating to the aſſaſſi-
nation of Henry IV. which we cannot diſpenſe with our-
elves from annexing to the text of our Memoirs. The
number and diverſity of them is all that perplexes us. For
with reſpect to the perſons who are concerned in them,
namely, the Jeſuits, the Duke of Epernon, and ſeveral of
the principal lords of the kingdom, the Marchioneſs of
Verneuil, and the party ſuppoſed to be headed by her,
the officers of the Queen's houſehold, and many others;
theſe circumſtances are fo far from doing any injury to
their memories, that it will be readily granted their inter-
tit requires that they ſhould neither be ſuppreſſed nor diſ-
buiſcd; for ftince all the malignity of their enemies has
never been able to prove one ſingle fact againſt them, it

neceſſarily follows, that what has been ſaid was mere ca-

Iamny, invented by wicked and deſigning perſons.

One general remark, and which is equally applicable to
al, is ſufficient to prove what 1 have aſſerted, that thoſe
accuſaticns were founded on calumny only; and this is,
that Ravaillac never accuſcd, or gave the leaſt room tor
iu{pecting that any of thoſe perſons were concerned in the
King's aſſaſhnation. He conſtantly maintained, that no
ne was privy to his deſign, which he had conceived upon
being told, that the King was going to make war upon the
Pope. He never varied from this declaration; and, when
he was put tothe torture, he ſaid the ſame as he had done
at his trial. The molt dreadful pains could not force him
to alter his depoſition : he proteſted, and repeated this
proteſtation upon the ſcaffold, That he never had either
an accomplice or confident. * When he was ready to ex:
pire, he turned to his confeſſor, and deſired he would give
him abſolution; for he had no more to ſay, This the
prieſt refuſed, telling him, That it was forbid to thole who,
like him, had been guilty of high treaſon, unleſs he dil-
cloſed his accomplices.” Give it me,” ſaid Ravaillac,
„ upon condition that the declaration I have made, that |

had no accomplices, be true.“ I will give it you *.
| that

1610. OF SUD. F 497

that condition,” replied the confeſſor; © but aſſure your-
ſelf, if you tell a lie in theſe moments, your ſoul, at its
ſeparation from your body, will be carried directly to hell.”
« accept and receive it upon that condition,” ſaid Ra-
vaillac. And theſe were the laſt words he ſpoke to Meſ-
fieurs de Filleſac and Gamache, two men of great candour
and honeſty, and the moſt able doctors of the Sorbonne.“
Words which deſerve great notice, fince they are record-
ed by him, who, of all the writers on this ſubje&, has

3
t WW fhewn moit prejudice and malice, Alemoirs for a hiſtory
t WW of France, p. 323.
5 After this deciſive remark, I ſhall begin with what relates
do the Jeſuits, who have been leſs ſpared than any of the
o WF others, and whom our author in the following book attacks
- WW tbe firſt, though he does not name them. But here I
- WW think myſelf obliged to relate what appears a very ſingular
is WF confeſſion in a great critic, who profeſſes that he does not
it fear the ſociety, and will ſpare no one whatever, © had
a- the curiolity,” ſays he, © ro read the anſwer made by the
| Jeſuits to the accuſations of their enemies, their reply to
o WF that, and the Jeſuits farther vindication of themſelves; and
le it appeared to me, that in many caſes their accuſers were

at a loſs, which perſuades me that many things have been

or charged upon them for which there were no proofs, but
ne W eaſily believed at the inſtigation of prejudiced perſons.” In
no W effect, there is nothing more ſolid, or better founded, in
on the declamations of Morizot, and a great number of ano-
the nymous writers. Bayle's Select Letters, wel. 1. letter
hen 230.
one i I ſhall now procecd to the examination of ſeme words
him WW attributed to a Jeſuit in a conference with Ravaillac : Ny
ts WW friend, do net accuſe god men, © Father Cotton went
wer WW likewiſe ro Ravaillac, and bid him take care of accuſing
ex- © the innocent; words which did not paſs unnoticed, He
ive afterwards would have perſuaded him, if he could, that
of he was a Proteſtant, ſaying, that he could never believe
VO,

that a Roman Catholic was capable of committing ſo hor-
rid an action: but Ravaillac derided Father Cotton, though
2 Jeſuit, as well as the reſt, whom he ſent away with j-its
& andpleafantry,” You would be aſtoniſhed,” ſaid he to ſome
upon of them who were queſtioning him, „if ] ſhould tell ou

ws : Un 3 ; that

493% M E MO IRS Book XXVII.

that it was you yourſelf who ſet me on.” He did not ſay
this to Father Cotton; for, wicked as he was, he had ſome
ſcruples of conſcience remaimng that would not ſuffer
him to ſlander the brothers of the ſociety.” Journal 9
the reigu of Henry I, anno 1610.

Peter Matthieu, in his particular hiſtory: of the death
of Henry IV. p. 116. ſays, „That the Queen, believing,
it theiohuman parricide could be led to repent of his crime,
he would more freely own who they were that urged him
to commit it, thought it. neceſſary that be ſhould be viſited
by the doRors and clergy, who might put his mind into
fuch a frame, that he would have greater fears of eternal
than temporal! torments.” Father Cotton therefore might
be of the number of theſe eccleſiaſties; but the author docs
not mention him in particular, and is wholly ſilent with re-
ſpect to the words which have been attributed to bim. He
does not tell vs that this father, when he accoſted Raraillic,
called him 7z:y friend. The Prior of Orleans ſays not a
word of this fact in his hfe of Father Cotton, where it
was natural for him to mention it, and where he has beet
as particular with reſpect to this father, as Matthieu has
been in every thing relating to the death of Henry the
Great,

« Two circumſtances,” fiys.Mezerai, e were obferved,
of which the reader may judge as he pleaſes, One was,
tba, when Ravaiilac was ſeized, {cven or eight men came
up to him with words in their hands, and faid loudly that
ke ougbt to be Hain directly; but they immediately con-
cealed themſclhꝭ es in the crud: the other, that the parri-
eide was not car: e/ l to piifon at ſirſt, but, was put into the
kands of Montigny, and remained two days in the Hotel
de Kats, hte he was fo chreleſsly guarded, that oil forts of
people wero allowed to ſpeak to him: among others, af
eceleſiaſtic who had received great: obligations from the de-
ceaſed King, accoſting him, called hum friexd, and bid
hir +. ke care not to ac2uſe good men,” Mezerai, it is plain,
has copied the ſirſt of theſe obſervations from P. Matlucu-
who fays that it was., the Baron de Courtaumar, who, draw-
ing his {word againſt theſe men, forced them to ſhelter
themſelves in the croud: but I dv nor fee what inference

is.to be diawn from the former of. theſe twa facts 2
7

q

___

A

1 "= 361
/

2

by 1
and
do p
7 aft re!
| mul
a ſu
©” gatic
= but
> her

Men
tent
dire

mind

main
bim,
© The
thap
® teal
chat

f

4

5

2
5

E=

F

1610, OF SUL L I. 400

by Mezerai, except that thoſe men, tranſported with rage

and grief for the death of the beſt of kings, were eager

do puniſh the impious aſſaſſin; and as for the other fact,

4
* D

after what has been juſt ſaid in the foregoing remark, it

> muſt be allowed to be very doubtful and hazardous, upon

* »

. 5
4

——

*

I

a ſuppoſition, that by the eccleſiaſtie who had great obli-
gations to the King, the author means Father Cotton :
but indeed, if this father did go to ſee Ravaillac, and if
he really ſaid thoſe words, My friend, do not aecuſc goed

men, What ought to be inferred from an expreſſion of gen-

a».

LA

4 -

over, added he, we, who are eccleitaltics, know nothing.

tleneſs and Chriſtian charity, which neither directly nor in-
directly preſents any thing criminal to the mind? Abr.
hiſt. and chron. vol. 3. p. 1450.

Here follows, what is ſtill, in different writings, to be
found againſt the Jeſuits on this occakon. 4 Father D' Au-
bigny, who had confeſſed Ravaillac, was privately in»
terrogated by the firſt preſident upon the ſecret confeſſion,
but he could draw nothing from him except this: That
God, who to ſome men had given the gift of languages,
to others the gift of prophecy. revelation, &c, had on
him beſtowed the gift of ſorgetfulacſs of confethons. Mora-

of the world; we do net mix in its affairs, or heed
what paſſes im it. Rather,“ replied the firſt preſident,
* yon know too mach, and are too far concerned in its
buſineſs; and, if you were not more ſo than you own you
are, things had gone better,”
| France, ib. p. 320. 321.
Theſe laſt circumſtances relating to Father D'Aubigny,
are certainly the molt ſevere of all that have been urged
againlt the Jaſuits. It was well known, that Rawaillac, in
his depoſitions, acknowledged that he was acquainted with

mis Jeſuit; that he had been preſent when he ſaid maſs 3

o
"
7

that he had impa: ted to him his viſions ; the trouble of his.
mind, &, He was confronted with this father, who
maintained to Ravaillac himſelf, that he bad never {cen.
bim, and that all he had ſaid concerning him was falſe,

The French Mercury, far more deferving to be credited

| 1 .
dchap any of the writers I have quoted, becaufe the author

peaks ſo fully and with ſo much clearneſs of this affair,

chat one ſecs, in a manner, the whole proce2dings of: the:

trial;

Memoirs for a hiſtory. of”

_— —

—

5oo MEMOIR Ss Book XXVII.

trial; he, after giving a minute account of every circum-
ſtance of their examination, adds, “ Father D' Aubigny
faid to Ravaillac, that he was very wicked; and that, at-
ter perpetratiag ſo horrid a fat, he ought not to accuſe
any one falſely, nor add to the number of his fins,” Ra-
vaillac being told, that, if he had any charge to bring a-
gainſt Father D'Aubigny, he maſt do it then, replied,
that he had not any; that he looked upon him to be an
honaſt man, and a good prieſt; and that he would believe
him. In like manner the ſaid D*Aubigny having notice
given him to make his objections againſt the witneſs, and
that, according to the ordinance, he would not be admitted
to make them, if not immediately, he ſaid he had no more
to ſay, but that he was a wicked man, and a molt auda-
cious har,” French Mercury, anno 1610.

Ravaillac's ſilence to theſe reproaches may well paſs for
a conviction of the calumny. This circumſtance of the trial
may be ſeen at large in the book itſelf, Matthieu ſays it
was Servin, the King's advocate, who interrogated Father
D'*Aubigny, and that this was the anſwer: That ever
face he had, by the orders of his ſuperiors, quitted preach-
10g to apply himſelf wholly to heating confeſhons, God had
beſtowed the ſingular grace upon him of effacing immedi-
ately from his memory whatever was ſaid to him under the
ſeal of confeſſion.“ But this writer, though an enemy of
the Jeſuits, does not mention the firlt preſident's malicious
reply to him; and doubtleſs he is more deſerving of beliet,
than the Memoirs for the hiſtory of France; becaule he
was living at that time, and was molt particularly interelt-
ed in the memory of Henry IV. who had honoured him
with his favour. Paſquier, the great enemy of the Jeſuits,
by not accuſing them of any thing, ſhews plainly enough,
that he believed them innocent. Hi/tory of Henry IV. ib.
Letters of Nicholas Paſquizr.

* On Sunday, May 23 Father Portugais, a cordelier,
an {ome curates of Paris, among others, the cu: ates of
the pariſhes of St Bartholomew and >t Paul, in dak ambvi-
guous words and hints ſcarcely intelligible, taxed the Je-
ſuits with being accomplices in the King's aſſaſſination, ar-
gung againit tem from their own books and writings,
namely, thoie of Mariana and Becanus, It was allo

2
propoled,

ofcd,

[} deprived of his authority by an individual.

1610. "OF en . 50¹

propoſed, an the ſame author whom I now quote, to
forbid the Jeſuits the public pulpits However, they went
no farther than to order Mariana's book to be burnt by the
hands of the common hangman, which was done according-
ly, June 8. before the church of Notre Dame. This
book openly defended the deed of brother Clément, and
has been twice printed; the ſirſt time in folio, the ſecond
in octavo. In the fir{t edition, he calls this brother, ter-
num Calliæ decus; but theſe three words are left out in
the ſecond edition, which I have before me.” Memoirs
for the hiſtory of France, ib. p. 325.

If all the authors who have written upon the ſame prin—
ciples with thoſe of Mariana and Becanus, were to be ac-
cuſed of having contributed to the King's murder, “ a
criminal proceſs might be entered againſt John Petit, a doc-
tor of the Sorbonne, whoſe opinions were rejected by the
council of Conſtance; likewiſe againſt the celebrated John
Gerſon, Jamcs Almain, Richer, John Boucher of the ſame
college and ſociety, Can they be ignorant that an extraor-
dinary aſſembly was held among the doctors of the Sorbonne,
to proceed to the apotheolis of James Clement, the afſaſſi-
nator of Henry III. and that among that great number of
doctors, which compoſed the aſſembly, only one, named
John Poitevin, was againſt it? In thoſe miſerable times, a
furious hatred and miſguided zeal extinguiſhed the natural
lights of reaſon ; and however revolting that doctrine might
be, which teaches that it is ſometimes lawful to murder
kings, however oppoſite to ſcripture and reaſon, yet, to the
ſname of humanity, and the diſgrace of religion, that doc-
tne prevailed, Mariana, a Spaniſh J-ſuit, in a book in-
titled De Rege et Regis in/titutione, held in effect that it
was ſometimes allowable to murder tyrants, though elſe—
where he teaches, that a lawful prince cannot be killed or
The enemies of
the ſeſuits advance, that it was from this book Ravaillac had

taken his firſt leſſuon, which he practiſed but too well. It is
> certain, however, that he never read the book, knew no»
thing of it, and did not underſtand Latin well enough to

read it: bat theſe reaſonings ate the effects of paſſion and

4 Prejudice. Father Aquaviva, to hinder the raſhneſs of ſome
** from raiſing ſach calumnies againſt the Jeſuits for

the

o ũ MEMOIR S Book XXVII.

the future, on the gᷓth of July forbade all the ſubjects of
the ſociety, upon pain of being excommunicated and ſuſ-
pended from exerciſing any of the ſacred functions, to ſpeak
or vrite any thing which could authoriſe, in any manner, or
under any pretence, the parricide of kings, whom, by the
law of God, ſays he, we are commanded to honour and
reſpect, as ſacred perſons placed by his hands upon the
throne.” GChronol. and Dogm. vel. 1. p. 115. and fol.
lowing. |

What is here ſaid of Mariana, may with equal juſtice be
applied to Becan: but, among all theſe accuſations, I ſee
only one in which there is any probability; which is that
drawn from the book of this Spaniſh Jeſuit, condemned by
the parliament as being capable of arming ſubjects againſt
their ſovereign ; but in reality what ought to be inferred
from thence to the prejudice of the French Jeſuits, what
proofs could a book furniſh againſt them, which was writ-
ten by a foreigner, and inthe year 1606 publicly condemn-
ed as a molt pernicious piece, and even rejected by the
Jeſuits themſelves ?

« The Queen, who was deſirous that Father Cotton,
and the Abbe Du-Bois, the declared enemy of that father
and the whole ſociety, ſhould be reconciled, permitted him
to have a conference with that abbe, which laſted four honrs,
at the houſe of the lieutenant-civil ; but, not being able
to agree, Father Cotton, to take him at ſome diſadvantage,
at length aſked him if he thought the Jeſuits had been the
cauſe of the late King's aſſaſſination, and if he believed that
he had killed him? No,“ replied the Abbe Du- Bois;
« for, if I thought ſo, I would this inſtant,” ſaid he,
ſwearing a great oath, * hoiſt you up by the throat and
ſtrangle you, and then throw you out of the window.”
Father Cotton afterwards aſked him if the Jeſuits were not
Catholics? © Oh yes,” anſwered he, © ſuch Catholics as
the devil is.” Journal of the reign of Henry IV. YP.

LEtoile, p. 233.

„On Tueſday, May 25. there was a quarrel betwixt
NM. de Lomenie and Father Cotton, in full council. Lo-
menie told bim, that it was he and his ſecretary who had
murdered the King; whereupon, the members of the coun-

eil repreſenting to him that he ought to be more moderate
in

1610. OF SUL L I. 503

in his expreſſions, he ſaid, that his grief for the death of
his good maſter might force him into ſome intemperance
of language, but that he would not ſpeak but in the Queen's
preſence. At the ſame time Beringhen quarrelled with De-
Lorme, ſirſt phyſician to the Queen, who ſupported the
Jeſuits, and ſaid things as ſevere to him as Lomenie had
done to Father Cotton.“

Is it ſurpriſing that perſons under the influence of paſſion,
and in thoſe moments when they ſuffer themſelves to be
carried away by their conjectures, prejudices, and particu-
lar enmities, ſhould utter invectives, and make reproaches

which they cannot prove? At ſuch times they often ſay

things which they do not believe, and which, when their
reaſon is leſs clouded, they inwardly diſavow.

John Du-Bois, abbe of Beaulicu, being a fhort time af-
ter -obſ'-ed to quit the kingdom, was arreſted at Rome,
and put into the priſons of the inquiſition, either at the ſuit
of the Jeſuits or of the procurator-general of Celeſtin monks;

for he had formerly been of that order, and quitted it with-
out giving an account of the money which had been depo-

fited in his hands, Ile had afterwards borne arms and
diſtinguiſhed himſelf in the ſervice of Henry III. who uſed
to call him the Emperor of the Monks : after that, he re-
ſumed the eccleſiaſtic habit, and was celebrated for his

{ preaching, Whatever was the cauſe, he was detained in

thoſe priſons till the year 1626, which was the ſame year
in which he died, being a few days after he was reſtored
to his liberty by Pope Gregory XV. Memoirs for a bi-

| ffory of France, French Mercury, and Mereri.

In L'Ftoile, La-Varenne makes a very ſingular ſpeech
to the Jeſuits at his return from La-Fleche, whither he
had accompanied them in the ceremony of bearing the
King's heart to their chappel. Having entertained them
all ro the number of twenty-four at dinner, he continued

| tus diſcourſe to them (the former part of which had been
| pretty ſevere) in this manner: I will not ſcruple to tell
| you,” ſaid he, „“ that there is a very bad report concern-
| ing you circulated in this city, which has come to my
ears; that there are among you ſome who were abbettors
of, and accomplices in the wicked aſſaſſination of the de-
| ceaſed King, Hitherto 1 have not believed it; but, if [

ſhould

- ———ů — —
_

=
:
F o
; *
4
:
:
4
3
*
.v
90
*
i B
*
- |
e
i
n4
b
U 29
2
x
"1
„
\
+ of
1 4
' oy
7
3
:
+
:
my _
| |
-
p
.
|
1
}
1
[4
: 0
1
14
1
1
*
1
1
=
*
*

o4 MEMOIR S Book XXVII.

ſhould ever happen to diſcover any thing againſt you, I de-
clare that I will have you all ſeized one after the other,
and hang you in my ſtables.” Such was La-Varenne's
harangue to the Jeſuits; but it was time, ſay they, to ſhut
the ſtable- door when the ſteed was ſtolen. id p. 176.

As this ſpeech of La-Varenne's is not mentioned in any
of the beſt authors of his time, there is good reaſon to
think it one of thoſe idle and ridiculous tales ſit to amuſe
the populace, and gratify the malice and prejudice ot an
enemy who finds reaſon and probability in every thing that
is conformable to his paſſion.

The ſame author, ſpeaking of the provoſt-marſhal of
Pluviers, ſays, that he had two ſons who were both Je-
fuits, and endeavours to prove that they were acceſſary to
the King's aſſaſſinat ion. But it is evident, that nothing could
be more unjuſt than the reaſonings of this writer, or more
falſe than his concluſions, with reſpect to the provoſt of
Pluviers: for why indeed ſhould it be afferted, that the
Jeſuns were in a combination with that provoſt, becauſe
he had two ſons in the ſociety ? It would not follow from
thence that they had contributed to Ravaillac's crime, un-
leſs it could be proved, which it is impoſkble to do, that
the provoſt hanged himſelf through his fear of falling in-
to the hands of juſtice, for having, in concert with the
Jeſuits, endeavuurcd to inſpire Ravaiilac with a reſolu ion
to complete his horrid deſign, But this baſe calumny is
Tefured by the French Mercury, who, after obſerving that
all which had been ſaid againtt the Jeſuits had been taken
from L Anticotton, the 1 harks of the butter-woman, and
ſuch like writings, ** They ought ſurely,” ſaid he, to
agree in theii ſatues, ſince they all proceed from the ſam?
mouth. Of theſe two books, the firſt was not printed till
the middle of September, and the other towards the end
of Odober; and it was always thought that this provol
hanged himlelf becauſe inſtruments for coining had been
found upon him, having practiſed the art of coining, and
been guilty of other crimes in his office, for which he
knew he could not avoid death; and not for the : bse
mentioned accuſation, which was raiſed againſt him at ths
inſtigation of his enemies.“ French Mercury, anno 1010.

That very obſeryation, that nothing was alledged 2 gain

the

. US {Vs WS TIRE, 5

1610. n. 50

the Jeſuits, at that time, which was not taken from the
molt contemptible libels, is alone a ſufficient anſwer to all
other calumnies of that nature; and. after ſome words
which e'caped one of the molt farious enemies this ſociety
ever had, it ought no longer to be doubted, T his Anti-
jeſuit, ſaid he, appeared about that time, and, except
low abuſe, it will be found to contain nothing. The au-
thor was a young man named Boneſtat, The factor of
Guillemot was impriſoncd for it. The Catholicon of Sau-
mur appeared likewiſe ; a work made up of bad and good.
La-Barillierie, who is a free ſpeaker, meeting two Jeſuits
ſome days after the King's aſſaſſination, Gentlemen,” ſaid
he, * I think you are Jeſuits : there is a merchant at
Chatelleraut who has very good knives to ſell ; perhaps you
may ind ſome that will ſuit you there.” This is not a
proof, but a witticiſm, which pleaſes, not. on account of the
truth there is in it, but for its malicious and ſatirical turn,
Memoirs for a hiſtory of France, ib. 353.

* Divray, a clerk of the court, told one of my friends
the next day, that as they were conducting Mademoiſelle
Coman, the ſame who has been formerly mentioned, be-
fore the council, ſhe ſaid to him; I revealed to the je-

op ſuits, in confeſhon, all I knew of this conſpiracy, and
* they intreated me not to mention it.“ Certainly the Je-
„ ſuits were greatly concerned in what this girl alledged :
F how comes it then that the writers of thoſe times, who
5 have been ſo particular in their relations, have taken no
notice of this circumſtance? 7Ubid. p. 358. 2
a Nor is it leſs eaſy to refute the following citations againſt
5 the ſeveral perſons we have named; indeed they carry their
wy refutation along with them, by comprehending in the
wil lame accuſation, perſons who were not only without con-
a nection of friendſhip or intereſt, but were declared enemies,
**. and publicly known to be ſuch: I mean the Queen and

the Marchioneſs of Verneuil, and their partiſans, For
the ſame reaſon, therefore, we think ourſelves diſpenſed
with from joining to each quotation reflections which
would greatly ſwell theſe notes, and which muſt neceſſarily
© Occur to every judicious reader.
The Sunday before the Wedneſday on which the
King was murdered, being the 9th of May, this ſoldic:,
Vor. IV, Xx a

506 MEMOIRS Book XXVII.

a wicked lewd fellow, and who, ſays the author a few
lines above, had formerly been a prieſt, met the widow of
Captain St Matthieu, a Huguenot, a little beyond the gate
St Anthony, on the road from Charenton, and knowing
her, he accoſted her, and, after ſome diſcourſe, aſked her
if ſhe (till lived at Paris. She told him ſhe did, And
what are you doing there ſo long?” ſaid the ſoldier,
« Doing !” ſhe replied, © I have a great deal of buſineſs
to tranſact,” © Faith,” returned he, „if I was in your
place, no law-ſuit or buſineſs whatever ſhould keep me
there; and it is becauſe I wiſh you well that I adviſe you
to get out of Paris?” «© But why do you wiſh me out of
Paris?” ſaid ſhe.” „ Pecauſe,” reſumed the ſoldier,
* before eight days are paſt, it is in danger of ſuffering fo
great a diſaſter, that happy will it be for them who are at
a diſtance from it, I therefore adviſe you, as a friend, to
quit Paris as ſoon as poſhble, and believe what I ſay to
you.” When they came to the entry of the church, where
the ſermon was not yet begun, the ſoldier ſaid he would
not hear the ſermon. * But,” ſaid he, laughing, 1
will go and examine the diſpoſition of your guards, who
are a multitude of poor nuſerable wretches, ranged on
each ſide like two hedges.” Then looking at them, Be-
hold thoſe lame ſtragglers,” ſaid he to this woman, * which
we are accuſtomed to ſee in Paris at the entrance of our
churches; do you not obſerve thoſe ſoldiers who are a+
mongſt them? I know them every one; they are all rob-
bers; four of them in particular, whom 1 ſee there, are
deſtined for four terrible exploits : but-the wickedeſt, and
molt determined of them all, I do not fee.” Saying this,
he took leave of the woman, and went away. Upon the
Friday following, when the King was aſſaſſinated, ſhe be-
gun to reflect upon what the ſoldier had ſaid to her, and
the Sunday after, being in doubt whether ſhe ought to go
to Charenton, hearing that others had ſet the example, o
ſhe reſolved to follow it, and upon the road again met the W
ſoldier; to whom, in great ſurpriſe, ſhe ſaid, „ I think

you are a prophet; I ſhall believe you another time: but ſo
1 hope we ſhall ſuffer no more.“ This is nothing yet, ly
ſaid the ſoldier; ** all is not over; there are other ſtrołkes 7:
to follow this, equally wicked, and much more dangerous; WW m

and,

1510. 07  $VUVLLY. 507

and, ſince you are reſolved to believe me for the future,
take my counſel, and leave your abode as ſoon as poſſible.”

« Upon giving immediate information of this diſcourſe
to the miniſters of the church, among others to M. Du-
rand, he procured her, by means of one of his friends,
acceſs to M. Defunctis, who having heard what ſhe had to
ſay, and got intelligence from her where this ſoldier dwelt,
and at what hour he might be ſpoke with, he went to his
lodgings at ten o'clock at night, and ſeizing him without
any difficulty, lodged him in a place of ſecurity, The
great probability there was in this ſtory made many pei ſons
hope that at length there would be a full diſcorcry of this
deplored and moſt abominable enterpriſe, if the vile me-
thods of proceeding uſed in the affair, had not deſtroyed
all the good effects that might have been expected fiom
the diſcoveries already made; but ſuch was the conduct ob-
ſerved in it, that one would imagine we were afraid of
ſhewing ourſelves too ſevere and exact, in ſcarching into
a crime the molt barbarous and moſt wicked that has
ever been perpetrated in Europe for upwards of a thou-
ſand years. DL Etoile's Journal, p. 150. and follixw-
77.

* Tueſday, May 18. the court being aſſembled, deli-
berated upon the forms and proceedings to be uſed in the
trial and condemnation of that moſt deteſtable parricide
and aſſaſſin of his King, Francis Ravaillac; but it was
more eſpecially conſidered in this aſſembly what torturcs
ſhould be uſed to extort a confeſſion from this miſerable
wretch, It was reſolved that he ſhould be put to extra-
ordinary tortures, and thoſe of the molt cruel kind, even
foreign ones were propoſed, and, among others, that of
Geneva, which was called the barathe or beurriere, a tor—
ture ſo violent, that it is ſaid none on whom it was tried,
but was forced by it to confeſs, Upon this the opinions
of the aſſemby were divided; the oldeſt and the belt ap-
proved of its being tried; the others wavering between
both, and apt to change their opinions every moment, re:
ſolved upon nothing; therefore molt of thoſe who are on-
ly determined by gain, having given their votes, in mitio-
rem (ſeu deteriorem ), carried the vote that day by a great
majority,” Vid. p. 154.

X Xx 2 According

„os MEMOIRS Book XXVII.

e According to the ſaid arr&t, he was put to the torture
in order to oblige him to reveal his accomplices : what
paſſed is ſtill a ſecret to all but the court,” French Mer-
cury, ann? 1610. fel. 454.

« A certain infamous fellow, having publicly railed at
the deceaſed King, and praiſed Ravaillac, ſaying that he
had performed a noble act, was ſeized and brought priſoner
to Paris, The informations againſt him, as thoſe againſt
Macon, were laid before the Chancellor, but have ſtill re-
mained a ſecret; nor has there been any mention made of
bringing them to juſtice,” Memoirs for the hiſtory of
France, vol. 2. p. 324.

« When the aſſaſſin was brought to the place of puniſh-
ment, and upon the point of being torn in pieces by the
horſes, obſerving that a certain man, who was near the
ſcaffold, had alighted from his horſe to put it in the place
of one which had been tired with dragging him: * They
deceived me,” ſaid he, © when they told me, that the
action I was going to commit would be pleaſing to the
people, ſince they theniſelves furniſh horſes to tear me in
pieces.” A proof, adds the author in the margin, that he
had been incited by fome perſons to commit that execrable
fact, and that he had accomplices.“ #45. p. 322.

Here follows what relates to the Provoſt of Pluviers.
Ahe Provoſt of Pluviers, or Petiviers, a city in Beauce,
diſtant about two days journey from Paris, was accuſed of
having faid, the ſame day, that the King was murdered,
This day the King is either flain or wounded, Being brought
priſoner to Paris, he was found dead in the priſon, {trarg-
ied with the ſtrings of his drawers. He was hanged by
the ſeet in the Greve, on the 19th of June.“ French
Mercury, ann 1610,

L'Ertocile, after relating the ſame fact, adds the following
circumſtances: * This infamous man, whole wickedneis
was publicly known, and who had two ſons of the order
of the Jeſuits, quod netandum, acknowledged by every
one to be a very bad ſubject to the King, but a good ſervant
to the family of Entragues and the Marchioneſs of Ver-
neuil, and known to be a rogue and extortioner, was ac-
cuſed of having ſaid, in Pluviers, while he was playing, or
looking upon others who were playing, at bowls, in a |

| en,

a an as Ac

1610. OF SU LL: F.--4 509”

den, at the very time the King was murdered, The King -
is juſt now murdered; he is dead, depend upon it; and,
ſome days before, he had uſed words to the ſame purpoſe,
or very near it, which was not taken notice of till the thing,
happened, which made them believe that the old villain .
knew ſomething of the*enterpriſe, and was one of the ac-
complices of that vile aſſaſſin: ſo that, being carefully
watched, and eagerly purſued, he was at length taken, and
brought to Paris, where he was confined in the Conctergerie
du Palais, where, a ſhort time afterwards, to their great
aſtoniſhment, they found him dead, being ſtrangled with
the ſtrings of his drawers; The parliament had him tried,
though dead, .and found him guilty of the crime of high
treaſon : but, after all, dead men do not ſpea l, which was
what they wanted; for, if he had ſpoke, he might have ſaid
too much for the honour and advantage of many perſons
whom they had no inclination to hurt. This was what was
believed by all the people about Pluviers, who uſed to ex-
claim, Cad God, how fortunate is the death of this wicked
man for M. D'Entrapues, the Marchioneſs of Verneuil
his daughter, and the whole family! Upon this miſerable
wretch was found a tool and an inſtrument made uſe of in
coining, called a h⁰id. It was ſaid, that he had been guilty
of that practice; but this inſtrument was found to be a
| tool for breaking iron- gates, and bars of iron, even of the
c WF largeſt fize, like thoſe in the Baſtile, in order to get the
; Count of Auvergne from thence,” Journal of the reign. '
of Henry IV. p. 183.
: * The Queen ſent for Durat the phyſician, a man whom
„we King deteſted, and would never ſuffer in his preſence,
h and even forbid the Queen to employ. She, however, re-
tained him for her phyſician, made him one of her coun-

» dil, with large appointments, and all to oblige Conchini,
s who, it was ſaid, bore with great fortitude the death of
r the King,” In the margin it is written, © The public were
y perſuaded, that his wife and he had greatly contributed to
t the King's aſſaſſination,” Memoirs for the biſtory of France,
r- w5.2. p. 309.

:- 8 On Sunday, January 30, the Marchioneſs of Ver-
or EE Peuil was, upon the depoſitions of Mademoiſelle Coman, .

q interrogated by M. the firſt preſident at his houſe, Her:

9 X 4. 3. examination

510 MEMOIR S Book XXVII.

examination laſted from one o'clock in the afternoon til}
five. She is thus called, Henrietta de Balzac D'E ntragues,
Marchioneſs de Verneuil, miſtreſs to King Henry IV. She
was accuſed by La-Coman; yet was decreed to be heard
but once, although the affair was the King's aſſaſſination,
and the crime high treaſon.” bid. p. 358.

« The next day the Queen ſent a gemleman to the firſt
preſident, to defire he would ſend her his opinion concern-
ing this proceſs; to whom the good man replied, . You may
tell the Queen, that God has reſerved me ta live in an age
to ſee and hear things ſo ſtrange, as I never thought I could
have heard or ſeen,” One of his friends and mine ſaying
to him, that it was almoſt the general opinion, that this
young woman, hy her accuſing ſo many perſons, and of the
higheſt rank in the kingdom, ſpoke at random, and with-
out any proofs ; the firſt prefident, raiſing his eyes to hea-
ven, and ſhrugging up his ſhoulders, replied, © There are
but too many, there are but too many.” 16d.

« Monſieur D'Epernon at the fame time, who was moſ?
intereſted in this affair, and who eagerly puſhed on the
proceſs againſt this girl that ſhe might be pur to death,
went generally for that purpoſe to the council, and made
a viſit to the firſt preſident to hear what had paſſed ; bus
that geutleman, with his accuſtomed gravity, and aſperity
of countenance, which thoſe eſpecially whom he did no:
Hke, were fure to meet with from him, repulſed him dil-
dainfully; ſaying, I am not your news-monger, but your
judge.” The Duke telling him, that he aſked him as 3
friend, Thave no friends,” replied the preſident; * I will
do yoa juſtice: be fatisfied with that.“ M. D'Epernon, re-
turaing in great diſcontent, went and complained to the
Queen; who immediately diſpatched a meffenger to the
firſt prefident, to tell him, that ſhe had been informed, he
had treated the Duke of Epernon ill, and that it was her
deſire he ſhould, for the future, behave with more reſpect
to him, in conſideration of his high quality. To this the
firſt preſideat replied: © I have been a judge fifty years,
thirty of which 1 have had the honour to preſide in the
fovereign court of the peers of this kingdom, and, during
that time, I never ſaw any lord, duke, or peer, of what

quality ſoeyer, who was accuſed of high treaſon, who *
re

]
j
\
F
a

1
AX
*
2

1610. OF S8 U L L I. 511

before his judges booted and ſpurred, as M. D*Epernon
has done, and with his ſword by his ſide. Do not fail to
tell the Queen this.” This was a freedom becoming a firſt
preſident, I ſhould not record this ſpeech of his here, if
I did not certainly know it to be true,”

If it be aſked,” ſays M. de Perehxe, © who were the
faries, the ſiends that ſuggeſted to him ſo damnable a de-
ſign, and urged him to carry it into execution? hiſtory re-
plies, that it is ignorant, and that, upon an action of ſuch
conſequence, it is not allowable to give ſuſpicions and con-
jectures for certain truths : the judges themſelves, who in-
terrogated the criminal, durſt not open their mouths, and
never mentioned it, but with geſtures of horror and aſto-
niſhment.” Perejfixe's hiſtory of Henry the Great, part 3.

410.

: The continuator of De-Thou's Latin hiſtory ſays, that
two different opinions prevailed upon this ſubject ; ſome
were perſuaded that the aſſaſſination of Henry IV. was the
work of ſome great lords of the kingdom, who ſacrificed
this prince to their ancient reſentment ; others believed
that it was Spain who {truck this blow by the partiſans ſhe
had in France: and this writer adds, that the Preſident De
Thou, and the ableſt heads in the parliament, was of this
latter opinion. He likewiſe mentions letters from Bruſſels,
Antwerp, Malines, and Bolduc, before the 15th of May,
which expreſſed that it was commonly reported in thoſe
provinces, that Henry IV. had been murdered. Nic. Rigalt,
anna 1610. vol. 6. p. 492.

That paſſage from L'Etoile, which I quoted a little be-
fore, may, if granted to be of any authority, give room
for a third opinion, namely, that this plot, or rather all
theſe different plots, were to end in a rebellion, and even a
kind of ſecond maſſacre in Paris; and that this was not ex-
ecuted, becauſe the conſpirators ſeeing the King dead, which
was the great and principal object they had in view, thought
it needleſs to proceed any farther,

And here I cannot diſpenſe with myfelf from mentioning
ſome writings, which may be found in the fourth volume
of L'Etoile's Journal, lately printed under the title of,
Pieces Juſtificatives. Some of them relate to the affair and
procels of Mademoiſelle Coman, They add nothing, or

very

512 MEMOIR S Book XXVII.

very little, to what has been already ſaid. The others
are,

Firſt, a manuſcript which the author pretends had been
found in the cabinet of the Duke D*'Aumale (Charles de
Lorrain, ſecond ſon of Claude) who died in the Low Coun-
tries in the year 1631. In this manuſcript, which heavily
charges the Jeſuits and the Count of Auvergne, although
in priſon at the time, it is related, that the Duke of Eper-
non, who was in the coach with his Majeſty, ſceing him
wounded to death (theſe are his words), * ſtabbed him in
the fide with a knife, that he might be ſooner out of pain,
'The Duke of Montbazon adds, he ſaw the Duke of Eper-
non ſtab the King, but did not take any notice of it, be-
cauſe he favoured this aſſaſſination.“

The ſecond of theſe pieces is intitled, The Meeting be-
tween the Duke of Epernon and Francis Ravaillac. It is
there aſſerted, that this duke, being at. Angouleme, ſent
for Ravaillac and two other accomplices of his, and he and
Father Cottoh exhorted them to poignard the King, giving
for a reaſon, that this prince was an enemy to the Pope,
the King of Spain, and the Catholic religion, which he was
going to aboliſh in Europe; and that, after they had made
them {wear to perform this, receiving the communion up-
on it from Father Cotton, they gave them each two hun-
dred crowns, ne aſſaſlins then took the road to Paris,
where, having ſtaid a long time, without meeting with an
opportunity of executing their enterpriſe, they obliged
D'Epernon to give each of them an hundred crowns more;
that, when the moment for-perpetrating the parricide ap-

oached, the Duke of Epernon, as he had agreed upen

forehand with Ravaillac, amuſed the King with ſome dil-
courſe, and then the horrid villain, throwing himſelf upon
the King, gave him a. wound with a knife; but the laid
Duke perceiving that it was very flight, and that the King
cried out, I am wounded, he made a ſign to him to repeat

the ſtroke, whereupon this execrable wretch, with a ſecond
blow, ſtruck the King into the heart; ſo that he expired
immediately. All theſe imputations, to be found orly id
conte:nprible libels, deſerve leſs, that we ſhould ſhew their
falſehood and inconſiſtency, than the former, See Fal

quier's

2 „ Las r 25

* 4 „ „ 6 ape

l
NR /// ĩ˙ • QS

160. 0 ＋ 8 UL:L-YF: 513

guier's letter to M. de Monac, in which he juſtifies the

Duke of Epernon,

The other pieces relate to the ſtory of Peter Du- Jardin,
known by the name of Captain de La Garde, of whom we
have already had occaſion to ſpeak. From theſe we learn,
that Du- Jardin was a native of Rouen: he ſerved at firſt
in the regiment of guards, afterwards in the light horſe :
he then went to Provence, where he was employed by the
Duke of Guiſe in his Majeſty's ſervice. Marſhal Biron
knew him when he ſerved in the light horſe, and attached
him to himſelf on account of his great bravery. After the
peace of Savoy, he went into the ſervice of the republic of
Venice, where he continued till ſhe made peace with the
Pope. He then went to ſerve in Germany under the Duke
De Mercœur. He again returned to Venice, from whence,
after a ſhort ſtay at Florence and Rome, he came to Naples.
In this city he became acquainted with a refugee, named
La-Bruyerre, who had been a leaguer : by him he was in-
troduced to a Jeſuit, called Father Alagon, uncle to the
Duke of Lerma, the King of Spain's favourite. This je-
ſuit, being deſirous to make uſe of ſo brave a man in the
deſign that was projected of aſſaſſinating Henry IV. joined
him with Hebert, Marſhal Biron's ſecretary, who has been
mentioned in our Memoirs, with Lewis D'Aix, mentioned
likewiſe in the account of the reduction of Marſeilles, and
with another provincial, called Roux, all of them French

| refugees,

In one of their parties of pleaſure Ravaillac was introdu-

ced to them, who diſcloſed to them all his deſigns, and told
them that he brought a letter from the Duke of Epernon

for the Viceroy of Naples. La Garde, having now got ſuf-
ficient intelligence of every thing that was projecting, went
to Zamet, ambaſſador from France to Venice, to diſcover
all he knew. This ambaſſador ſent him immediately to
M. de Breves, our ambaſſador at Rome, and to Zamet, his
brother, at Paris, De-Breves gave La-Garde letters for
M. de Villeroi, with which he returned to Paris in the train
of the Duke of Nevers, who at Fontainebleau preſented
him to his Majeſty. Henry IV. after telling him that he
would take proper meaſures to render theſe deſigns upon

his perſon ineffeQual, ordered this officer to accompany the

Grand

514 MEMOIR S Book XXVII.

Grand Marſhal of Poland into Germany, and to take care
of his intereſts there. La-Garde, returning to France with
advices of great importance from the Grand Marſhal of
Poland, was at Francfort informed of the King's death,
He retired to Metz greatly indiſpoſed, from whence he
followed Marſhal de La-Chatre to the expedition of Julicrs,
After the peace, as he was upon his journey to France, he
was attacked near the village of Fize by ſome armed men,
who gave him ſeveral wounds, and left him for dead in a
ditch, La-Garde made ſhift to get to Mezieres, where the

Duke of Nevers then was, who cauſed him to be condut-

ed to. Paris, where, upon preſenting a petition to the King,
he obtained the office of comptroller-general of Bierres;
but, when he leaſt expected ſuch treatment, he was ſeized
and carried to priſon. Before judgment was pronounced,
which could not but be favourable, becauſe his judges
found him abſolutely innocent of every thing charged upon
him, an exempt came to take him out of priſon, and de-
livered him a brevet for a yearly penſion of fix hundred
livres, and his patent for the office of comptroller-general
of Bierres : it appears that he retired to Rouen, and died
there, | |

Another writer of ſtill later date, who has reſtored the
five interrogatories of Ravaillac, in the volume of manu-
{cripts marked 192. of the King's library (for the French
Mercury mentions only the four laſt, which are abridgel
and related in an hiſtorical manner, and ſays not a word
of the firſt), believes, that in them may be found proofs
that the criminal endeavoured to impoſe upon his judges,

and did not make a full confeſior and that his judęcs, Þ |

on their ſide, ſeemed to be afraid of aſking him how he

came to be known to the Duke of Epernon, He has not Þ

the leaſt doubt of Ravaillac's having been in Italy, although

he conſtantly denied it. The pieces relating to the pro- f

ceſſes of La- Coman, and Captain de La- Garde, ſeem to
him to prove very clearly, that the plot of the parricide wis
laid at Naples in the year 1608; and that, at one and the
ſame time, they laboured to ſecure the ſucceſs of it in Italy,
Spain, Flanders, and France, To this he adds, that the
Duke of Epernon, and the Marchioneſs of Verneuil, met

ſeyeral times at St Jean en Greve; that they had been head,
94

ww — / Al << Ä ic: 1

S308 2 22 2. 2

bw pom | 2 _ p_ wt ww

1610. 0 8. U L kg RT 515

to ſay ſomething relating to their ſcheme, and that Hen-
ry IV. himſelf was informed of it: but that this prince,
either through a blind ſecurity or an exceſs of goodneſs,
neglected this information,

Thoſe who have obſerved that the Duke of Sully, in
ſome paſſages of his Memoirs, confeſſed that he does not
declare all he knows on this ſubject, may in theſe words
find ſome grounds for ſuſpicions : but indeed in all theſe
there is nothing ſufficiently clear nor poſitive, to make it
allowable, upon ſuch hints, to accuſe this or that perſon ;
and, at preſent, the beſt thing that can be done, is to
draw a veil over this myſtery of iniquity, and, if poſlible,
to conſign for ever to oblivion this ſhocking period of our
hiſtory. We ought to take this part, although it were true
what ſome perſons are fully perſuaded of, that there are
two or three cabinets in Paris which are able to throw ſome
new lights upon this fact. Thoſe who are poſſeſſed of
ſuch papers, are greatly to be praiſed for concealing them
with ſo much care; and it would be well if they could re-

| | ſolve to conſign them to the flames.

Throughout this whole detail, I have not quoted Vit-

torio Siri; not that he makes no mention of the aſſaſſina-

tion of Henry IV. and the trial of Ravaillac, Mem, recond.

vol, 2. p. 246. but he does it in ſo negligent a manner,

and like a man fo ill informed, and even ſo prejudiced a-
gainſt the perſon of Henry IV. and his maxims of govern-
ment, that his teſtimony deſerves to have no weight, I

| ſhall only obſerve here, that it is his opinion abſolutely,
that Rayaillac had no accomplices.

ExD of the FouRrU VOLUME.

— D NN

rr

„
—

— —

= * . A
r "I
