Memoirs of Maximilian de Bethune, Duke of Sully, Vol. 1 (Maximilien de Béthune, duc de Sully, 1638)
==========================================================
Sully's Mémoires (1638) - Henri IV's great minister on war, finance and statecraft; the classic ministerial memoir. The English translation (after Charlotte Lennox, 1756; 1760 printing), 5 vols. Vol. 1 of 5.

MAXIMILIAN DE BETHUNE,
D U K E or 8 1 L 15 Y,

PRIME MIN NISTER or
HENRY ITE G RE AT.
4 Newly tranſlated Gown the French edition of
Th M. de LECLUSE. |

IIluſtrated with an accurate Mar of France.

To which is annexcd, |
The TRIAL of FRaxcis RavaiLLac,
io the murder of HENRY the GREAT.

IN FIVE VOLUMES.

VOLUME I.

. ED NN H :
Printed for A, DoxaLpson, at Pope's Head.

MD:C-C:L-K,

„%. — —

— HAR 4A rt Eno ono 1

+ : — —' ˙ V Ls | w
: | F 7 0 ' . . : es : 1 — " 8
— IO Ones — Se ron tet A alert re Ie I I Ry 4 r — *

ADVERTISEMENT

By the Scorch Epirok.

HE great Demand for SvizY's
MeMoiss, and the high price
of the London edition, induced the e-
ditor to undertake a new tranſlation of

that excellent book; which is now of-

fered to the public at the low rate of fif-

teen {hillin gS.

The Monthly Review ſpeaks of theſe ;

Memoirs as follows.

cc The ! of this celebrated work
is ſo well known, and ſo univerſally,
eſteemed, that, it would be ridiculous

9

« in us, to think cither of adding to, or
« detracting from the public ſuffrage,

.

long ſince Wen in its favour.“

The editor therefore hopes.” that” a

new tranſlation of a book, fraught with

the wiſeſt maxims of rate, the fineſt in-

ſtructions and examples of morality, and

2 varicty of the moſt important events |

and E

iv ADVERTISEMENT.

and intereſting anecdotes, will not be un-
acceptable to his countrymen.

As to the tranſlation, its merit is hum

bly ſubmitted to the judgment of the pu-
blic; and though it is not pretended to

be free from faults, yet 'tis hoped it will

be found to be no way inferior to that
done at London; at leaſt, care has been
taken to rectify ſeveral miſtakes, and ſup-
ply ſome omiſſions to be found in that
edition.

As many towns and villages i in almoſt

Z every province of France are mentioned
in this work, and as ſeveral of theſe were
the ſcenes of great tranſactions; it was
thought that a map of that kingdom
might be of uſe, for illuſtrating the geo-
graphy, and ſhewing the diſtances of
places. An accurate map 18 according. y

on

M. DET ECTLUsELs PR EA CE.

HE Memoirs of Sally have. always
been ranked among the beſt books
we have, This truth being eſtabliſhe
ed long ago, by the judgment of all our good
critics, and of all the lovers of literature, I

may fave myſelf the trouble of a diſcuſſion,
uſeleſs to thoſe who know the book, _

With regard to thoſe who have never read
theſe Memos, it is ſufficient to give them an

idea of the work, to ſay, that they comprehend

the hiſtory of what paſſed from the peace in
1570, to the firſt year of Lewis XIII. chat is
to ſay, the ſpace of more than forty years; a
criod that has furniſhed the molt copious mat-

er to the hiſtorians of ovr r monarchy; and that
the ey treat of the reign, or, to {peak more pro-
perly, of almoſt the whole life of Henry the
Great. Theſe Memoirs preſuppoſe, indeed,

ſome knowledge of the preceding troubles, —

which are only occaſionally mentioned; but
they diſplay all the ſucceeding events in the
moſt minute detail. Events equally numerous
and diverſiſied; wars, foreign and civil; inter-
eſts of ſtate aid religion; maſte erpieces of ſtate-
adminiſtration; unexpedtcd diſcoveries; efforts
of ambition ; ſtratagems of policy; See

and negotiations; are all to be found here, and

are but a part of what the book contains.
The Memoirs of Sully derive another, per-

baps a {till greater value, from an infinitude of

Tok Þ b „ Ts

6 The French Editor's PR EFA E.
more par ticular recitals, which are not the pro-
vince of hiſtory, but an advantage peculiar to
memoirs. They admit a multiplicity of ſub-
jects, and all the variety of incidents which one
pleaſes to introduce; and, moreover, they are
not ſubjected to the vol ce that neceſſity has im-
poſed upon hiſtory, to omit nothing of thoſe
over-general things, in writing of which a man
feels himſelf perfectly diſguſted,

Would one give a thorough knowledge of
the prince he is about to ſpeak of? The pic-
ture of his private life muſt inceſſantly be com-
pared with that of his public life. He mult

__ exhibit him in the midſt of his courtiers, with

E ————1ͥITl“ͤ⸗ . —— 2 ———— — ̃ .

:

|

g |
|

?

N

.

SY

his domeſtics, in the moments when he obſerves
himſelf leaſt; and eſtabliſh his character by his
letters and his converſation. The paſſions de-
lineate themſelves better by a ſimple word, re-
lated as it was originally ſpoken, than by all
the art which an hiſtorian can employ, This
idea of memoirs is ſo perfectly anſwered by
thoſe of Sully, with regard to the prince who
is the principal ſubject of them, that it is not till
after having read them, that one truly knows
Henry IV. What they exhibit to us of this
great prince, in his good as well as his bad for-
tune, viewed as a private man or a king, as a
Warrior or as a politician : ; in fine, as a huſband,
father, friend, Sc. is marked with traits ſo
ſenſible, that one cannot keep himſelf from
being intereſted in the particularities of his life,
even the moſt indifferent. At the moſt, I can
only except ſome military e perhaps a 1
tic

2
1
5
A
2
us {Fn
» 38
” he” 7
WF
ne
6
f

N

(

cc

cel

c

"THe French Editor's PREFACE. = 5

tle too frequent in the beginning of the work,
and a ſmall number of others leſs pleaſing;
though otherwiſe theſe recitals are always con-
nected with the public affairs, and diverſified,

like all the reſt, with the part which w as. borne.
in them by the Duke of Sully, |
He is, ſo to ſpeak, the ſecond actor; ? SY

this double action makes no breach in the unity

_ of intereſt, if I may here be permitted this ex-
_ preſſion, becauſe that this minilter fays almoſt no-
thing of himſelf, which has not ſome relation to
the ſtate, or to the perſon of his maſter. The read-
er will, doubtleſs, be pleaſed toknow what judg-
ment was formed of theſe Memoirs when they
firſt began io fee the light; and I ſhall give

him information from the author of an old dil

courſe, to be found among the MSS. [ vol. 590.]
of the King's library. One of the moit

beautiful images of human prudence and fi-
« delity,” fays he, © is to be found in the ac-
count left to the public, by the Duke of

“ Sully, in theſe two volumes, of the nature
of the counſels he had given, and of the

number of the ſervices he had done, to his

king and benefactor, as well for the particu-

lar glory of his perſon, as for the proſperity -
* of his kingdom. And, in truth, the for-

tune of Henry the Great, and the virtue of

S-.-- C6

his prime miniſter, are two things which ap-
pear alternately, or, more properly, go hand
in hand. The miniſter, in this work, ſerves
and obliges the King, in all the ways that a
great prince can receive ſervice or obligation

V

ce

cc

1
+3
f

:

74
=_
[ :
5
; N
4
3
.
5
& :
:
:
F
1
? *
1
109
is
1
i
t
1
Fi
|
i
L .
1.
1
*
i
$
1
0
| |
£

wk Ss _—
2 — ⁵qĩuà—u—lĩL— Ro 7 PT

| 8 | The French Editor”: 8 Parr ACE.

1

„

from a ſubject, with bis hand, his courage,

his ſword, and even with his blood, and
* Hig wounds, by his valour or diſcretion, as oc-

* caſion required. But he particularly ſerved

e him in his council and cabinet, with the

greateſt good - ſenſe and molt quick-fighted
penetration, the moſt uncommon diſintereſt-

«© edneſs and the moſt f. ngular ſincerity, that

* has ever been known in the biltories, e either
* of our own or of other countries.“
It is natural, in the reign of a prince like

Henry IV. to look for great generals, pro-

and politicians, and able miniſters; bur what

muſt ſurpriſe us is, to find in the ſame perſon,
the warrior, the politician, the wiſe manager of

buſi neſs, the ſure and ſevere friend, as well as

the intimate confident and favourite of his ma-

ſter And what muſt appear {till more uncom-
mon, is to ſee, in a work where the actions of

two ſuch extraordinary perſons are collected af-

ter their deaths, a great king reduced to conquer
his own kingdom, occupied with a miniſter,
in his way, not leſs great, in contriving means

to make his undertakings ſucceſsful; labouring
afterwards, in concert with him, to render this

ſame kingdom not only peaceable but flou-
riſhing, regulating the linances, founding trade,

eſtabliſhing the police, and, in ſhort, recover-

ing every part of the government from confu⸗

ſion.
In this work fog are : compriſed two T%

luſtrious lives, mutually accompanying, en-

lighteuing, and embelliſhing « one another; that

of

T he French Editor” 8 PREFACE. 9

of a king, and that of a miniſter, „his confident,
nearly of the ſame age, carried on from the in-

fancy of both to the death of the firſt, and to |
the time when the ſecond ſaw himſelf removed

from the management of affairs.

Add to this, that theſe Memoirs of Gull: ”
are yet further recommended by excellent prin-
ciples of morality, by civil and political maxims

derived from truth, and by an infinite number
of views, projects, and regulations, of almoſt

every kind, with which they are filled. He

« alone” (lays the ſame cotemporary author,

ipeaking of the Duke of Sully) © firſt diſco-
vered the union of two things, which our fa-
thers not only could not accommodate, but
« even imagined utterly incompatible; the in-

« creaſe of the King's revenue, and the eaſe

“ and relief of the people. He that would

have an idea of a good ſubject and an iacor-

8 ruptible miniſter of ſtate, muſt look for
it in this picture, where he will ſee oeco- _

„ nomy in its beſt light, and policy in all its

* advantages; the art of uſing and the art of
gaining power; the ſcience of reigning as a
e man, and that of reigning as a 1 ing; tho
fineſt inſtructions and the richeſt exam ples 01
morality are here exhauſted, and the whole
ſupported and adorned by a knowledge of e-

very thing, from the higheſt arts, to mechan 2

6c © occupations.”

I fay it again, that as far as L Law the ſe⸗
vereſt critics are not at this very day of a much
aiterent way of thinking. One need only con-

b 3 . - ys

10 The French Editor's Parracs. |

ſult the Abbot Le Laboureur, in his additions

” the Memoirs of Caſtlenau, vol. 2. book

. 687,; Father Le-Long; and a mul-
345 of modern writers: for who is there
that does not cite with eulogiums the Memoirs
of Sully, as the firſt political treatiſe that has

ſhew us the real power of this kingdom, that

contains almoſt all that has been done by
| Richelieu, Mazarine, and Colbert; and which,
in a word, is to be conſidered as the moſt pro-
Per ſchool of the art of government: r

In the remaining tart of the preface, the
French editor gives a particular account of his

edition, and of the various editions which Sully” s
Memoirs have borne in France, But as this
_ would afford very little inflirufion or entertain»

ment to any reader, it bas veen thought proper
1 drop ib altogether, _

r

SUMMARY of Book l.
Emoirs from the year 1570 to 1580. State
of affairs in the council of France, and thoſe
of the Calviniits, at the peace of. 1570. Roſny's

extraction, and anecdotes of the houſe of Bethune.

Some account of the birth, education, and early

years, of the Prince of Navarre. Idea of the go-

vernment under Henry II. Francis II. and during

the firſt years of the reign of Charles IX. Artifice

of Queen Catherine of Medicis to ruin the Hugue-
nots. Roſny engages himſelf in the ſervice of the
King of Navarre, and follows him to Paris. Death
of the Queen of Navarre. The wounding of Ad-
miral Coligny, and other cauſes of ſuſpicion which
the court gave to the Proteſtants. Profound diſſi-

mulation of Charles IX. Maſſacre of St Bartholo-

mew ; a particular relation of this event. Obſer-

| vations and reflections upon it. The conduct of

Charles IX. and Admiral Coligny. In what manner «
the King of Navarre and Roſny eſcaped being maſ-

facred. Education of Roſny. The Calviniſts re-

ſume courage, and retrieve their affairs. Flight of
the Prince of Conde. Impriſonment of the princes.
The inſurrection of Shrove Tueſday. Death of
Charles IX. His character. Henry III. returns to
France, and declares war againſt the Huguenots.

Flight of Monſieur and the King of Navarre. The
Queen-mother deceives them by the peace called
the peace of Monſieur. The war is renewed. Mi-
litary rencounters, and taking of cities. Roſny? 8
friſt exploits in arms. The peace of 1577. Con-
ferences between the Queen- mother and che King

1 83 U M M A R N

of Navarre. More military expeditions. Taking

of Cahors, &c. Faults committed by Roſny.

8 U M M AR 1 of Boo K IT.

"Memoirn bom the year 1580 to the year 1587.

| Affairs of Flanders. The United Provinces offer
their crown to Monſieur: he goes to Holland;

Roſny attends him. The taking of Cateau-Came

breſis, Gc. Monſieur ſurpriſes the citadel of Cam-
| bray : he goes to England; returns to France; is
hated by the Dutch and the Proteſtants, on ac-
_ eount of the treachery attempted by him at Ant-
werp ; diſconcerted by the Prince of Orange.

Roſny diſſatisfied with Monſieur, who finding all

his ſchemes biaſted, returns to France. Roſny re ·
turns likewiſe, after having viſited the city of Be-
thune. Spain makes offers to the King of Na-

varre. Roſny ſent to the court of France by the

King of Navarre: he viſits Monſieur. Death of
that prince. Roſny? s ſecond j journey to Paris, and

negotiation there: his marriage. Domeſtic em-

ployments. Origin, formation, and progreſs of
the league. Henry III. joins the league againſt the

King of Navarre. Diviſions in the Calviniſt party;

the views of its chicfs. Roſny is again ſent to Pa-
vis by the King of Navarre, to obſerve the motions
of the league. An attempt upon Angers ; fails.
A dangerous journey taken by Roiny, The Prince
of Conde in extreme peril. The King of Navarre
in great perplexities. Military expeditions. Roſny
negotiates an alliance between the two kings. The
taking of Talmont, Fontenay, c. Roſny goes to
viſit and aſſiſt his wife, during the calamity of the
plague. Fruitleſs interviews between the Queen-

mother and the King of Navarre. A ſeries of mi-
Hur expeditions. Roſoy defeats one of the ene-
my*s

of Paris.
aſſaſſination.
the perplexing ſituation of this prince.
pPoſitions of the ſeveral officers in the royaliſt army
With reſpect to him. my ſurpriſes Meulan. Mi-
litary expeditions.
battle of Arques, at Which Roſny was preſent.
Skirmiſhes at Pollet.
An attempt upon Paris.
of different places.
moirs. Siege of M eulan.

ed e xii
my's a Other ſucceſſes of the Caleiniſts;

a declared perſecution againſt them. Madame de
Roſny in great danger. Rolny's ſecret Journey to

Pais. The Duke of Joycuſe leads an army into

Poitou, and is beat by the King of Navarre at Cou-

| tras 3 a particular account of this battle. ;

SUMMARY of Book III.

-Memoirs from the year 1 BY to the year [ 590. co.

Errors committed by the King of Navarre and te

Proteſtants, after the battle of Coutras. Secret de-
ſigns of the Prince of Conde, the Count of Soiſſons,
and the Viſcount Turenne. Death of the Prince of 2
Conde ; obſervations upon his death. The battle
of the Barricades, and the conſequences ; reflec-
tions upon this event. The Duke and Cardinal of

_ Guiſe aſſaſſinated; reflettions and obſervations on

this occaſion. _ Death of Catherine de Medicis,

The puſillanimity of Henry III. with reſpect to the
league. Roſny negotiates a treaty of alliance be-
| tween the two kings; the diſguſt he receives upon
this occaſion.

Interview of the two kings. The
Duke of Malenne fits down before Tours; mili-

_ tary exploits on both ſides. Battle of Foſſeuſe, ar*
Which Roſny is preſent.

Roſny. Military ſucceſſes of the two kings, Siege
Death of Henry III.; particulars of this
Henry IV. aſks counfel of Roſny ;

The dif.

A particular account of the

Henry IV. often in danger.
Rencounters and fieges
Digreſſions upon thoſe Me-
A Spanith army in

France, Roſny defends Paſſi. The battle of Ivry z
_— 1

Death of Madame to |

b n K K .
particulars of this battle. Roſny often in great

danger; is wounded in ſeveral places; he is car-

ried by his own orders to Roſny: Henry IV.'s af.
fectionate behaviour to him chere. © 45

SUMMARY of Book IV.

Memoirs from 1590 to 1592. A mutiny in
Henry's army after the battle of Ivry ; diſſipations

of the finances, and other cauſes of the little ad-

vantages he derived from it. Cities taken. At-

tempts on others; diſappointed. The taking of

the ſuburbs of Paris; the ſiege of this city ; par-

ticulars relating to this ſiege ; the cauſes which

obliged Henry to raiſe it. T he Prince of Parma
leads an army thither : his incampment, and other

military details. An error committed by Henry:

he obliges the Prince of Parma to retire. The
ſiege of Chartres. An adventure wherein Roſny is

in danger of being killed: he retires to Roſny in
diſcontent. Succeſs of Henry IV/s arms. The

taking of Corbie, Noyon, &c. An enterpriſe up-
on Mante. The Duke of Montpenſier's expedi-

tions in Normandy. Preparations for the ſiege of

Rouen; errors committed at this ſiege. Mutual

animoſities between the ſoldiers and officers of

Henry's army. Attacks, aſſaults, and other parti»
culars of this ſiege. The Prince of Parma comes
again with an army into France. The inſolence

of the council of ſixteen, Henry advances to meet

the Prince of Parma. An enterpriſe boldly ſe-

conded by the Duke of Nevers. The battle of Au-
male; particulars of this battle, and obſervations
upon it. Henry raiſes the ſiege of Rouen: marches,

incampments, rencounters, and battles, betwixt him

and the Prince of Parma, in the neighbourhood of
Rouen. Obſervations upon theſe battles. A glo-
rious exploit of the Prince of Parma at the paſſage

of the Seine. Henry's army refuſes to purſue him;

the cauſes of this refulal ; and reflection upon it.

S U M-

it; and their views.
vice. The wiſe and cautious conduct obſerved by
them both. Converſations betwixt them, wherein
Rony prevails upon him to change his religion.
Henry ſounds the Proteſtants upon this reſolution.
Roſny's conference with Bellozane, the two Du-
rets, and Du- Perron.
league to Henry; with what deſign; rejected.
The meeting of the ſtates of Paris.
the Prince of Parma's badly, executed. Diſunion
of the Catholic chiefs in theſe ſtates :
trigues and artifices to ſupplant each other. The
parliament of Paris publiſhes an arret.
of its members for the honour of the crown.
The truce.
Henry in profiting of the diſſenſions among the

cChiefs of the league. Conduct of Villeroi and

Jeannin.
vice. The ſiege of Dreux;
means. Henry removes all obſtacles to bis con-
verſion. Particulars relating to his abjuration. 5

4 ry with regard to the Pope, Spain, the league,

— LT WNAKE xy
SUMMARY of BOOK V.

Memoirs from 1592 to 1593. A ſuceinct ac-
count of the ſtate of affairs in the provinces of

France during the years 1591 and 1592. Intrigues
carried on by the Count of Soiſſons: his character.
An abridgment of the Duke of Epernon's hiſtory: his
diſobedience; his character. Several parties formed in
the ſouthern provinces of France: a ſhort account of
What paſſed there.

ſiege of Eperni, where Marechal Biron is lain : his
ceulogium. Death of the Prince of Parma. Rof-
ny marries again, and retires in diſcontent. The

The ſiege of Villemur. The

cauſe of it. He intercepts the memoirs of the

negociations between Spain and the league. A
detail and examen of thoſe papers.

A third par-
ty formed in France: the perſons who compoſe
Henry follows Roſny's ad-

Conditions offered by the
A project of
their in-
The zeal

The great wiſdom and ability of

Roſny gives the King very prudent ad-
taken by Roſny's

SUMMARY of BO OR VI.
Memoirs from 1593 to 1594. Conduct of Hens

and

— — — — — — — * — ER
ST r — — — — — —
: hon 2 n . — 4
. N — . 5 92 2 * — —

— —

8 mu n
— —.— — - Wh _ =
> — —
FP . mnt 5a” 2:
"

— — — -

— — — — — - ——
—. 40 4 4

— — — R

In $ UM MAR v.

and the Hogenots, after his ao. Another
truce. Artifices of Spain. Barriere's attempt up-

on the life of Henry. The Jeſuits accuſed and
cleared of this crime. Roſny begins a negocia-

tion with admiral Villars, to diſengage him from

the party of the league. Feſcamp ſurpriſed by a
very extraordinary method, A diſpute raiſed about
this fort. Several cities ſurrender to Henry. Roſe
ny's Journey to Rouen: a detail of his negocia-
tions with Villars. The character of that govern-
or. Roſny is employed by Henry to effect a re.

conciliation betwixt the Duke of Montpenſier and

the Count of Soiſſons, and to break off the mar-
riage of the latter with the Princeſs Catharine. He

viſits the Ducheſs of Aumale at Anet. A farther

account of his negociations with Villars, Medavy,
and others. The treaty with Villars, after many
obſtacles, concluded. Henry is received into Pa-

ris. Circumſtances relating to this reduction. Se-

veral inſtances of the generoſity and clemency of
this prince. An accommodation with Villeroi. Roſ-
ny's third journey to Rouen. Villars ſends away
the deputies of Spain and the league. The cere-

mony with which Rouen was ſurrendered to the
King. The conditions upon which Rofny conſents
to receive any gratuities. Villars comes to court.
An inſtance of Henry's generoſity. Lyons ſubmits
to the King, notwithſtanding the endeavours of the

Duke de Nemours to the contrary. Poitiers, Cam-

| bray, and other cities do the ſame. The taking of

La-Capelle by the Spaniards. The ſiege of Laon

commences. The affairs which oblige Roſny to
return to Paris: his converſation with The Cardinal

of Bourbon: he ſupports the Jeſuits in their pro-

ceſs with the univerſity and curates of Paris: he
returns to the ſiege of Paris. A farther account

of the ſiege. Henry's indefatigable labours there.

A great convoy of Spaniards defeated by Biron.
Roſny preſent at this rencounter. The King diſ-

pleated with Biron. The Spaniards endeavour 1 in
vain to throw Apples into Laon.

"= — IR
—_— 3 ;
n 7 N 5 Ee 1 _w ; . .

M E M 0 = R 8

.

B G © K ; 1.

HE court of Charles IX. flattered itſelf,
that the calamities which had happened
to the Reformed under the preceding
reigns, would finally compel them either

5 55 to ſubmit to the will of the King, or to abandon

the kingdom. The death of the Prince of Conde *,

3 their chief, the loſs of two great battles +, the utter
_ diſperſion of their ſoldiers, and the ſmall likelihood
cf ever being able to reinſpire with vigour the fee-

ble remains of troops diſpirited by a long ſeries of

ill ſucceſs, all conſpired to make the court believe,
that their ruin was now become unavoidable, But
ga a courage ſuperior to all events, ſupported them
in circumſtances fo deprefling. They recollected
-* their ſoldiers, who were diſperſed all over the pro-
Lvinces; and they began again to draw near to Bur-
gundy, Bourbon, and Berry. La-Charite was ap -
pointed for the place of their general rendezvous;

* Lewis I. brother of Antony King of Navarre, and ſon of

Cbarles of Bourbon, Duke of Vendome. He was taken priſoner at.

the batile of Jarnac in 1569, and murdered by a piſtol-ſhot in the
beck part of his head, by the Baron de Monteſquieu. The Duke
ot Anjou was accuſed of having ordered this gentleman to aſſaſſinate
the Prince of Condé. „ |

＋ Jarnac and Moncontour.

A . Vezelai .

LS
„

— * — —ͤ— — 3 I
— 2 gas -
ae 28 1 . 4 ; IEG
= WH 1 5 *** It *
— es — — — — 1 * 4 Ws
——— — — — —p—̃ů— — —
— —

2 — Fe

= =P

ed —
>= — e eaſe
- .

KR Keene ages a 4

J!. oe by ot 2 «©

Vezelai, and ſome other towns in that neighbour.
hood, were ſtill in their intereſts. They had even
the boldneſs to promiſe themſelves, they ſhould
| ſpread the alarm as far as Paris, as ſoon as they
received a conliderable ſupply of horſe and foot,

which they were made to expect from Germany,
The notice of this gave a good deal of inquie-

| tude to the Queen-mother, Catherine de Medicis.
She imagined, however, that it would be eaſy to
| hinder this junction, and afterwards to diſperſe
troops which ſhe believed to be already under

conſternation. For this purpoſe ſhe ordered a
mighty army to put in motion. Strozzy, La-

_ Chitre, Tavannes *, La-Valette, and all the general
officers in France, were deſirous of ſerving in it;
and the Marechal de Coſse, who was to have the
command, was intoxicated with the glory he
ſhould acquire, by exterminating even to the

very laſt Huguenot ſoldier, and bringing the chiefs

of the party bound hand and foot to the Queen»
mother. He very ſoon altered his ſentiments. The

Proteſtant army received him with intrepidity ;

they were always the firſt to offer the battle; in
the ſkirmiſhes, which were frequent, the advan-
tage was wholly on their ſide; and they even ob-
' tained a ſort of victory at the encounter of Arnai- -
le- duc r. So much obſtinacy convinced the Queen-

mother,

0 Tavannes, a marechal of France, had been page to Francis I. and
was at that time one of the counſellors and confidents of Catherine

de Medicis. © In the night of St Bartholomew,” ſays the author

of the Henriade, “ he ran through the ſtreets of Paris, crying, Let
« blood, let blood; bleeding is as good in the month of Auguſt as in
« May. His ſon, who has written his memoirs, relates, that his
« father, when on deathbed, made a general confeſſion of the ſins ß

4 his life; after which his confeſſor ſay ing to him, with an air of aſto- 5 |
„ niſhment, Why! you ſpeak not a word of St Bartholomew. I look _

« upon that, replied the Marechal, as a meritorious action, which
« ought to atone for all the ſins I have ever committed.” 25 5
+ It was thought, that the Marechal de Coſsẽ would beat the Hu-

%%% FS L. e
mother, that to ſubdue the Proteſtant party, ſhe
muſt have recourſe to other meaſures than war.
Treachery appeared to her the ſureſt method; and,
in order to have time to concert it, ſhe liſtened ſo
favourably to propoſals of an accommodation, that
a peace was concluded when it was leaſt expected,
and upon conditions perfectly advantageous for the
Huguenots. This was the peace of 1570*. After
which, during the ſpace of two years, each party

© taſted the ſweets of a repole, that had been equally

deſired by bot.

My father + retired to his houſe of Roſny, and
employed himſelf in ſettling his domeſtic affairs. As
it is the hiſtory of my own life, jointly with that of
the prince whom I ſerved, that is to make the ſub -

guenot army, or at leaſt prevent its approaching Paris. He did nei ·

ther; on the contrary, he was obliged to retreat after a very briſk.
encounter, and from thenceforward contented himſelf with watching
the motions of the enemy. In this fight, the Calviniſts were com-
manded by the Prince of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde, his cou-
ſin german, the one ſixteen, the other ſeventecn years of age, and
by the Admiral de Coligny. Matthieu (vol. 1. book 5. p. 327.) re-
lates theſe words of Henry IV. after he had mounted the throne,

Speaking of this encounter of Arnai-le-duc : © My fir(t exploits in

10

arms,” ſaid this prince, were at René- le- due, where the queſtion
«

was, Whether I ſhould. fight or retire? I had no retreat nearer ,
than forty miles; and it I ſtaid, I ſhould be at the diſcretion of
% the peaſants. By fighting, I ran the riſk of being taken or ſlain
for | had no artillery, and the King's forces had. A cavalier was
killed within ten paces of me by a ſhot from a culverin. Re-
commending the lucceſs of that day to God, he made it favour-
6 able and happy.” In this fame year the Hugvenots gained the
battie of Lugon, and took Marennes, the iſle of Oleron, Brouage,

"=

aa
© =

 YRaintes, Cc. |

* By this treaty of peace, they were put in poſſeſſion of many |

privileges, of which they had been deprived. The number of their
1 churches was augmented, and four cities were given them for ſecu-
_— nity, viz. La-Rochelle, Moniauban, Cognac, and La-Charte, This
peace, which was ſigned Aug. 11. was called the lame and ill founded

+ peace, becauſe it was concluded, in name of the King, by Biron,

ho was lame, and by N. de Melmes, Lord of Malzftiie, which in

3
*
3
1
**

*

2 2
X FE te
9 —

© French ſignifies ill ſounded.

f Francis de Bethune, Baron de Roſny, who died in 1575.

A 2 ject

n
—
2 ef

;
x!
43
}
; FL BY
.
1 :
; ö
4
1 }
4 (
' $
1 i ,
_
:
0 Ul», &
2 * tif 1
14 $3
A . 4
| p
7 *
1 \
FEB
© *
in
a] 1 27
IIe
19 :
f
. 1 +
:
: Bs
1
U 4
1
9 :
i
10
„
1 374
Y 1B 5
i in
137 ; |
5
345.1
16
7
5
* .
1
LL *
:
+
1 4 +
£278
0 ,
4 1
iT +
: J
13
1 5 *
? 1
f "1
1
os;
7 i
18
oP a”
$0
. 4
4.46
i ;
Nie
z
Tk
14 x
14
14
1738
2?
; '
| 4
y ;
\ :
4
3 .
- 2
. 14
*
5610
2 #
$ |
0 .
5 7
7 5
11 1
; :
| 23
4 ?
7, 3832
f 9
1 *
3 55
"i
1
3 *
=
' E U
«+ BY
1 to
oF —
9
1
q
.
\-x ©
+ 1M
F 13; 7
9 7 -
2 13
13
*
1
Wy
7
Jt
? !

* 2
177
3

f 1
*
- $0 |
+ #8
_
: ©
i a
ee
7 d
_
7 F%
o i 4
i
jp
Ve
. b
Gs
}
{1
iP
!
iF
_ :
* U
.

"9 1 nos,
2 -

— ws
pe

4 MEMOIRS: Book I.

ject of theſe memoirs, I ought to give ſome account
of my family and perſon. While in this I indulge
the curiolity of the public, I beg it would be belie-
ved, that I do it without vanity or affectation. It
is the obligation I am under to adhere ſtrictly to

truth, that induces me to relate every thing that

will appear advantageous to me in this e or in

the progreſs of my memoirs. |

Maximilian is my Chriſtian name, and Bethune
that of my family, which derives its origin, by the
houſe of Coucy, from the ancient houſe of Auſtria,
which is diſtinét from the preſent houſe of Auſtria
that is in poſſeſſion of the empire of Germany, and

the two Spains. This laſt is deſcended only from
the Counts of Habſburg and Quiburg, private gen-
tlemen, who three hundred years ago were in the

ay of the cities of Straſburg, Baſil, and Zurich,

and would have counted it their high honour io

have been ſtewards to ſuch a prince as the King of

France; ſince Raoul, chief of this ſecond houſe of
h Auſtria, was In a fimilar office under Ottocar King
of Bohemia. But it is from the ſon of this Raoul,

that the new ſtock of Auſtria properly begins, for

he took the name of Auſtria inſtead of his own.

The houſe of Bethune (which has given its name
to a city of Flanders, and from whence iſſued the
counts that anciently governed that province) boaſts
of one Robert de Bethune, patron * of the church
of Arras, whole father and grandfather, bearing

alſo the name of Robert, were declared protectors
of the province of Ar tois. One of theſe two Ro-
berts de Bethune ſignalized himſelf in France, by
the taking of La-Roche-vandais, a place of ſtrength

upon the confines of Auvergne, Whither the rebel

Emerigot Marcel had retired ; and the other in the
wars of Sicily, by killing, with his own hand, the

»The title of patron of the church was then ſo noble, that many

ſovereigns thought i is an honour to be NN en by it.

tyrant

1 tyrant | Mitafioy,. in bins of the two armies.

In reward of which ſervice, Charles of Anjou, the
rival of Mainfroy, very juſtly gave him his daughter
Catherine in marriage. They mention a fourth

Robert de Bethune, who gained a ſea-fight over the
infidels in the Mediterranean. In the church, a

James de Bethune, Biſhop of Cambray, at the time

pf the croiſade of the Albigeois; and a John de Be-

thune, Abbot of Anchin near Valenciennes, who _

died in the year 1250, with the character of ſanc -
_ tity, and whoſe relics are revered as thoſe of a mar-

tyr. The hiſtory of the croiſades has taken notice
of thoſe of the family who diſtinguiſhed themſelves
at the taking of Jeruſalem, by being the firſt that

; mounted the breach. Antony and Cotine de Be-
thune, treading the ſteps of their anceſtors, were

alſo the firſt who mounted the ſtandard upon the

walls of Conſtantinople, when Baldwin, Count of
Flanders, carried this capital from Alexis Comne-
bus; and Cotine obtained the government of it.

| Whoever has ſuch domeſtic examples as theſe,

N 5 cannot recall them too often to his mind, to ani-
mate himſelf to follow them. Happy, if during
the courſe of my life, I have been able to demean _
my ſelf in ſuch a manner, that fo many illuſtrious
men need not diſdain to acknowledge me, and that

I need not my ſelf bluſh at being deſcended from

them.

In progreſs of time the houſe of Bethune | inerca-

ſed yet more in eminence. It allied itſelf with al-
mwmoſt all the ſovereign houſes in Europe; it entered
into that of Auſttria; and to conclude with what
_. does it infinitely more honour, the auguſt houſe of
Bourbon did not contemn its alliance.

But I ought alſo to acknowledge, that. the

branch from which I am deicended, had then loſt
much of its primitive ſplendor. 1 his branch is the
1 ue of a younger brother, and the leaſt ſubſtantial

4 3 of

S-:. --M EMO 1K $ : Baok?,
of all thoſe who have borne this name. The eldeſt
branch having three times fallen into the female
line, all the great eſtates it poſſeſſed in different parts
of Europe, did not go to the collateral branches,
but went with the daughters to the royal houſes.
J "ga
My particular anceſtors, by marrying advanta-
_ geoufly, did not fail to reſtore to their branch
What was wanting to enable it to fupport the name
with dignity : but all theſe riches were almoſt en-
tirely diſſipated by the bad management and prodi-
gality of my grandfather, who left nothing to his ſon,
who is my father, but the eſtate of Anne de Melun

= wife, of which it was not in his power to deprive
As to my perſonal concerns: At the time which
1 ſpeak of, I entered into my eleventh year, being
born the 13th of December 1560. Although I
was only the fecond of four male children that my
father had, yet the natural indiſpoſitions of my

eldeſt brother made my father look upon me as him A

who muſt be head of his family; and all the

marks of a ſtrong complexion argued with him =

ſtill more in my favour. My parents bred me in
the opinions and doctrine of the Reformed, and I
bave continued conſtantly in the profeſſion of them:
neither threats, promiſes, diverſity of events, not
even the change of the King my protector, joined
to his moſt tender ſolicitations, have ever been able
10 make me renounce heãemn.
Henry King of Navarre “*, who will have the 7
VV a EH Os principal

* The houſe of Bourbon, (ſays Voltaire, in his Eſfay on the civil
_ wars), from Lewis IX. to Hen y IV. had been almoſt always neg-
lected; and was reduced to ſuch poverty, that the famous Prince of
Condé, brother to Antony King of Navarre, and uncle to Henry the
Great, had no more than 600 livres a-year for his patrimony. But

| Matthieu {Hiſt, of Hen. IV. vol. 2· PI. K 2. tells Us, that the n

„ r

+. Ts
l ,

rincipal ſhare in theſe memoirs, was ſeven years
older than I, and when the peace of 1570 was con-
cluded, entered into his eighteenth year“. A ge-
nerous, open, and engaging countenance ; an ealy,
blithe, and ſprightly manner; and a ſingular ad-
dreſs in all the exerciſes peculiar to his age, incli-
ned all hearts to {ide with him. He began early + to
give indications of the great talents for war, which
bave ſo highly diſtinguiſhed him among other prine
ces. Vigorous and indefatigable, (thanks to the edu-
of Bourbon was then in poſſeſſion of a revenve of more than

$00,000 livres a year in lands only, which was at that time thought

a very ample fortune. It is certain, that this was all it poſſeſſed of
the ancient cſtate of Bourbon, or even of the houſe of Moncade, the
maternal ſtock ; the eſtates of theſe two houſes, which came by very _
opulent and illuſtrious alliances, being alienated to purchaſe the viſ-
county of Narbonne. See Cayet's new chron. vol. 1. book 1. p. 23.
* He was born at Pau in Bearn, Dec. 13. 1553. Percfixe relates
ſome very curious particulars concerning his birth. Henry d'Albret,
his grandfather, made his daughter promiſe to ſing a ſong to him
while ſhe was in labour; in order, faid he, that you may bring me 2
child that will neither weep nor make wry faces. The Princeſs pro.
miſed, and had ſo much courage as, in the midſt of her pains, to

keep her word; and ſang a ſong in Bearnois, her own country-lan=

guage, as ſoon as ſhe heard her father entered her chamber.
The child came into the world without weeping or crying. His
grandfather carried him to his own apartment; rubbed his little lips £
with a clove of garlick, and made him ſuck a drop of wine out of
a gold cup, in order to render his conſtitution ſtrong aud vigorous,
Perefixe, p. 1. Cayet, vol. 1. book 1. p. 241. | $
+ This young prince, when only thirteen years of age, had judg-
ment to diſcern the faults of the Prince of Conde, and the Admiral
de Coligny. He was of opinion, and with great juſtice, that, at the
great (kirwiſh at Loudoun, if the Duke of Anjou had had troops in
readineſs to attack them, he would have done it: that he did not do

it, but choſe to retire, was an evidence of his bad condition, and

therefare they ſhould have attacked him; but this they neglected,
and ſo gave time for all his troops to join him. At the battle of
Jarnac, he repreſented to them as judicivuſly, that they had not a

> favourable opportunity tor fighting, becauſe the forces of the princes

were ſcattered, and thoſe of the Duke of Anjou all joined: but they
were tuo far engaged to retire. At the batttle of Moncontour, when _
he was but ſixteen years of age, he cried out, We loſe our advantage,
and conſequently the battle. Pere, ibid. e |

cation

n e .
cation of his infancy ), labour was his element, and
he ſeemed to wait with impatience for occaſions of

He was brought up in the caſtle of Coaraſſe in Bearn, ſituated
_ amidſt rocks and mountains. Henry d'Albret would have him clo-
thed and fed like other children in that country, and even accuſtom-
cd to run up and down the rocks. It is ſaid, that his ordinary food
Vas brown bread, beef, cheeſe, and garlick; and that he was often

made to walk barefoot and bareheaded. Peref. ib. TS
| While he was in the cradlc, he was called Prince of Viane. A

little time after, they gave him the title of Duke of Beaumont, and
afterwards that of Prince of Navarre. The Queen of Navarre, his
mother, took great care of his education, and aſſigned him for his
preceptor La-Gaucherie, a learned man, but a great Calviniit. :
Having while yet a child been preſented to Henry II. the King
| aſked him, if he would be his ſon. He is my father, replied the
little Prince, pointing to the King of Navarre. Well, ſaid the King,
will you be my ſon-in-law then ? Oh, with all my heart, anſwered
the Prince. From tha! time his marriage with the Princeſs May garct
Vas ſettled.-—— At Bayanne, the Duke de Medina, looking car neſtly
at him, ſaid, This prince either will, or ought to be an Emperor.

Cayet, vol. 1. book 1. p 240. _ | „
Me find, in the Memoirs of Nevers, ſome letters written, in
1567, by the principal magiſtrates of Buurdeaux, that contain ſcve-
ral very intereſting particulars concerning the perſon of young Henry.
« We have here the Prince of Bearn. It mult be confeſſed, that he

lis a pretty youth. At the age of thi!tcen, he has all the qualities

% of one of ciphteen or nineteen. He is agreeable, poiite, and en-
« paging. lie converſẽs with every body with an air Io eaſy, that he
« occalions a cicud to afſemble where-ever he is. He enters into
„ conveiſation like an accompliſhed gentleman; ſpeaks always to the
« purpoſe; and when the court happens to be the ſubject of diſcou:ſe,
&« it is caſy fo ſee that he is perfectly well acquainted with it, and
never ſays more nor leſs than he ought, in whatever place he is.
16 I ſhall all my life hate the new rel gion for having robbed us of ſo
« worthy a ſubject.“ And in another,“ Though his hair be a little
red, the ladies do not think him the leſs 2greeable for that. His
« face 1s finely ſhaped, his noſe neither too large nor tov {mail ; his
eyes full of ſweetneſs, bis ſkin brown, but very clear; and his
„ whole mien animated with an uncummon vivacity; fo that if he

« js not well with the ladies, he is very unfortunate.” Again, He
&« Jeycs diverſion and god cheer. When he wants money, he bas
e the addiefs to procure it, and that in a manner quite new, and e-
„ qually agreeable to himſcit as to others; viz. o thoſe, whether
„ men or women, whoni he believes his friends, he ſends a promiſ-
« {ory note, written and ſigned by himſelf, and prays them to end
 & him back the note, or the ſum containcd in it. Judge, if there
6 be a houſe that can refuſe him I is accounted an honour to have
a note from this prince,” Cc. vel. 2 p. 5 860.

acquiring

1571. . 9

acquiring glory. The crown of France not being as
pet an object upon which his deſires could be intent,
be loved to emertain himſelf with ſchemes of reco—
vering that of Navarre, which Spain had fo unjuſt-
ly uſurped upon his houſe; and he reckoned he
\ ſhould be able to accompliſh this end, by enter-
| taining ſecret intelligence with the Moors in Spain*x.
The enmity he bore to this power, was manifeſt;
it was born with him, and he was never at any pains
to conceal it. He felt his courage heated at the
relation of the battle of Lepanto +, which was
fought at this time, fo intenſely, that a ſimilar op-
portunity of ſignalizing himſelf againſt the infidels,
became one of his moſt ardent wiſhes, The vaſt
and flattering hopes which the diviners agreed in

making him conceive, were almoſt always preſent
to his mind. He ſaw the foundation of them in

that affeftion which Charles IX. early entertained _
for him, and which conſiderably increaſed a ſhort
time before his death: but all full as he was of
theſe happy preſages, he laboured to ſecond them
only in fecret, and never diſcloſed his thoughts to
any perſon but a ſmall number of intimate confi-

dents. VGVð/ „
In order to form a juſt idea, either of the gene-
ral ſtate of affairs in the government of France,
or of thoſe of the young Prince of Navarre in par-
ticular, and what he might have to hope or fear
in the times of which we are ſpeaking, it is necel-

ſüary ſuccinctly to relate the different ſteps taken
by the miniſtry, both before and after the death

WY » My ewe, faid Henry d'Albret, bas brought forth a lion, He add-
5 ed from a ſecret preſage, that the child would revenge him on Spain
for the injuries ſhe had done him. Peref. ib. N

+ Gained this year over the Turks by Don John of Auſtria, natu-
ral ſon to Charles V. aud generaliſlimo of the Spaniſh and Venetian

of

troops,

|

ME MOT R-9 een
of the King of Navarre his father“, ſlain be-
fore Rouen. I ſhall go back, therefore, to the

rupture that kindled the war between Henry II.
and Philip II. King of Spain. By which fide ſoever

it was occaſioned, the event was not ſo favour-
able to France, as it was convenient for the views
of the two men who had counſelled it. Theſe
were the Conſtable de Montmorency, and the Duke
de Guiſe, who hoped theſe troubles would furniſh

the means of reciprocally ſupplanting each other.

In this war there was ſufficient employment for

both the two. The Duke of Guiſe, at the head
of a ſtrong army, paſſed into Italy, where he per-
formed nothing worthy his reputation. But the
Conſtable did a great deal worſe. The moſt ſhi-
ning employment, which was the command of the

army in Flanders, he reſerved for himſelf, and loſt

St Quentin, with the battle of that name, where
he was taken priſoner himſelf. This defeat was

followed by that of Marſhal Thermes at Gravelines.

The Duke of Guiſe ſaw all his wiſhes completed
by theſe unfortunate events. He was recalled from
Italy, to put himſelf ſingly at the head of the coun-
cil and armies, with which he made an acquiſition

of Calais to France. The Conltable in his priſon

felt exquiſitely this blow; and to get off to detend
his rights at any rate, he treated of a peace with

Spain, It was not indeed honourable for the King

1 Antony de Bourbon, kpſhack of Jane PAlbret Queen of Navarre.

He turned Catholic. M. de Thou relates an anecdote of him,
| which we ſhall give in the words of ihe author of the Henriade,
| Franeis de Guiſe, ſays he, deſigned to aſſaſſinate him in the chamber

of Francis IT Antony of Navarte had a great deal of courage,

though his judgment was weak. He was informed of the plot,

yet went reſolutely into the chamber where it was to be exccuted.

If they murder me, ſaid he to Reinſy, one of his gentlemen, take
my bloody ſhirt, and carry it to my wife and ſon. They will learn
from my od what they ought to do to revenge me. Francis II.

durſt not (tin himſelt with this crime; and the Duke de Guile, at
leaving his chamber, cried out, What a poor King have we!

| bis

r

. 1
FTA 2 8 4

%o

his maſter, but it releaſed him from captivity. He

3 loſt every thing in the perſon of Henry II. who was

lain * amidſt the pomp of the marriage of his daugh -
ter with the King of Spain, which was the ſeal of the
peace. Francis II. who ſucceeded him, was young,
weak, and infirm; and as he had married the niece
bol the Duke of Guiſe , that nobleman came in his
turn ſingly to direct the King and the kingdom,
The Proteſtants could not have fallen into the hands
of a more cruel enemy, He was buſied in forming
vaſt projects, and meditating the ſtrangeſt cataſtro-
phes in France, when he himſelf did partake in the
Liciſſitudes of fortune. Francis II, failed him; a
diſeaſe of the ear + having put an end to the days
of this prince, in a manner abundantly ſudden.
> | The reign of Charles IX. his brother, yet an infant,
; was ſingular in this, that the authority ſeemed to
* be equally divided amongſt the Queen-mother, the
-- princes of the blood, the Guiles, and the Conſtable ;
inaſmuch as each of them ſecretly headed a ſepa-
rate party. The good deſtiny of the Duke of Guiſe
placed him a ſecond time at the head of affairs, by
the union that Catherine made with him. Upon
1 | this union ſhe even founded the principal part of
a ber politics; and it is pretended the hatred ſhe be-
F gan to ſhew towards the princes of Bourbon, had
1

3

FCC

0d „„ „
:

2 eee i Db ES SENS SZ: Ge Lag SS bY D
122 . * 7 N Na 8 55 8 8 <>: 72 2 AF. x
o „F 3 - + —

">, #

ga great ſhare in it. This averſion aroſe from her

having taken it into her head, upon the faith of an

aſtrologer, that none of the princes her ſons ſhould
e. have iſſue; upon which ſuppoſition the crown muſt
„ paſs to a branch of the houſe of Bourbon. She
could not reſolve to ſee it go out of her family, and

F Struck in the eye with a ſplinter of a Jance in a tournament,
Where he ran againſt the Count de Montgomery, July 10. 1559
I Mary Stuart, Queen of Scotland, daughter of James V. King
ol Scotland, and of Mary of Lorrain, of the houſe of Guiſe,
I The abſceſs that he had in this part turning to a mortification,
de died Dec. 5. 1560. No more was neceſſary to raiſe a ſuſpicion of
=. — | [therefore]

3
CEE

12 M E M O I R S. Bock 1.

[therefore] deſtined it to the poſterity of her daugh-
ter, who was married to the Duke of Lorrain.
Whatever there may be in this predilection of the
Queen mother *, it is certain it gave birth to two
parties in politics as well as religion, which began
from that moment to fill the kingdom with con-
fuſion, horror, and the moſt frightful calamities.

This terrible ſtorm would ſeem as if it had ga-
thered to break preciſely upon the head of the young
Prince of Navarre. The King of Navarre, his fa-
ther, was juſt then dead +. His death, indeed,

left a prince and a king to be head of the Reform-

ed religion in France : but this prince was a child
of ſeven years of age, expoſed to all the attacks of
the new council, who. atted in concert with the

Pope, the Emperor, the King of Spain, and all 1

the Catholics of Europe. In effect, this party ex-
perienced the moſt cruel reverſes; yet, by the wiſe
conduct of its chiefs, and the forward talents of
young Henry, it ſupported itſelf with glory till the

peace of 1570, at which period theſe Memoirs |

Commence.

Prince Henry made uſe of the quiet that was gi-

ven him, to viſit his eſtates, and his government of
 Guyenne : after which he came to ſettle in Rochelle,

* M. PAbbe le Laboureur, in his additions to the Memoirs of
Caſtelnau, aſſigns another reaſon for Catherine's hatred to the King
of Navarre. He aſſures us, he had read in ſome memoirs, that this
prince and the Duke d'Alengon being priſoners together, they con-
ſpited to ſtrangle the Queen-mother with their own hands, when ſhe
came into their chamber. This reſolution was not executed through

the horror they themſelves felt at the fact; and the King of Navarre
afterwards but ill concealing the ſecret, Catherine de Medicis was to
the laſt degree irritated againſt him. „ 5
I The author is miſtaken in placing the death of Antony King of
| Navarre in 1560: it did not happen till 1562, by a wound which he
received ai the ſiege of Rouen. See his charaéter and clogium in
the memoirs of Brantome, vol. 3. p. 242. 5 e 1

A yr, OO NV hn: wy

= —_ oats ts AY wes = > Fx, => => My pu A Pa ©

2 5

with the Queen of Navarre his mother, the Admi-

—

8 5

* . ©

ral de Coligny ®, * and the principal chiefs of the
* Proteſtant party; to whom this important city, far
* diſtant from the court, {ſeemed molt advantageous

for the intereſt of their religion. This was a "moſt
wie reſolution, had they only known to have fol-
| © lowed it out.

Queen Catherine diſſembled the trouble this con-
duct gave her, and, during the whole year 1571
ele only of faithfully obſerving the treaties, of
entering into a cloſer correſpondence with the Pro-
© teſtants, and carefully preventing every cauſe that
mige rekindle the war. This was the pretext of
the Marechal de Coſſé's deputation, whom ſhe ſent
to Rochelle with Malaſſize and La-Protitiere, ma-

bers of requeſts, her creatures and confidents; but

the true motive was, to obſerve all the proceding- of
the Calviniſts, to found their inclinations, and draw
them inſenſibly to ſuch an entire confidence in her,
as was abſolutely neceſſary to her deſigns. She
N veglected nothing on her part of all that was capa-
bie to inſpire it into them. The Marechal de Mont-
morency was ſent to Rouen with the Preſident de

« Morſan, to do juſtice there for the outrages com-

mitted againſt the Huguenots; the infringements of
the treaty of peace were ſeverely puniſhed; and
| King Charles uſually called it his treaty, and his
peace. This prince would on all occaſions artfully
rose, that he conſented to thi peace, in or-
der to ſupport the princes of his blood againſt the

5 too great authority 'of the Guiſes, whom he accu-

ed of conſpiring with Spain to imbroil the king-
be. Theſe noblemen ſeemed daily to decreafe

| | in
, Gaſpard de Col guy, Lord of Chatillon-ſur-Loing, Admiral of

France. | |
B + Charles IX naturally hated the Duke of Guiſe. He was fo diſ-

1 ale at his having demanded the Princeſs Margaret bis ſiſter in

marriage, that one day taking on this ſubject to the Grand Prior of

. | Free, natural ſoa ot Henry II. he lai, ſhewing him two ſwords,

3
Wy ES.
Wok LEE:
8 2
* 8
1
i :
* 8 *
* 1 3
8
a
'

VoL.I, | B | ( Of

6 M E M O I R 8 Book J.
in favour; and their complaints, whether true or
falſe, gave all imaginable colour to this report.
Charles did not even make the leaſt difficulty of ad-
vancing as far as Blois and Bourgueil, to confer
with the Reformed; who for their deputies had
named Teligny *, ſon-in- law to the Admiral,
Briquemaut, Beauvais. la· Nocle, and Cavagne; and
theſe four deputies, going afterwards to Paris, were
there loaded with preſents and civilities, _
The Marechal de Coſse did not fail to make the
| molt of theſe appearances of ſincerity. After he
had by theſe means inſinuated himſelf, he began to
entertain the Queen of Navarre more ſeriouſly, with
the project of a marriage between the Prince her
ſon, and the Princeſs Margaret, ſiſter to the King of
France: he was commiſſioned by Charles to pro-
miſe a portion of 400,000 crowns. For the Prince
of Conde, he propoſed the third heireſs of Cleves,

a very conſiderable match; and the Counteſs 3

q Entremont for the Admiral de Coligny. As they
well foreſaw, that he would be more obſtinate to

their perſuaſions than all the others beſides, there-
fore the Marechal de Coſte annexed to this laſt ar-
ticle of marriages, a preſent of 100,c00 crowns,
Which the King engaged to give the Admiral, to-
| gether with a grant of all the benefices which his
: brother the Cardinal bad enjoyed f. The Mare-
e hat

3 forts that bon Beil, there ie ciie- 60 il es if

d to-morrow at the chace thou doſt not kill the Duke of Guiſe with
4 the other.” Theſe words were afterwards repeated to the Duke of
Guiſe, who quitted his purſuit. Matth. book 6. p. 333. The fame
hiſtorian adds, that Charles IX. purſued the Duke of Guiſe one day

uith a javelin in bis hand, which he ſtruck forcibly into a door, juſt

at the time the Duke came out of it, for having, at play, touched
him with a file. 16. p. 376. |
He had a face ſo ſweet and graceful, that, at "the maſſacre of
St Bartholomew, thoſe who were firſt ſent to aſſaſſinate him, ſtopt, as
in ſuſpznce, and had not reſolution enough to ſtrike the blow.

+ Odet de Chaſtilon, Cardinal Biſhop of Beurais, Abbot of St
Benoit

„
| 29995
*

$

: 708
1

© *
*
GG
Wt
NE...
7

F*** Y. 15

chal de Biron came to confirm theſe ſhining offers,
and finally gained the Queen of Navarre, by making

4» a feigned confidence to her of the ſuſpicions entertain»
ed at court, that Philip II. King of Spain had poiſon-

cd the Queen his wife, Eliſabeth of France *, falſely

\ accuſed of an intrigue with the Infant Don Carlos +.
He told her farther, under an injunction of ſecrecy,
that the court being reſolved to revenge this injury,
would carry the war into Flanders and Artois, the
_ reſtitution of which would be demanded from the

EK.ing of Spain, as being ancient fiefs of the crown,

as well as that of Navarre ; and that they would

begin with ſuccouring Mons, which the Prince of

Orange þ had juſt taken from the Spaniards,

And for the finiſhing ſtroke, he added, that the

King had an eye upon the Admiral for conducting
his army, with the title of Viceroy of the Low

Benoit ſur Loire, &c. He was made a cardinal at ſixteen years of

SR age; and though he was degraded from this dignity by Pope Pius IV.
he was publicly married, in the habit of a cardinal, to Eliſabeth de

Ho Hauteville, a lady of Normandy, to whom he gave the title of Coun-

Fl © teſs of Bau vais, and as ſuch ſhe took rank at the public ceremonies. _
In 1564, he was arraigned for high treaſon before the parliament"of _

5 Paris. He died in the beginning of 1571, at Southampton in Eng-
land, whither he had been ſent, during the war, to ſupport the in-

tereſts of the Calviniſts with Q. Eliſabeth ; and after the peace, he _

woas employed by the King to treat of a marriage between that prin-
cels and the Duke of Alengon, It is certain, though D*Aubigne

takes no notice of it, that his valet de chambre poiſoned him with an
apple, as he was preparing to return to France, whither he was re-

called by the Admiral his brother. De Thou, lib. 50.
adadds, that the Admiral was in reality put into poſſeſſion of great part
bol theſe bencfices, and enjoyed them all for one year; and that
Charles IX. gave him alſo 100,000 francs, to purchaſe furniture for
his houſe of Chaſtillon. D*.Jubigne, vol. 2. book 1, chap. 1.

D'Aubi one

'* Eldeſt daughter of Henry II. and Catherine de Medicis. Moſt

3 of our French hiſtorians are of this opinion. The Spaniaids attri-
= bute her death to bleeding, and medicines, that the phyſicians, not
> knowing that ſhe was with child, made her take. She died a little

time after, in 1658.

+ Don Carlos, Prince of Spain, whom Philip II. his father alſo

put to a violent death.

+ William of Naſſau, Prince of Orange. ow .
EO e Countries:

Nin Book I.

Countries and he was actually, at that inſtant, per-
mitted to nominate the general officers that were to
ſerve under him, as a little before they had left it
to him to nominate the commiſſioners of the peace.
The report of this expedition into the Low Coun-

tries ſpread ſo far, that it is certain, the Grand Seignior _

offered the King of France his alleys and troops to
make a diverſion, and to facilitate the conqueſt, With
regard to the Queen of England, nothing was omitted
that ought to have been done on this occaſion. Mont-

morency was ſent ambaſſador thither, with inſtruc ·

tlons to uſe every method by which he might us
this princeſs, and diſpoſe her to chuſe one of the

King's brothers for a hufband: A marriage Wet,

they ſaid, would alike ſtrengthen the union of i
two religions, and the two pow ers-

This proceeding, {5 full of ſeeming frankneſs, 5

oughtt to have been ſuſpected by its being overacted ;

yet it had the deſigned effect; and the Gſcourſe of
| the courtiers did not a little contribute towards it,
The deſire of breathing the air of a court devoted

to pleaſure, and of enjoying the honours that were
prepared for them, conduced more than any thing

to remove their ſcruples. Beauvais, Bourſaut, and

Francourt, were the firſt who ſuffered themſelves 1

to be per faded; ; and they afterwards made it, in 5
ſome ſort, a point of honour, to perſuade others.

Some hints of a journey to Paris had been already | |

thrown out; theſe three perſons ſtrongly ſupported.
that deſign, and repreſented to the Queen of Na-
_ varre, that if ſhe refuſed to go upon this occaſion, 7
ſhe would not only give offence to the King, but
might alſo loſe the fruit of the moſt favourable of all
conjundlures. She was at firſt diſtruſtful: ſhe ba-

Janced ſome months, and ſubmitted about the end 1
of 1571. In the beginning of 1572, Preparation

were made for the e and the time of 5 8

; 1 ture was at laſt actually ſettled for the month of

May following. 8
The Huguenots, one would imagine, had affect.
ed to cloſe their eyes, that they might not ſee a

3 thouſand circumſtances, that ought to have made
the ſincerity of ſo many great promiſes ſuſpected.

The King and Queen could not diſſemble fo effec-

tually, as never to lie open to penetration. It was
> known, that Charles had one day ſaid to Catherine,
Do I not play my cue well?“ To which ſhe.
> anſwered, © Admirably, my ſon; but you muſt _
„ hold out to the end.” Something alſo had tran-
1 ſpired, relating to the reſult of the conferences held
at Bayonne *, between the courts of France and
Spain. The King of Navarre had been very ill re-
© ceived in his government of Guyenne : Bourdeaux
had ſhut its gates againſt bim; and the Marquis de
> Villars, who commanded the royal army there,
=> would neither withdraw his troops, nor allow them
to receive orders from the Prince. In Rochelle,
they were not ignorant that the King had actually
7 a naval force over all that coaſt, which they ſup-
poſed to be deſtined for Holland. The citizens
had moreover diſcovered the artifices which Strozzy,
> La-Garde, Lanſac, and Landereau, had made uſe

of to gain the cuſtody of their gates, and to ſeize

In 1564, the Queen mother, after having traverſcd a great part
ol the kingdom, advanced to Bayonne, where ſhe had many private

conferences with the Duke &Albe, who had accompanied the Queen
> of Spain thither. There were appearances ſufficient to induce a be-

= lief, that theſe conferences related to an alliance between the Pope,
= France, and the houſe of Auſtria, and the means by which they
> thould extirpate the Proteſtant party. But there is no certainty, that
the deſign of the maſſacre of St Bartholomew, which was not put in

execution till ſeven years after, was formed there. Matthieu tells

us, that the Prince of Navarre being then a child, and almoſt conti-
> nually with Catherine de Medicis, heard ſomething of the plot to

> exterminate the chiefs of the Proteſtant party; that he gave notice

ol it to the Queen his mother, and fthe to the Prince of Condé and

5 2 the Admiral; and that the rage this inſpired them with, carried them

to the enterpriſe at Meaux, Hijt. of France, vol. 1. P. 283.

B 3 | > Show -

18 * E M © TR Book].
their city. In tine, while they made a merit of
their exactneſs in maintaining the treaty of peace
in its fulleſt extent, it was but too eaſy to diſcern
an infinitude of outrages done the Reformed, which
the court had either authoriſed or tolerated. The
Chancellor de L' Hopital, for offering to execute

Juſtice upon the aggreſſors at Rouen, Dieppe, oO

range, &c. and for refuſing to ſeal the revocation
of an edict of pacification, had been baniſhed the
court. Without all this, it might (one ſhould
think) have been ſufficient to the Huguenots, to have
known, as they did, the characters of Catherine and
her ſon. Could they flatter themſel ves, that this

prince, naturally paſſionate and vindictive, would
forget the attempt at Meaux *, the invaſion of Or-

leans, Rouen, Bourges, Lion, $6." - Havre given up
by the Huguenots to the Engliſh, foreigners intro-
_ duced into the heart of the kingdom, ſo many battles
fought, ſo much blood ſhed ? The intereſ? f the ſtate,
that big word ſo much in the mouths of fovereigns,
becauſe it lends the maik of good policy to their per-
ſonal reſentments, and other paſſions, will ſcarcely per-
mit them to ſuffer their ſubjects to engage in ſuch
enterpriſes with impunity. As for Catherine, ſhe
had to that moment perſiſted in imputing to them
the death of her huſband, which ſhe could never
pardon, any more than their baving treated as an-
tichriſt thoſe of the houſe of Medicis. Nor was
there leſs imprudence in truſting the Pariſians, whoſe
animoſity and fury againft the Huguenots was juſt
then ſignally manifclied, . in the affair of the Croſs

»In the year 1567, the prince of Conde, and the Admiral de
Coligny, formed the deſign of ſeizing Charles IX. at Meaux, where
he then was, and from whence the Queen-mother made him ſet out
precipitately at night, to return to Paris. Tbis deſign would have

been executed, but for the ſeaſonable arrival of 3000 Swiſs, who co-

vered the King i in his march, and the n an! not attack him.
Ste the biſtorians,
of

x * 75 5 - 25 5 3 * 2 >

1

— r 7 JG" 7 > IT os & LO IH SARA hs R „ N
— Fat 8 * n ME Fo > - 8
. en a, 2 TR VT : N e
* Er RE 5 5 f — 5 2 7 4 92 5 " 4 « : :
Sts 5. L : f 3 mT 0 0 5 . * b
> * + bo þ 5 8 X

9 OFT TULLY. Og
f © of Gatine®. My father was ſo ſenſibly ſtruck with
e _* theſe motives, that he diſcovered himſelf incredu-
2 lous, upon the firſt advice which he received of the
e
e

journey of the court of Navarre to Paris, Perſua-

ded, that the preſent calm would be of ſhort con-
> tinvance, he made haſte to avail himſelf of it, in
onder to ſhut himſelf up immediately, with all his
n effects, in Rochelle, when every one elſe talked of
e nothing but leaving it. The Queen of Navarre her-
d ſelf informed him more particularly of this deſign
e _ ſoon after, and ordered him to join her in her paſ-
d __ ſage, at Vendome. He made himſelf ready to ſet
is out; and being deſirous of taking me with him, he
d ordered me, ſome days before that of his departure,
r.to attend him in his chamber; and no one being
p ßpreſent but La-Durandiere, my preceptor, he thus
). ſpoke to me. Maximilian, ſince cuſtom does not
es b permit me to make you the principal heir of my
e, “ fortune, I will, in compenſation, endeavour to
is, © enrich you with virtues; by means of which, 1
Tr- „ hope, as hath been foretold me, you ſhall one
= day become ſomething. Prepare yourſelf, there-
eh fore, to ſupport with fortitude all the diſappoint=

m I' be following is the fact, as related by M. de Thou, book 50.
> anno 1571. Philip Gatine, a rich merchant of St Denis ſtreet, ha-
ving been ſome years before convicted of lending his houſe to the
in⸗ VFuguenots for a church, he was condemned, by the parliament of
„as Paris, to be hanged or burnt on the zoth of July. His houſe being

> demoliſhed, in its place was erected a pillar, in the form of a croſs,
which was afterwards called the croſs of Gatine. With the edict of
ult * pacification paſſed in 1570, the Calviniſts obtained, that this croſs
oſs would be thrown down; which, after ſome delays, was at laſt exe-
22 ented, but not without ſuch violent tumults among the populace, that
| de the council was obliged to ſend ſome troops thither, under the com-

mand of the Duke de Montmorency. Felibien ſays, that this croſs _
here Nas replaced at the entry of the church-yard of the Innocents, after
out © the iron plate, upon which the decree of the parliament was ingra-
Jave Þ ved, had been taken away, and that it is ſtill to be ſeen there. And
0 __ > Sauval mentions the place where this houſe ſtood, in the ſtreet of St

> Denis, overagainſt the ſtreet of the Lombards; where indeed there

s a hollow in the ground, which poſſibly might be the foundation of
of > Gatine*s houſe. _ ; |

« ments

% e M O 1K $- Bookt,
«© ments and difficulties you may meet with in the
& world, and by nobly ſurmounting them, acquire

« the eſteem of men of honour, particularly that i

c of the maſter to whom I mean to give you, and
& in whoſe ſervice I would recommend it to you
& to live and die. While I am upon my departure
for Vendome, to meet there the Queen of Na-
& varre, and the Prince her ſon; do you alſo. make
c yourſelf ready to come along with me, and pre-
cc pare a ſpeech to preſent your ſervice to the
86 Prince, when J ſhall preſent bim your perſon.”
I did in conſequence accompany him to Vendome*#,
He found there a general ſecurity, and an air of
gladneſs on every face, to which he durſt not in
public object; but as often as he had an opportu-
nity of converſing in private, either with the Queen,

or the Prince, the Admiral, the Counts Ludovic

and Rochefoucaut, and the other Proteſtant Lords,
he very freely told them, he was ſurpriſed they had
ſo ſoon forgotten the ſubjects of a fear ſo well
grounded ; that, on the part of areconciled enemy,
an exceſs of promiſes and careſſes was no leſs ſuſpi-
cious,. and greatly more da angerous, than that of

menaces and avowed hatred ; that it was, beſides,

to hazard a great deal, to expoſe a young prince,
too little guarded againſt the allurements of plea-
ſure, to the attractions of the molt voluptuous
court in the world. He repreſented to them, that,

Inſtead of dreaming of an alliance ſo unhappy as F ;

_ that of this prince and a princeſs who profeſſed a
different religion, it had been more to the purpoſe,

to have puſhed a marriage with the Queen of Eng-
land, who could have {0 uſefully ſerved him in re-

0 "Panels Je Bethune, the author's father, followed the Princes of
Conde to the battle of Jarnac, and was there taken priſoner. An
indictment of high treaſon was made out againſt him, for having
borne arms againſt his OLE and his eſtates were ſeized, but were
reſtored to him at the Peace. Du Chejre,

covering

ln N 8

3
” >

157 2. ö 8 U. I. 1. 21

covering the crown of Navarre, and poſſibly, ac

cording to conjunctures, that of France. He had 5

ſo ſtrong a foreboding of the fatal conſequences of
this French match, that he oftentimes ſaid, if theſe
nuptials were celebrated at Paris, he foreſaw that
« the bridal-favours would be very red.” Theſe
were his own expreſſions. An advice ſo diſcreet _
was not taken but for the effect of weakneſs and
timidity. My father, not affecting to ſeem wiſer
than ſo many per ſons more enlightened, ſuffered
himſelf, contrary to his own ſentiments, to be car-
ried down with the torrent; and only demanded

lime to put hiwſelf into a condition of appearing

with that ſplendor his rank. required, in a court
where all was magnificent. For this purpoſe, he
again took the road to Roſny; but firſt he preſented
me to the Prince of Navarre, in the preſence of
the Queen his mother, and gave him, in my name,
aſſurances of an inviolable attachment; which I
confirmed with a good deal of aſſurance, putting

one knee to the ground. The Prince raiſed me im-

mediately, and, after twice embracing me, had the
goodneſs to commend the zeal which all my family
Rad ever dif covericd for him, and, with his natural
engaging air, promiſed me his pr otection; a pro-

mie I at that time regarded as the mere ellen of

his complaiſance, but which J have ſince ſeen ac-
compliſhed far beyond my hopes and merit. I did

-— not return to Roſny with my father, but went to
2 Paris in the train of the Queen of Navarre. As:

> ſoon as I arrived, my youth making me feel how
much I had 88 0 of inſtruction, I applied myſelf
cloſely to ſtudy, not ceaſing, however, to make my
court to the Prince my maſter. I lived with a go-
vernor and valet de chambre, at a diſtance from the

court (in the quarter of Paris where almoſt all the
colleges are), until the bloody cataſtrophe which
happened a ſhort time after. |
Nothing could be kinder than the reception and

| treatment

NEM O18: Brokh.

treatment which the Queen of Navarre, her chil-

dren and principal ſervants, met with from the
King and Queen-mother. Charles IX. was conti-
nually praiſing the virtues and probity of the Count

de Rochefoucaut, de Teligny, Reſnel, Beaudiſner,

Piles, Pluviaut, Colombicres, Grammont, Duras,
Bouchavannes, Gamache, my father, and other
Proteſtant Lords. The Admiral he always called
father, and took it upon himſelf to reconcile to him
the princes of the houſe of Guiſe. To him alſo he
granted the pardon of Villandry *, which he had re-
Fuſed to his own mother and his brothers, his crime
being thought unpardonable. When the Admiral
was wounded, the King, upon the firſt notice of it,
broke into oaths and threatenings, and vowed he
would make the aſſaſſin + be ſearched for, in the
darkeſt corner of the palaces of the Guiſes. He
would have all the court, after his example, to viſit

#* Villandry being at play with the King, was fo raſh as to com-
mit ſome off-nce againſt Majeſty itſelf, for which he was ſentenced

the

to be put to death. Davila, bos 5. See alſo the fact particulariſed -

by D'Aubigne, vol. 2. book 1. chap. 2.

+ He was called Nicholas de Louviers, Lord of Maurevert in Brie.
& Muſt 1,” ſaid Charles IX. throwing bis racket at bim in a rage,

&« be perpetually troubled with new broils? ſhall I never have any |

quiet?“ Many have doubted, whether theſe threatenings and
tranſports of Charles were not ſincere; and whether this prince, who
had at firſt apparently entered into all the deſigns of the Queen his
mother, did not ſuffer himſelf at laſt to be gained by the Admiral de
Coligny, in thoſe private converſations, in which the Admiral never
ceaſed to repreſent to him the effects of this princeſs's bad govern-
ment, and to exhort him to ſhake off his dependence on her, Vil-
leroy's memoirs of (tate, vol. 2. p. 55. & 66. and many other writes
of thoſe times, pive ſuch ſtrong proofs of this fact, that it is very
difficult to decide upon this queſtion. If we may believe the me-
moirs of Tavannes, there was io little agreement between Charles IX.
and his mother, that Catherine ſaw no other means of preſerving her
authority, which ſhe was upon the point of loſing, than by cauſing
the Admiral to be aſſaſſinated; and this writer pretends, that Maure-
vert was ſuborned, unknown to the King, to itrike the blow. On

the other ſide, Matthieu believes he is well founded in maintaining, |

vol. 1, book 6. that Charles IX. deceived the Admiral from firſt 5

—_ "Aa DQAaam * . * — 1 3 n

oF
$5 6

4 4
A
LF.

, 81 >
LW
Bs 3 the 104
EE. wes
2 4 x5 Ty
£ . 4
F My
a%
I
4 1.
: .

17
8 12
i =
2 by
— 4
28

the wounded Admiral. When the Guiſes begged |

of this prince, that he would deign to hear their

© © vindication, they were very ill received. The
_ Spaniſh ambaſſador was on this occaſion ſo ill

8 treated, 5

7 , laſt, He relates, that this prince obſerving the oppoſition made by
ſeome of his counſellors to the deſign of extirpating the Huguenots,
_ * repreſented to them in a rage, that the kingdom was loſt, if their

3

2 ̃ fr Ion IN
nes 53 ö *

the following is an abridgment.
going, ſome days before the maſſacre of St Bartholomew, into the
chamber of the King his brother, obſerved, that this prince looked
upon him with eyes ſo full of rage, and with an air ſo furious, that,
aopprehending the conſequence of theſe violent emotions, he ſoftly re-
> gained the door, and hurried immediately to give the alarm to the
Qucen-mother.
what had happened to herſelf, reſolved to get rid of Coligny without
further delay.

plot was not executed that very night; becauſe, ſhould that night
paſs, there would not be time to prevent the projects ef the rebels,

4 . with which, he ſaid, he was well acquainted. He added, that thoſe
who did not approve of his reſolution, would never be conſidered by

him as his ſervants. _ 755 | „„ 3 0p

But this hiſtorian does not advert, that, a few pages after, he him-
ſelf leſſens the weight of theſe proofs, by relating a converſation _
which Henry III. bad in Poland with his phyſician Miron ; of which
Henry III. then Duke of Anjou,

She being but too much diſpoſed to believe it, from

Maurevert having partly failed in his attempt, ſince

be only wounded the Admiral in the arm, the Queen-mother and
the Duke of Anjou, finding they could not hinder the King from vi-
+» ſiting him, thought it neceſſary to accompany him, and, under pre-
tence of ſparing the Admiral's ſtrength, interrupted, as often as they
could, the private converſation they held together. During this vi-
ſit, Catherine, who was ſurrounded with Calviniſts, obſerved, that
they frequently whiſpered to each other, and looked on her from

mme to time with very ſuſpicious eyes.
do be the moſt dangerous ſhe had ever been engaged in.

As they

: returned, ſhe preſſed the King ſo vehemently to tell her what had
paſſed between him and the Admiral, that this prince could not hin-

der himſelf from betraying it, by telling her, with his ufual oath,
that ſhe ſpoiled all his affairs, or ſome words to that purpoſe. Ca-
ttherine, now more alarmed than before, had recourſe to an artifice
which ſucceeded. She repreſented, in the ſtrongeſt terms, to her
ſeoon, that he was ready to fall into the ſnare, which, as ſhe imagined,
the Admiral had laid for him; that he was on the point of being de-
\ livered up to the Huguenots, combined with ſtrangers ; without ha-
+ Ving any thing to hope for from his Catholic ſubjects, who, through
dilguſt at finding themſelves betrayed. had choſen another leader.
HShe was fo well ſeconded by all the other counſellors, excepting only
| the Marechal de Retz, that Charles IX. himſelf, being ſeized with |

This adventure ſhe reckoned _

—

— —

9

— LI gy. 8 —
——„— — —
— a —— — —ũ +
- 2 — —
>" 5

= -
* may — — ͤ———— p —— ] — een —
2
"

2 m E M O 1 R s Bock l.

treated, that he thought fit to withdraw. Pope
Pius V. was not ſpared in the tranſports of Charles,

he having refuſed the neceſſary diſpenſation for

Henry's: marriage with the Princeſs Margaret, for
which they prepared with the utmoſt magnificence.

The King carried his deference for this prince fo
far, as to diſpenſe with his going into the church

of Notre-dame *. He was even excuſed from ob-

ſerving

fear, and paſſing from one extreme to another, was the firſt to pro-

poſe, and even preſs, the murder not only of the Admiral, but of
all the Hugnenots; to the end, ſaid he, that there may not one be

left to reproach me. All the reſt of that day, and the following
night, they conſulted upon the means of executing the deſign. At

break of day. Charles, the Queen-mother, and the Duke of Anjou, 1
went to the pate of the Louvre, aad hearing a piſtol go off, fear and

remorſe ſeized them. The King ſent orders to the Duke of Guiſe
to ſuſpend further proceedings. To which the Duke replied, his
orders had come too late: and they taking freſh courage, joined in

_ every thing that was afterwards done.

It is poſſible, I think, to reconcile theſe different opinions, and
preſerve to the proofs alledged on each fide all their force, by ſaying,
that Charles IX. who undoubtedly invited the Admiral to Paris, in order
to have him murdered with the reſt of the Huguenots, ſuffered him-
ſelf to be ſhaken by his ſpeeches ; that he embraced alternately pro-
poſitians from both the contending parties; and that their different
ſpeeches threw him into a ſtate of irreſolution, from whence he was
only freed by the natural impetucſity of his temper, of which Cathe-
rine knew well how to avail herſelf, Coligny's ſecurity proceeded

from his not being able to doubt the efficacy of his arguments on

the mind of this prince: otherwiſe, it would not have been poſſible
for Charles to have fo long impoſed upon a man of the Admiral's
great abilities and prudence. A young king of three and twenty,
who, till that moment, had been almoſt always governed by others, was

not cepable of that deep policy which they have had the complaiſance

to attribute to him. It muſt he confeſſed, however, that this young
prince already carried diſſimulation to its utmoſt height; of which

his having never diſcovered the ſecrets of his council, or thoſe of the

Admiral to each other, although ſtrongly preſſed to it, is an incon-
teſtable proof. | | | |

* The King's reſolution was, that the marriage ſhould not be ce:
lebrated in a manner wholly conformable to either rel gion. Not to
the Calviniſt, becauſe the vows were to be received by a prieſt, who
was to be the Cardinal of Bourbon; not to the Romiſh, becauſe
theſe vows were to be received without the ſacramental ceremonics
or the church.

A

1
79
A,
*
Fg
7.0
VEIL
9
8 a
vat;
bf Sh
, *
i
28-7
*
FS,
*
£2
3
* -
4
Ct
Fs
- - (ag
=
* *
5
2 5
Wy
” N
ws

1

1

t
3 C
It
qc
42
| 2 5
4
1

ty

diſmiſſed with a ſevere reprimand. The face of
things was wholly changed upon the death of the
Queen of Navarre ;z all the court appeared ſen-
ſibly touched, and went into deep mourning. Ina
word, it is not giving too ſtrong a name to all this
conduct of Catherine and her ſon, to call it an al -
maoſt incredible prodigy of diſſimulation; ſeeing ſhe
Could inſnare by it fo diſcreet a man as the Admi-
ral de Coligny, and that, notwithſtanding a thou-
ſand circumſtances concurring, one would think, to
make him apprehend the danger that was approach»
ing: for it was openly faid, that Genlis and La-
Nouè, who had been ſent to the aſſiſtance of the
Prince of Orange, were defeated + by the conni-
vance of the French court; which, while it was
> uncertain of ſucceſs in the principal object of its
= diſlimulation, could not think of ritking all the con-
= ſequences which that diſſimulation might produce.

A great ſcaffold was ereQted in the court before the principal pate
> and entry of the church of Paris, on Monday Augult 18. 1572, upon
= which were betrothed and married on the ſame day, and by a ſingle
Act, the Moſt High, Cc. This done, the bridegroom retired to
meeting to hear a ſermon, and the bride went into the church to hear
> maſs, according to the articles of the tieaty of marriage: after which
they both came to the entertainment prepared for them in the great
hall of the palace, &c. B. le Grain, Dec. of Hen. IV. book 2. |
Charles IX. gave his ſiſter 300.000 crowns for a portion; and the
- > Queen of Nayarie yielded the Upper and Low Counties of Armag ;
nac, Cc. to her fon at his marriage. Matthieu, vol. 1. book 6.
Charles de Bourbon, Cardinal, uncle to Henry IV.

I + John d'angeſt d'Ivoy, of the ancient houſe of Genlis. Francis
de la Norte, a gentleman of the greateſt reputation in the Proteſtant.
Parey, and eſteemed even by the Catholics themſelves The Admi-
+ ral, ſpeaking of this misfortunc to Charles IX. atributed it to the
> ſecret being but ill kept in the council. Charles demanded of the
Duke of Alba, by Claude Monducet, his reſident in the Low Coun-
tries, the French Proteſtant gentlemen who had been taken p iſoners,
De Thou, anno 1572, book 5 1. |

Vol. I. C They

26 M E M OI AR S Bookl

They were alſo informed of the conferences

which the Queen-mother, and the principal mini-
ſters, held with Cardinal Alexandrin, nephew of

Pope Pius V. and with the Guiſes - the laſt having

been twice diſcovered converſing in maſk with the
King, the Queen-mother, the Duke de Retz, and
the Chancellor de Birague *. This was ſufficient
to ſhew what they ought to think of their pretend.

ed diſgrace. In the death of the Queen of Na-

varre +, they thought they could perceive manifeſt 7
indications of poiſon. It paſſed for certain, that
the wound the Admiral received came from the
houſe of Villemur, preceptor to the Guiſes ; and
that the aſſaſſin had been met in his flight, upon a
horſe belonging to the King's ſtable, Even the
guards that Charles + placed about the Admiral af.
| | | | | ter

* Of bim it was ſaid, that he was cardinal without a title, cban-

cellor without ſeals, and prieſt without a benefice.

+ She! was lodged with Charles Gaillart, Biſhop of Chartres, a
man violently ſuſpected of Calviniſm. Soon after her return from
Blois, whither ſhe had followed the court, ſhe was ſeized with a
violent fever, and died on the 5th day of her illneſs. There wee
many different opinions concerning the manner of her death. The
Memoirs of L'Etoile, D'Aubigne, and all the Calvinifts, aſcribe it

to poiſon, which they ſay was given her in a pair of gloves by a WE:

Florentine, whoſe name was René, perfumer to the Queen mother. |

De-Serres gives us to underſtand, that the phyſicians who opened her

body, had orders not to touch her brain, which was ſuppoſed to be

affected with the poiſon. But they are all ſtrongly contradicted by
Le Grain, and ſeveral others, who maintain that ſhe died of a pleu-
riſy, occaſioned by her being overheated in making preparations for

the nuptials of her ſon: to which was added the vexation ſhe con-
ceived at being obliged to kneel to the holy ſacrament as it paſſed be.

WWW 4 f

N
*

fore her houſe, on corpus Chriſti day. La Popelieniere, Perefixe, and)

De Thou, endeavour to remove all ſuſpicions of poiſon, The laſt f =
mentioned aſſures us, that Charles IX. ordered the head of this prin- Þ

ceſs to be opened, as well as the r<ſt of her body; and if the phy-
ſicians did not do it, it was becauſe they found the true cauſe of her
death in an abſceſs ſhe had in her body. This is alſo the opinion
of Matthieu. |

+ All this is true, and proves, that this ſtratagem was the work of Þ

the Queen-mother, and not that of the King. It is hard to ſay, what
ho | Bo 88

N
4 4 £4
8
WR; 27
© vn

I 572 5 .
ter this attempt, under pretext of ſecuring his per- -

T

es ;
jj- © ſon, were, the greateſt part of them, his declared
of enemies. It was no leſs certain, that all the citi-
ag zens of Paris were furniſhed with arms, which, by
he the King's order, they kept in their houſes. .
nd I be moſt clear - ſighted among the Huguenots,
e © yielding to proofs fo convincing, quitted the court,
d. and Paris itſelf, or lodged at leaſt in the ſuburbs.
a. Of this number were Meſſ. de Langoiran, de Fron-
= tenay, the Viſcount de Chartres, de Loncaunay, de
_ Rabodanges, Du-Breuil, de Segur, de Say, Du-
be Touchet, Des-Hayes, de Saint-Gelais, de Chouppes,
E . . 3 3 PP ,
nd de Beauvais, de Grandrie, de St-Eſtienne, d'Arnes,
n de Boiſec, and many other gentlemen of Norman-
be dy and Poitou“. Happily my father was one
af. of thoſe, whole life was preſerved by a wiſe diſ-
ter J truſt. When they were preſſed to come nearer the
(court, they replied, that they found the air of the
ban- ſuburbs was better for their health, and the air of
'S, A 55 : was her real intention in ſtriking this lobe whether ſhe ſought 10
rom | get rid of a man who poſſeſſed too much power over the King's mind
tha and was capable of ruining her deſign of exterminating all the Hu-
were puenots; or whether, if the Admiral had died of this wound, ſhe
The would have confined her vengeance-to his ſingle death; or, laſtly,
be it whether ſhe expected the noiſe of this aſſaſſination would excite the
by a 1 Calviniſts in Paris to revolt, and by that means furniſh her with the
other. 4 occaſion ſhe wanted, to fall upon them with a high hand, for which
d her her party was already prepared. Many expedients were propoſed in
to be 5 the council to give a pretence for attacking them; amongſt others,
ed by WM the aſſault of an artificial fort built in the Louvre, which would af-
pleu- ford them an opportunity of turning the feigned laughter into a
ns for | real one againſt the Huguenots. At laſt, they reſolved to put them
con- all to the ſword in the night. 7 |
d be.“ The Admiral lodged in the ſtreet Bediſy in an inn, which is called
e, and at preſent the Hotel S. Pierre. The chamber where he was mur-
ae laſt dered is (till ſhewn there. | Ep |
 prin- ] All the perſons here mentioned earncſtly preſſed the Admiral to
phy- abandon Paris, © By doing fo,” ſaid he, “J muſt ſhew either fear
of her © or diſtruſt, My honour would be injured by the one, by the
pnion 8 other the King. I ſhould be again obliged to have recourſe to a
civil war; and J would rather die than ſee again the miſeries I have
ork of |  * ſeen, and ſuffer the diſtreſs I have already ſuffered,” Matthieu,
„ what vol. 1. boo 6. p. 343. | | Ee

C2 the

28 ME M 8 i 8 -. Bookt.

the fields ſtill better than that of the ſuburbs. When
they were informed, that the Biſhop of Valence, in
taking leave of the King for his ambaſſy to Poland,
had penetratcd into the ſecret, and been indiſcreet
enough to reveal it to ſome of his friends, and that
they bad intercepted letters ſent to Rome by the
Cardinal de Pelleve, in which he unveiled all this
myſtery to the Cardinal de Lorrain ; then it was,
that theie gentlemen redoubled their importunity
with the King of Navarre, either to quit Paris him-
{elf, or at leaſt to permit them to retire to their
own homes. To their advice the Prince oppoſed
that which had bcen given him by a number of
other perſons, and even in the Proteſtant party;
tor where are not traitors to be found? They
warned him to be diſtruſtful; they noted to him
the names of all thoſe who had been gained over by
the Queen-mother to deceive him. He liſtened to
nothing. The Admiral * appeared no leſs incredu-
lous : his bad deſtiny began by blinding, to deſtroy
him. Happy, if he had had the prudence of the
Marechal de Montmorency, whom they could ne-
ver draw from Chantilly, although the King. inceſ-
ſantly plied him to partake in the favour of the Ad-
miral, and to continue near his perſon, to aid him
in his counſels. |

Q It has been ſaid, that all the fine abs which the Admiral de

Coligny performed in his life, were againſt his God, his religion,

his country, and his King. ' How much is it to be lamented, that he
did not employ his talents more uſefully ! For all the hiſtorians agree,
that he was the moſt conſummate politician, and the greateſt warrior
that ever appeared. It is thought, that it was in conſequence of the
advice he gave to the Prince of Orange, that the Low Countries re-
bel.ed againſt Spain, maintained the war ten years, and formed the
plan of a republic, which in part has ſucceeded It is alſo believed,
and not without probability, that he would have made a like attempt
in France. He 1s grievouſly accuſed in Villeroy's memoirs, vol. 4

p. 3 22. 3 40. But he always ſteadily denied, particularly in his lat
will, his ever having had any intention of attempting the perſon of
the King. See his elogium and political deſigns in Brantome, vol 3:
De Thou, and the other hiſtorians. | a

Ti

*

NR T7 7 ” ONE . — p „ " — - 2 ee - — 9 4 | 1 . = — ks — — —
pe Ns 7 a Ons . ERA er 4 8 - 2 n 3 N T3 ar N
7 . "4 . Da 1 . * : Ws * 7 7 b; : - > Kit SIS 5 — 8 . — —
1 4 F: 5 "73 5 bs 5 7 4 7 E * 3 "WA, 16-3
. 4 T'Þ of . "= 1 7

* A * 4 z 4 & - 2 2 8 * 8 m ws hed *
ä . _ Py 9 ä mn _ | 25H
W 2 © ; 5 F . 0 -
2 L FP . n
© qa wwe Ss Mos Do. eas «Md Bi... MN — *

=> Tf I ſought to augment the horror univerſally ex-
cited by an action ſo barbarous “ as that of the
> 24th of Augult 1572, too well known by the name
et. © of the maſſacre of St Bartholomew, I ſhould in this

3
e e
"> BN =

40 "2 5 place
bis | = „ What M. de Sully ſays of the maſſere ought not to be thought
as, We! too ſevere. An cexccrable action,“ cries Ferefixe, © that never
ity c had, and I traſt God, never will have its like.” Pope Pius V.

| = was fo much afflited at it, that he ſhed tears; but Gregory XIII.
m- un who ſucceeded him, ordered a public thankſgiving to God for this
CIC © maſſacre io be offered at Rome, and {ent a legate to congratulate
ed Charles IX. and to exhort him to continue it. The following is a

0 84

a

mort account of the mallacre. All the neceflary meaſures having
been taken, the r1nping of the bells of St Germain PAuxerrois, for
ty ; matins, was the Gignal tor beginning the ſlaughter. The Admiral de
ney © Coligny was firſt murdered, in the midſt of his ſervants, by Beſmes,
2 a French gentleman, and a domeftic of the Duke of Guiſe, and
others; the Duke himſelf, and the Chevalier de Guiſe, (laying be-
by bo in the court. His body was thrown cut of the window. bey
| to © © cut off his head, and carried it to the Quecn-mother, together with
bis box of papers; among which, ?tis laid, they found the memoirs
ol his own times, compoſed by himſelf. After they had offered all
roy > forts of indignities to the bleeding carcaſe, it was hung on the gibbet
the © of «lontfaucon, whence the Marcchal de Montmorency cauſed it to
be taken down in the night, and buried at Chantilly. The whole
= houſe of Guiſe had been perfonally animated againſt the Admiral,
cel- evyer ſince the aſſaſſination of Claude Duke of Guiſe, by Poltrot de
Ad- Mere, whom they believed to have been incited to this crime by
him | bm; and, to ſay the truth, the Admiral was never able to clear
© himſelf of this imputation. If this butchery (as many people are
| {fully perſuaged) was only an effect of the Guiics? reſentment, who
| advided the Queen-mether to it, with a vicw of revcnging their

e

* * *

ral de own quartel; it maſt be confeſſed, that no particular per ſon ever
gion, Þ drew 10 ſevere a vengeance for an offence. All the domeſtics of the
hat he Admiral were afterwards flain; and, at the ſame time, the King's
agree, | emilfaries began the Hlinghter in ail quarters of the city. The moſt
varrior diltinguiſhed of the Calviniſts who loft their lives, were, Francis de
of the la Rochefoucault, who having been at play part of the night with
ries re- I the King, and finding himſelf ſcized in bed by men in maſks, thought
cd the Tit was the King and his courtiers who came to divert themſelves with

elieved, him; Antony de Clermout, Marquis de Reſnel, murdered by his
temp: | Cen Kinſman Lewis de Clermont of Bufſy d'Amboiſe, with whom

vol. 4 be bad a law-fuit for the inarquiſate of Clermont; Charles de C
his latt lenec, Baron of Pont in Bretagne, whoſe dead body excited the cu-
ron of rioſity of the ladies of the court, on account of a proceſs carried on
„ vol 3. by his wiſe, Catherine de Parthenay, daughter and heireſs of John
de Soubize; Francis Nonpar de Caumont, murdered in his bed
I C3 betwizs

Ti

*

MEMOIRS Beek.

place expatiate upon the number, the quality, the

virtues, and the talents of thoſe who were inhu- 7

manly butchered on this horrible day, as well in 1

Paris as in all the reſt of the kingdom. I ſhould 1
mark at leaſt ſome part of the reproaches, the igno. 7

minious treatments, and the deteſtable devices of ©

cruelty, which aimed, in giving death, to inflict a

thouſand ſtabs, as ſenſible as death itſelf to the un. »
happy victims. I have the pieces {till in my hands,

that vouch the inſtances of the court of France

with the neighbouring courts, to imitate its eñ ample

againſt the Reformed, or at leaſt to refuſe an aſy-
Jum to all theſe unfor tunate people. But I prefer

the honour of the nation to the malignant pleaſure |

which particular perſons might draw from a detail,
In which they would find the names of thoſe who
Forgot humanity ſo far, as to imbrue their hands
in the blood of their fellow-citizens, and of their
proper parents. I even would, if it were poſſible,
bury for ever the memory of a day for which the
divine vengeance puniſhed France, by {ix and twenty
ſucceſſive years of diſaſters, carnage, and horror.
One cannot help judging after this manner, when he
conſiders all that paſſed from that fatal moment till
the peace of 1598. It is even with regret, that!
inſiſt upon the part which regards the prince who

betwixt his two ſens; one of whom was ſtabbed by his ſide, but the
other, by counterfeiting himſelf dead, and lying concealed under the
bodies of his father and brother, eſcaped : Teligny, ſon-in-law to the

Admiral; Charles de Beaumanoir de Lavardin; Antony de Marafn,

Lord of Guerehy ; ; Beaudiſner, Pluviaut, Berny, Du-Briou, governor

to the Marquis of Conty; Beauvais, governor to the King of Navar:e, I

Colombieres, Francourt, Cc. The Count de Montgomery was pur-
ſued by the Duke of Guiſe as far as Montfort-L*Amaury. The
King pardoned the Viſcounts of Grammont and Duras, and Ga-
mache and Bouchavannes, The three brothers of the Marechal de
Montmorency were alſo ſpared, through fear that he might there-
after revenge their death, Sce the hiſtorians and other writers. Read
alſo that fine deſcription of the maſſacre of St Bartholomew, y M.
de Voltaire, i in his Henriade, canto 2

18

— — 1 . — *

e 25 eee N 1
e © A. n 2 D 8 LIN 1 IS oa 2
SS 4's 8 1 5 . 3 . ; 9 1

- 5 8 , 8 7 5 ” SD ons „„

* ” F * 4

5 f 7 „

2 2 r 9 „

* 8 TTT
. $I 7 Ly 2% ” 4

150 RO Wn I CIC

bs
e

Us TN; 5s 2 B

]

5 .

„ 8 U-L I. I. 31
is the ſubject of theſe memoirs, and upon what of
it concerned myſelf. og „ 2s 7
TI had gone to bed betimes in the evening, and
felt myſelf awakened about three hours after mid-
night, by the ſound of all the bells, and the con-
fuſed cries of the populace. My governor St Jus
lian, with my valet de chambre, went haſtily out
to know the cauſe; and I never afterwards heard
more of theſe two men, who, without doubt, were
among the firſt that were ſacrificed to the public
fury. I continued alone in my chamber dreſſing
myſelf, when, in a few moments, I ſaw my land-
lord enter, pale, and aſtoniſhed, He was of the
Reformed religion, and having learned what the
matter was, had reſolved to go to mals, to ſave his

life, and preſerve his houſe from being pillaged.

He came to perſuade me to do the fame, and to take

me with him. I did not think proper to follow him,
but reſolved to try if I could gain the college of

Burgundy, where I ſtudied, notwithſtanding the di-
{tance it was from the houſe where Ilodged, which
made the attempt very perilous. I put on my ſcho-
lar's robe, and taking a large prayer-book under my
arm, I went down. Upon entering the ſtreet, I
was ſeized with horror at the ſight of the furies, who
ruſhed from all parts, and burſt open the houſes,
bawling out, „Slaughter, ſlaughter, maſſacre the
“ Huguenots.” And the blood which I ſaw ſhed
before my eyes redoubled my terror. I fell into
the midſt of a body of guards: they ſtopped me,
queſtioned me, and were beginning to uſe me ill,
when, bappily for me, the book that I carried was
perceived, and ſerved me for a paſſport. Twice after
this I fell into the ſame danger, from which I ex-
tricated myſelf with the ſame happineſs. At laſt 1
arrived at the college of Burgundy, where a dan»
ger far greater than any Ihad yet nſet with, awaited
me. Ihe porter having twice refuſed me entrance,
| | Pon 1

1 MEM O 1 R s Bock!

I remained in the midſt of the ſtreet, at the mercy

of the furies, whoſe numbers increaſed every mo-

ment, and who were evidently in queſt of their prey,
when I bethought myſelf of calling for the prin-
cipal of the college, La-Faye, a good man, who
loved me tenderly. The porter, gained by ſome
ſmall pieces of money which I put into his hand,
did not fail to make him come. This honeſt man
made me go into his chamber, where two inhuman
_ prieſts, whom heard make mention of the Sicilian
veſpers *, wanted to force me from him, that they
might cut me in pieces, ſaying, the order was, to
Naughter to the very infants at he breaſt. All that
he could do was, to conduct me ſecretly to a re-
mote cloſet, w here he locked me up. I was there
_ confined three days, uncertain of my deſtiny, re-
ceiving ſuccour only from a domeſtic belonging to
this charitable man, who brought me from time to
time ſomething to preſerve my life,

At the end of that term, the prohibition for mur-
dering and pillaging any more of the Proteſtants be-
ing publiſhed, I was taken from my cell; and im-

mediately after, I ſaw Ferricre and La- Vieville, two
ſoldiers of the guard, who were my father's crea-
tures, enter the college. They came to know
what had become of me, and were armed, without
doubt, to reſcue me by force where-ever they
ſhould find me. They gave my father a relation of
my adveitme; and eight days after, I received a
letter from him, in which he acquainted me how
greatly he had been alarmed on my account, but
adviied me however to continue in Paris, which the
Prince my matter was not at liberty to abandon :
only not to expole myſelf to an evident danger, I

Mould reſolve to do what the Prince bimſelf had

* In the year 1282, the Sicilians murdered all the French in the
illand. The bell for veſpers was the lignal.

done,

i] : |

- Z 1 1
0 2G

1 =

5

= Pa ainted:

1

O F

9 UL LY.

done, meaning that I ovght to go to maſs. In ef.
fect, the King of Navarre had found no other means
to fave his life. He was awaked, with the Prince
of Conde, two hours before day, by a multitude of
odere, who ruſhed boldly into the chamber, in

tbe Louvre, where they lay, and inſolently com-

manded them to dreſs themſelves, and attend the

King. They were forbid expreſsly to take their

words; and as they went out, they ſaw ſeveral of

> their gentlemen # maſſacred diſreſpectfully before

their eyes. Charles waited for them, and received
them with a vitage and eyes in w bich fury was
he ordered them, with the oaths and blaſ-
phemies which were familiar to him, to quit a re-

- ligion that had been only taken up, he ſaid, to ſerve
ds a pretext for their rebellion.

The ee e to

* which theſe princes + were reduced, could not hin-

Clermont, Baron of Piles, a Perigordin, &c.
of Leyran, took refuge under the Queen of Navarre's bed, who ſaved
his life.

Chati lon, the Admiral's ſon, and Guy de Laval, D'Andelot's ſon ;

der them from diſcovering that they ſhould obey
bim with pain:
came immoderate.
and furious tone, e That he would no longer be
„ contradicted in his ſentiments by his ſubjects;
r that they, by their example, ſhould teach others
e to revere him as the image of God, and ceaſe

(to be enemies to the images of his mother.

fo that the wrath of the King be-
He told them, in an imperious

James de Segur, Baron of Pardaillan, a Gaſcon; Armand de
Gaſton de Lewis, Lord

Some perſons were {ent to Chatillon, to ſeize Francis de

but they. both eicaped, and fed to Geneva, Ve der de Gontault de

3 Biron was ſaved by fortifyi ing himſelf in the arſenal.

+ As Henry went to the King, Catherine gave orders that they

| ſhould lead bim under the vaults, and make him paſs through the

| guards drawn up in files on each ſide, in *menacing poſtures.
| ttarted through fear, and recoiled two or three ſteps back ; when im-

He

3 mediately Nancai-la-Chitre, captain of the life-guards, removed his

appichenſions, by ſu caring they ſhould do him no hurt. Henry,

I though he gave but little credit to his words, was obliged to go on

4 anudſt the carabines and halberts, Perefixe.

He

2 —_—_

> AN Ar,

7 . et 7 Bows > . . .. . ———.. nh TEE PR —
Cee, + 446 2 — ———— 2 — —— 1 5 —
2 2 1 - WES LA 1 = — ie en YI ene ern <t co > 9, 19 4B —
< 4 —— - — — — — 2

r
— 277...

fe *
—
——

. ————_—_ , ” - —— — — *

& — r INE — e © - AAR — gu nt _ —
— OI AE — — 32 . Fe —
n 2 - TX 2 OS b 2 4 * — | . =
. I - 2 2 —
- - S D 2 B A ens — N 22 - 2 —
by 2 a. I : — 7 — bet an Tagen — —— r . — : ,
ISL = 3 pe tn — — —. _ wes 7 —— — ang os — — _ — >

r — or CEE — ” — — — "IR -

—

LET

5

5

—_— wo
8
5 ——
—

= 2 I 2 8 — —— — — — — * — —
: — r
a Pr J ys . £ — — ==
ous; I IKem - — IJ „FFF 828 * . q 4 — >
22 — — bake. — CODEINE IDC has CEE DESI» *
9 = — 7 — Pp \ . —
1 . -4 . — ” oc — - 5 — 5 8 — *
— — AC - - — 2. - —7 . 8 — . 1 —
- — — * — A —_ * 4 * - 6 Font a
5 —
— — —— —— ůj— ———— ]ʃ ——— — — — — OT ——— 2
*

34 M E M OI R S Bock l.
He ended by declaring, that if they did not go
that moment to maſs, he was forthwith to give or-

ders to treat them as criminals guilty of treaſon a-
gainſt divine and human majeſty. The manner in

which theſe words were pronounced, not permitting

them to doubt but that they were ſincere, they
bended under violence, and did what was exacted.

Henry was even obliged to ſend an edi&t into his
dominions, by which the exerciſe of any other re.
ligion but the Romiſh was forbidden. Though this
- ſubmiſſion ſecured his life, in other reſpects he fared
for it but little the better. He was ſubjected to a

thou fand caprices and a thouſand inſults from the
court; at times free, oftener cloſely confined, ang

treated as a criminal. Sometimes his domeſtics
were permitted to fee and to ſerve him, then all on
a ſudden we would be prohibited to appear.

At ſuch times I employed my leifure as uſefully
as poſlible, I was no longer at liberty from this

r 8 4, * I

e

time forth for learned languages, or whatever is

called ſtudies. This application, which my father #
had always ſtrongly recommended to me, became

impoſſible when once I approached the court. It | ö

was with regret I parted with an excellent precep- |
tor, to whoſe care my father had intruſted my edu- |

cation: he himſelf perceiving he could be no longer |

uſeful, requeſted to retire. From his hands I palſed
into thoſe of one called Chrétien, whom the King
of Navarre kept in his train, and injoined to reach .
me mathematies and hiſtory; two ſciences Which
ſoon conſoled me for thoſe I renounced, becauſe!
felt that inclination for them, which I have ever
ſince preſerved : the reſt of my time was employed
in learning to write and read well, and in forming
myſeif to exerciſes proper to give gracefulneſs to
the body. It was in theſe principles, joining ſtill a
_ greater attention to form the manners, that the me-
thod of educating youth conſiſted, which was

EY Known

RE OI;

ully
this
r 1s

cep-
edu-
nager

afled |
King
each?
hich |
uſe I
ever
oyed Þ ſtrokes of cruelty, which every one made a merit
| of in his preſence,
| the perſon of this prince, none had ſo great a ſhare
of his confidence as Ambroſe Pare.
| who was only his ſurgeon, had contracted with
E him ſo great : a familiarity, Fong he was a Hugue-

ming
fs to
ſtilh a
> me-

was

non

5 N
9

. l when the conjuncture of the times throwing us,
both bim and me, into the tumult of arms, without
almoſt the hope of coming out of it, theſe exer-

S U L L I.
known to be peculiar to the King of Navarre, be ·
: A Tcauſe he himſelf had been brought up in that man-

11572. O F 35

I followed it till I was ſixteen years of age,

; elles neceſſarily gave place to ſuch as related ſolely

SY

* G23

mining een

: to war, which (renouncing all others) I began with
that of the arquebuſe. |
2 chen do, is to improve his heart by what he is obli-

All that a young man can

ged to with-hold from his underſtanding: for even

8 amidſt the hurry and din of arms, there are not
wanting, to him who knows to look them out, ex-
| ceeellent ſchools of virtue and politeneſs.
ties

on

But un-

. happy, and even all his life, is he, who being en-
gaged in a profeſſion ſo fatal to youth, is deficient
in ſtrength or inclination to reſiſt bad examples.
Though he ſhould have the good fortune to pre-
ſerve himſelf from all ſhameful vice, how ſhall he
inſtruct and fortify bimſelf in the principles that
ther © wiſdom dictates alike to the private man and the
ame

It habit by practice, that no virtuous action can ever
de found painful;

neceſſity of ſaving all by a crime, or of loſing all

prince; that virtue be fo effectually wrought into
and that when reduced to the

by a good action, the heart may be even a ſranger
to the interior ſtruggles of duty and inclination ?

It was not long before Charles felt violent re-
morſe for the barbarous action to which they had
forced him to lend his name and authority. From
the evening of the 24th of Auguſt, he was obſerved
to groan involuntarily at the recital of a thouſand

Of all thoſe who were about.

This man,

not,

[
x
==
. © T8
is '
„
fk
4
8. 14
* \ 4
2 *
a:
4M
WS
7.
* FF
1 5
; $3
17
151
$ *Y
g
[4 . *
n
19
n
HT,
745 "IP
+; {1
175
N .
+. 2
11 N
2 4 *
3 18
1 5

. .

18
1 4
N

.

bc 4 .

1 +

1

11 17 ;
31 >
i

* .
.

nnn
n

44 1
vai. k
*

124 0
FIT. N

.

iin

4 '

11

HAM: 5

115 9

17 MI
: .

+*:'-18 :

: 8 as =

£3 x it 49
8 1

e

49 $1 ;
N

11

i 4

+ 6 2

11
r
3; 7

ol ;n :
'q ">

\>3; $8: &Y

4 1%

1 * Z
WW: © 5
if 7

} +88
* 5 di
[= + $1
8 "ot -
1 45
. ;
1 :
9
* f «

+#: 3 ,
U a 7

W fk

+. 0

18

e

1 1 1

y 4 - :
9%

1 : (+
Fi *
1%
24+ "8
1 e
co is
1)
+ $4
.
1
1
wt 0
14
4 3 u
5 a
:
£ ; »)
D 82
171 «
: 4
C 2
pod
1th,
1 .
*
1
1 3
:
£ 1 .
- =
© + J.
977
1

=
q

453:

7 * |
: .
; F

U

Irn

1 *

5 :

> 1

'l |
|

3 — — ——— — —— —

——

36 r Book 1.
not, that, on the day of the maſſacre, this prince 9
baving ſaid, that it was at that hour that all thge
world muſt become Catholic Parè replied without
emotion, By the light of God, Sire, I cannot
ſp believe but you remember to have promiſed ne-
ver to command me four things, namely, to
e enter into my mother's womb, to be preſent in
a day of battle, to quit your ſervice, or to go 1
« to mals,” The King took him aſide, and open-
ed himſelf to him upon the trouble with which be
felt himſelf agitated. Ambroſe,” ſaid he to bim,
& I know not what has befallen me theſe two or
ce three days paſt, but I feel my mind and body all

& as much diſordered, as if I had a fever. I think

& nocent had not been taken in.” The order
which was publiſhed the day following to difcon-

tinue the ſlaughter, Was the fruit of this conver-
ſation.

The King even believed, that bis hw was

concerned to diſavow all publicly, as he did by the

letters-patent which he {cnt into the provinces. He
there threw: all upon the Guiſes, and would have

had the maſſacre paſs for an effect of their hatred

againſt the Admiral. The particular letters which
he wrote on this ſubject to England, Germany,
Switzerland, and other neighbouring ſtates, were
conceived in the ſame terms.

Doubtleſs it was the Queen-mother and her coun-
cil that made the King comprehend the conſequence

of ſo formal a diſavowal: for, at the end of eight

days, his ſentiments and language were fo orcatly
changed, that he went to hold his bed of jultice in
the parliament, to order other letters- patent to be
regiſtered ; the contents of which were, that no-

thing

ce at every moment, as well when awake as aſleep,
& that theſe mullbcred bodies preſent themſelves 0 1 1
c me, hideous faces, and covered with blood.

« with from my heart, that the infirm and the in-

28
SHY
MA 6
F% s
he: 4

bays —

5 3
1 .
bY; —
+. N
— $53
hs 1
: = 8 3 4
1
* y 9
2 | 0
— -
£ YR

„„ 37

cc thing was done on the 24th of Auguſt but by his
ut |

ot © crime was imputed, in order, if poſlible, to give
je- the name and colour of an execution of juſtice to a
to deteſtable butchery. Theſe letters were addreſſed
in to the governors of provinces, with an order to
go © publiſh them, and to purſue the reſt of the pre-
n. © tended criminals. I ought here to make honour-
he able mention of the Counts de Tende, and de
m, Charny; of Meſſ. de Mandelot, de Gordes, de
or © Saint-Heran, and de Carouge, who openly refuſed
all to execute any ſuch order in their governments.
nk The Viſcount d'Ortez, governor of Bayonne, had
ep, reſolution enough to anſwer Charles, who had
to wrote bim with his own hand, © That on this
1 © point he muſt not expect any obedience +.” _
in⸗ 1 . none The
on Nothing is more certain, than that, during the maſſacre, he
bn woas ſeen with a carabine in his hand, which, *tis ſaid, be fired upon
c. che Calviniſts that were flying. The laſt Marechal de Teſsé was,
in his youth, acquainted with an old man of ninety years of age,
vas u bo had been page to Charles IX. and often told him, that he him
: (elf had loaded that carabine. It is alſo true, that this prince went
the with his court to view the body of the Admiral, which hung by the
He | _ feet with a chain of iron to the gallows of Montfaucon; and one of
ave © his courtiers obſerving it ſmelt ill, Charles replied, as Vitcliuns had
3 done before him, © Ihe body of a dead enemy always ſmells well.“
; ed : Viltaires Henriade, p. 32. & 37. | -
ich I + Claude de Savoy, Count of Tende, ſaved the lives of all the
my, | Proteſtants in Dauphin. When he received the King's letter, by
ere which he was directed to deſtroy them, he ſaid, That could not be
| his Majeſty's order. Eleonor de Chabot, Count of Charny,
L ieutenant-General in Burgundy. There was only one Calviniſt
un- murdered at Dijon. — Francis de Mandelot, governor of Lyon:
nce ble was reſolved to ſave the Reformed; who, nevertheleſs, were all
ht maſlacred in the priſons where he had put them for ſecurity. M. de
5 WU Thou ſays, he only feigned ignorance of this barbarity — Ber-
ally trand de Simiane, Lord of Gordes, a man greatly eſteemed. ——
e in N. de S. Heran de Montmorin, governor of Auvergne: he poſttively
be refuſed to obey, unleſs the King was preſent in perſon. — Janne-
day Le-Veneur, Lientenant-General in Normandy, a man full of
no- W Probity and humanity: he did all that he could to preſerve the Pro-
ning VoL. I. D

expreſs order“, and to puniſh the Huguenots;

to each of whom, I mean the principals, a capital

te{tants

0 —ͤ — amor, — — ——
. — 4

—
——

z
=
.
i
i
l + kd
ft 44
H 59
N by | T8
: *
*
H. if
1 $
a .
Nö
FE i
08 7
- .
1
ae
3 1
.
7 1 > ©
1
"3 .
e
.
N "7
ps $h. TAK
385
* . 1 1
448 .
4 Ly
Ty Pt yt f
Ter: tina
BY 0034; 6
r
1 * . *
.
W
er
e
8 a
: 'y 1
: 1
TT ; 1
1 4 Ei 17
iH ls
N
. v4
ik i
"$3. 551 V8
: b 4 +
An
.
} 54
H
115 1
1
11
ien
10
1
FRE.
: ” x |,
: Me
4 5
1
N
FF,
v3 hk 23
4 1
111
v4 a8;
1 3
1 1110 8
++.
7 7
* 5 4
„
N
. . 1
1
11065
i. 7%
4 's
[>| 1 "IR
$ .
5 1
en.
47 N G
T >
x G
48 14
.
2 1
1 "+;
\ «
20 be :
Ham >
ö 7
. 4 Fy
*£F 536
hy ths —
1 :
1 7 5 /
1 1
.
41 1
M
2 7 is
z 143K"
N
19% 1
A 4 "8 * :
it bay
W
- i **
1 1
$Y 10 3
\ —
. fl
Ws: 1 4
. A
8 5 i
o X |
its 438}
b 4
N 44
1
13
1
bl
2 7 1
1277 1
4% .
'M 8
* A
NN {1
} 4
' hs
3 *
F 9
„ * 2
by 99
Wk
11 J.
N
1.
48 3
U
.
t i .
'
t A
; 8
W
$
147
1
* KY 7
þ 4
[ *
o * 1
t ap ©
128!
1 |
f 540
i; *
1 i.
1 4%
\ $4.5
* 2
i |
*
1
KF. 4
N
14
. 5 n
PO
3 E h
* .
1
ME 41
1 1
\...'þ
11 j
$4
+ 4
f 7
o

38 M E M OI RS Book].

The number of Proteſtants maſſacred during 4 f

eight days, in all the kingdom, amounted to 70,000.
This cruſhing blow conveyed ſuch a ſenſible terror

into the party, that it believed itſelf extinct, and
talked no longer but of ſubmitting, or flying into
foreign countries. A vigorous and unexpected

ſtroke broke yet once this reſolution. Renier *,

a gentleman of the Reformed religion, having, by a A.
kind of miracle, eſcaped out of the hands of the

Lord de Vezins, his moſt cruel enemy, ſaved him-

ſelf, with the Viſcount de Gourdon, and about 3
eighty horſe, and came to Montauban, He found
this city under ſuch a conſternation, and fo little in

a condition to defend itſelf againſt the troops of ü 2
Montluc, which approached, that, daring to ad.
viſe the inhabitants to hold out, he himſelf run the

riſk of being delivered up to Montluc ; which obli- -.

ged him to leave Montauban precipitately. This little
troop fell in with a party of 450 hotſe, belonging to
the army of Montluc, and, ſecking to die glo-
riouſly, performed ſuch prodigious acts of valour,
that they cut in pieces the whole party. Renier re-
turned to Montauban with the good news; he was
now obeyed, and they ſhut the gates upon Mont-
luc. This reſiſtance, and the reſolution of Mont-
auban, being communicated from one to another,
thirty towns followed its example, and conducted
themſelves in a manner that the Proteſtants (beyond

teſtants at Rouen; but he was not maſter of it. — N. Viſcount
d'Ortez, goveinor of all that frontier. See his anſwer to the King.
« Sire, I have communicated your Majeſty's orders to your faithful

inhabitants, and to the troops in the garriſon: I found there good
© citizens, and brave ſoldiers, but not one executioner.” De Tho,
lib. 52. & 53. D'Aubigné, vol. 2. book1. GK.

There is an error in the Memoirs of Sully in this place. It was
Vezins himſelf, a man of great honeſty, but of harſh manners, that
ſaved the life of Renier, whoſe enemy he had a long time been, and
ſtill continued to be, notwithſtanding this action. See this remark-
able hiſtory in M. de Thou, book 52. 535

their

1 1572.
4 their moſt aſpiring hopes) obliged the Catholics to
keep 15

N

thers, K. Charles and the Duke of Alengon.

O F 8 - Wa L 1 # þ # 39
themſelves on the defenſive. _
The latter had at firſt turned all their 8 a-

gainſt Rochelle and Sancerre, which, taking advan-

tage of the general fear, they inveſted. Theſe en-
terpriſes did not ſucceed. Sancerre, after having

ſuffered all the horrors of a famine, of which no

> hiſtory can furniſh us with examples, at laſt made

a ſort of treaty with the beſiegers. For Rochelle,
it fruſtrated all the efforts of the Duke of Anjou,
who had come to beſiege it in perſon; and the no-

mination to the throne of Poland happened very

ſealonably to ſave the honour of this prince. By
another treaty, in which Nimes and Montauban
were comprehended, Rochelle preſerved all its
rights ; and theſe were the only cities which kept
entire the advantages of the jait edicts,

Time, moreover, produced other conjunctures
favourable to the Calviniſts. The Queen- mother
had nothing of real tenderneſs for any of her chil-
dren, excepting only the Duke of Anjou. The
departure of this prince for Poland cauſed her as
much of affliction, as it gave of joy to his two bro-
This.
laſt, by his brother's removal, becoming Duke of

| Anjou, began to form great expectations of the

cetre, in D'Aubigné, vol. 2

crown of France, when he ſaw that the tender
health of Charles, who had no children, was at laſt
changed into a mortal A er The oppoſition

* The Marechal de Montlue, f in his Commentaries finds gicat
fault with the conduct of this ſiege; that they did not ſend«truops
enow, carried oa the affaults improperly, haza ded too much, and
laff:red proviſions to be brought into the place by fea; however, he
ſays, it would have been taken at laſt. He adviſed the Queen- mo-

. ther, from the time ſhe went to Bayonne, to take poſſeſſion of this

city, It would have faved France both men and money had this ad- :
vice been followed. See a relation of the ſieges Rochelle and San-

book 1. La Popelimiere, book 33. and
Matthieu, vol. 1. p. 340. and other hiſtorians,

D2

be

40 M E MOI R Ss Bock I.
he thought he had reaſon to apprehend the Queen-
mother would make to bis deſign, totally alienated

bim from her. This princeſs, by placing her con-
fidence in a ſmall number of foreigners of low ex-

traction, that governed her finances, had made the

greateſt part of the nobility almoft as diſcontented
as the Duke of Alengon. He underhand fomented
their revolt, and perſuaded them to avail themſelves |
of the aſſiſtance of the Proteſtants, in whoſe diſ-
grace they partook. To ward off this blow, —
at once to ſatisfy the Duke of Anjou, and her ten.
derneſs for the King of Poland, ſhe began from
that moment to think in earneſt of marrying ow
_ tirſt of theſe princes with the Queen of England,
and of procuring for him the ſovereignty of the |
Low Countries: but his diſcontentment had aready |
produced its effect. .

Charles, from another motive, joked in his bro:
ther's reſentment againſt the Queen their mother.
The diſeaſe with which he found himſelf attacked,
began at Vitry, whither he had accompanied the
King of Poland, in appearance to do him honour,
but in reality to taſte the pleaſure of ſeeing him
leave his kingdom. The condition to which he
ſoon ſaw himſelf reduced, created a thouſand ſu-
ſpicions againſt Catherine in his mind; fo that, uni-
ting his intereſt with the Reformed, he began 10

ſhew them a great deal of good-will. It principally

appeared in his permitting them, notwithſtanding
the oppoſition of the Queen- mother, to ſend depu-
ties to propoſe their grievances and their demands
at court. Theſe deputies meeting with others,
who came on the part of the Catholic provinces,
that had been prevailed upon by the diſcontented
lords to demand a ſuppreſſion of certain new taxes,
and a diminution for ten years of the old, they
Joined each other. The writ which containnd their
nds, was not ſigned indeed but by four or
five

18 : 544
N

„
88
9

* wot

A

© five Slain; the terms, heat in which it

| by conceived manifeſting unſhaken firmneſs in a

Ley

8 9 party that ſeemed to derive new ſtrength even from
its loſſes, the Queen-mother conceived a violent

ſpite. The King now refuſed her his authority,
and all ſhe could do was to uſe delays, till the death

ol this prince, which ſhe well foreſaw was not far
diſtant. The Reformed penetrated into her inten-

tion, and, that they might not be prevented, ap-
peared ſuddenly i in arms. This was called the in.

© furredtion of Shrove Tueſday, becauſe they poſe
ſeſſed themſelves of ſeveral towns on that day *.
\_ Montgomery þ returned from England to Norman-
dy, where he fortified himſelf. The Queen- mo-
| ther, and the whole court, was then at St Ger—
main-en-Laye. She thought, at leaſt, to take ſuch
meaſures, that the princes ſhould not eſcape her. But
the attempts that were every day made to get them
out of her power, did not a little imbarraſs them .

Guitry and Buhy came one day to St Germain in

arms, and thought to have carried them off. The
alarm was very great; but the conſpirators not
| having well ſecured their blow, Catherine had time
| to fly with the princes to Paris; where ſhe cauſed

behead Coconnas and La-Mole||, the contrivers of the

| plot, and impriſon the Marechals de Montmorency

and de Coſſè. After this ſhe placed guards about
the King of Navarreand the Duke of Anjou. She {ent

alſo ſoldiers to Amiens to arreſt and fetch the Prince |

. Fontenay. 158540 Melle, os, Tonnay- 8 Tal-
mont, Rochefort, Oriol, Livron, Orange, and other places i in Poi.

tou, Languedoc, Dauphine, Cc.

Gabriel, Count of Montgomery, the ſame that ounces

f Henry II.

i See an account of this ee in the life of Do-Pleis ler-

i nay, book 1. p. 26.

La-Mole and Coconnas were beloved by two great princeſſes, |

| [the Queen of Navarre and the Duchels of Nevers]. Love and j jea- |
: louſy brought them both to dettruction. Mem. of Nev, vol. 1. p. 75. -

. of.

3

ö M OI R 8 Book].

of Conde, who was there narrowly watched. He
got notice, diſguiſed himſelf, and, deceiving his
ſpies, fled bappily a third time into Germany, where,
upon his arrival, he was declared generaliſſimo of =
the troops of the religion in Franſe. —
I he Queen- mother loſt no time in marching all 1
hei forces againſt the Huguenots, divided into three

armies. Matignon led the firſt into Normandy,

where Montgomery, having only two or three in- 7
conſiderable places * in his poſſeſſion, was ſoon de

feated, and obliged to deliver himſelf up into the |;

Duke de Montpenſier, went to inveſt Fontenay,

and afterwards Luſignan, which he took, notwith-

ſanding the noble defence made by the Viſcount
de Rohan. The Prince- Dauphin, who commanded
the third, took likewiſe ſome ſmall places in Dau—
phine; but after ſitting down before Livron, ſhame-
fully raifed the ſiege. All was ſuſpended, and a
part of the gencrals recalled to court, on account
of the King's death, which happened this year on
the day of Pentecoſt. This prince died at the caſtle

of Vincennes, in the moſt exquiſite torments, and

bathed in his blood. In this ſtate the unhappy day
of St Bartholomew was always preſent to his mind.
He manifeſted, by his tranſports and by his tears,

* Theſe were Carentan, Valogne, Saint-Lo, and 8 In

a 34

this laſt be was taken fipt.ting like a man in deſpair, D*Autigne,

u bo was himſelf a zcaious Calvinift, cannot certainiy be ſuſpeAted of
Pertiality upon this queſtion relating to the pretended promiſe given

to the Count by the Matechal. The place,” fays he, © was ta-
& ken, erd lite was promiſed to all but the Count, to whom artfu!
« affurances were given, that be ſhould not be delivered into any
© other bands but thoſe of the King. This I am convinced of, not-
6 withſtanding the contrery has been written. France js guilty of
„ but too wavy petjmies; there is no cecaſion for inventing any to
& charge her with,” 4h vel. 2. bo 2. chap. 7. Montgom ery ſid
mittcd to his fate Ike a hero. De Thou, Lravitome, GC,

the

hands of this marechal, who ſent him to Paris, „
Where he was beheaded. The ſecond, under the

bigne,
Ted «©
given
28 la-
ar tful
to any
t, not-

ity of

any 0

ſad-

the

574.
4 | the regret which he felt .
rain + died alſo this year, in the Pope's territories, |
on the 23d of December, a day remarkable for
Q one of the molt dreadful. tempeſts that ever was

eric and a great (wearer,
ige when be died.
Ia. However, there were no proofs found of his being poiſoned,
| as the author of the Legend or Claude Duke of Guiſe ſays he
| wes, tlis death was occaſioned by violent excreiſes, to which he
| Was VELy much addicted, and a great quantity of bile, that often
made his eyes look quite yellow.
not lreighr, his oulders were bent, his legs thin and weak, his com-
Picxion pale, his eyes ghaſtly, and his countenance fierce.

| thieu, vol. 1. bock 6. in fin. and the life of this prince written in La-
a by Papire Maſſon. |

VV
The Cardinal of Lor-

o F

ſeen.
The King of Poland was informed of bie bro-
ther's death in thirteen days, and the night follow-

: "Y ing he ſtole from the court and fled. He viſited by
> the way the Emperor Maximilian,
Duke of Savoy, and took his route through Ve.
nice .
ccqually wife and conformable to his intereſts, to

In all theſe places, they gave him counſel

grant the Reformed peace, and the free exerciſe of

|| their religion : bur ſo little did he profit by it, that
+ he broke, e * his art wal! in France, the 5

# He ſent for the Kite of Hs in whom only he acknow-
\edged to have found faith and honour, and moſt affectionately re-
commended to him his wife and daughter. Perefixe. At his death
he ſaid, he was well pleaſed he had left no children, who would have
deen too young to govern the ſlate, in ſuch troubleſome times. Monte
Jac, De Thou, and almoſt all the hiltorians, agree, that if he had
bed, he would have been a very great king. He had a large ſhare

of courage, prudence, eloquence, penetration, economy, and ſo-

vriety : he loved polite literature and learned men; but he was cho-
He was no more than twenty-five years of

Many contuſions were found in his body. De

His ſtature was tall, but he was

See Mat-

} Charles, Cardinal of Lorrain, Archbiſhop of Rheims. See his
character in Brantomc's memoirs, book 3. He died, ſays he, at
Avignon by poiſon, if we may give credit to the legend of $t Nicaiſe,
p. 138. and moſt piouſly, according to Mannie, who wrote his cu;

| bopium, vol. 1. book 7, p. 407.

+ The reader may conſult Matthieu, vol. 1. at the beginning of

book 7. upon the paris of Henry III. of Tongs and the parti-
culars of his hurney. |

truce

and Charles

S r 2 — *
"oa a 5 — — 2 —w

1.
4

bt xn oo inc — —

- N
234k 11
F 49
1
1 «| "4
en
LING: +
.
„
1+ GEM
n
£4 its if
[ SORES
M
7 ITE
vo, 4}
IIe
4
; 8,788
1
ie.
q ol 8 * 6
1195 .
4134 "SY
Y Yi.
* K *
1 P
1 $
8 oy 2
1 en
+: 4-3
n
| 175 8
? 4 by ? . |
8 881 tz 18
N . U
en
1 4
„ ö
f . El
: 142 i
3 is $3
$200" v* 354
11 n 171
anne
1 1 85 1 15
12 $1 1
N N.
n
ani
17 il +832
(LETT
Fr 45488
l n
A 4
r
it VF
H * 7 > -
* f
n
14 Way: 1
125 0 389
ane
n
1
r
_— M7. |.
2. lie .
? oy
\ > 8-2 v
. N
iin
i
4 1
12
een
15: 00's
1 1
Ny . IS
_ o
N rr: * 14
! 13 x "1 *
N 81
43 k
"R318 95
r
* 3.
7 1
3
9 i f i"
: i; » 3 %
34+ [
57 5 4
= 2 F-
+ 7 1
1
1 AT
2
* -©
9
Us < .
* 4
at 8:4
; 3 3
=? 4 2
1
3
9
4» if - [8M
4 4
2 | o 5
{1:23
1 # 13 :
. ;
7 7 T% 7
18
3 1 1
: 44
1 x | }
». *8 L
q "68
r
92 N
1 4838
4,38
4:6 F
31
7 1
IE
"3h
2 *
* Y
.
13 3: 48:8
3 * 1
\ = 1
4 © 48}
7 7
57
4

44 MEMOIRS Bock l.

truce that had been granted them for three months,

and changed it, at the ſolicitation of Catherine, into
a declaration of war againft the whole Proteſtant
party; to which a great number of Catholics had
lately joined themſelves, out of affection to the

| Marechal de Damville, irritated by the .
ment of his brother.

The King went in per ſon to by ſiege for a \ ſecond

time to Livron, which he was likewiſe obliged to
raiſe; and brought nothing away with him, but the
ſhame of finding himſelf inſulted from the top of
the walls by the women, and even by the very chil-
_ dren, who heaped alſo upon the Queen-mother re-
proaches the moſt ſatirical and the moſt offenſive,

From this moment he began to ſhew himſelf fo pro.
digiouſly different from what he had been when
Duke of Anjou, that it may be ſaid, his ſhameful
flight to Avignon was the epocha of bis ignominy,

of the misfortunes of his kingdom, and of his own,
In his journey to Rheims, whither he went imme-
dilately after to be conſecrated, he became amorous

of one of the daughters of the Count de Vaude-

mont *, and married her.

It was a happinels for him, that the Duke of An-

jou was all this time cloſely conhned : but after

Henry's coronation, this prince, who again quitted
his name to take that of Monſieur, enjoyed, as well

as the King of Navarre, a little more liberty, which
was retrenched or augmented according to the
news that were received of their correſpondence

with the enemies of the Queen-mother +. Another

care of Catherine was to diſunite theſe two princes.

This

* Louiſa of tri, * of Nicolas, Duke of 3
Count of Vaudemont. Matthieu gives this princeſs great praiſes for
ner virtue and affection to her huſband, Vel.2.bock 3. p. 438.

+ Henry III. hated Monſieur, on account of his having, as he ſup-

| poſed. attempted to poiſon him. He endeavoured to engage the
King of Navarre to Kill this prince, but he received the propoſal with

horror.

RT
„

N

r e aw Zh

O F EVLLY. —

s, | 5 iT his ſhe effected, by promiſing each of them ſepa ·
ro | nately the poſt of Lieutenant-General of the armies
nt | France, and by employing the means which fo
ad ſeldom failed to ſucceed with her, I would ſay, in-
he | trigues of gallantry, and rivalſhips. She could not
n- manage ſo well, but Monſieur eſcaped at Jaſt : he
deceived his guards, and fled in diſguiſe the 17th of
ad September at night. He no ſooner gained Dreux,.

to than he ſaw himſelf attended by a numerous O00 3
he and at the head of a powerful party. | 18
of | [he Prince of Conde had laboured fo effectually

ll. in Germany, that Prince Caſimir was 7 to enter
e- France with a ſtrong army.

e, Catherine had recourſe to another game. She
o. endeavoured to regain Monſieur by the moſt ſpe-
en cious offers; ſhe purſued him from city to city,
ul always attended by a retinue of fine ladies, on

ö - whom ſhe reckoned ſtill more. In a word, * the ma-
naged ſo well, that he fell at laſt into the ſnare ſne

e- © laid for him.

s The King of Navarre, who had never ſuſpetted 5

e- | the trap of The lieutenant-generalſhip, imagined ſhe
could no longer fail him, and rejoiced at firſt to be

n. fairly rid of Monſieur, whom he always regarded as

er | his rival. The Ladies de Carnavalet and de Sauves «

d drew him out of his error. They made him com-

it prehend, that if either of the two could pretend to-

h | this fine employment, it was Monſieur, who could

de make it the price of his reconcilement; but that,

e in reality, Catherine deceived them both, and ; as

Ty

| horror. Henry III. being il with a diſorder in his ear, Henry IV.

* = laid one day to the Duke of Guiſc, whora he loved, Our man is
13 very ill.“ The Duke anfwered the firſt time, „It will be no-
thing.“ The ſecond, We mult think of it.” And the third he
r, © laid to him, * ] underſtand you, Sir; ” and ſtriking the bilt of his
or © ford, 4 See, Sir,” added he, what is at your ſervice. „» Matthieu,
| I 5 2 back 7. p. 419. |
p- | * They conferred tegether at Champigny- -ſur-Vade, a houſe be·
2 | longing to the Duke ot Moatpenſier, upon the confines of Touraine.

h tor

46 | M E M O 1 R S Bock I.
for him, he muſt look for nothing but a captivity ©
ſtill more rigorous. This prince opened his eyes,.
and applying himſelf wholly to recover his liberty,
he found the means one day of February, when be
was hunting near Senlis *. Having knowingly di-
ſperſed his guards, he inſtantly paſſed the Seine at
Poiſſy, gained Chateau-Neuf in Timerais, Which!
_ belonged to him, where he took up ſome money of
his farmers, and, followed only by thirty horſe, ar.
rived at Alencon, which the Lord de Kertra had
ſeized in his name. There he bad a conference
with Monſieur and the Prince of Conde, who a-
greed to unite all their forces. From Alengon the
King of Navarre went to Tours; where he was
no fooner arrived, than he publicly reſumed the ex.
erciſe of the Proteſtant religion. I was one of thoſe
who AECOmpantce this prince in his flight, and in
all this journey. He ſent me from Tours with Fer.
vaques, to Jemand the Princeſs his ſiſter of the
court of France, She was delivered to us; and
the ſecond day aſter, this princeſs alſo reſuming her
religion, heard ſermon at Chateaudun, and joined
the King, who waited for her at Parthenay.
The three princes, after the junction of their
troops, found themſelves at the head of above
50,000 effective men, and made Catherine tremblc
in her turn. All ſeemed to announce a moſt bloody
war. I threw myſelf into the infantry as a ſimple
voluntier, waiting the occaſion of an employment
more ſuitable. I made my trial of arms in the
neighbourhood of Tours, where there were ſeveral
ſkirmiſhes between the detachments of the different
parties. The King of Navarre hearing that my be.
haviour had more of temerity than courage in it,
ordered me to be called, and laid to me, Roloy

„ ·—— — — a . EY _— = zi

——

'* ae this detail in D7Aubigne, vol. 2, chap. 18. Mattien, vol.

bock 7. p. 420. GMcG.
+ According to others, 35,000 only. ;
N Ons Ces 8 if

* 1. 010. 47
iy

*« jt is not here that I would have you hazard your

ves „ life, I commend your courage, but I deſire
ry, e you ſhould employ it on a better occaſion.”
be This occaſion was not ſo near as we all believed,
au becauſe Catherine, not finding herſelf the ſtrongeſt,
e al had recourſe to her ordinary management. She
nich talked of peace; ſhe offered more than we thought
olf we could demand; promiſes coſt this artful princeſs
wo! nothing. In a word, ſhe had the addreſs to make
ad

nad the princes lay down their arms, and peace was
ence concluded and ſignech three months after. This

o vas called Monſteur's peace; for, beſides that

| the | Catherine” s principal view in making it was to gain

Mas this prince, he was ſo greatly the dupe of her fi-

ex. neſſe, that at laſt he wiſhed for it, and ſolicited it

hol: more ardently than any other perſon. It mult be con-

F. I. feſſed, it was one of the moſt advantageous : the
ar

princes, however, never committed a fault more

F tbe irreparable than when they put their hands to it.

and Plonſieur ſoon after committed a ſecond, no leſs

g her | capital, when, contrary to his proper intereſt, he

Oincd ſeparated from the Reformed 1. By this prepoſte-
35 rous ſtep he loſt, both on the {ide of France and of
their

England, the occaſions of becoming perhaps one of
above the moſt powerful princes in Europe. Thus all
emblc ¶ turned ſtill to the liking of the Queen- mother, who,

loody Win making this peace, had nothing in view but the

imp ſeilanion of her enemies.
ment

n the by By the edit of ſixty three articles, aſſed. at the convent of
everal MW keulieu near Loches in Touraine, between the Queen-mother and
Front the princes, the memory of the Admiral de Coligny and the other
Froteſtant chiefs was reſtored, chambers of juſtice, compoſed equally
ny be Wt Proteſtants and Catholics, were granted in the principal parlia-
in it, Wrncots, and ſeveral cities given for ſecurity. Monſieur procured alſo
R ofny large appennage for himſelf, and a conſiderable ſum in money and
oo 4 WMivels for Prince Caſimir. De Thou, D' Aubigns, &c.

8 + To ſpeak more juſtly, Monſieur, on this occaſion, ſacrificed the

* King of Navarre and the Huguenots to his intereſts, or to his politics.
In the memoirs of Nevers, vol. 1. p. go. et ſeqq may be ſeen all
ine ſteps taken by 5 party on the ſubjeQ of this treaty.

Henry,

1 M E M OI A 8s . Bookl

Henry, ſeeing the peace made, retired to Ro.
chelle, where the inhabitants, except that they of-
fered him no canopy, paid him all the honours they
could have done to the King. The Catholics in
_ this prince's train did not meet with fo gracious a
reception. Caumont, afterwards Duke of Epernon,

was not ſuffered to enter the city, nor any other

whom they could convict of having imbrued his
ſword in the bloody {laughter of the 24th of Auguſt.
The King of Navarre {taid but ſhort while in

this city. Scarce did he open his mouth to de-

mand the accompliſhment of the treaty, till he be-
came ſenſible of the greatneſs of his fault. Cathe-
rine denied ſhe had promiſed any thing to the Hu.
guenots, who were obliged to take up arms again
before the expiration of the year.

I quitted my firſt poſt, M. de Lavardin, my re-
lation, who had a great affection for me, having
made me take the enſigncy of the company he com.
manded. I was named to defend Perigueux, and

afterwards Villeneuve, in Agenois, threatened with

a ſiege. The King of Navarre propoſed to under-
take ſome conſiderable enterpriſes ; but the occa-
ſion was loſt : the greateſt part of the troops upon
which he had reckoned, then failed him ; and the
reſt were in fo bad a plight, that it was with difh-
colty he made two enterpriſes, the one upon Reole,
the other on St Macary ; in the laſt of which he
failed. Favas, who conducted that of Reole, put
me at the head of fifty foldiers, who entered it
without almoſt any danger. I demanded the ſame
commiſſion of Langoiran, to whom the aſlault cf
St Macary was intruſted; he granted it to my cou-
fin Bethune and to me: but Favas retained us in
the ſecond troop. This I mention as an inſtance
of the firſt ſignal happineſs I had in war; for the
inhabitants of St Macary, having had notice of our
defign, deceived us lo effectually, that not a 2
| | | | 0

* _ DOR ESR; i : i x *
. : — r 2
OE N I eel Es . = <4 ny : #8
. ” "3 2h th 3 Rs 4 o "
3 r e "Sf 5
: 7
” bo "4 . „ ©

5 : 3 7 Wy a
e
.
5 | 15 O 5
= 7 5 6. i l +
7 * -

of the firſt troop who had courage to enter, ever re-
S turned. | 8 8

49

At the ſiege of Ville-Franche, in Perigord, which

© was afterwards carried on by Lavardin, I was ex-

poſed to a more real danger. During the aſſault,

pbuaving mounted the wall with my colours, I was
© overthrown by the pikes and halberts into the

ditch, where I lay ſunk in the mud, and fo in-
tangled with my colours, that, without the ſuc- .
cours of La-Trape, my valet de chambre, and
ſome ſoldiers, who helped me to mount, I had in-
fallibly periſhed. The city being forced while they
.— were parleying on the walls, it was entirely pilla-
ged. I gained a purſe of 1000 crowns in gold for
my part, which an old man, who was purſued by
uiye or (ix ſoldiers, gave me to fave his life. The

name of Ville-Franche recalls to my memory a ſin-

gular adventure that happened ſome time after. The

inhabitants of this town having formed the deſign
of ſeizing upon Montpazier, another little neigh-

bouring town, by ſurpriſe, they choſe for the exe-
cution of it the very ſame night which the citizens

of Montpazier, knowing nothing of this, had pitch-
ed upon to make themſelves maſters of Ville-
Franche. Chance, moreover, ſo ordered it, that
the parties taking different ways, did not meet;
all was executed with fo much the leſs difficulty,
that the walls both of the one place and the other
were wholly without defence. They pillaged, they
glutted themſelves with booty; it was a happy
world, till day appeared, and diſcovered thei- miſ-
take. The compoſition was, that each ſhould re-
turn to his own home, and that all ſhould be put in
ts firſt ſtate. This is an image of war as it was
carried on at this time: it conſiſted in ſeizing by
ſubtilty or aſſault the towns and the caſtles of the
enemy; this occaſioned, however, engagements
often very bloody. ES
VoL. I. | E Þ

SD: M E M O I R S8 Dek.
I will not diſſemble, that the King of Navarre

Was very ill ſerved. His army was almoſt equallx
compoſed of Proteſtants and Catholics ; and he
ſometimes ſaid, that his obligations were greateſt
to the laſt, becauſe they ſerved him diſintereſtedly,

and through pure attachment to his perſon. But
it was this mixture of Catholics and Proteſtants _

that hurted his affairs. Meſſ. de Turenne, de Mont-
gomery, de Guitry, de Luſignan, de Favas, de Par-

_ daillan, and other principal Proteſtants, had an in-
vincible averſion to Meſſ. de Lavardin, de Mioſſens,
de Grammont, du Duras, de Sainte-Colombe, de
 Roquelaure, de Bogole, de Podins, and other Ca-
tholic officers. This manifeſted itſelf, among other
_ occaſions, with reſpect to myſelf, in a quarrel I had
with Frontenac. This officer having treated me as
a young man, added with contempt, “ that if my
“ noſe were wrung, it would yield milk.“ I re-
plied, that J found myſelf ſtrong enough to draw
blood from his with my ſword. This quarrel made
a noiſe; and what was very ſingular, though my
- aggreſſor was a Catholic, and myſelf a Proteſtant,
yet the Viſcount de Turenne * promiſed him his af-
ſiſtance, and that of his Proteſtant friends, againſt
me ; which M. de Lavardin being informed of, he
and his Catholics offered their ſupport to me. The
hatred which the Viſcount conceived againſt me,
proceeded from my having taken the part of Lan-
goiran, (to whom I was obliged), in a quarrel he
had with that nobleman. M. de Turenne pretended,
that where-ever he and Langoiran were together,
the latter ſhould receive orders from him as his
general. Langoiran, who believed himſelf of as
good a family as Turenne, made a jeſt of his pre-
tenſions ; and adding ſome ſtrokes of raillery, ſpoke Þ| -

—

Henry de la Tour, Viſcount de Turenne, afterwards Duke of
. of

Bouillon.

„e. OF 8 U LL TI. 51
of Turenne as of a bigot, who came over to the
Reformed, only becauſe Buſly * had ſupplanted him
in the favour of Monſieur. When all was calm, I
* was counſelled to court Turenne. I conſented ;
but he anſwered my advances fo ill, that I drew
back, and we continued colder than before.

This animoſity of party created an oppoſition in

the counſels of the King of Navarre, which blaſted
apart of his deſigns, and in particular that upon
Marmande. Lavardin having attacked it, againſt the

advice of La-Nous, and even that of the King, he
cauſed ſeveral bodies, of ahundred arquebuſiers each,
do advance, with orders to poſſeſs themſelves of the
hollow and other advantageous places near the
woyalls of this city. He gave the command of one
to me, with which I came to poſt myſelf at two
hundred paces diſtant from the place. I was ſcarce
there, when I was attacked by a detachment of the
F beſieged three times ſuperior to mine. I intrenched
© - myſelf, and being favoured by ſome houſes, de-
fended myſelf a long time. The King of Navarre,
who ſaw the danger to which we were expoſed, ran
to us, covered only with a cuiraſs, fought the whole
day, and gave us all time to ſeize theſe poſts ; but

they were of little uſe to us, as we had not men
enow to ſurround the city on all ſides; and the

* King of Navarre would have had the chagrin, of
not having only ſat down before it, but ſhamefully

of raiſing the ſiege, had not the arrival of the Mare-
chal de Biron, with propoſitions of accommodation,
furniſhed him with an honourable pretext for with-
drawing his troops. „%% Ota
A truce only could be agreed upon; during which
the King of Navarre went to Bearn, to ſee the Prin-

Lewis de Clermont de Buſſy-d'Amboiſe, celebrated for his va-
lour and perſonal accompliſhments. In an affair of gallantry he had
ſome time after with the Lady de Montſoreau, he was killed by her
huſband and his domeſtics” 1 .

. E 2 ceſs

1
4
[f bi
0 U
44
1
fi

— 2 —

—

— —

— —
— — 27 * Oh
—
— a. *
- b — — _
ho — WY Ca PR ]—˙ Rr yt en tr >

bod _ ma <
— REDD — — —

—— — Is gg” — rr
. —oy gen cn nn —

52 M E M OI R S Bock .
ceſs his ſiſter, or rather the young T ignonville a

with whom he was in love. He permitted me to
accompany him; and giving back my enſigncy to

M. de Lavardin, who beſtowed it upon young Be-

thune, my couſin, I quitted my equipage of war,
and took one more conformable to the character in

which I was to appear. My economy during three

or four years, joined to my military profits, made
my finances ſo conſiderable, that I faw myfelf now
in a concition to entertain ſeveral gentlemen in my

Pay, with whom I attached myſelf folely to the

perſon of the King. As I had no inclination to de-
ſcend from this ſtation, I eſtabliſhed ſuch regular
order in my domeſtic affairs, and in my company,

that the King of Navarre, attentive to the conduct

of his loweſt officers, confeſſed to me afterwards,

that I owed the greater part of the efteem with

which he honoured me, to the diſcreet economy

he obſerved in this arrangement. It was my youth

only that could make it extraordinary ; but I was
early ſenſible of what advantage it is, to ſettle order
within a family. This diſpoſition, in my opinion,

forms a very advantageous prejudice, either to a

ſoldier or to a ſtateſman.
During our ſtay at Bearn, nothing was thought
of but rejoicings and gallantry. The taſte which

Madame, the King's ſiſter, had for theſe diverſions,

proved an inexhauſtible ſource of them to us. Of
this princeſs I learned the trade of a courtier, with

which I was greatly Uunacquainted. She had the
goodneſs to put me in all her parties; and I fe-

member, ſhe would kindly teach me herſelf the
ſteps of a dance in a ballet that was performed with
a great deal of magnificence.

* This young lady was daughter to Madam de Th: go»
verneſs to Madame the King of Navarre's ſiſter. She was ordinarily

called in this court Mademoiſelle Navarre. Is afterwards married
che Baron of *

The

N e W n „ - r BI EY Drs Ao 5 2 > 2 8 j a , . . 8
an 8 — e 5 1 rl rn 3 * * * Ts ITS, 4 ** N ah bg - 2 ok - 4 % 3 N
8 rn £ . 845 7 o oo * N * N 1 od 5 r Y » .
4 : l

*

7
r
. 1

» 3) J
„
22
2

n 83 N ES

8
ä

„
7 8 +
; 9

of Navarre, who had been informed that the cit

of Eauſe, excited by the mutiniers, had refuſed en-
trance to a garriſon he ſent thither, ordered us to
come, with our arms concealed under our hunting

"habits, to a certain part of the country, where he
waited for us himfelf. He arrived at the gates
of this city before they could be advertiſed of his
march, and entered it without obſtacle, at the head
ol fifteen or fixteen, who had followed him cloſer

than the reſt of the troop. The mutiniers percei-

It

- Þ ">. : 0 v 5 tp >.> - n « 4 b . — c oþ * 7 2 1 . Rs vs 34 p 8 A
8. 0 8 7 . 8 I 2. 3 - » * "7 F 3 . , * © 5 5 N s
= r 2 OTIS 8 2 . 3 : 7 " - * 4 4 £4 E 1 * 5 8 3 1 [1
5 7 ERIN 8 8 e q 8 . 3 POTS: POTION het. n 5 WRAY ny A. A 2.5. For N 6 WOES Lo OD on ar to a eng
ps; r 770 A . i nb SO bg Nen e b 1 - 4 e eee *

ving this, called out to have the draw bridge in-
ſtantly let down; which was accordingly done, and
fell almoſt upon the buttocks of my horſe and Be-

thune's, ſo that we were ſeparated from the body,
Which remained without the eity. The rebels at
the ſame time rung the alarm-bell, and arming ha-
ſtily, a troop of fifty ſoldiers came thundering up-
on us. Among theſe we diſtinguiſhed three or four
voices, Which cried, “ Aim at the ſcarlet cloak, and
„ the white plume, for it is the King of Navarre.” |
« My friends, my companions,” ſaid this prince,

turning towards us, © it is here that you muft ſhew
e courage and reſolution, for on this our ſafety de-

© pends: follow me then, and do as I do, without

“ firing your piſtols, which cannot carry,” As he
ended theſe words, he marched fiercely up to the

mutiniers with his piſtol in his hand. They could
not ſuicain the ſhock, and were inſtantly diſperſed.
Three or four ſmall bodies of men preſented them-

ſelves afterwards, and theſe we drove before us in
the fame manner. But the enemies drawing to-
gether, to the number of 200, and our forces be-
ing greatly diminithed, the danger became extreme,
The King retired to a gate, which facilitated his

defence, and there he kept firm. He had the pre-

ſence of mind to order two of us to mount on the
belfrey, and make a ſign to our companions, who
WS | 3 continued

54 MEMOIRS Bookl.

continued in the field, to haſten and force the gate. |

This they performed with the leſs difficulty, as hap-
pily. the bridge bad not been drawn up.

Thoſe of the citizens who were well affected to
the K ing, but had been obliged to ſubmit to the ſe-

Qin1wus, ſecing the ſoldiers ready to enter the city,

attacked in their turn the rebels behind. They de-
fended themſelves reſolutely, till the gate being
forced, the city was filled with our troops. All

would have been put to the ſword, and even the 5

city abandoned to pillage, had not the principal in-
babitants, with their conſuls at their head, thrown
themſelves at the feet of the King who ſuffered
bimſelf to be ſoftened, and contented himſelf, for
all the puniſhment, with ordering four of them to
be hanged who had fired at the white plume.

The King of Navarre left * Bethune governor in
Faule, and advanced haſtily towards Mirande, upon
the advice which he received that St Criq, a Ca-
tholic gentieman of his party, had poſſeſſed himſelf
of the city; but not having men enow to keep it,
had been obliged to withdraw into the tower, where
he was beſieged, and very warmly prefſed by the

citizens and garriſon of the place. Notwithſtand-

ing the King marched with all poſſible diligence, he
could not prevent the misfortune of this officer,
Who had juſt been taken, and burnt with all his
troop, when the King of Navarre preſented himſelf
before Mirande. The inhabitants, who thought to

draw him into the fame ſnare, took care to conccal

What had happened, and made the trumpets ſound,
a. if St Ctiq was rejoicing for the aſſiſtance they
brought him; when a Huguenot ſoldier in the city,
perceiving the danger into which the King of Na-
varre was going to precipitate himſelf, and in which
we mult infallibly have periſhed with him, through

o See all theſe little military expeditions in D*Aubigne, book 2
the

EW, ;
:
:

A | bu JSC OD
be great ſuperiority of the enemies numbers, came
cover the wall, to advertiſe us of the ſnare that was
q! 1 laid for us. The King after this thought of no-
thing but retreating; but as he was very far ad-

be

n

a

vanced, the inhabitants of Mirande, who perceived
the moment that their deſign was prevented, ſallied

. out, and attacked him in his retreat. We found
= ourſelves, young Bethune and 1, engaged ſo for-
' wardly, that we were inveloped. We therefore

fought like deſperate men, who were reſolved to fell

their lives dearly - but we muſt have yielded, ex-
treme laſſitude hardly permitting us to ſupport our

arms ; when, happily for us, Luſignan and the elder
Bethune, whom the King of Navarre had ſent to
our aſſiſtance, charged ſo rudely, that our aſſailants
gave back, and afforded us the means of retreating.
The Sieur d' Y vetot, a gentleman of Normandy, and
La-Trape, my valet de chambre, were of great
ſervice to me upon this occaſion. |

The King of Navarre, ſeeing the day declining,
gave orders to ceaſe fighting, and retired to Jegun;
where, two or three days after, the royal troops,
with the Marechal de Villars at their head, appear-
ed in arms, drawn thither by the rumour of the at-
tack upon Mirande. It had been temerity to at-
tack them; therefore we kept intrenched, and en-
deavoured only to engage them to force us : bur
this they did not dare to attempt. The two armies
continued in view of each other till night. A com-
bat of fix againſt fix was propoſed by Lavardin and
La Deveſe ; but while we diſputed upon whom the
lot ſhould fall, the King on the one ſide, and the
Marquis de Villars on the other, drew off their
troops as the night was approaching.

Some time after, the King of Navarre going
from Leictoure to Montauban, commanded the
Count de Meilles and me, with five and twenty
horſe, to fall on a boay of muſketeers, which the

inhabitants

5
$
;
4
1 Vs ;
4 ys
4 4418
8 j?
„ N ;
8 1 72
12 * |
cy by +. .
I", 141K
* 1 th ?
I. | 1
n
.
ii
by 4
3 Ny | ! ot
i Ar
n
11
. 4 1
108 + BY
.4 $M
11 :
n
i $3465
LE „
D
D
5 "4 += | f
THI >. *
Mh
r
. 141 fk
SORTS ic
n BER
WW; e 149
YH © 453-8
n 1 00H '
4 KY '
An 5
19 n
8 4. nay
Nane 11
e
n 4s
: n 85> E
S391 + RAE] 72 9
I "ih k 15.2
F V2 1.
. ll :
38 U :
{+ "1 17 $91 } if
* il D 1 *
BILL. 8
7 1485 [
jt
118 1
48, * ;
i Y ö
If.
SHALE: |
= "
4 +. £
af * 12 4
4 21.3554 4 14 4
1 4 = >
Tx $152
TTY 1
3. HH 7
. 'S
9 141
4 8
To 444800
N .
7 1
4
o RA 7
9 « (B82 2
y Ane 1
=, e 131 7
1e kt
r
"Th it + i
lo ** 5 1
71 WE 4 10
; *
B [4
"TW 6 1.5
* MN :
r :
„ 14
. IN 1 —
A
1 "BF 4
n
7126 L [
g - 441.87
1
4 WS, 14
1 119
# * * 3 $15
+= 5! 4
Kh 12
* C Foo
: -
- 7%.
+ FI
3 * *
«© 3
4 HEY
r
„ N
4 7+
. i
"4; 18:8
. 25 7
**. 17
*” 7 *
5 =
1 1 1 *
£4" N
11. Cp
182 Ma 7
Ak Wa
.
$ :
4. 175
in 4 *
2 5.4108
* 8 Nj
Lo.) *
£ 3: .
ye Teen
#30 by *
. *
11-4 YR
At $7:
by oo "v0 J

I a0 ar
- C5 * .
W
Rn a: 7
2: 72
—
—

— 8 — >a
— - - —
pol 2 OE — 2 ene
2 ä 1 TO
7 1 72 5
1 n De TC 2
ſe OED FA 3 ay — 8
2 — — 2 — * LE
w rr. — ,
— r 3 r
_— 2222 2 (gs © —

*

56 MEMOIRS Book I.

inhabitants of Beaumont had poſted in the vine-
yards and hollow places in our paſſage. We drove

them before us to the very gates of the city, from

whence about ioo ſoldiers came out to their aſliſt-
ance ; one part of which remained upon the place,
and the other drowned themſelves in the ditches,

The King, who ſaw the rampart begin to be co-

vered with ſoldiers, did not think proper to go

farther, and continued his route.

At his return, he wanted to avoid paſſing under
the walls of this city, and took a lower road, by a

place, which, if I remember, was called Sx Nichs-

las, near Mas de Verdun. Scarce had we marched
a league, when we heard the noiſe of drums, and
diſcovered a party of zoo muſketeers, marching in

bad order enough under five enfigns. A council

was held: ſome were of opinion that we ſhould at-
tack the enemy, without any regard to the ſupe-
riority of their numbers; others diſſuaded it, The
King of Navarre, deſiring only to try them, ordered

fifty horſe to advance ; and in the mean time we

drew up in a line, with our domeſtics behind us;
ſo that we preſented a front to the enemy, which
concealed the ſmallneſs of our numbers. The ſhi—
ning of our armour impoſed upon them : they fled

_ acroſs the woods, where we purſued them; till
meeting with a church, they there barricaded them-

ſelves. |

This church was large, ſtrong, and furniſhed with
proviſions, being the ordinary retreat of the pea-
fants, a great nuinber of whom were in it at that

time. The King of Navarre undertook to force it,

and ſent to Montauban, Leictoure, and other neigh-
bouring towns, for workmen and ſoldiers not
doubting but Beaumont, Mirande, and other towns
of the Catholic party, would ſend powerful ſuccours
to the beſieged, if they got time. Mean while we

endeay oured, with the aſliſtance of our ſervants, to

Uundermino

= þ , 3 1 r . 8 4 4 y .

. „ or 3 b 1 „
undermine the church. The choir fell to my ſhare.

e In twelve hours I made an opening, though the wall
n - was very thick, and of a ſtone exceflively hard.
t- Afterwards, by means of a ſcaffold raiſed over this

2, gap, I threw a quantity of grenadoes into the
8. church. The beſieged wanted water, and kneaded
their meal with wine; but what incommoded them
0 till more, was, that they had neither ſurgeons,

© Jinen, nor remedies for the wounds that were given
r them by the grenadoes, which now began to be
a throw from all quarters. They capitulated there-
fore, upon ſecing a powerful reinforcement which
4 © had arrived from Montauban to the King of Na-
d © varre. This prince contented himſelf with order-
n ing ſeven or eight of the moſt mutinous to be
jj © © hanged ; but he was obliged to abandon them all to
t. © © the fury of the inhabitants of Montauban, who
>. | | forced them out of our hands, and put them to the
\s © ſword without mercy. We learned the motive that
d animated them, from the reproaches they made to
e © © theſe wicked wretches, of having been concerned
„ima moſt villanous debauch, the carrying off ſix
+ | married women and virgins, whom, after raviſning
j. them, they had butchered, by filling them with
4 © gunpowder, and ſetting it on fire, A horrible ex-
11 © ceſs of brutality and of cruelty ! „
I h'Jbe ſlates, which were then held at Blois, de-
|  puted the Archbiſhop of Vienne *, and the Duke of
tn Montpenſier and Richelieu, to the King of Navarre.
a. This prince ſent Bethune and me as far as Berge-
ax || Fac, to receive them. They were commiſſioned to

* The three deputies whom the ſtates ſent to the King of Navarre,
| | Were Petre de Villars, Archbiſhop of Vienne, for the clergy ; An-
Ot! KF drew of Bourbon, Lord of Rubenpre, for the nobility; and Menager,
ns = - geneial of the finances of Touraine, for the third ſtate. Here, there-
| fore, there is a fault, Conſult De Thou, D*Aubigne, Cc. See alſo
an account of the ſeſſion of the ſtates of Blois, in Matthieu, vol. r.
ve WB Þooky. p. 438. ard in the memoirs of Nevers, vol. 1. p. 166.
to et egg. | | 2
6 = | exhort

mn 8 2
2 . ——̃̃ ( ¶ . 7‚—⁰ ] ]

58 M E M OI R S Bock.

exhort the King of Navarre to embrace the Catho-

lic religion, which the ſtates had declared ſhould
be alone maintained throughout the kingdom. This
interview, which had produced a ſuſpenſion of

arms, having had no other effect, the deputies re- Z
turned, and hoſtilities recommeneed. 3

Some attempts were made upon Caſtel-Jaloux

and Nerac, by the Admiral de Villars *; but he

found over all "ihe King of Navarre, who diſcon:

certed his deſigns. This prince expoſed himſelf as

the meaneſt ſoldier, and performed before Nei ac
an act of extreme hardineſs; when a body of horſe
being detached on purpoſe to ſurpriſe him, he re-
pulſed them almoſt alone. Our prayers were not

capable to engage him to take more care of his

life; and his example animated us in our turn fo
much, that the ſame day twelve or fifteen of us ad-
vanced to fire our piſtols, even within reach of the
Catholic army. The King of Navarre, who obſer-

ved us, ſaid to Bethune, “ Go to your couſin, the

% Baron of Roſny; he is heedleſs to the laſt de-
« gree; fetch him off yonder, and his companions

« alſo; for the enemy ſeeing us retire, will no

« doubt charge them ſo fiercely, that they will be

all taken or ſlain.“ I obeyed this order, and
the prince, who ſaw my horſe wounded in the

ſhoulder, reproached me for my temerity, with a
warmth which had nothing in it but what was obli-

ging. He propoſed this day a combat of four a.

gainſt four; but ir did not take place, the Admiral
having given the ſignal of retreat.
The ſtroke the moſt iraportant for the King bad

Goubrleſs been, to have hindered the taking of

* Honorat of Janes, Marazis of Villars. Although he was made
Admiral by the King during the Admiral de Coligny 's life, he did
not in reality exerciſe that employment. ti after the death of that

| nobleman.

Brouage,

A 0 epiſt. 31.

, 8 2. 4 48 ;
1 2 4
a 4 1 _ 1 ; ” 3
TH 5 4 W ; - - WM . . . 8 *
8 7 71 To . |

£4

Brouage, then beſieged by the Duke of Matenne *.
le haſtened thither, leaving the Viſcount de Tu-

renne to bring his troops after him: but beſide that
this nobleman did not arrive ſoon enough to ſuc-
Cour this city, the interview between the King of
Navarre and the Prince of Conde at Pons ſo exa-
ſperated them againſt each other, that the Prince of

"Conde wanted to fight with the Viſcount de Tu-
renne, whom he accuſed of being the cauſe of this

p "miſunderſtanding. The public good ſuffered by
this diſunion. The Prince of Conde ſoon after
> "openly ſeparated from the King of Navarre.

The peace which ſucceeded accidents ſo little fa-

8 vourable to the Reformed, was the ſole work of
Henry III. who was deſirous of giving this morti-
> fication to the Guiſes. War no longer agreed ei-

ther with his inclination, which led him to a way

7 0 of life, ſingularly diverſified between devotion and
voluptuouſneſs +, nor to his deſigns, that tended all
to humble the princes of Lorrain, become too

powerful by the league. But although this peace +
was not even ſo favourable to the Huguenots as
that of Monſieur, yet they obſerved the articles of

* Charles de Lorrain, Duke of Malenne, ſecond ſon of Francis

| : of Lorrain, Duke of Guiſe. He was general of the league.

+ There is nothing, ſaid Sixtus V. to Cardinal de Joyeuſe, which

# pour King has not done, and does not do, to be a monk; nor any

thing which I have not done to avoid being one. He had no leſs
than 150 valets de chambre, minitros cubicularios, ſays Buſbequius,

t By the treaty that was concluded at Bergerac, between the King

| ol Navarre and the Marechal de Biron, and the edit that followed
in the latter end of September, the number of churches was dimi-
niſhed, the exerciſe of the pretended reformed religion was prohibited

deen leagues round Paris, the burying- places of the Calviniſts in this

3 city taken away, the liberty of marriages revoked, the chambers of
jſtice compoſed of half Catholics and half Proteſtants, ſuppreſſed in

Paris, Rouen, Dijon, and Rennes, &c. K. Henry III. called this
his treaty. It was obſerved faithfully by neither party. The Ca-

| _ tholics on their ſide complained, that ſeveral articles were infringed

by the Calviniſts. Memoirs Nevers.

' bo M E M OI R S Bookl.

it with more fidelity than the Catholics; who, in

the time of full peace, poſſeſſed themſelves of Agen
and Villeneuve, for which it was impoſſible to
make them give ſatis faction. The conſequence of
a peace lo ill obſerved, was an inaction full of ſu-
ſpicions; which much more reſembled a long ſuſ-
penſion of arms than a true peace. In this manner
paſſed the remainder of this year, and a ph of the
following.

Whether it was, that the Queen- mother was de-
Grous of labouring effectually to pacify the ſtate,

or that ſhe had ſecret deſigns, which obliged her to
court the King of Navarre, ſhe quitted Paris with
all her retinue, and making the tour of the pro-
vinces, had a conference with this prince at Reole

and Auch. She even ſtaid with him a long while,
at ſeveral times, either at Nerac *, Coutras, Fleix,

or other places; for the year 1578, and a part of
1579, Were wholly conſumed in comings and go-

ings, and reciprocal complaints of the bad execu-
tion of treaties, which were infringed on the one
part and the other without much ſcruple.

The intercourſe of two courts which yielded in
nothing the one to the other on the ſide of gallan-
try, produced ſuch an effect as might have been ex-
pected. They were wholly devoted to balls, feſti-
vals, and entertainments of gallantry. But while

love became the ſerious buſineſs of all the courtiers,

Catherine was wholly taken up about her politics :
for once, however, ſhe did not ſucceed. She in-
deed reconciled the King of Navarre to his wife,
then greatly diſguſted with the proceedings of her

* At Nerac, ſays Le Grain, the Queen: mother had ſeveral confe-

rences with the King of Navarre, her ſon-in-law, in which ſome ar-

ticles were explained, but not all : for the good lady would always
keep her Spaniſh gennet by the bridle as much as ſhe was able. It
was here that Henry IV. fell in love with the two ladies, d'à gelle and

Toſſeuſe. Some curious particulars of theſe conferences may be

een in Le Grain? 5 der. of Henry IV.

brother

_ 427-29 1 4 1 1 F
8 2 " 4 4 1 nr N r "
. nr. eee A . *
. 2 92 —— 2 Ft ue A — ,
+ It, . Snot 7 N JE; en 5 * 9
RETIRED) ay x =O 54 2 2 28 q 4 9 y - \ EX 3%

7 — FF. WI Ll =

2
IF ,

T0 SPELLS 86

brother Henry III. towards her; but ſhe could ne-
ver draw this prince again to Paris, nor prevail u-
on him by any motive to reſign to her the places of
ſecurity, to obtain which had been her Eran
view.

I ſhould ſwell theſe memoirs conſiderably, were
Ito enter into a detail of this medley of politics
and gallantry. But I acknowledge, with reſpect to
the firſt, my youth, and other affairs more ſuitable
to my age, did not permit me to enter into them.
As for gallantry, beſides that I have loſt the remem-
brance of it, a frivolous detail of intrigues would,
in my opinion, make a very indifferent figure here.
Upon the whole, all was reduced to a deſire of
pleaſing, and ſupplanting one another. I ſhall not,
however, omit ſome adventures which have a re»

ference to the war.

The Queen-mother and the 1 af Neview
could only agree upon a truce, which was to take
place over all the kingdom, till the prince and ſhe

ihould ſeparate. But whether ſhe thought that, un-

der favour of the war, it would be eaſy for her to

ſeize ſeveral towns by ſurpriſe and artifice, or that
ſhe believed this method was more proper to ac-

compliſh her ends, the was not ſorry that both
parties forgot they were in peace, and treated to-
gether on the footing of war: one thing only con-
tinued agreed upon, that there ſhould be a truce
over all where the court was, and its limits ordi-

narily extended no farther than a league and a half,
or two leagues, from the place where the Queen
and the princes kept their reſidence. This occa-

ſioned a contraſt altogether new: here they loaded
each other with civilities, and converſed with the
utmoſt familiarity ; if they met any where elſe,
they fought moſt deſperately. The two courts be-
ing at Auch, upon. a ball-night, notice was given

to the King of Navarre, that the governor of Reole,
VOL. I. h ny In:

62 M E M OI RS Bookl.

| who was an old man, and till then a zealous Hu-

guenot, having conceived a violent paſſion for one
of the Queen-mother's maids of honour, had vio-

lated his duty, and delivered up the town to the
Catholics. The King of Navarre, who would not

long defer his revenge, privately conveyed orders

to me, and to three or four others, to withdraw,
and, with our arms concealed as uſual under our
bunting-habits, join him in the fields. As many
of our people as could be got together, were of the
party; and taking care that the entertainment

ſhould ſuffer no interruption, we left the hall, and
joined the King, with whom we marched all night;

and arriving early in the morning at Fleurence, the

gates of which were open, ſeized it without any op-
polition. The Queen-mother, who could have
ſworn that the King of Navarre had lain at Auch,
was much ſurpriſed next morning at the intelligence
of this expedition; however, ſhe was the firſt to
laugh at it:“ I ſee,” ſaid ſhe, * this is in revenge
for Reole : the King of Navarre was reſolved to
« have nut for nut, but mine is better kernelled.”

An adventure perfectly ſimilar happened afterwards,
the court being at Coutras. The King of Navarre
having reſolved to ſeize St Emilion, he ſent us over
night to St Foi, which was not comprehended in the
_ truce ; from whence we marched to St Emilion,
with a petard in the ſhape of a ſauſage, which we

faſtened by two port-holes to a great tower. The

burſting of this machine made a noiſe that was
heard as far as Coutras. A breach was made in
the tower wide enough to give paſſage to two men
_ abreaſt, and by this means the town was taken.
The Queen-mother was nettled, and faid openly,
that the could not regard this action but as a pre-
meditated inſult, St Emilion being within the bounds
of the truce. It is certain, that the diſtance be-
tween Coutras and this town was ſuch as Rare

| | the

—

II": ”

WI OT. av

G BY W-

i ve fa ot

*
e

22 t £45 <7 2 Tag

It Cott 7 ba þ r 85 —
n 2 7 . ge 8
9 n "

Ws: 6 evtits <6
: 3 the caſe doubtful : but the King of Navarre, who

knew, that, a few days before, the citizens of St
Emilion had pillaged a Proteſtant merchant, which
the Queen-mother maintained to be a awful prize,
only put her in mind of this fact, and there was no
more word of the matter.

It often happened, that the two courts ſeparated :
from each other, when any thing had paſſed which
cauſed to either of them too great diicontent-
ment; but the intereſt of pleaſure, which had lan-
auiſhed without this, ſoon brought them together.
The Queen- mothei's court was carried by the King
of Navarre to Foix; where, among other diverſions,
he had a mind to give them that of bear-hunting.
The ladies were frighted ; this ſpectacle did not
ſuit with their delicacy, Some of theſe animals
tore the horſes to pieces; others overthrew ten
Swiſs, and as many fuſileers; and one of them,
who had been often wounded, mounting upon a

rock, threw himſelf headlong, with ſeven or eight

hunters whom he held faſt, and cruſhed to pieces.
At laſt the Queen-mother {eparated from the

King of Navarre, and continuing her route through

Languedoc, Provence, and Dauphine, where ſhe
had an interview with the Duke of Savoy, returned
to Paris, leaving all things on the fame footing in
which ſhe had found them; I mean, in a peace
which only more augmented diffidence and ſuſpi-

cions. But what ſhe did not forget, was, to ſe-
duce from the King of Navarre a part of his Ca-
tholic officers. Lavardin, Grammont, and Duras,
were of this number. Another effect of her pre-
ſence was, to have imbroiled ſo perfectly the prince
with the Viſcount de Turenne, that he challenged
him to a duel. Turenne went not to the place ap-
pointed, till he had firſt made all che ſubmiſſions

that were que to the quality of this prince. This

combat produced nothing fatal. The Viſcount de
e | Turenne

„ i Beokt.

Turenne received ſeveral wounds in a ſecond, to
which he was challenged by Duras and Roſan x.
It was ſaid at that time, that they owed the advan-

tage they had over Turenne, upon this occaſion, to

an artifice ſcarcely allowable.

After the Queen-mother's departure, the court
of Navarre came to Montauban, and from thence
to Nerac, where they continued ſome time, uncei-
tain whether it would not be moſt proper to renew
the war. This court being no leſs voluptuous than
that of France, nothing was yet Ong of but
pleaſures and gallantry.

They no longer heſitated about taking up arme,
tow ſoon they learned that the Catholics had pol-
ſeſſed themſelves by ſurpriſe of the city of Figeac,

and fat down before the caſtie, Ihe Viſcount of.
Turenne, whom the King of Navarre charged with

the raiſing of the ſiege, ſaid to me at parting,
« Well, Sir, will you be of our party? © Yes,
« Sir,” I replied, e ſhall be of your party at any
% time when is is for the ſervice of the King my
“ maſter, and at all times when you love me.”

The Catholics, ſurpriſed at the diligence of the

* The two brothers, Durfort de Duras, and Durfort de Rofan,
_ Fought with the Viſcount de Turenne, and John de Gontaut de Bi-
ron, Baron of Salignac, his ſecond. Although the brothers were
armed with coats of mail, yet the diſadvantage was wholly on their
ſide. The Viſcount perwitted Roſan to rile, and Salignac allowed
Duras to change bis ſword : at the ſame moment nine or ten armed
men fel] upon the Viſcount, and left him upon the place pierced with
two and twenty wounds, none of which, however, proved mortal.
He recovered, and generouſly interceded with the Queen-mother for

Duras. The Marechal de Damville, called by the death of his bro-
ther Marechal de Montmorency, coming thither about that time, was

conſulted on this act on; and it was his opinion, as well as that of

many others, that the Viſcount de Turenne was at liberty to ſatisfy
his revenge by any means whatever, without expoſing his own life,
NMenicirs of tie Duke of Bouillon; his life by Marſolier; De Thou.

Brantome (em. vol. 10.9, peaking of duels, ſeems to doubt he-

| ther this duel was condutted in the manner it was reported, conſider-
ing the reputation the t two brothers were in for courage and honour.

Reformed.

9
Fx
2
*
ih
8

1580. 0 FF: 8 . 65
Reformed, abandoned Figeac. Arms being once
taken up again by the Huguenots, they made above
forty attempts on different places, of which three
only ſucceeded x. Theſe were upon Fere in Pi-
cardy, upon Montagu in Poitou, and upon Cahors.
1 ſhall ſpeak only of this laſt, becauſe it was the on-
ly one at which I was preſent, and becauſe of all
the attacks upon towns by petard and ſap, there
was none ſo remarkable. one non
Cahors + is a large and populous city, ſurrounded
by water on three ſides. Veſins f was governor of
it, and had under his command above 2000 men,
beſides 100 horſe, and the citizens, whom he made
alſo to bear arms. He was upon his guard, like a

man who expected to be attacked. This we dif

covered by a paper found in his cabiner, on which
he had wrote theſe few words with his own hand,
« A fig for the Huguenots.” The King of Na-
varre, whoſe little army was till more weakened by
the abſence of Chouppes, and who ſaw no means
of opening himſelf a paſſage but by petard and jap,
did not, however, deſpair of taking the city. He

reinforced his troops with all the ſoldiers he could

find in Montauban, Negrepclifſe, St Antonin, Ca-
jare, and Senevieres ; but the whole made him only
about 1500 men, with whom he left Montauban,
and arrived about midnight within a quarter of a_
league of Cahors. It was in the month of June,

an exceſſive heat, and violent thunder, but without.
rain. He ordered us to halt in a plantation of wal-
nut- trees, where a fountain of running water ſer-

* See all theſe expeditions particulariſed in D*Aubipne, vol. 2.
| + The river of Lot waſhes its walls. | OG

+ The ſame who is mentioned in the beginning of this book. It
is thought, that if he had not been ſlain in the attack, at the head
of his people, the King of Navarre would not have made himKF

Malter of the place. a

3 ved

„ MOT es BookT,

ved to quench our thirſt. It was in this place that

the Eing of Navarre ſettled the order of his march,
and of the whole attack. Two petardiers belong-
ing to the Viſcount de Gourdon, the principal author
of this enterpriſe, ſeconded by ten ſoldiers, the moſt
reſolute in the King's guards, marched before us, as
being to open a paſſage into the city. They were
followed by twenty foot-foldiers, and thirty horle
of the King's guards likewiſe, conducted by St
Martin, their captain ; forty gentlemen, commanded
by Roquelaure, and ſixty ſoldiers of the guard, com-
poſed another body, and marched behind them, 1
was in this brigade. The King of Navarre, at the
head of 200 men, divided into four bands, came |
after us. The remainder of his little army, which
compoſed a body of about 1000 or 1200 arquebu-
| fiers, in fix platoons, cloſed the march. Ew
There were three gates to force; Which we
made haſte to throw down with the petard, aftcr
that we made uſe of hatchets, the breaches being
Jo low, that the firſt who entered could not do it
but by creeping upon their bellies. At the noiſe of
the petard, forty men armed, and about 200 ar-
quebuſiers, ran almoſt naked to diſpute our entry:
mean time the bells rung the alarm, and warned all
to put themſelves in a poſture of defence. In 2
moment the houſes were Cov ered with ſoldiers,
who threw large pieces of wood, tiles, and ſtones
upon us, with repeated cries of « Charge, Kill
„ them.” We found that it had been long deter-
mined to receive us warmly. It was neceſlary,
therefore, at firſt, to ſuſtain a ſhock, which laſted
above a quarter of an hour, and was not yet lets
terrible. I was thrown to the ground by a large
ſtone that was thrown out of a window; but I rat»
ſed myſelf by the aid of the Sicur de la Berticherc,
and La«Trape. We advanced very little, becauſe
frech platoons every moment ſucceeded to thoſe
Ce that

a T# > & R F

.
(PI AT
if
ns
TN
#%
.
A 1
*
* 825
C 2
8
1189
e
LG
3 ">
HL.
SY
.
:

07 VL LL iS:

that we repulſed; inſomuch that before we e gained

the great ſquare, we had endured more than twelve

| battles. My cuiles being looſened in the buſtle, I

was wounded in the left thigh. When arrived at
the place, we found barricadoes, which we mult
demoliſh with infinite difficuity, all the while ex-
ofed to the continual diſcharge of the artillery,
which they had formed into a battery. .
The King of Navarre continued at the head of

his troops during all theſe attacks: he had two

pikes brokep, and his armour was marked in many

places by the fire and blows of the enemy. We

nad already performed enough to have gained a

great victory; but to ſee all that remained to be
done, one might ſay we had not yet begun; the
city being of vaſt circumference, and filled with ſo

great a number of ſoldiers, that, in compariſon of

them, we were but a handful. At every croſs-

way we had a new combat to ſuſtain, and at every
tone houſe a new eſcalade to make; the ground

was ſo well defended, that the King of Navarre had

_ occaſion for all his men, and we had no time to

take breath.
It will ſcarcely be credited, that five . and
five nights paſſed complctely in this violent exerciſe,

During all this time, not one of us duiſt quit his poſt
for a lingle moment, take nouriſhment, but with his

arms in his hand, or fleep, except for a few mo-
ments leaning againſt the ſhops With fatigue, with

faintneſs, with the weight of our arms, and with

the exceſſive heat, wounds conſpired. to deprive us
of what remained of our ſtrength. Not one of us
but had his feer fo ſcorched and full of blood, that

it was impoſſible for us to ſupport ourſelves.

The citizens, who ſuffered none of our inconve-
niencies, and who became more and more ſenſible
of the ſmalneſs of our numbers, far from talking
of ſurrendering, thought of nothing but protr og

the

6 N E M OI R s Bock f.

the fight till the arrival of ſuccours, which were

faid to be very near: they ſent forth great cries,
and animated themſelves by our obſtinacy. How:
ever poorly they defended themſelves, they did
enough to oblige us to keep upon our guard, which
was to complete our misfortunes. In this extre-
mity, the principal officers gathered about the
King, and adviſed him to aſſemble as many men as

poſſible about his perſon, and open to himſelf a re. ;

treat. They redoubled their inſtances upon the ru-
mour which was ſpread, and which was alſo true,
that the ſuccours expected by the enemy were ar-
_ rived at the bar, and would be ſo ſoon in the city,
that he would have but juſt time to force the wall,
But this brave prince, whom nothing could daunt
or intimidate, ſuppreſſing the pain which he felt
from his wounds, turned to them with a ſmiling
countenance, and an air of intrepidity which he in-
ſpired into the weakeſt, and contented himſelf with
anfwering, © It is pr onounced above what muſt be.
« come of me upon this occaſion. Remember ye,
© that my retreat out of this city, without having

e ſecured one to my party, ſhall be the retreat of

„ my ſoul from my body. My honour is too much
« concerned to act otherwife. So let no one ſpeak

& to me more but of fighting, of vanquiſhing, or

« of dying.”
Readies by theſe words, and the example of

fo brave a leader, we began again to make new ef-
forts ; but, in all appearance, we had all been

Worſted in the end, without the arrival of Chouppes,
whom the King bad the precaution to fend for be-
fore the attack. He apprehended the danger of
the King, and made a paſſage into the city, with

or 600 foot, and 100 horſe, marching over the
belly of the enemies, who wanted to obſtruct his

aſſage. As ſoon as he joined us, we marched to-

gether to the bar, where the enemies ſuccours were
forcing

2 4 . *
5 IS 4 x ** . M3 tip es :
rs: oP P e
er tar Ig Ht 4 2 e

„ 4 * . N 7
Y p : 2 e :
a A 25 n
3 DEE IRE ANTE / ( 00
Deb es eee e Sa:

1
e
„3 N 9 7
Gn ety.
2, ERS
N
RIES,
5
n
An

forcing their entrance. All this quarter, which

1580, © F.-: SU LL 1 | 69

held out hitherto, was forced; and when we had
made ourſelves maſters of the parapets and towers,
it was not difficult to oblige the enemies without to
abandon their enterpriſe, and to retire: after which,
the inhabitants not finding themſelves the ſtrongeſt,

laid down their arms. The city was entirely pil-

laged: my good fortune made a ſmall iron cheſt _

F fall into my hands, in which 1 found 4000 crowns

in gold. In the detail of an action ſo hor, ſo long,
and fo glorious for the young prince that conducted
it * I am obliged to ſuppreſs a number of circum-
ſtances, and particular actions, both of the King

and his officers, which would appear almoſt to be

fables. 5

_ The King of Navarre returned to Montauban,
after having left Cabrieres + governor in Cahors.
Moreover, he defeated two or three ſquadrons be-
longing to the Marechal de Biron's army, who was
obliged to ſhut himſelf up in Marmande, To be
more within reach, the King of Navarre took up
his reſidence at Tonneins ; from whence there fol-
lowed an infinitude of little attacks, the foldiers
of Marechal de Biron making inroads every day in-

to the cnemy's country. Henry one day ordered

Leſignan, at the head of five and twenty gentle-
men well mounted, of which number I was one,
to advance even to the gates of Marmande, as if
to defy them : which was very ordinary, He made
us be followed by 100 muſketeers, who clapped
down on the ſhore of a rivulet not far from us;
and the King, with zog borſe, and two companies
of hi guards, conccaled himſelf in a wood a little
diſtant. Our orders were to fire our piſtols only,

* Other hiſtorians agree, that this attack laſted 7 whole days,
and that Henry IV. had a great many ſoldiers wounded there, and
only 70 ſlain, M. de Thou's relation of this action is a little diffe-
rent, but our Memoirs delcrve molt credit. |
Conſult D*Aubigne upon theſe expeditions, vol. 2. book 4.

to

7% m E M O i R 8: Bock L.

to endeavour to tune any of the ſoldiers whom we

ſhould find without the walls, and to retire towards
the body of muſketeers the moment they ſhould be-

gin to purſue us. Theſe orders we executed, how

ſoon we ſaw ourſelves ready to be attacked by

100 horſe, who came out of the city. T heſe ca-
valiers called to us to wait them, in a manner in—

ſulting enough. An officer of our troop, named
Quaſy, hearing himſelf defied by name, could not

refrain from turning his bridle towards his chal-
lenger, whom he ſhot dead: he loſt himſelf his horſe,
and regained the body of his br igade on foot, when

he was attacked by all the enemy 's party, irritated.

at the death of their comrade. We marched to his
aſſiſtance, and immediately the hotteſt encounter

enſued; during which one of our valets, ſeized

with terror, fled, and carried the alarm to the King

of Navarre, telling him, that we, and the whole

party of foot, were put to the ſword: A ſtory
Vholly without foundation. On the contrary, af—

ter fighting a few moments, the enemy ſeeing the

body of foot, who came out of their ambuſcade

to ſecond us, fearing a ſurpriſe, and ſuppoling that
the whole army would fall upon chem, withdrew.

into the city. 5

It was with oreat difficulty that they could re.
ſtrain the courage of Henry, who would fain have
fallen upon the enemy's army to revenge us, and
to periſh gloriouſly. But they made him ſuch preſ-

ſing inſtances to retire, that he conſented to it at
laſt, though with regret. His aſtoniſhment was
great when he ſaw us return, and his grief {till |

greater for having credited counſellors too timid ;

eſpecially when he ſaw Lelignan, who complained
With a good deal of bitterneſs for having been a-
bandoned upon this occaſion, As for me, : loſt.

an horſe, which was killed under me.
News gr catly more que added much to the
chagrin

1
. ' N „ „
N . 7))))CCCVCCTTCFCVCPVPCVGGGGGGGGGTTCCTTCCTCCCCC dhe a NE
„777. '“ ES
* 2 . 4

.

JJ SOLELY. - o+

chagrin of the King of Navarre. The Prince of
Conde, not contented with having decoyed a part

of his troops, and having openly ſeparated from

his party, had drawn ſeveral towns of Dauphine
and Languedoc into his intereſt, which he robbed
from Henry to compoſe a ſovereignty for himſelf.
Aigueſmortes and Pecais he had engaged to Prince
Caſimir, as a ſecurity for the forces this prince had
promiſed : and, laſt of all, he had lately poſleſſed
himſelf of Fere * in Picardy ; the loſs of which the
King of Navarre could not regard with an eye of

indifference. This prince, whoſe army was already

inferior to that of the Catholics, was ſtill obliged to
diſmember it. He difpatched Turenne, who ſoon
diſconcerted all the projects of the Prince of
Conde. As for himſelf, being no longer able to
keep the field before the Marechal de Biron, he
ſhut himſelf up in Nerac; in which the ladies and

c eourt of Navarre then were, always brilliant, not-

withſtanding the bad condition of the affairs of the
King. 8 „„ % ͤĩ ͥͥ
This retreat gave ſtill another face to the war;

it could neither be called a campaign nor a ſiege,

but it was both together. Biron, judging the ſiege

of this place to be an enterpriſe above his ſtrength,
ſought only to alarm us, by ſurrounding it with all

his troops; and the King of Navarre, though block-
ed up in the city, did not however fail from time
to time to ſhew himſelf open in the field. The
gates of the city being kept ſhut by his orders, his

Cavalry became of no uſe to him; and our only re-

ſource was to aſſemble in ſmall parties, and fally
out by the private doors which were kept open, to

eas retaken immediately by the Marechal de Matignon. In

| the Memoirs of the league there is a letter from Q: Catherine to the

againſt the court.

Prince of Condé, in which ſhe thanks him for having taken arms

attack

72 M E 1 G IR 8 Bock l.

attack the ſeparate detachments of the royaliſts,
ſometimes under the beard of the whole army. 1
reſumed my former condition of a private ſoldier,
and mixing with the officers, made one in many of
| thoſe bravadoes, in which there is neither honour
nor glory to be acquired: they were therefore ſe.
verely condemned by the King of Navarre. When
he was informed one day that I was wounded and
taken by a party of the enemy, notwithſtanding
his anger, he ſent Des-Champs and Dominge to
reſcue me if poſſible; and he expreſsly forbid me
to go out of the city without his orders, giving me
the names of raſh and preſumptuous, which I own
I too much merited ; for it is folly and extrava-
gance to precipitate one's {elf into a danger, from
which one cannot eſcape but by a miracle. The
Marechal de Biron made ſhew of beſieging Nerac;
but all ended in a few flight ſkirmiſhes, which the
ladies ſometimes beheld from the ramparts. The
enemies general had ſo little reſpe& for them, that
he ordered five or fix volleys of cannon * to be
made, though he expected no advantage from it.
The King of Navarre did not, however, neglect
to make himſelf maſter of Monsegur. Milon, one
of his captains, incloſed 520 weight of powder in
a ſauciſſe, which he found means to introduce into
a common ſhore, which ran into a ditch between
the two principal gates; the end of the ſauciſſe, to
which the fire was to be applied, remained bid in
the graſs. When every thing was ready for the
playing off this machine, the King permitted us to
go and ſee the effect, which was wonderful. One
of the two gates was thrown into the midſt of the
city, and the other fifty paces forwards into the
fields. The vaults were all ruined, and che Wall

* A ball of a cannon battered apainſt a gate of the city, behind
which was the Queen of Navarre. At the peace, ſhe procured the
government of Guicnne to be taken from this marechal.

perwitting

580. C 73

"2 permitting a paſſage to three men abreaſt, the city
© was taken. The enemy ſeeming determined to re-

take it, the King commanded me to ſhut myſelf up
in it, with forty gentlemen, We thought of nothing
but fortifying the place well with paliſadoes and in-
trenchments, in the room of thoſe the powder had
demoliſhed; and this we performed without inter-
| ruption, notwithſtanding the coqueluche “, a kind
- ol current malady, with which we were greatly in-
* | © commoded, and mylelf more than all the others.
e At length we put the place in a condition to have
» | nothing to fear from the enemy. After which 1
x returned to the King of Navarre, who, by the ca-
| reſles with which he loaded me on this occaſion,
» | was deſirous of teaching me to make a juſt diſtinc-
je tion between military exploits that are authoriſed
. by duty, and thoſe where one hearkens to nothing
To but the dictates of tranſport and impetuoſity. .
ge I ſaw with pleaſure, that the heart of this prince
at daily declared in my favour, and that he gave to a
be aatural inclination what he expected to grant only

to the recommendation which the Queen his mo-
| ther, when dying, had made of my perſon and of
my fortune. Some flight ſervices I did him this
| year, he rewarded by the charge of countellor of

| Navarre, and chamberlain in ordinary, with 2000
livres of appointments, There were none at this
time more conſiderable, and I was only nineteen
years old. But the fire of youth made me commit
2 fault which deſerved to have loſt me for ever the
8 g00d graces of this priancmmmee. 1
I ſupped one night with Beauvais, the fon of the
| King of Navarre's governor, and an officer named
| Uſeau, who quarrelled together, and being reſol-

This diſtemper ſcized them in the reins, the head, and particu»

| larly in the neck. Blecding and purging were mortal in this malady.
De Thou obſerves alſo, that this diſeaſe was as it were the foreruner

bb a plague that carried off 40,000 people in Paris. Boot 73. *

. G ved

74 M E M O I R S Book!
ved to fight, intreated me to facilitate the means,
and to keep their deſign ſecret. Inſtead of going
forthwith to advertiſe the King, whoſe whole at-
tention was to hinder theſe combats, which a falſe

point of honour made very common at this time, |

had the imprudence to promiſe them both the one

R
FR: e R
* d. e FUF — N *
4 0 - x 3 app : IRS.
3 8 5 on <6
* 2 f W $
5 Ky F405 & T ERS
WERE. * 8 4 LEN 2 . i N
15. e h

and the other; and having idly eſſayed to reconcile |

them, I conducted them myſelf to the meadow,

where each gave the other a dangerous wound,
The King of Navarre, who loved Beauvais, was ex-

tremely irritated by the part I had in this affair; |

and having ſent to ſeek me, he told me with in-
dignation, that I lorded it over the ſovereign, even
in his court, and that, if he did me juſtice, I de-
ſerved to loſe my head. I might have effaced my
Fault by a ſimple avowal; I added a ſecond, till

greater. Piqued at this prince's threatening, I an-

ſwered inconfiderately, That I was neither his ſub-
Jett nor his vaſſal. I threatened, in my turn, to
quit his ſervice ; and this prince not anſwering my
inſolence but by juſt contempt, I was going at this
moment to ſeparate myſelf, and perhaps for ever,
from the perſon of this good prince, if the prin-

ceſſes had not undertaken to make my peace with
the King; who liſtened to his friendſhip for me,
and contented himſelf with making me ſenſible of _
the hainouſneſs of my fault, by receiving me for

ſome time with a good deal of coldneſs. At length,

when be was convinced, that the regret which I
teſtified to him was ſincere, he reſumed bis former

ſentiments. This mark of goodneſs making me
know how a prince ſo mild ought to be ſerved, I
attached myſelf to him more ſtrongly than before,
and reſolved from that inſtant never to have any
other maſter. But I ſaw myſelf removed from him
for ſome time, by a promiſe imprudent enough,
Which I had made to the Duke of Alengon.

BOO

; WAA 8
Fol 5 * Wo - 2
» MAY 72 o OE Lo IE
5 1 5 * ee 2 3 F
IS IO LN 7%

1580. 0:5 UL LT BY

1 0 K l.
HE Queen- mother, fertile in projects for the
grandeur of her houſe *, and ſtill more for

her particular deſigns, having loſt hope of marrying
her youngeſt ſon to the Queen of England, had

turned all her views towards Flanders, of which
ſhe undertook to make him ſovereign. She had ar

firſt made many uſeleſs attempts upon the Dutch,

who, believing they could appeaſe the reſentment
of Spain t, by chuling a matter out of the houſe of
Auſtria, conferred that honour upon the Archduke
Matthias, notwithſtanding the powerful intrigues
of Catherine. The Archduke was a weak prince,
abſolutely deſtitute of the qualities neceſſary to a
ſovercign ; eſpecially upon this occaſion, when it
was fo requiſite to play the hero. He became con-
temptible, and rendered himſelf completely odious
to the nobility, by preferring openly to all the
Lords, the Prince of Orange #, whom he declared
lieutenant-general of his armies. The Dutch, diſ-
guſted with this new maſter, thought of nothing
more than to get rid of him. T hey caſt their eyes

M. de Thou, treating of this ſubject, ſays, (book 960, that be-

fore the crown of Poland was offered to the Duke of Anjou, Ca-

therine, who was reſolved to make him a ſovereign one way or other,
had ſent Francis de Noailles to Selim, then Grand Signior, to alk the

kingdom of Algiers for this prince; Sardinia was to be added to it,
which had been obtained from Spain, in exchange for the kingdom of

. Navarre, which they had promiſed him the poſſeſſion of; and as an

equivalent for the claim the King of Navarre had to this kingdom, |
other eſtates in France were to be given him.

+ The revolt of the United Provinces from Spain, the conſequences |
of which will be ſeen in the following part of theſe memoirs, began

by an inſurrection, and a confederacy formed there in 1566, the de-

lipn of which was to hinder the eſtabliſhmeut of the inquiſition in
thoſe countries. MSS. in the King's library, vol, marked 9981.

+ William of Naſſau, Prince of Orange, |
G 2 upon

76 ME M OI R S Book Il.
upon Monſieur, as upon a prince capable of ſup.
porting them by himſelf, and by the powerful pro-
tection of France.

He was at Coutras when the deputies from the
United Provinces came to make him their offer : he
accepted it with joy, and only deferred his journey

to the Low Countries till he could appear there with .

a train ſuitable to his birth. For this purpoſe, he
began earneſtly to ſolicit the lords and gentlemen
of diſtinction in the King of Navarre's retinue. The
greateſt part of the Catholics attached themſelves tv
him; and the hopes of a ſolid and laſting peace,
with which the Queen-mother took care to amuſe
the Proteſtants, was the caule that many of thoſe
alſo promiſed to follow him.

Fervaques and La- Rochepot, both of them my re
lations, engaged themſelves with him; and to make
me of the party, they repreſented to me, that after
the lols J had lately ſuſtained by the death of my
father, I ought to be at pains to recover the ſuc-
ceſſion to the Viſcount de Gand, who had diſinbhe-
rited me on account of my religion, and endeavour
to get poſſeſſion of ſeveral other eſtates in Flanders,
to which my family could pretend, and which the

protection of the new ſovereign could alone pro-
cure me. To theſe motives they added, upon the
part of Monſieur, a promiſe of 12, 0 crowns, to
furniſn me with an equipage. I yielded to their
ſolicitations, and paſſed my word. By reaſon of
various conjunctures, it was a conſiderable time be-
fore that Monſieur could go into Flanders. At
length all obſtacles being removed *, and the Dutch

| | redoubling

1 By the peace concluded at Fleix, a caſile upon. the Dordogne, |
between the King of Navarre and the Duke of Anjou. The Pro-
teſtants, to whom the laſt war had not been favourable, conlented
to it without difficulty. The Duke of Anjou deſired it with ardor,
in order to execute his deſigns upon the Low Countries. b he
yt

1580. JJC... ² BK ------W
redoubling their inſtances, this prince reminding us
of our engagement, ſent us orders to join him. I
went to take leave of the King of Navarre, and had
a long converſation with this prince upon my de-
parture, and upon the ſubject of my journey. IL
have never ſince thought of this conference, with-
out being penetrated by the ſentiments of genero-
ſity and affection which he expreſſed for me, nor
without admiring the penetration of bis mind, and
the juſtneſs of his conjectures. © »Tis by this
«© ſtroke,” (faid he, the moment I ſpake of leaving
him), “that we ſhall loſe you altogether ; you are
going to become a Dutchman and a Papiſt“? 1
aſſured him that I would neither become the one
nor the other, but that I muſt eternally reproach
myſelf, if, for want of cultivating my relations, and
to avoid a little trouble, 1 ſaw myſelf fruſtrated of
large eſtates that might revert to me from the houſes
of Bethune, Melun, and Horn : that this conſide-
ration alone induced me to follow Monſieur, and
only for a time; after which 1 ſwore to him, that
nothing ſhould be able to hinder me from followin

my inclinations, in attaching myſelf ſolely to his

| perſon ; and that whenever he had the leaſt need of

me, I would quit Flanders upon his firſt order.
The King then entertained me with the prediftions
that had been made him, that he ſhould one day be
King of France: and I, in my turn, informed him,
that a great fortune had been foretold me. I had
for a long time the weakneſs to give ſome credit to
theſe. For the King of Navarre, who was of opi-
nion that religion ought to inſpire a contempt for
thoſe villanous prognoſticators, as he called them;
he had within himſelf an oracle greatly more cer-
tain 3 it was a perfect knowledge of the perſon and
ſigned in the month of November. The articles were not made
known, but were believed to be of little importance. The cities gt-
ven for Ccurity were to be kept by the Calyiniſts ſix years longer.

"0-3 Character

78 MEMOIRS Book 11.

character of Monſieur, and a ſagacity which almoſt
unveiled to him futurity. He will deceive me,”

ſaid he, © if he ever fulfils the expectations that

« are conceived of him : he has ſo little courage,
a heart ſo double and malignant, a body fo ill
built, ſo little gracefulneſs in his countenance,
„ and ſo much awkwardneſs in all kinds of exer-
“ ciſes, that 1 cannot perſuade myſelf he will ever

*, do any thing that is great.” The King of Na.

varre had leiſure to know this prince thoroughly,
during the time that they were kept priſoners toge-
ther. His memory at this moment recollected an
infinitude of circumſtances, which gave him room
to conjecture, that he would infallibly miſcarry in a
deſign ſo noble and ſo hazardous. He told me, that
Monſieur happened to fling himſelf againſt the pil.
lar in running the ring; and in managing his horle,
he was thrown ſo clumſily, that his equerry could
not fave him the ſhame of ſo awkward a fall, but
by cutting haſtily and ſubtilly the reins of his horſe:

that he ſucceeded no better in dancing, hunting, or

any other exerciſe ; and that, inſtead of acknow..
ledging theſe natural defects, and of effacing them
in ſome manner by any degree of modeſty and inge-
nuity, he ſecretly hated all who were more favoured
by nature than himſelf. The King of Navarre was

in a ſtate to bear good teſtimony ; the preference
the ladies gave him in every thing to the brother

of the King, his 1ivalſhip with this prince in the fa -

vour of Madam de Sauves *, and ſuch like court-
a | adventures,

* She made this name well known by her gallantries. one night,

ſays Niatthieu, (vol. 1. b. 7. p. 409.), when the Duke of Alcngon
was with her, the King of Navarre laid a ſnare for him, ſo that as
he came out, he fel] againſt ſomething in his way, and hurt one of
his eyes. The next day the King of Navarre meeting him, ex-
claimed, “ Ah, my God! your eye! your eye! what accident has
3 befallen you?“ The Duke anſwered haſtily, “ It is ere 18 1
66 ima

1992

Sponge . R 3 Is * T
A * * 3 PE, "4 „ "i 25
. Ed A
Cor de Cr EE STR

1581.

OF S UL L. 1. 79

adventures, had rendered him the object of Mon- |
ſieur's jealouſy. .
All theſe particularities with which he entertained
me, little conſiderable in themſelves, have ceaſed
to appear ſo to me, when I reflect that all the views
of the King of Navarre were perfectly juſtified by
the event. He ended with telling me, that he well
foreſaw Catherine had formed a deſign to exter-
minate the Proteſtant party; and that he ſhould in
a little have occaſion for his faithful ſervants : ſay-
ing theſe words, he embraced me, and wiſhed me
2 happier journey than our leader's was likely to

| de. I threw mylſelfat his feet, and kiſſing his hand,
proteſted that I was ready to ſhed the laſt drop of

my blood in his ſervice. I went alſo to pay my re-

4 ſpects to the Queens z after which I took poll for

Roſny.
From hence I ſent Malgrian, my equerry, to Pa-
ris to buy me ſome horſes. I have never ſince had
any that equalled two which he brought me. One
of them was a Spaniſh horſe; he was quite black,
except a white ſpot on his right buttock. The o-

ther was a horſe of Sardinia, to whom nature had
given an inſtinct to defend his rider; for he rolled

his eyes, and ſprung upon the enemy with his mouth
open, never quitting him till he had thrown him ks
to the earth.
Part of the lands belonging to Monſie eur extend-
ing to the neighbourhood of Roſny, I took occa-
ſon to avail myſelf of the offer which this prince
had made me, and demanded the remainder of a
wood to make my beſt of. This produced a ſum
of 49,000 francs, wal Which, in fifteen days, 1

& ſmall matter ſurpriſes you.“ The other continuing to bemoan
him, the Duke being offended, advanced, and feiguing to jeſt, whi-
ſpered in his ear.“ Whoever ſhall lay J have got it where you ima»
% vine, I will make him a liars” Sau ray and Du-Gualt hindered
them from f. ghting.

fitted

o MEMOIR S Book l.
fitted out my whole troop. It was compoſed of

eighty gentlemen and upwards, ſome of whom fol-

| lowed me diſintereſtedly, and others received from
me a penſion of 200 livres at moſt. With this re-
tinue I went to join Monſieur, who waited for us
in bis caſtle of La- Fere, in Tarte nois; from whence,
after ſome time ſpent in deer- hunting, we marched

towards St Quentin, where all his troops were al-
ſembled.

The Prince of Parma # forrounided Carbbray with

his whole army, and kept it blocked up. This af-
forded an occaſion for the braveſt amongſt us to ſig-
nalize themſelves, and every one wiſhed to com-

mand the firſt party that ſhould be ſent to recon-

noitre. This honour fell to me, by the diſpoſition
into which Fervaques, the quartermaſter-general,
who was my friend and relation, had put the army :
it procured me, however, no advantage; for I re-
turned without having taken one priſoner, the be ·
ſiegers keeping all cloſe behind their lines, although
1 paſſed near enough to ſuſtain ſeveral diſcharges.
The Viſcount Turenne felt a ſecret joy, becauſe 1

bad refuſed the offer he made to join me, if I would

Wait till the day after. He choſe out 100 gentle-
men, with whom he advanced towards Cambray,
flattering himſelf that he ſhould not make a fruit-
leſs attempt. The event did not anſwer : this fine
troop had the misfortune to be defeated by 80 or
10 men of the regiment of M. de Roubais + of the
| houſe of Melun, WHO ſerved | in the _— 8 Oy

- # . Farneſe, 1 Duke of 3

+ Robert de Melun, Marquis of Roubais. The Viſcount Tr

renne's deſign was to throw himſelf into Cambray. See his Memoirs,
p-. 311. et ſeqꝗ. lt is obſerved there that he choſe rather to ſurren-
der himſelf priſoner to the Prince de Robecque, general of the Spa-
niſh cavalry, than to the King of Spain: which was the cauſe that he

was detained two years and ten months; for Spain feared, that after
Robecque had received the money for the Viſcount's anton, which |

was 50,900 coun, he would quit its ſervice,

ten

150 1. Tz LULLEL 81
ten or twelve of our party were made priſoners, a-
mong others Ventadour, and the Viſcount Turenne

himſelf.

- Monſieur advanced, however, with an intention
to give battle to the enemy's general. But he had
poſted himſelf ſo advantageouſly, that we durſt not

attempt to force him; and the following night he

raiſed the blockade, and retired towards Valen-

ciennes, without loſing a ſingle ſoldier, and leaving
moreover the paſſes behind him fo ſecurely guarded,

that he did not fear being overtaken. Monſieur en-
tered Cambray, and was received with magnificence

by the governor, whoſe name was D'Inchy. Chateaus

Cambreſis refuſed to ſurrender, and was taken by
aſſavit, Monſieur, who wanted at firſt to give

marks of a gentleneſs that might conciliate affection

towards him, forbid, under the ſevereſt penalties,
violence againſt the ſex who are the miſerable vic-

tims of war; and fearing that theſe orders would

not be more capable to reſtrain the brutality of the
ſoldiery than the plague with which the fort was
infected, he gave them the churches for an aſylum,

and placed guards about them. A very beautiful |

young girl threw herſelf into my arms as I was

walking in the ſtreets; and holding me faſt, con-

jured me to guard her from ſome” ſoldiers, who,

the ſaid, had concealed themſelves when they per-

ceived me. I encouraged her, and offered myſelf

to conduct her to the firſt church. She told me
the had been there, but that they would not receive
her, becauſe it was known that ſhe had the plague.

I became cold as marble at this declaration, and

anger renewing my ſtrength, I thruſt this girl from
my arms, who expoled me to death, when ſhe had

an argument to make herſelf be reſpected, which

appeared to me unanſwerable; and I betook my-

ſelf to flight, expecting every moment to be leized
with the plague,

Monſieur

82 „ i Book II.

Monſieur having attacked the paſſages of Arleux
and L'Ecluſe, I took ſome priſoners there, whom I
ſent back without ranſom, when I underſtood that

they belonged to the Marquis de Roubais, my cou-

| fin. Roubais, who was not ignorant of my rights

to the eſtates of the Viſcount de Gand, which he
had uſurped, ill received this generoſity, © By hea-
„ ven,” ſaid he, “ theſe civilities are fair and

« good; but if he was taken, he brings his ranſom.

% with him,” This misfortune which I had room

to fear would really have befallen me two days af-
ter, at the attack of a wall, if Seſſeval, by a very
ſeaſonable charge, had not extricated me from ſig-

nal danger.
The Prince of Parma having ; divided his army in

the Low Countri ics, Monſieur returned to Cambray;
where he was guilty of an inſtance of perfidy to-

wards D'Inchy, very little worthy of a great prince,
all whoſe words ought to be ſo inviolable, that no

pexſon ſhould have a thought of ſuſpecting him on

the {core of good credit. He invited himſelf to

dine with this governor, who was at an exceſſive
expence to receive him in the citadel, in a manner
ſuitable to his rank. He invited above ſixty to at-

tend this prince, whom ke treated with equal great-
neſs and magnificence. During the repaſt, he was

told that Monſieur's guards preſented themſelves at
the gates. D'Inchy thinking he ſhould fail in an
eſſential part of his reception of Monſieur, if he

ſent them back, gave orders for their admittance,

and of all who might come on the part of that

prince, who was, he ſaid, ſole maſter in the caſtle.

He ſpoke more truth than he imagined. After theſe |
came others, and after them more, till this party

finding itſelf the ſtrongeſt, Monſieur's guards dil-

armed thoſe of M. D'Inchy, and ſeized upon the

caſtle. All this arrangement was the invention of
Monſieur, who relied upon that Lncerity.1 in the go-
vernor,

8.
FIR 1
LITE
*
IE a
Kee
Ip
#744 *
Ke.
n
3
{HEELS
8
by Bey,
3
1 5
Le
8
8
rig
ot
3 ö
Ty
N
8
*
e
I
W
1

amn at * —— 2

1581. OE 8 Y LL I. 83
vernor, with which he was himſelf unacquainted.
When D'Inchy could no longer doubt of his miſ-
fortune, he complained bitterly to Monſieur, Who
_ anſwered him only with an inſulting jeer at his Pi-
cardy accent, and obliged him to quit the caſtle,
which he gave to Balagny. He thought he made
D'Inchy ſufficient amends by the gift of the town
and duchy of Chateau-Thierry. But that gentle-
man, who perceived the difference between what
was given him and what he had been deprived of,
reſigned himſelf to deſpair, and ſeeking death, found
it ſoon after in a ſkirmiſh „
After this Monſieur retarned to France, not-
withſtanding the prayers of the inhabitants of the
Low Countries to the contrary, who aſſured him,
that after the taking of five or ſix places, the only
ones of any conſequence, all Flanders would ſub-
mit to him. His deſign was to make preparations
for a voyage to England, whither he actually went
a little time after. All our hiſtorians have ſpoken.
of the reception he met with from Queen Elifa-
beth *, and of the nature of that engagement which
he contracted with her: I ſhall therefore ſay no-
thing, though I accompanied him in this voyage.
From England Monſieur again returned to Zealand,
flattered with a thouſand agreeable hopes. He
came to Lillo, and afterwards to Antwerp, where
he was crowned Duke of Brabant by the Prince of
Orange, aſſiſted by the Prince Dauphin, and all
the nobility of the Low Countries, who diſplayed
their joy in a thouſand ſhapes. This affection of

It is well known that the Queen of England allowed ſeveral of
the princes of Europe to flatter themſelves in this manner with hopes
of marrying her; and whether policy, or reaſons purely natural, was
the cauſe that ſhe never came to any concluſion, is a queſtion not hi-
therto decided, Monſieur went to England in the winter of 1581,
and returned to Flanders the ſpring following. See the detail of this
voyage, and of all the negotiations concerning the marriage at great
length, in the Memoirs of Nevers, vol. 1. p. 474.—603.

the

84 M E MO I R S Bock II.
the Dutch for Monſieur was of very ſhort conti.
nuance. The Prince of Orange, the only perſon
who was ſtill more beloved by the people than he,
being wounded in his chamber at Antwerp by a
piſtol-bullet *, the populace, who thought none but
the French could be accuſed of this action, muti-
| ied, and would have put them all to the ſword,

Monſieur could find no ſecurity but in taking refuge

in the houſe of the wounded, When the true
_ cauſe of this aſſaſſination was diſcovered 4, there
were no excuſes or ſatisfactions which the bur-

geſſes did not make to Monſieur for the injuſtice

of their ſuſpicions, and the revolt they had occa-
ſioned. But this outrage remained deeply impreſſed
on the heart of Monſieur. He vowed within him-
ſelf to revenge it in a ſignal manner. The Prince
of Grange was not a man that could be eaſily de-
_ ceived : he began from that moment to be upon
bis guard; for he read in the heart of the prince,
Bo reſentment, and the invenomed hatred which

he bore to all Proteſtants in general.

As for me, I had already received proofs of it
perſonally, which, added to other ſubjects of com-
plaint that Monſicur gave me, diſguſted me totally

at his ſervice. I had at firſt attached mylelf ſolely i

to his perſon, and to pleaſe him I ſpared neither

labour nor expence ; I believed therefore that I 1

Might talk to him of my pretenſions to the ſuc-
: ceſſion of the Viſcount de Gand, for it dependcd

March 18. rods by John de Tas The ball went quite
through his jaw. Ihe aflaſſin was taken by the ſoldiers of the
Prince of Orange, who ruſhed in at the noiſe, juſt as he was 1 298
his poniatd to diſpatch him. Chron, Piaſecki,

+ By the papers that were found in his pocket, he was Enden to
be a Spaniard. This it was that appeaſed the people, who were ready
to put all the French to the ſword. Mem. d. Aubery du Maurier.
The people ran about the ſtreet, crying, Behold, this is the marriage
of Paris, let us kill theſe wallicrers tlie, vg. 1. oth 7. in fins

upon

cr rere AA 2 Az

—

1582. OF 8 U L L T. 8
= vpon him to make this eſtate fall to me. He be-
came cold upon this propoſition; he made uſe of
* delays; but at laſt he came to a determination, and

one day that I redoubled my inſtances, he told me

very cavalierly, that he could not gratify two per-

ſons at a time; and that my couſin the Prince f
Epinoy had obtained, without trouble, what had
coſt me ſo much aſſiduity. There was ſomething
in this anſwer greatly more poignant than the re-

fuſal itſelf : 1 was ſenſibly ſtruck with it; and, a
few days after, I knew for certain what ſhare his

Proteſtant officers and I had in his heart, when L
heard him ſay publicly, that he had juſt baniſhed.
from his council D'Avantigny, the laſt of the Hu-
guenots to whom he would confide his ſecrets, and

that this made him greatly at eaſe. From that

time I bethought myſelf of quitting this ungrateful

prince; and waiting an occaſion of returning into
France, I attached myſelf to the Prince of Orange,
in whom I found all that was wanting in Monſieur.
I remember, a few days before the treachery of

Antwerp, being at this prince's palace with Sainte-

Aldegonde, and a miniſter named Villiers; he ſaid

to us, ſpeaking of Monſieur and the Catholics, who

governed him, © Theſe people have deſigns perni-
“ cious both for themſelves and us, in which, it
« 1s my opinion, they will not find their account.
« I intreat you, Sir,” added he, turning to me,
not to remove yourſelf from my lodging.” He
thought juſtly ; and his diligence finiſhing what his
forclight had begun, Monticur ſuffered the double
ſhame of unſucceſsful treachery *. | I:

About that time the ſame attempt was made, by Monſieur's or-
ders, on the principal cities of Flanders; the project ſucceeded upon
Dunkirk, Dixmude, and Dendermonde, but failed upon Bruges, O-
ſtend, Nieuport, &c. De Thou, book 779. The Duke of Montpenſier

and the Marechal de Biron made uſe of all their efforts in vain to dif

luade Monſicur from this enterpriſe. Matthieu, ibid.

VoL I. I Having

60
U
4
p
*
3
Lo
oy
"1
Yi]
1
*
* 1
'
4
FF.
+
{y
4
*
7
4
71 4
1
it
a .
-
=
BU
4
*
4
9 k
#4
*
5
; i
346
1
Fi.
Wheel
.

— W n
— 2 - - =
n * P N N * RY: — * Wd & W's - D
rc **

4 ay + FO, Re,

yg rected 2 3%, BR

„ MEMOIRS Book 11.

Faving aſſembled his army in the plein, he went
out of Antwerp one day of the month of Febru-.
ary, under the pretence of making a review, and
ordered his ſoldiers to enter the city again by thoſe
gates that were at his diſpoſal, and to make them-
ſelves maſters of it by armed force. Accordingly
his men threw themſelves into Antwerp, as into a

city carried by aſſault, crying out, © Slaughter,
„ ſlaughter, the city is gained; the maſs for ever,”
But the triumph was of ſhort duration. The Prince
of Orange, who watched all the motions of Mon-
ſieur, gave ſuch good orders every where, or ra-

ther made thoſe he had long before given to be ſo

well executed, that Monſieur's ſoldiers were repul-
| fed, cut in pieces, or almoſt all precipitated. For
terror having once ſpread among them, thoſe who
could not get out by the gates, which the great
number of carcaſes had obſtructed, threw them-
ſelves from the top of the walls. I had mounted
my horſe two hours after noon, to go and join
| Monſieur in the field. I was not yet gone out of
the city, when I heard the firſt ſhouts of the aſſail-
ants, aud almoſt in the ſame inſtant met the Prince
of Orange, who deſired me and ſome other French
gentlemen of the Reformed religion, who were
Vith me, to retire to his lodgings. As Frenchmen
we lun the greateſt riſk in the city at this moment;
as Huguenots, we were in no leſs imminent hazard
from the French army, if it continued in poſſeſſion
of the city. We followed his counſel, and faw
him not again till after he had perfectly re-eſtabliſh.
ed the peace of the town. All the trouble that he
gave himſelf to appeaſe the Flemiſh, and to make
them forget a ſtep ſo inexcuſable, is a proof that
| be was induced with regret, and in his perſonal de-
fence, to an action of which no Frenchman diſap-
proved. It was not his fault, that the Proteſtant
party in Flanders was not reconciled to Monſieur ;
| All

BY MY 583, o F 8 15 L V. 87 8

and as for us, after knowing that it was our in-
tention to join this prince, he put us into a condi- |
tion to do it without danger.

We found him greatly imbarraſſed in the neigh-
bourhood of Mechlin, of which the inhabitants, by
opening their luices, bad made one vaſt mariſh.
Four or five thouſand foot at leaſt, and as many
horſe of Monſieur's army, periſhed there with cold
and hunger, in a very rigorous ſeaſon, Monſieur,

however, abode five or ſix months in Flanders af-
ter this fatal enterpriſe : but his army had been ſo

conſiderably diminiſhed, the remainder was ſo

wretched, the cities were ſo well upon their guard,
and, to complete the misfortune, the Prince of Par-

ma returned fo ſuperior, that Monſieur was at laſt
| obliged to go back to France with the Duke de

Montpenſier, and the Marechal de Biron, leaving

nothing of himſelf in all the Low Countries but the
remembrance of a name juſtly deteſtable.

Wo to every prince fo imprudent as not to be
able to conceal his hatred againſt them whoſe ſer-

vice is neceſſary to him. But let us ſay once for
all, to the advantage of virtue, that, every thing
rightly conſidered, it moſt infallibly warrants the
ſuccefs of great enterpriſes, Wiſdom, equity, good
diſcipline, order, courage, good fortune, all things

which beget one another, in the order in which

they are here marked, are manifeſtly the whole con-
catenation of Alen of men truly great. The pro ·
cedure of thoſe who unjuſtly ſet themſelves off with
this comely name, offer, on the contrary, nothin

but temerity and obſtinacy, the companions of blind

ambition; an intoxication of their power, a vain

confidence | in their talents, a preſumption upon their
good fortune; all effetts of flattery, which ordi-
narily ſubjects no perſons ſo imperiouſly as thoſe
pretended heroes who belicye themſelves born to
lubjeck the whole univerſe, |

3 1

:
'S
S

1
;

; :

Pk 5

4.5
4

1

45

7 1
45
=
11
4 ,
L

We
: * 1
C1
4 .
i
{; 14.
-
4 $
1 7 a.
; |
: :
* F
y « —
1 * *
ij 2
j WE
in o
1 Ly” 92
: =
if:
2 n

vi!
*
1
M4

F
U
1
J Gy
*
i 1
: *
*
N 1.
if
i
F
& | 0
4 1 1
| 11
8 7
15
it
ST »

0 *
1
5
oi
We 1
N

5 A *
[7
Wt

©
"=
3

1 ac
=
bY
1
1

$
'{
1
k

8 1

s N
\ *

: . *

CES

1

1 4 A
14

14
BY

; 18
1

| 2
17
7

I
17
3
|

5

N 9
x

Y

Is

*
4 . on
. —

r AMR bo 7
8 — . ·⁵ðẽ ⅛

1

* — —— — — = 7 r W Lee — : . 2 SS reer "= y BY: = — = * 1
f 1 . WI) > ub ow 4 vgs . = 2 — * ISS. => ==> n — . * IE — * — — — =>
r r ren DFT 2 —ꝛ— — S L . el ne <A = ds wh + IR * * :
— * — — r — u & 3 — _ 8 be "Ve 5 >. INS e 2 n - HOI. _ « 4 —* = 6
- Me Hor ERS. ee n 5 r Rs 22 : x ED q <= : f 2 a 1 e
e * Wo 9 * eee 9 UI ED Eo EE 1 1 83 9 7 2 22 mne EET + — ls — ww — = L -
1 19 4 2 X55 , 4 2 4 *. 5 2 7 7 4 — — - * wy 4 *
- —W-- rp 4 . - —. '4 — 2 * * < 0 £ 4 — n 5 — 25 * — * 2 * - 9 _ —
1 DLO AY bo * — JS om, 8 2 : N . _ 5 : — —
— _— if ” amr * — 0 : 4 ou 90 4 AER ” a dd
— - 7 . —— 4 — N ker > oo» " 2 he - 2 De. _ — 2 2 rat ce . — — . —
a ”__—— . 1 0 — 2 ' — by — 2 N 55 — SF * oy rn 1 2 — 222 * — Meme — mw _=_
. ˙—— —ͤFm11 ]⁵²— — — ———  — — — w 8 —— » + —_—- - * — . - __ 8 2 -
2 — 5 — 4 - 1 ,
7 - - - x I
b a C - p
* —
/ . ”

4 —
—— u ů ig

8 MEMOIRS Book II.

1 had no mind to quit Flanders without ſeeing

the places which gave birth to my anceſtors. 1

| took a paſſport from the Count of Barlaymont, and
came to Baſſee, to the houſe of Madam de Maſtin,
my aunt. She received me as a nephew whom ſhe
had difinherited, becauſe he neither believed in God
nor in his faints, and becauſe he worſhipped none
but the devil. This was the notion Father Sil-
veſter, a Cordelier, a famous preacher, and the di.
rector of this lady „ bad judged proper to give her
of all Pretelladte ; and ſhe believed him upon his
word. She carried me to ſee an abbey that the had
founded; and as ſhe was ſhewing me the tombs
of ſome of my anceſtors, which the had cauſed
to be erected there, ſhe thence took occalion to
 Jpeak to me of my faith. If I were ſurpriſed to
car her utter the reveries that Father Silveſter had
put into her head, ſhe was not leſs, when, to un-
_ deceive her, I recited the creed, and all the prayers
Which are in common to us with the Roman Ca-
tholics. The ſentiments of nature awakened in
the ſoul of this lady with thoſe of reaſon : ſhe had
never been wanting with regard to me but out of
| her downright honeſty. She embraced me with
tears in her eyes, and promiſed me not only that
the would aſſure me of all her eſtates, but alſo that
ſhe would make thoſe of the Viſcount de Gand to
be reſtored to me. She ſpoke ſincerely : doubtlels

Father Silveſter found reaſons till better to diſſuade

| the effect of her good intentions ; for nothing of
all that ſhe promiſed was ever executed.

I had above all a particular deſire to ſee the city

of Bethune, the country and ancient inheritance
of my anceſtors, who . poſſeſſed there for a long
time very conſiderable eſtates. The treachery Mon-
| Geur had uſed with the city of Antwerp, rendered
all the other cities of the Low Countries ſuſpicious,

They would not ſuffer me to enter Bethune til after

.

I

CVT 89

1 had ſhewn my paſſport, declared my name, and
convinced them I came from Madam de Maſtin;
which produced an effect that I little expected. 1
had taken the road to an inn, whoſe ſign was the
coronet of the family of Bethune, when I ſaw co-
ming towards me a platoon of armed men, that

gave me ſome apprehenſion. It was, however, the

burgefles of the city, who, full of reſpe& for the
blood of their ancient Lords, no ſooner knew who

1 was, than they thought it proper to pay me all
poſſible honours, and brought me a preſent of wine,

baked meats, and other refections. I did not leave

this city till after I had viſited exactly, and exami-

ned with ſecret pleaſure, all the public and particu-
lar monuments which preſerved to poſterity the re-
membrance of the benefits my anceſtors had con-

| ferred on this city, and its gratitude for them.

Flanders having nothing more to detain me, I

returned to France, and took the direct road to
Roſny, where I ſcarce halted. I ſet out for Guy-
enne, full of joy to meet again the King of Na-
varre after ſo long an abſence. This prince recei-
ved me in a manner that left me no room to doubt
bdaut he was ſenſibly pleaſed at my return. He in-
*  clined I ſhould relate all my adventures, and thoſe
of Monſieur. &« Well,” ſaid he to me, after I had
done, © is not this the accompliſhment of all I told
4 you of this prince at Coutras ? but the Viſcount
„ de Turenne, whom I diſſuaded as much as poſ-
„ ſible from following him, has managed his mat-
. ters ſtill worſe than you.” 0 |

The expedition of Monſieur into the Low Coun-

tries had irritated the King of Spain to ſuch a de-
| gree, as to make him endeavour to gain the King of
Navarre's friendſhip, and offer him his ſuccours

for renewing the war with the royaliſts of France.
This propoſition he received at Hagemau, whither
AIRS Ss RE  -

pre" —
. — 722
: 2.55 22 OS

To.
— — ä
> es <X GIRO

TE LT

— U—
e

7.
K PP h A PE TLDS 8

8 r n
.

Nee

oo M E M OI A Ss Bookll.
he had gone to viſit the Counteſs of Guiche &; for
bis paſſion for this lady was then at its height, The

diffidence Henry had of all that came to him from

Spain, and his natural antipathy againſt that court,

prevented his giving any credit to it. I will not

take upon me to anſwer for the ſincerity of the

Spaniards in all the offers which were made him at

different times by Bernardin de Mandoce, the Cheva-
lier Moreau, and Calderon. I believe, however,
there were moments in which the King of Spain

dealt faithfully with the King of Navarre 4, and
this might be of that number. But be that as it

Vill, the King of Navarre gave no anſwer to this

propoſition, and only made uſe of it to convince
the King and Queen-mother of the purity of his
Intentions. He ſent me to Paris, to inform them
SS I ß
There was no longer almoſt any ſuch thing as

ſpeaking to the King, This prince having retired
to Vincennes, was inacceſſible to all but his mi-
nions and the miniſters of his pleaſures. I expected

to have been introduced to him by the Queen of
Navarre ; for this princeſs, whoſe humour could

not ſympathiſe with that of the King her butband,

Diana, or Coriſande Dandoins, Viſcounteſs of Lovigny, Cc. wife,
and afterwards widow, of Philibert Count of Grammont. In the
| obſervations upon the amours of Alcander the Great, this lady is

ſaid to have ſent Henry IV. 23 or 24,000 Gaſcons, levied at her

on expence. It is alſo mentioned there, that ſhe had a fon named
Antoiy, whom that prince offered to acknowledge for his own; but
the young man replied, that he. choſe rather to be conſidered as a

- gentleman than the baſtard of a king. Journal of Henry III. reign,
| 7. 270. Ke c |

+ That which induced him to believe this, was, that to this letter
of the King of Spain's, preſented to the King of Navarre by the
Chevalier Moreau, or the Commander Morree, as Davila calls him,
bock 2. was added an offer of 50,000 crowns a-month, made by the
ſame Chevalier, on the fronticr of Bearn, to maintain the King of

Navarre's army, provided he would make war uron France. Mem.
ef the league, vol. 5. | HAT e
had

: 33 Ce eee 1 N 2.
Weg 4 IIA - 2 : e , Pi 8 8 LR
: A * 9 o We * N po . — * N n ö 1 b . þ N N wv nl LR þ e . „ * . Wo
— e * 12 ˙ AS . N N r r 8 5 8 FN ve 5 * 5 2 5 SE AER AT WP Ss : p .
JF!!! xx DT CEE Th ICs Re pe Td troy te. LT Ex COT ͤ RA FOES TS 2 op Is. $5 : EI DEE Ee RR Pn on et * e * a :
( 92S 4 a Sr Rod 7 $ EN = RIS , I . xy y 1 . . . * 1 0 5 2 R Wo 2 . * — ,
* * n 8 . 4 wk; I . CI : 7 e bs 07S * 5 1 4 x E N 5

*
8
Reo
ws

- «x8

IH
ot
£8

1
+}

>” wh . Li SE | Þ I -
* d F ie _ CS alt n
/ 22 NIN ee SI RO EE F
F ST) ito uf ah. IE EIT E te $5 Goon be! "7 r 2 œ— . ICC TS . * n ö
7. . ß ⁊ͤTTdß . EA IE . ' i ; . Irons :
EYES 7 © SLES e r ES. FEE . 4 af 8 ren . n 3 : TR F294 v > 8
))) ͤ ĩðâb EIS S BE Be SORE EET Sos LE ane: Sen : 3 i 57 e ee 5

158 3. 0 F 8 UL L Y. 91

had now * left him to return to the court of . 2
but I learned from Madam de Bethune, that ſhe
| was in no better intelligence with the Queen her
mother, and the King her brother. I had re-

courſe to Madam de Sauves, who procured me an

audience of Catherine. The affair appeared to her
of conſequence ; ſhe ſpoke of it to the King, and
a negotiation was begun there. I even obtained

from his Majeſty a credential letter for the King of

Navarre ; but what reliance could one have on the

reſolutions of a court, where, it would ſeem, they

took never a good ſtep that was not immediately
repented of? The Queen-mother judged it proper
to make no other uſe of the King of Navarre's con-

fidence, than to enter into a ſtricter union with

Spain; as this prince came to know by the re-

pr oaches the King of Spain made him, for ng
betrayed his ſecre. |
One conſequence of this reconcilement with
Spain, was the bad reception Monſieur met with
from the King upon bis return from Flanders, which
occaſioned his retiring to Chateau-Thierry, op-
preſſed with chagrin. As I was now unemployed
at home, whither I had retired after ſeeing my de-

putation miſcarry, a motive of curioſity led me to
viſit Monſieur at Chateau-Thierry, I imagined his
bad fortune might have made him wiſer ; but it

bad only abated his pride. He received me with
ſo many civilities, that judging they could not come
but from ſome principle of intereſt, I immediately

| concluded, he had Tons great deſigns | in bis head,

* From that time they VO lived ſeparate, actaiciianiios the
reproaches which Henry III. often made the King of Navarre on
that ſubject, and upon ſome others that are mentioned by L'Etoile.
One day, when the latter reccived ſome very ſharp letters from
Henry III.“ The King,” ſaid he, © in all his letters, honours me
« greatly ; for by the rk he calls me 3 and by the laſt che

1

© fon ot Pm

” MEMOIRS Book Il

I no longer doubted it when I heard the magniſi-
cent offers made me in his name by Aurilly, who

had procured me the honour of kiſſing his hand.
Through projects with which Monſieur * was in-
toxicated, I could diſcover at the bottom of his
heart a melancholy and ſecret bitterneſs that _
voured him, and which nothing could diſpel.

was the beginning of that languor which ſome "ig

after terminated by death his ambitious projects .
At my return to Paris, I received an order from

the King of Navarre to attend him upon important

affairs. He was meditating to diſconcert, if poſ-

ſible, all the meaſures of the league, the great ſcope |

of which this ingenious prince early apprehended,

He needed a man of confidence at court to ſtudy
all its motions; and it was to charge me with this

_ employment, that he had commanded my attend-

ance, He communicated his reflections to me,
gave me all the neceſſary inſtructions, and when I
went to take leave of him, embracing me ſeveral

times, he ſaid, “ My friend, remember that the
principal quality in a man of true courage and
Vorth, is to keep his word inviolably; in that

44 which I have given to you, I will never fail.“ 1
Was not to ſeek for a pretext to authoriſe this ſe-
_ cond | journey to Paris. This favour in 8 5 1 bad

— Monficur ten the 1 of hs of 8 by the grace of God, 5
Duke of Lauthier, of Brabant, Luxemburg, Guelderland, Alencen, |
Anjou, Tourain, Berry, Evieux, and Chateau-Thierry ; Count of

Flanders, of Holland, Zealand, Zulphen, Maine, Perche, Mante,
 Meulan, and Beaufort; Marquis of the holy Roman empire; Lord

of Frieſland and Mechlin; Defender of the Belgie liberty. Hercules

Was the name that was given him at his baptiſm ; but when it Was
confirmed, it was changed to Francis.

+ There is not any hiſtorian who doubts that he died by os
His blood ran through all his pores, as if every vein had been burſt.

De Thou, book 78. This was, ſay the Memoirs of Nevers, for ha-
ving lain with La ——, who made him ſinell a poiſoned noſegy. |

left

88 163. _— 5. 33: 33.

* * e
eee 2 > N RAE
1 ̃ “ , . ON REIN

777770 ES
e eee

= *
„ © ur 3

r 1 1. 93
left my two young brothers at court *, made it
very plauſible. They began to give jealouſy to the
minions. The King already made them of his

parties of devotion, which was a ſtep ſpeedily to

arrive at the greateſt familiarity. However, I learn-
ed, on my arrival, that they were diſgraced; the

reaſon of which I did not know till a long time af-
ter, and it is of the number of thoſe things that
ought to be paſſed over in ſilence F This did not
hinder me from entering upon my new function at

Paris, and the court, I gave the King of Navarre
exact intelligence of all that paſſed there, that he
might take the meaſures moſt ſuitable to the ſtate
of his affairs. „„ 0 1
Engaged in this new kind of life, which obliged

3 me, by the nature of the occupations in which I
was taken up, to frequent the court, to mingle in

the moſt brilliant companies of the city, to take

part in their amuſements, their pleaſures, their idle-
neſs; in the flower and ſtrength of my age, it

will naturally be expected that I paid the ordinary

tribute to love. I became deſperately enamoured
of the daughter of the Preſident de St Meſmin, one

of the moſt beautiful perſons in France.

At firſt, I wholly abandoned myſelf to a paſſion,
the beginnings of which are ſo delightful ; and
when I would have reſiſted it afterwards, by reflect- |

ing that this alliance was not convenient for me, I

found this reflection very feeble againſt the regards

of this whole family for me, the friendſhip of 12

reſpectable father, and the charms of a miſtreſs that

* Solomon and Philip de Bethune, The firſt as eldeſt, was called

Baron of Roſny, and was governor of Mante. The ſecond has form-

ed the branch of the Counts of Selles and Charoſt. By attaching

themſelves to the perſon and party of the King of France, they both

ab,ured the Proteſtant religion, in which they had been educated,

feſſion of Sancy, chap. 7. 5

L EET ST on
n 2
"1 2 INT

} Thoſe who are curious to know it, need only conſult the con-

merited

— — N — — — — TX Gt OY * — N rg.» 2 2
k — 5 — F = = 6 "I r —— —= 2 — —
rr ” = — —.— — —_— — 7 "> a - IE — K ry ro DSS TY —
8 a 123 br 4 7 n > OD N 2 . —
FFP ” $32 :

94 M E M O IR Ss Bookll..

merited affection. 1 ſhould have had great diffi ·
culty to have broken this chain by my own ſtrength.
La- Fond“ propoſed to me, for my diverſion, to
viſit Mademoiſelle de Courtenay +, whom he wiſhed
me to ſeek, as being of a party more convenient
for me in all reſpects. I ſaw her, and internally

approved this choice ; but Mademoiſelle de St

Meſmin ſoon deſtroyed all theſe wiſe reſlections.
I came one day to fleep at Nogent upon the

Seine, having with me this ſame La- Fond, and ſome

other perſons. Thither a ſingular charice had con-
ducted Mademoiſelle de St Meſmin, and Mademoi-
ſelle de Courtenay, which J learned the moment I

_ alighted at the inn. The conjuncture was the moſt
delicate, and I judged that there was no way of
getting clear but by breaking for ever with her of

the two Jadies to whom I ſhould refuſe my firſt vi-
ſit and aſſiduities. There is no management nor

addreſs that can in ſuch a caſe N two women

at once.
The young ner of st Meſmin came down at

this moment, and found me in a revery, as a man
who fought to reconcile reaſon with love. She per-

ceived it; and my imbarraſſment affording her a
fine field for the vivacity of her ſpirit, ſhe endea-
voured to draw me to her ſiſter's feet; when La-
Fond approaching me, whiſpered in my ear, Turn
« to the right, Monſieur : there you will find

“ riches, a royal extraction, and full as much beau-
„When it ſhall have attained to the age of per-
& fection. Theſe two looſe words ſeaſonably re-

Wy « t

called my reaſon, and fixed my irreſolution. 1

8 that La Fond gore me e good counſel, and

| oy Anne ae Countenay, youngelt . of Francis de Courtenay
| Lord of Bentin, |

that

9. TP DP was his valet de chambre. He is mentioned in another I

rn 95

that the only difference as to beauty between Made-
moiſelle de Courtenay and her rival, was, that
the one held me upon the ſcore of charms, which

a year or two more promiſed the other. I excuſed
myſelf from going to ſee Mademoiſelle de St Meſ-

min, which drew upon me great reproaches ; but I

ſuſtained the aſſault, and in the ſame breath re-
paired to the apartment of Mademoiſelle de Courte-
nay, who valued this ſacrifice above its price. She
imparted to me the pleaſure ſhe took in the pre-

ference; and I applauded myſelf, when I had con-

ſidered my new miſtreſs more attentively, and when

ſome viſits more had acquainted me with her cha-

racter. She admitted my addreſs, and a ſhort time

atter this adventure 1 married her.

The tenderneſs due to an amiable ſpouſe, de-
tained me at Roſny this whole year (1584), in the
occupations, exerciſes, and diverſions of the coun»
try : another kind of life no leſs new. The coun-
try, to thoſe who have been accuſtomed to live at
court and in the field, is ordinarily an occaſion of
double expence ; but it furniſhes many reſources,
to a man who knows that good economy can ſup-
ply the place of great riches. A taſte for fine
horſes, which I had cultivated merely for pleaſure,
made a uſeful part of this domeſtic nei. I
kept jockeys, who went to ſeek horſes in foreign
countries, where they were cheap; I ſent them to
be ſold in Gaſcony, at the King of Navarre's court,
where I never failed to draw Jaroe {ſums for them.
I remember to have fold, among others, a roan

b horſe mark ed with a peach-flower to the Viſcount

de Chartres, for 600 crowns, which cott me only

40. The tapeſtry of the labours of Hercules,

which adorns the hall of Sully, came from M. de
Nemours de la Garnache, who paid me in this

coin a fine Spanith horle chat I had fold bim at

1200 Crowns.
5 5 owards

—C— ——

Gs MEMOIR Ss Bock II.

Towards the end of this year *, a letter from
the King of Navarre drew me from this inactive

life. He informed me, that the time which he had

foreſeen was arrived in which he had need of his

ſervants ; that the ſtate and religion were threatened
with the laſt misfortune, if immediate endeavours.
were not uſed to prevent it; and that he ſhould

inceſſanty have upon his hands a moſt cruel war.

I inſtantly diſpoſed myſelf to attend this prince, ta-
king with me, as well for his occaſions as my own,
48,000 francs, from the ſale of a wood of tall

beeches which I made with this intention. |

In effect, the hardy enterpriſes of the league
1 The peace continuing in force till the following year, the Me-
moirs of this and the preceding contain little concerning the King of

Navarre. Le Grain relates the adventure that happened to him with

Capt. Michau, who pretended to have quitted the ſervice of Spain for
that of this prince, in order to find ſome opportunity of murdering

him treacherouſſy. One day, ſays he, when the King of Navarre
was hunting in the foreſts of Aillas, he perceived Michau juſt behind

him, well mounted, with a couple of piſtols cocked and primed.
The King was alonz and unattended, it being cuſtomary for hunters

to ſeparate: and ſeeing him approach, “Capt. Michau,“ ſaid he to
him, with a bold and determined air, “ diſmount; I have a mind to
„ make trial of your horſe, that I may know if it be as good a one

« as you ſay it is.“ The Captain obeyed, and diſmounting, tbe

King got upon his horſe, and taking the piſtols, Do you deſign to

& ſhoot me with one of theſe?” ſaid he: © am told you intend to

kill me; but in the mean time I can kill you if I pleaſe.” Say-

ing this, he diſcharged the two piſtols in the air, and commanded
the Captain to follow him. Michau, having good reaſons to defire
to be excuſed, took leave of him two days after, and never after ap-
| peared. Decade of Henry the Great, bock 8. Buſbeq, who at that time
reſided at Paris, in the quality of ambaſſador from the Emperor Ro-
dolphus II. aſſures us alſo, in his letters {epiſt. 46), that a deſerter,
whom he does not name, adminiſtered poiſon to the King of Na-

varre ; but that this prince, either by the (trength of his conſtitution

or the weaknels of the poiſon, felt no bad eſfects tiom it: and adds,
that this ſame man having attempted afterwards to ſhoot him with

a piſtol, and failed, was taken, and put to the torture; and that it

was Known by the behaviour of Henty III. upon this occaſion, that
he had no part in the deſigned aſſaſſinution. .

Jͤ ²˙· ¶ ͤ!l . E ↄ—˙iV . — . ̃ p . "aw T7  _F_2_L% *'

broke

7 97
broke out this year“; and one cannot reflect
without trembling, that, in leſs than four years,
ten royal armies fell upon the King of Navarre,
when the danger that threatened equally the two

„ kings

* The firſt ſtep which diſcovered the deſigns of the league, was
an aſſociation of princes, prelates, and gentlemen of Picardy, wha
met at Peronne, to avoid obeying the edict of fixty-three articles,
given in 1576, in favour of the Proteſtants. The manifeſto that
was there drawn up, ſerved for a model to all the other provinces,
and even to the ſtates of Blois, which were ſummoned about the end
of that year, and whoſe reſolutions obliged Henry III. to declare him-
ſelf the head of the Catholics againſt the Huguenots, that he might
not leave this title to be aſſumed by the Duke of Guiſc. At firſt
they talked only of maintaining the Catholic religion alone in the
kingdom; but at length a debate concerning the ſucceſſion to the
crown was introduced, into which they brought the Pope and the Kin
of Spain, See the form of theſe aſſociations in the MS. marked
3826 in the King's library, p. 160. The conſpiracy of the nobility
of Normandy, with the oath to preſerve the Catholic religion in
France, and the crown to the houſe of Valois, ſee in vol 8832. p. 7.
All this volume is likewiſe filled with memoirs relating to the league,
and the firſt ſtates of Blois. See alſo the treaty the league made with
the King of Spain at the caſtle of Joinville, and ſign:d by the reipece
tive parties, with many other pieces on the ſame ſubject, vol. 88656,
All, or part of theſe pieces, with very curious circumſtances relating
to the fame ſubject, may be found in different authors, ſuch as the
Memoirs of Nevers, vol. 1. Memoirs of the league vol. 1. Memoirs
of (tate by Villeroy, vol. 2. De Thou. book 63 & 81. D'Aubigné,
vol. 2. book 3. chap. 3. Matthieu. vol 1. book 7. & 8. Le No ennaire
de Cayet, vol 1. in init. and many others. Many perfons believe the
original of the league to be much more ancient, and that it took its
riſe in the council of Treat, through the endeavours of the Cardinal
of Lorrain, the uncle; during which Francis Duke of Guiſe, on his
ſide, formed the plan of it in France; but the death of the latter
ſuſpended the effect It is pretended alſo, that Don John of Auſtria,
paſſing through France, in his way to Flanders, concerted the ſcheme
with the Duke of Guiſe. The college of Forterct has paſſed for the
cradle of the league. It is ſaid that an advocate named David, car-
ried the memoirs to Rome; and that thoſe memoirs, which may be
read in vol. 1. of the Memoirs of the league, being intercepted by the
Huguenots, gave them the fiſt certainty of it. Some perſons have
doubted whether this advocate, who died in his journey to Rome, or,
as others ſay, in his return from thence, did not treat with the
Pope by his own motion, and agreeably to his own opinion: which is
not Jeſs probable. As for Henry III. he certainly deſerves all the
reproaches which the Duke of Sully here caſts upon him. He had
Vol. I. e > undeniable =

os M E M O1RS Book II.
kings was turned againſt him alone, through. the

weakneſs of Henry III. who received laws from his
very enemies, and conducted himſelf the hand that

fought to ſubvert his authority.

Henry III. perceiving the league would publicly
ſet up the ſtandard of revolt, waked a little from the
lethargy into which he had been plunged, and

thought proper to diſpatch the Duke de Joyeuſe in-
to Normandy, to oppoſe the Duke d' Elbœuf, who

kept an army there, which the league made uſe of
to extort the famous edict of July *, by which all
the Huguenots were ordered to go to maſs, or to
abandon the kingdom in fix months.

Juoyeuſe, who had my two brothers in his army,
' paſſed by Roſny, and engaged me, without difficulty,

to go with him: bY attacking the 8 we en-

undeniable proofs of his enemies deſigns upon the royal authority;
to whom, when he broke the edit of pacifioation in 1577, he ſaid

aloud theſe words: © I am much afraid, that by our endeavours to

« ſuppreſs Calviniſm, we ſhall bring the maſs into danger.” We
are oſfred, that all the ſecrets of the league were diſcovered by a
gentleman named La Rochette, to whom they were intruſted, and who
ſuffered himſelf to be taken on purpoſe, that he might reveal them

without danger. In a word, it is alſo certain, that the Duke of
Guile began to raiſe the ſtandard of his party in 1585, when he was

ſtill ſo weak, that he could not depend upon more than 4000 foot
and 1000 horſe. Beauvais Nangis (and he relates it himſelf in his

Memoirs) aſked him one day what he intended to do if the King

ſhould come to attack him: © I will retire immediately to Germa-
ny,“ replied the Duke,“ and there wait for a more favourable
« opportunity.” | |

This was the treaty of Nemours, the 1 of the league, and
- the diſgrace of Henry III. Henry IV. told the Marquis de Ja Force,
in the preſence of Matthieu, that the moment he was informed of

this inglorious weakneſs of the nag of France, his muſtaches turned
ſuddenly white on that fide of his face which he ſupported with his
nand, Matth. vol. 8, Sixtus V. manifeſted his indignation ; and by

We ame bull of September 5. 1585, wherein he excommunicated all

that aſliſted the Huguenots. he likewiſe excommunicated thoſe who

undertook any thing againſt the King and kingdom. He foreſaw at

that time all the miſeries that would befal France. See theſe articles

_ of Nemours, and the proceedings of the league both in France and

in Nn, Memoirs of Nevers, vol. I. p. 661. Cc.

| t ered A 5 ; .
[ a rg 1 J
; . L105
N 4 AAS TIN
=
. . % +
—

15% OF 8 UE K 1. E

tered into the true intereſts of the King of Navarre.

1 gave him the beſt reception in my power; but

nothing charmed him ſo much as the beauty of
my horſes. F ed

Lavardin likewiſe took his way by Roſny, and
went to lodge at the extremity of the town. Chi-
cot *®, who would always give a looſe to his plea»
fant humour, at the expence of Lavardin, whom

be called a madman, ſent to tell him one day, in a
very myſterious manner, that that devil of a Hu-

guenot (meaning me) had kept the deaf man pri-
ſoner, (another ſurname he gave to the Duke of
Joyeuſe). Lavardin, without reflecting that his at-

tempt had been perfectly uſeleſs, though it had not

been ridiculous, armed himſelf immediately, with
all his domeſtics, and came to make a bravado be-
fore my houle ; where the railleries of all the com-
pany were profuſely beſtowed upon him.

What I am going to ſay, will not be eaſily be-

_ * Chicot was a Gaſcon, brave, rich, and a buffoon. At the ſiege
of Rouen, he wounded Henry of Lorrain, Count of Chaligny, in the

thigh ; and taking him priſoner, preſented him to Henry LV. ſaying,

& Here, keep what I give thee.” The Count, enraged at being ta-

ken by a fool, gave him a blow on the head with the hilt of his

ſword, which killed him. He uſed to ſay whatever he pleaſed to the

King, without giving him any offence. When the Duke of Parma

came to France, Chicot ſaid to the King, before all the courtiers,

« My friend, I ſee very well that all you do will fignify nothing, un-

« leſs you either turn Catholic, or pretend you are one.” Another
time he ſaid to him, ©] am convinced, that to be peaceably King
of France, you would give both Papiſts and Huguenots to Luci-

«* fer's clerks : ſo true it is, that you kings have no religion but in

* appearance.” I am not ſurpriſed,” ſaid he, another time, to his

Majeſty, “ that ſo many perſons deſire to be kings: it is a good trade,
© and by working at it only an hour in a day, one may make ſuf.

4 ficient proviſion for the reſt of the week, without being obliged -

to one's neighbours. But, for God's ſake, my friend, take care

and keep out of the hands of the leaguers; for if you ſhould fall

into ſome of them, they would hang you up like a hog's gut, and
write upon your gibbet, At the crown of France and Navarre are

* good lodgings to be let,” Memoirs for the hiſtory of France, vol. 2.

1 lie ved.

* ! — . IST foe - 7 n 3 — DAE — 2 — Ix;
— = — 2 FT 2 — - III LS £ = . * i DER: _ =
Oe RF ——y_—uq wecrcn=r. rt rue rr act zoo Ex ES Me er pe :

#
.
1
1
0
ö
0
}
ts
« |
k
1
"
:
r
4

* r

|
|
ö

—— — and 22 . Ty

lieved. Scarce were we ſet out together, but upon
our arrival at Vernueil, the Duke of Joyeuſe recei-
ved a packet from court, which informed him, that
the King had made a peace with the league, and
that it was his Majeſty's intention, that the army,

which only two days ago was to ſupport him a-
gainſt the league “, ſhould be led againſt the King

of Navarre. Joyeuſe, in relating this to me, added,
Well! Monſieur le Baron de Roſny, this ſtroke
„Will give me a cheap bargain of your fine horſes,
for the war is declared againſt the Proteſtants :
but J aſſure myſelf, that you will not be fo fool-
“ iſh as to go in ſearch of the King of Navarre,
« and imbark in a party that will infallibly be
% ruined, and make you loſe your fine eſtate of

« Roſny.”? 6 |

pleaſed Fortune to conduct the King of Navarre to

that greatneſs which ſhe had deſtined for him: for
I was always internally perſuaded of this; and the
_ predictions of La Broſſe were continually preſent to
my mind; ſo that my anſwer to Joyeuſe turned
Wholly upon them ; after which I quitted him ab-
Tuptly. The extravagance muſt have appeared to
him a little ſtrong ; and I learned that he ſaid to

»The King was obliged to it at Chàlons by the leaguers, who

were aſſembled there. He ſecretly excuſed himſelf to the King of

Navarre, upon the ſcore of neceſſity. This prince and the Qucen

| his mother ſuffered themſelves to be unſeaſonably intimidated by the
threats of the Icague, whoſe forces were exaggerated, although it
would have been very eaſy to have deſtroyed them in the beginning.

The council miſled an occaſion of uniting the Low Countries to the

crown, by ſending back the deputies from thoſe provinces without an
anſwer, who came to offer the ſovereiguty of them to the King, pro-
vided he would march with his troops on that ſide. Thus were two
_ great errors committed at one time. De Thou, beck 81. |

thoſe

The Duke might have ſpoken much longer with ·

out interruption, I knew the court enough, not
to be ſurpriſed at any thing from that quarter. But
I was aſtoniſhed to think by how many traverſes it

1585. „V 101

thoſe about him, © There goes a maſter - fool; but

&« he will be finely abuſed by his ſorcerer.“

L returned to my houſe; from whence I departed
| inſtantly, after taking ſome new meaſures con-

formable to the ſudden change which had ſo lately
happened. I went expeditiouſly to Guienne, where
the King of Navarre was, and ſtaid with him four

or five months, during which he was employed in
making preparations againſt the ſtorm. He carried
me with him to Montauban, where he held fre-

quent conferences with the Proteſtants upon the
part it was neceſſary they ſhould take in this con-

juncture. The miſery was, that, upon an occaſion
when all was at ſtake, they did not underſtand their
true intereſt ſufficiently, at leaſt ſo as to keep them
perfectly united, and to concur honeſtly in the ſame
views. From that time, ſome of the principal
> Chiefs thought more of their own particular advance-

ment than upon that of the King, without reflect-
ing that their fortunes were ſo cloſely connected
with his, that if he failed, it was impoſlible they
could ſucceed, Each built a fortune for himſelf,
out of the general plan. |

This Ciſunion of minds ſhewed itſelf more ſig -

nally in a particular conference held at St Paul de
| Lamiate, where audience was given to a doctor of
_ divinity, named Butrick, ſent by the Elector Pala»
tine. It was there that the Viſcount de Turenne
gave the firſt marks of that unquiet, double, and

ambitious ſpirit, which formed his character. He
| had, in concert with this Butrick, projected a new
ſyſtem of government *, into which they had drawn

* The hiſtorian who gives us the life of the Duke of Bouillon,
does not deny that theſe were the views of this Calviniſt nobleman.
He was a very able politician, extremely ambitious, paſſionately de-

ſirous of the quality of leader of the Calviniſts of France, and very
capable of filling that poſt. This is all that can be ſaid of him, to
ſoften thoſe terms, a little too ſtrong, which M. de Sully frequently

employs in theſe Memoirs, when he fpeaks of the Duke of Bouillon.
e 8 . Mell.

— — =

—

*
r IF ---- I.
r

—

SS *
2

— — hve te
EPP

— DET IO EErT
— 2 =

— mus

E

Ty

102 MEMOIR S Boch II.
Meſſ. de Conſtans, D' Aubigné, de St Germain-
| Beaupre, de St Germain de Clan, de Brezolles, and

others. They wanted to form the Calviniſt part of

France into a kind of republican ſtate, under the
protection of the EleQor Palatine, who ſhould keep
in his name five or {ix lieutenants in the different
provinces. _ „ 5
In examining this project, it was agreed, that

the King of Navarre was cleared of all obligations

to theſe gentlemen; ſince, by this plan, they con-

founded the princes of the blood with the officers

of the Proteſtant party, and reduced them to the :

quality of lieutenants under a petty ſtranger prince,

Tbis was not the only time that the King of Na- 3

varre found ſecret enemies in his councils, among

4
hg ö
N
7 3H
* * 97
8 8
7
N
S 5 .
.
N
Wy
” 8
3
SI
.
; Te:
os
k W
-
:
=>
*

his creatures, and, in appearance, his moſt zealous

ſervants, and even among his own friends and his
relations. „ .

Me muſt lay our account with every thing on
the part of men. They do not, for the moſt part,
keep to their duty, to ſociety, to conſanguinity,

from any regard to benefits, good credit, or virtue,

but according to their hopes and their ſucceſs. But
how could theſe able politicians pretend to main?

tain unity and concord in their pretended republic ?

they, who were for giving it ſo many heads, and | 8

heads as independent the one of the other, as un- DE

ſubjected to a protector too feeble to compel their
obedience. It was perceived at firſt what was
their object: they meant to become each in their
diſtrict fo many ſovereigns, not adverting, that
by this they only delivered up one another to the
diſcretion of Spain, and of the league, who had
_ deſtroyed them eaſily, by attacking them ſepa -

rarely...

Theſe cabals of the principal officers in the Pro- Io
teſtant party with a foreigner, which were carried
on in a manner hidden enough, happily did not

1

hinder

4
923

1

3

1

12 *
n
e
A. 1

—— SCE
e
* 1 8
oY 1

G n

* J
7
N
n
N
"
8
- *
* *
war's boy
n
7
*
YE
e
One
1, v
A
W 5
1
X oF;
n
x ED 4
bh BS
7 1
4 WW
N
N U —
Os
3838 8
DT 7 7 -
n N
Ss
5 *
2 NY
: ES]
=:
_*
N
; $
LY
—— 8
PI
=
ITE
By Fi
1
3
%
4
»
q
7

0 % ay
hinder the better party from prevailing in the afſ-
ſemblies. The Duke of Montmorency“ was of
opinion, that in the preſent danger we ſhould be all
united, and put ourſelves effectually upon the de-
fenſive. I inſiſted, in all the councils, upon the

neceſſity of acknowledging the authority of one
only head, and of not diſſipating the power, by di-
viding it. As we came out from one of theſe coun-
cils, the King of Navarre drawing me aſide, ſaid to

me, © Monſieur le Baron de Roſny, it is not all to

b 2 9 : : 3 ne "> b . , ; ys 3 3 err FFT
3 2 5s 3:2” ROT Mc \ - 4-2 . * 8 ; 5 : N os Hs . FFF

1 1 4 8 a." 4 8 9 2 SAL 4.2 1 2 WEL 4 ILL EF N 5 * 1 * " n
* PS CE z « C '> wt 1 7 TY * % 1 » p<? oh If £ * *. ** - *

n 7 — £ 1 . >a . 2 ris i 2 8 #2175 2000 28 1

5 5 R . YO SL) OE Ins (ccc * "

„ r . + Ix . 9 of ag „ 2 1 4 *

7 4 PA 75 — # 4 7 — # WY al * \ "x * Me ,

8 3 . E . C
5 r E N ; a

58 ſpeak well, we muſt act till better: Are you not
& reſolved that we ſhall die together? it is no
longer time to be good economiſts ; all men of
“ honour and conſcience muſt employ one part of
© their eſtates to ſave the other. I perſuade my-
&« ſelf, that you will be among the firſt to aſſiſt me;
% and I promiſe you, if I ever have good fortune,
“ you ſhall partake of it.” „ No, no, Sir,” an-
ſwered I, © I do not incline we hould die together,
© but that we ſhould live, and that we ſhould cut
te the head off all our enemies. My good manage-
© ment will not be detrimental here. I have ſtill a a
wood that will produce me 100,000 fr ancs,

© which I will employ to this end. You ſhall give
me more one day, when you are immenſely rich.
„This will happen. I had a preceptor, who had
« adevil in his body, and he predicted it to me.”

The King of Navarre could not help laughing at

this fally ; and embracing me cloſely, & Well, my
* friend,” ſaid he to me, © return to your houſe, |
« be diligent, and come to me ſoon again, with as
“ many of your friends as you can bring with you,
« and do not forget your wood of tall beeches.”

U He afterwards communicated to me the deſign he

5 bad to draw che war to Faris, or at leaſt to the

This is + emp, Mlarechal Dane, afterwards Duke of Mont-
| marc. |

Loire; 3

3 de ſy * o — an
— A $20 a

CR I · m ß Me = ; 2 :

14 MEMOIR S Bock II.
Loire; which was, in effect, the only method to

ſucceed. He told me alſo, that he had practiſed
ſome intelligence in Angers, but that he feared the

Prince of Conde would, by his precipitation, ob-

ſtruct his deſigns there more than the Catholics.

The event will ſhew if he thought juſtly, He pro-

miſed to inform me of all that paſſed, and took
leave of me, after a thouſand teſtimonies of affec -

tion, which I ſhall never forget.

lo arrived at Bergerac, almoſt in the ſame mo-
ment that the Cardinal de Lenoncourt, M. de Sil-

By: lery, and M. de Poigny, were deputed by the court

to the King of Navarre, to repreſent to him, for

the laſt time, the neceſlity of ſubmitting to the will
of the King, and of changing his religion *. Poig-

ny came to me the next day, and diſcloſing to me

nn the Memoirs of the life of J. A. de Thou, book 3. there is

à a converſation which Michael de Montagne had with this preſident,

Which the reader may not be diſpleaſed to ſee here. As they were

| diſcourſing fays the author, upon the cauſes of the preſent troubles,
Montagne told the Preſident, that he had been a mediator between
the King of Navarre and the Duke of Guiſe, when theſe princes were

at the court; and that the latter, by his cares, his ſervices, and aſ-

ſiduities, made advances to gain the King of Navarre's friendſhip ;

but finding that he made a jeſt of him, and that, after all his endea-
yours, he was ſtill an implacable enemy, he had recourſe to war, as
the laſt reſource to defend the honour of his family; that the enmity.
which raged in the minds of theſe two perſons, was the cauſe of a

war, which was at preſent ſo far kindled, that only the death of

one of them could extinguiſh it; that neither the Duke, nor any of
his family, believed themſelves ſecure, while the King of Navarre

lived; and the King of Navarre, on his fide, was perſuaded, that he
ſhould draw no advantage from his right of ſucceſſion to the crown,
during the Duke's life. As for religion, added he, which they both

make ſuch a noiſe about, it is a good pretence to procure adhe-

rents, but neither of them is much affected by it. The fear of being
abandoned by the Proteſtants, is the ſole cauſe that prevents the King
of Navarre from embracing the religion of his anceſtors; nor would
the Duke recede from the confeſſion of Augſburg, if his uncle Charles,
Cardinal of Lorrain, had convinced him, that he might follow it
without prejudice to his intereſt. "Theſe, he ſaid, were the ſenti-

ments he diſcovered in theſe princes, when he was employed in their

1 the

» Ton ety

. _—_ 7 n n ” . c
_ 3 x - A 2 4 7 A Tt i a 8 : 4 4 2 4 T . * 4
— 9 e $ © At 8 5 * WY ei LIE NB 1 os AE 2 e * 4p ET ” a * RAR.” by c
8 e Wo ARTE. 3 a I Men Se if Te ee IIS. WS £0} x ILY ; 2 75 o LL IE n 8 % Os ODS. 3
18. 3 r 7 Od on 37 y We z e o r os es MET E (INE ESTI e rr. oy Won ISAT SY, 8; 9 n * * 1 e « = 771 <

bog 6 — pq * 1 r e. 1 222 e 0 r n Ge IAG K. e 2 5 " l 1-4 e — 5 3 STO.” . * 6 * AE 7 Lis pot ns RIC oe
2 4 8 * 2 OI . 5 „ 1 * 4 f % PAL: 1 i e's ls a phone CV > V7 E = 72 5 ” H e j r « The Wie * W 5
5 n n "x ab 4 2 : F 0 I rae INS Es ANT A RIES TIN nd ds be o en — N \ x 4 — 7 n . 40 oe CLOS Is * n e ne a 4 8

4 8 . 5 8 . , 0 3 SN Ie, bn Wag ee ONE DSL os With! 7s ia he; : S 2. . V 5 2 . e „ SS oy TY Ta SE Sat, » 2 — N

” 3 23 8 a4 84 5 . * 7 4 . 5 2 3 7 K . 3 > 3 1 Peat ys: rc a8 FAIR a

1 8 3 5 . N . 5 EO g . 5 2 : 5 : 2 55 N Ig TILT 3 , 75 n „ eee "tad; e £ .

* Rv +. 3
FOIA, S
„ RI TY

_ _—
2 r
* A
ien = 2
r LS
,
* e
8
-
*

— ESR

—_—
n

1585. OF 8 V4 I 1 205
the ſubject of his commiſſion, aſked me what 1
thought concerning the event of his journey. 1 aſ-

ſured him that he took a uſeleſs trouble; and that
on an occaſion when religion, the ſtate, and the

royal authority were in ſo great danger, ſomething
elſe than words would be neceſſary with the King

of Navarre. He ſhrugged his ſhoulders, ſighed at
my anſwer, and inſtead of replying, I believe,”
ſaid he, © a maſs is a difficult pui chaſe in this city,”
1 conducted him thither myſelf with the other de-
puties, endeavouring to perſuade them, by this li-
berty that was allowed to Catholics, in a city Where-

in the Proteſtants were maſters, that we were not
the real enemies of the King.
It fared with the deputation as 1 bat predicted

to the deputies. As for me, I continued my jour-
ney to Paris; where, on my arrival, I found they
talked of nothing but of ruining utterly the King
of Navarre, and of exterminating the Huguenots,
Every thing there paſſed to the mind of the league,
| which ruled fovereignly ſince the ſhameful ſtep of
the King; all the Frenchmen that remained were

obliged to conceal themſelves, and mourn in pri-
vate the misfortunes which the King's weakneſs

had drawn upon the kingdom. It was to theſe that
I betook myſelf ; and I had ſome conferences with
Meſſ. de Rambouillet, de Montbazon the elder,
d' Aumont, de la Rocheguion, des Arpentis, and
' ſome others. 'Þ hey aſſured me, that if once the
King - ſhould appear in the neighbourhood of the
Loire, he ſhould ſoon ſee a conſiderable number of
true Frenchmen in his train. I confirmed them as

much as I could in theſe good reſolutions ; and af-

ter I had bought horſes at Paris, I made haſte to a-

mals thoſe ſums of money that I had promiled the

| King. |
1 learned by ke report, what had. lately hap- :
pened : at Angers : bur, in order to give a diſtinct.

account

. ⁵ A ⁵⅛•—ñUä—m .. 7
ie, rer er nh

n

—
HD

S. IC SEL

—_
SEEN,

— —

wot ————

106 M E M OI R S Bock II.
account of it, the ſtory muſt be taken a little higher.
Briſſac, who was governor of the caſtle of this
city, placed a lieutenant there in his abſence, na-
med Capt. Grec, with twenty ſoldiers upon whom

| | d ſavou ed Du Hallot's enterpriſe.

he reckoned. Two of theſe ſoldiers, who had

been of the Reformed religion, ſuffered themſelves |
to be gained by the King of Navarre and the Prince
of Conde, and waited only for a fovourable oppor-
tunity to deliver up the caſtle to them, which would
. neceſſarily be followed by the ſurrender of the city.
When it was learned at Angers, that Henry III.
had joined with the King of Navarre againſt the
league, a third party was formed, conducted by
Du Ballot, who courted Rochemorte and Freſne,
ſo were the two ſoldiers named. Matters did not
long continue in this ſtate : The two ſoldiers, preſſ-
ed by the Prince of Conde, ſurpriſed Capt. Grec,
and killed him with ſome of his men: after which
they ſeized upon the caſtle. Du Hallot, who knew
not of the change that had fo lately happened at
court, gave himſelf no trouble: on the contrary,
he reſtrained the people, by repreſenting to them,
that it was by the order of the King that the two
ſoldiers had acted : and he remained in his error,
till offering to enter the caſtle, he experienced him-
{elf the treachery of Rochemorte and Freſne; and
his miſtake made him loſe his life upon a wheel *®.

Hitherto all went well for the King of Navarre,

and the Prince of Conde's party; but they had al-
fo their reverſe. Rochemorte having been drawn 2
beyond the bridge by the Catholics, who kept the |
_ Caſtle inveſted, perceived that they ſought to ſur-
priſe the place, and make him priſoner. He wanted |
to re-enter. In this tumult, thoſe within the caſtle }F
thought of nothing but of drawing the bridge in-
ſtantly. Rochemorte graſped at the chains, which

The King was fo greatly afraid of the league, that he publicly

eſcaping

1585. . 8 U L L Y. 107

eſcaping bim, he fell into the ditch, where a ſtag
Vhich they fed there tore him in pieces. Freſne
only remained. Two days after, as he was ſleep ·
ing upon a parapet on the wall, where he thought
bdimſelf in great ſecurity, he was killed by a cara -
dine, ſhot from the other ſide of the river, at the
diſtance of above 500 paces. After which the Ca-
tholics chaſed the reſt of the Huguenots from the
city and caſtle, with the ſame facility that they had
ſeized it. All this had not happened, if the King
of Navarre had conducted the enterpriſe alone ; for
he would not have ſuffered the two conſpirators to
act ſo, till he had been at the gates to lupport them
with his whole army. .
This enterpriſe, fo ill concerted, produced more
than one misfortune. The Prince of Conde being
occupied in beſieging Brouage, when it was told
him, that bis party had ſurpriſed Angers, balanced
not a moment about quitting the ſiege, and going
to ſecond his creatures. By arriving too late, he
loſt both the one and the other. It was, moreover,
the cauſe, that all the Catholic troops, hitherto
diſperſed and inactive, aſſembled again in the neigh-
bourhood of Angers, which took away all poſſibi-
lity of regaining it, precipitated the actions of the
campaign, and brought the Prince of Conde himſelf,
as we ſhall ſee preſently, into a danger, from
whence he did not de but by a ſignal inſtance of
"good fortune.
Alter this firſt act of hoſtility on the part of the
1 Reformed, I judged there would be no meaſures
13 kept any longer, and found myſelf in a very great
imbarraſsment. If I ſaw danger in continuing at
Roſny, the country being overſpread with royaliſts,

I found no leſs riſk in my intention to penetrate to
the King of Navarre. This part, however, I took;
perſuaded, that he never had more need of ſuccour 5
KL Ras in the preſent eee ; and that the dif-
. c ficulty

168 M E MOI R S Bock II.
ficulty of conveying diſpatches through the midſt
of an enemy's army, was the only cauſe of my
not hearing from him as he had promiſed. Meſſ.
de Moui, de Feuquieres, and Morinville, to whom
I imparted my reſolution, found it too hazardous,

and refuſed to imbark with me. I did not for this

fail to ſet out, eſcorted only by ſix gentlemen, and

my domeſtics, two of whom carried portmanteaus, Þ

in each of which were 6000 crowns in gold. _
I put up the firſt night at Nonancourt, and the
| ſecond at Chateaudun. Hitherto no unlucky ren-
counter befel me : for although all was full of Ca-
tholic ſoldiers, they imagined every where that I
was going, like them, to join the body of the Duke of
Joyeuſe's army; with whom, as a ſoldier named o-
thepotain informed me, every thing went very well,
I diſlodged from Chateaudun before day, fearing an
_ eclairciſſement, and came to Vendome ; where not
inclining to be known by Benchart, I made Boiſ .
breuil, one of the gentlemen in my train, paſs for
the maſter of the troop, and I mounted, with the
domeſtics, upon a horſe that carried baggage. He
Who appeared to be the chief amongſt us, was aſk- -
ed ſeveral queſtions ; he anſwered properly, and we
Veere ſuffered to paſs. We traverſed the whole city,
in order to lodge in the moſt remote ſuburbs. Ben-
chart, who believed us to be Catholics, as we had
aſſured him we were, very obligingly ſent to coun-
ſel us to return into the city, becauſe the Prince of
Conde's army, which had been repulſed before An-
gers, was diſperſed over all the country, and ſome-
times made excurſions to the very gates of the city,
which rendered our ſojourning in the ſuburbs very
dangerous. What he repreſented to us as a mil-
fortune, we ſhould have looked upon as a very
great happineſs ; but there was a neceſſity for con-
_ cealing it: therefore the pretended maſter of the
equipage, feigning to credit this advice, called in-
ö 1 „„ ee

*

by. .
3 „
"ad
be
1 *

9
1 .
8
2
2
HY

i

| 1585. bY O F 8 U L L Y. 109

ſtantly to replace the mails, and return into the City.

It was my province who acted the domeſtic, under-
hand to protract our ſtay till the night ſhould come.
The tumult occaſioned by the imbarraſſment of all
thoſe who diſlodged, for the order was general,

ſerved to cover our diſſimulation. At length, we

did as others, but not till our horſes were fed and
refreſhed: the night being half over, we mounted;
but, inſtead of re entering the city, filed off into a

by- ſtreet, which I had cauſed to be reconnoitred,

and got into the fields on that fide where I ſuppoſed
the Prince of Conde's army might be.
The evil was, that the artifice which had hither-
to ſucceeded ſo well, might occaſion our ruin,
through the. impoſſibility of diſtinguiſhing readily,
what party thoſe whom we might happen to meet
belonged to. A miſtake in this might coſt us our

lives ; but there being no remedy, we continued our
route, though with uneaſineſs enough, and thought

that we ought not to alter our ordinary anſwer.
in effect, the firſt troop we met with was a com-

pany of light horſe, commanded by Falandre. To
the Qui vive? we anſwered, Vive le Roi; and Fa-
landre not examining the thing to the bottom, coun-

felled us to join him, for fear of meeting the Prince
of Conde's little army, which he aſſured us was not
far off; adding, that if we doubted him, we might

get further Intelligence from two or three compa-
nies of argoulets *, who were coming after him.
Theſe laſt words furniſhed us with a pretence for
cluding his perplexing civility : we feigned to have
reaſons for not following the ſame route with him,

and d for waiting to take our meaſures from the an-

. 80 called "Br the 1 with which PO were at firſt armed.
They ſerved on foot or on horſeback, as our dragoons do at pre-

ſent. When the arquebuſes were ficlt in uſe, they were ca ed horſe.
erquebuſters ; and it is by this name they are commonly ſtyled i in
theſe Memoirs. |

FOb I: K ſwer

no. ME N O I R S Bock II.

(wer we ſhould receive from the argoulets. In-
wardly, we were no leſs apprehenſive of this other
rencounter; but we prepared for it, relying ſtill
upon the good fortune of eſcaping, under favour of

diſguiſe. Accordingly we did not fail, to the Qui
vive? put to vs by the next company we met, to

reply with aſſurance enough, Vive le Roi, perſuaded
that we ſpoke to the argoulets of the royal army,
of whom we had intelligence. We had like to have

_ fared very badly for having reaſoned fo juſtly. The

argoulets having perceived the Prince of Conde's
troops at a diſtance, had turned off the road, and

had thrown themſelves into the woods. In place

of them, we had to do with four companies be-
longing to the Prince; which we eaſily compre- |

hended, ſeeing that che whole troop fell upon us,
and preſenting their pieces, cried out to us to ſur:

render, At that moment, I plainly diſtinguiſhed
three captains of my acquaintance, to whom it had
not been difficult, in any other ſituation, to have

made myſelf known; but I reflected, that in ſuch

| ſort of encounters, the firſt word, the firſt motion,
_ tending to anexplanation, are generally taken for a re-
fuſal to ſurrender, and followed by a cloſe diſcharge.

Inſtead, therefore, of naming myſelf, or thoſe of-
ficers, 1 uſed the demonſtration of a man who
_ yields himſelf priſoner. I alighted, ſuffered them
to take my horſes, and marched in a train, till co-
ming near Meſſ. de Clermont and St Gelais, whom
_T ſurpriſed greatly by embracing. They ordered

my equipage to be reſtored to me, and likewiſe the

portmanteaus which contained my money.

The Prince of Conde came up cloſe behind theſe

four companies. He could ſcarcely believe what

he ſaw, ſo hardy did my enterpriſe appear to him.

We lay all night in this place, after ſupping very

; frugally out of wooden diſhes : and when the time

came which obliged us to ſeparate, the Prince, who
exe | FCC

L 8
n
*

505 @r tn

was ſo ill cem ended that he was in no condition

to hold out againſt a royal army, nor even againſt
any conſiderable detachment, and in a canton where

he was ſought for in all parts, would have engaged

me to receive him into my troop, as a private

gentleman. He was too well known: It would

| have been to ruin him, and to have ruined myſelf
along with bim. I prayed him to excuſe me. I
made the fame compliment to the Duke de la Tres
mouille, and charged myſelf only with Meſſ. de

Fors, Du-Pleſſis, de Verac, and d'Oradour. The
Prince of Conde remained extremely imbarraſſed;

and finding that it was (till a greater riſk to continue

in the midſt of his 1 200 horſe, than to march with _
little noiſe, he divided them all into platoons, of
which the moſt conſiderable conſiſted only of twen-

ty cavaliers, made.them take by-ways, and march-

ing himſelf through the ſame roads, by a good for-

tune of which there are few examples, twelve times

eſcaped the purſuit of his enemies.

My own eſcape was little leſs ſignal. To the tira-
tagems J had already made uſe of I had joined an-
other, which wrought wonders. I took the name
of one of my brothers; and, to appear more youth-
ful, cut off my beard and muſtaches. This, how-
ever, did not diſguiſe me fo well, but that through
every place where I paſſed, I could hear people a-

bout me ſay, that J perfectly reſembled my brother

the Huguenot. To avoid the queſtions that might

be put to me, I aſſumed the ſtyle of a zealous par-

tian of the league. I ſpread the rumour of the
Prince of Conde's defeat, and of the rout of the

- Proteſtants by the Duke of Joyeuſe. I came in this

manner to fleep at Chateau-Renard. The great dif-

 ficulty was to paſs the Loire: this I would hardly

have accompliſhed, without M. des Arpentis, who
did me on this occaſion the office of a true friend.
M. de Montbazon did me another. I no ſooner

MOT alighted -

112 n E M O IR Ss Bock I.

alighted at Montbazon, than he ſent me a preſent
of wine and bon-chretien pears, and treated me

with ſo much kindneſs beſides, that although I was
known in this place, I complied with his entrea-
ties, and ſtaid there three days. We had need,

our horſes beginning to be fatigued. By the death

of M. de Montbazon *, which happened ſoon after,
I was deprived of the occaſions of ſhewing my gra-
titude to a man, all whoſe ſentiments aimed at the

welfare of the ſtate.

Under favour of my new diſoviſe, I iavtifed

Chatelleraud and Poitiers. At Ville- fagnan, meet-

ing with a regiment of Swiſs that was going to

; join the Marechal de Matignon's army, I found my

advantage in this encounter. The Swiſs took all in
good part that I pleaſed to tell them, becauſe I took

care to provide them every morning with a repaſt;

and in the end I believe I might have reckoned up-
on them, even under my true name. I travelled

with them four days, and we did not ſeparate while

I could poſſibly avoid it. Scarce had 1 quitted
them, when paſling the river at St Marſaud, I was
known by Puiferret. He advanced with bis 2

pany to the bank of the river. Happily for me, I

had already got to the other ſide; and having this

advantage, I gained the houſe of M. de Neufvy.
At Marton I went down, as ordinary, into the ſub-
ubs, and immediately, from I know not what
foreboding, returned into the city. I learned the
next day, that the door of the ſtable in which my

| horſes were ſuppoſed to be, had been burſt open in

the night by a petard. I made my reflections upon
this accident; but they did not hinder me from gi-
ving orders for my departure, when I was accoſted

| by a ſtranger, who ſaid to me, “ Monſieur, I do
not delire to know who you are; but if you are

He was ſain at the battle of Argues,

&
*
7

60
et
2
1
*

og
(63%;
8
het :
9
BEA
WAN
: 754
.
238
5
n
5
e 1
Ei
Tax
84

- EH

4 Huguenot, and intend to quit this place, you
cc are ruined ; five miles diſtant from hence there
ee js an ambuſcade of fifty horſe, well armed,
« which, in my opinion, waits for you.” I thank-

ed this man heartily for his kindneſs, without ap-

8 pearing troubled at what he had told me. I an-

ſwered coldly, that although 1 was not a Hugue-

| not, yet to fall into an ambuſh, ſeemed to me to

SE — ES

be always dangerous. I then returned to my inn,
where pretending that one of my fineſt horſes was
lamed, I ordered them to be all unſaddlet.

To ſatisfy myſelf of the truth of what I had
hear d, I made one of my valets, named Perigordin,
who could imitate perfectly the jargon of a peaſant,

diſguiſe himſelf like one; and after inſtructing him

in what he muſt do, ſent him to that part of the
country where I was told the ambuſh was poſted,
Perigordin meeting theſe fifty horſemen, told
them, in anſwer to the queſtions they put to him
concerning the news of the city, that my departure
was deferred till the next day, He followed them
to a town, two leagues from thence, where they
retired, not a little uneaſy at having miſſed their
blow, and in the reſolution of returning next morn»

ing to the ſame place, and he came inſtantly back

to me to make his report. I ſet out that moment;
and after ſome other little adventures of the ſame
kind, arrived at the houſe of M. de Longa, and
from that place at Bergerac, where the King of
Navarre then was. This prince, on whom nothing

of all that was done for him was ever loſt, held me

nd long time embraced in his arms; and ſhewed him-

elf ſenſible of the dangers to which, from my at-

tachment to him, I had expoſed myſelf, He would
know the moſt minute particularities of my jour-
ney, and principally the rencounter I had with the

Prince of Conde, and the ſlippery condition in
which I had left him. e e

R öÜÓ me

114 M E M O IRS Bookll.

| Nothing can expꝛeſs the imbarraſſment in which

the King of Navarre found himſelf at this time :
_ without troops, without money, without ſuccour,
he ſaw three powerful armies marching againſt him.

_'Thoie of the Dukes vi Matenne-and Joyeuſe were

_ advercing, by great journeys, and he had that of
the Marecbal de Matignon actually in front. The
40, ooo francs I had brought with me, came very

 ſeaſonably for this Prince, who could not have found
as much in all his court. We marched towards

Caſlillon and Montſegur, which Matignon made a

ew of intending, to beliege : but he falling all at
once upon Caſtets, we were obliged to turn to that
ſide; and after a long and very cold march, for it

Was in the month of February, we ame time
enough to make them raiſe this ſiege,
But when we learned that the Duke of Majenne's

army was near, chen it was, that we could no
longer imagine any means of being able to reſiſt

the efforts of two armies ſo ſuperior; and the a-

Noniſhwent was extreme. We knew not to What

fide to tun ourſelves, nor what reſolution to take.

One was of opinion, that the prince ſhould retire _

into the heart of Languedoc; another, ſtill farther ;
and a third adviſed him to paſs over to England,

from whence, aſter having ſecured himſelf of power-

ful ſuccours, he ſhould go and put himſelf at the

head of thoſe that Gerraany had made bim hope g

for. All agreed in one point, that the Prince
ovght to remove from Guienne. It was with regret
that I faw a ſentiment, which would leave the Pro-
teſtant party in France without remedy, was ready

to prevail. And the King of Navarre deſiring to
know my opinion, 1 repreſented, that the extre-
mity was not fo preſſing as to oblige us to aban -

don things entirely : that it would be time enough
to do chat, after we had endeavoured once more
to make head againſt them every where: this was
what

Fa
2
FS
2
os Of
a
oh
3 2 :
XS
FJ
ws
1544
Py
. *%
6
=:
9
Wed 2
* 8.
KAY
*
*

—_—

N
e

.

1586. i 0 F

what did not appear to me abſolutely impoſſible,
by leaving, for example, the Viſcount de Turenne
upon the defenſive in Guienne, with a ſmall body

of troops, ſuch as he could get together; and
while the Duke of Montmorency did the ſame in

. 115

Languedoc, and Lefdiguieres in Dauphine, the
King ſhould reſerve the defence of Rochelle and

the veighbourhood to himſelf, till the foreign troops
that could not but ſoon arrive, had put the two
ſides ſomething upon an equality. The King of
Navarre reliſhed this advice, and declared that he
would follow it. © But,” added he, © the Duke
« of Matenne is not fo perverſe a boy, but that
* he will permit me to take a walk ſome time
longer in Guienne,” He then gave ſome orders

before he ſet out for Rochelle, and made a journey

to Bearn, which the preſent conjuncture rendered ,
indiſpenſable. .

He was there only eight days; 3 and, during this

interval, the two Catholic armies having Joined,
and ſeized all the paſſages by which they thought

the King of Navarre could return to Poitou, he
ſaw himſelf upon the point of not being able to get

out of Nerac. In this critical conjuncture, the
| King reſolving to attempt all things, rather than
not ſecure himſelf a paſſage *, he left Nerac, fol-

lowed by 200 horſe, and took the road towards

Caſtel-geloux. When he was got half-way thither,

he ſeparated his whole troop, and keeping only
twenty of us that were beſt mounted, and a like

number of his guards, named Sainte- 10 for a place
of rendezvous for all the reſt: then, turning ſhort,

he took a road amidſt woods and heaths, which

0 8 by having often been at the chace ms

book 18. ; j Cage, book J. and other hiſtorians.

* Sce this paſſage of the King of Navarre, and all the military: ex-
peditions on both ſides, in D'Aubigns, vol. 3.; Matthieu, vol. 1.

and

116 M E M OI R S Bock II.

and 111080 at Caumont, where he ſlept three hours.

We paſſed the river after ſunſet, and marched all
night through the enemy's quarters, and even over

the moats of Maxmande ; after which, fetching one

compaſs more by Sauvetat, we came two hours
before day to Sainte-foy, where all his men, who

had divided into ſmall platoons, arrived alſo by dif-

ferent ways, without the leaſt loſs, not even of their
baggage. The Duke of Matenne, nettled at this

_ diſappointment of his hopes, went to diſcharge all
his wrath upon Montignac le Comte, where Capt.
Roux and Serj, More made ſo fine a defence againſt

all this army, that it could not oblige them to ſur-

Tender, but by granting them the moſt honourable

conditions. 5
This general found leſs ref date! in Sainte- Ba-

alle; - Deſpucilles, the governor of that ſmall place,

Was allied to the family of Courtenay, and reputed
a very brave man; which gave me a deſire to ſhut
myſelf up with him, contrary to the advice of many

of my relations and friends, who without doubt
knew him better than I. The King of Navarre
a long time denied me the permiſſion 1 alked of

him; at laſt, vanquiſhed by my importunity, he
gave me thirty men, with whom I threw myſelf
into Sainte-Bazeille. I found the place in a very

bad condition, without ramparts, and the houſes all

| built of clay, which the cannon went quite through,
However, it might have held out ſome time at leaſt ;

but Deſpueilles, being ſeized with fear, liſtened ro

nothing of advice, and was mad enough to put

himſelf into the enemies hands, who treated the
city as they judged proper. The King of Navarre,

| who learned at firſt the news of this very confuſed-

ly, was angry with us all; but when he was in-
ſtructed in the truth, all his anger was turned a-
gainſt Deſpueilles. What exaſperated him the moſt

Was, that this cowardly governor being preſented

before

1

1
nA

Ws
*
bes
NM
"TT
4 500
ra

RI

7 SVELY. 117

before him to exculpate himſelf, advanced moſt
imprudently, that if the prince himſelf had been

there, he could not have acted otherwiſe. The

King made him be put under an arreſt, from which,

eight days after, he was releaſed, at our ſolici-
tations.

The King did not abandon the field ll e at the laſt
_ extremity, and after having diſputed the ground
inch by inch. In retreating, he threw the remains
of his forces into Monzegur, Caſtillon, and Sainte-
foy. I lent him 6000 livres more, to fortify Monte.
flanquin, where Bethune commanded. At laſt,
fearing ſome fatal accident on the fide of Rochelle, |
he left ſome troops in Guienne, under the com-
mand of the Viſcount de Turenne, and took the
road to that city, by Pons, and St Jean d' Angely.
There were moments when Henry III. indignant
at the ſhameful per ſonage the league obliged him to

play, wiſhed ardently to find ſome means of feven-

ging himſelf v. But he wanted to do this without
danger; and from this motive, rejected always the
thought. that often preſented itſelf, of calling in the
King of Navarre, and of uniting himſelf with him.

The deputies from the four Swiſs Catholic cantons

coming to Paris, to treat of the ſuccours which
ſome time before had been demanded of this repu-
blic; the King, who was then in one of his mo-
mentary fits of ſpite againſt the league, thought pro-
per to make uſe of theſe Swiſs for this purpoſe;
which, with the troops that were at his particular

diſpoſal, and thoſe which depended upon the King
of Navarre, would form a body capable of redu-

cing the league to reaſon. He wrote to the King
of Navarre, to acquaint him with his new def ans,

2 It was in theſe moments that he aid, as 1 · Etolle relates, De

Huguenots. | 1
and

inimicis meis vindicabo nimices meos; meaning the be ad and the

- 4 " — ——_— *

n ED ONES Te EET E

> 2 I "ot A Fore. xm 2 a9 — 2 = -
3 — 2 2

. .
: — 24 OE CEE EI WO IEEE ne REI SCI hs N 2 T—ß — —— 2 - —— — —
n — Eg 5 — f 2 22. :.. ³¹¹w ↄ d . ̃ͤ . ¼ — .. ne gn RR = —— —— —— ̃ ———
. — * = * — < LE — C — — — 2ST — z 2 n 5 72 . — © = _— * - — . ST. : r — = _ =
: > * * ao — 56 * Rt ZE oe ea : Jͤ d RCW CW. 22 . — — 1
CERES £ = — 2 . — — 2 — * «> - N — ere — S g
. Pr · vm. eons oo 5 —— : — - 5

> —

— > ne — — ——

MM ON 8 Book II.
and deſired him to ſend a truſty perſon, with whom
he might confer upon this whole affair, and parti-
cularly upon the uſe they were to make of the
Swiſs. A blank paſſport was added to this letter,
Which the King of Navarre filling up with my name,

obliged me to depart without delay.

I arrived at St Maur, where the court then was,

and went down to the houſe of Villeroy, with whom

I dined, and ſtaid the reſt of the day. The day after
he preſented me to the King. I ſhall ever remems- .
ber the attitude and whimſical attire in which [I

found this prince in his cabinet, He had a ſword
at bis ſide, a hood hung down upon his ihoulders,

a little cap upon his head, and a baſket full of little

dogs hung from his neck by a large riband ; and

he kept himlelf fo inflexible, that, in {peaking to us,
he neither moved his head, nor his feet, nor his
hands. He began by giving vent to his indignation
_ againſt the league, which made me conclude. he
had received ſome new affront from it, and treated
of his union with the King of Navarre, as of a
thing the utility of which he was perfectly ſenſible
of: but ſome remains of fear made him always Þ
add, that he looked upon it as impoſſible, fo long
as the King of Navarre perſiſted in his reſolutions of,
not changing his religion. I took the word, and
told the King in anſwer, that it would be in vain to
propoſe this expedient to the King of Navarre, be?
cauſe by following it, he muſt act againſt his con?
ſcience ; but although he were capable of doing it,
this would not produce what his Majeſty expected;
for that the motive by which the league was actua-
ted, was neither a love of public good, nor that
of religion; that ſo precipitate an action would
therefore loſe the King of Navarre all the ſuecours
that he could expect from the Reformed, without
detaching for all a ſingle man from the league;
that, on the contrary, ſuch a weakneſs would in-

cCreaſe

nt

n 9
TE r
c DL TAY

cCreaſe the pride of their common enemies. The
Eing replied; and I ſtill perſiſted in maintaining,

that the King of Navarre, by complying with the
8

„terms propoſed, could bring only his ſingle perſon
„to his aid; whereas by uniting with him in the
condition he was now in, and without exacting the
„ 3 ſacrifice of his religion, he would ſtrengthen the
King's party with a body powerful in the ſtate. I
ſpoke in the ſame terms to the Queen- mother: and
I perceived that both the one and the other remain-
I F  edfatisfied of the force of my reaſons; but that the
4 | fear of the change which a union with a prince of
„ the Reformed religion might produce, was all that
> reſtrained them. I did not, however, deſpair of
d bringing them even to ſtrike this bold ſtroke ; and
„ | © by the manner, not only gracious, but even free
is and open, in which their Majeſties ated with me,
n I I had room to flatter myſelf with ſucceeding in
. I left them in theſe good diſpoſitions, to go to
Paris, to confer with the Swiſs deputies. 1 had
le not ſo much difficulty to bring them to my pur-
's Þ poſe; it only coſt me a little expence in entertain-

s ment, and eſpecially in wine; by the means of
which they promiſed, without reſtriction, a ſuc-
cour of 20,000 Swiſs z of which 4000 only were
do remain in Davphine, and the other 16,000 to be
employed in the ſervice, and at the diſcretion of the

two Kings. The King of France again aſſured me,
by Meſſf de Lenoncourt, de Poigny, and Brulart,
that his ſentiments were not changed, and that he
paſſionately deſired the union. It was not leſs ear-
neſtly wiſhed for by the King of Navarre. In the
diſpatches I received from him almoſt every day,
he exhorted me to ſet every thing to work to make
it ſucceed, and even to ſacrifice for this ſomething
of his intereſt. | gk eT.
At my return to St Maur, after having pron
| | No - tne

gh Eat. 27

120 NM E NM O IRR S Book lI.
the King an account of my journey, I brought up-

on the carpet the 5 perry about the employment

of the 16,000 Swiſs, and the route they muſt ob-
| ſerve. The King demanded, that they ſhould be

brought into the neighbowhood of Paris; and

even, if there was need for it, ſerve him againſt the
league. I foreſaw all the inconvenience that might
_ ariſe from this arrangement, and did not conde-
ſcend to this artifice, but by the expreſs command-
ment of the King of Navarre, who thought ſo little
_ ought not to fruſtrate the accommodation. It will
be preſently ſeen, whether this article was ſo fri-
volous as was imagined, and what was the conſe.
quence of this evil compliance.

_ The treaty between the two Kings being con-

cluded, upon the conditions that have been men-
tioned, I thought of nothing but quitting the court.
I left only Marſilliere at Paris, under colour of pur-
ſuing the negotiation that had been begun: but he
had only attended me to Paris, to take the firſt fa-
vourable occaſion of going to Germany, by the
means of Meſſ. de Clairvant and de Guitry ; on
purpoſe to facilitate there the miſſion of a body of
German troops, which the Proteſtants of thoſe
countries had promiſed to the King of Navarre.
This deſign Nanfilliere executed happily. As for
me, after remaining eight days only at Roſny with
my wife, I rejoined the King of Navarre, very well
ſatisfied with the ſucceſs of my commiſſion.

"This prince could not reſolve to continue ſhut up

and uſeleſs in La-Rochelle, He ſo managed, that
he obtained from the inhabitants 1200 foot, 200
borſe, and three cannons, which he gave to the
Duke de la Tremouille, to go and take Talmont,
which he could not ſuffer to continue in the hands
of the ene ny. 1 followed the Duke de la Tre.
mouille, with en Fouqucrolles, Bois-du-

Lys,

5 Malicorne had engaged to bring him;

een
438

A ess
2 RY
KEN
- 5 14
L 4

1586, „ SU LL 3 . |

Lys, and ſome other officers, and I had the charge :
of the artillery.

The town having no Fartifications, we ſeized it

without oppoſition, and immediately attacked the

caſtle. The walls were very ſtrong, but had no
works on the outſide, Maroniere, who was go-

vernor of it, although he did not expect to be at-

tacked, reckoned upon ſome ſpeedy ſupplies that
vhich deter-
mined us to preſs the place vigorouſly. The pat-
ſage by fea from Talmont to Rochelle is but ſix

hours. I imbarked for that place to fetch a ſup-
ply of powder, of which I had not a large enough

proviſion, and to inform the King of Navarre, that

we ſhould hardly ſucceed with fo ſmall a number of
men. The King ſpeedily raiſed 2009 more in the
neighbourhood of Rochelle, and ſhipped them on
board of three veſſels, which for two days were in
danger of periſhing. At length we arrived at Tal-
mont ; the three veſſels caſt anchor there, one af-
ter another; and the beſieged, learning that the King
of Navarre conducted the attack in perſon, ſurren-
dered to him.

It was want of money that had pee Mali.
corne from fetching ſupplies to the governor of
Talmont, The King of Navarre, ſeeing himſelf.
delivered from this fear, led his troops to attack
Chizai. Fayolle, who commanded there, defended
himſelf perfectly: he mace good uſe of a culve-
rine, which was the only pi-ce of artillery he had
in the place; and did net yield till he faw himſelf.
deprived of all reſource. 1 ;emarked it as a ſingular
thing, that Madame having ſent the ſtew ard of her
nouſehold with a letter to the King her brother, a
bullet of this culverine entered into the body of his
horſe by his fundament, and came out at his breaſt,
vet he was not thrown down, but continued vpright ;
above half a quarter of an hour,

VoL, I. L Another

122 M E M O I R 8 Book II.

Another ſhot from an arquebuſe cauſed a much
greater misfortune. A gentleman charged with a
verbal meſſage to the King of Navarre, concerning
important affairs, was ſhot dead at the feet of this
prince, having only had time to tell that he came
from Heidelberg, from Meſſ. de Clairvant and de
pitry. This officer was ſent to inform the King,
thi the German horſe, and other Proteſtant troops
| from Germany were ready to enter France ; and to
inquire at him through what place he thought it
proper they ſhould march. Some were for their
entering by Lorrain, where the league was moſt
powerful; others maintained, that they ought to
take their route by the Bourbonnois, from thence
by Berry and Poitou, coaſting the Loire. Meſſ.
de Montmorency and de Chatillon gave their opi-
nion for keeping them in Languedoc, and all along
the Rhone. Never was ſeen fo great a diver ſity of
ſentiments, and, as ill fortune would have it, the
very worſt prevailed ; that is to ſay, the advice to
make them enter into Beauce; doubtleſs, becauſe
the King of France did not incline to remove them
from himſelf, to the end that he might be enabled
to employ them upon occaſion againſt the league, or
aadaat leaſt to give it an umbrage. It is not probable
* that the King of Navarre would have conſented to
this; but the accident that has been related was the
cauſe that he was not even informed of all theſe
conteſtations.
This prince, with th ſame good fortune, took |
Sanzay, and afterwards St Maixant. The noiſe of
five or fix cannons, which hitherto were ſeldom Þ|_
| maade uſe of in ſieges, produced this effect. He
F availed himſelf of his good fortune; and ſeeing
himſelf reinforced with 200 horſe and 1500 foot,

which were brought him by the Prince of Conde,

and the Count de la Rochefoucault, whom he had

I Juſt made Colonel. General of his Infantry, 5 75 .
| 6 leved 2

SOAR. IIA BEE
5 Pls 4
3 *
i," Bows

|
|
Ii

—

—

Ta 1 We WT” — 3

7. T a6 GO OS. SS.

IP v.04 WS

Ss ID %w / $& 1 ww

m_—  . 5 8 a voy 8.

a
2s
AH
*
5

1586. O F S U . V. 123

lie ved himſelf able to undertake the ſiege of Fon⸗
tenay, the ſecond place i in Poitou; although he was

not ignorant, that in this place there was a brave
governor, and a ſtrong garriſon, This governor,

whoſe name was La- Rouſſiere, reſolved to defend

not only the city, but the ſuburb Des-Lodges allo,

which was larger and richer than the city itſelf,
and ſurrounded on the outſide with a large ditch ;

to which were added ſtrong barricadoes, which ſhut
up the entrance of this ſuburb. The King of Na-

varre ſent La-Rochefoucault, at the head of forty

gentlemen, to attack the head of this ſuburb in a
very dark night. 1 joined Meſſ. de Dangeau, de
Vaubrot, d' Avantigny, de Challandeau, de Feu-

quieres, de Braſſeuſſis, Le Chene, and two or thrge

others. We poſted ourſelves at the fide of the bar-
ricadoes, with our pikes in our hands, and our piſ-
tols at our girdles, to throw them down, or leap

over them, We were repulſed three times. Vau-
brot, Avantigny, and 1, in falling, drew five or ſix

barrels of dung upon us, under which we thought

to remain intangled; but thoſe who were at our

fide having at that moment forced their barricadoes,

we raiſed ourſelves under favour of this effort ; and
the enemies ſeeing usmaſters of the barricade, thought
of nothing but retreating, after having ſet fire to it,
for fear that, by purſuing them too cloſely, we
ſhould enter pel-mel with them into the cit.
Me lodged ourſelves in the fineſt houſes of the
ſuburb, where we found at the ſame time commo-
diouſneſs and abundance. The only inconvenience
we ſuffered, was from the ſmall ſhot of the place,
which, from the terraſs of the grand gate, com-
manded the whole ſtreet, and made the entrance to

the King's and our own houſes very dangerous;

and the batteries upon the ramparts commanding
all the avenues of this ſuburb, it was impoſſible to
eater it without being expoſed to continual diſ-

. charges.

498

mw MEMOIRS Book Il.
charges. One day, as I croſſed the ſtreet, going

from my own houſe to that of the King, which was

the moſt beautiful in the ſuburb, a ball battered a-
gainſt my headpiece, juſt as Liber ge, my valet de

chambre, came up to faſten it. I cauſed a rope to

be inſtantly faſtened acroſs the ſtreet, and, by
means of ſome cloaths that were hung over it, pre-

vented the 0 from eng at leaſt comers and
goers:
We afterwards applied ourſelves without remiſſion

to the trenching and the ſap. The King of Navarre

took incredible pains in this ſiege: he conducted
the miners himſelf, after he had taken all the ne.

ceſſary precautions againſt the ſupplies that might |
ar: ive from without. The bridges, avenues, and
all the roads that led to the city, were ſtiictly guad
ed, as likewiſe great part of the country. One
night, when I was upon guard with twenty horſe,

at the ford of a river, I heard the noiſe of horſes

and irons at a diſtance, which left me no room to
doubt but I ſhould be inſtantly attacked. This
noiſe ceaſed for ſome minutes, then began again
with more violence, and was heard fo near, that I

put myſelf upon the defenſive. I ſuffered the troop

to approach, in order to give them a cloſe fire: but
_ when we were uſt ready to diſcharge, I perceived

that what had given me ſo great an alarm was only

a herd of horſes and mares, which had been wan
dering all over this plain, and came to water at the
river. I was the firſt to laugh at this adventure;
but inwardly I was not ſorry that I had given or-
ders to the perſon whom I pitched upon to go for
 afliſtance, not to depart till we thould be engaged |
: in fight.

At this ſiege, my oa employment was to

conduct the artillery, The ſap was at laſt ſo far
agaadvanced, that we could hear the voice of the ſol- :
5 Kere who guarded the Parapers, within the lodg-

ment |

f. , , , ̃§é:: lo

8 Wwe TW

— BY.

3
1 ava
3 5
* 7 3
*. pt N
Te
«55

158 6. O F 3 LL. 125
ment of the miners. It was the King of Navarre
who perceived this firſt, He ſpoke, and made
himſelf known to the beſieged ; who were ſo aſto-

niſhed at hearing him name himſelf from the bot-
tom of theſe ſubterraneous places, that they de-

manded to capitulate, The propoſitions were all
made by this ſtrange way: the articles were drawn

up, or rather dictated by the King of Navarre, the
ſecurity of whoſe word was known fo thoroughly

to the belieged, that they did not require a writing.
They had no cauſe for repentance : the King of
Navarre, charmed with the nobleneſs of this pro-
cedure, granted the garriſon all honours, and pre-
ſerved the city from pillage.

A woman of the city having killed a fat hog the

'F ſame day that they had capitulated, hearing that the

—

garriſon had ſur rendered, imagined a pleaſant ſtrata»

gem, to conceal the prey from the avidity of the
loldiery. She made her huſband hide himſelf, and
wrapping the dead animal in a ſheet, laid it, by the
help of ſome friends, in a coffin, and by her cries

drew all her neighbours together. The lugubrious

apparel of a funeral, inſtructed them in the ſubject
that the pretended widow had to lament at ſuch a
rate. The prieſts were deceived as well as o-
thers: one of them conducted the proceſſion a-
croſs the ſuburbs, into a church-yard without the
city, with the permiſſion of the King of Navarre.
The ceremonies being performed, and the night
being come, people poſted by this woman near the
grave, came to take up the dead, and were juſt
ready to carry it into the city; when they were
perceived by ſome ſoldiers, who driving them from
thence, diſcovered the truth, and ſeized the prey.
One may well imagine the ſecret was not kept; it was
already no longer one in the city: a prieſt, to whom
this woman, predic with remorſe of conſcience,

uo ae 3 „ had

126 MEMOIR Ss Bookll.

had opened herſelf, ſpread the adventure evety
.

The King of Navarre lerwing the Lord of La-
Boulaye governor in this place, went to take the
abbey of Maillezais, the ſituation of which he found
ſo advantageous, that he conceived a deſign of
forming it a regular fortreſs. He ordered me to
draw a plan; and Davailles, a relation of La-Bou-
Jaye, was appointed to guard it. His troops more-
over ſeized Mauleon, and after that the caſtle of
La-Garnache; from whence M. de Genevois“ drove
his own mother. She retired to Beauvois, a ſmall
toon upon the ſea-coaſt, whither her ſon {till pur.
ſued her; but he fell at this time into her hands
bimſelf, and ſhe in her turn made him prnvoncy of

war.
I was not preſent at theſe ſieges: the ſorrowful
news I received from Roſny obliged me to go thi-

he. During my {tay at St Maur, I obtained a

protection for my caſtle and eſtate of Roſny, and
all the paſſports that were neceſſary for my going
thither when I ſhould think proper. It was this
that made me eaſy with regard to my wife, at a
time when all ſorts of outrages againſt the Protelt-
. ants were authoriſed. I learned that this town was
at that time almoſt totally depopulated by the
plague : my wife had there loft the greateſt part of
her domeſtics; and fear had obliged her to fly into
. N where ſhe had paſſed two

= DAubigne al: 3. 6. 1 © 100 . this better. The lady
of La- Garnache, ſays he, ſiſter to the Duke of Rohan, held the
city of La-Garnache, and the caſtle of Beauvois upon the ſea, in
. neutrality, Her ſon, called the Prince of Genev9:s, upon a pre-
. rence of his mother's marriage with the Duke of Nemours, ſcized
La- Garnache, by means of a | correſpondence he held with the do-

meltics. He made the ſame attempt upon Beauvois; but he found
himſelf the priſoner of his mother. The reſult of all this was, that
thic King of Navarte intereſting himſelf in procuring his liberty, ob-
tained it, and Ad the ſame means the place, . |

days

5 1586. 0 F 0: U LE Y. 127

days and two nights i in her coach. She had after-
wards taken refuge in the caſtle of Huet, belonging

to Madame de Champagnac, my aunt, which is
not far diſtant, The joy which ſhe felt to know

1 was ſo near her, gave way to her fears of the
danger I incurred by coming amongſt perſons infe&t-.
ed with the plague; and ſhe thought to force me

to return, by ordering the gates of the caſtle to be
ſhut upon me. She had too much need of ſuccour

and conſolation to be abandoned in this ſtate, I
entered, notwithſtanding her reſiſtance, and ſtaid a

month in this houſe, having only two gentlemen
and two domeſtics with me, and breathing the air

of the country in freedom; for the report of the
plague kept from my houſe all the 3 importunate. 1

was not wholly uſeleſs to the King of Navarre all

this while: my wood - merchants ſtill owed me

245; oc livres, and I preſſed for the payment of it.

The perſecution that opened againſt all Proteſtants,

left me at their mercy; and the fear leſt this mo-

ney, together with all my eſtates, ſhould be con-

| fiſcated for the uſe of the league, obliged. me to

content myſelf with 10,000 livres.
As ſoon as the contagion ceaſed, I carried my
wife back to Roſny, after having taken the neceſ-

ſary precautions to purify the houſe ; and I quitted

her upon the report, that the Duke of Joyeuſle,
whoſe march had hitherto been flow, and his ope-
rations inconſiderable, was advancing haſtily, to

drive the King of Navarre from Poitou. This

prince had juſt then been repulſed before Niort and
Parthenai; and finding himſelf unable to keep all
his fortreſſes againſt forces ſo ſuperior, he cauſed

the greateſt part of them to be. raſed and diſman-

tled, and preferved only Fontenai, Talmont, Mail-
lezais, and St Maixant, retreating to 3

where I found him.

The treaty of alliance between the two Kings,
which

n wan
Which was mentioned above, ſeeming to promiſe
quite another thing, the reader, doubtleſs, is im-

patient to know the ſucceſs. It was no longer in
the queſtion; in one moment all was overthrown,

The procedure of the court had ſomething in it

very ſingular. It would be a myſtery abſolutely
incomprehenſible, if one did not know of what
variations a prince is capable, who abandons him-

{elf to irreſolution, timidity, and ſloth. In mat-

ters of ſtate, nothing is worſe than this ſpirit of
indetermination. One muſt not in theſe difficult
conjunctures abandon all, nor refuſe all to hazard;

but after having choſen an end by wiſe and cool
reflections, all the ſteps that one makes ought to
tend to arrive at it. One cannot indeed too dear-
ly buy, nor. preſs too much a neceſſary peace;
but in critical circumſtances, nothing ought to be

more carefully avoided, than keeping the minds of
a people in ſuſpenſe, between peace and war. It

Vas not by ſuch maxims that Catharine's counſel.
lors conducted themſelves ; if they formed any re-
ſolution, it was only momentary, but never final;
and in ſo timid a manner was it always formed, that
it did not remedy even the preſent evil but moſt i im-
perfectly. The fault of all minds taken up in little
frivolous intrigues, and, in general, of all thoſe
Who have more vivacity than judgment, is to re-
preſent to themſelves that which is near, in a man-
ner that dazzles them; and not to ſee at a diſtance

what is through a cloud. A few moments, a ew

35 days, are what they call futurity.
Io this fault of never being able to come to a
- deciſion, the King, or rather the Queen-mother,

: added another to crown all *. It Was che uling 5

» It bes hn e! that the intereſt of the true + kala had ©
no part in the politics of this Queen, Witneſs theſe words which

ſhe was heard to ſay, when ſhe thought the battle of Dreux was
wh." 6 Wel! we . pray to God then 1 in French! 2H

know

43

8
© 0
——
PE
2,27 of
SER
8
bY

1586 G U EL: 129

know not what little affected diſſimulation, or ra-
ther a miſerable ſtudy of doubleneſs and deception,

without which ſhe imagined there could be no po-
litics. The firſt of theſe errors concealing from us
the evil which threatened us, and the other tying

the hands of thoſe who might have aſſiſted us to
prevent it; what could we expect if it was not to
be overwhelmed ſooner or latter? It was this that
happened to Henry III.; for not being able to re-

ſolve to make uſe of the remedy that was offered
him, I mean the junction of his troops with thoſe.
of the King of Navarre, in order to repel vigor-

ouſly the enemies of his authority. It was requi-
lite to engage him in this, (for he did reſolve upon
it in the end), that he ſhould ſee himſelf in an ex-

tremity which might have been as fatal to the
royal name, as ſhameful to the memory of this

prince.

Catharine had recourſe to her ordinary artifices,

and thought ſhe performed a great deal, becauſe
ſhe travelled a great deal. She went to Poitou,

and conferred many times with the King of Na-

varre * at Coignac, Saint-Brix, and Saint Mai-
xant. Sometimes ſhe ſought to ſeduce him, at o-
ther times to make him tremble at the ſight of the
conſiderable forces that were ready to pour upon

him, and whoſe operations, {he told him, ſhe had

The Queen aſking him what he would have? he replied, look -
ing at the young ladies ſhe had brought with her, © There is no-
thing here, Madam, that 1 would have.” Peref. Matthieu
(vol f. b. 8. p 518) adds, that Catharine preſſing him to make
tome overture, © Madam,” ſaid he, © there is no overture here for
« me.” This interview was at St Brix, Sept. 25. He was hunt-
ing one day at St Brix, and wanting to {hew that his horſe was more
lively than two very fine ones belonging to Bellievre, a herd of pigs

behind a hedge frighted his horſe, who threw himſelf over upon

him. He remained ſenſeleſs, bleeding at the noſe and mouth.
They carried him like one dead to the caſtle, However, two or
three days after he was not to be ſen there. Mem. of Ne vers,
vc. 2. p. 583. | 9 2 5 | . i

FT bitherto

8 M E N 0 IR 8 Book Il.

bitherto ſuſpended. In a word, ſhe "I nothing
that ſhe thought might induce him to change his.

religion. It may well be believed, that it was not
without regret ſhe ſaw the league in a condition to
oppreſs the King of Navarre, becauſe it was not

her intereſt that this ſhould happen. But what ſe»

curity did ſhe give this prince, by the raſh and un-
ſeaſonable meaſures in which ſhe wanted to engage

him? Had he not reaſon to believe, that this pro-
poſal of abjuring his religion, which ſhe was inceſ-
fantly laying before bim, was not, at bottom, but

an artful ſnare to deprive him of the aſſiſtance of

the Proteſtants, to make him countermand the

troops that came to him from Germany, to draw
him to court, to ruin him, and, after him, all bis
adherents? I had particularly proofs that juſtified

this thought. The conferences at which I was

preſent with the King, not affording me the means

of clearing my ſuſpicions, I held private ones, by
his orders, with the Ladies D' Uzes and De Sauves,
Who were better acquainted with Catharine's incli-

nations than any other perſons : and by whom J

was fo much beloved, that they always called me

their ſon. The better to know their thoughts, I

eigned to be aſſured of what I did only conjecture,

and complained that the Queen-mother ſought by
all manner of means to ſacrifice the King of Na-
varre to the league. Theſe two ladies confeſſed to
me in confidence, that they believed religion ſer-
ved Catharine only for a pretence, and that things
Were in ſuch a ſtate, that the King of Navarre muſt
no longer think of getting out but ſword-in-hand.

They aſſured me afterwards, that they ſaw with a
good deal of uneaſineſs the bad diſpoſitions of the

Council towards this prince. Theſe words I have

always believed to be ſincere, although ſpoke in a

court where, next to gallantry, fallchood was the
| 1 ſtudy.

Whatever ;

* <
CL *
r
* 3
8
N
.
„
r
* -
„
8
: A
Eds
8
8
6 Ke
Wn, ©
+ STA
+36
*

.
3
"1908
2 2%

n
—_
.
+> ha
— / -*
22
"= e
5 4
Tc 8
+
*

1586. Oo F 8V EL „„

Whatever were the Queen -· mother s intentions *,

ſhe returned without having obtained any thing;

and Joyeuſe with an army came to occupy her

place. The conduct of an army intruſted to Joy-

euſe was a ſecond myſtery. Was it to mortify the

heads of the league, who had pretenſions there, or
to ruin them outright, if the new general had ſue-
ceeded? Was it, on the contrary, the diſcovery
of his connections with the league, that induced
the King to give him a place, wherein he was aſ-
ſured this ungrateful man would periſh, or at leaſt
miſcarry? Or was it only to remove a favourite,

whom a new comer had deprived of the good gra-
ces of tho King? for it is often a mere bagatelle, a

nothing, that produces the effects, which we are
always willing to attribute to motives the moſt
grave. Was it not rather to inhance the luſtre of
his favour by a poſt the moſt honourable ? Such
was the ſpirit of the court, that conjectures, even
the moſt oppoſite, were ſupported by equal proba-
bilities ? One thing however which ſeems to de-

termine in favour of the laſt, is, that the army

which Joyeuſe commanded was compoſed of the
principal forces of the kingdom, that it was emi-
nently filled with the flower of the nobility, and
abundantly provided with all that could render it

victorious.
The King of Navarre employed himſelf princi-

pally in putting St Maixant in a condition of de-
| fence : he went thither with ſo much precipitation,
that, ſinking under his watching and fatigue, he
Was obliged, in his return to Rochelle, to throw

After a long converſation, the Queen-mother alk ing him if the

trouble ſhe had been at was to produce no other fruit to her who
wiſhed nothing more than repoſe; he replied, © Madam, I am not
the cauſe of it; it is not I who hinders you from {lceping in your

© bed, it is you that prevents me from reſting in mine; the trou-

„ble you give yourſelf, pleaſes and nouriſhes 790; peace is the

hiraſelf |

„en e of your * | VP" part. :

»

-
I Jane: —— Ie ger > mr = gn". 150 . 2 WEE" — —
=D ——— _ =—> — — — — i
- S T — x — ISS — — — — *.—. — =

— —ä—E4—Ü— — — — —\
N 1 * -
— — —

3 oe —— —ü— ä 2 —
- * . Jy

223 SOT _

> — —

r T...

— — —ũ 444% „c —K—ͤ % ũ «n : — r h!ĩ c «ͤͤ“é %%% —L—]P
. — — 2 * * Re eg > — 4 —

5 — — . 55
—. . p 9 ab een on men n= A 2 45 ery er er to Is 0 — — > —

en es, —ꝛ—-— — — —
— *
„ .

—

132 M E MO IRS Bock I.
bimſelf into a waggon drawn by oxen, where he
ſlept as in the moſt elegant bed. To ſpare the

roviſions with which he had ſtored Saint Maixant,

he had ordered the two regiments of Charbonnieres
and Des Bories, named to defend it, to poſt them-

ſelves at La- Motte Saint-Eloi, and there to expect

the enemy's arrival. All this could not prevent the
reduction of this laſt place, and of its caſtle, nor

that of St Maixant, Maillezais, and many others,

any more than the defeat of ſeveral companies, a-
mong others that belonging to Deſpueilles, which
Was beat almoſt in ſight of La-Rochelle. The
cruel behaviour of the conquerors rendered theſe
misfortunes ſtill more ſenſible: all we could do
in revenge, was to fall upon the waggons and the
ſtragglers, during the marches of this army. |

One day, as the Duke of Joyevle led his army

back again from Saintes to Niort, I poſted myſelf ö

with fifty horſe in the foreſt of Benon, near the

highway, ſeeking the occaſion of ſtriking ſome
blow. A ſoldier mounted by my order to the top
of a tree, to obſcrve the order and motions of the

enemy's army, told us, that he ſaw a detachment

_ advancing at ſome interval from the firſt battalions,
_ Theſe who accompanied me were for falling upon
this detachment, which might perhaps be ſubdued,
before it could be ſuccoured. I did not reliſh this
propoſal. I remembered a maxim of the King of

Navarre's, Tha one rarely ſucceeded in attacking a

party at the head of a whole army; and Ireft ained
the ardour of my troop, who burned with deſire to
come to blows. We ſaw therefore this detach -
ment paſs by, and afterwards the whole army, the

battalions of which we could eaſily count. The

laſt ranks marched fo cloſe, that I was of opinion

there was nothing to be done: but as we were

ready to retreat, the ſentinel informed us, that he
law two mall iquadrons of fifty or ſixty horſe each,
mar ching 1

*

3 at a great Aan from ach other.

wanted {till to have ſuffered the firſt to paſs by ; =
it was impoſſible now to reſtrain the troop. We

fell upon the firſt, - and routed them; twelve or

| fifteen were left dead upon the place, we took as
many priſoners, . and the reſt ſaved themſelves as
they could. But what regret did I not feel for not
having followed my own opinion, when I learned

that this ſecond troop was compoſed of fifty of

the principal officers of the Catholic army, with
the Duke of Joyeuſe himſelf at their head, who had
ſtopped at Surgeres, to refreſh himſelf with a col- |
lation! When I gave the King of Navarre an ac-
count of this action, he told me ſmiling, that he
perceived very well I was willing to ſpare the
Duke's ſquadron, in favour to my two brothers

who were with him. One of them having a deſire

to ſee La- Rochelle, I obtained a paſſport for him,
and conducted him every where, I had myſelf oc-

cation to take a tour to Niort, where the enemy's

army lay, to agree upon terms of a combat that

had been propoſed between the Albanois of Capt.

Mercure's company, and a like number of Scots
under the command of Wymes z ; but the Duke of
Joyeuſe would not permit it to be executed.

I found this general gloomy and diſquieted. I
gueſſed ſo truly the cauſe of his unealineſs, that
when he told me, that he was on the point of go-
ing as far as Montreſor, I did not heſitate to an-

ſwer with an air meant to increaſe his ſuſpicions,

that from thence he could go very eaſily as far as
the court. At theſe words he turned towards my

brother, as accuſing him of having revealed what

had paſſed. Tho” he knew that there was nothing
in it, he imagined his diſgrace was certain, ſince

the report of it had already reached Rochelle; and

it was this, 1 believe, that confirmed him in his

relolution to go and deſtroy, by his preſence, tho
VoL, I, X | 5 | als

— —ů — oo nt —

134 N E M OI R s. Bookll.

cabals of his illwillers. He concealed his ſenti-

ments, however, and anſwered coldly, that I ſuf.
fered myſelf to be deceived by my too great dif.
cernment. He endeavoured to perſuade me, that
he had no intentions of returning to Paris, I Was
ſo well aſſured of the contrary, that I went
back immediately to the King of Navarre, to con-
_ cert with him proper meaſures for availing ourſelves
of his abſence, which would leave the Catholic ar-
my without leaders: for I did not doubt but a part

of the general officers would take this journey

likewiſe: in effect, Joyeuſe was no ſooner ſet out
than his whole army, already badly diſciplined. e.
nough, lived without rule and without obedience.

The King of Navarre, who had ſecretly afſem-

| bled 1200 men, drawn out of his garriſons, fell ſo
ſeaſonably upon the companies of Vic, of Belle.
maniere, the Marquis of Reſnel, Ronſoy, and

Pienne, and even upon that of the Duke of Joy-
euſe, that finding part of them in bed, and part at
table, he cut them all in pieces. He oftener than
once alarmed the whole army, which remained

under the command of Lavardin. He followed it
to La- Haye in Touraine, and found means to keep
it, as it were, beſieged during four or five days.

If on this occaſion he had had forces ſufficient to
have enabled him to keep his poſt longer, I believe,
that hunger would have delivered the whole army
into his power. The ſoldiers ſpreading themſelves

over the villages, and expoſing themſelves every

Where to procure proviſions, we paſſed the river,
and ſurpriſed them every moment.

In this little time, we killed and took aboye 6

men. With ſix horſes only, I went into a village
full of ſoldiers: they were fo accuſtomed to be
beaten, that I ordered the arms of thoſe who wer?
at the tables, and upon the beds, to be ſeized, and
their matches to be put out, without their offering

10

1

F

to repulſs us, although they were about forty in

number. I brought them to the King * NE
and they inliſted in his troops.

The Count of Soiſſons, who had long hide diſ-

contented with the court, gave the King of Navarre
hopes, that he would come over to his party; and

this prince neglected nothing that could keep him in

this diſpoſition. The negligence of the Catholic
army furniſhing an occaſion, ſuch as both the one
and the other waited for, the Count of Soiſſons

took the road towards the Loire, and the King of

Navarre ſent all bis troops to Roſters, to facilitate

this prince's paſſage over the river. They ſerved
him likewile to ſeize the baggage of the Duke de
Mercœur. The great convoy that eſcorted it, was
attacked fo ſuddenly near a bank, that they ſurren-

dered without ſtriking a blow, and the baggage,

which was extremely rich, was entirely pillaged.

-My part of the booty amounted. to 2000 Crowns.

My brothers were no longer in this army; I had

obtained a paſſport for them to leave La-Haye.

This ſervice did not remain without recompenle:

7 they procured me from the court a paſſport to Pa-

lis, whither a preſſing occaſion called me. At this

time the perſecution againſt the Proteſtants was at

the height. On which fide ſoever they turned, they

ſaw nothing but open abyſſes. In the villages, where
all became ſoldiers for the ſake of pillage, their
| houſes could not ſecure them from the fury of their
perſecutors. In Paris, and the great cities, they

were expoſed to rigorous ſearches, which the zeal

of religion inſpired, and the deſire of being enrich»

ed by their ſpoils made but too cruelly executed.
Princes will often ſee themſelves ſubjected to mil-
tortunes like theſe, the greateſt that can befal a king-
dom, fo long as they will not know how far their

_ rights and duties extend in this reſpe&t, They
cannot beyond meaſure be enraged at any kind of

M - JET | | Ant tion

226, Mel R $9. Bookll.
action by which nature, ſociety, or the laws, are
wounded . A religion capable of authoriſing ſuch.
actions, becomes neceſſarily an object of the rigour
of their juſtice ; and in this only inſtance is religion
ſubjected to the power of crowned heads; but their
power is not extended to the internal ſentiments of
conſciences. In the precept of love to God, the

different apprehenſions of which form the diverſity |

of religions, the Sovereign Maſter reſerves to him-
ſelf whatever reaches not beyond ſpeculation, and
leaves to princes all that tends to deſtroy common
practice. The ignorance or the contempt of this
maxim, was the cauſe that the Reformed led an
unhappy life. They whoſe eſtates were large
enough to admit of their living in Paris, choſe that
as the leaſt dangerous way, becauſe of the facility
with which they could keep themſelves unknown in
a City fo confuſed and ſo tumultuous. „„

4

My wife had retired thither ſome time, having

It is true, it has never been demonſtrated, that religion obliges
ſovereigns to perſecute thoſe who make profeſſion of another faith;
dut this does not hinder the maxims which the Duke of Sully eſta-
bliſhes here from being very dangerous, in that they ſeem to diſ-
charge kings from that indiſpenſible obligation they are under to pre-
&rve the true religion; an obligation which includes that of making
the worſhip, and all the exterior practices of it, to be exactly ob-
_ ſerved ; which is equally conformable to the principles of a wife po-
liey, as to thoſe of religion; a fatal experience having but too well
ſhewn, that it is much more neceſſary to prevent all difputes upon
matters of religion, than to ſilence them when they are begun. At-
ter the confeſſion M. de Sully fo often makes in his Memoirs, of that
ſpirit of revolt and independence which conducted all the ſteps of the
Calviniſt party in France, it is ſtrange that he is not ſenſible, that,
_— to his own maxims, this body deſerved to ſuffer all the
Tigour of the law. This place, in my opinion, ſufficiently juſtifics
_ I have ſaid in the preface to this work, that it is more proper
to relate all the author's ſentiments in theology, than to ſuppreſs
them. It is not poſſible to underſtand his meaning here on the ſub-
ject of charity. Obſcurity is generally a proof of falſe principles, and
weak reaſoning. - This note is ſuppreſſed in the Geneva editiun.
It evidently favours perſecution, and ſrews it was written by a Roman
Catholic, SY | „ |
8 uſed

1587. 0 F 8 U L '"Þ: Þ 137

uſed the precaution to take a borrowed name: to
her was added, beſides the common misfortunes,
that of being far advanced in her pregnancy, du-

ring which ſhe wanted all kinds of conveniencies.
When I ſuppoled ſhe drew near her time, the fear

of all that might happen to her in this condition,
was what induced me to take a journey to Paris.
1 found her juſt delivered of a ſon, to whom I gave
for godfather the Lord of Rueres, then a priſoner

in the gaol of the parliament, and the child was
carried from the baptiſmal font to church, by a ci-
tizen named Chaufaille and his wife; for the wor-

| ſhip and aſſemblies of the Proteſtants were not ſuſ-

pended, for all the ſevere informatious that were

made againſt them. At this time there were ſeveral

women burnt for this cauſe : The dangers I ran
myſelf were very great; and I avoided them only

by the ſurpriſing happineſs of not being known.

At laſt the number of ſpies increaſing in all parts

of the city, the ſearch was ſo diligent, that nothing

could eſcape. I did not think it poſſible to ſtay any

longer in Paris, without expoling myſelf to evident
peril. I left it therefore alone, and in diſguiſe, and

fled to Villepreux ; from whence I took a by-road

to Roſny.

B The Duke of Joyeuſe had been received in Paris
| with praiſes and acclamations, which ought to have

made him bluſh in ſecret for not having deſerved
them better. They did not, however, hinder him
from being ſenſibly affected with the defeat of his

army, of which he was ſpeedily informed. He en-
deavoured, by all poſſible means, to make ſatisfac-
tion for this loſs, which, in the diſpoſition the King

was in with regard to him, was not a difficult taſk,

His arrival had difconcerted all the intrigues of his
enemies, and his favour with Henry was riſen to
ſuch a height, that he could refuſe him nothing.

3 All

— .

at MEMOIR S Bookll.

All the courtiers attached themſely es to him *; and

9

he ſet out again for Guienne, with the flower of

the French nobility; while many other bodies of
troops, taking ſeparate ways, aſſembled at the ren-
dezvous he had appointed for them.

Theſe different marches of the troops having

made the roads leſs fafe, I found no other means
of returning to Rochelle, but by accommodating
the date of my paſſport, which was expired, By
this chicanery I got ſafe to the King of Navarre,
whom I found ewployed in taking meaſures to pre-
vent the dreadſul ſtorm he ſaw ready to burſt upon
him. He drew together all the ſoldiers he could
find in Poitou, Anjou, Touraine, and Berry, and
ſent orders to the Prince of Conde, the Count of
Soiſſons, Meſſ. de Turenne, de la Tremouille, and
-Rochefoucault, to join him with all the forces they
bad. With all theſe ſupplies, his troops were
greatly inferior to thoſe of the Duke de Joyeule,
I bey only ſerved to put him a condition of open-
ing a way through Guienne, Languedoc, and the
Lycenois, towards the fource of the Loire, whete
be reckoned upon meeting the German aux1liarics,
He made uſe of his vtmoit endeavours to accom-

pliſh this junction, before the troops of Joyeuſe

were ali joined. i his prince, therefore, advanced

with his army towards Montliev, Montguyon, and

La- Roche-Chalais, but always cloſely followed an:
.watcaed by the enemy's general, who having pene-
trated into bis celign, thought he ought not to wall
for the arrival of the Marech al de Matignon, nor
of ſeveral other regiments that were coming to
join him, leſt he ſhould ſuffer an occaſion to clcaps :

In his embelly to Rome, he wes waited as the King's brother;
he had a heart worthy of his ample fortune. One day having mece
the tuo ſecretaries of ſtate wait too long in the King's antichamber,

he excuſed bimſcif by reſigning vp to them a  Gonation of 100,
crowns which the Ring had juſt given him. Notes on the Henriasc.

him,

bim, „ he 1 never be able to recover.
His forces were already ſo much ſuperior to the

K
*
LY Ws
<8
7:3
LEY
35508
> 4
7
AA
*
"ROAR
585
18
5
**
.
1
4

60

8 U 1 V. 139

King of Navarre's, that this determination could

not be accuſed of temerity; and the King, Who,
never hazarded a ſignal action, but when forced to

it by neceſſity, inſtead of ſeeking the battle, thought
of nothing but how to get the river between them,
that he might purſue his march without obſtacle,
and gain the Dordogne, upon which he had places

commodious enough for putting a ſtop to the 1225
ſuit of the enemies.

With theſe diſpoſitions on both des, the King of

Navarre arrived at the paſſage of Chalais and Au-
beterre. The poſt of Coutras appeared of import-
ance to him, for facilitating this paſſage. It ap-

train of no leſs importance to Joyeuſe, for retard-
ing it. He ſent Lavardin to poſſeſs himſelf of it;

but La Tremouille, being more diligent, prevented |

him, and maintained himſelf in it, after a ſkirmiſh

fharp enough, The King of Navarre reſolved to

take advantage of this poſt to attempt the paſſage,

and made us endeavour it all night. He relerved

to himſelf the care of tranſporting the troops, and
left that of the baggage, particularly the artillery,

conjointly to Clermont, Bois-du-Lys, Mignonville,

and me. As it was neceſſary to make vie of all
poſſible diſpatch, we ſet ourſelves to work imme
diately, having the water up to our knees. One
half was already got to the other ſide of the river,
when the ſcouts, whom the King of Navaire had
ſent during the night to make diſcoveries, returned
with ſome. priſoners they had taken, and informed
us, that Joyeuſe, reſolute to attempt every thin

to force the King of Navarre to a battle, had de-
camped about ten o' clock at night, and would be
up with him at furtheſt by ſeven or eight in the

morning. This intelligence convinced the King that

our labour was not only ulclels, but very danger

140 MEMOIR S Bookll.
ous; becauſe, if foand by the enemy employed in

| paſſing the river, that part of his troops which
ſhould remain on this fide of it muſt be inevitably
routed, as it could receive no aſſiſtance from the
troops on the other. Thoſe who had already got
over, were ordered to return immediately. Our
labour was now redoubled, and to add to it, he de-
prived us of Mignonville “, for whom he had occa-
| fion. Although we were extremely weakened by
the fatigue we had ſuffered, yet that did not hinder
the King from pointing out to me an eminence, up-
on which he expreſſed a wiſh that his artillery could

have been placed, but durft not hope that we ſhould.

have time to gain it. In effect, we already diſco-
vered the enemy's van. Luckily Joyeuſe, who
without doubt was not ſufficiently acquainted with
the ground, or ſuffered himſelf to be too much tran-

ſported by his ardour, had given orders for fixing

his artillery in a place fo low, that afterwards find-
ing it would be uſeleſs, he cauſed it to be removed,

and by that means gave us a ſpace of time, of Which

we were wiſe enough to avail ourſelves, to place
our own. It muſt be confeſſed, that this general,
after all that he did, drew almoſt no ſervice from
his artillery ; and this doubtleſs was one of the
chief cauſes of bis loſing the battle. This ſhews,
that there is nothing more neceſſary for the general
of an army, than an exact and piercing fight, which
| ſhortens diſtances, and prevents confuſion. I ne-
ver knew a general that poſſeſſed this quality 1 in an
equal 2 with the ug of Navarre fo

The

* Mignonville, who was ſlain ſoon after, before Nonancour, when

Henry IV. ſtormed that city. He was marechal de camp, and an

excellent officer. Henry had a great number of ſubaltern officers of

uncommon merit and abilities in his army; fuch were Montgommery,

Bellezuns, Montauſier, Vaudore, Des-Ageaux, Favas, whom the
hiſtorians, in ſpeaking of this battle, have "mentioned with honour.

T Le Grain makes him . chis —— * his
| 12S

2130p, 0 8 UV . 1 „. 141

The battle * was already begun, before our ar-
tillery, which conſiſted only of three pieces of can-
non, was fixed ; and we had ſoon occaſion for it.
The quarter of M. de Turenne, whoſe troops be-
haved very ill, and that of La-Tremouille, had been
forced the firſt ſhock, which was beginning to throw
the whole army into diſorder, The Catholics cried
out Victory; and indeed they wanted but little of
being victorious in reality. But at this very mo-
ment our *artillery began to play; and ſo terrible
was the fire +, that every diſcharge carried away
twelve, fifteen, and ſometimes five and twenty men.
It put a ſtop immediately to the impetuoſity of the
enemy, and galled them ſo much, that, to avoid
the fire, they diſperſed, and offered only an ill- com-
pacted and ill- ſuſtalned body to the efforts of the
King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, and the
Count of Soiſſons, who had come together at the
head of three ſquadrons. "Theſe three princes 9
performed prodigies of valour; they overthrew all

| ſoldiers. & My friends, bchold here a prey much more conſiderable
than any of your former booties; it is a new married man, who
« has (till the nuptial portion in his coffers, and all the choice of
courtiers is with him,” Dec. of Henry the Great, book 4. |

* Tt began Oct. 20. at nine in the morning, and ended at ten.
The victory was complete; 5000 of the enemy were left dead upon
the place, and go taken priſoners. In the King of Navarre's army

there was but a very ſmall number of ſoldiers ſlain, and not one per-
ſon of diſtinction. See the hiſtorians. Father Daniel (vol. 9. 4%
gives an exact deſcription of the battle of Coutras. I would fain
have tranſcribed the whole article here.

+ The firſt fire of the artillery, ſays Le Grain {book 4.) carried off
ſeven captains of the regiment of Picardy, the beit and moſt warlike
in the Duke's army. 3% Jo | e

I All I fhall ay to you, ſaid the King of Navarre to them, is, that
you are of the houſe of Bourbon, and, as God lives, I will ſhew you,
that 1 am your eldeſt brother. —— His valour was that day far ſu-
perior to that of all others. He wore a plume of white feathers on
his helmet, to make himſelf remarkable. Some throwing themſelves
before him, to defend and cover his perſon, he cried, © Stand off, I
« deſcech

% MEMO 1 K 8 Booth,

that oppoſed them, and arne vitorious over the

bodies of the dead. Their armour was all bat.

tered with blows. In a moment all was changed,

and the death of the Catholic general * fecured

to the Proteſtants a complete victory.

As ſoon as I beheld the enemy fly, I I abandoned

the cannon as uſeleſs, and mounting my horſe which
Bois-breuil kept ready for me behind the artillery,

1 flew to learn tidings of my brothers; and I had
the conſolation to hear, that neither of the two.

had been in the battle. I met the King of Navarre
buſy in diſperſing the fagitives ww and completing
his victory, which he did not think ſure fo long as
any remained to make head againſt him. The bo-

dies of Joyeuſe and St Sauveur his brother, were

drawn from under a heap of carcaſes, and laid up-
on a table in the hall of the caſtle of Coutras, and
a coarſe ſheet throw n over them f.

© beſeech you; do not eelipſe me; I would be ſen.” He Wied the
firſt ranks of the enemy, took ſeveral priſoners with his own haud,
and collared one named Chdetau- Reg nard, cornct of a company of
foot, ſaying, ** Yield ihce, Phihiſtinc.“ Peref, id,

* Slain in cold blood, by La Mothe St Henry; others ſay, by two
captains of foot, named Bordeaux and Deſcentiers.

Some perſons ſeeing the fugitives halt, came and told him, that

the Marechal de Matignon's army appeared: he received the tidings

as a new ſubject of glory, and turning courageouſly to his men, © Let

« us go, my friends,“ ſaid he: two battles in one day, is what has
& never been ſeen.” 5

The following is an anecdote, the truth of which I cannot ans

ſwer for. However, the reader may not be diſpleaſed to ſee it. It
is to be found in the Memoirs of Amelot de la Houſlaye, vol. 2 p. 443.

who relates it as drawn from the hi ;ftory of the lords of Enghicn, by
Collins. The King of Navarre,” feys this author, “ paired iþe
„ victory, to the great ſatisfiCtion of the King of France, who {-
e cretly correſponded with the victorious army, through the faithful
“ jinterpoſition of the Marquis of Roſny, of the houſe of Bethune,
& now Duke of Sully, who remained unknown at Pais.” I bis
author ſeems to have been acquainted with the Duke of Sully's ſeerc:
| negotiations with ary Ht. 80 4 mentioned: but he is miſtakes

1

BOOK

JJV

DD 0 Þ© III.
HAT the Proteſtant party might have derived

great advantages from the victory of Coutras,
and that they did not derive any, is equally true. I

am ſincere enough to confeſs, that the King of Na-
varre did not, upon this occaſion, do all he might

have done. If, with an army victorious and maſter
of the field he had advanced to meet the foreign _
auxiliaries, nothing could have prevented their junc-

tion; and, after a ſtroke ſo important, his party

would have bcen equal at leaſt to the Catholics. It

1s certain, that one never knows all the value of
a moment: the wiſeſt are deceived in this . The
ambitious deſigns and intereſted views of ſome of

the chiefs of the victorious army, ſnatched from

the King of Navarre the fruits of his victory; but
this is a truth few people are acquainted with,

The Prince of Conde, ſeduced by the advice of

Tremouille, thought the time was at laſt come,

when he could execute the hardy project he had
long premeditated, which was to diſmember the
crown of France of Anjou, Poitou, the countries

of Aunis, Saintonge, and Angoumois, to compoſe
of them for himſelf an independent principality.

With this view, he haſtily withdrew all the troops

in this, that theſe negotiations produced no effect, ſince the Duke of
Joyeuſe was ſtil} in high favour with this prince, at leaſt if we may
believe M. de Sully, who ought to know better than any other: and
that Sully could not be at Paris, becauſe he was at the battle; and

. that even the laſt journey he took there, ſome time before, had no

other motive than the deſire of ſeeing and aſſiſting his wife.

* Our beſt hiſtorians are equally agreed in theſe two things, that
the King of Navarre knew not how to avail himſelf of this victory,
and that this was not entirely owing to himſelf. D'Aubigne is al-

moſt the only perſon who exculpates all his officers, and lays the

blame wholly upon che prince himſelf, Vol. 3. ö. 1. c. 15. : |

144 M E M OI R S Book III.

he had brought to the general army, and turned all
his thoughts to make himſelf maſter of Saintes and

Brouage, which he imagined he would carry eaſily
upon the firſt alarm; after which he ſaw nothing

that could be able to reſiſt him. For ambition re-

ſembles the bird in the fable, who has a ſtrong
Wing, and an inſatiable appetite *. „„

The

»The Duke of Sully does not agree here wich D' Aubignẽ, Du-

Pleſſis-Mornay, and the author of the life of the Duke of Bouillon.
It is probable he had better memoirs than them all, with regard to

the deſign he attributes to the Prince and the Duke on this occaſion;

but I am afraid there was ſome prejudice and paſſion on his ſide. In

my opinion, M. de Thou is better able than any other perſon, to de-
cide this queſtion. Speaking of the conſequences of the battle of

Coutras, he ſays, that a council being aſſembled, to deliberate upon
what meaſures were neceſſary to be taken, the Prince of Conde pro-
poſed, that they ſhould go to meet the foreign troops along the tide
of the Loire, and ſecure them a paſſage over this river, by ſeizing
Saumur; that this advice was not followed, for reaſons which he re-
lates, and which are very bad; and it was agreed only, that the

Prince of Conde ſhould go, with what troops they could ſpare him,
to join to the German army towards the ſource of the Loire, taking

his way through the heart of Angoumois and Limoſin. That the King

of Navarre, on his ſide, ſeeing himſelf abandoned by the greateſt part of

the nobility of Poitou and Saintonge, marched towards St Foi in Agenois,
from whence he took the route to Pau, leaving the conduct of his

little army to the Viſcount de Turenne; who not willing to let the

ſoldiers be idle, beſieged Sarlat in Perigord, deſigning at leaſt to lay
it under contribution, if he could not take it. This is what De

Thou lays: to which may be added, a very important circumſtance,
and at the ſame time a very true one, ſince neither the Duke of Bou-

illon, nor his apologiſts, could contradict it; which is, that it was the

Viſcount himſelf who rejected the Prince of Conde's prudent advice.

From al} this it follows, that the Prince of Conde was not guilty of
what he is here accuſed of: which is further confirmed by D'Aubigne;,
who adds, that it was upon a promiſe the King of Navarre made him

to join him ſoon, that he advanced to Angoumois, where he waitcd 2
long time to no purpoſe, The Prince, however, is not cleared of ha-

ving had likewiſe views of independence, of which no hiſtorian

| BHoubts.. | |

Although the Viſcount Turenne appears to have aQed upon this

| occaſion in conſequence of the reſolution of a general council; yet,
in my opinion, we are not the leſs authoriſed to think diſadvantage-

ouſly of him, It is bad reaſoning in Marſclier, to grant on one fide,
that he was inſtigated by his ambition to wicked 4 and, on the

| other

1
i :
i
| 4
. .
| .
1
x 2 .
: -
3 1
*
o *
1
Fs
3
1
9
7975
1 *
1 FTA
a 8
4 2
o 2 „
3
9 OS
WS Lt
os!
2
Fa.
*
\ Tt) q
r * vB
7
bas: 1
,
2 8
&
*

% r &U . EY, 145

The Viſcount Turenne, with ſimilar deſigns up-

on the Limoſin and Perigord, where he already poſ-
ſeſſed great eſtates, purſued the ſame conduct with

the Prince of Conde ; and obliging all his troops

(which alone compoſed one third of the army) to

follow him, led them to the ſiege of Sarlat, flatter-

ing them that this expedition would enrich even the
meaneſt ſoldier. He perfectly juſtified the proverb,

that great promiſers perform the leaſt : the check

he received before this little paltry town, ought to

have convinced him timeouſly of the vanity of his

pretenſions. The Viſcount had the misfortune

not to be pitied by any, and leaſt of all by the

King of Navarre ; for he had acted quite contrary
to his advice,

The Count of Soiſſons concealed his def 915 more
art fully: however, it is certain, that bis new at-

tachment to the King of Navarre was not more

ſincere, and had been dictated ſolely by ſelf. intereſt.

He had gained the heart of the Princeſs Catherine,

the King's ſiſter, and he was continually expreſſing

to this prince, the paſſion he had of uniting himſelf
yet more cloſely to him by marriage; but this de-
ſign concealed another too ſhameful for him to ſuffer
it to be perceived. He pretended by this marriage

to ſupplant the King of Navarre in all his rights ;
and as he ſaw no probability that this prince, has

wing the Pope, Spain, and the F rench Cotholics for

other (de, to complain, that aboſs aeign are pete the wotives

of his conduct. This is to deſtroy the idea he would g ve us of the

Duke of Bouillon, as of the greateſt Poli ician of his time. Theſe
raſh judgments are condemned by religion, but are allowed by the
laws of hiſtory ; and political conjetures are often reduced | to this
foundation alone.

As for what has been ſaid in the ſame place againſt the Count of
Soiſſons, it is, and will be (till more ſupported hereafter by unanſwer-
able proof. De N book 87.; Mem. of Du Pleſſis. beck 1.; D' Au-

bigné, vol. 3. book 1. chap, 15 Marſuliet's liter of Henry Duke of :

Byuillon, vol. I. book 3.

Voi. N =

i
;
:
*
*

146 MEMOIR S Bock III.

his declared enemies, ſhould ever ſucceed in his en-

terpriſes, he reckoned vpon enriching himſelf with
his ſpoils, and upon gaining, at leaſt, the great e-
ſtates which make up the appennage of the houſe of
Albret on this fide the Loire. Such being his in-
- tention, he took care neither to aſſiſt him with as
advice, or his arm, to purſue his laſt victory:
the contrary, he ſeized that moment to preſs bim
ſo earneſtly to allow him to go to Bearn to viſit the

Princeſs his ſiſter, that the King, ſeeing himſelf in a

more forlorn condition than if he had loſt the battle,

thought he was obliged, in gratitude for the aſſiſt £ 8

ance the Count had given him, to grant him this ſa-
tis faction. He himſelf was alſo dragged thither (and
the Count was not ignorant of it), by a paſſion which

had always been the weakneſs of this prince. Love

called him back to the Counteſs of Guiche, to lay

at her feet the colours taken from the enemy, which

he had cauſed to be ſet apart for that purpoſe. Ac-
cordingly they took the road together to Bearn,
Happily this unſeaſonable journey did not produce
all the diſadvantages that might have been reaſonably

feared from it: it was ſo far of uſe to the King of

Navarre, as to give him a more particular knowledge
of the perſon on whom he was upon the point of
beſtowing his ſiſter. The Count of Soiſſons could

not ſo well diſſemble, but that the King gueſſed at
ſome part of his ſentiments ; and a letter, which he

received from Paris, perfectly revealed them. By
this he learned, that the Count of Soiſſons had ta-
ken this ſtep purely at the inſtigation of the eccle-
ſiaſtics, who had deviſed this artifice to deprive him

of all his poſſeſſions: that the Count had folemnly
_ ſworn to them, as ſoon as he had married the Prin-
ceſs, he would bring her with him to Paris, and
abandon for ever the party of his bene factor, and
afterwards concert meaſures with them to accom-
Plin the reſt, This letter, which the King of Na-
varre

N N e 5
pe >» © -* * _ ay. 3 way 1,5
Wo EEEPISBEr. c
A rt MOI rn 2 i PSS 2
„„ |

2 . 3 ä
n ä
r A 8 3 >
IE OE Ae Tag MEE e ee .

varre received at his return from hunting, when he

was juſt ready to fall into the ſnare that was laid
for him, gave him an averſion for the Count, which
nothing was ever able to efface. He broke with

him, and regretted too late, that he had abandoned

himſelf to his counſel. 8 5
, I had not the mortification to be a witneſs of all
© thoſe reſolutions which were taken after the battle
of Coutras, and which I ſhould in vain have oppo»

ſed. Some days after the battle, before theſe fooliſh

reflections had impoiſoned all their minds, the King

of Navarre took me aſide, in a garden, and aſked
my opinion concerning the condition into which
this laſt action had put his affairs. I told him, that
he muſt, without loſs of time, march with all his

forces towards the ſource of the Loire, to receive

the foreign ſupplies, or, what would be the ſame
thing, facilitate their paſſage, by taking poſſeſſion

of all the towns on this ſide of the river; which,

unleſs it were Poitiers and Angouleme, which he

might leave, ſeemed to me not difficult to be won.

By this means he would atleaſt ſecure to himſelf, in

all events, the fineſt and beſt provinces, from
whence he could not be driven in a ſhort time, or
by inconſiderable forces. „%%%

The King of Navarre approved of this advice,

and ſeemed to me determined to follow it exactly.

He told me, that he had juſt ſent Montglat to the
foreign army, and that ſince he could not go to put
himſelf at the head of it, he ardently wiſhed the
Prince of Conti would accept of that charge. He
had juſt received letters from this prince, in which
he offered to aſſiſt him in perſon. The pretence of
going to join the remains of the royal army, might
enable the Prince of Conti to reach the auxiliaries
without danger. The King then left to me the care
of prevailing upon the Prince to take this ſtep, and

commanded me not to give it over.

3 ,
— 8 . a — > . . 4 ” 2 * . — "==
. EE - — ͤ —. ...... —— : —— T_T T_T II — -
aL — . — — — —— _ BY — ro : IT, — = <5 5 2 _ —_——— — — 2 -
F< Cone = ed rn Le — — — * >. 1 -—— — . * — *

——

.
14
N
4
1

—
- » —
* F 5

8 th - C i

N' 2: 8 1

b 2 -
> RE IH

c
E

3 1

* * 12 5 — 4
_—_ - — 9 3
8 8 . er 1 88 A ; err ET 4a” v e 4 45 — — —— 2 — 22 an — 1 = — — 4 — p 1 4 8
= * wh. CEL Le LS Ws on. IS | i 5 — . —— aa 2 GA. ELSE: ˙ m — . ———— | \
EN Le 05 — 7 — CO TEE SELLS - aq — 2 FS ——— . 4 * — r <

Oc
n

e

1% M _E M O 1X 8 Book III.

I ſet out from the army, charged only with a
letter of three lines, and ſending wy equipage to
Pons, paſſed into the Maine, where I expected to
have found the Prince, by means of the acquaint-
| ance I had with the governors of thoſe places thro?

which he muſt paſs. I learned, at my arrival, that

the Prince of Conti had ſet out by himſelf two days
before, but had not been able to keep his route ſo
ſecret, but that his intelligence with the foreigners

was perceived; which was the cauſe that the roads

. were {till infeſted by detachments that were ſent
after him. I was therefore obliged to take a cir-
cuit, in order tojoin him, and to paſs by Roſny;

from whence coming to Neaufle, I was there in-
formed, that the Germans engaged without order,
and without guides, in provinces unknown, ſtopped

by large rivers, and haraſſed inceſſantly by the troops

of the league, had at length been totally defeated at
Auncau “: that the Swils, to avoid the like mil-
fortune, had inliſted, to the number of 12,000, in
the troops of the league: that the King of Navarre
was at Bearn, his tr oops inactive, and diſperſed on
all ſides.

This ſad news ſhortening my Journey, and fru-

| Nratiog my COON, nothing now remained for

5M see the Jetail of this | in De Thou, book 87. D*Aubigne, vol. 3.

dook 1. Matthieu, vol. 1. book 8. p. 537. Chron. Noven. vol. 1. p. 39.

and particularly the Memoirs of the league, vol, 1, where it is obſer-
ved, that at the time this army was incamped near the river Vonne,

Bontglat came from the King of Navarre, to defire the commanders
of it would march towards the ſource of the Loire, where he would

put himſelf at their head; but they did not think proper to do 1o.

The leaders were the Baron d'Onau or Dona, Guitry, Clervant, Beau»
vais La-Nocle, &c. If they had obeyed this order, the King "of Na-

voarre, then returning from Bearn, would have had time to join them

with all his troops, and the army would not have been defeated, Da»
vila (book 8.) relates the Duke of Guiſe's reply to the Duke of
Nlaienne, who thought it a great riſk to attack an enemy fo much

luperior in number. Thoſe,” ſaid he, © that do not care to fight,

“% may ſtay here, What I could not reſolve upon in half an hour,
"I could never reſolve upon all my life,”

me

85
$787
T1
f

* * 7
W
i
r

8

* 1 Gn
e n 2
ö

me to do, but to turn back to Roſny; where, while
I deplored in my heart the effects of fo bad conduct;

I feigned, for my ſecurity, to take part in the pu-

blic rejoicings that followed upon the defeat of Au-
neau. I viſited my eſtates in Normandy, expect-
ing the remedies which time, and the King of Na-
varre's return, might bring to our misfortunes :
and when 1 was informed that this prince had re-

turned from Bearn, I went to join him at Bergerac,

where the news of the taking of Caſtillon conſoled
him a little, amidſt ſo many ſubjects of affliction.
The ſiege of this place had coſt the Duke of Mai-
enne a million of crowns, and the Viſcount Turenne
retook it * for leſs than two crowns.

A little afterwards, we were informed of two

events that were likely enough to change the face
of affairs. One of them was the death of the Prince

of Conde +, a death az ſudden as tragical, the im-

priſonment of ſome of his chief attendants, and the

puniſhment of one of his domeſtics 2, who was torn
| | | | | to

_ * By means of a ladder of cords, | SIE,
Although there was a ſecret jealouſy between the Prince of
Conde and the King of Navarre, yet the King was extremely afflicted
for his loſs, and ſhutting himſelf up in his cabinet with the Count
of Soiſſons, he was heard to ſend forth great cries, and to ſay, © That
he had loſt his right hand.” Percf;xe, part 1. This prince was
called Henry, and was fon to Lewis of Bourbon, firſt Prince of Condé.
He had no children by his firſt wife, but at his death he left his ſe-

cond, Charlotte Catherine de la Tremonille, three months gone with |

child. It was a great error which was ſpread among the people, that
Henry of Conde, the ſecond of that name, was born thirteen months

after the death of his father. He was born the 1ſt of September

following.

+ The name of this domeitic was Brillant. One of his pages was

executed in effigy. The Princeſs herſelf was comprehended in this ac

cuſation. Rene Cumont, the lieut.nant-particulier of St Jean, com-

menced a proceſs againſt her, which was ſuſpended on account of
the birth of Henry II. Prince of Conde. After fix years impriſon-
ment, the Princeſs preſented a petition to the parliament of Paris,
who brought this affair before their tribunal, and acquitted Charlotte
Catherine de la Trémouille of the crime of which ſhe was accuſed.

7 Dee 3 > 5

3 i The

.
* \
*
19
1
4
7+
ſs "A
IF; :
"+ BRI
1
1
5 q
I; *s 1
: l
i 5
: if fc
_— .
| .
{4 4 7
N F
+
i 't
i
. i
by: *
1
” 55
* 1
| 7
$5:
4 * 1
99
=
wee J
: 1
be /-
1%. 3
U 7 ©}
8
19
i:
*
1 e
- Bn
Mr
.
Ha) »
111 i
a! *
6
1 »K
t 3
We: 1
W
1
* 14
11
11
1
1 © 4
We
$158
+81
1 9
$117
* 74
[
wn 14
ae 8
"ws
1
1
k ,
11
1 7 A
17-0
1 - VBY
k EH
N bY q
1
117 5
.
1
ar
4; * *
y
1 1
4
\
4:
14
FP \
.
1 3 4
1
of!
1 3
1
27
®*. +
W: 2
6 i”
15
„
4m
7: ._-
8
i
be
: *
14
1:4 |
1 5
1

5 bo 9 7 r
3 — —
W >> —  ” LOT
>% r ey 2 = WS + - 2
2 TCT

9
1 þ
4 5
* ; 1
44 5
a) .
4 41
_
. ,
iz
3 N
3
2
} bt
— 2
I
ö 4
X, +
2 ';
* %
7 o
*
$ 7
8
= 24
4
*

1% ME M © 1 Ss Posh II.

and of the King's departure from that city, follow-
„ „ ed

telted, with deep oaths, that they were never deliyered to him. This

to pieces by four horſes, left no room to doubt but

that he died by poiſon. The news of the popu-

hace “ riſing at Paris 4, and barricading the ſtreets,

The Prince of Conde died at St Jean d'Angely, March 5. 1588, aged

thirty-five years. De Thou, book go. Moriſot, I know not upon
What authority, ſays, that the death of the Prince of Conde might

be occaſioned by a wound he received in his fide, by a lance, at the

battle of Coutras. Henry Magn. cap. 12. Pp. 27.

2 Thurſday, May 12. 55 TE
+ T ſhall not give a detail of it here, as it would he too long, and

may beſides be found in a great many other books. It is ſufficien:
to ſay, that Henry III. to prevent the dangerous deſigns of the league,

having ordered about 6000 troops, the moſt part Swiſs, to enter Paris
and ſpreading them in different quarters of the city, the people roſe
and being kept together by ſome of the chief's of the league, fortificd

themſclves in the ſtreets, repulſed the ſcldiers, diſarmed the Swils,

dcteated the King's guards, and carried the barricades. within fifty

| paces of the Louvre, &c. Henry III. ſeeing himſelf ready to be be-
| Heged in the Louvre, and not willing to expoſe himſelf to the vio-

lence of an enraged populace, went out privately by the Tuileries,

and the ſuburb Montmartre, from whence he got to Chartres. The

affair was afterwards turned into a negotiation between the Queen»

mother and the Duke of Guiſe, and the abſolute decifion of it femit.
ted to the ſtates of Blois. | |

I obſerve, after D'Aubigné, that it was very fortunate for en-

ry III. that his troops ſeized and kept poſſeſſion of the ſuburb 8:

Honore, and the back of the Tuileries; and that no one cf the
league thovght of ſeizing theſe quarters. Thoſe who guarded the
gate of Neſſe fired at a diſtance upon the King's troops, and ſeeing

the ferry-boat of the Tuileries approach, in which they ſuppoſed tie

King to be, cut the cable. Chron Noven, tom. 1. |
Henry III. was, on his ſide, guilty of a much greater fault, in for-

bidding Grillon, Colonel of the French guards, to take poſſeſſion of

the {quare Maubert, and the quarter of the univerſity, and by hin-

dering his ſoldiers from firing upon the populace; who, by a ſlep

more firm and ſeaſonable, might have been retained in their duty.

The Duke of Guiſe waited ſix whole days at Soiſſons, not daring to

come to Paris, contrary to the King's orders, which were ſigniſied to

him by Bcilievie, in two letters that he ſent him at different times by

the poſt. They were to blame, as Matthieu alſo obſerves, vol. 1.

| book 8. for not ſending theſe letters by an expreſs to the Duke of
Guiſe; for the Duke imagined, that he _— clude this order, by
denying he hid received the letters, as in effect he did at the Queen's

palace, in the preſence of the King and Bellievre; to whom he pro-

fault

eee
1 ——
r . "IL
„
OI, 4 4
Oe WY

9

<3 .
ee

a King ſaw himſelf reduced, who knew neither how

158 7. O F r 151

ed ſoon after, and was ſpread every where by the

courier, who was diſpatched to give notice of it to

the Duke of Epernon. To this ſhameful condition

to

fault was not committed through negligence, but becauſe they had

not 25 crowns to pay the courier for his journey.

Henry III. was adviſed by the Duke of Epernon, to ſuffer his
guards to aſſaſſinate the Duke of Guiſe as he came to the Louvre;
and this prince, they ſay, would have engaged La Gueſle and Ville-
quier in the deſign, but they diſſuaded from it. It is reported allo,
that the ſame day wherein the ſtreets were barricaded, Alphonſo d'Or-
nano aſſured him, he would bring him the head of the Duke of
Guile, 1f he would permit him. In a word, it is thought, that the
King did not make uſe of half the precautions he might have done,
informed as he was of all the deſigns of the league, having bimſelf
varrowly milled being taken as he was going to Vincennes; and had
zuſt been convinced, by what had happened at the impriſonment of
La-Morliere, a famous leaguer, that the people only waited for an
opportunity of inſulting him. The King's council acted without
campariſon better in that affair of La-Morliere, than on the day of

the barricades. Memoirs of the league, vol. 5. Satyr. Menip.

The Duke's deſign in this enterpriſe has given riſe to great diſ-

| putes, which I cannot here enter into a detail of. In this, as in all

other dubious matters, much has been ſaid pro and con. Thoſe who
will have it, that he intended to carry, or ſuffer the people to carry
things to an extremity, to ſeize the King's perſon, in a word, to put
the crown upon his own head, ſupport their aſſertions by ſome wri-

_ tips of great conſequence, to which I am obliged to refer the reader,

See Memoirs of the league, vol. 1. and the volume marked 8866. in
the King's library. The chief of which are, A letter written to him
dy the Ducheſs of Lorrain, after the victory of Auneau, in which _

| the adviſes him to make uſe of the preſent opportunity to declare

himſelf King, Cc. A letter written by the Duke himſelf the next
day after the fortifications in the ſtreets of Paris, to the governor of

Orleans, wherein are theſe words: “ have vanquiſhed the Swiſs, cut

in pieces part of the King's guards, and hold the Louvre fo cloſely

_ © inveſted, that I ſhall be able to give a good account of thoſe that

Hare within. This victory is ſo great, that it will never be forgot,”
Cc. Many other letters, in which he mentions the King very dil-
reſpectfully, and the princes of the blood with the utmoſt contempt,
To this they add, the diſcontent the Duke diſcovered, and the re-
preaches he made the Queen-mother, for having amuſed him with,

conferences, while his prey eſcaped him. In fine, the writings that
were, ſay they, publiſhed by his commands, wherein was attempted

to be proved, the pretended right the houte of Lorrain had to the

crown, not to mention an infinite number of other pieces, which were

indecd

152 MEMOIRS Book III.
to prevent, to ſtifle, or to divide factions; who
amuſed himſelf with conjecturing, when he ought to

have acted; who never practiſed either prudence or

firmneſs, nor was ever acquainted with thoſe whom

indeed but ſo many fatirical libels againſt Francis Dvke of Guiſe, re.
proaching him with having ettempted to aſſert his chimerical claims
upon Anjou and Provence; and the Cardinal his brother, with en-
deavouring to make himſelf ſovereign of Metz, under the protection

of the Emperor; a project which the vigilance of Salcede prevented

the execution of; but he loft his head for it, and for having treated

about religion with the King of Spain, at the council of Trent, with.

out his maſter's participation, The greatelt part of theſe writings
are ſtill in every body's hands. 5 | :

For the Duke's juſtification they bring thoſe arguments made uſe
of by himſelf in a letter, or a fort of manifeſto, which he drew up
the ſame day, being the 13th of May. He there declares, that the
report of the King's intention to fill the city with foreigners, and to

fall upon the citizens with them, was the true cauſe of the populace
_ riſing; that, inſtead of ſupporting them, he had made uſe of his ut-

moſt endeavours, till two hours after midnight, to calm the tumult;
that he had preſerved the Swift, and prevented the maflacre; that
he had intreated the rebels to reſpect the royal authority; and that,
far from attempting any thing againſt the King's perſon, © I might,”
aid he, © have ſeized him a thoufand times, if I had been inclined
to do ſo,” &c. Add to this, that in treating with the Queen-mo-
ther, he required nothing but the deſtruction of the Proteſtants, and
that religion ſhould be ſecured ; and declared likewiſe, that it was not
in his own name he treated, but in that of the Cardinal of Bourbon,

- whoſe intereſts he ſupported againſt thoſe of the King of Navarre,

and the other princes of the blood. |

I do not find it ſufficiently proved againſt the Duke of Guiſe, that

his deſign was to place himſelf upon the throne, after the death of
Henry III. and the Cardinal of Bourbon; and this is very extraordi-

nary. What ambitious man, and in his place, could have reſiſted the

ſuggeſtions of the Pope, the King of Spain, and a great part of Eu-
rope, who all conſpired for his elevation? See the Duke of Parma's
opinion of this event, Davila, book 9. It was, “ that the Duke of
„ Guiſe had made a ſhew of doing too much, and effectuated too
little; that he ought to have remembered, that whoever draws his

« ſword againſt his prince, ought to have that inſtant thrown away

1 the ſcabbard,” Sixtus V. when he received the news, cried out,
« Oh, that raſh Duke, and that weak King”, The Earl of Stafford,
ambaſſador from England, (I relate this anecdote in the words of Le
Grain, book 4), “ being adviſed to take a ſafe conduct from the
Duke of Guiſe, I will have no other aſſurance, ſaid he, than the
_# right of nations, and the protection of the King to whom I am ſent,

© 8
„ ele

PPP
. 4; . 7 —
I ER 9 5 „ ER x * NN * - —_ * *
e 4 n I SA N —_—:. + 2 7 "ou X
h FP ²˙ ͤ v KKK Ek A ˙ a ; . 4 : n
1 = x „ 8 * 281 N 2 8 4. Mg N + a N 2

. 0.

*-£3

W

P r ; De ;
N d .. , EIS 2 5
mY 5 : FETT i

r SVULLY 159

he commanded, or thoſe that were neareſt his per-

ſon. The revolutions which happen in great ſtates,
are not the effects of chance, or of the caprice of

the people. Nothing ſo much occaſions the revolt

of the nobility of a kingdom, as a weak and diſor-
derly government. For the populace, they never

rebel from a deſire of attacking, but from an im-

patience of ſuffering. The juſt reſentment that filled
the heart of the King of Navarre, for an inſult ſo
outrageous, offered to one of his own blood, and
which, in ſome degree, reflected a diſgrace upon

all crowned heads, effaced in a moment the remem-

brance of Henry III2s injurious treatment of him-

ſelf, He declared his ſorrow for it in bis council,

who all, with one voice, approved of his reſolution
to aſſiſt and defend the King of France; and he ſent
his ſecretary immediately to this prinee, to aſſure
him, that he might diſpoſe of his perſon and of his

neos I St 85
The Count of Soiſſons, whoſe mind was deliver-
ed to perpetual chimeras, looked upon this event as
a ſtroke of fortune, which, by ridding him of all
his rivals, would give him the chief {way in the

council and court of Henry III. Changing there-
fore his battery in an inſtant, he reſolved to go and
offer his ſervice to this prince; and to make a

greater merit of this action, he ſought dependents
in the court of the King of Navarre, and from a-

© whoſe fervants and ſabjects you and the Duke of Guiſe both are.”

The Firſt Preſident de Harley anſwered the Duke of Guiſe with the
lame firmneſs, That, in the King's abſence, he would go and take

his orders from the Queen-mother, | |
There is a piece upon the different ſteps of the league and council,

before and after the mutiny in Paris, that deſerves to be read, and is

titled, „The verbal proceſs of Nicholas Poulain, the mayor of

* Paris, upon the league, from 1585 to 1588.” This Nicholas

Poulain, who ſecretly favoured the King's party, often gave good ad-

vice in this affair, which was never followed. This moiſel of ſecret

biltory is to be found in the Journal of Henry ILI.'s reign, vol. r.
p. 132, et ſeqq. 5 |

mong

———

— REA. A ———

3

A

+ * v ” A
re

—— ——yU U 2 ——

n a 3 gt en
MO er ER UL ny AE
2 A

tas LT nn N. 1 Fa
bn rat uo ren ket PT REID UTE CARED Eat Ponds

CSN

N

rr
n
—

"=
— 2
1

I b .
r K ne

wu M K NM 0 1 R 8 Book III.

mong his moſt affectionate ſervants, whoſe fidelity
he did not ſcruple to tempt. The King of Navarre
Was ſenſible, as he ought, of the indignity of this
procedure: but diſſembling his reſentment, and re.
flecting that it was his intereſt to have ſome perſon

with the Count of Soiſſons, in whom he could con—

| fide, to watch all his motions, and ſtudy the new
ſyſtem he purſued at court ; he commanded me to
lend an ear to this prince's diſcourſe, and to affect
a zeal for him that I did not feel. The Count of

| Soiſſons ſuffered himſelf to be eaſily deceived ; he

applauded himſelf for having gained me. T be dif.
tinction with which he treated me, procured me
ſome enemies, who envied me the ſhare 1 poſſeſſed
of his favour. I accompanied him in his journey,
after having ſecretly received inſtructions oo the

King of Navarre, and concerted with him thoſe

meaſures which his {ervice required me to take ups
on this occaſion, |
During our whole journey, the Cog continually

_ entertained me with the favour, the magnificence,
and the honours that waited him at court. The
King of Navarre, he fancied, would not even think
to vie with him. In all the ſtrokes of vanity and

io ſupportable pride which eſcaped him, he inſen-
ſibly mingled a vein of gall and bitterneſs againſt the
King of Navarre, that diſcovered the hatred and

_ antipathy he bore him. I could neither reſolve to
_ flatter his inclinations, nor to applaud his ridicu-
lous ſchemes; and all my anſwer was, that I fore-
ſaw the diſunion of the royal family, which had
been already the cauſe of ſo many misfortunes,
_ would finally bring France under the power of the
houſe of Auſtria, after it had made them deſtroy
each other. A diſcourſe more flattering would have
been more to his taſte ; but mine, however, ſeemed
to bear the marks of a ſincere attachment to him,
which could not Fail of pleaſing, 1 5

W »

o 5

1588. r gg

We arrived at Nogent-le- Rotrou, and afterwards

at Mante, where the King of France was. We
found him abandoned to that agitation which ariſes
from the moſt violent reſentment, and filled with
confuſion for the affront he had fo lately ſuffered.
Notwithſtanding all this, he was fo incapable of

profiting by this reverſe of fortune *, that even at
that very time he made the Duke of Epernon Ad-

miral, and ſoon after gave him the government of
. Normandy, vacant by the death of the marechal
Joyeuſe. The Count of Soiſſons was received fo
ungraciouſly, that it was impoſſible but he muſt.
have felt the folly of his great projects. The King
addreſſing himſelf to me, aſked me if I had quitted
the King of Navarre? I evaded this imbarraſſing

queſtion, by telling him, that in coming to offer

my ſervice to his Majeſty, I did not reckon myſelf
ſeparated from the King of Navarre ; becauſe I was

aſſured, that that prince, whoſe intereſts were the
ſame with his, would in a little time do the like.
I found this anſwer did not difpleaſe the King; but
being ſurrounded, and carefully obſerved by per-

ſons on whoſe countenances it was eaſy to read the
uneaſineſs which my diſcourſe gave them, he con-

cealed his ſentiments. The weakneſs of this prince

had ſomething 3 in it incomprehenſible ; bis real e-

* It is "believed that if Henry III. had added iin more benigne
and ſteadineſs, he would have been ſtill able to retrieve his affairs,
It is certain, that the Pariſians, in conſternation at his leaving Paris,

ſent deputies to him at Chartres, to ſupplicate him with every Kind

of ſubmiſſion to return to that city. To render this deputation more

affecting, they made the Capuchins walk in proceſſion, and enter the
cathedral with the inſtruments of the paſſion, crying, Miſer icordia.
The King received them with the air of majeſty and authority ſuit-
able to the occaſion. He careſſed the deputies from the parliament,

which had not becn any wiſe concerned in the affair of the barricades ;

the others he threatened with a reſolution never again to enter Paris,

and to deprive it of its charters and ſovereign courts; at which they
were ſo greatly alarmed, that the Duke of Guile needed all his ad-
dreſs and all his credit to pecify them, |

nemies

a — = a V. * s — 5
1 ͤ - HET

= == — n
N a . «
” = — 1 A * — "a 1 —_ 7 <4 -
= 4 — v6 c. — - — — -
— — * 5D. * * 8
— 2 = my 52 ”

bY
4%
1

* . — -
— am; 4= + * * *
1 n
. ren.
<= err

OTE WO IE EY
FE

Ri

—e— —
.
reer

8 A x2 4 2
* 2% a a
* n

—

==

— . ie. ab een

CAA Sort oo > Ae. vw

1

ES
\st

156 M E M OI R 8 Bock III.

nemies could not be hid from him, after the auda-
cious manner in which they had ſo lately taken off
the maſk ; but ſtill feigning ignorance, he again de-
| livered himſelf up to the Queen- mother *, and
through her to his perſecutors, to whom ſhe re-

conciled him. Perhaps, however, this laſt ſtep

5 was in this prince but a ſtroke of the moſt pro-
found diſſimulation; for the hardy action + he

committed

In the circular letter that Henry III. ſent into the provinces, after

the action of the barricades, and which began thus, Dear and wll

„beloved, you have, as we ſuppoſe, heard the reaſons that induced

sus to leave our city of Paris the 13th of this month,” &c. this
prince ſpeaks more like a ſupplicant than a king; he defends him ff
for having introduced a foreign garriſon into Paris, and doubted the
_ fidelity of the Pariſians. He gives a falſe and bad colour to his eva-

ſion, and declares that he is ready to begin the war zgainſt the Hus

guenots, at the head of the league, Ms of the royal library,

3 | | | | 255
be author means the conferences which the Queen- mother
held, by this prince's command, with the Cardinal of Bourbon and

the Duke of Guile; to which were alſo admitted, as J find in
vol. 3906. of the MSS in the King's library, the Lords de Lanſac,
_ Lenoncourt, Des- Chateillers, and Miron, brit phyſician to his Mi-
jeſty, who had been employed in carrying meſſages between the two
parties on the day of the barricades. Theſe conferences were held
at Chalons, at Sarry, a houle belonging to the Biſhop of Chalons, at
Nemours, &c. The league made moſt extravagant demands there,
ſuch as the entire abolition of the pretended Reformed religion, the

diſmiſſion of all the Calviniſt officers, even if they abjured; the pu—

blication of the council of Trent, the inquiſition, c.; and at laſt
obtained all they demanded by the edict of July 21. which was giver.

in conſequence of thoſe confetences. Mem. of the league, vl. 1,
Mem, of Nevers, vol. 1. Matthieu, vol. 1. book 8. Chron, Nover.

Vol. 1. and others,

1 lj The death of the two brothers, the Duke and the Cardinal of
 Guife, whom this prince cauſed to be murdered in his own apatt-
ments, by his guards, Dec. 23. at Blois, where he held the ſtates.

See this execution in the ſame hiſtoriens, with a detail of the pto*
ceedings and intrigues of both parties in the ſtates of Blois. The
Cardinal of Bourbon was kept priſoner : the other brothers of the

Duke of Guile fled.

The Duke of Guiſe periſhed as the Admiral de Coligny did:
preſumption hindered them both from ſeeing the danger with which

they were threatened. The Duke heeded none of the warnings

thet

1896. 0 n 157

to believe, that he did not loſe for a moment the

view of his vengeance. And if one might form a

judgment of this aſſembly, in all appearance, every

individual there had cach a latent object that he

that were given him. It is ſaid, that the Marchioneſs de Noir-

moutier, the ſame lady who made ſo much noiſe under the name of
Madam de Sauves, came on purpoſe to paſs the night with him;
and neither by arguments nor intreaties could hinder him from go-
ing the next day to the ͤV unheninn fo
Some perſons took upon them to juſtify Henry III. for this action;
among others the Cardinal de Joyeuſe, in a long memorial upon
this ſubject, which he ſent from Rome, where he then was. Ville-

r:y's memoirs of ſtate, vol. 2. p. 175. But the moſt judicious of our

hiſtorians, and even thoſe who have carried the privilege oi the roy-
al authority furtheſt, all deteſt it. The ſhocking circumſtances

of the murder of the Guiſes,“ ſays Perefixe, “ appeared horrible, e -

ven in the eyes of the Huguenots, who ſaid, that it too much re-

ſembled the maſſacre of St Barthlomew.” On the other fide, it
cannot be denied that Henry III. had no other way of preſerving

the crown in his houſe, and perhaps on his own head; for ther» is

not the leaſt probability in what Villeroy aſſerts in his Memoirs,
vol. 1. p. 25. that the King, without taking that ,courſe, might

have made himſelf maſter of the deliberations of the ſtates of Blois,
and have obliged them to comply with his will.

In this alternative one cannot help lamenting the conſequences of

bad conduct in a prince, which reduces him to ſuch a ſad neceſſity.
He was himſelf a fatal example of this truth, that he who {ſtrikes
with a knife, ſhall periſh by a knife. 2

The Duke of Guiſe was the idol of the Catholics, eſpecially of
the people, who called him always, Our great man. He had a ſcar
on the left check, below his eye ; which only ſerved to make him

more reſpected, becauie he received it fighting againſt the Hugue-
nots, at the battle of Chateau-Thierry, by a piſtol-ſhot from a Ger-

man trooper. He was, on the contrary, fo hated by his own fa-

mily, whom he treated with an inſupportable inſolence and ſeverity,

that we are affined his relations, and even his own brothers. through
tear of falling under the power of a tyrant, were he perſons that
ſent Henry III. the molt certain intelligence of his actions and de-
1190S; an intelligence which was ſulpected by this prince, as that gi-
ven to the Duke by many of the courtiers concerning the King's

violent reſolution againſt him, was by him; for they both imagined
from thence, that the deſign was to prevail upon them to.quit the
party, and break with the ſtates of Blois, in which each of them

would have found his account. Henry III. at firſt delipned only to

arreſt the Duke of Guiſe ; but he found it would be dangerous, and

committed againſt the ſtates of Blois, leaves room

}
:
-
;
.
*
,
y
%
. v
4 2
|
=
}
g
433
« 15
1
5
*

Ne

EN Bras foxes 7.

* — * * m— . ds
.
0 — 4 * — —
PPP

5 — — ä — — —— —v2—6
_ „ 1 OY

« £2.04 N OE
— C

—

4 %
4
4

—_ —

. . ee ee EE OE CD Tea

2

153 M E M OI R Ss Bock III.

purſued by ways, which ſucceſs diſcovered in ſome,

and diſappointment concealed in others.

The death of Catherine de Medicis, which hap-
| pened ſoon after * the aſſaſſination of the Duke

of

ill more to make him priſoner; therefore he determined to have
him poignarded. Both the bodies were conſumed in a fire, the bones
- burnt in a low hall of the caſtle, and the aſhes thrown into the air.

The King of Navarre, who had no hand in this aſſaſſination, was

| 7 the perſon that gained moſt by it. In all appearance, while the

Duke of Guile lived, he would never have obtained the crown. We
are aſſured alſo, that there were then great deſigns formed between

France and Spain, not only to extirpate the Proteſtant party, but

even to dethrone Eliſabeth ; which the event of the barricades, fol-
Jowed by the death of the Duke of Guiſe, was only able to hinder
the execution of. The King of Navarre lamented the fate of ibe
Duke of Guiſe, without blaming Henry III. “I always,” ſaid be,

« foreſaw, and ſaid, that Mefl. de Guiſe would never undertake the
% enterpriſe they had conceived, and bring it to an iſſue, without
d endangering their lives.” Cayet, vol. 1. p. 114. Several other

perſons were of the ſame opinion. Curſed be Lorrain,” ſaid Hu-
bert de Vins, in the Memoirs of Caſtelnau, * for his ſtupidity in

« ſuppoſing, that a King, whoſe crown he was attempting, would

„ not likewiſe diſſemble with him, to take away his life.” “ Since

4 they are fo near each other,” ſaid Madam de Tourbin, the ſiſter

of de Vins, “we ſhall hear the very firſt day, either the one or the

« other has ſlain his companion.” . | |
I The tragical events of the year 1588 have appeared to ſome to
verify the prediction of Regiomontanus, and other aſtrologers, that
this year would be the climacteric of the world. I find in it only a

new confirmation of the folly of this ridiculous ſcience.

5 * In the opinion of thoſe who have beſtowed ſo many praiſes
vuvpon this princeſs, it ſeemed ſufficient to merit the title of a politi-
cCian, that ſhe knew how to ingroſs the management of all affairs,

and to keep herſelf in poſſeſſion of authority: but when one re-
Bets, that theſe ſuppoſed abilities, which conſiſted, however, in ma-

king uſe of unworthy means and contemptible artifices, brought
things at laſt to ſuch an extremity, that neither ſhe, nor any other,

knew any longer what remedies to apply to them; it may be juſtly
_ aſſerted, that the quality of a politician did not compenſate for the

numberleſs faults ſhe committed. It is believed, that the fatal con-

ſequences which ſhe apprehended would attend the murder of the
Guiſes, in which ſhe had no part, the Cardinal of Bourbon's re-

288 the horror of the preſent time, and perhaps the ſtings of

her conſcience, haſtened her death, which happened Jan. 5. 1589.
She was forgot ſoon afterwards. De Thou, book 94. Her laſt ad-

vice to her ſon was, to put an end to the perſecution againſt the

| Proteſtants,

Si . . d F le: r 5 p N Eee > —

5 5 3 ö : . ee end ee BEERS tt 54 >. W 1 n x ; ? p
5 . E 4 4 <7. 0 2 a : . ok ORs „ 7 „ er N 1 * "=" * 2 6 - 3 N
1 Q 4 Z e 11 75 SILK YA nl 2 . 7 7 ˙ ä I IE. — 4 „ TS * * en Sti 7 * F \ 5 * 7 .
8 rc e r Ry nag 0 1 AIC * $ $5 3 EN - 8 f 3 r 7 . 8 . 8 ad * RR r 3
2 —— / ðͤ V 8 * . = r k, ea BS age fe'S 1 e . L EEE 3 a hes FIR r
e 8 * F * : 4 1 R - — 70 © * 2 1 * . KA -

CAA ©

E

1589, OF 8 L L I. 159

of Guiſe, did not afford Henry III. more liberty
to follow the inclination which led him to unite
himſelf with the King of Navarre. The league
was not extinct with the Duke of Guiſe. He had
the people to calm, the grandees to regain, the
Pope to appeaſe, Spain to keep in, and all the Ca-
tholics to manage, who, after this execution, were
thoroughly diſpoſed to take umbrage at his religion.

Henry, conſiſtently with the character of all

weak men, moreover magnified to himſelf all theſe
difficulties: he hoped to rectify all by mildneſs: he
explained his right and his reafons, and endea-

voured to juſtify himſelf by dint of declarations.
He ought to have employed arms alone againſt a

party, which had no longer any reſpect for the
royal authority; and, inſtead of increaſing the au-
daciouſneſs of the populace (who in power are no

leſs infolent, than abject in obedience) by a mode-
ration which can only be imputed to weakneſs, he
ought to have declared himſelf boldly the aggreſſor,
and ſought for vengeance like a King. Had he

ated in this manner, conjunétly with the King of

Navarre, he might, in all probability, have pre-

vented the loſs of Orleans, and an infinite number

of other * places; nor had he been at laſt reduced

to the cities of Blois, Beaugency, Amboile, Tours,

and Samur.

I was cither a witneſs to all theſe events, or L

Proteſtants, and to eſtabliſh an entire liberty of religion in France.

Chron. Noven. vol. 1. p. 132. Brantome's prejudices againſt this

queen render all he has ſaid to her diſadvantage very doubtful, vol.
7. of his Memoirs, p. 31. et ſegg. Varillas is not more to be belie-

ved, when he ſays, that her death was occaſioned by her grief for

the murder of the Duke, of whom ſhe was very fond. Siri praiſes her

lixe a foreigner, who was not well acquainted with the affairs of

our court at that time; for he came to France long after the death

of that queen. Memoirs of Recon di Vittorio Siri, vol. 1. % 26.

2 fis a puff of wind, ſaid Henry III. ſpeaking of thoſe cities,

which has thrown down a pack of cards.

= wo ES: i

n 8 CITE IN — * * . 8 K
— 21 2594. - ET =

TORR Barnes uae eng,

— — -.
*y — .
r ah Sn 8 2

n

2 2 8 2 ar

n

- Mr
n

n

8 9

— — 2 1 * 8 4

166 MEMOIRS Book 111.

was well Informed of them at Roſuy, whither 1

had retired, as to a place from whence I could ea-

ſily remark all that paſſed at court. I left it, as
ſoon as I thought it was time to give the King of

Navarre an account of theſe tranſactions. He had
not been a little perplexed himſelf, during this in-
terval, in unravelling and diſconcer ting the ſchemes

of the Viſcount Turenne ; who putting himſelf in
the Prince of Conde's place, continued all his pro-

jects for himfelf, and acted in the fame manner by :

the King of Navarre as the Duke of Guiſe did by

| Henry III. In an aſſembly of the Proteftants, held
at Rochelle, he boldly declared, that France, in
the preſent conjuncture, could not poſlibly avoid

| ſeeing her monarchy diſmembered ; and he gave

them likewiſe to underſtand, that, in this diviſion,
be would not forget himſelf. The King of Navarre
_ complained of this conduct in the fame aſſemblies;

and, to engage the Proteſtants the more firmly to
his perſon, he joined actions to words, ſeized vpon

_ Garnache, and took Niort by ſtorm, after a bloody

battle. It was at his return from this expedition,

that he fell dangerouſly ill at La-Mothe-Frelon *.

I took my way through Blois, in order to form

my laſt conjectures upon the ſituation in which 1
 thould find the court. Although I took all pre-
cautions to avoid being known by any perſon, the

Marquis of Rambouiller, ſeeing me paſs through the
ſtreet, knew me, though wrapped up in my cloak,
and ordered me to be followed, to know where I

put vp. T he 8 was an vpright man, who

* He left St e in Lane Patton, in the month of Janu-
ary, to go and aſſiſt Garnache, which was beſieged by the Duke of

Nevers. Du-Pleſſis-Mornay led his troops, and he himſelf marched

on foot, as if he was ſhooting. He overheated himſelf, and was fei-
red with a pain in his fide, attended with a fever, which obliged him

to ſtop at the firſt houſe he came to, which belonged to a gentleman |

called La-Mothe Frelon. Du Pleſſis perſuaded him to be let blood,
which cured bim. Tife of De 5 EW; b. 1. Pp. 125.

had

. e eee eee e d ans.

*

had always the good of the flate in view, without
any conſiderations of ſelf-intereſt : he believed it his

duty to avail himſelf of this encounter, to nake
his laſt effort upon the King's mind, and engage him

finally to throw himſelf into the arms of the King
of Navarre. He found him in ſuch a diſpoſition as
ne wiſhed, and the King conſented the more wil-
lingly to employ me upon this occaſion, as he re-
membered I had already been deputed to him on
that buſineſs. Rambouillet coming to- me by his

order, we concerted together what was neceſſary to
be done on this occurrence ; after which he pre-

ſented me to his Majeſty, who confirmed to me him

{elf his intentions. The many ineffectual engages
ments into which he had entered with the King of

Navarre, made me think it neceſlary to aſk him for

a letter of credence to that prince; but he refuſed

it, out of an appieheniion that it might fall into
the hands of Nuncio Moroſini, or the Duke of Ne-
vers ®, to whom, he ſaid, notwithſtanding his good»
will towards me, he ſhould be obliged to deliver
me, if I came to be diſcovered in Blois, I muſt
therefore paſs from the letter. I afterwards de-
manded, for the ſecurity of the King of Navarre,

that when he ſhould advance into the midſt of a

country full of his enemies, a town might be given

him, that would afford him a free paſſage over the

Loire. This, for the ſame reaſon, was refuſed.

Fs John Francis Moroſini, Biſhop of Breſce. Lewis de Gonzague,,

Duke of Nevers. Sixtus V. had juſt then publiſhed a bull of excom--
munication againſt Henry, which this prince uſed his utmoſt endea-
. your to get recalled, This Pope, who was ſaid to be equally fit to-

govern a great kingdom as to be the head of the church, ſecretly ap-

proved of that juſtice which the King of France had executed upon

the Duke of Guiſe; but he could not pardon him for involving a car-

dinal in it. Sce in Villeroy's memoirs of ſtate, vol. 2 p. 175, the
Cardinal de Joyeuſe's letters already cited. Sixtus V. foretold, that

the league would reduce Henry to the neceſſity of applying to the:
King of Navarre and the Huguenots for aſſiſtance. EO

. 3. 1

162 M. E M 0 1 R 8s Book III.
1 did not 1 theſe 1 8 to any bad inten-

tion of his Majeſty, but only to the fear he was in

of thoſe two men, upon whom he had voluntarily

rendered himſelf dependent. I did not, however,

believe, that the King of Navarre, without this laſt

article eſpecially, ought to advance with his troops -

as far as Blois. But this difficulty was in ſome mea-

ſure removed by Brigneux, the governor of Beau-

gency, whom 1 viſited before I went away. This
officer prevented me : after telling me, that he ſaw,
with grief, this place, like the reſt, would be infal-

 libly loft by the meaſures the King purſued, he of-
fered to 1c. u the care of it to me, or to Rebours,

or to any other officer the King of Navarre would

ſend thither; chuſing rather to loſe the place, and
follow this prince as a ſimple voluntier, than to con-

tinue in Beaugency, where they did not hearken to :

his counſels.
After this aſſurance, I returned ſpeedily to the

King of Navarre. This prince liſtened to me atten-
tively ; but not being able to diveſt himſelf of the
ciflidence that the paſt had infpired him with, he
often aiked me, with an unquiet tone, and ſcratch- |
ing his head, if the King atted at this time ſincerely ?
I aſſured bim of it; and added the engagement of

Rambouillet. Well then,” replied the King, «]
„ will not take his towns, while he continues to

44 treat honeſtly with me ; ” for he had taken Cha»

telleraud that very day. “ Return then,” added

be, © and carry him my letters; for 1 neither fear
'& Morofini nor Nevers.“ He made me go with
him that moment to breakfalt | in his cloſet; and I

rock poſt again for Blois.

The King of France, who did not doubt but the
King of Navarre's anſwer would be ſuch as he de-

ſired, had, through impatience, advanced as far as

Montriehard, with all his retinve. I found all the

lodgings i in this Andie Place either taken up or be-
[poke ; 5

Mn 5 _ 4 1
* : .. ͤ OR EO
* by o 8 I "** | < S x * 7 *

— na Ft

ST * * FAY an n * n 8
ee ee "DS * +4 3s 3 "= n — LG ay a 2 4 J
$ e A S F wat
P — *

*

— HI”

2

— —
44>
7 1
1
8
1
X
1

wis F 8 U . 1 1. 163

ſpoke; ſo that, as I arrived very late, 1 began to
think L ſhould be obliged to paſs the night in the

ſtrect. Happily Maignan found out the Marquis of
Rambouillet's lodgings, and he provided me with

| thoſe that had been deſigned for one of my bro-

thers, then at Tours. At midnight I went to the
King, who waited for me in a garret of the caſtle,

He approved of, and figned every thing, even to the
paſſage over the Loire; and would have had me to

ſet out again that very night. The rumour of a

treaty between the two King's had already reached
Chatelleraud, when I arrived there; and was ſo paſ-
ſionately deſired by the people, that 1 reccived 5
thouſand bleſſings as ſoon as I appeared.

The King of Navarre was no longer there, This

- prince, who never almoſt reckoned but upon his
_ ſword, being informed that the league had entered

Argenton through intelligence, marched haſtily thi-
ther, and arrived fo ſeaſonably, that he diſlodged
the troops of the league, before they had received
the ſupplies that were neceſſary to maintain them

there. He left Beavpre governor in this place, after
I had viſited the caſtle, and put into a proper con-
dition the fortifications of the place.

The fatigue of ſo many journeys made fo pre-
cipitately threw me, at my return, into a continued

fever, which confined me to my bed twelve days
completely. Du-Pleſſis found means to avail him-

ſelf of this accident, to deprive me of the honour

:-0f 8 treaty which he had only the trouble of dreſ-
ſing, and in which the Marquis of Rambouillet *

had a much greater ſhare than himſelf, This treaty
was ſigned at Pleſlis les-Tours, to the great ſatisfac-

tion of the two Kings, Saumur was the place of

It is juſt to inform the reader, that the facts are related very
di iffcrently in the life of Du-Pleſſis-Mornay, book 1. p. 131.; but to

which of the writers moſt credit ought to be given, is not caly to
determi ine, 1 |

ſecuity

8 through the ns of two FRET as ke on each ſide.“

164 N E R Book III.
ſecurity that was agreed upon, and Du-Pleſlis did

not fail to procure the government of it, as the na-
tural recompenſe for him to whom they had the

obligation of the treaty.

This procedure appeared to me ſo irregular, that
I could not help complaining loudly of Du - Pleſſis,

and even of the King of Navarre himſelf, who had

favoured another with the fruit of my labour. The
Count of Soiſſons, who never accommodated him-
ſelf to the general intereſt, or took part in the pu-
blic joy, laid hold upon this occaſion, to endeavour
to draw me into his new deligns ; and my two bro-
thers, on the other ſide, preſſed me earneſtly to at-
tach myſelf wholly to the party of the King. I re-
| Jetted this propoſition ; nor was my fidelity to my
prince to be ſhaken by all the efforts which were
made to ſeduce me. When I reflected alſo, that
the government of Saumur would have obliged me
to a continual reſidence there, and by conſequence |

muſt have removed me from the King of Navarre
for ever; 1 found, that what had appeared an act

of injuſtice, was rather a favour, which merited my
acknowledgment.
Nothing now remained for the two Kiogs to do,
| but to have a conference together, in order to con-
cert their enterpriſes. For this purpoſe, the King
of Navarre ſet out from Pleſſis- les-Tours. Agita-
ted by ſome remains of diſtruſt ®, which he could
not eaſily diveſt himſelf of, I remember he halted
near a mill, about two leagues from the caſtle, and
. know the opinion of -y oy the *

e His old Huguenot officers, they fay, were afraid, that at a time
| when treachery was ſo neceſſary to Henry III. to extricate him out
of the labyrinth into which the action he had committed at Blois had
| brought him (for he had been excommunicated by Sixtus V.) he
- would not ſcruple to purchaſe his abſolution at the price of the King

of Navarre's life. Perefixe, ib. This prince had often himſclt ſaid,
as De Thou relates, “ That he never went to the King's cloſet but

, that

4
*
1
*
4
Ky
>
2
1
1 1
2
$48
8
2
$58
3
* q
Ty
8
185
CL
HR
IF
6 *
25
i
2
*
*
*

* . 7 1 2 gets? 22 *
1 n 5 : : ;
eee X ; . 7 ; _ * : K
: a 4 : Ty dn FT ae bong

7
*
7
7
:
*
+
5
= ?
.
2
2
5
**
.
22
7
22
7
>
—
*
&
*
3
"=
*
\ os
WW
Y
537
*
2
8 *
x

*

1
"=> . 4
3s

*

4

WW F
*
4

5

;

40

i OP $UVYLY. 06

that compoſed his train, upon the ſtep he was ta-
king. I was of this troop, and the remembrance
of what I called injuſtice kept me ſilent. The King

of Navarre turning to me, © You ſpeak not a word,”

ſaid he, © of what you think?“ I anſwered, in

few words, That although the ſtep he was taking |
was not without danger, becauſe the troops of the
King of France were ſuperior to his, I believed this
to be one of thoſe occaſions, where ſomething
_ ovght to be left to hazard; and one ought to be

contented with taking all "the precautions which
prudence could ſuggeſt. This prince reflected a few
moments, then turning towards us, “Let us go,

let us go,” ſaid he, “ the reſolution is Ow

«© we mult not think of it further .
The King had advanced into the country to meet

the King of Navarre ; and the joy of an union fo
deſired had drawn together a concourſe of people

fo prodigious, that the two Kings continued near a
quarter of an hour, at fifty paces the one from the

other, without being able to approach nearer. 'They
embraced, with equal ſatisfaction +, and took the
road together to Tours, where the King of Na-

voarre lay only one night, and then returned to his
quarters at Maille. As for me, I ſtaid at Tours,

being detained by a great number of my friends

and relations, whom J found there, and took a
lodging in the ſuburb St Symphorien.

The Duke of Matenne, armed to revenge the
death of the Duke of Guiſe, and to ſupport the in-

tereſt of the i had no det: gn to K us there

* He wrote to Du- Pleſſis- -Mornay in theſe terms.“ Monſieur

6 Pu: Pleſſis, the ice is broken, not without many warnings, that f

' I went, I ſhould be a dead man. I palied the water, recommend-

ing myſelf to God, Cc.

At the bridge of La Motte, a quarter of a league from Ted |
“ Courage, my Lord,” ſaid Henry IV. to Henry III. “ two Henrys
are worth more than one Carolus.“ Matthieu, Vl. 1. . 152. The

Dake of Maicnne's name was (herles,
tranquil,

— 0-07 mr
. ———
2 1
— - <5

o/ p
—— 7
722
— =

li
:
y

||

166 * E M O A R 8 Booklll. |

tranquil, He marched with his whole army towards
this city. The King, who had walked as far as
Marmoũtier, unarmed, and followed only by twen-
ty horſe, wanted very little of being taken, and was
obliged to return precipitately to Tours. The ſub-
urbs having no other intrenchments than ſome flight
barricades, erected in haſte, by fix or feven regi-
ments of royaliſts, who defended them, I quitted
the ſuburb of St Symphorien, and ordered all my
equipage to be tranſported to the city, My pre-
caution was by the officers taxed with timidity z _
but it was not long ere it was juſtified, _
The Duke of Malenne attacked the ſuburb. He
was ſtopped ſome moments by means of five or {ix
| houſes, on the top of the hill, where our people
had poſted themſelves ; but they were very quickly
obliged to abandon them, in order to intrench them-
ſelves behind the barricades, where expecting foon
to be aſſaulted, they made uſe of this interval to
ſnatch a morſel in haſte. |
I found the King at the gate of the city, who
made me enter it, by telling me, that it would be
idle, in his opinion, to defend the ſuburbs, In
effect, the barricades could not reſiſt the enemy's
canon ; they were forced at the very firſt; and as
they had no ditch to ſupport them, their retreat in-
to the city was ſo confuſed, and ſo much expoſed
ro the enemy, that I am ſurpriſed all the ſoldiers in
the ſuburbs were not either taken or ſlain, and even
that the enemy did not enter the city along with
them. Two pieces of cannon would have been
ſufficient for this purpoſe, I beheld the rout of our
people from the convent of Jacobins, which looked
Over the walls of the city; and fearing leſt the miſ-
fortune ſhould become {till greater, I ran with my
two brothers to the gare, by which they were all
entering tumultvouſly. By the favour of ſome flight
intrenchments, which we ordered to be made, we
leſſened

JJ... Lv. 167

leſſened the danger, and with a little time and or-
der, they all entered; after which we cloſed up the
gate, and ſet a ſtrong "guard over it.

It being no longer doubted, but that the city

would be beſieged in form, I joined Chatillon and

ſome others, and we went to intreat the King to

confide ſorne i important poſt to our defence; he gave
us the Iſles * and we laboured there without intere
ruption from that moment till the next morning,

when the King came in perſon to viſit our work;

and addreſſing himſelf to me, greatly praiſed our di-

ligence. It was uſeleſs. At the firſt news of what
bad happened, the King of Navarre haſtened with
his troops to Tours, and appeared in three hours

before the city. The Duke of Matenne did not

wait for him, but retreated, after plundering the

ſuburbs, and the neighbouring places. A ſervice of

this importance gave great expectations of the al-
lance of the two Kings, and made the inhabitants
of Tours look upon the King of Navarre F as their

de cliverer.

The two Kings paſſed eight or ten days e
after which they ſeparated for the expedition that
had been projected on the city of Poitiers. While
they carried on the works there, the King of Na-
varre ordered me, with 300 horſe, and a like num-
ber of arquebuſiers, to whom he alſo gave horſes,
to defend Chartres, it having been diſcovered, that

Maintenon was privily endeavouring to poſſeſs him-

ſelf of this city, in the name of the league. I pro-
vided myſelf with rope-ladders, petards, and other

inſtruments, and came directly to Bonne val, with

® Read the lle. Thi is quarter, which is bite only by wa-

termen, and the meaneſt people, is of great e to the de-

fence of Tours.
1 Henry IV. highly extolled the behaviour of Hae] III. who

= 8 great courage upon this occaſion. Me m. f Neversy vol, 2.

p. 539, |
OUuLt

——„»„»„— . — —„—4ũ . Kͤ— —zl — . — — a
”

n

— . — a eZ —⁰ůQ̃ ˙ w Ä

t-
ö
f

166 N E M OI R S Book III.

out eating any thing that Whole day. Some pri-
ſoners whom we took from a detachment of twenty.

five troopers, informed us, that there was a party

of 400 horſe in the field, having Broſſe Saveuſe at

their head; and that Reclainville, who conducted

the twenty-five troopers, had taken us for the troop
of 120 horſe with which Lorges had juſt ſurpriſed

Chateaudun. We judged from this account, that
the party of 400 horſe wanted to come up with us;

and we, on our fide, having the ſame deſire, left

our arquebuſiers to purſue the road to Chartres lei-
ſurely, and taking ours through the little hills, in
order to reach the enemy's ſquadron, we met them
on the top of a ſmall hill, which each party had

climbed up on his own lide ; : ſo that we neither

ſaw them, nor they us, till we were within two hun-

dred paces of each other.

We came to blows without deliberation and
with ſo much fury, that, by the firſt ſhock, forty
of our men were thrown to the ground, I was of
this number, together with Mefl. de Cbaàtillon de

Mouy, de Montbazon, d'Avantigny „and de Pret-
ſaigny. Happily I had received no wound; my
borſe, who was only ſplit in the jaw by the puſh of
a lance, got up again, and I found myſelf (till on
his back, Perhaps there never was an action, of

this kind of combat, more hot, more obſtinate, or

more bloody. Four or five times we returned to
the charge, the enemy rallying again the moment
they were put into diſorder. I had two ſwords _
broke, and I had recourſe to a pair of large piſtols
loaded with balls of ſteel, againſt which no arms
were proof. Our enemies finding they had loſt
200 of their men, left us at laſt the field of battle.

We were ſcarce in a condition to reliſh the fruits

of our victory, becauſe of our wounds and our wi
rineſs, which rendered us almoſt motionleſs. A_
 kfle repoſe Was all we wiſhes for, when a 35 0
% rain

. a.

1589. DF S LL I. 169

rain fell, which, mixing with our ſweat, wet us all

over in an inſtant; for we were obliged to cover
our arms with our cloaths : and to complete our

| misfortune, we learned that the Duke of Matenne was
at our heels. In this melancholy ſituation, a coun-

cil being held, it was reſolved, notwithſtanding the
condition in which we were, that we ſhould march
all night, and endeavour to get back to Beaugency.
We arrived there, almoſt ſpent with fatigue and

thirſt, My ſtrength failing me, all I could do was
to ſink down upon a bed; nor was it poſſible to a-

wake me to take any nouriſhment.
The report of this battle being ſpread, the King
of Navarre came to Beaugency to vilit us, and

praiſed infinitely our action. Saveule being among

the priſoners, was brought before hin; and the
King, who, from the ſame principle of gener: "ity,
was led to careſs the brave, and to bewail the un-

fortunate, endeavoured to conſole him, by praiſes

on bis conduct, and every kind of good treatment.

But Saveuſe knowi ing that a great number of his re-

lations, and almoſt all his friends, had periſhed in
the fight, his grief for their loſs, joined to the ſhame
of having been vanquiſhed, and the conliderable

wounds he had received, threw him into fuch de-

ſpair, that he became furious, and died in the height
of a raging fever, without ſuffering his wounds to
be drefſed. The King of Navarre "made us fer out
for Chateaudun, where eight days PI made us

forget the paſt.

I was ready to depart, when a courier dibuphit

me notice that my wife was dangerouſly ill. I flew
to Roſny, with Dortoman, firſt phy ſician to the

King of Navar ure, whom this prince ordered to ac-
company me. All this canton was in the intereſts

of the league; and one of my brothers S, who had

taken poſſeſſion of my houſe, the fame wherein my

wife Jay ill, bad the cruelty to draw up the bridge,
VOL. J. P and

f that che two o Kings kept Paris bell ebe *; and tear-

not greatly contented with cach other. Henry III. could not con.

9" x E M o IR S Book III.

and refuſe me entrance. Pierced to my inmoſt

| foul, with a treatment ſo unnatural, I ſwore I
would enter, or periſh. I began actually to force
my own houſe, and the ladder was already applied
do the wall, when my brother, who did not per-
haps expect ſo much intrepidity, ordered the gate
to be opened.
The only conſolation I had was to find my wife
Nil alive, and to receive her laſt embraces. All re.
 medies were ineffectual, and ſhe died four days af-
ter my arrival. I acknowledge, that the loſs of a

wife lo dear, and whoſe life had been expoſed to

ſuch cruel viciſſitudes, ſhut my heart, during a
whole month, to every other ſentiments I heard
with inſenſibility the progreſs of the arms of the
two Kings, which at any other time would have in-
flamed me with an ardent deſire of having ſome part
in it: for it was about this time that Gergeau, Plu-
viers, Eſtampes, Chartres, Poiſſy, Pontoile, the iſle
Adam, Beaumont, and Creil, were beſieged. E-
very little inconſiderable town boaſted of having
ſtopped her King, who found nothing but re—

volt and diſobedience over all. He was now ſen—

ſible of the great advantage he drew from the
King of Navarre's aſſiſtance. As for this prince,
he was as prodigal of life as if he had been weary

of it. Where-ever there was moſt danger, there

was he certainly to be ſeen at the head of his ſol-
diers. In one of thoſe frequent encounters which
he had to maintain, at the very moment when, to
reſt himſelf, he was leaning upon Charbonniere,
this colonel] Was, by a muſket thot, laid dead at his

5 feet.

I awaked as | Goa; a profound lleep, when J heard

ing

=— ifs we may believe Matthieu, vol. 2. P- 3+ theſe two Kings were

ceal

*
.
8
%

„55 ELS On

J. | 5 p | 8 8 -
ing myſelf from a place where every object I ſaw
lt renewed my affliction, I haſtened to join the army.
I tit was here that I ſoothed that grief which ſtill |
ce * filled my heart, by expoling myſelf heedleſsly in
d all the ſkirmiſhes we had with the enemy, then more
frequent than ever, particularly in the field which
te was called the Scholars meadew. The King of Na-
2 varre perceived it, and obſerving that Maignan, my
fe  equerry, whom he often ordered to go to me, and
re- force me away, durſt not do it, he deſired him
al- - ſimply to tell me, that he wanted to ipeak to me.
a .- | | Scarce had he uttered one word, when he was
o interrupted by a gentleman, who whiſpered ſome-
a | thing in his ear, and left him immediately. The
ard King of Navarre, ſtruck with what he had heard,
the called me again inſtantly, and told me an aſſaſſin
in- had dangerouſly wounded the King with a knife “*.
iſle | ceal his jealouſy of Henry IV. who, far from expecting to reign,
E- } reſolved to retire as ſoon as he had re-eſtabliſhed the King upon his
in tibrone. 5 He nd 1 Co op
ing hy James Clement, a Jacobin monk, born in Sorbonne, a vil-
re:. lage in Burgundy, He was introduced by La Gueſle, the ſolicitor-
ſen- general, into the King's chamber, as having a letter of great conſe-
the quence to dchver to him. This prince, who had a great kindneſs for
| © monks, roſe fiom the cloſe-ſtoo] upon which he was fitting, having
nce, aqaalready read part of the letter, when the aſſaſſin ſtruck him in the
eary delly with a knife, which he left ſticking in the wound. The King
nere drew it out, and wounded the Jacobin with it in the forehead, who
| nas immediately killed by the gentlemen of his chamber, His
ſol- bdody was burnt, and the aſhes thrown into the Seine. The hiſto-
hich rians have not forgot to obſerve, as a circumſtance at that time not
„ to donbted of, that Henry III. was murdered in the ſame houſe, and
? llif we believe them) in the ſame chamber, place, and month, where,
lere, ſcventeen years before, that prince had aſſiſted at the council, in
t his Which the maſſacre of st Bartholomew was reſolved upon. M. Bayle
A A ſcems to have given credit to this anecdote, which is now proved to
ed be falſe, the houſe at the maſſacre of St Bartholomew not being built.

Henry III. died in the night between the 2d and 3d of Auguſt, aged
33 years. James Clement (ſay the notes on the Henriade) being at
St Cloud, ſome perſons who ſuſpected him, went at night into his
chamber, to obſerve him. They found him in a profound ſleep, his
breviary bcfore him, open at the article of Judith. He faſted, con-
leſſed himſelf, and reccived the ſacrament before he ſet out to aſſaſ-

| 5 2 2 - "4-02. e

r —

IN rr

: all that were in 1

JFF Book III.

He had about him only five and twenty gentlemen,

with whom he took the road with all ſpeed to St

Cloud, where the King's quarters were, At his
entrance into this prince's apartment, he found be
had juſt received an injection, which came away
again without either pain or blood. He approached
his bed, with all the inquictude that the ſincereſt

friendſhip could inſpire. Ihe King comforted him

with aſſurances, that his wound would have no bad
conſequences, and that God would prolong his

life, that he might be in a condition to give bim

new proofs of his affection. The wounded mo-

narch : theſe words i in ſuch a mann er, as

{inate the King. Te was praifed for this Allen at Rome, in the
chair where Henry III. 's funeral oration ought to have been pro-
nounced, At Paris, his picture was placed on the altars with the cy»
chariſt. Cardinal de Retz relates, that, on the an niverſary- day of

the barricadoes, in the minority of Lewis XIV. he ſaw a gorget up-

on which this monk was ingrav ed, with theſe words underneath, St
James Clement. |

The King of Navarre (ſays Chron. Noven. vol. 1. p. 223 kneeled |
at his bedlide, ſighs and tears not permitting him to ſpeak a word,
He took his Majeſty's hands between his, and kiſſed them. The

King, perceiving that he was ſilent through the ſtrong emotions

with which he was agitated, embraced his head, kiſſed him, and gave
bim his benediction. Had not the knife been poiſoned, the wound
would not have been mortal; for it was not deep, and had not reach-
ed the inteſtines, p. 217. | Burgoin, prior of the Jacobins, was tore
to pieces by four horſes. They could extort nothing but theſe
words from him: © We have done what we could, but not what we

«4 would have done; which made it be believed, that Henry 1V.

was deſigned to have been aſſaſſinated at the fame time. The Sicur

Je Rougemont was arreſted, for having defired to ſtrike the blow
- himſelf, p. 229, He died like a good Chriſtian. He forgave h's

enemies, and even Clement himſelt, ſays Matthieu. Sce, in the hiſ-

torians, a fuller account of his death. His character may be col-
tected from what is ſaid of him in theſe Memoirs. He was called, at

his baptiſm, Edward- Alexander, by Edward VI. King of England,

and Antony King of Navarre: but Catherine made him afterwards 5

aſſume the name of his father.

It is ſaid, that ſeventeen or eighteen perſons having gathered up
the aſhes of Clement, which the wind had diſperſed, getting into a

boat with theſe aſhes, the boat was fiyallowed up by the Seine, and

removed

. ͤ el

ii e To

removed part of the King of Navarre's apprehen-

ſions, and ſeeing beſides no mortal ſymptom, he
left him to his repoſe, quitted his chamber, and

returned to his quarters at Meudon.
My lodgings were at the bottom of this caſtle,
in the houſe of a man named Sauvat After I had

ſeen the King of Navarre diſmounted, I went home

to ſup, and had juſt placed myſelf at table, when J
law Ferret his ſecretary enter, who ſaid to me, “ Sir,
„ the King of Navarre, and perhaps the King of
e France, " Cefires you in an inſtant.” Startled at

theſe words, I went with bim immediately to the
caſtle; and, by the road, he told me, that Dorto-
man had infor med the King of Navarre, by an ex-
prets, that if he would ſee the King alive, he had
not a moment to loſe.

i went ſtraight to the apartment of the prince, |
where, while our horfes were ſaddling, he did me

the honour to conſuit me upon the preſent conjunc-
ture. The different reflections with which my mind

was filled at this moment, kept me for lome time
filent. The King was in no leſs agitation, It was
no longer the happy iſſue of a little negotiation, nor
the ſucceſs of a battle, nor a ſmall Kingdom, ſuch
as Navarre, upon which he meditated ; it was the

fineſt monarchy in Europe. But to arrive at it, how |

many obſtacles were to be ſurmounted ? and by
what travel muſt he not purchaſe it? All that the

King of Navarre had ſuffered until this moment,

might, in compariſon, be accounted nothing. How

cruſh a party ſo powerful, and ſo creditable, that it

had made a prince eſtabliſhed on the throne to

_ tremble, and almoſt obliged him to deſcend from

it! This difficulty already fo great, appeared in-

ſurmountable, when one reflected, that the King's

death would deprive the King of Navarre of the

principal and the greateſt part of his forces. He
Loud not reckon either upon the princes of the

1 blood,

1
[
|
:
|

474 : -M EM Q-T-R $- Book 1Il.--
blood, or upon the grandees ; and in his preſent
condition, he had occaſion for every one's aſſiſtance,
yet he had no one in whom he could confide. I
trembled, when it came into my mind, that ſuch.
ſurpriſing and unexpected news might occaſion a re-

volution, which would expoſe the King of Navarre,

With only a handful of his faithful ſervants, to the
mercy of his old enemies, in a country where he
Was deſtitute of all reſources,

Notwithſtanding all this, all apreed that the King

of Navarre had but one only part to take, that of

availing himſelf of the occaſion, and of uſing it
with all thoſe precautions which ordinarily render
it happy or otherwiſe, Indeed, without attempting
to judge of the future, which depends upon too

many things, and {till leſs to ſubject it to our pre-
cipitation; in great and painful enterpriſes, we

ſhould endeavour to ſubdue obſtacles one after an-
other; nor ſuffer ourſelves to be rebuted by their

greatneſs, or by their number. We ought never

5

to deſpair of what has been poſſible to any one.
How many things to which we have attached the
idea of impoſlible, have become ealy to thoſe who
knew how to take advantage of time, occaſions,
lucky moments, the faults of others, different diſ-
poſitions, and an infinitude of other circumſtances ?

The anſwer 1 made the King was agreeable to

theſe maxims. He did not think differently him-
elf. We agreed therefore, that, inſtead of return -
ing to the diſtant provinces, this prince ſhould re-
main in the midſt of the royal army, to ſupport his
claim, and that we ſhould ſet out inftantly for St
Cloud, but well armed at all events, taking care,
however, to keep our extraordinary arms concealed,
that we might not ourſelves be the firſt to create
terror and ſuſpicion. Upon entering St. Cloud,

they told us the King was better ; and obliged us

to put off our ſwords. I followed the King of Na-

varre,

q : 7 * E *
oy * "> > "and 2 vas 11, 3 p: or
2 4 . N : p
PFF c

1589. 9 3D . 175

varre, who advanced towards the caſtle ; when, all

at once, we heard a man exclaim, © Ah! my God,

„ we are loſt.” The King of Navarre making this

man approach, who continued crying, “ Alas! the
« Kingis dead, ? aſked him ſeveral queſtions, which
he ſatisfied, by {ach a circumſtantial recital of the
King's death, that we could no longer doubt the

truth of it.

Henry no longer doubted, when advancing a few
ſteps, he ſaw the Scotch guard, who threw them-
ſelves at his feet, ſaying, 4 Ah, Sire! you are at
e preſent our King and our maſter.” And ſome
moments after, Meſſ. de Biron, de Bellegarde, d'O,
de Chateauvieux, de Dampierre, and ſeveral others,
did the ſame.

The King of Navarre perceived, that this was one
of thoſe eritical moments, the good or bad employ-
ment of which muſt decide his deſtiny for life.
Without ſuffering himſelf to be dazzled with the
view of a throne, upon which this inſtant placed
him, or overpowered by dithculties, or by uſelels
grief, be calmly began to give orders for keeping
every one in their duty, and preventing mutinies.
He turned himſelf to me, and with that air of fa-
miliarity with which he entertained thoſe of whoſe.
affection he was aſſured, bid me go to the Ma-
rechal d'Aumont's quarters, and there, with all

the addreſs neceſſary to attach them more ſtrongly

to his intereſt, ſpread among his troops the news of
the King's death, and to make this marechal ſpeak
to the French guards, to engage their officers to
come and pay their homage to him in the afternoon,
and to prevail upon the nobility to do the ſame.
He recommended to me to have a ſharp eye upon my
own quarters, and to keep all there in due obe ·
dience. He ſtadied, moreover, to ſtrengthen him-
ſelf by all the foreign powers, on whoſe aſſiſtance
he thought he might rely. He wrote or ſent depu-
dies

5 M EM O::I XR 8 Book III.
ties to Germany, England, Flanders, Switzerland,
and the republic of Venice, to inform them of this
new event, and the right which it gave him to the
crown of France.

I repreſented to him, that one pf the things that
ſeemed to be moſt preſſing, was to get poſſeſſion of
Meulan, a place, upon this occaſion, of the utmoſt
importance, the governor of which (who was called
St Marc) he knew to be a zealous leaguer in his

| heart. I explained to him in few words, how cail! y |

| this might be executed; and the King approving, I
went to Meulan, and demanded a conference with
St Marc, upon affairs, I ſaid, of great conſequence

to him. He came to me; and while I amuied him

wich a feigned confidence, the Marechal d'Aumont
| paſſed over the bridge with his troops, and, taking
advantage of the firſt moment of conſternation, pro-

ceeded to the caſtle, which he made himſelf maſter

of, and we drove out the too credulous St Marc.
The King offered me this government, which
many conſiderations kept me from accepting. Part

_ of the King's apprehenſions were ſoon Jullifted by

the event. He found it impoſſible to keep either
the Duke of L pernon 5 or many other dilattected

Catholics, 5

be author of his life aſſigns very bad rcaſons for this retreat:
it is plain that nothing can excuſe it. Upon this occaſion it appears,
that, beſides the Protcitant party, there were three others among
the Catholics themſelves; the firſt of which was compoſed of thoſ?
perſons who abandoned Henry IV. after the death of Hcory III.;
the ſecond, thoſe who not being able to prevail upon this prince 10

declare that very moment, that he would embrace the Catholic re-
ligion, continued with him, but had neither affection to his 1

nor a lincere attachment to his intcreſt, The number of theſe wa

very great. The chief among them were, the Dukes of "piping |

ville and Nevers, g*O, (who had fpoken to him in the name of

the reſt), and many others. The third patty was made vp of thoſe
who declared publicly, (ſays D*Aubignc), that they would ſerve the

_ King without any conditions: and theſe were indeed but very few in

5 among which were the Marechals D'Aumont and Biron,

Sivry, C0. 17 was ee . at the rude a"
| Made

25 ; * 25 8 . e . » V7 7, Lp RAR \

5
7
4
J

Mem. of Brantome, vol. 3 p. 346.

1 OF rr. 177

Catholics, in his ſervice, eſpecially thoſe who owed
their fortune to the deceaſed King. Their deſertion

reduced him almoſt to thoſe troops only which be
had brought with him, and put it out of his power
to continue the ſiege of Paris, or even to continue

in its neighbourhood. The foreign powers either

gave him nothing but fine words, or offered him
juch ſupplies as could be no remedy to actual evils.

He was obliged therefore to retire to the centre of

the kingdom. He had already (though without dit-
covering his real motive for it) cauſed a report to
1 ſpread among bis ſoldiers of an intended jour-

icy to Tours. "This retreat was no leſs neceilary
for the lalety of bis perton, than for the ſtate of his
aftairs. A thouſand dangers threatened him, in the
neighbourhood of a city, where the King his prede-
ceffor, though a Catholic, and with a powerful ar-
my under his obedience, could not eſcape a tragi-
cal end. There they had uſt taken final reſolutions
to rid themſelves of this prince; and he had ſtill
more reaſon to tremble, when he reflected that thoſe
cruel counſels were held in the midſt of his army,
and that the aſſaſſins were perhaps near his perſon.

In a conjuncture fo imbarraſſing, it was neceſſary
to place a governor in Meulan, who had a regiment
actually ready to defend it againſt the league, Which
becoming inſolent by the King's death, in imagi.
nation already enjoyed the conqueſt of it. I had
not one, nor ſufficient time to raiſe one; the 80.

made him by the Catholics, and the declaration they added to it,

that they would retire, if he did not give them this ſatisfaction. He
told them reſolutely, that he would never be reproached with having

been conſtrained to take ſuch a ſtep; and demanded fix months time

to think upon it. Sce the hiſtorians upon this ſubject, and particu-
larly D*Aubigne, vol. 3. b 2. c. 23. Henry IV. received ſuch im-
portant ſervices upon this occaſion from the Marcchal Biron, that it
was reported, it was he who made him King: and the M arechal is
ſaid to have reproached Henry with his ſervices i in thoſe very terms.

Vern menc

.
2 DT RIG ns 5 ä N Rn 1 I = > C [2 Le e % IMP IVE * SIE. 1 yy 2 * 8 oe” _ 5 — i
* — — 8 8 kane ä — 72 P 1 - »„ = - - , — 7 ad — < — — = — — GS, Stoned — — — — * — * — —
: — — — - = * ee Po 2 — _ — bg — — 4 — — ak — , — 1 F . e a ak 5 a * * " PY
8 . ˙— . ¹ Ce :—— — — * 5 > 0 , | ,
y » ; : : K * 0 , : ö . :
S - 2 .
s .

17 M E MO IR S Book III.
vernment of Meulan was therefore given to Bellen -
„%% .

The King, in his retreat, took Clermont, and

ſome other ſmall towns. His forces were too in-
conſiderable for greater enterpriſes; and this alſo

was the reaſon that I miſſed of taking Louviers, up-
on which I had a deſign that in all appearance would
have ſucceeded. This deſign I communicated to
the King, and defired he would give me ſome forces
for the execution of it. He could give me only a

company of his light-armed horſe, commanded by

Arambure, which was not ſufficient ; but he aſſured
me that I ſhould be joined at Louviers by a regi-
ment of 1200 men, which was then at Nogent ;
and for this purpoſe he wrote to Couronneau the co-
lonel of this regiment. _ .

In this hope I came before Louviers, where 1

waited in vain for the ſupplies that had been pro-
miſed me. The river of Eure, which ran into the

ditches of Louviers, having been turned, a great

aqueduct that ſupplied the city with water, became
dry. This I had remarked, and it was through this
place that I propoſed to enter it; but it was not
_ probable, that Meſſ. d' Aumale, de la Londe, de Fon-

taine-Martel, de Medavy, de Contenant, and many

other officers of the league, of which this city was
full, would ſurrender, or ſuffer themſelves to be ta-
ken, without ſtriking a blow, I thought it would

be raſhneſs to attempt to force them with a hand-

ful of men, In order therefore to juſtify the truth
of what I had aſſerted, ] contented myſelf with ſend»
ing ſeveral perſons into this aqueduét, where I em-
ployed them only in enlarging the entrance, by for-
_ cing up with a petard the grate that cloſed it. By

this means they ſeveral times penetrated into the
city, and came out again without being perceived ;

* Read Joachim de Berengueville,

Which

J.. ²˙ SL  »s.

which convinced them, that the enterpriſe failed

only for want of men.

1 returned by Pont. de- Arche, to meet the
King at Ecoüy; from whence he hoped to paſs
immediately to Touraine; but he found the Nor-
mans ſo well affected to him, that he was deter-

mined, by their offers, to attempt the important

ſiege of Rouen. While preparations were ma-
king for this expedition, we took Gournay, Neuf-
chätel, the city of Eu, Treport, and Darnetal ;

where the King received advice, that the Duke of
Malenne fought to come to a battle with him. I was.
commanded to go with fifty horſe to reconnoitre
this general's army, which I found in the neigh-

bourhood of Mante, and ſpread over all my lands.
] went, and poſted my ſelf in my foreſt; from

whence I made obſervations, and brought the King
information, that the army of the league conliſted

of 25,000 effective foot, and 8000 horſe. The

King, who had only a little flying camp to oppole

jo formidable an army, was not willing to neglect

any precaution. He had already cauſed the com-
mander of Chaſtes to be ſounded, to know if in

caſe of any inconvenience, he would receive him

into Dieppe: and he had reaſon to be perfectly ſa-
tified with his anſwer ; but, in order to be better

aſſured of this governor's intentions, he went
himſelf to confer with him, and returned very well

ſatisfied. Seeing therefore that he might reckon.

upon a retreat fo ſecure as Dieppe *®, he the
leſs feared to keep the field before the enemy ; and

= Henry IV. it is ſaid, was reduced to ſuch an extremity under
the walls of this city, that he was upon the point of retiring into
England; which the Marechal de Biron prevented, by adviſing him

to make good his poſt at Arques. Before the battle of Arques, he
laid, that he was a King without a kingdom, a  buſband without x
ite, and a warrior without money.

reſolvin 8

Sr Os —ů — , : 4 1 1 _ 8 3
e eee r S ˙ Ü A EEE EEE I

1% N E M O IR S Bock II

5 reſolving to make head againſt them to the laſt ex-
tremity, he came and poſted himſelf before Arques.

At the end of the cauſey of Arques there is a

. long winding hill, covered with coppice : beneath
is a ſpace of arable land, in the midſt of which is
the great road that leads to Arques, having thick

bedges on each ſide. Lower down, upon the left

hand, there is a kind of great moraſs or boggy

ground. A village called Martingliſe bounds the

hill, about half a league from the cauſey. It was
in this village, and in the neighbourhood of it,
that the whole army of the Duke of Matenne was
incamped. The King was ſenſible, that by at-
_ tempting to reſiſt an army of more than 36,000
men, with leſs than 3090, his conduct might be
taxed with temerity. But beſides that it would be

very difficult to find a place more favourable for

his few forces, and that there was danger in going
back, he thought that the weakneſs of his patty
demanded ſome bold ſtroke at the beginning. He
neglected nothing that could any how compenſate
for the ſmallneſs of his number. He ordered deep
trenches to be cut at the cauſey, and above as well
as beneath the greet road: he poſted 1200 Swiſs
on each ſide of this road, and 600 German foot to

defend the upper trenches ; and placed 1000 or

1200 others in a chapel, which ſtood in the midſt.
of the upper and lower trenches. It was all the
infantry he had : his cavalry, which amounted

upon the whole only to Goo. men, he divided into

too equal ſquadrons; and with one poſted himſelf
between the wood and the road, and ſeparating
the other into platoons, made them go down be-
tween the road and the moraſs, to fill in ſome fort
the interval. He did not lie down that whole night;
during which, fearing that the enemy would make

themſelves maſters of the cauſey, he kept guard

there himſelf. In the morning they brought bim

fomething

— — — GS) wa © * „ | 18 *

0 06

—
2

4

16 0-F/ SV ELKE -tt

ſomething to eat into the trench, where he called
his principal officers to breaſtfaſt with him; after

which he thought, perhaps, to have taken a few
moments reſt, when he was informed by the
guards, that the army of the league was marching
towards him, in order of battle.

At this news, he ordered the Viſcount de
Chartres, Patcheux, Braſſeuſe, Avantigny, and
three or four others, to advance into the wood, to

make ſome priſoners: they returned in an inſtant,

bringing with them the Count de Belin. The King

went to meet him, and embraced him ſmiling. He, |

whoſe eyes were every where in ſearch of the

King's army, ſeeing hardly any ſoldiers about him,
anſwered him no otherwiſe than by marking his
| ſurpriſe to ſee ſo few around the King. © You ſee

„ not all,” ſaid the King to him with the fame

paity : for you reckon not God, and my juſt right,
« who alliſt me.“ Accuſtomed as I was to lee
this prince, I could not help admiring his ſerene
and tranquil countenance, on an occatiun ſo much
the more deſperate, as it left him full time for re-
flection. His air was ſo ſtayed, and his ar-
dor tempered with ſo much prudence, that he ap-
peared to the ſoldiers to have ſomething more than
humanity, and inſpired them in their turn with all
the intrepidity of their chief.

The Duke of Matenne ordered the upper

trenches to be attacked by a ſquadron of his Ger-

man foot, who made as if they declined fighting,

becauſe they bad only Germans to encounter.

They even pretended to ſurrender; and our Ger—
mans were ſo effectually deceived by this artifice,
that they ſuffered the others to advance and gain

the trench, from whence they drove out ours; and
from this advantageous poſt they gave us a great
deal of trouble. I ſoon loſt fight of all that was

done at the ſide of the wood; becauſe that part of
Vol. I. | Q the

— 202 a > — ö — — — <p I —— — *

*
3
'Y

C

. * -
— — —
po

—

— —

WM;
= .
4
1
| #
q

182 MEMO I R S Book III.

the moraſs where I was, with ten of my men,
was that moment attacked by a ſquadron of 8 or
$00 horſe. At the approach of a troop ſo ſupe-
rior, we drew together about 150 horſe, and
drove them back as far as the valley; where
meeting with four other ſquadrons, we were obli.

ged to retreat, till being joined in our turn by the

Count d' Auvergne * who brought 150 horſe more
to our aſſiſtance, we a ſecond time beat back the
_ enemy's ſquadrons. This management could not
laſt long. Three hundred horſe from the enemy's.
army joining the firſt, we were forced to yield, and
we regained the chapel in diſorder; where fortunate-
ly our foot-ſoldiers, who were poſted there, ſtop-
ped this cavalry ſhort, and engaged in a battle, in
which Sagonne and ſome other officers were flain.
The Duke of Mafenne commanding all the reſt |
ol his German foot to attack the chapel, we quit-
ted at length this poſt; and, overpowered by
numbers, abandoned the hollows in the road,
and even the road itſelf. This was the beginning
of a defeat: the conſequences had been fearful, if

Charles de Valois, natural fon of Charles IX. He is mention-
ed hereafter. It is upon the relation of this Count, afterwards Duke

of Aponleme, that Father Daniel, in his hiſtory of France, vol. 9.

Has given a deſcription of this battle, to which nothing can be added,

and differs but little from that in our Memoirs. See alſo Matthieu,

vol. 2. p. 14. et ſegqg.; Cayet, vol. 1. b. 2. p.1263. et ſegg.; the Me-

moirs of Nevers, vol. 2. p. 597. and the phyſician Du Cheſne's rela-
tion, Cc. This battle was fought on Wedneſday Sept. 20. It be-
gan at ten o'clock in the morning, and ended at eleven. The Duke

of Majenne, five days before, made ſeveral attempts upon Dieppe,

which were called eſcarmouches du Pellet. © My companion,” ſaid

Henry IV. to Arreguer, colonel of the regiment of Soleure, © I come

« to die, or to gain honour with you.” ( He drove back the
e treacherous Germains,” Cc. Le Grain, book 5, © My father,”
ſaid this prince, to Col, Galati, „keep a pike for me, f

fight at the head of your battalion.” Matthieu, ib. p. 14. After

or J will

the battle, he wrote to Grillon in theſe terms. © Hang thyſelf,

© brave Grillon, for we have fought at Arques without thee. A-

% dieu, brave Grillon, I love thee whether I will or not.“ |
N We

e 1 hs Pg
ws e OO ROOT

CFF 183
we had not happily met the battalion of the Swiſs,
who ſuſtained the ſhock, gave us time to rally, and
put us again into a condition of renewing the fight.
Nothing could have happened more ſeaſonably with
regard to myſelf. My horſe that moment falling
dead of his wounds, I mounted a freſh one. To
5 vanquiſh the brave reſiſtance of our Swils, the e-
nemy thought proper to order 500 horfe to march
along the fide of the moraſs: they would have ta-
ken us in the rear, and have eaſily overpowered
the Swiſs, and the reſt of the ſoldiers, when luck-
Hy the horſes approaching too near the morals,
they remained intangled in the mire, and their ri-
ders with difficulty enough diſengaged them, by
C0 their lancen . eh 8
. The battle continued ſome time longer in this
Nate, that is to ſay, while we had any ſtrength
left; but at length wearineſs began to overcome
us. On our ſide they were the ſame men who
were always in action; inſtead of which our ene-
mies were renewed, and multiplied every moment.
Great part of our brigade was diſarmed and diſ-
mounted. In this extremity, I was deputed by
the troop to repreſent our ſituation to the King,
and to demand from him a reinforcement. I met
— this prince coming to our quarter. My friend,”
| — faid he to me, “ I have not a ſoul to ſend you;
e ewe muſt not, however, loſe courage for all that.”
4 In effect, he was in no better condition than we.
I He turned, however, towards M. le Grand, and
dic him follow me with all the men he could get
1 together from the upper part of the road. I went
back to my party, and with apparent joy informed
them of a ſupply, upon which I but little depend

bes SD oct 3 28; J 25 ET ad \ 5 No r
12 TE AN ne Y +354 oy - £2. 4
: > . e r 5 42+ IONS

CIO bes DEP 9 ä 3

| ed. Every one was re- animated, and one may ſay,
| | that at that moment acts of valour were done that
| Vere incredible. The thick fog, which concealed

us from our enemies, bid from us likewiſe a great
| „„ deen

184 M E M 0 1 R S Bock III.

part of our danger: but when this fog was diſſipa-
ted, the ſun ſhewed us to them, and diſcovered

their whole army to us, ready to overwhelm us.

It was by this time fo near, that we could not

hope to gain the end of the cauſey, where our laſt

intrenchment was, and we thought of nothing but
5 {cling our lives dearly.

Our ſafety came from what we had looked upon

as our greateſt misfortune. The cannon of the
caſtle of Arques had been rendered uſeleſs by the
thickneſs of the fog; but as ſoon as the enemy
could be diſtinguiſhed, it made a diſcharge fo juſt,

and of fo terrible an effect, although there were but

four pieces, that the enemy were difordered. Four
other volleys ſucceeded with ſuch rapidity, as went
quite through their army; which, no longer able
to endure the fire, retired in diſorder to the ſide of
valley: behind which, ſome moments after, all

this terrible multitude were loſt; aſtoniſhed, with-

out doubt, at the great loſs they had ſuſtained, and
depreſſed by a reſiſtance which the Duke of Mai-
enne had not expected.
The King, after an action which 0 bim
with glory, retired to Arques; from thence he
went to Dieppe, always haraſſed by the enemy,
and engaged in frequent ſkirmiſhes; the detail of
which I ſuppreſs, as having nothing ſufficiently in-
tereſting after the battle of Arques. The King,
however, in one of theſe rencounters, found him-
ſelf expoſed to a danger ſtill greater: for, belicving
the enemy at a diſtance, he was exerciſing with us
a kind of military game in a meadow, and ſuſtain-
ed a diſcharge from 200 fuſileers, who lay in am-
buſh upon the ground between two hedges, but two
hundred 5 at moſt from the Place where we
were. |
J it 18 certain, that any 3 than Henry would Ex
: hare AP ſank under theſe Siticultes, before
| he

„ b a.,

he had received the ſupplies which were preparing
for him; but by his valour * and his {kill in diſpu-
ting the ground, he gave time to 4000 Engliſb and
Scotch, that Q. Eliſabeth ſent him, to paſs. the ſea:
and this reinforcement was ſoon after followed by
one greater, which was brought him by the Count

of Soiſſons, Henry of Orleans, Duke of Longue-
ville, d'Aumont, and Biron. It was owing to the
Count of Soiſſons that he was ſo often in danger at

Dieppe, who amuſed himſelf with diſputing about
the command of the forces, inſtead of flying to the
King's afliſtance. 3 1
Matenne durſt not wait for the junction of all

cheſe troops; he diſappeared with his army, and

left the King maſter of the field. Henry ſpoke no

longer of keeping in Normandy ; he ſet out again
for Paris, which he had quitted with regret. He
paſſed through Meulan and Poiſſy; and from this
place detached me, with the Duke of Montpen-

ſier g, to endeavour to perfect a correſpondence he
had a long time before begun in Vernon, or to
ſeize the city by means of that terror which his

approach would cauſe in it. We found no proba-
bility of ſucceeding in either the one or the other.

The Duke of Montpenſicr returned to Normandy,

and I joined the King at Villepreux.

» Sixtus V. preſaged, chat the Bearnois would be the uppermoſt, |
ſince he was not longer in bed than the Duke of Maienne was at

table. The Duke of Matenne was extremely flow in all his motions.
If he does not act in another manner,” ſaid the King, © I ſhall cer-

_ 5 tainly beat him always in the field.“ Pereſixe, ib. part. 2. The
ſame Pope, after the battle of Arques, applied theſe words to Hen-
ry IV. Thou ſhalt tread upon the lion and adder ; the young lion aud

the dragon ſalt thou trample under feet, Pſal. xci. 13. Meaning the
Duke of Maienne, the Duke of Savoy, the King of Spain himſelf.

+ Henry of Bourbon-Montpenſier, Prince of the blood, the only
fon of Francis and Renee of Anjou, at that time twenty-ſeven years

old, Henry III. took the government of Bretagne from him, with-

out any cauſe, to beſtow it on the Duke of Meicocur, He ſoon had

23 i Eis

reaſon to repent it.

——

*
—̃ — —— . — ñ——jEů— ͤ -eᷓ—— . —ß—v' ( — — — — — — — Dems
— — — — — — :
= = — a ho 2 * — - Pp
— 5 — = 0 — — — =" 2 hs
— Fo — i I
* * . r 2 . —
* * -
* — ——— VO — *

S

*
Ky
— —— — — — 4 — I * ©
SA 5 x — — —
J r PE”
— — — a — by, I — ts — yo — LG = — — —— 2 — - x
— - — . : 3
ho = 2

186 M E M OI R S Bock III.
His deſign was to alarm Paris, and even to at.
tack it; and as he ſaw his time, to attempt to
make himſelf maſter of it. He had taken the pre-
caution to ſend to demoliſh the bridge of St
_  Maixance, by which the Duke of MaTenne might
_ have been able to aſſiſt this great city; for that
general, alarmed by the King's march, had alſo
come near Paris by the oppoſite ſide, that he might
not meet the King. This prince, therefore, gave
the neceſſary orders for attacking all the ſuburbs at
the ſame time: that of St Germain fell to M. d' Au-
mont, de Chatillon, and me. As ſoon as the ſignal
Was given, we fell upon this ſuburb, and baving in-
deed an immenſe, but a confuſed and frighted
multitude to oppoſe, we hemmed two conſiderable
troops of ſoldiers within the incloſure of the mar-
| ket of St Germain; and there, in leſs than two hun-
dred paces, we left 3400 of them in a moment dead
upon the place, I could hardly prevail upon my-
ſelf to kill men whom fear rendered more dead than
alive; but putting them out of a condition to retilt
us, we paſſed forward, and advanced as far as the
gate of Neſle : fifteen or twenty of us entered the
city, and went very near to Pont-Neuf ; dut ſeeing
that our men did not follow vs, we turned. back.
An order from the King to give over the attack was
the cauſe of their abandoning us. The perſon _
whom he had ſent to demoliſh the bridge of St
Maixance ® had diſcharged this commiſſion fo ill,
that the Duke of Maienne appeared within fight of

De Thou obſerves, that the guard of this bridge was given to

William de Montmorency, Lord of Thoré; but being fick at Senlis,

he could not defend it. Book 97. It was attacked on All-faints day,

upon advice ſcent by James Corbinelly, a Florentine gentlewan, to
Henry IV. in theſe three words, „Come, come, come,” written in

a bit of paper, which the bearer incloſed in a quill, and held in his
mouth. They did not carry it for want of cannon to beat down the

gates. Matibieu, vil, 2. b. 1. p. 17. Cayet, vol. 1. p. 270.

Paris

1590. | 0 . L . 187

Paris with his whole army, almoſt at the ſame mo-

ment that we came within view of it ourſelves.
The King was now convinced that his enterpriſe

was become impoſlible, and that although we ſhould
make ourſelves maſters of the city, which on our

ſide would infallibly have happened, an army thus
diſpericd in a city ſo extenſive as Paris, would have

been in danger of being overpowered, having an in-

numerable multitude of people to oppoſe within,

and an army without to defend ourſelves againſt,

which would either have entered after us, or have

kept us belieged there. It was thus that the ardor
which this prince diſcovered in battle, did not ever
tranſport him ſo far as to make him deaf to the

counſel of prudence. He thought he had done e-
nougb, having created terror in the very heart of

that city that dared to deſpiſe him, and given it a

ſenſible intimation of what it had to fear from him.
Part of the ſuburbs was pillaged : our ſoldiers left

nothing in that of St Germain *, that they could
_ conveniently carry away. I had for my ſhare full

3900 crowns, and all my men made very conſider-
able booty.

Two days after this expedition, the King went

to ſeize Eſtampes; and reſuming bis firſt deſign of
ſhewing himſelf in the heart of the kingdom, at
leaſt with a part of his troops, he went towards

Tours, and in a ſhort time took a great many little

towns in * ouraine, Anjou, Maine, and Lower

* The Sicurs de Chatillon and La Nous (fays Le Grain, book 5.)
zNaulted the ſuburbs of St Germain, Bully, and Nefle, which were

richer and more magnificent than the others, and where they expect-

ed to find molt refittance, as well upon account of the fine houfes that

were in the ſuburb St Germain, which makcs its value equal to the

ſecond city in France, as the abbey St Germain, which was forti-
fied. Chatillon made it appear, that he remembered St Bartholo-

mew's day, and was reſolved to expiate the muider, and appcaſe the
manes of the Admiral his father. |

N ormandy.

4 5 * IT 99 2 = —
— — — EE EEE —
as >
8 3 — — 3 LE
* — A — oY — 2 =.
FI nts a, DS a lb 3 - — >
_ = > > = = » ©

hs 8 — —

—

— X—

|
!
{

188 MEMOIRS Book III.
Normandy v. He left ſome troops with the Ma-
rechal Biron, who took Evreux, without cannon.

1 drove the Catholics from before Anfreville. The

| King gave me all the countries about Mante and
Roſny to preſerve, with a ſmall body of troops,
with which I narrowly miſſed taking the Duke d'Au-
male, as he paſſed by Roſny. After I joined the
 Marechal Biron, for {8 fiege of Evreux. I cannot
give a more circumſtantial account of actions ſo
inconſiderable, and muſt even ſuppreſs the greateſt
part of them, as it is neither poſſible, nor to the
purpoſe, to expatiate upon facts ſo trivial.

I forewarn the public, therefore, to expect in

theſe memoirs a detail only of events of ſome con-

ſideration, and only ſuch as I have been a witneſs
to, or as happened to the King himſelf. If 1 join
to theſe any others, they ſhall only be ſuch whoſe
certainty I can warrant, by the fidelity of memoirs
Which have fallen into my hands. As for all others,
it will be ſufficient juſt to hint at them, that the
reader may himſelf collate the affairs of Henry the
Great, in the different periods of time, It was to
aſſiſt my memory, that I at firſt committed ſuch
traits as molt ſtruck me to paper; particularly ſuch
_ diſcourſes as the King held with mylelf, or as
1 have heard him hold with others, either upon war

or upon politics, in which I apprehended there might

be ſingular benefit to myſelf. This prince, who
perceived it by my ſometimes repeating, word for
word, what he had ſpoken, commanded me to put
my work in ſome order, and to extend it. I found

_ great ente in this 3 ; Io my ſtyle was among

1 1 3 Chateau- Brian: | Sable, Chiteau-Gontier,
Malenne, Laval, Argentan, Falaiſe, Liſieux, Baleus, Ponteau- de-
mer, Pont-I'Eveque, Honfleur, Haure- de- Grace, Donfront, &c. De
Thou, book 97. D' Aubigne, vol. 3. b. 3. c. 4. Cc. See alſo the Me-

moirs of the league, and particular relations of male Expeditions

7 printed at | that time. |

the

„ f $-V . 189

the meaneſt: but upon the reiterated commands of
bis Majeſty, and his promiling to correct it with
his own hand, I reſumed and continued this work
more aſliduouſly. This it was that gave birth to
theſe memoirs. But I return to my ſubject,

The army of the league ſitting down before Pon -
toiſe, took it, and afterwards laid ſiege to Meulan.

As I judged this place to be of extreme importance

to the King, I endeavoured, by all the methods I

could think of, to make its powder hold out“ and

to introduce ſome perſon into it on whom I could
depend, to prevail upon the beſieged to ſtand firm,

till aſſiſtance, which was very near, arrived. And
this I performed, by making a man ſwim over to
it; and in the mean time ſent notice to the King of

what had paſſed, and demanded ſupplies. My re-
doubled inſtances determined thiz prince to come

thither himſelf; but it was with great unwillingneſs
that he left other places, where his preſence was no

leſs neceſſary. © By your importunity, I am upon
““ the road to Meulan.” Thus he wrote to me.

« If any thing unfortunate ſhould happen, I ſhall.
& reproach you for ever.” It would indeed have

appeared very ſurpriſing to me, if no misfortune
had happened : for this prince leaving all his infan-
try before Honfleur, brought with him fo ſmall a

number, that it was impoſſible for him to ſuſtain

the attack of a whole army which preſſed Meulan,

and would not fail to fall upon him, as ſoon as it

was known how ill he was accompanied. _

'This I took the liberty to repreſent to him ; nd.
in effect, he had no ſooner left Verneuil to proceed
to Ivry, than going out to reconnoitre, I ſaw the
whole army of the league, inſtructed doubtleſs of
his march, bearing ſtraight upon him. He was

* The Duke x Sully is mentioned with Ain de 5 in the relation
of this ſie ge, by De Thou, book 98. and Matthieu, vol. 2. 12 22.

obliged

AT — — —2—
3
— —
—

190 MEMOIR 8 Bock nl.

obliged to turn back to Verneuil. It was not ordi-
nary for this prince to give ground before his ene-
mies, nor did he now do it without a good deal of
regret. In the fiſt tranſports of his anger, he ac-
cuſed me of having expoſed him to this affr ont, and
of being leſs ſolicitous for his reputation, by call-
ing him thither, than careful to preſerve my lands
from pillage. It was eaſy for me to juſtify mylelt ;
and this prince, who comprehended the importance
of ſuch a place as Mean, gave orders for all his
army to join him, :
Ibis produced the effect which I had promiſed
- myſelf. The enemy ſeeing the army on its march,
began to draw their cannon on this {ide the river,
and, without wholly raiſing the ſiege, abandoned
the care of it, to guard againſt being ſurpriſed. _
I ſent the King advice of this proceeding, and he
thought it proper to haſten his march, to prevent
any accident which might occaſion the loſs of Meu-
lan, and ſent me the ſcouts of his army, that while
1 waited for his arrival, I might perpetually annoy
the beſiegers. He came ſoon after, and entered the
fort, where being deſirous of obſerving the enemy's :
army, he climbed up, with ſome of us, into the
Belfrey x. The beſiegers having, at this moment,
pointed a battery againſt this belfrey, demoliſhed
the ſtaircaſe, and obliged the King, and all of us
that were with him, to come down with the help
of a cord, and a ſtick paſſed between our legs.
The King, to pay them in the ſame coin, ordered
four pieces of cannon to be raiſed in this place :
which was contrary to my opinion; becauſe ] fore-
| law that the enemy would quickly diſmount them;
wie actually Happened before we could derive the .

* -. 2 AS Henry IV. was ien eg the belfiey of 81 Nicaiſe, a cannon |
5 ball rn through his legs. Matth. ib. 24. |

leaſt

bh deed

r 3 VE ET 191
leaſt advantage from them, and the beſiegers fired

there ſo furiouſly all day, that we were not able to
remove thele four pieces till night, The enemy,

who had put the river between them and the King,

made a terrible attack on the bridge on that ſide;
but this was their laſt effort. The King poſting him-
ſelf at Orgreux, they were afraid of veing over=

come, and decamped forthwith.

The Marquis of Alegre had better ſucceſs, and

ſcized Rouen for the league. I received the news

of it at Roſny. The King, who had done every
thing to hinder the reduction of this place, march-
ed inſtantly to Rouen; but upon his arrival at Gail-

lon, he learned that the evil was without remedy.
In exchange he went to beſiege Dreux, after put-
ting me in garriſon in Paſſy. The Duke of Matenne,

who had juſt been reinforced with the whole Spa-

niſh army, paſſed the river, and ſpread his troops

all around Mante and Roſny, reſolute to raiſe this

ſiege. The vanguard of this army, which was con-
ducted by one of my relations, that bore my name,
had orders from the general to poſſeſs himſelf of
Paſſy in his way. I gave the King notice of his
approach; who replied only, that I might do as I

pleaſed. I reſolved, therefore, to defend myſelf ;
and although M. de Roſny wrote me, reprelenting

to me, that it would be raſhneſs to ſuffer myſelf to
be ſtormed in a place that had not even walls, and
offered me very advantageous conditions *, yet he

could gain nothing upon me.

x

3 Matthieu mentions this fac, exaQly. in the ame manner as it
zs here: he even relates the Duke of Sully's reply, in the very words
be made uſe of. © Here is the King ready to give battle; tell the
Duke of Malenne that he is now reckoning upon winning it; and

then I will conſider whether am to loſe it,”
The only difference in the two recitals is, that this officer of the
enemy” L who | is here 9 Roſy, was, according to Matthieu, the

Baron |

— — — —— p —

.1—wç—ç— — — — — —
-

” . : — — ; \ A 1 — > - —_—_— — — — £2 - — —
— = — ——— E: ' — = — — So ===
_ — — — — I — —— =
— — —W — — —— — ES
* a g

192 I E M O I R Ss Book III.

[1
ih
.
14

7
1H
|

I thanked him for his falſe politeneſs, and, in

the night, cauſed a ditch to he dug, which ſerved
the garriſon at leaſt for a ſhelter. Luckily the ene-
my had no mind to waſte time in fo inconſiderable
a capture, and wanted only to ſeize the place as
they paſſed. Next morning, the noiſe of the bag -
gage gave me to underſtand, that the army had
purſued its route; which drew me out of great per-
plexity. During the night, which I ſpent entirely
without in fortifying Paſſy, I thought I ſaw diſtinctly
two armies fighting in the air #. I know not whe-
ther this was a reality or an illuſion 3 but this ob-
ject made ſuch an impreſſion upon my mind, that I

was not ſurpriſed at reading a letter next day from

the King. He informed me, that the Duke of Mat-
enne's army, joined to the Spaniards, had approach-
ed with a deſign to offer him battle; that he had
_ vaited for it till the evening of that day on which
he wrote me, but that the whole day had been paſſ-
ed in ſkirmiſhing, making lodgments, and ſecuring
advantages, and that the general action was put off
till the morrow. His letter concluded with theſe
words: © I conjure you therefore to come, and

„ bring all with you that you can, particularly _
_< your own company, and the two companies of

Baron de Roſhe, one of the general officers of the league. However,
to thoſe who read the Memoirs of Sully, it would ſeem impoſſible for
the error to be on his fide. Compare the tuo writers. Oeconomies

Royales, Cc. vol. 1. p. 71. and Matthiev's hiſt. vol. 2. b. 1. p. 25.

D Davila, who alſo takes notice of this phænomenon, book 11.

Je ſeribes it in this manner. The thunder and ]:ghtning, ſome-
times mingled with horrid darkneſs, added to their terrors; and ſuch
3 flood of rain poured ſuddenly down, that the whole army was a-
larmed. A prodigious apparition, which appeared in the ſky as ſoon _

as it had ceaſed to rain, increaſed the general conſternation ; for du:

ring the noiſe of the thunder, at which the ſtouteſt among them
_ trembled, two great armies were diſtinctly ſeen in the air, that, after
continuing ſome time engaged in fight, diſappeared, covered with a
thick cloud; ſo that the iſſue of the battle could not be diſcovered by

W | 5 1 ©

« Badit

_— aa ce. .

— — — rr —

wy

Fo a —
BA:
„ 1 5
„ *

J!!!! og oe " CORE: o
| © Badit and James's horſe-arquebuſiers that I grant-
& ed you; for I know them, and would make uſe

d d
I was ſenſible, that, without very great diligence,
| I ſhouldarrive too late for the battle with theſe com-
[ panics, which I foreſaw the King would be in ex-
' treme need of, as he was much inferior in number
to the enemy. I therefore loſt not a moment, and
| was fortunate enough to arrive an hour and a half
before it began. The King ordered me to make my
company paſs to the right wing, where his own
' ſquadron was, to which he joined it; and making
the two companies of arquebuſiers diſmount, ſent
| their horſes amongſt the baggage, deſigning to make
uſe of them as the forlorn hope. After this, he
bid me follow him to ſee the diſpoſition of the two
' armies, © in order,” added he, © that I may learn
e my trade.” He had no ſooner placed himſelf ar
the head of his ſquadron *, than the trumpets ſound-
ad be charge ooo 3
I ſhall attempt nothing here againſt the rights of
biſtorians ; I leave it to them to particulariſe this
battle, and ſhall confine myſelf only to what I was
an eye-witneſs of. It is ſufficient to ſay, that, up-
on this occaſion, the principal cauſes that gave the
victory to the weaker party, were, the valour of

*

% My companions,” ſaid he, addreſſing himſelf to his ſquadron,
if to day you run my fortune, I alſo run yours. I am reſolved to
die, or conquer with you; keep your ranks, I beſeech you, and if
| © T ſhould quit them in the heat of the battle, raily immediately
a ; © which will be gaining the victory: you will do it between thoſe
« A three trees which you ſee up there on the riglit: and if you ſhould
h loſe ſigbt of your enſigns, your cornettes, or your ſtandards, keep
* my white plume of feathers always in view; you ſhall ever find
n them in the road to honour and to victory.“ Perefixe, ibid. part 2.
a” They loſt ſight of him in the battle, where, accompanied only by
m twelve or thirteen perſons, be was ſurrounded by the enemy. He
* killed the Count of Egmont's equerry with his own hand. “ We

© muſt uſe our piſtols,” ſaid he to his tioop, “the more inen the
Wy 8 * more glory.” Matthieu, vol. 2. book I, P. 36. Cc. |

lit VOL. I. ; R | | - the

——äIC— 222 —— 2 - p

MENT —— ab Ry EEE IT I YG IR; i AE A — on WR fs Ec — ——— b'ô Sn * —— ww

194 MEM OI RS Booklll.

the Marechal d'Aumont, who prevented the entire
defeat of the light horſe; the infinite difference
between the enemy's manner of uling their artillery
and ours; and more than all this, the ſingular ta-
lents of the King, which were never fo perfectly
known as in the day of battle, in the diſpoſition of
his troops, rallying them, their diſcipline, and their 5
exact and ready obedience.

ee 87 2 being lu perior i in enen he ought to have . .
| | LES

It is certain the Duke of Matenne, and the Count

of Egmont, who were at the head of the Spaniards,
| imagined, that if the King durſt wait for them, the
victory would certainly be theirs ; and that, if he
yielded, 'or gave ground before them, as they ex-
pected, they did not reckon upon any thing leſs,
than forcing bim out of whatever place he ſhould |_
retreat to, and thus finiſhing the war at a ſingle |
blow. With ſuch diſpoſitions, what muſt be the
conſequence ? I lay nothing of the perſons of the ol |
generals, who alone are worth many thouſand men.
The ſtronger party never makes uſe of thoſe pre-

cautions that are neceſſary againſt an enemy of

equal ſtrength; and, upon the other hand, the
weaker never for ms a reſolution to defend itſelf a-

gainſt a more numerous army, without determining

likewiſe to ſupply, by valour and addreſs, the defi-

ciency of numbers. The ſurpriſe that a courage,
animated by glory and difficulties, creates, aſliſts a a
ſmall number againit a greater : by this all become
in forne ſort equal. :
The King's {qu adron * * where e I was, had the at ·
1 tacks

cee upon this aQion De Then, book 58. | D'Aubigne, vol. 3

book 3. chap. 3. Le Grain, book 5. Memoirs of the league. Father
Matthieu, id. Chron, Noven. vol. 2. p. 327. and an account printed
in 1590! and others.

De Thou and Cayet RY OY 5 Henry IV. $ artillery had fired

nine times before the Duke of Maitcnne's began; they alſo blame the

Doke for having diſpoſed his army in the form cf a creſcent, like

1590. 0 F 8 . 19 5

tacks of the Count of Egmont to ſuſtain, who fell
upon us with his own ſquadron, and a ſecond of
100 or 1200 German horſe, It is true, the Ger-

diers did, fired almoſt in the air: but the Count of
Egmont, we mult do him juſtice, behaved like a
man who was determined to conquer. He charged
us with ſuch fury, that, notwithſtanding the de-
ſertion of the Germans, after a terrible fire, and
an encounter which laſted a full quarter of an
hour, and covered the earth with dead bodies, the
left of our ſquadron fled, and the right was broke
and gave ground. At the firſt onſet, my horſe was
wounded in the noſtrils, and in the neck at a ſe-
cond, where the ſaddle did not reach, and a third
brought him quite down, carrying away two of his
feet, and a piece of fleſn off the calf of my leg. 1
received another wound in my hand. A piſtol-ſhot _
gave me a third wound more conſiderable ; the ball
entered my hip, and came out near my belly. 1

not run to my aſliſtance with another horſe, upon
which I mounted, though with a good deal of dif-
| ficulty. This affection brought many wounds upon.

the form of a triangle. According to Matthieu, Henry IV. was
_ guilty of a great fault, in not beginning the battle, by falling upon
the light horſe commanded by Du-Terrail, and upon the Duke of
_ Maienne's body, who, having advanced too far, was obliged to go

army was compoſed of about 2000 cavalry, and 6 or 700 infantry ;

ok Egmont, who had boaſted that his ſquadron alone was ſufficient to
_ ſubdue the royal army, was ſlain in the fight. He was the fon of

father. Do not mention him,” he replied; © he was a rebel, and

mans, who profeſſed the ſame religion as our ſol⸗

ſhould have infallibly periſhed, if my equerry had :

half a league about in retreating. It appears, that the cavalry only
fought there; and, if we believe Le-Grain, 1200 horſe defeated an
army of 20,000 men. But here is a little exaggeration, The King's

and the league's conſiſted of 5000 horſe and 8000 foot. The Count

L'Amiral 'Egmont, who was beheaded at Bruſſels with the Count of
Horne. It is ſaid, that when he came to Paris, the perſon who com-
plimen:ed him, mixed in his diſcourſe ſome praiſes of L”Amiral his

« deſerved to die.?

0

196 M E M o I RS Book III.

* Maignan, and had like to have colt him bis

ife.
At a ſecond charge, this horſe was M ſlain,
and in the ſame moment I received a piſtol- ſhot in

the thigh, and a cut with a ſword on the head. I
remained upon the ſpot, and with my ſenſes loſt all
the remaining part of the action, which, from the
advantage the Count of Egmont had already gained,
bodded, I thought, no good to us: and moſt cer-
tainly the King bad been vanquiſhed, if all the reſt
of the enemy's army had behaved in the ſame man-
ner. All that I know is, that, a long time after,
recovering my ſenſes, 1 ſaw neither enemies, nor
any of my domeſtics near me, whom fear or diſ-
order had diſperſed ; another preſoge which 8 885
ed to me no leſs unfavourable.

I rctired without a head piece, and almoſt with-
out armour, for my own had been battered to
Pieces. In this condition I faw a tr ooper of the

enemy's running towards me, with an intention up-
on my life. By good fortune 1 found myſelf near
a pear- tree, under which I crept, and with that
little motion I was ſtill capable of, made ſuch good
uſe of the branches, which were extremely Tow,
that J evaded all my adverſary? s attempts, and kept
him at a diſtance, who being weary with turning
round the tree, at laſt quitted me. Feuquieres had
not the like good fortune; 1 faw him killed that
moment before my eyes. Juſt then La-Rocheforct
(who has ſince been with me) paſſing by, 1 «fled
bim for a little nag which he was leading, and paid
bim for it upon the ſpot thirty crowns. 1 always
believed, that on fuck occaſions it is proper to carry
a little money about one.
Thus mounted, 1 was going to learn news of
the battle, 8 7 0 I believed to be loſt, when I ſaw
ſeven of the enemy coming ſtraight towards me,
one of whom carried the white ſtandard belonging
5 80

ù˖7’T' LV ELEY. a9

to the Duke of Matenne's company. I thought it
impoſſible to eſcape this new danger; and upon
their crying Q vive? I told my name, as being
ready to ſurrender myſelf a priſoner. What was my
ſurpriſe, when, inſtead of attacking me, I found
four of theſe perſons intreating me to receive them-
ſelves for priſoners, and to fave their lives; and
while they ranged themſelves about me, appearing
charmed at having met with me! I granted their
requeſt : and it ſeemed fo ſurpriſing to me, that four
men unhurt, and well armed, ſhould ſurrender
Þ- themſelves to a ſingle man, diſarmed, covered with
B his own blood, mounted upon a little paltry nag,
and ſcarce able to ſupport himſelf, that I was tempt-
ed to take all I ſaw for an illuſion, or the effect of
muy wounds. I was ſoon undeceived. My priſon-
| ers, (ſince they would beſo) made themſelves known.
tor Meſl. de Chataigneraie, de Sigogne “, de Chan-
teloup, and d'Autreville. They told me, that the
| Duke of Maſenne had loſt the battle; that the King
uUas that moment in purſuit of the vanquiſhed, which
E had obliged them to ſurrender, for fear of falling
into worſe hands, their horſes not being in a con-
| dition to carry them out of danger: at the ſame-
time Sigogne, in token of ſurrender, preſented me
Vith the white ſtandard. The three others, wha
| were the Duke of Nemours, the Chevalier d' Au-
| male, and Tremont, not ſeeming inclined to ſur-
render, 1 endeavoured to perſuade them, by good
reaſons, that they ought to do fo ; but in vain, Af -

* John Je Vivonne, Lord of Chitaigneraie. Charles de Beau-

' fondle, Lord of Sigogne, Cornet of the Duke of Matenne's com-
| pany. Ihe hiſtorians take notice of the priſoners M. de Roſny took

TY in this encounter, and the wounds he received, to the number of ſe-
ven. It was for ſome time believed, that Henry IV. was ſlain. What
probably occaſioned this falſe report was, that the Marquis of Neſle,
| who that day had dreſſed himſelf like the King, was ſen ſurrounded

© by the enemy, aud wounded in ſeveral places, of which- he died.
| Mathieu, 1. | 8 8 |

; 7 | | E. 3 | tex

Tos ME MOI R S Book 111.
ter recommending their four comerades to me, ſee-
ing a body of the victors advance, they rode away,
and ſhewed me that their horſes were till vigorous :
enough to bear them from their enemies. |

I advanced with my priſoners towards a batta-
hon of Swiſs, and meeting one of the King's chief
pages, I gave him the charge of the ſtandard, which
was a burden too heavy for me. I then faw more
plainly the marks of our victory. The field was
full of the fugitive leaguers and Spaniards, and the
_ victorious army * of the King purſuing, and ſcatter-
ing the reſt of the large bodies, that had diſperſed,
or gathered together. The Swiſs ſoldiers of the
two armies meeting, bullied each other with their

pikes lowered, without Tong * blow, or making

any motion. :
The white n e . black 5

| flowers-de- luce, was known by every one to be

that of the Guiſes, which they bore in memory, and
through horror of the aſſaſſination of Blois, and at-
tracted all, as to a prey equally rich and honourable.
The black velvet coats of my priſoners, which were
covered with ſilver croſſes, were reſplendent from
afar in the field. The firſt who flew to ſeize them,
were Meſſ. de Cambrai, de PArchant, du Roller,

de Crevecœur, de Palcheux, and de Braſſeuſe, who 5 |

were Jained by the Count de Tor! 18. I advanced

4 M T he King cried, « Spare the French, and fall upon the foreign-
& erg,” Perefixe, ibid. part2. Henry (ays the author of the Ken-
riade) owed this victory to the ſuperiority of his {kill and valour. But
he confeſſed, that Matenne had performed all the duties of a great
general; he had no fault, he ſaid, but in the cauſe he ſupported, |

„ Duke of Maienne would have been taken, but for his precau-
tion in break ing the bridge of Ivry as he fled, But by that means he
butchered the German horſe and foot, 1200 of which were killed up-
on the ſpot; a like number of French infantry, and 1000 horſe.
Some have made the loſs much greater. Of the royaliſts, 0 private
men and about 20 gentlemen were killed. This battle was fought _

between Dreux and Nonancourt, at the . of St Andre and
Foucraiuville, = |

towar ds 5

1 - 7 OF "FT LE % 199
towards them, 150 ſuppoſing they would not know

my face, altogether disfigured by blood and duſt, I ;
named myſelf. The Count de Torigny no ſooner |

knew La-Chataigneraie, who was his dwg tg than

Judging that, in the condition he ſaw me, I could
not preſerve my priſoners from inſult, he intreated
me to give Chataigneraie to his care, for whom he

would be anſwerable to me. I readily granted his re.
queſt, yet it was with regret that I ſaw him go away,

What Torigny did through a principle of friendſhip,
had in effect a fatal conſequence for the unhappy
Cbataigneraie. He was known ſome moments after

by three men belonging to d'O's company, who had

been guards to Henry III. "Theſe men levellin
their pieces at him, ſhot him dead, crying, *Sdeath!
thou traitor to thy King, whom thou haſt mur-
„ dered, and triumphed in the deed.” _

1 might have made the Count of Tatiguy 5 pay
this priſoner's ranſom, and I was counſelled by ſeve-
ral perſons to do ſo ; but I could not reſolve to add

| + this new cauſe of affliction to what he. already felt
for the death of a man, with whom I had ne
been particularly acquainted.

I was not long ere I was larrcanded by many-

5 perſons, amongſt whom there was not one that did

not envy my good fortune. D' Andelot came after

the reſt, and preſſing through the croud, perceived

Sigogne, and the page who carried the ſtandard. He

was preparing to ſeize it, believing his good deſtiny

had kept this prey for bim, when a report that the

enemy had rallied, obliged him to depart abruptly.
l had not time to draw him out of his error; for

| after he had bid the page keep that ſtandard for

him, he ſuddenly diſappeared. The intelligence
Vas found to be falſe, and had no other founda- _
iion than the arrival of 200 ſoldiers from Picardy,
' which Meſſ. de Moy and de la Boilliere had Lraught
10 the Duke of Malenne. |

Being

20 M E M OI R S Bock III.

Being now diſengaged from the croud, and ha-
ving need of help, eſpecially for the wound in my
hip, by which J loſt a great deal of blood, J advan-

ced with my prize to the head of Vignoles's regi -

ment, which had behaved bravely in the battle.
Here, fearing no further ſurpriſe, I ordered a ſur-
geon to bind up my wound, and deſired ſome wine,
to prevent fainting, which I found coming upon

me. My ſtrength being a little recovered, I got to
Anet, the keeper of which gave me an apartment,
Where I cauſed the firſt dreſſing to be put on my
wounds, in preſence of the Marechal Biron, who

ſpent a few moments there after my arrival, and
took a collation in my chamber. He was conduct-
ing the corps de reſerve, which he commanded, to

the King, who, without ſtopping after his victory,

had paſſed the river of Eure, in purſuit of the ene-

my; and, as it was reported to me, had taken at
_ laſt the road to Roſpy, where he lay the ſame

night *.

That night he ſupped at the caſtle of Roſny. Being informed

that the Marechal d'Aumont was come to give him an account of

what he had done, he roſe up to meet him, and embracing him at-
fectionately, made him ſit down at his table, with thete obligirg
Words, that it was but juſt, that he who had ſerved him ſo well at
his nuptials, ſhould ſhare in the ſeaſt. Perefixe, ibid. part 2.

Perefixe, in the ſame place, relates another circumitance, which

does honour to the King. He remembered, that, the evening before
the battle, he had uſed ſome harſh ex preſſions to Col. I heodoric
Schomberg, who had aſked him for money, and toid him in a paſſion,
that it was not acting like a man of honour to demand money, when

he came to take orders for fighting. He afterwards went to him,
when he was ranging his troops in order, and faid, © Colonel, we arc

now upon the point; perhaps I ſhall never go from this place; it
is not juſt that I ſhould deprive a brave gentleman as you are ol
your honour; I come therefore to declare, that I know you to be

« an honeſt man, and incapable of committing a baſe aCtion.” Say.

ing this, he embraced him with great aff. tion. The Colonel, ſcu-
ſibly moved with this behaviour, replied, with tears in his eyes, © Ah!
« Sire, in reſtoring to m2 my honour of which you had deprived me,

« you depiive me of my lite; for after this, I ſhould be unworthy =

-.*
. 22

After

. 9 . 2 D * —

1% d 8 r N 201
After the Marechal Biron was gone, D'Andelot
arrived at Anet, full of reſentment againſt me for
wreſting from him his prize, for ſo he thought it.
He entered my chamber, attended by five or fix
armed men, and, with an air equally fierce and in-
ſulting, demanded an explanation, or rather ſought
to do himſelf juſtice : for perceiving the white ſtan -
dard, which, with that belonging to my company,
had been placed at the head of my bed, he would
have taken polleſhon of it by force, without at-
tending to what I ſaid to him. I changed my tone
8 immediate! „ and words run high on the one part
| and on the other. Ia the condition wherein LI was,
could do no more. But as he ſpoke with tran-
ſport, and made uſe of threats, the noiſe drew fif-
ſieen or twenty of my armed troopers into the cham-
* ber, at the ſight of whom D'Andelot reſtraining his
nage, went out, commanding Sigogne to follow him,
* which be refuſed, endeavouring, but in vain, to
make him comprehend the injulice. of his pre-
tenſions. 8
The next morning I cauſed my {elf to be carried
by water to Paſly, with an intention to go from
that to Roſny, to get myſelf cured. On my arri.
val at Paſſy, I learned that part of the ſoldiers in
| my train, and my valets, with all my baggage, had
— retired thither,, not knowing bat was become
of me, and intimicated by a falſe report which was
* ſpread, that the King had loft the battle. Being ap-
prehenfive of the reproaches I might make them,
ney kept chemfeltes concealed, F- cauſed them to |

« of your favour 101 did not Gaerifice it to- * for your Gries.” | i
I had a thouſand lives, I would lay them all at your feet,” In
fact, he was killed upon this oecaſion. il.
55 The Marechal Biron, who, at the head of the corps de gabe,
had greatly contributed towards this victory, ſaid to Henry IV. “ Sire,
vou have performed what Biron ſhould, and Biron has done that
by which the Ring ou; git to have done.“ | Hh

nn C " WES, » . "7 -
"I. 8 Ns 44S 2 2 12 n
. 2 ay Ee N eee e _—_

202 M E M O 1 Bock III.

be ſought for, but they were ſo much aſhamed of
having diſcovered their cowardice, that the night fol-
lowing they fled away on foot; nor have I ſince
been ever able to learn what became of them. They
left all my baggage behind them, with four of their

own horſes, which I ordered to be fold by auction,

and I diſtributed the money among their Wounded -

companions.

As I was not in a condition to cadre a a 1 3

ordered a kind of litter, compoſed of the branches of
trees, With the bark ſtill on, and the hoops of ſome
veſſels, to be made for me in haſte, and travelled
by Beurons, to avoid the aſcents and declivities
of Rougevoie and Chaàtillon.
55 Maignan, who was à youth full of gaiety and
imagination, though t proper to give this march the
air of a little triumph. Two of the grooms of my
ſtable were at the head of this train, cach leading
one of my fineſt horſes; they were followed by my
pages, one of whom rode on my horſe, the ſame
who having received three wounds in the battle, and
being thrown to the ground by a fourth, got up
: again without a ſaddle, and running about the field
of battle, was fortunately known by three of my
arquebuſiers. This page carried my cuiraſs, and
the Duke of MaTenne's ſtandard, the other bore my
bracelets, and my helmet, all 10 bruiſed and bat-
tered, that they were no longer of any uſe. My
equerry, the contriver of this pleaſant fancy, march-
ed next, his head bound up, and his arm in a ſcarf;
he was followed by Moreines, my valet de chambre,

dreſſed in my coat of orange-coloured velvet, 5 8 - 15
thin plates of ſilver, and mounted upon my Engliſh |.

nag, holding in his hand, as a trophy, a bundle of
the ſhivers of my viſtols, the broken pieces of my
{words, and the fragments of my plume of feathers.
The litter in which I lay came next, covered only
with a cloth, 29 5 which ey had hung the black
velvet

1590. e ob EY
velvet coats of my priſoners, with their plumes,
and pieces of their piſtols and ſwords at the four
corners. Theſe priſoners themſelves followed my
litter, and preceded the reſt of my domeſtics ; af ·
ter whom, ranged in order, came my own com-
pany of houſehold troops, and the march was elo-
ſed with James's and Baddit's two companies of ar-

q gquebuſiers. They were ſo maſſacred, that you

could ſee nothing among them, but heads. bound
up, and arms in ſcarfs; and ſome of theſe brave
loldiers were even e to make themſelves be
carried. |
i When we came near euros,” we cad all
the plain covered with horſes and dogs; and the
King himſelf, who, after a flight repaſt, had re-
turned from Roſy to Mante, hunting in my war-
ren. This ſhew ſeemed to rejoice him; he
5 thought it very happily diſpoſed, and ſmiled at the
_ vanity of Maignan, who had the honour of being
known to this prince, ever ſince his father, who
was a very brave man, had diſtinguiſhed himſelf at
the taking of Eauſe. The King approached my lit-
ter, and, in the ſight of his whole train, diſdained
not to deſcend to all the teſtimonies of ſenſibility
that a friend (if I may be permitted to make uſe of
this term) could render to his friend. I could not
expreſs my acknowledgment by throwing myſelf at
his feet, but J aſſured him, and with truth, that I
would ſuffer with pleaſure a thouſand times more
for his ſervice. He had made himſelf acquainted
with all the hazards I had run in the battle. He
inquired, with an obliging anxiety, whether all

| my wounds were of ſuch a nature, that I might

hope to be cured without mutilating any part of
my body, which he thought almoſt impoſſible,

| knowing that I had been thrown down ſenſeleſs,

and trampled under the horſes feet. When he was
: convinced that I had nothing to fear, he caft him-
ſelf

9 . 266 p

204 MEMOIR S Bock III.
ſelf on my neck, and turning to the princes and
the grandees who followed him, he ſaid aloud, that
he honoured me with the title of a true and ho-
neſt chevalier, a title which, he ſaid, he regarded
as ſuperior to that of a chevalier companion of
bis orders. He was afraid of expoſing me to
ſpeak too much, and finiſhed this agreeable con-
verſation with bis ordipary proteſtation, that 1
ſhould ſhare in all the good things that Heaven

| might ſend him; and, without giving me any
time to anſwer, left me with ſaying, “ Adieu, my
* friend; take care of yourſelf; and be aſſured
« you have a good maſter.” There are princes
who are capable of gratitude ; but how rarely is this

ſentiment augmented, or even preterved, in good
fortune 1 e

BOO R .

HE ſame day that the King <alned the battle 5
of Ivry, his party alſo obtained a victory at
Auvergne, where Randan commanded the troops
of the league. But fortune, it would ſeem, when
| ſhe gave this prince ſucceſſes ſufficient to put him
in poſſeſſion of many crowns, took pleaſure, at the
| fame time, in producing circumſtances which hin-
dered the effect, and left him of his victories only
the glory of having vanquiſhed. After the battle
of Ivry, terror and conſternation ſeized the whole |
party of the league, ſo that it ſeemed hardly poſ-
{ible for the King, who was at this time attentive
to avail himſelf of all his advantages, to have failed
of drawing very great ones. Nor did he expect to
ſee them raviſhed from him by a general mutiny
of his army, particularly of the Swiſs, who refu—
led to advance a ſtep further, till they were paid
the ſums which the King owed them.

This

P nn DEITY = ee tae

x *
*
= * 2
i * Y
= 4
6 . 1
= .
= *
: 8
= 4
b
.
*
.
2
— b
—
=
=
=
—
=
=
= 1

N

———

G
ae 2 bel. Le

one Has
an 8 i -
cel; © beoa
Y he Mind Fillers ESC

A New and
ACCURATE AA

hg (Ag UTSITIONS
— Compoſed 6
E 5 He latast Surveys, af
Wo wed by the moſtapyrroved® | |
| modern Maps & Charts 5
1 Obecroat'w|

v Engraved bs Tho® hi un Aura.
; 4

7 998 |

WY” "mom = >= emen
A e Y NR, bt. | Tn

= 2

. Ml Wh 8

eee

40 . N * £

fame
ee,
74 eAutie tf

—

$4 :
>. /Bea

15 harfy

Nö

2

TY Lais *

Way 5 185

Nice th V5 Cath

= (+ > -
Plea LIRA

ee, 2 1 765 2

Guy

2

Lots Brgy

E
2
ho . : * 1.8% 7
uh N t. Sedan i \ pan

fo | | —

2 | [my
mY ERoofey Ll H UN reves
1. Leebentdge \, -

30% 25 LEA
5 ee U \
7 t + © 7 =>, | . 1
"1 Rx: th —

————

| La COUT THURS f p

4 77 7,

Art. rnews t

o ö * 5 * of gf
(and; 4.1 #
f 87

_—_ | | oy > f 15 | | :
IIS. + halle, t e * aa —

e

Mone 2 . NS

Ze iy N 2 2 . 7 * Iban 7 0
1 5 <> Fay 3

{ec 2 1 A 47 I: 2 . 1
. = RR | 0 1

NEN

A, „
8 a +; All er. + WY a8 EY err Sor N

| wor a Loire tt;

—
2 FL 1. MOST
4 ˖ Libe, Het , We

=

—

. 2 ”
ESL

; VS AUVE R
a; le. | UT

2

z 5 5 Tuille 2 7

— #learuy Atl
SY ihe SA

Us ,
Foy OP E 5 0 7
. 8

e

8 4 5 * E 2 70 N
. "IG "AGEX OLS.- IE

EB
S

na 1 bes S 5
Sai X,
We.

hama

" 82202

13
77 rants : F 5 ">.

2 k
4

988 95 | ; ihe 2

Aug dar r

. LY LAY Leone. * 72 Hand 8 IRE 7 opere Been 2
\

ile Chailar Valence eral Howuan

V

1. L.
: DT
94s ee mar

7 1
cel

COrRAS BURG

Lake of
Genera

"i oo \ Ken
| $191 gt
Zu,

, O Anlleatenmes |
\ N

8 As
7 E
Mice =

YOM

|

7

{ N j 16 |
|

re 2
|
| |
— —

rY
2.1

4 -
1 $
1

J 8& UL: LT 208,
This prince had then neither money nor means *
in readineſs to recover any. He came to Mante,
to demand ſome of the ſuperintendant of the fi-
nances. This man, who ſecretly bore a mortal
hatred to the King, and beheld his ſucceſs with
grief, took pleaſure in augmenting his imbarraſſ-
ment, and had but one anſwer to make to all his
1 In this time of confuſion, when the
royal treaſure became a prey to the firſt invader,
the finances were very difficult to manage, and the
King's revenues ſcarcely ſufficient to ſatisfy the
avidity of the receivers, which ordinarily increaſed
with public miſery. Henry wanted that abſolute _
authority, which alone was able to check them,
and ſtill more the means of convicting them of any
miſdemeanor z for he had not the lighteſt know- _
ledge of the affairs of the finances. Notwithſtand-
ing this, he entered, contrary to his inclination,
into a detail which became neceſſary for him, and
obliged d'O to remit certain ſums, which it was
not difficult to ſee had paſſed through his hands.
Theſe ſums he made uſe of to pacify his ſoldiers :
but this affair took up at leaſt five days, during
which the King could not leave Mante, or, by con-
ſequence, derive any advantage from his victory.
I remember to have heard this prince declare, that
at this moment, for the firſt time in his life, he
jaw himlelfin a ſituation to convert his deſires into
achgns : “ for I have often had deſires,“ ſaid he,
bat never found the ſeaſon to form deſigns.”
He took this laſt term in the ſignification that all
wife men give it, for a projet, the ſucceſs of
which is warranted by reflection and prudence. In
this ſenſe indeed a man may incline to take what
jcems righc in bis own opinion, without prejudice
to any other perion ; but fouls only raſhly engage

in deligns, without any appearance of tucceeding
in them.

. 8 : During

N 6 M E M 0 1 R 8 Bock IV.

During the King's tay at Mante, D' Andelot
went to bim to complain of me; and this prince
gave himſelf the trouble to come to Roſny, that

he might hear us both. D'Andelot was there ge-

- nerally blamed, and the raillery his ridiculous pre-
tenſion drew upon him from the principal officers,
made ſuch an impreſſion on his mind, that he went
over to the party of the league, 1 did not think
the ſame juſtice was done me with regard to the
government of Mante, the taking of which was al-
| moſt the only fruit of the battle of Ivry. The
King, of whom I requeſted this poſt, gratified the
_ Catholics *, at which I could not help making loud
complaints. I confeſs, to my confuſion, that if I

had ſeriouſly reflected upon the ſituation the King

was then in, every moment upon the point of be-
ing abandoned by the foreigners for want of pay-
ment, and thoſe Catholics that were in his ſervice,
ready to ſeize the lighteſt occaſion of diſcontent for
a pretence to quit him, I ſhould not have murmured
that he granted to a Catholic, who had but little af.
fection to his perſon, what he refuſed to a faithful
| ſervant. There was more greatneſs of mind in being
fatisfied with the friendſhip of this prince, without
its effects, than in receiving favours, which he was
obliged to adjuſt to policy, and to the necellity or
the times.
All obſtacles being removed, the King advanced
with his troops, took Dreux, and marched to-
Wards Sens, which he expected to have ſurrendered
through the correſpondence he held within the city;
but this failed, and Henry, unwilling to have come
fo far in vein, and being beſides informed that the

place was unprovided with ammunition, he under-

took the ſiege of it. It was not long before he
found hiraſclf, WORN the malice of bis ſecret e·

hes This government was given to I. de Roſhy? 8 youngeſ brother.
nemies, |

130 %⅔%cy“0 0 f 8 U . L T. 207

nemies, in a general want of all things neceſſary to

finiſh this enterpriſe, and was therefore obliged to

| abandon it, To eltace the ſhame, he gave out,
that he raiſed this ſiege, only in order to go and
| Inveſt Paris itſelf, and he took his route thither by

Corbeil, Meulan, Lagny, and St Denis, which

he made himſelf maſter of in his way.

I was not at any of theſe ſieges; and my wounds
were not yet even half cured, when J learned that

the King was before Paris, 1 could not reſiſt the
_ defire I had to be preſent at this expedition; I ſet

out, with my arm in a ſcarf, and ſupported by two

_ crutches. The King g, forgetting all my complaints,

received me with bis uſual goodneſs, and com-
manded me to ſtay near his perſon. He commu-
nicated to me the defign he had formed upon Pa

_ ris, all the ſuburbs of which he was reſolved to

make himſelf maſter of at the ſame time, in order
to deprive the city of the ſubſiſtence it drew from

them, ſuch as fruit, vegetables, Sc. He divided

his army into ten little bodies, to equal the num»
ber of the ſuburbs he deſigned to form; and ha-

ving made choice of the night for the execution of

his ſcheme, he witkdrew to the mountain of Mont-
marte, to be able to ſend ſupplies where- ever there
was occaſion for them. He placed himſelf in an

abbey, where he was not only followed by the
wounded, who could not partake in the glory of
this night, but by all the aged, and the gentlemen

of the Tobe and the pen. He gave me a place at the

window from which he beheld the action; during
which he converſed with Du-Pleſſis, Ross, de |
Freſne, Alibour, and me. _

The attack began at midnight, with a terrible

noiſe of artillery, which was anſwered by the city.

There was not one perſon, who did not think that
this immenſe city would be deſtroyed, either by
the fi e, or by the infinity of mines kindled in its

8 2 intr alls.

28 MEMOIRS Bock IV.
intrails. Never was there a ſpectacle more capable .
of inſpiring horror. Thick clouds of ſmoke, through

which darted by intervals ſparks of fire, or long

trains of flames, covered all that place of the wor 1d,
Which, by the viciſſitude of light and darkneſs, ap-

| peared plunged in black darkneſs, or buried in an

ocean of fire. The thunder of the artillery, the
Noiſe of arms, and the cries of the combatants, added

to this object ail that can be imagined frightful,

Which was moreover redoubled by the natural bor-
ror of night. This ſcene continued two whole

hours, and ended with the reduction of all the ſub-

urbs, not excepting that of St Antoine; although,

by its great extent, we had been obliged to begin

the attack at a conſiderable diſtance. T! ney blocked
up the city-gates, ſo th at Noth! ing could now enter

without the per miſſion of thoſe who gnarded them;
and the people immediately faw themſelves reduced
to an excels of miſery and famine, which I cannot
pet think of without horror.

I muſt be permitted to paſs rapidly. over e

place; I find no pleaſure 1 in enlarging upon ſo dread-
ful a ſubject. The King, naturally compaſſionate,
Vas touched. He could not bear the thought, of

ſeeing this city, the empire of which was deſtined
for him by Providence, become one vaſt burial-
place. He underband permitted every thing that

could contribute to its relief, and ſhut his eyes to

due ſupplies of proviſions Which the officers and
ſoldiers ſuffered to enter the city, either out of
: compaſſion to their relations and friends who were
in it, or with a deſign to make the citizens pur-
chaſe them at a high price. Doubtleſs he imagined.
this conduct would gain him, in the end, the hearts
of the Pariſians: but he was deccived ; they enjoy=
ed his benefits, without coaling to look upon him
as the author of the public miſery ; and, elated with

the Prince of Parma's arrival, they inſulted him,

WW 10

- — _ *

—

1590. J. 0
who only raiſed the ſiege becauſe he diſcovered him-
ſelf too ſenſible to the misfortunes of the beſieged *.
Ĩ᷑o0 juſtify an action, in itſelf as much blamed
by the maſters in the art of war, as praiſed for its

* Perefixe, Cayet, and many others, are alſo of opinion, that the
King was with-held from taking Paris by ſtorm, and from yielding
to the repeated intreaties of his ſoldiers, particularly the Huguenots,
by his having perceived, that on this occaſion they were reſolved to

revenge the maſſacre of St Bartholomew, by putting all within Paris

to the ſword. The Duke of Nemours, ſays Perefixe, ſent all uſtlefs
mouchs out of Paris: the King's council oppoſed his granting them
paſſage; but the King, being informed of the dreadful ſcarcity to
which theſe miſerable wretches were reduced, ordered that they ſnould

5 be allowed to paſs. I am not ſurpriſed,” {aid he, & that the Spani-

& ards, and the chiefs of the league, have no compaſſion upon theſe

poor people; they are only tyrants: as for me, I am their father
% and their King, and cannot hear the recital of their calamities,

e without being pierced to my inmoſt ſoul, and ardently deſiring to
« bring them relief.“ Perefixe, part 2. The Cardinal de Gondy,
Biſhop of Paris, having been ſent, during this ſiege, to make Henry
propoſitions for peace: 1 will not diſſemble,” ſaid he, © but diſco-

ver my ſentiments to you freely. I am willing to grant you peace,
] deſire it myſelf; I would give one finger to have a battle, and

« two to have a general peace. I love my city of Paris, I am jea»
“ Jous of her, I am deſirous of doing her ſervice, and would gragt

4 her more favours than {te demands of me; but I would grant
&« them voluntarily, and not be compelled to it by the King of

& Spain or the Duke of Maſcnne,” It may be added, that Henry IV.
expected the Pariſians would capitulate before the Prince of Parma's

arrival. The extremity to which this city was reduced, raiſed

at once compaſſion and horror. In the ſpace of a month,
39,009 perſons died of hunger; mothers fed upon the fleſh of their

children; by the Spaniſh ambaſſador's advice, they dug up the dead

bodies, and made ute of their bones pounded, to compoſe a kind of

paſte. This deteſtable food coſt the greateſt part of thoſe that eat of

it their lives. Sce a relation of this in the hiſtorians, particularly in
Villeroy's Memoirs of {iate, p. 358. &c. Read alſo the fine verſes

of the Henriade upon this ſubject, canto 10, The Parifians owed _

their lafety chiefly to the Duke of Nemours, whoſe gallant defence

has been lightiy praiſed by our writers, The people ſeconded him

with an ob{tinate eagerneſs, which had more of fury than true cou»

rage in it. A regiment of prieſts and monks were ſeen there, Ca-

puchins, Feuillans, Carthuſians, &c. groteſquely armed above their

frocks. This awkward regiment being eager to ſalute the legate,

killed his ſecretary at his de. The monks of St Genevieve, the
Celeſtins, and ſome others, would have no part in the military maſs
querade. Cayet's Chron, Noven. ib. 360. |

8 3 principle

7
*:
1
1
13
1 g
1
1
y
1
3
13
1 v
1
*
bd
*
*
1
A
:
a
7
*
© nn
|
}
[|
4
U
1
'
19
1

_ — . _—_ _
: neee ad . ce!

— ü Ü—ͤ— _
.

2 MEMOIR S Book IV.
principle thoroughly humane, the King ſpread a

report, that he bad raiſed the ſiege of Paris, only

to meet the Prince of Parma, and, by a deciſive ac-

tion, to terminate a war already too long. He made
uſe of all the precautions neceſſary to Tecure a ſafe
retreat from a city ſo populous as Paris, and com-

manded every one to hold themſelves in readinets

for a general ſignal ; to the end that, all the ſub-

urbs being evacuated in a momeat, no perſon right
remain at the mercy of the populece. This retreat
required great wiſdom and conduct, and wa. happily
effected on the 1ſt or 2d of Se ptember in the ſame
year; after which the whole army arrived at the

common rendezyous, without meeting with any in-

convenience. .

The King * knowing that the Pines of Parma

Was in the neighbourhood of Meavx, poſted himſelf
between this city and Paris, and made his light
horſe advance as far as Claye; where the two camps
being lo contiguous one to the other, that an infi-
nity of ſmart encounters enſued. The King, upon
the Marechal Biron's repreſentations, preferred to

this poſt that of Chelles, and went thither contrary
to his own opinion; becauſe he looked upon this
poſt to be more advantageous, and at the ſame time.

fitter to ſhut up the road to Paris from the enemy's

general ; for ke had ſtill ſome views upon the city,
and carried on a correſpondence within it, which,
if the Prince of Parma had entered, would have

failed him, as it did without this. T he King there-
fore occupied a riſing ground, which on one ſide
Preſented nothing to view but a deep valley and a
morals, that took N all po of acting in

® De Thou ſays, hes Henry Iv. was obliged to pretend, chat be

| only raiſed the ſiege of Paris in order to go and meet the Prince of

Parma, and to give him battle; for fear that his ſoldiers, whom no-

thing but the hopes of the pillage of Paris had prevailed upon to tay =
with him, ſouls have abandoned Pita,

that

%%% OF 8SVLLY

that place. The Prince of Parma no ſooner per-
ceived this, than he incamped on a hill oppoſite to
this. It was neither his deſign nor his intereſt to
bazard a battle, but to be a check upon us; his
camp aniwered this purpoſe moſt exactly, as he
was there ſheltered from all inſult, and out of the
reach of the cannon. The King became ſenſible of
the error, Which too much complaiſance had drawn
him into; when, after remaining two or three days
in this poſition, he faw Lagny taken before his
eyes, without being able to hinder it *.
This event, joined to his railing the ſiege of Pa-
ris, gave him ſenſible uneaſineſs, becauſe he percei-
ved that it might be concluded from thence, that
the enemy was ſuperior to him in capacity, which
this prince confidered as a matter of extreme im-
portance in war. What troubled him ſtill more,
was, that none were more ready to believe, or
even to ſpread, theie diſadvantageous reports, than
the Catholics of his own army.. He could but little
rely upon the arms of thoſe whoſe hearts he did not
poſſeſs. The King, moreover, knew that the dif-
obedience of his folders, and the want of money,
u hich he ſuffered, were effectuated by the ſame per-
ſons; and he concluded, that this diſpoſition with

The Duke of Sully is more candid than the greateſt part of the
_ hiſtorians, who will not confeſs that Henry IV. committed any fault
upon this occaſion. They cannot agree amongſt themſelves, either
about the raiſing the ſiege of Paris, or all theſe different incamp-
ments. Villeroy, in his Memoi:s, mentions this circumſtance in the
ſame manner as Sully does; and attributes to that one fault, of pre-
ferring the poſt of Chelles to Claye, all the honour the Prince of Par-
ma gained, by obliging the King to raiſe the ſiege of Paris, without
coming to a battle; the taking of Lagny, Cc. vol. 1. p. 190. vol. 2.
p. 466. See likewiſe upon all theſe expeditions Matthicu, ibid. p. 53.
Cc. and the other hiſtorians, The Prince of Parma was deſirous of
ſecing Paris, and cntercd it incognito. J am informed,” ſaid he,
to the Duke of Maienne, © that the King of Navarre makes more
6« uſe of boots than ſhoes, and that one can ruin him ſooner by de-
* lay than by force.“ Cayci's Chron, Noven. ibid. p. 390.

: | EE regard

— 2 — —

2
— ] -A ˙A ⅛—T““l1 i Ä —ͤ— nb ns A =

* oy >
an fot Ao
A

wor

{
3 3
8
i

212 MEMOIR S Book Iv.

regard to him was an incurable malady, which his

good or his bad fortune equally rankled. Such, in

effect, is the antipathy of Which religion is the
principte; and, in the ſequel, the King often and

ſeverely experienced it. 5
He took a prudent part, and the only « one that

was left him. He no longer perſiſted in his deſign
of taking Paris, which ſo many circumſtances con-
_ curred to fruſtrate. He quitted his camp at Chelles,

where he run great hazards with an army fo little

connected in intereſt with its chicf, and even ſud-
denly abandoning all thoſe quarters, retreated to the
river of Oiſe, and ſettled at Creil; where, without
ceaſing to haraſs the Price of Parma, he ſuffered
him ſlowly to conſume of himſelf. During all this
time, he made no other motions than what ſerved
to keep his army from being enervated by idleneſs.
He engaged it in the ſiege of Clermont, and employ-
ed it in frequent detachments. My company he

poſted in the neighbourhood of Mante, to keep

the country of Chartraine, and part of the iſle of

France, in order. I obtained leave to continue

near his perſon, though I was not in a condition
to do him any great ſervices; the wound in my
hip not permitting me to ſit my horſe, but with
great uneaſineſs and awkwardneſs ; and that in my
elbow took away the uſe of one of my hands.

It happened as the King had foreſeen. T he

Prince of Parma forthwith boaſted of his advantage 5
in being maſter of the field; and to make uſe of it,
he laid ſiege to Corbeil. The King had provided
this place, as well as all the other royaliſt towns,
with whatever was neceſſary to ſupport a long ſiege.
The enemy's general did not expect this, and was
greatly aſtoniſned at the firm reſiſtance of Rigaut,
governor of Corbeil, whom he a long time deſpaired
of ſubduing. He thought his honour was engaged,
I and in the end he ſueceeded. 15 was with this only
11015

— tt 1 1 EE OY 1

my uſeleſs, that had promiſed itlelf the conqueſt of

OT VEL TT. -vy

exploit, however, chat the campaign was conclu-

ded. He had bought it too dear to attempt a ſecond
at the ſame price; and not being able to effect any
thing upon the King's army, more than upon his
towns, he thought it wiſeſt to return to the Low

Countries; to the extreme regret of the league,
whom his preſence had greatly relieved. _

He judged, like an able general, that the King,
who had {fo to ſpeak) cloſed his eyes upon all his

advances, would open them upon his retreat; and
that this would not be effected with the fe eaſe

as the reſt. He was not miſtaken; but he conduct-
ed with ſo much prudence, that one may ſay he pre-
vented the laſt misfortune which probably had hap-

pened to any other. He could not however do ſo

well, but that the King, by an infialte number of
attacks and ntmiſhes, ſometimes beat up his quar-

ters elfectually, and brought him within a flagere

breadth of his ruin. The moſt conſiderable of theſe
little battles, was at the paſſage over the liver of

Aline. It was upon this occaſion, that the Baron

de Biron engaged himfeif fo far amidſt the enemy's

| battalions, that if the King had not run thither in :
perſon, with as many of us as were about him, and

made a pow: erful effort to bring him off, he would
have certainly toft his life there, or at leaſt his li-
berty.

I was well enough to keep my rank with hs reſt
during this whole march, which was an excellent
ſchoo] for a ſoldier to learn his trade in. It no lets

Jullified the conduct the King had till then obſerved,
than it did him honour by the manner in which he
executed it, Laying aſide only the terms of ſhame
and ignominy, which the cou tiers, eager to pleaſe

this prince, joined (in my opinion unjultly enough)
to the Prince of Parma's retreat, it is true, that the
manner in which the King knew to render an ar—

all |

214 M E M 0: I'LL 3 Book IV.
all France, bis hardineſs in attacking a powerful
enemy, who retreated not through weakneſs, and
his addreſs in ſeizing all advantages, were a ſubject
of admiration to perſons conſummate in the art,
and equally ſtruck the eyes of the ignorant &. The
King's conduct alſo upon this occaſion gave his par-

tizans new courage Many towns ſurrendered, and

ſome Catholics came over to his party; among o-
thers, the Duke of Nevers, who brought his troops
_ along with him, either becauſe he began to be a-
fraid of him, or becauſe he was diſguited with the
| league,

Z It was not ſach allies e as ihels that 1 wiched the
King. I found he dearly bought by his deferences
the aſſiſtance of a man, who might indeed have been
of lome aſc to him; but who, to fpeak my own
opinion, only increaſed the number of his ſecret .
enemies in the amen k. It is thus I denominate
all thoſe intereſted Catholics, who carried every
| thing there with a high hand, and thought they had
Aa right to preicribe laws to Henry.

During this prince's ſtay in the reighbourbood of
Mante, 1 took Gifors, by means of a correſponds
ence which a gentieman in my company, named

Four ges, ca ried on with Eis auer h was in

* Henry IV. (Fay: Manbien, vol. 2. p. 59.) ep he was in pur- :
ſuit of the Prince of Parma, ſtole away From Attichy, and went, for
the firſt time, to fee the beautiful Gabriella at Cœuvrcs. He con-
tented himſelf with eating ſome bread and butter at the gate, that
he might not raiſe any ſuſpicion in her father. Afterwards mounting
his horſe, he faid, he was going towards the enemy, and that the
fair-one ſhould ſoon hear what he had done for the love of her..
+ By all the letters that paſſed between the Duke of Nevers and
Henry III. which are at the end of vol, I. of the Memoirs that bear
nis name, it eppears that the Duke of Nevers ferved this prince ef.
fectually againſt the league, but without any kindieſs to the King of
Navarre. When he joined this prince, their reciprocal letters ſhew, |
that the ſervices he did Henry IV. were conſiderable indecd, but that
he exacted a very high price for them, and that it was with difficulty

Henry bore with 1's "Ss his Jalouly, and his dad emer: ”

the

1590 O f m8 U L L. 2135
the place. I did not imagine the government of
this city would have now deen refuſed me; but it
happened in this inſtance as it had done in all o-
thers. Meſſ. de Nevers, d'O, and other Catholics,
put in practice all thoſe low artifices, which pro-
_ cured them all the favours that ought only to have
been the recompenſe of ſervices, and prevailed upon
the King to give this poſt to one of their religion.
I was too ſincere to hide my thoughts of ſuch
injuſtice; I choſe to explain myſelf to the King, at
the very time when all theſe gentlemen might hear
what I faid, and concealed nothing that Jay upon
my heart. The King, a much abler politician than
I, did not feem to be touched with my invectives
againſt the Catholic party, although he ſecretly a-
reed that I did not injure it. He only anſwered
me coldly, © I perceive you are heated at preſent ;
« we Hall ſpeak another time.” «© We muſt allow
* him to talk,” added he, after I rctired : he is.
& of an haſty humour, and has even ſome kind of
„ reaſon : however, he will never be guilty of any
ec thing baſe or wicked ; for he is a good man, and
& loves honour.” In the firſt moment of my dit-
content, I left my company to the care of my lieu-
tenant, and went to take a tour in the valley of
Aillant, and to Combrailles, upon my wife's eſtate,
taking only; along with me fix gentlemen, and my
domeſtics, I did not expect to be employed in
any military functions in this journey. Wi ile I was
at Bontin, the Count of Tonnerre engaged me, to
ſecond an enterpriſe that he made upon Joigny. His
deſign was to force with a petard a poſtern gate,
v hich for a long time before had no t been opened,
and through that to enter the town. Tanneire, for
this exploit, had only 200 arquebuſiers, which he
had got together in haſte. They followed him a-
bout three hundred paces into the city; but here
their leader being thrown Gown, by a ſhot from an
ar queb ule,

— et as

- —
_— —

* — —

_— — my
bo — —— -
— — * 2 9 ——— =
Mr — — — — ̃ —— — < ND Gs, 6 —
= =
n 8

— =
> 4 — — — . =
A > pts
.
— ».
* *

416 M 3 M 0 1 R 8 Book IV.

a fear began to ſeize them, and they ha ·

ſtily retreated towards the poſtern, carrying the
wounded Count along with them. Their danger,
or only their fear, redoubling, they had the baſe -

neſs to leave him upon the pavement, about thirty
paces from the poſtern; where he would have been
cut to pieces by the citizens, if I had not flown to
his aſſiſtance, with only twenty men: for, notwith-

ſtanding all my endeavours, I could not prevail up-

on thoſe cowardly ſoldiers to face about. However,
I diſengaged Tonnerre, who took the road to Gien,

of which he was governor ; after which I muſtered
up his brave troop, and reſumed my way to Bontin.
The remembrance of the King's former goodneſs

to me, and an invincible inclination, drew me to-
wards him. I found him occupied in the ſiege of

Chartres “; the taking of which was principally

owing to the valour and addreſs of Chatillon +. I

was prevented from being preſent at this ſiege, by

2 adventure which I mult reckon among the moſt
1 I was ever engaged in, in my whole life;
nor have the intentions of the authors of it, or even

their names, ever come to my knowledge.,

Returning from an aſſault which Chatillon made

upon the body of the place, by means of a bridge

of a new and a very ingenious ſtructure, the King,

es oblerved that my former Acer for his ſervice

0 The magiſtrate of oils city made him a very. long karanoue; =
and telling him, that he acknowledged the city was ſui ject to "the
King, by divine and human right; the King, out of paticace at his

prolixity interrupted him, puſning forward his horſe to enter, and

faid, „Ay, and add alſo by the cannon law.” F. Chalon's biſt:ry of

France, vl. 3. p. 227. This fiege was long and bloody. See Mat-

thieu, vol. 2. p. 63.; Cayet, vol. 2 p. 415.; and other hiſtorians.
+ Francis de Coli igny, fon to the Admiral, and Admiral of Guy-

enne. He died this year, 1591, in his caſtle of Louve, thirty years

old, leaving three ſons. The Calviniſt party had a great loisin him;
for it 1s bel ieved, that if he had lived, he would even have excelled his
tather. De Thou, book 102. Three ſons of D*Andelot, the Admiral's
brother, died at one time, in the year 1 1 Bock 85.

Was

2 F TA. *

8

nan

CCC?! 217

was not diminiſhed, called me, and commanded me

to bring my company before Chartres. I was obli-

 ged to go myſelf, and fetch it, at the fame time to
take the funds neceſlary for its maintenance. A-

bout three leagues from Mante, near the town of

Touvery, I ſaw a brigade of twenty horſe in the
field, which I ordered Tilly to reconnoitre. Upon
his information that they bore white ſcarfs, I ad-

vanced without fear or precaution : as for them,
continuing their route, as if they had not even re-
marked us, they entered into the wood ; from
which, according to the courſe of the road I had

taken, 1 could not expect to ſee them come cut.

I rode on with Tilly, La-Poterie, and La Rue, be-
fore the reſt of my troop, which conſiſted only of
ſix: other gentlemen, and four ſervants, who fol-
lowed at ſome diſtance ſeparately. IT heſe troopers,

or robbers, I know not what name to give them,

knew the foreſt perfectly, and bad taken their mea»
ſures ſo well, that they met us at the paſſage out of
the foreſt, 10 where our road croſſed theirs. The

two firſt took off their hats, when to the Qui vive?

we anſwered, Vive le Roi; but at the ſame time,

taking advantage of our confidence, they fired al-
maoſt cloſe to our breaſts. I ſaw three of the fore-

moſt take aim particularly at me. Naturally not

one of us ought to have eſcaped; but doubtleſs,

precipitation, fear, or a bad conſeience, cauſed the

hands of theſe villains to tremble, ſo that of three
hots aimed at me, one only reached me, which
entering my lip, came out at the nape of my neck:

it appeared to me, that La- Poterie and Tilly recei- I
ved the two others in their cloaths. La-Ruz was

the only perſon who was brought down.

The reſt of my troop running up at the noiſe,

ſurrounded me, cr ying, Vive Reſuy. We all toge-
ther charged our agg reſlors, who retired, firing, to

a village covered with hedges, where we loſt them.
Vor. 1. T : T hey

\

JJ! M0 TI RS Book IV,
They continued only to fire upon us from within
the houſes, which covered my face with ſmall ſhot.
By this circumſtance I concluded, that our adver-
ſaries were in a country that they knew, and that all
this village was full of ſoldiers, who only ſought,
perhaps, to draw us nearer. After ſeveral times
calling to thoſe traitors, to turn and accept a de-
fiance, ſeeing them averſe, I thought it was the
wiſeſt way to leave them, and take ſome care of
my wounds; eſpecially that in my neck, which
Was the moſt - conſiderable, and by which I loſt a
good deal of blood. I got to Touvery, where, in
the houſe of M. d'Auteuil *, I put the firſt dreſſing

vpon them, and from thence retired to Mante,
where I was {ix whole weeks under the ſurgeons
hands. During this ſpace, the King's army not
only ſeized Chartres, but Corbie likewiſe. Parabere
conducted this ſiege, in the abſence of the King,

It is ta this year, and while Henry IV. ſtaid at St Quentin, that
we mult bring back this prince's letter to M. de Roſny, which is
without date, and may be {een amongſt the MSS of the King's li-
brary, the contents of which perfectly agree with the text of our

Memoirs, and is as follows. © All the news T have from Mante are,

that you have been fatigued, and are much emaciated: if you have
any deſire to refreſh yourſelf and grow fat, it is my opinion, that
e you ought to come hither. Mean time your brother will ſend us

« news from thence of our ſiege at Chartres, &c. _ EO

From ſeveral places in theſe Memoirs, where the ſhare Henry IV.
gave to M. de Roſny in all his reſolutions is mentioned, particularly
that relating to his converſion, which we ſhall come to preſently, we
may infer, that this prince had always an entire confidence in him.
have tranſerib<d the foregoing letter, to ſhew, by another teſtimony,
that this opinion is not ill founded, and that the Duke of Sully has
not, throngh vanity, impoſed upon his readers, The hiſtorians have
not begun to mention this miniſter till he began himſelf to appear in
a public character. It is more than probable, that, a long time be-
fore that, he had been the (ul of all the actions and councils of Hen-
ry the Great, It is caſy to trace this time back to his moſt early
youth; though indeed all the actions of the Duke of Sully compoſe a
like, wherein one ſees no youth. This advantage mult be allowed to
minds born grave and ſerious, oyer theſe more lively and full of fire.

who

| boldly, aud PU me

or OF $ VL EY ---at$

who was kept at St Quentin, by his new paſſion
for Mademoiſelle d'Eſtrèes * |

The ſiege of Noyon followed that of Corbie.
There is none which I could have more wiſhed to
have given a circumſtantial detail of than this, if I
had been a witneſs of it. A thouſand fine actions
were performed by the beſieged. The Duke of

Maienne, who ſaw that this place was of great im-

portance to the league, gave orders to the Duke

d' Aumale, lieutenant general, who was then at
9 C2

Ham with fome of the forces of the party, to ſpat
nothing to ſupport this place, till he approached Nitin:
ſelf. The Duke d' Aumale endeavoured twice to
throw ſaccours into it ; but La Chantelerie and
'Tremblecourt, who cor nducted them, were cut in
pieces one after the other. The Viſcount de Ta-
vannes, major general, th inking he might be molle
ſuccefsful, pacſen ted him ot \Wit d LAOS argue BU Aliers :
they me with a party of Bey Or lixty horſe, belong -
ing to us: Who, 50 the Qi vive? chuiged them
1-t0 flight: . the j- rincip. 1 OH.
cers, who would I ave reſiſted, were all wounded,

and taken priſoners with Tavann es: their chief:
D*'Aumale flattered himſelf, that he ſhould, in his

turn, beat two quarters of light horſe, which he
had ordered Bellangliſe to reconnoitre; but he found
them mounted, and going to meet the King; and
having attacked them, theſe light horſe, notwith -

| landing the great ſuperiority of the enemy, defended

themſelves ſo long, and ſo well, that the Baron de

Biron, Meſſ. de la Largerie and de la Ballers, had
time to come to their alſiſtance: after whic h, theſe
two troops joining, they defeated d'Aumale's whole

* She is often mentioned in the courſe of this work. Her name
was Gobriclle : ſhe was daughter of John Antony d'Eſtrées, and Fran-
ces Babou de la Bonrdaifierc. She bore ſucceſſively the names of the
fair Gabrielle, Madame de Liancourt, the Marchioneſs of Monceaux,
and Dacheſs of Bearfort, |

T2 detachment,

ü—  — —
— p7§ꝗ＋̃— 2 — oy =o 2 SI nn ng!
= 4

220 M E M 0 1 K 8 Book IV.

= detachment, which conſiſted of 500 horſe, and as
many arquebuliers on horſeback. Very few reach -
ed Ham without wounds, and a 3 number of 5

priſoners were taken.
The Duke of Mafenne arriving at Ham at "the.

very moment that theſe ſhattered remains retreated
thither, was a witneſs of his loſs, and proteſted pu-

blicly, that he would wipe off this ſhame, _— |

by raiſing the ſiege of Noyon, or by a battle. He
drew together all his forces, ordered the Baron 4

_  Roſne to bring him the Spaniſh troops, under the
command of the Prince of Aſcoli in Champagne;
. 8 finding himſelf at the head of goo foot and 200
ghorſe, he advanced towards Noyon. He forgot his

oath, when he ſaw that he had to do with men who

ſeemed not to have even perceived his arrival. The
commander of Noyon had repreſented to him, by a
_ gentleman whom the King permitted to paſs through
e army, that he bad engaged to ſurrender the
place in fix days, if no ſuccours were ſent him.
The Duke of Matenne, the Prince of Aſcoli, and
the Duke of Aumale, ſuffered Noyon to be taken
before their eyes. This commander certainly de-
ſerved to have been better ſeconded, His name was
Veieux; and, from a private ſoldier, he had become
governor of Pierrefond, by his bravery and his ge-
nius. Upon the report of Noyon's being attacked,
he had found means to throw himſelf into it, with
fifty horſe, and as many arquebuſiers, to reaſſure
| this city, where all was in conſternation and dif-
- Ways. and to hold it out till the laſt extremity.

The Duke of MaYenne ſeeing that his army way”

: uſeleſs, ſent it into quarters, and marched flowly
towards Paris, He had long carried on a corre-
ſpondence in Mante, and he now thought it time
to proceed to execution. He ſecretly drew out the
_ garriſons of Paris, Dreux, and Pontoiſe, and ſud -
deniy preſented bimfelf within muſket- ſhot of this

; city

1591. OF S U L LY. 221

City, before day. My brother was governor, and
I was then there myſelf; my wound not permitting
me to keep the field. I was. advertiſed of the ene-
myꝰ's arrival, and ran upon the ramparts, with my
head bound up, time enough to make ſome diſ-
charges upon the aſſailants, which hindered them |
from continuing their deſign.
The Duke of Maſenne ſucceeded no better bis
fore Houdan, which he alarmed as he paſſed. My
other brother, who was there with his regiment,
and ſome companies, gave him ſuch a reception,
that he retreated with ſhame. _
What had happened at Mante, joined to the in-
formation my brother had received, left us no room
to doubt but that the enemy had ſome correſpond»
_ ence in the city, After conſulting together upon
what was neceſſary to be done upon this occaſion,
I fixed upon the following expedient. I had {till
in my pay fix of thoſe brave ſoldiers who ſerved as
a a forlorn hope in the battle of Ivry, and to whom,
beſides their pay, 1 gave eight livres a- month. They
were then in my brother's garriſon, to whom 1
could not refuſe them; and their fidelity I was ab-
ſolutely aſſured of. In concert with us two, they
feigned to be diſcontented with the governor of
Mante; and preſenting themſelves to the garriſon
of Pontoiſe, were received with open arms. They
were no ſooner there, than they propoſed to d'A-
| lincourt to make him maſter of Mante, by the con-
nection which they ſaid they ſtill preſerved in that
place. To convince the governor of this, they
demanded four ſoldiers, whom, by my connivance,
they conveyed into Mante, and directed them to
get acquainted with ſome eitizens, who were well

_ diſpoſed to engage in all ſorts of factions. In a

little time every thing was agreed upon, and the

day fixed for delivering up Mante to the league.

1 heſe four ſoldiers found every where a facility in
| T 3 --* ".-- a

- — — DI) —
—̃ 1 ce ee
5 8

222 N | M 0 [ * 8 Book IV.

the rofecution. of their deſign, which made him
| beiizve the ſucceſs of it infallible, and he would
have all the honour of it to himſelf, My {oldiers
info wed ine exactly of all that was contriving in
Pontoiie, and of the joy which ſo well concerted an
enterpriſe occaſioned there. The general council
of the league, headed by the Cardinal of Bourbon *,
reſided 1 in that city.

Meantime I took my meaſures very 4 that

- no affectation might appear in my conduct. I cau-
fed trains of gunpowder to be laid upon the ram-
Parts which they intended to ſcale, without any
one's perceiving it; and {hut up all the houles that
| Nood near that fide: after which J introduced into
the place, by mall diviſions, at different times, the
| beſt ſoldiers in the garriſons of Nogent, Vernon,

and- Meulan. This done, I thought my ſelf obliged

to fend and inform the K ting, who was at Com-

Piegne, of all that paſſed; and it was this that

ruined our project. This prince could not reſiſt
the deſire he had to receive the Duke of Maienne

himſelf in Mante, and imagined he had taken ſulſi-

_ cient precaution not to hurt our ſeheme, by not

entering Mante till the night that it was to be exe-
cuted, and by carrying in with him only fifty horſe,

und the ſame number of valets. As for me, when
4 ſaw him arrive, I was 0 well perſuaded.” that all

* This is not the old Cardinal, Chatter of Bourbon; 100 of Chatles

of Bourbon, Duke of Vendome, and brother to Antony king of

Navarre, whom the league had proclaimed King. Ile dicd of the
ſtone the year before at Fontenai, in Poitou, whether Penry IV. had

cauſcd him to be removed from Chinon, aged 67 years, a prince,

who had reaſon to complain, that they obl:ged him to aſcend a throne

Which had no allurements for him. He could not conccal his joy
for the victory that Henry IV. gained at Coutras; and only accepted
the crown, ſays Cayet, to preſerve ; it for that prince whom he loved.

Chron. Noven. vol. 1. book 2, p. 357. It is the Cardinal his nephew.

lle was fon of Lewis I. Prince of Conde: who was flain at Jarnac, and

brother to the Prince of Conde, who ded at St John d'Angely, to

n the 1 rince of Conti, and the Count of Svilluns.

Our

Sohns ens

*

150% 0 SV: : 5 L 1. 223

our meaſures were broke, that I could not help re-

proaching him with ſome warmth, for coming thus

to deſtroy our work, and expoſing, perhaps, the
lives of the four ſoldiers who conducted .

means of the evidences that might be brought a-
gainſt them. The King aſſured me, that nothing

of what J feared would happen, and went to ſuß

at the governor's ; and there, being fatigued with

his long journey, threw himſelf upon a bed in his
cloaths and jack- boats.

The night paſſed, and the day came, without

any appearance of the enemy. I watched for them
all night upon the ramparts, with one of my bro-

thers ; the other ſtaid with the King. Juſt as I bad
gone to repole, Bellengreville, whom I had ordered

10 obſerve the enemy's motion without, came to
me, and informed me, that the Duke of Matenne

having reccived advice that ſome troops, led by the
King in perſon, had entered Mante in the night,
Juppoicd his deſign was diſcovered, and had retreat-
ed, after having advanced as far as Bourgenville.
i carried hin to the King, to whom he made the

ſame report; and, as a proof of the truth of what

he ſaid, produced two carts, loaded with ropes

ladders, and ſuch other inſtruments, which the
leaguers, imagining they already law the King at

their heels, had left in the field, to retreat more ex-
peditiouſly. The thing became public and irretrie-

vable; for the ſoldiers who eicaped on both ſides
could not be ſilent.

The King fucceeded better with regard to Lou-
viers. This city kept a prieſt in its pay, who, from

the top of the higheſt belfr ©, which he never left,
played the part of a ſpy with a good deal of exaCt-
nels. As ſoon as he ſaw any one appear in the
field, though it were only a ſingle perſon, he rung a
certain bell, and at the fame ſide hung out a great

flag. We did not deſpair of thaking his Nn
an

e — bs _
* 8

— l2»—:ꝛ⸗ ——
by

; — ern In
. —

© AB Gs — — —̃ů — Ig

— ————
———— — —-—
e
2 :

SE = emer ene nag
—
—_

;
|

SS. ms

E
—
4
Z

D eee

; Montpenſier | in all his enterpriles- 3 in Normandy f.

ani 5 = = ** gx 2
3 — — — — 7 2 * 4 mn
2222 dd IE = rs > ER, = —
G *

—
3

. —— . a ES — — — — — — * = Fs : — - - * — 3 1 1 "IO N

224 MEMOIR S Book Iv.

and 200 crowns of the ſun, with a promiſe of a

| benefice of 3000 livres of revenue, corrupted him.
It remained only to gain ſome of the garriſon ; the

Sieur Du-Rollet took this upon himſelf, and ſuc-

ceeded equally well. He addreſſed himſelf to a cor-
poral and two ſoldiers, who eaſily accuſtomed the
reſt of the garriſon to truſt the guard of one of the

gates to them alone. Every thing being thus con-

cluded, the „King preſented himſelf before Louviers,
at eleven o' clock in the night“. No one rung the
bell, nor was there the leaſt motion in the garriſon.
Du - Rollet entered, and made the gate be opened,
through which the King paſſed, without the ſmalleſt
reſiſtance, into the centite of the city. Fontaine-
Martel made ſome ineffectual efforts to draw the
- garriſon together; as for the citizens, they were

wholly occupied in concealing their wives and their

daughters. "The city, whoſe principal riches con-
ſiſted in its magazines of linen and leather, was en-
tirely pillaged. I had a gentleman with me, called
 Beaugrard, a native of Louviers, who was of great
uſe to us in difcovering where theſe kinds of mer-
chandiſe were concealed, and a prodigious quantity
of them was amaſſed together. The produce of
my ſhare amounted to 3000 livres. The care of
Louviers was by the King conſigned to Du-Rollet.

The fame good fortune attended the Duke of

This

WS | 7; | | |
I In the Lower W 75 Falaize, Baſevs, Argentan; Lizieux, |

Cc. were in the intereſt cf the league; Caen, Alengon, deez, E-
couch, Gc. in the King's. The moſt conſiderable action happened ;

in 4pril 1589, in the field of Argentan, near Pierrefitte, Villars, and

Commeaux, where the Duke of Monpenſier cut off the leaguers of
| thoſe cantons, whom they called Gautiers, to the number 5 or

6000. Three thouſand weie left dead upon the ſpot, ard a thou-

ſand taken priforers; the rett eſtaped to Argentan. Commenyn.”

which is at preſent ſcarce a. vill: gc, was taken with geat difficulty.
At een the Duke of Montpei. lier extirpated this whole patty, and
S | reduced

1% OT. 9% „ * 225

This ſucceſs was no more than neceſſary to con-
fole the King for the news he received, that the

Duke of Guile *, whom he conſidered as his prin-
cipal enemy, had eſcaped from the caſtle of Tours,
where he had been kept priſoner ever ſince the af.

ſaſſination at Blois. The King now reſumed his

former deſign of attempting every thing, to be-

come maſter of Rouen. Aſſured of the aſſiſtance
and affection of almoſt all the cities of Normandy,

he quitted Mante, where for ſome time paſt he had

relidence of his court and his council; and cauſed
his troops to file off towards this city. While

fixed his abode, and made it a little capital for the

preparations were making for this important ſiege,
Henry made a fecret journey to Compiegne, of

which love was the true motive, though he gave

out that it was to ſend to Germany for a levy

of cavalry. The Viſcount Turenne undertook this

affair, from gratitude for the King's having effect-

ed, and honoured with his kae his marriage

with Mademoiſelle de Sedan r, daughter and only _

heireſs .

reduced ſeveral of the rebellious cities. He was aſſiſted by the Count

of Torigny, Metl, d'Emery, de Loncaunai, de Beuvron, de Viques,

de Bacqueville, PArchant, and others. See theſe rag in the

3d volume of the Memoirs of the league,

—"#

Charles of Lorrain, fon of Henry Duke of Guiſe, EA was gain -
at Blois, and of Catherine of Cleves. He was born in 1571.
The flight of the Duke of Guiſe will tuin the league,” faid Hen-

ry IV. as it is related by Le Grain. The Duke's valet de chambre
having found means to amuſe Rouvrai and his guards, either by
play, or drinking, let him down from the higheſt window in the
caſtle, in the midſt of the day, with a rope, which he afterwards
made uſe of to deſcend himſelf. The Duke got into a {mall boat,

which carried him to the other fide of the river, where two hoi ſes

waited for him, Cc. Matthieu, vol. 2. p. 81. Cayct, vol. 2.
book 3. p. 465. Cc.

4 Charlotte de la Mark, daughter of Robert th Mark, fovereion

prince of Sedan, and of Frances of Bourbon Montpenſier, by the

death of her brother, William Robert de la Mark, Duke of Bouillon,

which happened 5 Gevers; it in the year 1 588, ſhe became heireſs of
wy ; this

—— — — —
> — . 7 * 2 —

= ASE — — we
* —— — — — = — b 2 .
”

226 M E M 0 I R S Bock IV.

hcireſs of the deceaſed Duke of Bouillon, which
was concluded this year. I was not forry for my

part, that this retreat gave me an opportunity of
enjoying, ſome time longer, at Mante, the com-

pany of Madam Chatcaupers, with whom chance

had lately brought me acquainted, and to whom 1
felt myſeif attached more and mor e, by an inclina-
tion fo ſtrong, that it made me think of a ſecond

marriage.

The King had « expre Gly forbi aden all commerce,
and nanfportati on of mcrchandiſes, and of cvery
kind of proviſion, into Paris and Rouen, as being
cities in open rebellion: but in this, as in cvery

thing elſe, he was very il! Vobcyed. The governors

of paſſes, eſpecially :; Ong the Scine, gained dy the

immenſe ſums, which their facility produced, al-

moſt publicly granted the necefiary paſſports bot
merchan ts, and maſters of boats. De- Fourg
whom I have formerly had occaſion to mentic

came one day to ivform me, that a large boar,
whotc lading was reputed worth 50,000 crowns,

had gone up the river towards Paris, where, after

a few days ſtay, a leſs one would bring back the

value in filver to Rouen: which he was well aſſured
of, becauſe his own father was to conduct the boat.
i cauſed it to be ſo well watched, that in its re-
turn it fell into my hands, and 1 ſaw with aſt: niſh-
ment the paſſport ſigned by Berengueville, and my
brother, the one gover nor of Me lan, and the o-

this principality, The Duke, 3 in his laſt will, forkadh his ſiſter to

marry a Roman Catholic. This was the diſpoſition. but tlie King's.

friendfhi ip for the Viſcount Turenne his de fire of taking the lady

from the Dukes ot Lorrain, Montpenſier, and Nevers each of

whom demanded her for his ſon; policy, which adviſed him to give _
an ambitious neighbour to the Duke of Lorrain, and perhaps the
belief that this marriage would induce the Vikount to lay afide his
deſign of making himielf head of the Calviniſts in France ; were the
motives which determined Henry LY to marry the heireſs of Sedan

tothe Y count Turenne, | |

ther

wk. OT FULLY 227

ther of Mante; but they did not care to mention
this to me, nor did I take any notice of it to them,
but cauſed the boat and its conductor to be brought
to Mante. I opened two large packets, where [
expected to find the $0,000 crowns in ſpecie. But
ſeeing only ſome pieces of gold and ſilver thread,
and Spaniſh ſilk, I threatened to put the maſter of
the boat into a dungeon. The elder Fourges, a-
larmed at this threat, preſented me with letters of
exchange for 36,000 crowns, which he would
have perſuaded me was the whole produce of the
ſale. As he defended himſelf with a good deal of
action, the weight of the goid he had about him
broke his pockets, and fo great a quantity fell from
them, that the floor was in an inſtant covered
with crowns of the fan*. He probably intended
to apply this ſum to his own uſe, or thought it
could be in no place fo ſecure as about himſelf.
One may imagine what was his confuſion, After
diverting myſelf ſome time in obliging him to take |
ſeveral turns about the room, I ordered him to
ſtrip, and found 7000 crowns in gold ſewed up in
his cloaths. I was then in vety great reed, waiting
the ſale of my corn, wood, and bay, at Roſay : the
King made me a preſent of this ſum, and was ſin-
oularly pleaſed with the recital of poor Fourges's
adventure. It was not fo with Berengueville, ane
my brother, they were extremely angry with me.
I come to the ſiege of Rouen.
The King had not ſeen himſelf at the head of
forces ſo conſiderable Four thouſand Engliſh ar-
rived to him, conducted by Roger Williams; and,
moreover, he expected ſoon a fecond reinforce-

A gold coin current in thoſe times. It was firſt ſtruck in the
reign of Lewis XI. and ſo called, becauſe there was the figure of a
ſun above the crown. The valve of theſe crowns at this time is 64

ſols. Le Blanc, traité hiſt, des monnoies de France, 5.9. de I intro
duftion, et p. 372.

ment

— — - 3 8 . —
3 — —— p
— — oe > 28
— — "mg". - 1 8 *
= — 5

— —ðſß!ß—
— K, Ne
—— — .

2 ——V—

—
— —_
—

A * q —
— — * 5 *
——*”ẽä 2 x —ů —
.
-
.
*

: 228 5 M E M 0 5 R 8 Bock Iv. g

ment from this cotntry: which difi mbarked du-
ring the ſiege, under the command of the Earl of
Eſſex *, the miniſter and favourite of Queen Eliſa-

beth, 'T he United Provinces, beſides the two re-
giments in the ſervice of this prince, ſent a fleet of

fifty ſail well equipped to the coaſt of Normandy,

having on board 2500 ſoldiers, commanded by

Count Philip of Naſſau. The Duke of Bouillon
(for fo the Viſcount of Turenne called himſelf ſince
his marriage) ſucceeded ſo well in his negotiation
in Germany, that he brought back 5 or 6000 horſe,
| beſides ſome companies of foot, with the Prince
of Anhalt at their head. Theſe foreign auxiliaries,
Joined to Goo Swiſs, which the King had in bis
pay, to different reinforcements that came from
ſeveral places, particularly Normandy; and to
| thoſe troops, either Proteſtants or Catholics, that
were at his own difpoſal, compoſed an army of

40,000 men. Caen, and the other chief towns of

the province, engaged to furniſh proviſions, and
every thing neceſſary for a ſiege, which could not
fail of being long, both becaule of the goodneſs of
the place, and becauſe of the ſtrength of the garri -
| ſon. The Marquis of Villars, known for his
| bravery and capacity, ſhut himſelf up there with
the ſon of the Duke of Matenne, reſolved to bury
themſelves under its ruins. In effect, from the
day that we fat down before this city, till the
Prince of Parma's arrival, which obliged us to raiſe
ne: ſiege, there paſſed almoſt fix months ; and
what is worſe, fix winter-months : for it was in-
veſted in the beginning of October, and abandoned

the 2oth of March following, after cfforts on the

part of the beliegers, a and a reſiſtance on that of the

$0 Robert D'Evreux, Ezl of Flix, ties 'rite to Q. Eliſabeth,
See the letter of thanks which Henry IV. wrote to tliſabeth, in

beſeged,

Villeroy's 3 9 4. * 24%

r MB Re

_
L

＋

Ws bob

1591. O F 8 U L L Y. 229
beſieged, ſome Grcuitifiviices of which I hall

relate.

The troops of the beſ jegers were placed in dif.
ferent quarters; the King's were at Parnetal, and
that of my company at Freſne VEſplen, whither Il

rarely went, the King having honoured me with a

lodging in his. Here 1 diſpoſed myſelf for a long

ſtay, and hardly ever quitted him or the Marechal
de Biron. At firſt there appeared ſuch an emula-

tion amoyngſt the officers to be employed, that, to
avoid all diſcuſſions, the King regulated the time

and duration of each of their ſervices - and decla-

red that one day of four he would himſelf work at
the trenches, with the gentle men that were about

his perſon, who were to the number of two or
three hundred. |

I had ſolicited beforehand for a poſt in the ar-

— tillery, for which riy inclination was fo ſtrong,

that I ſubmitted to ferve not only under the Mare-
chal de Biron, but Meſſ. de la Guiche, de Born,
and de Fayolles alſo. But Piron, who had no af-
feftion for me, gained over theſe general officers,
and prevaited upon them to exclude me, with which
] bad afterwards reaſon to be well contented; for
thole pieces of ordrance of which I was to have
the charge, bappence. to fall into the power of the
enemy.

The motive of this Marechal's hatred 8
me was, that in the council, where it was debated
on what ſide the place ſhould be attacked, Biron
being of opinion, that we ſhould attack the caſtle;

I was not afraid io maintain, that we ought firſt to
apply to the city, which would bring along with it

the 1eduction of Fort St Catherine. This queſtion
was a Jorg time the ſubject of all converſations, as
well at the table, as at the council; and Biron ne-
ver forgot the expreſſion I gener ally uſed, The

city taken, the Ts _ 1 wrrender, 98 8 5
Vol I. IH

57 *
F 7 3.
7
; .
39+
1}
cr
# +
7 5
*
7
* 1
þ 9
1
4
Fade
Ni
15
i
»L
*
[7%
v4
Av
r N
"109
.
2 © =
1 9
*

- : - — _ = : _ ; : __ — — 2 K G _ — ge 4 —.'— — 9 —
3 "2 (ENDS 1 —— — "Dry 6 — — q * = — 1 r
I 1 we Memon — — - — WF, — 2 Y o — — — — : —
* - — RG OS I RY N _— 92 — " — — .
— —_— — ————— ͥ — — —ä—ẽ—— — ad — —gL— ——— — . ² — , ̃ — ³ͤõN! -UK. es IS
- ® 1 .
+ of *

230 MEMOIR S Book Iv.
I cannot indeed comprehend, how a man ſo ex-
perienced as the Marechal was, could determine

for attacking the caſtle, which, not to mention

the commander, or the gariiſon, (and neither the
man ner the garriſon were ordinary) nor its ex-

_ cellent fortifications, had this in particular from
the nature of the place, that in attacking 1 it without,

not half the number of ſoldiers could be brought a-
gainſt it which the beſieged could oppoſe to defend 5
it; which is quite contrary in cities of war.
However, the opinion of the Marcchal de Biron
carried it; for his authority, and the dependence

to which he had accuſtomed the other general of-
_ficers, captivated all the votes. Without doubt,

this Marechal, flattering himſelf that nothing could

be able to refit ſo ſtrong an army, embraced the ”

part which he thought the moſt oloriovs s, and the
likelieſt to bring the ſiege ſoon to an end; and the

King, who was reſolved not to ſpare himſelf *, by
following this advice, ſeemed to be of the ſawe *
pinion. For 1 look upon as a pure calumny, diſ-
ſeminated by the Mar echal's enemies, that report

which was whiſpered in the army, that he had aik-

ed the King for the government of Rouen, which
this prince had refuſed him, becauſe he had before
promiſed it to Du Hallot, upon the recommenda-

tion of M. de Montpenſſer; and that he endeavour-

ed underhand to fruſtrate this enterpriſe, and,

9 „ Perhaps alſo they Apen upon blowing up the fore of st
Catherine wich the mine; but the deſign was diſcovered by the be-

ſieged. Memurs of the le ue, vol. 5, T hoſe writers that have de-
„ 8

fended the Marr chal Biron's advice againſt that given by the Duke
of Sully, with regard to the place at which they ſhouid begin the at-
tack, ſay, that it was very difficult, and, at the ſame time, very

dannzrous, tor tlie army of Henry IV. to leave behind them the

fort of st Catherine, the hill e elpecially being ſo near the city. See,

_ noon the operations of this ſiege, Matthien, vol. 2. 88. 96. et ſeg: :

Cayet, Chron, Noven. vol 2 book 4. (who is for the Duke of Sal-

** opinion egulaſt the Marechal B. ron}; and other hiltorians.

through

5 e

ty; but nothing,

$-U L LY. 1

through envy, gave a counſel which he knew would
render all our efforts upon this place ineffectual. It
is more certain, that theſe eternal conteſtations

with the Duke of Boulllon had more than once

been like to ruin all; for this nobleman, to be re-

venged on the King, raiſed a mutiny amongſt the

horſe, and other German forces which he had

brought,

The batteries were bebe raiſed enpolits
to the fort, and we contented ourſelves, for guard-

ing the lower part of the river, to place there ſome

companies of German foot, which having been
worſted in ſome ſallies that were made on that ſide,

vielded the poſt to the Hollanders, who underſtood

lieges better than they. In effect, theſe laſt main-
tained themſelves there, and prevented ſallies by that
place. It was not long before the King perceived
that he had engaged in a work of extreme difficul-
he imagined, was impoſſible to
obſtinate bedr Villars was not contented with

defending himſelf within; he came out of the ca-

ſtle, and cauſed a deep tiench to be cut upon the

declivity of the hill, over-againſt the fort, with

which the end of it communicated, and placed

there in the night a guard of 6 or 700 men.

As this new work was extended far into the.
countty, and as it not only incommoded the be-
ſiegers in their attacks upon the caſtle, but alſo ex-

poſed them to be fallen upon in the rear, while at

the ſame time they had the garriſon from within in
front, the King reſolved to ſeize it, and to render

it uſeleſs. He made choice of the ſame night when

it was his turn to watch the trench with. his 300

gentlemen, whom he commanded to be completely -

armed, and to have, beſides their uſual arms, hal-
berts in their hands, and piſtols at their girdles,
and to his troop added 400 muſketeers or pike.
men. It was at midnight, and amidſt the extreme

ö e ee

232 M E M O I R S Bock Iv.

cold of December, that we attacked this trench in
different places. The action, which was very ob-
ſtinate, continued half an hour with equal animo-
ſity on the one part and the other. We made con-
ſiderable efforts to gain the brink, and the beſieged
repulſed us ſeveral times. 1 was twice thrown to
the ground, my halbert broke, and my arms
lofened or broke in pieces. Maignan, whom I
had obtained permiſſion to bring with me, raifed
me, put my arms again in order, and gave me bis
halbert. The trench was at laſt carried by main
force, and we cleared it of more than fifty dead or
dying enemies, whom we threw from the precipice
of the hill, This trench was open to the cannon
of the fort; but the King had the precaution to
order ſome gabions, hogſheads, and e of wood
to be brought there, which covered the n to
whom he committed the guard of it. 5
Villars had not expected to ſee his out works car-
ried in ſo ſhort a time. When he was told it, and
| that it was the King in perſon who had conducted
the enterprite, © By heavens,” ſaid be, © this
“ prince deſerves a thouſand crowns for his va-
4 Jour, I am ſorry that, by a better belief, he
e does not inſpire us with as ſtrong an inclination
& to acquire him new ones, as, by bis preſent
* creed, he gives us ſubject to diſpute with him
« his own: but it ſhall never be ſaid, that I hare
failed to attempt in my perſon what a great king
ce has executed in his.” In effect, he put .
at the head of 400 men, armed as he had bee
told the King's were, and taking alſo 800 Aae 55
ſelected out of his whole number, he attacked the
Engliſh, and diſlodged them from the trench. The
King felt himſelf piqued at the vanity of Villars,
and reſolving not to let go his hold, prepared for a
ſecond attempt. The Englith, apprehending re-
proaches, which they certainly had not merited,
3 Intreated

more than neceſſary to evite the ſhame of being

)))öͥͥͤͥ OS RT”.

intreated the King to put 100 Engliſh gentlemen in
his troop, and to fuiter all the foot, who were to
attend him on this occaſion, to be Engliſh likewiſe.
They alſo demanded leave to ſuſtain the firſt effort
of the enemy, and behaved in ſuch a manner, that
in ſpite of the reſiſtance of the beſieged, who had
doubled their number, the trench was a ſecond
time regained : they afterwards maintained them-

| ſelves in it, and took away from the beſieged all

inclination to approach it for the future. By what

happened for a ſimple ditch, it is eaſy to judge of

the event of a ſiege, of which this attack was but

the beginning. The King was ſenſible, that not-

vithſtandiog "all his care, and the infinite pains that
he gave himſelf, he would find great difficulty in

ſucceediqg. The deſtiny of France alone preſerved
this prink e on occaſions, when he hazarded his
| perſon in ſuck a manner, as made us ſometimes
_ deſpair of his life. And it was upon this ac-

court, that, the next day after the trench was ta-
ken, I found occaſion to expreſs our common
fears, when he drew -c afide, in the preſence of

the Catholics, and all the courtiers, to converſe

with me upon the preſent ſituation of his affairs.
I cannot do otherwiſe, my friend,” replied this
prince, as ſoon as I began to make my repreſenta-
tions; © and ſince it is for my glory and crown
4e that I fight, my life and ex 'ery thing elſe ought
« to be of no confideration with me.“

It is certain, that in the King's ſituation he could
not do leſs than he did, to perſuade the world, that
if this ſiege failed, it was not through his fault;
and all theſe inſtances of eminent valour were no
foiled in an attempt which one half of his army 38
feared he ſhould ſucceed in, almoſt as much as the
enemy themſeives. Theſe were the very ſame Ca-
tholics whom J have formerly mentioned, who,

U--3 nor

ee

75
.

234 M E MO IR S Book lv.

not contented with having obliged him to begin

the ſiege at a place Which rendered the taklng of
the city impoſſible, ſuffered him to ſuſtain. all the

trouble, obeyed him but by halves and with re-
gret, created obſtacles upon obſlacles, and pu-
blicly declared, that nothing was to be expedcd.
from them, while he was of a religion different
from their own.

It was to open his heart vpon ſo many ſubjects
of diſquietude and chagrin, that he was deſirous of
diſcourſing with me, and I then faid nothing to
him which he did not know as well as my ſelf ; at
ſo little trouble were his domeſtic enemies to con-
ceal their ſentiments. He told me, he had percei-
ved for fome time, that he was threatened with a
miſchief ſtill greater, which was the deſertion of all

the Catholics in his army; © which will bring along

0 6
(
cc
6

with it“ (theſe are the very words of this prince)
the ruin of tke ſtate, and that of the kouſe of
Bourbon; for if they once break with me, they
will never after chuſe for a king a prince of that
« family.” tle added, that this diſobedience was
an incurable evil, w hich he was obliged to diſſemble.
He made me obſerve, that, at the very time he

ſpoke to me, Meſſ. de Nevers, de Longueville, de
la Cuiche, d'O, and de Chateauvieux, jcalous of
ſo familiar a converſation with an Huguenot, ob-
ſerved us malignantly from a corner of the hall,

and whiſpered continually together. For this 1ca-

fon, he ſaid, it would be neceſlary to ſeparate, and
that he muſt be obliged to tell them that our diſ.
courle turned folely | upon a negotiation with the
Marquis of Villars, which, in reality, the King
had hinted to me in this converſation. =
Nothing could have happened more advanta-
geous for the King, than to have put an end to the
lege of Rouen by a treaty with Villars, which, in
leality, Would have it engaged kim from the league,

| and |

1302. OP 8 U L L X. 235
and brought bim into his own party. It was what
this prince ardently wiſhed for, but ſtill leſs for the
| honour of his enterpriſe, than for the advantage of

gaining over ſuch a man as this governor, He i-

magined it might be brought about by means of
 La-Fonr, for whom Villars had great conſideration,
though he was only bis ſtevward. The King was

not ignorant that Villars had received this dome-
ſtic into his ſervice, after he kad left mine; and
that La-Font owed his favour with his new maſter
to thoſe teſtimonies I had given of his probity.
This thought bad ſtruck me before it was men-
tioned by the King, and I had even found means
to get La- Font ſounded upon the ſubject. His an-

ſwer, which I related to the King, was, that at
preſent he ſaw no appearance of what I propoſed,

that he even thought himſelf obliged to prevent his

maſter's entertaining any ſuſpicion of his fidelity, -
to have no commerce with me, much leſs to ſee

me, as I propoſed : that all he could do, was to

obſerve if M. de Villars changed his ſentiments with
regard to the King, and in that caſe to confirm

him as much as poſhble in them, and to inform me
of it.

Henry thought no more of it; but before we
ſeparated, he aſked me what he ought to do with

regard to the liege, and the Prince of Parma, who,

he had juſt learned, had paſſed the Somme, to join
bis troops with thoſe of the Duke of Malenne.
The King doubted not but that his intention in this

Vas to proceed directly to Rouen, and ſtill leſs but
that Villars would eaſily hold out till his arrival, I

told the King, that I ſaw but two things for him
to do, and that it was his pat to determine upon
one of them. 'The firſt was, to change totally the

ou der, and place of attack, and to cairy it to the

fide of the city, and there uſe his utmoſt endeavours
to make himſelf maſter of it before the enemy
ſhould appear. The ſecond was, that without loſs

of

—

—

= tt — . * : ph e — — —— - — —
— — — yu — po by * e "2X — — =
7 „% 1 ar . — * 5 5 y . Z
_ — my et "= p- =
N * * * % —— — .
- 2 3 — — — : — 25 — =
— — — — ——
—

— — on — - 9 og —ů —
* — 2 — — — —ʒ —
A
— 7 q 2 oth 2 dy . —
2
— —
*

— — —

& — <>.
— -

236 NM E M OI R S Booklv.

of time he ſhould go and attack the Prince of Par-
ma, and oblige him to repaſs the Somme, and con-

tinue afterwards the ſiege without fear.
The King reſolved upon this laſt advice: but as

by following it he had no delign to raiſe the ſiege,

leſt the Prince of Parma, who perhaps had that on-

ly in view, ſhould afterwards avoid the battle, he
told me, that he would go and meet him with 7 or

$900 horſe, who were of no uſe at the liege; and
that he would attack him with this cavalry, or, if
he had not paſſed the Somme, diſpute his paſſage.
He quitted rae, ordering me to prepare myſelf to go
along with him with fifteen or twenty troopers on-

I, choſen from the reſt of my company,

I returned at the end of two days from Freſne
PEſplen , and, on my arrival at Darnetal, I learned

that Viilars bad wade a ſally at the head of 100
| borſe, with whom he had overpowered the guard;
and would have been the cauſe of much greater dif.
order, if the King, armed only with a cuiraſs, had
not run thither, followed by the Baron de Biron,
an Engliſh officer whoſe name has eſcaped me, Gril-

lon, and ſome othefs who were about him: theſe

three gentlemen eſpecially had covered themſelves
With glory, Grillon had his arm broke by a ſhot.

from an arquebuſe. As for the King, having pre-
cipitated himſelf into a danger, ſomewhat like that
which is related of Alexander the Great in the city

of the Oxydracæ, he extricated himſelf out of it
with the ſame preſence of mind, and the ſame in-
trepidity. If this, which is only an example, has
all the appearance of a fable, Henry's action had
two whole armies for witneſſes. |

The Prince of Parma, with his wha army,

poſſeſſed the border of the Somme, and, ſatisfied
with recovering this river, made ſcarce any mo-

tion ; for beſides that the governor of Rouen had

ſent to info! m him, that, as he intended to ſh ike

ſome :

„% OF 1 ‚ T r 1
ſome important blow, he might let it be a good 5
while before he came to his aſſiſtance; he waited

for the arrival of Sfondrate, who was to bring him

the troops of his uncle Pope Gregory XIV. *, and
thoſe of the Duke of Matenne, who however came

not ſo ſoon. He had been obliged to go with his

beſt troops to Paris, to puniſh the inſolence of the
Sixteen, who, abuling the power he had ſuffered

them to aſſume, had dared to hang the Preſident

Briſſon 4, and jome other counſellors, as reſpectable
for their virtue as for their age; and had doubtleſs
gone farther, if the Duke, fearing perhaps fome
ſudden caprice of theſe feditious counſellors ? a-
gainſt himſelf, bad net doomed them to the like
puniſhment : but as, in executing this act of juſtice,

he had certain meaſures to keep, he did not join

the Prince of Parma as ſoon as had been expected.

The King, when he was informed of this diſpo-
Roe, thought it neceſſary to haſten his march. He
left to the Marechal Biron mg care of carrying. on

Sixtus V. died in Aveuſt 1599. Henry IV: when he was in-
formed of his death, faid, “ Here is a trick of Spanifh pol.cy : I have |
& Joft a pope who was my all.“

+ © A cataſtrophe very unworthy of ſo learned FE excellent a
© man,” ſays Mezeray, fpcaking of the Preſident Briſſon, “ but u-
% ſual to thoſe who think to keep well with two parties.” For the
parliament being transferred by the King to Tours, Briſſon was the

only one of the {ix preſidents who. a e at Paris. The league

obliged him to perform the duties of Fiſt Preſident, and it was he
that belped to degrade K. Henry III. According to the Duke of Ne-
vers's obſervation, his death was looked upon to be a juſt puniſhment
of his ingratitude. Henry III. had freely beſtowed upon him the poſt
of Preſident. However, he was one of the greatcſt men of the robe.
The Duke of Maſcnne revenged his death, by cauſing Louchard,
Amcline, Aimonet, and Anrous, four of the lixtcen, to be hanged :
in a parlour of the Louvre.

+ One of the ſixteen, named Aman faid one FO in hos Duke
of Maienne's chamber, « Thoſe who m3de him have a right to un-

make him.“ Hamilton, the curate of St Come, a furious leaguer,

came himſelf, attended by prieſts inſtead of ſoldiers, to Kere the
Countcitor T argit 4 in his houle,

the

238 M E F - 8 & R 8 Bock IV.
the ſiege, whoſe forties he weakened but by 7 or
8000 Horſe; conſiſting from 3 to 4000 French
troopers, as many German horſe, and 1000 horſe-
arquebuſiers; at the head of which he departed
from Darnetal, and took the road to the Somme.
He paſſed the firſt day by Boiſſiere and Neuf Cha-
tel; the ſecond by Blangy, Londiniere, Longue-
ville, Senerpont, and Gamache; and the third ad-
vanced to Folleville, with a ſimple detachment, lea-
ving the body of his cavalry behind him, to be e con ·
ducted by the Duke of Nevers.
We met a conſiderable party, led by Mell de
Roſne, de Balagny, de Vitry, the Baron de la
Chatre, St Pol, La Mothe *, and others, who had
doubtleſs advanced with the ſame deſign as we, to
reconnoitre the ſituation and forces of the enemy.
The King commanded the Baron de Biron, Meſſ.
de Lavardin, de Givry, de St Ceran, de Marivaut,
de Chanlivant, La-Curee t, d'Alambure, and ſome
others, to go and attack them; who were repulſed
and handled very roughly; and part fell, among
which was Lavardin. Henry ran with 300 horſe
to diſengage them; and, believing this encounter
might be followed by an action more ſer] ious, at leaſt
between the cavalry of the two armies, which was
What be greatly withed for, ſent orders to Nevers
to e his pace. But | the Prince of Parma,

* La Methe, governor of Valenciennes, was 2 2 Frenchman, of the

country of Beauvaiſis; but he had all his life ſerved in the Spaniſh ar-

my, and was ſlain i in 1595, at the ſiege of Dourlans, at the head of

the Spaniſh artillery, very much reoretied by the Spaniards. The
King of Spain had juſt created him Count of Ekelbeke. See his
death and pancegyric in De Thou, book 112.
I La- Cue was one of thoſe perſons in whom the King confided,
I | was called by him nothing but Curce. Be performed wonders at
the battle of Ivry, and on many other occalions. The voiume of
Ms. in the royal library marked 8929. is filled with relations of his

intrepidity, Ee was killed! in an encqumter at the ſiege of Mont-
auban. | | |

h

1592. 0 F oo L Y. 239

who had a quite contrar y deſi ign, reſtrained his ſqua ·

drons, who had retreated of themſelves when they
perceived ours advance; and the King, ſeeing no
appearance of affecting any thing in the midſt of
ſo many battalions, and the night already approach-

ing, contented himſelf with obſerving this army

cloſely, and checking its motions, as he went to his

quarters at Breteuil; where his cavalry, for fear of

a ſurpriſe, were obliged to keep themſelves extreme-

ly cloſe, and part of them even lay without all night,
though the ground was covered with ſnow.
The ardour with which the King went to meet

an enemy greatly ſuperior, awakened our fears for

the dangers to which he expoſed his perſon, and
obliged us ſtrongly to repreſent to him the conſe-

quences. But this prince, who had no conception

cf that management we propoſed to him, when
glory was in queſtion, c changed not his conduct. He
contented himſelf with naming thirty of us to con-
tinue near his perſon, and not to leave him upon
any occaſion whatever. An employmen t very ho-

nourable in truth; but the danger of it ſomewhat

abated the paſon for it. With this precaution,
which was no more than ſufficient, he only exp; vied
himſelf ſtill more.

Being informed that the Dake of Gu iſe, who com-
manded the Prince of Parma's vanguard, had put
himſelf at the head of his ſquadron, to facilitate
the lodgment of this infantry in a large town called.

Bures, he refolved to cut off this ſquadron ; which

he executed with the utmoſt vi igour, at the head of

1200 horſe and 1009 horſe 3 1d. nebuſiers. A great
number of the enemy were left dead upon the place,

and the reſt betook themſelves to flight. Ihe Duke

of Guiſe's green ſtandard was taken, and all the
baggage plundered, Henry, who waz not willing

that a any of theſe cavaliers {bout eicape him, eſpe-
cially their Colonel, ſent immediate orders to the

Duke

%% ME M OI A 2 Bock iw.
Duke of Nevers to advance with all ſpeed to Bully,
that he might poſſeſs himſelf of the road through

which he conjectured the Duke of Guiſe and the fu-
gitives would retreat to the reſt of the army, and

take them priſoners. I had orders to ſuſtain the
Duke of Nevers with ſixty horſe ; which I obeyed
with reluctance, not doubting, but in ſuch hands

the affair would have an iſſue little worthy of its be-
ginning.

The Duke af News, the floweſt of all men, be-

gan by ſending to make choice of the moſt favour-

able roads, and marched with a flow pace towards
Bully, with his hands and his noſe in his muff, and

his whole perſon well packed vp in his coach. This

once he had no occaſion to boaſt of his extreme

_ caution, | It was fo long before he arrived, that he
gave time to the Prince of Parma, who was greatly

more alert than he, to throw a regiment of 15 or
1600 men into Bully, who made uch taſte, that
they reached the town in the beginning of the night.
As for the Duke of Nevers, the ſun riſing the next
pay found him at laſt upon the height of the moun-

tain at the foot of which Bully is ſituatec d, preceded
by his couriers, whom he had that day doubled,

through an exceſs of precaution apain{t a lying

enemy: the firſt, to the number of fifty, marched
two or three wiles before him ; and the ſecond,
which amounted to loo, went ſome fow paces ug
fore his coach. But unfortunately, with all his fore-
Tight, he had forgot to make ſure of this p paſſage,
and had not ſent a ſingle ſoldier to keep guard there.
He began to deſcend the mountain with great tran—

quillity, and doubtleſs with more tranquillity than

if he had known whom he was to find in Boliy.
His firſt couriers, entering the city, were ſufficient-

ly ſurpriſed at the ſight of ſo much good company;

but as the cold had obliged theſe ſoldiers to diſarm,

and to ay Gown their n to range themſelves
rourd

I
.
.
4
ö (

iI

r

— 04

w

1592. 0 . 247
round a large fire w hich they had kindled, theſe fifty
_ couriers had time to ſave themſelves by Bight. This
they did not indeed upon that ſide where their ma-

ſter was, but by paſſing quite through the city, and

getting out at the oppoſite end as faſt as their legs
could carry them, without troubling themſelves a-
bout what might become of the Duke of Nevers;
Who, with his coach, was juſt then ſticking in the
_ deepeſt part of a deſcent, equally ſteep, rugged,
and winding. It was in this place that the Duke
of Nevers, hearing the noiſe of ſome fulileers who
were firing after his ficſt couriers, and the ſecond
_ having come to ee their report, full of con-
ſternation, was frozen with fright ; and tcfol-
ving now at laſt to toſs no time, he threw away
his muff and his fars, not without often exclaim-
ing, The devil,” nor without quarrelling his va-
1 lets for not coming readily enough to help him out.
All their endeavours could not diſengage the coach,
Which was aps to be dragged back to the top of
the mountain; where the Duke again made vie of
it, to return a Ale more Halli) to the place where
he had lam the preceding night. It was thus that
we ſeconded the King upon this occaſion : A truly
- ridiculous cxpluit, Where the danger did not equal
the fear by a great deal, lince not a ſingle man
Was loſt.

The Prince of Parma, by this important blow,

knowing what ſort of an enemy he had to deal
With, durſt not for the future fauffer his vanguard to
27 be ſeparated from the army; and perceiving that the

King almoſt never lott fipht of bim, iedoubled his

dliſidence; which was, without doubt, the cauſe

that he did not take all the advantage he might have

done of the encounter at Aumale : An action ſin-

1 golarly hardy on the King's ſide, and well oalerving
a paiticular relation.

Some day's after that I have ja mentioned, the
| OP GL, 5 & - | | Kir 8

% ᷣ M Book lv.

Eing following the Prince of Parma at a great di-

Nance, had advanced, with 6900 horſe towards Au-

male. Givry, whom he had ſent at the head of
ſome troopers to get Intelligence, returned and in-
formed him, that the enemy 's army was advancing
directly towards him in the plain, in good order,

apparently with a deſign to force him back, and to

cut him off in his retreat. The King called a coun-
cil; and finding, as he ſaid, that he had too many
And too few ſoldiers, he reſolved to ſend all his ca-

valry back to Ophy, Blangy, and Nevuf-Chatel, and „

to keep with him only 400 troopers, and 500 wee
arquebuſiers, and with this body of men to advanc
into the plain, to diſcover exactly the "condition ;
and the number of the enemy; and hovering about
El them, to take or cut off ſome ſquadrons,
Hie mounted the hill of Aumale, with his 900

horſe, and marched two leagues without perceiving

any thing, till the ſky, which had been extremely
dark, becoming very clear, he a ſecond time ſaw
_ Givry return, who came to give him full ſatis faction
in all that he wanted to know about this army. It
was ſo near that they heard diſtinctly the ſound cf
the trumpets and drums. But Henry would needs
ſee it himſelf, He made an exact review of it, and
found that it conſiſted of 17 or 18,000 Infantry,
Vith 7 or 8000 cavalry, who marched very cloſe:
the cavalry, in the midſt of the battalions, and the
hole flanked with chariots and baggage, that ten.
dered approach impoſſible. From this ſituation of

The enemy, he found he had ſtill too many men;
and retaining only 100 troopers, ordered the 890
others to repaſs the dyke and town of Aumale, and

| 3co horſe of his ſquadron to ſtop upon the decli-
vity of the hill, to be within reach to aſſiſt him, if
there ſhould bs occalion. Five hundred arquebu-
ſiers he gave to the conduct of Lavardin, with or-
ders to poſt them in the ditches and hedges that
| Were

1392.

ter his reſolution.

O F

Were at the entrance of the town, from whence
they might incommode ſuch of the enemy as ap-

proached too near. As for himſelf, he not only

_ waited for the enemy with his 100 horſe, but even

marched to meet them.
At this moment we all gazed upon one another,

perfectly aſtoniſhed at the temerity of a deſign, which
ſeemed to expoſe the perſon of the King to inevi-
table death.

_ with him, yet knew not how to be ſilent. At length
I was choſen and deputed by the reſt, to repreſent

No one durſt venture to expoſtulate

to the King, in the name of us all, the danger to
which he expoſed himſelf, and to intreat him! to al-
This commiſſion I performed i in
the molt cautious terms that I could deviſe. * Tis

„ the language of fear,” replicd the King; © from

“ you, of all others, 1 would never have expected
4 fp 23
| R.

I prayed him not to think ls unjuſtly of
any of us; and told kim, that the only thing we

2 required was, that he would give us what orders
= he pleaſed, provided he would himſelf retire. This

prince confeſſed to me afterwards, that being fen-

ſibly affected with theſe words, he repented of

what he had ſaid to me. He anſwered, that no ex-

Preſſions of gur fidelity could reach the idea he con-

ceived of it.“ But,” added he, coldly, and with

an air that „ me that it was uſeleſs to ſpeak
to him more, be you allo aſſured, that I am not
4 fo raſh as you imagine; that Lam as much a-
4 fraid of my {kin as another; and that I will re-

i treat io ſeaſonably, that no inconvenience Mall

ce happen. ”

The Prince of Parma 00010 not but RS vpon
an attempt ſo hardy, as a ſnare that was laid for
him, to draw his cavalry into an open field where
he ſhould meet with the King's, which he ſuppoſed
to be concealed, and ſuperior to his. He even ſus»
ſpected a long time, that the King's whole army

X 2 could

— INNO LETTER — —
—— —— —
— WW” alt” ae

31 mY N -

—

© » et "UP" ——— Inn *
. . WAR — —

——

＋ — — —
8 be
e
2

—

—

=; 8 — ——
- ' —
— — — 2 :
— —vu— — —J _ — —————
— — — :
- —

gs ov
— —
ey =

—
22
—

M - —— CET
Rn — 2 >
1 —
ww —
- — —
— ce
—

— 25!

— 8 — ne
— — Ir *
— xx —— I

—

— — Lora eo
—
— — —

— —
—

—

—
— —

n N OT —
* — . 1 nr — — —
K >—t— nn > TT * — — - — —
wat ape — — | — a

- : - * e 2 . — 22
— — — 2
— A a,
-

—
5

no rilk by attacking us;

ambuſcade in this place, and itop.

244 MEM 0 1 R 8 Book Iv.

could not be far off; and; having no delien to en-
gage bim, he did not quit his poſt, which was in

the centre of his army, where he was ſeated in an
uncovered chariot, without arms or boots, and em-

ployed in giving orders to reſtrain the ardour of the
ſoldiery, Who ſuffered with i
to inſult 30, 0.
by the report of his light horſe and his earabineers,

impatience 1co men
However, when he was aſſured,

that at preſent he had "but 109 horſe in front, and

that if there was any cavalry, it muſt be on the

other ſide of the valley, he thought he ſhould run
which he did with ſuch
tury, and at ſo many places, that we were broke

through, and driven back as far as the valley. Here

ir was that our arqucbuſiers ought to have poſted

- themſelves; and on our arrival, the King cried to
by em to charge, 2 afte

r having firſt warned us not to
charge, in order That the enemy might ſuſpect an
In effect, they

id ſtop ſhort ; but finding that this cry was follow.

cd only with iifty or ſixty ſhots which we fired up-

on them, they came on again with more obſtinacy.
Our arquebukers, ſeized with fear, or perhaps
willing to chuſe a more advantageous ground, had

1etired much lower than the place that had been

marked for them, and they were the principal cauſe

of the misfortune that happened. The enemy's
| ſquadrons, encouraged by the little reſiſtance they
found, purſued their point, and we could not bin-
der them from mixing amongſt us.
ſelves reduced to the neceſſity of fighting with this

We ſaw our-

vaſt multitude with our piſtols and ſwords, in a

; danger that may be eaſily imagined : and, indeed, in
my opinion, there could not be a greater ; for from
a hundred we were already reduced to forty. Hen-
y, leeing that none came to aſſiſt him to extricate
himſelf out of this bad ſtep, reſolved to make his

retreat: which, ON this occaſion, was almolt as pe-

rilous

FFT

rilous as his defence, becauſe we had a bridge to

pals, and that bridge at a great diſtance, This
prince, with a compoſure truly admirable, placed
himſelf in the rear of his troop, and made it file off

towards the bridge of Aumale, which, by the or-

der he cauſed to be obſerved, it paſſed over without
confuſion. He was the laſt that paſſed, and held
firm againſt the enemy till every one of us was on

the other ſide. That moment he was ſhot in the
reins; and it was a ſignal happineſs, that he re-

ccived no more than this one wound, which did
not hinder him from continuing to fight on the
other fide of the bridge, while he was endeavouring
to gain the hill; where the 400 horſe he had ſent.
thither made ſo good an appearance, that the Prince

of Parma, more than ever perſuaded that he only

ſought to draw him to a battle, forbid his troops to 5
| advance, and wade them all return to Aumale.

The King, on his ſide, reached Neuf.Chitet,
where his wound obliged him to go to bed. T he
ſurgeons removed our conſternation by aſſuring us,
that it was incopſiderable. He obliged us to come

near his bed, and converſed with us familiarly upon

the dangers of that day: upon which I obſerved, as
ſomething ſingular, that among us all, who were in

the chamber, there were not two perſons who could

agree in the recital of the moſt particular eircum-
ſtances of the action *. In general, it paſſed as I

have related: what appeared doubtful to me, I
have buppreſſed'; but as It is here, one may be cer»

» There is faves any ſkirmiſh or battle of which as much may |
not be ſaid. Although there are a great number of writers, and even

contemporaries, who have treated of the military. exploits contained
in theſe Memoirs, I cannot meet with two who agree exactly in their

deſeriptions. D?Aubigne, in that of the encounter at Aumale, does
not even mention the King's wound, which was the only one he ever
received in his life. Matthieu, ibid. p. 100. and our bell hiſtorians,
differ but little from our Memoirs.

* | tain

2 reer

j
1 x
[
|
we
i
;
N |
ty (44
tt
I i4s
*
1
Fl 1
14
i
n x
N
7 *
4 Vo
4
.
, »
* 114
1
\
!
'
'
f
}
{
[
:
£
& 7.
a
N
ach
Ai
LY
| \
14 \
1
Nin
"4 1+
4 U
"tf
: pk -
WR
1 3
1 1
$46 bit
10 14
1
$41
HAH
Wy
4
* ;
*
1
11
1

'
1
4
\Ty
ſt
*
*
vi
l

— . :
— —ͤ—— — 2 —

246 MEMOIR S Bock w.

' tain that there are few kings whoſe lives preſent 2s

much *. |
The Prince of Parma's over-prudence hurt him

upon this occaſion: it hindered him from cutting

off our whole ſquadron, that is to ſay, from —_

Ing the war that day, by the death or taking of th
King; for the one or other was inevitable. But be

was dete mined to undertake nothing till he was

joined by the Duke of Malenne, not being willing
10 bear alone all the inconveniencies of a war, of

which he was not bimſelf to reap all the fruits.
He was not able to comprehend the cauſe of this

delay in the chief of the league: the ſuſpicions he
1

entertained of it made him ſuddenly change the
march of his army, and take the road back to the

Somme An action excuſable in a ftranger, who

| faw himſelf in the midſt of a country, where he was
not warring in bis own behalf. Henry, who, with-

Out conhdering what was glorious for himſelt in the
laſt battle, called it only the error of Aumale ; and

being ſolicitgus to repair this Heroic error, could
nL

not iclolve to ſuffer the Spaniſh general quietly to

retreat. He put off the cure of his wound to ans
other time, and remounting bis horſe, continued to
gall him, very much troubled that he could not do
more. But he had a politic general to deal with,
who, naiwithſtanding all bis endeavours, preſented
bim ys s wich an infantry in fr ont, Which Le
cou! KY not 1 and conducted himiſelf with fo.

much wiſdom, that it was I poll e, even at the

. Heury having ſent to the Prince of Parma to alk his eie of

this 16ircat, he rep Flied, that * indeed it was a very fine one; but
„that, far his part, he never agen in any place from whence he
Was 2 Jed to retire”) Peref. ibid. part 2. It was on this occaſion

that Du-Pleſſis- Mornay wrote this pretty letter to the Xing. Fire,
** In war you have been an Alcxander : it is time you ſhould now
© be Au zu us: it is ou, 90 Oy and 1 to die tor you 3 and yours,
4% J dare tell you, Sire, to live ior France,“ &c. Nees upon the
Penriudes | |

pallage

id

Id

BY OF 3 L L v.

247
paſſage of the river, to have an encounter with
him. The King at length, quitting him at Pont-
dormy, returned to Neuf-Chatel, to have his wound

curcd, at the houſe of M. de Claire; where I was
received as a friend and relation. I kept only a va-·

let de chambre, a page, and a footman with me,

and ſent all the reſt of my equipage to wy quarters
before Rouen.

The ſucceſs of the ſieve became more doubtful

| every day : at laſt the King was informed, by a

courier, that Villars, at the head of 200 muſketeer S,

and or 400 ſoldiers had in the night made a fu-

rivus fally on the ſide of Darnetal ; that he had pe-

netrated even into the King's quarters, where he had

cut all the German foot to pieces, and carried off
fix picces of cannon, and all the powder; that af-

terwards, purſuing his point, he had fallen upon

the trench, which he attacked behind; had killed

there 3 or 400 men, and put the reſt tO flight: in
a word, that he did not retire till he had cleared and

demoliſhed almoſt all the works of the beſiegers. .
This melancholy news recalled the King imme—

diately to Rouen: be was there convinced, that

this misfortune was wholly occaſioned by the Ma-

rechal de Biron's fault; but although he looked up-

om it as irreparable, and hated this com mander *,
he was much upon his guard, not to let any thing
appear. The natural hatred of the Catholics of his

*® There cannot be a ſtronger proof” of the reſpe and deferenee
which Renry IV. thought himicif obliged to ſhew the Marechal Bi-
ron, than what this prince ſaid one day to young Chatillon, on a
certain occaſion, when he offuicd me very reafo znable advice, but
contraty to the mind of the Maicchal : “ The goflings,” ſaid he,
* would lead the geele to the patiure, When your beard is white,
perhaps you mey have acquired ſome knowl:dge. I do not ap-

prove of your ſpcaking 0 frecly: that bel: N95 only to my father
there,” pointing to Biron, who had threat cned to retire; 6 We

mult,” puiſucd he, embracing him, © go all to his ſchool,” Mat-
t val, 2. 2. 16. |

60
„
40

party

148
1

#
5 405
*

248 M E M O13 Book IV.
party againſt the Proteſtants, took this occaſi on to
inſult the Marechal de Biron, who, next to the

King, was looked upon as the principal ſupport of

the Huguenots. The Catholics ſaid openly, that
Heaven would never favour Henry's party, while

he continued a heretic, (a ſpeech very ſenſible after :

all the ſucceſſes he had met with till this very mo-

ment!) ; and that they expoſed themſelves to the divine

malediction, by aſſociating with this reprobate body.
From thence, animated by their zeal, they formed
a deſign of taking up all the Huguenots, who had been
interred indiſcriminately with the Catholics, and lea-
ving their carcaſes a prey to the crows. Two things
| hindered the execution of a deſign as contrary to
religion as to nature itſelf : the difficulty of diſtin-
guiſhing the bodies, and fear leſt the Proteſtants,
who compoled two thirds of the army, ſhould think
their honour engaged to revenge upon the living Ca-
tholics an outrage, which, through a zeal for reli.

gion, exceeded all others,
The King, who perceived theſe diſpoſitions on

both lides, inſtead of blaming any particular perſon,

or ſuffering a diſcontent to appear, which might in-

_ creaſe the public broils, affected to fay openly, that

the misfortune was not ſo great as they figured to
themſelves. In reality, great as it was, it did not

appear ſo conſiderable to this prince as a diviſion,
which, without the greateſt addreſs upon bis part,
might either deprive him of all the Catholics in his

party, or, on the firſt opportunity, ſet one half a-
gainſt the other. It was very hard fore this prince,
in the midit of fo many aud ſuch ſenſiblè diſquie-
tudes, to be obliged to keep all within his own

| heart, and ſubſtitute unworthy compliance: in the

place of abſolute commands: but he was not igno-

rant that the tone of authority, which has the

power of ſubjecting all men, vicu it proceeds from

1592 0 .

a man known for his ſuperior abilities, has no effect

upon minds inflamed and difunited by religion.

He was alſo perfectly ſenſible, that Pafter the
misfortune occaſioned by ſuch bad conduct, no-

thing now remained to be done but to raiſe the ſiege 9
Rouen: and he only ſought for a plauſible pretence for

doing ſo, without awakening at the ſame time the
public diſſenſions. He learned therefore with great
joy, that the Prince of Parma, reinforced by the
troops of the Duke of MaTenne and Sfondrate, was

. returning haſtily to give him battle. He thought
this a favourable opportunity to leſſen the ſhame of

raiſing the ſiege, and to turn againſt the common
enemy the fury of two ny Which were rending
his army in pieces. |

That he might gain time to e his lines
without confuſion, "and regulate the order of his
march, he ſent Givry to throw himſelf into Neuf-
Chitel, which the enemy would be obliged to take

before they could come to Rouen. This, although

a place of ſufficient ſtrength, did not hold out near

ſo long as he had expected: the cauſe of which is
difficult to be aſſigned; but the whole blame was

caſt upon Palcheux, who was much weaker, and
worſe ſuſtained, than Givry “*, although an old offi-

cer, and diſtinguiſhed by his actions and his wounds,

he ſuſtained all the violence of the ſtorm; and was

put under arreſt at Dieppe, in my opinion, very

unjuſtly. The relations and friends whom the gar-

riſon of Neuf-Chatel had in the party of the league,

ſeemed to me to be the true cauſe that the place |

made fo ſlight a reſiſtance. It ſurrendered in the
middle of March. The King, by his care and di-
. - Byencs, repaired this misfortune, and drew off his

* Neuf-Chätel might have been taken in an hour's time, ſays
Matthieu; who nevertheleſs, as well as the Duke of Sully, blamed

Sivry for turrendering without making preater reſiſtance. vol. 2.
5 102. |

troops

450 M NM O 1. R 8 Book IV.

troops from Rouen without receiving the leaſt
check *; and, putting himſelf at their head, ad-
vanced without loſs of time to that ſide on which
he knew the Prince or Parma was e the
city.

On his arrival at a plain, where the enemy's ar-
my muſt paſs, he waited for it; and as ſoon as it
appeared, ſent and offered the Prince of Parma
battle. The Prince accepted it with apparent joy,
although inwardly he was very averſe. He was a-
fraid of engaging with a general ſuch as he knew
Henry to be, and of expoling to the event of a
battle the reputation of the moſt able warrior in
Europe, which a long ſeries of great actions had
acquired him among his partiſans, Finding kim-
ſelf now in ſuch a ftuation as that he might be for-
ced to fight, he had recourſe to one of the moſt
art ful ſtratagems imaginable to avoid it: he cauſcd
the beſt troops amongſt all his battalions to ad-
vance, and compoſed of them a front of battle;
behind which he drew up, as without deſign, all bis
cavalry. Under favour of this front of infantry,
ordered as uſual for an action, and ſeeming to
wait only for the ſignal, all his cavalry, the
remainder of bis foot, and the whole baggage,
entered into the defiles, which ſerved for an out-
let to the enemy's camp; and, covered by hills
and buſhes, which the Prince of Parma knew mar-
vellouſly well how to take advantage of, they ſaw
themſelves very ſoon out of reach of the King's ar-
my, who were ignorant of all that paſſed behind
the camp. This front of infantry, which had no
depth, taking the ſame route after the other 5, in

» This * coſt the King a arent many ſoldiers. to thoſe limes
it was reported that he loſt 3000 men, and the beſieged only So.

The Earl of Eſſex challenged Adm. de Villars to ſingle combat, who :

replieq, that his quality of Governor forbade him. Sce the Chron.
Noven. and Mezerat, | ws

| ſou;

1 0 . 2514
four and twenty hours all diſappeared; nor was it
poſſible, on account of the ground being full of
narrow ſtreights and necks of mountains, to diſor-
der the enemy's retreat, or to engage with his
rearguard.
The Prince of Parma was extremely rejoiced.
that, without the leaſt loſs, he had reached the ve-
ry gates of Rouen. He knew no perſon would be
hardy enough to attempt to ſtorm him under the
walls of this city; his deſign, therefore, was to
ſlay there about fix weeks, which was a ſufficient
time to refreſh his army, and afterwards to march
back to the Somme by Neuf-Chatel, Aumale, St
Valery, and Pontdormy; confining all the expedi -
tions of this campaign to the advantage of putting
this capital, and the reſt of the cities that kept firm
to the league, out of a condition to apprehend any
thing from the King's army. Henry penetrated in-
to this generals deligns; ; and forbearing obſtinately
to make head againſt an army ſo advantageouſly
| poſted, ſufiered the Prince of Parma to 8 his
triumph, and laid another ſnare for him. He diſ-
banded his whole army, as if it had now become
uſeleſs to him, or as if he had been conſtrained to it
by neceſſity. Part of it was diſperſed in Arques,
Dieppe, Gournai, Andely, Giſors, Magny, and o-
ther diſtant places; and part had Mante, Meulan,
and the adjoining places for its quarters: the reſt
he ſpread about Pont de V Arche, Evreux, Paſly,
Vernon, Conches, and Breteuil, and fixed himſelf at
Louviers. This conduct was ſufficiently juſtified
by appearances : it would not have been Ka poſ-
ſible to have ſubſiſted a numerous army, had he
kept them together; but by the diſpoſition of his
quarters, particularly the laſt, where he had diſtri-
buted all bis beſt troops, and by the promiſe he
had exacted from his officers to repair to Pont de
Parche at the firſt order, it was cafy for him to
reunite

— . rat
.

l
|

252 MEMOIRS Book IV.

reunite his army in a ſhort time. T bis ſeparation,

he reckoned, would make the, Spaniſh general per-

fectly ſecure, and furniſh him with ſome means of
ſurpriſing him, at leaſt in his retreat.
In effect, the Prince of Parma, fearing that
Rouen, ſurrounded by ſo large an army, would be
ſpeedily famiſhed, and to whom it was repreſented
that there would be no danger in ſpreading himſelf
over the country, made part of his troops advance
to Ponteau-demer : D*Hacqueville delivered up this
city to him cowardly enough; and the King not
only ſeemed to be indifferent about it, but feigned
moreover an ignorance of the enemy's deſign upon
Caudebec, which greatly annoyed the city of
Rouen; and neglecting to ſend ſupplies to La Garde,
who was governor of it, ſuffered this place to be
taken. He obſerved, with extreme pleaſure, that
the enemy, after theſe two cor quelts, attracted by
the conveniency of lodgings and proviſions, extend ·
ed themſelves along the Seine, below Rouen, as
far as they could. The Spaniſh general, however,
was not without ſuſpicion of ſome ſecret deſign in
this inactivity, ſo unuſual with Henry; and doubt.
leſe, had he been the ſole commander of this ar-
my, he would not have hazarded ſo much. But

he repoſed himſelf upon the aſſurances of his col-

league, the Duke of Matenne, who was then de-
tained in Rouen, by an indiſpoſition, that no miſ-
fortune could befel him; and he believed it, upon

a ſuppoſition that he was better acquainted with

the ſtate and diſpoſition of the countries. |
The King, finding the enemy contributed of
themſelves to ſerve his deſigns, reſolved to haſten.
their execution. In leſs than eight days he aſſem-
| bled 20,000 foot and 8oco horſe, with whom he
ſpeedily advanced to Varicarville and Fontaine-le-
bourg. All the paſſages between Rouen and Cau-

debee he ſhut up, ans. began with revenging him-

e

F ˙ . ˙— u ⅛—VA Say . a ©

N 1 l "TY

? 11502, O F SUL EL 253

ſelf completely for the raking this place and Ponteau-
demer, by cutting off from the troops which were
there, all communication with the body of the ar-
my, which put them wholly into his diſcretion.

He afterwards came in perſon with 10,000 foot
and 3000 troopers, to attack, without delay, the

enemy's vanguard, commanded by the Duke of
Guiſe. The furpriſe into which his ſudden arrival
threw this troop, rendered the conqueſt of them
eaſy. The Duke's ſquadrons were broke through
at the firſt onſet, and he was obliged to fly with
precipitation towards the body of the battalions,
leaving with a great number of the lain, all the

bags age, which was conſiderable, in the Power of

the ; vanquiſher.
the Prince of Parma, track as with a thunders
bolt at this news, applied himſelf wholly to ſecu-

ling his other quarters, by placing the Duke of
Guiſe as Yvetot, and in fortifying the camp, in
which be lodged his diſperſed troops, on all ſides.

He was deſirous of quaitering all the army there;

but as this camp was too ſmall to contain it, he

commanded the reſt not to remove far from it, to

guard their poſts with great care, and to keep them
lelves very cloſe. After this precaution, which he
did not think ſufficient, to ſupport all the lodg-
ments ſpread around his camp, he poſted 3000

men in a wood which bounded them, fortified this

wood all round with intrenchments, and joined it

by a line of communication with the camp. The
laſt ſtep the King had taken made him extremely

formidable to the Prince of Parma; but this prince
thought to eſcape him by his great foreſight, and
diligence in going where-ever his preſence was ne-
ceſſary: he was again miſtaxen. The next day the

King ordered the Baron of Biron to attack the

wood with a body of 8coo infantry, compoſed of

an equal number of Engliſh, Dutch „ and Germans,
Vox. I. Y e

in u d b e e
to animate them by emulation to excel each other,
and cauſed them to be ſupported by 600 troopers,
completely armed. The attack laſted three hours;

at the end of which the wood was carried. Thoſe
who defended it, ſeeing themſelves broke through,

fled in diſorder to the fortified camp, after having

loſt above 800 of their men. Their flight expoſed
the greateſt part of the lodgments, particularly that

of Yvetot, where the Prince of Pama thought he
had incloſed, as in a place of aſylum, the Duke of
Guiſe, with the ſame vanguard that had been fo
badly handled already. Henry, as if he had a per-
ſonal hatred to the Duke of Guiſe, haſtened to re-
connditre the quarter of Yvetot ; and judging by the

alarm, and the confuſed cries he heard there, that

their conſternation was not yet over, he fell upon

this quarter with 400 muſketeers and loc foot,

armed with piſtols and halberts, and attacked it in
ſeveral places at once. The Prince of Parma, who
had not expected ſuch rapid execution, ſaw his whole
_ vanguard upon the point of being put to the ſword;
and taking counſel only of neceſlity, ran thither
_ kimſelf, and vigorouſly ſuſtained our efforts, til!

the troops of this whole quarter had gained the
fortified camp. He loſt there 7 or 8co men, al-

moſt all private ſoldiers. The greateſt misfortune

was, that in this action, wherein he behaved like

a man who knew as well how to fight as to com-
mand, he received a very dangerous wound in the
"Ts. JJ ² mm 8

Night

»The little reliance one can have on the exactneſs of thoſe mili-
tary details which the hiſtorians give us, is ſhewn particularly in this,
in which I have obſerved a great many contradictions amongſt them,
with regard to the incampments, and the number and date of the
encounters. The author of theſe Memoirs relates a'l theſe expedi-
tions in ſuch a manner, that he ſeems to allow but three or four
days for actions which could not, and were not, performed in lels
than three weeks, Ile cau no other wiſe be juſtified, than by ſuppo-

ſing

1

nts} ng LI. od ED Gonna nn it.

FCC 255
Night approached before this battle was ended.

1 The King, inſtead of taking any reſt after a day fo

well improved, employed the night wholly in pre-
paring himſelf for greater advantages. Judging
therefore, that the enemy's army, numerous in-
deed, and covered with intrenchments, yet dif-
mayed, and half vanquiſhed, would keep cloſe
within their camp, where their number would hurt

them more than it could ſerve them, he heſitated

not a moment in undertaking to force it. That

* readineſs which governed all the actions of this

prince, was in him not only the effect of nature,
but the fruit of reading, in particular the lives of

—

Cæſar and Scipio, hom he ſtudied preferably to

all the conquerors of antiquity. He drew out in

the night ſix pieces of cannon, which he pointed
againſt the fortification of the camp, that-he might
make uſe of thera at the dawn of day. He vilited

his whole army; and kept it in ſuch a diſpoſition,
that it might be drawn out at this hour at the ſame

place, in order of battle. His commands were

ſing that he intend d to give a flight notion only of this campaign.

D' Aubigné, either becauſe he was ignorant of the facts, or had no de-
ſign to relate them minutely, gives room for the ſame miſtake, as

our Memoirs, vol. 3. book 3. c. 15. It is in De Thou, Davila,
Matthicu, Cayet, and the Memoirs of the league for 1592, that
we muſt look for them; although, as | have juſt ſaid, their relations
differ in many circumſtances. According to the Memoirs of the
league, which, in my opinion, merit moſt to be credited, the King
defeated the Duke of Guiſe on the 28th of April, and another body
of troops on the 1ſt of May; on the 5th attacked the fortifications
before the camp; and on the 10th, at five o' clock in the morning,
began the great attack, in which the Prince of Parma received this
dangerous wound, vl. 5. De Thou will have it, that it was at the

taking of Caudebec that the Prince of Parma was wounded, and that

be did not paſs the Seine till the 22d of May. Bock 103. Cayet
is of the ſame opinion. vol. 2. b. 4. Pp. 32. & ſeggq. Matthieu blames
Henry IV. for not taking the Dnke of Maſenne priſoner at the ſkir-
mitt of Yvetot, and, with as little reaſon, for avoiding a deciſive
battle. p. 109. The King is by ſome others accuſed of (til! greater
faults, in being ignorant of the Prince of Parma's preparations to paſs

the river, and with not knowing how to prevent him,”

i Ts executed

256 N E M O IRS Bock Iv.

executed with the greateſt exactneſs: his former

ſucceſſes gave an authority to all his words, that

made the moſt mutinous docile.

Here 1 cannot refuſe all my praiſes to the Prince

of Parma for an action, which, in my opinion,

can never be ſufficiently admired. His camp was
between Rouen and Caudebec, at ſome diſtance.
from the Seine, over which, in all that interval,

there was not any bridge; yet the next morning

| there was nothing to be found any longer in this
camp. All the troops, who lay there, Tf 1 may

ſpeak fo, heaped one upon another, thoſe. that
were in Caudebec, and, in general, all that were

ſpread about the neighbourbood of it, had tranſ-
ported tbemſelves to the other ſide of the river.

Can it appear otherwite than a fable, or an illu—
lion? Scarce SJE the King and Eis arg bellcve
their own eyes?

The Prince of Parma had sorten the King's

reſolution to attack him in his camp the next day;

and he did not doubt, after what had paſſed, but
it would be forced, and his whole army delivered
up to the mercy of the victors. A forelight uſe-
leſs, and only productive of deſpair to any other,
whoſe prudence had not beforehand provided a re-

| ſource. But, notwithſtanding all the Duke of
Malenne's repreſentations, he had not delivered

himſelf up ſo entirely to that ſecurity he would have

inſpired him with, as to negle&t any means that
might extricate him from a bad ſtep, if it ſhould.
happen that he ſhould be one day inveigled in a
Country where there were few reſources, as on
the borders of the Seine below Rouen.

Theſe meaſures had been to provide himſelf ſe-

erctly with all the boats he could find, which he
cauſed to be brought near Caudebec. 11 was to

this precaution, which few generals had been ca-
* of, that the Prince of Parma owed the ſafety
| of |

„ 6 S$ULLY ow
of his troops, and the preſervation of his glory, of
his reputation, and perhaps of his life. He cauſed
theſe boats to be laid over the river in the night;

and notwichſtanding the diſorder of his camp, and

the inconvenience ariſing from his wound, he gave
ſuch good orders, that a bridge was built that very
night, over which his whole army and baggage paſſ-
cd ſecurely. This we received particular informa-
tion of the next day at Caudebec, which ſurrendered
as ſoon as we approached, He only deſerves the re-
putation of a conſummate warrior, who, before a
battle, is as cautious as if he was perſuaded he
ſhould be conquered, and in it behaves as Sit he was
ſure of conquering.
Oa the King's fide, the firſt moment only \ was
loſt in ſurpriſe 3 all the others were employed in ta-
king ſpeedy mealures to deprive the Spaniſh general
of part of the fruits of his dexterity. Henry, af-

ter having well conſidered his attempt, and remo-

ved all doubts of fjuccels from his own mind, held
a a council of war, and there propoſed to paſs his
army over Pont de Arche, or at Vernon, and
puriue the enemy without loſs of time. Some of
us, though indecd a very ſmall number, ſupported
this ſentiment as it deiei ved. If it had been fol-
lowed, this campaign had perhaps been the laſt of
the war. But one may lay, that the Prince of Par-
ma, having done more than could have been ex-
pected from humanity, obliged fortune now to come
over to his fide ; for, upon the propoſal of march-
ing the army to Pont de PArche, a cry was raiſed
in the council, and a kind of general mutiny, as if
the King had made the moſt unreaſonable propoſi-
tion in the world. The Catholics, the Proteſtants,
and foreigners, ſeemed to outvie each other in ſearch-
ing for difficulties to oppole it: they cried, that the
Prince of Parma's army, being i ina level country,

1 3 | might

258 M K mM n bock V.

might reach the gates of Paris * in four or five days ;

whereas it would be as long before we could even

gain Pont de PArche. They repreſented to the
King, that the way through which they muſt paſs
being full of foreſts, mountains, and defiles, the
army could reach the rendezvous but in ſmall divi-

ſions; and that, although it ſhould have time to

come up with that of the league, the fatigue of ſo
troubleſome a march would make it impoſſible for
them to attack it. In a word, they all treated this

propoſal, in itlelf fo ſenſible, as a deſign e
diculous and chimerical.

The King, mote enraged at the ſecret intentions

of thoſe who talked to bim in this manner, than

the purport of their diſcourſe, could not hinder him

ſelf trom replying, with ſome bitterneſs, that all
theſe difficulties were only ui. furmountable to thoſe
to whom fear, and a diſlike of fatigue, made thera

appear ſo He made it evidently app ear, that they

might reach Pont de “Arche in two days, and Ver-
non in four, from whence they might continually

ſend detachm :ents of 4 or 500 horſe, to retard the
Prince of Parma's march; to whkich alſo the many
obſtacles ke would mect with would contiibute, fuca

as the: paſſage over the liver of Eure; Louviers,
Paſſy, Maintenon, Nogent | ic Roi, and Chartres, all
being ii. ficient to oblige him to go greatly out of

Eis way: that the enemy had no bridge open to

them but thoſe of Aquigny, Cocherel, Sciliy, and
two cr three others which lay out of their road;
and that it would not be impoſſible to break or burn

art of theſe bridges, before the enemy arrived.
Thele reaſons rendered the thing not only plau-
{:ble, but palpable ; and it may be laid, that the ge.

* It is acknowledged by De Thou, that th King m'ght have
ſtopt this army, by ending his cavalry to ſhut up the paſlage to

Font de VFarche. It 1 VETY upjuſtiy, as we Lud bug, that Le char-

ges tiupry IV. with | this error.

ner al |

Winn OF lr -- agg

neral officers, by refuſing to yield to them, reſiſted
reaſon with full conviction. And this naturally ſug-
geſts two reflections: Firſt, how it happened, that
a prince, who in all bis expeditions made uſe of
mercenaries, picked up here and there, of different
countries, manners, religions, and intereſts, often
a very ſmall amber; and always ready to mutiny, |
ſhould be able to perform what is related of him in
his hiſtory. The ſecond is, what this prince would
| have done, if, inſtead of ſuch troops, he had had a
conſiderable number of ſoldiers under his command,
docile, united, diſciplined, obedient to his will,
conſtantly atizebed to his perſon, and willing to *
crifice their lives for bim; in a word, ſuch troops
as thoſe conquerors bad, who have been {5 highly
exalted? If theſe reflections are not made every
time they offer, it is becauſe there is ground for
them in every page: and, beiides, no one can be ig-
norant, that we thould judge very ill of merit and
abilities by the ſucceſs, if we did not at the ſame
time judge of the ſucceſs by the obſtacles.

It is ſcarce poſſible to conceive a reaſon for that
invincible obſtinacy which the general officers in the
King's army diſcovered upon this occaſion, in oppo-
ſing ſo wiſe an advice, unleſs it was owing to that
ſame diſpoſition of minds which I have juſt now
mentioned. If a ſmall number of French Proteſt—
ants be excepted, whoſe fidelity was unqueſtionable,

ar.d moſt of the Englich troops, who leemed to att _

| ſincerely, all the reſt of the King's army, Proteſt-
ants, Catholics, and foreigners, ſerved bim with-

court affection, often with regret, and perhaps withed

more than they feared that he m ight lutfer ſome con-
{iderable loſs. Notwithitanding this dilaffection to
their leader, there were occaſions when all theſe
perſons were as it were forced to {ccond him, and
to do their duty. Such had been the attack of the
Duke of Guile, the encounter at the wood, and the
battie

JJ 0 WY. Book IV.
battle that followed it. Such would have been the
attack of the Prince of Parma's camp, if he had
_ waited for us; for at that time all the King's ope-
rations, which he knew well how to connect with
_ each another, were executed with ſuch rapidity,
that he did not ſuffer their courage, when once
heated, to have time to cool, nor their minds time
to return to their firſt falten of thinking. More-
cover, the conduct of a ſmall number of brave men
is alone ſufficient to raiſe emulation in a whole ar-
my, and force it to follow their example, when
they are once engaged : but this fierceneſs, and this
ardor, once abated, their former ideas awakened
more ſtrongly, ant they were ſo much the more
capable of imbittering their minds, as they then
became ſenſible that they had done the "ey: con-

trary of what ey intended to do. 5
Unbappily the chiefs of the royal army were oc-
copied in this wicked train of reflection, when the
King made a motion to purſue the Prince of Par-
ma. The Catholics, who had a little time before
publicly declared, that they were reſolved to with-
draw their aſüftance, if the King did not abjure Cal -
viniſm, within a certain term which they preſcribed
to him, and to reunite themſelves with the reit of
France, there to appoint a King of their owa reli-
gion: theſe Catholics, J lay, could not icli a pro-
ject, which, by making the King malter of his ene»
mie“; would put him into a condition of giving them
law, inſtead of recciving it from them.
The Ruguenots, who feared this change of reli-
gion as much as the Catholics endeavoured to en-
| hance the neceſſity of it, took umbrage at every |
thing, and always thought they were upoa the point
of being ſacrificed, ſo long as the King did not ſa-
crifice to them that intereſt that made him court
the Cathulics, Through an appreneuſion that, by
exterminating the league, they ſhould only labour
for

1 OF BULLY. 266

for the Catholics again themſelves, they the more
eaſily accommodated themſelves to a ſtate which
would at leatt leave the balance even, and render
them neceſſary : and, in caſe the King ſhould one
day forſake their religion, they were reſolved to
take ſuch meaſures beforchand, as might make them
he feared both by the Catholics, and by him whom
wh gave them for a maſter,
ele precautions were, to procure ſo great a

number of towns to be yielded to them, to. obtain
ſuch - favourable edits, and fo many other affu-
1 ances, that the King, although a Catholic, ſhould
find it bis 8 and Lis intereſt to be well with

them. It was towards this cad that the Duke of
Bouillon, v. 10 was the principal mover of the party,
directed all his views, and to which he made the
5 or 600 German Forſe under his command ſubſer -
vient. Oa the ſlighteſt occaſion of difcontent, or
rather on the fiſt caprice, they broke into mur
murs, and threatened, as wwe; did then, that they
would return immediately to Germany. The King,
being obliged to behave in ſuch a manner as to ſa-
tisſy equally ſuch oppouute parties, was greatly per-

plüGexed by his endeavours to choak theſe ſeeds of

diviſion : he was defirous of avoiding an open rup-
ture, or at leaſt of protracting it, till he ſhould be

bout of danger, It was this perplexity that reduced

him to compliances and proceedings, very prejudi-
clal to the ſtate of his affairs. |
here is no labyrinth like this complication of
intereſts which divided the different parties that
compoſed the King's army. I have yet but touched
upon the ſmalleſt part. The Catholics, beſides their
common object, had cach of them a particular in-
tereſt, which was, to make Henry purchaſe their
perſonal ſervices very dear; and he was convinced,
that, without this fatisfaCtion, they would not
bring affairs to a general concluſion. The —
| Q

— — rc —_
_ — — — — — —

— , ]—⏑§ÜQ⏑ 'i. —”˖ Era ans

262 M E M 8 1 R 8s Bock Iv.

of the French Calviniſts were not zotiely the ſame
with thoſe of the foreign Proteſtants. There were

certain times when the Engliſh, who alone were

united, agreed among themſelves, that, in all the
5 dangers they were expoſed to, they were actuated

by a principle of generoſity, which, whatever turn

affairs might take, would bring them no advantage;
and, while this reflection employed their minds,

they would look upon themſelves as madmen, who

lacrificed their lives purely to gratify the paſſions of

forcigners, and demand leave to retire, as they did
vpon this occaſion, when they abſolutely refuled to
engage beyond the Scine, ſeeing neither any ſecu-
rity nor reſource for them in a country fo diſtant

from the ſea. To exaſperate them more, and to

ſtrengthen their ſuſpicions, the Catholics ſeized thoſe
moments to perſuade them, that the King's abjura-
tion was become a poiat abſolutely neceſſary.

With regard to the other foreigners, who ated

Fo as they were paid, d'O, and theſe ſame Ca-

tholics, had a ſecret equally ort and infallible, and

they made uſe of it fr equently : : this was to keep the
_ King in want of money Therefore, when the
Swiſs and German horſe were aſked if they would

purſue the Prince of Parma, they replied only by
demanding their pay; proteſting, that it it was not

inſtantly given them, they would not paſs the river,
but to return home, or to engage in the ſervice of

the league.
Even the Spaniards, the King? s declared enemies,

bad alſo their intrigues, and took part in this prince's _
affairs. At this very time they made a propoſal to
him, not only to withdraw their troops, but even
to lend them to him, to ſerve him againſt the
league, in a word, to put the crown upon his hcad,

provided he would yield Burgundy and Britany to.

them for ever. In order to afliſt the King to van-

quith theſe ſcruples which the making f ſuch liberality
CT, might

1592. „ E 1 263

might raiſe in his mind, they recalled to his remem-

brance the example of Francis I. who, they ſaid,

in a ſitvation leſs preſſing, had abandoned to them

the * ſovereignty of Flanders and Artois ; and that
of Henry II. who had given Spain more towns f
than were contained in theſe two provinces. The

' King had ſufficient reaſon to believe, that a nego-
tiation ſo unſeaſonable was a piece of Spaniſh arti-

fice, in the taſte of Hagemau, which tended only to

create more confuſion, and render him ſuſpected
both by the Proteſtants and Catholics : but, altho?

this propolition had been really ſincere, he had a

motive for rejecting it infinitely ſtronger, which

Was the implacable hatred he bore to © and the

houſe of Auſtria.
At laſt, even the league, fob ſome view or other,
entered into the reſolutions that were in the King's

council. Villeroi, Jeannin, Zamet, and others, of-
fered Henry, in the name of the league, to give

him the crown upon certain conditions. It is very
difficult to gueſs the true motive of this ſtep : whe-
ther diſguſt at the haughtineſs and inſolence of the
Spaniards, an artifice to procure new ſupplies, or a

deſign to alienate the Proteſtants from the King.
The only evidence of the fincerity of this propo-
ſition, was the very hard conditions that were an-

nexed to it: I ſhall ſoon have occaſion to expatiate |

upon this ſubject.

* By the treaty which was paſſed during the impriſonment of this
prince at Madrid, Feb, 25. 1526, Francis I. refizned his claim there
likewiſe to the Juchies of Burgundy and Milan, to the kingdom of
Naples, @&c. ; but this treaty was declared null by the ſtates of the

kingdom aſlembled at Cognac.

+ By the treaty of Chatcau- Cambreſis, i in January 15 59, after the
battle of St Quentin, for three cities only of Ham, Catelet, and St
Quentin, France yielded to Spain and her allies more than rt 5o for-
tified places. The Conſtable Montmorency's jealouſy of the Duke of

Guiſe, and his eagerneſs to be free] from his confinement, made

kim patch vp this treaty, at which the whole Einglom murmured.

lhe

4 5 2 2
— —ͤ p — — 2 th "4-1 . . -

—

—

— Or APE éÄ— . ³ 1 oe
— — wn oe — = .
.

— — —

264 M E M O IR S Book IV.

I )he leaſt conſequence of this chaos of views and
intereſts was the ſpreading over every affair an im-
penetrable obſcurity, and creating in every mind
jealouſy and diſtruſt, It is indeed ſurpriſing, that,

after this, the Proteſtants and Catholics could live
together in the ſame camp, without expoling the
King to the grief of ſeeing them mutiny, or of
cutting one another's throats. Thoſe who in a

prince ſought for what is termed policy, might here

find ample room to praiſe. the prudence of a King
who kept ſo many jarring intereſts united, and to.

admire his diſcernment in diſtinguiſhing thoſe who

ated with fidelity towards bim: nor ought it to

paſs unobſerved, as a finiſhing ſtroke, that ſo many

ſecret movements preſented to view an outſide tran-

quil and uniform. Falſehood aſſumed all the ſem-

| blance of truth, and enmity concealed itſelf under
the maſk of friendſhip. Thoſe who pretended the

greateſt aſſection to the King, either betrayed bim,

or laboured only to advance their own intereſt.

It would be uſeleſs to diſſemble, that the Na-

rechal de Biron often played this game, either

through malice at being refuſed the government of
Rouen, or deſire of protracting the war“, or a dif-

poſition that took pleaſure in creating over all dil.
cord and confulion. He was never known to agree
with the general opinion, or to yield to the King's

inclinations. He inceſſantly contradicted, either

for the pleaſure of contradicting, or for that of obli-
ging every one to embrace is opinion. In the

council, when the queſtion that has occaſioned this

85 digreſſion was debated, be was neither for purſuing
the enemy, nor for ſtaying in Normandy : he
ee it Was neceil ſary to 7 go. before and wait for

0 What then, raſcal! wou!@? thon * vs to hs cabbages
« for Biron? “ ſaid this marechal to his ſon, who propoſed to him
nun expedient to finiſh the war at ont blow. Perefi ve fark 2. ibid.

ln 6

tdhe Prince of Parma on the frontiers of Picardy,
7 through which he would be obliged to paſs in his
return to Flanders. A project ſingularly chimerical,
which was immediately applauded by the Proteſt- :
ants, who were ſubjected to all the inclinations | of

this marechal.

The King ſaw plainly, that all efforts to retain

274 ſuch. diſcontented troops in his ſervice would be in
vain. The campaign was drawing towards an end,
and a ſiege ſo long and fatiguing as that of if len |
made the ſoldiers extremely deſirous of repoſe. The

King was reſolved to grant it them: he followed
that maxim, That a prince ſhould always have the

appearance of doing voluntarily even what he is
cConſtrained to do. He ſpoke to the foreigners, who
wWuanted to return home, and gave them permiſſion.
He diſtributed all the money he had amongſt them,
leaving himſelf without any to ſupply his moſt eſſen-
tial expences : and though they were not wholly
 fatisfied in this reſpect, yet they had reaſon to be

| pleaſed with the noble manner in which he praiſed
and thanked them for their ſervices. As he had

left Normandy in peace, and (except Rouen, «nd a

few other cities) entirely reduced under his obe-
dience; and as there was no reaſon to apprehend,
that the army of the league would come thither
ſoon, he permitted all the officers of his army,
as well Catholics as Proteſtants, to retite to their
habitations: and, to lay the Marechal de Biron un-

der a neceſſity of not abandoning him with his Pro-

teeſtants, which, after this permiſſion, he forefaw
be wou! 1 do, he declared, that ke would abide by
his advice, and in a few days would ſet forwards to
Picardy; not that he really entered into this ma-
rechal's views, but as he had not yet ncwn himſelf
in that province, nor in Champagne, he thought it
neceſſary to make himſelf known there, and to 5
daeavour to conciliate the affections of the people

Vo. I. „„ towards

— <a —

— e —˙r—

— —̃äp—
— — —

.

—

266 MEMOIR S Bock v.

towards him. A more ſecret motive * contributed

to favour and confirm this reſolution; and Biron,

who knew and flattered the King's weakneſſes, drew

from thence his beſt reaſon. 5

5 O V.

-Hile the King, with a fow Proteſtants, pur-
ſued the road to Picardy, the Prince of

Parma loſt not a moment in regaining Paris, from
whence, without any difficulty, he returned to Flan-
ders, but little ſatisfied with his campaign, diſcon-
tented to the laſt degree with the league and its
_ chiefs, and much troubled at a wound which he
perceived was incurable. 1 5

It is in general and particular hiſtories that a de-

tail of all that was performed this year, and the

preceding, in different places of the kingdom, muſt

be ſought for. The attack of St Dennis , Where
the Chevalier d' Aumale loſt his life; the taking Ste-
nay and Dun, in Lorrain; the defeat of the Sieur

d' Ambliſe, with the Duke of Bouillon's t other
martial exploits, either before ot after his marriage;

Hit paſſ on for Mademoiſelle I'Efirees.. He ſometimes ſtole

from his army to go and ſee her. He once diſpuiſed him ſelf like a
country man, paſſed through the midſt of the enemy's guards, and

came to her bone, not without running the riſk of being taken.

Notes upon the Henriade.

Claude de Lorrain, knight of the order of St John of Jeruſalew,

| having ſurpriſed this city at the head of a body of troops in the ſer- 5

vice of the league, De Vie ran and beat them en, The Chevalier

d'Aumale was killed in this encounter.

+ The Duke of Bouillon took Stenay the Go 45 chat his nup-
tials were celebrated. Africanus d' Anglure d' Ambliſe, gencral of the
troops of Lorrain, coming to attack Beaumont in Argonne, a city

three leagues from Sedan, which the Duke of Bouillon had taken
from the Duke of Lorrain, Bouillon defeated his troops or. the
| walls of this place, and D'Ambliſe was ſlain, |

the

the loſs of the battle of Craon *; the defeat of the
Sieur de la Guerche, and the blockade of Poitiers,
are the principal actions, to which an infinite num-
ber of others in Provence, Dauphine, and Poitou,
may be added. From the departure of the Prince
of Parma, to the negotiations which preceded the
King's coronation, many things happened worthy
of remark, and may likewiſe be found there. I have,
in another place, juſtified my ſilence in all theſe re-
ſpects, and the liberty 1 allow myſelf of ſpecifying
only the moſt important facts; among which are
khoſe that regard the Count of Soiſſons, and the
* Duke of Epernon; and even upon theſe the narra-
tion J have juſt made has not permitted me to ex-

patiatee . e EY |
Ihe Count of Soiſſons, after having abandoned

the King's party, and been at open variance with
him at Bearn, ſtill retained hopes of marrying the
Princeſs, his fiſter, of whoſe affections he always
remained maſter. By the death of Henry III. to.
whom he had laſt attached himſelf, he was left in
the King's army, whom he ſerved without affection,
and only till he had refolved upon ſome new pro-
ject, or till ſome occaſion favourable to his love pre-

- ſented itfelf. He thought he found one in the ſiege
of Rouen, an enterprite, in his opinion, of too
much importance to afford the King leiſure to oc-

« This battle was fouglit before the city of Craon in Anjou, which

was then beſieged by the royaliſt troops; they were compoſed of
French,. Englith, and Germans, to tne number of 7 or $000 men,

- _ commanded by the Duke of Montpenſter, the Prince of Conty, the

Puke of Damville, Cc. who were defeated by the Duke of Mer-
coeur, at the head of the Spanith troops, and thoſe of the league.
About the ſame time, George de la Ville quier, Viſcount de la Guerche,
ttempting to paſs the Vienne, a river in Poitou, was defeated at the
head of a imall body of troops of the league, and himſelf drowned in

the river. Sce a relation of the blockade of Poitiers, and the ſeveral

© ſkirmiſhes before this city, in d'Aubigne, vol. 3. book 3. c. 11. For
All theſe expeditions conſult likewiſe the hiſtorians above cited.

"he pi cupy

— — — — —
— PR
—

{lj
10
N |
it
|
1 4
1

266 MEMOIRS Bock v.

cupy himſelf in other affairs. He feigned a journey
to Nogent, and, ſtealing away from the camp,
went ſecretly, and with the utmoſt expedition, to
Bearn, in order to accompliſh his marriage there
unknown to Henry. But he was one of thoſe per-

ſons whoſe moſt inconſiderable actions were ſtrictly 1

obſerved by the King. This Prince penetrating in-
to the Count's deſigns, ſent ſuch orders there, that

the Count, upon his arrival at Bearn, found the

5 Princeſs Catherine indeed in the moſt favourable dif.

oſitions towards him, and ſome lay that ſhe had

herſelf ſolicited him to take this journey: but it

was quite otherwiſe with the council, which the

King bad eſtabliſhed, in his abſence, to conduct this

province. The Sieur de Pangeas, who was at the

head of this council, made head againſt him, ſnewed
| him the orders he had received from the King, rai-

ſed the country upon him, and obliged bim at laſt |

to return to France, with the diſgrace of having
failed in his attempt; for which the Count could
take no other vengeance on Pangeas, than by throw-
Ing him down a ſtaircaſe one day, when he met

him in the King's apartments at Pontoiſe.
By all theſe ſtrokes the Count of Soiſſon's cha-

racter may be eaſily underſtood; to finiſh the pie-

ture, let it be added, that there never was a more

blind or more Nea ambition. To him all new

events appeared as ſo many ſteps whereby to arrive
at his ends, and engaged him in new meaſures,

which threw him at ſo much the greater diſtance
from them, as he imagined he approached nearer.
He himſelf knew not well the object his withes aim-

ed at; reſtleſs, uneaſy, and jealous, his ambition
was fed by every thing, and drew advantage from

nothing. Nature had given him qualities quite con-
trary to thoſe of the King; he reſembled him nei-
ther in humour nor manners. The King was open
and frank; che Count of Soiſſons, to a mind natu-

rally

r UL . . 269
rally dry and improvident, added an affected phlegm,

and all that is deſpicable in diſſimulation. He en-
däeavoured to impoſe upon the world an aſſumed ſe-
riouſneſs for an air of grandeur ; laboured to appear
impenetrable, and miſtook the frozen countenance
which falſe gravity wears for reſpe&t. Pomp and
apparel was perfectly his taſte : in a word, ambi-
tion had taken poſſeſſion of his heart, and his whole
exterior conduct was made up of ceremonials and
- formality. The near affinity this character bore to

that of the Spaniards in general, was perhaps the
ſource of that antipathy the King conceived for him,

and which he could never ſurmount.

As for the Duke of Epernon *, ambition was not

| his only and predominant paſſion ; he was likewiſe

John Lewis de Nogaret de la Valette, Duke of Epernon, Co-

13 lonel-General of France, Governor of Guienne, Metz, and the
county of Meſſin. He died in 1642, aged 88 years; and, as the au-
thor of his life obſerves, he was the ojdeſt duke and peer of France,

the oldeit officer of the crown, general of an army, governor of a

province, knight of any order, and counſellor of ſtate, and almoſt

the oldeſt man of rank in his time. He was called the King's war-
drobe, becauſe of the great number of poſts which he poſleſled in this

. prince's houſehold. J here is recorded a very fine anſwer of his to

Henry IV. who one day, in anger, reproached him with not loving
him. The Duke of Epernon, ſays his hiſtorian, without being ſur-
priſed at the King's rage, anſwered coolly, but with great gravity,
« Sire, your Majeſty has not a more faithful ſervant than myſelf m
« the kingdom: I would rather die, than fail in the leaſt part of my
« duty to you; but, Sire, as for friendſhip, your Majeſty well

„ knows that is only to be acquired by friendſhip.” The King, who

equally knew how to admire great actions and ſpeeches of this kind,

| converted all his indignation into eſteem, &c. Life of the Duke of E-

pernon, p. 225. The character which is here given of him by the

Duke of Sully, is rather too diſadvantageous; however, it would not

be eaſy to refute what he ſays. All the hiſtorians agree with him, in
charging the Duke of Epernon with a bourdicls ambition; and his
correſpondence with Spain is proved by ſeveral letters of the Cardinal
d'Oſſat. As for his extraction, © Patrem,” ſays Buſbequius, “ ha-
% butt bello egregium, avum tabellionem ſive notarium.” Epiſt. 17.

On the contrary, according to Father Vaiſſette, he deſcended from

William de Nogaret, famous for his quarrels with the Pope in the

reign of Philip le Bel. Conſult likewiſe our gencalogiſts.

Z 3 a4 actuated

— een cnn =_ -

—— —

l —

— — — — =
— ͤ Ä eee Eee Eng — —
— meme meer r= IIa ren a

— müͤ
. —

—— ——— —— —
— . ²˙

——

— | —

— Eo =
_ 2 — —
= —ͤ —

10
K
0
N
5
It
tt
1}
N
1 4

2% M E M OI RA Ss Book v.

actuated by an viicooguerable: pride; an inſo-
lence, or rather a natural ferocity, which ſhewed

v Zlion, a Scotch .

itle'f at the firſt inſtant, Ambition, 'tis ſaid,

makes 5 of various methods to accompliſh its de-
ſigns. Epernon, upon this footing, could not be
an ambiti us man; ; for he knew only one way,

which was that haughtineſs by which he expected

to carry ail before him. In a word, ambition was,

in him, but a natural love of independence, inſpired

by hardnefs of heart, n.ifanthropy, and a preſump-
tion that made him conſider himſelf above conde-
ſcenſion and recompenſe. He hated the King, be-

| cauſe he hated the whole world; and, without
doubt, there were many moments when he was not
too well ſatisfied with himſelf. A conitant diſobe-

dience to hi> ſuperiors, an ungainly intercourſe with
his equals, an? a cruel and inſupportable conduct

towards his inferiors, make up the reſt of this cha-

racter.

Epernon, finding that his enterpiiſes had not the
ſucceſs his pride had promiſed him, was obligcd to
alter his behaviour, and fometimes, though but fel-

dom, bchaved courteouſly to thoſe whom be

might have occaſion for; but even his very careſſes
(it chat phraſe may be allowed w hen ſpeaking of him)

nad a fort of ſpleen and contempt in them : fo that

if he hatcd the world, he was equally hated by it;
no one ſerved him from any other motive than
fear, which was the cauſe that, with great diſpoſi-
tions for war, and in a fituation which might Hak 'C
made them uſ-ful, he ruined his affairs. Provence
and Davphine beld f or him, and for La Valette his
brother. Theſe provinces, whoſe governor, be-
fore him, kad bcen the grand prior *, the natural
brother of theis tree laſt kings, 8 bia firſt

* lenry; Count aten &

159 2. O F 8 I. L Fo 271
for his extraction, and hated him after for his cru-
ety. They were rejoiced when Epernon (who,
when Henry III. was living, would not remove far
from the court) ſent them La-Valette in his ſtead,
who made himſelf agreeable to Provence, and ſer—
ved the King with fidelity, Henry III. becoming
acquainted with the true character of his favourite,
began to be apprehenſive of him himſelf ; he dil-
graced Epernon, and had thoughts even of putting
him under an arreſt at Angouleme. La-Vaiette,
on this occaſion, loſt his government; but all was
reſtored to him after the murder of the Duke of
Guiſe, which laid Henry III. under the neceſſity of
ſtrengthening himſelf with every one whom be could
engage in his party, at any price whatever. After
the death of this prince, Epernon, whole vanity _
would not ſuffer him to obey the King of Navarre,
quitted him at Pontoiſe, notwithſtanding all the in-
ſtances he made bim by Meſl. de Bellega de and
Roquelaure to return, aud all the prayers he him-
{elf employed. Jo oppoſe a King was a circum»
ſtance too flattering to bis pride, and in hi govern=
ment of Provence he forgot nothing that might con-
tribute to it. He was the fiſt amongſt the nobi-
lity to ſign the King of Navarre's excluſion from

the crown, It vill not be raſh to judge, by Eper-
non, of the ſincerity of this motive of religion,
with which it was then ordinary to cloak themſelves,
- In vithdrawing from lawful authority, |
| 5 The remainder of the Duke of Epernon's hiſtor
will give a jup*: ficial knowledge of the affairs of the
Provinces in the ſouth of France. He there expe-
+  rienced great reverſes: the two brothers affilting
-- each other mutually, were often worſted, and could
not prevent three or four conſiderab.e parties from
being formed in Pauphine and Provence, which
oppuled them there, without reckoni g one in each
of the great towns, which endeaveufed to make
__ _theraſelves

272 NM E M 0 1 R 8 Book V.

themſelves ladependent, The Duke of Savoy, and
the Duke of Nemours his brother, carried on in-
trigues there; and their party became very power-
ful, after the King of Spain had permitted the Nuke
of Savoy, who was his ſon-in law, and whom he
_ vigorouſly ſupported, to be acknowledged Count of
Provence, and hold this fief of his crown. In the
- midſt of their ſucceſſes, theſe two princes met with
a formidable adverſary, that ſtopped them in their
career, and reduced their party to ineffectual me-
naces. This was Leſdiguieres, remarkable for his
valour and good fortune againſt the Duke of Savoy.
He always continued faithful to the King, and could
never be reproached with having appropriated to
_ himſelf the fruits of his actions, nor of having co-
veted the ſovereignty of Davphine. Perhaps he only
viſhed that the King might long have occaſion for his
aſſiſtance, and never come into thi- province. Meſſ.
de Montmorency and d'Ornano gave much ſtrength
to this party. The others were formed by the
Duke of Joyeuſe, the Counteſs of Sault, and the

Count of Carces, with the Sieur de Vins. Lewis
d' Aix and Cajoux, Ligny, Martinengue, and many
others, raiſed tumults there, and filled theſe coun-
tries with diviſions and carnage; but their faction
did not yet extend itſelf beyond the bounds of one
city. La Valette was hardly able to ſupport him-
ſelf longer in Dauphine, when he was flain at the |
ſiege of a little inconſiderable town. The Duke of

Epernon immediately invaded this government:

for form's ſake, he demanded letters: patent for it

from the King, who durſt not refuſe them to him;

but upon this, inſtead of quelling all theſe different
parties, he went thither only to make a new one,
vpon which the King had as little reaſon to depend
as upon any of the others. One may judge of this,
by what pales. at the lege of Vilemur, the only

action

— 2 "="

+
< *
7 Nn
. 5
3 * =
- 3

1592. O F . 271

action which I ſhall particulariſe from memoirs, the
authenticity of which I can warrant.

The Duke of Joyeuſe, a zealous partizan of the
league in Languedoc, having drawn together 5 or
6000 foot and 8 or goo horſe, in the neighbourhood
of Toulouſe, advanced with them on the 15th of

* June, in the year 1592, towards Montauban, pil-

| laged the little villages, and the flat countries, and,

after exerciſing all the cruelties which paſſed as

common in theſe miſerable times, came and laid
ſiege to Villemur. >

WE be Sieur d'Ariat, from whom I give this detail,

and the citizens of Villemur, had recourſe to The»

mines, who commanded for the King in that pro-

"vince, and intreated him to come immediately, with
powerful ſupplies, to their aſſiſtance. Themines,

knowing be was not ftrong enough, addreſſed him -
ſelf to the Duke of Epernon; and while he waited

for the reinforcement the Duke promiſed to give

him, ſent a detachment of ſmall bodies of cavalry
and foot, which got into Villemur with great dith-
culty, the troopers on foot, becauſe their horſes

could be of no uſe to them, the city was fo cloſely

invironed. Joyeuſe was ſeverely puniſhed for the
error he was guilty of there, as we ſhall ſee pre ·
ſently. This error was the attacking the town
itſelf, inftead of beginning with the caſtle, which,
although much ſtronger in appearance, was in rea-
lity the weakeſt. Doubtleſs he was not ſufficiently.
acquainted with the place, or had a deſign to make
uſe of the magazines of corn, and other ammuni-
tions, of which he knew the city was full. 2

_ Epernon ſent indeed a conſiderable body of troops;

but as he had given them orders to act but faintly, and,

above all, not to run the riſk of fighting theſe troops,
although upon their arrival they made a very great
noiſe, minded nothing but recreation, abandoned
their poſts, and, by their bad example, did more
1 | harm

harm than good to the other royaliſt ſoldiers. Joy-
euſe, who did not want courage, eſpecially when
he was to act in perſon, finding the occaſion favour-
able, and perhaps doubtful of the Duke of Eper-
non's deſigns, fell upon his ſoldiers, ſurpriſed them,
and would have made a great {laughter, if Themines
had not run thither time enough to ſave the re-
mainder; he could not, however, prevent 7 or
200 from being ſlain. There needed no moe to
make Epernon recall them abfolutely . Themines
afterwards ſtrongly ſolicited both him and the Ma-
rechal de Matignon for afliflance, but in vain 3 and
all he could do was, to throw himſelf into Villemur,
with d'Ariat, 250 arquebuliers, and about 100 or
120 troopers, to ſupport the beſieged, whom Joy-
euſe preſſed more vigorouſly than before. He obli- |
ged Reiner, who was Lord of it, but who was
grown too infirm to perform the duties of a go-
vernor upon this occaſion, to go out, and reſolved
to deſend himſelf there till the laſt extremity, be-
ing aſſured, that the King, to whom he imparted
bis ſituation, would not ſuffer him to periſh.

—_ . - 5 = —
— = Y
———— EE a — — — — —
r
—

— ——— —
— — uy =

CREE Wop or emo >
1 San ar nc no

— ———ö— ſ— — —

|
|
|
|
|

de Montmorency and Eper non, to fend him ſupplies.
This laſt, accuſtomed to diſobey, gave no attention
to this order; ; but Montmorency ſent him Leeques
and Chambaut, with ſome brave Proteſtant troops.
Thele were fal too few in number to oppoſe the
army of Joyeuſe, lately reinforced by the inbabi -
tants of Toulouſe. Lecques and Chambaut, there-
fore, had recourſe to Meſſilac, lieutenant for the

* All this is ſo poſitive, that it may balance the authority of De
Thou, who mentions this fact very favourably for the Duke of E-
pernon, and that of the author of this Duke's life, who maintains,
that his ſldicrs drove thole belonging to the league from Villemur, |
and put this place into a ſtate of defence, p. 134. The Chron.
Noven agrees here with our Memoirs, b. 4. . 35 as likewiſe the Me-
moirs of the league, vol, 5. | |

King

274 M E M OI RS Bookv.

In effect, this prince wrote inſtantly to the Dukes

1592. O F . "> 2 WS

King in Auvergne, and to the Viſcount de Gourdon,
as remarkable for his courage and fidelity, as for his
deformity. Theſe two officers marched immediate-

ly to the aſſiſtance of Villemur, with 800 arquebu-
ſiers and 280 horſe. Joyeuſe ſent to offer them
battle, which they refuſed, warned by the misfor-
tune which had happened to Epernon's troops, and
occupied only about their object. After this refuſal,
the beſiegers cavalry, who found themſelves too

moch ſtraitened in their lines, demanded permiſſion

of Joyeuſe to remove into the neighbouring villages z
Which this general granted with difficulty, and con-
trary to the opinions of the Sieurs d'Onous and
Montberaut. He obliged the officers to give their

words, that, upon the firſt ſignal which ſhould be

made them, they ſhould return to the camp with -

- out lcfs of time. | |

Meſſilac, Lecques, and Chambaut, perceiving that
this removal of the cavalry had extremely weakened
the army of the beſiegers, divided their whole foot
Into four bands, to each cf which they added fifty
troopers, whom they cauſed to diſmount. A regi-
ment of 800 men was drawn up in battalia, within
view of the intrenchments, with orders to charge
on a certain ſignal. Four hundred men attacked the
flrſt intrenchment, and were ſupported by the four

troops. The guard there uſually conſiſted of no

more than 200 foot; but Joyeuſe, who had ſpies

agamongſt us, being advertiſed of the attack a few
moments beforehand, ſent thither 400 men more,
and at the ſame time made the cannon fire three
times, which was the ſignal agreed upon with his
Cavalry. It happened, that either through ſlackneſs
in obeying on their ſide, or eagerneſs on that of
the Proteſtants, this cavalry did not come up till
after the action was begun. Our men advanced be-
fore ſunriſe, and falling upon the firſt intrenchment,

. + kid 100 of thoſe who defended it dead upon the

ground;

e e.
ground; the reſt fled towards the ſecond intrench-
ment, and carrying thither only their fears, this,
though much better than the firſt, was forced in the _
ſame manner, and with a conſiderable loſs.
Themines beholding all within the walls, ſecond -
ed the aſſailants, and made ſo ſeaſonable a fally,
that he completed the rout of the beſiegers. Their
cavalry ſhewed themſelves that moment at the head
of the camp; but, inſtead of putting a ſtop to the
_ diſorder, they no ſooner perceived the 800 men,
which compoſed the body of reſerve, with 300 horte
puſhing againſt them, than they followed the mo-
tion of the reſt of the army, and ſought for their
ſafety in flight, Fear increaſing every moment, it
ſoon became a general rout, which it was not poſ-
ſible for Joyeuſe to prevent. Dragged along him-
ſelf with the fugitives, he gained a bridge of planks
and ropes which he had ordered to be thrown over
the Tarn. The number of thoſe who haſtened thi-
ther, on this ſide, overcharging this bridge, it ſunk
under Joyeuſe, and he and all that were with him
were ſwallowed up in the river. Fear had ſo blind-
ed the reſt of the troops, that, ſtill imagining they
ſaw a bridge where none now was, they plunged
into the waves where it had ſtood. More than
| 3009 foot and 400 horſe periſhed on this occaſion,
cither by the ſword or the water. An enormous
loſs for an army fo inconſiderable; whereas the
royaliſts did not loſe thirty men. The citizens of
Villemur beheld this aſtoniſhing ſpectacle from the
top of their walls, with a joy mingled with ſurpriſe
and horror; which made them compare an effect
of fear, which had the appearance of a prodigy,
with that which the ſacred hiſtory relates of the E-

gyptians at the paſſage of the Red ſea. But it is
time to return to the King.

This prince went into Picar dy, a in order t to

give occupation to his troops, lent the Marechal de
Biron

„%

w d OO

1 1592. 0 F D . 277

Biron to beſiege Epernai. The ſiege was long and
obſtinate; Biron was ſlain there by a cannon- ball.
And if the King, who during this time ſtaid at
Compeigne, had not determined to ſhew himſelf
before this city, they would have found a difficulty
in taking it. He defeated a powerful ſupply which
endeavoured to throw itſelf into the place, and obli-
gedit at laſt to ſurrender. 5
His funds failing him abſolutely, he was obliged,
after this expedition, to diſband all the remainder
of foreign troops. He continued ſome time longer
in his quarters, upon the report that was ſpread,
that the Prince of Parma was to return, for the
third time, into France, to execute the great pro-
jects be had formed againſt the King. The death
of this brave general + happened very fortunately _
to remove the diſquietude of Henry, who ſaw him
ſelf not in a condition to reſiſt ſuch an enemy.
The Spaniſh army, having loſt its chief, diſperſed.
The time that was taken up in appointing his ſuc-
ceſſor, gave the King leiſure to breathe again; he

Which took off his head. He was almoſt as famous for his

© learning as his abilities in war. De Thou greatly regrets the loſs we
have had of his Commentaries. He commanded in chief in ſe-
ven battles, and every wound he received in theſe battles made a

ſcar. He was godfather to Cardinal de Richelieu, who was named

5 after him, The city of Gontaut, in Agenois, gave its name to this
"508 family. See the panegyric of this marechal in Brantome, vol. 3.

F At Arras in the abbey of St Vaaſt. The Spaniards were accu- 5

ſed of having poiſoned him through jealouſy, but the wound he re-
ceived in Normandy the year before, joincd to the bad make of his
body, was the only cauſe of his death, as was acknowledged when
be was opened. Cayet, ibid. go. See in De Thou, book 104. a
panegyric on his great qualities. His body was carried through Lor-
rain to Italy, attended by 160 horſe, capariſoned in black. He was
no more than forty-cight years of age. He complained of being
twice poi.oned by the Spaniards, if we may believe D*Aubigne, who
aſſures us that the Italians were fo ſtrongly perſuaded of it, that from

that time they could never endure the Spaniards, vol. 3, 5. 3. c. 28.

And this alſo is the opinion of Bongars, book 49. |

.
— —  — —— — — - _——

-
. = - 28 = l = ——
— — — — — — —— — 1 __ e — 2 9

— 2 Vs . = __ 2, _ = 2 —
— - = _—_ -

= s — > > \ =
— — —— — — — — —

— — > - —
— — COTE INNS

— 2 . 2 2 — — => r — — — — 2
— — — — 2 2 = — — —

—
—_—_
2 —

— —— —
— _— :

— —
———== =
=: =
— — 2, —
—
— —w
—— =

—
DD = — —

278 M E M © 1 R 8 Bock v.

drew 1 near to Paris; and thought of nothing but a. 4
vailing himſelf of the Spaniards removal.

I did not attend the King in bis journey to Pi.
cardy. I went to Mante, where finding Madam de

Chateaupers in a diſpoſition favourable to my love,
1 married this lady, and our nuptials were celebra-
ted the ſame day that the Prince of Parma N With
bis army, paſſed through Houdan.

To confeſs the truth, the King's politics were not

to my taſte, I ſaw with uneaſineſs, that the exi-
gency of bis affairs laid him under the neceſſity of
complying with every deſire of the Catholies of his
party, and that all the Proteſtants remained with.
out recompenſe, and were altogether neglected,
_ eſpecially-ſince the departure of the foreign troops,
Which gave their rivals all advantages over them.
I had, in particular, often experienced the effects
of their hatred or jealouſy, from whence I conclu-
ded, that all the roads to fortune were ſhut again!
me for ever. I was likewiſe diſguſted with the
King's behaviour towards me; his coldneſs, though
I knew it to be feigned, had ſuch an appearance oi
a total eſtrangement, that I determined to quit war,
and retire to my eſtate, there to live far from bu -
ſineſs, and the tumult of life.

The event juſtified the King's prudence, and !
was the firſt to come over to his opinion, and to

give him advice very oppoſite to my firſt ſenti- |
ments; but then 1 au all things with other eyes

„This * not hy but the 2 2d or 24th of May, as the Prince

0 of Parma did not paſs the Seine till the night of the 2 1ſt or 22d _
that month. There mult therefore be a miſtake either i in the New ©
journal of Henry III. printed in 1720, (where, in p. 271. the Dube
of Sully's marriage is obſerved to be cclebrated on the 18th), or in
the Memoirs of Sully. The Baron de Roſny's ſecond wife was call“?
ed Rachel de Cuchefilet, daughter of James Lord of Vaucelas, and of
Mary d'Arbaleſte. She was firſt married to Francis Huraut, Lord
oi Chateaupers, and Marais, who died in 1590, She died after the
| Duke of . in 1659, aged 93 years. |

The

19. OF 8 UL L Y. 279

jj The reflection on all that the Proteſtants and my-
ſelf had to ſuffer ; the little conſideration I appear-
cd to be then of, and ſomewhat of that general diſ.

poſition of mind which always dictates the intereſt

pl religion, formed all my reſolutions, and were
the foundation of a ſyſtem which I built for the
_ King, and which at that time ſeemed to me to be
the only one reaſonable. I would have had this
prince doing juſtice to thoſe who had ſerved him
With zeal and affection, to have refuſed all other

aſſiſtance, and caſt himſelf entirely in their arms.
* I was perſuaded, that after ſuch an open declara-
tion of his dependence upon the Proteſtants, Eng-

land, Holland, and all the Proteſtant powers in
_ Europe, would exert themſelves ſo effectually in his

flavour, that they would ſoon, without any obligation
to the Catholics, ſcat him upon the throne. _

In this, as in every thing elſe, the King's under-

_ ſtanding was greatly ſuperior to mine. He knew,
from the firſt inſtant, that a kingdom, like France,
Was not to be gained by foreign hands; and al-
though it had appeared even poſſible, yet it was the
hearts of the French, rather than their crown, that
this good prince ſought to conquer, And he would
have thought the rewards which, on that occaſion,

he ſhould be obliged to beſtow upon the authors of

his elevation, to their prejudice, to have been an
1ncroachment upon their lawful right.

My laſt motive for retiring was, that a little after

I arrived at Mante, the wounds in my mouth and
neck, which I had received in that unfortunate ren»

counter at Chartres, opened again, and obliged me
to go to Roſny to be radically cured, to prevent

the fatal conſequences which generally attend

wounds of that nature. I continued there ſome
time: after a life ſo tumultuous as that which till
this moment J had led, I taſted the pure pleaſure

that a retired life offers to thoſe who are devoid of

WV ambition.

20 MEMOIR s Bock v. ;

ambition. I amuſed myſelf alſo in writing the e-

vents, varied by good and bad fortune, to which 1 1

had been expoſed for twenty years. |
Buhy, the King's lieutenant in the Vexin, came

one day to viſit me, and informed me, that the

King had written to all the governors to draw to-
gether all the troops they were able, and to come
ſpeedily to his aſſiſtance : for it was about this time

that they were in the fulleſt expectation of the Prince
of Parma's return into France; and Buby, therefore,

aſked me, if I would not, upon this occaſion, do as

others. This queſtion recalled the remembrance of

the many governments which I had requeſted, and

| had been denied to me; and, laſtly, the poſt of one
of the King's lieutenants, which the Duke of Ne.
vers and the Catholics had hindered me from ob.

taining, in a haughty and inſulting manner. I an-

ſwered this officer, with ſome emotion, that if the
King had had any occaſion for my ſervice, he
would have done me the honour to write me.

Buhy found ſomething of anger in my reply, and, _
like a good courtier, exaggerated it, when he re-

[eated it to the King, and gave him to underſtand,
that he ought no longer to have any dependence on

me, for I had reſolved to ſpend the reſt of my days

in the country. This circumſtance was altogether
of his own invention; for 1 did not eſteem Buhy

' ſo much as to make him the confident of my fe-
crets. © His humour then is greatly altered,” re-
plied the King immediately, © for he never Failed

« to be preſent on ſuch occaſions as are now ap-

& proaching. Although he excuſes himſelf on ac-
0

*

count of his wounds, I know well what detains

him; he is offended with me, and with ſome

& reaſon. He would play the philoſopher for the

4 future; but when I ſee him, I ſhall be able to
4 make all up again ; for I know him.”

This converſation n in the preſence of the
Preſident

| | 4 1592. OF 8 UL L V. 281

R = Preſident Seguier, who dined with me ſome time

I after, and related it to me. Having freely poured
my heart into the boſom of this great magiſtrate,

e ; whom I knew to be equally a good friend, an ho-
e __ neſt man, and an excellent politician, he anſwered
)= __ me in theſe words, which I ſhall never forget, be-

je . aꝛuſe they firſt began to open my eyes, and to cure
e me of my firſt way of thinking. © Sir, you ap-

de e pear to me to be a little in anger. We live in f
e, . a time when tranquillity is very difficult to ac- ;
as 4 quire. The wiſeſt amongſt us are ſilent, and [
ff patient, in hopes of a better age; and the King |
d  « js ſo good, and fo wiſe, that God has deſtined a
ie ee him to be dur reſtore r, li
&e From that moment, finding no other inconve- þ
bniency from my wound, than a little difficulty in ;
n pronunciation, I began again to ride, and followed A
XC by ſome fifty horſe, I made excurſions over the 4
je great road of Verneuil and Dreux to Paris, in or- —
e. deer to reſume my former occupation, which 1 j
d, perceived was again likely wholly to ingroſs me. |
e In the ſecond of theſe journeys, one day when I jt
d, Vas riding towards Dreux, between the villages of j
n M.arolles and Gouſlainville, I met ten or twelve :
ys men on foot, who, the moment they ſaw us, ſtruck CE
er into the woods with which that country abounds, - |}
y I followed them immediately, and made two of
ſe - them be ſeized, who had not quitted the great road. —

e.. Theſe were peaſants who were returning from Pa-
iris, Whither they had been to ſell their poultry. I
p* alked them ſome queſtions, and they anſwered me
every ingenuouſlly; they told, that it was their cu-
ns ſtom to travel in the night, to avoid the inconve-
ne niencies they were expoſed to in thoſe roads in the

Cd
——

ne day; but that they had taken courage this once, =
to having nine or ten perfons in their company, among |
+ Whom they ſaid two or three were domeſtics belong- i

he ing to Meſſ. de Mercœur, de Medavy, and de
nt Vieux - Pont EY „ ͤ ewe N

-

=: Aa There
7 :
r Wah. . :
SIGN >
: +155 18

262 M 7 M O IRS Bock v.

There needed no more to make me purſue the'e
three men, whole myſterious journey excited my
curioſity. It was impoſlible to overtake them;
my people could only ſeize two others of thoſe that

were of Verneuil, from whom finding I could draw
nothing by threatenings, I made uſe of another me.
thod. I gave them four crowns, and promiſed
them more, if they would tell me all they knew
concerning theſe three domeſtics, They deſired
me to follow them, and led me directly to a large
hollow oak, ſurrounded with thickets, where they
told me theſe ſervants had ſtopped, and put ſome
papers which they had about them, into the trunck
of this tree : In effect, I found there two tin boxes,
and a ticking {ack, which ſeemed to me to be full,
I was conſoled for the meſſengers eſcape; and after
latisfy ing the two men, I returned to Roſuy, , Very
impatient to open my packets.

They appeared to be ſuch as 1 wiſhed, In thc
firſt I found commilſions from the Duke of Mal-
enne to levy ſoldiers, ſeveral letters written in cy:
phers, in this general's own hand, to the Duke of
Mercœur: but pieces more important foon enga-
ged all my attention; they related to the third par-
ty, Which was then beginning to be talked of, and
among theſe I found two memorials that ſeemed : 40
be of the utmoſt conſequence. The firſt was a me-
morial of the demands which the Preſident Jean-

nin made upon Spain, in the name of the Duke of |

Majenne, and the ſecond contained the anſwer oe

ven to theſe conditions by the Archduke Erneſt foi
the King of Spain. All the refleftions imaginable
could not throw fuch light upon the Duke of
Maienne's deſigns, the ſpirit of the league, and
the politics of Spain, as the contents of theſe two
pieces: of which it will not be diſagreeable to pre.
ſent to the reader an extract.
The Duke of Ma ienne ſubmitted the league to the
Tope, and Put it under the King of pa s protec-·
tion,

1592. OF
tion, upon the following conditions, which regard-
ed the party in general, as well as himſelf in parti-
* cular. Firſt, That the King of Spain thould fur-
niſn, and maintain in the ſervice of the league, an
army of 16,000 foot and 3ooo horſe; in which
army there ſhould be 2000 foot and 50 troopers,
all French, of whom he, the Duke of Matenne, was
to have the abſolute diſpoſal, beſides 4000 foot
more, and 500 horie, French likewiſe, who were
to continue near his perſon only, and to be
maintained by Spain: That the number of theſe
troops ſhould be augmented as occaſion required,
but this without ſtipulation, and only in the way
of favour: That the Duke of Matenne ſhould have
the chief command of theſe troops, and thoſe of
all the party, with the title of Lieutenant General
of k the crown, till a King of France was elected:
That this election ſhould be made in a general con-
© ference; by which expreſſion they certainly meant
the ſtates of the kingdom: That till this election
Was made and accepted, the penſion which Spain
already paid to the general ſhould be augmented to
ds much more, that is, from 30,000 livres a- month
to Co, ooo, beſides 100,000 crowns, Which he
ſhould receive immediately, and 10, ooo livres af.

$U L L . 283

ter the ratification of the treaty ; in expectation of
which, they ſhould begin, by putting bim in actual

poſſeſlion of Burgundy: That after the nomination

bf the future King, the Duke of Matenne ſhould be -
continued in the government of the ſtate, with the
title of Licutcnant-General ; and that then, and
not before, he ſhould yield up the city of Soiſſons
do the Spaniards, becauſe it was at preſent the only
place of ſecurity he had for himfelf in France:
That if he found inſurmountable obſtacles, either

in the election of a future King, probably from the
King of Navarre, or in the invaſion and keeping of
Burgundy for the Duke of Maienne, the King of
Spain ſhould make the Duke amends for this loſs,

by

284 M E M o 1 1 Bock V.

by an annual penſion of 300,000 livres, for the poſ-
ſeſſions he might loſe in France; which penſion
| ſhould never be leſſened or taken away, whatever a.

greement might be made between the King of Spain

and the acknowledged King of France, but ſhould

paſs to his heirs for ever. It was moreover ſtipula-
ted, that Spain ſhould cancel all the Duke of Mat.
enne's debts, or thoſe of the King elected with the

conſent of this crown, if he was a native of France:

That they ſhould give ſuitable ſatisfaction to the o-

ther principal officers of the league. They were

not expreſſed, either becauſe the Duke of Matenne

Vas leſs ſolicitous about the intereſts of others than
about his own, or that he thought this article would

be eaſily ſettled, becauſe, if money was wanting,
the lords might be ſatisfied with penſions, dignities, |

or governments. |
Such were the demands of the chief of the

league, in which, as we have ſeen, he was not for-

gotten. For all this, he offered the King of Spain,

(beſides the crown, which, although he was not

mentioned, could only be deſigned for a prince of
the houſe of Auſtria, ſince the Duke of Matenne
ſeemed to exclude himſelf), he offered, I ſay, 2
certain number of towns, for whoſe names, as

well as that of the future King, blanks were left;
thoſe that Spain might take being to be reſtored to
the French Catholics, under the protection of the
King of Spain and the Duke of Matenne. All was

calculated for the ſecurity and caution of Spain, till

the election of a King, without any further expla- |
nation; which proves alſo, that they thought this

election would ſufficiently indemnify this crown;

at leaſt that they wanted, by this favourable inſinua- E

tion, to flatter it with hopes, in order to procure
an immediate and effectual aſſiſtance, What gave
riſe to this ſuſpicion was, their care in inſiſting up-

on, and often reſuming f the folowing clauſe: br
t

1

8 25

| "TY 1554. OF S U L L Y. 285

till all theſe articles were agreed to at Madrid, for
- which they allowed the ſpace of a month, Spain

' ſhould firſt begin by ſending a powerful ſupply into
© Burgundy, which they ſaid was in very great dan-
ger. The more to haſten the reſolutions of this
court, the Duke of Matenne, who throughout the
Vhole treaty ſhewed himſelf to be a faithful ſervant
(although a little intereſted) of the houſe of Au-
ſtria, aſſured them coldly, that if theſe conditions
VvVere not thought advantageous enough for Spain,
_ ſhe might turn to another fide than his, and that
wWeeary of bearing this burden, he requeſted nothing

g better than to be diſcharged.

But this was only a feint; he had to do with a

council who would not ſo eaſily change, and wo
_ underſtood their intereſt fill better. To this me-
morial the Archduke Erneſt anſwered, in the name
of the King of Spain, That his Majeſty was well
_ pleaſed with the title of Defender of the league,
and wiſhed to be regarded as the chief of the par-
ty: That they ſhould find him always ready to

13 grant them whatever ſupplies they demanded a-
gainſt the King of Navarre, and even more than

they demanded ; for he conſented to fend into Pi-

. cardy alone the 19,080 men formerly mentioned,
(it is eaſy to ſee with what deſign, for this province
bounded the Low Countries), beſides thoſe which
he offered to ſend into different parts of the king-
dom. He did not ſeem to be ſo much alarmed on
account of Burgundy as the Duke of Matenne,

probably becaule the council of Spain diſcovered
that this general, who had demanded the poſſeſſion
of the province, would be glad that the troops

i ſhould be all employed there. Upon this article,
he only granted wherewithal to raiſe 1000 Ger-

5 man foot, and to maintain 300 horſe. He added,
"however, that if the whole force of the war was

.
x3 #4

4 Ss
$5 7
£ iy OF
* K * 2 755 2 N
js £9.54 18
» RET *
» oh
＋ * "- x

5 turned againſt this province, his Catholic Majeſty

would

© oa PS "F
- * EN 5
„

— —
32 <

— —
— Ty 2
- 4

il

i [3

31 |

4 IT

. :

0 N |

Wi

? 11

THE

"

«
:
J 446

+

|

i

L {

q [

* 1

1 \
N it

is 1

* [4

=

. []

"87

1

{45
"i,
10808

1.

1 til
wh 1
bY * i
£80 a
U.
q
.
} .
$i 10
ie
*
14
3 [0
TI & 18 :
l 1 |
48
8 ++
.

i
ts os
! 4 Fl
Rn! 031

i!

i iy
(i! 1
Ti 1

'3F:.45

f
1 |
j |
1 "$8: th
33:
v x
11 141
1 *
. '7
'\V 4
15
* 2 fl
N 4
Fit
1
p
wu
1 74
N
1
i
1
142
1
4
N
Vp th.
|
1
» v4
iv |

1

my

5

| f
1858

* |

Fj!
> 1

+ i

N |

11 3:

8 %

48:

>
FLEW! BY

FS:
1 1
+1 3 1
1
«£ |
4 ,

3

1

2 .1Þ
U . >
4
F * 3
ns ff
.
s. 1
. {3 \
i * [
s 4
b i
J
1
10
1
*

1 44

© LY
i S

$ 77

1114
\\$::3$
'F' |
1
{
1

U J
4 +4
9 i
= {TW
115 1
.
9619
tk

1 |
6} y
9 0
1.16
1

i}

.
1
oy . *

I 2
Ty.

— A es
— - —— — — — 3
— — — — — — —— — — —
7 — 4 — — —

286 MEMOIRS Book v.

would 1 not refuſe to ſend conſiderable troops thi.

ther; and, doubtleſs, in this he meant to keep his
word. 5

As to what r cgarded Matenne in particular, his
Catholic Majeſty appeared much leſs liberal. Of all
the articles this was the moſt reduced. He would

make no addition to the penſion of 30,000 livres
a-month ; and would grant him only for hiraſelf 2009

foot and 500 troopers, and that no longer than he

wes in tne army in perton. Upon the other arti-

cles he was perfectly ſilent. With regard to thoſe
places which might be ſized, Spain conſented that

the Duke of Malenne ould keep what might be

taken, provided the was allowed to do the fame,

She would 185 deſiſi from her demand of Soifſons, 1
and was abſolutely refolved to have this city for a
ſecurity for thoſe advances ſhe made in this war;
| ſhe promiſed only to reſign it after the election of
the King: this nomination appeared ſtill doubtful _
to Spain, who gave them to underſtand, that if ſhe |

was ſatisfied with it, every thing might be expect.
ed from her gratitude, but beforehand ſhe would

.

ruk nothing For this purpoſe, all the other arti
cles were left unanſwered, and a new one was add -

ed; which was, that the Duke of Matenne ſhould
remove certain perſons from about him, who,

doubtleſs, did not ſupport the intereſts of Spain with

the French general; their names were not written;

but it was ſaid, that they had been ſignified by

word of movth to the agent of the treaty, Such

attending only to his own intereſts, and reſolving
to ſell his aſſiſtance very dear, followed exactly the

Duke of Matenne's example, and thought greatly |

more of it than of him.

Upon reading theſe papers, all my reſentment ;
was extinguiſhed ; and thinking them of great im-

portance to the King, 1 haſtened Inſtantly to Com-
eigne.

—— —-—

were his Catholic Majeſty's diſpoſitions, who, by

1 ʒùulu „„ 207
peigne. I found time and abſence had not altered
the ſentiments of Henry with regard to me. I had

half an hour's private converſation with this prince,
to whom I related in general the occaſion of my
journey. The reading of theſe papers was put off

till the evening of that day, when, all the courtiers
being retired, I was introduced into the King's a-

artment, and remained there ſhut up with his Ma-

jeſty, who ſent for Beringhen and Choirin, to de-
cypher the greateſt part of the papers. We learn-
ed of whom the third party was compoſed, which
as yet had been only mentioned in whiſpers. It
Was formed in the midſt of the court, under the au
_ ſpices and upon the plan of the Abbe de Bello-
anne, the two Durets, and I believe the Abbe du
Perron; all of them creatures of the Count of Soiſ-
ſons and of the Cardinal of Bourbon, and particularly

attached to the laſt, In all appearance, theſe perſons

were the authors, and at firſt the only promoters,
__ of this faction; but it was afterwards joined by Meſſ.
de Nevers, de Longueville, de Villeroi, d'O, and
the reſt of thoſe Catholics who were in the court,
Who valued themſelves upon being too good French-
men to ſuffer the Spaniſh dominion, and too zea-
lous for the Roman religion to conſent to have a
\ Proteſtant king. The Count of Soiſſons ſome time
after joined theſe gentlemen; and it was reported,
that, inconſtant to his former miſtreſs, he was
ſeveral times upon the point of marrying Mademoi -
ſelle de Longueville. They had aſſumed the name
of politicians, to diſtinguiſh themſelves from the
royaliſts and leaguers, and to ſhew that they re-
garded the good of the ſtate, and the pieſervation
of the rights of the crown beyond every other
_ conlideration. Their principal view was alike to
- exclude every foreign prince, the Duke of Mal.

. .. enne, and the King of Navarre, from the throne.
Ihe bulk of the party knew no more: but the

chiefs,

2 M E M S K R * Book V.

chiefs, who were maſters of the ſecret, thought of
nothing but getting rid of the two laſt by the ſword
or by poiſon®; after which they might, without
any difficulty, make the Cardinal of Bourbon King,
and, not to diſcontent Spain altogether, obtain a dil-

penſation for him to marry the Infanta.

When this project is compared with that of
Jeannin, it is matter of ſurpriſe, that papers which
contained ſuch contrary ſchemes ſhould be found

in the ſame packet. Without ſeeking for the re-

ſon of it in the ſecrets of providence, which by pre-
ſenting the King, at one and the ſame time, with all
the plots that were formed againſt his perſon, ſeem-
ed to point out to him the meaſures neceſſary to
prevent them; it is my opinion, that it may be
found in the different intereſts of all thoſe perſons,

who correſponding together, and ſome from a great 1
diſtance, ſuch as the Duke of Mercœur, without

any other common motive than the hatred they bore

to the King, hatched a thouſand chimerical deſigns,
and delivered themſelves up to thoſe hints which

darted into their minds, without any other fixed and

determined object than that of excluding the King x

of Navarre. In this confuſion of ſentiments, it is
not aſtoniſhing, that he ſhould, by the ſame means,
meet with ſuch oppoſite machinations.

1 continued three days at Compeigne, often ia

conference with the King, who appeared to be ſen-

ſibly affected with the deſigned attempts againſt his
vos 5 becauſe he had flattered himſelf, that his
conduct ought to have ſuppreſſed ſuch thoughts, 52
He ſent me to Mante, perceiving. that my ende -

vours to ſpeak in thoſe converſations might open f
my wounds. I received from this good prince all
the marks of a tender and unbounded confidence,

* This accuſition is to be met with in no aber writer, and is of
the number of thoſe which the author one not to have aſſerts Þ »
wichout giving likewiſe a 1 1

*
WE
LIC -
AL 4 -
2 8
*
8
% Ne *
valet
FL,

Ih, * 2
N 5 2
e LORE OS:
2 . — 8 PI
9 2: LY 8
pod R *

PPV
n

£ 8
& SY
*

1502. OF S8 UL IL V. 289

At parting, he deſired me to obſerve carefully every
motion of his enemies, d to prepare mylelf to
give him good advice upen his arrival at Mante ;
for he intended, he ſaid, to regulate his behaviour
in ſo difficult a conjuncture wholly by my directions.
He ſtaid no longer in Picardy than was neceſſary to
make ſome proper diſpoſitions there, and ſet out for
Mante. This city he preferred to any other, be-
cauſe, by its ſituation, it ſeemed to him the moſt.

proper reſidence to diſcover and overthrow the dif-

- ferent cabals of his adverſaries, at a time when the
* intrigues of the cabinet were likely to ſucceed to
the operations of war. His council was already
bbere, and he had cauſed the Princeſs, his lifter, to
be conducted thither. After the diicovery this
„prince had juſt made of the plots that were laid a-
giainſt his life, it had been extreme imprudence to
: © have neglected any precautions neceſſary for his ſe-
curity. He doubled his guards; he placed in Li-
„ may, which is the ſuburb of Mante, a body of
1 __ Engliſh troops, whoſe affection to him was unque-
1 __ ſtionable, and reſolved to hold all the world ſuſpect-
3 + ed, ſince he was convinced, that thoſe perſons
5 qwhom he had admitted to his councils, to his table,
3, and to his pleaſures, were capable of forming the
= molt violent refolutions againſt him.
na I of all the favours that a prince, as eſtimable for
the qualities of his mind as for his great actions,
is could grant, the ſentiments of his heart ate thoſe
is Which moſt affect a man of honour; I owe a great

deal to this prince, who honoured me in particular

- > vith his confidence, at a time when infidelity, dark-
neſs, treachery, and all that intereſt could ſuggeſt
to ſubjects who had exalted this idol into the place

ol love to their King, had left him no other part to
take than that of reſerve and general diſtruſt, I
have ſomething yet further to ſay, (for why ſhould

. JESS
WM
I þ

7 11 omit that part of all my life which ſeems moſt :
np VoL I. BB likely

|
|
|

290 MEMOIR Ss Bock v.

likely to procure me the eſteem of perſons truly vir-

tuous ?) It is, that in a conjuncture ſo delicate,

this prince was reſolved to abandon himſelf wholly
to my direction, and to confide to me his deſtiny

and his crown *: for without me he undertook not
the ſmalleſt affair; perſuaded, doubtleſs, that the _
advice of a man aQtuated by a ſincere attachment,
and (if I may uſe the expreſſion) a true friendſhip,
_ ought to be preferred to penetration and ability,

when they are joined with a doubtful fidelity. No-

'I we may believe De Thou, Gaſpard Schomberg, Count of _
Nanteuil, Lewis de Revol, Secretary of State, and himſelf, had a

eat hand in determining Henry IV. to change his religion. There
is no hiſtorian who ſpecifies any particular man, as having ſtruck this
this bold ſtroke : they do not even ſeem to have dreamed of M. de
Sully in this affair; which however docs not invalidate the truth of

what is aſſerted in this part of his Memoirs, that it is chiefly, and

even in ſome manner wholly to him, the honour of it is due. Taci- 1

tus tells us, that Auguſtus, after having deprived one of his chief mini.

ſters entirely of his favour, permitted him ſtill to have the appearance

of enjoying it. With regard to the Duke of Sully, it was quite the
contrary; for he already was in abſolute poſſeſſion of his maſter's fa-

vour, while no one ſuſpected it. And that which is moſt remark- 3 3

able in their hiſtory is, that a long time after this miniſter's favour

with the King was known, by his being in poſſeſſion of che firſt een:
ploy ments in the kingdom, even until his maſter's death, iv public _
the King behaved to him with the utmoſt circum ſpection; while in
private, never were familiarity and confidence carried further be.
tween a King and his ſubject. Hence it was, that in ſome hiſtorics

of Henry the Great, the author of which, without penetrating into
the ſecrets of the cabinet, contented themſelves with repreſenting on-
ly the public face of affairs, the name of Roſuy is never mentioned,
and that of Sully, ſo well known to writers better informed, very
| ſeldom, conſidering the part Sully played during the ten or twelve

years of this prince's life. Incomprehenſible as this reſerved and my- | =
ſterious conduct appears, thoſe who reflect upon the ſituation of affairs

in thoſe times, together with the religion of the Duke of Sully, wil 1

comprehend, without any difficulty, the neceſſity the King and his

miniſter were under, to obſerve this conduct, and never to depart

from it. Nor is this one of the leaſt inſtances of the prudence and 7; 5

abilities of theſe two great men. I thought it neceſſary to make this
obſervation once for all. Roſny,” ſays Matthieu, vol. 2. p. 276.

« had a long time a ſhare in the King's moſt important affairs; and

« from the time of Henry III. was one of his moſt intimate conf- |}

« gents,” Cc.

thing

1 Sv

the honour of ſuch a diſtinction: but after having

1 wholly reſigned myſelf to it for ſome moments, 1
perceived the weight of that burden I was loaded
with, and trembled amidſt my joy, leſt my weak -

neſs and incapacity ſhould engage me in ſome falſe

but the prince who repoſed himſelf upon me. |

Prom this moment, all thoſe precautions the King
made uſe of for his perſon, I alſo obſerved in the
 * advice I was going to give him. I prepared my-
elf for it by the deepeſt reflections on the ſtate of
' © the neighbouring kingdoms in general, and on that
of France, of the parties into which it was divided,
| > and of the Kiog, in particular. I conſidered, that
: if, in ſuch employments as mine, one cannot com-
mit faults, even innocently, without deſerving ſome
* > reproaches, we draw thoſe reproaches upon our»

bY 3 1. . . . . .

my own diſpoſition and inclinations, and convinced
me of the neceſſity of beginning with obliging my
cy heart to ſubdue and forget itſelf. A ſerious

the reſt of the Proteſtants. I ſearched into the

© > ground of it, and I ſoon found it in that com-

mon prejudice, that to be worthy of the religion
one profeſſes, cruelty, perjury, and deceit ought
to paſs for nothing, provided one can ſecure its ſuc-
ceſs. I ſuppreſſed theſe ſentiments, equally inju-
=> riovs to the author of religion, and prejudicial to

59 = means: and when I declare, that there was nothing
I more diſtruſted than thoſe ſnares which the zeal

2 thing ever gave me ſo pure and noble a delight as

ſtep that might prejudice, not me, (for on thoſe oc-
caſions felf, I believe, is leaſt in one's thoughts), |

ſelves, when we act according to the dictates of
paſſion. This reflection led me to ſtudy thoroughly

>
EX 2 ES ADELE; _ pn oe 8 RES - 7 r
— — . - __ Non
FFF At * RY a IR I C3 * — edi AAR 2 * WT

of thoſe complaints which I ſuffered frequently to

s = 4 review of my paſt conduct ſhewed me the injuſtice
1 |

e ſcape me againſt the King's behaviour to me and

„5

*
PFF... A EET

the religion that is promoted by ſuch unworthy

B b 22 0 f

3

— 8 ;
— _— — ——
c

3

02: ME -M- 0 1 R 8 Book v.

. of religion might lay for me, 1 ſhall be eaſily be-
lieved, if the advice I gave the King be conſidered,

When I was thus certain of myſelf, I the leſs
fearcd to carry my views into that impenetrable
chaos of different intereſts, and to ſound a futurity,

which offered, on every fide, nothing but frightful
ptecipices. Muſt the miſeries of France be perpe-

tuated, by giving arms, perbaps for more than an
age, to two parties in religion, then nearly equal?

Muſt a prince, who fo well deſerved to be happy,

conſume his whole life amidſt the horrors of a war,

which till then had not given him a moment to

breathe ; and (if I determined upon this) prepared

for bim labours infinitely greater than all he had
pet endvred? On the other hand, ought I to ex.
| Poſe the whole body of Proteſtants 1 in France, who 7

ought only juſtice and peace, to be victims of hu-

5 man policy, and at the mercy of their moſt cruel _
enemies? While uncertain of the event of the

war, and of the moment when the King might be
ſuddenly taken off, ought I to bring things to ſuch

an extremity, that France might, perhaps, become |
a prey to Spain, and to all her neighbours, or, diſ.

membered by a thouſand tyrants, loſe in one mo-

ment the glory of her name, the ſplendor of her

monarchy, and the ſucceſſion of her Kings? What
perils in war? What ſnares in peace? What ſub-

alarmed by ſo many dangers almoſt inevitable?

But the greateſt of all was the not fixing vpon

any. At laſt, when all was thoroughly examined,

it feemed neceſſary to prefer that which would put
an end to the civil war, reſtore tranquillity to France,
ſubmit it to a good King, and put it in a condition
to take vengeance on its foreign enemies: I mean
that reſolution which might the moſt effectually re-
move the preſent inconveniencies, and procure time
to bring a | remedy for thoſe which were to be ap-
prchendec.

jects of fear on all ſides? How form a reſolution, =

); OF. 9 V3 L-. 293
pirehended. In one word, I reſolved to prevail
upon the King to embrace the Roman Catholic re-
ligion, and to perſuade him to it by degrees. I
was ſenſible, that by this means I ſhould give diſ-
> gult to two ſorts of perſons, the Proteſtant neigh. -
dours of France, and the French Calviniſts. But as
do the firſt, France, when united with itſelf, had
no occaſion for any foreign aſſiſtance; and it was
© eaſy to give the ſecond ſuch advantages, as would
make them bchold this change without murmuring.
With regard to both, I depended upon that grati-
tude which a prince like Henry could not fail of
having for perſons to whom he had the moſt eſſen-
tial obligations. e ES
Ihbeſe refieQtions wholly employed my mind from
the moment I left Compeigne, and I was ſtill ab-
| A 1 ſorbed in them when the King arrived at Mante.
9 be firſt thing be did, was to ſend for me to come
do him, with the uſual precautions. Jaquinot con-
ducted me into his chamber before day, and we im-
mediately entered upon our ſubject. Henry, who

e
eee, 2 br” ee

; | 8 on his ſide had made a thouſand reflections on the

perplexing ſituation he was in, began by drawing a
very natural repreſentation of it; irreconcileable in-
tereſt in the princes and nobility of the kingdom;
hatted amongſt themſelves, and againft him; mu-
+ tiny and diſobedience in all minds; inactivity in the
foreign allies; intrigues and animoſity on the part
of the enemies; treachery within; violence with-
out; rocks and precipices on all ſides. The end
of this pathetie diſcourſe was to demand what re-
medy I knew to all this. j
„I, replied, that, without taking upon me to give
his Majeſty advice, I ſaw ſimply three ways to take,
and he might determine upon which he pleaſed. The
>» fuſt was, to ſatisfy all at his own expence, or ra-
ther at the expence of the ſtate ; the ſecond was, to
ſatisfy none, but to endeavour to carry all with a
«ö;ðĩ . bis

3 *
1 - _ A _ — * 7 , 4 * * . _ —_ F 4 1 . 6 _
4 — * — gr — — — — — — 1 - Get”, — * a 15 4% ; — 8 7 2 . — 228 — — _
e . 9 , = ge ot r * * * — — * he + > —— ̃ — AAS. ME 5 — — - ——
mr ne Poe fy 2 2 1 ——_— — k o- —_ 2 h 1 — RES 7 8 EA 8 5 — S . D «es — 5 wo . . ** 1 2 * 2
Der 8 7 — 2 . LANG : * 3 * RAI 2 = *_ FI ©. nt 5. : Fu y . —E: WEIS *
a . 4 : K *

n
n
=

S SOAR?

1

P
bi Renee Ee Sn — es :
OG” C 2 RX 8 . % * - q 5
3 — * N 3 rf ˙ A an i ae 2 2 wy po th ASE R *

— *
1

ow:

LY
5
<>
n
nd S\ N Rs '

*
F 3 * ES 7
1
8 * e
n Lie
ö

5

ph Aa - — - EE . — 5x
"EEG

ts Shae 2

204 MEMOIR S Pock V.
high hand; the third, which held a medium be-
tween theſe two, was, to remove all obſtacles that
oppoſed his acceſſion to the crown, by turning Ro-
man Catholic. The King then told me, that what
J had ſaid to him was nothing but an advice, and

* commanded me to tell him plainly, what I would
do if I were in bis place. I endeavoured to make
him underſtand that, by reſuming one after another

the three different methods I had laid before him,

I made him ſee, that, by following the firſt, he re- 1

duced himſelf to nothing, and that if there was a

neceſſity to gratify wholly the avidity of Spain ang
the French leaguers, he would ſcarce, out of fo _

great a kingdom, keep a few provinces for himſelf, _
As to the ſecond, I repreſented to him, that as foon _
as he ſhould give occaſion to believe, that he de-
pended only upon the claim Eis birth gave him to

the crown, the deſertion of all the Catholics, and

the unbridled fury of a whole nation of enemies,
both within and without the kingdom, would draw _
upon him a terrible ſtorm. The inconſtancy of

fortune, and the uſual reverſes of war, although

this prince had not yet experienced them, found _
their place in this reflection. I did not enlarge vp- _
on the third, but only told the King, that being a
Proteſtant myſelf, I could ſay nothing to him upon

this ſubject,

As 1 was ſpeaking, I perceived the perplexity in-

to which the preſent conjuncture had thrown the

King, to increaſe every moment. 1 did not doubt,
but the review of all theſe difficulties would bring
him to the point I deſired. I was ſure that he

would not even think of the fuſt of my propoſals.
I knew him too well to believe him capable of agree-
ing to an accommodation which would leave him
_ cnly the ſemblance of King, a ſubject or dependent
upon Spain, or reduced at laſt to a ſmall part of

France, It was the two others only that imbar-

raſſed

3
* £

1 % OF S 0 EE VF; 295
raſſed him. On one ſide, he ſaid, by continuing in
is religion, he ſaw united againſt him all the princes

of his blood, the nobility of the kingdom, and
** thoſe who were at the head of all affairs and the
finances, ſuch as Meſſ. d'Epernon, de Nevers, de
2 Longyeville, de Biron, d'O, de Rieux, de Villeroy,
de Manou, de Chatcauvieux, de Vitry, d' Entragues,
and de Sourdis. It would be too tedious to men-

tior them all. He ſaw them ready to reſolve upon

forming againſt him a par*y independent of the

league, or, what was moſt probable, and likewiſe

moſt dangerous, ready to unite themſelves with the
league, end to concert together meaſures for ob-
ſtructing all the avenues to the throne. On the
bother, he objected the complaints of the Dukes of
Bouillon and Ja Tremouille, and the outcries of
ſo many Proteſtants whom he was going to aban-

don; thoſe who were ſo dear to him, and from

wd bom he had ſo long drawn his only aſſiſtance. He
repreſented them as paſſing from diſcontent to a re-

folution which deſpair at being ſacrificed by an un-

- grateful prince would inſpire, which was to ele& a

chief, canton themlelves out in France, and oblige

him to turn his arms againſt them. He ended with
theſe words: © I can never uſe them ill, nor declare
„ war againſt them; I will always love them.”
This ſentiment, which Ciſcovered a ſenſibility and

© gratitude ſo ſeldom to be found in the heats of
ſovereigns, moved me extremely, I thanked him,

N in the name of all the Proteſtants, by bending upon

one knee, and kiſſing his hand. The reaſons with

*%
wr

* B A 6
\ * ; :
4 *
7 . - 7
© TOR *
. oy r
. Ea 22 75
. e In

which this prince oppoſed his change of religion,
aand the manner in which he delivered them, were
__* What alone diſſipated my apprehenſions, and con-
flirmed me in the opinion, that no other remed

could be found :o the preſent evils. I told him,
that Meſf de Bouillon and de la Tremovil'e, and

All of merit and diſtinction in the Calviniſt party,

3
4.5
>
*
—
3
*
SF:

_ would

th 3 = * 2. — > C'S Xa — -
r —_

— W
= - Fan wares arm, er

” +.
_ 2 — watt”. Po . —
FFP ͤ v Dt Eee ne re Eg
.

4
x
*
»
4
1
1.
4
1 0
4 v
T]
424
4 *
11
9 5
* 15
1
391
43%
175
1 *
5.
Ein
7
x1
149
4
1"
» BY
17 1
1
EI.
4 *
16%
12
*
*. N
5 8.
1
1 1
q F.
4
4
1
| .
1
tl
11D
*
7
vy *
1% 2
B4
Ss
bY *
|
*
9
}
Ls
57
pl
*þ
4
4
z
i!
L
n
F
—

—
m- 2 * . 2
P

He

pee

|
[
|

©  NEMO1KT Book v.

would not be ſo unreaſonable as to take arms againſt
him, for a reſolution which mere neceſſity had for. £

ced him to embrace, when he continued to treat

them with all the regards due to their perſons and
ſervices. After explaining all my thoughts on this
ſubject to the King, I added, that the foundation of
all religions which believe in Jeſus Chriſt being el
ſentially the ſame; that is, faith in the ſame m 5

ſteries, and the ſame belief of the Divinity, it

ſeemed to me, that one who from a Catholic be.
came a Proteſtant, or from a Proteſtant became a ©
Catholic, did not change his religion, but followed, 7
for the intereſt of religion itſelf , that practice in

which policy alone had made them to differ. But

although I might be miſtaken in this notion, it was

always inconteſtable, that the embracing the Catho-

lic religion did not include the neceſſity of perſecu-
ting alf others; on the contrary, that God perhaps

diſpoſed the King to this change, to give a new ex-
ample to Europe, and one more worthy of religion

itſelf: That the difference of religions had long |
enough occaſioned the moſt tragical ſcenes in France,

and proved a ſource of diſorders and calamities, by
the averſion with which it inſpired people againſt

* Aid to theſe words of the Duke of Sully what he ſays ſome 4 5 |

pages before, and what has been obſerved a liitle higher, where he
ſpeaks of the duty and authority of kings in religious matters; it
may be determincd that he was a moderate Calviniſt, and conſideted

all religions as indifferent which agreed in the fundamental articles
It is thus that the author of the MS. which I have quoted in the
preface of this work, ſpeaks of it; and it is even the chief reaſon

which he makes uſe of to juſtify the Duke of Sully, for having given
to Henry IV. ſuch advice, as, without this, would have but ill agreed
with the law: of conſcience and natural rectitude. It being his opi-

„nion,“ ſays he, ſpeaking of the Duke, of Sully, „that the King R
4 might as eaſily work out his ſalvation in our religion as in his own,
« he offered no great violence to his conſcience, in perſuading him
eto this change; on the contrary, it was effectually ſerving the (tate, _

5 »

„ nay, Chriſtianity itſelt, without hurting his reputation. ”» Happily, ©

Heory the Great did not "adopt the neutral opinions of bi paigitter
as * — acknowledges very ſincerely.
thoſe

F 2» a, 9 D
8
3 hop 7
| 8 r
1 9 , -
3
e

l or SULLY. 297

2
5 2

Fi

lhoſe of a contrary faith from their own, which was
> equally the caſe with the Proteſtants as well as Ca-
> tholies: That he might remedy this dangerous
evil, by uniting thoſe who profeſſed the two reli-
gions in the bands of friendſhip and Chriſtian cha-
ility; or, if this was impoſlible, preſcribe to them
 *- rules ſo juſt, as might make both parties be con-
tented with what ſhould be granted them. I ſoften-
cd this prince by the ſingle thought of immortali-
ing his memory, in re-eſtabliſhing in a deſolate
= kingdom, peace, abundance and ſecurity, and of
meriting, by the ule of thoſe abilities he had re-
c̃cixved from heaven, the glory of giving happineſs
do France, after ſhe had begun to deſpair of it, and
to lock upon her wounds as incurable. I am cer-
teain, that this motive was more intefeſting than that
of his own quiet; which, however, I did not for-

get; and I obliged Henry tacitly to confeſs, that
his ſpirits, after being exhauſted, if I may uſe that
term, with war, demanded a ſituation leſs turbulent,
2 and more tranquiilill. „„ 6” *
I) be ſtrongeſt proof that I pleaded upon this oc-
gaaſion for reaſon and juſtice, was, that the King,
_ who poſſeſſed that happy ſagacity of diſtinguiſhing
immediately the truth or falſehood of any poſition,
cConfeſſed to me that my diſcourſe had penetrated
to the bottom of his heart: he added, that he
Vvould reflect upon it more thoroughly, but that he
believed he ſhould follow no other advice. In ef-
Ndb˖ fed, at the end of three days he had taken his re-
1 — ſolution, and he now only endeavoured to remove
19 the difficulties which remained. Some of theſe re-
garded himſelf; for as ſincerity and rectitude were
3 rooted in his heart, and regulated all his words and
„ actions, I am perſuaded, that there is not any thing
 __ Which could have prevailed upon him to embrace
„ a4 a religion which he internally deſpiſed, or even but
" FFT doubted

298 NM E M 0 1 1 I

doubted off A prince who bad never deceived | K
man, was far from intending to deceive Gd.
The other difficulties related to the leaders it 3H
the Proteſtant party, whom the bare propoſition of |

Book v.

changing his religion would not fail to make re-
volt, as well through fear, as through a point of

honour. He aſſembled them, and addreſſing him- =
ſelf to the moſt diſtinguiſhed amongſt them, which
were Meſſ. de Bouillon, de Sancy, du Pleſſis, le
Salignac, de Morlas, de Conſtans, and Salettes*;
I allo being preſent. He told them, (with an in:
tention to ſound their inclinations), that he had
brought them together to know their ſentiments
upon what he had to communicate to them. He
ſaid he had received certain advices, that Bello
kanne and the two Durets, agents for the third
party, had had an interview with Villeroy and
Jeannin 4, and that it was agreed upon to unite all |
the forces of the league and the other Catholics a-
gainſt him; that the time which the Catholics had |
ſo often threatened him with was now come, for

they were going to abandon him unanimouſly;
their common deſign being now to place the Car-

dinal of Bourbon upon the throne, to marry him to

the Infanta of Spain, and to endeavour, by all poſ-

ſible methods, to rid themſelves of his perſon.

That the Cardinal, indeed, had expreſſed great re-
luctance to this laſt propoſition, but, by all appear-

_ ances, they would ſoon gain his confent, when
they convinced bim, that the crown could * no

oh plates was preſident o the rarkiament of Pau, hs coun-

ſiellor of ſlate at Navarre. Morlas, his natural ſon, was member of
the privy council, counſellor of ſtate, and ſuperintendant of the ma-

ga of France. They were both converted. Henry IV. when
de was informed of the death of Morlas, who was a man of great

merit, ſa:d, & I have loſt one of the wiſeſt men in my kingdom.”

Chron. Noven. book 7. p. 545.

7 See Matth. vol. 2. p. 66. Cc. chron. Neven. lo2e De Thov,

M. 2 Nevers, Mem. de * er.

other

„„ ne vos

- 22 Vs Yet 0 4 3 > » 9 nd *
2 e r

NE N i TE i tg RS oh, "Ir he

7 . POT >” 1
6 2 „ «” i . 1
8 * N L "I
Se Song Ws cx
= 3 2 PP
q Ln S i oi ace „„ ROS
Ke . 1 SSR „ ee N > ,

N
eee e e

hes =
8

2 os 7

>
* 4%

RE It en oe BIG, "pet S N *
Lage CD = *; IG 45. 6. LOBE mg 8 285 "IN 85 ys
S e e

n > re oy
N n BINS,
. r

„ 200 „ =

Q. => =

1592. Oo F 8 L L V. 299
* other means be ſecured to him. He conjured them
to tell him, ſincerely, what they thought he had to
do upon this occaſion, particularly upon the deſer-
tion of the Catholics, which would reduce his par-
Jõͥ;- mßm,ß ß
By the noiſe and confuſion this declaration erea-
ted in the aſſembly, it well appeared that all thoſe
who compoſed it, without any forecaſt or manage-
ment, without any ſettled point, and even without
any ſincere attachment to the King, had till then
thought only of living from day to day; of gaining
time, and profiting by their maſter's abilities for
war. They could never agree, nor form any con -
nected reſolution. They did not know whether to
> Wiſh for peace, or continue the war. One ſaid,
that there was nothing for it but to reſume their
> arms, and riſk all at one caſt. Another imagined,
that by arreſting eight or ten of the principal Ca-
= tholics, who were not yet upon their guard, par-
ticularly the authors of the plot, it might be ren-
deered abortive. Others, more moderate, or per-
haps more irreſolute, contented themſelves with
ſaying, that it would be neceſſary to accommodate.
matters by negotiations, without being able to tell
how. I ſeized this overture, and by digeſting it to
> ſomewhat reaſonable, I carried all the votes for a
> negotiation, It was known that I had ſome in-
=> fluence over the Count of Soiſſons, and that I had
free acceſs to the Cardinal of Bourbon. This car-
dinal often ſaid in public, that although I was a
>> Huguenot, there was no perſon for whom he felt
== ſo ſtrong an inclination as for me. I offered to uſe
my mediation with theſe two princes, to prevail up-
on them not to liſten to the perſuaſions of the King's
enemies; and the better to inſure ſucceſs, I pro-
; miſed I would endeavour to gain their creatures and
their counſellors, eſpecially the Abbot de Bello-
anne, the Durets, confidents to the Count of

- 2%
A . gy + = * n 1 = -
EY > * 5 25 W
JJ oo Yo
os, Pong See ;
ot ASE bong ro ueprega it im SD. 85 2
* 1 Ge __ , % p -

- * . CURIE SA
* 1 64 Mg 2 L
c N 3 T N

eee e de

os * XP 23 wer” S n
7 e . e

tons Ly

o
gr rd IG TT re

aw wy ww -o WW” —.

iv
;
1 .
?
1

'

1

?

| 300 M E M O 1 R 8 Bock V. C
; Soifſons, and a lady called Madam des Koſie ers, an 1

intimate friend of the Cardinal's.

No perſon contradicted this opinion, doubtleſs
£ boemile the Proteſtants, who had heard the decla-
ration, ſenſible that they were too weak actually to
renew hoſtilities, thought that at preſent there was
nothing better to be done. The King, on his fide,
was not ſorry at its being unanimouſly voted by the
Proteſtants, that he ſhould addreſs himſelf to the
princes of the blood, and hold a commerce with the

Catholics of the league. According to my plan,

I began with the Abbe de Bellozanne. I knew jea. :
louſy had made him the ſecret enemy of the Du.
rets, and believed that by taking him on this ſide,

confirming him in bis hatred, and flattering 4-7

with having ſhortly the chief hand 3 in all affairs, ]
could reach my end. I introduced myſelf wit)

telling him, that I was come to thank him, in the

name of the King, for having in his favour ſo ge-

ncroully oppoſed the enterpriſes of the Durets;

' Which could only proceed from the rectitude of his Bp
heart, and his good will towards the King, Which
bis Majeſty, although he had but a ſmall acquaint.
_ ance with him, eſteemed as he ought, till he ſhould
be in a ſtate to give him more ſenſible proofs of
his affection, which he would certainly do, by pro- _
curing him a cardinal's hat, or, at leaſt, one of the
richeſt benefices in the kingdom, when thoſe favour: i
Were in his power, by the change of his religion, "2
which was likely to happen very ſhortly. —
This introduction, which flattered the vanity of =
the man extremely, gave me occalion to enter, s
if undeſignedly, into the ſecret proceedings of te
Durets, which I pretended to be very poſitively in-
formed of, in order to learn them from him, and _
to engage him to oppoſe them yet more refolutely. .
In effect, I had ſcarce dropped a few words on this
ſubjes + when my wan, giving way to his incl
nation, 1

" 22
N
3 * 72 -
J Weds: |
(0
Wk 24

Wicoz OF $ULL V. 301

\

7
*
*

nations, fell upon the Durets, and ſpoke ſo much

co their diſadvantage, that I fell into the other ex-
treme, and believed that he was induced by his
Hhatred of them to accuſe them falſely. The hint
of the cardinal's hat and the biſhopric producing its
effect, Bellozanne pretended to feel that zeal for the
| © King's ſervice, which I attributed to him from pure
fiction. It was not his fault, that I was not per-
ſuaded, that he had oppoſed all the violent reſolu-

tions of the Catholics, whoſe intrigues and views
be informed me of. I flattered myſelf for ſome
lime, that I had brought over this man to the King

but rogues ſoon reſume their natural character. Im-

! _mediately after he had made this proteſtation to me,
be made one quite contrary to the Cardinal of Bour-
| bon, and afterwards to Villeroy and Jeannin, to
whom he repeated from one end to the other all the
converſation he had juſt held with me. If he drew
* advantage from his treachery, by the new degree
of favour it procured him, I, on my fide, perhaps,
made better uſe of it for the King, than if he had
kept the ſecret. Moreover, I had hereby found
meeans to inform thoſe gentlemen of the King's co-
| ming diſpoſition to embrace their religion, which

drew them internally towards this prince, but eſpe-

cCially the Cardinal, who was more enamoured of
religion than of a crown. Bellozanne's imprudence
? likewiſe produced another effect, which was the in-

ſpiring them with a deſire of ſupplanting each other,
in their endeavours to acquire the good graces of the
(eing. TI heartily therefore pardoned Bellozanne's
_ double dealing, and even drew a third good conſe-
quence from it, with regard to the Durets.
I Theſe gentlemen perceiving the honour Bello.
Zane had gained by the new ſecrets he had diſclo-
ſed to his patrons, and the increaſe of favour they
had procured him, were the more ready to hear
tdthe propolitions I went afterwards to make them.

vor. I. "Du I

302 M E M O I R S Bock V.

J told them, the King, offended at the knavery of
Bellozanne, (which in reality he was, becauſe he
had carried it ſo far as to give umbrage to the Pro-
teſtants), would have no commerce for the future
with a man fo faithleſs, and was diſpoſed to make
uſe of them in his future meaſures. I confided ſome

papers to their care, the reading of which I was cer-

tain would have a marvellous effect. It was the
project of accommodation between the league and
Spain, and the anſwer in conſequence of it, which
they had no knowledge of, and which I ſhewed to
them that moment. This ſtroke piqued them;
they thought themſelves deſpiſed, and the project
ſo reaſonable as to fear it might be executed, and
affairs brought to a concluſion without their contri-
buting any thing to it; which to theſe ſort of men
| tated not a moment in offering me with ardor their
ſervices for the King. The change of religion,

which I had alſo inſinuated to them, ſeemed to re-
move all the oppoſition that could be made to this

prince. They were raviſhed with being inter-

meddlers in a project, the invention of which ap-
peared to them more happy than that which the
Duke of Matenne had propoſed to Spain; or ra-

ther, there remained no other part for them to take,

after the victory Bellozanne had juſt gained over

them. In effect, they kept the ſecret better, and
laboured in it uſefully enough. 7
l 1 applied myfelf afterwards to the Abbe du Per-

ron, who, by his character, his reputation, and
bis eloquence, had more power with the Cardinal

of Bourbon, when he aimed at making him either

take or quit a reſolution, than all the artifices of

Bellozanre and the Durets. We had been acquaint-
ed a long time, and he had ſome obligation to me.
1 concerted my diſcourſe, as having to do with a

man for whom eloquence, grand W 0 . 5

is the moſt mortifying conſideration. They heſi.

: -
ur
*

12
55
=
%
*
2
95
A
ba
3
7
853
£58
ws
**
by:
3
.
»

"2

of
*
4

N 1% 9 8 DUEL K- 393

deep reaſoning, had powerful charms®; and I in-

troduced into it as much or more of politics and

- * N K . 1 If, pak =» C 7 4 ; a :
a $64 IS 347 2 e xe OT I Woes ons AR. & f 2 Ws . 1 : — a 5

worldly views, as of religion. My brother, the
governor of Mante, was preſent at this converſation,
when, after having thrown out my ordinary inſi-

nuations about the King's future abjuration, I un-
dertook to prove to Du-Perron, that, except Spain,

and ſome turbulent perſons in France, it was the

intereſt and advantage, not only of France, but of
all Europe, that the King of Navarre ſhould aſcend
the throne, and poſſeſs the kingdom in the ſame

extent, and with the ſame power, which had been
enjoyed by the Kings his predeceſſors.

I began with the Pope. I told Du-Perron, that
he who had ſo perfect a knowledge of the court of

Rome, knew better than any perſon, that Cle-
ment VIII. now in poſſeſſion of the holy ſee, was

neither ſo violent as Sixtus V. nor ſo changeable as
Gregory XIV. That this Pope conſidered the pre-
ſent affairs of Europe and Chriſtianity in a clear and
impartial view. That it was not his intention, by
breaking the neceſſary balance between the houſes

of Auſtria and Bourbon, to ſubject France to Spain;

| becauſe he was not ignorant of any of the views of
this laſt power for univerſal monarchy. That the
Pope would in this find not only his intereſt, as
common father of the Catholics, but alſo his tem-
poral intereſts in particular; becauſe Italy and the

patrimony of St Peter would ſoon follow the deſtiny

of France, and the other kingdoms ; and the Pope

would be in danger of ſeeing himſelf one day re-
duced to the quality of ſimple chaplain to the Kings
of Spain, That beſides, his Holineſs had too much
judgment not to open his arms to a King, as ſoon.

* The Duke of Sully's judgment of the Cardinal du Perron 8
more confor inable to truth, than that given him by Joſeph Scaliger,
ho treats him only as a babler, locutuleius, or locutu le vis. |
Ce 2 0

”
U
1
f
k
1
4 .
ifs
10
"
15
,
. > 4
os .
. U
1
j +
55
1
2
i
'
F
F.
| WP
1
4
þ
.
1] *
3
13
be .*
14
i
N
+1! ”.
"a5 *
1
Lt :
©:48
.
1 * FR
„
wh
3M
*
1
1
v4 a
3M
4 1
1
1
. 4
s „
HJ .
z
- tt
I
£ 6
7 ,
34 %
1
88
1
1
1
1
11
BY
by 6 * 11
14 .
* i,
*
.
*
4.
.
+
* =
= 1
1
F i
= P
4 f
1
2
4
f *.
1
1
2
'*$ „
1
1
0 ;
i .
4
N :
1
8 1
Pi
"8
oy
I» © g
g 7
a 26
$& *
+:
o * }
> =
r 2
55 &
+8
+.
WM
\ BE
+.M7
WE '
5 7
..
( ;
1 wy 12
tf
12 x
. 4
WT |
I:
” 19
% Ay
. |
Wo
* 1
* ;
4
\
4
| ;
1
F
A
*
7
* 4

304 M E M OI R S Bock v.

as he ſhould expreſs his deſire to be received there, | ®

without troubling himſelf about that mighty phraſe
a relapſe, with which fools only weie affected.
I bad ſtill leſs difficulty to ſupport my propoſition,

with regard to the other crowned heads of Europe ;
I therefore did not dwell long upon them, that J
might turn all the converſation upon Spain. I aſk-
ed the Abbe du Perron, if he did not agree with |
me in the opinion, that thoſe deep politicians who

gave riſe to all the diforders in France, began to
deſpair of the ſucceſs of the great project they had
formed to conquer all France, and this upon the

knowledge they had, as well of the King and the |
Proteſtants in his intereſt, as of the French Catho:
lies? Could the King of Spain ever ſeriouſly intend

to make a Spaniſh province of France, and flatter

| himſelf that his domination would be endured by
a people who had always emulated and hated Spain?
Of all this there was already more than mere ſuſ- } *
picion. F;;%% 86
By the King of Spain's conduct it was viſible,
that he imagined the Dukes of Maienne, Guiſe,
and Mercceur, fought only to make him their dupe;
nor had he a more favourable opinion of the Dukes

of Savoy and Lorrain, whom he ſaw make uſe of

his troops and money without ſhewing any greater
reſpect for him. One convincing proof that theſe
were the real ſentiments of Philip was, the propo-
' fitions he had made, and often renewed, to the
| King of Navarre, by D. Bernardin de Mandoce,

Moreau, and the Count de Taxis. For, in reality,

this Prince ſeeing that all he could pretend to from }
the troubles in France was, at the moſt, the pol- |

ſeſſion of two or three of its provinces, it was of
little conſequence to him, whether he obtained
It is

them from the King or from the league.

true, that if he divided France amongſt the chicts
of the league, he gained hopes of one day getting

4 „ A * L AY WR. 4 _— 4 * C * 2 5 Th Tx". . . OT 4 - 5 . 1 a . ; - , 8 : . * * 2 ” * 7 Fe SB. EE 2. - u
2 | * 3 TV . ˙ ET INT * 28 7 n WRIT r 2 N 9 8 * 2 ran P > + < e . C : . ” „ * - Y N. „ .

2 2 Bo woe LY 2 3 N wp. ' £5 2 P's, A Vs REEF jt : ; bo g 4 L ö

n Ea OS SST at ; K i n 5 r 82 v 5 3 .

ES ee
n

b Wy Lk
* 5
Fe oY

n

: SES

tit all to himſelf, by ſeparately attacking thoſe petty
: | kings; but that, in effect, he purchaſed theſe hopes
at a very high price, by that ſcarcity of troops
and money into which the avidity of the league

1 lip perceived that he might be obliged to recall the

more and more every day.
bbbſerving that Du- Perron liſtened to me atten-
| tively, and ſeemed to be inwardly convinced of the
reaſonableneſs of all I faid, I did not ſo ſoon quit
the Subject of Spain. I told him it was not pro-
bable, that ſo many brave men, fond of their li-
berty, their laws, and cuſtoms, would ever be ea-
ſy under a foreign flavery, and reſolve to bear a-
way no other reward for their gallant actions, than
the honour of being dependents upon the grandees

although he had greater obligations to the Prince
of Parma than to any other perſon, ſuffered him

© while he continued in the profeſſion of the Pro-
without difficulty, that hackneyed reproach of a

amongſt themſelves, the marriage of the Infanta,
_ Which the league had propoſed to Henry by Ville-
roy and Jeannin, ſoon after the raiſing of the ſiege
of Rouen, which I could not give a full account of
moment. After this, turning with vivacity to Du-

F)

| 'F 1592. O F „ V-L L . 30

1 had thrown him. And although the King ſhould |
de able to maintain the war but a ſhort time, Phi-

5 ſupplies he lent to France, having but ſufficient for
- himſelf in Flanders, where the war was kindling

of Spain, or at beſt penſionaries of a King, who,

to wait for the recompence of his ſervices till his
death: That the whole view of the French lords,
buy ſeeming to join the King of Spain, was only to
procure the grant of greater rewards from Henry,
teſtant religion; after which they would abandon, -
relapſe, as well as the deſign of chuſing a King from

and all the reſt of their vague projects. For a proof
of the truth of what I ſaid, I produced the treaty

in its place, but ſhall lay before the reader in a

* . . ,
b r +0 e * - JE . n . 3 e 1 838 . T e
n „%% PPP OE ROS I TOES HR UII T0 IE Se CAPERS CEL E P< ets ATE ITT CIT IIA TORT RR. Ph. 8
x we 7 — . , - 5 * — >. . * Pr r
$4 : 2 RR : oo SSD, . . Bn 3 : — + cop Wo : "5A „ *
. 2 3 2 * #” if * — * -

Perron,

306 M R M 60 * R 8 Book v. MF

Perron, I aſked him if he was not of the Intereſt
of all good Frenchmen, and of himſelf firſt of all
to prevent ſuch deſigns from being accompliſhed,
whether the good of the ſtate required, that by
deſtroying in a moment an edifice which had coſt

the Kings of France ſuch labour to raiſe, and which

ſome of them had cemented with their blood,
France ſhovld be again filled with thoſe little 5.

rants, ambitious and cruel, who claimed a right
of giving law to their prince, and who were al-

ways ready to fly before the fiſt enemies that at.
tacked them? And laſtly, if he did not confch;

that a monarchical government, by which all thc

members are united, and under the direction of

one only chief, was the moſt glorious and moſt ad-

vantageous of any, and for the French nation in

F
I cut ſhort my diſcourſe upon this third 5 of

politicians, by obſerving to Da-Perron, that one
of thele two things muſt neceſſarily happen, either
that they would unite themſelves to the league, and _
{o deprive it of all aſſiſtance from Spain; or take |

meaſures ſeparately from it, which would produc?
the neceſſity of deſtroying it, or of being deſtroy:

ed by it. In any of theſe cafes, nothing cov. |
happen that would not be for the King's advantage.

5 — x 8 bn
2 1 „„
5 r DET
F

To conclude with what related to the perſon of te
King himſelf, I found no difficulty in making the
Abbe confeſs, that this prince was abſolutely fitted

to reign over the French. I repreſented to him,

that his reputation was ſo well eſtabliſhed every
where, that the league had great reaſon to fear,

— 5

and the third party (fo far from being creditable)

ſtill more, that in the provinces, where no one

delivered himſelf up ſo blindly to the caprices of | 5

the league as in Paris, they would put themſelves
entirely under the protection of this prince, when
their intoxication was over, and had given place

jj;

— þ
yy I
1
8 £4
SAP
>
4
3
N
—
1
* * .
N
52
5 33
4»
ts
A 7 4
S
2 13.
*
**
*
A
4
85
L.

i” 07 SUVLL EY - my

to that love of repoſe ſo natural to thoſe who have
> ſuffered. That the provinces began already to

teſtify openly their diſcontent. But without all

© this could not the King, brave and experienced as
bie was, and aſſiſted only by the Proteſtants and
foreigners, maintain the war a long time, and guard
againſt domeſtic attempts upon his perſon? They
had ſcen him when he had not ten cities in his par-
ty, and with only a handful of men, make a ſtand
\ againſt all the forces of the kingdom. I concluded
with faying, that inſtead of giving the enemies of
France the pleaſure of ſzeing her waſte and deſtroy
_ herſelf, it was the general intereſt, to favour and
[ ſupport a prince, who appeared capable of reſtoring
her to her former tranquillity, and of railing! her to
a a new degree of ſplendor.

The Abbe du Perron had no wy to make to

all theſe reaſons, he was convinced of their force;
and, as I had expected, knew. weil how to bring o-
ver the Cardinal of Bourbon to his opinion, by add-
ing to them all thoſe which his own penetration ſug-

geſted to him, and which he did not fail to adorn

7 with all the brilliant apparel of eloquence. The
- remainder of this year, and the beginning of the
next were employed on his part and on mine in go-

ins backwards and forwards, and in conferences

olf this kind. As ſoon as a negotiation was begun,
we had more negotiators than we wiſhed,

It was true, that Villeroy and Jeannin had a

1 long time before preſented the King with a project
of a treaty, in the name of the league, by which
they offered, upon certain conditions, to acknow-

ledge him for King. This piece is curious e-

; nough to deſerve an abſtract to be given of it. The
true ſpirit which animated the league, clearly ma-

nifeſts itſelf in it. The King's abjuration was at
the head, as the fi: ſt and principal condition. They

. required. that in the ſpace of three months he

ſhould

3008 M E M O 1 R 8 Book V.

ſhould make a public profeſſion of the Catholic re-
ligion; that he ſhould reſtore it in all thoſe places
from whence the ſuperiority of the Reformed had
baniſhed it; that he ſhould break off all alliance
with them; that they ſhould have no ſhare in the
dignities, embaſſies, and employments of ſtate of
any kind whatever; in a word, that their conti.
nuance in France ſhould be tolerated only, and for

a certain time, which wight be prolonged as exi- |

gency required.
Many other articles ſeemed to be infarced *

only to perſuade the people that the chiefs of the

| league, by treating with Henry, had nothing but
the ſervice of religion and the ſtate in view. Such
was the clauſe of naming to benefices, conformable

to the canons; and that of holding the ſtates fr om

ſix to ſix years; and many others.
Theſe were all ſpecious conditions; but they add ·

ed, | (ubich was the moſt eſſential point for the au-
thors of the project), That the King ſhould ae
knowledge, authoriſe, and ſupport the league with
all his power: That he ſhould leave a certain num» _
ber of towns in their hands, into which he could

not even put garriſons; that is to ſay, that he
ſhould reign under them: That he ſhould diſtribute
all the governments of France amongſt ſuch of his

principal officers as they ſhould name to him: That
he ſhould keep a ſufficient number of troops in
each of theſe governments, to maintain the Ro-.

man-Catholic religion there: That he ſhould not
diſpoſe of the taxes, impoſts, and other revenues

of the crown; but they ſhould be all applied to
this uſe, according to a diviſion proportioned to

the quality and occaſions of thoſe governments:
That all the garriſons which ſhould be put in the
_ fortreſſes of the kingdom, ſhould be paid in the

ſame manner. The deſtination of theſe gavern- >

ments was as follows; Provence was to be given to

tbe

5 e r
I

PX 7 — 4 . 4 7 * . ©, "I * ws 2 = $4 . . : . N - o q . - « 1 * 1 9 1 —
_ * 5 * ; a . _- ; : e « : y @ e N "a YES 752 CoD ö . 5 . , % } # . 8 ef C 4 .
I * 9 n Ms SS Fer + I wah * _ 4 | bY, if . * , : D 1 N 2 8 5 765 4s IF 5 RN ; 4 { : 2% 24 7 . oO 8 PUR Ste . * „ x52 of S
x — 5 — 5 3 . SE 8 q of 44 . 8 # 4 Gr ttt 2 — 9 1 S254; 4H" 26% ö 8 0 4 7 == * 2 2 5 33 1 8 ; IF i # .. A 2 £ * 3 * c 7
2 * r ERIN 2 3 * x B Ls ISS 2 5 5 0 . — v 8 p 6 2 s 7 * f » 3 8 ; © 3 e J

. 3.
*

3 7
:
85

8. . —
1 Ls
9 f :
BS $2 4
„
„
17 *
Fs
4 .
e
© "ng
4: 63
-
os
0
WE
*
2
Ly
bo
- *
3
2
WE
2
*
* 3
:
ky
4 *
”
;W
{ £ 4
' 1
8 o
(0
WY
<6:
Bo 2
4
Lo .
.
SY
15
We
CO.
**

8 to
FRE
**

99
5
9
YN
4;
7
3
v3
wy
Rp
Px. 05
*
7
25
*
;
; 1
.
3
L
v

the. Duke of Nemours, Languedoc to the Duke of
Joyeuſe, Bourbonnois and Marche to the Duke of
Elbeuf, Bretagne to the Duke of Mercœur, the

two Vexins, with the title of governor, to d'Alin-

court, part of Normandy to Villars, the Iſle of
France to the Baron of Roſne, Orleannois and
Berry to La Chatre, Picardy to the Duke of Au-

male, Champagne to the Duke of Guiſe, with the

nefices which his family had enjoyed. —
The Duke of Maſenne had, with reaſon, the
largeſt ſhare. To the government of Burgundy,
which was alotted for him, they added thoſe of
Lyonnois, Foret, and Beaujolois; and in all theſe

poſt of high ſteward, and all the dignities and be-

provinces gave him a power that had annihilated

that of the King ; the right of diſpoſing, as he plea-

ſed, of governments, lord lieutenancies, and other

employments, not only in the amy, but alſo in

the finances, and courts of judicaturez and what

was ſtill more, the nomination to eccleſiaſtical dig-

nities and benefices: and to crown all theſe extra-

ordinary advantages, they added the poſt of con-
ſtable, or licutenant general of the crown, It was

this only that ſeemed worthy of the Duke of Mai-

enne's acceptance. They likewiſe kept in reſerve |
four marechals batons *, and the league, at their

_ own leiſure, were to name the perſons on whom
they were to be beſtowed; beſides very conſider-

able penſions to the moſt diſtinguiſhed amongſt
them, they carried their exceſs ſo far as to pre-
{cribe to the King the clearing the debts of ſome.
conſiderable pertons of their party whom they

 * Theſe four marechals batons were given the following year to
Roſie, La-Chitre, Bois-Dauphin, and Saint- Pol, cach of whom wil!
be mentioned hereafter. On this occaſion there is a bon=mat related

_ of Chanvalon, „ Sir,“ ſaid he one day to the Duke of Matenne,

you have made ſome baſtards, which will be legitimated at your
ex pence.“ . ä | 2
| ſhould

jo MEMOIRS Book v.

ſhould name, to the number of twenty. And, to
_ conclude, with abſolutely tying up his hands, the)

added, that he ſhould allow the league to chu 1
the for cign princes that were to accede to the trea-
ty, and to be gvarantees for its execution. The
Pope's name only was expreſſed ; doubtleſs, the

blanks were to be filled up with the King of Spain

among others, By this they too plainly acknow. _

ledged the views of the Spaniards. Charles V. re-

quired nothing elſe than ſuch a ſcheme, when he

ſaid that he had been falſely accuſed of hating a
King of France, ſince inſtead of one he wiſhed there
had been twenty. |

No perſon believed that che leagoes by treating
with the King on conditions ſo injurious to this
prince, could perſuade themſelves that he would
ſubmit to them. It is probable therefore, that

they did it in order to make his refuſal give diſguſt

to the dregs of the populace. The King likewile,

far from treating theſe propoſals as a ſerious mat- | _

ter, or anſwering them privately, as he would have
done had he thought it poſlible to have come to a-
ny accommodation, ſacrificed them immediately to
the proteſtants, who gave to the piece all the qua-

lifications that it merited; it even turned the Ca-

tholics againſt the author; for theſe Catholics find-

1ng that all there was badly arranged; that it was

full of articles which, being only ſnares, would

prove an inexhauſtible ſource of difficulties; and
that there were ſome which it was abſolutely | im-
poſlible to execute, they took no notice of what

—

made the ſtrongeſt impreſſions upon them, which

was, that, by the diſtribution of favours anc it-
wards, nothing remained for them.

The King made no other uſe of theſe propoſals

than to bind thoſe who ſerved him more clolely to
bis intereſts, gave a very ſhort and a very dry an:
wer to the Preſident Jeannin It was at the camp

befoic

— — N s 7
K . 7 2 r.

* 4 * .
9 1 , - > TE : : x5
- Y « 12-6
; 4 7 . . * 1 — "ES
* , . 5 g 8 0 3% 3 3 or bi 3 W Af. oy
X F F — 4 \-. >
4 . Z \ 7 7 . ” — SLES X 8 2 5 ws ng, CORE IX, -
£05 „ 178 > . - 2 * 2 — 8 - N 50 * a * * Pb, . 2 1 I 2 . 4 p 5 wa 2 IRA x at Ve 2 l N n 2 8 * 2
TA . e 22 ; 3 22 F 8 7 S 7 2 WY mid ; 3, mY r * g 1 2 2 : . ; p 5 Is 4 WH 2 b CF Pe DE Ee ag 2 er e Se NIALL TIS» 2
Rt Co et tho $4 4 FF ee S - > : e 2 e n . — 8 4 - g * 5 a WOE ONT 2 22 2 5 EF PETITION EH ; . * n : a p .
EV S * r 9 . „o ASS! robbie 91 Soba xo bo 854 5 * 3 . > , 4 : v , "» . 6 pe A ; « . g x
3 . r „I d FOSTER 0, A * N R * , c a : - , |
= PEE A 3 5 r a
* -

g Fo

15

5
7
f
Y
--

_ aſtoniſhed at the tone that he had taken with him:
hat if his project was well examined, he would
find that he had not yet treated well enough for
the league: That the only fear he had when he
drew it up was, that it would be diſavowed, eſpe-
© cially by the Duke of Nemours, who, inſtead of a |

government, had already formed a principali-
ty for himſelf in Lionnois, with the approbation of
the King of Spain; and till more by the Duke of
MNPNaienne, whoſe intereſts had been alſo too much

- neglected in it; (certainly this moderation of Jean-

© nin” s was truly admirable): That, in his opinion,

he had ſhewn the King bis readineſs to ſerve him,
byy not mentioning his giving the league any towns
ds a ſecurity for the performance of his word, (as
if thoſe which were to be beſtowed upon the go-
vernors did not anſwer the ſame purpoſe): That,

> 2 8 Is 82 6 x — . 4 % _— 7 . a ,
* bet * . 4 2” - _ 8 1 . * - £ *
8 r 3 7 bs * he 4 v< "was * A * 2
a EE WE TSS r SELIG rs .

r U * L v. 31¹

before Caudebec. There is no neceſſity to repeat

1 Ude contents.

Civil wars, eſpecially thoſe wherein religion has
a ſhare, give an air of licence and affrontery which

| T on all other occaſions would be ſurpriſing. Jean-
nin, offended at the ridicule with which his project
had been treated, anſwered in writing, which he

addreſſed to the King himſelf, That he was greatly

to pleaſe the King, he had eluded the queſtion, of

making theſe governments hereditary. This indeed
was true ; but after all the other rights with which
he had inveſted them, would it be difficult for them |

to accompliſh this for themlelyes?

Jeannin afterwards obſerved to the King, with a
liberty that might well be called immoderate impu-
dence, that the Catholics having with juſtice taken

arms againſt him, he ought not to make uſe of the
words crime and abolition with them; for they
were intitled to treat with him upon the foot of
an equal, becauſe they did not look upon them-

ſelves as enemies ſubdued, nor him as King, while

the

. .
-/ — ä 7 5 2 — . FA Te is
— Oe — — * 3 — — ar Gary. . — — Mt : Ii aig
8 % 8 z po * 1 *
2 . 2 . K 5 Nr n Nr -
p- - g N L L

—

9 _ -

.
* '- <a "9

— ———

the Cardinal of Bourbon, the only acknowledged

Kirg in France, was alive; nor even after his
death, on account of his religion; therefore it
Was the body of the monarchy which treated wih

a foreign prince: that, for the ſame reaſon, the

King's acceptation could not be called an edi of
pacification, granted by a King to his ſubjects, but
an amicable convention with a people, who freely
| choſe a King after the reaſons for refuſing him were
removed. Many other impertinences with which
this letter was filled, do not deſerve to be repeated,

Jeannin concluded, by abſolutely rejecting all a.

ſiſtance from Meſſc de Bouillon, Du Pleſſis, and
the other Proteſtants whom the King had mentioned

in his letter, and declared he would have no com.

munication with them.

While the King deliberated upon what reſolu.
tions he ſhould take, the ſtates were held at Pariss.

The thought of aſſembling them came from the
Prince of Parma; and it muſt be confeſſed, that by
the manner he was to have taken there, in order
to accompliſh his deſigns, a reſolution more de-

ſtructive of the King's cauſe could not have been

formed. This general intended. to have ſummon-
ed them at Rheims, and to have renewed al
his endeayours to make himſelf maſter of the de.
liberations within; while, with a ſupeiior army
without, he retained the people in his party,
and the nobility in their duty, he aſſured himſcit

that he ſhould obtain an election entirely to the

taſte of Spain, and cauſe the elected monarch to

* The ſtates were ordered to meet the 25th of January, but

they were not opened till next day, in the Louvie, which was pie.

pared for that purpoſe. All the ſpeeches, acts, and ceremonies of
this aſſembly may be found in many of the hiſtorians. See particu
larly De Thou, book 105. Davila, b. 13. Memoirs cf the league,
vol 5. Villeroy's Mem. of Nate, vol. 44 Mem. of Nevers, vol. 2.
Matthieu, vol. 2. Chron, Novyen. for 1593, b. 5. Satyre Me.
nipee, Cc. | 5 ;

. | t 6

PR

——

. * cage, CO — 9 22 —

— . "Pp
W SN Er: 2

++. 246.686

„ 4
e ;
RI

e

n

*

.
Kot
48
Ip
* 1 f

2
en
72
7
"FI;
5

l 4

2 1
IX
=

C 7
ofey

19
Wes

- ab

*
142

© I
875
.

1

* 73

33
FE

8

.
o 1
8

meaſures. It is true, that the Count-of Mansfield,
who ſucceeded him, came at laſt with an army as
far as Noyon; but at that time, the ſame ſubmiſ-

5
8

4 . 05

); EL YL © ogrs

be.crowned immediately. This whole plan was the

L ellect of deep politics *, quick diſpatch, great libe-
" rality, a well-choſen opportunity, and, above all,

an army capable of inſpiring awe; theſe were in-

deed the true means of bringing affairs to an iſſue,
and of excluding the King for ever from the throne.
But the Prince of Parma dying juſt as he was upon
the point of executing theſe projects, they all ex-
pired with him, or were afterwards conducted nei -

ther with order, diligence, nor the other neceſſary

ſion was not made to Spain, as had been before
they had conceived hopes of ſeeing the King abjure

= Calviniſm; and the Count of Mansfield returned
uuithout having done any thing, beſides, there was
no an alteration in a circumſtance, which to the
Prince of Parma had always appeared eſſential : this

was, that inſtead of getting the ſtates aſſembled at

Rheims, the Duke of Mafenne had prevailed upon

the Pope and the Spanith plenipotentiaries, who
were Don Diego d'Ibarra, the Duke of Feria, Ini-

go de Mandoce, and Count John-Baptiſt de Taxis,

to conſent that they ſhould be aſſembled at Paris.
Each of theſe perſons hoped, that in a city which

was entirely in their intereſts by their alliances,
their intrigues, and their preſents, they might move

a thouſand ſprings to engage all the ſuffrages. But

when this great diſorderly body was aſſembled,

they found themſelves croſſed by ſo many and ſuch
different intereſts, that the Spaniards having only

their own voices, like others, and deſtitute beſides

of the means of making them be heard by force,
found that they ſhould meet with more obſtacles

dee the Duke of Parma's letter written vpon this ſubje& to the
King of Spain, Chron. Noven. b. 4. P* 5. | |

„„ than

— — — — —
* Et — *
* £ - 12

314 M E M O IR 8 Book V.
than they had foreſeen; and from that time they
feared, that they ſhould reap no other fruit of all
their intrigues and ſecret practices, than the im-
broiling affairs ſome time longer, till this compli.
cation of ſo many views, and the impoſſibility of
ever uniting them, would at length oblige them to
liſten to the dictates of reafon, ..
How indeed was it poſſible to reconcile the Pope,
or rather his legates, who had their particular de-
ſign, the King of Spain, the Dukes of Savoy and
Lorrain, the Dukes of Matenne, Nemours, Mer.“
_ cceur, and Guiſe, in fine, the Princes of the blood,
who had allo their different deſigns *, of which
they were no leſs tenacious? All thoſe parties, as
ſoon as the ſtates were opened, reflecting that this
was the laſt effort of the party, had recourſe each
of them to a thouſand ſtratagems which mutually
deſtroyed one another, and according to the notion
of what is called fine policy, involved and conceal-
ed themſelves under falſe meaſures to bring others
to their ends. They joined to the multiplicity of
machinations already ſo perplexing, a flux and re-
flux of opinions, which brought them into a laby-
rinth where no perſon longer knew where he was.
No one declared his ſentiments honeſtly, but ſeem-
ed to ſpeak only to diſguiſe their deſire, and to {ct
people about divining its Objeckk.
The Spaniards at this juncture regulated their |
conduct by their ordinary maxim, and their parti-
cular character; or perhaps their deſign was to
ſound the inclinations of the French, to diſcover if
they would bear willingly a foreign prince to reign |
over them. When they perceived that by this de.
lay they were in danger of loſing what they had
been fo long aiming at, they at laſt made their moſt

The league was of this advantage to France, ſays Le Grain,
that cvery one was willing to command in it, and none to obeys : - *
5 reaſonable

oF 189% OF 8 VEE”. 315
reaſonable propoſition, which was the marriage of
the Infanta * with the Cardinal of Bourbon. All
the French nobles, with the Guiſes at their head,
waited only for this ſtep of the Spaniards, and con-
curred in one common deſign, which was, to make
© uſe of this propoſal to kindle between the King and
Cardinal all the hatred that could animate two de-
clüared rivals, and conſequently between the King
and the leaders of the contrary party, the Count
of Soiſſons, the Duke of Nevers, Longueville, and
others. They ſuffered this propoſition to be car-
ried fo far, as to have the articles drawn up, and
ſent by Bellozanne to the Cardinal ; but all the
nobles afterward uniting, knew well how to make
it fall. With what deſign? That may be eaſily pe-
netrated into, in order that what theſe lords took
away from the Cardinal and the Princes of the
blood might fall upon themſelves. As the princes
of the blood, by ſeeming to reſign their hopes in
favour of the Cardinal, they had an oblique view
towards themſelves ; which ſhewed them, that after
him the crown would more eaſily revert to them, than

Clara Eugenia of Auſtria, ſecond daughter of Philip II. of Spain.
Catherine, the eldeſt, was married to the Duke of Savoy, but not
till after the Cardinal of Placentia, Legate, and Cardinal de Pellevé,
had endeavoured in vain, to bring France under ſubjection to Spain,
by the marriage of this Infanta with Prince Erneſt of Auſtria, the
eldeſt of the Emperor's brothers. Villeroy's Memoirs of ſtate im-
pute to the court of Madrid, as an error, by which Spain loſt the
crown of France, their not ſuffering this Infanta, the future Queen,
to come to France, unleſs the Prince whom they deſtined for her
| huſband was declared aud acknowledged: but I doubt whether the
arrival of this princeſs at Paris would have removed all obſtacles.
According to De Thou, the Duke of Guiſe's party was ſo powerful,
by the union of Spain and the clergy of France, that had not his
own uncle, the Duke of Maienne, ſecretly oppoſed him, and the
King of Navarre declared very ſeaſonably his reſolution to embrace
1 the Catholie religion, in all probability this prince would have been
declared King. The Duke of Guile, ſays Father de Chalons, af-
þ ter Matthieu, Hiſtory of France, vol. 3. p. 257- was praiſed for the
moderation he diſcovered on this occaſion. He gave no indications

of his having flattered himſelf with ſuch agreeable hopes, nor ſhewed
any ſolieitude for ſo great a fortune. |

Dd2 if

— — — —
—

—

—
. eo or tr a re rr I rs er —ͥ—œ —a•ĩ ——ů—

— ————_

316 MEMOIRS Bock v
if it paſſed to the bead of a foreigner. The Spaniards

comprehended the meaning of all the intrigues of
the Princes of Lorrain, and, one may nad ima-

not laſt long.
liberations, and the firſt motions, are ſuggeſted by
5 the paſſions. If by a concurrence of cauſes they |

gine, never forgave them.

This common intereſt of the nobles; which es |
them againſt Spain and the Princes of the blood,
divided them afterwards into as many branches as
they had heads. Every one believed his own fitteſt

for the diadem. Jealouſy and malice were ſoon of
the party, and each diſputed for the crown, for the

4 pleaſure of hindering one another from obtain.

ing it. It was the conſolation of thoſe who found
themſelves excluded Some of theſe parties ob.
jected to one perſon only, and comforted himſelf
for not being able to ſucceed for himſelf, if he

could fruſtrate his machinations. Of this claſs was |
the clergy, which, without naming any perſon for
the throne, uſed only their utmoſt endeavours to

hinder the King of Navarre from being elected.
Another undertook to ſupplant two, three, or
more of the competitors : : but there was not one

from any of theſe motives who was capable of
forming a party ſo much ſuperior to the others, as

to bear down all its oppoſers. The people, al.

though generally the ſlaves of their prejudice in fi-
vour of a ſubject, were here, by the number of
ſubjects, hindered from determining. And upon

this occaſion it happened, as has been often expc-

rienced, that adopting the ſtyle of that ſort of in-

different and neutral perſons who are always to be

found in public aſſemblies, an affair of this import- }
ance was turned into a mere ſhew, and cauſed only

laughter at the unhappy candidates who were te.

jected.

But theſe intrigues, this ET of Rübe could
In ſuch ſort of debates, the firſt de-

ale

are prevented from ſucceeding, reaſon, though it
ſlowly appears in tumultuous aſſemblies, yet for-

ces itſelf at laſt to be ſeen and acknowledged, and

after long oppoſition is followed through neceſſity.

he firſt thing that was done on this occaſion was

: by means of the parliament, which weighing more

f F — 5 — 8 2 wy dead 75 K IT * *
rr
j OO or rn I on

FED EC te OI ES =,

maturely the different propoſals that were brought

upon the carpet, either for a Spaniſh King, or one

of Lorrain, found that ir would be an everlaſting
_ reproach to them, to ſuffer a law ſo fundamental

as the hereditary right of ſucceſſion to be infringed,

and began, without knowing well what would be

the conſequence, by granting an edict * which for-
bad the carrying the crown out of the royal fami-

ly. This was far from being a new thought;
there was not one who had it not, and who did

not feel the injuſtice of acting contrary to it. But

in order to give it due efficacy, it ſeems it was ne ·

ceſſary it ſhould be propoſed with weight and gra.
vity.... The edict did the dune.
The rights of the royal family began to appear

fäacred to a thouſand perſons, who a moment be-

fore had not reflected upon them. Spain, whoſe _

1 The edict was paſſed the 28th of June. „ This action, ſays
Villeroy, vol. 2. p. 58. © was the more applauded by all good men,

4 as the danger that attended it was fo great: it was certain y of great

„ uſe, and I muſt ſay, that the kingdom owed its ſafety to the
« court.” John Le Maitre, although made Preſident of the parlia-
ment of the league by the Duke of Maleune, the Preſident Edward
Mole, the Counſellors William Du-Vair, afterwards keeper of the
ſeals, Stephen Fleury, Peter d'Amours, Lazarus Coqueley, &c. were
the chief promoters of this edict. In conſequence of it, the Preſi-
dent Le Maitre, with the Counſellors De Fleury and d'Amours,
were deputed that ſame day, to make remonſtrances to the Duke of
Malenne, as lieutenant- general of the crown, The Duke com-
plained bitterly of this affront from the parliament; and the Arch-
biſhop of Lyons, who was with him, having repeated the word af-
front in a paſſion, and treated the deputies with bad language, the
Preſident Le Maitre ſilenced him with great authority and dignity.
N of the league, vol. 9. Memoirs of Nevers, vol. 2.
F JF Arne ah |

-D 0:2 attempt

3 MEMOIR S Booky, |
attempt was fruſtrated by this edit, might have | _
ſtill warded off the blow, had ſhe united with the |

Lorrains, whom it equally ſtruck at ; but the more
ſhe thought ſhe was intitled to reckon upon their
ſuffrages, the more irreconcileable was her enmity
toward them, when ſhe found they had betrayed
her. They could never make up to her, and their
_ conſtant miſunderſtanding inſenſibly paved the wa
for the victory of their common adverſary.

To accompliſh this, there remained but one ſe |

to be taken, which was prevented by the ſtrong op.
poſition of the clergy ®. A ſtop therefore was put
to the affair for ſome time: they reſumed, as if for

amuſement, ſome of their former worn out projects.

Different hopes were again raiſed to be ſoon and ef.
fectually extinguiſhed ; for there was not one per ·
ſon who did not tacitly confeſs, that if the King +
abjured, all conteſtation would be at an end. E-
very one voted for the engaging him to comply
with this demand, and they applied theinſelves t9
it, not ſlightly as before, but from a more clear
and diſtin& view of the true intereſt of the ſtate:

a view which from this moment became that of the

_ parliament and the whole people, and which met
with no more oppoſition, but what ſome nobles, for
their perſonal intereit, were pleaſed to create,

All the memoirs of theſe times confirm the violent proceding
and outrageous behaviour of the Cardinal de Pleſance, Legate, a6
of almoſt all the biſhops of France, and curates of Paris and th:
Sorbonne. Debourbonnez nous, Seigneur, was the explicatioi 2
_ preacher gave of that paſſage of ſcripture, Deliver me, © Lord, cit
of the miry clay. There is an infinite number of ſuch circumſiances,
the malignity of which cannot ſurely be excuſed by zeal for the tru:
religion, De Thou obſerves, that the clergy was the anly one of
the three eſtates that perſiſted in voting for a war. 8 .

+ It was demonſtrated at this time, that Henry IV. was not only
the laa ful heir to the crown, that was never diſputed, but alſo that
in his perſon the three races of our Kings were united, Sce a proof
in a new work intitled, Genealegical hiſtories of all the ſovereign fa.
anilies, in the 22d gencalogical table,

The

i].

w_ — +

iz, F 8 U . 19
Ihe Dukes of Matenne, Nemours, and Mer-
Cœur, teſtified the greateſt obſtinacy, as was moſt

natural, conſidering that they, of all others, had
been moſt flattered : but bad as their intentions

were, they could not hinder a conference with the

King from being propoſed in the ſtates, and car-

ried by a plurality of voices. It was, however, in

© their power to deſtroy or ſuſpend the effect; and
they did not fail to do ſo: for this purpoſe they

uſed their utmoſt endeavours; they ſet their emif-
ſäaries to work, took advantage of the King's bad
ſucceſs at Selles *, cauſed Mansfield to advance,
who took Noyon, gave all the force they were
able to the Pope's refuſing to allow the Cardinal de
 Gondy, and the Marquis de Piſany, whom the King
had ſent to him, to enter Rome, or even to ſet

| foot in his Holineſs's territories. Could they flat-

ter themſelves, that the irregularity of theſe pro-
ceedings would not. be remarked, after having ſo
often proteſted, that in all their actions they had
only the intereſt of religion in view, and that they
were ready to ſubmit io Henry as ſoon as he ſhould
quit his errors? No perſon was deceived ; and al-
though they prevented all the conſequences which
the conference held at Surene, in the month of A-
pril , might have produced, it was thought the laſt
effort of an expiring power. It appeared plainly,
that if the King, after having conſented that no Pro-

* The journey which Henry IV. took towards Tours, and the
neceſlity to which be reduced himſelf of raiſing the ſiege of the city
of Selles in Berry, were then thought conſiderable faults.
F ln the latter end of April, and during part of the month of
May. See in the records, vol. 828g. of VSS. in the royal library;
Villeroy's memoirs of ſtate, vol. 4.; Matthieu and Cayet, ibid, &c.
The Archbiſhop of Bourges, who pleaded the King's cauſe, maintain.
ed, that obedience is due to Pagan princes, and ſupported this aſſer-
tion by the authority of St Paul, the privileges of the Gallic church,
and by many other unanſwerable proofs. Inſupportable as the argue
ments alledged by the Archbiſhop of Lyons to the contrary were,
they prevailed in this conferenc, | |

teſtant

—— — ——— — — —

No M E M O 1 R 8 Book v.
teſtant deputy ſhould appear at that conference, had

not yet entirely complied, it was becauſe the leaguers
raiſed more difficulties about temporal, than the

King about ſpirirual matters. The people, eſpe-
_ cially, were diſpoſed to do him all. juſtice, and the

ſweets of a truce, which was the only benefit re-

ſulting from this conference, drew them entirely in- 7

to his intereſts. But I now return more particu-
my to mi prince. © o2uoEEEoEnEEETEREDE
He made Mante the place of his conſtant reſi-

dence, where all his prudence was ſcarce ſufficient
to keep a party, compoſed of perſons ſo oppoſite in

their ſentiments, entire. He had been alarmed at

firſt, with the convention of the ſtates, and with fo
much the more reaſon, as the firſt thought which
ſuggeſted itſelf to his mind on that occaſion, was,
that an aſſembly, in appearance ſo auguſt and re-

ſpectable, would ſoon find a remedy for the diſor-

ders of the ſtate. Under this apprehenſion, the King
began to flatter the Catholics more than was his cu-
ſtom; and, as we have juſt ſeen, made ſome efforts

to gain the Pope, to the end that he might not ex-

_  tinguiſh in both parties the only hope that could
| hinder them from coming to an open rupture with
him. It may be ealily imagined, that this could

not be done without awakening the diſcontent of

the Huguenots. But the King, by his wiſdom, was

beforehand with them; and it appeared, that no-
thing was done but in conſequence of that general

council of the Proteſtants, of which we have alrea- -

dy ſeen that the reſult was to turn the thing into

art and negotiation. When their complaints grew }

too loud, and the King found reaſon to fear that
they would carry things to extremity againſt him,

he knew how to appeaſe them by ſome new mili-

tary expedition, which he likewiſe engaged in, to
convince the people ſtill more, that this ſame prince,
who appeared fo eaſy and gracious, was no lets
Et Vorthy

0

lities in war.

As ſoon as he was informed of the diſunion that
raged in the ſtates, the trouble and conteſtations

that every word gave riſe to, he looked upon this

aſſembly to be the happy means by which his de-
ſigns would be accompliſhed ; and all his perplexity
now was, the regulating his conduct with the great

number of mediators who meddled in his affairs, as
ſoon as it was propoſed in the ſtates to treat with
him. This prince would at that time have found

no obſtacle to the crown, if he had appeared of a

humour to fatisfy the exceſſive demands which the
nobles and other members of the league began to

make him; but he was reſolved that poſterity
ſhould never reproach him with his having owed the
regal dignity to his meanneſs, in ſubmitting to the
g avidity and the caprice of his ſubjects. That he was
thus able to reſiſt his natural inclination and ardor to

aſcend the throne, was a convincing proof of his

1 being well worthy of it.

1 ought here to do juſtice to ſome of them, (the

'F number indeed is not very great); but I am well
aſſured, that Meſſ. de Bellievre, de Belin, and Za-
met, for inſtance, had no view to their own inter-
eſts in thoſe applications which they made to the
King. Some others there might be, who behaved
in the ſame manner; but of them I cannot ſpeak.
with any certainty. As to the reſt, I ſhall content
myſelf with naming the principal agents deputed to
the King, as well by the league and the ſtates, as
by the clergy and French nobility. I ſhall not re-
peat names already mentioned, but add to them
only the Cardinal de Gondy, the Marechals d' Au-
mont and de Bouillon, the Admiral de Biron, Meſſ.
J'O, de Vitry, de Lux, du Pleſſis, la Verriere, de
1 Fleury, and the Abbe de Cheſy. A great many
Ez others remained undiſtinguiſhed in this croud, al-
F though

pn to command them for bis valour and abi-

- — — —

222. MB MO -I KR: 3. Book Y.
though there was not one amongſt them, who was
not perſuaded in his own mind, that he ſhould be
one day mentioned in hiſtory, as the perſon who
had given the deciſive blow. I once counted over
to the King, by their names, above a hundred of
thoſe perſons, Thoſe that remained would make
a fine decoration here, if one could for a moment
only open and diſplay the hearts of thoſe ardent
_ counſellors. Vanity, the deſire of favour, ſelf. in.

_ tereſt, vile artifice, jealouſy, knavery, and trea-

chery, would be all one could diſcover in them.
I bere were ſome, who till the laſt moment did
not quit their diſguiſe, by which they abuſed the

_ privilege of conferring with this prince, in order

to betray more ſecurely, and to ſpread ſnares for
bim, which any other could not have eſcaped, Ii
is with regret that I name Villeroy“ and Jeaanin
here; but the fact is too well known, and the con-
4 e e e le

5 * In the iſt volume of Villeroy's Memoirs of ſtate, which eon ·

tains only a juſtification of this ſeeretary's conduct, he candidly con

feſſes, that he would never have been prevailed upon to engage in the
party of Henry IV. if he had not beforehand taken all the neceſlary
meaſures for the ſecurity of the Catholic religion. He confeſſes allo,
with the ſame ſincerity, his connections with the league and Spain,
and the political principle which he had eſpouſed, that, in making
peace, it was moſt advantageous for the King, to ſeparate him from

the intereſt of England, and unite him with Spain. With regard to

other accuſations, he defends himſelf with great force. He protelicc

that he never received any money from Spain; and whatever argu» |

ments he offered, either in the ſtates or any other councils, were (it:
cerely meant for the King's advantage, and to forward the perde.
See the note upon this ſubject ſome pages above, and what is faid in
the preface to this work. As to the oath taken by the league, which
the Duke of Sully here mentions, and which is the moſt ſerious 4.
_ ticle againſt Villeroy, he is clearly juſtified by Matthicn, vol. 2. p. 153

et ſeqq by Cayet, Chron, Noven. book 5. p. 229. and ſome other -

 hittorians ; fo that it muſt be confeſſed, that this is an error in out Me.

moirs. According to theſe hiſtorians, Vil eroy had not only no pit

in this oath, but was alſo abſolutely ignorant of it, till Henry IV.

ſhowed him this writing at Fountainbleau, and charged him to te.

monſtrate the baſeneſs of ſuch a proceeding to the Duke of Maienne,

whom Villeroy was at that time, by the King's command, honellly |

endeavouring

a Sade 4h

? 1553. 5 323

fuſion they were afterwards in, when the King pu-
bich reproached them with it at Fountainbleau, is

3 a conviction of it, as well as the intereſted conduct
1 Villeroy afterwards obſerved. Two days only be-
fore the King's abjuration, thoſe gentlemen employ-

1H ed themſelves ſo uſefully, that they procured a ſe-
.. cret aſſembly to be held, compoſed of the Pope's,
and the King of Spain s miniſters, and the chief

artiſans of the league, either in perſon, or by proxy,

1 for the Dukes of Nemours and Mercœur, then ab-

ſent. In this aſſembly, the legate made them all

ſwear, upon the crols, the evangeliſts, and even
the hoſt, to maintain the league, till they ſaw, up-

on the throne of France, (I "ſpeak it with pain), a
King agreeable to Spain; and, above all, never to
acknowledge the King of Navarre for ſuch; though
he ſhould join to the claim of his birth that of a ſin ·

cere abjuration. This very pious and charitable

oath, ſigned by the whole aſſembly, was incloſed in

a packet, and ſent to Rome. It was from a letter
wrote by the Cardinal of Placentia to ſome mem-

bers of parliament, the bearer of which was taken

up at Lyons by the King's foldiers, that we came
to the knowledge of this piece. In this manner did
they ſport with fidelity, virtue, and religion. This
circumſtance, though anticipated, feems to me not
improperly mentioned here.

Amongſt that croud of negotiators oy coun-
ſellors there were many who imagined to deceive
the King, and who only deceived themſelves. The
King let them remain in this 9 not to per- |

endeavouring to 1 from the league. But it is ſtill more cer-
tain, that when Villeroy reproached the Duke of Maienne with this
criminal ſtep, Maſenne anſwered him in theſe words: “ I would
* neither tell you nor the Preſident Jeannin of this oath, becauſe I |
had promiſed otherwiſe to the Spaniards and the legate, and was
not ignorant that you would never be brought to > approve of ſuch a
" weren * Mathieu, Pp. 155.

ſuade

by = - Zo — —
—ͤ—4ũP — — > —— :

— — . ̃ —— —

tary, to bring me to him, who introduced me in-
to his chamber, where I found him in bed. He
_ owned to me, that he was under a neceſſity of uſing

been repeated to the King, that I was afraid his
_ eaſy diſpoſition would make him give up more than
he ought to do. But the manner in which this
prince repreſented to me the ſtate of affairs, and
painted the different characters of all the pretenders
to his favour, convinced me I had been deceived.
1 was ſurpriſed at that juſtneſs of penetration with

the veils that obſcured it. Nor was I leſs charm-

Z inſiſted upon my preſcribing to him the manner in
which he ſhould finiſh an affair, which, to confeſs

ment. I endeavoured to excuſe myſelf from ac-
cepting this honour ; but all I could obtain was a

during this converſation that the King firſt ſpoke to
me about his deſign of intruſting his finances to My

324 ME MO IR S Bock V.
ſuade theſe ſchemers, but the people, of the faci-
lity of bringing him to the point they wiſhed. 1
ſpeak this becauſe I was told it by the King him.
ſelf. 1 remember one night, which was, I believe,
on the 15th of February, when all the courtiers

had quitted his apartment, he ſent Ferret, his ſecre- *

this precaution whenever he had an inclination to
converſe with me, that he might not give diſguſt to

the Catholics, and the Proteſtants likewiſe, who 13

hated me ſtill more, perhaps, through jealouſy, than f 5

the former did through a natural averſion. After
complaining of this reſtraint, in terms very obl.
ging to me, he talked to me of thoſe affairs which |
vere at preſent upon the carpet, and of the in» |

trigues of the courtiers to giye themſelves the ho-
nour of the deciſion, I had ſaid before, and it bad ;

5

which he, at a glance, diſcerned truth through all

ed, when, ſubmitting his knowledge to mine, he

the truth, was not without danger till the laſt mo-

delay of three days to take my reſolution : it was

care. | |
After

1

N 15939. OF 8 U L L Y. 325

Alfter three days mature reflection, I waited up -

on the King with the ſame ſecrecy. I reliſhed none
of the ſchemes that had been recommended to him,
and which differed only in the proportion of thole

© rewards which were to be granted to the principal
members of the league, and to other intereſted per-
* ſons. My opinion was, that matters were not yet

ripe for a concluſion ; which J ſupported with the
following arguments: That the King was freed
from that only fear which-could induce him to pre-
cipitate the iſſue; by which I meant the fear that
all theſe pretenders to royalty ſhould unite reſo-
lately in favour of a ſubject; becauſe the miſunder-

' ſtanding which had already riſen among the princes,

the nobles, and the miniſters of Spain, gaining
ſtrength every day, we could not but expect to ſee

them ſoon ſtudious to deſtroy each other's preten-

ſions. This being ſuppoſed, which was the eſſen -
tial point, it muſt neceſſarily happen, that thoſe who
were indifferent, and had right intentions, would

bind themſelves more cloſely to the King's party:

That this effect was already indubitable, with re-
gard to thoſe cities of France which were at too

great a diſtance from the league and the cabal, to
be influenced by their impreſſions and warmth :

That the chiefs of the league themſelves, through
hatred, jealouſy, or even a conſideration. of their
own intereſt, would, one after the other, throw
themſelves into the King's party: That the bare

hopes only which this prince would ſuffer them to

entertain, would give bim beforchand moſt of
thoſe advantages he could gain from the accom-

Pliſhment of them, and would not expoſe him to
dangers : That the dangers of a too precipitate ex-
ececution were, firſt, an open ſeparation of the Pro-

teſtants, who were not yet ſufficiently prepared for

this change, which might produce the moſt fatal

conſequences ; ſince the King, not being yet ſecure
oo SE I: — DE

|
nn

326 MEMOIR S Book v.

of all the Catholics to oppoſe them, would remain

at the mercy of both parties; and, ſecondly, the

neceſſity he laid himſelf under, by throwing him |

{elf into the arms of the Catholics, of granting all
their demands, however exorbitant they were;

which, both for the preſent and the future, was of
dangerous conſequence : That it was neceſlary to

allow theſe ſchemers, and all the chicfs of the
league, time to give a preciſe form to their de.

mands, by which they would perceive, that they

were incroaching upon each other; which would
oblige them to reduce of themſelves their exceſlive

pretenſions, to agree, that by ſetting too high a

value upon flight ſervices, they would put it out of
the King's power to ſatisfy them, and at length to

teck their own intereſt in the general intereſt of the

tate. I told the King, that he would find, the firll
who took this ſtep would be thoſe, who having,

only at the inſtigation of foreign powers, demanded
fatis factions which they were perhaps deſirous of

ſharing with them, would begin to be ſenſible of
the injuſtice of their proceedings, in proportion as
their hatred of thoſe foreigners increaſed : and that
thole very foreigners, finding the King ſo ready to
comply with the demands that were made upon

him, would make others demand what they them

ſelves did not believe they could obtain.
I ſhewed the King, that whatever change ſhould

happen in his affairs, it could not be ſo ſudden, but

he would have it in his power to prevent it, ſince

> 2 x72 x

N N n > a
Z og OED CE Ss +
Les 5 25 e 5
—

U * » 6:
En

IF : 7 1 bs * 128 Ys
S

/ ͤ Brgy Va 6 OO on FE OR RE $ y n { - n
eee eee ee, er e T r IE HI NN

ee A CREE

a few words would ſuffice for that ; whereas, by 1

gaining time, he would diſcover all their deſigns,
and could ſecretly break thoſe connections that

might be among them, till all that remained to put
an entire concluſion to the treaty, would be to be-
ſtow ſome ſatisfactions upon thoſe who had really a

right to demand them. To bring affairs happily to
this end, I ſaw nothing better to be done, than for

the

%Y & ˙— — a S- "we *

FC OE. AMOS. ns on ho

9 8 2 : =
5 PTV ee *
SS hee 6 ae ir EEE INS J
SR Ce SEN OE ae I OR

ES po LO

r EE WE MG CR ESL 1 N VEG IE” N
e SLAIN EF, LTH PFF YEP ERA EEE * $12 VIS = 1 £30

Cr II RD ag
e A FC RE

1593. O F | SUL . 327
the King to perſiſt 1 in that conduct he had hitherto
obſerved: To receive every one kindly ; promiſe
little ; ſeem deſirous of biinging matters to a con-
cluſion; aſcribe always the fault of delays to ob-
ſtacles, and earneſtly endeavour to remove them.
This, in my opinion, is the manner in which one

generally ought to act in political affairs Which are
a little thorny. It is well known in theory, that the

difference between precipitation and diligence is,
that this laſt, as much a foe to inaction and floth

as the other, engages in nothing without having

firſt conſulted judgment upon it; while! in practice

they are almoſt always confounded.

In thoſe arguments which I made uſe of to the

King, bis converſion was always the foundation I

ſuppoſed; and his Majeſty, by contradicting none
of them, gave me to underſtand, that he would not
be ſtopped by that formality. I added only one

thing more; which was, that he would not ſuffer

this negotiation to degenerate into mere debates,
as his adverſaries did, but clap ſome military ex-

pedition to it. Having many other reaſons to

add, I offered to give them to the King in writing.
His Majeſty replied, there was no occaſion for it ;

that he believed he comprehended all I could have

to ſay to him ; and that, when he had time himſelf,

he would diſcourle with me upon a ſyſtem, by which

it ſeemed to him, that, after having united himſelf

to the Catholics, it would not be impoſlible to re-

concile them to the Proteſtants.
That this reſolution might be fully executed, the

King, at bis return to Mante, after the breaking
off the conference of Surene, cauſed others, who]-
ly upon the ſubject of religion, to be held between
the Catholic doctors and the Proteſtant miniſters ;
at which he was regularly preſent: : and, on the 0.
ther hand, he made his preparations for opening
the esta paign, in the month of April, by ſome ac-
5 E e 2 — tion

328 MEMOIRS Boox v
tion of i importance, rather indeed to keep up biz
reputation with the people, than with a deſign to

continue ſerioufly a war, for which his funds. were!

abſolutely inſufficient.

This expedition was the fi ege of Dreux, fu
which the King borrowed a large ſum of moncy | =
from the city of Mante ; and leaving that place a:

bout the beginning of April, came to paſs the river -

of Eure at Seriſy, while 1 on my fide aſſembled, and
led the neceſſary artillery. The Admiral de Biron,
by the King's order, inveited the city, which made

little reſiſtance : all the difficulty lay in taking the
caſtle, and eſpecially the tower Griſe, which was

cannon proof. I promiſed the King to cariy it, if |

he would give me four Engliſh and Scotch miners,
and a certain number of workmen. My enterprilz
did not fail to furniſh matter for laughter and con-
tempt to my enemics, who eagerly ſeized this occt»

tion to mortify me. The King, though very doubt.
ful of my ſueceſs, granted my requeſt, I led my |

miners and pioneers to the foot of the tower, where,
to guard them againſt the fire and efforts of the be-
ſieged, I covered them with mantelets, and ſtrong
pieces of wood, and made them apply fo cloſely
and with ſuch eagerneſs to the work, that, out cf
ſix and thirty pioneers which 1 had, four only
could work at once: the hardneſs of the ſtone ex.
hauſted their ſtrength, and covered them with ſweat
the inſtant they began to work; but I cauſed them
to be relieved immediately by four others ; fo that
the work was not diſcontinued for one moment,
although the enemies within endeavoured to deltroy

them, by precipitating large pieces of Kone, and

firing inceſſantly upon them.

When I found that, notwithſtanding this vige -
rovus defence, I had the very firſt day made an opc.
ing five feet in height, three in width, and four in

pl, I believed the ſucceſs almoſt infallible Six

nnen, 1 Y 7 5

days

des n
I oe RS :
oo ng OR
3 * 8 =
* pe
WO » : 5

e

e

* 8 33 Py Mt r 4 7 a— is ” VY PF Y

E . 8 ITS» en 5 2 7 3 . 22 Er os 8 * . ö * By . 5 we * 1 : n 2 4 * RO nk — 2 3 4 z 7
r . T *. 2 2 Sz . 1 e 2 * S 1 * > 8 n „ en LISTEN ex%' - 1 SR 3 LCA 2 » #7 2 „ 2 8 0 2 . :
5 7 - 7 ee a 5 DE os 22 TOS OSS Tr: * & > wal i So Er Er > en Ss tne SET, Was 2.8 . F S 2 "St ” I LEST I "= 6 i 5 8 7 x ö — 7 „ 4 GEL nol *
22 2 „ < \ * + TY: WEIS IS OS bet NT DES Le, « WS * rc — F 2 77 N » r IE 3 £2 * e FP, 1 . . 2 2 * 8 TIA x n * PT Nn 5 r
8 8 . * . # — * ne 2 , . 8 * 7 2 W N 9 eee r 82 b N 8 * 3 . RE dag) {Cole ER, Ie nh DK a
O 8 7 : ö . of "ok I N : og * * $ 5 2 * —
I * 1 * A —

30 — 2

1h
Ty

S
" 2 45
” — 2

8 We Yr 2
NESS ESI ont Fes

e

on 8 Lan
* W e
1 2

4 8 >
n q
* VI" þ4
n *
2 N
3
ME 1548
5 x ”
„
* 9 27 2
Ra
*

We.

35
X

% 8
2
Fs

> 4

t

1
5
LID

*

.

Bet
8
2
3.0
.

1593. . 329

days were conſumed in this work. I incloſed three
or four hundred pounds of excellent powder, in
ſeveral cavities of ſix or ſeven feet ſquare, in the

thickeſt part of the wall, which I ſhut up with
ſtrong ſtones cemented together with plaiſter, lea-
Ving a paſſage only for two large ſauciſſes of dry.
hies filled with good powder, the end of which
reached to the powder. within, and joined on the
obutſide of the tower a train to which the fire was
to be put. The Duke of Montpenſier, defirous of
feeing the diſpoſition of this machine, received a
muſket - ſnot there in his face. Every one waited
impatiently for my confuſion, the reſult of this
great work. And when they. were informed of the

time when I was to ſet fire to it, they eagerly al-
ſembled to behold the effect: which was not indeed

inſtantaneous; for at firſt a low found was heard,
accompanied with a good deal. of ſmoke, during
which a thouſand contemptuous glances were caſt.

upon me; and. I was forced to endure: as many

= ſtrokes of raillery upon my mine: but I ſoon had my
revenge. In a few minutes, a much thicker cloud.
of ſmoke roſe as high as the tower, and, in an in-

ſtant, we ſaw it ſeparate preciſely into two parts,
one of which fell, dragging men, women, and chil-
dren with it, who were buried under its ruins. The.
other continued ſtill ſtanding, but in ſuch a condi-
tion, that we could behold under its uncovered roof

all choſe that were within, who, terrified and aſto-

piſhed at ſuch an horrible accident, and at our fol--
diers firing immediately and directly upon them,

ſent forth moſt lamentable cries. The King, mo-

ved with compaſſion, ordered the fire to ceaſe, and
ſending for thoſe miſerable objects, gave a crown.
to each of them. The caſtle inſtantly ſurrendered ;
and this once I was ſure, that the government of.
a city, taken almoſt wholly by my means, would
not be refuſed me. But D'O triumphed in gaining:

330 MEMOIR S Bocky.

it from me; and J yielded it to him, after the King

bad repreſented to me, that the terms he was upon
with the Catholic party made it impolitic to dil.
cblige them for ſo ſlight a ſubject.

The King ſtopped only to perform a few wore
ſuch little expeditions, and returned immediately to

Nlante, to reſume his conferences. This alternate
ſucceſſion of war and debatcs laſted all the time
that the ſtates continued to be held, and even till the
day of the King's abjuration. 1 mould betray the

cauſe of truth, if I ſuffered it to be only ſuſpected,

that policy, the threats of the Catholics, the fatigue

of labour, the love of repoſe, the deſire of freeing
Himſelf from the tyranny of foreigners, er even the
good of the people, though highly laudable in it.
fel, had entirely influenced the King's laſt reſolu-
tion. As far as I am able to judge of the heart of
als prince, Which I believe I know better than any
perſon, it was indeed thoſe conſiderations which
fiſt hinted to him the thoughts of his converſion ;
and I confeſs, that I myſelf ſuggeſted no others to
bim, fully perſuaded, as I have always been, al
though a Calviniſt, from what I have gathered from
the meſt learned of the Reformed miniſters, that
God is no leſs honoured in the Catholic than in the
Proteſtant chutch. But at length the King felt him-
fe1f brought ſo far, as to regard the Catholic faith
as the moſt ſure. The character of candor and
_ 4incerity which I always obſerved in this prince,
perſuades me, that he would have ill worn, during
all the remainder of his life, ſuch a diſguiſe.
Moreover, the confeſſion I make here ought not

to be judged hardly of. It is not ſurpriſing that

Henry, who had never heard ſo much ſpoken of

religion as in theſe conferences, and in theſe con-
tinual controverlies, ſhould ſuffer himſelf to be
drawn on that fide, which they were careful to

make

n

1

5 7 4 £4 i \ 7 d fas hu 3 8 * Js. B x * K s * as l * 1
$54. A E 2 N >. , 3 * 2 N * 2 1 — 1 F * n n
- * nnn 0 LS SHEA 5 2 ” : + ©. r. +. 2% © £32 l 4 — 2 e * — * 3 4
N 8 e 1 A 3 7 ei rs n or SS 277; 75 4 N
E WR a . OY EFA V n I SONG SITE eB oa. LE Pry Re: n 1
we, RES erate: 8 S r BR 22222 gs cl DE T OT
- *

— ö FN I 4
: . 2 2 . 17 5 > 43 SOA =P £
* . eee * e

a Nn
make always victorious ®. For it muſt be obſer-
ved, as an effect of the King's prudent delays, that
all, even the Proteſtants, nay more, the Proteſtant
clergy who were employed in the conferences, were
at laſt thoroughly convinced, that the King's change
of religion was a thing abſolutely neceſſary for the
good of the ſtate, for peace, and even for the ad-

3 vantage of both religions; ſo that there was a kind

S

of general conſpiracy to draw him to it. The Pro-

teſtant clergy either defended themſelves no longer,
or did it ſo weakly, that their adverſaries had al-

ways the advantage.

The Abbe du Perron, who was there as in the
ficld of his glory, was not a man who would loſe

the fruits of his victory. With that ſoft and inſi-

nuating converſation, that ſtrong and perſuaſive elo ·
quence, that inexhauſtible fund of erudition, ſup-
ported by a prodigious memory, he could neither be
overthrown, nor convicted of falſehood, but by
the help of a whole library; a kind of languiſhing
defence. With princes, the tranſition from com-
plaiſance to flattery is very eaſy. Some of the
Proteſtant clergy, who were moſt about the Kin
and whom he conſulted upon his difficulties, for-
mally betrayed their faith f; or, by a concerted
5 e , _=

„All theſe diſcourſes of the cardinals and prelates of France, whe»

iber intended to enlighten his underſtanding, or increaſe his zeal,

may be found in vol. 9214. of MSS in the King's library.
The ſincerity of his converſion is there proved by the following
marks : His reſpe& for the Pope, the cardinals, and the whole cler-
gy ; his folicitude for the converſion of the young Prince of Conde;
his alliance with the Pope, by marrying the Princeſs of Florence; his
endeavours to cultivate a good intelligence between the ſovereign -
Pontiff and the King of England; the marriage of his fiſter with the
Duke of Bar; the erection of the hoſpital for ſick, and other buildings;
the ſepulchre of our Lord, and the holy places; the ſatisfaction which
he ſhewed at the victory gained over the Calviniſts by the Biſhop of
Evreux, Cc. X 1 |
1 D'Aubigne names ſome of theſe Proteſtants; and obſerves alſo,
that the Marchioneſs de Monceaux, the King's miſtreſs, acted the

332 M E M OI R S 5 Book V.

perplexity, Aattered that religion which they al-

ready looked upon to be the religion of the King.

The leaders of the Proteſtant party were not ſo
_ eaſily brought this length. They were ſometimes
untractable. It was in vain to remonſtrate to them,
that, by their obſtinacy, the King would lote the
crown ; and that, ſince it was neceſſary it ſhould be
poſſeſſed by a Catholic prince, it was an advantage
to them, that this Catholic prince was the fame
who had ſo long been affectionately united with
them, and upon whoſe friendſhip they might rec-

kon. They had flattered themſelves, that they

' ſhould ſee a prince of their own faith upon the
- throne, and that Calviniſm ſhould be the eſtabliſhed |
religion in France. They thought it hard to be |
deprived of this advantage. Self. love in all reli? “!
gions makes ſuch a lofs be looked upon as irre- 3
parable “. | OE.

The King experienced this exceſs of bad humour,

when ſome of the chief cities in the kingdom, that
had been ſuffered to groan under the oppreſſion of
an infinite number of little tyrants, firſt applied to
his Majeſty, and deputed the Count of Belin to de-
mand of him the freedom of commerce. Henry
was either at Mante, or at Vernon, when the Count

of Belin came to make him this propoſition, which

he received in the preſence of his. whole council.
There was not a Proteſtant there who appearec.

willing that he ſhould grant it; and what is ſtill

more ſurpriſing, it met with equal oppoſition from

ſame part, in the hope of becoming Queen herſelf, if Henry ſhould

be declared King. Vol. 3. book 3. chap. 2.

* « If I follow your advice,” replied: Henry IV. to 5 clergyman FE

named La- Faye, who addreſſed him in: the name of the Proteſtant

party, © there will in a little time be neither a king nor kingdom in
France. It is my. deſire to give peace to all my ſubjects, and re-
“ poſe to my ſoul. Conſider among yourſelves what is moſt ne-
« ceſfary for your own ſecurity ; you ſhall-always find me ready to

content you.“ Chren. Noven. ibid. 1

0 Mt ati W_J

*
4"
N
38
*
N
.
EDN
.
n
— .
! \s 4
ET
DOS
Fr
22
*

Vithout ſucceſs.

8

the Catholics, without their being able to aſſign a ;

lawful, or even a plauſible reaſon. All theſe per-

ſons perplexed one another in their deliberations,
and perceived plainly that their opinion was ground».
leſs, yet they would not alter it. The King look» |
ing at me that moment,“ Monſieur de Roſny,”

ſaid he to me, what makes you fo thoughtful ?

1 Will not you ſpeak your mind abſolutely any

* more than others? 1 took the word, and was
not afraid to declare myſelf againſt all thoſe who

had given their opinions, by maintaining, that it
was neceſſary not to heſitate a moment in comple»

ting the gaining the people over to the King's inter-
eſts, by an inſtance of kindneſs which he might re-

voke if he found that they abuſed it. This advice
raiſed a cry of diſapprobation, which I have always
regarded as a recrimination of that conſent I had
extorted from the covneil, which has been men-
tioned before, The King was obliged to yield to-
their importunity; and the Count of Belin returned

Henry, however, made his reflections upon 113
refuſal ; and judging, that there wanted but little
more of the ſame nature to alienate totally the

people's affections from him, and to induce them
to go over to the party of his enemies, he reſolved

to defer his converſion no longer. He well per-
ceived, that he ought no longer to expect to van-
quiſh the oppoſition of certain of the Proteſtants,

or to obtain their full conſent to this ſtep *; bur
that it was neceſſary to do ſome violence, and to.

hazard ſome murmurs, which would end in nothing.

Henry IV, was always ſenſible, that his abjuration would ex-
Pole him to great hazards; which made him write in this manner to
Mademoiſelle d*Eſtrees. © On Sunday 1 ſhall take a perilous leap,
by While I am writing to you, 1 have a hundred troubleſome people
4 about me, which makes me deteſt St Denis as much as you do
. Mante,” Cc. See the new edition of Henry the. Great's letters.

—

o
et. ber. Await. <p TH. oo cell = I nn en ,
* «" 2 * 2

Co

n *
wy —ͤ—ũ—64— ͥͤ tx.''—— —

2

_
—

rer A Pw n | . I
> 4 — 2 e FS. - L n ur ww *
© RX r N * 8 * 3 * Ps >> * F : 7
— „„ e wed K nt ©, 5 = Dp 3 22
1 8 — 3 ge + fe Dp," x? 1 33 2 een
Ee te — FE * ee 2 1 — LJ ad * 2 — 7 45
— gan + et N bl « p

{SS 4 — — . Cue bh

* ; 6
3 IT = *. <4 SE i r
V 2 2 4 + 5 5 r N *. 8 RL * = 1
>, 9 * r 8 = „ — — 23 3 = — 2

333 2 1
6 | Nn
HE ia
- - a. <4
rr

1
22

—
*

» ei uns oc A EL
bo e
w 1 ä

n
„

-s.

* 2
E4 43
—Y

A Pg
F e

— — — —— — — one —
: PR —_— _Y w=—
n n
hs 2 „„ 4 I.
— 8 . Le "7 MO Fit < IP
SL Eh E285 \ 2
2 22 7 * 9 7
by 8 8
5 bf L's A
— . r by 7 1
* — 7 i 8 of WO % I
" — x 25 2 14 232523 „„ BYGP

—

334 ME M OI R 8 Book v.

As for the Catholics of his party, the King endea.
voured only to diſſipate their fears, that, looking
upon them as perſons of whom he was ſecure, he
would apply himſelf wholly to the gaining the ref},
by beſtowing all favours upon them, He therefore

at laſt declared publicly, that the 2oth of july
ſhould be the day of his abjuration; and named the

church of St Denis for this ceremony.

This declaration diſconcerted the league, and
filled the hearts of the people, and the Catholics of
the royal party, with joy, The Proteſlants, al.
though they had expected it, murmured and fhrug:

ged up their ſhoulders, and did for form's ſake all

that ſuch a juncture required of them; but they
did not exceed the bounds of obedience, All the
_ eccleſiaſtics, with Du-Perron, intoxicated with his
_ triumph, at their head, flocked together; every
one was deſirous of a ſhare in this work. Du.
Perron, for whom J had obtained the biſhopric of
Evrenx, thought he could not ſnew his gratitude

for it in a better manner, than by exerciſing hs

 fanGjen ot converter upon me. He accoſted me

with ak the confidence of a conqueror, and props |

ſed to me to be preſent at a ceremony, where be
flattered himſelf he ſhould ſhine with ſuch lights,
as would diſſipate the profoundeſt darkneſs, * Sir,"
replied I, © all I have to do by being preſent at yo
« diſputes, is, to examine which {ide produces tit
ce ſtrongeſt and moſt valid reaſons. The ſtate of if.
& fairs, your number, and your riches, require that
ce your diſtinctions ſhould prevail.“ In effect, they
did. There was a numerous court at St Denis,

and all was conducted with great pomp and (plene |
dor. I may be diſpenſed with dwelling upon tie |
deſcription of a ceremony, which the Catholic hi.

ſtorians * will do with equal prolixneſs and compli
| ; |

cency.

5 wo See, belides tlie aboye-mentioned hiſtorians, Mexerai, 2

on . ' 3 . a
” —_ M KY 4 VP N Soy 1 2 — WEN „
— 7 » 228 2 & IRE 148 2 * 5 x
D VER RIS eee « r ron
FF FP ENT ; 4

b i . x
F 2 WES Ani fie of RE OE IE IRE SS. * 2 N * 38 * 8 e n ”
3 n Le . e ASI IT. I INE * 2 * . S r 4 2 3 ts ny, vg
> = 8 TCT 0 FO ton og 10 þ Dog ont wr ͤ W IBN 2s 4
78 * e CCC I e 8 ED FE CL PEI EAIS os rota a EI,
: e a N : nnn 7 2 5 > * 5 6

> >

Wee, 5 2
„ oo ts oo.c.: a.

nA BREE by I
ah . F
S

Ts Py WIE ys EE ger

*

x

ha

.

* ö

25 „

4 *

% <If :

1 5
ET
8
NN
5
2 *

1

#2

*

Ree: >.

2 . - aA . a * 1 n

: k £ . HS 18 0 5 7 5 . 7
4 Ae . of, : 5 N "53s F Rel eh e Ft Se: 2 S .

3 CORES. To 1 IS N er * = ry - * r * „„ He ra LS 8 4 ö 7
88 8 woo ed 28 ARS $20, 5 N 1 en | . L f | N $
: N 5 Ee; N e 1 dE OB ar og A RE c 22 9 F * n
. en r Nt 5 222 ASAT IEF: LIL, "RADEON + oh] 1 2 Ces 32 r Nn n N ES 8 - * * 7 N
es . T ̃ꝗ | | |

I did not imagine I could be of any uſe at this

time; therefore kept myſelf retired, as one who

bad no intereſt in the ſhew that was preparing,
when I was viſited by Du- Perron, whom the Car-

dinal of Bourbon had ſent to me, to decide a final
diſpute that had ariſen about the terms in which the
form of the King's profeſſion of faith ſhould be
conceived. The Catholic prieſts and doctors ſtuff-

ed it induftriouſly with all the trifles their heads

were filled with; and were going to make it a ridi-
culous paper, inſtead of a grave and ſolemn com-
poſition, The Proteſtant miniſters, and the King

himſelf, could not away * with the childiſh infigni-

ficancies with which they had ſtuffed this formula;
and it occaſioned a conteſtation which had like to
have ruined all, 355

IJ went immediately with Du-Perron to the Car-

dinal of Bourbon, with whom it was agreed, that
none of the points of faith which were controvert-
ed by the two churches ſhould be omitted, but that
all the reſt ſhould be ſuppreſſed as uſeleſs. The

parties approved of this regulation; and the inſtru»
ment + was drawn up in ſuch a manner, that the
King acknowledged there all the Roman tenets con-

cerning the holy ſcripture, the church, the num-
ber and the ceremonies of the ſacraments, the ſa-

volume of MSS. marked 8935. in the King's library; where may be |

found likewiſe the letter written to his Holineſs by the King, the

commiſſion given to M. du Perron, when he went to Rome to make

a tender of obedience to the Pope, and the King's declaration of the
motives of his converſion. £5 |

Let us not ſpeak of a requiem”,” ſaid Henry IV. © I am not

© dead yet,” „ 5
T See the original of it in the old Memoirs. Du- Pleſſis-Mornay,

and Mezerai after him, reproached the King and the Catholics, ap-

parently without any foundation, that this firſt inſtrument which th

ſuppreſſed, was however the ſame that was ſent to the Pope, as if the

King had compoſed, written, and ſigned it with his own hand, but,

in reality, counterfeited, by M. Lominie. Theſe are his own wards,
book 1, p. 198, book 2. p- 207. "on Poa

eſiſice

1 —
3 x ages woos * = \
£ tz -
_

- 40 * as
„5
>. ws hr. on. ned ES
= on _ — yy 5 * E 2 *

* r | I. ; bar 3 1 8 5 — * 4 :
X A es - — 6 x ESSE ens I OSU 0 ͤ TT ᷣͤ ᷣ ᷣ ᷣ VV f a TIS ⁰ tee 2 ge OSS et" Ws
ae at WAR. wee oe EE > 5 8 D , . Ir IE ES $f ER ant es At OS :

eo Dn Et te 8 5 r N Uh. . 1 1 * 8 N . enen 3 1

3 — i o >, Gs 5 te = e bg” > p 2 — — 9 2

erde 3 2

8

"C5 5 2 f
r

A
-

—

Y * 14
<4 4 s -
— I WI _—

*

"
— * 4 7 44 —
Th Say * ; .
n — — < 7 2 92 8 2 2 ** 0 y * in. - £ — 2 = 4 We NAD 88. —
83 8 8 Dar 2. REES 0 n ORs - 2 S ” I" A, 8 41. * 8 1 N ws n - 2
— % are to r er. Q %. GP „ oe 1 6 Mgr Coed Ea eee 25-4 © 3.8 8 7—

4...

cab mo ©

pt og 4

* he" Bats =

— ENDS ve — Es
. |

— — *

336 M E MOI R S Book VI.
crifice of the maſs, tranſubſtantiation, the doctrine
of juſtification, the invocation of ſaints, the wor-
' ſhip of relics and images, purgatory, indulgences,
and the ſupremacy and power of the Pope *. Af.
ter which the ſatisfaction was general Tf.

B O OK VI.

HE ceremony of the King's abjuration was

| followed by a deputation + of the Duke of
Nevers to Rome, who, together with the Cardinal
de Gondy, and the Marquis de Piſany, were to
make the Pope the obeiſance uſual in ſuch caſes.

Although _

* Another act of equal validity, by which Henry TV. acknow-
ledged the Pope's authority, is the declaration which he made after
his converſion, that it was neceſſity, and the confuſion of affairs, that
_ obliged him to receive abſolution from the prelates of France, ra-

ther than from thoſe of St Peter. This declaration is recorded in

Villeroy's Memoirs of ſtate, yol. 3. p. 61. |

It was Renauld, or Beaune de Samblangai, Archbiſhop of Bour*
ges, who received the King's abjuration. The Cardinal of Bourbon»
who was not a prieſt, and nine other biſhops, aſſiſted at the ceremony.

Henry IV. entering the chapel of St Denis, the Archbiſhop ſaid to

him, Who are you?” Henry replied, © 1am the King.“ „What
« is your requeſt?” ſaid the Archbiſhop. © To be received,” faid

the King, © unto the pale of the Catholic, Apoſtolic, and Roman

church.“ Do you deſire it?“ added the prelate, © Yes, I do

4 deſire it,” replied the King. Then kneeling, he ſaid, © I proteſt
c and ſwear, in the preſence of Almighty God, to live and die in the

& Catholic, Apoſtolic, and Roman religion; to protect and defend it
_ & apainſt all its enemies, at the hazard of my blood and life, re-
« nouncing all hereſies contrary to this Catholic, Apoſtolic, and

4 Roman church.” He afterwards put this ſame confeſſion, in wris

ting, into the hands of the Is who preſented him his ring

to kils, giving him abſolution with a loud voice, and heard his con-

feſſion, during which Te Deum was ſung, Cc. See a particular ac- |
count of the ceremony in the hiſtorians, Cayet, book 5. p. 222.

: eqq- Matthieu, Cc.

+ Clement VIII. refuſed to acknowledge and receive the Duke of ;

Nevers as ambaſſador, and would oblige the French biſhops to go
aud preſcat themſelves to the grand inquiſitor, pretending =

8 S eee WWW 7
9 en SSR ON CCC 4

© ra FM wu mw ©

A „ —

a

renn 337

Although this change was a mortal ſtroke for the

league, the Spaniards and the Duke of Matenne
ſtill held out. They endeavoured to perſuade their
partiſans, that there ſtill remained reſources capable
of fruſtrating it : but all of them ſpoke at that

time contrary to their ſentiments ; and this feigned

confidence was only deſigned to obtain greater ad-

vantages from the King, before he was well eſta+

bliſhed on the throne. |

This is not a ſimple conjecture, at leaſt with re-

card to the King of Spain, ſince it is certain, that
he ordered Taxis and Stuniga to offer the King ſuc-
cours ſufficient to reduce all the chiefs of the league

and the Proteſtant party, without annexing any o-

ther condition to this offer, than a ſtrict alliance be-

tween the two crowns, and an agreement, that the
King ſhould give no ſupport to the rebels in the
| Low Countries. Philip II. judged of Henry by

| himſelf, and conſidered his converſion only as the

principle of a new political ſyſtem, which required
him to betray his oldeſt engagements. It may not,
perhaps, be unuſeful to make here a remark upon

Spain; it is, that although before and after the
death of Catherine de Medicis, ſhe had put a thou-

ſand different ſprings in motion, and although ſhe

they had no power to abiulve the King. M. de Thou blames, with
as much reaſon, the Pope's infiexibility upon this occafion, as he ex-

tols the courage, prudence, and the whole conduct of the Duke of

Nevers, book 108. See Mem. de Nevers, tome 2. 39% de bibliot.
du Roi, and in the hiſtorians above mentioned, the pas ticulars of the
embaſſics of Nevers and Luxemburg, and the negotiations of Father
_ Seraphin Olivari, De la Clielle, of the Abbots du Perron and d'Oſſat
with the Holy Father. The Pope (till deferred a long time an ab-
{»lation, which he had a great deſite to grant, and received very ill
La-Clielle, who preſented to him che letters of Henry IV. Father
Seraphin, who was preſent, and plainly perceived that the Pope's an-
ger was only feigned, ſaid to Lim merrily, © Holy Father, if the de-
vil himſelf was to come and af; an audience of you, and if there
* was any hope of converting him, you could not in conſcience de-
* ny him it.” This made his Holmes ſmile,
Vol. I. FE had

2 —¼ 8 4. bs .
—— 8 2 W = *
_ wy — I I RS Som — * * 4 my -
I. Y — „ „ - 2 - ET" — gee, — Nr = MAL. A Cd 1 OT ON no N 1
; Fe 06 n —_ er 4 _ þ Mm ne. r 4 Tag = — 2 2 ͤ ͤ˙v . 2— 2
" X 2 * x 5 — — Og R 1 2 Y — 3
* * * _ S ** 8 * A mw * — * Levy F —— e r x. 2 p LY . 8 1 1 ,
—— > + 5 Ws 1 3 Ir c FE . — oh | ba en —— N
— 9 * 7 — * ” . a n — . — r 2 . WS n - Ag; BS hos. HS 2 * — n 1
8 - — 125. 2 2 5 ow Ae — — n 1 ext AD 5 : am — 1 e a ö 2 |
Ne es) — — S 1 eee , þ Cookie. fat .. oo te RES r
— 27 n - — e . , =. L » 4 A p m_ 2 1 3 — - I 3 % 3 8 . -
3 — o — e 4 v F voy +» - n 5 a 5 Pg —— "i
rn Dn — * n: = oa . he *
1 3 „ 4 5 re
3 8 > Z * 7 — * * 4
n .
- *

„

. "Re. P . e
K ˙· nt, ni ei Eg oe oe
3 07- Bho — 4 8 - PTD” INI D 0 FY.- *

ol 4 iT 7 bd PA. 2 by —_—_ —
r EE tk con
3 — —_ 2 Sr. — SITS >
r — . .
— 3 * A. * * ar W ads Cat ag 7
— 25 — 38 on * LR 6 3

-
nn
3 wo
aan, _—

333 MEMOIR S Bock VI.

had changed parties and intereſts every time ſhe :
thought it expedient to draw advantages from the

diviſions that agitated this kingdom, the Proteſtant

party was the only one to which ſhe had never
turned herſelf. She has often publicly proteſted,

that ſhe never had the leaſt intention to gain or

ſuffer their alliance. It is by conſequence of this
fame antipathy, that the Spaniards have conſtantly
refuſed the new religion admiſſion into their ſtates :
which cannot be attributed to any thing but the re-
publican maxims with which theſe religioniſts are
accuſed of being tainted. The King being more |}

and more convinced, that to choak the ſeeds of

{ſchiſm in his kingdom, it was neceſſary to give

none of the different factions occaſion to boaſt, that

his power was at their diſpoſal ; and that, to reduce
all parties, he muſt not eſpouſe any: he therefore
_ conſtantly rejected theſe offers from Spain, and

_ thoſe which the Duke of Matenne made him to the
ſame purpoſe ; but, at the ſame time, appeared will-

ing to treat with any of the chiefs or of the cities
of the league which would ſurrender, and to re-
compenſe them in proportion to their forwardneſs
and ſervices: and it was this prudent medium that

he was reſolved to perſiſt in. Although his laſt
action had united him to the religion of the league,

yet his averſion to the ſpirit of that body, and to

the maxims by which it had ever been conducted,

Was not diminiſhed : the very name only of the

league was ſufficient to kindle his indignation. The
Catholic leaguers ſuppoſing that his abjuration au-
thoriſed them to aboliſh, in ſome cities which de-
pended upon them, the edicts that were favourable
to the Huguenots, the King cauſed them to be re-

eſtabliſhed: and though in ſome places, the leaguers
had obtained the conſent even of the Huguenots

themſelves (determined to purchaſe peace at any
price) for this purpoſe, yet the Proteſtant party
| om | | murmuring

S . ona als aka SEE: a 3

e ens Raf en: . K

murmuring at it, Hemy canceled all that had been
done to that effect *, and manifeſted, that his in-
tention was to keep the balance always equal.

The Duke of Matenne, finding that in this laſt
ſcheme, which he had believed infallible, he was
diſappointed as well as the reſt, placed all his fu-
ture dependence upon his old friends the Pariſians,
and negletted no methed by which he might awa-
ken their mutinous humour. But very far from
ſucceeding in this attempt, he could not even hin-
der them from diſcovering their joy at what had
juſt paſſed at St Denis. They talked publicly of
peace, and in his very preſence ; and he had the
mortification to hear a propoſal to ſend deputies to
the King, to demand a truce for {ix months, and to
be obliged to give his own conſent to it, The
truce for three months, that had been granted them
at Surene 4, had only given them a relith for a
longer one.

The King gave audience to the e in full
council. The greateſt number of thoſe who com-
poſed it, liſtening only to their jealouſy of the Duke.
of Matenne, whom they feared as a man that had
the means in his power of purchaſing favour and
_ rewards, were of opinion, that no regard ought to
be had to the demand of the deputies, becauſe the
perſon who ſent them perſiſted in bis revolt agaiuſt

the King, ever ſince his abjuration. Notwithſtand-
ing the juſtice of not confounding the Duke of

* The King, on the 12th of December this year, held an "im
bly of the Proteſtants at Mante, in which he publicly declared. that
his changing his religion ſhonld make no alteration in the affairs of
the Proteſtants. Mem. de la ligue, tome 5. And the Calviniſts ha-
_ Ving made many demands, he told them, that he could not grant

them, but that he would tolerate them, Moiidies, tom. 2. b. 1.
P. 164.

+ Or at Villette, Gragted between Paris and St Denis, a as it is ob- |
ſerved in the Memoirs of the league. It i is dated July 31. and was
pub! aſhes the next Cay at Paris.

F f 2 Maicgne

349 M E M OI R S Book VI.
Maienne with the Pariſians, I ſaw this advice was
| Likely to be followed; and certainly it could not but
have produced ſome terrible misfortune. I inſiſted
ſo ſtrongly upon the advantage of letting the people,
already recovered from their firlt wanderings, taſte
the ſweetneſs of a peace, which would intereſt them
ſtill more in the King's favour, that this prince de-

clared he would grant the truce they demanded of

him, but only for the months of Auguſt, Septem-
ber, and October. 1 %„FFCC
The next day a prodigious concourſe of the po-
pulace of Paris aſſembled at St Denis. The King
ſhewed himſelf to the people, aſliſted publicly ai
mals ; where-ever he turned his ſteps, the croud
was ſo great, that it was * ſometimes impoſſible to
pierce through them: at the ſame moment, a mil-
lion of voices together cried, Long live the King.
| Every one returned, charmed with his good mien,
his condeſcenſion, and that popular air which was
natural to him. © God bleſs him,” ſaid they, with
tears in their eyes, and grant that he may ſoon.
« do the ſame in our church of Notre-Dame in
e Paris,” I obſerved to the King this diſpoſition
of the people with regard to him: tender and ſen-
üble as he was, he could not behold this ſpectacle
without a lively emotion. „ „
The Spaniards had recourſe to their ordinary ſub-
tilties. D'Entragues came to me one morning,
and told me, that a Spaniard was juſt arrived at St
Denis, charged with important diſpatches, from
Mandoce, who had ordered him to addreſs himſelf
directly to me, as being the only man who had

„ They are wild,” ſaid Henry, “ to ſee a King.” Etoile, il.
In a letter which he wrote to Mademoiſelie D'*Eſh ces, upon this or
ſome limilar occaſion, he ſays, „A pleaſant adventure beſel me at

« church : an old woman of eighty years of age ſcized me by the
„ head ard kiſſed me; I was not the firſt who laughed at it; to-
% morrow you {hall puriſy my mouth,” Recucil des letires Heut
te Grand. | | t |

: | any

159 3- FCC 341
any knowledge of the propoſals which he had a long
time ago made to the King at Bearn, by Moreaw
and the Viſcount de Chaux. This Spaniard, whoſe
name was Ordognes or Nugnes, had been a domeſ-
tic of D'Entragues, whoſe ſervice he had quitted
for that of Mandoce : D'Entragues correſponded,
by bis means, with the Spaniſh ambaſſador to the

league: This is what | learned of this man by the

recital, whether true or falſe, that D*Entragues made
me. I did not confide much in this Spaniſh emiſ-
fary, and ſcarcely more in D'Entragues, with
. whoſe turbulent diſpoſition I was acquainted. I
received him therefore coldly enough; for I did not

doubt but this was all a Spaniſh ſtratagem. But

D'Entragues ſeemed ſo offended at my ſuſpicions of
his fidelity, and added fo many aſſurances of the
veracity of his Nugnes, that I permitted him to
bring him to me that evening. The King, whom I
informed of D'Entragues's viſit, had the ſame opi-
nion of it that I bad: howerer, he. commanded me
to hear the envoy.

 P*Entragues did not fail to return at the time
Azppointed, accompanied by the Spaniard; who,
alt Ty ſome vague conveiſation about the joy there
bhe court of Spain for the King's abjuration,

and infinite proteſtations of good-will, which I had
"Znoxeaſon to believe very ſincere, at length told me,

he was charged to propoſe a marriage between the
King and the Infanta of Spain, with ſome other ar-
Ticles, which he declared he had been ordered to
explain only to the King himſelf, to whom he in-
treated me to preſent him. Henry being willing to
hear him, I told Nugnes, without any ceremony,
that ſince he came from ſo ſuſpected a place, he muſt
purchaſe the honour of an audience from his Ma-
jeſty, by ſubmitting to a few precautions that
would perhaps be a little mortifying. He thought
; ang too hard. I therefore began to ſearch him
E f 3 = mel

342 M EM: O:1-R-S Book VI,

myſelf, and afterwards cauſed two of my valets de

chambre to make a more rigid ſcrutiny about his

perſon and cloaths : one of them having been a
taylor, acquitted himſelf perfectly. When he came

into the King's apartment, I made him kneel, and
held both his hands betwixt mine. He added no-

thing to the propoſals he had already made me;

but talked of the alliance between the two crowns,

in terms ſo ſpecious and ſo magnificent, that the
King, who at firſt would hardly liſten to him, could

not kinder himſelf from approving of the Spaniard's

propoſal, to fend ſome perſon on whom he could
rely, to inquire of Don Bernardin de Mandoce bim-
ſelf, if the truth of what he had juſt ſaid could be

reckoned-apon, . „5
This deputation, which would have the appear-

ance of a myſtery, I could not approve of, and

ſtill leſs of the choice his Majeſty made of La- Va-
renne for this occaſion, a man full of vanity;*,
The King, to whom I diſcovered all my appreher-

lions,

„His name was William Fouguet, and he derived the title of La-

Varenne from the marquiſate of La- Varenne in Anjou, which he

bought. His firſt employment was that of a cook to the Princeſs

Catherine, and his chief excelleney in it was Jarding meat. If it be
true, that this princeſs met him one day after his prefcrment, and

id to him, © La-Varenne, You have gained more by carrying pou»

lets“ to my brother, than by larding pullets to me; one may

conclude, that the means by which he gained the King's favour were

not the moſt honeſt, He was firſt made cloak-bearer to this prince,

__ afterwards counſellor of ſtate, and comptroller general of the poſt-
office, and always lived in great familiarity with Henry IV. who gave

Him letters of nobility. La Varenne appointed a gentleman to attend

his ſon. What,” ſaid this prince to him, © if thou badſt given
thy ſen to a gentleman, I ſhould have underſtood what you would

© beat; but to give a gentleman to him, is what I cannot compre- |
© bend.“ They ſay likewiſe, that La-Varenne having obtained
ſome favour of the King, which the Chancellor de Bellievte made

ſame difficulty to you! him, La Varenne ſaid to him, “ Sir, don't
* have ſuch a high opinion of yourſelf, 1 would have you know,

® The original word is of an ambiguous meaning, denoting both a

 Þullet and a girl. |
£ 7 wt: | that

[
I
. .
55

S

7%! dE eee ewewedc vows ss

eee it eee

„ f t, w aq
ſions, thought he ſhould avoid any appearance of
an engagement or negotiation with Spain, by gi.
ving La Varenne no commiſſions in writing, and

making the regulation of ſome boundai ies upon the

frontiers of Spain the pretence for his journey. La-
Varenne had no ſooner received orders to depart,

than he boaſted of his commiſſion, aſſumed the am-
| baſſador, and repreſented himſelf as ſuch to Man-
doce; who, on bis fide, paid him greater honours
| than he had required. This produced the effect
which the Spaniards deſigned it ſhould. It was for

ſome time believed in England and Germany, that

Henry courted the King of Spain's friendſhip, and
to break the alliance with the Proteſtant powers
Which might perhaps have produced an open rup-
ture, if the King had not taken meaſures immediate-

ly to convince them of the contrary.
A laſt reſource which the league now depended

upon, and which was the cauſe that they always
protracted an agreement or rupture with the Spa-
niards, was the horrid reſolution of aſſaſſinating the

King : A reſolution with which they knew well how

do inſpire a ſmall number of determined men, whoſe |

heads they had turned with the alluring proſpect of
great rewards, if they ſucceeded in their enterpriſe,
and the hopes of meriting a crown of martyrdom if
they failed in it. Nature itſelf ſo recoils at the re-
flection, that thoſe who boaſt of being the ſupport-

ers of religion, ſhould ſo monſtrouſly abuſe what
it holdeth moſt ſacred, that this paſſage ought to be

effaced from all Millories'4 were it not likewiſe cer-
tain, mae there is not 00F e of men, who.

« that if my oder was twenty- thy: years younger, I would not
I change my employment for yours,” See |” Aubigne, Geneal. de
Sainte-Marthe, Mem. de M. le Duc d'Anguleme, Mem. de Pu-

Pleſfis, &c, Menagiana. Cayet, ibid. tom. 5. p. 276. ſpeaks of the

embaſſy of La-Varenne into n in a quite An manner from

| 125 Memoirs.

| bear

2344 MN E' NMR 8 Book VI,
bear the name of Chriſtians, that would not reject
with indignation the imputation of authoriſing ſuch
a deſign. It were even criminal to accuſe any body _
of men, or even any individual, without proofs too
clear to-be-conteſted. r.. he
IT be King had them but too frequently“ in thoſe
journeys he took from Sr Denis to Chalons«fur- _
marne, to Fort de Gournai, to Brie-comterobert,
to Melun, and afterwards to Meulan and Fontaine-
bleau. Upon this article, the monks eſpecially have
contracted a ſtain which they will not eaſily efface.
Henry, while at Melun, had like to have perithed _
by the hand of theſe furies, whom the Jeſuits and
Capuchins had diſperſed over all. Among other
informations which were ſent kim upon this ſub-
ject, he received advice, that one of theſe villains _
had ſet out from Lyons, with a reſolution to come
and attempt to aſſaſſinate him. + Fortunately, be-
fore he left Lyons, he declared his deſign, in con-
feſſion to a prieſt ; who, frighted at this frenzy, re-
vealed it to a gentieman of Lyons, This gentle-
man poſted away immediately to get to Melan be-
fore the murderer, and deſcribed him ſo exactly to
the King, from the picture the prieſt had drawn of
him, that he was known and ſeized amongſt the

“ Cayet, Chron, Noven. book 5. p. 280. ſpeaks more politively
of thoſe conſpiracies againſt the life of Henry IV. Mariſot ſays, that
a Flamand, named Aventizs, came to St Denis with a deſign to ſtab
this prince; but obſerving with what devotion he behaved at maſs,
he threw bimſelt at his feet, and implored his pardon ; but after-
wards, reſuming his firſt intention, he was broke upon the wheel in
1593. Chap. 33. : 2

+ See Davila, book 4.; Mem. of the league; De Thou, b. 107. ;
Mezeray, b. 62. Cc. It is proper to obſerve here once for all, that |
when the Duke of Sully nd other Calviniſt writers throw out ſuch |
imputations upon Villeroi, Jeannin, D'Offat, and the Jeſuits, it fig-
nifies no more, in the ſenſe of the writers themſelves, than that ſuch
a thing happened in conſequence of the principles, writings, theſes,
preachings, the ſpirit, in a word, that actuated the league; and not
that ſuch a perſon or ſich a Jeſuit was the author and mover of the

action. See Cayet, b. 5 CG =

crouo

1593. N . 345
croud at Melun, confeſſed his crime, and received
chaſtiſement. The King was aſhamed even for bis
enemies, who, by this wickedneſs, diſcovered ſo
manifeſtly the bottom of their hearts. He found
himſelf equally alarmed with all theſe attempts a-
gainſt his perſon, and tormented with the precau-
tions he was obliged to take; and often complained
x6. me in the bittereſt wanne r.
He had been happy, if the behaviour of the Ca-
_ tholics in his court had at leaſt conſoled him for
that of the Catholics in the league. But the King's
_ abjuration had produced no more change in them
than the others; and they thought they had no leſs
right to ſubject him to all their caprices. They
bore with impatience the King's not breaking off
all commerce with his old Proteſtant ſervants, and
openly murmured if he but converſed with any of
them, cſpecially with me. The apprehenſion of
my bringing him back to his former belief, affected
them much leſs than their ſuſpicions that, in theſe
converſations I had with the King, 1 ſhould prevail
upon him to rectify the abuſes in the government,
_ eſpecially the diſorder of the finances. Henry,
who was not yet in a condition to ſpeak as a ma-
ſter, had the complaiſance to avoid all particular
converſation with the Huguenots, refumed his con-
ferences upon religion with the Catholics only, and
continued them at Andreſy and Milly *. I took
this opportunity to aſk the King's permiſſion to go
to Bontin, where I had grain to ſell to the value
of 5 or 6v00 crowns, He granted it, and told
me, that, at my return, he might perhaps fee more

* And likewiſe at Pontoiſe and Fleury, a caſtle in Gatinois, bg-
longing to Henry Clauſe, grand malter of the foreſts and the waters.
The Roman Catholics who were there, were, according to M. de Thou,
Meit. de Schomberg, de Villeroi, de Belin, de Revo), Jeanuin, and
de Thou himſelf, who gives us alſo to underſtand, that they ſpoke
more of politics then of rclgion. | a

clearly

= — - _ — —
— — A — amentang - — — —

— = — — — — — —

— Is ——— - — ——
— — —— . ——— . — — : — —
9

346 ME M O I R 8 Bock VI.
clearly into his affairs, and be able to talk farther |

with me.

I came to Bontin, with my wife, at a time when
grain bore a very high price. All the great cities,
taking advantage of the truce, haſtened to fill their
magazines, whatever might happen, and paid for
What they bought with the money which the Spa-

niards had ſcattered over all. Spaniſh piſtoles were

then ſo common, tnat commerce was generally 8

carried on in that money.

I had ſcarce ſold half of my grain, when a letter .

the King wrote to me from Fountainebleau obliged

me to attend him. He had, in my abfence, open-

ed three letters directed to me, from which he could

draw no intelligence, becauſe two of them, one of

which came from Madam de Simiers, ſiſter to Vi-

try, and a great friend of Admiral Villars, and the
other from La-Font, were written in eyphers; and

all that the third, which came from a man named

Deſportes, of Verneuil, contained, was, that he had
ſomething to communicate to me relating to the
propoſal I made him in my abbey St Taurin of

Evreux. The King, rigidly watched by the Catho-

lies, could only give me thoſe letters, with the
contents of which I afterwards acquainted him.

Deſpor tes was the agent employed by the Baron de

 Medavy, to treat of an accommodation with him,
and the ſurrender of Verneuil. The letter from
Madam de Simiers, and that from La-Font, turned
only upon ſome facilities which now preſented them- _
ſelves, to engage Villars in the King's intereſt, But
_ affairs ſoon took another turn with regard to him:

the loſs of Feſcamp ſo affected this governor, that,
for this time, he broke off all accommodation. 1
was informed of it by new letters from Madam de

Simiers and La-Font, in anſwer to mine, at the very
moment when, by the King's command, I was

Preparing |

or id Dice Ä ö oe eee. ae Ee

”_ CP, CET ROT TT” CT SS: = 7»

1593. O F 8 U I. IL. 3 347
preparing to go and confirm Villars i in his good rc re-
ſolutions.
his was what had happened at Feſcamp ; it is
a ſtroke of hardineſs that merits particular mention.
When this fort was taken by Byron from the league,
in the garriſon that was turned out of it, there was
a gentleman called Bozs-r9/e, a man of heart and of
head, who remarked exactly the place out of which
he was driven; and taking his precautions deep,
_ contrived to get two ſoldiers, whom he had gained,
to be received into the new garriſon which was put
into Feſcamp by the royaliſts. That ſide of the
fort next the ſea is a perpendicular - rock fix hun-
dred feet high, the bottom of which, for about the
height of twelve feet, is continually waſhed by the
fea, except four or five days in the year, during the
utmoſt receſs of the fea, when, for the ſpace of
three or four hours, it leaves fifteen or twenty fa -
thom of dry ſand at the foot of the rock. Bois-
| roſe, who found it impoſhble by any other way to
ſurpriſe a garriſon, who guarded attentively a place
lately taken, did not doubt of accompliſhing his de-
ſign, if he could enter by that ſide which was
thought inacceſſible. He thought no longer but
how to render the thing pollible ; ; and this was the
expedient he took.

He had agreed upon a ſignal with the two ſoldiers
whom he had corrupted, and one of them waited
for it continually upon the top of the rock, where
he poſted himſelf during the whole time that it was 5
low water. Bois - roſè taking the opportunity of a
very dark night, came, with fifty reſolute men,
choſen for the purpoſe from amongſt all the ſailors,
and landed with two ſloops at the foot of the rock.
He had provided himſelf with a thick cable, equal
in length to the height of the rock, and tying knots
at certain diſtances, run ſhort ticks through, to
lerve to o ſupport them as they climbed. The 3

ier

—

34 M E M OI R S8 Book VI.
dier whom he had gained, having waited ſix months
for the ſignal, no ſooner perceived it, than he let

down a cord from the top of the precipice, to

which thoſe below faſtened the cable, by which
means it was wound up to the top, and made faſt

to an opening in the battlement with a ſtrong crow

run through an iron ſtaple made for that purpoſe.
Bois - roſè giving the lead to two ſerjeants, whoſe
courage he was well convinced of, ordered the fifty
ſoldiers to mount the ladder in the fame manner, one
after another, with their weapons tied round their
bodies, himſelf bringing up the rear, to take away

from the faint-hearted all hope of returning; which

indecd foon became impoſlible ; for before they
had aſcended half-way, the ſca riſing more than ſix
feet, carried off their floops, and ſet their cable a-

floating. The neceſlity of extricating one's ſelf
from a difficult ſtep is not always a ſecurity againſt
fear, when there is ſo much cauſe for apprehen-

ſton. Let one but repreſent to himſelf theſe fifty

men, ſuſpended between heaven and earth, in the

midſt of darkneſs, truſting ſolely to a machine o
inſecure, that the leaſt want of caution, the treach-
ery of a mercenary ſoldier, or the lighteſt fear,
might precipitate them into the abyſs of the iea,

or daſh them upon the rocks; add to this, the noiſe

of the waves, the height of the rock, their laſſitude
and faintneſs; it will not appear ſurpriſing, that the
molt reſolute of the troop ſhould tremble, as, in
effect, he who conducted them began to do. This

ſerjeant telling the next man that he could mount

no higher, and that his heart failed him, Bois- roſe,
to whom this diſcourſe paſſed from mouth to mouth,

and who perceived the truth of it by their advan -
eing no higher, took his meaſures without heſita -

tion. He paſſed over the bodies of all the fifty that
were before him, adviſing each to keep firm, and
got up to the foremoſt, whom he attempted to re-

animate;

4+ a

e a”. Sow r W

1593. O | F S U 1 V. 5 349

animate ; but finding that gentleneſs would not pre-

vail, he obliged him to mount, by pricking hin in

the back with his poniard; and, doubtleſs, if he
had not obeyed him, he would have run him through,
and precipitated him into the ſea. At length, with
incredible labour and fatigue, the whole troop got

to the top of the rock, a little before the break of
day, and was introduced by the two ſoldiers into
the caſtie, where they began to ſlaughter without

mercy the centinels and the whole guard: ſleep
delivered up almoſt all the garriſon to the mercy of

the enemy, who carried it with a high hand over

all who reſiſted, and poſſeſſed themſelves of the fort.
Bois -- roſe immediately ſent notice of this almoſt
incredible ſucceſs to Admiral Viilars, and thought
the government of the citadel he had fo dearly
bought was the leaſt gratification he might expect.

However, he heard that Villars, or rather the Com-

mandeur de Grillon, had a delign to drive him out

of it. In the firſt tranſports of his rage for this in-

juſtice, he delivered the caſtle of Feſcamp to the

Ring, whole converſion he had juſt been infor med

of, Villars, at this news, broke off the negotiation
which he had permitted Madam de Simiers and La-

Font to carry on in his name, and ſent forces to in-

veſt Feſcamp. Bois-roſe, finding himſelf too weak
to make a long reſiſtance, called the King to his aid,
who inſtantly ſet forward for Dieppe, and came to
St Vallery in Caux. When this hoſtility broke out,
the three months truce was expired; but the King
had been prevailed upon to prolong it for two or
three months, upon the Duke of Maienne's repre-
lentation, that it was neceſſary he ſhould have more
time to ſettle an affair of ſuch importance as his ac-
commodation, and that of the league. He failed
not to exclaim againſt this violation of the truce;
and ſent the Count of Belin, governor of Paris, to
the King, to complain of it. Belin came to St
Vor. I EO | Tale,

|
|
|
|
|

— — — — —

35⁰ M E M O I R 8 Book VI.
Vallery, acquitted himſelf of his commiſſion, and

demanded a farther prolongation of the truce for

three months; a time neceſſary for the Duke of

Maienne to make known his laſt intentions at Rome
and Madrid, whither he had ſent Cardinal de Joy-
euſe and Montpezat for that purpoſe. The King,

Who perceived he only wanted to amuſe him, re-
jected the Count of Belin's propoſals 3 and, without
liſtening to any more complaints of the Acton, which

his enemies had been the firſt cauſe of, marched
directly to Feſcamp, forced the troops of Villars

to retire, and provided this fortreſs ery
with all that was neceſſary for its ſecurity.

The King, at his return to Mante, being in»

formed that the Marquis de Vitry was inclined to
receive him into Meaux, to fecond the good inten-
tions of this governor, he came to Lagny, Where
all was regulated i in ſuch a manner, that he made his
public entry into Meaux * on the firſt day of the year

1594. La-Chatre immediately followed this ex-
ample, with the cities of Orleans and Bourges.

The truce being at an end, the King laid ſiege to
Ferte- Milon. I would have taken this opportunity
to finiſh the buſineſs that had carried me to Bon-

tin; but his Majeſty commanded me to review ſome
battalions of Swiſs at Montereau. I ſent to Madam

de Roſny to meet me at this place, from whence

I intended to carry her to Mante. She waited for
me there in vain, Two days before that in which

* The Duke of Matenne upbraiding Vitry for having betrayed
him, in delivering the city of Meaux into the King's hands, Vitry
ſaid to his meſſenger, . You preſs me too much: you will at Jaſt

 & make me ſpeak as becomes a ſoldier. Suppoſe a thief had ſtolen a
_ « purſe, and confided it to my care; if afterwards, coming to the
„knowledge of the right owner, I ſhould reſtore it him, and refuſe

« to give it back to the thief who had intruſted me with it, do you
« think I ſhould commit a wicked and treaſonable action? So it is
te in the affair of the city of Meaux,” Memoirs for the btory of

France, tom. 2,

1 |

153. OF

from Madam de Simiers and La- Font, which in-
formed me, that the man (meaning Villars) was ap-

peaſed, and that nothing hindered me from reſu-
ming the ſcheme that had been laid aſide. This af-
fair the King thought of ſuch importance, as not to
admit of a moment's delay. The Count de Cha-
Hgny, juſt then coming to the army with a paſſport
for Paris, intreated the King to ſend a perſon whom

he could depend men to conduct him to that city;

and the King was willing that 1 ſhould avail my elf
of this double occaſion of learning more particu-
larly the diſpoſitions of the Duke of Malenne and

the league, and of gettting to Rouen ſecurely.
I accompanied, therefore, the Count de Chaligny

to Paris; from whence, after having an interview

with the Duke of Malenne, I went to Louviers, to

the houſe of the Sieur de St Bonnet, about two

Icagues from Rouen: from this place J ſent no-

| tice of my arrival to the intromitters : they came
to fetch me the next evening, and introduced me
into Fort St Catherine, where Capt. Boniface re-
_ ceived and treated me magnificently, while we wait-
ed for Villars, who came at night, attended only

by one ſervant ; 1 likewile having none but my va-

let de chambre with me. We did not part till af.
ter a converſation of two hours, which left me en-
tirely ſatisfied of the ſentiments of this governor.
Our interview was conducted with the utmoſt ſe-

crecy; for, beſides that the governors of the prin-
cipal royaliſt cities in the neighbourhood of Rouen

would not have failed, either through jealouſy or
through intereſt, to croſs the negotiation, and per-
| haps have done ſomething worſe, as, in effect, they

did, as ſoon as they had any ſuſpicion of the affair.

There were in this province a great number of

forces, as well foreigners as thoſe belonging to the
[cague, of which Villars was not entirely maſter,
"08 82 and

SELLS a

I was to review the Swiſs, I received new diſpatches

3 ji 2 1

352 M E M Oi R S Bock VL,

and which might in a little time be joined by ſuch N
conſiderable ſupplies, as to make him repent of his

meaſures. |
1 ftaid five whole days in Fort St Catherine with

the ſame privacy; during which time I had ſeveral _
conferences with Villars, and entered upon the prin. _
cipal conditions of his accommodation. Intereſt was
not here the greateſt difficulty to get over; he was
leſs ſolicitous to gratify mercenary views, than to
be convinced that the King, by treating with him,
ſought not only to gain the capital of a province,

but to bind to his intereſts a man who manifeſted

as great an inclination, as he had abilities, to ſerve

him. It has been already obſerved, what idea Vil.

lars had conceived of the King. As ſoon as my

diſcourſe had confirmed him in it, I could re
the treaty to be in great for wardneſs; ; but 1 could
not then go any farther, not having in writing the
neceſſary powers for concluding the affair.

But to give a more perfect knowledge of this
governor : All that you could fee of him had a re-

ference to one or other of two qualities that pre-

dominated in his character, or was produced by

their mixture. Theſe two qualities were valour
and integrity. The firſt rendered his heart eleva-
ted and generous, full of a pride noble and natu-

ral *, which is nothing elſe but the ſentiment of
our worth; a ſentiment that has nothing of that
_ pitiful vanity and affectation, by which one is loſt

in an overweening admiration of himſelf. The fe-

cond makes a man fincere and ingenuous, inca-
pable of artifice and of ſurpriſe, and ever diſpoſcd to

ſubmit to reaſon and to juſtice. He who unites

both the two, has rarely any other fault than a

baſtineſs | in the firſt movements of anger.

M. de Thou, ſpeaking of Admiral de Villars, ys that he was

of a haiſh and WET ſpirit, Book 103.

CC ˙ ˙T—T—I.w. ůͤ ..... 7˙⅛˙ſ » dh anon Regs Erol

8 Such 8

3 O07 EULLE ww

Such was Villars : and what 1 have till to ſay

concerning him will juſtify the truth of this cha-

rater. Nature had not formed him to continue
long an enemy to a prince with whom he had ſo

great a conformity in his humour. The only dif-
ference between them was, that Henry, by conti-
nual reflections upon the effects of anger, by a
habit acquired in a long courſe of adverſity, by the
neceſſity he was under of gaining friends; and, fi-
nally, by the bent of his heart to tenderneſs, had

converted theſe firſt tranſports, ſo vehement, into

{imple movements“ diſcernible in his countenance,

in his geſture, and but rarely in his words.

Here is an anecde te taken from the Memoirs of the life of the
Preſident de Thon, wh:ch pieves what the author ſays here concern-

ing the character of Henry iv. and which has alſo ſome relation to
what had been fad before upon the ſiege of Rouen, „ One day that
« Grillon came into the King's cloict, to excuſe himſelf upon his

© being reproached, that his going backwards and forwards to treat
« with the Admiral, had afforded him the occaſion and the means
# of making that furious ſally which has been mentioned, he paſſed

& from excuſes to conteſtations, and from conteſtations to tranſport
« and blaſphemies. The King, being irritated at this behaviour,
& commanded him to go out; but as Griilon was coming back every
© moment from the door, and they perceiving that the King grew

4% pale with anger and impatience, they were afraid he would ſeize

© vpon ſomebody's {word, and ſtrike the fellow that was become ſo

„ infolent, At laſt, being come to himſelf, after Grillon went out,

and turning towards the Lords who attended him, and who, with
4 De Thou, had admired the patience with which he bore ſuch cri»

4 minal brutality, he ſaid to them, * Nature has formed me paſſion-
ate; but fince J have been ſenſible of this fault, Thave always en-
_ © deavoured to guard againſt the dictates of ſo dangerous a paſiton.

I know by experience, that it is a bad counſcllor, and am glad too)

have ſuch good witneſſes of my moderation.“ It is cet tain that
* his temperament, his continual fatigues, and the different ſituations

« of his life, had given him a firmneſs of {oul, that was more proot

„ againſt anger than againit his paſſion for pleaſure, It was re-
„ marked, that while Grillon was thus conteſting with him, M. Bi-
* ron, who was then in the King's room, ſitting upon a trunk, pre-
* tended to be aflzep; and as the diſpute grew warmer, his ſleep be-

came more profound; though Grillon came near him in order to

*© abuſe him, and cried aloud in his cars, that he was a mongy ſuarl-

The

. —

222 NEE DI I us =o, 222222 LEY, oo rent ng 7
— - ES — dr i wer rr pin et Ec — — 5 >
- Led 3 — n dre — —— . as 2

2

* >

— -

"5 » vain we = — — pe — — = * 2 — I 8
- 8 . — n — GG 2 D — e <A. -
J Eine 13" Ee I Cn ut DE * . 1 — 2 r > 2 . >. ET ee 3; I .
„TTT —— — — Ls ec FEI 2 Sens = 6 = i OS A PE te te. n "ofa: Ca;
——— ſs ms N 2 r E 1-3 IA TEE = — A N . 3 5
2 — 3 Ne * * 23 * 3 - O OA, 2

8

SY ui bn We
— rn nn
8

—
4 5

— —

——

4 — — * 2 = —— — 2 2 $ 3 N
— — N - 2 12 2% _— * I 32 — on 7» . IS - + PLAINS P 2 Ear. © fr Ghai 2 — == 22 33 — 3 I — 5 - 4 . = > © "1s. ;
8 : 4 - —— * — — — ” = Roa er Ht 9 3 pur 5 + 4--2:x4 + OT * __ 3 OS == N BE 7 +} 22 2 8 7 WRC IL TEES ESA 2 on oo :
2 ——.— — — L — * 2 2 — 5 8 —ͤ— woo 2 — EY 5 28 — Sz n 8 — = _—— = . ron Enuint ne ton, SIC" r 4 8 5 = 2 $$ 2 T 5 RO hs — \
N =” ER : — — 2 2 2 K „. W — S SE » xr <= 5 r TR — B.. ISS — OF Fae * mY at a IR EY fn
2 2 2 Der 2 8.5 - 2 r 5 = bs ths A A. - re nl * 4 - * . K — 2 2 1 — — SC FI 2 Sd : - 5 322 22.
= — * 4 2 JW 2 2 * L 8 * — — — — * =: — > * 8 2 . * df Y = g * . 8 2 : ” b wh * "2X 22 — — —— — — — — . 5 3
5 2 . —— — 22 SD IEEE” — — 5 5 "Fe —— - em 5 . 1 gr * ö _—_ —_——— 2 2 "= £ . 3 PW, - "a2 2:4 - = < O - — - — —
5 — L Ga I » > Ls Ee. OT Vat — 1 r WED = . E — <= - = + 8
— 8 > PE "IQ Se. —— "= S232. N = — . -

— ==
R
1 9 Ne ”—
= — —— — — LY
\ — — 2 37

+4 —
——

POL — ——— 2
n D

E22

ä pike
.

— o—
Ir RIS 9

354 M E M OI R Ss Bock VI.

The King was juſt come to Chartres * which

place he had choſen + for the ceremony of his co- |

ronation, when J joined him, to give him an ac-
count of my journey, and to procure full powers.
I had reckoned upon ſetting out again inſtantly, and
little expected to be detained with him ten or twelve
days, as I was. He was then cndeavouring to re-

concile the Count of Soiſſons and the Duke of |

Montpenſier, whoſe enmity was firſt occafioned by
ſome diſputes relating to the prerogatives of their
rank, as princes of the blood, and was afterwards
exaſperated by their competition for the ſame poſts,
the ſame governments, and, above all, for the ſame _
_ miſtreſs, who was the Princeſs Catherine, ſiſter to
the King. The Duke of Montpenſier had, without
contradiction, the advantage in the good graces of
the King, as well as in fortune; for he had im-
menſe eſtates; he appeared at the coronation with
a train of 4 or 500 gentlemen, while his rival could
with diſficulty maintain ten or twelve: but poor as
he was, without places, without governments, and
diſliked by the King ever ſince his eſcape from
Roven, he was ſuperior in one point, he poſſeſſed
the heart of the Princeſs, which nothing could a-
lienate from him. The Counteſs of Guiche } was.

ing dog. The company was perſuaded, that the Marechal only
« affected that deep ſleep, that he might not expoſe himſelf to the

« brutality of ſuch a fiery hot brained man; which he would bave |F

% been obliged to do, had he been ever ſo little awake, It was alſo
“e believed, that he was willing to leave the King all the fatigue of
© the converſation,” | | „
Feb. 17. 1594. 5 5
+ Againſt a frivolous decree of the ſtates of Blois, which annuls
the ceremony unleſs it is made in the city of Rheims. It was de-
_ cided, that his Mejeſty ſhould be crowned by Nicholas de Thou,
Biſhop of this city, and not by the Archbiſhop of Bourges, who
claimed that honour as Lord Almoner ; and that the ſeinte ampoule,
or holy bottle, ſhould be diſpenſed with. See this ceremony deſcribed.
in the hiſtorians, 8 He: | 5
t The ſame who had been miſtreſs to Henry IV. but ſhe was
grown very fat, coarſe, and led faced. Journal of the reign of Heu.
III tom. 1 p 279. ö 7

"the

1593. 0 FT SOLELY. 355

the depofi tory of their ſeerets; and their common
meſſenger when they could not fee each other.
She had ſo well cultivate this attachment, that ſne

had made them both ſign a promile of marriage,

which only the difficulty of the times hindered them
from cairying into execution,

His Majeſty was fo paſſionately deſirous of re-
conciling theſe two princes of the blood to each
other, that this conſideration ſuperſeded the treaty

with Villars. He had no regard to my inſtances,

nor to the danger which I made him fee would at-.
tend the delaying it; I muſt determine to under-
take this difficult reconcilement, conjointly with the
Biſhop of Evreux, whom he had at firſt pitched up-
on, but he found he was unable to ſueceed alone in
ſo delicate an affair. It is true, I ſtill preſerved a
great ſhare of the Count's eſteem; but 1 knew his

baughty and diſdainful ſpirit, and that the very fear

of ſeeming to pay a deference to a rival who was

bis ſuperior, would not only wake bim rigid in his

Pretenſions, but perhaps induce him to form new
nes. I will not tire the reader with a detail of the

conteſtations, the reſuſals, and the ſallies of ill hu-

mour which we bad to undergo : we were more
than once upon the point of abandoning. the pro-

jet, However, by the force of arguments, drawn

from the will and the fatisfaction of the King, with
a good deal of patience, many intreaties, and much
importunity, we prevailed upon the two princes to
ſee and to embrace each other. I was not to anſwer
for the heartinels of this reconciliation : the article
of their paſſion for the Princeſs, and her marriage,
which I carefully avoided mentioning, continued
ſtill undecided, left between them the principal

ſeeds of diviſion : but this I looked upon as an ob-
ſtacle abſolutely unſurmountable.

1 was extremely well ſatisficd at having ſucceeds
ed, without touching upon this article, n and I now

Jaw

a = — . — Nee —
Ts On - ' Ss 8 — — grads LEES Sen ane Ee — Mt 8 Re 1 — — : - — —
8 N x 2 —— : i
— 2 r —— TP „ r * - Ko 2 -
” ; * S 2 ; 5 Dye — 5 1 — — — 5 8
— b. FT . 8 Ph — — r r — — 4 +
EE th OBS Aut SG 2 —— — 8 — ada AS
_ — „ — — 2 2 ——  — — r = — 5
22 2 3 ae > es 2 IA — I >; 7 :
5 SF. — — — —— —
- - = 7

—

A
.
-

- 1 rr 9 => n ” 4 e 8 at Fc rt i 2 " 25 *
DOT IE pg I IIS ER £57 < as + 2 2 — . a Cos. —_— 2 5
> apt n — 8 be rer - IA. 2 5 : XX "250m . 7 K
rr oh = nn IL 7 g!!!᷑T———.... "NS
Zh — — Ee . — 2 8 - K — —
3 — e 7 — reg * a 8 = — — IF "= — 8 — — * 1 1 FELT +
no mere” _ . — — - ore toads ng at on 5 ee mir art rig ET 26
F O 7 2 . 6 2-7; 7 oe — 8 TIC : Pp 4 3 E r — tg” = 3 =
„ r Ss => Ch, : - — N 5 8 * F en WE Ax.” > nn ue : —>& 1
— — — 2 ” — — 4” EA — 2 CA EE ur ad — Bras 2 r GERT * r= AO FSG
7 a Sn —— — — Ad non KY : 4 —_— rn IN 2 — 2
— * — 3 3 F777 F oo oa 2 : 8
* — — = — FS - I ft gn © 2

r
— 2 2
— go IST,

3 2

35 M E M OI R Ss Book VI.

ſaw nothing to delay my journey to Rouen. I was
not yet where I thought. The King's ardent de-
ſire to reconcile theſe princes, was with a view of
_ attaining another end, which he ſtill more paſſion-

ately deſired ; and this ſecond point was the very

ſame that I thought I had ſo prudently ſhifted, the

marriage of the Princeſs his ſiſter. To crown all,
I was the very perſon his Majeſty fixed upon to ac-
compliſh this matter, I was therefore charged a-
new to get up the promiſe of marriage, which I

have juſt mentioned; that, this obſtacle being re-

moved, the King, reſolute to gratify to the full the

Duke of Montpenſier, might finally employ his au-
thority to put the Princeſs into his poſſeſſion, and

by that means free himſelf from the apprehenſion
of ſeeing a marriage concluded, which, though clan-
deſtinely, would be no leſs perplexing, ſince the
Count of Soiſſons would become his heir: whether
he conſented to it or not, and make uſe of his own
riches againſt him. If there were any children of
this marriage, a thing hardly to be doubted, it
would give his Majeſty, who had none, another
cauſe for uneaſineſs.

I trembled when I received the King's order for

this purpoſe, I would have repreſented to him,
that Villars would certainly engage himſelf in the

enemy's party for ever, as wouldalſo Medavy, and

ſeveral other governors in Normandy, unleſs 1 went

immediately to all thoſe places. It was a thing re-
| ſolved upon; the King would not hear me, and

only granted me what I demanded of him to be

able to ſucceed ; which was, that he would give
no ſuſpicion of my being charged with this em-
ployment, and that he would leave me to make
choice of the means.

When I was alone, and had reflected upon the
| commiſſion which I had received, I confeſs I found

my {elf 3 in the UL perplezity. From the know- |
5 88888 |

5 ; : ;
OY A th 3 r 8 * YC

1594. 5 DULL Y. 357

ledge I had of the Princeſs Catherine's humour, from
_ whom I muſt wring this writing, I was convinced
it was not in the power of human eloquence to
make her reliſh the King's deſigns with reſpe& to
her perſon, What likelihood was there of per-
ſuading a woman, and a princeſs, to renounce the
man ſhe loved, and beſtow herſelf upon one whom
ſhe hated? There was no probability of ſucceed-
ing but by artifice, For this I faid to myſelf, What
though i in deceiving her I conſult not her heart, at
leaſt J conſult her intereſt, -and divert the misfor-
tunes which the irregularity of her conduct might
bing upon the King and the kingdom. 1] Battered
myſelf, that the Princeſs would one day think her-
ſelf obliged to me for having, by an innocent ſtra-
tagem, hindered her from loſing her fortune, to-
gether with the friendſhip of the King her brother.
Specious as theſe reaſons were, I cannot help con-
feſling, that I did betray her; and this reflection
gave me pain. The impoſſibility of ſucceeding by
any other means, and the hope that even ſhe would
one day pardon me, and confeſs that I had done
her areal ſervice by it, finally determined me. As
for the Count, having no occaſion to make any ap-
plication to him, and being likewiſe but little at-
tached to him, the reſpect that was due to his per-
fon ought to be laid alide, when it oppoſed the pu-
blic utility, and what the ſervice of the King my
maſter exacted of me. The whole of this affair
was, in the iſſue, productive of diſquietudes to me,
from which, doubtleſs, my ſcruples and reluctance
ought to have preſerved me.
There was ſtill another difficulty to be removed.
I faw the Princeſs very rarely, becauſe of my con-
tinual occupations; and I knew her ſufficiently,
not to doubt, but that whatever meaſures I made
vie of to obtain the contract in queſtion, my un-
uſual aſſiduity would, in a mind naturally diſtruſtful,

cr _ |

358 MEMOIRS Bock vi.

ereate ſuſpicions which would guard her againſt all I

could ſay, or get others to ſay to her. I therefore
_ endeavoured to att in ſuch a manner, that ſhe

ſhould prevent me herſelf. For this purpoſe, I

made uſe of the two Du-Perrons, who I knew (e-

| ſpecially the youngeſt) were of a humour to make
their court to the great, at the expence of a ſecret,
] was moſt intimate with the Biſhop of Evreux, the
_ eldeſt : but one riſks nothing in reckoning upon the
good opinion all men have of their own merit: on

this article they begin with being dupes to them»
ſelves. I went, therefore, to viſit the younger Dus»

Perron, I flattered him; I inſinuated myſelf into
his favour, by feigning to impart ſecrets to him.

He regarded himlelf as an important man, and,
through vanity, believed every word 1 ſaid to bim.

When ] perceived him intoxicated with ſelf love, I

told him (with all the marks of the moſt perfect ſin-

cerity, and even exatting an oath of ſecrecy from

him, which I ſhould have been very ſorry if he had
kept), that the King had imparted to me in confi-

dence his intentions with regard to the Princeſs;

that he was reſolved to make her mary the Count;
and that ſome little difficulties which {till remained

to be got over, prevented his Majeſty from publicly

declaring his determination. I was afſured two
days only would be ſufficient for Du-Perron to get
rid of a ſecret ſo weighty, in ſuch a manner that it
_ would reach the Princeſs Catherine. Accordingly,
he imparted it, almoſt in a moment, as a profound

ſecret, to M. de Courtenai, and two other of the

Count of Soiſſon's moſt intimate confidents, to

whom they ran to communicate it, as he allo did

to the Princeſs and to the Counteſs of Guiche.
I reckoned the Princeſs, flattered with an hope
ſo agreeable, would make me the firſt advances ;

and I was not miſtaken. Going to take leave of --

her, as a man juſt ready to undertake a long jour-

ney,

— — 2

„ A. 0 a.

— —

ney, I bad a e rock of Du Perron fide ·

lity. The Princeſs added conſiderably to the diſ-

tinction with which ſhe ordinarily received me; and

the Counteſs of Guiche, unwilling to loſe fo favours

able an opportunity, after ſome converſation upon ;
indifferent matters, made haſte to bring upon the

carpet the amours of the Princeſs and the Count,

who was alſo preſent, and embracing me in a tran=
ſport of friendſhip,“ See,” ſaid ſhe to the lovers,
, a man who is able to ſerve you in your deſigns.“
Ihe Princeſs then addreſſing herſelf to me, told
me, that I knew the Count and her had always e-
ſteemed me greatly; and that ſhe would be ſen-

ſibly obliged to me, if I would aſſiſt her endeavours

to reſtore herſelt to the good graces of the King .
her brother, She ſpoke only theſe few words, and
left the care of ſay ing more to that inſinuating and

gracious air, which ſhe knew better than any other

woman in the world how to aſſume when ſhe plea-

ſed. I ſeemed to be gained; and, after thanking
the Princeſs for the honour ſhe did me, I added,
that if I could depend upon the diſcretion of all who

heard me, I would inform them of many things
which would not be indifferent to them. Women
make nothing of promiſes of ſecrecy, acculed as
they are of keeping them badly. They promiſed,

they added an oath, and ſuperadded a thouſand ;
but J had no mind to open myſelf farther at that
time. I aſked them for three days delay: they aſ-

liſted me in finding an excule for deferring my jour-

ney to Rouen; and | took leave of the company,
who impatiently expected the time I had marked,

I returned punctually at the end of three days. 1

ſuffered myſelf to be preſſed a long time ; at laſt,

ſeeming to yield to the importunity of the two Ja

dies, I told them, that having ſeveral times ſounded
the King upon the marriage in queſtion, he at firſt

ewed ſome reluctance to it, without caring to ex- 7
plain

S IT
by

5

*
A
1 1
7
1
1

BY 3

i, ©

1 1

\
$2
i * |

; 0

16
2 9

3 12
L dd

1

1 4

|
1
J + *
, A.

1 1
e

"5 , 1

N 5

v N

1
«off,
. 140
1 ö
- — 1
I.

1

4 7

*i y

wy 1
: ö

„

FF

15 .

wit

PS | .

=:

1 0

Ly 8

er $5411

y A

41 4 1
1. 1

1 16
48 \W

= .
2

oy. © . *

Anz
"4

Nen

n
U "447
# in

; t
4 *

196
Tg IR

AE

ien

Amy
4
8}

Nine

EA

" ETY
Wo 4

T7
1 7

++ Y

l
t. 1
* 5
* 7

1
e

4 3 i

F |

* q 4

1.7:

1

1

39 F

- lg 38

* ERIN

Wa +

%

t, l

Rae
7
Th rs

n

{| 1 $*)
IN :
{40
5 4 "oh :
a: þ
. 21
HIS

WOW 6 /

. .

er
„

BY 148

7

Fe i»
95
39

80 9
e
UE 44,

11421 5.288

5 7

i

A
NILS

1
all bes

y 111 ih,

4

4 *

8

: 4 18]

rH 7 -

-£413 Ie

{21142

L. .

135 4

RSA.

e. by

1474 4:48

e

A
1

.

0 Ryde

Nag!
©.

obey

48;

4

bo

4 LI.

+4 LH

tbr

1 279

ee

* 7

1

„

R
$

43:47
0
1
*D
17
[
"74
BY
1 $
30 WW
*

+ LH
18056
*

7
99
1. 500 ,
off 40
„
al

Pal |

n

110k
of $21

Mg PW x
14
Ae!

4 * 7 *
1
5 y 3 1

3
7 1

„ 4
er
A.

mat $19!

. e

N

1
it 4
#1
it

1

1
- 5

360 M E M OI R S Bock vI.
plain bimſelf farther ; but my earneſt intreaties had

at length prevailed upon him to open his heart to
me upon this ſubje&t ; and he confeſſed, that, far |
from feeling any repugnance to conclude this union,

he thought it a very proper one; and that ſince he
had no iſſue of his own, he ſhould be overjoyed to

fee the offspring of his ſiſter and a prince of his
blood, whom he would look upon as his own chil-
dren : that the ſweet and peaceable diſpoſitions of

the Count of Soiſſons and the Princeſs were greatly
to his taſte ; but that he always felt it would be
very difficult to forget, that the Count had ſought
to deceive him, and to obtain his ſiſter without his

_ conſent. This ſpeech, every word of which I had

preconcerted, produced its effect, All the three

began to confeſs, that they might have acted other-

Vile, and to condemn one another for having con-

ducted the affair with ſo much independence. This
Vas what I waited for: I ſeized this opportunity
to convince them, that I believed the evil migbt

be very eaſily remedied ; that the King was natu-

rally kind, and ealily forgot paſt injuries; all that
was now neceſſary to be done, was to behave in a

quite contrary manner, to ſolicit his favour, to ſeem

abſolutely dependent upon him, and to leave bim
maſter of their perſons; in fine, (and this was the
grand point), to ſacrifice to him the written engage
ment they bad mutually given, as being that by

which he had moſt of all been exaſperated; and

not to fear giving him even a declaration in vi-
ting, in which they ſhould both bind themſelves not

to marry without his conſent: after this conde-

ſcenſion upon their part, I believed I could aſſure

them, that in leſs than three months, the King
would himſelf prevent their deſires, and cement
their union.

I found no difficulty in gaining credit ; a that

very inſtant they promiſed to ſacrifice the contract

of

1594. 0 TT.. Pra FOE .
of marriage, pollibly becauſe they thought | it would.
be of no uſe to them, if the King, when become
abſolute maſter in his kingdom, ſhould not agree to
it. The Counteſs of Guiche ſaid ſhe had left it at

Bearn, bat would ſend for it immediately. They
did not fo eaſily ſubmit to the declaration I de-
| manded afterwards, and without which their re-
| ſigning the contract ſignified nothing, which the
parties intereſted might renew at pleaſure, This
was the very argument which I urged ſucceſsfully,
and by which L convinced the! 3, that, without this,
the King could neither depend upon their ſincerity,
nor be aflvred of their obedience. This article wa;

ſtrongly debated ; and when at laſt, by the force 5

remonttrances, L bad obtained a writing, by which

the Princeſs and the Count diſannvlled "all proral ſco

that had paſſed between them, releaſed cach other
mutually from all engagements, and ſubmitted
themſelves abſolutely to the King's diſpoſal 3 the
conlequences of this writing alarmed them, and

they had recourſe to a medium, without which it

is probable the affair had reſted here. This me-
dium was, that J only ſhould be intruſted with ir,
and ſhould not ſuffer it to go oat of my hands, not
even to pals into thoſe of the King. Luckily they

did not add, that it ſhould be returned to the Prin»

ceſs, if matters turned out otherwiſe than was ex-

pected. I gave my parole of honour ; with which
they were contented ; and the writing was deliver-
ed to me in form, ſigned by the Prince!s and the

Count, and ſealed with their arms. The King's,

joy for my ſucceſs, which he durſt hardly flatter -

bimſelf with the hopes of, was conſiderably I: fs,
when he found the writing was to 1emain in my
hands. He often intreated me carnellly to give it
him; but finding, by my perliſting to refuſe him,
that the obedience | owed him could not influence

me to a breach of my promiſe, he no longer in-
Vox. I. . 1 ˙ |: |"

362 MEMOIR S Book VI.
ſiſted. The two lovers ſeeing the agreeable hopes
I had given them ſtill unaccompliſhed, could not,

as it may well be imagined, pardon me the impo-

ſition I had put upon them. The ſequel of theſe

Memoirs will ſhew it.

After the concluſion of this affair, the remem-

brance of which was always diſagreeable to me,
TI was wholly employed in preparing for my jour-

ney to Rouen. I was apprehenſive, and not with-
out reaſon, that ſo long a delay had abſolutely broke

all my firſt meaſures with Admiral Villars. I ob-

__ rained a cart blanche * from the King, to conclude
a treaty, not only with this governor, but alſo with

all the other governors and officers of the province.
| Juſt as I was going to ſet out, Deſportes arrived,
and ſtopped me once more. He was ſent by the
Baron de Medavy to the Biſhop of Evreux, to de-
| fire that he would lend him his houſe of Conde for
a little time; and alſo prevail upon me to come
thither, that he might confer with me upon the con-
ditions of his treaty, and that of Verneuil, I left
Chartres, and came in the evening to Anet, Madam
d Aumale having long ſollicited me ſtrongly to viſit

her there. | |

This lady, who had more underſtanding and pru-
dence than her huſband, conjured him inceſſantly

to break with the league, and reſign himſelf to the
King. She was ſenſible, that not only his duty and
ſecurity required that he ſhould take this Rep, but
bis intereſt likewiſe ; for the Duke d'Aumale's do-
meſtic affairs were in ſuch diſorder, that there was
no other way to avoid approaching ruin, but by
being among the firſt Who ſhould avail himſelf of

the advantages which tliey might obtain, who upon

| * The preſent Duke of Sully has the original of this Full power
in his paſſeſſion, as likewiſe many of the originals of Maximilian de

this

Bethune's letters upon this ſubject,

777 a6
this occaſion were moſt forward in returning to

their duty. I alighted at an inn in Anet; and

while my ſupper was preparing, went to wait upon

Madam d' Aumale, attended only by a ſingle page.
To the joy that animated the countenance of this.

lady the moment ſhe perceived me, ſhe added all
the graces of a friendly reception; and that ſhe

might not waſte moments ſo precious, took my
band, and made me run over with her thoſe fine

' galleries and gardens which make Anet a moſt in-
| chanting place. Here ſhe expreſſed to me her car-
neſt delire to have her huſband return to the obe-

dience due to his ſovereign, and named the condi-

tions upon which he might be induced to conſent |
to it. I omit all the propoſitions, either approved
or rejected, that paſſed between us. Hitherto 1
had ſeen nothing but what did honour to the maſter
of a houſe truly royal; and I ſhould have been ig -

norant of the deplorable ſtate to which the Duke

was reduced, if ſhe had not intreated, and even
forced me, to ſup with her, and to ſtay there all

night, After a repaſt, which we waited for a

long time, and as ill ſerved, I was conducted into

a vaſt chamber, all ſhining with marble, but fo na-
ked, and ſo cold, that I could neither get heat nor
ſleep, in a bed where the ſhort narrow ſilk curtains,
_ a ſingle ſlight coverlid, and damp ſheets, were fuf-
ficient to benumb one, even in the midſt of ſum-

mer. Not able to continue in bed, I roſe, and
thought to ſecure myſelf againſt the inconveniencies
of my damp lodging by making a fire; but I could
find no other wood to burn than green holm and
Juniper, which it was impoſlible to kindle, I was |

_ obliged, therefore, to wear my gown the whole
night; by which means I was very early awake;
and joyfully quitting ſo diſagreeable a lodging, I

went to join my attendants, the meaneſt of whom

VVV

— — ——— —˙ er
— ny

— „ 2
—B en
7 — ter a
© 2
To = * ==

—. NE 2 1
— .

SE

I
. = 2 E 7 — 2 — — - J aA. — . — Set \

4 = - — — — = - Bier — —— — — — 2 1 — — —
———ů— —— 2—æ2ĩ. 5 . —— IOD My 2 * ASD SSECES RY
7 =o i 1 — = n a — —— — + —

. * SF rr „ =
- — 2
2 n 2 — N hy -- -
. —

2

i EN — * —

— Ph 8

- _ wn hy

<-> oe IEEE -7
— OR

— * —

— arm ry nee ng

3 —
— —

—
—
TELE CERT IS XS
* — I, ==
— 2 =

- == — — 5 . = =
—

1 1 4
_ 3 ” => -
XY = 2
— — — —
3
* = 8 - 4
- Ig. — —
— -
— — * m
— - W * . -
— — —
— 4 N »s
2 n —
= —
= . a = 33 P F
Fe = CERT : PESTS > CATE

364 MEMOIR 8 Bock VI.
had fared better, and paſſed the night more com-
fortable, than their maſter.

I made myſelf amends for this fatigue * at Conds,
where I found every conveni-ncy eſſential to good

reception. As ſoon as J arrived, I got into a good

bed, Medavy not being expected till noon. At firſt
be regulated his behaviour according to that no-
tion, That in ſuch a conjuncture as the preſent, the
molt inconſiderable nobleman has a right to ſet a

ue upon bimſelf ten times above his worth. =
performed his part perfectly well, by an air of
tilfe diſtruſt, and an affected ſuper tority, which he
imagined would greatly advance his affairs. I con-
traſted his vanity with a frankneſs that brought him

down, and told him very ſimply, that if he waited

{:11 the great cities came to an accommodation, he,
who had only Verneuil to offer, his ſacrifice would
immediately loſe above the half of its value; and
that afterwards, perhaps, his propofals would not be
even regarded, or any thing granted of all that he

might demand, My fincerity forced him to be
candid likewiſe ; he appeared more reaſonable, and

we ſoon agreed: he only intreated me not to make

the affair public till the end of March, becauſe he
had engaged to Villars to do nothing without bis
participation. He ſent Deſportes with me to Rouen,
to pay this compliment to the governor, and to ob-
ſerve, at the ſame time, whether I concluded the

treaty with Villars, whote accommodation drew his

along with it, and in ſome meaſure neceſſarily,

I came to Louviers the next day; from whence

making known my arrival to Admiral Villars, he
fent the captain of his guards to receive me at the
gate of the city. I did not enter ſecretly as before,

but publicly, and with a kind of pomp. The ftrcets

were filled with the people; and the hopes of a
peace, by which tranquillity and commerce would

be reſtored, Ken a thouſand acclamations of joy
from

oo 3 OS =

SIA

oO 202

OMA g g.

n

Eu
3
. —
A
34
7
15
9 *
1
Sa
*

x

1594 'Q. FR SULLY. 365
from them as I paſſed. Villars had cauſed the fineſt
| houſe in Rouen to be prepared for the reception of

me and my train, which conſiſted of twelve or fif-
teen gentlemen, and had given all the neceſſary or-

ders for treating us magnificently. La-Font, who

had the care of my reception, waited to conduct

me thither : he. outdid his maſter, and at night.
gave me the muſic, and the diverſion of dancers
and jugglers, whom I could not prevail upon to re-
ceive either money or preſents. I ſent Du-Perat
to make my compliments to the Admiral, Madam

de Simiers, and the Abbe de Tiron, who had a

great ſhare in the management of this affair : they

inſtantly returned me the ſame civility by the Sieur
de Perdriel, and deſired him to tell me, that after
I had repoſed myſelf this day, we ſhould enter up-
on buſineſs the next. This, however, did not hin-
der the Abbot from viſiting me in the evening,

without ceremony. Indeed, bis whole conduct up-
on this occaſion diſcovered a degree of rectitude
and ſincerity rarely to be found in ſuch con-
junctures.

I found by his ſcones; that the Has had 3

within a very little of loſing Villars irretrievably.

A deputy from Spain, named Don Simon Antonia,

and another called Chapelle Marteau, from the
Duke of Matenne, came to Rouen fome time be-

fore my arrival, and had made very advantageous

propoſals to this governor; he bad likewiſe daily
received letters from the Catholies, even thoſe in
the King's party, Which tended to render him ſu- |
ſpicious of his Majeſty's deſigne, and to prejudice |
him againſt a pegopation conducted by a Proteſtant
agent. This argument had great weight with Vile
lars, always zealous for bis religion, end would
have infallibly determined him for the enzmy's par-

ty, if, in this perplexity, his mind had not "SY

balan xced by other letters from the Cardinal of
Hb Bourbon

366 NM E M O I R $ Bock vi.

Bourbon, the Biſhop of Evreux, and the Marquis

of Vitry, who all aſſured him he might depend upon
the King's word, and my ſincerity. Tiron ſhewed
me part of each of theſe letters, and thought it
neceſſary to warn me, that as the Admiral had been
perpetually beſet by deputies of the league, and of-
fended likewiſe at the delays that had been uſed

with him, I muſt not expect to vanquiſn his irre-
ſolution, without ſuffering ſome of thoſe ſallies of
rage, ſo natural to him, and which, with a little

patience, it was eaſy to ally, _

I went to wait on Villars *, well prepared to

fuſtain all theſe little aſſaults ; and at firſt perceived
_ plainly, that the ſight of me awakened ſome re-

mains of diſtruſt and anger in his mind. My be-
| haviour ſoon diſſipated this cloud, and he with great
ealmneſs and ſerenity propoſed his conditions,
which were compriſed under the following heads:
That he ſhould continue till in his poſt of Admiral,

which had been beſtowed on him by the league ;

and in his government of Rouen poſſeſs a power in-

dependent of the Duke of Montpenſier, governor

of that province, at leaſt for three years; and that
this power ſhould extend over the bailiwicks of

Rouen and of Caux: That the exerciſe of the Pro-

teſtant religion ſhould not be allowed in this capi-

tal, nor ſix leagues around it: That all the officers

poſted by the league in the cities belonging to his

government ſhould be continued there, with 1500
foot and 300 horſe, to be maintained by the King
for the ſecurity of thoſe ſame cities: That his Ma-
Jjeſty ſhould give him the ſum of 120, ooo livres to

M. de Villars, in the Memoirs of thoſe times, is reprefented as
a man extremely fierce and paſſionate. It is there obſerved, that
the Baron de Roſny was the only one that could ſucceed in theſe ne-
_ gotiations., Memoirs for the hiſtory of France, vol. 2. Theſe nego-
tiations of the Baron de Roſny are allo commended by M. de Thou,

pay

book 109.

eamp ſhould be delivered to him: and, in fine,

That he ſhould have the diſpoſal of the abbeys of
Jumieges, Tiron, Bonport, La-Valaſe, Saint- Tau-
rin, and that of Montiviliers, which he deſigned for

a ſiſter of Madam de Simiers.

If all theſe articles had as much depended upon
me as that relating to the abbey of Saint-Taurin,
which was my own, and which I immediately
yielded to Villars, the treaty had been concluded
without further delay ; and this I aſſured him of,

with regard to thoſe wherein the King was abſolute

maſter. But whatever power 1 had received from

his Majeſty, I could do nothing in thoſe articles

' Which regarded the Duke of Montpenſier, and Bi-
ron, who was inveſted with the poſt of Admiral,

and in poſſeſſion of Feſcamp, which he had got
from Bois-roſe, on a promiſe of indemnification,

that had not yet been fulfilled ; and T did not think
I had a right to ſettle this affair without informing

the King of it. As I did not heſitate upon any of
thoſe conditions which depended immediately upon

the King, I expected that Villars would have been
ſatisfied with my conduct; but this governor go-
ing out with the deputies from the league, at the

very moment that I was endeavouring to make him

_ comprehend my reaſons, he interrupted me haſtily

with theſe few words, pronounced in a very paſ-
ſionate tone: © That I might ſpare myſelf the

trouble of talking to him more, ſince he was de-
* termined either to agree upon all, or break off

all, upon the ſpot.”

Although I was a little ſtunned with this unfore-
ſeen blow, I anſwered Villars calmly, that I was
perſuaded the King would grant him the three ar-

ticles in queſtion, as well as all the others, (that of

Feſcamp making two, becauſe Bois-roſe was con-
cerned in it): That this needed not hinder us from
. drawing

1394 OF 8 U L L I. 36%
pay his debts, and a penſion of 60,000 : That Feſ.

— .
* "CER =
— — - op 2

1

— *

f
ron
„
F _
44 = n
15 i 4
: * 8
{ jp
4 RAY
71
y
| 3) oY
141
t 1 71
n
| © ow ®
ANESTH
an 1 (
,O9% » 1
114
* 1
i oft ag!
* * 435 5
0 B WY 7
nnn
aß
$1000
1 1 5
r, "7h G
1 1
e
; .
nn
i
1 *
7.47 A 14
n
et} |
8 1
E |
is 14
0 72 1
1
11 +408
r
: l
; 0 90
{*7 * i
ap 14 : 8
1. i, ) WR IS
e
en .
} 7 0 19 E.
0 }
1324. J*
met:
1
5 Wet ki l
* (HH 1 4 3*
r
FIRED; © N
er
7 11138
81 1 *
10 14
i 1
1
5 en .
bk he 1
E vol i
We.
e 6
. 7
N i. 4
l i
$2326 "s »
+4139
tl; th |
1 bas, * 17
q 10 5 4 1
Kaan 1 , of
1111
ane * \
c 1.
nr 2
1 wet r 5
Ky (| 7.
*. i } \
1.2 2238 1
e ih
As Jy
Wo #J1 %
; 1 7
43 Nj
* 5 1
8 9 4
0 1 4 by
g 1 4
3 i 5 3;
FS B10
x !
. ? A
AS
3 (+34. Þ 85
Tarts it 74
hoes 5 "i
9 * .
1 {
* .* & 8
i I it I 1
I |: 77 N
[i 1 481
cc, il
1 .
e + \
© 34 1. ber
1 $52.17 1
„ Wt
EW 24 :
o 1
F. 9 As | =
i
AWE 8 ;
$3 Bk 8
1. J 95 1 1
yh "1:38 a.
& 4:14 " at
ES» * 74 N
1 1
57 J
* 4 5
1 RS
n
nn 'Y
.
ren
24 N 1
: is 4
"=: 75 2.
1
1 4 5 » 16 Wh. |
0" 1.2 .
? 1408 1. B by |
e
1 *
17 $008 18
{PV A io
. & a} 4
a, 1
* | ( 8 '
38% ? 1
{tt Fe —— :
140
4 i tl
e
: Feat bb (144
45 4 t 95 {
13, 3 4
14 4
A 48
29
TIA
11 0 1
nf 114848
wr nd f
AR ob
{ a 1480
3% v4 4
l
1 13, 1344 :
WH! *
1
1 . 138) 7
53.4; 4818
4 „ 6 ! x,
$":#T3 11
- N
ö 4s
+ "IN Bi
44 18 7
0 K. a
4410 *
144 1
. a Mg
55 1, 1
6 FIT th
F. " \ 4 | L
V Tay:
Mie
i 4 + "i
17 4% IO E
17 ; i
N N
. 1319 1 ot
» 147 7
rt
-* 1 1
326 ff Al i
4 : [p41
4 *D$ it :
(| 1 17
ne
* b 181 j
= 07's; $1 .
ee
1
bs b 4 :
4 14
4 0 if 12 :
n
is LY " *
14 1
DG {
<4 $4 33ft if \
ein;
3120 1 x
”"T 1 „
2 1 Mi 9 1
. 1
iN it *. 4
1 4 *
F + 5 4
an
8 « 4
;: }
29
q

263 M E M OI R Ss Boch vi.

drawing up the treaty, and even ſignipg it that moment,
as if every thing was agreed to, only with a poltil
in the margin over againſt the three articles, that
we waited an anſwer from the King. And to con-
vince him that I ſought not to gain time, in order
to betray him afterwards, I offered to remain in
his power as. an hoſtage, till his Majeſty returned an
anſwer. Villars ſtill found difficulties ; but he could

not reſiſt Madam de Simiers, the Abbot de Tiron,

and La-Font, who all ſuppor ted my ar guments. 7
had the treaty drawn up in haſte ; we figned it; and

J ſent a copy of it immediately to the King, with a

long letter, in which I gave him an account of all
that had paſſed. But before the anſwer could be
brought to Rouen, another incident happened,
Which we imagined would have rendered it uſcleſs.
Moſt of the governors of the {mall forts in the

neighbourhood of Rouen, far from returning to

the obedience they owed their King, perſiſted in
their revolt ; becauſe; in the preſent "confuſed ſtat

of affairs, they acquired gains, which they Foreſive
would ceaſe with the war. The moſt artful among
them made themſelves equally neceſſary to the
two parties, and exacted bribes from both, Du—
| Rollet, governor of Pont de PArche, was one of
| thoſe who played this game with the greateſt ſub-
tilty. He had, for more than a year, flattered the
King with hopes that he would fall upon means to
deliver the city of Rouen and its governor into bis
hands, provided he would give the government of

this place to him; of which his Majeſty, at a ven-
ture, gave him a written promiſe, Du-Rollet tall.

ing in an enterpriſe which exceeded his abilities,

took it into his head to fruſtrate my negotiation,

Which he attempted in this manner.

He commanded a captain named Dupr& to mingle

with my train as 1 paſſed through Ponte de Arche,

and to enter Rouen with me. I had been inforia-
ed

0 oo 0

1

— = ga. wy mp

22

A *
LEI) .
4 5 n

1594. O F 1 369
ed, that Du-Rollet was not very well affected; but

1 had no reaſon to ſuſpect this captain of having
any bad deſigns; nor could I hinder him from fol-

lowing me. I was likewiſe abſolutely ignorant of
this Dupre's being the very fame-perfon who had
been employed by Pu-Rollet before to cabal a-

gainſt Villars in Rouen *. He was no ſooner en-

tered, than, renewing his former acquaintance, he
put himſelf at the head of a party of fook-hardy

p<1ions, with whom he laid a plot to ſeize the old
dalace, and ſecure the governor's perſon; perſua-

ding them that he acted thus by my orders. As he
had no other delign than to alarm the governar,
and to inſpire bim with the utmoſt deteſtation of
me, he was not at much trouble to keep the affair
ſecret. In effect, Villars Was neee it imme

diately.

The exceſs of anger this news threw him into,
and the injurious thoughts it inſpired him with a-
gainſt the King, and eſpecially me, may be eaſily

imagined. Convinced that he had now an incon-

teltable proof of my treachery, he would not exa-
mine the matter any further, but ſent D'Inſencourt

to me that moment to deſire I would come to him.
I had dined that day with La-Pile, attorney general

of the chamber of accounts, and had juſt received

letters which put me into very good humour. The
King granted Villars the three articles which had
been left undecided, and engaged bimſelf to pro-
cure the conſent of the parties concerned. Over

againſt theſe articles, I had written upon the mar-
gin of the original treaty, which I had carried with
me, Granted by his Majeſty's order. I promiſed
my (elf great e in thus ſurpriſing Villars, who.

n During the * of Rover: Du-Rollet reking to throw himſelf
into that city, was taken and ſhut up in the old caitle ; where, how-

ever, it is probable, he ſtill continued to carry on inttigues for the

King's intereſt. DT" be 4: P. be.

could

Ph. - *
. ——— 4 — — aa us my 2 = ne For
r ES Z Fe — <3 DF. -
- EZ FFP OS CE OI ER Ka 2 2 <
— LR SSN — Sp — FATE I .
2 RE * ä > — w——_—_— = - . f
___ b ; — — n 2 2

en Book VI
could not expect ſuch a quick diſpatch ; and went
out of La-Pile's houſe with the treaty in one hand,
holding a white ſcarf which I had put into my poe-
ket ia the other, intending to throw it about Vil.
lars's neck, and embracing him, to ſalute him Ad-
miral and Governor of the diſtricts of Rouen and
Caux. The contrariety of reflections that employ-

ed our minds as we advanced to meet one another, |

had, I believe, ſomething in it ſingular.

I did not long keep my ſmiling air ; for Villars
perceiving me at a diſtance, came towards me with
haſty ſtrides, his face ſwelled and inflamed, his
eyes ſparkling, and all his features expreſſive of the
moſt violent anger. He began by ſnatching the
paper out of my hand, without giving me time to
open my mouth; and, with a voice ſo altered by
this inward agitation that it was ſcarcely articulate,
he ſtammered out theſe words, too lingular nc not to
be related in the original.

© Io, Sir, where, in the devil's name, are you
60 going, ſo airy, and ſo full of mirth? By hea-
“ vens, you are not yet where you imagine, and,

before the game is ended, you may not nerhaps 5

be laughing to yourſelf, at leaſt if I treat you as
. you deſerve, You are out in your reckoning,
« you and your King of Navarre alſo; for, by my

“ ſoul, he has got a
% can find no other footman than Villars, take my
. word he ſhall be badly ſerved.” Saying this, he
tore the treaty in a thouſand pieces, and threw
them into the fire at the ſame inſtant. Having given
the reins to his fury, he added an infinite number
of invectives in the ſame tone, as vague, and well
ſupported with oaths, of which his fury was an in-
exhauſtible ſource.

That I ſuffered him to go on thus, without in-
terruption, was at firſt owing to my aſtoniſhinent,
through neceſſity, and afterwards to reflection: 225
| orts

in the baſket, and if be |

1594. 0 F . =.

ſorts of diſpoſitions will not be contradicted.

length he ſtopt of himſelf, and fell to traverſing |

his chamber, which was very long and wide, like a
man out of his ſenſes. Well, Sir,” ſaid I, when

J found he was ſilent, without ſeeming moved by
all I had heard, “ have you done yet talking inju-

% riouſly and at random? You have reaſon to be
« ſatisfied at having thus behaved like a madman,

« without being contradicted in your extravagan-
« cies.” Perceiving that the calm tone in which I
ſpoke to him, obliged him, in ſpite of himſelf, to

liſten to me, I proceeded to tell him, that what he

had juſt done in my preſence, appeared to be no-
thing but an artifice he had conceived to retract the

word he had folemnly given ; but that this fetch

would always diſhonour him, and greatly leſſen my
opinion of his wiſdom and integrity.“ Sdeath,“
cried he, ſtopping ſhort, © it has not yet befallen

* me, it never ſhall befal me. I am too much a

& man of honour ; ſuch breaches of faith are only
ee fit for thoſe who betray their friends, and endea-
& vour to get them aſſaſſinated.” Hitherto he had
{aid nothing ſo poſitive as this laſt word, by which,
though I could not comprehend .it, 1 began to be

able to conjecture from whence ſack a tranſport of

fury proceeded.

I aſked him to explain himſelf, and proteſted to
bim, with that air of ſincerity and confidence which

makes itſelf felt even by the moſt prejudiced, that

I was abſolutely ignorant of his meaning; and that
if I could be convicted of the ſlighteſt inlincerity, *
was ready to deliver myſelf into his hands, with -

out deſiring either pardon or favour. Thus obli-

ging him to be more explicit, he reproached me
Vith having employed Dupre to aſſaſſinate him, and
to ſeize upon the old palace. The violence of his
agitation not . permitting him to ſpeak otherwiſe |
tan in broken and interrupted ſentences, the af-

fair

2 4 —
Y -: - = * * 1 3
2 2 - — —— —— — = _——ra Z — 3. 2 N
2 — - . — er 12 2 — - —
— 8 —— IGG — —_— 8
— S — — r AR = --_. = SEES Lo 3 — . > > — =
- 2 " A >= 2 — — = t — Fo = — >».
— — — — of ES * — = 4 ode eta
* 28 * . — DES 2 — . —ů .
Cs * 2 —— — — 2 8 2 - l =y —
n A K x4 Fr N
—— — — — >» _
*

—— —⅜ ,

* e 3 g rn 2
. - 2

Cnr — VV ⁵˙ . ene For tr nes

he had been ſeduced by Spanilh piſtoles to contrive
ſuch a frivolous pretence for breaking with me.

„ Who 1!” cried he, relapſing again into a rage,
& *Sdeath, muſt I confeſs that I have acted treacher-

ee ouſly with you, and broke my oath? I would

© rather die than be guilty of ſuch baſeneſs.“ © By
„ heaven, Sir,” anſwered I, “ for you teach me
& to {wear, it is only. by your fulfilling or break-
« ing off the treaty, that I ſhall know whether to
& believe you an honeſt or a perjured man.”

The eclairciſſement was till protracted, and be-

came worſe inſtead of better, in proportion as an-

ger got an aſcendant over us. Very ſeaſonably, du-
ring this conteſtation, the Abbot de Tiron came in,

and entering immediately into the occaſion of our

_ quarrel, brought us nearer to one another. De.

« pend upon it, Sir,” ſaid he to Villars, © the Ba-
& ron de Roſny is nat capable of the deſigns that
© have been projected againſt you; he is a man of
& too much honour, and, in ſuch a caſe, too pru-
ei dent, to throw himſelf into your power.”

Theſe words began to open my eyes. I turned

calmly towards Villars, telling kim, that I was con-
vinced anger alone dictated all that he had ſaid;

and that I expected, as ſoon as it was allayed, he |

would do me juſtice againſt himſelf, for all the in-
Jurious things which bad eſcaped him, and that he
would make good his former ſtipulation. Well,
“ Sir,” ſaid he, already half pacified, © I will keep

ec my word : but take care allo not to fail of

% your's, with regard to the three articles yet un-
« determined.“ I anſwered, That if it had not
been for his fury, which ade him throw the treaty

into the fire, he might have ſeen that the King had

conſented to them all three,
We

92 M E M OI R S Bock vl.
fair appeared to me devoid of all probability, and

I I could not hinder myſelf from entertaining ſuſpi-
cions of his ſincerity, nor from telling him, that

with a ſerene countenance, and even ſmiling, “ all
« js over, we are good friends again ; but, by

e heaven, the traitor who made all this miſchief
4 ſhall die before I eat or drink.” He kept his
word; for cauſing Dupre to be brought before him,
aſter he had confeſſed the whole affair, he ordered
him, without the formality of a trial, to be hung

vp at a window.

Villars intreated me afterwards to me bim the
King's letter. I did not ſcruple to tell him, that

his Majeſty's ſecrets ought only to be communica-
ted to his declared ſervants. To make Villars of

this number, nothing more was Ay but to

draw up the treaty again; which we $:,1-d, and of

which each of us kept a duplicate, We 1 on-
ly, that the affair ſnould remain a ſecret for ſome

time, on account of the league and the Spaniards; :

againſt whom this governor took new meaſures, by

reinforcing the troops he had in Rouen. After this,
I no longer made any difficulty in ſhewing him all
my letters, as well thoſe which I had written to
and received from the King before, as that in which
I informed him of the ratification of the treaty, and
his Majeſty's anſwer to it. The courier who care _
ried theſe laſt diſpatches was not more than four

days on his journey.

Theſe letters gave infinite ſatisfaction to ) Villars,
particularly the laſt, written with the King's own
hand. His Majeſty, i in that, thanked me, more like a
friend than a ſovereign, for the ſervice I had juſt
done him, and concluded with theſe words: Come
_ * to me at Senlis on the 2oth of March, or at St

NY Denis on the 21ſt, that you may belp to cry,
4

Lill do the fame at Rouen * (for 1 wrote to

Vol. I. 1 1 him,

1594. 0 FUEL V4
We were upon theſe terms when Madam de Si-

miers was introduced. *© Don't be angry with me,
% Madam,” faid he, as he went to receive her,

Long live the King, in Paris; and afterwards we

+ N \ k
«rf Wh (| 9

176 1 $
£44} Wy $8 |
ans: - ;
e
161 io! ;

Þ 1445 7
alt“

1

— pon — ä 2
3 - — * p . *
1 — — — +
” T W054, "Ry vil - — = Fe -- >
7 4 > i . — 8 by TS a
SE STS . n | E — 232
— * —— *

8
11
0
*
' If
5

;
3
1

1

1

1

}

{

'

1 1

394 MM E M OI R S Book VI.
him, that his preſence there was neceſſary). © Shew
* this letter,” added he, “to the new friend you
& have acquired me, that he may ſee I recommend
ee myſelf to him, that he may know I love him
wy wel. and that I know how to prize and reward
& ſuch brave men as he is.“ © By heaven,” ſaid
Villars, at this place, © this prince is too gracious
& and too obliging to remember me, and ſpeak of
& me in ſuch high terms.” From that moment,
Villars continued firm in his obedience and affec-
tion to the King: nor had his Majeſty, amongſt his
moſt ancient ſervants, one more abſolutely devoted
to his intereſts. He deſired me to be ſatisfied with
| his word for the execution of all the articles com-

prehended in the treaty, and I accepted it as the
beſt ſecurity he could give me. |

The remainder of the time that I Raid in Rouen,
was employed in regulating ſome affairs of the ſame
nature. I ſpent the day with the Admiral, and
ſhut myſelf up at night, to give audience to the
principal officers, as well of the city, and of the

. parliament, 28 of the army, ſcattered throughout :

the province, who came to me privately to concert

meaſures for diſuniting the league. Medavy was

of this number, and I concluded the treaty with
him. Verneuil not being a city of ſuch import-
ance as to make it neceſſary to ule the ſame pre-

_ cautions with it as with Rouen, the King ordered

Medavy to publiſh his treaty, for an e to
other governors.

As I was ſolicitous not to neal meeting his
Majeſty at the place he had appointed me, I made
haſte to leave Rouen, overloaded with the thanks

and civilities of the governor. I parted with the
ſame ſatisfaction from the Abbot de Tiron, and Ma-
dam de Simiers. I promiſed them to return in a

little, and aſſured Madam de Simiers, I would bring
her brother, the Marquis de Vitry, along with me,

with

| 1594+ 0 1 8 * L L 12 | 375

with a body of troops ſufficient to put Villars into
a condition to explain himſelf without fear. The
obligations I owed to them were great enough to
demand this ſervice of me, although his Majeſty” 8
intereſt had not been an additional motive to it.
It was upon ſome correſpondences the King car-
ried on in Paris, that he founded his hopes of being
ſoon admitted there; and he was on his way thi-
ther from St Denis when J joined him. His party
in that city was fo well formed, and ſo many per-
ſons of equal courage and fidelity had joined, that
it was in a manner impoſlible that it ſhould not ſue-
ceed. Ever ſince the battle of Arques, where, as
bas been ſeen, the Count de Belin was taken pri—
ſoner, he had been convinced, from his own expe»
rience, of the great qualities of the King, and the
weakneſs of his enemies; and the Duke of Matenne.
had perceived, that the inclinations of this governor
leaned ſecretly towards the King. Upon this ſuſ-
picion, he did not heſitate about depriving him *
of the government of a city fo conſiderable to the
party as was that of Paris, and ſeeking for a man
of known fidelity to himſelf and to the league, who
could be intruſted with the care of this great city,
at a time when the neceſſity of his affairs obliged
him to repair to the frontiers of Picardy; accor-
dingly, he had fixed upon Briſſac, whom he gratt-
fied with this government.
Hie anſwered his expectations perfectly! in the be-
ginning. The ſtudy of the Roman hiſtory had in-
| tired this officer (who valued himſelf greatly upon
his penetration and judgment) with a very fingular
project, which was, to erect France into a republic,
and to render Paris the capital. of this new ſtate,

* The parliament upon this ſa made a A biohly ha
nourable for the Count of Belin. The citizens are there exhorted
rather to partake than ſuffer his baniſkment- from the city. Me-

mir s 1. for ihe * of France, vol. 2, Memoirs of the league, vol. 6.

"1-3 - pon

376 M E MOI R 8 Book VI.

upon the model of ancient Rome. Had Briſſac

deſcended ever ſo little from this high ſpeculation

to particular circumſtances, which, in the greateſt

_ deſigns, it is neceſſary to have a regard to, he had
ſeen that there are conjunctures when the happieſt
projects become equally chimerical and impoſſible,
by the nature of obſtacles, by the difference of

geniuſes, and of the characters of nations, by the

ſpirit of the laws which they have adopted, and

by inveterate cuſtom, which, as it were, ſtamps
the laſt ſeal upon all. Time only, and long expe -

rience, can remedy the defects in the cuſtoms of a
ſtate whole form is already decided; and this
ought always to be attempted upon the plan of its

original conſtitution *. This is ſo true, that when-

ever we ice a ſtate conducted by meaſures contrary
to thoſe of its eſtabliſhment, we may be aſſured a
great revolution is at hand. Moreover, the appli-

cation of the molt effectual remedies does not ope -

rate unon the diſeaſed who refuſe to receive them.
Briſſac went not ſo far: he could not for a long

time comprehend, from whence the general oppo-

ſition his deſigns met with proceeded ; for he had

opened bimſelf freely to the nobles and all the chief
partizans of the league: at laſt he began to be ap-

prehenſive for his own ſafety, left while, without
a ſecond, he was labouring to bring his project to
perfection, the King ſhould fruſtrate it by ſeizing
his capital, This fear made him very readily fall

from ideas purely Roman to the French ſpirit of

thoſe times, which was, to be ſolicitous only for

his own advantage. When a predominant prin-

3 The ſenſe in which the Duke of Sully underſtands this maxim, |

and the true one in which it oughit to be taken, is, that the ancient

forms and fundamental principles of government are to be varied

from as little as poſſible, He does not mean, that we are to admit
the abuſes which ignorance or neceſſity have introduced in the dif-
ferent inſtitutions relating to the finances, politics, &c. He wii!
treat this ſubject more largely in the ſequel of theſe Memoirs.

ciple

N G MO FF

»

k S te wt. A bw Pat ” nah hh own «a+.

a ved oo a.

buns >

0 #vVELY 377
ciple of intereſt is yet farther fortified by the ap-

prehenſion of any danger, there is ſcarce a man
who may not be induced to betray even his beſt

friend. Thus Briſſac * acted: he reſumed the de-
ſign of the Count de Belin, but from a motive far

leſs noble; and thought of nothing but of making
the King purchaſe, at the higheſt price, the treachery

he meditated againſt the Duke of Matenne in his
abſence. St Luc, his brother-in-law, was employ-

ed to negotiate with the King; and having procured

very advantageous conditions, Briſſac agreed to ad-

mit Henry with his army into Paris, in ſpite of the

Spaniards. The troops of the league were abſo-

lutely at his diſpoſal, and there was no longer oc-
caſi on for violent meaſures with the people.

D'O + was forward enough in his applications

for the government of Paris, and of the iſle of

France, and obtained bis requeſt. There was here
2 conflict of intereſt which perplexed this ſuperin-

tendant to ſuch a degree, that, notwithſtanding his
new dignity, the reduction of Paris was one of the

things in the world he moſt feared to ſee happen.

According as he gave it out, this fear had no other
motive, but that of ſeeing the finances become a
prey to the men of the ſword and the gown, by
whom, he faid, the King, as ſoon as he was poſ-

ſeſſed of paris, would be oppreſſed, for the pay-

ment of penſions, appointments, and gratifications.

But this diſcourſe deceived only thoſe who were ig-

norant of the advantage he found in keeping
things 1 in their firſt confuſion, and wao Knew not

* The Duke of Matenne, as De Thou Gade was informed |

of Bri ſlac's treachery by the Ducheſs of Guile, his mother; but he

would not believe her. Conſult upon this reduction of the city of

Paris, Matthieu, vol. 2. b. 1. * 174. ; Caron, Noven. b. 6. p. 3345
and other hiſtorians.
Our Memoirs make no mention of M. D'O's being deprived by

the league of this government, which Henry III. had beltowes upon.

; hum. Perefixe, part 2,

113 with

e
— 111K i 0

378 M E. M 9 R 8 Book VI.

with what ſucceſs he had hitherto laboured for that
purpoſe.

The King put all the friends of the Count of
Belin in motion, on whom he had no leſs depend-
ence than upon Briſſac ; and at five o' clock in the
morning * preſented bimſelf, at the head of 8000
men, before Porte Neuve, where the Mayor of Pa-

ris +, and the other magiſtrates, received him in

form. He went immediately and took poſſeſſion of
the Louvre, the pa ace, the Great and Little Chatc-
let; and finding no where any oppoſition, he pro-
ceeded even to Notre Dame, which he entered to
return thanks to God. His ſoldiers, on their fide,
fulfilled with ſuch exactneſs the orders and inten-
tions of their maſter t, that no one, throughout all

this great city, complained of the ſlighteſt violence
upon their part. They took poſſeſſion of all the
ſquares and croſs-ways in the ſtreets, where they
drew up in order of battle. There was not the
leaſt commotion; and from that very day, the

. March 22.

1 This mayor of Par was John L'Fvillier, hs u hen Briſſac
ſaid to him, © We mult render to Cæſar the things that are Cæſat's,
he replied, © We muſt render them indeed, but not ſell them to
« him.” F. L'Etoile's journal aſeribes this bon mot to Henry IV.

L'Hoillier was rewarded with the poſt of Preſident of the chamber of

accounts, and Counſellor of ſtate; and Martin L' Anglo's, an alder-
man, was made mayor of Paris in his room. Le Grain, 5. 6. It is
obſerved, in the volume of MSS marked 9033. in the King? s library,
that Henty IV. entering Paris by the new gate, which has been fince

called the gate of the conference, he went out again, and returned

ſeveral times, fearing, notwithſtanding the repeated aſſurances of the
mayor and aldermen, that, by permitting his troops to enter. Paris,
their Celign wes to cut them i in pieces, and ſeize his perſon. .

+ The King perceiving a ſoldier take a loaf from a baker by force,
ran to him, and would have killed him. L'Etoile's journal, Perefixe
favs, that La-Noue being arreſted for debts which his father con-
tracted in this prince's ſervice, complained to him of that inſolence,
The King, in public, ſaid to him, © La-Nouè, you muſt pay your
« debts, I pay mine falthFuily ;” but afterwards taking him aſide,
he gave him hs jewels to pawn to the creditors, inſtead of the bag-

: gage they had ſeized of his. Pure. park 2,

ol ſhops

1 80 * r 2
ſhops v were opened with all the ſecurity which a
long continued peace could have given. |
The Spaniards had now only the Baſtile, the
Temple, and the quarters of St Anthony and St
Martin in their poſſeſſion; and there they fortified
themlelves, being about 4000 in number, with the
Duke de Feria, and Don Diego d' Evora at their
head; all greatly aſtoniſhed at ſuch unexpected
news &; and firmly reſolved to defend themſelves to
the laſt extremity, if any attempts were made to
force them from thoſe advantageous poſts. The
| King relieved them from their | perplexity, by ſend-
ing to tell them, that they might leave Paris, and re-
treat in perfect aſſurance. He treated 150 Cardi-
nals of Placentia and Pellevè with the ſame gentle-
neſs, notwithſtanding the reſentment he ſtill retains
ed for their conduct with regard to him. Soiſſons
was the place whither theſe enemies of the King +
retired, under favour of a ſtrong eſcort. His Ma-
jeſty chen publiſhed a general pardon g for all the
french who had borne arms againſt him. When
this facrifice is not extorted by neceſlity, but, on
the contrary, made at a time when vengeance has
fal liberty to latiate iclelf, it is not one of che leaſt

Motif
ar S

—— HH
£ — 2 - *
— — — — + "—_
en N — PTE : l . *
K 2 = IF OE! . - OBLES <
A — > _ x - TED .
—— ns. ee 3 2 Tn Es 25 : r — .
— — · . —*Wwö̃ — ¹˙ — eos

us

_— 32 *
ͤ— ig won marley ä —

2

my le = — — - *
—— Sp 2 — — 1 — — 2 E * - : „ * 2 —
— — ” - 8 - 2 2 7. — — — Tengen Ve” — by > * ——
LD rr E 4 — : — * 5 7 — — — - — *
— — —— — == TIRES Lo . — — — — — * * 2
— g — Sa ents — * STIITIS —
3 . r 8
— 1 - — * 2 BY — *
2 — rn — * 7 3
8 n N :
* —— — 3 * —
3 — 3 — » — .
— 3 Eh

„LeoEtoile obſerves, that this news being ETD to the Spaniards
_ while Langlois was amuſing them with relating circumſtances out of
the Roman hiſtory, the Duke of Feria cried out two or three times,
« Ah, great King, great King!” DL Etoile's journal.
+ The King had a mind to ſee them march out, and looked at
them from a window over St Denis's gate. I hey all ſaluted him
wich their hats off, bowing profoundly low. The King, with great
courteſy, returned the ſalute to the principal officers, | adding theſe
- words, © Remember me to your maſter; go in a good hour, but re-
turn no more.” Peref. part 2. This anecdote agrees with that in
the Memoirs for the hiſtory of e but is contradicted by the
Journal written by the ſame author, E
t All the Memoirs of thoſ- times are filled with inſtances of |
Henry's clemency, and his lively and agrceable repartees. See the
Memoirs above cited. A leaguer coming to him one day when he
was playing at Primero, © You are welcome,” faid the King to him;

. 5105 if we wid, you will be dune Le ern boot 10.
marks

8 =
— — P ” — 3 R age aegange "roppan
— a 1 — — 22 — £ — 2 — 2 MG is tlc — - 22 — — — e *
* - a> A ot "Ee 5 — AG oi ren 6 A ho I — ECRTIRTS "IS 5 "> 4 So 7 —— — ho
. EAT 8 8 = — 7 — 8 9 — — — Ee Tenge = — — — — : 3 -
1 JEEP IE — Os _ 4 oy : 2. — - - n Il << —— — — — * 8 L — e __ 4: F
butt de EO . = 5 — 2 — 5 = 4 2 — —— — rr EIS 2 we; 2; WHEL,
— * I SF —— — — — - w * 2 — — — 2 2 2 Fi -. 22 — * P 25 3 — — ** 4 — — pe — pM;
” — — — LEI IT 1 A 707 an. —_— 4 A — — — —— — 4 a 8 0 — —
IE LSE, r — — © * r — — — . — — . — 3 — —
— CE tits — 5 — . ” 2 - - * pe - ep *
— ” * — — — : s- . —
— < ** — — . 2 a a A 4 — fi = _ =
— . — a Na bas. * — wg AS — — — ICT rene * — q
. — — — ” —ů—ͤ— = — — = ihe _
s 5 m—_—_— 2
—— — — — —
A — 2 — = N

— —
—— _— 2
— IVES
— —
ES DIED — —
— | dg

—

= Dr
— —
Re —
— — — =
DEED ——
LETT
r
o S oe e
—— T 2%
—— NS

EL A
-
| — —
— ——
- « -
— pets — *
— — A, eV —
as 4 — — — ba
© ay —

Jo M E MO IR S Bock vI.

marks of a truly royal heart. Madam de Mont-

penſier being introduced to the King, he received
her as politely, and converſed as familiarly with
her, as if he had ſome very important reaſon for

ſparing her the confuſion with which any other
perſon in his ſituation would have taken pleaſure to

Cover ern %%% rio pu ane
The King had not yet found an opportunity to
converſe with me upon the negotiations of Roven ;
therefore that evening, when the croud was over,
he took me aſide to a window in the Louvre, and
made me give him a circumſtantial relation of all

that had paſſed, even to the minuteſt incidents; to
which he liſtened with a good deal of attention.

He accuſed himſelf of being the cauſe of Du-Rol-
let's unſeaſonable interference, by not acquainting
me with the propoſals he had made him, which
would have put me vpon my guard againſt all that
could have happened from that quarter.

The King had not yet mentioned to the Duke of
Montpenſier, or the Baron de Biron, the conditions
Which, at their expence, he had granted to Admi-
ral Villars : and this was now all that perplexed
him; for he conducted himſelf by quite different
maxims from thoſe princes, who, in ſuch caſes, in-
ſtead of prudent demeanor and condeſcenſion, be-

® Perctixe obſerves, that he played at cards with her that very
evening. L'Etoile adds, that he returned both her's and Madam de
Nemours's viſit; and relates a ſingular conver ſation that paſſed be-
tween this prince and her; at the end of which, Madam de Mont-
penſier, whoſe hatred for Henry was publicly knou n, tzking notice

of his entcring Paris, ſhe wiſhed that it had been ber brother the

Duke of Maicnne who had let down the bridge for his Majeſty,
„% Adzokers,” replicd the King, © he might poſſibly have made we

% wait a long time, and I ſhould not have entered ſo early.“ This |
lady (purſued he) hearing the populace cry, Long live the Rig, ſaid,

laughing, that Briſſac had done more than his wife, who, in fifteen
years, had made but one cuckow ſing ; whereas he, in eight days, had
made more than twenty thouſand parrots fing in Paris. L*Etcile,
ann. 159 4s | „ | |

gin

—

1594. 8 * VVT
gin by (lencing all complaint, and owe the obe-
dience which they reccive to the tone of authority.
He agreed with me that I ſhould make him, in the
reſence of thoſe two noblemen, the ſame detail I
had juit now done, as if it were for the firſt time;
and mould give them to underſtand, that the con-
eluſion of the treaty with Villars depended upon
their ſacrifieing to bim their rights. The thing be ⸗
ing executed in this manner, the Kiog, turning to-
wards them, ſaid, with ſome emotion, that he would
rather loſe Vilars and Rouen both, than gain them
by doing any injuſtice to two perſons whom he
eſteemed. Montpenſier and Biron were fo affected
with this manner of treating them, that they decla-
red they would, with all their hearts, deſiſt from
their pretenſions. Henry thanked them; and, as
an equivalent, gave the firſt the governments of
Perche and Maine, to be joinedto that of Normandy,
as ſoon as it ſhould be entirely reduced; but Vil-
lars's generoſity changed this diſpoſition. As for
Biron, a marechal's baton, with 420, ooo livres in
money, indemnified him for the loſs which he

ſuſtained.

The reduction of Parls threw the King into 8
perplexities, which obliged him to delay (till longer
his journey to Rouen. He was employed in recei-
ving the homage of the different courts *, of the
univerſity, and of the other corporations of the
city of Paris; whoſe ſubmiſſion he thought he could
not better reward, than by applying his cares to the
_ reſtoring them to that harmony ant good order
which the civil wars had interrupted. He had
likewiſe anſwers to give to feveral goveraors of
towns and n particularly of the lile of

* The 3 of Paris was recalled from Tours, where it had |
been removed by letters. patent from the King, dated Marci 28.
NS: |

| France,

332 MEMOIR Ss Bock vI.

France, who, after the example of the capital,

came to make their obeiſance. |
Villeroy was not amongſt the firſt; it was neceſ-
ſity alone, that either fixed his irreſolution, or

forced his inclinations. Some places of little im-

portance ſtill held out for him and his fon, with
which, by means of Du-pleſſis his friend, and San-
cy, Whole daughter was juſt married to his fon, he
made very advantageous conditions for himſelf : af-
ter obtaining, by repeated importunities, two tru-

ces, the one of two months ſpace, the other for

three months; which he procured to be ratified by

the Duke of Malenne; after having a long time af- _

fected a neutrality, and put a thouſand ſprings in
motion to protract, till the laſt extremity, his ſe-
paration from his old friends, he at laſt concluded

a treaty * almoſt after all the reſt, and obtained

the

This circumſtance in our Memoirs is poſitively contradicted by
De Thou, who ſays, book 108. that Villeroy's treaty with the
King was concluded long before, but that his Majeſty would not ſut-

fer it to be made public, becauſe he was deſirous that Villeroy ſhoutd
mske uſe of his influence ov: r the Duke of Matenne, to prevail upon

him to join his party. Matthieu, in the places already quuted, is

of the ſame opinion; and Cay t, who likewiſe ſupports it el{ewhere,
does not contradict it by Villeroy's letter to the Duke ef Nlaienne,

dated Jan. 2 in the ſame year; although, in relating the purport of

this letter, he caſts a kind of repioach upon this miniſter. In this

letter, which was intercepted by the royaliſts, Villeroy, whoſe deſign
was to inform the Duke of Matenne beforehand of his treaty with
Henry, which was going to be publiſhed, and to endeavour once
mote to prevail upon him to follow his example, adviſes Malenne to
conſider in earneſt of a peace for the party in general, and himſelf in
particular, . Becaufe“ ſays he,” their cauſe is deſperate;“ and
adds, „Wie have loſt all confidence in each other,” &c. Coyit,
dook 6. p. 292 1-5 23

With the key that De Thou and other hiſtorians have given us to

Villeroy's ſecret tranſactions with the chiefs of the league, and to the

part he played by the King's order, the meaning of thoſe words which

they would impute to him as a crime, is eaſily comprehended, and

it is even plain, that in ſpeaking to the Duke of Maicnne, he could

not have expteſſed himſelf otherwiſe. Indeed, if on this occaſion

Villeroy could be charged with any fault, it was in not .
| ft

1594 · „„ U „„ 383
the poſt of ſecretary to the King, i in recompenle tor
that he had given up.

The day after the King's entry into Paris, be
thought proper to make me ſet out for Rouen, ſince
he could not go thither himſelf. I arrived at that
city on the 25th of March, bringing with me Vitry,
at the head of 300 men. La. Font received me at
the gate of the city, and conducted me, with all
my train, to the houſe that was prepared for me,
which belonged to the Sieur de Martinbault, the
fineſt in the whole town, and, by Villars's orders,
furniſhed ſumptuouſly. Simon Antoine and La-
Chapelle did not approve of ſuch a remarkable dif.
tinction. They knew nothing hitherto of the trea-
ty, but had taken ſo rauch umbrage at my firſt
journey, that they made uſe of all their credit to

prevail upon the Admiral to forbid my entrance in-

to the city.

La- Font, who acquainted me with all their! in-
trigues, appriſed me alſo, that they were that very

night appointed to ſup with the governor ; as were
likewiſe the Abbe Tiron, the preſident Boquemare, |
, and ee, two counſellors of the

little more generoſity * he pad ſo good an opportuni ty for „
for, beſides thoſe rewards mentioned in our Memoirs, he procured
the government of Lyons for Charles de Neufville, Marquis of Alin-

court, his fon. But what French noblemen in thoſe times, or even
what man however little diſtteſſed in his circumſtances, could boaſt
of being exempted from this repro2ch? Father de L'Etoile does not
conceal the covetous and ſelfiſh diſpoſition of Villeroy. Henry IV.”
| ſays he in his Journal, “ going one day, with twelve or fifteen of his

* courtiers, to partake of a flight co! lation with * leroy, ſaid to them,

* when they were ſeatcd at table, My friends, we arc at an ordinary,

let us fare well for our money, for we have an ho!t that will make
« us pay dear for our entertainment.” I do not think it will be
neceſſary for the futore to obviate all thoſe invectives which the
Duke of Sully, in the ſcquel of theſe memoirs, throws upon a man
who has been highly ſerviceable to this > kingdom, till his death in
1617, having p»fleflcd the poſts of miniſter and ſecretary of ſtate un-

der four ſucceſſive kings, Charles IX, Henry III. Henry IV. and
Lewis XIII. 8 | |

parliament, i

384 NM E M OI R S Book I.

parliament, and ſome others. I was reſolved to

take this opportunity to declare myſelf; and La-
Font having aſſured me, that the Admiral would

not be diſpleaſed with any thing I did, I was will.

ing to enjoy the confuſion of the two deputies of

Spain and of the league, by telling them what bad 1

juſt happened at Paris.

I went immediately to St Ouen, 1 Villars

was with his company. He entertained the de-
puties at one end of the gallery when I entered. I
did not ſeruple to interrupt their converſation, by
running to embrace him; and told him I was jult
come to invite myſelf to ſup with him, and to tell
him my news. Villars, after returning my embrace,
pointing to the two deputies, as if he acted in con-
_ cert with me in this affair, told me coolly, that ha.
ving ſo many people to ſup with him that night, he

was afraid I ſhould not find the party well aſſort-
ed. I replied, that I could accommodate myſelf to

all companies, and I was perſuaded (the animoſity
of party aſide) thoſe two gentlemen would receive

the news I bad to tell them with pleaſure, The

_ governor glancing a look at Simon Antoine, that
deputy taking the thing like a man of gallantry,
ſaid, he would be charmed to know in what man-
ner the King had treated the Spaniards and the two
cardinals. This he accompanied with encomiums

on this prince, and complements to me, with all

| imaginable politeneſs and good taſte.“ For ovght !

“ can fee, you will oblige me to treat you all,” ſaid
Villars, adding a compliment of excuſe for his bad

ES cheer.

The reſt of the company approaching, the Pre- :

ſident Boquemare preſſed me to declare my news;
but 1 would fay nothing till we were ſeated. Sup-

per was called.“ I am,” faid the Admiral, pla-

cing himſelf firſt at the middle of the table, $4
« very bad maſter of ceremonies.” I did not mean

{0

1594. 0 F E . ——

to uſe any with Don Simon, who having ambi-
tion, and being beſides of a rank to ſupport it,
might have, upon a bare compliment, feated him-
ſelf in the fit {t place, a thing perhaps of fome con-
ſequence, on an occalion, when | repreſented the
King's perſon. I ſeated myſelf, therefore, without
any ceremony, at the head of the table, telling the
Spaniſh deputy, that if our own perfons only were
concerned, I would willingly pay him what I
thought due to a ſtranger of merit: which he re -
ceived with a very good grace. La Chapelle
ſerved to him, that 1 did at the table what my 132+
ſter had juſt done at Paris, and that there was .
thing in it but what was orderly. © I fee.” ſaid tin
Spaniard, * and Iain afraid this precedence i is b.
& a bad augury for us; however, it ſhall not hin
e der us from being merry, and drinking to the
% health of our maſters, who te not enemies,
&« ſince there is no war declared between them.”
This anſwer was full of witdom and policy; and,
during the whole repaſt, the Spaniard ſupported his
part of the converſation like a man of ſpirit, and
appeared ſenſible of the King's good qu allt! CS, a-
bove all, of the marks of clemency which he had
given to all his enemies, whether foreigners or
French. I took notice that iron oniy, and a
prieſt named Dadre, were lileat during this detail.
Thus the feaſt paſſed over wich a good deal of
Joy, real or apparent, in all the guells. After it
was over, Villars, as he attended me out, intreated
me not to viſit him all the next day, Which he
would employ in getting rid, one way or other, of
his deputies. He knew not yet. how theſe two men
intended to take their leave of him, but told me,
that if I wanted to be inforined of it, I need only
ſpend the afternoon with Madau de I \micrs. Here
1 learned, that Villars had bcen cloſeted three
whole hours with the two agents; that they had
Vo“. I. SE 1 made

"2386  -M E. M O-I Rs Bock VI.
made uſe of reproaches, and harſh language. But
this governor was not a man to be eaſily intimida-
ted or altered : he told them plainly, that he had

concluded a treaty with the King, and that they
had nothing for it, but to retire without delay, ei-

ther to Soiſſons, or to the Duke of Matenne, whi-
ther he would grant them a ſafe conduct, the only

_ Favour he could grant them. There was a neceſſi-

ty for coming to this extremity : and Villars took ||

care to guard againſt the effect of their reſentment,
by giving orders for the newly-arrived troops to
enter Rouen; with which he took poſſeſſion of the
palace, the fort, and the caſtle. This done, he
ſent La-Font to me, to tell me, that the next day,
at my firſt requeſt, he would declare himſelf for
the King, in the preſence of all the inhabitants of
the city, whom he cauſed to be aſſembled for that
_ purpoſe, with all the form and ceremony that
might make this action more ſolemn,
I never experienced a more perfect fat isfation
than what aroſe from the reflection of having done
the King and kingdom fo conſiderable a ſervice;
nor enjoyed a more tranquil leep than that which

the ſucceeding night afforded me. The next morn -

ing early 1 haltened to Villars, at St Ouen, whom!
found walking in the great ſquare, whither he had
come an hour beiore, and which, as well as all the
principal ſtreets, was filled with ſuch a prodigious
concourſe of people, drawn thither by the report of
the deputies departure, and the new ceremony, that
Perdriel, D'Iſencourt, La-Font, and the ſoldiers
whom the governor, out of reſpect, had ſent to at-
tend me, could with difficulty open me a paſlage :
the joy was general, and eaſily remarkable in all
their faces,

I accoſted the Admiral, with whom I found the
Baron de Medavy and the Preſident Boquemare :

and, after the ordinary lalutation, I told him, ag
the

„ «„ <
OE VESTS *

|

I

1594. 0 F 8 Li: La Bo 7 387
the King being now a good Catholic, it was time
he ſhould give him ſome teſtimonies of his zeal.
Villars replied, that in his heart he was already
_ faithfully devoted to bis Majeſty's ſervice ; and that
if, to make an open profeſſion of it, nothing more
was neceſſary than to put on the white ſcarf, he
was ready to receive it at my hand. I took one
out of my pocket; and Villars had no ſooner put
it on, than, without further thought of what he
was to ſay, „Come on,” cried he, with a tranſ-
port perfectly in his character, the league is, that
every one cry Vive le Roi, The profound ſilence
that had been held during our conference, was in-
terrupted at this word by an univerſal acclamation
of Vive le Roi. At the fame inſtant, the ringing
of the great bell, with all the others in the city;
the diſcharge of all the artillery from the fort and |
other places; added to this general ſhout a noiſe.
capable of inſpicing terror, if the joy which dilated
every heart had permitted them to perceive, that
there was not a houſe in the city that was unſnaken.
« The ſound of theſe bells,” ſaid I to the governor,
« ſuggeſts to us to go and give thanks to God in
& the church of Notre-Dame.” Accordingly, Te-
Deum was ſung there with great ſolemnity, and fol-
lowed by the celebration of the maſs, at the be-
ginning of which I retired, As ſoon as it was o-
ver, Villars took me up in his coach, and carried

me to a magnificent entertainment, to which the
ſovereign courts, all the officers of the army, and
magiſtrates of the city, were invited. Orders were
ſent to Verneuil, Pontau-de-mer, and Havre, where the
Chevalier d'Oiſe commanded, and to all thoſe places
that acknowledged the Admirals authority, to fol ·
low the example of the capital.
It was my firſt care, as ſoon as I was at leiſure, to
inform the King of what had juſt happened, and to
intreat him to ſend ſome of his counſellors to re-
n e _cllabilth

3338 MEMOIRS Bock vl.
eſtabliſn the parliament. The next day, the city

came in a body to thank me for the trovble I had
taken, and brought me their preſent, which con-
liſted of a ſile-board of plate, gilt and finely

wrought, of upwards of 3000 crowns value; which
I was obliged to accept, notwithſtanding all my

Inſtances to the contrary. It was not long before
my courier returned with diſpatches from his Ma-
jeſty: he brought a letter for Admiral Villars, in
which the King ſtyled him his Cœrſin, Admiral,

Cor erner in chief of Rouen, Havre, &c. and invi-

ted him to come to court, in terms which promiſed
him the moſt gracious reception: that which was

for ine, contained an order to return as ſoon as

poſſible.

The Admiral, who would not appear there till
he had an equipage ſvitable- to his rank and dignity,

took time to prepare himſelf, As for me, I ct
out forthwith, and lay the firſt night at Louviers,
where J had with Bois- role, whom I did not know,
the little ſcene I am going to repreſent.

This gentleman having learned, by public report,

that the King had given Villars the fort of Feſcamp,
and keard no mention of an indemnification to him-

ſelf, reſolved to complain to the Kipg; and having

occaſion for the protection and countenance of

fome governor who was known to his Majeſty, came

to Louviers a few moments after my arrival, to
get a letter of recommendation from Du- Rollet.

He alighted at the ſame inn which I had choſen,
and was told that a gentleman was juſt come, who,
by his train, and the diſcourſe of his domeſtics, ap-

| peared to be very well at court: my name they did

not mention; and Bois roſè believing me to. be
Fill at Rouen, was at no pains to learn it, He did

not heſitate a moment in preferring the protection

of this Lord to that of Du-Rollet. He inſtantly

came up to my chamber 3 ; and, after making 3
elf

— WR]

ew — 2 = 0

J

wy 4 i. ©OOLA. . can. ww - > | «A

5 - a

ſelf known, told me, that he had great reaſon to

complain of a nobleman of the court, called the

Baren de Rifny, who, abuſing his maſter's favour,
had ſacrificed him, as well as the Duke de Mont-

penſier, and Marechal Biron, to Admiral Villars his |

old friend. He afterwards explained his demands,
but in a manner fo lively and paſſionate, and with
ſo many oaths and menaces againſt this Baron de

| Roſny, that nothing could be more pleaſant than

the character I ſupported upon this occaſion.
When he had vented all his fire, I told him, that
] was well enough acquainted with the affair he
mentioned to me, to aſſure him, that the Baron de
Roſay durſt not have done any thing in it but by

the King's expreſs command ; and that his Majeſty
actually purpoſed to give him a recompenſe where-

with he would have reaſon to be contented. I did
not think it neceſſary to carry my civility ſo far, as

to promiſe him to ſerve his reſentment againſt that -
Baron of whom he complained ſo bitterly ; on the

_ contrary, I teld him, that if he knew the Baron de
| Roſny, he would confeſs, that a man who, for the
good of the ſtate, voluntarily reſigned his abbey of
St Taurin, could only be influenced by neceſſity

to do what he attributed to ill-will. I took leave of
him, ſaying, that I ſhould be glad to fee him when
LIarrived at court, where I promiſed to ſpeak to the
King concerning him, and to obtain the equivalent
he demanded. Bois-roſe went away as much plea-
fed with me as diſſatisfied with the Baron de Roſny ;
but having inquired my name of one of my pages,
whom he met at the bottom of the ſtair-caſe, he

was thunder-ſtruck to hear the name of a man

whom he had talked of in ſuch harſh terms to him
ſelf: ſo that being apprehenſive of the reſentment

he ſuppoſed I entertained againſt him, he mounted
his horſe in an inſtant, went to another inn, and
let out with all poſſible expedition for Paris, that

K k 1 .

by. gens

—

*
5 «$148 *
ae
0 '
3:31 WW
| þ 101 4
„
4 13* :

0 a1 >.

1

8
4

' 154

1

[4.41 :

is, :

1%!

N.
,

l 4 |
one's
2
11
oy

: 2 7
£78

F.

N i of

[2 1 NP

1

e

*

A

e

£14 ;

77 >

n

811
Tet 2

\'> 47:88 3

1

4? 4
= P
©. M$

+: 1 BY

* 17
:,1 WH

MH

4

+ ax 1
RS...

1. FM

374

11 1 75
YI 11

i2 7

_

Jan **

132

8 2

b 1
/
4

1831-83

7 Ne
166.6

an

RN

e

1. 1

n

5 i} 14

eile

10 14

71 1611

iv —

: 14

1

1

4

: 1 \

:

390 M E M O IR Ss Bock vl.

he might get thither before me, to find protection

againſt the bad offices 1 was about to render him.

The adsenture did not end here. While Bois-
role te precautions againſt me as againſt an irre-
concilcable enemy, 1, with more tranquillity, pur—
ſued my route by Mante, from whence I brought

my wile tc Paris. The firſt thing 1 did after my
and give him an

arrival, was to wait on the King,
account of my journey, who, according to cuſtom,
would have me omit nothing. After having ex-

hauſted every thing that was ſerious, 1] was willing

to divert him with the ſcene at Louviers; for Bois-

roſè had taken no notice of that, and had only
conjured his Majeſty not to be prejudiced by what
I might fay againſt him, becauſe of an inveterate

hatred that I bore him. The King laughed hear-

tily at the adventure of Bois-rofe. I ſent for him;
and he finding I was the perſon to whom he was re-

ferred, believed his affairs deſperate : I enjoyed bis ;

unealineſs and perplexity for ſome time, and after-
wards drew him out of it in a manner that ſurpriſed
bim greatly, I ſolicited warmly in his favour, and
obtained for him a penſion of 12,000 livres a year,
a company with an appointment, and 2000 Crowns

in filver. He had not hoped for fo much, but,
his bluſtering apart, I looked upon bim as an officer
of great courage and reſolution ; and J afterwards
bound him more cloſely to me, and thought him

worthy of the poſt of lieutenant general of the ord-
nance in Normandy, when the King had made me

-- orand maſter. of it. ©; „
I concealed nothing from the King of all that
bad happened to me at Rouen, except the preſent

of the fide board of gilt plate. He was aſtonithed
one morning to ſee it brought into his chamber.
I told him, that, having in vain endeavoured to

hinder the city of Rouen from making me this pre-
_ lent, I came to bring it to his Majeſty, as a ing
ES hic

) wr
which belonged to him, ſince I had ound myſelf 5

by a ſolemn vow, never to receive any thing from
his ſubjects under this name, while I remained 1 in
his ſervice. .
And here it ſeems not improper to declare my
reaſons for this conduct, which J am perſuaded will
not be thought the beſt- concerted ſtratagem to
gain greater riches : for although the rewards I re.
ceived from the King were very conſiderable, and
even ſurpaſſed my expectations, it will be rea-
dily allowed that a man, who, for fo long a time,
had almoſt the fole management of the finances and
the army, was able to enrich himſelf by a much
ſhorter method. It is not neceſſary that I ſhould
name it; the paſt age has afforded but too many
examples of it; and, notwithſtanding all my en-
deavours to introduce a contrary cuſtom, the me
I doubt, will ſupply many more.
Intereſt, therefore, being out of the queſtion, my
reſolution to avoid receiving any obligations may
be placed to the ſcore of vanity, Againſt this im-
putation I can offer only a ſimple aſſurance, but a
very ſincere one; that J acted thus from no other
motive, than the deſire of teaching thoſe who. might
ſucceed me in the conduct of affairs, that, in this
reſpect, therE1s no difference between them and
ſuch as are ſect over the diſtribution of juſtice: for
if a judge who opens his hand to pieſents, even
without any intention of being influenced by them,
is looked upon with abhorrence; a miniſter, and
any man inveſted with a public employment, ren-
ders himſelf equally guilly, who receives gifts with
complacency, which, in the minds of thoſe who
give them, are in the very inſtant, or in the iſſue,
to be at the expence of the King, or at leaſt of his
lubjects. If we cannot depend on the rectitude of
intention of thoſe who make us theſe preſents, (it
is to my lucceſſors that I addreſs myſelf here),
much

392 M E M O I R S Bock VI.
much leſs can we on our own who receive them:
and let us accuſtom ourſelves to regard as two
things which can never be reconciled, our maſter's
profit and our own ; unleſs, as I have obſerved be-
fore, it ſhould be himſelf who beſtows gifts on us;
and his liberality will always go far enough to leave

us no cauſe to complain, after we convince him

that nothing comes to us from any other ſource.

But the misfortune is, being accuſtomed to calcu- |
late, and to fee immenſe ſums paſs through our

hands, we are led inſenſibly to conſider as a ſmall

matter thoſe that are ſufficient for the happineſs and

for the fortune of one individual.
The King did not diſſemble that he was not ac-
cuſtomed to ſuch diſcourſe; and owned, that if this
ſyſtem, ſimple as it was, could be once eſtabliſhed
in the finances, it would be the means of enriching
both the King and the ſtate; which, before and
ſince, have been ardently ſought for in vain. He
would not have accepted the ſide board, but to ac-
commodate himſelf to my way of thinking, by
obliging me to take it from his hand. This dona-
tion became public, becauſe he granted me a wri-
ting *, in which it was ſpecified, that this ſide-
board was a preſent made by the city of Rouen to

* Roſny's humour agreed perfeAly well with the King's. When
he truſted the finances to his care, he deſited him not to take a bottle
of wine, or receive any preſent whatever, without his knowledge;

and when Roſny informed him of any that were offered to him, the
King immediately permitted him to accept of them, being ſo deſirous
that he ſhould find his advantage in ſerving him faithfully, that he
often added gifts of his own to thoſe perquiſites, to encourage him to
ſerve him better and better. But Roſtiy never received them till
they were duly regiſtered in the chamber of accounts, that every one
might know the bounty of this prince towards him; by which means
he would avoid the reproach of abuſing bis favour to empty his cof-
fers. Peref. p. 227 This writer, as well as the reſt of the world,
were, through the Duke of Sully's modeſty at that time, ignorant
that he himſelf was the contriver of this wiſe and well-concerted
Economy. Sa . .
his

1594 0 F
his Majeſty, who had beſtowed it upon me; and the
next day this prince ſent me 3ooo crowns in gold

from his own ſtrong box, to make me ſenſible that
ſuch an action in a miniſter ſhould not go unre-

warded. I now fulfill bis views, by forming, the

public of this double gratification.

Admiral Villars appeared ſoon after at cour t, with

a train of more than an hundred gentlemen ; ſome
of whom were of the greateſt families in France ;
but people ſoon drew off their attention from the

magnificence of his horſes, and the grandeur of

his equipages, to fix it upon his generoſity and up—

on Bis modeſty, which are indeed the true riches of
a man, although they rarely accompany the former.

He accoſted the King with an air at once noble and
ſubmiſſive, and threw himſelf at his feet. Ad-

© miral,” ſaid the King, in pain at this poſture, and

raiſing him haſtily, © ſuch ſubmiſſion is due to God |
„% only; and reſolving to elevate the Admiral as

much as he had humbled himſelf, he began to ex-
patiate to the courtiers upon the great actions which
Villars had performed, and did it with a diſcern-
ment ſo juſt as gave them new merit. The Ad-
miral, by proteſtations of reſpect, and devotion to
his ſervice; endeavoured to ſtop the courſe of theſe
praiſes; and afterwards perceiving the Duke of
Montpenſier, he went up to him, and, kiſſing his

hand, acknowledged bim his ſuperior, ref igning to

him bis government of Rouen with ſo good a grace,
that this prince, who had at firſt received him cold-

ly enough, being affected with his generoſity, em-
braced him ſeveral times, and from that moment

received him into the number of his deareſt friends,

The months of April and May were employed
in the ſame manner by the King and his council, in
receiving deputies from the different cities and go-
vernors, who came to treat upon the conditions of

their ſurrender. Thoſe of Lyons and Poitiers "0
6

«ft
—

—

— . —— —— — — ery et
7 — I 2 . — — 4 * om
eo nerd — —— Pe — — — —
— LSD 5 Es SIE
. NE

ä 2 — . MR.

— - —

= NINO _—

SV Li L 1 393

— —

— ——

IVE —.— a = . =_ *

—

—
— —
—

— 1
iy

— ny Fs

—

—

—

> 27 ns — cn gem ef =
——— _—

394 MEMOIR S Book VI.
the moſt conſiderable. A ſtrange fall for the Duke

of Nemours! This ambitious man ſuffered the

chimerical project of making himſelf King of
France, by marrying the Infanta of Spain, to em-
ploy his mind; which foolifh pretenſion, the public
| hatred, and the oppoſition of his own brother, the

Duke of Matenne, obliging him to renounce, he

ſoon conſoled himſelf for this diſappointment, by
erecting, in idea, a principality compoſed of the pro-
vinces of Lyonnois, Beanjolcis, Foret, Macennois,

and Dombes, which he was to hold of Spain. He

began by endeavouring to make ſure of the capital

of his new kingdom; but the Lyonnois *, more
ſubtil than he, took care to ſecure the perſon of
their pretended ſovereign, who treated them al-

ready as atyrant; and conſidering him in that light,

kept him confined, without any intention, how-
ever, of breaking with the party. The league was

offended at the affront offered to one of their lead-

ers; and Saint Sorlin, the Duke of Nemours's
youngeſt brother, intereſting Spain in his quarrel,

obtained from the Nuke of Savoy, and the Duke
of Terra Nova, governor of Milan, a powerful
ſupply of forces, with which he fell upon the Ly-
 onnois. This violence determined them to ſepa-
rate openly from the league; and calling in Colonel
D'Or nano to their aſliſtance, they declared openly
for the King, pulled down and dragged the arms

» Perefixe ſuppoſes the Duke of Matenne limſelf᷑ to be the author
of the revolt of Lyons, it being his deſign to ſnatch, this city out of

the hands of his half-brother. What the author ſays here of the

Duke of Nemours, ought not to hinder us from doing him juſtice in
other reſpects. He is allowed by all the hiſtorians to have poileſſed
very great and amiable qualities, both of mind and perſon, and to
have been one of the moſt deſerving noblemen in all France. See
his panegyric, and that of the Marquis de St Sorlin, bis brother, in
the Memoirs of Brantome, vol. 3. under the article of M. de Ne-

mours, p. 23. et He.; and the account of the detail of Lyons, in

5 Cayet, book 6. p. 299. and other hiſtorians.

and

„ A 6 9

La dion. 3 1

„„ͤJ v' BL LE 296
and colours of Spain, Savoy, and Nemours, in the
dirt, burnt, with a kind of inſulting farce, in the
public ſquare, the effigies of a woman, in the habit
of a ſorcereſs, with this inſcription on her fore-
head, The LEACUE; and allowed only three
months time to all the little towns dependent upon
| Lyons, to return to their duty. |

The Duke of Nemours remained in oreat per-
plexity during this tumult; and apprehending ſome-

thing worſe than confinement from his pretended
ſubjects, to effect his eſcape, put on the habit of
his valet de chambre, who reſembled him in his
ſhape, and going out of his apartment with his

cloſe-itool pan in his hand, paſſed through the an-
tichamber where the guards were, without being
known, becauſe he turned his face aſide, as if to
avoid the bad ſmell; from thence he ſtole into the
ſtreet, and gained the fields ; too happy, after fo
much imaginary grandeur, to abandon, like a fu-
gitive, a city which he had deſtined for the ſeat of
his glory; and convinced, by ſad experience, of a
truth to which we always will make ourſelves blind,
that there is nothing ſo difficult as to make effects
anſwer our deſires. |
Ambition, moreover, 1 as head. Ba-
lagny ſeeing himſelf governor of Cambray, a place
by its ſituation of great importance for the King,
had the hardineſs to demand his title of governor to
be changed into that of ſovereign prince, and the
misfortune to obtain his requeſt, Hence he flattered
.*himfelf, that he ſhould ſee his name ſwell the ca-
talogue of crowned heads, and forgot that he
wanted means to maintain himſelf in that elevated
rank. He maintained it, or thought to maintain it,
by exhauſting bis purſe to appear with magnificence
at court, and to ſend to the ſiege of Laon 2000
arquebuſiers and 300 horſe. But the glory of this
upſtart potentate was of mort duration: he, al
Ve

2 MEMOIR 8 Bock vl.

well as Nemours, ſplit upon the common rock ſo
fatal to ambitious men, who can never be perſuaded,

that the beſt concerted ſchemes are thoſe which af.
ford only moderate advantages, but ſubjected to no

changes, and ſecured from all hazards.
The Spaniards ſeeing, that, in the centre of the
kingdom, every thing ſlipped through their hands,

reſolved to ſtem the torrent by ſome important

blow, and laid ſiege to La- Chapelle. The King did
not balance a moment upon the neceſſity of lea-

ving all his domeſtic affairs, to go and prevent the N

reduction of this place. His ſoldiers, however, were
not in the ſame diſpoſition: Weary of war, they

ſought only to forget and to avoid it. So much
time, therefore, was waſted, before the King could

draw his army together, that although he marched
before with a ſmall body of troops, yet he came
too late: he found the ſiege fo far advanced, and

the Count of Mansfeld who commanded it, ſo ad-
_ vantageouſly poſted, that, weak as he was, he could
not venture to force him. But the place being of

great ſtrength, he flattered himſelf that the governor
would hold out long enough to give time to the reſt
of the troops to join him, and then he would be in
a condition either to throw ſuccours into the place,
or force the beſiegers to a battle. But this govern-
or, following the maxim of thoſe times, attentive

only to his own profit in every thing, had been fo

| beneficially ſparing of proviſions, ammunition, and
| ſoldiers, to man his garriſon, that he was obliged
to ſurrender much ſooner than he needed to have
done, and ſaw himſelf ruined by his avarice.

The King, by way of repriſal, inveſted Laon.

He was not ignorant, that the league had put this
place, already fo ſtrong by its ſituation and forti-
fications, into a condition ſufficient to make who-
ever attacked it repent of his attempt. Du—
Bourg

1500. OF 8 UV L I V. 397
Bourg“ was governor of it; one of the beſt and
molt experienced officers the Duke of Matenne had
in his army. The Duke's ſecond ſon, the Count
of Sommerive, with a great number of the nobi -
lity, was ſhut up there. The King, therefore, con
{idering that, on this occaſion, he had his military
reputation to ſuſtain, a reputation to which he owed
all his ſucceſs, neglected, on his part, no care or
attention, to accompliſh his enterpriſe. ———
I attended him joyfully to this ſiege, and was
charged, according to my taſte, with the direction
of a battery of ſix pieces of cannon, conjointly
With the elder De-Born, who, in quality of lieute-
nant-generaÞof the ordnance, had the conduct of
it in the abſence of the Count de la Guiche grand
maſter, and conſented to take me for his colleague.
_ Scarce had I taken poſſeſſion of my new employ»
ment, when I was obliged to abandon it. The King
was informed, by letters from Paris, that the Count
d' Auvergne, with D'Entragues, his father-in-law, _
had begun thoſe ſeeret practices againſt him which
afterwards had like to have loſt him his head upon
a ſcaffold ; and that many diſaffected and ſeditious
perſons daily reſorted to Paris. A violent diſpate_
had likewiſe juſt commenced between the univerſity
and curates of Paris on one fide, and the Jeſuits on
the other; which, in a. government yet hardly eſta-
bliſhed, was very formidable. 5 6

This news convinced his Majeſty, that there was
a neceſlity for having a vigilant and faithful agent
in that great city ; yet he delayed mentioning the
affair to me, becauſe he knew well that I ſhould.
not be pleaſed with a commiſſion which would ob-
lige me to leave the ſiege. However, a letter

* He was the ſame who choſe rather to go out of the Paſli'e, or.
which he was governor, publicly with the lack ſcart, than to re ·
ceive a bribe to put it inte the King's hands. Cayet, vol. 2. p- 691.

Vol. I. — 1 5 v hich

398 M E M O I R 8 Book VI.
which I received from the Cardinal of Bourbon,
and which I could not avoid ſhewing him, deter-
mined him to propoſe it to me. The Cardinal,
without entering into any detail, only expreſſed
himſelf ardently deſirous of ſeeing me, upon affairs
of great importance, which he ſaid 1 only could
ſucceed in. Although all this had only the air of
a compliment, yet his Majeſty thought he ought
not to neglect this advice: and had theſe affairs re-
lated only to the Cardinal, the King had ſo many
motives for being ſolicitous about him, that when
he had read this letter, he commanded me to pre-

pare for returning to Paris; which I obeyed, but

with great regret at quitting the ſiege, There was
a neceſſity to fill up the employment I left vacant,
with a man whoſe fidelity could be depended upon.
I named to bis Majeſty Vignoles, Parabere, and
'Trigny, and he choſe Parabere. I flattered myſelf,
that when the affairs which called me to Paris were
terminated, 1 ſhould return to Laon; and 1 was
reſolved to uſe all poſſible expedition with them;
but they were ſucceeded by others, and that fo
ſoon, tbat, from the end of May to the beginnin

of Auguſt, which was the time this ſiege laſted, all
I cculd ſee of it was in theſe little excurſions I
- ſometimes made thither from Paris; therefore my

account of it will be unconnefted enough.

_ Having received the King's inſtructions for m

journey, I ſet out, and reached Crepy the firſt night,
where I lay, and the next day arrived at Paris. I
waited upon the Cardinal immediately, and found
bim very ill“, and as much depreſſed in mind as
in body. He embraced me tenderly, and diſco—
vered infinite joy at ſeeing me; then ordering his

* The moment he perceived himſelf ill, he departed from Gaillon,
and came to St Genivieve, and afterwards to his tine houſe of the
abbey of St Germain, according to De Thou, book 109.

chamber

1594. r 1 V LES 399

chamber to be cleared, made me ſit down by his
bedſide, that I might hear the thouſand important
things which he ſaid he had to communicate. Thoſe |
he began with gave me no great opinion of the
reſt; but they were ſuch as ſat neareſt his heart,
although they conſiſted only of domeſtic uneaſineſſes,
and female quarrels, with which I am almoſt a-
ſhamed to entertain the public. A certain lady na-
med Madam de Reſieres, was the cauſe of them.
The Cardinal, either through jealouſy or a diſturbed
imagination, bad taken it into his head, that ſhe
baſtened his death by magic, to be revenged on
him for ſowing diſſenſion between her and the Abbe
de Bellozanne, her favourite. His only confolation
was, that if he did not die, his murderets would,
My wife had informed him, that this Madam de
Roſieres was dangerouſly ill; and probably it was
upon this information that be had formed all hi;
fable of magic and death.

He imparted all theſe ſecrets to me with ſach ap-
parent dejection, that I did not doubt but that theſe
imaginations contributed in a great meaſure to ha-
ſten his death. I endeavoured to inſpirit him; and
he at laſt was able to ſpeak to me of his other af's
fairs, which he had like to have forgot. Next to
Madam de Roſieres, the King was the perſon of
Whom he complained with greateſt bitterneſs ; for

his mind was in ſuch a ſtate, that he only com-
| plained of thoſe whom he loved. He had aiked the
King's permiſlion to diſpoſe of his benefices; and
his Majeſty, he ſaid, had not heard him favourably *
which, he added, could only be occaſioned by this
prince's not having any regard for him, or that he
was not ſincerely attached to the Catholic religion;
for how indeed could he be a good Roman Catho-
lic, and diſoblige a cardinal ? Afterwards, without
 conlidering whom it was he was ſpeaking to, he
intreated me to defend the Romiſh religion to the
| | L 1 2 3 Kings

40 M E M O IR Ss Bock VI.

King, to confirm bim in it, to prev all upon him to
| keep up a cloſe correſpondence with the Pope, to
demand of Sr Peter his benediction, that he might

afterwards obtain of him the difſvlution of his
marriage with Queen Margaret of Valois, and be at
liberty to marry another princeſs, by whom he

might have children who would ſecure the crown
10 the houſe of Bourbon, and peace and tranquil-
lity to France. The end of this diſcourſe was much

more judicious than I had reaſon to expect: nor
W 190 the Pope's panegyric improperly introduced in

; for it muſt be confeſled, that Clement VIII. was
8 a poſſeſſed of great wiſdom and juſtice, but

alſo ſo good a politician, that the court of Madrid
could never boaſt of having deceived him by their

diſguiſes,

| The Cardinal afterwards brought the affair of the
Jeſuits upon the carpet; and although, as a man
devoted to the court of Rome, he openly favoured
them, yet the argurnents he made uſe of to prevail

upon me to ſupport them, were founded upon po-
licy and the intereſt of the King, and ſo ſolid, that

J was convinced his underſtanding was not impaired
by ſickneſs, but only upon the chapter of himſelf,
Al the ſteps I took in that affair were in conſe-
quence of his Eminence's prudent reflections on
the danger of baniſhing the whole ſociety from
France in ſuch a conjuncture; - for, as we ſhall ſoon
ice, nothing leſs was in agitation.

A fourth affair, which he recommended to me,
vas, to ſupport, againſt the ſuperintendant, the old
Archbiſhop of Glaſgow in Ireland, whom he loved

and honoured as if he had how a near relation.

'This ar chbiſhop bore the name of Bethune ® The
1 . Queen

* James de Bethune, Archbiſhop of El in Scotland, and

not in Ireland, came to Paris in quality of ambaſſador in otdinary
from the Queen of Scotland, and dice there in 2 aged *
ix

. cas wk „ awd Oo „ Hd „ „ „ 0

"ER ao. Rs . md Wa A RQAtmc \

1 — M94

oY
8
Lo”
5.
85
_y
1
*
4

* F N. 40

Queen of Scotland, his benefactreſs, being dead, all
he now deſired was, to ſpend the ſhort remnant of
his life in peace, far from his native country; but

in the ſuperintendant he found an enemy, to whoſe

perſecutions he was perpetually expoſed, and Who

ſeemed reſolved to drive him out of France. I ne-
ver could diicover the true cauſe of this hatred;
perhaps it was owing to the attachment this pre-
late always ſhewed to the family of the Guiles,
from whom the Queen of Scotland * was deſcend-
ed. The Cardinal ſaid, that D'O had no other
motive than the intereſt which the Cardinal took in
the Archbiſhop : and it 13 certain, that, as often as
his Eminence ſolicited the ſuperintendant in favour
of the old prelate, he ſeemed to be more eagerly
bent upon his deſtruction. The Cardinal, there-
ſore, intreated me to prevail upon the King to take
the Archbiſhop under his protection: he had pro-

miſled to have no concern, for the future, in any

affairs, either within or without the kingdom: in-

deed, he was no longer capable of it, and his con-

duct, moreover, irreproachable. To gain me en-

ſix years; having, during fifty - ſeven years, ſuffered great viciſſtudes
of fortune, fines the murder of Cardinal de Bethune, Archbiſhop of

St Andrew's, his uncle, which happened in 1546. His epitaph may

be (till ſeen in the church of St John of Lateran. Amelot de la
Houſſaye, in his Memoirs, mentions the proceſs that Nicholas De-
netz, Biſhop of Orleans, had with Maximilian Francis Duke of Sully,
k which, it appears, that they vnjuſtiy diſputed the right this family
had to the name of Bethune. * However this may be,” ſaid he,
ſpeaking of this archbiſhop, „the family of Betwn in Scotland,

„ from whence were deſcended the Cardinal Arehbiſhop of St An-

“ drew's, and the Archbiſbop of Glaſgow, ambafſidor from Queen
&« Mary Stuart in France, where he died in 1650 or 1661, (here is
* an error in the date is acknowledged by Melt: Ce Sully and de
& Charoſt, for a branch of their houſe.” vol. 2. p. 63. Therefore,
according to our Memoirs. the true name bath of the Archbiſhop of

Glaſgow, and of the Archbiſhop of St Andrew's, was Bethanz, and

not Betun.

Mary of Lorrain, daughter of Claude Duke of Guile, married
in 1539, to James Stuart King of Scotland. 1

n tirely

402 M E M OI XN 8S Book VI.
tirely over to his intereſts, the Cardinal told me,

that this archbiſhop had ſo great an affection for 5

me, that he wept continually for my unhappineſs,
in being educated in the Proteſtant religion.

He reſumed again the ſubje& of his benefices,

with which he concluded his diſcourſe ; and ear-
neſtly intreated me to obtain for him his Majeſty's
permiſſion to reſign them, confeſling that the poſ-
ſeffion of theſe benefices had given * dreadful unea-
| lineſs to the deceaſed Cardinal, his uncle, from
whom he had them, as well as to himſelf, ſome of
them having been foreibly taken from families who
were the lawful proprietors of them; and his E-
minence thought, he ſhould make a ſufficient atone-

ment, both for himſelf and his uncle, and pacify his

conſcience, by reftoring them to the injured per-
ſons after his death. He had nothing new to tell
me, when his phyſician entered the chamber. Du-
ret (for it was he) having recommended ſilence to
his patient, took upon himſelf the care of acquaint-
ing me with all the fecrets of the Cardinal, whoſe

confidence he poſſeſſed; and he acquitted himſelf

like a very eloquent man, that is to ſay, he wea-

ried me ſufficiently. 1 made no other anſwer to

bis tedious ſpeeches, than reiterated promiſes of
ſerving his Eminence.

During the three days which 1 aſſed at Paris, !
was ſufficiently convinced of the dangerous corre-

ſpondences carried on by the Count d Auvergne,
D'Entragucs, and bis wife. Their houſe was the
rendezvous for all the King's enemies, either in the
league or the Spaniſh party: every night they held
ſecret councils againſt the King's intereſt and ſer-
vice. Till 1 ſhould have an opportunity of con-
ferring with his Majeſty upon the meaſures neceſ-

ſary for ſuppreſſing this wicked cabal, 1 repreſented

to Meſſ. de Cheverney, de Pont-carre, de Bellicvre,
and de Maiſſe, that they could not Watch too nar-
row:y

£ RWWA
A 7 Ry

1594 9 r LEY 403

rowly the motions of theſe incendiaries; and i
particularly recommended it to Maieſſe, with

whoſe activity I was well acquainted.

I afterwards applied myſelf, with a particular ate

tention, to the affair of the Jeſuits, againſt whom

a proceſs was actually commenced before the par-
lament, and vigorouſly purſued by the univerſity

and curates of Paris, who accuſed them with ha-

ving monopolized to themſelves the education of

the youth *, and the direction of conſciences; re-
preſented them as a ſociety very pernicious to the
tate; and propoſed their being baniſhed as ſuch
from all the dominions of France. It was nothing

leſs than certain, that all theſe adverſaries of the
ſociety would triumph over them, as they had pro-

miſed themſelves, even if the King ſhould not in-

terpoſe his authority. The Jeſuits had ated power-
fully upon this occaſion. The party was already

ſo well ſupported, that, without laying any ſtreſs

upon the Pope, Spain, and their partiſans in the
league t, who were not few, one half of the par-
lament was on their ſide, and openly ſolicited in
their favour. The cauſe was put into the hands of
advocates in the higheſt repute at the bar: the Je-
ſuits retained Duret and Verſoris; and their ad-

verſaries Arnaud and Dolle g. In Paris nothing
was talked of but theſe two powerful factions.

I reflected upon what the Cardinal de Bourbon
had repreſented to me, That there was no extre-
mity to which this order would not proceed, ſti-
mulated either by revenge, or by the hope of for-

c ng us to repeal their baniſhment ; Thar, by their

9 Fee Richel. polit. teſt, part 1. ch 2 2. 8 10,

I The Cardinal of Bourbon, the Superintendant Do, Antony

Seguire, King's Advocate, aud a great many others, openly lolicied
for the Jeſuits.

| See the particulars of this . De Thou, book 110.; Hiſt.

ol the e of . vol. 6. Þ.. 366. ; and others.

intrigues,

264 M E M: O-1 KK 'S$ Book YL
intriguee, they might animate part of Europe againſt
us: That they well know how to make their per-
ſecution be looked upon as an injury offered to re-
ligion itſelf, and bring the King under a ſuſpicion of
being ſecretly attached to that which he had juſt
quitted; which, in the preſent ſtate of affairs, miglit
have very dangerous conſequences, Clement VIII.
Not having yet been able to refolve upon granting
the abſolution ſolicited for at Rome; the King be
ing engaged in one of thoſe enterpriſes, the event
of which is always ſo uncertain, and often fo dan-
gerous; and, in a word, the Catholics who had
moſt power in the kingdom, as well thoſe who

were at Paris, as thoſe that filled the court, fear-

ing, or ſeeming to fear, for their own intereſt, that
they had not yet ſufficiently provided for the ſecu-
rity of the Romiſh religion in France. I was ſen-
ſible, that Meſſ. de Longueville, Nevers, and Biron,
had publicly expreſſed themſelves to this purpoſe,
and had uſed all their endeavours to communicate
their apprehenſions to the Cardinal of Bourbon, by
means of D'Entragues, D' Humiers, Des Sourdis,
and ſome others. It is not my deſign to impute
here any bad intention to theſe perſons; but it is
certain, that, amongſt theie zealous Catholics, there
were few who were not actuated by a motive like
that of Biron, who did not diſſeminate thefe dil-
courſes till he had loſt all hope of obtaining the
government of Laon.
He this as it will, prudence, I thought, required,
that the authority of the abſent King ſhould not be
expoſed for a quarrel between prieſts and theolo-
gifts; and did not doubt but his Majeſty, in fuch
a a caſe, would chuſe the moſt moderate fide. I
therefore declared to the council, tbat the King did
not think the accuſations which were brought a-
gainſt the Jeſuits. of ſufficient importance to autho-
riſe ay harſh treatment of them; and that his Ma-

jeſty

f!

jeſty would wait to be determined by their future
behaviour to the ſtate and bimſelf, whether he
ſhould baniſh them, or permit them to continue in
France: and that, till he had given more poſitive
orders concerning them, he abſolutely forbad any
violent proceedings againſt thoſe fathers; that no
invectives ſhould be permitted in the pleadings a-
gainſt them; and even that their cauſe ſhould be
tried in full court. No perſon expected to find in
me a protector of the Jeſuits ; and I may ſay, that
my recommendation of them at that time would
not have been uſeleſs, although I had not ſpoken in
the name of the King, In effect, no farther pro-
greſs was made in this affair. 5
The deference I owed to the Cardinal of Bour-
bon made me reſolve to ſpeak to the ſuperintendant
in favour of the Archbiſhop of Glaſgow ; though I
knew well, what I had to expect from a man ſo
little ſolicitous to conceal the hatred he bore to
my whole family, and which a late quarrel with
my youngeſt brother had augmented, I hoped.
from the King more juſtice, and I haſtened to join
bim at Laon, after taking leave of the Cardinal,
who continued ſtill conſiderably weakened. —_
At Bruyeres, where I had left my field-equipage,
I learned, that the Duke of Mafenne, being in con-
ſtant expectation of a great army, which Count
Charles of Mansfeld was to bring him, had advan-
ced with ſome troops as far as La-Fere, and twice
attempted to throw a ſupply of 100 horſe and 200
arquebuſiers into Laon ; that the firſt was defeated
by Givry, and the ſecond by the Count of Soiſſons,
whoſe turn it was that day to guard the trench :
that the King gave always a glorious example to
the princes and officers, and mounted guard in the
trenches in his turn, t
His Majeſty was in bed when I arrived at his
quarters, although it was three o' clock in the af
| ternoòͤn.

r 1 Rk $:: - BookVE

ternoon. He aſked me, if I was not ſurpriſed to
find him in bed at ſuch an hour. This bed, how-

ever, was only two matreſſes upon the hard ground.

All night, and the preceding day, this prince had
been ſtanding at the trench, where he was employed

in directing works to be made in the mountain,

upon the declivity of which Laon is ſituated, either

to change the place of ſome batteries, or to ſhelter |

the workmen by parapets. He was ſo greatly fa-
tigued ſtanding upon the ground, which was ex-
tremely rugged, that ſeveral contuſions roſe in his
feet, which did not, however, hinder bim from
ſtaying to ſee the work carried on, till all theſe con-

tuſions burſting, each of his feet became one large
wound, which obliged him to be put to bed, and

| ſome dreſſings to be applied to them; which he

ordered to be changed in my preſence ; . That you

© may be convinced,” ſaid he, © I do not act the
& {ick man unſeafonably.” I was very far, indeed,
from entertaining ſuch a thought; and if I accuſed
him of any thing, it was of the contrary exceſs. I
believe he perceived it: for ſeeking, as it were, to
Juſtify himſelf, he told me, that he was under a ne-
ceſſity of undertaking and ſuperintending this work,
which would give him two days advance upon the
beſieged city; and that I would not condemn bim
after 1 had ſeen it, or, at leaſt, heard an account of
it from the connoiſſeurs whom he had ſent to vi-
fit it, and whoſe return he expected at five o' clock,

I took advantage of this opportunity of being
alone with the King to give him an account of my
journey, which I did, kneeling on a cuſhion which
he ordered to be brought for me. His Majeſty, de-
ſirous of authoriſing what I had done, ordered Beau:
| lieu-Ruſe to write three letters inſtantly ; the firſt,
which was addreſſed to the Chancellor, regarded the
Jeſuits, and contained only a repetition of what |
had ſaid myſelf. In the ſecond, he informed RO,
| No that

Prat Meng anaas D AI con fred. war Aoi... os e 4

OH — — — rm ˙— A A MM wi

my

: 1594. Oo by LY LL % 407

that it was lis intention the Archbiſhop of Glaſ-
gow ſhould enjoy the only two abbeys he had in
France peaceably, and juſtified this prelate's paſt
conduct, by the gratitude he owed his benefactreſs.
The third, to the Cardinal of Bourbon, was written

in the name of Lomenie, ſecretary of ſtate, who
made known to his Eminence, that the King would.

approve of the diſpoſition he ſhould make of his be-
nefices, and was ready to ratify it, by ſigning hime

{elf the form he ſhould ſend him, provided he

found in it nothing contrary to the canons, the li-
berties, and cuſtoms of the kingdom. The reſt of

the letter was an aſſurance of his protection and
friendſhip ; and as a proof of his confidence, he
ſent the two other letters under cover to him; and

had the complaiſance to acquaint him with the con-
tents. I deſired Du-Perat, whom the King ſent
with theſe three letters to Paris, to deliver one

from me to the Cardinal, in which I exhorted bim,

by every thing that I thought could make any im-

preſſion upon his mind, to free himſelf. from all
his domeſtic uneaſineſſes.

Theſe affairs were but juſt over W the arri-
val of Meſſ. de Biron, Givry, Saint-Luc, Marivault,
Parabere, Vignoles, Fouqueroles, and others, whom
the King had ſent to examine his works of the pre-
ceding day, particularly two mines which he had
cauſed to be opened. Every one gave his opinion
of them, to ſhew his own ſkill: they could not a-
gree, and a diſpute inſenſibly aroſe amongſt them.
Marechal Biron, who ſullied the great talents hge
had for war, by an aſſuming air, and a ſuperiority
of accent, which made him always maſter of the

| converſation, could with difficulty bear to hear any

one declare himſelf of an opinion contrary to his.

The King, perceiving that words grew high a-
mongſt them, in order to oblige them to Glence,

told them he had received notice trom three ſuc-

ceſſire 5

4o MEMOIRS Book v..

ceſſive ſpies, from different places, that the Duke
of Maienne and the Count of Mansfeld had reſol-
ved, at all hazards, to throw a very conſiderable
convoy of ammunition and proviſions into Laon, in
order to avoid a battle; and that this convoy was
to ſet out inſtantly upon its march, ſupported by a
very powerful eſcort, with a deſign to ſurpriſe the
guard, force themſelves a paſſage, and enter into

the beſieged city. This afforded a new ſubject for

conteſtation, which ended at laſt in Biron's favour,

| whoprocured the command of a ſtrong detachment,

with which he intended to poſt himſelf in the fo-

reſt between Laon and La-Fere, and to attack the
_ eſcort with the convoy. He compoſed the detach-
ment himſelf, which conſiſted of 12co French in.
fantry, all choſen men, 800 Swiſs, 300 light horſe,
200 troopets, and 100 gentlemen of the King's
houſehold. I aſked the King's permiſſion to go a-

lopg with this detachment ; which he refuſed me

ſeveral times, alledging, that there were many
things which he wanted me to inform him of ; but
I made ſo ſtrong inſtances, that the third time J
prevailed. |

Mee began our march at ſix o' clock in the after -

noon, and reached the foreſt at one in the morning,

where we advanced cautiouſly to the extremity of

the wood near La- Fere, which was the place of our
ambuſcade. Marechal de Biron detained all the
paſſengers we met on the great road, who, he
thought, might carry intelligence of his deſign into
La Fere; and placed centinels on horſeback at the

end of the wood, to bring him an exact informa-

tion of whatever came out of the city, We wat-
ted with great impatience till four o' clock in the
afternoon, before we heard any news; and then
the centinels came to inform us, that the great road
from La-Fere to Laon was covered with fo Jong
a file of ſoldiers, and ſuch a vaſt quantity of bag-

| gage

1594 0 F . 409

gage of every Kind, that they could imagine no-
thing elſe but that the whole army of the enemy
was advancing. That inſtant I perceived a good
number of the moſt reſolute amongſt us to look

pale, and whiſper to each other, that it was ne-

ceſſary to make our retreat, This ſome of us op-
poſed; and the commander declaring himſelf for

this laſt opinion, it was agreed upon, by a plurali-
ty of voices, that ſome one of the troop ſhould be

ſent to reconnoitre, and bring back an exact ſtate
of things. Fouqueroles, whoſe valour and intre -
pidity was well known, was choſen, with two or

three others, for this employment; and returning

a little time after, informed us, that this ſceming-
ly formidable line was compoſed of three hun-
dred carts, laden with ammunition, eſcorted by
four ſquadrons of 100 hundred horſe each, who |
marched before the convoy, followed by 8 or 90

muſketeers ; an equal number of Spanith infantry
brought up the rear.

This number not being equal to onrs, it was a-

greed upon, with one voice, that we ſhould attack
them; and we only differed upon the manner of

doing it. I, with many others, were of opinion, that

it would be better to let the convoy enter the fo-
reſt, and afterwards fall upon them in the rear.

Givry, Montigny, and Marivault, who were at
the head of the cavalry, were for the negative,
and maintained ſo poſitively, that there was leſs
danger in attacking them in the open field, that

they drew Marechal Biron into this opinion. At

firſt this method ſucceeded: the cavalry of the e-

nemy gave way as ſoon as they were attacked,

though at the beginning they ſhewed great reſolu-
tion, and retired to the ſides of the waggons: but

we ſoon found whom we had to deal with; the

enemy's infantry, which were in front, waited
firmly for our troopers, whom Biron ſent to attack
VOL. I. Mm e bend

—

88 => nr

1
1
.
4
\
1)
:
14
K 7
d *
＋
1
1
i
f
LY
WW 6
_
8
*
19
1. 9
k
bl
bi "
a
1
*
|
1
1
i FB
'F
1 Pp
IH
ow ;
*
*
1
14
< 2
|
:
bs
: it
id
{3s
113
+
15
1
*
47
*
7
7
. 4
+ 8
*
7
1
Wo
1
|
43
\
Us
Wy
= -
i.
4
1
t %
0 7
4
"
x
*
15
39
*
3
7
8
7
; [1
Lf
is x
1
1
fo
1
*
0

'
"
q
|
N
*
+
j
jt
2
at
1
n
|
”

% ME MO i Bock VI.

them, and fixed upon them with ſo much order,
as obliged them to give ground. Biron command-
ed them to return to the charge by the left flank,
While he attacked the right, which was viſibly the
leaſt dangerous. The onſet was fo terrible, that
the enemy's foot were forced to retire, and, like
the other ſquadrons, take ſhelter in the midft of
the carts, from whence they ſtill continued to de-
fend themſelves: in the mean time, the Spaniſh
battalion advanced from the rear to the front, and
formed itſelf in ſuch a manner, that it was ſup-
ported on all fides by the cavalry and tke a
gons, without loſing the aſſiſtance of the firſt bat -
talion: they made ſo vigorous a defence, that all
Biron's entreaties and menaces could not hinder
our 600 horſe from quitting the fight, extremely
weakened. The Swiſs and French infantry, who
| took their place, found equal reſiſtance. The
battle continuing to lengthen, Biron apprehended
that an action which paſſed ſo near La-Fere, would
give time for a conſiderable ſupply. to be ſent to
the convoy, if it was not very ſpeedily ended, for
a laſt reſource, commanded the 100 ge ontlemany to
diſmount, to add to their other arms, which con-
ſited of a ſword and piſtol, a pike, of which we had
brought a great quantity along with us; and to
bring up to the charge all our foot, both French
and Swiſs, which had not yet encountered 'the
Spaniards. Meſſ. de Guitry, de Montigny, de Ma-
rivault, de Trigny, d'Arambure, de la Curee, de
Lopes, d' Heures, and others, advanced in this
manner at the head of 300 foot; and Bir on, with
an equal number, followed them, 1 was in the
ſecond battalion. We cloſed ſo cloſely, that the
rike and fuſee became uſciels. We fought hand
to hand, and almoſt wreſtled with one another.
The Spaniards at length gave ground, and, after

| thro wing

d e

throwing away their arms *, fled for ſkelter to the
woods and Waggons. This laſt refuge was of no

ſervice to them; we purſued thein there, and made

a horrible carrage of them: no lefs than 1200
were left dead vpon the place. There were fey

priſoners; the perfons of any diſtinction in the cx
valry bad time to get back to La-Fere, We nei
ther purſued them, n the others who had taken
ſheiter in the woods, leſt we ſhonld be ſurpriſed,
and put into diſorde er, by new troops ſent from La-

of >
44
C5
57 2

4.
4
—
Ir
.

ere to their afliſtance: on the contrary, we only

th duscht of railyin! 85 and keeping upon our guard,

curirg the time that was neceſſaty to reſt and re-

lech Daft with. tome of thoſe pr O ions CO
Which we found great abundance in the convoy,

In the night we marcked be ck to the camp, and
brought thither, without meeting with any odtlacle, |

oi Ye 2 28

—— 2 CHOY > > 28 Ae, but 10 pi! laced by the fol-

8,

ciers, and ſo carelel ſely looked after, notwithſiands |
irg the Sema nder ltr ict orders concernivg it, that

above 40 war or 53 were lamed.

—
—

Biron, vith the lame ſupercilious air which he
had aſſumed, to diser the command in this ex-

pedition, preſerted himſelf to bis Majeſty at his re-

turn, to receive the praiſes due to his ſucceſs.

Having fo fine a m ater to talk of himſelf, one
may eaſily imagine v! zat a man, who knew not 24

merit of ſilence upon theſe occaſions, would ſay
to the advantage of bis victory. One would 5276
ſaid, to have h 1eard bim, that he had quſt that mo-

ment returned from ſett! ing the crown up on his

Majeſty's head. Experience has ſhewn, that this
haughtineſe, which borders a little upon boaſting,

of itſelf ſuthciently in the French taite, common-

ly ſucceecs with a general who has Frenchmen to

* La-Cutes, who was a good judge in this matter, attributes the

Epaniards Celeat to their cuſtom of uling too long (words, and waiſt-

beits too Mort. J. $929, MSS. de la Vibliot. N
5 —————————ů—ů— conduct 2

.
— — Frmomoug®

%
« IF Ing i oo
IN? Io .

Y

4
1
g
Tr

nn
: .
+ RP
4
JR}
"1

1
3%}
10
4
1

:

i

7

1
wy
1
i

oY -
1

13
. | 0
115

1
!
.
ö

. *
—

N N O 1 Ks Book VI.

conduct: with them to ſeem ſure of a victory,
goes a great way towards gaining it. The King
was not ignorant of this, and he had found very
| happy conſequences from it, on thoſe hazardous
_ occaſions, when the ſoldiers ſought only in the

countenance and words of their leader, the idea

they ought to have of the preſent danger. Hence
a ſeeming corficence of ſucceſs became habitval _
to him, and this air was imitated by all the gene-
ral officers; and, as it often happens, many of
them, but particularly Marechal Biron, overadted
it fo far as to become inſupportable to all the o-
thers, and even to the King himſelf, who was by
no means the leaſt indulgent. N TI
The obliging reception which his Majeſty gave
to Biron, and thoſe that had followed him, crea-
ted great jealouſy in the courtiers, who had not
been of the party, and completely turned Biron's
head. However, he could not obtain the govern-
ment of Laon, which was what he aimed at by
cxalting bis laſt action, and arrogating all the glo-
ry of it to bimſelf alone, as if others came in for
nothing. The King diſcloſed his thought of it
fully to me, and ſeemed, on many accounts, great-
ly diſcontented with this Marechal. His Majeſty
told me, that, after io many cauſes of complaint which
Biron had given him, after his having dared even late-
ly to threaten him with going over to his enemies,
and the diſcoveries he had juſt made of the actual
_ correſpondence he carried on with Meſſ. d Epernon
and d'Avergne, he could not reſolve to truſt him with
the care of a place fo near the Low Countries as
Laon, which ought not to be given but to a man
of approved fidelity *: but he feared, he ſaid, that

Biron would keep no meaſures aſter this refuſal, and

would openly join the party againſt him, or, what

Was ſtill more dangerous, continue near his per.

_ * This government was given to Marivault.
=. fon,

i r d LL v. 1

ſon, while he ſecretly ſided with bis enemies. Hen-
ry, who from this moment was perſuaded, that he
would one day have every thing to fear from Biron,
added, that he had perceived this Marechal ſought
my friendſhip for ſome time, doubtleſs with an in-
tention to procure my concurrence to a marriage
between his brother and Mademoiſelle de Saint
 Genies, my niece, who was one of the greateſt
fortunes in France ; and he ordered me to take
advantage of this new friendſhip, to found him,
and to penetrate into his deſigns. -
I be great convoy being "defeated, the King,
without any obſtacle, continued the ſiege of Laon,
till he received notice that the Duke of Matenne,
and the Count of Mansfield, far from being diſ-
heartened by this bad ſucceſs, talked of nothing
leſs than coming to force the lines of the beliegers,
as ſoon as they had received ſome troops they were
in expectation of. The Marechal de Biron treated
this news with raillery; but his Majeſly, who ne-
glected nothing, was not caſy about it till Givry,
whom he had ſent to reconnoitre, eſcorted by
300 horſe, with ſtrict orders not to return without
a perfect knowledge of the ſituation and forces of
the enemy, brought him, at the end of three days,
certain intelligence, that there was not a fingle
company of them on this ſide the Oiſe; and that
the Spaniards were more inclined to return to
Flanders than to Laon. The King, relying upon
the fidelity of this report, that very evening made

a party to go and dine the next day at St Lambert,

a houſe dependent vpon the domain of Navarre,
and ſituated in the midſt of the foreſt, where he
remembered to have often gone to eat fruit, milk,
and new cheeſe, during the time that, in his youth,
he had reſided in the caſtle of Marle ; and he pro-
miſed himſelf great pleaſure in ſeeing It again.
About thirty of us attended him to St Lam-
| Mm 2 ert

1 MEMOIRS BookVL

| bert, where, as he had paſſed part of the pre-
ceding night! in viſiting, as uſual, the trenches bat-
teries, and mines, he fell aſleep as ſoon as he had
dined : his good conſtitution, joined to a habit of
fatigue, had accuſtomed him to ſleep in any place,
and when he pleaſed, and to wake at any hour.
The weather being thea extremely hot, eight or
ten of us went into the thickeſt part of the fo-
reſt *, not far from the great road leading from
La- rere to Laon. We had not gone farther
than twelve or fifteen hundred paces, when a
| Noiſe which came from that ſide near La-Fere
drew all our attention; it ſeemed to be a con-
fuſed mixture of human voices, ſmacking of whips,
neigbing of horſes, and a noiſe like the diſtant
ound of trumpets and drums. That we might
hear more plainly, we came forwards to the
road, from whence we perceived diſtinctly eight
; hundred paces before us, a column of infantry,
which appeared to us to be foreigners, march-
ing in gocd order, and without noiſe : that which
we had heard proceeded from the ſervants and
vagabonds who followed, and thoſe that con-
ducted a conſiderable convoy of artillery which
eſcorted it. Extending our view as far as it was
poſſible, fo great a number of troops appeared to
us to file off after thele waggons, that we did nor
doubt but that it was the enemy's whole army. |
Me returned haſtily, and found the King awake,
ſhaking a plum- tree, the fruit of which had appeared
very delicious.“ Faith, Sire,” ſaid we to him, e
have juſt ſeen ſome people paſs, who prepare very
different plums for you, and of a little harder di-
« geſtion,” The explicationdid not conſiſt of many
Words, the time was preſling ; and the King the
more readily believed us, having, as be told us,
| heard ſomething for a quarter of an hour, which
I be forelt of Folambry,

(not

„ ELM by
(not being able to imagine that Givry could have
| acquitted himſelf ſo ill of his commiſſion) he

thought was a noiſe proceeding from his oun
camp. His Majeſty ordered twelve of us, who

were rea..y at hand, to go inſtantly to the dif.

_ ferent quarters of the cavalry, (a liſt of which

be always carried in his pocket), to ſpread the a-

larm there, and bring them all with the utmoſt

expedition to his quarter, while a part of us ſhould
go to the infantry, to form them into battalions,

and poſt them between the ſame quarter and the 55

trenches. He gave theſe orders as he was mount-

ing his horſe, and although he rode at full ſpeed,
he continued giving them to all he met, with the

ſame juſtneſs and extent of thought, as if he had
been long before prepared for a battle. Thanks

to ſo much celerity, and that admirable preſence of
mind, which was the cauſe that nothing eſcaped this
prince, here, where any other, inſtead of forming
a regular plan, would ſcarcely have been capable |
of taking the leaſt ſenſible reſolution. The ene-
my did not ſurpriſe a ſingle man; which perhaps

ſaved the whole army from the vtmoſt misfortune:
for it mult be confeſſed, that if the enemy's ca-

: valry, which at the fame inftant appeared in the

front of the camp, where they formed themſelves
into ſquadrons with great expedition, had once

thrown the ſoldiers into a conſternation, which,
the King and part of the officers being abſent,
muſt almoſt infallibly have happened by an effect

of the firſt ſurpriſe ; it would have been ealy for

them, amidſt that ſudden contuſion, to have de-
feated one or more quarters, and perhaps fear

might have delivered up all the reſt.

We may hold by this ſingle example, to prove of
Vat utility it is for a general of an army, L will not
fay only to poſſeſs that quality of mind which takes
in all cares, however infinite ; but to know by their

names,

* 4 _
—  — — — —

rr

5 —
_ RIP avs my oy ̃ AA * Wee : — —
bs 8 ;
2 1 .

4 1
＋
FA
}
5

- LE

CR PAR ERS

416 MEMOIRS Book VI.

names, their capacity, their good and bad qualities,
the officers, and the different bodies of his army;

and in his turn to be known by it, for the man of
all the general officers, whoſe advice (the quali-
ty of leader apart) they would chuſe in a diffi-
cult conjuncture to follow as the wiſeſt, to give it
Vith firmneſs, but without the oftentation which
ſeems to ariſe from the certainty of having found
out the beſt ; to inſpire them with a reliſh for their

occupation; to render their diſcipline pleaſing, by _

never oppreſling them with orders, but, at the
fame time, to accuſtom them never to expect, that

_ thoſe already eſtabliſhed will, on any account what. :

ever, be diſpenſed with, or diminiſhed; in a
word, to poſſeſs the art of making himſelf be at all

times readily obeyed by them, without inſpiring

that timidity which keeps them ſilent, when, by a
ſcaſonable hint, they might aid the lights of their
leader; an inconvenience which in all times has
been the ruin of many armies, and their com-
manders. |
f Notwithſtanding the expedition the King uſed on 1
this occaſion, if the enemy's general had known how ⸗
to avail himſelf of every moment, I believe he

might have given us a conſiderable ſhock; but

knowing the prince he had to deal with, he durſt
not ſuffer the van of his army to appear, till the
whole was come out of the foreſt, that one part
might not be deprived of the aſſiſtance of the other,
in cale the King mould be informed of bis march,
and meet him with all his ar my. It happened allo, 5
that the march of the enemy was protracted by the
breaking of a carriage, upon which a piece of ord-
nance was placed, which imbariaſſed them greatly.
The waggons ſplit in pieces when the convoy was
defeated, the luggage of which, with the bodies of
men and horſes, overſpread the road, cauſed a ſe-
_ cond imbaraſſment ſtill greater: and, laſtly, the
3 | a

2556 OF 8$VLLY ay

perſon whom the Dake of Maienne had ſent to re-
connoitre a place proper for pitching his camp,
did not make all the Apa which he might have

made.

The King carefully availed himſelf of all theſe de-
lays. He drew out from the trenches as many men
as were ſufficient to cover them, without leaving ,
too few within, and ranged the reſt of his army in

order of battle before, when the enemy, who nolonger
| hoped to ſurprize him, gave him time. That day

Was employed on each ſide, in gaining all advan»
tages for a battle. It was not however the inten-
tion of the two generals of the enemy to riſk it;

they dreaded the King's aſcendant, and our cavalry
which was almoſt all compoſed of gentlemen. Their

whole deſign, by this motion, was to engage the

King to raiſe the ſiege of Laon, by coming to meet
them, and afterwards to evade a battle, or throw,

at leaſt, in the confuſion cauſed by their arrival, =

3000 foot and 300 troopers into the place: but as
We did not know their intention till afterwards, that
we were informed of it by ſome priſoners whom
we took, it was not doubted but that there would
be a general action upon the morrow; our two

camps being fo near that we heard diſtinctly from
ours, the found of their trumpets, and the Thouts

of their ſoldiers.
In the midſt of the ground that Speed u vs from
the enemy, there was one ſingle hill almoſt round,

Which appeared to me of extreme importance to
the beſieged city, if the enemy ſhould poſſeſs theme |
ſelves of it. The King, uh had fent me to recon-
__ noitre it, gave me two pieces of cannon, to ſup-
port a regiment that were by his order to poſt and

fortify themſelves there. I cauſed a hut to be e-

rected for myſelf; and when the King came to viſit
this poſt, ke found every thing in order. The next

"my the W making « a ſhew of greater reſolution
- than

48 N E M IR S Bock VI.

than the evening before, began a Qcirmiſh with all
their {mall Mot, and endeavoured to make them-

ſelves maſters of a little wood which was between

the two camps. Above fifty thouſand fires of {mall
arms were given, but with ſo little effect, that Ta-

rabere, who came to my hut to ſap with me, aſ.

ſured me that they had not twenty men flain, nor
more than twice that number wounded,

Night coming on during this tumult; and the
two generals of the enemy's army, u ho thought of
nothing leſs than engaging further, took advantas 30

ok it to retreat, Without woll, to La-Fere. Ihe

King ſuffered them to fly, not to loſe ſight of his
object; and he contented hirlelf with the GUgrace

and the ridicule they had drawn upon themſel es Dy 2

making ſo much ado about nothing.

1 2 ab Sk a: 5 —
EA tie TIA 0 LUV 1E.

The Hllowing Books are publiſhed by A.

DoxALD SON, at Pope's Head.

"he R Matthew Henry's expoſition of hs Old

and New Teſtament: wherein each chap»
ter is ſummed up in its contents; the ſacred text
inſerted at large in diſtinct paragraphs; each para-

raph reduced to its proper heads; the ſenſe given, |
and largely illuſtrated ; with practical remarks and

obſervations. In ſix volumes folio. The ſixth edi-

tion.— Price of the finc paper in quires L. 4: 10:0,
and the coarſe L. 3: 10: 0.— The binding three ”

ſhillings per vol. in calf.

2. Rollin's antient hiſtory, a new edit, ten large

volumes, price 25 ſh. bound.

4: ——— method of ſtadying and teaching the
Belles Lettres, 4 vols, price 12 ſh. bound.

4. TheReverics of field marſhal Count Saxe; or,

memoirs on the art of war, a new tranſlation ; to

which is added, A treatiſe on the legion, with forty
= . plates, 8 vo, price 7 ſh. bound.
A new English Dictionary, containing an ex-

pad of moſt words in the Englich language, 55

3 vo, containing near 600 Pages, and fold for 3 ſh.
bound.

6. juſtice's Gar dener 8 Dilector, for the kitchen,

fruit, and flower garden, ſecond edit. 5 ſh.

7. A ſet of Twelve Views of the caſtle, and o-

ther public buildings in and about Edinburgh, de-

ſigned by the late Mr e and lincly

engraven, price 6 ſh.

8. A new Copy book, containing text, half

text, and round hand, price 2 ſh.

9. A New and Faſy Introduction to the making
of Latin, with remarks upon the idiom of the Ro-

| man language. By Hugh Chriſtie, M. A. Rector of

the Grammer Sch: 0 ct Mon trale. Price 1 ſh. 6 d.
vound, | |

* * The

— r
e

. 4

"i * The examples in this introduction are di-
vided into diſtinct claſſes ; the firſt are ſhort, and
anticipate none of the ſubſequent rules, a fault
much and juſtly complained of in n performances of
this kind. |
10. A Grammar of the Latin tongue, after a
new and eaſy method, adapted to the capacities of wy
children, by the ſame author, price 1 ſh. "IR
The authors of the monthly review, vol. xix.

page 498. are pleaſed to give the following cha-
kacter of the grammar : In regard to the merit

of Mr Chriſtie's Latin grammar, we ſhall only ſay,
that it is theplaineſtand moſt diſtin performance of
the kind we remember to have ſeen within 1 _
row a compals.” _ :
11. Archbiſhop Tillotſon's whole works, a new

x edition, 10 large vols 12mo.

12. A ſelect collection of Engliſh plays, 3
the beſt authors, containing, Mahomet. —— The
orphan of China — Siege of Damaſcus Chri-
ſtian hero — Don Sebaſtian —— The Indian Em-
peror — All for love, Theodoſius, or, The force
of love, King Henrys, and Oroonoko ; all trage-
dies: alſo the following comedies, The Mi-
ſer Provoked Wife — - Recruiting Officer
Conſtant Couple, or, A trip to the jubile; and Sir
Harry Wildair. T heſe make three handſome vo ·
lumes.
: 13. The Re 8 Opera Polly, an opera,
and Gay's Paſtorals, bound together, price 2 bh. 844.
or the paſtorals ſeparate. ;
14. Ramſay's tea table miſcellany, 4 vols in one,
price 3 ſh. bound.
_ Hill's arithmetic, a new edition, price 3 ſh.
bound. 5
16, The Military Kiſtory of Germany, and of

England, from the or 1727 to 1749, pice bound
"I |
