Memoirs of Maximilian de Bethune, Duke of Sully, Vol. 3 (Maximilien de Béthune, duc de Sully, 1638)
==========================================================
Sully's Mémoires (1638) - Henri IV's great minister on war, finance and statecraft; the classic ministerial memoir. The English translation (after Charlotte Lennox, 1756; 1760 printing), 5 vols. Vol. 3 of 5.

MAXIMILIAN DE BETHUNE,

DUKE or SULLY;

PRIME MINISTER. OF

HENRY: cms GREAT

15 Newly tranſlated from the French edition of

M. de L' EcLusE.

INFIVE: VOLUMES.

VOLUME III.

E DI N B UR G KE:

*%

£ | Printed for A. Do x ATL DSoOx, at Pope's Head,

MDC CLX.

*

e . % —ßætn ]⅛ —Ü1j ⅛ ͤJ 5 ˙ .... —Ter! . ]⅛vis [m - wor ̃] - moto no

*
5
IA
7 4
1 Hl

4.50 G0 * 8 8 4 * r bs i =;
# 4 a : . p
—_— ; * » l * 5 2

. RY;

SUMMARY of Book XIII.

Emoirs of the year 1692. Foreign princes at
Paris. Henry IV. goes to i'lois : the occa-

ſion of his journey. An account of Marechal Bi-
ron's conſpiracy : a council held at Blois upon this
occaſion, A deſign formed to arreſt the Dukes of
Epernon and Bouillon: the firſt clears his conduct;
the great art and addreſs of the ſecond. Quarrel
between the King and Queen : Henry's copverſa-
tion with Roſny upon this ſubject. The effects of
Henry?s journey into the provinces ; he reſolves to
have Biron arreſted : particulars of his and the
Count d'Auvergne's impriſonment; and of Piron's
trial and execution: Roſny's behaviour through
out this affair. Henry pardons the Peron de Lux,
and the Count d*Auvergne, who again betrays him:
reaſons why he behaved in this manner to the
Count d' Auvergne. The Prince of Joinville ar-
reſted : the King pardons bim alſo; but he is con-
fined in priſon. The Duke of Bouillon artfully a-
voids coming to court. The courtiers endeavour

6 w.c '

to raiſe ſuſpicions in Henry againſt Roſny : curious

converſations betwixt them on this occalion, Af.
fair of the advocates : diſcourſe of Sigogne. E.
dicts and regulations upon the coin, commerce, fi.
nances, &c. Mines diſcovered in France. Edit
againſt duels. The alliance with the Swiſs renews
ed. Journey of Henry to Calais. Account of the
military exploit: between the Spaniards and Dutch;
and other foreign affairs.

4A 2 8 U M-

omg x —ů— ——— —

1 J

SUMMARY of Book XIV.

Memoirs of the year 1603. Troubles at Metz :
Henry goes thither and baniſhes the Sobolles : o-
wa aftairs tranſacted in this journey. Memorial

gainſt the Cardinal d'Oſſat: examination of the
— and conduct of the Cardinal. Affairs of
the Low Countries. Intrigves of the Duke of Bou-
illon, and new ſeditions of the Calviniſts. Death of
Eliſabeth. James I. King of Great Britain. Hen-
ry's return : his conver ſation with Roſny upon the
death of Eliizbeth : reſolves to ſend Roſny ambal-
ſador to London: deliberations! in the council, and
intrigues in the court, upon this embaſſy. Indif.
poſition of the King. Public and private inſtruc
tions given to Roſuy: his departure with a nume-
rous retinue. Character of young Servin. Roſny
embarks at Calais; inſolted by the vice-admiral of
England: his reception at Dover, at Canterbury,
Sc.; he is received in London with the higheſt ho-
nours : his ſeverity in the affair of Combaut. State
of the political affairs of Great Britain. Character
of the Engliſh : of King james: of the Queen, &c.
Several factions at this court. Roſny's conferences
with the Engliſh counſellors ; with the deputies of
the States- General ; with the reſident from Venice,
&c. He obtains his firſt audience: he is concerned
at not being permitted to appear in mourning,

SUMMARY of Book Xv.

Farther memoirs of the year 1603. Continua-
tion of Roſny's embaſſy to London: detail of
what paſſed at his firſt audience: public converſa-
tions of the King of England with him upon differ»
ent ſubjects. Accidents at the court of London

favourable

DMK. v

favourable and unfavourable to this negotiation.
Diſpoſitions of the different courts of Europe. Roſ-
ny's firſt conference with the Engliſh miniſters. In-
trigues of Spain. Roſny's ſecond audience, and
private converſation with King James: he perſuades
him to ſupport the United Provinces: other affairs
tranſacted between them: his ſecond conference
with the Britiſh miniſters, who endeavour to over-
throw his negotiation. Imprudent proceedings of
Count d' Aremberg. Third audience. Roſny ad-
mitted to the table of the King of England: pu-
lic converſations on different ſubje&ts. Third
conference with the Engliſh miniſters and the depu-
ties of the United Provinces. Artifice and perfidy
of Cecil. Fourth audience: private converſations
with King James, to whom he communicates the
political deſigns of Henry IV. and Eliſabeth, and
endeavours to gain his approbation of them : a
Mort abſtract of theſe deſigns: James declargs
himſelf publicly in Roſny's favour. :

SUMMARY: of Book XVI.

Farther memoirs of the year 1603. Continua-
tion of the embaſſy and negotiations of Roſny at
the court of London. Form of a treaty with his
Britannic Majeſty : ſubſtance of this treaty. Diſ-
patches from Roſny intercepted. Audience of
leave, and Roſny's laſt converſation with K. James:
preſents which he makes in London: his return:
dangers at ſea : his reception from Henry IV.: pu-
blic converſation between them on the ſubje& of
his negotiation. Memoirs of the ſtate of affairs in
England, Spain, the Low Countries, and other fo-
reign countries. Roſny reſumes his labours in the
finances. Henry ſupports him openly in a quarrel
which he had with the Count de Soiſſons: he en-

= tertains

vi 7

tertains the King at Roſny. Journey of Henry in-
to Normandy : what paſſed in this journey. Mu—
tiny of the Proteſtants of the aſſembly of Gap.
Roſny made governor of Poitou. Eſtabliſkment of
the ſilk manufactory in France: converſations on
this ſubject, in which Roſny endeavours to diſſuade
Henry from this deſign. Remarks on his opinion
of wearing ſilk, and on other parts of luxury. A
colony ſettled at Canada.

SUMM ART Of Boon XVII.

Memoirs of the year 1604. Medals preſented to
his Majeſty by Roſny. Death of the Ducheſs of
Bar: particulars concerning her death, and the diſ-
putes which it occaſions. Deliberations upon the
re-eſtabliſhment of the Jcſuits. Converſations of
Roſny with Henry, and the arguments which he
urges againſt their re-eſtabliſhment : the conditions
upon which they are recalled : protection granted
them by Henry. Father Cotton makes his court
to Roſny. Memorial againſt Cardinal D'Oſſat. Sen-
timents of Roſny not favourable to this Cardinal,
or the policy of the Catholics. Treachery of Ni-
colas L'Hote ; how diſcovered : particulars upon
this ſubject. Villero!'s conduct examined. Roſny's
ſentiments upon the difference of religion. Pro-
motions of Cardinals, and affairs of Rome. Cu-
rious converſation of Henry with Roſny, upon the
domeſtic diſorders occaſioned by the Queen and
the Marchioneſs of Verneuil.

SUMMARY of BOOK XVIIL

Farther memoirs of the year 1604. Continua-
tion of the preceding article, upon the diſquiets
and domeſtic quarrels of Henry IV. Roſny endea-
| | vours

1 1 2 3 all
" cel
a e

% — 99

1

AN Fo vii

vours to put an end to them: the riſk he run up-
on this occaſion from the Queen and the Mar-
chioneſs of Verneuil; her malignity. Wiſe and
diſintereſted conduct of Queen Margaret. Faction
of the Proteſtants and ſeditious in the kingdom.
Henry's journey to the provinces deſigned and pre-
vented. Roſny viſits his government: how recei-
ved at Rochelle, at Poitiers, &c. Hatred of the
Proteſtants againſt him : other particulars and ad-
vantages of this journey : his reception from Henry
at his return, Juſtification of the Duke d' Eper-
non : falſely accuſed. New intrigues of the Count
d' Auvergne: means uſed by Henry to have him

arreſted : letters which he received and wrote to

him: an account of his being ſeized : his trial.
The Marchioneſs of Verneuil is likewite arreſted :
Roſny is employed to interrogate her: he can, nei-
ther by advice nor intreaties, perſuade Henry to
baniſh her from France. Weaknels of this prince
for his miſtreſs. *

SUMMARY of BOOK XIX.

Farther memoirs of the year 1604. Henry IV.
depoſits bis treaſure in the Baſtile : a council held
on this occaſion. Conliderations and maxims of
Roſny upon government : means he makes uſe of
to recover money.  FYerification of rents : other
operations and tail of the finances. Regulations
of the police and army. Eſtabliſhment of a mili-
tary hoſpital. The talents and abilities of Henry IV.
for government. Caules of the weakneſs of ſtates.
Rupture between France and Spain, on account of
commerce. Peace reſtored by Roſny, by means
of a treaty : particulars and ſubſtance of the treaty.
Farther account of the affairs of the United Pro-
vinces, of Spain, and of England. Agreement and
treaty between the two laſt powers. Caules of the
diſcontent.

_
_— 2 —
:

|

viii SUMMARY;

diſcontent of the United Provinces againſt Eng.
land. The Conſtable of Caſtile comes to Paris:
his converſation with the King. Other converſa-
tions between Henry and Roiny concerning this
ambaſſador. Erroneous maxim of Roſny's on the
Salic law. Introduction to the execution of Hen-

ry's great deſigns. Affairs of the Griſons, and of

the fort of Fuentes, proceedings of the French,
and other particulars on this affair. Diſpute with
the Pope on the ſubject of the bridge of Avign6n ;
terminated by Roſny in favour of the King. The
acquiſition of the earldom of Salat Paul: prudent
advice given by Roſny to Henry on this occaſion,
Religious orders eſtabliſhed in France.

SUMMARY of Book XX.

Memoirs of the year 1605. Concluſion of the
proceſs againſt the Counts of Auvergne and En-
tragues. Complaiſance and weaknels of Henry IV.
for the Marchioneſs of Verneuil. The Jctuits pro-
cure the demolition of the pyramid. Great diſpute
between Roſny and Father Cotton, on the ſubj ect
of the college of Poitiers : defends himſelf againſt
the calumnies of his enemies: his reconciliation
with Father Cotton: he quarrels with the Duke d'E-

rnon and Grillon : their reconciliation. Inſtances
of the fantaſtical humour of Grillon. New calum-
nies againſt Roſny, by which he is in danger of be-
ing diſgraced. An affecting converſation with Hen»
ry, in which they are reconciled : an intereſting
detail of this whole affair. Other attempts of
Roſny's enemies to ruin bim: marriage of his
daughter with the Duke of Rohar. Henry refuſes
to give the /zeutenance de Roi of Saint jean d' An-
gely to the Duke of Rohan: other favours and gra-
tuities granted and refuſed to Roſny by the King.
Henry's deſign to marry Mademoiſelle de Melun to
the Marquis of Cœuvres.

he
N-
V.
o-
are
ccc
inſt
ion
E-
ces
um-
be-
len;
tin
*
his
fuſes
An-
gra-
King.
un T0

% 6

O O KRK M.

HE perturbation in the minds of the peo»
ple, occaſioned by all thoſe domeſtic in-
ſurrections mentioned in the preceding
book, did not hinder them from relign—

ing themſelves, this winter, to their accuſtomen
pleaſures and public diverſions. By the Queen's
order, and for her amuſement, a magnificent in-
terlude was compoſed : the arſenal was the place
the King choſe for the repreſentation of theſe diver-
ſions, on account of the conveniency its ſpacious
apartments afforded, both for the actors and ſpec-
tators. At the time that this interlude was to be
play ed, the wound I had received in my mouth at
the ſiege of Chartres happening to open again, I was
not in a condition to give the neceſſary orders at the
arſenal, and they had already pitched upon another
place for its repreſentation ; but the Ring choſe ra-

ther to wait till I was cured, which retarded that
entertainment eight days.

Towards the middle of Lent, the Count of Schom-

berg, Grand Marechal of the empire, and envoy
trom the court of Vienna, arrived at Paris, into
which he made his entry with a retinue of forty or
© fifty horſe. The King ordered the ſame honours to

VoL, III. A be

2 le Book XIII.

be paid him that the Marechal de * Bois-Dauphin
had received at Vienna. The prince, ſon to the
Marquis of Brandenburg, reſided likewiſe ſome time
at Paris. It was not uſual to defray the expences
of perſons of his rank, eſpecially, as his Majeſty
obſerved, if they did not follow the court : but the
King was reſolved to ſhew a particular reſpect to a
prince, whoſe family, one of the moſt illuſtrious in
Germany, had always profeſſed a remarkable at-
tachment for France; and I was ordered to ſend
him every day, in his Majeſty's name, preſents of
the richeſt wines, and moſt exquiſite proviſions for
his table.

When every thing was ready for the King's de
parture, and his Majeſty, in the ſeveral journeys he
had made to Paris, had given all the neceflary or-
ders for ſecuring peace and tranquillity in that city,
and in the provinces from which he was going to
remove, as well as thoſe through which he was to
paſs, he left Paris on the 2oth of May, and came to
Fontainebleau, from whence he took the road to
Blois. The Queen, and all her houſchold accom-
panied his Majeſty in his journey ; I likewiſe attend-
ed him, but did not ſet out till a few days after : the
King ſent me notice of his arrival at Blois, and his
intention of ſtaying there eight or ten days. This
delay was no more than neceſſary for a regimen that
was preſcribed him by his phyſicians, to cure a de-
fluxion of humours which had fallen on one of his
legs, and for the time it laſted, as Henry wrote to
me, might well be called the gout. Blois likewiſe
was the moſt proper city he could chuſe to diſcover
the ſecret practices of Marechal Biron. Henry had
many perſons in this province in whom he could
confide, who applied themſelves ſolely to the ma-
king thoſe diſcoveries, and almoſt every hour ſent

a Urban de Laval, Marquis de Sable, who died in 1629.
courlers

riers

1602. O0 F . 3

couriers to him with the intelligence they had pro-
cured. By them the King was informed, that Bi-
ron's cabal extended to Anjou, the higher Poitou,
Xaintonge, Mirebalais, Chatellerandois, Angou-
mois, Perigord, Limoſin, Marche, and Auvergne,
and even took in the higher Guyenne, and Langue-
doc; that it was ſupported by four or five noble-
men of the court, whole names were not expreſſed,
for fear of advancing any thing that was yet doubt-
ful. The connections with Spain, the ſchemes for
ſurpriſing the frontier cities, and the arguments they
made uſe of to inſtigate the people againſt the pre-
ſent government, (the ſame which 1 have already
mentioned), made up part of theſe advices, and
to them the following new informations were added.
The ſeditious, to prepoſſeſs the people with un-
favourable thoughts of his Majeſty's journey to Blois,
which was doubtleſs a fource of uneaſy apprehen-
ſions to them, gave out every where that Hen
had only undertaken it with a deſign to chaſtiſe 5
verely thoſe that had reſiſted Jambe ville, D'Amours,
and the other commiſſaries that had been ſent to ex-
act the duty of 5 per cent. upon the rivers and other
places of paſſage, and to ſettle it himſelf, in ſuch
a manner, that, by a new regulation of the rates,
it ſhould produce thrice as much, and to force the
duty on falt to be every where received by taking
poſſeſſion of the ſalt-pits, for which the proprietors
were to have no other recompence than ſome ill- paid
annuities from the town-houſe of Paris; and, laſtly,

to ſtop the murmurs which it was expected the ex-

acting of two tenths would raiſe, (which, they made
them believe, Henry had obtained the Pope's per-
miſſion to levy), . and the revocation of the draw-

backs granted on the taxes of 1594, 1595, and

1596, which I have already mentioned in the ac-

count of my journey into the ſeveral diſtricts.

Thus was this good prince repreſented, almoſt
A 2 throughout

4 NM E M O 1 R 8 -. Book XIII.

throughout his whole kingdom, as a furious and im-
placable tyrant. They were never without one ſet
of arguments to engage the Catholic nobility in a re-
bellion againſt him, and another to ſow ſedition a-
mongſt the Proteſtant officers and gentry. To the
firft they repreſented, that this treaſure and this for-

| midable artillery, which the King was providing,
1 were to be employed in depriving them totally of
their privileges, and reducing them to a ſtate of
flavery ; they perſuaded the ſecond, that the perſe-
cution againſt them was already begun, that the pay-
ment of their garriſons, the funds for the preſerva-
tion of their cities, the penſions of their leaders,
their officers and miniſters, would be leſſened this
year by one third, and the next by two, after which
there would be ſo much the leſs difficulty in depri-
ring them of all their fortreſſes, as it was a point
already agreed upon by the council, to exclude the
Proteſtants from all public offices and employments,
by refuſing to expedite the patents for them.

If the proofs againſt the perſons of the conſpira-
tors had been as clear as thoſe of their plots, the
King might that inſtant have given free courſe to
his juſtice ; but, with regard to the Dukes of Bouil-
lon and Tremoville, for example, there was as yet
leſs certainty of their guilt, than of Marechal Biron
and the Count d*Auvergne's; for at the moſt there
were only ſuſpicions, though thoſe indeed were ve-
ry ſtrong, againſt them. "The other lords of the
court, whole names, to the number of eight, were
found ia the liſt, might be well ranged under a third
claſs of perſons, whoſe doubtful conduct required
ſome explanation. 'The Dukes of Bouillon and E-
pernon attended the King in his journey to Blois,
and his Majeſty was of opinion, he might be able
to draw from themſelves a proof of their real ſenti-
ments, by attentively obſerving the air and turn of

their countenance, during the recital he made 8
| 0

— — > 2724 3
xy - — - Ga — oy ”
8 2 « 9
9 * — 2 oY * * 4

Ae Arne UU—::E:::t·T— „„

— _ * = 2

> — — —— —
— — * 4 —

a ler 5

of the news he received : he began firſt with D' E-
pernon. A juſt regard to truth has ſo often redu-
ced me to the neceſſity of ſpeaking diſadvantageouſly
of this nobleman, that it is with a real ſatisfaction 1
ſeize this opportunity of ſhewing his innocence,
and giving him the praiſe he deſerves.

D'Epernon hearing whiſpers about the court of
intrigues and cabals, caſily apprehended, that, as it
is uſual to judge of the preſent by the paſt, his name
would not fail to be mentioned amongſt thoſe that
weie called enemies to the ſtate; for which reaſon
he took the precaution to renew to his Majeſty at
Fontainebleau his aſſurances of fidelity. Theſe aſ-
ſurances were all the proofs he had to offer, and un-
fortunately Henry, who had been long prejudiced
againſt him, did not give much credit to them.

Notwithſtanding this ftp he ſtill continued to ſuſ-

pet him, and becauſe D'Epernon, in ſpeaking to
him had referred to me, the King wrote to me at
Paris an account of what had paſſed between him
and the Duke, letting me know, at the ſame time,
that D*Epernon ſeemed to have an intention to make
up matters with me, and he ordered me to make
the firſt advances to him, to the end that, if the
crime with which he was charged ſhould appear to
be yet only intentional, his Majeſty might not have
any cauſe to reproach himſelf with having ſuffered
the Duke to ruth into actual treaſon, when there
needed only good advice and kind treatment to pre-
vent him from ſo doing.

I obeyed the King's orders; and, from that mo-
ment, became convinced of the Duke of Epernon's

innocence. He ſpoke in the ſame ſtrain to the King

at Blois as he had done to me, and did not deny his

having heard of ſome commotions and ſecret in-
trigues, but ſaid, that theſe were always ſo general,
and fomerimes ſo full of contradiction, that he could
not imagine that any credit was to be given to them;

A 3 that

6 M E MO IR S Book XIII.

that thoſe who were ſaid to be the authors or fa-
vourers of theſe plots having never given him the
leaſſ iutimation of them, he had treated as a fiction,
a project which appeared to him wholly extravagant,
the preſent ſituation of affairs rendering the execu-
tiop of it abſolutely impoſſible : but whether real or
not, the Duke offered to continue about his Maje-
ſty's perion, as a ſecurity for his own fidelity, for
the ſpace of ſix months; and if that time was not
ſufficient, he ſwore to the King, that he would not
leave his Majeſty till bis ſuſpicions were entirely re-
moved. The King could have no objection to ſo
reaſonable a propoſal; and began, as well as I, to

believe that the Duke d' Epernon was innocent.
The Duke of Bouillon diſcovered far leſs ſince-
rity. On the firſt mention his Majeſty made of the
plot to him, he treated it as a calumoy invented by
ſpies and informers, againſt the nobility of the king-
dom, to magnify their own ſervices, and appear at
leaſt to gain the money that was given them for un-
dertaking that deſpicable office. To this reproach,
which tacitly attacked his Majeſty, he added an ap-
plication of a paſſage in the New Teſtament, 11 zs
impoſſible but that offences will come, but woe unto
him through whim they come; a paſſage, which, if
taken in its true ſenſe, might have been with more
juſtice applied to Bouillon and his adherents. Boull-
lon did not ſtop here ; he added, that it was true
he was tcld, that the Catholics, as well as the Pro-
teſtants, complained of their being oppreſſed with
high taxes; and that, in proportion as the King's
1iches and happineſs increaſed, they became poor
and miferable: that, beſides theſe general com.
plaints, he bad, in a certain place, heard Proteſtants
lay, that ſooner or later it would be their deſtiny,
to be looked upon as the plague and nuſance of the
ſtate ; that both they and their children would be
bated, perſecuted, and preſcribed ; that they gr
A

1602. O F

3-V-LLY -

be excluded from all honours and employments,
and that the kingdom would never be quiet till they
were totally extirpated: he added, that the more
credit was given to theſe reports, becaule that per-
ſons of the greateſt abilities in the kingdom, not
being admitted to the council, nor conſulted on af-
fairs relating either to the difference of religions, or
to the new taxes impoſed, they could not inform
the people of the true motive of thoſe reſolutions that
were taken there, nor could the people attribute
them to any thing but to a deſign againſt their li-
berty.

13 ſufficiently plain, that the Duke of Bouillon,
by talking in this manner, ſought to inſinuate to
the King, that all theſe reports of a rebellion had
no other foundation than the cries of che people op-
preſſed with a multitude of taxes; and that this
ſeeming diſcontent was put on to conceal from his
Majeſty his real ſentiments ; but the inſolence and
ſeverity of his expreſſions ſhewed plathly enough,
that he could not reſiſt this opportunity of diſchar-
ging ſome part of his malice : he even added, with
tae ſame ſubtlety, and with equal chagrin, that they
had endeavoured to perſuade himſelf, that his Ma-
jeſty intended to aboliſh the privileges of his viſ-
county of Tvurenne, and to purchaſe the rights and
claims of the houſe of Mark upon Sedan ; bat to
this, as well as to every thing elſe, he had only re-
plied, that he was perſuaded the King would never
act in ſuch a manner, on account of the ſervices he
had at all times received from the Proteſtant body;

he finiſhed, by proteſting to his Majeſty, that, al-
though all that had been told him concerning the

ſeditious and traiterous attempts in the kingdom
ſhould be as true as he believed them falſe, yet, as

to himſelf, it ſhould never make bim ſwerve from
his duty and fidelity.

The King, diſſembliog to the Duke of *
the

——
— x — — — — rw - _
—

—  J@_—_— —

— ˙KUũ˖ũ ũ K wv . 222222 -

8 M E MM ON 8: Book AHI;

the opinion he conceived of him from this diſcourſe,
made him a propoſal of the ſame nature with that
which the Duke of Epernon had of himſelf fo frank-
iy made, and which he expected would throw him
into great confuſion. He told the Duke, that he
was ſatisfied with his aſſurance; and that he would
no longer preſerve any remainder of diſtruſt of him,
provided he would give the ſame ſatisfaction that
Epernon had offered, which was, not to remove
from the court while this atfair continued in agita-
tion; and that he might depend upon it, ke would
not keep him about his perſon without communica-
ting to him all his deſigns, and calling bim to his
councils, as he ſeemed to deſire, that he might be
Eimſelf a witneſs of his folicitude to relieve the peo-
ple, and be able to give both the Proteſtants and
Carholics an inconteſtable proof of the purity of
his intentions. Bouillon preſerved an uncommon
preſence of mind under this blow; he broke out in-
to an exclamation of joy and ſurpriſe at the ſenti-
ments his Majeſty diſcovered for him; and as to the
propoſal he made him, he told him, that he would
go and ſettle bis matters for complying with it, not
for {ix months only, but for his whole life, if ne-
ceſſary, by taking a journey throughout all his e.
ſtates, that nothing might afterwards interrupt the
long ſtay he intended to make at court. In this
manner, by appearing to do all that his Majcſty re.
quired, he reſerved, nevertheleſs, the power of do-
ing only what he pleaſed himſelf, and of making a
plauſible excuſe for the ſudden departure for which
he was really preparing.

Henry, comprehending his deſign, reſolved to
call a ſecret council to deliberate upon the meaſures
that were neceſſary to be taken in this conjuncture.

The Count of Soſſoins, the Chancellor, Villeroi,
Maiſſe, and myſelf, were all that were preſent at
this council: all other affairs were poſtponed till

Deſcures

% & „ _—_— 5 - =”

7 & - _-.-

5 -n, os

1602. 0 7 e . 9

Deſcures was heard, who had been ſent by his Ma-
jeſty to invite Marechal Biron to court, and whole
report was ſuch, that it was unanimouſly reſolved
to arreſt this Marechal and the Count d' Auvergne
as ſoon as they arrived. The King afterwards pro-
poſed to our deliberation, whether it would not be
proper to do the like by the Dukes of Bouillon and
Epernon, before they left the court. Almoſt all
the counſellors were of this opinion; and the moſt
diſtinguiſhed amongſt them, qualified it no other-
wiſe, than by ſaying, that Biron was the only one
to whom mercy might be afterwards extended, be-
cauſe that doing nothing by himfelf, he would ea-
fily be reduced to reaſon, when he was ſeparated
from thoſe who hurried him on to his ruin. I take
particular notice of this advice upon account of its
lingularity.

My opinion was directly oppoſite. I could not
approve of the arreſting of Epernon, or even of
Bouillon. If in ſuch caſes, ſuſpicions were to ſetve
for proofs, it was likewiſe neceſſary, I ſaid, to ar-
reſt all whom La-Fin had accuſed, and myſelf the
firſt. Let us ſuppcſe, they ſhould afterwards be

found innocent, by this precipitate action, an op-

portunity might be loſt of ſeizing Biron and Au-
vergne, Whole treaſons were manifeſt, ſince it
would be impoſlible to arreſt them all at the ſame
time, and their flight would put it out of our power
to prove any thing againſt the priſoners. The ar-
reſting of Bouillon and Epernon, I added, would
have this farther ill conſequence, that, whether
guilty or innocent, his Majeſty could not, after ſuch

| a ſtep, avoid treating them as traitors, through
a juſt fear of what their reſentment only of ſuch a

public outrage might, induce them to act againſt

bim. The King yielded to this advice, and the
© Council broke up, it being already dinner-time,
His Majeſty being deſirous of conferring with me

alone

— — ——— —
a —

—
COT ny S

— . err — — CZ — —
— -
AE IRISH

I D—

——

— . —

* — 2 — — =
— —
wv * 5 oe — Fen -

+

10 ME M OI R S Dock XIII.

alone upon what had been debated in the council,
bid me ſnatch a ſoldier's dinner, and come back to
him before the court filled again.

When 1 went down into the hall, where I was
waited for by a croud of pcople who attach them -
ſetves to men in power, I ſaw the Duke of Eper-
non advancing to meet me, who, with the fame
air of conſcious innocence which I had before ob-
ſerved in him, told me, that ſuch long and ſecret
councils alarmed a great many perſons, but he was
not of the rumber, becauſe he had nothing to re-
proach himſelf with. I replied, that he bad then
nothing to fear, the King being more diſpoſed to
pardon the guilty, who confeſſed their crimes,
than to puniſh the innocent on ſuſpicions only.“ I

„ perceive,” added I,“ many people who are lea-

* ving the court; but thoſe whoſe conſciences are
& clear, need not have recourſe to that expedient.”
& TI am one of theſe,” added Epernon; “ and I
« am reſolved not to leave the court while theſe diſ-
« contents continue.” «©« You cannot do better,
« my Lord,” replied I; © and I promiſe you, that,
ce on this occaſion, you ſhall not loſe the merit of
« having taken ſo good a reſolution,”

When I came home, I ordered my ſteward to o-
mit one entire courſe, and to ſerve up any thing
that was ready. Nicolas “ came in juſt as I was
ſitting down to table: “Come wath immediately,”
faid I, without telling him of the orders I had juſt
given, © and take your place.“ He was greatly a-
ſtoniſhed to hear me, after I had drank two glaſles,
and eaten a haſty morſel, aſk for the fruit, and, at

Simon Nicolas was the King's ſecretary, © a poet, a facetious
% man, and an old offender, fays the journal of Henry IV. be.
* lievirg in God only for intereſt, and, for this reaſon, he became
© the more acceptable to company, according to the corrupt man-
ners of thoſe wretched times.” He died two years after, in the
7oth year of his age, in bis laſt illneſs expreſſing himſelf with fect
infamous impiety, as will not admit a tranſlation,

the

"+ #. 55. deeb

Uz
—

an explanation of it here, leſt I ſhould betray the ſe-

the ſame time, order my horſe to be got ready : he
who loved good cheer as well as mirth, was not
pleaſed at this order. Pardieu, Monſieur,” ſaid
he,“ I am not ſurpriſed that you paſs for one of the
&« yiſeſt noblemen in France; I don't know one
ce who can drink three glaſſes during the whole time
« you are at dinner,” “ Well, well, Monſieur
« Nicolas,” replied I, “do you make an end of
& your dinner, as for me I have buſineſs that calls
« me elſewhere.” |

I related to his Majeſty what D*Epernon had ſaid
to me a little time before. The King agreed with
me that D'Epernon had no inducement to engage
in an affair that was carried on by perſons, whoſe
religion and diſpoſition were different from his, by
which likewiſe, while he had no advantages to hope
for, he run the hazard of being {tript af his eſtates
and employments. D' Epernon had judgment e-
nough to know that the ſcheme of theie rebels was
likely to be a fatal one.“ Not,” ſaid the King,
© that probably in his heart he is not glad of theſe
&« diſorders, that he may become more neceſſary to
&© me; but he knows by experience ſuch deſigns
te are often blaſted.” His Majeſty charged me to
make another effort to prevail upon the Dukes of
Bouillon and Tremouille to ſtay at court, but to de-
fer it till he went to Poitiers, becauſe he might then
receive intelligence that would determine him. I
uſed my utmoſt endeavours for this purpoſe, in the
preſence of Meſſieurs de La Nouë, de Conſtant,
I Aubigne, and de Preaux ; but all I could ſay was
ineffectual.

During their Majeſties ſtay at Blois, an affair of

a very different nature was in agitation at court,
: whieh I am under ſome perplexity how to relate,
- becauſe it made too much noiſe to be paſſed over in

lilence ; and yet I am not at liberty to enter into

cret

12 ME M OI R S Bock XIII.

cret confided to me alone by the King and Queen,
whom it perſonally concerned ; the medium there-
fore which I ſhall obſerve, is to recount only fo
much of it as tranſpired, and came to the knowledge
of the courtiers,

It was reported, that there was ſome miſunder-
ſtanding between the King and Queen, which was
confirmed by the King's ſending Armagnac for me ſo
early in a morning, that he was ſtill in bed, as well
as the Queen, and, contrary to their uſual cuſtom,
each in their ſeveral apartments. It was obſerved,
that I had been ſeveral times backwards and for-
wards between them, and I had been ſeen kneeling
three or four times before the King and Queen, as

if I was endeavouring to obtain ſome great favour of

them. As nothing in ſuch caſes eſcapes the inqui-
ſitive courtier, each formed particular conjectures up-
on theſe circumſtances, as alſo that, with the names
of the King and Queen, they heard thoſe of the
Duke and Ducheſs of Florence, and Mantua, Virgil
Urſin, Don John, Bellegrade, Trainel, Vinti,
Joannini, Conchini, Leonora, Gondy, Catherine,
Selvage, and the Marchioneſs of Verneuil ; other
perſons, they ſaid, were hinted at, under the co-
vert name of the tawny complexioned. They en-
deavoured to diſcover ſomething by my wife, ha-
ving learned that Conchini, who had often buſineſs
with her, and who publicly paid her the ſame re-
ſpect as a ſervant to his miſtreſs, and often addreſl-
ed her by that title, had been ſeveral times ſent by
the Queen to bring her; and that ſhe paſſed many
Whole afternoons ſhut up with her Majeſty in her
cloſet, when ſhe was alone, or when only Leonora
was with her.

But that which afforded moſt matter for diſcourſe
was, that, at the lime when theſe diſputes ran highelt,
La-Varenne came one morning to acquaint me, that
the King waited for me in the new gallery which he

| had

1002. 9 „ 13

had lately cauſed to be built at Blois, over thoſe that
extend the whole length of the lower garden, it is
that in which there is the odd repreſentation of a
hind with a ſtag's horns. It was obſerved, that his
Majeſty ordered two Swiſs, who underſtood not a
word of French, to be placed centinels at the end
of this gallery which was not yct cloſed up, and
and that, during two hours and more which we con-
tinued together, we ſeemed to talk with great ear-
neſtneſs and action. They might, notwithitanding
the diſtance, hear ſome of our words, from which
they could draw no lights; but it was not the ſame
with thoſe which his Majeſty ſpoke when he went
out; theſe they underſtood, and carefully remem-
bered. © No more need be ſaid of it; I will regu-
« late my whole conduct by your advice, ſaid the
“ King, that I may be no longer reproached with
obltinately followmg my own will; but remem-
ber, that we may probably both repent it one
day; for you cannot but be affected with any
misfortunes that happen to me. I know the diſ-
poſition of thoſe perſons who fomeat our differ-
ences, they will be the cauſe of great uncaſineſs
« to the ſtate. Gentleneſs and indulgence are lau-
e dable qualities, I confeſs; but you cannot deny

allo, that their extremes are dangerous.“ It
was not difficult for them likewiſe to diſtinguiſh the
latter part of my reply to the King.“ It was, in-
deed, a part of prudence, I told him, to foreſee

and to prevent bad accidents, but it was equally
* neceſſary to avoid haſtening them by uleleſs pre-
* cautions.” On this they founded their ſuſpicion,
that the King had a deſign to proceed to ſome vio-

cc
4
cc
cc
c&

6c

cc

cc

lent meaſures again't certain perſons of the Queen's

* houſchold, and who were moſt in her confidence.
I can ſay no more oa this ſubject.

From

® This is ſpeaking very p'a'nly; end ax the other mcmoirs of
VoL. III. B that

14 M E NM Is Book AHL.

From Blois the King came to Poitiers; he after-
wards ſhewed himſelf in the Limoſin and Guyenne':
his preſence produced every where ſo good an ef-
fect, that he found no oppoſition to his will, not
even to the eſtabliſhment of the duty of 5 per cent.
tax *: he might have afterwards continued this tax,
and the levying it would have met with no difficulty;
but, ſatisfied with the ſubmiſſion of his people, he
took that opportunity to change it into a ſmall ſub-
lidy, and afterwards to ſuppreſs it entirely. The
edict of revocation expreſſed, that his Majeſty was
wholly induced to it by the obedience of his ſubjects.
Henry, pleaſed with the ſucceſs of his journey t,
returned again to Fontaincbleau, whicther he was
ſoon followed by Marechal Biron.

The conſternation into which his party was
thrown by the King's journey, convinced him that
his affairs were not ſo far advanced as he had been
willing to believe; this made him take a reſolution
to go to court, which ſeveral other motives contri—
buted to confirm, His treaty with Spain and Savoy

that time all agree with this notion, it can ſcarce be doubted, that
Henry bad not only taken a reſolution to clear the court of thei:
informers, who cxaſperatcd the Queen's mind againſt him, bu:
likewiſe to make this princeſs ſenſible of her indiſcretion, by for-
bearing to ſce her, and cbliping her to live at a diſtance from him.
in one of bis pajaces, and perhaps by ſending her back to Florence.
We may ſce, in the Hiltory of the Mother and Son, tom. 1. p. 9.
that this Prince had threatened her both with the one and the other,
It is probable that M. de Roſny thought this laſt courſe rather toy
violent, as, in fact, it was, all citcumſtances conſidercd.

* La-Septennaire ſays, that M. de Roſny was ſent for this pur
pole by his Majcfly to Rochelle; and that he was commiſſioned by
the-Rochcllers to make rcmenſtrances to the King, for ſuppreſſio;
the ſchedule of rates or tariff of this duty,

+ During this progieſs o Poitiers, ſays La-Septennaire, which 1:
ſicd near two months, the court ſeemed melanchely, the King p«n-
ſive; no councils, no judicial proceedings were held, except at Nj is:
«il which was owing to the public and private diſquiets of Henry,
of which mention has already been made.

Was

ON

3

1602. . 153

was not yet upon ſuch a footing, as could give him
hopes of having an immediate ſupply of what troops
and money he wanted. Too glaring an oppoſition
to the King's will, might raiſe ſuſpicions of his trea-
ſonable practices, which hitherto he imagined had
eſcaped notice; nor was it unlikely, as the Baron
de Lux, his friend and confident, repreſented to
him, that the King, upon his repeated refuſals to
appear before him, would march directly to him with
an army, as to a declared rebel; which would be a
fatal ſtroke to the Marcchal, who was neither in a
condition to defend himſelf, nor to retire into any
of his fortreſſes, which were unprovided with am-
munition of every kind, particularly of artillery.
This 1s a precaution which I had taken, in ma-
king preparations for this ſtroke upon Biron ſome
months before. I repreſented to him, that it was
neceſſary all the pieces cf cannon in the fortified

places of Burgundy ſhould be caſt over again, and

the powder new beat. The attention with which
] applied myſelf to all the duties of my employ-
ment, as maſter of the ordnance, was alone ſuſli-
cient to have made this propotal paſs unſuſpected.
But, that I might not give the leaſt umbrage by it
to the Marechal, I was the firſt to offer him to ſup-
ply the deficiencies, by furniſhing him with plenty
of every thing that was neceſſary from the acſenal of
Lyons, which I had lately filled with great care.
I conſented that Biron ſhuuld diſpatch ſome of his
loldiers to Lyons, to efcort the boats that were to
be loaded with picces of cannon I was to ſend him,
and that he ſhould receive them before he ſent awa

thoſe he already had. He was ignorant that I had
taken ſuch meaſures every where, that the boats from
Lyons which went up the Saone very ſlowly, were
ſtopped by the way, till thoſe that came from Bur-

gundy had got beyond the places under his juriſdic-

2 tion 3

16 M E M O I RS Book XIII.

tion; and when both were in my power, my boats
from Lyons proceedcd no farther,

Biron did not perceive the artifice I had made
uſe of till it was out of his power to prevent it. He
diſcovered fo violent a rage againſt me, and boaſted
ſo publicly he would poigrard me, that the King
wrote to me never to go out without a good guard,
I bad likewiſe, as it without deſign, poſted the
light horſe upon the paſſage of the Loin. But all
this, which Biron probably believed to be done
only to mortity him, could not open his eyes. De-
Lux and he dre no other inference from the im-
poſſibility they were now under of defending them-
ſelves, but that it was neceſſary they ſhould deceive
the King, till, by foreign afiiltance, they had pro-
vided for their ſecurity. Deſcures and jeannin act.
cd in ſuch a manner with them, as to increaſe this
conſidence; and La Fin had not only given Bi-
ron * the ſtrongeſt aſſurance that he had not be-
trayed him, but likewiſe that he had fought for an
interview with the King with no other view than
to ſound him, and that he had found him very far
from gucſiing the truth: This he again confirmed
to him at Fontainebleau, where, as he paſſed him,
he ſaid theſe words; “ Courage, Maſter, ſpeak
« boldly.” The council had likewiſe fo earneſtly
kept the ſecret, that the court was wholly unac-
quainted with what was deſigned againſt Biron ; and
D*Eperron hearing of his arrival at Fontainebleau,
ſent him ſuch offers of ſervice as are uſual among!
perſons of high rank ; in which, after what had

palicd

The Marcchal de Biron imagined that he had ſeen the treaty
that was made with Spain flung into the fire; but La-Fin deceive
him, by burning, inſtead of it, a piece of uaſte- paper.

+ The Duke d'Epernon did not deny, that upon this occaſion he
had performed all the offices of a friend to Marechal de Biron :
When he converſed with him upon this affair,” ſays the hiſtorisn
of his lite,“ he did not do it in ambiguous terms, as others 0

. « hut

”—_
2 F
*

*
8
%
£5,
51
*

r 17

paſſed at Blois, he was guilty of great imprudence,
as he has ſince confeſſed himſelf.

I had gone to Morat for an airing, when Biron
arrived at court. The King ſent me notice of it
in the following billet : My friend, our man is
« come; he affects great modeſty and reſerve :
« haſte hither ſpecdily, that you may adviſe us what
« js to be done. Adieu, my dear friend.” I re-

© but with great openneſs and ſincerity. He acquainted him with
© La-Fin's treachery, and ſhewed him all the proofs of it, and ex-
« horted him to throw himſclf upon the King's mercy. This
« clears the Duke d'Epernon. Du- Pleſſis- Bauſſonniere, a gentle-
« man of honour, and very much attached to the Duke, who was
© the perſon ſent to meet the Marechal, was employed to uſe all
© forts of arguments to prevail with him to aſk the King's pardon,
« And indeed this gentleman, aſſured of his own and his patron's
innocence, could never be induced to retire into a foreign coun-
try, after that the King, why was not ignorant of this ſtep, had
« cauſed the Marechal de Biron to be arreſtcd; in which he did the
«© Duke d*Epernon a conſiderable fervice. The Duke got afterwards
from the ſame hind a ſecond piece of advice, which proved very
ſuccelsful, and that was, to confeſs freely to his Majeſly all Ris
protcedings with the Marechal Biron, and with what views and
* intentions he had treated with him.” The ſame hiſtorian, in this
zccout, throws in ſome hiats, which diſcover the very bottom cf
the Duke d'Epernon's ſentiments, and which at the fame time ſerve
to ſue his character: The Duke &Epernon,” fays be, “ and Bi-
„ton, having gone together to the Louvre to pay their compli-

ments after dinner, his Majeſty being told beforchand of their co-
ming, placed himfelf at a window, to obſerve, through the glaſs,
their motions and countenance. A friend of the Duke d'Eper-
non, who was about the King, gave him notice of this, that he
might regulate his behaviour accordingly. But he acted quite
contrary to what he was adviſed; and being more and more confiim -
ed in the teſtimony he fcceived from his conſcience of his inno-.
cence, and filled with a juſt and high indignation to ſee his fideli-
ty ſulpected, he walked on with un upright countenance, and his
eyes directed towards the wind..w where he knew the King leaned.
This his Majeſty took particular notice, and made thoſe about
him do ſo too. The King afterwards made a match as ten-
nis, in which the Count de Soiflons, with the King, played >
gainſt the Duke d'Epernon and the Marechal.” It is at this
match that the hitloritans of that time. make the-Duke utter a pord
laying, tellipg the Marecha!, “ That he played well, but choſe his
Ade badly.“ Hit. de la vie de Duc d'Epcrnon, an, 1002. p. 205.

B 3 turned

N
1

1
:

18 M E M OI R $S Bock XIII.

turned immediately, as faſt as my horſe could carry
me, and found the King walking before the pavi-
lion where 1 was lodged, with Praſlin, whom he
left to come to me. He took my hand; and con-
tinuing his walk, told me, that he had in vain en-
deavoure ], by every method he could think of, to
extort from Biron “ a confeſſion of his crime, al-
though he was fo little capable of concealing his
thoughts, that he read thera plainly in his counte-
nance. . His Majeſty afterwards laid open to me his
moſt ſecret ſentiments with regard to the Marechal:
he ſtill felt for him all his former tenderneſs, and
beheld him not with reſentment, but compaſſion :
Ardently he wiſhed, that I would ſuggeſt to him
the means by which, without incurring any danger,
he might avoid treating him as a ſtate criminal. But
this was not eaſy to be done, conlidering Biron's
known diſpoſition. If it was dangerous to ſuffer
him to eſcape, when he ſhewed no ſigns of repent-
ance, it was no leſs fo to releaſe him upon his
word, after letting him know that he had proofs of
Eis trealon in his poſſellion,

The King once more reſumed a reſolution ſug-

* The Kir g, wearied out with his obſtinacy, ſuddenly left him,
ſaying, as he went away, © Well, I mull learn the truth elſewhere ;
„Adieu, Baron dc Biron,” Theſe words were like lightning be-
fore a clap of thunder, that {t uck him to the ground; the King
thereby degrading him from thoſe many high dignities to which he
had advanced him. The fame day, after ſupper, the Count 4:
Soillons allo exhorted him, in the King's name, to own the truth to
him; and concluded his remonſttance with this ſentence ct the wil
man, 4. The anger of kings is the forerunner of death.” Pref.
Ibid. After dinner, ſays La-Septennaire, he came to wait on the
King, who was walking in his grand hall, wicre his Majelly, ſhews
ing him his ſtatue in relievo triumphing over the vanquiſhed, a/s
to bim,“ Well, couſin, if the King of Spain had ſcen me thus,
„% what would he ſay 2? To which he lightly made anſwer “ Sir,
« he would fear you but little.” All the Lords that were preſen:
took notice of this preſumpiuous anfiver, and the King looking Stern -
ly at him, Biron, who obſerved it, explained his meanitig, by ad:
ding, © 1 man, Sir, your fixtue, but not your perſcu.“ |

geſted

% 0 n . L . 19

| geſted to him by the natural ſweetneſs of his tem-
; per, Which was, to endeavour to reſtore the Ma-
a rechal to a right way of thinking. But, as his Ma-
; jeſty bad not been able to ſucceed in this attempt
. himſelf, he ordered me to urdertake it, and pro-
) miſed me to avow all I ſhouid ſay ty Biron to en-
. gage his ſubmiſſion, provided that I gave him no
D hint of what La-Fin had jaid, by which the deſign
- of arreſting him might be prevented, to which it
3 _ . would be neceſſary to have recourſe, if the Ma-
| rechal perſiſted in his obitinacy. “ IF he opens
d « himſelf freely to you,” ſaid the King, “upon
: « the confidence you muſt endeavour to inſpire him
n « with of my favourable intentions towards him,
. © aſſure him, that ke may come to me without
at «© fear, and confeſs all; and if he diſguiſes no part
8 % of the truth, I promiſe you, upon my royal word,
er % will pardon him chear fully.“
t- I went to the callle to ſee the Marechal, who ws
15 in his Majeſty's chamber, talking to La-Curee at
of the head of the bed. 1 had a ſufficient number of
attendants with mne; and the Marechal, ſeeing that
85 room was made for me, advanced to ſalute me, but
did it very coldly. I thought I ought to begin, by
in, endeavouring to ſoften the reſentment I knew he en-
re: tertained againſt me. How is this, Sir!“ ſaid I,
a embracing him, “ you ſalute me with the gravity
he i of a ſenator, contrary to your uſual cuſtom : you
: e muſt not be thus reſerved ; embrace me a ſe-
LID * cond time, and let us talk freely.” When we
. were ſeated, and out of the hearing of any perſon
the in the room, “ Well, Sir,” ſaid I, in an obliging

tone,“ What a ſtrange man are you! Have you

0. yet paid your reſpects to the King? How were
Sir, « you received by him? What has he ſaid to you?
lent | * You know his diſpoſition is frank and open; he
i. © likes others to be ſincere with bim. I am told,

you behaved in a very reſerved manner to hin,
c &« which

20

cc
cc

MEMO: 1K $5 Boot XIHL

which was far from being ſeaſonable, nor did it

ſuit with either his temper or your's. I am your
kinſman, your friend, and your ſervant j; take my
counſel, and you will find it will be uſeful to
you : tell me freely what you have upon your
heart, and depend upon it I will procure you fa-
tisfaction; be not apprehenſive that I will de-
ceive you.” To all this Biron contented himſelf

with replying, in a cold and indifferent manner, “ I

cc
cc
cc
(

cc

have waited on the King with all the reverence
and reſpect that I owe bim; I have anſwered all
his queſtions, which were only on genera] mat-
ters, nor had I any thing more to {ſay to him.”
Ah! Sir,” replied I, © it is not thus that you
ought to act with the King: you know the good-
nels of his heart, open your's to him, and declare
freely to him, or to me, if you had rather it ſhould
be fo, all your grievances, and I promile, that, be-
fore night, you ſhall be ſatisfied with each other.”
I have nothing more to ſay, either to the King or
to you, than what I have already ſaid,” returned

the Marcchal : “But if his Ilajeſiy entertains any

«c
60

neſs to ſave him, „is offended at your coldnels ;

16
ly,
646

(e

4
cc

ſuſpicion of me, or thinks I have given him
any cauſe of complaint againſt me, let him or
you acquaint me with the occaſion of theſe ſu-
ſpicions and diiguſts, and I will give you fatif-
faction.“ © The King,” faid I, in my eager-
bl
for as to other particulars,” added 1 immediate-
© he is quite ignorant: but let your conſcience
be your judge, and act in the ſame manner as
if you knew we were informed of your moſt ſe—
cret actions, nay even your words and thoughts:
for I proteſt to you, upon my honour, this is the
molt certain way to obtain whatever you can de-
tire from the King. The method I recommend
to you I always follow myſelf. If it ever hap-
pens that I commit any little fault, I acknow-
| e edge

KD @ <4 x Py #*% <<. aa

. 1602. O F . 21

t « ledge and exaggerate it to the King, who then
[ grants me all I wiſh, If you will believe me, and
/ « take my counſel, dear Marechal,” purſued I,
0 « you and I ſhall govern the court, and be at the
r « head of affairs.” “J am willing to believe you,“

. replied Biron with the fame coldneſs, “ but I have
. * nothing to accuſe myſelf of; I feel my con-
F & ſcience perfectly at eaſe, ſince the confeſſion I
I &© made the King at Lyons.” Although I had pro-
0 bably ſaid but too much already, yet I could not
ll forbcar making him ſeveral other motions and in-
[ treaties, which he received no better, and ſoon af-
* ter withdrew to his own lodgings.
u The King entering that moment, I repeated to
4. him all that I had faid to Biron, and bis anſwers.
re © You have gone rather too far,” faid this prince
Id to me, © and have ſail enough to create ſome ſuſpi -
e & cion in him, and even to induce him to fly. Go
8 &« into that gallery,” added his Majeſty, after reſlect-
or ing ſome moments upon the blindneſs and obſtinat᷑y
ed with which the Marechal hurried on to his ruin,
ny & and wait for me there; 1 would talk to my wife
im e and you alone.” Accordingly, he returned a ſhort
or _ time aſterwards with the Qucen, and ſhutting the
u- door of the gallery, he told us, that the double ob-
11. ligation he was under, as a king and father, to
er- Vatch over the ſafety and happineſs of the ſtate,
$; leaving him no other part to take, but that of arreſt-
te- ing Marechal Biron and the Count d' Auvergne, all
ce that now remained was, to conſider how to do it
as ſecurely *. His Majeſty was of opinion, that we
{e- ſhould
ts:
the * It would not have been done, if the Marechal de Biron had
* hen «cvantage of the notice that was given him, A certain per- |
1 on put a letter into his hand. as he was going to wait on the King
end after tupper, in the name of the Counteſs de Rouſſy his fitter, and,
ap- as he inquired what news, upon finding that the bearer made no
LM anſwer, he doubted ſomething elſe was the matter, and, after open -
5 ing the letter, he found notice given him, that, if he did not _

22 XM EN IND

ſhould wait till the Marcehal and the Count were
retired each to his reſpective lodging, and that then
ſoldiers ſhould be ſent to inveſt them. I propoſed,
that they ſhould be in the King's cloſet till the night
was far advanced, and that, aſter the greater part
of the courtiers, weary of waiting for his Majeſty's
retiring, ſhould be withdrawn, they ſhould then be
leized, as they went out of the King's apartment.
« I do not ſee how this can be done,” replied
Henry, © without having my chamber and cloſct
& filled with blocd ; for they will not fail to draw
« their ſwords, and defend themſelves; and if this
« ſhould happen, I had rather it were in their a-
« partment than mine.” I thought it of moſt con-
ſequence, upon this cccalion, to avoid, as much as
poſſible, all nolie and coufuſion; but the King con-
tinuing firm in bis faift propoſal, took leave of me,
bidding me go home to ſupper ; “ and at nine
& O clock,” ſaid he, © let your horſes be prepa-
& red, and you and all your people be booted,
& ready to mount and ſet out when 1 ſend for
«c you.”

I withdrew to my pavilion; where, after giving
orders conformable to thoſe I kad received from his
Majeſty, I went into my clofet, from whence I
could fee all that paſſed about Biron's apartment,
which was in the pavilion oppoſite to mine. I read

his rctreat in two honrs, he would be arreſted, and directly ſhewed
it to one of his friends called De-Cartonnieres, who ſaid to him,
Then, adicu, Sir, I wiſh I had a poignard in my breaſt, proviced
you were now ſafe in Burgundy, To this he made anſuer, ſuppolc
J were there, and that I were to have four in mine, upon receiving
the King's orders, I would immediately come hither. Notw:th-
ſtanding this, he went into the King's chamber, where he played t
primero with the Qucen, and in the midit of his game, the Ser
de Merge, a gentleman of Burgundy, was obſerved to whiſper forme»
what in his car, which the Marechal not regarding, the Count d'Au-
vergne came alſo and twice touched him on the ſide, telling hin,
It is not ſafe for us to be here.“ Sept. Ibid,

and

”

©

1602. UL. 23

and walked about alternately, without neglecting
to obſerve what was doing on that ſide where I ex-
pected ſoon to ſee the attack begun, and to receive
new orders from the King. The clock ſtruck nine,
ten, and eleven, yet nothing was done. At length
midnight came, yet all was quiet. I am afraid,
ſaid I, returning into my chamber, where all my
domeſtics waited for the ſcene that was preparing,
ſome at play, ſome in converſation, and others a-
ſleep; I am afraid, ſaid I, that they have not ta-
ken their meaſures right, and have ſuffered the birds,
which with fo little difficulty they might have ta-
ken, to eſcape, and which will not be eaſily in-
trapped again. I then ordered them to ſaddle my
hories, and pack up my baggage, while I went into
my cloſet, and wrote a few words.

I continued there half an hour, after which I
hearda noiſe at the door of my pavilion next the gar-
den, and a voice that cried, * Monſieur, the King
& ſends for you.” I looked out at the window, and
new the meſſenger to be La-Varenne, who went
on ſaying, “ Sir, come immediately, the King
“wants to ſpeak with you, and to ſend you to
“ Paris, to give the neceſſary orders there; for
* Mefl. de Biron and d'Auvergne are made priſon-
« ers.” © And where were they taken?“ ſaid I.

* Vitry arreſted the Marechal de Biron as he came out of the
King's autichamber. “ Sir,” ſays he to him, © the King has com-
* manded me to give him an account of your perſon : deliver me
* your ſword.” „ You but jcſt,” replies Biron to him. © Sir,”
rejoins Vitry, © the King has ſo commanded me.” „ Pray,” fays
the Marechal again, “let me ſpeak to the King.” „ No, Sir,” re-
turns Vitry, © the King is retired to reſt“ Praflin waited at the
ſame time for the Count D'Auvergne at the pate of the caſtle, 10
whom, as he came out, he faid, * You are the King's priſoner.”

+® What I, I!” returned the Count d'Auvergne, much turpriſed,

6

* Yes you, Sir,” ſays Praſlin to him, © I arreſt you in the King's
name, deliver me your ſword.” „ Here take it,”” replies the

Count, * it has never killed any but wild boars; if you had ac-

+ quainted me ſooner of this, I would have been in bed and aſlcep
+ two hours ago,”

: & In

244 M E M O IR S Book XIII.

& In the King's cloſet,” he replied. *© God be
& praiſed,” ſaid I, “ that the King has followed
ce that advice.” I ran directly to his Majeſty's a-
partment. Our men are ſeized,” ſaid he to me:
e mount your horle, and go and prepare their lod-
& oings in the Baſtile : I ſhall ſend them in a boat
e to the gate of the arſenal next the river: make
% them land there, that they may not be ſeen, and
ce carry them, without Rr" Frog through the midſt
& of your courts and gardens, When you have
“ made proper diſpoſitions in the arſenal for their

ec reception, if you can, before they arrive, which

& they will do ſoon after you, go to the parliament
&« and the town-houſc, and declare there what has
te happened: tell them, that, at my arrival, they
& ſhall know the reaſons for this proceeding, which
& they will find to be juſt,” All theſe orders were
happily and exactly executed. At the very mo-
ment that the priſoners landed at the arſenal, my
wite was brought to bed of that daughter of mine,

who dore the title of Mademzi/elle de Sully.
I gave the care of the priſoners to the ſoldiers of
ne King's guards joined to my own, and poſted
them in ſuch a manner, that they might be ſaid to
be guards upon each other. I likewiſe placed a
guard upon the baſtion, oppolite to the windows in
the pritoners apartment, and another upon the ter-
race of the tower: ſo that, as 1 wrote to the King,
it was impoſſible they ſhou'd eſcape, vnleſs by the
interpoſition of angels. The repeated advices !
received from his Majeſty, obliged me to take all
theſe precautions. A few days after the detention
of the priſoners, the King wrote to me, that he was
informed, there was a ſcheme laid to procure thcir
eſcape, ordering me to watch them carefully, for
that I ſhould anſwer for them. I conſented to this
condition, relying on the fidelity of my ſoldiers,
who, to make an eſcape practicable, muſt hav?
been

J. % 25
© been corrupted every one. Another time the King
2d ſent me notice, that the plot which was formed for
a- delivering Biron and D*Auvergne was alſo againſt
bs my perſon : a boat full of ſoldiers was in the night
d- to come up the river, and the men were to land at
at the ſteps cf a gate bebind my apartment which
ke Jooked vpon the river ; that they were to force 0+
ad pen this gate with a petard, to do the ſame by the
dſt ſecond, and get into my chamber while I was in
Ve bed, and carry me to Franche-Comte, freſh horſes
eir being in readineſs for them at the end of every ten
ch leagues; and that, when in poſſeſſion of my per-
nt 2n, they were to deal with me, by way of repri-
las ſa}, as Biron ſhould be dealt with. This laſt infor-
ey mation, although ſo circumſtantial, appeared to me
ch as frivolous as the reſt. I thanked his Majeſty,
ere however, for giving it me. He had the goodneſs
10. 1o command me to be ſtrictly attentive to my own
my ſafety, aſſuring me, that if the deſign which wgs
ne, laid againſt me ſhould ſuccced, he would not heſi -

tate a moment to purchaſe me at the price of free-
of ng the priſoners, and, if there were occaſion, by
ted a ſtill greater conceſſion. To ſatisfy him, I placed
to a ſmall guard likewiſe at this gate. |
da I be Firlt Preſident, the Preſident de Blancmeſnil,
; in and the two counſellors De-Fleury and De-Thurin,
ter- were named by the parliament to interrogate the

1602.

nz, Priſoners, whom, for this purpoſe, I ordered to
the be carried into a ſmall pavilion, in the midſt of the
-s ] great walk of the arſenal : as it was neceſſary like-
ail Vile, that they ſhould be examined in full parlia-
ion ment, I cauſed a covered boat to be prepared for
was them, in which they were carried thither, and
heir brought back again without being ſeen. The hiſtory
fo: of this trial, and all the particulars of the event I am
this now relating, are known to every one; and that
jert, Marechal Biron, ſeeing Miron, the lieutenant-ci-
ave Vol. III. C vil,

26 nnr Book ENL

vil, at the foot of the ſcaffold * gave him a caution
againſt La-Fin, took his leave of the elder Rumig-
ny, intreating him to bear his reſpects to Made.
moiſelle de Rumigny, which, he ſaid, was all the
preſent he had to make her, and many circum-
ſtances of the like nature. The ſudden fallics of
rage, the terrors and weakneſſes which this man +,
who, amidſt the greateſt dangers of, war, had ac.

| quircd

* The particular account of this affair, to which the author here
refers, is to be found in all the hiſtorians, ard in many other wri-
tings. |

y Theſe inward agitations had almoſt deprived him of his ſenſes,
and gave great trouble to the Spectators, and eſpecially to the exe-
cutioner, who durſt not let him ſee his ſword, and who yet took his
opportunity ſo well, by amuſing the Marechal, that he mede his
head fly off at one blow, which he gave ſo dextroufly that it was
ſcarcely ſeen, I cannot forbear mentioning, to the honour of learn:
ing, that Marechal Biron the father was as remarkable for erudition
as the fon for ignorance: he could ſcarcely read. The following
account of him from the Chronologie Septennaire, will ſerve to f.
niſh his charater, Ihe author, after obſerving that he had almcf
|| the qualities neceſſary to make a great warrior, namely that ke
was brave, ſucceſsful, indefatigable, ſober, and temperate, add,
« He was particularly fond of ſplendor, proud and oftentation;
* and even has been often known to deſpiſe the pleaſures of the
« table, and live abſtemiouſly, that he might gratify his fantallic
te paſſion for glory; he was daring in battle and immeaſurably am-
& bitious: he was ſo preſumptuous as to believe that neither the
« King nor France could do without him : he was alſo become ſo
* malevolent and ſlanderous, that he ſpoke ill of all princes; he ha
% been often heard to ridicule the maſs, and make a jeſt of the pre-
* tended Reformed : there are numberleſs inſtances given of his ha.
« ving but little religion; he relicd very much on the ptedictions of
„ aſtrologers and diviners.” The author, after this, gives an ac,
count of an adventure that happened to him as he was going to con-
ſult, under a borrowed name, the old aſtrologer La Bioſſe, the ſame
of whom NI. de Sully ſpeaks fo often in his memoirs. 4% This good
* man, ſays he, who was then in a little tower or garret that fer-
« ved bim for a ſtudy, ſaid to him, Well, my ſon, I ſee the per.
* ſon for whom this horoſcope is caſt will arrive at great honours
i through his diligence and military bravery, and might come to be
* a king, but there is a caput algol that keeps him from it.“ ** Aud
& what is the meaning of that,” ſays the Baron de Biron, “ Don't
t aſk me the meaning of it,” returns La-Brofſe? © No” ſays the
Baron, © but I muſt know,” After many altercations between

chend;

3
3 *
4 vez”
"7

24
4

Lal Res as Oat... a ac o/c

AM

8 -» *Þ-x 2 £28 =n 8 fo Nnnocz © OD wy © KM, ke, go Ky,

—"=
_ © ſl
N 5 4

II.

ion
1g
de.
the
m-
; of

1 +,

ac.
ircd

here
wri⸗

enſcs,
> EXE»
ok his
de his
t was
learn -
dition
owing
to b.
almod
hat ke
adds,
ati u,
of the
intallie
ly am-
er the
me ſo
he has
he pre ·
his ha-
ions of
an ac.
to con-
he {awe
11s good
hat ler-
the pe-
honouts
ne to be
„% And
“% Don't
ays the

betwecn ©
then, =

1602.
quired the character of intrepid, ſhewed at his exe-

SJ Lo ts

O F

27

cution, have furniſhed matter for much diſcourſe,
and doubtleſs will not be forgot by hiſtorians. As
for me, 1 have nothing new to relate, except, per-
haps, ſome circumſtances that regard me perſonally.

While preparations were making for trying the
two ſtate-priſoners, they often delired to ſpeak
with me ®. Two conſiderations hindered me from

iving them this ſatisfaction; firſt, becauſe it would
be to no purpole to hear the prayers and ſolicita-
tions of Biron, whoſe death was too neceſſary for
the good of the ſtate, and too firmly reſolved by
the King, to give hopes of obtaining his pardon

them, La- Broſſe at length ſaid, © The meaning is this, my friend,
& he will do ſo much that he ſhall have his head cut off.” Upon
& this, the Baron fell upon him and beat him crnelly, and after-
„Wards leaving him halt-dead came down from the garret, taking
& the key of the door with him.“ Ihis account is filied with other
pretended predictions that were made him, and to which I think no
man of ſenle would have ſhewn any regard. by
lle requeſted the Sieur de Baranton, M de Praſlin's lieutenant,
* on M. de Roſny from him, and tel | him that he deſired to
e him; but, if that favour could not be obtained, he earneſtly
begged of him to intercede with the King for his life, a piece of
ſervice which he expected from him, as he always had a great e-
ſteem for him, and found him to be his friend, and ſuch a friend
that, had he been perſuaded by him, he would not have been in the
place where he then was; that there were perſons more guilty than
vimſclt, but that he was the moſt unfortunate of them all; that he
Was content to be confined between four bare walls and chained
down. The earneſt entreaties which the Sieur de Baranton made in
bis name, ſo greatly affi ted MH. de Roſny and his lady, the Sieur
inet and others who were preſcut, that they were unable to ſpeak
or ſome time, and fat liſtening in tears. At length M. de Roſny
broke ſilence aud ſaid, “ I cannot lee hm nor intercede for him, it
is now too late; had he been perſbaded by me, he had not been
E in this melancholy ſituation, for he ought to have owned the
truth to his Mzjeſty from the time of his arrival at Fonta.ncbleau ;
and ſince he did not fo, he has taken trom the King the means
ok ging him his life, and from all his friends that o/ interceding,
for him.“ Chronologie Septennaite, ann. 1602. Sce the whole
& this affair in the hiſtorian Matthieu, tom. II. I. i:i p. 482. to 334.
Where an account given ot what relates to the Duke de Sully is

nformable to that in our memoirs. |
and,

C 2

*
|
14
11
.

28 M --E--M-:Q-:I* R 8 Book I.

and, ſecondly, having been comprehended myſelf
in La-Fin's depoſitions, I was not willing to give
either weak or malignant perſons room to ſuſpect
that I had uſed any endeavours with the priſoners
to keep them filent with regard to me, or that I
had any occaſion to ſpeak to them, It was my de.
Ggn, on the other hand, that, if any ſuppoſed me
to have had the leaſt connection with Biron, they
ſhould think, that, by thus refuſing to fee him, !
ſhould make him reſolve to live no longer on terms
of civility with a man whom, vpon that ſuppoſition,
he muſt, for many reaſons, regard as a traitor. He
everenced my innocence z and if he ſpoke of me,
as he oſten did, it was only to praiſe the counſel: 1
had given him, and to condemn himſelf for not
following them. X
DeffunCtis, grand provoſt of the Iſle de France,
took down in writing all the converſations in which
Marechal Biron had mentioned my name, and gave
the manuſcript to me ſome time afterwards. By
that I learned that Biron, when he came out of the
chapel, where he had made his confeſſion to the
Sieurs Garnier and Maignan doctors of the Sor
bonne, aſked if there was no perſon there belorg.
ing to Monſieur de Roſny ; and being told, that the
ounger Arnaud was there, he called him, and ſaid,
« Monſieur Arnaud, I deſire you will carry my lat
e“ farewell to Monſieur de Roſny; and tell him, that
« to-day he loſes one of his beſt friends, and the
« moſt affectionate kinſman and ſervant he ever
« had: I have always highly eſteemed his merit,
& and valued his-friendihip. Alas 1” ſaid he, after

raiſing his voice, and ſhedding ſome tears, which

obliged bim to keep his face covered with his hand-
kerchief, “ had I believed him, I ſhould have avoid:
ce ed this fate. Tell him, I beſeech you, that Ire
% commend my brothers to him, particularly my

« brother Saint Blancard, who is his nephew, and
85 81 & that

y By oy ws

1602.

O F L L . 29

« that J intreat he will give my youngeſt brother
ie ſome poſt about the Dauphin; and that he would
te tell them, that, although I have failed in my du-
« ty and obedience, yet that they ought faithfully
& to perform theirs, and continue always firm in
« their attachment to the King; but that he wo-ld
« not let them come immediately to court, leſt they
&« ſhould ſuffer any reproaches on my account.”
Another time Biron talking of me, ſaid, The
« King has, in Monſieur de Rofny, a faithful ſer-
ee vant, and a wiſe and prudent counſellor : his
& Majeſty has done well to make uſe of him; for
« while he continues to direct his councils, France
« will be happy, and I might have been fo likewiſe,
« had I governed myſelf by his advice,” On any
other occaſion, I ſhould have avoided inſerting in
theſe Memoirs, ſuch diſcourſes in my own praiſe ;
but in this cale I did not think myſelf at liberty
to make the leaſt alteration in the Marechal's words.
I was ignorant of his having given theſe public tel-
timonies of his eſteem for me, when I joined with
the reſt of his relations * in imploring a favuur for
him; a flight one indeed, it was only to change
the place deſtined for his execution. Accordingly,
inſtead of the Greve, which was named in the ſen—
tence that was paſſed upon him, his Majeſty per-
mitted the Marcchal to be beheaded in the court of
the Baſtile.

*

* Mefſicurs de Saint Blancard, de la Force, the Count de Rouſſy,

de Chatcauncuf, de Themines, de Salipnac, and de Saint Angel,

went. three days after the arreſt of Niarechal de Biron, to throw

=themſclves at the fect ot his Majeſty, who was then at St Mau des

Foſſles; but they could obtain no other favour than that which our
author ſpeaks of bere. Henry comforted them, by reminding them

of the example «f the Conitable de St Pas, l, allied to the heufſe of
Bourl on, who was behcaded for 1 fimilar crime, and the Prince uf

+ 1 : ,
Condé, who would have undergone the ſame fate, had it not been for
the death of Franci II &c. MS B blioth Royale, vol. 9129. ahere

© likewiſe nay be (een a collection of papers and records relating 0

4 the Marechal de Biron's proceſs

”

C3 All

30 M E MO IR $ Book XIII.

All the ſchemes of the cabal were diſconcerted
by the death of Biron. Lavardin, whu had been
ſent at the lame time by his Majeſty into Burgundy,
at the head of a body of troops, took poſſe ſſion of
all the places there which had been held by that
Marechal, without ſtriking a blow, and ſent Senecs
to inform the King that this province had ſub-
mitted. The government of it wa given to the
Davphin, to whom M le Grand was made lieute-
nant. The proceedings againſt the conſpirators
ſtopped here; and, except Fontenelles “, whom
Henry thought it neceſſary to puniſh for an example
to others, although he was not one of the princi-
pal criminals, he pardoned all the reſt, The num-
ber of the conſpirators was very great; and, upon
examination, many of the moſt conſiderable cour-
tiers + were deeply concerned in the plot. I con-
firmed as much as poſlible the King's inclinations
to lenity. I forewarned thoſe whom I knew to
have had ſome ſhare in the confidence of Biron,
and repreſented to them fo plainly, that all they
had now to do was to throw themſelves at the
King's feet, and implore his pardon ; that almoſt
all purſued this method: The ſecrecy which I pro-
miſed them will not permit me to mention their

names here, and, far from having any cauſe to re-

pent of a ſtep, of which the King and myſelf only

Guy Eder de Beaumayoir, Baron de Fontenelles, was a gentle-
man ef Britany. He was convicted of having intended to deliver vp
the fort of Douarnenes to the Spaniards, for which he was drawn ur-
on a ſledge, and broke alive in the Greve. © The King,“ ſays l.
de Perefixe, © in conſideration of his family, which was very iu
* trious, granted to his relations, that, in the ſentence he ſh eld
not be called by his own name: but hiſtory could not conceal t.“
M. de Thau, l. 129 fpeaks of him as of a fellow who had been em-
ployed in Britany by the league. |

+ According to Siri, there was ſomething more than mere ſuſpi-
cions ap inſt the Copſtable de Montmorency, and even againſt the
Lake de Montpenſer. diem. tecond. vol. I. p. 103.

were

1

om
ple
aci-
im-
pon
ur-
on ·
Ons
-
ON,
hey
the
noſt
pro-
heit

þ FE*1]

only

entle-
Jer vp
*
8 ; p
HHH
ſh el
al it,”
em-

ſuſpi-
it the

were

1602.
were witneſſes, they were ſoon convinced, that his

' Majeſty not only took care to ſhew he had no re-
ſent ment againſt them, but likewiſe appeared to hold

« £5 2 *

ern 31

them in higher eſteem than betore.
Hebert, who was ſecretary to the party, and had
been ſeveral times ſent into Milan, and throughout

all Italy by Marechal Biron, was likewiſe arreſted.

I was ordered to interroga'e him in the preſence of
the Count d'Auvergne, and to receive his depo-

ſitions, the King having promiſed bim a par-
don, upon condition that he ſincerely declared all

he knew. The principal diſcovery he made, and
that which gave the fulleſt conviction of the perfidy
of Spain, was, that Roncas and Alphonſo Cazal had
been ſent by that court, at different times, with
large ſums of money to Marechal Biron. To con»

* vince Hebert that his Majeſty had no deſign to de-
ceive him, before I began to examine him, I deli-

vered his pardon, ſigned by the King, into the
hands of the Count d' Auvergne. :
The Baron de Lux was not excepted out of the
general amneſty, His perplexity, when he heard of
the impriſonment of his friend, had been very great,
becauſe he found it equally dangerous to leave, as
to ſtay in the kingdom. He was ſtill undetermined

what to do, when La Plume came from his Maje—

ſty with an order to attend him, promiſing the Ba-
ron his pardon, at the ſame time, if he would en-
deavour to deſerve it by his obedience and repen-
tance. De Lux, ſenſible of his guilt, was now

more alarmed than before; yet he told the meſſen-

ger that he was ready to obey the King's orders,

provided he would aſſure him that he ſhould not be
expoſed to the ſhame of a public examination, nor

be confronted with his accuſers ; that he ſhould be
continued in his poſt *, and permitted to retire from

4 He was governor of the caſtle of Dijon, and the town of Beaune.

2
.
e's

court

32 M MN O Book XIII.

court after his confeſſion; he was afraid of being
detained, under pretence that it was either not full
enough or inſincere. There being no le:ter from
his Majeſty, De Lux appeared contented with a
promiſe under my hand that he ſhould receive no
harm.

The King having granted all that the Baron de
Lux demanded, he came to Paris, and meeting his
Majeſty as he was going a hunting, threw himſelf
at his feet, and was beginning a long ſpeech, when
the King, who had not leiſure to hear him then,
ſtopped him ſhort, by ſaying, & Go to Monſieur de
«© Rofny, and I will talk to you afterwards.” This
order, the tone with which De-Lux fancied it was
given, and the place to which he was fent, raiſed
ſuch apprehenſions in his mind, that he was upon
the point of making his eſcape. However, he came
to the arſenal, but under ſuch terrors, that, inſtead
of liſtening to any thing I ſaid to him, he was con-
tinually locking round him, and his apprehenſions
were increaſed when he ſaw his Majeſty's guards
enter and file off in the court of the arſenal, the
King having ſent them thither, becauſe he intended
to paſs by the arſcnal in his return from the chaſe,
De Lux now thought himſelf loſt. Ah ! Sir,
& ſaid he to me, I came hither upon the King's
e word and your's; do you intend to detain me?“
* Why do you atk me this queſtion, Sir, faid I?”
The guards, faid he, which I perccive entering
« in files, perſuaded me that it is not the King v ho
« is coming, but that they are probably ſent for
« me.“ Without giving me time to undeccive |
him, he entreated me to allow him to ſpeak to the
King before he was confined, promiſing, and I be-
lieve very ſincerely, to conceal nothing from him.
% I have obſerved your uneaſineſs, replied I but
„be not afraid, I have no orders to arreſt you;
« ſpeak freely to the King; ſwear to be faithful to

" him,

1

A's

*

I. 76a. OF 8 U L L I. 33
ng « him, and keep your oath; you will then have
all 4 nothing to apprehend. Had the Duke of Biron
Joy te ated in that manner, he would have been now
a « alive.“ That moment a meſſenger informed me
no that the King was returned to the Louvre, and de-
fired to ſpeak with me. The evening was fo far
de "advanced before the chace was ended, that, inſtead
118 of coming to the arſenal as he had propoſed, he
elk Vent directly to the palace. This meſſage relieved
en the Baron de Lux from his terrors. |
n, The next day he had a conference with his Ma-
2 jeſty, which laſted above four hours. He gave no
is cauſe for accuſing him of indiſcretion in concealing
a8 bis accomplices, but named ſuch a prodigious num-
ed ber of perſons, that Henry, glad to ſind in ſuch gene-
on ral accuſations a pretence for believing none, and for
ne making himſelf eaſy, treated all thoſe whom De- Lux
* accuſed, and who were continually about him, no
n- leſs favourably than before. It is certain, however
= that many of them were acquainted with Marech
4; +  Biron's deligns ; but the hope of remaining unob-
ks ſerved amongſt the croud, determined them not to
4 own their connections with him, notwithſtanding
% all the advances and promiſes which I made them.
ir, This was not the caſe with the High Conſtable. He
No had kept up a ſort of intimacy with Biron, which
„ in prudence ought to have been avoided. But, as I
5 was perſuaded that it was merely perſonal, and ex-
* tended no further, I thought myſelf obliged to ju-
th ſtify him to his Majeſty, on whom his aſſurances of
55 fidelity made ſo little impreſſion, that he could not
70 help regarding him with an eye of ſuſpicion. I

ne may ſay with truth, that my endeavours did not a
little contribute towards reſtoring him to the King's

# - favour ; and this prince had no reafon to repent of

5 his clemency, either to him or any of the others *,

+ : except
== | |

to = * It is not certain that Henry IV. never had reaſon to repent of

this

34 M E M O 1 R s. Book XIII.

except only the Count of Auvergne, whoſe ſtory it
is now time to reſume.

The nature of that crime which he, as well as
the Duke of Biron, had committed, and the equa-
lity of the proofs againſt them, made it highly pro-
bable that their puniſhment would be alike ; how-
ever, their fates were very different; the King not
only gave him his life, which he cauſed to be inti-
mated to him by the Conſtable, but alſo ſoftened,
as much as poſlible, the inconvenience of his impri-
ſonment. He permitted kim to agree with the
Lieutenant of the Baſtile for his table, diſcharged
him of the expence of the officers and ſoldiers ap-
pointed for his guard, and reduced them afterwards
to five, comprehending the exempt, upon my re-
preſentations that a greater number was uſeleſs. At
firſt, indeed, he was not allowed to walk upon the
terraſſes, but afterwards he was indulged in all his
deſires ; and at length wholly “ diſcharged from his
confinement. He had been fo little accuſtomed to
be created as a criminal, that when he was told the
King had granted him his life, he ſaid, it ſignified
nothing, unleſs he gave him his liberty likewiſe.

Thoſe who praiſe alike the good or bad actions
of kings, will not want arguments to juſtify Henry
in this different treatment of two equally guilty ;

this indulgence. As to the aſſaſſination of this prince, there remains
a great many doubts, the clearing of which becomes more and more
difficult: but by ſuppoſing what is very likely, namely, that the
blow which * off Henry IV. did not proceed from the conſpiracy
here mentioned, we may {till believe that this cataſtrephe had not
happened, if the conſpirators had been proſecuted with more ſeverity,
In this caſe it muſt be allowed, that Henry IV. and M. de Roſuy

- were deceived by thei! too great lenity, of which the Prince became

the vctim. What the author ſays four lines higher of thoſe who
buldly concealed themſelves among the croud, ſufficiently ſhews, that
the ſpitit of revolt was not extinguiſhed by the death of its head.

* In the beginning of October. © It was not, ſays Le Septen-
* naire, without having firi: made an open confeſſion to Meſſicurs
« the Chancellor, de Sillery, and Rofoy.”

they

RR Dee TT „ „

pten-

Ticur

they

=
4 1 69 2.

nnr 35

they will alledge, as it was then reported at court,
that the ſervices his Majeſty might expect from the
Count of Auvergne, in diſcovering to him the plots
of the Spaniſh party againſt France, made it neceſ-
ſary to pardon him for his own intereſt, For my
own part, I am too candid not to confeſs, that on
this occaſion the King gave no proof of his clemen-

cy, but of his paſſion for the Marchionels of Ver-

neuil, ſiſter to the Count of Auvergne ; which was
the ſole cauſe of the indulgence he ſhewed to the
Count. However, I concealed my thoughts with
great care, and, in the courſe of two years, never
mentioned a word to the King upon the ſubject, be-
ing perſuaded, that all the arguments I could uſe
at the time, would have no force againſt the prayers
and tears of a miſtreſs; and when the thing was
done, it was to no purpoſe to ſhew him his error.
It was not till after the Count of Auvergne had, by
new inſtances of ingratitude, obliged his benefac»

tor to proceed againſt him as a criminal, that I juſt

hinted my thoughts of his former conduct, and og

then I was forced to it by the King himſelf.

One day, when the King and I were alone, the
converſation turned upon this ſubje&t; and Henry,
after viewing me ſilently for ſome time, at length
told me, that he had been often greatly ſurpriſed at .
my not aſking him his reaſons for ſaving the Count
of Auvergne. I replied, that I had thought it my
duty to keep my conjectures on that head to my-
ſelf, among which there were two that appeared to
me to be the moſt probable, but that I never choſe
to explain myſelf to his Majeſty for fear of offend-
Ing him. Henry anſwered immediately, with his
Þiual vivacity, that he could caſily gueſs, that one
pf the motives to which I attributed the favour he
bad ſhewn the priſoner, regarded the Marchioneſs

Þ Verneuil; and aſſured me, that that alone had

deen but ſufficient to have commuted his puniſh-

x 4 ment

4

- 7 —— —
- 16 - T A = 2 "ID 2 — - —
WAauwY 225 : — 2 =
—— . om gs—_
- —— — 1 —— = — py

lt

*
— — — —
— — — - _

—
— << mw
. wt 2 2
Oe ww a er rr En

— * —
—
——
"CBS — : „7“ 4 A

— —

36 MEMOIR Ss Book Xin.

ment into a perpetual impriſonment; but that he
was abſolutely ignorant of the ſecond, to which!
ſuppoſed his deliverance had been owing, and preſl.
ed me repeatedly to tell him what it was. I own-

ed to him, that it had been always my opinion, that

his Majeſty would not inflift a ſhameful death upon
a man who would be always conſidered as the
uncle of his children, in caſe he ſhould have any
by the Marchioneſs of Vernevil, Henry ſwore to
me, that he had not hitherto carried his reflections
ſo tar, although that conſideration, if it kad occur.
red to him, would have had great weight with him;
and he inſiſted upon my gueliling, in my turn, the
true reaſon that had induced him to ſet Auvergre
at liberty. He again repeated to me, that the ſo.
licitations of his mittreſs, the intreaties of the con-
ſtable, his three daughters, and of Ventadour, who
had all thrown themſelves at his feet, had not had
ſo great a ſhare in that reſolution as J imagined,
they having contented themſelves with afking only
the life of the priſoner. And at length, after all
this heſitation, he declared to me, that his chief in-
ducement to pardon Auvergne was the great pro-
miſes he made him, and the air of ſincerity with
which they were accompanied He then related to
me all that had paſſed between himſelf and Au.
vergne, When the latter implored the favour of
conference with him: he told me, that the Count,

after many aſſurances of a ſincere repentance, and.

proteſtations of inviolable fidelity for the future, had
promiſed him, with the- moſt ſacred oaths, if he
would reſtore him to liberty, to get him intelligence
of the moſt ſecret reſolutions that were taken in the
council of Spain; to accompliſh which, he had on.
ly to reſume, in appearance, his former engage-

ments with that court, well knowing how to de-

ceive them, and to make them believe as truth, what
on his ſide would be only fiction. But that thi
diſſimulation might not, in Spain, draw upon him

—

the | a

1 e vo 2 „ =}

. 0 2

_

OD <-

* Ba

-

—

—

III.

he
h 1
ell.
n-

bat

bon
the
any
10
ions
cur.
im;
the
"gre
ſo·
on-
Who
had
ned,
only
r all
fin-
pro-
with
d to
Au-
of 2
zunt,

and.

had
f he
ence
n the
Jon.
gage

de-
What
this
him

the :

$602.
5 puniſhment of a traitor, it was neceſſary that

his Majeſty ſhould not reveal to any of his miniſters
what he then ſaid, nor take umbrage at his jour-
neys to Spain, nor the packets he ſhould receive
fi om thence.

The King, after this recital, added, that it was
with difficulty he could bring himſelf to believe the
promiſes Auvergne made him, or ſuppoſe that he
could fall ſo low, as to take up the trade of a ſpy,
and become a double traitor ; but that after the

Count had aſſured him he really meant to perform

all his engagements, although he hated him more than
ever, yet he was determined to expect the perform -
ance of his promiſes, and make uſe of him to pro-
eure ſuch intelligence concerning the proceedings of
Spain, as he could obtain by no other means; and
in this expectation, he had promiſed Auvergne ſe-

kreſy, and the other conditions he had demanded,

My concluſion, from what the Eing told me,
was, that he was every way deceived by the Count
of Auvergne, or rather, I repeat it again, betrayed
dy his paſſion for his miſtreſs; this was the faſcina-·
tion that cloſed his eyes upon the artifice of Au-
yergne; and after having prevailed upon him to
pare his life, ſnatched from him likewiſe the grant
of his liberty, and that upon fo ſlight a foundation,
s does little honour to the prudence of Henry, It
s not clear, indeed, whether Auvergne had not
Ben an inclination to keep his word, but by ſuffer-
Is himſelf to be ſeduced a ſecond time, he became
once more a traitor to his prince.

It cannot be denied, that he was ingenious, ſub-
le, penetrating, and naturally eloquent ; qualities
Fery fit for the part he had undertaken to aft, But,

pot to mention his ambition, his inclination to de-

Pauchery, and other dangerous paſſions, he had ia
Dis heart ſuch a fund of malice and perſidiouſneſs,

hat it was eaſy to ſee he would reſume his former

VoL, III. D diſpoſitions;

38 ME MO I R S Book XIII.

diſpoſitions; but he reſomed them with ſo much
addreſs, that the King did not perceive when it hap.
pened, taking it for granted, that it did not hap.
pen the very moment he found himſelf ſecure. He
often conferred with his Majeſty concerning the
King of Spain, and related very bad things of him,
the better to play his part; but all he ſaid might b:
reduced to matters of little conſequence ; while to
the court of Spain he gave very exact and very ma.
terial informations of every thing that paſſed in
France. I ſhall reſume his ſtory in another place.
The Prince of Joinville, to whom Henry like.
wiſe extended his clemency, was a young man of
a different character; nothing could be more light,
more whimſical, and more unſteady ; he had eng.
ged himſclf with bad company, among whom, to
be in the faſhion, and to appear a man of conſe.
quence, it was neceſſary that he ſhould have corre.
ſpondences without the kingdom; this was ſuſh.
cient to ruin him entirely. His Majeſty being in.
formed, that he carried on his intrigues with Spain
by the Count of Chamnite, governor of Franche-
Comte for the King of Spain, and one of his mini
ſters, he ordered him to be arreſted. As ſoon a;
he was in cuſtody, he, like all the others, declared,
that he was ready to make a full confeſſion, pro-
vided that it was to the King in perſon, and that |
ſhould be preſent. I had left Paris in the evening,
to viſit my new acquiſition of Sully, and to trace
out the plan of ſome buildings there, to render it
more habitable than it was at preſent. I was jul
arrived, and preparing to fit down to ſupper, when
I heard his Majeſty's poſtilion blow his horn, and
immediately ſuſpected my ſtay at Sully would not
be long. He gave me a billet from the King, which
contained only an order to come to him, without
explaining himſelf any further. Believing the buſi-
nels to be of the utmoſt importance, I ſet out ſo

early

e a = }_ e x a ww mw A os e a was f

dS egy wy www cow yas ow oy tw, 9 > Be

UI,

nuch
hap.
hap
He
the
him,
it be
le to
ma-
d in
ce.
like
n of
1ght,
Ng
1, t0
Onſe-
orre⸗
ſuſh:
g in.
pain
che.
mini.
on a8
ared,
pro-
bat!
ning
trace
ler it
juſt
when
and
J not
hich
hovut
buli-
ut ſo

early i

o rl.

8

39

early the next morning, that I only ſaw Sully by the
tight of the flambeaux. When I was made ac-
quainted with the affair, 1 thought it my duty to
intercede for an unexperienced youth, who was
drawn into errors by his raſhneſs and folly. Joinville
being brought before us, confeſſed all he was deſired
to do. The King, entering immediately into his
character, treated him as he deſerved; he ſent for
his mother, the Ducheſs of Guiſe, and the Duke,
his brother, and taking them into his cloſet, © Here,
« ſaid he, is the prodigal ſon himſelf, I thall uſe
& him like a child, and pardon him for your's and
4 Monſieur de Roſny's ſake, who has interceded for
„ him; but I do it upon condition that you will
all three reprove him ſeverely, and that you,
& nephew,” added he, turning to the Duke of
Guiſe, “ will anſwer for his conduct for the future:
J give him to your care, make him wiſe, if it be
& poſſible,” | :
+ This change was not ſo eaſy to be eſfectuated on
a youth paſſionate, intractable, and who had already
taken a fide. He was ſuffered to remain in priſon
for ſome months, where at firſt he was obſtinately
fullen, then inſolent and furious, and at laſt, through
mere wearineſs, promiſed to behave well, if he was
taken from thence. The King conſented to his re-
moval, and he was told, that he might go and l.ve
h the caſtle of Dampierre. Joinville was not much
better pleaſed with this place than his priſon, and
Tepreſented to the King, that he could not reſide in a
Taſtle which was not furniſhed, Unfortunately for
A the King knew this to be a falſehood. As he
dad himſelf often hunted near that caſtle and Che-
Freuſe, which is but at a ſmall diſtance from it, the
Keeper of thoſe two houſes had offered to accommo-
Fate him with apartments and beds there; and he
had been told by the Ducheſs of Guiſe, that Dam-

* was as well furniſhed as Chevreuſe, This be-

D 2 havigur

40 NM E M O IR Ss Book XIII

haviour of Joinville's ſo incenſed the King again(i
him, that he reproached me for the too great inter.
eſt I took in the affairs of that family, and ordered
me to concern myſelf leſs with them for the future,
And now his Majeſty, inſtead of revokirg his ſen.
tence, declared that the priſoner ſhould be again
examined before he was enlarged ; which renewing
his former fears, he promiſed to make a fuller con.
feſſion than he had yet done; but being, as he ſais,
apprehenſive that bis Majeſty was flill angry With
him, he again entreated that I might be the periun
to whom be ſhould make bis declaration.

The Duke of Bouillon had not been careful to
return from his cſtates, as he had pronũſed to the
King; therefore, after Biron was arreſted, his Ma.
jeſty judged it neceſſary to write to him, to ſee i
upon this occaſion he would not give ſome proof ci
his copnection with the priſoner : he informed him,
that Marſhal Biron Lad been convicted of conſpiring
againſt the ſtate; and that when he came to court,
he would ſhew him the proofs of his treaſon, and
acquaint him with all the particulars of it; fatisfy-
ing bimſelf with thus infinvating that he expected
the performance of his promile, without giving him
a direct order to come. Ihe Duke of Bouillon calily
comprehended the deſign of this letter, and anſwered
it no otherwite than by ſending a gentleman of his
retinue immediately to his Majeſty, to congratulate
him upon the danger he had c{caped. By this per:
ſon he ſent a letter to me, in which he carefully
avoided ſaying any thing from which the leaſt ac.
vantage could be taken, either becauſe he had al.
ready learnt that his aſſociate was ſeized, or that his

imagination ſuggeſted to him immediately the beha-

viour which it was proper for him to aſſume. He

told me, that never had any one's aſtoniſhmert
equalled his, when he learned that the ſtate and the
King's perſon had been in danger; that his fidelity,

| and Þ

1 19 + Es Tha. 4. OG?

=

*.

„ rr

+4

.
r

III.

ainſt
Ter.
ere
ure,
ſen.

ain
ving
con.
ſaid,
with

4 10 1

i] to
the
Ma.:
ei
Ff Gt
him,
ring
Dutt,
and
isfy-
ted
him
alily
ered
Bis
ulate
fully
t ad-
d al-
it his

beha -

He

ment

4 the |
elity, |
and :

1602.
and the readineſs he ſhewed to go to every place

O F . 41

where his duty and the King's ſervice called him,
would, he hoped, convince his Majeſty, that he ſhould
never have the like reaſon to be apprehenſive of him;
and that he would expect the King's orders, and my

ood advice, that he might obey the one, and fol-
2 the other. The whole letter was conceived in
terms ſuch as theſe :; he could not, however, hinder

pimſelf from hiating ſomething in favour of the ac-

cuſed, but in a manner fo general as could not hurt
bim. After expreſſing his wiihes, that this event
might not give his Majeſty any diſturbance, he added
theſe words, © nor alter the natural ſweetneſs of his

% diſpoſition.“

Ine King, when I ſhewed him this letter, thought
he miglit make uſe of it to draw Bouillon to court,
For he durſt not ſend him an abſolute command to
come, leſt by a refuſal he ſhould lay him under the
neceſſity of punifting him for his diſobedience by
the force of am, which he neither choſe nor could?
conveniently do. He therefore told me, that ſince
Bouillon aſked my advice concerning what it was
proper for him to do in this conjunCture, I ſhould
reply, that it was true, the king had been informed
. was not wholly unacquainted with the Duke of
Biron's intrigues, but that this ought to ſtrengthen

his reſolution of coming to his Majeſty, either to

Juſtify his innocence, or by confelling his fault, to
obtain a pardon for it; and that I ſhould aſſure him,
that I would give him my word, or, if neceſſary,
become his ſurety, that ſo far from having any thing
to fear, he ſhould be received by the King with open
arms. Henry knowing my de.icacy on thele occa-
ions, prevented my ſcruples, by telling me, that he
would engage his royal word that Bouillon ſhould
be treated in whatever manner I promiſed him; and
not ſatisfied with this verbal aſſurance, he gave me
a writing concciyed in theſe terms; “I promiſe to
| D 3 * M.

„
1
:

42 M E M OI R S Bock XIII.

& M. de Roſny, that if the Duke of Bouillon comes
* to court upon his letters, and the promiſes he
6 ſhall make him, I will obſerve them all faithfally,
4 or give the Duke free leave to retire where-ever he
et pleaſes; and neither in his journey to or from
ce the court ſhall he receive any diſturbance : for all
ee

e ſaid Sieur de Roſny. Given at Paris, June 24.
"2002."

I wrote to the Duke of Bouillon, and without
telling him of the engagement his Majeſty entered
into with me concerning him, preſſed him in the
ſtrongeſt terms, and by every argument I thought
could have any weight with him, to come and ſettle
for ſome time at court. This letter Bouillon re.
ceived almoſt at the ſame time with the verbal an.
ſwer the King ſent him by his deputy, and took oc.
caſion, from his Majeſty's not having himſelf preſſed
him to come, to tell me in anſwer, that the advice
1 gave him being inconſiſtent with the King's orders,
he could not govern himſelf by it, whatever incl.
nation he might have to do ſo; and that he would
content himſelf with ſending to court, as his Maje-
{ty required, a perſon who ſhould give as fatisfaQory
an account of. his conduct as he himſelf could do,
and ought to be equally depended upon. This per.
{on was a gentleman named Rignac, who according:
iy came to court about the ſame time that I receivet

Bouitlon's anſwer to my letter, and whoſe expence

were all defrayed, as if his journey had been of gre:
importance, becauſe, in appearance, he came by hi
Majeſty's orders: but the Duke of Bouillon, inſteat
of coming himſelf, removed till fai ther from cout,
and went to Caſtres.

{ am not ſurpriſed that my arguments had, ct
this occaſion, fo little weight with him, ſince be re
garded me as his enemy, and did not ſeruple to cal.

me ſo in public; nor was the king ignorant that;

- .
EL 201

:

which I engage my faith and royal word to the

*

4

m. $162 OF $ULL „. 43

mes this was his opinion, having informed me of it him.
s he ſelf in a letter, dated the 28th day of December
this year. Nor was pete ſurpriſed at the man-
rhe ner in which the Duke of Bouillon acted with his
rom Majeſty. As ſoon as he perceived (which was no
r all very difficult matter for him to do) that the King
the had recourſe to diſſimulation with him, he ſuppoſed
24 it eaſy enough to impoſe upon his Majeſty and his
council without rifking any danger. For this pur-
10ut poſe, all that was neceſſary was, to anſwer, in * ap-
er:d pearance, always with great ſubmiſſion, without ta»
the king any of thoſe meaſures, which they durſt not
voht formally preſcribe to him. This artifice ſucceeded
ettle ſo well, that he made uſe of it a long time. No-
1 re- thing could be conceived in more modeſt or reſpect-
| an» ful terms than the letter he wrote on this ſubject to
oc. | Du-Maurier, and which, after his Majeſty had per-
eſſed uſed it, was given to me to be communicated to
vice the Chancellor and the Duke d'Epernon, with whom
ders, by the King's orders, I treated this affair methodiz
ncli- cally. The King ſtrongly intereſted himſelf in it,
'ould and had a conference with Conſtant and Saint-Aubin
Haje. about the Duke of Bouillon, which laſted a whole
co afternoon; but it produced nothing.
do, The game which, upon this occaſion, was played
pe. by the King of Spain and the Duke of Savoy was
ding ſtill more uncommon. All the foreign powers in
eived alliance with Henry, more eſpecially England and
encs Scotland, whoſe ambaſſadors were ſtill at Paris, con-
gren gratolated his Majeſty, upon his having ſo happily
y hs + cruſhed this dangerous conſpiracy. Philip and
iſteal © Charles-Emanuel appeared more eager than any of
our, the others to compliment the King upon this event:

—
—
— —
—
—

-

be Duke de Bovillon's letters to the King we find in the 3d
d, on tom. of Villeroi's Memoires d'Etat. p. 158. & jeg. Sce likewiſe the
Je te. # reaſons which the hiſtorians of bis life adduced, to clear him of the
6 1 accuſation of having been concerned in Marechal de Biron's plot, his
© refuſing to come and wait upon the King, and his fight to Caſtres,

t tba. v. b. 222. & fog,
| unleſs

44 M E MO I R S Book XIII.

unleſs fear was their motive, it is not eaſy to gueſs
what could oblige them to have recourſe to ſo groſs
an artifice. Henry was more ſincere with them;
he ſignified to them, that he was well informed of
the part they both had in the plot; all the blame
of which they threw upon the Count of Fuentes,
as boldly, as if it had been poſſible to have per-
ſuaded him that this Spaniard would have dared,
without their permiſſion, to act in concert with Bi-
ron and the other conſpirators.

Some days after the execution of Marechal Biron,
the King came to the arſenal, and I had a converſa-
tion with him, that well deſerves to be related:
&« You fee,” ſaid his Majeſty to me, after making
ſome reflections, as vſual, upon the ingratitude of
Meſſ. de Biron, d'Auvergne, de Bouillon, and three
more of the moſt conliderable noblemen of the
court, whom he had pardoned, and whole names he
mentioned, “ you ſee that thoſe on whom I have
ce beſtowed the greateſt favours, are the ſame per-
« ſons by whoſe ambition and caprice I have ſuf-
« fercd the moſt.” He then obſerved to me, that
theſe {ix men had, at different times, received larger
ſums from him than the five kings his predeceſſors,
except Henry III. who had been accuſed of fuch
oreat prodigality, had given to their favourites.
Henry added, that to filence thoſe who always un-
reaſonably enumerated the ſervices of theſe fix
gentlemen, he would have me draw up a memorial
of all the rewards they had received from him ſince
they had entered into his fervice; in which he did
not pretend to include any thing but thoſe preſents
that his liberality only had induced him to make
them, and not ſuch poſſeſſions as they had acquired
by his aſſiſtance, and enjoyed through his protec-
tion; ſuch, for example, was the principality of
Sedan, for which Bouillon was doubly obliged to
him, having fuſt procured, and then ſecured to him

the

* * 5 4
k _ 9
TL, Po „ S868 {
, 4 "of St LE, + - L253 Bu 2
& „ oa 6p þ
omen OO ̃᷑è oe RR TS ERR

n
* *
7
7
7
{2 *
C200
%
ak
* *
*
N
* a,
6a”
* *
Pa*
. ; $ +!
1
n *
%

ln 45

the poſſeſſion of it, as has been ſeen in circum-
ſtances ſufficiently perplexing.

The King, whoſe ſole view in entering upon this
ſubject, was to make a particular application to me,
told me, that by this diſcourſe, which might have
ſome relation to the preſent ſtate of my fortune, he
had no intention to give me a leſſon, being too well

erſuaded of my fidelity, to think there was any oc-
caſion for it; but that having ſcriouſly reflected up-
on the manner in which it was neceſſary he ſhould
behave to me, that he might not 1 himſelf to
the mortification of ſeeing the confidence he had
in me leſſened, he thought prudence required that
he ſhould take two precautions, with reſpect to me,
in the rewards my ſervices and family deſerved from
him. © One of theſe precautions, ſaid the King,
« has a reference to the world, the other to my»
« ſelf: firſt, that theſe rewards ſhould neither ſue-
« ceed each other ſo rapidly, nor in themſelves be
« ſo exceſſive, as to render you the object of pu-
ce blic hatred, always ready to break out againſt
« filt miniſters: and the ſecond, that theſe eſtates
« and theſe honours ſhould be of ſuch a nature, as,
« if it ſhould happen that through religion, or any
e other motive, you ſhould be capable of violating
© your duty, they may not put you into a condi-
tion of giving any umbrage to your benefactor
* kimfſelf, or, after his death, of diſturbing the
* tranquillity. of his ſucceſſor, or of putting the
“ ſtate in danger: in one word,” ſaid this Prince,
after giving me to underſtand, that as he ſpoke
without any diſguiſe, he would permit me to tell
bim my ſentiments freely likewiſe, “ I want to a-
void having the leaſt occalion of ſuſpicion againſt
* you, that my friendſhip for you may continue un-
* alterable. 1 daily experience ſo many inſtances
* of ingratitude, which I never expected, that, con-
* trary to my inclinations, I am obliged to be dif.
& truſtful,

46 M E M O I R S. Book XIII.

* truſtſul. Do not imagine, therefore, that I will
« put you in poſſeſſion of great cities, and ſtrong
c fortreſſes, which, in the high credit, and great
« abilities you poſſeſs, might make you independent
“ of me, and enable you, whenever you pleaſed, to
« throw the kingdom into confuſion. I cannot do
% more for you than ought to be done for a ſer-
„% vant, however faithful he may be, by a prince
« who carefully ſtudies his honour, his reputation,
« and the intereſt of his people.”

Henry, without giving me time to reply, added,
that till proper opportunities offered for completing
my fortune, he, from this moment, would join to
my ſalaries and penſions, which were no more ſuffi-
cient to anſwer the expences of my table and houſe,
an extraordinary gratuity of ſixty thouſand livres a-
year; that by uniting this ſum to my own eſtate, 1
might purchaſe more lands, build upon them, fur-
niſh and embelliſh my new houſes, and make an
ample ſettlement for my children; telling me graci-
_ ouſly, that he ſtill reſerved to himſelf to give me other
proofs of his friendſhip and liberality : “ And this,
« purſued he, I ſhall do with the more willingnels,
« as I am aſſured you will not ſquander theſe ſums
« fooliſhly on entertainments, dogs, horſes, birds,
« and miſtreſſes.“

During this long diſcourſe of Henry's, my mind
was agitated with various thoughts, which made me
liſten to him in ſilence. The reſſections it occa-
ſioned left me ſtill more moved with his freedom,
and the confidence he repoſed in me, than diſcon-
tented with a caution which many others, in my ſi-
tuation, would have thought exceſſive, The King
having commanded me to be very ſincere in my
reply, I told him, that although 1 had at this mo-
ment an abſolute certainty in my own mind, that
neither his Majeſty, nor his ſucceſſors, nor the ſtate,
ſhould ever have any cauſe for thoſe *
| 0

b
8
1

=

11602. N . ve

of me which his wiſdom had ſuggeſted, yet I my-
ſelf did not think he carried it too far; it being, in
my opinion, one of the chief maxims of govern-
ment, that a prince ought never to deliver himſelf
up blindly to one perſon, whatever ſervices he may
have received from him, ſince it is next to impoſſible

that any one ſhould be able to anſwer for the wiſ-

dom and juſtneſs of his counſels for the future.

Therefore, inſtead of thinking myſelf injured, I

found cauſe, in all his Majcity had ſaid, to admire
his prudence, and to acknowledge his goodneſs.
ſince whatever bounds he ſhould preſcribe to his fa-

' yours, they would always greatly exceed both my

expectations and my ſervices. |
As I could not doubt but that the malignant in-

ſinuations of the courtiers, who were jealous of my

favour with his Majeſty, had ſome ſhare in thoſe
fears he expreſſed of me, I ſeized this opportunity
to explain myſelf on an article, which, from this
moment I foreſawẽ I ſhould be under a frequent ne-
ceſlity to return. I begged his Majeſty would per-
mit me to repreſent to him, that he ought not to
give faith to the poiſonous reports of informers,

without having firſt had good proofs of my crime,

and given me an opportunity of defending myſelf.
I aſſured him that he would. find me ſincere enough

to confeſs my faults, which of itſelf deſerved that

he ſhould treat me in this manner; and that he
ſhould be convinced that what my enemies imputed
to criminal views, could but at moſt amount to a
failing, which I would not ſcruple to confeſs that
inſtant, and for which I had ſome occaſion for his
indulgence; and this was, that through impatience
of any obſtacle or delay in any reſolution that I
judged neceſſary to be taken, ſome words of com-
plaint or anger might eſcape me againſt the too eaſy
diſpoſition of his Majeſty, of which my enemies
would not fail to take advantage, although the

purity

472

wi.

* Hm — — . — — Pp _ — —— —
—— — we” —  —— * . — — — — — — . wean

—
—

„
$

—
)
1

48 M E M OI R S Book XIII.

purity of my intentions might be eaſily perceived

in the words themſelves, on which their calumny

againſt me was founded.

What I then ſaid to the king I now repeat to my
readers, and that not from an affectation of mode-
ſty, by way of juſtification of myſelf, I am con-
ſcious I have no occaſion for any, but becauſe,
however irreproachable my conduct may have been,
I have, nevertheleſs, been more than once oblige!

to clear myſelf to the Prince whom I ſerved. If

this confeſſion does not hinder them from denying
ine that juſtice I have merited, it will not make them

judge leſs favourably of Henry, if they attend to

the conjunctures and maxims of the times in which
we both lived. In all times, there is nothing againſt
which it is ſo difficult to defend one's ſelf, as the
ecret machinations of envious courtiers : what ef.
fect then might they nut be expected to produce in
the mind of a prince, who could collect a thouſand
examples of treachery, diſloyalty, and diſobedience
to himſelf, and hardly one of real attachment? To
judge clearly of the ſentiments which Heary enter-
tained of me, we mult not conſider bim in thoſe
moments when the remembrance of fo many in-
ſtances of ingratitede, awakened by the molt artful
impoſtures, opened his heart in ſpite of him to dit.
traſt and ſuſpicion ; but, when recovered from thoſe
impreſſions which the plots they endeavoured to
comprehend me in had made on his mind, he gave
we the ſincereſt proofs of his tenderneſs and eſteem.
The world therefore may judge as it pleaſes of thoſe

little intervals of favour which I have been obliged |

to ſoffer during the courſe of what will be called
my glory and proſperity, and which probably any
other might have ſuppreliſed, for the honour of ha-
ving it ſeid, that he directed as he pleaſed the incli-

nations of bis maſter; on this ſubject 1 ſhall vſe |
neither |

— —

* head w-

. =
7 —
— an. #

1 60 2» 9 . 49

neither diſguiſe nor concealment, for truth is my
guide, and inſtruction is my end.

The Duke of Luxembourg having had a cauſe
brought before the parliament this year, the advo-
cates that plead. d for him had the aſſurance to exact
fifteen hundred crowns for their fees. The Duke
complained of this extortion to the King, who or-
dered the parliament to iſſue out a decree, by which
the lawyers fees were reduced and ſettled, and they
obliged to give receipts for all the money they re-
ccived, and a general receipt for what papers were
put into their hands, that they might be conſtrained
to deliver up theſe, which they generally kept till
their demands were ſatisſied. The neceſſity of put-
ting a curb to the avarice of theſe people had al-
ways appeared fo ſtrong, that the States had already
given the ſame orders *, but to no purpoſe. The
parliament granted the decree that was demanded
of them, but the lawyers, inſtead of ſubmitting to
it, went, three or four hundred of them, to return

into the public regiſter the enligns of their office,

which produced a total ceſſation of law proceedings.
There was almoſt a general murmur throughout
Paris, particularly among pragmatical coxcombs

and badauds +, a ſet of wretches with which the

town is crouded, who taking upon them to be wiſer
than the King, the peers, and the ſtates of the king-
dom, decided againſt them in favour of the advo-
cates t, and found ſome abettors, even at court,

who, with ſo much power and art exaggerated an

* Ordonnance de Blois, art. 1 62.

+ Such as are ſtyled cockneys at London.

} Matthieu, in relating this incident, tom. II. I. iii. p. 478. ſeems
in like manner, to take the pait ot the advocates, and yet, for all this,

every good man mult be of the Duke of Sully's opinion. In the ſe-

quel of theſe memoirs, he 2 the means of conſiderably dimi-
niſhing the number of proceſſes; and it is for this that endeavours

ought, indeed, to be chicfly uſed for buſineſo, to remedy the abuſes of
which he complains,

VOL. III. E evil,

—

50 M ne - Book II.

evil, very inconſiderable in itſelf and eaſily reme-
died, that the king was ſtunned with their clamors,
and began to be in pain about the conſequence.
While this affair was yet in agitation, bis Ma-
jeſty being one day in his cloſet converſing with
ſome cf the courtiers, and relating the continual ſo-
licitations that were made him in favour of the ad-
vocates, “ Faith, Sire, I am not ſurpriſed at it,”
ſaid Sigogne, railing his voice, and aſſuming the air
of one in a violent paſſion; “ theſe men make it
« plainly appear, that they know not how to em-

*,
*

“ much about a trifle. To hear their exclama-
« tions, one would think the ſtate, without theſe
« bawlers, would be ruined ; as if the kingdom
“ under Charlemagne, and ſo many other great
« kings, during whoſe reigns neither advocates nor
* attorneys were heard of, was not in as flouriſh-
é ing a condition as it is at preſent, when we are
te devoured by theſe vermin.” Sigogne afterwards,
to prove that the eſtabliſhment of advocates in
France was not very ancient, produced the regiſter
of the chancery, of which the firſt paper is intitled
A permiſſion to plead cauſes by an advocate; and,

perceiving that he was liſtened to with pleaſure, he

added, that this ſcience was eſtabliſhed to the ruin
of the nobility and the people, and the deſtruction
of trade and agricuiture. © There is not,” ſaid
he, “ any artiſt, or even any ſimple labourer, that
te is not of more uſe to the community, than this
ce ſwarm of men, who enrich themſelves by our
te follies, and the artifices they have invented to
ce ſtifle truth, throw down all right, and darken
“% reaſon. If we are ſo blind,“ continued he, with

a vivacity truly diverting, “ that we will not, and |

& ſo unhappy that we cannot, do without them;
te nothing remains to be done, but to command
them to reſume the exerciſe of their employ-

& ment

ploy their time, ſince they diſturb themſelves ſo

ww K . nw. mw

— — - — my —

hs win, BY 222

20 — — — — BY

©
"yp

18

ms FF, ww ww

w

» 29% „% ic wt wm vn. N41 Oo OY mow wh) — GOD

—
4

* 1 d

1602. O F . 51

*

“ ment within eight days at fartheſt, upon the con-
&« ditions preſcribed by the court, upon pain of
& being obliged to return to the ſhop or the plough
& which they have quitted, or elſe to ſerve the
&« ſtate in Flanders, with a muſket upon their ſhoul-
&« ders. I'll anſwer for it, if this method be taken
&« with them, we ſhall ſoon ſee them run with ea-
e gerneſs to reſume theſe magnificent enſigns, like
« yermin towards a heap of wheat.“

There was not one in the company who could
forbear ſmiling at this lively fally of Sigogne's, and
the King was among the firſt, and confeſſed that
bis arguments were very convincing. But whe»
ther it was, that he ſuffered himſelf to be overcome
by the ſolicitations “ that were made him, or a-
larmed by the fears of the conſequegces that might
attend his joining this new diſorder to thoſe troubles
by which the kingdom was then agitated ; or that,
as he afterwards declared, he had reſerved to him-
ſelf the making one day ſuch a genetal regulation
in this affair, that not only the advocates, but the
attorneys and the whole body of the law ſaould
be comprehended in it, he conſented that the arret
ſhould, for this time, continue without effect. And
thus was this ludicrous buſineſs terminated ; for
refleftions upon which, I refer. the reader to Si-
gogne's own words: fo the world was left to think,

that it was I who made kim ſpeak them f.

This

The medium made uſe of by the King's peop'e, who under.

hand favoured the advocates in this affair, was, that the King ſhould
ſend new letters to the parliament, whereby the advocates were or-
dered to reſume and continue their functions, on condition, however,

of obeying the decrees of parliament, and the ordinance of the ſtates,

But as theſe letters did at the tame time allow them to make ſuch

remonſtrances as they ſhould think reaſonable, with reg rd to the ex-
erciſe of their ſeveral employments; and as they we e particularly

| alfured, that they might act as before, they had no difficalty to ſub»
mit thereto, Le Thou, I. 129. Sept, an 1602.

Le Jau nal d' Henry IV. relates a little piece of hi.tory waick
| | E 2

15

M E M OI R 8 Pook XIII.

This naturally leads me to take notice of the
great law-ſuit commenced this year by the third
eſtate of Davphine, againſt the clergy and nobility,
upon the manner in which the taxes were ſetticd
and aſſized in this province. I, with thirteen other
commiſſioners, choſen amongſt perſons of the high-
eſt diſtinction in the kingdom, were named to take
cogniſance of it; but it was ſix years before it could
be decided: the animoſity between the parties con-
cerned was ſo great, that there was a neceſlity for
{ending a ſecond time to take information upon the
ſpot. I took a more ſpeedy method to bring a man
named Jeuſſeaume to juſtice. He hed been a re—
ceirer general in the revenue; and, becoming 2
bankrupt, had carried off a great deal of the royal
money. I cauſed him to be ſeized at Milan, whi-
ther he had retired, and he was hanged on a gibbet.
All crimes that draw along with them the ruin of
a multitude of familics, cannot be too ſeverely pu-
niſbed. The King again ſnewed bimſelf ſolicitous
for the intereſt of his finances, in the affair of the
receivers and treaſurers- general of Burgundy. Some

I ſhall ſet down here. Hen:y one time hunting on the ſide of Groſ-
bois, dropt his company, 2s he frequently did, and came by him-
jelf to Cretcil, which is a league on the other ſide of the bridge of
Charenton, and that at noon-day, and as hungry as a hanter. Ge-
iog into en inn, he inquired cf the landlady if ſhe had any thing for
him to cat, to which the anſwered, No, and that he was come too
late, taking him only for a private gentleman. Henry then aſked
her, for whom is this roa{t-meat J fee at the fire? For ſome gentle-
men, replies the, that are above, and whom I take to be ſolicitors.
The King ſent, in a civil manner, to aſk them to let him have a
iece of their roz{t-meat, or to give him leave to fit at one end of
their table upon paying for it, boch u hich they refuſed him. Upon
this, Henry ſent privately for Vitry, and eight or ten more of his
attendants, vhom he ordered to feize theſe folivitors, and carry
them away to Groſbois to have them well vhipped, to teach them
more complaiſance to gentlemen another time.“ This the {id
« Sieur Vitry ſaw punctualily and {pecdily performed“, ſays the au-
thor, „notwithſtanding all the arguments, catrcaties, and remon-
« ſtrances of the lawyers.”

dravgnht:

1 - 8U L LY.

© _gdravghts had been made on them for the charges
d of garriſons and works about fortifications, which
3 they had not paid, either through negligence, or
q with a bad deſign. ] adviſed his Majeſty to fend
y thither a commiſſary on whoſe probity he could
: depend. He did ſo; and he began by ſuſpending
y thoſe men from their employments, and himſelf
q performed the duties of treaſurer. The money
3 that was expended upon this occaſion was raiſed
: out of the ſalaries of theſe receivers and treaſurers ;
: « That I,” ſaid Henry, © may not pay the penalty

& for their failure in my ſervice and their own
iy « d. «x2 27

uty. |
To prevent the exportation of gold and ſilver

l coin, I found a method leſs tedious and ſevere than
4 puniſnments and conliſcations, which was only to
55 ralic their value “, there being no reaſon why they
: ſhould be carried out of the kingdom, but that they
; would
3
e * The crown, called ecu d'or au ſoleil, which was valued at ſixty
2 lis tournois, was talſed to ſixty-ſive; that called ecu piſtolet, of (if -

ty eight ſols, to fixty-two; and fo of the other gold ſpecies. Ihe

vilver franc of twenty ſols, was raiſed one £1 and four deniers, and

„ tae relt in proportion. It was in the month of September that this
double o:donnance paſſed, about the ra:ſmg the value of money, and
the re eſtabliſhing of reckoning by livres; for the reckon.ng by
crowns had only taken place about twenty-five years before, that is,
fiir the ordonnance of 1 577, which had abrogated the reckoning by
livies. Matthicu very highly approves of both theſe regulations of
the Orke of Sully's, rom. 2. i 3- p · 840. Le-Blanc, on the contrary,
ſays, p. 351. 372. ef %%% that. whatever cogent reaſons they might
Wave had for abrogating this famous ordonnance of 1577, it was very

in done, either with regard to the money itſelf, becauſe the gold and
ſilver ſpecies were afterwards 1aiitd as much in ſeven years as they
bad been during the ſpace of ſeventy-five years before; or with re-
gard to commerce, becauſe merchandiſe and proviſious were propor-
tionably enhanced in their prices. The opinion of this lait writer
ſeems to me to be grounded upon ſtronget reaſons, The reckoning
by crowns had been ſettled as favourable to thoſe who had the'r re-
: Venues ia fiiver, thoſe who improved their money in the pub'ic funds
and otherwiſe, and th ſe who ſold goods upon credic payable at a

© Certain time. The ordonnance of 1 577 {e:rurcd the ffs of a cons
| Liderable auniber of the natives; and beſides, if there had been any

| E 3 conſuſion

. 3 0 wy 0

RY 1

= wr, 6

- Bo ww = ©

Vs

54 M E M OI R S Book XIII.

would paſs for more in the neighbouring countries
than at home. At the ſame time, 1 ſettled, over
all the kingdom, the way of reckoning by livres,
inſtead of crowns, as had been till then the practice,

By

confuſion fonnd in the coin, this neicher was, nor could be, the cauſe
of it, but only the miſersble condition to which the civil wars had
reduced France, The Duke of Sully prejected theſe two regulations
here mentioned, to prevent theſe diſordets, which were, according to
him, the too great plenty of forcign ſpecies, that, in commerce, oe-
cupied the plece of our own; ſecondly, ths enhancement of the price
of proviſions; and, laſtiy, the exportation of the gold and ſilver coin
to our neighbours. It was equally eaſy t have made him ſenſible,
that his complaints, in all theſe reſpects, ſignified nothing, any more
than the remedy which he applied to them, We have already ſheun,
a little higher, in what fenie it is that this quantity of foreign coin,
which abounds in our commerce, is an advantage; and if it could be
called an evil, the augmentation of the nominal value of coin, to wit,
in reckonings. to which he has recourſe, would be more proper to
raiſe than lower it.

As to the raiſing of the price of provifions, the fame augment»
tion could not but make way for it (till more; and the reafon for ob-
viating it, which he draws 5 the computation by livres, well ap-
pear to every one very inſufficient, and even frivolous. Moreover,
it appears to me, that the enhancing of the price of proviſions follows
as a neceſſary conſequence and effect of the multiplication of gold and
lilver in Europe, lince the diſcovery of America. In order to pics
vent it, we muſt have prohibited a commerce, not only with Spain,
whoſe mines furniſh us now with theſe metals, but alſo with all cur
neighbours, among a hom they circulate as well as among us. A
itate that ſbould be conducted by this principle, would, among the
other ſlates of Europe, make the ſame figure as the republic of La-
cedæmon did with relp:& to the reſt of Greece, The only thing to
te attended to, and which is of very great conſequence, is, that all
the merchandiſe and p:ov.ſhuns, and generally whatever conſtitutes a
part of commerce, ſhould riſe at the fame time, and in the ſame pro-
portion in value. If the production of manufactures be enhanced,
without ra fing the price of corn, for example, then agriculture is

negictcd. It the wages of journeymen be not propoitioned to both,

thoſe people can no longer live and pay their taxes,

As to the exportation of coin out of the k'ngdom, which ſeems to

have been the chef view of the Duke of Sully, it is true, that the
avpmentat an of its current value in reckoning, might, in ſome mes—
ſure, prevent it in annihilating or d:minithing the profit of the deal-
ers in bullion ; and, probably this was the only reafon that deter-
mined him. The narrow views of his age, with regard to the fi-

nanccs, and ſtill more as to commerce, did not allow him to ſe, |

that

i 3 ning —- CTY — A.

|
Fx

I : 602. O F e . 55

—

By ſome this may be thought an uſeleſs refinement,
r ſince all the ways of reckoning muſt come to the
ſame thing at laſt. I am, however, of opinion, ex-

. perience having ſhewn me, that the cuſtom of talk-
y ing
( that he deſtroyed a flight abuſe by one a great deal more conſiderable,
4 nor ſuff-r him to go up to the ſource of the evil : he would have per-
0 ceived, that the advantage of commerce, and conſequently the great -
eſt quantity of gold and ſilver, will remain in that nation which ſhall
x have made all others depend moſt upon them, for riches, either na-
a tural or acquired, and that as long as the balance ot trade ſhall be in
” favour of ſome one neighbouring nation, this prohibition of export-
E ing gold and filver is neither reaſonable nor practicable. At preſent,
f when we begin to ſee a little more clearly into theſe matters, there
. is no one but agrees, that all theſe regulations, and this whole ſeries
wy of reaſoning did not attain the end propoſed.
n | 1
* Though the exigency of circumſtances, which is a!moſt endleſs,
does not permit either the providing againſt, or the ſubjecting every
1 thing to a ſingle ule, we may, however, aver, that, on the article

of money and commerce, there are two general and very {imple ma-
xims which may be accounted as invariable ; and theſe are, to avoid,
with the greateſt care imaginable, meddling with the coin, and en-
deavour continually to render the French as laborious, induſtrious,
= and frugal as poſlivie.
The frequent variations in the coin give mortal wounds both to
domeſtic and fo gu trade, by the extinction of credit, the ſhutting
nd , :
up of private purſes, the imbatraſſment and diſadvantage of exchange,
and the ruin of eitates : All this is palpable and obvious. To this

in, we may add, that the King, who appcars to be the =y one who
ur gains by ſuch proceed.vgs, to put the caſe impartially, always loſes
- conſiderably more thereby than he gains; beſides, that the inſolvency
h

of his ſubjccts is an evil which he always ſhares with them, and even
feels much longer than they do: All his expences increaſe with the
coin, ſo as not to be diminiſhed even when that falls.

al The othe! prigciple has (till leſs necd of proof. It ſeems, that na-

bY ture has reſerved io France the ſovereignty of trade, from the ad-
or vantage of her ſituat ion, and the goodneſs of her fail, which obliges a
<d, great part of her neighbours to have recourſe to her, for all thoſe
1 things that ſupply the firit and eſſential neceſſuries of life: the has
th, | no moſ e to do than to ſhare, at lealt equally with them, in the com-

merce of all thoſe things that ſerve only tor mere convenicncy, or
to which luxury has introduced into Europe. If the conlumption of
the the latter ſhould exceed the produce of the former, we ſhail complain
es- unjuitly of our condition, for, ro pretend to hinder the exportation
al- of our materials of gold and ſilver to foreigners, when it is we that
7 tte indebted to thele foreigners, is endeavoui ing to make the effect

3 ceaſe, without removing the cauſe. But to ſet a Frenchman to com-
* merce that is cart ied on by ſea, to manufactures and arts, to hinder
4 g — *

56 MEMOIR S Book XIII.

ing always of crowns, for want of a denomination
of a money more convenient for petty traffic, had
imperceptibly raiſed all that was bought or ſold to
more than its real value,

Ti.c

him as much as poſſible from expending too much on things thi!
come from abroad, and which are but ſuperflaities, and, on the o-
ther hand, to increaſe his proper riches, by encouraging the cul: iva-
tion of his lands. 'T his is what we may truly call promoting tie
intereſt of trade.

Beſides Le Blanc and Matthieu, conſult on the ſubject of this note

De Thou, I. 129. Le-Grain, | 8. Percfize, and other writers 9.

that time, in order to find out the hiſtory of theſe regulations of th:
finances and commerce; for, io reality, the rea{un;ngs of the wri-
ters on this whole matter are not very ſatisfactarty. We might well
ſay of them what the Duke of Sully ſaid of the parVament of Poris,
© They are maſters of arts of which: none of them know any thing.”
Mem. pour Phiſt. de France.

As M. de Sully treats no more of money, T will ſopply that part
from the ſame memoirs, tom. 2. p. 275. et e Theugzh this wri—
ter ſeems not even to underſtand the Nate of the queſtion, and [peaks
not very favourably of the King and bis miniſters. “ Ar that time,”
ſays he, ſpeaking of all the deliberations upon this ſabject in 1889,
« theie was brought upon the carpet, and propoſed to the council, 3
« new <d'Q for the coin, which they wanted to ler and alter, that
« is, to raife its value, and by the fame means to ruin the people,
% Every one mur mured at this propoſal : the Kirg alone finding hi:
« account in it, laughed at it, and at all the world, even at his own
© miniſters, and their remonſtrances, as he did at the firſt Pickdcnt
©« of the mint (William Le Clerc), who being d ſconcerted mm tis
« ſpeech, having been twice inter rupted by his Majeſty's break ng
4 into a fit of laughter, which made him ſtop ſhort in the middhe
« thereof; and upon his Mje{ty's ohſerving it, he ſays to tim, Go
« on, Mr Preſident, for I am not laaghing at yo but at my con-
« ſin, the Count of Soiſſons, who is ncar me, end tells me, that be
« ſmells a ſhoulder of mutton. This Ccond ſtroke fuck bim quite
« dumb. Upon which, the King falling into a fit of laughter, went
« away and left him. A native of Ferigord, who was one of the
« principal perſons that had communicated this project of the cd
« to the King. preſſed much for its being put in exceuticn. 7 bs
« King, who very well knew the iniquity of the edit, ſeeing him—
« ſelf continually teaſed by this rude contractor, at length aſked
„ him what ccuntryman he was; to which he anſwered, I 2m a na-
« tive of Perigord, Ventreſainteris, replies the King, 1 always
thought fo; for in that country they are all counterteits of coins.
— On Saturday, the 5th of September, the court being met on
« the coin dict, rejected it entirely; Nec debernus, nec P imuss, we
« neither

s
» WW

7

4. *

lr 57

The intcreſt of commere: was ſtil! more con-
cerned in the news the King received from ſeveral
parts of the kingdom, that thoſe who had been em-
ployed to ſeek for mines, had diſcovered a great
number of“ gold and ſilver ones. This report was
ſpread at court, with ſo many appearances of pro-
bability, that every one repreſenting to himſelf the
direction of this new labour as a ſource of immenſe
ri-hes, there was not one who did nct uſe his ut-
moſt endeavours to procure the grant of it. Mon-
ſicur le Grand obtained the office of ſuper inten-
dent, and Beringhen that of comptroller- general.
This gave occaſion for La- Regnardiere, a buffoon

& neither onght, nor can, concluded they with ore voice. The
& gentlemen belobging to the mint were called; among whom one
„ o the Reformed Rel'glon, called BA uh, ſpoke his ſentiments ve. y
« freely, fer which he was hichly commended; and the firſt prefi-
% dent jaid, Non in paralolis iſie locutus eff nos. It mult be ob-
% ſerved, that as ſcon as the people belonging to the mint had enter-
„ ed the chamber, the firſt picſident ſaid to them, Sit down and be
„ covered, and you ſhall ſpeak preſently. On Treſday the 8th, in
« the evening, M. de Sully went to ſce the firſt preſident, in order
% to prevail on him to perſuade the court to paſs the edits; but in
* this he found him irfiexibl-: and as the Preſident repreſented to
„him the injaſtice of it, M. de Sally anſacred. The king ought not
4% to look upon that as unjuſt which ſuits his affairs. On Tucf-
* day the 15th of September, the King ſent his letters patent to the
% court, to prolong the pailiament for eight days, during which
„time they were ordered to ſet about the regiſtering of the edicts,
* two of which were in a manner revoked; and as to the others, it
* was hoped they would fall of themſelves.“

 * Le-Septennaige mentions the places where theſe mines of all
Corts were diſcovered. In the Pyrennces, mines of talc and copper,
together with ſome of gold and ſilver; in the mountains of Foix,
m nes of jet and precious ſtones, and even carbuncles, though but
few; in the lands of Gevaudan, and in the Cevenncs, mines of
lead and tin; in thoſe of Carcaſſone, mines of Glver; in tho of
Auvergne, mines of iron; in the Lyonois rear the village Saint
Mar:in, of geld and filver; in Normandy, ſilver and very good
tin; at Annonay in the Vivarais, mines of lead; in La-Brie and
Picardy, mines of marcaſite of gold and (ilver. Some of theſe
mines, but eſpecially thoſe of gold and ſilver, are very difficult
and troublcfume to work, and at the ſame time of fo little profit,
that MI, de Thou had rcaſon for diſſuading them frem meddling
with them ever ſince that time.“ L. cxxix,

whoſe

38 MEMOIR S Bock XIII

whoſe jeſts were equally ſatirical and agreeable, to
ſay, © that they could not have made a fitter choice
6 of a man for the direCtion of the mines, than one
« who was himſclf a compoſition of mines“.
The improvement and working of ſilk, of which!
ſhall have more occaſion to ſpeak in the following
year, may be dated from this period, the edict for
planting of mulberry-trees being now firſt publiſh.
ed.

Among all theſe different edicts, none made ſo
much noiſe as that againſt duels J. His Majeſty
went ſo far as to make death the puniſhment of
thoſe who diſobeyed; in which, I confels, he acted
contrary to my advice. I have too plainly declared
my thoughts of this pernicious and favage abuſe, to
fear the accuſation of having endeavoured to tole-
rate it; but I foreſau, that an exceſs of ſeverity
in the means would be the principal obſtacle to the

execution. When it becomes neceſſary to declare

the will of the ſovereign to the ſubject, it is of the
utmoſt importance to examine carefully, whether
the thing to be prohibited be of ſuch a nature that
the fear of death may prevent diſobedience; for

otherwiſe thoſe cxtreniities are, in my opinion, leſs

efficacious than degradation or diſgrace, or even than
a pretty high fine or forfeiture. If the practice ol

* Giimaces or antic geſtures, The uncouth appearance which |
this jeſt makes in Engliſh, is at once a proof of Mr Addiſon's obſer. |

vation, that “ a pun can be no more engraven than it can be tran!-
« lated;” and that this kind of falſe wit paſſed current in other
courts, as well as in that of Britain, in this period.

+ This edit, in which duelling is declared to be high treaſon or
leze majeſiéè, was paſſed at Blois in the month of June, and is a very
ſevere one. This is the edit which firſt gave the conſtables and
marechals of France a power of prohibiting violent methods, and op-
pointing the reparation of the injuries received. This the parliament
reſtrifted, in the regiſtering, to thoſe rencounters alone that concern-
ed the point of honour, and excepted all other crimes, as debts, l-
faults, Cc. M de Su ly, in the courſe of theſe memoirs, handles
this affair of duelling at greater length,

duclling

_
C 4 *
FF)
94
*

Wy nnr 59

duelling be ſeriouſly conſidered, it will be found
to be of this nature; for it is commonly perſons of
quality, and even of the greateſt diſtinction, who
are guilty of it; for whom ſolicitations are ſo much
the more ardent and ſucceſsful, as the puniſhment
with which they are threatened is great and infamous,
It is not therefore to be doubted, that many par-
dons will be granted, the example and hope of

which, are ſufficient to encourage diſobedience to

the law. It often happens, that thoſe puniſhments

are moſt regarded, for which a pardon dare not,
nor cannot be ſolicited. |

Beſides thoſe embaſſies already mentioned at the

beginning of this year, the King received a ſolemn

deputation from the thirteen Swiſs cantons: foity=
ty-two deputics of that people came to Paris to re-
new the alliance *, which had been the occaſion of
Marechal Biron's journey to thoſe cantons. I was
appointed, together with Sillery, De- Vie, and Cau-
martin, to treat with them ; but, not being able, on
account of my other employments, to attend this
buſineſs conſtantly, I ſatisficd myſelf with getting
exact informations from Sillery of all that paſſed at

their meetings. The only difficulty I ſtarted, was

concerning the three millions that were granted them,
beſides the forty thouſand crowns to which their
uſual penſion was raiſed. I could have wiſhed that
they had deducted certain ſums paid on their ac-
count, during the campaign in Savoy, and on ſome
other occaſions; as for the reſt, theſe gentlemen
have always thought good cheer, and deep drinking
with them, the moſt eſſential parts of their reception.
The King preſented them with gold chains and me-
dals; and the King likewiſe ſent back, loaded with

* Sce all the ceremonies of entries, audiences, taking oaths,
c. which were obſerved on this occaſion, in the Septennaire, anne
. 3602, Matthieu, tom. 2. |. iii. p. 471. Cc.

preſents,

— ͤ—ꝛ᷑
— —

—

—
—
—

— = — - — -
— — S — p = —
ä—mDD—Dd— — . ——ß —— —

— —

* ——
—

— —
—

—
—

—
P 2 22 g *
— — —

—

My

—

. r

*
0
ll
f ;
N
i]

:

|
1
g

|

j

;
17

— cc Dt ————

60 u 1 M Gi n 3 Book. Kit

preſents, the Pope's chamberlain, who came to

compliment his Majeſty in the name of Eis Holineſs,
He gave his conſent to the alliance which the te.
public of Venice made with the Grifons againſt
Spain. |

The great armaments and other warlike prepara:
tions which that crown was making for the follow.
ing year, kept the crown of France in continual
attention to their motions, and were the cauſe that
Henry, who held it for an inconteſtable truth, that
it was by the military power alone a ſtate could be

rendered flouiiſhing, not only rejected the propoſal -

I made him, to diſband part of his troops, particu
larly to leſſen the number cf his guards by twelve
or fifteen hundred men, but allo that he took a re-
ſolution to make a new levy of tix thouſand Swiſs;
and it was with great difficulty that I prevailed upon
him to defer this levy till the month of September,
He was more exactly mindful than ever about the
payment of his army, and I was obliged to the Con-
ſtable for having ſolicited with great carnettnels the
payment of my company of gendarmes. And at

laſt he determined to take another journey to Calais,

which was the moſt conliderable of all his Majeliy
made this year, except that into the provinces.
Henry took his route through Verneuil ® towarcs
the latter end of the month of Auguſt, leaving his
Queen in the ſame condition ſhe was the preceding

year, that is, far advanced in her pregnancy, for |
ſhe lay in of Madame, her eldeſt daughter, in No-

vember. He recommended to me with great car-
neſtneſs to be aſſiduous about her, and endeavour
to make her approve of this journey ; as likewile to

procure her every kind of diverſion that might al-
leviate her concern during the firſt days of his ab-

®* Verncuil near Scnlis, a caſtle which he had given to his miſſteſe,
Mademoiſelle d'Entragues, and from which ſhe took the title of Mar.

chianeſi of Verneuil. g
ſence.

—

Wo. OF 8 r . 61

fence. He never wrote to me without making in-
quiry about the ſtate of her health, and the manner
which (he paſſed her time: and it may be truly
faid, that he never omitted giving her every inſtance
of reſpect and tenderneſs that might make her for-
zet the uneaſineſs ſhe received from his amours.
ods about this time that he legitimated the ſon
he had by the Marchioneſs de Verneuil, which was
gmong the number of thoſe things. that gave the
greateſt offence to the Queen, Henry was detained
a little time at Monceaux by a fever, occaſioned by
a cold he got in walking late in the evening to ſce
his maſons at work The remedy he uſed for it
was, to go to the chace next day. As ſoon as I
had written to him at Boulogne, that every thing
relating to the Queen was in ſuch a ſituation as he
wiſhed, he ordered me to attend him in that city,
with the Preſident Jeannin, for whom he reckoned
be ſhould allo have fome commands.
It was from this place that his Majeſty was a wit-
neſs of part of the event and exploits of the cam-
paign between the Spaniards and the Flemith, with -
out having any inclination to difarm, whatever af.

\ furance might be given him by the King of Spain,

till he had ſeen what turn affairs would take in the
Low Countries ; where, however, they till conti-
fued to he on the ſame footing as before. The
ſiege of Oſtend was not fo vigourouſly puſhed by
the beſiegers, as it was ſuſtained by the beſieged.
Prince Maurice of Naſſau, after continuing ſome
Une at Berg, uncertaia of what he ſhould next un-
dertake, went, on the 19th of September, to inveſt
Grave, and intrenched himſelf, not doubting but he
ſhould receive ſome oppoſition in this enterpriſe.
Accordingly, the Admiral of Arragon, in the ab-
ſence of the Archduke Albert, who was detained
by ſickneſs at Bruſſels, endeavoured, by means of

'Þ 2 bridge which he threw over the river, to beat up

Vol. III. F one

|

4
4
5
wy
|
|
vi
*
vi

— —
| gs 5 ö * —

— — —

_— COTE. — at Cr. dt eee re ee EY
a * 2 2 p ———_ N

i
|
9

*

— .  — — exp -

N —

9 — ——
2 gn

—— —

N — —

— a> 2
* — * D

— . —— —

12

383 2

— ——

62 en

Book XIII.

one of the quarters of the beſiegers, and to ſuceout

the place; but he did not ſucceed: and he had e.

ven the mortification to find, that many of his Spa.
niſh companies mutinied, and, after ſeparating from
the main body of his army, poſſeſſed themſelves of
Hoeſtrate and Dele. He took ſuch wrong method;
to engage them to return, that they came to a re.
ſolution to apply to the Prince of Orange, who

gave them the city of Grave for a retreat, which he

had taken, and which theſe Spaniards reſtored to
him, when the ravages and violences they commit.
ted upon the territories of the Archduke oblige!
him to treat with them, and to receive them on ve
ry ſtrange conditions *. |

The council of Spain, through a deſire of carry.

ing on the war, reſolved to make new and more vi.
gorous efforts. A ſquadron of twelve large gallie:
and pinnaces, fitted out at Sicily with great care,
manned with a ſufficient number of ſoldiers, and
plentifully ſupplied with all neceſſary proviſions
failed for this purpoſe out of the Spaniſh ports, to
cruiſe in the channel, The command of this ſqua

dron was given to Frederick Spinola, couſin to the

Marquis of that name, who conducted the ſicge cf
Oſtend. He flattered himſelf that he ſhould become
maſter of the fea, and complete the ruin of tht
Flemiſh But this proved a vain hope, Of twelve

veſſels, two of them periſhed cre he had quitted the|

coaſts of Spain; the ten others, meeting with :
Dutch ſquadron, were almoſt all either taken ot
ſunk ; the laſt that eſcaped, and in which Spinol:
bimſelf was, happened to run a-ground within (git
of Calais, but ſo diſabled by the cannon, and it

ſuch a ſhattered condition, that the ſlaves who row Þ
ed it having mutinied and fled, the General found]

* See in the hiſtorians the particulars of all theſe expeditions, whic Þ

ere here only br efly related.

hicaſel Þ.

„

bl

I 602. O F SUL L . 63

u bimſelf obliged to land alone, and with much diffi
e. eulty, at Calais, from whence he went to Bruſſels,
a do complain to the Archduke of the ſea and the
m Winds.

Spain made herſelf amends for theſe misfortunes
d; by the acquiſition of the marquiſate of Final, which
re. Was taken by the Count of Fuentes. There was
ho bot the leaſt ſhadow of a pretence for this uſurpa-
he - tion; this little ſtate, which is on the coaſt of Ge-
to boa, being inconteſtably a fief of the empire. Ne—
fit, vercheleſs, when the Emperor, to preſerve, in ap-
be! Peararce at leaſt, the right of the empire, offered to
ve ſend commiſioners to diſcuſs this affair upon the
ſpot, his offer was rejected with contempt by the
King of Spain *. He uſed the ſame violence with
regard to Piombino, a fief likewiſe of the empire,
lies Which afforded him a convenient port; and had
likewiſe the fame views upon Embden, when he un-

re, ewe

* dertook to ſupport againſt the inhabitants the lord +

ns ok this city, although he was avowedly a Proteſtant z *
Y

1 but in this he did not ſucceed: the citizens of
Embden maintained their liberty againſt both the
the one and the other, and joined themſelves to the
States.

” The Duke of Savoy ſucceeded no better in the
tel Attempt he ordered D*Albigny to make upon the
ene“ city of Geneva, This expedition ended unfortu-
(he. nately for the aſſailants, although they had opened
themſelves a paſſage into the city by ſcaling the
__ walls, and above two hundred of them had already
entered, after ſtabbing the centinc}, whom they had

=
4 —

en forced to tell them the v atch- word, which ſerved
6 them to get clear of the patrole; in fine, till they had

on- but to the ſword the fulſt guard, which they thought

* The Marquis of Final, by his importunities, obtained a penſion
during his life.
bid 1111 He was called Count d'Oſt Friſe. See the origin of theſe troy
N bles in Chron, Sept. anno 1598 and their concluſion, anno 1602,

= © nh would

— —a

Oe wo Ce. 1. A > —— —— 2 ——u— nn Bet. ———
. - x 8 - — 22 L — — = - - - Eh — — — —— —
ns AG _ * nt * : - -
8 , 2 — — cnmy e — — _ — —
— r > — Ds "= . — — — :

———

WD ac
e SR

64 MEMOIR Ss Bock XII.

would ſecure them the poſſeſſion of the city. But

the citizens deriving new ſtrength and courage from

the extremity they beheld themſelves in, charged
them with ſo much fury, that they drove them back,
and forced them to abandon their city. Some of
theſe Savoyards threw themſelves off the walls, to
eſcape the rage of the enemies; many others were
taken, and hanged without mercy. Spain entered
very deep into that black deſign, which was follow.
ed by a peace between the Duke of Savoy and the
republic of Geneva“.

The revolt of Battori from the Emperor conti.

nued the war in Hungary: the Duke of Nevers
Went

The treaty was concluded the following year at Remilly, through
the meciation of the Swiſs Cantons. Siri, ib:d. p. 200,

+ See how la Chronol, Septen. relates an action, of which M. de
Sully ſpeaks with a kind of contempt. * The Duke of Nevers
„thinking, by bis on example, to recall the courage of thoſe who
« withdrew from danger, and to induce others to come on, went di.
«© rectly to the breach, trampling over the dead, the wonnded, and even

« thoſe that were flying; but he received there the ſhot of a lage |
„ arquebute that was fired amidſt a great number of other arms, |

© from one ot the angles of the ſaid breach, that ſtruck him juſi on
the left ſide, penctrating into the breaſt near the heart and lungs;
but it was conducted {o providentially, that, neither breaking. or
« hurting any noble part, it gained him as much laſting honour, s i:
« ſhewed a great miracle in bis preſervation.”

Let us likewiſe hear this writer concerning the death of the Duke
de Mercceur : © Having an inclination, ſays he, to return to France,
in order to prepare tor ſome greater expedition againſt the Turks,
„% he went from Vienna to Prague, where he took his leave of the
« Emperor: but while he was at Noremberg he was ſeized with a fe-
& ſtilential ſpotted fever. No ſooner was the hoſt brought him, 11.20
«© the moment he ſaw it, though in a languiſhing and weak (ate of
u body, yet of a vigorous and ſound mind, having more faith than
« life, (the device of the Duke of Mereœur being plus fidet ras 1216

4 he threw himſelf out of bed, and falling pre ſtrate upon the ground, -Þ

1 adored his Saviour, uttering the moſt devout cjaculations.” The
whole of what this author adds concerning the acts, ſayings, and ſen-
timcnts, of the Duke of Mercceur, till the moment of his death, '
quite affecting, and a high eulagium on his character: “ His funerzl
* oration was pronounced in the church of Notre Dame at Paris, b)
Monſieur Frangois de Selles, coadjutor and biſhop elect of Geneva
« The Turks imagined that the affairs of the Chriſtians did not pro:

46 {pet

„

E

mne ee ic e aa | Qt _—

-
2. — %Y

1602.
went thither, in expectation of ſucceeding to the
poſt and reputation of the Duke of Mercœur, but

laying ſiege to Buda after Peſt had been taken by
the Chriſtians, the Turks, who on their ſide had at

06

=

VV 65

length got poſſeſſion of Alba Regalis, haſtened thi-
ther with ſuch numerous forces, that they forced

them to raiſe the ſiege ; and the Duke of Nevers re-
treated very much wounded. An action of George
'Baſte, the imperial general, has been very much and

very deſervedly applauded. The rebels in Battori's

party having ſeized Biſtrith, Baſte retook this place

by 8 capitulation, which, during his abſence, was
violated by ſome German ſoldiers. As ſoon as he
was appriſed of it at his return, he hanged up all
thoſe ſoldiers, and out of his own money ſatisfied
the inhabitants for the damage they had ſuffered,
The rebels were ſo greatly affected with the genero-
ſity of this action, that they all ſubmitted to the
Emperor, and demanded no other ſecurity than the
CeneraPs word.

ſper excepting where this prince was.” After the culogium of his

family, the hiſtorian paſſes to that of his virtues: “ He was one of
*« the moſt temperate men in the world as to dict, ſo as only to eat
when obliged through nece ſſity, and he drank almoſt nothing but

© water, He was no leſs abſtemious in other temporal enjoy ments;

humble in the poſſe ſſion of all thoſe high honours and great favours
% heaven had heaped upon him. and never abuſing any af them; he
* was equally acceſſible to rich aud poor; moderate in his recrea-
tions; he had a great contempt for idle aſſ-mblics : fo that what
time remained for amulement be employed in reading uſeful books,

He had an exact (kill 'n practical mathematics; he was alſo elo-

* quent, and would gracefully deliver his elegant ſentiments, not cu-
« ly in French, but likew-ſe in the German, Italian, and Spaniſh
* tongues, in which he was more than moderately ſkilled; and yet
„he never employed his elocution but to enforce things tha! were
uſeſul, praife-worthy, and virtuous.” The deſcription which this

- writer afterwards gives, with regard to his performing the duties of

religion, ard thoſe of his ſation, his piety, his prudence, and his other
Vir:ucs, torm altogether a yi. which may ſerve for a model to the
great of our times, if we except that en immoderate ambition and
miſlaken zeal for religion made him undertake a conſpiracy aga nſt
his ſovereigu. Matthieu, ibid. 456. ſpeaks of bim in the ſame

mauner,
1 BOOK

6 ME MOI IHS Bock XIV.

B O O K XIV.

HE city of Metz had been, for ſome time,
ſhaken with thoſe inteſtine diviſions, which

broke out in the beginning of this year. The Duke
d' Epernon, who was governor of it, and of the
whole country of Meflin, had placed there as his
lientenants Subole * and his brother, who made
ſuch an ill uſe of their authority, that they were
ſoon hated by the whole body of the citizens,
'This hatred was ſtrengthened by the difference of

their religions; and there was ſuch a general out.

cry amongſt the citizens and country-people, again
the lieutenants, that D*Epernon was obliged to go
himſelf to Metz, to hear the complaints of both
parties, and to endeavour to reconcile them. So-
bole complained, that the city refuſed to furniſh
the troops with victuals; and the city, in their turn,
threw the whole blame upon Sobule. Some dil.
putes had allo riſen concerning a certain Provencal,
priſoner at Vitry ; which, through rancour and de.
{ire of revenge, occaſioned ſeveral other matters lels

conſiderable ; and theſe heats had already proceed:

ed ſo far as to make a revolt be dreaded.

The Duke d' Epernon was ſoon convinced that the
two Soboles + had not juſtice on their ſide, at le}
with regard to the firſt complaint, which was in-

deed the chief, and by them made the occaſion ef

a quarrel, with no other view than to afford them
a pretence for opening the magazines of the citadeh
which was never permitted but in caſe of a war or!

Raymond de Comminges, Lord of Sobole, and his broth,
gentlemen of Gaſcony.

+ Sobole accuſed the city of Metz of holding intelligence with the
Count of Mansficld, in order to ſurrender itſelf to the King of Span.
T his accyſation appeared to be falſe, Vie du Duc d'Eperncn, p. 217,

liege,

6 2

v. iss. o r $ULL u. 67

ſiege, and this to make themſelves maſters of them.
D' Epernon would have been glad to have pacified

matters, without being obliged to deprive his two
creatures of their poſts ; for he well knew, that

ne, this was an exertion of authority, in which he would
ich have ſome difficulty to ſupport himſelf, the two
ke brothers being at the head of a party, ſtrong enough
the to oppoſe the Governor as well as the citizens.

his Things were in this ſtate, when the King recei-
ade ved advice of what was doing at Metz. He ſent me
ere notice that he would come to the arſenal to confer
ens. with me, and deſired that I would have a ſupper
: of prepared for him and ſix other perſons whom he
but. ſhould bring with him. He made me follow him
ink alone into the great ſtore-houſes of cannon, and ſmall
go arms, near the Baſtille, and, beginning, as uſual,
oth to diſcourſe about the ſituation of affairs within the
80. kingdom, with reſpect to the malecontents, he told
niſt | me the news he had juſt received from Metz.
ur, Henry, without any heſitation, reſolved upon ta-
dil“ King a journey thither, upon his reflecting, that if
cal | Metz, a city ſo very lately diſmembered from the
de. empire, ſhould unfortunately happen, in the preſent
leß ] conjuncture, to ſeparate itſelf from France, it would
ccd be a difficult matter to recover it. Several other

political motives made this journey abſolutely ne-
tte] ceſſary, beſides that of taking from the Duke d'E-

cash pernon a citadel, which he might make uſe of to
o in. very bad purpoſes, and a conſiderable extent of
nf country, wherein, under the reign of Henry III.
hem be had behaved more like a ſovereign prince than a
ade} governor ; and, upon a ſuppoſition that he ſhould
or: one day carry his great deſigns into execution, there

would be a neceſſity for having, in this country, ſo
important by its ſituation, a governor from whom
he could promiſe himſelf more aſſiſtance, than he
could expect from D*Epernon. It was probable at
leaſt that ſame fayourable opportunity would offer
to

— —-— —
* 9 — = .
* —— '
— ——— — — —

— = =D *
— - — —
4 — 2 — — —
— 4 38 fy
* = —
— — .
5

- — P

—— we — — — we

-— —— —

. , ERR—_—s
—

— —
2
2

————

— — Na

--

— —
———

—

yr” 2 — —
2 —

— —äö— —H ͤ — m—_

2 2 >
-* — *
=> — * 2

*
1
=
_—_ *
3
Mn
wh 27
=
10
}
1"
1
Li
ls
1
0
.
.
=
1
4
11
1
' 4
_—_
-'4 'E
- 6.
2 >
=
74 vl
.
1
1
9 T
*; © »
— of *
.
4
*
1
TO
 _
1
ts |
*
!
14
1
1
1
—

— — - _—_—— - I
— - n n N
F « a SE Tee we 2... ; 2 2

.

68 MEMOIR S Bookxiv.

to join Lorrain to France, and in that caſe it im-
ported his Majeſty highly to go himſelf in perſon,
and procure a perfect knowledge of this ſtate, and
give the government of that province, which was
upon its confines, to a man on whom he could
depend. This journey likewiſe would be of uſe to
him, as it afforded him an opportunity of beco-
ming acquainted with ſome of the princes of Ger-
many, and of ſounding their inclinations with re.
ſpect to the houſe of Auſtria, to know if he might
expect any aſſiſtance from them in an advantageous
conjuncture, and even to attach them to himſelf, by
reconciling many differences ſubſiſting between
them, of which he was very well informed.

It was agreed between us, that his Majeſty ſhould
ſet out without loſs of time, to the end, that by ap-
pearing at Metz with his whole court, (ior it was
reſolved that the Queen ſhould accompany him), at
a time when the two factions, not having yet pro-
ceeded fo far in their inſolence as to embrace a par-
ty contrary to the King, both the one and the other
ſhould think of nothing but of juſtifying their con-
duct, and ſubmitting to his determination. The
King would not even ſtay till the coats of his guards
(for about this time they were to be all new cloath-
ed) were ready; but leaving me at Paris to corre-
ſpond with him, ordered only Villeroi among his
ſecretaries of ſtate to attend him, and left Paris the
latter end of February, notwithſtanding the rigour
of the ſeaſon, which made the roads very bad for
the ladies to travel, and took his rout by La- Ferte-
ſur-Jovarre, Dorman ſur-Marne, Epernai, Chalons-
ſur - Marne, and Clermont: the court ſtopped at
Verdun, and four or five days after arrived at Metz
by Freſne cn Verdunois.

Henry's arrival put an end to all diſpute, and
nothing was talked of but ſubmiſſion and obe<c.ence :
not but Sobole, who was ſenſible this affair *

C

be terminated by his expulſion, had ambition and
reſolution enough to maintain himſelf in the citadel
11 in ſpite of bis Majeſty, and diſcloſed his thoughts to
his particular friends: but the moſt prudent amongſt
11 'them repreſented to him, that, if he engaged in
ſuch a deſign, he would be irretrievably ruined : fo

to — 2 * *

. that, ſubmitting to the arret for his baniſhment, he
1 gave up the citadel without making any conditions,
re. and quitted Metz and the whole country of Meſſin.

t The King appointed Montigny to be his lieutenant
in this province, in the room of Sobole, and D' Ar-
by quien his brother to act as lieutenant for the Govern-
or in the city and caſtle of Metz. Montigny, for

this new poſt, quitted his government of Paris, the
114  falary of which, however, he received this year.

p- | 4 It was thought that D*Epernon was far from being
vas | fatisfied with all theſe changes, as may be caſily
At imagined, the two lieutenants being under no obli.
3 gation to him for their preferment; but he could
ul have nothing to ſay, he bimſelf, through neceſſity,
WE being the firſt to require the baniſhment of the two
n. |. Soboles ; ſo that every thing ſeemed to be done
+. | Vith bis conſent. |

ds | | have taken this whole detail from the letters

oh his Majeſty honoured me with during his ſtay at
Metz, in which he informed me ſuceinctly of all

* the incidents, and dwelt ſtill longer upon the man-
the ner in which he was received at Metz, and upon
_ the city itſelf, which he {aid was three times larger
* than Orleans, and finely ſituated, but that the caſtle
as was not worth any thing ; he likewiſe told me, that
boy be wiſhed for my preſence in that country, that he

might ſend me to viſit the frontier, and that, before
—— lix days, he ſhould put every thing in ſuch good
order as to be able to leave Metz. In effect, the

ind King accompliſhed it in much leſs time, and was
re: only detained there by an indiſpoſition that obliged
uld him to take ſome medicines, after which he found

be oh himſelf

* —— — — —ʒ * -
. ERS
— 5 — 2 — mad
2 — — —

1 .
4
.
19
. ö
0
11
4 be +
\2 14 *
N 1
1 v4
4 +}
1
N
1
KI f
'q
14 T
\'F_
*
1
4 «
: N
» 8 :
* :

_—

2 — —— 2

— — . tc — 2 —

70 M E M O IR S Book XIV.

himſelf quite well, although it was followed by a
fir of the ague, which he thought had been occa-
ſioned by a cold. The Ducheſs of Bar, ſiſter to
his Majeſty, came to Metz on the 16th of March,
and the Duke de Deux-Ponts, with his wife and ©
children, arrived three days afterwards. The re-
mainder of the time his Majeſty ſtaid in this pro-
vince was employed in concluding a marriage be-
tween Mademoiſelle de Rohan and the young Duke
de Deux Ponts ; in compoling a difference between
the Cardinal of Lorrain and the Prince of Branden.
bourg *, concerning the biſhopric of Straſbourg,
which was accompliſhed by dividing the revenue
of this biſhopric equally between them, without
having any regard to their titles and pretenſions;
in reſtoring tranquillity to that city, and in being
ſerviceable to all the princes who required his in-
terpoſition in any of their affairs. The name of |
Henry became ſo revered in this country, that ſeve-
ral ſovereign princes of Germany took a reſolution |
to come thither and pay their reſpects to him, to
offer him their ſervice, and demand his protection;
which, however, they could oply do afterwards,
and by ambaſſadors, the neceſſary preparations for |
their equipages taking up more time than his Ma-
jeſty had determined to ſtay at Metz. There were
only the Cardinal of Lorrain, the Duke de Deux:
Ponts, the Marquis of Brandenbourg and Pome-
Tania, the Landgrave of Heſſe, and three or four
others whoſe dominions lay neareſt the Rhine, that
came thither in perſon.

The Jeſuits, who, ever ſince their baniſhment,

* John Manderſcheidt the Catholic Biſhop of Sraſbourg, dying in
1594, Cardinal Charles of Lorrain obtained this bifhopric of tlic
Pope; and the Proteſtants, on their part, got John George, brothet
of the Elector of Brandenboutg, elecicd; whence a war aroſe, which
continued till this year. Sce the hiſtorians, Baſlompierre's Memoi's
vol. 1. Septennaire, &c.

had

2
*

0 $0 LL Y. 71

a2 had been uſing their utmoſt endeavours to procure
a their re-cſtabliſhment in France, appeared no leſs
to ſolicitous to make their court to the King: for this
ch, purpoſe, they made uſe of the good offices of the
nd fathers of their order at Verdun *, ſupported by

re- La-Varenne, who declared himſelf their protector,
'0- that they might one day become his, and repay
de- his zeal by the advancement of his children, for
ke whom he already thirſted after the moſt eminent
en dignities in the church. D'Oſſat, though not in
en. Prance, laboured with equal ardo and ſucceſs in
Ig, their favour. The ambitious deſire of being arbi-
nue trator of the affairs of Europe, had often made this
out man undertake to treat of matters quite foreign to
ns; ' his commiſſion. The obſtacles he raiſed at Rome
ing to the marriage of the Princeſs Catherine, the
in- King's ſiſter, is one proof of it, and his ſolicitations
of | - for the Jeſuits another; for the re- eſtabliſhment of
ve.

this ſociety was regarded by him, Villeroi, Jeannin,
and other creatures of the Roman court in France,

to be the moſt eſſential part of that ſyſtem of poli-

tics, which they endeavoured to have preferred

there to that purſued by the council.
D'Oſſat, by printing his letters, which prove the
truth of my aſſertions concerning him, ſeems not

* The Fathers Ignatius Armand, Provincial Chateiller, Broſſard,
and La- Tour, introduced by La-Varenne, came on Wedneſday in
Paſſion- week, to throw themſelyzs at the King's feet, and to implore

his favour for their re admiſſion into France. Henry IV. would not

ſulfer the Provincial, who ſpoke for the whole order, to addreſs him
kneeling. When he had done, the King anſwered them, That, for
his part, he was not an ill-wiſher to the Jeſuits, He required hem
to give him in writing what they had been ſaying to him, and kept

them the whole day with him. They returned on Eaſter Monday ;

and the King promiſed to recall thera, and even ordered the Father
Provincial to come to him at Paris, and bring Father Cotton with him,
„ will have you with me,” added he, © for I think you uſeful to
© the public, and to my kingdom.” He diſmiſſed them, after ha-
ving embraced them all four. De Thou, b. 129.; Chronol. Sept.
anno 1603.; MSS Biblioth, Royale, vol. 9129, &c. P. Matthieu,
vol. 2. b. 3. P · 556. ;

to

22 M E M O I R S Bock XIV.

to be ſolicitous about concealing his true ſentiments
from the public. But, if he is inexcuſable, for ha.
ving almoſt always obſerved a conduct quite oppo,
ſite to that which the gratitude he owed to his
prince and benefactor ought to have ſuggeſted to
bim, he deſerves ſtill greater reproaches, for having
endeavoured, both in his diſcourſe and in his wri-
tings, to give a bad impreſſion of the King and his
miniſters. When removed from the centre of bu
ſineſs, all the informations he could obtain muſt be
through the canal of wretches, to whom a man of
ſenſe and judgment ought to be cautious of giving
credit. It is not difficult to perceive, that this paſ-
ſage tends partly to juſtify myſelf agaiaſt the cen-
ſures of D'Oſſat, this cardinal having about that
time wrote a letter to Villeroi, in which he did not
ſcruple to attribute Marechal Biron's rebellion, and
the diſcontent of the other French lords, to the very
little ſatisfaction they received from Henry, and]
the oppreſſion the people groaned under through
the tyranny of his counſellors : and, that he miz': |
not do things by halves, this able man, who vaiu:4
himſelf upon his nice diſcernment in affairs of ſtate,
preſumed, by deſiring Villeroi to ſhew his letter t9
the King, to adviſe his Majeſty to remit his confi
dence and his authority into other hands. Poſ-
ſibly, if this proceeding of D'Oſſat's was thorovgh-
ly examined, it would be found to have more arti-
fice than miſtake in it: for it is not likely, that a
man who received ſuch exact informations from
Villeroi of every thing that happened, could be is:
norant that what he repreſented as a general con.
ſpiracy of all the ſtates in the kingdom, was, in
reality, only a faction compoſed of a few per{ons,
whoſe heads were turned by ambition, and the li-
centiouſneſs of the late times; and that all the re!
of the French nobility placed their glory and it
happineſs in their firm attachment to thcir Prince
hat

,, , muamg uo wal

7 oy

—

— —— ——

2

— 1. 7: 7

nts at the clergy, on their ſide, ,praiſed him no leſs,
12 ind, in effect, had no leſs reaſon to praiſe him, ha-
20, Ming but lately received a very conſiderable gratuity
his From him; and, laſtly, that the people, beſides the
to Þpprefſion of the penny in the ſhilling, had, by
ing Sis Majeſty, been farther relieved, by an abatement
wor of two millions in the land- tax.

his I was not acquainted with any of D' Oſſat's ma-
"1 HScious proceedings, nor of his perſonal complaints
0 Piel me, for not paying his penſion exactly.
Villecoi undertook to recommend the ſpeedy pay-

ing ment of it to me; and acquitted himſelf of this
aſl Commiſion, by exalting, as uſual, the great abili-
en ties and ſervices of this cardinal Some days af-
hat terwards, I was accoſted by a. banker, who made
not mea propoſal to diſcharge certain penſions, given
and | by his Majeſty to perſons at Rome, among others,
er; D'Oſſat's ; which he did with the ſame unpolite
and] freedom, that the cabal of my enemies affected to
1h ble me wich. There are ſome offices in themſelves
get of ſuch dignity, as to draw refpett and conſidera—
ved tion upon the perſons who poſſeſs them, I was not
ate, ſorry that the banker was made ſenſible of this truth,
to and ſent him away coldly enough D' Oſſat found
nit | himſelf obliged to write to me four months after-
Po. wards ; and I received his letter at the ſame time
gh: that one was brought me from my brother, who
rt. was ambaſſador at that court. D'Offat expreſſed
at 4 himſelf in ſo inſolent a manner in this letter, that
rom it certainly deſerved no better an anſwer than I
ig had given the banker. However, being of opinion,
on: that I ought not to regard it, I was going to make
, in out a draught for his payment, when I received an
ons, iaconteſtable proof of the injurious language he pu-
. dlicly uſed againſt me. That inſtant, I confeſs, I
withdrew the warrant, which was a very exact one,
and ſubſtituted another in its room of a more doubt»
ful payment, and from that time reſ-lved to expe»
dite no more, but by the King's expreſs command.
VoI. III. G I

—— —_—-

— *

88 ET — * J >= — —
— . ̃7˙‚' oo 2 os

* —
—— 7 ”
—— == 7

— — — 2 —

— — — Ä — 2

4
1
s.
|
+
LY)
an |
* .
” :
þ :
|
17
4
2 :
"4
1 }
.
4
1 N
t 4
1
5
«4
wy
LY
1
oy
|
p
$4
ll
WW”
v9
1

——

—

—— . PRES —— ͤ - wer We TT err
5 — * - — o 2 mg .
=_ — Lo \ — . Ms, th -
* 1
2 — —
— —— :

74 MEM O IR Ss Book x

I wrote to Villeroi at Metz, and acquainted hin
with this reſolution; and in the poſtſcript of ny
letter, gave him a detail of the ſpeeches and letter,
of D'Oſſat, in which I was concerned; and, i:
the height of my juſt indignation, gave this card;
nal the epithets of «ngrateful and imprudent,
which, if what I heard of him was true, he defer.
ved; if falſe, I gave Villeroi to underſtand, tha
I would pay a proper regard to his interpoſition in
favour of D'Oſſat. He was ſtill more affected hy:
my threat to acquaint the King with the inlolence|
of his agent, and conjured me to be pacified. [|
conſented; and all the revenge I took upon D'0/.
fat, was to render his intrigues at Rome ineffeCtual:}
thoſe in favour of the Jeſuits were continued only d:
during this year, for the ſociety returned to Franc: tl
in the following year. =.
I ſhall reſume this article in a proper place, and ft
ſhail have occaſion once more to introduce D*Ofſat
on account of a memorial which was addreſſed to
me from Rome againſt him. At preſent, wha

4

remains to be ſaid of him regards the coadjutor(hipþ 4
of Bateux, and the abbey of Coulon, if the affair

was worth a long detail; but as it is not, I {hill 1
content myſelf with only informing the reader, that :
D' Oſſat procured himſelf to be made coadjutor of þÞ **
Baſeux, and treated with the Maintenons for hi: 3
abbey of Coulon, by an agreement not very advan ;
tageous for them, His Majeſty gave me this ad: q
bey, after performing the promiſe he made to the L

Maintenons, that they ſhould loſe nothing by it
ſince they obtained an equivalent upon the biſhop 1
ric of Evreux. Villeroi earneſtly ſolicited his Ma

jeſty for D'Oſſat, and endeavoured to engage my i :
intereſt for his friend: Maintenon, on the con
trary, was highly diſſatisfied that this favour ws 4
granted bim. c

The Pope's nuncio made me another complaint
in

Fm # ..%

T. *
1603.

' = "=

O F S U L L I. 75
bin the King's abſence, upon the journey his Ma-
mu 3 had undertaken. That his Holineſs intereſted
tte; Rimſelf in it, was occaſioned 55 the Spaniards ha-
„In Bog joined to the notion they formed to themſelves

ard. of the occaſion of this voyage, that which was con-
zeirxed of his Majeſty's armaments and treaſures,
which common fame had greatly increaſed, and in-
thy Fefted even the Holy Father with their apprehen-
nin bons. Henry, whom I informed of the nuncio's
| by fears, ordered me to reaſſure him, without trou-
ene bling myſelf to draw either Spain or Savoy out of
their opinion.

„%% His Majeſty and I treated by letters of many dif-
ory ferent affairs; and, amongſt others, that of Flan-
only| ders. It was computed, that, the laſt of February
Inc this year, the Spaniards had loſt 18, c men, and
| fired above 250,000 volleys of cannon before O-
ſtend: Nevertheleſs the ſiege was but very little ad-
Ma yanced ; and, in the month of April, the beſiegers
d attempting to make a general aſſault, they were re-
pulſed with great lols. From this the Archduke
rh s convinced, that, notwithitanding all his efforts,
ata it would be time only, and a total want of men
bal ad ammunition of every kind, that would deliver
the dhe place into his power. Naſſau, on his fide, af-
ter the reduction of Grave, laid ſiege to Rhinberg,
- his and from thence went to inveſt Boiſledue, not con-
1van | Hdering that this enterpriſe exceeded his ſtrength,
5 ab. i being impoſlible, as I have already obſerved, to
take Boiſleduc with ſo ſmail a number of troops,
| Accordingly, he was on the point of loſing both his
army and his reputation there; but, in revenge, he
bad the fatisfaftion to drive the Spaniards out of
the caſtle of Vactendock, where they were, in a
manner, already maſters. The garriſon of this
place, too weak to reſiſt them, and no longer think-
ing of any thing but retreating, had abandoned the
eity and the caſtle to their diſcretion, when they
in G 2 were

76% MEMOIR Ss Fock XW .

were joined by ſome Dutch troops, who paſſed b)
that place in their march to the army of Prince
Maurice, and all together attacked the Spaniard:
and diflodged them from the caſtle. 9
It may be caſily imagined, that the United Pio. n
vinces could not cairy on this war, without beigg a
at a great expence both of men and money, tz, 4
which it was abſolutely neceſſary that France foul! 4
continue to contribute. The ſiege of Oſtend alorw:
had coſt them ico, ooo volleys of cannon, and .
7000 men. His Majeſty, for the intereſt of bot!
the powers, kept Buzenval in thoſe provinces, who
was then upon the point of returning to France;
and the agent ſent by the ſtates to the King was
named 4erſens *. Ibis agent repreferted to me,
that his countrymen would be ſoon in no condition
to keep the field, unleſs his Majeſty would permi
them to recruit the French companies that were in
their ſervice with Frenchmen. The King ſent me
an anſwer from Chalons-fur-Marne to this requel},
which I had communicated to him, and told me,
that he . io to it; but, to avoid an open rup-
ture witFSpain, upon theſe conditions, That
ſhould be Aerſens himſelf that ſhould raiſe the 1.
cruits, and not the officers, who would do it too
publicly, having already acted in ſuch a manner, « þ

—— K«4* 2
rer
y

"ASSEEIES 4 Don

7 E 8 "=> : 1 —
— — 4 _ *
ES, aire rr ad Ac

— N 28 — |

»

FFP
Fd - "wo - P

r , ae oP rtygug=wvp =

_ . ewes
. 1 RE
* Ott 1 # > —
— "MLS... aa r
fy >
3 an
I —

to draw upon him ſome reproaches from the Kirg I

! of Spain: that the recruits ſhould be raifed vin t

\ Et.
1 Francis Aèrſens, reſident, and afierwards ambaſſador from tit b
; | | States of Holland at the court of France. The Niemoirs of tl: I {
| time repreſent him as a man of a ſubtle, artful, and even danger

| turn of mind. Cardinal de Richelicu ſpeaks of him, Oxenition, BW
Fi Chancellor of Su eden, and Guiſcardi, Chancellor of Montferrat, as il h
i 1 three only politicians he had ever knoun in Eviope. © It was the tec, i
Bi ved opinion of that t me,“ fays Amclot de la Houfſaye, © that Heck, f
it [4 «ry 1V. had an amour with A#rſns's wife, and hat the huſband |
| ® was content with it, by reaſon of the profit he reaped fem: e

3 „% This amour laid the foundation of his fortune. He left 10,000 9
14 % Lvres a-year to his ſon, who was called Ven SommerdyR.” {

1
F | the

A soz.
e utmoſt expedition, and the utmoſt ſecrecy ; and

that the ſoldiers who liſted, the number of which
de delired to know, ſhould file off, without any

4 th

0.3. 3-08-4440 77

poiſe, to the place where they were to imbark,
marching ſix in a company at moſt, with no other
arms than their ſwords, and no more money than
was neceſſary to anſwer their expences till they got

there: that they ſhould take ſhipping rather at

Dieppe than Calais, this laſt city being too much
crouded with foreigners 3 and that notice ſhould be
ſent to Chaſtes, who was governor of it, and Vice-
admiral de Vice, whole concurrence was neceſſary
to the deſign, and for whom he ſent me a letter
without a ſeal. Some alterations, however, were
made in theſe orders: Aerlens could not levy the
men alone; and it being my opinion, that I ought
not to meddle in it, the officers raiſed the recruits,
but did it with all poſlible ſecreſy. His Majeſty
thought it would not be amiſs to ſend the garriſon
he had forced to leave Metz to Flanders; and, for
fear that they ſhould inliſt with the Archduke, caſt
his eyes upon my couſin Bethune to conduct them.
As for the penſion for which Aerſens ſtrongly im-
portuned me, the King deferred taking a reſolution
about it till his return.

During the ſtay his Majeſty made at Metz, the
Doke of Bouillon brought his affair likewiſe upon
the carpet: he had retired to Germany to the Elec-
tor Palatine, to whom he was allied by the Electreſs:
be prevailed upon this Elector to undertake his ju-
ſtification to Henry, or to deceive him again by a
letter, which bis Majeſty ſent me immediately to
have my opinion of it. The purport of this letter,

ia which the Elector Palatine very unſeaſonably af-

fected to treat with the King of France as with an
equal, was to repreſent to him the great afiliction it
gave to the Duke of Bouillon to have his fidelity

lulpected by the King, and to aſſure him that he him-

G3 ſelf

— — *

——

— —— — D PY \ —
5 ——_— 7 — tp 5 283 — 2 - - iis

—

2 ——_—

— — _

|

.
*
1
10
ml 19
f
0 ] ;

— — - - — — —
ES *. 22 — 4 1 — 2 — — 2 < => —
—— — _ — — = 4 1 — w
7 Wow my LA . 2 - 2 — 23 8
- A "LE
p 4 ——_— — F * LETT”
= - - MD — 2 2

—y[— — 2 — -
1 gp 2 —
— — — ad " —

— — — —
—= E - hs Innes + . — 9,
3 — — — "= £2_3&" "Soo > ——-> xa 8. SH
_ ol ict. oo ae Gn , ern i UAE i. 3 — Hs. hs q
— - - =_ — — — 2 — * by es nt —— —
6. —— 2 * - - —

— -
—
*

1

78 M E M OI R S8 Book XIV.

ſelf was convinced of his innocence, by proofs which
he thought unanſwerable. The King had ſent for
Bouillon to come to him and clear up his conduct,

and afterward gave him notice by La-Tremouille

that he ſhould at leaſt ſtop at Sedan; but Bovillon
had done neither the one or the other; the Pala.
tine, therefore, to excuſe the Duke, alledged, that
with regard to the firſt complaint, the quality of his
accuſers made it imprudent for the Duke to go and
abandon himſelf to them; and to the ſecond he ſaid,
that the gentleman who had brought his Majeſty's
letter had found Bouillon at Geneva, from whence
he had a ſincere intention to go and expect his Ma.
jeſty at Sedan; but that thinking it neceſſary to take
his rout through Germany, that ke might avoid the
countries in dependence upon Spain and Lorrain,
and alſo to pay his reſpects to the Elector and Elect
rels, his kinſwoman, whom he had not yet ſeen, it
was owing to this tedious journey that he had miſſed
the opportunity of receiving his Majeſty at Sedan,
The letter concluded with repeated aſſurances of
the Duke's attachment to his Majeſty, for the fince-
rity of which, the Elector brought the connection
there was between them as a proof,
Henry anſwered the Elector's letter with more
oliteneſs than he had reaſon to expect, and pro-
miſed, as he had always done, to reſtore the Duke of
Zouillon to his friendſhip and eſteem, but upon con-
ditions which Bouillon knew himſelf to be too guilty
to accept. In effect, at the very time that he was
making theſe new proteſtations, his Majeſty received,
while at Metz, advice from Heidelberg, which he
communicated to me, that a man named Du-Plefiis-
Bellay, brother to the governor of the young Cha-
tillon, bad been ſent by the Duke of Tremouille to
the Duke of Bouillon with diſpatches, in which bis
Majeſty was nearly concerned; that this courier,
who was to {21 out from Longjumeau, had orders t

| paß

JJJ%%ͤ̃a . è P77... ¼¾Ü——U: owe wane wor A wv 2R| T9 wk ed

hc beda, wy wwe

ich!

for
uct,
aille
Hon
alas
that
bis

and i

laid,
ſty's
ence
Ma-
take

the

rain,
lect.
n, it
iſſed
dan.
s of
nces
tion

nore
pro-
e of
con-
uilty
Was
ved,
1 he
Ing
Chas
e to
1 bis
ner,
rs to

P21

1603.

Germain, with whom Henry was highly di

be had juſt related to me.

rr . 79

paſs through Sedan without making himſe'f known,
not even to Du-Maurier; and at his return, he was
again to paſs through Sedan, and afterwards Paris,

with the anſwer to Tremoville's diſpatches, whom

he was to meet at Comblat. His Majeſty would not

have entered into ſo circumſtantial an account of
this affair, but that he wiſhed (which however was

not practicable) that I, in concert with Rapin, could
arreſt this courier, not before his arrival at Paris,
but in the road from Paris to Thouars, after he

- ſhould have received letters in that city, which

would fully diſcover the nature of his commiſſion.
His Majeſty had certainly no occaſion for farther
proofs of the Duke of Bouillon's guilt. I may ven-
ture to affirm, without any danger of judging too
raſhly, that the ſubmiſhon which appeared in that
ſtep he had lately prevailed upon the Hector to make
in his favour, was only diſſembled, with a view to
wo things, the firſt was to inſpire the King with a
ſecurity in regard to his perſon, and the ſecond to
continue to draw from him thoſe ſums which for a
long time he had regularly received for the ſupport
of his fortreſſes. This demand he renewed bY Saint-
pleaſed.
His Majeſty recommended it earneſtly to me, to
have no regard to the inſtances that were made me
from Bouillon, but at the ſame time to give him no
reaſon to ſuſpect that I had any knowledge of what
Theſe orders were in-
deed unneceſſary, after the diſcoveries I had lately

made of the new diſcontents which Bouillon and

Tremouille had excited in the provinces amongſt
the Proteſtants, and from the reſult of the conver-
ſation I had with Henry at the Arſenal, before his
departure for Metz, of which I have only mentioned
what related to this journey. |

To proceed; after having long conſidered the

eaſt of the cabal, which ſtrock a mortal blow to the

heart

4 N
1 ;
V; G

[

\
*
1 0 P
YZ 3
4 ö
11
1 .
1 14
1
de
6 |
7
=
|
q
1
3
.
þ .
j 7
f

80 M E 1M OUR.

heart of Henry, I found means at laſt to ſet him at
peace, by ſhewing him, that however formidable
might be its preſent appearance, it would, after
ſome ineffectual ſtruggles, fall into nothing. What.
ever notions may be tormed of the levity and incon-
ſiderateneſs of thoſe whom we are pleaſed to term the
vulgar, I have always found, that though they may
fix vpon ſome particular aims, and follow them not
only with raſhnef: but rapture, yet theſe aims are al.
ways to a certain degiee general, and directed to
{ome common intereſt ; but that any private one's
ends, ſuch as proceed from the anger or wiſhes of a
particular man, or of a {mall number, are never long
or much regarded. I will venture to ſay farther,
that of general intereſts the voice of the people will
give the moſt certain judgment: allowing this prin-
ciple, I conſidered the ſeditious party as terrible, on.
ly on account of the miſchievous influence that it
might have in the provinces, by miſrepreſentations
of the king and government; and the dread that
might be raiſed of oppreſſion and ſlavery. And as
thoſe influences and thoſe terrors would be made
every Gay leis by effects of a-contrary kind, and hal
never infected the principal governments, or g1 cat
cities, the court could never ſee itſelf oppoſed but
by a paltiy rabble, and a few petty fortieſles, un-
able to ſtand a fortnight againſt a royal army.
The King was at Rietz when he heard the fit.
news of the ſickneſs of Queen Eliſabeth, which wzs
ſent to him by the Count de Beaumont“, our am-
baſſador at London: his Majeſty thereupon reſolved
to haſten his departure from that city. At his ſiſtœs
requeſt he went from thence to Nancy, where the
had cauſed a magnificent ballet or interlude to be
Prepared for his entertainment. He remained there
for ſome days in great anxiety about the next ad-

* Chriſtopher de Harley, Governor of Orleans, who died in 1613
vice:

— 22 ..

a 2, 800

"x:
.

wc a. es FA cm &@AS aw - coves _ Www. ic» wo, BY

1603. O F . 81

wat IF vices which he expected to receive concerning the
ble health of Eliſabeth. The death * of this great Queen,
fter Þ which he heard of ſoon after, was an irreparable loſs
hat - to Europe, and Henry in particular, who could not
on- bope, in the ſucceſſor of Eliſabeth, to find the ſame
the I favourable diſpoſition to all his deſigns as he had in
nay I this Princeſs, “ the irreconcileable enemy of bis ir-
not © 1econcileable enemies, and a fecond ſelf:“ ſuch
al. ere the terms which Henry made uſe of in a letter
I to be wrote to me on this event, which was almoſt
ne's @ wholly filled with the praiſes of this great Queen,
of a azad exprefiions of forrow for her loſs.

His Majeſty, who was immediately ſenſible how
her, greatly this event might influence the political affairs
will ef Europe, determined, as I have already ſaid, to
rin Lad me in quality of ambaſſador extraordinary 0
on. King James. He informed me of this his intention
t it in the letter above mentioned; and fearing, perhaps,
ons chat 1 ſhould oppole it, as I had formerly done, en-
that @ deavoured to prevail upon me to accept this com-
4 xx MW million by the ſtrongeſt motives, and ſuch as he
1ade knew moſt likely to make an impreſſion on me. I

* Eliſabeth died the 4th of April, N. S. in the 70th year of her
ige, and the 44th of her reign. The public report, and the common
but opinion of the hiſtoriens at that time, were. that her death was occa-
loned by a ſecret grief and melancholy which the could not conquer;
de occaſion of which was attributed to her remorſe and ſelt-reproach
for being the caule of the Earl «f Eſſex's death, for whom, among all
ner favoui ĩtes, ſhe had ſhewn the greateſt affection. This is the opi-
nion of Matthieu, tom. II. I iii. p. 570. Thuanus and ſome others
lay nothing of this ſuppoled grief, but, on the contrary fay, that, like
| Eupuſlus, ſhe dicd without grief or fear, and only through the mere
* failure of nature. Her hatrcd againſt our religion, and her cruelty in
putting her fiſt couſin, Queen Mary, to death, bave tarniſhed the
| luſtre of her reign : nevertheleſs. 1 acquieſce in the elegy beltoued
bpon her by Thuanvs, who concludes his enumeration of her great
abilities by ſaying, ſhe had thoſe of a Kinp, not merely ss ſuch, but
| Of a very great King. She ſpake Latin, Greek, French, Italian, and
*paniſh ; ſhe was alſo well verſed in the mathematics, hiſtory poli-
ics, Cc. Beſides particular hiſtories of her life, ſee Thuanus, Pere-
xe, Journal de Hen. IV. La Septennaire, 22 1603. Memoires
| CEtat de Villeroi, tom. III. p. 209. and other F:cnck hiſtorians.

Was

82 M N NM ON S8. Book XIV;

was the only perſon Henry could think of for this
purpoſe; I repeat his words, and that becauſe I was
the only man in France who had any knowledge of
the affairs that were to be negotiated in this embaſſy.
My religion, probably, had already diſpoſed the new
King in my favour, and would gain me free accels
to him. I dare not mention what his Majeſty fur-
ther ſaid, in regard to that reputation of honour and
fidelity which he ſaid I had acquired among fo-
reigners. Henry ſoon followed his letter: from
Nancy he returned through Toul, Vitry, Rheims,
Villers-cotterets, and Saint-Germaine- lay e, to Fon-
tainebleau, which, within a few days, compleated a
tour of two months.

I had received a ſecond letter ſoon after the firſt,
in which his Majeſty ordered me to meet him fif-
teen or twenty leagues from Paris. A report was
current, that immediately upon the death of Eliſa-
beth, the Spaniards began to uſe their utmoſt efforts
to gain the new king: we ſhall afterwards fee that
this report was but too well grounded. Henry had
a thouſand things to ſay to me on this head, which
made him extremely deſirous of an opportunity to
converſe freely with me about it. I joined him at
the houſe of Monglat, where he had ſcarce any at-
tendants with him, at which he expreſſed great ſatil-
faction. He embraced me cloſely three times, ſaid a
few words publicly to me on the ſucceſs of his jour-
ney, and inquired more particularly of me about
his buildings“ at Saint-Germain and Paris. Materials
were then collecting for building his grand gallery
at the Louvre, for the arſenal, and for other works,
of which I had the inſpection and conduct, and
which had been paitly the ſubjects of thoſe letters
I had received from him; therein he had alſo direct-

* Henry IV. built the new caſtle of Saint-Germain, extended
the gardens to the banks of the Seine, and formed its beautitul
tzrialles.

ed

1603. O F L. 83

ed me to proceed in the execution of what had been
rojected in regard to that apartment of the Louvre
called the hall of antiquities.

After I had, in a conciſe but ſatisfaftory manner,
replied to all theſe articles, Henry took me by the
hand, and led me unto the garden, at the door of
which he ordered ſome of his guards to be placed.
The embaſſy to England was the ſole ſubject of
our converſation. His Majeſty had at firſt impart
ed to his court his reſolution to ſend this embaſſy,
but without naming the perſon whom he had fixed
upon to execute it. The knowledge of this a'one
had excited ſome murmurs among the partiſans of
the Pope and Spain; and it was faid, that Henry
ſought allies only among princes who were of a dif-
ferent religion from his own, But when his Maje-
ſty, notwithſtanding, declared publicly his inten-
tion to inveſt me with this employment, their diſguſt
then ſhewed itſelf without reſtraint. This whole
cabal, which I had good reaſon to think was made
up of my moſt inveterate enemies, boldly repre-
ſented to his Majeſty, that to ſend a Huguenot to
treat concerning the intereſt of the kingdom, with
a prince of the {ame religion, would be highly dan-
gerous to the ſtate; and more eſpecially ſo, were
he intruſted with a full power. Finding they could
not prevail upon his Majeſty to revoke my nomi-
nation, they conteated themſelves with getting my
commiſſion confined only to condolances upon the
death of the late Queen, and compliments for the
new King; or, at moſt, to an inſpection into the
ſtate of affairs in England ; but without any power
to aft, or even to confer on the principal occaſion
of my journey.

Henry, at the ſame time that he informed me of
theſe ſecret practices in his court, of which I was
till then ignorant, repeated to me his aſſurances,
that he had not been influenced by them to alter his
deſigns,

—

——

— —— — — — — — . ” *
——
* * — —

- — «>
— 9
— wy * — 3

2
—
—

- = * - _ >» Ii
——_—* — -
. 22 nv” >.
po 2 3 — £

— — —

— — -
ay

2

e

* — — — — — —
4 8 * = — — — 2 —
_ _— — 5 — —
. o "22 7 SB » © k — m_— 2 =
N : - —
— — — * 4-4 — 5 I
— — — — —
= = — — — = 2
» ie —_— - —
N as — * . —
*

—U U — —- Awe. —ͤ .. redraw -- — —
* -
_ —

a

$4 MEM O INR

Book XIV.

deſigns, either with reſpect to the embaſſy, his

choice of me, or of the particular point which he

had at firſt in view : and he further confirmed this

his reſolution, by judiciouſly obſerving, that an
embaſſy, whoſe commiſſion ſhould be confined
merely to ceremony, would be uſeleſs and vain ;
and that, if there were any hopes of ever ſeeing
the new King of England purſue the maxims of E.
liſabeth, in regard to the political engagements of
that princeſs, it would, doubtleſs, depend chiefly
on the manner in which he ſhould be at firſt preju-
diced againſt the houſe of Auſtria, and in favour of
the alliance with France and its ancient partiſans:
but he confeſſed to me, that this point appeared to
bim, in all reſpects, ſo extremely difficult, that un-
leſs it was managed with the utmoſt dexterity,
both in the council of France, and at the Engliſh
court, it would, perhaps, be better not to think of
it at all. He further ſaid, that it would firſt be
neceſſary ſo to impoſe on the enemies which I had
in the court and council, that they might ſuſpec
nothing in my commiſſion more than what ſhould

be declared to me, in their preſence, and even

with their conſent. His Majeſty, on this occa{ion,
repeated a ſimile of La-Riviere's, which he often u-
ſed, that the kingdom of Fiance may be compared
to an apothecary's ſhop, in which are contained
not only the moſt ſalutory remedies, but alſo the
moſt ſubtile poiſons; and that the King, like an
able apothecary, ought to make the beſt advantage
of both, by mixing them in the moſt proper manner,
In regard to the propoſitions which I ſhould make

to the Engliſh miniſters, he ſaid, I ought to be cau-

tious not to expoſe the ſovereign of the principal
kirgdom in Europe to the ſhame of having made
advances which ſhould be neglected or deſpiſed,
and perhaps to a neceſſity of revenging them:
and as to the more ſecret propoſitions, which, at

proper

3

4
—_—
p 8 N
» + Fre rd »
LES

8 —
1 1

O 6 2

N * 2 2
$6,444» « et 4
2 "wa
p -
—

1603.

. 85

proper opportunity, I ſhould make to King James,
he ſaid it would require great judgment and dexte-
tity, to avoid haſtening, by any imprudent ſtep,

his engagements with Spain, which as yet were,

pethaps, uncertain, or, at leaſt, far from being

concluded. His Majeſty ſuppoſed, that all cauſes of

dillatisfaction might, as much as it was poſlible,
be obviated, by giving me, in writing, and in open

council, ſuch inſtructions, in regard to my embaſſy,
as ſhould appear to be only general, and merely
complimentary, which I might publicly produce
in England as well as in France, but which, how-
ever, ſhould not prevent my ſeconding his Majeſty's
more particular intentions, whenever a favourable

opportunity might preſent ; provided, nevertheleſs,
that I did it as of myſelf, and without giving this

Prince to underſtand, tnat I was authoriſed herein
by the King my maſter. |

What his Majeſty thus acquainted me with, ap-
peared to me of ſuch great conſequence, that I de-
ſired him to grant me four days to conſider of it,
before I gave him my anſwer I immediately ſet
out poſt for Paris, to be at liberty to make my re-
flexions, and Henry departed from thence for Jully,
I eaſily perſuaded myſelf to comply with the King's
deſires; but I thought it a neceſlary precaution, to
have his Majeſty's more immediate avowal and au-
thority for all theſe propolitions which he had en-

joined me to make to the King of England, as of

myſelf, without which I thought it would be riſk-
ing too much. To be favourably received and heard
by King James, it would be proper to begin by
gaining his confidence, to which my religion gave

me the beſt claim; but I was ſenſible, that, by this,
I ſhould be obliged to break through thoſe bonds

of circumſpection, which, in France, I had pre-

| ſcribed to myſelf, out of a deference to the reli-
gion of the Prince, 1 had no reaſon ty doubt, but
VoL. III. H that,

—— — — — 5
-

|
|
*
|
|
1
9
|

— 2 _— = —
— —— — _
2 — — 22 —
<a. - —
= *

—

2 — —

. —

- —

Py dy —

= — —
”. 4

—

—
—

22

a 1-4

” _
*% > I
* — — — —-— —
-

*

— —ͤ ——

— — — — — - —
= 2 . yy > A - = N 4
— - — oo 2 —
— PP.
— . „ —— ————— — —

- 2
— by
*
2
— — —

— — —.—
— a
* * * -

. E —

. or ts. < e
— —
———

—— — 1

: - —
LPS A" :

r

— .-
—

"RY
— — -

— ——3—33 ̃ ͤ —V— — - 2
=_
- : - =

: — —
— wt FY— 2 2 oz. —

—

, —
— — — —

———
=,

86 M-EM-O--.1 8

Book XIV,
that, whatever words might eſcape me, which in

this reſpect ſhould appear ſomewhat free, would be

as induſtriouſly reported by the enemies I ſhovld |

have in that court, as they could have been in
France; and I had equal cauſe for being apprehen-
five, that ſomething of this kind ſhould be aftcr-
wards repreſented in ſuch a manner, as to appear
criminal in the eyes of his Majeſty, who, as well
as other good princes, had his moments of miſtruſt
and ill humour; and ſometimes one of theſe mo.
ments is {ſufficient to ruin a miniſter, however firm.
ly ſupported ; a reverſe of fortune which it was not
impoſlible but I myſelf might experience.

All theſe conſiderations confirmed me in a reſolu-
tion, not to depart without a writing ſigned by his
Majeſty and known only to us two, whereby, what-
ever my conduct might be at the court of Lon-
don, and whatever expreſſions I might uſe to the
King of England, I might be able, if neceſſary, to
juſtify myſelf, and ſhew that I had done nothing
but to promote the ſucceſs of our affairs, and that
by his Majeſty's expreſs orders. Thus I declared
mylelt to Henry, when, at the end of four days,
he came to the arſenal to receive my anſwer ; tho
indeed I made this declaration no otherwiſe than by
faying, that I was full of fears leſt any part of my
cor duct, on this occaſion, ſhould draw upon me
the misfortune of his diſpleaſure.

We were at this inſtant alone. Henry, after ba-
ving taken a ſhort turn among the workmen in the
grand walk, and commended what they were doing,
called me to him, and we went, as was his cuſtom,
to the end of this walk, which terminates in a kind
of balcony, from whence there is a view of Paris.
My propolal gave him a moment's thought, aftcr
which he confeſſed J was in the right, and in a few
days he brought me himſelf the wiiting I required,
and, having read it to rae, gave it into my __—

.

. © =

a ae a a. iis. os. © ao. om Ot. tongs ho an V0 OA ov. ad © Sm SS

— — wy

— 1 Fim _— ara

„%% o $ULL Y. $7

n It was expreſſed in ſuch terms, as rendered it high-
e © ly probable that Henry would never oblige me to
make it public. I was permitted to appear, to the
n King of England and his miniſters, fo zealous for
1. | © the Reformed Religion, as to give them aſſurances
that I preferred it both to my country and king,
to whom, on this account, I was not more attach-
ed than to the King of England. The propoſitions
lt which I was to make this prince were allo enume-
0. rated; but I hall omit them here, as being aircacdly
n. related in the account of my conference with Queer

It Eliſabeth, and of Henry's grand deſign. I was allo
directed to deſire the King of England, in caſe he

Us ſhould not approve of what I had to propoſe to him,
is not to let it be known in France, becauſe I was
t. | not authoriſed to make any ſuch propoſitions ; and
n further, (ſuppoſing King James approved them), I
\ | ſhould feign to defer communicating to the King
to my maſter what might be agreed between us, till I
g | fhould ſee whether it would be as favourably recei-
at ved by the northern crowns, and the States general
d of the United Provinces, as by his Britannic Majeſty.
's Such was my lecret credential letter, which I
*. then conſidered as a great acquiſiiion, and no doubt
by the King, on his fide, thought it as great a compli.
ny | ce; yet it is certain, that by this we had neither
Ne of us done what was ſuthcient, It was neceſſary
do be prepared for the King of England's abſolute
5 and entire compliance with all his Majeſty's inten-
he kons, and to be able to make the beſt of an oppor-
85 tunity, which perhaps might never offer again. In
m, | © word, to conclude a treaty, I ought to have car»
ad iied with me a blank ſigned by the King; but our
os fear of the faction we had to combat in council did

lcarce permit us even to think of this.

In regard to the general inſtructions which I have
mentioned, the King deferred having them drawn
up till he came to Fontainebleau, for which place he
H 2 let

countermanded on occaſion of a violent diſorder,
which ſeized Henry immediately after his arrival at

Fontainebleau, which was about the twenticth cf

May *. This was ſo ſtrong a retention of urine,
that his phyſicians at firſt deſpaired of his life. The
King himſelf was ſtrongly perſuaded that his ial!
hour approached ; and being deſirous to divide the
few moments which he had yet to live, between the
care of his ſoul, and that of his kingdom, he ad.
dreſſed himſelf with great fervour to God, and then
dictated the following letter, which was immediate.
ly diſpatched to me at Paris, where I was making
the neceſſary preparations for my voyage, and little
expected ſo melancholy a meſſage. © My friend,
«« I find myſelf fo ill, that it ſeems highly probable
« God will ſoon diſpoſe of me; and it being my
« duty, next to the care of my ſoul, to make the
« neceſſary diipoſitions to ſecure the ſucceſſion to
« my children, that their reign may be proſperous,
« and may promote the happineſs of my wife, my
% kingdom, my good and faithful ſervants, and my
« dear people, whom I love equally with my own
ct children, I deſire to confer with you on all theſe
& matters: come to me therefore with all dili-
« gence, and ſay nothing of it to any one; make
« an appearance only of going to the conventicle
“ at Ablon; and having privately ordered poſt-

* The King, ſays the Marechal de Baſſompierre, was ſeized with
a retention of urine on the eve of Pentecoſt, which gave him gre?!
pain, but he was ſoon freed from it. The phyſicians being aſſembled.
(theſe are the words which we find in the Journal de L'Etoile), the
reſult of their conſultations were in theſe terms: Abſtineat d quavis
muliere, etiam regina; ſin minus, periculum eſt ne ante tres menſes e-
lapſos vitam cum morte commutet. Henry IV. did not ſtrictly ob-
ſerve what was here enjoined him, nor did any bad conſequence ariſe
therefiom.

« horſes

33 ME M O IR Ss Bock XIV 1

ſct out, attended by his whole court; and in three
days his council were to follow : but they were |

J A

7 J J 1603. O F . 89

e « horſes to be there in readineſs, proceed imme-

e. diately to this place.“
„ The peruſal of this moſt ſenſibly affected nie. I
it | ſet out with the greateſt precipitation. When I
entered the King's chamber, 1 found him in his bed;
„ the Queen was ſeated by him, and held one of bis
0 hands between hers; he held out the other to me,
l and ſaid, My good friend, draw near and em-
eſ brace me, I am extremely glad you are come;
e js it not ſtrange that, two hours after I wrote to
« you, my exceſhive pains ſhould begin to abate ?
n « I hope, by degrees, they will entirely leave me,
0 « for I have made water three times, the laſt moſt
„ profuſely, and with but little pain.” Then turn—
: ing to the Queen. This,” ſaid he, “of all my
“ ſervants, is he who belt underſtands, and is moſt
| «© careful of, the interior affairs of my kingdom,

© been belt able to ſerve both you and my children.
& I know, indeed, that his temper is ſomewhat au-
« ſtere, that he is often rather too plain for ſuch a
& ſpirit as yours, and that, on this account, many
% have endeavoured to prejudice you and my chil-
© dren againſt him, that he might be removed from
« you; but if ever this event ſhould happen, and
« you ſhould employ ſuch and ſuch perſons, (na-
« ming them ſoftly in her ear), and, inſtead of
« following the good counſels of this man, ſhould
ee be wholly guided by their opinions, depend upon
« it, it will prove deſtructive to the ſtate, and may,
% perhaps, ruin my children and yourſelf, I have
“ ſent thus ſuddenly for him, that, with kim and
« you, 1 might conſult upon the means to prevent
e theſe evils ; but I thank God my precautions will
« probably not yet be neceſſary.“

Couriers upon couriers were the next day dif.
parched, to diſſipate the diſagrecable rumours which
were already ſpread in all places. I did not my ſelf

3 return

:
« and, had I been taken from you, would have
|
|

go MEMOIR S Bol TV. BY
return to Paris, till I had ſeen the King make water:

he would have it ſo, and he did it twice with ſuch
facility, that I was perfectly ſatisfied all danger was
over. Three days after I received a letter from
him, wherein he informed me, that, having been
bled in the left arm by La-Rivierie the evening I
left him, he had been greatly relieved, and, having
reſted well the whole night, found himſelf grow
better and better every hour. He thanked me for
the intercſt I ſeemed to take in his health, and for
the advice which, on this occaſion, I had been free
enough to give him, to be more moderate in hunt-
ing; and he promiſed to obſerve what I had ſaid.
He was already able to be as circumſtantial as uſual
in thoſe details with which his letters were com-
monly filled: he directed me in this, to ſend two
hundred crowns to each of the perſons afflicted with
the evil, whom his own diſorder had prevented him
from touching, and whom nevertheleſs he would
not ſend back. Herein alſo, he thanked me for the
portraits of the new King and Queen of England,
which I had ſent him. His Majeſty's phyſicians were
unanimous, on this occaſion, in making bim the
ſame repreſentations which 1 had done, in regard to

the injury his health received from the violence ot

his exerciſe in hunting. He followed their advice,
and found himſelf conſiderably better for it: he al-
ſo received great benefit from the waters of Povgues,
which he drank this year for ſome time, during
which the young Princeſs his daughter was taken ſo
ill, that her life was deſpaired of; both the king
and the Dauphin his ſon went frequently to ſee her,

Together with this letter from his Majeſty, the
contents of which I have here related, I received
another much longer, which Villeroy wrote to me
by bis order, upon the affairs of England. Herein
he informed me, that his Majeſty had ſent to ac -

quaint the Count of Beaumont with Eis 1
; that

el. 91

that he might notify it to the King of England;
alſo that I was expected by his Britannic Majeſty,
| who attributed my delay to the King's indiſpoſition,
and to the Baron Du-Tour's not having notified to
the King in form, the death of Eliſabeth, and the
acceſſion of James VI. * to the crown of England.
The Baron Du- Tour was, for this purpoſe, ſent by
James to his Moſt Chriſtian Majeſty: he left Lon-
don on the day after this Prince's entry there, and
arrived a few days after at Fontainebleau, where he
acquitted himſelf of his commiſſion. Villeroi fur-
ther informed me, that my departure for England,
for theſe reaſons, being no longer to be deferred,
the King would ſoon ſend for me, and inform me
of the day : but his Majeſty changed his intention
in this reſpect, and came himſelf to Paris. The

* Henry Stuart, Baron of Darnly, Duke of Rotheſay, &c. eſpou-
ſed Mary Stuart, widow of Francis Il. of France; ſhe having after
his death retired into Scotland. He was (ſtrangled in his bed in 1567.
James Stuart, at firſt King of Scotland, and afterwards of England,
was his Son, and dicd in 1525. On his acceſſion to the crown of
England, the Marquis of Roſny wrote the following complimentary
letter to the Archbiſhop of Glaſgow, at that time his ambaſſador in

France; the original of which is in the cabinet of the preſent Duke
of Sully.

To the Scots ambaſſador.

SI R,
\HE intereſt you have in the proſperity of the affairs of the
1 King of Scotland, joined to the deſire I have to do you ſer-
vice, have induced me to write to you, that by the letter which I
have juſt received from the governor of Dieppe, you might be in-
formed of the deceaſe of the Queen of England, of the acceſſion,
reception, and acknowledgment of the King of Scotland, to that
crown, and that all things there are in a {tate of peace and tranquil-
lity; for which I rejoice with you, it being highly beneficial to all,
aud the deſire of every good man.
S I R,
Your moſt humble couſin
and ſervant,

Ros N v.
heat

92 ME M O I R S. Book XIV. 3
heat which had begun early this year was exceſſive,

and rendered the ſands of Fontainebleau inſupport-
able to one but juſt recovering from ſickneſs.

Two days after his Majeſty's arrival at Paris, he |

aſſembled the Chancellor Bellievre, Villeroi, Maiſſe,
and Sillery, on the ſubject of my departure, and
that I might receive my public inſtructions in their
preſence, When I entered the King's cloſet, where
this council was held, I told his Majeſty that the
Count of Soiſſons was in the chamber without, and
that it appeared to me neceſſary that he likewiſe
ſhould be introduced to be a witneſs of my depu-
tation. Henry replied, that he did not know the
Count was there ; and that, from what I had juſt
ſaid, he would take occaſion to reconcile us to cach
other; for the Count of Soiſſons's reſentment till
ſubſiſted. Accordingly, the Count meeting me two
days after, as I entered the palace, told me, that
he had learned from a good hand that I had ren-
dered him an office which he had no reaſon to ex-
pect from me; he thanked me for it, aſſured me
that he would forget the paſt, and for the future
would be my friend: but he did not long continue
in theſe ſentiments. |
The principal object of theſe inſtructions had al.
ways been a cloſe alliance between France and Eng-
land againft Spain, notwithſtanding all that had been
done to prevent it by the partiſans of that crown
in Trance. The principal difference between theſe
and the ſecret inſtructions which 1 had received from
his Majeſty was, that, in the former, he had con-
cealed the true motives to this alliance. I will not
tranſcribe them here, as the particulars would be
too long and circumſtantial. The ſubſtance of them
was bricfly as follows: to take every opportunity
of diſcourling upon, and informing the King of
England, of all the unjuſt and violent proceedings
of Spain, thereby to inſpire him with an averſion
o

—

mw

$9 gy

wk:

AQ &t A =:

&

1603. 0-7: $:V LL: 93

to that crown; to repreſent the various arts em-
| ployed by her to embroil Europe; her new uſur-
 pations in Italy; her ſecret practices in England,

by means of the Jeſvits ; her intrigues in Ireland
ard Scotland, under the ſanction of the authority
which the Pope pretends to have over thoſe king-
coms; her deſigas upon Straſbourg, by forcing the
Cardinal of Lor rain to conſent to the Pope's giving
the coadjutorſhip of it to the brother-in-law of the
Catholic King ; finally, her proceedings to obtain
univerſal monarchy : all which did but too evi»
dently appear.

In conſequence of theſe repreſentations, the King
of England muſt either have concluded a peace with
Spain, or have entered into an open or ſecret war
againſt that crown. In the firſt caſe, I was to con-
vince this prince, that a peace would enable Spain
to get poſſeſſion of the Low Countries; after
which, ſhe would not fail to tura her arms either
againſt France or England; and moſt probably to-
wards the latter, on account of the Pope's long in-
yeteracy to it. I was alſo to undeceive the King of
England, in regard to the report induſtriouſly ſpread
by Spain, that ſhe had no intention to get poſſeſ-
lion of the Low Countries, but only to form them
into a diſtinct kingdom, ſuch as that of Burgundy
had been, to be given to the Archduke. As a laſt
reſource, I was to inſiſt, that Spain ſhould at leaſt
be made to purchaſe this peace at a high price, or
ſhould be obliged to the King of France or England
for it; and eſpecially that ſhe ſhould give up Oſtend.
In caſe an open war ſhould be reſolved upon, I was
to endeavour to diſcover the intention of the King
of England on that head, and, if poſſible, prevent
it, and repreſent to him the neceſlity of beginning
by giving a powerful aſſiſtance to the States.

Finally, if a ſecret war was reſolved upon, in
Which I was to uſe my endeavours to confirm or

engage

94 M E MOI R S Book XIV.

engage the King of England, in this caſe I was to
repreſent to him, that prudence required he ſhould
begin by ſtrengthening himſelf upon the throne, ſe.
curing it to his deſcendents, and by gaining Europe
in his intereſts ; ſo that Spain might be one day ir-
reſiſtibly attacked: that, till this was effected, it
would be proper only to keep this power in awe,
or engage her in a fruitleſs employment of her
forces againſt Flanders : that, in the mean time, the
conditions of the union might be agreed on, and
cemented by a double mariiage between the chil.
dren of the two Kings; which, however, ſhould
not be declared till they had begun the execution
of their deſigns. I was, moreover, to be particu-
larly careful to regulate and determine the nature
of the ſuccours which were proviſionally to be gi-
ven the States; and prevent the Engliſh council
from demanding the 300,000 livres which that
crown had lent the United Provinces, leſt they
might thereby be induced to throw themſelves into
the arms of Spain : on the contrary, I was to per-
ſuade his Britannic Majeſty to be at new expences,
equal with his Moſt Chriſtian Majeſty, in favour of
theſe people, and to aſſiſt them with the ſame num-
ber of ſhips as Queen Eliſabeth had done; alſo to
obtain permiſſion, that the 450, ooo livres which
this Queen had lent France, migbt be applied as
exigencies ſhould require in Flanders; and that
zoo, ooo livres more might be added to them by
England, that, with the 7 50,000 livres which Hen:
ry obliged himſelf to join to them, a fund might be
formed of 1 500, ooo livres for the preſent neceſſi-
ties of the States- general. In caſe I could not
gain a compliance with theſe articles, I was to en-
deavour to get the States debt to England of
Zoo, ooo livres diſcharged, France obliging herſelt
to pay it; alſo, to manage this affair in ſuch a
manner, that the King of England might not hare

. the

Ties OF SULLY 9%

the maritime towns of Holland delivered to him as
* ſecurities for theſe ſuccours; and to ſound his in-
tentions in regard to thoſe of which he was already
poſſeſſed in Zealand. In purſuance of this plan, I

was to conſult with Barnevelt, to act in concert
with him and the States deputies at London, ſeem
attached to their intereſts, entertain them with a-
greeable hopes, perſuade them that their intereſts
were the care of the Britiſh council, without giving
umbrage to this council, and make the beſt advan-
tage I could of the knowledge they might have ac-
quired of the new court and the King.

Theſe were the principal points of my inſtrue-
tions. There were ſome others which did not re-
late to the ſame ſubject, or at leaſt not immediately :
ſuch was that in regard to the piracies of the Eng-
liſh, I was charged to complain, that, ſince the
treaty of Vexvins, they had taken from France to
the amount of a million; and 1 was to endeavour
to get a diſſolution of the treaty of commerce con-
cluded between England and France in 1572, as
being diſadvantageous to France, which, by that
treaty, had not the ſame privileges and immunities
in England that the Engliſh had in France. The
cloſe union between Eliſabeth and Henry had cau-
ſed all things to be equal on both ſides, during the
reign of that Queen, and his treaty was then con-
ſidered as void, though it had never been formally
| annulled. My orders were, however, to be ex-
| tremely circumſpett on this head, and even entirely
to ſuppreſs it, if I found, that by bringing it upon
the carpet, I might run any riſk of raiſing a ſuſpi-
cion in the new King, from which Eliſabeth herſelf
had not been exempt, that France only ſought to
imbark England in a war with Spain, out of which
| ſhe would then eaſily extricate herſelf, If what the
Baron du Tour had ſaid in France, of his Britannic
Majeſty's reſolution to ſuccour Oſtend, ſhould ap-

pear

gs M E M OI R Ss BoockxIv.

ar to be well: grounded, I might then ſpare my.
ſelf part of theſe precautions.

The manner in which I was to treat with the am-
baſſadors of the King of Spain and the Archdukes;
the attention which I was to beſtow on the affairs
of Ireland and Scotland; and the juſtification of
Beaumont, againſt whom King James had been pre-
judiced, and for whom I was charged to procure
the ſame privileges of this Prince which were en.
joyed by his agent in France : theſe were other ar-
ticles of my inſtructions. There was one article
concerning the Duke of Bouillon, in reſpect to
whom I was to be ſilent, unleſs the King of Eng-
land ſhould ſpeak to me about him, to which he
would probably be induced by the Elector Palatin;
and in this caſe, 1 was to paint the Duke of Bou-
illon in bis real character, and not to engage the
King of France in any thing on his account. We
may obſerve, that the ſubje&t of my negotiations
were ſufficiently extenſive ; for I was to gain a
knowledge of the diſpoſitions of the King and people
of England, not only with reſpe&t to Spain and
Flanders, but alſo to the northern crowns. To
ſay the truth, the political ſtate of all Europe was
concerned in my enſuing conduct, and its conſe»
QUENCES. |

Theſe inſtructions *, in which to my other titles,
his Majeſty had added that of Marquis, having been
read to me aloud, were then delivered to me in pre-
ſence of the Count of Soiſſons, Sillery, and Jeannin,
ſigned by his Majeſty and Villeroi. Henry alſo gave
me ſix letters, one from his Majeſty to the King of
England, beſides another for the ſame Prince for

* The original of theſe inſtructions, ſigned with Henry 1V.'s own
hand is ſtill in being; as alſo another piece, written by M de Relny,
bearing this title, I mem orandum made by me, and delivered to M. de
Villeroi, according to his deſire, to aſſiſt him in preparing my inſtrudſians.
This piece is only a recapitulation of all the points which were the
objects of his embaſſy to London. Cabinet of the Duke of =

orm-

_—
= Pay en oy oO Ah my nd > On mm Cc.

„ 97

form-ſake counter- ſigned: two others, in the ſame
manner, from the King to the Queen of England,
and two others from the Qucen of France to the
King and Queen of England: his Majeſty alſo gave
me a cypher, with which the council was acquaint-
ed; but he likewiſe ſecretly gave me another, of
which none but we two had the key. When I went.
to take my leave of this Prince, he preſented me his
hand to kiſs, then embraced me and wiſhed me a
good voyage, repeated his reliance upon me, and
bis hopes of my good ſucceſs.

þ 1603.

HIjybe beginning of June I ſet out for Calais, where
l was to embark, having with me a retinue of up-
e wards of two hundred gentlemen, or who called
; themſelves ſuch, of whom a conſiderable number

* WW were really of the firſt diſtinction. Juſt before my
e departure old Servin came and preſented his ſon to

c me, and begged I would uſe my endeavours to make
$ him a man of ſome worth and honeſty ; but he con-
a feſſed it was what he dared not hope, not through
e any want of underſtanding or capacity in the youn
d man, but from his natural inclination to all kinds of
0 Wh vice. The old man was in the right: what he told
5 me having excited my curioſity to gain a thorough
Co knowledge of young Servin, I found him to be at
once both a wonder and a monſter ; for I can give
:, no other idea of that aſſemblage of the moſt ex-
n cellent and moſt pernicious qualities. Let the rea-

der repreſent to hiimſelf a man of a genius ſo lively,
and an underſtanding ſo extenſive, as rendered him
ſcarce ignorant of any thing that could be known;
of ſo vaſt and ready a comprehenſion, that he im-
mediately made himſelf maſter of what he attempt»
ed; and of fo prodigious a memory, that he never
forgot what he had once learned; he poſſeſſed all
parts of philoſophy and the mathematics, particu-
larly fortification and drawing; even in theology
de was ſo well ſkilled, that he was an excellent

Vo“. III. I preacher

|

98 M EM Q--1. R 3 : Book XIY,

reacher whenever he had a mind to exert that ta.
* and an able diſputant for and againſt the re.
formed religion indifferently; he not only under.
ſtood Greek, Hebrew, and all the languages which
we call learned, but alſo all the different jargons or
modern dialects; he accented and pronounced them
ſo naturally, and ſo perfectly imitated the geſtures
and manners both of the ſeveral nations of Europe,
and the particular provinces of France, that he might
have been taken for a native of all or any of theſ:
countries; and this quality he applied to counter.
feit all ſorts of perſons, wherein he ſucceeded won-
derfully ; he was, moreover, the beſt comedian and
greateſt droll that perhaps ever appeared; he had a
genius for poetry, and had wrote many verſes; he
played upon almoſt all inflruments, was a perfect
maſter of muſic, and ſung moſt agtecably and juſtly;
he likewiſe could ſay maſs ; for he was of a diſho-
ſition to do, as well as to know, all things: his body
was perfectly well ſuited to his mind, he was light,

nimble, dextrous, and fit for all exerciſes ; he could

ride well, and in dancing, wreſtling, and leaping, he
was admired : there are not any recreative games
that he did not know; and he was {killed in almoſt
all mechanic arts. But now for the reverſe of the
medal: here it appeared that he was treacherous,
cruel, cowardly, deceitful; a liar, a cheat, a drunk-
ard and glutton; a ſharper in play, immerſed in
every ſpecies of vice, a blaſphemer, an atheiſt ; in a
word, in him might be found all the vices contrary
to nature, honour, religion, and ſocicty; the truth
of which he himſelf evinced with his lateſt breath,
for he died in the flower of his age, in a common
brothel, perfectly corrupted by his debaucherics,
and expired with a glaſs in his hand, curſing and

denying God.
From the moment of my departure to that of
my return, 1 wrote regularly to his Majeſty, and
gave

—

3 . 1 1 — — 8 „1 * Hg wy away

1603. O F . 99

gave him an exact account of whatever happened

to me. My letters were of three kinds: for indif-
f:rent things I uſed only the common character; my
general cyphers I uſed for ſuch matters as were to
be known only to the council; and my ſecret cy-
pher I employed in what I addreſſed to the King
timſelf, which was to be feen only by him: his Ma-
jeſty choſe to have the greateſt part of my letters in
this cypher, though he found the difficulty of de-
cyphering ſo great, that he at laſt entruſted the key
o Lomenie, whom he encouraged from time to
time to render himſelf well ſkilled in it; but the
ciculty which I experienced myſelf in the uſe of
tiis cypher, whenever I wanted to deſcend to par-
ticulars, compelled me to abridge the ordinary length
of my letters: however, I complied with his Ma-
jelty's deſires in this reſpect as well as I could, more
eſpecially after the affair of the loſt diſpatch. All
theſe letters, which I have preſerved, I ſhall here re-
duce to the form of a narrative, wherein the public
may be exactly informed of every material circum-
ſtance relative to my embaſſy at London, and my

negotiations With King James. |
I ſtaid a day at Calais, waiting for Saint-Luc and
ſome others who had honoured me with their com-
pany. I found the vice- admiral of France ready to
receive me; and the vice-admirals of England and
Holland alſo came and delired I would embark in
their ſhips. The report current at Calais of the
good underſtanding between the Englith and the
Spaniards, occaſioned by what had paſſed at the em-
barkation of Count d' Aremberg, ambaſſadors from
ine Arch-dukes, and the complaints which I ſaw
mace to De-Vic, of the enterpriſes of the Engliſh
cruizers upon the coaſts of France, inclined me at
tirſt to refuſe their offers; but finding nothing in
the letters which I received at Calais from Beau-
mont, concerning what I was told, to prejudice me
BY againſt

100 NM EM OI R 8 Book XIV,

ag ainſt the new court of London, I changed my
de ſign in this reſpect; and that I might not begin
by giving them any cauſe of complaint, I accepted
the two veſſels offered me by the Engliſh vice-ad-
m iral.

I embarked the tgth of June at ſix o'clock in the
morning. The Engliſh, by whom I was ſerved, paid
me a reſpect which appeared to me to degenerate
into ſervility ; but I had very ſoon reaſon to alter
this opinion of them, Even at the very moment
when they deſu ed I would command them in every
rcſpect as if they were of my own nation, De-Vic,
who only fought an opportunity of ſhewing the
Ung ith his reſentment of the violences committed
by their pirates, advancing, bearing the French flag
on his main-top-gallant maſt, I found theſe com-
plaiſant Engliſh were enraged at an offence, which,
according to them, was equally injurious to the
King of England and the King of France, whom!
repreſented; and I had reaſon to think them ſtill
more rude and unpolite, when, without deigning to
conſult me, fifty ſhot were immediately fired againſt
De. Vic's * ſhip. It was with great difficulty that

I

* Thuanus end the Septenary Chronology, whoſe teſtimony here-
upon is of great weipht, more eſpecially as they agree in it, both lay,
that the captain of the Engliſh ſhip in which de Roſny was, did ac-
tually fie upon the French vice admiral, But as I ſuſpect our Me.
mois, cither for the honour of our nation, or perhaps from vanity,
have ſomewhat qualified this matter. I will here lay it before the reader
as it is related in the Chronology above mentioned: “ De Vie, vice-
« admiral of France, toon after he had caſt anchor in Dover road,
« (at which place be had landed part of the retinue of M. de Rotny,,
« failed from thence on his rcturn to Calais, and paſſing by the ſhip
« on board of which M. de Roſuy then was, he ordered his flag t9
© be hoiſted, and gave him a ſalute; ſoon after which the flag 425
« again taken in, Ihe Enyliſh ceptain of the ſhip whercin VI. de
1% Roſny was, ſecing the French flag hoiſted, commanded his men t9
« fire upon the vice-admiral of France, ſwearing he would irffer 0
« flag to be ſeen in thee ſcas tut that of + rgland, A gun vis n
* mediately fired upen De Vic's ſhip, who having demanded the e,
« ſon of it, prepared to defend himſelf. M. de Reſny complainec 7

1603. OF Ul. 101

made myſelf heard; which, however, I at laſt ef-
fected, by repreſenting to them, that De- Vic acted
thus only to do me the greater honour; and alſo
to give me a more diſtinguiſhed mark of his reſpect,
by dropping his flag upon my firſt command ſo to do.
| thought it would be moſt prudent to do this; and
the Engliſh hearing what I ſaid, were ſo far prevailed
upon by it, as to make their next diſcharge at ran -
dom. I made a ſignal to De-Vic, which he perfect-
ly well underſtood, and took in his flag; but, as I
was afterwards told, he ſwore at the ſame time to
be revenged on the Engliſh whenever he ſhould a-
gain meet with them. Though I much queſtion,
had the opportunity now been given him, whether

4 it to the Englith captain, and repreſented the firing this ſhot as an
offence done to himſeif; but he talked to a man who refuſed to
«4 hear reaſon, and who arfwercd him only with rage and fury; he
« was therefore forced to ſubm't, and made a ſign to the vice admi-
* ral of France to take in his flag, which he did. De-Vic thinking
him ſelf injured, demanded ſatis faction of the Engliſh admiral; who
* anſwered him, that the King of England, his maſter, did not per-
mit what the captain had preſumed to do; defired that he would
* excuſe his indiſeretion, &c. and promiled that nothing like it ſhould
* ever happen again. This reply appeaſed and quicted all parties.”
Chron. Septen and Thuanus, anno 16c3, Cardinal Richlieu, in his
Teſtament Politique, makes uſe of this as an argument to demon-
rate to Lewis XIII. the abſolute neceflity there was for a naval
power: „Ihe canon ſhot, ſays he, by piercing the veſſel, pierced the
* hearts of all true Frenchmen ; and if the words of King James were
* civil, yet were they of no other effect than to oblige the Duke of
" Sully to obtain his ſatisfaction from his own prudence, by feigning
* to be contented, though his diſcontent and his reaſon for it, was
" :caily greater, and farther from being removed than ever. The
* King, your father, was under a necefſity to uſe diflimulation on
* this occaſion, but he did it with the reſolution, whenever it might
again be neceſſary, to maintain the juſt rights of his crown by ſuch a
* naval force as time would furniſh him with the means to acquire.“
Part 2. chap. 9. In regard to the fact, which is alſo related in the _
Teſtament, the circumſtances- are told in a manner almoſt entirely
afferent, We may farther obſerve, that M. de Sully, in that part of
his Memoirs where he ſpeaks of the ſatisfaction which he deſired
King James to grant him, paſſes it over very flightly ; doubtleſs, be-
cauſe he would not appear to have been fo very grievouſſy offended:

4 perhaps he really was.
. I 3 | he

_ — ,' —

102 M EM OI R S Book XIV.

be could ave obtained the revenge he threatened.

Be that however as it will, the diſpute was ended
by thi means, and our paſſage met with no further
interruption.

I arrived at Dover about three o' clock in the af.
ternoon. Beaumont, together with Sir Lewis Lew-
kenor, were there waiting for me. Sir Lewis had
the ſame office in England, which Gondy had in
France, being that part of the reception of ambaſſa-
dors, which conſiſts | in providing them with lodging,
proviſions, horſes, or chariots, and other things of
this nature. The Mayor of Dover alſo came and
complimented me; and the acclamations of the
people were ſo great, that it was ſaid, that nothing
like it had ever before been ſeen for any ambaſſa-
dor. But I was not now to be impoſed upon by
theſe appearances, having ſo lately received a differ.
en {pecimen of the Engliſh politeneſs, of which !
had another example, even before my departure
from Dos er.

The governor of this place ſent his nephew to me,
to deſue I would come whth him and fee the callle,
he not being able to wait on me himſelf, being con-
fined to his bed by the gout, This invitation was
followed by a ſccond, from which J conceived a
good opinion of the perſon by whom they were
ſent; and 1 thought the imputation of want of ci-
vility might juſily have fallen upon myſelf, had J,

after this, quitted Dover, without waiting on the Go-
vernor. I therefore went to the caſtle the next day,
with al my retinue ; but 1 ſoon diſcovered, that tne
Ci) 1 motive to this civil invitation was the pecur T
ary reward exadted of thoſe who have the curiolity
to lee the caſtle of Dover This was demanded of
every one of nz retinue, and that too rudely enough,
which was followed by the cerc emony of making all,
except m ih If, quit their werds. Being introduces
to the Governor, whoſe name was Thomas W ymes,

220

— — _ AH © wm

© — Hy

n — Au— ©. 4. was _— Tu u uv x ww HF. 5” 1—

qe r . a | i. a aa Vo . ö

1603. O F . 103

he received us ſeated in his chair, but, perceiving
that ſome of us were looking at the towers and
walls of the caltle, he put on ſo ſour a countenance,
that, pretending to be afraid leſt our preſence might
incommode him, I immediately withdrew, without
looking at any thing further. I had exhorted my
retinue, whatever might be ſaid or done to them,
not to forget the rules of French politeneſs ; and
this proved to be no unneceſſary caution.

When we were upon our departure for London,
Lewkenor no longer ſhewed bimſelf that polite and
obliging perſon, who but juſt before had demanded
a liſt of thoſe who accompanied me, that, as he
ſaid, they might all be furniſhed with the neceſſary
horſes and carriages: and 1 could not but ſuppoſe
his ſole deſign, in getting this lift, was, that he might
end it to London; for he ſuffered all my retinue to
provide themſelves horſes as well as they could, and
at their own coſt; and theſe mild people hired them
at ſo high a price, and at the ſame time with ſo
much arrogance, that they ſeemed to think they did
us a favour. However, we all carefully concealed
our ſentiments of fo rude a treatment. My own
conveyance I procured in the coach of the Earl of
Beaumont.

I had more reaſon to be pleaſed with the beha-
viour of the gentry in and about Canterbury. They
came to meet me upon the road, and that they
might pay me all imaginable honours and reſpects,
they pretended to have received orders ſo to do
from the King of England. Canterbury is but a
ſmall city, but extremely populous, and ſo polite,
that, in no other place I received ſuch diſtinguithed
eee and civilitics as there; ſome came to kiſs
my boot, otheis to kils my hands, and others to
make me picſents of flowers; all which mull be at-
tributed not to the Engliſh of this city, (they every
where piclerve hci character of avertion for the

French),

104 ö -I.-R:: 5: Book AIV,

French), but to the Walloons and Flemiſh, who,

having at many different times taken refuge in this
city on account of their religion, have at laſt almoſt
entirely changed ir, and at this day compoſe two

thirds of its inhabitants. I viſited the church, and

was preſent at the ſervice, wherein the muſic was
excellent. The church is extremely beautiful and
magnificent. When the canons underſtood that!
was of their religion, they redoubled their careſſes
and civilities. One of them ſhewed himſelf ſo well
affected to France, as to give me an intormatlon of
ſome conſequence, which was afterwards confirmed
by Aerſens to Henry himſelf, This canon had been
intimately acquainted with Arnold, the father of
him whom I had with me, as one of my fecretarics;
and being informed that this was the fon of his old
friend, he came to ſee him, and, among other
things, told him, that he had been informed by the
ſecretary of Count d' Aremberg, ambaſſador from
the Arch-duke, who had paſſed through Canterbury
only a few days before, that his maſter was charged
to repreſent to the King of England, with a view to
engage him in an alliance with Spain, that Henry
meditated great deligns againſt England, which would
openly appear in leis than two years; and, at the
{ame time, to make offers to his Britannic Majelly
of powerful ſuccours from the King of Spain, with
which he might prevent the deſigns that Henry me-
ditated, by ſeizing certain piovinces of France, on
which the King of England had much juſter pre-
tenſions than any Henry could have upon England.
Here my Lord Sidney came and complimented
me from the King of England, and made me many
obliging offers of ſervice. I knew that the perſon
who had been charged with the ſame commiſſion to
Count d'Aremberg, was my Lord Howard, whole
rank was much ſuperior to Sidney's, being the Duke
of Norfolk's nephew, uncle to the Lord High
Chamberlain,

— — . kd tg

Sw www f „ ee

eds —=— uw ww OA QJyvwoa£Uﬆm,. a. vu cc

Chamberlain, and member of the privy-council.
At firſt, therefore, I was apprehenſive that this de-
utation might be a mark of ſome contempt from
the King of England; but, afterwards reflecting
that the quality of the perſon who had received the
ambaſſador from Spain was inferior even to Sidney's,
concluded that all this might be merely acciden-
tal, more eſpecially as I could not receive greater
honours than thoſe which Sidney, and others by
his direction, paid me. I nevertheleſs communi-
cated my thoughts on this to Beaumont, deſiring
him to get an explanation of it; but to do ſo with
ſuch addreſs, that no cauſe might be given to per-
ceive a miſunderſtanding, where, perhaps, none
was intended to be ſhewn. Beaumont applied to
Sidney himſelf, and managed the affair with him ſo
well, that he immediately wrote to the court of
London, to inform them that they ſhould ſend an
Earl of the privy council to receive me, which was
done accordingly, The Earl of Southampton, one
of the miniſters and confidents of King James, came
to me frota that Prince at Graveſend, accompanied
by a numerous retinue of nobi ity and gentry. In
our way to Gravelend we paſled through Rocheſter,
where our reception was extremely different from
that at Canterbury; the inhabitants of that city had
faced the marks which were placed by the King of
England's meſſengers on thoſe houſes where we were
to be entertained and lodged if neceſſary,

At Graveſend I was received in the King of Eng-
land's barges, a kind of covered boats, which are
very commodious and richly ornamented ; and in
one of theſe J was carried up the Thames to Lon-
don, where, upon my arrival, the Tower alone ſa-
luted us with upwards of three thouſand guns, be-
lides the diſcharges from ſeveral ſhip-guns, and the
mulquetry from the mole and fort before this tower :
| ſcarce ever heard a finer ſalute. I landed near

the

106 MEM OR 3:- Book XFV.

the Tower, where many coaches, of which South.
ampton and Sidney performed the honours, were
ready to carry me, and all my retinue, to the houſe
of the Earl of Beaumont, which I had choſen for
the day. The confluence of people was fo great,
that we could fcarce open ourſelves a paſſage.

This very evening I had an opportunity of being
better acquainted with the character of the two
Engliſh Lords who had been ſent to conduct me.
Upon my arrival at Beaumont's, my Lord South.
ampton took me aſide, and having told me, that the
King, who was at Windſor, a caſtle about twenty
miles from London, had ordered him to come to him
there that day, however late it wight be, to inform
him of the particulars of my arrival, he earneſtly de-
ſired, having firſt expreſſed to me his zeal, that I
would impart ſomething to him which he might
communicate to his Majeſty, no doubt with an in-
tention to do himſelf honour by it, and gain the
favour of that Prince. After him my Lord Sidney
came and made me the ſame requeſt, by ingenioul-
ly telling me, that he hoped the honour which he
had received by being firſt deputed to me, and the
reſpect and attachment which he had for his Moſt
Chriſtian Majeſty, might merit my reſerving for him
at leaſt ſome pait of the affairs with which I was
charged; and he added, that I ſhould not diſcloſe
my ſelf entirely to Southampton. I plainly percei-
ved theſe gentlemen had a mutual jealouſy of cach
other, and contended who ſhould be the firſt that
ſhould give the King any informations. I very ci-
villy thanked them, and appeared obliged to both,
but gave the preference to Sidney; that is to lay,
the former received only falſe, and the latter no-
thing farther than general informations of bur little
conſequence, and ſuch as I ſhould have been glad
to ſee publiſhed.

They both made what uſe of them they thought

Proper»

.

9 . * as. 4 — ”

* CY WI ow PE SD. VO

. CT K-/

proper. As to myſelf, I ſupped and lay this evening
at Beaumont's, and I dined there the next day ; for
ſo ſhort a time had not been ſufficient to procure
and prepare me lodgings, till the palace of Arundel,
which was deſtined for me, could be got ready.
This palace was one of the tineſt, and from its great
number of apartments upon the fame floor, the
moſt commodious in London: but this greatly em-
barraſſed my retinue, which could not be all lodged
at Beaumont's. Houſes and apartments were ſought
in the neighbourhood, but the difficulty was to get
them; for the inhabitants refuſed to receive us, on
account of the miſbehaviour which they had but
lately experienced in ſome of Marechal Biron's peo-
ple ; the greateſt part therefore had like to have
been obliged to paſs the night in the ſtreet.

It muſt indeed be confeſſed, that, if what I heard
on this ſubject was true, Eiron, by the exceſſes
which he had ſuffered his whole retinue to commit,
had not ineffectually laboured to juſtify the animo-

| ity of the Engliſh nation againſt us. I am accu-
ſtomed to ſpeak my ſentiments freely, and never
| more ſo than when they may be of uſe in correct-
ing our manners. The youth of our nation have
not yet diveſted theraſelves of that vain, pert, and
| conceited air, nor thoſe licentious and even auda-
cious manners, with which we have, in all ages,
been reproached. Unfortunately too they are not
more circumſpect among foreigners than in their
own country, where they are accuſtomed to ſpend
their lives at gaming-tables, and other places of de-
dauchery, and run into boundleſs exceſſes.

I was fully reſolved, that, if my conduct could
not clear France from this reproach, it ſhould not,
at leaſt, - be incurred by thoſe over whom J had au-
thority : and I determined to exerciſe this authori-
ty in ſuch a manner, as to oblige all my people to a
[n& regularity of behaviour. But in theſe caſes

| precepts

+ * = * — 4
- — = —ͤ— —2 — —
E — 4 —

108 ME M OI R S Book XIV.

precepts are ſeldom effectual; I therefore enforced
them by an example, for which an opportunity hap.
pened almoſt immediately.

I was the next day accommodated with apart.
ments in a very handſome houſe, ſituated in a great
ſquare, near which all my retinue were alſo provi.
ded with the neceſſary lodgings. Some of them
went to entertain themſelves with common women
of the town, At the ſame place they met with
ſome Engliſh, with whom they quarrelled, fought,
and one of the Engliſh was killed. The populace,
who were before prejudiced againſt us, inſtigated
by the relations of the deceaſed, who was a ſub-
ſtantial citizen, aſſembled, and began loudly to
threaten revenge upon all the French, even in thcir
lodgings. The affair ſoon began to appear of great
conſequence ; for the number of people aſſembled
upon the occaſion was preſently increaſed to up-
wards of three thouſand, which obliged the French
to fly for an aſylum into the houſe of the amballa-
dor. I did not at firſt take notice of it; the even:
ing advanced, and I was playing at primero with
the Marquis D*Oraifon, Saint-Luc, and Blerancourt;
but, obſerving them come in at different times by
three and four together, and with great emotion,
at laſt imagined ſomething extraordinary had hap:
pened, and, having queſtioned Terrail and Cadan-
court, they informed me of the particulars.

The honour of my nation, my own in particu-

lar, and the intereſt of my negotiation, were the

firſt objects that preſented themſelves to my mind

I was alſo molt ſenſibly grieved, that my entry into |
London ſhould be marked at the beginning by lo |

fatal an accident; and at that moment, I am per-

ſuaded, my countenance plainly expreſſed the ſenti- |
ments with which I was agitated, Guided by my |
firſt impulſe, I aroſe, took a flambeaux, and, o1- |

dering all that were in the houſe (which was about

23

| 1603 O F C l . 109

a hundred) to range themſelves round the walls,
hoped, by this means, to diſcover the murderer,
which 1 did without any difficulty by his agitation
and fear. He was for denying it at firſt, but I foon
obliged him to confeſs the truth. He was a young
man, and the ſon of the Sieur de Combaut, principal
examiner in chancery, very rich, and a kinſman
likewiſe of Beaumont's, who entering that moment,
deſired me to give young Combaut into his bands,
that he might endeavour to fave him. “ I do not
« wonder,” replied I to Beaumont, with an air of
authority and indignation, “ that the Engliſh and

« « you are at variance, if you are capable of pre-
o WW © ferring the intereſt of yourſelf and your relati ns,
r © to that of the King and the public. But the ſer-
it vice of the King my maſter, and the ſafety of ſo
d W © many gentlemen of good families, ſhall not ſuffer
. « for ſuch an imprudent ſtrippling as thi.“ I told
h Beaumont, in plain terms, that Combaut ſhould be
1. beheaded in a few minutes. How, Sir,” crie !
th Beaumont, © behead a kinſman of mine, poſſef]-4
th « of two hundred thoutand crowns, an only ſon;
t; * it is but an ill recompence for the trouble he has
57 “given himſelf, and the expence he has been at to

& accompany you.” I again replic4, in as poſitive

p. a tone, © I had no occalion for ſuch company:“
n- and, to be ſhort, I deſi ed Beaumont to quit my a-
pirtment ; for I thought it would be improper to
u- have him preſent in the council, which I intended
he to hold immediately, in order to pronounce ſentence
ad. of death upon Combaut.
ito In this council, I made choice only of the oldeſt
{0 nd the wiſeſt of my retinue ; and the affair being
ere preſently determined, I fent Arnaud to inform the
ati Mayor of London of it, and to deſire him to have
my his officers ready the next day, to conduct the cri-
ol minal to the place of execution, and to have the
out

txecutioner there ready to receive him. The Mayor
VoIL. III. K returned

110 M E M O I R S. Book XIV.

returned me for anſwer, that his firſt care had been
to quiet the tumultuous populace, not doubting but
I would do him juſtice, and that he was juſt coming
to demand it of me, when he received my letter
and the ſentence. He moreover exhorted me to
moderate it, either becauſe my ſeverity had if.
armed his, or, which ſeemed moſt probable, becauſe
he had already ſuffered himſelf to be gained by pre-
ſents from the friends of the criminal. I ſent again
to this magiſtrate to inform him, that as no ſupe-
rior authority, nor reſpect for any perſon whatever,
had determined me to pronounce this ſentence, I
could not conſent to revoke it ; that, by carrying
it into execution, I ſhould juſtify the King my ma-
ſter, and give the Engliſh nation a convincing proof,
that I had done every thing upon the occaſion which
my duty required; therefore, in ſuch an affair, l
could only acquit myſelf of it by committing it to
him, and by reſigning the priſoner to ſuch puniſh-
ment as juſtice and the laws of England required,
I accordingly ſent Combaut to him : ſo that the
whole procedure became a particular affair between
the Mayor and Combaut, or rather Beaumont,
who, without much difficulty, obtained this ma-
giſtrate's conſent to ſet Combaut ar liberty; a fa-
vour which none could impute to me. On the con-
trary, I perceived both the French and Engliſh
ſcemed to think, that, if the affair had been deter-
mined by me, it would not have ended ſo well for
Combaut; and the conſequence of this to me, with

reſpect to the Engliſh and French, was, that the

former began to love me, and the latter to fear
me more.

This removed at leaſt one obſtacle to the ſuccels

of my negotiation : but there ſtill remained many

to encounter, from the nation in general, from the |

King, and from other particular perſons, according

as their different intereſts might incline them to

traverſe

—  w ky. oo wc cw A. << an. am At od mac ai oa 8

—

1603. O F r. 111

traverſe it. It is certain, that the Engliſh hate us;
and this hatred is ſo general and inveterate, that
one would almoſt be tempted to number it among
their natural diſpoſitions. It is undoubtedly an ef-
fect of their arrogance and pride; for no nation in
Furope is more haughty and inſolent, nor more
conceited of its ſuperior excellence. Were they
to be believed, underſtanding and common ſenſe are
to be found only among them. They are obſti-
nately wedded to all their own opinions, and de-
ſpiſe thoſe of every other nation, and to hear o-
thers, or ſuſpect themſelves, is what never enters
into their thoughts. This temper is more injurious

| to themſelves than to us, as, from thence, they are

at the mercy of all their caprices. Sometimes one
would be induced to think, they have contracted all
the inſtability of the element by which they are
ſurrounded. With them all things muſt ſubmir to
the reigning diſpoſitions 3 and the ſole difference
between them and any the moſt inconſtant people
in Europe, is, that their inconſtancy proceeds not
from lightneſs, but from their vanity, which con-
tinually ſhews itſelf in a thouſand different ſhapes.
Their felf-love renders themſelves ſlaves to all their
capricious humours. What they at one time be-
leve to have wiſely performed, or firmly reſolved,
is at another time deſtroyed, without their know-
ing, or being able to give a reaſon. They are ac-
cordingly ſo undetermined in themſelves, that fre-
quently one would not take them for the ſame per.
lons ; and from hence they themſelves ſometimes
appear ſurpriſed, on perceiving their own continued
reſolution. If we examine what are called their
maxims of ſtate, we ſhall diſcover in them only
the laws of pride itſelf, adopted by arrogance or

indolence.
From this portrait, it may at firſt appear n
de extremely difficult for an ambaſlador to in
2 em

112 M E M OI X 8 Bock XIV.

them with new reſolutions. And this is true; but
then it is only for the preſent moment : this being
elapſed, they no longer remember what you may
have enforced to them in the ſtrongeſt manner. $9
that a King of France muſt continually have near
them a perſon of underſtanding and authority, who
might compel them, as it were, to hear him, and
force them to be reaſonable; and even in this caſe, |
tuch a perſon would always have their pride to com-
bat, which inſpires them with a belief that they |
are infinitely ſuperior to all the other nations in
Europe “. .
France, therefore, can no more depend on tie
Engliſh than on any of her other neighbours ; ber |
true intereſt and beſt policy is, to render her own r
interior ſtate and condition ſuch as way make her c
not only entirely independent, but alſo able to MF
compel all Europe to feel its want of her. And 0

this, after all, would only be difficult to miniſters 2
who can conceive no other methods to effect it than t
war and violence; methods that ought never to be n
purſucd without an abſolute neceſſity. But let tlie WF 1;
ſovereign thew himſelf a lover of peace, diſintereſt- al
cd in what regards himſelf, and ſtriftly impartial 1
with reſpect to others, he will then be certain to e
preſerve all bis neighbours in that dependence which Wl tt
is only durable, becauſe it conciliates the affections, | 50
inſtcad of ſubjecting the perſons +. |
Ss ©
|

I wiſh, wich all my heart, I could have entirely ſopprefſed every Þ
thing in this character, and in this whole relation, fo little advarti- $ F
geous to a nation, whoſe virtues and genius have rendered it qualiy Þ 4
well reſpected and eſteemed. To reconcile truth u th the vera 5
the author, we can only ſay, that he has bete painted the Et g ff 1
ſuch as they appeared to him at that time. One ef the molt harfy ,
effects of the cultivation of arts, and the improvement of fee, 5, ff wi
that thoſe prejudices and partialities which were the cauſe of hatred | <8
and jealouſy have hereby been diſſipated. _
+ It is not ſurpriſing to hear ſuch reatoning as this now we have bat

acquired juſter notions in var and politics, and that France is ari've*
| at

1603. O F LL. 113

it I dare farther maintain, that peace is the great
g and common intereſt of Europe, the petty princes
y of which ought to be continually employed in pre-
0 ſerving it between the greater powers, by all the
ar moſt gentle and perſuaſive means; and the greater
0 powers ſhould force the leſſer into it, if neceſſary,
1d by aſliſting the weak and oppreſſed. This is the
e, only uſe they ought to make of their ſuperiority.
n- When ] conſider Europe as compoſed of ſuch civi-
5 lized people, I cannot but be aſtoniſhed that ſhe ſtill
in continues to be governed by principles ſo narrow,

and cuſtoms fo barbarous. What is the conſe-
he quence of that profound policy of which ſhe is ſo
er vain, other than her own continual laceration and
vn rvin? War is the reſource in all places, and up-
er on all occaſions: ſhe knows no other way, nor
G conccives any other expedients : it is the ſole re-
nd lource of the moſt inconſiderable ſovereign, as well
ers as of the greateſt potentate : the only difference be.
an tween them is, that the former makes it with leſs
be noiſe, and in conjunétion with others, while the
ne latter does it with great preparation, and frequently

alone, that he may ſhew his grandeur, though in
reality he only ſhews himſelf more ſignally deſpi-

0 cable. Why muſt ve always impoſe on ourſelves
ch the nece ſſity of paſſing through war to arrive at
ns ? the attal f which is the end
peace ? the attainment of which is the end of all
wars, and is a plain proof that recourſe is had to
S BT on.y for want cf a better expedient. Nevers
bcleſs, we have fo effectually confounded this truth,
very
ti ; . :
ly Wl ſo great a degree of glory, that conqueſts can ad nothing, or but
et WT Oy h de, to in: but what o mon oft we conteive of the views
"th and peretiation of the Duke of ul, when we behold him eſlabliſh-
py me privciples, n appearerce fo mprope for the tiate of mijery and
„ kee in which the Kind im was at that time, or at leaſt from
atred akeucc it was hut juſt cored? I 1s by uch true, ſ hd and wile
mexims as theie, het the M mis of Su beve come a rich
na mine, from hence all uw able miniſters bens fince drown incllie
ved vale treatures, |
at IN 3 that

114 M E M OI R S Book XIV.

that we ſeem to make peace only that we may a.
gain be able to make war. But let us now return
to the Engliſh.

The court of London might be conſidered as
compoſed of four ſorts of perſons, who formed ſo
many different factions; and from this circumſtance
only, one may infer, what in reality was true, that
this court was full of ſuſpicion, miſtruſt, jealouſy,
private and even public diſcontents. I ſhall here
advance nothing of the truth of which I was not
well convinced, either by my own obſervations, or
from the lights I received from the partiſans of
France, from thoſe who called themſelves ſuch,
from the diſcontented, and, in ſhort, from many
other opportunities which occaſionally occurred,
The firſt of theſe factions were the Scotch, at the
head of which were the Earl of Mar, Lord Mount-
joy, Erſkine, Kinloſs, and other gentlemen of the
King's bedchamber. They were in the intereſt of
France, and endeavoured to engage the King in
their party, who ſeemed diſpoſed to ſuffer himlelf
to be governed entirely. Some of them were to-

lerably ſkilled in military affairs, but not one of

them was acquainted with the bufineſs of the ca-

binet. I have not mentioned the Earl of Lennox |
in this number, becauſe, though he was equally |
well inclined to France, he had nevertheleſs a party |
among the Scotch, which was ſeparate from that of
the Earl of Mar, and even oppoſite to it; not in-
deed in its political principles, but only in a com-

petition which ſhould have the advantage in the

King's favour, and there was a reciprocal and in-
veterate hatred between them. Thus the Scotch

faction had ſubdivided itſelf into two.

The ſecond, in all reſpects entirely oppoſite to
the former, was the Spaniſh faction. In this all the |
Howards were engaged, having at their head the

Admiral of that name, the Lord High peer: :
the

* — — — — Fae —— ac wo H— i *q *

= 07 :-2 v1 LT. 115

i the Maſter of the horſe, the Humes, and others of
n leſs note. The third was compoſed of a number of

old Engliſh, who, conſidering France and Spain as
8 equiponderous, or being equally jealous of theſe
0 two nations, were attached to neither, and ſought
© to render Flanders independent of both, by reſto-
it ring the ancient kingdom of Burgundy. The firſt
V, movers of this faction were the Chancellor, the
e Lord High Treaſurer, and Cecil the ſecretary of
50 ſtate, at leaſt as far as one could judge of a man
pr who was all myſtery; for he ſeparated from, or
f united with all parties, according as he judged it
b, moſt advantageous to his own particular intereſt,

He had born the principal ſway in the late govern-
ment, and he endeavoured, with the ſame ſubtilty,
to acquire an equal ſhare in the preſent; his expe-
| rience, joined to his addreſs, had already made him
be conſidered by the King and Queen as a neceſſary
man. Laſtly, there was a fourth faction, compoſed
of ſuch as meddled in affairs, without having any
connection with thoſe before mentioned, and even
without having any agreement among themſelves,
unleſs that they would not feparate or unite with
any other. Their character was purely Engliſh.
They breathed a ſpirit of ſedition, and were ready
to undertake any thing in favour of novelties, even
were it againſt the King bimſelf. They had at their
head the Earls of Northumberland, Southampton,
and Cumberland, Lord Cobham, Sir Walter Raleigh,
Griffin, and others.

Nothing could as yet be diſcovered with regard
to any of theſe factions, except that they mutually
hated and were jealous of each other; and it was
Impoſſible to foretell which would at length obtain
the aſcendent, and gain the Prince to its inicreſts.
To judge from appearances, his favour would be
di puted only by the men of learning, and the fa-
your ites of his bed-chamber; the flilt, Cate” by

elr

uſed to inſpire James, thoſe ſhould prove to be moſt

116 ME MO 1 R S8 Zoch NI.

their ſuperior knowledge and dexterity they com-
monly ſucceeded better than others in gaining their
maſter ; the ſecond, becauſe they had the advantage
of familiarity, and of being admitted into all his
parties of pleaſure. But the King's humour and
inclinations were not yet ſufficiently known, beſides
that his acceſſion to ſuch a crown as that of Eng-
land might occaſion ſuch alterations in them as
would render any judgment on this head extremely
recarious.

All that I had to fear was, leſt, among the dif.

ferent ſeatiments with which endeavours would be

difficult that were to attach him to the intereſts of
France. Hitherto his inclinations had been con-
formable to thoſe of the Northern powers, who were
for making three diviſions of the houſe of Auſtiia;
Spain, Germany, and Burgundy. They deteſted the
fiſt, as being too powerful and enterpriſing ; the
ſecond they deſpiſed, but would however have been
reconciled to it, by diliniting it from the Pope,
Spain, and the Jeſuits; the third was as yet only
imaginary, but was what they fo paſſionately deſi-
red, that they would have ſpared nothing to reſtore
it, provided they could alſo have ſeparated its in-
tereſts from thoſe of Spain and Germany, or at
leaſt have obliged theſe powers to renounce all pre-
tenſions upon one another. ,

King James was not ſo well difpoſed in favour of
Henry as Eliſabeth had been. He had been inform-
ed that Henry, in deriſion, had called him, Captain
of arts and clerk of arms. "There was ſome rea»
ſon to. appr hend, that it would be difficult at fi-lt
to kinder him from ertcrtaining thoughts of renews
ing the a cient pretences of England upon France,
of which hi: e wuitiers had not failed to talk to him
very eaincſt'y. As to myſelf it had been hinted to

him, that boch J and my brother had ſpoke of him
WO

— — ** 3 8

— , ac i Mas ²—e oe. _ SO ˙—3—? ans eG am: ec a. a

—

1603. O F . 117

in terms not very reſpectful. But to give the rea-
der a more perfect knowledge of the character of
this Prince, let me add, that he meant well, was
conſcientious, eloquent, and had ſome erudition;
though leſs of the latter, than of penetration and a
diſpoſition to learning. He loved to hear diſcourſes
on ſtate affairs, and to be entertained with great de-
ſigns, which he himſelf conſidered and diſpoſed with
a ſpirĩt of method and ſyſtem ; but he never thought
of carrying them farther, for he naturally hated
war, and yet more to engage in it himſelf, He was
indolent in His actions, except in hunting, and want=
ed application in his affairs 3 all which were ſigns
of an caſy and timid diſpoſition, that made it highl
probable he would be governed by others; and this
was farther confirmed by his behaviour to the Queen
bis wife.

The character of this Princeſs was quite the re-
verſe of her huſband's; ſhe was naturally bold and
enterpriſing; ſhe loved pomp and grandeur, tumult
and intrigue. She was deeply engaged in all the
civil factions, not only in Scotland, in relation to
the Catholics, whom the ſupported, and had even
firſt encouraged, but alſo in England, where the diſ-
contented, whoſe numbers were very conſiderable,
were not ſorry to be ſupported by a Princeſs de-
lined to become their Queen, Every one knows
that women, though but weak inſtruments in ſolid
affairs, often act a dangerous part in intrigues. The
King could not be ignorant of this, but he was ſo
weak as never to be able to reſiſt, nor perſonally to
contradict her, though ſhe made no ſeruple publicly
to ſhew that ſhe did not always conform to his ſen-
timents. He came to London long before her: ſhe
was {till in Scotland when I arrived at that city, and
James wiſhed ſhe would not have departed from
thence ſo ſoon, being perſuaded that her preſence
would only be detrimental to affairs. He ſent to

*- acquaint

118 M E MOI R S Bock XIV.

acquaint her with his deſire, and that with an air
of authority, which coſts nothing to aſſume againſt
thoſe who are abſent; but ſne was very little affected
by it.

e of obeying, the Queen prepared to quit
Scotland, after having, of her own accord, and a-
gainſt the King's expreſs deſire, appointed herſelf a
great chamberlain of her houſhold. She was alſo
attended by the Earl of Orkney, and another Scotch
nobleman, and brought with her the body of the
male child of which ſhe had been delivered in Scot-
land, becauſe endeavours had been uſed to perſuade
the public, that his death was only feigned. She
alſo brought with her the Prince, her eldeſt ſon,
whom ſhe in public affected to govern abſolutely,
and whom, it was faid, ſhe ſought to inſpire with
ſentiments in favour of Spain; for it was not
doubted but that ſhe was inclined to declare on that
ſide, Nevertheleſs, the young Prince gave her no
room to be pleaſed with his deference for her. He
naturally hated Spain, and favoured France; and
this preſage was ſo much the more happy, as from
the aſſemblage of ambition, greatneſs and genero-
ſity, already perceivable in him, he promiſed one
day to become one of thoſe princes who are the
ſubject of much converſation. He was, from re-
port, acquainted with the character of the King of
France, and he propoſed making him his model;
which was certainly very diſagrecable to the Queen
his mother, who, it is ſaid, had reſolved to deſtroy
his French diſpoſition, by having him ſent to be
educated in Spain. :

Thus I have given ſome account of the ſtate of
che court of London, at the time when I began my
negotiation. The character of the reſt of the prin-
Cipal perſons who compoſed it, will more particu-
larly appear in the enſuing part of theſe Memoirs.
Here therefore I will only add, that beſides Count

| d' Aremberg

1603. O F L

d' Aremberg from the Archdukes, Prince Henry of
Naſſau, and the other deputies from the States-ge-
neral, whom J found here upon my arrival, the
ambaſſador from his Catholic Majeſty, and the en-
voys from Sweden and Denmark, were alſo hourly
expected, and they accordingly arrived the day af-
ter me. There were likewiſe ſome others, but not
of lufficient conſequence to be particularly men-
tioned. Upon the whole, it appeared as though all
the Princes of Europe conſidered the gaining Eng-
land to their intereſts to be of the utmoſt import-
ance to them,

The firſt of the foreign miniſters whom I ſaw at
the court of London were thoſe of the Elector Pala-
tine, who having already made their compliments
to the new King, and being prepared to return
home, came to take their leave of me, almoſt im-
mediately after my arrival ; but nothing particular
paſſed between us. Soon after they had left me,
Cecil ſent his principal ſecretary to be informed by
Beaumont, at what hour he might conveniently ſee
me; and he accordingly came in the afternoon. So
long as we had any witneſſes of our converſation,
Cecil talked to me only of the King of England's
affection for the King of France, of the deſire which
he had of giving him proofs of it, and other things
in the ſame ſtrain, which could only be regarded as
compliments : nevertheleſs, when we were in my
chamber only with Beaumont, I pretended to con-
lider what he had ſaid as very ſerious; and this 1
did to gain an opportunity of repreſenting to him,
how highly advantageous an union between the two
Kings would be to both, and of urging the engage-
ments they had formerly contrafted, and the ſer,
vices each had received from the other. |

This general introduction ſerved me at leaſt to
form a judgment of the diſpoſition of the perſon
who ſpoke to me; and, from his reply, I peil ceived

| It

120 ME MOI R 8 Book XIV.

it was not favourable to France. Cecil made me à
long harangue, the deſign of which was, to convince
me that his maſter ought not to meddle in any of
the affairs of his neighbours, but leave Holland to
act as it ſhould judge proper, in regard to its dif.
putes with Spain. He ſpoke of Oſtend as a place
little worth the pains which had been taken to pre-
ſerve it; and of the commerce of the Indies as an
advantage, of which, in good policy, the Low coun-
tries ought to be deprived. I oppoſed theſe ſenti.
ments ; and though he ſeemed convinced by my ar-
guments, he, nevertheleſs, appeared very little in-
clined to enforce them to the King his maſter. He
changed the ſubject, by informing me, that bis Na-
jcſty was gone to Greenwich, in order to avoid the
ſolicitations which Count d'Aremberg would not
have failed to make, to obtain his audience beforc
mine, which his Majeſty could not have refuſed him,
becauſe he had arrived before me, and which, ne—
vertheleſs, he was not diſpoſed to grant. To this
favour, which Cecil gave me to underſtand was not
inconſiderable, he allo added that of offering me my
audience, which was a fecond obligation, no leſs va-
lvable than the former, as all ambaſſadors wee
uſually obliged to demand it of the King; neither
was it his fault, if I did not alſo regard the depu-
tation of ſuch a man as him as a particular mark
of reſpett. 1 was not, however, deficient in my
acknowledgments to the deputy, and 1 delircc he
would give himſelf the trouble to teſtify my gratt-
tude for it to the King.

Notwithſtanding all the pains this ſecretary ha!
taken to perſuade me, that no one, after the King,
had ſo much power as himſelf, and that he even
governed in the councils of the Prince, I thought I
perceived the contrary. I likewiſe imagined, that,
fearing leſt ſome of his competitors ſhould deprive
him of any of his important employments, he had

ſolicited, |

wk, ped goa gw > toi, tric JJ. a uwuww =2D wim ca :

— — AY yu

. ” @ — ww,

.

2. 9YJ = © 06

© I 5 = ©

— os r 121

ſolicited, and perhaps wich great aſſiduity, from the
King his maſter the office of treating with me,
wherein he acted as if he thought himſelf degraded
by the execution of it. La Fontaine, and ie de-
puties of the States General, who entered juſt as
Cecil went out, were, from his behaviour, of the
ſame opinion; and this did not appear to us an un—
fortunate circumſtance, no more than the obſerva-

tion which they had made, that ſince ſames had

been informed of my departure from France to
London, he had begun to treat them with more
kindneſs, having before then refuſed both to ſee or
ſpeak to the Prince of Naſſau, and even publicly gi-
ven the States the epithet of ſedirious rebels. Theſe
deputies began to perſuade me, that the King of
France ought not only to inſpire the King of Eng—
land with more favourable fentiments in regard to
them, but ſhould openly declare himſelf their de-
fender. They had much more to ſay on this head;
but it was late, and ſupper was on the tables; I
therefore diſmiſſed them, with general aſſurances
that they ſhould be ſatisfied. |

I gave then a more poſitive anſwer to Barnevelt
their principal, when he came to ſee me at the pa-
lace of Arundel, of which I was now ia poſſeſſion.
Barnevelt, like his colleagues, began by magnitying
the miſery to which the United Provinces were re-
duced, the expences they had been at ſince the peace
of Vervins, their debts, and their exhauſted condi-
tion, He faid the States could no longer keep
Oſtend, nor reſiſt the Spaniards, unleſs the King of
France cauſed a powerful army to march without
celay, and either through the frontiers of Picardy,
or the territories belonging to the Archduke, enter
Flanders from the land fide, which was the only
means of forcing the Spaniards from before Oltend,
taving proved, they faid, by experience, that the
Spaniards could eaſily deſtroy, one after the other,

Vo“. III. L all

122 M E M OI R S Book XIV,

all the little ſuccours that were ſent them by ſea,
and that immediately on their landing. After all
theſe complaints, he concluded, as his colleagues had
done, that Henry ought to declare himſelf their pro-
tector, and enter into an offenſive and defenſive al-
liance with them. |

I told Barnevelt, in plain terms, that he muſt re.
nounce any ſuch hopes; for that Henry was not at
all diſpoſed, through complaiſance for them, to draw
upon himſelf the whole power of Spain, nor alone
to ſupport the burden of a war, in which, ſuppoſing
the King of England ſhould refuſe to be concerned,
he could not expect to have the advantage. For
-this reaſon, I told him, as was really the caſe, that
I could neither take any reſolution, nor ſay any thing
poſitive to them, till I had at leaſt ſounded the dil-
politions of this prince with regard to them. Barne-
velt having been at London for a conſiderable time,
might reaſonably be ſuppoſed to have acquired ſome
knowledge of the King, I therefore aſked him what
diſcoveries he had made? Hereplied, that this Prince
having from the firſt been inclined to peace, both by
the advice of his counſellors, and his own paſſive
diſpoſition, had long deprived them of all hopes;
but having apparently reflected, that this peace would
coſt England dear, if, by his inaction, the Flemiſh
ſhould return under the dominion of the Spaniards,
or ſhould be obliged, in order to free themſelves
from it, to accept that of France; and having, per-
haps, been made ſenſible what even England had to
fear from a power, who, without any regard to

Juſtice, attempted whatever ſeemed for its conve- }
niency, when all other objects became inſufficient |
to ſati:fy its unbounded deſire; theſe conſiderations |
ſcemed to have thrown James into a ſtate of per- |
plexity, out of which he had probably not yet ex-
tricated himſelf; for he had ſaid nothing more to

them, than that he would not ſeparate himſelf from
France;

— a_ CL TY | og 1

ans a es td of m ff ab nd n m woo mm os mw vo OvYy ow=

os wy oo — amy

- | wk os 3

0 u 1 1. 123

France; on the contrary, that he only waited the
arrival of the French ambaſſador, to unite more
cloſely with Henry, by concluding a double mar-
riage between the two families.

What Barnevelt ſaid would have diſſipated part of
my fears, had the King of England been one of thoſe
princes on whom one could depend. But in all this,
with reſpe& to himſelf, I could only perceive diſſi-

| mulation, or, at beſt, irreſolution; for thoſe of his
miniſters, whom I had reaſon to believe were belt
6 acquainted with the ſecrets of his councils, upon
4 every occaſion conſtantly faid, that all endeavours to
inſpire them with a dread of Spain would be vain,
˖ the ſituation of their iſland protecting them againſt
the enterpriſes of any foreign power whatever. It
: would indeed have been highly imprudent in the
£ States and Barnevelt to have judged any otherwiſe,
or have deferred taking mealures to prevent their
4 final ruin, till James had taken his reſolution ; and
N. believe the States were too good politicians to have
5 committed ſuch a miſtake. In conſequence of this
opinion, which I communicated to Barnevelt, I con-
4 jured him, by all the intereſt of his country, not to
by conceal from me any of the moſt ſecret reſolutions
4 which had been there taken, upon a ſuppoſition that
h England would abandon them, or even, which was
f but too likely, that ſhe would endeavour to augment
Fo their diſtreſs, by taking this opportunity to demand
= the cautionary towns offered to Eliſabeth.
6 Barnevelt finding himſelf preſſed, and conſidering
- me as the confident of a Prince who was the only
of true friend to his country, no longer heſitated to diſ-
1 cover all to me. And after having intimated the
* merit of ſo important a ſecret, he informed me, that
4 the council of the United Provinces had reſolved, at
a all events, to avoid giving up the cautionary towns ;
pet that the terms of their treaty with Eliſabeth would

furniſh them with the means of doing this, by the
| L 2 | time

124 M EM OI XN S Bock XIV.

time which might be required to examine the tenor
of it; that in caſe they found themſelves too cloſe.
ly preſſed by the Engliſh and Spaniards, they would
endeavour to bring upon. the carpet the treaty of
Brunſwic and Vandrelep, offering Oſtend to be fe.
queſtrated, till the concluſion of the treaty ; that
during this interval, ſome event might perhaps hap.
pen in their favour, and thus, at leaſt for the pre-
ſent, a ſtop be put to the power ful forces prepating
in Spain againſt Oſtend. |

In order to underſtand what is here ſaid of the
treaties with Eliſabeth and Spain, it is neceſſary to
know, that the late Queen of England had demanded
of the States certain towns “, as a ſecurity for the
money which ſhe had lent them, with this gracious
clauſe in their favour, That they ſhould not give
her the poſſeſſion of them, unleſs they entered into
an accommodation with Spain without her corſent.
As to the other treaty it was propoſed, in the height
of the hoſtilities between Spain and the United Pro-
vinces, to put the conteſted countries under the
power of the houſe of Auſtria; not the branch
which reigned in Spain, but that which poſſeſſed the
empire of Germany. But whether the States or
Spain, or which is moſt probable, both, were the
cauſe of ir, the treaty that was begun by the Duke
of Brunſwic, and continued by Count Vandrelep,
came to nothing. The former demanded, that the
provinces and towns which Spain till preſerved, or
had regained in Flanders, ſhould be comprehended
in the treaty ; becauſe, ſaid they, they riſked too
much by being ſo near the power of Spain, who ta-

king advantage of a pretended peace, might ealily |

regain poſſeſſion of what ſhe appeared to abandon 3

and the latter could not but with regret think of fe- |

paratirg ſo brilliant a gem from her crown,

* Fleſungue and Biille.

a vn ( eee et EI og ES

1603. SF. . 125

In the afternoon of this day I was viſited by the

reſident from Venice, who was the ſecretary of that
republic. He was as free and unreſerved in his dif.

courſe with me as Barnevelt had been; for his ſtate

was in the ſame ſituation of jealouſy and complaints

againſt Spain, and of union with France. He fur-

ther confirmed to me what J had before ſtrongly
ſuſpected, of the irreſolution of James, He told

me, that this prince, who ſo often and fo loudly re«
peated the high ſounding words, the policy of Eu-

: rope, did, in reality, concern himſelf with nothing
) leſs; and that his diſſimulation, which his flatterers
complimented in him as a virtue, had always con-
d ſiſted in giving hopes to all, but accompliſhing none;
$ that it was not to be expected he would change his
© maxims, having frequently been heard to ſay, that
0 it was to ſuch an artful conduct alone he owed his

. ſecurity when King of Scotland; and therefore it
t was highly probable that he would again put thoſe
. arts in practice, and purſue them more ſteadily than
: ever, at the beginning of a reign, and at the head
of a great kingdom, with whoſe people, affairs, and
e neigb bours, be was utterly unacquainted all which
x were circumſtances favourable to his maxim.

Theſe reflections of the Venetian were at once
ſenſible and juſt. He afterwards informed me of
the Duke of Bouillon's proceedingz with the new
King, whom, by the envoys from the Elector Pala-
tine, he had ſolicited to {peak to Henry in his fa-
vour. But James ſtopped them by ſaying, that it
did not become a great Prince to intercede for a fe-
dellious ſubject. After this mortifying reply, I know
not what were Bouillon's thoughts of that ſcheme
which had been concerted between La-Tremoville,
D'Entragues, Du Pleſſis, and himfſcif, and had bore
in their opinions ſo favourable an aſpect. This
ſcheme was to make the King of England protector
of the Calyinilt party in France, and the Elector Pa-
1 5 L 3 latine

126 M E M OI R S8 Book XIV.

latine his lieutenant. Bouillon's agent in London
was an Engliſhman named Williams, who had en-
tered into bis ſervice after having quitted that of his
Majeſty, to whom he had been huntſman, and one
of his grooms of the chamber, known under the
name of Francis le Blanc. D'Entragues's agent was
named Du-Panni. He was very frequently at Beau-
mont's, and his principal correſpondence was with
the Duke of Lennox ard his brother. Henry had
informed me of all theſe particulars in his letters,
and having by his order made inquiries concerning
them, I found they were exaGily true. D*Entragues
Was certainly in the right thus to negotiate by o-
thers; for had he appeared at London, he would
ſoon have been diſcovered to be a man of many
words and but little underſtanding. The teſtimony
which I on all occaſions bore to this truth, did not
advar ce his affairs.

The ſame day alſo Count d'Aremberg ſent one of
his retinue to wait upon me, excuſing his not coming
himſelf, as cuſtom did not permit ſuch viſits till after
he had received his firſt audie ce of the King. All
that paſſed between me and thi nobleman conſiſted
in compliments, offers of ſervice, and aſſurances of
peace ard friendſhip, in all which nothing was
wanting but ſincerity. |

The King of England, who had before acquaint»
ed me that he would grant me an audience on the
22d, which was Sunday, ſent a gentleman to con-
firm it to me, to deſire I would not think the time
tediuus, and to be informed how I was lodged, and
whether | wanted any thing. To this favour was
_ alſo added the preſent of half a buck, which, a3
this Prince ipformed me by the bearer, was the fill
he had ever taken in his life though he was a gicat
lover ut the chacz ; the real. n was, there was none
in Scutland, From hence he touk occaſion to
make Henry a compliment, by ſaying, that be at-

tributed

tributed his good fortune to the arrival of a man,
who came from a prince that was looked upon to
be the King of hunters. I replied, that this con-
formity of inclination in their Majeſties was to me
a preſage of their perſonal union, unleſs a jealouſy
of the chace ſhould prevent it : that, in this caſe,
I would take the liberty to offer myſelf as arbiter
between their Majeſties, being ſo diſintereſted and
indifferent in this article, that when the King my
maſter made a party for the chace, he was ſo far
from thinking, like the King of England, that my
preſence would contribute to its ſucceſs, that he
generally ſent me to purſue other affairs in my clo-
ſet, where, he ſaid, I was more lucky. Though
there was nothing ſerious in all this, I was never-
theleſs glad of the opportunity that was afforded
me to inſinuate myſeif into his Biitannic Majeſty's
favour ; and wih this view, I turned my compli-
ment in ſuch a manner as might pleaſe the ſelf com-
placency of James, who, 1 very well knew, was
extremely flattered by any compariſon with the
King of France. I returned the compliment which
Count D' Aremberg had paid me, and at the lame
time, ſent him half my preſent.

One part of the orders 1 had given with regard
to the ceremony of my audience, was, that all my
retinue ſhould appear in mourning, to execute with
propriety the firſt part of my commillion, which
conlilted in complimenting the new King on the
death cf Eliſabeth, though I had been informed at
Calais, that no one, whether amballador, foreigner,
or Englith, was admitted into the preſence of the
new King in black; and Beaumont had ſince repre-
ſented to me, that what I intended wouid m. ſt cer-
tainly be highly diſagreeable to the court, where fo
ſtrong an aff-Ctation prevaited to obliteiate the ne-
mory of that great piinceſs, that ihe was never

ſpoke

3,

28 MEMOIR Ss Book XIv.

ſpoke of, and even the mention of her name in-
duſtriouſly avoided.

I ſhould have been very glad not to have been
ſenſible of the neceſſity I was laid under of appear-
ing in a garb which would ſeem to caſt a reprozch
on the King and all England, But my orders here-
upon were poſitive, not to mention that they were
almoſt laudable ; and this was the reaſon J paid no
regard to Beaumont”: repreſentations, who intreated
me to defer putting myſelf to this trouble and ex-
pence, till he had wrote about it to Eiſkine and
ſome others, who were beſt acquainted with the
court ceremonial. He wrote accordingly, but re.
ceived no anſwer on Thurſday, Friday, nor even
all day on Saturday; and I {till perſiſted in my re-
ſolution, notwithſtanding the reaſons which he con-
tinvally gave me to the contrary. On Saturday
night, which was the evening of the day preceding
my audience, and fo late that I was in bed, Beau:
mont came to tell me, that Eiſkine had ſent to ac-
quaint him, that the whole court conſidered my in-
tention as a premeditated affront, ard that 1 had fo
offended the King by it, that nothing would more
effectually prevent the ſucceſs of my negotiation,
from its very cammencement. This in formation
agrecing with thoſe of my Lord Sidney, the Vile
count de Saraot, La-Fontaine, and the States de-
putics, it was impoſſible for me to be in doubt a-
bout it; and, leſt a greater evil ſhould enſue, I
cauſed all my retinue to change their apparc], and
provide themſelves others as well as they could.
Lew kener coming the next morning to inform me,
that I ſhould be preſented to the King at three 0?
clock in the afternoon, 1 perceived, from the ſa—
tisfaction wh.ich he exprefied at the new orders !
had given, that it was infliſpenſably neceſſary to
vanquiſh my tepugnance Nevertheleſs, it gain-
ed me alu ch > much honour with the public,

| as

r —=_ . W A ooo / mack. ama r r uu U Xa cAaoaacc

as if I had perſiſted in my intention; becauſe it was
generally known, that neceſſity was the ſole motive
of my compliance.

K 0 Vs

HE King of England's guards, commanded
by the Earl of Derby, came to attend me
from the palace of Arundel, and eſcorted me to
the Thames, whoſe banks they lined whilſt I went
down to Greenwich. This paſſage I made in the
King's barges, being attended by one hundred and
twenty gentlemen, ſelected from my whole retinue.
Upon my landing, I was received by the Earl of
Northumberland, who, through an infinite number
of people, conducted me to the King's palace.
I was carried into a chamber, where we were
reſented with a coljation, though contrary to an
eſtabliſhed cuſtom in England, never to treat am-
baſſadors, nor even to offer them a glaſs of water.
His Majeſty having ſent to deſire my appearance in
bis preſence, I was above a quarter of an hour be-
fore I could get to the foot of his throne, occa-
ſioned both by the great numbers that were already
there, and becauſe I made all my retinue walk bes»
fore me, The prince no ſooner perceived me than
he deſcended two ſteps, and would have deſcended
them all, ſo very deſirous he appeared to receive
and embrace me, had not one of his miniſters, who
ſtood next him, whiſpered ſoftly in his ear, that he
ought to go no further.“ If, ſaid he aloud, I
« thew this ambaſſador particular marks of honour,
“ and fuch as are contrary to cuſtom, I mean not
« thereby to give a precedent to others: I particu-
% larly love and eſteem him for the affection which
© I know he has for me, for his firmneſs in our
* religion, and his fidelity to his maſter,” I dare

not

130 M E M O I R S Book XV.

not repeat all that he ſaid further to my advantage,
I received fo obliging a favour with all due reſpect ;
and replied, not by an harangue, ſuch as ſome may,
perhaps, expect to ſee here, and with which court-
pedants would be more pleaſed ; but only by a
compliment, which, in reality, comprehended as
much, and was more ſuitable to my ſituation. Hen-
ry*s affliftion for the death of Eliſabeth, his joy for
the acceſſion of James to the throne of England,
the praiſes of the two kings ; all theſe I compriſed
in very few words, I excuſed myſelf from my
want of rhetorical abilities, and from his Mot
Chriſtian Majeſty's having himſelf explained his ſen-
timents in his letters, which I at the ſame time pre-
ſented, diſtinguiſhing to his Britannic Majeſty that
which Henry had wrote with his own hand. He
read them himſelf, and then gave them to Cecil;
expreſſing, at the ſame time, how ſenſible he was
of their contents, by theſe words:“ That he had
« not left in Scotland the ardor with which he had
« always loved the King of France, ard deſired the
« proſperity of his crown.” 1 continued to com-
pliment his Majeſty, though in the ſtyle of com-
mon converſation ; for that of haranguing was ex:
tremely diſagreeable to me. I ſaid, that Henry had
given public demonſtrations of his joy, on ſeeing
the throne of England filled by a prince who was
ſo worthy of it, and for his having been ſo readily
and univerſally acknowledged ; that if there had
been occaſion for the preſence of bis Moſt Chriſtian
Majeſty, he would have given proofs of his ſincere
attachment to his intereſts, and union with his per-
ſon, and have come with pleaſure to any place where
bis preſence might have been neceſſary. I did not
repent my having made this compliment. James re-
plied, that if he had even found the Engliſh at war
with the Fiench, his endeavours would, neverthe-

leſs, have been to live in peace with a prince *
= e

r a o«@ kk. - tk. [ai ooo

my pÞ£-< -A,_ wy % an, twws

od.

— 253

= © 6 Ge” << = '-o&

T

like himſelf, had been called from the crown of
Navarre to that of France: “ It being always com-
“ mendable,” ſaid be, & to overcome evil with
« good.” But that he had had the double ſatisfaction,
of quitting a crown in friendſhip with France, for an-
other that was not leſs ſo. The late Queen was
mentioned on this occaſion, but without one word
in her praiſe. |
After this, his Majeſty being deſirous to diſcourſe
longer and more familiarly with me, he made me
aſcend all the ſteps leading to the throne. I took
this occaſion to make my particular compliment, for
which he thanked me with an air of ſincerity and
affection. He did not conceal from me the infor-
mation which he had received from Paris, of the
diſcourſes attributed to Henry, to me and to my
brother, after his return from Scotland. He con-
feſſed that he had for ſome time believed them, but
that he had at laſt diſcovered the whole to be only
an artifice of their common enemies, who, by uſing
ſuch means, to open themſelves a paſſage to uni»
verſal monarchy, had rendered themſelves much
more odious to him. He exclaimed in very ſe-
vere terms againſt the Spaniards, which could not
dut give great pleaſure to Naſſau, who was near
enough to hear ſomething of what was ſaid; and
alo to the Flemiſh deputies, who were preſent,
though incognito, having not yet been able to ob-
tain audience. He ſpoke with the greateſt abhor-
rence of their endeavours io kindle the flames of
war among their neighbours ; proteſted, that he
would oppoſe their unjuſt deſigns ; and talked of
the King of Spain as a man too weak both in body
and mind to think of the great chimera's of his pre-
deceſſors. The pleaſure which I received from
this diſcourſe was ſufficient to make me deſirous of
Continuing it. I told the King of England, that he
Las extremely happy in being fo well *
I wit

- aw Ani F

LI % gy—_ mo WW WwW- „ is. hag

dd © VYD: © mn 2 0 we 0s

x
* 4
by

132 ME MO IR 8 Book XV.

with the character of the Spaniards only by the ex-
perience of others, but that it was not ſo with the
King of France. To prove this, I inſtanced what
they had done ſince the concluſion of fo ſolemn a
peace as that of Vervins ; the 1evolt of Biron, the
war of Savoy, and ſome other grievances. I add-
ed, that ſuch was the artifice of the Spaniſh coun.
cils, that to delude Europe in regard to its injuries,
they always began by complaining firſt, This con-
duct was equally dangerous and deteſtable with that
which they uſually practiſed, of treating with their
neighbours only with the premeditated intention of
deceiving them, even by that ſecurity which trca«
ties ought to give. James replied, that all this he
knew very well. In a word, I could no longer
doubt, that the reſentment which he ſhewed againſt
Spain, before ſo many witneſſes, was as ſincere as
it was violent. From this moment the firſt dawn
of hope began to appear in my favour.

The King of England changed this ſubject to that

of hunting, for which he diſcovered an extrava- |

gant paſhon. He ſaid, that he knew very well!
was no great lover of the chace ; that he had attri-

buted the late ſucceſs of this ſport to me, not as

Marquis of Roſny, but as ambaſſador from a King

who was not only the greateſt prince, but the great?
eſt hunter in the world; and added, very politely,
that Henry was in the right not to carry me to the
chace, becauſe I was of greater ſervice to him elſe-
where; and that if I purſued the chace, the King
of France could not. I replied, that Henry loved
all the exerciſes, but that none of them made him
neglect the care of his affairs, nor prevented bim
from a cloſe inſpection into the proceedings of his
miniſters; being far from that blind credulity which 4
the King of Spain had for the Duke of Lerma.
Hereupon James ſaid, that, without doubt, I had

found it very difficult to regulate the finances, and

rel;

0 8. UV LL Bs 133

reſiſt the importunities of the great men of the
kingdom : and of this he produced ſome inſtances,
which I had quite forgot. He then ſuddenly aſked
me, as it were interrupting himſelf, How the King
of France did? Ijudged, from the manner in which
this queſtion was aſked, that endeavours had been
uſed to perſuade this Prince, that Henry, ſince his
late indiſpoſition, could not live long ; that he had

* JJ. xxx -. + _

x given credit to it; and that this opinion would be
t the moſt powerful motive to prevent his union with
r France, as he could have but little dependence upon
f a minor king. I endeavoured therefore to unde-
0 ceive him, in regard to all theſe falſe reports, and
ſacceeded. But he further ſaid, that he had been
r told one thing in regard to Henry, for which he
& was extremely ſorry; and this was, that his phyſi-
8 cians had forbid him the chace. To this J replied,
n that ſuch advice was, perhaps, what he himſelf
MW would do well to purſue. In reality, James had
t but lately narrowly eſcaped breaking his arm at the
. MW chace, the manner of which accident he had related
1] WM tome.
i When I acquainted Henry with this part of our

converſation, he, in his anſwer, ordered me to tell
the King of England, that, in purſuance to the ad-
vice of his phyſicians, he was more moderate in his
hunting than he uſed to be, and that ſince my de-
parture he had been at the death of five or fix ſtags
without the leaſt inconvenience, © Well,” ſaid the
King of England to me, till continuing the ſame
ſubject, “ I underſtand you have ſent part of the

in produce of my ſport to Count d'Atemberg ; and
im bow do you think he received it? I aſſure you,
nis it was not at all agrecable to him. He ſays, you
ch * ſent it only to ſhew that you was more regarded
na * than he; and he is in the right, for 1 will ſurely
* make ſome difference between my good brother
nd Wl © the King of France, and his maſters, who have
(Ci WW Vol. III. 14 « ſcent

434 M E M O IR Ss Book Xv.

ce ſent me an ambaſſador who can neither walk
« nor talk; he demanded an audience of me in
« a garden, becauſe he could not walk up ſtairs into
ce a room.” ſames then aſked me, whether the
Spaniſh ambaſſador, who had been ſent to him, had
paſſed through France? and upon my replying that
he had, “ Spain,” ſaid he, “ ſends me an ambaſſa-
« dor poſt, that he may arrive the {5oner, and finiſh
« our affairs in poſt-haſte.” Thus, upon every oc-
caſion he inveighed againgſt the Spaniards. Taxis,
courier-major to his Catholic Majeſty, had, in effect,
taken his rout through France into Flanders, from
thence to repair to London; and this journey he
had performed with great expedition, though his
orders extended no further, than merely to diſcover
the intentions of the King of England. The real
ambaſſador was Valaſco, Conſtable of Caſtile, who
ſoon followed him. |

After all this, James aſked me, (for he did not
dwell long upon one ſubject), whether I went to the
Proteſtant church in London? Upon my replying
that I did: Then,” ſaid he,“ you are not reſolved,
as Ihavebeen informed, to quit our religion, after
« the example of Sancy, who thought by that con-
& deſcenſion to make his fortune; but, by God's
ce providence, did juſt the contrary.” I treated this
report as a calumny, and ſaid, that my living in
France in friendſhip with ſo many eccleſiaſtics, and

being ſo frequently viſited by the Pope's nuncio, ,

might perhaps have given riſe to it. Do you
c give the Pope the title of Holineſs ?” ſaid James.

I replied, That, to conform to the cuſtom eſta-
* bliſhed in France, I did.“ He was then for pro-

ving to me, that this cuſtom was an offence againſt

God, to whom alone this title could juſtly belong.-

I replied, that I ſuppoſed that a greater crime was

not hereby committed, than by the frequent giving f

to princes ſuch titles as they were well known not
to

i a

= 5 — —- — = — my ay go — ws wy

- Bo £A A-MH- 4 EN S- , H.S)-

.

mente. 135

to deſerve. He ſpoke to me of Du-Pleſſis, and ap-
peared ſomewhat concerned for his fortune and pre-
ſent condition, He ſaid, that I ought not entirely
| to forget him ; that it was true, he had been greatly
| to blame, to publiſh his laſt book under his own
name; becauſe, by the titles which he therein gave
himſelf, he obliged the King of France to take no-
tice of it ; but that this ought not to obliterate the
remembrance of the ſervices which he had done to

the Proteſtant religion. He ſaid not a word to me,
, either of Holland or the Duke of Bouillon; but he
: bighly approved Henry's chaſtiſement of the Duke
: of Savoy, who was, he ſaid, an ambitious and tur-
g bulent man.

d I think I have omitted nothing of any conſe-
| quence of what was ſaid to me by the King of Eng-
: land, in this my firſt audience. When he was in-
| clined to put an end to it, he entered into his cabi -
1 net, ſay ing, it would be time for me to go to ſupper,
and to my repoſe. Upon my coming out of the

chamber, I was accoſted by Admiral Howard, Lord
Mountjoy, and Stafford, and the Lord High Cham-
berlain. Erſkine, in conducting me crols the court
of the palace, ſpoke to me of his attachment to his
Moſt Chriſtian Majeſty, and his deſire of being
ranked amongſt the number of my friends. The
Farl of Northumberland, who had received me at
my landing, and who again attended me to the river
upon my departure, ſaid pretty near the fame to me.
No one amongſt the Engliſh lords has more under-
ſtanding, capacy, courage, nor poſſeſſed more au-
thority than he. He manifeſted a great deſire to
have a private converſation with me upon the pre-
ſent ſtate of affairs, I gathered from what he ſaid,
though he did not ſpeak in plain terms, that he was
not ſatisfied with the government; that he blamed
tte greateſt part of the King's actions; in ſhort, to
ſay it in a word, that he had no great ſhare either of
M 2 fidelity

136 M E MO I R 8. Book XV,

fidelity or eſteem for James. It is not neceſſary to
ſay with what reſerve and circumſpection J liſtened
to ſuch diſcourſe.

The open declaration which the King of England
had made againſt Spain, had given me ſome hopes,
that the court of London would be inſenſibly preju-
diced againſt that, court. In the interval between
my firlt and ſecond audience, ſeveral things hap.
pened which increaſed theſe hopes. An Engliſh Ca-
tholic, who wa» likewiſe a Jeſuit, (as was at firſt re+
ported), was ſeized in the habit of a poor traveller,
and being queſtioned, he confeſſed that he had dil-
guiſed bhimſelf in this manner, to deliver the Catho-

lic church from the oppreſſion of the new King of

England, unleſs he re-eſtabliſhed the Romiſh reli.

gion in his dominions ſolely, or, at leaſt, with privi- |
leges equal to thoſe enjoyed by the Proteſtants; and |
. unleſs he likewiſe declared himſelf againſt the Pro-
teſtants of Holland; that eight other Jeſuits had
conſpired with him in this deſign, and that they had
actually diſperſed themſelves in different parts of
London, in order to embrace any opportunity that i
might offer to deſtroy this Prince. But the report
was falle, in regard to the perſon of this ſuſpected 3
Engliſhman, for he was not a Jeſuit *, but only a
ſeminary prieſt. Had the truth of all the other cir-
cumſtances been equally well diſcovered, probably
the whole affair would have been reduced almoſt to
nothing; but this was not done. James, accoid-
ing to his character, taking umbrage immediately,
imagined that the reaſon Count d' Aremberg deferred 3
demanding bis audience, was not on account of bis
indiſpoſition, which was diſſembled, and that he
only waited till the ſuppoled conſpirators had ac-
compliſhed their deſign, or at leaſt till by their in-

* M. de Thov, no more than M, de Sully, charges the Jeſvits 4
with having any concern in this conipiracy, which is the ſame that

1.

will be mentioned below.

trigues

4
”

J AT __wCQow-hu.ocyc. REES RIES

—

1603. O F rk. 137

trigues in the kingdom they had occaſioned a re-
volution, which would have releaſed him from his
obligations to wait on the King at court.

g It is inconceivable to what a length this frivolous
ſuſpicion was carried. The Queen was at the fame

*

time coming to London. This, ſaid they, was to
1 favour the Spaniſh faction, which ſo diſturbed James
. that he immediately ſent the Earl of Lennox ex-
p preſsly to forbid that Princeſs to continue her jour-
. ney. But whether the Earl could not, or whether
. he rather choſe not to ſucceed in his commiſſion, the
Queen did not obey. Lennox was recalled, and the
King remained only the more perplexed. After his
' W cxample, his miniſters, courtiers, and particularly
i- WH the old court being prejudiced in favour of the
i- W mwaxinms of the preceding reign, began to ſhew them-
d Wl ſelves greatly diſguſted both with the Queen and
)- WH with Spain. They called to mind the conduct and
d policy of Eliſabeth, who had lived in a perpetual
id miſtruſt of the court of Madrid; and now they la-
0: WM viſhed upon her thoſe praiſes of which they had
at been before ſo ſparing, and ſeemed diſpleaſed with
* WW themſelves at the indifference they had thewn to her
ec

memory : nor muſt I forget that it was not without
doing violence to mylelf, that I refrained following
ſuch a general example.

I believe the Spaniſh faction all this time was in
no little pain. For inſtead of talking, as before, on-
ly of peace and nevtrality with all the world, no-

ly, WY thing was now more common than to hear it ſaid,
05 that fo far from having any dependence on what
is i

Spain called her friendthip and alliance, it was not

he even ſafe to contract with her; that the aibaiſidor
ace of this court had not dared io preſent himſelf in
in- London, and that moſt certainly he could not come
Pr thither, for fear of becoming the object, and per-
that WY haps the victim, of the public indignation, Ihe

conduct of his Catholic Majeſty was compared wich
M 3 that

133 MEMOIR $ Book XV.

that of his moſt Chriſtian Majeſty. Henry's proce-
dure appeared ſo open and irgenuous, and fo far
from all deceit, that it carried conviction with it.
He, ſaid they, would ncver have ſent into England
the man who, of all others in his kingdom, was
moſt neceſſary to him, to . machinate a deceit un-
worthy of them both; nor would I myſelf, in quit-
ting the court, have thereby left an open field to the
malignity of my enemies, only to come and act one
of thoſe characters, whoſe concluſion is generally
that of beholding one's ſelf at once both diſhonour-
ed and facrificed to the public indignation. In ſhort,

if an union between the two crowns, which I pro-
poſed, was not in all reſpects the beſt conduct that |
they could purſue, it was at leaft the fafeſt; for
what would Spain be able to do, when the two con- |
federate kings ſhould conſider all dangers which |

might happen to either, as equally common to both?

It was thus that they ſometimes reaſoned in the
council, and in the preſence of the King of Eng- |
land, very much to the ſatisfaction of thoſe coun-

ſellors who were in our intereſts, and who neglected

no opportunity of gaining the Prince to their party.
My Lord Mountjoy, whom I had made my intimate
friend, on account of the almoſt public profeſlon
which he made of attachment to France, here uſed }

his utmoſt intereſt and endeavours.

But all this only diffipated part of my fears;
perceived ſo many other obſtacles, that they almoſt
entirely diſcouraged me; what I might expect from
the Queen only ſcarce appeared ſurmountable. My
apprehenſions from Secretary Cecil, wete but little
inferior to thoſe from the Queen. He was at this

time ſeparated from his former friends, and had u-
nited with the Scots. I endeavoured to penetrate
into the real motives of this ſeparation; for I was i
ſtrongly perſuaded of the inſincerity of this ſubtle I

"Y

- miniſter's proceedings. Perhaps his hopes mg 4
| =

x

= My my wy my ou p< 0 — my mn pp wy 0» ow

*

0 D 1 E--1 139

be in time to become head of the Scotch party, and
afterwards to unite it with the Engliſh, whom he
might have abandoned only in appearance ; but
theſe Scotch Lords were ſo difficult to manage, and
ſo much upon their guard againſt the Engliſh, that
he could not but be baffled notwithſtanding all his
efforts; and he was himſelf too penetrating not to
be perfectly ſenſible of it. Accordingly it was ſ:id
(and when I became acquainted with the arts of this
miniſter I was myſelf of the ſame opinion) that he
had ſought the Scots, who were real confidents and
favourites of his Majeſty, only to make himſelf
known, and render himſelf neceſſary to this Prince;
that having ſucceeded thus far, he knew perfectly
well how to center all power in himſelf, and, ma-
king uſe of the King's name and authority, would
ſilence the Queen, the Engliſh, and even the Scots
themſelves, or at leaſt would leave to thoſe he ſhould
judge proper only ſome faint ſhadow of favour, and
would then reaſſume his real character. And what
is moſt remarkable, it was not unlikely that this
ſubtile man was himſelf the dupe of the-Scots, who
pretended to be fuch to him. For is it poſſible that
Cecil, known in England by every one to be the
moſt ambitious and moſt tenacious of power of all
men, ſhould remain unknown only to them? But
no doubt they all knew that the Prince's ear was not
alone ſufficient to maintain them at the head of af.
fairs, with which they were not in the leaſt ac-
quainted, and of which the Secretary only could
give them the beſt information.

Suppoſing alſo that the Scottiſh party was un»
doubtedly firm in the intereſts of France, there ſtill
remained a material doubt, whether fo haughty a
people as the Englith would ſubmit to be governed
by foreigners, and more cſpecially dy the scotch,
who at all times had been the object of their aver»
lion, And beſides, it was far from being *
| al,

@

« 0
— — —— — —

— a | —_— — 1 — 2-
— . — ws — — — — - =
OE I oo Aer SEE ea

== « — —
— — <4
— - —

: *
.
me
14s

x

140 ME M O I R S Book XV.

that the Scotch would always continue to poſſeſs the
King's favour. For the regard which he alteady be-

gan to ſhow to the Earl of Eſſex, Southampton, and

my Lord Mountjoy, plainly proved that they might
eaſily loſ@their influence. Laſtly, to increaſe this
unpromiſing aſpect, the two kings of Sweden and
Denmark, whoſe repreſentations might have been
of great weight in determining this Prince, and who
had hitherto been ſo unanimous with Henry, that
they had concurred in all his deſigns, now either
did it not at all, -or did it with ſuch indifference,
that their example was far from inſpiring a proper
reſolution. In the frequent conferences which 1
had with their ambaſſadors, in preſence of the Earl

of Mar, Lord Mountjoy, and Erſkine, who was
_ Preſent three times, as being a common friend, they
made me the faireſt ſpeeches imaginable; their aver-

ſion for Spain appeared equal to mine; they even

proceeded ſo far as to draw up a kind of ſcheme,
whereby they ratified whatever Henry might do for
all of them, even in regard to the diviſion of con-
queſts, which they agreed might eaſily be per form-
ed by means of a firm and durable union. But our
conference being ended, they no longer remembered
any of their promiſes, and ſaw nothing but obſtacles,
in regard to which in my prelence they had kept a
profound ſilence. A ſtrange behaviour this! from
whence, however, 1 diſcovered, in ſome meaſute,
with what fort of men I had to deal.

My Lord Mountjoy told me one day in conk-
dence, that he had been preſent at a meeting of
theſe ambaſſadurs, wherein only thoſe of his Maje-
ſty's council and the States deputies were admitted;
that here, inſtead of labouring mutually to ſtrengthen
themſelves in laudable reſolutions, each of them had
only ſought to extricate hini{clf out of the affair.
He gave me an account of their deliberations. 1 he
Daniſh deputy repreſented, that indeed bis maſter

; poſleſſed

160g. O F.: 8 UV L L I. I41

| poſſeſſed a great extent of territory, but for the moſt
| part barren, and, By the inconveniency of its ſitua-
tion, rather expenſive than profitable; that the ſub-

| miſſion and tractableneſs of the people was an ad-
| vantage of no uſe to the King his maſter; becauſe,
from the prodigious variation of their manners and

FF cuſtoms, he could neither underſtand them, nor could
they underſtand one another ; and that he was now
actually engaged in endeavours to eſtabliſh a general

and uniform regulation among them, which did not
permit him to be concerned in any other enterpriſe.

Phe Swede ſaid, it would be highly imprudent for

his maſter to engage in a foreign war; becaule his
nephew the King of Poland, had not yet forgot his
pretenſions to the crown of Sweden, but, on the
contrary, ſeemed diſpoſed to renew them with more

vigour than ever; fo that the preſervation of his

own dominions might probably find him ſufficient _

employment. Barnevelt, in the name of the reſt of

his brethren, explained himſelf in a manner ſo dif-

ferent from his uſual complaints, that, I confeſs, I

am at a loſs to conceive what could be the intention

of ſo ſtrange a procedure. He ſpoke of Spain only

with contempt. In the revolt of the Spaniards,

and the forces of the States, he found reſources
ſuthcient to preſerve them from all oppreſſion. He
ſeemed no longer to deſpair of the ſucceſs of Oſtend

as formerly, and intimated that his malters had
conceived a deſign which would do more than in-
demnify them for that loſs, ſuppoſing it ſhould hap-

pen. "The Engliſh miniſters, taking their text from

a ſaying of the King of England, That every new

King, if he had the ſmalleſt degree of good con»

duct, ought at leaſt to let a year and a day paſs be-
fore he made any innovation, though of the ſmalleſt
conſequence, concluded unanimouſly, that it would

be moſt prudent to wait; and they remained firm

to this determination. If we conſider theſe Northern
geniuſes

142 M E M OI R S Book Xv.

geniuſes o with ſome little attention, we ſhall per-
ceive they conſtantly preſerve ſome affinity with
the nature of their climate. They have but little
vigour of thought, few reſources in their imagina«
tion, little conſtancy in their reſolutions, and not the
leaſt tincture of good policy. The example of Eli.
fabeth is an exception to this rule, and is fo much
the more glorious to that great Queen.

I now only wanted to be as well acquainted with
the Spaniſh councils, as I was with thoſe of Britain
and the North; or, in other words, I wanted only
to know what were the real deſigns of that crown,
what propoſitions ſhe had already made to the King
of England, how they had been received, and finally
what ſteps ſhe intended to take for the accompliſh-
ment of her deſires; for barely to underſtand that
the King of Spain ſought to detach England from
France and the Low Countries, was knowing no-
thing, or at moſt but very little. It was ſuſpected
that Spain meditated ſomething of much greater
importance; this might be conjectured from the in-
formation which I bad already received from the
canon at Canterbury; and it appeared ſo much the
leſs to be neglected, becauſe Aërſens and Barnevelt
both at the ſame time affirmed the certainty of it,
the one at Paris, the other at London. I thercfore .
vſed my utmoſt endeavours to come at the truth, Þ
What I was told by my Lord Cobham and Sir Wal-
ter Raleigh was conformable to this information.
But what made the greateſt impreſſion upon me,
was, that the Farl of Northumberland, whom I had
gained by the offer of a conſiderable penſion, under
the name of a preſent, with great ſecreſy one night
when I was going to bed, ſent his ſecretary to ac-
quaint me with the following particulars,

„ Sin.  Wud. f_d and aw an. oo. as ac 6

— py —

Ihe times are changed; and I do not doubt if the author had
lived in our days, but he would have done juſtice to the wildom and
policy of ſome of the-Northern powers, |

| From

0 e. 143

From the moment King James aſcended the
throne of England, ſaid this ſecretary, the King of
Spain has not ceaſed to ſolicit him, either by his
own agents, or thoſe of the Archduke, or by the
Engliſh Catholics, to enter into an offenſive and de-
fenſive alliance with him, againſt France and the
United-Provinces, whom he calls their common
enemies. He has omitted nothing which might
perſuade him that both of them, but more eſpecial-
ly that his Britannic Majeſty, had a title ſo clear
and inconteſtable to ſeveral provinces in France,
that it would be ſhameful in him not to make uſe
of it, at a time when the exhauſted condition of
that kingdom preſented ſo fair an opportunity. The
means propoled by Spain to ſecure the ſucceſs of
this enterpriſe, were, that James and his Catholic
Majeſty ſhould, at the ſame time, demand of France
the reſtitution of Normandy, Guienne, and Poitou,
for the King of England ; Britanny and Burgundy,

SY . . x A. ON ow

1

: for the King of Spain; and, upon a refuſal, to fall

upon theſe provinces with all their united forces.
a His Catholic Majeſty for this purpoſe, has even of-
p fered to draw all his forces out of the Low Coun-
1 tries; moreover to renounce all his pretenſions up-
on the United Provinces, and grant them that liber-
2 ty which they ſo ardently deſire; upon a ſuppoſi-

tion, however, that, in conſideration of this favour,
they would conſent to ſtrengthen the league by
joining it, and by concurring in all their deſigns.
The King of England having made no anſwer to
all theſe great offers, farther than by ſaying, that
they were premature, and that he choſe to begin
bis reign by gaining a knowledge of all his new ſub-
ect, and by ſtrengthening himſelf upon the throne,
Spain eaſily perceived that this reply was a civil re-
fuſal. And James not being diſpoſed by open force
s attempt the recovery of his ancient poſſeſſions,
Pain then turned her endeavours to perſuade this
3 piince,

Err as n CY EL Dn na "IE ** . eden Dan... tet tc T dt On ;
a». * * R 1 . 12 Cad = PE" g "IM 5 . 1 2 1 3 *
ah 5 \

144 M E MOIR S Book Nx. lll;

rince, at leaſt to favour the French provinces in n
their deſign (of which ſhe informed him) to erett f
themſelves, after the example of Switzerland, into n
an independent republic. All this has been repre- f
ſented to James to be extremely eaſy to effect. It f
has been ſaid, theſe provinces impatiently waited a fi
favourable opportunity to ſhake off their inſupport- c:
able yoke. The Spaniſh emiſſaries, ſeconding p
theſe diſpoſitions, have every where reported, that la
it only depended on themſelves, whether they ti
would enjoy a profound tranquillity without taxes, e
ſubſidies, or military garrifons, under the protection b
of the two crowns their proteCtors, and that they h;
had no cauſe to apprehend either the reſentment of MM ti
Henry, or the violences of his troops; becauſe car: te
would be taken at the ſame time to involve him in MW &
ſo many other perplexities, that he would be under u
a neceſſity of ſuffering them to preſcribe their own WM cc

laws. We do not yet hear, added the ſecretary of u
the Farl of Northumberland, what James replied vc
to this ſecond propoſal. We conjecture that it was E

not more favourably received than the former, be- YM pr
| cauſe the Spaniſh emiſſaries, in their conferences Wl 2 «
| with his Britannic Majeſty, have ſeveral times been ¶ co
obliged to change their ſyſtem, or ſucceſſively to WM "it
repeat the ſame again with different modifications. WM ve
Some times they have offered him the whole force co

—— —y—y ny.

and all the treaſures of Spain, to uſe them againſt A
France in whatever manner he ſhould judge proper, be
without requiring any thing more in return, than Wl ge

that he ſhould conclude no treaty without their .
conſent, nor ſhould concern himſelf in any manner the
in their quarrel with Flanders. At other times, WM inc
they have deſcended only to deſire that he would WM to
give no aſſiſtance to the United Provinces, 322

| If the whole of what was here related to me was }
| true, fro 1 thence might be concluded that France, |
without knowing it, was actually in the moſt immi-

neut

, W wack of

— i

=, 1

1603 oF 3: U-L ET: 145

nent danger, becauſe a ſingle word of approbation
from King James would have drawn upon her a
moſt terrible ſtorm. But for my own part, I con-
feſs, that to me this appears ſo extravagant, and
ſo much beyond the bounds of probability, that
from whatever places it might come confirmed, I
cannot believe that Spain would ever think of pro-
poſing to King James any thing like the firſt propo-
ſals which are here related. Suppoling all diſficul-
ties were removed between Spain and England in
regard to the armament and the partition, which,
however, would be no inconſiderable diſcuſſion, yet
had they well conſidered how many other difficul-
ties would ariſe from a difference of religions, in-
tereſts, manners, and cuſtoms, both between them-
ſelves and with the French provinces which they
ſuppoſed in concert with them, that article which
concerns the United Provinces, alone deftroys the
whole of this project. If Spain began by endea-
rouring to ſubject them, this crown and that of
England, could not be ignorant that ſuch an enter—
priſe was alone capable to deſtroy, or at leaſt for
a conſiderable time to prevent the execution of their
common deſigns, becauſe France, being once con-
vinced that her own ſafety depended on the pre-
vention or retarding of this conqueſt, would have
conſidered aſſiſting the States as defending herſelf,
And if Spain propoſed to gain theſe provinces in
her intereſts, (he would herein have been more
groſsly deceived ; for no offer, not excepting even
that of liberty, would have been able to reconcile
them with their moſt mortal enemy, much leſs to
incline them to aſſiſt her in her conqueſts, and that
too againſt their ancient and only ally. 1 am not
ignorant of the manner in which the States depu—
ties have always thought. They upon all occaſions
have conſtantly ſaid that Spain deceived them, that
England trifled with them, and thac France alone

VoL, III. N Was

146 M E M OI X 8 Book XY,

was favourably diſpoſed towards them. And if
ſometimes they have talked in a different manner,
as in the conference above mentioned, it was ei-
ther to excite the French to make ſtill greater ef-
forts in their favour, or to inſpire the Engliſh with
the ſentiments of France in regard to them. Be-
ſides, will any one believe that Spain would volun.

tarily relinquiſh territories, of which ſhe had got

poſſeſſion?
In regard to the informations which Henry and
I received on this head, neither the canon of Can-

terbury nor Barnevelt, who with Aerſens muſt be

conſidered only as one, becaule the former received
his in formation from the latter, could be ſufficient»
ly depended upon. The firſt might have been de-
ccived, and the ſecond might have ſought to de-
ceive us, which deceit was not ineffectual in pro-

moting the ſucceſs of their affairs. In regard to

the three Engliſh Lords, I was ſo far from de-
pending upon what they ſaid, that, on the contrary,

I ſuſpected they were themſelves the ſole authors of |

Q

the whole ſcheme; that they had concerted it to-

gether, and then, with proper alterations, preſent-
ed it to the King of England, to me, to the States de-
puties, and to the public, thereby to appear as per-

ſons of conſequence ; which was quite ſuitable to ?

their characters. In regard to Spain, I made no
doubt but ſhe would be pleaſed to hear ſuch reports
ſpread, and even that ſhe would gladly uſe her en-

deavours to make them believed, not with any in-
tention ſeriouſly to confer with his Britannic Ma-
jeſty concerning them, nor even that they ſhould }
come to his ears, but only with deſign to increaſe

the diſcord, and augment the number of the ſeditious
in thoſe provinces of France which were intereſted

therein. It was in theſe terms that I wrote about
it to Henry, who ſometimes conſidered the whole

as an attifice of the States to accelerate a rupture
between

FR e = aw en ©

1603. O F „ 147

between him and Spain, and ſometimes believed it
true in regard to Spain, who, from a deſire to de-
ſtroy Henry, and a hope of profiting from the in-
experience of James, attempted every thing. I
told Henry, that, though all theſe ſchemes ought
to be treated only as chimerical, it would be pro-
per, nevertheleſs, to be attentive to whatever paſſed
in Poitou, Auvergne, the Limoſin, Pays d'Aunis,
in ſhort, through all Guienne, in which places they
were capable of producing the ſame bad effects as
tough they had been true.

The day after my audience, being the 23d of
june, and a day on which his Britiſh Majeſty con-
ferred the honour of knighthood on ſeveral perſons,
he ſent to acquaint me, that he would grant me a
ſecond audience the day on which I mylclf had de-
fired it, being Wedneſday the 25th; that I ſhould
be with him at two o' clock, and bring but few per-
ſons with me, in order to prevent the inconvenien-
cies cauſed by great numbers, and, ſaid he, that I may
confer with you alone with greater freedom. Up-
on this occaſion, I was accompanied from London
to Greenwich by my Lord Hume, who, in France,
had had the honour of ſeeing and diſcourſing with
his Moſt Chriſtian Majeſty, I took ſome refreſh-
ment in the apartment into which I was conducted
to wait till I could be introduced to the King. And
here I was accoſted by little Edmonds *, who made
me a long ſpeech, in which he complained, that he
was not treated ſo well as his paſt ſervices, and his
knowledge of the affairs of France, deſerved. The
Earl of Northumberland put an end to our conver-
ſation, by coming to require my appearance in the
King's apartment.

Edmonds had been agent, and afterwards ambaſſador from Eli-
ſabeth to Henry IV. during the wars ot the league; and he had rc#l-
ly acquired a perfect knowledge of the affairs of France.

1 | Immediately

*
22 — r n TIER.

. = ol ——
— —— l

TFT... ˙ m Ü rear In—_—

1438 M E MOI RS Book Rv.

Immediately upon my entrance this Prince aroſe;
and having commanded that no one ſhould follow
him, he conducted me through ſeveral apartments
into a little ordinary gallery, wherein we held our
conference. I began it by thanking his Majeſty for
having thus given me an opportunity to diſcloſe my.
ſelf to him on the ſubject of my commiſſion, with-
out reſerve and without witneſſes : “ Not,“ ſaid I,
„that the King my maſter has ſent me to require
« any thing of your Majeſty, but only to be in-
« formed of your intentions in regard to affairs

« wherein your Majeſties may both be equally con-

« cerned, and that the King my maſter may con-
« form to them, as a good brother.” The King
of England replied, That the manner in which he
plainly ſaw the King of France and I acted with
reſpect to him, required that he ſhould not conceal
any thipg from me; and that he would therefore

diſcover to me his moſt important ſecrets. He then, |

in a few words, pretty juitly deſcribed the preſent
political affairs of Europe ; “ in which” ſaid he “it
« js neceſſary to preſerve an equilibrium between

« three of its powers,” meaning the houſes of
Bourbon, Auſtria, and Stewart. He ſaid, that of |
theſe three powers, the houſe of Auſtiia in Spain,

from the ſpirit of dominion with which ſhe was
poſſeſſed, was the only one who ſought to make

the balance incline in her favour. That a know- |

ledge of this unjuſt deſign was the cauſe that the
King of France and he, though in appearance in

eace with that crown, were, however, really |
thought ſecretly at war with her. That Spain was
not ignorant of it; but that ſhe could not com-
plain, ſhe having herſelf fet them the fi: ſt example;

10 Henry, by her combination with Marechal Biron

and the diſaffected in France, by the ſuccours (he |
had given the Duke of Savoy, when at war with |
his Moft Chriſtian Majeſty, by the enterpriſe upon

Genev2, |

1603. rer. 149

Geneva, finally, by ſeveral other proccedings of
the like nature ; to him, by inſtigating and encou-
raging the Jeſuits and the Englith Catholic faction.
From hence it appears, that the affair of the Jeſuit
had gained but too much credit with James. But
that all this could, by neither fide, be conſidered
as ſufficient cauſe for an open war ; and, as they
were upon equal terms, it would therefore be beſt
to avoid it, by continuing, as before, fecretly to
favour the enemies of Spain, though with a reſo-
lution to purſue more vigorous and effectual mea-
fures, in caſe Spain ſhould herſelf reſolve upon any
open rupture,

I very highly applauded ſuch Jandable fentiments,
and indeed they really deſerved it, Nor could 7
have ſaid any thing further on the ſubject, had 7
not, at the ſame time, perceived in the perſon from
whom they came a diſpoſition to peace, or rathec
to indolence and inaction, which in a manner con—
tradicted his words, and ſeemed to tell me, that,
having promiſed a little, he would perform nothing.
This obſervation induced me to tell his Britannic
Majeſty, that the plan of conduct which he had
laid down to be purſued with Spain, was exactly
conformable to the ſentiments of his Chriſtian Ma-
jeſly ; and that Henry only feared it would be in-
ſufficient to prevent their one day feeling the fatal
effects of the reſcatment of that crown, whoſe cha-
rater, upon this occaſion, I endeavoured to paint
to him in the moſt natural colours. I repreſented
to James every thing that Spain had been accumu-»
lating for one hundred years paſt ; the ear doms of
Flanders and Burgyndy, the kingdoms of Granada,
Navarre, and Portugal, the empire of Germany, the
ſtates of Naples and Milan, all the Indies, and, but
for niere good fortune, France and England alſo,
both thele crowns owing their preſervation, next
to the firmneſs of Eliſabeth. and Henry, only to the

N 3 lucky

—

150 MEMOIR S Book Xv.

lucky incident of the revolt of the Low Countries;
and I concluded, that as both James and Henry
would one day be indiſpenſably obliged to enter in-
to an pen war with Spain, in order to ſap the
foundation of ſo vaſt a dominion, it was therefore
abſolutely eceſſary now to concert the proper
meaſures for it, that no ſtep might be taken to the
contraty : and that this, together with the means
whereby the preſervation of the United Provinces
might be proviſionally ſecured, was all that I had
to deſire of his Majeſty. © But,” ſaid the King of
England, © what better aſſiſtance would you that
« the King of France and I ſhuuld give the Low
& Countries, than to comprehend them with us in
«& a general treaty of partition and pacification be-
ce tween them and Spain, upon conditions of which
& we ſhall! ourſelves be guarantees? whereby ſhould
% Spain firſt fail in the obſervation of them, we
& ſhall then have juſt reaſon to take arms againſt
ec her, and drive her entirely out of thele provinces,

e And I conſent,” added he,“ upon a ſuppoſition -

& that this will be the caſe, immediately to deter-
c mine with you, what means and what forces we
« ſhall employ for the execution of it.” James
was not ſenſible of all the objections to this parti-
tion treaty which he propoſed between Spain ard
the Low Countries; or if he was, he artfully en-
deavoured to avoid entering into any engagement
with me. The council cf Spain would not have
failed to appear ſatisfied with what he propoſed ;
but during the delays whick negotiating this treaty
would produce, eſpecially with a court whoſe di-
latorineſs was one of the chief arts of her policy,
Oſtend, which was reduced to extreinity, would
fall into the power of its enemy, and with it a part
of Flanders, Holland and Zealand being ſeparated
from it; and Spain would, in the mean time,
ſtrengthen he:!e!f in what me did poſſeſs, mm

woul

r . , / d / ðᷣ

2 © — mg — —

1663. 0 F U I517

would be preparing the means for ſucceeding more
effectually in her deſign of ſubjeCting the reſt of this
ſtate.

I defired his Britannic Majeſty to beſtow ſome
ſerious reflection upon the conſiderations which I
had thus laid before him. He remained for ſome
time in filence, and ſeemed deeply immerſed in
thought; after which, in a heſitating and irrefolute
voice, he ſaid, that it muſt be confeſſed I was in
the right ; that the affair was of great conſequence z
that he had often thought of it, though his reflec-
tions had not as yet produced any effect; and that
he had waited my coming, to determine him in his
reſolution. At this moment, I penetrated into all
that this prince refuſed to tell me; and I thought I
ought without beſitation to attack him in his in-
moſt receſſes. I therefore replied rather to his
thoughts than his words; ard ſaid, that as often as
this affair had been debated in his Majeſty's council,
and as often as he had heard his miniſters utter ſen-
timents different from mine, his Majeſty might
cally have been convinced, that they did it only
from ſome motives of ſelf intereſt, becauſe there
was not the leaſt room for doubt. That one ſingle
examination would demonſtrate, as evidently as a
million, that it was indiſpenſably neceſſary to pre-
vent the reſt of the Low Countries from falling un-
der the dominion of Spain, becauſe, were ſhe to
ſucceed in this, ſhe might, with the ſame forces,
fall very roughly, and without ceremony, upon
France and England. Upon this occalion,, with»
out expuling theſe Englith countcllors ſo much as I
could, by a diſcovery of part of their intrigues, I
lo far acquainted the King of England with them,
as to make bim ſcnlible that 1 was not ignorant
that they had endeavoured to make him tun thoſe
forces againſt France which I wanted to perſuade
bim to employ againſt Spain,

James

152 M E M OI R 8 Book Xv.

James entered of himſelf into the ſentiments with
which I wanted to inſpire him with reſpect to his
council. He told me, that he was very far from
being of the ſame opinion with ſome of his cour—
tiers, in what concerned the ancient pretenſions of
England upon France ; and beſides that the preſent

conjuncture, and political ſtate of affairs, did not

permit him to think feriouſly about them, he alſo
conſidered theſe pretended rights as annulled by di-
vine providence, which irreſiſtibly gives and takes
away crowns ; and by time, whoſe preſcription was
more than centenary ;z which words he repeated
ſeveral times That this conſideration being of no
weight with him, he could therefore previouſly aſ-
ſure me, that whatever his final reſolution might
be, at leaſt he would not ſuffer the United Pro-
vinces, nor even Oftend, to come under the domi-
nion of the Spaniards. That, for the preſent, 1
ought not to require any thing farther of bim, nor
preſs him to a concluſion, till he had firſt conferred
with two or three of his miniſters, of whole know-
ledge, as well as honeſty, he was well convinced.
That beſides, from the refleftions which J had
ſuggeſted to him, he was now able to diſtinguiſh
and reſiſt the voice of paſſion and prejudice. And,
laſtly, that he would in a ſhort time acquaint me
with what might be farther neceſſary for me to
know, in regard to his ſentiments and final reſo-
lution. |

I ſhould be very glad not to have concluded
our conference on this head ſo ſoon ; but James
broke it off, by ſaying, that he ſhould finiſh the re-
mainder of it another time, becauſe he wanted now
to have ſome converſation with me cuncerning the
Duke of Bouillon. He informed me, that the de-
put ies of the EleQor Palatine had ſtrongly ſolicited
him in favour of the Duke : but that, not being
perfectly well acquainted with the affair, he * re

ule

a ea eas R Gw=s B59 oy -a.T

1603. O F 8. 153

fuſed to concern himſelf in it at all, through fear,
Jeſt he ſhould favour a rebel. He deſired me to re-
late to him all the circumſtances of it; which I
accordingly did very ſuceinctly; fo that he had the
whole affair before him. James gave me his word,
that, however he might be ſolicited by the Palatine,
he would never concern himſelf in it ; and faid, he
wiſhed others would meddle as little in the affairs
of the Engliſh Catholics. I readily apprehended,
by the manner in which he uttered theſe laſt words,
that they were meant as a kind of reproach.

In order to underſtand what is here meant, it is
neceſſary to be informed, that ſome time before
the death of Eliſabeth, the partiſans of Spain, ha-
ving, as uſual, the Jeſuits at their head, had raiſed
diſturbances in the three kingdoms of Great Britain.
Though religion was their pretence, their real views
were political, either becauſe the King of Spain, as
his flatterers had perſuaded him, really believed his
lights to the crown of England were ſo well found.
ed, that, after the death of the Queen, he might
openly declare his pretenſions, or becauſe he ſought
to involve the ſucceſſor of Eliſabeth in ſuch trou-
bles as might prevent his engaging in any thing
elſe. The Jeſuits, upon this occalion, very impru-
dently, it ſhould ſeem, had differed with the Eng-
liſh Catholic ſecular clergy. This was chicfly occa-
ſioned by their endeavouring to create a certain
arch prieſt *, which the Engliſh Catholics would not
allow. The affair was brought before the Pope,
who, upon this occaſion, for reaſons of which Iam

* Cardinal d'Oſſat, in his letter of the 28th of May 1601, to M.
de Villeroi, ſays, that, at the ſuggeſtion of an Engliſh Jeſuit, whoſe
name was Father Perſonio, (or Parſons), rector of the Engliſh college
at Rome, and devoted io the King of Spain, if he was ſo to any, the
Pope created in England a certain arch prieſt, to whofe authority all
the eecleſiaſtics, and even all the other Catholics of England, were
to be ſubjet, By this means, adds he, it was propoſed to have the
Featex part of the Catholics of Ergland under the Pope's influence.

ignorant,

154 M E M OI R S. Book XY.

ignorant, neither concurred with thoſe Jeſuits, nor
with Spain, but, on the contrary, liſtened very fa.
vourably to the ſecular clergy, who had deputed
three of their body to Rome, having a paſſport un.
der Cecil's own hand. This is a proof that Elifa.
beth thought ſhe ought to defend the ſeculars; aud
allo, that (he looked upon the others as her real e-
nemies. Henry had been of the ſame opinion with
Eliſabeth, and the common intereſt had from the
firſt determined him to ſupport the Engliſh clergy
at the court of Rome againſt the Spaniſh cabal.
From hence it was that the enemies of France had
taken occaſion to prejudice James againſt us“, by
inſinuating to him, that Henry had ſupported the
Engliſh clergy only with deſign to gain them to
his own intereſts, and that from the ſame views that
Spain had done. It was not difhcult for me to un-
deceive the King of England in this reſpect. re- |
- preſented to him, that Henry having conſidered, }
that to prevent the whole body of the Catholics of
Britain from entering into the Spaniſh intereſts, 1
was a point of the utmoſt conſequence; he had
therefore been indiſpenſably obliged to appear in
their favour upon ſeveral occaſions ; but that he had
been ſo far from having had any thoughts of enter-
ing with them into any deſign prejudicial to his au- ?
thority, that, on the contrary, his ſole intention
had been to oppoſe this common enemy; and that
had the Catholics departed in the leaſt from their

5 Rm I ot RV £S- awd ? .f wm od a oo. ic. ac cc ac

+ — —
— — ©sy

The King of England cannot be conſidered as blameable for
having taken umbrage againſt France upon that account. The ſawe
Cardinal gives us to underſtand, that the political views of the Spi- 3
niſh party were, by this means, to unite the Pope, the King of
France, the King of Spain, and the Engliſh Catholics, to place a Ca-
tholic King upon the throne of England. But it is likewiſe true, that
Henry IV. was not only ignorant of this deſign, but alſo that he had ll ©
acquieſced with Eliſabeth in quite different purpoſes, This fact is
related in the Septennaize, an. 1604. :

duty,

2 1603. O F SUL L . 155

IT duty, or even appeared ſo to do, he would from
a. that moment have abandoned them.
d James was ſo fully ſatisfied with this account,
1+ TW that he acquainted me with the regulations which
a- he meditated in regard to the Roman Catholics of
d bis kingdom; “ from your information,“ ſaid he,
e « and with the approbation of Henry.” He had
th afterwards ſeveral opportunities of being convinced
he that I had not impoſed on him, particularly by a
py letter which the Pope's nuncio wrote to him from
Paris, relating to the Engliſh Catholics. - James an-
ad ſwered this letter in a more obliging manner than
by uſually the court of London did letters received
he from the court of Rome; and being perhaps de-
to termined by my reaſons, he not only entered into

the ſame views in regard to this affair which good
policy had ſuggeſted to Henry, but it allo ſeemed
probable, that, to ſecure the Engliſh Catholic party,
he would chuſe rather to have recourſe to the Pope
and his miniſters than to any foreign prince. The
Pope, on his ſide, did not ſhew himſelf inſenſible of
this preference . One Colvil having dedicated a
book to him which he had wrote againſt that prince,
when only King of Scotland, his Holineſs would
neither receive the work, nor permit the author to
ſtay in Rome, Henry had acquainted me with this
circumſtance, that I might, if I thought proper, re-
late it to the King of England ; and Henry had been
informed of it in the letters which my brother wrote
to him from Rome.

Upon my departure, at the concluſion of this my

* We muſt believe cither that his Holineſs had no concern in the
political deſign which I mentioned in the preceding note, as related
by Cardinal D'Oſſat; or that, perceiving it had miſcarried, he had
conceived that of gaining, if it were poſſible, the King of England,
who had at firſt ſhewn himſelf fo favourably diſpoſed to the Catho-
lics, that it was reported he would become one himſelf; and that
de had only pretended to be of the Reformed religion, in order to
iſcend the throne without oppoſition,

ſecond

— — —— õr 2 ü - —

4

:
R =
:
|

:

0 al

-

15s MEMOIR Ss Bock Xv.

ſecond audience, I was informed that this Prince MW
was to ſet out the Monday following to meet the 1
Queen; and I judged, that the audience which his Ne
Majeſty promiſed to grant me on Sunday the 29th, 1
would, on this account, probably be the laſt I hould Y (
obtain. And as I was afraid I ſhould not be able to MY 1
conclude my negotiation in one more, I deter- Y c
mined to demand another of him before that on It
Sunday. James replied, that he could not grant 0
this requeſt, all his time being abſolutely engaged o
till Sunday; but that he would ſend his miniſters
on Friday the 27th, to confer with me and prepare In
matters. ti
Accordingly, on Friday, at three o' clock in the Yk
afternoon, there came to me Admiral Howard, the I
Earls of Northumberland and Mar, Lord Mountjoy, Y
lieutenant-general in Ireland, and Secretary Cecil, If.
who was their ſpeaker. After the firſt compliments Tc
were over, Cecil told me, that the King of England Ft!
thought he could not better ſhew his Moſt Chriſtian YL
Majeſty how ſenſible he was, both of the upright Nat
neſs of his intentions, and his ability in the conduct Are
of great affairs, than by wholly relying upon him Inc
in all that concerned the relief of Oſtend, and the u.

ſupport of the ſtates. =

1 was immediately ſenſible of this ſecretary's ar- IE.
tifice, and the deſign of it, in thus conſtruing what ti;
I had ſaid to the King of England in a manner differ - ſc
ent from my real meaning. I replied, that indeed Fn
the King my maſter would have been extremely glad ii,
to have had ſome meaſures taken in Europe, to pre- Wi;
vent the invaſions of Flanders by Spain; but that Wb
he was ſo far from having ſent me to give law to his
Britannic Majeſty, that he did not himſelf know F

what conduct to purſue with regard to the affairs of Wh:

thoſe provinces, with the true ſtate of which he Mr
was not even well acquainted. That it was there-W
fore vain to think of penctrating into what Henry

might

Th
ww

V. 1603. O F Lr. 157

„ce might have determined in his mind as to the States,
he becauſe, in reality, he had not as yet determined
his on any thing. That nothing farther could be con-
th, ¶ cluded from what I had ſaid to his Britannic Maje-
uld I ity, than that when he ſhould be well diſpoſed to-
to HE wards them, I could engage, that che diſpoſitions
er- Jof his Moſt Chriſtian Majeſty would not be contrary
on to his; and, in a word, that 1 was come about no
FJ other deſign, than to be informed of the intentions
of the King and parliament of England.

Cecil replied, that he had no deſign to deceive
me by what he had ſaid, but only to hear my fen-
timents of the preſent ſituation of affairs, and to
know whether any expedient had been devited in
the council of France, to obviate the difficulties of
which at London this enterpriſe ſeemed to be fo
full, that it appeared impoſſible to be executed. He
confeſſed, in ſetting forth thele pretended difficulties,
that a pacific agreement between Spain and the
Low-Countries would, in the preſent ſituation of
affairs, occaſion the loſs of theſe provinces, Then
reaſoning from the falſe concluſion, that there was
no medium between ſuch an agreement and an open
war with Spain, he endeavoured to ſhew, that the
war would be {till leſs agreeable than the peace to
ar- Iagland, which was already exhauſted, though at a
vnat ume too when great expences were requilite in con—
ffer - equence of the coronation. And he concluded yet
Iced nore peremptorily than before, that France mult
glad done be engaged in the execution of her deligns.

re- * tle added, indeed, that England might in a year be
that Able to ſecond them. The riches and power of

ance were alſo a ſubject which did not eſcape him,

now finally, he attempted, with all the addreſs of which
rs of e was maſter, to make me declare, that the King
h he t France, being reſolved to make the buſinets of
1ere-

Je States his own, deſired no other favour of Eng-
Vor. III. O land

— — — * — —— — —— — —
— —

158 ME M OI R S Bock XV.

land than that of a neutrality, to which, no doubt, I ;j
he would give his conſent with pleaſure.
I gave Cecil to underſtand, by ſmiling at his laſt f.
words, that he had laid this fnare for me in vain;
and I told him, that, without ſeriouſly replying to
propoſals which I plainly peiceived he had made it
only to give me an occaſion of ſpeaking, it was 11.
ſufficient for me to deſire him to take notice of
one thing, which he ought to bee well as
myſelf, and this was, that England, by ſuffering |
France to act alone for ſome time before ſhe joined Y a;
her, inſtead of laying the foundation of an alliance
with her, would thereby rather lay the foundation Y
of a rupture. Becauſe one would expect to enjoy My
the conqueſts which ſhe might make during this
time, and the other would doubtleſs require to
partake of them. I addreſſed myſelf perſonally to Neo
Cecil, and told him, that, nevertheleſs, this would Ne
not prevent my agreeing with him, in caſe his pro- hi.
poſal for an union with France within a year bad Nea
been ſincere on his part. Becauſe the King of ex
France would rather chuſe to defer the declaration In
of war againſt Spain, which he mentioned, till this Mic
time, an open war being altogether as inconvenient qu
to France, in the preſent ſituation of her affairs, as Me
it was to England. Jt
Upon this occaſion, I thought it proper again to Met
repeat, and in terms the moſt explicit, that I was;
not come to propoſe to the Engliſh council a decla-F
ration of war from the two Kings of France and Am-
England againſt Spain; but only to repreſent, that pr
good policy required them not to ſuffer the United-My,
Provinces to be oppreſſed for want of ſuccours Abe
which might be given them without diſturbing thai:
quiet of the reſt of Europe; and to confer with biyc
Britannic Majeſty upon the nature of theſe ſuccours#
and the other ſteps to be taken, both at preſent and

aftcrwards, in favour of the Flemiſh, Upon this

. i .·̈ä .

t, F the King's counſellors thanked me for the ſincerity
with which I had ſpoken ; and Cecil, having nothing
aſt farther to reply, told me, that he would go and
; Y confer with his Majeſty hereupon, that then he
to would converſe with the deputies of the States about
de Nit; and, if I deſired it, even in my preſence, which
'as F 1 did not think proper to oppole. Thus ended our
ol F conference.
as Count d'Aremberg, having long deferred from
ing F time to time demanding his audience, ſent at laſt to
1ed FF defire the King of Eogland would diſpenſe with it
ice Fentirely, on account of his indiſpoſition, and that
ion be would only ſend one of his counſellors to confer
% wich him. James did not appear ſatisfied with this
this ¶ procedure; he however granted him what he de-
: 10 Flired, and Cecil was the perſon charged with this
to Fcommiſſion. Cecil, who was perfectly well acquaint-
ould Jed with the reports current at that time concerning

pro- FF himſelf, being deſirous to avoid giving any new
bad Wcauſe to vilify him upon this occaſion, {ought to be
of Y excuſed, and deſired that he might, at leaſt, have
tion en adjunct, that is, a witneſs of his words and ac-

tions, though he affected not to receive him in that
Yquality. This fact alone unanſwerably proves, that
Ide was far from enjoying that favour which he was
deſirous the public ſhould believe be abſolutely poſ-
Aled. Kinloſs, a Scoichman, was the petſon alſo»
Fciated with him.
D' Aremberg confined himſelf wholly to compli.
and nent, and to the moſt general exprethons. When
that preſſed to come to particulars, he replied, that he
nited- vas a ſoldier, and had no {kill in negotiation; that
outs, te was come only to hear what the King of England
g the tad to ſay to him, and that, after bim, his matter
th hig would ſend a man of buſineſs. Theſe words were
cour> repeated and ſpread throughout London, with all
at ande ridicule and contempt they deierved. Indeed uo
| thi mbaſſador was perhaps ever before guilty of ſo
12 O2 great

160 MEMD 1-3 Book XV,

great an imprudence, nor can one but with difficul.
ty believe it of a people ſo accute as the Spaniards,
It was of great diſſervice to them in the Engliſh
council, and brovght part of thoſe who compoſed
it to favour me, And if the deſigns of Spain were
not hereby entirely fruſtrated, which they might
have been, it was becauſe this aukward behaviour
was repaired by the addreſs of the other partiſans
of this crown, having Cecil bimſelf at their head,
notwithſtanding his endeavours to make the contrary
de believed. It was even entirely forgot, when it
was ſaid, that the Spaniſh ambaſſador, who began
to be no longer expected, would foon arrive, Cecil,
no doubt, waited his arrival, to begin the concluſion
he was prepariog for my projects, and the other
counſellors appeared diſpoſed to fall into their former
irreſolution. I was even informed from good hands,
that it not being doubted but this ambaſſador would
make propoſals to his Britannic Majefty, accompa-

nied by ureſiſtible offers, part of theſe counſellors

had begun to draw up an account of the debts of
France and the States to Exgland, whereby, from
the ſums contained in this account on one ſide, and
the treaſures of Spain diſburſed in London on the

other, nothing might be proof againſt them,
What was moſt remarkable in my reception on
Sunday the 29th of June, was, that all the gentle-
men of my retinue had the honour of being treated
with a dinner by his Majeſty, and I had that of be-
ing admitted to his own table, In purſuance of his
Majeſty's directions, I arrived at Greenwich about
ten o'clock in the morning, and was preſent with
him at divine ſervice, in which there was a ſcrmon.
He ſaid nothing particular to me from the time of
my arrival to our fitting down to table; the con-
ver {ation turned almoſt entirely upon the chace and
the weather. The heat was exceſlive, and much
more violent than was uſual at London in this
month.

8

hos A Rwy

r

m_ wy hey — a — — 2 — — ..

˙— > e 9 on

hut oa . apy oa, oo» gy ay

— gu ans

1603. O F S U L L I. 167

month. There were only Beaumont and .]
who fat with James at table, where I was nut a
little ſurpriſed to behold that he was always ſerved
on the knee. A ſurtout, in form of a pyramid,
was placed in the middle of the table, which con-
tained moſt coſtly veſſels, and was even enriched
with diamonds.

The converſation continued the ſame as before,
during great part of the entertainment. But an op-
portunity offering for the King to ſpeak of the Jate
Queen of England, he did it, and to my great re-
gret, with ſome fort of contempt. He even went
ſo far as to ſay, that, in Scotland, long before the
death of that Princeſs, he had directed her whole
council,. and governed all her miniſters, by whom
he had been better ſerved and obeycd than herſelf.
He then called for ſome wine, bis cuſtom bein
never to wix water with it, and holding the glaſs
in his hand towards Beaumont and me, he drank
to the health of the King, the Queen, and the roy-
al family of France. I returned him his health, and
that too without forgetting his children. He in-
clined himſelf to my car when he heard me name
them, and told me ſoftly, that the next health te
would drink ſhould be, to the double union which
be meditated between the royal houſes. He had
never till now ſaid to me a ſing e word about this;
and ] thought the opportunity which he had thus
taken for it was nat extremely well choſen, I fail-
ed not, however, to receive the propufal with all
poilible marks of joy, and rephed ſoftly, that I
was certain Henry would not hchtate in his choice
between his good brother and ally, and the King
of Spain, who bad belore applied to him upon the
ſame ſubject. James, ſurpriſed at what I told him,
informed me in his turn, that Spain had made him
the ſame offers of the Infanta for his ſon, as ſhe
bad to France for the Dauphin. The King of Eng-

O 3 land

162 M E MO IR Ss Book Xv.

land appeared to me to be ſtill in the ſentiments in
which I had left him in our laſt conference; though
he gave me no opportunity of converſing with him
in private He told me, indeed, before all who
wele preient, that he approved every thing that had
been done in the laſt conference between the coun-
fellors and me ; that he would not ſuffer the States
to be overwhelmed ; and that the next day, the man-
ner in which ſuccours were to be granted them
ſhould be ſettled. For this purpoſe he gave orders
that his counlell.rs ſhould, the next day in the af-
ternoon, repair to London, there to conclude the
affair with me. I thought theſe words ſufficiently
authoriſed me immediately to put into the hands
of his Biitannic Majeſty the form of a treaty, which
I had drawn up and brought with me; and this !
accordingly did in the preſence of his miniſters,
Having found means, in the courſe of the conver-
ſation, to drop ſome few complaints of the pira-
cies of the Engliſh upon the French, the King laid,
that this happened contrary to his intentions ; and
he was even angry with the Engliſh Admiral, who
appeared himſelf inclined to vindicate what had been
done. At laſt, he quitted the company to go to
bed, where he uſually paſſed part of the afternoon,
and ſometimes even the whole of it.

The journey which James was to have made ba-
ving been prevented or deferred, I hoped I ſhould,
without difficulty, be able to find an opportunity of
telling bim what 1 had yet to ſay; and this gave
me ſome conſolation for having done fo little this
day. For notwithſtanding what has here been ſaid
of reſolutions and ſuccours in ſupport of the States,
I was not ignorant that affairs were not as pet
brovght to the iſſue which J deſired ; for the King
of England till referred me, for the concluſion of
them, to the ſame perſons as before; and theſe, I
very well knew, were not difpoled in my *

of

1603. O F SUL. 163

Nor did Barnevelt and the deputies from hence
draw a more happy preſage; for they were very far
from conſidering themſelves as having ſucceeded in
their offenſive and defenſive alliance with France
and England, with which they had ſometimes flat-
tered themſelves. They reſolved to make a final
effort with me, that they might at leaſt ſecure
France in their intereſts, 8

For this Purpoſe Barnevelt repaired to me before
any of the others, and after having made me ac-
quainted with his apprehenſions in regard to the
preſent ſituation of affairs, and the effects of the ar-
rival of the Spaniſh ambaſſador, which was always
ſaid to be very near, he told me, that the Holland»
ers, being reduced to the loweſt ebb of deſpair,
would abandon every thing, and ſeek an aſylum out
of their provinces. Barnevelt obſerved, from my
reply, that I was not the dupe of his exaggerations.
I told him, that it was the Engliſh council, and not
I, which was to be perſuaded ; becauſe I was ſuf⸗
ficiently convinced the States were really in a pers
plexed ſituation. He endeavoured to prove to me,
that if nothing could be obtained of the King of
England, good policy required that France ſhould
openly and alone eſpouſe the cauſe of the United-
Piovinces, before their firength and ſpirits were
entirely ſpent and exhauſted. I replied, that he
required of me what was not in my power, becauſe
I was come to London only, if it were pollible, to
enter into an aſſociation with the Engliſh, and in
cale they refuſed this, to know their reaſons.

After this we had ſome diſcourſe about the towns
deſtined for cautionaries. Barnevelt informed me,
that Cecil, in a conference with Caron, one of the
Flemiſh deputies, had given him to under ſtand, that
England being reſolved to maintain peace with
Spain, would require Holland to make the ceſſion
of thoſe places as a ſecurity ; and in conſequence

of

164 Nn.

of this ceſſion, Cecil had only promiſed him, that
theſe towns ſhould be preſerved in a ſtrict neutrality,
till the debt of the States was paid. Barnevelt,

who perceived that this affair appeared to me as in.

tereſting as it really was, acquainted me, though
with all the reſerve which ought to be obſerved by
a man intruſted upon oath with the ſecrets of his
council, that the States had put things in ſuch a
train, that the council of London would have ma-
ny diſhculties to remove before it could obtain pol-
ſeſſion of thoſe places. But from hence he alſo in-
ferred, in order to gain his point with me, that as
the conſequence of this would probably be a war
between England and the United-Provinces, it was
therefore for this reaſon that he preſſed me imme-
diately to join the forces of France with theirs,
without which there would be no equality be-
tween the parties. I confeſſed to Barnevelt, that
J could not blame the reſolution of his waſters';
but that the King of France, upon this occaſion,
could only lament their fitvation, not being in a
condition to ſupport them with open force againſt
Spain and England together.

In the afternoon, all the Flemiſh deputies came
in a body to afliſt in the conference; and ſoon af-
ter them the Ergliſth counſellors, appointed by his
Britannic Majeſty, alſo arrived. Cecil being, as
uſual, the ſpeaker for all of them, began by ſaying
dircclly, that the King of England was really in the
intereſt of the States. And tuning to me, he aſked
me, whether this was not what 1 defied, and the
real deſign of my commiſſion? I conce:Jed what 1
did but too plainly perceive, frum this blunt baſty
procedure of the Secretary; aud iiftcad of giving
him a direct ar ſwer, I addrefied niyfelf to the de-
puties, and told them, that tuo gr cat kings deſign-
ing to intereſt themſelecs in then affairs, they ovght
therefore juſtij to rcpieſent the {tate of them LO

LUN

— 0 F--8:.0F-b LF; 165

from a full and perfect knowledge of their neceſ-
ſity, the ſuccours which they wanted might be aſ-
certained. Barnevelt, as uſual, drew a picture of
the miſeries to which Spain had reduced them; and
theſe he deſcribed in as lively and affecting a man—
ner as he poſſibly could. But to come more im-
mediately to the buſineſs, he ſaid, it was neceſſary
that the Spaniards ſhould be driven entirely out of
Flanders; and that the States were in hopes of be-
ing able to ſucceed in this in the ſpace of a year,
by nſeans which he deduced in the following man-
ner. That the whole force of the United-Provinces
amounted to about twelve or fifteen thouſand in-
fantry, not including the garriſons, and three thous
ſand cavalry, belides fifty ſhips actually in a condi-
tion to ſerve, with artillery and ammunition in pro-
portion; that therefore nothing more was neceſſary,
than for the two Kings to double theſe forces, by
furniſhing an equal number of each as above men-
tioned.

I was apprehenſive theſe propoſals would not
be reccived very favourably ; and that I might not
appear to authoriſe the deputies in demands which
were really too great, I toid Barnevelt, that he ſhould
have been more careful only to aſ what could be
granted. I then aſked Cecil, in a manner ſome-
what peremptory, to acquaint me what were the
rea] intentions of his matter, with regard to what
was here propoſed to him, Cecil replied, that his
Britannic Majeſty would have been glad to have
maintained himſelf in a ſolid and fincere peace with
all his neighbours. That, as far as could be judged
from the fate of France, and from mere appears
ances, his Moſt Chriſtian Majeſty was probably of
the ſame ſentiments. Nevertheleſs, that from the
remonſtrances which I had made to the King of
England, this prince was determined to purſue the
medium between his own deſires and thoſe of the

States,

166 MEMOIR S Book Xv.

States, that is, he would conſent privately to aſſiſt
the United Provinces. That perhaps a time might
come when more could be done for them, but that
at preſent they muſt expect nothing farther.

The deputies not doubting but this reſolution was
really fixed, withdrew to confer among themſelves
upon what had been ſaid by Cecil, who in the mean
time continuing his diſcourſe, ſaid, that indeed the
King of England was very willing to aſliſt the States,
but that he had no deſire to ruin himſelf for them,
He avoided entering upon any particulars, in regard
to the nature of theſe pretended ſuccours, that he
might not be afterwards anſwerable for any pro-
miſes or poſitive engagements. But he ſaid, that in
caſe Spain ſhould carry her reſentment ſo far as per-
ſonally to attack the two Kings, protectors of the
liberty of Flanders, in order to make all things
equal on both ſides, France muſt contribute eight
thouſand infantry, and two thouſand cavalry, and
England one half of that number ; and the ſame
rule might be obſerved in regard to the ſquadrons
which it would be neceſſary to have upon the coaſt
of Spain, and in the Indies. And he farther decla-
red, that England had no fund to defray the expen-
ces of theſe forces, except the money owing from
France, which was to be paid in two years ; but
that the King of England would willingly ſacrifice
it for the ſervice of the common cauſe.

I was extremely diſſatisfied at the Engliſh ſeere-
tary's thus endeavouring to avoid coming to any
poſitive agreement, by purpoſely evading the ſtate
of the queſtion, and by raiſing only anticipated dif-
ficulties. But I concealed my indignation as well
as I could, and replied, that this was not a ſubject

to be diſcuſſed in ſo vague a manner. That it was

above all things neceſſary, without an equivocation,
abſolutely to determine what ſhould be done in fa-
vour of the United Provinces, and for the ger of
Oſtend.

WW e row r pw ay S #uS awuS £m yp tir. an. an r / Ges oa

ws wa, yo) PP Bo ww AAA woo e www tm”

1603. O F

Oſtend That after this, whether the council of his
Britiſh Majeſty might be inclined to a war, or whe-
ther it might be forced into one by Spain, there
would be many other conſiderable matters to diſcuſs,
in regard to the following ſuppoſitions. Firſt, that
this crown ſhould attack only one of the two Kings,
or ſhould attack them both. Secondly, that the
two Kings ſhould declare themſelves the aggreſ-
fors. And laſtly, that they ſhould endeavour to
make conqueſts upon the Spaniards in the Low-
Countries.

To make Cecil yet more ſenſible that he ſcarce
entered at all into the affair, I repreſented to him,
that, in caſe of the rupture with Spain, which he
mentioned, to render the ſuperiority in favour of
the two Kings, that of France, beſides twenty thou-
ſand men which he would have in Flanders, would
alſo be indiſpenſibly obliged to have the ſame num-
ber upon the frontiers of Guienne, Languedoc,
Provence, Dauphiny, and Breſſe, not to mention the

ſquadrons of gallies which he muſt alſo have to ſe-

cure the Mediterranean; that it was neceſſary even
now to determine theſe matters, and to prevent be-
ing expoſed to a thouſand troubleſome diſcuſſions,

ſufficient to deſtroy the harmony between the allied

princes. |

Then replying more particularly to what Cecil
had ſaid, I told him, I could not conccive for what
reaſons he was for caſting upon the King of France
the whole or greateſt part of the expence of a war,
in which Henry would be only equally concerned
with the King of England. That if by ſuch means
the Britiſh council ſought to diſtreſs Henry, it but
ill underſtood its intereſts, nor conſidered that,
though an equality of expences ſhould be ſtipulated,
France would certainly have other expences to de-
fray, perhaps even greater than theſe ; ſuch were
thoſe for the defence of her coaſts and frontiers,
which,

S U LL Y. 167

— — — 2 x 2 * 1 —
— _ —
KEST 4

A — 3 +

* — - 7
Gr Hen."

— ee _ =

1 — TJ;
Pap ep n=

— —
3

—
75. TT —
” — cf >.
- —
n —

— —T
—— ——

5 — —

—

2 — I
2

7
2

. Mo. ——
—̃ — —
5 7 oe * 5 ; - -
. TS 5

.
— — —
_ ———
— a —
ny. —- *

MF PEN

168 M E MOI R S Book Xv.

which, by diverting part of the enemies forces,
would not be leſs ſerviceable to England than to
France. I added, that, for all theſe reaſons, 1
thought the Engliſh council took a very improper
time to demand the payment of the ſum lent to
France. That Henry was fo far from expecting
any ſuch matter, that he had given me no orders
about it. That I only knew, from the place which
I filled in the council of finances, that his intention
was to diſcharge it by annual payments, as had
been agreed with the late Queen. And that with-
in the current year he propoſed to pay two hundred
thouſand livres; but ſtill, that the Britiſh council
took a very wrong method to obtain the payment
of this debt, by ſhewing, from their unreaſonable
difficulties and ſuſpicions, that their ſole view was
more and more to exhauſt France; which conduct
was very malignant, and abſolutely oppolite to that
of Henry, who, in all his actions, manifeſted no-
thing but honeſty and good faith, and laboured only
for the public good.

What I ſaid made not the impreſſion upon my
hearers which I deſired. On the contrary, the
Engliſh took fire, and proteſted, if any thing far-
ther was poſitively demanded, they would abandon
the States entirely. Cecil, more eſpecially in this
conference, fully diſcovered himſelf to me for what
he really was; he made uſe only of double exprel-
ſions, vague propoſals, and falle meanings, being
perfectly ſenſible that reaſon was not on his ſide.
The moderation and ſincerity which I oppoſed to
his ill deſigning ſubtilties, forced him into contra-
dictions, which put him to the bluſh, when by a
ſingle word I made him ſenſible of the ridiculoul-
neſs of what he ſaid. Sometimes thinking to inti-
midate me, he magnified the forces of England;
ſometimes he endeavoured to ſhew the advantages

to England of the pretended offers of Spain. He
watched

1603. 8-8-0. 1: Jo Fo 169

watched opportunities to wreſt any words which
might drop from me or the deputics to his advan-
tage, and even maliciouſly ſuppoſed that we had
ſaid things which never entered our thoughts. He
proceeded ſo far as to endeavour to raiſe diſcord
between me and the deputies, by caſting upon me
the refuſal of openly aſſiſting the States. He, and
his colleagues by his direction, demanded that France
ſhould immediately pay to England, in part of what
ſhe owed, forty or fifty thouſand Tame Sterling.
And he told the deputies, that theſe ſums ſhould be
employed for the relief of their moſt preſſing neceſ-
ſities, and, upon my refuſal, they all ſaid it could
be imputed only to me, becauſe, ſaid they, all the
money in France was in my diſpoſal. If all the me-
rit of thoſe we uſually call able politicians conſiſts in
thus endeavouring to enſnare the open and unde-
ſigning, and to make theſe bear the blame of their
wickedneſs, while they at the fame time enjoy all
the benefits of it, a politician is then truly a very
deſpicable thing. What piqued me the moſt was,
to ſee that theſe miniſters, who were here only to
ſet forth the intentions of the King, impudently ſub-
ſtituted their own inſtead of them. For I knew
well, and was firmly perſuaded, from the manner
in which this Prince has talked to them in my pre-
ſence, that he had given them quite contrary or-
ders. |

The deputies, who had returned, and were pre-
ſent at this time, again retired, greatly diſſatisfied no
doubt, and in more perplexity than before; where -
upon Cecil again changed his battery. He faid, that
ſince the King of France could not enter into a war
but in conjunction with England, the latter could
not do it, unleſs her expences therein were defrayed
by France and the States ; which neither of them
being really able to do, the beſt conduct therefore
which the two kings could purſue, would be to

VoL, III. P continue

170 MEMOIR Ss Bock Xv.

continue to live in friendſhip, but without inter-
meddling with any foreign diſputes whatſoever,
This, probably, was what the Secretary really pro-
poſed ; and, notwithſtanding the length and frequen-
cy of his diſcourſes, was all he had ever uttered
with ſincerity.

As I did not think proper to make any reply to
this, the Engliſh, believing perhaps that they had
gained their point with me, ſaid, they would relate
to the King every thing which had paſſed in the con-
ference, and would demand an audience from bim
for me, wherein all things ſhould be expeditiouſly
ſettled on this footing, and this audience would
probably be my laſt, and that wherein I ſhould take

my leave; becauſe, after this, nothing more would

remain to be done. If I kept ſilence upon this oc-
caſion, moſt certainly it was not becauſe I acquieſced
in what they ſaid; on the contrary, the manner in
which they had again expoſed themſelves, and as it
were confeſſed themſelves to be liars and impoſtors,

had inſpired me with the utmoſt contempt for them;

but I judged, that expoſtulation or paſhon would be
ſo far from making them quit a reſolution which
they had concerted together, that perhaps it might
rather tend to promote a rupture; whereas, as mat-
ters were at preſent ſituated, friendſhip at leaſt ſub -
ſiſted between the two kings, and as this friendſhip
might be more ſtrongly cemented by a double mar-
riage, (which was publicly talked of), ſome more
favourable opportunity might probably hereafter
occur. However, I did not abſolutely deſpair of
the ſucceſs of my commiſſion ; becauſe 1 thought 1
perceived the King had no concern in the deligns
which his counſellors thus endeavoured to put in
execution.

To come at a certainty in reſpect to this, was
what I propoſed in my third audience; for I do not

conſider as ſuch my reception on Sunday. Dy
240

4 aaa 1 od. i. a _

* e As #4 n *

e ee wry ow mr” fun mw ow 4 Add % „% wo Oc

8

"x BS - un

1603. „% 9: ©. 171

had demanded it for me from the King, and this
Prince ſent Ei ſkine to tell me, that it ſhould be on
the day after the conference here related, and that T
ſhould bring but few of my retinue wich me, be-
cauſe he wanted to diſcourſe with me in particular;
and this was further confirmed to me by a Scotch
Lord, who was extremely intimate with my friend
the Earl of Mar. The Lords Hume and Seaford
about noon came to accompany me from London,
and, upon my landing at Greenwich, I was received
by the Earl of Derby, who conducted me into the
King's apartment. I had with me only four gentle«»
men and two ſecretaries. |

The King of England took me by the hand, and,
commanding that no one ſhould fullow him, he led
me through his cabinet into his gallery, the door of
which he alſo ſecured. F: embraced me twice,
with expreſſions that ſhew. how Þ e he wag
ſatisfied with the King of France and me, and how
ſenſible he was of his molt Chriſtian Majeſty's ha-
ving ſent him the man who, of all his kingdom,
was moſt neceſſary to him; he inſiſted, that makin
uſe of the preſent opportunity, I ſhould ſpeak to
him without any reſerve. This moment therefore
ſeemed favourable to me, to complain to him of
his miniſters; and after the uſual complimentary
tanks, I accordingly told him, that it was much
more advantageous to me in all reſpects to confer
with him than his counſellors, who, after having
very ill executed his orders in the Jait conference,
had alſo, without doubt, given him a falſe account
of what had paſſed between them and me and the
Flemiſh deputies ; and J promiſed, if he would give
me leave, to give him a ſincere and juſt relation of
every thing,

The King approving my propoſal, I acquainted
him with all that had paſſed between us the pre-
ceding evening; I inſiſted more eſpecially upon the

| P 2 demand

172 M E MO IR Ss Book Rv.

demand to diſcharge the debt owing to England,
and on the aſperſion upon his moſt Chriſtian Majeſty
and me, with which it had been accompanied; I
- added, that if after having filled my letters to Henry
only with eulogies on the generolity, the prudence,
and the perfect friendſhip of the prince to whom 1
had the honour ef ſpeaking, and this becauſe he
himſelf had authoriſed me to do it, both by bis
words and actions, I ſhould be obliged, on a ſud.
den, to write to him in a quite contrary ſtyle, with.
out having any rezſon to alledge for it, other than
difficulties, entirely frivolous, the King my maſter
could not but think I had acted the part of a flat-
tering, and perhaps an unfaithful miniſter, to the
intereſt with which he had intruſted me; and it
would beſides be conſidered as the effect of a deter.
mined friendſhip with Spain, from whence, perhaps,
a m__ might enſue between the two Kings,
whoſe intereſt, as well as inclination required their
continuing in a conſtant ſtate of union. I thought
I ought not to heſitate upon informing the King of
England, that there were ſeveral of thoſe whom he
admitted into his council who were neither well diſ-
poſed in themſelves, nor well affected to his perſon;
that, without naming them to him, he ought to
conſider as ſuch all thoſe who appeared ſo little ſos
licitous for his glory, and the honour of his crown,
as to adviſe him, under the name of an ally, to
render himſelf the flave of Spain; that he would
do well to be, in ſome degree, diffident of ſuch
perſons whoſe characters he was not perfectly well
acquainted with, and to be guided rather by bis
own wiſdom, than the repreſentations of his mini-
ſters,

It was no difficult matter to inſpire the King of
England with a diffidence of his miniſters; for he
was naturally but too much inclined to it. The

change which I perceived in his countenance *
| e

166. 0 8 JL L T. 173

he heard my laſt words, his geſture, and ſome ex-
preſſions that eſcaped him, convinced me my ob-
ſervation was juſt; I even thought ] plainly percei-
ved, that, either from an effect of this diffidence,
or from the praiſes 1 laviſhed on him, this prince
was at laſt in the moſt favourable diſpoſition I could:
wiſh him : I therefore embraced this opportunity
to introduce in our converſation ſoine general hiats
of a project, by which, with the aſſiſtance of his
Britannic Majeſty, the tranquillity of all Europe
might be ſecured. Having ſaid this, I remained ſi-
tent, as though I had been apprehenſive of fatiguing
him by too long a diſcourſe. But I knew the cu-
riolity of James would be excited by the little I had
ſaid : accordingly he replied, that my diſcourſe had
not appeared tedious to him, - but that it would be
proper to know what o' clock it was. He went
out, and aſked ſome of his courtiers whom he found
at the end of the gallery, and they telling him that
it was not three o' clock, * Well, Sir,” ſaid the
King to me returning, “ I will break off the party
“ for the chace which I had made for this day,
* that I may hear you to the end; and this em-
„ ployment will, I am perſuaded, be of more ſer-
“ vice to me than the other.“

The reaſon. that induced me to hazard a ſtep of
ſuch conſequence, as that of communicating to King
James the great deſigns upon Spain and all Europe,
which had been concerted between Henry and Eli-
ſabeth, was, that being perſuaded this prince was
already, of himſelf, inclined to the alliance with
France, he only wanted to be determined in this
reſolution from ſome great and noble motive ; and
becauſe, on the other ſide, his miniſters conſtantly
brought him back to their manner of thinking, ap-
parently becauſe he could not ſupport himſeif a-
gainſt them, from a perſuaſion that they oppoſed
his ſentiments only through ignorance of them,

— However,

174 M E MOI RA $ Bock Tv.

However, this did not prevent my taking the fol-
loving precaution, which I judged to be very ne-
ceſſary. |

I therefore reſumed the diſcourſe, and told him,
that, without doubt, he had ſometimes thought,
and with gocd reaſon, that a man in poſſeſſion of
the places and honours with which I was known to
be inveſted, never quitted his poſt but for a very
urgent occaſion ; that this was my caſe ; that tho
my commiſſion was only to require an union be-
tween France and England, yet nevertheleſs, from
the opinion I had conceived, which fame had not
been filent in reporting, of his genius and abilities,
I bad reſolved, before I quitted the kingdom, to
diſcourſe with his Britannic Majeſty on ſomething
infinitely more conſiderable ; but that what I had
to acquaint him with was of ſuch a nature, that I
could not reveal it to him without expoling myſelf
to ruin, unleſs he would engage, by the moſt ſo-
lemn oath, to keep it a ſecret. James, who liſten-
ed to me with a profound attention, heſitated how-
ever at taking the oath which I required ; and, to
render it unneceſſary, he endeavoured himſelf to
diſcover what it was of ſo intereſting a nature which
1 had to communicate to him. But finding my an-
ſwers to the different queſtions which he ſucceſſively
aſked me gave him not the leaſt light into the affair,
he ſatisfied me at laſt, by the muſt ſacred and ſo-
lemn of all oaths, I mean that of the holy ſacra-
ment.

Though J had now nothing to fear from his in-
diſcretion, yet, however, I carefully weighed all
my words; and, beginning with an article in which
I knew the King of England was moſt intereſted, I
mean religion, I told him, that, however I might
appear to him engaged in worldly honours and at-
fairs, and how indifferent ſoever he might perhaps

bave ſuppoſed me to be in matters of religion, yet
it

2 _ 2 ME CP Yo FO

O
tl
tl
th

1603. CC 175

it was no leſs certain that I was attached to mine,
even ſo much as to prefer it to my family, fortune,
country, and even King ; that I had neglected no-
thing which might incline the King my walter to
eſtabliſh it in France vpon ſolid foundations, being
under great apprehenſions leſt it might one day be
overwhelmed by ſo powerful a faction as that of an

union of the Pope, the Emperor, Spain, the Arch-

dukes, the Catholic princes of Germany, and fo
many other ſtates and communities intereſted in its
ſuppreſſion ; that my ſucceſs hitherto had been to-
lerable 3 but that perhaps I was indebted for it only
tojunctures purely political, which had engaged Henry

in a party oppoſite to the houſe of Auſtria, That

becauſe thele circumſtances might change, or be-
cauſe I, who was the only perſon that would uſe
any endeavours to make Henry continue firm in
this political plan, might loſe my place and his fa-

. vour, I did not fee how the King of France could re-

ſiſt a party which both his religion, and the example
of others, would call upon him to embrace. That
this conſideration had long inſpired me with the
thoughts of finding a perſon for the execution of
this deſign, who, by his rank and power, would be
more proper than me to accomplith it, and fix Henry
in his ſentiments. That having found all that 1 had
ſought for in the Prince to whom I had the honour
of ipeaking, my choice had not been difficult to
fixz In a word, that it depended only upon him-

| ſelf to immortalize his memory, and become the
| arbitrator of the fate of Europe, by a deſign to

which he would always appear to have put the fi-

niſhing hand, though he might not be more con-

cerned in the execution than his Moſt Chriſtian

| Majeſty.

Taere remained only to explain to him the na-
ture of this deſign, of which at fuſt 1 gave nothing

further than a general idca, under the notion. of a

project

-
463]
4
f Þ
by
v1
1 *
K*
5

— —_

A RT EY

2 = .—_- —_— -
ro

.
KK — wo
22 — wr — —

r

- . n
— ——

1% M E MOI R S Bock Xv.

project for an aſſociation of all the princes and ſtates
in Europe, whoſe intereſt it was to diminiſh th
ower of the houſe of Auſtria, the foundation o

which ſhould be an offenſive and defenſive alliance
between France, England, and Holland, cemented
by the cloſeſt union of the two royal houſes of
Bourbon and Stuart. I repreſented this aſſociation
in alight which ſhewed it might be very eaſily form-
ed. There was not the leaff difficulty in regard to
Denmark, Sweden, in a word, all the Proteſtant
princes and ſtates; and it might be rendered ſuffi-
ciently advantageous to engage in it the Catholic
princes alſo : for example, the turbulent and ambi-
tious diſpoſition of the Duke of Savoy might be
foothed with hopes of obtaining the title of King ;
and the princes of Germany, with promiſes to dil-
tribute among them thoſe parts of it which the
houſe of Auſtria poſſeſſed, as Bohemia, Auſtria,
Hungary, Moravia, Sileſta, &c. and to re-eſtabl'(h
their ancient privileges: Even the Pope himſelf
might be gained, by granting him the property of
thoſe countries of which he only poſſeſſed the feo-
dality. In regard to the King of France, though!
endeavoured to perſuade James that he had hitherto
bad no concern in this projet, which I pretended
was entirely of my own forming, I, however, ſaid,
that when I ſhould have communicated it to him,
I could ſafely engage he would have no thoughts,
either of retaining any conqueſts which might be
made, or being recompenſed for them ; though,
according to all appearances, the greateſt part of
the burden would fail upon him, as well in the ex-
pences neceſſary for the carrying on the enterpriſe,
as his own perſonal ſervices. 1 imagined it was
moſt proper to give the affair this turn, in regard to
Henty, that he might not be under too abſolute an
Obligation.

The King of England immediately ſtarted ſom?

objections,

4

odd

3 „ — @\b. ww. AA ww — —UüUä——

mm O05 iy © — wy

ORrRAUu H.i.)d. =” Oo rn =o” -©A ©

AQ <

Ci

objections, upon the difficulty of uniting ſo many
different princes ſo differently diſpoſed ; the ſame
nearly which Henry had made when we had laſt
diſcourſed upon it at Montglat, upon his return
from Metz; though, from the flight ſketch which I
had given him of the deſign, he, however, appear-
ed highly to approve it, and expreſſed a delire of
being more circumſtantially informed of it. In con-
formity with which deſire, the following is the ſub-
ſtance of what I ſaid to his Britannic Majeſty.

Europe is divided into two factions, which are
not ſo juſtly diſtinguiſhed by their different religions,
becauſe the Catholics and Proteſtants are confound-
ed together in almoſt all places, as they are by their
political intereſts; the firſt is compoſed of the
Pope, the Emperor, Spain, Spaniſh Flanders, part
of the princes and towns of Germany and Switzer»
land, Savoy, the Catholic ſtates of Italy, which
are Florence, Ferrara, Mantua, Modena, Parma,
Genoa, Lucca, &c. Herein likewiſe muſt be com-
priſed the Catholics diſperſed in other parts of Eu-
rope, at the head of which may be placed the tur-
bulent order of Jeſuits, whoſe views, no doubt, are,
to ſubject every thing to the Spaniſh monarchy.
The ſecond includes the Kings of France, England,
Scotland, Ireland, Denmark, and Sweden ; the re-
public of Venice, the United-Provinces, and the o-
ther part of the princes and towns of Germany and
Switzerland. I do not take in Poland, Pruſſia, Li-
vonia, Muſcovy, and Tranſilvania, though theſe
countries are fabjedt to the Chriſtian religion, be-
cauſe the wars in which they are almoſt continually
engaged with the Turks and Tartars, render them
in ſome manner foreign in regard to thoſe of the
weſtern part of Europe.

Were the power to be eſtimated in proportion to
the pump of titles, the extent of territories, and
the number of inhabitants, it appears, on the ſlight-

eſt

Book Xv.

M K M O in 8

eſt glance, not very favourable to the ſecond of

theſe factions, and the ſuperiority would apparently

be determined in favour of the firſt, Nevertheleſs,
nothing is more erroneous than ſuch an opinion
which may thus be proved : Spain, which muſt
here be named firſt of her faction, (though, from
rank and dignity, ſhe is only the third) becauſe ſhe
is in reality the ſoul of it; Spain, I ſay, including
her dominions in the Faſt and Weſt Indies, does
indeed poſſeſs an extent of territory as large as
Turky and Perſia together. But if it be true, (and
that it is ſo cannot be doubted) that the new world,
in recompence of its gold and other riches, deprives
Spain both of ker ſhips and inhabitants, this im-
menſe extent of territory, inſtead of being ſervice-
able, is burdenſome.
Let us take a view of the other powers of this
faction, and we ſhall every where find reaſon to di.
miniſh our ordinary ideas. The Pope ſeems firmly
attached to Spain; and, ſurrounded as he is on all
ſides by this formidable power, and having no rea-
ſon to expect ſuccours from any of the other Ca»
tholic princes, it is, no doubt, his intcreſt to be lo,
But as he does, in fact, conſider his ſituation as but
little different from real ſervitude; and as he is not

ignorant that Spain and the Jeſuits only make a

vain appearance of ſupporting his authority ; it may,
doubtleſs, be concluded, he only wants an oppoi-
tunity to free himſelf from the Spaniſh yoke, and
that he would readily embrace a party which ſhould

offer to render him their ſervice, without the run-

ning any great riſk ; and Spain has in reality this
opinion of him.

In regard to the Emperor, he has nothing in com-
mon with Spain except his name, which ſeems only
to in creaſe the jealouſies and quarrels which ſo tre-

quently ariſe between theſe two branches of Au-

ſtrian power: belides, what is his power? it *
| ils

litt!
littl
viev
DW

W 179

fiſts merely in his title. Hungary, Bohemia, Au-
ſtria, and other neighbouring countries, are little
better than empty names. Expoſed as he is, on
one ſide, to incurſions of the formidable armies of
the Grand Signior; liable, on the other fide, to
ſee the territories under his dominion tear themſelves
in pieces, by the multiplicity and diverſity of the
religions which they contain; under continual ap-
prehenſions allo, leſt the elector princes ſhould riſe
and make an attempt to regain their ancient privi-
leges. Indeed the preſent Emperor, all things
juſtly conſidered, might perhaps be claſſed among
the moſt inconſiderable of the European powers:
beſides, this Auſtrian branch appears to me lo deſti-
tute of good ſubjects, that if it hath not ſoon a
prince, either brave or wiſe enough to unite the dif-
ferent members of which Germany is compoſed, it
will have every thing to fear from the princes of its
circles, whoſe only aim it is, to get their liberty, in
religion and election, reſtored to them. I do not
except even the Elector of Saxony, though he ap-
pears the more ſincerely attached to the Emperor,
as to him of whom he holds his principality, be-
cauſe it is evident his religion muſt, ſooner or later,
ſet him at variance with his benefaftor. But ſup-
poling the Emperor to receive all the returns of
gratitude which he can expect from this Elector,
this will amount to nothing, or but very little, ſo
long as he ſhall be under apprehenſions from the

branch of John-Frederick, whom he has deprived

of this electorate.

Thus, from a thorough examination of all par-
ticulars, it appears, that almoſt all the powers on
which Spain ſeems to depend for aid, are either but
little attached to her, or capable of doing her but
little ſervice. No one is ignorant. that the general
view of the princes and cities both of Germany and
Switzerland is to deliver themſelyes from the domi -

mon

9
|
9
i

A

„
py
4
”
TY
$
of
|
:
*
1
1

SS

i 2m -.
— — = 2 — ul
— —

.
r

8 n

2 — — —AZæ-æͤ
*

180 M E M OI R S Book XV.

nion of the Emperor, and even to aggrandiſe them.
ſelves at his expence. Nor has he any greater de-
pendence on the eccleſiaſtical princes, than on the
others. A foreign Emperor is what they moſt wiſh,
provided he is not a Proteſtant. Nothing could
give the Archdukes a greater pleaſure, as much
Spaniards as they are, than a regulation, by which
they ſhould become ſovereigns in Flanders, inde-
pendent of Spain, weary at length of being only
her ſervants. It is the fear of France alone that
binds the Duke of Savoy to the Spaniards ; for he
naturally hates them, and has never forgiven the
King of Spain, for doing ſo much leſs for the
daughter which he beſtowed upon him, than for
her younger ſiſter. As to Italy, it need only be ob-
ſerved, that it will be obliged to acquieſce in the
will of the ſtronger party.

It is therefore certain, that the ſecond of the
factions here deſcribed has nothing to fear, provided
it underſtands its own intereſts well enough to con-
tinue in a conſtant ſtate of union. Now it is alfo cer-
tain, that in this ſcheme theſe motives, ſo natural to
diſunion, do not occur; and that all of them, eren
that cauſed by the difference of religion, which in
ſome ſort is the only one, ought to give place to the
hatred againſt Spain, which is the great and com-.
mon motive by which theſe powers are animated,
Where is the prince, in the leaſt jealous of his glo-
ry, who would refuſe to enter into an aſſociation
ſtrengthened by four ſuch powerful Kings as thoſe
of France, England, Sweden, and Denmark, cloſely
united? It was a ſaying of Eliſabeth's, that nothing
could reſiſt theſe four powers, in ſtrict alliance with
each other.

Theſe truths being ſuppoſed, it only remains to

examine, by what methods the houſe of Auſtria |

may be reduced to the monarchy of Spain, and to

poſſeſs that dominion only. Theſe methods "Ro
= either

9 e. 181

either in artifice or force, and I have two means
for each of theſe. The firſt of the ſecret means is,
to diveſt the houſe of Auſtria of the Indies; Spain
having no more right to prohibit an intercourſe
with theſe countries to the reſt of the Europeans,
than ſhe has to deſtroy their natural inhabitants;

and all the nations of Europe having alſo a liberty

to make eſtabliſhments in the new diſcovered coun-
tries as ſoon as they have paſſed the line, this en-
terpriſe would therefore be eaſily executed, only
by equipping three fleets, each containing cight
thouſand men, all provided and victualled for fix
months ; England to furnith the ſhips, Flanders the
artillery and ammunition, and France, as the moſt
powerful, the money and ſoldiers. There would
be no occaſion for any other agreement, than that
the conquered countries ſhould be equally divided.

During this, the ſecond of theſe means ſhould be
ſecretly prepared, upon occaſion of the ſueceſſion
to Cleves, and the death of the Emperor, which
cannot be far diſtant, in ſuch manner, that under
favour of the opportunities which theſe two inci-
dents might furniſh, reaſons might be found to di-
velt the houſe of Auſtiia of the empire, and her o-
ther dependencies in Germany, and therein to re-
{tore the ancient free manner of election.

The firſt of the two open and declared means is,
in conjunction to take up arms, and drive the Spa-
niards entirely out of Flanders, in order to erect
this ſtate into a free and independent republic, bear-
ing only the title of a member of the empire; and
this, when the forces of the allies are conſidered,
will not be found difficult. The United-Provinces,
comprehending in them Liege, Julicrs, and Cleves,
form a triangle; the firſt fide of which, from Calais
to Embden, is entirely towards the ſea: the ſec nd
is bounded by France, viz. by Picardy, as far az
the Somme, and by the country cf Meflin, as far as
Mezieres: the thud cxtends from Metz, by Triers,

VOL. III. 2 Cologn,

——
—

ES —
CH — EEE

22

—

— 4 +
ur
2
24

— — — —— x —
— — - 2
— —
- > - x y
*

— — 22

— — —
— =
——

——

—

3

mT—T P p ꝛ —— 2 —
—

182 ME MO I R 8 Book XV,

Cologn, and Metz, as far as Duſſeldorp. It is on-
ly neceſſary to ſecure theſe three ſides in ſuch mans
ner that they may be inacceſſible to Spain, which
may be done without difficulty, England taking up-
on her the firſt, France the ſecond. the Electors and
the other intereſted princes the third. All the towr's
which ſhould happen to be upon this line, except
perhaps Thionville, which might require to be for-
ced, would, upon a menace to be put under contti-
bution, immediately ſubmit.

The ſecond of the two laſt means, is for the league
above mentioned generally and in concert to declare
war againſt Spain and the whole houſe of Auſtria,
What is moſt eſſential to obſerve in regard to this
war, is, that France and England ſhould renounce
all pretences to any ſhare of the conqueſt, and re-
linquiſh them to thoſe powers who were not of
themſelves capable of giving umbrage to the others,
Thus Franche-Compte, Alſace, and Tiroll, natu-
rally fall to the Switzers. The Duke of Savoy
ought to have Lombardy, to be erected, with his
other dominions, into a kingdom ; the kingdom of
Naples falls to the Pope, as being moſt convenient
to him ; Sicily to the Venetians, with what may be
convenient for them in Iſtria and Friuli. Thus it
appears, the molt ſolid foundation of this confede-
racy would ariſe from all the parties being gainers
by it. The reſt of Italy, ſubject to its petty prins
ces, might perhaps be ſuffered to continue under its

preſent form of government, provided that all theſe

little ſtates were altogether conſidered as compoling
only one body or republic, of which they ſhould be
ſo many members.

This is a pretty juſt account of the manner in
which I acquainted his Britannic Majeſty with the
deſign to which I endeavoured to gain his approba-
tion. 1 farther added whatever I thought might

tend to obviate his doubts, and confirm him in fa-

your

1 r 183

vour of it. I confeſſed that I was not myſelf able
to elucidate the deſign ; that I was not ſurpriſed
that his Majeſty had at firſt perceived great difficulties
in it; that Henry would, 2 doubt, find many in it
alſo, but that they only proceeded from my own
weakneſs, and the impoſſibility of ſhewing clearly
what to be perfectly explained required much time
and long diſcourſes ; that I was convinced in my
own mind, the deſign was not only poſlible, but
that alſo the ſucceſs of it was infallible ; that if any
thing was found defective in the ſcheme as I had
conceived it, it might eaſily be rectified by the ge-
nius and abilities of four great kings, and ſome of
the beſt generals in Europe, to whom the exccution
of it would be intruſted, | |
I then returned to the alliance between the two
Kings of France and England, and I told his Bri-
tannic Majeſty, that this alliance being the chief
and neceſſary foundation of the confederacy which
I had propoſed to him, this mult therefore neceſ-
. farily begin it, without paying any regard to the
diſcourſes of prejudiced perſons, or being affected
by ſuch frivolous conſiderations as thole of the
debts of France and Flanders to England. I aſſured
him, that England had nothing to fear from France,
for that Henry's great preparations of arms and
ammunition, and his amaſſing ſuch vaſt ſums, were
only deſigned hereafter to enable him of him ſelf to
accompliſh the greateſt part of this important de—
ſign; at leaſt, that I could flatter my ſelf with ſuc-
ceſs in engaging him in it, from motives of glory
and the public ſervice, which operated ſo po er-
fully upon the mind of this prince. I touched
James in his moſt ſenſible part, his ambition to
immortalize his memory, and his deſire of bein
brought into compatiſon with Henry, and of ſha-
ring his praiſes,
My earneſtneſs to ſucceed, gave ſuch force and
1 clearneſs

184 M EM OI X 8 Book XV.

elearneſs to my expreſſions, that this prince, enter-
ing into my full meaning, embraced me with a
kind of tranſport proceeding from his friendſhip for
me, and a ſenſe of the wrong meaſures which hi-
therto endeavours had been uſed to make him pur-
ſue. © No, Sir,” ſaid he, “ do not fear that 1
« ſhall ever fail in what we have together agreed
«« upon,” He proteſted with the fame ardour, that
he would not on any conſideration have remained
ignorant of what I had told him; that he would
never contradict the good opinion which the King
of France and 1 had conceived of him ; that he
really was what I thought him; that his reflections
upon what I had faid would yet farther confirm
him in the ſentiments with which J had inſpired
him; that he would even now engage to ſign the
plan. of alliance which I had preſented to him on
Sunday, and wherein he had himſelf made ſome in-
conſiderable alterations ; that I ſhould alſo ſign it
in the name of the King of France, unleſs I rather
choſe to carry it with me unſigned, to ſhew it to
his Moſt Chriſtian Majeſty ; in which caſe he gave
me his royal word, that upon my bringing or ſend-
ing it back at the end of a month or ſix weeks, ap-
proved and ſigned by Henry, he would immediate-
ly, and without the leaſt difficulty, join to it his
own ſignature. He concluded, by obligingly aſ-
ſuring me, that for the future he would do nothing
but in concert with the King of France. He made
me promiſe the ſame ſecreſy in regard to all perſons,
except the King my maſter, which I had been ſo
free as to require of him; and this he extended ſo
far, as to forbid me ever putting upon paper cer-
iain things, which upon this occalion he revealed to
me, and which 1 therefore ſuppreſs.

Our conference bad begun about one o'clock, and
continued upwards of four hours. The King call-
ed in Admiral Howard, the Earls of 8

| and,

a wa oc Rv. kk - a. a . . Erooas amo rats. A AC: -

—— „% wa we tc oc two

A „

r de . 185

land, Southampton, Mar, Lord Mountjoy, and
Cecil, and declared to them, that having deliberate-
ly conſidered my reaſons, he was reſolved to enter
into a cloſe alliance with France againſt Spain. He
reproached Cecil in very ſtrong terms, for having,
both in his words and actions, acted contrary to
his commands; which explanation the Secreta
received very aukwardly. Cecil,“ ſaid this Prince
to him, © I command you, without any reply or
« objection, in conformity to this my delign, to
« prepare the neceſſary writings, according to
* which, I will then give the dexter *, and all aſ-
* ſurances to the ambaſſadors of the States.” This
was the firſt time he had diſtinguiſhed them by this
title. Then turning to me, and taking me by the
hand, he ſaid, Well, Mr Ambaſſador, are you now
&« perfectly ſatisfied with me ?”

I replied with a profound bow, and making his
Majeſty the ſame proteſtations of fidelity and at-
tachment, as if it had been to my own King, I de-
fired he would let me confirm it to him by kiſſing
his hand. He embraced me, and demanded my
friendſhip with an air of goodneſs and confidence
which very much diſpleaſed ſeveral of his counſel-
lors that were preſent. Upon my diſmiſſion, he
gave orders to the Earl of Northumberland to ac-
company me to the Thames, and to Sidney to eſ-
cort me to London.

> 0 O K vt

Othing now remained, but to reduce into
form the ſeveral particulars of the ſtipula-
tions between the King of England and me, and

* This expteſſion fignifies an oath, or promiſe of alliance, made
by preſenting the right hand,
Q 3 Ggnified

136 M E M OI R S Bock XVI.

ſignified by this prince to his miniſters, and to form
them into a treaty, or rather into a plan of a trea-
ty, between the two Kings. For indeed a peace,
whoſe final and principal effect was to proceed from
the acceptation of his Moſt Chriſtian Majeſty, into
whoſc hands it was firſt to be tranſmitted, could
be called by no other name. And, upon this
occaſion, I was perfectly ſenſible of the injury my
negotiation received from the unhappy precaution
which neceſſity had obliged Henry and me to take
in the council of France, not to propoſe any thing
to the King of En gland, but as of myſelf.

James, being more entirely perſuaded than I could
have wiſhed him, that I had ated only from the
ſuggeſtions of my own deſires, and for the ſecuri-
ty of the Proteſtant religion againſt all events which
might happen, had never, from the ſecrets which
TI had revealed to him, conſidered me as the inſtru-
ment of the King my maſter; and looked upon it
as doing a great deal, to engage himſelf firſt, upon
very promiſing appearances indeed, that the King
of France would concur with him even with gieater
readineſs. But how great is the difference between
ſach a general engagement, liable to many various
interpretations, and a treaty, wherein, by virtue of
a full power from the King, I might, with all the
care and exactnels poſſible, have inſerted every par-
ticular in that clear and diſtinét manner, from
whence the bonds of all political treaties acquire
their ſtrength and duration? I ſhould not fo confi-
dently aſſert, that, upon this occaſion, inſtead of
the meie form of a convention, I had reaſon to
expect his Britannic Majelly's ſignature of a treaty,
complete in every ſenſe, which it would not be pol-
ſible for him to retract, had not the murmurs, of
which the letters of the Count of Beaumont to the
King are full, in regard to this deficiency of a ſign-
ed blank, been an authentic teliimony, that vavity

uy

mp, ow -©@ © wy — wes

© Mp 0 oe, bag wy

rn 187

or ſelf. love do not in the leaſt move me to exagge-
rate.

But I ſhould reproach myſelf with being guilty of
injuſtice, were I to appear ſuſpicious of the good
faith of King James; on the contrary, I affirm, no
prince in Europe could ſhew himſelf more jealous
of it. But it happens, from I know not what fa»
tality, that the thing in the world which one would
think ought to be leaſt expoſed to the caprice of
fortune, I mean a political agreement or treaty, the
pure effect of a mind free in its operations, and
maſter of its ſentiments, is, however, the moſt
changeable and uncertain ; the contracting parties
in no other inſtance would incur the imputation of
having forfeited theic word, yet in this they almoſt
always fail in the execution, provided they can find
the ſmalleſt colour or pretence for fo atrocious a
perjury ; as if cluding a ſolemn promiſe or engage-
ment were not the ſame as a direct violation of it,
I did not doubt, that, as ſoon as I was gone, the
counſellors of his Britannic Majeſty would uſe their
utmoſt efforts to render ineffectual what they had
not been able to prevent; and I expected that Cecil
would be one of the moſt active for this purpoſe;
for the victory which I had gained over him, the re-

primand which he had received from the King on

my account, and his confulion from the converſa-
tion which I had had with him, when it came to be
publicly known, were ſo many wounds which alto-
gether had abſolutely mortified him.

Nevertheleſs it will readily be admitted that I had
realon to be ſatisfied with the ſucceſs of my negoti-
ation: my own ſituation in the affair conſidered “,

its
The embaſly of M. de Roſy is mentioned with great elogiums,
in almoſt all the hiſtories and memoirs at that time, without taking
notice of many modern writers who have ſpoke ot it in the fare
manner, though ſome of them, as the authors vi Vileros memoirs

et ſtate, and of the hiſtory of the Duke of Bouillon, had no "_
el

—
— —

ꝗͤ—Uü—ü— A
. — = =

— I —

—— ——
> JS

i

188 M EM OI R S Book XVI.

its concluſion was as happy and advantageous as it
could be; for I had gained the glory of having ſuc-
ceeded in an enterpriſe that was thought to be ex-
tremely difficult, without running the riſk of bein
accuſed of exceeding the bounds preſcribed by my
commiſſion. The King and his council had it in
their option to retrench, augment, or alter what-
ever they thought proper, in an agreement, of which
I had neither made them nor myſelf the guarantees;
and this was performing all that it was poſſible for me
to effect: as to its real utility, when conſidered in
reſpect of Henry's deſign, to which I would readily
have ſacrificed all other conſiderations, if I had not
completely ſucceeded, it was becauſe I could not
perform more, without ſhewing a diſregard to the
terms preſcribed, not only in my public, but even
in my private inſtructions. However, from what I
have done, there aroſe one real and very ſenſible ad-
vantage; and this was, that, in a conjuncture,
wherein there were ſo many jult cauſes to fear an
intimate union between England and Spain, this
union was abſolutely fruſtrated, and his Britannic
Majeity engaged in another, from which he could
neither ſo ſoon nor fo eaſily return to the former.
I therefore immediately ſet about drawing up the
form of a treaty, which having finiſhed, I preſented
to the King of England and his counſellors, to be
by them finally reviſed and examined: they read it
ſeveral times, ſucceſſively retouched it, and made

eſt in exalting the glory of that miniſter. P. Matthieu's account of
it is conformable to that here given, even the moſt minute circum-
ſtances, vol. 2. p. 577+ et %% See alſo the manuſcr pts in the King's
library, vel. 9590 and tbe htſt v-lume of Sri mem. 1ccond, Be-
ſides the detail 01 the Ma quis de Roſny's embaſly to London, which
in every point ag ets with what has been ſaid here, P. 2 26. et ſeq. we
find quite through this hiſtorian many very curious remarks on the
council and perſon of King James, as well as on the affairs of the
Engliſh court.

ſome

Math

nm min, pw ep © Aa ow wo od ac

— = ©, — ws.

a © &©& ==

a;
al

A

163. 0 F S UE: LY; 189
ſome inconſiderable alterations; at laſt it was abſo-

lutely determined in the following manner.
The King of England, after returning his moſt

_ Chriſtian Majeſty many. thanks for the very agree-

able manner in which he had prevented him, and for
the quality of the ambaſſador he had fent him, re-
newed and confirmed the ancient treaties of alliance
between Eliſabeth and Henry, and alſo between
Scotland and France, and expreſſed his intention of
applying them perſonally to himſelf by the preſent
treaty, which, in a manner, comprehended them all,
beſides its other principal deſign -of their own per-
ſonal defence againſt Spain, and the ſafety and pre-
ſervation of their dominions, ſubjects, and allies,
in ſuch manner, and at ſuch times as the two Kings
ſhould judge proper. 'The United-Provinces were
declared to enjoy the benefit hereof, and they were
the only allies herein expreſsly named; in regard to
whom it was alſo ſtipulated, that proper meaſures
ſhould be taken, either perfectly to ſecure their li-
berty, or at leaſt, that in caſe they were conlidered
as ſubjects to Spain or the empire, it ſhould be on
conditions which would procure them perfect peace
and tranquillity, and at the ſame time free the two
allied kings from all apprehenſions of a too power-
ſul and abſolute dominion cf the houſe of Auſtria in
theſe provinces.

However, beſides that the two princes mutually
engaged to declare themſelves openly, when either
ſhould require it of the other, in order to prevent
the effects of the court of Madrid's artifices, it was
alſo agreed immediately to furniſh the States- gene-
ral with ſuccours ſufficient to ſecure them from op-
preſſion; the number of men who were to compole
theſe ſuccours was not determined ; it was only a-
greed that they ſhould be ſent from England alone,
and that the expences of the whole armament ſhould

de defrayed by his moſt Chriſtian Majeſty, one half
purely

190 MEM OI R S Bock XVI.

purely with the money of France, the other half in
deduction of the ſum due from France to England.
It was likewiſe agreed, that theſe proceedings of the
two crowns in favour of the Low-Countries ſhould
be purſued with as much ſecrecy as was poſſible, to
avoid a direct infringement of the treaty of peace
concluded with Spain. On a ſuppoſition that this
power, conſidering this action as an abſolute infrac-
tion, ſhould make repriſals upon the two protecting
kings, the following reſolution was taken : if the
King of England were attacked alone, the King of
France ſhovid furniſh him with an army of fix thous
ſand French at his own expence, during the whole
time of the war and in four years, and by equal
proportions, diſcharge the remainder of his debt,
England ſhould act preciſely in the ſame manner, in
regard to France, in caſe the ſtorm ſhould fall up-
on her; the choice of either ſea or land ſhould be
in the option of the party attacked, nor ſhould Eng-
land in this caſe require any part of her debt. Fi-
nally, ſhould Spain at once declare war againſt both
the allied princes, in order to act offenſively, and at
the ſame time promote the ſecurity of Flanders, his
moſt Chriſtian Majeſty ſhould have an army of
twenty thouſand men on the frontiers of Guienne,
Provence, Languedoc, Dauphine, Burgundy, and
Breſſe; he ſhould likewiſe have the ſame number
of forces in Flanders; and ſhovld farther divide the
Spaniſh forces, by directing his galleys to cruize in
the Mediterranean. His Britannic Majeſty on bis
ſide, beſides a land army of at leaſt ſix thouſand
men, which he ſhould keep in ccnſtant readineſs,
ſhould ſend a fleet into the Weſt-Indies, and ſhould
order another to cruiſe upon the coaſts of Spain.
All payment of debts ſhould be ſuſpended, and each
ſhould defray its own expences. The alliance, bi-
therto kept a profound ſecret, ſhould now be made

public, by a treaty offenſive and defenſive *
5 the

the two Kings; neither of whom, without the
other's conſent, ſhould either lay down his arms,
diminiſh the number of forces agreed on, nor be-
gin any preliminaries or conference for an accom-
modation.

Such was the ſubſtance of the projected treaty
which had given me ſo much trouble and anxiety.
James ſigned it, and I ſigned it after him; after
which, I thought of nothing but returning as ſoon
as poſlible into France, where it was to be changed
into a treaty with all the forms. I did not fail to
adviſe Henry of it, from whom, however, I con-
cealed, or diſguiſed part of this important informa-
tion, and likewiſe the detail of what had laſt hap-

ened to me with the King of England, in preſence
of his counſellors : my diſpatches had been ſo long,
ſo frequent, and yet ſo imperfect, and written in ſo
much haſte, that perhaps it was not acting amils to
ſpare his Majeſty the trouble ; for he muſt have
armed himſelf with great patience to read them.
This, however, was not the only cauſe of my ſilence;
for the regularity which Henry obſerved in writing
to me, both to inform me of all material tranſac-
tions in the council of France, and to ſend me new
orders and new inſtructions, conformable to the
ſeveral changes that happened in the buſineſs of my
negotiation, ſufficiently perſuaded me nothing of
this kind either fatigued or diſguſted him; but, be-
ſides that upon theſe occaſions, it is a ſtroke of
good policy, always to keep ſomething in reſerve,
to inſure a better reception upon one's return, I was
unwilling to expoſe the whole ſecret of my negoti-
ation to the hazard of a diſcovery. An accident
Which had but lately happened, contributed till
more to increaſe my circumſpection. I have not
mentioned this in its proper place, that I might not
interrupt the relation of matters of greater con-
ſequence.

Among

- .
%
2 2

—
——

I
l
|
.
*
|

— >

ao * .
* —

* * 93 — 2
— ma 2

—_— a
"IT. _

—

—

— "»
— —

= 3
— 8 .
- > -

2

— ——— vn -

192 'MEMOIR S Bock XVI.

Among the great number of letters which J ſent
from London, ſome directed to Villeroi and the
council, and others to the King only, one of theſe
laſt, daied the 2oth of July, was never received by
Henry, which he diſcovered from the contents of
my, diſpatch by the next poſt, and gave me imme-
diate notice of it: it was a letter of the greateſt
conſequence. The courier to whom I entruſted it
was one of my own domeſtics, of whoſe fidelity and
honeſty I was perfectly ſatisfied : I queſtioned him,
and he anſwered, that, upon his arrival, the King
being gone to hunt, he had carried the letter to

Villeroi, and had given it to one of his clerks; that

he did not know this clerk, and had forgot to alk
his name, being at that moment interrupted by
Louvet, who alſo came and ſpoke to this clerk, and
at the ſame time delivered him ſeveral other packets
directed for his maſter. This account I ſent his
Majeſty, entreating him to make all poſlible inqui-
ries about it. After great trouble, and many in-
formations, his Majeſty was able to give me no 0-
ther ſatisfaction than that he had been told, and did
believe the fault was in the poſt-maſter of Ecouan.
I had before had reaſon to be ſuſpicious, and the
affair of the clerk, whoſe roguery I was alſo well

_ acquainted with, having entirely opened my eyes,

J no longer doubted that there was a traitor em-
ployed in the King's office, and even that this could
be no other than one of thoſe under Villeroi. L
wrote to Henry, and told him, that notwithſtanding
his account of this affair, I was of opinion it covld
only have happened at the time and place which 1
had deſcribed to him in my former letter: this clerk,

Whoever he was, bcing gained by the enemies of the

ſtate, to diſcover the contents of the letters which
I 2 to his Majeſty from London, could not reſiſt
his deſire to open this, the direction of which exci-

ted his curioſity; for I wrote upon the cover, Packet
10

. 193

to be given into the King's own hands, without being
opened. He repented it, no doubt, when he found
he could make no ule of it, its moſt eſſential con-
tents being expreſſed in a cypher, the meaning of
which he could no ways diſcover; and this coni-
deration conſoled me for the loſs: but he had com-
mitted the fault, and apparently thought it better to
throw the letter into the fire, than deliver it opened.
I afterwards diſcovered the truth, which juſtified
theſe conjectures.

Henry could have wiſhed that I had practiſed up-
on the Queen of England and the Prince her fon,
as I had on King James, thereby to gain a perfect
knowledge of both their characters and inclinations :
but as, notwithſtanding the reports which had been

current, this princeſs remained ſtill in Scotland, and

would not arrive for ſome time, his Majeſty did not
think it a ſufficient conſideration for me to make
a longer ſtay at London, whillt ſeveral other affairs,
almoſt as important, required my preſence at Paris
and he was the firſt to preſs me to return as ſoon as
poſſible. This order was perfectly agreeavie to me.
Envy and malice triumphs moſt over the abſent.
My friends loſt yet more than myicif from my not
being among them. TI intruſted Vaucelas, my bro—
ther-in-law, with the care uf carrying the Queen
of England the letters f om tbeh Majeſties which I
had brought for her; and J inſtrufted him in what
he ſhould do and ſay, to obtain what the King de-
fired to know concerning this princels.

Whilſt I was very bubly employed in prepara—
tions for my departure, the wound which I recei-
ved in my mouth at the ſiege of Chartres broke out
afreſh, and cauſed a fever, which retarded my de-
parture for ſome days, and even prevented my wri-
ting as uſual to the King. But as ſoon as I was
ſomewhat recovered, I demanded my audience of

leave of the King of England, who had the good-
VoL. III. R nels

194 M E M O/I R S Book XVI.

neſs to ſpare me the trouble of going to Greenwich
upon this occaſion, by ſending to acquaint me,
that he would come to London on purpoſe to re-
ceive me, and that he ſhould be at Weſtminſter ready
to give me audience in the morning as early as [
pleaſed; becauſe he propoſed to go a hunting the
ſame day, “to diſſipate the uneaſineſs,” added he
very obligingly, „which he ſhould feel for my de-

c“ parture,” | |
I attended his Majeſty ſo early in the morning,
that he was not dreſſed, and waited near an hour ;
which time I employed in viewing -.the magnificent
tombs and other curious antiquities for which the
cathedral of St Peter's, Weſtminſter, is celebrated.
I was received by his Britannic Majeſty with all
oſſible marks of eſteem and affection; and he re-
plied to the compliment which I made him on the
regret I felt from my departure, that his own, of
which he had informed me, was alſo moſt true,
and the more fo, as he could not hope for my re ·
turn, becauſe my many and various avocations
would detain me in France; but he proteſted, and
confirmed his proteſtations in the moſt ſolemn
manner, that, by whatever perſon his moſt Chri-
{tian ſhould ſend back the treaty, of which 1 car-
ried the form, he would ſign it without any further
diſcuſſion, He ſpoke of this his new alliance with
Henry in a very affecting manner; ſaid he conli-
dered this prince as his ſole model as well as his
friend; and proteſted, that he ſhould look upon
all thoſe who were enemies to him, as enemies to
himſelf. To ſhew me that he had not forgot any
of his promiſes, he made a kind of recapitulation
of all of them. He promiſed not to permit any
interceſſion or acceſs to him, from any of the ſub-
jects of the King of France; and required the
ſame deference from the King of France; particu»
lorly with regard to any Jeſuits who might be found
Bt | | iN

7 195

in diſguiſe, either within his dominions, or on board
any of his ſhips ; he praiſed Henry extremely for
having baniſhed this order out of the kingdom, and
ſaid, that he adviſed him from his heart, never to
be guilty of ſuch an error as to recall them : he in-
ſiſted on this article the moſt ; for indeed he hatcd
the Jeſuits no leſs than he did Spain; and this a-
verſion was increaſed, by his conſidering them as
his perſonal enemies: nor did he appear perfectly
ſatisfied till 1 had engaged, as abſolutely as I could,
to ſend theſe aſſurances, which he required of his
Moſt Chriſtian Majeſty, in writing. He gaye me
two letters for the King and Queen of France, pure»

ly complimentary, in anſwer to thoſe which he had

received from them, wherein the article of the
French ambaſſador was not ſlightly touched “.
Being furniſhed with theſe letters, and the form
of the treaty, I reſolved to ſtay no longer than the
next day. Having taken my leave of all thoſe
gentlemen who were with me for this purpoſe, I
departed from London, taking the fame road as at
my arrival. Sidney and the Engliſh Vice-admiral
elcorted me to the ſea ſide, and took care to provide
me and all my retinue with every thing we wanted,
both for our journey by land, and paſlage by ſea.
But I ſhould before have mentioned the preſents
which I made in England, in the name of his Moſt
Chriſtian Majeſty. That to King James was fix
tine horſes richly capariſoned, to which Henry added
alſo another gift, which ought to be eſteemed (till
more conſiderable ; this was a gentleman called
Saint- Anthony, in all re ſpects the beſt and moſt
complete horſeman of the age; that to the Queen
of England was a large and moſt beautiful Venetian
glaſs, the golden frame of which was covered with

* Matthieu the hiſtorian ſays, the King of England made the

* of Roſuy a preſent ot a chain ſet with diamonds of great
value.

R 2 damonds

198 M E M OI R S. Book XVI.

diamonds; and that to the Prince of Wales was a
golden lance and helmet, inriched likewiſe with dia-
monds, a fencing maſter, and vaulter. The Duke of
Lennox, the Earl of Northumberland, in a word,
all thoſe whom I have occaſionally mentioned, be-
ſides ſome others, were preſented, ſome with boxes,
and others with crotchets, buttons, egrets, rings,
and chains of gold and 'diamonds : ſeveral ladies
allo received rings and pearl necklaces. The va-
lue of all theſe preſents, including 1200 crowns
which 1 left with Beaumont to be diſtributed in
certain places, amounted to 60,000 crowns. Hen.
ry's views in making fo many rich preſents, a con-
tiderable part of which were even continued as pen-
ons to ſome Engliſh Lords, were to retain them,
and attach them more ſtrongly to his intereſts. 1
made them partly from my own knowledge, and
partly from the recommendations of Beaumont,
my chief care being to diſtribute them fo as to a-
void giving any cauſe of jealouſy between theſe
Engliſh Lords, and to prevent King James himſelf
from conceiving any jealouſy of my intention,
The precaution which 1 uſed for this purpoſe was,
to alk his permiſſion to acknowledge, by ſome ſmall
gratuities, the ſervices 1 had received in his court.
At Dover I received a letter from Henry, where-
in he acquainted me, that he had arrived at Villers-
Coterets the gth of July, at which place he impa-
tiently waited for me: he paſſed ſome days here,
during which the Queen made a journey to Lieſſe.
I did not take any reſt at Dover, and ordered all
things to be in readineſs to embark the next day,
The weather was ſo bad in the night, that the Eng-
liſh Vice-admiral very ſcrioufly adviſed me to alter
my reſolution. The leaſt delay appeared no lels
inſupportable to all wy retinue than to myſelf, eſpe-
cially to thoſe city-ſparks who find themſelves out

of their clement when they are off the 1
EY

0 U. 197

of Paris: they all preſſed me with ſuch eagerneſs
immediately to quit Dover, and Henry's letter flat -
tered me with io favourable a reception, that I con-

ſented to fail! as ſoon as we could. Repentance foon

followed our precipitation: we met with a violent
tempeſt, that we were in the utmoſt danger : we
were the whole day in croſſing the channel, and ſo
extremely ſea-ſick, that though we were three hun-

dred of us, had a veſſel with only twenty men at -

tacked us, we muſt have ſurrendered.

A ſecond letter which I received from Henry at
Boulogne, rendered it neceſſary for me not to loſe
a moment. At this place, I quitted thoſe who had
accompanied me, after having thanked them for the

-tonour they had done me, and left them to go

where-ever they thought proper. His Majeſty had
taken care to order poſt-horſes to be in readineſs in
all the proper places upon the road, in caſe my
health would permit me to make uſe of them. I
therefore took poſt at Abbeville, at three of clock
in the afternoon, and arrived the next day, at eight
m the morning, at Villers-Coterets,

I would not take any repoſe till I ha4 fiſt recei-
ved the honour of ſaluting his Majeſty. I found
him in that walk of the park which leads to the fo-
relt, where he propoſed to take an airing on {one
horſes that were to be brought there to him, Bel-
lievre, Villeroi, De Maiſſes, and Siliery, were walk-
ing with him, and in one of the walks adjacent
were the Count de Soiffons, Roquelaure, and Fron—
tenac. Immediately upon his perceiving, me, thoug!
at a diſtance, he ſ2id, as De Malſſes atteiwards in-
formed me, „ There's the wan I have > much
“ withed to fee; he is at laſt arrived; my couſin
* the Count of Sviſſons wilt b, called, that he
* may be preſent at the brief clatien ke will give
„ us of what he has ſcen, heard, ſaid, and done,
* of which he has wrote me nothing. Let my
| R 3 « horſes:

198 ME M OI R S Bock XVI.

« horſes be ſent back; I ſhall not now go into the
« foreſt.”

His Majeſty would not ſuffer me to kneel to kiſs
his hand, but embraced me twice very cloſely. His
firſt words were, that he was perfectly ſatisfied with
my ſervices; that he had not thought my letters
tedious, and that he ſhould take pleaſure in hearing
what I had not related in them. Irepiied, that this
relation would be ſomewhat long, and could not
well be made, but as opportunity ſhould preſent, to
diſcourſe on ſo many different matters. I began
with the perſon of the King of England, which I
deſcribed to him nearly the fame as I have already
in theſe memoirs. I did not omit either the admi-
ration which this prince exprefled for his Majeſty,
or the delight he took on being compared with him,
nor his deſire to render bimſelf worthy of the com-
pariſon. I related the proofs which he had given
me of his attachment to France, of his contempt
for the chimeras with which Spain had endeavour»
ed to inſpire him, and how far he was from eſpou-
ſing the party of the revolted French Calviniſts.
King James was ſenſible from his own ſituation,
how, very unfit this laſt procedure would have been,
having ſo great a number of ſeditious in his own
dominions, that I was very much deceived, if they
did not one day cauſe him much trouble. ] added,
that if I had myſelf been diſpoſed to give ear to
them, the chicfs of this faction had given me fair
opportunities to enter with them into very ſerious
enterpriſes. I mentioned the affair of the loſt diſ-
patch, and ſpoke my ſentiments of it with free-
dom. I then returned to the King of England, and
acquainted his Majeſty with what he was ignorant
of in regard to my laſt audience, and, together with
the form of the treaty ſigned by us both, I preſent-
ed to him the two letters from his Britannic Maje-
ſty, and another letter wrote to his Majeſty, ſince

my

renn 199

my departure from London, by the Count of Beau-
mont, which I had received upon the road. Henry
ordered Villeroi to read all thoſe letters to him.

2aumont in his letter acquainted the King, that
the Queen of England, with her children, was in-
ſtantly expected in London, from whence ſhe
would go directly to Windſor to reſide there with
the King; that many were apprehenſive her arrival
would cauſe diſturbance in affairs, and might inſpire
the factious with courage; that happily there was
no able man among them; that the Spaniſh ambaſ.
ſador was at laſt arrived in England, and, with an-
other from the Duke of Brunfwic, was ſaid to be
actually at Graveſend, from whence they were im-
mediately to proceed to London, his Britannic Ma-
jeſty having ſent ſhips to protect the Spaniſh ambaſ.
ſador in his paſſage againſt thoſe of the States; that
Count d'Aremberg depended ſo entirely upon the
alterations which this ambaſſador would make in
affairs, that bcing informed of his arrival, he was
gone before him to Windſor, there to wait his co-
ming: nor did Beaumont diſſemble his own fears
of the effects which it might have on a prince ſuſ-
ceptible of new impreſhons; not ſo much from
what he would gain from the magniticent offers of
Spain, as from his own natural timidity, his weak-
neſs, and even ſeruples, leſt, in ſupporting the Uni-
ted-Provinces, he ſhould countenance a parcel of
rebels.

Beaumont wrote thus from the communication
which had been made to him of a plan for an a-
greement between Spain and the States, deſigned
and drawn up in Germany, of which he even gave
the purport in this letter ; but he ſeemed perſuaded
the deputies of the Low Countries would never con-
ſent to it, though the Emperor ſhould be guaran-
tee of it; becauſe they thought it neither ſtrong e-
nough to oblige Spain to obſerve it, nor even ſuf-
2 ; ficiently

200 M-E M O INR 8. Book VI.

ficiently impartial, to hope from it a perfect peace
with that crown; beſides, they had a general fu-
ſpicion of all propoſitions wherein France and Eng-
land were not concerned. He obſerved, that theſe
deputies were likewiſe upon the point of returning
home, with a reſolution to animate their republic
to a vigorous defence, from the certainty my con-
vention with his Britannic Majeſty bad given them,
that they ſhould not be abandoned by the two kings,
and from the permiſſion which James had given
them to raiſe ſoldiers in Scotland, to be command-
ed by my Lord Buccleugh, whom they had accept-
ed as Colonel of theſe recruits : finally, Beaumont
concluded his letter, by ſaying, that, in order to be
ſtill more perfectly informed of every thing that
paſſed, and to remind the Kirg of England of bis
promiſes if neceſſary, he was going himſelf to
Windfor. I take no notice of thoſe paſſages in this
letter, wherein Beaumont gave the higheſt prailcs
to my conduct and my negotiation.

Villeroi having finiſhed the reading the plan for a
tifaty, Well, couſin,“ ſaid Henry, addreffing
himſelf to the Count of Soiſſons, * what dò you think
« cf all this? give me your opinion of it freely.”
I readily imagined what reply he would make, and
the Count did not deceive me, © Since you re-
& quire it of me,” ſaid he, « I muſt ſay, that J
& think the Marquis of Roſny has very great credit
& with the King of England, and that he is in a
marvellous good intelligence with the Engiith, at
& leaſt if his relation, and all which you have been
& informed of, is true ; for which reaſon he ought
& to have brought much more advantageous con-
& ditions, and a treaty in a better form than that
& which he has preſented to you, which is really
& nothing more than a mere project of hope» and
4% fair words, without any certainty that they will
& ever be executed.“ «© What you have ſaid is

| 1 « truly

8

1603. O F “ 201

« truly very fine and good,” replied Henry : “ no-
« thing is ſo eaſy as to diſcover faults in the actions
« of others,” His Majeſty ſtill continued to ſpeak,
as if to make my apology, and altogether my elo-

He ſaid, I was the only perſon in France who,
with ſo limited a power, could have performed what
] had : that my credential letters were not even de-
manded of me at the court of London ; which be-
haviour was not to be paralleled z that he had fore-
ſeen and expected the diſficulties with which I had
ſtruggled, and that he had not hoped I could have ſo
eaſily conquered them; that he was perfectly ſatisfied;
and that he only repented his not having given me
carte-blanche. *©* Roſny,” ſaid he, “ in his conduct
&« has given me an example, which confirms to me
« the truth of a Latin proverb, though I do not know
“ whether I ſpeak it right, Mitte ſapientem, et nibil
% dicas : and I am certain, that, if his preſence
e ſhould again become neceſſary on the other ſide,
« he will always be ready to return, and ſerve me
« with the ſame ability and addreſs which he has
& here ſhewn.” -1 ſuppreſs great part of what, up-
on this occaſion, the generous ſoul of Henry inſpi-
red him with for my defence : what gave me the
molt ſenſible ſatisfaction, and which I conſidered
as infinitely ſuperior to all the praiſes he beſtowed
upon me, was his adding, that he had nothing to
fear from thus prailing me to my face; becauſe he
knew that thoſe praiſes, inſtead of making me vain
and leſs diligent, would only increaſe my deſire of
acting ſtill better. Theſe words ſilenced the Count
of Soiſſons.

I then anſwered ſeveral queſtions which the Kin
aſked me, touching the nature and power of the
three kingdoms of Great Britain, on the character
of the Engliſh, and what they thought of their new
King. After this the converſation turned on the
affair of Combaut. Henry, after I had given him

a

202 ME MO I R S Book XVI.

a circumſtantial relation of it, aſſured me that he
approved of my conduct therein, conſidering it as
equally dangerous either to favour, or pretend ig-
norance of the eſcape of the criminal, to endeavour
to excuſe him, or openly to vindicate him. I ac-
quainted his Majeſty with the character of young
Servin *, ſuch as I have already given, The King
having twice aſked whether dinner was ready, went
in to ſit down to table, having firſt directed Villeroi
to provide me my dinner, and ordered me to go
and take my repole till the next day, as being what
J muſt very much want, after having rode poſt, and
that ſucceeded by a pretty long waik. He ordered
my good friends Frontenac and Parfait, to ſerve me
from his kitchen, till my own equipage and attend-
ants were arrived; * And to-morrow morning,” ſaid
he, “ we will renew our diſcourſe.”

In the afternoon, the King took the airing in the
foreſt which he had intended in the morning ; in
the evening at ſupper, he ſent me two excellent
melons and four partridges ; at the ſame time ac-
quainting me, that I ſhould come to him early the
next morning, before any of his counſellors were
with him, which I accordingly did. Though it
was very early, he was dreſſed, and had breakfaſted,
when I entered his apartment, and was diverting
himſelf with looking at a game of tennis then play-
ing in the little court of the caſtle, which was ge-
- nerally uſed for this diverſion. 4 Roſny,“ ſaid he,
« we will take a walk while the freſhneſs of the
© morning continues ; I have ſome queſtions to aſk
% you, and ſome matters to diſcuſs, on which I
“% have been thinking the whole night. 1 aroſe at
« four o'clock, theſe things having preſſed my
« thoughts ſo ſtrongly, that I have not been able

* L'Etoile makes mention of him. © It is ſurpriſing,” ſays he,
% how it could happen, that the plague ſhould find means to attack
« ſo great a plague as he.“

; | « to

o . ” :
* Pry: 4 F n
. CO oem a

1603. 0 S Tc 203

ce to ſleep.” He took me by the hand, and we
walked into the park, where we continued near two
hours alone. Bellievre, Villeroi, and Sillery, ha-
ving joined us, the King continued walking ano-
ther hour with us four. Our mornings were gene-
rally ſpent in the ſame manner, during the three
following days which his Majeſty paſſed at Villers-
Coterets. In theſe converſations I gave him an ex-
act and particular account of all the moſt ſecret and
important matters, with which he ſtill remained to
be acquainted with. 8
received ſeveral letters from Beaumont, the
contents of which may ſerve as a ſupplement to the
affairs of England, which I have already related.
The arrival of the Queen at London did not occa-
ſion all that diſorder which had been apprehended ;
the diſcontented found her not to be what they had
conceived. It ſeemed as though her ſudden change
of ſituation and country had made as ſudden a change
in her inclinations and manners; from an effect of
the elegancies of England, or from thoſe of the roy-
al dignity, ſhe became diſpoſed to pleaſures and a-
muſements, and ſeemed wholly engaged in them
and nothing elſe : ſhe ſo entirely neglected or for-
got the Spaniſh politics, as gave reaſon to believe
ſhe had, in reality, only pretended to be attached
to them through the neceſlity of eventual conjunc-
tures. Kintore, Who had accompanied her, open-
ly continued his profeſſion of attachment to France.
Some ladies, in whom this princeſs repoſed the great-
eſt confidence, poſitively aſſured Beaumont ſhe was
not fo perfect a Spaniard as was believed. Beau-
mont contrived to get himſelf preſented to her, and
made my excuſes to her for not having been able to
ſtay till her arrival, nor wait upon her myſelf with
the letters from their Majeſties. |
During all this the Spaniſh ambaſſador, whoſe
arrival in England had been ſo politiveiy aſſerted,
| Was

204 MEMOIRS Book RvI.

was not yet come. Count d' Aremberg, who was
ſo far deccived in his expectation as to go and wait
his arrival at Windfor, found himſelf at laſt obliged
to demand without him his audience of the King,
who granted it. I am ignorant of what paſſed in
it : I only know that he demanded a ſecond, for
which the King made him ſuffer a thouſand delays,
which, however, .can only be attributed to this
prince's diſtaſte of buſineſs, and his paſſion for the
chace, which ſeemed to make him forget all other
affairs; for at this very time, his conduct and diſ-
courſe was ſo far from giving the Spaniſh partiſans
any cauſe to deſpair, that, on the contrary, he ap-
peared diſpoled again to fall into his former irreſy-
lation. Beaumont did not know to what to attri-
bute this change, whether to his natural indiſpoſi-
tion, or to the inſinuations of Cecil, who uſed all
the means he poſlibly could to make him fail in the
obſervance of his promiſes. Happily many new
incidents concurred to ſupport this prince againſt
all temptations of this kind ; and the Spaniards
were ſo imprudent in their conduct, as to be them:
ſelves the principal cauſes of it.

No ſooner was the Spaniſh ambaſſador arrived in
London (for he did at laſt arrive there) than both
court and city, and all affairs, were put into a vio-
lent ferment, the effects of various cabals, intrigues,
miſt uſts, and ſuſpicions. He ſoon multiplicd the
number of his creatures, by his extraordinary libe-
ralitics to all thoſe whom he conſidered as necellary
to be gained. He endeavoured to tamper with the
Scotch troops, and engage them in the Spaniſh ſer-
vice, as the States had done in theirs. This would
have been a deciſive ſtroke, which Holland could
not evade any otherwiſe than with the aſſiſtance ot
her protectors, by retaining theſe troops in her own
ſervice. All theſe proceedings of the Spaniard, be-

ing purſued with a ſpirit of pride and independence,
| | veie

3
5 a.
'#
E

67 Tv LY. 205

were ſo much the more diſagreeable to James, as
his natural weakneſs produced in him a repugnance
to oppoſe them by an exertion of his authority.
He would have given the world to be freed from
his perplexity, by the departure of the ambaſſador,
A whiſper was likewiſe current concerning a con-
ſpiracy of the Engliſh Catholics * againſt James's
perſon. Beaumont conſtantly treated this inſinua-
tion as a calumny; and indeed, whoever is acquaint-
ed with the true ſtate of this body in England at
this time, will, in its weakneſs and the meanneſs of
its ſentiments, diſcover an unanſwerable argument
to diſprove it. |

But a more certain and undoubted conſpiracy was
that of fome Engliſh lords, who formed the delign
of ſtabbing the King. Their chiefs, for the deſign
was proved, and it was believed they had under-
taken it at the inſtigation of Spain and the Arch-
dukes, were Lord Cobham, Raleigh, Gray, Mark +
ham, and ſeveral others of the principal ſervants,
and even the intimate confidents of the late Queen,
though they had appeared among the moſt forward
to do homage to her ſucceſſor. Nevertheleſs Cecil
was not named in the cabal; the affair was public,
and was the ſubject of much diſcourſe.. A religious
diſpute, which aroſe in the conference between the
Proteſtants and Purltans, increaſed the diſorder.
The converſation of the court turned entirely upon
the diſputes and quarrels which happened between
particular perſons. The Earl of Northumberland
{truck Colonel Vere in the face, in preſence of the
whole court, and was confined at Lambeth by the
King's order, who was juſtly incenſed at fo diſre-
ſpectful and outrageous an inſult. The Earl of
Southampton and Lord Grey gave each other the

* It produced a proclamation, whereby King James baniſhed the
Jeſuits out of his dominions, Mem. d'etat de Villeroi, vol. 3. p. 217+

VoL, III. 8 lie

206 NM E M OI R Ss Book Xvl.

lie in the Queen's preſence, and uſed ſeveral other
attrocious expreſſions; but they were reconciled to
the King by aſking pardon of the Queen for their
imprudence, and to each other by an intervention
of the royal authority, commanding them to for.
bear any acts of violence. After which, without
any other ſatisfaction, they converſed together as
friends: from whence one wovld be apt to imagine
they were of opinion, that the King's name and au-
thority preſerves the honour of thoſe who cannot
vindicate it for themſelves.

When from the accounts which Beaumont gave
me in his letters, of all theſe public and private dif.
ferences, I found the affair was in the moſt favour-
able ſituation I could deſire it, I embraced the op-
portunity to put the finiſhing hand to the work
which I had begun at London: I did myſelf the
honour of writing to his Britannic Majeſty ; I in-
formed him, that the King of France had with
pleaſure ratified the plan concerted between his
Majeſty and me, and that he had ſent the Count of
Beaumont the neceſſary power to reduce it into
ſuch a form as his Majeſty ſhould judge proper; 1
repeated the proteſtations of obedience and attach-
ment which I had before made him; I aſſured him,
that by this I was fo far from offending the King my
maſter, that, on the contrary, I ſerved and obeyed
him.

I wrote at the ſame time to Beaumont, and in-
formed him of what had happened to me upon my
return into France, of my converſations with the
King, and his inclination to ſend me again at a pro-
per time into England. With this letter J alſo ſent
Beaumont the treaty ſigned by bis Majeſty. and
gave him likewite the neceſſary inſtructions for
maintaining the good intelligence which this treaty
eſtabliſhed between the two crowns : this would in
ſome meaſure depend on that which ſhould ſubſiſ

between

between the ambaſſador of France at London, and
that of England at Paris. This latter had taken
offence at the ſubſcription of a letter, whercin a
title had been given him which was either impro-
per, or ſuch as he did not like. I took the blame
of this upon mylelf, and repaired it as well as I
could. | |
Beaumont having received the treaty, acquainted
the King of England therewith, who referred him
directly to Cecil. He was aſtoniſhed to find this
ſecretary on a ſudden become tractable, give his
approbation of it with great readineſs, and without
making the leaſt difficulty; on the contrary, he was
laviſh in his praiſes of his moſt Chriſtian Majeſty
and me: all things conſpired to promote it; the
treaty was therefore received, ſigned, and accom-
pliſhed, in the molt authentic and ſolemn manner,
Dauval being arrived in France from Beaumont
with an account of this good news, I made m
acknowledgments to bis Britannic Majeſty in a ſe-
cond letter: and to employ all forts of counter-
batteries againſt the Spaniards, who ſet no bounds
to their preſents, we imitated them in this reſpect,
and even gave penſions to all the moſt diſtinguithed
perſons in the court of King James ; the beſt and

moſt beautiful horſes were induſtriouſly procured

where-cver they could be found, and they were
ſent, together with magnificent furniture, as pte-
ſents to this prince.

Thus was Spain diſappointed in thoſe great hopes
ſhe had conceived to our prejudice, from the acceſ-
lion of the King of Scotland to the throne of Eng-
land, and which probably were the motives for her

making thoſe great armaments which ſhe did this

year. .On the 27th of May, a ſquadron of twelve

Spaniſh galleys, manned with three thouſand ſol-

diers, and completely equipped, were beaten by only

four Dutch veſſels, wbich was the ſecond loſs of

I :2 this

— 2 — Bows 2 —— ———

— ——— — "TO

— —

— — ——— — 10
" 3

208 M E M OI R S Bock XVI.

this kind that Spain had lately ſuffered: Frederic
Spinola, who commanded this ſquadron, was killed
in the engagement. Spain, to retrieve theſe misfor-
runes, made ſuch preparations on every ſide for war,
as ſpread a terror amongſt all her neighbours. She
made herſelf miſtreſs of the Mediterranean, by the
=o that Charles Doria commanded there; and
veſſels in the mean time were building in the port
of Liſbon, for the embarkation of twenty thouſand
ſoldiers. This work was purſued with ſuch indefa-
tigable labour, that it was not remitted even on
Sundays and holidays.

Every one talked his own way about the occa-
ſion of ſuch formidable preparations : ſome ſaid,
that they were deligned againſt Flanders, particular-
ly Oftend ; others, that they were deſtined for the
conqueſt of Barbary, becauſe the King of Cuſco
having promiſed the council of Madrid to aſſiſt that
crown in the reduction of the important city of Al.
giers, they provided a ſupply of men and money,
which that prince kept to himſelf, without being at
much trouble about the performance of his word.
Many perſons were perſuaded that Spain had a de-
ſign upon France itſelf : the firſt notice his Majeſly
received of it, was at the ſame time that he was ad-
viſed to be attentive to the caſtle of If, and to the
iſlands on the coaſt of Marſeilles. I was then in
England ; his Majeſty wrote me an account of it;
but did not ſeem to give much credit to thoſe infor-
mations, although he was not ignorant that the Duke
of Savoy was very ſolicitous to do him this bad of-
fice ; but he knew likewiſe that Spain thought this
advice of the Duke's very intereſted ; and the Pope
gave him repeated aſſurances of the contrary, which
there was great room to think proceeded indirectly
from the council of Spain, who had reaſons for not
provoking this prince too far. 1

* *
3 e — —
„ N Y © a” .

— n nnr 209

In reality, all this was unravelled by taking into
conſideration, what was carrying on with King
James, by a double negotiation of France and Spain
at the ſame time; and his Majeſty took the part
which prudence directed, which was, to give new
orders for the ſtri&t obſervation of diſcipline in Lan-
guedoc, Provence, and Dauphine. Monſieur Le-
Grand, who had lately obtained that the artillery of
the city of Beaune ſhould not be taken away, was
ſent into his government of Burgundy, with orders
to act in concert with Leſdiguieres, and to throw
himſelf into Geneva, if the Duke of Savoy ſeemed
to have any intention of making a new attempt up-
on this city, although the council of France at the
ſame time earneſtly adviſed this little republic to
liſten to the mediation offered by ſome Swiſs can-
tons, to terminate by an advantageous agreement
that kind of tedious and long war which had fo long
ſubſiſted between them and Savoy. However, the
tranſportation of arms from France into Spain, or
Spaniſh Flanders, was prohibited; and Barrault “
cauſed four thouſand five hundred pikes of Biſcay to
be ſeized at Saint- John de-Luz, which a French mer-
chant of Dieppe had embarked for the Low- Coun-
tries, notwithitanding this order.

The long ſtay which was made by Doria on the
coaſt of Genoa with the galleys before mentioned,
was another myſtery that could not be found out.
He had failed for the coaſt of Villa-Francha, as if
with a deſign to take the thrce ſons of the Duke of
Savoy on board, Who appeared to be waiting at

Nice only for an opportunity of being conveyed to

Spain; their father, it was ſaid, ſent them there to
be educated, and to be raiſed to the firſt dignities
of the ſtate , the government of Milan, and the

* Emerick Gobier de Barrault. 8 |
The ſecond of theſe princes was made viceroy of Portugal, and
the third archbiſhop of Toledo and cardinal,

8 3 viceroylhip

—— — — — — _

216 M E MOI R 8 Bock NI.

viceroyſhip of Naples and Sicily, being thoſe he

molt eagerly panted after, probably becauſe he flat -
tered himſelf, that thoſe titles would afford him an
opportunity to ſnatch ſome part of thoſe territories
for himſelf, But every one was deceived ; Doria
paſſed by without landing or ſtopping at Villa Fran-

cha: nevertheleſs, there were perſons who conti-
nued to believe that it had been his deſign, but that

his reſentment for Savoy's not paying him thoſe ho-
nours, nor eſteeming him ſo highly as he thought
he deſerved, had prevented his execution of it;
others maintained that it was agreed upon between
the Duke of Savoy and him, that he ſhould act in

this manner, to give the Duke a pretence for ſtay-
ing longer at Nice, where, ſaid theſe conjecturers,

he only waited for an opportunity to make an at-
tempt upon Provence; and others again thought
they had diſcovered the reaſon of his departure, to
be an order which they ſuppoſed he had received
from Spain to go and join his ſquadron to the great
naval army of the Spaniards : or poſlibly the coun-

eil of Madrid had nothing elſe in view, but to ac-
cuſtom her neighbours to preparation and motions,
For which they could not gueſs the cauſe. However
that may be, this did not prevent the voyage of the
children of Savoy into Spain; after a delay of ſome

time longer at Nice, they paſſed cn the twentieth
of June within view of Marſeilles, without faluting

the caſtle of If; their convoy conſiſted of nine gal-

leys, four of Malra, three of the Pope's, and two of
Savoy.

In the mean time, ſome other Spaniſh troops
were upon their march from Italy to Flanders. His

Majeſty was the more attentive to their motions,

becaule he was informed that Hebert, who had lett
France. and retired to Milan, continued his former
intrigues with the Count of Fuentes: the ſecret was

diſcovered by a letter that Hebert wrote to his bro-

ther,

K b . + x "IR ; So Sz
<a $4.2 2 1. JE OT
4 A . * * n W

1603. 0:7 B UV . 211

ther, who was a treaſurer of France in Languedoc.
Theſe troops, as I was informed by his Majeſty's
letters to me at London, quitted Savoy, and paſſed
the bridge of Greſin on the firſt of July; they con-
ſiſted of ten Neapolitan companies, commanded by
Don Inigo de Borgia, and only Don Sancho de Lune
remained in this canton with a ſmall body of troops,
with a view no doubt to haſten the treaty depend.
ing between Savoy and Geneva, which was con-
cluded accordingly on the 15th of the ſame month.

The remainder of the Spaniſh troops that were

drawn from Italy, conſiſted of four thouſand Mila-
nois, commanded by the Count de Saint-George,
who took the ſame rout.

Notwithſtanding theſe ſupplies, by which the
Archdukes received a great acceſſion of ſtrength,
yet Henry was ſtill of opinion, that the Spaniards
would not complete their enterpriſe upon Oſtend
this year; they themſelves ſeemed to think that
time alone could effect it, their forces being conſi-
derably diminiſhed. The thouſand horſe that at-
tended the Duke of Aumale were reduced by de-
ſertion to leſs than five hundred, and thoſe that re-
mained were ſo great an expence to their. own com-
manders, that they expected to be ſoon obliged to
diſband them. Such was the ſituation of the Uni-
ted-Provinces during this year, wherein they gained
likewiſe another advantage over their enemies; a
ſmall number of Dutch veſſels who were going to

load ſpices, meeting with fourteen Portugueſe gal-

leys belonging to Goa, gave them chace, took fave,
in which they found great riches, and diſperſed the
reſt. 2

Europe, during the courſe of this year, had not
more tranquillity in the caſt than the weſt. Maho-

met III. to ſecure himſelf, as he thought, in

the throne, cut the throats of twenty of his bro-
thers. Buried in the receſſes of the ſetaglio, he did
. not

212 M E M O I R S Book XVI.

not perceive that his mother, to whom he entirely
abandoned the government, abuſed his authority :

and was fuſt informed of it by the Janizaries, who

came one day in a body, and in a manner that
ſhewed they would neither brook a denial nor de-
lay, demanded the head of the two Capi Agas, who
directed the council of the Sultana-mother, and the

- baniſhment of this Sultana herſelf, which he was

obliged to comply with immediately. He after-
wards put his own ſon, and the Sultana his wife to
death, and was himſelf ſeized with the plague, of
which he died,

But it is now time to reſume the affairs of the
kingdom. His Majeſty having returned from Villers-
Coterets to Fontainebleau, 1 left him in this laſt

place, and came to Paris, to attend my uſual em-

loyments : theſe were to make the receivers ge-
neral of the diſtricts, and other perſons in office,
bring in exact accounts; to caſhier thoſe who were
convicted of any miſdemeanour, as it happened to
Palot a receiver in Languedoc and Guienne; to
make a proviſion of ſums neceſſary to keep the old
allies of the crown, and to acquire new ones, and
the maintenance of thoſe that reſided in foreign
courts for this purpoſe; and laſtly, by the mere
force of frugality and ceconomy, to enrich the trea-
ſury, by diſcharging all the debts his Majeſty had
contracted during the league, and the other engage-
ments of the ſtate, at the head of which his Majeſty
generally placed the penſions he allowed the Swils
cantons, and was always very ſolicitous to know if
they were diſcharged : the fewer allies we had in Ita-
ly, the more neceſſary the King thought it to ſoothe
and manage them. He made a preſent of a ſuit of
armour, which he had one day worn in battle, to the
Venetian reſident at Paris; that republic earneſtly
requeſted it of him, and ſet ſo high a value upon
this preſent, that they hung vp the ſuit of wo,

wi

PE 9 * ST

„ e, oaks tees

F 5 < QA

, 4
Y
7

00 8ULLY. an

with a kind of ceremony, in a place where it was
publicly expoſed to view, and ſerved for a monu-
ment to poſterity, of their veneration of a prince
who was {> juſtly famous for his military virtues,
As the new ceconomy which I had introduced
into every branch of the revenue, cut off the greateſt
part of thoſe profits which the courtiers and other
perſons about the King drew from different places,
and leſſened the preſents his Majeſty made them
from his own purſe, they fell upon methods to ſup-
ply this vacuity; to which the Prince, delighted
with an opportunity of ſatisfying them, conſented
ſo much the more willingly as it coſt him nothing;
this was to prevail on his Majeſty to paſs innumer-
able edicts, granting certain privileges and tolls up-
on particular parts of trade, to be enjoyed by them
excluſively of all others. When this trick was once
found, there was nothing that promiſed profit, which
did not get into the brain of one or other among

thoſe who thought they had a right to ſome favour

from the King; intereſt gave every man invention,
and the kingdom immediately ſwarmed with thoſe
petty monopolies, which, though ſingly of little con-
ſequence, yet altogether were very detrimental to
the public, and particularly to commerce, in which
the leaſt obſtruction produces miſchief, I thought
it my duty to make frequent and earneſt remon-
ſtrances to the King on this ſubject; and therefore
made no ſcruple to expoſe mylelf to the anger of
the Count of Soiſſons, with whom, as I have already
ſaid, I could never live three months together with»
out a quarrel.

The Count of Soiſſons preſented a petition to the
King at Fontainebleau, in which he propoſed that a
grant ſhould be made him of fifteen pence upon
every bale of goods exported ; a deſign that muſt
certainly have been ſuggeſted to him by ſome of his
friends, for he could never bave thought of it _

| elf;

214 M EM OI R S Bock XVI.

ſelf; nor did he know all the conſequences of it, at
leaſt he aſſured the King, that this toll would not
bring in more than thirty thouſand livres a- year;
and ſo well perſuaded him of the truth of what he
had aſſerted, that his Majeſty, who thought himſelf
obliged to beſtow a gratuity of this value upon him,
and being likewiſe vanquiſhed by repeated importu-
nities, granted his requeſt, without giving me, who
was then at Paris, any notice of it. Henry, that he
might be troubled with no farther ſolicitations about
it, cauſed an edict to be expedited for the Count,
which he ſigned, and the ſeal was placed to it; but
ſome remains of ſcruple with regard to trade, the
importance of which he was fully ſenſible of, made
him, in granting this favour, reſerve a verbal condi-
tion, that it ſhould not exceed fifty thouſand hvres,
preſs too hard upon the people, nor be too great a
burden upon trade.

That evening the King, refleQing upon what he
had granted, began to have ſome {ſuſpicion that he
was impoſed upon: he wrote to me inſtantly, and
propoſed the thing to me as an indifferent queſtion,
without telling me what had paſſed, or naming any
perſon. I knew not what to think of ſuch a de-
mand, but ſet myſelf to work, and, taking to my
aſſiſtance the accounts of the cuſtoms and domain,
and entries of proviſions, I found that the annual
amount of this tax would not be leſs than three
hundred thouſand crowns, and I could not but think
it ſtill of more importance, when I reflected on the
trade of hemp and linen, which it ſeemed likely to
ruin in Britanny, Normandy, and great part of Pi-
cardy ; I therefore went immediately to Fontaine»
bleau, to make my report to his Majeſty. The
King confeſſed to me all that had happened, with
many marks of aſtoniſhment that his :onfidence had
been thus abuſed. The true remedy bad been to
have cauſed the edict to be brought back, and have

entirely

1603. e 215

entirely ſuppreſſed it, as being obtained by a falſe
pretence : but, that I might not be embroiled with
the Count of Soiſſons, who could not be long igno-
rant that it was I who had opened his Majeſty's eyes,
it was agreed upon between us to have recourſe to
another method, which was, to hinder the parlia-
ment from regiſtering the edit, All that was ne-
ceſſary for this purpoſe, was to ſend no letter with
it, either under the King's hand or mine: this was
an agreement that had long been made between the
King and the ſovereign courts; and without this
formality, whatever other orders were produced, the
parliament knew what they had to do, and would
not regiſter any thing. I was certain however, and
I told his Majeſty ſo, that this expedient would not
preſerve me from the reſentment of the Count, and
of the Marchioneſs of Verneuil, who I diſcovered
was concerned in this buſineſs; but I reſolved to
hold firm againſt the Count, provided his Majeſty
would be proof likewiſe to the ſolicitations of his
wiſtreſs, which he promiſed me, and added, that he

would openly ſupport me. |
Two or three days after my return to Paris, the
Count of Soiſſons came to my houſe, and paid me
many compliments, ates, br" he ſaid, occaſion for
a Maximilian de Bethune at full length; he thought
by ſhewing me great kindneſs, and condeſcending
to be familiar with nie, he ſhould eaſily obtain my
ſignature, without being obliged to tell me for what
purpoſe he demanded it. I anſwered coldly, pre-
tending to be quite ignorant of the matter, that
I never ſigned any thing without knowing what
it was: the Count then found that he muſt have
recourſe to other means; he acquainted me with
what his Majeſty had lately done for him, and faid,
that as he was not ignorant of the private agree-
ment between the King, the ſovereign courts, and
me, the ſignature which he demanded was a letter
| to

216 ME M O I R 8 Bock XVI.

to the parliament of Britanny, and the court of
aids at Rouen.

At this declaration, I aſſumed an air ſtill more
ſerious, and pretended to be greatly ſurpriſed that
the King had given me no intimation of the affair,
nor communicated it to the council, to whom reſo-
lutions of ſuch "conſequence were always made
known; and from thence took occaſion to tell the
Count, that an edict of this nature, which bore ſo
hard upon the public intereſt, deſerving to be ex-
cepted from the general rule, 1 could not take the
danger upon myſelf; that therefore he muſt addreſs
himſelf directly to his Majeſty, or bring me at leatt
an order ſigned by him, which would ſerve to juſtify
me againſt the reproaches I could not fail to draw up-
on myſelf, ſome time or other, for my compliance.
The Count replied, with much bitterneſs, that I
only made uſe of this extreme caution to ruin his
deſign, and to break with him entirely; but finding
theſe words could not alter my reſolution, he went
advay grumbling. I heard him mutter ſomething
between his ſhut teeth concerning our former quar-
rels, and he went to diſcharge his choler at the
houſe of the Marchioneſs de Verneuil.

This lady, although as much enraged with me as
the Count of Soiſſons, was yet come to make me a
viſit, juſt as I was leaving my cloſet to go to his
Majeſty, who had returned to the Louvre. She
could not have choſen a worſe time; the too ealy
King had juſt ſuffered a ſcore of edicts, all in the
ſpirit of the firſt, to be extorted from him, and, to
ſay the truth, of but little conſequence, I ſet out
with a full reſolution to make a new attempt upon
the King, in favour of the people who would be
prevented by theſe extortions from paying the land-
tax. The Marchioneſs aſking what paper it was I
had in my hand,“ This is a pretty buſineſs, Madam,”

anſwered I in a paſſiop, yet affecting to be much
| more

r R..

W 2 7

=

#

=
w
4

4 life, unleſs his Majeſty would himſelf do hi juſtice,

1603. O F 8 U L L 1. 217

more angry than I really was; “ you are not the
« laſt among thoſe that are conerned in it;“ in et-
fe, her name made the ſixth article. I then opens
ed the memorial, and read to her all the names,
with the titles of the edifts. © And what do you
«© intend to do with this?“ ſaid ſhe. © I intend,
« anſwered I, to make ſome remonſtrances to the
& King upon it.” „Truly,“ replied ſhe, no longer
able to contain her ſpleen, © he will have little ta
do to take your advice, and offend ſo many great
« people. And on whom, pray, would you have
© the King confer favours, if not on thoſe who are
«© mentioned in this writing, his couſins, friends,
ce and miſtreſs?” © What you ſay, Madam,” re-
plied I, «© would be reaſonable enough, if his Ma-
« jeſty took the money all out of his own purſe;
ce but to make a new levy upon the merchants, ar-
ce tiſts, labourers, and countrymen, it will never do;
&« it is by them that the King and all of us are ſup-
% ported, and 'tis enough that they provide for a
«© maſter, without having ſo many couſins, friends,
« and miſtreſſes to maintain.“

Madam de Verneuil lolt none of my words, ſhe
dwelt particularly upon the laſt; and, in the rage
with which ſhe was tranſported, made ule of them
to form a thouſand wicked ſlanders. She flew im-
mediately to the Count of Soiſſons, and told him,
that I had ſaid the King had but too many relations,
and that it would be happy for him and his people
if he could get rid of them. The Count, mad with
rage, went the next morning and demanded a con-
ference with the King. After a long enumeration of
his ſervices, he told him, that I had ſo vutragiuuſly
injured his honour, that he mult abſolutely have my

Henry, ſeeing him in ſuch violent emotion, aſked
him with great compoſure, what I had done or ſaid;
and whether the affront he had received was directly

Vol. III. T 5 from

218 M E M O I R S Book XVI,

from me, or had been related to him by another
perſon ? The Count, not caring to enter into any
explanation, replied, that if we were both together
in his Majeſty's preſence, not all the reſpect he
ought to have for a perſon who was dear to him
ſhould hinder him from doing himſelf juſtice ; and
added, that what he had ſaid was true, and he ought
to be believed on his word, for he was not accu-
ſtomed to lie. If that was the caſe, couſin,” ſaid
the King, in a voice ſuch as muſt naturally put
him into confuſion, “ you would not be like one
“ jn your family; for we always produce your el-
« der brother, in particular, as remarkable for this:
«© but ſince it was a report made to you, tell me
« who made it, and what he ſaid, and then I ſhall
e know what I ought to do, and will endeavour to
« ſatisfy you if you are to be ſatisfied with reaſon.”
The Count replied, that he had taken an oath not
to name the perſon from whom he received his in-
formations, but that he was as well convinced of
his veracity as his own. “ So then, couſin, anſwer-
« ed the King, you excuſe yourſelf from anſwering
«© my queſtion, on account of an oath you have ta-
« ken to the contrary; and I likewiſe will take an
& oath to believe no more of your complaint, than
« t Monſieur de Roſny bimſelf ſhall acknow-
« ledge to me; for I have as good an opinion of
« his veracity, as you can poſſibly have of thoſe
ce who tell you theſe fine tales.”

The Count of Soiſſons, when he went out of the
King's preſence, diſcovered ſuch an exceſs of fury
againſt me, that his Majeſty thought it neceſſary to
give me notice of it; which he did by Zamet and
La-Varenne, whom, at the ſame time, he ordered to
alk me, if 1 had not by ſome word or action given
offence to the Count? I anſwered, that ever lince
the viſit I had received from the Count at the arſe·
nal, which was above fifteen days ago, I had m_

p 0

2 9 9 2 CO

„ L LACS

, MW. RW WY

re 219

ſpoke to him, or any of his people ; that the Mar-
chioneſs de Verneuil indeed had been at my houle,
but neither ſhe nor I had mentioned the Count.
« Oh!” ſaid the King, when theſe words were re-
peated to him, © we need not doubt any longer
« from whence this miſchief proceeds, ſince Ma-
&« dam de Verneuil is named; for ſhe is fo full of
% malice, and has ſuch a ready invention, that to
te the leaſt word of Monſieur de Roſny ſhe would
« add a hundred, nay a thouſand ; but, for all that,
te this affair muſt not be neglected. The rage in
which his Majeſty had ſeen the Count, gave him
reaſon to apprehend that he would take ſome violent
reſolution againſt me; he therefore ſent La-Varenne
to tell me, that I ſhould never ſtir out of my houſe
without being well attended, and that he deſired L

would ſpare nothing for my ſecurity ; adding, with

great goodneſs, that all the expence I could be at
in guarding myſelf would be far below what it
would coſt him if he ſhould loſe me #, |
I cannot quit the article of this neq creation of
edits, without taking notice of an arreh of council,

much more ancient, by which a tax of anchorage

was ordered to be levied on all the foreign veſſels
that anchored in our ports. This at the bottom was
no more than what was paid by our vellels in fo

\* LEtoile's Journal treats at large of this difference, which the
King put an end to, by obliging the Count of Soiſſons to be contents
ed with a letter of ſatistaction which M. de Roſny wrote to him:
and, according to Matthieu, Henry IV. made the Count de Soiſſons
and the Marquis de Roſny come into his apartment, and reconciled
them, ibid. 592. De-Thou alſo ſpeaks of it, b. cxxix. The ſteddi-
neſs of M. de Roſny has procured him great commendations from
our hiſtorians. He had no conſideration for any thing, ſays father
* Chalons, but the King's ſervice; nor could any reſpect for perſons
e of the greateſt quality, princes, or even the Queen herſelf, prevail
* on him to make the leaſt conceſſion, where he thought the King's
© intereſt or glory came in queſtion: this got him many enemies,
and was the cauſe that, after the King's death, the Queen took the
: management of affairs out of his hands.” Hit. de Fr. vol. 3.

255.

2 reign

220 MEM ᷣ OI R S Bock XVI,

reign ports; nevertheleſs, it was with regret, and
only by his Majeſty's expreſs orders, that I carried
it into execution, looking upon it to be one of thoſe
exactions which was moſt likely to depreſs the vi-
gour of our trade. The parliaments of Rouen and
Rennes. made great oppoſition to the regiſtering
them, and the Marecha! d'Ornano beſtirred himſelf
greatly, having money owing him from the ſtate,
which had been charged upon that part for his re-
imburſement. The eſtabliſhment of commilſlioner-
- examiners, lieutenant particuliers, aſſeſſe urs-crimi-
nels, and other officers of juſtice, met with no leſs
difficulty from the ſame court of Rouen, which
more than any other oppoſed theſe new edicts; the
laſt were made with an intention to ſatisfy and fend
back the colonels and captains of companies, who
had waited at Paris a long time for their pay, in
conſequence of theſe new regulations : probably it
was the meeting with ſuch obſtacles as theſe to his
deſigns, that had long made Henry ſolicitous to ſup-
preſs the chamber of requeſts in all his parliaments.
He had laboured very earneſtly to effect this, and
actually began with that of the parliament of Tou-
louſe this year, which continued to be ſuppreſſed,
notwithſtanding all the objections that were made
to it by his own council, in which all the debate
ran contrary to bim. |

The quarrel between the Count of Soiſſons and
me made a great noiſe ; but the King, to ſhew me
that it had produced no alteration in his friendſhip,
ſent me notice by Beringhen ſome days afterwards,
that he intended to pals by Roſny, in the journey
he was upon the point of making to Normandy,
and that he expected I ſhould treat him there with '
his court. The princes, princeſſes, and the con-
ſtable, were all that the King permitted to be of this
party. The preparations I made were worthy of

him who did me the honour to be my gueſt : es
the

— * BS BM" * 9 * 9

ö
*
N
;

1639 OF SUL L V. 221

the entertainment was diſturbed by an unforeſeen
accident; the rivers were ſo much ſwelled by a ſud-
den ſtorm, that the offices of Roſny were over-
flowed ®, the fruit ſpoiled, as well as the labour of
the ſervants; the ladies were terrified, ſuppoſing the
danger to be much greater than it really was. I re-
moved their fears by cauſing a conduit to be open-
ed, through which the water uſed to have a paſlage,
and which had been filled up to make the paſſage
more commodious for his Majeſty and for the car-
riages. I had already begun to make the road and
the bridge at the entrance to Roſny, but neither
were yet completed.

The waters did great damage for ten leagues
about; but I came off for two or three hundred
crowns.

His Majeſty proceeded as far as the Lower Nor-
mandy, but did not go beyond Caen: he took the
government of it from Crevecœur- Montmorency,
who was accuſed of carrying on correſpondences
with Bouillon and d' Auvergne, particularly with
Tremouille, whoſe kinſman he was, and gave it to
Bellefonds. From Caën the King paſſed through
Rouen +, where he ſettled entirely all the affairs of
that province. In this city he declared his pleafure
concerning the marriage of my daughter, whom, as
it was formerly mentioned, the Princeſs Catharine
had propoſed for the Duke of Rhoan, and who had
ſince that time been demanded in marriage by Mon-
lieur and Madam de Fervaques, for Monſieur de
Laval the ſon of that lady, His Majeſty at Rouen

* 1 believe L'Etoile a little exaggerates this accident, when he fays
their Majeſties with great difficulty eſcaped the danger. The King,
* adds he, laughing, told M. de Roſny, that heaven and earth were
combined againſt him, and that he ovght boldly to take care of
* bimſclf,”

4 *“ The King was attacked at Rouen with ſo violent a looſeneſs,
as to void blood, which the phy ſieians ſaid came from his having

eaten too great a quantity of raw oyſters.” L'Etoile, anno 1603.

1 3 ordered

\

222 MEMOI R S Book XVI.

ordered me rather to prefer Laval; but he once
more altered his opinion.

The affairs of religion were in part the occaſion
of the journey his Majeſty had lately taken ; and
the Duke of Bouillon had likewiſe a ſhare “ in it.
He was not yet quite diſcouraged from his attempts
upon the King of England: he was till in the court
of the Elector Palatine, whom he adviſed to build a
citadel upon the ground which divided his territo-

Ties from France, for the defence, he ſaid, of the

- true religion ; and had the boldneſs, without aſking
his Majeſty's leave, to ſolicit Erard, his firſt engi-
neer, to come and draw the plan of this fortreſs for
him. To ſerve his ambition every thing ſeemed
lawful, and ſacred as well as profane things were
proſtituted to that purpoſe. He publiſhed a wri-
ting this year, in which he exclaimed, in a moſt out-
ragious manner, againſt the whole body of the Pro-
teſtants: he had already drawn great advantages
from this ſtratagem, and ſeconded it on his fide by
counterfeiting perfectly well great uneaſineſs and
apprehenſion of the miſeries which hung over the
Proteſtants, in conſequence of the new reſolutions
that were taken by the council of France, to whom
he attributed theſe libels. However, it was no dif-
ficult matter to prove, that they had been compoſed
by his friends, and fent into England with a view
to hinder his Majeſty from ſucceeding in his endea-
vours to gain King James: but it was upon weal:
and hot- 2 that Bouillon always im-
poſed; and on them indeed his pains were not all
caſt away. An aſſembly of Proteſtants was held at
Saumur and Poiton, on occaſion of the King's laſt
indiſpoſition, in which Du-Pleſſis extolled this duke
in a manner not only ridiculous, but likewiſe inſo-

* Tt is in vain to endeavour at any juſtification of the Duke of
Bouillon. His own hiſtorian gives up his defence, after the depoſi-
don of the Count d' Auvergne, b. 5,

\ lent.

L

. W .
„ TT IT . 1 ; 0
PP

i *F
.
.
1
o PR”
S,
„
#
- og
*
10
7

4

16. OF SUL L I. 223

lent and preſumptuous; for the praiſes he gave his
hero ſeemed to be all at the King's expence, whom
he calumniated without any reſpect to his perſon or
dignity-

Of all theſe aſſemblies none made ſo much noiſe
as that which was held at Gap, the latter end of this
year. The Elector Palatine and the Duke of Bouil-
lon, by their letters and creatures, cauſed queſtions
to be propoſed in it which had a ſtrong tendency to
the rekindling a war. The miniſter Ferrier, by
their orders, uſed his utmoſt endeavours to prevail
upon the Proteſtants to inſert among their articles
of confeſſion that the Pope is the antichriſt : ſurely
it could not be called a fpirit of religion, but rather
of diſcord and intrigue, that preſided at the deciſion
of this deere tenet, which they likewiſe pro-
poſed to ſend printed to all the univerſities of Eu-
rope. As ſoon as the King was informed of this
ſcandalous proceeding, he ſent me orders from Fon.
tainebleau, where he had reſided ſince his return
from Normandy, to put a ſtop to the licentiouſneſs
of the Proteſtants, and, above all, to hinder this

new article of faith“ from being received. Villeroi

likewiſe, by his commands, preſſed me to exert my-
ſelf on this occaſion, I wrote immediately to
Saint Germain + and Deſbordes; and whether it
was owing to the arguments I made uſe of to ſhew
them the folly of their conduct, or the adviee I gave
them not to irritate Henry, who they ſaw was re-
{olved not to ſpare them, I know not, but the article
in queſtion was at length ſuppreſſed. The Pope, I
believe, was under great apprehenſions about it;
for he was ſo extremely enraged, that it was with

* See the life of Du Pleſſis-Mornay, b. 2. p. 296. where we find
Neps taken by De-Mornay to procure the reception of this abſurd
tenet,

+ Deputies from the Calviniſt party to reſide at court, according
to the cuſtom of that time,
difficulty

224 M E M OI R S Bock XVI.

difficulty his Majeſty could appeaſe him: and pro-
bably it was to this incident that the Jeſuits owed
their re-eſtabliſhment in France. The Holy Father
had the conſolation to ſee his dominions filled with
an acceſſion of monks of every kind, Auguſtins
reformed, Recolets, bare footed Carmelites, igno-
rant friars; and amongſt the other ſex, capuchin
nuns, folietans, and Carmelites: ſo many religious
orders were never inſtituted at one time as in this
ear.

The boldneſs of the Proteſtants on this occaſion
will not appear ſo ſurpriſing, if it be conſidered,
that they had even gone greater lengths upon ano-
ther when they were inſolent enough to offer their
mediation to the King, in favour of certain foreign
princes with whom he had reaſon to be diſſatisfied.
J was continually repeating to them, that thoſe re-
bellious proceedings would fall heavy upon them
one day or other, and that they would groan for
them a long time: but they had prophets whoſe
predictions were far more agreeable to them than
mine. Bouillon, La T1emouille, Leſdiguieres, and
Du- Pleſſis, to render my repreſentations ineffectual,
and myſelf the object of their hatred, inſinuated
every whete, that I ſacrificed, on all occaſions, that
very religion for which I pretended fo much zeal ;
and that, by this practice, I enriched myſelf with
wealth and preferment, to which other men had a
better claim: nor did the Papiſts, except perhaps a
very few, conſider themſelves as at all obliged to
me for that which 1 did upon principles of pure
equity; for by the malignity of my ſtars, or the
invidiouſneſs of my place, I muſt honeſtly own J
loſt my labour. |

While theſe complaints of the Proteſtants againſt
me ran higheſt, I went one day to his Majeſty, with
an intention to make him ſuch repreſentations as
would ſecure me againſt the effects of their nay

The

—

. rn

The King was then in a gallery near his chamber,
walking with the Duke of Montpenſier, Cardinal
Joyeuſe, and the Duke of Epernon: he made me
a ſign to approach, and aſked me whether I could
gueſs the ſubject of his converſation with thoſe three
gentlemen? I anſwered only with a bow.“ We
« were talking, ſaid the King, of the government
et of Poitou, and they have adviſed me to give it to
& yon; could you have imagined this? they being
« ſuch good Catholics, and you ſuch an obſtinate
« Huguenot.” I did not even know that this go-
vernment was vacant. Lavardin, who was governor
of Perche and Maine, had the reverſion of it after
the death of Malicorne, who was very aged and in-
firm, and intended to reſign his own for it; but
reflecting that all his eſtates were ſituated in the
\ provinces he was at preſent governor of, he releaſed
Malicorre from his engagement, and both together
carne to reſign this government to the King, that he
might diſpoſe of it in favour of one of his natural

children, |
Henry likewiſe inſiſted upon my gueſſing his mo-
tives for preferring me to this poſt, rather than any
other perſon, or even thoſe that were ſo near to
him. I had nothing to alledge, but the knowledge
his Majeſty had of my fidelity and ardour for his
ſervice. The King replied, that his true reaſon for
giving it me, was, becauſe I was an Huguenot, but
a reaſonable one, and zealous for the good of my
country; that the Proteſtants beholding me in this
light, could not but be highly ſatisfied with his
choice; and that he did not doubt but that his
whole kingdom would be no lels fo, ſince I was ca-
pable of inſpiring them with more dutiful ſenti-
ments, of giving them juſt notions of their King,
and of teaching them to rely on his goodneſs, and
to reſpect and love his perſon; and that by ſuffer-
ing the gratuities which he granted to the principal
members

1
;
: j
—
.
1 1
7
*
©
oy
4 N
1
*
8
: *
343)
ain
MM
T9
3
wm
O .
=
4
=
=
SW _
'{FY
 _
bo
od
+
Ws | 4
4%
1
i * <<]
7
1 4
1
1 *
_
.
]
*.

r —
8 7 n
. 2 ©. &rF . =» - 2
— — 4x; 1 4
4" *

1 * n
— = aw <->
* — *

n N 4 % p

226 M E MOI R S Book XVI.

members of this body to paſs through my bands,
the authority which the Duke of Bouillon ſtill pre-
ſerved amongſt them might be deſtroyed. His Ma-
jeſty added (without doubt becauſe theſe three gen-
tlemen, who were allo joined by Briſſac, Ornano,
and Roquelaure, were preſent) that although he felt
ſo ſtrong an affeCtion for his religion, as to wiſh
with the utmoſt ardour to ſee it embraced by all
the Huguenots, and by me in particular, yet he
could never forget that God had made uſe of that
body, and of the cities of Rochelle, Bergerac, and
Montauban eſpecially to free him from the oppreſ-
ſion of Spain, to aſſiſt him in ſupporting his juſt
claims, and to ſave even his life from the fury of the
leaguers; that, on this account, however diſcon-
tented he might be with thoſe cities for diſcovering
leſs duty and affection for him than formerly, yer,
nevertheleſs, he thought himſelf obliged in honour
to continue the ſame gratuities he had always allow-
ed them for their fortifications and colleges. The
King repeated ſeveral inſtances which the province
of Poitou had hitherto given, of its inviolable at-
tachment to its lawful prince,“ when no Bouillon,“
ſaid he, & was there to excite them to ſedition;“
and could not hinder himſelf from ſaying, that at
this very time the welfare of the kingdom depended
upon maintaining a peace with the Proteſtants.
After this his Majeſty told me, that I might treat
directly with Meſſieurs de Lavardin and Malicorne,

repeating, that it was more for the intereſt of tlie

ſtate, and therefore more agreeable to his inclina-
tions to give this government to me than to his
own children. All that were preſent ſaid ſomething
in approbation of what his Majeſty had done, and
praiſe of me; and I made my acknowledgment to
all, either in words, or by low bows. I diſpatched
Montmartin immediately to Lavardin and Mali-
corne, and he tranſacted the buſineſs with ſuch pru-

dence,

mw

7.

#* of
+ &
[5

1663. O0 F Ur. 227

dence, that by a ſeaſonable preſent of a thouſand
crowns to thoſe whoſe advice they took in this af.
fair, I got this government from them for twenty
thouſand crowns. Upon their reſignation, Du-Freſne
ſent me, on the ſixteenth of December, the patents
for the government of Poitou, Chatelleraudois, Lou-
dunois, &c. This made my revenue from govern-
ments amount to thirty thouſand livres; namely,
twelve thouſand livres from the governments of
Mante and Gergeau, which I already poſſeſſed, and
were both very lucrative for private governments,
eſpecially Gergeau, on account of the garriſons ; and
eighteen thouſand livres from that of Poitou : in
this ſum, however, I have always included my ſala-
ries for the two poſts of ſuperintendent of the for-
tifications, and of the works,

I muſt not omit giving ſome account of the at-
tempts that were made this year in France, to eſta-
bliſh the ſtuff- manufactures, and eſpecially ſilk ones,
Henry, who was carried with ardour to every thing
which in his opinion could contribute to the glor
and utility of the kingdom, ſuffered himſelf to be
perſuaded by Les Bourgs and Des Cumans, that it
was a mighty eaſy matter not only to ſupply ſilks
for our home conſumption, which uſed to be brought
from foreign countries and diſtant regions, but alſo
to carry on a conſiderable trade with foreigners for
this merchandiſe. For this purpoſe, all that is ne-
ceſſary, ſaid they, is to give encouragement to ſilk-
weavers to come amongſt us, to increaſe the breed
of ſilk · vorms, plant mulberry-trees, and erect large
buildings fit for thoſe ſort of manufactures. I ex-
claimed loudly againſt this ſcheme, which 1 ne-
ver approved: but the King was ſo prejudiced in
favour of it, that all my remonſtrances were in-
effectual. |

I remember that one day when his Majeſty did
me the honour to viſit me at the arſenal, to _

5 wit

n 2

" — ct . Sa . a = *
® * jy ” 2nd - .
4 „„ — * 8 — > e * 22 * — 4
. : 2 * 1 0 N . — 2 . *
IF ee wn c .
Ft . 8 2 . {4 * . 8 —_—
> 1 5 4 0 .
2 N 0
T "X - 7 * * »
— 99 —— -

$23.
—

Fr.
. *
* 1 = 1 * 9 7
r | ;
2 Wo 4 = C > :

*
PREM 7 L — ——— — — , Lon ned NESS, TIE b
7 325
2 8 * Wee — r
5 . 2 — "2 oy — -
n rn = ——_— ST
Lo 3 5 * 7 — -

*%

2283 M E MO I R S Book XVL

with me upon the neceſſary methods for eſtabliſh»
ing theſe manufactures, which could not be done
without a great expence, we had a pretty warm de-
bate about it. © I know not, ſaid he to me, find-
ing I received all the propoſals he made me on this
ſubject, with that reſerve and coldneſs which J al-
ways aſſumed when I was not in his opinion, * I
% know not what whim this is that you have taken
& in your head, to oppoſe a ſcheme ſo well calcu-
& lated to enrich and embelliſh the kingdom, to
& root out idleneſs from among the people, and
& which I ſhould find ſo much ſatisfattion in com-
te pleting.” I replied, that this Ilaſt\reaſon had fo
much weight with me, that if I could ſee the leaſt
probability of ſucceeding in the ſchemes for a {ilk
manufacture, I ſhould content myſelf with repre-
ſenting to bis Majeſty that he would purchaſe this
ſatisfaction at rather too high a price, and deſtroy
by it that which he propoſed to himſelf in the exe-
cution of thoſe great deſigns, which, by his com-
mand, I had mentioned to the King of England ;
but that I entreated him not to be offended with me
if I preſumed to tell him, that 1 could not, as he
did, ſee either glory or utility reſulting from this
eſtabliſhment. I then aſked him, if he would per-
mit me to give him my reaſons for thinking ſo dif-
ferently from him? © I give you leave, ſaid he, but
« upon condition that you afterwards hear mine,
& which, I am perſuaded, are more convincing than
& yours.” I then made the following obſervations
to his Majeſty.

That it was through a wiſe diſpenſation of pro-
vidence, which deſigned that all the nations of the
earth, or of one continent, ſhould be obliged, by
their common neceſlities, to have an intercourſe
with each other: this country was fitted to produce
one thing, and that another, excluſively of all the
reſt : France had the good fortune to be ſo on
28 ably

160% OF 8 UL L I. 229

ably diſtinguiſhed in this diſtribution of benefits, that
no country probably except Egypt ſo univerſally
abounded with whatever ſupplied the neceſſities, or
contributed merely to the conveniencies of life for
the reſt of the world; her corn, grain, and pulſe,
her wine, cyders, flax, hemp, ſalt, wooll, oil, dying
drugs, that immenſe quantity of cattle, great and
ſmall, which uſually ſerve her inhabitants for food,
putting her in a condition not only to envy none of
her neighbours on the ſcore of any of theſe advan-
tages, but even to diſpute with them thoſe which
make up all the trade they carry on: Spain, Italy,
and Sicily, are of this number.

It is certain, that her climate refuſes (3k: the
ſpring begins too late, and an exceſſive moiſture al-
moſt always prevails; and this inconvenience, which
is abſolutcly irremcdiable, affects not only the ſilk-
worms, Which, on this account, are hatched with
great difficulty, but likewiſe the mulberry trees that
theſe inſects feed upon; for which a mild and tem-
perate air is neceſſary in the ſeaſon wherein they put
forth their leaves. The difhculty of multiplying
them in a country where none ever grew, cannot
but be very great; it will be five years at leaſt be-
fore there can be any certainty of their coming to
perfection, during which we riſk the loſs of time,
labour, and the produce of the ground they are
planted in. But are theſe difiiculties, which ought
to diſſuade us from engaging in an enterprize, the
ſucceſs of which they do not render doubtful but
unpoſlible/ a real loſs to us? That is the queſtion,

A country-life affords ſo many various labours
and employments, that in France none need be idie
-but thoſe who reſolve againſt all work; therefore it
is neceſſary to begin, by curing people of this lazy
diſpoſition, which, if real, is the only thing worthy
of attention, But how is this done by offering
thera the culture of ſilk for an employment? firſt,

VOI. III. U they

+
7
t
: .
4
4
"3
: *
1
*
N
=
IS
,n
n © *
»,
*
=
=
*
*
f
n
.
43x
Py oo
: »
IN
*
4 .
*
*
8
"=
=
F 4,
r
| 1
* 5
1
1
c *
*
e
|
| HR:
= *
1
| |
:
1
1
1 *
| BOY !
|
*
Js
= -
4*
1
0 LC
_
of
: iD
: =

.
i }
7
1 1
= N 4
1
=.
. ?
: 2
=
i

= —

—

230 M E MO IR S Book XVI.

they leave one profeſſion, which brings them in a
certain and ſufficient income, for another, where
their gains are caſual and doubtful. It would not
indeed be very difficult to make them prefer this to
the former ; becauſe it is but too natural to quit a
hard and laborious kind of life, ſuch as agriculture
is, conſidered in its full extent, for one that, like
working upon ſilk, does not fatigue the body by any
violent motion. But even this is another argument
to prove the dangerous conſequences of ſuffering.
the country people to be thus employed; it has
been a common obſervation, at all times and in all
places, that the beſt ſoldiers are found amongſt the
families of robuſt, laborious, and nervous workmen :
if, inſtead of theſe, we enliſt men, who are brought
up to no other labour than what 4 child, if taught
it, has ſtrength to perform, we ſhall be ſoon con-
vinced they are no longer fit for the military arr,
which requires, as I have often heard his Majeſty
himſelf obſerve, a ſtrong conſtitution, confirmed by
laborious exerciſes, that tend to maintain in its full
vigour the whole ſtrength and force of the body.
And this military art, the ſituation of France, and
the nature of her politics, make it abſolutely ne-
ceſſary to hinder from degenerating or being de-
preſſed.

At the ſame time that we enervate the country
people, who in every reſpect are the true ſupporters
of the ſtate, among thoſe of the city we introduce
luxury with all her train of miſchiefs, effeminacy,
ſloth, voluptuouſneſs, and that domeſtic extravagan-
cy, Which is not to be feared that people who have
t .t little, and know how to be ſatisfied with that
little, will ever plunge into. In France we have
already too many of theſe uſeleſs citizens, who un-
der habits glittering with gold and embroidery con-
ceal the manners of weak women.

The

e 24 1 e

1603. O F SUL LT. 231

The objection, that immenſe ſums of money
are carried out of France into foreign countries
for the ſupport of this luxury, proves the truth of
what I have juſt obſerved, and deſtroys the infer-
ence they pretend to draw from it: would they
reaſon juſtly upon the inconveniency that ariſes
from this commerce, and this importation of vain
and unneceſſary merchandiſes, they would be con-
vinced, that the beſt thing that could be done,
would be to ſuppreſs the vie of them entirely, and
abſolutely prohibit their being brought into France;
at the ſame time to fix, by good and ſevere regu-
lations, the richneſs of cloaths and furniture; and
to put every thing of this kind upon the ſame
footing as they were in the reigns of Lewis XI.
Charles VIII. and Lewis XII.“ That neceſſity
which obliges us to dreſs in one ſort of ſtuffs ra-
ther than another, is the mere vice of fancy; and
the price that is ſet upon them, an evil we fall in-
to with full conviction. Were we to conſider,
though but with the ſlighteſt attention, the ſource

Many edicts of this kind were iſſued out at different times during
the reign of Henry IV. againſt which the dealers in ſilk at Paris pre-
ſented many uſcleſs remonſtrances to the King and NM. de Roſiy.
The memoirs for the hittory of France relate in what manner that
miniſter received the Sicur Henriot, who ſpoke for them, a good old
merchant, whoſe manners and drels bore the marks of the ſimplicity
and plainneſs of the tradeſmen of former times, —* The next day,”
ſays the writer of theſe Memoirs, © they waited on M. de Sully,
« who anſwered them only with difdain and ridicule ; for Hentiot
« having put one knee to the ground, that nobleman immediately
« raiſed him up; and having turned him round, the better to ſurvey
his old-faſhioned dreſs, being a ſhort holiday-gown, lined with tat-
« fety, his jacket and the reſt of his cloaths ornamented with ſilks
& of different kinds, in the manner they were formerly wore by mer-
© chants,” he faid io him,“ Honeſt friend, what reaſon can you
« and your company have to complain, when you are much fer
„ than I am? Is not this damaſk, this taffety? &c. And after
« turning them into ridicule, ſent them away without giving them
“ any other ſatisfaction; which made them ſay, as they were return
L ing, The ſervant is ruder and haughtier than his maſter.“ Vol,

p- 278.

U-'2 of

N
**
* |
"1
9
*
$4
.
i
i»
*
2.)

_ : —_— * _
4 8 - — bh — =_ — 23% » A
AT mn rn nes, 8 n
8 . rr

— =.
« - - — * .

. IS...
”-
n

2

232 MEMOIR S Book XVI.

of what is called the faſhion, we ſhould find to
our (ſhame and confuſion, that a ſmall number of
perſons, and thoſe the molt deſpicable of a great
city, which incloſes all ſorts indifferently within
her walls, for whom, if we were acquainted with
them, we ſhould feel that contempt we have for
men, without morals, or that compaſſion we have
for fools, that theſe very men diſpoſe neverthe-
leſs of our purſes, and keep us enſlaved to their ca-
rices, :

But filk cloaths are not the only things which
require_reformation by the royal power; there is |
as much to be done with reſpe&t to diamonds, |
jewels, ſtatues, and pictures, if it be confider-
ed as a prievance, that foreigners take away
our gold and ſilver: we muſt likewiſe take into
conſideration, equipages, kitchen-furniture, move-
ables, and every thing in which theſe metals are |
made uſe of. If we reflect upon the amazing ex-
travagance that prevails in France, the ſums ſquan-
dered fooliſhly in gardens, buildings, coſtly works,
entcitainments, liquors, and what not; if we think
on the exorbitant price paid for offices, of marri-
ages ſet up to auction, what is there that wants
no reformation? We cannot charge to foreign
manufactures the tenth part of the money that is
thrown away in France, without the leaſt neceſſity.
The care which the law and the finances would
require, would engage us in an endleſs digreſlion :
theſe two bodies of men, of which the one ought
to be the guardians of regularity, and the other of
parſimony, ſeem. only to have been brought into
the world, to deſtroy both the one and the other.
Theſe are the only people that know what it is to
be rich ; and how they come by this wealth, may
be ſeen by the manner in which they ſpend it :
the old chancellors, firſt preſidents, counſellors of
ſtate, and the heads of the courts and ä if

they

ah,
"x4;

2
4
4
*
—

£
5

1603- O F S. UE: F; 233

they were to come into the world again, would
not know how to find thoſe who now fill their
places, and reſemble them in nothing but their
titles *.

I ſaid every thing I could think of on this ſub-
ject, that carried with it any force, to bring the
King over to my opinion; but I could not pre-
vail. © Your arguments are very ſtrong,” ſaid he

Though ſilk and other materials of luxury. are in ſtrictneſs no
otherwiſe good or bad, than according to the good or bad uſe made
of them; yet, as it is really more common to apply them to bad
than to good purpoſes, the good intention of the author, and the pu-
rity of his morals, cannot be ſufficiently praiſed, The rigid defend»
ers of the Chriſtian doctrines do, and always will eſpouſe his ſenti-
ments: but it muſt be acknowledged, that the politicians of the pre-
ſent times, even thoſe whe are moſt ſevere, think differently; they
find nothing conclulive in thoſe exam ples of antiquity which are pro-
duced againſt luxury, even in reſpect to the times from which they
are taken, much leſs in regard to the preſent. According to then

opinion, other cauſes brought about thoſe revolutions which were

:tributed to it; which cauſes having now loſt their force, ſuch re-
volutions do not, nor can they happen again: the increaſe of gold
and ſilver in Europe, occaſioned by the mines of thoſe metals diſcu-
vered in America, and whence this part of the world has becn en-
riched within the laſt two centuries, has introduced by its natural
conſ-quence luxury or ſuperflaity, which makes the nece{fory ex-
change againſt the redundance of money, otherwiſe an vickfs drug.
This has entirely changed the face of Europe, unavoidably influen-
eed the ſyſtems of government, and left no means of aggrand fing
any ſtate except by commerce, which opens every inlet w luxury :
no inconveniencies ariſe from hence, till it exceeds what the profits of
commerce will aflord: beſides. exper.ence demopttrates more clear!
than reaſoning can that it is not at all incompaiible, ener wi
order, ſubordination, or a m}.tary ſpirit

As to what relates to ſilæ ſhould we even ſuppoſe with M. de Sul-
ly, that France is improper to produce it, his manner of realoninp
will nevertheleſs be imperfect, as he ſcems to have be:n ignorang
how much the manufzQtuie adds to the value of the orig'nal maic-
rials, and of what advantage that is to the Kingdom. It «iy one
ſhould ſtill remain unconvinced of this truth, he onght to be fent
for conviction to our manufactures of ſilks at Lyons, Hours, &c.
and i" fpite of what our author tays ir: this place, the eltabliihment
of the manufattures of uff of all k ads, wiich was begun in the
reign of Henry IV. will aiways compel us to ſpeak in pra'fe of him.
Sec on this article, Li'flay politique far le commerce, chap. 9.
P. 195. fcond edit. 1736,

U 3 to

1

nf

1
=
4

© >
1 ,
* .
111
« 1
1
.
a 5
1

— S
F ——

234 M E MOI RS Book XVI.

to me; “and I would rather chooſe to fight the
« King of Spain in three pitched battles, than en-
ee gage all theſe people of the law, the offices,
ce ard the city, eſpecially their wives and daugh-
% ters, whom you have brought upon my back,
cc with all your whimſical regulations.” „Then it
te js your plcaſure, Sire,” replied I, © that I ſhould
« ſpeak to you no more upon this ſubje& : how-
« ever, time and experience will convince you,
* that France is not fitted for theſe gewgaws.”
I was obliged to content myſelf with endeavour-
ing only to prevail upon the King to alter his in-
tention of taking the Tournelles, and that whole
encloſure, for the new buildings he projected for
his ſick manufactories. I repreſented to him, that
he would one day deftroy what it would coſt him
ſo much to build, and brought to his remembrance,
that once, when be was laying with me the foun-
dations of a deſign, far more noble and juſt, the
Tournelles had been deſtined for another build-
ing of a very different kind “. © As things ſhall
fall out,” replied Henry; and this was all 1
could get from him. He followed Zamet, wha
came to tel him, that the dinner he had ordered
to be prepared for him at his. houſe, was ready,

It was not, I confeſs, without deep regret, that
I faw fuch large ſums of money ſquandered, which
might have been employed to ſo many uſeful pur-
poſes. I made a calculation of the expence Hen-
ry was commonly at every year, in buildings, in
play, for bis miſtreſſes, and hounds, and found
that it amounted to twelve hundred thouſand

*

* The building here meant, was intended to be a magnificent
ſgqrare, of ſeventy two faihom on every ſide, which was to be called
the /quare of France; eight ſtreets were to have opened into it, of
eight toiſes in breadth, bearing the names of ſo many provinces,
he deſign for it was made in 1608, but the death of Henry IV.
put a ſtop to the execution of it: under the following teig it was cx-
ecuted in part, and was called the royal! ſquare,

crowns,

F
We
.
FX
1
. Fr
*
r
„ * i N
by
2
4, "9
For
*
4

1603. O F SUL I. . 235

crowns, a ſum ſufficient to maintain a body of fif-
teen thouſand foot: I could not, though I riſqued
the danger of loſing his affection, be ſilent upon
this ſubject. He commanded me to give fix thou -

ſand livres to Madam de Verneuil, too happy

once more to purchaſe, at this price, that domeſtic
quiet which was ſo often interrupted by his wife
and his miſtreſs ; but, fortunately for him, he e-
ſcaped any broils this year, It was the current
report at Fontainebleau, and for a long time be-
lieved, that the Queen was again with child, but
it was afterwards found to be a miſtake ; which the
King did me the honour to inform me of.

The colony that was ſent to Canada this year,
was among the number of thoſe things that had not
my approbation : there was no kind of riches to be
expected from all thoſe countries of the new
world, which are beyond the fortieth degree of
latitude. His Majeſty gave the conduct of this
expedition to the Sieur Du-Mont *.

| BOOK

* See in the Septenary, the deſcription of a voyage made to Ca.
nada by the Sieur Du- Mont. There is alſo a relation of the man-
ners of the inhabitants of this part of tlie new world ; but it is very
unfaithful, and filled with fables. M. de Sully is again miſtaken:
in this point; our new colonies are a proof of it. We refer fur a
further account of this matter to L'EKilai politique ſur le commerce.

Liberty and protection, theſe two words ich comprehend the
only true means of bringing the internal commerce of a nation into
a flouriſhing ſtate, may, in another ſenſe, be applied to the trade
carried on to the two Indies; that is to ſay, as the author of theſe
Memoirs remarks, that none of the trading nations of Europe ſhould
be excluded from it, but that it ſhould be indiſctiminately ſhared a+
mongſt them all; and that the method of carrying it on to the molt
general advantage, is by excluſive privileges, granted not to private
perſons, but to whole companies acting under the name, and by the
authority of the _

I ought not to forget obſerving here, that the firſt company for
carrying on a trade to the Eait-Indics was eſtabliſhed in France, un-
der the reign of Hcnry IV. and in the year after his death. It was
formed by a Fleming, called Gerrard le- Roy. The edict of its e-
ſlabliſh:acor, which bears date the iſt of June 1604, grants many
| | EX&cmptigns

238 ME M O I R S Book XVII.

.

Began this year, as I had done all the pre-
ceding ones, by the performance of a cere-
mony annexed to my employment, which was to
reſent their Majeſties with two purſes of ſilver
medals. When I went to pay them the accuſtom-
ed compliments on the firſt day of the new year,
I came into their chamber ſo early in the morn-
ing that I found them till in bed. Beſides the
purſe of ſilver, 1 had cauſed two purſes of gold
medals to be ſtruck, which they received with
great pleaſure. Roquelaure, Frontenac, and La-
Varenne, coming that moment into the room, the
converſation turned entirely upon theſe medals, of
which the emblem was an open granado, and the
device alluded to an anecdote in ancient hiſtory
concerning Darius “ and Zopyrus. The delign
was the more agreeable to the King, as he found
it affect the malecontents of France in ſuch a
manner, as he had a few days before directed me to
make it affect them. His Majeſty the next day
made me a preſent of his picture, in a box orna-

exemptions and privileges to this company: the fifth and fixth arti-
eles are ſomething remarkable, it being therein ſaid, that gentlemen
might become members of this company, without derogation to their
gentility. The difficulty of procuring the neceſſary funds, the di
union amongſt the members, and all the other cauſes, which have
ſo often ſinee occaſioned the deſtruction of this inſtitution, prevented
its having the propoſed effect at that time: it was reſerved for the
celebrated M. Colbert, to place it on a more ſolid and durable baſis,
The hiſtory of this company, the many advantages whereof are at
preſent more known than ever, would carry me too far; and mors-
over is to be found already in many good books.

* As an explanation of theſe medals would be of little conſe-
quence, I forbear to give any; nor do I take any notice of them in
the beginning of any other years. Thoſe who iutereſt themſelves
in ſubjects of this nature, may ſce the ſeries of theſe medals, vol. II.

p. 6. of the old Memoirs, where they ae collected by the author.
mented

*

N
*
WY 4
.
—
3
£
I»
&
#E
"iz

mented with diamonds; and the Queen ſent my
wife a diamond chain and bracelet of great value.
The death of the Ducheſs of Bar, his Majeſty's
only * lifter, was the firſt intereſting event to the
court

* The ſuſpicion ſome conceived of this princeſs having been poiſon-
ed, was entirely groundleſs: her death was attributed by others to
the potions ſhe took to make her pregnant: it rather ſeems to have
been occaſioned from her phyſicians having treated her as being with
child, though ſhe was not. Andrew du Laurens, whom the King
ſent to her, was not miſtaken in this reſpect, as the re(t were; but
the Princeſs herſelf was ſo firmly perſuaded of her being with child,
by the extreme defire ſhe had to find it ſo, that ſhe refuſed to take
any of the medicines preſetibed by that phyſician; imagining he
wanted to fave her life, at the expence of the child's ſhe believed
herſelf to have conceived ; whercas the was not at all ſolicitovs about
the preſervation of her own life, provided that of the ſuppoſed infant
could be ſaved. She perſiſted in this notion and theſe ſentiments till
the laſt moment of her life, always crying out, © Save my child.”
Her body having been opened, it clearly appeared Du-Laurens had
been extremely right in his judgment; that inſtead of a real preg»
nancy, her illneſs was occaſioned by an inward tumour or ſwelling
which for want of an application of the proper remedies to diſpei ſe
it, had brovght on an inflammation,

This princeſs was a rare example of conjugal affeion ; whenever
ſhe ſaw or heard any new married women ſpoken of, ſhe uſed to
make it her wiſh, that they might love their huſbands as affeftion-
ately as ſhe loved hers. She often repeated this verſe of Propertius,
changing the word Venus into Deus :

Omnis amor magias, ſed aperio in conjuge major ©

Hanc Venus, ut vivat, ventilat ipſa facem.
Her corpſe was carried to Vendome, and depoſited by her mother's,
Queen Jane of Albret. The Pope had at length granted this diſpen-
ſation, which had been fo long ſolicited, but the Duchels died betore
It arrived in Lorrain.

Henry IV. took it much amiſs, that the Pope's nuncio, inſtead
of the compliments of condolence, which he received from all the
princes in Europe on the death of his ſiſter, only ſpoke to him of his
Holineſs's feats for the ſalvation of that princeſs, who had died out
of the boſom of the church; and anſwered him with ſome warmth
and indignation, but very judiciouſſy, that it was a notion inconſiſt -
ent with the goodneſs of God, to ſuppoſe, that the moment when a
per ſon breathes his laſt was not ſufficient for his mercy to open the
gates of heaven to any ſinner whatever; © 1 have not,” added he,
the leaſt doubt of my ſiſter's being ſaved.” De- Thou, and Chro-
nol, Septen. anno. 1604,

What Amelvt de la Houſſay advances in his notes on Cardinal

D*'Oflat's

> ><. Oe

Tr an I 4 2 4
1 >
.

*

222 — „ * * Jo * 2 — *
— EGS

—

F

= > —
a * 72

m

* .
7 1 N
U

N N
4 4
*

+ *

4

.

= 228 -

* PP MAUI LI» r

Iv

236 M E M O 1 R S Bock XVII.

OR .

Began this year, as I had done all the pre-

ceding ones, by the performance of a cere-
mony annexed to my employment, which was to
preſent their Majeſties with two purſes of ſilver
medals. When I went to pay them the accuſtom-
ed compliments on the firſt day of the new year,
1 came into their chamber fo early in the morn-
ing that 1 found them ſtill in bed. Beſides the
purſe of ſilver, I had cauſed two purſes of gold
medals to be ſtruck, which they received with
great pleaſure. Roquelaure, Frontenac, and La-
Varenne, coming that moment into the room, the
converſation turned entirely upon theſe medals, of
which the emblem was an open granado, and the
device alluded to an anecdote in ancient hiſtory
concerning Darius * and Zopyrus. The deſign
was the more agreeable to the King, as he found
it affect the malecontents of France in ſuch a
manner, as he had a few days before directed me to
make it affect them, His Majeſty the next day
made me a preſent of his picture, in a box orna-

exemptions and privileges to this company: the fifth and ſixch arti-
eles are ſomething remarkable, it being therein ſaid, that gentlemen
might become members of this company, without derogation to their
gentility. The difficulty of procuring the neceſſary funds, the di
union amongſt the members, and all the other cauſes, which have
ſo often ſinee occaſioned the deſtruction of this inſtitution, prevented
its having the propoſed effect at that tine: it was reſerved for the
celebrated M. Colbert, to place it on a more ſolid and durable baſis,
The hiſtory of this company, the many adygntages whereof ate at
preſent more known than ever, would carry me. too far; and more-
over is to be found already in many good books.

* As an explanation of theſe medals would be of little conſe-
quence, I forbear to give any; nor do [ take any notice of them in
the beginning of any other years. Thoſe who intereſt themſelves
in ſubjects of this nature, may (ce the ſeries of theſe medals, vol. II.
p. 6. of the old Memoirs, where they ate collected by the author.

mented

mented with diamonds; and the Queen ſent my
wife a diamond chain and bracelet of great value.
The death of the Ducheſs of Bar, his Majeſly's
only * litter, was the firſt intereſting event to the
court

* The ſuſpicion ſome conceived of this princeſs having been poiſon.
ed, was entirely groundleſs: her death was attributed by others to
the potions ſhe took to make her pregnant: it rather ſeems to bave
been occaſioned fiom her phyſicians having treated her as being with
child, though ſhe was not. Andrew du Laurens, whom the King
ſent to her, was not miſtaken in this reſpect, as the re(t were; but
the Princeſs herſelf was ſo firmly perſuaded of her being with child,
by the extreme defire ſhe had to find it fo, that ſhe refuſed to take

any of the medicines preſcribed by that phyſician; imagining he

wanted to fave her life, at the expence of the child's ſhe believed
herſelf to have conceived ; whercas ihe was not at all ſolicitovs about
the preſervation of her own life, provided that of the ſuppoſed infant
could be ſaved. She perſiſted in this notion and theſe ſentiments till
the laſt moment of her l:fe, always crying cut,“ Save my child.”
Her body having been opened, it clearly appeared Du Laurens had
been extremely right in his judgment; that inſtead of a real preg»
nancy, her illneſs was occaſioned by an inward tumour or ſwelling
which for want of an application of the proper remedies to diſpei ſe
it, had brovght on an inflammation,

This princeſs was a rare example of conjugal afſection; whenever
ſhe ſaw or heard any new-married women ſpoken of, (he uſed to
make it her wiſh, that they might love their bulbands as affection-
ately as ſhe loved hers. She often repeated this verſe of Propertius,
changing the word Venus into Deus :

Omnis amor magaas, ſed aperio in conjuge major ©

Hanc Venus, ut vivat, ventilat ipſa facem.
Her corpſe was carried to Vendome, and depoſited by her mother's,
Queen Jane of Albret. The Pope had at length granted this diſpen-
ſation, which had been ſo long ſolicited, but the Ducheſs died betore
it arrived in Lorrain.

Henry IV. took it much amiſs, that the Pope's nuncio, inſtead
of the compliments of condolence, which he received from all the
princes in Europe on the death of his ſiſter, only ſpoke to him of his
Holineſs's feats for the ſalvation of that princeſs, who had died out
of the boſom of the church ; and anſwered him with ſome warmth
and indignation, but very judiciouſly, that it was a notion inconſiſt-
ent with the goodneſs of God, to ſuppoſe, that the moment when a
perſon breathes his laſt was not ſufficient for his mercy to open the
gates of heaven to any ſinner whatever; © 1 have not,” added he,
the leaſt doubt of my ſiſter's being ſaved.” De- Thou, and Chro-
nol, Septen. anno. 1604,

What Amelut de la Houſſay advances in his notes on Cardinal

| D'Oflat's

0

— —_ — _ __ — SEC —
= > 3 2
W 5 — —_ — — —
= - — —
$ 2 LS e's T)
8 ak
P

238 MEMOIR S Book XVII.

court this year : Henry appeared greatly afflicted
at it; he wore deep mourning, and not only or-
dered the whole court to do fo likewiſe, but alſo
the firit gentlemen, and officers of his bed-cham-
ber, the grand maſter, and officers of his ward-
robe, the pages, and, in a word, all his houſhold;
the ſame regulation was oblerved in the Queen's |

Before the Ducheſs of Bar left France, ſhe had
contracted ſome debts in Paris, which were not
yet paid. Without doubt, this princeſs had been
prevented only by death from diſcharging them, |
ſince ſhe had ſent jewels from Lorrain to be
pawned to her creditors, who had made a ſeizure
of her houſes, furniture, and other effects. Her
houſes were, a palace at Paris, a houſe a Fontaine-
bleau, and another at Saint Germain, which the
King her brother had given her; and, among o-
ther furniture, there were pictures in her gallery,
chamber, and cloſets, which were well worth
keeping in the royal palaces, and which the King
wiſhed to have for that purpoſe ; but they had
made the Ducheſs's debts ſo conſiderable, that he
did not think it fit to deſire them till they were
all cleared. Theſe debts amounted to twenty
thouſand livres. ;

——— *
i ee
* n Re 2
. r IE ' vw. £ S&"' a
r * >

D'Oſſat's letters, that this princeſs had no more affection for het
huſband than he had for her, is contrary to the opinion of all other
| hiſtorians: there is more foundation for this notion, that the delign
of the journey the Duke of Bar took to Rome, was leſ to ſolicit
the diſpenſation for his marriage, than to oppoſe it; but that the
Pope did not ſuffer himſelf to be ſo impoſed on. The palace here
ſpoken of is the palace of Soiſſons, formerly called, The Queen's
IF, becauſe it had belonged to Queen Catherine of Medicis, who
eft it by her will to her grand-daughter, Chriſtina of Lorrain; but
by reaſon of Queen Catherine's debts, it was ſold in 1601. and
bought by the Ducheſs oi Bar. It was ſold again in 1604, for one
hundred thouſand livres, or thereabouts, to the Count of Soiſſons,
whoſe daughter, Mary of Bourbon, transferred it, as part of her
portion, to Prince Thomas Francis of Sayvy-Carignau, grandfather
of Prince Eugene,

I

F A

6 FY Les

A OS ba. Re.

* % %* ——_— SS

+
*
*
">

1604. O F 8. U L IL. I. 239

I was afterwards commiſſioned by his Majeſty
to take an inventory of the furniture and jewels
belonging to thisprincels : that which rendered the
execution of this employment very difficult, beſides
the different kinds of debts and effects, was the
ſpecifying of thoſe that the King of France, and the
Duke of Bar had a right to, and the claims they
both made to the rings the Princeſs had pawned
in Paris. Madame de Pangcas gave us a very ex-
act account of what rings and other jewels the
Princeſs was poſſeſſed of, either before or after her
arrival in Lorrain, and of what her moveables in
France conſiſted; and the inventory was. regulated
by this writing. The whole was regiſtered with
great exactneſs, in the preſence of two or three
members of the council, named by his Majeſty,
and the Duke of Lorrain's commiſſioners; and
this done, each of the two princes took poſſeſſion
of thoſe effects that either belonged, or were to
be returned to them. The Ducheſs's palace at
Paris was, by the King, deſtined to be fold, be-
cauſe part of the money for which it was firſt
purchaſed was not yet paid; and the ſum produced
by this ſale was ſufficient to ſatisfy the firſt owner
of it, and all the other creditors. The King gave

the houſe of Fontainebleau to the Queen, and that.

at Saint Germain to the Marchioneſs of Verneuil.
But as this fale could not be made immediately,
and the creditors demanding ſureties, it was, by
their conſent, agreed betweea the two princes,
that the jewels ſhould be depoſited in my hands,
without any other ſecurity than my word : they
remained there till the following year, when the
Queen having taken them, I was diſcharged by a
writing, dated 28th June, 1605, and ſigned by
Des Marquets and Buntempts. 1 ihall now proceed

to the re-eſtabliſhment of the Jeluits, which I have
promiſed to give ſome account of.

Notwithſtanding

rern

r
—

2 4

= E bo - . - 2
- —— o — _ - 8 - — _
_—_ they Ie td Ee | 22 :
LS. o - . *
- FX « p 1
— —— — a_ * ad by

—

2

.=-
: .
„ F |
bh
1

bY.

+ 3 ,
=

4
7
I

42

«ny
Weld -
2
0
1
7
NM.
117
* +)

*
"i

1 1
4 )
* 0

240 M E M OI R 8 Book XVII.

Notwithſtanding the arret that ſeemed to de-
prive them of all hopes of ever ſettling again in
France, yet they had found means to engage the
court in their intereſts, and to make, even in bis
Majeſty's council, ſuch a great number of pro-
tectors, whoſe voices, joined to the earneſt and
almoſt continual ſolicitations of the Pope, the
houſe of Lorrain, and many other perſons, both
within and without the kingdom, ſo greatly
ſtrengthened their party, that it was not poſlible
for Henry to reſiſt any longer; and indeed it muſt
be confeſſed, that he yielded without much reluc-
tance. Some Jeſuits who had gained acceſs to
his perſon on account of what had paſſed the
preceding year during his journey to Metz, be-
| haved with ſo much addreſs, and made ſuch ad-
vantage of that permiſſion, that Henry began to
ſee them with pleaſure *, and even to admit them
familiarly to his preſence. Thoſe who were thus
ſent to try their fortune, and who, we may be afſu-
red, had been choſen with all the diſcernment of
a ſociety that underſtood mankind perfectly well,
were the fathers Ignatius, Mayus, Cotton, Armand,
and Alexander; for father Gonthier did not yet
ſhew himſelf ; his turn of mind, which was rather
ardent than complying, was not yet wanted.

The Jeſuits being thus ſecure of great part ol

* The favourable reception the Jeſuits met with at court and in
Paris, was principally owing to their qualifications as preachers; thoſe
who are named here were excellent in that reſpect. We ſhall {von
have occaſion to ſpeak of Father Cotton. Father Laurent Mayus,
or Mayo, was born in” Provence ; he was a man of great wit and
conduct, and one of thoſe who the moſt effeQually aſſiſted the Pope's
nuncio in procuring the re-eſtabliſhment of the Jeſuits. This Jeſuit
putting Henry IV. in mind of his promiſe to recall that order at a
proper time, ſaid to him, Sire, your time is now come; it is nine
„months ſince you made this promiſe, and women are delivered at
« the end of nine months,” „ True, Father Mayo,” anſwered
that Prince, but don't you know things go longer than women Co.”
Chronol. Septen. anno 1603. ,

the

: . .

1604. O F SUL L V. 241

the court, flattered themſelves that their enemies
in the council would be either the weakeſt party,
or ſuch as would not contradift a propoſal they

knew to be agreeable to the King, they preſented

a petition in form to his Majeſty ; who having in
effect taken a reſolution very favourable for them,
ordered the conſtable one day to aſſemble a coun-
cil at his houſe, compoſed of the Chancellor,
Meſſieurs de Chateau-neuf, Pontcarre, Villeroi,
Maiſſes, the Preſident de Thou, Calignon, Jean-

nin, Sillery, De-Vic, and Caumartin ; there to

hear from La-Varenne, the moſt zealous ſolicitor
the Jeſuits had, the ſociety's propoſals, and what
arguments they could offer to ſupport them; to
deliberate upon them ; and to bring him an exact
account of what paſſed “. |

* The parliament of Paris having been informed of the King's re-
ſolution touching the recal of the Jeſuits, ſent the firſt Preſident de
Harlay as their deputy to his Majeſty, to preſent their remonſtrances
againſt it, The Preſident ſpoke to the King with great vehemence ;
the ſubſtance of his ſpeech may be ſeen in De-Thou, who after ha-
ving related, as an eye witneſs, what paſſed on this occaſion between
the King and his parliament, complains of a writing which came a-
broad at that time, under the title of, The Xing's anſwer to the re-
monſtrance of the parliament; and which is a continued ſeries of re-
proaches from that Prince to the firſt Preſident, and of praiſes of the
Jeſuits : whereas the only anſwer the King made to the deputies of
the parliament was, that he thanked them for the ſolicitude th
diſcovered for the preſervation of his life, and that he would take all
neceſſary meaſures not to run himſelf into any dangers. The length
and ſpirit of this writing teſtify in favour of M. de Thou; but, on
the other ſide, this anſwer of Henry IV. whether true or fictitious, is ſet
forth in the 4th volume of Villeroi's ſtate memoirs, p. 400. and con-
firmed by Matthieu, that Prince's hiſtoriographer, whom Henry IV.
himſelf furniſhed with memoirs of his hiſtory, vol, II. book iii. On
this authority, which is of great weight, Father Daniel bas cited it
in his hiſtory of France, in folio, vol. 3. p. 1939. Thele things
would induce one to believe this was the real anſwer of Henry IV. at
leaſt in ſubſtance ; and M. de Thou agrees, that after the King's an-
ſwer, which contained an order to regiſter his edit, the parliament
having made a farther attempt to avoid regiſtering it, his Majeſty
ſent for them a ſecond time, and declared his will to them with au-
thority, and even with anger; and afterwards ſent Andrew Hurault
de Maiſſes, one of his ſecretaries of ſtate, to the parliament, to cauſe
his edict to be regiſtered without any modification,

VOL, III. K | His

_— 9

—

o ©,
__
1
2
* 1

— —

*
N — &
— 1 5
2 £

— . . 4 - —
8 En
AYR 4 r * —
—W es Ys .
4 of * 5
294 * 3 .

oo o adit ——
i
12

-
*
—

P > -

_ *

242 ME MOI R S Book XVII.

His Majeſty would have been very well fatisfi-
ed to have had me of this council, and his reaſon
for not naming me to the conſtable among the 0-
thers, was (as he told Oſerai, the firſt groom of
his bed chamber, who afterwards repeated it to
me) becauſe he believed this commiſſion would not
be agreeable to me. But Sillery here exerted all
the arts of a courtier ; he affected to his Majeſty
ſo much ſurpriſe, that this council ſhould be held
without me, accompanied with all thoſe treacherous
| praiſes which envy and malice make uſe of on cer-
tain occaſions, that he Jaid the Prince under a ne-
ceſſity of telling him I ſhould be there likewiſe.
The views of this artful courtier were, to make
me only anſwerable for all the inconveniencies
which they foreſaw might equally attend a denial,
or grant of the Jeſuits requeſt; for every one
knew it was a nice affair. I gueſſed Sillery's mo-

tive for _ in this manner, and it was not long

before my ſuſpicions” were fully confirmed.

The council being aſſembled, and myſelf pre-
ſent, as one of the members, the queſtion was put
to the vote; when Bellievre, Villeroi, and Sillery,
directing their eyes ta me, Sillery ſpoke for the
others, and (aid, that theſe gentlemen, as well as
himſelf, yielded to me the honour of deciding up-
on this queſtion, as to one who was better ac-
quainted with the affairs of ſtate, and the King's
inclinations than any that were preſent. I was al-
ready not too well diſpoſed towards Sillery, and
this ſtroke put me quite out of humour with him :
inſtead of a compliment, with which any other cour-
tier would have paid his flattery, I anſwered to
his meaning, - and that without any diſguiſe, 1
told him, that I ſaw no reaſon for altering a cu-
ſtom ſo generally received, as that of voting ac-
cording to rank, eſpecially on a ſubje& that my
ſentiments, whatever they were, would, on 2
1188 | count

F
r

* . on -

COW

)
[
|
4

983
»
A.

,

fy

N

*

+ ay

6

»
*
.
„
1
#5
pL
,
*

*

a 35

A *
. — ;
* »
Ws.
*

1604. OF SUL L V. 243

count of my religion, be ſuſpected of partiality;
unleſs it was with a deſign to give the world a
diſadvantageous interpretation of my words, as I
knew many that were preſent expected to have an
opportunity of doing; and had even done it be-
fore-hand, by groundleſs charges upon a point on
which I had not yet declared my thoughts ; and
added in plainer terms, that although I ſhould vote
firſt, yet I would not give the perſon that ſpoke
to me ſo great an advantage as he ſeemed to hope
for ; but that I would do nothing till I had firſt
conſulted my oracle. And, in reality, I was reſol-
ved to have a conference with his Majeſty, before
any reſolution was taken in the matter in debate.
« I find then,” ſaid Sillery, ſmiling maliciouſfly, and
affecting ignorance of the meaning of my laſt words,
« that we mult wait for your opinion till you
« have taken a journey to the banks of the Seine,
“ four leagues from hence.” Ablon it was that
he meant, the place where the Proteſtants had
their aſſemblies. 4 Monſieur,” replied I,“ your
« enigma is not very obſcure ; however, I aſſure
% you, that as in religious matters, not men, but
« the words of God, are my oracles, ſo in affairs
e of ſtate, I am guided only by the voice and
« the will of the King; which I intend to be par-
« ticularly informed of, before any thing be de-
e termined upon a buſineſs of this importance.”
Then addreſſing myſelf to the whole company, I
told them, in a tone of voice ſomewhat raiſed,
that great inconveniencies mult infallibly be the
5 of a precipitate reſolution in this

e.

After this diſcourſe, which might be taken for

that act of deliberation I had juſt before declined,

the conſtable taking advantage of the hint I had fur-
niſhed him with, and pleaſed likewiſe with having
an opportunity to do me ſome ſervice, for, ever

X 2 ſince

1

244 M E M OI R 8s Book XVII.

ſince that he had received from me in the affair of
Marechal Biron, his former prejudice againſt me
was changed into a ſincere affection, ſaid, that he
was entirely of my opinion, as to the neceſſity there
was of knowing the particular inclinations of bis
Majeſty, before any thing was reſolved on; and
added, that it would not even be improper to deſire
him to be preſent at their debates, if it was only to
put a ſtop to thoſe little heats and ani moſities, that
had already begun to appear in our firſt ſitting,
Villeroi, ſhewing an impatience to proceed, which

ſurpriſed every one that knew his diſpoſition, faid,

that ſince this affair could no otherwiſe be termi-
nated than by the re-eſtabliſhment of the Jeſuits, it
was needleſs to protract it any longer; and, after
giving all the weight he could to his Holineſs's in-
terpoſition, and anſwering for the faithful perform-
ance of the promiſes made by the ſociety, he ex-
plained the motives of the King's conduct in this
affair, who had not, he ſaid, referred it to a council
the members of which were all appointed by him-
ſelf, to be contradifted, but to avoid taking upon
himſelf the annulling, by his authority, fo folemn
an arret of parliament as that againſt the Jeſuits;

and concluded, by, complaiſantly ſaying, that it was

fit his Majeſty ſhould be ſpared the diſagreeable ne-
ceſſity of deciding ſolely this queſtion. Villeroi
certainly highly honoured us all by this ſpeech;
and the council, no doubt, owed him great acknow-
ledgments. De-Thou ridiculed this opinion, as
Villeroi had done ours; he ſhook his head, and
ſaid, that, if his Majeſty's defign had been ſuch as
Villeroi repreſented it to be, not to meddle in this
affair, he would have referred it to the deciſion of
the parliament, as likewiſe the examination of the
Jeſuits propoſals; and hence taking occaſion to give
his own ſentiments of the matter, he added, that if

the King would avoid the blame he would incur by
l x acting

*
1
g .

*
*
4
q
Wa

bk,

$ 4 „„ E: [ _ ; 1 IRS.” — Fs *
r

2 ¼½].!ſ! T ↄ qꝙ%r:Um.u» ß...
4

x)

164. 0 F SUL L I. 245

acting otherwiſe, and the danger that would reſult
from it both to the ſtate and his own perſon, this
was the only part he could take, namely, to refer
it to the parliament. Certainly this was not ſpeak-
ing like a courtier : but neither his advice nor that
of Villeroi was followed. The reſt of the coun«
ſellors declared, by a ſingle word, that they thought
it neceſſary his Majeſty ſhould be applied to, before
they proceeded any farther; and this was the end
of our firſt ſitting. |

The next day I had a private conference with his
Majeſty ; and the firſt thing I brought upon the car-
pet being the debates on the preceding evening, I
perceived the King expected I ſhould tell him my
ſentiments of them. I did not heſitate a moment
as to the part I ſhould take, and truth obliges me to
confeſs, it was not very favourable for the Jeſuits “*.
I told his Majeſty, that I c6uld not poſſibly com-
prehend how, after an arret of parliament publiſhed
by his order, and for a cauſe as neceſſary as juſt, he
ſhould ſuffer himſelf to be (till prejudiced in favour
of an order, from which both himſelf and the ſtate
bad nothing but miſchief to expect. Here I could
not help bringing the King of England to his re-
membrance; and, having no intention to protract
my diſcourſe to any length, I contented myſelf with
barely entreating him to diſpenſe with my aſſiſting
at ſuch hateful deliberations ; or if not, to let me
know his will preciſely, and command me ſo abſo-
lutely to regulate my vote according to it, that I
might find my excuſe in the neceſſity of obeying
him. „ Well, ſaid Henry, ſince we are alone, and
you have leiſure to diſcourſe on this matter, tell
“ me freely what it is you fear from the re- eſta-
© bliſhment of this ſocicty, and afterwards I will

It is ſaid in the manuſcript of the King's library, which we have
quoted before, that M<f1; de Sully, de Buillon, de Maupeou, &c. did

all they were able to divert the King from this reſolution, |
R 3 «tel

*
b |
1 wn
„* 4
19
4 N
. *-
1 e
2
5
=;
1 j
7
; :
XY
XY
 %& Wn
1 1
1
a y
J he \
3
of
1
rd *
„ *
. F
A}
- *
* 7
I
*
.
4
$ © 5
"=
F,
1
*
*
1
:
|
7
*
1 *
.
I
?
5
*
ry
,
*
7
-
;

246 M E M OI R S Book XVIL

4% tell you what I hope from it, to the end that
« we may judge whoſe arguments have the moſt
« weight.” I would ſtill have excuſed myſelf from

this taſk, ſaying, that it was abſolutely needleſs,
ſince his Majeſty had already taken his reſolution.
But he replied, that that ſhould not hinder him from
paying ſome regard to my reaſons ; and commanded

me ſo poſitively to enter into this diſcuſſion, that 1 ; 2

could no longer refuſe to ſatisfy him.

The public has no advantage to hope from the 7

reſtoration of the Jeſuits in France, which it may
not promiſe itſelf from any other religious order;
and for the excluſion of the Jeſuits there are parti ·
Mar reaſons ariſing from the inconveniencies which

f llow from their eſtabliſhment in this kingdom. J

The reaſons and inconveniencies are reducible to
fur heads, which are immediately ſeen to be of the
laſt importance; religion, the conduct of govern-
ment with reſpect to foreign nations, the interior
government of the kingdom, and laſtly the perſon
of the King. Let us now ſpeak of the firſt: the
only ſure foundation upon which the ſyſtem of go-
vernment, which the council will henceforth follow,
can be ſupported, is union and peace between the
two religions prevailing in France: the Jeſuits muſt
be ſuppoſed, by thoſe who favour them, to promote
this peace and union; but in truth, this can be leſs
expected from them than from any other men.
Their firſt ſtatute places them in ſuch a blind ſub ·
jection to their general, or rather to the Pope, that,
though as particular men they might have the moſt
pure and pacific intention, they can move only by
the will of theſe two ſuperiors, of whom the Pope

has a great deal of miſchief in his power; and their
general is always either a Spaniard born, or a de-
pendent upon Spain. Now it cannot be imagined,
that the Pope, and the general of the Jeſuits, will
ever contented)y fee the Proteſtant religion forming
? Fa 4

r ,
ö r 8 . , *
4 - 7 * * - . 1 We
— 4 — * . * , 4 ©
F oa Beto 4 ie oo EF gt a $os

Z diſtinct intereſt in France; it muſt therefore be,

w
4 LS LE” ry bs.” 4 4
- ed hy, £ *
F _ * — Ww £0 * 9 Tx
Ds OR Pe rs ng org Y dC inn” th FOCI a WEE

- deſign the help of the Proteſtants will be neceſſary,

do, they will endeavour to waſte the forces of the

neh ag

that the Jeſuits, filled with the notions of Rome,
men likewiſe of dexterity and intelligence, and, to
complete their character, jealous of the honour of
their own party, will, by their confeſſions, their
ſermons, their books, and their converſation, keep
up a perpetual ſchiſm among the people; whence
will enſue diſcord and contention between the dif-
ferent members of the body politic, which will ſoon
or late produce ſuch another civil war, as that from
which we are got free.

Nor are they leſs capable of diſturbing our con-
cord with foreign nations, which is the ſecond rea-
ſon for which good policy would oppoſe their re-
vocation ; the Pope either favouring Spain by incli-
nation, or depending againſt his will upon that
crown, particularly ſince the Spaniards laſt invaded
Italy, and the great view of Spain being the de-
ſtruction of the French monarchy z when we con-
ſider that the Jeſuits are connected with both the
Pope and the Spaniards, by principles, cuſtom, and
religion, what can be concluded, but that France
will have in her boſom a body of men always ready
to take part with her enemies? Here religion comes
again into the queſtion : the ſcheme formed by
Henry, for the glory and tranquillity of Europe in
general, requires, that at ſome time he ſhould ſend
an army into Italy capable of ſetting the Pope free,
even without his own conſent, from the ſhackles in
which he is kept by the power of Spain ; in this

without which nothing can be done againſt the Spa-
niards: but the Jeſuits will never like a ſcheme of
general policy, which will make the Proteſtants im-
portant, and eſtabliſh them in Europe. |
Rather than ſee the execution of ſuch a deſign,
and become enemies to Spain, as they muſt then

—

King

<£ S?

- + , " * w I - 1 * * - " —_—_— = _ I Sage - 4 -
E — Ä r * 3 — K -
E. - - _ % - - l . —Y - —
n — . Y >

2 — — =

ö =
248 MEM O1R s Book XVII

King upon his ſubjects, which is the third reaſon a.
gainſt recalling them : and what will produce almoſt
as much diſorder in the government of the king.
dom, their acceſs to the prince, and the influence
which they will have over the exerciſe of his power,
will enable them to commence another kind of war
againſt the miniſters and men in office, under the
ſuſpicion that they have not the ſame deſigns with
themſelves. I reckon myſelf among thoſe who will
be firſt ſacrificed to theſe new favourites. And to

conclude, has not the King himſelf had a dreadful Þ

inſtance of their hatred, without giving them new

opportunities of daggers and poiſons ? and does he

not know the reaſons for which the Jeſuits would
have put another prince upon the throne of France
in his place? ſuch a one as they hoped to make
more eaſily concur in their ſchemes, both general
and particular. If he had any doubt of it, I offer-
ed to prove it evidently to him, by a paper ſent me
from Rome againſt the Cardinal d'Oſſat, of which J
ſhall ſpeak preſently; and 1 then added a few re-
fleftions, with which that paper had ſupplied me.
The King anſwered me, that he ſhovld like to
ſee that paper, and ordered me to ſhew it him; but
he remained invincible in his purpoſe, notwithſtand-
ing all the reaſons that I could offer him. He told
me, he had only two things to oppoſe to my dil-
courſe, which he found I had formed by long pre-
meditation ;. the firſt was, that it was natural for
the Jeſuits to be devoted to Spain, the only power
which had courted and careſſed them, when they
were ſcorned or hated almoſt every where: that if
they had found the ſame reception in France, or
ſhould now begin to find it, they would ſoon forget
Spain. For the truth of this he quoted Father
Mayus, who had declared to him, as he told me, in
the name of the whole ſociety, their ſincere attach-
ment, and confirmed it with the ſtrongeſt oaths,
ſubmitting

+
A;
8
A
CE
x
"4 .
C
,
N.
*
*
4
:
5
8

— ä

„% WL LY: 249

ſubmitting that he and his aſſociates ſhould be con-
ſidered as the moſt flagrant traitors, if his promiſes
were not fulfilled, 5

The King added, that theſe oaths and promiſes
perhaps would not ſo fully put me to ſilence, but
that I might have ſomething to reply; but that a
ſenſe of his own intereſt, and care for the preſerva«
tion of his perſon *, determined him, he ſaid, not
only to receive the Jeſuits to mercy, but to treat
them well; for if he once reduced them to deſpair,
and deprived them of all hopes of returning to
France, there was nothing which they would not
attempt againſt him. His Majeſty then dilated at
large upon the credit, the artifices, and the expe-
dients of that ſociety, by which he endeavoured to
perſuade me, as he appeared himſelf perſuaded, that
this ſociety, to whatever diſtance it might be driven
by baniſhment, would have a thouſand means of

practiſing on his life, and that he was deſirous to ſet

himſelf free from perpetual diſquiets. He concluded
with this expreſſion of Czfar +, That it was better
to put one's ſelf at once into the power of thoſe
that one ſuſpects, than to be continually uſing pre-
cautions againſt them. |

By theſe words, and the tone with which they
were pronounced, I ealily comprehended that his
Majeſty had already reſolved upon the re- eſtabliſn-
ment of the Jeſuits, and that nothing could diſſuade
him from it. Therefore, inſtead of oppoſing this
reſolution by new objections, many of which, and
thoſe very ſolid, I had ſtill to offer; I told him, that

% Ventre-ſaint-gris !” ſaid Henry IV. to thoſe who endeavour-
ed to diſſuade him from recalliag the Jeſuits, © will you be anſwer-
* able for my peiſon ?” which words [topped every one's mouth. See
the King's MSS vol. 9033.

1 Inſidias undique imminentes ſubire ſemel confeſtim ſatius eſſe, quam
cavere ſemper, ſays Suetonius ; which d oes not abſolutely ſignify, that
the moſt unexpected death is the beſt, as the text in the old memoirs
exprelles it, and which is more conſiſtent with the context.

ſince

—

250 M E M O 1 R 8. Bock XVII.

ſince he ſeemed to make the ſafety of his perſon,
and the happineſs of his life, to depend upon the re-
calling this ſociety, that was ſufficient to make me
labour for the ſucceſs of the affair as zealouſly as
La-Varenne himſelf could do; and that, when the
council again aſſembled, he ſhould have proofs of it.
I ſaw joy ſparkle in the eyes of this Prince at my
words; and that the ſacrifice I made him might
not go unrewarded, and that I might have no cauſe
to apprehend the blame of what might happen ſhould
fall upon me, he promiſed me two things that in-
ſtant, and gave me his royal word for the faithful
performance of them. One was, that neither the
Jeſuits, nor any other perſon in the world, ſhould
prevail upon him to declare war againſt the Prote-
ſtants, unleſs I myſelf ſhould adviſe him to it : the
other, that nothing ſhould be capable of making
him remove from his perſon a miniſter, with whom,
be his religion what it would, he was well ſatisfied;
« and eſpecially,” added he, with a moſt obliging
familiarity, “ a man of whom I can ſay, with the
« utmoſt ſincerity, what you the other day told
« me Darius ſaid of his Zopyrus *.“ He likewiſe
aſſured me, that he would endeavour to make the
Jeſuits entertain the ſame ſentiments of me that he
did; and that I ſhould know, before much time was
paſt, in what manner he expected they ſhould behave
towards me.

I am not ſure whether he did not exert himſelf
on this occaſion that very day; for I had a viſit
from La-Varenne the next morning, who delired as
a favour, that a Jeſuit, who he aſſured me, was (till
more a Frenchman by inclination than birth, might
be allowed to pay his reſpects to me. I anſwered

Zopyrus a Perſian ſatrape, having cut off his noſe, ears, and
Tips, in order to execute a ſtratagem, which put Darius in poſſeſſion
of the city of Babylon, that Prince uſed to ſay, he would have given
| twenty Babylons for one Zopyrus. Herodotus, b. v.

La- Varenne,

SH Wwe % *

Sn F* mn myy

vs Ud TS CD CD mas 0D WHY we ww www FO 56%

— 3 — „ wi To TY %Y _

. n

4s
*

+*
2
= %
—

0 6
7
*

IJ

*

—

1604. O F r 251

La-Varenne, that he well knew every one was ſure
of a polite reception at my houſe, and eccleſiaſtics
eſpecially, who never perceived any more of my re-
ligion, than the obligation I thought it laid upon me
to treat them with a diſtinguiſhing reſpect; and that
if this were not the caſe, the character he gave me
of this Jeſuit was ſufficient to inſure his welcome.
This French Jeſuit was Father Cotton *, whom he
brought with him the next day as I went into the
hall to give audiences as uſual after dinner. The
Jeſuit approached me with all imaginable demon-
ſtraticn of veneration and reſpect, and was laviſh
in his praiſes of my great capacity, my ſervices, and
likewiſe upon the protection which he ſaid he had
been aſſured I was diſpoſed to grant his ſociety, in-
termingled with the moſt profound bows, and re-

peated aſſurances of gratitude, devotion, and obe-

dience. I was not deficient in a return of compli
ments and ceremony, being ſolicitous to omit no-
thing the perſon and preſent occaſion required.

The next day the council, ſtill compoſed of the
ſame members as before, aſſembled for the ſecond

time; and no affair was ever more quickly diſpatch-

ed; without entering into any diſcuſſion, or making
a needleſs diſplay of arguments in favour of a que-
ſtion already decided, I ſaid in brief, that the preſent
conjuncture of the times required, that the Jeſuits
ſhould have a ſettlement in France. It was reſolved
that they ſhould take an oath to hold all the *
ciples of true Frenchmen, and elect no one for a
provincial who was not French by birth : this they
ſwore to perform, and all the paſt was buried in
oblivion. All I have to add is, that during the
whole time I was extremely reſerved, and acted with
great eircumſpection, as well with regard to Father
Molina's opinion of grace that was publiſhed this
peter Cotton, born 1564 at Neronde, of one of the moſt diſ-
tinguiſned families of Forex. |

. : | year,

1 - * — -
OC eres MP EIT

15

* Q
© /
HO!

an:
:

=
*

—

_— ———

\ © hag .

252 M E M OI R S Book XVII.

year, as upon ſome propoſitions of three Jeſuits,
which occaſioned high debates between thoſe that
favoured, and thoſe. that oppoſed them, eſpecially
theſe two; that the Pope's being the ſucceſſor of
Saint Peter was not a point of faith, and that con-
feſſion might be made by letters. On this occaſion,
the Jeſuits were ſoon ſenſible how neceſſary the
royal interpoſition in their favour was to them.
Had they been given over to the parliament, the
Sorbonne, the univerſities, and the moſt part of the
biſhops, and the cities in the kingdom, their doc-
trine had not taken deep root : bor the King did
not abandon his new favourites; and even, at the
ſolicitations of La-Varenne, gave them his caſtle of
La-Fleche, where they ſoon founded a very fine
college. |

The reſtoration of the Jeſuits afforded matter for

a real triumph to Villeroi, Jeannin, Du-Perron, and
above all to D'Oſſat, who had not neglected their
intereſts at Rome, where he ſtill reſided to manage
his Majeſty's affairs at that court. And here it
ſeems proper to introduce that memorial, which was
addreſſed to me from Italy againſt this eccleſiaſtic,
and which, as has been obſerved, I had already
mentioned to the King.
His Majeſty was then gone to Chantilly, to ſpend
a few days there in the month of April, on account
of the pure air, the agreeableneſs of the place, the
conveniency for hunting, and other country-amule-
ments, which his phyſicians ſeemed to think neceſ-
ſary for his health. Upon ſome letters I wrote to
him, in which I could not diſpenſe with myſelf from
obſerving that by his abſence a great number of at-
fairs were left undetermined, he returned imme-
diately to Paris, notwithſtanding all the intreaties of
his phyſicians to prevent him. The ſame evening
that he arrived, he remembered the memorial in
; Queſtion, and aſked me for it, by which he only
| | prevented

*
7 8 .
. ˙ A WF i oa

—

e

ig, * 3
n

5 „

4
r

—

*
1 Na — 1 5
, ts” cat

"2 * 2
1118 aw”

+ LE Fwd

8 *
. NS VO bogs PTS

1604. r 253

prevented me, it being my intention to ſhew it him

that day. I had brought it with me, between my
coat and wailtcoat, and I left it with him that he
might examine it at his leiſure. I had made no al-
terations in it; and added nothing, except perhaps
a few reſlections which this paper had no great need
of, to draw upon the perſon againſt whom it was
wrote his Majeſty's utmoſt diſpleaſure.

The author of this memorial, who had his rea-
ſons for neither mentioning it in his-own name, nor
that of the perſon to whom. it was addreſſed, endea-
voured to prove, that D'Offat had prevaricated in
every point of his commiſſion, and had accepted it
with no other deſign, but to bring matters to that
paſs, that the King ſhould be obliged to enter into
the views of the Catholic leaguers of his council,
and to purſue a political plan very different from
that they found he had hitherto conducted himſeif
by. This new plan, which ſtill breathed the ſpirit
of the league that gave it birth, conſiſted in uniting
France in intereſt and friendſhip with the Pope,
Spain, the Archdukes, and Savoy, againſt all the
Proteſtant powers of Europe in general, and the
Proteſtants of this kingdom in particular ; to make
Henry concur with the Pope in placing a Catholic
prince on the throne of Great Britain; no longer
to protect the United-Provinces ; to uſe his autho-
rity to procure a general ſubmiſſion to the council
of Trent; in a word, to make him adopt all the
Auſtrian ſchemes, and all the maxims of the other
ſide of the Alps. The Jeſuits were to undertake
the taſk of cementing this union, which was to be
founded upon a marriage between the children of
France and Spain, and the firſt effects of it the de-
throning of King James.

The author of this memorial, to prove that he

did not bring theſe heavy accuſations againſt D'Oſſat

like a mere declaimer, juſtified the truta of them
Vol. III. Y i

254 M E M OI R S8 Book XVII.

by that Cardinal's own letters, as well thoſe I have
formerly mentioned, as others which he had col-
lected, and by his common difcourſe at Rome, ei-
ther in public, or to my brother, ambaſſador to
that court, and others in private. He explained
the myſtery of thoſe almoſt inſurmountable obſtacles
the Holy Father made to the King's abſolution, and
the marriage of the Princeſs his ſiſter: he ſhewed
that they proceeded from D'Oſſat himſelf, who,
during the whole time that thoſe affairs were de-
pending, abuſed with impunity the confidence his

maſter repoſed in him; and, to prevent the re-

proaches he had reaſon to expect from him, gave
him to underſtand, that he was under an abſolute
neceſſity of perſuading the court of Rome, that his
Majeſty was of the ſame opinion, and that it was
with great difficulty he ſuppreſſed thoſe reports
which fiom time to time were ſpread to the con-
trary.

It is certain, that throughout this whole affair
D' Oſſat acted with great art, as likewiſe in the ini.
nuations he ſecretly gave the King, that Spain,
with reſpett to him, had only the moſt pacific in-
tentions, ſor which the Pope was ready to be ſecu-
rity. All this is fo clear, and ſupported by the au-
thor with ſuch inconteſtable proofs, as forces be-
lief, notwithſtanding that ſpirit of hatred and fury,
which jt cannot be denied every part of this paper
breathes againſt D'Oſſat; he is allo reproached in
it with aſſuming the character of a great politician,
and a conſummate ſtateſman, when he bad ſo much
reaſon to bluſh for his ignorance and incapacity ;
and that in this eccleſiaſtic nothing was to be found
but the meanneſs of his original, having, before his
advancement to the purple, been a pedagogue and
a footman, and owed all the ſeveral advantageous
changes in his fortune to the fawning arts he prae-
tiled on Villeroi, and to his laviſhly ſerving the as

: tree

I Un
*

. * ** /
int . ⁵ ↄ

"W
*

He = *«  o--

PRIFY r vu. rw cw Wl wot ac A.

dans 8 „ ii. —— —_— — rn 1

oy
3%
2
*
F,
2"
I
52
OP
»
* OY
*
=
©
4

9
. 47 U
2
=
Yo
2
1
: KA
*
1

*
— by
n *
. 2 4 .
„. . x.

F<
k EE" 3
r F.5d at won 3

0 8 VL L. I. 255

tred of other Catholie leaguers to the Proteſtants.
At the concluſion of this memorial, the author ears
neſtly iatreats the perſon into whoſe hands it ſhould
happen to fall, to ſhew it to his Majeſty.

Setting aſide all that this paper contains of the
extravagant or outrageous, which ſhew it came from
a declared enemy, it muſt ſtill be confeſſed, that
D'Oſſat could not eſcape the reproach of having
ſlandered his ſovereign, and being ungrateful to his
benefactor ; and that he even left to poſterity the
means of convicting him of thofe two crimes, in
the letters which through vanity he cauſed to be
printed, wherein he calumniated Henry IV. a
prince who oppreſſed the clergy, deſtroyed the 8
bility, rvined the third eſtate of the kingdom, and
acted like the tyrant of his people.

Nor is truth leſs violated in thoſe furious excla-
mations he makes againſt the Proteſlants. What
can one think of the epithets of impious, horrid,
deteſtable, ſacrilegious, with which he brands a bo-
dy that makes profeſſion to agree with him in the
belief of all the fundamental articles of the doctrine
of Jeſus Chriſt, and have the ſame veneration for
the divine writings in which they are contained,
the Apoſtles Creed, the Ten Commandments, and
the Lord's Prayec ?

As to his political errors, though in D'Oſſat they
may well be imputed to views too narrow and con-
fined, yet they are not the lets palpable. At a time
when the ambitious projects of the houſe of Auſ-
tria were in a manner poſted up throughout all Eu-
rope, he expoſed France to the danger of being the
ſirſt victim of them, by breaking off for ever with
all her allies that were to ſupport her againſt this
proud and infolent monarchy. And what is till
more ſurpriſing, this deſtructive policy communica-
ted itſelf, as it by contagion, to the gicateſt part of
thoſe who were employed in the adminiſtration of

Y 2 public

*

—— —

"
q
o
6
*
i

— ͤͤ—
<4

— —

—

2

256 MEM OI R Ss Bock RvlI.

public affairs: and what is yet more to be lament.
ed, it gained ground upon the wiſeſt as well as tbe
ſmalleſt party *.

It was this policy that in the month of April this
year expoſed Villeroi to one of the greateſt mortifi-
cations that could happen to a man in a public em.
ployment. The King, when he ſet out to Fontaine-
bleau, where it was his cuſtom to keep his Eaſter,
during Which there was a ceſſation of all buſineſs in
the council, took leave of his counſellors till the
Sunday after Eaſter; but on Good Friday he re.
called me by a letter, in which he informed me,
that he had difcovered ſome treaſonable practices in
his court, and that he wanted to confer with me;
for which purpoſe he would order poſt horſes to be
1cady for me at Ablon on Eaſter Sunday, that 1

* This ſyſtem of politics has not been produQive of the miſchief;
M. de Sully apprehended it would occaſion; on the contrary, the e-
vent of it has bcen as favourable as it poſſibly could have been. It
is nevertheleſs true, and will in ſome degree be a juſtification of our
author's manner of rez{oning on this occaſion, that if the execution
of theſe deſigns, of which the dc{truftion of the Proteſtant religion in
France was the principal, had fallen into the hands of any other than |
Cardinal de Richelicu, the ſuccels of it would not only have been
doubttul; but if an attempt of ſo great conſequence as this bad by
any means miſcarried, France would, in all probability, have been
replunged into the frightful ſituation ſhe was in during the reign of
the children of Henry II, \

Cardinal de Richelieu did not, however, in every reſpect follow
the plan attributed to D*Offat, Villeroi, &c. ſince duting his whole
life he was engaged in war with Spain. The perfect knowledge he
had of the particular refources on which France could depend, and
which, if we may judge from appearances, he had acquired principal-
ly from Sully's memoirs, made him take in, and in ſome degice te-
concile, both theſe oppoſite ſyſtems, by entering into the deſign of
weakening the houſe of Auſtria, in purſuance of the one; and of de -
ſtroying Calviniſm in France, according to the other of them. !
don't know of any one inſtance that fo evidently proves, as this docs,
what a ſingle man is capable of. The Proteſtants of France, who
had obtained a toleration of themſclves, after havipg remained un-
diſturbed full thirty years, were, almoſt at crce, brought into an
entire ſubjection: this happened, becauſe on ihe one fide there was
a Cardinal de Richelicu, and on the other there was no longer a Henry
of Navarre.

3 A 15 N
RO IOW * eee 2 A >

might

— Fw „ * . _ — s i, Sev * r $6. 2 5
1 F * i * - . 8 * Fat 3 Pa. 3 2 1 « % 7
* E e af * & : 4 gy L $5 . s * . 1 * . 2

a ac two , . , Aww ann Kio]

« mg, * 1 Sad N P 1 . 4 9 * Sw ver „ * 2 p A "7 $4 + R ” 1 1 4 oy ; 0 1 Sw
TBE oi a EY I tens BYE eee Sona its ler 3 . ; —

1
1
13
$4
1

a; or et,

1604. O F S U L LT. 1

might ſet out for Fontainebleau when the commu-
nion was over. I did ſo, and this was the affair in
queſtion.

Villeroi had a clerk in his office named Nicolas
L'Hote *, whoſe family, from father to ſon, had
been attached to that of Villeroi ; but the perſon
of whom we are now ſpeaking, before he entered in-
to his ſervice, had been ſecretary to the Count de
la Rochepot, when he was ſent ambaſſador from
France to Spain. L'Hote had wit, but of that
ſort that ſtrongly inclines the owner to artifice and
intrigue. During his ſtay in Spain, he contracted
an intimacy with the Spaniſh ſecretaries of ſtate,
Don Juan Idiaques, Francheſes, and Prada, to whom
he betrayed the ſecrets of the ambaſſador his maſter,
When La-Rochepot returned to France, L*Hote
finding himſelf without any employment, ſolicited
Villeroi, whoſe godſon he was, for a place in his
office, and was by him intruſted to decypher his
diſpatches; which was very agreeable to L'Hote,
as it afforded him an opportunity of carrying on his
firſt trade with ſecurity.

Barrault +, who ſucceeded the Count de Ia
Rochepot in Spain, perceived, a ſhort time after,
that the ſecrets of his prince were known to that
court; and in vain tortured his imagination to diſ-
cover from whence this 'misfortune proceeded,
Not being able to fix upon any particular perſon,
he intreated his Majeſly, in a ſhort letter addreſſed
to himſelf, to look upon all the clerks in his ſecre-
taries offices, eſpecially thoſe belonging to Villeroi,

Or, as others ſay, Du- Portail.

+ Emerie Gobier de Barrault. It is related of this ambaſſador,
that being one day at a comedy in Spain, in which the battle of Pa-
via was repreſented, and ſeeing a Spaniſh actor throw him down whoa
performed the character of Francis I. ſet his fort on his throat and,
in the moſt out ragious terms, obliged him to alk quarter he got up-
on the ſtage and in ſight of the whole houſe, ren the ator thruugh
the body with his ſword, Amelot's notes on D'Oſſat.

Y 3 as

. .

238 MEM OI R Ss Book XVI,

as ſuſpected perſons. This treachery extended its
influence to all our other ambaſſadors to the ſeveral
courts of Europe, who were extremely aſtoniſhed,
and complained to the King, as Barrault had done,
that the contents of their diſpatches were known at
theſe courts as ſoon as they received them from
France, and very often before.

But neither Barrault nor they could penetrate any
Farther into the affair, till Barrault was one day
accoſted by a Frenchman of Bourdeaux, a refugee
in Spain, whoſe name was John de Leyre, but bet-
ter known by that of Rafis, which be had born
when he was in the ſervice of the league, having
been one * of the molt active of the incendiaries,
and on that account not being able to get himſelf |
comprehended in the pardon, was obliged to fly in-
to Spain, where his ſervices, which conſiſted in re-
vealing ſome advices he {till received from his aſſo-
Clates in France, were rewarded by a good penſion
that was allowed him by that court, and which was
continued to him, till the council of Spain having
procured by other means more certain intelligence
than any they could get from Ratis, he ſoon per cei-
ved, by the contempt he was treated with at Ma-
drid, and the diſcontinuance of his penſion, that
his credit was ſunk all of a ſudden; and changing
his battery that inſtant, he applied himſelf with the
utmoſt diligence to find out who was the traitor in
France that had enriched himſelf with his ſpoils,
not doubting but that if he ſhould ſucceed, this
diſcovery would purchaſe his recal to his own coun»
try, which he had always in his view, and proba-
bly procure him greater advantages than thoſe he
loſt in Spain.

Men educated in the arts of faction, and the myſ-
tery of intrigpe, have talents for theſe fort of diſ-
Coveries peculiar to themſelves. Rafis got acquaint»

L' Etoile ſays, he had been one of the ſixtcen.

V

—
_ :

w *
f
1
A
1
ns
2 * *
"=
' +,
f 5
3
9
* *
*
”
* 4
2
4 - *
-
* VE
8
4
bed 3
54
8
PE
E
8
4
:
»
*

ae.

-
en „ e 12

ed

k
.
5
YH
:
*
*
9
4
*
4"
Y
E
7
4
8.4

27 ates bc nt) lags 5.099 AL,

A OF SULLY as

ed with another Frenchman, named Jon Blas, who
bad ſettled in Spain, and it was from him that he
learned in what manner L'Hote had abuſed the con-

* fidence of his firſt maſter. Rafis, ſtruck with this

hint, fixed, as by inſtiaft on this man; having
procured from other perſons information that he
was actually one of Villeroi!s ſecretaries, at that
diſtance his ſagacity alone diſcovered to him what
ſo many others upon the very ſpot were ignorant of.

His ſuſpicions being changed into a certainty, he
went to Barrault, and offered to point out the trai-
tor of whom he complained, but that care muſt be
taken to prevent his having any ſuſpicion that he

| was diſcovered, on condition, that if his informa-

tions were found to be true, the King would give
him a free pardon in form, and a decent penſion.
Barrault thought the affair of ſuch importance, that
he made no ſcruple to promiſe both. Rafis likes
wiſe exacted a promiſe from Barrault, and this with
a view to his own ſafety, that he ſhould proceed
ſlowly and cautiouſly in the affair; and that when
he wrote to France upon the propoſals that had
been made to him, he ſhould addreſs himſelf to
none but the King. But Barrault underſtood this
laſt requeſt as an exceſs of unneceſſary caution,
which did not excludg him from acquainting his
Majeſty's chief miniſters with the affair : and it was
Villeroi himſelf that he informed of Rafis's offer and
propoſals. Villeroi, who did not imagine that the
traitor was in his own office, ſent the diſpatches im-
mediately to the King: but L'Hote being with his
maſter when this packet from Barrault was opened,
drove directly at his purpoſe ; and reflecting upon
the importance of the advice, acted in the very
manner that Rafis had with ſv much reaſon been
appiehenſive he would do; for he wrote inſtantly
to his correſpondents in Spain, deſiring them to
take all the neceſſary meaſures, and that without
delay,

260 M EMO I R 8 Book XVII.

delay, to prevent Rafis from diſcovering more,

This was the beſt method he could think of to ſe. © ;

cure himſelf, and to prevent any bad conſequences ;
and it would probably have ſuccceded, had the per-
ſon concerned been any other than Rafis.

This man, when he received his pardon, which
his Majeſty ſent him, together with his anſwer to
his propoſals, obſerved that it was not ſigned by
Lomenie, to whom the King would naturally have
referred it, if it had not been offered him by an-
other train of conveyance ; and concluding- from
thence that it had paſſed Villerors office, he went
directly to the amballador, and complained that he
had deceived him; and now thinking it no longer
neceſſary to conceal any thing, he told him his rea.
ſons for preſſing him to write only to the King. and
to Villeroi leſs than any other perſon. He gave
him, in a few words, all the informations he had
promiſed him concerning L'Hote”s intrigues ; that

done, he told Barrault, that, to avoid, if it was ſtill
poſlible, the danger with which he was threatened |

at Madiid, he had nothing left for it but to endea-
vour to gain the French territories with the utmoſt
expedition. And accordingly he mounted his horſe
that moment; and it was happy for him that he
did fo, for the next morning his houſe was inveſted
by archers, who were ſent after him with orders to
make all poſſible haſte, that they might come up
with him before he reached the frontier : but Rafis,
by good fortune, or rather by his own extreme di-
kgence, eſcaped with Deſcartes, Barrault's ſecretaty,
whom ihis ambaſſador permitted to accompany him,
to preſent him in France. They never reſted till
they found themſelves at Bayonne, from whence
continuir g their rout without delay, they came to
Paris, and hearing the King was at Fontainebleau,
ſet out directly for that place.

On the road he met Villeroi, who was going
rom

20 „ — Lend

1604- O F SUL L I. 261

from Fontainebleau to his houſe at Juviſy; and be-

&. lieving they ought not to conceal any thing. from

him, intreated him to have his clerk arreſted by way
of ſecurity ; and that they might have the ſole ho-

* nour of the affair, offered to return themſelves to
Paris to arreſt him. Villeroi neither approved of
their propoſal, nor the offer they made him of their

perſons ; which, it muſt be confeſſed, was an in-

* ſtance of great imprudence ; but he, doubtleſs, ima-

gined, that it was not poſſible for L'Hote to eſcape,

Ne told the two couriers, that his clerk was to come
to him the next day, and that it would be then time
enough for them to ſecure him; it being likewiſe
bis opinion, that his Majeſty ought firſt to be ſpoke

to about it; and that they riſked nothing by this

1 delay, provided they kept a profound ſilence. Sur-

priſed and diſſatisfied as they were at this proceed-
ing, it was their buſineſs to obey ; and they deli-
vered the packets they were charged with to him,
to be given to his Majeſty, which he did the next
day.

The King had not yet received theſe packets on
Eaſter-day when I came to Fontainebleau, nor by
conſequence knew of the two couriers arrival, or

the name of him that betrayed him ; the only cer-

tain intelligence he had was, the warning that had
been given him to hold all the clerks of Villeroi
ſuſpected. As I did not reach Fontainebleau till it
was very late, and was greatly fatigued with my
Journey, I did not wait on his Majeſty till the next
morning. I found him up and drefled, though it
was ſcarcely ſun-riſe. Barrault's informations had
given him great uneaſineſs. This prince took my
hand, and leading me into the gallery that joined to
his apartment, conferred with me there a long time
upon the news he bad juſt received from his am-
baſſador. The diſpatches from London that had
been loſt, coming into his mind, and all that 1 *
al

262 M6-M 0 1K deen

ſaid when I imputed this misfortune to Villeroi's

people, which at that time he took for an effect of N

jealouſy and hatred, now appeared to him ſo well
founded, that he acknowledged to me he began to
give credit to it, and to conceive very unfavour-
able thoughts of Villeroi. As he did not expect
that Deſcartes and Rafis would arrive fo ſoon, he
ordered me to ſift this matter to the bottom, and
uſe my utmoſt endeavours to find out the truth.
His Majeſty and I had been three days employed
in endeavouring to make diſcoveries, when Villeroi
arrived with the packets before mentioned. I was
walking with the King in the long gallery of the
garden of Pines *, and preparing to take leave of
him for my return to Paris, at the very moment
that Villeroi came up to us, His countenance ex-
preſſed all that grief the conſciouſneſs of having ſuch
news to inform his Majeſty of muſt neceffarily in-
ſpire ; and I may venture to ſay, that for a man
who had ſome cauſe to wiſh to bumble a rival, or
at leaſt to rejoice in his humiliation, I ſympathiſed

truly with him in bis affliction, While he read

the papers, his Majeſty often looked at me, and
preſſed my hand ſeveral times. He did not give
him time to read them out, but interropting him at

the name of L*Hote, “ And where is this L*Hote,

& your clerk ?” ſaid his Majeſty, with ſome emo»
tion, © have you not cauſed him to be ſeized ?”
«& I believe, Sire,” replicd Villeroi, in great con-
ſternation, © that he is at my houſe, but he is not
e yet arreſted,” © How!” returned Henry, iv a
rage, “ you believe he is in your houſe, and yet you
& have not ordered him to be ſcized! Par dien
e this is great negligence indeed; how could you
& trifle thus when you knew his treachery ? this
& buſineſs muſt be attended to immediately: go

* The gallery of Ulyſſes,
ce back

*

"Ws | . 3 2 2 "I WE 3 n W es. „ .
bi e e cr bt Pies Din MR gs vi i SR

i

W

.

e K =2x©

rr

<4 ca r Aa £m

—_ «a oo a anpcoauuwcac-

« — * * 1 * * 7 - & . 5 4 ow, * £ ht 2 F *
e ee bt Fes Din eee

*
0
IF
8
*
<4
*

.

« back with all poſſible haſte, and ſeize him your-
« ſelf.”

Villeroi departed in the utmoſt grief and confu-
ſion; and I did not delay a moment my return to
Paris; when the next day I received a letter from
his Majeſty, who charged Deſcartes to tell me
from him all that had paſſed. Since I find myſelf
engaged to relate this affair, that I may avoid the
repruach of having ſupported ſuch accounts of it
as have been given by the enemies of Villeroi, in
what remains to be faid I ſhall follow the detail
he himſelf gives of it, in the apology for his con-
duct, which he thought it neceſſary to“ make pu-

lic. After baving recounted, in a manner ad-
vantageous for himſelf, all that had paſſed from
the moment wherein he ſpoke to the two couri-
crs, to the time that he went to the King at
Fontainebleau, he proceeds in the following man-
ner.

That at his return to his hovfe, he found the
Biſhop of Chartres, and ſome other perſons of dif.
tinction, who waited for bim, and detained him a
long time in his cloſet, the ſubject of their confer-
ence being the ſettling ſome points relating to the
8 ceremony of the order of the garter.
When Deſcartes came to his apartment, to ac-
quaint him that L'Hote, with Deſnots, were juſt
arrived from Paris, his reſpe&t for his company
hindered him from interrupting them. L'Hote,
on his firſt entering the houſe, was ſaluted with
the news of the arrival of the two couriers from
Spain, yet preſerved preſence of mind enough to

See the original of this apology in Villeroi's memoirs of ſlate,
pag. 522, it bears date the 3d of May. There can be no doubt of
its containing a faithful relation of the ſentiments and actions of this
miniſter, it being ſirictly conformable to the accounts given of it by
M. de Thou, the Chronol, Septen. Matthieu, and all other hiſtorians
af credit of that time.

appear

— — — — ———— — —

—
%

appear but little concerned at it ; and pretending
that he was hungry, and would go and eat a mor-
ſel in the kitchen, only paſſed through it, telling
the maitre d'hotel, that he would go to a public
houſe and refreſh himſelf, and get his boots taken
off, that he might be in a condition to appear be-
fore his maſter. Villeroi, after his company went
away, aſked where L*Hote was? and being in-
formed that he was in the offices, as every body
thought he was, he thought he could not do better
than ſend a ſervant to tell the maitre d'hotel, that
he ſhould amuſe L'Hote with ſome diſcourſe, and
not loſe ſight of bim: he himfeif, in the mean
time, went to Lomenie, to deſire that he would
lend him Du-Broc, lieutenant du prevot, who he
intended ſhould arreſt him. He brought back
Lomenie with him, and they placed themſelves
at a window that looked into the court where the
whole tranſaction was to paſs. But theſe precau-
tions were too late, L'Hote had already eſcaped.
Thoſe who judge favourably enough of Villeroi,
to take the whole recital upon his word, will, at

leaſt, probably exclaim here againſt the dilatory

manner in which this ſecretary of ſtate executed
thoſe orders he had juſt received from the King's
own mouth, and in a tone as abſolute as it was
preſſing : he would be ſtill more culpable, if a
thouſand circumſtances of L'Hote's eſcape, made
public by Deſcartes and Rafis, which were not
mentioned in his apology, were true : however, it
would be certainly great injuſtice to believe every
thing that on this occaſion was ſaid againſt Ville-
roi *; his enemies had too good an opportunity

* De-Thou remarks, that M de Villeroi did not abſolutely eſcape
ſuſpicion ; but at the ſame time he ſays, that H-nry IV. far from ſul-
fering himſelf to be influenced by it, en'cavoured to comfort him
under his misfortune, bock cxxxii. P. Matthieu likewiſe aſſecis,
that Henry IV. was too well acquainted with the fidelity of this nu-
giſter to conceive the leaſt ſuſpicion againſt him. vol. II. b. iii. p. 637.

afforded

264 MEMO I R S Book XVII.

= ew » ans A aa dh. and nan” TS

«a 1

1604. O F . 265

afforded them to rail, not to take advantage of
it; the Proteſtants, eſpecially, painted him in the
blackeſt colours, not able to deny themſelves the
pleaſure of being revenged on him, who had con-
tributed more than any other to the King's change
of religion. But, on the other ſide, it is not fit
to hold him clear of any blame, as thoſe that are
devoted to him do, who inliſt, that his whole con-
duct in this affair was juſtifiable. All my friends
did not ſcruple to fay publicly, that, if ſuch an
accident had happened in my family, I ſhould
have been much more ſeverely reflected upon.
The foreign ambaſſadors reſiding in France, and
even the Pope's nuncio, came to my houſe at
Paris, and declared to me, that if, after ſuch a
diſcovery, their diſpatches muſt {till paſs through Vil-
leroi's hands, their maſters would not venture to
mention any thing of conſcquence in them.

As to the traitor, all that could be done was to
ſend ſome archers aſter him, who purſued him ſo
clolely, that when he came to the {ide of the ri-
ver Marne, with a Spaniard who accompanied him,
and at a ſmall diſtance from a ferry-boat, be could
not hope to reach it before they came up with
him, and ſaw no other way to avoid their purſuit,
than to throw himſelf into the river, thinking to
ſwim over it; but he was drowned in the attempt.
The Spaniard choſe rather to be taken; and he
was brought back to Paris, with the body of
L'Hote, which was drawn out of the water. Vil-

leroi ſeemed truly afflicted, that they had not been

able to ſeize his clerk alive; indeed be had rea-
{on to regret it; it was the only means he had left
to ſtop the mouth of flander. He was the firſt to
propole to me, in a letter he wrote to me about
this affair, to have the carcaſe * treated with the

utmoſt

The ſurgeons who examined his corpſe, were unanimouſly of o-
vor- Ill. 4 binion,

266 M E MOI R S Book XVII.

utmoſt ingnominy, and to puniſh the Spaniard in
an exemplary manner.

All this could not appeaſe the King. He knew A

not, for a long time after this adventure, in what
light to behold Villeroi : and was three days in
doubt whether it was not fit to baniſh him from

his preſence, But Villeroi threw himſelf at his

Majeſty*s feet, with ſo many marks of a profound
ſorrow, ſhed tears in ſuch abundance, and made
ſuch deep proteſtations of his innocence, that Hen-
ry could not help believing him (though the world
would never be perſuaded, but that he only feign-
ed to believe him) and with that goodneſs, ſo na-

tural to him, granted the pardon he ſo vchement-
ly implored.

Matters were in this ſtate, when I returned to
Fontainebleau, to inform his Majeſty, which I was
indiſpenſably obliged to do, of the repreſentations
made me by the foreign ambaſſadors. It was reſol-
ved, that the cypher made uſe by our ambaſſadors
ſhould be changed; and the King now thought
only of taking advantage of this incident, to make
Villeroĩ more exact, (Irepeat the King's own words),

pinion, if we may give credit to L'Etoile, that he had not been
drowned: and, as there was no more appearance of his having been
ſtabbed or ſtrangled, they concluded he had been ſmothered, and
afterwards thrown into the river. The Septennaire takes no notice
of this examination by the ſurgeons, but gives an ample detail of the
particulars of L*Hote's flight, and the manner in which he was found,
which totally deſtroys the validity of the account given by L'Etoile,
u ho, vpon other occaſions, has given ſufficient proofs of his difl:ke
to M. de Villeroi, and yet could not avoid acknowledging, that Hen-
ry IV. did not treat M. de Villeroi with the more coldneſs on this
account; “ raking the trouble, ſays he, of going even to his houle,
© to comfort him in his ſorrow, not dilcovering the leaſt ſigns of
diffilerice of him by reaſon of what had paſt, but ſeeming rather
* to put more truſt in him than before. It was therefore {aid at
„ court, that it was happy for him he had ſo good a maſter, ſince,
in affairs of ftate of ſo much conſequence, kings and princes uſu-
« ally expect maſters ſhould be anſwerable for the acts of their ſer-
yants,” Anno 1604, p. 24.

more

_

— + * 1 *
” - —
n e *
- Fa. « *
- . — 1 * . Wo x bd
e N. N |

*
”
vWF
3
5
3
4
7 *
1
ES,
o
*
FE.
;
a
1
A
4.
3
*
_
N
7

more cautious in the choice of bis clerks, and leſs
haughty than he had formerly been. His Majeſty
concerted with me a letter, which he thought
likely to produce this effect, becauſe I was to
make it public; this letter was brought to me at
Paris by Perroton from the King, as it to acquaint
me with the indulgences he had thought fit to
ſhew Villeroi. The conteats were, that his Maje-
ſty could not refuſe a pardon to the tears and en-
treaties of this ſecretary. ; that I ought no longer
to diſtruſt him, ſince he did not; and that, in his
preſent condition, charity required, that I ſhould
write to him a letter to give him comfort, and an

* aſſurance of my friendſhip ; and this he entreated
me to do.

I ſeconded the good intentions of his Majeſty

- without any reluctance, and, I may even ſay, with
more ſincerity than he required of me, except

that I could not prevail vpon myſelf to write to

Villeroi, that I held him entirely diſculpated. This

I thought would appear a ridiculous piece of flat-
tery : I ſaid enough to afford him the means of
perſuading the public, by my letter, that I was
convinced he was innocent of the capital crime of
which he was accuſed, I gave him the hint of the
declaration he publiſhed ſome days afterwards,
and repreſented to him, that he ought to endea-
vour to ſhut the mouths of the Proteſtants, to
whoſe cenſure he had laid himſelf open, and that
the only method he could uſe for that purpoſe,
was to relax a little of that violence he had ſhewa
againſt them, by ſeeking to inſpire the Catholics
with more benevolent ſentiments of them; and
laſtly, to appear publicly the promoter of that re-
gulation I had fo often propoſed to him, to eſtabliſh
a perfect concord between theſe two bodies. If
in this letter I added, that his abſolute jultification
in the King's opinion, depended upon his future

* behaviour,

28 NM E M OI R S Book XVI
behaviour, and if as to what had paſſed 1 produced

the example of Marechal Biron, it was only in o.

bedience to the King's commands, who was will.

ing to appear indulgent, but not weak.

Villeroi, in his anſwer to my letter, thanked me

for the advice I had given him, which he aſlurcd
me he would exatly follow, and for my good cf.
fices, which he proteſted he would never forget,
He confeſſed, that he ought not to have ſo blind!y
confided in a young man like L'Hote, and was
candid enough to acknowledge, that although his
conſcience did not reproach him with the guilt of
any crime againſt the King, yet the error he hed
fallen into, was ſufficient to caſt a ſtain upon his
reputation, which all the faithful ſervices he was
reſolved to continue to render his Majeſty, during
the remainder of his life, would never wipe : oil,
In his defence he only ſaid, that the great obliga-
tions L*Hute had received from him, were what
made it ſo difficult for him to believe he could fail
in his duty. Villeroi ſeldom wrote to me with-

out renewing the mention of his fault, his misfor-
tune, and his innocence, and almoſt always the obli- |

gations he thought he owed to me on this occo{,2n,
It appeared that Barrault did not give credit to
the injurious reports that were ſpread of Viillerc!
by his enemies, ſince he wrote to bim a ſhort
time afterwards, and gave him an account of a
converſation between himſelf and Prada, of, which
L'Hote was the ſubject. Rafis had reaſon to be
ſati-fed with a recompence that was made him;
beſides the ſum of fifteen hundred and ſixty livre,
which he received from Barrault when he leit
Spain, a gratuity of a thouſand crowns was be:
ſtowed on him, and all the conditions agreed to
by the ambaſſador were fulfilled. This did not
hurt Barrault himſelf, being paid in the laſt quar-
ter of his penſion. Deſcartes repreſented to the
King,

5
11 ä * 6 6
*

40

Loa Ho HH —

King, that a man could not live in Spain but at

great expence ; and that, notwithſtanding all my
I. letters, his maſter had not been able to get any
thing from that quarter.
10 Ie paper upon religion, that has been men-
'4 * tioned before, conliſted of ſome articles, which,
f. if received by the Catholics and Proteſtants, ap-
t Þ peared to me capable of uniting the two religions,
y = by deſtroying that deteſtable prejudice which
is makes them load each other with the harſh accu-

is fſations of hereſy and treaſon, impiety and idola-

try. This paper I had drawn up with the conſent
d and approbation of his Majeſty ; and I ſhewed it
I$ * to him ſeveral times, in the preſence of the Bi-
s hop of Evreux, Bellievre, Villeroi, Sillery, and
g J Father Cotton. ;

> If the Proteſtants do not believe all the Ca-
* > tholics prefeſs, it cannot, at leaſt, be denied, that

t > we believe nothing which they do not likewiſe;
il > and that what we believe contains all that is eſſen-
- tial in the Chriſtian religion, the Ten Command»
ments, the Apoſtles Creed, and the Lord's Prayer,
being the great and general foundation of our
, | common faith. Here then let us ſtop, and conſi-
5 3 der the reſt as ſo many dubious points, about
| |= which men may be left at full liberty to have dif-
t! ferent opinions. We are perſuaded, that it is not
only uſeleſs, but criminal, to ſearch into the ſe-
1þ > crets of the Almighty ; but, we not only ſearch
| © into his ſecrets, but ſet up ourlelves as judges of
them, when we charge one another as criminal

}
for having different opinions, and different degrees
of knowledge, with relation to ſpeculative truth,
though knowledge, in all its different degrees, is
received from God. Let us leave to him alone
the knowledge of his ſecrets, as well as the diſpen-
ſations of his providence : let us allow to the ſo-
vereign magiſlrate what the public good requires,

& 3 the

1
4
p 1
den!
J
4

250 NM E M OI R S BookxXvi

the power of puniſhing thoſe who violate the laws | |;
of charity in any ſociety ; for it belongs not to any
human judicature to puniſh errors only cogniſable

by God. Let us conſider this in another view;

if our unhappineſs be ſuch, that the error is on our

ſide, can the Catholics imagine, that they ſhall

bring us into their notions by abuſe and perſecu-

tion? Compaſſion and tenderneſs are the only
means that do any ſervice to religion, and the on-

ly means that religion dictates: the zeal which is

ſo much boaſted, is only rage or obſtinacy, dil.
guiſed under a reputable appellation. This was
the ground-work of my paper : nothing can be
more plain or more true ; but the power which
men allow truth to have over them is very ſmall;
and what is generally called reaſon in religion, if
examined well, is, in moſt men, nothing more
than their own paſſion. |

If to recor.cile the two religions is morally im-.
poſſible, it may, with equal certainty, be ſaid to be
politically impoſſible, ſince it cannot be done with-
out the concurrence of the Pope, which cannot be

expected, ſince it was not obtained in the pontifi- |

cate of Clement VHI. who, of all the Popes that
have for a long time fat in the ſee of Rome, was

moſt free from party-prejudices, and had more of |
that gentienels and compaſſion which the goſpel |

reſcribes to all its followers.

The Holy Father was at this time fo old and in-
firm, that his death was hourly expected. The
King thought it neceſſary to fend the Cardinals de
Joy euſe and de Sourdis to Rome, to manage the
intereſts of the nation in the approaching conclave.
His Majeſty, by the advice of Cardinal Joyeuſe,
gave De-Sourdis 9900 livres for his equipage, and
the expence of his journey, with a penſion of 2400
crowns a-year, during the time that he flaid at
Rome vpon his affairs,

big: One

hb 32 .
ö A A ˙ EEE

(0 542+. a

P
p
8
t
(
a
t
t

ws * SS HFS OS

11654

. 7 2

:

,

&

8

15

1 -4
C *
F

O F Ss UV Lb: Fs 271

One of the laſt actions of Clement VIII. was the
promotion of eighteen cardinals at one time; which

1 made it generally believed, that this Pope, finding
"2 himſelf near his end, was deſirous of giving his ne-

phew Cardinal Aldobrandin a laſt proof of his af-

fection, that, according to all appearances, would

place him upon the pontifical throne, by the great

number of dependents on his family which were
introduced into the conclave ; or, at leaſt, that the

* papal dignity ſhould be conferred on one under

* whom this Cardinal might expect to govern, Two
of theſe hats were to be given to France; and the

*

choice of the two men, whom the King was to

> calion of a ſtrong intrigue at court, between the
* Biſhop of Evreux and Seraphin Olivary *, on one
* ſide, and Meſſieurs de Villars, Archbiſhop of
Vienne, and de Marquemont on the other. The
two laſt were ſupported by the intereſt of Bellievre,
Villeroi, Sillery, and all their friends; and I thought
obliged to range myſelf on the fide of Du-
Perron and Olivary, the one being my biſhop and
particular friend, and the other remarkably diſtin-
> guiſhed for his eminent piety. Notwithſtanding all
the intrigues of the oppolite party, Du-Perron and
>» Olivary were preferred; and the former, by my
* advice, wrote a letter of thanks to Villeroi, as if
he had really ſolicited bis advancement : ſuch is
the cuſtom of courts.
Ik! he preſſing affairs that had obliged his Majeſty
to leave Chantilly, and at the beginning of ſpring,
was the clearing and ſigning the common compu»
tations for the expence of his buildings, his hunt»
ing, his privy pur ſe, as like wiſe of the fortifications,

4
name to his Holineſs for this dignity, was the oc-

a MEG +

A

Seraphin Olivary Cazilla, an Italian by deſcent, but born at

Lyons, patriarch of Alexandria. Jerom de Villars, Denis de Mar-

quemont, archbiſhop of Lyons: he afterwards was made a cardinal,
and ambaſſador from France to Rome,

artillery,

272 M E M OI R S Book XVII.
artillery, and roads. When the day was fixed for

the tranſacting this buſineſs, his Majeſty, to ſhun ©?
that crowd of petitioners who waited only for an

opportunity of ſeeing us together, ſent the young
Lomenie to tell me, that I need not come to the
Louvre, becauſe he would be himſelf the next day
at the Arſenal; and accordingly he came ſo early in

the morning, that many of the officers, concerned

in the affairs that were to be ſettled, all of whom
I had ſent for, were not yet come. The number
of theſe was far from being inconſiderable, go.
vernors of fortreſſes, engineers, intendants, and
comptrollers of the buildings, the ſeveral perſons
belonging to the board of ordnance, overſeers cf
bridges and cauſeys, and others.

Henry had ſomething of conſequence to impart
to me; I judged ſo by that deep melancholy
which, notwithſtanding his endeavours to diſguiſe,
appeared in his countenance and language, and al.

ſa becauſe he led me into the great gallery of arms,

the place where he generally communicated his ſe-

crets to me: and here the reader may expect to |
find one of thoſe remarkable converſations that he

has already met with in theſe memoirs,

Our diſcourſe did not begin with the chief cau- |

ſes of his uneaſineſs. The heart, involved in its
own vexation, has need, in the fiiſt inſtant, of the

help of other objects to be diſintangled, efpecizliy

if with this vexation be mingled ſomething of con-
fuſion. Therefore the Dukes of Bouillon and Tre-
mouille, with the reſt of that cabal, were the ſubs
ject he firſt led to; theſe perſons having lately,
through malice, united themſelves with the Prince
of Conde, the Marchioneſs of Verneuil, and the

family of d*Entragues ; and thoſe from whom bis

Majeſty had received this information, offered to
rove the truth of it by their own letters, and o-
ther undeniable teſtimonies,

Having

N
* _—
_— >.

„„ OF 8s uv L IL I. - 373

FFF '

1 "a
4 *
(> *
N =
=
*
x . E 5
1
7 Pg 4
*
'

Having deſired this prince to allow me a whole
day to conſider what advice it was moſt proper to
give him on occaſion of this new intrigue, he chan-
ged his diſcourſe to his excurſion to Chantilly, bis
hunting; and afterwards he gave me an account

Jof his loſſes at play, the money he laid out in

© preſents to his miſtreſſes, and other ſuperfluous ex-
© pences, which were to have their place in the ex-
© pence of the current year, as well as the money
applied to the manufactures and other buildings,
which altogether made vp fo conſiderable a ſum,
that Henry, who ſecretly reproached himſelf for

7 theſe extravagancies, could think of no better ex-

pedient to prevent the confuſion he expected my

remonſtrances would give him, than to add, be-

}
fore I had time to reply, that I might alſo place
there a gratuity of fix thouſand crowns, which he
now granted me. This precaution could not hin-
der me from giving evident marks of my aſtoniſh-
ment and grief at the increaſe of ſuch trifling ex-
pences. Henry again endeavoured to avoid co»
* ming to any explanation with me, by ſaying, that,
after ſpending ſo great a part of his life in conti-
: nual labours and fatigue, he had a right to allow
himſelf now ſome indulgence in his pleaſures. I
anſwered the King with my accuſtomed ſincerity
and firmneſs, that what he ſaid was indeed very
reaſonable and juſt, if, inſtead of thoſe great pro-
jets he bad communicated to me, and which by
his orders I had imparted to the King of England,
he had reſolved to paſs the reſt of his life in the
enervating pleaſures of luxury; but that if he
ſtill retained any thoughts of purſuing his former
ſchemes, he would deccive himſelf greatly if he
ſuppoſed them compatible with ſuch expenſive a-
muſements; and therefore he muſt determine his
choice upon the one or the other. I ſtopped at
theſe words; Henry having ſilently liſtened to me

while

274 ME M O I R S. Book XVII.

16
while I was ſpeaking, like a man who was full of
anxiety, and wholly abſorbed in thought. But the 10
preſent diſpoſition of the heart, whatever that may 2
be, always governs our firſt emotions, and in bin liv
that moment produced nothing but vexation and |} |
rage; yet he contented himſelf with telling me, Key
that he perceived I had entertained very unfavour. | in

able thoughts of him, and commanded me, with. | fn
out troubling him any more, to carry the ſums he t

had mentioned to account. BY .
Still, however, I was not diſcouraged. I knew | !
the heart of this Prince as well as my own; | © 5
had always found him ſenſible to glory, and open ee
to conviction, and I could not believe him chan *
ged in fo ſhort a time: inſtead, therefore, of ha- f.
ving recourſe to the ordinary palliatives, after tell. Þ 7
ing him, that I ſaw plainly the freedom 1 had for. | :
merly uſed in my repreſentations, was now be. | | |
come diſpleaſing to him, I again renewed the for- F
mer ſubject, and talked to him of the meaſures he | .
had already taken in Germany and Italy, to pre. f
are the way for thoſe glorious actions he one day *
intended to perform, and the ſucceſs the perſons In
he had employed there for that purpoſe had al- 0
ready found. I repeated, that it was uſeleſs to 5
take all this trouble, if the money that ſhould be 2
deſtined for thoſe great enterpriſes, was ſquander-
ed away on unneceſſary expences. I convinced F
him, by a very exact calculation, that he could Þ .
not engage in the execution of theſe deſigns, with- Þ 2
out having before hand forty-five millions entire, Þ 1
that is, the revenue of two years, which it requi - ,
red ihe ſtricteſt cxconomy to keep together; and ,
that with this ſum the war could not be ſupported 1 ,
more than three years, without anticipating the
royal revenues, or burdening the people with ex- We

traordinary taxes. This the following calculation
makes evident.
'The

.
*
4
=
*
8
2.4

G44 0 *
= q "Th WE» —

* * IR MY Y
” <

1604. O F . I. . 275

The maintenance of an army of fifty - thouſand
foot, which is the leaſt that could be employed
on this occaſion, will coſt nine hundred thouſand
livres a month, and nine millions a year, allowing
only ten months to the year; ſix thouſand horſe,
* which is the number anſwerable to ſuch a body of
1 infantry, will require three hundred and forty thou-
* ſand livres a month, that is, three millions four
hundred thouſand livres a year; a train of artille-
| ry of forty pieces of cannon, cannot well be ſup.
* plied at a leſs expence than a hundred and fifty thou-
© ſand livres a month, and fifteen hundred thouſand a
| year. Theſe three articles alone make up four»
teen millions each year; and by conſequence, near
* forty two millions will be required for the three
| years together, on a ſuppoſition that the war will
continue ſo long. The expence of making levies,
of hiring carriages, of victual, and other things
| abſolutely neceſſary at the beginning of the war,
cannot be eftimated at leſs than a hundred and
fifty thouſand livres; the waſte of that victual, with

bother unforeſeen expences in ammunition, mult a-

mount likewiſe to the ſame ſum. The remainder
of the forty-five millions, it may eaſily be imagi-
ned, will be conſumed in extraordinary expences,
too tedious to inſert here.

* "rhe King ſtill anſwered, that, before every thing
could he in readineſs for the execution of theſe

ſchemes, ſo many obſtacles would ariſe as to render

all his endeavours uſeleſs : but while he ſpoke in
this manner, I perceived that his anger was al-

| ready wholly extinguiſhed, and that he approved

of all I had ſaid to him. This he immediately
after confeſſed, and, at the ſame time, declared,

f Vith a lincerity truly commendable in an abſolute

Prince, that the obſtacles he had raiſed, and the
* ſevere things he had ſaid to me, proceeded only
from the anxiety of a heart oppreſſed with a —

crue

276 MEMOIR S Bock xvn

cruel affliction than that he had at firſt complained
of when he mentioned the traiterous cabal, and
that his peace was wholly ruined by the behaviour!

of the Queen, and the Marchioneſs of Verneul|,
Theſe words, unhappily, but too ſincerely, ehanged
the ſubject of our converſation,

Henry's paſſion for Madamoiſelle d'Entragues

was one of theſe unhappy diſeaſes of the mind
which, like a flow poiſon, preyed upon the prin.

ciples of life; for the heart, attacked in its mf

ſenſible part, feels, indeed, the whole force of itz
misfortune, but, by a cruel fatality, has neither the
power, nor the inclination to be freed from it,

This prince ſuffered all the inſolence, the caprices, |

and inequalities “ of temper, that a proud and am-
bitious woman is capable of ſhewing. - The Mar.
chioneſs of Vernevil had wit enough to diſcover

the power ſhe had over the King; and this power

ſhe never exerted but to torment him, She talk.

ed to him continually of her ſcruples, and regret. |
ted the facility with which ſhe had yielded to his

deſires ; ſcruples which he reſented with ſo much
the more reaſon, as he was not ignorant that ſhe

forgot them entirely with perſons of inferior rank.

* He reproaches her on this account, in ſome of his letters, which

have been preſerved amongſt the manuſcripts in the King's library, Þ
and are of his own hand-writing. He writes to his lady in thc F

terms: © I perceive from your letter, that neither your eyes, 107
« your under ſtanding are extremely clear, ſince you have taken what
« I wrote to you in a quite different ſenſe from wht I intended. 49
« end muſt be put to theſe perteſſes, if you propole to keep the et-

* tire poſſeſſion of my love; for neither as a king or a gaſcoun, ca

% ſubmit to them: beſides, thoſe who love ſincercly as I do, expect
« to be flittered, not ſcolded,” &c, © You have promiſed mc,
ſays he in another letter, © to behave with more prudence ; but you
% mult be ſenſible, the ſty le of your other letter could pot but vir
% me offence,” Cc. Amongſt other original letters of Hen) the
Great, in poſſe ſſion of the preſent Duke of Sully, there is oe fem
this prince to his miſtreſs, See the collection of the letters of Heut
the Great, lately publiſhed,

They

,
| 8 TE
* " E (ELSE, 8 MG ts 9 * 0
* of
757 8

1 dias £ CCS AD

= 6c

h

=» —
—"—_— = =
_—_— 4

£5
„

r — 6 ITY f
—

= ca. 2

way
cas ®

»

oY

WS Y * — A 0 88
yy ABR eat gy. AE * nit

4
.

mis fortune, occaſioned almoſt continual uncaſi-

cel wh

2

.
t
* y

bn 277

hey now ſeldom met but to quarrel, Henry
paid a high price for favours which were not en-
Wcared by that tender ſympathy which forms the
Pappineſs of lovers, and which; to complete. his

Weis between him and the Queen his wife.

| This princeſs, on her ſide, who had from na-
ture a temper too uncomplying, and from her
couptry a ſtrong propenſity to jealouſy, not being
able to make her, rival feel all the effects of her
hatred, revenged bherſelf upon her huſband : and
thus was this unhappy prince expoſed to the fury
of two women, who agreed in nothing but in ſe-
*parately conſpiring to deſtroy his quiet. Whate-
ver endeavours were uſed to produce a reconcilis
#:tion between the King and his wife, were render—
ed ineffectual almoſt at the ſame moment: the
Queen began immediately to require a ſacrifice
that Henry could not make her; and his refuſal,
though ſoftened with the grant of every other
wich, affected her ſo ſenſibly, that ſhe forgot all
his compliances, and laboured herſelf to continue
the cauſe of her own uneaſineſs, by depriving him,
together with the privileges of a huſband, of all
that tenderneſs and regard that conciliates aftee-
tion and fixes inclination. |

| She was ſoon informed, that the King had gi-
ven Madamoiſelle d'Entragues a promiſe of mar-
riage; the original of which, as I have formerly
mentioned, had been torn by me, but another had
been drawn up by the King; and ſhe never ceaſed
: toimenting him till he had promiſed to get from
his miſtreſs this paper, which all the cecleſiaſtics
; whom ſhe conſulted aſſured her was of 0 force.
| Henry, merely to oblige her, at length reſolved to
deſire the Maichioreſs to reſtore it; and he de-

LO

*

—

*

manded it of her in a manner that (hewed he would
not be refuſed. He had juſt left her when he came
VoL III. Aa | to

*

at

278

to the Arſenal: the effort he had made upon himſ.!}
to take this ſtep, the little advantage he had drain
from it, and the offenſive language with which liz}
miſtreſs had accompanied her refuſal, had altoge.Þ
ther produced that deep affliction in which I n

kim.

The Marchioneſs of Verneuil, upon the firſt in.

M E

r Book XVI

F

5 .

timation that it was expected ſhe ſhould reſign tte
promiſe of marriage, threw herſelf into the molt!
violent tranſport of rage imaginable, and told the}
King, inſolently, that he might ſeck it elſewhere,

Henry, that he might finiſh at once all the hah} Fi

things he had to ſay to her, began fo reproach bet
with her conneQions with the Count d'Auveryre!
Fer brother, and with the malecontents of te
kingdom. She would not cendeſcend to clear ber.
ſelf of this imputed crime, but aſſuming in ber
turn the language of reproach, ſhe told kim, tha!
it was not poſlible to live any longer with him;
that as he grew old, he grew jealous and ſuſpiciou |
and that ſhe would with joy break off a correſpord: |
ence for which ſhe had been too ill rewarded, to

find any thing agreeable in it, and which rendouf}
her, ſhe ſaid, the object of the public hatred. Ste
carried her inſolence ſo far, as to ſpeak of the

Queen in terms ſo contemptuous, that, if we mi

believe Henry, he was upon the point of (iiikin; Þ
Fer; and, that he might not be forced to conmii

ſuch an ovtrage to decency, he was obliged to
quit her abruptly, but full of rage and vexation,
which he was at no pains to conceal, ſwearin,
that he would make ber reſtore the promile that
bad raiſed this ſtorm,

After giving me this account of the behc1out
cf bis miltels, the remembrance of which rence:
ed all his rage, he was forced to grant (and with.
out Eis confeſſion 1 ſhould bare much {i fpedte!
I) that Le (ould with difficulty bring bimſelf t

&

C9

Lak Tons
1
-
I —

2 ˙ NE TE

1H

3 -
—
—
Cd

—
*
n

r

ui 18 8 11: YI

reſolution of keeping the oath he bad made in
aße the firſt ſallies of bis fury: and as it is uſual with
bn lovers, who never have lo ſtrong an inclination to
ge- praiſe the object of their paſſion, as after they
have ſaid all the injurious things poſlible of them,
eary fell again upon the good qualities cf his mi.
ſtreſs, when out of thoſe capricious humours, and
tet when thoſe ſudden guſts of paſſion had ſubſided,
of He praiſed, with a tranſport of delight, the charms

——
1

5 3 4 Age

PS

e of her converſation, her ſprightly wit, her repar-
e. tees fo poignant, yet ſo full of delicacy and ſpi-
u Fritz and here indeed he had ſome foundati jon foc
(t bis praiſes. The Queen's temper and manners
ne | were o different, that the contraſt made him (Hil
let more ſenſible of thoſe charms in his miſtceis. © I
l- * find nothing of all this at home,“ faid he to
at me; I receive neither ſociety, amuſement, nor
at ( content from my wife; her converſation is un—
„ „ pleaſing, her temper tarſh ; ſhe never acc ommo-

1, “ dates he erſelf to my homour, nor ſhares in any

d.“ of my cares. When ] enter her apartment, and
| 2 © otter to approach her with tcndernets, or begin to
lp talk famihaly with her, the receives me with
e © lo cold and forbidding an air, that 1 quit her in

„„

ge © diſguſt, and am oblig 2ed to ſeck conſolation elſe-
T3 © where. When my coulin Guiſe is at the Louvre,
1 have recourſe to her converſation to baniſh
„ wy uneaſineſs; yet ſhe often tells me plain
o ( truths, but it is with ſo good a grace, that I can»

n WY © not be offended, and am forced to laugh with
“% her,” Such was the diſpoſition of this prince;

and probably the Queen had only herſelf to blame,
that ſhe had not bcen able to draw him cut of the
ſnares of her rival, or to diſergage him from eve-
iy other intrigue of gallantry : at leaſt, he appear-
ed to me to be abſolutely ſincere, and to have the
belt intentions imaginable, when he preſled me, at
the concluſion of this diſcouiſe, to ule my utmoſt
Aa 2 endeavours

z
%
{
4
*
7
*
>
-

2% I E M OI R Ss Book xv

endeavours to prevail upon the Queen, his wife, to

alter her behaviour, and accommocate herſelf mor |

to his humour.

I was about to anſwer, for this ſubject ſeemed ©

not yet half diſcuſſed, when we were interrupt: oy

by Meſſieurs de Vic, de Trigny, de Pilles, de For.

tria, and others, who entered that moment, and | |

told his Majeſty, that the perſons whom he had cr.
dered to attend him, had waited more than an

|

hour, and that it was fo late, it would be impoſ.
ſible to do all the buſineſs that morning. The
King, after recommending ſecrecy to me, fo!loyx. |
ed them into the hall, and gave the reſt of th: |
day, and the two following, wholiy to the aff:irs |
that had brought him to the Arſenal. The *

of ſurveyor of the highways in Guienne was gi.

ven, at my ſolicitation, to Bigole *, who was then
in his ſervice, A commiſſiorer was appointcc to
go and pull down the fort of Craon, Many other
new diſpoſitions were made, which I ſhall not n: en |
tion here.

The King did not fail to take the firſt opporty- |
nity to renew the converſation that had been ſo

unſeaſonably interrupted : he had a reconciliation Þ

with the Queen io much at heart, that he wrote
me billet after billet, enjoining me to undertake
the talk he had propoſed to me, I was ſenſible
I run great hazards by obeying him: a too ſrce
and too ardent zeal on theſe occaſions with pel—
ſons of this rank, often expoſes the mediator to
the reſentment of one of the parties, and ſome:
times to that of both; beſides, to ſpeak candidly,
this employment was leſs ſuitable to me than to
any other perſon, theſe little broils being extreme:

ly diſagreeable to my temper.
I therefore reſolved to omit no petſuaſions
which I thought capable to make Henry bimſelf
N. de Bigoſe, cor Viliouſe, he was Feretary of the Enarces 5
take

|

;

"-

JJ ns REO AORTA æ⁊fe Fo IE wk & 4%... A. 2

N ante hs. Me.

Urn vi

take the only reaſonable meaſures that were left
bim. I brought arguments, cxhortations, examples,
to prove, that it depended upon himſelf to regain
bis quiet, and fix it upon ſolid foundations; and
all that was neceſſary for this purpoſe, was to
* exert the maſter and the king, oblige the Queen
to keep her ill humours to herſelf, and forbear
her reproaches, and, above all, her complaints in

public, which produced nothing but indecent re-

> fleftions : and as to thoſe who by their malicious
informations embittered the mind of this princeſs,
to puniſh them ſeverely for the ſlighteſt word they
dated to utter againſt him. I repreſented to this
* prince, that to ſecure his own peace, and the hap-
| pineſs of his life, required only that he ſhould ex-

ert a very ſmall part of that courage and ſtrength of
mind he had ſhewn on occaſions of a very different

nature, that his reputation ſuffered from that ten-

der fault in his conſtitution, almoſt incomprehen—

* ſible in ſo great a Prince. I told him, that a ſove-
reign, without incurring the in putation of tyranny,

and by the ſole privilege of his high office, might
exact from his ſubjects and family, as well for his
own perſon, as his ſtate, that obedience fo neceſ-

lary to preſerve a juſt ſubordination and ſecure re-
ſpect: and that it was abſolutely fit and juſt, that

he ſhould chaſtiſe ſuch perſons who made it their
buſineſs to deſtroy his domeſtic quiet. To theſe
arguments I added the ſtrongeſt entreatics; I con-

jared Henry with lifted hands, and eyes ſwims

ming in tears, to employ his authority on this oc»
caſion: the condition 1 ſaw him in filled me with
the deepeſt concern.

It is certain that this prince had no other part
left him to take; and 1 could never comprehend
why he appeared ſo ſtrongly averſe to it. He re-
membered the advice I had given bim at Blois,
which being fo different from that Ipreſied him now

a a 3 to

232 M E MOI R S Book XVII.

to follow, gave him a kind of advantage over me;
he ſeemed to be pleaſed with having an opportu-
nity to tell me, that I perhaps was the true cau!:
of all that had ſince happened. But there wa;
nothing ſolid in this objeQion, if well examined;

and when I diſſuaded his Majeſty from having re-
courſe to meaſures which might have produced

dangerous conſequences (this I cannot ſpeak more
clearly without betraying the ſecret J then vowe.
to keep) I had no intention to exclude him from
taking ſuch gentle and eaſy methods as would b:
juſtifiable in the father of a family, to ſecure the
tranquillity of his houſe, And Henry was red.
ced to the neceſſity of owning, that if I were wel!
acquainted with his diſpoſition, I would be con-
vinced it was abſolutely out of his power to a(t
with rigour towards perſons with whom he was
accuſtomed to live in familiarity, and above all to
his wife. |

I had nothing left but to tell him, that then be
muſt baniſh his miſtreſs, and give his wife all the
ſatisfaftion ſhe could require. But he prevented
me, by ſaying, that he was ready, if it muſt be
o, to remove all cauſe of complaint from the
Queen, provided he could be aflured, that, after
making her ſo great a ſacrifice, he ſhould find her
fuch as he wiſhed : but that he foreſaw he should
be plagued all the remainder of his life, becauſe
this princeſs was weak and obſtinate enough to be-
lieve, that, by acting in the manner ſhe did, the fol.
Jowed the dictates of reaſon; when, in effect, the
was only governed by her paſſions. Henry, to
convince me of the juſtneſs of this fear, entered
into a long enumeration of the Queen's faults, in
which he but repeated to me what he had {il
before, upon the delight ſhe took in contradicting
and tcazing bim; he only added, that ſhe had dil-
covered the molt violent hatred to all his natural

children,

1 *
- .
* Ped. S's” ** T1
» of - # 2 1 CE 21
rr r

23 1 .
570! A ag. — end IC

1604. O F . 283

children, although born before ſhe came into
France, which it was not piobable ſhe would ever
remit ; he dwelt upon the little ſenſibility ſhe had
ſewn to his tenderneſs and regard for her, or
gratitude for the extreme attention with which he
prevented all the occalions ſhe might have for
money, although he was not ignorant that ſhe nes

ver received any but to ſquander upon Leonora
and her huſband, and ſome others, who were con-
* tinvally filling her cars with malicious ſtories, and
| giving her bad advice: he took me to witnels, that

never queen of France had received ſo many and

* ſuch conſiderable grants; and it is certain, that J
bad been the firſt to ſolicit for them by my wife;
and this I did with a view to peace, which is often

*

5
4
2
T7
*
4
C

purchaſed by theſe means, and always by the
King's orders. By the rage this prince expreſſed

apainſt Conchini and his wife, whom he conſider. |

ed as the creatures of Spain, and ſpies of the
Duke of Florence, no one, doubtleſs, would have
choſen to be in the place of theie two Italians
but this rage had no other conſequences than ma-
king him condemn himſelf for not following the
advice I was free encugh to give him when the
Queen came into France, which was, to forbid ail
her Italian attendants to paſs the Alps with her.
This long converſation concluded with the fame
requeſt as the preceding one had done, that T
ſhould atterapt, by the gentleſt methods 1 could
think of, to perſuade the Queen to more condee

(cenhon to her huſband's will, without giving ker

cauſe to ſuſpect that I acted by his orders. Hen-
ry uled every argument which he thought likely to
have any force with me, to engage me to under-
take this taſk, teiling me he did not doubt my
ſucceſs, having, on an occaſion ſimilar to this, pre-
vailed upon the Queen to wiite a letter to him,
When no one elſe could.

BOOK

—
_

N E M* O-- I- R$ Dok e

B O O K. XVII.

Hance afforded me a very favourable opportu-
nity of executing the commillion the King,
at this time, gave me to the Queen. The ml
common method of making grants to this pria-
ceſs, was either to create edicts in her favour, az
thoſe which 1 have juſt mentioned, or by grant-
ing to her the money paid upon contratts and
bargains which ſucceeded through her intereſt and
protection. Theſe edifts and contracts always
paſſed through my hands before they took effect;
and it was my buliceſs to name, examine, and au-
thoriſe the perſons concerned.“ .

The Queen was offered four and twenty thou-
ſand livres, to procure the grant of an edit c n-
cerning the officers of the exciſe in Lanoved-c,
She ſent D'Argouges * to ſhew me the edict, and
acquaint me with the propoſal. I told d'Argouges,
that his Majeſty might indeed, without doing the
public any injuſtice, grant the favour the Queen
required, but that I did not think ſhe tock a gud
opportunity to obtain it; the King appearing to
me ſo diſcontented with ſome late proceeding; of
this princeſs, that I was afraid he would not bare
this complaiſance for her, unleſs ſhe firſt endea-
voured to remove his diſpleaſure ; and I took the
liberty to offer her my advice and ſervices on thi3
occalion, if ſhe thought I could be of any vie to
her. The Queen, tempted- by a ſum fo con{+{cr-

nr OT

able, accepted my offer, and promiſed every thing,

believing that, by writing a ſubmiſſive letter to the
Kirg, as ſhe had done before, ſhe ſhovld certain

Florent d*Argouges, treaſurer of the Queen's houſh1d : his ſon
was firſt preſident ol the parliament of Biitany, and at the t.me £|
lis death, a counſelor ob ſtate, ard of the piivy council,

ly

:
.

*
„ Rr

D
— Af = —

42 4

„

—

cd

—-
*

3

N Fn.
8 —

. 285

ly ſucceed : accordingly ſhe wrote a letter, and
. ſent for me to ſhew it me, appearing willing to

alter whatever I judged improper in it.

Never did any ſtep ſe had taken coſt her fo
much. She had fo great an averſion for the Mar-
chioneſs of Verneuil, that ſhe would hardly deign
to pronounce her name: but if any circumſtance
occurred to introduce the mention of her, her ge-
ſtures, her moticns, her very ſilence itſelf cFpreſT-
cd, in the moſt lively manner, what ſhe would not
ſay. As it was abſolutely neccflary to accuſtom
her to hear her rival ſpoken of, I put her upon this
ſubje& without reſerve ; and then ſhe conſoled her-

{elf with giving the Marchioneſs the moſt ſevere e

ithets her imagination could furniſh her with;
ſhe ſaid ſhe never could re ſolve to look favourably
upon a woman who had darcd to biing herſelf in
compariſon with her, and inculcated the ſame in-
ſolence and Want of reſpect for her and her chil-
dren, who embroiled the ſtate by countenancing
the malecontents, while the King, blinded by his
paſſion, took no care to reſtrain her.

I began by ſympathiſing with her in her griefs;
but ſhewing her how much the cauſe af them was
increaſed by her behaviour to the King, I made
her ſo fully ſenſible of her fault, that ſhe wrote
another letter in the terms I dictated to her, and
ſent it to the King, who had left her at Fontaine-
bleau, and was then at Paris. While be was un—
der the impreſſion of the joy this letter gave
him, he returned her an anſwer fo tender and
polite, as it might naturally be expected would

produce one from the Queen in the ſame ſtrain :

but unfortunately, juſt before this letter was deli-

vered to her, her emiſſaries had informed her, that ©

the King was gone as uſual to the Marchioneſs de
Verneuil, and inſinuated, that he was diverting him-

> ſelf with bis miſtreſs at her credulity. She now

forgot
/

236 MEMOIR s Bock XVIII

forgot all that ſhe had promiſed, ſaid the King had
deceived her; and, inſtead of writing, told thz
meſſenger who brought her his Majeſty's letter,
with a cold and contemptuous air, that ſhe nced
not write, ſince ſhe expected to ſee the King the
next day, as he had promiled her. The King

was piqued, as it was natural he ſhould be, at

this behaviour, apd could mot be ſilent: thoſe tha:
heard what he ſaid in the firſt emotions of his ag.
ger, were not perſons who he could expect would
be ſecret as I was, to whom he wrote direct.
All that was ſaid on both ſides was reported to
each of them; and matters were now ia a wolſe
tate than before,

I was now engaged in a new affair, that of ſet.
tling the debate; but, at moſt, I could expect only
an interval of peace, which would continue 1
longer than others had done, while his Majeſty
could not prevail upon himſelf to take the only cf.
fectual methods that remained. Theſe propoſals [
again made bim, when he ſent La Varenne for me
one day, to find, if poſſible, ſome remedy for bis
continual diſquiets, which became every day more in-
ſopportable. I found him in the Orangerie of the
Juilleries, which a_ſhower of rain had obliged him
to enter; and as he was repeatedly preſſing me to
tell him what he ſhovid do, and, vpon my refuſal,
abſolutely commanded me to give him my advice,
« Then oblige four or five perſons,” ſaid I to
him, © to paſs the ſea, and as many others the Alps.”
The King anſwered, that balf of my counlel tc
cold follow without any difficulty, ſince nothing
hindered him from exerciling ſome ſeverity upon
thoſe ſeditious perſons who were conſpiring againſt
him in his court, but that it was nut the fame
with the Italians; becauſe that he not only had
every thing to apprehend from that vindictive
people, but likewiſe by removing her favouitcé,

15

1.

£
Wed
*
14
4
l
;

N
44
7

*

16% 0 . 287,

he ſhould give fuch offence to the Queen, as would

tender her for ever implacable. The King, after

| refleting a little upon the propoſal I had made
him, fell upon a very ſingular expedient, which

> was, to get this princeſs herſelf to conſent to what

I had adviſed, He ſtopped there, as if the thing

| lad really been poſlible, and inſiſted upon my u-

-* ſing all my endeavours to work this miracle, pro-

| milling me, that if I ſucceeded, he would, from
that moment, renounce all his gallantries. Af

ter the King had given me this new commiſſion,
ke left me, as he ſaid, to meditate upon it, and
continued his walk alone in the garden, the rain
having ceaſed during our converſation.

I did not begin with the Queen, by aſking im»
mediately a ſacrifice which 1 ſaw ſhe was not diſ-
poſed to make; I believed, that if ever a favour-
able opportunity offered to prevail upon her, it
would be when there was a perfect agreement be-
tween their Majeſties; and this I laboured with fo
much aſſiduity to produce, that, at length, I re-
conciled them more thoroughly than they had ever

been before; they agreed to forget all the paſt,

and for the future to be deaf to all malicious in-
formers. This calm laſted three weeks, and du-
ring that time the court was fi ' of joy, and dif-
ferent amuſements were thought of every day : but
ſome new ſtratagems of the Marchioneſs de Ver-
neuil's having produced their ordinary elect, theſe
good reſolutions vanithed again, and it became ne-
ecſſary, as a laſt re{ource, to attempt the expedi»
ent propoſed by the King.

It may eaſily be figured, in what manner the
Queen received a prop ſal to tend away, in ſome
loit diſgracefully, thoſe perſons of her houſholi
whom ſhe loved the moſt. I expect d ſhe wou! 1
refuſe me, and I had ro hopes but from my ©
ſlinacy, in returning often to the charge : but this
. 17. cel

w-

233 MEMOIR 8 BookXvii

princeſs continued inflexible z and, to ſay the

truth, Henry, on his ſide, fo ill performed the pro. i g
miſe he had given me, to reward this ſacrifice by Þ

that of renouncing all other attachments but ty
his wife, that ſhe drew from thence her beſt argy.
ments for not yielding to mine. |

What I had foreſcen, really happened; the!“
Queen, inſtigated by thoſe whom I directly at.

tacked, began to ſeek a quarrel even with me,
and complained, that I had not kept my werd
with her, as if it had been in my power to ſepa.

rate Henry from his miſtreſs. But I did not fal
to obſerve to her, that ſhe performed her promiſe Þ
no better; and by that appearance of coldnei;
and diſlike, which, after ſo many relapſes, the
King looked upon as infurmountable, ſhe was her.
ſelf the cauſe of that evil ſhe imputed to me. I
propoſed Madam de Guiſe to her, as an example
ſhe ſhould follow, if ſhe ever hoped to fix the Þ
King's affection ſolely upon herſelf. She afterwards |
complained publicly, that I did not pay all the re.
ſpect I ought to have done to her letters: this I

was acquainted with by the wife of Conchini, who
was leſs unreaſonable and imprudent, than any o-
ther of her favourites, by whom ſhe was abſolutely
governed. To this complaint I anſwered, that it was
indeed true, I did not always pay regard to letters
which I ſaw written by the hand of any of her ſe—
cretaries, becauſe they were either dictated without
her knowledge, by unjuſt ſolicitors who abuſed her
name, or written with a view to draw her reſents
ment upon me, if I refuſed to comply with them;
but as for thoſe written with her own hand, I
defied any one to accuſe me with having neglecled
to anſwer them with the utmoſt deference and re-
ſpect
To ſay the truth, it was abſolutely neceſſary that
I ſhuuld continually call to remembrance, as {
did,

= : . , 1 85
= ono el c aca Aid

* ”
ak. aw av en A. 49 4h. £&. cn

rr os

did, the duty I owed to the wife of my king, that 1
might not be carried by her unreaſonable impor-
tunities to any failure of reſpect or obedience; for
indeed there was no end of her demands: the ex-

pences of her houſhold alone coſt the King every
year three hundred and forty-five thouſand livres; all
the gratuities, contracts, and edicts, that were made

in her favour, were not ſufficient to ſupply her o-
ther expences : ſhe, one day, in a fit of ill humour,

pawned her rings and jewels, or rather thoſe that
belonged to the queens of France, and there was
a neceſſity for drawing moncy from the exchequer
to redeem them; the edit of exempts was paſſed
in every pariſh for her advantage; ſome receivers
of Rouerque and Quercy being behind hand in their
payments, the money was applied to her uſes; ſhe

took upon herſelf to pay the nuptial expences of

hundred livres for that purpoſc : this wgs indeed
but a trifling ſum ; but by ſuch trifles as theſe one

Santi, her Italian gardener, and aſked 0 for ſix

may judge of this princeſs's diſpoſition with regard to

 exconomy. What could I do in this per plexing ſitu-

ation, ſince the inconvenience was equal whether 1
granted all, or refuſed all, but to retuſe whatever

Vas really an encroachment upon juſtice, and a
| detriment to the public good, and in ſuch demands

as muſt indiſpenſably be granted, and elpecially e-
dicts, to prevent any oppreſſion in levying the mo-
ney? As to their Majeſties perſonal quarrels, it mult

be confeſſed, that in the King's conduct there were
unaccountable weakaeſles, and in the Queen's in-

excuſable irregularities,
From the little ſucceſs I had met with ever ſince

L had firſt interpoſed in theſe domeſtic quarrels,
I at length was fully convinced, that in thele af-

fairs ſuch only as were intereſted ſhould under-

take to mediate between the parties: I therefore
| quietly ſlipt my neck out of the collar, and will-

vol. III. B b ingly

290 M E M O I R Ss Bock xv.

ingly left the field open to Sillery, whom the King
likewiſe made uſe of on this occaſion. He ſome.

times found that Sillery managed the two ladies

better than I, which I had no difficulty to believe;

this employment required complaiſance and diſli. Þ -
mulation ; I could neither flatter the ſentiments of

others, nor diſguiſe my own; and without this there
was nothing to hope for, and every thing to fear:

and there the reſentment of a wife and a miſtrel;
both was to be dreaded, which made the danger Þ
ſo much the greater. By what has been related, Þ

my firſt obſervation has been fully made out; and

the ſecond, I may ſay, was no leſs verified by the
. event, ſince, if I had not been extremely cautious, Þ

J ſhould have certainly been the victim of the lover
and the miſtreſs, and upon the following occaſion,

At the time when the miſunderſtanding between Þ
Henry and the Marchioneſs of Verneuil increaſed F
every day, I was deſired by the King to make her
very ſevere reproaches in his name. Inſtead of re- Þ

lenting, or confeſſing her fault, ſhe aſſumed fo

haughty an air, and anſwered with ſo little reſpech Þ
that this once I began to hope the affair would not Þ
end but in an open rupture, which was what I molt Þ

ardently wiſhed for. She not only refuſed to give
his Majeſty the ſatisfaction he demanded of her, but
appeared fo fully determined to break off all com-

merce with the King, that ſhe even went ſo far, as
to ſolicit me in the moſt earneſt manner imaginable, Þ

to prevail upon the King to conſent to this reſolu-

tion, as being equally neceſſary to the future happi- Þ
neſs of them both; and deſired, that as ſoon as1 Þ

went home I would write a letter to the King,
which had been concerted between us, in which ſhe
expreſſed herſelf in terms ſtrong enough to make
me conclude ſhe acted ſincerely. However, the
knowledge I had of this woman's character was
ſufficient to give me apprehenſions that ſhe would

ditayoV

lr 291

diſavow all that I ſhould write to the King, and
pretend that I had endeavoured, by underhand prac-

tices, to widen the breach between her and this

prince: A conduct which, indulgent as he was, he

would have never been able to pardon; for in af-
fairs of love, he carried his ſenſibility and delicacy

very far. I therefore took the precaution to ſend
this letter to the Marchioneſs before it was given
to the King, and at the ſame time deſired ſne would
read and examine it wich attention, that ſhe might
be convinced I had ſaid nothing more in this letter
(which was very long) than ſhe had dictated to
me; and intreated her to let me know, whether L
had not ſcrupulouſly obſerved the purport of her

words. I recommended it in a particular manner

to the bearer, to bring me back no verbal meſſage,
but to oblige this lady to write what ſhe thought
neceſſary to be altered in the letter, and all that ſhe
would have me add to it. |

She had already relaxed much from the ſeverity
of her firſt reſolution ; my meſſenger perceived it,
by her cavilling at the terms, and appearing diſſa-
tiched, though fhe did not give the leaſt hint, that
the letter ſhould be ſuppreſſed, My ſervant finding
that ſhe returned the letter, after all this vague de-
clamation, without any politive anſwer, remembered
the orders I had given him, and told her, that ha-
ving a very indifferent memory, he intreated that

ſhe would write down what ſhe had juſt faid to him,

that he might not incur any blame from his maſter,
for his having forgot, or imperfectly reported, any
of her words. She underſtood his meaning, bur
had gone too far to recede : ſhe therefore took the
pen, and wrote to me, that ſhe approved of the
whole letter, except one expreflion, which was ſuf -
ficient, ſhe ſaid, to put the King into a violent paſ-
ſion. I had told the King in this letter, that the
Marchionels intreated him till to allow her the ho-

B b 2 nour

202 M E M O IR Ss Book XVIII,

nour of ſeeing him ſometimes, but to have no pri.
vate correſpondence with ber; the laſt words the
ſoftened, by adding, “ that might be prejudicial to
%% him;” which made no great difference.

I carefully depoſited the Marchioneſs's letter, and
ſent mine to the King, not without having ſome
hopes, that pride, and affronted love, if not reaſon,
would prevail upon him to concur in the refolution
his miſtreſs had taken, and that he would at length
ceaſe to be the flave of a woman. In effect, he read
my letter twice over, with all the indignation and
rage which might naturally be expected. How!”
ſaid he, “ does ſhe deſire our correſpondence may
c be broke off? I deſire it more ardently than ſhe
& does; ſhe ſhall be taken in her own ſnares,”

The King uttered theſe words in a low voice, but

my meſſenger heard them. He aſked for paper
and pens, and wrote a billet to me that inſtant, in
which he promiſed, that on the Monday following,
the Marchioneſs of Verneuil ſhould receive a letter
from his hand, which ſhould prove that he ſtill knew
how to command his paſſions.

This billet of the King's was dated the 16th of
April, but that of Monday never came ; but on his
arrival at Paris, he flew immediately to his miſtreſe's
houſe, flattering himſelf that he ſhould at leaſt o-
verwhelm her with confuſion, and force from her
a thouſand painful regrets. Far from it: it was
himſelf that played this part ; he diſavowed all that
his agents had done, he condemned himſelf; in a
word, he threw himſelf upon the mercy of her who
had juſt treated him with the utmoſt contempt.
Then it was that I thought myſelf happy to be pol-
ſeſſed of a letter from the Marchioneſs that could
reſtrain his reſentment againſt me. She, howerer,
imagined, that this letter could not hinder me from
appearing, through her repreſentations, as an in-

cendiary and ſlanderer. I would not take upon me
| to.

*

e eee

a nr e wa» ow

. *
: 2
Y
: 2
N 8
J
?
*
28
[

= DT CT VEL. 203

to anſwer for Henry's good opinion of me that mo-
ment ; the letter ] ſhewed him when he came to the
Arſenal undeceived him; but it could not open his
eyes upon the arts of his unworthy miſtreſs. He
told me ar parting that he would chide her ſeverely.
I did not believe him; and indeed. how could I, af-
ter what had juſt happened ?

After the reconciliation between the King and the
Queen, which was made, as has been ſeen, at the
expence of the Marchioneſs of Verneuil, this Wo-
man, who, for the firſt time, thought herſelf really
abandoned, undertook to ruin this peace, and un-
happily but too well accompliſhed her purpoſe. It
is wonderful to think how many ſprings ſhe put in
motion to awaken the King's love for her, and ex-
cite his jealouſy ; even religion was profaned to
ſerve her purpoſe ; ſhe would be a nun, and devote
herſelf to perpetual confinement ; ſhe openly joined
the party of the malecontents ; ſhe ſought out all
the young women to whom Henry had diſcovered
any attachment, and prevailed upon them to forge
ſuch promiſes of marriage as that he had given to»
her; ſhe made ſo inſolent a vſe of that, as to pre-
tend to derive from it a chimerical right to get the:
Queen's marriage annulled ; and, what is hardly to
be credited, found ecclefiaſtics who countenanced'
her in theſe extravagancies, and who. were hardy
enough to publiſh the banns of marriage which ſe
boalted ſhe would oblige the King to contract with
her. At the ſame time, a great number of letters
and memoirs were diſtributed among the public, in
which the ridiculous pretenſions of this woman were
ſupported . Henry would have given any reward

for

* Sec the Cardinal d'Oſſat's complaints on this occaſion againſt
the e urts of Spain and Savoy, and in particular againtt a caphelin,
called Father Hillary, of Grenoble, who carried on a cabal at Rome:
in. fayour. of the Marchioneſs de Vernguil's party. Letters of the
B b 3 22

—— IE RES
. . s

—

—— — —
.

TILA

e

f
\
{
|
J
|
i

1s i
d-w

3 =_y - -
r

> "Sn; 2
> .

LY
— —

3
> 1

— — :

_—

I 12 - oe
P

= * d * * — i
D —
— LLP. OR nn DONE 42

— — — —

294 M E M OI R S Book XVII.

for a diſcovery of the authors of theſe writings, his

whole court were employed to find them out, and
mylelf among the reſt.

I ſhould never come to an end, if I undertook to

relate all the circumſtances of this affair, which, |
trifling as the greater part of them are, brought a |

good deal of trouble upom ſome that had a ſhare in

it. But 1 am weary of diſplaying thoſe little weak |

neſſes in a prince, who, on other occaſions, has af.
forded me fo many opportunities of admiring the
heroic firmneſs of his mind. This ſtorm, which
was occaſioned by a mere love-quarrel, ended, as
uſual with Henry, in an increaſe of tenderneſs for
his unworthy miſtreſs, which carried the miſunder.
ſtanding between him and the Queen to greater

heights than ever “. It was fixed, that, by a moſt i

unaccountable contradiction in the nature of things,
this prince ſhould, throughout his whole life, ſeek

his pleaſures and gratifications at the expence of

his quiet and his health, Theſe two motives made
me {till intereſt myſelf in theſe unpleaſing affairs;
for I could not, without the moſt ſenſible afffiction,
{ce the health of a prince fo dear to me declining
every day. He had not indeed any illneſs this year
that immediately threatened his life, but he never

gave ſo much employment to the phyſicians, La-
Riviere and Du-Laurens ; he was obliged to uſe

bleeding often, and obſerve a ſtrict regimen, to pre-

22d February and 15th October, 1601, and of the iſt of Apill,
1602. The liberty of publiſhing ſatirical libels was never fo great
us at that time.

* « The Duke of Sully has often told me (ſays the author of
4 Phiſtoire de la Mere et du Fils) that he never knew them a week
« tcpether without qustreling. He alſo told me, that once the
* Queen was (> far tranſported with paſſion, that being near the
« King, and haſtily lifting up ber arm, he was fo appichenſive ſte
« was going to do ſomething further, that he caught hold of bet
* with leſs reſpect than he wiſhed to have done, and fo roughly,

« that ſbe afterwards complained he had ſtruck her,” Cc. Vol. J.
7 8.

vent

. = JS  £@z> . £

*

vent the bad effects of a blood heavy and inflamed,
Vhich brought frequent indiſpoſitions upon him,

*Rage, grief, and impatience, threw him into ſuch
an agitation, that one day, being violently offended
at ſome late proceeding of the Marchioneſs of Ver-
*neuil, the arm in which he had been bled the even-
ing before, opened again, as he was ſitting down to
dinner. The Queen accompanied bim this year in
his journey to Monceaux, whither he went to drink

the waters of Pougues and Spa“ with the greater
conveniency.

Nothing would have been wanting to complete

the unhappineſs of theſe domeſtic quarrels, if Queen
Margaret had born a part in them. This was the
only misfortune that Henry eſcaped : and certainly

this princeſs merited the higheſt encomiums for the
' ſweetneſs of her temper, her reſignation, and, a-
boxe all, for her 3 in a ſituation
that afforded ber many arguments to urge a com-

pliance with all ſhe could deſire. Her demands were

few, and for things not only neceſſary in themſelves,
but ſuch as ſhe had an inconteſtable right to, the

| fulfilling ſuch engagements as had been made with

her, and ſome exemptions for her borough of Uſ-
ſon. Her chief ſolicitation was on account of ſuc-

| ceeding to the poſſeſſions of her mother Queen

Catherine. That princeſs, by ber contract of mar-
riage with Henry II. was intitled to leave her ef-
tects, after the death of her ſons, to her daughters,

| Preferable to the natural children of her buſband.

Although this diſpoſition was abſolutely equitable,
yet Charles of Valois, Count of Auvergne t, pre-

tended

The Spa- waters are in the biſhopric of Liege.

+ By virtue of a deed of gift, which Henry III. had made to him
of iheſe eſtates. In 1606 the parliament confirmed the will of Ca-
therine of Medicis, and adjudged theſe eſlates to Margaret of Valois.
Brantome, in vol. V11. of his memoirs, p. 38. gives an enumera-

Lon of theſe eſlates, conſuling of the carldems of Auvergne, Laura-

9

N
1
|
N
J
4
8
?

———— 2

—
ny b '
F

-
n

© 4-4 wow -

1

1

*
5 "IT tb

* — 1
1 5
o 1 : *
„

Bo
APs
* Bit ant 2

—
3

296 MEM OI R 8. BookXvin| ?

tended a claim, to the prejudice of Margaret. She | ©
bad not the principal writings that proved the leg

lity of hers. But the King interpoſed his authority

to make it be given her, and that ſhe fhould obtain
the juſtice that was due to her. Margaret, during |
her whole life, maintained the ſame rectitude of

conduct; and from her behaviour, it could never

be diſcovered that ſhe had once been the wife of |

the King. I ſhould not confine my praiſes to what
I bave already ſaid of her, were I not apprehenſive

of being accuſed of partiality, ſince the intereſt |

which this princeſs had always the goodneſs to take

in my fortune is well known, Her letters to me |

were ſuch as one would write to a ſincere and un.
alterable friend. You are always,” thus ſhe ex-
preſſes herſelf in one of them, © my reſource, and,
* after God, my ſureſt reliance.”

But let us now paſs to other cares and uneaſineſſ:s,
that the King ſuffered this year from a traiterous
cabal, in which the Marchioneſs de Verneuil will |
again have a place. Without repeating inceſſantly |

the names of the Dukes of Bouillon, La-Tremouille,

and De Rohan, the Count d*Auvergne, d'Entragues, |

his wife, Du- Pleſſis, and the reſt, it may be calily
imagined that theſe are the perſons I mean. The

ſame ſpirit of ſedition, by which they had acted in
the intrigues they had ſet on foot with the Proteſ- |
ant party in the ſynod of Gap, ſtill directed their |
enterpriſes, and ſuggeſted to them innumerable ſtra -
tagems, either to raiſe an inſurreftion among the | +
King's ſubjects, or make him new enemies abroad.

gais, Leverous, Douzenac, Chouſſae, Gorreges, Hondocourt, Er.
the yearly revenue of which, according to his account, amounted to
an hundred and twenty thouſand livres;. heſides that prince is“ portion
ot more than wo hundred thouland crowns or ducats. “ which,” fa
he, © would be worth now more than four hundred thouſand 58 to-
ether with a great quantity. of furniture, plate, precious ſlones, jc u-
Cc.

ö It

N 1604

It is ſcarce credible how many ſlanderous lies were
propagated of his Majeſty, how far they extended
their influence, and how many plots were formed
Soaiaſt the government by the authority of theſe

belted by the Ducheſs-dowager of Rohan. It is

„ UL LY. a7

leaders.
The King, when he ſent me to Paris by D'Eſ-

1 ures ſome advices he had juſt received at Saint-

*Germain-en-laye, began in this manner: That al-
though 1 had not already too favourable an opinion
of this whole body, yet I ſhould with difficulty be-
lieve what he had to write to me concerning it. In-
deed 1 am obliged to confeſs, that the proceedings
of the French Proteſtants were ſuch, as left them
no reaſon to complain of any one but themſelves,
if they one day met with a ſevere puniſhment for
them. They boaſted almoſt openly, that they would
oblige his Majeſty, not only to receive the Duke of
Bouillon in his kingdom, but alſo to inveſt him with
honours and offices worthy of a chief of the reli-
— Du- Pleſſis, the foul that animated this body,
ſuggeſted only ſuch thoughts; La-Tremouille, had
prepared his creatures for undertaking all things,
by perſuading them, that they would very ſhortly
behold a ſurpriſing revolution in France: the Duke
of Rohan, in the mean time, took upon bimſelf to
ſpread this report in foreign countries, and in Eng-
land eſpecially, by a truſty emiſſary named Durand,
who uſed his utmoſt endeavours to draw off his Bri-
tannic Majeſty from Henry's party. This man, who

at London aſſumed the title of M de Haute-Fon-

taine, ſhewed himſelf fo faithful and officious a ſer-
: vant, that the King, as well as every one elſe, was
perſuaded that he had exceeded his commiſſion ; for

it was affirmed, that he had treated on conditions
for the eſtabliſhment of his maſter in England,
where he wanted to get him naturalized. If this

deſign was not Durand's alone, it could only be ſug-

alſo

208 M E M O I R 8 BookXvin|

alſo certain, that the Duke of Rohan ordered Du.
rand to preſent the King of England, in his name,

with a horſe of great price, which, in the preſent
conjunctute, it was not juſtifiable for him to do,
without Henry's conſent. |

But it was more neceſſary to enter into a ſtiid
examination of the Count of Auvergne's conduct

than any of che others: few perſons were ignorant |

of his connection with Spain. He was then in Au.
vergne, where he was not idle, either with reſpet
to the common cauſe, or his own particular one,
He had made uſe of the promiſe of marriage given

—

*

by Henry to the Marchioneſs de Verneull his ſiſter, |

®* The hiſtorians give no clear account of the purport of the treaty
entered into by the Count of Auvergne with the Spaniſh council;

but Amelot de la Houſſaye will help vs out on this occaſion ; and he |

is the more worthy of credit, as he aſſures us, that the Count of Au-
vergne, and the Marchioneſs of Verneuil, entruſted the original «> |
this treaty to his grandfather on the mother's ſide, their near relation |

—___

and intimate friend, called 4ntony-Eugene Chevillard, paymaſtcr-ge- | |

neral of the gendarmery of France, He further informs vs, that
Chevillard, being involved in the diſgrace of the Count of Auvergne,

and ſent tg. the baſtile, he kept the original of the treaty fo well con

cealed in the ſkirt of his doublet, that no one diſcovered it; aud,

finding himſelf treated as a ſtate criminal, he, by degrees, eat both |

the treaty, and the ratificaticn of it by the court of Spain anpncxel

to it, up in the ſoups, and other victuals, which were brought to his F

table. The King of Spain thereby promiſed to aſſiſt the Count >

Auvergne with troops and moncy, to place his nephew Henry ct

Bourbon on the throne, who was the fon of Henry IV. by the Mar
chioneſs of Verneui, and who, in that writing, is ſtyled Dauphin of

France, and lawful heir to the crown, Art. Entragues-Balſac, Tou-

chet. Amclot de la Houſſaye further aſſures us, in the note on tht

Cardinal d'Oſſat's letters above mentioned, that two capuchins Þ

called Father Hillary of Grenoble, and Father Archangelo, the ons
at Paris, and the other at Rome, had the guidance of this conſpita-
C . .

M. de Sully ſeems to inſinuate, as if ſomething farther had been
intended in favour of the Count of Auvergne himſelf: perhaps he had
ſome deſign of ſetting up ſome writing or diſpoſition of his father
Charles IX. by virtue whereof he might pretend to claim the cron
in his own right. Sce alſo, on this ſubject, the memoirs of the lie
of the Preſident de Thou, and in particular his hiſtory, anno 1605.
Vitt. Siri's mem. recond. vol. I. p. 297.

10

GI
-

- "OED

ws DA A wn ww © ov ay K @. &

.

W604 OF 8 UL L I. 299

0 ſerve his deſigns, and joined to it a claim of his
own yet more ridiculous than this writing: but in
Spain he found perſons credulous enough to conſi-
der them both in a ſerious light. It is certain, that
He had acquired great credit and ſtrong influence
there. We ſhall ſoon ſee to what it conducted him.
The methods his Majeſty made uſe of to render
all theſe intrigues ineffectual, were to apply himſelf
with his accuſtomed attention and aſſiduity to the
affairs both within and without his kingdom, and
to fill the intendences and other public offices with
*ſuch men only as were diſtinguiſhed for their merit,
their probity, and zeal for his ſervice. Boucault
was an example of this, who, from an advocate on-
ly, was made preſident of the court of aids in Mont»
ar in reward for having uſefully ſerved his Ma-

ieſty in Languedoc. Henry likewiſe commanded

me to aſſemble the Chancellor, Villeroi, and Sillery,
Who with me compoſed a kind of council, to conſi-

der of this matter. By his orders, I ſtill kept up a

- correſpondence by letters with the principal Prote-

ſtants, which I own was of little ſervice to his Ma-

jeſty: his chief dependence, and with reaſon, was

upon the journey he propoſed to make this year to
Provence and Languedoc, while J on my ſide was
to viſit Poitou, and the weſtern part of France.

I greatly approved of this deſign when Henry
communicated it to me; and we employed ourſelves
together a long time in making preparations for
theſe two journeys; the neceſſity for going to take
poſſeſſion of my government ſerved me for a pre-
- tence for mine; the King wanted no excuſe for his:
on the contrary, it was fit he ſhould not appear ig»
norant of the occaſion that made his preſence neceſ-
ſary in the ſouthern provinces of his kingdom, and
openly avow his expectations of the good effects it
Would produce. On ſome pretence or other, I was

4. * * *

do viſit, either in my rout, or by going a little about

Orleans,

3000 M E M O I R S Book XVII.

Orleans, Touraine, Anjou, Poitou, Saintonge, An.
goumois, and Guyenne ; and his Majeſty was like.

wiſe to take Berry, Bourbonnois, Lyonnois, and |

Dauphine, in his way „, ſo that between us we
were to go through almoſt all France. We ſettled the
time of our departure, our ſtay, and even the place
of our meeting, which was to be at Toulouſe ; and
J looked upon his Majeſty's journey to be fo ce tain,
that I thought of nothing but of coming imme:
diately to Paris (for all this was reſolved on at
Fontainebleau) to ſettle the affairs of the government,
that our journey might not ſuffer any delay, it being
reſolved that we ſhould ſet out ſome time in the pte.
ſent month of June at fartheſt. Such perſons az
had buſineſs depending in the King's council, prell.
ed the concluſion of it with the utmoſt aſſiduity,
as ſoon as the King's intention was made public ;
and the counſellors rejoiced at this eagerneſs, be-
cauſe, that great part of them being to attend the
King in his journey, they did not chuſe to leave
the buſineſs they had begun, to be finiſhed by the
new council, appointed by bis Majeſty during his
abſence.

This ſcheme ſo well concerted, was never car-
ried into execution, with reſpe& to the King's
part in it. As ſoon as his Majeſty's intended jour-
ney was declared to the courtiers, all was preſent-
ly in an uproar ; and it cayſed, as uſual, much
commotion at court. There was not one to whom
this deſign did not give great uneaſineſs, and who
did not uſe his utmoſt endeavours to diſſuade lim
from it; ſome, ſuch as the miniſters and great
officers that were about his perſon, to ſpare thc
expences of ſo tedious a journey, and the gay de-

o See the original of a letter written by Henry IV. to M. de Raſ-
ny, on the ſubject of this journey to Poitou, dated the 20th of July
1604, with an indorſement thereon, as moſt of his letters have, in
the hand-writing of this miniſter. Henry IVth's letters.

licate

7 1604- 9: x--$:0”"L7L-Y, 3o1

| f ticate youth of the court, to avoid the fatigue and
bother inconveniencies uſual in ſuch expeditions ;
ſo that, when his Majeſty propoſed the affair in
form to his counſellors of ſtate, whom he ſent for
expreſoly to Fontainebleau, and the principal lords
of his court, aſſembled for that purpoſe, they op-
' poſed it with innumerable obſtacles, without ever
reaching the true one.
They alledged the uncertainty of the ſieges of
Oſtend and Sluys; the fear of a league between

England and Spain; the treaty of commerce de-

fair of the Count d'Auvergne, and the Marchio-
nels de Veneuil ; the miſunderſtanding that had
riſen lately between the republic of Grifons, and
the Count de Fuentes, concerning the Valtoline,
in which France was indiſpenſably obliged to in-
tereſt herſelf, on accourt of the Venetians and
the Swiſs. All thoſe affairs 1 have alicady men-
tioned, or ſha!l do immediately : in a word, they
found ſo many inconveniencies likely to accrue

from this journey, and knew ſo well how to ag-
gravate them, that the King was prevailed upon to
alter his reſolution.

They even ſuggeſted reaſons to his Majeſty, to
make him change his opinion as to the necellity of
mine. The affairs that then lay before the coun»
cil began to appear to him of ſuch importance,
that, to prevent loſing ſight of them for ſo long
a time, he, for this once, deſired me to confine
my endeavours to what I couid do, without going
farther than Poitou, and remit, to another oppor-
tunity, my deſign of viſiting the maritiine coaſts,

do not pretend to deny, that part of the argu -
ments they made vfe of, to diſſuade the King from
his journey, had ſome weight: however, I believe
1 have mentioned the moſt important of them;

VoL.1II. 7 We and

pending between France and that crown ; the af

—— —
— — 4. - 1 =
= * . — « w— b * * *
* — a 4 =
a 4 — * —

-<
N
==

_ DB

.
.

27 — -
. *
FK

———
8
Derr

—
2

—

„

"hears BER
"2 + VoS iS

(

E o__  .

|
v4
1
1

1
*
ir

302

advantage it would be to the ſtate.

One man, whom the news of his Majeſty's ig.
tended journey did not a little perplex, and whoſe |
name, probably, the reader will not expect to find

here, was Leſdiguieres; and a report being then

current, that the Count of Soiſſons was ſhortly to]
be put in poſſeſſion of thoſe cautionary places gi.

ven to Leſdiguieres, it was natural for him to be.

lieve, that he was perſonally concerned in the te.

ſolution his Majeſty had taken. His correſpond.
ence with the Duke of Bouillon was juſt come to

light; Morges, who had given ſecret advice of i}

from Davphine, brought proofs of it when he

came to Paris, which were confirmed by Du.

Bourg.

I ſet out from Paris in the month of June, and

took the ſhorteſt road to Poitou, accompanied by
ſeveral perſons of quality of. that province, who,

upon the report of my journey, ranged themſelves Þ
about me, ſome of them with no other intention,
but to pay me thoſe honours which they thought Þ -
due to their governor: but others, among whom, |

I may, without ſcruple, put“ Richelieu and Pont-

courlai, attended me in my expedition with no
other view, but to get more certain intelligence of

my deſigns, either from my own mouth, or by |

tampering with my people, to learn all that ſhould Þ
be done or ſaid in my family, that they might af.

terwards give the chiefs of the Proteſtant party no-
tice of all, and prepare them to oppoſe ſuch meas
ſures, as they imagined I might be ordered to take
againſt them in favour of the Catholics; in a word,
to take advantage of every little inadvertence, if it
ſnould happen that any did eſcape me, to render
me criminal or raiſe ſuſpicions in the King's mind

* Francis du- Pleſſis de Richelicu, father of Cardinal de Richelieu,
and Francis de Vignerod de Pont-coulab

10

M E M OI R S Book XVIII.!
and I ſtill perſiſted in my firſt opinion, of the great

1

|

|

1604.

to my prejudice. But, in this, my enemies did
not ſucceed, however they might in ſome other of
their deſigns ; the correſpondence his Majeſty did
me the honour to keep regularly with me, when E

O F . 303

was at any diſtance from him, ſtill continued as u-

ſual; and J had even more frequent opportunities

of entering into his confidence, and knowing to
* what degree he intereſted himſelf in the ſafety of
my perſon. He often, with great goodneſs, bid
me remember, that I was in a country where,
whatever appearance the inhabitants might aſſume,

it was certain they wiſhed me no good, and that
J ought to be continually on my guard againſt

them. s

It was but too true, that the King's enemies and
mine, had taken meaſures before hand to render all
my endeavours fruitleſs, and to animate the popu-

lace againſt me: that which appeared moſt likely
to produce this effect, was to ſpread a report, that
the deſign which brought me to Poitou, was to
force the proprietors * of the ſalt-pits to yield up

* their property, and to purchaſe them for the King.

Thoſe in whom I diſcovered the greateſt malevo-
lence towards me, were ſuch from whom it was
leaſt to be expected, my brethren the Proteſtants :
but I mean the principal ones only; yet theſe
affected to pay me outwardly all imaginable ho-
nours; and although they refuſed to let me into
the ſecret of their debates, yet it was always up-
on ſuch plauſible pretences, that I had room to
tcign myſelf entirely ſatisfed. They were appre-
henſive of Parabere, who was more particularly at-
tached to me than any of the others, though they well

* Perefixe makes no doubt, but Henry IV. really had formed this
deſign, and greatly commends him for it, as being the only certain

method to fiee his people from the gabelle or ſalt-duty, which, he

aſſerts, this Prince was tully determined to aboliſh, as well as the

taille.
882 knew

7

:
n
«4
q
we.”
vw
*
=
=
=
*
=
4.
©
15
bes
I
4
*
1
.
CE. +
\ ,
Wo
.
K %
4 wy
1
il
I.
*
1
1
wy
* N
f *
; +
3 oY
: *
0

knew his ardent zeal for his religion, becauſe he
was naturally frank and open in his temper, and

had intentions far more equitable : they therefore J

commiſſioned D' Aubignè and Conſtant to watch
him narrowly, and never to quit him while he
continued about me. But this malignancy, with
reſpect to me, extended no farther than to a ſmall
number of perſons; or if it did, they concealed
it with great care. I was received with the mol!

diſtinguiſhing marks of reſpect in every place where |

I made any ſtay; and in thoſe that I only paſle
through, they came to meet me, harangued me, and

eſcorted me with ceremony on my way. The ec ·

cleſiaſtics ſeemed moſt cager to ſhew me reſpect;

and I never heard the leaſt expreſſion that ſuggell- |
cd a doubt of my religion : the inhabitants of Poi- |

tiers, who have the reputation of being naturally rud:
and unſociable, gave me, by their polite and te.
ſpectful behaviour, a very different notion of thei:
character.

I was ſtill more ſurpriſed at the eonduct of the
Rochellers : this imperious city, that uſually makes

it her boaſt to have only the King himſelf for go- |
vernor, and under him that haughty and important |
mayor, who is generally elected out of three per-

ſons propoſed by them to his Majeſty, might hare

laid great ſtreſs upon thoſe mighty prerogatives with | | |

10 much the more reaſon, in reſpect to me, as their

city was not properly within the limits of my go- |
vernment ; however, they gave me as honourable
a reception as they could have done to a governot F

choſen by themſelves. 1 entered the city with a

train of twelve hundred horſe :

gave me the leſs room to be apprehenſive of thoſe
attempts his Majeſty warned me to be careful of;
the Rochellers opened their gates to this train,
without any diſtinction of perſons or religions;

they were all lodged within the walls, and mol of
them

_ _—

304 MEMOIR s Bock xv

—

0

ſuch an eſcort !

1604.

rl 305

them in the houſes of the citizens. At a public
inner, which was given on my account, and to
Fvhich I was invited with great ceremony, they
rank the King's health, and fail, that if his Ma-
Scſty had done them the honour to preſent him -
ſelf before their gates, though followed with thirty
thouſand men, they would have opened them to him;

N and that, if their gates were not wide enough to ad-

mit them, they would have thrown. down three
hundred feet of their walls. I ſaw nothing but
reſpect and ſubmiſſion, and heard nothing but
praiſes of this prince; they likewiſe aſſured me,
vith the moſt flattering encomiums, that, if I had
brought a train much larger with me, they would
| have acted in the ſame manner.

The dinner I have mentioned conſiſted of ſeven-
teen tables, the leaſt of which had ſixteen covers;
and the next day they gave me a collation as mag»
'niticent as the dinner had been; they added to it,
the repreſentation of a naval fight between Correilles,
and Chef- de- Baye, in which twenty Fren:h veſſels
attacked a like number of Spanith veſlels. The
vanquiſhed Spaniards were brought bound hand and
foot, before a picture of the King, expoſed to pu-
blie view; and they were preſented to me as to his
lieutenant. general: nothing was wanting to render
this ſhew complete; dreſſes, arms, pavilions, and e-
ſcutcheons, all were choſen with the utmoſt pro-
priety. I repaid this good reception, by granting
the Rochellers, in the name of the King, whole e-
| logium. I pronounced publicly, the deliverance of
their priſoners ; excepting theſe, and the Sicur de
- Luſſan, I puniſhed ſeverely all that had infringed
the treaties of commerce. His Majeſty was fatisfi--
ed with having obliged the city of Rochelle to atk
him for this favour, which he well knew hoy to
make them pay for. At Poitiers, I learned ſome

ir cumſtances which perſuaded me, the Count cf

Se Auvergne:

306 M E M O IR S Bock xy
Auvergne was much more culpable than I had hi.

therto believed.
The King had allowed me ſo little time to regu.

late the aſfairs of this province, that I was obliged |
to defer viliting the Upper and Lower Poitou till an. |
other opportunity. I could only obtain permiſſion

from his Majeſty to go to Saint John d*Angely, and

to Brougage, by repreſenting to him the neceſſity

there was for undertaking this journey, to undeceire |
the people of that diſtrict, who ſuſpected that the

King had an intention to deprive them of their ſalt.

pits. 1 ſet out from Rochelle, to go to theſe two

places, and was received by Meſſieurs de Rohan
and de Saint-Luc ſtill better than I expected. I u.

ſed my utmoſt endeavours to recall Rohan to his |
duty and allegiance; I mentioned his intrigues in

England, and exhorted him to recall Durand from
thence: he appeared greatly aſtoniſhed at this dil.
courſe eomplained of the calumnies his enemies
ſpread abroad of him; diſavowed the agency ef

Duvtand ; and, to convince me of his ſincerity, ac-

knowledged circumſtances unaſked, as the horſe

preſented by him to King James, but aſſured me, |
be had obtained his Majeſty's permiſſion for it,

which he could eaſily bring to his remembrance,

From Saint Jean I reſumed the road to Paris |
through Thours, where I was deſirous of having a F

conference with the Duke de La Tremoville. I
did not expect ſo polite a reception from him as!

really received, ſenſible that he muſt be greatly mor- Þ

tified to ſee me poſſeſs a government, and receive

honours, to which he had aſpired with ſuch extreme
ardency, as to ſolicit them publicly. Our conver-

ſation often turned on the many cauſes of com-

plaint the Proteſtant party had given the King; and

even in the preſenee of Parabere, Saint- Germain,
de-Clan, Eeſſes, La-Valliere, Conſtant, D*Aubigre
(theſe were hardly ever abſent) Preaux, La Feri

ere,

he tes. at

9
—

WM, of s ul. 1. x. 207

ere, and La- Suaſſaye; they all exclaimed loudly
upon the injuſtice that had been done, them by the
King, proteſting their fidelity and attachment to
his Majeſty; and the better to impoſe upon me,
accompanied their aſſurances with ſo much civility
to myſelf, and ſuch groſs flatteries, that they fell
into the other extreme of a too glaring affectation.
In the midlt of all this art and diſguiſe, I did not
| © ceale to penetrate into their deſigns, by turning the
diſcourſe, in their preſence, upon the ſtate of af-
fairs in Spain and England. They betrayed them-
}| © ſelves then in ſpite of their endeavours to the con-

\ *trary; and it was no longer poſlible for me to
doubt, that all this little court of people, attached

| to the Dukes of Rohan and de la Tremouille were,
iz reality, ſuch as they were repreſented to his Ma-
jeſty: but what I diſcovered at the ſame time, and

© the intelligence which the poſt I poſſeſſed in that
province afforded me an opportunity of procuring,
gave me, in the ſequel, the utmoſt certainty that
.F — theſe gentlemen had no. power with the reſt of the
| _ Proteſtant party; they were no longer, as former-
, thoſe abſolute leaders that, with a ſingle word,
drew all their ſuffrages; but, on the contrary, they
Vuere ſhunned as men infected with the plague, when
© they came to deliberate in the aſſemblies. This
they had brought upon themſelves by their own
imprudence, in putting the party upon ſuch dan-
gerous and ridiculous enterprizes, as had at length
undeceived the moſt credulous amongſt them; and
dhe higheſt idea that could be now given of them
| Vas, that they formed a party in the midſt of the
party itſelf, and only ſupported themſelves by a
Vain exertion of authority, of which they but poſ-
ſeſſed the ſhadow.
I did not negle&t to make all the advantage I
could of ſuch favourable diſpoſitions, and entirely
undeceived the people with regard to the injurious
? ; reports

* 1

38 M E M OI R 8 Book XVIII. I

reports that had been ſpread among them concern-
ing the ſalt-pits, the exciſe, and other monopolies,

which had been made uſe of to excite them to ſedi. |
They now began to have a more perfect

tion.
knowledge of their King; their notions of his ty.

ranny and their ſlavery were wholly effaced. I made |

the Proteſtants comprehend how groundleſs their
ſuſpicions were, that Henry had ever deligned to
exclude them from any of the offices and dignities
in the ſtate, ſince it had always been his chief ma-

xim to keep the balance even between the two tre-
ligions; I convinced them likewile, - how much |

they had been blinded by prejudice, with reſpect to
Clement VIII. who was ſo far from endeavouring

to extirpate the Proteſtants, that he had, on all oc- |
cations, ſtrongly oppoſed making war againſt them, |

My actions completed the work theſe afſurances |
bad begun; I diſtributed penſions among thole of |

the party who had adviſed peace, and ſerved the

King faithfully ; and, to convince them abſolutely |

that they were not deceived, with regard to the
equitable intentions of their ſovereign, I ſhewed
them the paper that contained all the reformations

he propoſed to make in the ſtate, the ſame that 1
were |
By theſe means I ſo weakened the

have formerly mentioned, with which they
fully ſatisfied.

Duke de la Tremouille's party, that he could ne-

ver afterwards add to it ſix perſons of any conſe-
The Duke of Bouillon was fo greatly al-
tected with the knowledge that he had Joſt all the

quence,

remaining intereſt he had hitherto preſerved in this

diſtrict of France, that he determined to paſs the

reſt of his days in that kind of exile which kept
him quiet in the court of the Elector Palatine in
ſpite of himſelf. Saint-Germain, who was not un-
acquainted with any of the Duke's ſecrets, wrote
an account of this deſign to La-Suaſſaye, of whom
he thought biofelf abſolutely ſecure; but La 755

aye

os OF 8 U fL. L. 1. 5
|

aye gave me Saint-Germain's letter, which I ſhew-
*ed to his Majeſty.
Having thus performed all that the preſent con-
juncture, and the ſhortneſs of the time permitted
me, I obeyed the King's repeated commands (which
© | Pevery one of his letters brought me) to return as
r | ; 2
ſioon as poſſible, and followed in a few days my laſt
)
$

letter, which I wrote to his Majeſty from Thouras,
'on the 16th of July. Before I went away I viſited
the Duke de la Tremouille for the laſt time; he
"| was indiſpoſed when I came to Thouras, and I left
: | him at the point of death when I ſet out from
| thence; he died“ without being prevailed upon to
> | promiſe that he would come to court, and his death
"| deprived the malecontents of one leader.

> I arrived at Paris on the 22d of July, where I
found a billet from his Majeſty, dated the 18th, in
which he deſired me to ſend into every part of Nor-
mandy, Britanny, and Poitou, whither I had 3
'F deſign to go myſelf, two perſons on whoſe fidelity
and underſtanding I could rely, and to come my-
| ſelf to him at Monceaux, where he waited for me,

having given over drinking the waters. I was ſen-
ſible, by the kind and obliging reception this prince
gave me, that I bad been fortunate enough to give
him fatisfaQtion+ as to the buſineſs that had occa.
ſioned my journey; and I now related to him, du-
ning the courſe of three days, all that I had omitted
in my letters to him or to Villeroi,

It has been reported, that the Duke of Epernon
behaved at that time in ſuch a manner in Guyenne,
as to give his Majeſty more cauſe than ever to ſu-
 Ipect him; that I alſo diſtruſted his fidelity, and on

Claude de la Tremouille, Duke of Thovars, died of the gout,

L being only thirty-four years of age See his elogium in De» Thou,
book xxxi. and Matthieu, vol. II. b iii. p. 663.

* - + be- Thou ſays, this journey of NI. de Roſny freed Henry IV.

* from great dicquict, book Xxxi. |

| this

4
®
2

310
this occaſion did him all the bad offices that could

proceed from a mortal enemy. This report, with!

regard to myſelf, I here declare to be abſolutely

falſe; and I believe what was faid to the diſadvan.

tage of D*Epernon to be ſo likewiſe ; and that the
unfavourable fentiments they attributed to his Ma.
jeſty of this Duke, has no better foundation. One
would imagine, that the opinion Henry entertained
of him was ſufficiently clear, by the letter thi;

Prince wrote to the Duke on the ſubject of the diſ.

pute between Du-ͤPleſſis and the Biſhop of Evreus,
in which he treated bim as a friend, a title he ne.
ver gave to thoſe whom he did not think wor.
thy of it.

my own knowledge.

His Majeſty, after the time here meant, granted|

D*Epernon a thouſand things unaſked, and oten
reſſed me to viſit him, and gave him other inſtances
of kindneſs, even before J had received the ane

compliment from him. If Henry heard any thing |

to the Duke's diſadvantage during his ſtay in Guy:

enne, it is what I am wholly ignorant of; this on.
ly I know, that his Majeſty was eaſily freed from
any remains of ſuſpicion, after the letters tha]
D' Epernon ſent to him, and to me, by Perronne, in]
which there were ſuch evident marks of fincerityF
and conſcious innocence, confirmed by the oficr

he made to attend his Majeſty upon the very ti
order he ſhould receive, that he might put bis per.

ſon in his power, to anſwer for the loyalty of bs
intentions, that there was nothing lefi to reph. F
No one is ignorant of what paſſed between the
King and the Duke of Epernon during the life, and
even after the death of Henry III. and that this
prince had diſcovered ſome reſentment towards
him ; but this was at an end; forgetfulneſs of in:
juries is a virtue very rare among princes, and is
thougtt Þ

And here I may add a circumſtance
of which I am abſolutely certain, and ſpeak from

M E M O IR 8s Book Il

9

2 —

aber.
„

604. O F 8 UI. L . 311

| thought yet rarer than it is. Sufficient regard has
not been ſhewn to the proofs which Henry has gi-
ven more than once of that true greatneſs of mind
which is capable of pardoning; and all that he did
For the Duke of Epernon may be conlidered as an
inſtance of his clemency.

Por myſelf, I was ſo far from being an enemy
to D'Epernon, at the time I have been ſpeaking of,
that J can bring a thouſand inſtances to prove we
had been in a perfect good intelligence with each
other: but it is fit I ſhould be believed upon my
bare word, as J have hitherto ſhewn myſelf equal-
I y incapable of diſguiſing my ſentiments, whether
of friendſhip or hatred, or accuſing the innocent,
or juſtifying a traitor. D'Epernon had the miſ-
fortune to fall off his horſe in Guyenne, by which he |
broke his thigh and his thumb, and bruiſed him- |
ſelf likewiſe in the ſhoulder and elbow ; which

.| obliged him to keep his bed forty days, and lie
during all that time upon bis back. I wrote to
| him a letter of condolance upon this accident;
and he thanked me with the fame affection which
he uſually expreſſed in all his letters, for he then
treated me as friend; and I was likewiſe his con-
| fident in all that regarded the King“. Another of
my friends, but one who had never been other-
'F wiſe, from whom I this year received letters e-
| -qually polite, friendly, and unreſerved, was Belles
i garde; they are dated from Dijon; he was then
in his government of Burgundy. But it is time to
return to the Count of Auvergne.

It now depended wholly upon the King to de-
| Prive this rebellious ſubject of all means of con-
| ſpiring againſt the ſtate : the unſeaſonable clemen-
ey with which he had been treated by his Majeſty at

I N See the originals of theſe letters in the old memoirs ; they ſeem
'® little to contradict one another in what relates to the Duke of E-

) - pernon,
F- the

312 MEMOIR S BookRvin 6

the time that Marechal Biron ſuffered a juſt ſen. ] * ric

tence, was the cauſe of his relapſe; as the ten- © the

. derneſs his Majeſty had ſhewn for his whole fami. Þ apf
. ly, on account of the Maichioneſs de Verneui, is,
had firſt encouraged him in his revolt. It would Þ ret

not probably have been difficult to find ſuch an. Þ det
other opportunity as his Majeſty had ſuffered to!

eſcape him when he received notice of the new cer

|. intrigues which the Count was carrying on in Þ his
Spain, and that fuller diſcoveries concerning thoſe he

intrigues might be expected from the ſeizure of Þ pel
Morgan“, his chief agent, who was juſt then at- no

reſted, but the King was contented with ſufferirg tin
D*Eſcures to go, by my orders, to Auvergne, dei

| where the Count then was, to diſcover the plot, tri.
| and by gentle methods perſuade him to come and me
throw bimſelf at his Majeſty's feet. gr:
In effect, D' Auvergne was convinced that this | co

was the wiſeſt, and the only part he had to take; by

the ſeizing of Morgan had wholly diſconceried mi

him, and the meaſures he had taken had been too Þ fir
imprudent to leave him a hope, that his deligns wt

could be concealed, or that they were in ſufficient 80
forwardneſs to enable him to throw off the maſk; 101

he feared that by fly ing he ſhould expoſe the Count 70

and Counteſs d' Entragues, and his whole family, 1 el

to a ſhameful] treatment; he therefore yielded to We

D' Eſcures's arguments, and promiſed to go with on

him to court, and reveal to the King his cloſet ſe- | -

crets, and even to ſhew a letter from his ſiſter, Bui

which, he ſaid, was of the utmoſt conſequence,
provided that his Majeſty would grant him the par- |
don he had promiſed. The original of this letter ! Pi.

from the Marchioneſs de Verneuil was not pro- Þ®  _
duced till the following year, and it was not vary we
certain what credit ſhould be given to it, becaule ÞÞ tw;
the brother and ſiſter ſumetimes appeared to be on *

Thomas Morgan, an Er.gliſhman, See De- Thou, 175 1
11ENGYy

$a >
7 x 5 * 1 4 *
„ 14 ne 4 FE "6

= 07 3.0 LEL:Y 3t3

> friendly terms, and often in ſuch high diſguſt, that

they could not bear each other's fight. That which
appears moſt worthy of obſervation in this letter
is, that in it ſhe exhorts her brother to a ſecure

* retreat in a foreign country, and appears herſelf
determined to do the like.

That the Count d'Auvergne was not very ſin-
cere in the promiſe he made D'Eſcures, appears by
his ſending Yverne to Spain, at the very time that
he ſet out himſelf for Paris. The Biſhop of Mont-

pelier diſcovered this intrigue, and ſent the King

notice of it: but this prince was willing a ſecond
time to liſten to his fine promiſes. He only or-

dered, that the parliament ſhould finiſh Morgan's
trial, that the crime being made public, might give

more weight to the pardon he was reſolved to

grant to the whole family of Auvergne, which was

comprehended in it. All that this prince gained

by the proſecution was, to get that famous pro-
miſe * of marriage he had in vain ſolicited his mi-
ſtreſs to return, reſtored to him by D'Entragues ;
which was done -in the preſence of the Count of
Soiſſons, the Duke of Montpenſier, the Chancel-
tor, Sillery, La-Guele, Jeannin, Gevres, and Ville-
roi; that this reſtitution might not be afterwards
eluded by any reſtriction or diſavowal ; and an act
was made, importing, that this was the true and

only writing given by his Majeſty on that ſubject:
and the declaration of D'Entragues confirming this,
Vas joined to the paper.

This conduct of Henry was not calculated to
make the Count of Auvergne leſs raſh and enters
priſing; and, in effect, be renewed his former

* Henry IV. in order to get back this promiſe was obliged to pay
the Marchioneſs de Verneuil twenty thouſand crowns dowa, and
to promiſe the baton of a marechal of France to the Count of En»
* who had never been in any military action. De-Thoa,

ok cxxxii.

Vo“. III. D d intrigues

„ 6-M0- Q--2 M-8 Book TVI.

intrigues almoſt before his Majeſty's eyes : ti

This prince was then convinced of the full e

tent of his crimes : but this conviction came tuff

late; for the Count, either by his own penetr:
tion, or that he received notice of what had hay
pened, had time to leave the court before ther:

ſolution that had been taken to arreſt him could bf ©
executed, determined within himſelf never to rf

turn to it again, after the danger he had fo late)
eſcaped, and even to leave France altogether, vpo
the leaſt information that any thing was reſolve
on againſt him, |

The King acquainted me with the perplexity |:
was in through his own fault. D'Eſcures was ſe:
again to Auvergne: he went a third time, but!

no purpoſe : the methods that had formerly ſup
ceeded were now ineffectual, D*Auvergne alva
knew how to elude his return to court, to whicf
he was earneſtly preſſed, but with ſuch appearany

of indifference and unconcern, that it was not p.
{ible to draw from his refuſal a conviction ot i:
ciime, as it was expected they ſhould do, ©:
made the faiteſt promiſes imaginable, and al:
appeared diſpoſed to ſet out. There was a nec}
ſity at length for making uſe of the only metic

et unattempted, which was to ſecure his perio!
but this did not ſeem caſy to effect.

I caſt my eyes upon a man who ſeemed to-
likely enough to ſucceed in ſuch an attempt, #4
this was the treaſurer Murat; his perſonal batte
to the Count d'Auvergne, his knowledge of th
gountry, the convenience he could have of f.
"|

Lt. tt Mi

9

era

whole care was to deceive the King, who for |
long time was impoſed upon by his appearances |
ſincerity : but at length the whole myſtery wi
diſcovered by ſome letters written and received by
D*Auvergne, which fell into the hands of Lome.
nie, and by him carried immediately to the Kin

„

ds

te

|
1

—
*
ww
<.
—

—
t
—2

„
-

-Fleaily, and perceived, that the propoſal was far

WL OF . SU LL Y 315

ga long time on the ſpot without giving cvs
bf ſuſpicion, his reſolution in any arduous enicc-
prize, and his zeal for the ſervice of his Majeſty,
All promiſed a happy and honourable end of this
tommillion. I propoſed him to the King when his
Majeſty mentioned the affair to me, and upon his
approbation I ſent for Murat; to whom at fir!t
I] ated with all the reſerve and precaution, that
12 of ſuch conſcquence required. When
1 found that, inſtead of bringing arguments for
Fes diſpenſed with for ſuch a ſervice, he
bimſelf prevented my offers, I explained myſelf

-

from being difpiealing to hin; he only regui-
ed a commiſſion for it under the great ſeal, which
Pas granted, and kept very ſecret. As we bad
pot yet loſt all hope, that D'Eſcures might be able
do draw the Count to court, and in that caſe Mu-
Tat would have nothing to do, when J gave hin
pis inſtructions, I enjoined him not to act but in
Toncert with D*'Elcures, and to conccal from evce
y one the part that was to be given him in this
Puſineſs, if he found there was no longer any cc»
T:l10n for him.

D*Eſcures fet out for Auvergne or the 15th of
Ruguſt (this was the third or fourth time of his
Boing) and Murat followed him a few days aſter—
Wards, provided with blank letters for the chies
ad officers de preſideauæ, which were to be fill-
Ed up at the places themſclves. Ia the mean time
gone letters from D' Auvergne came to hand, in
Irhich he expreſſed ſo much fear and ſhane, that
the King rightly judged he would never be pre-
Failed on to appear at court, and therefore thought
Wt delt for D'Eicures to avoid preſſing bim to take
That ſtep, leſt he ſhould increale his apprehenſions.
Plurat had now orders to act ſingly; and DE.
eures, on his ſide, to uſe his utmoſt endeavours
| Daz: to

316 M E M O I R S Book xv
to procure certain intelligence of all D*Auvergne;; fir

practices in Spain, and, if poſſible, to intercept I thi
the treaty which it was thought he had already
made with the council of Madrid. All this DF an

{cures executed with ſuch dexterity, that he pre. | thi
vented the Count, artful and penetrating as he! © far
was, from ſufpecting any of thoſe meaſures the] co
council was now purſuing. | vi

A little affair between a brother of Murat's and
the Count of Auvergne gave this truſty agent 21 3th
pretence for going to the Count; which havin} H.
{ſettled between them, the Count, of himſelf, en. I th
tered into a converſation with him concerning theÞ cc
{tate of bis affaits at court, which gave Murat u qr
| opportunity of ſeeming to regulate the advice he K
| offered him upon what he himſelf had ſaid. Dau. © th
| vergne founded violert ſuſpicions upon the in,
|

nuations that were given him, that the King e,! bi
pected he ſhould ſhew himſelf at court; and up h.

bis King, he could not reſolve to appear befot ]“ fe

| on D'Eſcures's endeavouring to perſuade him u p
| go, yet pretending not to know that it was tte] m
\ | King's delire, he therefore aſſured Murat that teÞ th
| would not go; and that rather than expoſe hin.! p.
| -- ſelf to the fury of his enemies, he would ſubmitÞ ſo
| himſelf to a voluntary exile in a foreign country: fte
| he mentioned the fate of Marechal Biron, which be
| ſeemed to give him great apprehenſions; and ſaid , V
| that formerly having had the misfortune to offend} t!
|
| him till he had effaced the memory of his fault byÞ *
| new ſervices, and till the pardon his Majeſty: had LY b
granted him was confirmed. At length he gave de
Murat to underſtand, that his reaſon for not be“ V
ing willing to truſt the intentions of the cou, it

|

| arofe- from the informations he had received of the Þ
| danger he was threatened with if he appeared
| there, this notice having been ſent to him from

ſome of the courtiers themſelves, perſons of *
| | y

23 R tro SE: -
Ne 2 LR wit
—

6

wr
;

4
bx
0
7)
9373
1

CT ᷣ gy

$ Grſt diſtinction, who were well acquainted with
| the affair, and deſerved to be relied on,

Murat finding himſelf made thus a confident of,

| anſwered with great ſeeming ſimplicity, that ſince

the Count had confeſſed his error to the King, he
ſaw no inconvenience attending his return to
court; that the pardon he had obtained made a
vide difference between his caſe and that of Mare-
' chal Biron; and that nothing but a relapſe into
the ſame error could authoriſe his ſcruples, ſince
Henry had never yet broke his word with any. one;
therefore his beſt counſellors would be his own
* conſcience. D'Eſcures likewiſe laboured with e-

qual ſolicitude to re-afſurc him with regard to the

King, and to give him a diſtruſt of thoſe perſons
that ſent him the informations he had mentioned.

} To all this the Count only replied, that when
his life was in queſtion, he would not run any
7 hazard ; that neither the King, the Queen, or the

> princes of the blood, were his friends, and the
> maſter of the horſe was his mortal enemy; that

the ſilence of his friends on this occaſion was one
proof of his ruin being determined; that no one
ſolicited for him to the King; that he now never
received any letters from Vilerci, Sillery, or me,

becauſe we were not willing to reproach ourſelves

Vith having been the inſtruments of his fate; that

the Conſtable no longer correſponded with kim,

for fear of rendering himſelf ſuſpected : but it was
with the March ioneſs de Verneuil he appeared to
be moſt diſcontented ; he knew Eis ſiſter, he ſaid,

to make her peace with the King at his expence,

was capable of charging him with falſe crimes,
if ſhe could not with real ones; and concluded
with new proteſtations, that nothing ſhould draw
hin from his ietteat. As he did not ſulpett that
D'Eſcures and Murat were come with an intention
to piutuade him to go, he told them, that he ſup -

Dd 3 roled

7 — ZZ—vL᷑ .  —— —————— EE —————
2 8 — —

218 MEMOIR S Bock XVIII

poſed Vitry would arrive in a few days, and expe;

to gain him with fair words, but that he would |

loſe his labour.

The retreat he was reſolved not to be prevailed Þ

upon to leave was Vic, a poor houſe, without any
conveniencies, but ſituated in the midſt of a wood,

where D*Auvergne paſſed whole days, under pre.
Although there had been no
other proofs of his crimes, his fears, his continua

tence of hunting.

alarms, the agitation of his thoughts, the wildneſ;
of his look and air, and the diſorder of his whole

perſon, would have been a ſufficient teſtimony a. Þ

gainſt him: nothing could be more miſerable than
the life he now led ;

truſt himſelf at any conſiderable diſtance from it;

he was never ſeen in the neighbouring towns; |
he had left off viſiting his friends, nor durſt even |
confide in his miſtreſs, a certain lady, named Ma-

dame de Chateau-gay; he no longer viſited her at
her houſe, but when he choſe to ſee her, they met
in an obſcure village, or in the midit of the fields,
always in the night, and never twice together in
the fame place. His ſervants, whom he poſted on
eminences in the neighbouring places, were or-
dered to give him notice waen they ſaw any one
appear, by blowing a horn; and ſometimes he
made uſe of dogs for his guard.

With thefe precautions he defied all his enemies,
and ic{ulently, as well as imprudently, boat fed,
that he ſhould always be able to deccive and cſcare
them: nevertheleſs, his reſolutions were always
varying, he never continued two moments ia ile
lame wind, And this man, ſo wile, fo fagacious,

penetrated fo lutle into the intentions as thoſe who
his friends,
LOCK

tau e to deſtroy lam, that be made then

and the terror and anxicty
that preyed upon bis heart, revenged, by antici-
pating his puniſhment, both the King and the ſtate.

He was afraid to ſlay in his houſe, yet durſt not

| 160
Geol

nab
cre!

Witt
2
vas
Sp⸗
tha
me
det
: oY
Gin
hin
ho
un.
be,
the
an-
WW

5604. O F S U L L I. 319
took them for his counſellors, and was many times

pon the point of abandoning himſelf to their diſ-
cretion. But prudence is a quality ſeldom found
with a bad conſcience; bad D' Auvergne poſſeſſed
per ſo little of it, he would have known, that there
was no ſafety for him but in an immediate flight to
Spain; and this, probably, was the only ſcheme
that never entered into his head. At the very mo-
ment that, to D'Eſcures and Murat, he appeared
determined not to expole himſelf to the danger of
going to court, he talked to them in a (train quite
different. He once ſent to them to come and meet
him at a place three leagues diſtant from his own
houſe : though this ſummons gave them at firſt ſome
uneaſineſs, not knowing what his intentions might
be, yet they went, and found that he had ſent for
them only to tell them he was now refolved to go
and preſent himſelf to the King. His Majeſty, to
whom they ſent immediate notice of this reſolution,
and who gave the more credit to it on account of
a falſe report that was added to it, wrote to me on
the gth of November, that D' Auvergne was at
Moret, ready to ſet out for Paris. In this it was
not D'Eſcures and Murat that were deceived by
the Count, but the Count by his own inconſtan—
cy; for he was the firſt to retain them with him,
when they appeared willing to go back, and to re-
fer them for his laſt anſwer to the return of Fou-
geu, from whom he expected to draw a great deal
of intelligence; to which the two agents ſeemed to
conſent, purely through complaiſance to bim.

> This whole account I take from Murat's letters.
I received, at the ſame time, a letter from the
Count d' Auvergne himſelf. He complained to the
two agents, that he rever had any anſwer to four
letters, which, he ſail, he had wrote to me. I
weceived, indeed, four from him, but all together;

ad
4s

*
1
3

3

3:29 M E M OI R S Book XVIII.
and the writing ſo like, although of different dates,

that I perceived immediately what credit I ought

to give to them. It was probable, that D*Auvergne
did not think of me at firſt, or believed that i:
would not be proper to make any application to
me; but that afterwards, ſuppoſing this method
was likely enough to make his peace, for he offen
mentioned me to the two agents, he had recouiſe
to it, with the well known artifice of antedating
his letters, to prove to me that this had alway;
been his deſign.

If the Count had any intention to draw a pro-
mile from me which, on this occaſion, he miph:

make uſe of as a ſecurity, he deceived himſelf great. |

ly: I ſent him an anſwer indeed, but as if I bad
nothing more nor better to ſay to bim, than what

I had ſaid before to Marechal Biron in the ſame cit.

cumſtances, I treated him like a ſtate criminal,
without augmenting his ſuſpicions ;' the letter!

wrote to Auvergne, in a word, was but a copy cf]

that which 1 had written to Marechal Biron; and
he could not be ignorant that it was fo, ſince I ae.
knowledged it plainly. It is by this counterſitroke,
which is doubtleſs of new invention, that I gave
D' Auvergne to underſtand, he ought neither to at-
tribute to the King, fuch fentiments of him as he
really did not entertain, neglect the advice 1 had
often given bim, relating to his conduct, nor lay
a ſtreſs upon actions and reports, that had no foun-
dation but in his own unquiet conſcience. This
was all that I wrote to Auvergne; and after his
conviction this proceeding appeared fo candid, and
ſo free from all artifice, that he praiſed it greatly.
D*Eſcures end Murat at length found the oppor:
turity they had fo long waited for, M. de Ven.
domce's regiment of light horſe being to be revic
ed, they imparted a ſcheme that they bad concert:
ed to D'Erre, who commanded it; and the gene
oflicers

5
&a »
*

1604.
; in the following manner: D'Erre went to the Count,
and told him, that he being Colonel- General of the

$

O F S U L L I. 321
officers of this body being all ready, it was effected

light cavalry, he ought certainly to be prefent at
this review.

D' Auvergne apprehended no danger,

| becauſe he was not only mounted upon a horſe,
which, as he ſaid, outſtripped the wind; and, in-
| deed, he was accuſtomed to make him gallop ten
| leagues without intermiſſion 3 but he was reſolved

E ring the whole time.

not to enter any narrow place, or to diſmount du-
Accordingly he came to the

review. Nereſtan advanced to ſalute him, follow-

ed only by four footmen, in appearance; but in
reality, four ſtout and reſolute ſoldiers, whom they

had diſguiſed in liveries, at the inſtant that Nereſtan
| was paying his compliments, two of theſe ſoldiers
© ſeized the reins of the Count's bridle, and the two

others, at the ſame time, laid hold of his legs and

pulled him off his horſe, throwing themſelves upon.

him ſo ſuddenly, that he had neither time to lay

bis hand upon his piſtols, nor draw his ſword, and

ſtill leſs to fly. He was immediately conducted, un-

der a 200d guard, to Paris, and ſhut up in the Ba-
ile ®, :

D'Entragues

* © The Counteſs of Auvergne, as meek and humble as the
* Matchioneſs was haughty and imperious, having thrown herſclt at
„the King's feet with all the marks of the deepett ſorrow, to beg

his pardon for her huſband, his Majeſty, with great courteſy, rai-

* ſed her up and ſaluted her, ſaying thus to her, I feel the utmoſt
* compaſſion for your miſery and your tears. but if I ſhould grant
* your requeſt, this my wife (taking the Queen by the hand) muſt

- © be declared a whore, my ſon a battard. and my kingdom fall a

« prey to others. The ſame lady having obta.ned the King's per-

| * miſſion to ſend one to ſee her huſband, and to quite of him what

+ © ſhe could do for his ſervice, he ſent her word, only to let him have

| ® ſome good cheeſe and muſtard, and not to trouble herſelf about
| © any thing turther.” Journal of the reign of teamry IV.

The Count of Auvergne,” ſays Amclot in the place before
quoted, “ had ſo entire a dependence on the fidelity dt 4 nthovy (that

F is the pay maſter Chevillard) that, in three examinations be er-

went,

p d
- m — . — py -
= * 4 > ” ” as . N N
N 74 - — 4 a $.- nn , * 2 — >
* 0 ” * — — »
Fe Fs
4. +4 1 - Z * MY Po
"©, A - © -
aw. £ -

2 .

*

1 * .

—
—-

—
Ne
% * *
——— —
| \

a.

_— 7 *
8 ADE Us
*

rn
& ——

. p, E — * 1 2
5 rn
- TSX - » 7 mY

— a —
-
_ -
ous © —

* 2 1
— ce”
3 2 — 2 * <7
-
n 7 - I
2 = wi * LS ?
>
mm 2 ho 1 2

*
—
a) Sa © 5
N - _
- py
7

222 M E M O 1 R 8 Bock vin

D' Entragues was arreſted at the ſame time that
the Count D' Auvergne was; and the Maichioneſ, |

de Verneuil was, in ſome fort, aſſociated with the

two criminals, fince the King conſented that (he |

ſhould be confiied in her houſe®, where ſhe
continued under the guard of the Chevalicr dy
Guet. It was this aſſociation that ſaved the live;
of the father in-law and the brother. At fiilt they

had not dared to hope for ſo much lenity ; not
could the public expect it, after ſuch frequent rclap. |

ſes, eſpecially as they found that preparations wee

making for trying them with the utmolt ſeverity, |
The Count of Auvergne gave the King an exact ac.
count of his correſpondences, as well within az}

without the kingdom; and he was obliged to give
up that promiſe of aſſociation made by him and the

Dukes of Bouillon and Bu on, which has been

mentioned before, and till now could never be for.
ced from him,
Meſſages at the ſame time began to be carried

between Henry and the Marchioneſs de Verncu!, |

not on the ſame account; for I am perſuaded, tie
reader does not expect to ſee any great feverity u.
ſed. towards her. The King could not refovlve t
leave her a fingle moment in doubt of her pardon;

with difficulty it was that he endeavoured to ſue
appearances, by ſending different meſſengers to
tell the Marchioneſs, that ſhe ſhould purchaſe ti}
pardon, by an abſolute ſubmiſſion to ſuch conditions}

as he ſhould preſcribe to her. La-Varenne, S.
gogne, the whole court was employed in theſe met:

lages, which, by the manner in which they vate

« went, he ſaid with as much intrepidity as if he had been entircy |
innocent, in this reſpect. Gentlemen, ſbew mr de ſingl. line 1
writing to prove I ever entered inio any tri aty with ih King of hn EF

« or his ambaſſador, and I will write the ſe tence of my d. all mer th
% and coniemn myſelf to be guartered alive.” ;
In the houie ef one Audicourt, in St Paul's ſtreet.

oy 1

9232

— penms "Irs

"Ow -

a 9

—
.

7 —

1604. . L L. 323

Jagelicered, were indeed the real advances of a lover,

|

ho feared, notwithſtanding his anger, that he

Fhould raiſe too ſtrong an obſtacle to his reconcili-
ation with the object of his paſſion. The Marchi-
Joneſs diſcovered and well knew how to make her
advantage of this weakneſs. I likewiſe ſerved Hen-
Iry for an interpreter upon this occaſion, although
I plainly perceived that he would not come off with
*honour : but he inſiſted upon my interpoſing, and
#1 obeyed him, with an intention to make the con-
cluſion of this affair as honourable as I could for
bim.

The fiſt order his Majeſty gave me, was to go
to the Marchioneſs de Verneuil, and hear what the
| had to ſay concerning the crimes ſhe was accuſed
of, to draw from her a confeſſion of them, and
make her ſenſible of her ingratitude, I cannot ſay
that my commiſſion went farther, unleſs one takes
in ſeveral bitter reproaches, and ſome advice which

proved to be uſeleſs, concerning the manner in

which ſhe ought to have behaved to a prince who
had laid ſuch great obligations upon her. 1 did
not ſee her the firſt time I went to her houſe; ſhe
ordered me to be told, that a defluxion which was
* failen upon her face, hindered her from receiving
any viſits. I ſent a gentleman to her, to know at
what hour I ſhould attend her; but, before my
meſſenger was returned, a ſervant, whom ſhe had
ent in the mean time, came to tell me, that ſhe
would fee me at two o'clock in the afternoon.

I found a woman whom diſgrace could not
humble, whoſe ipſolence detection could not a-
date ®, and who, inſtead of endeavouring to ex-

cuſe
She ſaid, ſhe gave herſelf no concern about dying, but that,
ti on the contrary, ſhe wiſhed for death; but, if the King ſhould put
© her to death, it woul4 always be ſaid he had killed his wife, for,

* that ſhe was his qucen before . he other: upon the e, the on-
| ® ly delired three things of bis Mejeſty; a pardon foi her father,

—

a

+;

=

„

—

;
5

£ "os; *

23 *

3
5 v4 7 2
ES Ie

a FO Sy, * . 4

* — n o — —
"OT VR * pee” l <4 w 0
1

n
— — > * © *
OS

* a , K as "If
1 „** «3 "Db. * 2
** 8 rr
3 . p,
% +4 poof 1+ * FX .

g : Aa — 0 ts * 8 5 17
*. _— -
1 1 * py 7 >
Dok ns Ed ene An ns ed He RET
— -6 r 2 — = 4 > — * 4,
2 8 8

”—
,

— +

— + — ks \ -
PP
* — —[—j—̃— —

EE Fo
as _— —

PL
N 74
80
8 n=
4 l
p b
b
1 .
44
” d N
o
4 .
*
45 *
1
. #54
*
*

+. +

LY *
"Welt MP. Loo -

-- — + — _— ©
_ my 64D. -
4 1

=

- »

1 RE . —

7 ay

— — — Rn
2 * —
> * — P & +» ©

1

324 MEMOIR 8s Bock xv

- cuſe herſelf, or to implore a pardon, talked i
the ſtyle of one who had ſuffered wrongs, not gil
ven them, and pretended to demand conditions fy
herſelf ; ſhe complained, ſhe raved againſt th.
King, made new demands, wrapped herſelf up i:
reſerve, and affected the devotee. I was not |
perſon on whom theſe arts were to be playcd of,
I neither flattered her pride, nor ſoothed her re
ſ-ntment ; I began with the greateſt of her crime
and reproached her with having joined het elf t
the enemies of the ſtate; I told her, that (
would have reaſon to think herſelf happy, if be
puniſhment was confined to a permiſſion to bari!
herſelf out of the kingdom, to end her days ins
ny country but Spain; and that this favour would
not be granted her, till ſhe had ſubmitted to b
examined as a criminal, and aſked the King's put
don for her diſobedience. Se

I proceeded, in the next place, to her infolen} ge:
behaviour towards the Queen. I made her ſenſi ? ü
that to offend, as ſhe had done, a princeſs, who 7
was her Queen and miſtreſs *, by a thouſand ini
rious reflections, was to attack the King himlſclf
and expoie her own perſon to a fevere puniſhment
I reproached her wich her ridiculous affectation d
equalling berſelf to the Queen, and her childre!
to the children of France; with her haughty a.
inſolent behaviour; and eſpecially her malignity it
ſowing diſcord between their Majeſties : and ads
ed, that ſhe would be compelled to throw befehl
at the Queen's feet, to implore her pardon for i
the faults ſhe had committed againſt her,

ws

1 w

« a rope for her brother, and juſtice for herſelf.” Journal of ti}

reipn of Henry IV. “ On ſcarching her cabinets,” ads the fan'Þ.

author, © and making an inventory of all her papers, many love-iF

ters (the implements of her trade were found amongſt chem, ſowe Þ

© of which were from Sigogne, h ch occaſioned his diſgrace.” Þ

* « She ſometimes ſaid, that if juſtice were done her, (he 0g"

to be in the place of that clumſy tradeſwoman.” Perciixe. Na |

*

1 604. O F 8.5L L Y. 325

Nor did I ſpare her upon her pretended devo-
Bon to which ſhe had recourſe, not ſcrupling, at

he ſame time, to violate her principal duties to

0 Sec King, the Queen, and the ſtate. I told her
|

Plainly, that this ſhew of regularity was mere gri-
ace and affectation, which I proved by entering

it Into a detail of her whole life, to let her ſee that .
4 vas well informed of her amovrs. I even men— þ
3} Fioned them all particularly, to deprive her of her 6
pfual excuſe, that they exiſted only in the jealous 28
i magination of the King; and thence drew a new 1
e ſſobject of ſhame and confuſion ſor her with regard =
i! Fo this prince, whom ſhe ſo groſsly abuſed. I ſhew- P
ed her what ſhe would have done, if her inclina- "ll
| tion for a religious life had been a real return to- ;

Kards God; and aſſured her, that his Majeſty would
% Hever have oppoſed her retreat into a convent, if
e had perceived in her behaviour any {:gns of true
ge votion. |
I gave her, at length, all ſorts of good coun-
vt Wels, which indeed ſhe did not deſire, nor was dil-
poſed to follow. She ought, at leaſt, to have appear-
ed willing to do ſo; but the contented herſelf with
Znſwering coldly, after hearing me the whole time
with great indifference, that ſhe thanked me, and
ould conſider of what I had ſaid When I aſked
her what cauſes of complaint ſhe had feceived,
that had thus carried her to violate her duty to the
King? her anſwer was, that if the King bad aſked
her this queſtion, he would have been to blame, hi
Flince he knew them better than any other perſon; | =_
andd if it came from mylelf, I was no leſs ſo, ſince
I had no means of ſatisfying it.
Continuing ſtill to queſtion her, I aſked what it
Vas that ſhe requeſted of his Majeſty ? She anſwer-
eq, that although ſhe knew well the King's inclina-

tions would not be corfurmable to her's on this
7

1 article, yet ſhe till perſiſted to demand permiſſion

vo“. III. E e for

326 M E M OI R S Book xVm

for herſelf, her father, mother, brother, and bet un
children, to go and ſettle themſelves ſome where d
out of France: and added, in naming her brother, th
that he ſuffered only on account of his affecting] vc
for ber. 1 could hardly perſuade myſelf this reſo-Þ bit
lution was fincere. I contrived it ſo as to make] fut
her repeat it ſeveral times, and ſhe never variedÞ,/ Wa
from it in the ſmalleſt article. It was natural &Þ %d
nough that the rage and grief ſhe conceived at the] ful
impriſonment of her family, and the treatmem vo
ſhe herſelf ſuffered, ſhould make her form ſuch iÞ 3
deſign ; and the conditions ſhe annexed to it abſo an
lutely convinced me, that ſhe was in earneſt. Up *

on my obliging her to explain herſelf farther, vu} Fre
to this intended retreat out of the kingdom, ſ'F pri
ſaid, that ſhe would not go among foreigners u] ir
ſtarve ; the Queen ſhould not have the ſatisfactinf Mit
to know, that ſhe dragged on a miſerable life inf hb
poverty and exile. She therefore inſiſted, that a} To:
eſtate in lands ſhould be given her of an hundred} Fac
thouſand francs at leaſt, which was but a tie“ ed
after all ſhe might have lawfully expected from the} vn
King. Theſe words, which ſhe pronounced with great mil
bitterneſs, doubtleſs related to the promiſe of mar} kt

riage given her by Henry, the loſs of which hai
affected her ſtrongly : and ſhe endeavoured, bu
in vain, to conceal her rage from me.

I bad never formed to myſelf any great exper
tations from an interview with the Marchionels d
Vergeuil; but I could not help laying ſome ſtre6}
upon her repeated requeſt, to be allowed to ſettl|
out of the kingdom ; the more I reflected on ii
the more I was convinced, that it was the on!
method by which this whole intrigue “ could bt}

unravelled;

NM. de Sally had made Henry IV. loſe a favourable opportunil
of ge n. hadfome'y rid of his miſtreſs, if we may believe Baſſin

picrre's memoirs, where the thing is thus related, vol. I. p. go. "A
Kig

r * „ * * mg

LE TW

a

s —_

TR

A *

þ

1604.

oe. 327

unravelled; and all which now remained to be
done, was to prevail upon Henry to conſent to
this propoſal of the Marchioneſs, by which he
Swould remove from his eyes an object that drew
Him into continual weakneſſes, and purchaſe the
Future peace and tranquillity of his family, Money

was all that was required of him to procure theſe

advantages: ought the effort then to be fo pain-

ful? I was determined to uſe my utmoſt endea-

Fours to accompliſh it,

I went to his Majeſty; and, after giving him
an account of the ſucceſs of my commiſſion, pro-
poſed to him the expedient that preſented itſelf to
Free him from all his uneaſineſs. I was not ſur-
priſed to find, that it did not appear ſo happy to
tim as it had done to me; but I was armed
With ſtrong arguments of every kind to ſupport it:
Fbat did I not ſay to this prince? what perſua-
Pon did 1 not uſe ? policy, intereſt; quiet, reaſon,
fach of theſe motives I dwelt upon, and exhauſt-
ed all; I brought to his remembrance his own
pnfavourable opinion of this woman and her fa-
mily; I repeated circumſtances ſo much the more
Þkely to re-kindle his anger, as they had already

# King aſked whether he ſhould give Madam dz Verneuil any thing
to enable her to marry a prince, who, ſhe told him, was willing to
® havghcr, provided ſhe had a hundred thouſand crowns more than
* bee was worth? M. de Bellievre ſaid, Sire, I am of opinion,
'F it\will be well worth your while to give that lady a hundred thou-
# land crowns, if ſhe can find a good match by that means, to which
M. de Sully anſxering, that it was an eaſy matter to talk of a
hundred thouſand crowns, but very difficult to find out the means
to raiſe them, the chancellor, without taking notice of what he
ſaid, went on ; Sire, I am of opinion, that you ſhould take two
hundred thouſand good crowns, and 'f that is not ſufficient, three
hundred thouſand, or, in ſhort, any other ſum that may be ſuffi-
cient, and give them to this fair lady to get her a huſband; this,
I repcat it, is my advice. The King repented afterwards he did
JF "ot tollow this advice.” But ſuppoſing this pretended match to be
Wmcthing more than a mere artifice of the lady's, I believe it miſ-
Arricd through Henry IV.“ fault rather than the Duke of Suliy's.

E e 2 often

1 „ 4 > —— I
— I" v0.4 ar h 1 kk
® 4+ 2 * 9 = * —

. \ * *.
* .4 ST» * Y .
arte St * * = e . * * — —
* — ——— — 1 222 I . 8 = "
bogs .- t —_— l _- \ — + — af » 4 -
\ .

TS

4 ——

— 1 +»
- tr eee dl ˙ i ] N11 A
<AES 05 Foe} __— - 0 =; oa 2 4 y 2

— -_ 17
—_—
-

—

1

326 MEM OI R 8s Book XVI
often produced that effect; the harſh epithets be

had given the Counteſs d*Entragues and her daugh. 3 |
ters; the intrigues ſo well known and fo incon.® Sb
teſtable, that had given cauſe for them; the ſun * 9
of money granted by his order, to pay for an iÞ Arti
maginary ſacrifice in the firſt favour, which bel Ind
confeſſed, at the ſame, was no longer in the powaÞ er}
of his miſtreſs to beſtow ; the untimely birth of FG,
the infant by a ſtorm, and other anecdotes of the] Kya
ſame nature, capable of diſguſting a delicate lo Þ Rim
ver. Never before had I made a diſcourſe ſo pa ne
thetic, nor, in my own opinion, ſo convincing; obi
all my tenderneſs for the honour of this prince] Jets
was alarmed by the ſhame I ſaw ready to overÞ Jeje
whelm him; 1 entreated, I implored, every poweÞ ar
of perſuaſion 1 exerted; I was not diſcoursÞ er
ged by an ineffectual attempt: again I returvdÞ 1
to the charge; my zeal became perſecution : and] "that
ſometimes carried me out of myſelf, as it did inf bit
a converſation we had in the garden, belonging Þ be
to the conciergerie at Fontainebleau, where ue] Ao c
{poke ſo loud, as to be heard by Baſtien and Bru Þ aut
nault. | 7

henſible; a prince, whoſe great qualities might
ſerve as a model for other monarchs to form them:
ſelves upon, reduces us to the neceſſity of either
throwing a veil over one part of that heroicÞ
mind, or of confeſſing that it diſhonours the of
ther. I take, without heſitation, this laſt path,
while I lament the force of human frailty, forlF
hold myſelf under an obligation to do it; and ſhould 2
think I had laboured but by halves for the inſtruction 7
of mankind in general, and of princes in particula þ
if I threw any part of this picture into ſhade. IF
therefore open to them the receſſes of that heb,
where ſo much greatneſs wa* blended with ſo muct ſen
weakneſs, that, by the contraſt, each may become
| | more S

Nothing was ever more ſingular or incompre- br

W504 OF $SULL Y. 329

de more conſpicuous 3 and that they may be upon
heir guard againſt that dangerous paſſion, fo ca-
. Sable of inſpiring ſhameful affections, and of taint«
u ug their ſouls with vices abhorred before; mean
'Þ Artifices, cowardly fears, jealouſy, rancour, rage,

e and even perjury and lies, Yes, I repeat it again,
'| perjury and lies; Henry, that man on every other oc-
Faſion ſo upright, ſo open, ſo fincere, became ac-
huainted with all theſe vices, when he abandoned
Fimſelf to love. I often found that he deceived
me by falſe confidences, when he was under no
bligation to enter into true ones; that he feigned
geturns to reaſon, and reſolutions which his heart
gejected; in a word, that he pretended to be a-
'þ Thamed of bis fetters, when he ſecretly vowed ne-
Fer to break them.

* It was but too true, that he was infected with
hat jealouſy his miſtreſs publicly reproached him
With. This was eaſy to be perceived by the efforts
de made to ſupplant rivals, whom he was too weak
to deſpiſe, and too timid to puniſh. Aut Cœſar,
gut nihil, ſays he in one of his letters to me.
What a ſtrange contraſt of caprices and extrava-
ancies ! He was convinced that the Marchioneſs
of Verneuil had recourſe to the affectation of de-
Votion to conceal her libertiniſm; and this con-
Fiction pierced his heart with a thouſand cruel
and inſupportable wounds; but he felt, no leſs for-
Tibly, the delight which the deſire of triumphing
ver a real devotion gives to a depraved heart.
One of theſe caprices-which moſt ſurpriſed me,
and perſuaded me, that it was abſolutely impoſſible
o cure this unhappy prince, was, that at thoſe ve -
y times, when be appeared moſt cool and indiffer-
ent in all he ſaid of his miſtreſs, yet the letters he
rote to be ſhewn to her, cxpreſied quite contrary
ſentiments. I have made the fame obſcrvation of
the Marchioneſs, but with leſs ſurpriſe, It muſt be,
3 | Ee 3 therefore,

—
=
= vw

—

* L 1 a 4 . "a + . * a . * — * off; ** 3 R
ö „ 4 * ©#* «S273 £'s 4 A * = 4
8 r po +5 74 2 , S AE 5 13 * — pag rere . A
. — * 3 5 2 _ 2 - $.. . _ a ” 5 1 Ef % 3 7.4 br * — - * = he — — - 2 2 *
> RX 2 * 1 i N 47 , : 4 -
* — 2 - £2 F, 15 r 3 22 - we. * Kel ' Z » v
- 4 a

3
” » * —

pl
;
:
:

4
WE
1 *
£
Fo!

330 WE MOI R S Book XVin.

therefore, that theſe lovers, amidſt the wildeſt tranſ.
ports of their anger, could not hinder themſelves
from till depending a little upon the latent tender.
neſs of each other; and that their tenderneſs (till
ſubſiſted without their perceiving it themſelves : or
that the King, ingenious in finding out methods to
debaſe himſelf, had a long time before furniſhed
his miſtreſs with arms againſt him, which he would
not oblige her to make uſe of, by driving her to
extremities : or laſtly, and this is the leaſt unfavour.
able judgment that can be formed of this prince,
that ſome private tranſactions had paſſed between
them, which Henry, through regret or ſhame,
could not reſolve to impart to me, or to any one
whatever.

I have thrown together all that relates to the

= .
preſent ſubject, although part of the facts, as has
been ſeen, ſuch as the ſeizing of the Count d'Au-
vergne, and the proceſs carried on againſt his fa-
mily, did not happen till towards the end of the
year, that I might not be obliged to interrupt the
narration ſo frequently *. I ſhall reſume it at the
beginning
I here ſubjoin an anecdote of Vittorio Siri's, relating to the 2.
mours of Henry IV. and the conſpiracy of the Count of Auvergne.
"This writer aſſerts, mem. recond. vol. I. p. 297. that one object of
this conſpiracy was to ſeize the King's perſon, by laying an ambu-
ade for him, and then putting him to death; and that D*Entragncs,
who had underiaken the execution of this project, intended to moke
uſe of the paſſion be had diſcovered the King to have vewly conceived
for his ſecond daughter, who is repreſented as much handſom er than
her ſiſter, to draw him in to the ſnare. He therefore ſent his wife to feich
her away from Fontainebleau, making no queſtion but the King wou'd
expoſe himſelf to any danger to come to ſec her at Maleſherbes, which
place is but three leagues diſtant from that palace: and truly, Henry
immediately ſent meſſage after meſſage to Mademoitctle d'Entragues,
by ſome of his courtieis diſyuiſed in the habit of peaſants. Her an-
ſwer to which was, that ſhe was fo cloſely watched, that there was
not the leaf} probability of her being able to ſee the King. At laſt
he could not forbear going there in perſon, accompanied by Mare.
chal Baſſomp erte; and not daring to go into the houſe for fear of
being diſcovered, he was obliged to content himſelf with ſpeaking'ts
Dm er

*

1
4
-

E . 1
A * 5 F Nuß * *
„ e n 0 „

3
.
1
£1
|

* Dd

O07: $0 LL YT: $6
beginning of the following year, that we may ſee

the event, after I have given, in this, an account

of ſome other matters very different from thoſe I
have been treating.

her at the window of a lower room: he wrote to her every day, and
ſent her verſes of gallantry, which he got the beſt poets of the court
to compoſe for him. At laſt they agreed to meet one another on a
day appointed, at a certain place, in a meadow named by the King,

where they might be at full liberty, and where he promiſed to come
in diſguiſe. D*Entragues ſeemed to be _— ignorant of all this

contrivance; but either having mentioned to his daughter, or acci-

dentally given her ſome reaſon to ſuſpeA his deſian. whether ſhe re-
ally loved the King, or was apprehenſive of the conſequences, ſhe

broke off the om and took other precautions againſt the
danger to whic

Henry IV. was going to expoſe himſelf on her ac»

count. The King, wearied out by fo many »bſlacles to his wiſhes,
' renewed his amour with the Marchioneſs of Verneuil; and, if we
may believe Siri, often was expoled to the ſame dangers with her:
one day in particular, as he was going in diſguiſe from Fontainebleau

to viſit her at Verneuil, he ſo narrowly avoided falling into the hands
of fifteen or ſixteen of D'Entragues's relations, who were upon the
watch for him in the fields, in order to aſſaſſinate him, that his e-
ſcaping them may be conſidered as a particular inſtance of his good

fortune. But as theſe circumſtances are not taken notice of in .

memoirs of credit of thoſe times, they ſeem to be only ſome of thoſe

* ſtrokes, with which a foreigner, on the authority of popular report,

may think he has a right to enliven his ſubject,
Mademoiſelle d' Entragucs of whom we have been ſpeaking, ſtems

to be her of Henry 1V.'s miſtreſſes, whom he has celebrated
under the name of Liſa: and there are ſtill ſome original pieces of
poetry in being, which he ſent her; amongſt others a ſonnet, of

” which I ſhall only repeat the four firſt verſes:

Je ne ſais par ou commenter,

A louer votre grande beauté;

Car il weft rien, ni wa te,

Que vous ne puiſſiez effacer, &C.
What tongue can tel!, what words expreſs,
The beauties of thy charming face;
Since all we've ſeen, and all we ſee,
Appears but as a foil to thee, Cc.

| What follows is in the ſame rain. Though there is a remark at

A the head of this ſonnet, of the handwriting of Henry IV, that it was

made by Collin, a poet whoſe pen that prince often was pleaſed to
make ule of in works of this kind, theſe compoſitions are neither too
correct, nor too poetical, to prevent our believing Henry nimſclt
might be the author of them, or at leaſt in ſome degice concerned

34

5 n them.

BOOK

. o *
= %  - © 4 bad. 4a De 93 * - > $0 1 — 2 oo us * .
5 v Lond 8 nd Sas 1 — oy -— ; = 4.444 * - -— — — * 4 3
N CY — Fs. * * — , ps a p * * > — _ "x A -
ST wr. 724 * = \ 1 8 PR: #4 4 - " — . b . . 4
p a — ot 2 . [4 PR 1 n *
5 * . * on 7 — al 3 m * 4 - 4 - 4
— 2 5 » 1 - . E F — — 4
I 4 _ o p 3 I —
— —

g . . 4
” n *
— 8
2 *
* W 3
4 <=--Y

iz —
e IIS
— _ 5 p - - ©
y - ow * % + - ,
1 2 2 = ms ed. _ Y _ —

—

2 23.
"ES — .
wy

332 M E M OI R S Book XIX

B O O K XIX.

Ince the year 1602, the King looking out fot] ,

a ſafe and convenient place where he might
lay up his revenues, and the money which he de.

ſtined for the execution of his deſigns, fixed up. fece

on the Baſtile, where he ordered cheſts to be made,
and all other neceſſary conveniencies : for this a.
ticle he was obliged to publiſh a regulation that
might bring this new diſpoſition of money into

method, to prevent the confuſion of different cf.

fices, and to hinder the receivers from being en-F
tangled with the chamber of accounts: the regu
lation was thus. |
No money was to be carried to the Baſtile but]
that which remained clear in the King's bands; F
all charges, both ordinary and extraordinary, be.
ing firſt taken out of the revenues of the quaiter Þ
in which they fell. The money was put into the]
hands of the treaſurer in office, in the preſence |
of the ſuperintendent of the finances, and the F
comptroller-general, who at that time was John Þ
de Vienne; the comptroller and I had each of us
a key, and the treaſufer had likewiſe a third;
when his year of office was over he received a F
certificate, ſigned by me and Vienne, of the ſums |
that had been put in the King's cheſts during bis
adminiſtration ; this he put into the kands of hi
ſucceſſor, and received from him an acquittance, N
which he was at liberty to ſhew as his diſcharge. FÞ
The new treaſurer had a right to know whether the
certificate was exact, by inſpeCting the money con-
tained in the treaſury ; upon this acquittance, the
treaſurer was authorifed to draw up his account,
which the chamber of accounts was obliged to
paſs without further examination,

cos O F r 333

His Majeſty was of opinion, that he ought ear-
y to publiſh his intentions, and juſtify his con-
But, both with reſpe& to that accumulation of
Fiches, and to the changes which had been already
made, and which were ſtill to be made in the fi-
Sances. This was done in a council extraordi-
paiily aſſembled for this purpoſe. The chancellor
ceived from the King, and publiſhed, the liſt of
thoſe who were to compoſe the council, conſiſting
df deputies of the. ſovereign courts of Paris, na-
med by his Majeſty, the principal members of his
Eouncil, and the chief adminiſtrators of juſtice,
the revenues, and police. They met on the ap-
pointed day in the great cloſet of the Louvre,
Fhich is at the end of the guard room, joining
1 of the King's chamber. When they were all

aſſembled the King came in, and having ordered
the whole aſſembly to be ſeated, he explained to
them the motives of his conduct, in a diſcourſe of
hich this is the ſubſtance : The civil wars, he
told them, had reduced the revenues of the king-
dom to ſuch a ſtate, that the annual income was
Acarce ſufficient to clear the annual debt; and it
Was neceſſary therefore to improve the ſtate of
affairs, not only by inquiries and proſecutions,
Which had already ſo far benefited the nation, that
it was cleared of part of the debt, but likewiſe to
form new funds, that if there ſhould either hap-
pen a war of conſequence, or a troubleſome mi-
nority, the King might neither be obliged to be-
come bankrupt, nor to let public affairs ſink into
their former confuſion, to ſupport the expences
which could not otherwiſe be raiſed for this pur-

ik that the beſt uſe was to be made of peace-

able times, in which there was nothing of that

4 to be dreaded; that the means neceſſary to
this, which however ſhould be practiſed, without

doing any miſchief by precipitation, were the ex-

tinction

">
,

;
13
1

.
o

. *

„
1
1

55

*
= 1

2
*

4 *
1
1 *

9
, oy o

R *

*

” i

s
. ig
1

7

WH

*,
$ 4

*

.

1

"bad

*

1 » bs

FX
BY ©.
1
:

px *

w |

N
<A
"

:

” x
1
off

1

— =

: 1

* .

1 *

8

13

of

* ,

4

3 ,

—

* 1 '

: , N

——

47 \

—— ? —
* F q
4 9
* by
"+=
1

*

1
*

*

"=
*

*
1
©
1

*

N 39

Fs ©

i*9 4

$1

18

15
2
£ 7
*
1 f

9
11.
41

.

*

334 M E M OI R S Book XII. &

tinction of revenues granted by the ſtate on fe.

veral pretences, the reimburſement of offices, and
the reſumption of crown-lands, that had been gi

ven away.
His Majeſty was reſolved to begin by examinin

the ſeveral grants of revenues; and this was to
entered upon this very year: upon this head he!

let fall an expreſſion to prepare their minds for the

Juſt ſeverity of this procedure, by faying, that infſÞ

the firſt place he ſhould endeavour to make a 11igo.

rous diſcrimination between thoſe that had realy Ki

paid in money the principal of the arrears, which
they were now receiving back from the King's re

venues, and thoſe who had made falſe claims vp.
on the King. Henry added, that he reckone
ſo much upon the economy with which he intend

ed to manage his revenues for the time to come 4

that he conſidered a deſign which required the +
maſſing of large ſums in the treaſury, as by m

means inconſiſtent with his purpoſe of eaſing ie bi:
people by leſſening the taxes, which he ſhould tt

ways keep before his eyes. He exhorted the a:
ſembly to aſſiſt ſuch juſt and upright intentions
and directed that they ſhould twice a day, during
eight days, deliberate maturely upon this propoli
tion, and at the end of that time, ſhould lay be
fore him the reſult of their deliberation. He pro-
miſed to follow any good ſcheme that ſhould be]
offered, with the ſame ſincerity which he had dil
covered in imparting his own ; and not to forge
' thoſe who ſhould give proofs on this occaſion of
their regard for the public. |

Aſſemblies of this kind are, in my opinion,

not to be condemned, even when they are only Þ

called to keep up a form which may be of 10

great uſe, ſince they ſerve, it may be ſaid, no.

ther purpoſes than to notify to the miniſters, with

leſs appearance of abſolute power, the decrees n +
| | tne

— —

* 604 O F SUL L I. 335

. the prince already fixed in a ſecret council. This
«& yery aſſembly did not eſcape this reflection; the
ropoſal of the King, though in itſelf unqueſtion-
ably juſt, and beneficial to the community, did
hot meet with the more approbation for its uſe-
| fuloneſs. I know not what will be ſaid on this oc-

e Faſion by the aſſertors of the authority of the

pcople, but 1, for my part, am of opinion, and
| Sultitudes of inſtances like this ſufficiently prove
It to be juſt, that the deſigns of a good and wiſe
king muſt not be, at all times and in every ſitua-
jon, the ſame with thoſe of the people. The con-
| fiderations which regulate popular opinions are ſel-
dom free from intereſt or paſſion, and never, or al-
moſt never, reach farther than the preſent. Thoſe
ho judge beſt are themſelves deceived by their
dwn ſenſe of intereſt, and ſeem, one by one, to
have determined, though they will not confeſs, and
perhaps do not know it, to procure their own ſa-
lis faction, without any care about the future,
This corruption ariſes from the deſire of preſent
happineſs, a deſire natural to man; and unhappily
t falls out in government as in policy, that there
may be juſt reaſons for deferring this completion
pf felicity for ten, twenty, or fifty years, and ſome.
mes for a longer time. What means can be con-
ived to make this delay not offenſive to the com-
mon people, and even to thoſe who, though they
Save more knowledge, have the ſame paſſions with
He vulgar? The caſe is otherwiſe with a wiſe and
ood king, or with a miniſter who repreſents him,
and performs the acts of government. His incli-
ations, it is true, ought to be directed to the good
ef the ſubjects, but he always knows, that by
atching too ſoon at happineſs it is almoſt always
miſſed, and that there is no proportion between
ſhe real evils into which men are plunged by ſuch
miſtaken precipitations, and the vexations *
| | idea

gom—_ - . CT WD W

-<
—_— —
—

—— 2 — 2
Nr
— weuw "_

=
4
a) ”
x
4 U
*
o 4
2
1
 -b
*
75
* n
of *
Wo
«8
0
}
* 1
14 1
3
©
1
"©
. * N
8%

336 M EM OI R S Book XIX.

ideal and imaginary, which are complained of by
thoſe that think they want ſomething. Happy is the
public when it is governed by ſuch principles of
policy, as put it in the way to tranquillity ; all re.
gard to ſhort-lived and tranſitory advantage is ca
aſide in conſideration of general good, and a wil:
king is not leſs a father of thoſe ſubjects who hall
live at the diſtance of three or four generation;
than of thoſe who live in his own time; and con.
{iders the falſe tenderneſs which he might har,
ſhewn to his own time, at the expence of ſuc.
ceeding ages, as the partiality of a father in favour
of ſome of his children, which is to end in the
ruin of his family.

The ſcheme which Henry had formed for the

intereſt of his kingdom, making it neceſſary tha

he ſhould take all meaſures to increaſe his revenues,

inſtead of making all thoſe defalcations about which
ſome who pretended great zeal for his ſervice welt
continually talking to him, he required my private
advice. The advance which I had made in the
knowledge of the finances enabled me to dilcove

ſome ſources of large profit which would vay

little burden the people; of theſe I put nine into
a memorial which I preſented to his Majeſty, «
tollows.

1. The contractors who in late times manage
the chief farms of the revenue, had, under pic

tence of ſeveral employments which they rep!

ſented as neceſſary, miſapplied the money which

they had received, and made thoſe ſums paſs in thet Þ

accounts, to the ruin of the exchequer, which v3

4 I 6

ces

the
be

repreſented as having received them, though ,

a penny came to it. By this article alone the

crown was robbed of ſeveral millions. Of the!
accounts and details I therefore demanded an &

act reviſal, that I might lay hold on the contri |

tors, who had not been able ſo completely to con,
ccd

1604. O F 8 UL L. . 337

| ceal themſelves under the different names by which

they carried on their robberies, but that I ſhouid

be able to trace them.

2. The clergy of France had, by the mouths of
the cardinals, archbiſhops, and biſhops, » accuſed
Caſtile, their receiver- general, of having detained

| their money. The petition which had been pre-

ſented to me, was accompanied with an account of
the articles of accuſation ſo poſitively and clearly
ſtated, that nothing remained but that the King
ould reclaim the immenſe ſum which the receiver
appeared to have embezzled.

All the managers of the finances, and the
people of buſineſs, particularly the treaſurers of

France, who had contributed much to the ruin of

the finances, might be aſſociated with Caſtille, by
the erection of a chamber of juſtice; whica muſt
produce great advantages, if private intrigues and
ſecret artifices could be kept out, by which theſe
inquities are often defeated,

4. The abuſes in the alienation of the King's
lands were fo groſs, that any of thoſe who had
them in their hands held them by mere vſur; dation,
without any title; and the others had them at a
price [9 ſcandalouily low, that they were repaid by
the income of the very ticſt year at fix per cent.
which was the intereſt then current. Of this I
made his Maj jelly fully fealible, who would not
ſulfer theſe alienations to be exactly verified, that
he might be drawn to conſent to the reſumptian of
all thoſe poſſeſſions, or to ſome meaſbres for obli-
ging the poſſelſors to pay the true price.

5. In the other offices and employments there
was the fame corruption to be removed by the ſame
meays; the perſons in poſſeſſion were to be obliged

to ſu pply the deficiences of their firſt payment in
proportion to their ſalaries, or to give back their

Vo“. III. F.f employments

_

”

—
of *
— 5 RS

— l — — — *
F

"4 _y

338

employments for the ſame ſum for which the,
purchaſed them.

6. The debts due to the Swiſs cantons were, 4
a bad regulation, ſo far from being leſſened,
they had been always increaſing. I had aher
made ſuch an alteration in that part of our af
that by the ſeaſonable payment of one million,
had obtained an acquittance of cight ; half of
reckoned to the principal and half to thg arten
and by taking the ſame method with the rel}, .
public was ſoon cleared of that debt.

7. As it was eaſy for the King to recover the py
ſeſſion of the crown lands that were alienated, 0
was of great advantage to him to alienate I noi
not how many little paits of them, conſii ing
hore rents, and particular claims, of which th

expences for repairs, leaſes, and receiving, lon
times under pretence of proſecutions, ſort

of drawbacks, and improvements were 1 1
the connit ance of the treaſurers of the finance,
who alone made their advantage of them, to {|
a prodigious hcighth, that according to a czlcu's
tion which J made, by reckoning ten years, 0
with another, a fifth part muſt have been added
before a ſingle penny could come to the Kin;
This was the chief ſource of plunder to the office:
of the revenne. By alicvatirg all theſe parts at 0

rate for money ſettled by the laſt edict, the Ku;
would be more than doubly a gainer, .
might buy with the money which this rate wov.
bring in, thoſe parts of this revenue which we
mortgeged at ten per cent.

8. The profit was yet greater with reſpect to
reſumption of the roy al” revenues that bad ber
alienated; ſome of the contractors had offered u i
to purchale them back to the King for tz!
millions, without cbliging bim to repay any part
he ſum, provided he would let them te! e th

Ll

M EM -Q.*I-R: $:- Book Xi}

*
2 -*
vi-G

been

to vw!
for jt
but u
ſo m
Mond
to th

CY.
to be
Heult
ing!
|
Nica!
prov
port
time
Full.
pert
Capt
turn
nat!

|

= of a

the
bon
pell
pri

olce of the part to be purchaſed, and allow them
b cnjoy them for a certain number of years, after
nich they would reſtore them to the crown clear
fall debts and incumbrance. The King, inſtead
df accepting their propofal, had nothing to do but
o get himſelf the money which they would have
nen by the bargain. |

9. France had in her hand the infallible means
df drawing to herſelf all the commeice of the O-
tean and Mediterranean, and to fcc. them, without
any great expence, in the middie of her provinces:
Jl this would coit her nothing but the labour of
kutting a canal from the Seine to the Lowe, from
the Loire to the Saone, and from the Saune to the
Mecuſe®; and the fuſt glance of this project pre-
ſents

YL "I AED ROSEN AM IAIN 1
* Before the Duke of SAM Came into nde mi ?

*
111

8 [1 , *

* 1 1 1e never
p | ' p Og — d ! * Ma « # . * # 0 . 3 ” e
been onglet of in Pranee CO * Serie 415 1K > wi Aste 1108 ri - $1V« vs .

to which, nevertheleſs, it mult be
Jor its wealth and commerce, He began with the caval of Briare,
put was not able to procesd farther. © P.
ſo much to render tac reipa ot Lewis the Great in- mortal, as that
wonderful canal for joining the two ſeas: the, grent bunciits clotting

9 pi) CETCULL 5 pelulog
over the example Hoene foi ds us, poums ant to us Mat cn
ito be farther done, and at the laue time Proves, that nowty

-*
- .

ned, the Kingdem is indeltcd

» 1 * = | * z
1 14 7 . -
I Ls 2 " 19 T3973 "133 Cy BCLIHULUE

to the nation from hols under. as ngs, 1

. 4 . * SS + - : ” - i — . 3 . £ * z |

of win @LTNMDPES of this nature nv = CET HCY alc VE. 22 Ii 7 1} be.
. " „ - * 3 *

ing impeingie.

the jouwing tivers, and making roads, which tender te commu-
nication either of different proviuces, er dilletent Paitsz Os tn Une
province, more eafy and comme diout, are perhaps che two molt im:

SY Þ

portant objects to which a vile government can apply its attention in

time of peace; and by employing the ſoldicry, who te ai luch times

| Ulle, or that prodigious number of beggats, WHO ate always fo, in
perturming works of this nature, they will be executed at a moderate
expence. Idleneſs, which generally makes beggars and vegabends
turn thieves aud robbers, at the fume time will be banned lem the
nation, and commerce mtoduced into every part Ct it,

It is neceflary there ſhould be ſome principal centie for the riches
of a nation; but neverthelts other cites It Culd not fall a ſaciilice to
the capital; which being in the body politic, what the heart is in the
boman body, conſtantly iccctving che blood, aud as conſtantly pros
pelling u even to the molt extreme parts, they catmot be ce.
piived of it without biiuiging a laronur on the wile mach re

1 2 Much

—

IEEE

—

*

*
;
9
*
*
L,

340 M E M OI R 8 Bock II

ſents us with more than two millions a year, w!.ich
we ſhould get from Spain alone, and which would
be real and ſolid wealth, as all that is which is pro.
duced by commerce.

I entered into a long ſeries of particulars, when
1 gave in my report to the King; and 1 accompa.
med it With a paper, in Which. 1 cleared up the ie.
ality of . of the revenues which were not com.
priſed in theſe articles. Ihe Prince, who certain.
ly 3 a very different 3 and whoſe m.
tural liuelinels of temper kept him from atten cling
to my diſcourſe ſo cio le! iy as was neccſſary,
at. firſt a thouſand difficulties to
ſaid, that indeed the ſchemes were great, but ſe me
of them were wild and unſettled; others of no get
profit; en Cifticult to be executed, and |
hard to be made conſiſtent with each other. wr
this was becauſe he did not underſtand them. |
knew well enough what his Majeſty was wanting,

and what propoſal would have ſuited bis inclins
tion: an augmentation of the cuſtoms, creation of
new offices, or. a further alienation of his crown»
lands: if I wou! 1d have ſhewn him a ſcheme lich
I had myſelf drawn up vpon theſe means of railing
e I might have brought fourſcore mil ich-
of ready coin into his coffers ; beſides ſixty millions
more, by letting a leaſe of five millions a year, t0
which I had raiſed fix of his farms above their fol-
mer value. But 1 eaſily brought the King to aitov,
that though theſe methods were eaſily practicable,
they were at the ſame time very burthenſome to
the people; that we ought not to have recoutlc to

ralled
all my deligns; b.

Much trouble might be ſaved in ſtudying the nature of thoſe ſeat
ſprings which give motion to the molt minute branches of con
merce, were due attention given to that ſimple and obvious principit

of ovly ſupplying the country-people with the means of living in caſe
z nd plenty. i

them

11604

them

| me l

in ca
and:

1 hac

althc
yet 1
Ce
niche
25
ned
eve
auth
the
latic
mill
this
est!
in v
I th
| (ho
by
had
ſed
pre
anc
we
chi

bu

tunit) of conſulting chein.

7604. O F K 341

them but in the moſt prefling exigencies; and that

| me leiſure of a time of peace ſhov!d be empl: meu

in carrying on meaſures that required more tin
and application. Such were the nine ſchemes 78

] had laid before him, of which 1 aſſured him, that

although he ſeemed to rate them at fo little,
yet if they were fziifully managed and brought on
dae after another, they would in time make him
icher than he was by two hundred millions.
he King fell into my opinion, and we determi-
ned to begin by the re eſtabliſhment of the public
revenue, when I had ſhown, by good extracts and
authentic papers out of the chamber of accounts,
the court of aids, and other offices, that this regu-
lation would, without the leaſt injuſtice, bring fix
. into the royal trealury. Te engaged | in
s afterwards ſo warmly, that he ſhewed tt; e High-

<> injpatience to begin, and never writ me a Jetter

in which he did not mention it. To ſucceed in this,
I thought it necefiary that a new council or office

* ſhould be erected: to this an oppoſition was made

by the chamber of accounts; but no regard was

| _ to their arguments. This council was comp

{cd of Chateau. ne uf, Calignon, and Jcannin, the
preſidents De-T how and i ambonneau 1
and of Rebours; a treaſuter, and a regiiler, who
were Le- Gras, and Regnouard s and 1 was the
chief of it, and preſent at it as often as my othe
bulineſs would gire me Icave; but whether 1 was
there or not, e a thing went forward according
to a ſcheme which [ had diawn as the rule“ of their

operations. All ow pr 2CCEL 1232 would be tedious

to relate; it is ſuſficient to fas, that 1 had made a

! P 1
clear and exact A ion between the grants made
at different times and hom different funds; lome

* A more particular detail is given of theſe repulations, in the old
memoirs; thoſe concerned in the revenue May there have an oppor-

FF 3 | had

E
'
11
Dy
*
Y
:

*
—

—
— *%. 4.x
2

=

. 7 1
a 3
AN

242 M E M OI R 8 Book XIX

had been bought for the payment of the third part
of their price in ready money, ſome for half, o-
thers for the whole ſum; there were ſome that hal
colt their poſſeſſors very little, ſome were obtaine|
by mere fraud, and others honeſtly procured ;, the:
lalt were never touched otherwiſe than ts fette
them more ſecurely according to their original cyr-
dition; as for the reſt, according to the degre de of
fraud and injuſtice with which they had been fur.
cured, we either {truck them entirely off, or order.
ed the full purchaſe to be paid; there were ſo nec,
of which the poſſeſſors were obliged to pay back
the arrears, which they had ſo unjuſtly got int
their poſſelionz and others, who for having em-
bezzled the arrears were obliged to deduct them
from the principal, which it was ſo much eaſier ty
pay off, The public gained another advantage, by
ſuppreſſing a number of receivers, of the revenue,

who were an uſeleſs burden upon it, and of whom
I left only one re! maining.

The inquiry which 1 bad ſchemed ont again!
monopolizers and oficers of the revenue va
terwards carried on by the erection of a charn ber
of juſtice; but as the corrupt management of {+
citation and interceſſion was not cut off, Soth
was produced, but the common conſequence, tt
chief criminals eſcaped, and theſe who: were las.
conliderable ſuffered all the ſeverity of the Iz:
ſome remedy was found for this abuſe, at leut!
the time imme dia tel following my inquizy; for!
took great care, that when any man Was F321
guil:y cf cor;uption he ſhould be immedciatety gs.
niſned. Exact information was giveu of the ia!
were committed at Rouen, Mankind now began
to give to all theſe ſtrukes of art the name ti4!
they deſetved; and thoſe unlau ful gains which hy
{o long impov erithed ee, and enri iched the ol
fcers of the reven e, Were treated, without cer

n

141001 1
4 Ts

1604

mony
to (hc
ver re
Tl
ſente.
ment
den
diho
plan!
The
Moan
kind
do t
paſſe
unde
take
Tat
du b
to tl
me

prin
[

*
Ot
4

fork
VINE
the
the
den

Ebony, as robbery and rapine; and Honeſty began
t» hey her head in a ſanctuary where ſhe had ne-
vcr reſided before.

The treaſurers of France having this year pre-
ſented their accounts full of blanks for nonpay-
ment, I coal. think of n» better method to cure
nem of a practice whic't 1 very mach ſaſpected of
dikoneſly, than to alligu them theſe pretended
blanks for the payment of their next year's wages.
The removal of D. Jaart, whole place was given to
Moantauban, and ſome other ſ{t-»k23 of the lame
kind, taught the chief of theſe mea of buſiaeſs to.
o their duty, and to d» it well. By a decrce
paſſed agaiaſt one Le-Roi, they were forbidden,

unler'a penalty of an hundred thoutand livres, to-

take any foteigaer as a partner in the King's farms.
This decree was declared in the nane of Charles
du Han, farmer-gencral of the fire great farms,
to the chief perſons iatereited in the revenue, and
the other farms of the King at Paris, and the other
principal cities ia the kingdom.

I complaiaed to the King of an invaſion made by
the parliameat of Toulouſe on his authority, by
forbidding any corn to be carried out of the pro-
viace of Languedoc. I was informed of this by
the treaſurers of the province, begauſe it tareatened
the ruin of the foreiga cuſtoms, the farmers of which
demanded a very conliderable abatement : it like»
Wit: reduced both the gaileys and the garriſons into
difficulties, as they were generally victualled from
that part of the kingdom.

The four hundred thouſand livres raiſed by aug-
menting the taile, into which half of the tax of la
penny in the ſhilling had been changed, continue:
ill to be paid; as likewiie the other half, laid upon
merchandiſes: though the edift by which theſe
ares were eſtabliſhed was {ſettled but for two years.
the officers of the revenue made repreſentations

10

oO
* — * . — 5 -
Ko

a

2 my
LT Ae

— —
. ˙ een ON.

b4 L
d
-
. .
Tx
LL 4
*
id *
4
1
1 *
FI
*
—
4 i
:
©
a
9 90
* r
4 -
: 3
19
T
N 1
.
1
:
15
*
1
Uh
9
x
7 \
ws £
+»
7 *
=
2
.
1
£4
E
.
, \
4 \

TT ET;

” *—— — , — — —- =
E352 | |

22
-

>

de I, 2
Jo —

TTTCC .... „

to the King upon this account: they complaine]
of the low value to which certain farms were fallen

which depended upon commerce with Spain, by

the prohibition of that trade, as well as by th:
multiplicity of edicts daily iſſued by the cuncil
and which they repreſented as more co-op us to
the public, than the taille itſelf. I allow, for )
part, that their complaints were juſt, and had m;
ſelf remonltrated to the King long before them, 2
had written two letters upon this ſubject, one to
the council, in which he ſhewed them, that the
preſent ſtate of affairs, and particularly the arm.
ment of Spain, did not allow him to make ar: Wa-
batement in his revenues for the preſent year; and
the other to me, to prevail upon the council to
come into his opinion.

I gave him what aſliſtance was in my power,

rand maſter of the ordnance. The aiſenal was at
that time ſtored with an hundred pieces of cannan;
there were in the galleries, ſmall arms for fiftecn
thouſand foot, and three thouſand horſe; and in the
Temple and at the Baſtile, were two millions of
pounds of powder, and a hundred thouſand bullet,
I reme ember, that one day as Henry was walking
with me in the arſenal, he ſeemed alarmed at the
number and power of the enemies that threatened
bim: but 1 ſhewed him the formidable ſtore, by
which he would be able to bring them all to terms.
He then demanded a liſt of his arms, ammunition,
and artillery, with a ſummary account of his ready
money, and what could be added to it, in the ycars
160+ and 606. He entered into my cabinet, and
made my ſecretaries' write thele minutes, that he
might have them always in his pocket.

The regulation and diicipline of the ſoldiers was
an article of government molt neccilary to be con-
ſidered in order to its reformation. It is had to
conceive, that, in a nation which from its fiilt e-

ſtabliilm cn

, 160.

tab!
deed
care
met!
of F

« fold

mar
held
notk
mer
Was

in t

ſelv
lent
be
pub
wel

1 m N YT: 345

ſlabliſnment has been engaged in war, and has in-
deed purſued no other trade than that of arms, no
care ſhould have been hitherto taken to form and
methodiſe them. Whatever related to the ſoldiery
of France, was offenſive and diſguſting. The foot

ſoldiers were enlificd by violence, and made to
march by a cudgel, their pay was unjuſtly with-
held, they heard of nothing but a priſon, and had
nothing before their eyes but a gibbet. This treat-
ment drove thera into all methods of defertion,which
was prevented only by the prevots, who kept them

ia their camp like men belicged : the officers them»
ſelves being ill paid, had ſome kind of right to vio-
lence and plunder. Henry would often ſay, and
he ſpoke according to bis own experience, that the
public could never be well ſerved, till the troops
were put into another ſtate.

The firſt point, on which this new regulation
muſt depend, was exactneſs of payments, which
the King began by ſettling it ſo, that, for the fu-
ture, it could neither be delayed, nor the mone
appointed for it applied to any other uſe. This
regulation was followed by another equally juſt,
and equally proper, to reconcile the mind to the
trade of arms: by this there. was a proviſion mace
for the relief of ſoldiers, when, by wounds or
ſickneſs contracted in the ſervice, they were un-
able to live either by war or labour: things were

| managed fo, that, in this ſtate of miſery, they
wanted nothing, either for their maintenance or
their cure ®, ]

* By the King's edit, dated the 7th of July 1605 (for poſſibly this
affair could not be concluded till the year after) his Majeity granted
to the gentlemen, officers, and ſoldiers diſabled in his ſcrvice, the

royal houſe of Chriſtian charity, built with the nioney aribag from
the {urplus of thejaccounts of hoſpitals alms liouſes, and ipitals for le-

„

— — — —_—

| pets, G c. and from the penſions of lay-monks, and the oblats *: the
ky ſuperintendence
; Layouts or oblats, were folders diſabled in the King's ſervice,

who bad the maintenance of a mont «ſſignea to them an ifs revenues of
a a0 hey, as a reward for their ſervice.
The

346 M E M OI X S8 Bock XIX
The liberty with which I have expreſſed my{c!f

concerning the King's faults, gives me a right to
praiſe him for his good qualities. He was bon
with the virtves and method of ceconomy, and
therefore practiſed them without any conſtraint :
particular details of buſineſs were to him merely
an amuſement. Princes who engage perſonally in

he adminiſtration of government, f fall communly
into one of theſe two inconveniencies; either they
are incapable of ſubmittiag to moderate Views, Gt
they cannot raiſe them to any heighth. Ihe ming of
Henry adapted itſelf wich the fame caſe to t. log
ſmall or great, of which his letters give {uffici::
evidence, and a way that was then uſed of ap
ing to him immediately, ſometimes for mere tri!
ſhew it ſtall more plataly. There had been lung
due two hundred and fifty crowns to a wine mel⸗
chant of Giſors, who had formerly furniſhed the
houſhold with wine. His Majeſty ſent me to pay
him, and to recompence him for the delay; 700
% conſcience,” ſays he, © obliges me to pity that
«poor man.” 1 have, perhaps s, told too many of
theſe kind of {tories ; but my book wpul.l make
quite another kind of a figure, it I p
the public all the le ters which the king d
me.

ſuperintendence of it belonged to the high conſlable of France. Tui
eſlabliſu ment has ſince been changed, or ther totally abolitled, by
what Lewis the Great ſ{ubitituted in its Nead, in building and endes.
ing the royal hoſpital of Mars, or the Invelids, a monument ain
ſuflicieat to immortalize His memo y. bes houſe of Chiriftian
rity was before this only an ho{yital, without 12 revenue belong";
to it, built by Lienry III. for maimed foldiers; it ſtood in the 5.
urbs of Saint Marcellus, in the ftreet . rue de Oi it, all id W3s
ready to fall down Two years after, Henry 1V. alſo Cauitd =
. ofpital « St Lewis to be b uit; tor this parpole, he granted! ;
Hotel Dieu, ten ſous on every * mot * of ſalt, within the ide. d vi
"A durivg fitteca years, and five ſous tor ever.

A mi ot of fa it cont ai! #1: if Fr. w 4 cd ba, bes, Gi id 16 00 Nei: 4 nn
3 an E. 4% tuſue

0

1604. O F r 347

' As to thoſe other ideas that had a higher ob-
je, either of intereſt, of glory, or publie happi-
neſe, the King never loſt fight of them, either in
bis vexations or his pleaſures : that he might know
nu hether my ideas agreed with his, he made many
'F inquicies ; and concluded at laſt, that I ſhould give
tim an enumeration of all thoſe things, by which
| =h thought the glory of a powerful kingdom might
be deſtroyed or ſullied. I thought there was no
better way of complying with his intention, than
that of preſenting him a ſketch, written with ſuch
E ſimplicity, and with ſuch few uicleſs ornaments of
ſtyle, that he might at once glance it over: it
contained an enumeration, without proof or ex-
* poſition, of thoſe abuſes which commonly find
their way into public affairs. I here lay it be-
fore my readers, to whom it may ſerve as a com-
pendium of the principles, which they have ſeen,
and muſt expect to ſee, diffuſed through theſe me-
* moirs. REED
The cauſes of the ruin or decline of monar-
chies are, exo bitant ſubſidies, mongpolies, chief:
ly thoſe relating to corn; neglect of merchandiſe,
trade, agriculture, arts, and manufactories; the
great number of public employ ments, the fees,
and exceſſive authority of men in office; the coſt,
the delay, and the injuſtice of tribunals; idleneſs,
luxury, and all that is connected with it, debauche-
ry and corruption of manners, confuſion of ranks,
changes of the valve of money, unjuſt and im-
piudent wars, the deſpotic power of ſovereigns, their
+ diind adherence to particular perſons, their preju-
dice in favour of particular conditions or profeſ-
lions; the greedineſs of miniſters and favourites,
the degradations of perſons of quality; contempt
and neglect of men of letters; the cornivance at
dad cuſtoms, and infraction cf g: 0d laws ; an bb-
| ſlinate adherence to cuſtoms, cicher miſchievous

$——_— www

LOTS * -

**

. OF

n , 8 * 2
8 n

>
:
+
* 9
8
: 4
4 -
I ,
s.. \
-
24
ö 1
+
= 2 4
7 0
4
1
4
251
5 * 4
19
Hf
3
—
„ \
T 4
”
TH
KEI XI
-
%
1
4
2 5
. ;
, *
2 \
v 7 .
. :
46s 1
» DN
* *
4:3
£ 4
* 5
1 1
: ,
SA :
Bo.”
1 1
| by
*
i * 0
by TI 4
Hy
* *
4 *
z
*\ .
: J
Wy
| 8...
" 4 *
1 f
=
1
4
" |
%.
«+ =
* 4 \
11 F
I |
\ 4
tf
TE
i -
1
1
9 150
4
* l
M i
} :
- hy
A

„F

—
L

348 M MOI Beek RN

or indifferent; and the multiplicity of edicts and
uſeleſs regulations.

If I was to chuſe among all the forms of 85
vernment, of which this monarchy has furniche
examples, I ſhould propoſe Clovis, Charlemagne, Pj.
lip the Auguſt, and Charles “ the Sage; and I thode
wiſh that the eye might never fall fo low, as vpn
the reign of Charles VIII and our times; and if
was to cltabliſh a ſingle principle of governme;
it ſhould be this, That good laws and good manner ;
produce each other. But ſuch is our unhappincls
that we never perceive this valuable connection,
till corruption and abuſes have been carried tage.
ther to the higheſt points; fo that among mas,
the principle of good ariſes always from the cxtic-
mity of evil.

The regulations for the augmentation 2nd .
curing of commerce, appearing to Henty to de d
the firſt importance to the public, he laid out 16:
greateſt part of his care upon them. The project
of the canal for joining the Seine to the Let

Deipz

=

* Tt would perhaps have been (ill better, to have alſo 2 d tis
three firſt of theſe, and kept only to Charles V. On cxawin ts
— Qers of Kenry IV. and the Duke of Sully, we hall fe 3 the une

Ned on the principles of a Roman, the other on thole of a te

Speitan: the maxims here laid down diſcover a mixture of both i!
principles. I have obſerved before, what correftives were 10rts}
to modify the two aultere tem per of the Duke © f Sully : 10 me:
take the ſame liberty with the tco warlike diſpoſition of I enry l.
A military ſpirit is undoubtedly neceſſaty to defend @ (ate . it opeht

therefore to be nour ſhed with the utmoſt care; but it ſhould nee

ſtanding be kept in the fame ſtate. we do a mallif}, for ile de fences
our houſe, that is, chained up, and very ſeldom indulo: ed u le
liberty of purſuing its own courſe, leſi it ſhould turn up- n its mtl
and tear them to pi ces. The reputation alone of courayc pc aue

almoſt the ſame effect as the exertion of it can. It may be la 4 J Gow!

as a principle, that there are no means but what are prelera. le b

war, if the ſame end can be obtained by them.
+ This is the canal of Briare, which from that little town 143750

NM outarois, about ten leagues diſtant from it. It was to ebe

:
*.
V

continued to Moict: but this part of the deſign was left uu

Gd

1604. O F L.. 349

being ratified, I removed myſelf to thoſe parts, that
there might be no miſtake in the preparations that
were previous to the execution; whether in ta-
king heights, or levelling the ground, or laying
hold of any advantages that might occur. I ſpenc
but little time in this journey ; for the King re-
called me as ſoon almoſt as I was gone. In the
like manner I regulated ſeveral affairs of com-
merce in the journey I made to Poitou, as has
been already related.

Of theſe affairs, the moſt important and moſt
perplexing, was an unforeſeen quarrel which hap-
pened this year with Spain, concerning the mutu-

al traſke carried on between the two nations. The

King of Spain had, in the preceding year, Jaid a
duty of thirty per cent. upon all French goods
imported to Spain or Flanders; as likewiſe upon
all goods exported from theſe two ſtates into France;
a heavy impoſition, which was at once an inſult
upon our nation, and tended to revolt the minds
of his own ſubjects. The King returned it by

and the canal itſelf was neglected, after more than three hunJres
thouſand crowns had been leid out upon it, through the malice
of thoſe who cnvicd M. de Roſny, or, according to Mezerai,
through the change that happened in the miniſtry. Tins work
was far advanced at that time; it bas ſince been reſumed, and at length
finiſhed. M. de Thou beftows great commendation on M. de Svlly,
for being the inventor of this delign, b. cxxxii. A further prof or
t3's may be drawn from the ſilver and copper plates, or a Kind ot me-
dls found in 1737, when they were at work on the fluices in th's

canal, and which it was certainly wrong to take from thence, The

Count of Buron, one of the parties intereſted in this canal, ſent the
copper ones to the preſent Duke of Sully, which are now in the
1uke's cabinet of medal:, but kept the ſilver ones cn account of their
value. One of theſe copper medals is charged with the Duke of Sul-
ly's arms, and another bcars this inſcription: * 1607. Maximilian
de Bethune, under the reign of Henry IV. by the hands of Ne ſſire

„Peter Ozon, at this time mayor and governor of Montargis le-

Franc. The Duke of Sully has alſo lately recovercs part of the

remorials and other writings relating to this canal.

Vol, Bk: ©: G g expreſsly

—

*

—

— — _—  —_—

—

-—-

— 2 —
n

— —

— —

*

EC Ce wn

7

.

SS
*

5 :
* «
by
» /

"WW
3

L
< -

4
*

*

-

:
1 :
Cy
o 4.4
„
*
o
m
=
oY
+ XZ

*

»
#
*

I.

*

# *

* 7

: 2

: | UL

1 v *

1
"
U
7

4

1 —
.
4

«IF | 7
» CY

.
* *

0 *

*
.

—— 2.
„ -— 2 22
p a ,

=

*
. ——_ 2

er - Had — 4
S * — —
. ˙ I, oo
of
* <1 „

350 MEMOIR S Book XM

expreſsly prohibiting all commerce with the ſab

jeQs of Spain, and the arch-duchies, and by a ch.
ty ſtill larger upon all the Spaniſh goods landed
Calais: but this prohibition could not prevent the
fraudulent carriages of our proviſions to the cg,
my's country. The French merchants, notwith,
ſtandirg the new monopoly, ſtill found there ven
ſuch great profits to be made on our grain an
other g goods, from the ſcarcity of them in Spain
that they expoſed themſelves, for thoſe profits, f
all the rigour of the uw; and, on that accort:
there was a kind of ſedition ralfed in the city of
Marſeiile, of which the Preſident DNu-Vair ſent in.
mediate notice to the court, The merchants d
this city Joſt all patience, when they found then,
ſelves obliged to fit idle and inactive, while th;
Italians came and carried away their provition,
and cdeprived them of their uſual profits. Ne
permiſſion, whica was granted by his Majcly t
the Italians, was, in my opinion, ill jadged.
The Englich were pleaſed at this new incident;
and ſo fu were they from endeavouring to accom
modate the affair, that they ſecretly ſtrove to mak:
it worſe, ne they carried on the Mane .
fraudulently, which the Italians were authoriſed!
do, It was diſcovered, that eight or nine Englik
veſſels had taken in their loadings of grain at V-
Ione, © and went from thence to Saint Sebaſtian, u
difembark them : this, doubtleſs, was the 152
the Spaniards depended upon, otherwiſe their pro:
Libition would have fallen heavy upon the; welle
which, Hemy, from the beginning, had Ratteres
himſelf would happen: and it was the hop "tha
Spain would ſuifer more from it than we 0 ined
to his ſolicitude to maintain the honour ct
rown, that it might not be ſaid his enemies c
dilpc te of its con DMerce, which made him Pill rs

115
4.43

”
'

gquire a ſtrict obſervation of the proiiccn
ad

1604

bad

perlc

hat

Loi
of t
pun
pul
trary

Juch

om
that

II

dr

me
vid:
With
car
mea
that
Was
Cat
cos
Kin;
Tent
pf |
and
in zu
his

thre
lery

1604.

Ur 351

Lad publiſhed. He commanded me to ſend a
perſon of probity and underſtanding, to vilit all

hat part of the country, from the mouth of the
Loire to the Garonne, and all along the borders

of theſe two fivers, to ice that this ordinance was

punctually obeyed; and he was empowercd to
punith al! that ſhould be found to have acted con-
trary to it; thoſe being generally the places where

Þoch illegal practices were carried on. I gave this

zamiſiion to La-Font, who executed it ſo well,
tat his Majeſty kept him afterwards about his own:
erſon.

Henry, at the ſame time, ordered his ambaſſa-
dor in England, to complain to King James, of
ge practices of bis ſubjects; and to give him to
priderſtand, that, if he made peace with Spain,
With a view to appropriate to himſelf the trade we
carried on with that kingdom, ke would take ſuch
meaſures that France ihould not ſuffer alone, but
that England ſhould loſe more by it than her. This
was tacitly to delire, that ke would ofter his me-
diation to compoſe the dittezrence between the two
crowns ; for Henry thovglit it probable, that the
King of England might be tempted by the appa-
rent advantage of ſuch an acceſſion to the trade
of bis kingdom as to make peace with Spain;

and he was now ſenſible, though too late, of the

wiury he had done himſelf, and that the arguments
his council had made uſe of were all falle : this
threw him into great perplexity. Villeroi and Sil.
lery were appointed by bis Majeſty, to attend this
aſtalr with the utmoſt aſſidulty; and I likewiſe
Was ordered to confer about it with the Conſtable,
tae Chancellor, the Commandeur de Chaſtes, and
Vice-admiral De-Vic.

We found many difficulties to ſtruggle with on
both ſides. Trade muſt neceſſarily ſufter great in-

Jury, it the prohibition remained in force; and if

w
1
1

Gg 2 repealcd,,

— — —a— —

E

21

-

252 MEMOIR Ss Book VII

repealed, great ſhame muſt reflect upon the crown,
Henry could not refolve to do any thing that, i,
his opinion, ſeemed to acknowledge his fears d
Spain, which had not condeſcended to take any lley
that led towards an accommodation with him; an
all that could be hoped for from his moſt Chriſtian
Majeſty was, that, although he ſuffered the prohi.
bition to remain in force, he would wink at the in
fringement of it by the merchants, that he might be
at liberty to repeat it again if they too openly abuſed
this indulgence, to the prejudice of the royal autho.
rity : as for me, the wound that was given to trade,
was the only thing almoſt that I confidered; there.
fore, on this account, England and Spain were equi
to me; and I repreſented to his Majeſty, that the
damage we mult inevitably ſuſtain, made it neceſ
fary that he ſhould uſe no more ſeverity with the
one than the other.

The King of England did not refuſe bis medi-
tion in this difference; he even offered to engage
for the faithful performance of the promiſes bott
parties ſhould make on this occaſion : but he at
tected to act as an arbitrator between the tuo
crowns ;z and the King, offended with his vanity,
would not accept of his mediation, but in the qua-
lity of a common friend. The Pope likewile be.
gan to intereſt himſelf greatly in the diſpute, be
ing apprehenſive, that a more dangerous rupture
might enſue between France and Spain. He wrote
to Cardinal Bufalo, his nuncio in France, to ut:
his utmoſt endeavours to prevent it; and this cat.
dinal, a ſhort time afterwards, found a fave able
opportunity to obey him,

The Count of Beaumont, who till continued to
be our ambaſſador at the court of London, had of-
ten mentioned the late diſpute concerning our trade,
in the preſence of the Counts de Villa-mediana and
d' Aremberg, the one ambaſſador from the King

Palo,

by e

}

560% F . 353

Spain, the other from the Archdukes; and had e-
ven drawn up a kind of an agrcement with their
concurrence, together with that of the Preſident
Richardot, and Lewis Vroreylzen, which had been
communicated to the Conſtable of Caſtile, who was
Tkewiſe at London: but this ſudden departure, to-
gether with ſome other difficulties that came in the
wy, hindered this matter from proceeding fo far
as to get the preliminary of this agreement ſigned.
The Conſtable of Caflile paſſed through Paris, and
had an interview there with Cardinal Bufalo, who
preſſed him fo earneſtly, and upon ſo many motives
concerning this affair, that he obtained a promiſe
from him, that it mould be referred to the exami-
ration of ſome commiſſioners, whom he named fer
the King his maſter; the council of France ap-
pointed ſome on their ſde. But this method of
proceeding was not likely to bring the affair to a
concluſion, which, by being ſubmitted to ſo many
arbitrators, was protracted to an inſufferable length.
Bafalo prevailed upon Don Baltaſar Stuniga, the
Spaniſh ambaſſador in France, and upon Alexander
Rovidius, a ſenator of Milan, who were intereſted in

a cauſe for one of the parties, to refer every thing
relating to it to bim; this done, that the buſineſs
might on the ſide of the other party be wholly con-
ſigned to one pcrſon, he defired the King to give
me a power equal to his, and without any adjunct:
om that time the affair was thought to be in great

© forwardyeſs, I went to viſit the Cardinal, and ani.
* mated his zeal by a new incitement, telling him, that
we were upon the point cf declaring wer, and chat
his Majcfty was buized in making great preparations
for it. In a few days J prevailed upon him to a-
gree to the articles I had draun up, by which the
freedom of trade was ſceured 2 theſe articles were
almoſt the ſame with thoſe that had been propoſed
aud diſcuſſed at London.
G g 3 The

254 NM E M O IR Ss Bock XIX.

The ſubſtance of this treaty, for ſuch it became
afterwards, although every thing had been agreed
on only between Cardinal Bufalo and myſelf, was,
that the edict of thirty per cent. and that for the ſul.
penſion of trade between the two crowns of France
and Spain, ſhould be and continue repealed ; the
was the\great point. But the two princes having
both endeavoured to juſtify their conduct by many
reciprocal complaints againſt each other, which like.
wiſe related to the trade of their kingdoms ; many

other articles were added, that tended to remote.

theſe grievances.

It was ſpecified, that his moſt Chriſtian Majeſly
ſhould publiſh an cdi&, forbidding all his ſubjccts
either to export or authoriſe the exportation of any
Dutch goods into Spain, or any ſtate under the do.
minion of that crown, by lending veſſels, waggons,
or any other ſort of carriages; that the real French
goods ſhould be ſtamped with the ſcal of the city
which furniſhed them, and ſhould be inierted in a
regiſter : this was done with a view to obviate the
inconveniences which might ariſe from a reſen blance
in the goods, which otherwiſe ſhould be liable to
confiſcation ; but they were not upon a bare {u{pi-
cion of fraud to ſtop or retard the exportation of
theſe goods; that all the Dutch, who were talen
in French veſſels, ſhould be ſeized; that the French
ſhould not carry Spaniſh goods into any part uf in!
Low-Countrics, but wol that ſhovld be ſpecified
in the bills; and that, to prevent any breach of
faith, they ſhould enter into an obligation in wit
ting before the Spaniſh magiſtrate of the piace fiom
whence they {et out, to pay the thirty per ccni.
which obligation ſhould be returned to them up-
on their bringing back, within a year, a cetifi-
cate from the magiſtrate of the place where they
diſembarked, either in France, or in any pat of

Flanders where trade was permitted; that the King
U

o 8ULLY 355

of France ſhould order all Spaniſh goods to be
ſeized, which were brought by his ſubjects in Spain,
to be carried into any of the prohibited places,
half of which ſhould be given to the. informer,,
the thirty per cent. deducted : that the French ma-
giſtrate, who ſhould be convicted of having given
Falſe certificates of diſcharge, ſhould be proſecuted
and puniſhed ; and that the two Kings thould mu»
tually engage to leave the places of patlage free.
| The article of the impoſts, which ever ſince the
. peace of Vervins, were laid upon googs carried
from Spain to Flanders, or from Flanders to Spain
/ WW through Calais, and when they entered this port,
; WW having been already ſettled in the preſence of this
1 WM cardinal, nothing remained to be added to it. It
Vas ſtipulated, that forty days after the date of this
, W treaty, it ſhould be publiſhed in the reſpective ſlates
on the ſame day: it was dated the 12th of Octo-
ber, and ſigned at firſt only by Cardinal Bufalo and.
a me *.
e Although I was very ſure that Henry would ap-
e
?

PR

——

*
&
— 8 128 A IRE; =
CREST Sd” ub

—

— —— r V as. ih. 5
— *
9 3 *

8

122 — —

K%%ö—Q⁊õ6¹³⁴ed — — —
2 wks ray pe

prove of this treaty, as he had been fiſt conſulted

vpon every article in it, yet I was apprchenſive of
te cavils of Sillery, and the other commiſtioners,
f WW from whom the cogniſance of this affair had been
taken: the expedient I made uſe of therefore was,
na WW t {end Arnaud the elder with the articles to Sille-
, vith a civil requeſt, that he would give me his
0 opinion of them. Sillery, without looking into
f W cm, anſwered quickly, that the affair was in very
. $004 hands, and that the perſon who had tranſacted
nene, might alſo conclude it alone. This anſwer

1 5

Dee the treaty itſelf in the Chronologie Septennaire. I he King
1 <5 the Marguis de Roſhy no other titles in it but that of Great
y er and Captain General of the orduance of France, Cardinal Bu-

| . ful, did not Ggn it, but only Meflicurs de Roſny and de Sillery ; Don
1 os de Cuniga, for the King ot Spain; and the Senator Rovis
3 As. Matthieu, vel. II. b. ii. p. 655.

would

356 FF e

would not ſatisfy me; I ſent Arnaud back again to
tell him, that it appeared to me neceſſary, that the
treaty ſhould be ſigned by him, and the other com.
miſſioners firſt named, and that I entreated he would
come to my houſe and ſign it; but that if he te.
fuſed, I could not diſpenſe with myſelf from ſencin;
the treaty to his Majeſty by Arnaud; letting tin
know at the ſame time, that the difficulty ke made
in ſigning it would delay the concluſion for tuo
days: and this was no more than the truth. Si
lery, being afraid, that if any accident ſhould haps
pen during this interval that might prevent this 1.

reement on trade from taking effect, he ſhovil b:
anſwerable for it, went to Cardinal Bufalo's heut
and ſigned the treaty, as did alſo Villeroi.

The King, when he received a copy of theſe ar.
ticles, confirmed by theſe free ſignatures, belts:
ed great praiſes on the Cardinal nuncio, and mat:
him a preſent of a cioſs of diamonds ; he 1ccon-
menced him to the Pope, in a letter which wa
conceived in terms very advantageous for bin,
and honoared him with the diſtinftion of catin!
at his table. His Majeftly would not publiſh tl:
treaty of commerce till the ratification of 1: ani.
ved from Spain; but he ſecretly permitted the en
portation of grain, which was what the people at
dently defired.

About this time another treaty was conciude
at London between England and Spain, in which
France could not avoid intereſting herſelf greatly
after what had ; ſſed the preceding year between
ter and England. e be itorovobly informed ol
this treaty, it is necetiary io repreſcut lite
both political and military, in Spe and Flarcelh
with which thoſe of Ergland have in this reſpcR a
unavoidable connection.

The fiege of Oſtend continued Nil! to be cat
on with the fame obſtinacy by the Spaniards: !

ti!

*

d n * 357

the mean time, the Prince of Orange, at the be.

ginning of the campaign, attacked the iſle of Cade

ſan, which he made himſelf maſter of on the 16th

of May, and afterwards of all the neighbouring

forts, deſigning to open himſelf a way from thence
to the frontier of Calais; and at length laid ſiege to
Slays. From Bruges the King reccived advices,
that the Archduke, who beheld this attempt with
grief, was gone to aſſemble fifteen or ſixteen thous

and men, with whom he hoped to ſuccour this

place, by ſtorming Ardembourg, which covered it;
but that Maurice had ſo well intrenched himſelf

| there, that it was not believed he could be for-

ced out, provided he had a ſufficient number of
men to guard his intrenchments: the Flemiſh ge-
neral took likewiſe the precaution to carry his
treaches as far as Ardembourg, that if he ſhould
be obliged to draw off his troops from the ope-
rations of the ſiege, he might be in a condition
to reduce the place by famine, if he could not
by force. Sluys ſurrendered on the 16th of Au-
uſt,

The Spaniards, animated by the vigorous reſiſt-
ance of their enemies, and a ſenſe of the prodigious
loſſes they had ſuffered before Oſtend, thought their
Þonour ſtill more concerned after this ſucceis cf the
Prince of Orange, to prevent their being foiled in an
enterpriſe which laſted ſo long. De Vic informed
bis Majeſty by D'Auval, who was returned from
England, that he had cauſed three wines to be
blown up before Oſtend, but without ſucceſs: how-
ever, it is certain, that Oftend was reduced to the
laſt extremity; the Spaniards boaſted that they
would take it before the end of July ; and that
they ſhould till have time to go and deliver Sluys
with all their forces re-unitcd, No one gave cre-
dit to this boaſt, eſpecially when Perſi le riche, -

captain of the regiment of Nereſtan, who came

K lately

y
|

358 M E M O 1 R S Bool XIX.

lately from that place, faid poſitively at Paris, that
it would ſtill hold out fix weeks or two months.
In effect Sluys ſurrendered before Oſtend; for 1h;
Flemiſh defended themſelves with a courage that
has few examples: they were ſeconded by a re.
inforcement of eleven companies, which made up
between a thouſand and twelve hundred men, all
freſh, which had been juſt ſent them by the States
under the conduct of General Marquette. 'Ihey
fell upon an expedient to make an inner intrench.
ment, which miglit enable thein, when reduced tg
a neceſſity of capitulation, to obtain more aden.
tagcous terms, by holding out there; and th:
found means, preſſed as they were, to throw in
aramunition and money. |
This was a new and ſurpriſing ſpeRacle for :!
Europe, that a little ſtate, which forms but a fcaice
perceptible point in the map, ſhould dare to rail
her head from the midſt of her marſhes, and brave,
during fo long a time, the formidab': po er cf
Spain. It is wonderful to think where they found
forces, or funds to pay them, for it was compu-
ted, that this war coſt the States twenty thou
florins a day; the perplexities to which they va?
often reduced were not indeed known; they hat!
ly any longer knew to whom they ſhould liv
recourſe, and were obliged to apply to every one
for relief. The Duke of Bouillon having promi
ſed them a ſum of money, they ſent Captain Ser.
roques to reccive it; but he came back without
any thing, but the regret of having put his mi
ſters to the expence of tour or five thouſend 9.
rins, which their compliments to the Princcls cl
Orange coſt them. 5 5
Henry was their uſual reſource : ſometimes they
requeſted an hundred thouſand crowns z at otic!
times, two hundred thouſand weight of powder, tor

they conſumed great quantities of it: there v®
£3

GS —

Tale, Tie anra's and Gry of the tro Hes tber lund
» wn J ve anra.s and 995 ry 7 29 iro Ft ef ib; * F. lune.

W 350

no end of their demands. Buzenval, whom his
Majeity ordered to reſide in thoſe cantons, to give
him an account of all that paſſed, was of great
ve to them, in ſupporting their ſolicitations with
the King, who at length was the only power that
continued to be their friend, when ail the others
had abandoned them. The Dutch expreſſed great
fondneſs for Buzenval, and kept him with them
as it were by force when he was recalied home,
And who indeed was there whom they did not
Goth, and endeavour to engage in their intereſts ?
They would have made me a very conliderable
preſent, but Buzenval, whom they acquainted with
heir deſign, aſſured them I would not accept of
t: and they contented themſelves with offetivg
me, by Atclens, ſorge curious pieces of ſheil-work,
ed ſome coach-horſes of their country for my
vile. Henry ſhewed a readineſs to oblige them,
which could not proceed from {clf-interelted mo-
tives, and which, with that people, ought to have
given him the merit of one of the founders of
their liberty. They mult be ungrateful in the
Lipheſt degree, if they ever abandon a crown to
which they owe ſuch great obligations ®, Henry
wrote to me this year, when I was in Poitou, that
Buzenval had made him new requeſts in favour of
tie States, which probably it was not prudent to
grant; but that he could not reſolve to abandon

mem, js: ee cnt might be raiſed in Eng-
land, or whatever threats Spain might throw out
ugainſt bim. |

It is ealy to judge what the preſent war muſt
hve colt Spain, which was in effect the aſſailant,
by what I have juſt related of the Uvited Provin—
ces, who kept themſelves merely upon the defen-

*
»

3 * » . P . » o
_ * Grativs freaks of it 1'mollt in the me words, ir li: book, in-

Ive,

2

p

360 M E MOI X S8 Book Kix

ſive, and did not ſtir from their own doors; and
of the reſentment that Spain preſerved againſt us,
The council of Madrid, enraged at the loſſes they W
ſuſtained by a war that bad almoſt drained their
treaſury, which, however, they concealed with the
utmoſt care, often threatened never to forgive the 5.
treatment they received from the French. Hen 6
affected to be ignorant of theſe threats, and he

acted wilely ; the council by this impotent anger, K
ſhewed its own weakneſs ; and it was well Kaon .
in France, that his Catholic Majeſty's revenue; *
were exhauſted. 0

Oſtend * was taken at length on the 22d of VI he
tember, and Henry had the conſolation to fec, thit

for five or ſix hundred thouſand crowns, whic! hs
this expedition had coſt him every year fince n v.
fiſt began, he had conſiderably advanced the un ,.
of his enemies the Spaniards. ob

It might reaſonably be expected, that the treaty
I had negotiated with England the preceding year

would have produced greater things. Spain wal ys
convinced that ſhe ſhould loſe Flanders entirely, it er
ſhe did not find means to make ſome change in choc (i.
diſpoſitions in which 1 had left the King of Great 55
Britain. After my departure, therefore, from "Ml
London, ſhe renewed her intrigues and ſolicitation ne
to obtain at leaſt a neutrality in what concerned tit f
United Provinces, if ſhe could not bring bis bi no

tannic Majeſty over to her party. The 85 nia rt
at firſt, thought they ouglit to make very ki TH be

mands; and afterwards their offers alſo were 23 hi ki
to procure a grant of part of thoſe demands. T hi re
firſt propoſals were rejected without being cn araines apf

but theſe were followed by another, which ga the
them hopes that they ſhould prevail upon the 4 fro

| * See the ſurrender of Oſtend and Suys, and the other 201015 "iP - w
this eampeiga, in De-Thov, the Septen. Matthieu, Siii, end oba
Biſtorlaus, an, 1604,

76
1

ibs. VT VLLY 361

iich to abandon the Dutch, knowing they had no»
thing fo much at heart; this was to make the In-
dian trade free to both nations. But this offer pro-
ved ineffectual, becaule Spain, fore ſeeing that there
would be ſtill a neceſſity of abating ſomething in
her demands, added a condition that deſtroyed its
force, and required, that England ſhould enter in-
to a league offenſive and defenſive with her. The
King of England's council having many ſtrong rea-
ſons for rejecting this alliance, made no ſeruple to
confeſs, that it was the intereſt of their crown to
ſupport Holland, inſtead of openly taking part with
her enemies.

It was now abſolutely believed, that the Spaniards
had nothing to hope for from England: Beaumont
was the only one who was of a contrary opinion,

aa foretold, that notwithſtanding all theſe apparent

obſtacles they would come to an agreement, which
in effect they did. The Spaniards, ſome time af-
terwards, returned to the charge, {till leſſening their
demands according to their ſubtile maxims of poli-
cy, and commiſſioners were appointed on both
lides; the diſputes ran fo high, that they were ma.
ny times upon the point of breaking off the con-
ference, The affair imperceptibly turned into a

* Negotiation more peaceable; the Engliſh commil-

lioners reduced the Spaniſh ones not only to exprels

no reſentment againſt France, but they were the

fiſt to ſay, that ſhe ought not in any manner to
be excluded. They never mentioned the two
kl2gs without joining the third to them; and even
treated the States with reſpect and conſideration,

appearing inclined to come to an agreement with

them at all events. All this was done to conceal
from his Britannic Majeſty whatever was contrary

in the real deſign of ibis negotiation to the firſt,
and to remove all his ſcruples.

To this battery they joined the aſſiſtance of lit»
Vol. III. H h te

mn

362 MEMOIR S Bock XII.

tle anonymous writings, in which the authors en.
deavoured to prove, that peace was equally advan.
tageous for the three kings. In one of theſe pa.
pers, which was ſuppoſed to be written by an Eng.
liſhman, becauſe the power of the King of Eng.
land was greatly exaggerated, who, ſays the au.
thor, can ſubſiſt independent of any other ſlate,
though none without him: as if the Spaniards were
not capable of ſo high a flight of flattery to ſecure
the ſucceſs of their deſigns: in one of theſe papers,
I fay, it was maliciouſly infinuated, that this peace
was deſired with equal ardour by the three
kings; but that their Moſt Chriſtian and Britannic
Majeſties ſecretly wiſhed, at the ſame time, that it
would give them a claim to the poſſeſſion of Flan.
ders.

However, they could come to no agrecment,
during the ſpace of a year; and it was not till the
21ſt of June this year that the negotiation was
likely to ſucceed ; but it went aw rapidly at the be.
ginning of July, and was ſo far advanced, that no

- Sf 2 aw of - in. At _ ig  gpwo ond gu: OS: aw 0 ih. od ons as an. cs

—
—

one in England doubted of its being concluded, as k
ſoon as the Conſtable of the Caſtile arrived, who tl
was upon the point of going to London in the qua- tl
lity of ambaſſador extraordinary from his Catholic l;
Majeſty, and furniſhed with full powers to conclude 1
the peace: the ſame opinion prevailed in Paris; and l

b

it was even believed there, that not only England
but the United-Provinces, had ſecretly made con- *
ditions of agreement with Spainz and that the

States, by the interpoſition and atbitration o“ n
his Britannic Majeſty, had put an end to the di
diſputes on occaſion. of the cautignary towns, in
the navigation of the Indies, the liberty of tra- 8e
ding without paying thirty per cent. and others. i **
But why, if this was ſo, did we not ſee the! "

ſiege raiſed, and other hoſlilities ceaſe on bot |
ſides? | C2
7 Thi:

1 * LE <

Ns

the
the

as
Eels.

the.

On

*
512
This

. rr 707

This report, however, was abſolutely falſe, at
leaſt with regard to the imaginary agreement and
arbitration. The States perceived but too ſoon,
and even while the conferences were ſubſiſting, that
they had nothing more to expect from his Britan-
nic Majeſty. This Prince became weary at length
of ſtruggling ſo long with his inclinations ; he affect-
ed to be the common friend of all Europe. He had
lately given the name of Great Britain to his uni-
ted kingdoms, and had made a ſolemn entry into
London, where a conference was held by Eis orders
to reconcile the church patty and the Puritans; for
his paciſic notions extended to all things: he did
not reflect, that by this condutt he was going to
exclude from the benefit of a peace thole very per-
ſons that had moſt need of it, who were the Dutch,
whom he left to the mercy of their enemies. 'The
Englith already began to abuſe every one of that
nation whom they found trading in their ports; and
when the Dutch alledged, as uſual, that the Eng»
liſh ought not to concern themſelves with a certain
kind of traſſic upon their coaſts, they replied, that
they had permiſſion to do it from the King of Spain
their ſovereign. Nothing ſo irtitated the Dutch as
ſpeeches of that nature; and if the inhabitants of
Fiuihing had been ſoffered, it is belicved they would
have murdered all the Engliſh they bad amongit them:
but the fatal conſequences of ſuch a proceeding be-
Ing repreſented to them, they reſtrained their rage,

The States had expected a quite different treat-
ment, when, at the beginning ef the conferences
detween the commiſſioners, his Britannic Majeſty
lifted that they ſhould be admitted, and thcir a-
gent, the Sieur Le-Caron, heard there. Le- Caron
acknowledged, that at firſt he had good reaſon to
be ſatisfied with the Englith commiſſioners: upon
the Spaniards introducing the ſubject of the Dutch
cautionary towns, Which they paſſionately deſired

H h 2 ſhould

"IT * —
— 2
of << — 22
EE *
- *

2 „
——

n

—

— * 4
AS

_—_— -
* —
*

464 NM E M OA RA 8s Bock NIR.

mould be put into their hands, the Engliſh told
them, that they could do no otherwiſe than ſurrend.
er theſe towns to the council of the United-Pro.
vinces, when the money lent upon them was ge.
paid: and when the Spaniards retorted, with ſome
reſentment, that the reſtitution of them ought to be
made to thoſe who had given them as hoſtages, the
Evgliſh counſellors only anſwered, that if the States
refuſed to pay the money that was lent, they wou!.
make the ſame propoſal to the Spaniards, They
were likewiſe favourable enough to the Dutch i;
the article concerning trade, which held theme
long time in diſpute; the Spaniards inſiſted, th:t
Holland ſhould open to them the trade of the Fe.
miſh coaſt, and particularly that of Antwerp, Which
ſhe had, as it were, locked up, by building fever:
Forts upon the Scheld, and among others that cf
Iſſot; but the Engliſh ſoon cooled in theſe favoura-
ble intentions for their neighbours. Buzenval,
whoſe letters furniſhed me with great part of what
I have related concerning theſe conferences, Judged
thus of the event, that the Engliſh knew well what
would be the conſequences of this new plan of po-
litics which they had embraced; but that great jca-
Jouſy of us, and alittle folly, had ſuggeſted all that
had been done on this occaſion.

Matters were in this ſtate, when the King cf
England thought proper to inform his Moſt Chi.
ſtian Majeſty, by his ambaſſador at the court of
France, of his intention to conclude a treaty with
Spain, the Engliſh ambaſſador preſenting the me-
morial to the King at the ſame time. His Britan-
nic Majeſty, in this memorial, perſiſted ſtill in the
ſtrange opinion, that this treaty was not inconlilt-
ent with that of the preceding year. James had at-
tempted to perſuade Beaumont to believe the ſame,
and promiſed Henry that he would defer the con.
eluſion of it till the diſputes which then ſubſiſted

between

1604. 9

between the two crowns of France and Spain con-
cerning trade were terminated. The commiſſion-
ers, however, did not ſcruple to ſign the ® treaty
between Spain and England, and referred Peaue
mont to the arrival of the Conſtable of Caſtile to
ſettle the affair of the trade between this nation
and Spain. The Conſtable was applied to when
he paſſed through Paris in his way to London; but
he prevented, by cbſlacies which he raiſed on pur-
poſe, the concluding vpon any thing with Cardinal
Bufalo, who had already begun to intereſt himſelf
in the affair. But what was ſtill more ſurpriſing,
theſe commiſſioners, without giving Beaumont any
ſati faction on that head, had the aſſurance to de-
mand the impoſt on the port of Calais to be taken
ot. Beaumont who knew it was his Majeſty's in-
tention to continue it, even after the affair of the
thirty per cent. was concluded, which had no rela-
tion to that, evaced the propelal, by making one
of the ſame nature to them.

The Conſtable of Caſtile paſſed through France
again the latter end of September, in his return to
Spain, carrying with him the treaty concluded,
and arrived at Paris juſt as the treaty of com-
merce was concluded there likewiſe. He demand-
ed permiſſion, the next day, to pay his reſpects
to the King, to whom he prefented himſelf with
an air and countenance full of ſatisfaftion; he
made him a ſtudied compliment, which for that
realon was perhaps the leis ſincere; taking for his
ſubject the two agrecments lately made, he endca-
voured to peiſtade this prince, that Fiance and
Spain being the two moſt powerful monat chics of

This treaty- is no way different from a true treaty of peace :
the Kings of Spain and Euglang engage tizeic ollies its it, that 38, all
the ſtates and princes of Cbrulendom, who are ail ten ed, except
the United-Provinces alone: it i: ſet out at large in the Sepien. ans
2604. Matthicy, 650, Cc.

HF h 2 Clu iſtendom,

6-0 LD £. le

„ „ U ²˙² om.
- = _— 4 —
» * ” - - — N — = .

** . — — - ” 4 p 5
f * - Ez — os "ets .
1 IS 8 ra * = "'P * WIE — * a La 3 =
4 - 1 2 * 2 0. * = — ä
_— | , - 6 — — 2 2 :
l * « EO : * 4 IJ * * — Ae. * 2 2
w** — => . - *- FEEL. a >» * 2 > <
£4 2 dy, . 9 7 - . - —
1 =
*

A
Jag 83 WF

> ICY

*..
=

_— C4

2 3 2 |

—

*

* 33
I — —
32 — 2
2 — — — —

. oy »4

ns" 432.4
A N 2
© —— Sona -

-

— —

_ * — "_- -D a = F —
a = - - $a 83 —
EL TS
. — - 4
i ry 8

366 . NOR Deer.

Chriſtendom, a ſtrict union between them was the

neceſſary and infallible means of accompliſhing e-
very enterpriſe they (ſhould undertake in concert;
he laid great ſtreſs upon the alliance which had at
all times been between France and Caſtile; he dwelt
upon the advantages of this aſſociation, which
would give the ſame friends and enemies to the twy
crowns, and upon the means of rendering it indil.
ſ>luble; which was, he ſaid, to be wholly free
from all partiality ; to diveſt themſelves of all jea.
louſy of authority, and pre-eminencez to explain
and determine, 1n an amicable manner, their pre-
tenlions upon certain cantons and cities of Europe;
he did not forget to inſinuate to his Majeſty, that
the Proteſtants were enemies which policy required
ſhould be humbled: he concluded his ſpeech with
repreſenting to the King, the advantages that 2
double marriage between the children of the two
kings mult neceſſarily produce; a marriage which
ſeemed (he ſajd) by the circumſtances of the times,
to be already determined in heaven, He artfully
aſſured the King, that he had no authority from his
maſter for what he had (aid on this ſubject, but en-
treated him to acquaint him with his ſentiments on
it; becauſe, though they were only overtures made
by himſelf, yet if they had the good fortune to be
approved by bis Majeity, he !hould with the great-
er confidence propoſe them afterwards to the ing
his maſter.

I was not preſent at this diſcourſe, but the King
came to the axſenal on purpoſe to give me an ac-
count of it. He ſtopped, aſter relating the Spa-
niard's propoſals, telling me he deſitred to know
what anſwer 1 ſhould have made to them, betore
he repeated that which he had given himſelf. I re-
plied, with the ſame gaiety, that I could tel! hin
immediately, but that I would defer ſatisfying him
till the next day, that I might take time to conticer

of

„„ OF r 367

of it, and pevent him from accuſing me of precipi-
tation, as he often did when my opinion had not
the good fortune to pleaſe him. His Majeſty con-
ſented to it, ſmiling, and gave me a little tap on the
cheek, as was his cuſtom when he was in good
humour.

1 went the next day to the Louvre, to acquit
myſelf of my. promiſe, and ſound the King walk
ing upon the terras of the Capuchins; I told him,
that if he ſtill remembered a ſentence which I had
once applied to the Spaniards, and which he thought
diverting enough, © that they preferred works“
eto faith,” he would not be long at a loſs to know
what anſwer I would have made to their ambaſſa-
dor; that after ſo many breaches of faith, ſo man
perjuries and violations of truth, with which Spain
had diſhonoured herſelf in the fight of all Europe,
the Conſtable of Caſtile's diſcourſe would have ſeem-
ed to me to be a new ſtratagem of the King of Spain,
to break off the alliance between his Majeſty and
the United-Provinces, and the other Proteſtant
powers his friends, that he might find a ſtill more

favourable opportunity of invading his kingd m

than his father had done. This being a fact of to
atrocious a nature that no palliation of it ought even
to be attempted, I recalled it to his remembrance,
and added, but for England, Holland, the French
and foreign Proteſtants, but for his incredible la-
bours and inceſſant fatigues, Spain had probably at
this day talked to him in the ſtile of a maſter : that
the council of Madrid, accuſtomed to profane all
that is moſt ſacred in religion, abu ſed the name of
marriage, which had nothing binding enough in it
to reſtrain their lawleſs attempts. And here I made
an obſervation to Henry, which appeared to me to
nave great weight in it.

In alluſion to one of Calvin's doctrines, which is cenſurcd by the
Cailiviic church,
15

—

"PLE - ©

ms >» 0
: tl.
2 — #

3 — -
— - -
7%
hs — —
"7 *
*
Po "a
—
ry
*

— — ů — =

yer.

- —
r -
- — *
"> | . of
»
. 4 —
1
4 _— : 4
- - = =
of = =

*

— 5
D =. "IIS <

2368 M E M OI R S8 Book KI

It was not, I told him, a ſtroke of ſuch wiſe pg.
licy as was generally believed, to marry the ſon gf
France into families almoſt equal to their own, ſach
as that of Spain “; for beſides that there waz 50
alliance, however cloſe, but muſt yield to the ha.
tred which ambition inſpires againſt a rival, the a0.
vantage that was expected from theſe unions mi
be deſtroyed by the very cauſe which made it too
conſiderable: but it was quite difterent with nar.
ages contracted with inferior families; from them,
at leaſt, we might promiſe ourſelves all the aſlit.
ance they are in a condition to give: the honour of
an alliance with the moſt illuſtrious houſe in the
world is too flattering for them not to make them
contribute with all their power towards the ſupport
of its grandeur, and the increaſe of its glory,
Spain , by this practice, has found the {ccict
of conliderably augmenting her power, by mean;
leſs rapid, indeed, but alſo leſs hazardous than
War. |

I take this occaſion to obſerve, that I am not
of the common opinion with reſpect to the Salic
law ; that law ſo much talked of, which is no
where to be found in writing, but whoſe o11icical
is ſufficiently demonſtrated by the name it bears :
as its antiquity is proved by the uncertainty cven
of this origin . It has been generally eonſidered

48

* By this ſtroke of politics, France neverthelcf gained the cron
of Spain to the houſe oi Bourbon, after the death of Charles 11
+ Ihc houſe of Auſtiia,” ſaid Guy-Mtip, © has gained prevt in:
« heritances, fer Jarceam carnis; that is, by alliances and mana:
61 ges.“ e.
$ As to the Salic jaw, the Abbé du Bos ſpeaks of it as follows, in
his critical hiflory of the eſtabliſnment of the French monarchy in
Gaul, vol. III. b. vii. p. 290. 291. * It probably obtained ue
Gt ff om its being already in force amongit e Salian Francs, win
ts Clovis incorpozated into their tribe all the tribes which ackrows
« ledged.him as king, in the year 510, except the tribe of ihe Bt
% pn,

160.

99. 1
the

flect
atio1
rece
caul

a pu:
« wh
K rec
te the

porta
this
perpt
OCCa!
confi
a pre
of w
belle
lince
the ;
lune,

HED FULL TY. 369

as the ſureſt foundation of the kingdom, and of
the regal power. To me it appears, from the re-
flections I have made on this ſubject, that the ſitu-
ation of France, and the other advantages ſhe has
received from nature, are of themſelves ſufficient
cauſes for the pre-cminence ſhe has over all the

« puarii, The moſt ancient digeſt we at prefent have of this law, is
« what was made by the order of King Clovis, and afterwards cor-
« rected by the orders of Childebert and Clotarius his children — la
« the year 793, Charicmaine made a new digeſt of it, in which he
« addcd many new ordinances to it, &c.” This writer farther aſ-
ſerts, ibid. 273. That the clauſes which enacts, ( at the crown
„ of France ſhall not deſcend from the lance to the Ciitafl,” is re-
ally contained. in the 624 article of the Salie laws.

But another opinion has been maintained, and ſeems to be ſupported
by reaſons of ſtill greater force, in oppoſition to the foregoing, by an
academician- of equal judgment and knowledge (M. de Foncemazne),
in his execllent memou on this ſubject, inſerted in the collection of
the memoirs of the Royal Academy of inſeriptious and belles lettres
ann. 1727, p. 490. C eg. it is thereby proved, that there is no one
giticle in all the Salic code which excludes daughters from the ſucceſ-
en to the crown ; and that the 6th paragraph of the 62d title of
this code, where it is ſaid, That males alone can enjoy the Salic
& lands; and that femalcs can have no ſhare in the inheritance,”
oupht only to be extended to the lands and iateritances of private
perſons; but that, beides this, there was a cuſtom, exiſting from
time immemorial, even amongſt the Germans, that daughters could
not ſucceed to the crown ; that Tacitus makes mention of this, &c.
-M. Foncemagne had before demonſtrated, in another memoir
(ibid. anno 1726. p. 464. & leq.) that the kingdom of France was

hereditary but in the male line only, during the firſt race of our

Kings.

i he ſentiments of theſe two writers, though oppoſite in them-
ſ:'ves, become united againſt the principle laid down in this part of
theſe memoirs, which conveys to us an idea in every reſpect inſup-
portable, Belides its direct tendency to deltroy the pre-eminence
this nation enjoys, it would involve the whole Kingdom in almoſt a
perpetual ſeries of civil and foicign wars, from the cabals it would
occaſion in the choice of a ſuccetior to the crown; it would create a
confuſion in the laws, tor which foreign kings would not always obſ.rve
a proper deference, and bg productive of many other inconveniences,
of which the author undoubtedly was not aware: I cannot therefore
believe but the whole is only an imaginary ſcheme of the compilers,
lince none of the Duke of Sully's maxims are diſcoverable in it. On
the actual exiſtence of the Sale law, conſult Venderlin, Eccard Ba-
le, Cc. cited by the two academicians above named.

other

2 ˙— —

*
*

— —
"4 I Fe

rr
4 *

———
n

Pre IS

\'Þ
14
1246
4

44 ”

* j |
& -

— = = >,
_- Sap >< "I A FE ; ; =
2

E =
-
— 4.
- - N —
- .
2 —
. 4.

5

> 3. < -C + o
— YL
* _ ”- hat
„ - <
"C7 22
* S * Rs - =
A IE CPE > -
— N 2
= _ = .
-oS p.
£ CR

—
7

12
3 — —

> . p
— <- n

2

— 2 *

2

3590. MEM ON Doku

other ſtates of Europe; and that the Salic law, (,
far from contributing to theſe advantages, has of.

ten hindered them from being improved by tho: .

which a well directed policy might have added to
them, It is certain, that if a foreign prince, by
marrying an heireſs of France, ſhould become ovr
king, the firſt kings of this race would be confi.
dered either as Germans, Italians, Spaniards, or
Engliſh 5 but as there is not the leaſt reaſon to
fear, that he would transfer the feat of his empire
from a city which every prince, if he had it i

his power, would chuſe to reſide in, this firſt fo.

reign prince, or king, would be ſoon a natur allzcd
Frenchman ; and his poſterity, from the fiiſt ge.
neration, would be wholly French. The hovle cf
Auſtria, eſtablithed in Spain, and that of Stvar,
placed on the throne of England, are evidences ct
this truth. This fiſt foreign prince, or king,
would likewiſe unite to our crown his hercditary
dominions, probably for ever. The Salic law, by
forbidding (if I may ule the expreſſion) the king:
dom of France from falling to the diſtaff, has de.
prived it of one way of aggrandizing itſelf ; and a
way ſo much the leſs to be deſpiſed, as force having
no ſhare in it, it affords no occalion nor pretence
for war.
Henry was much diſpleaſed with the anſwer |
would have given to the Spaniſh Conſtable ; he
aſſured me, that his ſentiments were the ſame with
mine, but that he had concealed them under fair
words, that he might not give the Caſtilian any
ſuſpicion of his deligns *,
| Theſe

* John De- Serre, ſpeaking of the reception Henry IV. gave the
Conſtable, ſays:“ The King tent the Duke of Montbezon, with 2
« moſt honourable train of noblemen, to receive him at the gate 0!
« Paris,” When Zamet gave an entertainment to the C. nſtable, the
King came unawares, juſt as they were giving water to the Co |
to waſh, ſaying, © I ain come to ſop with you,” The Confladie

*

teh

1604

Ti
dice
land
babil
were
imme
ry th
with
I ha
Rom

migh
that
bis E

Cure

for t
2ppe:

by ſe
treſſe

bino,
eyes
derec
ners
been
Vas

| ſteps
: ſuch

princ

| he g⸗

being f
a napk

> © you;

4 you
liouſe |
and wl

Theſe deſigns might indeed ſuffer ſome preju-
| dice from what paſſed at London between Eng-
land and Spain, yet it did not take away a pro-
bability of carrying them into execution; things
| were not yet ſo far advanced as to attempt that
immediately : in political affairs, time brings eve-
ry thing about, if its operations are waited for
with prudence. In Cardinal Bufalo I found all that
had been ſo long ſeeking for on the part of
Rome; nor did I ſcruplg to acquaint him with what
might poſſibly happen hereafter, being perſuaded
| that the kingdom of Naples, which J allotted for
| his Holineſs's ſhare, was a bribe ſufficient to ſe-
cure his ſecrecy, and even to make him ſolicitous
for the ſucceſs of it. This cardinal had always
2ppeared to me to be a perfect politician. Spain,
by ſeizing, as ſhe had lately done, upon the for-
treſſes of Porto-hercole, Orbitello, Talamone, Piom-
bino, Final, and Monaco, had opened the Pope's
eyes; and indeed, if the Romans had not conſi-
dered theſe frequent innovations as the forerun-
ners of their approaching ſlavery, they muſt have
been wholly void of reflection. That Clement VIII.
was of this opinion, is ſufficiently clear, from the
ſteps that he was obſerved to take; he was juſt
; ſuch a Pope as Henry had occaſion for, and this
prince ſtudied to oblige him on every occakion :
he gave him a convincing proof of this diſpoſition,
ding ſorpriſed, was going to put one kuce to the ground, and preſent
a napkin to him; but the King raiſed him up and ſaid, © Ir is not
> © your buſineſs to do the honours of this houſe, hut to receive them,
you are of the blood royal :” and truly, the King is related to the
houſe of Velaſques, holding he office of conſtable by hereditary right,
and which is conferred by the kings of Spain on thoſe they think
proper to elevate to the next degree below themic!ves,
his ambaſlador had already bad the honour of paying his reſpects
to the King, two years before, when he was going to Flanders. “Ile
continued on his knees,” ſays Matthieu, © ſomething enger than

10 he expected, and therenpon ſaid, the King received him like a
„King, and careſied lim as a relation,” Vol. II. b. v. p. 605.

Ai, 317.
by

.

Wo . 1

: - 4

| * 5 2

44 Y ' '

12000
Ws "7

1

4 .

4 *

N

32 WME MOI R S Bock XIX.

by ſending the Prince of Conde to his court to be
brought up, and inſtructed in the Roman - Catholic re.
ligion. 2

The Princes of Germany had equally favourable
impreſſions of Henry. His Majeſty commanded
me to treat the Duke of Wirtemberg's amba{lidor
with great reſpect, that he might make a friend of
his maſter ; and though he had ſome reaſon to be
diſſatisfied with tne Elector Palatine, on account
of the Duke of Bovillon, yet he paid, without
making any cavilling, certain ſums that fi!) re.
mained due to this Elector, for which his miriſers
ſolicited, Henry only requiring, that he ſhov'4 tn
his fon from Sedan. With reſpect to the United.
Provinces, though they were abandoned by Eng.
land, yet as that crown did not turn her arms a-
gainſt them, this made no alteration in their at
fairs, the aſſiſtance they had received from the ng
liſh having been very inconſiderable. After the
loſs of Oſtend and Sluys, the States took a little
repoſe ; but it was wearineſs, and their exhauPed
condition, that made them ſubmit to this re{pite,
which was to continue but a ſhort time. Ius
the means of diverſion was ſecured, to be ue
whenever France ſhould make attempts upon Spain.

I bave lightly touched upon a difference be.
tween Spain and the Grifons *, which made nolic
enough this year, to give occaſion for many hiito-
rical memoirs that were compoſed on this fubyect
This difference I am now going to explain.

The Swiſs Cantons have, for neighbours and als
lies, the three leagues of the Griſons, the thixtecn
corporations of the Upper and Lower Valais, con.
ſiſting of fifty four parithes, of which the Biſhop
appointed by them is lord; Saint Gal, Geneva,

* See Matthien, vol. II. b. iii. end other hiftorians, particularly
Vittorio Siri, who treats this point of hiſtory very fully, dem. te.

F vol. I. p. 369. C /eq-

Neut:

Milar

16
Ne

not
dit]
the

hab
line
dite
ing
tho
it 1
bre:
Con
by |
ing
ſage
char
aboi
fruit
it is
to

both

and!
nice
it tr

grob!

that

to B.
2 lik

| ſons,

this [

ter It

north
which

:
*

the M.

Neuf-chatel, Baden, and other cities imperial and
not imperial, which ſubmitted to the Swiſs, on con-
dition that their privileges ſhould be preſerved :
theſe cities are comprehended in pipe bailiwics,
The Griſons, of whom we ſpeak at preſent, in-
habit the Alps; and that which is called the Valte-
line, which is a valley, or rather a kind of large
ditch, lying between the foot of the Alps belong-
ing to Italy, and thoſe on the other ſide of it ; for
though its length be thirty leagues, or thereabouts,
it is not more than one league broad, where its
breadth is greateſt, fiom the Tirol to the lake of
Coma. All the ground of this valley is watered
by the Adda, which runs quite through it, and be-
ing increaſed byjthe torrents it receives in its peſ-
ſage, is but hittle leſs than the Marne, when it dif.
charges itſelf into the lake of Coma; it contains
about a hundred thovſand inhabitants, and is very
fruitful in grain, vines, fruit trees and paſturage:
it is bounded on the eaſt by the earldom of Tirol,

to which it is contiguous, but the pallages- are
both narrow end difficult; on the ſouth by relle

and Bergamè, dercndencies on the republic of Ve-
8 2 9 |

nice; the chain of mountains which ſeparates

it from thoſe two cities, are ſo ſtecp, and the

ground ſo hard, that it is wholly inacceflible on

| that ſide, except by two paſſages, from Tiron in-

to Breſſan, and from Morben into Bergamaſque;
2 like chain of mountains, inhabited by the Gri-
ſons, bounds it ou the north. The diſpoſition of
this place is ſuch, that there are no paſſages to en-

ter Italy from theſe countries which lie to the

north of it, but thoſe thar lead into this valley,
which at the weit ends in a plain in the dutchy of

Milan, in which runs the lake of Coma, between
| tne Milaneze and the Valteline. This is the place
e are about to ſpeak of.

About ſix hundred paces from the lake of Co-
Vol. III. Ii ma,

= oy 2 at

7 pf 2 9 4 *. — 4 — =
| * — 2 J 2 —
Pa — — *. Zn 2 Se;
mt — 5 K

5 = S *® * 7 y#

L — 2 - ad - - - *

* 4 + > by 21 —— 2 *

8 . *

234 M E M OI R 8

ma, Spain had lately built a fort called the fort of
Fuentes, from the name of him who was appointed
to command it, upon a rock two hundred feet in
height, which commanded the whole extent of
ground which ſeparates the Milaneze from the Val.
teline, and which is already but too difficult to paſs
from the bogs and miry fields. Upon the ſhore of
the lake, which in this place is not above two or
three hundred paces in breadth, another fort waz
built over againſt the firſt, but not near ſo large;
and to cloſe up this paſſage completely, deep
trenches were dug in the ſpace between the bot.
tom of theſe mountains and the lake. The forti-
fications of theſe two caſtles were very well con-
trived, being rendered pointed and angular, to
ſuit the form of the rock ; which has this farther
advantage, that no cannon from any of the neigh
bouring places can take a direct aim at it.

It was not likely that the Griſons would not
take umbrage at ſuch an enterpriſe ; for although
the Spaniards appeared, or feigned, to have no
thought of theſe people in building this new
work, and to ſhew that they had no deſign upon
any part that did not belong to them, cauſed
ſome trenches which had been carried too far to
be filled up, yet it was but too apparent, that theic
view was to endeavour one day to join the States
of Italy and Germany, by invading the Valteline;
and till then, to put any obſtacle in this place to
the paſſage of thoſe beyond the Alps into Italy,
to cut off all communication between the Swils
and Griſons, and the French their allies, with tte
republic cf Venice; in a word, fo reduce the Gi.
ſons to capitulate with them, and acknowledge
them for their maſters.

Book XIX.

Spain had already given the Griſons ſome proof

of this laſt deſign. The Proteſtant party had hi.

therto been moſt powerful in the three leagues,
being

littl
to c
thin
coul
mor
equ;
had

Grit

they

ö 1604. O F SU L L I. 375

being eſtabliſhed in the moſt conſiderable canton,

and embraced by perſons of the greateſt riches

and diſtinction among them; theſe were firmly at-
tached to France, and were mortal enemies to
Spain: but the differences of religion had as yet gi-
ven riſe to no miſunderſtanding among thele people,
becauſe they were ſenſible their ſtrength conſiſt-
ed in being firmly united: the Spaniards, howe-
ver, found means to break this union, by ſend-
ing their uſual emiſſaries, the Jeſuits and Capu-
chins, into theſe cantons, Theſe fathers, by per-
ſuaſions, promiſes, and bribes, eaſily ſucceeded in
their deſign of ſetting the two parties at variance
with each other ; and gave the Catholics as great
a diſguſt to the form of government eſtabliſhed by
their countrymen, as averſion to the religion they

profeſſed.

Their hatred began firſt to ſhew itſelf in the re-
ſult of the debates in the afſembly of Catholics,
which was held at Baden, and which for the firſt
time was directly contrary to that of the Prote-
ſtants, who held a ſeparate one at Arau at the
ſame time. Some demanded, that thoſe perſons
who had embezzled the money of the public
ſhould be proſecuted, and arrets iſſued againſt
them; others openly ſupported thoſe perſons : but
the Catholic party becoming at length the ſtrong-
eſt, they proceeded to ſuch extremities with the
Proteſtants, as to baniſh them entirely into ſome
little cantons, under pretence that they intended
to deliver their country up to France. This is a
thing which France hardly thought of ; but ſhe
could not be indifferent to what paſſed there, any
more than the republic of Venice, who took an
equal intereſt in theſe people. The Sieur Paſcal
had been long our ambaſſador to them; and the
Griſons appeared ſo well ſatisfied with bim, that
they deſired they might have juſt ſuch another ;
11 2 and

376 M E M OI R S8 Book XII 160.

and as while theſe good intentions continued, they
had alſo requcſted, that the ambaſſador might be one diet
capable of teaching them the art of war, we ſent great
De-Vic, with orders to him and Canaye, who re. each
ſided at Venice in the ſame quality, to act alway; the
in concert with each other,

a re

The beſt and ſhorteſt method we could har *
taken, was to ſupport the leagues, in hindering iy I. by
force the building of the fort of Fuentes, or at ical bis;
to furniſh them with the means of building ove on pene
their ſide, which would have rendered it uſelcls, deci:

They had thought of this themſelves ; and it uon theC
not have been a new thing, if his Majeſty had gien of tl

ſome money to theſe people: but indeed the GH, all o
ſons had greatly cooled the zeal of their friends for dem:
their intereſts; they were ſo far from expreſſing any MW cont
gratitude to his Majeſty for the penſions he dill MW behi;
buted amongſt them, that they made no other re. to at
turn but complaints of their being injudiciouſly be. WW Cour
ſtowed, and that this diſtribution was not referred W of A
to their miniſters, not!

The Venetians were alike diſcontented with of t
them, upon other accounts, which Canaye com- men
municated to De- Vic; and it was highly probable, of F
that the Swiſs would ſerve them no more with catic
their accuſtomed good-will. The latter had allow: in a
ed themſelves to be allured by the gracious recep- antic
tion their ambaſſador had met at Milan; and no at tl
one, on the other hand, doubted but the hve a gri
cantons of Lucern, Schwitz, Zug, Vri, and Un: pal;
derwalt, would renew their alliance with the Mi W Spa;
laneſe. | of a

In oppoſition to all this, the liberty of the Gri- W not
ſons appeared a ſort of point, to every intereſted i
party, which ought not to be neglected; nor could
the Spaniards hope as yet to complete their delign
of hood winki g the eyes of the Helvetic ſenate,

though they ſuppoled it not greatly illuminated with
true

1604. O F SUL L I. 377

true political principles. In a word, it was at the
diet appointed to meet at Coire, June 12. that theſe
great efforts were to make their appearance; and
each reſpective party, who expected the clearing of
the whole affair in queſtion, took care to depute
a repreſentative worthy to be truſted. Alphonſo
Cazal came thither in the behalf of Count Fuentes :
I, by the means of Mont-martin, ſent letters from
his Majeſty to De- Vic, which, however, never hap»

ened to be produced in public, becauſe Canaye

declared that the State of Venice, with regard to

the Griſons, held ſentiments very different from thoſe
of the King ; and it was a principle inculcated into
all our ambaſſadors, to unite conſiſtently in the ſame
demands. The French and Venetian ambaſſadors
contented themſelves with carrying on their point
behind the ſcene, nor did they hardly ever appear
to act: their ſeeming inactivity gave great hopes to
Count Fuentes; yet all the intrigues and movements
of Alphonſo Cazal, in conjunction with him, could
not ſupport his party from miſcar ing. The reſult
of the diet was, that the “* leagues would bear no
mention of a treaty with Spain, except the fortreſs
of Fuentes was previouſly razed, except communi—
cation and commerce were rendered free and open;
in a word, except all things were reduced to their
antient ſit uation. The alliance with France received
at the ſame dict a new confirmation ; nevertheleſs,
a great diſtance of ſpace and time was required to
paſs from ſuch reſolutions to actual effects; and the
Spaniards had many ſubterfuges to recur to by way
of amuſing the Griſons. Mont-martin returned
not thence, till he had maturely conſidered every
point that adminiſtred matter in theſe debates, ta-
king a draught at the ſame time, by my order,
both of the fortreſs and the diſtrict round it. I

* When tao or more cantons unite in one common cauſe, it is

called a league.
11 3 have

4 -
„ qt. 4 t+- yr — Fm
* — — 28 * n — -
— —. — 3
N 4 3 2 a

*
a”
*
1
9
1
*
*
6
4
CY ” .
18
* [1+
-
. x 7
-
1 , 4
\ * 1
4 N
4 .
4 \
t 3 : "1
. 1 »
q U
ik -
+ [5
4 ee
7 k o
: \
. >
's 4% 9
v7
14 ,
2 %
7
"yl "2
; 1
—
* $4 G
=
£ 0 7
1 * n
i *
' lus
—
* EE +
* »
T7
y , 5 *
þ :
15
* 4
*s EI
-Z
' 4
1
„ .
US...
a4 \ be
”
=
*
5
* j
: *
[7 4
*
4 * y n
4 :
2 9
2, .
0 s
1 g
7
* 1 ”
* 13
1 *
#4 .
k 4
—_ | „
7
+ HOI
” :
—
7
1
1
*
4
\ 1
1
a
U U
"x *
7 4
U

=
* —
—
2 :

378 M E M OI R S Book XIX.

have formed this article upon his repreſentation and
memoiis.

A diſpute of the ſame nature with this, but in
which his Majeſty was immediately concerned, a-
role this year, on account of the bridge of Avigs
non, This famous bridge was falling into decay
for want of ſome repairs which had a long time
been neceſſary. This delay was occaſioned by the
particular ſituation of affairs in France, which left
no time for the diſcuſſion of a queſtion between
the King of France and the Pope, without which
theſe repairs could not be undertaken. The que-
ſtion was this; the Pope, in quality of propric-
tor of Avignon, claimed likewiſe the propietor-
ſhip of this bridge, of the toll and paſſage of the
Rhone, between Avignon and Villeneuve, and con-
ſequently of all the privileges annexed to theſe
paſſes “; therefore the repairing of this bridge
was deferred till it was decided, to which of the
two, his Majeſty or the Pope, it belonged to do
it. The King being deſirous, that this queſtion
ſhould be decided once for all, and falling entire.
ly under my cognizance, it was referred to me,
which affords me an opportunity of explaining it
to the public.

The law received in France bas, at no time,
granted any claim upon the waters and courſe of
the Rhone to its borderers, though ſovereign prin-
ces ; for of this rank ſome of them have been, as
the Prince Dauphin, the Duke of Savoy, the Count
of Provence, and the Prince of Orange. The
queſtion was reduced to this point, namely, Whe-
ther the Pope, who is one of the borderers, has
any right to be excepted from this general rule
by any particular conceſlion ?

To decide this point, I cauſed the archives of

Cardinal d'Oſſat ſpeaks of it in a manner greatly in ſavour of

the Pope, in his letter to M. de Villeroi, of the ad cf June *
the

the monarchy, the antient rights of inheritance, the
regiſters of the ſeneſchal juriſdiction of Nimes,
and all the charters of the province, to be conſulted.
I ſent commiſſioners of probity and underſtanding
to the place; and the reſult of theſe laborious in-
quiries was, that the regulations by which rivers
are divided between the borderetrs, have no relation
to the King of France, and alſo that he enjoyed a
double right with reſpect to the Rhone, poſſeſſing
ſolely as ſovereign its bed, the old and new channel,
with all the rights annexed to them, Among the
provinces through which this river runs, Langue-
doc has this claim moſt inconteſtably eſtabliſhed,
being an antient fief of the crown, which has ne-
ver been ſeparated from it, and the Counts of Tou-
louſe have always held it in this quality. In this
it is different from Dauphine and Provence, which
are acquiſitions to the crown : but neither this rea-
ſon, nor another equally ſtrong, the poſlibility that
the provinces of Dauphine and Provence might be
alienated for an appanage or a portion, could hin-
der them from being comprehended in the ſame law
with the Rhone, by the right of regale, which our
kings could not be deprived of. A great number
of edicts which were iſſued in the mean time in
their favour, againſt the borderers of the Rhone,
confirmed this right; and the treaty which was af
ter the laſt war concluded with the Duke of Sa-
voy, eſtabliſhed it upon a ſolid foundation. The
doubt concerning the Pope's intereſt in Avignon
arole from this:

A fund of four thouſand livres was formerly ſet
ade by the Kings of France, for making repairs in
dis bridge. This fund was afterwards relinquiſhed
to an order of monks, who make a vow to aſſiſt
all poor travellers, and called themſelves the bro-
| thers which ſerved the hoſpital at the bridge of
| Avignon, becauſe that hoſpital joins to the ay:

380 M EM O I R S Book XIX.

they were likewiſe inveſted with the rights which
were to come to the King, on their binding them.
ſelves to keep the bridge always in repair. Theſe
rectors of the bridge enjoyed a long time theſe re.
venues and rights, but took no care to perform the

obligations they had entered into. At length this
firſt fund was diſſipated and loſt, no one knew how;
during which time the officers of his Holineſs made
ſeveral different attempts to get poſſeſſion of the
bridge and its rights; and the beſt way to effect
this, in their opinion, was to make a voluntary
offer of being at all the expence of the neceſſary
repairs : they ſeveral times attempted to begin the
work; but although his Majeſty's council did not
act with all the ſpirit they ought to have done upon
this ſtep of uſurpation, the candidates, however,
were always contradicted, and their demands re-
jetted. From all theſe proofs, his Majeſty's claim
was aſcertained.
| I cauſed a definitive arret to be iſſued, which de-
cided this difference. By this arret, the Rhone and
its iſles, its ports, tolls, rights, and dependencies,
particularly the bridge of Avignon, were declared
to belong ſolely to the King, by the regal rights of
the demeſue, and the patrimony of the crown. In
conſequence of this arret, his Majeſty ordered the
repairs of the bridge to be begun, and meaſures to
be taken to recover the firlt funds, that had been
miſapplied and loſt : and thus was this affair end-
ed, in which the Duke of Savoy was almoſt 23
much concerned as the Pope. |
His Majeſty alſo made an acquiſition of the each
dom of Saint Paul, one of the appanages of the
Count of Soiſſons. This Prince being plunged in
debts, determined to ſell this earldom to fatisfy his
creditors, who were very preſſing for payment: be
thought, no doubt, that, after the birth of a on,

which his wife had. lately brought, he ought net
£9

160.

to li-
he re
ſtoic]
on tt
louai
of 8
conſi
venice

Maiſſ
Soiſſo

| the K

ſeeing
inquit
time
king |

from
* Coun

8 —

_

1604- O F 3 . 381

to live any longer in a diſſipation of his fortunes :
he received, with his uſual affectation of gravity and
ſtoiciſm, the compliments his Majeſty ſent him up-
on the birth of his ſon ; and afterwards ſent Guil—
louaire to the King, with the offer of his earldom
of Saint Paul. Henry, in this acquiſition, firſt
conſidered his inclinations, and afterwards the incon-
venience of doing homage for it, if it paſſed into
the hands of any foreign prince; he therefore heard
the Count's propoſal favourably, and till they could
agree upon the price, advanced him a conſiderable
ſum of money to free him from the importunity of
his creditors,

His Majeſty, who had not yet mentioned this af-
fair tq me, wrote to the Count of Soiſſons, and de-
ſired him to apply to Caumartin and me, to whom
he intended to entruſt the management of this pur-
chaſe; and wrote to me allo, to know my opinion

of it, I approved of it entirely, and uſed my ut-

moſt endeavours to ſerve the Count of Soiſſons;
but I found it neceſſary to give great attention to
the form in which the purchaſe was to be made.
The affair being protracted to ſome length, I ſet
out on my journey to Poitou : Henry, 1n the mean
time, liſtening only to his impatience, and being
perſuaded that there was no danger to be hazarded
in bringing the affair to a ſpeedy concluſion, referred
it to Meſſieurs de Believre, Villeroi, Sillery, and
Maiſſe, who ſettled all matters with the Count of
Soiſſons by a bargain of exchange. At my return
the King acquainted me with what was done; and
ſeeing me greatly aſtoniſhed at his precipitation,
inquired the cauſe, reproaching me at the ſame
time with the little inclination 1 diſcovered for ma-
king ſo fine an acquilition to the crown, which had,
from my anceſtors, fallen into the poſſeſſion of the
Count of Soiſſons: it was for this very reaſon that

I

382 ME M O I R S Book XIX.

I knew more of the matter than any other perſon,
and I excuſed myſelf in the following manner to
his Majeſty.

From the time that this earldom had been poſ.
ſeſſed by the counts of its name, it had been the
ſubje& of many debates, whether it ſhould be held
of the county of Boulogne, or the county of Ar.
tois; that is to ſay, of France or Spain. This dif.
pute being of the number of thoſe which it is not
eaſy to decide, it was agreed to in the laſt treaties
made by Francis I. and Henry II. with the kings
of Spain, that till the queſtion could be decided,
the lords of Saint Paul ſhould be at liberty to hold
it of either of thoſe counties which they ſhould pre.
fer. The ſucceeding Counts of Saint Paul choſe to
do homage for it to the county of Artois; and, by
this preference, gave Spain a claim which might
furniſh a ſufficient pretence for rekindling the war,
as ſoon as the King of France, the poſſeſſor of this
fief, ſhould declare, that he would hold it for the
future of the Count of Boulogne, who was him-
ſelf, for he could not without a kind of diſhonour
do otherwiſe, It would have been a melancholy
thing, to fee the war rekindled for a trifle of this
nature; and ſhameful to avoid it by ſubmitting to
do homage to a crown which owed it to France.
The King was convinced by my arguments; and
the remedy was, to break the firſt contract, and
ſign a ſecond in the name of a third perſon, and his
Majeſty was not to declare himſelf till he could do
it without any injury to his dignity.

This affair was concluded at Fontainebleau,
where the King made a long ſtay this year. He ſent
for the Dauphin and the reſt of the children from
Saint-Germain. It was bis firſt deſign, that the
Dauphin ſhould not paſs through Paris in this jour:
ney ; but he altered it upon ſome repreſentations

which I made him. The children of France, with
| | Madam

1604. o 383

Madam de Montglat their governeſs, paſſed through
paris in their way to Saint-Cloud, and came to
Fontainebleau by Savigny.

One of his Majeſty's natural ſons, who was call-
ed Alexander, and had the title of Monſieur, was
received into the order of Malta, in compliance
with the King's inclinations “. He gave orders,
during bis ſtay at Fontainebleau, for his buildings
to be begun. The expences of this year were not
leſſened but increaſed, by the addition of thoſe
ſums laid out on the buildings deſtined for the new
manufactures. My part was to obey, and I did it
in ſilence, but with deep regret. I remember on-
ly, that ſeeing at the ſame time a great number
of religious orders eſtabliſhed in France by the
Pope's commiſſion, I quoted to his Majeſty the ex-
amples of Charlemaigne for the firſt, and the Ro-
mans for the ſecond.

* This ceremony was performed in the church of the Temples
in the preſence of the legate and ambaſſadors. The young prince
not being able to pronounce the words of the vows, Henry IV. ha-
ſuly deſcended from his throne and made them for him to the
Grand Prior, promiſing that the Prince ſhould ratify them when he
ſhould be ſixteen years of age. De-Thou, book cxxxii,

+ Politicians have always made a great outcry againſt the too
great increaſe of religious orders, and the exceſſive number of monks
I this kingdom. If our kings and our miniſters of the greateſt a-
bilities have not followed this maxim, it was not owing to their not
allowing the force of theſe reaſons, but to their thinking it their du-
ty to give religion the preference to politics: ſince, if it be true that
monks are uſeleſs to the (tate, it is equally inconteſtable, that reli-
gion would ſuffer by their ſuppreſſion. © The man muſt therefore
be either wicked or blind,” ſays Cardinal de Richelieu, whoſe evi-
dence on this ſubject is leſs liable to ſuſpicion than M. de Sally's,
| © who does not ſee and acknowledge, that the religious orders are
* © not only uſeful but even neceſſary ; as, on the other hand, nothing
| © but too indiſereet a zcal can prevent one from perceiving, that an
Lexceſs of them is not only inconvenient, but may be even increaſed
| © toſuch a degree as to become deſtructive. What is done for the
| © ſervice of the (tate is done for the ſervice of God, who is the baſis
| © and foundation of it: to reform the religious houſes already eſta-

* bliſhed, and to ſtop the too great increaſe of new foundations, are

* two things pleaſing to God, who deſires regularity and order in
* all things.” Political Teſtament, part I, chap. ii. $ 8. |
Mahomet

* 4 * —
2 — = *
»4 — ay q 3
, — . — r

— —
» *® pA
— ——

CY
—

— — —_
i. „„
—

—
- i
> Xx = >

{}

- *

ö bo
=
* Ws
| *

6 .

| |
EY

384 NM LE M QI RNS Dock N.

Mahomet III. dying of the plague, Achmet his
ſon, who ſucceeded him at fourteen years of age,
was obliged to appeaſe the murmurs of the people
againſt the bad government, by baniſhing his grand.
mother, who was the cauſe of it. Sinan Baſha, the
counſellor of this princeſs, was cited to give an ac.
count of his conduct; but inſtead of obeying this
order, he fled. Perſia, being then at war with this
crown, took advantage of theſe diforders to ſcize
certain towns. The Sicur de Salignac was then
our ambaſſador at the Porte.

000 O. XX.

HE proceſs which was carried on in patlia-
ment, againſt the Counts of Auvergne and

Ent agues, and the Marchioneſs of Verneuil, ter-
minated in an arret iſſued the beginning of this year,
by which the two counts were condemned to loſe
their heads, and the Marchioneſs to be ſhut vp,
during the reſt of her life, in a cloiſter. I received
the firſt news of it from the King, who ſent for
me to acquaint me with the ſentence; and, after-
wards drawing me aſide to the balcony of the fiſt
gallery in the Louvre, aſked me what impreſſion I
thought this treatment would make on the mind of
his miſtreſs? I aſked his Majeſty, in my turn,
whether, in propoſing this queſtion, he wiſhed that
I ſhould tell him my ſentiments freely? “ Yes, yes,”
replied Henry, “ do not be apprehenſive that 1
«& ſhall be offended; I have been long accuſtomed
& to your freedoms.” I then told him, that be
himſelf could anſwer this queſtion better then any
other perſon; for if he gave the Marchionets 1ea-
on to believe that he was wholly cured of is pA.
ſion, and animated with a juſt indignation ag-io!t
her, he would ſee her have recourſe to fubmiliion,
A ea to

1605. O F —. 6-5 M8

to prayers and tears to move him; but if, on the
contrary, he ſuffered her to ſuſpe& that he had
ated only under the impreſſion of a mere love-quar-
rel, ſhe would not recede from her former inſolence
of behaviour.

I afterwards frankly confeſſed to Henry, that
whichſoever of theſe two parts ſhould be taken by
Madam de Verneuil, I was perſuaded the conſe-
quence would be till the ſame, for many reaſons,
among which, his natural clemency and his conſi-
deration for the children he had by his miſtreſs, did
not ſeem to be the leaſt, © I would have you viſit her,”
{aid this prince to me; © I want to know what
& ſhe will ſay to you, and if ſhe will not employ
you as an interceſſor for her to me.” 1 entreated
his Majeſty, with the utmoſt earneſtneſs, to diſpenſe
with me both from the viſit and the interceſſion: 1
was truly weary of acting a part which had never
produced any effect; and I was unwilling, toloſe en-
tirely the good opinion of the Queen, to whom, not-
withſtanding I had always ſopportedher intereſtagainſt
her rival, J had been repreſented as an artful incen-
diary, and the venal ſpy and flatterer of Henry. 1
had proofs, that ſuch inſinvations had been given
the Queen more than a month ſince: I told the
King ſo, and named three perſons to him, who had
been the authors of them, and repreſented to him,
that there wanted only this ſtep, which he required
me to take, to deprive me hereafter of all means of
ſerving him with this princeſs, on occations which
he was ſenſible recurred but too frequently. Hen-
ry conteſted this point with me a long while; but I
prevailed at length, and left to another thoſe infal-
lible means of making court to a prince, but for
which I ever had the ſtrongeſt dillike; and if I ſtill
took any part in the affair, it was only to prevent
the concluſion of it from being as thameful for
Henry, as I foreſaw it was likely to be.

Vol. III. K K This

386 A Oln Book XY:

This prince did not want courtiers conformable
to his taſte; and here the grols ſervility of a cout
was fully diſplayed. As ſoon as it was perceived
that Henry could neither diſengage himſelf from
his miſtreſs, nor rule the Queen, this crowd of vo.
luntary ſlaves to the paſſions of the ſovercign ac-
commodated their actions, words, and even the air
of their countenances, to this diſpoſition: no one
dared to contradict either the Queen or the Mar-
chioneſs, and only feigned to do ſo, when the na-
ture of their commiſſion required it; they but
balf ſerved his anger, that they might always have
their juſtification ready for both ſides. Sigogne
had been ſent to me, by his Majeſty, with a very
ſevere order concerning the Marchioneſs, con-
ceived in the ſtrongeſt terms: he did not ſcruple
to ſuppreſs one half of it ; and, what is indeed
aſtoniſhing, Henry diſcovered that he did fo, told
me of it, and yet continued to make ule of him.
If this prince carried weakneſs to an extravagant
length, his courtiers puſhed their flattery ſtill far-
ther; it was never better known to what degtee
of ingenuity, and at the ſame time of ſervility,
meanneſs, and wickedneſs, it could attain.

No one was deceived as to the manner in which
Henry treated the Marchioncſs of Verneuil ; but
it was matter of general ſurpriſe, to find that the
lenity ſhewn her extended to the two other cil-
minals, whom the public voice had already con-
demned to the ſame puniſhment which Marechal
Biron had ſuffered : the Count d'Auvergne's fen-
tence * was commuted into a perpetual im piiſon-

ment

% The King charged this puniſhment,” fays Baſſom pierre,
& to an impriſonment for life, partly in eon ſide ration of Medam
« d'Angouleme, who moſt earncltly begged it of him, but more for
© a reaſon he gives us, which is, that the late King Henry III. his
* predeceſſor, had, on his death- bed, recommended only the Count

* 6: Auvergne, and M. le Grand to his fayour ; an d yr wou'd
6 theictee

_ 07 39-6 Lv 387

meat in the Baſtile, where, for once, he had leiſure
to grow weary * of confinement ; that of the la-
dy's father, iato a banihment to his own eſtates :
and as for her, ſhe had a full pardon 4, and even
dictated the conditions herſelf.

The affair between the King and the Marchioneſs
could not be terminated in this manner, without
creating new quarrels between this prince and the
Queen, to whom this late inſtance of tenderneſs
and conſideration in the King her huſband, for his
faithleſs miſtreſs, acorded ſulticient matter for rage
and exclamation : it was abſolutely neceſſary ſhe
ſhould be appeaſed, and Henry was obliged to
have recourſe to me on this occaſion. No labour,
no fatigue was equal to this; every moment there
were new exprellions to explain, new actions to
jultify, new iatereſts to conciliate; it was the bu-
lineſs of the night as well as the day, to compoſg
theſe differences: no ſooner did a calm appear,
than a ſtorm aroſe immediately after, which brought
every thing back to its former ſtate. At my re-
turn from the Limolin, at the end of the year, I

therefore not have it faid, that he put a man to death, who ha
been ſo aſſectionately recommended to him, by the perſon from
* whom he had received the kingdom.” Vol. I. p. 165. But nei»
ther M. de Sully, nor Henry IV. himſelf, when converſing with his
miniſter on this ſubjcct. makes the leaſt mention of this motive.

* He came out ot his piiſon in the next reign. He was ſes
venty-one years of age, when, in 1644, he took for his ſecond
wife Mademoiſelle de Nargonne; and, as this lady did not die till
1713, aged ninety two years, it made a kind of a chronological pa-
redox, that a daughter-in»law ſhouid Cie an hundred and forty years
after her father-in-law, ;

f © The King,” ſays Percfhixe, © permitted the March oneſs to
„ retire to Verneuil, and ſeven months having paſſed without the
* attorney-general's finding any evidences againſt her, by the King's
* order, (he was declared guiltleſs of the crime whereof the was accu-
* ſed,” % He alſo,” ſiys the Mercure Frangois, “ diſpenſed with
© her perſonal attendance on the parliament to get her letters of
* pardon regiſtered, which were allowed by the parliament on the
* 6th of September.” See the particulars of this proceſs in M. de
Thou, an. 1605, Siri, ibid. p. 299. and other h ſtorians.

K 2 found

—

22 * — — —

am oo
—

— = ="
- W
— £4 n-- ASSES ——

bY

* ww, Ch & 45 N 4 .
* — 71 | a > 1 — — — — o p
: a, * * 4 l
2 : > 4 a
LT „„ LS 11 ** 7 4 — "I
wy —- b ; £3 2 . 5 —
* 2 = Ja 4 £ - —
We — 5 — * —
— __

=—y

r

= 2 3 2-2
* DER a 2 — > A 5
＋ — + ET +: S 2 * 4
16 . 2
"> * * —
. % x —_—
- — *

388 nA MD 1-3-8 BookY.Y,

fourll more unhappineſs at Fontainebleau than
there had ever been before: what could be done,
in an evil ſo irremediable, than to deplore it in ſi.
lence? and this was the method I purſued. I
collected all the letters the King had written to me
upon this ſubject, and ſuffered none to remain in
the hands of my ſecretaries, from whom I con-
cealed, for the future, what the King imparted to
me in confidence, whatever inſtances they might
make me. One of theſe letters of moſt cole
quence I ſnatched from a ſecretary of mine, who
had begun to read it in a little ſummer houſe,
where 1 ſent him to ſearch for ſome papers. I att
upon the ſame plan at preſent with the public, to
whom I do not communicate all theſe little quar-
rels, which they would find a necdleſs repetition
of diſputes, reproaches, jealouſies, and violent de-
ligns, of which the reader is, I believe, already
ſufficiently weary. |
From the diſpoſition the Count of Auvergne
was known to be of, it was believed he would nat
be very ealy under his confinement in the Baſtile,
nor D'Entragues reliſh the inactive life he was com-
pelled to in ſpite of himſelf. It was diſcovered,
{ſix months afterwards, that the Count had con-
certed with his father-in-law, who apparently found
the ſecret of getting intelligence even in his pi.
ſon, the means of eſcaping from the Baſtile. It
was a rope-maker who gave information of this
deſign, and ſupported his evidence with fo many
proofs, that, upon his report, the Grand Prevot,
ſearching the wood of Maleſherbes, found the cords,
pullies, and other engines, with which the project-
ed eſcape was to be effected; for which D'En-
tragues was afterwards arreſted, and obliged to
go through an examination at his own houſe. He

alledged, that he was not obliged to anſwer the
Grand

Grand Prevot; there was a neceſſity therefore for
forcing him to it by a ſpecial commiſſioa, which
his Majeſty ſent for that purpoſe, from the pro-
vince where he then was.

In the mean time, D'Entragues compoſed a kind
of caſe, written and ſigned by his own hand, to
juſtify his proceedings, and expected that this
would acquit him. This piece, for its artful turn,
and the ſpecious manner in which, he gloſſed over
his conduct, was well worthy of its author : yet,
with all his ſubtilty of reaſoning, he could not
clear himſelf of the principal charge, nor explain
to his advantage the meaning of the cords and
machines found in the woods of Maleſhetbes. He
defended himſelf much worſe when, notwithſtand-
ing this paper, he found himſelf obliged to go
through an examination: he maintained, with great
obſtinacy, that no bad intention could be proved
azainſt him, by the diſcovery of thoſe cords and
pullies. The Grand Prevot omitted no part of his
duty upon this occaſion z he took care to keep all
the domeſtics of D*Entragues ſeparate, that they
might have no opportunity to conſult either with
their maſter, or with one another. Bat notwith-
ſtanding the rage Henry appeared to be in, yer,
through the whole procedure againſt the criminal,
ſomething ſo favourable was perceived, that he
had no great reaſon to be apprehenſive, although the
rope-maker furniſhed all the proofs that were ne-
celfary to convitt him, and heavily accuſed, among
others, a man named Giez : yet they choſe to be-
lieve the accuſed perſon, upon his bare word, that
he was abſolvtely ignorant of every thing; and
he was not ſo much as impriſoned. I was at my
government while this affair was in agitation, but
lent orders from thence to my lieutenant in th
Baltile, to confine the Count of Auvergne more

K k 3 clojcly

oy
«
1 =
vi! -
4
”
1 '
\
: * 6
48
5
U
, *
N

—

- - —— -
*

PF 5
F)

'F

Þ
1

+”.
wo *
18

0 7%

E £1

** =
: _y
EE 8

= 1 _—
- —
2

* + o_ 9

* E AKC oo $4 ARS cows
= 1 1 4

N
I

a

4

_ IEA
En

A ws —
— Some
2

© 6

ps
— — —
— — Es nod — ee
— 2 — * 2 * N 5
I "4 — - 2 ry
- — > 3
% > 0 _
of _— =

TE
—

; ot

—
— 2 —
#3 af: *

"<> I

— 1 —

— — 8
by — -
— "op * N
—
- * —_—— *
—
Ur
— — bY
=—z — —

390 M E MOI R S8 Bock XX.

cloſely than ever; which was all that this plot pro.
duced.

I proceed now to the concluſion of another af.
fair, which was begun and almoſt finiſhed during
the preceding year: this was the entire reſtora-
tion of the Jeſuits, Theſe fathers, whatever in-
{tances of kindneſs they received from the King,
thought nothing was granted while the pillar “,
raiſed upon the foundation of ChathePs houſe, {till
remained, His Majeſty, perſecuted with prayers
and entreaties upon this article, conſented, at laſt,
that it ſhould be referred to his council. I thought,
and ſeveral others were of the ſame opinion, that
the ſociety had no reaſon to complain of ill treat.
ment, if the council came to no other reſolution
about it, than to eraſe the inſcription upon this
pillar, which was indecd too ſevere: but they knew
io well how to gain over the greateſt part of thoſe
who compoſed the council to their ſide, that they
obtained an arret ſuch as they deſired.

* This pyramid, about twenty feet high, and tolerably wel

built, ſtood oppoſite to the palace, there being only the ftrect be-
twixt them ; over the pedeſtal, on each of its four ſides, was a plate
of black marble, having the arret of the parliament (before mention:
ed, in ſpeaking of the proceſs againſt John Chatel) engraven en
them, with ſome inſcriptions conceived in terms the moſt injur.ous
10 the Jeſuits, We do not think it neceſſary to recite theſe infcrip»
tions, which are preſerved in the memoirs of the league, Vol. VI.
D*Aubigne vol. III. b. iv. chap. 4. The royal MSS. vol. 9033
where the French tranſlation of them made at that time may allv
be ſeen, as well as in divers other writings.
NI. de Thou's works, and the Mercure Frangois, which may ab
fo be conſulted touching the demoliticn of this pyramid, a7 160),
agree with M. de Sully, that ic became a kind of juſtice, to defece
theſe inſcriptions, whea the Jeſuits were reſtored, the two arrcts be-
ing contradictory to one another: but they alſo obſerve, that the
dettrution of it occaſioned a violent outcry, it being thrown ddun
at noon-day, in the month of May, by the licutenant- ci vil, ſent 797
that purpoſe by the King, and a fountain was built in its place:
„The order for it,” fays Matthicu, vol. II. b. iii, p. 683. © v5
« directed to M. de Sully, as furveyor-general. The moſt yaluz lie
of the ſtatues belonging to it were carried to the giottos of Saints
« Germain,”

[

11 391

I cannot admit, that my conduct, on this oc-
caſion, could merit the whole weight of the je-
ſuits indignation : however, my ruin appeared to
theſe fathers, and to the three eſpecially who play-
ed the greateſt game at the court, ro be of ſuch
conſequence to religion, the common cauſe, and
their own particular intereſts, that it was reſolved
to effect it if poſſible. With the three Jeſuits, a
like number of the principal lords of the court
aſſociated themſelves, whom I ſhall name no more.
All that was now neceſſary, was to recall to their
minds the former notions of the league, of which
the name indeed, but not the ſpirit nor the policy,
was baniſhed the court: they found no difficulty
to increaſe their party conſiderably, in a very ſhort
time, with all the voluptuaries of the court, whoſe
ſoft and effeminate lives, it was owned, I had cen»
ſured with more imprudence than injuſtice. The
Jeſuits, by making themſelves uſeful to their aſſo-
ciates, drew great advantages from them ; ſo that,
in a little time, a great number of colleges were
founded in many of the chief cities in the king-
dom, and endowed with very conſiderable reve-
nues.

They did not, however, ſucceed every where
with equal facility : the people of Troyes, Rheims,
and Langres, did not receive the offers they made
them of their ſervices very favourably. They
were obliged therefore to have recourſe to letters
from his Majeſty : the Fathers, Cotton and Gau-
thier, were employed to aſ them of the King, in
whom ſo many petitions, one after the other, ſome-

times occaſioned a little reflection. He told them,

that he was very willing to gratify all their deſires,
but that he feared they would, at laſt, endanger the
royal authority : he brought Poitiers for an example,
where, notwithſtanding the mandates they had ob-
tained from him, yet they had laboured for two

years

® — —
. —

> a 2
- *

81 +37 > 2 bs
. —— F 5+ <8
- — *
F — ——
. PRA

— —
—— —

* 9

—
T4 = =: — - - =
5 — = r —

2 — 3 2 1

- -
*
** * *;

— 8

: w— nds;

— 9322

—
— —
—

2

SS

-
- —

| : 53S Sn

0

*

1

*

.
ky.
Fo

4

9 7

* « 7
4198

*

392 l Book XX.

years ineffectually, to procure a ſettlement in that
city, though, at the ſame time, it had ſolicited,
that a royal college might be founded there.
Father Cotton replied, that nothing could be infer.
red from the behaviour of the inhabitants of Pi.
tiers, which could affect the other cities, because
they would not be fo unfortunate as to be oppo-
ſed by perſons ſo powerful, ſo reſpected in the pry.
vince, nor even Jo much favoured by his Majeſty,
as their enemies of Poitiers were,
The King had not here any occaſion for all that
enctration on which he fometimes valued himſelf,
which enabled him to diſcover, by the geſtures on-
ly, and the turn of the countenance, of thoſe who
{poke to him, all that paſſed in their hearts *, He
anſwered the Father, that he perfectly underſtood
what he had elſe to ſay, but that it was a mere
caluinny, for which he had no other foundation,
than ſome reports that had been made him; for
that having ſpoke to me himſelf of this matter be.
fore, I was fo far from diſcovering ſuch intentions
as were attributed to me, that I had aſſured him!
would raiſe no obſtacles to their attempts; and that
I would give thera my aſſiſtance. Ah! Sire,“ fe-
plied the Father, . God keep me from offending in
& any manner thoſe you love, and by whom you
& think yourſelf ſo faithfully ſerved; I will love
e them, and ſerve them myſelf : but if your Majeſty
« has any inclination to be convinced of the truth
&« by inconteſtible proofs, nothing is more caly than
c to produce ſuch as ſhall leave no doubt of the
« certainty of what J have had the honour to tell
« you,” The King aſked, with ſtill greater ear-
neſtneſs, if he was ſure he could prove what he
had advanced? The Father again confirmed it.

* Matthieu has obſerved the Game thing of Henry IV. * Ile
4% could form a judgment,” Gays he, © of a man's actions and
« words, from his look and manner,” Vol. II. b. iv. p. 8 7.

46 Well,

160 5. O F . 393

„ Well,” ſaid Henry, leaving him,“ J will conſider
« of this matter.” And he ſent for me that in»
ſtant.

As ſoon as I came to the Tuilleries, Henry
took me by the hand and led me into the oran-
gerie, where, as we walked, he aſked me, as if
without any deſign, how the affair went on at Poi—
tiers, concerning the Jeſuits founding a college
mere? I replied, that I was wholly ignorant of
tzcir proceedings, having reſolved not to concern
myſelf with them, for thoſe conſiderations I had
mentioned to his Majeſty. Think well what you
« ſay,” replied this prince, * for they would per-
*& ſuade me, that it is you alone who prevent
& their eſtabliſnmeat in that city.” I aſſured him,
with an oath, that I had never, directly nor in-
directly, oppoſed their ſettling there, nor even ex-
preſſed the leaſt diſlike to it. Well,” ſaid the King,
« ſince it is fo, take no notice of this matter to
« any one.” On his entrance again into the Louvre,
he took Father Cotton aſide: Who has told you
% theſe idle tales of M. de Roſny? “ faid he,
© they are abſolutely falſe, as I indeed ſuſpected
« they were.” „ They will not be found ſo,”
replied the Father; and for a proof of his aſſer-
tion, told him, that I had written ſeveral letters to
the Biſhop of Poitiers, the treaſurers of France in
that city, to Sainte-Marthe, and others, with
whom I could do any thing; expreſsly ordering
them to oppoſe the ſettling of the Jeſuits there.
He added, that he had ſeen theſe letters himſelf ;
and that they were in the hands of a man of ſtrict
honour, who had allowed him to read them,
Can you ſhew me theſe letters?“ ſaid the King.
* Yes, Sire,“ replied the Jeſuit, “ whenever your
* Majeſty pleaſes.” The King, who till now had
ſuſpended his belicf, could not, for this once, hin-
der himſelf from being influenced to my preju-

dice.

® —
.
— a 2

$ . . - = * 2 J 22 4 W
ry 2 a4 * 8 - #«-* 4 C —
N RET IO $i 2 — f
* : —
- d - = * -
. 7 2

8
— . „
© = IE

4 3 — * * 8 *
nee —ůͤ— — — , , _ g 2
- fon un og es 9 I ; "PM © Lo
— Shs 2 — pr. z — — - — + wg % — —
* 2 4 = , & _ mn —
CY = -
— 2 — . — — 2 — *

—
— ——

304 M E M OI R 8 Bock XI.

dice, “ will talk to you to-morrow,” faid he
to the Father, “ and give you all the neccllary
« orders upon this affair,”

I came the next morning to the Tuilleries at
eight o'clock, the King having ſent me orders to
attend him very early: he talked to me of the u-
ſual diſpatches and the preſent affairs; then taking
me again into the orangerie, I gueſſed immediately,
by the very turn of his countenance, part of what
he was going to ſay to me. „ You know,” fail
he, © how much I love you, but you likewiſe know
% how much I love truth, and hate all infinceri-
« ty ; you have uſed it with me; and although |
e never conceal any of my ſecrets from you, you
have diſſembled with me, in the anſwer you gare
« me to the queſtion I aſked you concerning the
« Jeſuits. I am not offended at your conduct 1n
& that affair; as they never diſcovered any great
e friendſhip for you, it could not therefore be
« expected, that you ſhould become their advo-
« cate; but I am grieved to find, that you are
% capable of diſſimulation, you who profels to be
« a lover of truth and ſincerity.“

My aſtoniſhment was ſo great, that I liſtened
to the King in a profound ſilence; at length, te-
covering myſelf, “ Sire,” ſaid I, © this is one of the
« blackeſt impoſtures that ever was invented; the
« only favour I implore is, that you will init
% upon a free explanation of this matter. If tie
% Jeſuits can prove their accuſation to be true,
& inflict what puniſhment you pleaſe upon me, |
& ſhall never complain; but if it is found to be
&« falſe, ſuffer me, Sire, I moſt humbly impiore
you, to do myſelf public juſtice, that I may Pie:
« vent ſuch deſigns from being undertaken 4
« gainſt me for the future; for if there is 2 Ne
“ ceſſity for my being continually employed in
« defending my conduct, it will be no longet

| « pollivic

_— Oy ULELY: 395

| « poſſible for me to attend to ſtate- affairs, the

« number and weight of which are already more
« than I can well bear.” © What!” interrupted
the King, *have you not written any thing againſt
« the Jeſuits, and prevented their founding a col-
« lege at Poitiers? Think a little, and refreſh your
« memory, that you may not engage to maintain
« any thing of which the contrary may be pro-
« ved againſt you.” No, Sire,” I replied, “ I
« ſwear by my God, and all my hopes of ſalva-

« tion, that what I fay is true.” “ What malig-

« nant minds are theſe,” purſued the King, mo-
red with a juſt indignation, * which can never ceaſe
« to envy virtue, or be weary of their fruitleſs at-
« tempts to ruin thoſe who are faithful to my ſer-

« vice? Leave this affair to me,“ continued he,

« I will ſearch it to the bottom, and diſcover, if
« poſhble, both its ſource and its authors.”

He left me at theſe words to go and hear maſs
at the convent of the Capuchins, where he krew
he ſhould find Father Cotton ; and calling him, re-
newed the diſcourſe of the preceding days, and aſked
for the letters which he ſaid he had ſeen. © Theſe

letters, Sire,” ſaid the Father, “are in the hands

of a perſon of honour, and I will anſwer for
the truth of what that perſon ſaid, as well as
that the letters he ſhewed me are genuine.“ „It
is enough,” returned the King, “but go and
bring them to me, that I may ſec them; 1 know
* his hand-writing, and his ſignature as well as my
* own, having received more than two thouſand
letters from him in my life.” The Father, per-
plexed by ſo unſeaſonable an order, endeavoured
to elude it, by appealing to his Majeſty's know-
ledge of his veracity, and his averſion to all kinds
of falſhood, © I am willing to believe you,” ſaid

| this prince to him, „but I would alſo have others
| © dclieve you, by ſhewing them theſe letters ;

« therefore

EY

*
2 * 2 1 > - my 1 —
2 *. * —— be A 4 2 - 4 *
— =» ers - * > 2 — 2 — ——
7 a 2." —— — —f A — — *
& 7 ay . > = - —
, . * 5 - - — — 222
— — — * 3 — et —
aq

—

*4
6 l
”
.
*
\s 1
IT
1 q
'
4 |
. 1
*
% *
1
44
4
1244
4. *
488
— 1
#45
S
=.
4
17 F
8 0
4 \
1
«©
4
**
[4 |
$4

396 Olek YE

« therefore do not fail,” purſued he in a ſevete

tone, © to bring them to me; for I am determi.
te ned to ſee them, that I may convict of malice
te and fraud thoſe who are really guilty. Go, and
& return again immediately,” |

There was no reply to be made to an order {
poſitive ; the Father retired with a low reverence;
but the King expected him in vain all the remain.
der of that day : he apologized for it the next
morning, on account of the abſence of the perſon
who was poſſeſſed of theſe letters. But there was
a neceſſity to find another excuſe for returning
without them, which would coſt the Father much
more. He told the King, that this nobleman's va.
let de chambre had unfortunately thrown theſe
letters into the fire with other papers, But for
want of the letters, he brought a thouſand new af
ſurances of the truth of what he had advanced,
The King, however, was not diſpoſed to pay bim.
ſelf with that ſort of coin : © How !” ſaid be, in-
terrupting him, in a rage, “have they burncd thel:
« letters? this is not to be believed.” And per-
ceiving that Father Cotton, who was ſenſible this
affair would not reft as it was, equivocated in tis
anſwers, and ſeemed deſirous, that nothing more
ſhould be ſaid of it, he quitted him in diſguſ.
& Roſny,” ſaid he, approaching and taking me a
ſide, “ your letters have been burnt.”

I came again to his Majeſty, to propoſe an cx:
pedient to him which I thought would entirch
ſilence my accuſer ; this was, to prevail upon the
King to write to the Biſhop of Poitiers, and the
officers of that city, to produce all the lettas
they had received from me; and to write to them
myſelf in the clcareſt manner upon the ſubjedt. |
carried with me all the originals of theſe leitet
in which his Majeſty found nothing to take c.

fence at: he ordered his ſecretaries to write tho
letters,

1605. © -F . 397

letters, which were to be in his name, immediate-
ly; and ſent them to Poitiers in the ſame packet
with mine, by a courier named Conſtant. Upon
the receipt of theſe letters, the biſhop and the ma-
giſtrates of the city ſent the Sicur de la Pariſiere
to give his Majeſty all the informations he deſired,
La Pariſiere, in the name of all his fellow-citi-
zens, atteſted, with regard 'to me, that they had
always conſidered my letters as written with fa-
vourable intentions towards the Jeſuits ; and pre-
ſented to the King all they had been able to col-
lect.

Among a great number which related only to
the affairs of the province, four were found in
which the Jeſuits were mentioned ; three of theſe
letters, directed to Saint Marthe the lieutenant-
general, and to his brother, ſeparately, and the
office of the finances, were copies of each other,
and after other matters were diſcuſſed, concluded
with theſe words: “With regard to the Jeſuits col.
lege, I know not why you make ſo many diſficul-
« ties about that, and perliſt in your ſolicitation for
« the royal college, of which you have written to
me, ſince you know, as La- Pariſiere has often told
« you from me, that you will never obtain of the
“King what is neceſſary for it, and that he abſo-

„ Jutely commands the other ſhould be allowed;

it is your part therefore to act prudently, and
do that with a good grace, which in the end you
will be obliged to do whether willing or not : be
it your care only, upon receiving them, to make
ſuch regulations as may not leaveit in their power
to diſturb the tranquillity of the city or pro-
vince 3 or make any alteration in that union
maintained at preſent between the two religions,
that the King may be ſerved with duty and af-

4 fection by all.“

Vol. III. LI The

G 3 *. —
L - — 3 wa
<p - —

1 Y = z ©
* 2

- - — *

- — = = —
2 "= —

1.
7 17
te:
* —
ts

F

$

*

Fu

398 „ :.9-:: Book XXL.

The fourth letter, addreſſed to the Biihop of Poi.
tiers, is yet ſtronger: after ſome buſineſs and ſom:
compliments, which made up the firſt part of it,
the King read theſe words: © I always doubted,
« that the Jeſuits would not find people as kind
ce and charitable in actions as in words: for my
« own part, if the province is willing they ihc '4
«© have a ſettlement in it, and that they will te.
« ſolve to live quietly there, without embittcring
« the minds of the people, or doing any thing to
c difturb that harmony which at preſent ſub'fs
ce between the two religions, I ſnould be glad to
« fee them in my government, and will do them
& all the ſervice I can; but if they foment diri.
« ſions there, or give riſe to any jealouſies and cif.
te truſts, 1 had rather they were any where elle.”

The King's courier, as he paiiled through Paris,
which bis Majeſty had juſt quitted, and ſet out for
Fontainebleau, left for me a particular anſwer to the
letter I had written to the Biſhop of Poitiers, of
which theſe are the contents: that Father Moully,
the Jeſuit, had brought him a letter from Father
Cotton, in which this Father mentioned certain let.
ters ſuppoſed to be wiitten by me to kim, againft
the eſtabliſhment and honour of the fociety, and
the complaints which this Father, believing nem
to be tive, had made of me to bis Majeſty. The
Biſhop added, that after reading this letter, he had
obliged Father Mouſſy to own, that his brother ad
been greatly to blame, to believe a matter of ſech
conſequence ſo lightly; and acted {till more impru-
dently to write it, and biting it to the ears of ie
King: that Father Mouſly had ſeen all the letters,
and found nothing in them which could authors
ſuch an accuſation, and undeitock to und-cci-!
Father Cotton, by acquainting him with what he
had ſeen.

The Biſhop of Poitiers, who really believed the

| exiſtence

1605. O . 399

exiſtence of this imaginary letter of accuſation a.
gainſt me, which Father Cotton had told him in bis,
had been ſent from Poitiers, and who thought,
probably, that it would do both me and him ſer-
vice to diſcover the author of it, ſent me word,
that he would uſe his utmolt endeavours to fad it
out; and that he had been told, the preceding
day, that it was ſigned Cuillaume; but that no
perſon knew better than Father Cotton himſelf; for

although, as he was likewilc informed, it was that

Father who had thrown this letter into the fire,
yet he could not have forgot the ſubſcription of
it: the Biſhop's letter is dated March 23. 1605.
| thewed it to Sillery, who ſet out for Panfou, from
whence he went to Fontainebleau, to make his re.
port to his Majeſty : but the King ordered me to
bring this letter to him at Fontainebleau, together
with the copies of thoſe which had been ſent me
from Poitiers. I perceived that this new proof of
my fincerity had increaſed his eſteem for me.

The next day he ſent for Richelicu and Pont-
Courlay, and aſked them, if they knew who it was
that had ſuggeſted to Father Cotton the complaints
he had made againſt me ? and whether they had
ary ſhare in it ? They replied, that very far from
engaging themſelves in the affair, they had earneſt-
ly adviſed Father Cotton never to mention to the
King thoſe letters, whether ſuppoſititious, or writ»
ten by ſome impoſtor under a feigned name; be-
cauſe that if his Majeſty gave credit to my words
in matters wherein my religion might render me
ſuſpected, he had much more reaſon to believe me,
rather than thoſe idle reports received to my pre-

judice. The King anſwered, that they mult prevail

upon me to ule the ſame moderation in this buſineſs
as they had adviſed Father Cotton to, and prevent,
laid he, all occaſions of miſunderſtanding between

my faithful ſervants, as well in political as ecele-

L. 1 2 ſiaſtical

44
1
1
1 f
.
3
U
Wh
|
gh
4
+
*
by

4+
4
4
11
. 8
20 ©
* 1
,
o
*
= *
—

10

B

400 M E M O 1 R S8 Bock XX.

ſiaſtical affairs. He permitted them, if they could
not by any other means reconcile us to each o-
ther, to throw part of the blame upon himſelf,
I ſubmitted with a good grace to this reconcili-
ation : after the two agents had aſſured me Father
Cotton had no intention to injure me, they intreat-
ed me to allow the Father to wait on me, and al.
ture me of the truth himſelf, I conſented, and they
brought him the next day. This Father told me,
that it was true, he had complained of having a ſecret
enemy, who oppoſed the eſtabliſhment of a college
at Poitiers, but that he had no thought of me.
However, bis Majeſty had underſtood that he meant
me, and mace me believe ſo likewiſe : that although
in this whole affair there was only a miſtake, yet
he was extremely afflifted that it had given me
any diſturbance, the remembrance of which he
would endeavour to efface by the moſt faithful
ſervices. In this manner was an affair concluded,
which had given both parties a great deal of trouble,
It was probably in conſequence of this reconci-
lation, that Father Richeome of Bourdeaux pre-
ſented me, at the cloſe of this year, by Father
Cotton himſelf, a book of his writing, with a
moſt flattering dedication to me : he takes notice
in this dedication, that although this book could
not be very agreeable to the profeſſors of my reli-
gion (for it treated of the pilgrimage to Loretto),
yet he had made no ſcruple to offer it me, and
did not. doubt of its being favourably received,
on account of my attachment to the King (to
whom indeed the higheſt elogiums were given in
it) ; to this motive he added a ſecond, which
was purely of his own invention, that he had been
aſſured I felt in myſelf a ſtrong diſpoſition to em-
brace the Roman Catholic faith, a diſpoſition which
increaſed every day; and reminded me of alittle pre-

ſent he had made me the preceding year, which _
. , 00 5

| hew
as re
| mtre}

ind i

*

60 5. O F 8 U L L I. 401

book, intitled, The apologetic remonſ/trance a, the
Teſuits to the . *, I told him, in my anſwer,
that knowing myſelf to be capable of loving even
my enemies, his ſociety might from thence judge
what were my ſentiments concerning thoſe who
profeſſed themſelves my friends. I returned him
compliments for compliments, wiſhes for wiſhes,
and even book for book; for I feat him the jour-
ney to Jeruſalem, in return for that of Loretto,

If any one doubts that theſe profeſſions of e-
ſtcem, which were made me by the Jeſuits, were
not ſincere, let him ſuſpend his judgment for a
moment, and he will know what to aſcribe them
to; I will not omit any circumſtances of the fact
Jam going to relate, as I do not imagine they
will ſeem tedious to the reader, ſince they concern
perſons fo diſtinguiſhed at court, as the Duke d'.
pernon and Griilon r, colonel of a regiment oi
guards.

1
F
bi
nt
* |

Gri:lon

* This is the laſt of that Father's works againſt Antony Arnaud:
he wrote many books with great {ucceſs on behalf of his order.

+ Lewis Berto de Crillon or Grillon, a genileman of Avignon,
as remarkable on account of the peculiarities in lis temper as 1s
intrepidity, which had procured him the name of Dread nay bt. 1
find in the life of the Duke of Eperron a flory very proper to be
related along with what the Duke of Sully tells us of this gentleman,
The Duke of Guile, to whom he had been ſent after the redaRtion
* of Marſeilles, having a mind to try lis courage,“ fays the biſto +
nan, (agreed with ſome gentlemen, to give a ſudden alarm before
** Grillon's quarters, as if the enemy had been matters of the teu;
at the ſame time he ordercd two horſes to the door; and poing vp
into Grillon's room, told him all was loft; that the enemy were
maſters of the port and town; that they had forced the guard,
and broke aud put to flight ail that eppuied them; that had.
impoſſible to reſiſt them any longer, he thought it was better tot,
them to retreat, than by (uficiing themſelves to be taken, add to

them. Grillon was afleep when the alarm was given, and was Hund

— ——

402 NM EM © IT. R 8 Bock RX

Grillon had at firſt the ſame unfavourable ſenti.
ments for me with which almoſt all the courtier;
were tainted ; but after a little adventure which
happened at the ſiege of Charbonnieres, during
the war with Savoy, his friendſhip for me became
ſtronger than his hatred had ever been. Grillo,
at that time, was-quartered at Aiguebelle, a little
town at the bottom of a fort, where he command.
ed our foot, and often came to viſit the quarter
of the artillery, where I was ; he happened one
day to be with me in a meadow, from whence !

was obſerving a ravelin which I wanted to hare

battered down, and myſelf, and thoſe that accom:

anied me, were within reach of a battery, from
whence the diſcharges began to be fo frequent,
that I reſolved to defer doing the buſineſs I was 2:
bout till a- fitter opportunity, when we needed not
uſeleſsly endanger our lives. How ! morbley
«© my Grand Maſter,” ſaid Grillon to me, with an
air and tone of voice peculiar to him, * are you
c afraid of guns in the company of Grillon ? 4r:
c nidieu! ſince I am here they will not dare to
&« come nigh us; let us go to thoſe trees I ſees
« bout two hundred paces from hence, we may

« ever, without being at all diſconcerted by ſo hot an alarm, he
« called for his cleaths and his arms, ſaying, They ought not, a
too ſlight grounds, to give credit to all that was. ſaid of the et-
my; and, even if the account ſhould prove true, it was more be.
coming men of honour to die with their arms in their hands, than
to ſurvive the lo of the place, The Duke of Guiſe, not beings
+ ble to prevail on him to change this reſolution, followed hin
out of the room; but when they were got half way down ſtait,
not being able to contain himſelf any longer, he burſt out a laugh
ing; by which Grillon diſcovered the trick that had been played
him. He thereupon aſſumed a look much ſterner than when he
only thought of going to fight, and ſqueezing the Duke of Gul“
hand, faid to him, ſwearing at the fame time (for he always bt
gun his diſcourſe with the moſt horrible oaths) Young man, nevt!
make it a jeſt to try the courage of a man of honour; for, y
% God! hadſt thou made me betray any weakneſs, I wou'd hate
„ plunged my dagger in thy heart: and then left him without la:
jog a word more,” Page 176,

222228228285

« reconncitit

1605 O F S U L L I. 493.

© reconnoitre the ravelin there with leſs danger.”
Let us go then,” replied I, ſmiling, “ ſince we
| « are trying who ſhall ſhew himſelf moſt mad; but
| « ſince you are the oldeſt, I would willingly allow.
| « you to be the wiſeſt alſo. Probably I ſhould have
done better to have paid no attention to what he
> ſaid; however I took his hand, and led him fo

far beyond the trees he had pointed to, that the
| bullets began to whiſtle ſtrongly in our ears. Ar-

WW © nidieu!” ſaid Grillon, “ theſe rogues have no re-
WW © gard to the Grand Maſter's baton, or the croſs of
(6 che Holy Ghoſt, and may probably lame us; let
. © us gain that range of trees and thoſe hedges,
Which may ſhelter us; for, par la corbieu, you
gare an honeſt fellow, and worthy to be Grand Ma-
4 ſter : J will, during my whole life, be one of the
© © moſt faithful of your ſervants; let us vow an
« javiolable friendſhip to each other; do you pro-
“ miſe me yours? I took his hand, which he
held out to me in token of union, and from that
moment he continued to love me with a greater
affection than he had ever ſhewn to any other per-
lon whatever, not even, as it was ſaid, to the King
himſelf ; and this adventure, which had given riſe-
to it, he talked of to every one.

By what means I regained the Duke of Epernon's
friendſhip, has been already mentioned. About the-
beginning of the year, he came to me, and deſi»
red, that 1 would direct his appointments, as colo-

nel of a regiment of guards, to be paid him in
ready money. I repreſented to him, that he had

been paid already all he could with reaſon demand

Þpon that account; and that what: he farther re-

Euired, was but a poſſeſſion without a claim, or

Eather an uſurpation, which his favour with Hen-

y III. had given him an opportunity of commit-

ing (for this was a diſcovery I had lately made),

pf that I was reſolved to cut it off for the fu-

* ture,

404 M E MIM OI R S Dook XX. 1

ture, unleſs he brought me an order from the vi
King, by which this ſupplement was granted kim b.
in the manner of a gratuity. D' Epernon, offen- ti
ed at this diſcourſe, complained to the King, an. gc
endeavoured to perſuade him, that I was become te
his enemy. His Majeity, to undeceive him, re. D
minded him of the council held at Blois, wherein { lit

oppoſed the advice given by the Count de Soiſſone, WM fu
to arreſt him with Marechal Biron. This circun-
ſtance, which D'Epernon had never before been
acquainted with, made a great impreſſion upon his
mind. “Do you aſſure me, Sire,“ ſaid he to the
King, “that it was from M. de Roſny I received
ce this act of friendſhip? ? © Yes, I aſſure you of
etc it,” replicd this prince,“ for I am not ules to
cc Je, eſpecially in things of conſequence.”
D*Epernon left Fontainebleau the ſame day, ani
ſet out for Paris in a hired coach, having ſent one
of his own before to Eſſonne, where it was to wait
for him. I had left Paris in the fame manner, bis
Majeſty having ſent for me to Fontainebleau, D'E-
ernon and I met each other in a place over ago!
a chapel above Eſſonne: the Duke ordered bis
coachman to ſtop, and called out to me, that he
intreated I would give him an opportunity o
one word to me, We both alighted. “ I have t
4% long,“ ſaid he, approaching me, © been undes
& great obligation to you, without paying you
& thoſe acknowledgments you merit from me.” He
then repeated what the King had juſt told kim;
and, in the tranſport of his gratitude, loaded me
with praiſes and aſſurances of the moſt inviclible
friendſhip. I replied with my uſual ſincerity, that
he was under no obligation to me, on accouit of
the circumſtance he mentioned, ſince it was bu
ſineſs of every honeſt man to take the part vi it
nocence, excluſive of all intereſt and views ©! an

kind, and that hereafter he would be {lull better _
8 VINCE

; great difficulty that I could put this notion out of

160 5. O F . 405

inced, that all my intentions, with reſpect to him,
had been equitable, and more ſo than he had ſome-
times believed. This affair produced ſuch a perfect
good intelligence between us, that, eight days af-
ter, being upon the point of ſetting out for Guienne,
D'Epernon made me a vilit to requeſt one of thoſe
little favours of me with which a man takes plea-
ſure to oblige kis friends.

The Duke had been informed, that ſome per-
ſons, who were enemies to him, earneſtly ſolicited
Grillon to reſign bis colonePs commiſſion, in favour
of another whom he had likewile as little reaſon to
love; and, knowing that Grillon was wholly go—
verned by wy advice, he intreated me to prevent
his reſigning this poſt till he returned from Guienne ;
and this I promiſed him. During D*Epernon's ab-
ſence, his Majeſty was told ſome things to his diſ-
advantage, which determined him to give the polt
toa man who was not ſo much devoted to the Duke
D'Epernon as Grillon. It was not with this view,
that the affair was propoſed to Grillon from the
King, but becauſe he, in reality, was not very di-
ligent in the exerciſe of this employment, and was
ſoon to take a journey to Provence, where his ſtay
was likely to be very long. He was given to un-
derſtand, that it was for theſe two reaſons his Ma-
jelty wiſhed he would diſpoſe of this employment,
and promiſed to procure him a good price for it.

Grillon, ſingular and fantaſtic-to the laſt degree,

and already a little diſtempered in his brain, only
| ſhook his head without anſwering, the three firſt
times that they mentioned the King's intentions to

him. He afterwards ſuſpected, that it was I whom

the King had in view to ſucceed to his employ-
ment ; and when he came to take leave of me,
& alked me if it was not ſo; making me, at the

ſame time, many offers of ſervice. It was with

his

n

406 MN E Book XY.

his head, and was obliged to tell him, that I would
not accept of this employment, although it ſhould
be given me for nothing. How !” returned
Griilon immediately: “ ſure you do not think an
e employment which Grillon has poſſeſſed unwor.
« thy of you: Arnibleau, my Grand Maſter, you
% are very vain ; for ſince I have filled it, it is
« worthy of the beſt of you.” “ know,” replied
I, © that one Grillon is of more value than a thou.
& ſand Roſnies; but J have other reaſons which
& hinder me from thinking of it.” © Oh, very well,
& that is enough,” faid he; and then, without my
ſolicitation, engaged not to refigrr it till I thould
adviſe him to it, and then only to that perſon who
ſhould be agrecable to me: and from this time,
he would not give a ſerious anſwer to any of the
ropoſals that were made him on this ſubject.

At length the King was obliged to talk to him
himſelf : he ſent for him, and repeated the {ame
arguments which were uſed to him before, to pie.
vail upon him to rcſign a poſt, the duties of which
were incompatible with the long ſtay he propoted
to make in his native country, adding a thouland
kind and obligiag things upon the valour and fer-
vices of Grillon. “ By what I can underſtand,
« Sire”, replicd Grillon, © you want me to quit
«© your ſervice, and that I ſhould become «blo»
% lutely papiſtical; for you know I am born a tub»
& ject to the Pope.” Ah no, Grillon,” replica
his Majeſty, © that is not my intention,” Ihen
adding new reaſons drawn from the nature of bis
employment, © So then, in good earncſt,” ſaid
Grillon to him again, “ you would have me reſign
© my eres 2 and ſince it is your deſire, |
& will not do it, at leaſt to the perſon for hom!
& hear it is deſigned.“ |

This ſpeech, indeed, was no great indication of

a ſound mind. He withdrew in a rage; but the

16
Kin
he

of t

vle
fait
trav
Pile
met
but

Ver

tell
hex
he \

| the
| ſho!
not
ſon

per!
by |

1 £09
Fort

48 A

| with
tion

A

men
dling
diſcl
uſua
to W

lay,
| ware
ly fe
me,
leme
fore.
| very
; the rx

160 5. 0 SUL Le 407

King, who knew his humour, only laughed at bim:
he even took a reſolution to ſpeak to him no more
of the matter; ſo little was this prince ine ined to
vſe any reſtraint to perſons who had ſerved him
faithfully. But happening to mention this little ex-
travagance of Grillon before Roquelaure, Zamet,
Piles, Fortia, and ſome other captains of the regi-
ment of guards, one of them ſaid, that there were
but two ways to render Grillon tractable; which
were, to employ D'Epernon in the affair, and to
tell him that it was for me, and in my name, that
| he aſked him for his poſt. The King replied, that
he would never diſpoſe of it at the ſolicitation of
| the Duke D'Epernon; neither did he deſire that I
| ſhould accept of it; but that he believed I would
not refuſe to intreat Grillon to yield it to the per-
| fon he had in view. His Majeſty did not name this
perſon; but only added, that he was worthy of it
by his abilities, and rich enough to give Grillon a
good recompence for it. Henry then ordered Piles,
| Fortia, and Zamet, to come to me and propoſe it
as a thing that would be very agreeable to him, but
| without owning that they had his orders for men-
| tioning it.
| At firſh, I made no other anſwer to theſe gentle-
men, than that I had private reaſons for not med-
| cling in the affair. But upon their preſſing me to
diſcloſe theſe reaſons, I informed them, with my
| uſual ſincerity, of the engagement I had entered in-
to with the Duke D'Epernon, which was, as 1 may
lay, the pledge of our reconciliation, When thele
words were related to the King, he was immediate-
y ſeized with fo violent a tranſport of rage againſt
me, that, as he afterwards owned to me, he never
| 1emembered to have born me ſo much ill-will be-
fore. Doubtleſs the occaſion of it would appear
| Very flight, if I did not, at the ſame time, inform
ke reader, that it was in this year, and at this very
g time,

1
— = =

*
4
,
1
1
« 7%
»
1
8
1
* *
"x
i -
.
j? m
=

* To . 4
n wo
425 e 5 .

—

rere

4 MP

48 M E MOI R S Book Xx.

time, that my enemies had then actually given me
the ſevereſt blow they had ever aimed againſt me,
and brought me in reality within an inch of my
ruin, or at leaſt of my diſmiſſion from my employ.
ments, to the laſt of which I think 1 ſhould have
readily ſubmitted. Libels, letters, informations,
malicious inſinuations, attrocious calumnies, al
that envy could ſuggeſt moſt injurious and meſt
horrid, had been practiſed, and ſtill continued t9
be practiſed every day againſt me; all which I ſhall
particulariſe hereafter : for the preſent it is ſuf.
cient to ſay, that the poiſan had been ſo ſubtilly ap-
plied, that the King, although he had long been a-
ware of the malice of my enemies, had not bcen
able to avoid being tainted with it, and it had reach-
ed even to his heart.

I ſhall not here uſe the ordinary ſtyle of thoſe
who have ſuffered ſuch trials, when they exclaim,
with ſo much vehemence, againſt the ingratitude
and injuſtice they have met with from princes. 1
always ſuſpect that ſuch outcries proceed cither
from great vanity, or great ignorance of the human
heart. To make calumny againſt the abſent ſuc-
ceſsful, nothing more is requiſite than to find the
means of opening the mind to ſuſpicion ; and to
thoſe who, having every thing to govern and di-
rect, have likewiſe every thing to foreſce and to
fear, innumerable arguments will occur to keep .
live and juſtify this ſuſpicion. How many appezr-
ances of fidelity are there ſo well diſguiſed, that
truth itſelf could hardly aſſume any other face, eſpe-
cially before Kings, from whom one would ima-
gine ſhe delights to conceal herſelf ? But are there
not many miniſters likewiſe, who, from being
loyal and affectionate, have become traitors to their
ſovereigns? To all theſe conſiderations, Henry, on
his ſide, added a too curious and too active refcaic!
into all poſſible contingencies, W herein, for the 2

| ent

1605. O F UL 409

ſent or the future, any danger to the ſlate m'ght be
apprehended ; and I, on mine, too little ſolicitude
to leſſen his ſuſpicion, which was not fo much the
effect of indifference, as the mark of a conſcience
clear and irreproachable. It is not ſurpriſing, there-
fore, that the artifices of my enemies had made ſo
deep an impreſſiog in the mind of Henry. Hows
ever, I have always, after this, laid it down for a
maxim, That any ſovereign who imagines ſuch a
conduct neceſſary to ſupport his intereſts and au-
thority, takes the direct method to ruin both, by
leſſening himſelf that reſpect and deference which
he ought to oblige his ſubjetts to ſhew to thoſe to
whom he has conhded thoſe intereſts, and by whom
that honour is maintained,

When the three men whom the King had em-
ployed in the affair of Grillon, had acquainted him
with what I had ſaid, which had occaſioned thoſe
tranſports of rage againſt me, Vilierol, Sillery, La-
Varenne, and Father Cotton, came very ſeaſonabl:
for him to diſcharge this heavy burden. I had no
reaſon to think, that this accidental meeting was a
favourable effect of the influence of my ſtars ; for
he repeated my words to them, and his own ſenti-
ments upon them, with the moſt violent emotions
of rage. How !” ſaid he to them, perceiving
that they made him no anfwer, “ you are ſilent,
« you ſay not a word: But by heaven,” purſued he,
4“ all this looks ill; for ſince fire and water mingie
ei ſo well together, (it was D'Epernon and me whom
* he meant), there muſt be higher deſigns, at leaſt on
“ one ſide, than I could ever have imagined; but I
„ ſhall take care to prevent them.” It was abſo-
lutely in the power of thoſe four perſons, to whom
the King addreſſed this diſcourſe, to prevent theſe
ſuſpicions from going ſo far. One word only
would have ſufficed ; but they took care not to ſay
hat word; but, on the contrary, upon the King's

VoL, III. Mm | ſaying,

410 M E M OI R 8 Bock XX,

ſaying, that while I continued faithful in my alle.
giance, and the performance of my duty, I was
the moſt uſeful ſervant he had, and that he ſhould
never ceaſe to lament the loſs of me, they, to
add fuel to fire, under a feigned ſolicitude to al.
leviate his Majeſty's diſquiet, began to praiſe, with
the utmoſt ardour, my great abilities in the ma-
nagement of affairs, the unwearied application !
was capable of, and the aQtive turn of my mind,
From hence they inferred the great need which
all the members of the ſtate had of me, and the
dependence which that neceſſarily introduced;
they exaggerated the high credit 1 had acquired
among foreigners, and with what caſe I coul. put
every thing in motion, without ſtirring out of my
cloſet: praiſes which I neither merited in their
good nor bad ſenſe. Certainly envy can aſſume
every diſguiſe, ſince it can oblige men, not only to
praiſe thoſe whom they moſt abhor, but in their
praiſes outdo flattery itlelf,

The four confidents had reaſon to applaud them
ſelves for this laſt ſtroke of policy, when they found
| they had not allayed the King's anger againſt me,
but only to mix with it the ſtrongeſt emotions of
jealouſy, diſtruſt, and apprehenſion : that this was
the ſtate of his mind they were well aſſured, when
he told them, that, if I reſigned myſelf up to the
ambitious deſire of becoming head of a party, my
credit was ſo great, and my friends ſo numerous,
that I was able to do the ſtate more harm, than
Admiral Coligny had ever been able to do. My e-
nemies now thought there was nothing more nc
ceſſary to be done, but to ſuffer thoſe black ſvipt-
cions to work in his mind, and wait the effect; ac
cordingly they took "ids of the prince, after h2-
ving thus inſtiiled the poiſon into his heart, Ben:
ry, in this ſlate of mind, was no longer capable
either of ſecreſy or art; he ſpoke of me public)

&)

Coo we cd —— - —

ma I. Ed my << =

1605+ OF SU L. L . 411

as of a rebel, and the whole court was immediate-
ly filled with the noiſe of my diſgrace, and the ex-
ectation of my approaching ruin.

I had likewiſe many friends there, who kad, a
long time before matters came to this point, in-
formed me of all that was practiſing againſt me-by
my enemies, and of what was faid by the King.
I am not ſure, whether it would not have been
more prudent to att upon this occaſion as I had
already done on many others of the ſame nature,
in which Henry of himſelf returned from his ſu—
ſpicions and Ciſguſts to his uvſual manner of thinks
ing with regard to me. It is a mortifying thing
for innocence to be perpetually employed in ſup-
porting itſelf by preofs, and exaggerate its merit
by praiſes: a man who thinks he ought to owe
his elevation to virtue alone, feels an honeſt ſhame
at bcing obliged to fecure that elevation by me-
thods leſs worthy ; yet it is evident on many OCs
caſions, that if virtue is not aſſiſted by chance
and induſtry, her own {ſtrength is not ſufficient
to protect her from the hatred, and even from
the contempt of the public. So many repeat-
ed advices as I received, determined me at length
to wiite a letter to the King, His Majeſty had
not yet fixed, for any conſiderable time, in any of
his palaces, but had conſumed the months of Ja-
nuary and February in journeys to Saint Germain
(where his children were) and Monceaux, ſtaving
but a ſhort time at cach place; and, on the 3th
of March, the day on which my letter was da-
ted, was at Chantilly. I ſhall not tranſcribe this
letter here, as I have no crime to efface, nor no
particular action to juſtify; it contained only ge-
neral aſſurances of innocence, and arguments ſimple
indeed and unſtudied, but which, on that very ac-
count, ought to have had the more weight,

I oblerved to his Majeſty, that, during twenty-

Mm 2 two

14
oy
1
i?

14

* DE * a

FP
LL
_

2 -- — — * „ -

a — —
2 = - _
—_—— — — - +—y .
$ — —

= 5

— — Oo
SM
— — _
* p

f

412 M E MOI R 8 Book XX.

two of the thirty-three years which J had been i,

his ſervice, the favours 1 had received from him |
had been but very ſwall, although I had been + MF
conſiderable expences: yet fince that conſiders. MM ©

tion, the lowneſs of my fortunes, and the pi ofvet
of a decent eſtabliſhment eiſewhere, which mio; ME

have given ſome excuſe for my abandoning hin, 1 !
could not prevail upon me to do fo; it was not
credible I ſhould do fo now, when I ſaw myself U
{5 generouſly rewarded, when my fortune cu d
only encreaſe, ard when ſo many favours, which e
I every year received from my king in a manner h
wholly obliging, attached me no leſs to his per. l

fon, than my offices and employments. It was WF m
10t probable therefore, I faid, that I ſhould hazard MF i
the being deprived of one haif of theſe advanta.
ges, by the band which had heaped them on me,
and of the reſt by the reverſes of fortune: that!
d&cfied all my enemies to charge me with the au.
al commiſſion of any crimes of which I could nt
clear myſelf, in two words, whenever his Mejclly
informed me of it; that all thoſe accuſations were

be preſented to him: but ſetting all this aſide, | l
entreated him not to conclude” me guilty, bu to

upon ſolid proofs: that I ſhould wait without no!
fear the efforts of my enemies, and fubmit, with =
out repugnance, to all the rigour of the law, a, e

all the effects of his anger, if the ſmalleſt ciim: 'N
could be proved againſt me; being moſt cert: a
that if, in the great number of employments with 1
which 1 was inveſted, he could charge me vid .

0

the commithon of any fault, it would not be u bet
my honour or duty was concerned, but an cl
of my ignorance or incapacity z in which calc !

wi

519

1% Fr 8 U L. I. I. 473

was ready, at his leaſt command, to reſign all my
offices into his hands, chuſing rather the obſcurity
of a private life, with his favour, than the ſplen-
dor of the higheſt dignities with kis hatred.

I was convinced by the anſwer which his Maje-
ſty ſent me, that the informaiions I had received

| vere not falſe; he addreſſed me in it with the

title of Couſin inſtead of Friend: though ſhort, it
was not written with his own hand; a kind of cir-
cumſpection and reſerve, which was not uſual with
him, ran through it, and not one word of conſo-
lation found a place: the King only obſerved to
me coldly, and in few words, that it was my bu-
ſineſs to ſuffer the world to talk of me as it plea-
ſed, and continue to ſerve him well. I pretended,
however, to be ſatisfied with this letter, and, after
having done all that was neceſſary upon this occa-
ſion, conſcious cf my own 1nnocence, I was per-
ſuaded, that eagernels and precipitation did not
become me; 1 therefore waited till his Majeſty
was wüling to enter into a diſcuſſion of the affair
with me, and continued to att as uſual,

The King, after ſtaying at Chantilly fix or ſe-
ren days, quitted it to return to Paris, where kis

preſence was neceſſary: he began to have a fond-

neſs for the former, from whence alſo he wrote
to me, thac he was much better in health (as I
ſhould perceive by his countenance as ſoon as I
law him); that he eat and ſlept well there, ne.

wer riſing before ſeven o'clock, though he went to
ed at ten or eleven, I expected, at leaſt, that
he would mention my letter to me when he re»
Norned to Paris; but I was miſlaken ; he took not
pe ſmalleſt notice of it, alizovgh he ſtayed there
Fight days, and four mornings ſucceſſively confers

ed wich me on many Citierent attalrs, as we

Palled in the Tuilleries: Villeroi and Sillery in-
Ned were preſent, After giving us all the neceſ-

M m 3 ſary

me

—

1
. =
- -
1
a
:
:
7
4
4
*
i
*
—
%
Ly
by
\
*
be
" 5
i. 43
T
1
vai -*
. 8
*
4 4
* 4
WT
+ FTY
2
1,-F *
2 *
9
vi
[ul
ol
„
*
-. =
1%
:
.
* 4:8
-
1 *
- ©
1
« SY
: *
4
" -$
7. * 1
8 5
oo
{3 *
_
3
* 1
1
1 -
*3J
— **
MF
*
32.
1
L
.

414 A E MOON Dee.

ſary orders, ke ſet out for Fontainebleau, ſtill
keeping up the ſame reſerve' in all the letters he
wrote me from thence, during the remainder of
this month, as well upon general as private at-
fairs.

It was here, as J obſerved a little before, that
they ſupplied all wich was yet wanting to make
his Majeſty refolve my ruin; and, as he ſtaycd
there during the whole months of April and Mey,
they had time ſufficient to effect their purpoſe, and
brought him to the point we have already teen,

Calumny is like fire, which, the fiercer it buins, -

is extingviſhed the ſooner, if no more fuel be
added to it; and it is not fo eaſy to ſupport it 2s
ſome have imagincd, eſpecially with princes who
act on principle. If their imaginations be quick
and lively, and their temper precipitate like Hens
ry's, the paſſions once inflamed will, at firſt, car-
ry them very far from their purpoſe, but never ſo
far but that they may be brought back bv rea-
fon: and from diſpoſitions like theſe one will
have violent fits of anger to ſuſtain; but to male a-
mends, there is neither obſtinate prejudice, impericct
reconciliations, nor ſtudied artifices to apprehene.
It was this reafon which induced me to wait with
more patience than I ſhovld otherwiſe have done,
for the iſſue of an affair fo complicated and per-
plexed ; and without altering my behaviour, either
while J was at Paris, or in thofe ſhort excurſions
I made from time to time to Fontainebleau, I
appeared always the ſame. My friends were not
able to comprehend how I could enjoy a tranquil-
lity which they were not capable of themſelves,
although ſo ful y perſuaded of my innocence, that
all of them would have willingly become futetics
for my conduct: they expreſſed great ſurpriſe at
his Majeſty's behaviour to me, and could not keep

ſilence at court, and probably, in ſecret, taxed the
: prince

1605. O F . 415

prince with injuſtice. All the Kind offices of ſin-
cere and affectionate relations I received from the
family of Lorrain upon this occaſion.

At length my wiſhes and expectations were an-
ſwered: the King finding that my enemies could
bring no procfs of what they had already advan-
ced againſt me, he began to fear he had been a
little too haſty : my palt ſervices roſe to his re-
membiance; my preſent conduct, and the pure
port of my letter, dwelt upon his thoughts: he
was ſtruck with a!l this, and regreted that he ha
ſuffered ' any expreſſions of anger to eſcape him,
being convinced, that nothing was more juſt and
reaſonable than the requeſt 1 had made him, that
he would not condemn me without proofs of my
guilt, One day when I was at Fontainebleau, he
tent La-Varenne, D'Eſcures, and Beringhen, to
me, on pretence of ſome buſineſs, ſuppoſing I
ſhould tell them, in confidence, my diflicultics
and perplexity; however, 1 confined myiclt whol-
ly to the buſincſs they came about, and avoided
mentioning any cther ſubject. Villeroi and Sille-
ry were ſent to me afterwards for the ſame pur-
poſe, which I was convinced of as ſoon as I
found, that they had nothing to ſay to me, but
on an affair of ſo little conſequence, that it was not
worthy the trouble they gave themiclves 3 this
was about a diſpatch from Anccl “, who managed
the affairs of France at Vienna. I behaved to theſe
gentlemen as I had done to the others: they had
orders to make advances, and draw from me, at
any price whatever, a confeſſion of my ſentiments
upon the treatment J received from his Majeſty,
The reader will judge if they acquitted themſelves
faithfully of their commiſſion, and like true me.
diators : they turned the converſation, from buſi.
nels, to the danger and difficulty of ſerving pria.

William Ancel, maſter of the houſhold, reſident at Vienna.

ces,

416 F ee

ces, and the mortiſication miniſters are frequent-
ly expoſed to, and the uncaſineſs which fiander
muſt give to a man of honour: they afterwar 2;
gave me to underſtand more plainly, that a miniſte
was not defended from theſe inconveniencies under
the reigaing King.

I ſaw cleaily enovgh, that theſe two gentlemen,
by talking in this manner, executed indeed rhe v1
ders they had received, but with ſo much ali.
tional art on their fide, as made it evident, they
were very ſolicitous to find ſome occaſion of fe-
aliſing my ſuppoled crime, when they made thcir
report to his Majeſty. To adopt their ſentiments
had bcen inſolence, and ſilence might have bcen
conſtrued into obſtinacy and pride: I theref.re
replied, with great compoſure, that I did not

doubt but that there were princes in the world ſuch

as they repreſented, but that his Majeſty was too
juſt and too good, to treat, ia that manner, ſuch
ſervants whoſe behaviour-had been irrepro«chab'e,
ae, for example, I believed my own to be: that!
was ſo wwell perſuaded of this truth, that, although
I ſhould hear the contrary from his own mouth,
yet I ſhould ſtill think his tongue but ill explained
the meaning of his heart. Theſe words were lut-
ficient to diſconcert theſe malicious commiſſioners;
but they had recourſe to other artifices, to force
from me ſome expreſſion of complaint or anger;
and, finding that they were not able to effect their
purpoſe, they returned to tell his Majeſty not what
I had ſaid, but that I had ſaid nothing at all, and
that, contrary to my uſual cuſtorn, I was fo wrapt
up in .reſerve, that I had not deigned to utter a
ſingle word. From hence it was caſy to judge
what thele two gentlemen would bave laid, it
had given them the leaſt oppori. Nity of entrapping
me. During the remainder of thi day, I ſaw on-
ly ſuch meſſengers as thoſe ; but was fully de.

termived

160 5. 9 Un 417

termined not to open myſelf, on this ſubject, to
the King himſelf, unleſs he led to it firſt : and that he
might ſce no alteration in my conduct, I prepared
to ſet out the next morning for Paris, as the e-
vening before I had told him I would.

I waited on his Majeſty as uſua!, to receive his
orders before I went away. I found him in his clo-
ſer, ſurrounded by the courtiers who were come to
his levee, and getting himſelf booted to go to the
chace. At my entrance, he aroſe half up from bis
chair, one of his boots being alrcady on, and pull»
ing off his hat to me, bid me good morrow, Cere-
moniouſly calling me Monfreur all which ciſco»
vered a mind either grieved or perplexed. His u-
ſual ſtyle to me was, My friend Roſuy, or Grand
Maſter. But that confuſion of mind he appeared to
labour under, when, v ithout ſeeming to know what
he did, he fri ck the little ivory cylinders which he
had in his ha!:d one againſt the other, convinced
me that I was not miſtaken, when I conciuded
there was neither anger nor diſguſt in this beha-
Viour. I had likewiſe made him a much more pro-
found bow than uſual, which,. as he afterwards
told me, moved him ſo much, that it was wit
difficulty he could reſtrain himſelf from falling that
inſtant upon my neck. He continued muling ſome
moments longer, and then told Beringhen, that it
was not a good day for the chace, and that he
would be unbooted. Beringhen, ſurpriſed at this
ſudden change of his intentions, replicd a little im-
prudently, that it was a very fine day. “ It is not
* a fine day,” replied Henry, with ſome emotion;
* 1 will not ride this morning, take off my boots“
That done, the King entered into a couverſation,
directing himſelf ſometimes to one, ſometimes to
another, and chuſing ſuch ſubjects as he thought
would afford me an opportunity of ſpeaking. But
obſerving I was ſtill ſilent, he took Bellegarde "Y

ne

418 ME M01 K:-8-:: Book XL;

the hand; “ M. le Grand,” ſaid he, © let us walk,
« I would talk with you a little, that you may ſet
* out to-day on your journey to Burgundy.” They
had ſome private buſineſs together, which relatcd
chiefly to ſome idle tales and quarrels of women.

When they came to the door of the little flair.
Caſe which leads to the Queen's garden, the King
called L'Oſerai, and, as he afterwards told me, bid
him obſerve whether 1 followed him ; and if 1
turned another way, not to fail to inform him im-
mediately of it. I ſtaid in the ſame place during
the whole time that his Majeſty was talking to MM,
le Grand, in the walk that leads to the garden of
the Conciergerie: But 1 oblerved that he often
turned his eyes upon me. After Bellegarde had
taken leave cf the King, I advanced, and deſired to
know if his Majeſty had any orders for me. * And
% where are you going?“ ſaid he: “ To Paris,
« Sire,” replied 1, © upon the buſineſs you ipoke
to me of two days ſince.” „ Well, go then,
replied the King; © 1 fill recommend to you the
« care of my. effairs, and deſire that you ſhou!d
«& continue to love me.” 1 bowed low: he cm»
' braced me as uſual, and I took the road to my own
houſe : but ſcarce was I got to the diſtance of three
hundred paces, when, looking back, I ſaw La-\
renne running after me, crying, Monſicur, i
King would ſpeak with you. His Majeſty, ſceing
me return, ſtruck into the road which leads to the
Kennel, and calling to me while I was yet at a dit.
tance, ** Come hither,” ſaid he: “ have you no-
« thing to ſay to me?” © No, Sire,” 1 replicd,
% not at preſent.” „ Well then, I have ſome-
« thing to ſay to you,” anſwered he with precipt-
tation; and taking my hand, led me into the grove
of white mulberry-trees, and ordered two Swil:

centinels, who did not underſtand French, to be
placed

7
4 *

.
ne
*

„ P,, _ anc oo

„

placed at the entrance of the canals which ſurrounds
ed the grove.

The King began by embracing me twice in a
molt affectionate manner, which the courtiers ea—
ſily perceived, for we were within view, and the
carefully watched all our geſtures : then calling me
friend, and reſuming his former familiarity with
me, he told me, with a look and accent which
went to my heart, that the coldneſs and reſerve with
which we had for a month paſt behaved towards
each other, muſt needs be very painful to two per-
ſons, who, for three and thirty years, had been
accuſtomed to the moſt unlimited confidence, and
that it was time to deprive thoſe who were the
cauſe of it of an occaſion of triumph, which flat-
tered too much their hatred of me, and the envy
with which they beheld his and his kingdom's in-
creaſing proſperity. The heart of this good prince
opening as he ſpoke to me, he added, that, ear-
neſtly defiring we ſhould both forget what had hap-
pened, he thought it neceſſary to leave me igno-
rant of nothing that had paſſed on his ſide, either
with reſpect to the informations which had been
given him againſt me, the effects they had produced
in his mind, and, laſtly, the words and actions by
which he had made thoſe unfavourable impreſſions
public. He intreated, commanded, and made me
promiſe to follow the example he was going to
give me, to diſcover to him all the different emo-
tions with which I had been agitated, and my ſen-
timents both of the treatment I had received from
him, and of the affair itſelf, with the ſame vnre-*
ſerved freedem he ſhould uſe towards me: * that,
e before we leave this place,” faid he, “our minds
may be wholly freed from doub:s and ſuſpicion,
and both perfectly ſatisfied with each other;
therefore, as I ſhall open my whole heart freely
to you, I mult intreat you will not diſguiſe your's
6 from

—

420 MEMOIR S Book XX.

& from me.” I gave him my word of honour, that
I would moſt faithfully obey this injunction,
The King then began firſt, by naming all thoſe

perſons who had endeavourcd to injure me with him

on that occalion, as well in effects as words, a-
mong which there were ſome of all ranks and ages,
and many who had ſerved his Majeſty as long as
myſelf. Theſe I believe I may divide into ſeven
claſſes; in the firſt I ſhall place the princes of the
blood, and great officers of the crown; in the fe.
cond, the King's miſtreſſes, with their children, and
ſuch as either through the ties of blood or fried.
ſhip ſupported their intereſts and ſerved their pa
ſions; among theſe were Cœuvres, Freſnes, Foryc:,
Puget, Placin, Vallon, and many more; the Mar—
chioneſs of Verneuil was at the head of all Th:
rage which animated theſe two claſſes againſt me
was excited by my having retrenched their gratu!-
ties: the third was compoſed of the partizans of
Spain, and the remains of the old leaguers, whol?
politics and principles of goverament could not a-
gree with the King's or with mine; and this clas
was increaſed by many members of the council,
Villeroi, Sillery, Freſnes, Forget, and others, who
acted in concert with the Jeſuits, In the fourth, !
comprehend all the petit-maitres, court- favourites,

and idle inſignificant perſons, who load Paris wich

an uſeleſs weight; theſe were actuated by their te-
ſentment againſt me, for preventing his Majeſiy
from beſtowing ſuch favours on them as they cx-
peed, and for the oppoſition of my manner of l-
ving and conduct to theirs ; the number of thele 15
too great, and themſelves too contemptible, to
ſully the paper with their names. The fifth was
made up of the ſeditious and malecontents of
France, whom the flovriſhiog condition of the king:
dom, the wiſe cecononiy of Henry, and the pre-
parations he was making, which rendered him t09

2 | power fu

powerful, incited to conſpire my ruin. The finan-

ciers and other men of bulineſs made up the ſixth ;
and they, indced, had no reaſon to be much my
friends,

The ſeventh and laſt claſs was compoſed of an-
other kind of court-flatterers, ſomewhat inferior to
thoſe 1 have already mentioned : theſe were ever
ready to give advice, and {ought to make their
court to the prince, by continually furniſhing him
with new projects for raiſing money; men, for
the moſt part, formerly in place, and to whom no-
thing more of their once ſhining fortune remained,
than the deteſtable ſcience of impoveriſhing the
people; which, for their own intereſt, and by an
effect of a long habitude in guilt, they endeavoured
to teach his Majcſty ; but finding that this trade
was become much leſs profitable to them, fince his
Majeſty had confided to me the ſole management
of his finances, they practiſed another art, which
diſcovered diſpoſitions nearly the ſame ; this was,
to invent flanders, dreſs up detraction like truth,
and be the venal inſtruments of thoſe who either
durſt not or would not appear themſelves in the ſa.
tirical libels which filled the court : It was by them
that theſe contemptible pieces were compoled,
ſpread abroad, and the truth of them maintained
and propagated : the dangerous talent of raillery,
and lively ſallies of wit, opened them a way to the

| company and familiarity of Henry, who loved an

ealy and ſpirited converſation. Although he was

| perhaps upon his guard againſt their malignant

ſtrokes at me, yet he could not at length avoid be-
Ing touched by them. Some of thoſe whom at firſt

he had deſpiſed or baniſhed from his preſence,
found means afterwards to make themſelves be
heard. In this liſt would be found none but names

lo obſcure, that they do not deſerve to be raked

from the duſt, ſuch as Juvigny, Paraſis, Le- Maine,

VoL. III. Nn Beaufort,

422 MEMOIR S Bock XX

Beaufort, Berſot, Longuet, Chalange, Verſenai,
Santeny, exc. if Sancy, who merits the firſt place
among them, had not completed his own diſhonour
by this vile trade, which helped to retard his ruin,
when his folly and exceſs had left him no other te.
ſource. He was obliged to fell his jewels, and
oftered them to the King, who, becauſe he was not
willing they ſhould go out of the kingdom, ordered
me to purchaſe them. |

The King, after recounting the names of the
authors, gave me a detail of their artifices, Al
that the wit of man could deviſe, when animated
by an eager deſire to deſtroy, was practiſed by
them. Where-ever the King turned his ſteps, be
ſaw nothing but informations, letters, libels, bil.
lets, and other papers of the ſame kind, not to
mention the political memorials with which they
preſented him, under ſhew of zeal for the ſtate, and
affection for his perſon. Theſe papers he found
under his table, under the carpet of his chamber,
and under his pillow. They cauſed them to be
preſented to him by perſons unknown ; they were
given into his own hand, in the form of petitions,
and crammed into his ſleeves and pockets. I was
there painted in the moſt hateful colours, and the
moſt injurious epithets were not ſpared, except
when, by the refinement of thoſe treacherou:
praiſes which J have already mentioned, they exag:
gerated to his Majeſty my unwearied induſtry, my
great abilities, the depth of my judgment, my
manners, once rude and forbidding, now, as they
ſaid, became gracious and obliging to all. Henry,
with great ſincerity, owned to me, that he was fe
impoſed upon by theſe artifices, that he had almol
entirely loſt the good opinion he had once concel
ved of me; and that theſe wretches had con:rivei
to fill him with ſuch a deſire of knowing all theit

intentions, that, at the very time when he ſeems
)

1605. 0 F S U L . 423

po weary of that infinite number of libels and in-
eformations, as to throw them aſide without taking
any notice of them; yet afterwards he could not
„reſiſt the inclination he felt to collect them toge-
ther, and cauſe them to be read to him.
nit muſt neceſſarily be, that this prince was pre-
judiced in a ſtrange manner, ſince he could not per-
4ceire that theſe writings were often no leſs inju-
rious to himſelf than to me; as, for example,
:& when he read, that I made him mercenary and un-
IWF juſt to thoſe that ſerved him faithfully, to whom,
under pretended compenſation for old debts, he re-
fuſed what they had a lawful claim to. They like-
viſe imputed weakneſs and timidity to him, in wri-
ting to me on all theſe occaſions ; which certainly
was not greatly to his honour, whether in him
they made it an excule for his avarice, or a mark
of his dependence. It was by thele inſinuations
they began at firſt; and while they went no far-
ther, the King, who found only new occaſions to
: W praiſe my adminiſtration, was not prejudiced againſt
me: but to put thele critics to ſilence, he only re-
„ quired ſummaries of the ſtate-debts which 1 had
3 WW. cilcharged, to ſhew them; and as for me, when I
e had an opportunity, I ſeverely reproved thoſe per-
x WW ſons for their too free cenſures, while, under a
falſe pretence of being denied juſtice, they ſuffered
7 W expreſſions to eſcape them in their rage, with which
his Majeſty had good reaſon to be offended. But
| they ſoon left theſe flight accuſations, for others of
| greater conſequence.
| Henry, to excuſe the credulity with which he
bad believed theſe ſlanders, would have me judge
| myſelf of the libels in which they were contained.
But as it would have been a tedious taſk to read
| them all, he fixed upon one * which Juvigny had
ſhewn
This book was intitled, A political diſcourſe, ſhewing ihe King
N n 2 in

— K fn ©

424 M E MO IR S Book XX.

ſhewn him twelve days before, and which had been
made public, becauſe in this all the different calum-
nies which were ſcattered throughout many other
libels had been collected, which made it as com-
plete as a work of that kird could be, There was
indeed ſome little intricacy in it; but it was writ,
however, with a ſufficient force of ſtyle and judg-
ment to perſuade hi: Majeſly, that it proceeded
from ſome other hand than Juvigny, whole powers
it greatly exceeded, The King, taking this paper
out of his pocket, told me, that by reading it, I
might poſſibly help him to find out the avthor,
whcle name he would be glad to know. I received
it from his Majeſty's hands, and read it from be-
ginning to end in his preſence. The reader, if he
pleaſes, may here lee the ſubſtance of it; for it is
rot my intent to conceal any part of it.

The author, whoever he was, began (and indeed
no writing had ever need of ſuch a precaution) by
endeavouring to clear himſelf of all ſuſpicion of
envy or prejudice. The great qualities of Henry,
the happineſs which France enjoycd under his reign,
the advantageous ſituation of his affairs, made a ſe-
cond preamble very proper to captivate the good-
wili of this prince, and ſtill more, to lead naturally
to the accuſation he was to make againſt me, of
having inſolently boaſted, that this happineſs was
my ſole work ; and from thence, with great art,
Introduced this reflection, that it was but too com-
mon for miniſters of ſuch abilities, and favourites
with ſo much power, to engage in deſigns perni.
cious to the ſovereign and the ſtate. A croud of

in what reſpcs bis Majeſty is ill ſerved. © It was privately handcd
about at Paris,” ſays L'Etoile, „in MS. The (iyle of it #3
« ſomewhat free and bold for thoſe times, when all truths were net
« allowed to be ſpoke; it nevertheleſs did not, contain any thing 4+
« gainſt the King or his ſervice, but meny things againſt >. 5
« Roſny.“

examples,

1605. b. 425

examples, eloquently diſplayed, finiſhed this part

of the picture. |
From thence the author proceeded, not to exa-
mine my actions, which alone could afford a juſt
proof of his aſſertions, but to criticiſe my man-
ners; and in the gracious reception I had Jately gi-
ven to all perſons in general who came to my houſe,
found an unanſwerable proof of thoſe pernicious
deſigns ; and added, that the number of perſons,
from the princes of the blood down to the moſt
inconſiderable of the people, which, by this ſtu-
died civility, I had gained over to my intereſts, was
almoſt incredible. He attempted to enumerate this
croud of partiſans, which could not indeed but be
very conſiderable, ſince all that this accuſation was
founded upon, was that complaiſance and politeneſs
of behaviour which, in France, it is the cuſtom to
treat every one with. The Prince of Conti and the
Duke of Montpenſier were at the top of the liſt ;
then the whole family of Lorrain ; ſeveral French
lords came next. My reconciliation with the Puke
of Epernon, becauſe followed by a fincere ar.d re-
ciprocal friendſhip, was miſrepreſented under the
name of an union formed by a boundleſs ambition.
Meſſieurs de Montbazon, de Ventadour, de Fer-
vaques, d*Ornano, de Saint Geran, de Praſiin, de
Grammont, d*Aubeterre, de Montigny, de Schom-
berg, and others, were likewiſe mentioned as per-
ſons whom J attached to my intereſt, by the dif-
tinction with which I treated them, the ſervices I
was perpetvally doing them, and the diſtribution E
made amongſt them cf part of his Majeſty's trea-
fures, which I was fo ſparing of to all others.
All this not being ſufficient to give probability
to thoſe views the author attributed to me, he add-
ed to it the correſpondences I carried on without
the kingdom. Ke menti ned an expreſſion which fell
from the King of England, and which might well
Nan 3 be

426 M E MOI R Ss Bock X.

be conſidered as a mere compliment, That the
King of France was happy in having me, and made
it an argument to prove, that I had violated the
faith I owed to my prince ; that not only his Bri-
tannic Majeſty, but likewiſe the States-general of
the United Provinces, the Dukes of Wirtemberg
and Deux-ponts, the Landgrave of Heſſe, the Prince
of Anbalt, the Marquiſſes of Anſpach, Dourlach
and Baden, were ready to take my part blindly,
and engage openly in my defence : the ſlighteſt
ſervice which any of them received from me, was
conſtrued into a criminal intrigue. All the Pro-
teſtant bodies, whether French or foreigners, as
well as the Eclvetian ſenate, being gained by the
regularity of their payments, and by largeſſes from
me, wete {aid to be abſolutely. devoted to my in-
tereſts.

After having thus made the firſt eſſay with ac-
cuſations, which carried in them ſome little appear-
ance of probability, the author became more har-
dy, and impudently hazarded others, the falſity of
which appeared at the fiſt view. According to
him, I did not content myſelf any longer with my
correſpondences in foreign countries alone; but by
ſending his Majeſty's, money into England, the
Low Countries, Germany, and Switzerland, I was
laying up for myſelf immenſe ſums, in order to
retire there one day, and, as opportunities offer-
ed, make levies of Swiſs, German horſe, and
Lanſquenets, to ſupport the Proteſtant religion,
and, after the exaraple of Admiral Coligny, give
up France. to be preyed upon by theſe troops.
The author, who doubtleſs was ſenſible that a mi-
nute detail of circumſtances was generally conſi-
dered as a mark of truth and ſincerity, particula-
rized this event, as if he was already a witneſs of
it ; he alledged, that, by purchaſing arms, iron,
lead, braſs, bullets, and other wariike ſtores, for

his

1 e . 427

his Majeſty's magazines, I had alſo private maga-
zines of my own, in each of the ſtrongeſt Prote-
ſtant cities; where I depoſited thoſe ſtores in my
own name. Certainly theſe people would have
had reaſon to congratulate themſelves upon the
ſucceſs of theſe arts, if by this accuſation they
could have prevailed upon the King to diſcontinue
his preparations. This admirable piece concluded
with an exhortation to his Majeſty to confide no
longer in one perſon the management of his re-
venue, the uſe of his authority, and the admini-
{tration of his affairs; but to aſſociate with me
ſome perſons wha might keep a vigilant eye over
my conduct.

While I was reading this memorial, Henry ob-
ſerved me with great attention, but finding that J
read it as I would have done any indifferent paper
in which 1 was not the leaſt concerned, without
ſaying a ſingle word, without betraying the leaſt
emotion, or even any change of colour ; © Well,
* what do you think of it?“ ſaid he. What
“is your opinion of it, Sire? “ replied I, © you
* that have read it more than once, and kept it
ſo long in your hands; for my part, I am not
* fo much ſurpriſed at theſe fort of writings,

which in effect are nothing but the trifling produc-
tion of fooliſh and wicked men, as to find that ſo
great a king, poſſeſſed of ſo much wiſdom, cou-
rage, and goodneſs, and who has known me for
lo many years, would have patience to read
them himſelf, and hear me read them through-
out in his prefence, without, at leaſt, ſhewing
by his anger the violence he did himſelf, in liſten-
ing to ſuch calumnies, and without ordering the
authors to be ſought for, to puriſh them ſeverely.”
After having thus ſpoken, I conſidered that the
moſt effectual way to reſtore peace to the King's
mind, and revive in him all his former Rey

O

«
10
40
te
«
«
6
«c
«
«

48 M E M OI AR Ss Book XX.

of me, was to give a direct and particular anſwer
to each of the accuſations which my enemies
brought againſt me; and this I had given him my
word I would do. I confined myſelf therefore
to Juvigny's libel, which I had ſtill in my hands,
that I might give a ſeparate anſwer to each ar-
ticle. The reſt of my enemies, who durſt not at.
tack me openly, for fear of being obliged to pro-
duce. their proofs, merited only contempt : and it
was with this obſervation that I began my an-
ſwer. To the preſumptuous and injurious diſcour—
ſes of his Majeſty's government, which they at.
tributed to me, I oppoſed thoſe words I had ſo
often in my mouth, in which I pointed out the King
as a model for thoſe princes who would be good
and great to form themſelves by. The examples
they produced of miniſters who became traitors,
and favourites ungrateful, could not affect the fi-
delity of a man who, like me, had laboured to
perfect thoſe great and amiable qualities he had
derived from his illuſtrious anceſtors. I deficd
them to produce a ſingle perſon, whether a fricnd
or kinſman, to whom 1 had given any gratuity
without a ſufficient reaſon, and a particular order
from his Majeſty. Againſt the traiterous deſigns
they imputed to me, of fomenting the civil wars,
T appealed to Henry's knowledge of the affection
T bore to my country, the attachment I ever had
to his perſon, my ſolieitude for my own honour
and reputation, and the oppoſition I had given on
every occaſion to the ill deſigns of the Protellants,
which had drawn the whole weight of their reſent-
ment upon me.

Beſides, what advantage could I promiſe myſelt
from theſe chimerical ſchemes, which I did ent at
preſent poſſets in the greateſt and moſt honoviebic
ſtation to which any ſubje& could aſpire ? M hat

could be my aim? To place the crown on my
own

. G n

07 $0 EL £F: 429

own head ? my enemies themſelves did not accuſe
me of ſuch a frantic ambition ; to carry it out of
the royal family, although it were in my power
to diſpoſe of it, on whom could I fix my choice,
but the prince to whom J had, during thirty years,
conſecrated all my labours and my ſervices, and for
whoſe intereſt I had ſhed my blood, and devoted
my life? Why, if I was the traitor they inſinu-
ated, did I ſtill bend my whole cares to the in-
creaſe of his glory, by thoſe noble deſigns which,
if 1 did not ſuggeſt, I was, at leaſt, the ſole confi-
dent and promoter of? If I had views prejudici-
g al to his crown, or dangerous to his perſon, why
; did I fo earneſtly ſeek to engage him in all thoſe
a alliances with England, and the other powers of
5 Europe? Was not this acting directly againſt my-
9 ſelf? Is it by purſuing ſuch meaſures as theſe,
that ambitious and deſigning ſubjects have endea-
voured to bring about revolutions, and to ruin the

d ſtate? Was it not rather by enervating the mind
0 of their maſter, ſoothing his inclinations to luxu—
0 ry, indulging his paſſions, prevailing on him to
5 violate the laws, to neglect all order and govern-
A ment, and to throw every part of the ſtate into
= confuſion ? Whereas I was continually laying be-
. fore his Majeſty the ſtate of bis affairs, informing
$

i 8 him of the uſe and deſtination of his money, and
carrying my ſolicitude for order and ceconomy fo
far, as to reproach him with even the ſmalleſt
needleſs expence. I amaſſed him treaſure, filled
his magazines and arſenals, pointed out to him
the means of rendering himſelf formidable to all
Europe. It is not thus that rebellious ſubjects
act, when they ſecretly undermine the foundations
of their ſovereign's power. The conduct of mi-
niſters is always equivocal in ſome part or other;
however, I may truly ſay, that mine might ſtand
the teſt of the ſtricteſt examination,

It

430 M E M QO-- 1 R$: Deck.

It was eaſy for me to perceive, that his Maje-
ſty felt all the force of theſe arguments; I con-
cluded them with imploring him, in the moſt fer-
vent manner, to believe, that I had neither con-
cealed nor diſguiſed from him any of the thoughts
of my heart ; I confirmed theſe aſſurances by the
moſt ſacred oaths, which he knew I never uttered
raſhly; J addreſſed him by all thoſe reverenced
and tender epithets which had, at all times, been
the expreſſions of my zeal and attachment to his
perſon. I would have embraced his knees, but
he would not ſuffer it, leſt thoſe who beheld this
poſture might imagine ] had recourſe to it to ob-
tain his pardon for a real crime : he told me, that
he was fully convinced of my fidelity, that he
ſincerely repented of his too eaſy belief, and that
he would never remember what was paſt, but
to impreſs upon his mind the obligation he was
under to love me the better for it. This was the
reſult of a conference which had been ſo neceſ-
ſary to reſtore quiet to us both.

Thoſe who have any knowledge of a court, may
eaſily gueſs the emotions that agitated the hearts of
the courtiers, during a converſation which laſted
more than four hours, and with what attention our
words and actions were obſerved; for thovgh it
was not poſlible for them to hear what we ſaid,
yet they could not be ignorant of the ſubject we
were upon. The manner in which Henry had re-
ceived me in the morning, his recalling me after [
had left him, the precaution he had uſed at the be-
ginning of our converſation, the papers he had ta-
ken with him, the carneſt manner in which we ſeem-
ed to diſcourſe, was ſufficient to inform them of
the reſt; each, according to his fears or hopes,
expected the reſult of ſo important an explanation
between us. |

Henry was willing to tell it them himſelf. After

receiving

1605. O F . 431

receiving the papers again from me, which he was
reſolved to throw into the fire, he went out to the

ove of mulberry- trees holding me by the hand,
and aſked this crowd of courtiers who were got to-
gether, what it was o'clock; they anſwered it was
one o'clock, and that he had been walking a long
time. © I have ſo,” ſaid the prince, in an accent

which ſpread a paleneſs on every cheek; © but

te there are ſome preſent who are more weary than
© J am: however, to conſole them, I here declare
© before you all, that Roſny is dearer to me than
& ever, and that our friendſhip will continue till
& death; and you, my friend,” purſued he, turn-
ing to me, „ go home to dinner, and love me
c and ſerve me, for I am fully ſatisfied with you.”
Many others in the ſame ſituation I was, would
have“ made uſe of their returning favour and ia-
tereſt, to exact vengeance on thoſe who had la-
boured thus to procure their diſgrace ; but I thank
Heaven that I have not the reproach to make my-
ſelf, of having even entertained ſuch a thought. I
carefully concealed their names from my ſecteta-
ries, nor will 1 mention them here; I likewiſe ſup -
preſs part of what the King laid to me to their diſad-
vantage: though they have acted in a quite contrary
manner, yet it cannot alter my opinion, that this
ſort of revenge is unworthy of a generous mind.
That I might remove all cauſe of uneaſineſs from
the King, concerning the affair which has led me
into ſo particular an account of this great difference
between us, I managed Grillon with ſuch art, that
he at length conſented to take thirty thouſand
crowns of Crequy for his poſt, which, in reſpec

* The Sieur de Juvigny or Divigny, a French gentleman, au-
thor of the abovemeutioncd memorial, ſuffered for all the reſt: a
proſecution was carried on ag1init him for h gh treaſon, and he was
found guilty, condemned to death, and all his effects to be confiſca-

ted ; but having made his eſcape, he was hanged in effigy at Paris.
to

— <4 ” 8 * rome
FEE ww A r..

— =
bad — — * 1
r ²˙-ARN ²˙wä Ä AT. oo

_ 3 — — Y > 6 5 * - —y
1 — mg St 's — —
— Son 25.4 4 —__ - — 1212 —

——— — 1

432 ME MO I R S Book XX.

to Leſdiguires, his Majeſty had permitted that no-
bleman to purchaſe . This drew many acknow-
ledgments to me from the father-in-law and the ſon,
Crequy came in perſon to make me thele compli.
ments, and added to them repeated aſſurances of
gratitude and affection: Leſdiguieres wrote to me
from Grenoble, and expreſſed himſelf in terms till
ſtronger than Crequy had done. As we were be-
fore connected by alliances between our families,
this laſt ſervice they had received from me, made
every one expect to ſee us for the future intimate
friends; however, there was not any perſon by
whom I was ſo eaſily abandoned, or received ſo
many bad offices from, after the death of Henry,
as from theſe two men: gratitude is a virtue not to
be found among courtiers.

The heart of Henry being once tainted with ſu-
ſpicions to my prejudice, it was not impoſlible but
that the wound might again be opened. It was
this hope that ſupported my enemies amidſt the
mortification and grief they ſuffered from the ad-
venture at Fontainebleau, It was not long be-
fore they again returned to the charge“ and (it

| is

* Henry IV. though extremely diſſatisfied with the Duke of E-
penon, who had retired to Angouleme, and made great complaints
of the injuſtice he pretended the King had done him on this occaſion,
yet inſiſted that M. de Crequy ſhould wait on him as his colonel, at
the diſtance of a hundred leagues from Paris, to take the oaths be-
fore him, get his commiſſion allowed by him, and receive his orders
for being inveſted in his poſt. The Duke of Epernon made him
dance attendance after him for ſeveral days, and ſuffered him to
wait a whole day at the door of his chamber, Hiſtory of the Duke
of Epernon, p. 112.

+ © The King,” ſays Le-Grain, b. vii. “ advanced the Duke of
Sully in ſuch a manner, that he always reſerved a ſufficient autho-
© rity over him; and who knows but it might perhaps be a pru-
« dential meaſure in the King, thus to expoſe him to the hatred
* of many, againſt whom he was very able to protect him, in order
« to keep him under apprehenſions of what might be the effects of
« his failing in his duty?” This paſſage in our memoirs ſe-ms, at
firſt ſight, to offer ſomething in favour of this conjecture: the opi-
nion of thoſe nevertheleſs, who think there was no artiſice in the

ſuſpicions

«a 2 wo in ww

160 5. O F . 433

is with regret I ſay it) were almoſt as ſucceſs-
ful as before: the affair, however, did not be-
come as public as the former had been, becauſe
it was ſooner followed by an explanation, and it is
needleſs to repeat it here. If my enemies from
time to time enjoyed the pleaſure of believing that
I ſhould fink under their efforts, yet they were ſoon
undeceived, and thoſe ineffectual attempts but in-
creaſed their ſhame and rage; and had ] been of a
diſpoſition to enjoy ſuch victoriee, this laſt, being
not leſs complete than the other, would have af-
forded me ſufficient matter for triumph: it was
likewiſe at Fontaineblcau, that the King and I came
to an explanation of this fecond difference; and
the morning afterwards the King ſent for me very
early. As foon as I entered his chamber he took
my hand, and led me towards a croſs-barred wine
dow which looked into the Queen's garden, having
ſomewhat to impart to me in private; but as we
paſſed, he ſaid aloud, in the pretence of the whole
court, © You cannot conceive, my friend, how
% eaſily and happily I flept this night, after ha-
« ving opened my heart to you, and had all my
& doubts cleared up.“ He then aſked me, if I did
not feel the ſame calm fatisfaction; I replied that

ſafpicionsof Henry IV. conceived againſt the Duke of Sully appears
to me better tounded ; but whether his ſuſpicions were feigned ot
real, I alſo think, as many other perſons of ſenſe do, that they ought
to be reckoned among that prince's defects. Accord ing to the firſt
ſuppoſition, a iow cunning, unbecoming the character of { great 2
King, is apparent; and according to the ſecond, a piece of injuſtice
for which the ſuſt movements of a haſty paſſion would be no cxcuſe,
there being a kind of agreement between this prince, and his mini-
ſter, that the firſt ſhould overleok in the charater of the other, that
firmneſs and inflexibility of temper, incapable of a baſe ſubmiſſion
and flattery, in conſideration of a fidelity ciiablifhcd on foch numbers
leſs proofs. This is a ſuſficient evidence, that the pe! forman-e of
the moſt important ſeryices will not diſpenſe a man from a flexibility
to, ey compliance with, the humour of princes, even the moitt
perfect.

Nor. III. O 9

7

©. gy, _—

— ä—wĩ—H— OA — er ſt — ne He .
- | - 5

F 24 -
— —

— — a>; = ron
=  * i —

434 M E MO IN S Book XX,

I did, and that he ſhould always find in me the
ſame fidelity and affection. |

In the midſt of a favour fo often interrupted by
little jealouſies and heats, what convinced me that
the heart of Henry ways leaned towards me was,
that however diſatisfied my enemies might ſome.
times, by their inſinuations, make him with me, yet
it never interrupted the courſe of thoſe benefits
with which it was his conſtant cuſtom to load me
and my family 1 had proofs of his beneficence
with reſpect to my eldeſt daughter, amidſt thol:
very ſtorms I have mentioned *. I had engaged my
word to Fervaques, to give her to the young Laval,
whom his Majeſty, as I have formerly obſerved,
ordered me to prefer to the Duke of Rohan; and
the affair was upon the point of being concluded.
One day, about the beginning of this year, when
I was walking with the King upon the terrace
belonging to the Capuchins, he again introdu-
ced this ſubject, and told me his reaſons for de-
firing me to reject the Duke of Rohan, which
were, that the marriage of this lord with my daugh-
ter had been propoſed by the Princeſs Catharine to
the Ducheſs of Rohan, and accepted by my wite,
without acquainting him with it; and likewiſe be-

* Margaret de Bethune, This lady, to be revenged on her only
daughter, who, againſt her will, had married Henry de Chabot, in
the year 1645, ſet up a boy about fifteen years old, as being really
her ſon by the Duke of Ruhan who died ſeven years befote.
« Many pcrſons of credit,” ſays Amelot, ** who have ſeen Tan»
« cred {the name of this pretended heir to the houſe of Rohan) have :{-
« ſured me, that he had the topping of the Rohan family, which 1s
a ſmall tuft of hair on the forchead, and that the features of his
« face were remarkably like thoſe of his ſuppoſed father,” To this
anecdote we may add another, by which it is pretended that the
Duke of Rohan had a mind to purchaſe the kingdom of Cyprus of
the Grand Signior for this child; it was alſo ſaid, that his father and
mother bad kept him concealed only that they might marry their
donghter to the Count of Soiffons, and afterwards the Duke of Wi-
mar, See theſe curious fables in Amelvt de la Houſſaye, article
Bethune, Cc. and art, Chypre
cauſ⸗

*

cauſe Monſieur and Madam de Fervaques had ſo
earneſtly ſolicited his intereſt in favour of Laval,
that he had promiſed them to give him to me for
a ſon in law, rather than the Duke of Rohan, who

was not ſo rich indeed, but had the honour to be

fo nearly related to him, that, if he died without
children, as the Princeſs his ſiſter had done, the
Duke of Rohan would ſucceed to his kingdom of
Navarre, and the other eſtates of the families of
Albert, Foix, and Armagnac : he then added, that,
for other reaſons which he would acquaint me with,

he had again altered his opinion, and that it was

bis intention I ſhould break with the family of Fer-
vaques as decently as I could. Having already
prepared them for this change of my reſolution,
he deſired me to withdraw the contracts and articles
which had been agreed upon between us, in ſuch
a manner, that the breaking off the match ſhould
appear entirely my own act, and that they might
not have any room to ſay they had refuſed an alli-
ance with me. He added, that he would himſelf
bring the Duke of Rohan, to pay his compliments,

with the Ducheſs his mother, and expected that I

would receive him as one who was to be my ſon-
in-law within three days, having already ſettled e-
very thing relating to the marriage bimſelf; that he
would have the contract drawn up in his preſence,
and would ſign it as the kinſman of both parties.
I thanked his Majeſty for the intereſt he took in
my family, and the honour he conferred upon me.
The affair was managed as he had directed, the
King gave the bridegroom ten thouſand crowns for
the wedding cloaths and expences, and the like ſum
to my daughter. The year before, I had married
Mademoiſelle Du- Marais, my wife's daughter by
her firſt huſband, to La- Boulaye, the ſon of him
whom Henry had loved ſo much: (he had no rea-
lon to expect any other gratuity from his Majeſty,
4 O o 2 than

—— —— — — — —

436 M E MOI R S Book XX.

than that which is generally given to all the Queen's
maids of honour, under the title of a preſent for the
nuptial robe, and had been ſettled at two thouſand
crowns: the King raiſed it to five thouſand in favour
of my daughter-in-law; but that it might not be
made a precedent for others, he ordered me to car.
ry it to account.

It was uſual with bis Majeſty, after he had clear.
ed the accounts of his expences in fortifications
and buildings, to ſay to me, in the preſence of the
officers employed in thoſe works, who attended to
know his pleaſure concerning farther improvements
in them, “ Well, you ſee my fortifications and
& buildings are reſolved upon, what have you done
& to your houſes?” To which, when I replied,

as I ſeldom failed to do, that I could do nothing

to them for want of money; he would anſwer,
« Well, ſhew me your plans, that I may know
« what you would do if you had money.“ And af.
ter examining them, and telling me what he thought
it would be neceſſary to alter, he added, that he
would give me twenty thouſand livres to enable me

to make thoſe alterations he pointed out to me.

However, 1 ſometimes requeſted favours of him
which he refuſed to grant, and 1 ſhall not have the
vanity. to conceal it. He would not give the poſt
which had formerly been the Baron de Lux's to
my brother, or to La Curee, for either of whom [

requeſted it; telling me, that for Bethune, he de-

figned a poſt | in Britany, which would ſuit him bet-

ter; and that as for La-Curee, he did not think that
employment compatible with the poſt of licutenant

of a company of light horſe, and the government

of Chinon, which he already poſſeſſed. The truth 5

was, he chole to give it to Ragny, who could do
him greater ſervice in the province. I aſked the o-

ther favours of him in the ſame letter, the one for

wy nephew De 8 and the other for La. Bou:
Jaye:

w 2. 7 3 a. | * *
— — es fd Res 4 5

—

b 1665. OF- SUL L T. 437
8 hye : he told me, that La-Boulaye had not yet, by

e [WU his ſervices, merited ſuch an inſtance of his boun.
d ty; but he granted the other, which was, the ab-
r WM bey of Moreilles in Poitou, lately become vacant.
e I received another refuſal from him, if it may be

called ſo, in which my ſon-in-law, the Duke of
Rohan, was concerned. The occaſion of it was
r- this: ,

13 F The Duke of Rohan was governor of Saint- John
ice d' Angely, of which place Des-Ageaux was the
to King's lieutenant. It was not the governor, to
is &F whom in juſtice it belonged, that named this lieu-
nd WF tenant, but his Majeſty, who thought it neceſſary
ne for the good of his ſervice, to deprive the governor
d, of this privilege, that the lieutenant, who, in trou-
ng bleſome times, had hitherto always played an im-
er, portant part in affairs, might, in ſome degree, be
independent of the governor, and in a condition to
at- render his power ineffectual, if he ſhould not uſe it

nt to the King's ſatis faction, and for the advantage of
he the ſtate. The lieutenant, therefore, was, in rea-
me IF lity, poſſeſſed of the whole authority, and the go-
vernor had only an empty title. The Duke of
im Rohan, who carneſtly wiſhed to have this prero-
the gative reſtored to the governor, intreated me to ſo-
»oft licit the King for that purpoſe, a favourable oppor-
, to tunity offering itſelf, by the ſickneſs of Des-Ageaux,
2m I ubo, it was thought, would never recover. What-
de- ever inclination I had to do my ſon-in-law this ſer-
vice, I durſt not make the propoſal to the King di-
rectly, the requeſt having too much conformity
with that ſtate of dependence into which my ene-
mies had inſinuated I ſought to place all the * Pro-
7 teſtant
* * Itis faid in the Hiſt. de la mere & du ſils, vol. I. p. 15. that
Henry IV. refuſed the Duke of Sully the government of Saint
Maixant, which the Queen herſelf, at the Duke's requelt, deſired of
= the King for him, ſaying, prudence would not permit the making a
£4 Calyiuiſt maſter of that place, ſmall as it was, If any thing could
= Y O 3. ebe

438 M E MO IRS Bock RX.

teſtant cities. Nothing more would have been
wanting to renew all his ſuſpicions, I reſolved,
therefore, to found him firſt upon the ſubject ;
which 1 did very artfully ; taking occaſion, upon
the news of Des-Ageaux's ſickneſs, to aſk his Ma-
jeſty, whom he had thought of to ſupply his place
if he died? It was by letters that I made this at-
tempt ; but I would go no further till I had recei-
ved his Majeſty's anſwer. The King, in his an-
fwer, told me, that he did not intend to renounce
his right of naming the lieutenant of Saint - John,
becaule it would not always be the Duke of Rohan,
nor my ſon-in-law, who would be governor of that
place. I mentioned Pouſou, the mayor of that
city, to him, whom he continued in that office up-
on the character I gave of him. Des-Ageaux re-
covering of his ſickneſs, no farther ſteps were ta-
ken in the affair.

Before I quit this article of marriage, I ſhall take
notice of what happened at court, with regard to
Mademoiſelle de Melun, my niece, whom they
thought likewiſe of marrying at that time, as her
fortune was extremely large, the Marchioneſs de
Roubais, my aunt, having made her her ſole heir.

The family of D'Eſtrees caſt their eyes on her
for a wife to De -· Cœuvres *; they thought them:
- ſelves ſure of the King's intereſt z and the affair
was propoſed to him by M. de Vendome himſelf,
to whom the King promiſed that he would ſpeak to
me of it before he left Chantilly. He recollected
the affair when he was at Louvreen-Pariſis, where
they went to dine, and wrote to me concerning it
in terms which ſhewed how earneſtly he deſired the
marriage might be concluded.

make one doubt of the tru h of this fact, beſides M. de Sully's filence
in relation to it, the facility with which that Prince gtanted him the
government of the whole Province muſt be ſufficient.

* Francis Hannibal D'Eflrecs, Marquis of Cozuvres, Duke and
Teer aud Matecbal of France.

;

1605 OF SULL V. 439

I wrote to the young lady's relations, who
were all Flemings; but the anſwer they gave me
being ſuch as I neither ought nor could repeat to
my ſovereign, I ſent him none- at all; and when,
at his return, -he aſked me the reaſon, I only told
him, that Mademoiſelle de Melun's relations did
not approve of the propoſed alliance. The King,
ſuppoſing that it was myſelf who anſwered for
them, and that I had not wrote to them about the
affair, I was obliged to ſhew him the letters I had
received from the Marchioneſs de Roubais, the

| Prince and Princeſs de Ligne, the Princeſs d'Epi-
noy, the Counteſs de Barlemont, and the Counts
t de Fontenay and de Buquoy, who had all written
. to me upon the ſame ſubjett. Henry, in theſe let-
ters, finding, what I would not tell him, that, not-
. withſtanding the honours he had conferred on the

houſe of D'Eſtrèes, they thought it beneath their
e alliance, “I ſee,” ſaid this Prince with ſome re-
ſentment, * that ſince. we have to do with all theſe
y e proud Flemiſh fools, we muſt think no more of
er *& it.” Accordingly the affair went no farther, his
le Majeſty being reſolved not to meddle in it any mores»

End of the THIRD VoLUME. ;
