Memoirs of Maximilian de Bethune, Duke of Sully, Vol. 2 (Maximilien de Béthune, duc de Sully, 1638)
==========================================================
Sully's Mémoires (1638) - Henri IV's great minister on war, finance and statecraft; the classic ministerial memoir. The English translation (after Charlotte Lennox, 1756; 1760 printing), 5 vols. Vol. 2 of 5.

PRIME MINIS TER OF

HENRY Tz GREAT.

| Newly enſured from the French edition of ;
M. de LU ECLUSE,

IN FIVE VOLUMES.

VOLUME n.

6 EDINBURGH:
F | Printed for A. DonaLlDsoN, at t Pope 8 Head.
3 | NM D C C L X.

—

— —

— 5 ca

PIE. cr
My

— 2

o

SUMMARY of Book VII.

Mie from the year 1594 to the year 1596.
1 Henry diſſatisfied with the Duke of Bouillon;
and why. The motives for Roiny's journey to Se-

dan: his converſation with Bouillon: in which he.

penetrates into his deſigns, and diſcovers his rcal
character. The taking of Laon. Military expedli-
tions in different parts of the kingdom, bete ixt the
King's army and that of the league. Deligns of
the Duke of Maienne upon Burgundy. Death of
the Cardinal of Bourbon. Death of the Superin-
tendant D'O : his character. Character of the Du-

cheſs of Guiſe. The Duke of Guiſe makes a treaty

Vun the Ki ng. Roſny's apology for this treaty,

Services performed by the Duke of Guiſe for his
Majeſty, Character of Sancy. The {tory of Alt»
bouſt, Changes made in the council of the fi-
nances. Maxims and reflections relating to the
finances. Henry declares war againſt Spain, con-

2 trary to Roſny's opinion: he is wounded by John

Charel : particulars of this horrid attempt; and
the baniſhment of the Jeſuits. The motives which
determine Henry to march into Burgundy. Roſny
quarrels with the council of the finances. Deſer—
tion of the Count of Soiſſons. Roſny inſulted by
the Count's officers. A campaign in Picardy. The
French defeated at Dourlens. Death of Admiral
Villars. Campaign in Burgundy glorious for Hen-
ry IV. Battle of Fontaine-Frangoiſe. Conditions
upon which the Pope gives abſolution to Henry,
The conduct of Cardinal d'Oſſat examined. Henry
goes to Picardy, Loſles ſuſtained there by France.
| E11; on:

iv Ss UMM AR Y.
The Duke of Montpenſier reveals to the King the
lots of the chief noblemen of the kingdom. Bou-

illon is ſent to London Jealouſy and hatred of
the council of finances againſt Roſny.

SUMMARY of Boox VIII

Meracirs from the year in to 1597. Stege
of La-Fere. The King taken ill. Military enter-
priſes : fome executed; others blaſted. Death of

the Duke of Nemours, and of the Duke of Ne.
vers. Embezzlement of the firances. Roſny goes
to Henry at Amiens: his adventure with an aſtro-
loger. Madam de Liancourt in great danger.
Roſny's journey to Rouen: he is deputed to the
Princeſs to prevail upon her to eſpouſe the Duke
WM of Montpentier : the treatment he receives from
i - her: in danger of being diſgraced upon this oc-
YH caſion: recovers the favour of the Princeſs. Suc-
ceſs of the King's arms in different provinces,
Oppoſition made by the financers to Roſny's being
appointed one of the council of finances. Henry's
irre ſolution upon this head, who at laſt places him
in the council. The Duke of Mafenne concludes
a treaty with the King, and comes to his Majeſty
at Monceaux. Roſny goes to vilit the generalities:
calumnies of his enemies upon this occaſion : his
journey of great ufe to the King. Roſny's diſputes
with Sancy : he diſcovers the artifices and frauds
of the council of finances. The aſſembly des ne-
tables held at Rouen, Reflections upon the ſtates
of the kingdom. Good counſel given by Sully to
the King. The reſult of this aſſembly. The coun-
cil of reaſon eſtabliſhed, and afterwards pres
| Rolny's labours! in the finances. |

—— — 4
- —— — — OY OR > RN ne

| 8 1 M- .

JFF
SUMMARY of Book IX.

Memoirs from the year 1597 to 1 1598. Diver-

ſions at court. The Spaniards ſurpriſe Amiens.

RNeolſny contrives the means of retaking this place:
he is put at the head of the council of finances in

the King's abſence: his labours in the finances,

and diſputes with the council. The ſiege of A-
miens, all the neceſſaries for which are ſupplied by
Roſny. The Proteſtants mutiny again, during this
ſiege : their deſigns, Death of St Luc. Henry
promiſes Roſny the poſt of grand maſter of the
ordnance ; but gives it to D'Eſtrees. Roſny made

governor of Mante. The Spaniards attempt in vain

to ſuccour Amiens. It is taken. An account of
Henry's letters upon different ſubjects. Enterpriſes :

after the ſiege of Amiens: ſome fail, others are
executed. Negotiations for a peace. Henry IV.

goes into Britany. Cabals of the Calviniſts to ob-
tain a favourable edict, Henry gives audience to
the Engliſh and Dutch ambaſſadors, who cannot
prevail upon him to continue the war. Edict of
Nantz. Henry's converſation with the Duke of
Bouillon. A ſingular converſation between Hen-
ry IV. and Roſny, upon the difſolution of his mar-
riage, and his paſſion for the Ducheſs of Beaufort.
Henry returns to Paris: goes to Picardy. Con-
eluſion and ceremonies of the . of Vervins.

SUMMARY of Book X.

Memoirs from the year 1 598 to 1599. Part :
of the troops diſbanded. Ordinances upon grain;
the wearing of ſwords ; and other regulations up-

on the finances, the police, public works, &c.

2 5 ferences held 4 at Boulogne between Spain and Eng-

Queſtion of the true or falſe Don Sebaſtian, Con-

land,

a wann N 15 1
Z £5 £45
% Us 2 * N * * 1 "x" * * Det 7

F = * * * 4 I er *
LY * * Ex" n

8 .

* » * $
F a

©. "SOON A .

p ene

* Ft 4 "Va 481 N 4 tra ” 2 88 es 1 l. * * bi
* lern * is 8 8 2 2 8 * N r 2 *
* ws * *

land, but without effect. The Ducheſs of Beau -
fort labours with her partizans to be declared Queen.

The firmneſs and reſolution with which ſhe is op-
poſed by Roſny : he quarrels with her: they are

reconciled by Henry. A converſation betwixt

this prince and his miſtreſs upon that ſubje&t. Hen-

ry's ſickneſs. Reception of the legate at St Ger-

main. Labours of Roſny in the finances. Qua-
lities neceſſary for a ſtateſman. Roſny gives an ac-

count of his wealth; his character; his manner of
living, G. The deplorable condition to which
France was reduced by the wars. Sums expended

for the treaties made with the league. Arrets which
were publiſhed. Roſny has a diſpute with the

Duke of Epernon : Jabours with Henry to rectify

the abuſes in the finances. The abilities of this

prince for government. Singular tranſactions. Ex-

poſition, examen, and artifice, of the laſt will of

Philip II. The Archducheſs comes to Marſeilles.

Oppoſition of the clergy of France to the marriage
of the Princeſs Catharine with the Duke of Bar;

Cardinal d'Oſſat's conduct upon this occaſion: a

conference held between the Catholics and Pro-

teſtants for the converſion of this princeſs, but
without ſucceſs: Henry orders the marriage to be

ſolemniſed by the Archbiſhop of Rouen: humu—

rous converſations upon this ſubject. The clergy
and parliament oppoſe the regiſtration of the edict

of Nantz ; alterations made in it; aſſembly of the
Proteſtants ; artifices of the Duke of Bouillon up-
on this occaſion : the edict regiſtrated. The af-
fair of Martha Broſſier. Gratuities and employ-
ments given by Henry to Roſny. The ſtrange
deaths of the Conſtable's wife, and of the Ducheſs
of Beaufort: Henry's grief for the loſs of the Du-

_ cheſs: Roſny comforts him. 1

8 UM.

—— 2
,
*. q
7 4
<a
$
b
D
*
9
2
2 WAKE,
o 273
2
een
*
w

» LIES %

S8 UM M A R F. vii

Memoirs from the year 1599 to 1601. Affairs
of the marquiſate of Saluces. Artifices of the
Duke of Savoy to avoid making a reſtitution of Sa-
luces. Journey of Henry IV. to Blois. Diſſolution
of bis marriage with Margaret of Valois : his a-

$ mours with Madamoiſelle d'Entragues, who per-

ſuades him to give her a promiſe of marriage: the
courage and reſolution of Roſny on this occaſion.

Articles of marriage with the Princeſs of Florence

concluded. Foreign affairs. Roſny takes upon

him the guardianſhip of his nephew D*Epinoy. Re-

vocation of the permiſſion for manufacturing rich

ſſtoffs. Roſny is made Grand Maſter of the ord-

nance, and gives great application to the affairs of
this poſt. The Duke of Savoy comes to Paris;

brings over the courtiers to his intereſt; endea-

vours to bribe Roſny, and afterwards to exclude
him from the conferences: but fails in both at-

tempts, and returns home. Nicole Mignon at-

tempts to poiſon the King. A public diſpute be-
twixt the Biſhop d' Evreux and Du-Pleſſis Mornay.
Ne ſubterfuges of the Duke of Savoy: reaſons

for declaring war againſt him; preparations made

8 8
W
1

by Roſny for this war. Henry IV. marries the
Princeſs of Florence by proxy : takes Chambery,
Bourg, Montmelian, Charbonniers, &c. Other par-

ticulars of this campaign: great ſervices performs

ed there by Roſny, notwithſtanding the jealouſy
and oppoſition of the courtiers. Cardinal Aldo-
brandin comes to negotiate a peace; Roſny's re-
ception of him : the conferences broken off by
the demolition of fort Saint Catharine: reſumed

. by Roſny; who concludes the treaty. The Queen

comes to Paris, and is received by Roſny at the
Arſenal, Foreign affairs. 5
0 SU M-

vill SUMMARY ©
SUMMARY of Book XII.

Memoirs of the year 1601. Affairs of the fi-

nances ; of money, of commerce, &c. Prohibition
againſt carrying gold or ſilver coin out of the king ·

dom. Chamber of juſtice eſtabliſhed, but to little
| purpoſe. The author's refleftions upon luxury and

corruption of manners. The officers of the robe

and finances ſuppreſſed. Journey of Henry IV. to
Orleans. Afﬀairs of the United Provinces. Hen-
ry goes to Calais. The French ambaſſador inſult-
ed at Madrid. Embaſſies from the Grand Seignior
and the Venetians. Eliſabeth comes to Dover.
| Letters betwixt Henry and Eliſabeth. Roſny goes
to Dover. Converſations between Eliſabeth and
Roſny, in which they lay the foundation of the
great deſign againſt the houſe of Auſtria: the great
wiſdom of this queen. Death of young Chatillon-
Coligny. Birth of Lewis XIII. Henry makes La-
Riviere calculate his nativity. The affair of the
iſles concluded with the Grand Duke of Tuſcany.
 Roſny procures the Count of Bethune to be na-
med ambaſſador to Rome, notwithſtanding the en-
deavours of Villeroi and Sillery to the contrary.
Oppoſition made by theſe miniſters to the opinions
and policy of Roſny. Particulars of the conſpira-
cy of Marechal Biron: Roſny endeavours to recal
him to his duty : Henry ſends him ambaſſador to
London; to Sweden: he reſumes his intrigues at
bis return. La-Fin's depoſitions. An account of
the pretended Don Sebaſtian ; and other foreign
affairs. e TS.

|

GGG

8 F

J 5 ales

G n YI.

Remained but ſhort time in the camp before
Laon, after this event. Some difficulties
which aroſe in the treaties, particularly that
with the Baron de Mcdavy, obliged me, in

obedience to his Majeſty's orders, to take a jour-
ney to Rouen, which was followed by a ſecond to

Paris, and another, more conſiderable than both,

to Sedan. |

The Duke of Bouillon gave daily new occa-

ſions of diſcontent to the King. When, through

© his Majeſty's intereſt, he married the heireſs of Se-
dan, he had engaged to bring him a certain
number of troops; but he not only neglected to
fulfill this engagement, but alſo retained, with-

but aſking the King's permiſſion, the troops which

he had lent him to guard his frontier, till he
Was In peaceable poſſeſſion of his new principa-
lity; nor did he even make any excuſe for not

ſending them back, or give him any account

of the ſtare of his affairs. His new grandeur
inſpired him with the vanity of making him

mm

1 ſelf be regarded in Europe as a formidable po-

tctentate. This, which he could not hope from

: £5 4
- r 2
* .
wn *
$43 ws
{x 40

; rat
Fc Ns

a ſtate ſo weak and circumſcribed as his own, he
fought to obtain by all ſorts of machinations and
Vol. II. oo 2 intrigues

4 ME M OI R S Bock VII.
intrigues in the neighbouring courts. All the
incendiaries and malecontents in Europe were ſure
of finding a protector in him, and he was the
main ſpring that actuated the cabals of Auvergne
and Entragues.
One day when the King ſent for me ſo early in
the morning that I found him ſtill in bed, having
only Ozeray and Armagnac in his appartment, .
while we were all conſulting upon meaſures to

prevent the combinations of his ſecret enemies,

his Majeſty dwelt in particular upon the Duke of
Bouillon, and ſeemed greatly affected with his in-
gratitude, after having conferred an obligation
upon him which ought to have attached him to
his intereſts for ever. In effect, the King, by ef-
fectuating his marriage with Mademoiſelle de
Bouillon, had given to this Duke a proof of friend-

ſhip fo much the ſtronger, in that his Majefty ated :

againſt his own judgment, and the advice of al-
moſt all to whom he had imparted it. The day
after this converſation, Beringhen preſented a
gentleman to the King, in his. chamber, who
brought him a letter from Bouillon, in which the
Duke informed his Majeſty of the death of his
wife, and excuſed his delay, by the grief and
perplexity iato which her death had plunged him.
This letter likewiſe gave the King to underſtand,

that Madam de Bouillon had left a will, in which

the bequeathed the principality of Sedan and all
her eſtates to her huſband, and put them under
the protection of the King of France; becauſe it
was expected, that her relations would give the
Duke of Bouillon great diſturbance about this do-
nation. *© That is to ſay, ſaid the King, when he
had finiſhed reading the letter, © that the Duke of
Bouillon has great occaſion for my alliſtance :
Is he not very civil?“
To humble and puniſh the Duke, his Majeſty
was ſtrongly tempted to leave him to e all
alone

1 „ U 1. E

alone with theſe difflculties; but the native ſeect⸗
neſs of his diſpoſition, and the remembrance of
the Duke's former ſervices, {till prevailed He
| anſwered the Duke by a compliment of condo».
| lence upon the death of the Ducheſs of Bouillon;
and aſſured him of his willingneſs to aſſiſt him.
If the king had thought that this laſt mark of his
_ friendſhip would have reduced the Duke of Bouil-
Ion for ever to his duty, the commiſſion of him
whom he ſent with this letter would have con-
| ſiſted in barely delivering it to the Duke; and
any inconſiderable perſon might have ſufficed for
that: but this Prince, accuſtomed to confer bene-
fits only on the ungrateful, intended to make this
| deputation anſwer ſeveral purpoſes. He turned
towards me, and told me, that in his opinion Iwas
the propereſt perſon to carry this letter; becauſe,
if of itſelf it was not able to fix Bouillon in his
AJauly, the arguments of a man, who had a right
__ to repreſent it to him ſtrongly, might perhaps ac-
compliſh it; and that, if neither the one nor the

other proved effectual, it was neceſſary to pene-

trate into the Duke's ſecret intentions, and to exa-
mine narrowly the will, and the Fran dona -
tion of Madam de Bovillon. ;

This embaſſy ſeemed perfectly Similar to that

which had drawn upon me the hatred of the
Princeſs and of the Count of Soiſſons; and my
 tirſt emotion upon receiving it was an uneaſineſs
that the King's ſervice generaſly engaged me in affairs
o diſagreeable. Henry, who gueſſed partly at what
paſſed in my mind, forgot nothing which he i-
magined capable of leſſening the unpleaſantneſs
ol this commiſſion : he told me, that the ſucceſs
Vhich fortune ſeemed to annex to all affairs
wherein I was employed, as a reward due to my
___ fidelity, induced him to employ me, preferably
do any other: that none of my ſervices were loſt
upon him; and that he took extremely kind the

A 3 attention

4 M E M OI R S Book VII.

attention I always ſhewed to avoid or break off
any connexions which were capable of cooling
my zeal for him. Speaking theſe words, he em-
braced me tenderly ; adding, with a kindneſs that
went to my heart, that he intreated me to be care-
ful of my own ſafety, ſince I ſhould be obliged
to paſs through placcs ſubject to the Guiles, and

to preſerve myſelf for a prince who loved me.

Princes who behave in this manner cannot fail to
be faithfully ſerved. _

I was at that time luckily well enough pro-
vided with money, having ſent for remittances
from Roſny and Moret, where my wife was;
and fo was in a condition to ſatisty, without de-
lay, the king” s impatience for my departure.
Three hours after I had received this order I went
to Bruyeres, where my equipage lay, and, followed
by five and twenty troopers well armed, in four
days I arrived, without any bad accident, within
view of Sedan. The Duke, being informed of my
arrival, came to meet meas far as the village of Tor-
CY, which ſeparates this little ſtate from France;
there he alighted, and put on a ſad countenance
to receive my compliment, and to read the King's
letter. He then loaded me with perſonal civilities;
ſeemed charmed with the choice his Majeſty had
made; and perſiſted (notwithſtanding my repeat-
ed inſtances) to treat me as an ambaſſador, I
was lodged magnificently, and all the expences
of my retinue defrayed, He ſhewed me, with
great complaiſance, the fortifications he had raiſed
about his caſtle of Sedan, by which he was confi-
dent thit it would be impregnable, I was not
of the ſame opinion; all the expence the Duke
Was at to ſtrengthen this place, could not ſappiy
the defect of its ſitvation.

The fiege of Laon, of which the Duke inqui-

red the news, afforded us matter for entering into

a more particular converſation. After reiterated aſ-
lurances

-

ends — „

4594. 0 * 1 7
| ſurances of his attachment to the king, the Duke
aſked me, if the many ſubjects of complaint which
his Majeſty had received from the Spaniſh Low
Countries, had not determined him to carry the

: war thither ; and ſpoke to me of this project, as
an affair which he ardently wiſhed to ſee execu-

ted. He expatiated upon the advantage of this

war; upon the manner in which the provinces

of Luxembourg, Liege and Namur, might be at-

_ tacked ; upon the correſpondences which, with

this view, he carried on in the principal cities of
Flanders ; and upon the powerful aſliſtance he
offered to carry thither. It was not difficult to
believe, that he had uſed his utmoſt endeavours to
promote a war, of which all the advantage would
accrue io himſelf. He was greatly deceived in ima-
gining the King equally intereſted in a project, that
with regard to him was a pure chimera, Indeed the
Duke, fearing that at court it would be treated
with ridicule, omitted nothing which he thought
might bring me to approve of it, by painting
it in the fineſt colours, and with all the air of
diſintereſtedneſs capable of impoling upon me.
After having thus diſcourſed upon Flanders, he
plunged into politics, and dilplayed all his elo-
quence in proving to me, that it being the
King's chief intereſt to huwble the houſe of Au-
ſtria, he could never attain this end but by
keeping up a ſtrict union with the Proteſtants.
The King's late abjuration, he ſuppoſed, was
but a neceſſary ceremonial, which had only
changed his external appearance; and which he
thought he proved ſufficiently, by two or three
ſtrokes of raillery upon ſome ſuperſtitious praQti-
ces of the catholic devotees , upon the mendicant
ons, and upon the equivocations of the =
gits

The Duke of Bouillon ſtopped here, like a man
who was afraid of explaining himſelf too —
ang.

3 M E M O I R 8 Book VII.
and looked upon me attentively with a feigned
inquietude. Hitherto 1 had liſtened to him with-
out interruption ; and diſcovered, without his per-
ceiving it, all the ideas which roſe in that am-
| bitious brain. But many things {ſtill remained to
be known, for which it was only neceſſary, I
thought, to let him ſpeak a long time ; for it
is not poſſible but that a man, who is at once ex-
tremely vain, and a great talker, ſhould, at length,
| betray all his ſecrets: 1 therefore forced a ſmile
into my countenance, and aſſumed the air of one
filled with admiretion of his wit, his policy, and
his eloquence. The Duke, agreeably flattered,
did not need much entreaty, but reſuming his
diſcourſe, he went on to make me ſenſible of the
true intereſt of the Proteſtants, in the preſent ſi-
tuation of affairs in France. Here it became ne-
ceſſary for me to divine more than he faid; ei-
ther becauſe the Duke of Bouillon's expreſſion ſuf-
fered a little from the conſtraint he laid himſelf
under, for fear of indiſcretion *, or becauſe he
thought the affectation of a myſterious air did
more honour to himſelf and the party, or, in
fine, becauſe his diſcourſe was built on a ſyſtem
ſo ſublime, and ideas fo ecke, that he like-
wWiſe was loſt in it as well as I.
Irecalled the Duke from this too elevated flight ;

The true n of the Puke de Bouillon, is thus given us:
« On ſet purpoſe he uſed to expreſs him ſelf,“ ſays the writer of his
life, © in ſo dark and perplexed a manner, that he could give to
** what he ſpoke any ſenſe that he pleaſed. He pretended that there
e were ſome nice conjunctuies, in which a man mult either be ſi-
“ lent, or follow his manner of ſpeaking.” Another maxim of
the Duke de Bouillon's, according to the ſame writer, was, That
«< a man ought to be very cautious of giving any thing under
his hand. A man interpiets what he has ſpoken as he plea-
* ſes; and he agrees only to fo much of it as he thinks proper, re-
„ tienching more or lefs. He approves or diſapproves as he thinks
« convenient. But the caſe is not the ſame with regard to what
&« is written,” Cc. M. de Sully was of a quite contrary opinion.
We may find ſome politicians, who will not condemn the Duke de
Bouillon; but none who does not commend the Duke de Sully.

and

„„ "Gn ID ey FF” -q--

„ bw WV £1 „„ ws @

„% © G6 ted ed.

1 1594. O F S8 JL LT. Sy
and he told me more plainly, that the Proteſtants
were ſo much diſguſted at the King's converſion,
that he could allay their apprehenſions no other-
wiſe, than by declaring war againſt Spain con-
jointly with them; that, unleſs this was done, it
Vould be impoſſible to perſuade them, that they
.. were not made a ſacrifice of, and for the future
would be always expoſed to the violences of the
French Catholics, ating in concert with the Pope
and the Spaniards. The Duke urged, as proof of
this, a piece of intelligence, which he thought
perhaps as falſe as it really was. Villeroi, ſaid
he, had upon the part of the Dukes of Lorrain,
Maienne, and Mercceur, propoſed to the King, at
Fontainebleau, this union between France and
Spain; and the Pope would not have refuſed the
King his apoſtolic benediction, with a bull, ac-
_- knowledging him King of France, but becauſe he
Would have this union to be the preliminary.

To this proof Bouillon added others equally

groundleſs, by which he thought to make it ap-

pear, that the Catholics had wholly eſtranged the
King from the Proteſtants, and had prevailed up-
on him to uſe them with great injuſtice, The

grievances of the Proteſtants thus eſtabliſhed, the

Duke was willing to inform me of the remedy _
they had thought proper to apply. They were
preparing, he ſaid, forthwith to fortify all their
places of ſtrength, to chuſe a leader without the
_ kingdom, and to eſtabliſh within it a general
Council for the affairs of religion, a place which

he did not name, to which all the different

chu ches were to addreſs themſelves, and which
Was to determine, in the laſt reſort, all the affairs
of the ten other provincial councils, into which
the whole Calviniſt part of France was to be divided;
and that the power of this {overeign council might
be abſolute and inconteſtable, a protector or foreign

prince

10 M E M OI RS Bock VII.

prince was to be put at its head, capable of ma-
king it reſpected.

Whilſt he was talking of theſe ſubjects, the

Duke of Bouillon, according to the occaſion he
had to dazzle, to convince, or to deceive me, aſ-
ſumed ſucceſſively the character of a friend and
ally of the King, of a good Proteſtant, or of a

mere relater of facts, but always that of a man con-

ſummate in politics, and the depoſitary of all the
moſt ſecret affairs of the Proteſtants. He could

nor, however, involve himſelf ſo well in myſte-

ry, but that I comprehended clearly enough, that
all theſe projects of high and low councils, theſe

regulations ſo particulariſed, might very pro-

bably have their ſole exiſtence in the Duke's own

brain, and not in the ſynods of St Maixant, and

St Foi, as he would have had me to believe.
This foreign prince or protector, eſpecially, ſeem-
ed to me to be purely his own creating, and in
reality no other than himſelf, who gave his own
views for ſo many determined points, and all

his end in this (for what ſprings will not ambi-
tion put in motion ?) was perhaps nothing elſe

than that I, by imparting theſe deſigns to the
court, as if the Calviniſts had really formed them,
and were ready to put them in execution, ſhould

raiſe the King's indignation againſt them ; and by
this artifice he might oblige the Huguenots to take

ſuch a reſolution as he wiſhed them to take, but
durſt not openly infpire them with; which was,
to chuſe him for a leader, whom the hatred and

complaints of the Catholics pointed out to them

for a defender. All that happened in the ſequel
has but the more confirmed me in this thought.

After having thus, as he imagined, made me
ſubſervient to his deſigns, the Duke reflected, that
he ſhould loſe more than he gained, if the King,
of whole aſſiſtance he ſtood in need, ſhould en-
tertain any ſuſpicion to his diſadvantage ; he there-

fore

5
ARS
A
ET;
1
3
* 2 *
+
Ax Pp
7
N,
ts
7 *
*
7
+ of
TY?

TW Li „ 2M _T SD % =

A

C r r -  . E

*

w

— ——

A © 1594 SF UTCUW LEEL ©

fore reſerved a moſt refined ſtroke of policy for
the laſt. This was to . aſſure me, that theſe propo.

ſals had indeed been made him, but that, far from

_ approving them, or offering to ſecond them, he
had uſed all his endeavours to reclaim the party
from their prejudices; in which he bad the miſ-
fortune not to be ſucceſsful. I know not if it be
poſſible to imagine any thing ſo double and ſo
crafty. Certainly if the Duke of Bouillon could
flatter himſelf, that theſe arts would leave me
in abſolute ignorance of the affairs of the Pro-

teſtants, and the diſpoſitions of the ſeditious, he

could not at leaſt prevent me from diſcerning

ſomething of his own particular ſentiments with

regard to the prince whom he was betraying

J anſwered a diſcourſe fo full of artifice, by

. telling nothing but the plain truth, which is the

moſt effectual way to diſconcert politicians lo curi-

ouſly diſguiſed. I aſſured him, in few words,
that the King was always the ſame with regard

to the Proteſtants : that he was ready to grant
them all the advantages they could reaſonably de-

mand; but that the preſent cogjuncture obliged him
do defer ſome time longer thoſe teſtimonies of his
_ . friendſhip : that his majeſty had not forgot any
of thoſe cauſes which Spain had given him to
hate her; and that he would always preſerve a
lively reſentment of them, even if he were not
to enter into the common concern of Europe, to
put a ſtop to the deſign of the houſe of Auſtria for

univerſal monarchy ; but that, in order to ſecure

ſucceſs, it was previouſly neceſſary that all ſhould
be quiet within his kingdom, ſince it might be ex-
pected that Spain would defend herſelf in a very

different manner, when ſhe ſaw herſelf directly at-
tacked, than ſhe had done in a war, wherein ſhe
had engaged only as an auxiliary.

I told the Duke de Boulen, that I readily be-

lieved

” - — —

— * * 1 * — 2 3 on. = _ Y
5 . ” * * _ — - _— N PRES. > BEE bn 1 2 . REL >
” r — — a _—_ — * . 6 : * * ” 2 — *

4 ; TR 4s r N . 8 " = — 1 5 * n 5 — — — . — — nag :
— 7 . n ä » © Why BY TOE r * W a _ . TY * 2 — 2 25; OO Se Is — - = CAPE 2

< — * 7 = — . oe 2 5 — 8 — uo as = . oh Fs - WO B32 i

, $ : : y : —_ : - — — 0 CEOS rr KID 2 — gy po St: 8 5 Cots I - _-
*

the donation *. He formed the ſame judgment

Ono perm cnpmopr_ par n—o_i
8 * —

ws >
46 ** "" © * *
reer s
— 1 _ —
5 OV - IT * *
1

2 NM R M O TT R S Bock VII.

lieved all he had ſaid to me with regard to himſelf,
ſince he muſt be ſenſible that the principles of

honour, juſtice, and gratitude, pointed out to him

too plainly the conduct he ought to obſerve with
the King, to leave him any poſlibility of miſta-
king it. He refuſed mie the troops 1 demanded

for Henry, nor would he permit me even to peruſe

Madam de Bouillon's laſt will, ſaying, that ſhe _
had ſealed it in a caſket, and exacted a promiſe
from him, that he would not open it but with the

uſual forms of law, if any one ſhould conteſt its va-
lidity, and that ſhe had afterwards obliged him to

confirm his promiſe with an oath. From all this, it

was not difficult for me to comprehend that my

remonſtrances were uſeleſs ; therefore my com-

miſſion being now executed, I reſolved to return
immediately to Laon.

I was greatly ſurpriſed, on my el at the
camp, to meet the King, who was going to hunt,

_ paſſing ſo near the walls of the city that he was

within muſquet-ſhot of it. was ſoon informed,
that both ſides had laid down their arms, the city
having capitulated upon condition to

ten days, if within that time they were not aſſiſt-
ed by an army, or at leaſt if a reinforcement of

eight or nine hundred men were not thrown into

the place, Henry made me keep cloſe beſide him

during the chaſe, that he might hear all the par-
ticulars of my journey, When I told him that

the Duke of Bouillon refufed to ſhew me the

will of the deceaſed Dutcheſs, he replied, that
after this he ſaw well what he ought to think of

=

n order to deſtroy the ſuſpicions which the whole of whis

account might raiſe as to the reality of that donation of the Dutch-

eſs of Bouillon, I will give you what the Duke de Bouillon's bio-
grapher ſays on this head. © By her laſt will,” ſays he, © ſhe ap-
pointed the Duke de ny, her huſband, her uniyerſal heir.

« I;

; 1504. O F 8 TI. L T. 13
"of the Duke of Bouillon as I did, “ who offers,”
5 fad he, to be a mediator in diſturbances of
c which he himſelf has been the ſole author,”
Nor was he leſs diſpleaſed at his refuling to End
- the troops he demanded : but the preſent con-

JI juncture required that his Majeſty ſhould diſſemble
e all theſe occaſions of diſcontent ; and therefore,
e in public, he appeared to be very well ſatisfied with _
e the Duke's conduct, and determined to maintain
e him in Sedan. With reſpe&t to the war with

- Spain, which I was commiſſioned to propoſe to
o him, he left it to be deliberated upon in full coun-
it CCCCCCꝙ00000 int £7
y The Count of Sommerive, Du-Bourg and Jean»
- min, finding it impoſſible for them to prevent the
n inſurrection of the citizens, and of the garriſon of
Laon, who were incenſed againſt them as tyrants,
t, 4 Tt was currently reported that, notwichſtanding this laſt will ok
Is the Dutcheſs, the ſucceſſion would be conteſted with her huſband :
[the truth is, Charles de la Mark, the Count de Maulevrier,
uncle to Charlotte de la Mark, alledged that this ſucceſſion be-
94 « Jonged to him, and that ſhe could not diſpoſe of it, in favour of her
n c huſband, to his prejadice. The Duke de Montpenſier pretended
k. „ likewiſe, that the ſovereignties of Bouillon, Sedan, Jamets, and
„ Ravcourt, could not be conteſted with him; as he had been ſub-
of „e ſtituted therein by Robert dela Mark, the laſt Duke of Bouillon.
0 « The Dake de Bouillon thought it more cligible to accommodate
N ©. matters with cheſe two claimants, than to engage in a law-fuit,
which would divert him from the execution of his grand deſigns:
. « the accommadation was concluded; and the ſovereign juriſdiction
alk « of Bouillon, Sedan, and Raucourt, remained in property to him.“
16 Hiſt de Henry duc de Bouillon, par Mar ſollier, tom. 2 liv, 4. This
5 hiſtorian likewiſe ſpeaks of the Duke de Sally's journey to Sedan, and
at of the protection which Henry IV. offered the Duke de Bouillon
of on this occaſion. But here we cannot but obſerve, that it would
nt have been much better not to quote, on this ſubject, Sully's Me-
= moirs, than to diſguiſe their ſenſe, and conceal, as he has done, the
0 objection chat ariſes from the text of theſe Memoirs: and this ſo
much the 1ather (t would be to no purpoſe to diſſemble it, after all
pe. that has been ſaid of it, and very latcly, by Amelot de la Houſlaye,
. in his Memoirs, in the article Bouillon la Mack) fo much the ra-
10. ther, 1 ſay, as Henry IV. and the Duke de Sully, are not the on-

ly perſons who ſeem to doubt of the reality of ſuch donation. |
ir, Vor. H. B who

|

Genes Foo pp ²˙ eee a9 > 8 —
2 - ©. A e 5

La 7 pa es 1
r n —
e e a ny + Ine
*

*
7 A g
» $43 *
* .
13:B
1
: $4.53}
=_ .
4 .
1
: 1
6
1 >
IF: $4
. 11
i
YL
'*:
1
1
$1136
7 1
©5407 *
4 N
1
ls Y
n.
1 by
1. bas
1 7
1+, HERE
iN; 3 *
.
+; .
.
1
.
1
*Y
. 42H
2 $
t
- 324
.
1
16 17}
_ p
* x
Wet ,
"531481
* 4 14 1
» *.
.
1
9 :
- 8%
105 4
I.
: * FEED?
+ *
1
+ $8000
„
1 $5
271
f .
FF
| 228 af
20 L
3
Ot W x!
$13:
"$3 Lv 8
10
705 „
{ 4 *
*1 *
es 4
1
18 F
os © l
. ; :
1 :
1.5 b
wh t
; 5 1
1 7
13
1 7% 2
1 E
; [3
7 1 ,:
A ba
11
4 A; N
TS: 1
1 >
1% [4
x
l $*
E
7
31 i
_
_ :
1
35
W.
8
0 'v ;
*
2 „
YI L
F - .
*
* 5 15
114
' 1 N
[ 1 +1}
;
q *
8 »
| 4 l
N
$
.
3
*
„
by
.
1
2
*

14 M E M OI R S Book VII.

who had rendered their domination inſupportable,

thought proper to yield before the time preſeri-

bed for delivering the city to the King. They

had no longer any hopes of aſſiſtance, after the
misfortune which happened to a reinforcement

which the Duke of Matenne had attempted to

throw into the place. This reinforcement co.
ming too late, near Laon, to have any hopes of

ſurpriſing the beſiegers, thought it beſt to wait for
night in the wood, where they kept themſelves

_ concealed all that day. The King hunting in that

part of the foreſt at the ſame time, his dogs dil-

covered the ambuſcade. The enemies, although
eight or nine hundred in number, inſtead of ſhew-
ing themſelves or attacking the King, who had only

three hundred horſe with him, thought they ſhould
be able to avoid an abſolute diſcovery by ſeparating,
the better to conceal themſelves: but the dogs

purſued them inceſſantly, and the King's troop
arriving in the mean time, they were ſurpriſed in

{o great a diſorder, that our footmen and ſervants

only, without any aſſiſtance from the three hun-

dred horſemen, - maſtered and pillaged them.
After the ſurrender of Laon, the King judged

it proper to take a journey to the frontiers of

Flanders ; his chief inducement to it being the

hopes that many of theſe cities would ſurrender

to him at his approach. The event did not anſwer
his intelligence and expectations; and his Majeſty
drew no other advantage from his journey, than
confirming in their allegiance Amiens, Abbeville,

Montrenil, Peronne, and ſeveral other cities, in-
to each of which he made a ſolemn entry. I can

{ay no more of the tranſactions here, the King's
ſervice calling me at that time to Paris upon af-
fairs of leſs importance than the former, and which

for that reaſon I ſhall nor enter into a detail of,

any more than of what paſſed in the different
provinces

74
Wy. e
D
fy
8 ö 2
en Pig 2-H
$ 3

Rc

＋

i-

ey

he f

nt 7

0.
of
for L
e

l-

gh.

W- ;

Ws
dd

g,
gs

in | 7

f
he 5

ty 8

7

nt
1
. *

i %
my 32
3
3
3
3

* 2 * 55 9
K
wp) :
a 15

provinces of the kingdom. The reduction of

Morlais, and Quimper, by Marechal *  Aumont,

with the aſſiſtance of the Engliſh forces; the

building of fort du Croiſic, by the Duke of Mer-
coeur, at the head of his Spaniards, to be a check
upon Breſt, were the moſt conſiderable exploits
of the two parties in Brittany. Savoy, Piedmont,
Provence and Davphine, continued to be the
theatre of a + war always favourable to Leſdi-
guieres, againſt the Duke of Savoy, notwithſtand-

ing the defeat and taking of Crequy.

The Duke of Matenne, ſeeing Laon taken, al-
moſt all Picardy in the King's party, the chief
officers of the league, and the Duke of Guiſe him-
ſelf, diſpoſed to treat ſoon of an accommodation
with his Majeſty, complied at laſt with the ſenti-
ments of the Preſident Jeannin , who had long
preſſed him to fix himſelf in one ſingle province,

and there make powerful efforts in time, to ren-

der himſelf independent; ſo that, after fortune
had ſubjected all to the King, which he doubted
not would ſoon happen, he might at leaſt have

ſome remains of his eſtate for a retreat.

Burgundy was the province fixed upon by the
Duke of Maienne; and he marched thither with
his forces, after placing good garriſons in Dour-

„lle was killed the following year when beſieging Comper, by

a cannon- ball that broke his arm to ſhatters ; being upwards of ſeven»

ty years of age: he ſaid no more when he found himſelf wounded,

than theſe words, “ I have got it”. He was generally eſtecmed,
and generally regretted, See his eulogy and great qualities in M. de

Thou, b. 113. ED ns | |
F See theſe military expeditions in the hiſtorians.
t I know not if the author does not here a little too lightly tax

this preſident: at leaſt it has been ſaid, that more than two y ears

before, at his return from Spain, he had been the fiſt to adviſe

the Duke de Maſenne to come to an agreement with the King; as
being diſguſted at the haughtineſs and exceſſive vanity with which
di7 the King of Spain, in treating with him, had ſaid, “ My town of
Paris, my town of Orleans”, as if France had actually been his

own.
B: 2 lens,

% ͤ el ee .

lens, La-Fere, and Soiſſons. Beſides his being
already in poſſeſſion of great part of this province,

its contiguity to Savoy, Franche Comte, Lor-

Tain, Switzerland, and Germany, from whence
he hoped to draw great ſupplies, was a new mo-
tive to ſettle there The Pope, and the Empe—
ror, ſeemed to enter into his views: he might
ſtrengthen his right of conqueſt, by a reſignation
in form, which Spain would grant him 10 much
the more willingly, as by that means ſhe would
revive a claim upon Burgundy, long ſince ſup—
preſſed, but never wholly renounced, All theſe
likely appearances made it be believed by ma-
ny perſons, that the ancient kingdom of Burgun-
dy was upon the point of being reſtored. The
Duke of Matenne's conduct in theſe quarters,
the remaining part of this year, and till the
month of April in the following, ſupported this
opinion; and I had Jeſs reaſon than any other
to doubt of his intention in this reſpect, after the

letters I ſaw at Paris, ia the hands of the Cardi-

nal de Bourbon.
But, unfortunately for the Duke of Mai tenne, the
| Burgund ans were not in the humour of chuſing
a ſubject for their maſter : they never before gave
ſuch convincing proofs of their fidelity to their
ſovereign. The Duke of Guiſe beginning with
endeavours to ſecure Beaune, by throwing a
ſtrong garriſon into it, the burghers roſe againſt
them, defeated them, and forced them to ſhut
themſelves up in the caſtle: and, as they might
ſtill ſuffer great inconveniencies from them, they
fortified themſelves with barricadoes againſt the
caſtle, and invited Marechal Biron to come to
their aſſiſtance, permitting him to lodge his little
army fix weeks within their walls. They after-
wards attacked the caſtle in form, with a battery
of (weave pieces of cannon ; and carried on their
works

rl LY. 17

Works ſo vigorouſly, that they drove out at laſt
the garriſon of the league. I ſhall ſpeedily re-
ſume the expeditions in Burgundy; at preſent I

muſt leave them, to return to the affairs of the
capital. 5 =D

perceived the Cardinal's illneſs to increaſe ſo

much every day, that, not doubting but his end _

was very near, I ſtaid at Paris to give the King
immediate notice of it, He died without making

that diſpoſition of his benefices which he ſeemed
to have had fo much at heart. His Majeſty was
afflicted at his death, having loſt a good kinſ-

man and an affectionate ſubject. He wrote to me,
that he was oppreſſed with the importunity of

ſome perſons who coveted the Cardinal's ſpoils ;
and that, to get rid of them, his general anſwer
Was, that they were already diſpoſed of. His deſigns
with regard to thele benefices were as follows:
In the agreement with the Abbot de Tiron, cer-
| tain abbeys belonging to the Chancellor and the
Governor of Pont-de-PArche were yielded to him,
for which thoſe two gentlemen demanded to be
doubly indemnified out of the benefices of the
deceaſed Cardinal, The King was deſirous that
the Abbe de Tiron ſhould releaſe theſe abbeys to
the proprietors, and receive in exchange for them
the archbiſhopric of Rouen, valued at thirty
thouſand livres a year, but charged by the King
with the payment of a penſion of four thouſand
crowns, which he had promiſed to the Chevalier

D' Oiſe, retaining for himſelf Gaillonhouſe, which

| he deſigned to purchaſe from the Abbe; and he

ordered me to diſpoſe him to accept of this equi-

valent. As for the abbey of St Ouen, one of the
_ fineſt benefices the deceaſed Cardinal had poſſeſſed,
_ the King, as yet, had not beftowed it on any
one; and he had the goodneſs to tell me, that

1 WE

8 M E M O IR S Bock VII.

he would not do it without charging it with a

penſion of ten thouſand livres for me.
The greateſt difficulty I met with in managing
the King's affairs at Paris, was to communicate
his prudent ceconomy to the directors of his fi-
nances, the ſuperintendant eſpecially. The abuſe
ol ſuffering the finances to become a prey to fa-
vourites, (an evil, the ſource of which may be

traced back to the reign of Charles VIII.) had in

this laſt reign increafed to ſuch a degree, that had
a man of the greateſt induſtry, prudence, and
integrity imaginable, been at the head of. the fi-
nances, he perhaps would not have been able to
remedy the bad conſequences of fo prodigious a a
diſſipation: and, unhappily, D'O “ poſſeſſed none
of theſe qualities. His temperament naturally
formed for profuſion, indolence, and voluptu-

ouſneſs, had. been wholly ruined by all thoſe vices | ?

for which the court of Henry III. was famous,

gaming high, exceſſive debauchery, expenſive 4
follies, domeſtic diſorders, and extravagancies of

every kind. D'O was on a footing with Bclle-
garde, Souvrai, Villequier, Quelus, Saint Luc,
Maugiron, Saint-Megrin, Livarrot, Joyeuſe, E-
pernon, La-Valette, Du-Bouchage, Thermes,
and many other leſs declared. favourites: and the

title of minion was all the recommendation he _

had for a poſt which the moſt inconſiderate prin-
ces think fit, for their own intereſt, to except

from thoſe with which they reward ſuch ſort of
ſervants, e 1 4

Such was the man by whom the finances were

conducted at a time, when, minions and miſtreſſes

Franeis D'O, Lord of Freſnes, Maillebois, &c. firſt gentleman f

of the bed chamber, governor of Paris and the iſle of France, ſu-
perintendant of the finances, Cc. He ſurpaſſed kings and prin-

ces in extravagance and prodigality; for, even to his ſuppers,
he had pies made of muſk and amber ſerved vp, that amounted to

twenty five erowns,” Journal de L'Eteile, Ann. 1594, p. 37+
6 | | eing

784
52
3
*

3
od
EY
$
\ 1

Bs
+
© © 8

Pc. 7
2
W

MASS 1118
N 5
7 2
1 32
r ,
+ LL ESR
I

ttt wv

= being excluded from the council, one would have

expected they ſhould have taken a quite different
form: and what is moſt ſurpriſing, the King, in
his moſt urgent occaſions, had not even the pri-
vilege of dividing his own revenues with the ſu-

perintendant D'O did not ſcruple to let him

loſe a city or a governor for the want of a very
inconſiderable ſum of money, while at the fame
time he denied none to his pleaſures. Lieramont,
governor of Catelet, applied to me, to ſolicit the
payment of his garriſon from D'Q : I thought the

affair of ſuch importance, that I got over my re-
luctance, and acquitted myſelf of my commiſſion ;

mus“. LeGrain b. 7

but with little ſucceſs. The ſuperintendant, af-
ter I had left him, ſaid to Meſſieurs d'Edouville
and de Mouſſy, that he had rather fee this place
in the hands of Spaniards than Proteſtants, Lie-
ramont was of that religion. Mouſſy, who was

my kinſman, repeating this diſcourle to me, 1

declared to the ſuperintendant, that I would make
him anſwerable for the place, if it were Joſt for
want of this payment, But this menace had lit-
tle effect on him. Dn .
Fortunately for the King, a retention of urine
delivered him, a few days after, from ſo bad a
ſubject. And it is worthy of obſervation, that
this man, who was poſſeſſed of more than four
millions, or rather of all the money in the

kingdom, which he diſpoſed of almoſt abſolutely;
more ſplendid in his equipages, his furniture, and
his table, than the King himſelf, was not yet a-
vandoned by his phylicians, when his relations,
who had always ſeemed to bear him great affec-
tion, his domeſtics *, and ſome others, under
* He had no children by Charlotte Catherine de Villequier, h's

wife. “ Henry IV. playing at tennis with M. D'O, made him
* obſerve that the marker ſtole their balls, and afterwards called to

„ him with a loud voice, D'O, you ſe that all the world cheats

the

20 MEMOIR S Bock VII.
the title of creditors, pillaged him with ſuch ea-
gerneſs, and ſo completely, that, a long time be-
fore he expired, there was nothing left but bare
walls in the chamber where he lay; as if fortune

thought fit to finiſh with him at leaſt by an act

of juſtice *. :
he King returned to Paris to treat of a truce,
which the Duke of Lorrain requeſted inſtantly;

and of an accommodation with the Duke of Guile,

who follicited it by the Ducheſs of Guile, his mo-
ther, the King's couſin-german, and Mademoi-
ſelle De Guiſe, his ſiſter. It muſt be confeſſed,
that of all thoſe perſons who had been in arms
againſt the King, the Duke of Guile deſerved the

moſt indulgence. To the common motives of

religion and independence, which ſeemed to au-
thoriſe all things, he joined that of a father aſſaſſi-
nated by the order of the preſent king's predeceſſor,
It was Madam De Guiſe, his mother, whole per-

ſuaſions chiefly induced him to take this ſtep: ſhe

was continually repreſenting to her ſon, that the
revolt of the princes and nobility of the kingdom,

* « If” ſays M. de Gillon, © each muſt give in his accounts a-

„ bove, I believe that poor D'O will find himſelf much at a loG to

« find good documents for his. It was ſaid that he died very much
 & jn debt, more than he was worth; and that there were five and twenty
« or thirty officers in his houſe when he died. The treaſurers re-
« gretted him extremely, and called him their father: it
« was even ſaid. that three of them gave each fifty crowns to Col-
jo to encourage him to dreſs him properly. M. le Grand, his

good friend, was almoſt diſtracted for his loſs; for he allowed
& him every year one hundred thouſend franks to ſpend. Madame
& was not at all ſorry for it, becauſe he almoſt ſtarved her: thoſe
& of the religion regretted him as little, for he withed them no good,
« Madam de Liancourt mourned for him, becauſe ſhe could do with
« him as ſhe pleaſed; and if he kept her in favour with the King
& — M. Scguier, the Dean, who aſſiſſed him to the laſt, as like-
« wiſe did his brothers, repeated to him, as he was dying, Have
« mercy on me, O Ged Some of the laſt words he ſpoke were, Re-
e member me to his Majeſly; he will know better, after my death,
« wherein I have been of ſeryice to him, than he did while I lived,”

L*Etoile, ibid. | | 05
which

*

i; 4;
+ "51

1594. „% > UV. Þ--1> " -
which in the beginning was juſtified by religion,
became criminal after Henry had removed the on-

ly obſtacle that could hinder him from enjoying

his right of inheritance to the crown. 5

In any other age, which had not, like this,

loſt every diſtinction between virtue and vice,
this woman would have been the ornament of her
ſex, for the qualities of her heart and mind.
ler whole conduct was regulated by a native
rectitude of ſoul; fo that it was eaſy to ſee that

ihe had not even the idea of evil, either to act,
or to adviſe it: and at the ſame time of fo ſweet
a diſpoſition, that ſhe never was ſubjected to the
ſmalleſt emotion of hatred, malignity, envy, or
even ill humour. No woman ever poſſeſſed ſo
many graces of converſation, or added to a wit
| fo ſubtil and refined, a ſimplicity fo artleſs and
agreeable, Her repartees were full of ſalt and
ſprightlineſs; and the pleaſing, as well as great-
er qualities, ſo happily blended in her compoſi-
tion, that ſhe was, at once, tender and lively,
tranquil and gay. it was not long before the
King became perfectly well acquainted with the
character of this lady; and from that moment he
not only forgot all his reſentment, but alſo be-
haved towards her with all the familiarity and
frankneſs of a ſincere friend. He conſented to
give the neceſſary paſſports to the Sieurs de la
Rochette, Perigord, and Bigot, whom the Duke
of Guile ſent to propoſe his demands; and, whol-
ly ſubdued by the inflances of theſe two ladies,
named, on his fide, three agents to treat with
the Duke: theſe were the Chancellor De Cha-
vißgny, the Duke de Retz, and Beaulieu- Rule, ſe·
cretary of ſtate,

Theſe three perſons, to ſhew their great ill
in negotiating, began at firſt by uſing all thoſe
turns and artifices which policy has wrongfully

introduced

22 M E M O I R 8 Bock VII.

introduced in the place of that frank and open

conduct, that without deceiving any one, pro-

duces the ſame effect. Their conferences laſted

ten days ſucceſſively; yet at the end of this time
the ſmalleſt preliminary was not ſettled, Madam
de Guiſe, who was tortured by theſe affected de-
lays, came one day into the King's apartment,

when his Majeſty did me the honour to converſe

with me, holding my hand; and turning the dil-
courſe upon the treaty with her fon, ſhe com-

plained to the King, with her uſual gaiety, but
mingled with a little impatience, that he had em-

ployed three men, © who go,” ſaid ſne, “ three

“different roads to reach no end; the firſt, by
„ never ſaying more than theſe words, We

«. muſt conſider; we muſt adviſe ; let us do better;
the ſecond, by not underſtanding himſelf, al-

though he ſpeaks. almoſt continually : and the

« third, by never ceaſing to find fault,” This

was, in reality, the true character of the three ne-

gotiators, This lady, ſuffering herſelf to be
wholly tranſported by her zeal for the King, and

tenderneſs for her ſon, taking his Majeſty's hand,

which ſhe kiſſed, notwithſtanding Henry's endea-
vours to the contrary, ſhe conjured him to re-
ceive the returning allegiance of the Duke of Guile,
and give her the conſolation to ſee her family re-
{ſtored to the favour of their King. She ſpoke

with an effuſion of heart ſo ſtrong and lively, that
the King, affected by it even to tears, could not

hinder himſelf from anſwering, © Well, couſin,

*& what is it you deſire me to do? I can refule
« you nothing” © All I deſire,” replied ſhe,
is, that you will name the perſon whoſe hand

ce

00 your Majeſty holds to treat with my ſon.“

“ What!” returned the King, “this wicked Hu-

* guenot, Truly I grant him you very willing-

5 ly, although I know that he is your 3 *
and

$44.4

pe of

'T 3
2

2

N
*

31

$

I 54

„ „„ —˙ i ak. a, 4 to ir He. 9

eine
.

1594. f 0 F 8 ; FEY 1 \ #38 | 23

ce and that he has a very great friendſhip for you.”
That very moment he removed the cogniſance
of this affair from the three commiſſaries, and

cauſed a commiſſion, under the great ſeal, to be

given to me; not only for ſettling the treaty with
the Duke of Guiſe, but alſo for the affairs of the
whole province of Champaigne. It may be eaſily

imagined, that after this the Chancellor bore me

no good-will; but it is the part of an old and art-
ful courtier, to appear ſo much the more obliging

and reſpectful to thoſe who are in favour, as the

reſentment he harbours againſt them in his heart
is violent and laſting. Chiverny, indeed, EX».
celled in this art.

The Duke of Guiſe had begun with very ex-

travagant propoſals, which if he had inſiſted up-
on, would have rendered his treaty ineffectual.
Doubtleſs he was induced to make them, through
his knowledge of thoſe perſons to whom he was

referred: he thought, that to obtain ſomething,

he muſt demand a great deal. He claimed no
leſs than the poſt of high ſteward of the King's
houſhold, which the Count of Soiſſons had been
in poſſeſſion of, ever ſince the aſſaſſination of the
Duke of Guile, to poſleſs the government of
Champaigne, which had likewiſe been given to
the Duke of Nevers; to enjoy alſo the benefices
of his uncle, the Cardinal of Guiſe, particularly
the acchbiſhopric of Rheims, then actually poſſeſ-

ſed by M. Du- Bec, a relation of Madam de Lian-
court, the King's miſtreſs. He added ſeveral o-

ther articles; but theſe three gave riſe to the
greateſt difficulties. The Duke of Guile, being

informed of the change of the commiſſioners, re -

ſolved immediately to leſſen the extravagance of

bis demands: and wrote to the Ducheſs, his mo-
ther, and to his agents, to conclude a treaty with
| : me upon reaſonable conditions, and even at any

rate.

24 M E M O IRS Book VII.

rate. He had lately a new inducement to con-
clude the treaty as ſoon as poſſible, of which !
was abſolutely ignorant. He had difcovered that
the city of Rheims (the moſt conſiderable preſent
he had to offer the King) deſigning to make a

merit of returning to its obedience voluntarily,

had ſollicited the reſt of me province to do the

like; and had already drawn a great party into

their views. The Duke of Guiſe, to prevent this

inconvenience, having attempted to place a gat-
riſon there, the inhabitants declared, that they

would guard the city themſelves ; and this refu-
fal occaſioning a debate, they anſwered the Duke's
menaces by other threats no leſs haughty,

After the ſecond conference I had with the
Duke's agent, there was no mention cither of the
poſt of bigh ſteward of the hovſhold, the go-
vernmcnt of Champaigne, or of the benefices;

and thoſe three abſtacles being removed, Lav

very little difficulty remaining. I propoſed to the
King, the drawing the Duke of Guile from Cham:

paigne, to fix him in Provence, by giving him that

government for a recompence; ſo that his intereſt
there being united with that of Leſdiguieres, and
Ornano, who ſupported the King's party again!

the Duke of Epernon, they might at once. join

to reduce the power of that formidable ſubject.

The King conſented to this fo much the more
willingly, as by tne manner in which the family
of Guiſe acted with bim, he judged he might de-
pend upon their fidelity ; and he ordered me to

conclude with him upon this plan. I made the

propoſal to the Duke's agents, and, upon reitera-

ted commands from his Majeſty, uſed ſo much
diligence in ſettling all other matters, that the

next evening the treaty with the Duke of Guiſe

was concluded, and ſigned by me for the King,
and

,
en
4 * Y -
* 997 *
n +
g

:. FEEL

5 and by Madam de Guiſe, and the Duke's three
commillioners, for him.

The next day fix deputies from the city of
Rheims arrived at Paris; and, addreſſing them»
ſelves to me, told me, that the King needed not
beſtow any great rewards upon the Duke of Guile,
not only becauſe Rheims was no longer in his
power, but becauſe the inhabitants were ready to
deliver him up to the King. They did not re-
quire to be introduced to his Majeſty, but ſaid,

that they would be fatisfhed with his approbation

ia writing, or only mine; ſubmitting it to the

King to grant them what recompence he ſhould
think proper: and ended with offering me, ac-
cording to cuſtom, a preſent of ten thouſand

crowns, Which I neither could, nor would ac-

cept of. I thanked them, in the King's name,
for their good-will ; and aſſured them that he
would, with pleaſure, receive this teſtimony of ir.

J deferred giving them an anſwer, till I had re-

ceived orders from his Majeſty, to whom I went
immediately to relate all that had paſſed, The
Eing was at that time in his cloſet, from whence

he made every one but Beringhen depart, and
liſtened to me walking, often ſhaking his head,

and ſmiling, through a reflection on the natural
levity and inconſtancy of the people. He after-

Wards took me aſide to the window, and deſired

me to tell him what terms I was upon with the
Duke of Guiſe. As ſoon as I had informed him
that the treaty was concluded, he did not heſitate
a a moment whether or not he ſhould obſerve it;
but he would not, however, appear inſenſible of
the affection of the city of Rheims. I introduced
the deputies to him, whom he thanked as became
2 King, beſtowing upon them a very conſiderable
feward, with an air ſo gracious, that they re-
+ turned full of joy and admiration,

Vor. II. | 'The

.
mM
Pg

26 MEMOIRS Bock VII.

The treaty with the Duke of Guiſe being with
the uſual form ſigned by Gevres for the King,
the Ducheſs and Mademoiſelle de Guiſe demand-
ed his Majeſty's permiſſion for the Duke to come
himſelf, and aſſure him of his obedience. I wrote
to him to ſeek for no other ſecurity than that per-

miſſion: and he did not heſitate to comply with
my advice. He aſſembled as many of his friends

as he could, and came and threw himſelf at the

King's feet, with ſo many marks of a ſincere re-

pentance, that the King, who penetrated into his

inmoſt foul, inſtead of reproaches, or a ſilence
which on ſuch occaſions is more terrible than e—

ven reproaches, made uſe of all his endeavours to

reaſſure him: he embraced him three ſeveral
times, honoured him with the name of nephew,

treated him with the greateſt tenderneſs and free-
dom, and, without affecting either to avoid or recal

what had paſſed, mentioned the deceaſed Duke
of Guiſe with honour, He faid that they had been
friends in their youth, although often rivals for

the ſame ladies; and that the Duke's good quali.

ties, and a conformity of diſpoſition, had united
them in a fixed averſion to the Duke of Alencon,

A friend, who endeavours to reconcile himſelf to

his friend after a flight quarrel, could not have
ſhowed a preater diſpoſition to renew the friend-

ſhip; and all thoſe that were witneſſes of this

reception, could never ſufficiently admire a king,
who, with ſo many qualities to inſpire fear, em-
played only ſuch as created love.

The Duke of Guiſe, abſolutely gained by this

diſcourſe, replied to the King, that he would ne-
glect nothing to render himſelf worthy of the ho:
nour his Majeſty did the memory of his father,
and the ſentiments he was pleaſed to entertain of
himſelf: and from that time he took ſuch care to

y
*
1
f
t
I
1
K
>
A
a
t
>
1
7

convince bim that his reſpec] and attachment

would _

7 7 Fu .
TAR
* 1 pink
g 7
8
N
9 *

l. „ OF S U L
th would continue inviolable, that the King, for.

8. r all which any other, in his ſituation, would

d- have apprehended from the raiſing again a fami—
ne Jy which had made kings tremble, lived with
te him familiarly, and admitted him, with the o-
r- ther courtiers, into all his parties of pleaſure :
th for ſuch was the character of Henry, that that ex-
ds terior gravity, which the royal dignity makes it
he _. neceſſary to aſſume, never hindered him from re-
e- ſigning himſelf up freely to pleaſures, which an
is equality of conditions ſpreads over ſociety. The
ce truly great man knows how to be by turns, and
e- as occaſions require, whatever he ought to be, ma-
to ſter, or equal, king, or citizen: it is no diminu-
al tion of his greatneſs, to unbend himſelf in pri-
„ vate, provided that he ſhews himſelf in his pu-
e- blic character, equally fit to manage the affairs f
al the camp and of the cabinet, the courtier will al-
ke ways remember that he is with his maſter, _

n Madam de Guile entering the King's apart-
or ment ſome days after, when the Duke of Guile
li. preſented the napkin to his Majeſty for a flight re-
d paſt which he made in the afternoon, ſhe again
nu. _ took occaſion to expreſs her gratitude to him for
to bis goodnels to her ion, and told him, with a
7e lively emotion, that if ever the Duke of Guile
d. Was deficient in his duty and obedience, the would
is diſinherit him, and diſown him for her fon. The
g, _ King, running to embrace her, aſſured her that
be, on his ſide, would ever preſerve for the Duke,
and his whole family, the tenderneſs of a father.
is Ihe treaty I had juſt concluded with the Duke
e- _ of Guiſe produced much loud ciamour. His own
particular enemies, and that ſort of people which
r, warm about a court, who have no other buſineſs
of than to decry the conduct of perſons in place,
o united themſelves againſt me, and being ſecretly _
it inſtigated by thoſe from whom the cognilance of

—— — — af”

x
10
N
.
N
|

„

— — —

— 2
SN +

—, DAS
8

—— . - -
— r han abatng
A —___— —— 2 7 —
* — 12

28 1 MM © TK. Book VII.

this affair was taken, proclaimed every where,
that I undertook this commiſſion only to pleaſe
Madam de Guiſe. The Duke of Epernon was
not ſilent on this occaſion; and whenever the
Duke of Guiſe and he were mentioned together,
he conſtantly ſaid, that I had offended the. one
without cauſe, to oblige the other Againft all rea-
fon. Theſe diſcourſes were ſo often hol ted to
the King, that he was at laſt made to believe, I
had acted with rather too much precipitation:
however, he was not diſpleaſed with me upon that
account. |
It was not eilfcult Go me to Joftify my "elf;
which I did by an apology in writing, and
preſented it to the King, I there dcfended my
conduct with the following reaſons: That the
King could not poſſibly grant the three ar-
ticles before mentioned to the Duke of Guile,
without giving diſguſt to a great many other per-
ſons; notwithſtanding which, he would have been
obliged to grant them, if he had not bad a go-
vernment to give him, which was the leaſt recom-
pence the Duke could expect, after reſigning Cham-
paigne, and yeilding up ſo many other claims:
that with regard to the government which was gi—
ven him as an equivalent, no other could be cho-
ſen, from whence fewer bad conſequences might
be feared, than from Provence. For upon a ſup-
poſition that the Duke of Guiſe might hereafter
become capable of forgetting the new oath of alle-
giance he had taken, there was little danger to be
apprehended from him in a province which had
no communication with Lorrain, the Low Coun-
tries, and Burgundy eſpecially : on the contrary,
although none of the Duke's demands had been
_ complied with, except the continuing him in the
government of Champaigne, yet by that, there
was a — of Perpetuating the war in thoſe coun-
tries:

t
&
9
1
t
]
1
]
1
5
I

1
0
4

<W 19 jo wo -

Se
1

Ns. %
tries: That it was the King's intereſt to reſerve to

himſelf the power of beſtowing the government
of Champaigne upon a man who ſhould be not

only ſincerely attached to his ſervice, but whoſe

integrity likewiſe ſhould be fo well known, that
the rebels in Burgundy might deſpair ofever bring-

ing him to favour their views. With regard to
the conveniency of fixing upon Provence for 1] ol
Puke of Guiſe, I added that argument relating to

the Duke of Epernon, which! have already ligbt-

15 mentioned. LI recalled to the King's remem-
brance, in a few words, the many occaſions of
complaint this man had given him, his repeated
revolts, his intrigues to diſengage all the catholics

from his Majeſty's party, his inſolent boaſt that
he would never acknowledge any ſuperior in his

government, his laſt proceedings at Villemuir,

and many other circumſtances which certainly
would do no honour to the hiſtory of this“

ſupercilious ſubject. It was oppoſing one leader of

the leapne by another, whom a thouſand moves,

beſides that of his perſonal intereſt, which oupht

always to be regarded as the moſt powerful, con-
curred to regulate his conduct by a (yſter quite:
contrary to his former views,

Without dwelling upon the orders his M. jeſty

bad given me with roga ard to the Duke of Guiſe,

or the danger of a longer delay; although the

treaty with bim had not bee n fo advantageous 3 as it:
Was eaſy to prove it was, I repreſented to the King,

that he could not actrigoror ly towards a man, who
had ſo ſteadily refuſed all the offers and moſt flats.

| tering promiſes ſrom Spain, the Dukes of Sav OY.”

and Lorrain, and all the enemies of the Nate *, to.

pPrevail upon him to continue a war, which, obe-

* The Duke of Guiſe was hated by the league, e eſpecially ſinee the |

time he bed killed with his own hand, in 2 tumult, the Cov de St
Faul, bis feld lientenant, who was muck beloved by them.

8 1}

C 1 CVT.

$ 21
2 8
.
* _

a bc!

5 * ' Ly
5
5 WH,

30 MEMOIRS BookVIL
ever ſhort a time it had laſted, would have been

a greater inconvenience to him, than all he had

granted to the Duke of Guiſe. Nor ought it to be

thought a matter of little conſequence (whatever

his and my enemies could ſay) to gain over a man

whoſe name and birth might have put him at the
head of a powerful party. I agree with them, if

they pleaſe, that this lord made after all but a fri—

volous ſaerifice of unjuſt claims, and uncertain ex-

pectations; nay I will reduce it lower, and aſcribe
it all to the King's generoſity : yet, if by that means
he bound to his intereſt, not a ſingle man only,

but a family reſpectable for their alliances, their

riches, and their influence, it cannot be called an
uſeleſs generoſity.

The King was ſtruck with theſe reaſons, and

ſcemed greatly ſurpriſed at my exact knowledge of

Epernon. He did not think it proper to permit
this writing to be publiſhed, becauſe of the truths
it contained, which it was not yet time to reveal,
I ſubmitted, without any difficulty, for I never
gave myſelf much trouble about the efforts of en-
vy, having always looked upon that paſſion as an

incurable diſeaſe, The Duke of Guiſe's whole con-
duct for the future made a ſtill better apology for

me: he began his government by ſo clear and
abſolute a declaration of his ſentiments, that the
ſeditious were deprived of all hopes of ever being

able to {ſeduce him. In all occaſions wherein the ;

King's ſervice, or the good of the ſtate, required
Lis aſſiſtance, he behaved with equal firmneſs and

prudence, The reduction of NMarſcilles Fo which | 5

Was

5 This town was upon the point of being delivered up to the King
of Spain, by two of its burgeſſes, named Charles Caſault, and Lewis

D' Aix; when the Duke of Guiſe found means to make 3 If maſ-

ter of it, by intelligence held with Peter and Bartholomew Libertat,
two! rothers, who were alſo burgeſies of the fame town. They flew
Ceſault, beat che troops of the £ 2 hve, and let in, through the

Porte cale,

r

of 7 Pp
F230

n was with reaſon thought one of the beſt ſtrokes of ;
d that kind, was his work: and with the help of Lef-

e _dipuieres, and the Counteſs of Sault, he fo well
r | hunibled the baughty Epernon, that he at laſt ob-
n Jiged him to reſtrain his rebellious diſpoſition ;
e and this proud ſubject was ſeen to ſubmit to the
if King's mercy, and to become one of his molt aſſi-
i- duous courtiers, n re Tn
- __ ] never was unwilling to do juſtice to the Duke
e ol F pernon, to be among thc firſt to enhance the
18 value either of his perſonal ſervices, or thoſe of
„ his ſoldiers at Limoges, Saint-Germain, Ville-
ir bois *, Chartres, Boulogne, Montauron, Antibes,
n and even at Villemur. I am forry that the ſubject
____ Ttreat onneceſſarily engages me ina diſcuſſion which _
d mayextinguiſh any ſentiments that do him honour ; |
f but ſince this is a place where nothing ſhould be
it __ concealed or diſguiſed, what can, what ought to
s be thought of his conduct in Provence! Certainly,
1. to aſcribe it all to a bigotry in his religion, is ſhew-
ring the utmoſt favour to his reputation. His pa-
j- ., Negyriſts, who ſo loudly extol his moſt inconſfider-
n able actions, ought to be a little more moderate
C © Porte-reale, the Duke of Guiſe, who performed this enterpriſe with |
a great deal of conduct. See De Thou, b. 116. D' Aubigne, tom.
d 3. liv. 4. chap. 12. Henry IV. upon receiving the news of the re-
e duction of Marſeilles, faid, “ It is now that I am king.” In the

g following campaign, the Duke of Guiſe ſhewed a great deal of valour,
in purſuing the Spaniards as far as Gray; and killed with his own
band, a trooper belonging to the enemy, who had given him defiance.
d Henry IV. embracing him, ſpoke theſe words, Thoſe who find
d old examples of virtue before them, mult imitate and repeat them,
for ſuch as come after,” P. Matthieu, tom. 2. liv. 1. p. 192.

n See on each of theſe actions, L'hiſt. de la vie du Duc d' Eper-
s neon, printed at Paris, Ann. 1655. Villebois is a town of Angou-
mois, which at this day is called La-Valette. You may likewiſe con-
12 ſult the ſame hiſtory, as to the reproaches which our memoirs give
s this Duke: but he cannot be juſtified in every particular; and even
his oun hiſtorian looks upon it as impoſſible. All that can be faid is,
t, that M. de Sully took pleaſure to aggravate faults, which the laſt
w Paͤ-ats of the Duke d' Epernon's life have almoſt entirely effaced.
Ee 1 |
e, 4 5 when

* 5
NN
1
2
$5244

—

_ A 2 — — A ng — ———— . ——A—E — — —
8 . - Y Nn 22 a 5 Far > 8 - of ——
- — - . 9 * - — 9

EDS

al
be
vB
OS
*
*
is
11
1
19
x
:
.
*
17
F 0
*
1
71
bs
1
uf
45
iz
iy
1
1
455
*
7

”: K.

32 MEMOIRS Boch VII.

when they reflect on his frequent revolts, and act;

of diſobedience; or begin by eſtabliſhing it for a
truth, that a ſubje& may be irreproachable, yet

fail in his duty to his King and his country, in-

troduce diſcord and confuſion to gratify his ambi-
tion, and give to violence the name of right. If

any panegyrics are to be beſtowed here, doubles

it is the King who merits them, who, after al!
theſe offences, received Epernon with open arms,

and never excluded him from favours ; which in

every reſpect, were indeed mere favours to him.
After the death of D'O, there appeared among

the candidates a man, who, it was immediately

thought, would have the poſt of ſuperint endant;

this was Nicolas de Sancy, who wanted neither

capacity, nor experience, for that ſtation, Sancy

might be very properly called a man of wit, uling

this term in the ſenſe that is generally given it, to
denote vivacity, ſubtilty, and quickneſs of appre-
henſion. But, as theſe qualities are by no means

inſeparable from an excellent Judgment, Sancy
ſpoiled them by a degree of vanity, caprice, and

impetucſity, which ſometimes rendered him in-

ſupportable. It is my opinion of theſe ſtrong and

lively imaginations in general, that although they
are commonly ſubject to two great faults, which
are, too much ſubtilty, and too little clearneſs in

their ideas, and confuſion and unſteddineſs in their
ſchemes, yet they ought not to be thought utterly.
incapable of bulinzſs; becauſe. it often happens,

that they bir upon expedients which would have

eſcaped more cautious and phlegmaric minds: but

there is almoſt always occaſion ta watch over them,
and to correct their errors.
Sancy had long, ard uſefully ſerved me Ul.

and the reigning King, both in Germany and

Switzerland. He had inſinuated himſelf into Hen-
ry's favour by great complaiſance, a ſubtle beha-

viour,

H. 1594. "070 8 V0 1-06 33
ts - viour, a refined art in heightening his pleaſure,
a id by becoming neceſſary in his affairs of gallant- |
yet Ty. Hence it was that he lived with bis prince
N- ppon terms of the moſt intimate familiarity. That
bi. e might negle& nothing by which he thought he
g 1555 make bis court ſucceſsfully, he inveighed 7
Without ceaſing, againſt the diſſipation of the fi-
all Hances; and, as a flatterer generally goes beyond
35, pis mark, in railing at the ſuperintendant he could.
in Hot help dcerying likewiſe the ſuperintendancy, as

8 an employment ruinous to the ſtate: by which he
13 pave good reaſon to call his underſtanding in que-
tion. But he bimſelf oppoſed his advancement
t; to this poſt by an obſtacle ſtill greater: he not
er only neglefted to pleaſe Madam de Liancourt-*,
then miſtreſs to the King, but alſo by an intem-
8 perance of tongue, to which ſuch perſons as he are

©

oO very ſubject, he had offended this lady on one of

„the moſt delicate ſubjects.
s [ know not whether the ſtory I am noing to re-
1 late had ever any foundation in truth. However
d this may be, thus the ſtory ran in Paris: His Ma-
jeſty having ſent Alibour, his firſt phyſician, to
viſit Madam de Liancourt, who was indiſpoſed
(this was in the beginning of his addreſſes to that
lady) at his return he told the King, that ſhe was
indeed a little diſordered, but that he need not be
- uneaſy, for the conſequence would be very good.
But will you not bleed and purge her?“ ſaid the
King to him. © 1 ſhall be very careful how I
do that,” replied the old man, with the ſame
: : ſimplicity, * before ſhe has gone half her time,”
How!“ interrupted the King, aſtoniſhed and
8 | difordered to the laſt degree: „ what is it you lay

N

e gd - hy

.

> * This was the fair Gabrielle, who wan wife to Nicolss d' Amer-
8 val, Lord of Liancourt. She was forced by her father, they ſay, to
1 this marriage, which was not at all to her liking : but Henry IV.

T knew very well how | to hinder the conſummation,

Bs
* 4
25
7
9 ae
7 7 *

2.

We

;

« friend?

34 MEMOIRS Book vn. 5

friend? Surely you rave, and are not in your right thi

„ ſenſes.“ Alibour ſupported his aſſertion with

good proofs, which the King thought he ſhould |

_ deſtroy, by telling him upon what terms he was

66

from that time. The King quitted Alibour in

great rage, and went immediately to reproach the

ſick fair one, who, no doubt, knew well enough

how to give a different turn to all the good man
had ignorantly ſaid; for it was not perceived that

any miſunderſtanding had happened between the
King and his miſtreſs. It is certain, however,
that the event was exactly conformable to Alibour's _
prediction: but it was thought that Henry, after _

a more ſtrick examination, was brought to believe

that he had been miſtaken in his reckoning, ſince,

inſtead of diſowning the child which Madam de

Liancourt lay in of at Coucy, during the ſiege 4
Laon, he acknowledged it openly, and had 1 it bap 9

tiſed by the name of Cæſar.

Sancy gave free ſeope to his wit, in ROT this =
ſtory ; and did not forget the circumſtance of La-
Kegnardiere *, who, having one day, as he ſaid,
taken the liberty to inform his Majeſty of ſome

with the lady. © I know not what you have done,
or what you have not done,” replied the old
_ phyſician with great compoſure, and for a com-
plete proof referred him to four or five months

things that did not pleaſe him, was ſoon after ba-

niſhed the court, under pretence that he had

quorrelled with the admiral r. Sancy found ſome- |

thing :

2. Ls Ss was a kind of bufſoon, half ſoldier, half lav?
yer, and half gentleman, who ſaid whatever came uppermoſt.”

It is in this manner he is ſpoken of in the adventures of ihe Baron

de Fœneſte, liv. 4. ch. 7. where we find many more ſtories related

of him.

+ The Journal de L Etole, and the Confeſſion de Sancy, confirm ”

all this pleaſantry, as alſo the ſuſpicion of its ending tragically for 5 .
old M. Alibour, the King's firſt phy ſician, who was poiſoned, tbex
| tay, by order of the King's miſtreſs: but all this is — without

7

"4594
thing to ſay upon the death of the good man Ali-
4 ur, and would have thought it more natural, if

TE EELE LL: 2

it had not happened before the accompliſhment
of his prediction. If he commented thus upon the
birth of the ſon, he did no leſs upon the whole
nduct of the mother. Sancy proved, to his
oft, what the hatred of a woman, eſpecially a

1 King's miſtreſs, is capable of doing: Henry loved
dim, and wanted to raiſe him; and although he

was inclined to ſuppreſs the poſt of ſuperintendant
of the finances, yet he would have preſerved it,
merely to have beſtowed it upon him; but Madam 55
de Liancourt knew how to prevent it.

+ Inſtead of a ſuperintendant of the finances, his

Majeſty compoſed a council conſiſting of eight
- perſons ; theſe were, the Chancelor de Chiverny,

the Duke de Retz, Meſſieurs de Bellievre (who was

ſucceeded by Matignon) de Schomberg, de Maiſſe,
de Freſne (protected by Madam de Liancourt) de
. roi, and de Sancy, who thought
himſelf very happy to be one of the members * of

this body. The King judged it neceſſary to give
this council for form's ſake only, and without any

diſtinction, a titular head, which was the Duke
of Nevers. This form of government of the fi-
nances laſted ſome time, although with a few in-

conſiderable alterations, which I ſhall mention in
their proper place: for the reader may expect in

By proof. ' You may alſo read, on this head, what Sauval has told,
on the faith of public report, and ſatirical libels, touching the 1 intrigues |
| between the fair Gabrielle and the Duke de Bellegarde.

* M. de Thou and Perefixe ſay, that M. de Sully was for ſome |
time ſupe intendart before M. de Roſny: which ought not to be un-
| dertood in my opinion, but only of the authority which he aſſu-
med of himſelf among his fellow-counſellors, as M. de Sully tells us
* afterwards. The writers of that time agree, that nothing of cer-
© tal nty can be ſaid as to the ſtate of the council of the finances, till

by WEE? x dhe time in which M. de Roſny was at leaſt declared the chief. We
run no riſk | in believing all he ſays on n the head of the finances.

- 808 :

19
365
1 TY
x
1 £
9 [+ 7
7
! *
116
5
N.
1
.
4 ,
, _
f ++
wc;
:
g
- vi
1 i
171%
+: *
$1 . 3
: 1
1
1 6
> »
11 :
: 1
i
HUE
We
: it 4 :
1
{ 'N
i 1
Fol
437-10
bf q
ELM
a 4
i
. 1
By |
x .
'
- 1 N
a
4 5 *1
377468
BK
$t+ 8
4 *
1
11
$3: LW
»
9 . 3
+135
.
i.
1 Wo.
4 :
?
1 7
1 1
* J
11 'Þ
f .
, +
* 1 f
3
14 Þ
"|
$548
b „
+, +8
3.8
. .
.
1
* p71 5
AS
3 b
—
1
I} :
N
bl
er Y
. *
17 .
i

—

r

36 MEMOIR S Book VII
theſe memoirs to ſee whatever relates to the finag.
ces treated with all that clearneſs and extent which
a man, who has ſo long made them his ſtudy and.

employment, is capable of giving them.
The King was convinced, in the ſequel, that

this new change in the counci} * was far from
affording that remedy the diſcaſe required: ſmall _
as my experience was in theſe affairs, I eaſily -
_ comprehended it, It is not the government of

one man only by which the finances are thrown
into confuſion ; ſince it is an inconteſtable truth,
that, as they muſt paſs through ſome hands,

the fewer that are employed, the leſs will be em-
bezzled. The abuſe lies in the choiſe of this
man, and in the nature of the finances: and

therefore, to have this office diſcharged by many

different perſons, is to perpetuate the evil. If in
the whole kingdom, it is difficult to find one
ſingle man fit for ſuch an employment, how can
it be expected that a great number will be met

with? Nor is the miitake leſs palpable in ima

gining, that all theſe perſons bringing each of
them one diſtinguiſhing good quality into their

employments, the ſame effect will be produced
as from a man who unites them all in himſelf;
ſince that is to ſuppoſe, that this ſingle good Qua:

lity cannot poſlibly be rendered uſeleſs by the op.
poſition of ſeveral bad ones, either in himſelf or

in his aſſociates. In general, the predominant

principle with which thoſe perſons who are inveſt
ed with public employments, enter upon the ex.

ecution of them, is to raiſe and enrich themſelves

and their relations. If this e eager defire of riches |
is not felt by them at firſt, it is inſpired, in-
creaſed, and ſtimulated, by the great ſums of mo-

* * Peri talks of this new form of the council of the finances, : 07

_ Roſny, Ann, 1598: EA

- * * > ö
.
.
1 4
N 4
r
5
4
n
e
1
. ,
5 *
7
* 52

12
POM
. BY
Þ
e
Ae
y. £44
6d
2
7

O F U N . 37

ey which paſs through their hands : amidſt that
| Saf on, and mutual fear of, cach other,
ery one repreſents to himſelf integrity as a qua-

by not only uſelels, but hurtful to him, the ho-
| Hour of which is ſhared by his colleagues, the in-

convenience wholly his own. The King was far

from being fortunate in his choice of the mem-
bers of this body: ſeveral of thoſe who compo-

Fd it, beſides their evil diſpoſitions, were in a
ſituation that expoſed them to corruption: they
had debts to pay, and domeſtic wants to ſupply.

His Majeſty deſtined me a place in it, and had,

for a long time, in his converſations with me,
expreſſed his deſire, that I would ſtudy to make _

myſelf thoroughly acquainted with whatever re-
garded the finances; but I could not poſſibly ſub-

mit to the imperious behaviour of the Duke of
Nevers, who very unſcaſonably aſſumed great con ·
ſequence to himſelf from his quality of prince, in
a place where it ſignified very little. One day,
- When his inſolence had exhauſted all my patience,
| 1 took the liberty to intreat he would remember,
that the family of Bethune was in poſſeſſion of the

earldom of Nevers before the family of Gonzaguec.

To a man puffed up with vanity, no blow could be

more ſenſible. He often repeated to thoſe who

would hear him, that my whole family were Hugue-
nots; and, to anſwer my anecdote with another,

(aid, that he had ſeen my grandfather make a ve-
Ty mean figure at Nevers. I ſuſfered him to have

| bis revenge, which could extend no further than

keeping me out of a council where 1 had very
little inclination to be with him; and this ſaul-

faction he had. The King, who bad many mea-

ſures to keep, told me, in a very obliging man-

ner, that he was under a neceſſity of deierring

ſome time longer the proof he intended to give

me of his friendſhip ; - and I waited for it with-

Vo | II. D out

3 M E M OI R S Bock VII.
out murmuring, ſatisfied with the poſt of Secre.
tary of ſtate, with a ſalary of two thouſand livres
a year, and a penſion of three thouſand fix hun-

dred more, which the King conferred upon me.

Perſons of the leaſt diſcernment being convin-
ced of the neceſſity there was to introduce a re.

for mation into the finances, the new council were

at firſt deſirous of this honour; and a ſcheme for

that purpoſe was propoſed by thoſe amongſt them
who moſt valued themſelves for their penetration
and method. Theſe were Freſne and La Grange.

le- roi. But after they had produced a very large
volume upon this affair, it happened with that, as
with moſt plans that have been or can be invent.

ed; nothing more eaſy in ſpeculation, in prac- |

tice nothing more difficult : and the King, whom

they had flattered with mighty hopes, found eve.
ry thing in the ſame condition as before, at the

end of the year which he had paſſed at Paris, ex- | 3

pecting daily the effect of their promiſes.

. S - © ae
5 * 7 2x oy 4
* 4c. 4 & Ca — —

He was retained there to more purpoſe by the
treaty with Lorrain, which, entirely forſaking Spain,
concluded a league e ee and defenfive with
France. Sancy's ſervices were of great uſe in
this treaty; and to him almoſt all the honour 1

it was due. The King was no longer at a loß

.

rived at Paris he came in perſon to preſs the exe |

cution of thoſe ſchemes he had entertained me ©

|”

for employment, after the Duke of Bouillon ar-

with at Sedan, particularly a declaration of war ö

againſt Spain, which he made the baſis of his ad.
vancement in the Low Countries, He uſed ſuch
_ plauſible arguments for it, that, after almoſt per.

ſuading the King, and gaining the generality of .

the courtiers to his opinion *, he did not ſeruple

„M. de Thou makes no dcubt but the Duke de Bouillon was
the principal author of this war: and his hiſtorian entirely *
that

$595 Of 8 I L I. 39
re- to propoſe it in full council. He found there two
res different parties who did not approve of this war:
un- thoſe in whom a rooted attachment to Spain and
. the league ſtill remained, and they were not few
in- in number; and thoſe who thought a war, in
re. the preſent weak and exhauſted ſtate of the king-
ere dom, was very unſeaſonable. Theſe laſt had ve-
for ry few partiſans, but very ſtrong reaſons on their
em Aide, if theſe could only have procured them au-
ion dience. VVV . 1
ge. I would not incur the reproach of ſilence up-
rge on this occaſion, I uſed every argument my rea-
as fon could ſuggeſt, to diſſuade the King from this
nt war; but this prince, whom a natural propenſi—
ac ty drew always a little to that fide, thought he had
om now found the opportunity he ſought for, to
ve. revenge himſelf upon a neighbour who had made
the it his endeavour to maintain the flame which
ex-  _ conſumed the heart of his kingdom. He was
ſure of troops from Lorrain : England and Hol-
the land, by their ambaſſadors, gave hopes of a
in, powerful diverſion ; and, according to the Duke
ith of Bouillon, a ſingle word from him was ſuffi-
in cient to make all Luxembourg ſurrender : Sancy
ok made great promiſes in behalf of the thirteen
of © Cantons: all Franch-Compte lay open to their
ar ravages, The King was determined by all theſe
xe- | _ flattering appearances z and in January, the fol-

var that in giving this counſel he far leſs conſulted the advantage of the
1 ſtate, and the glory of the King, than his own perſonal intereſt, and
IG | that of the Calviniſtical party, who neceſſarily wanted a war, in or-
ich | der to obtain the favourable terms which were granted them by the
er- e:1& of Nantz Notwithſtanding the reaſons for declaring war a-
; gainſt Spain, of which a minute detail may be ſeen in MSS. de la
Bibliot. de Roi, vol. marked 8955, and in the King's declaration,
that is ſet down in tom. VI. of the memoires de la Ligue: all good
writers and judicicus perſons are unanimous, in favour of the Duke
de Sully's opinion as to the precipitation and imprudence with which |
„ Henry IV. conducted himſelf in this affair, the conſequenees of
» hich might have been a good deal |
bes t ba good deal more fatal thau they were.

22 lowing

2
my
an If Rt

ww
oS
*

n 1 *

K "7 : 3 *
Tr... IEA ge Gon rue a
%
7)7)7222ͤ ĩ2k! e ICs

40 M E M OI RS Bock VII. Y

lowing year, war was declared in form againſt

That kingdom ſeemed to give herſelf very :

little trouble about this proceeding ; and anſwer.

ed only by ſhewing great contempt for Henry's
council, and for Henry himſelf, to whom ſhe gave _
no other title than that of Prince of Bearn. While ai
ſhe made preparations to defend herſelf, her e-
miſſaries in France endeavoured to ſpare her the

trouble, by an attempt fo horrid, that it is ſcarce
credible ſhe could have recourſe to it.

On the 26th of December, the King being then
at Paris, in his apartments in the Louvre *, where

he gave orders to Meſſieurs de Ragny and de

Montigny, who entered with a great number

of other perſons; at the very moment when he

ſtooped to embrace one of them, he received a_
wound in the face with a knif, which the mur-
derer let fall as he was endeavouring to eſcape _
through the croud +, I was preſent, and ap-

proached

* According to others, in the chamber of the Marchioneſi de

_ Monceaux, at the Hotel de Schomberg, behind the Louvre: but

in fact, it was neither at the Louvre, nor at the Hotel de Schomberg, 8

that this affair happened. A fegiſter belonging to the town-houſe at
Paris, quoted by Piganiole, tom. 2. de la deſcription de Paris,
ſays, that the fair Gabrielle reſided, in 1595, at the Hotel D'E.

ſtrẽes; and that it was at this place Henry IV. was wounded, This
Hotel was afterwards called L'hotel du Bouchage ; and was purcha-
ſed in 1616, by M. de Burelle, in order to lodge and accommodate
the fathers of the oratory, who ſtill continue there,

+ © Immediately the King, who found himſelf wounded, Iook-
« ing round him, and ſeeing Mathurine, his fool, ſaid, The deue:
« take the fool: ſhe bas wounded me. But ſhe, denying it, ran di.
e rectly to ſhut the door, whereby the was the occaſtun of prevent-
ing this aſſaſſin from making his eſcape; who, upon being ſeized
«© and afterwards ſearched, dropped his knife, which was all over
bloody.” Thus L'Etoile ſpeaks of it. The MSS. de la Bibl,
du Roi ſay quite otherwiſe in vol. 9033. namely, © that the King
finding himſelf wounded, ſpoke thus to one of thoſe two gentle-
% men, Ab, couſin, you have wounded me: and that he thereupon,
% throwing himſelf at his Majeſty's feet, replied, God forbid, Site,
{© that J ſhould entertain even a thought of hurting or wounding
| | | | you

*

*
*

mi proached in an agony of grief, ſeeing the King

all covered with blood, and fearing, with reaſon,
Try that the ſtroke was mortal. The King removed
er. our apprehenſions with an air of ſweetneſs and
ys tranquillity ; and we perceived immediately, that |
ve his lip only was wounded ; the ſtroke hiving been
ile aimed too high, the force of it was {ſtopped by a
E- tooth, which it broke. 1 e 19
he be parricide was diſcovered without any diffi-

ce culty, though he had mixed among the croud.

He was a ſcholar, named John Chatel ; and rea-
en dily anſwered, when he was interrogated, that he
re came from the college of the Jeſuits, accuſing
de _ thoſe fathers with being the authors of his crime.

er The King, who heard him, ſaid, with a gaiety
de which on ſuch an occaſion few perſons could have
2 deen capable of, that he heard from the mouths

r- _ of many perſons, that the ſociety never loved him,
de and he was now convinced of it by his own mouth.
p Chatel was delivered up to juſtice * ; and the pro-
d ſecutions againſt the Jeſuits, which had been ſuſ-
pended, were now reſumed more vigorouſly than
de before, and terminated in the expulſion of the
2] 5 ne CAPW
at your Majeſty: I have no weapon about me but the ſuord by my
is, * ſide.“ M. de Thou ſays, that the Ccunt of Soiſſons ſeizing the
dd̃aͤſſaſſin, ſpoke aloud to him, that it was one of them two who had given
is the blow; and that the poignard was perceived to lie at his feet glit-
2tering by the light of the candles. Lib. 3. | | |
tic © After having been put to the ordinary and extraordinary trial

upon the rack, which he endured without making any confeſ-
&- | 4 fion, and having made the amende honorable, his hand was cut off,
& | holding in it the murderous knife with which he intended to kill
the King; then his fleſh was torn off with red-hot pincers, and be
was drawn between four horſes in the Place de Greve; his body
d | and members caſt into the fire, and burnt to aſhes, and the aſhes
rr © = © thrown into the air. The Sieur Chatel, the father of the parti-
( © cide, was baniſhed France for nine years, and for ever from the
g I precinQs and juriſdiction of Paris, condemned to pay a fine of
f four thouſand crowns, his houſe razed, and inſtead thereof a py-
N © ramid erected, containing the whole ſtory of the fact.“ L'Etoile,
» 3 ibid. It is thought that the little ſquare that lies before the Barna-
g = bites, is the ſpot on which Chatel's houſe ſtood,

D 3 whole

_—

3
EIS: ©)

422 MEMOIRS Bock vll. .

whole order ® out of the kingdom. Father John 7 ;

Guignard + was hanged for his pernicious doe.
trines againſt the authority and life of kings,

John Gueret t, Peter Varade, Alexander Mayus,
Francis Jacob, and John Le-Bel, other member,

of the ſociety, ſuſpected of being his accomplices,
were obliged to make the amende honorable, aud
condemned to perpetual baniſhment.

This attempt confirmed the King in | his reſo ·

lution to purtue the war with Spain, He drew a
favourable avgury for his future ſucceſs from the
advantage he gained in the firſt acts of holtility,

As ſoon as the treaty between France and Lor-
rain was concluded, and the latter immediately,

and without ſolicitation, diſperſed her troops over
Burgundy, under the conduct of Tremblecourt

and Saint George, and carried terror into every

part of that province. On the other ſide, th;

_ garriſon of Soiſſons, a place abſolutely devoted to |
the league, commanded by Conan and Bellefond, ©

Was almoſt wholly cut off by Mouſſy , D' Edou·
vile, De n and Gadancourt, the lieutenant of

The Jeſuits, in obedience to the arret apainſt th: em, .
Paris, conducted by a ſcrjeant of the court: they were thirty-
ſeven in number, part of whom were put into three carts, ar.
the 7eit travelled on foot; their procurator being mounted ON 4
little nag,” Cc L' Etaile, 19d. |
7 He would not make the amende hontrable to the King, alledpire
that he had not offended him. Cayet, ibid. |

4 Here tlie author is miſſaken. John Gveret was, 5 by an Expire.
arret, condemned to perpetual baniſhment ; but there is no expic;

K a
* -

oy
—

mention made of Peter Verade, Alexander May os, Ec. who were
compriſed with all the reſt, and without being particularly named in

the arret which proſeribed j in genera] the whole ſociety. It is a gla-

ring calumny ein Moriſot, to have advanced, chap. 33+ that Francis |

Jacob, to whom they had told that Benry IV. was juſt aſſaſſinated

by Chatel, boaſted that he would have diſpatched this prince, it he
nad not been prevented by Chatel. I know of no biſtorian who bs

faid any ſuch thing.
I On the 25th of February, in the plains de Villers Coterets in
Vallois. The Baron de Canon is called Conas or Conac, in M. de
Thou: and inſtead of Bay's, you mult read it Beyue.

my

ee
\
r l
WIC 5 ” .

4
8 7 1 8 e Bet Ke
1 ” 37

7% * — > of

W
5
q 2
F
2 5
7 294
a -
- .
9
IN
1% "IN
"IS }
s
0
£
3

JJ...

y company. The Duke of Montmorency, to

prove bimſelf worthy of the dignity of conſtable,
which he had lately been inveſted with, fell up-
on Davphiny, the Lionnois, and Breſſe, with a
body of four thouſand foot, and four hundred
well | diſciplined horſe ; n out from thoſe pla-

ces the remainder of the troops belonging to the

Dukes of Savoy and Nemours, took Vienne by
ycompobtion from Dizimieux, who was governor of
it for the Duke of Nemours, and afterwards
| Montluel. Marechal Biron, after the expedition
at Beaune, made himſelf maſter of Nuys, Autun,
and Dijon *. The Duke of Bouillon, as ſoon as
war was proclaimed, entered Luxembourg, where,
with the aſſiſtance of Count Philip of Naſſau, he
defeated eight or ten parties of horſe, command-

8 ed by Mansfield.

Henry did not doubt but that, by uniting all
| theſe ſeparate bodies into one army, he ſhould
make whatever province he condatted it into
Lende It is certain, that if he did this, he

. could. not make a ſtand every where as before;
| but the expectations bis Majeſty formed from bis

fir ſt project, made him reſolve to prefer it. Ha-

ving the choice of entering Picardy, Champaigne,

or Burgundy, he determined upon the laſt, where
Meſſicurs de Montmorency, Biron, and Sancy,
[gave him hopes of great ſucceſs. Their ſecret
motives for calling him thither were theſe.
Ihe conſtable Montmorency had been alarmed
dy the great preparations he {aw made by Spain
in Lombardy, where the conſtable of Caitile had

7 orders to quit the Milaneſe, however neceſſary

bis preenics might be in that country, to enter
France, and make ſome bold attempt there, after
he ſhould be joined by the Count de Fuentes,

* See all theſe different expeditions into Burgundy, i in De Thou
and D'Aubigue, Ann. 1595.

general

-

. — — —
gran: note;
— ——— a yo}

15 *
oy
'tt *
Ft .
.
1 S
i .
N
„ 1
113 :
''
* o N
ith
50 5
Th 7
= 7 [a
+ 19
8 -.
* %
1
1 ö
* o
: £
_ 7. *
+ 38}
1
* £
.
3
.
FAS -
11. a
*% q
9
"Tong
B
1
IX £
A i
4
nen 5
iq:
5
;K :
Is
HATS
1 FT
ifs an:
5 i «17
N 11 4
i
p 7
11
. N
47 v7
f
3
13500 :
15. 3358
4 .
SHER
14-0 5
5 TY;
:
| :
: 111
5 145
4 1 4
b 4
„
4
1 1
i
148: 1
11

Mode. Os s
S
— -
.

44 MEMOIR Ss Bock VII. i

general of the Spaniſh troops in the Netherlands, 9

Montmorency therefore apprehended that all theſe
troops would fall upon him. Marechal Biron,
who was in the ſame quarters, where, after ſeizing
the city of Dijon, he had attacked the caſtle of it,
and that of Talan, both of great ſtrength, was a-

fraid, likewiſe, that he ſhould be obliged to raiſe b.

the ſiege if he was not aſſiſted.
As to Sancy, his views were to advance his
own reputation by the conqueſt of Franche-Com: |
te, to which he was inceſſantly endeavouring to
perſuade the King. Convinced by his own ex-

perience of Madam de Liancourt's power, he

fought to gain her approbation of this: but the
terms he was upon with this lady not permitting
him to propoſe it to her himſelf, he concealed his
own intereſt in the affair, and made vie of the
interpoſition of others. He cauſed it to be hint-

ed to the Chancellor de Chiverny, and, by his
means, to a lady who could not fail of making

her court by it to Madam de Liincourt, that the

King might eaſily provide a noble inheritance for |

her ſon Cœſar, by driving out the Spaniards from |
Franche-Comte, and giving him the poſſeſſion f
it under the ſovereignty of the thirteen Cantons,
who would be induced by their own intereſt to
favour the attempt.

Madam de Liancourt, I am perſuaded, could
not flatter herſelf with the hope of gaining the
King's conſent to ſo ridiculous a ſcheme; and
durſt not even communicate it to him, though
this Prince's paſſion * for her was ſo great, that
he ſuffered no one to be ignorant of i it: but there

„4 He went through Paris, paris this 14% b his fide ; he took
«© her with him to hunt, and careſſed her before all the world.”
Journ. de LEtoile, Ibid. And we may judge of the attachment of
Hen, IV. to ihis lady, from the letters he writ to her: which ſee in
the collection newly printed,

A.
9
ö I
;
1
4
$2
z
=

1. 0 595 OF 8 6 L L . 45
ds. b needed no more to make him reſolve upon a
eſe journey to Burgundy, than this lady's joining |
n, 'Y erſelf to thoſe who adviſed him to it. Such is

ng a court, and thus are King's impoſed upon: from

* hence they may learn, that, whatever ideas
1 they may have conceived of the wiſdom and a-
dilities of their miniſters, to judge truly of every
tranſaction, it is the ſureſt way to ſtudy carefully
is the ſecret inclinations, intereſt, and diſpoſitions

of thoſe who are neareſt to their perſons.
„ To remedy, in ſome meaſure, the inconveni-
X _encics which might ariſe from leaving the frontiers

he "bf Picardy expoſed to the inroads of the Spaniſh
he troops that were in Flanders, the King, who
Vas not, like others, impoſed upon by the great
is promiſes that England and Holland made him,
ie Teft Meſſieurs De Nevers, De Bouillon, De Vil-

1 lars, and De Saint Paul, upon this frontier,
is with each a detachment under their command;
g en joining them to aſſiſt each other upon occaſion, |
„% and above all, recommending a good intelligence
r amongſt themſelves. In caſe of a re-union, the
N Duke of Nevers was appointed to command in
chief. He provided with the ſame wiſdom and
„ foreſight for the affairs at home, by eſtabliſhing a
council, which, beſides the finances, was to take

| cogniſance of all the treaties that were made with
d tte provinces, cities, and governors; of all af-
« _ fiirs relating to war; and of the civil admini-
d tration of the kingdom, |
1 As ſoon as his Majeſty had publicly A ed

t bhimſelf with regard to the forming this council,
the Count of Soiſſons wiſhed to be made pre elident 5
ok it: and began to inſinuate ſomething to that
« WE urroſ in the King's preſence, That 1 might
remove his reſentment againſt me for traverſing
bis marriage, I ſolicited this title for him, which
1 Was more honourable than effective, and in all
5 5

—
ee eee v.

46 ME MOI R S. Book VII.
appearance would be of ſhort duration: but the
King, whoſe averſion for the Count increaſed e-
very day, had already fixed upon the Prince of +
Conti, and at dinner declared his purpoſe before
the whole court. Then turning to the Count of
Soiſſons, he told him, that, knowing his diſpo-
ſition to be turned wholly cowards war, he bas tf 1
keep him about his perſon this campaign; and
ordered him to get his company of the houſehold- 4
troops in readineſs to attend him, The Prince v
of Conti anſwered only with a profound bow, be.
cauſe he expreſſed himſelf with difficulty; and the ſo
Count of Soiſſons did the ſame, becauſe anger
hindered him from ſpeaking : all his Majeſty faid f

to him being accompanicd with praiſes of his va- fe
Tour, and an air of diſtinction which forced him 0
to appear ſatisfied. If

The members of the new council were almoſl iP
all the fame that had compoſed the former; to
which were added three intendants, Heudicourt,
Marcel, and Guibert: the number was afterwards _
augmented to eight, by joining to thoſe three In-
carville, Des-Barreaux, Atichy, Santeny, and Vi-
enne, and a ſecretary named Meillant. Although
the Duke of Nevers was not now in the council,
the King found no leſs difficulty in procuring me 1
a place in this than in the former. He was a-
fraid to propoſe it at firſt, on account of the Ca-
tholics, who could not ſuffer a Proteſtant i in power:
but he broke through this obſtacle three days af-
terwards; and the reaſon he gave for it to the |.
other counſellors was, that the confidence which
the Prince of Conti had in me, rendered my af-
ſociation neceſlary even to themſelves. |
The road his Majeſty was to take being through
Moret, 1 attended him ſo far, nor ſo much to re-
ceive him there, ſince Madam de Roſny could
have dene that without me, as to have an oppor-

tonity

f W995 "Cr TLYLLLT 5

tunity of conferring privately with this Prince,
b E End of receiving his laſt inſtructions concerning
of any affairs that might in his abſence be brought
re pbekore the council, the members whereof did not
Of 7 long continue in a ſtate of friendſhip. My col-
95 lengues perceiving by the private diſpatches! recei-
d ved from the King, that I was in poſſeſſion of
i "his confidence, entered, through jealouſy, into a
combination againſt me, looking upon me as one
Who would carry away the honour of every thing
elaudable that might be done by the council. They
e "ſought to diſguſt me, or to ſilence me, by, joining

r in a conſtant oppoſition to all my opinions; but,
d © finding that notwithſtanding this behaviour 1 ſtill
followed my own plan, they had recourſe to an-
n other ſtratagem, and in our aſſemblies every at-

flair was diſcuſſed but what related to the finances,
ſt Which was referred to private mectings, either at

0 the Chancellor's or at Sancy' s; and there all was
t, regulated without my participation. I did not
s diſſemble my thoughts of this colluſion, but de-
. cilared to them, that I had no deſire to mix in
- | | their debates; and, inſtcad of ſigning their de-
a crees, proteſted againſt them, and retired to Mo-
, 4 ret. The members of the council, who could
e not even invent any pretence for the diſguſt they
gave me, being afraid of his Majeſty's reproaches,
_ @ prevailed upon the Prince of Conti himſelf to in-
: | treat me to return. Being always naturally in-

þ <opable of flattery, or of acting inconſiſtently with
e | my own ſentiments, I replied, that ſince they
: | 1 did not rectify the abuſes which had been intro-
, : duced into the finances, although they were ſuffi-
1 1545 acquainted with them, I would at leaſt a-

void the reproach of following their conduct, and
- LU Would ſtay at Moret, rather than be a wimneſ of
| © faults which I ſaw committed with impunity.

; . The King, whom I informed of what had 250

—

.
=> l = — = — #00” > — — , — en * — — — — — aa
—Uw—U VU —— 2 — — 2 — 2— A—•1 * poo EI” _ 2 o EI ra. — * .
a 2 2 Re SLE — — — * n LS 2 3 > * n — — 2
2 7

; - —
8 8 — — — = —

——— — ”- —— — —

——— — _ 5 — = — ring

- — —
8
— — oT—

A 9 a . — - = — K =
Kut hb > $0 El — 9 LICL — —_— . » * 2 22 — 7 *
: * — os ee - eng Ws. . 2
3 — . _p— ä — — 13. - Eh: Fa. —— nt ng 1 a > Be pe / . * —— 2 — — - — = . — — —

— K — Eo oor r ˙ 8 BE he TOM — Fe EIT "appr REDS» 2 r — c . 2 * — — .

OIL — 4 - * 2 Iu 5 . - - * "I "2X + 2 3 : - K 2 * 1 2 r — 4 — >. . — - RY "vs — COU ˖—³²ẽ—᷑1d ä

— — i 6 * win X 7 — ele 1 5 5; Os. 5 -— aa þ

2 - — rx 9" Ty 2 — — — ay > * —— — 3 N CY 4 - * 2 EE — — — — — . TELE — . — 2 —5 i 8 0

* * .— > 1 — — 5 —— — — 25 — — 5 Fr uae — — —— SES — * 5 2 — — ” — —— ”" — diene — _ — nya > ——— — 8 — — — 5 * N . = —

= 5 2 1 * "a — 22 r TR - ” 5 — - — . N EIS. TR" E = - —— — — — —— — 4

— de — % * — n wake R — — F * —

: Dna Ge RS — r 7 N
n * . „ Mu n
— * 2 $ RET OTTER. Sa 1, ** A

ne EAT. Fon rad * 5 232 "IJ
— r n
Sr

4 MEMOIR Ss Book vll

could Induce the King, however greatly he was

approaching, the King ordered the Conſtable de
Montmorency, and Marechal Biron, to bring up

of high ſteward of the King's houſehold, he had

in his preſence. The king did not think Proper =
as he would have done his fon or brother (theſe

the like. The King immediately diſpatched let- |
ters to his council, to take proper meaſures upon
the Count's flight: the ſame meſſenger left one fort

ACmites the correſpondence : had with bis Majelty,

pens to me, found ſo much conformity between
his ſituation and mine, that he thought he coull 3
not conlole me more effectually, than by acquaint F
ing me of it in his turn, He had indeed untrac- *F
table tempers to deal with. The Count of Soiſ- 7

ſons, who had followed him with reluctance, re. g
venged himſelf by repeated inſtances of his ca-
price and ill humour. But not all his endeavours ©

offended, to order him to retire; which was all
he wanted; and he was at laſt obliged to go of ©
his own accord, upon a pretence fo very trifling,
that it had ſcarcely the appearance of one. A re-
port being ſpread that the Conſtable of Caſtille was

the two bodies of troops which they commanded:
the Count of Soiſſons alledged that, by his poſt

„ err

a right to the chief command of theſe troops in
his Majeſty's abſence, and aſſerted his claim to it

— A > a

even to requeſt a favour of this nature from the 1
Conſtable, and the Marechal; and uled his Wel 1
endeavours to baniſh ſo ridicatons a notion from 31
the Count's mind, He ſolicited, he intreated him,

were his Majeſty's: own words) but in vain; the
"uf

Count, who did not err through ignorance, quitted

him with a diſſembled diſcontent, and prevailed _ 3
upon part of the ſoldiers under his command to dy

nne,

—
. H& 3 .
IT. = q 2 JW
* N LESS! u-
rad Get oy ns Af 2
N > OO INT NV ORE N

me as he paſſed by Moret. Henry did not yet
know that I had retired thither; but we had a-
greed upon this expedient, to conceal from my e

Three

VL SV . 2»
Three or four days after the receipt of this letter,
y ſervants informed me that ſome ſoldiers were

nt. 2 But arrived, who inſiſted upon quartering at Saint-
ac Mamert, a village upon the confluence of the
Ile | wp and the Loin, dependent upon Moret, and
re. Aiſtant from it about a quarter of a league. I ſent
ca *Camord to bring me intelligence who they were,
irs and what was their deſign. They not only ne-
vas glected to return me, by this gentleman, the uſual
all compliments upon theſe occaſions, but likewiſe
of anſwered him inſolently, that they had a right to
18, quarter in any place where their horſes began to

be fatigued, and all that could be required of them
was to do no miſchief. They refuſed to name their

| captains, and only ſaid that they belonged to the

: Count of Soiſſons. To put theſe officers ſtill far-
tber! in the fault, I wrote to them a ſecond time,
3 telling them that, ſince they belonged to the Count

of Soiſſons, who honoured me with his freindſhip, |

; they were welcome to quarter at Moret; that 1
1 would provide them lodgings in the inns and
baouſes of the town's people, where they would
bhbave greater conveniency; and juſt hinted to

| hem that I was ſenſible of the manner in which

they had received my deputy. Camord, whom I

| would have ſent with this ſecond meſſage, told

* ve WT:
+
* Rs 8 SES,
1 LON " Err na Du 44 n
2 2 War 8 n anode nn
1 F c
r

me, that it would have no other effect than to
© increaſe the inſolence of theſe officers, who came
5 7 with a premeditated defign to affront me; which
be confirmed by ſeveral other circumſtances of his
I reception, that he had concealed from me before,
to avoid a greater misfortune. Madam De Roſny,
5 who was preſent at this relation, began to give

7 20S

way to female fears; and accuſing Camord with
imprudence, faid, ſhe had rather that the whole
village of Saint-Mamert was laid! in ruins, than

ſee me, for ſo flight an occaſion, at variance with
VoI. II. E e

* 1 17

A 2

. n
e
N { HF

50 f M E M O | I R 8 Book vi "MF

the Count, and 50400 to a conteſt with his of C.
ficers. YN
I bid my wife be ſilent; and iis arreſtirg
five or ſix of the troopers, who came to get th
equipages mended at Moret, and to purchak i
proviſions, I again ſent Camord to thoſe infulen' I}
oificers. They received him ſtill worſe than be. i
fore, and hardly forbore laying hands on him;
mingling great threatening with their complaints for
the detention of their ſoldiers. It was no longer

poſſible to diſſemble: and all that now remained }
to be done, was to aſſert my authority, yet wih Þ.
all poſſible moderation. I ordered twelve other Ay
troopers, who had juſt entered Moret, to be ar. ge
reſted; and in two hours time aſſembled an hund. gi

red and fifty arquebuſiers, thirty horſe, and thirty

foot ſoldiers; with whom I marched to Saint.“ Ar
Mamert, by the road that leads to it by land, and} be
which has a thick ſhade of trees on each ſide; cl
while the reſt of my troop purſued the ſame rout! *
upon the river, in a flat boat covered with planks, | E
and arrived at the ſame time with me under the
houſes of the village ſituated near the liver. The! ©
Count of Soiſſen's party, ſeeing this double eſcort, Ai

detached ſome of their men to aſk me what! e
meant by it? Nothing“, replied I calmly, *but 1
* that this village belonging to me, I come to 2
% quarter my ſoldiers bere.” The officers by hee 9
words underſtood that I was not ditpoſed to yield | %
to them; and ſent again to make excuſes for what |
had happened, telling me that they had no Geſign | 3
to quarter in any place that belonged to me, with |
out my permiſion; which the Count of Soiſſons Þ *
would never pardon them for. In effect, they
paid for what proviſions they had bought, and
remounted their horſes, without even demanding
the priſoners, whom [ ſent after them as ſoon 3s

the y had reached Dormeilles. They thanked
| me,

1

O F S *J . 51
e, and offered me their ſervice, which entite-
y removed my anger. ſent the officers a dozen
i ottles of wine and two pies; after which I
heir mounted my horſe, to go, in obedience to 115
haſes I lajeſty's order, to conlul: with the Prince of
lents *Tonti upon the meaſures neceflary to be taken
be. With regard to the Count of Soiffon's deſertion.
im; Ibis misfortune was very inconſiderable, com-
for pared to that which happened in Picardy. The
ger Fealouly of command created a miſunderſia anding
ned $etween the Duke of Nevers and the Duke of
vie Povillon, The Counts of Fuentes and Roſne,
ther Who commanded the * troops, and were
Ar. Houbtleſs informed of it, took minen of their
nd Piviſion, and laid ſiege to Catelet and Capelle.

irt) Ehe firſt of theſe two places wanted proviſions
at | And warlike ſtores, and the ſecond had a Cithos
and! hourable governor: but the loſs. of them was
de; chiefly occaſioned by the two French general F
out who, through hatred of each other, neg glected to
188, | ive them any aſſiſtance.
tet Things were in this ſtate, when the governor
he of Him, a place belonging to the Spaniards, be-
jng diſcontented with his garriſon, reſolved to
at! deliver up the caſtle of Ham to the King, which
dut would neceffarily include the furreader of the ci-
o wy. He addreſſed himſelf to the Duke of Longues
ee Pille, and intreated him to tend him a powerful
eld alliſtance, having a very numerous garriſon to
bat oppoſe. The Duke of Longueville acquainted
ion | his general officers, and the Duke of Bouillon in
t- particular, with the affair, who promiſed him a

20s RY peedy lupply. Upon this allurance, the Dake
1e i

nd . Brantome juſtifies the Duke ic deren conce ning the defeat
ng IP be French met with at Dourlens; and oblerves that hs : acvanced bY
Bo jong marches, and that he ordered them to wait for hirn; but the

polber commanders did not think proper to do fo, Tom. III. tis
od 263. 5

E 2 O

— or EIDOS — LEY D "=
22 * A bs ons — = 2 - -
—_— Y - x 7 — 8 . * — mw _— 4 — — 4 — — — 4 a4. 22
: - 3 2 A - * hr a -* 2 *
. * 7 25 og 2 Om 24 Ti pre ns D 8
2 2 3 2 — oo Wo — * <p —
— — — Ä— es * —— — — <tc; — — — — »
1 — ., 7 — 2 TT ——— en 0 - . CAVE:
3 + we wept are yo * — —— — — — . — — —
— — — — — ——— 2 — 2 — —
— Dr = — —
" 5 0 ,
V — ——— — — — — —
+ — e — —
. — lY— — * . = - 6 -
.

7 *
—
—

8

i} 2
Wa:
14.8 x) I;
_ 3
_ 7 4 17
I 3
ve 1
. 13 *
{08
=» 1
_-
r
392-4 TY 51
$5 'F by 6 3
11 I
1 4 77
bo. 1
: 4
VN mn
1
n
_

LY
3

in all Picardy.

troops, during this interval, than by raiſing the | ©
ſiege of Dourlens, which bed been attacked bßß

52 M E MO I R S Book VII. "Y
of Longueville, that he might not by delay lo:

| fo favourable an opportunity, haſtened immed.

ately to Ham with D'Humicres, followed by ſome
Picardine troops, and threw part of them into the

_ caſtle, and part in the adjacent places, endez-_ +

vouring to reduce the city by ſcaling and petard.
ing. The enemy's garriſon defended themfelves c
like lions, and repulſed them ſeveral times; and

probably a hotter action of this kind never hap» *?
pened. At length, the French, animated by te
bravery of their leaders, who found that it was
in vain to expect any aſſiſtance from the Duke of *
Bouillon, attacked the trench next the caſtle, car t
ried it, and entered the city. The Spaniſh gar- f
riſon received them there with great intrepidity; 2t
being forced to give ground, they rallied again fe:

veral times, and many little battles were fought ©
in the ſquares, croſs-ways, and even in the hou-
ſes; till they were all, to the number of a thou -

ſand or twely e hundred men, cut in pieces, But

the French bought this advantage very dear; it
_ colt them thirty of their beſt officers, among

whom were Du-Cluſeau and La-Croix, and E
D'Humiers himſelf “, the belt and braveſt office!

Meſſieurs de Saint-Paul, de Bouillon, and Vil- | 3
bars, thought they could not better employ their _

es and Roſne, after the taking of Tatelet

and Capelle. The Duke of Bouillon brought four
hundred horſe, Villars as many, and Saint-Pau!
five hundred; and their infantry conſiſted, in all,
of two chouſs ind mi, Which they determined to

* Nothing can be added to the eulogium which M. De Thou

gives this gentleman; he ſays, book cx1i. that the King and the
whole kingdom lamented him: his life and illuſtrious actions fill che
89 oth vol, of the MSS, de la Bibliot. de Roi.

throw

22M .
3 1
1 4 "MN
1595.

. "Ix"
if they failed of driving the

0

Show into the city,

„ 3 — from before it.

About half a league from Dourlens, Bouillon

1 Having ſent fifty of his troop five hundred paces:

before him, to gain the ſummit of a mountain,
from whence they might have a full view of the
city and the camp of the beſiegers, four of their

1 Pores, who preceded the others, perceived a bo-
Ray of the enemy coming directly towards them,
between the camp and the hill.
effect,
2 hieß bad got intelligence of our deſign.

This was, in
in order of battle,.
But

theſe four troopers, being hindered by their fear

their whole army,

A from making a full diſcovery, made a falſe report
to the Dake of Bouillon, who, ſuppoſing it to be
Z only a detachment,
them with his ſquadron.

haſtened his march towards

Arriving at the top of
the hill, he plainly ſaw his miſtake. One party
of one hundred horſe preceded two ſquadrons of

2 + fix hundred each, which followed at the diſtance

of about a thouſand. paces, and were lupporied
by three other ſquadrons, conſiſting of an equal

| 3 number, and a body of ſeven or eight ay, Fer

foot. The hundred horſe, perceiving Bovillon,
galloped towards him, followed at a great pace
by the two firſt ſquadrons, all armed cap-a-pie,
and lances by their ſides; which left him no

room to doubt but that the French were diſcover»

ed, and that they would be obliged to en age,
notwithſtanding the inequality of their num! bers,
the Spaniards being ſtronger by two thirds than
they, unleſs he could conceal from them his lit--
tle party.

Bouillon, ſending a gentleman to the Admiral,

1 to deſire. he would come immediately to his aſſiſt⸗
ance; Villars, who was bravery itſelf, without
bk} anſwering a ſingle word,
W midſt of his troopers, and making them put their

N
.
*

armed himſelf in the

E 35 helmets

. — by _ — — RI — 2
— — — — — 7
— * = 4 es hoe Fo 8 2 rs pages 1 ny 5 +
„ — — * Iz ey ER. _
2 3 r GAA r 2 2
— — D — I _— ” - — — : - >. . 1
— A * Ti - * N
— or he hog g ere — dap — 2 —— —
— 2 I. —— 2 _ _ -
P — a
— *
— * — — — —.— —— —
” - rt —_ y — — a — w —
— ” - 9 To 4 as, ds K 2 - 2

— —

— x *

* - — COLIN
— — — A
= PRIN — . r — — —
X
«> 4 * * —
3

2 nn
— —
2
ö
6

e -
bas 2 — rn
2 .
- — . 1
—
— N
— x
. 1
r
< - Cale... — *.
— nN — 77.
2 — 4
8 — =,

Lb
——

54 N E M Oi AR s Bock VII.

helmets on, exhoried them no. otherwiſe than by | 1
bidding them follow him; and Bouillon {aw bim 1
in an inſtant at his fide. Finding him in ſuch a
good diſpoſition, he told him, that to pre ven 2
the enemy from diſcovering their rear, it was |

neceſſury to charge them with as much fury as
poſſible. The Admiral ſtaid not to be deſired a
f:coad time; but, ſuppoſing that he ſhould be

through emulation, firſt with his troop, and gui-

 Vigoroully fupported by Bouillon, advanced,

loping intrepidly towards the enemy, ſuddenly |
attacked the left wing, threw himſelf, with his

piſtol. in his hand, amidſt that foreſt of lances,
and carrying terror and diſmay through the fit

nix bandes horfe, would have cut them in pic-
ces, and perhaps have gained ſtill greater advan-
reges, if he had been ſcconded with equal brave.

j

ry: but Bouillon, on his ſide, made only a falle

attack; after which he wheeled about and retreat:
ed, and has fince Contuautly maintained, that it
was this only which ba: 4 been agreed upon be-
tween the * Admiral and him, although all thoſe
who accompanied the latter have unanimouſly
alſerted, that he 1ncant a true attack.

This miſtake, if it was © one, had a conſequence
as fatal as might have been expected + the enemy's
13acdron which Loullion had attacked and after:

If we will not g. 10 credit to his biographer, let us 3 M.

de Thou, wav er Y ty lens the Duke de Bouillon: he, moreover,
ys. that the Admiral de V Wors was acquainted by. the Count de

Saint-Paul to retire; but that he Cid not teke this notice for any o-
ther than a kind of order of the Duke de Bouillon, to which be re-
fuſed to pay auy regard, thruugn © ice of vanity and bravery

which cannot be excuſed trom the imputation of temerity, I. 112.

D*Aubigne ſpeaks in the hme manner as De Thou, tom. 3, l. 4.
e. Les Mem. de Ja Ligue, tom. 6. and Macthien, tom. 2.1. 1.
The opinion of Cayer is, that ihe Ainvral de Villars would wil-
lingly have taken advantage of the advice which the Duke of
Bouillon cauled to be given him to rcti; re, but that de e was then too
far engaged. Chron, Norten. I. 7. p. $94 |

W ar ds

—

Iz
oy

8 I n
FFP
eee ng ee

e

N = N A era ARS;
pres bop £ £

0
a... as CS

r AE Io ee ie, oi
REIN IS a Ia ves

J 1555 0 F 8 U L $. 7. 3 5

N Wards ſhunned, was the firſft to fall upon Villars,

8 ho was then conqueror of his own; and being,

that inſtant joined by frcth troops, Which came
N pooring on him in great numbers, his quadron,
: deing quite overwhelmed, could find their ſafety
only in flight. Villars, incapable of fear, and
| 7 diſdiining to turn his back upon the enemy, per-
89 formed wonders With a few brave men who would:

not abandon him; but at laſt being attacked on.

= Fall ſides, and fucrounded by the enemy, they were

all thrown to the groand and expired, pierced
2 with a thouſand wounds or maffacred in cold.

1 blood ®. »

Bouillon gained nothing by this fert ifice of his.

= colleague: the victorious enemy attacked his

3
An

3

n . EE b x : 5
9 — h KY I ETD Bk; LEE ts ee ee

> ſquadron, the other commanded by Saint-Paul,
and the whole body of foot.” Their leader bad
vot inſpired them, by his example, with a reſe-
lution to defend themſ=lves, and at this moment.
be minded nothing Jef. Bouillon 2 and Saint-Paul,
fled with their cavalry, leaving the foot without.
any hopes of Seen! in effect, they were all cut
to pieces. After this, the beſieged in vain de-
manded to capitulate. The enemy, intoxicated.
With their good fortune, would liſten to no pro-
poſals, but ſtormed the place While they were

parleying, and inhumanely butchered all they
found in it. I had this wl;ole relation from La-
Font, who, after the loſs of his matter, returned
to my ſervice; and the reader may be aſſured that
it 18 avſolutely true, ſince this man deſerves all

been made prifoner by ſome Neapolitans, a Spaniſh captain, named-
Contrera, entered on purpoſe into a diſpute with them about ha-
ving him, and he made a handle of ther refuſal, to kill him. L'E-.
tolle ſays, that the hatred which the Spaniards bore him, from the
time that he quitted the party of the league for that of the King,
was the true cauſe of his death. He gives him the ſame encomiums
as M. de Roſny. Journ. de . de L Etclle, Ann. 1 1595.

the

0 The Admiral de Villars was among theſe laſt: after having

56 MEMOIR S Book VII.
the faith that is due to a man of honour, and an
eye · witneſs of what he relates. He told me that

more than three thouſand French were loſt upon

this occafion; and, what is truly deplorable,
more valiant men periſhed, than in thoſe three

great battles the King fought at Coutras, Argues,
and Ivry: France, in Villars alone, ſuſtained a

irreparable loſs; to the general grief of the king- :

dom, I joined mine in particular, for the loſs of
à true and excellent friend.

Another letter, equally worthy of credit, from
the Sieur Baltazar, whom I had charged expreſsly
not to omit the ſmalleſt circumſtance reiating to
the aGlions of the King's army, puts it in my
power to inform the reader of all that paſſed. [n

this recital he will, with great pleaſure, behold a

King whom the ſweets of royalty had not power
to alter; his {acceſſes were ſuch, in all their cir-
cumſtances, as could be attributed to nothing bat
his own valour and good conduct, and the glory
of them was heightened by the oppoſition of tholc

_ misfortunes which happened in all places whe
he was not in perſon. This campaign of Hen

Ty's in Franche-Comté, in the opinion of the beſt
Judges, exceeded all he had hitherto performed.

I have before obſerved, that Marechal Biron was
employed in aſſiſting the citizens of Dijon, who
held the enemies garriſon beſieged in their caſtle,
He arrived there very ſeaſonably: the Viſcount of
Tavannes having brought a conſiderable reinforce-
ment to this garriſon, the beſieged became be.
ſiegers in their turn. The citizens, preſſed on all
| fides, and reduced to the laſt extremity, could on-
ly defend themſelves at the end of a ſtreet to which
: they had retired, and had but one of the city-gates
in their poſſeſſion, when Biron came to their af-
ſiſtance, and-reanimated their courage; they once
more drove out the Viſcount Tavannes, and in-
veſted

— — —
2 3
* - > 7 * us
5 3
3 ——
OO ha
7 ** . "
--
* n

A 5 ; : 2 2 AY 2

1 . . RJ: 8 3 : CES iT. g r ep {7 „ ge e ee, eee — _
8 13 e S ͤü••J/•ũ r dd NS

.

1
1
=

14
pede
KT
AEM
meg
1
=
*
8
Wn
Tac
1
CEA
r
.
IS
3
7 .
78
2
a+
+
4
—
.
+
7

yeſted him in the caſtles of Dijon and Talan *. In
the midſt of theſe tranſactions Biron was inform-
ed that the Duke of Maſenne, full of grief for the
© ſucceſs of the King's arms in Burgundy, had ſo
earneſtly ſolicited the Conſtable of Caſtille for aſ-
ſiſtance, that the latter was upon the point of

1 paſſing the Alps, with his army, to enter Burgun-
dy. Biron, concealing this intelligence from the

Eing, contented himſelf with only ſending to in-
treat he would come as ſoon as poſſible to helphim
to reduce the caſtle of Dijon. The King was come
to Troyes when he received the Marechal's diſ-

patches; and barely gueſſing ata circumſtance which

_ the Marechal had an abſolute certainty of, name-

ly, that the Conſtable of Caſtille, who, he ſup-
poſed, would foon paſs into Flanders, would take

Dijon in his way, to ſettle there the affairs of the |

league with the Duke of Matenne, he marched
thither haſtily, and put every thing in motion,
that they might find nothing more to do at their
Arial. N ; ᷑ ni
It is not to be doubted but that theſe two gene-
rals might again have prevented the King, and
preſerved the caſtles of Dijon, had they not ſtop-
ped unſeaſonably in their way to take Veſou, and
ſome other little places in Franche- Comtè, which had
been ſeized by the troops of Lorrain. To this volunta
ry delay neceſſity afterwards added another at Gray,
by the overflowing of the river Saone, which ren-
dered their paſſage impracticable. To remove this
obſtacle, the Conſtable of Caſtille cauſed a bridge to

be built over the river: but by his carrying on

this work ſo ſlowly, it ſcemed as if he was afraid
of engaging himſelf in the heart of France, with

ſo many rivers behind him, The truth was, this

About half a league from Dijon, where an Italian, named
Franeiſque, commanded. | WE: |

general

SHER 2

58 M E M OI R S Book VII.

general already knew that he had the King before LENT
Bim. .
When the King left Troyes he ſent the Govt .

of Torigny with eight or nine hundred horſe - | f
fore him, with which Marechal Biron was exfrems: Ot
ly pleaſed. Four days after, Henry himſelf arrived

at Dijon, and, without diſmounting, went imme- v

diately to reconnoitre the outworks, and all. the yp
neighbouring places; efpecially on that fide where a
the enemy might be expected. He cauſed deep

trenches to be made, and by that means cut off
_all communication between the two caſtles. This
=. the King perceiving that notwithſtanding |
all the efforts he could make, the caſtles might
ſtill hold out a long time, he went, according to
his uſual cuſtom, with a ſmall detachment to mect
The enemy, that be might retard their march, and
give time to the reſt of the eir troops to finith their
enterpriſe, He thought, if he could find his ene-
mies employed in their paſſage over the Saone, it
would afford him a favourable opportunity, though _
he had but an inconſiderable body with him: he ©
therefore appointed Lux and Fountain-Francgoifſe* |
for a rendezvous for the reſt of his troops, and
marched before with only three hundred horſe, |
half of whom were ar quebuſiers; and with this
little eſcort advanced to the Vigenne, near Saint-
Seine; from thence he detached the Marquis of |
Mir ebeau, with fifty or r lt horſe to get intelli- | 7
_ gence z and i in the mean time he paſſed the river | 3
of Vigenne with a hundred, or a hundred and“
twenty horſe; deſigning only to reconnoitre the
ground, and the form of a country, where he |
might poſſibly be ee] to come to an engage»
ment.
He had not marched more 1 955 a league, when

*

TIE eee , we - . R RR

PFF 88 2c SN ups os 2 n Nenne

* Upon the frontiers. of Burguady and Frauclie-Cemté: this ex-
peditioi: happened ; in the beginning of June.
be

1595. 15 8 L ECC
he ſaw Mirebeau return in great diforder who
told him, that he had been charged by three or
four hundred horſe; which had prevented him
from getting a full view of the enemy: but added,
that he believed thoſe four hundred horle had been
ſent to ſeize the poſt of Saint-Seine, and that they
vere followed cloſe by the whole army. Biron,
1 ho arrived that inſtant, offered to go and make
a clearer diſcovery. At the diſtance of a thouſand.

> oa he found, upon a little hill, an advanced
guard, conſiſting of ſixty horſe, which he attacked;
5 ——and taking their place, ſaw plainly the whole Spa-
niſh army marching in order of battle; and in

t kia a body of four hundred horſe, which,
0
t
.
r

WE.
*y
A .
0 5 0
EA

8
*
ES
9
N
*
IK
4
5
77 5
55
* 4
Es
1 5

aqdvancing before the reſt of the army, purſued a

party of one hundred and fifty French. This was

the party commanded by D'Auſſonsille, whom his
© Majeſty had ſent to make diſcoveries on the other
«| — fide. D*'Avſſonville, by flying, diverted the ſtorm

it} upon Biron. The enemy's detachment dividing
a into two bands, attacked bim on the right and
e left, doubtleſs with the ſame intention as Biron,
# 9 to diſcover what forces were in the rear. The dif-
4 > ference between them was, that the enemies, being
„ ee by near ſix hundred horſe, were two
is thirds ſuperior in number to the two ſquadrons
t-| : commanded by Biron and Mireveay, which made
»f | © up only three hundred.
i- |» Notwithſtanding this b Biron conti-
r nued to make a ſtand: he ſeparated his three hun-
d dred horſe into three equal platuons, placing Mire-
de beau, with the firſt, on the light; the Baron of
je Lux, with the brand. on the left; and poſted
e- himſelf, with the th 7271 in the middle. The e-

nemy attacked each ide at once, with a hundred
n | j and fifty men: Lux ſuffered greatly, and was e-
E ven thrown to the ground, with many others :

| buon, having the advantage in his place, flew to
bc + his

> l e weil

his aſſiſtance, and reanimated his troops: but was |
Himſelf charged with ſuch impetuoſity by all the *
enemy's ſquadrons united together, towards whom

he ſaw others from the main body of the army

ſtill advancing, that he was obliged to retreat.

'This retreat, as ſoon as the enemy's horſe drey
' nearer, was changed into a real flipht; in which

condition he came within view of the King, Who
immediately ſent a hundred horſe to ſupport him,
Nothing is more difficult than to ſtop the flight of _
a ſquadron when the enemy is at their heels; the
laſt hundred were ſeized with the ſame pannic, |
and returned flying with thoſe whom they went

to ſupport.

The King now finding that all depended upon
himſelf, advanced towards the fugitives, without

taking time to put on his helmet, expoſed himſel

to the fury of the victorious ſquadrons, which con.

ſiſted of more than eight hundred men, called hi:
principal officers by their names, and throwing
himſelf every where, without any regard to hi:

_ own perſon, obliged ſome of the fugitives at lat g

to ſtop. He compoſed two bodies of the whole

and putting himſelf at the head of a hundred and
fifty horſe, returned to the charge on one ſide c
while La-Tremouille, with a like number, did the
ſame, by his order, on the other. But for this
intrepidity, it is probable, that not one of thok 4.

three hundred men, engaged thus on the farther

ſide of a river, with a victorious body of cavalry |
in front, would have eſcaped, The King *, giving +

_ * The King ſaid, that upon other occaſions and emergencies inn
Which he had happened to fall, he fought for victory, but here It!
_ contended for his ite. Perefixe, Matthieu, Cayet, Le Grain a
and D'Aubigne, relate the actions of this day in the ſame manner n
but M. de Thou, and vol. 8929 of the royal MSS. with ſome lite 1 0
difference. D*Aubigue ſays, that the King did not ſhew himſelf ne
entirely ſatisfied, that only the Dukes de la Tremouille and he! ” us

i. or 8s uvul IVI. 61

1 bis ſoldiers an example, threw himſelf, bare- headed,

amidſt ſix of the enemy's ſquadrons, broke through

them, and forced them to give ground. Biron,
taking advantage of this opportunity, rallied a-
bout a hundred and twenty horſe, and returned to

ſupport the King, and altogether drove the ene-

my's horſe back to the main body of the Duke ot
Mafenne's army. |

Henry would not have ſuffered his ardour to
have tranſported him ſo far, but that he did not
immediately perceive, that a wood on each ſide
of him was crouded with fuſileers, to whoſe diſ-
charge he had like to have been expoſed, and

would have been ſurrounded by them, if, in the

es int)!
ere he
TEE
anner!
ze litik

him}

D

belt

heat of the fight, he had attacked the Spaniſh ar-
my: he therefore ſtopped his career, and kept
bimſelf upon his guard. At that moment he per-
, Ceived two other bodies of horſe, who came out
pol one of thoſe woods to ſtrengthen the advanced
85

bevf jvined together with a good grace, © to bruſh” off, ſays he,
the dew before his Majeſty.” Tom 3.1. 4. c. 8. |
Ling to De Then, he commended much before the parliament

But accor«. ©

Mirebeau, La Curée, and many others

hae no need of counſel but of aſſiſtance,” replied Henry IV.
to thoſe who adviſed him to make his eſcape on a good Turkiſh horſe
chat was got ready for him; © There is more hazard in the flight
5 than the chace.” Matthieu, tom. 2. I. 1. p. 187. Mainville,”

s this hiſtorian, © who ſtood near him, and had his piſtol ready

1 charged for the firſt of the enemy that came near bim, let fire

Y 4 at one ſo 4 propos, that he ſhot him quite through the head; and

the bail came whiſtling ſo about the King's ears, that he never
'* ſpoke of a piſtol but he remembered this report, ſaying, That it
was the loudeſt he had ever heard, having been charged with two

'& ſteel balls.” According to the account of the fame hiſtorian, the
Duke de Matenne demanded only four hundred horſe of the Spa-

milk general to attack the King's troops; which the Spaniard refuſed.

1 im, being perſuaded that Henry only wanted to draw him into an

zmbuſcade. This diſtruſt of the enemy was the occaſion of his e-
ape at Fontaine Frangoiſe, as it had been before at Aumale. And

Phat is more ſurpriſing is, that this Prince only loſt ſix men in ſo
Dot an action; while on the enemy's fide were killed one hundred

Ind twenty, beſides two hundred wounded, and ſixty taken priſon»
5. Chron. Novenn, I. 7. p. 497. | |

guard,

vas * * *
welt <3 2

2 tes
55 }
s

tw

—
* IJ. *

verturned all that oppoſed him, and found him.

ſelf at large before all thoſe battalions, who were
aſtoniſhed at the miracles they ſaw him perform.

Henry knew this ſurprize would not laſt long, and

that he would have the fury of a whole army to

ſuſtain, animated by the ſight of a handful of foes,
do repair the ſhame of ſuch an aſtoniſhing defeat;
he therefore took advantage of the enemy's inac-

tion, to regain at leaſt his firſt poſt, without be.
ing purſued; and diſengaged himſelf from the
midſt of the enemy's army with ſo much order
and ſuperiority, that they could make themſelves _
no amends for their loſs, And this Prince, in

one day, and almoſt in one moment, acquired the

honour of the moſt glorious victory, and of the
fineſt retreat of which any hiſtory ever afforded

an 0 example,”

On his arrival, he Wund the Count of Chiver- |
ny, the Chevalier d'Oiſe, Meſſieurs de Vitry,
de Clermont, de Riſſe, d'Arambure, de La- Cu-
ree®, d' Heures, de Saint-Geran, and de La-Bou-

M E M O I R 8 Book VII.
cd, which he had vanquiſhed. This was one 5
of thole critical moments, when the leaſt want of
precaution brings on inevitable ruin. The King,
who with one glance perceived the deſign of theſ: _
troops, ordered his to halt and thicken their
Tanks, that they might be in a condition to re.
ceive them; for in the heat of his victory he o.

Jaye, with each his company, which being joined

to thoſe troops the King had before, compoſed

a body of eight hundred horſe. After this rein-

forcement, the enemy durſt not attack them, be

ing perſuaded that his whole army was not far

* This gentleman fought without armour, and was badly mount:
ed. A voice which he thought to be the King's, called to him,
Take care Curee;” when, lo, he found it was one of the enemy,
who was juſt ready to run him through with his lance; but he kill
ed him. Vol. 8929. NIS. de la Bibliot. de Roi.

WW N ? —

r co. eas. bu re

(4 "Ut 4 = : 17 2 o
—_— i * n N
a _ r 1 r

EPR 8 8 I
— —
1 [CY

„„ „

IJ
* p —
* 75
- . 4
5
$
« 1 ®
%
A
5
> *

4. 5 4
.
2 24
Be 5 (>
h 5
% 0 £32]
ets |;

7 1 44

es, or 3 1 1 7. 6
and not yet recovered from their conſternation at
of the defeat of their men by a platoon ſcarce the
„ ſixth part of their number, they turned back,
c plöKhscing the infantry in the rear to cover their ca-
pvalry. The King followed them cloſe, and har-
©  7raſſed them continually, till they had repaſſed the
% Saone upon the bridge they had built below Gray.
u. Not daring to attempt the paſſage again, Burgun—
"© dp, by this exploit, remained wholly at the King's
n. diſcretion; he reduced it all in a few days, except
id the Scurek, and ſeized ſeveral little towns in
to Franche-Comté, which he releaſed, at the in-
„ _ treaty of the Swiſs, Theſe advantages were all
3 __ owing to the battle of Fontaine-Francoiſe. -
Henry, when he learnt the defeat of his forces
& in Picardy, confeſſed, that thoſe advantages,
n great as they were, did not equal that loſs. He
er,

Jdauitted Burgundy and the Lyonnois immediately,
and marched haſtily towards Paris. paſling by

in Moret, I acquainted him with my motives for lea-

lie ving the council: he approved of them, and was

ble of opinion, that the confidence which the other

el members of it perceived he repoſed in me, and
the deſire I had to make myſelf ſtill more worthy

that diſtinction, had drawn their enmity upon

„ me. He had the goodneſs to conſole me, by aſ-

u fſuring me, that my ſufferings upon this occaſion

u. would only increaſe his friendſhip for me. I a-

cd greed with his majeſty, that at a time when the

ed check his forces received at Dourlens might occa-

in-“ ſion a revolution, there was a neceſlity to diſſem-

de. ble his diſguſt, and to avoid accuſing any one. It

f was to me only that the King complained of the -
authors of that fatal accident, and deplored the

"| dangerous effects of diſagreement among generals, ]

ny, | Which is almoſt the ſole cauſe of the greateſt dif. F

eil.

> * Seure, a town upon the river Saone: it has changed its name,
= > and now is called Belle garde. |

Fa: aſters

V Beek.

aſters in war. He appeared ſenſibly affected with
the loſs of Adm. Viliars, and never mentioned
him but with the higheſt praiſes : nor could he be
_ deceived by any thing which the intereſted parties

advanced, to place all that had e to the Þ

account of the deceaſed...
It was then that this prince was convinced,

and acknowledged to me, that he had yielded un-
reaſonably to propoſals for a war, the ſucceſs of

which he had been perſuaded was infallible: he
was even candid enough to treat it as an error

which might plunge France once more into great.

er miſeries than thoſe ſhe had been. juſt delivered

from. By ſpeaking thus, the King conſidered on-

ly the greatneſs of a loſs ſuch as Catelet, Capel!c,

Ardres*, Dourlens, Cambray, from which Ba-

lag ny bad been juſt driven; and Calais eſpecially,

which though not yet taken; was looked upon E

as already loſt: for my part, 1 thought the

kingdom was then in moſt danger, when the

King, by an aſtoniſhing inſtance of valour and
good fortune, preſerved Burgundy and his own
life. From that time Henry uſed to ſay, that a
declaration of war was one of thoſe affairs that re-
quired the greateſt deliberation, and could never
be ſufficiently enough attended to. From this ex-
ample, princes may ſtill draw another leſſon no
leſs uſeful, which is, that they ought never to
harbour a rancorous hatred againſt their neigh—
bours, and that prudence, on certain occaſions,
requires them to ſcem diſpoſed for a reconcilia-
tion, notwithſtanding the moſt violent, ande even
the moſt juſt reſentment.

The King was careful to avoid diſcove ering his

* Ardres was Gnenderad to the enemy by the Count de Beli
almoſt without making any defence; for which he was difpracee,
turned out of his places, and ſent home to bis ellate, Cc. Bonge!s
Epiſt. 75. ad Camer, Moriſot, c. 33.

thoughts

A

+ 5 q 8 1 N ? - . *
i * SPY $25. - 2 2 I 9 8 | - 3 , 8 . rs 2 2 . ood tang nn”, |
— 6ʒ !. NL "ln OPS P26 7 1 RA _ wins Wa word cs fs yooas A aA —

1
s

1 fans

Tg
9
SIE
8
Ps
1:8

pro's

INES
!- &
% 2
55

BESS:
2

1

f
:

J
:
*
7
*

„
35
1
2
io
.
.
» 1
4
* 82

2081-40 F 59: LL; - 6
thoughts in public; on the contrary, he endea-

voured to revive the courage of thoſe who ſeem»

, ed molt depreſſed, To the Parifians, who made
him compliments of condolance upon his loſs, he

| | replied, that it might be eaſily repaired, provided
they would join actions to words. They made

him great offers; but his Majeſty, who had had
frequent proofs of the little dependence he could
have on them, took his own meaſures, and with-
out waiting for the accompliſhment of their pro-
miſes, left Paris the next day, with the ſatisfac-

wid CD CD SS...

2 72 ws

1

& *Y

0

CG

4 5 * N 9 „ . 8 2 * 7 2 2
* en

lion of hearing before he went, by a courier from

Rome, that the Pope had been at laſt prevailed
upon to grant him the abſolution“ he had fo long
ſolicited. In the preſent conjuncture, this news
Was of the utmoſt importance. 275 |

To this abſolution the holy father annexed the

following conditions r: That the King ſhould ex-

_ clude

* © What made the Pope,” lays M. de Perefixe, & delay giving
© abſolution ſo long was,” ſaid he, “ becauſe that he alone had the

poser of reſtoring peuitents: and he was very much diſpleaſed,

that the prelates of France had taken upon them to abſolve him,

though they had only done it proviſionally, ad cautelam.“

+ Belides theſe conditions, the original of which may be ſeen in

; vol. 8778, of the MSS, de la Bibliot. du Roi, where the act of ab-
ſolution of Henry IV. is {ct down at length, in Italian, the holy fa-
ther impoſes therein for penance upon this Prince, to hear, on every

Sunday and feſtive}, a conventual maſs in the chapel royal, and pri-
vate maſs every week day, to ſay the roſary every Sunday, the cha-
pelet every Saturday, and the litanies every V'ednefday, to faſt e-
very Friday, to confeſs and communicate publicly at leaſt four times
a year. I obſerve, in this act, that the Pope, after having given
this Prince abſolution, then entitles him only the King of France
and Navarre. At cach verſe of the Miſcrete, the holy father gave
a light touch of the penitentiary crook on the ſhoulders of M. Pu-
Perron, and M. L'Oſlat, who are therein called Procuratori di Na-

- . varra« this is but an ordinary formality in this fort of cercmeny;

upon which the Pioteſlant writers have not failed to comment with
great malignity, by faying that Henry IV. had ſubmitted to receive
lalhes of the whip from the procurator, and other ſuch like ca-
jumnies: but theſe malicious pleaſantrics have not been able to im-
pole vpon any, ſinec M. de Thou and all the ſeuſible writers bv:

| F 3 ſheun,

66 NM E M OI R Ss Bock vl.

clude the Proteſtants from all employments and
dignities, and uſe his utmoſt endeavours to ſup.
preſs them entirely: That he ſhould re-eſtabliſh
the maſs in Bearn, and oblige the Huguenot;
to make reſtitution to the Catholics of all the ef.
fects which had been taken from the eccleſiaſtics;

| ſhewn, that they were altogether unjuſt and without foundation,
M de Sully, as far as appears, had got over this popular error;

but J know not if he obſerves the ſame equity with regard to M.

- D*'Oflat. :

What he ſays here, and in many other places of theſe Memos,

excited in me a curioſity to read carefully the collection of this Car.

dinal's Jetters, who is reputed amongſt us to have been as good a

Frenchman as an able ſtateſman. I will ſpeak freely my mind as to
each grievance which furniſhes the Duke de Sully with occaſion of
attacking him, according as they fall in my way. And to begin
with that of Henry IV th's abſolution, it appears to me, after ex-.
ming all he ſays on this head, p. 45. 48. 105. 107. 115. 129. 209.
Cc. of the old edition in folio, that we cannot but acknowledge on

one hand, that he met with great ſeruples in the Pope's breaſt, an!

=
# 7:54:00 -A
8 e

real difficulties on the part of the ſacred college; that be ap-

plied himſelf with great aſſiduity and with equal ſucceſs to ſurmopii

them; and that any but he would have had much to do to base
conquered them ; as is evident from what happened to the Deke
de Nevers, the Cardinal de Retz, the Marquis de Piſany, and ©:
thers; that for his own part he is very far from approving the ma-

ny ſubterfuges to which the court of Rome had often recourſe in
their formalities; and even that all this chicane made him often un-

eaſy, as alſo the unfair dealing which, he complains, they uſcd in

the bull of abſolution. However, in oppoſition to all this, a man

may perceive on the other hand in theſe very places, and ſtill more

in all thoſe paſſages that in any meaſure relate to the Proteſtants, th?

Jeſuits, or the council of Trent, Cc. that his Eminence was not at

all diſturbed, that the affair of the King's abſolution had paſſed un-

der the reſtriftions of which M. de Sully complains fo bitterly! |
whether it was that M. D'Oſſat did not perceive therein the pre-

tended leſſon of the honour of the crown, and the prejudice done to
the liberties of the Gallican church, which I leave to the learned to
determine; or whether he believed that all theſe precautions became
neceſſary for the intereſt of religion; or laſtly, whether he were nat
Hiatled in favour of the maxims of the league: and yet all this docs
not hinder me from ſubſcribing to the encomiums given to this Car-
dinal by all our beſt hiſtorians, and laſt of all by Amelot de la Houſ-
ſaye, in the life he gives us of him, prefixed to the edition of his
letters, to which I refer the reader. The Abbe du Perron and NI.
de Viileroi, had likewiſe done conſiderable ſervice to Henry IV. ia
ihne aila:r of his abſolution. Matthieu, tom. 2. b 20 p. 270, C

Eat

=
EIS,
. 2 3 2 a
- de Ae ll c

3
—

8 PTY ll mou d . wud as 7 broom —

: 2595. o F $ CEE LE vo

d XThat he ſhould prevail upon the Prince of Conde
to embrace the Roman Catholic religion: That
h be ſhould publiſh and cauſe the council of Trent
to be received: And laſtly, That the Jeſuits
fl. ſhould be again eſtabliſhed in France. Theſe con-
ditions which regarded the Proteſtants, and the

council of Trent were not re with, the reſt
n. were.

„ Thoſe perſons who thought the King received
laws from the Pope upon this occaſion, ought to
„ lay the blame upon Du-Perron, and ſtill more
upon Arnaud D'Offat, then agent for this affair
0 at Rome. Thele two eccleliaſtics were fo far from
of __ rejetins theſe conditions, that they would have
ia been grieved, if they had not been inſiſted upon;
itt any credit may be given to a memorial which
in was many years afterwards ſent me from Rome,

and which I ſhall ſpeak of fully in its proper

. place: it affords a complete proof of what I have
juſt advanced, at leaſt with regard to D'Oſſat.

te. f This me morial advances two things relating to
” the King's abſolution, which is one of its prin-
m  _ cipal articles. That the Pope and the whole ſa—
n- ___ cred college were fo ardently deſirous of the King's
„ applying to Rome for this ceremony, that they
re could not conceal their fears, when they were

ſometimes informed that Henry would be brought
 » to deſpiſe it, or to reckon it uſeleſs ; and this the
„„ author proves from their own letters: ſecondly,
hat D'Oſſat, inſtead of informing the King of

ttmis diſpoſition in the court of Rome, which he

m2 | would have done had his honour and dignity been
ot | of the ſmalleft conſequence to him; on the con-
© | trary, gave this prince to underſtand, that he could
. not obtain a reconciliation with his Holineſs, but
is Þ by offering an incroachment upon the liberties of
„ a Gallican church, and purchaſing it by thoſe
„ conditions already mentioned. Henry, however,

t rewarded

68 M E M O I R S Book Vii,
rewarded his two agents with the moſt eminent
dignities in the prelacy. LE 5
In three days his Majeſty arrived at Peronne,
where he was immediately ſaluted by Balagny,
This man, who by an exceſs of ridiculous vani-
ty *, had juſt Joſt his government, his fortune,
his wife, and his honour, inſtead of bluſhing for
his folly, and concealing himſelf from reproach,
affected to ſhew himſelf, talked big; and in thi;
ſtate, which was indeed the fitteſt for him, cx.
pected all that regard which is generally paid to
unfortunate. fovereigns. The King reſolved to
attempt every thing to aſſiſt Calais, and finding
that his troops were not ſufficient to ſtorm tlie
camp of the beſiegers, took the only courſe that
now remained, which was to throw himſelf into
| the place, at the head of a conſiderable rcinforce-
ment. Twice he embarked with this deſign, but
a contrary wind forced him back again to land.
While he deſpaired of accompliſhing his enter-
priſe. Matelet, governor of Foix, came to him,

"J
2
-
F
4
]
3
5
15
1
8
5

* M. de Perefixe ſays, that Cambray was teken by famine: o-
thers, as Matthieu, blame the miſunderſtanding that ſubſiſted be-
tween the Duke de Nevers and de Bouillon for it; and otbers again

the negligence of Balagny. The memoirs of the league, tom. 6.
remark, that three companies of Swiſs, not having had their pay
given them, compelied him to deliver up the place. All the hilto-
rlans have cried up the courage of Renee de Clermont, the wife of |
Balapny, and fiſtet to. the brave Buſſy d'Amboiſe, who, #ficr ha-
ving, to no purpole, done all tie could to inſpire reſolution into the | |
garriſon and her huſband, did not chuſe to ſurvive the loſs of her
Principality, and died cicher of famine or grief. And here in
„% one atticle, is an abftraQ of the grœateſt diſgrace that France hes
« ſuffered from foreigners in the memory of man.” So ſpes ks
JYAubigne, in concluding the gth chap. l. 4 tom. 3. of his bi-
ſtory, in which he has collected the taking of Catelot, la Capcllc, Þ
Ardres, Cambray, Calais, and the defeat at Dourlens. Balagny tels
2 Spaniſh officer, who ſee med ſurpriſed at ſeeing him take his miſtreſ-
along with him, end in the ſeme boat, that love ſoftened ail the
croſs accidents of fortune : © Rigbt,“ replicd the Spaniard, “ and
+ eſpecially at preſent, as you will have leſs to do than you have
4 had before.“ P. Matthieu, tom. 2. I. 2. p. 219. |

Igor Co 23 Dr r 2 IT ESL _ "x" = ES. - K 72 8 —
den * * 2 — A > B —— o —- — — — 21 — as — — —
NN ²˙ - r EE — —: f 8 = 2
. i niet ARIA ; "EP ESE oo 6 er EE 93 6
=
Jy N - 7 * . : WE

8

— . e —
—
N > 5 > 8
— 1 8 Ro a
— — —ͤ ũ—ÿʒꝛͤ— — —

and

—

WW. or $vrLr ©
nt and offered to attempt a third time to enter Ca-
Aus, promiſing him that, if he would give him

© Pour or five hundred gentlemen, he would ſo ma-
) age, either by ſea or land, that he would open
Il himſelf a paſſage. The King, prailing his reſo-
e, jution, gave him the eſcort he demanded ; with
or Which Matelet ſucceeded in his deſign, and enter-
h, ed Calais, after having ſurmounted a thouſand
18 obſtacles *. But the glory of this brave action
was ſoon obliterated, when it appeared that he
to pad only joined the garriſon to be infected with
to their fears, and to conſent to a capitulation: and
the King had the mortification to march to Ca-
ie lais, only to ſee it ſurrendered before his eyes.
al If it be demanded where, during this time,
o were all thoſe French noblemen and officers who
& were ſo forward in adviling the war; and why
ut they ſuffered the King to bear the whole burden of
a it, and ſuffer repeated loſſes? It muſt be own-
„en, to the diſhonour of the French name, that
2, they expected to draw advantages to themſelves
by the misfortunes their imprudence occa-
o- _fioned, and their negligence augmented ; and
* +9 gugenen aug
„formed, in the mean time, projects more fatal
6. tc the King's authority than the bloodieſt foreign
„ war. Theſe projects I ſhall mention immedi-
o- YT ese | | | 5 .
1 ately. CEL | .
2. * Hiſtorians do not agree as to this action. Some, as De Thou
le |. © and D*Aubvigns, by ſaying nothing at all of it, ſeem to call it in que -
on: others aſcribe it to the Siear de Campagnole the younger,
in | _ Davila and our memoirs, to Matelet, governor of Foix. Queen
2 | _ EZizabeth offered to defend Calais againſt the Spaniards, upon condi-
ks tion that the place were put into the hands of the Engliſh. Sancy,
i- | _ who was then ambaſlador at London, made anſwer to the Queen,
% | © That the King his mailer would rather have ic in the hands of the
's | Spaniards than in thoſe of the Engliſh : and Henry IV. ſaid himſelf,
„ [che were to be bit, he had rather it was by a lion than a lion-
ne | *© &f5:” and this was the reaſon that Queen Eliſabeth afterwards retu-
it | {cd to beſiege that town, while Henry IV. lay before that of A-
ve | miens, though they offered then to put it into her hands by way of
Þ fcurity, Matthieu, ibid, p. 223. TO PLES =
4 The

70 MEMOIRS Bock vl.

The King, equally ſuperior to good and bad *
fortune, comforted thoſe that were dtiven out of

Calais, provided for the ſecurity of Boulogne,

Abbeville, Montreuil, Monthulin &, and other
towns and caſtles, and marched towards Saint:

Quintin, fearing leaſt the enemies, who were not

far from thoſe quarters, ſhould ſurpriſe ſome of |

the nobles, and general officers who came thither

ſeparately. They choſe this opportunity for the E

execution of a deſign which they had formed, be-

fore they left Paris. The Duke of Montpenſicr

was the perſon whom they charged with this com-
miſſion, not becauſe he was more diſaffected than

the reſt, but becauſe his temper was the moſt con-
deſcending, and his underſtanding the weakeſt,

He accoſted the King at Saint-Quintin; and in

the name of the principal French nobility, pro-
poſed to him, 2s the only means of ſubduing his
enemies, to reſign to the governors of provinces the
property of their governments, with an heredita- |
ry right to them, requiring nothing of them but

their allegiance,

It is not eaſy to comprehend how a propoſal |

which had ſo manifeſt a tendency to throw France |
into a ſtate of anarchy, that in its earlier ages
had filled it with blood and horror, could pro-
ceed from the mouth of a Frenchman, a prince,

and what is more, a prince of the royal blood,

Henry, ſtruck with aſtoniſhment at the prodigious

inſolence of this affront offered to the royal dig—
nity, could not at firſt utter a word. The Duke
of Montpenſier continuing a ſpeech which had been
{ſtudied long before, endeavoured to prove to bis
Majeſty, ihat while theſe governors, or rather
thoſe little princes, obliged themſelves to maintain
iges always ready for his ſervice, he would be

jd Cities and forts in Picardy,

never.

n ' *
Ne
N
I
- "1 he 17 6448

I L. os. OF SUL L Y. "0

ad Pever again reduced to ſuch a ſituation as he was

kin at preſent, to appear before his enemies with-
e. out ſoldiers to oppoſe them. The King, agita-
„ted with various paſſions, diſcovered none to the

"Duke, but compaſſion at ſeeing him in a character ſo
contemptible and unworthy, He ſtopped him from
of {proceeding farther, by telling him, without the leaſt
reſentment, that he had already heard too much;

5 and that he was convinced thoſe French nobles
bad taken advantage of the eaſineſs of his tem-
©, per, to make him the bearer of a propoſal, the
1. whole meanneſs of which he was not ſenſible of,
in be who was a prince of the blood, and nearer
n. the crown than himſelf had formerly been. The

ſt : King added much more to the ſame purpoſe,
wui.ith equal calmneſs, and was ſo far from being

0 - apprehenſive, that he ſhould be reduced to yield
i. do ſuch a propoſition, and fo determined to ſuf⸗

5 fer a thouſand deaths, if poſſible, rather than
bring ſuch a load of infamy upon the royal dig-
nity, that he had not even the thought of entering
into any diſcuſſion of this project, or of uttering 5
1 a ſingle word in anſwer to it“. |
Ihe Duke of Montpenſier hems ſenſible of

85 | ; his fault, by the air and tone with which his Ma-
© # jeſty ſpoke to him; he bluſhed, and aſked par-

don for it, and intreated the King never to re-
1 | member that he had been capable of thus de-
. | grading himſelf from his rank. The King, af-

us þ 5 >

„ ter having ſhewn the Duke the whole extent of

: his fault, directed him how, in ſome meaſure, to

Le 3 A 4 NS

: repair it, with thoſe who had prevailed upon him

n

:. do commit it; and aſſured him, that he, for his

r own part, would forget it entirely, and {till re-

n ard him as a kinſman,

e The Duke of Montpenſier agreed to take the
We are all E faid Heary IV, [+ Henne, before the

princes of the blood.

| firſt

0
.
x
o
7
| |
3-5
;
—
wy
* by!
3 4
it
i
CY
2 bo
1 7
19
| 1
RT
14
PF)
+
9 .
4%
350
F
1 by
= >
wo
.
Wh
* 3
#2
5
pay
I; :
43; _ *
(51.
1
1
11 1
'% | if
4
„
a i
Lig 1
B. *
"7
>
5
oy -
7:
Þ. 1+ 108
J ö ;
4
.
N

—

| 8
i
1
in
.
';H
#7 11 .
1
4 l
1
1
—
4
29
LF 42
1 5
N i"
$; 1
KV.
*

—
e * * ERS

rr —
b . N
2 * <A
8 — 2 re
— SES —
2 2 N

72 M E M OI X 2 Book VII.
firſt opportunity that offered, when the authors of f
that inſolent propoſal brought it again on the car.
pet, to declare, that he had reflected well upon
the commiſſion they had given him; that they |

might ſend their propolal by any other perſon, |
ſince he abſolutely ditapproved of it; and if e-

ver he was to mention it to his Majeſty, it Hold

be with a deſign to diſſuade him from it ; and
that they might depend pon his uſing his ut.
moſt endeavours to hinder its taking effect. IIe

performed this taſk ſo exactly, and with an air

any future attempts on his fidelity.
It was therefore to reduce the King to the ne.

ceſlity of making them his cquals, that the prin. |
ces and governors of provinces in France o
ill performed their promiſe of aſſiſting him with
troops. The Duke of Bouillon was one of tho: |
who ſold his ſervices the deareſt, His Majeſty,
not doubting but he had a part in the plot, was
willing to have a proof of it from the Duke's
perplexity, without letting him know that he wa |

informed of it by other means. Bouillon did

not want art and eloquence enough to conceal |

whatever he deſigned ſhould not be known; but,
beſides that Henry poſſeſſed in no leſs degree the

art of penetrating into the thoughts of thoſe with
whom he converſed, the preſence of a ſovereign
is of itſelf ſufficient to abaſh a man conſcious of |

any ſecret guilt. The King began by convincing

himſelf, that the Duke of Montpenſier had not
betrayed their late Diſcourſe to the Duke of Bouil-
Jon. After which he introduced the defeat of
Dourlens, by aſking him plainly, and with a kind

of confidence, how it happened that he had been
dilappointed in thoſe certain correſpondencies
Which, as he faid, he carried on in Liege, Ro:

and

—

">
=»
- *F

FR
Wy /

ſo natural, that he wholly diſconcerted all thot
noblemen, and left them no inclination to make

—
Pa 4
4 "

. 9/5 2 9 me ae

3 „

and many other places in Luxembourg, and Hai-
halt, upon which, AS he knew, the war had been
undertaken ? £ :
Bouillon, embaraſſed by the queſtion, and that
Ar of ſimplicity with which it was propoſed, in ·
Read of giving a direct anſwer concerning his pre-
ended correſpondencies, fell into long incoherent

o F . 73

. which betrayed him more effectually,
an the moſt ſincere confeſſion could have done.

He accuſed all the world; the Duke of Nevers,

Who, he ſaid, had corrupted his officers, and ob-

ſtructed bis levies ; ; the Engliſh for not making

the promiſed diverſion ; the Dutch for taking
advantage of this conjuncture to increaſe their
power on the ſide of Over-Iſſel and Frieſland.
pon which the Duke of Bouillon, who ſought
_ only to turn the converſation ſtill more from the firſt
ſubject, told the King, that the true cauſe of the
misfortune which had lately happened, was, that

bis Majeſty had no perſon of weight or confidence,

_ — ee ar

and on whom he could rely, at the court of Lon-
don to haſten the ſupplies that had been promiſed
there; and, at the ſame time, offered himſelf for
"this embaſſy, and even ſolicited it earneſtly. The
King being of opinion, that it would anſwer no
purpoſe to preſs the Duke any further upon this

fault, ceaſed to mention it; and reflecting, that

he ſhould not loſe much by his abſence, conſented

at laſt to the embaſſy to England. According-
ly his commiſſion was expedited, and the Duke
of Bouillon, a few days after, ſet out for that
kingdom.

It was from his Majeſty himſelf that I had the

Particulars of this converſation with the Duke of

Bouillon, as likewiſe that with the Duke of Mont-
penſier before mentioned.

The King had no ſooner quitted Bouillon, en

| ceflefting that the Duke, inſtead of having any

Vo L. II. G deſign

„ Mie Book Vll

deſign to ſerve him uſefully at the court of Lon.
don, had poſſibly only ſolicited that employment
to give bad impreſſions there of his conduct, ot
at leaſt to labour only for his own intereſt, b.
ſent Jaquinot for me early in the morning, to com.

municate his fears to me. I kneeled on a cuſhion |

at his bedſide, and his Majeſty aſked me immedi.
_ ately what was ſaid, and what I, in particular,

thought of the long converſation he had jul.
held with the Duke of Bouillon? I replied, that

every one had his own conjectures; and that pro-

bably the affair of Ham and Dourlens, and th:

propoſal made by the Duke of Montpenſier, mad:
up the greateſt part of it. The King told me
that I was miſtaken ; that he was too well ac.

Auainted with the Duke of Bouillon's diſpoſition,
to doubt that any reproaches upon thoſe occa.
ſions, inſtead of correcting, would only ſerve u

throw him into an open revolt. His Majeity al.

terwards, repeating exactly all that has been rela}
ted concerning the embaſly to England, propoſe |
to me to accompany the Duke of Bouillon thi-|

ther, that I might have an eye upon his beha:
viour.

In courts every thing is brought about by art.

fice. The King, after his converſation with the

Duke of Bouillon, telling his council for the f.

nances, that he had ſent the Duke to England,
theſe gentlemen, after conferring together, found |

nothing ſo fit to ſatisfy their hatred of me, as to V f
perſuade the King to join me with the Duke of Þ

Bouillon. My abilities for negotiations were
praiſed, an honour which they were reſolved to
deprive me of, when they had once ſucceeded in
removing me from the King, who, not penetra*
ting into their views, approved of the propoſal:
but I did not ſo eaſily fall into the ſnare ; 1 ſhew:
ed his Majeſty the true motive of theſe gentle.
mens

W

A wy yy

e

% AA, Be FA pus —

7 4
a
7 * ba „,
* . br
FOE TIES:
a. 6 oY FI
(9 2 8 {> 49h
e g
Tak. » 9 5 -
*. x. 3 4
by 0 23a 9
os

u or $8VULLY 75

n Mens feigned generoſity with regard to me. From
MN the moment that the Duke of Bouillon diſcovered
Ot Z :

"that I watched his conduct, and diſconcerted his
projects, he would not fail to break with me;

nm" and ſuch a genius as his, when actuated by ma-
o tice, would not fail to ſuggeſt to him the means
wo "of throwing upon me the blame of all the faults

he committed, and all the good he neglected tO
uſt! do. My enemies knew this as well as I; his
hat Majeſty was convinced by my reaſons, and preſl-
ed me no further. 8

the f The gentlemen of the council did not ſtop
bere: when they came again to the King, they

MN were the firſt to confeſs, that it was with reluc-

de tance they joined me to the Duke of Bouil-

3% Jon; but ſince the Duke was to ſtay but a ſhort
% time at London, they had pitched upon me to

take his place with the ſame title and equal ho-

a nours. All was alike to them, provided they

% could get rid of me. The King was again influ-

ſed enced by their opinions, and ſome days after, de-

- dũlared his intention to me, ordering me to make
=

preparations immediately for this voyage; to
provide myſelf with money; and to diſpoſe my
wrt Wife to follow me, if I choſe to have her with me;
the which, however, he did not think neceſſary, ſince
f. I ſhould not, he ſaid, be abſent above ſeven or
pd, eight months at the utmoſt, The King inſtantly
5 perceiving my reluctance, accompanied this order
% with the moſt obliging expreſſions his imagination
of could ſuggeſt; he told me, that the preſent per-
plexed ſituation of his affairs hindering him from
10 giving me the ſole direction of the finances, he
in ® ſhould reproach himſelf for expoſing to the dan»
in gers of a long and furious ſiege the only man in
: his kingdom whom he thought worthy to fill
% | that important ſtation, His Majeſty had juſt then
Z 8 G declared

76 MEMOIRS Book Vll.“ 1

declared himſelf concerning the ſege of |
La-Fere.

While the King was ſpeaking, I was truck with 1

aſtoniſhment at the obſtinate perſecution of my e.
nemies, and the depth of their malice. Under the
appearance of a title of honour vain in itſelf, and

fatal in its conſequences, they took away, and
perhaps for ever, all opportunities of advancing

me: For who in my abſence would be ſolicitou

for my intereſt? Who would hinder them fron

prolonging my ſtay out of the kingdom, till, af.
fairs having taken a fixed and durable ſtate in
France, there would be nothing left for a man
who, by ſo long an abſence, would be after

wards regarded as a {tranger. Theſe reflection
kept me firm in my purpoſe, I intreated the} *
King not to force me to a journey for which I|
elt an invincible repugnance ; and 1 had the}
good fortune to find, that Henry was of himſelf}
diſpoſed to believe, that I ſhould be of more ue“

to him at Paris than London, during the ſiege

he was going to undertake: he therefore ſent
me thither to facilitate his ſupplies of money, |

and the diſpatch of whatever was neceſſary to-

wards carrying on the ſiege, to receive his or Þ
ders there, make one in his council, and dircd |
its xefolutions. Had the choice of my revenge]

been in my own power, I could not have fixed
upon any other more effectual.

V

HE motive which had determined the King

to undertake fo difficult a ſiege as that of
IS Fere, was, that, his enemies having after their
ſucceſs ſeparated their troops, he would not ſuffer
his own, who had at laſt aſſembled, to renal
1 E;

**

1 *

WRT: tt 3

1

n 1

2 * \ N

Oey E 2 1 *
9 ee

. A

of "Idle, and becauſe it was of importance to ſecure

Picardy, already ſhaken by ſo many repeated

ih; Joſſes, Had I the liberty of diſpoſing of myſelf
e. as I pleaſed, I ſhould have choſen to have conti-
be mued with the King during this ſiege, whoſe too
in4 great ſolicitude for my ſafety I could by no means

nd approve : but I durſt not refuſe the commiſſion
ing which would detain me in Paris; and his Maje-

ow ſty, to render this order leſs diſpleaſing, aſſured
om me, that nothing conſiderable would for a long

i or other, he would permit me to make a journey
aan thither. In reality J did ſo ſeveral times; but J
ter. had no ſooner arrived, than the neceſſity of pro-

ons viding for the ſubſiſtence of his troops, obliged
the! me to return again immediately. I comforted

h 1} myſelf, however, with the thought, that through
the! my diligence the army being ſupplied with every

le! thing it had occaſion for, 1 might flatrer myſelf.

ſs þ with having, in ſome meaſure, contributed to the
egeÞ ſucceſs of this fiege, which laſted fix months, and
ent was the longeſt in which Henry was ever enga-
ey, | ged. This place, beſides its advantageous fortifi-

%. cations, had a very numerous garrifon, compoſed |
or. of ſelect ſoldiers, and commanded by two cxcel-

oth ent officers, the one a Frenchman, high ſteward
nge of Montelimart; and the other a Spaniard, na-
med Oſorio. n

ho was his friend and kinſman, and had come
expressly for that purpoſe from Flanders, where
be lived, took it into his head, that it was poſſible
| to lay all La-Fere under water; and upon the aſ-
ine Þ. ſurances of his friend, was ſo confident of ſucceſs,
r of that the King, though contrary to his own judg-
heir | ment, ſuffered him to make the attempt: it would
ier indeed have ſhortened the ſiege; but it is to be
\ain obſerved, that almoſt all projects of this kind are
dle, Þ | "= liable

time be done before La-Fere; and that ſome time

|  Beringhen, at the perſuaſions of an engineer,

* r 2

F
0 4.
18
9
* 5 *
tz
i
4
; ]
+5
x
,
8
i 4%
i? y
14 *
.
1 obs
N
[! 0
+1; 1
E
1
4,24 30
m7
41128
{384
+18
.
11
3
19
"HY
.
.
bY
N
.
1
*:\Y
+
(© 138
3 ii
i; 58
.
1
TX
be. 3
0 0
741
if
i738
yo 1
} File {1
wok!
.
\ 4:8
11
f 12
m-
1118
It W
17S i
.
©, ab
' ö x
1
N
.
Met!
4. 6
. *
148
1
n þ
11
4 d
[ 1
"3
1448
1 4
1:48
BI
. "1
.
e
1
a
5 £
4.7"
1
" 3218
1508
bY: q
A YU
.
1
wy
2%
£6,718
*
18.7
f
_
Fs, |
21
— 2
x 4
1
.
{Ft .
11 'Y
*
[1 4 17
a
4 *
7
BF
i 146]
« 3 7
5 ne
1 54
55.
9
.
Pr.
i» 4
1
D
0
„
. 3
19 NB
: Ll
b 38
19
2 £%
-
+,+£48
3.8
es 9
-i 1
3
gt |
x! :Þ
oh oY
Wo
7
7
'*
i L588

:
|
:
py
3

—
2

* — — —
JEET Ea oe i ITN
—— — AD — — — nt;
— —— 7 2
. . PE,
—— v ů˙⁵oOdͤ voes
— — — — ES

1

8 M E M OI R Ss Bock VIII.

liable to diſappointment : the ſlighteſt miſtake is

ſufficient to ruin them, and it ſeldom happens but

ſome miſtake is made. The project of turning
the courſe of the Teſin formerly coſt Francis J.
the loſs of a battle, together with that of his li-

berty. In one of theſe journies 1 made to the
camp, I found this propoſal upon the carpet. 1

looked upon the execution of it to be impoſſible,
and I combated it with all my force: but the en-

gineer wanted not plauſible reaſons for his opi-

nion. It was, as he ſaid, an attempt that would
colt but little time or trouble; all they had to do
was to raiſe a cauſey ; this they performed; and
the water deſtroying their work two or three
1:mes, they renewed it as often; at laſt it became
proof againſt the water, but the river did not

: 1iſe to the height they expected: it is true, .

deed, that it wanted only fix feet, but that was
ilufhcient to force them to abandon the work “, af—
ter were conſumed in it a great deal of time and
money. 55

The King falling ſick at Traverſy, where his

head-quarters were, the ſiege of La-Fere ſuffered
a fiil} longer delay. As ſoon as the news was
brought me, I flew to him, and never left him till
he was reſtored to perfect health. His ſickneſs
was conſiderable enough to make me apprehcnd

for France the greateſt loſs it could poſſibly ſuſtain.

The Governor of La-Fere, finding himſelf in want

of every thing that could enable him to hold out a

jonger time, ſurrendered the place to the King,
who cauſed it to be repaired ; and at the intreaty

* D'Aubipre does not ſpeak of it ſo contemptibly, ch. 12. Ibid.

The cavſey,” fiys he, „ having made the tiver Oite flow back
* within La-Fere, it fpoiled all the magazines they bad in the lower

& parts and cellars of the town. It was a large machine, above a
quarter of a league in length. Such an undertaking ſlic ws, that
** neither t] e King nor the Kingdom was diſpirited under their prel-

Eures and diſadyantages, v
5 Us

*

15966. O F N 79
of Madam de Liancourt, he appointed her ſon
Cæſar to be governor of it, Manicamp, a kinſman
of this lady, performing all the functions of that
office, in quality of deputy-governor. 1
His Majeſty marching afterwards to the frontiers
of Artois, took the caſtle of Imbercourt by aſſault;

: and thought to have done the ſame, by ſurpriſe,

with the city of Arras, Marechal Biron * was the
cauſe of the ill ſucceſs of this laſt enterprize, by
not providing himſelf with a ſufficient quantity of
petards: the three firſt they applied played tolera-
bly well, but the fourth being thrown, without
effect, into the ditch, with the perſon that directed
it, ſeveral of our men were killed and wounded
by it. Ir was, indeed, a mortifying thought, that
a conqueſt of ſuch importance, which would have
ſecured Amiens from the misfortune which ſoon
after happened to it, ſhould be loſt for want of a
few petar ds more. Biron, to avoid the reproaches
he had reaſon: to expect, got out of the way, and
went to diſcharge his rage upon the country a-
bout Bapaume, where he made a horrible devaſ-
tron „„
The ill ſucceſs of the attempt upon Arras was
ſufficiently compenſated by many favourable events
that happencd at the end of the preceding year and
beginning of this, which I ſhall paſs over ſlightly
as uſual ; theſe were, the reduction of Toulouſe ,
the proſperity of the King's arms in Provence, and
the reunion of the chiefs ofthe league in the King's
party. Joycuſe t, who had quitted the habit of
a monk, to aſlume that of a foldier, and paid him-
ſelf with uſury for the mortifications of a cloiſter,

* Biron, in his turn, Joudly exclaimed againſt, the King's avarice,

+ As to thele facts, conlult the hiſtories before mentioned for the
Years 1595 and 1596. „ | | NS

| He again entered himſelf among the capuchins, and died there
under the name of father Ange, .

made

80 M E M O I R S Book VIII.

made a treaty with the King about that time. The
Duke of Nemours followed his example; but juſt
as It was upon the point of being concluded, he
died ® with vexation, as ſome believe, for the bad
ſucceſs of ſo many goodly projects. Saint-Sorlin,
his brother, continued the treaty for himſelf,
Moreover the death of the Duke of Nevers + deli-
vered the King from a ſervant equally troubleſome
and uſeleſs. Laſtly, the Duke of Maienne, now

_ abſolutely diſguſted with the treachery of the Spa. |
niards, began to think ſeriouſly upon means of
reſtoring himſelf to the good graces of the King.
The King thought it of ſuch importance to |
make himſelf maſter of Arras, that after having

He voided, by his mouth and pores, every drop of blood |
in his body.“ Perefixe, Ibid. Cayet gives a very moving de-
ſcription of it, Ibid. p. 519, . , |
+ Louis de Gonzague died of a dyſentery at Neſſe in 1595, aged
ſifty- ſix: of chaprin, ſay others, becauſe that when he talked with
Henry IV. adviſing him with regard to Calais, this Prince made
' anſwer, © How can you adviſe me on this head? you who have ne-
ver been nigher that town than ſeven leagues.” Tho? M. De
Thou, I. 113. an] Brantome, tom. 3. p. 259. very much exto!
him, the charge which the Duke de Sully brings againſt him, cf
| Having been always a very expenſive ſervant to his maſter, may be
eaſily made out, even from this general's own letters to Henry IV.
of which we have a collection in De Nevers's memoirs, tom. 2. p.
207. 376. It your Majeſty,” ſays he to him in one of his letters,
* cannot or will not come this length, I hall remove ſo far, that
„ there will be no grounds to expect any ſuccours from me. In
„truth, Sire, you do not make me returns ſuitable to the manner
“ in which I ſerve you; and it appears to all the world that you
«© do not value me much.— I never was treated in the manner you
ts treat me by the kings your predeceilors ; from them I received
« many favours, whereby I was obliged to ſerve them implicitly,
« and J am yet to reccive the firſt favour from your Majeſty. If
fatal and ruinous commiſſions be not the favours I receive from
«© you, I will be ſo free as to tell you, that I have received no other
| & ſince you were pleaſed to order me into theſe parts“ Cc. p. 34%
And there are a great many more letters in the ſame ſtrain. It is
from theſe the Duke of Sully, to whom Henry IV communicated
all his cabinet ſecrets, formed a judgment. as to the diſpoſitions ct
the Duke de Nevers, and not from thoſe he writ to ſeveral other
Perſons, which ſkew great attachment and zeal for the King's perſon;
| | 433

— 2 ͤa—— oe Ig EL =. 5 W 7 —

4 {foe i Gli REI GE 3232 — — 8 —— r n — REI. DKASo...1 ——

8 — — N r r * — 70 5 * _ — | = * 99 £
Se —̃ — hots Doi” io . _ hw wt rare or od - — — — — — — n o 8
1 — 9 — — Pe rr -- FREY * 5 3 . = —— . 2d — — — * ——— —— 2 2

— — — <> IT ICE 1 2 2 — Peg” * AL — . —— * — 2 3 . 4 ——— as " _ = my _- — - * * AN P

— EO ms
— 9 —

1
1
N 8
1 bs
: 4

23
2 x —
SE” bead re
One BRL,

CC

in vain attempted to ſurpriſe it, he reſolved to be-
ſiege it in form. I was, I imagine, the only per-
ſon to whom he communicated this deſign ; ſecre-
ey was of ſuch conſequence on this great occaſion,
that he durſt not truſt any one with the care of
making obſervations upon the place; and therefore
undertook that taſk himſelf, I had continued the
whole winter at Paris, employed in his Majeſty's
© ſervice, and ſometimes made little excurſions to
Moret, in which I took great pleaſure, One day,
when I was buly in overſeeing my workmen, Who

were levelling the high grounds about two thou-
ſind paces from my houſe, to bring thither two
rivulets which form thoſe two ſheets of water which

are at preſent near the great alley, a courier from |

Madam de Liancourt arrived, who brought me a

letter from this lady, and another from his Ma-
jeſty, in which he informed me of his deſigns up-
on Arras, and the methods by which he hoped to

ſucceed. I had never ſeen this prince in ſo great

a rage as by this letter he appeared to be, againſt

the“ impoſitions and rogueries (theſe were his

* words) of eight gluttons;” who were given him,
he ſaid, inſtead of one that he had before: thoſe.

“ raſcals,” added he, © with that prodigious num-

ber of intendants, who have brought in all
their male and female goſlips, feaſt together,
and have conſumed above a hundred thouſand
crowns, a ſum large enough to drive all the
Spaniards out of France,” This was, indeed,
exactly true, which I ſhall make ſufficiently ma-
nifeſt when I enter into an account of the finances;

at preſent I ſhall only relate two or three circum-

ſtances. 85

The council of the finances ſuppoſed, that in
order to furniſh the ſupplies for the ſiege of La-Fere,
they ſhould be called upon to clear their accounts:
in this, however, they were miſtaken, the King

having

32 MEMOIR Ss Book VIII.

5 having put the ſuperintendency of the ſiege wholly

into my hands. Theſe ſupplies Deſcures, La-Cor-
biniere, and ſome other contractors, with whom
the financers lived in ſuch intelligence, that they
made ule occaſionally of their names, without ad-

mitting them to more than very ſmall ſhares, were

engaged to procure, They then treated, under
theſe borrowed names, with tradeſmen and pur-
veyors, who commonly ſerved them at the loweſt
prices, and contrived to charge to the King double
or triple the real expence.

The following fact I had from the King himſelf
Very conſiderable arrears were due from the royal
treaſury to the Swils ſoldiers, German horſe, and
other foreigners in the French pay. The council
ſuborned a man, named Otoplote, who gave the
receivers deputed by theſe foreigners to under-
tand, that they mult never expect to be paid, un-
leſs they conſented to reduce their demands to ſuch

a moderate ſum as could be given them, without

draining the exchequer. The reduction was a-
greed to; but the gentlemen of the council char-
ged the whole ſum to the King's account, and by
this means robbed his Majeſty, or rather the laws
ful creditors, of the overplus.

To this many other frauds of the ſame kind may
be added, Theſe gentlemen revelled in luxury,
while the King and his houſhold wanted neceſſaries.
A few days after that on which his Majeſty wrote

to me, he ſent to inform them that he had occa-

ſion for eight hundred thouſand crowns, for an
enterprize of importance (the ſiege of Arras;) he
intreated, he conjured them to let him have this

ſum, but 1 in vain ; all the anſwer he could get was,
that fo far from being able to furniſh him with

what he demanded, they knew not how to ſupply
the expences of 115 bouſhold. It is, indeed, cv-
rious to ſee how this houſhold was ſupported. *'
« am,”

L ee. Mat 56-4 der e FEI CIS Ne.

Land holed through on the ſword - ſide.“

1596. 0 F 8 . 83

&« am,” ſays this amiable and worthy prince, in
a letter to me, © very near my enemies, and hard-
« ly a horſe to carry me into the battle, nor a
« complete ſuit of armour to put on; my ſhirts

© are all ragged, my doublets * out at elbows, my

&« kettle is ſeldom on the fire, and theſe two laſt
days I have ſhift for a dinner, my purveyors
© having informed me, that they have no longer

„ wherewithal to furnith my table.“ That of the
gentlemen of the council were better provided.

Henry, in his letter, deplored theſ2 monſtrous a-
buſes, leſs on his own account than on his people's,

whom he ſaid he looked upon as his children, ſince
heaven had given him no others, and propoſed
to me the deſign of aſſembling the ſtates of the

kingdom, to conſider of a remedy for all theſe a-
MEL Goo ot ĩ

1 obeyed the order the King gave me to burn
his letter, but not till I had taken a copy of it; and
as the reaſons for keeping it ſecret now no longer
ſubſiſt, T think it my duty to publith the contents,
as a proof of the wiſdom and goodnels of this prince.
His Majeſty concluded his letter with ordering me
to come to him in Picardy, and to conduct his

miſtreſs thither. We were the only perſons to

whom he could diſcloſe his thoughts with freedom.
The letter from Madam de Liancourt was very
ſhort; in it the informed me, that ſhe would ſet

out the Tueſday following, in order to reach Mau-

buiſſon on Wedneſday, where ſhe had a lifter, who
was abbeſs, and that ſhe would wait for me till that
time at Paris, | 33
L arrived at Corbeil on Saturday evening, in-
tending to paſs part of Sunday and all Monday
* & have ſeen upon him,” ſays Le Grain, I. 8. © a coat of

« plain white cloth, that was very much ſviled by his breaſt-plate,
and torn in the ſleeves; as alſo ſtockings that were much worn

at

1
1

A
in

8 MEMOIR Ss Bock VIII

at Paris, having ſome purchaſes to make for the

palace. Juſt as I entered the ſtreet de la Coutel-
liere, I met a meſſenger from Madam de Lian-
court, who acquainted me, that that lady having

received freſh letters from the King, and alſo an

account that her ſiſter, the Abbeſs of Maubuiſſon,

was ill, ſhe had determined to ſet out before the day
appointed, and that I might join her at Pontoiſe.

I ſuſpected this lady had an intention to make
her court to the King at the expence of my dila-

torineſs ; I therefore altered my reſolution, and

told my people, that I would go that ſame night
to Maubuiſſon, without ſtopping at Paris, but on-
ly while I refreſhed myſelf, and baited my hor:

ſes, which Idid at the firſt inn I came to, whoſe

ſign was the three pigeons. The mention of this
inn recals to my remembrance a comical adven.

ture which happened to me there.
Going up ſtairs without any attendants, into
a very large chamber, I there found a man walk-

ing about it very faſt, and ſo abſorbed in thought,
that he neither ſaluted me, nor, as I imagine,

perceived my entrance, Looking at him with
more attention, every, thing in his perſon, hi:
manner, dreſs, and phyſiognomy appeared to me
very uncommon ; his body was long and lank,
his viſage emaciated and ſhriveled, his beard thin

and forked; he had a large hat on his head which

covered his face, a cloak buttoned cloſe at the
collar, boots of an enormous fize, a ſword that
trailed on the ground, and in his hand a large

double bag, like thoſe that are tied to faddle bows.

I aſked him, pretty loud, if he lodged in that
chamber, and why he ſeemed in ſuch profound
contemplation ? My man, diſdaining the queſtion,
without ſaluting or even deigning to look at me,

anſwered me bluntly, that he was in his own
chamber, and that he was thinking of his own

affairs,

r L F. 85

as I mizhr do of mine. Although I was

; Fa little ſurpriſed at his impertinence, [ neverthe-

Beſ⸗ defied him very civilly to permit me to dine
in that chamber; a propoſal which he received
fag nbling, and was followed by a refuſal fill leſs
polite. That moment three of my gentlemen,
my pages, and ſome footmen, entering the room,

my brutal companion thought fit to ſoften bis
looks and words, pulled off his hat, and offered
me every thing in his power: then ſuddenly,
eeying me with a fixed look, aſked me, with a
wild air, where I was going? I told him to meet
the King: What, Sir, ” replied he has the
King ſent for you? Pray tell me on what day

% and hour you received his letters and alſo at
_* what hour you ſet out?“

It was not difficult to diſcover an aftrcloger by

| theſe queſtions, | which he aſked me with an
| invincible gravity. I was farther obliged to tell

him my age, and to allow him to look into my
hands.

After all theſe ceremonials were over, 40 Sir,“

ſaid he with an air of ſurpriſe and reſpe&, * I will
“ reſign my chamber to you very willingly, and
before it be long, many more perſons will quit
4 their places to you with more regret than I do
| © mine.” The more I pretended to be aſtoniſh-
_ ed at his great abilities, the more he endeavoured
to give me proofs of them; he promiſed me
riches, honours, and power (aſtrologers are ſel-
dom niggards) and added, that if [ would inform

him ef the hour of my birth, he would tell me
all that had or ever would happen to me; but

without deſiring to know my name, or telling me

his, he thought proper, after theſe words, to

leave me precipitately, excuſing himſelf for not

ſtaying longer with me, upon the neceſſity he was
under to carry ſome Papers immediately to his
Vor. II. H - ._ advocate

86 M E M O I R S Book VII. j J

advocate and procurator. I made no efforts to

detain him; but it was not the ſame with my ©

people, whom I perceived to be ſeized with fear
and reſpect at every word this madman uttered,
I diverted my wife with an account of this little
adventure in the firſt letter I wrote to her.

In the evening I arrived at Maubuiſſon, Which

is a ſort of ſuburb to Pontoiſe: there I met Ma.
dam de Liancourt, with whom I took the road
next day to Clermont. I rode about ſeven or |
eight hundred paces before the litter in which |
this lady was, and which was followed at ſome
_ diſtance by a great unwieldy coach that carricd her |
women; before and behind this coach marched |

ſeveral mules loaded with baggage. About 1
league from Clermont, where the road was very |
narrow, a ſteep kill on one fide, and a hanging
valley on the other, leaving only room enough
for two carriages to go a-breaſt; the coachman
alighting upon ſome occaſion or other, one of the
mules paſſing near the fide of the coach, after it
itopped, by its neighing, and the ſound of its
bells, fo terrified the horſes, which unfortunatel)
happened to be young and f{kittith, that, taking
tne bir between their teeth, they drew the coach
along with ſuch rapidity, that meeting with two
other mules, they rode them down. The women
within, ſeeing a thouſand abyſſes opened under their
feet, apprehended their danger, and ſent forth
moſt doleful cries. In vain did the coachman and
muleteers call, bawl, and ſtrain; the horſes could
not be ſtopped. They were already within fifty
paces of the litter, when Madam de Liancourt, a-
larmed by the noiſe, looked out at the coach door,
She gave a frightful ſhriek upon ſeeing no poſli-
bility of preventing her litter from being over turn—
ed. I alſo turned back, and trembling at the
danger in which ſaw this lady and her retinue,
without

11 1596 Dy SLE EY: 37
without being able to aſſiſt them on account of the
* = diſtance I was at, Ah! friend,” ſaid I to La-
Font, © the women will be daſhed in pieces,
What will become of us? and what will the
king ſay?” While I was thus ſpeaking, 1 pulh-
ed my horſe forward with all my ſtrength; but
this was needleſs, and I ſhould have come too late.

By one of thoſe lucky chances, which have in

them ſomething miraculous, when the danger
Was greateſt, the axle-tree of the little wheels co-
ming out of the nave by a violent ſhock which
broke the pegs, the two wheels fell on each ſide,

and the coach to the ground, and there ſtopped

one of the hindmoſt horſes was thrown down by

the ſhock, and kept in the other; the fore horſes

broke their traces, and paſſed fo cloſe to the litter,
which was already at the extremity of the preci-
pice, that it is plain, if they had drawn the coach

along with it, it would have been thrown over

it. I ſtopped them and gave them to my do-
meſtics to hold; after which I flew to relieve Ma-
dam de Liancourt, who was half dead with fright,

| went next to the coach, and aſſiſted the women
to get out of it: they were for having the coach-

man hanged, and I was ang rus enough to

cane him foundly. At length their terrors being
entirely diſipated, and the carriage refitted, we

_ reſumed our Journey ; and till we arrived at Cler-

mont I continued to ride cloſe to Madam de Li-
ancourt's litter.

The King had ſet out for this place to meet his
miſtreſs, and arrived there a quartes of an hour
after us. I did not fail to inform him immediate -
ly of what had happened; and while 1 was rela—
ting this adventure, I obſerved him attentively,
and ſaw him turn pale and tremble, By theſe e-
motions, which I never perceived in him in the
greateſt dangers, it was caſy to judge of the vio-
lence of his paſſion for this lady.

H2 The

ad

1
+143
13 1
4
1
11
..
„ ]
.
3
}
_\
1 ».4
9 *
„*
1K
j '
.
' q
+
L o
.
6
4
.
tight
N
Tt
v5
*
e
in
7
*
0
\N>
. 5
; *
1
4&8
N.
.
} 1
77. T4 ,
wet.
Fl 12
i
k \
1
þ 1
4s J
A
n
13 i
n
14
Ni
8 500
$13
n
4
9
.
f i
* 1;
$0134
1.
IN. *
; 148;
„%
[4.5 15 BY
*
TOR
441
43%
.
ie
1248
1
en
t [
' wh .
mf
+ | 9
47
11
144%
*
1
La >
8 4
nes \
*
ln!
1 & 07
l
19%
OD:
4 5
19
1
33%
1
.
*
Sv, 7
3
Bs...
. by
x XN
| Wi
A
5
5
1
Tir
if
4
1
*
4
8

i

3

Gai
————

n

N
EI ey.
wh 1 2 — —
ITS — X ES E IEEE cp WII
2 CES . r _ — — — — — - ö 5 — — 0 I ISS 4 — * ä — et es i ee ee neon: I 2
7 — lerow Fo Bs — — — — ; 7 I — ET ie ET INE ————ßê— — — - = — _
"238%. 8 1 22 : * 8 r ————— ow = — — _ — — — | F
— — 4 _ . 2922 — — _ — — — — —— = — - : N
* 1 5

RESET
*L

- — *
- 3 —

NED 2

n

D

2
.

©

* 2 Es >
BY _ ht 2
3
— * 0
>. 8 by
2 SFO n
* PINE DN ECL
- » > er Er, D
_ — <

8 M EM OI R 8 Book VIII. Vn 5
The firſt moments were given to tenderneſſ;
after which the King conſulted with me concern-

ing the ſtare of his affairs. That which was of © 7

moſt conſequence at preſent, was the advice he
had juſt received, by a letter from Rouen, that

the Duke of Montpenſier, engaged more ſtrictly

than ever with the factious courtiers, had formed
a very dangerous deſign againſt his royal perſon
(this defign was not explained); and that he was
endeavouring by all forts of methods, to gain
himſelf dependents. The King was ſo much rhe
more afflicted at this news, as he really loved the

Duke of Montpenſier; and ſince policy hindered

him from marrying his ſiſter to the Count of
Soiſſons, or any of the princes of Lorrain, he
was accuſtomed to look upon this Prince as his
future brother-in-law. He inſiſted that all other
buſineſs being poſtponed for this, I ſhould go im-
mediately to Rouen, and there either prevail upon
the Duke of Montpenſier to return to his duty,

or diſconcert all his intrigues.

1 ſtaid ſix days at Rouen, and doring that time

| I had ſufficient reaſon to be convinced that the

imputations againſt this Prince were abſolutely
falſe, and an artifice of thoſe who ſought to throw

the government into confuſion. The Duke of

Montpenfier, whofe ſentiments were very differ-
ent from thofe of which he was accuſed, ſuffered
nothing to appear either in his actions or diſcourſe,
but what proved his {trict attachment to the King.
'Thoſe perſons with whom he had had the cloſeſt
connections, durſt not in his preſence avow any
principle contrary to his, and deſpaired of ever

gaining him, One day when he did me the ho-

nour to invite me to dine with him, he talked to
me of his reſolution to continue inviolable in his

duty to the King, with a candor and freedom which

thole who know him are ſenſible he would not
have

175

e
"9 OW g

7 4 75
* * Y
#4

$7 9 4
; K 7
8

; 0
* N.
n

n

5

bs” 7
2 ie
44 * 88

*
e
ee eee

ſatisficd with the Duke of Montpenſier's ſenti-

juſtify himſelf, yet innocence carries along with

1166.70: $T ELK 3g

have been capable of, had he been conſcious of
any ſecret guilt; and although he did not ſeek to

it certain filent proofs, which can hardly be mil-
taken. He embraced me ſeveral times as a man
who was dear to him by being faithfully devoted
to the King; and on that account promiſed me
his friendſhip, of which I have ſince had many
inſtances. I mentioned to him his marriage with
the Princeſs Catherine, as an affair in which the
King was as ſolicitous for his ſucceſs as he him-
ſelf could be. He confeſſed to me that he had ne-
ver delired any thing with ſo much ardour as the
poſſeſſion of this Princeſs, but that he duiſt not
flatter himſelf with a hope of obtaining her, ſince
he had not qualities, he ſaid, capable of gaining
her heart, or of ſubduing the aſcendant the Count
of Soiſſons had over him. I remained entirely

ments, and reſolved to give a good account of
them to the King. The remainder of the time
I ſtaid at Roven I employed in renewing my for-
aer friendſhips with ſeveral perſons, among
whom were the firſt Prefident De Boquemare,
Meſſieurs De Lanquetot, De Gremonville, De
Bourgtheroulde, De Berniere, all members of the
parliament; the Abbots De Tiron, and Martin—
bault; the Sieurs De Motteville, Des-Hameaux,
De Meſnil, Captain of the Old Palace; De La-
Haulle, De Menencourt, Du Meſnil- baſil, and o-
thers, by whom I was treated, and whom | treat-
ed in my turn. I lodged with La-Pile, one of |
my particular friends. he

1 found the King ſtill at Amiens*, where a few

Ihe deputies of the crown of Amiens ſpeaking to him, in their
addreſs, of Himy IIIL's goudnels; “ Yes, ſays be to them, be
wos a good Prince, but he was afraid of you, and ſur aiy part

“ 1 neither fear nor love you.” Le Grain, Decade d'Henry le
rand, |, x. | | | |

H 3 days

o M E. MOI R S Book VIII.

days after arrived deputies from the principal ci-
ties of Provence and Languedoc, whoſe compli-
ments and harangues his Majeſty received with
his uſual goodneſs. The deputy from Marſeilles
was heard with moſt pleafure, as he ſpoke for a
city ſo ancient, and at all times fo faithful to its
ſovereigns. |

The King being not only undeceived by my re-
port of the Duke of Montpenſier, but alſo more
than ever convinced of his affection, reſolved to
make one effort more in his favour: and unfortu-
nately I was the perſon whom he fixed upon to
diſcharge this new commiſſion, Having ſent for
me one e night to his bedſide, he told me that, un-
Ger a pretence of viſiting the Princeſs Catherine,
I muſt go and endeavour to prevail upon her to
give the Duke of Montpenſier that place in her
heart which the Count of Soiſſons“, notwith- _
ſtanding the facrifice of the marriage- contract, till
poſſeſſed. Aﬀer what had happened to me at
_ Chartres upon this occaſion, I thoun ht it pre-
ſumptuous to embark in an affair in which it was
im poſſible to ſucceed. I conjured the King not to
expoſe me, by this new attempt, to the eternal
hatred of this Princeſs and the Count. My in-
treaties, preſſing as they were, had no effect: he
anſwered me only with the proverb, a good ma-
der, a bold ſervant; and obedience was the only
choice left me.

My laſt reſource was to demand my commiſſion
in writing, that it might ſecure me bo OI the
fate of many courtiers, who have been diſgraced
for acting with a blind obedience to their raſter;
againſt perſons of that rank; and, befides a lat-
ter of compliwent to the Princels, 1 required a

8 she uſed to ſay to fich ; as ſpoke to her by the King's order, A
0 boys all things, 1 will have wy Ccunt,” Platthicu, tom. 2. J. 2.

cond

1596. OF 8 UL I. 1. 91

ſecond, in which he ſhould tell the motives of my
journey, the nature of his orders, and the man-
ner, and arguments by which he deſired I
ſhould enforce them. When I made this propo-
ſal, the King, always tenacious of what concern-
ed his honour, replied, that his greateſt enemies
never demanded ſtronger ſecurity than his word.
I anſwered, by aſſuring bim, that I would never

make uſe of it but in caſes of extremity; and that

if the Princeſs ſhould appear diſpoſed to comply
with his defires, provided I could convince her,

that I ated ſolely by his authority, this writing
would then be neceſſary. The King yielded to
this laſt argument ; and, being furniſhed with this

authentic writing, I ſet out for Fontainebleau,

where the Prince{s then was, extremely perplexed
with the commiſſion I had undertaken,

I ſtaid only one day at Paris, from whence 1
went to the Princeſs, who expected me with fome
impatience, the King having informed her ſome
days before by Lomenie of my intended journey,

without explaining the occaſion of it. She had

flattered herſelf (for love, if it fears all, hopes all
likewiſe ) that I might poſhbly be come to make
the Count of Soiſſons happy; and this thought
made me happy alſo, as long as it laſted, which
was the two firſt days; for thoſe I thought neceſ-

ſary to give to civility and compliments. She al-
tered her behaviour on the third, when ſhe found

that I only introduced the ſubject of her love with

no intention, but to declare to her, that the Count

of Soiſſons had, by his imprudent conduct, in-

cenſed the King to fuch a degree, that ſhe ought

no longer to think of making him her huſband:

for I judged it proper to begin by removing one
lover, before I endeavoured to introduce another,
Although in ſpeaking of the Count de Soiſſons,
made uſe of the gentleſt t terms that my imagi-
| nation

92 MEMOIR Ss Book VIII.

nation could ſuggeſt, he had in the Princeſs ſo
zealous an advocate, that her anſwer was a ſe—
ries of the harſheſt epithets, and menaces to de-
prive me of the King's favour. Aſtoniſhed at a
rage ſo ſudden and violent, I thought of nothing
but appeaſing her, otherwiſe my commiſſion would

have that moment been at an end. I therefore

intreated her to hear me, and began a tedions
ſpeech, of which I knew not myſelf the end. And
firſt J intreduced a long and eloquent proteſtation
of my reſpect, attachment, and carneft deſire to
ſerve her; during which I racked my imagina-
tion, in vain, to furniſh me with the means of
calming her mind, ſince what it was moſt necefſary
ſhe ſhould hear, namely the Count of Soiſſons's

inſolent behaviour to the King, was orecly
what would moſt readily work her into a paſſion.

1 ventured however to break through this difficul-
ty, and conjured her to refle& ſeriouſly whether
this Prince had, by his whole conduct, deſerved
that the King ould endeavour to make him hap-
Py. It was the hope only that a diſcowſe, whoſe
beginning was fo diſagreeable, would end in a
manner favourable to her paſſion, that obliged

the Princeſs to give any attention to me; Which |

I judged by thoſe emotions of anger and diſdain
which alternately appeared in the fluſhing and
paleneſs of her face,

I continued to lay before ber, with all the mo-
deration imaginable, the many cauſes of diſiatiſ-

faction which the Count had given the King, par-

ticularly his behaviour in Burgundy, certainly in—
excuſable even in the eyes of a miſtreſs. I uſcd,
| however, the precaution to repeat frequently that,
for my own part, I believed the Count to be ve-
ry diſtant from thoſe ſentiments. which, from his
conduct, might be aſcribed to bim: I dwelt up-
on the conſequences it muſt unavoidably have, at

| | a

e Jer k
? PF 5
Vi - => +,
WI. ye CESS Wb — "12M
e eee +.
Ae bo EUs REES
NL NES e OE oo Sf Ie 2
1 ks e . >
v q "SI *

1596. 0 F S8 U L. L. T. 93
a time when a proceſs was actually commenced

againſt the Princeſs of Conde, by which the Prince
her ſon, ſtill a Huguenot, lived uncertain of his
ſtate, in a kind of exile at Rochelle. This affuir
being of the number of thoſe in which juſtice a-
lone was not ſufficient, the friends of the young

Prince would have Found it difficult to have ſcat-

tered thoſe accuſations againſt the mother, and ſe-

cured to the ſon his rank of firſt Prince of the

blood, and preſumptive heir to the crown, it the
King by ſuppreſſing the records and evidence of
the proceſs, as he did at laſt, had not intereſted
himſelf in the juſtification of the one, and in the
defence of the other. I made the Princeſs ſen-

\ ſible, that the Count was maſter of his own fate,
but that he made ſo bad an uſe of the King's fa-
vourable diſpoſitions towards him, that he would
infallibly oblige him to engage in the intereſts of

bis rival. In ſhort, I imagine, I ſaid enough to have

made any other think the Prince highly culpable.

The Princeſs, who, during this diſcourſe, had
fallen into a reverie, occaſioned more by vexation
than prudent reflections, interrupted me here, to

haſlen to that concluſion of which at ficſt l had given

her a favourable proſpect, and which ſeemed more
remote in proportion as I lengthened my ſpeech.

But having one begun, ſhe was not ſufficiently

miſtreſs of herſelf, ro ſtop where ſhe intended;

and piving way to the rage that filled her heart,
ſhe fell upon me a ſecond time, who, ſhe ſaid,

only fought to deceive her, and upon the King
her brother, who loves me ſo much,” faid ſhe
Ironically, © that he cannot reſolve to get rid of
* me;” and as a proof entered into a long enu-

meration of her lovers; amongſt whom it would

have been eaſy for me to prove, that ſhe had miſſ-
ed of an eſtabliſhment through her own fault;
as when ſhe 1cfuſed the King of Scotland. In the

courſe

* = —— "

r— > -
—

— ——

l oe ii DENA 4 CAR

— 2 222 SIE <= — — — —
. ——— : — — 5 — — ——
— — == —. — p -. — = = — —ñ̃ !( == =T" 2 - — 2 —
— — 0 : — TS. * W =
— — L — — — A — — bh ib Nag ei err OO 2

* o SIRE — —_—
— — * _— —— .
— — . SEED —
„rr

94 M E M O I R S Book VII.

_ courſe of her complaints ſhe neither ſpared the
queen her mother, nor King Henry III. who, ſhe
ſa id, had all conſpired io keep her ſingle. Her ſtock
of rancour being almoſt exhauſted by ſo many
invectives, the ſofter paſſion took its place, and
naturally turned her thoughts on the Count of
Soiſſons; a ſubje& which ſhe treated not leſs am-

ply, but in a manner very different from the

former.

rupting me, was to hear that advice by Which, I
told her, all paſt errors might be repaired, he
aſked me poſitively what that advice was, but with
the ſame tone of malignant raillery; by which J
Was ſtill better convinced, that her mind was irri—
tated beyond the power of human eloquence to
cure. But, preſſed by the queſtion, 1 replied,
guy the Count of Soiſſons's doing the very con-
«© trary of what he has hitherto done.“ The
_ obſervations I made while I pronounced theſe few
words, were ſufficient to perſuade me, that it would
be to no purpoſe to propoſe the Duke of Mont-
penſier to her. I therefore looked upon my com-
miſſion to be at an end, or rather abſolutely fru-
rated; and all I aimed at now, was to draw
myſelf out of this embarraſſment, by expreſſions

ſo vague and general, that the Princeſs might.

not take any advantage of me, nor afterwards
maintain, that I had failed in my promiſe to her,
Nothing is more eaſy than this kind of difcourle,
I entered at firſt upon the neceſſary duties oi

crowned heads, but did not inſiſt long upon this

ſyubje& ; though I drew no other inference, but
that the King could not be reproached with any
failure in his. This introduced another diſcoulz
in form, divided into ſeveral parts, wherein Hen-
ry's gentleneſs of diſpoſition was copiouſly dil
cuſſed ; and to conclude by ſomething ti

| clearer,

At length, recolleAing that her Align by i inter. | |

be. # F.3 ESE bs RET 2 *
— 2 8 AN” ed >
a 2 . 3 1
W
8 - 4 . MO 2 - * + *E "x - "I
** * * 3 N Wan Tre. w
* * Ho. EY ro 2 MO.
— +; a rr 3 FTW
8 7a RET RA 33

Fam os pm 22 FW 2 — 1 Om * 1 4 1 n .

*
„710 LL
F 7 >
* 2
{4

» 77

clearer, ſince the Princeſs, contrary to my ex-
pectations, had patience enough to liſten to fo
tedious an harangue, I aſſured her, in few words,
that Henry's temper was ſuch, that, I was confi-
dent, he would be eaſily prevailed upon to con—
ſent to every thing that was reaſonable.

The Princeſs, ſurpriſed at ſo precipitate a con-
cluſion, aſked me, indeed with ſome appearance of
reaſon, if I had nothing more to ſay to her; for
it is certain, that I had made much travel but
little progreſs. I replied, that I had till a great
many things to add. This long converſation having
laſted till night, 1 depended upon having wearied
the Princeſs ſo much, that ſhe would take an ab-
ſalute leave of me: but I was miſtaken ; ſhe gave
me only till the next day to ſatisfy her demands,
and left me with a ſullen and malignant air, ac-
companied with a glance, and ſome interjections,
which I heard as I went out, upon the trick I had
played her at Chartres; from whence I preſaged

nothing favourable for the ſucceſs of my commiſ-

ſion.
I ſhould have been the moſt preſumptuous of
all men, if, after this, I could have flattered my-
ſelf with being able to bring her to the point we
deſired. Indeed | was fo far from entertaining ſuch
a thought, that how happy ſhould I have been, if
the Princeſs, in quitting me, had commanded me
never to appear before her again? I went, how-
ever, to wait upon her at the appointed hour,
which was after the had dined. She had repaired
to her cabinet earlier than uſual, and continued
there ſhut up conferring with the ladies De Rohan,
de La-Guiche, de La Barre, and De Neufvy, from

none of whom! had the leaſt reaſon to expect any

good offices. I waited in her chamber, talking
to the ladies De Gratians, and Pangeac, and two
other young ladies, who were as much inclined

96 M E M OI R Ss Book VIII

to ee me as the others to do the contrary,
I told them, that I ſhould not have been ſorry,

if they had been in the Princeſs's cabinet inftead © 7

of thoſe ladies that were then with her, who, [
was perſuaded, were that very moment giving her

very bad counſels. 'I hey told me I ought not to ;

imagine fo, but in a tone that confirmed me ſtill
more in my opinion.

It was an hour at leaſt, before the Princeſs came
out; ſhe had been all this time preparing berſelf,
and, perceiving me, told me, that ſhe was going
to give me her anſwer ; the purport of which it
was not difficult to gueſs, by the formal, cold, and
contemptuous air with which ſhe pronounced cheſe
words. I followed her, in great uneaſineſs ; but
ſhe ſpared me the pain of ſpeaking firſt, by tell-
ing me, that ſhe acquitted me of all I had pro

miſed to inform her of, and that now I had nocking 1

to do but to hear her in my turn: then aſſuming
an air ſtill more haughty and contemptuous, the
treated me in the preſence of all thoſe witneſles
( am obliged to confeſs it) like the baſeſt of men,
who, ſhe ſaid, took upon myſelf the character of
a perſon of importance, and an able politician,
while, in realiiy, I was a vile and infamous pa—
raſite, who had endeavoured to extort from her
_ own mouth a confeſſion of faults, of which nei—
ther ſhe nor the Count had ever been guilty, to
make my court to the King, who was himſelf a-

ſhamed of the part I ated. The Princeſs. could

here avoid falling into the female fault of betray-
ing, by an exuberance of words, the reſerve ſhe had
refolved to maintain. Something which I had

faid the evening before, relating to her conduct,

and to that of the Count de Soiſſons in Bearn,
occurring to her memory, ſhe entered into an un-
ſeaſonable defence of it. Pangeac was called a

| great logerhead, who had not yet received his full

deſerts;

Fe 1 97

| deſerts ; ; my comment upon the duties of Kings
was found highly unbecoming : then recalling
herſelf from this rambling train, the told me,
that, to cloſe all with a few words, and to hinder
me from boaſting of my commiſſion, ſhe gave me
to underſtand, thatI was rath and imprudent to the
laſt degree, to concern myſelf with the affairs of a
perſon lo far above me; I, that was only a private
gentleman, whoſe higheſt honour it had deen to
be brought up in her family, and who, as well as

EE my relations, had ſubſiſted only upon the boun-

ty of the Princes of Navarre ; that the fate of all
thoſe who, like me, ungrateful for paſt benefits,
durſt preſume to interfere betwixt perſons ſo near-
ly united, was to be facrificed ſooner or Jater,

without the honour of having my interpoſition

known to be the cauſe. From a woman theſe ex-
preſſions might be endured ; but, as the Princeſs
was well aſſured, that no man whatever, not even
the Count of Soiſſons, although a prince of the
blood, durſt talk to me in that way, ſhe added,
as the higheſt affront ſhe could think of, that all
ſhe had ſaid was in the Count's name as well asher
own. The concluſion of this ſpeech was of piece

with all the reſt ; ſhe threatened with an exceſs of
rage, to ruin me for ever with the King, by a

1 . ſingle word, and forbad me, for the future, to
appear in any place where the might happen to

be.

I do not believe any diſtinction of rank or ſex
can authoriſe the uſe of expreſſions ſo abuſive : cer-
tainly it cannot be vanity in me to repeat them;
but, as the Princeſs added endeavours to words, and
obliged me to take meaſures for my own defence,
in which, for the firſt time, I waved that ſubmiſ-
ſion which I owed to a Princeſs, the ſiſter of my

King, I cannot better prove the neceſſity 1 was |

Yoo l. I under

„„ M E M OI 5
under to take ſuch ſteps, than by faithfully re—

}
i
i
|
|
|
10
it
id

Book VIII.

lating thoſe converſations, and even the very

words that were uſed. Although my pride ſuffer-

ed greatly by this ſhameful treatment, I had dif:

cretion and even policy enough, not to ſuffer it

to appear; I ſay policy, for had my countenance

bitterneſs, the Princeſs, without hearing me, would
have left me in a triumph, which it was neceſſary!
ſhould leſſen before thoſe perſons who were either
accomplices or witneſles of the ſcene.

L began therefore with the falſe timidity of a
man who is ſolicitous to exculpate himſelf; and
that I might engage the Princeſs to hear all I
had to ſay, I told her, that I was very much

grieved to find that bad counſels had made her

diſcover a meaning in my words that I had never
intended, and had drawn upon me a treatment!

could not poſſibly deſerve; that it was ealy for
me to convince her how little I merited thoſe
reproaches ſhe had caſt upon me; and to be-
gin with the Count of Soiſſons, ſhe knew, that
in all I had faid relating to him, I had added

that, for my own part, I was abſolutely convinced

of the rectitude of his intentions. By this intro-

duction I ſtopped the Princeſs, who ſuppoſed ſhe
ſhould ſoon have the pleaſure to ſee me at her feet

imploring pardon.

I went on with the ſame alive to tell ber

that, to remove the diſpleaſure ſhe ſeemed to en-
tertain, that a private gentleman, and one un-
worthy to approach her, ſhould be ſent to treat
with her, I begged leave to remind her, that al-
though, by the prodigality of my anceſtors, I
was neither ' poſſeſſed of the eſtate, nor dignities

to which I had a claim, yet that above a hun-
dred thouſand crowns had been carried by the
daughters of my wi into the houſes of

= Bourbon

_ expreſſed the leaſt emotion, or my reply the leaſt 3 |

4 4
+/
*
8
89
1
19
N
SIS
5
*
> FR
| ;
%
: +
:
4 .
* -
. *

1596. 0 F $ULLY, 99

Bourbon and Auſtria*; and that, far from be-
ing a charge to the King ſince I had been in
his ſervice, his Majeſty had ſometimes given me
the pleaſure to ſee him have recourſe to me in
his neceſſities, I acknowledged, however, that
nothing could juſtify my having exceeded his
Majeſty's orders, if I had really been capable of

doing ſo. That moment, taking another paper
of the King's out of my pocket, addreſſed to the

Princeſs, in form of a letter, I took advantage of

| the aſtoniſhment into which I had caſt her, to
tell her, that, to finiſh my meſſage before I quit-

ted her for ever, I declared to her, as her ſer-
vant, that his Majeſty, holding the place of her
father, and being likewiſe her maſter and her
King, (he had no other part to take than ſubmiſſion
to his will ; that, without liſtening to any thing
the Count of Soiſſons could ſuggeſt, ſhe muſt re-
ſolve either to accept of a huſband from the King
her brother, or incur the lofs of his favour; that
in this laſt caſe, it would be a very ſenſible mor-
tification to her, after having held the rank of a

3 queen, to ſee herſelf reduced to a very inconſi-

derable fortune, ſince ſhe was not ignorant, that,

| beſides the preſents the King had beſtowed, in the

reſignation he made her of thoſe eſtates ſhe at
preſent enjoyed, he had conſulted rather the die-

tates of his own heart, than the laws and cuſtoms

of Navarre, which might have given her a pro-

viſion nothing near ſo conſiderable.

| Theſe laſt words drew the Princeſs, in ſpite of
herſelf, out of that ſcornful inſenſibility and dif-
dain which ſhe had affected to ſhew, to precipitate
her into the greateſt tranſport of rage of which any
woman could be capable. After giving vent to

refer the reader to the explanation I have given in the be-
ginning of theſe memoirs, about the alliances of the houſe of Be.

I 2 all

thune,

100 M E M O IR S Bock VIII.

all that anger could inſpire, ſhe went furiouſly in-

to her cabinet; and I withdrew, with great com-
poſure, towards the ſtair-caſe, whither Madam de
Neufvy came running after me, to tell me, that

the Princeſs had ſent her to demand the letter 1
had ſhewn her. This was a new ſtratagem of
thoſe four ladies, who had perſuaded the Princeſs,
that ſhe would ruin me more effectually with the

King, if ſhe could make it appear, that I had ſa-

crificed his Majeſty's letter. I perceived the ſnare
| that was laid for me, and I replied to Madam de
Neufvy, that 1 was ſurpriſed the Princeſs, after
having refuſed to hear the contents of = letter,
ſhould ſend immediately to demand it. I added,

that I would communicate it only to the Princeſs,
and read it only once to her, having occaſion for
it myſelf, This was not what the meſſenger
wanted, and ſhe returned without making me any

reply.

I went that evening to Moret, where my wiſe then

was, and ſtaying with her only one day, ſet out the

next for Paris, to meet my courier, whom I had

ſent from Fontainebleau with difpatches to the
King. But I was greatly ſurpriſed when, inſtead
of him, I ſaw young Boeſle, the Princeſs's ſtewaid
of the houſehold, arrive with a letter, at which
IT was ſtill more ſurpriſed, when I ſaw it was from
the King. I knew that Boefſe was the perſon

whom ſhe ſent with her diſpatches to his Maje-

ſty. 1 found that this letter had been ſent open

to the Princeſs, and had not been tranſmitted to

me till it had paſſed through her hands, and that

ſhe had ſealed it with her own ſeal : all theſe cir-

cumſtances left me no room to doubt of my miſ-
fortune, which by a ſad foreboding in my mind

Was ſtill more confirmed, and [ opened the letter :

trembling. My fears were but too juſt. Inſtead

of praiſes, and thoſe expreſſions of eſteem and
| confidence

_m nn... 0 «aaa K as «

e or $ULLY. 01

11 confidence with which the King's letters to me

were generally filled, my eyes were {truck with

2 a ſevere command to make the Princeſs ſatisfac -

tion. His Majeſty © could not ſuffer (theſe were

«© his words) that one of his ſubjects ſhould affront

* a Princeſs, and his ſiſter, without puniſhing him

immediately for his fault, if he did not repair

tit by ſubmiſſions.” “.

Il was aſtoniſhed, I own, with: this mortifying.
blow, and fo much the more, as, having no rea-
ſon to imagine, that the King had not received
my letter, I faw that it was after he had read it
that I was thus treated. What reflections did I
not then make upon the misfortune of being em-
ployed in reconciling the great, and upon the
danger of ſerving kings. I could reproach my-
ſelf with nothing in regard to Henry. I had fer-
ved him four and twenty years with an unweart-
ed aſſiduity, and a zeal that nothing could allay :
it was with reluctaney that I accepted this laſt diſ-
agreeable commiſſion: the writing which I had
obtained of the King contained many things more
ſevere than any I had ſaid to the Princeſs; and
I had ſuppreſſed them at a time when it would,
perhaps, have been excuſeable to have aggravated
them. My guilt was, at molt, a too faithful obe-
dience ; yet his Majeſty ſacrificed me cruelly, with-
out any regard to my reaſons, or his own expreſs

commands. I was ſenſibly affected with this in-
| Juſtice, and all my thoughts ran upon reſolutions
for ever to quit the court.
But ſearce had 1 formed theſe reſolutions when
a thouland motives concurred to make me change
them. Henry, as I had ah eady often proved, had
acquired ſuch an empire over my inclinations, that
after repeated oaths on my iide to quit him, a
ſingle word fiom him has drawn me to him as it
were by enchantment _ To this was added the
1 3 conſideration

T. N

LJ Lal * ede —_— I.

EP «> ES

. 93 ns Cf. 0

E

— — — — th — — N
= ” — — — — — — 2 —
- - — — —.— ES -

Salt eren of my own wire; By liſtening to
my reſentment I was expoſing myſelf to loſe the

rewards of my long ſervices, when I was juſt up-

on the point of obtaining them, and at a time
when, being diſinherited by the Viſcount de Gand,

I loſt an eſtate of fifty thouſand livres a year;

exhaaſted by a long and expenſive ſervice, having
a houſe to renew, and menaced with a numerous
fem y by the fertility of my wife, theſe expected
rewirds were all my reſource, and the only foun-

dation I had to build upon. But, on the other
fide, how could I endure to ſuffer, like a crimi-

nal, the haughty and contemptuous behaviour of
a Princeſs, with whom I had juſt before maintain-

ed a character ſo different, and who would make

| this cup as bitter for me as ſhe was able? The agi-
tation and grief of my mind may be eaſily ima-
gined, by any one who can ſuppoſe himſelf in my

Phae. |
At length cok the moſt prudent part I could,

but it was far from ſuſpending the uneaſineſs that

preyed upon my ſpirits ; I feigned ſickneſs, and the
deep melancholy with which I was ſeized, was in
reality capable of communicating to my body ſome

part of the diſorder of my mind, I diſcovered to

no perſon whatever the cauſe of my grief, but ſent

for a phyſician, who making me tremble for
the conſequences of a diſeaſe entirely of my own

making, promiſed, however, to reſtore me to
health by plentiful bleeding and purging.

At four o'clock in the afternoon another phy-
ſician arrived, for whom the cure of my diſtem-
per was reſerved ; this was Picaut, my courier,

whom I had waited for impatiently, to take,

upon the accounts he ſhould bring me, my laſt iſ
reſolutions. After informing me that he had had the
misfortune to ſtrain his ankle, which was the
cauſe. that & the Princeſs' s courier came to the King

before

.

former letter, which he had written in one of
* thoſe ſudden tranſports that I knew were natu-

106 OX: ST LL 9 109
before Ta he preſented me with a letter, in this

Prince's own hand-writing, which removed all
my complaints. Henry told me in it, that I had

reaſon to be offended with the contents of his

ral to him, and upon exagerated complaints,

joined to the inſtances and importunities of his

ſiſter; but that, to calm my uneaſineſs, he aſſu-

red me he would diſavow nothing I had faid, in

which if he failed, he would permit me to make
uſ2 of his own letter againſt him. He concluded
with theſe words, Come to me, that you may
inform me more particularly of all that has paſ-

« fed, and depend upon being as well received

by me as you have ever been, although I

e ſhould be forced, to take up the old motto of
the houſe of Bourbon, let who will en, -

Adieu, my friend,”
In this kind familiarity I knw again my old
maſter. This letter was dated the 17th of May,

3 and the firſt the 15th, and both from Amiens,

for which place 1 ſet out very early in the morn-
ing, and arrived there the next day. I neither

ſuppreſſed nor palliated any part of what had

been ſaid or done at Fontainebleau between the
Princeſs and me ; and his Majeſty, by repeated
expreſſions of friendſhip and eſteem for me, ſhew-
ed that he approved of my whole conduct.

That I may not too often interrupt the thread
of my hiſtory by a recital which is equally proper

every where, I ſhall finiſh, in a few words, all
that concerns this affair. La-Varenne, who was-

employed by the Princeſs to take care of her
intereſts at court, did not fail to inform her of
the good reception the King gave me, and the
general report, that the finances would be wholly

confided to my care, The Princeſs comprehend-

ed, by this ne ws, that it was now neceſſary not
only

ii
1
|
110
IE
if
I"
j
|
|
|
1 |
0
}
!

_— I

104 M E M 0 1 R 8 Book VIII.

only to drop her reſentment, but that it was alſp 2.

her intereſt to be upon good terms, for the
future, with a man from whoſe hands hencefor-

wards all the appointments for the ſupport of ber

| houſhold were likely to come. Whether ſhe was
convinced that ſhe herſelf was wrong, or ſtil]
imputed the blame to me, ſhe had the generoſity
to pardon me: and I muſt confeſs, to the honour
of this Princeſs, that in this ſhe ſhewed a great-
| neſs of ſoul of which few could have been capa-
ble. If, from the qualities which marked the
charafter of this Princeſs, we abate an exceſs of
vivacity, which it was not in her power to reſtrain,
and to which, in the affair above mentioned,
was added the force of the moſt impetuous of
all paſſions, there will remain a diſpoſition na-
turally eaſy and benevolent, and capable even
of friendihip, and of gratitude.
She communicated this alteration of her Ga
ments with regard to me to Madam de Pangeac,
one of my friends; and even made the firſt advan-
ces to Madam de Roſny. 1 had left her in child-
bed at Moret. When her health was perfectly re-
_ eſtabliſhed, ſhe went one day to church at Fon—
tainebleau, and returned without waiting upon
the Princeſs, under pretence of a ſlight indiſpoſi-
tion which confined her Highneſs to her bed. Ma-
dam de Pangeac blaming this, as if from herſelf, but
in reality by the Princeſs's orders, my wife found
herſelf obliged to tell her, that the terms I was
upon with the Princeſs made it impoſlible for her
to do herſelf that honour, At a ſecond journey
which Madam de Roſny made to Fontainebleau,
the Princeſs cauſed her to be told, that the reaſons
ſhe had given Madam de Pangeac ought not to
prevent her coming to ſee her; and in fact on her
going (he was molt graciouſly received. The

| Princeſs owned ſincerely, that he was not yet fully
ſatisfied

30 A ww *

AAA

. 9
IE
1

Bee: $040
3 :

WS fe i
73 BU

8 5
*

FF 105

fatisfied with my conduct, as ſhe thought ſhe had
reaſon to expect a very different one, conſidering
thoſe inſtances of friendſhip which I had received

from her in my youth. She mentioned ſeveral

parties of pleaſure at Pau, or at M. de Moiſſens's,
| where ſhe had done me the honour to take me
| with her, particularly that when running at the
ring I gained the prize, which was a jewel of (mall.

value, and was going to receive it from her hand,

ſhe changed the jewel, and gave me one in its

ſtead worth two thouſand crowns, She did not
forget to mention, that my father had often car-
ried the Queen, her mother, in his arms. After
all this, the Princeſs very obligingly told my wife,

that her reſentment againſt me had never extend-
ed to her, whoſe bumour and character ſhe loved,
She ſaid a thouſand obliging things of M. de Saint-

Martin, my wife's uncle, who had been firſt gen-

tleman of the bed-chamber to the King; and of

Madam de Saint-Martin, the ſiſter of M. de Moiſ-
ſens, and conſequently a near relation of her own.
Madam de Roſny left her extremely well ſatisfi-

ed, and fully determined to uſe her utmoſt endea-

vours to reſtore me to her favour. She made no

attempts this firſt viſit; but afterwards, | obſerving
to the Princeſs the attention I ſhewed in ſettling.

the aſſignments for the payment of the officers of
her houſhold, and repreſenting to her, that it was
by repeated orders from his Majeſty that I had ſub-
dued the reluctance I had to accept of that com-
miſſion which had offended her, Madam de la
Force, who was then at the Princeſs's toilet, joined

my wife; and what ſurpriſed me greatly, being
ſupported by Madam de Rohan and Madam de la

Barre, they prevailed upon her to ſend for me that
moment. From the time that the Princeſs was
convinced of my innocence, ſhe had ſo great a
degree of friendſhip for me as to confide all her

ſecrets

1
|
2
[!
f
0

DDS — —

106 MEMOIR S Book VIII.

| ſecrets to me alone. She propoſed and promoted
with all her intereſt the marriage of my eldeſt
daughter with the Duke of Rohan, her neareſt re-
lation * on the ſide of the deceaſed Queen her mo.

ther, and the heir of her eſtate in Navarre. The

King did not then approve of this match, though
he did afterwards. And laſtly, when this Princeſs
ſet out for Lorrain, ſufficiently diſcontented, as is

well known, with the court of France, ſhe de- |

clared publicly, that there were only three perſons

in it whom ſhe eſteemed, and that I was one of

them. 1 | 5
Hoſtilities between the King's party and that of

the league continued, during the years 1595 and

1596, in the ſame parts of the kingdom as in the

preceding years; in Britanny, between Meſſieurs

d' Aumont and de Saint Luc, and the Duke of
Mercœur; and in the provinces in the ſouth of
France, where ſeveral little ſkirmiſhes happened
between Meſſieurs de Ventadour, de la Rochefou-
caut, de Chateaunevf, de Saint-Ange, de Loſtange,
de Chambaret, and other officers on the King's
fide; and Meſſieurs de Pompadour, de Raſtignac,
de Saint Chamant, de Montpeſat, de la Chapelle,
Biron, and other leapuers. The defeat of the
Crocans, the ſiege of Blaye, the taking of Agen,
and the death of the Duke of Rochefoucaut, were
the moſt remarkable events + that happened in
VVV

Henry II. of that name, Doke de Rohan, Cc. who married

Margaret de Bethune, as ſhall be ſeen in the ſequel of theſe memoirs,
was grandſon to Rene I of that name, Viſcount de Rohan, and I-
ſabella D*Albret, daughter to John King of Navarre. See in al! the
_ genealogiſts the other alliances of this illuſtrious houſe with that of
France. |

+ Moſt of the events which the author mentions here, happened |

before the year 1595. The Count de Rochefoucat had been dead

ſince the year 1591, having been killed, as we ſaid before, at the

battle of Saint-Yrier la pe:che. The Viſcount de Pompadour was

likewiſe dead in 1591. The taking of Agen by the Count de la

Roche, ſon to Marichal de Matignon, was likewiſe in the ſame year

1191.

F , / ⁰ —.A eee

R TCC

V 107

the Limoſin and the adjacent places. Leſdiguieres

continued the war with equal ſucceſs in Dau-
phine, Provence, and Piedinont; ſometimes a-

gainſt the Duke of Savoy and ſometimes againſt the

Duke of Epernon. The concluſion of all theſe

expeditions was the entire defeat of the Duke of

Savoy, who, thinking to derive ſome advantages
from the diſunion of the Dukes of Guiſe and E-
pernon, had marched as far as Provence, ' from

whence he was ſhamefully repulſed, and likewiſe
the diſcomfiture of the Duke of Epernon, who
yielding to his rival the Duke of Guiſe, aſliſted

by the ſame Leſdiguieres, D' Ornano, and the

Counteſs of Sault's party was left without any
reſource, and reduced to the neceſſity of implo-

ring the King's clemency, by letters conceived

in terms extremely ſubmiſſive, which his Majeſ-
ty received at Gaillon, His letters were very
ſoon after followed by himſelf; he came and

threw himſelf at the King's feet, which was a

kind of triumph for Henry, this Duke's humi-
liation, with that of Bouillon, and de la Tre-
mouille, being ſome of the things for which he

moſt earneſtly wiſhed.

1 591. Blaye was beſieged in the year 1593, by the ſame Marechal,
who, notwithſtanding the defeat of a Spaniſh ſquadron, was obliged
to raiſe the ſiege. The Crocans, ſo called from Croc, a village in

the Limoſin, where they began to aſſemble themſelves, were alſo de-
feated about the ſame time by Chambert, or Chambaret, the go-

vernor of that province: and afterwards, the Marechal de Matig -
non completed their final diſperſion and overthrow in Languedoc,
more by itratagem than by open force. Conſult, as to all theſe e-
vents, the hiſtorians above quoted; as alſo ſee, in the particular hi-

| {tory of the Conſtable de Leſdiguieres, the expeditions of this hero,
famous for the victories at Epernon, Pontcharra, Vinon, &c. and
for the taking of the fort d'Exiles, of Cahors, and of a great num
ber of other places; whereby he became maſter of all Savoy, and a

part of Piedmont. | 5 ig |
| Beſides a war, France was fore afflicted this year 1596, with a
plague and famine, which were occaſioned by the utter inverſion of

the ſeaſons; for L'Etoile ſays, that there was a ſummer in April, an

autumn in May, and a winter in June.

During *

|
1
\
k

5 rr ᷣ ͤ ͤ  — — ——  —— —— — — — >» — — TIE * a rr p
a *

——

ics M E M OI R Ss Bock vIII.

During his ſtay at Amiens, the King took ſe.
veral new meaſures towards my reception into
the council of finances. T his Prince, who by
reaſon of the native rectitude of his own mind,
could not believe it poſſible for men to be as
corrupt as they really were; and from the ſweet-
neſs of his diſpoſition, could not proceed to ex-
tremities till he had tried all other methods, had
for a long time imagined, that he ſhould at length
bring this body to manage the revenue of the
| Nate with wiſdom and œconomy; and this im-
portant reformation was not ſo difficult, but that
It might be produced by the advice of one man of
application, {kill, and integrity, whom he would al:
ſociate with thoſe that compoſed it. With this
view he ſpoke, both in public and private, to
the gentlemen of the council to receive me a-
mongſt them. However great their reluctance
was, they durſt not openly reje&t a propoſal,
which being made in this manner, reſembled ra-
ther an intreaty than an order. „
Ion ingenuouſly I did not much reliſh this
ſcheme. His Majeſty, in a private converſation,
told me it was his deſire I ſhould endeavour to
gain the good-will of the gentlemen of the coun-
cil, and by ſome inſtances of complaiſance, re-
move the ſuſpicions they had entertained, that if
I joined their ſociety, it would be only to do
them bad offices; ſo that J might engage them
by my behaviour, to make it their own requeſt,
that I ſhould be aſſociated with them. I did not
heſitate a moment in replying, that this appeared
to me to be the worſt way imaginable of being
introduced into the council of the finances, to
owe it as an obligation to thoſe who governed
them; and knowing ſo well as I did, the diſpo-
ſition of that body, I could not ſerve them and
the ſtate at the ſame time, The King, who did
5 115 | : — not

J TT. RE EEO LS

% $#V-L L I. 109
not like to be contradicted, and who likewiſe remem-
bered my diſputes with the Duke of Nevers, ſuppo-

ſed | had ſtill ſome remains of reſentment againſt
_ thoſe gentlemen. He diſcovered, he thought, ſome-

thing of haughtineſs, or, at leaſt, of ſelf-lufficiency

in my anſwer, and told me, with ſome warmth, that

he had no mind to irritate every body upon my ac-

count; therefore, without making any more at-
tempts to bring me into the finances, he would caſt

about for ſomething elſe to employ my head, which

could nor, he ſaid, continue inactive.

He had till ſome remains of diſpleaſure in bis

countenance, when he left me to viſit Madam de

Liancourt, who inquiring the cauſe, repreſented
to him, that he would never be ſerved with fide-

lity till he found a man who, from a regard only

to the public good, would not fear to draw upon

himſelf the hatred of the financicrs. As for me,
1] looked upon my engaging in the finances, as

firther off than ever; and reflecting, that my
employment would henceforwards be reduced to

treaties and negotiations, an office which ſeldom
fails to bring certain ruin upon any man, who

would maintain his rank in it with dignity, and his

reputation with honour, I reſolved to explain my-

ſelf to his Majeſty, and prevail upon him to ap-
prove of a ſcheme that would, at leaſt, re- im-
burſe me of all I had advanced. But Henry did

not give me time to make the propoſal. When
TI approached him, he told me, that, upon the re-
preſentation of Madam de Liancourt, he was now

brought over to my opinion, and that, without
any longer delay, he was going to declare his in-
tentions publicly, after having, for form's fake,
imparted them firſt to the Conſtable and Villeroi,
whole buſineſs it was to expedite my commiſſion.
Theſe two gentlemen came very ſeaſonably into
the King's apartment, and received this order ;
the 8 making a bow, and Villeroi ſaying, he

Vor. U. EY would

333

2
n
— —_— 0 2
— —— ens

ou

.
7

io MEMOIR S Book VIII.
would give me the commiſſion as ſoon as he could

meet with a precedent of the proper form.
In the afternoon, when the King was gone a

hunting, I went to make my acknowledgments to

the Marchioneſs de Monceaux, (for this was the title
that Madam de Liancourt had lately taken); after
Which I thought I was obliged, in civility, to viſit

Monſieur de Villeroi,of whom, inſtead of the com-
miſſion, I aſked for a warrant, which would have

anſwered the ſame purpoſe. Villeroi made an e

vaſive reply, and for three or four days that 1
preſſed him, always deferred the affair on various
pretences till the next day. At laſt, the King left

Amiens to go to Monceaux, and paſſed by Lian-
court, (where Liancourt), his firſt equerry, re-

ceived and treated him very ſplendidly. It was

in this place, that the utmoſt efforts were deter-
mined to be uſed, to exclude me from the coun-
eil of finances.

Liancourt, at Villeroi's ſolicitation, Invited the
Chancellor, who was his intimate friend, and the

other members of the council, who came to that
place by the King's order, to ſtay at his houſe

during the King's reſidence there. They took

advantage of this opportunity, of being always
near the King, to endeavour effectually to exclude
me from the council. The method they made
uſe of was not to attack me directly, but to inſi-

nuate to the King, that I was not fit for this em-
ployment, in which, they ſaid, for want of that

experience which experience only can give, it
would not be poſſible to avoid committing a thou-
ſand faults, the leaſt of which was enough to ruin,
paſt remedy, the credit, and conſequently bring

on the deſtruction of the ſtate. Theſe diſcourſes _

were ſo often repeated in the King's preſence,

(for they deſignedly turned the converſation up-

on that ſubject), and witch ſo great an tee
=

JC -L LE: x80
of ſincerity, that the King was, at laſt, ſhaken by
them, and when at the fame time he Fond theſe
gentlemen could, with ſuch facility, form the ſu -
reſt projects, diſcourſe with ſuch clearneſs upon
the ſtrength and intereſts of the ſtate, calculate
its revenues with the utmoſt exactneſs, and that,
in a word, they were apparently maſters of the
whole ſcience of commerce, in its full extent, and
of every other method by which a ſtate is ren-
dered flouriſhing ; and eſpecially that they con-
verſed with each other in a language ſcarce intel-
ligible to any but themſelves; and, influenced
ſtill more by the long preparation which they re-
| preſented as abſolutely. neceſſary, before any one
could be received into the council, he thought,
that the preſent bad ſtate of the finances, was not
the greateſt misfortune with which they were
_ threatened, His Majeſty likewiſe, looking upon
all this as a proof of their repentance, and from the
apprehenſions he had juſt given them, expecting
to ſee a very great alteration in their conduct,
gave over all thoughts of adding me to their num-
ber. ;
Villeroi, who, during this time, 1 at
Amiens, yet was not the leſs informed of all the
meaſures taken by a body, whom be directed
as he pleaſed, ſcized this opportunity to ſend my
commiſſion to the King, which he could not dif-
penſe with himſelf from expediting, after the ex-
preſs orders he had received from his Majeſty.
When it was tranſmitted to the King, he had left
L iancourt, having ſtaid there only a day, and
wWuas then at Monceaux, where, ſtill under the in-
fluence of theſe ſuggeſtions, he gave it to Beringhen,
telling him to keep it without ſaying any thing to
me, till he had orders to the contrary. Beringhen,
who was one of my friends, diſcovered the ſecret
to me, which 1 kept faithfully, Fifteen days 28
* 2 c

11 M E M © t N 1 Doe var.

ed in this manner. The King did not ſpeak to

HBeringhen about my commiſſion, and the gentle-
men of the council, blinded by their ſucceſs, in-

ſtead of that ſincere repentance which his Maje-
ſty expected from them, gave him new proofs of

their art fice and inſincerity, and ſuch groſs ones,
that they forced him to cruſh them with the blow _
which they might, with very little difficulty, have
avoided. |
The King 1 that the council had juſt
farmed out the royal aids of Normandy for thirty
_ thoufandcrowns, and todefraud the treaſury of this
4am, fo much ſhort of the true value of that tax, they
Had applied it entirely to the diſcharging their old
demands upon the revenue. With alittle attention
he convinced himſelf of other faults in their con-
duct; that the five large farms did not produce the
fourth part of their value; becauſe Zamet, Gon-

dy, and other farmers of the King's revenues, who
were employed in them, by connivance of the

gentlemen of the council, divided with them the
_ immenſe profits that accrued from thoſe farms.
The avarice of theſe people was not yet ſatisfied,

and, under pretence of the loſſes at Calais, Cam-

bray, Ardreſs, &c. they allowed ſuch drawbacks

upon all the other parts of the King's revenues,

that, inſtead of increaſing, they became percep-
tibly les. The King, amidſt that juſt indigna-
tion which this knowledge inſpired, ſent for me,
and commanded me to go to Paris, to inquire
from whence fo great a diſſipation of the moncy
proceeded, which could only take its riſe from the
council. I replied, that his Majeſty having cer-
tainly revoked the order he had once given to Vil-
leroi, to diſpatch my commiſſion, ſince 1 had not
received it, I had no right to intrude into the
council, or to meddle with the affairs tranſacted
there. How!” ld Henry; concealing his con-

 ſeioutnels

7
4
— 4
E
1
55
2
oz
Ke
7 .
9
'F
#2
>" 1 *
* 5
9
e
bs
+
*
*
£

e

1596. O0 F E L T. 11

ſeioufneſs of this reproach, © then Beringhen has

© not given you your commiſſion, and a letter
« from Villeroi, which he has had thele fifteen

% days: you ſee this heavy German would have

forgot them.” While, by the King's orders, I

went to make preparations for my journey, that

] might reach Claye that evening, his Majelty

ſpoke to Beringhen, who conſented to take all
the blame upon himſelf, During this interval, a
thought came into my head, which I eommuni-

cated to the King when I returned to receive his

laſt orders. I told him, that I thought it would
be neceſſary for me to go, before the day appoint-
ed for the opening of the ſtates, to ſome of the

principal diſtricts of the kingdom, to procure there

2 more certain account of the preſent ſtare of his
Majeſty's revenues, the diminution they had ſuf-

fered, and the augmentations they would admit

of, to the end that his Majeſty might regulate his
demands upon the ſtates according to this ſeheme,
which, however imperfect, might ſtill, in propor—
tion, throw ſome light upon the ſtrength of the

more diſtant diſtricts, and conſequently upon the
whole kingdom: that, beſides this advantage, I

did not deſpair of procuring for him, in thoſe di-
{iricts only which IL ſhould viſit, the three or four
hundred thouſand crowns which he had demand-

ed in vain of the council. I thought it would be

uſcleſs, and even imprudent, to take upon my-
felt to make this examination, without ſuch an

inſtrument as appeared to me to be the moſt ef-
fectual means to prevent my being deceived, which
was a full power from the King to ſuſpend the

contumacious receivers and overſcers from the ex-
erciſe of their office, or even to diſcard them en-
tirely, and to reward the integrity of thoſe who
were beſt diſpoſed to promote the good. of his Ma-
jelty's ſervice. ES 0 .

* 3. Henry |

fe «
— S — —
—

— 2 IT TI AE

n
4
4
a
<P
#1
V1
j
57
*.
$1
1
**
"5
15
Lb
þ 7
:
1 4
e
Be"
q
SY
«
x
1 *.
5
4
1
"I 4
1
ne
* 59
A's,
þ 8.25
4;
1
4:24
1
is .
1.7
* :
g U
4. 9
- 3.
;
UY
WY
13
Ws
2
; *
B:
.
N
: 31
5
1
7
o
We
E N
1
84
=
N.
* 76
9 *
9
L-48
H
1
3
\F: ,
1 qe
1
Wir
+LY
Kr
142
1
WW
RK A
e
4
1
1
iir
4 _
8 25
4.54
4
"©
8
2
1
1
7 *
1
1
Li © +
$484
ts 4
4.6.3.6
1 0
t ©
to L
* 1
7 J '
n q
+8
7-8;
?
; +4
5 ,
q bo
+
f 4 |
9 +
*
HAS!
55
Iv, 8
5
1 * wr
k
—
4 "2x1
4
"IVY
? 2
14
1
1 1 5
1738
ö i
'T'v 1
jt
1118
48
4. 4
* Bu 4
HAN: fy
MA! +7
n
17 1
k:
4 5 [- ,
14
„
4
hy 1
225 1
+ 4
$ ;
l
N i *.
1 =.
+ 4B
KEE +. y
- !
—
_
;-
=.
ub 44
ny a
3
> $
1
*
* -I

3
788;
1
+
i
—
4 1

114 MEMOIR $ Bock VIII.

—

Henry highly approved of the eſſential part of

this ſcheme, but altered ſomething of the man-
ner in which it was to be propoſed to the coun-
cil. He was of opinion, that I thould take ſuch
meaſures in offering this advice to them, that

thoſe who moſt valued themſelves upon the
ſtrength of their genius, ſuch as Sancy, Schom-
berg, Freſne, and La-Grangeleroi, might ſeize the

hint firſt themſelves, and fo paſs, at leaſt in part, for

the authors of it; and likewiſe that each one in

the company might flatter himſelf, that this com-
miſſion would be given to him, or through his
means, to the intendants and maſters of requeſts,

who were Wholly at his devotion. Nothing could

be more prudent than this medium, which gra-

tified alike the vanity of ſome, and the rapacity

_ of all, Accordingly I took my place in the coun-

cil, where, by a miracle, to be found only in
courts, my colleagues, who inwardly pined with

vexation, ſuffered nothing but joy to appear in

their countenances, words, and behaviour. I was
almoſt deceived myſelf by that profuſion of praiſes
with which the chancellor loaded me, and the
manner in which he told me I had been ex-

pected by them with the utmoſt impatience: ſuch

is the art of courtiers; they ſettle it amongſt them-
ſelves, that however groſsly they play the coun-
rerfeit, they ſhould not appear ridiculous to each
other. |

The treaty with the Duke of Maienne, which

had been agreed upon ſome time before, was con-

claded during the King's ſtay at Monceaux.

When the King was at Amiens, the Duke had
ſent a man to him, named D'Eſtienne, to know

what place would be agreeable to his Majeſty, for

him to come and pay him his reſpects; and the
King appointed Monceaux, in confideration of
the Duke's indiſpoſition, which would not peemlt

| — — ma " him

. 4 e a —
e _—_ O N g K&S"
Men oe PENS EY wr 0 3 e
* N 3 3 ALY . a . af 9
: £5 = e G e ee *," £2 .
he HE. Ko e n 4 - 4 . 3 Nh” n 8 r 3 ES :
. n 5 k FO ils _ * 2 N e ; p N 547 9
- df. N 5 2 7 - n £ » it p J ? : x) 1 I 2

* —
4 8 N
> 9. 2
* . FACS > * RI ASS l a
— >" „ WOE £ PRE IR ID: NETS: fr
PRE . 2 CITY = DET * 2 SENT 2 * . Os ey 5 © pn. 6 6 8) : 7 * N 338 *
ow 8 23 * p 4 * © 7's £7 re % : "2-38 22 r "RH * 2 ? - A 8 1 . .
2 2 7 28. + ? 4X L v7 . . » Z . i |
— 2 1 R . oor ge) A * , : . g ; ; p 1 p n 22 7 .

in OT SULLY. ug

him to make longer journies than from Amiens

to Soifſons, where he reſided, The King was
walking in his park, attended only by me, and

holding my hand, when the Duke of Maienne
arrived, who put one knee to the ground, with
the loweſt ſubmiſſions, and added to a promiſe
of inviolable fidelity his acknowledgments to his
Majeſty for having forced him, he laid, from the
arrogance of the Spaniards, and the artifice of
the Italians. Henry, who, as ſoon as he faw him
approach, had advanced to meet him, embraced

him thrice, and, forcing him to riſe, embraced
him again with that goodneſs which he never

with-held from a ſubject that returned to his du»
ty; then taking his hand, he made him walk
with him in his park, converſing with him fami-
liarly upon the embelliſhments he deſigned to

make in it. The King walked fo faſt, that the
Duke of Matenne, equally fatigued by his ſcia-

tica, his fat, and the extreme heat of the weather,
ſuffered great torments without daring to com-
plain, The king perceiving it, by the Duke be-
ing red, and in a ſweat, whiſpered to me, If I
« walk longer, ſaid he, with this corpulent bo-
« dy, 1 ſhall revenge myſelf upon him, without
% any great difficulty, for all the miſchiefs he has
done us.” Then turning to the Duke of
Matenne, © Tell me truly, couſin,” purſued he,
* do I not walk a little too faſt for you ?” The
Duke replied, that he was almoſt ſtifled ;z and that,
if his Majeſty walked but a very little while longer,

he would kill him without deſigning it. - © Hold
_ there, couſin,” replied the King with a ſmile,
_ embracing him again, and lightly taping his ſhoul-

der, © for this is all the vengeance you will ever
receive from me.” The Duke of Matenne, ſens
ſibly affected with this frank behaviour, attempted
to kneel and kiſs the hand his Majeſty gave him J

„ and

116 MEMOIR Ss Bock VIII.

and proteſted that he would henceforwards ſerve
him even againſt his own children. “ I believe it,”
ſaid Henry; “and that you may love and ſerve
„ mea long time, go to the caſtle and reſt and
e refreſh yourſelf, for you have much need of it,
« I will give you a couple of bottles of Arbois wine,
„% for I know you do not hate it: here is Roſny,
© whom I refign to accompany you; he ſhall do
* the honours of my houſe, and attend you to your
«© chamber; he is one of my oldeſt ſervants, and
„ one of thoſe who is moſt rejoiced at your
„ heartily reſolving to ſerve, and love me aticc-
“ tionately.” The King continuing his walk,
left me with the Duke of Matenne, whom I con-

duced to a ſummer-houſe to repole himicif, and

afterwards attended him on horſehack to the

caſtle, as much ſatisfied with the King and me as

we were both with him.

The King thought doncrxics ſy agreeable 2
place, that he ſtaid there longer than he had «
firſt intended: he ſent for the Conſtable and Vil-
leroi from Amiens, and ordered the council of
the finances to reſide at Meaux, for the conveni-

ency of receiving bis commands. I had not vet

propoſed in it my fcheme cf viſiting the diſtricts.
His Majeſty, more and more convinced, that it muſt
have good conſequences, took upon bimſelf the
talk of propoſing it. At the firſt hint he gave of

it, the connicllors, who thought none but them-

ſelves could be deſigned for this employment, and
each of whom was attentive to his own particu-
lar intereſt, without prejudicing that of the ſocie—

ty in general, approved of the deſign; but were

greatly ſurpriſed, when they found that, amongſt
them all, the King only named La Grangeleroi
for this purpoſe, and appointed him two diſtricts:

his Majeſty filled up the other commiſſions with |

the names of Meſſicurs De Caumartin and BizuuZze,.

tor

OS b rr n

for two diſtricts each; and with Sofs af be

now to repent that they had not hindered the ex-
ccution of a plan, which would produce a full
proof of their injuſtice: they united their utmoſt
- endeavours to render it uſeleſs, or at lcaſt to tra-
yerſe it as much as poſſible. Their malice waz
all directed againſt me; for by the confidence the
> King placed in me, and the part I had acted in
—— this affair, they gueſſed the truth. The character
of ignorance, raſnneſs, obſtinacy, and ſome other
faults ſtill more glaring, was plentifully beſtowed
v pon me, and I had no ſooner begun to exerciſe
the duties of my employment, than I perceived that
their foreſight had ſuggeſted all the neceſſary mea-
ſures to be taken with the treaſurers of France,
the receivers general and particular, comptrollers,
clerks, and the lowelt officers in the revenue.
All that crew, moſt of whom had either fold, or
blindly devoted themſelves to their wills, were
ready to do whatever was required of them; ſome
abſented themſelves, and left their offices ſhut up;
others prefented me with a ſtate of their accounts,
drawn up with all that art which may be expect-
ed from men who make a ſcience of roguery :
others contented themſelves with ſhewing me the
orders of Meſlieors De Freſne, D'Incarville, and Des
Barreaux, by which they were forbid to communi-
cate their regiſters and accounts to any perſon
Whatever, 8
This exceſs of malice J at firſt treated only with _
gentleneſs and patience. I exhorred, I endeavoured.
to perſuade, upon principles of honour and ju-
Rice, perſons who were alike ſtrangers to both,
i next cauſed a report to be ſpread, that the de-
ln of aſſembling the ſtates of the kingdom was
| | | 1

1. ther two maſters of requeſts, for one diſtrict each:
flour of the chief and moſt extenſive were aſſign-
cd to me. The gentlemen of the council began

118 M E M O IR S Bock VIII.

to ſuppreſs that prodigious number of offices and

clerkſhips, eſpecially thoſe of the treaſury, of all

ſocieties the leaſt uſeful, though the moſt difficult
to manage; and that none were to be continued in

their places but thoſe who made themſelves wor -

thy of that diſtinction, by a ſincerity which, on
this occafion, would prove their regard to the pu-
blic good. This threat producing no effect upon
perſons who were ſecretly ſupported by the coun-

cil itſelf, I was obliged to make uſe of the power

I had received. I diſmiſſed moſt of thoſe dan-
gerous officers, cauſing the duties of their employ-

ment to be exerciſed by two out of each body, whom
I choſe amongſt all thoſe that appeared to have

the beſt principles. By theſe means I made myſelf
malter of all the regiſters and accounts, which

ſerved me for a clue to enter that labyrinth of rob- i £

beries and exactions.
What a ſcene had I there before me ! It weld

be vain to attempt an account of the tricks and

ſubtilties of this miſchievous trade, or an enu-
meration of concealments, forgeries, miſrepre-
ſentations, and productions of the ſame eviden-
ces, to ſerve different purpoſes; not to mention

the contrivance of an artificial contuſion, through

which thoſe wretches ſee with great clearneſs,
though, to every other eye, all is darkneſs and
inextricable perplexity. I content myſelf with re-
marking that, by the debtor-ſide of two old ac-
counts, which I cauſed to be rectified, by the dit-

charges and bills of exchange of the current and
three preceeding years, which I brought together
and examined, ] eaſily collected more than five hun-

dred thouſand crowns, which was Joſt to the King.

It may bejudged what a ſum would have been raiſed,

if, from all thoſe who were thus employed, a rigo-

rous reſtitution had been demanded of all that they
fraudulently gained! in ſo long a courſe of diſhoneſſiy,

out

= A
3
LE

we.
LY

8 ö
. f
7 «

22 x *
e * * * '; N 5 a 2
eee, e ee OR OTIea as dag; ; 3
Py 4 N 8 * 5 2 2. 7
. q 5 C Br TN AL Ls AO
5 Tr a 8 "= S Noi 3
N 3 N | 1 bs ER
NN en ee 5 2 "KIND Wt r 55 os. DD 3 ly
Wo, 5 2 . . on b *

- AM N © Aa an. Aa. a * IN _ a

r

—

1 py 4 GU © n
OE, 9 o 2
ME — — 1 N

_ ,
: I&- n 2 8 2 F 1 N 19 * 2
W Fa, £44 3 e SEA Sg
Vo EO ped ON I EO Co EBIT 4 -
; : 2 7 II ING 7 x 8 5 —
. ee e 2 e y 2 y

vr IN et HE

0D -F V6 Bs wth
out of the different ſums that had paſſed through |
their hands, ſince only from aſſignments for old
debts, re-imburſements of loans, arrears of long
ſtanding, and orders payable to the bearer, ſo
much money was recovered.
My partners were not ſo forinats, or ſo exact

as I; all, except Caumartin, who brought the King
two hundred thouſand livres, paid his Majeſty on-

ly in long memorials of improvements to be made
in the farming his revenues; though the King had

choſen thoſe perſons with the greateſt care. But

it is not ſurpriſing that they ſhould act in this man-

ner; for to dare the hatred of a ſociety ſo powerful
as that of the financiers in France, to be proof a-
gainſt the preſents and allurements, againſt the
tricks and artifices of all their dependents, the
greateſt part of whom do not want underſtanding,

and make uſe of it only to dazzle, corrupt and de-

ceive, requires a degree of courage and fortitude of
which few perſons are maſters.

Mean time the gentlemen of the council, who
had intelligence of all my proceedings in the pro-
vinces, were in a ſituation that may be eaſily ima-
gined. Unleſs they found means to render all

my endeavours uſeleſs, or to ruin myſelf before
my return, their reputation and intereſt were both

at ſtake, My abſence afforded them all the con-
veniency they could with for the proſecution of

this deſign ; every thing that malice could ſuggeſt

was ſaid and done, by them and their emiſſaries,
to prejudice the King againſt me: they never
mentioned me but as a tyrant, who drained the

ö the people of all their ſubſtance, by the moſt cruel.

extortions, without procuring any advantage to
the King; ſince the ſums with which I took ſuch.
pains to fill his treaſury, being deſigned for the pay-
ment of penſions to the princes of the blood, and
falaries of the great officers of the crown, they
would be only placed in his coffers to be taken

3

*

NT OI ——— —— — ”

1

n
r

rr k

120 M E M OI R Ss Bock VIII.

out again immediately. Notwithſtanding the in-
vectives and impoſtures of this terrible cabal, none
of whoſe practices againſt me I was uNacquainted

with, I perſiſted to finiſh my work with all ima—

ginable diligence, and to take the moſt prudent
precautions, that I might one day be able to ſtop

the mouths of my accuſers.
Henry, who had at firſt given no credit to their
reports, beginning afterwards to apprehend bad

_ conſequences from my inexperience in thoſe af-
fairs, deſired me, in his letters, to return as ſoon
as poſlible : but, at length, when my enemies had
made their party ſo ſtrong, that there was a ge—
neral outcry againſt me at court, the King was pre-
vailed upon to believe, that I ſhould uſe the power
J was poſſeſſed of with a ſeverity that would make

even himſelf odious to the people ; and then, in-
ſtead of a deſire, I received an abſolute order to

return to Paris. I obeyed without heſitation,

though greatly concerned to be thus ſtopped in the

midſt of my inquiries. I cauſed the accounts of

my four diſtricts to be immediately drawn up,

pete ſigned by eight receivers-general ; and not
- having time to covert the fifteen hundred thou- |
ſand crowns I had raiſed into a leſs bulky coin, 1

loaded ſeventy carts with them, making the eight
receivers-general accompany them, under the
guard of an officer and thirty private men of the
marechauſſee, or patroling horſe-guard, who con-

ducted them to Rouen, where the King then was,
at the opening of the ſlates.

Of all the anders which had been invented
by the gentlemen of the council, to procure my
diſgrace, none ſeemed to them 1 ſpecious as to

perſuade the King, that I had filled the priſons
with the officers and clerks of his finances; to
which they thougiit fir to add, that, through an

infolent Vage Weed in my retinue fifty of the
Principal

3

* G 1 9 oh 8 ay 2 1 * 8 wy
L e ae. aim
ENT NED " © 0

£ *
75 CS NN 5

PPP

r
4 |
1 FN
* *
9 9
1 ry
wil
voy
=
1
LES
3 :

r DOES :
r 1 7 « k
2 war 22 „ 4

principal ones bound in chains. The King, who :
ſuſpected no falſehood in ſo poſitive a charge, re- Fl
ceived me, when on my arrival at Rouen I went 1
to pay him my reſpects, with an air that convin- [:
A ced me my enemies had been very active in their

endeavours to hurt me, He did me the honour,
indeed, to embrace me, but with a coldneſs and re-
ſerve altogether unuſual with him. He aſked me why
I had given myſelf the uſeleſs trouble of bringing
money along with me, which I knew belonged to
- perſons whom he had no mind to diſoblige; and
de was not a little ſurpriſed to hear, that not one
_ denier of it was due to the princes of the blood,
nor to any of the penſionaries of the ſtate, Who
were all paid the April quarter, and would be
likewiſe as exactly paid thoſe of July and Octo—
ber, ſince I had not taken up any of the payments
before- hand, The King, after obliging me to re-
eat theſe words ſeveral times, and even to ſwear
io the truth of them, broke inte an exclamation
FE -gainſt thoſe wicked detractors, and impudent im-
poſtors, as he called them; * but,” added he,
« what do you intend to do with the receivers.
„ and officers whom you keep priſoners in your

e 1
: In] CEE II
be e

| 6% train?” The aſtoniſhment into which this
i queſtion threw me, was of iiſelf ſufficient to con-
F vince the King of the falſehood of this accuſa-
| tion; nor was it difficult for me to perceive that
: moment that the malice of the gentlemen of the
, council would recoil upon themſelves ; and that
1 it would diſcloſe more effectually the ſecret mo-
tives of their conduct than any thing I could ſay.
y His Majeſty required no other explanation; on
oy the contrary, he loaded me with praiſes and Ces
1 monſtrations of kindneſs.
50 Having been told, that the ſum I had raiſed
1 muſt be very inconſiderable, upon his aſking me

al | what it * 1 replied, that being unwilling to

—— _— Fe

122 M E M OI R Ss Bock VIII. 755

keep any part of it in my own hands, either for my
charges, expences, or penſion, the receivers-ge-
neral would find the full ſum ſpecified in the ac-

counts, and learn from thence never to keep back

any part of his revenues, and his Majeſty might
himſelf deduct my expences from the fifteen hun-
dred thouſand crowns which I had brought him.

A ſum fo conſiderable gave great pleaſure to the

King, who was in extreme want of money: he
told me, that he would take care my expences
ſhould be all paid ; and that, beſides my penſion

of ten thouſand livres a month, which he raiſed

to eighteen, he would preſent me with the ſum

of {ix thouſand crowns, as a reward for the ſer—

vice I had juſt done him. He commanded me

to ſay nothing of what had paſſed between him

and me, and ſent me to lay apart from the mo-
_ ney II had brought him what was neceſſary for tge

payment of the {ix companies of Swiſs, at the rate of
eighteen hundred crowns a company, and to give it

them the next day, as that was a preſſing demand,

1 returned to my carriages, which ſtood in two
courts belonging to the Sieur De Martinbault,

under the fame guard that had conducted them

to Rouen. I ordered them to be unloaded, and

the barrels that contained the caſh to be placed
in apartments, the locks of which were changed,

and ſecured by large padlocks, with three keys
to each; the two receivers had one a-piece and

myſelf the third. The next morning 1 ſent the
Swiſs officers the ren thouſand crowns that were
due to them by three clerks, eſcorted by ten

ſoldiers of the guard.
A ſhort time after I had font away this eſcort,

Zancy who was generally charged with this em.

ployment, ſent me a billet, in which he defired

me © to deliver to the Sieur Le Charran, the

** bearer, nincty thouſand: crowns for the pay-
; «ment.

40

10% 9 38 UL L YL... 129

« ment of the Swiſs,” Theſe were the terms
in which the billet was conceived ; for this coun-
ſellor would have thought it a degradation of his
high rank to have condeſcended to any polite-
neſs or explanation with his colleagues. I was
equally offended at the ſtiff air of his letter, and
the impudence with which he demanded a ſum
that I knew to be three times more than was due
therefore I anſwered the bearer bluntly, that l
neither knew Sancy, his writing, nor his orders.
« How! do you not know Sancy !” faid Charron,
ſurprized, no doubt, at my preſumption, for at
this name the whole council trembled, the rank
Sancy held in it approaching very near to that

of ſuperintendant. Perceiving that I had no in-
tention to ſend any other anſwer, he went back
to report it with all the timidity of a ſervant who

is apprehenſive of awakening the bad humours of
his maſter. Unfortunately for Sancy, he repeat-

ed my meſſage before ſeveral perſons who were
witneſſes likewiſe of his tranſports, © We ſhall

ſoon ſee,” ſaid he, ſwearing, * whether he knows
* me or not.” Then, after loading me with what
invectives he thought fit, he went directly to
Saint-Ouen to the King. Well, Sancy,” ſaid
his Majeity to him, “ have you been to pay our
*«.Swils?” “ No, Sire,” replied Sancy, with a
ſullen air, © I cannot go, for it does not pleaſe

your Monſieur de Roſny that I ſhould, who

„plays the emperor in his apartment, ſet upon
&

his barrels of caſh, like an ape upon a block,
and ſays he knows no one; and I am not ſure

Whether you will have more credit with him

than any one elſe,” © What is the meaning

of all this?” replied the King, “ ſee how ir

is, you will never be weary of doing this man
bad offices, becauſe I confide in him, and he

ſerves me diligently.” His Majeſty added, that

| L 2 . he

&
ic

124 M E M OI R Ss Bock VIII.
he had more difficulty to believe my reſuſal as
he agreed with himſelf to give this money to the

Swiſs, Sancy ſupported his aſſertion by the teſti-

mony of Le-Charron, whom he had brought
along with him. The King, ſuſpecting ſome
new inſtance of malignity, ordered Biart, one
of his grooms of the bedchamber, to go and
Fetch me.

As ſoon as he fe me, he aſked me what had
happened between Sancy and me. * | am going
< to tell you, Sire,” replied 1 boldly : and accord-
ingly, without fearing the reſentment of the terri-
ble Sancy, I related all that had paſſed, in a way
that might have mortified his vanity, Sancy,
who was not of a temper to yield, became more

inſolent than before, and aſſuming an imperious

tone, an altercation 10 ſpirited enſued between us,

although in the King's preſence, that his NMajeſy
Was obliged to command us to be ſilent. That

inſtant, ceaſing to ſpeak to my adverſary, I turn-
ed towards the King, and intreated him to give

me no ſuperior in affairs wherein I ated folely

by his order. The gallery at Saint-Ouen, where
this ſcene paſſed, was crouded with a great num-
ber of perſons, who generally being weary of
Sancy's inſolence, rejoiced to ſee him ſuffer this

little mortification. It would bave been very

& difficult,“ ſaid ſome, as I was afterwards in-
formed, « for two ſach geniuſes to have exerci-
«ied the ſame employment, without one of them
„„ being ſupplanted by the other; but in the

% humour the King is in at preſent, the beſt e-
& conomiſt will be his choice,” Others beheld

my increaſe of favour with envy; and others,
who probably had very little regard for either of
us, laughed at the novelty of the ſight, and cried,
„% There is one hot headed man, who has met
< with another that will not eaſily yield to him.”
The

rr
The report of the great ſums with which I had

filled the King's coffers was no ſooner ſpread,

than I was overwhelmed with the demands of an
infinite number of his creditors, moſt of whom

were ſent by the gentlemen of the council ; who

through impatience to ſee it diſſipated ſoon, a-
greed with the creditors to have the uſual draw-

backs upon their debts. My principal view in

raiſing this money being to make a fund for thoſe

military expeditions which the King was ſhortly

to begin, without his being obliged to load the

people with new taxes, I was reſolved not to ſuf-
fer it to be ſquandered away; and therefore reſiſt-
ed all their iraportunities, and continued unmoved

by their inſolence and threats. But reflecting af-
terwards, that there was an abſolute neceſſity for
ſending home the eight receivers-general, who a-

lone were acquainted with the uſes to which I put
this money, | was afraid of giving too much ad-
vantage to calumny 2 keeping ſo large a ſum in
my poſſeſſion after their

to fend it to the royal treaſury, The King, who

departure; and I reſolved

thought his money was no where ſecure but in my
hands, endeavoured ſeveral times to vanquiſh my
ſeruples; but in vain: I was determined to pre-
ent the leaſt ſuſpicion upon this occaſion, and
therefore cohfided it to the care of the two trea-
ſurers, Morfontaine and Gobelin. I removed his
Majeſty's fears by promiſing him that I would
obſerve ſo carefully how this money was laid out,
that he ſhould not ſuffer the leaſt loſs. I ſepa-

_ rated, in the preſence of the receivers, thoſe

ſums that were neceſſary for the payment of the
army, the expence of a train of artillery of twen-

ty pieces of cannon, with double equipages, a

ſufficient quantity of powder, beſides a convoy of
other implements neceflary for a ſiege, ſuch as

N pick-axes, &c. which I cauſed to be carried to A-

L 3 micens.

126 M E M OI R Ss Bock VIII.

miens. I likewiſe laid aſide bly thouſand crowns
more for the King's s privy purſe, out of which he
generally beſtowed preſents, unknown to the Ca-
tholics, on many old officers and Proteſtant ſol-
diers who had ſerved him faithfully in his wars,
The remainder, ich I calculated with the great.
_ eſt exactneſs, amounted ſtill to four hundred and
fifty thouſand crowns, and I carefully preſerved
both my former accounts, and thote relating to
the ſams that were taken from the total. But be
ing deſirous of having a ſecond proof of what the
gentlemen of the council and their receivers-gene-
ral weile capable of, I affected great neglipence
concerning the diſpoſal of the money; and when
the receivers came to me, before they ſet out for
_ their offices, to demand a copy of my accounts,

"5 replied, that having no longer any concern about
a ſim that was now under the care of other per-

ons, and they having been witneſſes themſelves
ol the uſes to which the money had been applied,
I had deſtroyed thoſe papers, as having now no
further occaſion for them. Of this the receivers
did not ſail to inform their maſters.

A month was paſſed ſince the money was car-
ried to the treaſury, during which time they made
ſome payments out of it, of which I likewiſe pre-
tended to keep no account: but here it was not
poſſible to commit a miſtake; for no ſums being
paid without a warrant from the council, all that
was neceſſiry was, to keep an exact memorandum

of it, which I did. Theſe warrants in a ſhort

time amounted to fifty thouſand crowns, and

conſequently there was ſtill four hundred thouſand

In the treaſury. The King, however, ſome days

after, demanding two hundred thouland crowns
to be ſent to Amiens; where the deſigned prepa -

rations were already made, particularly for the ta-

King of Hedin, Sancy and the reſt replied, that

they believed wt {um Was Bil in the treaſu-
1

77 FP re”

ry, and that was all; and ſending for D'Incar-

ville, who was likely to know beſt, having the
care of the regiſters, he aſſured the King that there
was hardly two hundred thouſand crowns in his

coffers. His Majeſty, to whom I had ſaid three
days before that there was ſtill four hundred thou»
ſand crowns remaining, was extremely ſurpriſed ;
but their aſſertions were ſo poſitive that they for-

ced his belief; and he told me that I muſt certain-
ly be miſtaken. I was ſo ſure of the contrary,

that i mentioned before D'jncarville himſelf, and

all my colleagues, whom his Majeſty had ſent for,

that there was a miſtake of one half of the money.
D' Incarville replied, that his regiſters were more

certain than my memory; and offered to bring,

the next day, an extract of all his payments, I
perccived from whence fo great a ſecurity proceed-
ed, and I was reſolved to ſuffer them, till the laſt
moment, to flatter themſelves that they were go-
ing to gain a complete victory over me. I had

courage enough to conceal, even from the King, the

ſtratagem I had made uſe of, and to endure, with-
out reply, his reproaches, for letting this ſum go

out of my hands, contrary to his order,

The accounts were brought the next day, well

atteſted, and no miſtake was found in the dit-

burſcments': that would have been too palpable :
the whole miſtake lay in the receipts, which was
tounded upon their full perſuaſion that I had really
deſtroyed the papers which proved the quantity
and quality of the coin carried at different times
to the royal treaſury.. I ſecretly reflected with
aſtoniſhment on the ſubtilty with which they had
ated with regard to theſe receipts, fo as to in-
volve them in an obſcurity impenetrable to any
one who was not poſſeſſed of a full proof of their

falſhood, and with what art they had given to this

obſcuxity an air of truth, and even of conviction.
b

J aſked to ſee the receipts, with a feigned ill-hu-

mour, Which ſeemed to theſe gentlemen a con-
feſſion of my defeat. The council offered to
make the receivers-general depoſe upon oath the

numbers and contents of the carriages which had

been ſent to the royal treaſury, I replied, that
the diſcuſſion would be too tedious, D'Incarville,
who took great advantages of my diſſembled per-
plexity, told me, that I might go and examine

the regiſters of the finances upon the ſpot, ſince

they could not be moved out of the offices. Al-

though I eaſily comprehended that theſe regiſters,
public and authoriſed as they were, might {till be

counterfeited like the reſt, yet I could not ima-

gine the manner in which it was done, the receipt
for each of the carriages being ſigned by D'Arnaud
and De L'Hote, whoſe band. Writing I knew: 1

had therefore a curioſity to ſee theſe regiſters : all

appeared very exact, and in the uſval forms,

The gentlemen of the council began then to in-
ſult over me, and they made a very bad uſe of.

their ſuppoſed advantages.
I now thought it time to ſilence them, and to
cover them in their turn with a real confuſion.

Accordingly, I produced the notes and accounts,

ſigned by the eight receivers- general; and like-

wiſe an exact memorandum of all the warrants of
payment. That inſtant all their arrogance va-

niſhed, and they would have been reduced to the
neceſſity of confeſſing their roguery, had they not

bethought themſelves of a contrivance to avoid

it; but ſo groſs a one, as ſtill left them, in my
opinion, all the diſgrace. A clerk, inſtructed by
D'Incarville, came to the King, and told him,
that L'Hote, who kept the key of the hall where

the regiſter lay, being abſent one day when one

of the moſt conſiderable of the carriages Wa

5 bog to the treaſury, and the receivers 3
conducted

7 9 7

WI. Jo. VS Ww

—

206-0: ee ee . 129

conducted it being in haſte to return, he thought
it would be ſufficient to mark the ſum contained

in the carriage, upon a looſe ſheet of paper, in-
tending to pet it afterwards reviſed, and ſigned

by D'Incarville, and inſerted in the regiſters ; but
that he himſelf afterwards going to Heudicourt,
it had ſlipt out of his memory; for which he
intreated his Majeſty's pardon. The King con-

tented himſelf with lightly reprimanding him for
his neglect, ordering more care to be taken of

the regiſters for the future. Then going towards
the Conſtable (who was at the end of the gallery

where all this had paſſed, and who in the whole

affair had appeared more favourable to the gentle-

men of the council than to me) he cried out to

him at a diſtance, in the preſence of ſeveral per-

ſons, that his money was found, and that he

would make it known for once whom he was to

entruſt,

Amidſt theſe contentions came the day appoint»

ed for the meeting of the ſtates of the kingdom,

or rather of the aſſembly of notables ; for fo they

were called. The reaſon of adopting this name“,
inſtead

* Perefixe ſays, that it is becauſe the King had. not time to aſ-

ſemble the ſtates together : © The kings,” ſays D*Aubigne, with his
uſual malevolence “have recourſe to ſuch ſorts of aſſemblies, when
« thoſe of the ſtates- general are tedious, difficult, or ſuſpected by

„them. The deſign of aſſembling theſe little ſtates being to find

money to carry on the war againſt Spain, there were ſeveral
ſehemes propoſed and agreed to; the pancarte, or old rate, was
the chief, which was but very ill received in many places of the

| © kingdom,” Cc. Tom. 3. I. 4. c. 14. De Thou ſays very little

of it, I. cxvit. and Davila no more. All that is ſaid in theſe Me-
moirs about this afſembly is found, fo far as I know, no where

eſe: and in order to render it ihe more intelligible, I have taken

the liberty which I have deſired in the preface to this work, and

that was, to compare with each other all the thoughts that the com-

pilers of M. de Sully's manuſcripts have made uſe of in their me;

moirs, without any order of connexion. As we may well ſuppoſe.

that they were all mutually connected, and had each their proper
object in the mind of this great ſtateſman, it entirely coincides with
| | his

weep res
— <

22 — —
J n e r /

2 — I r 33
CLI = af, auger ona i It TO TM

X 7
.....

130 M E M O I R 8s Book VIII.
| inſtead of that of the ſtates of the kingdom, which

ſhould naturally have been uſed, aroſe wholly

from the lawyers and financiers, who perceiving,
that at this time they had riches and influence to
give them ſuch a ſuperiority to the other claſſes,
as they were unwilling any but the clerpy ſhould
| ſhare with them, diſdained to ſee themſelves le-
velled with the people by one common denomi-

nation; which yet muſt have been the caſe, if

the forms uſed in thele aſſemblies, and particular-
ly the diſtinction of the three orders, had been
preſerved. They, indeed, made their appearance
with magnificence and ſplendor, which ſunk the
nobility, the ſoldiers, and other members of the
ſtate, below conſideration, ſince they were not
able to dazle the eyes with ſplendid equipages, the

glitter of gold, nor a long train of attendants ;

things which will always draw the envy, the re-
verence, and the worſhip, of the vulgar ; or,

more properly, will be a laſting proof of our fol-
ly and depravity,

Such, in general, is the notion that ought to be

formed of great and auguſt aſſemblies. Thoſe men
of whom one imagine?, that they muſt come thither
with minds full of wiſdom and public ſpirit, warm
With all the zeal that animated the ancient le-
giſlators, commonly think on no other buſinets
than how to make a ridiculous diſplay of their

pomp, and ſhew their effeminacy to moſt advan—

tage. The diſunion of the bodies which com-
poſe theſe aſſemblies, the diſſentions, oppoſitions
of intcreſt, deſire to over-reach each other, in-
trigues, and confuſion, which compoſe the true
notion of them, have their original from the

his views, to 3 them to the ſubjects to which they naturally be-

long. And all chat can be deſired is, I think, never to alter the

ſubſtance of the ORNATE | in my Sen to which. 1 have princi-
pl'y applicd wylctt,

ſame

7 3 CAA es. 88 — z

1% QF LV LL Y nt

fame hateful cauſe, as well as the meanneſs there

diſcovered in the proſtitution of eloquence. By

what fatality does it then happen, that what im-

provements one age makes in knowledge above
preceeding times, are never applied to the ad-
vancement of virtue, but RY to the reline-
ment of vice ? |

By all this there is no intention to inſinvate,
that in theſe aſſemblies there may not be found a
ſmall number of men of great abilities and great
virtues, men whoſe qualities no body diſputes z
but, inſtead of being forced into public notice,

they are treated with an affectation of negligence
and contempt, which ſink them into ſilence, and

with them ſuppreſs the voice of the public good.
Thus long experience has ſhewn, that an aſſembly
of theſe ſtates rarely produces the good that

might be expected; for, in order to anſwer ſuch

expectations, the members ought to be equally
inſtructed in true and honeſt policy; Rat leaſt,
ignorance and knavery ſhould be ſilent in the pre-
ſence of the few of knowledge and integrity:
but ſuch is always the character of multitudes,
that for one wife man, there are many fools, and
preſumption is the firſt attribute of folly ; it is
here more than any where, that great virtues,
inſtead of exciting reſpect and emulation, pro-
yoke hatred and envy.

Beſides, if the prince that holds theſe aſſemblies

| is powerful, and fond of power, he will eaſily

defeat their ſchemes, or cruſh them into ſilence ;
but, if he is weak, and unacquainted with his
own rights, an unbounded licentiouſneſs of de-
bate will ſoon ſink the kingdom into all the miſe-
ries tnat naturally follow the depreſſion of the
royal authority, Neceſſity therefore requires, that
there ſhould be, both in the ſovereign and the
ſubjects, a complete knowledge of their ſeveral

rights,

132 M E M OI R S Book VII.

rights, and mutual obligations. The firſt law of
a ſovereign is, that he ſhould keep the law ; for

he has himſelf two ſovereigns, God and the law:

Juſtice ought to preſide on his throne, and gentle-
neſs to ſupport it. God is the true owner of
kingdoms, and monarchs are but the miniſters,

who ought to exhibit to the people a true copy of
the perfections of him in whole place they ſtand;

and remember, that they do not govern like bi: a
but when they exerciſe their power like fathers.
In hereditary monarchies, there is an herditary
miſtake : the ſovereign is maſter of the life and
property of his ſobjects, and by means of the
- words, Such is our pleaſure, is diſpenſed fron;
giving the reaſons of his conduct, and from ha-
ving any reaſons to give. Suppoſing this were
really the right of a king, is it not the utmoſt

degree of imprudence, to incur voluntarily the

hatred of thoſe who muſt every moment have his
life in their hands? And hated he muſt certain—
ly be, who forces a conceſſion of power, my a

previous declared intention to abuſe it.

With regard to ſubjects, the firlt law which re-

ligion, realon, and nature preſcribe them, is obe-

dience; their duty is, to reverence, honour, and
fear their princes, as repreſentatives of the ſu—

preme Governor, who may be ſaid to appear vi-
fibly on earth by theſe his miniſters, as he appears
in heaven by the orbs of light. 'Theſe duties they
are to pay from a principle of gratitude, for the ſe-
curity and advantages they el:joy under the pro-
tection of the royal authority: for the calamity

of having an unjuſt, ambitious, and arbitrary
king, they have no other remedy but that of fot-

tening bim by ſubmiſſion, and propitiating God

by prayer. All grounds of reſiſtance, however

folid they may be thought, will appear, upon 4
careful” minen, to be nothing more mo
artfa

PPY

„ 8 ULEV 113

artful and ſubtle pleas for diſloyalty; nor has it

been found, thar by oppoſition princes have

been reformed, or taxes aboliſhed ; but to the

calamities which gave room for complaints, has
bcen added a new degree of miſery, as may be
found by inquiring into the ſentiments of the

lower people, and particularly thoſe of the coun-

try.
Such are the principles upon which the mutual

happineſs of governors and ſubjects might eaſily

be fixed, if in general aſſemblies of the nation,
each party appeared fully convinced of the truth

of theſe maxims : but ſuppoſing this the caſe,
there would ſtill be leſs need of general aſſem-
blies, to which recourſe is never had but when

there is ſome diſagreement between the members

and the head. It may, however, be concluded,
that, as theſe aſſemblies are at preſent uſeleſs, both
on account of the occaſions on which they are

called, and of the methods in which they pro-
ceed, ſo they might be of great efficacy for the
fapport of regularity and general virtue, if the

prince, acting as the real head of united mem-
bers, would call them with no other purpoſe, than

to oblige thoſe who lay down their employments,
to give an account of their adminiſtration, in the

face of the kingdom, and to chuſe with wiſdom _

and diſcernment, thoſe by whom their places are

to be ſupplied; animating them to a due diſcharge

of their offices by his exhortations, and by a pu-

blic diſtribution of praiſe and blame, puniſhments
and rewards *,

Henry, while he waited for the meeting of the
aſſembly, $090k. a Journey to Arques, Dieppe, and

* There cannot, 1 think, any thing be added to the juſtoeſ of
theſe ſentiments. And we necd only remit hither thoſe who, with
Comines, Boulainvilliers, & have taken the ſide of the ſtates, and
the at iſtocratical party. |

VOI. II. A Caudebec,

— —

2 n r — — 2
— . ..

—
3 5
— — * —— — — — — _
I" — S 9 A Eo AC EY — . er
n 2 N r — 44% I IE >: 3 : og ——
Soom drb onthe DET AIESTT; ye ras ogy + Su OI . —— — — — = —
bps . 5 I J — .

2 0 7 SES = re, r — 2 - rr — 7 . . — FRE
e = 7777S „ 5 e
1 3 ne ar, ro n 2 K e **

— po — 3 6 = 2 - a

nnn can En

— rr — PR —
... I ugh Es or : T
1 x
—
- — —— —
2 rr

88 TIED he
F 8 ;
ELIE IE LEE Aa Woe es OR.
> IJ S

'— pn
ED

. — * _ 8
* — ny_ CE TEAS WT ES 2
5 . 2 Fe —— x
4 2 5 . 2 . r

E

*
— —

134 M E M OI R Ss Book VIII.

Caudebec, G. that he might have a ſight of the
places where ſo many memorable actions had been
performed, and I accompanied him to all thoſe
( 1 |

On his Majeſty's return to Rouen, he opened
the aſſembly by a ſpeech, uttered with a dignity
becoming a great prince, and a ſincerity with
which princes are unacquainted : he declared that,
to avoid all appearance of violence or compul-
ion, he had determined not to call an aſſembly of
deputies, named by the King, and blindly obſe-
quious to all his inclinations, but that he admit-

ted at large perſons of all ranks and conditions,

that men of knowledge and merit might have an
opportunity to propoſe, without fear, whatever
they thought neceſſary for the public good; that,
at that time, he would not attempt to confine
them by any limitations, but enjoined them not
to make an ill uſe of this freedom, by any at-
tempt to leſſen the ſovereign authority, which is
the chief ſtrength of the kingdom; and exhorted
them to eſtabliſh-union among their members, to
give caſe to the people, to clear the royal treaſu-
ry from debts, which, though it was liable in
them, it never had contrafted ; to ſhew their ju-
| Nice in reducing exorbitant ſalaries, without leſ-
ſening thoſe that were neceſſary; and to ſettle,
for times to come, a fund clear of incumbrances,
ſufficient for the ſupport of the army, _

Hie added, that it ſhould be no objeQtion to
bim, that the meaſures propoſed were not of his
own contrivance, provided he found them dic-.
tated by juſtice, and public ſpirit: that they ſhould
not find him pleading his age, his experience, or
perſonal qualities, as an exemption from any juſt
regulations, though princes often made excuſes
far Jeſs defenſible : but that he would ſhew, by
his example, that it was no leſs the buſineſs of

8
Ef \
ö
/

"2 (3
*

U .
1

A %

$4,
3
y 8 4
8 x

*
3

"EI.
.

1
3
A

WS

"Ws 458

RF 51
IE.
KY
1
Nr

I
. $I Is

.

.
2
as

vo
i
.
2
3 *
Id
4

*.

*

Wer
*
23S
Y g

. - +

kings to enforce edits, than of ſubjects to obey 5

them “. = WK
Henry roſe after this ſpeech, declaring that
neither he nor his council would be preſent at
their conſultations, that they might be wholly
freed from conſtraint z and accordingly went out

with all his counſellors, leaving only me to lay

before the aſſembly ſuch accounts, memoirs, and
public papers as were neceſſary for their infor-
mation a |

When I gave an account of the laſt aſſembly
of theſe eſtates at Paris, I ſpoke at large of their
methods of proceeding, and the forms uſed in
thofe great and numerous aſſemblies z and (hall

therefore only obſerve, at preſent, that, except-

ing the ſubject of their deliberations, this aſſem-

bly exactly reſembled the former. As they were
now neceſſarily to come to ſome concluſion, par-

ticularly with relation to the ſubſidies, and the
method of raiſing them, they could think of no—
thing better to be done, than to make a collec-
tion of old uſeleſs regulations of a nature con-
trary to the prefent ſtate of affairs. For, inſtead

of conſidering, that the nation ought to be treat-

ed as a body afflicted with ſome new and extra-
ordinary diſtemper, and therefore requiring an

If T were defirous, ſays he, to paſs for an elaborate orator,
% would have introduced here more fine wo.ds than good will;
« but my ambition aims at ſomething higher than to ſpeak well:
© I aſpire to the gloiious titles of the deliverer and reftorer of France.
© I have not called you together, as my predeceſſors have done, to
&« oblige you blindly to approve of my will and pleaſure; I have
% cauled you to be aſſembled, in order to receive your counſels, to
&« depend upon them, and to follow them; in ſhort, to put myſelf
“ into your hands as my guardians: this is a declaration which is
not very common for kings, for grey hairs, or for conquerors,
* like me, to make; but the love which I bear my ſubjects, and
* the extreme fondneſs which I have to preſerve my ſtate, have
made me find every thing eaſy and every thing honourable.”
Peref. part 2. 1 2 8 3

M 2 uncommon

136 MEMOIR S Book VIII.
uncommon remedy, and that in proportion as its

mechaniſm is better known, the operations per-

formed upon it ought to be altered; ſuch is the
force of prejudice, that men continue obſtinately

to endeavour the cure of their preſent diſorders

by means of which the inefficacy is demonſtrated
by their inability to prevent the evils, or toſtop their

_ Progreſs. An injudicious reverence for antiquity,

_ a falſe notion of cauſes, occaſioned by the diſtance

of time; a want of diligent reflection on the

paſt, and of clear views of the future, about which
our ſelf-love hinders us from coming to any a—
greement, all contribute to perpetuate the wrong
meaſures of ancient times. It is a maxim with
ſome, that laws and cuſtoms are not to be chan-

ged; a maxim to which I zealouſly adhere, ex-

cept when the advantage, and what is much
ſtronger, the neceſſity of the public “* requires
their alteration, = a „„

The genius of the French nation, they ſay, is ſuch, that this
alone renders all change, even the moſt uſeful and neceſſary, ex-

| tremely dangerous for us: a ſyſtem, whoſe foundation it ſeems all
the world, at this day, agrees was excellent, and which, notwith-

_ fanding this, has had very troubleſome conſequences, makes us in-

ſiſt more than ever upon this conſideration. The Duke de Sully,
u ho lived at a time in which he did not want for proofs of the de-
fects objected to the nation, would have anſwered to this, that two
things are abſolutely neceſſary in any nation whatever, in order to
ſecure the ſucceſs of ſuch fort of enterpriſes : the firſt is an authority
in the legiflator, ſufficiently great not to be obliged to change, or a-
bate the leaſt title of his plan through fear, policy, or compliance;
the ſecond, is a wiſdom equally great, to prepare all the means for
putting it in execution. Amidſt a great number of real changes
that have been made in the different parts of the government, which
will be ſeen in the ſequel of theſe memoirs, we may obſerve a ſtill
greater number of projects which have not been executed, though

| Banned a great while ago: and what is the reaſon ? Why, becauſe

— Henry the great and his miniſter watched and waited for the proper

conjunctures and circumſtances, &c. which ſhould render them cer-

tain and infallible. I will not ſeruple to ſay, that perfect (kill con ·
ſiſts not in imagining, but in knowing, the hazards that proceed

from too great precipitation, and too great ſlowneſs, to be aware of
the proper opportunity; and in ſhort, to know how to conduct and

how to prepare for it,

7 Accordingly

e 2 . : xv
TEES) 2 11 4 *
8 5 bs > * . : ©, fbi>>W of pot x * 4 0 5 2 — 2
DO 1 Mn ; 64TH . ; . oth + ot” * 2 1
a VR A Cantata Fwy eee 8 „ J
4 * ' bir, TT. . e 432 —
by ds > Cr ba D n
ZT ER Re Sn IR
3 J SPE SOIT « * ? ”
FCC e 842 7 4

7

. 4
74
Bet
.
>,
wy
LH
7
**
*
.
2 7
5
85
SF
1
3

with raking old regulations and ſtatutes out of the
duſt, and went on ſtill enlarging the collection,

which they found already to be of no value, till
an impoſſibility came full in their view, and de-

ſtroyed their projet; for it appeared that theſe
old conſtitutions were adapted to a form of go-

vernment in which royalty, though decorated

with a ſpecious title, was a ſtate of ſervitude; and
could therefore not be applied to a time when the

the public intereſt had concentered in a ſingle per-

ſon the authority which was formerly diſtributed

amongſt great numbers, and eſtabliſhed monarchy
as the ſureſt foundation of general ſecurity.

This fancy was followed by another, which

held them for a time by ſome ſpecious appearan-
ces, though, in effect, it was no leſs inconveni-
ent than the former. This was the eſtabliſh-

ment of a new council, which they thought it
proper to denominate the council of reaſun, whoſe

members ſhould be firſt named by the aſſembly,

and afterwards by the ſovereign courts. But there

was already a council of this kind, and that very

council had been apparently the cauſe of the dif:
orders in the finances, and the abject poverty of
of the nation. This ſignified nothing; the whole

multitude ſuffered themſelves to be ſo dazzled

by a fine name, and a new choice, that it was
propoſed, and agreed to make the fame evil its

own remedy, It was determined that the new
council ſhould divide the King's revenue into two

parts, which they eſtimated, without much exa-
mination, at thirty millions*; thar they ſhould

The author has reaſon to ſay that this computation is not ex»
at, ſince, notwithſtanding the augmentation of the King's revenues,

and the clearing of his debts that happened under his maiſtty, and
which may be ſeen in the ſequel of thcſe memoirs to amount to a
very conſiderable ſum, Cardinal Richelieu did not value the whole
revenues of the ſtate, atter all the alterations which he himſelt had

made, at more than thirty five millions, Telt, Pol. part 2. p. 152.

M 3 keep

bo

ys OF CV ELF in,
Accordingly they beſtowed their time and pains

8 3
2323

*
+
2
14
"150
Wt.
> 4
_ 1
1
TEU
AI.
+ A
* A *
1
1
"K's
*
( }
ye
112
19
1
*
LY
*
*
2
4 *
E
1
”
e,
17 4 x
.
-
*
7 8
.
FI
FI:
k * $1
WT
1
if
q N
"oh
bz!)
.
.
1
„
1
vl 175
3 ry i
*
"1
£2
by
1
4 V3
Ph
457
4 «6:
14
1 Ni
*
o +8 7
1
; 1
1
x
i SE
W.
1
14.
4 ny
.
1
1
=” N
_
i 2
* FF
„ by
94
4 4
1
1
94
Nets
al +
5
1
1 7
122
+ 33%
1
1
9055
r
1
1
1
"238
„
14
.
HEB
1
1
BY
/ „ ;
">
15
14
7 ts
vi TW» a
135
J
1
ib
2 2
TY \
2 -
TY!
2 87
1 J. 4
1 1914
19. 1
* i
4
£48
% 1
3 i

Aarne

— - =

—

— _—_ >.
2 <= n 3
© Ss g
———— i ů
— — ey ane een > —
EIT :

e

* n

138 MEMOIR Ss Book vin.

keep one half in their own hands, for the dif.

charge of arrears, penſions, ſalaries, and other

public debts and engagements; and that out of

the ſame ſum they ſhould repair or erect cities,
buildings, roads, or other public works; and that

of this ſum neither the King nor the ſovereign

court ſhould have power to take cognizance, or

examine the application, It may eaſily be ima-

gined, how the members of the council flattered
their rapacity by a diſpoſal ſo abſolute and unac- -
countable of half the revenues of the ſtate : let us

for a moment ſuppoſe them diſhoneſt in their

management, what numbers muſt be diſtreſſed,

What confuſion and ruin muſt enſue!

The other part was left to the King, to be ma-

naged by him, or his miniſters, with equal ex-
_emption from account. This ſhare was burthen-
ed with all the expences of the artillery and forti-
fications, all foreign affairs, embaſſies, and nego-
tiations, the ſupport of his houſhold, his build-

ings and his equipage, the payment of his offi-

cers, and his privy purſe. Neither party was con-

fined by any prefcriptions, as to the manner of

railing or managing either ſhare of the revenue;
ſo they preſerved that mutual independence on
which the projectors valued themſelves; as if the
ſtrength of the kingdom did not depend upon the
power of aſſiſting, according to their reſpective
need, any of the parts that ſhould happen to be in

diſtreſs, and ſupplying the diſeaſed, if I may uſe

the expreſſion, with the ſuperfluous blood of mol
that are more ſound.” 7

As the thirty millions at which the 70701 re-

venues have been rated, were ſuſpected to be
ſomewhat more than their real value, they reſol-

ved to create a new tax, by laying five per cent.
upon

8 We "TER geen A contin of theſe memoirs which uniformly
| renders

+ I
.

upon all merchandiſes“, and proviſions bought
and ſold in the kingdom, by wholeſale or retail.
When they computed the amount of the trade of
particular perſons, and the expences of neceſſity,
convenience, and luxury, they concluded that
this new tax might ſafely be rated at five millions;
and the happy notion was bleſt a thouſand times,
though in reality the ſcheme was no leſs chime-
tical than the new computation was erroneous f.

When the aſſembly had thus brought their

ſcheme in all its branches to perfection, they ſent

it by their deputies to the King, who received the
propoſal in his council. The indignation raiſed
by this project inſtantly appeared by ſuch a con-
fuſton of outcries and murmurs, that the King had

great difficulty to make the council give their o-
pinions one by one. The field of diſcuſſion was
| boundleſs; every man was made eloquent by vexa-
tion and reſentment. When my turn came, I
ſatisfied myſelf with ſaying coolly, that I had no-
thing to add to ſuch fine harangues. The King,

who obſerved me attentively, and wondered at
my caution, reſolved to have a private converſa-

tion with me before he gave the ſuffrage which

was to determine for or againſt the aſſembly's

ſcheme ; he therefore adjourned the conſideration

renders ſou pour livre, © a penny in the ſhilling,” which is a twelfth
part, whereas a ſou is only the twentieth part of a livre. .

* Corn was the only thing that was exemptcd. „

+ M, de Sully thinks and ſpeaks of the eſtabliſhing a ſou in the
livre, or ſhilling in the pound. as almoſt the whole world thought
and ſpoke of it at that time. Le-Grain nevertheleſs gives his ſuffrage
to this tax, I. 6. Matthieu does not condemn it; and what is of
greater weight, Cardinal Richelieu finds it to be ſo much the more
juſt as it is eſtabliſhed, ſays he, in divers other ſtates, and had been
already reſolved on by a body of the ſtates, under Francis I, Hows
ever, the difficulties and inconventencies which M. de Sully mentions
in the ſequel are real, and partly the ſame which made Richelieu be
the firſt entirely to diſſuade Lewis XIII. from eſtabliſhing it, Teſt.
Pol. p. 2. c. 9. § 7. 2 „ | |

of

F . MSIE - 3 — —
— — — 5 Pe — Se Eee wing t V4 — = 2

: : p 3 —— = 3 — — . -
— — - — * — > y =

* — —_ STS 3 - 4 — — — —__
= : - — ry . I Ts . „ 2 — — — — WT

— = 2 4 pre” * — Ts =

3 — Me Cog 2 -

rr

2 r

2 .

— — lbs
3 5 3 ee.

- BY
3 | N

140 M E M OI R S Bock vIII.

of the affair till the morrow, in the preſence of
the ſame perſ:ns. As ſoon as we were alone, he

aſked me with eagerneſs, the reaſon of my ſilence;

and I offered to his conſideration the following
_ obſervations. _
It is certain, that the aſſembly were ſo infatua-
ted with their new ſcheme, that if the King ſhould
follow the opinion of his council, and reject it
with ſcorn, he would expoſe vile to the dan»
ger of a general diſſatisfiction; the more danger-
ous becauſe the ſtates aſſembled acknowledged no
| ſuperior, nor allowed that even the King had

power to alter their decifions, One of the moſt

Important maxims of monarchical government is,
that the King ſhould take care not to reduce his

ſubjecis to acts of diſobedicnce, or even to words

of diſteſpe&; beſides, the King would directly
break the word, by which he had promiſed the

aſſembly to conform himſelf to their reſolutions:
and to conclude, all they who contrived, or bad
adopted the ſcheme, would make the rejedion of

it by the King, an argument by which they would
convince themſelves, that this was the true ſcheme
_ of affairs, till by an attempt to put it in execution
they were cured of their notion, and would inſi—
nuate, that only their Prince had prevented then
from ſeeing that practice eſtabliſhed in France,

which had been for ſo long a time deſired. Every
body knows, that it is the diſpoſition of the peo-
ple, eſpecially of thoſe that have ſpirit and reſent-

ment, to ſpeak een of their fovereign's
: meaſures. 32 85

On the other ſide, it was equally certain that

- this project was at once deſtiuctive in its tendency,
and impracticable in its execution; to give a full
conviction of this, the leaſt knowledge of the fi-
nances was ſufficient, Beſides the obſtructions
| which 1 have Juſt been mentioning, how many
more

e ** .
„% OBI INT OR pint ws :
. a *. _— Wins CHATS 1 Fig I 5) » bj6.4y .

would be produced by an election of the members

all the provinces of the kingdom? No ſooner
could this ſcheme, which was now only ſketched
out, be branched into particulars, than that ap-
pearance of impartiality and juſtice, by which the
conduct of public affairs muſt be neceſſarily thrown
into the hands of new and unexperienced men,

: 8 1
* "TOY "aL -__ .
2 3 0 - 4,
din? ©. i AS . 8 ** 4 * A BE 0
Se ly * 2 3 wy 5
E 72727 r v4
8 n hy 8 2 CONE 50
4 ET RG 7 2 TY 4 a ? e -
1 22 — LES * 5 . 120347 7s, &F- : 5 vas 2 .
N 5 * FF 1 * -, P's
* * 3 — r . x 5 1 8 .
SLES Rik ENG ere e 5 c
TT Dn VEST

e BST RT ar a EL IG *#Y . l
* . 2 N ne Ty x * **
ag] Wn 2

that all the meaſures they would take would be
only blunder accumulated on blunder.

ſhould ariſe from this ſcheme, I drew my argu-
ments to perſuade the King to conſent to it; by

the honour of falling readily into the meaſures

da royal authority, that when the new council had
e made the melancholy experiment of their ſtrength,
n be would ultimately receive this advantage, that
a. all the parts of the finances would return into his
7 | own hands more exempted from dependence.
m
80 As the calculation of the royal revenues was made
2

by the aſſembly, and the council ſelected from it,
it would be ſuppoſed that they had taken in all
neceſſary conſiderations relating to thoſe pay-
ments, of which the collection was moſt difficult

amiſs, that the King choſe his fifteen million out
part the revenue of the Five great Farms, Eſcheats,
Royal Aids, he might expect, without preſump-

2 to ſee them doubled, if not trebled, in a
ſhort.

˙Cjſ TY

more muſt ariſe from the competitions which

of the council, who were to be taken equally from

* would occaſion innumerable miſcalculations, and
miſtakes Jt was apparent that the heads of the
new council would immediately grow giddy, and

From the impoſſibility that any advantage :

which he would obtain, in the eyes of his people, :

Which they themfelves had propoſed; and this
E | condeicenſion would be ſo far from leſſening the

| and expenſive: they could not therefore take it
of that part which he liked beſt. Chuſing for his

and Caſual-rents, Crown-lands, and >ubſidies or

1 1
n

142 MEMOIR S Book Il.
mort time. This I ſpoke with full confidence,

becauſe I had already ben ben. myſelf of reſpon-'

ſible people, who had engaged to take theſe farms
at a conſiderable advance. With reſpect to that
which remained in the hands of the council of
reaſon, the caſe was quite otherwiſe; and [

would have been bound to the King, that the
| five per cent.; amongſt others, would not, when

all expences were defrayed, bring in above two
hundred thouſand crowns clear money.

The reaſon why I did not give this opinion ?

openly in the council, was, becauſe 1 thought it

proper that it ſhould Rem to come from the King 1

bhimſelf. The King, after having heard me with

great attention, was afraid leſt my advice ſhould
bring him into difficulties, and into a miſtake
in ſome ſort irretrievable; but having conſider.

ed my reaſons very e he reſolved to follow |

my opinion,
When the council met next day, they. gave

their votes as the day before, and J voted in the L
ſame ſide. The King declared that he could not]

follow their advice, left them in the utmoſt aſto- Þ :

nithment, and went in to the aſſembly, where be]
declared, in ſtrong terms, that finding himſelf

diſpoſed to promote, with all his power, the in-

clinations of ſo wiſe a body, he received their |

ſcheme without any qualification or reſtriction,

which he conſidered as conſiſting of three articles;
the erection of an independent council, the diviÞ

ſion of the public revenues, and the raiſing a fas

of five per cent; that the aſſembly had nothing {

to do but in twenty. four hours to name the coun
cil; to give in a ſchedule of the thirty miblions,
that he might chuſe his own ſhare: and that the)

ſhould ſee, by his conduct, whether he or the

council were the better ceconomiſts. The good

nels and compliance of the King were loudly
praiſes;

. = 68
n
8

. of. 4g
AG

on moment how chimerical a ſcheme had been em-

. braced by the multitude.
at laſt completed, in which the clergy were very

it

ith
ald |
ake |
Jer. z
low |

ave |
the

not $
afto« |

e he

E In-

their Þ

ti ON,

icles; Þ

di.
a tax
thing Þ
Coun
lions,
t they
'r the
good iÞ

loudly
raiſed; Þ

; S Bee. = * - |

3 N 2g „ 5 * * e ww |
DE Lt ee OW M 1 . * 2 4
OE: r e r : ""_

by. of * $ Fo: Ts.

* .: * 2
RRR RI EI
8988 et FA TERS AER $a

wclth

1596. 0 F :
praiſed; and the council finding itſelf concluded

by a determination ſo unanimous, which left no

firther room for debate, at leaſt between the
King and his ſubjects, thought of nothing but re-
turning to Paris, there to conclude this maſter-
piece of policy.

The new council was not formed with ſo little
| diſturbance as had been expected; that change
of temper which retarded the election was ſo
great, that people of penetration ſa from that

BY from the firſt; and the Cardinal de Gondy,
famous for his conomical abilities, was put at

its head, as if public affairs was to be adminiſtred

dy the ſame rules as thoſe of a Private houſe.

The council of reaſon held their meetings regu-

* larly in the epiſcopal palace, where the Cardinal

had aſfigned them an apartment.
But no ſooner had they begun to lay papers

upon the table for the collection of the payments

mongers were ſo much perplexed,

of the enſuing year 1597, but theſe new money-

that they
knew not on which fide to turn them. The far-

© ther they went the more the labyrinth was per-
| plexed ;
take for the five per cent.; the farmers aſked for
other funds, but at a diſcount which put them
quite at a loſs ; and to add to their vexation, the
' buſineſs could not be put off: all the penſioners
of the ſtate came upon them, and talked of no-
thing but millions to people that had not yet got
a ſingle farthing. Chagrin and vexation ſoon
broke the unanimity of the new council; they
Whom immediately to quarrel, and reproach one
another with ignorance and raſhneſs. |
The thing was come, in a few weeks, to this
_ paſs,

s 1 45 i OT; bs

The nomination was.

they found no body that would under-

: 7 — 2 *
* LOTS I” CIR oe — 2 i
5 — a > 8 - 7 8 5 — gp
fo gray iy at, OS Sis iy ws => ee rs — . - — 4

2 * 2 F *. fi
20> d rr
83 * * 2 D

4

* OS an. > LE II — n rere XS 5 0 —_ o ” W INES p _ >"
EEE — — — Wk f =
=— 2 "x rib — 2 err y 2 — 4 2 2 Be — —— * 4 A = K — * — « —
. — — big == T TIED nn ts EW EY ap : > 75 TT =
— —. .... ——. . —— —— . ———— INN NE IE — — - — I =
* * I f

44% M E M OI RA Ss Bock VIII.

palſs, that the council of reaſon could do nothing
reaſonably; and they were forced to apply to D'In-
carville and me, and egg 7ed of us to come, at

leaſt once a week, and give them ſuch counſel as

we gave the King, whoſe part of the revenue they
ſaw growing and flouriſhing day after day. I ex.
cuſed myſelf on account of my employ, which
took me up altogether. They then addreſſed the
King; who, with his ordinary goodneſs, com-

manded ine to go: but I did not forget, on that

occaſion, what was neceſſary to his ſervice. I ”

mented the ſtate of the affairs of the council;

found no means of extrication, and I helped *
ward nothing but perplexity. In ſhort, ſcarce
three months had paſſed before theſe profound po-
liticians, being at the end of all their art, and
| ſinking under their burden, went to the King to
beg to be diſcharged. The King, who I believe

began to like this new regulation that ſet him at

eaſe, told them that every thing was difficult at

firſt; adviſed them to take heart, and ſent them

away confured by their own reaſons. But they
ſoon came back, and changed their intreaties to
 Importunity ; confeſſed that they had been in the
wrong when they undertook to govern the king-
dom, and ſhewed a thouſand times more ſatisfac-
tion on their diſmiſſion from their employment,

than at their advancement to it.

This burden fell upon me, as an addition to

that with which I was already loaded, and my la-
bour was ſo great, that it required both my days
and nights. As I had a kind of paſſion for the
re eſtabliſhment of the finances, I made prodigi-
' ous advances in the ancient regiſters of the coun-
cil of ſtate, the parliaments, the chambers of ac-
counts, and the courts of aids, and even in the
private accounts of the former ſecretaries of ſtate,
for the new ones would not communicate Sous

I did the ſame thing in the offices of the treaſurers
of France, in the treaſury chamber, and in the
papers of the treaſurers of the exchequer *: 1
raked even into that vaſt collection where al!

Fee *

IS.

TY e
2 EO oc. © Dee . 7 TY ol.” 7 «7; .
N DH D OE rect IS
bar of © . 2 e ee 2 OE 2 9 8

3
* 7 78

n

—— es 1
3

2 WY 5

the ordonnances are kept inſeribed. Having
a deſign to draw up a general ſtate of the fi-

nances for the year 1595, which was the end of
all my reſearches, I thought it fit to negle& no-
thing, that I might come as near as was poſſible,
in the firſt year of my management, to the exact-
neſs to which I earneſtly deſired to carry it.
Whatever fraud or miſtake had crept into the fi-
nances, I imagined that it could be neither fo
great nor ſo general, but I ſhould be able to prove and
ſhew its original, by comparing theſe pieces which L
have been mentioning, or by the inferences to be
drawn from them, with a due obſervation of the
different proportions of various times and altera-
tions of affairs, „ : |
The people of the King's council were frighted
at the ſight of my project, and beginning to ima-
vine that I thould throw every thing open, blamed
themſelves now more than ever for not having with
much vigour oppoſed my admiſſion into the conn-
cil, Maiſſes, to whom I mult do this juſtice, that
as ſoon as he diſcovered my intentions he joined his
| <endcavours with mine, gave me information of
their terrors and regret. To confirm them in
their ſuſpicions, I declared in public, that I had
obtained ſuch intelligence about the finances, that
they would be preſently regulated upon another

RR ( aa ro. c

PING
*

„„
Aa

* © Rolny, before he entered upon bis office of ſuperintendent,
„ had furniſhed himſelf with all the neceſſary informations, the
„better to be enabled to acquit him felt therein: he perfectly knew
** all the revenues of the kingdom, and all the expences neceſſary
„ in raiſing them: he communicated all thit he knew of this mat-
“ ter to the King, who lad in like manner ſtudied a'l thi things
thoroughly himſelf.” Cc. Peref. p. 225.

Vol. II. N . plan;

3 + a3 ic * 2
5 N — A
> hun — : - 1

CESS gf
ſons - - -

. —— » ˖ ——
2 —

5
*
E q . }
K * r — — ORR INS FI 2 L + FAO a —_ lb
: 8 FEI 2 ED IR — — IO c r 7 — EP 222. ĩðVç d T...
c = = — D 4 — 2 7 N 8 by 5 > MEAS COR Gs” PRES ov n Wt Ms Pak. erg RR R EE: 4 ES. — n 2 > FO 4" 4A —5 = * — 7 p E. 7 -
- = —— — 5 _ > EAI I I ms a he 7, 7 es ent + KEE $44, 5 n . TTT — — — E 9 — en oe on rg K * 3 > ie ET SERA : — 28 o AY 2 * 3 — <= - 2
00G ] ĩ ⁵ ↄ ꝗ ⅛ꝛ˙ .. ee 7 e as EE ed ann . =D BB AS ot ous <a P . HE oe „ K — oe
. I Fat i FS 8 — — N = 8 —— I 8 DE Er Ce 00 — — cas _— Vs — — rn a" :
y — —— — H — n 2 2 = ” ID ER I EET Ie - — 2 — PR AY - r I 9 - ” he — — > — — *
— — ö ITE CO — 3 3 — SOT . Bay: DS N 2 — 2 5 En Pte fort 2 2 * 1 — 28 : 6.
= * — — . — ST Lots "7 2 — — 2 - Ds 2 0 . Py — ge
5 ont err F — — 3 RS. 1
* een 8
— * 3 — 8.
2 >= 5

4
4
N
15
[I
1
1
|
ith

— —
— r
— — 208” IE ELL IE . —

—_—_

CLI EET DD —

— —
— —
——

—

- —
— — = — — ha — oo - —
— I e — 3 — 4
— Die Es AL — — Os _— — "
; . - ——— — * — I —— ——
Wye SA es — — 2 — Es as „ — C

— —— —— ED —

— — eo
— —— — —

% M E M O 1 R S Bock vin, |

plan; and I deſired that the DO OE

the intendant of the finances of France, the trea.
ſurer of the exchequer, and the receivers-general,

ſhould be joined with me, in order to draw up

this general ſtate of the finances, of which theſe

very men were in ſuch terror. I had the care,
however, to keep the pen always between my own
fingers.

However, I could not this time keep myſur
clear of ſeveral conſiderable errors, nor eſcape be.
Ing tricked by theſe old practitioners. I think h
is no ſhame to confeſs it; this very year they gain.

ed a profit of one fifth, which is „

though infinitely leſs than their ordinary gains,
propoſed the next year to remedy both this and an.

other miſtake which I had committed: one of the.
chief tricks of the financiers was, to make the e
pence of the current year appear to be much mot
than the receipt, and to anticipate the revenue
of the following year; by which means the cu
pence of the next year, and of all the reſt in ſuc}
ceſſion, was thrown into a confuſion, from which}
theſe men drew many advantages, particularly
that of appearing never to have money which wi

not pre- engaged long before, and of being abl

to alledge this excuſe to the King, and all thok]

whom they were not inclined to pay. In the ſe

cond place, they made uſe of that money: and

to conclude, they paid off the old debts at a ven
low price, and yet charged them entire in thei
accounts. This negligence of mine colt the king.
dom this year two millions.

This fault I corrected the following year, during
my reſidence in Britany : fo that from that rim
forward the receipts and expences exactly agreed.
And in the mean time, to fill up the deficiency

which my miſtake had made, I took the parti «

a

2 caſuelles, les galviles, the five great Rand and

f 1 |

1
8

ant,
„
an.
f the,
ex-
more

nue
c

ſuc·
bich!
larlyF
wah

able

thok}

je ſe·

anch!
very
theilt]
king ·

uring!
time!

3596. o F . © Th

Ine toll of the rivers, out of the hands of the Duke
of Florence, who held them under the names of
*Gondy, Senamy, Zamet,
L'Argentier, and other old managers, who had
no ſhare in the new finances; and I increafed theſe
farms with two millions that had been loſt by miſ-
Computation. The contraQors for the finances,
and their aſſociates of the council, were thunder-

ſtruck with this laſt blow; but foe this time their

= ite vented itſelf in ſmoke, the King having ſup-

Ported me for ſome time in a manner ſo conſpi-

cuous, as junk them all into inactive deſpondency.
The conſequence of his conduct to the aſſem-
bly was, that he was made maſter, not only of
the pretended council of reaſon, but likewiſe of
bis own, whoſe authority was now declining

and he had no longer reaſon to fear that his de-
Fgns would miſcarry, as e by their ob-

ſtruction.

The deſign in which he was then aQnally en-

gaged, was the ſiege of Arras, which had been
propoſed in the council of war, which, excepting
only the ſecretary, conſiſted merely of men of ac-
tion: it had there paſſed without oppoſition; but

the reſolution was kept ſecret, becauſe only by

concealment could we be aſſured of ſucceſs. That
the merchants with whom I agreed for ſupplies of
all neceſſary proviſions might know nothing of the

matter, I named to them a great number of cities

along all the frontiers of Picardy, and Arras a-
mong the reſt, at any of which they obliged them-
| ſelves to deliver during the whole campaign, fifty
"thouſand loaves a-day. Santeny, Robin de Tours,
Mauleville, and Lambert Chevalier de Guet d'Or-

leans, engaged likewiſe for the conveyance of e-

very thing elſe, and particularly of twenty-five
Cannons.
à price, that if the misfortune that happeogd at
ET N 2 1 Amiens

The contract was concluded at ſo low

Le-Grand, Parent,

10
b

| 4
43
a
E
1
4
?
"IPG
* 1
.
1
7
pl
i
: hb
#. 1
»
AS
4

*

77
, ba
i
To

.

"+: ;

"* 4

a

4 *
* 1

74 3

14
as.

1

{ $808

Ae

Wi

>

' EV

*
N

1

\

65 *

1

4

A 4

A b. 4

e

* 2
7
0

$11

1

* > IE

24

1.

1 * 1

Rb

LIFE

e's

be i

1 j

MY 4

WY
*
#19

*

"DR:

* S

0

i

1
6 0
R418

* 7 *

e
1 *

.

1

Ab

MERE

4.257

NH *

; 7

WH
N

28A

3

.

It

W 1 N
Al
2415
A
* : -

1
i 10 0

n
F308
d i; 5

N.
8

70 *

>

41
* ls

4 Wine
DI.
. 4:28
"a+ 0 = v3
i.
8
1
L.

1 i

1
*. 5
is wg
EIS
i
Ft a.
1 LM"
3+ :

ne
ei

i

1
1
8

4

1

1

4,4 + if
$534

44
B © 7

: il

* PST.

145 [he
ee
"a :

ms

1 117

4

il

Fl
bt

£

7-875

142% LE

2 *
= 8 »

— — — LET =

— —_——

RET TAPES. Hes
L .
— —

— A*; 22 2 12
— 1 — omit is — EOn
— EET EI ern ere IS, 0.
_—_—_—

2 . —— —
— —
4 — —

—
ICC SES IE —[—— - p
— — — ͤ — — :
— —
—

— mes oo

- SD D ———ů—
— eto
——

— 1

148 M E M O IR S Bock IK.

Amiens a little after, had not obliged us to draw
thither the forces deſigned againſt Arras, they

would have been conſiderable loſers: but as it

| Happened, their gain was reaſonable,

BOOK IK

HE amuſements uſual at Paris in the winter
ſeaſon were no ways interrupted by the pre-

Parations that were making for war. The gen-
tleneſs of the government ſecured the be

of the public, who taſted all the ſweets of it, with

out any of that alliy which for ſo long a time 40
imbittered all their pleaſures. Callantry, ſhew:,
play, took up the time of the e and the

King, who liked theſe diverſions through taſte,

permitted them through policy. Monſieur and

Madam de Fervaques intreated me to allow of the
addreſſes of Monſieur de Laval, the fon of this
lady, to my eldeſt daughter. I referred them to the
King, without whoſe conſent I could not now diſpoſe
of my daughter, ſince it had been propoſed by the
Princeſs, ro mary her to Monſieur de Rohan; with
whom the King being at that time offended, ap-
| proved of Monſieur de Laval. |

The court every day had the pleaſure of a rev

entertainment, from engagements of this nature,
the moſt ſplendid of which was given by the Con-
ſtable, at the ſolemnity of baptizing bis fon, This
was the pretence; but it was well known, that
one of the moſt beautiful young ladies of the court,

and who was afterwards married to an old ma
was the real object of theſe gallantries. Moniras

rency, amongſt all the courtiers, choſe out twelve
noblemen for his ballet, who he thought would

appear there with the greateſt magnificence; and

prevailed upon the King to lay his commands up-

ON 1

+
=
\
4
®
2
Z
A
$3
"38
*
4
13
4
j
U
I

AR
E A * oY

1509-0 F- $8 UL LL... gp
on me to be of this number. The elegance and
propriety with which it was conducted, and which
is the very eſſence of theſe fort of diverſions, was
ſuperior to any thing I had ever ſeen of the kind.
This entertainment. was univerſally allowed to
have greatly excelled all that went before it: it
was likewiſe the laſt, and a ſtrange diſturbance.
happened at the end. I retired about two in the
morning, and had been an hour and a half in bed,
when I faw Beringhen enter my chamber, with
the utmoſt conſternation painted in his counte-
nance : he could but juſt tell me that the King.
wanted me; and aſſure me, in anſwer to my in-
-  quiries, that no accident had happened to his per-
ſon; for this was the firſt queſtion I aſked, and

his reply comforted me beforehand for the miſ-
fortune, whatever it were, ſince I {ſaw none which
were abſolutely irremedible, but thoſe that threat-
ened his life. I pur on my cloaths haſtily, and
ran to the Louvre, in great anxiety of mind: up-
on my entering the King's chamber, I ſaw him
walking about very faſt, his arms folded, his head
reclined, and all the marks of a deep unecaſineſs *
impreſſed on his countenance. The courtiers
ſtood in different corners of the room, leaning
_ againſt the hangings, without uttering a ſingle
word. „„ og: .

The King coming to meet me, preſſed my hand
with great emotion, crying,“ Ah, my friend,
6 what a misfortune! Amiens is taken,” I con-
fels, I continued immovable, like all the reſt, at
this unforeſeen blow; a place fo ſtrong, fo well

* « Being as it were thunder-ſtrack at this, and yet looking up to
„ heaven as he commonly does more in adverſity than proſperity,
he ſpoke aloud, This blow is from heaven! Then pauſing a little,
© ſaid, I have ſufficiently acted the part of King of France, it is
* time now that I aſſume the character of King of Navarre; and
turning to the Marchioneſs, who wept, we mult quit our preſent
warfare, and take horſe to engage in another, = |

8 provided

. — N :
8 by — — "AD 8 — — — — 8 we #+ - — . m - «£ -
r.... OS ou te AW IFC Lo PI IR 3 —
— — 3 ů— — — 5 nn nn OE _
a Ic = — A — — — — a 7 2 — * — a = Z
- — 5 — — gs gyms ” — a f . =
- 3 IF, * * r — a9 — — — — » T9 _ — =
— — 0 — — „ —— . T——4 —ͤ— an .
— — — = — — — — — = — — > —— — _

22
Ln I —

+;
5
He
—
Ly
,
7
»
1
4
1
=_
|
Fi
\
a
4
23
y
Lo
4
7218
14
1
%
1
:
1
14
5
i
1
1
1
; |
,
1
1
4
:
:
7
;
.
iF
it
4
11
;
;
14
"334
j 1
1
144
;
1
. 1
nn
Ho |
TIT CE
+8 45 : 8
1
A
DN.
"FEA 1
i
4 $4
} }
.
J
51 352
1 749
144
11 1
N
;
Ae *
I
It 13
i
11: 10008
"78
nin;
"$M :
(221
1181
2 4
*
*L 4
FRET /
4/4443
ir XI
1 141
155 3Þ
L 1138
24 ; 2
1 3
1
een
41-409
j : 2284
+ 3.99 4
1
+ 1.2358
8
IB]
Ez Ws :
80
r
1 1
. Fs x 33 »
„
6
ER -
1% £
28K
<1
$4 5 -
q 2 45
c it Y
| f :
|
4 ö
TIF . :
N 5
p „
' 14. 8
4
l C85 iS
ory
! i ONE
Ne
aa
1
n
1 « 1
14 i
B91 137%
an © [278
=_ = :
3: —
) 141
e
1 „
l KY J.
B74 18
173 1994
.
1 „
147 1
| P44 (FAY
' BP: 14588
14.44 {T6078
144
nn.
is 1B
$4
1244
x
{
4

9; .
(946
Ly
11
Wo
. |
it
18:
iq :
E
1198
I
N
n
1 |
#1.
4 N
1 BK:
5 17
v1 |
14
1
A
{
i
1H

15% ME MOI RS Book X.

provided with every thing that was neceſſary, ſo

near to Paris, and on the ſide of Picardy the on-

ly key to the kingdom, to be taken ſo ſuddenly

ere we cculd be informed that it was threatened
with an attack : the thing was almoſt incredible,

and the general conſternation appeared to be too
well grounded. However, I took my reſolution

immediately, and while the King, who bad re-
ceived this news as he was preparing to go to bed,

Telated to me the manner in which the Spaniards,
with ſome ſacks of walnuts, bad ſurpriſed this im-

portant place *, I reflected that, inſtead of in-

creaſing, to no purpoſe, the general diſmay, pru-

dence ſuggeſted, that, in the preſent circumſtance,

it was neceſſary to keep up every one's ſpirits,
and to comfort the King. I therefore told him,

that I had in good time juſt put the finiſhing

hand to a ſcheme, by which nor only Amiens,

but ſeveral other places, w ould be reſtored to him,
without much difficulty.

"This hint alone ſeemed, on a ſudden, to 8
robbed the late misfortune of half its force; and

although it did not hinder the King from 1cHleQ-

ing on all the difficulties of an enterpriſe which
might have very fata! conſequences, yet, as the
aſtoniſhment the courtiers were in left them no—

* It was on the eleventh of March. Hernand Teillo de Porto-
C:rrero, a Spaniard, the author of this ſcheme, had diſguiſed like
country- men and country women, carrying goods to market, abort
thirty Spaniards, who ſtopped up one of the gates of the town, and

emuled the guard, by pouring out at the entrance thereof a cart

loaded with facks fail of fiberts which one of them untied ; and du-

ring this time ſome Spanich troops, who lay concealed behind the
hedges, marched up, and, putting the guard to the ſword, made
themſclves maſters of the town. See au account of this in all the

kiftortans, under the year 1597. Hernand Teillo was killed in

5 rows defending this town againſt Henty IV. He uſed to ſay,

that the three preatelt commanders he knew, were Henry for the
conduct of a large army, the Duke of Maicnue for the ſiege of a

ton, and Dlarechal Biron for a batile. Matthieu, tom. 2. l. 2.

P. 232.
thing

ee
eee

e 0 ERS. *

3 s A ; F436

2; a8 CE LN S C, N 2 .
-

1

5 bY 5
Y . *
7 2
. e.
J " We

S ha Sea

-. AN

DIY. . ; . (TIS. 88
VP a a OS

© tories, but what tended to increaſe his diſquiet,
his hopes were greatly raiſed by what I had ſaid,

<5

3 4
8
N
1
1
Eg
$3 2-1
N

14597. O0 F M L $6. 151

thing to ſay, in anſwer to the King's interroga-

and he deſired to know what methods they were

by which I propoſed to ſerve him. 1 replied, that

he ſhould be informed by the papers I had drawn

up for that purpoſe; and 1 went out as if to
fetch them, leaving the King at leaſt in a more

1 compoſed ſtate of mind than I had found him.

Hlad he been a witneſs of my perplexity and un-

© eaſineſs, when I was alone in my cloſet, he would
have ſuppreſſed part of thoſe praiſes which he

beſtowed on me when I had quitted his cham-

ber; for then it was, that, reſigning myſelf up to
reflection, I comprehended the whole extent of

* thoſe misfortunes, which might be expeQted from
the preſent poſture of affairs. The King's trea-

ſure exhauſted, not a fingle regiment fit for ſer-
vice; at the ſame time that there was an abſo-

| lute neceſſity both for money and troops, in great

abundance, and that without any delay.

| I read over my private memoirs : I revolved.
in my mind all thoſe ſchemes for levying money,
which I had employed my leiſure hours in con-
certing, foreſeeing, that the King would have

ſoon an occaſion for them. Moſt of theſe ſchemes

might be reduced to two different kinds; one

very eaſy and plain, wherein all that was neceſ-
ſary was to be done was, to augment the land-

tax, and other impoſts already eltabliſhed ; the o-

| ther more difficult, which conſiſted in conttiving
new ſources from whence money might be drawn.

The firſt I did not think it prudent to have re-

| courſe to, ſince, after all the hardſhips which the
country- people had endured, to oppreſs thein (till
more by an augmentation of taxes, the fule weight

of which falls upon them, and at a time when they
but juſt began to breathe again, was to complete

the

. Late ia AE
— — — — — —

152 M E M O 1 RS Book IX.

' the ruin of the tate, and to deprive the King
himſelf, for the future, of his moſt fruitful, and,
in one Rae his moſt certain reſources.
I then turned my thoughts another way, and
fixed upon the following project, which was, to
demand of the clergy a free gift for a year, if not
for two years, and oblige them to make immedi-
ate payment; to augment the old offices with
new members, four in each lovereign court, be-
ſides four maſters of accounts in every chamber,
two in every office in the finances, two offices of
counſellor in every preſidial court, an aſſeſſor in
_ every royal tribunal, and an elect in every election;
to add a third to all the officers of the finances *;
to keep back half a year's payment of the arrears
of ſums borrowed from the contractors in the laſt
reign; to increaſe the tax on falt fifteen /oze a

potile, and to leave it always 1 in that ſtate, becauſe

ſuch an increaſe would give room for the ſuppreſ-
ſion of certain offices too chargeable to the public;
to raiſe the entry of goods, and the tolls of rivers
a third part, by a new eſtimate; and, as all theſe
' meaſures gave us, for the moſt part, only the
hope of money, to begin by borrowing twelve
hundred thouſand livres from the richeſt people of
the court and principal cities, and to aſſign them

payments out of an augmentation of the gabels

and five great farms; and, to ſupply the ready
money which we ſhould have occalion for beſides,
to raiſe a proſecution in the chamber of juſtice a-

gainſt the old contraftors, who had made conſi-
derable fortunes, and oblige them to ſuffer a new
tar, in form of a Joan.

The offices of the Gnances were poſſeſſed by two perſons: t the
firſt was called L/Ancien ; the ſecond, who had been appointed aficr,
was called L'Alternatif ; and this third was called Triennal, becauſe

he had every third year his rotation with the other two, who alone

: had the privilege of reimburſing the Tricanal,

1 his

"ae OS: 5% _ ic han - has

— — — — feed — — AA

97. O F C -- 144
This plan was indeed of ſufficient extent. How-
ever, it was not my intention, that theſe methods
ſhould be all made uſe of at once, but, being un-
certain how long the war would continue, they
might employ them ſucceſlively, beginning with
thoſe which were the leaſt burthenſome. With
regard to the troops that were neceſſary, I thought
they could not do better than to raiſe them in thoſe

provinces of the kingdom which had no longer any

occaſion for defence. Thus I taxed the Iſle of

©: France, by joining Bary to it, with a complete re-
| giment; the Orleanois with Touraine was to fur-

niſn a ſecond; and Normandy itſelf a third: theſe

regiments were to conſiſt of fifteen hundred and fifty

men, furniſhed and maintained by the provinces,

from the day of their arrival before Amiens ; be-
cauſe theſe provinces enjoyed the right of calling

the regiments by their own name, and of appoint-
ing the officers.
Five days after I carried my arojett to the King,
with the proper evidences formally drawn up in
thirteen papers, His Majeſty retired to examine
them with me, in the preſence of D'Arambure,
_ Lomenie, Beringhen, and L'Oſerai. When I had
hniſhed reading them, I told the King, that, with
theſe ſupplies, there was nothing to retard his de-
parture for the expedition of Amiens ; ; ſince all the
neceſſary preparations for a camp in Picardy were

already made in ſuch a manner, that, I durſt aſſure

his Majeſty, his army would not only find there
proviſion in great plenty, but likewiſe every thing
requilite for mere convenience, With the ſame cale,
and at the ſame price as in a city, I added, that

whatever reſource this ſcheme might afford the

King in. his preſent neceſſities, his Majeſty muſt not
imagine it could be carried into execution, without
increaſing the number of thoſe wounds of which
France was far from being wholly cured: that he

need

h * 4
235
129
vw
A
1

0
Ws,

WT

1

Y

*

99
1
K
1 by
THR

E
18
5 11

75
19%
1
ſe
1

.
1717
PIs
' "4

54
;
io
(B81
„ —

v4

g 3
13

4
N *

11 4
ifs
Fer
. i
1 1
1

. "71 4
gl.
Fr

7»

HE

by © 9
1% #1

138
179
| p
1 I
4

i,

4 "1
.
1177
is *

1
4 . .
1
14
y b

HI)
d.
e

19

* 77

2 8

++» .
4

ö
1 $4
.

*
7
9
1

ly. 5
= 0 77
N 7 i
1,85

9

mon
1 7

f

74

1
1
IR

+8 Is
1
e
i
Bl

*

1

pet

| G

3 1
» nn

RN.

4 .,

C *

n

4.

19 57

79

0 4

; (i
1 . 7

| *,

++ 36 Li
An
8 ue
1
„
. 3 |
A WE
it N
ns
+ ="
Ker
1
1
e
a 1
4.404
a
4 2a
: 7 Ng
1
0 An
e
. 78
7
1
i : 4
2 4
Ie
i 1
X watt:
F
' 4}
| . 5
[ 7
| $i
-
3
148
.
N i
;\ ns
757 5
Ia
þ 1
1 15 {
4 N
10
if 1. of
5 —
of
* { ol
4 1-8
1 lt
+ Ls
| .
55 9
* 18
11
| ! vo
, $3
: 1
4
4%
0 . k
"ok

| 1

> VGV ERS Ts
” . A 2's WE EIA
as

154 MEMOIR Ss Bock IX.
need only take a ſlight view of the immenſe debts
and engagements with which the ſtate was over-

burdened; that, to an exhauſted ſtate, a new tax,
in Whatever manner diſguiſed, is always the ſame;

therefore the war ſhould not be renewed, but with
a view of procuring an advantageous peace, which

was now become abſolutely neceſſary : and how-
ever great the public miſery was at preſent, I was
fully convinced that twelve years of continued
peace would be ſufficient to reſtore the kingdom to
a flomiſhing condition.

I did not doubt but that, by the conduft which
the King appeared diſpoſed to oblerve, the ene-

mies, notwithſtanding the advantages they had

gained, would be the firſt to wiſh for the end of
the war; and at that time I freely diſcloſed a
thought to the King, the juſtneſs of which was
verified by the event; and this was, that the firſt
overtures for a peace would be made by the King
of Spain, whom policy, in that ſtate of weaknel;
and incapacity to which the common courſe

of nature had reduced him, would not permit

to expoſe his crown io the uncertain chances
of war, always to be feared, but chiefly in the be-

ginning of a Prince's reign who was till a child,

I even went ſo far as to foretell, that Spain would

purchaſe peace by the reſtoration of all the towns

the had taken from France.

My ſcheme for raiſing money was ſo auch appro-
ved by the King, that he reſolved to propoſe it him-
ſelf in full council; but he communicated it before-
hand to a kind of little council of war, compoled
of the Duke of Montpenſier, Meflieurs de Mont-
morency, de Matenne, d'Auvergne, de Biron,
d'Ornano, de Bellegrade, de Saint-Luc, de Fer-
vaques, de Roquelaure, and de Frontenac: he
afterwards ſummoned an extraordinary council,
to which he admitted all in Paris who had a right

10

—_—
0 1 _ orb
: in N In —_ r
2 * Re TP - 1 LEES g * —

2 eo SF 2 yy 33 n doh. HE e 8
„ r 0 5 3 g
Ron 1 PE . „ N 1 82 1

. . * vs F * „ 3 & « 1
. 7 OF erg 2 . =
* ** * enn

N 80 WN *
3—2B 3j ES. oe Hee Ns IEEE Lo
ha en We Hoe oe RE ate won on: inn A CORE RES ,
Na 12-2 (gs on Bet NE EI AG IE OO ALD e

n 3 V-L-L-T-ng5

to a place there, : particularly the chief perſons of

the aſſembly of Rouen, who {till reſided there.

The King could take no happier meaſures to eſta-
bliſh his authority upon the weaknels of this great

aſſembly, which was now acknowledged by them-
ſelves. He began with lamenting the loſs of A-
miens, declaring the neceſlity there was to recover
this city as ſoon as poſlible, giving in a full plan
of all that was neceſſary for that purpoſe : he con-
cluded with aſking the advice of all that were pre-
ſent, concerning the means of carrying it into
execution, complaining, in order to conceal from
them what he himſelf had to propoſe, that his

molt uſeful and nereſſary enterpriſes were always

oppoſed by difficulties, and retarded by delays.

Here the King ſtopped, as if to wait for the de-
liberations of the aſſembly. Each looked upon
the other without attering a ſingle word; at length
the nobles broke ſilence, but it was only to refer
the affair to the financiers, who in their turn
replied that it belonged wholly to the nobles.

Henry urging them to deliver their opinions, ſome

general propoſals for new levies were made, which
were immediately oppoſed by one half of the aſ-
ſembly; and the counſellors finding their ſpeech
all at one time, to ridicule, in a confuſed and diſ-
orderly manner, whatever might be offered by ei-
ther party, the King, ſeizing that moment when
their animoſity was carried to ſuch a heighth, that
there was not the leaſt probability of their coming
to any agreement, drew the memorial out of his
pocket, telling them, that, although he had but
little experience in the affairs of the finances, yet,
upon the preſent occaſion, he would offer his o-
pinion, which he was always ready to give up for
a better: he then prepared to read the paper,
which threw all that were preſent into a fixed at-
tention, and afterwards into an aſtoniſhment, that

rendered

156 M E M OI R $S Book IX.
rendered them ſpeechleſs and immoveable. Hen-
ry ſuffered them to remain in this ſilence for two

moments, then declaring that he underſtood it as

an unanimous conſent, added, that as he had no

intention to make uſe of all thoſe meaſures at one

1 time, he would begin by borrowing the ſum of

twelve hundred thouſand livres; and exhorted the

nobles and the wealthieſt perſons in the kingdem,

to comply voluntarily with the preſent neceſſity of

the times, and depend upon his royal word, that
the lenders ſhould have their principal reimburſed
in the ſpace of two years, together with the inter-
eſt. His Majeſty then brought forward the fif-
teen ſous upon ſalt, the eſtabliſhment of the third
man in the finances, and an inquiry into the
conduct of fraudulent contracters. The affair was
| decreed, and a decree drawn up upon that plan,
We had, in a very little time, three hundred
thouſand crowns voluntarily lent: the creation of

the third man brought in twelve hundred thou-

ſand, and the ſame ſum was drawn from the col-
lectors of taxes, to whom the treaſurers of France

were joined, but were ſuffered however to tax

themſelves. | 5
The council of the finances, accuſtomed to
rejoice in the calamity of the people, were ſoon

comforted under theſe new ſubſidies, provided

they might paſs thorough their hands, They rc-
preſented to the King, after having greatly com-
mended his memorial, that the ſucceſs of it de-

pended upon his employing perſons of great ex-

perience, ready diſpatch, and poſſeſſed of a full
power to execute it. The King replied, that the
perſon he was reſolved to employ ſhould be invelt-

ed with his authority; and that, with regard to

the other qualities, he pitched upon me (I was
preſent at this diſcourſe) as the molt induſtrious

and moſt prudent amongſt them, although the
Lo 1 ET youngeſt.

= youngeſt, He expreſſed bimſelf in yet ſtronger
terms to Schomberg (whom bis Majeſty viſited

9

F.

.

15997, 0 F 8 U . 15

juſt before his departure, on account of an indiſ-
poſition “ that confined him to his bed) and to the
counſellours he found in the ſick Count's cham-

ber. He told them, that as J only ſhould bear

the blame, if he was not ſupplied with every

thing he had occaſion for, while he employed

himſelf wholly in fighting againſt his enemies, fo

1 he was reſolved that every thing ſhould be regula -

ted in the council apreeable to my directions.
And accordingly, before he went away, he in-

veſted me with his whole authority. This mor-

| tified Schomberg to ſuch a degree, that he choſe -

rather to go and ſerve at the ſiege, than fee mie at
the head of the finances. Sancy likewiſe left the

ccuncil, to hold his rank in the army as coloncl

ol the Swils.

The gentlemen of the council gave me {til
more reaſon to ſuſpe& thera, of which I had a
proof in the affair of the third men. After ha-

| ving recorded the -edift by which they were crea-

ted, I endeavoured to raile as much money as was
poſſible from theſe offices. And to deprive the
gentlemen of the council of all means of ſerving,
at a low rate, any relation or friend, as was

uſual with them, I applied myſelf with as muck

aſiduity to the pen, as any clerk or treaſurer des

parties caſuelles ; and not ſatisfied with uſing this
precaution, I gave a note under my hand to each

purchalcr, who was obliged to carry it to the trea-
ſurer, from whom, after laying down the money,
* Gaſpard Schomberg, Count de Nanteuil. This diſorder was a

difficulty of breathing, that proceeded from the membrane that
covers the heart becoming cflcous on the left tide, as alſo ſome o-

thu « of the neighbouring parts; and this was found fo upon open»

ing his ody after his death, which happened two years afterwards.

Fe vi. employed in the making the edit ot Nantes, as ſhall be eb
{c1v 9 hereafter; and he did many other ſervices to ihe ſtate. M.
de Thou highly commends his character aud abilities, both as 2
warrior and as a ſtateſman, |

14
12

158 MEM O:I R$. BookIX.

he received an acquittance, and both were to be

produced to me.

. All artifice becoming ineffectual, the cantrac.
tors had recourſe to a method which, doubtleſs,
had ſeldom failed before; they attempted to cor-
rupt me With biibes. Robert De Tours, a very
_ conſiderable contractor, after conferring with the
council, whom he had gained over to his intereſt,
came to my houſe, and entreated one of my ſe-
cretaries to procure him an interview with my
wife, to whom he offered a jewel worth ſix thou-
ſand crowns as a preſent for me, and another
worth two thouſand for her, that I might not
oppoſe a determination of the council, w tho had
aſſizned to him the nomination of all the third

men in the diſtricts of Tours and Orleans, for the

ſum of ſeventy-two thouſand crawns, He was
introduced to me by Madam de Roſny, whom,
by a ſevere reprimand in the contractor's preſence,
I made ſenſible of the fault ſhe had committed,
Nor did I ſpare him, in order to prevent ſuch at—
tempts for the future He left me greatly ſurpti—
ſed, and probably as much offended at my be-

haviour, I had juſt been refuſing, from another
contractor, ſixty thouſind crowns, for one haifor
that of which he had before offered me ſeventy-

wo thonſand for the whole; and that very even-

ing, that half brought me fourſcore thouſand

crowns, becauſe 1 divided it into fmall parcels,

This employment detained me at home all that
day ard the following, for i thought it of more
conlequence than to attend the Chancellor's ſum—
mons, who had ſent a ſerjeint of the council
twice to me, to defire I would come thither, and

finih an affair which would procure the King, he

ſaid, ſeventy-five thouſand crowns of ready mo-
ney. I went as ſoon as I was diſenzaged, with-

out thinking any more of Robert De Tours.

The Chancellor, upon my entering the council-

chamber,

1
8 ae ee” *
— DS 7 3

„

Mn + eas 1

ee Pro and 7
e L « n
— 9 * 7 * 2 e e

1597. F VL E:T.----149

chamber, made me ſome fight reproaches for
my negligence : I anſwered him bluntly, that
1 had been more uſeful to the King in my cloſer,
„% We have been no leſs fo here,” returned the
Chancellor, who fought to enhance the value of
the ſervice he had done the King, in procuring
him this ready moncy, by the neceſſity his Ma-
jeſty was in for it, having, by two letters ſuc-
ceſſively, demanded ſome of the council. When

I deſcovered that this was the One which had
juſt before been offered me by the contractor of

Tours, he having only added three thouſand
crowns more to the ſum, I repreſented to theſe

gentlemen, in very ſtrong terms, that ſince they

couid not be ignorant that Robert had firſt appli—
ed to me, they ought not to have concluded,

without my knowledge, an affair which had ap-
peared to me to be unjuſt,
Finding that they were endeavouring to impoſe
vpon me, partly by complaint, and partly by an

air of authority, I told them plainly, that if I had
been of a humour to be gained by bribes, the

bargain would not have returned to them; but that
ſince the King relied upon my fidelity, 1 would not

fail to give bim every proof of it in my power,
The Chancellor, Freſne, and La Grangelerci, ſen-

ſibly affected with the reproach conv cyed i in theſe

words, had the aſſurance to mention immediately,

that a baroain by which the King loſt more than

half of what was due to him, was, notwithſtand-

ing, more advantageous for him, fince he was paid
with ready money, than mine, by which I com-

monly allowed the purchaſers the term of fix

months for the payment. of the ſecond moicty.

They did not ſtop there, bur reproached me

with ſetting myſelf up for a reformer of the fi-
nances; and declared, with an air of contempt,

that they were able to ſupport their bargain a-
gainſt mine, Upon this, growing violent, the

O 2 | council

160 NM E M O1 R S Bock Ik.

council determined that their aſſignment to Ro-

bert De Tours ſhould take place.

I did not think proper to ſay one word more
concerning this unjuſtifiable method of proceed
ing, nor upon the regulation that was made in
conſequence of it, which was, that thencefor-
ward the council would have no repard to parti-
- cular notes. But when Fayet, the ſecretary,
brought me this arret to ſign, I refuſed to do ſo,
till I had received the King's anſwer to a letter,
in which, as [ told Fayer, I had ſuppreſſed no
part of the truth, nor concealed the perſons:
this letter gave Fayct ſome apprehenſions, as!
deſigned it ſhould; he intreated me to ſhew it
him; and pretending to be overcome by his im-
portunity, I yielded. It turned entirely upon the
underhand practices which Robert had made uſe

of to gain the gentlemen of the council; all
Which 1 had had the good fortune to diſcover. |
likewiſe gave the King to underſtand, that this

Contractor had procured the favour of the coun-
cil, by making to Madam de Sourdis *, miſtreſs

10 the er, the ſame offers which I had re-
jected; to which he had added other preſents to
Madam de Deuilly, a relation of the Chancellor's,

* Tſabel Babou de la Bourdaiſiere, the wife of Francis D*Efcor-

bleau, Marquis de Sourdis; ſhe had an elder ſiſter, called Frances,

who was married to Antony D'Eftrees, and mother to the fair Ga-

brielle ; and likewiſe a younger ſiſter, who married Claude de Beau-
villiers, the Count de Saint-Aignan, This whole family was
ſtrangely cried down and ſatirized in the Amours du Grand Alcandre,
and other ſarcaſtical libels of that time, even as far back as the

grandmother of theſe thiee ladies, who was called Mary Gaudin,

All the daughters of this line were remarkably beautiful. Leo X.
was ſo charmed with the beauty of Mary Gaudin, at Bologne, u heie
he had ſeen her, when he had a conference with Francis I. that he
preſented her with a diamond, called by domeſtic tradition Gau-

din's Diamond. It is Amelot de la Houſſaye who ſpeaks ſo; and

he has collected ſeveral ſuch like anecdotes of this who!e family, to
done L refer the cucious reader, in the article Badou de 4a Bo: ard ite
er

and

z 0 EET, a "EN * . . >
2 * 9 Rn” Pre Wot — 5 4 . - jo £ 24 N 2 ; 4 ta .
be ety e {ES Wu a ee n nn
4 R Lat : : „ ut 2:1. 7 | = 1

2 aa hand A *

«
6
8
*
Had
8
.
-
bend
EN
.
1%
1
2
TS
A
tt, of
*
2
7
r
by .
-
Sr
FS
74 W*
*: 156%.
*
.
*
+ *7
*

4 Amiens continued, I took a journey regulaly.

r B V-L L YT, e

and Freſne's miſtreſs. Fayet repeating the con-
tents of my letter to the perſons moſt concerned
in it, they ſent him back immediately, to intreat
I would not fend it: the arret was ſuppreſſes,
and Robert's bargain rejected.

In this manner I divided my labours, between
the care of receiving the money of the {tate, and

laying it out. advantageouſly for the neceihties of

the army, which wanted neither proviſions nor
artillery during the whole time that the ſiege of

every month to the camp, carrying with me each
time fifteen hundred thouſand crowns; which
procured me the freindſhip of all the principal
officers, who were not accuſtomed to fuch exact

payments. I extended my cares and ſolicitude

even to the private ſoldiers, by eſtabliſhing an
hoſpital in the camp, ſo convenient and fo well
attended, that ſeveral perſons of quality went thi-
ther to be cured of their diſeaſes or wound: x.

The King's folicitude for the ſafety of my per-
ſon, which, indeed, ke almoſt carried to exceſs,
more than compenſated for all my trouble.
Saint-Luc, to whom the Count de la Guiche

had reſigned the poſt of great maſter of the ord-
nance, took me with him to ſee his lodaments,

knowing my fondnels for that part of the military

art: this engaged me very far in the trenches

and other places in which there was ſome danger.

The King being informed of it, gave me a 1
reprimand, abſolutely forbidding me to appe

at any hazardous poſt; and ſaid publicly on this
occaſion, that i had enemics even in the camp,

* D*Avubigne relates, that it was commonly ſaid at that time,
thit Henry IV. had b: ought Paris with him before Amiens, to lhew
the abundance that teig, ed in his camp. He likewiis brought his
miſtreſs to Pecquipry, a' Wich the Nlarechel de Eiron and other
general ollceis mumured very much,

O 2 who

8

E — =_ "Bs rh ESR ts Ih —
we EE - 7h n

"x

A ESI on FIC
— 3 * —
— r :
EEE . 7s be. ies 8
3 * r

— RET
——

rm rr —

e

162 M E M IR 8 Book IX.
who ſo eagerly deſired my death, they would
voluntarily expoſe themſelves to any danger,
provided I ſhared it with them. It was hardly
pollible for one who had been a ſoldier, not to
feel his former ardour for war revive, near a
prince who was equal to every military duty,
and performed all with an application ſo unwea—
ried, and courage fo invincible, as might have
animated hearts the leaſt ſenſible to glory.

His example, however, did not produce the

ſame effect upon all. In the very midſt of his

camp, a cabal of mutjnous Proteſtants was
formed, headed by Meſſieurs de la Tremouville,

de Bouillon, and du Pleſſis, which gave bim

great uneaſineſs. Going to pay my reſpects to
him, before I returned again to Paris, 1 found

him in deep affliction: he had juſt received cer-
tain intelligence, that theſe three gentlemen, in

concert with the two Saint-Germains, De-Clan
and De-Beaupre, * D*Aubigne, La-Caſe, La-Val-

liere, La-Sauſaie, La-Bertichere, Preaux, Baſig-

nac, Regnac, Beſſais, Conſtant, and other Pro»
teſtants, to the number of twenty, had held an
aſſembly of the whole body of Proteſtant bigots,
wherein they had made a propoſal, which they

ſupported with all the power and influence they

had, to take advantage of the opportunity the ſiege
of Amiens + Agen them, which could not be

carried
* This i is the hiſtorian D*Aubigne, who is always called D* Ae
bieny in theſe memoirs : his name is Theodore-Agrippa d'Auvione ;
his birth, bis ſervices, and his con: "age, gained him g orcat reputation
#mong the Calviniſt party: he retired in 1620 to Geneva, u here he
died in 1631, aged fourſcore, leaving behind him only one fon,
calle] Conſtaus d. dabigns, whoſe daughter was Frances d'Aubigne the
late Marchionefs de Maintenon. Addias de Choumon: t, Scigucur 4e la

Bertichere, brother to John de Chaumont, the Marqu' s de Guilty;

his polterity i is ſtll extant to this day. Hector de Preaux, Cc.

T It is certain that it was by this.conjunQure of the ſiege of A-
miens, and the ſeveral ſteps which the Calviniſts of France took 19
make their N of it, that they obtained the famous dict cr

Nantes,

.
, 2 8 N .
4 Y _ ET k 1 Y ""Y
2 RP EN. 2
; r : TY” -— + EO ends Pl a
* 5 £45, 4% Fs RE 4 * 1 * 2 —— 8 — Ker .
2 (IF N Ta U e 5 4e None Z

TR.
e

„„

-
* 2 "7
E 2
If)
2
if
9
ho *
- oF
*
i
8
$
-/ Oe
1%
We
#248 -
3 8 "a
Pod 4 2
* av 1 90
8
8
1
1
1 4
5 e
| by
«.z *
by. 4
*
8
6% .
7 „
»
| 5
55 2
2
3 ö
\

1597. ele. 163

carried on without their aſſiſtance, to force an
edict from the King entirely to their ſatisfaction;
or, if be refuſed, to do themſelves juſtice, by
taking up arms apainſt him. Happily for the

King, this propolal was objected to by many per-
ſons in the aſſembly, as well as in ſome of the
great towns, Which they had endeavoured to draw

over to their party. His Majeſty was a little
comforted by this circumſtance; but he had rea-
ſon to apprehend, that the moſt violent party
would carry it at laſt. He commanded me to
write to ſome cf the principal amongſt them, to

prevail upon them, it poſlible, to reſume more

reaſonable ſentiments, and particularly the Duke

Nantes, which was granted them the year following. The Duke
de Bouillon does not deny this. All the reaſons by which he ju-

ſtißes this conduct, may be ſeen in Marſolier, I. 5. but the beſt of

all is the proteſt which he and Du Pleſſis Mornai make, that what.

cver might apparently be the view of the Calviniſts in theſe aſſem-

blies at Saumur, Loudun, and Vendome, that were called together
immediately after one another, and conducted with a great deal of
warmth, neither they nor the other heads of the party ever. had an
intention of deliberating therein upon taking up arms, but only a-
micably to endeavour to obtain equitable conditions. We could

_ wiſh, ſolely for the entire juſtification of the Duke de Bouillon, that

there had not been reaſon to upbraid him for refuling to foilow the
King in his cxpedition to Amiens; and that the ſurpriſe of this
town by the Spaniards had not been followed, on the party of the
Calviniſts, by a tranſlation of the Proteſtant aſſembly of Vendome
to Chatelleraut, where the proceedings were fo violent, that the
King was obliged to ſend tbither M. de Schomberg, de Thou, de
Vic, de Calignon, and de Montglat, who were charged with full
powers to offer ſuch conditions as (ſufficiently ſhew, that Henry IV.

thought he had every thing to fear from them. The reaton why -
the Calviniſts have filled Europe with their complaints about the re-

vocation of the edict of Nantes, is becauſe the intervention of a

ſpace of time of upwards of fourſcore years, has made them Joſe _

light of the means they uſed at firſt to extort it. As to the above
remark, conſult the memoirs of the Duke de Bouillon, his hiſt. b

Marſolier; the hiſt. of the edit of Nantes; the life of Du-Plefſis
Mornai ; the verbal proceſs of the aſſemblies of Vendome and Cha-
telleraut, &'c. but eſpecially D'Aubigné, tom 3. I. 4. c. 11 where
he relates, at very full length, all the ſebemes and cabals of the Calvi-

viſt party, and the new turn which they endeavourcd to give their

de

alfalis,

. ˙——
—— _ *

— —
I IS, ——
— 2 — 7
3 ge? by 4 — 2! :
I 2 hw” gr EATS

—

"=

—

—
=.
-

- — — 1 — * 8 1 — — > NN 2 — —
== — EET, — . RET TEYE 2 — — — — * 9 . 64257 W e
8 — — = —_— EXE : >, " 8 — 95 N ” =" 5 2
— 2 2 FF Saas, CRE tia Lt — — 1 5 n e err 2 8 :
ee . . ͤ ͤ . ͤ oma apt ee Cer „ 2 — | —

ä PS Id ag.» 1 r K 114. 1.2 ef II rs e 3 — * — 2 Ah — Es — .

: F 28 - F == _— — 5 e — Toon 8 — 2
; OF nt th ; A n * 0
» A 2 nt 2 (x 3 * SD 8 * —

A

—

— r -
— Hen bs .
2 —
— — — —

2 —

— dp Fo
— ” 5 1
— a

n

ME 8 *
—
mg, -
S = A > RITA: is & 4 Lug
. 8 — <0 W 1 1
ys — n — * 7 2 2
A ˙= ⁰ n N 4 r A gt
—_— 5 r dr ICT. 7 2 _ — 4
a 3e4 8 6 . 0 3 * ”

— YEE"
3
3

164 MEMOIR S Book IX.
de la Tremouille, whom be knew to be the
chief promoter of the conſpiracy.
HFitherto | had preſerved ſome degree of intims-
cy with La- Tremouille, inſomuch that he thought

himſelf obliged to require my preſence in theſe
aſſemblies, but concealed the occaſion of them;

and in his letter to me made uſe of ſuch ambiguous

terms, as it was not difficult to judge, that | was
conſidered by thele gentlemen as a man unfaithfal
to his own party; and that La- Tremouille waz
not far from engaging in an open rebellion. This
did not hinder me, however, from taking advan-
tage of the remaining correſpondence there waz
between us, to endeavour to bring him back to
his duty. I wrote to him in anſwer, that although
it were true, the King, in reſpect to him, was
ſuch as he imagined, there was neither honour
nor greatneſs in extorting from him a declaration
which was the effect only of neceſlity ; but that,
in reality, this Prince had the ſame ſentiments a3
formerly for the Proteſtants; that he was not the
cauſe of that injuſtice they ſuffered from the Catho-
ics, ſince he had equal reaſon to complain of them
| bimſelf; that beſides he ſhould obſerve, that the
conſequence of this edict, obtained fo infeaſonably,

would not be ſo advantageous for them as they

imagined, ſince the Catholics, always more power-
ful than they, were able to prevent it for the pre-
ſent ; and for the future, the King, juſtly offended
at their violent proceedings, would loſe all incli-
nation to grant them one day, voluntarily, what
in ſo unfavourable a conjuncture they wanted to an-
ticipate by force; and all the effeck which an un-
ſucceſsful attempt would produce, would be to

_ create a diſtruſt of them in the Catholic party, and

put them upon their guard againſt them. I re—
minded Tremouille of the examples of thoſe il-
luſtrious Proteſtants, who, on all occafions, both

/ Et as oo. ĩ⅛˙cöꝓé «d n

85 2 2 == ow 00 ,w

a.

1597. OF 8 UL L I. 165
by their words and conduct, ſhewed, that a Pro-
teſtant who acts conformable to his faith, has the
good of the ſtate, and the true intereſt of his King
always in view. Tremouille was fo little moved
with my letter, that he ſhewed it to every one,
and made a public jeſt of it: but theſe deſigns not
being ſupported by a ſufficient number of partiſans,
fell ro the ground. . „„
The poſt of great maſter of the ordnance be-
came vacant, at my fourth viſit to the camp.
Saint- Luc, looking between two gabions where,
in appearance, there was ſcarcely room enough
for a cannon-ball to enter, was unfortunately ſhot
dead by one. The King was converſing alone
with me when Villeroi and Montigny came to
tell him the news, which they would not impart
in the preſence of any other perſon, becauſe of
the particular deſigns each had on this poſt, I
came up to the King again when they bad left
him, and his Majeſty informed me of Saint-Luc's
| death, and likewiſe that Villeroi and Montigny
had aſked him for this poſt ; the firſt for his fon
D' Alincourt, or his nephew Chareau-neuf-'Aube-
pine, and Montigny for himſelf, Saint-Luc had
genius, readineſs of invention, was capable of
great induſtry, and poſſeſſed of much perſonel
courage; the only fault he could be charged with,
was his reſigning himſelf up too much to a lively
imagination, which furniſhing bim with ſcheme
after ſcheme, he conſumed in theory great part
of that time which ſhould have been employed in
practice. The King, however, thought none of
me candidates capable of filling his place; D'A-
| lincourt wanted fortitude, and, ſſid the King, has
no colour on his nails : Chateauneuf concealed his
- KF Vent of real genius, under an appearance of af-
- WF feftation and grimace. Montigny was, in truth,
| valiant, and of warm affeStions; but theſe quali-
1 ties

10% ͤ M E M OI R S8 Book IX.
ties were not ſufficient to intitle him to fo conſi.
derable a poſt, as he was withour AS order,
or ceconomy.

His Majeſty, by talking to me in this manner,
appeared to me to have no other reaſon for he.
\ NNtating whether he ſhould beſtow this pot vpon

me, but becauſe he thovght the duties of it incom-
patible with thoſe of ſuperintendent of the finan—

ces. It was not difficult for me to undeceive bim;
and that inſtant he promiſed I ſnould have it; but

deferred = proof of his friend{hip for me, 15
the ſiege was at an end, my preſence being, i

his ooinſon.” neceſſary at Paris; during which
time he would leave the place vacant. I did not
ſee the King all the following day, and unfortu—
nately for me he ſaw the Marchioneſs of Monceaux
in that interval, who omitted nothing to prevail
upon him to change his reſolution in favour of
the elder D*Eftrecs, her father. The King reſiſted
the intrezties of this lady, and even her tears; but
he was not proof to her threats of throwing her{clt
into a convent, if he refuſed her this favour. The
fear of loſing her rekindling all the ardours of his
_ paſſion, ſhe obtained the poſt for her father. The

next day the King, with ſome confuſion for the
weakneſs he had ſhewn, informed me of what hd
paſſed; however, in one circtim{tance he took
care of my intereſts, by conditioning with Mon:
ſieur D'Eſtrèes, who was utterly incapable of x-
erciſing this employment himſelf, that he ſhould
exchange it for the fi: ſt poſt under the crown which

| ſhould become vacant, and abſolutely reſign it Cf

a more conſiderable war ſhould happen to break
229 in favour of him whom his Mejeſty ſhould
appoint : and he again engaged his word to me,

that I ſhould be the perſon;
I was ſatisfied with this aſſurance, and Ss

to Paris, where a few days afterwards I received
NEWS

2 5 * * - al
hoo att a _ "PM 2
, 3 1 3 . _—
2 * e R . . 2 3
4% RL ve 29 Cas « 23 * * weg : "IS NETS oo *
: - 7 Ae” . D * Or Ws os 44M 5
> 0 3 * 4 5 e * * N 2
* . : be dee & r

45

P 4 3
4, :
"i
4
Z
„
4 1
*
3
WS
:

news from the camp of the enh of my Jong

brother, governor of Mante, whom I had left in

good health. Olf four brothers his death reduced

us to two. The King rejected all the applications

that were made to him by ſeveral perſons for the
government of Mante, to beſtow it without any
ſolicitation upon me. I received this gift by the

ſa ne letter which his Majeſty wrote to me on oc-

caſion of my brother's death, tog2ther with the
writings neceſſiry to invelt me with all the rights

of my brother, who died without children. I
ſent Baltazar my ſecretary to Amiens, to procure

my patent for the government, Which as ſoon ag

J had received, I went to Mante to be acknow-

jedged as governor, deſigning to ſtay there but

four days.
The gentlemen of the . foppolivg my
abſence would be much longer, nd probably fol-

2 lowed by a reſignation of my employment in the

finances, were full of joy; and one of the firſt ad-

vantages they drew from it, was to take proper
meaſures for appropriating to themſelves part of
thoſe ſums deſtined for the ſiege of Amiens.
They all figned a letter to his Majeſty, written in
the name of the council, in which they repreſent-
ed to him that, having been ſupplied with every
thing that was neceſſary for the ſiege during five

months, his Majeſty could not be ſurpriſed to hear
that his funds were quite exhauſted, having nothing
remaining but ſome bad arrears and aſſignments

of payment. Henry, who knew not that I was

at Mante, and who, by an effect of his ordinary
vivacity, had not examined the ſignatures of this
letter, was ſo much the more ſurpriſed at it, as 1
had poſitively aſſured him that I was able to fur-

niſh him with the uſual ſums for four months long-
er, which was all the time the ſiege was expected

to

— — — — = © = 28 = * =;
1 — — = — — — — — — —
1 * —— — — a 22
_— 2 "ps nd 41 3 < — -
440, OE — — - Ty 2
5 OE anne es hy 2 9 IRE I. Inc — —
— * 1 ef

—— - —_ * — So
— — — — — — —
— =" . _—
2 2 C : pa
— ; — ——
? n . —
* => —
i : . ——
2 - .

—

168 MEMOIRS Box N.

to laſt. He exclaimed in very ſevere terms againſt
the gentlemen of the council, in the preſence of
the chief officers of his army; nor for this once
was I ſpared any more than the reſt: but after a mo-
ment's reflection, caſting his eyes upon the names
ſubſcribed to this letter, among which he did not
ſee mine, and learning from the courier that I was
at Mante, he condemned himſelf immediately for
his too precipitate anger; and that the reparation
he made me might be complete, he read my an-
Wer to the letter he wrote me upon this occaſion,
in the preſence of the ſame perſons.

His intereſt indeed required that he ould

remove their apprehenſions. A fiege ſo extreme-
Iy laborious had ſometimes diſcouraged both
them and their ſoldiers to ſuch a degree, that an

abſolute deſertion would have been the conſe-
quence of his treaſure being exhauſted, ſince,
upon the leaſt delay of the remittances, the King
could not hinder many from leaving him. All
went on well to the end; if the beſieged defend-

ed themſelves with vigour, and made fallies up-
on ſallies, they were attacked with the ſame {pt- |

tit, and were always defeated.

The ſap was carried as far as the ramparts,
and the beſiegers had juſt taken poſſeſſion of two
cilermates, which they rendered uſeleſs to the
beſieged, when the Cardinal Archduke, with
the Count of Mansfield, who ſerved under him

in quality of Lieutenant. general, thought it time

to make an effort to prevent the reduction of the

place: they marched towards it with an army

conſiſting of between twelve and thirteen thou-

ſand foot, and two or three thouſand horſe, and
paſſed the river of Authie, with an intention to

offer the king's forces battle, or at leaſt to throw
a<onkderable fupply into Amiens. All that en.

deavoured

"3,
LY

+ -
* * p
WY c
_©
TH 2
« *
Wo by.
47 "= 4 4
1 J
_— x
ERPs,
Es 5's
A EI.
5 N
2 *
DS
e
p 7 2 ©
2.
* 1
bv 4 WL .
. 2 bs, 4
+ - 5
; *
— 57
2 <
2
7 .
4 2
- KY
1 2
9
* 2 *
7 *
. 5
3
A
* 9
5
5
4 PI
: 8 KO
8 .
5 4 A
* =.
IF
|,
> 15
i
be
W-
"6
*L
25
5
*
7

1597. O F 8 UL L V. 1

deavoured to enter were driven back *®. The

King went himſelf to reconnoitre the enemy's

army: he had a full view of it ; and notwith-
ſtanding the ſuperiority of their numbers, find-
ing them a confuſed and diſorderly multitude,

without diſcipline or conduct, reſolved to attack

them; but at the firſt motion he made, the
Archduke retreated with precipitation þ : proba-

* Perefixe relates this fact very differently. “ The Archduke,
« fays he, came and lay before the quarter called Lp, on the

15th of September, at two in the afternoon, when no body ex-
„ pected him. He might have eaſily thrown three thwufand men
into Amiens; ſo great was the conſternation which was {pread in
« the camp. Henry, doubting of the ſucceſs of that day, ſpoke out

« aloud, O Lord (at the ſame time leaning upon the pommel of his

« ſaddle, with his hat in his hand, and his eyes liited towards hea-
ven), if 'tis to day that thou intendeſt to puniſh me, as my ſins
« deſerve, I offer up my life a ſacrifice to thy juſtice, ſpare not the
„ guilty; but, O Lord, for thy great mercy's lake, pity this poor

* ſatisfied,” ſaid he gallantly, “with the courteſy of the Spaniards,
who would not advance one ſingle ſtep to receive him, and who,

„with a bad grace, tefuſed the honour which he offered them.“
Perefixe, part 2. Moſt part of the hiſtorians agree, that the Spa-

niards let lip one of the fineſt opportunities they ever had of beat-
ing the King's army: and this Prince ſaid himſelf afterwards, that
ſome of his chief officers told him all was now loſt. Matthieu, tom.
2. l. 2. p. 234. fp | |

+ The King ſaid of the Cardinal Archduke, that he came on like

a captain, but went off like a prieſt, La Curee very earneſtly de-

fired of the King, that he would be pleaſed to let him go and diſco-
ver the poſture of the enemy's army, putting his Majeſty in mind,
that the Spaniards had entercd France four times, and that he had
every time attacked them, and was the firſt who had beaten them.
Henry made anſwer, M. la Cuie-, don't be in a hurry; and at

the ſame time he gave him leave, La-Curee, was much ſpoke of

upon this occaſion for his valour, and the noble retreat he made
before this army encamped at Betancourt, four leagues from A-

miens, However, he afterwards ſaid, upon this occaſion, that
"ven three or four hundied men retreat in this manner before
hole army, it is only the fault of that army, if they are not

cut off. He was an undaunted man: for one day he flu g himſelf
into the midſt of the enemy, when by his hand being benumb-
ed with holding his piſtol, he could not uſe his fword, There

Vo L. IL. | TR | | were

bly

- = — — — — — — — 2 = — _ = * = 1 a - of
— — — —— — — — — 8 ; 7 S
— — — — & — MS — 34 5 0 — — - P 2 Tv
IF TALE — Ws bot — = — — — _ = —_ Wo.” — —_— — — 3
. RS — : ö oo”. * — — Is : * q 5 > + —
. RIES * R — ä =" ng, rn _—_— r .. ÜL
r 3 a b : - . - 8
SIO IEEE -; — — 2 = =
ita, ES Bhs a ;

BON Gr
*

kingdom, and chaſtiſe not the flock for the errors and faults of |
the ſhepherd, When he ſaw nothing appearing, he withdiew diſ-

= — —— — —
—— ———

—
Sa — — 2

> pan
2
AR eds

2 —.

1 EE
— TS

—— — — —- yp
—

— EIS
ER — erage, ng >
- ne — ES

—

DME —
Lacy

* — 8 eng
— — - — 2 8 > = ane . 0 — T os
8 J Fee. 9 SY r 8 0 p 8 — r ACTED
"tO FOILS — Re Bb: 2 e A r DOIN + Ye — 2 *
9 > 2 2 g R me” * Sow LA" - "IE" -
— RIESISIIET SN 2 8 ©

—

— —

— As
2

— — == 5
——m— Els

" —

—— —
— — —ä—
—

—— —

—
— 7

is

— oe n
; . a
— —— . ̃ Ia
* be os) . n r -
— S ere a

170 M E M OI R S Book IX.
bly it would not have been impoſſible to have
forced the Spaniards to a battle, and to have beat
them without diſcontinuing the ſiege: at leaſt
Henry was always of this opinion, Neverthe-
leſs he yielded to the advice of the greateſt num-
ber, who were for allowing the Archduke to
retreat. After this, they applied themſelves
| cloſely to the fiege. The ravelin having been
carried away, and the body of the place begin-
ning to be ſapped, Amiens ſurrendered the latter

end of September this year, which had been al.

molt wholly employed in this ſiege.
When I look upon the great number of letter;
which I received from the King during the expedi-
tion of Amiens, I cannot help being ſurpriſed that
a prince, who had the operations of a great ſiege
upon his hands, and the care of a, whole camp,
ſhould yet be ſo attentive to all affairs within his
kingdom, and with equal facility and equal dili-
_ gence acquit himſelf of ſuch oppoſite employments,

I ſhall ſpare the reader the trouble of peruſing all

theſe letters, as likewiſe thoſe which his my
did me the honour to write to me afterwards,

reckoned above three thouſand, without taking in
thoſe that I have neglected to preſerve, or Fave

been loſt through the careleſſneſs of my ſecreta-

ries, It would be too tedious to give 4 particular
account of each: ſome of them I ſuppreſs in obe-
dience to his Majeſty's orders, as they regarded
perſons whoſe reputation he had no deſire to

wound, and whom | have doubileſs more reaſon

were even women dreſſed like men, ts fought in the French ar-
my: four among them were very remarkable, who diſtinguiſhed
themſelves in taking priſoners with their own hands, and one c'pe-

cially, who went under the name of Captain Gaſcon. Theſe parti-

culars are taken from vol. 8929 of the King's MES. See al/o on
this head, tom 6. des Memoires de Ja Ligue, in which are g ven

very high commendations of the ſpirit, alertneſs, and valour of

| _ *.

to

h > rich > 23 2
. r 28 . 3 >”
* ES - $7 Fes. > ks g. 02 * . 5
ee ES : CN J as __ \ n Se -
8 7 s s £0 S , PC VL» -
— . 0 0 ” MW 4 2
. . x . SEE > +
Eh : ; 8 — Z IE Ie CORRS
þ; : EA ; S 22 > vo F „„ OC 702 k

f Ay —

. 1 3
8 e e e ee N N :
- = * o 4 *
n 7575

„
165 eee

1597 6 HL 171

to avoid offending, as I ſhould do by revealing in-

trigues of ſtate, or merely gallantry, which have
ſtill continued ſecret : as for the reſt, they turned
wholly upon accounts, application of particular
ſums, payments, penſions, and other things of
the ſame nature, all of which were ſo dry and un-
entertaining, that they afford new matter for prai-

ſes of this Prince.

With regard to his Swan wie example, he

was ſo extremely exact as to make me give him

an account once a week, of the money received,
and the uſes it had been put to*®, He does not
mils to remark that, in caſting ſome cannon, they
wanted to rob him of a piece. In a remiſſion of
fix or ſeven thouſand crowns which he was obliged
to grant the people upon the land taxes, he ſettles
himſelf the gratification that ought to be repaid to

certain pariſhes which had ſuffered moſt. He cal-

culated exactly the number of the offices that
were fold, and the money ariling from thence.
He never forgot any perſon to whom the ſtate was
indebted, or who had done it any ſervice, either
in the diſtant provinces or the neighbouring king-
doms, aſſigning with the utmoſt diſcernment a
particular fund for all. His great care was,
that the fund appointed for the ſupport of the
war, ſhould not be broken in upon by any other
payment, as appears when he mentions a recom-
pence to be given to the Sicur de Vienne, who
had brought back the city of Tours to its obedi-
ence, or the repayment of four thouſand crowns
that he had borrowed of Madam de Beaufort.
The number of his letters relating to his mili-
tary affairs are prodigious. He calculated fo juſt-

ly the ſums neceſſary for the making of trenches

and other works, together with the ſoldiers pay,

A hundred crowns could not be expended, ſays Perefixe, but
de knew whether they were well or ill laid out,

P 2 that

|

172 MEMOIRS Bock IX.

that there was no danger of a miſtake in following
him. The order he obſerved in the march of
| his troops was not regulated with les prudence,
than that of the convoys of money which came to
his camp, that the one ge: not be retarded,
nor the other intercepted.

All this made up but one part of his cares,
The letter wherein he- ſpeaks of the repairs of

Montreuil, Boulogne, and Abbeville; thoſe in

which he expatiates upon the method of mMait-
_ taining regularity in the provinces, ' obedience in
the cities, ſubordination in the different bodies,
on occaſion of the chamber of accounts which had
failed in the reſpect they owed him; that in which
he ſays, © I would not mix the expences of
« maſquerades with theſe deſtined for the ule cf
% my army;” for Mortier, who had provided

dreiles for a maſque, had cauſed the money laid.
out on that occaſion to be inſerted in a memorial

of military expences; that allo which contained

his reply to the offer which the city of Paris made
him by her Mayor and aldermen, to ſupport, at

their own expence, twelve hundred men, in cou—
Kieration of which ſervice, he diſcharged this city

; from paying the aids a ſecond time, and many 0

ther of this kind; all theſe ſhew, that the ſame

hand that was able to draw up a plan of attack,
was cqually capable of conducting the affairs of

the cabinet,

The only thing he neglected was his perſonal

maintenance; to make him think of it, Montglat,

the rſt Reward of his houſhold, was forced to in-
form him, as he tells us in Gme of his letters,
that he could ſcarce make the pot boil any long-

er. He was not aſhamed to confeſs a thing * hich

affected his domeſtic enemies only; it was their
art to bluſh that he was deſtitute of appare],

arms, and horſes: ; however, he afterwards found
means

— >

1
* 1
de
= N
INNS
* s
4
2
„„
HI TY
Ty

))

means to ſettle a fund for his own ſubſiſtence,

” which could not be confounded with any other;

it was the mark of gold ariſing from the offices
which were fold, that he deſtined for this uſe.
Such were the ſubjects of many of the letters he
wrote me this year, from which the reader may

FP judge of thoſe of the following years, the origi-
nals of which | keep with the utmoſt care, but ſhall
only tranſcribe the moſt important amongſt them.

It is remarkable, that although there are a great
number of them, and almoſt all very long, there

are few, however, that are not written with his
own hand, particularly thoſe which are directly

addreſſed either to the council or to me *. |
J was preſent at the council which was held af-

ter the ſurrender of Amiens, upon the operations
of the reſt of the campaign. Three propoſitions
were made: to follow the enemy's army; ſeize
ſome cities of Artois by ſurpriſe; and beſiege

DourlensF in form: upon which each one that
was preſent gave his opinion; mine was, that it

could not be expected the Cardinal Infant, who
had ſo obſtinately refuſed to fight, when he had
no other way of ſuccouring Amiens, ſhould ſuffer

himſelf to be obliged to come to an engagement
now, when he was ſenſible he ſhould have all the

l obſerved in the preface the reaſons that induced me not to
tranſcribe here ſo many letters. They may be ſeen at the head of
the new collection of Henry le Grand's : the originals of ſome of
them are at this day to be ſcen in the fine muſeum of the Duke de
Sully, with marginal notes written by Maximilian de Bethune's own
hand. But the moſt valuable picces in this cabinet, beſide a con-
ſiderable number of original letters of Henry III. and other cotem-
porary princes, are papers of ſtate, letters, ſerious or gay pieces, and
other fragments, writ by Henry le Grand's on hand, and by his
chic! muniter or only ſigred or marked in the margin by them.
We have el eady ſpoken of thoſe that concern the accommodation
of the Admiral de Villars, and other governors and towns,
eſpccially n Normandy : we ſhall have occaſion in the ſequel to
ment!on pa ticula: iy ſome others, | |

A city of Picardy.

P 3 King's

— n — =
EIS g . -
— —
* — — 2 > **

- GOTH os PET CI x e

1 23 Wan 22
4 - 27 Aha ww” ret

— nn

1
3

— ED — 2 — "INI TD . a
— . 2 2 Ts 2 i 2 SY
2 8 PAC, WW Senor 8 Ti. cr ty p 4, —
8 — PEI 250 &t x 2 5 r — Ek 2 Hee 3 — 2 FF —_-— 0 r — ET, * - we of 2
. 138 8 — 3 * — _ * - Mor NI — — 2 * A 8 6. _> — — L's G — — ER —__ was IK
EAN <> ay Ie 2 n rr 1 5 2 . 3 E Eras E * 2 — — 2 n
"IEP Cs "& (Vee \ I" 8 Te x * rr — >: Mz Lf 7 . *

1 —
N I

— — E 7 2
N 99
: 5 L "23% 7
7

„57
— .

1 2 4
2 — - . *
* = 3. PRO IE To tn
2 8 -

174 N E M O IK S Book IX.

| King' 8 forces to encounter, and had had ſufficient

time to take meaſures to avoid it; nor was it more
probable, that the enterpriſes upon the cities of
Attois ſhould ſucceed, in the neighbourhood of
ſo numerous an army : yet that either of theſe de-
ſigns appeared to me more judicious than the pro-
ject of lay ing ſiege to Dourlens, ſince that in fif-
teen days we might know what was to be expect-

ed from the former, and incur no ſhame by fail-

ing in them: whereas, by following the latter,

we ſhould infallibly have the regret to find that.
we had conſumed a great deal of time, money,

and troops, to no purpoſe It was refolved, that
the two firſt meaſures ſhould be ſuddenly attempt-
ed, without renouncing the ſiege of Dourlens.

The Spaniards kept upon their guard, and the

French gained no other advantage by this attempt,
than the honour of having endeavoured to finich
the war by a ſingle action, which contributed as
much as all the ref, to make the King of Spain
deſirous of peace.

It was quite the reverſe with the enterpriſe of
Dourlens, upon which they were obſtinately bent.

The King ſent me at Paris, whither I had now

returned, his laſt reſolutions on that head. I did
not ſeruple to repreſent to him, in terms ſtill
tro ger, the reaſons that had hindered me from

ap; roving that propoſal; that his army, having
ſuffered conſiderably at the ſiege of Amiens, was
not in a condition to undertake a ſecond equally

laborious, in the month of October, a ſcaſon when
the ground about Dourlens, which is naturally fat
and viſcous, was made impratticable by the rains,
and within fight of an army eager to ſieze an oc-

caſion of being re venged, The King did not
take my freedom amis, though he was not con-

vinced by my reaſons. He wrote to me in anſwer,
that the expedition of Pourlens was ablolutely
neceſſar)

5 n IE
4 Tas + DS bt, LE
p e e
e eee, e 8

* N n
er R <9 n „ * 5

* = * : FX 2 o
. 0 2
> 28 * 5 6 = we 40 0 8 N * mA 3 va a
SHARE 1 . l OY ___.
» - g N 8 1 7 Ws . "IR 2 a6
WNT a Th . . 3 KS 3 3
4 8 to LIP TY Yo - 7 22
6 - , Fs 394, TELE OA * „ Lp

1597.
neceſſary for the preſervation of Amiens and Ab-

beville: that by putting Picardy in a ſtate of ſe-

curity, he ſhould facilitate the ſale of the new of-

fices; and that he would take ſuch meaſures, that

the ſiege ſhould not continue ſo long as I appre-
hended.

Accordingly Dovelens: was inveſted the ninth

of October, and on the thirteenth, the rains had

ſo much ſpoiled the ground and the roads, that

the works could not be brought forward. Ville-
roi informed me in a letter, that they already re-
pented of their attempt; in effect, the King ſet

out almoſt immediately after, from bis quarters

at Beauval, and came to Belbat, where he gave

orders for raiſing the ſiege, at which the ſoldiers

had ſuffered ſo much during the ſhort time it had
laſted, that they were upon the point of diſband-
ing. The King cauſed them all to be paid, pla»

ced them in winter quarters upon the frontier,

left his light horſe there, retrenched part of the 5

garriſons Which the ſurpriſing of Amiens had ob-
liged him to throw into the neighbouring places,
and ſet forward for Paris, to ſpend the winter
there, taking his rout through Rouen and Mons
ceaux, where he ſtaid eight days,

From this place he ſent me orders to over-rule
the difficuities which the Chancellor de Chiverny

raiſed in parliament, to erect his country of Ar-

magnac and Lectoure into a preſidial; and to af

ſign the money ariſing from it to the payment of
colts granted in parliament to the Sicur de Fon-
trailles, Count of Armagnac, in a ſuit which he
had carried in that court againſt his Majeſty, As
the Princeſs might have ſome claims upon this
money, by virtue of the ceſſion hei brother de-
fizned to make her of all his eſtates in this pro-
vince, the King deſired me to keep the matter ſe-
cret, and uſed the ſame precautions with Fon-

, 3 trailles

0 F $ v . LY. 175

— re Fm Set — — 2
2 % OG * —

—

— . —— ——— = entree ee one oe .
: r —
wont een — —

— 55... — 2 —
— . rr 1 *
— — TH * *%

. —

. *
2 — 2 A =» = — —
SA ar N MER os 5 -
2 C as _—_— LS 1 TI 1 1

nr r 3 S ö 3
IEEE TEE ii, ee St Fe SS 26
— * =

— T — 1
= Sg 2 . Fo" I
"vx; =" * — wr -

7 * 2 — m ＋
„ ˙ TTT

— et

— — ef
2 RE, 2% r
— 8 n
5 VE IS —

2
* Cn 5 2

= —_— th —
IV . ET: I :
a 3 8
* << XZ 2 Y TR
G > EY VEE a 29%

1756 M E MOI R Ss Book lx.

trailles and the Chancellor, the laſt of whom ob.
ſerved this command very ill; but his indiſcre-
tion had no bad conſequence, the Princeſs leaving
the court of France a ſhort time after. In the

ſame letter, the King ordered me to pay Demeu- _

rat his ſolicitor at Riom, as likewiſe La-Corbiniere,
who was employed to furniſh proviſions for the

troops that were left in Picardy, It was in theſe

intervals from buſineſs, that he extended his at-
| tention to the molt inconſiderable objects. He
made me give the Sieur de Piles, an old faithful
ſervant, a reward of three thouſand crowns, and
another of eight thouſand livres to Gobelin, to
whom, at the ſame time, he repaid ſixteen thou-
ſand livres, advanced by him tor the ſupport of
his houſhold. There was no name, even to that
of the poor woman who gathered the taxes at Gi-
ſors, which was not mentioned ſomewhere in his
A %¶òr] GO
The poverty of the people“, which was indeed
exceſſive, having produced many blanks in the re-

ceipts for the taxes, the King ſuſpected that the

gentlemen of the council, who were very zealous
in repreſenting and exaggerating theſe deficien-
cies, would find means, when they had obtained
a diſcharge for the people, to put large ſums in
their own pockets, by concealing the diſcharge
that had been granted; he ordered me fiſt to ge

information, whether the people were as much
behind hand in the years 1594 and 1495, as thoſe.

gentlemen had made him believe; which would

_ ealily be done, by ex:mining the accounts of re-

ceipts and expences given in by the general and

® Bougars, deſcribing in his letters the deſclation which the civil
was had cauſd in the kingdom affures us, amen gt othes things,
that the highways, wete ſo over-run wb biizrs and theuns, that
their trad cuuld not but with much ade be dſcovincd. Epiſt. 73»
ad Camerat, - | 5 |

particular

L «aa e — :
eee „ ˙ us,

OF 8; . 177

7 Þ partcatar receivers, and by viſiting the courts of

the ſame provinces, whither I was already gone;

and ſecondly, to examine whether this deficiency

© of the taxes did not proceed from idlenels in the

0 collectors, and diſobedience in the people.

To conclude, his Majeſty began to buly him-

ſelf at Monceaux with another matter of im port-

anee, that of drawing up articles, on which he
deſired to come to an agreement with the Pro-

| teſtants. This work he preſſed for ſome time
vpon the Chancellor and Villeroi : I was likewiſe
ordered to engage in it; but he would have had

reaſon to complain a long time of the litile atten-
tion which thoſe men paid to his Gelign, if he
had not come himſelf to Paris to put it in execu-
tion *.

For theſe two laſt affairs concerning the Guan
ciers and the Proteſtants, more leiſure was neceſſa-
ry than the King, upon his arrival at Paris, was
able to aftord them. He was obliged to turn his
thoughts upon making new preparations for pal-
ſing the following ſpring into Britany, where the
rebels, finding themſelves out of the view of their
ſovereign, continued, with impunity, in diſorder
and diſobedience. 1 ne Duke of Mercœur, who
was at their head, durſt not openly, however,

favour their revolt: on the contrary, the letters

he wrote to the King were filled with ſeeming to-
kens of ſubmiſſion; and during the ſpace of two
years, it had been his whole ſtudy to amule him
with feigned propoſals which he knew how to e-
vade fulfilling. The King, on his ſide, had con-
ſtantly diſſembled with the Duke, and hitherto

* © He ſaid to a deputation of the i who came to com-
* pliment him after the expedition to Amiens, ſhewing them the
' Marechal de Bron, „ Here, Gentlemen, is the Marechal de Bi-

ron, whom I freely mn both to my friends and enemies.“ Pe-
ref. part 2. |

contented

Ol re ne es er — = — 0 . — —
—— . y — Oo —— — oy -
* — — — —

22

*

Ds MEMOIR S BooklX,

contented himſelf with favourably receiving the

officers of this province, who, weary of Mei-

cœur's delays, addreſſed themſelves directly to
is Majeſty : but at length, the King thinking it

time to go and attack this rebellious ſubje&, even
at his own doors *, this deſign, which was car-

ried on with the utmoſt ſecreſ;, employed us
during the whole winter.

It would have anſwered no porpott to have un ·
dertaken it without a body of twelve hundred
foot, and two thouſand cavalry, and a train of

artillery, conſiſting of twelve cannons at leaſt ;
and it was not poſiible to draw out theſe troops

from the {ix thouſand foot, and twelve hundred

horſe, which his Majeſty thought neceſſary for

the dcfence of the frontier of Picardy, and which
he had committed to the care of the Conſtable,

aſſiſted by the counſels of Meſſieurs Bellievre, Vil-

leroi, and Sillery. New funds were to be found

for the ſupport of all theſe troops; the taxes

could not poſſibly be increaſed otherwiſe than by
leſſening the coſts of the collection, which is with

reſpect to the King a real increaſe. I likewiſe
applied myſelf to collect the debts that were in

arrear, and to recover ſuch as were negletted ;
to which I joined ſome new impoſts, few in

number, and not oppreſſive.
The King, without theſe ſupplies, would have

| been obliged to have liſtened to propoſals for a

peace, and could not then have concluded one,

but upon terms very advantageous to Spain.

One of the Duke de Merceeur's friends, hay\ ig aſked him ore

day, if ever he dreamed of teing Duke of Britany, he made en-
Mer, © I know not whether it be a dream, but it has le ſted theſe
« ten years and upwards.” The Ducheſs de Mercœur's grandmo-

ther was Charlotte, heireſs of the houte of Penthievie, whoſe pre

tended rights to the Duchy of B: ritapy were 9 the foun-
dation of hole of the Duke de Mercur. | |

Popr pe

C

_ 0 TY EET: 5

Pope Clement VIII. deſired it with great ar-

dour; and, long before the campaign of Picar-
dy, had ſent the Cardinal of Florence, in quality
of legate, to propoſe it to the King; at the ſame
time Calatagironne, patriarch of Conſtantinople,
went by his Holineſs's orders to Spain for the
ſame purpoſe. The negotiation had been unfor-
tunate in the beginning. The King, more irri-
tated than diſcouraged by the invaſion of Amiens,
only anſwered the Cardinal haughtily, that he
would defer hearing what he had to propoſe, till
after he had regained this place. The King of
Spain on the other hand, although it was with

4 regret that he beheld the war renewed, yet found-

ed great hopes upon his ſucceſs in Flanders, and

; particularly upon having ſurpriſed the city of A-

miens, the poſſeſſion of which might draw along
with it that of all the neighbouring country from
the Oiſe to the Seine. VF |
The expeditions of the campaign being more
favourable to the French, drew both ſides nearer
an accommodation. Philip knew Henry to be a
Prince with whom it was as difficult to keep as
to gain advantages, and having beſides a fore-
boding in his own mind, that the illneſs he was
ſeized with would be mortal, the fear of leaving
at his death the Prince his fon expoſed to ſuch an
enemy as the King of France, induced him to li-
ſten to the advice of Calatagironne, who when

he was aſſured of the King's inclinations, re-

turned to Rome to acquaint the Pope with
then, and was by his Holineſs again deputed to

France, to give the Cardinal of Florence an account

of his ſucceſs, and act in concert with bim.

Accordingly their Eminences renewed their
former ſolicitations with Henry, and often repre—
ſented to him, that the peace, in ſome meaſure,
depended wholly upon him. The King, who

Was

—— —
— —— —

180 M E M OI R S Book IX.

was undeceived in his turn, and no longer influ.

ed indifferent to their propoſals: at length he told f 7
them, that he would not be againſt a peace, pro- by
vided Spain would give up all ſhe poſſeſſed in his

poſſibly be obtained. And the King replied, that

war, nor waſte time ſo precious in mere nepotis-

x ——————ů —- —

ever, I quickly put matters in ſuch a ſtate as ! | 2
conſequence, I expected to have found him al-
ſurpriſed to hear, as I drew near Angers, that the
the ſervice he received from Meſdames de Mer- iÞ
cœur and De Martigues upon this occaſion : they Þ .,

chioneſs de Monceaux, a er to meet the

enced by thoſe great and flattering hopes, which,
through a reliance upon the promiſes of his cour-
tiers, he had entertained, ſaw the return of the
two negotiators with pleaſure, though he appear.

25 1
FL,
+4

dominions. The legates hinted, that this might U

upon this plan he permitted them to treat and
conclude a peace with the three miniſters he had
left in Picardy, to whom he referred them; in |
the mean while, that he might not loſe the ad-
vantage of thoſe preparations he had made for

tions, he ſet out for Britany.
The King took his rout through Angers, in "he
beginning of March, ordering his army to follow

. wm. a. o« oa a. 4a

F
him by ſhort journies: he permitted his council | b
likewiſe to attend him, but not till it had made Þ *®
the neceſſary diſpoſitions for ſupplying his army | *
in Britany, and the troops and commiſſioners I F

for the peace in Picardy, with all things that were
needful. As I now had the abſolute direction of
the council, and met with no oppoſition what:
thought I <a Join the King, without any bad
ready far advanced in Britany, and vas greatly
King had not left that city. The Duke of Mer-
cœur mult have been infallibly ruined, but for

began with obtaining, by the intereſt of the Mar-
King

CD :; UI; "og © Y DÞ-. _—_

—

2

„ 5 * x. FOE
Wee net ow't e

8 2 2 4 %
Fe ter. "9x 2

3s ING;

„
„

n

COOLS | - 2
N
Bas e

1597. 0 F

to their party. The Ducheſs de Mercœur offered
her only daughter, to be diſpoſed of in marriage
to whomſvever the King thought proper, hinting,

to the Marchionels, that ſhe would not be againſt |
marry ing this opulent heireſs to her ſon Cæſar 4,
| © The Marchionefs of Monceaux was ſo agreeably
flattered by this alliance, that from that moment,
confidering the Duke of Mercœur's intereſts as her.
on, ſhe ſolicited for him with the utmoſt ardour
and aſſiduity:

every art to ſoften a prince remarkable for his
complacency to the ſex.

the two ladies likewiſe employed

He (ſuffered himſelf to

be diſarmed by their ſubmiſſions, promiſes, and
- tears, and no longer thought ee the
Duke of Mercceur.

Ihe moment I alighted at Angers I went to
pay my reſpe&s to the King. This prince, who

by the firſt word I uttered, and the turn only of
my countenance, comprehended all 1 had in my

mind,

embraced me cloſely in his arms, and

\ preſſing me to his boſom, ** My friend,“ faid he

to me, © you are welcome; | am tru y glad to

s ſee you here, for I have had great need of you.”

-K And 1,
mean compliances that are dictated by flattery)

Sire,” I replied (incapable of thoſe

lam greatly grieved to find you ſtill bere.”

lt is long,” ſaid the King,

interrupting me,
that we have learned to underſtand cach other
„ by half a word; I gueſs alr-ady. what you
would hy. to me; but if you knew what has

* They had come thither before the King. but were refuſed en-
trance; upon which they withdrew to Ponte de Ce, till the King

arrived at Angers.

} © The eſpouſals were celebrated at Angers with the ſame mag-

. nificence as if he had been a law fully begotten ſon of France : :

© he was bat four years of age, and ſhe but ſix.“ Feref, 24 den,

„„

King at Angers “; where, as ſoon as they arri
ved, they entirely gained over the King's miſtreſs

_ —

PEN
777... Dy EVE Ine Lo We

2 Boon —

l
q
4
kf
}
|

182 MEMOIR S Bock IX.

“ paſled, and to what a forwardneſs I have alrea.

7 dy brought affairs, you would alter your opi-

e nion.“ I replied, that thoſe advantages, What
ever they were, which he meant, he might have
obtained, and many far more conſiderable, if,
inſtead of ſtopping at Angers, he had preſented 3
himſelf before Nantes, at the head of his army, |
The King endeavoured to excuſe himſelf upon
the want of inſtruments proper for the ſiege of
the city. I anſwered, that he would have had
no occaſion for them, becauſe Nantes would have
rendered them unneceſſary by a ſurrender, and
perhaps have delivered “ the Duke of Merccur |
into his hands. The firſt of theſe things it was
highly probable would have happened, and the | __
King acknowledged he believed ſo. After this þ
confeſſion I added, It is true, I do not find the |

«© bravery of my prince in this inſtance ; but!
„ ſhall ſay nothing, becauſe I know what it was
« that withheld you.” With this prince, I was
not apprehenſive my {ſincerity would have any
bad conſequences, He confeſſed all to me,
though with fome little confuſion, alledging as

an excuſe his compaſſion for thoſe who were in a

ſtate of humiliation, and the fear of diſobliging

his miſtreſs.
After this, the converſation turned wholly up-
on news: his Majeſty had juſt received letters

from the Queen of Evgland, expreſſing her deſire
of ſending an ambaſſador to him, to induce him,
as we imagined with great probability, to con-
Ty the war. By: other kee from Bellievre

C All the kiftoitins agree, A, Henry IV. was in a e to
have made the Duke de Mercaur ſmart for his diſob: dicnce: he

would never ſuffer that this Duke ſhould ſend him any perſon in his

name to Vervins; and proteſted, that he would rather endure 2
_ continual war, than conſent that ont of his ſubjeQs ſhould ſeem to
treat with a thus like a foreign prince,

and

e eee eee eee, e rr Rory oa,
S fra fe „ „ oe e om we fas AS

225 — — 2 —

=

PP VI”

ln

2 — 2

—_—

A — — — — BY of — — — 2

bY 9
8 n
1 "Jas
J 1

%

*

N
1.
pe
1
—

8 on
Fe of
*

f

4

o
98
»

*
*
F
4X
7

1
1
r
N _—
2 2 5 48
1
; Bt, OY
77 Hp

0 UL LY 183

and Sillery, he was informed, that the legates

had offered, in the name of Spain, to reſtore all

© the cities, except Cambray, that had been taken

during the war. The King's carrying troops
into Britany, without being under a neceſſity of
© leaving Picardy defenceleſs, had given great ſur-
priſe to Spain, and ſatisfaction to the court of
London, ever ſolicitous to humble the pride of
that crown. I adviſed Henry not to refuſe a

» 2 22 OI yu=yq Tip hdd =

£2 ws

oQ a»

peace for the ſake of a ſingle city, and to be fatis-

| : fied with having dciven the enemy out of Picardy
and Britany. Es DE

This latter province, which had panted for

- tranquillity a long time, was ſenſible how much
it owed to his Majeſty, whoſe preſence at the
head of an army was the only thing which could

- procure it that happineſs. The party of Mer-
cœur became the King's party. The Spaniards
were not in a condition to hold out long again{t
their united forces.
where they were cantoned in the greateſt num-
bers, could not fail of yielding ſoon to the com-
mon lot, and a few days were ſufficient to clear
the province entirely of its foreign enemies, who
_ afterwards aſſembled her ſtates, in order to prove
her gratitude to the King, by granting him a con-

Blavet“ and Douarnenes,

ſiderable ſubſidy. His Majeſty commanded me
to continue my rout to Britany, and while IL

\ waited there for his arrival, to pay the troops,
and quarter them in caſerns in the neighbour—

hood of Rennes and Vitre, with ſtrict orders to

| keep up an exact diſcipline there: after which
I was to go to Rennes, to repreſent his Majeſty's

perſon in the ſtates, to haſten their reſolutions

concerning the ſums that were promiſed, and

* Blayet is now called Port Louis, and lies in the biſhopric of

Vannes: Douarnenes is another port and road, in the biſhopric of

Quimper, 5
= 0-4: =: a

OSS

— — —

IS > — — 2 — — 2 3 Cy Sn 0 — ——— = —
* = 2 J I Bo — > op A 5 PRE . — —
—— > ha q — r L a — 7 3 — — 2 p W/m 2 — n - Ao ==
Cn ESRI OI IHE TEES Eo — 2 — —— ES, ä * =
: : 2 Ko . — —

.

—— Ay

—— — Ir — ;
reer

r

184 M E M O I R 8. Bock I.

uſe all my authority to facilitate the levying ir,
The King having an inclination to ſtay ſome © 7
days longer at Angers, laid hold of the pretence, ®
that ſomething was ftill wanting to the tre;
with the Duke of Mercœur.

I had no reaſon to be offended with the Ducheſs
or Mercœur for having endeavoured to procure.
the moſt favourable conditions ſhe could; yet
I fo far reſented her making the King the dupe

of her arts, that if his Majeſty had not obliged
me to make her a viſit, 1 would have left An- 1
gers without ſeeing her; although I was rela. © =
ted to this lady by the fame fide, by which!
Had the honour to be allied to the royal manly, 1
that i is, by the houſe of Luxembourg. |
The King remonſtrated to me, that if the
confideration of being related to her, together
with the Jaws of politeneſs, were not ſufficient
to induce me to pay her this reſpect, yet the
Ducheſs of Mercœur deſerved it on account of
that regard ſhe had for me, which the know-
tedge of my intentions could not alter. In effect,

I was received by her and Madam de Martigues
with the higheſt diltinftion and reſpect. Madam
de Mercœur, after ſome gentle reproaches for

| Having endeavoured to hurt her intereſt, and
rhat of ber daughter, my little kinſwoman told
me, that there was nothing ſhe fo ardently de- It
fired, as to be able to put the affairs of the Duke e
der huſband into my hands, that I might con- I
elude this treaty with the King in whatſocver I h
manner I thought fit. I anſwered the Ducheß, a

ES 7 IO * 8 * * + : 4, . —— Ga

= £©\þ 4 „„ . es % bein nes GAY „ oa as

that while my eſpe and adherence to her were ſÞ v
not - inconſiſtent with the ſervice of the King, e
which always carried me againft any other con- Þ a
ſideration, the ſhould find no body more e diſpoſed tt
to ſerve her thin myſelf. Lc

8 went to Chatcau-Gonthier that evcning, and
\ Teac he

„ie. OF 8 UL L I. i
© reached Vitre the next day, where I ſaw but too
> plainly of what importance it was to be extremely
= cautious and circumſpect in quartering troops, that
nothing might be neglected. Meſſieurs de Salig-
nac and de Mouy, Marechals de camp, were of

great uſe to me upon this occahon. Tranquillity

Was ſo perfectly eſtabliſhed in all this part of the
country, that the countrymen who at firſt had re-
treated to the woods, and fortified themſclves there,
where every moment they were ready to come to
- blows, now returned to their houſes; and the city
of Rennes thought that ſome acknowledgment was
due to me: for this reaſon, when the ſtates were
* aſſembled, a fine apartment was prepared for me
during my abode in that city, at the houſe of Ma-
demoiſelle de la Riviere; ſhe was a woman of wit
and pallantry, who being always looking out for
pleaſures for herſelf, was the fitter for the commiſ-
ſion with which ſhe was charged, of engaging me
in all the entertainments that are commonly found
in cities like Rennes, opulent and polite. If the
life of a miniſter was to be at all times like that
vphich I led in this city, and which laſted almoſt
ſix weeks, it would have in reality all thoſe charms
vwhich are ſo falſely attributed to it. 1 had no other
employment than being preſent at the aſſembly of
the ſtates, Who, with all poſſible gratitude, agreed
to the ſervice the King required of them, and grant—
ed him, without any oppoſition, eight hundred
- thouſand crowns; of which one hundred was to
be paid the firſt month, as much the ſecond, and
_ afterwards two hundred cach month, till- the
Whole was paid. To furniſh this ſum, a tax was

created of four crowns: upon a pipe of wine. The

aſſembly were deſirous of adding a preſent of fix
thouſand ciowns to me, which I retuſed, without
examining whether this was among the number
of thole occaſions when I might have been per-

Q 3 . mitted.

mr ng

IR — 4 88 Lach __ Frog _ OE OST IO ary r
RR . ...... A a

*
|
*
|
=
Ih:
*
V
#
*
x
;
|
*
1

186 MEMOIRS Bock IX.
mitted to have. accepted a preſent. The King,

to whom the merit of my diſintereſtedneſs had

been highly exaggerated, and who had himſelf
beſtowed more praiſes on my conduct in the af.
ſembly, than it deſerved, was reſolved, that the
ex pence of a preſent to me ſhould be his, and in-
ſtead of fix, gave me ten thouſand crowns. Dur-

ing ſix and twenty years, which I had ſpent in

Ty bis Majeſty's ſervice, I had never received ſo con-

ſiderable a gift. On this occaſion there was a

kind of generous conteſt betwixt the King and the
province of Britany; which at laſt obtained, that

theſe ten thouſand crowns ſhould be added to the
eight hundred thouſand the SERIE had offered

his Majeſty. |
The treaty with the: Duke of Mercer being

completed, the King ſent it to the chamber of ac-

counts at Rennes to be regiſtered. As ſome pri-

vate articles in this treaty were not expreſſed, the

court thought it had a right to refuſe regiſtring it,

without certain reſtrictions with reſpect to theſe ar-
ticles. Henry, who knew better than any other

prince in the world, how far the power of theſe I
ſovereign courts extended, and always appcared

careful not to make the leaſt encroachment upon

it, reſented this refuſal with becoming ſpirit; and,

together with the difpatches which I received gon

him regularly every day, he ſent me an order in
_ writing for the chamber of accounts, in which he
_ obſerved, that this court could not be ignorant,
that in all treaties or acts relating merely to war

or the King's perſon, the ſovereign of France took

counſel with no perſon, nor demanded his letters
| to be regiſtred but as a formality, which otherwiſe

was little eſſential; he reproved them for their
raſh conduct, and ordered them to repair their
diſobedience by an abſolute ſubmiſſion to his will,
. he King did not ſhew leſs firmneſs on another
occaſion

mo — £7 _ bans 2

— * =;

* 1
. N $ n 5
, : a 8 it RR It
* ty Top © * EET NE be + Bhs hs 8 3
W e a ARES ͤ
* N N 5 2 en 0 n * * *

1999. / n LT. 187
occaſion which likewiſe regarded the ſovereign
courts. Theſe bodies aſſumed the privilege of
furniſhing immediately but half of the ſum which

the aſſembly had taxed them for their contingent,

and endeavoured to take a more convenient and
more diſtant time for the payment of the reſt:
they made the ſame difficulties about their ſhare

that it was his will they ſhould furniſh the whole

of the neceſſary contributions for the maintenance
of thoſe troops which they had demanded them
ſelves. Henry eaſily comprehended, that they

would not have had recourſe to this artifice, but
to avoid contributing any thing, as ſoon as he had

quitted the province: therefore he ſent me word,

tax; which was done accordingly. Their murmurs
on account of paying the troops ceaſed, as ſoon
as they were convinced that the tranquillity of
their province depended upon this regulation, and
they were the firſt after that to approve of my
conduct. 33% eſt eg. WE
Theſe ſeveral orders were ſent to me from Nantes,
to which place the King had advanced, after the
treaty with the Duke of Mercœur had been agreed
upon, to attend to two affairs of importance, name-
ly, the edict for the Proteſtants and the reception
of the two ambaſſadors from England and Holland.
His Majeſty believing his preſence in Picardy was
neceſſary to forward the peace, intended to have
left Nantes in a month's time, without taking a
journey to Rennes, which he had looked upon as

uſeleſs; and had already given orders for the march _
of the five regiments of Navarre, Piedmont, the
Ile of France, Boniface, and Breaute, which he

drew out of Britany, to fortify the frontier of

Flanders. The King having informed me of his

deſign with reſpect to theſe regiments, I repreſent-
ed to him, that the probability of a peace, being
now changed to an abſolute certainty, it was ne-
8 - 2 - BERAry

F
N
L
—
*
th
f
- FR
*
8
+4
+
:
{
45
:
Fr.
br
#4
$
+
© Bl
J
*
ly
+4
4;
oy
4
75
Ls
5 *
ny
7
y
&.
' 24%
1
7 1
3.
7 7
:
95
17

.

83 MEMOIRS BooklX.

ceſſary to diſband part of his troops, and leſſen
the number of his garriſons, as being a burden

too heavy for the kingdom to ſupport, and that |

two of thoſe regiments were now ſufficient for Pi.
cardy; accordingly, only the two firſt were ſent
thither, under the conduct of the Marechal de
Briſſac. I even infiſted ſo much upon the neceſſity
there was for his Majeſty to ſhew himſelf at leuſt
in the capital of Britany, that the King, altering
his ſcheme, reſolved to come and ſpend ſome days
there before his return to Paris; and for that pur.
poſe, to diſpatch as ſoon as poſlib! e, thoſe two al-
fairs which detained him at Nantes.

It was now become more neceſſary than ever, t© |

_ regulate that concerning the Proteſtants : tbeſe
people aſſumed fuch a licentiouſneſs of tongue =
France, that the King himſelf did not eſcape the
rage and malignity of their invectives. The [Go
monſtrances his Majeſty had made to the authors

of the plot before mentioned, were fo far from

bringing them back to their duty, that, in appear-
ance, it ſerved only to make them uſe their atmoſ
efforts to bring the whole Proteſtant party in their

feveral ſynods *, to the molt violent reſolutions:

Madam de Rohan did not ſcruple to cabal with

many of them, in order to carry, by a plorality

ok voices, the propoſal of taking up arms, and
forcing the King to receive ſuch conditions as they

ſhould preſcribe to him; in which attempr the

was ſeconded with ſurpriſing aſſiduity, by D'Aubio-.

ne, remarkable for his ſatirical turn, and propene
ſity to ſlanderþ. It was he who in thoſe aſſemblies

had the aſſurance to mention, that they ought no

® At 8 1 Vendome, and 8 of theſe we
have ipoken before, on occaſion of the cabals of the Protcliant par
ty during the ficve of Amiens.
Hes ſuppoſed to be the author of the confeſſion of Sancy, the
; &Jventures ot tie "Baran dc E =ucite, and other " lampoons. |

longer

cs

*

7 *

1 n

2 2

81 Nee
2
POTS
mats 1
LAS:

: 2, ;
5 LOA.
, 4
Fa” *

1597. 0-4 8 9090 LL 1. 189

longer to place any confidence in a prince who,

together with his religion, had abjured every ſen—

' timent of his affection, good-will, and gratitude,

for the Proteſtants : that nothing but neceſſity for-

ced him to apply to them and treat them with re-

gard; that when this was over, he would have no
longer any care about their conſciences, liberties,
or lives; that the peace with Spain, which was
upon the point of being concluded, would plunge

the party into the utmoſt diſtreſs, ſince the ſole

motive that induced Henry to conſent to it, was

to unite himſelf with that crown and the Pope, to

ſacrifice them to their common hatred ; and there-

fore, that nothing remained to be done, but to
take advantage of the King's perplexity during ſo

toilſome a ſiege *, the diſtreſs he was in for money,
the need he had of their aſſiſtance, and the power

which the Duke of Mercceur ſtill poſſeſſed in Bri-
tany, to obtain by force what Henry would after-
wards refuſe to grant them. | OC

To incite the members of theſe aſſemblies to a

revolt, the Proteſtants thought the blackeſt calum-
nies were lawful. D'Aubigne was not aſhamed to
repreſent Henry there, as a prince to whom all re-

ligions were indifferent, and who was only zealous

K ef France is a very good Catholic.“ Journal de L*Etoile, p. 233.
| preſented |

for that which would ſecure him a throne +. This

was the notion he wanted to give of his converſion,
According to him, the ſuppoſed injuries offered to
the Proteſtants left no room to doubt of the new
iyſtem of politics that Hem y had formed for him»
fell. Thoſe injuries opened to D'Aubignè a vaſt
held for exclamation; the leaſt of them were re-

* The ſiege of Amiens. „
11 18 : 3 f
is very unwilling to believe; and yet, for ail that, they are ſtill
tue and m: ſt certain; namely, that the Queen of England died
a maid; that the Archduke is a great general; and that the King

*
72 2 0 — 8
* . 2 . 1 CT... = 2 * —

.
Ces Cr Fl
3 0

here are three things,“ ſaid Henry IV.“ which the world

i ů—
.

PPA
8

5

TIER

IT.
— —

190 M E M O I R 8 Book IX,

preſentad as outrages of the moſt violent nature,
and inſtances of the deepeſt treachery ; and thus,
without any regard to the extreme injuſtice of
Which he was guilty, he placed to the King's ac-

count all thoſe hardſhips which proceeded ſolely

= from the Catholics or the court of Rome. The

Duke of Bouillon, leaving others to declaim, ſup-

ported D'Aubigne, by his uncommon dexterity
in ſowing diviſion between the King and all that
came near him, whether Catholics or Proteſtants,

and created him ſufficient employment, that he
might not for a long time be at liberty ro turn his
arms againſt him. The taking of Mende by Fol.
| ſenſe, and the fitting out of the Count d Auvergne,
were the conſequence of theſe counſels.
None of theſe perſons neglected to make their
court to the ambaſſadors from England and Hol-
land, as ſoon as they arrived at Nantes; and de-
pended ſo much the more upon drawing them in-
to their ſchemes, as they were not ignorant, that
it was particularly recommended to them to pre-
vent a peace with Spain. Theſe ambaſſadors
were, Lord Cecil *, ſecretary to Queen Eliſabeth,

and Juſtin de ad. : Admiral of the republic.
They demanded a private audience of the King;

or, if that could not be obtained, at leaſt to have
no one preſent but Lomenie and me. But 1 was
| then employed at Rennes,

If the two ambaſſidors had been perſuaded by

the Proteſtants, all they had to do was to intimi-

date the King, and force him by menaces to come
into their deſigns; but either this was not in their

power, or being convinced of the Proteſtants in-

Jer, they thought it beneath them to be influ-

1 This was not the ſecretary himſelf, whoſe name was w illiam, but
his fon Robert. De Thou, I. xx. See likewiſe Chronol, Scpten-
naire for the year 1598, concerning this interview of Henry IV.

with the Evglith and Dan ambaſſadors.

enced

enced by their paſſions; and therefore took no

notice to the King of what they had ſuggeſted.
They bad indeed offers to make which were
much more likely to prevail with a prince of

whoſe inclination for war they were not ignorant :

the Engliſh ambaſſador offered, in the name of

the Queen his miſtreſs, ſix thouſand foot and five
hundred horſe, to be maintained at her expence
and Naſſau four thouſand foot, and a large train

of artillery completely furniſhed and ſupplied,
beſides a particular ſupply, which they hinted.

would be very conſiderable, provided Henry
would endeavour to retake Calais and Ardres.

| Upon the ſuppoſition that the King appeared in-
clined to accept theſe offers, the two ambaſſadors
had orders to conclude a treaty of alliance imme-

diately between France, England, and the Low
Countries, againſt Spain, and to ſtipulate that
neither of theſe three powers ſhould liſten to any
propoſal, either for a truce or peace with the
common enemy, but with the conſent of the two
Sher, 5 e

Happily the King eſcaped this dangerous ſnare;

and the conſideration of the preſent ſtate of his
kingdom had more weight with him than all o-
thers. He thanked the ambaſſadors with great

politeneſs, and introduced his anſwer by aſſur ing

them that although he could not accept the offers

of their ſovereigns, yet he would not depart from

that friendſhip which had ſo long ſubſiſted be-

tween them : and that the peace he was going to

conclude with (Spain for he did not conceal the terms

he was upon with Philip) ſhould not hinder him
from keeping up the ſame correſpondence with
them as before, nor from ſupplying them with
money, when they had occaſion for it, with this

only precaution, that theſe loans were taken un-
3 TE I ane der

1598. O F F 191

2

* > —
— ü TT I EIN —
— 7 % EE x2 _ * 2 . Mo a4; 3 nd
— br es —_— wo 3 2 — Ip — A n — = —
— e 2 e > $56 4 A SS
272CCͥͤĩ²—⁸¾¹wq ⁵]ꝛ2A2 ñð ̊ ꝰ]ð ß

1 99
=

192 M E M O 1 R S Book IX.

der the title of acquittances of debts, to give no
pretence for a quarrel with Spain. 5

He afterwards, with the ſame ſincerity, ex-

plained to them all his reaſons for putting an end

to the war. His kingdom, he told them, was

not like England and Holland, ſecured by nature
from the attacks of her enemies, but open on all

ſides; his caſtles unfortified, and deſtitute of am-

munition ; his marine weak, his provinces laid

_ waſte, and ſome of them reduced to mere deſarts,
He went on to give a more particular deſcription
of the abuſes which had crept into the govern. *
ment, and introduced a thouſand diforders; al!

ſubordination being deſtroyed by the licentiouſ-

neſs that had been practiſed with impunity a-
midſt the confuſion of civil and foreign wars; his

power weak, and unſtable, and the royal autho-

rity, as well as the moſt ſacred laws of the ſtate,

equally diſregarded. Theſe evils could only be
remedied by a peace; and if that remedy was

ever ſo little delayed, France was every hour ap-

proaching to her ruin ; the diſtemper would foon
reach the heart, and no human help would then

be able to remove it. Henry did not forget to
ſtrengthen theſe motives, by comparing his pre-
ſent ſituation, in all theſe reſpects, with that of
England and Holland, who could engage in a
War, on which their ſafety depended, conſiſtent—
ly at the ſame time with their ſafety and their in-

tereſt; and the King drew this parallel with ſo

much 'clearneſs and judgment, and fo exatt a
knowledge of the ſtate of thoſe countries, as to

make them feel the truth of what he was ſaying;
ſo that the two foreigners, having nothing to ob:

je& againſt ſuch convincing arguments, looked

upon each other in amaſement. The King gave
them to underſtand, that, when he had ſettled

the affairs of his kingdom, be ſhould then, with

more

1 85 * .
FE hs « Sv £09
e

ot

"0 ;

.
LY 4
SY
$455
* =; 8
1 .
1
: 2
8
*
Xx
*
78
8
*
me
EH
4 oF
F 2,
.
SE"
. *
5 *

a A, „„

TD Bu

HS 5 cas 7

1598, O F 8 U L. I. I.
more aſſurance of ſucceſs, renew his former de-
ſigns againſt the empire, and the houſe of Au-

ſtria; but that theſe two enterpriſes were not of

a nature to be executed at one and the ſa ne time,
The ambaſſadors, for form's ſake, thought they
ought to diſſuade his Majeſty from this reſolution,
but did it ſo faintly, being themſelves ſtruck with

the force of his arguments, that, before the con-

ference was ended, the King brought them over
entirely to his opinion, and obliged them to con-
feſs, that the peace he was going to conclude was
for the advantage of all Europe. Th-y left France
ſoon after, and filled their reſpective countries
with the opinion they had themſelves conceived
of the great wiſdom and extraordinary abilities of
the King of France. „5

In effect, What innumerable miſeries would this
Prince have drawn pon nis kingdom, if following

the wild emotions of hatred and revenge, rather

than the calm dictates of wiſdom and prudence,
he had at that inſtant engaged in a war, wich,

though in his power to begin, was not to end!
How dreadful the conſequence, if chance, which

arbitralily diſpoſes of all the events of war, ſhould
have favoured the eneniics of France ! But graut—
ing that his arms were vict vrious, how little pre-
ferable to a defeat is that ſucceſs, which a Yrince
muſt purchaſe at ſo dear a rate, as by the alienation
of bis domaines, by the anticipating and mortga-
ging his revenues, by the ruin of commerce and
agriculture, from whence France derives her chief
ſupport, and laſtly, by the utter devaſtation of
his provinces! Such evils cannot be balanced by

the acquiſition of new territories, the poſſ-ſhon

of which keeps the conqueror in perpetual alarms,

and, remaining as ſo many hateful monuments to

the enemy of the ambition and injuſtice of him

that gained them, cheriſhes and keeps alive thoſe

Vo. II, R ſeeds

193

2

8 — — ——_ 5 . 2
. — — — . * . 2 r . = "LL yr I e n B
p JJ ͤ DS ont ning JJ... OSD WOES I, en OST — OR
B He TED AS c ä . > ge — a
P "EI — — — ; * —y . G — : — — — 8
2 N. 8 — ww age rey 3
AS Ln LI e — Eat — 5 yoga RG , m—_—_ >< 5
Fern as * . — 8 .

— Ws —h96
+ HS >

” —— — —

194 M E M OI R S BooklX,

ſeeds of envy, hatred, and diſtruſt, which ſooner
or later never fail to produce the ſame miſeries
with which the kingdom was before overwhelm.
ed. On this account, I am not afraid to ſay, that,
in the preſent ſtate of Europe, it is almoſt equally un-

happy for its princes to ſucceed or miſcarry in their
enterpriſes; and that the true way of weakening

a powerful neighbour, is not to carry off his ſpoils,
but to leave them to be ſhared by others.

The inſolence of the Proteſtant cabal was total-

ly depreſſed, when they found that the ambaſſ-
dors, upon whom they had ſo greatly relied, were

entirely brought over to the King's opinion; and,

not doubting but that a peace would now be ſoon con-

cluded, they thought only of procuring reaſonable
conditions. It was happy for them that, ata
time when it would have been eaſy to puniſh them

for their unjuſtifiable proceedings, they had a
Prince to deal with whoſe reaſon was always
ſtronger than his reſentment. Both ſides were
then very induſtrious to draw up that famous a-
greement known by the name of the edict of
Nantes, by which the rights of the two religions
were afterwards both clearly explained and ſolid-
ly eſtabliſhed. Schomberg, the Preſident de Thou,

Jeannin, and Calignon, were employed to draw

it up, of which all I ſhall ſay is, that, by this edict,

it was provided that the French Calviniſts, who

till then had been only privileged by truces reſu-
med and continued, ſhould have a fixed and du-
rable eſtabliſnment“. All that now remained to

be

The edict of Nantes was ſigned the 13th of April. De Thou
ſays, that the judicial confirmation of it was put off till after the de-
parture of the lepate, whom they were loth to ſend away diſcontent-

ed. The concefſions this edit contains more favourable than thoſe

that had been formerly granted them are, that thereby they were
admitted to places of truſt, both in the courts of juſtice and in the |
finances: all the reit is no ways eſſentially different from the edict

0

,
7
"I
"Is
et
8
8
=
Bu 4
4 *
&
*
*
8 2 T
£7
F
C * - t 6
. WH
3
* : K
9
8
oa hv
Fd 3.
1
x
1
£

1 :
4:36
I
N
.
*
92
8
SS
Pas.
„
8
3
7
.
N 8
5 1 2
4 .
Y 4 N
„
35 1
S 8

1
FERRO

Tf... ĩᷣͤ v ONT: A
e ee e

4
5
ws
ol
3 "Ag
9
©.
* *
*
bf
-H 1
> 7 4 L
= 12 *
AN
*
N
WA
F 03
2.50
N
3
* 1
PF: ING
* 55
2 3
1
wy 3 S
8
OS
2 *
1
Ne
3
*
7
- *
x
4
2
„

WE)

<ul

88

Hy

NY

"To

KS

8

2

#

e

N 1 "©

9 2

4 1

4 WE.
8 ax

bs r
3

| 8

33

33

.

. 0

=

1

r x „ Fe ZN I. .

8 8 Py 3
. AA
eee a PE OY Bd; SC art

% VE nm 8

be done, was to get this treaty regiſtered and con -

firmed by the parliaments and ſovereign courts,

and to begin with thoſe of Paris; which was de-
ferred till the King's return to that city.

Having paid what he owed to the Proteſtants *,
according to the exacteſt juſtice, the King thought

himſelf not obliged to ſhew much regard to thoſe

who (ſtill continued to ſtir ſedition, ſuch as the
Duke of Bouillon in particular, who had moſt
reaſon to reproach himſelf, and for once, he re-

ſolved to ſpeak to him like a maſter. He had now

acquired a right to do this, even though we ſup-
pole him not to have had it in the character of
King. He propoſed as ſoon as he arrived at
Rennes, to execute this deſign, and took his rout
thither without delay. The Duke of Bouillon then

lodged at the houſe of PAllove, where he was con-
fined to his bed by the gout. The King went to
viſit him, and after the firſt compliments, ſigni-

fying that it was his pleaſure to be left alone with
the Duke, the reſt of the company quitted the
chamber, and his Majeſty deſired that he would,

without interruption, hear what he had to ſay to
him. He began with a particular detail of all his
proceedings, to ſhew that he was not ignorant of

any of them. He dwelt chiefly upon ſome ſteps
the Duke had taken ſince the edict of Nantes, and

of pacification that paſſed in 1577. Bayle aſcribes the honour of
compoſing the edit of Nantes to the reformed miniſter Chamier.

See it in Matthieu, tom. 2. book 2. and in ſeveral other hiſtorians.
There were likewiſe ſome ſecret articles, of which the moſt diſad-
vantageous for the Calviniſts is that which forbids them the exerciſe

of their religion in a great many towns and particular diſtricts, as
Rheims, Soiſſons, Dijon, Sens, Cc. becauſe Henry IV. had fo en-
 gaged himſelf by particular treaties before, with the different Lords

of the league.

* Le-Grain mentions a good ſaying of Henry IV. One day as

the Proteſtants were importunately teaſing him with their demands,
Apply to my ſiſter,” ſays he to them, “ for your affairs are now
fallen into the hands of women to conduct them.?“

F :
=)
4
1
5
.F
C; ©
*
"M5
1
*
5
£4
> »
1
F
43
3]
9
11 *
85
*
5
*
4
"44
Fi!

— - — S
TTT

— Tae, os 3
K „re
F

1 were

rr

1 SS 8

14 dE ITN —

2
7 * *
<= *

4 = | „
8 = ION» on * 8
Zee EV SENSE. aan WW. — — — —
NA 8

. ˙m ²˙²A vv. ̃ k

— 2
— 5
—

n

rr *

— 1
ECC ³˙· -A

- A 80 = 5 1 enz 220 8
ern n OE = (ES = Da op amy =
wks - 4 — — 8 3

3 « : 2 r

77 T
r r

A irs bas
3
—

WS
Fez.

2—
Ty
--.

16>
LIES
Te. TELUS Sn ent wes

Po
——

c
a
n
5 FS =

PLS FEET
; n

2

y x
EL LIES
P

196 M E M O 1 8 Bock IX,

were therefore ſo much the more criminal, as it

ought to have prevented him from entertaining a
thought of rebelling againſt a Prince who had ſo

generoully adhered to his intereſt. The Duke at.
1empted to offer ſomething in his excuſe, but
he was ſtopped by the King, who told him,

that without any juſtification, he would from that
day forget all that was paſſed; and ſince he had
pardoned whatever the moſt inveterate malice had
been able to ſuggeſt to his enemies, he had no

_ inclination to exclude from his favour an old ſer.
_ vant, with whom he had been pleaſcd for a long
time. At laſt, he adviſed the Duke, with an air
of authority, which became him better as he uſed
it ſeldom, to make good uſe of the counſel he was
now giving him as his friend, to think no more

of his paſt behaviour, but for the ſake of acting

in a manner quite contrary; for if he ſhould again
mail in his reſpect to his King and maſter, he was

reſolved to make uſe of that convenience which
the peace now eſtabliſned in the kingdom gave,

to bring him to puniſhment. After which the
King, without waiting for his anſwer, went out

and left him to his own thoughts.
The inhabitants of Britany were charmed with

the affability of their King, and his complaiſance
in being preſent at all the entertainments with
which the ladies contended to divert him. Henry
divided his time between theſe aſſemblies, the

ſport of running at the ring, balls, and tennis-
playing, without leſſening his aſſiduity about the

Marchioneſs of Monceaux, who was very far ad-
vanced in her pregnancy.

In the midſt of theſe 3 the King at
certain intervals appeared fo penſive and reſei ved,

that it was not difficult to gueſs ſome ſecret un—
_ eaſineſs preyed upon his mind; and I was the
more convinced of it when his Majeſly, who of-

ten

ten diverted himſelf with hunting, ordered me

twice to follow him apart, that he might have an

opportunity of converſing with me alone; yet
when I did ſo he was ſilent. I then remembered
that the ſame thing had happened at Saint-Ger-
main, and Angers; and I concluded that he had
a deſign in view, which he had ſome difficulty to
diſcloſe to me, knowing with what freedom I
ſomerimes oppoſed his opinions; but what this“
deſign was I could not poſlibly gueſs. Returning

from the above mentioned viſit to the Duke of Bou-

illon, his Majeſty being at the foot of the ſtair-
caſe, ſaw me as I entered the court, and calling
me, made me go with him into the garden which
| was extremely large and beautiful, holding my

hand with his finger between mine as uſual, then
ordered the door to be ſhut, and that no berlon
ſhould be allowed io enter.

This prelude made me expect to [hear a ſecret
of great conſequence. Henry did not enter upon
it immediately, but, as if he had not ſufficiene
reſolution to explain himſelf, began to tell me
what had juſt paſſed between him and the Duke
of Bouillon. This converſation was followed by
news relating to the negotiations of Vervins, and
led him inſenſibly to reflect on the advantages
France would receive from a peaceable government.
One circumſtance, the King ſaid, gave him great
uneaſineſs, which was, that not having children
by the Queen his wife, it would anſwer no pur-
pole to be at ſo much trouble to procure peace
and tranquillity to his kingdom, fince, after his

death, it muſt neceſſarily fall into its former cala-

mities, by the diſputes that would ariſe between

the Prince of Conde and the other princes of the

blood, concerning the ſucceſſion to the crown,

His Majeſty confeſſed to me, that this was his

motive tor deſiring, with ſuch. ardour, to leave
K 3

1598. OF $0444 197 |

— 3 0 2
. — — -
. — —ͤ—ͤ— BEER. - SS
F r 2 —
— =, 2 — — ——

EE PPP 3.

n

9 r
B et Fe
n
5 NN

9

R
vw
1
"
WW
5
Aj
1
A
1
1
1
$\ Tz
bs |
**
* 1
0:78
ST |
"1a
7
1

1s MEM O 1 R 8 Book I.

ſons behind him. Unleſs his marriage with the
| Princeſs Margaret could be diſſolved, it was not
poſſible for him to be abſolutely happy ; but the
Informations he received from the Archbiſhop of
Urbin, Meſſieurs du Perron, d'Offat, and de Mar.
que mont, his deputies at Rome, of the Pope's fa.
vourable diſpoſitions in reſpect to that affair, gave
bim great hopes of its ſucceſs. In effect, Cle.
ment VIII. who was as good a politician as any
prince in Europe, revolving in his mind what
means were moſt likely to hinder France, and the
other Chriſtian kingdoms, from falling again into
a ſtate-of anarchy and confuſion, could find none
ſo effectual as to ſecure the ſucceſſion of the crown
of France, by authoriſing Henry to engage in i
ſecond marriage, which might cs bim male
children.
Our converſation being fixed upon this ſubject,
It was eaſy for me to perceive that it was from
hence his Majeſty's uncaſineſs proceeded ; but |
could not fo ſoon know what particular circum:
_ ſtance it was that diſturbed him. The King be-
gan to conſider with me what princeſs of Europe
he ſhould chuſe for his wife, in caſe his marriage
with Margaret of Valois ſhould be diſſolved. But
indeed he ſet out with a declaration which ſhewed
any refieftions on that head would be fruitle's,

© That I may not repent,” ſaid he, “of taking

i fo dangerous a ſtep, nor draw upon my ſelf a

* misfortune which is with juſtice ſaid to exceed
« all others, that of having a wife diſagteeable in
« perſon and mind, it is neceſſary that in her
« whom I marry I ſhould find thele ſeven things,
beauty, prudence, ſoftneſs, wit, fruitfulnels,
EE riches, and a royal birth;” but there was not
one in all Europe, with whom he appeared entire-
ly ſatisfied. © I ſhould have no objection to the

« Infanta of Spain,” purſued Henry, © although
46 IG

873 5

E 1
KF
p |
F
1

0: LT iV YL is

ſhe is a little advanced in years, provided that
with her I could marry the Low-Countries, e-

ven though I ſhould be obliged to reſtore to you
the county of Bethune,

Neither would I refuſe
the Princeſs * Arabella of England, if, as it is
publicly ſaid, that crown really belongs to her,
ſhe were only declared preſumptive heireſs of

it; but there is no reaſon to expect that either
of theſe things will happen.

I have alſo heard
of ſome princeſſes of Germany, whole names
[ have forgot; but the women of that country
don't ſuit me. I ſhould always fancy I had a

 hogſhead of wine in bed with me; beſides, 1

have been told that France had once a queen
of that country; who had like to have ruined

it: all theſe conſiderations have given me a

diſguſt to the German ladies. The ſiſters of

Prince Maurice have likewiſe been mentioned.

to me; but beſides that they are Proteſtants,
which would give umbrage to the court of

Rome and the more zealous Catholics, they are
daughters of a nun; which, together with a

certain reaſon the: I'll inform you of ſome
other time, has prevented my entertaining any
thoughts of them, The Duke of Florence has
a niece who is ſaid to be handſome, bur the is

_ deſcended from one of the molt inconſiderable

families in Chriſtendom that bear the title of

Prince, it not being above threeſcore or four-

ſcore years ſince her anceſtors were only the
firſt citizens in Florence; ſhe is likewiſe of the

ſame race with the Queen-mother Catherine,

Arabella Stuart. She was daughter to Charles, Earl of Lenox,
ho was grandſon to Margaret Queen of Scotland, eldeſt ſiſter to
Henry VIII.

Her couſin german James VI. King ot Scotland,

| having in 1602 been declared lawful heir to Queen Eliſabeth, the
following year a conſpiracy was formed in her favour; and ſhe died

By in 1616, a priſoner in the Tower of London, fee the hiſtorians,

& who

CN = ne e 8

. ——

= B —
_ > Be >:

.

— _ —
—
3
r

. = =
3 Fas

nero > I AA ets oO

= OE Eo —
= 2 - 8 2 =z 0

x £
” © 3
P ˙ v6.4 ERA Ot Tn rn

TTT
1 £

TINS
- > 7 7 — * =
e

BL — —
* * * * _— — *
. Ss rk ee EE I SS SS

_ 8
rom rw I FIR
—

— 2 *. - =
P
— ea REI EE

— ** 2 "= >
3 wa pen
RS oo ety

Le Fonts Q 2

—
3

n

WA: 2 Cl ”Y 2
. ee OT
=
Fra f
—

2
3

To io AFG

3 ESL
2

n
«©

r SY
ax. Solty Et,
od n

mee wn PLES.

88 Re AFL,
*

— Ne __ — K
— ooo pr wits —ͤ

9x EI

U

— has — AI yn UII ww . . Ine re

200 MEMOIRS Book .

5 who did fo much miſchief to France, and to
me in particular.

F Theſe,” continued the King, obſerving that

1 liſtened attentively to him, © are all the foreipn
Princeſſes of whom I have any knowledge, Of
„ thoſe within my own kingdom my neice of

„ Guiſe would pleaſe me beſt *, notwithſtanding

« the malicious reports that have been ſpread that

« ſhe loves pullets in paper better than in a fricaſ.

„ ſee, For my part I not only believe thoſe fe-
Lo ports to be falſe, but ſhould rather chuſe a wiſe
«© whois a little fond of gallantry, than one who

„wanted underſtanding; but I am apprehenſive
that the violent affection ſhe difcovers for her
« family, particularly for her brothers, would

create ſome diſorders in the kingdom.”

After this the King named all the other priu—

ceſſes in France, but to as little purpoſe. He ac-
knovwledged that ſome were beautiful, and gentee!,
ſuch as the eldeſt of the Duke of Matenne's two
daughters although of a brown complexion, the
two daughters likewiſe of the Duke of Aumale,

and three of the Duke of Longueville ; bur all
| theſe were either too young, or were not to bis
liking. He afterwards named Mademoiſelle Ro-

han, the Princeſs of Conti's daughter, of the houſe

of Luce; Mademoiſelles Luxembourg and Gue-
mene; but the firſt was a Proteſtant, and the ſe—

cond not old enough, and the perſons of the two

others did not pleaſe him: and all for ſome reaſon
or other were excluded. The King cloſed this e-

2 1 SISTER, of Lorrain : ſhe was a very beautiful princcls.
It was propoſed, at the time of the liege of Paris, tor her to mairy

Henry IV. in order to unite the two parties, The ſa;caſtic lam-
poons of that time charge her with carrying on an intrigue with the
Duke de Bellegarde, mafter of the horſe: and what Henry lays
| here of poulets, is taken from a ſong that was made againſt Ma-

demoilelle de Guile, which may be ſcen in LEtuile, for the year

Ae.

Name ation

=

66

1598. „ . - 262
numeration by ſaying, that although theſe ladies

might be all agreeable enough to him in their per-

ſons, yet he ſaw no way to be aſſured that they

would bring him heirs, or that he could ſuit him-

ſelf to their tempers, or be convinced of their pru-
dence, three of the ſeven conditions without which

he had reſolved never to marry ; ſince, if he enter-
ed into an engagement of that kind, it would be

with a deſign to give his wife a ſhare in the ma-

nagement of all his domeſtic affairs; and that, as

according to the courſe of nature he ſhould die be-

fore her, and leave children very young behind
bim, it would be neceſſary that ſhe ſhould be able
to ſuperintend their education, and govern the

kingdom during a minority.

Meary at length of endeavouring to no purpoſe
to find out what the King aimed at by this diſ-
courſe, But what is it you mean, Sire, ſaid I,

« by fo many affirmatives and negatives; and
6

*

« a woman upon earth qualified to be your wife?
Cc.
(6
(6
1
IL
66

heireſſes are moſt to your taſte; but can you
expect that heaven ſhould raiſe a Margaret of
Flanders, or a Mary of Burgundy, from the
dead for you, or at leaſt reſtore the Queen of
England to her youth?” I added ſmiling,

demanded, I ſaw no better expedient than to

by talking with them in perſon, he might know
the turn of their temper and genius ; and thac
for the reſt he ſhould refer himſelf to experienced
matrons, to whom recourſe is had on ſuch oc-
caſions.“ 7 hen beginning to talk more ſerious-

Ys

\ *

> — - 1 . = - .
- - — 5 — 7 - NO 7 — = — ——————— 5 — — 1 - A 4 _ _
— . Rite. ie 22 >> 56 ar eermmn er AS EIN. ES — l ST 2 < TEE TE —
AE Dona : r 8 — 1 RS nf r _— 7 * 2 wo . g 7 — »
= a » 2 S120 — „ 2 — — 4 . — . E 5 3 8 wy by: 3 OR y gh
a? = "II. G N 1 £54 " * * J 2 — ARE 12 2 27 x — IVF "2 —_ 4
pn OT LES Eee 8 N * : — 7

what am I to conclude from them, but that
you are deſirous to marry, and yet cannot find

By the manner in which you mentioned the In-
fanta Clara Eugenia, it ſhould ſeem that great

2
r
* >" Wr
- OE
or ER

that for proof of the other qualities which he

bring all the beauties of France together, from
the age of ſeventeen to that of twenty five, that

— x —V-V: . ·˙ð—A ⁰— —

— — yn — —

|
c«
=
440

| 40
40

4

„
cc

— —
—
o — — — — — — —
— — 7— u rm Res — ——

cc

46

202 MEM 0 I R Ss Bock IX.

ly, I declared that, “ in my opinion, his Majeſty

„ might contract his expectations, by ſtriking off
a great fortune and royal birth, and content
himſelf with a wife who was likely to keep his
heart, and bring him fine children; but that
& probability, there being many beautiful women
incapable of childbearing, and many illuſtrious
fathers unhappy in their offspring; but that
«© whatever his children ſhould prove, the blood

from which they ſprung would ſecure the retport
“ and obedience of the French nation.”

my your advice concerning this aſſembly of beauties,
with which I am mightily diverted, and your

ſage reflection that great men have often children
«i

« have ſons whoſe actions ſhall exceed mine. Since
* you confeſs that the lady whom I marry ought

to be of an agreeable temper, beautiful in her
66

her bringing children, reflect a little, whether
you do not know a perſon in whom all theſe qua-
lities are united.” I replied that 1 would not
take upon me to decide haſtily upon a choice
wherein ſo much conſideration was requiſite, and

40

to which I had not yet ſufficiently attended. And
what would you ſay,” returned Henry, if!
| * ſhould name one, who, I am fully convinced,

poſſeſſes theſe three qualities,”

1 ſhould fay,
Sire, replied I, with great ſimplicity, that you are

much better acquainted with her than I am, ard

that ſhe muſt neceſſarily be a widow, otherwiſe

you can have no certainty with regard to her fruit

fulneſs. This is all that you would deſire,“
ſaid the King, * but if you cannot gueſs who ſhe

is, 1 will name her to you.” Name her then,

ſaid , for 1 own I have not wit enough to find

out

here again he muſt content himſelf with mere

$0 Well,” interrupted the King, ſetting aſide
who poſſeſs none of their qualities, I hope to

perſon, and of fuch a make as to give hopes of

* n ants” 5 N ERA. 1 * * 55 e
a. — 9 3 n 1 1 1 1 —_— 1 *

= 2 : —
. —_ 6 8 1
SE... .

OF N Þ aj

cout who ſhe is. Ah! how dull are you,” cried. 4
the King, * but I am perſuaded, you could gueſs x
e who I mean if you would, and only affect this 9
. jpnorance to oblige me to name her myſelf; 3
& confeſs then that theſe three qualities meet in 1
6 my miſtreſs: not,“ purſued the King (in ſome i
5 5 confuſion at this diſcovery of his weakneſs) © that 1
44 I have any intention to marry her, but I want [
to know what you would ſay, if, not being able I
4 tomeet with any other of whom Icould approve,

LE & I ſhould one day take it into my head to make
TE © her my wife“? VV
It was not difficult for me to diſcover, amidſt
5; * theſe ſlight artifices, that his Majeſty had already
thought of it but too much, and was bur too well

_ | _ diſpoſed to this unworthy marriage, which every
thing he had ſaid tended to juſtify, My aſtoniſh-
, | _ ment was indeed very great, but I thought it ne-
; | ceffary to conceal my thoughts with the utmoſt

care. I affected to believe that he was jeſting,
f þ that I might have an opportunity of anſwering in
; | ſuch a manner as might make the King aſhamed
of having entertained fo extravagant a notion.
t My diſſimulation did not ſucceed; the King had
not made ſo painful an effort to ſtop there. I

command you,” faid he to me, © to ſpeak
4 þ © freely; you have acquired the right of telling
| © me plain truths; do not apprehend that I ſhall

J, be offended with you for doing fo, provided
5 that it be in private; ſuch a liberty indeed in
„ T: / FD F:

ec | public would greatly offend me“

d I replicd, that I would never be fo imprudent a
ſs do fay any thing in private, any more than in pu-
it: blic, that might diſpleaſe him, except on ſuch oc-
„ caſions when his life, or the good of the ſtate was
ne in queſtion, I afterwards repreſented to him the
n, | diſgrace ſo ſcandalous an alliance would draw upon
d bim, in the opinion of the whole world, and the
. „„ re proaches

204 MEMOIR S Book I.

reproaches he would ſuffer from his own mind

upon that account, when the ardour of his paſſion

being abated, he ſhould be able to judge impartial.
ly of his own conduct. I ſhewed him that if this Was
the only means to which he could have recourſe to

free France from the calamities a doubtful ſucceſ. _
ſion would occaſion, that he would expoſe himſelf _ ©
to all the inconveniencies he was anxious to avoid,
and others ſtill greater: that although he ſhould
legitimate the children he had by Madam de Li.
ancourt, yet that could not hinder the eldeſt, who
was born in a double adultery, from being, in

this reſpect, inferior to the ſecond, whoſe birth
was attended with but half that dilgrace; and both
muſt yield to thoſe whom he might have by Ma-

dam de Liancourt after ſhe was his lawful wife.

This bye circumſtance making it impoſlible to ſet-

tle their claims, could not fail of becoming an in-

exhauſtible ſourceof quarrels and war. I leave you,
Sire, pur ſued I, to make reflections upon all this,
wo; before I fay any more.” That will not be

_« amiſs,” returned the King, who was ſtruct with

my arguments; “for you have ſaid enough of
« this matter for the firſt time.“ But ſuch was
the tyranny of that blind paſſion, to which he was

ſubjected, that in ſpite of himſelf he reſumed the

diſcourſe that very moment, by aſking me it,

from the diſpoſition I knew the French to be of,
_ eſpecially the nobility, I thought he had any rea-

ſon to apprehend they would riſe in rebellion,

| while he was wing, if he ſhould marry his mil.
treſs,

This queſtion convinced me, that his han

a received an incurable wound. 1 treated

bim accordingly, and entered into arguments
and expoſtulations, with which I ſhall not trouble

the reader, ſince his own imagination may ſug:
| geſt to him all that i it was neceſſary to ſay upon

this

Oy - 4 *
512.5 3688 NILS £3
2 * N of Eqs 3

* 5
e Y N 5 bx - * r * N Mts, l ee EE. Fo
e 33 1 F e $4
CUSP SENS, OLIVE AS ENS Ee c n 3 3 EY 22
r . . 9 FFC F 8 5 a 3 ©
PPT e r N 5 4
: : * ** r * y r n y 2 2 * 2 A A i

—— 0 :. oa ae f oc coo AM A; m wo n A. 9 yn A. AS e a2 e

—_ * ou tc ** 8

*

this ſubject, which has been already but too fully
handled. We continued three hours alone in
the garden, and I had the conſolation to leave

TR a

n=

pe — __ * —
F
n . 2

the King in a full perſuaſion of the truth and rea- |
ſonableneſs of all I had faid to him. 1

I The difficulty lay in breaking thoſe too power-
full ties. The King had not yet brought him-
ſelf to that point. He had many dreadful “ con-

flicts of mind to ſuffer ere that could be effected; j
and all he could do for the preſent, was to defer
taking his laſt reſolution till he had obtained #

.
— IT IE LIES 1

e

e Af Se nh.
ates SRL BO

V Tn this inward ſtruggle, the voice of reaſon and decorum had 4
not the ſtrongeſt ſway with Henry IV. and even though NM. de =
© Sully does here and elſewhere fay it, the world has always been bl
perſuaded, upon very good grounds, that, if the death of his mi- ;
© ſtreſs, wham he ſo tenderly loved, had not prevented this Prince,

he would either have mairied her, or he would not have married

again at all. He was not always directed on this head by che (ole a

ad advice of the Duke de Sully, at leaſt, if we believe a very curious by

| © anecdote, which may be ſeen in vol. 9590. des MSS. de la Bibliot. 1 |
du Roi; where it is obſerved, that Henry IV being at Saint-Ger- 1
maln en-Laye, (this was probably but ſume months at moſt after his 1
' | _ return from Britany), ſent for his three miniſters (M. de Rolny, 4
de Villeroi, and de Sillery), to conſult with them about this ſo im- 1
* | portanta queſtion, relating to his marriage; and that the firſt (who 1
do be ſure was M. de Roſny) was of the (ame opinion as is mention- 5
a in this place of his memoirs: that the ſecond adviſed him on the | H
; | contrary not to marry, but leave the ſucceſſion to the Prince of 9
, Conde, who by birth-right was his true heir; and that at laſt the *
' | third (this was M. de Sillery, the moſt artful courtier of the three) 7

1 in oppoſition to both the former advices, told him, that the beſt
„ thing he could do was to marry his mitt eſs, and legitimate the eldeſt

bol the children he had by her. Hevry IV. (continues the author F
bol this anecdote, who plainly ſhews himſelf to be a p<rſon to whom _ _

1 | oncof the three miniſters themſelves had communicated what paſſed
- | Þciween the King and them) | fay Henry IV ſeemed ſwpriicd at *
KF this, and afterwards faid, I had promiſed myſelf a great deal from i
your abllitics and fidelity, by the advice I wanted of you with re- 1

l gard to my marriage; yet (till I fear, that inſtead of having ſa- =
4 BB *« tisficd me, you have only increaſed my irreſolutivn by the contra |

q |  * rtety of your opinions, which are backed with ſich ſtrong reaſons, |
# that I find myſelf not a little embarraſſed as to the judgment 5

| © which I ſhould make as to the beſt of them; as to that therefore 7
- = * Ircquriealittle time to conſider of it,” &c. And after he had =

n fad this, he got up and diſmiſſed them, —
Vol. II. 8 the

4

206 M E M O IRS Book 1x,

the permiſſion he had been ſo long ſoliciting
from the Pope, and till then to keep his ſen.
timents ſecret, He promiſed me not to acquaint
his miſtreſs with what I had ſaid, leſt it ſhould
draw her reſentment upon me. * She love;
« you,” ſaid the King to me, *© and eſteem;
„you ſtill more; but her mind {till entertains
„ (ome remains of diſtruſt, that you will not
* approve of my deſign in favour of her and
„ her children. She often tells me, that when
one hears you perpetually talking of my king.
„ dom and my glory, one is apt to think that
« you prefer the one to my perſon, and the
other to my quiet.” I anſwered, that again
this charge I could make no defence; that the
kingdom and the ſovereign were to be looked
upon with the ſame eyes: © Remember, Sire,
« added I, that your virtue is the foul which
* animates this great body, which muſt, by
its ſplendor and proſperity, repay you that
« glory and happineſs that it derives from you,
e and that you are not to ſeek happineſs by any
© other means.” After this we left the garden,
and, it being night, ſeparated, leaving the courtiers

E

AN

to rack their imaginations in vain to gueſs the

ſubject of fo long a conference.

Neither the King nor I had attended to a cir-
cumſtance abſolutely neceſſary on ſuch occaſions,
which was Margaret's conſent to the diſſolution
of her marriage. I conceived it to be highly
proper to enter upon this negotiation while we
expected the ſucceſs of that which was carrying
on at Rome. I was willing firſt to ſound the
intentions of this Princeſs; therefore the ſub-
ſtance of the letter I wrote to her on this ſubjec
Was, that, moſt ardenily deſiring a reconcilia-
tion between her and the King, vpon which
France founded her oh wa of having a e
eir

5 ä 8 2
_ 1 1
n e 88 + * * 19545 2 "8 7 8 wa r 1 4 5 2 1 4 * 1 * mn — n n —_
by N 7 7 » 6 * De ee * 32 _ x 8 a : T "po 4 3 2 <> Z 7 > = TY P 1
4 y 1 . 7 3 „ 8 . g 7 — 2&7 RM woe
A Is 5 5 8 k : ö n e 2 en D
0 f 5 , ; ma.” 4 5 {5 255 2 Sort

F p 2
e eee

n - 6 7 , wrt
2 2 PETE 8 — 7 aka”
o 2 W A M n *
3: * 1 I» ET: FE RT : Ig W we jd L

_ 9 9 8 ;
24 :
Is ;

Eg 1 . |
#7 0 20

N 1. .

- EM.

2 el

© heir to the crown, | habe: it my duty to in-
en ſhe would authoriſe me to uſe my utmoſt
* 0 endeavours to effect this reconciliation ; but that,
if the | inclinations of both parties were ſuch as
2 1 to render this attempt fruitleſs, or that it ſhould
not conduce to the purpoſe I mentioned to her
A (a point I was ſenſible the ſterility of this Prin-
J ceſs would make her ſecretly agree to) I hoped

ſhe would not be offended if I ſhould afterwards

take the liberty to perſuade her to make a ſtill
greater ſacrifice, which the ſtate expected from

ber. I did not explain myſelf any farther, but
. alter what I had mentioned juſt before, upon

| tbe neceſſity of giving legitimate children to the
crown of France, it was not difficult to gueſs
| what I meant by this ſacrifice.

The Queen took time to deliberate upon a
matter of ſuch importance, before ſhe ſent me
an anſwerz which I did not receive till five
months after I had written to her: it was dated
from Uſſon®, where ſhe uſually reſided, and
was ſuch a one as we would have wiſhed, pru-
dent, modeſt, and ſubmiſſive. Margaret, with-
out explaining herſelf any more than I had done,
upon a ſeparation that was not yet publicly talk-
ed of, was contented with ſubſtituting, inſtead

of it, an aſſurance that ſhe would readily ſubmit

to the King's will; adding the moſt candid praiſes

of his conduct, and thanks to me for my ſoli-
citude and cares.

The King ſtaid at Rennes bot oven or eight
days, reſolving to ſet out as ſoon as poſſible for

Paris, that he night reach Tierra the beginning |

IM This princeſs had at firſt retired, many years before to Agen,

E and afterwards to Carlat. King Henry III. her brother, had not

treated her better than Henry IV. her huſband, but perſecuted her

every where, and at laſt ſhut her up in the caſtle of Uſſon in Au-

vegas, where, after his death, ſhe was contented to live,

8 2

P
PPP

3

n

28 MEMOIR Ss Boon A
of May. He took his rout through Vitre ,

from whence I received orders from him to give

a gratuity to the garriſon of Rochefort, and after.
wards to cauſe the caſtle to be razed. From

Vitre his Majeſly coaſted along the Loire, and

came to Tours, by the way of La-Fleche,

which be took pleaſure in ſeeing again, it being

the place where he had paſſcd part of his time in

his youth. „
1 ſtaid behind him at Rennes five or fix days, to

put the affairs of the finances in order, pay
the troops, ſettle their departure from Britany,
and their march through the provinces ; after
which T came to Tours to the King, his Majeſty
| having ſent for me upon an affair of great import.
tance. I left him to continue bis journey to Pa-.
_ ris, where (notwithſtanding all the haſte he was

able to make) he did not arrive till the latter end

of May. I was fo weary + of the formality of |
our reception into the great cities, and particu-
larly of the long ſpeeches that we were torment-

ed with in every place, that taking a bye-road
by Le-Maine and Le-Perche, I came alone to

my eſtate at Roſne, where my wife was employ-

ed in attending the building of a houſe, and had

I have ſubſlituted this word in the place of that of Villeroi, 15

the original bears: there never was a place of that name in Britany;
and, in fact, Henry IV * road lay through Vitre.

I The King was no leſs ſo. L'Etoile relates ſome very ſmart fe-
partees of his M:jeſly to theſe in portunatc haranguers; one of them
tired him with long titles ard com pellations of honour, and repeat:

5 ing often, « O very benign, O very great, O very mercitil, &.
«* King.” „Add too,” ſeys Henry to him, “and very weary.”

Another having begun his ſpeech with theſe words, “ Ageflaus

« King of Lacc& mon, Sire,” Cc. The King, interryptirę bm,

ſays, Vente, ſaint gris! I have heard a good deal ſpoken of this

Ageſilaus, but le had dined firſt ; but, for my part, 1 have not

« yet,” Havirg twice told ancther, that he ſhould cut ſhoit his

| harargue; and ſeeing that he went on tediouſly nevertheleſs, he left

him, ard ſo went away, telling bim, You muſt ſay the re 11 then

to maſter William,“ meaning the fool that bglorged to the couit

narrowh

1 * IH + Banks) * 7
e F Ro A Fe ˙
o re er PD -” N 3 2

et
x Y
92 [
ET
3%
"£420
1
*. 4
+ $5.8
£5 :
64
. of
1
Rt 70
Faroe *
.
„
30
2 3
.
ot
"03

5

. x Ct A;
Dl Foro he IE 24 ee gs oe es eee
7 In, EO eb N . 4 2
e —— ie ff
* * r N
R * FY 1 _ a A

* SY * * » 8 * is
ee =
— a « Dt a. 1

* ry " ET r __— oY A”  o& ac w«

kd — 1 MM 1 OY * —_

£5 e
. 5 PIE ine

.
FE)
N
* 1 by
1
n
3
2
Po A
CIA *
I
„
.
rt
*
8
.
e
* 5 1
* 2 85 8
+. *
3
W
Fe AES 1
r
17 9
7 35
6
ee
NES
«
.
.
5 755
*
8
Ws
» © %
4
x)
N
7H
19".
y
EE,
I
Pe)
Ar

1506. OF 8ULL I. 209

narrowly eſcaped being cruſhed to pieces under
the ruins of the old edifice, which was firſt to
be demoliſhed. I ſtaid there but a ſhort time,

yet upon my arrival at Paris, I found the King
was gone from thence. He had only paſſed

through it, and taken the road to Amiens imme-

diately. This city he thought convenient for
correſponding with the plenipotentiaries of Ver-
vins, and likewiſe for viſiting all the fortreſſes

upon the frontiers, to facilitate the evacuation
of thoſe that were to be reſtored to him by the
treaty, and to provide for their ſecurity for the
© future. All this was but the work of eight days,
and his Majeſty was no ſooner come to Paris than
the treaty was figned ®. _ % Oo

Ihe treaty was very clear and plain. The
 _ reſignation of all the towns and fortreſſes that

Spain poſſeſſed in France was almoſt the only

| _ conſiderable article in it. No difficulty aroſe con-

cerning the affair of the marquiſate of Saluces ;

the King did not think fit to break off the

peace on account of this article, which was rec-
koned of fo little importance, that if Savoy

ſhould refuſe to do juſtice in it, the King, it was

ſaid, might, with very little trouble, ſeize the
whole territory without any obſtruction from
Spain» Both parties, however, obliged them»

on the 2d of May, 1598, the peace was ſigned, in the name
of the King, „ by M. Pomponne de Beilievre, Knight, Lord of
© Grignon, and counſelor of ſtate to the King, and M. Nicholas Bru-

* lart, Knight, Lord of Sillery, counſellor of State to the King, and

© preſident in his court of parliament at Paris. In the name of the Car-

* dinal of Auſtria, having full powers from the King of Spain, by M.

John Richardot, Knight, chief and preſident of the pi ivy council of his

* ſaid Majeſty, and one of his council of ſtate : M. John Baptiſte

de Taxis, Knight Cc. and M. Loyis Verreiken, Knight,” G.

See this whole treaty in the Memoires & negotiations de la paix
traitzes & Vervins, tom 2. with an account, in form of a journal
of all that paſſed betwcen the plenipotentiaries, from the opening of
that negotiation Liil the concluſion of the peace. |

0.3 -- ſelves

'
(
5
Jo
6.
"7
«+2
4
1
MY.
Is
*
x
1
*
4
1
p +
i
pak 4
t
*£Þ
=»
*
"i
N
43.4
v2
TE
Iv
+
1
14
q
4
.
Pp
1
1
1
£80
$283
aA]
ap}
N
"7%
4 "08
125
308
+F
br.
1
Gs
- *
{
9
49
4
7
*
Is

210 M E MOI R $ Book N.
ſelves to ſtand to the Pope's * deciſion of the

affair. Here the plenipotentiaries committed an
error, which was the cauſe of engaging his Ma-

jeſty ſoon after in a war that might have been

avoided, 1 ſhall take no notice of the reſt of

thoſe formalities in uſe amongſt them t, and _-
leave it to others to extol thoſe refined ſtratagems

that in politics are thought the maſterpiece of
human wit. on
The King ſigned the treaty at Paris, in the

_ preſence of the Duke t d'Arſcot and the Admi-

ral of Arragon; the Archduke did the ſame at
Bruſſels, in the King of Spain's name and his

own, before Marechal Biron, on whom the King,

to qualify him for this ceremony, had juſt be.

ſtowed the rank of Duke and Peer of France, a

dignity that completely turned his head. Meſ-
ſieurs de Bellievre and de Sillery were likewiſ:

What regards the Duke of Savoy, who was repreſented by M.

Gaſpard de Geneve, Marquis de Lullin, and counſellor of ſtate, &*c.
is at the end of the 24th article, and imports, © that the remainder of
* the other differences that ſubſiſt between the ſaid moſt Chriſtian
* King and the (aid Duke, ſha!] be referred to the judgment of our
holy father Clement VIII. to be determined by his Holineſs with -

in one Year. — And matters ſhall continue in the ſtate in which

— b :

* er are rene” oy OA
F There were found the ſame difficulties as to the ſubſtance, and
the ſame obſtacles as to the formalities that are uſually to be met

_ with in ſach fort of deliberations. They may be ſeen in the Lettres |
de M. de Peilicvre & de Sillery, and in the Relation, Ec. Ibid. Theic

two negotiators have been generally commended for the firm and
wiſe conduct which they ſhewed therein. In their letters, and, a»
mong others, in thoſe dated the 7th of April, and qth of March,
they give a particular detail of the motives that induced them to
cor.elude with the agents for the Duke of Savoy in the manner of

which M. de Sully complains : and all this they did by the particu» -

lar orders of bis Mzjeſty, in his letter of April 9. Cc. 5
+ Henry IV. took an oath for the obſerving of the treaty of pezce

on Sunday the the 21ſt of June, the Cardinal de Florence, the

Pope's legate, officiating in the moſt folemn manner. The account

is alſo to be met with, Ibid. tom. 2. p. 266. of the MSS. de la BI.
bliot. du Roi, vol. 936 1. Mem. de la ligue, tom. 6. Mem. &

Nevers, tom. 2. Matchieu, tom. 2, l. 2. Cayct, and others.

> f ES *
h 3 FO „
s Z
!!! 3 3 *

e
CE

18986. OF 8 5 1. n

preſent. The Duke of Savoy gave his ſolemn
aſſent to the peace at Chamberry, in the pre-
ſence of Gadagne Botheon, governor of Ly-
ons, who was deputed to him by the King for
that purpoſe. | 15 | OILS
Thus, notwithſtanding a league ſo powerful
as that of the Pope, the Emperor, the King of
| Spain, the Duke of Savoy, and all the eccleſia(-
© tics of Chriſtianity, did the King of France ac-
compliſh his deſigns ® and crown them with a
glorious peace. All thoſe who had been em-
ployed in effecting it he rewarded with a royal
munificence ; and to prevent this meaſure from
alienating Holland from his intereſts, he ſent
Buxenval to Amſterdam, to keep up a good in»
telligence with the States, and to pay the pen-
ſion his Majeſty allowed them. One could never
weary in giving this prince the praiſes fo juſtly
due to his great abilities, and to his ſurpriſing
diligence and expedition in ſhowing himſelf in
cvery part of his kingdom where his preſence was
neceſſary. | 5 |

5 N ba bs SE
f 3 9 e
I 77 OSS *
8 e rr 3 $a 1 8
72211 e eee *

* — *
t v 0 * N
— '*, * =
RITES OE Epi,

=>

- EN PE NIE 8 ' Fee 2 . — . :
- — * — 5 FEM - , — — — 0 —— "OE 42 er - — —— rr he
. NT — WET XF OE PIE IF EE 5 ; 2 —— ABR oy 2 5 5 A *
„CCC ĩ 000 2 2 | F ĩðx ch ay oe” mag —
q > 8832 — 2 IO 22 * — . — Pn 2 8 ra 4." Rh 5 —5 # 2 2 ER. _—_—y - 3 5 R 22 hues w
— -A — — 8 8 4 5 4 3 — * — K < ASSN ME TIT
2: — r — 2 2 7 — a — — my,

3 00x

ES

IHE peace produced other cares and other
| 1 labours. The King began by reducing
the number of his troops, both French and fo-
- | reigners. The Swiſs, except three companies

.

.
>
1
1
1
7
\
FR
"ay
$& |
RM
\ <a
{4.5
*
*
1.
„ #
me
„
5 . j
3 "5
"% 2
.
"3
1
2
7
1
. i}
i 7]
A...
J
* 2
N
13
1
7
1
.
Wot
171
1
18
1h
*
+1584 I
4 F48
*; 8
og 1 8
1
i
FIN
11
44
11
"LAY
54
11
N E
4.3
24
F338
T8
11 N
.
i
\ 4
1&3
$ 8 y
&
*
l
7
1299
4 *
* e
AR
> ALI +
11
1 *
1 ?
PEW
+484
44-2 BY
V8
33, P88
41-15 i
E
an.
$5158
1. RY
"77 1
*
12 8
688
P41 4 80
17 * 5
* n 9
FE 4.900% *
19 32-4 324M
e
e
Fenn
nn
e
J 3'& $3
111 ts
4 $ 1
1 =
* „ *
.
» «
* * 4
e
{2% "OLE
1 4 Wy
# YA. bo
1
M mM £0
1
I ood?
e
oh, «A600
1
e
* 1. 4
1 : v5
8
a * *
Fa *
11% To
YA +: ay
- „44 1
At {8 bes
4
er
N
1 1975
ks 1 3735441
Sund
x 7. 3 245
M
een
n,
4 ROS of Be
q br) M4 *
7 4
Rf wo
1
ann
i LY
en ee
en j.
BEET. .
a
Jaa

n
7 "i > eb 9 1
„
— * I — * 8 —
wx Sh —
. 3 8 88

2
A —
2
*
*
RT

f »The letters which this prince wrote to his two miniſters at Ver-

- vins, during all the time that this negotiation laſted, confirm this.
They are inſerted in the Mem. & Negociations, & c. Ibid. He ſays,
] That with one ſtroke of his pen he had performed more exploits,
e ( than he could have done during a long war with the beſt ſwords

xn | * of his kingdom.“ It was alſo ſaid, upon this treaty, that the

= rags had got the better by arms, but the French by negotia-
le jon. | Ex e | 5

* . _
44>,
Nn LEST

of

212 M E M O 1 R S Book X.

of an hundred men each, commanded by the
Colonels Galati, Heid, and Baltazar, were dif.
banded. This reduction was not ſo complete as
I could have wiſhed, and the neceſſity of the

times ſeemed to require; but my advice on this

head was not approved by his Majeſty. How-
ever, if it had been conſidered that the royal
treaſure was almoſt exhauſted, and yet there was
an abſolute neceſſity of furniſhing money for
many occaſions ſo urgent, that new ſums muſt
neceſſarily be borrowed for that purpoſe, 1 am of
opinion that I could not have been reproached
with a ſordid and miſplaced ceconomy. |
Theſe ſums were to be applied to the fortify.
ing a great number of towns, and the repairing
of may buildings, that by the late diſorders of
the times were threatened with approaching ruin,
which it was neceſſary to prevent without delay.
Upon viſiting the chief rivers of the kingdom,
to ſettle the different claims (a buſineſs which
Was truſted to four perſons of known probity)
it was likewiſe found neceſſary to raiſe ſeveral
works, particularly upon the Charente.
Amongſt other political regulations which
were thought neceſſary to be made, the King (ct
bounds to that prodigious quantity of grain,
which it was uſual to ſend out of the kingdom,
and which often expoſed France to ſuffer the
_ greateſt inconveniencies from a fearcity of her
own produce *. By another regulation, all that

© 4-T: he mol juſt conſequence which it would ſem can be Jaws
fiom all the reaſonings we read and hear daily upon this point,
namely of expottir.g corn out of tlie kingdem, is that which the

Duke de Sully infers here., It would be untcaſonable to cp,

this kingdom of one of the woſt happy reſources ard one ct the
richeſt ſupports of its commerce, ty forbidding all exportation of
this it of commodity : and it vould be no leſs impru dent to al-
lou it without meaſure or PRs =

had

«
"Re"
-X
8
*
"44
7 —
web
: r
2
N
3
"+
en
69
£
%
7
Fes
2
58
M8.
Res
2
*
K
.
"I
W . 9
* **
4
2,
oy
e
3:
_—_—
.
.
.
—
>
4
Il
3
4
*
*
587
A *
7

Ou Fe; RR an „ ans o 0 an ems a. Ae 6 r eee

SU LEY a9

130.0 f .
had no right to wear ſwords “, were forbid,
upon pain of the ſevereſt puniſhments, to appear
with them. . | \;

If to find this proper medium, the public and royal magazines do

not appear to be an anſwerable and ſufficient expedient, by reaſon of

the great expences and ſtil] greater inconveniencies that attend them;

it would ſeem that the ſame objection cannot be made againſt com- |
miſſaries that might be eſtabliſhed to take care that the granaries of

private perſons might be filled, opened and ſhut, whenever the pu-

blic exigencies required it. This part of political economy, whoſe

oreat and almoſt ſole view ſhould be to know and to keep up the
proportion betwixt the productions of the earth and their conſump-

tion, by fairly balancing the different years and different provinces, |

is not, I believe, ſo difficult as at firſt it appears. |
As to the regulation of carrying arms, ſeveral perſons are of o-

pinion that it would be proper to add ſome diſtinguiſhing marks in

the form of the cloaths, that might ſerve to make known in public

the different ranks of people. TOs i „„

As to arts and ſciences, and the belles lettres: if it be true, as it

appears undoubted, that it is to the care that has been taken for

ſome years paſt to cultivate them in Europe, that we owe the dif-

ference that may at this day be obſerved among Europeans, with

regard to the ſoftneſs of their manners, the politeneſs of their beha-
viour, their connexion with each other, and the means which a more

pacific ſpirit has found out to diſcuſs and terminate, in a leſs cruel

manner, their reſpective differences; it appears that, by all kinds of

public motives, independently of that of the glory and particular in-

tereſt that reſults from it, a great ſtate ought not to loſe fight of this

object. Alter all the care which has been already taken in this king-
dom, in order to form and eſtabliſh a library, muſeums, and col-
lections of all kinds, that might be worthy of the powerful mo-

narch that rules it, to inſtitute academics where perſons apply them

ſelves to improve the arts and ſciences ; the world expects with im-
patience to ſee the deſign executed that was formed ſome time ago,
namely to accommodate all theſe different parts a little more to one

another, in ſuch a large town as Paris, by bringing them all within the

fume walls, where one might conveniently find all, at once, as books,
inſtruments, printing-houſes, and in general, all the neceſſary im-
pliments, together with proper accommodations for lodging the per-

ſons appointed, and entruſted with the inſpection of them ; and eſpeci-
ally, to ſee eſtabliſhed a tribunal of arts and ſciences. conſiſting of
proper perſons in the different academies, and paid by his Majeſty,

to ma ke exact trials, and form a preciſe judgment conccrning books,

diſcoveries, and productions that might be uſeful to the public. At
firſt there was an intention to make the ſquare or place Vendome

ſerve for this purpoſe ; after this the Old Louvre was pitched upon :
but exigencies of (tate that are ſtill more neceſſary to be attended
to, have ever ſince made the execution of this project be deferied.

*
of 07
a 2 2 _ : — = ,
£ 8 7 2 bs . — — — — Ä— — —
. -- Þ..-, III * : — matt Aw 5 — nat — —
= — — 2 — = - 5
— — — - wu 8 2 2 2 5
X r — * "> — — ——
— — 3 — Oe We x —

1
” it 4

5

— — —
maine
2 —

= in

> wat 3
r 7
9 —

© eps ea = *

75

— — 9
— I

2 * N

N

Amidſt

. av— —
. ²˙ . RS
rhe Eta
pen ne Te 8 2
2 — a IE... + 4

. 3 2
2 n >,
— — WE
n 2
8933 gu = *%
> 2 * ey

214 M E M OI R S Book X.
Amicdſt theſe occupations, polite literature
was not excluded from a ſhare of the King's at.
tention. He heard Caſaubon mentioned, and up.
on the reputation of this learned man, he invited
him to come and ſettle in Paris with his family,
where he fixed him by a penſion that afforded
him the means of living as became a man of his

character, who is not called, ſaid Henry, to go- 8

Fern 3k.

I am under a neceſſity of ſuppreſſing a detail of

leſs important incidents, the number of which
would be infinite, were I to recount in theſe Me-
moirs all that his Majeſty ſaid or wrote to me
from Fontainebleau, Monceaux, and Saint-Ger-

 main-en-Laye, where he paſſed the remainder of
this year, and where, from time to time, he
commanded my attendance to confer with me up-

on different occaſions. I ſhall exactly fulfil my
former promiſe, in ſuppreſling all that are not in
themſelves of ſome conſideration; and ſhall only
_ obſerve here, that perhaps no miniſter of ſtate
ever found in his prince more attention, or more
fertility of expedients for every thing that could

promote either the advantage or the mere con-
venience of a kingdom, than I found in the Prince

whom I ſerved. Neither peace, nor domeſtic at-
fairs, made him neglect to obſerve what was do-
ing in the neighbouring courts, The queſtion

about the true or falſe Don Sebaſtian “ made then

a

This queſtion ſeems at preſent to be pretty well decided, by the

authority of far the greatcſi part of the beſt hiſtorians, who make

no doubt but that King Sebaltien leſt bis life in tbe battle be fought.

with the Moors at Alcacar, in 1578; and conſequently: that this
_ pretended Don Sebaſtian was but zn impoſtor, ſupported both at
that time and ſince by the enemies of Spain, See the proofs of this

King's death in M. de J hou, book 65. of which we ſhall ſay more

in the ſequel. France could beſides have meddlcd in this queſtion
another way. Catherine de Mcdicis pretended to have a rights

—_——_—

: SE ER RIES

2 7 £ SLE. 26 5 1
1 %! ALS 4 i OS ES 5
UI STC a Reb Ee IG > Fa A 4

: a NET 90 -

9 7

a: as. ad 1

e

XS
1
ES
„
3
. ©
%
"bo *
39 -M
1
” "4
0
8
1
3
9
8
FAY
er
8
3
4 2
wh
„
Na+
"I
2
3
8
2
23%
72
wo 3
32
.

Sz Is: ES
r
5

. BLUES 4 5 N 4 2
8 RN 3
eee

rt. OF SU L LL Ti. _ 215
a great noiſe in Europe as well as in Spain, He
ſent La-Tremouille into Portugal, to endea-
your, if poſſible, to unravel the myſtery, that he
might not, but upon full conviction, determine
upon the juſtice or iniquity of the council of
Spain, which had begun their meaſures by cau-
ſing the ſuppoſed King of Portugal to be arreſted,
Henry, not having yet explained himſelf con-
cerning thoſe great ſchemes which he afterwards
formed againſt the houſe of Auſtria, was deſirous
of acting this year as a mediator between Spain
and England. He therefore propoſed a conference
to be held at Boulogne® between the two crowns,
and ſent Caumartin and Jeannin, to aſſiſt at it in
his name. It was in vain that I oppoſed a meaſure,
which ſeemed to me to be founded in very bad po-
licy; happily, however, this conference produ-
ced nothing that had been expected from it. The
obſtinate hatred theſe two nations bare to each o-
ther, gave riſe immediately to ſo hot a diſpute a-
bout precedency, that they ſeparated before they
had even begun to ſettle the ſmalleſt preliminary.

The Jeſuits were not more fortunate in their
endeavours to take advantage of that article in the
treaty of Vervins, by which all French exiles as
well as foreigners were at liberty to return into
France and ſettle there. The decree of council
which intervened, deprived them of this reſource,
and they were obliged to make uſe of other means
that ſucceeded better. 7 e

tile to the crown of Portugal, alledging that ſhe was deſcended of
Robert, ſon to Alphonſus III. by Maude his firſt wife, who died
in 1262. Since which time ſhe maintained that all the kings of
Portugal were no other than vſurpers. But as theſe were points
very difficult to be decided, it appears, that ſhe made but little pro-
greſs in making good her pretenſion s..
This conference or congreſs, into which were admitted the
States of the United Provinces, was not held till the year 1599, in
the months of May and June. | | |
The

2i6 MEMOIR 8 Book X.
The aſſembly of the clergy which was held this
year, and continued part of the following, ſhared
likewiſe his Majeſty's attention, as well as the pro.
motion of Cardinals. The ſon of Madam Sour.
dis was one of thoſe Frenchmen for whom the
King procured a hat, although he was too young
to be thought worthy of that diſtinction. Madam
de Sourdis owed this favour to the Ducheſs of
Beaufort's intereſt, whom ſhe prevailed upon to ſop-
ds ter requeſt.
This was the title the King's miſtreſs now bore,
by for which ſhe quitted that of Marchioneſs of Mon-
ceaux, when the birth of a ſecond fon drew from
his Majeſty an increaſe of tenderneſs and honours,
This lady had for a long time ſet no bounds to her
ambition; ſhe aſpired to nothing leſs than being
declared Queen of France; and Henry's paſſion
for her, which increaſed every day, gave her
hopes of accompliſhing her deſigns. When ſhe | 3
was informed that the King's agents at Rome |
were commiſſioned to ſolicit the diſſolution of his
marriage with Margaret, and that his Majeſty was
on the point of ſending the Duke of Luxemburg
. to that court with the title of ambaſſador, to haſten
the concluſion of it, ſhe looked upon this as a fa-
vourable opportunity, But ſuſpecting the agents
and probably the new ambaſſador, ſhe caſt her Þ
eyes upon Sillery, who was already deep in her.
Intereſt, and whom this laſt inſtance of confidence
would not fail of binding till cloſer to her ſervice. |
| She ſent for him, and explaining her views to
bim, fet no bounds to the reward which ſhe pre-
tended to give for his ſervice and devotion. As
ſhe knew what was moſt likely to tempt Sillery,
ſhe aſſured him of the ſeals at his return from
Rome, though at the hazard even of diſobliging
Madame de Sourdis her aunt and intimate fiiend,

and e him likewiſe the poſt of Chancellor,
as

a, ed. ———%// / ͤ tnds oat. bi Goes IR"

5 of
*
999

þ YEA nd Ca LE TA ” 4 - 2 2 n 2
RE a EL re ĩͤ AFL $2.25 Fr 2
, * 7 L E OWE Le RO AA In, 8 N 5

v3

NESS Ede oh
on mo Hom AO Fay, IX trpw

/ % vc WO ET T Ended
No bps EIT BIN ets LET PERS E e 8 ae
"> 2 POE > Wh CORD r

. => dl: rt A E e e e A a<'/

1

K - 6 F - 0 . ä K
fe” P * ge 9 Id :
93 5 a * ; a
17 FS N 1 p : N * „ Soo,
27 2 _ ICE - DT PET ANTS YA. * —
N er ß F 4 9 2 a

—

| 5 0 0 : | |
lery engaged, with all the oaths ſhe demanded
from him, to negle& nothing that might prevail
ZZ upon the Pope to legitimate the two children ſhe |

-

85
6s

E had by Henry, and to diſſolve his marriage with

22 ͤ T1 . _ . .
* eee ee F . 2 1 ee 0 Vo pH NT

A *
34k
it
2

1 0
4

. *
$1 Ry
x ” N 8
85 pe
. <=
* *
2
+
o
|
*

7

Margaret. This firſt ſtep taken, few obſtacles re-

mained to hinder her advancement to the throne,
= $he eaſily found reaſons to make the King ap-
prove of the ambaſſador ſhe had choſen. The
Duke of Luxemburg was only ſuffcred to ſer out,
to be recalled as ſoon as Sillery ſhould be in a con-

2

Jas ſoon as it ſhould be vacant, At this price Sil-

„„

dition to take his place. The Ducheſs was at no

ains to conceal from the court the title with
which ſhe had juſt graced her favourite. She aſ-
fiſted herſelf in preparing his equipages, and pre-

vailed upon the King to give the neceſſary ord-rs
for Sillery's appearance with all the pomp and

magnificence, by which the ſucceſs of his nego-

tiation might be ſecured. „„

The Ducheſs of Beaufort at the ſame time, to
prepare the French for that change which ſhe me-
ditated for her children, obtained of the King,

who had no leſs tenderneſs for them than fir the

mother, that the ceremony of the baptifin of the
ſecond ſon ſhe had lately born him, ſhould be per-
formed at Saint-Germain, where his Majeſty then
was, with the ſame magnificence and honours

which in this ceremony are only uſed to the chil-

dren of France. Thovgh I could pardon in this

lady an intoxication in which ſhe was kept by the
ſervile reſpe& the courtiers paid to her children,
and the adorations they offered to herſelf, I cold
not have the ſame indulgence for Henry, who was

ſo far from taking any meaſures to undeceive her,
that he gave orders for the baptiſm of this child,
with a readineſs that ſhewed how agreeable the requeſt
was to him. I declared my ſentiments of this pro-
ceeding with great freedon . Iendeavoured publicly
VoI. II. 1 to

— —

* 4
3 a LIT oo rn _ r *
n — 8 —
— — * ——— 9

—
n

. 2 ——— — *
F = : PET —>—— S. * — 7 — _ EE 933 =
et HS oe ES n 5 — IE: 1 1
- hd 9 m_ — IS = — 3 * - A
2 —.— TER; r 3 4 ryiite, gnee Py 2 —— 28 = = >
. — — 4 . —— — — 2 — — 5
2 NV l 85 3

— = —

Re Sony IE

M — — —
r

3
3

=”
„
e

—

—

—

2 E dl e A RIES 3 N GD 3
„% ³ A . —— OA, ICS
. BL e nn, - — r VEE
— n

— SD 8
F
— — re Fg nets .- -o* —
2 AAA 1
— .
5 < Le 2 Le bY 4.6 6

218 NM E M O IR Ss Booky,

to oppoſe the inference which I perceived be
courtiers would draw, in favour of children ſo | 3 ©
dear to the King, for the ſucceſſion to the crown. ]
The King himſelf, after the ceremony, became 7
ſenſible that he had permitted too much, and tod ;
me that they had exceeded his orders; which had 1
no difficulty to believe. The child was named Ale.
xander *, as the eldeſt had been Cæſar; and te
court flatterers, by a kind of ſecond baptiſm, gare |
him the title of Monſieur, which in France na mn
one is allowed ro bear but the King's only bio- c
ther, or the preſumptive heir to the crowbn. f
The miſtreſs did not ſtop here; ſhe began to 2
eſſume all the airs of a queen, not indeed WhoIIl a
| through her own preſumption, for I think ſue &
knew herſelf too well to have indulged ſuch extra © 2
vagant ideas, but was driven on to take that ſfep e
by the continual ſolicitations of her creatures and ' u
relations. Madam de Sourdis, Chiverny, and | u
Freſne, ſeconded her fo well on their parts, that | 1
it became inſenſibly the public talk of the court, | J
that the King was going to marry his miſtreſs; | * n
and that it was for this purpoſe he was ſoliciting 8
his divorce at Rome. { was ſhocked at a report t

ſo injurious to the glory of this Prince. I went

to ma, and made him ſenſible of the conſequence 2
of it. He appeared to me concerned, and even Þ | |
picqued at it. Yet his firſt care was to juſtify Ma» | \
dam de Beaufort, who, he poſitively aſſured me, |
had not contributed to the report; for which all 1
the proof he had was, that ſhe had told him ſo. 1
He threw the whole blame upon Madam de Sour- Þ® <«
dis arid Freſne, to whom he ſhewed that he was! 1
capable of pardoning a conduct ſo little reſpectſul ! {
to him; ſince, although he was aſſured they were :
They gave him the title of Chevalier de Vendome, Lady Þ (
Catherine, filter to the King, and the Count de Soiſſons, were the

iponſors at his chiiſtening, He died g. and prior of France, in 16 29.

Auilty

e. OF SULLY 2

guilty, he gave them not the ſlighteſt reprimand.
One eircumſtance added great weight to the ſteps

I took on this occaſion both in public and private.

« « +
*
*

L Queen Margaret, with whom the affair of the ap-

proaching diſſolution of her marriage obliged me
27 to keep a correſpondence by letters, was the laſt
who heard of what was ſaid and done at court,
with regard to Madam de Beaufort's pretenſions.
As ſoon as ſhe was informed of them, the wrote to
me, and gave me to underſtand, that ſhe had not
changed her mind with regard to a ſeparation
from the King, but that ſhe was ſo much offended
at their intending to give the place ſhe reſigned to
a woman fo infamous as the Ducheſs was by her
commerce with the King, that, although ſhe had
at firſt given her conſent without annexing any
conditions to it, the was now determined to infiſt

1838

N — 2 =

upon the excluſion of this woman; ad no treat-
ment whatever ſhould oblige her to alter her reſo-
luution. I ſhewed this letter to the King, who
Judging by it how much his marriage with his
miſtreſs would irritate the beſt of his ſubjects a-
gainſt him, began, in reality, to change his ſen-
timents and conduct. — _ |
I was of opinion that if Madam de Beaufort was
acquainted with the contents of this letter, it might
probably produce the ſame effects upon her. 1
| would not take this trouble upon myſelf, being
| unwilling to meet the inſolence and rage of a wo-
man, who looked upon me as a ſtumbling block
in the way of her advancement; but I communi-
cated the letter to Chiverny ...! Freſne, who im-
mediately informed Madam de Sourdis of it, and
| ſhe, almoſt in the ſame moment, the Ducheſs of
Beaufort, But this lady's counſellors were not fo
| eaſily alarmed; they were very ſenſible that the
deſign in which they had undertaken to engage
the King, could not fail of meeting with many
 - AS: _ dithcultics,

n £ * * * £ "OY a * 1 ; l : . in # 85 5
1 2 5 ” i 1 A TT, ? * 4 ” Ib S 5 % a 25 * 3
8 4 — go = Tet I A 5 ce
rr W 4 — Rr . e 5 8 $2. . 85 r p 1
SEPA AUR to SS SI NON Yo Ge SER, = STS .

r

220 M E M OI R S Bock X
: difficutrics, and they had ſettled their behaviour

upon each. The reſult of their deliberations had?

been, to haſten, as much as poſſible, the conclu- E
ſion of the affair; perſuading themſelves, that ©
when it was once over they might give ir a 1 1

that ſhould make it excuſable; or, at worſt, nat.

ters would be compoſed after a Jittle murmuring,

as always happens when things are without reme-

dy. They knew well the difpoſition of the French 3
nation, eſpecially the courtiers, whoſe firſt law it is,
to be always of the ſame mind with the ſovercign,

and whoſe ſtrongeſt paſſin, the deſire of pleaſing

bim. Ina word, they thought themſelves ſecure
of every thing, provided the King bimſelf did not

fail them.

Freſne having drawn up the warrant for the |
payment of the heralds, trumpeters, and other |
_ under-officers of the crown, who had attended at |

the ceremony of the baptiſm, it was brought to
me, as well as the reſt, that 1 might give my or-
der for its pay ment. As ſoon as I caſt my eyes
upon this writing, a tender concern for the King's
honour made me look upon it as a laſting teſti-
mony of his weakneſs, which was going to be
handed down to poſterity. I heſitated not a mo-

ment to return it, and cauſed another to be drawn

up in terms more proper. The titles of Monſieur,
Son of France, and all that could give any notion

of that kind, was ſuppreſſed ; and conſequently
the houſhold fees reduced to the ordinary price,
with which they were highly diſſatisfied. They
did not fail to renew their efforts; and in their

diſcontent quoted Monſieur de Freſne, and the

law by which their claims were regulated: At firſt
I reſtrained my ſelf before theſe people, whoſe bad

intentions I well knew; bur growing impatient at
Jaſt, 1 could not help ſaying to them, with ſome
indignation, * 8 go, L will. do 8 in it;

„ KNOW

.
1
ts
_ 4 Cc *
.
NS |
x IS
2
Wd ew 1
3
2
29
EIN
INST.
ft
Br
* 2 1
*
*
8
*
4 92
OY
3
2
SR
ery

1 LULLYT a

c know that there are no children of France.“

No ſooner had theſe words eſcaped me, than,
ſuſpecting that a troubleſome affair would be made
of it, to prevent it, I went immediately to h's

© Majeſty, who was walking with the Duke d'Eper-
non in the palace of Saint-Germain. 1 ſhewed
him the warrant Freſne had drawn up, telling
bim, that if it was allowed, there needed no more

but to declare himſelf married to the Ducheſs of

Beaufort. This is Freſne's malice,” ſaid the
King, after he had read it: © but I ſhall take
„ care to prevent it.” Then, commanding me

to tear the paper, he turned to three or four lords

of the court who were neareſt him, © How ma-
„ Jignant are theſe people,” ſaid he aloud, “ and

& what difficulties do they throw in the way of

„ thoſe who ſerve me with fidelity. They brought

a warrant to Monſieur de Roſny, with a deſign
to make him offend me, if he paſſed ir, or my
miſtreſs, if he refuſed it” As matters then
flood, theſe words were far from being indit>

15 ferent. They gave the courtiers, who had ſmiled

at my fimplicity, to underſtand, that they might
poſſibly be deceived themſelves, and that the ſup-
poſed marriage was not ſo near as they had ima-
gined. The King continuing to converſe with
me apart, told me, that he did not doubt bur
that Madam de Beaufort was greatly enraged againſt

me, and adviſed me to go to her, and endeavour,

by ſolid reaſons, to give her ſatisfaction. © If

"hey will not do,” added he,“ I will ſpeak to

« her as her maſter.”

I went directly to the Dutcheſs's apartment,
which was in the cloiſter of Saint-Germain. I

knew not what notion ſhe conceived of a viſit which
the found I began with a ſort of explanation She
did not allow me time to proceed. The rage with
Wnich the was animated not permitiing her to ob-

„ | 1 3 lerve

„ n M G N Book X.
ſerve any meaſures, ſhe interrupted me with a re.
proach that I had impoſed upon the King, and
made him believe that black was white. Tis
Well, Madam!“ ſaid I, interrupting her in my

turn, but with great calmneſs, “ ſince you think
« fit to talk in this manner, I ſhall take my leave;

© but I ſhall not, however, negle& to do my du-

„ty.“ Saying this, I left her, not being willing
to hear more, left 1 ſhould be tempted to ſay ſome:

thing more ſevere. I put the King in a very ill 3

humour with his miſtreſs, when I repeated to him
What ſhe had ſaid “ Come along with me,”

ſaid the King, with an emotion that pleaſed me 1
greatly, “ and I will let you ſee that women do

% not wholly poſſeſs me.” His coach not being
ready ſoon enough for his impatience, his Majeſty

got into mine: and as we drove to the Duchels's

| lodgings, he aſſured me that he would never have
cauſe to reproach bimſelf, that, through his com-

plaiſance for a woman, he had baniſhed or even
diſguſted ſervants, who, like me, were only ſoli-

citous for his glory and intereſt.

Madam de Beaufort, upon my leaving her apart.
ment fo haſtily, had expected to ſee the King ſoon

after: and during that time had taken ſufficient

pains to ſet off her perſon to the greateſt advantage;

| believing, like me, that the victory which one or
other of us muſt now gain, would be the preſage

of her good or bad fortune. As ſoon as ſhe was
informed of the King's arrival, ſhe came as far as
the door of the firſt hall to receive him. Henry,

without ſaluting her, or expreſſing any part of his
uſual tenderneſs, * Let us go, Madam, {aid he,
e to your chamber, and ſuffer no one to enter

% hut yourſelf, Roſny, and me; for I want to

«6

talk to you both, and make you live rogether
40

upon friendly terms.” Then ordering the door

to be ſhut, and that no one ſhould be ſuffcred to
remain

% $V LEY ng

remain in the chamber, dreſſing-room, or cloſer,
he took her hand, holding one of mine at the ſame
time, and with an air at which ſhe had good reaſon
to be ſurpriſed, told her, that the true motive
which had determined him to attach himſelf to her,
was the gentleneſs he had obſerved in her diſpoſi-
tion; but that her conduct for ſome time paſt had
convinced kim, that what he had believed to be
real was only diſſembled, and that ſhe had deceived.
him. He 1eproached her with the bad counſels to
which ſhe had liſtened, and the very confiderable
faults they had occaſioned. He covered me with
praiſes, to ſhew the Ducheſs, by the difference of
our proceedings, that 1 only was truly attached to
his perſon. He commanded her to get ſo far the
better of her averſion for me, as to be able to re-
gulate her conduct by my advice, ſince, ſhe might
depend. upon it, his paſſion for her ſhould never
induce him to deprive me of his confidence.
Madam de Beaufort began her anſwer by ſighs
and tears; ſhe aſſumed a tender and ſubmiſſive
air; ſhe would have kiſſed the hand of Henry;
 _ omitting no artifice which ſhe thought capable of
melting his heart. It was not till ſhe had played
over all theſe little arts, that ſhe began to ſpeak,
which ſhe did by complaining, that inſtead of
thoſe returns ſhe might have expected from a Prince
| to whom ſhe had given her heart, ſhe faw herſelf
\ . facrificed to one of his grooms. She repeated all
that I had faid or done to the prejudice of her chil-
- dren, in order to awake his Majeſty's reſentment.
 apainſt me, Then, feigning to ſink under the
violence of her grief and deſpair, ſhe let herſelf.
fall upon a couch, where ſhe proteſted ſhe was de-
| termined to wait for death, not being able to en-
dure life after ſo cruel an affront, The attack was
a little ſtrong ; Hænry did not expect it. I obſer-
ved him heedfully, and faw his countenance chan ge;
| . x Ut

(e

224 MEMOIRS Bock X

but recovering himſelf immediately, that his miſ.
treſs might not perceive it, he continued to tell

her in the ſame tone, that ſhe might ſpare herſelf
the trouble of having recourſe to ſo many artifices

on ſo ſlight an occaſion. Senſibly affected at this

reproach, ſhe redoubled her tears, crying, that
ſhe plainly perceived ſhe was abandoned, and that

doubtleſs it was to augment her ſhame and my

triumph, that the King had reſolved to make me

a witneſs of the molt cruel treatment that was ever
ſhewn to any woman. This thought ſeemed to |
Plunge her into a real deſpair, * By heaven, Bla-

dam,“ faid the King loſing patience, © this is

>

whoſe aſſiſtance I cannot be without, I declare

“ to you, if I was reduced to the neceſſity of chu-
ſing to loſe one or the other, I would rather part
“ with ten miſtreſſes like you, than one ſervant
„ ſuch as him.” He did not forget the term of

40

groom which ſhe had uſed; and was ſtill more of—

fended, that ſhe had applied it to a man whoſe

family had the honour of being allied to his own.

Alfter this harſh ſpeech the King ſuddenly quitted
the Ducheſs, and was going out of her apartment _

without ſeeming to be moved at the condition in
which he left her; probably becauſe he knew her

well enough to be aſſured that all this violence of |

grief was only affeQation and grimace. As for me,
1was ſo far deluded by it, as to be greatly concern-

ed for her; and was not undeceived till Madam ce

Beaufort, perceiving the King was going to leave

her ſo much offended, that the had reaſon to ap-
prehend he would never return again, changed

ber behaviour in an inſtant, ran to ſtop him, and

threw herſelf at his feet; no longer to impoſe up-

on his tenderneſs, but to ſooth him to a forgetful-

nels of her fault, She began by apologiſing os
apt n e [OD

«& too much; Iknow to what all this artifice tends; Þ_
you want to prevail upon me to baniſh a ſervant Þ

„„ r D. nay

and complacency, and ſwore ſhe never had nor
ever would, have any will but his, Never was
there a change of ſcene more ſudden. I now ſaw
a woman perfectly agreeable, eaſy, and compli-
ant, who behaved to me as if all that had juſt paſ-

ſed had been a dream; and we all ſeparated very

ood friends. |

The King being at Monceaux about the end of

October, felt ſome light touches of a fever, which

ended at laſt in a violent attack *; it was attributed
to the diſturbance cauſed by a prodigious quantity |
of humours, which were diſcharged by a purge; and
aas the fever ſeemed to have wholly ceaſed, the

King thought himſelf cured, and wrote to me to
that effect; obſerving, however, that his indiſpo-

ſition had left a faintneſs and dejection upon him
which was not uſual with him, but that he would
endeavour to diſpel it by walking, if he could get
ſtrength enough. Thele ſymptoms were the fore-

runner of a diſtemper, which a few days after-
wards feized him with ſuch violence that he was

ſoon in great danger, and I hid the affliction to

find him in this condition on my arrival at Mon-
ceaux, with Chatillon and D'Incarville, whom he

ſent for in the letter I have juſt mentioned. *
thought for a long time that 1 was only come to
ſee my dear maſter expire in my arms, for he

would not permit me to leave Monceaux during
his illneſs, and often called me to his bed-ſide. In

one of theſe moments when the obſtinacy and
continual recurrence of his diſtemper baffled all

* In the following manner the hiſtorian Matthieu ſpeaks of this

diforder of Henry IV. „ While he was very merry with his mi-

* ſtreſs and Bellegarde and laugbing heartily at {ome ſatirical ver-
* ſes, he was ſuddenly ſcizcd with a violent fit of vomiting, which

kept him for ſeven hours together in very great danger, all that

time having a conſtant deſire to drink, and itill throwing up the
water while the glaſs was at his head.” Tom. 2. l. 2. p. 4
| | 5 the

her paſt conduct; aſſumed an air of gentleneſs

— —

— —— s OE —U—
. aac —

21 ih
Toa =P I. _
— —

,
: - ag. ————4 x —
WIRE © * * — — 0 EI SN
* . TREOTTSITTaAnDT = FEATS iT IIS Ba, 2 3 - - —
— — & — OT. * — — ws —— — ” — — =
— . — — — S ns - 5 - 3 - — 8 = 8 —
— — — — — TOME ad oo Ha a ny er OS ——— = - " 2 2 ; — IO A Re === — — — - —

P 3 2 Sv — — . — 5 — * 2 . HED og 5 — — H— 2 i ——̃— — TI? - . — BE — — - — 3 1 co
3 Fe 4 — * n eee - . - = "I 2 - — —-— — "4 G - — - = — — 2 — = — 2 _— = "Þ ——
S, n 4 7 . . OED N Oo & a 3 S —— — : — _—_—— CY — — — — — — . he 8 , - 8

Ag SELL - Fav Y — = 1 — — q + : 3 — - * = 3 r IPO E — — — 1 — a
r 5 8 — % 2 n
n BOY 2 * at 3 — —_——_ f — DEI. —— go of
. 1 2 gen * 4 * ad — — * 8 =
2 — — KY a _—_ FF $I Ant oo Cabos _ _ *
2 3 _— — — — — —_— —— — CR —
- — . 5 gn es _ — n wa
4 S 2 Sr n 2 n
* 3 n CS

—

—
*. be
=”; FFP
r

*
—
—

— 2

— ——
— ab
8 un
nn Z
C

" — —
Dr. 7

. —————

WM. ie lors phe ont
— 2 8
SEX.”

3 n
4
—
*

— —ꝑ ——
— — —
— — ͤ——————————
aA 1 # - =>
{+ - ad . > : - .
— 0 8 r
— 2 oy

mn 2
5 44
an
——
—

— Io a4
—

— — — = — —

if
;
|

+ MEMOIRS
| the art of the phyſicians, and this Prince bimſcht
thought that his laſt hour was approaching : : © My

: $6
2

e
4

wy friend, ſaid he to me, you who have often ſcen
me meet dangers which it was eaſy for me t9

2

« convinced my people, by diſcharging them of
part of their taxes and governing them — 9
that l love them as my own children.”

At length Henry's good conſtitution prevailed, |

and his ciſterper was removed almoſt inſtania-
neouſly *; fo that the grief into which his danger
had plunged us, Was followed immediately by the
joy of his recovery. He had afterwards a flight
relapſe, which had no bad conſequence : he lent
me word of this at Paris, whither I had returned
as ſoon as I ſaw him out of danger. And in ano-
ther letter, dated the 6th of November, which

Schomberg, at his return from Monceaux, brought |

me to Paris from his Majeſty, he informed me

that his health was perfectly eſtabliſhed, except

that he had ſome ſmall remains of that dejection
on his ſpirits of which he had formerly complained,

and of which he could not getrid, notwithſtanding
he followed exactly the advice of his phyſicians,
The Sieurs Mareſcot, Martin, and Roſſet, having,
upon the news of his illneſs, haſtened to Monceaux
to aſſiſt his phyſicians in ordinary with their ad-
vice, he had the attention to cauſe them to be paid
for their trouble, writing to me to give each of

It was ie this malady that Hears: Iv. was very much

| troubled with a caineous excreſcence; which ſerved as a pretext to
the Ducheſs of Beaufort, to let him know, by means of La Riviert,
his firſt phyſician, whom ſhe gained over to her intereſt, that be
could, after this, have no more children. Amelot de la Houlliys,

num. 1. ſur la lettre 243. du Cardinal d'Oſſat.

them

Book X.

have avoided, know better than any other per. z
© fon how little I fear death; but I will not deny |
% that I am grieved to die befars | have raiſed this F
% kingdom to that ſplendor I intended for it; or

. 3
3
Ire
I by \
0 0
E. 1
4 Wa 4
q 5
9
tb
R. ay
wn
FP
*
3
RE.
1 4
5 *
5
*
4
1
A 3
Fg
<
©7. 4
*
bt
7
7

oF SVLELY: as
them one hundred crowns, and ally to Regnault

his ſurgeon.
The King had not yet quitted Monceaux when

the Cardinal of Florence, who had ſo great a hand |

in the treaty of Vervins, paſſed through Paris, as
he came back from Picardy, to return from thence

to Rome, after he had taken leave of his Majeſty.

The King ſent me to Paris to receive him, com-
1 manding me to pay him all imaginable honours.
He had need of a perſon near the Pope fo power-
© ful as this Cardinal, who afterwards obtained the
pontificate himſelf. I therefore omitted nothing
that could anſwer his Majeſty's intentions; and the
| legate having an inclination to ſee Saint Germain-
_ en-laye, I ſent orders to Momier, the keeper of

the caſtle, to hang the halls and chambers with

the fineſt tapeſtry of the crown, Momier exccu—

ted my orders with great punctuality, but with ſo
little judgment, that for the legate's chamber he
| choſe a ſuit of hangings wrought by the Queen of

| Navarre; very rich, indeed, but which repreſent-

ed nothing but emblems and. mottos againſt the

Pope and the Roman court, as fatirical as they
were ingenious. The Prelate endeavoured to pre-
vail upon me to accept of a place in the coach that
Was to carry him to Saint-Germain; which I refu-

| fed, being deſirous of getting there before him,

that I might ſee whether every thing was in order;
with which I was very well pleaſed, I ſaw the

_ blunder of the keeper, and rectified it immediate =
ly. The legate would not have failed to have
looked upon ſuch a miſtake as a formed deſign to
* Inſult him, and to have repreſented it as ſuch to

| the Pope. Reflecting afterwards, that no difference
in religion could authoriſe ſuch ſarcaſms, I cauſed
all thoſe mottos to be effaced.

[ had long hoped that a peace would afford me

leiſure to examine the finances of the kingdom
| thoroughly,

2 2 p * 2 ů — — 86> =
— — — © E —
* — — 5 — ä ————
— Fe — © 2 hy = ” 2 =
—— —— Lo . mn OO
by r 8 3 << Re CY = ——
— 4 2 * « 8
— ——— 9 —
— — 9 = 2 2 * *
= 7 * . wm * bz : 3= — *
. — 8 ** 3

——
——— 2

<2

— oy —
1 wry * = *
— n * :
: — x EEE
—_— 54 2 — — ES
r — me erty
e — — re gee”
2 r

228 MEMOIR 8 Bock X.
thoroughly. All that I had hitherto been able to
do, was only to alleviate the miſchief; and far
from having been able to dig to the root, ſo as to
eradicate it at once, the different neceſſities of the
fate, which always followed each other ſo cloſe
during the war, made it to be reckoned on as a
great ſtroke of policy to manage the finances with-
out increaſing the confuſion. It is certain that,
upon a cloſer examination, they ſeemed rainted

with an incurable diſeaſe, which could not even

_ be inquired into without the moſt unſhaken courage
and invincible patience. The fi: ft glance was able
to diſcover nothing but an univerſal loſs of credit;
the royal treaſury indebted feveral hundred mil-
lions; no means of raiſing more money; exceſſive
poverty; and ruin at hand. But this very ſtate of
_ deſpair made it neceſſary not to delay a fingle mo-

- Ment the undertaking this great work, while ſeve- |

ral opportunities concurring ſhewed at leaſt a poſ-
ſibility of ſucceſs Every thing was in tranquilli-
ty; the pay of the troops conſiderably leſſened,
the greater part of the military expences ſuppreſſed,

the King's council, weary at length of making uſe-
leſs endeavours to deprive me of any management

of public affairs, almoſt all boſine {s was tranſacted
by me; theſe gentlemen diſdained even to come
to the meetings, unleſo forced thither by their own
| Intereſt, or that of their relations or friends. In

_ thoſe meetings, nothing was propoſed without my

approbation, and nothing executed without my

conſent. The King had no ſecret with which [_
was not entruſted, nor any authority with which

I was not occaſionally inveſted. All theſe conſi-

derations perſuaded me that, if the calamities

cauſed by ſo many long and criel civil wars were

ever to be repaired, now or never was the time to

accompliſh it.
I had received Ha: nature a ſtrong Rita:

tion,

_

1% 9
tion, a body able to ſupport “ long labours, and
a mind capable of great application, a natural
propenſity to regularity and ceconomy, improved

by a particular ſtudy of that ſcience for a courſe

of

* The picture which M de Perefixe pives us of M. de Roſuy,
altogether agrees with that which we ſee drawn here. He had

„ eſpecially, ſays he, a genius turned for the management of the -

finances, and all the other qualifications requiſite for ſuch a ſta-
« tion. In fact, he was a regular man exact, and a great cecono-
„ miſt, he was punctual to his word, no ways pr-digal, without a-

ny pompous oftentation, not inclined to profuſe expence, game,
or women, nor addicted to any thing that did not cxactly tally
„ with a man bred to ſuch an employment Beſides, he was vi-
gilant, laborious, expeditious, beſtowing alm ſt his whole time

on buſineſs and but littl- on his pleaſures. Withal he had th:

« happy dexterity of ſecing through ſuch ſort of matters, and of

knots, under which the farmers of the finances, when they have
a mind to be knaviſh, endeavour to conceal their tricks,” Part
3. P. Matthicu gives him no leſs high a chatacter, tom. 2.1. 2.
p. 278. © The King gave him,” ſays Le-Grain, „the poſt of
ſuperintendent general of his finances. inveſting him with ſ: great

4 an authority as had never been ſeen in that office before. In this
« place, it muſt be confeſſed, there wanted a man at that time, who

* would have his eyes hood-wir.ked to every other confideration but
% was neceſſary to reſtore to its full vigour; and who would be
more rigid than either the dignity of ſome perſons, or the reſpect
due to others, would have endurcd at any other time. And in-
“ geed this great authority and power, which the King gave him,
did, in a little time after, reſtore full ſtreng th to all the main re-
&« ſources of the ſtate.” See the whole of what this writer lays, with
regard to M. de Sully. 1 7. 5 V
« He put,” ſays D'Aubigne, tom. 3. Il. 5 c. 3. © the finances

4 jnto the hands of the Marquis de Roſny. afterwards Duke of

« Sully, becauſe he found he had a very extenſive and laborious ge-
% nius, as alſo a natural ſeverity of temper, which, without regard-
« ing the favour of any body, enabled him to bear the unpleaſing
« irkiomeneſs of rebuffs ; and by that means, filled the King's cof -
fers, to which the natural diſpoſition of his matter did not a little
contribute.“ . „ .
In a ſn-all piece, tom. 3. of the Mcm. d'Etat de V lle:oi, we
find the following account.“ This change in the face of affairs,

* which the ſaid Sieur de Sully had introduced into France, that |

had been brovght to the luwelt ebb of diſtieſs, rendering it opus
leut and flourithing by means of his good management and indus»

| „ ſtry,
Vol. II. U

$ J L L T. 229

unraveling the puzzling perplexities and untying the intricate

1 P
1 — kt — 2
Foe = - KP
A S — >
<3

3

the King's advantage, that is, to the public treaſuic, which it

3

FFP
„ _—_—

— — — - — 8 r * * ”
- 2 2 a _— "» = > — as __ 1 * Wo 2 I
2 — a X 8 _— 2 vin & aig ml" por - — — — - — —
9 = EL RING BAY A; Ee oe PR Grp —— K EET — . . — 8
* LS 8 - —— — — 3 —— * þ * 2 "TY 2 2
= 7 8 — — * 2 3 -: . ot Hl; 2 8
— 1

250 MEMOIRS Bookx W

of twenty-five years that I was near the King's
perſon; and, if I may be allowed to fay it, a
_ paſſion yet more forcible for honour and virtue.
Such are the qualities I brought to the conduct

of public affairs. With theſe, although one can-

not keep clear of committing faults, and thoſe

likewiſe very conſiderable, yet (and experience

as well as the ſucceſs that attended my labours
gives me a tight to ſay ſo) one may be aſſured

that the revenues of a ſtate are fallen into good
hands, when a moderate degree of judgment,

much diligence and exactneſs, and ſtill more pro-
bity, are qualities remarkable in him that go.
verns them. I dare not aſſume more likeneſs
than this to the portrait I am going to draw of

a good miniſter of the finances; becauſe that, al-

though I have always propoſed ſuch an one for
my imitation, yet I candidly confeſs I am far
from pretending to ſet up myſelf for a model,

It would be the ſhorteſt way to ſay, that a

man who is called to the management of public

affairs, ought to have no paſſions; but that we

may not wholly deſtroy the notion of ſuch a be-

ing, by reducing him to an impoſſible and mere-

« ſtry, does ſufficiently teſtify his abilities The remonſtrances,

& which he made even to the King's pleaſure, and the oppoſition

© which he maintained againſt all the great men, ſhew his virtue,

4 prudence, and "—_ Even thoſe who envy him ſay, that he
s alone was of more ule to the public, and knew its intereſts better,
than all the reſt of the kingdom beſides” The manuſcript which

we quoted in the preface, coincides with this; and further may be

added the ſuffrage of the greateſt part of the hiſtorians and memoirs
of that time, which all agree, that M. de Sully has, in ſtrict juſtice,
deſerved the appellation of the moſt laborious, the moſt capable, the
moſt upright, and above all, the moſt ſteady miniſter that ever was.
The ſeverity, rigidneſs, and haughty carriage, which are almoſt the

only faults with which he has been charged, ariſe from the laſt men-

tioned quality, that no doubt was carried a little too far. We hall

have occaſion to ſpeak more of it in the ſequel: but I thought

myſelt obliged previouſly to add theſe teſtimonies, to the account he
gives us of bis character and conduct. | £1

ä 1

1598. OF $'VU- f LT.
ought to have ſuch a knowledge of them, as to
be able to avoid their influence. He fhould be
ſenſible of all the meanneſs of pride, the folly of
ambition, the weakneſs of hatred, and the baſe-
neſs of revenge.
reflections as immediately relate to him, I ſhall
not take any notice here of the great meanneſs of
treating people ill, not only by actions but even

words, and of never giving orders to inferiors

but in the tranſports of rage, or peeviſhneſs of

ill-humour, ſeaſoning them with oaths and cur-
ſes; ſince, living for the public, he ought to ap-
pear affable, and be eaſy of acceſs to every body,
except to thoſe who only come to him with a de-
ſign to corrupt him, and never to loſe ſight of
this maxim, which holds one of the firſt places
in the affairs of government, That a kingdom

ought to be regulated by general rules, and that

exceptions only occaſion diſcontent, and produce
complaints.

A juſt knowledge of what is due to rank, and
of different degrees of diſtinction, is fo far from

being contrary to this maxim, that it is eſſentially

neceſſary to it, as well for obſerving thoſe rules

of behaviour to perſons of different ranks, which
the French politeneſs has eſtabliſhed, as to be un-

deceived of that miſtake, that one's riches and the
favour of his King place every other perſon in a
ſtate of ſubordination to him.

the fair ſex is a ſource of weakneſſes and injuſtice,

which will inevitably carry him beyond the
bounds of his duty. A paſſion for deep play,
will expoſe him to temptations ſtill a thouſand
times more difficult to be overcome by a man
who has all the money of the kingdom paſſing

through his hands. That he may eſcape this
dangerous ſnare, I am under a wy of pre-
2 ſeribing

231
ly ideal exiſtence, it is ſufficient to ſay that he

As I intend only to make ſuch

An inclination for

8 2 ä——᷑—ÿ 2
— —

44>
A
— —

*.
—
— A PII gs TG

__ oe - — a aps. 2 — ju * — — —
FI 9 DC: he'd RR 5 55 . — A apy — — In. IIS — > uw ES oe” =
33 3 .

. 2
2 —
—

D

= +a —
PPP 5

.
bf

* X oy
es cog ES,
— —

— — - — _
4 - N. 2 Won . þ VA * 4 — * * r . - * *
_ $070 7 — ³ũq]JvJ BE 2 7 a 8 — — 2
... DEE Fo i hea wee
7 —— — — mIRC

— —
r
2 2 $"< 7 bh
II

—
.

oY 4 — Wenns
P .

ma

.
4
*
*
21
x
G
"yg
1
1
>

„%% ̃ 11!!!  BookX
ſeribing to him to have no . either
With cards or dice.

A diſlike to buſineſs proceeds generally from
the ſame inclinations which lead to voluptuouſ-
neſs, or create effeminacy. A ſtateſman ought in
temperance to ſeck for a remedy againſt a fond.
nels for ſplendour, and the delicacies of the table,
| Which ſerve only to enervate bòth body and mind.
A virtuous man ought to be wholly unacquainted
with drunkenneſs; a diligent man ought to be
no leſs ignorant of what is called high living,
As he ought to make his retirement in bis cabinet
at all times, and at all hours, not merely {upport-
able, but pleaſing ; he cannot be too careful to
prevent his mind from running on the delights
of balls, maſquerades, and other parties of plea-
lure, In all theſe trifling amuſements there is a
nameleſs inchantment, that intoxicates the hearts
of philoſophers and miſanthropes themſelves,
The fame caution is neceſſary againſt hunting,
keeping many ſervants, equipages, furniture,
buildings, and all other occaſions of expence that
luxury has invented. A taſte for any of theſe
things ſoon degenerates into a kind of paſſion, of

which the waſte of time is not the only bad con-

ſequence z ; prodigality, ruin, and diſhonour, are

Its uſual effects. It belongs only to a man who

cannot reſolve to live and amuſe himſelf with his
own company, to think continually of galleries,
columns, and gildings, and to run all his lite

after ſtatues, antiques, and medals. Do you

learn to be contented with a common picture;

the delicacy of procuring, at a great expence of

money and anxiety of mind, original and other
ſcarce pieces, egen wholly from an affectation

of taſte,

1 am, however, far from carrying the ſeverity

of theſe maxims ſo far, as to forbid a man, he

veſte

5

veſted with a public employment, from having

any attention to his own eaſe; and to deny him

all kinds of amuſement. I would have him indulge

himſelf in moderate pleaſures, and take care of
his forrtune, provided that he does the one with-

out diſſipation, and the other without diſhonour..
It is one of thoſe advantages that attends a diſ-

poſition not prone to expence, and fond of regu-
larity, that he who is poſſeſſed of it, if he lives
long, finds himſelf inſenſibly in affluent circumſtan-

ces. To make a fortune, which is a phraſe of ſo

hateful a ſound, (becauſe, when it is applied to a

man of buſineſs, it commonly means nothing but
injuſtice, oppreſſion, and cruelty ; and when applied

to a courtier, nothing but mean tricks, deſpicable
Aattery, cringing ſervility, and even at fome

times knaveries and treachery,) is nothing more

than a natural conſequence, and even an act of

virtue, where all ſee that the fortune is only the
reward of labour, or an honeſt recompence of
good actions. Thar I may not be miſtzken, I

will add, that this ought to appear fo clearly
as to force our greateſt enemies to ſee it and con-

feſs it ®, . by;
It ought therefore to be an eſtabliſhed rule,
That every man who undertakes the management
of the finances, or any other part of the miniſtry,

ſhould make, and renew from time to time, a

kind of acknowledgment of the ſtate of his in-

come; that is, that upon his entrance into the

- miniſtry he ſhould draw up an exact and particu-

A great part of the maxims which fill up chap. 8, part. . of
the political teſtament of the Cardinal de Richelieu, that treats both
of the council and counſellors of the King, is evidently taken from

this and many other places of M. de Suily's memoirs; and chiefly

what he ſays of the four qualities requiſite to conſtitute a perfect

counſellor, to wit, capacity, fidelity, courage or reſolution, and ap-
plication. I ſhall have occaſion in what follows to make ſome re-

marks upon what ſeems overſtrained in the maxims and manners.

of M, de Sully, with regard to what is called luxury. IF
- l lar

+>,
* : — wp ” 2
= — + a_—_—_— 2 — 6
e tt a, nt et 6

22
13
8
1
2
.
U
4
*
if
1
:
1
5
[-
-
.
$
9
1
k
1

44
9
1 7
143 .
0
e
11 1
. 7 *
A
1
N.
een
| 51
.
1414
| o
1 1
A
v ＋
1
n
19
"ane be
N { „ q
1:41 38
* N
4 «7
Fry
5
in ul 4
N 5
0 1
5 5
' G [2s
. *
Ly .
} Ls
wry
: U St i?
| 4:
$7)
it ,
iv
#12 1
„
47 16.
4 7
1 th 4
f 44
Wh
ng,
1 311;
"1 2 14 P
4 x4 1
3 *.
_
1486
N }
4 $1 ö
2 8 by
n 1
N 179
ne
. =
N
r U 1
* i. 15 1 +
1
* !
i $1f
14 1
Wt .* 5 i
14,348
1
a ++ 7 1
. ua | of
1191 4878
135 "4
$11 F128
« (83 :
RF»;
* 8 >
(TY
19
1 5
ain
1 422583
7 'F 9 lf
Bed. 3
17 L 5
142 1
i
4 5831
{4 LB
- ».H
1. 8 10
i
js 7; $88
* D
9. * 4
} iy)
1
4 4. 1-8
44 : o i
. 1
+4 "4 #2
{2% K 49.
! þ HIS
1 Bs 4 \ Hy
13. 7
* 2% 3
T7! 9 _
; 1 1
337-7 2
f 14 2
nts N A
: *
1 uy n
1
3:53 1&8
f ;
7 * a ”
4 15 4 2
1 1
Pr: + "8.18
e
k : of I.
j 7 *
e
e
1 e
1 1 3 *
: * 2
1 370
£021! EN
{3 ; 8 a! i
"18.44: 77
i $M
n
N 88
[hy 1 01 2
1 +48
5 iy »
1 i 20
+4688 I
{2777 Ty
an 7
1
„
1 js ip >
219 v*' i 68
1
ENS 1} /
. WH.
by : 11
i =: 7
} *
215 Sg
* #.- 210 [24
4d # 51 7
* "+7 P
STO
#4451 4
1932445)
17» *
Un
. ix 7
317 &
52 83? I
71 A* I
N
e
„
Fan
985
179
44 F
*
1
N
NI
1
n
„
+ © of
b 1 A
. 14
LO , $77
£3448 }
x 14
Fee
ei
779
& "yi 38
£ "et 22
„
« & {
vet
7 2
3915
4
TY £78
"I 32.600
in ?
l 07.
21! q" 038
; g 28
: —
I
© XR
i
:
: 0
9
0
;
15
+
*
1
1
t
i 4
: 8

234 M E MOI R S Book X.
lar memorial of his preſent poſſeſſions, and upon

his leaving it give in another in the ſame form;
ſo that whatever alterations have happened i in

his fortune may be known to others as well as

himſelf. | have already taken care to give the

public an account of every augmentation of my
fortune, and each new dignity that was confer-
red upon me, according to the different periods

of time when they happened, and I ſhall ſtill

continue this method. But as I look upon this

affair to be ſubject to calculation, I am going to

put every one into a way of doing it himſelf, and
Mall ſhew it completely done at the end of theſe

Memoirs.

My father s eſtate being cacally Kvided between .
me and the only remaining brother out of four
that I had, my ſhare of it, joined to my wife's

fortune, which was ten thouſand livres, amount-

ed only to fifteen or ſixteen thouſand livres a year,

And as it increaſed but very little in the ſpace of

five and twenty years when the King had no
means of rewarding his ſervants, this was my
whole income when the revenues of the ſtate were
committed to my care. I am ſenſible that there

are many perſons who would bluſh to make ſuch
a confeſſion; but for my part, J have already ſaid,

that in this reſpect ſee only one thing that ought |
to give occaſion for a bluſh, which is, the infamy |
of poſſeſſing riches either 1 or doubtfully aequi-
red. I have neither the reproach of extortion,

confiſcation, or unwarrantable profits to appre-

hend; all that I added to my firſt fortune aroſe
merely from the King's bounty to me, ſo that I

owe all to one God, and one maſter.

What I had been able to add to my fortune till .

the preſent year 1998, amounted to the following

ſums, an appointment of two thouſand livres a

year as counſellor of Navarre, as much as elbe
ellor

ſellor of ſtate, with a penſion of three thouſand

fix hundred livres, which the King annexed to

this poſt. My falary as member of the council,
having been augmented by degrees, and in pro-
portion to the {crvices the King found he received

from me, was, at this time, brought to twenty
thouſand livres. The King doubled my company

of gendarmes, which at firſt only conſiſted of fifty
men, and after it was incorporated with that of
the Queen, of which I was made Captain-lieute-

nant, the pay amounted to five thouſand livres.

The King made me likewiſe honorary counſellor

of the parliament of Paris, but without any in-

come, It was at this time, that Chauvelin the
younger had the firſt diſpenſation that had been

granted from the rule of forty days, paying for
it four thouſand crowns. 1 ſhall make but one

article of the government of Mante, which had
been juſt then given me, and that of Gergeau

which I had afterwards. Such was the ſtate of

my fortune at that time ; the courſe of it, till then
extremely flow, became very rapid the following

years, by the great offices with which his Majeſty

honoured me, and by rewards ſo conſiderable,
that when I colle& them together they will make
one of the moſt important articles. I ſhall take
into it his leaſt preſents, and even thoſe which I re-
ceived from other royal perſons. Before I enter
into the diſcuſſion of affairs, and account of the fi-
nances which 1 have promiſed, ſince 1 have begun

to inform the public of my perſonal character, I

will finiſh the picture by giving a detail of my
public employments, and my whole manner of

living, after I was in a public employment. This

is the proper place for it, although, in order to
ſay all upon this head at one at time, it is neceſe

lary I ſhould ſuppoſe my ſelf poſſeſſed of all ww

ik OT $U LL . 235

* * 5 1 — = — — — — ©; . 5
EINE N 8 == - — Em
— - % 2x7 — — — — 1 * = - $04 — I 2 — — — Ie By cg x 22 — bo — — * ” . ” W — * ag nn = — —
— 8 —— - — = — 2 N rer: 2 323 2 2 tons — 23 ä 2 1 E — r — 2 * 2 *
— - 3 1 > — 2 ” * - . n Ro” 8 gd . 8 "BA 7+ x: — — D — 3 . FIDE
K > AP, Pu vet 2 bg 2 _ 2 — 5B IPO ch we 2 2 Peg , 2 ERS : 5 2 — * © ane
or: - — - — _— — SL I * = 8 . K r — 1 5 — * — . — — — . — — — — — ya vs” 4 —
— rm en ee. 7 Dy ner ap in 2 _— - — 3 — 5 _ — —— — — — — Nr — _ SO eat on — —— 50 —. >
S I IEC ESD — — " — — — . - - - 4 —5 2 — — = _— —— = - = TE, 5 — — — ——
— 2 — N . 5 — 3 f 8 — — PE Þ — 1 — — — 8 5

— — —
o Et > I —
SECS ore or or
4 —:. Dee Big its nn a
SSI. — 2 —
.

2
S I Ti ron 3x; rod Ie
2 —— ——

236 MEMOIRS Bock X.
poſts which were not given me till ſome time af.
ter.

Six days 1 in the week a council was held boch

morning and evening. The firſt and moſt im—
portant was called the council of ſtate and the fi-
nances, which ſingly took up the Tueſdays,
Thurſdays, and Saturdays, fitting both in the

morning and afternoon. The King was the head

of it, and was generally preſent. The dukes and
peers, the officers of the crown, the knights of the
King's orders, or thoſe who had a warrant from
his Majeſty, had a ſeat and a voice in the conſulta- |Þ
tions. Here were received and examined all kinds

of petitions on any occaſion whatever, but eſpe-

cially thoſe relating to the penſions of ſtate, which
from this time began to be paid with a punQuility
that made them be preferred to every other eſta-

bliſhmenr, and even to landed eſtates, The three
other days of the week were likewiſe taken up

morning and evening with different councils, which

were called conſcils des parties or privy councils,
compoſed of a certain number of particular coun»
ſellors, where examinations were held of things
properly referred to each of theſe councils. If

there was any controverſy, it was diſpatched to

the courts of juſtice to whoſe cogniſance it belong-

ed; and care was taken that juſtice ſhould be done

honeſtly and ſpeedily, I was a member of each
of theſe councils, and commonly preſided in them
when the King was not prelent, which often hap-

pened, eſpecially in the conſeils des parties, or

privy councils. I never failed to be at the council

of ſtate, the whole buſineſs of which lay upon

me. All the letters and petitions that were to be
preſented there were addreſſed to me; and as the
queſtions that require general deliberations are not

very common, it often happened, that in com-
: municating the affair, I delivered likewiſe the re-
ſolutions -

„% v »v

ſolutions to be taken; and often carried thither
decrees ready drawn up, that every thing might
be diſpatched at one ſitting; and it happened but
very ſeldom that alterations were made. I have
always laid it down as a rule, that the anſwers
which are given for regulating the conduct of per-
ſons employed in great affairs, cannot be too ex-
peditious, or too diſtinct; all the time that is
ipent in debate is loſt time. e

It may be eaſily imagined how much time theſe
employmenis required, I accuſtomed myſelf to
riſe at four o'clock in the morning, both in winter
and ſummer; and the two firit hours were taken u
in putting in as much order as poſſible thoſe affairs
that were to be each day brought upon the carpet.
A miniſter who acts otherwile will leave all things
in confuſion and perpetual diſorder, by the different
perplexities he will find himſelf involved in at laſt,
At half an hour after fix I was drefled, and ready
to attend the council, which began at ſeven, and
generally ended at nine; and according to the
importance of the buſineſs that was tranſacted in
it, at ten, and ſometimes eleven o'clock. It often
happened that his Majeſty, inſtead of coming to
the council, would ſend for me at nine or ten
o'clock, when it was over, and either alone, or
with his two other miniſters of ſtate*®, Villeroi

OY} tees | and

* Thus were thoſe called then, who lince have been intitle] ſe»
cretaries of ſtate : and ſuch as were named {ſecretaries of ſtate, as
M. Forget, M. Lomenie, M. Beabl'evu-Ruſe, and M. Potier, were
properly no more than four ſecretaries of the finances, or his Meje-
ity's firlt ckiks. Though it appears that none of the three hath
been called prime miniſter of ſtate, yet ſo unequaliy was the diſtri-
bution of the functions of the miniſtry made between M. de Sully
end his two colleagues, and Henry IV. gave the firſt ſo great a ſhare,
and ſo much authority in what belonged to their province, that we
may ſay he was, in effect, prime miniſter, only that he had not
the name. This title was not at that time much in uſe: for the
Chancellor du Prat, under Francis I. the Conſtable de Montmo-

trency,

238 MEMOIRS Book R.

and Sillery, walk with us, acquaint us with his
intentions, and give each of us orders relating to
our particular employ ments. From thence 1
went dome io dinner
My table generally conſiſted of ten covers; and
being ſerved with a moderation that was not ap-
proved of by the Lords of the court, eſpecially
the Epicures, who make a ſerious affair of refining
upon every thing that is eat or drank, I ſeldom
invited any perſons to dine with me; fo that my
table was uſually filled only with my wife and

children, or at moſt with ſome friend who was not
more difficult to be pleaſed than myſelf. Frequent

attempts were made to alter my conduct in this
_ Feſpe&t ; but I always replied to any reproaches of

that kind, in the words of an ancient, That if the

gueſts were wiſe there was ſufficient for them; if

they were not, I could ſuffer the want of their

company without trouble.
When dinner was over, I went into my great

hall, where it was known that I regularly gave
audience; and therefore at that hour was always

full. Every one was admitted, and had free au-
dience; the reply was no leſs ſpeedy, In this my
particular taſte agreed perfectly with his Majeſty's
intention, I began with the eccleſiaſtics of both
religions. The country-people, who remained
laſt, were kept but a little time in expectation. I
took care to diſpatch every one's buſineſs before |

retired; and even ſent for thoſe who, ſtaying in

the court or garden, had ſuffered the hour to (lip.

If the affair that was propoſed to me was equitable,

and depended upon me, I promiſed in two wor ds

rency, under Henry IT. Cc. did not bear it, though they ſolely
pr, the confidence of their maſters. M. de Villeroi was at the

head of foreign affairs, having alſo the Preſident Jeannin for his
colleague. M. de Sillery and Bellievre, who became chancellor ſome

little time after, had the management of all domeſtic affairs.

1598 ·
the execution of it; if otherwiſe, I civilly chid the
propoler, and honeſtly forbore to meddle with it.

If it appeared doubtful, or complicated, I called

an intendant, or one of my ſecretaries, to whom
I gave the papers that led to an explanation of it.
And ſuch was my management, that the affair
was totally diſpatched within a week, if I had pro-
miſcd it; and let the buſineſs be ever ſo much
perplexed, the council before whom it was laid
always diſpatched it within the month. _ 1
As to the other councils, which were held on

Mondays, Wedneſdays, and Fridays, I aſſiſted at

them likewiſe as long as I could, before the increaſe
of my employments had likewiſe increaſed my bu-
ſineſs, and even afterwards, But when the direc-

tion of the marine, artillery, fortifications, build-

ings, bridges, and cauſeys, were intruſted to me
only, to which muſt be added the affairs of my
governments, I was obliged to apply to this buſi-
neſs in the place of the other ; and to devote the
mornings of theſe three days to the diſpatch of
buſineſs relating to theſe offices; becauſe his Ma-
jeſty thought them of conſequence enough, eſpe-

cially that of ſurveyor-general of the high ways,

and ſuperintendent of the fortifications and works,

to be preſent at the clearing the accounts of each of

theſe bodies of people, which was done in the

preſence of the governors and other officers, who
were called together in a body on theſe occaſions.

Notwithſtanding this, I did not neglect the other
councils, but took care to be preſent when any

important affair was debated, eſpecially when it

JJ os 5
I regulated my time in ſuch a manner, that I

had ſtill leiſure enough for thoſe other affairs, and

alſo for many more which I have not yet mention-
ed. The extraordinary and unforeſeen buſineſs in

which I was engaged, the converſations I had with
es abs e his

ov? t r. ww

* 5 ren! — — — 5 1

* = n Se e — 3 — 2 2 3 - 2 - : . — 883 . — So — "
5 — * = "IG 22 — 223-4 vu ap 3 *.

— ES 33 = x AS a — — . 2 — - K — Leer I N
E ee — pe Ono, > OI a — ; — 2 THe ö; i > 4 r AFR ad
OSD IT — — © ADE Ss 2 oy ES =

— arr”. * * - 5 :

- — — — — 8
_ r * — —* ———
" : 8 3
- 8 * 2 WE «4 FS
PP
— *

SAO I ICT. Ty

. 2 A
. os =

1 4
10
j#
1
n
e
1 19
1
1 * £8
af} 5 3
. $1] 127 a
8 8? "1:13 WM
5 1 89 i"
„ "(MY
14174:/ 7808
HEL |
324 $.
1/4838
'
| £

* = "x -
4 8 2 3 2
3 · L 8

*
8 N
1
18
is L,
h
*
1
©
g
5
k
&
8
0

*
— ST

W > &
_ er Lo Oe LOS Ri, od
58 — — — — — Sox ng SS 3 ne Lupe A. ww bh

— — _ — — mats; — - . 2 — IG

#x% a> . — < ng — Be . — —
= mW — — — — — >, — a — ue
.. . EP cg er ner et} er I”
— - * I —
6 2 -

— ͤ

——— r — =" © 57 hg DAI *

249 M E MO IR Ss Bock K.

Kis Majeſty, the orders and letters I received from
him, may be imagined by a general declaration,
that this prince notonly informed me of whatever

; happened to him, but alſo intruſted me with his

molt private affairs , his ſecrets, deſigns, reflec.
tions, private diſtempers, pleaſures, domeſtic un-
eaſineſſes, fears, hopes, amours, friendſhips, and
diſguſts; in a word, all was confided to my fideli.
ty and diſcretion, terms which 1 am juſtly intitled
to uſe, In all theſe moments, to comply with the

King's deſires and occaſions, there was an abſolute

neceſſity to lay aſide the moſt preſſing buſineſs, to
invent ſchemes, to go upon private errands, an-
ſwer letters, and undertake journeys; by all
which, the affairs of the ſtate would have been in-
jured, if by giving the night as well as the day to
theſe accidental employments, which were not re-

gvlated by months, days, or hours, an extreme

diligence in reſuming thoſe affairs that had been
interrupted by them, had not reſtored every thing |

to its proper ſtate.
One is ſurpriſed, in giving this detail, how, with

ſuch an exact œconomy of time, there ſhould re-
main ſo little for affairs merely domeſtic. The
few moments I could ſpare for them, I was never
able to find but in one of the afternoons of thoſe
ſame three days; and theſe | ſnatched by intervals.
It was neceſſary therefore that my wife ſhould ac-

cuſtom herſelf to do all that I was not ablolutcly

obliged to do; otherwiſe I muſt have relied upon

people of buſineſs, or upon my domeſtics,

As to amuſements, and huurs of caſe? and re-
: freſhment, which were neceſſary to ſoften the fa ·

N TIRE any -minifler had the confidence of his aller more

entirely than this had: and never was any more worthy of it, on

& account of his hdelity, activ 7 continual application to bubnels,
« and diſiinereſedi eſ in every thing that related to the Kivg”s ſer-

vice, Ge. nil. de France de Chalons, tem 3. P. 255. FN
© tigus |

J ͤ © agt

tigue of ſuch extreme application to buſineſs,

they were regulated with as much exactneſs as
my moſt ſerious affairs, but, like them, ſubject

Y to frequent interruptions. When, by good for-

tune, this did not happen, I had no occaſion to
o out of the arſenal to find them; for it was
in this caſtle that I reſided from the time I was
made grand maſter till the death of my king,
which 1 reſigned to the tranquillity of a private
life, The exerciſes of the arſenal, which was an
excellent ſchool for young people, gave the
greateſt relief to my mind, eſpecially when I ſaw
my children, my ſon-in-law, my relations and
friends, mingled together. The good company

which appeared in the afternoon at that little
meeting, the exultations which were often heard,

the air of gaiety without effeminacy, and of plea-
ſure without negligence, which appeared there, is,
of all things that I know, moſt proper to relief a
mind to which, by long habit of labour, all the
amuſements of mere idleneſs have been made in-
ſipid. In whatever manner [I ſpent the after-

noon, when the hour of ſupper arrived, I order-

ed all my doors to be ſhut, and no perſon to be
ſuffered to enter, unleſs he came from the King.

From this hour, till I retired to bed, which I al-
ways did at ten o'clock, there was no longer any

mention of buſineſs, all was eaſe, mirth, and ſo-
cial joy, with a ſmall number of good and agree-
able friends. een 5 5
The office of prime miniſter, though at all
times laborious, is not always loaded with the

ſame difficulties; and the good fortune of thoſe

is to be envied, who are called to it at a conjunc-

ture when the whole ſtream of affairs having for

many years run on in acalm and regular courſe,
they have nothing to do but fit quietly at the
helm, content themſelves with a general inſpec-

r 1 tion,

n r : — ON r Is > aa Za 3 2 — — 1
Ec : = - - * — -
2 - n — , TR ** —_— 3 _ ” -
_ x oy I *- NE Ot Jo 5 - - - - — — — =
gn fi ie RE AE; © dB a — a A — =_ —— 2 —
I - F —— 2 — — — _ — — r F
8 S8 3 4 — =; - ht 8 1 2 * —

n A Yn FE
rr
A INS

SR — —

— —
K
——

a — *

FFF

— 2 Prey I EE ne oy

San EE INCL.
ama > art" — *
3

— —

r

r

221 RASeg  OOG -
— aber .

—— —
22

—

tion, and leave the reſt to be performed by that
great number of perſons who act in ſuborging.
tion to them. This advantage I never enjoyed,
as may be perceived by what I have had occy.
ſion to ſay of it at different times; and, not to
touch yet upon the affairs of the finances, which

Was at that time an ocean without bottom or

' ſhore, I deſire the reader juſt to caſt a look upon
the different perplexities which muſt occur, even
in managing the interior affairs of the kingdom,

a cabal of diſaffected people to watch narrowly,

and, if poſſible, to break; a religious diſpute to

terminate; a powerful party to ſatisfy; and a

general ſubordination and ſcheme of government
to eſtabliſh, and cauſe to be obſerved; T hings

were in fuch a ſtate, that of all thoſe officers of

war and police, of the finances, judicature, and
the King's houſhold, of penſioners, and thoſe that
received ſalaries from the ſtate, nothing more
was known than that their number was infinite,
and that there was a neceſſity for learning their
names, and marking them all in a regiſter, in
order to ſuppreſs part of them. 55
he affairs of war were in the utmoſt diſorder,
and the regulation of them did not, as may pol-

fibly be thought, conſiſt in diſbanding part of the

troops, There was a neceſlity for taking cogni-

ſance of all the towns and fortreſſes, moſt of

which were lo near ruinous, that upon this ac-
count, as well as to leſſen the number of parri-
ſons that were ſupported in France, thoſe that

were uvſeleſs were to be demoliſhed. This could

not however be done till after the death of thoſe
perſons from whom it would have been dange-
Tous to take away the governments of them.

The marine alone might have furniſhed buſi-
neſs enough for one miniſter, for a great num

ber of Years. For this part of the ſtate, which

I equires |

„%%
” requires ſo much application, does not make a
very rapid progreſs. It muſt be the effect only
of that quiet and ſplendor which a kingdom gains
” by peace and a good government *. It is nor
to be imagined to what a degree the marine, and
the commerce that depended on it, had been ne-
glected in France. I agreed with the King, that
this eſtabliſhment ſhould be begun at the tounda-
tion. Thar the ſea-coaſts ſhould be viſited, and
| ports examined, in order to take meaſurcs for
| repairing them. That the ſame ought to be done
| with thoſe few diſabled veſſels and galleys that
were yet to be found, till new ones. could be built,
After which, officers ſhould be appointed, and
ſailors and pilots ſought for, who might be ſtimu-
lated to induſtry by rewards. In a word, to ſpare
a longer detail, that an abfolutely new maine
/ inn FI
All this could not be performed but by de-
grees, and a little at a time. The finances being
that part of the body of the ſtate which was
moſt diſeaſed, required aſſiſtance firſt. The great-
neſs of the evil may be imagined, dy 2 Fiſt of tu
ſums which were drawn from the exchequer to
bring over the heads and other principal mem-
bers and cities of the league to the King's party.
This lift has ſomething curious enough; it a-
mounted to more than thirty-two millions of
livres, and is as follows 7. i
To the Duke of Lorrain, and other perſons
comprehended in his treaty, three million ſeven

—

. ; — nes - . 9 =. — —— r Wy
— * 4 n * — _ 28 Ce = - * — — — *
0 ö — — — — —
2 — — ISR . — ape — — ———s —_—_ oy —— — 3
— — . PET — — — - E — —— 2 = *
- = : 4 s . f — ——— - < „ ——— — — — — —
* 2 0 wo. I E : 5 . pF bf : 1 2 b 5 - "ACT nw. -- — ON I — — — — Pug "= 2 = pI * — —

: z7 p - 7 * — — 8 5 288 RE, "2M ” — 5 7 8 EY = 2 2
r ee ay — * * << far r R a ee a7 2 r ; ets 2 x - 8 p —
K - 2 — — > c — 2 Dy 4 . = 8 D =

—— 5 2 er 8 5 X _ ä _ - - —
— — 27 — 2 S S i 8 re NESS
— . I I — 2-4 ”

— + — ome >
_— _—__—
a ” *

—

>, — —
is Ads *

— SIE —
r
— —
>a * an, _

_—

n N . — 8 1 I CIC ANAL EIE
. OS ee A— v I ery Cn 7 —˙ 1 · 7 eo ara ie ZIG Lye — ——
RE Re CRT en a — — - — E — -
I . = :

A |
WEED ene 0 Un
—

A nation muſt be very powerful,“ ſays Cardinal Richelieu
alter Af, de Sully, “ to pretend to this inheritance, (the poſſeſlion of
Athe ſovereignty at fea), the titles to it being founded more in
_ * force than in reaſon.” Teſtament politique, part. 2. chap. 9.
55. 6. Cardinal D'Oſſat, in ſeveral of his letters, adviſes Henry IV.
to put his marine on a new footing, | : |
Here the old memoirs have an error, in the calculation, of a
dont one hundred thouſand livres. e .

X 2 hundred

2 M E M O IR S Book X.
hundred ſixty-ſix thouſand eight hundred and

twenty-five livres. To the Duke of Malenne,
and others comprehended in his treaty, together

with two regiments of Swiſs, whom the King

took upon himſelf to pay, three million five hun-
red and eighty thouſand livres. To the Duke
of Guiſe, and others comprehended in his trea-
ty, three hundred and eighty-cight - thouſand
livres. To the Duke of Nemours and others,
three hundred and ſeventy-eight thouſand livres,

To the Duke of Mercœur, for Blaver, and other
_ towns of Britany, four million two hundred
ninety-five thouſand three hundred and filly
livres. To the Duke D'Elbœuf, for Poitiers, &c.
nine hundred and ſeventy thouſand eight hundred
and twenty-four livres. To Meſſieurs de vil.

Jars, and the Chevalier D'Oiſe, for Roucn and

Havre, comprchending likewiſe the indemnifica-

tions granted to the Duke of Montpenſier, Mare-
- Chal Biron, the Chancellor, &c, three million four
hundred ſeventy-ſeven thouſand eight hundred
livres. To the Duke D*'Epernon and others, four
nundred and ninety fix thouſand livres. For
the reduction of Marſeilles, four hundred {ix
thouſind livres. To the Duke of Briſſac, for Pa-
Tis, c. one million ſix hundred ninety-five thou-

ſand four hundred livres. To the Duke of Joyeuſe,

for Toulouſe, &c. one million four hundred
and ſeventy thouſand livres. To Monſieur de la
Chatre, for Orleans, Bourges, &c. eight hundred
ninety eight thouſand nine hundred livres. To
 Mefſicurs de Villeroi and D'Alincourt, for Pon-
toiſe, &c. four hundred ſeventy-ſix thovſand five
hundred and ninety-four livres. To Monſieur de

Bois-Dauphin and others, ſix hundred and ſe-

venty-cight thouſand eight hundred livres. To
Monſieur de Balagny, for Cambray, &c. eigit
hundred and twenty-eight thouſand nine hangers

0 Po | ane

>
.
Wo
p 2.

2
WE .

3

and thirty livres. 'To Meſſieurs de Vi try ind de
Medavy, three hundred and eighty thouſand livres,
To the Sieurs Viddme d'Amiens, d'Etournelle,

Margie de Trenel, Seſſeval, du Peche, Lamer,
e and for the cities of Amiens, Abbeville, Pe-
ronne, Coucy, Picrrefont, &. one million two

hundred ſixty one thouſand eight hundred and
ei:hty livres. To the Sieurs de Bellan, Quion-

ville, Joffteville, du Peche, &c. and for Troyes
Nogent, Vitre, Chaumont, Rocroy, Chateau-Por-
cien, &c. eight hundred thirty thouſand and for-
ty eight livres. To Meſſieurs de Rochefort, and

for Vezelay, Macon, Mailly, Cc. four h. andre
lifty-ſeven thouſand livres To Meſtieurs de Ca-
nillac, d'Achion, Lis gNerac, Monfant, Fumel, Cc.

and for the city Du Puy, & ze. five hundred foriy-
ſeven thouſand livres. To Mctheurs de Montpe—
zat, and de Monteſpan, Sc. and for ſeveral cities
of Guinne, three hundred and ninety thouſand.

livres. For Lyons, Vienne, Valence, and other

cities of Dauphiny, {ix hundred and thirty-ſix
thouſand eight hundred livres. To the Sieurs

Daradon, la Pardieu Bourcanny, Saint-Offange,
for Dinan, &c, one hundred and eighiy thouſand
livres. To the Sieurs de Leviſton, Baudoin, and
Beauvillers, one hundred and ſixty thouſand livres.

I ſhould terrify my readers were | to ſhew them
that this ſum made up but a ſmall part of that

| which was demanded from the ag ns r, both

for the French and foreigners, under the title of
pay, penſions, loans, arrears, 74 and that the

total of all theſe 0008s after making ſome de-

duftions, amounted, by the compur ration | made,

to near three hundred and thirty millions of

livres. This calculation I would lay down here,
but that 1 think it will . more properly
when I ſhall treat of the diſcuſſion of ail thele
particulars, FE

X 3 Here

—— — 11
— — > ——
—

— — *
A

—

246 M E M OI R S Book N.

Here was a large field diſplayed for the la.
bours of a ſuperintendent of the finances; but the

difficulty was, where to begin. The exorbitan -
cy of the ſtate-debts demanded an increaſe of the
taxes; but the general poverty, a diminution of
the old. And upon mature conſideration, I even

found it for the intereſt of the Prince, that the

cries of the public miſery ſhould be heard. It
is not poſlible to give a juſt idea of the dreadful!

condition to which the provinces were reduced,
eſpecially thoſe of Dauphiny, Provence, Langue-

doc, and Guienne; the theatres of long and
bloody wars and outrages, by which they were
_ wholly exhauſted, I granted, over the whole
kingdom, a remiſſion of the remainder of the

ſubſidies of 1 596, which were yet to pay “; a pro-
ceeding that neceſſity, as well as charity and ju- _
ſtice, demanded, This gratuity, which gave the
people time to breathe again, was the loſs of

twenty millions to the King; but it facilitated the
payment of the ſubſidies of 1597, which had been
otherwiſe morally impoſſible.

After this relief, I endeavoured to procure the

country-people as many more favours as I was able,
being ſtrongly perſuaded, that it could never be
the ſum of thirty millions, which was raiſed eve-
ry year in a kingdom ſo rich, and of ſuch extent

as France, that could reduce it to its preſent mi-

ſerable condition, and that the ſums made up of

extortions and falſe expences, muſt certainly infi-

nitely exceed thoſe which were brought into his
Majeſty's coffers. I took the pen, and refolved

to make this immenſe calculation. I faw, with

a horror which gave new force to my zeal, that
| for

Together with the arrears of preceeding years, for which pri-
vate perſons had given their bonds to the 1eceivers of the taxes:
_ ſorac of which bonds, according to Le-Grain, liv. 7. being ſeven
Years Sack wards, were declared null and void.

— oa: ns YAN IE, 4 ans © _ Pa” lhuo 9s

2” |

IE. T4 - 8 i... — a__—

&?

4
£22.

. 4 1 5 bs %

07 $VLLT ay
for theſe thirty millions that were given to his
Majeſty, there were drawn from the purſcs of

the ſubjects, I almoſt bluſh to fay it, one hundred
and fifty millions . The thing appeared to me

ſo incredible, that I could not believe it, till with

great induſtry I convinced myſelf it was true.
After this, I was no longer ignorant from whence
the calamity of the people proceeded, at a time

when, although commerce was interrupted, indu—

ſtry ſtopped or perſecuted, the farms neglected

and without value, and every other kind of wealth

diminiſhed in proportion, they had been obliged

to furniſh a fum ſo much beyond their abilities,

which had been forced from them with the utmoſt

yiolence.

I then applied my cares againſt the authors of

this oppreſſion, who were the governors and other
officers of the army, as well as the civil magi-

ſtrates, and officers of the revenue; who all, even.
to the meaneſt, abuſed,in an enormous manner, the

authority their employments gave them over the
people. And I cauſed a decree to be paſſed in

council, by which they were prohibited, under

great penalties, to exact any thing from the
people, upon any account whatſoever, without a.

* This ſum, exorbitant as it is, will not, however, appear exage

erated, if we conſider, that beſides the ordinary expences of levy-
ing it, which were at that time exceſſive, the people had till a

great number of other impoſitions and exaQions to bear. © For

France would become too rich,” ſays Cardinal Richelieu, Teſt,
pol. part 2. c. 9. $ 7. © and the people be in too flouriſhing a con-
* nomy, were not ſquandered with prodigality here. She loſes
* more, in my opinion, than thoſe kingdoms that pretend to rival

her lay out in their ordinary diſburſements.” Upon this he re-

lates a good ſaying of a Venetian ambaſſador; to wit, That to ren-
der France happy, he wiſhed no other, than that ſhe knew as well
how to expend the money ſhe ſquindered without reaſon, as his re-

public did not to ſpend one ſingle farthing without occaſion and the

preatelt good huſbandry,
TR warrant

wR * — ts. + gin, r
. £ „ c 2 9 2

—

POIs RY — 3 „
S Er ESE ——
—

„dition, if the public money, which other ſtates expend with œco-

—

4 \
* Fol og 2 5
1 Fee
RV
He 1
1 wy: 2;
: 17
f
n :'S i
17
1 # l
e
268”
1 1
1 |
E
4
q
5
4 p |
1 wy
1 7
T1: wt
:
a8. 1
| 1
Iain.
177
s *
1
1
vi
Air *
. *
a
i x
4 1
151
. *
N
© ts.
H
$? 53 4
17
1
wu 2 7
8
en
[7 * 1
1 F
1
* my
18
4
{$3.,7 '
1 * #
6
W412 33)
n *3 C4
Þ3\.% HM
: 7 -
'"n : :
| 4
1
1 7 &
4 .
1 1
"8 77
l
i 8
3. 310
ith y 1
f EN.
' $54
14> $&.46
14 *
1
1 18 4 '7z
H .
7
1
44+?
#.34'3
$ F'$
1
* 14
49
7
[Ty 1
V.
1
} *
* 4
$4. q e
:
; :
p .
1
1
11 .
7 4 1 1
1:
1 *
* , Nn
1
: N ; 7
*
(3, +
my 1. a=
i
1
* 4
. 1
' 5 16
3 4
1 85
1
1 1
n
bt »s *
7; % 18
+ UN -
+ he
Te -
0]
8
F ” x
, wal
* 3h
*
19
K
95
7 5
Fa
*
py
'
18
5 |
"mg
15
1
1
71
1
19
"£4
KY
119
et
A
Wi
14
Dane
n
TAL [WL
*
6
It "+ 2.465
2.8
2
1
n
1 f
Whos! tech
«
Wy
z
«3th 54'S
hs
3838 2.3

r K
SS e THY
OE ICED

248 MEMOIRS Book X.

Warrant in bin beyond what they were bound
to pay as their ſhare of the tallage, and other ſi.
dies ſettled by the King; the treaſurers of France
being enj ined to give information of all con-

trary practices, on pain of — anſwerable for

them themſelves.

all theſe petty extortioners, Dur reiled a 151 ious
reſentment in them againſt me. And natwith-
ſtanding there was ſomething ſhameful in exprel.
ſing it, yet many of them made loud com-
plaints of me, as if I had in reality ſtripped them

of their lawful poſſeſſions. The Duke @Eper. =

non was the firſt who explained himſelf on This

: head, and ventured to come to a quarrel with
me about it. The Mortification he had ſoffefed

had not leſſened the fierceneſs and infolence of
his temper. The Provencals. had often blciſed
the moment when he quitted their province. No
people could be more miſcrable than his vafſſals,
and thoſe that were too near neighbours to his
lands. He raiſed every year at their ex pence, a
revenue of above ſixty thouſand crowns.

The members of the council, to whom this

decree gave as much pain as to the Duke d'Eper—

non, informed him of the day when it was to be

| paſſed ; and he flattered himſelf he ſhould be able

to prevent it. Accordingly he came and took his

Heat in the council Ef and addrefling himſelf to

me,

The quarrel] mentioned here happened on Monday the 26th of

October 1598. at the Chancellor's, where the council was held.
he Duke dEpernon having told M. de Roſny that he was not

* obliged to wait upon him at his honſe, va!ung his quality ata
« very high rate; the latter made anſwer, with an air of rodomon-
et tade, That he was deſcended from one cf the oldeſt families in

« France, Les, Sir, replied the Duke d'Fpernon. it you will al-

« low that there is ſome difference betwixt yon and me: Having
mentioned his ſword, and taken o occaſion to raile the profeſſion of
« 21mg

A

cow $6 A

3 2 1 1 a 8 = RE e

„ 88 * L. I 249
me, made a compariſon, with great arrogance
and contempt, of the manner in which he ſup-
ported the honour of his name, with that in
which I diſgraced mine, by the new trade I had
V 8 taken

arms above all others, M. de Roſny returned, That he likewiſe
& had a ſword, and knew how to uſe it. Jo which the Duke d'E-
& pernon replied, That he did not doubt that. The Chancellor
& then interpoſing, pacified them, whereupon they began to talk a
& little more cooly; when M. de Roſny, reſuming the diſcourſe,
« ſaid to him, Sir, you have treated me as if I were fume petty
© tax gatherer. No, replied the Duke d'Epernon, you will
find, that Jam not come hither to give you any opprobrious lan-
© pvage. I am not a perſon to be uſed fo, ſays M. de Roſny,
© interrupting him: ſuch treatment I would not bear from ane
% man alive. I did not intend any affront, ſays the Duke d'Eper-
*" non. I am glad, returns M. de Koſny, aflecting to take his an-
© tagon ſt's laſt woids as an apology, that you did not affront me.
«© I give nobody any affront, replied the Duke d'Epernon; and were
even that the caſe, I cairy about me what will give ſatisfaction
« to perſons of my own rank, and to others according to their ſta-
„% tions. It was, probably, after theſe laſt words, which were, very
« provoking, that both of them clapt their hands to the hilts of
© their ſwords. The Chancellor and the other counſellors had of-
ten interpoſcd and at length parted them“ The 8055th vol,
of MSS. ce la bibliot. du Roi, from which T take theſe particulars
almoſt word for word, relates them, with tome other ſimilar circum »
ſtances, to ſhow the haſty and proud temper of the uke de Sully:
and at the fame time the who e of this account is given us in ſuch
a manner as is not at all favourable to him. Le-Grain has allo this
fact in his eye in what | am going to quote. But though he agrees,
that a minitter ought, above all things to have a great regaid for
moderation, yet he cannot forbear juſtifying M. de Sully: How
% was it poſſible, ſays he, that he ſhould retrench ſo many penſions
and falaries of officers who did no fervice for them, refuſe fo great
a number of perſons that preflingly claimed and demanded ren»
wards, and have a watchful eye over the many counlels that were
given the grandecs of the kingdom, which counlels lie often turn».
ed to the King's advantage, and to their great diſſatistaction, with -
out being inveſted with a very extenſive authority, and fhewing
at the tame time a lofty ſupercilious carriage? The King too
would have it fo, to the end that all might be on an equal tooting,
till he had diſcharged his duty towards his k:ngdom, and enriched
it: for which rcaſon ſa»jct+ ought not to murmur. And in as
much as the Kg icthihed ius approbation of all M. de suily's ac-
tions, when lis Majeity declared to ſome of the great oués that
© wanted to quarrel with him, that he himſelf would be h.s ſecond +
oh | G ye

*

-
-

—

. dat CIC IDIOTIC TIT

— 4 © - _
— = — — —
—

250 M E M o 1 R 8 Book N.

taken up. To this impertinence I replied with.
out any equivocation, by declaring to him, that
every way I thought myſelf at leaſt his equal.
This plainneſs threw D*Epernon into a rage, in-

ſtead of that inſulting calmneſs he had affected

at firſt; and he proceeded to menaces, which]
heard with no more patience than the ref, 1

oY

anſwered him with great ſpirit : he replicd in the
ſame manner: and, without further explanation,
each of us laid his had on his ſword. If the per-
ſons who were preſent had not thrown themſelves Þ-
between us, and forced us to go out of the coun-

cil at oppoſite doors, a very uncommon ſcene
would have been acted in the place where this
debate happened. Our quarrel being related to
the King, who was then at Fountainebleau, his
Majeſty was ſo well pleaſed with the zeal which

on this occaſion I ſhewed for juſtice, that he wrote

to me that ſame hour with his own hand, and
_ praiſing my conduct, offered to be my ſecond a-
gainſt D'Epernon, to whom he ſaid he would
| ſpeak in ſuch a manner, as to prevent him for
the future from giving me any more inſults of
that kind. D'Epernon perceiving the King was
greatly offended with him for this proceeding,
aſked my pardon in the preſence of his Majeſty,
who obliged us to embrace each other.
Hheeſides thoſe revenues which the princes of the
blood, with the King's ſiſter at their head, and
the officers of the crown, had contrived for them-

& we are not at liberty to canvaſs ſuch proceedings, nor injure his
« Majeſty's memory after his death, nor the Duke de Sully's ho-

* nour during his lite, ſeeing he ated nothing but for the ſervice o?
“his maſter. — God grant,” adds this writer, after ſhewing tie
wiſdom and neceſſity of the King's conduct, and that of his mini-
ſter, that this treaſure may be preſerved with the ſame care that
« it has been acquired.” liv. vii. 1 thought this remark neceſſary to

be made, as in the ſequel of theſe memoirs I ſhall adduce a gi cat
22 other examples, like the diſpute we have juſt now ſeen wens

ſelves,

my =

ar EIS EEG eo rm 0. Oo

T 251
ſelves, the people were farther incommoded by
the manner of their collecting the revenues. There
was not one of theſe perſons who was not a pen-
Goner of the King, under the title of their em-
ployments, rewards, gratuities, or treaties made
with his Majeſty on their returning to their obe -
dience to him. And, by an effect of the licenti-
couſneſs of the paſt times, it was cuſtomary for
theſe officers, inſtead of addreſſing themſelves
to the treaſurer of the exchequer for the pay-
ment of their penſions, to pay themſelves out
of the produce of the farms upon which they
had aſſignments ; ſome upon the tallage, ſome
on the exciſe on ſalt, others upon foreign com-
modities, the crown lands, five large farms, e-
cheats, tolls of rivers, revenues of Bourdeaux,
patents of Languedoc, Provence, &c. The King
had no other means of paying more conſiderable
_ debts which he had contracted with foreign prin-
ces, namely, the King of England, the Count pa-
latine, the Duke of Wirtemberg, the Duke of
Florence, the Swiſs Cantons, the republic of Ve—
nice, and the city of Stratbourg, His Majeſty
paid in the ſame manner thole penſions that po-
licy required he ſhould allow foreign princes and
communities; for France has always made her-
ſelf a voluntary debtor to all Europe. From this
it happened, that all theſe different creditors ſet
up new farms for their own profit, in the midſt.
of the King's They had their conmiſſarics and
receivers among thole of his Majeſty, and who
applied themlelves with equal induſtry to pillage.
the people. Certainly there never was a more
dangerous, and at the ſame time a more ſhame-
ful abuſe, that every one, and particularly foreign-
ers, ſhould be thus ſuffered to concern themſelves
with the revenues of the ſtate; and monopoliſers 5
of all nations multiply uſuries and extortions in

the

252 M K M O N 8 Bock K.
the moſt audacious manner ®, and, with impu—
nity, arrogate to themſelves part of the royal au-
thority. |

Nothing ſeemed to me more neccſſary than to
ſtrike ſuddenly at the root of this evil, by a ſe—
cond declaration; in which all the foreigners, and
natives, princes of the blood, and other officers,
were prohibited, on pretence of any claim, title,
or debt whatever, to levy money upon the farms,
and other revenues of the ſtate; and were en.
Joined to apply to the exchequer only for the pay.

ment of their penſions, arrears, Sc. I faw, un.

moved, the ſtorm which ſuch a declaration could

not fail of raiſing againſt me. In effect, the de-
cree was no ſooner publiſhed, than every place
reſounded with clamours of the lords, and chief
tax-gatherets; from whoſe complaints and ex-

clamations, it ſhould ſeem that they had been te-

duced to beggary, when they were only brovoht

back to the conditions of their original agree

ment, and had their payments transferred to dif-
ferent funds. The King, who had great ſepſivi JI
lity in his temper, was moved at theſe complaint;

and could not ſuppoſe them to be ſo unrcaton? ble

as they were. He was apprehenſive that my 20a
had probably carried me to commit ſome impru-
dence ; he therefore ſent for me, and as foon a:
I approached, © Ah ! friend, ſaid he to me, What
« have you done?“

It was not difficult for me to convince his Ma-

Jjeſly, that I had acted upon principles of juſtice

and eiter That it was not fit his finances

* This abuſe wal have drawn aſhes it ſome conſbquences of {0
ruinous a nature, that we cannot too much bleſs the memory of
him who bad the courage to charge himſelf with the public odium,
entirely to extirpate it; inſtead of accuſing him cf a baughty beha-
viour and ſtern temper, without which it would have been impoſſio c

for him to HOW: accomplit.ed it,

ſhould

. 1

CCF

ſhould have any longer fo many maſlers, nor ſo
many different mortgages, That the farms

would produce him an income twice as great, as

ſoon as their value ſhould be railed by being iu

bis bands, and that this profit had not before ac-

erued to the different proprietors, but to their. a-
gents and clerks, And laſtly, That whenever
this was done, it was not depriving them of what
was their own, but taking away profits to waick
they had no right. The King comprehend- the
juſtueſs of this proceeding, bur he was perpicxed
about the diſcontent he mult necellaily give 10
Sir Thomas Edmonds, agent to the Queen, of
England ; a certain German, factor to tte : Dake

of Wirtemberg; Gondy, farmer to the Dake at- -

Florence; and laſtly, the Conitavie, his godfather,

the molt diſtinguiſhed perlous In his ooh and

his own ſiſter. .
I intreated his Majeſty to and foe ſome of
them, to whom I might ſpeak in his preſence.
The Gonſtable was but juſt gone out of his apart-
ment: he was called back: © Well, godlather,
« ſaid the King to him, what complaint have
% you againſt kolay ?” — © I complain, lays he,
that he has put me upon the level with the
common people, by taking from me a poor
little aſſignment which I had in Languedoc
* upon a tax, of which nothing ever came to you.”

cv

{ anſwered the Conſtable wita great civility, that

[| thould be the firſt ro acknowledge myſelf guil-

ty, if it had been my deſign that he ſhould loſe .
any thing. I alked him what profit he made of

this tax, Knowing well that he was one of thoſe

perſons from whom the contractors exacted the
higheſt price for their ſervices. Monſieur de Mont-
morency anſwered my queſtion; and I aſſured
him, that he might depend on being paid the
whole ſum. #4 'Tis well, faid he; but who will

35 ͤ 5 e promile

D 4;

—

— — — 2 — — 8
8 — n —— DN

I — . — .
— — - * — ;

— — boy L — 82 * 2 8 — — 2
— r —— — 22 2 * 2 SY x ny < - — * — - =Y
be * — 1 — EI © — - — 1 25 * 2 - = .
_ 1 5 e — —— 5 — - 4 — = N
ND knee — — nes >
; = ren IE 2 2
2 — EOS = pe 5

.

— e 2 - - 2

— — — 8 ay ena — — > S

— 22 JE" — 2 — x - _ de abroad 1 e * Fs”

— os * > p Ny <a > — — — — — e. A n ” * * rr . — — * 8 * * * 2
. 2 W S _ "4 api. = ET yy —— E rer - yo N op * 2 n Ih — ” — ? - Wo» e
g Op eas MER; S Pu n LN 5 * * - N * — * 3s wor Cath LA — 2 —— — — — Tom wha — ,
n ed tn: 8 7 . >a * 2 b — C . $ = . = _ - — N —— — — - —_ 55 * ver ee
- 2 1 — . — Karts 2 mn, 0 22 1 r n 5
8 . Es. S 1 Fs. + an * - - — 1 -

— ——
r

—
„
2

— i) 3 — — a - — — - -
. —— S ors en — — — 2

ED ID NSD

— 2
8 ——

ws > ——
— —
po - ——

—
—
PP i I en
> — —
+ AM
8

W
1 2
— alan, rd
- RD
* 1 — —

6“ promiſe me that I ſhall be paid exactly as |

« now am?“ „I will,“ replied I, © and will give

&« you his Majeſty for ſecurity, who ſhall never

de turn bankrupt, I promiſe you, at leaſt if be

« ſuffers me to manage his revenues as I pro-

ce poſe to do; and I will be counter-ſecurity to .

«© him, becauſe I expect, that if I make him rich,

be will be fo kind to me that 1 ſhall never

% . break.” 1 5 : „ 9 I
The Conſtable, who was a plain honeſt man,

was pleaſed with my anſwer, and ſincerely ap-

roved my ſentiments. He even confeſſed to me,

that he had let out the tax in queſtion for only
nine thouſand crowns a year, out of which he
was obliged to give two thouſand to the treaſurer,

4 All this I know, © replied 1,” and I am reſolved

„ to give you the nine thouſand crowns entire;
yet the King ſhall have eighteen thouſand, and
e there will ſtill remain four thouſand for me.”
The Conſtable was amazed; he was not willing
to own he had been fo greatly impoſed upon;
while the King, in the mean time, laughed hear-
tily. However, the next day I brought a perſon

to his Majeſty, who in his preſence took this

farm at fifty thouſand crowns, in the name of the

ſtates of Languedoc. The King offered to aſl:

ſign me, upon this ſum, the four thouſand crowns,
which I had only propoſed in jeſt, I refuſed it,
and told his Majeſty, that the diſorder in the fi-

nances, which I was endeavouring to remedy,

having moſtly proceeded from the eaſy temper of

the deceaſed King, in appropriating his farms to

the gratuities he beſtowed on thoſe about him, as
well financers as others, they would infallibly fall

again into the ſame inconveniency, if it was not

made a cuſtom for men of buſineſs, who ſerved
his Majeſty uſefully, to receive their rewards only
| from his hands. The King agreed that I was 15

) — the

e

' of 8 © -n.

1598. 0-F - 38:V-: LL v. 255

the right, and I loſt nothing by it; for having

procured twelve thouſand crowns to be advanced

upon this farm, he ſent Beringhen with” a preſent

of four thouſand to me.

I ſatisfied all thoſe perſons who were in the

C ſame ſituation as the Conſtable; and, indeed, what
could be more reaſonable, than that his Majeſty
ſhould himſelf receive his own revenues? As
for all the reſt, whoſe intereſt made them deaf to
arguments fo convincing, I gave myſelf no more
trouble about them. By this article the revenues
of the crown had an addition of ſixty thouſand
crowuns.

This trouble was light, compared with that
which J found in laying open the tricks of the
farmers of the revenue, and their agents. The
molt likely means I could deviſe to accompliſh
it, was to procure ſuch a general and exact ac-
count of the finances, as I have mentioned. But
here lay the difficulty: I was not ſatisfied with
that which I drew vp, as has been obſerved, in
the year. 1596, for 1597 3 nor even for the year
following, although it was much more exact than
the others, becauſe I was under a neceſſity of
regulating my calculations. according to the re-
ports, and by the accounts of the intendents and
treaſurers; from all whom, without exception, |

notwithſtanding the caution I uſed in chuſing
them for this purpoſe, I had reaſon to expect ar-
tifice and fraud. I therefore went to work again
this year, I collected all the commiſſions of tal-
lages ſent to the ſeveral diſtricts, and all the edicts
by which money was raiſed throughout the king-
dom. To theſe I joined the tariffs or rates made
in conſequence of theſe edicts, and the leaſes and
under-leaſes granted by the council to the firſt

and ſecond farmers. I compared all theſe pieces
according to the knowledge which my former
Eds 7 2 Work

DIC . —_ —— EE 8 ö —
. = 4 * " "1 4-4; x 4 = = 5 Ss = _ HI --af
> __ — x = 2 — Ir: —
3 5 —— —— 5 5 — ; l
— Gags It 2 ou a
— — — — r 2
— 5 5 — * * — - + 4 +7-<—_z — 1 — 7
al Pie hone ge 8 2 1 * > —

— by

23232 -> - 8 CER
ON Vt INE FEIIN = 2
— —
CVT

S Deas
— =_y

*
1
*
1
*
jb
t
F
+
1
1
13
4
1
1
3
F:
47
;
;&
4
i
1
1
4
4:
10
|
+:
%
i
THY
i
}
F.
7
th
25
1
7
+>
4
155
7
i
18
1
1
*
9
17
7
8
:
U
1
4
: %
1
4
5
.
*
10
x
o
My
5%
*.,.0
195
.
Y
1
+
oc
+
I
4
HERS
48
Lis
1 *
1
1
.
1
1128
1
Uh ef
*
14"
i 33
Ti 4
{07
1
*
f;
i
70
8
1
x
*
*
iT
">
*
=
17
5
1
:
»Y
'
15
IF
*
, 1
1
"|
*
pf +
*
74
_
4
4,
, *
15
>
4
1

2 . 8 ; $ > x J * 8
1 < 8 3 4 8 = 5 — — = : — A 8 2 : SS EIELTY nt net —
— omg” oc x : —— D 2 2 Ta Ceo 2 Do — —2 x k — 1 on re - 4 ERECT Ne CIOS on
— — 2 3 1 ; 5 . rr 2 S 8 N ny Wb E ava XIE r 9 5 £ 8. EIS Lg 7 arg 5 .
* — . " Iz . 2 « 2 . 8 2 — > — he FM een $6 Is — — — 9 = =* . —
>; ” r . — — 22 — 5 . — 8 = Ar 8 Soo ff I.” - 8 ; Ls x
1 . A 7 EL; UE —_ mY : _ 2 n ESE r r — AE ©. IO e G 2 — 7 . 1 *
2 ry” r 2 N . — . l — ** —
12 — 2 E . 2
— a p 5 N 5

——
* as 7
-©3 aka bn 4, -

— —— — ——
PPA De OT
— — . —

r
b
* DYES WIE.
a _— 2

— — 7;
—

—

me
—

—
8

256 MEMOIR Ss Bock X.

work had afforded me in this matter. And at
laſt I thought, that J had come for once to the
bottom of the buſineſs. There was ſome abv{«

in the ordinary commiſſions of the tallage; theſe

however; were the leaſt; there were much
Breaker in the extraordinary. commiſſions granted
heſre 7 150 far the enſuing * Year . put t 1e chi. 42

enormities eppeared. to arilc > from the ur der-loiſce,
The farmers that took them fim the cHuneil,

aud the reaſurers of F ran ce, whom the firmmers

employed, collected twice as much as had been
a ligne and as theſe firmers-gencrel

ales of - under. leaſes, the ſeries of

Endler- ales proceeding without end, produced: a
maltiplication of charges, cndleſs likewiſe, and

:fForded no other advantage than that of main-
taining in profuſion thoſe who did notbing to
deſerve it; fiſt, the geniemen of the council,
then the farmers, and the reſt of the fuboraing:
tion, who kept the myſteries ex ſecret into
vbich they had been once initiated.

I was tranſported at this diſcovery ; and by th ,
authority of the King, to whom I had old it,
opt the procuce of the tallages paid upon cxtra-
ordinary cemmiſſions, and, without having er)
regard to them, ſent w ord to the receivers, that
they ſhould account for it as for any other mo-
ney, and ſhould immediately remit it. I annul-
led for ever the under-leaſes ; and ordered, that
for the future every part of the revenue ſhould
have cnly one farmer and cne receiver. Great
were the clamovrs on this cccaſion ; but the moſt

Ciſcreet amongſt the farmers, knowing that thele

murmurs only ſer ved to expoſe Pen to notice,
and finding that by the ſuppreſſion cf a great
part of the contraCtors, places were likely 10 be-

come ſcarce, came in haſte to look for me, and

took the ſame farms again I Pn their OWN account;

with

OP
a
18
Bits
1 *
*E
*
5
2 4
*.
.

a... 8 NEE, Eo! — nw * ew

V«

1508. O F . 437
'> with this difference, that their profit came to the
' King, the value of the farms being doubled “.
ln proportion as my work was improved by
my experience, I brought my general ſtate of the
revenues towards perfection. It then came into
my mind to go on no longer by the forms of
accounts, ſuch as the receivers had drawn up
themſelves, but to ſend them ſome. contrived by
myſelf; in which I endeavoured to have every
thing, to the minuteſt particular, clear and di-
ſtint. When they were returned to my hands,
I examined them over again with the utmoſt.
accuracy, noting the ſlighteſt inadvertency or o-
miſſion; ſo that there was ſoon nothing at all
left out, even in the leaſt and moſt obſcure parts
of the revenue, becauſe every thing was to be
vouched by the writings which I ordered to be
brought along with it, and which I compared
with the utmoſt attention. Thus I blew up all
the mines of the receivers, which were very nu-
merous, ſuch as, pretended differences, bad mo-
ney, drawbacks, immunities, privileges of office,
payments of rent, charge of carriage, fees to
judges, and coſts of auditing accounts; all theſe,
and more, were very commodioully uſed to the
advantage of the commiitioners and clerks ; be-
caule no body had given himſelf the trouble to
rate, according to their real value, all thoſe par-

1 "5548

Though we are more and more convinced of the juſtice of this,

to wit, that the King ſacouid take for his own advantege all peſſible 1
lbere in the profits of his fairs and other revenues; yet we bod, Wl

it ſeems, and that with ſome ground of icsfon, that ſince the Duke [41

bk dully's time, there has not been made, in this reſpect, all that 0
| Propicls which his views, and the great care he took, had apparent 1
I given hopes to expect. We lhail have occ¹ν n to enter hu this {Bi
matter at ſome greater length, when our author comes to ſpeak of the 1
farmipgof the Tallage, an other taxes which is the true cauſe of all the f i

difficulties that ate to be met in attaining to the end he propoſed,
and which all the miniſters after him made the object of their en-
deavours. ; | 5 |

* „ —

- ily” ES — — 4
— Pn "Ie
B if FER

3.4 ticulars

7

4 — — —————— — —
2 — EE es 13%
Ree: Fg *
—

% a

258 M E M O 1 R S Book KX.

ticulars which, being ſo extravagantly ſwelled,
abſorbed a great part of the ſum received; and
the people of the council, who ought to have ex-
amined them, knew the advantage of this jargon,

So litile care was taken of the accounts of the |
receivers, that a man often quitted his employ-

ment, charged with vaſt ſums of arrears, which

_ afterwards funk into oblivion. I put an end to

this cuſtom, I obliged thoſe who came into of.

fice to inquire after heir predeceſſors, and uſed
the only method that could have any effect upon

them. As long as any arrears remained, the:
had no other fund for their ſalaries and allow-
ance. They then knew very well how to hinder
theſe little bankruptcies, inſtead of favouring
them, as they had hitherto done.

Several receivers, and particularly thoſe of the
chamber of accounts, upon whom aſſignments are

moſt frequently granted, bad the ingenuity to

contrive ways of tiring out thoſe who brought
the aſignments, by frequent delays, till they

were content to take part of the money granted

them, and to give an acquittance for the whole,
I ordered that no payment ſhould be deferred;

and that no money ſhould be taken for prompt

payment. This prohibition put an end to all the
accounts of the reimburſement of money payable
by the precepts of the chamber, and to the mul:
tiplicity both of accounts and charges, by which

the King's money was ſtolen to an incredible de-

gree. From this time we had a clear inſight in-
to the finances, and confuſion was at an nd;

When the general ſtate, of which I have been
ſpeaking, with the regulations and different mo-
dels were drawn up, I went to read them before

the council, in the King's abſence, I eaſily per-
ceived that my colleagues were offended at my
diligence, and at my neglecing to deſire their
oh aſſittancs

1 «
>, 0 2 l r F
* = 8 p< IO 2 5
3 » 2 EY 2
e N 1
* r N . * *

__— 07 $$ LL

aſſiſtance in my work. However, they content-

ed themſelves with anſwering me drily, and in a
jeſting manner, that my ſecretaries had an eaſy
time of it with me. Theſe papers were indeed all
written with my own hand ®, But as ſoon as J
had left them, they acknowledged that my la-

|  bour had been infinitely great and exact; and

de Henry III. priuted in 1.729, tom. 2. p. 477.

that it would be in vain for the future to pre-

tend to hide any thing from me. Two days af-

ter, when his Majeſty was preſent in the council,

I read theſe papers again; upon which he aſked
them their opinions of my accounts, They al-

lowed them to be very right, and ſaid, that, for
a ſoldier, I was extremely expert in buſineſs, 1
know not whether it was they who were the au-

thors of a piece of ſlander that was current about
that time, namely, that I had employed + Du-

Luat to write a book, in which, under pretence
of giving a new view, of the finances, I railed,
without charity or reſerve, at his Majeſty's beſt
ſervants. The King aſſured me, that all the en-

deavours of my enemies ſhould never alter his

friendſhip for me. In effect, his Majeſty, from
that moment, behaved to me in ſuch a manner,
as to make me look vpon him rather as a friend

The prefent Duke of Sully preſerves as a choice curioſity, a
great part of theſe manuſcripts, with many other originals of M.
de Roſny's, which he takes pleaſure to ſhew to ſuch as viſit him:
he looks upon them as one of the principal ornaments of the mus»

ſeum which his taſte for the ſciences induces him to avgment daily:
and theſe are, in fact, ſo many glorious monuments of his illuſtri-
. ons family. a ; pf

T There is mention made in vol. 8778. des Manuſerits de la bi-
| bliot. du Roi, of a book in which he g:ves many uſefel hints to the

members of the council with regard to the finances: this, no doubt,
is the book which our author means here. Du-Luat is rep:clcnted

to us in the remarks on chap. 9 de la Confeſſion de Sancy, as a
quick, ready and agreeable flatterer, who in a manner hewitched

the Duke de Sully, bis maſter, with a genealogy, in which he de-
rived his pedigree from the houſe of Courtenzy. Journal du regne

than

a

— -

” 1 > et 2 — ws F _ 5 > - OD — 5 2 = 2
N EO . Wn 7 ——— — — — SD ————
* 2 —˖⁊i11 "I. - * . — £4 © — Mw 4, 4 2 . k -
E Pi amood . — = —
— WS £5 = E * E — + * =
non EY HED IO wo 2 2 * ä Tur

1
*

11 10
7 1 ?
: 14
1 '
+ |
4 } i
' .
11
i 4
9
;
10
vu
* \
e
1

_ => — —

—
e

4 en ens — 2

—
—

266 MEMOIRS Bock X.

than a maſter. He intereſted bimſelf ! in all my
concerns, ſhared in all my joys, and bore a

part of cvery affliction that befel me.
I ſhould be doubly ungrateful if I concealed
the obligations I received from this Prince. With

regard to the finances, they were not confined to
the ſupporting all my proceedings with the ut.

moſt reſolution, (as it happened when the mayor
and aldermen of Paris refuſed to communicate
their accounts to me, under pictence that they

had no connexion with the council of the finan-

ces), nor in preventing all my defires, or with
the gentleſt goodneſs conſoling me under qifficul-

ties, as he generally did, by propoſing himſelf

for an example. His knowledge and his advice,
eſpecially in relation to the finances, had often
been of great uſe to me; and 1 candi dly confeſs,

that without it I ſhould kave 1 in vain attempted an

enterpriſe ſo difficult as a reformation in them.
Moſt of my deſigns were hinted by him *; and
1 keep, with the greateſt care, whole memorials
written, although very long, with his own hand,
upon ſubjects which equally employ ed us both.

After this I ought to own, with the ſame ſin-

cerity, that moſt of choſe praiſes which were gi
ven to the adminiſtration of affairs in the reiga
of Henry IV. ought with juſtice to revert to mas
Others would have ferved him with equal abiti-

ties, and as much fidelity as me; for it never |

happens that good ſubjects abandon: their King
Ir is the king who abandons good fubjedts. The

great difficulty will ever be, to mcet with a 9 8

who in a miniſter capable of managing bis affairs,
ſeeks not for one who will comply with all bis

inclinations, and ſooth all his paſſions; who u-

niting great wiſcom to great penctration, calls

NM. de Perefixe, p. 225. likewiſe aſſures us, that Henry IV. 2

had thgroughl / ſtudied the 88 of the finances,
none

1 %
5
2 1 ©

„ OT S YF wt

none to thoſe employments but perſons whom
he knows to have as much rectitude as capacity ;
in a word, who being poſſeſſed'of great abilities
*® himſelf, has not the weakneſs to envy that ad-
vantage in another, This jealouſy of merit in a
ſovereign, which ſuppoſes, however, that he is
himſelf maſter of ſome degree of it. creates, in
one ſenſe, more diſorders in a ſtate, than the ha-
tred he is known to have of particular vices can
do good. 5 8 N
When 1 quitted Britany, 1 leſt there regula-
tions ſor the finances, differing according to the
nature and privileges of that province; and af-
terwards ſent thither the Sieur de Maupeou, ma—
ſter of accounts, as well to enforce the obſerva-
tion of them, and raiſe the value of the farms in
that province, as to haſten the payment of the
money for which I had ſettled a fund. I like-
wiſe ſent, for the ſame purpoſe, Cocfhard, audi-
tor of accounts, to Poictou, and Bizouz to Cham-
paigne. I appointed Champigny over the toll
of the rivers, in the diſtrict of Orleans or Tou-
raine, But for this time I have ſaid enough of
the finances. 1 5 „„
Iwill now proceed to incidents of another kind,
which by their ſingularity rendered this year re-
markable. It is yet a queſtion, of what nature
that illuſion might be which was ſeen ſo often,
and by ſo many perſons, in the foreſt of Fontaine-
bleau: it was a ſpectre *, ſurrounded with a pick

„

= -
x:

EE Rn EEE —— — IIs Ws — 1

— EI; 0 "Me S —— AE hs —— ORR — — — I >

— <S TTT ]²V - ⁵ð¹Aä . ccCxaRCCC_——_—s

ERR RA. Mo, yo ee ISA ſe ER. — * — :
— - p TT _ — — — 2 2 . — 0 7

n

.
e ws * r
1 v3, 8
— ED r
Ta % 4 2 Ph 8

pr ies ES ern vg

2 „ — 2
JJ. ² A TH Ea
C 2 Ware 2

r

1
1

2

— * 1
.
. ?

* Perefixe mentions this apparition, and makes it ſpeak, with

a hoarſe and frightful voice, theſe words, M'attendez vous, or M'cu-
tendez vous, or Amendez vous. He zſcribes theſe V ſions to the de-
luſive arts of ſorcerers or cvil ſpirits, Ibid. part 3. See lik2wite
Journal Henry IV. and La Chronologie Septcunaire, ann. 1599,
where it is ſaid, that the King and his court, who Javghed at this
apparition as a fable, ſaw it one day diſtinctly among the buſhes,
in the ſhape of a tall black man; wh.ch ſo fr igt them, that the
| | - 8 „ile

262 MEMOIR S Bock X.

of hounds, whoſe cries were heard, and who were
ſeen at a diſtance, but vaniſhed when any one
approached near to it. A whale was taken on
the coaſt of Holland, eighty feet in length “. The
Tiber overflowed in ſuch a manner as to throw
down a great number of houſes, and laid part of
the city of Rome under water. A report was
| ſpread in Europe, that the Jews, through hatred
of the Chriſtians, had offered the Grand Signior

five hundred thouſand ducats to deſtroy the holy.

ſepulchre at Jeruſalem.

But the moſt intereſting event, and with which

this year was cloſed, was the death of Philip 11,
King of Spain, after ſogering, for the ſpace of eight
or nine months, ſuch agonizing + torments, as a

principle of piety only could have enabled him to

ſupport with a patience he ſhewed for ſo long

ſuife was, who 1 ſhew the lighteſt pair of heels. P. Matthien

aſſures us, tom. 2. p 268. that one day, at Fontainebleau, the Duke
of Sully, having heard the noiſe of it, came down, imagining it was
the ſtamping of the King's horles, after his return from hunting,
Bongars, epiſt. 184. ad Camerar. tells us, with an air of gravity,
that this was the ghoſt of an hantſman that had been killed in the
foreſt in the time of Francis I.

* See the deſcription of this nee fiſn in the Chronologie

Septennaire, p. 17. and the account of this overflowing of the Tiber,

in Cardinal d'Oſſat's letters, p. 365. It was greater, ſays he, than
4. any recorded in hiſtory ; ſo that the whole plain on which ſtands
&« the city of Rome was under water a pike's height in the ſects
% and houſes; and that not one among a hunired could go to hear

„ maſon Chriſtmas: day. This inundation did ineſtimable damage," |

Ce.

+ © For two and twenty days together there was, © fins Perefixe,

4 a flux of blood from all the veſſels of his body; and a little be-

fore bis death impoſthumes that broke in his breaſt, from which
„ there continually iſſued fo great a ſwarm of vermin, that all the
« care of his attendants could not deſtroy them.” Ibid. M. de Thou,
I. 120. adds to this a dyſentery, teneſmus, diopſy, Cc. and he gives

as moving a deſeription of the deplorable condition of this prince, |

as of his patience and religious ſentiments under it. Matthieu ſays,
that he had no leſs than ſeven fiſtulas cn two fingers of his right
hand; and he aſcribes this terrible diſeaſe to the debaucheries ol his
youth, He died on Sara September .

9 |

1598. OF 8 ͤͤ EL EY #03
a time : however, this heroiſm of his was quite
loſt upon the vulgar. When they reflected, that

through his avarice and ambition he had almoſt

drowned the new world with the blood of its
miſerable inhabitants, and on his own ſubjeAs ex-

erciſed equal cruelties, except taking away their

lives, they looked upon thole infectious ulcers,

with which his whole body was covered, to be
not ſo much a natural accident, as the effect of

divine vengeance, He left a will behind him,
which, in my opinion is too curious a piece to be
paſſed over in ſilence; it is not certainly known
whether he dictated it in his illneſs, and gave it
with his own hand to his ſon, or whether it was

found after his death, with his other private pa-

pers, in the box that he had put into the hands

of Chriſtopher de Mora, his favourite; but this
- circumſtance, of ſmall importance in itſelf, is like-

wiſe of no conſequence towards proving the au-
- thenticity of this piece, which is clear from ma-
ny others. The copy that fell into my hands

was ſent me by the ſame perſon who ſent one to

the King ; this was Bongars, his Majeſty's agent

to the Proteſtants in Germany, who had it from

the Landgrave of Heſſe, and that Prince from the
cities of Venice and Genoa ; and it is in every

reſpect ſo exactly conformable to thoſe which
were ſent to different places, that it removes all
doubt of its being forged by ſome of his catho-
lic Majeſty's enemies k. : 1

Notwithſtanding what NI. de Sully ſays here, the piece which

in his memoirs is intitled, Te/?ament du Roi d'Eſpagne, is neither the
genuine [atter-will of that prince, nor even a faithful extract of it;

which may eaſily be diſcovered, by comparing it with the particular

and circumſtantial one which M. de Thou gives us, I. 120. But it
might happen that this writing, which was likewiſe called, Inſtruc-
tion du Roi d'Eſpagne d ſon fils, might really have been a ſecret,
and haye nothing more in common with the will and teſtament of

| | | this

a - REICH Sec,
N 8 8 FW ns
CM I ere — I ENT ==

Fe REARED

—

x
p
kit
7
þ
11
i1
Ly TIP
it F
4
z VB

In

o .
22 cen _——- = =
2 —-- 4. ea — -
= . = 4 —— — - -
- r N —
GEES —

— —
— ene ens — 2 . 3 2 DC In : < ; „„ rr — III _ bj
* 2 pry 7 * 1 7 JAE FOR A Ra - — r SEM --H= a7 3
2 ths —ů 5 —— ns ; 3 - : 4 9 2 DES Qt” f or . — 41 nf

SE

2
—
—

|
F
|
|
|

204 M E M O I RS: Book X.

In this piece Philip begins with a candid eny.
meration of all the faults he had committed, aud

places at their head his chimerical ſcheme of uni-

verſal monarchy, the abſurdity of which he car.

neſtly endeavours to make his ſucceſſor ſenſible
of, by his example, and by that of Charles \
his father, whoſe inſtructions he adds to his own,
although he confeſſes he had not profited by
them. To this will he joins the memoirs which

had been left him by that Emperor *, to the end

that Philip III. might always keep them together,
The Emperor Charles V. being 1 in the flower of
his age, and of a healthy and vigorous conſtitution, |

maſter of Spain and Germany, covered With gho-

ry, and elated with ſucceſs, formed the deſizu

of ſubcuing the Infidels, and reuniting all tre

powers of Europe, as well as all the religions, to

his. After many years ſpent in fruitleſs attempts,

he quitted his crown, and with it all his chimerical
projects. Philip his ſon, ſuffered himſelf to be
taken in the ſame ſnare, and ſucceeded ſtill w arſe,

which he was deſirous his ſucceſſor ſhould know,
The difference of religions, laws, and manne:s
among the Europeans; their almoſt equal know-
ledge of the art of war, the great number of
{trong cities with which Europe is filled, and which

made as many long and painful ſieges neceſſary ;

the inconſtancy of the ſeveral nations, who ate
always ready to obey the firſt comer, who offers

to aſſiſt them in repelling 3 domination waic.

this prince than its being RI as is evident, in the ſame (oi it.

and in conformity to the ſame maxims, without the precaution {hat

is commonly uſed in writings deſigned to be made public. As to the
ſubſtance thereof, it is given us in the Chronologie Septennaire, in the

ſame manner as in theſe memoirs, only in a different ſtyle and or-

der.
MN. de Thou finds nothing i in the laſt will of Philip II. compa-

rable to the wiſdom of the diſpolitions, and the . of expiel-

bon, ſhewn in that of charles V .
it

TY
70
Emp
Y
—
Ke
*
.
N
.

N
2

* 5 F
8
.

*
2 3
*
I

ſtroke, in 1588, as ſoon as it ſet out; to bring
the Low Countries into ſubje&tion ; to overthrow

cure him.

it had taken immenſe labours to eſtabliſh 5 all
theſe Philip repreſented as unſurraountabie ob.
ſtacles to ſo great a deſign. 1

He acknowledges that he had not been always
of the ſame opinion: that the impetuoſity of
youth had prevented him from making thoſe pru-
dent reflections at firſt, and that afterwards two

oreat victories, and the diviſions which tore the

kingdom of France to pieces, contributed to con-

tinue his infatuation, and to make him reject.

with diſdain all the offers that had been made him
for an advantageous peace. And, as he thought,

he had reaſon to fear that his ſon would not make
a better uſe of his underſtanding, it was by a de-
claration of all that a ridiculous ambition had

made him unwiſely undertake, that he ſought to

He therefore acknowledges as a fault his having

endeavoured to get himſelf declared Emperor of
all the new world; he accuſes himſelt of a deſign

to invade Italy upon frivolous pretences; to con-

quer the kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland,

a project which in fix years had coſt him twenty

millions in preparations only for a fleet with

which he expected to overwhelm this power:
this was the fleet called {he invincible armado,
which, however, was reduced to nothing, at one

the French monarchy, by taking advantage of the
weakneſs of the laſt king, and prevailing upon

his ſubje&s, eſpecially the eccleſiaſtics, to revolt;
and laſtly, to deprive his own uncle Ferdinand,
and Maximilian, King of the Romans, his ne-

phew *®, of the empire. He obſerves, that theſe

9. Philip TI. was called, The devil of the South, Demon meri-
* dianus ; beeauſe he troubled all Europe, in the ſouth of which Spain
lies.“ Notes ſur la Ilenriade. : |
„„ intrigues

f . .

EE. a ne

r

r

Suns. =
—

—

— 8 A 8 2 5 2 = by FLO
d "2 FFP per, =
—— — — — * ——
— — —— —— — - * r — 25 CE RE
p ELD i ates mera 0 ; : _— 3

n

—— —

266 M E M Oi R S Book x.

intrigues Colt him above ſix hundred mil lions 0
ducats *; a proof of which, he tells bis ſon, he
would find ia the accounts Wich he left in his
cabinet, drawn up and written by himſelf. He
blames himſelf leſs for his profuſion of Money,

than that of human blood, which he cauſed to
be ſhed : and indeed the confeſſion he makes,
that he had facrificed twenty millions af men to
his luſt of dominion, and laid more countries

waſte than all thoſe be poſſeſſcd in Europe, is e.

nough to raiſe horror in every mind not wholly

diveſted of humat ty, 9

What has been the eſſect of ail this? This is
the reflection which be propoſes to his is bb
vidence, as if it nay thought itlelf concerned
prevent ſuch wicked dcfigns from ſuccceding,
cauled bim to loſe Germany, Dy tre jealouſy 7 ind
hatred of his own relations; Engl. and, by the
winds and ſtorms; ireland, by the treache Ty
of its inhabitants, whom its great diſtance ſe-
cured from his reſentment; France, by the infla-
bility of the people, and their averſion. to a ſo—
reign domination Þ, and laſtly, by the great qua-
lities of their king. 80 taat the mighty prept:

P. Matthieu ſays, that the Indies viclded to the King of Spun

two hunched and ſixty mulious of geld in the ſj ace of fix: your
years; and that he might have ce nquercd all 1 vikey.. wich tha:
trea re only which he ipent in Flanders. Tom 2 . 2. p. 26.

t In the genuine latter will of Phil ip II. is an att icle with tegud

to Henry 1“. the omiſſion of which in cur memoirs is ſufficient to

prove, that th- pet to u lick this name is given 15 ſupp⸗ ſititious; and

that is, | hat his prince being troubled u, th ſt ang rem: '\r{e of cor
{icierce for the ulur Dal on of tie k: nadom of Navirte recent: nds
to his fon what had been fore recommer ed o himſelf by bis fas
ther, n mely, to cauie 1144 point to be carcfully exam ned. by ti:
moft able lawyers, in order to reſtore he crown to its r. hthul onn-
er, it it ſhouldi:come cut fo, according to equity. Ch aries V. had
laid as much to Vhilip I. and Ferdin: nd and 1: abel to Charles V.
In this maenner to BY 4 the Keg f a diipe {ition known to be
zuſt, to a ſur: or who, one might be affared, would pay no regard
[9 it, is hat 22,6 Thon cails an impudent trifing wah the Deitp.

1 +» +1

; ii
49434445

111 SU L 3 267
rations he had made, and the torrents of blood
that had been ſhed, procured him no other advan-
tage than the acqui iſition of the little . ngdom of
Portuoal to bis dominions.
After this, Philip made a more e ap-
plication of theſe inſtructions to the perſon and ſi—
tuation of the heir to his throne 3 and reduced to
the following articles the politics from which no
King of Spain ought ever to depart, and Philip IEP
leſs than any other, on account of his ten der
gage: theſe articles were, firſt to naintain with
| France the peace whic!\ Philip It himſelf hoped to
have concluded before his death, and this as weil
in conſideration of his own intereſt and quiet, as
out of regard to bis people : to keep up a good
correſpondence with the Pope, ana to ſtreng then
it by having alwaz ys a great many cardinals i 515
intereſt: to be upon fliendly terms with the Em—
peror and his family ; neverthelels, not to ſuffer
the penſions to pals through his hands, which his
intereſt required he mould contiave to the clec-
tors, princes, and prelates of Ger! any, in order
to keep them always attached to him by thoſe Es
geſſes; at the ſame time, to take care to foment
© diviſions among them, 85 W afford kim
tide means of turning to his advantage thoſe op-
portunities that time might riding for acquiring:
the empite: to De more vigilant on the ſide of Ger-
many, as there is a greater multiplicity of inter—
eſts in the northern counties than in any Other
place. Poland, Denmark, and Sweden, were
powers from which he thought there was little to
be apprehended ; the firſt, not only on account
of its diſtance, but becauſe the policy of the prin—
ces its neighbours, as well as its own, being mitf-
taken, made the King of Poland rather the mi-
niſter than the maſter of his ſubjects: the two o-
thers, by realon of their diſtance likew 1155 joined
| - My SET | LO

4
r 1 1 EI _—_ ' . OE 7
* 8 — tm, =, 2 £ _— I I 22 — 2 q e * 2 ;
* SEES — „ r 2 — * — — - — — 25 2 f —_ —
EE ON IVE EE EE PTE Ie EEG IT” — II = .
2 2 — J 2 —— — — * k — — 3 . —_ - * —
3 PP - .

- Fs,
2 3
2

2
222
— ==

2 a 23
* * — —

0

4.
7
7 fl
MY.
N.
*
.
. N
E
* *
1
[©
4b [T8
1 4 *
* a0
4 45
1; *
tk
1
3
1
1
. rn
1 d
EY
1 6 *
. E |
EM
0 Rude
ARLEN
. ©
{al
8
oo:
e
is ne” |
# 2%
wel 5
7 19
- TIRE
s gas
ILY 0
3
p „ $ *
| 4 U
11.983
I * 1
N
© M0
if 1% I.
+} f
0 { 5
rn.
2 SAIF
4 - NY * 55
>
'.. SS
4 71 * \
8
2 £
1 *.
1 $ \,
1
1
45
1.38 6+
_
: 35
C ©
= 1
3» 9
IN
AA eq
ii
4 2 £
. as
3%
837
— + 7 %c
* 7 8
N
4 3 1
148 79
, $552,
23 oh
11.
A
5 * „
e
£420
17
4
e
n
e
1
iet wt
N 1
N
„ hs
©1338
O71;
74 k
e
1
C * \
A
* 4 1
1 ST 1
Eg
421 "0804
4 7k re,
44 13
: 9
{1/34 Fy
' ibs $Y 5&2
10% 1
= 1.
= KY Y
.
1
7 5
n
DR ©,
A a}
1197
MY
0
SS
*
ins
7 3
Ss © * 4
2678
L.
* 3 $68
W Y 1
1
1
410M
43> * 00
e
7 wht $633
# ,
\ THEE
E 2. 14 9
£9 ©
l
* 7%
4 :
2x :
+. SL
o x
= 1
1 4
* «>
„
1 +4
+
d FY *
1," 68
11779
; +08
4 5
8: 'F:; 1
g .
186 17
#4 %%
iN $ +
+3 * BT)
: * k
* 432 4
* 1
10% 8 1
_ "£10
3 4 n i
MO. -
n
14 ; *\ 1
i >
5 * 2
1 £5 LY
W g
1
1255 7
14 io '
#323
14 * i
eo Y 4
7 724
*
1
e * *
13 19
LR 5.
e
* 4 35%
* 44.005
7
\ © 304 :
1
„
8 Js
as £ .
14 1
- FE
<2 5
Th
£7 3
2 73 *
. : 4
—— 1328
4 + 5 1
1 $ »f
t's 93
1
77 + *
e
* *
1
. 1
15 1
9 N
3 1
SET.
; *
2 * _
7 *
3 *3..xY 4
1 1
1 8:8
+ 44+ +
rv STR
*:4 »
! =; 7,
115. 4 by
F I4
yg 71
N.
"Mew
k 8
*
" 5
*
1
„ 4%
i { 3
\ LW
, 1
.
N „ 4:

„
——— — 8
_ 3
— 4. VE *
A — — 4
> 1
y —
— my
* 7
eee
K-. 227 2
— —

— % I 0 2 : A
1 r
% Sn. ce Og Xt
5 *
rr

JJC

to their poverty and unſkilfulneſs in war, were az
little to be feared. He took care not to ſay the

ſame with regard to France, England, und Flan.
ders, which be conſidered as powers very formi-
dable to Spain, and againſt which he recom-
mended it to his ſon, to be always upon his guard.

With reſpect to England , *, his advice ar to

1egictt nothing to prevent the three crowns which
| compriſe the Britannic iſles from being Placed on
the {ame head; an event which this able pol ihe

cian, from a ſpirit of prediction, mentioned as

very near; and for that purpoſe not to repret the
money which was diſtributed in thoſe $0anJs t9
make partiſans, and to continue filling them with
ſpies, but of another ſort from thoſe that were
then there, whoſe fidelity Philip II. thought be
bad reaſon to ſuſped. Jo cultivate carefully thoſe

_ diviſions which a diverſity of religions might pro-
duce in that ſtate, as well as in France: he con-
ſidered thoſe which the league gave riſe to amongſt

us as things now ſtale and uſeleſs, ſince we had a
king of Henry's capacity: but to give occaſion for
many other civil diſcords in each of thoſe two ſlates,

and eſpecially ſuch as might keep them in war a-

gainſt each other, or at leaſt in diſtruſt and ſuſpi-
cion, which might be done, by favouring the

Pretenſions of one upon the other, to whic ch their
mutual hatred naturally incited them. To con-

ſider as the greateſt misfortune imaginable, that
| firoke which ſhould join the United Provinces,
and thoſe two powers already united amongſt
_ themſelves, in one common intereſt ; ſince from

thence mult naturally reſult a power capable, ſays
he, of ſubjecting ſea and land. To find means
to exclude all the princes of Evrope from the na-

They alſo 1 him ſay at the point of death, when ſre:king
of F England, Pacem cum Anglo, bellum cum reliquis : & Peace with
4 che Engiith, and war with all the reſt of the world. ”

| vigation

nn A

vigation of the two Indies, an attempt which
could meet with no obſtructions but from thoſe
three powers; and leſs from France than the two

others, becauſe ſhe had no marine; a new mo-

tive for gaining poſſeſſion of the Low Countries,
and yet more of England.

However, amidſt all theſe counſels that Philip

gave his ſucceſſor, he never adviſed him to enter
into any war, not even with the rebels in the
Low Countries, but earneſtly diſſuaded him from

The conduct he recommended to be obſer-
ved with the Provinces was, to grant a general _

pardon there; to require nothing of the people
but that they ſhould acknowledge the Spanith au—
thority ; to watch the behaviour of the govern-
ors, miniſters, and officers, that were maintain
ed there; not to continue them too long, nor
to give them a too abſolute power, becauſe they

would be the perſons whom they would have the

moſt reaſon to fear, if ever they entertained a de-
ſign of heading the party.

If, however, Spain could not avoid engaging in
a war, Philip was not willing that his ſucceſlor
ſhould be deprived of that knowledge which ex-
perience had piven him in that reſpect. He ap-
priſed him, that, if he propoſed not to ſink un⸗

der it, he muſt not undertake a war but in ſuch
favourable opportunities as might, from time to
time, preſent themſelves, ſuch as, changes in the
government, civil diſſentions, faults or neceſſi-

ties of the ſovereigns, &c. This maxim of Phi-

lip, that a prince ſhould make himſelf acquaint-

ed even with the moſt particular inciinations of

the princes his neighbours, is fo true, and of ſuch

vaſt importance, that no change ſhould ever hap-

pen in the ſtates about him, but whar he ſhould.

be prepared for, and in reaCineſs to take advan—
tage of that inftant, He concluded this article

by thewing the new king, that he is anſwerable

Z 3 — for

> 4.45
.
> E N *

> A
- _ -- —— —
at $a
OE OPT
.
— 6 2

Ze
;
-

N

*%; =
+> 7
F
Le!

Mg ET —
"LIFE ANT avg

279... M E M 9 T R S Bock X.
for his actions at the tribunal of a God, who Jud.
ges wars, and, unhappily, not by the ſame ru'es
which warlike princes lay down for themſelves.
After theſe maxims, which regarded only the
government abroad, Philip proceeded to thoſe

which he thought neceſſary for the government

at home. He held it juſt, that a king of Spain,
e nations under his command, .
vhoſe cuſtoms and manners there was as grcat a

fitter as diſtance in their realms, ſhould ft dy
to govern each according to their reſpective ch. 1.

racter, and all with gentleneſs and moderation :
that he ſhould be acquainted with the talents and
diſpoſitions of bis counſeflors and ſecretaries, arid
chuſe them himſelf: that he ſhould likewiſe expe-

dite all his diſpatches, and render himſelf. expert

in the uſe of eyphers, 1 that he might not expoſe a fe
cret of conſequence to be betrayed by a confient ;
that he ſhould be carcful to ſeek for men of honour
and ſufſicient abilities to beſtow employments upon:
that he ſhould avoid giving any perſon any great
auſe of complaint, elpecially t thoſt of high qu uality ;
be obſerved, that the. prince, his eldeſt fon “, had
tifered by k and that he ſhould make a jo 1
diſtinction between the ancient and the new no—
bility, in order to a- dyance the laſt, as being ge-
nerally ſuſceptible of pure and diſintereſted ſen-
timents: that he ſhould leſſen the number of the
perions that were employed in the revenues, ad-
1 iniſtration of juſtice, and the officers of the
tonſhold; and recommended the fame conduct

to be obſerved with regard to the ccclchiaſtics ;

to which ke added, thar they, as well as others,
bought to contribute to the neceſſities of the ſtate,
not only becauſe * could better afford it, on
account of their riches, but likewiſe becauſe it
became neceſſary for them to do ſo, if they would

| * Don Carlos, Prince of Spain: it was by order of bis father that
he loſt bis life; and it app:ars that his crime was rather gaining over
the affectious of the grandes than treating them Wich contempt.

not.

ty

1508, Fe 8 3 L L Y 3 + 4 6
not forfeit the reſpect that was due to their cha-
rater, 1 luxury, floth, and impiety, the ordinary

fruits of great riches, and the indolence in which

they lived; but that he ſhould increaſe the num-
ber of merchants, h ifbandmen, artifts, and fol-
diers, by whoſe. induſtry, labour, and frugality
alone, a-ftate is ſupported againſt the ruin oe
which it is threatened by the diſſoluteneſs of th

other ranks, All principles, which, like thele,

| tend to maintain ſubordination and conoemy in
a ſtate, againſt corruption and Gifu: der; merit

raiſe from whatever mouth they procecd.
Philip cloſed his will with the article relating to
domeſtic diſpoſitions. He enjoined his ſucceſſor

to fulfill the promiſes and other clauſes of the In-

ſanta his ſiſter's marriage. He propoſed a match
S t

for the young King, in which he had already

made fome advances, and privately regulated all

the articles, which he informed him he would
find in the hands of Loo. He obſerved, that

though no king ever loved his father's favourite;
yet he would recommend Chriſtopher de Mora for
his confident, who had been his own, Philip III.

choſe rather to prove the truth of the obſervation,

than comply with the rcqueſt, and gave Mora” I

place to the Marquis of Doria. He required, a
an inſtance of reſpect due to the memory of a fax

ther, that all thoſe perſons to whom he had given.

employments ſhould be continued in them; but

he exprelſed himſelf in ſuch a manner with regard

to this article, as ſhewed he rather wiſhed than
hoped for a compliance with it. He recommend-

ed to his ſon the Doctors Ollius and Vergius, who
had attended him in his illnels. He mentioned

Antonio * eres as a dan; zer ous man, With whom
| 25 it

5 * Antony Peres had been ef miniſter to Philip II. with 8
he fell inco dil grace for reaſons which have no menner of relation

to the ſubject of theſe memoirs: he retired to Paris, Where be died
| in

— IO
IG
* .
2
OLA 2

r
C
1
1 IH
* 10
1
1 {4
'Y DE...
_ n
#
k 1 2 ' a
© t F \ Tc 1 :
: L
* $7 an :
1 11;
7:08 m
1 N N
e
vi ?
1
« .
1:
| 1 *
„ * + KEE bl
e  _—
13 77 . 2
„ 4
g - *
on
9
* 1
my Wn}
k ; mM
. FR
1 „ eee
7 r
* 8 - US 1 5
L 4 1
: WS 1
_ 14 FRY
a 0
14 1 \
- |, m8
1 * 14 £
. 4 1
17 e 0
- $a,
# TIE .
4 1
£ N. 1
| +4 K
. . 15 U Fi -
1.4 1
T 14 NY Js
e
1 1 72
\; > +48 Pf,
* 11
5 e
. | 94 85 1 q
Y e
1 _
7 i .
1 e
0 4 3,* $0 ö
* 4
8 $ 4
3 2 $4
ju 5 2
7 e
5 e
i Weg. 4%
- IÞ £ £
= | er 9 $228
7 n
. |
. uz J az if * 1
. , 3
t 88
5 PF, 5182
* 8 1 7 180 c
a e
7 > {Aras
? ** ex x
. A 1 'S
vu e's on |
* 1 e
. D .
1
Þ x v
8 444
1 „
7 n
. 9 7 *
* 1 1 a5
4 eie
. e
# 1 1 1 14 wo
0 e
2 iin
22 of
. % 122. N
* *
. * £ "
My \ 4 NET
: . 8
; ; |." ING
: tif 5:
2 i
4 ©. Py 41
f „„ * RE
- u&* * 1
4 1 5
9 M
84 N
: / 'Y *1.),
1 ” ah :
N 1 53 4 Hz
© . & 7 *
T1 90-008
ER
Kt 1 {HH j
* | © 0 HORN
1 1 1 L of N
«i ' { x vw 1
' +. $4. \
1 7 Rr £74
af 2...” + 36
4 — "584
15 „
i +1 att lt
1 * 8 111
5 e
1 33% 20
„
* e
i Pe. L
: * * n . 24.4.3
* 16
py et 185 „ AM
ö + H 4
7
ot LS
1
N 19 1 *
o
5 F £4 2
85 My * #4 :n
x 1:64 „
5 1
F WA
þ n
2 1
* 4 4 19
3 I vx 1
* + 4 .þ
14 * 1
1 [ 4
19 e
* 4
4 5 4
J 2h
bo : * 4J
x * 7 *
$4 4
SEAS:
n
4 9
„ 1 1 IF
3 2 & 253 | 4
: »
8 3 n
. pr 1 *
y £436 x88
+47 1
4 e 15 4
: . „ 2C,:-
1 a +
4 * F484
pe . is 1
7 1 & 4x 1
4 1 1 19
1
. 1 BI f t
2.
0
»
1

rer

reer
—— q * e. -

_ **

. =, 4 -

2712 MEMOIR S Book.
it was neceſſary he ſhould be reconciled; and af.
terwards not to permit him to ſtay either in France,

Flanders, and eſpecially Spain, but in the uſeleßg

country of Italy. Philip concludes this piece with
a ſhort maxim, To love God, to endeavour to be
virtuous, and to profit by the precepts of a father.

It muſt be confeſſed, that in this piece there are
likewiſe many more ſtrokes of * piety and reſigna-
tion to the will of God, who he ſaid had in mercy.

chaſtiſed him in this life rather than the other.
The firſt of theſe articles which was executed

by the King of Spain was that relating to his mar-
riage with the Archducheſs of Gratz: he ſent

immediately after the death of his fither to de-
mand her in marriage; and in the beginning of
the year following ſhe fet out for Spain, accom-

panied by her brother, the Archduke Albert, with

whom ſhe landed upon the coaſt of Marſeilles, for

the benefit of that air. The Duke of Guile, who
was governor of the province, having notice of it,

{ent to let the King know of her arrival, and received
orders to give this Princeſs a very honourable recep-

tion; his Majeſty deſtined fifty thouſand crowns to
be expended for that purpoſe, and ordered then to
be paid at Marſeilles. I was upon the point of ſending
thither, to direct how this money was to be diſpo—

ſed of, either La-Font, or another of my dome-

ſtics, who was only a footman of my wife's, a

man of low ſtature and a mean figure, but in

whom I had diſcovered fo much capacity, fidcli-

in 16:1. He was a great politician, and a man of very conſiderable -
parts: the following maxim was one of his, which includes a deal

of meaning in three words, namely, Roma, Conſega, Piolago : that

is to ſay, To gain over the court of Rome, compole the council of |

proper perſons. and to be maſter at ſea,

fle ordered his coffin to be brought him, which was made of
copper, and a death's head to be laid upon a buffet, with a crown
« of gold by its”? ſays La Chronclogie Septennaire, where, ann.“

1598 we way find, together with an account of all that this prince

ſaid and did in his laſt illneſs, the hiſtory alſo of his public and pris

. :

=
5
4
4
Y
9
x -
©
Ky
©.
1
* .
N %
. *
kg 4
-*%
3
+
4Y
e

deavour his eſtabliſhment: but there was no oc-
caſion for it, a perſon I had upon the ſpot was
ſufficient; for the Archduchels, notwithſtancing

the inſtances that were made her by the Duke of

Guiſe and the city of Marſeilles, would not enter

any of the great cities, to avoid the ceremonial,

but ordered tents to be ſet up upon the ſhore;

where ſhe reſted and heard maſs; the Archduke,
indeed, was ſo devour as to viſit the churches at
Marſeilles, but went to them incognito, and wich-

out any train; and afier kiſſing the relics, re-
turned without either cating or drinking.

| This marriage united the two branches of the
' houſe of Auſtria by a double tie, the deceaſed

King of Spain having already, on the zth of May

tie preceding year, married the Infanta Iſabella,
his daughter, to the Archduke Albert, who, for

that enen d had diveſted himſelf of the cardinal's

purple. This Princeſs had, in appearance, a very
large portion, ſince it was made up of no leſs
than the ſeventeen provinces of the Low-Coun-

tries, Franche-Comte, and Charolois: but the

additional clauſes that were inſerted, that this

new ſovereign ſhould be excluded from any come

merce in the Indies, and not ſuffered to permit in
his ſtates the exerciſe of any religion but the Ro-
man Catholic, without which tlie Conation was
made void, reduced it, in effect, to nothing, by

the difficulty he would find in obliging the Flemiſh
to accept of ſuch hard conditions.

The Archduke, till he could go in perſon to :
Flanders, to remove all theſe obliacles, ſent the
bigh Admiral * of Arragon thither,. in the quality |

»Conſult the Chronologie Septennaire, both as to theſe mil. tar y

| expeditions, and as to all that is here ſaid of the marriage of the
King and the infanta of Spain, for the years 1598, 1599. Mat-

of

thin Ibid. p. 298, Cc.

1599 · 0 7 8 „ 1 * 273
ty, and prudence, that I thought I ought to en

* :
—

2 » &y
75 - - 1 „ 77 . dos CARED. PB 8 be — e >> r D 2 — wt e —— — EE r P * * -
3 —— - ES *. . — Seer * : . : : : #4 0
: TD . PET PO ; —̃ä —-„—
8 —— Sn r eee * . —— — DO
COPREASDE Grote IEC. - 5k; TERS ſow — — =

* E:
1 *
! al
s.
% Ss s
| 1.
* of
f
*
1

6 5

;

-

bo +. *
5

2 . Gs
5 =
#2 .

— hy
42 3 n
n
2 1
— ——

r 7
2
. 32 3

— 4
2
— D
— n

8 n OE
« 2 2 "Res RY 5 2
<< — — D —

4
5
\
ru
N
41
7 , 4
n
18
7
©)
» %
9
C — 85
1
9
q
3
4 *
* 4
MER
1
N
1
wh. 2
*
2 HJ
7%
*
1
.
"839
1
af **
.
" 4 LE.
1
i
f
1
ES.
4 48
N88
1
1
n
bt
+ "4
1 i
* e
11

3 .
.
8
8, -
v AE 1
8 4
.
N
N d
N 7
B08
2 4,44!
— 1 ro
9 15 A
: 6 * 1 4
4 F
Wl The i
: 2] *
488
* Nee
nnn
— 7
13 al 3
** EE
t
lag 74
e
»4 Y * e
111
N
e
iN "© 4
Wk

8 4
2
8 — 9 I
©; hr IS > 122
" Po, ot ont een Emery,
C
e
mY = 5
. et eas

2 —
2 >
— — 8 * ag

- CORE 4

n

— 2 — —-—
- .. cont LE

n

%% M01 R$ BookX

of his Lieutenant-general, who performed ſome
actions on the frontiers of Germany; and aftor-
wards his couſin, the Cardinal An are, Who iſ.
out many caicts, but without effect. The bouſe
of Auſtria began to think there was danger in de.
Jays; therefore the Archduke went himſelf into
the Low-Countries, taking with him his bride, on
the 5th of 8 opteraber this year; the remainder of
which was ſpent in chreatenings on his ſide, which
likewiſe procuced nothing; ſo that there was a

neceſſity for coming to open force; and this was

the beginning of that long and b Jody war between
Spain and the Flemiſh, the progreis and event of
which I ſhall take notice of each year.
At the ſame time that the marriage of his Ca-
tholic Majeſty was celebrated in Spain, that of the
Princeſs Catherine with the Prince of Bar“ was ce-
lebrated at Paris, It was upon this eſtabliſhment
that the Princeſs at length fixed her deſtiny, hi—
therto ſo uncertain. During the life of Quten Ca-

therine it was firſt propoſed to marry her to the
Duke of Alencon; but Henry III. would not con-

ſent to it, on account of the hatred he bete to
his brother. AﬀterwarCs, they talked of piving
her to Henry III. himſelf; but this the Queen

mother oppoſed, through the averſion ſhe | 948 10 to
the family of Navarre. This Princeſs, in her turn,
refuſed the old Duke of Lorain, becauſe: he bad
children by a former marriage. The King ef

Spain demanded her, on condition of a ſtrict

1
union between the King of Navarre and bim,

which the firſt of theſe Princes would not hear

ok. The Princeſs was afterwards fought by the

* Henry Duke of Par u ho beczme Duke of Lorrain. after the
death of Lis father. Charles II. The King pave his ſiſter at her
6 maz :iage, three hurdted tho SY d cours of geld for her pO
* tion,” Jays the hifltorian Matthieu, Ib d. p. 279,

Duke

Jays, - =P

wy >, tg. ty bg

yp 1 22

W ˖· ’ wůwů̈ũͥili . 275
Duke of Savoy; but in circumitances wherein this
marriage might prove prejudicial to the Proteſtant

religion; and therefore the Proteſtants themſelves. .
threw ditliculties in the way. She would not have
the Prince of Conde on account of his poverty;
and refuſed the King of Scotland, without giving
any good realon for it. The Prince of Enhalt
made like iſe Eis advances... And in thoſe tranſports.
of anger with which ſhe was ſometimes animated
agaialt the Kiag her brother, ſne reproached him,
that he would have thrown her into the arms of
three or four other foreign princes, or, as the
called them, gentlemen, for the payment of their
ſubſidies. Lillly, her inclination for the Count
of Soiſſons made her reject the Duke of Montpen-
fier, who was a ſuiravle match for her. At length,
the neceſſity of procuring. an eſtabliſhment deter-
mined her to accept the Piince of Bar,

This deſigned marriage was no ſooner made
public, than the eccleſiaſtics in general, and the
French biſhops in particular, then aſſembled at
Paris, found, in the difference of religion of the

two parties, a reaſon. tor hindering its concluſion,
which they did not ſuffer to eſcape them. The
firſt meaſure they took was, to hinder, at Rome,

Vith all their power, the diſpatcbing of the Gif:
penſation, without which, they imagined, it was
not poſſible to proceed to the celcbration of the
marriage, In this reſpect, they could not truſt
the care of their intereſts to one more faithful than
D'Oſſat, who nevertheleſs was ſent to this court
to manage thoſe of the King. But this is not the
firſt time, nor will it be the laſt, that this eccleſi-
aſtic has ſuffered from me, and will again, the
reproach of having not only exceeded but betray-
ed his commiſſion. If I may give credit to he
memorial from Rome which has bcen alre dy
mentioned, D'Oſſat, in the name of the whole

| party

— .

—

—_—
a. — 8

— : — -
— 1 . p 7 .
— = £ l ———— — —
1 = = - — 2 n "= A.
* - AC ORF WP PP Bo 85 - PR
1 KS * 3 ST 5 Wa — 8
* PP = Io = CER J A
F * . a ts SECT ERS
2 - LSE 2 72 D ©
> 2 2 =
8 2 1 —— 2 2 . 7
E — n - rp 2 FN
— . oo = g
* » AS > - HS. * 3
— — 3 I
. — — - : : —

"5:
G- —
——
5 —

+
en.
«

ed
4G h
Bll.”

.
bY”...
19%:

.

x

*

rr ̃⅛ ˙òͤd̃d . x OS

ſpectacle.

276 ME M O 1 8 Books,
party of whom he was the inſtrument, neglett.
ed nothing to difſuade the Pope from granting the

diſpenſation, which he was particularly employed
by his Majeſty to ſolicit. Theſe perſons gave his

Holineſs to underſtand, that if he continued firm
in his refuſal to grant this favour, it would pro.

duce two things <qually to be deſired; one, that the

Princeſs would turn Catholic; the other, that ſuch
a change would be thought by the Proteſtants an

effect of the violence uled to her by the King her
| brother for that purpoſe; which would increaſe
tle diſtruſt they already openly ſhew ed of his Ma.

jeſty, make them conſider bim as their enemy and

declared perſecutor, and bring on, at Jength, that
inteſtine war which, according to them, Was ſo
much to be deſired, for the intereſts of the holy
Father and the true «li; gion. |
The clergy did not ſtop here; they de re.

monſtrances ſevere enough to merit the title of

threats. His Majeſty had the complaiſance to liſten
to them, and

nd permitted a conference to be hell,
in which Dr du-Val on one fide, and the miniſter

Tilenus on the other, endeavouring to ſupport
their cauſe, debated with much heat, and in my

opinion, to little purpoſe; though each boaſted
afterwards, that he had vanquiſhed his adverfary.

I ſpeak as one who was a witneſs of the diſpute,
for I ſuffered myſelf ro be drawn along with the
crowd which ran thither, as to a very intereſting
I did not come in till toward the con-
cluſion, when the two diſputants were beginning
1 know not for what.

to ſink under the fatigue.
reaſon they were deſirous of making me play the

part of a judge upon this occaſion; probably be-
cauſe they were informed I had been employed by _
his Majeſty to draw up the articles of marriage be-
tween the Princeſs Catharine and the Prince of
Bar. They were beginning to repeat io me all

296

1 OF: 83 E LF. 277
the points of a diſpute, which had already taken
up ſeveral hours; but [ earneſtly intreated them to
ſpare me either this trouble or this honour, telling
them, that if two ſuch learned men had not been
able to reconcile the canon and decrees of the Pope
with the holy ſcripture, or to prove that ſuch a
talk was impoſſible, it could not be expected that
{ich an ignorant perſon as I ſhould be equal to it;
and this was really my opinion, „5
This conference not having produced all the
effects the clergy expected from it *, and finding
likewiſe that they ſucceeded no better at Rome,
| they declared, that nothing ſhould be capable of
| prevailing upon them to give their conſent to this
marriage. Little regard would have been paid to
this; but as there was a neceſſity for getting a bi-
ſhop to perform this ceremony, and that all thoſe
gentlemen held together, hence aroſe an obſtacle,
upon which they founded their laſt hopes.
In this perplexity the King was adviſed to have
recourſe to the Archbiſhop of Rouen, from whom,
being his natural brother, and obliged to him for
the biſhopric,, more complaifance was to be expect-
ed; beſides, his Majeſty, as well as all France,
knew this prelate to be not very ſcrupulous (to ſay
no more) in matters of religion, However, upon
the firſt propoſition made him by the King, the
Archbiſhop, like a devout rebel, overwhelmed him
with citations, as often ill as well choſen, from
the holy fathers, the holy canons, and the holy
ſcriptures. The King, aſtoniſhed, as may be weil
imagined, at ſuch uncommon language from a
man who generally talked of quite different mat-
ters, could hardly hinder himſelf from laughing
in his face, aſking him, by what miracle it was
_ * Perefixe ſays, that the King not being able to accompliſh her
converfion, though he made uſe of threatenivgs, ſaid one day to the

Duke of Bar, « My good couſin, it is your buſiueſs to break her.“

*#

278 M E M OI R S Bock X.

that he had become ſo learned and conſcientious ?

| Suppoſing, however, the Archbiſhop might be
wrought upon by ſerious arguments to comply, he
tried their efficacy; but finding him til] untracta-
ble, he grew angry, and reproached him with his
ingratitude. © Since you carry it ſo high,” add. _
ed Henry reſuming his firſt air of pleaſantry, «1 |
„will ſend you a great doctor, your uſual con-

« feſlor, who is wonderfully {kilful in caſes of con-
& ſcience.” This great doctor and director of
conſciences was Roquelaure, an old companion of
Monſieur de Rouen's, and an actual ſharer in his

debauches, by whoſe intreaty he had obtained the

| archbiſhoprick. The prelate underſtood perfectly

well the meaning cf this little threat, and the em-

barraſment he appeared to be in was a proof that
he was under ſome apprehenſions of thoſe great

advantages which an accuſtomed familiarity would _
give Roquelaure over him, without the addition
dt thoſe which he derived from that wit which all
the court acknowledged to be free, ingenious, and

fruitful in the moſt happy falliesz and the Arch-

biſhop himſelf was not often guilty of carrying

too far the reſpect due to the epiſcopal character.
The King having quitted Monſieur de Rouen,

ſent for Roquelaure; Do you know, Roquelaure,

46

ſaid he to him, that your Archbiſhop takes upon

© he underſtands as little of as you or I; how-
ever, by his refuſal my ſiſter's marriage is ſtop-

„ ped: therefore pray go to him, and talk to him
as you uſed to do, and put bim! in mind of pal

< times.“

bim to play the prelate and doctor, and would
quote the holy canons to me, which I believe

*
, |

1s *
: 2
e g
1 8
þ .
3 3

F =

* i I

** #

*

By the Lord, Sire,” replied Roquelaure, «this |

is not well done of him: for it is high time, in

„my opinion, that our ſiſter Kate ſhould taſte the |

£ {ivects of n, But pray, Sire, ri .
„„ what

x
k Y
7 *
7 2
G TG
* 4
ns
pe 2
EN
7 *
* 25
3
*
£

(4

as
©

«6
«6

ce
cc

40
40
0

ce

«

6
460
=

10

ec

hs
(60
_—

af

1599. V L L T. 27S
(60
(6
1
6

what reaſons this Gne fellow of a biſhop gave

you for his refuſal? he ſeldom has much better
to give than mylclt. I will go to him and teach

him bis duty.”
He did not fail to perform his rol; 6 What ”

is this I hear, Archbiſhop?” ſaid he, as ſoon
he entered his apartment: * they tell me you
have been playing the coxcomb; by the Lord,

I will not ſuffer it; it derogates too much from

my honour, ſinee every one ſays you are ga-

verned by me. Know you not that at your en-

treaty I became your ſecurity to the King, when
4

60
3
60

I prevailed upon him to give you the archbi-

ſhopric of Rouen; therefore I defire you would

not make me out a liar, by continuing thus

obſtinately to act like a fool: this might do be-

tween you and I, who are often ſeen quarrellipg

at dice, but ſuch diſputes muſt not be thought on

when our maſter's ſervice and his abſolute com-
mands are in queſtion.”

© Merciful God! replied Monſieur de Rouen,

what is this you would have me to do, Roque-
laure? What! muſt | make myſelf ridiculous,
and ſuffer the reproaches of all the other prelates,
by an action which the whole world agrees is
unjuſtifiable, and which every one of the biſhops
to whom it has been propoſed by the King has

refuled?” Hold a little, pray,” interrupted

| Roquelaure : : © there is a wide difference between
46

1
t
(0

them and you; for thoſe men have puzzled their

brains ſo much about Greek and Latin, that they

are become fools --- and you are the King's bro-

ther, and obliged to obey all his commands,

without any heſitation : the King did not make
you an archbithop to preach to him, and quote
the canons, but to do whatever his ſervice re-
quired: if you continue this perverſeneſs and
obſtinacy, I will acquaint Jeanneton de Con-

| A a 2 «dom,

Pp

=_ 7;

4
9

46

20 MEMOIRS Books,

©. dom, Bernarde I 'Eveillee, and Maſter Julian

with the whole ſtory : Do you underſtand me?
don't let me tell you this a ſecond time: know,
that nothing ought to be ſo dear to you as the
King's favour, which, together with my ſolici.
tations, have done you more good than all the

46
46
40

Greek and Latin of the others: By the Lord, i

is a fine thing to hear you talk of the canons,
40

Monſieur;de Rouen endeavoured to perſuade him,

that he ought to quit that ludicrous ſtyle, which

was agreeable enough when he was in kis youth;
and hinted ſomething concerning paradiſe to bim.
* How! paradiſe !” interrupted Roquelaure:“ Are
* you ſuch an aſs to talk of a place, where you
have never been, where you know not what is

you attempt to get in till another time!“ “ Yes,

40 yes, ?? ſaid the Archbiſhop, I ſhall be admitted
46 there, de not doubt of it? * Ton talk ieh,

ſaid his companion, preſſing Qill harder upon

him; ; © by the Lord, I believe paradiſe is as lit-

* tle deſigned for you as the Louvre for me: but

and your conſcicnce, and do you now reſolve
to marry the Princeſs to the Prince of Bar; for
if you fail, I ſhall take from you three or fou

mouth; farther the ſaid deponent knoweth not:
and then adieu to the croſs and mitre; and, what
is worſe, to your fine palace of Gaillon, and
© revenue of ten thouſand crowns,” |

Many other things paſſed between theſe two

men, which may be gueſſed at by this ſample,

Roquelaure would not leave the Archbiſhop till
he had made him promiſe to marry the Princeſs;

and accordingly he was the perſon that Pere
he

of which you know as little as of high Dutch »

doing, or whether you ſhall be admitted when

let us lay aſide a little your paradiſe, your canons,

paltry Latin words that you have always in your

MG * a. aw ”_ 8 **

the ceremony *. I received from both parties very
magnificent preſents, in return for the pains I had
taken; among others, a Spaniſh horſe of great va-
jue, which was given me by the Duke of Lorrain :

] ſent him to his Majeſty, who ordered me to keep

Ninth -- 5;

This was not the only occaſion on which the

clergy were againſt the King; they made a more
reſolute and likewiſe a more important oppoſition
againſt the regiſtering the edit of Nantes, which
always appeared to them a difficult morſel to di-
geſt ; as they had for almoſt a year held an aſſem-
bly at Paris on this account, they had had time
to prejudice the parliament, and other ſovereign
courts, as well as the Sorbonne, . againſt this edict.
All theſe bodies, as ſoon as it was publiſhed, re-
belled, and occaſioned diſorders that may be bet-
ter imagined than deſcribed. It was the ſubject
of all diſcourſe; every one applied himſelf to cri-

ticiſe the piece, and to offer different arguments
againſt it, all which were far from being juſt, as

well as the reaſons the parliament gave for not re-
giſtering it: but that candor and ſincerity 1 have

profeſſed to obſerve here in matters that neareſt

concern me, oblige me to confeſs, that they were
not abſolutely to blame.

For example, the Proteſtants, by one of the ar-
ticles of the edict, were permitted to call and hold

all ſorts of aſſemblies, convocations, &c. when

The ceremony was performed one Sunday morning, ſays the

Chronologie Septennaire.— The King came to fetch the Lady
* C:<herine, his filter, when ſhe was dreſſed; and leading her by
the hand into his cloſet, whither her ſaid future ſpouſe had come
before her, he ordered M. the. Archbithop of Rouen, to marry
them, Cc. and that it was his pleaſure it ſaould be fo. This the
* Archbiſhop at firſt refuſed, alledping, that the uſal ſolemnity
* ouaht to have been obſerved therein, To which the Eng very
* learnedly made anſwer, That his preſence ſapplied the want of all
"* other ſolemnity, and that his cloſet was a conſerated place.“

06 OT SULLYL mt

. 22

„ e

>; ——— 5 2 0 5
— — ys IS we: 5 a dh Wr . he AD
LS Fa” > ie 2 PIER

a +» a _ i ö * . * * —
le EG 3 . Ba: 2g. 2

2

Pe y

os

* pay 73
A TR SOS = ©L
+ Gs # 922 *

1 PR

«15-26 r 8

72 r
n + 4,5 -

209 4.

am
K
th I

"gs BY

NH

x -

D 4
r e

282 MEMOIR 8 Bock k.

and where they pleaſed, without aſking leave ei-
ther of his Majeſty or the magiltrates; and like.

wiſe to admit in them all foreigners whatever,

without acquainting any ſuperior tribunal : as alſo

on their fide, to be preſent, without licence, at
the aſſemblies which were held amonglt the fo.
reigners. It is very plain, that a point as abſo.

lutely contrary to all the laws of the Kingdom, as
prejudicial- to the authority of the King *, the

right of the magiſtracy, and ihe utility and quict

of the people, could not have been obtained but
by ſtratagem; and it was upon this point likwiſe
that the enemies of the Proteſtants inſiſted cheifly,

in the ſeveral remonſtrances they made to the King,

each alledging thoſe arguments in which they were
moſt intereſted. The parliament remonſtrated,

that this article compleated the ruin of their avihe- |

rity, which the clergy had already confined to

ſuch narrow limits, as well as the King's (fer it

was pretended, that theſe two authorities were ſo
cloſely connected that they could not be ſe para.
ted) that if appeals againſt the irregular exertion
of eccleſiaſtical authority ſhould be taken away,

| they would have only the ſhadow of any power.
The clergy and the Sorbonne complained of the |

ſuperiority this conceſhon would give the Proteſt-

had managed wich ſome perſons, who perhaps were not aware of
the darger of it; but the Sieur Beith'er, who was agent for the
« clergy, and Biſhop of Rieux, diſputed it ſo warmly w.th the Mas
rechal, in the preſence of the King, that after hearing his 1esfons,
and in regard of the importance of the point itſelf, his Mejeſty

M. Cayel's agrees with that of F. Matthieu, tom, 2. J. 2. p 280.
& ſ#q. to that the art cle of the ed ct of Nantes, which was ſo rm.
ly conteſted, being apparently the eighty ſecond, is at preſent as dls
advantageous to ine Calviniſts, as it was formerly favourable to

them; ſince it forbids ihem all cabals, nepot ations, intelligences,
5 allemblies, councils, les gues, aſſeiations, either in or ovt of the

| kingdom, aſſeſſments and ra ſing of Ro. G. without Eis Be-
ſty's cxpref permiſſion,

=> ant

® © This point, ſays le Septennaire, the Marechal de Bovillon |

ordered it to. be erazed.” Ann. 1599, p. 66. This account cf

e N SHES * : * 9
4 r * ** . N * $f 's
? : " A Y . „
* . 4 7 PROBE, Es © .
4s a 0 n [A 2 *
n e e Rs n
, Þ * 3 Nl * £ e 5 5 1 ,

„ „ „„

ant over the Catholic church in France, which had
never been poſſeſſed of fo large a power in its ju-
riſdiction; and this was certainly true. Laſtly,
they enumerated all the bad conſequences which
this abſolute independence of the French Hugue-
nots might produce, either amongſt themſelves,
or their aſſociations with all the enemies of France
in Europe. „% 1
The King had not yet examined the edict with
care: all he knew of it was from a light reading,
in which he had, doubtleſs, glanced over this
_ clauſe, or probably wholly omitted it. The ſur-
prize he diſcovered. to thoſe who talked to him in
that ſtrain, ſhewed he had been deceived; and he
' promiſed them to conſider it attentively, and give
them an anſwer, When they left him, he im-
mediately ſent for me, and ſhewing me the edict,
I concealed from him none of the ſentiments I
have delivered here: I added, that by too great
zeal ro make that article advantageous for the Pro-
teſtants, I thought he was doing them a miſchief,
in that it would give large ſcope for all the ſlander
that would be invented againſt the worthy men of
the party, of their intriguing with foreigners a-
gainſt the ſtate, or of ſuffering themſelves to be
ſuborned. Henry, ſtill more confirmed in his
opinion, fent me back with orders to prepare my-
ſelf to ſupport all theſe motives in the aſſembly of.
the Proteſtants, which he would have to be cal-
led immediately; while he, in the mean time,
went to demand an explanation of the edict from
_ thoſe who had drawn it up. _ „
Meſſieurs de Schomberg, de Thou, Calignon,
and Jeannin (for the King ſent directly for them all
four) were greatly diſconcerted by the reproaches
the King made them of having abuſed his confi-
dence. Schomberg and De Thou, in the name
of them all, replied, that they had been obliged
V — —

284 u E M O t R S Bock X.

to act in the manner they had done, by the

threats of Meſſieurs de Bouillon and de la Tre.

mouille, who declared, in the name of the whole

party, that if this article was denied to them, they

would break all agreement, and even commence

war againſt the Catholics; which ſeemed to them |

of the utmoſt conſequence, the peace with Spain
labouring at that time under great difficultics,
The king contenting himſelf with this excuſe, or-
dered Berthier, ſyndic of the clergy, to report

it to the aſſembly, and to add from him, that

amongſt four perſons, to whom he had commit-
ted the care of drawing up the edict, there being
no Proteſtant but Calignon, he could not perſuade
himſelf that the three others would have given the

Proteſtant religion ſuch an advantage over the.

Catholic. The anſwer made by the biſhops ſhew-
ed plainly, that they had not the fame opinion of
thoſe three gentlemen that his Majeſty had; they
were treated in full aſſembly as falſe Catholics, who
in many articles agreed with the Proteſtants, and
had no ſeruple about the reft, Whilſt we con-
demn this ſecond imputation “ as it deſerves to
be, we ſtill allow, that with regard to the hrſt,
every thing made apainſt the writers of the edit;
and that their reply to his Majeſty did not fo effec-
tually deſtroy the opinion that might be conceived

* If a certain private converſation be true, which D'Aubigns

makes the Preſident de Thou to hold with the Duke de la Ire:
mouille, when he was ſent by his Majeſty to the aſſembly of the
Calviniſts, the ſuſpicions of the clergy would not be ill founded:
« You have too much judgr ent, ſays the Preſident to him, not to
« know very well, that confidering the point at which matters now
« ſtand, and the conceſſions we have already made yt, the de-
4. mands which you may make are not at their utmoſt height ——

„NM. de Schomberg is a Lutheran, and very far from being a good -

4 Calviniſt ; as for my own part, you ſhall know the inmoſt thought

« of my heart” Tom. 3.1.5. e. i. But it is very proballe that
_ D*Avubigne has related this converſation upon the credit of pe 4s
not to be depended on, as allo ſome other points of his hiſtory,
which at that time drew an arret of parliament upon chat wok.

of

; : n "3% - hes
= 4 * 2 . 2 2
» > Xs _—_ 2d ES, pb * F258

Pi
8
4%
gt
.
"he
F
:Y
: 57
A
. 5
Ny
Ws
.
.
1
>
2
Fo
£5
A
1

15999 0 F IL LL 2s
of it, as the ſilence they obſerved i in his preſence .

gave it ſtrength “.
The Duke of Bouillon, [howevie, had certain-

ly thoſe ſentiments they attributed to him. By

endeavouring to come at the bottom of the affair,
J learnt that he had in reality diſcovered an inſur-

- mountable obſtinacy; but was there no other

means to make the others more reaſonable? and

then, what could he do by himſelf? If all the Pro-

teſtants were like the Duke de Bouillon, what

could the writers of the edit mean by this blind

compliance with their inclinations? was the King

and the realm to be betrayed for neceſſity? as no-
thing could be thought worſe than that by honeſt

and ſkilful negotiators, they can hardly be char-

ged with ſuch a notion. For my own part, I al-
ways thought Bouillon the ſole favourer of the
' project contained in that article, as he had been

the author of it; he conſidered only himſelf, and
diſregarded others. I will now ſhe w the ultimate
deſign of all his politics.

The Duke of Bouillon, in order. to terminate

in his favour the diſpute for precedency between
bim and the dukes and peers of France, as well
as the marechals that were more ancient than

him, formed a deſign to get his ſovereignty of

Sedan + declared a fief of the empire. But this

prerogative was not to deprive him of all com-

munication with the Proteſtant French lords, o-
therwiſe he would loſe more than he gained.
The medium he thought upon to reconcile his

intereſt with his ambition, was to have his church

of Sedan comprehended in the Proteſtant churches
of Franes. This he did by means of the article

7 M. de Sully? „ ſincerity i in all this | is 6 remarkable, that we cans |
not, in my opinion, ſufficiently admire it in a Proteſtant.

f Conſult l' Hiſtoire du Duc de pagan] which we have . |
3 times 5 already, E

in

6
a Ui;
"7 12
1
ry SY
Kal fe. +
mm
1
_ T —_
WL = .
a
. UNE
12 - R
BY
f 8 . 1
1
e
12 ON q
, 9
*
.
* l 7
n
r
* 1
=
7 N 2
; if
». I} =
: * *
e
** * 45
[ 1
+; "Bis
! i Fo 08
ON 2 Ny
/ 7
* 8
1
Pts «8 D:
2:88 *
? 1
K'f Sh,
{8 3
. It
390
18.4 1 þ
8 OF — |
1
7 Hin
; "FIR
j3 BS os)
+00 1
"8
+ 26
\ 08
:
1 4.3
1
"ts
»y 3
9
N
*
us)
99
9
. *:
8
Ya, 14.
*
*
2
2 bs
16. 4
* „
1
1
1
ih
ts 2
4
L
n
437
«uh 0
"*
N
2
1
299
253-8
* "
2 4
i 6D
by
[3 7 9
3
1
8 7
[4 **
4 .
1 3
9 5
Ft
44 -
I
by
y
*
7

4

in

1
4

4

« 7
2 7
1 «
"4-44
84
N

18 *F

„ 14
: 1-4

N

9

PW.
122

OH

17

*

1
4s
{#

n
4
I
4

.

8
4
a7

nf

9
1

4, ws

os ty

1

3

#14

Re
'q

78
TH

” 3
*
y
17
12
N

19

14498

1

1 o

* 22
4

: ö

- — — —
Ro I 4 re — 8 Py oa ” 0 2 8 ＋
7 VE Ee > 2 — — 2 8 > e > LEI — X 3 r 12 —
e ** « * 8 — 4 FI." $9 x. exo ne * — 2 —— —2— 2 Go . 3 "I S — — —ͤ— po nr 2% r — 7
2 7 A 2 E — 9 7 — — ov . r 1 — Ea * 8 * = Ie A 232 9 g 2 i _ oo —
%. WV . n 8 N 5 2 > 2 > — Ag + Bed 0 72 128 . . * * * — - by we”
: XY. 18+ Be WS! n a 5 r 3 V refine FO dS r — * 1 — £ bg <> ; & > ID ES: « a — —
2 : 8 "Hg" . - 1 —— — — 2 J _— As * det 2 a ws. _ — - Þ . 4 . « 8
RF ae "p67 A * RS” e - ye $a , — — — -— - Dr rere 18 2 . 5 * * 2 *
— —_ SJ — * — . 2 . w_ 2 * 8 FASTEST — * — _- F * -
5 — — 4 „ <1 : - r — — — — PET: e 3 £ - 2 K — 2 Sat 1
— . ˙ . ge > EEE RS DAE -

ay ..-
S
82 *
-

. => = 6 1 —
E RN 3 + SE. if Ne Ge 2 2
28% N 3 Sw Se apa. LE ERS 3 .
A no VS. aac 3 =
Sx. 2 "

5
5
2

* TI —
—  __ — — = —
rr = — —
I # — — <4 w— - Ru it 9 — ” -
CG Ne VICE TULIP ml ———— — > — —— — —

= —
r

286 M E M O IR Ss Bock.

in queſtion: mean time he would continue to
make himſelf be treated as a foreign prince.

Berthier came back to the King, to give bim
an account of the diſpoſition in which he found

the prelates of the aſſembly, together with the
reſult of their deliberations; which was to take

from the four perſons who drew up the edi& all

cognizance of the affairs of religion; and the
_ diſputed article, and ſome others leſs eſſential,
ſhould be mended z which his Myjelty likewiſe
promiſed. 5

Nevertheleſs, the aſſembly of the chief Prote-

ſtants then at Paris having been ſummoned the
day after that, in which this agreement betwixt
the King and the commiſſaries was made, I re-

ceived, as uſual, a note inviting me to be there,

I had left off going to theſe aſſemblies, ever ſince
TI perceived that my preſence laid a reſtraint up-

on three or four of the leading men in it, and

was good for nothing but to produce alterca- |

tions. I deceived them, by preſenting myſelf at
this. The Duke of Bouillon eaſily comprebend-
ed the deſign which had brought me there thus

contrary to my uſual cuſtom, and hinted as much
with an ironical feverity ; which I anſwered, by

exculing myſelf on account of the multiplicity of
affairs that took up my time, and by feigning
not to know the occaſion on which the preſent.
aſſembly was held. I gave no attention to the
ſullen air which the Duke de la Tremouille al-
ſumed, nor the expreſſion he let fall to intimate,

that he was not perſuaded of the truth of what

1 faid ; but went and ſeated myſelf near Meſheurs
de Mouy, de Clermont, and de Sainte-Marie-Du»
Mont, who informed me of the buſineſs that was
to be brought upon the carpet; aſſuring me, that
the article which had made ſo much noiſe, was

_ diſapproved of by almoſt all the Proteſtants 3

an

1599 · O F C , 11.
and that none but Meſſieurs de Bouillon, de la
Tremouille, du Pleſſis, and ſome others of the
cabal, inſiſted on it, in order to bring on a civil
War. They could not obtain their point, not-
Vuluithſtanding the tumults they had occaſioned,
and the clamours they made in the aſſembly.
When it came to the vote, it was carried againſt
them, the contrary opinion prevailed, and with

I
C
7
2
4
FN
* 4
2
oY
* 7
. .
ey, E
"8.
15
.
*
WY
1 1
1
Up [1
22
2

tb oe

— 2 = * 5 — q 2
- * #72 4 * a: 7s, 1 Þ ab. 75 . EE ES is of "i

> oo». DD” : S ot ER BEI

SITY = — = 3 * — 1 = — DSI n
- * WIT 5 2 N n . Fr of II
AE 2 EI IX - 1 *
F wn.” - <0 * ee bc Sin
_ 82 4

reaſon; for the beſt arguments were on our A
! # They likewiſe agreed upon ſome qualifications

With regard to two or three other articles, in
Which the public good did not ſeem to be ſut-

* The edit of Nantes was at length verified on Thurſday the
25th of February this fame year, after many difficulties ſtarted by
the clergy, the univerſity, and parliament. It was upon this occa- |
Hon that Henry IV. told the biſhops, © You have exhorted me con ·

cerning my duty; let me now exhort you concerning yours: let
Aus excite a mutual emulation in each other, which of us ſhall
perform their parts the beſt My predeceſſors gave you good
„ words; but I, with my grey jacket on, will ſhew you good deeds :
though I am all grizzled without, yet I am all gold within: I
4 will look into your papers, and anſwer them as favourably as I
« can.” The following was the return he made to the parliament,
when they came to make him remonſtrances ; * You ſee me in my
& cloſet, where I come to ſpeak with yon, not in my royal robes,
nor with my ſword and other military habilimepts on, as my pre-
„ geceſfors were wont, nor like a prince who is to receive an ambaſ-
4 ſador, but clad like the father of a family, in his plain doublet,
« to ſpeak familiarly with his children; what I have to fay to you
«is, to intreat you would regiſter, with the uſual ſolemnities, the
« edit which I have granted to thoſe of the Calviniſt rehgion, What
6 I have done is for the lake of peace, which 1 have concluded with
the neighbouring powers around me, and would have the ſame
« obſerved within my own dominions.” After he had told them
the reaſons that induced him to make this edit, he added, „Such
as would hinder my edict from paſſing are for war, which I will
_* to-morrow declare againſt the Proteſtants ; but 1 will not carry it
on, I will ſend them to it. I made the edit, and would have
it ©bſerved : my will ought to be a ſufficient reaſon; for in an o.
bedient ſtate they never aſk their prince any other. I am King,
l ſpeak to you as ſuch, and I will be obeyed,” Peref. Ibid. and
Journal de Henry IV. Ibid. See alſo in M. de Thou, and in le
_ Septennaire, anno 1599, the ſeveral modifications which were added
to the edict of Nantes, and all the conferences held on this oe ſion.

ficiently

28 M E M O I R S Bock K.

ſiciently conſidered, The juſtice and mildneſs of : m
Henry's conduct was acknowledged by every one. en
After the affair was thus ſettled, he explaincdd | ad

his motives to the greater number; and for the
reſt, he thought only of hindering them from li
doing worle. „„ 0
He acted with the ſame prudence with refpc& © ce

to ſome diſaffected Catholics, who being unwilling * n
to appear openly themſelves, brought one Mar. o
tha Broſſier, a pretended demonaic, in play, wha © wu
Was become the object of the people's curioſity, 1e
Who are always ſtruck with the marvellous, be- a
ther true or falſe. It is indced ſurpriſing, that a. t
matter ſo ridiculous in itſelf, and which was even __C
below the conſideration of the mob, ſhould be n
talked one for a year and an half, and become | »
an affair of ſtate : one half of the world ſuffer e
themſelves to be dizzled by every thing that feems 1
to be ſupernatural, and others are kept in awe, 1

not by the thing itſelf, but by the motives upon
which it is founded. Martha Broſſier met with
many protectors among the clergy, even as far
as Rome, whither ſhe took care to be carried.
The King, without any extraordinary notice, al-
lowed “ both the time and means neceflary to

| make

ire LORIE ET ISS
ov a”, . WF.

 ® We have a very curious account of all that relates to this pre.
| tended demoniac in M. de Thou, at the beginning of book 123.
ann. 1599, an abſtract of which is as follows: One James Broſher,
a baker at Romorantin in Sologne, taking a diſlike to his own trade,
turned conjurer, with a deſign to travel about the country with his
three daughters, Martha. Silvina, and Mary; the eldeft, who is the
| perſon ſpoken of here, had ſucceeded ſo well, by the inſtructions
Which her father had given her, to counterfeit a demoniac, that ſhe
_ impoſed upon every body at Orleans and Cleri, except Charles Mi-
ron, Biſhop of Angers, who found out the impoſture, by putting
common water in the place of holy water, and holy in the place of
common; by repeating a verſe from Virgil inſtead of the begin ing
of the exorciſm, and touching her with a key inſtead of his epiico-
pal croſier. This did not hinder her from cominy to Paris where

the pitched upon the church of St Genevieve for the ſcene on wed 8

N
2
85 4
8
oh
1 4
FOR
*
8
1
7
os
"I
8
CHEE
3
22
It”; 4
2

1599. ))

make itſelf known: after which the whole trick
ended in the general contempt of its authors and
adtrels.

The death of a great many perſons of diſtince-

tion afforded matter for other diſcourſe. The
Chancellor de Chiverny, Schomberg, and D'in-
carville, all three members of the council of fi-

nances, dying within a ſhort time of each other,

occaſioned a great alteration of affairs: the ſeals

were given to Bellievre; the office of comptrol-

ler-general, which D'Incarville had poſſeſſed, was,
at my ſolicitation, granted to De-Vienne 3 and

that of ſuperintendent of the finances was re-
. ſtored in my favour. Henry having ſent for

me to the garden of the Tuilleries, where he
was walking, told me, that he was reſolved to

entruſt the care of the finances to one man on-
ly; and afſuming a very lerious manner, made
me promiſe to give freely my opinion of that

to ſhew herſelf to the people, who flxcked thither in great numbers.

She impoſed upon all the credulous cecleſiaſties, and upon the capu-

chins, who began to exorciſe her in good earneſt; and cven upon
ſome phy ſicians whom Ijenry IV. had ſent to ſee her: thougb all
the reſt depoſed formally againſt her, eſpecially Michael Mareſcot,
one of the phyſicians, who publicly convicted her of not under ſtand-

ing Greck or Latin, and having. no preater capacity than what is
common to her ſex; and. in ſhort, of being an impoſtor and arrant

cheat. But notwithſtanding all this, the eccleſiaſtics and preachers
knew ſo well how to intereſt religion in this aair, and the pretend-
ed demoniac played her part ſo well, that the arret of parliament,

that enjoined her, as alſo her father, to return home, how wiſe and

reaſonable ſoever it was, occafioned ſtrange murmurings, and almoſt
a revolt in Paris: and this gave the King a deal of uneaſineſs, who
ſaw, that what enemies he had remaining of the old league, did ap-

pear again on this occaſion. Alexander de la Rochefoucaut, Lord
olf St Mattin, and Count de Randan, even undertook to revive this
affair, by cauſing Martha to be ſent to Avignon, and thence to Rome,
where ſhe gained ſtill more partiſans. But, unluckily for her, Car-

Gina d'Oſſat was there, who employed himſelf ſo cticually in this
affair, that at length Martha and all her family ſaw themſclves ut-
terly abandoned; and they lived and died deſpiſed and quite miſtr-
able, Conſult alſo the other hiſtorians, 1 | |

Tonk n= B b

5 - 1 * r
<2 A IRE _— .
2 ———
— 6G - 22 a — — — 2 i=
4 1 * —

1 =
265 — 2 2 1
— \ * — = =
A. wo 2
TS Es
Are ro +
3 -

EE —
222 os
2
Sr Es Sy — IH —
3 ——

hs - —— * <=: — 2 Nod=as * 5
D 2 2 22 —— et =
* — 2 7:45, 2 - 4
i” a< _ IH I of OI on WT oP nee NS te»
——" 4, A er nia xs
* om = Bhs "Try L 4
8 2 —

25
22
* 2
tb oy ds 9
- 3 8
==> Lets wap,
be THY ny et
2 —

- —
9 — ** * r
— —

2 ———

—

r

man,

490 ME M O t R 3 Bock X.

man, when he ſhould name to me. Having af.
| fared him that I would, he ſmiled, and tapping
my cheek, told me, that 1 had reaſon to know
him well, ſince it was myſelf, His Majeſty be-
ſtowed on me likewiſe the poſt of ſurveyor of the

highways, for which he ſent me the patents, to-

gether with thoſe of ſuperintendent of the forti-
| fications. And Sancy, reſigning himſelf up to
his uſual whims “, having thought proper to re-
tire from the council, and to give up the office
of overſeer of the works, the King added theſe

employments likewiſe to the other favours he

loaded me with. The appointments for the ſu—
perintendency were ſettled at the rate of twenty
thouſand livres; thoſe of ſurveyor of the high-

ways, and of Paris in nao were ten thou-

ſand livres.
His Majeſty was 15 well pleaſed with this me-

thod of fixing the rate of ſalaries, that he was
likewiſe deſirous of regulating, in the ſame man-

ner, the gratuities he propoſed to give me, as well,
he faid, to prevent me from expecting a gratuity

for every conſiderable ſervice 1 did him, as to

| ſpare himſelf the trouble of cauſing all the pre-
ſents he made me to be regiſtrated, fince, with-
out that, I would not receive any more from

him, however little their value was: he therefore
declared to me, that all thoſe rewards and pre-
ſents ſhould, for the future, be compriſed in one

ſettled gratuity, which ſhould be paid me the be-
ginning of every year, in the form of letters pa-

tent, regiſtered by the parliament; and aſked me
beforehand if I was fatisfied with the ſum, which
was lixty thouſand livres: adding, that it was his
deſire, that with this money I ſhould purchaſe e-
ſtates, which I ſhould be at liberty to diſpoſe of

* Joſeph Scaliger ſpeaks, as well as our author, of M. de Sancy

as a fanatic, and as very * to enthuſiaſtic reveries.
| in

f eos — 2 e

— 8

1 55
=
2»
3
3
4
;
1
Re
5
E
1
> *

in favour of thoſe of my children who made
themſelves moſt worthy of my affection, in or-
der to keep them more firmly attached to me.
This goodneſs of the King's merited my moſt
grateful acknowledgments. However, this regu-
lation, which I have mentioned here, was not
made till the year 1600, and did not begin to take
place till the year 1601. JFC

Mademoiſelle de Bourbon * died likewiſe this

year; and Monſieur D'Eſpinac t, archbiſhop of.

Lyons, who may be ſaid to have taſted of all

kinds of fortunes; then Madam la Connetable ;
and after her Madam de Beaufort: theſe two laſt.

deaths made a prodigious noiſe every where, and

were attended with a great ſimilarity of very un-

common circumſtances ; both were ſeized with a
violent diſtemper, that laſted only three or four

days; and both, though extremely beautiful, be-
came horribly disfigured, which, together with
ſome other ſymptoms, that at any other time
would have been thought natural, or only the

effects of poiſon, raiſed a report in the world, that

the deaths of theſe two young ladies, as well as

their elevation, was the work of the devil, who
made them pay for that ſhort felicity he had pro-
cured them. And this was certainly believed,

not only amongſt the people generally credulous

to a high degree of folly, but the courtiers them-
ſelves: ſo prevalent at that time was the infec-

tion of trading in the occult ſciences, and fo great

was the hatred and envy to theſe two ladies, on
account of the high rank they enjoyed.

She was daughter to Henry I. the Prince of Condé, by his firſt
wife, the Princeſs of Nevers, Marchioneſs de L'Iſle, Cc. 12855

T Peter D*Eſpinac : he had been a great partiſen of the league:
however, P. Matthieu aſſures, that he had done conſiderable ſervi-
ces to Henry IV. againſt Spain, tom. 2. J. 2. p. 308. where he gives
an elogium of his virtues, M. de Thou, on the contrary, repre-
{cats him, in book 90. as an inceſtnous and ſimoniacal perſon.

V

— WY
1 3 8
7 ” — 2 * . x e. 22 85 7
8 2 / Ea OE, LES 20 — FE"
RIS SST for 4 - - = WE SE — . — —— LS
: e . bs i " Sao wage . 8 5 . — — pre .. ͤ A0 W S ...
e s 33323 >> + > 24 RF ns rake 3 — A ; r — 2 ů —— — ay ee * — OE Is 75 4
FS ” A = * 7 2 — 1 7 - * 1 22 + « 20 5 * N 5 3 n 2 — Aer 4 ma - D : * R > fa
a5 n 0 * . J T — n r * 3 S O
— * 2 2 * 4

„
* 3

B b 2 : This

” -
De 3 —
> >, n E
: — — — —
; Res Cn — - — ==; 20 — > $
, ky” SA tics ret al d A&A - 2 2 = * S ds D
*% c wt 0 . __ — bb = 3 r n 3 —
- C + 5 i — 1 - w oY 22 ng af: 2 25 2 = 294" + s 7 4 = - , -
2 ; | 8 n . ; 8 — RENE —— MES. — — — — — | k - —
2 — 2 2 5 . _— nos m 8 1 2 : me? . 22 — — — 1 . r 1 . a Go OIL a MS — 7 => 2 — 22 n » eo. = — — « A -
My. 3 - — * n 5 2 8 IEEE. 3 — * dne HT "aps, * Cars 2 * - — — 2 4 OE aw _ Ares -s 12 — gn dw OI 3 > 7 : I — — = 2
TH . — Colts oo. FE. 2 — a — 9 - I Se b

8 :
=

” — 9
. n
5 * Bo IS D 3 SER
... or 3
* n — - 8 Fx

292 MEMOIR S Book X.

This is what was related of the Conſtable s lady

and (as it is faid) by the ladies that were then 1 :
her houſe: ſhe was converſing gaily with them |

in her cloſet, when one of her women entered in
great terror, and told her that a certain perſon,
who called himſelf a gentleman, and had indeed
a good preſence, ſaying that he woas quite black,
and of a gigantic ſtature, had juſt entered her
anti-chamber, and deſired to ſpeak to her about
affairs of great conſequence, which he could not
communicate to any but her. At every circum:
ſtance 3 to this extraordinary courier,
which the woman was ordered to defcrive mi-
nutely, the lady was ſeen to turn pale, and was
1o oppreſſed with grief, that ſhe could ſcarce tell
her woman to entreat the gentleman, in het
name, to defer his viſit to another time; to which
he replied, in a tone that filled the meſſenger
with horror, that ſince the lady would not come
willingly, be would take the trouble to go and
ſeek her in her cloſet, She, who was till more
afraid of a public than a private audience, reſcl
ved at laſt to go to him, but with all the marks
of a deep deſpair.

The terrible meſſage performed, ſhe returned
to her company, bathed in tears, and half cco0
with diſmay ; ſhe had only time to Peak. a few

words to take leave of them, particularly of three

ladies who were her friends, and to aſſure them,
that ſhe ſhould never fee them more. That in

ſtant ſhe was ſeized with exquilite pains, and died
at the end of three days, inſpiring all who hL

her with horror at the frightful change of every

feature in her face. Of this ſtory the wiſe thought |

as they ovght to think.

1adam de Beaufort was the weakeſt of ber fx.

with regard to divination ; ſhe made no ſecret of
her conſulting with aſtrologers, and always bad 3

great

8
„
i

3 2 PR Oe
e WE
© * N „ eee —

CC -w5
great many of them about her, who never quit-

ted her; and what is moſt ſurpriſing, although
ſhe always, doubtleſs, paid them well, yet they
never foretold her any thing but what was diſa-
greeable: one ſaid, that ſhe would never be married
but once; another, that ſhe ſhould die young; a
third, that ſhe ſhould take care of being with
child ; and a fourth, that ſhe ſhould be betrayed

by one of her friends, Hence proceeded that me-

lancholy which oppreſſed her, and which ſhe
could never afterwards get rid of, Gracienne,
one of her women, has ſince told me, that ſhe
would retire from all company, to paſs whole
nights in grief, and in weeping, on account of
—.. ß

Being then far advanced in her pregnancy, ma-
ny perſons will be at no loſs to gueſs the cauſe of
that misfortune which attended her. She was al-
ready greatly indiſpoſed both in body and mind,
when, at the latter end of lent, ſhe was deſirous
of making one of the party with the King at
Fontainebleau: ſhe ſtaid there but a few days.

The King, who was not willing to incur the cen-

ſure of keeping this lady with him duiing the
Faſter holidays, intreated her to leave him to
ſpend them at Fontainebleau, and to return her-
ſelf to Paris Xx. Madam de Beaufort received this
order with tears: it was ſtill worſe when they
came to part; Henry, on his ſide, more paſſionate-
ly fond than ever of this lady, who had already
brought him two ſons, and a daughter, named
Henrietta, did himſelf equal violence, He
conducted her half-way to Paris F; and al-

thovgh they propoſed only an abſence of a few

0 According to P. Matthieu, tom. 2.1. 2. p. 316. ſhe came to
Perehe expedited. _ | 2 |

T At Metun ſhe lay the day before, whenee the King conduftcd
her to the boat in which ſhe embarked to come down to the arleneb

. days,

Paris, in order to have the articles of the purchaſe of Chateauneuf in

det bg, LE
4 *
2”

— — Page
r

— D e eee
= PO TO In ro 2
* 5

3.

MITY

17 g

mY
"8

©
+ "50
U

» AY

e

1
" bt
x43 21
: *
"£4 188 5
0 «

; that +
e
7 1
1 WAY l
NB
e

12

= * CO *
„
1 ö
wel
F Wot bf

81 l
2 5 9 4
* 1 2

* 1 *

* e
_—.;

R: » "
: "FH 4

q
"7260
(4 fy +
Ws:
e
+.
e
. 1358

ty 2

1 Ti
. wy; 1

40M

i>
e

K

1
1
i 4.28
v8 1
WE.

*

LO

" '®

1

, ct
F 1 "»4 >
x "7%
1 EIS
1 eine

in 25 1

F Wk 11

. 4 CITY
.

F-15808

n
a, * * 1
ee
. ES

N Me.

1

e

1
-
1 E 1
ul. » ; * A
7 42 »
#3. : if
. f 2
14 "34
F —
N 7

** 11
1 To
5 419
0
1
a I
_
1
nei

i i
e
„ eb

1 5 1
7 4, 423 BY

„

N
„

1759 2

9 ed
* * re "<2

* "41-356

*;.i N

41% #20
1 „

iin

e
l

e

1 <>:

* 130

Is *

Wy if
1 1 *
3 1
n
1

13 +.
* 57 7
71 5 (al _
1

4

* 2
—_— 2%

oM

| PF 58
Ws” *
; +41. an

1
e

1 T3
,,1% SHY

, HY,
1
1
"ie
* (77 57%
e
5 Xi
*

"of _

PAY. /
414 2
3
2 Y o \
. £ i
+8
£39
/ 380
*

Wr

14

12
f Q
oY
1
4

1 4
1.

2
7
7

of 1

1

89 0
Ev
1
v.08
I
="
4: 6
$7

*
1
22

1
4

# *

1.8
n
6
4: 83

1

*

"83

Az
oy
1
LL
- *
14
18
pw” |
FL
1 4
Lp A
4 0
e
.
%.
%
+ 2 \
CAT x
* *
PS.
” * 1
ha 4
n
{#724
FS 2
4
, }
3.
1 — 1 1
* <7
EH
7
vs. $2.0
ra 7
1
29
*
$ 4
*
** x
3
of a |
& q |
FLY, oP
_
4
.
FE
bt,
4.0
2
[0 LI
Rs

= ML AE
ED

204 MEMOIRS Bock.

days, yet they dreaded the moment of parting, 3 . he
if it had been for a much longer time. Thoſe 7 pr

who are inclined to give faith to preſages, will m

lay ſore ſtreſs upon this relation. The two lo. en

vers ſeveral times renewed their parting ende. th

ments, and in every thing they ſaid to each other © ſo

at that moment, ſome people have pretended to ed
find proofs of thoſe prelages of an inevitabte 2

fate. e
Madam de Beaufort ſ poke to the King as if for w

the laſt time *; ſhe recoramended to him her chil | th

dren, her houſe of Monceaux, and her dome | n
tics: the King liſtened to her, but, inſtead cf | te

comforting her, gave way to a ſympathiſingg

grief. Again, they took leave of each other, and A

a fecret emotion again drew them to each others )

arms. Henry would not fo eafily have torn hiv | ti

ſelf from her, if the Marechal d'Ornano, Roque: E::.©
Jaure, and Frontenac, had not taken him away by f

force. At length they prevailed upon him to re- h

turn to Fontainebleau; and the laſt words he faid AY

were, to recommend his miſtreſs to the conduct 1

of La- Varenne, with orders to provide ever) 1

thing ſhe wanted, and to conduct her Jafely to I

the Houſe of Zamet, to whom he had choſen 10 «

confide the care of a perfon ſo dear to him. 1

I was at Paris when the Ducheſs of Beaufort ar. ;

rived there,; and intending to go with my wile a

few days after to receive the communion at Ro:
ny, whither I carried the Prince and Princeſs of
Orange, to whom [ was deſirous of ſhewing the new

1

buildings Which the King's liberality had enabled

me to raiſe there, I thought I was under a ne-
ceſſity of waiting upon this lady to take my leave |

of her, She no longer remembered any thing

that had paſſed at Saint-Germain, but gave me

a molt obliging reception: not daring to explain

* 8 freaks in the oy manner * this parting, tom.

L 5.
berſelf

3 1 8
5 _ - 8
1 rr * 2
0 . . ES 0 ho
a A EY; SA yt > be Fas th IR
2 e "SIM

1599,

herſelf clearly upon that compliance with her
projects to which ſhe ſo ardently wiſhed to bring
me, lhe contented herſelf with endeavouring to

engage me in her intereſts, by mingling with
thoſe civilities which ſhe ſhewed but to few per-

ſons, words that carried a double ſenſe, and hint.
ed to me a boundleſs grandeur, if I would relax
a little of the ſeverity of my counſels to the King

with regard to her. I, who was as little moved

with the chimeras that filled her head, as with

' thoſe ſhe thought to inſpire me with, pretended

not to underſtand any part of a diſcourſe fo in-
telligible ; and anſwered her in equivocal terms,

with general proteſtations of reſpe&, attachment,
and devotion ; which fignify what one will.
At my return home, I deſired my wife to pay

the ame compliment to the Ducheſs : ſhe was re-

ceived with equal tenderneſs: Madam de Beau-
fort intreating her to love her, and to be with
her as a friend, entered into confidences, that
would have ſeemed the laſt inſtance of the moſt
intimate friendſhip to thoſe who, like Madam de

Roſy, were ignorant that the Ducheſs, who had
no great ſhare of underſtanding, was not very
delicate in the choice of her confidents : it was

her higheſt pleaſure, to entertain any perſon ſhe

firſt faw with her ſchemes and expectations; and

the more thoſe ſhe converſed with were her inferi-
_ ors, the lels reſtraint ſhe laid on herſelf; for then
ſhe no longer guarded her expreſſions, and often

aſſumed the airs of a queen,

She had as little caution with reſpe& to what
really happened, as to what ſhe was in expectation
would happen; too much ſimplicity on ſuch oc-
caſions gave riſe probably to thoſe reports which

were ſpread in the world concerning ſome irre-
gularities in her eonduct when the was very young.

Theſe cenſures, however, appeared to me to be
the mere effect of the maliee of her enemies;

for

—

:
k
7
„
„
i
13
„
WW.
ww
1
15 15
1
WT”
: *
*
*
x

— = 2
* — ä
EY... 4 P —
2 RN
—_——
EIS == = 5
z ar—_—
42

. — —
= Fer Jeet

2s; .
e
—
® "4 Ch

1 * — > ne een

96 NENOTtRS war

for it could not be imagined, that a woman would
carry her imprudence and folly ſo far as to ſay
both good and ill of herſelf indifferently ; and |

never thought I had any reaſon to reproach my.
ſelf with having, for ſix years, confined a woman
named La-Rouſe, who was one of her ſervants, |

and her huſband, in the baſtile, who, after the

death of this lady, continued to load her memo-
ry with the utmoſt infamy: for although all they |
ſaid had been true, yet the reſpect that was due |
to her family, and ſtill more to the tenderneſs |

the King had for her, and the children ſhe brought
him, ought to have ſilenced their ſlanders.

Madam de Roſny could not help being ſurpri.

ſed at the Ducheſs's diſcourſe, and was ſtill more
| fo, when this lady making an aukward aſſemblage

of the civilities which are practiſed between e—

quals, and theſe airs of a queen, told her ſhe

might come to her coucher and lever whenever ſhe
pleaſed; and many other ſpeeches of the ſame
kind. My wife, as well as every one elſe, con-
_ cluded there would be a great change in the Du-
cheſs's fortune, and returned home full of theſe

reflexions, which ſhe communicated to me. I had

not even diſcloſed to my wife what had paſſed be-

tween the King and me upon this ſubject, as 1
well as the ſcene at St Germain: I promiſed ber
to acquaint her with the true ſtate of things, pro-

vided ſhe would not tell the Princeſs of Orange
what Madam de Beaufort had ſaid to her; and

we ſet out together for Roſny.

Two days after, which was the Saturday before

Eaſter, as I was performing my promiſe to ha-
dam de Roſny, and acquainting her with te
Ducheſs's deſign to get heiſelf declared Queen,

all the practices of her relations and dependents

for that purpoſe, the ſtruggles the King had in bis |
_ own mind, and the reſolution he had at length |
taken to overcome himſelf, adding ſome reflec Þ.
„ tions

1599 OF 8 L IL I. 297

tions upon the calamities which a contrary conduct

would bring upon the kingdom, I heard the bell

of the firſt gate of the caſtle without the moat
ring; and none of my ſervants anſwering, as it
was yet ſcarcely day, the bell was rung with more
violence, and a voice ſeveral times repeated, 1
come from the King. Immediately I wakened a

footman, and while he went to open the gate, 1

flipped on a night-gown, and ran down ſtairs,
greatly alarmed at being ſent to ſo early in the
morning. 5 Le, 5

The courier ſaid that he had travelled all night

to tell me that the King deſired I would come in-
ſtantly to Fontainebleau: his countenance had ſo
deep a concern on it, that I aſked him if the King

was ill? © No,” he replied, © but he is in the
* utmoſt affliction : Madam the Ducheſs is dead.“
The news appeared to me fo improbable that I

made him repeat it ſeveral times; and when con-

vinced that it was true, I felt my mind divided
between my grief for the condition to which her
death redaced the King, and my joy for the ad-

vantage all France would gain by it, which was

increaſed by my being fully perſuaded in my own
mind, that the King, by this tranſitory ſorrow,
would purchale a releaſe from a thouſand anxieties,

and much more anguith of heart than what he
now actually ſuffered. I went up again to my
wite's chamber full of theſe reflexions, ** You will

neither go to the Duchels's coucher nor lever,”

faid I, © for ſhe is dead.” I brought the courier
up with me, that while I dreſt, and he breakfaſt-
ed, he might inform us of all the circumſtances

of this great event, which was ſtill better related
in the letter La-Varrene had written from Paris to

the King, and which his Majeſty ſent me by the
Courier, together with a ſecond from La- Varenne,
directed to my ſelf. .

Zamet

n. 3 C ——= * * — — Y — Cr
222 . l = 2 3 8 — — Reno
„
— + = -S BE — — . col -
_ _

eo be
—

> 3 5
—_ -_-
WH a
—
—

9 —

2x

— S
5 2 2
2 ry SE
8
n "WM

.

.
= —
— — — 4

-
— 8 5 * r *. N e . ne pt * 705 — hn + 2 *
r 8 * 7 2 * * r 3 % . Po Q * — ----
wig == 3 * 3 = 8 = . + —e p : "A ” 7 ago Es or LEE WS 8 Lg 4
- TIES. - TY DS ES > 2

2

8
8 TED = *

1 . 2
. 8 .
rr

_ —— 2
7 n
3
——

*

ee

-

” Sv. ; . ** * PIs
Ds;
Pa

2 HK Ott SEE. os. at — ——
—— 3
—

4
.

———

> 4 Ra ey
8 — — —
a
— 3 —

ene
* *
.

5

—

1
Ky oY *
Ts ©

n
*
2

A.

17
*
N
>
:
if
*
175
„
bl
Cit
5
&
on
7M

a 8
2

.

— — _

3 peed: end ens FE Edda:
EE. — IR — ——

—

- y 2 I
b VEE: 4
ys». —
5 <p; .

3

* 22 it 8 5
n
— .

pwn mas rn wa oo ts > _ - as
— ——ͤͤ 4 —.

M E M O I R S Bock X.
Zamet“ had received his gueſt with all the af.
duity of a courtier who is ſolicitous to pleaſe, and
_ neglected nothing which he thought might contri-
bute to make her paſs the time agreeably. On
Maundy-Thurſday Madam de Beaufort, after din.
ner, where ſhe had eaten of the greateſt delicacies,
and all prepared to her taſte, had an inclination
to hear the evening ſervice at St Antony's the leſs;
ſhe was there ſeized with fainting fits, which obli.
ged her to be carried back immediately to Zamet's,
As ſoon as ſhe arrived, ſhe went into the garden
and was immediately attacked with an apoplcQtic

295

fit, which it was expected would have inſtantly |

ſtifled her. She recovered a little, through the
aſſiſtance they gave her; and ſtrongly poſſeſſed
with a notion that ſhe was poiſoned}, commanded
them to carry her from that houſe to Madam de
Sourdis her aunt,
Germain, | Eo

Scarce had they time to put her in bed when
thick ſucceeding convulſions, ſo dreadful as ama-

zed all that were preſent, and in a word all the

ſymptoms of approaching deith, left Varenne,
who had taken up the pen to write the King word

_ ® Scbaſtian Zamet, a rich private gentleman, was an Italian end

a native of Lucca: but he got himſelf naturalized in 1587, toge.

ther with his two brothers Horace and John Antony. He, dclired
the notary who drew up his daughter's contract of marriage 0
ſtyle him lord of ſeventeen hundred thouſand crowns, Henry IV.

had pitched on his houſe for his meals and parties of pleaſure: this

prince beſides loved him becauſe he was a facetious and mcriy
man. „„ = |
| + D' Aubignẽ gives us to underſtand this, when he ſays, that af.
ter ſhe had refreſhed herſelf with Zamet, by eating a large cit,
or, according to others, a ſallad, „ ſhe immediately felt ſuch an tt

„ flammation in her throat and ſuch violent twitchings in her ſto-

% mach, that,” Cc. But neither De-Thou, Baſſompierte, Le Sep-

tennaire, nor any other hiſtorian, imputes her diſorder to poiton.
Loe- Grain aſcribes it to the crude and cold joice of the citron. Sau-
val ſays, that he knew ſome old men who remembered to have ſcen

-

the Duchels lic ia (tate in the nunnery of Saint Germain.

— * n _— 5 4
R I TOO ˙ G EI 6 a . N :
%

who lived in the cloiſter Saint. |

5
ry

1599) 0 F S U LL I. 299
of the accident that had happened, nothing elſe
to ſay but that the phyſicians all deſpaired of his
miſtreſs's life, by the nature of her diſtemper,
which required the moſt violent remedies, and

te circumſtance of her being far gone with child,
© which made all applications mortal*, Scarce had
he ſent away the letter, when Madam de Beaufort
drawing near her laſt moments, was ſeized with
new convulſions which turned her black, and diſ-

| figured her ſo horribly that La-Varenne, not

| doubting but the King, upon the receipt of his
letter, would ſet out immediately to ſee his miſ-

treſs, thought it better to ſend him word in a ſe-
cond billet that ſhe was dead, than to expoſe him
to a ſpectacle at once fo dreadful and affliting as
that of a woman whom he tenderly loved, expi-
ring in agitations, ſtruggles, and agonies, that left
hardly any thing of human in her figure.
La-Varenne, in the letter he ſent me by the
fame courier, informed me that the Ducheſs was
not dead, but by what he could judge had not an
hour to liver; in effect ſhe expired a few mo-
ments after, in a general ſubverſion of all the
functions of nature capable of inſpiring horror and
diſmay. The King, who upon the receipt of La-
Varenne's firſt letter, had not failed to mount his
horſe immediately, received the ſecond when he
was got half way to Paris, and liſtening to nothing
but the exceſs of his paſſion, was reſolved, not-

Abe phyſician La-Riviere came in great haſte upon this oc-
* caſton,” ſays D'Aubigne, © with others of the King's phyſicians, and
* entering but three ſteps into her chamber, when he ſaw the ex-
* traordinary condition ſhe was in, went away ſaying to his brother

* phyſicians, This is the hand of God.” Tom. 3. I. v. c. 3. |

F. Saturday morning, the convulſions had writhed her mouth to
the back of her neck. Her body was opened, in which a dead child

was found. See concerning this death, M. de Thou, |. 122. Mat-
thieu, Ibid. Le-Grain, Il. 7. Le Septennaire, ann. 1599. Mem. de

Baſſompierre. De Thou, Matthieu, and Baſſompierre, place her
death a day ſooner, | | |

withſtanding

300 MEMOIR S Book K.

withſtanding all that could be ſaid to him, to give
himſelf the conſolation of ſeeing his miſtreſs once

more, dead as he believed her to be. The ſame

According to Baſſompierre, who ſpeaks of it as being an eye.
witneſs, Henry did not believe that his miſtreſs was yet dead, J.
ſays that La-Varenne having come to acquaint the Marechal d'Or.
nano and him, who had accompanied the Ducheſs to Paris, that ſhe
was juſt dead, they both took horſe in order to bring the melanchg.

ly news to the King, and keep him from coming to Paris. \,

© found,” ſays he, © the King on the other fide of La Sauſſoye,
“ near Vilejuif, coming on poſt horſes with all expedition. ax
« ſoon as he ſaw the Marechal, he ſuſpected that he came to hiino
« him the news, which as ſoon as he heard, he made great lament.
&« tion for her. At length they prevailed with him to go into the
s abbey La Sauſſaye, where they laid him upon a bed: when at
& laſt a coach coming from Paris, they put him into it, in order t9

* return to Fontainebleau.” Mem. de Baſſompierre, tom. 1. p 69, |

& ſeq. Le- Grain adds, that he fainted away in his coach betwecu the
arms of the grand ecuyer or maſter of the horſe. | |

Without attempting in any reſpect to juſtity the exceſſive fond-
neſs Henry IV. had for this woman, juſtice however oblipes us to

obſerve here, that this attachment was no leſs founded on the good

qualities of ber heart and mind than the beauty of her perſon, and
that only the antipathy which is commonly born towards ſuch 28
are in the ſame condition, makes people ſay all the ill of ber that
we ſee related in theſe memoirs, and in the other hiftorians, 1 will
conclude this article with what D'Aubigne ſays, who is a whiter that

is naturally more inclined to blame than to commend, It is

« wonder,” ſays he, how this woman, whoſe great beauty bad

tt nothing of the looſe turn in it, could have lived rather like a queen
« than a miſtreſs for ſo many years, and that with ſo few enemies
„The neceflities of ſtate were the only enemies ſhe had to encoun-

© ter.” He had ſaid before, that ſhe uſed with great moderation
her power over the King: and P. Matthicu adds, to the good qui
lities which he remarks in this lady, that of having often given ve'y

55 good counſel to Henry IV ibid. She would not ſuffer any other pe.

« ſon near her,” ſays Le-Grain alſo, I. 8. * though the Sieur de Lien.
« court was a man of great merit and of a very honourable lawily
« inſomuch that this marriage was diſſolved before it was conſum-
* mated.” Some accounts of that time ſpeak of Nicholas d'amer-
val, Sieur de Liancourt, as a perſon of a truly diſtinguithed biith
and of a very plentiful fortune; but whoſe mind, ſay they, ws 3s
badly formed as his body. Mademoiſelle d*Eitrees married him on-
ly to get rid of the tyrannical treatment ſhe received from he fa-
ther, and becauſe the King promiſed her that he would linder the
conſummation of the marriage, and even diſſolve it; which he ac-
tually did. 5 N

perſons

L
.
5
5

&

FE

E N.
od 4 We .

R
WP” ah

TEE NE Oo

> q 1 ; .
3 e PIR *
* by — © $: C
7 e ; . I

1599. 0 F 8 VU EL F. 301
perſons that had carried him back the firſt time to

Fontainebleau, prevailed upon him by their argu-

ments and intreaties to go back once more, and
it was from this place that he diſpatched the cou-
rier to me. 5 Te

did not loſe a moment. I breakfaſted at Poiſſy,

and dined at Paris. I made uſe of the Archbiſhop
of Glaſgow's coach to carry me as far as Eſſonne,
from whence I took poſt, and at night got to Fong
tainebleau, I went immediately to the King,
who was walking in a gallery ſunk in an exceſs of
grief that made all company inſupportable: he
told me that, although he expected the ſight of

me would at firſt increaſe his affliction, as in ef-

fect it did, yet he was ſenſible that in the condi-

tion to which the loſs he had ſuffered had redu-

ced him, he had ſo much need of conſolation,

that he did not heſitate a moment to ſend for me

to receive the aſſiſtance I only could give him.
With a Prince equally ſenſible of what he owed

to religious and political duties, I was not at a
loſs for ſources from whence to derive arguments

to calm his ſorrow. I recalled to his remembrance

ſome of thoſe paſſages in the holy ſcriptures,

wherein God as a father and maſter requires that con-

fidence and perfect reſignation, the effect of which
is to inſpire a Chriſtian with a contempt for all ſub.

lunary things; to which I added ſuch as might

incite to the acknowledgments and adoration of

Divine Providence as well in deep misfortunes as
unexpected ſueceſs. I made no ſeruple to repreſent

to Henry, that the accident which now gave him all

this affliction, was among the number of thoſe which
he would one day look upon as moſt fortunate. I
endeavoured to place him in imagination in that
painful, and (if his miſtreſs had lived) unavoidable

ſituation, when, on one ſide ſtruggling with the
force of a tender and violent paſſion, and on the

Z...... 8 other

be 1 1
—_
* 8 4% 1
* 5 |
- 08
ITY
wk 440 —
1
9
Ry
1 .. 1
0 4,3
nn
8 ; . hd
_— i
- MES
7 IM
it ?
4
al 4
£

| 5c tb. —
_— Mn: Fi

* 4 |. WL 2 cnn +
— "2 PRE Fo. HTS q — x — I 3 n r

2 ZT TSS A n :
— — IEG i —
——— ů — — * . r „ * — r * :
EEE AG nx —_—_ 2 3 rr

"> E - TE

_
*

2 — Se — — x — —— —___— In - — 5 —
2 22 — — —— = = by = 2m * — 2 — =
” — —ͤ— - —
. — +4 — * - N - -

— -
— — — — —— woOC—
— an —

—
— —
— 8 — —

— — ——
* —— —-—

202 M E M OI R S Book K.

other with the ſilent convictions of what honour
and duty required of him, he would be under 41

abſolute neceſſity of coming to ſome reſolution,
With regard to an engagement, which he could
not break without torture, or preſerve without in-
famy. Heaven, I told him, came to his aſſiſtance

by a ſtroke painful indeed, but which could only

open the way to a marriage, upon which depend.
ed the tranquillity of France, the happineſs of his

people, the fate of Europe, and his own good, to

whom the bleſſing of a lawful union would always

appear too dearly purchaſed, by the deſertion of a

woman, who, by a thouſand good qualities, was
Worthy of his afteGtion, | |

[ eakily perceived that this laſt: argument, in-

forced in a manner advantageous to his miſtreſs,

made an impreſſion vpon Henry's heart, by the

{oothing pleaſure it gave him to hear his choice
approved of, He confeſſed to me, that it was ſome

relief to hira to find me placing his attachment for
the Ducheſs of Beaufort among the number of
thoſe that are formed by a real ſympathy of minds,
and not on mere libertiniſm; and that he had been

apprehenſive I would have no otherwiſe endea-

voured to comfort him, than by rendering him a-
ſhamed of his paſſion for her. 'T his firſt conver-

lation was very long. I do not remember cvery
thing 1 faid to the King. All I know is that, af.

ter having firſt applied thoſe gentle ſoothings that

affliction demands, the continuance of which I op-
poſed by arguments drawn from the neceſſity all
princes and perſons in any public character are un-
der, of preſerving, even in the moſt reaſonable
 forrows, that freedom of mind requiſite for affairs
of ſtate; Henry had not the weakneſs * of reſigning

* Henry IV. made all the court go into mourning for the death
of the Ducheſs of Beaufort. He himſelf was dreſſed in black for the
Grlt cight days, and afterwards in violet, Mem, de Chiverny-

. je himſelf.

— oo

SE EO a WL a Re os Io WE

1399. OF: LL 303
himſelf up to orief through obliinacy; or of ſeek-

ing a cure in inſenſibility. He liſtened more to
the dictates of his reaſon than his paſtion, and al-
ready appeared much leſs afflicted to thoſe perfons
who entered his chamber. At length every one
being careful not to renew his grief, which his
daily ; employments gradually diminiſhed, he found
bimſelf in that ſtate in which all wile men ought
to be who have had great ſubjects of affliction,
that is, neither condemning, nor flattering the

cauſe, nor affecting either to recall or banith the |
Temembrat \ce of it.

Toyeule likewiſe employed the public attention, |
e. from a ſoldier and a courtier * become a
1 and afterwards from a capuchin become

gain a ſoldier and a courtier, he reſumed his in-
clination for the frock, which it was pretended the
Pope had only during the war granted bim a dif-
penſation for quitting; and this time he wore it
till his death, The marriage of his daughter, the
ſole heireſs of the family of Joyeuſe, with the Duke
of Montpenſier, was the laſt action of his public
life. The Marchioneſs de Be iſle „ after his ex-

| ample,
* Henry de 3 Count de Bouchage, and youngeſt brother
is the Duke de Joyeuſe, was ſlain at Coutras. © One day at four
in the morning, as he was paſſing through the ſtreets of Paris near
the convent of the capuchins, after he had ſpent the night in a de”
bauch, he imagined that he heard angels ſing ng the matins in the
convent : at which being much affe ted, he immediately turned
capuchin under the name of Frere- Ange. Afterwards he quitted
the frock and carried arms againſt Henry IV. at which time the
Duke de Maienne made him governor of Languedoc, a duke, peer,
and marechal of France. At laſt he made his peace with the King;
but one day this Prince being with him on a balcony, under which
was a great number of people aſſembled together, Couſin, ſays
Henry IV. to him, this multitude ſeem to me to be very content=
ed and caſy at ſeeing together an apoſtate and a renegado. This
ſaying of the King's made ſuch an impreſſion on Joycule that he
entered again into his convent, where he died.” This anecdote is
taken from the notes on the Henriade. | |
Antonietta d' Orleans de Longocyille was the widow of Charles
| e 2 d

«
T
=”
40
40
&

1364 MK E M 0 t 5 Book NI.

ample, took the habit of a nun of the order of 8.
Barnard, commonly called Feuillantines.

r

FE time ſettled by the reference made to the
5 Pope concerning the marquiſate of Saluces
had elapſed without any deciſion by his Holineſs,
becauſe the Duke of Savoy, who knew better than
any other perſon that it could not be favourable for
him, had, to “ elude the ſentence, made uf
of all thoſe arts that were generally practiſed in
Eis little court, whole policy it was, when its
fafety or advantage was in queſtion, to employ
_ cunning, treachery, ſubmiſſion, and the appear-
ance of the ſtrongeſt attachments. The firſt thought
that preſented itſelf to the Duke of Savoy's mind
was, to revoke a reference which had only been
made to gain time, or with a hope that France

would embroil itſelf with the holy ſee. But as this

| proceeding ſeemed too diſingenuous, he had re-

_ courſe to another artifice to make the Pope volun. | ;
tarily reſign the arbitration. He appriſed his am-

baſſador at Rome, that he had certain intelligence
from France and Italy that Clement VIII. had
ſuffered himſelf to be gained by the King, on a

de Gondy Marquis of Bellifle, and eldeſt fon of the Marechal de Reta,

Mezeray informs us, that the reaſon of her retiring, was the mortiti-
cation ſhe had received by not being able to revenge the death of her

huſband ; a ſoldier whom ſhe had employed for this purpole having :

been taken and hanged : for ſhe could not obtain his pardon of the
King. The Marquis de Belliſle had been killed in 1596 at Mount-

Saint-Michel, by a gentleman of Bretagne called Kermartin, LUE- |

toile ſpeaks of her as a woman who was much admired by all thc
court on account of her beauty and underNanding, and as an eminent
example of devotion and penitence in ber convent.

* This marquiſate was a transferable fief of Dauphin, to which _

the houſe of Savoy had no right. | |
dare » private

1599. 0 8 UL L T. 395
private condition, that his moſt Chriſtian Majeſty:
ſhould engage to yield afterwards to the Pope him-
ſelf all his claims upon the marquiſate of Saluces,
The ambaſſador, who was firſt impoſed vpon by
his maſter, explained himſelf in ſuch a manner
upon this colluſion, that his Holineſs, who had
only accepted of the arbitration for the advantage
of both parties, refigned it with indignation.

The Duke of Savoy, who had not doubted but
that the Pope would act in this manner, gave the
King, however, to underſtand, that he would re
ly entirely upon him, without having recourſe to
any foreign arbitration upon the diſpute. He
thought, by piquing this prince upon his honour,
to obtain that which was the ſubject of their con-
teſt, which he took care to have repreſented to
him, as a thing of ſuch ſmall valuc, that it could
not merit the attention of ſo great a King, And
it was with theſe inſtructions that the Sieurs de Ja-
cob, de la Rochette, de Lullins, de Bretons, and
de Roncas, the Duke of Savoy's agents, came to
Paris. VVV“. ;

With views of this nature the miniſter and the
confident of the prince is commonly the perſon
whom they begin to engage in their intereſt, or
(to be plainer) whom they endeavour to corrupt;
and if he ſhould not appear very virtuous, do not
even conceal from him the deſign with which they
come, and in their diſcourſe make no longer any
uſe of that caution which is obſerved in a congreſs.
Theſe gentlemen therefore told me, that their
maſter did not pretend to hold the marquiſate of
Saluces of his Majeſty any otherwiſe than as a
mere gift of his munificence ; and at the ſame
lime inſinuated to me plainly enough, that this pre-
ſent would produce from the Duke of Savoy ad-
vantages for me proportionable to the importance
of the requeſt, and my ſolicitude to ſecure its ſuc-
5 . . ©: Cold

_—_— 7.
n
. 4
_ | +406
4 7 1 *
- Ss
Bl
= «+.
a
IM
7 1
A.
io 2%
908 145
429 *
bf 7
he 184
* ** **y
IF
a
; 3%
ie
An
NB
ft ,
bo
© FF *
? 4
1
— 4 5 774
* 74 z*
e
1 41 „.
i. mo I
1
e 3
e
_—
| 2 4% * >
„
Nin YH
; "of NR.
1+ FRE

8

«
34
.

14.

* NY

1
1 ty
*

2 of +

- + - —
2
— ” —
2 r
x 5.
2 +

306 MEMOIR S Bock xl

ceſs, I would not ſeem to underſtand theſe lat

words; and with regard to the firſt, I told the x.
gents drily, that ſince, as they well knew, no one
could beſtow upon another what was not immedi.
ately in his own poſſeſſion, it was neceſſary the

Duke of Savoy ſhould firſt begin by reſigning al!
claim to the marquiſate of Saluces; and that then
his Majeſty, who 1 aſſured them had no leſs great.

neis of mind than his Highneſs, would uſe his

power royally. And I very earneſtly intreated
them to addreſs themſelves directly to the King:
which they did, diſcouraged with the manner!
ipoke to them. Henry treated them with great
civility, but appeared fo reſolute upon every thing
that regarded that ſtate, that after ſeveral aſclel
attempts, they laid aſide all thoughts of ſucceccing
this way.

Finding all France, and the court itſelf, flled
with malecontents and mutinous perſons, they i.
magined that by puſhing them on to ſome violent
reſolution, they might give Henry ſufficient em-
ployment within his kingdom, to make him lolz
night of all that paſſed without, The Duke of 8a.
"wy 's preſence appeared to them abſolutely necei-
iary to engage more cloſely thoſe lords who litter:
ed to their ſuggeſtions, and they wrote to him,
that his intereſt required that he ſhould take a jour-
ney to Paris. This project was perfectly ſuiled
to the Duke's character *: he canfented to it, and
ordered them to demand bis Majeſty's leave for

that purpoſe; which the King would have denied,

if he could have done it with any appearance of
Treaſon. But the Duke of Savoy had deprived him
of the leaſt pretence, by proteſting, that he under

took this! journey, in order that he might kimnſelt

-.* It is ſaid, that this Pr! ince, during his reſidence at the court of

France, one day let fall the following words, „I am not cc 1e nt

© this Kiogdom to reap, but to ſow. 5

tr cat

ere

3 a Ces re 9 2 hag 4

e 7 14 091,27

7
8
„

4 Fi
"i
1

4

1599. 0 Fo LE 307
treat with his Majeſty; or rather, that he eame to
ſubmit entirely to the King's will. This declaration

he accompanied with ſo many complaints againſt

Spain, that he ſeemed to be upon the point of
coming to an open rupture with that crown ; and
that henceforward he would place all his hopes
of ſecurity on an union with France, He had

a ſhort time before refuſed an advantageous pro-

poſal made him by the King of Spain, to ſend his

ſon and bis eldeſt daughter to the court of Ma-

drid, to appear there as princes of the blood - royal
of Spain. . f

By this ep of the Duke of Savoy, the Pope
was fully determined to concern himſelf no fur-
ther with the affair of Saluces: but nothing could

make the King neglect two things, which from
the very firſt appeared to him abſolutely neceſ-

fary ; namely, to give up no part of that ſatisfac-

tion which was due to him by the Duke, and to
diſcover all his tranſactions with the malecontents
of his court. „„

Among theſe the King always gave Marechat

Biron the firſt rank. His Majeſty knew, that du-
ring the ſtay this Marechal made in Guienne, he

had ſolicited the nobility of that province to en-

gage in his intereſts ; and that at his own table he

had had ſuch converſations with them, as proved
him to be an enemy to the royal authority, All

this might kave been attributed to the pride and

inſolence of his diſpoſition ; but what gave moſt

weight to this behaviour was, that his intrigues at

the court of Savoy, although carried on with all
poſſible caution, came at the ſame time to his Ma-
jeſty's knowledge. And the journey the King
took this year to Blois, had in reality no other mo-

tive than to diſconcert the projects of Biron, and
to retain the people in their duty; but in public,
the King talked of it as a party of pleaſure, to paſs

the

— . dig yt 6 ER 5
— -
. RE. SA
* — DNS SLIM
. - -

x7
nt

kill \
* |
* oy
8 I
b 1
1
Wan! |!
f BY j
. 855
"7%
e
| "T4990
08
1 ta 1
?
* 1 }
iP fx Y N
Na
4 Hr
"THR
— +? 74
e
* 4
Ty :
u
(GY
* 2
n #
= neo
o 5 os
* Ul
mY & .
it; 5
1 „
* 1
e
4 "©
4 7
l
My 91
Fe
ni
NCR
11 1
1
6
.
1
5:8
1
.
3.9
9%
GE |
*
©
75
*
wi
* F
1
1
948
29-88
„ 9
1
i
iin
p iy if 4
271
*g 4
' 1762
RH
493.63
fy Ne
FR
AN
4 1
2
IX
:
"LMIKE
9
a
1 85
a
e
* :
$ N
1
1
1 444
4
$67
1 hb Bed
0) N
n
1 N
9 2 1
7 yr
n
2
\ 0
1
* %# .
e
1
1;
Z 6 Th
N
\
ES
TER
" 7
1
A
17
* 11
75 ?
l IT, \
Mt)
i
i 59818
JE 2 ad
1 142
77
5
55s
N [4
9 rr 4
£ et
1-8
* a
| 1 7
$4
14
4
v 4% 7
: *
*, VE
">>
v8
4
13
1 4
N
"SEX
A 1
"4x4 1
"vi; 29
' 2 SY
We Wb
4 4
4.3488 f
” Be .
[Ks F
40
1 t
I-95
46-1
30.4 }
1
e

4
4
1
;
*&
1
31
.
is *
bo bf
.
*
g's
1
*
+»
1
1
)

38 MEMOIR S Bock!

the ſummer in that agreeable climate, and to eat,

he ſaid, ſome of the excellent melons there. His

removal from Paris likewiſe, in the ſtate things
then were, was a matter of indifference. .

I attended his Majeſty, whoſe ſtay at Blois pro.
duced nothing of conſequence enough to be
mentioned; he paſſed his time there in the em-
ployment I have already mentioned, and in en-

deavouring to procure the ſo earneſtly, deſired |

_ diſſolution of his marriage with Margaret of Valois,
As long as the Ducheſs of Beaufort lived, no one

was ſolicitous to preſs Henry to a divorce, either
| becauſe they apprehended that their endeavours

would turn to the advantage of his miſtreſs, who _
was univerſally hated, or that they did not care

to expoſe themſelves to the rage of this woman;
who was always to be feared, even though her
_ deſigns ſhould not ſucceed 2: but as ſoon as the was
dead, there was a general combination of the par-

lament, all the other bodies, and the people, to

ſolicit him on this ſubject. The procurer-general
came to his Majeſty, and intreated him to give

his ſubjects this ſatisfation. The King, though

he was not determined upon his choice, promi—
ſed, however, to yield to the deſites of his peo-

ple. 5 5 Ne 8

I now reſumed my correſpondence with Queen
Margaret with more ardour than before: 1 had
taken no pains to remove the obſtacle which this
Princeſs made, on Madam de Beaufort's account,
to the conſent that was required of her; for | looked

upon it as a reſource to which, probably, every
one muft have applied; and it was this only that

could have reſtrained the court of Rome, if the

King had ſuffered himſelf at laſt to be gained by

his miſtreſs: beſides, the compliance I obſerved
in Margaret aſſured me that ſhe did not make it 2
pretence for an abſolute refuſal, I was confirmes
| 17 "0,56

%s OF +8 U LI I. 309
in this opinion by the anſwer ſhe wrote me from
Uſſon, to a letter I had juſt ſent her, in which [
mentioned the ſacrifice that was expected from
her, in very reſpectful but in very clear terms,
as ſuch negotiations require, Margaret, on her

ſide, to ſhew that ſhe perfectly underſtood what
was to be done, explained herſelf abſolutely upon
| the bill of divorce, annexing to it ſuch reaſonable

conditions as took away all difficulty for the fu-

i ture; ſhe only deſired a decent penſion might be
aſſigned her, and that her debts might be paid;

appointing a man to conclude this affair, either

with the King, or with me, who, though firmly

attached to her, could not be ſuſpected: this was

| Langlois, who had ſerved his Majeſty fo faithful-

| ly in the reduQion of the city of Paris and had

- been rewarded for it with the poſt of maſter of the

requeſts, It was not eaſy to find a man who
was more capable of buſineſs: e brought his

Majeſty an anſwer from Margaret *; for the King
thought he likewiſe was under a neceſſity of wri-

ing to her, which he did with equal goodneſs and

complaiſance, but in terms far leſs explicit than 1

had done. With the letters, Langlois brought a
ſtate of this Princeſs's demands, which were im-

mediately granted. To render the thing more
firm, Langlois undertook to make her write to

n 5 y N ways $7 4 2 ? K :
ß VERS er TR RSS ID 5

the Pope in terms that gave his Holineſs to under-
ſtand, that ſhe was far from being conſtrained to
this act; that ſhe had the ſame ſolicitude for the
concluſion of this affair as all France had. D'Oſſat,

provided with a writing of the ſame kind, found
no more obſtacles: he was ſeconded by Sillery,
who endeavoured to efface the ſcandal of his firſt
commiſſion, The holy Father uſed no more de-

Dee theſe two letters of Henry IV. to Margaret de Valois, and

of Margaret's to Henry, in the new collection des lettres du Henry

le Grand, £0
lays

zo MEMOIR 8s Boch X.

lays in granting the favour that was demanded of

bim, than what decency and ceremony required;

and did not ſuffer himſelf to be influenced by ſvg-

geſtions of envious perſons, a deteſtable fort of
men who are to be found in every place. He ap-
pointed the Biſhop of Modena, his nephew and

nuncio, to put the finiſhing hand to this affair,
which could be only done in France; aſſociating |
with him two commiitioners of that nation, the
- Archbiſhop ot * Arles, and the Cardinal de Joy

euſe: the courſe they were to take was, to declare
the parties free from all engagements, by the nul-
lity of their marriage. „

While this affair was haſtening towards a con-
cluſion, Henry returned to Fontainebleau; and
giving great part of his time to diverſions, and
the pleaſures of the table, heard Mademoilelle

 P*Entragues + often mentioned. The courtiers,
eager to flatter his inclination for the fair, {poke
ſo advantageouſly of the beauty, wit, and fpright-
lineſs of this young lady, that the King had a de-

fire to ſee her, and became immediately paſſio- :
nately enamoured of her. Who could have fore«

* Theſe three commiſfiries having met in the palace of Henry de
Gondy, biſhop of Paris, after matwiely examining the reaſons alled-

ged on both ſides, declared the marriage void, by reaſon of conſan-

guinity, different religion, ſpiritual affinity, compulſion, and for wanc
of the conſent of one of the parties: for Henry IV. and Margaret de
Valois were related in the third degree; the mother of Jane d' Ale
bert, who alſo was called Margaret, being the ſiſter of Francis I:
See the hiſtory and pieces concerning this divorce in Matthicy, tom.
II. b. ii. De-Thou, liv, cxxiti. La Chronologie Septennalre, ann,
1599. : NET 8
7 Catherine Henrietta, daughter to Francis de Balzac, Lord ct
Entragues, Marcouſſy, and de Maleſheibes, by Mary Touchet,

miltreis to Charles IX. whom he married for his ſecond wife. Ihe

writings of thoſe times repreſent her as not ſo beautiful, though

younger, than the fair Gabrielle, and till more gay, ambitions, aud

enterprizing. This ſketch, which correſponds with what the Puke
de Sully ſays here, will be very much confirmed in the ſequel of
theſe memoirs. | | |

ſen

1
Ct
h
TN
-Þ

h e de
ſeen the uneaſineſs this new paſſion was to give
him! but it was Henry's fate, that the ſame weak-
neſs which obſcured his glory, ſhould likewiſe de-
E: - ftroy: the-tranquillity of his life.
Ihe lady was no novice: although ſenſible of
tte pleaſure of being beloved by a great King, yet
ambition was her predominant paſſion; and ſhe _
flattered herſelf ſhe might make ſo good uſe of her
' charms, as to oblige her lover to become her huſ-
band. She did not therefore ſeem in haſte to
yield to his deſires: pride, chaſtity, and intereſt,
were employed in their turns; ſhe demanded no
leſs than one hundred thouſand crowns for the
price of her favours. And perceiving that ſhe
had only increaſed Henry's paſſion, by an obſta-
cle, in my opinion, much more likely to cool it,
ſince his Majeſty was obliged to tear this ſum from
me by violence, ſhe no longer deſpaired of any
thing, and had recourſe to other artifices; ſhe al-
ledged the reſtraint her relations * kept her in,
and the fear of their reſentment, The prince
endeavoured to remove all theſe ſeruples; but
could not ſatisfy the lady, who taking a favoura-
ble opportunity, at length declared, that ſhe |
would never grant him any thing, unleſs he
would give her a promiſe, under his hand, to
marry her in a year's time. It was not upon her
own account, ſhe ſaid (accompanying this ſtrange.
requeſt with an air of modeſty, with which ſhe
well knew how to enflame the King) that ſhe aſk-

This fear was not entirely without foundation. If we may
believe the Marechal de Baſſompierte, in his memoirs, her mother
4 was indeed very condeſcending in this affair; and it was even ſhe that
re the King to Maleſherbes, a houſe where ſhe lived: but her fa-
. ther: was not ſo complying, any more than the Count d' Avergne,
half brother, by the mother, to the lady. They wanted to pick a
quarrel with the Count de Lude, whom Henry IV. employed upon
this occaſion; and they carried the lady to Marcovſſis, where the
King neyertheleſs went to ke her. Tom. I. . | 4
725 | | | c

9 312 ME MOT RS Book Xl.

ed for this promiſe, to her a verbal one had been

ſufficient, or indeed, ſhe would have required

none of any kind, being ſenſible that her birth
did not allow her to pretend to that honour, but
that ſhe would have occaſion for ſuch a writing,
to ſerve as an excuſe for her fault to her relations;
and obſerving that the King ſtill heſitated, ſhe
had the addreſs to hint, that. in reality ſhe ſhould
look upon this promiſe as of very little conſe.

quence, knowing well the King was not to be

ſummoned to a court of juſtice like one of his
common ſubjects. | „ Du,
W hat a ſtriking example of the tyranny of love!

Henry was not ſo dull but that he plainly percci- | |

ved this girl endeavoured to deceive him : not to
mention likewiſe thoſe reaſons he had to believe
her far from being a veſtal, or thoſe intrigues a.

gainſt the ſtate of which her father, mother, her

brother, and even herſelf, had been convicted,
and had drawn upon this family an order to leave
Paris, which I had ſo lately ſignified to them
from his Majeſty; notwithſtanding all this, the

King was weak enough to comply with his mil-

treſs's deſires, and promiſed to grant her requeſt,

One morning, when he was preparing to go

to the chace, he called me into the gallery at
Fontainebleau, and put this ſhameful paper into
my hands. It is a piece of juſtice, which I am

ſo much the more obliged to do Henry, as the.

reader muſt perceive that I do not endeavour to
paliate his faults, to acknowledge that, in the

greateſt exceſſes to which he was hurried by his

paſſions, he always ſubmitted to a candid con-

feſſion of them, and to conſult with thoſe perſons

whom he knew were moſt likely to oppoſe his de-

ſigns. This is an inſtance of rectitude and great-

_ neſs of ſoul, rarely to be found amongſt princes.

While I was reading this paper, every wors 4
15 55 whic

1
1

15

2 5
pot
5

. 74-0

"»
8
2
Je 1
3
1
7
4
1
"oy
r

a 8
* 75 I
*.

FI

- 4 1 * 2 —
" ——
: 1 J 2 Pet
WITT . : 8 3 W
2 i NS; e e
7 = 5 „ 1338 Ce © * N — — _ -

Its BY 9 golden N NN <

4 "CE ante HERD SES a HAN Fe

„ en ü a

which was like the ſtab of a poignard. Henry
ſometimes turned aſide to conceal his confuſion,
and ſometimes endeavoured to gain over Eis con-
fident by condemning and excuſing himſelf by |
turns; but my thoughts were wholly employed

© upon the fatal writing. The clauſe of marrying.

a miſtreſs, provided ſhe bore him a ſon in the

4 ſpace of a year (for it was conceived in theſe terms)

appeared indeed ridiculous, and plainly of no

*
4
. 7
{
2
*
2
«
"_
F;.

{ 2
2
3

*
;
1

eflect; but nothing could relieve my anxiety, on
account of the ſhame and contempt the King muſt

neccſſarily incur, by a promiſe which, ſooner or

later, would infallibly make a dreadful confuſion,
I was alſo afraid of the conſequences of ſuch a ſtep
in the preſent conjuncture whilſt the divorc2 was
depending; and this thought rendered me ſilent
1% Er ĩ (((( (
Henry, ſeeing that I returned him the paper
coldly, but with a vilible agitation of mind, ſaid
to me, Come, come, ſpeak freely, and do not
« aſſume all this reſerve.” I could not immedi-
ately find words to expreſs my thoughts, nor
need I here aſſign reaſons for my perplexity,
which may be eaſily imagined by thoſe who know
what it is to be the confident of a King, on occa-
ſions when there is a neceſſity of combating his
reſolution, which is always abſolute and unaltera-
ble. The King again aſſured me, that I might
ſay and do what I pleaſed without offending him;
which was but a juſt amends, he ſaid, for having
forced from me three hundred thouſand livres.
] obliged him to repeat this aſſurance ſeveral times,
and even to ſeal it with a kind of oath; and then
no longer heſitating to diſcover my opinion, I took
the paper out of the King's hands and tore it to
pieces, without ſaying a word. How !” ſaid Hen-
ry, aſtoniſhed at the boldneſs of this action,
«& Morbieu! what do you mean to do? I think
:YobShb e « you

314 M E M OI R S Book Kl.
vou are mad.“ I am mad, I acknowledge,
Sire, replied I, and would to God J was the only
madman in France. My reſolution was taken,

and I was prepared to ſuffer every thing rather

than, by a pernicious deference and reſpect, to
| betray my duty and veracity ; therefore, notwith-

ſtanding the rage I ſaw that inſtant impreſſed on

the King's countenance, while he collected to.

gether out of my hands the torn pieces of the wri—

ting, to ſerve as a model for another, 1 took ad-
vantage of that interval to repreſent to him, in

a forcible manner, all that the ſubject may be ima- -
gined to ſuggeſt to me. The King, angry as he
was, liſtened till I had done ſpeaking, but, overcome Þ
by his paſſion, nothing was capable of altering bis
_ reſolution; the only effort he made was, not to

baniſh from his preſence a confident too ſincere. He

went out of the gallerywithout ſaying a ſingle word

to me, and returned to his cloſet, whither be or-
dered Lomenie to bring him a ſtandiſh and paper;

he came out again in half a quarter of an hour,
which he had employed in writing a new promiſe,
J was at the foot of the ſtaircaſe when he deſcend-

ed ; he paſſed by without ſeeming to ſee me, and
went to Maleſherbes to hunt, where he ſtaid two

days. |

1 was of opinion that this incident ovght to
put no ſtop to the affair of the divorce, nor hinder

another wife from being ſought for for the King,
but rather that it ſhould haſten both: his Maje ·
ſty's agents at Rome made therefore the firſt o-
verture of a marriage between Henry and the
Princeſs Mary of Medicis *, daughter to the grand

* Mary de Medicis, davghter to Francis Grand Duke of Tuſcany,

by the Archducheſs Jane of Auſtria, daughter to the Emperor Fer-
_ dipand. She had for her portion fix hundred thouſand crowns, be-
ſides rings and jewels. La Chronologie Septennaire, anno 1699, p.

121. and Matthieu, tom. II. liv, ii. p. 336. give an account of the
pegotiations of D*Offat and De-Sillery, relating to this marriage.

Duke

Duke of Florence. The King ſuffered us to pro-

ceed in this buſineſs, and, by the force of repcat-

ed importunities, even appointed the Conſtable,

the Chancellor, Villeroi, and me, to treat with
the perſon whom the grand Duke ſhould fend to
paris. We were reſolved not to let the affair

_ ſleep. Joannini, the perſon deputed by the grand

Duke, was no ſooner arrived, than the articles were

inſtantly drawn and ſigned by us all,
I was pitched upon to communicate this news
to the King, who did not expect the bufincls
| would have been concluded fo ſuddenly. As ſoon

as I replied to his queſtion from whence I came,
« We come, Sire, from marrying you,” this
Prince remained a quarter of an hour as if he bad

been ſtruck with a thunderbolt, He afterwards
walked up and down his chamber haſtily, deliver-

ing himſelf up to reflections, with which his

mind was ſo violently agitated, that for a long
time he could not utter a word. I did not doubt
but that all I had repreſented to him had now a
proper effect: At length recovering himſelf like a

man who- had taken his reſolution, © Well!“,

ſaid he, rubbing his hands together, 4% well, Jes

e pardieu! be it fo, there is no remedy : if for
« the good of my kingdom I muſt marry, I

„ muſt,” He acknowledged to me, that the fear
of ſucceeding no better in his ſecond than his firſt
marriage was the caule of his irreſolution. Strange

caprice of the human mind! A Prince who had
extricated himſelf with glory and ſucceſs from a

thouſand cruel diſſenſions, which war and policy
had occaſioned, trembled at the very thoughts of

_ domeſtic quarrels, and ſeemed more troubled than

when, that very year, upon notice ſent from a
Capuchin of Milan“, an Italian, who had come

to
2 en Iv. thanked him bimſelf for i it and cauſed ſeveral: advan-

v d 2 tegeous

n

We
159 KY
. 4
N
4h
1
e
} *
TI
181
* 2 i
411 15
3
#
| * 7 5 7 1
* 0
8 4.460
WY
ö 1 1
1 *
i
9 4
5 [A ie va.
* SLOW!
I
h ir
1 [1
1
508 2 bi
8
7
Wi |
ö k
2:14.98
0 Ky
Paſt 7
e
n
i
e
e
iin ,
4/4 3.5
. :
WAIT i
—
48 1
0 (6 4
£4% 3! 2
4 1
c 4 7
T4
{8k
N
Ni
90 4
? Fa
4 4
. * "I
'
301 i '#
146
T.
$45 3h
1 >
2
—
*
1
1
— 1

.
.
N
17
(i "1
91
1
\
bl
9 1
Hd
0
ity
ys
5
70
18s
Fo
I
.
FM
A
ly
TH

i N
1 , +4
<4: |
„
ii
„ .
v1.28
. ay
* WA
.
1
}
„
1
„
N.
10
kh
088
„
N
' |

== — — —
— — — *
— — - -

JJ

to Paris with an intention to poignard him, vas
ſeized in the midſt of the court. The marrigge.
though concluded on, was not ſojemniz: edi till

tte

following year.

Other foreign affairs in this, which remain to

be mentioned, are theſe; the war in the Low

Countries, which was vigoroufly begun hen the
Archduke went into thoſe provinces; the King,

10

upon reiterated complaints from Spain, forbadh 1
ſubjects to bear arms in the ſervice of the States,

but this was merely for form's ſake, policy not
permitting him to fuffer the Flemiſh to be oppreſl.

ed, His Majeſty not only forbore to punith theſe

who difobeyed theſe orders, but likewiſe aſſiſted
that people privately: the war in Hungary, which

1 ſhall ſay nothing of, except that the Duke of
Mercceur afced and obtained leave to ſerve in the
troops of the Emperor Rodolph; the revolution
that happened in Sweden, where the then reipn-
ing King and elected one of Poland“ was dethro-
ned by his ſubjects, who put his uncle Charles

Duke of Sudermania in his place; and loſt all hope
of ever being reſtored by the defeat he receive |
from his rival.
With reſpect to my own perſonal les, this
was the moſt conſiderable. This year the Pin-

ceſs d'Epinoi came to me when I was at Blois, to
engage my intereſt with the King againſt the prin-

ces of Ligne, who had attempted to uſurp her e-
ſtate, and that of her children. Theſe children
were five in number, four of whom, three ſons _
and her eldeſt daughter, ſhe had brought with

tageous offers to be made him by his ambaſſador at Rome. Unatth; eu,

tom. II.] v. ii. p. 302.
Sig ſmond. This misfortune befel him for attempting to re ·
eſtabliſh the Catholic religion in Sweden, See with regard to all theſz

foreign affairs, De» Thou, le nn and other hiſtorians, enn.
1599.

| her;

85 FX

3 A we une a ? ** *
„ N 5

— NG

. - 8 + 55 as Saks 7 2 x 1 8 9 2 N . 2 % 8 "T's * v IEF x f n Ne att att BB yt RE LE ACE EA
A . 2 — * WEE ER, mu e's * n - 7 4 4 3 of x s 9 8 x 2 n 22 J — : 7 2 i C : e 7
ERECT Es 3-440 S . I REN ae e 1 * © 7 N b pb :

MF 159 OF SULL 1
her; the youngeſt was educated under the care of
the Madam de Roubais, widow of the Viſcount
de Gand her uncle and mine. The Princeſs told
3 me, that the neareſt relation by the father's ſide
” which her children had in France being myſelf,
it was fit I ſhould be their guardian, I accepted
willingly of this truſt, to procure them juſtice ;_
and had the ſatisfaction at the end of ſeven years,
during which time I took the ſame care of theſe
children as my own, to reſtore to them the poſ-
ſeſſion of all their eſtates, which amounted to a

hundred and twenty thouſand livres a year. 1
ſhall have occaſion hereafter, to take notice of the

obligations they received from his Majeſty.
About the ſame time the merchants of Tours
came to intreat my aſliſtance in procuring leave
for them to eſtabliſh manufactures of ſilks, and of
gold and ſilver ftuffs, which had not yet been
made in France, together with a prohibition for
importing any from foreign countries for the fu-
ture, aſſuring me that they had ſufficient to ſupply
the whole kingdom. Before I gave them their an-
ſwer, I required time to examine if their report
was true; and being convinced it was not, len-
deavoured to diſſuade them from an enterpriſe
which could not miſcarry with impunity : I could
not prevail Upon my refutal they addreſſed _
themſelves directly to his Majeſty, I thought it
neceſſary not to oppoſe an cttabliſhment, which,
if well conducted, might be of great uſe. The
King, overcome by their importunity, granted all
they alked; but fix months were ſcarce paſſed,
when, for want of having taken proper meaſures,
they came to get their commiſſions revoked*, which
„ | | had

»The murmurings of the bankers and the public farmers of the
revenue, whoſe profits the new prohibition had conſilerably dimi-
niſhed, likewile contributed not a little to its reygcatiou. Chronolo:

D d 3 gie

8 ” =

4
* 1
. :
5
1 174 ”
: i |
1 TS 3.
* *
ry
* 17% on
* IK
5 $f -
* by . ” .
. 5
of V . ih
1
"Ln
F ..
? HT
Sh;
1 * *
THEY i
1 5 1272 65
; 1
LN id
_—_— 7
. =
„„
„
KH ws "yg (4
' 6, T4908
Ware:
1 3»
wes AF 4d
1 n
1 M8
- 4” ma
＋ !
v4 F j
by! WW As
19" 1+ IF 8
v | 45
46 14
＋ 1
. :
"4k 3.5 ;
1
4 1 17 |
* 4
14 1
n
* * 75
1 1.
+41 3.6
Y ES
1
[ * 199 —
ll
14 8
Aj 4 1
54 1 |
i $464
ix N * re
Kt 2 :
W932: « N
e
\. 9
44 538
45
# , ik .
Betts!) if > n
[+
Is » 3#8
*
1
17 '
- 6 «x
* . oF
+ 4.3 2888
418 f
"T3 L888
* WS. 4%
144
k
1
Ait e
ö N
7 * 15
ak 17 va
Wes i
"$227 488
e 4 1
3
N 1
AR
ARS. 2. /
} . 1
1
8 4
1
ene
1 p10
N 1
ry tt
4
4 (163 J
7, \
EN. 6
* . {NJ
AL OR
.
i
tre] x
f ect
„
3
6 LS
; "$f
I I 3-3
BS |
F LF
+4 ER
Rn 1.48 \
? WAY
6." x7
o * % *
"op 15
11
. «28 "
1 +.
meet?
"I
Ks 6 :
| fv + IE
1
. 14
Bi 1 1
. ad
"07-6 290
1 1
ue.
78 5 »

„ ons Ms
— T

2 4
Is > RT ne or
02 nr 3 2 * a6 83 —
—_— 22 — ——

- 855
. Shay, a ra. x
EAPO —

Py es — — 7

7 2 x
— — 2
W - row. os i ee 32

ny MEM OI R 8 Book XI.
had given general diſcontent, on account of the
inconveniency and increaſe of expence to the pur.
chaſers which had been produced by this new re.
Halten DO |

The King believing the affair of the marquiſite
of Saluces would not be finiſhed without ſtriking

a blow for it, had, for ſome time, thought of pet-

ting a man to perform the duties of 'grand maſter
of the ordnance, who was capable of acquitting

himſelf well of them, and above all of acting by

himſelf; this good old d'Eſtie:s was not able to

do: however, his Majeſty would not take away
the polt from him for his childrens ſake, of whom
Monſieur d'Eſtrees was the grandfather ; but the

expedient he hit upon was, that the elder De-Born

being de ſirous of reſigning the poſt of lieutenant- |
general of the ordnance, I might treat with him

for it, and unite the duties of that employment to
thoſe of the grand maſter of the ordnance, al-

though I was not inveſted with this laſt. He even

offered, in my favour, to angment the privileges
of the firſt, already very conſiderable, by railing
it into an office, giving it authority over all the

lieutenant-generals in the provinces, augmenting

the ſalary, and laſtly by granting the patents gra-
tis. However, I muſt acknowledge, that I was

not to be won by theſe offers, and could not re-
lolve to ſerve under another, after having been

diſappointed of the firſt place: I therefore exculcd
gie Septennaire, p. 94. an. 1599. The caſe is the ſame with regard

to theie ſtuffs as all che other parts of traffic. The freedom of trade
which ſhovld ſubſiſt between ail the nations of the world, will not
give us, in this reſpect, any advantage over our neighbours, farther
than we can find out the methods of manufacturing theſe ſtuffs out-
{c)ves of a more beautiful, finer, or cheaper fabric. At this very day
# great number of foreigners take them off our hands, and the pro:
hibition is in force only as to Indian ſtuffs and printed linens ; but it
were to be wiſhed that we wouid be more careful to forbear ihe ule
of the latter, or rather make in France ſuch ſtuffs as would ſerve in-
ficad ct theſe which are ſo commodious and ſerviceable,

myſelf,

< * 4 2 — **
9 . 1 N 6
wo r 8
e c

3 |
Shy
.

S* 4 . A, 5 8 4 * r T NS 5 — 3 2 * —
7. * 3 . Wy D 4 4 1 1 9 4
r CEE > Sw N Is 2 1 n 5
o ener S> a 6 e ee |
e Ng e EO OA 8 * * *

e
CIS

—_ ©

— ——_
—

nb penn 565

* * ————— * 0 * *
I 4 1 . "x 1 288 r . 33
9 ; IS HEIRS ö 77 i oe >. RE * 4 F
Rs ACE SEED as, 00s; 25 WES N 3

> IR
2%
Ys 2
&
KY
C27
N * 4
3
A
Fra!
25
+
1
1
3
I
*
8
3
3.
* 1
5
X *
5 8
5 *
1 5
1
1

of

WM 1599 OF 8 U L L I. 319
myſelf, upon the buſineſs I was already charged
bpeith, from not complying with the King's inten-
tions. The King was not to be impoſed upon by _
this anſwer, and after many ſolicitations which [ __
Z knew how to defend myſelf againſt, he left me in

anger, telling me that he would mention it to me

no more, but that, ſince I would liſten to nothing
but my own caprice, he would take his own way,

His kindneſs for me made him that moment

forget his threat. He cauſed a propoſal to be
made to Monſieur de Eſtrèes to reſign his employ- _
ment, which, as ſoon as I was informed of, I of-
fered, by Monſieur and Madam du Peche, three
* thouſand crowns to Madam de Nery, who govern-
ed the old man entirely, to procure his confent ;
the maſter of the ordnance being importuned by
this woman, told the King that he was willing to
accept of an equivalent for his poſt, The King

immediately acquainted me with his reſolution,
adding, that he required nothing of me for the

offence 1 had given him, but to put his artillery
into a condition to obtain the marquiſate of Sa-

luces for him, which, he was every day more con-

vinced, would not be yielded without force, that

is to ſay, without a great number of very diffi-

cult ſieges; for that is the uſual way of carrying

on a war in Savoy. I thanked his Majeſty, and

agreed with d'Eſtrees for eighty thouſand crowns; |
all theſe petty claims ariſing to a conſiderable ſum
more, I was, on this occaſion, obliged to take

up rents to the value of a hundred thouſand

crowns from Morand, Vienne, and Villemontee;
and three days afterwards I was ſolemnly inveſt-
ed with the dignity * of grand maſter of the ord-

-* The King declared it an office of the crown, and that in favour

4
1
K.
1
1
4
* 79
1 [6k
1014 11
1
1
47%
4,338
n
.
41. 57 F1
4 if 14
7
1 1
1
2 )
:

M. de Sully. Brantome, in the place where he gives us the liſt
of the grand maſters of the ordnance, ſpeaks thus, Since M. de

« Roſny |

- — P ——— E fn — 5
or 2 -v _—_— a——— . - =
= . — = = » WT... WS < DS. wet rare
. to nr the — BD. xr I — TP
* 4 * : — * — i 5
* —_— 8 =
2 — N + r cher 0 ET by

—

320 MEMOIR S Book x.

nance, and took the uſual oath for it. This was
the fourth great office with which I was then kg.
noured ; the annual produce of it was twenty
four thouſand livres. I thought myſelf obliged,
in gratitude to his Majeſty for this laſt inflance of
his bounty, to give all my cares to the artillery,
1 viſited the arſenal, where every thing ſeemed to
me in ſuch a miſerable condition, that I reſolved
to take up my reſidence there, that I might ap—
ply myſelf wholly towards its re-eſtabliſhmenr,

| although this caſtle was then very ill built, and

deſtitute of every conveniency.

The affairs of the artillery were ſtill worſe, I.

began by reforming the officers of this body,

who, not having the ſlighteſt notion of their
trade, were, in fact, only the ſervants cf the of.

ficers of the court of juſtice. I caſhiered about

five hundred of them at one ſtroke. I conferred.

3

- - : EE -- -
4
EDS 1 x
IE oo f
- 3 r 1 25 . k
he : e
* it EEE 2
.

next with the commiſſaries for ſaltpetre, and a-

greed with them for a conſiderable proviſion of
powder, which I ſhewed to the King. I treated

likewiſe with the maſters of great iron-works, for

iron to make carriages and bombs; with foreign

merchants for the metal; and with cart wrights
and carpenters, for the wood - work neceſſary for

the deſigns I had formed. His Majeſty came to

viſit his arſenal himſelf, fifteen days after I was
ſettled there; and thele viſits became afterwards
one of his chief amuſements: he took pleaſure in

ſeeing all the preparations that were making there,

4% Roſny has had this charge of grand maſter, who undoubtedly does
the place ſo much honour, the arſenal is in very good order, owing

« of the thing itſelt and his own good ſenſe would have it fo. Wit-
neſs what he performed in the laſt war with Savoy, where, in
a ſnort time, he gave proof of very quick diſpatch and diligence,

4 by being iooncr in the feld than he was expetcd,” Vies des hom ·

mes illuſtres, art. M. Roſny, tom. I. p. 227. 228.

to his great capacity and application, eſpecially as the importance

| and

„
þ e e

yi.

1599. © F 8 U L. 2 V. 321

and the extreme diligence with which I applied
/ [[[
That diligence indeed was no more than ne—
ceſſary in the preſent poſture of affairs in Savoy,
the detail of which, and thar of the war they

produced, will make up the ſubject of theſe me-

moirs for all the following year. It was at the end
of this, that the Duke of Savoy left his own do-

. minions to come into France with thoſe inten-
ions I have already mentioned, but they were
too well known to produce the effects he had

romiſed bimſelf from his artifices. The reflec-
tions which the paſt conduct of this prince, toge-

ther with that of his agents, and a knowledge of
his character, gave riſe to, were far from being
favourable to him. There was likewiſe ſome-
thing ſtill more poſitive againſt him: Leſdi-
guieres had ſent advice to his Majeſty, that the
Duke was fortifying his caſtles and towns with
great care, eſpecially thoſe of Breſſe, and furniſh-
ing them with ammunition and proviſions, It

was known, by means of the Count de Carces,
and the Sieur du Paſſage, that he had ſtrongly ſo-
licited the court of Madrid, and preſſed the Pope,
to procure a ſecond reference of the affair; re -
preſenting to him, that it was the intereſt of all
Italy not to ſuffer that his moſt Chriſtian Majeſty

ſhould poſſeſs any thing beyond the Alps. The

French reſidents at Florence ſent advice, that the

_ Duke's purpole, by coming into France, was to
circumvent the King; who, on his ſide, was per-
ſuaded, that it was M. de Savoy himſelf who
would be the dupe, not only of him, but of the
King of Spain, and other princes of Italy; for
theſe laſt were at no pains to conceal their diſlike
of the Duke of Savoy's ambitious and reſtleſs ſpi-
_rit: and the King of Spain had not forgot the
public complaints he made, that while they gave

Do ro af eps ES „„

75 31
. 5 * fi
1 1 4
4 1
4
1
BOS ab! \
" 488
wo +
f * 9 "
þ 5 1.5 1
"2 4M
wo: 2
0
_ oy
35-68 v
7. Re
WP» 1
2 {EW
e
e
ie 4 I
11480 4
ew.
/ MI}:
£7 Fs 4
+08 "©
*.
+» 68
n
1
; 5 % 70's
WR
7
e
aw
+» /\ *
1
1 we *
1 ”"
by 3
16 if N 1
Wag B23 |
4 ** + 7
e "0
1 |.
4 on
+ a2
21
" \ 1.9 iy
FL * 7
8
48%,
' IN
[ 4158 ;
Fe OR
' 54%, BURY
4 48
. 3%
1 i
i % hy
bt, N N
; bh bf .
* . *
+ N
nene
Nine
: ' il
* * **
nt fr 4 7
, 8
13:3 8 tp Ul
8
bh 7 ;
5 1
4
1 1
is HB
7: BM
17
14 + 8%
1.7 8
l
"=
374 2
348 us
”W#
BK i»
«

"IN
1
1 1
Nan
i
e
3
i v&f
19
1
4
7
ei
1 4
6
* N 1
i
We
i F
85
Y 1
i
1

322 MEMOIRS Bock X.

the Low Countries and Franche Compte, of
more value than the two Caſtiles and Portugal,
as a portion for one of their infantas, the other,
whom he had married, had nothing but a exuci—
fix, and an iniage of the Virgin Mary, Many 9.
ther indecent ſallies of the like nature, followed
by reciprocal complaints, had abſolutely ruined
their former good correſpondence. 8

Ihe event proved the juſtneſs of thoſe obi

er-

vations which the letter the King ſhewed me from

Leſdiguieres occaſioned ; but in public he ſtor. |

ed no reſentment at what he had learned of me
Duke's proceedings; he even ordered me to ſpare
no expence to give him, at Lyons, ſuch a re.

ception as is due to foreign ſovereigns. This |

Prince, I believe, had no cauſe to complain of
me upon this account: but Meſſieurs the Counts
of Saint John * did not act in the fame manner;
they denicd him certain honours which the Dukes
of Savoy claimed in the aſſembly of canons as
Counts of Villars, It was at Fontainebleau, and
at Paris, where the ſhew was moſt magnificent.
The + Duke of Savoy, on his part, appcared with
ſplendor ſuitable to his rank. 3
Three days after his arrival at Paris, the King,

who was deſirous of ſhewing him the new regu -

lations in the arſenal, ſent me notice that he

© Tt was by order of the King, according to F. Matthieu, vol. Il.

b. it. p. 323- that the canons of Lyons refuſed the Duke of Savoy
the place of honorary canon in their cathedral, which they had grant:
ed to the former Duke his father, and that for a very obvious reaſou,
the houſe of Savoy having ſince that time loſt poſſeſſion of the eailvom
of Villars. This ceremony conſiſted in preſenting ſome ſacred velt-
ments to the Duke at the entrance of the cloyſter, and giving him
rank in the church among the canons. |

+ Notwithſtanding this magnificent reception, the Duke of Savoy,

after the firſt conference he had with Henry IV. became ſenſible that

he was not likely to obtain his demand. © I have delivered my
« meſſage, ſays he, and may now go whenever I will.” Matthieu
fur le voyage de ce Prince en France, tom. Il, liv. ii.

would :

N . on” og Teng \ 1

1599 0 * C 323

would come and ſup there, with the Duke and
chief lords and ladies of his court. The Duke of
Savoy came fo long before, that I could not im-
5 pute ſuch extraordinary haſte to mere accident.
Ue defired to ſee the magazines; which was not
- what J wanted; I was aſhamed of the poverty of
the old magazines, and therefore carried him in-
to the new work -houſes. Twenty cannons late-
ly caſt, and as many more in readineſs for it,
forty completely mounted, and ſeveral other
works which he ſaw carrying on with great dili-
gence, ſurpriſed him ſo much, that he could not
help aſking me, what I meant by all theſe prepa -
rations? Sir, replied J, ſmiling, To take Mont-
melian. The Duke, without giving any indica»
tions that this reply had a little diſconcerted him,
aſked, with an air of gaiety and freedom, if I had
ever been there? and upon my anſwering him in
the negative, Truly, I thought ſo, ſaid he, or you
“ would not have talked of taking it; Montme-
lian is impregnable.” I anſwered in the ſame
tone, that I would not adviſe him to oblige the King
to make the attempt, becauſe I was very certain
Montmelian would, in that caſe, loſe the title of
JVVVVVVVTVVVVVV(V IT RS.
Theſe words gave our converſation immediate-
ly a very ſerious turn. The Duke of Savoy ta-
king occaſion to mention the affairs which brought
him into France, had already, in a polite manner,
begun to make me ſenſible, that he knew I was
Not in his intereſt, when we were interrupted by
the arrival of his Majeſty : and afterwards nothing
was thought of but pleaſure. However, the ſame
night commiſſioners were named for examining
the occaſion of the conteſt : the Conſtable, the
Chancellor, Marechal Biron, Meiſſe, Villeroi, and
myſelf, were appointed for the King; and for
the Duke of Savoy, Belly his Chancellor, the
7 c

2
%

*

i
3x4
7
8

be
.
3
Lo
5
8 "32
$1
£2

;

F

% M E M 0 R 3 Boch l
Marquis de Lullin, the Sieurs de Jacob, the Count
de Morette, the Chevalier de Bretons, and des
Allymes. 5
The Duke of Savoy had already brought over

the greater part of our commiſſioners to his in.

tereſts: he gained them completely at laſt, by
the liberal gifts which be beſtowed both on them
and the whole court * at the new year. But!
was the perſon that gave him moſt trouble; for
every time, when the queſtion was debated a-
mongſt the commiſſioners, I conſtantly held frm

to this determination, either that a reſtitution Þ
ſhould be made to his Majeſty of the marquiſate of Þ

Saluces, or that Breſſe, and all the border of the
Rhone from Geneva to Lyons, ſhould be given
him in exchange. But for the apparent inicivi-
lity of ſuch a proceding, they would have ſolici-

ted my excluſion from their meetings: therefore

they had again recourſe to an attempt to gain
me, which they relolved to do at any price what-
ſoever. | En on

On the 5th of January, Des Allymes came to
make me the uſbal compliments in the name of
his Highneſs: he intreated me, with great polite-

neſs, to attend to his maſter's reaſons; that is, in

The Duke ſent the King two large baCGns and two cryſtal vaſes,
as a new year's gift. In return of which, the King g ve the Duke
« a crotchet of diamonds, where, among others, was one with his
« Majcſly's picture: it was a very fine picce, and the Duke bad a

« great value for it: he made preſents to all who came to compli.

„ ment him.” Chronologie Septen. ann. 1600. It was faid that

he bad gained over the Ducheſs of Beaufort to his intereſt. So that
if this lady had not died, it is probable the reſtitution of S:luces might

have been diſpenſed with. The Duke of Savoy playing at primero

with Henry, on a bett of 4000 piſtoles, the King neg}. £0 his play, |
ſuppoſing that he had already won the game: but the Duke, wiv |

had it in his own hand, contented himſcif with ſhewing the cards to
the Dukes of Guile and D*Aubigne, who were preſent, and then
ſhuffled them together. It is D' Aubigrè that relates this circumſtance
of the Duke's generoſity or policy. DN:

plain

— LA 2 by 2

DOE OUR On We rage rr ge ny Yo OE ee

1600. O0 „„ 9 3 325

plain terms, to approve of them; for at the ſame _
time that he made me this requeſt, he preſented
me with his Highneſs's picture, in a box enriched
with diamonds of fifteen or twenty thouſand crowns.
value. To aſſiſt me in making a compoſition with
my conſcience, he told me, that this picture came
from a daughter of France; and while be per-
ceived me buſy in admiring the brilliants, added
' that it was given me by a Prince whole attachment
to the King was equal to his friendſhip for me.
I ſtill kept the picture in my hand, and alked Des
Allymes what were the propoſals he had to make
me? He, who thought the deciſive moment was
now come, immediately diſplayed his whole ſtock
ofeloquence; and for want of good reaſons, endea-
voured to prove the advantage that was to be gain-
ed by the pretended rupture of his maſter with
Spain, who offered to aſſiſt the King in conquer-
ing Naples, Milan, and the empire itſelf, All
this coſt him nothing; and to hear bim, one
would have thought that he had been able to dii-
poſe abſolutely of theſe dominions; for which he
added, that he did not doubt but the King would
yicld willingly to the Duke a paltry marquiſate.
I could keep filence no longer. I told Des Al-
Iymes, that if the King demanded the marquiſate
of Saluces to be reſtored to him, it was not on ac-
count of its value, ſince that was very inconſider—
able; but that he could not in honour ſuffer the
crown to be diſmembered of one of its ancient
domains, and which had been uſurped at a time
when the Duke of Savoy, having received the
higheſt obligations from Henry III. at his return
from Poland, ought in gratitude to have abſtained
from it. Ithanked the deputy for his obliging ex-
preſſions in my favour; and to pay his compli-
ments with others, aſſured him, that when the
Duke of Savoy had made an abſolute reſtitution

„n RS pork

of Saluces, I would not forget to uſe my intereſt
with his Majeſty, to engage him to procure thoſe
opulent kingdoms for the Duke which he had of.
fered to the King, and which would be much more
convenient for him than his Majeſty, Saying this,
I opened the box, and after praiſing the Work-
manſhip and the materials, I told Des Allymes,
that the great value of the preſent was the only
reaſon which hindered me from accepting it; but
that if he would allow me to return the box and
the diamonds, I would keep the picture with great
pleaſure, in remembrance of a prince ſo obliging.
Accordingly, I ſeparated the box and diamonds
from the picture; when Des Allymes telling me,

rhat it did not belong to him to make any altera

tions in his maſter's preſents, I intreated him to
take back all together, and he leſt me in deſpair
of ever being able to engage me in his maſter's
intereſt, and appeared but little ſatisfied with my
behaviour, „ 1 85
All that remained now to be done was to ex-

clue me from their meetings, Upon his Maje-
ſty's refuſing to gratify them in this requeſt, the
Duke of Savoy took it in his head to deſire, that

the Patriarch of Conſtantinople might aſſiſt at

_ theſe meetings in the name of the Pope; which
the King agreed to, not thinking of the ar-
tifice concealed under this propoſition. The

next day, the King having an inclination to

play at tennis, appointed the aſſembly to be kept

at the Conſtable's houſe, becauſe he could conve-

niently make his party when he went from thence,
after he had ſeen the conference begun : but be-
fore he left us, he exhorted all the commiſſioners
to have a ſtrict regard to juſtice; and whiſpering
me in particular, Take care of every thing,
. Maid he, © and do not ſuffer them to impoſe up-

on you,” 5

Upon

r 8 U L . 327
Upon the King? $ departure, I found, that in-

ſtead of taking their ſeats, they divided into par-
ties, two and three together, and the nuncio

1600.

ſometimes conferring with one ſer, ſometimes

with another, not ſuffering the buſineſs to be en-
tered upon regularly ; and, above all, carefully
avoiding to ſay any thing to me. At length Bel
lievre told me, that the good Patriarch could not

ſubdue his ſcruples about converſing with an Hu-..

onenet; and intreated me, in the name of the aſ-

lembly, to abſent myſelf, ſince nothing could be

done while I was preſent, 1 nllantly comprehend-

ed the cauſe of this behaviour; and bowing pro-
foundly low, withdrew; meds to go and give
the King an account of what had paſſed I met him

in the gallery, where he had ſtopped to ſpeak to Bel-

lengreville: he aſked me, with ſome ſurp rize, if all

was over already? and upon my acquainting him

with the truth of the matter, he fell into a great
rage, and ordered me to return to the commiſ-
ſioners, and tell them, that if there was any per-

ſon amongſt them to whom my preſence was diſ-

pleaſing, it was his buſineſs to withdraw, not
mine.

by repeating this new order of the King's. The

meaſures they took were, to waſte the hours in

ſeeking for expedients, till dinner-time approach-
ed; and then they deferred entering upon the
queſtion till the afternoon. But notwithſtanding

all their endeavours with his Majeſty, 1 continued
ſtill in the number of the commiſſioners, and the

nuncio was obliged to vanquiſh his reluctance,
Bretons and Roncas turned themſelves on every

| tide, to avoid yielding to a reſtitution of the mar-
quilate; they offered to do homage for it to his
to hold
1 eaſily render-
and got it una-

Majeſty, and if that was not ſufficient,
Breſſe upon the ſame conditions.
ed all theſe propoſals ineffectual,

oo B--2 nimouſly

[ diſturbed a little the joy of the aſſembly,

—
= I

— —

—— _ — 12 2
. 5 r

— RITA TRE
. Sy i r

9
Fey ks

4 2 5 p r —
r Re IO BE = LI . — r . 1 £ 2
— = . — 3 IE: "WEE — —
Fes — 8 = - — — — 2 A
WI AIR — — . = 2 Sas
00 „ DES. - — . : 2
: SEST =

ESD

= DINED —— b res rd 5
85 — re Kh 2 — Een Eo Wnt KR
3 oo 5 ” < . * 2 2 n 22 8 — pe
ED ==. wi Si ————— —

*
<a

=

JIE e —

7
*
5-52 Ru

3

|

i
6

* *
ens

— —

.
„FFF
2 — . r . 3 — — 5
6 ——— rs 1

7 5

—— — * — 3 — *
5 7 2 - — IR 7
hag * < - ” 2 8 * — — Re” > * 5 — x , DCE
Ac. FP. - BE ws — ka — n Us — — — — E36 — > I WR : © oi
2 = N * Pe 4 * 1 - b r - 2 Wet r 8 232 $944.54 * 2 9 2 PL? — s e 5 —_— x * Ke . 3 3 4 i a et S * * — V 2. -
Ss n * a . - - Re, 5 — — Fro — —— e g — EY N —— —— — — x — — — >= Era =2==£*7;.4 2. og DIE — — <a
2 g Io” > JEN — — 3 — We = at — 7 1 (£236 * 8 —— — — ERS oi — — 3 ˙— ——— * 2 — — — — 1
3 22 - 8 = of 8 n 2 25 — r —— . SOR 1" 4 — at ITT Xx — - — DOS) oo IO —— ——_— ME. - r : .
— — 2 1 Ks — — — — — 4 ; : — — - 2 So - — — 5 — — — 3 2 2 3
9 — —- : IT = + : — 3 — 3 . . — * 5
— 8 7 * : 1 4 —— * : : = 0 s 4 8 * 4 . — N - 5 * 1 IE -
” : LS 8 4 . Z - his ' — 2 »< * - 3 bo "+2 Þ \
5 — > he i E 2 Chee oa FEESNS . _— LR rs i 2 * —
— — — — — — . CEL — er Cn — PE" I 3 — — * 2 oF"; 8 . 7 bY — — . 2
x 20 * * 8 WTI 78 I, > Se PEE ee nn, 2 ww : 2 7 7 *
< — . = GY 85 9
N err 8 - *

4 >> YOu;

—.—

Pong =

2
KS
*

PS

< a5 — d 4 2
gt af 5 „

DAE Fn
— > «

2 1 2 ES 3
. E AEZh , N * #
ä 3 , OO IRIS i IT TI
1 - - Ew BE FL,
3 a I 2 —

—

— 225
©

M E M 0 I R 8 Bock XI.

nimouſly declared, to give the Duke of Savoy
this alternative, either to reſign Salnces to the
King, or, in its place, the county of Breſſe as far
as the river of Pain, the vicarſhip of Barcelonette,
the valley of Sture, that of Perou'e, and Pigne

1e

328

rol; in which cafe, all the towns and fortreſſes ta.

ken on both fides were to be reſtored *. :
The Duke of Savoy expected a quite different

conduct from the commiſſioners; but the truth ih,

they durſt not openly oppoſe a determination
which they knew to be the King's: all the re.
Toures they had left was, to join with the cour-
tiers in ſupporting the intereſts of the Duke of
Savoy; and were continually repreſenting to the
King, that he ought not to act too rigorouſly
with a prince, whoſe alliance he might purchaſe
at a very inconſiderable price, and would be
much more advantageous than a fief of no value,
and which would be very difficult to preſerve,
The alternative they offered the Duke of Savoy
afforded them a pretence for granting him fix
months to come to a reſolution : he deſired eigh-
teen; and I maintained, there was no neceſlity for
any delay, I went to his Majeſty to acquaint him
with this reſolution, which was taken in ſpite cf
me, and repreſented to him the great inconvent-
ency of giving the Duke of Savoy fo long a time
to renew his correſpondences, and to prepare for
War. Henry, prejudiced. by the diſcourſe of the
courtiers on the neceſſity of granting a delay to
the Duke of Savoy, aſked me how it was poſſible

A kind of agreement was concluded upon this plan between the
com miſſaries, which it was much ſuſpected the Duke of Savoy wou'd
not obſer ve, becauſe of the delays he deſired: whereupon, as Le-Grain

relates it, a certain perſon propoſed to Henry, that the Duke of 8-

voy ſhould be ſeized, and by that means obliged to perform bis pa't
of the articles. But this propoſal was rejected by the King. See the
particulars of the negotiation, and of the Duke's reſidence at Pail
in M. de Thou, and Le Septennaire, an. 1 599, 1600. |

| . | to

* * 1
. *
* 72
| .
5 F *
4
-_
%
©
z 8
1
1
*
*

4

by 1 —
1
* 2
* *
E
ng
«xe
>
2 7

I rr
to do otherwiſe? © By granting the Duke of

© Savoy,” ſaid I, © an honourable eſcort of fifteen.
«© thouſand foot, two thouſand horſe, and twen—
e ty cannon, to conduct him to Montmelian,
« or what other place he ſhall chuſe to go to, and
*« there oblige him to explain himſelf upon the
“alternative that has been propoſed to him.“ The
King did not approve of my advice; his word
was given to the contrary : I was truly grieved
at it; for 1 have been always firmly pertuaded,
that, but for this compliance, his Majeſty might
have avoided a war, and have received complete
ſatisfection. All could obtain was, that three

months ſhould be taken from the ſix that had been
agreed upon. „„ OE op „„
The Duke of Savoy, finding that his NMajeſty,

*

who was weary of the continual ſolicitations he
had on this ſubject, would no longer anſwer o—
therwiſe than in theſe few words, I am re/otved to
have my marguifſate, ict out a little time after for
Chambery, where, till the expiration of the time

preſcribed, which was in the month of June,

he employed himſelf in preparations for his de-

fence. He would have had no occaſion for them,

if the plot of a woman, named Nicole Mignon,
had ſucceeded. She had undertaken to poiſon
the King “, and thought to have engaged the
Count of Soiſſons, who, on all occaſtons, made

By procurivg her huſband to be admitted into the number of the
King's cooks, by the intereſt of the Count de Soiſſons, Reward of
_ the houthold. She was well known to all the princes of the blood,

and to Henry himſelf, at St Denis, where ſhe kept one of the princi-
pal inas du ing the war. The Count of Soiſſons, to whom the bad
hinted, that it would be his own fault if he was not one of the great.
eſt princes in the world, ſuſpecting that this weman hid fore bal

deſign, cauſed Lomenie to conceal hip ſelf in a cloſct, which pove

him an opportunity of diſcovering what means ſhe intended to vſc,

She was accuſed of practiſing ſorcery, but was only a protigate Wo-
man, and ſomewhat diſordered in her ſenſes. Chionologie Septen-
nale, anno 1600. 88

Ee 3 known

= —_ — r " . — 8 e 1 2 en —
22 R rn 2 * I * "ax <—— >= P - 7, 2 > 7 - = 0 —— _ bn r=
* SIE! 2 — 3 gt —— 4 - m7 rx ey 209 dS 2õ« — —2 — 8 — 5 £ = — ni XI = 2 — —
n 8 1 SUS — oy a — — 2 - — — — De! won — —— ete_k — > — — eee "= == x E rt oor on = Ir * r F< 2
582 2 — hs - = L 7 PF 22 ENT FS: 3 = + ple — — = Sn 2 3 == <1. gunna I
ons — . — — — 2 4 — 9 — 2 — * WEIS. COT
* *

.

5 * 3 — TR _ 8 3 2 — FFF — 2 oY - —_—— 8 —_
7 . — ͤ— — = WW ED — — i Wer COT re =o ER
FV ͤ DI TEIN TT Hh ut CES; ABS r L %% ͤͤ VB
r rn nn nn Wor det ——— © 5th CE ITY, = aa to Lon > CG . 8
2 * 1 20 5 . 8 2222S X T . : l
9 b ! .:.. . ĩͤ . bs Ry Ke 1-8 ITN :

— —

a T > K 3 —
ä PPpaby Pac. Et ES 3 —
;

fre A *
=
b _ ID = F*
= 23H >, IS 5
— > C MEE 0

*

1

+

* j&

1
|
7

wes

.

*

1

\ Mt

M1
iz

19

1

N.

1
49 :

4 +

A py

*N
14 £ *
5
iS...

5 1
n
8 g
if 5

1

e.
| $544 SES
5
Ro © y 7
e | 4
> 4&4 4 \»f

' $5: Fon

of #3

. N
| Fa
„r

' "7 nts

Id

3 it +
/ .
11 "

#45

Bs) AL}
l
bl 4 4 .
Lay.” Fa -

n 7
be! .
x 4

Ft
* AY + 4.4

n
e
87 .

7 10 7
ny
e "ys

2%

. A: »

1

1 q 1

, Z
11
4337 1
DOLLY & © - 42
„ +
"3; 30 :
/ * r
"ah
{ 6
1 7 * ,
194 1
„ Eo) 8
2.3 +86 4
N

N n 4
7 FS :
3, THe :

e
1 >,

l Nen
9 *%. 4
48, R$ of
e is
. 1

2 11
A * A

1 *
ad "g
1 %

75
„
«
wt
* N jt
WEE 1
1 -
; 7
4 .
a .
ef; 710

608

4 is 1
1 *

* 1
* 4
ef , a

44 ?

9 * -
bw, ? :
5 »

Pt

* k (
© 0 0b 4
79
1 . *

15 %

121 10 |

the 2

Ae * a

3
2

N —
* of

_ ee

NM E M OI R 8 Bock XI.

known his diſcontent, in her deſign; but he con-
ceived ſo great an horror at it, that he diſcover-
ed her immediately: ſhe confeſſed her crime, and
Was burnt. „„ - 25
Nothing remarkable happened during theſe
three months, except the diſpute between Mel

"ISS:

ſieurs du Perron and du Pleſſis. Towards the
latter end of the laſt year, appeared a book * of
: FO e Du-

* This book is intitled, Lit rut ions de la ſainte enchariſlic, and at.
tacks the maſs by pretended arguments draun from the fathers. A;
ſoon as it appeared in public, many Catholic divines exclaimed againſt
the falſchood of a great number of the quotations it contained, This
oviiged Du-Pleſſis to cif:r a kind of challenge, which thoſe decor
prevailed upon the Eiſhop of Evreux to accept. After ſeveral letters
and ſteps taken on both ſides to ſettle the method in which they vere

to proceed, and ian which it appears that Du-Pleſſis repented moe

than once of having gone ſo far; the King determined that there
ſhould be a public diſpute between the two antagoniſts, wherein bfty
of theſe paſſiges were to be made good every day, till all the five
hundred and fifty were gone through, which M. du Perron hid ex-
- cepted againſt. They met in the eouncil chamber at Fontaineb cau,
in the preſence of the King and commiſſaries appointed by him:
_ thoſe for the Catholics weie the Preſident de Thou, the Advocate
Pithou, and the Sicur Martin, reader and phyſician to his M:jelty ;
for the Calviniſts, Freſne-Canaye, and Caſaubon. They met on
Thurſday the 4th of May, at one o*clock in the afterncon. Of
ſixty one paſlages which Dy-Perron ſent to his antagoniſt, the latter

was only prepared on nineteen of them, which he had ſelected from
all the telt: as to theſe, ſaid he to the King, I will loſe my reputa-

tion or life, if one of them be found falſe. However, he was con-
vitted of an unfair repreſentation in all thoſe that were examined:
and they could only go throvgh nine of them: the Chancellor then
declared the opinions of all prefent, upon theſe nine articles fever,
iat in the firſt, which was from Scotus, and the ſecond from Pu-
randus, Du- Pleſſis had taken the objection for the anſwer; in it
third and fourth from St Chryſoſtom, and the fifth from Jerom,
that he had omitted ſome of the moſt material words; in tte fach,
that it was no where tobe found in St Cyril ; on the ſeventh, which
was taken from the Code, that it was indeed from Crinitus, but
that Crinitus had falſified the text: as to the eigth, which included
two propoſitions from St Bernard, that Da-Pleflis ought to have fe-

parated them, or at leaſt to have put an Cc. between: wit! regard

to the niath from Theodoret, that it was mutilated, and that the
word idols was taken for images. This was the only centercnee
that was held. Du-Pleſſis Mornay, being ſeized with an indiſett

tion

my biſhop: the letters we wrote to each other
were always in this ſtrain. I was greatly furpriſed
to read in that he wrote to me on account of the

1600. O F 3 331
Du- Pleſſis upon the euchariſt, which was looked

upon, by the Proteſtant party, to be a maſter-
piece, and which I ſent immediately to the Bi-

ſhop of Evreux, who was at his diocele ; the dif-
ference of religon had never been able to deſtroy
that friendſhip and gratitude which this prelate

had always for me, nor that affection and reve-

rence, which I had ever preſerved for his merit,
his abilities, and even for his quality of being

book I had ſent him, that the errors and falſe-

hoods it contained were ſo numerous, and fol-
lowed one another fo cloſe, that the whole book

was juſtly cenſurable, * Not that I would accuſe
© Monſieur du Pleſſis of infincerity,” added the

Biſhop of Evreux, with equal moderation in his

tion next day, went to Saumur ſome days after, without taking leave

of the King. Fieſne Canaye, one of the Commiſſioners, and Saint
Marie du Mont, another eminent Proteſlant, were ſoon after this
diſpute. in which Heniy bimſclt ſometimes ſpoke, converted to the
Catholic faith. Du- Pleſſis pretended to prove, by the auihority of
St Cyril, that it was not a cuſtom among the primitive Chriſtians
to adore the croſs, and yet he alledged the reproach which the Em-
peror Julian throws on them upon this very account. © It is not
very likely,” returned the King, © that Julian the Apoſtite would

« have reproached the Chriſtians for adoring the croſs, if they had

“ not actually done ſo; otherwiſe he would have expoſed himſelf to

G he laughed at.” It was the King likewiſe who ſaid, that at leaſt

an Cc. ought to have becn put in the paſſage from St Bernard,
A Catholic having obſerved to a Calviniſt, that Du Perron had
already gained ſeveral paſſages of Du- Pleſſis, No matter, anſwered

the Proteſtant, provided that of Szumur be till left to him. Mat-

thicu, ib. This fact, which is told in the ſame manner in ſeveral
polemical treatiſes, is generally atteſted by all our good hiltorians,

and even thoſe who treat the Proteſtants moſt favourably. M. de
Thou, liv. 123. p. 843. who was himſelf one of the commiſſaries.

Matthieu, Ibid, Chron. Sept. p. 123. Cc. Suppl. au Journal
d Henry IV. tom, II. p 51. Cc. Vol. 8778. de la bibliot. du Roi,

Le. Gran, and ſeveral others, who give us a relation of the whole
diſpute; ſo conſequently no credit is to be given to the manner in

which it is related in La Vie du Pleſſis, liv, 2. p. 269.

adverſary's

1 ES > — 2 — 2 2 —— — oe" es ED RED 2 S 2 n —
. — NN K ie er, = nude WES es r . EE Cn HR q IE:
KK ͤ ͤ ͤ———:. — 3 rag — — - NEE — nn me
- TELLS IE Er re on EXE 0 — = _- - 3

= : 4 1 1 3 —

2 re ea
> «I I
rl 2 1 22
— —
#, Dn

7
1
2
Tg
IH

332 NM E M OI R Ss Bock XL

adverſary's regard, as politeneſs in mine, © but !
* am ſorry for his misfortune, in having given
** credit to the confuſed collections of compiles,
„ who have greatly deceived him.” The re-
mainder of his letter contained only compliments

upon my late preferment to the poſt of grand

maſter of the ordnance, and aflurances of the

pleaſure it would give him “ to ſee me,” he ſaid,

+ who commanded the cannons of France, obey
„the canons of the church.“

I never had ſo good an opinion of Du-Pleſſis as
the reſt of the party had, who were all prejudi-

ced in his favour; and I would not have choſen
to have been ſecurity for the exaQtneſs of thoſe

lerge volumes, which he ſent into the world in

ſo quick a ſucceſſion; for that on the evchaci?

had been preceded by a treatiſe upon the church,

To write well, and upon theſe ſubjects eſpecial»
ly, long reficxion is neceſſary, This I told the
Biſhop of Evreux in my anſwer ; but, at the ſame
time, I obſerved to him, that I could not believe
Du-Plefſis's book was, as he ſaid, a ſerics of cr-
rors. F told Du-Perron, at the ſame time, that
this would be the ſubject of a great diſpute be-
tween them; for Du-Pleſſis would not ſuffer his
accuſations to paſs unanſwered: this was all the
ſerious part of my letter, the reſt of it was filled

with compliment, praiſes, and an invitation to

viſit my new dwelling, which do not deferve 19

be repeated *.

What 1 had foreſeen happened, However, I

| Had expected only a private not a public diſpute,
I would have interpoſed the King's authority, to

have hindered the two champions from procecd-

ing fo far, but Du-Pleſſis was the moſt difficult |
| a | | | to

* See theſe letters in the original, tom. II. part 4 p. 52. >
+ Sir, ſaid Du-Pleſſis io M. de Roſny, my book is my own 2
| | | linen

— +0 eee eee

JCCC0ß000 LET: 333
to be perſuaded, and perſiſted in his reſolution to
meaſure his weapons with thoſe of the Biſhop of
Evrenx. Every one knows how the diſpute was
terminated. Du Pleſſis's defence was weak, and
ended in his diſgrace. The King, who would
honour this challenge with his preſence, gave 2a
thouſand praiſes to the wit and learning of Mon-
ſieur 'Evreux. © What do you think of your
% Pope? ” ſaid Henry to me, during the debate
(for Du-Pleſſis was with the Proteſtants what the
Pope is amongſt the Catholics: ) “I think, Sire,”
replied I, © that he is more a Pope than your
« Majeſty imagines, for, at this moment he gives
„ the Cardinal's hat to Monfieur d'Evreux. If our
© religion has not a better foundation than his
&« legs and arms croſſed, I would quit it this
* maar.” j

It was upon this occaſion that his Majeſty, in a
letter to the Duke of Epernon, told him, that the
dioceſs of Evreux bad vanquiſhed that of Sau-
mur; that this was one of the greateſt advan -
tages, which, for a long time, had been obtained
for the church of God; and that ſuch a proceed-
ing would draw more Proteſtants to the true
church, than a courſe of violence for fifty years.
This letter, the turn of which was no leſs ſingu-
Jar than the choice Henry made of the Duke of
Epernon to addreſs it to, made as much noiſe az
the diſpute itſelf, when it became public, which
could not fail of happening when it was in ſuch.
hands. Some ſaid that the King wrote it to de-
ſtroy the ſuſpicions of his not being a ſincere Ca-
tholic, which, notwithſtanding his converſion,
prevailed during his whole life, and gave room to
the Jeſuits ro mention him difadvantageouſly in

,
3 — Cc * 4 2 ranch 2 Cond FEI EST Rene) Err — IS FEARED MH.
3 3 gy the ev. f ot green Sm aL * 1 " re Er — — 2 EEE ern ing ner wn note node — —— —_—
3 - — — — ä bh bs — — Oy — — <>, non — — A — 7 N — x: — = » 2
7 f : ” CCC => 5 7 — Dae 5 — I + : 2 Fa EN — ——v—e— 5
bo — — — —

r.
AL

.
om
j
>
*
h
195
1
4
Ya)
**
70
4.
2
© 4
12
8
1 ;þ
"of

1
l
Nen
1
1
red E:
+ %,. I
SY;
.
1
*

i
\ "3h
wha
"1

f

8 a . 8 > #2 ha __
— — — as a br 1 5 — - 7 'h k
.- m4 = * — 1 C57 $ C L : _ 2
5 < TIED LES — — r = ow" = 2 : bs \ © ES * : 5
TR, CORE 2 2 4 "TT RS 7 1 ran * . Pe 4 Ann att Sa — — — — — * — FO FR” ce = — - —_— 2 — 22
5 ay # 2 \ — as - - * Fu Dan x — 2 _ 3 232 7 .— * N . CE INTE gg een . IL : RE 4 * r 5 r +
27 * 33 2 - % = FH 4 : —_— "ow 7 r — — = — — — — ———— . > — — — _ — — —— 2 = = ——
” - — >. S OB. ETD 1 22 2 . — Io. =— . wwe, — + <6 — — 1 — — 2 = — Fa — — —
= TS _ : 8 - © — 5 2 — 2 — — — — — — 8 —— — oh
TRA - - — — 5 2 — — = - — ———_ ve” — __
: 2 3 ' 2 * = 9 2 37 I < * 2 4 8 - - — — — — - : 2 . — — -
4 os b 2 1 . Ig > — 2 - — 12 — — a — IE —
— a Se 3 - . : 2 * * hs = . — 5 3 ET” — S hn 2 - & * 8 _ >. r
* * 88 — —— 4. * n — JETRn 0 ES s ny nd 4 p < * hs * as I ; ©, rr 12 "4 — IS « * i *2 4 2 —
A * W _ — — = 2 = wi. eight Tot a 1 S x — — 24-20 ad x wad A+, 5 — bs HA f = — N —
LET. IVEY CE 2 = 5 4 Nec ea . 211 — E — — . — — = OE — — —_ — — — —
3 . 2 - * 3 — i ot - anion; . 8 >. WES rn — DF? E 7 pen \
£ _ - a - e * 1 4 — . * F 2 — as 2 K MG 472
2 — 2 <> IM 2 5 2 7 2 I ES 6 *
es AT; = 1 W 4 .

which I will defend, and I intreat you would ler mp todo fr don't
you meddie with it, for you have not reared it. Matthieu, tom. II.
| lip, Il. p- 3 40. | 5 | N | |

thier

334 M E NM OI R S Book TI

their letters to Rome: : others imagined, that this
letter had a meaning which was not at fil} Pere
cCeived, and maintained, that the King had a yiey
In it to perſvade either Spain or the Proteſtant,
that all efforts to induce the council of France to

take violent and fanguinary methods with them i

would be uſeleſs.

The fix months that had been given to the Duke
of Savoy were now expired, yet he had taken no
care to ſatisfy his engagement. His Majeſty be.
gan to think be ſhould obtain nothing but by
force ; but, beſides the perſuaſions of his courti-
ers; who all {ſeemed to have ſold their voices to
the Duke of Savoy, this Prince was then retarded
by an obſtacle far more powerful, his fondnels
for his new miſtreſs, to whom he had given the
title of Marchioneſs of Verneuil. He was no long-
er able to think of a ſeparation, and (it is with
ſome confuſion that I mention it) after I had, by
repeated importunities, prevailed upon bim to
take the rout to Lyons, he deliberated whether
he ſhould not carry her with him, to which he was
farther incited by the flatterers about him *. She
was now with child ; and, having the promiſe of
marriage in her poſſeſſion, the affair became of
great conſequence to Henry.
more interpoſed in his favour.
neuil was fo frightened by the thunder during 3
| ſtorm, that ſhe was delivered of a dead child.
The King was informed of this accident at Mou—

lins, whither he had advanced, and from whence

he ſent many a melancholy look to the place
where he had left his miſtreſs ; but, reſtored

* She came to meet him at St Andre Je la Colte. Bap erre,
who was with Henry, ſays, that the lovers quarrelled at their firlt
meeting but were ſoon reconciled : after which, this Prince carricd

his miſtreſs to Grenoble, where he continued with her ſeven or eight

days, and afterwards to Chambery, tom, J. P 96. Cc.

10

Providence once
Madam de Ver-

*

1000. VF 333

to himſelf by his own reflexions, he continued
his rout to Lyons, where his troops had orders to
z join him. Se „ 3 NE
I intended to follow, as ſoon as I had ſettled
” all affairs relating to the government, and taken
proper meaſures to ſecure the neceſſary ſupplies
for the war, which I did not delay till the mo-
ment of execution. I had written to the re-
ceivers-general, that, according to the King's or-
der, they were no longer to pay any bills drawn
vpon them, except thoſe which were for the ſup-
port of the frontier garriſons, and the payment
of the troops; becauſe all others would be im-
mediately diſcharged at the treaſury, to which I.
ordered all their money to be carried directly. 1
likewiſe forbad thoſe that paid rents,-to diſcharge _
any bills without a new order, to keep them
from paying, as they were accuſtomed, ſuch notes
25 had been revoked, or created without money.
I raiſed ſome militia which I choſe rather to in-
corporate in the old corps, than to compoſe new
regiments of, TI applied myſelf more particular-
ly to the affairs of the ordnance. I ſent orders
to the lieutenants of the ordnance of Lyonnois
and Dauphine, and to the commiſſioners of that
of Burgundy, Provence, ana Languedoc, to col-
left all their beſt pieces, and to make a great
number of carriages for cannon and balls in pro-
portion, and ſend them all with the powder, and
other ammunition, to Lyons and Grenoble : and
fearing, leſt my orders ſhould not be punQually
executed, I went myſelf to Lyons, and returned
6111 vs
|» AL gave the like orders in all the other provin-
ces, and brought carriers to Paris, whom JI obli-
ged to enter into an engagement before a notary,
to carry, in fifteen days, three millions three hun-
dred thouſand weight to Lyons, without explain-

ing

,
1
1
; I

3 — * *
5 ol q >” 20 oe _ COS: * 2 rn
XP ? r ene . 27 boos < I 2 8 3 8 =... = Les:
an TY O 8 £ 2 — 5 * r — 4 — Ia — — _ =
OE SSR Ergo RES ERS 584 > 2 2 . Tf 5 D1d0 — SRD 7...
APIs CxS Ir . 2 * Y - 8 ;

* NN

*
oe
1
tr
6
.

=
SAS
S
Sohn

3
—
—
2
. Ie ewes

l 1
"On
45 ey.
4
F(t 10
f 1
95.
N
i"
1 5
Nen
3 7 o
l ih! PR
In q
N 8
W
„* 4 *
1884 W
| in!) 7 b
e
ii
8
4 135
V 5 5
i ö 1
4; ma,
Gy) 1
} 4 4
.
v7
." 1
4 — *
1 f
wy 2
“, —
0 *.
1 8.
1 wet
J *
e *
1 4
wh 1 731
+1 197
LE! *
- $24.58 5 17
5 3 3» i&
by 14
2 Fs 14.8
4 »* 4 4
* LE
110
Nn
1
"4 2544
1420 TER
£ | 4 i
it 1
2 :
1
BL TS
#' * 1
5 "ay 1
8 ee
ann
A
> in.
4 1
1 *
1 7 16
i : 1
14 b \
4? *
1
1 N
94 wy)
Kit AW
| 4
i Ng
a -
$43 P A
. pF
halls Y
> | 4
1 7
. [x
8
1
—— 1 .
4 I it
1.12% THEY
enn
1
i
70 1 T. 6
7 FN 1 kh
1 109]
* F
101 :
9 r
. * |
[
$I ;
n
3 it its
l
"#4 OE 4 4
141
1 t
| * 3 Uh.
1 io I
l. *
uit wit
© 3. *
. 7
tt
LING
OY
[4:1 $4628
+, 45 45
17 —
MH
4 4,
Af
j s. 7
- 1
ein
. ERS
$38. Þ
ey, Z
of + Wh
e
WP”:
F 7
be, *
.
,
3m!
. ” 4
N. *
30 SIR
3" ”
's Tis up
| i ,
. )
* * *
10 F\
: £41
% *
* v1
i
„n
Kn
4 #1;
15 75
i 3
WI
"M3
FEA
543
3 1
N
1
Ry" 4
9 1
1 1
1
+ 1.
"#t.
4. 77 *
Tal 41
J 4 ot 1
1 + Ly
Oy |
: Nee
432 ky 3.2
"=
"ct uy
1
N 1 *
To 356 3
FL Eg
P PF +4 4 8
4 '
* 4
MP 5.»
x ,
* 1 5
4
j

336 MEMOIRS Bock Nl.

ing to them what kind of merchandiſe it wiz,

'J hey were greatly aſtoniſhed when they found

their loading was twenty cannons, fix thouſand

balls, and other things belonging to the ordnance

not very portable. They alledged, that ſuch

heavy pieces could not be comprehended in goods
of carriage; but having threatened to ſeize their

_ carts and horſes, and they not being willing to

loſe the expences. they had been already at, pe.
folved to do what was required of them: and!

had the ſatisfaction to ſee all this luggage ar-

rive ſafely in ſixteen days at Lyons; whereas,
by the ordinary methods, it could not be done
in leſs than two or three months, and at an in-

finite expence.

It was always doubted whether the king would

Aeriouſly renew the war, till his Majeſty was {ten

to take his rout to the Alps. The Chancellor Bel.
lievre, who had perſiſted in his endeavours to

diſſuade him from it, finding my advice prevail.

ed, came to me with an intention to wake me
approve, if poſſible, of the reaſons he had aycinſ
it, I did not regard him as one of thole perſons
with whom to enter into an explanation, would
have been uſeleſs. His ſincerity appe.ired in the

manner in which he ſpoke to me, and the relic
tions with which his mind ſeemed to me to be

agitated: the condition France was in, for which
a war of any kind whatever could not but be fatal;
the King's honour, which was engaged to main—
tain a work ſo ſolid as that of the peace of Ver-

vins : the reproach of the infraQion of that peace
to which he expoſed himſelf: the fear of bring |_
ing all the Duke of Savoy's allies upon him, to

oppoſe whom he had an amy ſufficiently provi-
ded with artillery indeed, but conſiſting only of

{ix or ſeven thouſand foot, and twelve or fiftect

hundred horſe, and (for fo Bellievre imagines)

deſtitute

*

ide, 7 8 0 L L . 3
1 deſtitute of all neceſſary proviſions. This was the
ſum of the Chancellor's objections. | 2
I do not think that, in any paſſage of theſe
© memoirs, or in the conduct of my whole life, e-
© ſpecially ſince I have been called to the govern»
ment of public affairs, there is any thing that can
lay me under the neceſſity of juſtifying mylelF
| with regard to too great a propenlity for war.
' Should it appear to any one that, on this occaſion,
I acted in contradiction to my own maxims, [ an-
|  ſwer, that, in reality, no maxim, however gene-
ral it may be, can ſuit all caſes; and ſuppoſing
| | war to be (as I really believe it is) an evil at all
times, it is alſo certain, that it is often a neceſſa-
ry, and even an indiſpenſable evil, when by that
only theſe claims can be ſupported, which it would
be a baſeneſs to renounce ; fince it mult be like.
wiſe confeſſed, that generoſity and mildne(s, two
qualities abſolutely neceſſary in fovereigns, yet
when employed againſt the common rules of pru-
dence, degenerate into weakneſs, and are looked
upon as inſtances of bad conduct. Fo
To this general reply I added the particular
reaſons for the preſent war. I thewed the Chan-
cellor, that he ſuffered himſelf to be unſeaſon-
ably alarmed : the King of Spain was the only for-
midable ally, whom it might be apprehended +
would join the Duke of Savoy; but it was to be
conſidered, that the reigning King of Spain was
a young man, without experience or abilities for
war, ſufficiently employed in reducing his own
lubjects, and wholly guided by a miniſter as
little inclined to war as himſelf, by the natural
turn of his diſpoſition, and a deſite of becp-
ing in his own hands the moncy which muſt be
conſumed by war; and laſtly, that he bore no
goodwill to the Duke of Savoy, and was convin—
ced, as well as all Europe, that the King demand-
TO. nr one ne mm

3
— — — — 5 2 r OT RD 2 5 =
—— 22 —
— — ——— _ — —— -- > > — 2 — * 0 = ————
. AAS. - 3 T r — 3 nt EE Ss > 2 * 2 *.
. ——_— L 48-6 122 n — — * p ;
% 8 — 2 * 4. n * 7 K re T7 - ok. 1 4 —
— by — a =: 2 ;
To — — — - 3

— AIRES —
.

DIES 2
—
„rr -
Saint

— — & =

2 "4
* -

_ D e
Gente ——— =5 — —
Abb
LED 22 ex er re >}
— 3 — — — —
— — 3 A

— : — n 8
= = e 2 W 4g
> 3 nt 8 5 — * 7
Rr Z A 4 8 1 he
2 2 _ — = 3 *
1 1 * - — — « KJ * — 5 l E
” 1 25 25 2 <4 1 . Ret, x 3 5 * l — 3 — mn
op I: IB + — 2 * < 5 — 25 = BY EE : —
—— 2 8 5 Ep. Sv 2 A Ze — —_— 2 7 — = — — . EO EEE III —
= = Lo ; 3; KS 5 — — — - — bg ta > a = 2 2 * — 5 * 2 = — -
, - r D — — - — — — — er ee we eres ng -— = — 5 OE ERR: ED WES. pe i. — 3
— — my k. _— > ** a —— — p — 2 = . — * 5 : - De 7 = . = = \ =
* — 7 * — * = . - 2 de K Pe PINE? 5 7 2 =. - — == — - * 8 a . - —.—
1 = - 8 N * — Px ops — x - * — = £ - * 2 x _ . * e — : — - 8 5 x
= — < 2 * — — Ry m4 PO Cie i A an * _— 8 5 — = = Kon oh LY Fs OS —— EIT
r - — LT 8 r wats — = » . n 6d - ” ng — 2 r * 8 _—_— 5 =: l
232 C'S: * 4. = 44 hs ants a a et * bes \ IJ BRI. . " r 53 n 4 ET be SS I hap” —_—_ 8 3223
3 . a MID \ - * Wm. EAT nr 5 TD Co IR 7 — wa. n _ 2 1 ee ie p — — N 1 —
* PP . IOE A o SEP ES 2 FRE F ˙ m EE DOE D .
* - : —— 5 *

2 > Xx, * ”
— — —
1 CEOS
n - I” »YY = at 1
. —

7
9 .
ne”
4
8
»'

0
|
|
|

333 MEM O:1R-S Book Xl,
ed only a reſtitution of what belonged to him:

that this war would appear a mere difference be.

tween the King and the Duke of Savoy, or r4-
ther an effect of the intoxication of the latter, oc-
caſioned by an ill-grounded preſumption, and the
intrigues carried on in his favour in the council

of France: and this preſuppoſed, the ſucceſs of

the war depended. upon its being purſued with
expedition. I maintained to the Chancellor, that,

with four thouſand men this year, the King would
gain greater advantages, than. with thirty thou- Þ
ſand the next: but 1 did not neglect to prove to

him, that his Majeſty was not ſo unprovided as

he imagined, at leaſt, that he ſhould not want for
two things, which, in the offices I held, it de-

pended upon me to furniſh him with, that is, mo-

ney and artillery, Bellievre was fo far from be:
ing convinced by my arguments, that he left me

with chagrin : the event will ſhew who had the

| beſt reaſons on his ſide.

The Duke of Savoy ſeeing that, contrary to
his expectation, a French * army was ready to

fall upon him, had recourſe to his uſual artifices, 1
to prevent, at leaſt, any act of hoſtility before the

winter was begun. He ſent deputy after deputy F|
to his Majeſty at Lyons; ſometimes he appeared

willing to perform the agreements, ſometimes he

eluded them by ſpecious reaſons, and at other
times, he propoſed advantageous projects for his
Majeſty, and continued to impoſe upon this

prince ſo completely, that Henry, believing he

ſhould be under no neceſſity to go farther than

Lyons, ſtaid there much longer than he ought

to have done, While I continued with Henry

* He was encouraged, it is ſaid, by certain idle predictions of 2.

ſtrologers, who gave out that, in che month of Auguſt, there would
be no King in France: a thing that proved very true, ſays Pere: xe,

fer at that time he was victoricus in the heart of Savoy.

in

„ OT Ur 09
in this city, 1 guarded him ag: 'nſt 1» ſubtilties

of the Duke of Savoy; but, as 1 as I left
him to return to Paris, to haſten, as I have ſaid,

the preparations for war, the King was ſo effec-

tually deceived by the Duke's pretended ſince-
rity, that he wrote to me to ſuſpend my cares;
for every thing v was ſettled in an amicable man-
1 TE

In effect, the Duke of haves bad agreed to all

| hat was demanded of him, but this was a mere

verbal agreement, and propoſed, that hoſtages
ſhould be given on each fide ; a very proper ma-
nagement to delay the performance of his word,
by the time that was neceſſarily taken up in na-
ming thoſe hoſtages, and ſending them to each
other. I wrote to the King very freely my opi-
nion of this pretended accommodation, and did
not ſcruple to diſobey his orders, by forwarding
the ammunition “, and came in perſon to Mon-
targis, from whence I ſent my baggage up the
Loire, intending to ride poſt myſelf. Here it
was that I received a letter from the King, which
contained only theſe few words,“ You have gueſſ-
& ed truly: the Duke of Savoy has deceived us;
come to me as ſoon as poſlible, and negle& no-
« thing that may be neceſſary to make bim ſen-
« ſible of his perfidy. “
I was informed more e of all that
had paſſed, by a letter from Villeroi. The King
had ſent for Roncas, from whom he had re-
ceived fo little ſatisfaction in the explanation he
demanded of him, that, reſolving to preſs him in
fuch a manner as to leave him no ſubterfuge to
have recourſe to, the © Sovoyard deputy at eng

> Matthieu, i in the account which he gives of this expedition i in-
to Savoy, beſtows, in ſeveral places, high encomiums on the Duke
of Sully, and i» a great meaſure aſeribes to him the honours of that

campaign, Tom. 2. liv, 2. p. 352, 361. 365. c.

2 betrayed

betrayed himſelf by his equivocations, which
threw the King into ſo great a rage, that he would
hear no more, and inſtantly took his rout to.

wards Chambery; and it was from this place that

the :bovementioned billet was dated. His Maje.
fly imagined, that this city would ſurrender at
his approach, and that he ſhould not be at the

trouble of e it; but in this he was mil-
taken. 5

This interval was id by the King i in fo.
liciting his marriage with the Princeſs Mary of
Medicis z and this negotiation, which was hig|ly
pleaſing to the Pope, was of ſervice to the King,
in hindering his Holineſs from taking any part in
the affairs of Savoy. D'Alincourt, whom his Ma-
jeſty had ſent to Rome on this occaſion, obtained
all that he demanded : the marriage was conclu-

ded on, and nothing now remained but to ſend
ſome perſon to Florence, to ſolemnize it by proxy,
Bellegarde earneſtly ſolicited for this honour ;
but all he could obtain was to be the bearer of
the procuration, 9855 was given to the Duke of
Florence.

While this ceremony was per forming! in Florence
Henry thought it neceſſary to appear wholly taken
up with balls, plays, and entertainments: how
ever, that did not hinder him from laying out 10
Tefs aſſiduovſly the whole plan of the campaign ;
he ordered Leſdiguicres to take an exact view of
the caltle of Montmelian; and upon his report,
that with twenty pieces of cannon, and twenty
thouſand diſcharges, it might be taken, he rclol-
ved to attack it, He likewiſe cauſed that of Bourg-

en- Breſſe to be reconnoitred by Vienne and Ca-

ſtener, who were with me; and it being their o-

pinion that the place might be carried, it was fe.

* Cce the whole account of it in La Chronologic Sc ptennaire, an.

ſolved

1 Coo.

„„ frews eo Kkpu aq a — ce 2

ſolved to endeavour the taking of theſe two cities

by petard, and in the ſame night; and in pro-
per time beſiege the two citadels in form. Ma-

rechal Biron, to whom his Majeſty committed this

enterpriſe, gave the expedition of Montmelian to

Crequy, and reſerved that of Bourg to himſelf.
The King had, without knowing it, pitebed

upon him, amongſt all his general officers, who

was the leaſt likely to give ſucceſs to the enter-
priſe. Biron was at that time deeply engaged

with the Duke of Savoy. It is thought that his
treaty might have been ar leaſt rough drawn or.
ſketched out by this time. He ſent word to Bou-

vens, the governor of Bourg. to be upon his guard,

and informed him of the night and the hour when

it was deſigned to ſurpriſe him. All this was after»

wards proved. But what is ſingular enough, this

treachery did not hinder the taking of Bourg, and

on the ſame night that it had been reſolved to attack it.

Bouvens communicated the advice he had recei-
ved to the garriſon and inhabitants of Bourg, ex-

borted them to defend themſelves bravely, kin-
cled great fires, doubled, nay, trebled the corps-

de guard, and, in a word, took all poſſible pre-

cautions on the night that he expected to be at-
tacked, even to the ſtanding centinel himſelf. E-

very one impatiently expected the hour mentioned
in the billet, which in reality was to be that of

the attack. However, it happened that Marechal
Biron, who was himſelf at the head of his troops,

either to give the governor more time, or to ren-
Cer the enterpriſe impoſſible to be executed, or

perhaps by mere chance, took a road fo far about,

that inſtead of midnight, it was break of day when
he appeared before Bourg, He would then have
perſnaded his officers to defer till another time an
attempi which at fuch an hour was very impro-

per. But his opinion was ſo ſtrongly oppoſed by
FI; Samr-Anvpe

1600. O F 7:3 5 UVEL-L Y. 341

{
|
1
t
[1
4.3
WL
11
iv
4
1
1
14
— 1
.
ny
+.
—
1
1
1
is
4.3
N
vi
ve
4
)
*
#4
1
bY
4
11
3*
23
4A
1
IS?
bs.»
+»,
ei
74
eng
16
ay
*
N
rh
4K
ns
Hs
(FED.
vv
|
F809
Nn
1 x
1
I
*
1
1
ie
5
Ne
14
| 47 -
| *
1
9
1
*
{
B: *
1 1
7
"A 4
*
*
gs 4

= * oa 4 th I . 2 2 aa +
„ Ont 1 4 ol Eo wide
2 2 r a IE
= — 7 a, a >e.D + <>
> ay 2 ——5 iz, ; £5 — 2 = — as
* .- 5 C = 7
— — = ow. ad — * * 5
= — —
ls —_ — ve, wn IS OF Va, 22
2 * 3

342 MEMOIRS Boy

Saint-Angel, Chambaret, Louſtrange, Vienne,

and particularly by Caſtenet, who had undertakey
to fix the petard in open day, even thouph the

baſtions ſhould be filled, and likewiſe by Bot,

to whom his Majeſty had promiſed the government
of it; that Biron, fearing leaſt he ſhould incur the

imputation of cowardice, and believing that the

deſign would miſcarry, was obliged to conſent to

The affair turned out quite otherwiſe : the gu.

riſon and the citizens having been upon the watch

till two, three, and even four o'clock, were of o-

Pinion that the enterpriſe was blaſted, or that it

was merely imaginary; and when day appeared,
went to breakfaſt, and to refreſh themſelves with

ſleep; leaving the care of guarding the walls to

ſome centinels, who being oppreſſed with ſleep,
acquitted themſelves very ill of their charge Ca-
ſtenet, with three faithful men whom 1 had given
him, advanced as far as the counterſcarp, with
each a petard in his hand, followed by twelve
men well armed, and of tried bravery : the centi-
nel cried, © Who goes there?“ Caſtenet, whom
I had inſtructed, anſwered, That they were

friends of the city, who were come to adveriſe

the governor, that ſome troops had appeared at
the diſtance of two thouſand paces, and were gone
back: he added, That he had much more to ſay

to Monſieur Bouvens from the Duke of Savoy;
and deſired the ſoldier to go and inform him of
it, that the gate might be opened. The centinel
quitting his poſt to go to the governor's houſe,

Caſtenet, without loſs of time, advanced to the
gate and fixed his petard, which carried off the

draw- bridge, and made a breach, through which,
the ditches not being very deep, twelve men, b)

the help of ſhort ladders, entered immediately,
and after them the whole army. All this was 5
TR 9 ecuted

We 42

n 1
Nie, phos "ME ade .
ee e eee 858

7

by *

1660. OF 8 UL LY. as

| ned with ſuch rapidity, that the city was filled
in a moment with our men, and Bouvens had on-
ly time enough to retire ee with his
garriſon, into the citadel.

The town of Montmelian * was taken in i the
ſame manner; and Chambery, by his Majeſty 8
orders, was inveſted: the citizens, full of terror,

thought not of defending the town, but fortified
themſelves in the caſtle, where at firſt they made

a ſhew of reliſtance; however, they capitulated

the next day, being intimidated by a battery of

eight pieces of cannon, the fire of which they

durſt not ſtand, By the order his Majeſty cauſed

to be obſerved, there was not the leaſt violence
committed, The French ladies, who followed
their huſbands in this expedition, ſettled at Cham-
bery; and the next day after the reduction of it,

my wife gave a ball to the principal ladies+ of the
town, where all appeared as gay as if it had not |

changed its maſter. |
After this, the King ſent me to Lyons, to give

orders for the furniſhing and conveyance of the
ordnance; and commanded me to vilit, in this

journey, the Citaclels of Saint: Catherine, Seiſſel,

Pierre-Chatel, l'Ecluſe, and other fortreſſes of
Breſſe, particularly the caſtle of Bourg: he order-

ed me likewiſe to provide a quantity of gabions,
three feet in heigbth and nine in width; upon
which I anſwered him, that ſuch gabions were
only proper to make an incloſure for ſheep newly
bought up in the country, The King, on bis
fide, in the mean time, went to polſeſs himſelf
of Conflans, Miolens, Moaticts, Saint: Jacome,
Salint-John de- Mol ienne, and Saint Mich el: not

* Conſblt meuile on all 1 my exped; tions, De Thou, 5

Matthieu, and La Chronologie Septen an. 1600. in which Sully is

menticned with great honour See likewiſe tom, 1. des Mem. de

Baſlow pie rre.

one

f
"
My
Fe”
4
vl .
WW.
TIN
Ki
152108
*
"7
A.
' «
115
.
th
1 1
We
.
8
+,
Wa 6 -
Fo
WH
*
*
18
1
.
1
is {
v5 :
1
"FH
4
—— 2
l
1 M4
its
43 Xt
e
"4-08
3:28
#448
© >
*
4+ *
13
it
£4
.
1
0 $8
Th
5
7
4
3
*z
31.2%
i
« 1
4.6 1
1
$43
by. *
\
-* 2%
.
YL 1
.
43.17
If 10
+
1
3 .
of 1
N q
12
nl
© A777
Ra 1
— 241
LY
. *
£119
55
* . —
4
wh
"22886
. .
LA A
Fi
.
44
,
T's,
93
0
[ 1
a K
1
S + ,
;
*
1
74 PP
"at \
10 1
STE
3.
*
o {
Was
4 1
: an!
N
4 ny
=
1

—
8
5. 4 — —

r
5 To EOS
x *

A RIS,
"TO 3. * — IX
Py ; *
[4 » *

—

|
|
|
|
|

344 MEMOIRS Book®

one of theſe. places held out againſt the cannon,
The taking of Miolens reſtored liberty to a man
who had been detained in the priſons there fifteen
years; Feugeres brought him to me on account
of the ſingularity of a prediction that had been

made him, upon the duration of his captivity,

and the perſon by whom he ſhould be delivered;
which was found to be exactly fulfilled,

left Lyons, to execute the commiſhon his Ma-
jeſty had given me“. I reached Villars by dinner.
time, and Bourg in the evening, where I was re-

ceived and treated with great politeneſs by Mare—

chal Biron, When he found that I came to take

a view of the citadel, he uſed his utmoſt endea-

vours to diſſuade me from it; repreſenting to me,

that I expoſed myſelf to evident danger. He was
certainly right: the enterpriſe was full of hazard;
but it was becauſe this Marechal, having failed in

his attempt to hinder me from executing my de-
ſign, bad given the enemies (for I cannot think o-

therwiſe) ſuch exact informations, that where ever

I preſented mylelf I found a battery againſt me,

Notwithſtanding this, I continued there night and

day, till J had finiſhed all my obſervations,

Biron, who probably had expected that I ſhould
pay dear for my curioſity, finding that I had e-

ſcaped, laid other ſnares for me: on the day that
I was to leave Bourg and return to Lyons, Ire:
ceived advice, that a party of the ENEMY» con-

ſiſting of two hundred men, had arrived at a ca-
ſtle near the place where I was to lodge that night.
I took notice of it to Biron, who then had none

of that obliging ſolicitude for my ſafety which be

had diſcovered before, and treated the informa
tion as a jeſt; which raiſed my ſuſpicions, IAH?
ed him for an eſcort of ſoldiers; which he ex-
cuſed himſelf from granting, telling me, that he

In the Upper Breſſe. 5
Would

Ee.
5
bp:

2

Ts

720
Ne

a
"7
Wh,

© 1 4
85

93
5 5

would commit this care to his own guards : but
he privately ordered them to return, and leave
me at Villars, which they did notwithſtanding my
intreaties to the contrary, as ſoon as J alighted

at Villars, and my mules were unladed. The
deſign of this proceeding appeared now but too
plain. I ordered my mules to be loaded again,

and travelled four leagues farther, nor ſtopped

till I came to Vimy, where I thought myſelf in
ſafety. My ſuſpicions that Biron had undertaken

to deliver me up to the Duke of Savoy were chan-
ged to a certainty, when I learned that three

hours after I bad left Villars, the two. hundred

men came and ſtormed the houſe I had been at,

and ſeemed very much concerned that they had

miſſed their blow.

A courier from his Majeſty waited for me at
Lyons; his buſineſs was, to get a train of artil-

lery to force Conflans, the only one of thoſe little

towns which the King had attacked that made
any reſiſtance, and which ſurrendered immedi-

ately at the approach of the cannon. The King,

whom I went to viſit at Saint-Pierre d'Albipny,
told me, that he was afraid he ſhould not accom-
pliſh fo eaſily his deſigns upon Charbonnieres and

the caſtle of Montmelian; and ſeemed to make
ſome difficulty about undertaking thoſe ſieges at

the approach of winter. I aſſured his Majeſty,

that inſtead of five months (for ſo long he ima—

gined the ſiege of Montmelian would laſt) it might

be ended in fo many weeks, provided that during

that time the works were carried on with vigour,
The King gave no credit to what I ſaid on this
head, and after I had left him, ſaid to my brother
and La-Varenne, that my enemies would take ad-
vantage of my preſumptuous manner of talking.
However, the attention with which I had exami-
ned the weak parts of this caſtle, which had appa-
„ SST TT rently.

tao eg ES 3

5
— 2 _ _ . — — 1
8 4 1 Eg ny —— . * xl: ES Fx _ — PIERS rs. — * AR
> a ab" — 2 n DRE i cg mg ” C — :
2 - SD 3 ; 7 — 9 1 *
- =. 2 I 3 2 j þ . — 8 5 „ * * . "3 =
i; abs En Ae RAGE EL La * 8 — —— n — —_—_—

— — — — E Ee rune re ̃7—r : = on Ele et
XR ER — = - — == = =o — —
— 0000000 F.. — ˙
r 5 . : 8 — - FA dn a : — FA 23 3
4 8 a 2 8 * 2 —D Sn. «+, Sow Taleo whe pe ee — A Tire Lee -

BEE 1 - Y — — > — — . —
i ND» ay . — —— 5 * 8 = _

OATS
obey gr to
” —— —
Ho

_—_— *

n

i ee

2
| "Fs 140
N
n
5 RJ; 7
. 1 * i
1 ren * 1
1 = d
ae
i.
1 1 #1 ts
$4 it,
$48
1
5M L
„
1
N 19
1 74
t
1 *
1

346 MEMOIRS
rently eſcaped the obſervation of others, convinced
me that I had not advanced any thing lightly,
The next day, the King taking a journey to
Grenoble, left the command of the army in his

Book TI.

abſence to me
employed myſelf in obſerving Montmelian, un.
der the cannon of which we were, but in form.
ing the plan of the out-works, and of the diſpo-
ſition of thoſe batteries with which I expected to
carry the fort, I went afterwards to the King at
Grenoble, who had paſſed his time in delibera-
ting with his council upon this enterprize, which
he had forbad me abſolutely to begin in his ab.
ſence. I inſiſted again upon the reafonablenei;
of undertaking it; and again found the ſame op-
| Poſition. I know not whether it was through
enmity to me, or attachment to the Duke of Sa-
voy, that the Count of Soiſſons, the Duke d'E-
pernon, La-Guiche, and many others appeared ſo
_ unreaſonable : amongſt all the counſellors, only
Meſſieurs de Leſdiguieres and de Crequy were of

my opinion, 1 laid the plan 1 had juſt finiſhed

upon the table, and went out, ſaying, that while
they deliberated whether Montmelian ſhould be at.
tacked, I would go and put myſelf in readineis
to take it; and in the mean time would fall upon

Charbonnieres, that the example of this fort, for

the taking of which I demanded only eight days,

might teach them what to expect from Montme- |

lian. .

Accordingly I laid ſiege to Charbonnieres,
Where I ſuffered incredible fatigues; the firſt diff

culty was to bring the cannon to bear on the
place; the only road that led to it was extremcly
narrow, bordered on one fide by the river Arc,
of which the bank was all along perpendicularly
ſteep, and on the _ by impracticable rocks:

they could with difficulty travel a league a 0ay,

becauſe

During this time, I no longer

F becauſe they were every moment obliged to un-

harneſs the cannon, one of the wheels almoſt al-
Ways running over the ſide of the precipice. We
were certain at leaſt of favourable weather; for

in this climate it is generally fair during the

autumn; however, there now fell ſuch violent
rains that the road was all under water, and the

eight days, which I had thought ſufficient for the

taking the place, had been almoſt wholly conſu-

med in bringing up the carriages. This was my

excuſe in the council, againſt the malicious re-

mark which the Count of Soiſſons and others did
not fail to make upon the promiſe I had given.

The King, who that moment looked at me at-

tentively, perceiving that my face was very red,

and all overſpread with pimples, ran to me, and

unbuttoning my clothes, examined my neck and
breaſt, crying, © Ah! my friend, you are very
„ill.“ He ſent immediately for Du-Laurens

who, after examining thoſe pimples, ſaid, that
by bleeding and taking a little care of myſelf

they would be removed. I had, indeed, over-
heated myſelf with labour; and, when in a vio-

lent ſweat, had been wet quite through my
clothes with the rain, without perceiving it. 1
was bled as ſoon as I got to my quarters, which

were at Semoy: the King had his at Rochette,

from whence he ſent Thermes the next day to
know how I was; and was greatly ſurpriſed to
hear that his meſſenger had found me on hocſe-

back, viſiting my batteries. Oh
Before I erected them, I was willing to take a
more exact view of the place, beginning with Ai-

guebelle, for that was the name of the little city
at the foot of the fort. It ſeemed to me that 1
was known every where, and that there was a
general conſpiracy againſt me; for, as often as I
appeared in view, a volley was diſcharged upon

mes

1600. O F 8 VE LEY. 347 |

A : . . — + PI e — EI AI.

: D hed To I — Free: oe

ra I r nad ER I * 3
e 2 ee 8 CN wen

” ä : BIRD — 2 2 mo — > *
—— — 222 — role — .

—— ——— —— — s — — 55 —
— 2 7 — — AF l

TIS —
tar
————

6 *
.
—

— —

— 4
— poogyney:
— LEE I

3

—
2 4 4
— r ugh es
— 3
& ASME. >
3 ——̃
ä erage

25." <4
*
—

— —

— —

348 MEMOIR 8 Book X..
me. The rock upon which Charbonnieres is f.
tuated, appearing inacceſſible on all ſides, and
not to be taken by the cannon, I was greatly

afflicted: however, examining it more narrowly,

I thought that I had found out a part where what
ſeemed on the outſide a natural rock, might pro-
| bably be a place filled up with earth covered with
green turf. I repreſſed the joy this diſcovery
gave me, till the night afforded me an opportu-

nity of being convinced of it. I approached very

near the wall, being favoured by the darkneſs of
the night, and was tranſported with joy, when,

upon trying the ground with my pike, 1 found

that it went down as I deſired, and that this ba-
ſtion was ſuch as I had believed it to be. I was
no longer in doubt on what ſide I ſhould batter

the fort, and no difficulty now remained, but to

find out ſome place proper for erecting theſe bat-

teries; for Charbonnieres is, indeed, ſurrounded

with mountains that command the town, but ſo

ſteep that a man can hardly aſcend them on foot.
I began again to creep along theſe mountzins,
which, in reality, had a terrible appearance, and
all ſeemed wholly inacceſſible to the cannon,

except one, upon the declivity of which I ſaw a

road where it was not impoſſible but ſome pieces
of cannon might be heaved up by main ſtrength.
Unfortunately the acceſs to this road was by an-
other which paſſed ſo near the fort, that they |

might pelt us from thence with ſtones.

This was another obſtacle, which did not, how

ever, cool me in my attempt. I choſe out two
hundred French, and as many Swiſs, to cach of

whom | promiſed a crown, provided they could,
by this road, bring up ſix cannon, which I gave

| them, and mount them on an eminence that!
pointed out to them. I pitched upon a very dats
night to this work, recommending to them path

| 7 : - cularly,

—_—
g 011 as
S

OI

cularly, to make as little noiſe as poſſible; and,
to prevent the beſieged from obſerving it, cauſed
horſes and carmen to advance in the oppoſite
roads, whole cries and the ſmacking of the whips,
drew all the enemy's fire to that fide; but with

no effect, for theſe carts were covered, in their
march, by trees, gabions, and even by the walls,
while my men that were employed in forcing up
the cannon, eſcaped the notice of the belieged,

who were deafencd with the noile of their own

fre. I appointed La Vallée lieutenant of the
ordnance in Britany, and other officers, to watch
over and encourage my men in this uncommon.
method of carriage, It rained ſo violently, that
La-Vallee and the reſt of the officers left their
poſt to go to ſupper, and the ſoldiers their can-
non, when they were got about half way. This

was what I had expected; and, having taken

that road, I met them in their retreat, and gave
them a ſevere reprimand, threatening them that

they ſhould have no pay for three months, and

brought them all back that inſlant to their taſk,
which they reſumed, and the cannon again be-
gan to move. 1 did not quit them till I ſaw

them out of danger, which did not happen with

out receiving ſome check: their delay at length
occaſioned their being diſcovered, and fix were

killed and eight wounded, |
got back to my quarters while it was yet dark,

ſoiked through with the rain, and fo diſguiſed with

dirt, that 1 was not to be known, but full of joy
that my fix pieces of cannon were out of danger,
though not yet upon the top of the rocks, I flept |
an hour, and breakfaſted, and returnins to my

work, met La-Vallee, who, not knowing what 1

had done, began to value himſelf upon the per-

formance of the night. The reproaches J loaded

him with, while I contradicted what he ſaid, ought
JVA S-:: 10

t
ls
l N
1
.
t :
! }
F
'F
"e ;
— 1
fi (]
1
m4
.
N.
1 7
N
3
10
1
1
i IL.
j+
114.
{ &
! by
iq 4
?
oy
1
ln
:

—
2222
— — ET. — —

©. ge Seer ewergnan— <>
— —
.
2

232323 one, —

3530 M E M O 1 R 8

to have covered him with confuſion ; but he wa;

Book Ks,

the moſt undaunted lyar I ever knew, What!

„you have been there then,” ſaid he, without the
| ſmalleſt diſcompoſure. © Well, | ſincerely confeſs

«© Tama fool,” © You are 8 indeed,“ replied

I, © and ſomething worſe; but avoid ſack a we

« viour for the future, and repair your fault.“

was not doubted, but the beſieged would en: ta

vour to make thema iwer amends for their being
ſurpriſed ; which did not binder the cannon, by
the mere force of my mens labour, without any
aſſiſtance from the horſes, from being placed upon

the rock at nine o'clock, where, during that

time, I had made proviſion of gabions, planks

and every thing that was neceſlary to make plat:

forms there.
But, when the pabions came to be filled, ng
earth was to be found within half a league of the

place: all that could be got in this ſtubborn ground

was ſtony, and could not be uſed for making port.
holes and platforms, without running the dangerof

Taming all who were employed in the work. Th
_ officers, for want of this uſual Poſes, ſeeing.

themſelves expoſed to the whole fire of the place

came, in great conſternation, to acquaint me with

the condition they were in. I told them, without

any appearance of emotion, that they ſhould begin

directly the paliſado, which I had ordered them
to erect along the borders of the rocks, making it
very high and thick to deprive the enemies, at

leaſt of the ſight of the cannon, which, otherwiſe,
they would be able to diſmount; and this was
performed immediately, theſe mountains being al-
moſt all covered with wood. To ſupply the rel,

I ordered the carpenters, and pioneers of the a7.

my, to cut down two hundred large beech trees,

Which were cleaved into billets, ſome round to fill

up the > gabions „ Others jc quires to make a ſccuie

lodgment

et for the ſix pieces of c cannon ; and the
better to conceal their laſt ſituation from: the ene-
my, to which the branches of the paliſado greatly
contributed, I contrived, that there ſhould be on
” each ſide ſeveral openings filled with baſkets of
earth; upon which the enemy made a continual
fire, without knowing at what part of the paliſado
| © the artillery was placed, ti the moment when we
| were prepared to diſmount the battery of the fort,
and throw down the paliſado by which our cannon
bad been concealed, At two o'clock in the atter-
© noon, this work was completed; and. about an
|» hour afterward his Mayetty came to viſit it, and
- embracing me, aſſured me of the ſatisfaction it gave
him, He faw no obſtacle that ſhould hinder us
from beginning to batter the place. I repreſented.
to him, that it was ſtill neceſſary to delude the be-
ſieged till night: this Prince ſubmitted ro my opi-
nion; but the Count of Soiſſons, D'Epernon, La-
Guiche, and Villeroi, who attended him, making
obſervations that his cannon was pointed againſt
a rock, on which it would be uſeleſs to loſe more
time, Henry came to me and ſaid, that he would
have them fire, that inſtant, ſome vollies upon the
| oppoſite ravelin: again I conteſted this point with
him, and perhaps with rather too much heat; for
it gave me great uneaſineſs to ſee a work, that had
colt me ſo much labour, likely to be ruined by too
much precipitation, My reſiſtance put Henry in»
| to a paſſion, and he again, and in a very ablolute
manner, commanded me to obey him, even ad-
ding, that 1 forgot he was the maſter, *© Yes,
Site,“ replied I immediately, © you are the
fy „ maſter, and ſhall be obeyed, though at the ex -
* pence of ruining every thing.” I cauſed ihe
WT 4 to be thrown down, and gave orders that
they ſhould fire, but I would not be a witneis of
it, and withdrew in great diſcontent. As the guns

G g 2 - were

14
mn l
ROT o
# ,N'
1 4 n
vl
1
2 qt
q qe }-
N nl
4 \ EM
e
1 * o
4 NE
| HO
1985 14
1 *
e
1 15
©; a
1 * F h
Fi N
* 1 Wit»
1 s
W
WT:
o Tia
1 1
{ "HR
[i mus ft
$1,538
1 ” I
ivy "Fs
nen
"NAS
+ BI
» 145788
(4388
le
y »" On
3
11
1-74 1
y
1 2
19
5 A
17
4 *
e
75
7
_—  .
c 48!
1:78 ;
* 1
.
.
my... -
1
N
1
15
/
p 4
1421
41
N
*
1
9
CN;
z \!
|
2
1
* 1
4 ro
1 88
1
— 1
l
*
9 N
1 9
5
Hy
* H
+ hf
1 L
106
4
RI”
4 \ 23g 4
bu)
4
: vat
y 15
10
**
5
35
Et
. 4 17 ”
T3
Wy.
ud .
1
p 1
+ 4748
! FEW
/, 8%
"Ra
1 4
£ N
oa:
VL: 4
<<
» *
Ke
4 $4
4 x
48
S221
1
Nr
13
14
%,
- FF
1 E
þ
;
.

r eee

* — Ia ®. -
eZ ren £4 rae
PS CO os De Te on oo Pig
—
:

3 M E M Or R S Bock yr

next day.
of the air, occaſioned by the cannon, might poſi

were not aimed, every body took upon then, tg
direct them according to his own mind, but tg
one hit the right place. After a hundred ineffc.
tual diſcharges, the King ſent La-Guclle for me,

to complain to me of the faults of my batterics, 1

replied, that J intreated his Majeſty would <x:oulb

me, for. it being now ſunſet, it was no longer dme
to undertake any thing. His Majeſty ordered the
| firing to ceaſe, and every one withdrawins, |

came and lay in the midſt of my batteries, which
I cauſed to be completed during the remainder

ol the night, notwithſtanding the rain that fell

in great abundance. The beſieged, on their
fide, laboured as hard, and were not without ſome

apprebenſions that they ſhould find the place, to
which they gave the moſt attention, defective: [
judged ſo by the fires and candles which | ſaw

lighted up in the fort, and contented my ſelf with

interrupting their ſecurity, by firing ſome diſchar-
ges from time to-time. e
At the break of day, there aroſe fo thick a for,

that, at x o'clock, the fort could not be ſeen: this

unlucky accident gave me great uneafineſ?, becauſe
all my batteries were ready; and 1 had boat

over night, that I would take Charbonnieres the
I fancied, however, that the agitztion

bly diſperſe the fog, and I cauſed ſome vollies

to be fired. Either by chance, or by a natural ef.
fect, that which I had jeſtingly propoſed, ſucceed-

ed almoſt beyond my hopes. No ſooner had the

reſt of the artillery anſwered the cannon from the

top of the mountain, than the fog wholly cilap-
peared. The beſieged had been all night empioy-
ed in erecting a battery of four pieces of cann.n

over againſt my fix, which the imprudence com.:

mitted the day before had diſcovered to them, and
which, at that inſtant, they endeavoured to dil-

bs as *
7 »
Sy
2 0 P4
BY
FF
TY

ry

1 60C

mou
give
rectl
two

S
155
I; 4
IE
5

; 1

S . OO OR!

mount. I found that there was no time to be
given them, and cauled a piece to be pointed di-
realy oppoſite to their port-holes, which rendered
two of their four cannons uſeleſs, killed one gun-
ner, and wounded two others: but this did not
happen till after their diſcharge had killed, on our
fide, ſix gunners and two pioneers, and at length
made our pieces uſeleſs, till they were diſlodged
from thencte. %

The King ran thither, upon the noiſe, at nine
o'clock, and ordered his dinner to be brought to
a place which I had contrived in ſuch a manner,
that he might ſee every thing that paſſed without
danger. This was an incloſure made with the
largeſt trees, laid at their length one upon another,
in the form of a rampart. I ſhewed his Majeſty
the bodies of thoſe that had been juſt killed, and
made him ſenſible, that this was the conſequence

of the bad counſel that was followed the day before.

1 did not ſay this without deſign, perceiving that
the ſame perſons continued ſtill to find fault with
my work, and to prejudice his Majeſty againſt me.

1 did not ſuffer myſelf to be at all diſcompoſed with

their obſcrvations, and told them haughtily, thet,
not having yet eat any thing, though I had la-
boured hard all night, I would leave the place free
to any of them that were deſirous of playing the
grand maſter of the ordnance, but that, at my re-
orn, if they did not pe: mit me to order my bat-

teries as I pleaſed, I would abandon them entirely.

My table, as grand maſter, confiſted of forty co-
vers, and was placed under a kind of half arch,
formed by nature in the rock, and hung with ivy.

The King ſent me a large trout pye, which was

ſent him from Geneva. My dinner was ſoon o-
ver, and I went again to intreat his Majeſty that
be. would ſuffer me to perform the datics of my

employment alone, and renewed my promiſes that

SS: 1

354 M E M OI RS Bock XI.

I would make him maſter of Charbonnieres that

day. Ihe King replied, that he would be con-

tented if it was taken in three days; : upon which

La-Gueſle'faid, that, if he was in the place, he

| ſhould know how to hinder it from being taken in
a month. Go theie then, ſaid I to them all, fa-

tigued with their impertinence, and if | do not

hang yon all to day, let me paſs for a boaſter,

The King then withdrew into his incluſure, and
delivered me from the importunate preſence of bis
courtiers 401 three hours, which he paſl-d in wait—

ing for his dinner, at table, and in ſurveying the

park of artillery. At the end of this time, I ſaw
him come back with the Count of Soiſſons, to
whom he ſaid loud enough for me to hear, th T his
place will not be taken to day.” The Count
ante vered, with great complaiſance, Thai his Ma-
jeſty, who had more knowledge of war than any
perſon wiativever, ought 19 make uſe of bis au.
thority to force me to obey, inſtead of waſtingiime
in battering a rock, which could not be hurt by
the caniion. I had my revenge that jnilint, The
King come juſt at the time that the enemy beat a
Parley, and the lieutenant of the place came out

to treat with me. U intreated his N ajeſty to have

no part in the capitulation; and I told ine licute-
nant that he might go back again, for I wos re-
_ ſolved that the garriſon ſhould ſorrendei at difcre—
tion. The lieutenant returned with a per fonated
boldneſs, Hying that there were ſtill Wo hundred
men in the fort who were able to huld it out eight
days longer. Henry ngen, leaving Leſdigui-

eres and VWilleroi with me, who perſuad ied me to

accept of the conditions offered by the beſicged.
Leſdiguicres even carried me towards the fort, to
ſhew me that the enemies were not reduced to ex-
tremity. | ſtopped him when he came within two

or three hundred Paces of the curtain, telling h. bim,

that

SE” a.

1690, OF 8 1 1. 355

that it would be raſhneſs to expoſe himſelf to the
mouth of the cannon of the fort; and I withdrew

to a rock a hundred paces diſtant, which ſerved me
as a ſhelter, while theſe gentlemen very unſeaſon-

ably rallied me for my caution : but they ſoon _

changed their tone when a tert ble fire * them
to follow me.

IJuͤhe lieutenant of the fore returned a heond
time, but with propoſals little different from the

former. I ſent him back without hearing him :

5 upon which Villeroi ſaid, That, if the city failed
of being taken that day, he could not diſpenſe

with himſelf from acquainting the King that it was
owing wholly to me. I pretended not to hear

him: and, ſending the beſieged my laſt reſolutions

in writing, ordered the artillery again to play:

the ſecond diſcharge ſet fire to the powder of the
beſieged, and killed twenty or twenty-five of their
men, ind fix or ſeven women; art the third, the
little ravelin fell down entirely, and they could
no longer bring any aſſiſtance to the breach, be-

cauſe the cannon, ſweeping along a low path that
3ed to it, at every fire deſtroyed ſome of their deft.
ſoldiers. This made them reſolve to beat a par-

ley once more, which I pretended not to bear,
although I faw their drammet carried up in the

air at the heighth of twelve fect, by a cannon ball

which entered the ground where he ſtood, but

did him no other hurt, The beſieged then held

vp a pike, with a flag f:ſtened to the top, crying

out that they ſurrendere.i, and implored us to ceaſe

firing. Yet the artillery continued to play, till the

enemics, holding out theit hands over the breach

to our ſoldiers, 1 was ataid forme French would
be killed amongſt them. I then mounted my
hotſe and entered the city on full gallop. It was
law ful to treat it as on“ carried by aſſault: bat

that heart muſl be wholly impencirable t ome”

:

© '

v? ik

gt
7.

:
1
»
\ +{J
|
F: 3J
Sb
1
F uy
F is
ay 99
144
*
11
1
it
7
+4
4
( 1
1
4/4
$132
|
=
N.
1
en
l
iy
a 71
*
* * 5
; 4
*
:
+ 43s te
4
3's
1
4
4
5
Ws
N
7
vt
\
'
F
w
1
*
E
4
zF (
4
oF 1
5
T7
J
U
#1
bY:
5
|
6
F 4
*
o&
i

8 8 S er Com,
r
. 1 one
+ * 7 r * 2
. 3 9
2 2 4 CES, i 0
—
— *

356 M E M OI R S Book TI.

paſſion, that could not be ſoftened by a ſight ſo

truly pitiable as now preſented itſelf; it was the

women, the wounded, and thoſe that were ſcorch-

ed by the fire, who came and threw themſelves
at my feet. I never in any other place beheld the
ſex ſo lovely as in this city, nor fo finiſhed 3
beauty as one woman in particular who came 19
implore my mercy: inſtead of executins my

threat, to hang all the inhabitants, I gave the

ſame conditions I had offered at firſt, and cauſed

the garriſon to be conducted to a place of ſecurity

which I had appointed for them.

_ Notwithſtanding this ſucceſs with Charbonnieres,
I ſtill found great oppoſition in the council to my
' propoſal. of attacking the caſtle of Montmclian,
The debate ran very high: 6 Take care what
« you do,” ſaid his Majeſty to me, prejudiced
by the great number that diſapproved of the at-
tempt, © for if we are obliged to raile the fic ge,
« every one will exclaim againſt you, and! pol-

« ſibly ſhall be amongſt the firſt”. They were
not ſenſible at that time what a ſtrong train of
artillery, well conducted, was able to do at a
ſiege: what had happened at Charbonnicres had
ſo confirmed me in my opinion on that head, that

I did not fſcruple to engage that I would carry
Montmelian in five weeks, as 1 had already pro-
miſed in a former. cor ae I ſtipulated only for

one condition, which bis Majeſty could not 8
me, becauſe he had accepted it, without its beit

named, and this was, that he ſhould not be die-

ſent at the fiege | foreſaw that it would be very
bloody. | produced a plan of the fortreſs, and
of the attack; and every one agreeing that [
ſhould make the emp, 1 laid ficge to the calile
of Montmelian.
Ibis caſtle is ſituated on a rock almoſt as hard
as that of Charbonnieres, and fo high that it com-

m ands

0 8 U L I Y. 357

mands the whole country about it; ſteep and in-

acceſſible on all ſides except that next the city,
where the aſcent is leſs difficult, but on which, to
make amends, there runs a ditch, cut in the rock

itſelf, and which muſt have been done with infi-

nite labour with the point of a ſharp chiſſel; be-

ſides which, there were three baſtions, that could :

neither be ſapped nor undermined, their founda-
tions being of rock itlelf, almoſt impenetrable,

and above a toiſe and a half deep. The country
is ſttrewed with ſeveral mountains, but ſome are

ſo diſtant, that they appeared to be abfolutely out
of the reach of cannon, and the rocks that are
neareſt are ſo ſteep and pointed at the top, and fo

rugged and bare, that far from being poſſible to

carry up and make uſe of cannon, it is difficult

to believe that a man could climb up. The ſcaſtle
was then provided with thirty pieces of cannon,

with powder for eight thouſand vollies at leaſt, a

proportionable garriſon, and ammunition in "uw

abundance,
The firſt thought that occurred to my - wind;

and ſupported it againſt obſtacles in appearance un-

ſurmountable, was, that however ſolid and con-
tinued the rock ſeemed to be, upon which, or ra—
ther in which, the baſtions were raiſed, it was not

poſſible that it ſhould be all of equal hardneſs; and

if one part of it only was ever ſo little weaker than

the ret, the artillery I had would ſecure me the
means of opening a paſſage through it. In order

to be convinced, I began to open the trenches be-
fore the baſtion called Mauvoiſin; for otherwiſe
it would have been impoſſible to have approached
near enough to diſcern whether this whole maſs

was an entire rock, cut with a chiſſel; but the
rock which we found even with the ground hin-

dered us from carrying on the trenches.

I was obliged to have recourſe to artifice; and

one

. Abe nd.

— ES — ha, _— rr 3 Cue — r 2 —— © — — —
r — Ws 1 a — — png Pe” —— = 2 . _
— - — — — — 2 9 2 1 TE 5 2 — — — — —
nk 1 —— — pom 57 * - — — —— 7 — — . — — — 4
E —·’—. ˙— wi r —— — — x — — — - : 5
7 r 2 2 — — — or SS — - — — —
RE wow — — — NS: = 2 —. — Sr 2 — *

*
þ i
q
N
gk
il 7 o
}} 4 f,
8
1
"18
"i U
„
1'Y \
* 8
My 50 4
94 *
N
My if
Fe
TT
8
E,
” 4
7 *
1 4
4"
1.3
t A
4 1s
, |
14H
Wh 1
4p F
415
1
wn";
W
MTs
**
ps
5:4
My *
Wt:
4%;
8
445
9
N
37!
{$541
" o
1
2:
n
$4
WF gu
A 1 9
243
J 4
.
1
4.
9
Fiir
7
Mae
1
4 1
* |
74%
L oi
WR
Y
1
UT
ö n
*; th? 3
„
e
114
1
166 3: 28
"2558
NG *
e
n
I. . f £5 CE
$411 j 23
% 4H
+ 1
1
wa Pal ts
44 3K
: if
4 43
$1
l
10 it .
1
wt >
*
$þ 9 4
1:3) IF
454 5
1
4 Y
TE =,
, *
1
* 1
1 5
E
1.148
i MA
he 3
n ; 4
"4. #158
* . *
W
» 1
.
1 2x
„
1
+7
.
1 14
* tK 5,
"Ex... 17 138 i#
„
1 4 J
i#
Ft oh (#0
1 iy þ *
e
jt %
Li 1 44
# + 855
"©:
y 1
7 , 54
8
vi 7.
a if
Me
wo,
3 4080
1 8
* 1
j 77 N
is :
„ 1%
:
T's
8! 4 P
I FS: 00
} | v2
N +
„ mo
oY *
1
wm
M7 +1
1 i = ©
5 N 1 4
TY.
| *£
$1
313
1 . Fed
TE
1
4 F 1%
ma
4. 8
1 { :
- VE C 0
oy
1
19 .
1
+3 4 4
ke | "7 0
TOP , W 4
10 „5
5 i
» kt * *
nnn N
id fs
N
1 1
be |
n 4 5
BE th
1
"Q A
. *
v4
19 N
us, *
|
13: + *
.
* V
1
1
1 .

1 —
3 —
= 2 A 222
e
——— ̃˙ —— te.
r

253 M E M O I R Ss Book XI.
one very dark night cauſed a hut to be built with
clay, and thatched over, very near this baſtion,

and fo low that it could not be thrown down by

the cannon :; it was ſhot through and through
With tie ſmall arms, as ſoon as the day diſcovered

it to be beſieged ; but it was not overtnrned, and

none of our men were in it, I ſuffered the ene.
my to diſcharge their rag e for tome days upon

this hut, till of themſelves they ſhovid ceaſe to

fire; which at length they did, ſuppoſing it had
been built there to make them ſpend their pow.
der in vain. When 1 found the beſieged neglect-
ed it, I entered it in the night, taking no other

arms with me but a buckler, with which, upon

occaſion, I could entirely cover my body 2 aint

the fire. From this hut I carefully examined the

Whole baſtion; 1 perceived there a light at the
bottom, from whence I concluded that it was
hollow, and that it was not an entire rock which
could be cut into ſo deep. Without doubt the
beſieged were then making ſome repairs there,

The "day beginning to appear, I perceived like-

wiſe that the flank was uncovered ; and this was
proof that it was not a ſolid rock that formed ei-
ther; and that this flank preſented itſelf naked,
and eaſy to be pierced with the cannon, I was

now ſatisfied, and had no other care but how to

get out ſafely, which in broad day could not be
done without difficulty, the hut not being above a

hundred paces diſtant from the parapet, which

Was lined with ſoldiers, and I had above two

hundred to go before | could ſhelter mylelf, !
ſeized that moment when the guards being te-

lieved, the ſoldiers began to be careleſs, and
5 leaving my buckler in the hut, I began to run as
faſt as I was able; four centinels perceiving me,
cried out, and fired upon me at the ſame time;

their muſquet-ſhot whiſtled about my ears, and
covered

covered me with gravel and flint- ſtones, but did
not wound me; before the other ſoldiers were

ready, I bad gained the neareſt lodgment.

1 had, at firſt, reſolved to place a battery of h
cannon on an eminence, on the ſide of the Iſere,
where they might be carried up more eaſily by

the help of ſteps cut by the hands of men; but

| having obſerved, on the oppoſite {ide of the wa-

ter, another eminence which faced the citadel, and

which had this advantage, that from thence might

be ſeen the road that led to the wells of the
caſtle, and to the magazine, the entrance of the
tower, and the guard-houſe: I preferred this laſt,
and conſidered upon the means to carry up ſix

pieces of cannon, This eminence was perpen-

dicularly ſteep on all ſides but one, and even the
fide of the aſcent was a league about: but this
was not the greateſt difficulty; to plant them
there we muſt level rocks of ſuch hardneſs, that

moſt of the officers — the enterpriſe rigl-

culous.
The enemies were not of the fame opinion:

as ſoon as they found that we had undertaken to

make a lodgment upon the edge of the rock, they
pointed ſix pieces of cannon there likewiſe,
and made a continual fire: the firſt volley was
ſhot one day when I was giving directions about

the works, with my ſtaff of command in my

hand, dreſſed in a green coat laced with gold,

and a plume of green and white feathers upon
my head. I obſerved that this ſhot had paſſed a
good deal above my head, and that which fol-

lowed it as much below: perceiving that they
were going to fire a third time, I ſaid to Leſine,

Maignan, and Feugeres, that this would be be-
tween both, and that, without doubt, the beſieged

ng perceived me would take an exact aim. I
retired two or three ſteps behind a . part
of

OCR

. — —_
. — — -
* — *

8

= "4 *
— —
2 SCE A = -
— S
2 - _ wo.
> 2; E oo -—. cM. - D

FTE
A
Wm.
by IDE.

LS

*
»
_ n —— tt — 4 — A 2. - - — * r tr ent noon 2000 ES So ” 2 = _—_ = _ _ ——
% N 7: 22 1 717 — S — * — wo — 2 7 * Wa & 5 a. ten — — 2. — ot — — 2 — 3 2 —
. — — * > > — — n — S — —-— — _ —— — 22 — —: — - nor ” BEI ne — 3 — — — < — —
== — — * —— 2 — 7 * . EST A RR . ds rr "_ — c a — — 2 — — — ' — = — —
I : : _— 2 others ing — —̃ — — — . EDD — 2 —— — —
+. = = : —— — FIRE = —— 2 — 6 OSS - CERES — Ar == — — 2
2 — 2 = =—. - > > - — 2 —— — — — ——ʒ - —_ _—_— — — — — 2 "= = hg” EEE IE ISS OS — . 5 = — >
2 8 +. — i _ wy - . 4 ü Fn. r —— = =P EE ů — — — = — g -— — 7 \
be — = —_ 2 ” - — = — . = A Ir ENCLS— — 1 Fa er CE -4 N — Y l * * : — 8 deg
. 8 - - A , = : - 1 — 1 ra a> : = 2 - *
— — * 8 2. > " A o ah. — ped . FR - = (hr my 2 3 "x HER — = >. -
< thx * — on : I 2 2 — EE * TY —— £ 2 — — 2 Er FS = 3A OS EI 8 — "= — = _—_
3 hob 6 — — — —— + pon ECTS ner SIE En ow wo fn — — -
& — p — b _ EET nal” W 5 pn ogg ; : - :
- — c 1 MP ” , — — . 7 — 5
— — ; 1 8 — —— - — kb —
pond 2 2 — W3 4 —
To

2 2

1
ke
—

5 2 —
— — - * _
9 2
"A $I r
. = RS 1
9 *

36 MM E M OI R $S Bock TI.
of the rock, from whence I held my pike in on:
hand fixed in the place where I had ſtood my.
ſelf; one ball threw down the pike, the other;
killed three pioniers and two gunners, and broke
ſome glaſſes and bottles that had been brought
for a refreſhment, and were placed in a hole of
the rock. This accident was related to his Ma.
jeſty, as an inſtance of raſhneſs in me; and he
wrote to me immediately, that my perſon bcin
ſtill more neceſſary to him for the buſineſs of the
ſtate than war, he deſired that I would not ac
| like a mere ſoldier of fortune, who had a reputa-
tion to raiſe ; and that he would recall me, TW!
diſobeyed this command,

Henry could not reſiſt the deſire he had to ſce

the diſpoſition of this ſiege, and wrote to me a
ſecond time, deſiring I would diſpenſe with the
promiſe he had given me to the contrary, aſſuring
me that he would go to thoſe places only that 1
ſhould appoint, and with no other attendants
than the Count of Soiſſons, D'Epernon, Belle-
garde, and me. I entreated him, at leaſt, to dil

guiſe himſelf in an ordinary cloak; and, above
all, to ſhun, at the expence of going half a
league about, a certain field, ſtrewed over with

flint ſtones, oppoſite to which the beſieged kept
a party of thirty or forty ſoldiers continually,
armed with muſquets; and ten or twelve pieces
of cannon were pointed there, becauſe they knew
that our men paſſed every moment through th

field, to go to the new battery raiſed upon the

rock. I did not doubt but that he would have
complied with this requeſt ; but when he was up-
on the ſpot, he could not reſolve to uſe this pre-

caution; and my entreaties being ineffectual, we

marched all five in a file. Some muſguet- hot

that we were expoſed to at firſt, made two or three

01

8

20
Js
„
44.0:
"4
1
1 ?
FE

% ũ f 3 VL. LE: 361
of the company look pale, but it was much
worſe when we entered the field : there was, at
once, ſo terrible a diſcharge of the heavy cannon
and ſmall ſhot, that we ſaw ourſelves in a mo-
ment all covered with earth, and our ſkin ſeratch-
cd with a ſhower of thoſe little flint ſtones. Hen-
ry making the ſign of the croſs, * It is now,” ſaid
I, „that I acknowledge you to be a good Ca-
& tholic.” Let us go,” ſaid he; «this is a bad

« place,” We doubled our pace, eſteeming it a
ſingular piece of good fortune that none of us
were killed, or at leaſt lamed. No one thought
of returning the ſame way, but took the road from
the mountains, where I cauſed horſes to be brought
for the company.

The King was a little aſhamed of his Ane
ry raſnneſs, which was the cauſe, that ſome days
afterwards, when I ſent him notice that all my
batteries were finiſhed, his Majeſty, who was then
returned to the Tarantaiſe, having an inclination.
to ſee them, ordered me to make a truce for ſome
hours with the governor. The King's curiolity
being ſatisficd, 1 was ſeized with an inclination to
exert the prerogative of a grand maſter exerciſing
his office in the royal preſence ; but as this could
not be done without a diſcharge of the artillery,
which would have been conſidered as an infrac-
tion of the truce, which was not yet expired, to
induce the beſieged to break it, I ordered ſome
commiſſaries to ſend certain ammunitions to the
battery upon the rock, which they had an occa-
lion for there. The enemy, who had not loſt a-
ny part of their fierceneſs, and probably repent-
ed of having granted the truce, cried out, chat it
was violated, and that they were poing to fire.

Accordingly, they fired twelve or fifteen cannon-

ſhot, I had given my men orders, in calc this
happened, to hold themſclves in readineſs to an-
Vor. II. | Hh ,

362 MEMOIRS Book x.
ſwer them immediately by a general diſcharge,

This was the firſt, and afforded matter for ſerious

reflection to the beſieged, when they ſaw their

tower battered by fifty cannon ; they were the

firſt to demand a continuation of the truce ; e-

ſpecially when a ſecond diſcharge ſucceeded ſo
rapidly, From that moment they began to alter

their opinion, that the citadel was impregnable,

and privately ſought out ways to procure an | ho-
| nourable compoſition.

Two women were, by change; the firſt mover
* of this accommodation. Madam de Brandis,

wife to the governor of Montmelian, and then

with him in the caſtle, amuſed herſelf with ma:
king little glaſs-toys and pieces of chair-work,

My wife being then in the town, ſhe a6. af

pair of ear-rings, and two chains of exquiſite

workmanſhip. Madam de Roſy, in return, ſen-

her wine and veniſon, and deſired to know if it

was not poſſible for them to ſee each other: they
obtained permiſſion for it, and paſſed three after-
noons together with ſuch familiarity, that, at
length, they began to conſider how Montmelian

might be ſurrendered with honour. Each ac-
quainted her huſband with the ſubject of their
converſations, and we were ſo far from oppoſing

them, that they were authoriſed to go on, but

concealed from one another that they acted by

permiſſion, Madam de Brandis had an indiſpo-

fition that made the country-air neceſſary for her.
Her huſband thought he could procure this favour
through the interpoſition of my wife; and {he

made fo reaſonable a repreſentation to him of the

condition to which he would be ſoon reduced,
without being able to obtain honourable terms

afterwards, that he conſented to treat with me,

* The hiſtorian who has given us the life of the Duke rer

non, aſcribes to him the honour of taking Mutmelian, 5
| | | | an

1600. O F . 38
and ſent me a deputation for that purpoſe, I diſ-
patched notice of it to the King, who propoſed
it to his council; and it was there reſolved, that
a month ſhould be granted to the governor, af-
ter which, if he was not rclieved, the place ſhould
be ſurrendered. I was very ſure that it could not
hold out fo long, and that it was relying too
much upon the doubtful ſincerity of an enemy to
grant ſuch conditions, I gave my opinion free- |

ly ; but it was to no purpole to oppole a reſolu-
tion in which envy had as great a ſhare as fear.
The King did not begin to repent of having
followed the counſels of Marechal Biron and d'E-
pernon rather than mine, till a little while before
the expiration of the time granted to the beſieged,
a report was ſpread, that an army of twenty-five _
thouſand men was coming over the Alps to their
aſſiſtance. The King acquainted me with the
perplexity into which this news threw him: he
was determined to meet the enemies and fight
them ; but he was ſenſible of the danger he ran,
in leaving behind him ſuch a fortreſs as Mont-
melian. He aſked me if by ſome means or o-
ther there was not a poſſibility of putting him in
poſſeſſion of it before that time. Difficult as it
appeared, it was nevertheleſs accompliſhed, and
in this manner. Se Coo

Ever ſince the ſuſpenſion of arms, the Count
of Brandis ſuffered all ſtrangers to enter his caſtle
who brought proviſions and neceſſaries which the
wounded, and even Madam de Brandis herſelf,
had occaſion for. As there was only one gate
to enter by, the crowd was often ſo great that
ſome blows paſſed between them ; for which the
governor could not chaſtiſe them, becauſe there
were a great many Frenchmen amongſt them,
and therefore intreated me to apply a remedy to
this inconvenience; and I now believed that I
nad / Be 0

1% KEMONRS Fon

had found the opportunity I ſought for. I plz
ced a guard of fifty choſen men at the gate of the
caſtle, commanded by officers, who, being in.
for med of my deſign, accuſtomed the guards g
the caſtle to ſee them enter it at firſt three or fou
only in number, afterwards more, till at length,
the garriſon not daring any longer either to hin,
der or fire upon them, they found themſelvy
almoſt maſters of the caſtle itſelf, without giving
them any aſſiſtance; but, on the contrary, inſtead
Fir the diſorder, theſe French did all they!
could to increaſe it. th

Brandis imputed all to the licentiouſneſs of the Þ _ h
ſoldiers, and complained to me of it, I told him,

that he might fall 1 upon all thoſe ſtrangers, whom 7
I ſuppoſed to be country-people. He replied, | a.
that he would have done fo, but for the great! d
number of my ſoldiers that were amongſt them; 1 it
and that rather than do them any violence, al I 8
though without any intention to break the con- f
ditions, he choſe to confide to me the care of put? t
ting an end to the diforder. I ſeemed to yield to 1 1
this expedient (which was what I moſt ardently | ;

withed) only to reſtore order and quiet, and told
the governor, that I could eaſily accompliſh it,
if I had a guard within equal to that without: he
conſented to it, and I cauſed fifty ſoldiers to en.
ter; but theſe were not all, thirty had pot in
before, and a much greater number had ſlipt in
with them; I came thither myſelf likewite, with
all my train: and from that time our party Wis
fo ſtrong, that the fort and Part of the tower was
at our diſpoſal. |
Brandis then found the fault he had commit.

ted, but could repair it no otherwiſe than by
ſhewing himſelf ſtill more generous, He cam?
to me, and told me, that he conſented 1 ſhould

take polſeflion of the tower, and that he rem
ret

7
2
{IV
(Foy
5p

1 ted it wholly upon the ſecurity of my word. I
reſolved not to abuſe his confidence, and faith-
fully obſerved all the articles. I ſupped and lay

RR 2
ee eee e tl

r 8 U LILY. 363

in the tower that night; and the next day after
that in which I had received this commiſſion
from the King, I went to tell him, that without

any fears from Montmelian, he might march to

meet his enemies; which he did in good order,

and at the head of his army; but the information

he had received was found to be falſe, +

The garriſon of Montmelian marched out after

the month was elapſed, and yielded the place to

his Majeſty, who commanded me to ſettle Cre-
quy there with his company. The garriſon was
reinforced, and provided with great plenty of
ammunition of all kinds. I would have perſua-

ded the King to have diſmantled this place, as

it muſt undoubtedly be reſtored to the Duke of

Savoy in caſe of a peace: and to have done the

fame by all the other conquered fortreſſes : but
the advice of the courtiers, who all ſeemed to be
in the pay of the Duke, fave Montmelian from

a treatment that good policy required.

The myſtery of this conduct with regard to
Montmelian, as well as many other things, was

explained two years afterwards, by the diſcovery _
of ſome letters of Marechal Biron in cyphers: he

told the Duke of Savoy, to whom they were ad-

dreſſed, that he had obtained a month for the
garriſon of Montmelian, to give him time to raiſe
the ſiege: that he had nothing to expect from
his friends, unleſs he made an effort to ſave: this

place, which could hold out three months long- +
er; and aſſured him, that the reduction of it

would give him great concern. In the letter he

wrote to this Prince after the caſtle was taken,
he tells him, that his negligence in ſuccouring it

had ſilenced the French lords in his party, who
would

Hb 3

iP
4

366 MM EM O1-K- 8 Book JI.

would have declared againſt the King, if, by d.

vancing to join them, he had put it in their
power to do fo with ſafety. Notwithſtanding the
caution he obſerved in not writing their names,

they were all ſo well deſcribed that it was not

difficult to know them. The filence I keep with
regard to theſe names, is only in favour of ſon:
whom the public perhaps has not ſuſpected.
Montmelian was not yet ſurrendered, when
it was reported in the French army, that Cardinal
Aldobrandin, the Pope's nephew and legate, was
on his way to come and treat with his Majeſty
concerning a peace and his marriage. The King
having appointed me to go and receive his Emi-
nence with all imaginable honours, I advanced to

meet him with a body of 3oo9 foot, and 540

_ troopers, all ſpruce fellows, It was not difficult
for him to perceive that it was the grand maſter
of the ordnance who waited for him, by the
manner in which he was received: at his ap-
proach to Montmelian, the truce affording me
an opportunity to make uſe of the artillery of
the place as if it had been my own. Upon this
_ occaſion I joined them together, to pay him the
greater honour: the ſignal was given by a white
flag raiſed on the battery of the rock: mine be-
gan after a great fire of the ſmall-ſhot, and was
_ anſwered by that of the caſtle, in ſuch a manner,
that both having time to load again, this double
diſcharge of an hundred and feventy cannons,
performed with the utmoſt regularity, and muh

tiplied by the echoes formed amidſt the mount

ains, had the nobleſt effect imaginable, though
not in the legate's opinion, I believe, who Was
more frightened than ſoothed, by an honow!
ſo magnificently dreadful, believing all the
mountains about him were going to fall down,

and

*
*

F $0 ELY ww.

and had ſeveral times recourſe to the ſign of the
crols,

carried the Cardinal to dinner at Notre Dame

de Miens, and forwarned him of two things re-

lating to the buſineſs he mentioned to me; one
was, that he ſhould give no credit to any of thoſe.

perſons who would make a boaſt to him of their

intereſt with his Majeſty ; the other, that if they
promiſed him to get all the places taken from

the Duke of Savoy to be reſtored without being

demoliſhed, he ſhould believe them till leſs; for

he might be aſſured this would never happen.
After this caution, I reſigned him freely to thoſe

ſent by his Many ro fetch him, and continued
my hoſtilities, by beſieging the citadels of Bourg

and fort Saint-Catherine.

The latter was attacked before the other; at the -
intreaty of the citizens of Geneva, whom the King

was glad of an opportunity to oblige. Upon our

arrival at this fort, which is ſituated on a riſing
ground, in an open field, of which it ſeems to be
the centre, Marechal Biron, who by chance was

near me, aſked me to go that inſtant, on horſe-
back as we were, and reconnoitre the place with
him. I told bim that we were too gayly dreſſed,

and had too many plumes on, to examine it in o-

pen day: for the Marechal was mounted on a
white horſe, and wore a large plume of feathers
of the ſame colour. No, no,” ſaid he, you
« need not be under any apprehenſion : morbien | 7
they will not dare to fire upon us.” „Let us

upon me it will ſprinkle upon you. Accord-
ingly, we came within two hundred paces of the

fort, and obſerved it a long time, while they on-
Iy fired twelve or fifteen vollies of ſmall-ſhot, and
1 believe in the air, although we were about twen-

ty horſe 3 which lurpriſed me greatly. Cer-

on : tainlys |

= r — — — =
- a — Ca 927 — C > —
4 — » — . 1 ant > - _
8 MESS 88 er ER WE — —
— — —— . q 242 — — > — 3
4 . 7 5 = —

go then”, replied I, “if you will, for if it rains

iy _—

21
——

— —
. —— 7
PICS a —
3 ST
oa 3 A
r dA AI
x - TS,» Ap

.
. a
28
1
15%
*
7

4 -== —

: ed a — — TIT = 2 Es
A : — — — —
> - — y . — — — WI .
— — = — — — d — . — =
— — KKK ² ⅛ Q ] xx ̃ ̃ . . MES -
— apa es AX hg > +a , I 2 N = bs ESE a 7 2 loaf a pag ap peg —
GERD nn CR Ng =: 2 = On ane Lo — — — — — _

2 W We

3658 M E M OI R S Book X.

4 tainly, Sir,” ſaid I to the Marechal, “ there is no

one within, or they are aſleep, or afraid of us,”
The King could with difficulty believe this, be.
cauſe being there himſelt the day before, with ſiz
horſe only, they fired repeated vollies at his ap.
ptoach; and when I returned the next morning at
the break of day, on foot, and with no other
company than Erard and Feugeres, I was recci.
with fo great a noiſe of the artillery, that the
King ſent Monteſpan thither, believing it was a
ſally, © Whom are theſe fellows aiming at?”

ſaid Monteſpan to me, finding no body in ſight.

« At me, I believe,” replicd 1, “but I have ſcen

6“ all that I wanted to fee,” However, I gueſſed

ſoon after the reaſon of that reſpect which they

 ſhewed Marechal Biron I perceived that the

| flank of the baſtions of Saint Catherine were ſo
bad that great part of them had fallen down, and
that the ditch was in no better a condition I ab
ſured his Majeſty, that as foon as the trenches were
carried to the extremity of the ditch the place
would ſurrender. In effect, the beſieged, who
were likewiſe in want of every thing, demanded

to capitulare, if they were not ſuccoured in fix

an. | |

Aſter I had opened the trench, I deſired leave
from the King to make a tour to Geneva: | arri-
ved there the next day, with an hundred horſe,
and came very ſeaſonably to relieve this city from
the terrors which the preſence of a great number of

Catholics within their walls occaſioned Reſſieurs de

Guile, d'Elbeuf, d't-pernon, de Biron, de la Guiche,

and many others, were there, with their ſeveral
attendants. 1 aſſured them, that his Majeſty had

their intereſt at heart, and that I would not leave
them while thoſe gentlemen continued among

them: but the reniembiance of the late perſecu- |
tions was yet too recent in the minds of ihe cin

zenls;

S 0 0 PRES To Ge ©
zens; they could not be fatisfied till I had remo-
ved the occaſion of their fears; which I did that
evening by ſpeaking to thoſe gentlemen, who all
left Geneva the next day, The city deputed
twelve of their chief citizens, with Beza, their
miniſter, at their head, to compliment his Maje-
ſty, and to endeavour to obtain a requeſt that they
kept very ſecret; this was, the demolition of fort
Saint-Catherine, which they were moſt ardently
deſirous of. Beza delivered himſelf like a man of

ſenſe, and one who knew how to praiſe with de-

licacy; congratulating the Proteſtants upon the

happineſs which the reign of ſo good a Prince
promiſed them, Henry thanked the deputies and _

the city, offering to beſtow upon it any of his
conqueſts which ſhould be molt convenient for it;

and preventing their requeſt, told them in a low

voice, that they ſhould have the pleaſure to be
maſters of the fate of fort Saint-Catherinez and

that he gave them his word, in my preſence (for

he held me by the hand at the ſame time) that
no intreaties whatſoever ſnould hinder him from
razing it, Upon which the deputics withdrew,
extremely well pleaſed, . 5

His Majeſty, at Cardinal Aldobrandin's requeſt,
conſented that the conferences on the ſubject of a
peace ſhould be held at Lyons, and appointed the
Cardinal du-Perron, the Conſtable, the Chancel-

lor, Villeroi, and Jeannin, to treat with the le-

the future Queen * arrived in that city. | As ſoon

This princeſs left Florence on the 17th of October, having
embarked at Leghorn, and, with an eſcort of ſeventeen galleys,
landed at Toulon, from whence ſhe came by the way of Marſeilles
and Avignon to Lyons, where the King arrived poſt on the gth of

November. As ſoon as he alighted (I take the following account
from the moſt authentic memoirs of thoſe times) the Queen happen-
to be at Supper; and having a deſire to ſes her at table without

being

30 MEMOIR 8 Book NI

as the King was informed of it, he quitted his quar.
ters, and ſet out in very rainy weather, riding
poſt, with great part of the lords of his court. It

Was twelve o'clock at night when we pot to the

bridge of Lyons, and waited there a full hour,
Wet through with the rain, and almoſt periſhed
with cold, before they would open the gate; for
his Majeſty, that he might have the pleaſure of

; ſurprizing the Queen, would not ſuffer himſelf ty

be named, They had not yet ſeen each other,
The marriage ceremony was performed without
any pomp. We attended the King at ſupper,
who afterwards diſmiſſed us to refreſh ourtelves
likewiſe; and he retired to the Queen's apart.
ment. e e

being diſcovered, he went in as far as the drawing room, which was
very much crouded; but he was known the moment he appeared by
thoſe neareſt the door, who opened to make way for him: upon
Which, his Majeſty went away directly, without going farther. The
Queen, in the mean time, was well aware of all this, but ſtill gave
no other ſigns than by putting the plates away as often as ſhe was
ſerved with any thing, and eat fo little, that ſhe ſeemed to have ſit
down rather for form's ſake than to ſup. After the table was
removed, ſhe returned immediately to her chamber. The King,

who waited only for this, came to her chamber-door, and ordering
MN. le Grand to go before, he knocked ſo hard, that the Queen thought.

it muſt be the King: upon this ſhe ſtept forward at the very inſtant that
M. le Grand entered the room, who was followed by his Majeſty, at
- Whoſe feet ſhe immediately threw herſelf. The King raiſed her up,
embraced her with great tenderneſs, and all that was polite, paſſion-
ate, and reſpectful, paſſed on both ſides. After the firſt compl-
ments were over, the King took her hand, and led her to the fire.
place, where he continued talking with her above half an hour; he

_ afterwards went to ſupper, but eat very ſparingly, In the mean

time, he bid Madam de Nemours tell the Queen, that he had not
provided himſelf with a bed, expecting ſhe would give him part 6
hers, which from that time was to be in common between them,
Madam de Nemours carrying this meſſage to the Queen, ſhe returts
ed for anſwer, That ſhe had come thithcr only to obey his Majclly
as the humbleſt of his ſervants. Upon this, the King undreſſed, and
went directly to the Queen's chamber, who by this time was in bed.
Chronologie Septennaire, an. 1600. where alſo may be ſeen the par*
ticulars of the Queen's journey, and her reception in the towns e

France, Cc. De Thou, liv. 125. Matthieu, tom. II. p. 378. li

„„ 2 2 wy ch = . ©, £5

7

1600. r. 371
His Majeſty's arrival only increaſed the warmth
with which they conteſted the articles of the peace:
the plenipotentiaries were almoſt all in the Duke
of Sayoy's intereſt, and glad of an opportunity to
make their court to the legate; which was the
cauſe that Henry thought it neceſſary to make them
give an account of their negotiation, and ſeverely
blamed the commiſſioners for having exceeded the
power that was given them. Bellievre and Vil-
leroi had promiſed the legate, that none of the
fortreſſes which had been taken ſhould be demo—
liſhed, but eſpecially Saint-Catherine, for which
the legate particularly ſolicited, as being the beſt,
and even the only bulwark the Duke of Savoy had
againſt the republic of Geneva, Henry made them
ſenſible, that their precipitation in ſubſcribing to
an article of this importance without conſulting.
him, had given him ſome ſuſpicion of them; and
added, that in a few days he would acquaint them
with his intentions upon that head. Then ſending
for me, he told me, that the ſhorteſt way to pre-
vent the ſolicitation which he expected from the
legate, would be to blow up the five baſtions of

the fort, and to ſend word to the citizens of Gene-

va io come and complete the demolition of it. No
order was ever more expeditiouſly nor more effec-

tually executed. The Genevois, in one night,

laid this citadel even with the ground, and carried
away all the materials ſo carefully, that the next
day it could with difficulty have been believed that

tere ever had been a fort in the place; and at

firſt the report ran, that it was deſtroyed by light-
ning. When the truth was known, the legate

expreſſed great reſentment at it, and did not ſeru-
ple to confeſs, in the heat of his paſſion, that I

was the only perſon who had not deceived him
with flattering hopes on this head, and that he had
not ſufficiently attended to my admonitions, But

372 MEMOIRS Boy,

bis having, upon the faith of the commiſſioners,

given very different expectations to the Pope, waz 6
what he was chiefly concerned at. For three  Þ i
four days the negotiation was entirely broke off; 1 2
and when it was afterwards reſumed, it was with 1
ſo much animoſity on his Eminence's part, that he a
rejected all the propoſitions that were made him. 7
Theſe propoſitions were, That the Duke of Savoy |
ſhould yield to the King the courſe of the river £
Rhone and its borders: That he ſhould not ere 1
any fort within a league of it to favour the Spa. :
niards paſſage : That he ſhould leave to the re. 9
public of Geneva the enjoyment of certain villa. e
ges ſpecified likewiſe: That Beche-Dauphin * 1 1
ſhould be demoliſhed, Chateau-Dauphin reſto- | 4
red: and laſtly, That the Duke ſhould pay a hun-] 4.
dred and fifty thouſand crowns for the expzaccs oft | yy
OS md ee pie 4
The King looking upon this affair as wholly im- 01
practicable, through the obſtinacy of the legate, C
reſolved to carry on the war more vigorouſly than | ot
before, and communicated his deſign to me, which WU t
was, to go in ſearch of the Duke of Savoy at te h.
head of his army; while I, with the artillery, bat. t
tered the citadel of Bourg. Each of us had patti-  #
cular obſtacles to this double project, beſides tre ſ# xe
want of money, which was common to both. 11 ſe
found the enter prize on Bourg very difficult to be F
executed, the ſeaſon being now ſo far advanced! | re
the difference between this caſtle and that of Mont | tt
melian, with which I think it may be compared, 1 at

is this, that for thoſe that have only ten or twelv? |

pieces of cannon, Montmelian is equivalent to ten

ſuch places as Bourg, becauſe that the reduction

of Montmelian depends upon having artilay

ſufficient to batter the out-works; but for an arm)

fixty cannon ſtrong, the citadel of Montmciian 1
Frontier of Daughine, | =

not

1600. o F
not more difficult to carry than that of Bourg;

becauſe this laſt being more regular than the other,
it can only be attacked methodically and by ſlow

degrees. Had the counſel I gave, to attack this

ſort immediately after the ſurrender of Montmeli-
an, been followed, it would have been now ia the
King's poſſeſſion. e

Wiith regard to this prince, his perplexity was
occaſioned by bis knowing in what manner the
greateſt part of his general officers conſpired with
Spain and the Duke of Savoy againſt him: he had
great reaſon to be apprehenſive of engaging him-
ſelf in the enemy's country, if they were with him:
Leſdiguieres was the only one on whom he could
depend; he had lately given an inſtance of his fi-

delity, in ſending notice by Calignon, that the

Duke of Bouillon made uſe of a man named On-

devous to carry on his. correſpondence with the

great lords of the kingdom. It is certain, that if
Calignon had been more diligent to acquit himſelf

of his commiſſion, Ondevous would not have had
time to eſcape as he did, and bis detention night
have laid open all the ſchemes of the ſleditious; but

there is no appearance that FI happened through
the fault of Leſdiguieres. I adviſed the King to
rely entirely upon him, and to bind him (till elo-

ſer to his ſervice, by making him a marechal of

France, and governor of Piedmont. As for the

reſt, it was ealy to prevent the conſequences of
their ill intentions, by giving them employ ments

at a diſtance from the body of the army.
But the affair that appeared moſt preſſing to us

both, being to procure a ſupply of money, it was :
reſolved that | ſhould et out for Paris in four days:

and that!] might be enabled to piſs ſix entire weeks

there, 1 employed theſe four days in making all

the neceſſary preparations for the attack of Bourg,

in paying the ſoldiers out of what little money re-
You II. „ ED mained,

U L L- I. 373

*

W 3 — —— — — —
— - — bo 4 — — — — - — — — — 8 — h—_— - — —— = —_ ——— — — — 2 ——
. — NENT wane yh ee er OECD —5 - : = . AAR CRIES Ts I EE ͤͤ—.w—J—ʃX——
— — — CTY 8 _ = — I A ES > 2 - — — 8
- „„ une II En = ELEC Tu a. ES 2 ED Ie — = SE —— —_—— ok ot
I. — .... ͤ v. —— — — 5 = = > = ä —
e — AT A EEG = — 8p rr error 1 22 —— 8
— * r \ 322 a NE —_ * = — * y — — p — — — *
— — — n 8 ——

4 — —— — — -
SE. ES. — on 2

** 9 — — —

— 2 — — 8 , AE 3 — SES tn © 4 "4 2 . — — — 5 — — - 2
8 — 9 . des, + tn "etc As 5 - 8 - 2 —_ 4 8 0 - So 2 — — — — — 2 — ——_ —— a „ gt — SEE. > = FEES ZE en — — —
— 2 8 8 — — p = ow ON 2 EE 1 5 999 ee er 1 * . . * n a G Er ny — Oy + — oy, 24 2 8 — — — a > — —— — 2
——— — N —_ Gn — Rr — * — — en "= - i” kgs „ E — — 2 * n * n r e (VE A — — 34 — — — - — 2 —. N N 4. * —— * _ wt "go —— ID wo 2 =
= 8 — ay ly 3 ale 2 che Ee hat . 5 ——— Þ R 4 3 7 > 7 * — a * » - + K 5 © „ RS . 3 WWE IIa WI 2 2 — — =L — A : ——
—* — — — K _— n - — e- 70 Fane: 64x] — 2 * » ho. * r = 2 2 1 — . 5 9 — — — — = * 54 2 — a 95 =
Tae = COIN 8 * _ A : 5 1 g * . : Re * * 5 2 2 * N TS wr 4e7 2. 1 S 2 pr A ene . = ue.
— * 80 8 : 2 3 — 3 .
— n A — : :
— 4 as

* 2
2 2
> oy . 8
.  alor
—_—
—

=

$4441.

374 M E MO 1 R 83 Bock 1.

mained, and in providing for the ordinary as well

as extraordinary expences of the King's houſhold.
The very next day I ſent away my wife and my
equipages before me, with directions to wait for

me at RKouanne, where I propoſed, as ſoon as !

arrived, to ſend them down the Loire as far as Or.

| Jeans : they waited there for me three or four days

longer, becauſe my meaſures were broke by the

alterations that happened in the affair of the peace,

When I went to take leave of the King, he
adviſed me to viſit the legate alſo before I ſet out,

he having always expreſſed great eſteem for me.

I went to viſit him booted, my poſt-horſes wait-
ing for me on the other ſide of the river, oppo-
lite to his lodgings. He aſked me, where I was

going in that equipage? © To Italy,” replied I;
* and I ſhall go with good company to Kiſs the
“ Pope's foot.” © How ! to Italy?“ faid he,

in great amazement : * no, that muſt not be, Sir;
« | beg you will aſſiſt me to renew this peace,”
1 ieemed to conſent, in reſpect only to his medi-
ation, the King having laid aſide all thoughts of
it, I repeated, in a few words, all the principal
articles that had been already propoſed, and at-

terwards aſked him, if he would give credit to what

I was going to ſay to him? Having aſſured me he
would, I told him, that he might be abſolutely
certain, that of theſe articles, his Majeſty would
abate none of his demands with regard to tie

borders of Rhone, the villages in the neighbour-
| hood of Geneva, Chateau-Dauphin, and Beche-

Dauphin ; becauſe I was well acquainted with the

King's intentions in all theſe reſpects. He deſired

to know my reaſons, which I excuſed myſelf from
telling him, on account of the ſhort time I had
to ſtay. After walking, thoughtfully, ſeveral

times backwards and forwards in his chamber, he

aſked me, if, with the ſame proteſtations of ſin-

cerity,

a

2

Bn 2 — „ — 2.00

7
on;
*
7 *
22
— 98
ct
OF,”
Ms
3
*
82
25
3
1
1 24
*
8 45.
7.
IT
4 Hg
4
5
1
8
.
ao
4
7
2

Ao

.

5
*
*
' |
* %
IS
{. yt
«3%
1 =
71 75
CEO
5
wb
_—
| 35.
N
54
2
*
*
5
. .
8 3
Sw
2
4
5

1600. 98 * L L TI. 375

A cerity, I would aſſure him, that, provided he a-

oreed to all theſe points, there ſhould be no men-

tion made of the other. I told him, that I believed
J might promiſe this. Upon which, he entreat-
ed me to go and acquaint the King with what be
had ſaid. Henry was glad to ſee me come back:

and I returned a moment afterwards to the le-
oate with full powers from his Majeſty. And we
concluded that“ inſtant a treaty which had lan-

guiſned ſo long a time; the conditions of which

were as follows.  _

The Duke of Savoy, in exchange for the mar-
quiſate of Saluces, which the King of France gave

up, was to make a ceſſion to his Majeſty of the
fortreſſes of Cental, Monts, and Roqueſparviere,

all Breſſe entirely, the borders and country of _

the Rhone on both ſides, as far as Lyons, except

the bridge of Grezin, and ſome paſſages neceſſary
for his Highneſs to enter Franche-Compte ; but
he was not by this ceſſion to acquire a right to
raiſe any tribute from theſe places, or to build a-
ny fort there, or to ferry troops over, but by the
King's permiſſion, and on condition, that for this
privilege of paſſing the bridge of Grezin, the
Duke ſhould pay France one hundred thouſand

crowns : that he ſhould likewiſe reſign to his Ma-

jeſty the citadel of Bourg, the bailiwic of Getx,
Chateau-Dauphin and its dependencies, with all
that could be comprehended in the province of
Dauphine, on this ſide the Alps: that he ſhould
likewiſe renounce the property of Aus, Chouſy,
Valley, Pont d'Arley, Seiſſel, Chana, and Pierre-
Chatel, to the borders of Geneva: That the for-
tifications of Beche-Dauphin ſhould be raiſed :
that the King ſhould, on his ſide, reſtore all the
* M. de Thou, Matthieu, and La Chron. Sept. 2gree with this
account, ib. an. 1601, See alſo the treaty in the Mem. de Nevers,

tom. II. p. 775. Cc. |

555 other.

qt F 1

AE" 5 3 2 —
W 9 2 o . \-» Is 5 * 5232 >
255 9 os po io rn te Ion Soy 4 IS 35% 3
nM 2 - —— —
5 7 *

- — — -
ts: he - = 3 — — 1 — 2
N 8

376 ME MO IN 8 Book II.

other forts he had taken, which are not ſpecified
here, withdrawing the artillery and ammunition
that were then placed there. The other articles
related to criminals, and priſoners of war that had

fled on either fide, church-benefices, exchange of

_ eſtates between private perſons, &c. It was ar.
ticled for the Duke of Nemours, part of whoſe
eſtate lay in this country, that he ſhould not be
diſturbed in the poſſeſſion of it, neither for the
part which he held of the King, nor for that

which he held of his Highneſs. The other clau ·

ſes common to all treaties I ſhall not mention.

Notwithſtanding this treaty was ſigned by me

for the King, by the legate for the Pope, and
the Duke of Savoy's agents, yet the Duke, influ-

enced by the Count of Fuentes, put off fo long
the entire concluſion of it, by his complaints and
delays, that the King thought it neceſſary no:
to lay down his arms: he took poſt to Paris“,
wiere he waited for the Duke's determinations,
In caſe there ſhould be a neceſlity for his re-.

turning into Savoy, he had certain meaſures to
take for the affairs within his kingdom, and in

Paris eſpecially, at a time when every place wa3
filled with malecontents. He left the Conſtable

and Leſdiguieres, till his return, with ſome good

troops upon that frontier; and Villeroi, and two

or three other commiſſioners at Lyons, to con-

clude the buſineſs of the peace.

Ie departed, ſays Baſſompierre, one night poſt from Lyons,
c jn order to return to Paris; and embarking at Rouanne he land-

& ed at Briare; from whence he came to lie at Fontainebleau, and
« next day dined at Villeneuve; and creſſing the Seine below 0
«© Tuilleries, came in the evening to Verneuil (afterwards Senlis)

% We continued three days at Verneuil, and then came to Paris. —

„ at length the Queen arrived at Nemours; and the King, having
4% rode polt with ſixty freſh horſes, came and carried her to Fo
« bleau, where after ſtaying five or fix days, ſhe arrived at Paris, and

a | | *
„as accommodated with apartments at the houſe of Gondy-

Mem, de Baſſompierte, tom. J. p. 89. 90.

But

A

my 5

— oy

|

—

J.. TTT ia $40

4

| gate to demand ;

1600. O F 8 9 5 5 3

But his Majeſty found no occaſion to return in-

to theſe provinces. The Duke of Savoy, after
having long amuſed himſelf with expectations

from the diſaffected French lords, gave place to

more prudent thoughts; and reſlecting on what

he had already loſt by bis obſtinacy, he thought
himſelf very happy to accept the treaty in the.
form already mentioned; accordingly the laſt for-

malities were added, and the peace was publiſh-

ed at Paris and Turin, with the uſual ceremo-
nies: however, the articles were not executed
without many difficulties being raiſed by the
Duke of Savoy, Which detained Villeroi at Ly-
ons part of the following ycar: it was not till

then that every thing was entirely agreed to;

and Spain, who had taken great intereſt in the
affair, even adviſed the Duke of Savoy to comply
with the articles of the treaty. On all theſe oc-
caſions Henry paid great deference to the Pope.
He granted all the delays which the Duke of Sa-
voy, by Count Octavio Taſſone, engaged the le-
which was contrary to V le.
roi's advice: but his Majeſty having in reality ob⸗
tained all that he could demand, thought he ought

not to obſerve too rigorouſly the manner it was

yielded to him, nor hazard, for ſuch a trifle, a re-

newal of the war. This produccd as many ad-

vantages to the King as any war ended in a fingle
campaign could poſſibly do. His Majeſty decla-
red, that Breſſe ſhould not be comprehended in
the diftrift of Lyons, but that it ſhould be re-
united to Burgundy, and be under the Jurado

of the court of aides of Paris.
The Queen did notTet out immediate! y aft er

for Paris. She had brought with her her uncle
Don John, a baſtard of the family of Medicis,
Virgilius Urſinus her couſin, who being brought
up, While young, with Her, bad conceived hopes

11 3 above

SAA ( c
— 9 . —— -

I =
=
* -
25 — IT 2
— 5 . IE ,-
—
aire be, —

= — — XK
8

— E_
e

22 — -

I
$27.1 3
£438!
+ 4
7 x:
E
Fs. :
Via
J
s
mY
. 1
71
3 K
49S.
7 $1
2 ;
=, x
NY
7 4 .
.
7 -}
LY:
% + 68
N
* to
* T4
K F
1%
41 * *
5 5
me I
b&2 :
3x
5 4
6
1 a
mt
ME -
»
1
2
1
un
13.4
11% 4Y i
0 F
14
»
þ
» "av
& 3 Y
2 74
*
SY 7 $
- .
4 i
$408
* * o
4:.% F
*
.
9 1
+ F
ou *
4
, 4 vc
iS i
e
4
* *. 1
0
*
N
TR M4
4 :* £
7 FE 1
I?! * 5
1 5
1 * .
9
wy. 6 F
(3 4 £ 9 od
7
5 'y
KI v
12 3. 4
£211 8 i
Wo ak,
* *%* 2
11
p - {>
bs ” o
. : 1 N 4
_ . ! .
, 337 4 30 N
7
1 1 .
TY. L k
* ITT:
i 23”.
WH
' |
. +
1 »
*
1 N **
I
*
M$ *
50
= bo
FT 9
' 5
1
171
1 5
1-4 -, 6
5X
RES .0 :
l
e.
1 1
1 hl
11
7 4
14 þ
24
i :
Y N 51
9 5
3
ot
dy © 4
. *
5
4
* + 2 3
Tv
"” * l
Fre.

753

7
0
?
þ
!

©
, 1
_
1
1
To 1.
211
1
2
57 q *
.
8 On
4
ws It
„
|
1
"4
'.
ke.
1 i
1
| 1;
+ .
| f
4
{
4 1
J.
1
L
4
*
br
2
*

—

2 . e — — —
— rragncF es eo

p— IIS —

378 M E M O 1 R 5 Book NI.

above his condition. Many more Italians of both
ſexes were in her train; amongſt others, a young

man named Conchini, and a girl called Leonora

Galigat, who afterwards played a great part in
France, I went to Paris eight days before the
Queen, to make preparations for the ceremony
of her entry *®, which was performed with great
magnificence. The next day, the King brought
the Queen and the whole court to the arſenal

10 dine with me; the Queen was attended by all

her Italian ladies, who being pleaſed with the
wine of Arbois, drank more of it than was ne.
ceſſary. I had ſome excellent white wine, that
Was as clear as rock water: I ordered ſome de-
cCanters to be filled with it, and when the ladies
aſked for water, to temper the Burgundy, they
were preſented with this liquor. The King ſu-

ſpected by their gaiety, that I had played them
a trick, This winter was wholly taken up with

parties of pleaſure, on account of the King's mar.
riage. „ Y

In Flanders, this year, the war broke out with
great violence; Prince Maurice of Orange giin-
ed a battle in the month of May againſt the Arch:

duke Albert, in which the + Admiral of Caſtile,

7
188

It does not appear that this princeſs was complimented sich the
ceremony of a public entry into Paris. The citizens, fays the Chro-

nologie Septennaire, would have prepsred a very magnificent one
for her, and add: eſſed the King for that purpoſe; - but his Mzjclly

choſe rather that the expence ot the entry ſhould be laid out on other

things that were more neceſſary. It afterwards adds: upon her at-
8 | y p

rival at the poſtein-gite of the ſubub St Marcel, the Marquis de
Roſny cauſed all the cannon of the arſenal to be fired three times,
| She was carried in a litter along the moats of the city, and that day
lodged at the ſuburb St Germain, at Gondy's houſe, and the nczt
at Zamet's, and after that at the Louvre. T6:d, |

+ This was the battle of Nieuport, that was fought in the month

of July, wherein the Spaniards loſt 8900 men. The Prince of O-
range was nevertheleſs obliged to raiſe the ſiege of Nieuport and fe-

tire to Holland, The greateſt part of thele foreign tranſactions ate :

peitact

1
*
5

*

5
Sl
1
FI
N
*
4
*

ß! T2

me man on whom he chiefly depended, was taken
priſoner. He afterwards laid ſiege to Nieuport,
but was obliged to raiſe it. All I ſhall ſay of

the war between the Emperor and the Grand Sig-
nior in Hungary, is, that the Duke of Mercœur

was made lieutenant-general there by his Imperi-
al Majeſty. I ſuppreſs a detril of the grandeur
and magnificence of the ſecular * jubilee at Rome,

and ſhall conclude the memoirs of this year with

an incident that afforded matter for much ſerious
reflection upon duels : Breaute having + killed

his adverſary in ſingle combat, was afterwards 40.
ſaſſinated himſelf.

0 n - xn

I Have now finiſhed the laſt military narration

that will be found in theſe memoirs, at leaſt,

in which France was concerned. The life of
Henry the Great, hitherto wholly paſſed amidſt.

the tumult of arms, will in the ſequel exhibit

reither fully nor exactly related in our memoirs; and I therefore
think it unneceſſary to give an account of them in the notes, but

rather refer the reader to the memoirs and hiſtories of that time.

In like manner conſult the general and particular accounts of the

military expeditions between the armies of the Emperor and the
Grand Signior, which are mentioned here. 85

* It was laid, that 300. tn French, men and women, went to
Rome, to obtain the indulgence of the jubilee; concerning which,

lee the ceremonies in La Septennaire, an. 1600, and otlicr memoirs _

of that time. | | |
| + Charles de Breaute, a French gentleman of Caux, captain of a

troop of horſe in the ſervice of the States; his antagon.fit was a Fle-
miſh ſoldicr, lieutenant of a company under the governor of Boiſle-

duc, with whom he fought in ſingle combat, twenty French againſt

the ſame number of Flemiſh. After having the advantage in a firlt
encounter, in which he killed his antagoniſt, he was made priſoner
in a ſecond, and put to death by order of the Governor of B iſledue.

He was one, ſays the author of the Chrcnologie Septennaire, that

| eagerly ſought after occaſions of duelling, for which reaſon he had

been obliged to quit the court of France,

only

+ e

2 2 —
—— pe  ——

—

1 — —̃ . Er —— - - — > — = EEE -
5 — 6 — — —— - — . 7 w "© 75 PAR
— - 5 od = - _—_— f NT , "I 1 8 2 2 8 — 8
Fe” — 8 1 E * 4 - * 8 — * 2 2 * - —
PT 2 3 r r = ——— - : =
n * 0 1 od. - - I APE SD<Fe mee R— — ——_—— — WE _—_— 9 a

3
2 eg”
” -

” — r _ _ ——
r => So EDIT 2 ra 9 2
n : <8 SPL *

— 2. Ws —
— N 3
e q —
., ro Fs
Sd. an ov. -- <_*"

"4 i
”
—
bei?
5 q

1
1

f 1
1
1

3

- 8
—

44
.
| "FIR
; {11
kh l
we! 15
1 4
Wt 1
;
nw:
Me
8
10 : ' 7
l
[7 WET
1 .
1
ng
* tf
ivy *P
Bf ;
1
10 Fs b
e
e
i
g 1
q $7 *
. 10 of
770
12 8
ein
rn 272 y
TI:
—_ *
1
5 {
16 1
0 7
1 N
n 1 at ?
bs WE!
b * 1
* (13421
4 44744
I 139
1 118
. 1
11,48 T7
B
WW 5 its .
1
8 4 FA
1
3
- Hart
Nr mes
4X8
5
13-5983
1%: 2% dy
1
o
a
4 T
(te ERS
i314
AR TY
Hole Ok ©
\ . 3
e
Nag
147
110
I 4
4 08H
Hl Ni
e
ü N
' IB
. 1#W
l
4
* N.
1
a
| |. 4
e
1
Ai
Fry
4:6
1 405
, * 1
4\ 28188
.
1 ! 952
e
1
„ HARD
„ *
WS
1G Py as
1
: mer...
5 mn *
TL
nes >
NM,
a.
"6%
+; 2:88
i” # *4
[B&W]
* 174 :
6 8
„
404 4
Þ
RY
TT «
1 :
1 4 * &
_—— 7
e
A why * b : ,
1
4 28 9
0 N * Y
"7 ”
W
j >
Ms
_ 4
© F
#1 oY
1 LE:
' 185
Lal Ar *
1 * 2
v 4
. 55 1
*

5 i
My. 7 *
.

f +5 2
m_
1% 2
e
9
1 5 *
1 8
f „

538
5 Y 2 25
Ws,
1
=>
is Ak
1
.
4 1
2 *
1
1 2
: [4
N *
: 3 3;
[1 by,
_ =
„
i = Ts.
. + F-
1
85
+
1
"| þ
WER -
4 .
9 yi
1
1
on
. =
9
1
oe
/ » i
T1
. 15
. *
x 2
8 vo
4 1
. oe
ME {
72
* FED
- ig
11
1
HRT :
1 1 Þ$
£35
* ,
8} M4 -
1 4
$33.32
| #
3K
$3.98
- »
IS
4
48 1
l
17
1
$133
32
> WEY
+5
4d x

380 MEMOIR 8 Book XI.
only the actions of a pacific king, and father of
a family. The manner in which the campaign in
Savoy had been conducted and terminated, leaving
no room to fear that the peace would be again in-
fringed by any of the ancient enemies of thi
| monarchy, or that it would not ſubſiſt as long i;
his Majeſty pleaſed, I reſumed, by his orders, and
under his inſpection, thoſe ſchemes with regard 0
the finances that the war had ſuſpended, and
were now to meet with no more interruption,
Afier the repreſentation I have already given of
the ſtate of affairs within the kingdom, it would
be injurious to conſider the life which the Prince
and myſelf now embraced, as idle and inactive:
if it is leſs noiſy and rumultuous, it is probably
more laborious. 5
T am now, then, again to be conſidered ag

ſhut up in my cloſet, where I applied myſeff,
with the utmoſt attention, to the examination of

all the abuſes that ſtill remained to be remedied

in the chamber of accounts * ; the offices of the
finances, the crown-lands, the aids, the ſubſidies

the equivalents, the five large farms, the tenths,

and all the reſt. I laboured at once for the pre-
ſent and the future, by taking ſuch meaſures, that
the method I eſtabliſhed in the direction of ever)
part of the finances ſhould not be afterwards ſab-
ject to any alterations. I conſidered of means
to enrich the King, without Impoveriſhing bis
ſubjects, to pay his debts, repair bis palaces ;
and ſtrove, with ſtill more aſſiduity, to complete
the art of fortifying his cities, than that of at-

tacking and defending them; and to make pro-

viſion of arms and ammunition, I extended my
cares to the repairing and renewiig public works,
ſuch as roads, bridges, keys of rivers, and other

As to theſe reformations, conſult likewiſe Matthiev, tom. II.
by. 8. p. 444»

buildings,

8 began to look into the application that had been

made of the money granted for thoſe uſes to the
cities and corporations, or rather into the frauds
that had been uſed in the management of theſe

funds. Eo

The ſcheme of drawing up an account of e-

very part of the finances, under the title of a

general ſtate, which ſhould lay down their na-
ture uniformly and clearly ſeemed always ſo hap-
py a thought, and ſo proper to bring them to
the utmoſt exactneſs, that where-ever this me-

thod was practicable I made uſe of it. On the

firſt day of this year, when 1 preſented to the
King the gold and ſilver medals, as uſual, I gave

him at the ſame time five of theſe general ſtates,

each of which related to one or other of my em
ployments, bound up in one volume very neat-
ly. In the firſt, which was of the greateſt im-
portance, becauſe I there gave an account of all
that concerned myſelf as ſuperintendent, was ſet

down on one fide, all the money that was raiſed

in France by the King from every tax whate-_
ver; on the other, all that was to be deducted for

the charge of collection, and conſequently all
that was to be brought clear into his Majcſty's
cofters. I cannot perſuade myſelf that this me-

thod was never thought of by any one ſince the
finances were ſubje& to ſome regulation; but in-
tereſt alone prevented the execution of it. How-

ever that may be, I ſhall always inſiſt upon it,
that without this guide there is no proceeding

without miſtakes or roguery, þ =» |
The ſecond of theſe ſtates was drawn up mere-

ly for the uſe of the keeper of the royal treaſury ;

here was ſet down, whence and upon what ac-

count

Tic 0 8 VL L-L.-- 362
1 buildings, which reflect no leſs honour upon the

ſovereign than the ſplendor of his own palaces,
and are of general utility : for which purpoſe I

*

332 MEMOIR Ss Book Xl.

count he received all the King's money that paſ[.
ed through his hands during the year of his of.
fice, and how much he was at liberty to diſburſe
out of the whole ſum, and for what purpoſe,
The third was compiled for the uſe of the ma.
ſter of the ordnance, containing an exact ac.
count of money received and expended; with x
true inventory of all that relates to the artillery,
the number and forts of cannon, and of other
arms, the quantity of inſtruments of war, and
proviſions of victual, laid up in different places,
or magazines; the ſtate of the arſenals and for-
tified places, and other obſervations of the ſame
fort. The fourth related to the chief furveyor of
the roads, and gave an account of all the money
diſburſed or to be diſburſed for the repair of eve-
ry thing under his charge, whether it was to be
done at the expence of the King or of the pro-
vinces. And to conclude, the fifth contained a
catalogue of cities and caſtles, particularly thoſe
on the frontiers, that required any money to be
laid out upon them; with a kind of rough draught
of the works neceſſary at each place, formed
with due regard to their natural ſituation and pre-
ſent ſtate. Ns
The King, upon my repreſentation, reformed
many abuſes with reſpe& to money, which had

cauſed a decay of commerce, of which money 5

the chief inſtrument; the firſt was the pradtiſe
| Which was then allowed, of putting money to in-

tereſt at eight, or even at ten per cent. X a practice
of equal miſchief to the nobility and the people;

It is thus that a Prince, in our times, remarkable for his abili
ties and ſuperior {kill in politics, has judged : being firmly perſuades,
that the (tate would receive great advantages in every reſpect from a
regulation that would oblige monied men to betake themſclves to
commerce and agriculture, which are infinitely preferable to the
ba re and dead produce of rents.

0

19 OO IO OS c I „ p - n 5 2 N FE 1
* oF ö Ore IS TL EIN : ; ,

1601, / Fo Vn Oo | 383
to the nobility, becauſe they, being forbidden to
engage in trade, have no other riches but the pro-
duce of their grounds, of which the price was
brought down by high intereſt; to the people,
becauſe, by putting out money to intereſt, they
made as great profit by ſitting {till as by labour,
and thereby kept immenſe ſums of money uſeleſs
to the public, which, without that method of
growing rich, they would have improved by ſome
means advantageous to the commonwealth. The
intereſt of eight per cent. was aboliſhed, and ſix
per cent. allowed in its ſtead.

The coin of different countries was till this time

current in France, and paſſed in commerce equal-
ly with that of our own ſovereign. A prohibition.
was iſſued, by which all money was put down but
the coin of France *, that of Spain only excepted,
which would have been too much miſſed in com-
merce had it been at once forbidden. But it was
more neceſſary to rid ourſelves of the merchandiſe
of our neighbours than of their money, for the
whole kingdom was filled with their manufactures;
and it is incredible how much miſchief was done

by foreign ſtuffs, particularly thoſe of gold and

ſilver. The importation of theſe, and of all others,

was forbidden under ſevere penalties : and becauſe
France had no means of ſupplying herſelf with them

It is true, that the ſpecies of foreign gold and ſilver coin ovght
not to paſs current and be confounded with that of ihe prince in in-
terior commerce, and in payments made between individuals; but is
it not evident, that the more ſuch coin abounds among our own mo-
ney, the more flouriſhing will our commerce be? The hiſtorian
Matthieu obſerves, tom 2. 1. 3. p. 446. that this prohibition made
the commerce in France fall almoſt entirely; and the Duke of Sully
himſelf agrees, a little lower, that he was obliged to have recourſe
to other means to retrieve it. We will examine this queſtion with
him, when he comes to handle it. in the following book. As to
the prohibition of uſing gold and ſilver in clothes and houſhold furni-
ture, we ſhall alſo have occaſion, in the ſequel, tu give our opinion
on the principles he eſtabliſhes with regard to luxury, ESTATE

out.

354 M E MOI R Ss Book NI.
out of her own ſtock, we had recourſe to the true
remedy, which is, to do without them; the uſz of

all ſtuffs wrought with gold and ſilver being for-
bidden by an edict _ „„

All theſe declarations tended to introduce one,

by which it was forbidden to carry any ſpecies of
money out of the kingdom, under the penalty of
a confiſcation of all that ſhould be intercepted in
the carriage, and likewiſe of all the eſtates of the
offenders, as well thoſe that favoured as thoſe that
were guilty of the infringement of this law, The
King gave a public proof how much he had this
affair at heart, by the oath he made, not to grant
any pardon for this fort of miſdemeanours; and

even to hold all thoſe ſuſpected that ſhould dare to

folicit him to the contrary : yet all this could only
oblige thoſe perſons that carried on ſuch practices
to conceal them more carefully. I was of opinion,

that one example would be more efficacious in cor-

recting this obſtinate evil than all the threats that
had been publiſhed againſt it. I was not ignorant
that a great many very conſiderable perſons, and
even amongſt the courtiers themſelves, made a
fund out of this pernicious traffic, either by ſuffer-
ing this money to paſs under their names, or by
ſelling, at a high price, the authority which ena:
bled them to correſpond with the foreigners, and
ſecured the privileges of paſſage. I thought it moſt
prudent to apply myſelf to thoſe who were em-

ployed by them for theſe correſpondences, and

' Promiſed them that, as a recompence for their
diſcovery, they ſhould have the fourth part of tholc

* He ſhewed, by his example, how to retrench the ſuperfluity of
dreſs, for he commonly went clad in a coat of grey cloth, with only
a pourpoint of ſattin or taffety, without any indented edg ng*, lace,
or embroidery : he commended ſuch as dreiled in tha lain faibion,
and rid culed others, who carried, ſa d he, their windmills ad their
old woods on their backs, Peref. part 3. |

ſums

16

ſur
the

ei. eb 1 0 b "0d 6 305
ſums that were ſeized by their informations; for
the King having made over theſe confiſcations
to me, I had a right to diſpoſe of them. By cheſe
means I was well (erved. _

A month was ſcarce elapſed, whe Licclied
notice from an Inconſiderable man, the authors
not being willing to make themſelves known, that
there were two hundred thouſand crowi's in gold
collecting to ſend abroad, which was to be ſent
at two different times, and that the firſt carriage
would be much leſs than the ſecond. After ha-
ving taken all the neceſſiry precautions, this ſum
appearing rather too conſiderable for me, I thought
myſelf obliged to mention it to the King, o
made this qualification in the right be had given
me, that if the ſum did not exceed ten thouſand
crowns, I might appropriate it to myſelf, but
that the overplus ſhould be his, “ Which will
„ come, ſaid he, very ſeaſonably, having bad
& ſome loſs at play that I durſt not tell you of,

** nor make up with my own money.” IL was

not mercenary enough to wait for the profits of
the ſecond carriage. I ordered the firſt to be dog-
ged, and with ſuch vigilance, that it was lopped

half a league beyond the tcrritories of France. it

could not be done in the kingdom, though but a
quarter of a league from the frontier, without für-
niſhing the offenders with a pretext for getting it re-
leaſed, There was found in piltoles, double piſtoles,

and crowns of the ſun, to the amount of eight and.

forty thouſand crowns, which had been c ncealed
in ſome bales of common goods for exportation.
be King's reſolution on chis article was ſo well
known, that the concuttors named no perſon as
proprietor of it; and notwithitanding all the noiſe.
this ſcizure made at court, it was Jitavowed by -
every one; and the ſum was, by his Majeſty, di-

vided 1 in this manner: feventy-two thouſand livres
VO r. II. K k ve he

p = > — 5 as CEN LES. \
R — U OBS = — ”
5 ads. Lat 42 _ — - r nos
— — — 3 — — — f - = . . —
- 2 — A — Lo F qe rr 2
— r . — mo «40 — — 3 0A —
2677 Xp ASI dot LAS Le Ps 2 2
2 "= ES IM ns OE. woes - Xs ZIREESS —
, a — — —
9 * - -
* ——— e
nes 299 * —— * —

* R —— - — 3 2: oe
— f = .. —
RN P Ex ia raw —— e

” — — * — 8 — * — — —— = — —

— — —ę— — 2 _ —— gr — * — —
apes. * r en i So — n
. RY — . . 7Ü—.Dꝛ—ß7
DIE — == —— —_ CD

— — — — — — — — —
ha 9 aA r A =p *
— — — = 2 n 3 3k F: he
q hu Bly aig . D 7 * tz q
ES e Ne * 5 — =
TT 2 — DT - VE — — F . ” * -
————— 2

NN rr SW A er tw re, —

"4

336" M E MOI R S Book XI.

he reſerved for himſelf, five and twenty thouſand

he ordered ſhould be given to the informer, and
the remaining forty-feven thouſand he left to me;
promiſing me, that however Jarge any future cap.
ture might be, he would take no part of it from
me. But after this, no more money was attempt-
ed to be carried out of the kingdom; this example
had given a general diſlike to fo ruinous a traffic,

Thoſe that compoſed the chamber of juſtice“,
which was erected againſt the contraQors, treaſu—
rers, receivers, and others who had been puilty

of miſdemeanors in their offices, were likely, ity.

appearance, to exerciſe far greater ſeverities. It
was my advice, that theſe offenders ſhould not
cCnly be obliged to refund, but that thoſe who
were convicted of embezzling the public treaſure
ſhould be corporally puniſhed. Money, however,
the poſſeſſion of which covers all crimes it is the
cauſe of, excepted this from the juſt rigour of the
law r. I would, were it poſſible, transfuſe into
the breaſts of my countrymen ſome part of that
indignation that fills mine, againſt ſo pernicious
an abuſe, and all that contempt which ] feel for
thoſe that owe their elevation to it, If we conſi—
der as a ſlight matter, the deſpicable light we ap-

* Otherwiſe called the royal chamber: it conſiſted of a preſident
of the parliament of Paris, two counſellors, two maſters of requc!t,
a preſident and ſour counſellors of the chamber of accounts, a pict-
dent and three counſcllors of the court of aids, and one of the ge-
neral advocates of the parliament, Cc. Commiſſioners were lent
into the provinces, to give them informations of ſuch as were guily
of any malverfations. . To „
+ The Duke of Sully ſeems to me to reaſon juſtly, when, in fop-
poſing the utility of the chambers of juſtice, he requires, that they
{ſhould not confine their proceedings to pecuniary mulcts only, but
join to theſe corporal pun:ſhments. And he ſeems to me to have
ſtill greater reaton, when, in the ſequel, he adviſes to ſrppteſs this
method as abſolutely uſeleſs; and entirely abolith, in France, the
uſage of compoſitions in farming the finances: and this is likewile
the opinion of Cardinal Richelicu. Teſtament Polit. part I. ch. 4.
pear

1601, 0 F

pear in to our een by this ſhameful qa
(for none ſtrikes more directly at the honour of
the nation) we cannot conceal from ourſelves the
evils it has given riſe to; nothing has contributed

more towards perverting our ideas of probity,

candor, and diſintereſtedneſs, or to turn thoſe
virtues into ridicule; nothing has more ſtrength-

ened that fatal propenſity to luxury, Which is na-

tural to all men, but is with us become a ſecond
nature, by that peculiarity of temper which makes
us faſten eagerly upon every thing that can gratt-
fy our paſſions; and nothing in particular has fo
greatly degraded the French nobility, as the rapid
and dazzling fortunes of -contractors and other
men of buſineſs, by that opinion which they have

circulated every where, and which 1s indeed but

too well grounded, that in France this is almoſt

the only method of arriving at the higheſt honours,
and firſt employments of the flate, in the Poftet-
ſion of which all is forgot, and to the attainment
all is permitted.

Jo go to the ſource, military virtue is ROY
the only quality by which true nobility can, in

France, be obtained, preſerved, or dignificd :

and in this practice there will be found no pre-

judice or empty opinion, if it be conſidered, that
precedence muſt naturally be granted to that
rank, by which all other claſſes of the commu—
nity are preſerved and ſupported in that ſecurity
without which there can be no property: but this
ſtate of life is not the way to a great fortune;

this ſimplicity and ſeparation from lucrative pur-
Poſes ſhew the antiquity and purity of the firſt

inſtitution. By bravery nothing bur honours
could be got, becauſe in thoſe times honour was

the only reward of glorious actions: in later days,
ſince the notions of mankind are changed, N

every thing is rated by the money which

K k 2 .

—
0 - EAT _ — {x — 2
n „ — 2— —— — —— -- _

AL —

— * = SIE
— — 2 2 - eg eons
. tr SEE

Dd —

*

77 —
2 —
Props TR

= — 1 C 7 — — — - — 1
— 4 . —— GILES — * — — — 2 > WPF © nm — — — — — —— 2 by — K = — — "A =
— 55 £4 e - RE HS S SES oo ef I ERrREoENS = — — va
44 4 © - : — N 2 Jo — 1232 — — — IA — . ——— — — —— — — — —— — — — . _ — a - -
7 — — — — — — —— — _ — —.— — — —
: 7 T3 3 a 2
P K * by N
S N .
4 _ 2

.
3 cm — .

—
x

1 habe eee
— 0g a £ — 2 "i

—

— 2 ES ITY ILY ; 3 — : 818 DA Ns 3
- I - ; l eb r ARLG 6 . hows Ry SOLIDS
"3 8 — 9 — A A - + . An r IE 5 Ra 8 b is I — =
RE ES ES 3 ET ob Oh, 1 IE 2 Mo Fr Ware. > thy PPT oe Ie .
nm 34 wo RETRY — 2 APV. OM Sn BO, * har ates 'd RY 3-4 3 wy 30 OO mT a 4: PEP Rn n *
Wo ” 3 2 2 n a "* $ e

3 - "
Br — on
— n r 1 7

: q 1
- = — 2 * .. . rn 8 . 8
* F l 2 „„ « r : - » =p 2 : A $62 5: ;

— —— 2 8 — — — — — A — — „6 2 —
* Fo — en 72 W 8 * * 4 DE tn Am = Hy >, > I A er : packs _
e „ Aco; _ "a 4 4 88 4 * Q . — EEE

_ 12 hs A wy 3 * © > IO * * * => 8 — * 2 — **
r r Rs — g : 4 1 - | 5 2
Rs >: — 5 4 4 „rr — N 2 A

— — =
T5 _—_—

2 * — 2 22

> et rr

—

* —/ a =

brings, this generous body of nobility is brought

in compariſon with the managers of the revenue,
the officers of juſtice, and the drudges of buſineſs.
But this compariſon terminates in a univerſal

agreement, to pay to theſe gatherers of money
that refpe& which muſt always be ſhewn to thoſe
who are poſſeſſed of power, and are in fact, our

ſuperiors, an advantage which the former have
Joſt ®, And, indeed, how ſhould it be otherwiſe,
when we ſee the nobility of the ſame mind, with

regard to this point, as the meaneſt of the people,

and making no ſcruple to mingle the molt illu-

ſtrious blood in a ſhameful alliance with a dirty
pedlar, who knows nothing but the change, his

ſhop, his counter, and his knavery ? This abuſe

is neceſſarily productive of two others, confuſion
of ranks, and degeneracy of families; which laſt
is better proved by experience than argument.
We need only take a view of that great number
of moneril gentry with which the court and ciiy

is filled, and we ſhall find them wholly deſtitute

of the plain and manly virtue of their anceſtors;
no depth of thought, no folidity of judgment,
raſh, inconſiderate, a ftrong paſſion for play, 3

natural propenſity to diſſoluteneſs, a ſolicituce

for dreſs, and vitiated taſte in every kind of

laxury; that one would imagine they thought

* The ſame Cardinal Richelieu complains of this abuſe, and pro-
poſts a remedy for it, according to the Duke of Sully's ſcheme.
© Gentlemen,“ ſays he, + cannot be promoted to places of truſt
and dignity, but at the expence of their ruin; for at pi cle! all
ſorts of people are admitted to them through the infamous tratiic
carried on by means of money. For the future, all perſon+ ſhould
be excluded from thoſe poſts, but thoſe that have the good for-

e tune to be of noble birth.“ This miniſter concludes, in another
place, after M. de Sully, „That the means of continuing the no-

% bility in that purity of manners which they derive from their au-
& eftors” thele are bis words © is to retrench that luxury and intole·
& fable expence which have been gradually introduced.“ Part l.
ch. 3+ 5. 1. 8 : he

to

a wy =

to od even the women in the efeminacy of

their manners: yet theſe people engage in the

army, but with fuch diſpoſitions, to which is often
added a ſecret contempt for the profeſſion they

embrace, what can be expected from them? This

ſubverſion of all order is indeed to be lamented,

but is inevitable, while that profeſſion, which
has only glory for its object, is not exalted to the

higheſt rank, and dignified with the chiefeſt ho-
nours, which, for that purpoſe, ought to be

taken from the upſtarts of fortune; and ſince.
the infamy which we ſhould find theſe creatures
of e chance ſtained with, if we took pains to exa-
mine them, is not ſufficient to draw our con-
tempt, it is neceſſary they ſhould be branded

with public marks of diſgrace, to ſignify the rank
they ought to hold,

The King was convinced by the juſtneſs a th E
reaſoning. However, in this chamber of ju-

ſtice, the ſame thing happened that generally

does: the little rogues paid for all the reſt; the
Principe delinquents found their ſecurity in that
rery metal for which they were proſecuted ; they

made uſe of a {mall part of it in preſents, which

ſaved the other. This quali ifying would not have
prevailed with the king had it been employed
directly; but it found acceptance with the ladies

of the court, and even with the Queen herſelf;

they gained the Conſtable, Bouillon, Bellega: de, 5

Roquelaure, Souvre, Frontenac, and ſome others,
who though not of this hich claſs, knew as well
how to work upon the Kino! s inclinations; ſuch
were Zamet, La-Varenne, Gondy, Boneuil, Con-

chini, and many more of that ſort, The com-

plaiſance of this Prince for all thoſe whom he ſuf-
fered ro live in ſome degree of familiarity with

him, and eſpecially for ladies, deſtroyed all his

Wie relolutions, ſo that the ſtorm fell only upon
js 4 K 3 x | oſs

— huts PA CAD. Et PS GEES nos
3 2 — — ET, ws n * *

93 "0" 3 *

* 2 * N 2 < LS _— FRI. wh wats, LES. . 2 4 —
Acc ccc ae cc

—

. ̃ —— — i EY

——
— Sama IE es 2 —

—

* —
—
—

- N II In WIC 2 Is cn ers 9 rence

5
AA — —
S

— — — —
— x
.
2 — — Cod = LO 4-
UUpU— ̃ on nn oi AG ——

r
2 — m

_— — 2 0 *
. . Pod on FT Fo 6

— —— ——

. >
N 47 a

> I «Stay ot * ooo Si we 4 gs

—

N a

— — — — _—_ ” — 1 2 —
n e .
2 N — 2 —— hp,

44

390 M E M OI R S
thoſe that had reaſon to reproach chenjſtbves with
not having yet ſtolen enough to put their thefts

Book XII.

in fecurity. The retrenching of part of thoſe
officers of all ranks, with which the bar and
the finances abounded, and which was done
at this time, was looked upon as the work of the
chamber of juſtice.
_ officers, as well as their extreme licentioulacſs,
are indubitable teſtimonies of the calamities that

are introduced into a ſtat e, and the forerunnets

of its ruin.

In May the King and Queen had the devotion
to celebrate the jubilee at Orleans. I attended

their Majeſties as far as half a league beyond Fon-
tainebleau, from whence they proceeded that
evening to Puilcaux, I took advantage of this
little vacation, to viſit the lands of Baugy, which

had been juſt awarded to me by a decree, for the

great ſums which were due to me from theſe
lands, and upon which I began to build imme-
Ciately With the confilcated money ! have lately
mentioned.
from the place where l intended to lie, by a con-
rier from his Majeſty, who called out to me while
I was yet a great way before him. Be broucht
me a letter from the King which contained only
theſe few words. [pave you fix days for your

journey 10 DBaugy, but I have received latters o
« great conſequence from Buzenval, which 1 war
** to. ſhew you; you will oblige me if you will
come and Ke ty-night here at Puiſeaux, whither
you need bring no _neceſſaries, 1 have given
£c

orders for your lodging, and ſent thither my

© hunting bed, and have ordered Coguet 10
6

get your ſupper ready, and your breakfaſt in
* the morning, for I will detain you no 10n; 149

40

Adieu, my beloved friend.“

I wiſhed my wif ie, who accompanied me, F
£005

The great number of thoſe

| was ſtopped Within two Jeagucs |

F 1601. QF: JFF

good night, and taking with me only two gentle-
men, a page, and a valet de chambre, and one
groom, I turned back to Puiſeaux, where I found

. — >

2 — — —
— — 2 2 2 . ore no : A. — *
—

the King, who was amuſing himſelf with ſeeing
the youth of bis train wreſtle and leap in the |
court-yard of the priory. As ſoon as he ſaw me, was
he called Paſquier, who had been ſent to him by (+ l
Villeroi, with Buzenval's letters, which informed 14 4 i
the King, that Prince Maurice had taken the field N {0
with his army, which he had increaſed with gar- _ Ha

\ riſons drawn out of their quarters, and eſcorted 1}
by two thouſand waggons : that, with this ar- Wh |
my, he intended (as Buzenval had learned from br ;
the Prince of Orange's officers, and from the 4 :
Prince himſelf) to croſs Brabant, the country of 1
Leige, Hainault, and Artois, to gain by it the ri- 1

—

vers along the frontiers of France, from whence
be expected aſſiſtance, and biing the war to the
neighbourhood of Gravelines, Berque-Saint-Vi-
| _nox, Dunkirk, and Nieuport; that the Archduke,

greatly inferior to the Prince of Orange, not ha»

—

- — N * — ONTTT" — Dern Inn Yet I et Ie 2 — Et
wm. . — 8 a Sew Ge. is "IA Saks i Sabin oY WTI TT IE RC
* 1 RRR e „r te
. 2 22 . * INKS pb -
—
3
*
* *

SLE —
c
76ß—I EEC Id "LAI

—_
—

— * —_— o + i£s
L + =" ge To —

—

*
ving yet received the troops which he expected 1
from Italy and Germany, beheld thoſe prepara- 4
tions with aſtoniſhment, and durſt not oppole his 1
| march, but that he conteated himſelf with being
near him, that he might oblige him to keep in i
TE

a narrow compals, and that while he obſtructed
him, be might be himſelf near the place where
he perceived the ftorm would fall; that, finding
this ſtep, which had been communicated to him,
of preat importance, he thought it was neceſſary
10 inform the King of it, owe
The knowledge I had of the Low- Countries
made this deſign of the Prince of Orange appear
to me fo dangerous, that I thought it likely to
draw upon him a total defeat, He would be
obliged to march a great way within view ot the
enemy, and upon their fronticts, through coun-

| 7, | tries

392 M E M OI R S Book Xl.
tries ſo full of woods, hedges, and hollow ways,

particularly in Liegeois, that T thought them im.

paſſable for ſuch a number of waggons; and the
King was of the ſame of opinion. After we had
conferred together a long time, he reſolved to
ſend Prince Maurice his ſentiments of it, and
I reſumed my rout to Baugy, in which I viſited

5 the lands of Sully, that I had a deſign of purcha—

fing, and did fo accordingly the following year,
The King continued his pilgrimage to Orleans,

and laid there the firſt ſtone for the rebuilding the

church of the holy croſs : he afterwards retained
to Paris, to which place [ had come three days
before his Majeſty,

Henry's letter changed the deſign of Naſſau;
he beſieged Rhimberg, and took it on the terth
of June. The Archduke Albert, in revenge, in:
veſted Oſtend on * the fifth of July. Mivrice,

on his ſide, laid ſiege to Bolduc, either to torce
the Archduke to abandon his enterpriſe, or to in-

demnify himſelf by the reduction of this place,

which was looked upon to be the moſt import:
ant fortreſs in Brabant. I was ſtill of opinion,

that he would do neither; and when the King.
ſent for me, to hear my ſentiments of it in the.

preſence of the courtiers who were by when th?
pacquet which brought the news was opencc,
and who all ſpoke difterently of it; ! Paid, that,
although I was very young when had viſited Bol-
duc, I had nevertheleſs preſerved the remem-
brance of the place, and that, not to mention

its ſituation, which rendered the ſiege of it a work

of immenſc labour, it leemed | to me e

It will be often mentioned; this ſiege, in which many brave
actions were performed on bo. b ſides, having laſicd abvuve three
years ; but for a minute detail of them, conſuit M. de Thov, Ls
Septcnnaiie, and other hiſtorlaus.

conſidering

w=oegEeo2cWHaenuwmwny —

gr „
conſidering the extent of the place, and the great
number of its citizens, to ſurround it in ſuch a
manner as to hinder any one from going in or
out, at leaſt without an army of twenty-five thou-
ſand men. In effect, the Prince of Orange failed
in his attempt upon Bolduc : but all this did not
happen till November.

The war breaking out ſo near our frontiers,
made Henry reſolve to go to Calais, as if he had
no other deſign but to viſit that country. Al-
though he always ſuſpected the Spaniards, he was
not apprehenſive, in the preſent ſtate of the af-
fairs of that crown, that they would be prevailed
on to break the peace: but he was not diſpleaſed
at having an opportunity to give them a little
uneaſineſs, in revenge for the daily occaſions of
diſcontent which he received from them. They
acted, indeed, in a manner ſufficient to have ob-
liged his Majeſty to do ſomething more, had not
policy prevailed over reſentment. After many
fruitleſs attempts to break the alliance between
the Swiſs cantons and France, and to hinder the
Pope from aQting as arbitrator in the diſpute a-
bout the marquiſate of Saluces, becauſe his Ho-
lIineſs could not diſpenſe with himfeif from gi-
ving judgment againſt the Duke of Savoy, they
bad ſent troops to that prince in the laſt cam-
paign, under the command of the Count de Fu-
entes. Their continued intrigues with Marechal
Biron, Bouillon, D'Auvergne, the Prince of Join-
ville, were publicly known, Biron himſelf had
_ confeſſed it to his Majeſty : and laſtly, the King,
at his return from Orleans, received certain in-
telligence of their practices with the cities of
Metz, Marſeilles, and Bayonne,

At all this his Majeſty diſſembled his diſpleaſure; „
but nothing provoked him againſt that crown ſo
much,

much, as the outrage * which La Rochepot, our
ambaſſador at Madrid, his nephew, and his Whole
train had received from that court. La- Roche pot
gave an account of it in his letters. I fear by
heaven,“ faid Henry tranſported with rage,
& that, if I can but once ſee my affairs in order,
„ and get a ſufficient ſupply of money, and what
« ever elſe is neceſſary, I will make fo furious q
« war upon them, that they ſhall repent of ha-
„ ving obliged me to take up arms.” However,

*

he ſtill ſhut his eyes upon ſo glaring a violation

of the rights of nations, but it was not without
doing great violence to his inclinations. * [I ſee
“ plainly,” ſaid this prince to me ſometime,
““ that, through emulation, jealouſy, and interct
«& of ſtate, France and Spain can never be on
friendly terms with each other, and that a pro-
« per ſecurity againſt that crown muſt have ſome?
« other foundation than words.“ He was ſullici-
ently convinced of the error in Villeroi and Sille-
ry's policy, who often, in his preſence, maintain:
ed againſt me, that a ſtrict union with Spain was
not only neither impoſſible nor dangerous for

France, but likewiſe the moſt reaſonable ſyſtem of

politics that ought to be embraced. To their ar-

guments I oppoſed that competition ſo natural tio
| theſe two crowns, the oppoſition of their inter-

eſts, and the remembrance of ſo many recent in-
Jjuries; and I concluded that, with a neighoour

* Antony de Silly, Count de la Rochepot. His nephew happen-

ing to bathe himſelf with ſome French gentlemen, was inſulted by

ſome Spaniards who flung his cloaths, and thoſe of his companions |

into the river. Theſe revenged themſelves for the affront by kills
_ Ing and wounding ſome of the Spaniards ; thoſe that fied toon after
returned to force open the ambaſſador's houſe, and thence dragged

his nephew to priſon, with others of his aſſociates that had taken

thelter there. This difference was compromited by the Pope, who cau-
ſed the priſoners to be (ent to bim to Rome, and delivered. them to
the Count de Bethune, brother to M. de Suliy, ambailador of I ance

at that court, See the aboye-mertioned hiſtorians for the year 3691+ |

394 M E MOI R S8 Book XII.

ſo artful and unjuſt, the neceſſary meaſures to be
taken were, to hold them always faſpefted, and
to be always prepared for defence. The laſt news
that came from Madrid gave me, for this time,
the advantage over my opponents, at leaſt in the
King's opinion, who heſitated no longer about go-
ing to Oſtend, after he had diſmiſſed two cele-

brated embaſſies, which he received about this

time.

One of theſe embaſſies was from the Grand
Seignior, who, knowing that the Sophy of Per-

ſia, bis enemy, had ſent a ſolemn depuration” to

the Pope, the Emperor, and the King of Spain,
without taking any notice of the King of France,

againſt whom he ſeemed to make an overture of his
alliſtance, at the ſame time that he aſked for theirs,
he was returning one act for another. His High-
neſs, on this occaſion, made uſe of his phyſician,

who * was a Chriſtian, and inveſted him with the

dignity of his ambaſſador. The terms in which

this haughty potentate expreſſed himſelf, with
regard to the French r, diſcovered a diſtindion
and reſpect, of which there are few examples;
he ſet a higher value, he ſaid, upon the friend-
ſhip and arms of the French, than of all the o-
ther Chriſtian nations together; and that, al-

though they ſhould all unite with Perſia againſt
him, he ſhould think himſelf in a condition to

deſpiſe their attempts, as ſoon as he had ſecured.

* Bartholomew Cœur, a renegado of Marſcilles. He demanded

of the King that the Duke of Merceur ſhould be recalled from Hun-
gary, becauſe, among the propheſies which the Turks believe, there
is one, they ſay, that the French ſhall drive the Turks out of Eu-
rope. 5 . 1 |

+ To the moſt glorious, moſt magnanimous and moſt illuſtrious

rince of the faith of Jeſus the compoſer of the differences that

happen between Chriſtian potentates, prince of grandeur, majeſty
and opulence, and the glorious leader of the greateſt ſubjes, Hen»
ry the IV. emperor of France; ſuch were the titles which his High-
nels gave the King. MSS, de la Biblioth. de Roi, vol. 9592.

the

Nn
1
« "
;
x ©!
2 i
d at
181
10
TA
[
1
N
*

4 IT

1601! O F $-U- LL 6 395

— — — g-A —
—— —— — — — Foo on .
IA — > We TIS — — = O
: _— — TT 8

— — —
4 N

.
—.. ] .
. ˖˙ De Ae:

0

a —— — =
— . ——
1 2 2 — —

—ͤ
"= 2
n
In

EEE Ta oy——_—

— 2 —
— —

—

N reid weliatone yt ED
re een c a need r..
645 "4 .

* 2
I
N ** —
e

—

4 —

—

-
—— — PPP r
4 — Nr NR P _ pore” 2
#3 2 2 2 2 N . 1 5 = f
ho * 2 POS «dC G3 -
> PT. -

——

.
*
n
8

© . ö ACE £3 ad
- 2 42 2 3 * 7 C
. 22 2 6s

z na EIS;

„ — 2 ho , hmm, 22 8

- 22 > 1 — 3 2 — i. Eo og eee N IC

— 4 * < - n * a £ £4 2 pe
CART . ——

RS,

—— —

A He ͤ ͤ IG DER SID rn

ISS

8 =» 5 —
4 — us
A —

— —

— — mw

—

— nd ee ths

— — on IE

a” — © =P 4

n - _

. 3 * Rt
— — - —

396 M E MOI R S Bock XI.
the alliance and aſſiſtance of a king, whoſe ſupe-

riority over his neighbours, as well as his great
perſonal qualities, he appeared not to be ignorant

of. The Turkiſh ambaſſador preſented his Ma-

jeſty with ſeveral rich preſents, and gave me two
ſcymetars of exquiſite ap onane which I keep
with great care.

The other ambaſſador was from the republic of
Venice. This ſtate had been a long time, by a
particular alliance often renewed, and by their
common intereſt, united with France againſt the

Spaniſh power: it had been amongſt the firſt in

complimenting his moſt Chriftian Majeſty upon
| his marriage and the peace, by the Sieurs Grace
nigo and Delfin, the laſt of whom was likewile

in this embaſſy. Henry was deſirous that theſe
ambaſſadors ſhould be received with the utmoſt

diſtinction in Paris. He ordered them to be ſer-

ved with his own plate, and loaded them with
_ preſents of equal value with thoſe he gave the
firſt, The letters he then wrote to me turned
_ almoſt wholly upon this head, for he was then at
Fontainebleau with the Queen, who was far advan-
ced in her pregnancy, upon which account the King
could not come immediately to Paris, and {till {cs
the Queen, who had fo great a concern in this

embaſſy. His Majeſty ſhewed ſo much reſpect for

the Venetian ambaſſadors, as not to ſuffer them
to wait for his return to Paris, but let them know
that he would receive them at Fontainebleau, to
which Foe his coaches and equipages attended
-* REM».
he en could not fail to ſoſpect, that
the King, by marching towards Calais, would en—
deavour to obſtruct their deſigns upon Oſtend, by
way of repriſal for the ill treatment La-Rochepot
had received In order to diſcover the purport of
this j Journey, they e to him the 0 of
018

Solre in the quality of ambaſſador, under a pre-

tence of making him the ſame compliments on the
Queen's pregnancy which he reccived from all
parts; enjoining this ambaſſador to inſinuate a

complaint of his journey, by which Solre gave a

fair opportunity to the King, who, inſtead of ſa-
tisfying him as to the occalion of his complaints,

made, in his turn, very heavy ones againſt Spain,
aſſuring him however, but in a general manner,

that he would not be the firſt to come to a rupture,
provided that the Spaniards did not force him to

it by continuing their unfair proceedings. With

this promiſe the ambaſſador pretended to be ſatis-

fied.
The Queen of England hearing the King was

at Calais, thought it a favourable opportunity to

ſatisfy her impatience of ſeeing and embracing her
beſt friend. Henry was not leſs deſirous of this

interview, that he might confer with the Queen
upon the affairs of Europe in general, as well as
on their own in particular, eſpecially thoſe which
had been juſt hinted to him by the Engliſh and
Dutch ambaſſadors when he was at Nantz, Eliſa-

beth firſt wrote him a letter equally polite and full
of offers of ſervice; ſhe afterwards made him the
_ uſual compliments, and repeated thoſe aſſurances

by the Lord Edmond, whom ſhe diſpatched io

Calais, till ſhe herſelf could arrive at Dover, from
whence ſhe ſent the Lord Sidney with other let-
n = 3 1 | | Ds

Henry reſolving not to be outdone in complai-
ſance, anſwered theſe advances in a manner that
ſhewed at once his reſpect for the ſex of Eliſabeth,

and his eſteem and admiration of her character.

This intercourſe continued a long time, to the
great mortification of the Spaniards, whole jealouſy

was ſtrongly excited by proximity and cloſe cor-

reſpondence. Of all the letters wrote by theſe
„„

Vol. II. LI :

ESE WF LL To

—
— wc} — —
— .
—

r
. bw 222 5

— — A
gs Cane _ _— —
© : 6 4 8 ""Y — 5 e 4 — 3 D 5 e Be .
A V 2 n —— 3 — Re 8 — 4
n n — —

—
— a4 — = TY —

—
a.
83 — — —

N 0 · . Mn err Th
Fr
— 22 n

—
4

> Fran in: r
1 2 =

«Ir ar 2; 9
3 . et ah a W * We 7
CCC

— e
r
= . -—_ <4 rr

*

338 MEMOIRS Book XII.

two ſovereigns on this occaſion, I am poſſeſſed on.

ly of that in which Eliſabeth informs the King of

thoſe obſtacles that prevented her conferring with
him in perſon, lamenting the unhappineſs of prin-
ces, Who, contrary to their inclinations, were
ſlaves to forms and fettered by circumſpeQion,
This letter *, becauſe it was the occaſion of the

voyage I made to this Princeſs, I have kept in my
| Hands; in it ſhe tells her moſt dear and well be-

loved brother (for ſo ſhe called the King of France)

that her concern at not being able to ſee him was

ſo much the greater, as ſhe had ſomething to com-
municate to him which ſhe durſt not confide to any
other perſon or commit to. paper, and yet that ſhe
was upon the point of returning to London.

The King's curioſity was ſtrongly excited by |
theſe laſt words; in vain did he torture his ima-

This letter, and this whole relation of the Duke of Sully's con-
cerning Henry IV.'s journey to Calais, and Elizabeth's to Do-
ver, appear ſufficient, without any other feflections, to ſhew the er-
1or of all theſe various judgments current at that time, and which
have been mentioned by different hiſtorians concerning theſe two
potentates. It was faid Elifabeth propoſed to Henry, either that he

 thould come to Dover, or at leaſt confer with her in a veſſel half

way between theſe two towns, and that this propoſal concealed a ſnare
in which Eliſabeth hoped to entrap Henry, by ſeizing upon his per-

fon in the interview, and keeping him priſoner till he reſtored Calais,

and that Henry excuſed himſelf from complying with her requeſt,
only becauſe he ſuſpected the deſign ; others ſay, becauſe his fears of

the ſea were ſo great, that he durſt not venture into a veſſel. No
one ſuſpected the true motive for propoſing this interview, which

was the occaſion of all theſe letters that paſſed between them, and
cauſed the Duke of Sully. to make the ſecret voyage to Dover, of
which be here gives an account. Siri, on this occaſion, builds upon
the reſentment which he ſuppoſes Eliſabeth always preſerved, both

of the peace of Vervins and the ſurrender of Calais, as well as her

fear leſt Henry ſhould aggrandiſe himſelf too much, and on the jea*

| louſy which the Engliſh entertained of the French. Mem. Recond.

vol 1. p 130. 150. Cc. But this writer, ſo well acquainted with

foreign negotiations, eſpecially thoſe of Italy and Spain, is not right,

neither in the facts nor the opinions which he produces concerning

the interior of our court and councils under the reign of Henry IV.

He knew neither this prince nor the Duke of Sully, ;
gination

160

bei

gination to gueſs their pur port. „ Pete Feret
being ſent by him to fetch me, “I have juſt now

& received letters,” ſaid he to me, © from my
good ſiſter the Queen of England, whom you
« admire ſo greatly; they are fuller of civilities

„than ever; ſee if you will have more ſucceſs

„than I have had in diſcovering her meaning.”
I agreed with Henry that it muſt be ſomething

of great conſequence which induced her to ex-
preſs herſelf in this manner; it was reſolved,

therefore, that I ſhould embark the next day for

Dover, as if with no other deſign than to take
advantage of the ſhortneſs of the paſſage to make
a tour to London, which would give me an op-
portunity of ſceing what ſtep the Queen would
take upon my arrival, neither the King nor 1
_ doubting but that ſhe would be immediately in-

formed of it. I acquainted no one with my in-

_ tended paſſage, but ſuch of my domeſtics as were
to attend me, and of theſe I took but * very ſmall

number.

[ embarked early in the morning, and revered
Dover about ten o'clock, where, among the crowd
of thoſe who endbacked and diſembarked, I was

immediately diſcovered by the Lord Sidney, who

five or ſix days before had ſeen me at Calais :

with him were Cobham, Raleigh, and Griffin, and |

they were ſoon after joined by the Earls of De-

vonſhire and Pembroke. Sidney embraced me,
and aſked me, if I was come to ſee the Queen?
I told I was not, and even aſſured him, that the

King knew nothing of my voyage: I likewiſe en

treated him not to mention it to. the Queen, for
not having bad any intention of paying my re-
ſpects to her, I had no letter to preſent, my de-
ſign being only to make a ſhort tour incognito to

London. Theſe gentlemen replied ſmiling, that

I bad taken a uſeleſs precaution, for that pro-
LI 2 9

4
( 6: :
1
|
F 4
4 483)
WIG |

THAI +1
. -
we” Z :
11
HER
* N
0
1
K ht
NH i Ti
i
7 : 5 ,
: +. * 1
IT : Ul
23.3: 3%* WM
4 p 4
87 Ab
bs : YL
1% + N 1
0

1 4.
432) 4
= |

A1

Fred © ö
1 1
1414 ;
1411 1
4 q
1
Ki 1 x
.

”»

P 4 . *
ws þ
4! 179
N *

.
if j
3:

(4783 * 24
*h4 } a
94 ,

— 4} {2+

4 9 1
44-7 48
(4 .
4
* 1
.

9 *.
+34 14
, 7
ö * 1 7

11
1 1
1

1

: Ky
a B05
ob 1 1

4
74 ;
e

17 19
ry
7 * 1
„4 7
1
te

"> 65, 8a
1
' 1. Þ

; vat 4

1 47 \
1 11 6
$77 *Jy 7

a 2 *; 1 0

4
4 4
wt | 5
YG - " 1
19
SY
* .

1 1
1
„0

771 ; 41

118 15;

* 38.18

132

PANE

. Rm
1 .

3 bh
--

37

8 :

' FF

1 4 8

4's 5
— 1

18 5 F
:

. 7

} \
* 1 1
ky ::þ *

0 9
U 1 1 „

— ” *

8 i
+4504

. s- = 1
4.8 i
* 3X i
4 0

„ 1

29-0 }
* b 1
1.

5 4 '

Ne i

| Rail Þ
l x

7 7 i

14 #
8 4
Te | I

e
Fl is [

4 .
* 4

1 ut

F-1 4
15 4 *”
* *

1% *
— *
e <4 *

7 i} 2
+81 7
8
88
1

1

. 81

i. tis

.

, is

1 »

. 4
THE: ©

=—
1
.

U 4 »
2.4 1
38" 4 4
7:7. 6-238
3* 4
> FF Y

, A i* 5

7 **

1

1

1 - Ir

1 ? s
n

a 1

*

5 *

Ay [4 3
: :
; F : *

17

's ks l
JS {4

: 147
. 4 i
{34 * 4

$118

oy 4

* Lo 8
5

142 *; 3
45 *

4 5
FF '* 2
N Ta

4 * 1
14 N 1
» 7
: 15
[7 85” Y
.
N oo

"414 14
nn 0
.
4
* 1 *
1
*

"200. M E M O 1 R 8 Book XII.

bably the guardſhip had already given a ſignal of

my arrival, and that I might quickly expect to
ſee a meſſenger from the Queen, who would not

ſuffer me to paſs in this manner, having but three

days ago ſpoke of me publicly, and in very ob-

liging terms. I affected to be extremely concern-

ed at this alas accident, but to hope never.
theleſs, that I might ſtill paſs undiſcovered, pro-
_ vided that theſe gentlemen would be ſecret as to

the place where I was to lodge; from whence, 1
aſſured them, I would immediately depart as ſoon

as I had taken a little refreſhment : ſaying this, I
left them abruptly, and had but juſt entered my

apartment, and ſpoke a few words to my people,

when I felt ſomebody embrace me from behind,

who told me, that he arreſted me as a priſoner

to the Queen. This was the captain of her
guards, whoſe embrace I returned, and replied
ſmiling, that I ſhould eſteem ſuch impriſonment
a great honour.

His orders were to acted me directly to ths:
Queen; I therefore followed him. *© It is well,
«« M. de Roſny,” ſaid this Princeſs to me as foon

as I appeared; © and do you break our fences
„thus and paſs on without coming to ſee me? I
© am greatly ſurpriſed at it, for I thought you
© bore me more affection than any of my ſer—
<« vants, and I am perſuaded that I have given

„ you no cauſe to change thoſe ſentiments,” 1

replied in few words, but ſuch as ſo gracious a re-

. ception required. After which I began, without

any diſguiſe, to entertain her with thoſe ſenti-

ments the King my maſter had for her. To give

you a proof,” replied ſhe, © that I believe all

you have told me of the goodwill of the King

„ my brother, and of your own, I will diſcourſe
©. with you on the ſubject of the laſt letter I wrote
Fi. to him; though perhaps you have ſeen it, for
bo * Stafford

- J PIE Re OT ONE Ea Oh 1111 ᷣ ooo oe ĩ¾ v ² a Bil.”

40 ad a. d ꝗqęngg̃ — hp ̃§³ . ] — U

1% OF: 8 U L. L . 401

« Stafford (that is the name of the Lord Sidney)

& and Edmund tell me, that the King conceals

& few of his ſecrets from you.“ She then crew
me aſide, that ſhe might ſpeak to me with the

greateſt freedom, on the preſent ſtate of affairs in
Europe; and this the did with ſuch ſtrength and

clearneſs, beginning from the treaty of Vervins,
| that | was convinced this great Queen was truly |
worthy of that high reputation ſhe had acquired
in Europe. She entered into this detail, only to
ſhew me how neceſſary it was that the King of

France ſhould, in concert with. her, begin to exe-
cute thoſe great deſigns which they both medita-

ted againſt the houſe of Auſtria, The neceſſity of

this ſhe founded upon the acceſſions this houſe was

daily ſeen to make: ſhe repeated to me all that had
paſſed on this ſubje& in 1598, between the King

and the Englith and Dutch ambaſſadors, and aſk-
ed me if this Prince did not till continue to have

the ſame ſeatiments, and why he fo long delayed

to begin the enterprize? __ 1
To theſe queſtions of Queen Eliſabeth, I an-
ſwered, That his Moſt Chriſtian Majeſty ill con-

tinued to think of that affair as he always had

done: that the men and money he was raiſing,
and the other warlike preparations he was ma-
king, were deſtined to no other pur poſe than the

execution of the concerted plan; but that in France
things were far from being in ſuch a ſtate, as to

enable him to undertake the deſtruction of a

power ſo ſolidly eſtabliſhed as that of the Auſtrian

princes. This I proved, by the extraordinary

expences Henry had been at ſince the peace of

| Vervins, as well for the general neceſſities of his

kingdom, as to reſtrain the attempts of the ſe-

ditious, and to carry on the war which he had
juſt ended with Savoy. 1 did not diſſemble with

1 2 > 12 * FEA... 1 * } 1 f EY
£135 pill Ct E he Opinion L. Had al 78 entertain
7 1 . l

* an 3 : {4 4

wad

3 * - 2 3 — — — — — 8 :
. r 8 2 * S FS > r Wi tr — - -— x —
—— ns oi. 2 — — 2 — 8 i. 8 r . 0
* 3 — — —— — FRE. Los = - 5 IX * - —
: — — ———
— 4 — — ä —— = - "oy
: 2 * — - — < ; — —
— — 3
= bo 1 =
— "

4 — ˙ ob et oe Mm -—-
„ 8 — — — *

* „ . 1 - -
a ad Bt, 7 — PR. ASE] 8 _ - % =
wi — oy ; « meg. » > aw Re -
— r . w
ww I 2m.

- —_—_ — *
DN NE Dn nr
S
e 1

—
"4 = — Bonne iy
FT COT r — — _
EET A tC ED _.. are eo. =
terre : — 2

wy

00h Tu, my eo RS 45-17 eg .

0 ³˙ AA A 2 —
8 r
.

_— —

492 un f M O 1 K 8 Penn

ed of this enterprize, which is, that though Eng.

land and the United-Provinces ſhould ufe their
utmoſt endeavours to reduce the houfe of Au-
ſtria, unleſs they were aſſiſted by all the forces

of the French monarchy, and on whom, for ma-

ny reaſons, the chief weight of this war muſt fall,

the houſe of Auſtria, by uniting the forces of j is
two branches, might, without any difficulty, not
only ſapport itſelf againſt them, but even ren-

der the balance equal; it would therefore be uſe.

leſs, and even an imprudent attempt, to endea-

vour to. ſap the foundations of fo formidable a
power, by the ſame means only that ſerve mere:
ly to kcep upon the defenſive with it: and it
would be indiſpenſably neceſſary to defer the at-
tempt for ſome years, during which France would
acquire all ſhe now wanted, to enable her to ſtrike
more effectually the blow that was preparing for
the common enemy; and would, in conjunction
with her allies, endeavour to engage the neigh-
bouring princes and ſtates in their deſign, the
Princes of Germany eſpecially, who were more
immediately threatened by the tyranny of the
houſe of Auſtria.

It was eaſy for the Queen of England to com-

pre hend, by the manner in which I expreſſed |
myſelf, that theſe were not ſo much my own as
Henry's ſentiments, which I communicated to her,

and ſhe gave me tv underſtand as much, by con-
feeſſing, that they appeared ſo juſt and reaſonable
to her, that ſhe could not avoid adopting them:

adding only, that there was one point on Which

all the parties could not be too ſoon agreed,
which was, that the ultimate view of the intend-

ed combination being to confine the power of:

the houſe of Auſtria within juſt bounds, it would
be neceſſary that each of the allies ſhould ſo
proportion all his deſires « or Expectations, m__

bs

3 —

or OF U L-$ oy
he might conceive in conſequence of the e-
vent, as that none of them might be capable of
giving umbrage to the reſt : ſuppoſing, for ex-
ample, that Spain ſhould be deprived of the Low-
Countries, neither the whole nor any part of this
ſtate was to be coveted, either by the King of
France, or the King of Scotland, who would one
day become ſo of Great Britain, nor yet by the
| Kings of Sweden and Denmark, already ſuffici-
ently powerful by ſea and land, to make them
ſelves reſpected by the other allies ; and that the
ſame conduct ought to be obſerved with regard
to all the other ſpoils that might be taken from
the houſe of Auſtria, by thoſe princes whoſe do-
minions ſhould happen to be neareſt to the con-
quered countries; For if my brother the King of
France,“ ſaid ſhe, *f ſhould think of making him-
6“ ſelf proprietor, or even only feodal lord of the
„  United-Provinces, I ſhould never conſent to it,
but entertain a moſt violent jealouly of him;
„ nor ſhould I blame him, if, giving him the
« ſame occaſion, he ſhould have the ſame fears
e of me.“ „ e |
Theſe were not the only reflections made by
the Queen of England; ſhe ſaid many other things,
which appeared to me ſo juſt and ſenſible, that I
was filled with aſtoniſhment and admiration. It
is not unuſual to behold princes form great de-
ſigns; their ſphere of action ſo forcibly inclines
them to this, that it is only neceſſary to warn
them of the extreme, which is, the projecting
What their powers are fo little proportioned to
perform, that they ſcarce ever find themſelves
able to execute the half of what they propoſed ;
but to be able to diſtinguiſh and form only ſuch as
are reaſonable ; wiſely to regulate the conduct of
them; to foreſee and guard againſt all obſtacles
in ſuch a manner, that when they happen, no-
. „ 5 thing

thing more will be neceſſary, than to apply the
remedies prepared long before; this is what few
. princes are capable of, Ignorance, proſperity, luxy-
Ty, vanity, nay, even fear and indolence, daily pro-
duce ſchemes, to execute which there is not tke
leaſt poſſibility. Another cauſe of ſurpriſe to me,
Was, that Eliſabeth and Henry, having never con—
ferred together on their political project, ſhould

apree ſo exactly in all their ideas, as not to differ

even in the moſt minute particulars, .
The Queen obſerving my eyes were attentive-

ly fixed on her without ſpeaking, imagined ſhe

had expreſſed herſelf fo confufedly in ſomething

ſhe had faid, that I was unable to comprehend
her meaning. But when I ingenuouſly confeſſed
to her the true cauſe of my ſilence and ſurpriſe,
ſhe then, without ſcruple, entered into the moſt
minute parts of the deſign : but as I ſhall have
an. ample occaſion to treat of this, in relating

the great ſchemes which were prevented by the

untimely death of Henry IV, I ſhall not trouble
the reader with uſeleſs repetitions ; but in this

place juſt ſhew the five principal points to which

her Majeſty reduced ſo extenſive a ſcheme, as from

the ſequel of theſe memoirs this will appear t9
have been. The fir ſt was to reſtore Germany to its

antient liberty, in reſpe& to the election of its
emperors, and the nomination of a king of the

Romans. The ſecond, to render the United-Pro-
vinces abſolutely independent of Spain; and to

form them into a republic, by annexing to them,
if neceſſary, ſome provinces diſmembered from
| Germany. The third, to do the ſame in regard
to Switzerland, by incorporating with it ſome of
the adjacent provinces, particularly Alſace and
 Franche-Compte. The fourih, to divide all Chriſten-

dom into a certain number of powers, as £qu#1 43
may be. Ihe fiſih, to reduce all the valious re:

' yz i 0
*.-

44 MEM O-I R S8 Bookyn:

—

3 2 Q, ammo oc

wh OO

=

061 0” 5 ee

Our conference was very long. I cannot be-
ſtow praiſes upon the Queen of England that

would be equal to the merit which I diſcovered

in her in this ſhort time, both as to the qualities

of the heart, and the underſtanding. I gave an
exact relation of every thing that paſſed between

us to the King, who very highly approved all
ſhe had ſaid to me, Their Majeſties correſpond-

ed by letters, during the reſt of the time they
ſtayed at Dover and Calais. All preliminaries
were agreed on; meaſures were taken even on the
grand object of the deſign, but with ſuch” ſecre-

iy, that the whole of this affair remained to the

| death of the King, and even much longer, a-
mong the number of thoſe on which only vari-

ous and uncertain conjectures are formed.
The King did not return to Paris till he had

carefully examined all the fortreſſes upon his
frontier, and provided for their ſecurity : in eve-

ry other reſpect, he appeared an indifferent ſpec-
tator of the quarrel between the Spaniards and

the Flemiſh; and all he did in favour of Oſtend,
the ſiege of which was ſtill continued, was not to
binder ſome French from engaging in the ſervice
ok the Prince of Orange, in which ſeveral of
them loſt their lives: amongſt theſe, the death of
young * Chatillon-Coligny, whoſe head was ſhot

off by a cannon-ball before Oſtend, deſerved to

be particularly lamented. The King, when he
was told it, faid publicly, that France had loſt a

Henry de coligny, Lord of Chatillon, ſon to Franeis, and

grandſon to the Admiral de Coligny: he carried to the aſſiſtance of
Ostend a regiment of 800 French. According to Brantome, the

houſe of Chatillon- Coligny came originally from Savoy, of a very

noble and antient lineage, as he ſays, and who were formerly fove-

teign princes, and very powerful, Tom. 3. p. 173. +11

Y 4%
ligions in it under thoſe three which ſhould appear
to be moſt numerous and conſiderable in Europe.

4 MEMOIRS Book XII.

man of great merit: myſelf, in particular, was
ſenſibly afflicted at his death. Coligny, at an
early age had already united almoſt all the quali.
ties that form a ſoldier ; valour, moderation, pru-
dence, judgment, and the art of making himſelf
equally beloved by the foldier and officer,
But Coligny was a Proteſtant ; and the jealou-
ſy of the courtiers ſoon converted all theſe vir-
tues into ſo many crimes, in the opinion of the
King; they told his Majeſty, that Coligny already
aſpired to the diſtinction of being head of the
Proteſtants, both within and without the king-
dom, to which he was ſolicited by the Duke of
Bouillon; that he defired nothing with ſo much
ardour as to equal, or even to ſurpaſs, the ge-
tions of his father and grandfather; and had
been heard to declare, that he ſhould not re-
gret the loſs of life, if he had the ſatisfaction to
| loſe it at the head of an army, fighting for the
Preſervation of his friends. His affection for the
ſoldiers was treated as an artful and dangerous
artifice, They hinted to the King, that he had
already raiſed a jealouſy in the Prince of Orange;
and that his Majeſty would one day have reaſon
to fear a ſhoot from a ſtock that had given ſo
much trouble to our kings. Henry was ſo far in-
fluenced by theſe inſinuations, that when I went
to aſk ſome favours of him for the mother and bro:
tber of Coligny, he dwelt continually upon what be
had heard, and had given but too much credit
to, and appeared to me not only full of inditfer-
"ence for the death of Coligny, but alſo ſo great-
ly prejudiced againſt the whole family, that de-

ſiſted from a ſolicitation which could not but be

prejudicial to myſelf, my connections and con-
formity of religion with the deceaſed conſidered.
The King, at his return to Fontainebleau, had

| the pleaſure to find the Queen in as good a 2

5
=
E
R
*
<>
*
1
t
8
4
*,
.
* *
7
- 9
. 1
A
5
*
5
2
=
1 Fe)
.
*
1
8
22
L008
Pet?
2.
*
*
"=
2

1601. O F 8 UL. L I. 407

health as he left her. He was ſeldom from her
during her pregnancy, and took all poſſible care
of her health *. In a letter he wrote to me ſome
days before the Queen lay in; he ſays, © Bring no
« people of buſineſs with you at this time: no
% mention muſt be made of it during the firſt
« week of my wife's lying in; we ſhall have
e ſufficient employment to hinder her from get-
«BO. EE ate oe NT oe $3
At length, the moment that was to fill the King,
the Queen, and the whole kingdom with joy, ar-
rived ; the Queen was, on the 17th of Septem-
ber +, delivered of a fon, whoſe ſtrong health,
as well as the Queen's, filled the kingdom with,
the moſt agreeable hopes . I believe I may ven-
ture to affirm, that this incident gave me more
joy than any one elſe. I was attached to the
King's perſon by the moſt tender ties of affec-
tion, an affection which [ felt in a higher degree
than the moſt faithful of his ſubjects, and was
therefore more intereſted in his happineſs. He.
was ſo well convinced of this truth, that he did
me the honour to give me notice of the birth of
his ſon in a billet, which, at ten o'clock at night,
he ſent from Fontainebleau to Paris, where I then
was; it contained only theſe few words: The

2 TOW * 8
1 p — . — vu : - 2
F —

* « We read,” ſays Bayle, in the Rep. de Lett. for January,
1686, © that Henry recommended to Louiſa Bourgeois, a very ſkile
© ful midwife, who laid the Queen, to perform her office ſo care -
© fully, as that there might be no occaſion for employing a man-
* midwife, Since this,” added he, © would ſhock female modeſty.”
I On Thurſday night, about midnight. 3
I Perefixe ſays, © The King, imploring the bleſſing of heaven
upon the infant, gave him alſo his own benediction, and put his
* ſword into his hand, praying God, that he would be pleaſed to
© give him grace to make uſe of it only for his glory, and the de-
© fence of his people.” Matthieu ſpeaks in the very ſame terms:
„My deareſt,” ſays he to the Queen, © be of good cheer, for God
has granted us what we wanted.” This writer adds, that a ſhock
of an earthquake was felt two hours after midnight. Tom. 2. I. 3,

p. 441. 2
* Queen

w_—_

»
4
10
;
.
A
« *
7
2
{
2
\
"SO
*
82
3
7 1
a.
*
Y =
P 72
32 25
HY
*4 $20
*
:

48 M E M O I R S Book KI

6 Queen is juſt delivered of a ſon ; I ſend you

be the news, that you may rejoice with me.” Be.

ſides this billet, which he wrote as to a friend, he

| ſent me another the next morning by La-Varenne,
as grand maſter of the ordnance ;z he there men.

tioned the birth of the Dauphin, as an occa-

ſion of inexpreſſible delight to him, “Not ſo
« much,” ſaid he, for the near concern I have

in this incident, as for the general good of my

e ſubjects.“ He ordered me to fire the cannon
of the arſenal; which was performed in ſuch a

manner, that the report was heard even at Fon.

tainebleau. On this occaſion it was not neceſſary
to order public rejoicings : all his Majeſty's ſuh-
jects, from the firſt to the meaneſt, concurred in
giving demonſtrations of it, in which fear and
policy had no part, EP

The King's ſatisfaction was only interrupted

by a light indiſpoſition, which he had drawn.

upon himſelf, La-Riviere was his firſt phyſician,
a man who had little more religion than thoſe
generally have that blend it with the profeſſion
of judicial aſtrology ; yet the world did him the
honour to ſuppoſe, that he concealed the prin-
ciples of a Proteſtant under the appearance of a
Catholic. Henry, who already felt a tenderneſs

for his ſon, that filled him with an eager auxiety

to know his fate, having heard that La-Rivicre

had often ſucceeded wonderfully in his predic-

tions, commanded him to calculite the Dauphin's

nativity, with all the ceremonies of his art; and

that the exact moment of his birth might be
known, had carefully ſought for the moſt excellent
| watch that could be procured. It appeared, that the
King thought no more of this deſign till about 2
fortnight after, when he and I being alone toge-

ther, the coverſation turned upon the predictions

of La-Broſſe, which I have formerly mentioned,

concerning

ʒ11111

concerning his Majeſty and me, which we had
found ſo exactly accompliſhed, Henry's inclina-
tion to make the experiment with his ſon re—
ceiving new ſtrength by this diſcourſe, he order
ed La-Riviere to be ſent for.

The phyſician, without taking any notice of it,

had proceeded in his work, © M. de La-Riviere,”
ſaid the King to him, © we have been talking of
« aſtrology z what have you diſcovered concern-

« ing my ſon?” © I had begun my calcula-
« tions,” replied La-Riviere, © but I left them un-

ſincere, and that he concealed his thoughts, ei-
ther through an apprehenſion of offending his

Majeſty, or from an effect of ill humour, whim,

or the caution of an aſtrologer, who held it dan-

gerous to diſcloſe his ſecrets. ** I ſee plainly,” faid
Henry, “that you are not reſtrained by motives

of conſcience; you are not of the number of

whatever it be, I will know it, and 1 com-

« ly.” La-Riviere ſuffered himſelf to be preſſed

ſtill longer; and at laſt, with a diſcontented air, ei-
tber real or diſſembled, ſaid, ** Sire, your ſon will
live out the common age of a man, and will
reign longer than you; but his inclination and
* yours will be very different; he will be ob
ſtinate in his opinions, often governed by his

own whims, and ſometimes by thoſe of others:
it will be ſafer then to think than to ſpeak : 2

40
e
40

impending ruin threatens your former ſociety:
all the effects of FRE prudence will be de-
Tok 3h. M m " * ſiroyed:

finiſhed, not caring any longer to amuſe myſelf
with a ſcience which I have always believed to
be, in ſome degree, criminal.” The King im-
mediately diſcovered, that this anſwer was not

perſons that are fo very ſcrupulous; but, in re-
ality, you are afraid of not being able to tell
me the truth, or of making me angry; but

mand you, on my diſpleaſure, to ſpeak free-

— me : 2

— —
— — —
— — A

| |
I
g
N
1

— a 7
« dy > x 22

— —
— — — —

Wn.

—— F ———

40 M E M OI R S Book All,

„e ſtroyed: he will perform great things, will be

& fortunate in his deſigns, and make a great fi-
« pure in Europe: in his time there will be a
4“ viciſſitude of peace and war: he will have chil-
& dren; ; and after him things will grow worſe.
* This is all you can know from me, and more
e than I had reſolved to tell you.” The King,

after muſing a little while on what he had heard,
laid to La-Riviere, You mean the Proteſtants, :

& know; but you ſpeak thus becauſe you are

„ well inclined towards them.” I underſtand,”

faid La-Riviere, * what you would have; but [

* ſhall ſay no more.” His Majeſty and I conti.

nued together a long time in converſation, ma-
king reflections on every word that had been ſpo-

| ken by La-Riviere, which remained ngy on

: the King's mind,

It was not poſſible for me to 11 long at Fon-

ulnebleau ; but the King continued to give me,

with great kindneſs, an account of every thing

that happened. © You cannot imagine,” ſays he
in one of his letters, how well my wife is re-
covered of her lying-in ; ſhe dreſles her 7
« herſelf, and talks already of getting up.”

another, nine days after her delivery, he 2
« The Queen goes already into her cloſet; ſhe

has a conſtitution ſurpriſingly ſtrong : my ſon

4 likewiſe is very well, I thank God: theſe are
© the beſt news I can ſend a faithful and affec-

cc tionate ſervant, whom I tenderly love ““
Henry ſent his fon to Saint-Germain to be nurſed,
on account of the goodneſs of the air: and by

one of thoſe little ſtrokes of popularity, whi: be

ſhew the heart better than more oſtentatious ac-
tions, he would have him ſhewn to all Paris fer

* The original of this letter of Hay IV. to M. de Sully is fill
extant; it is dated from Fontainebleau the 27th of Auguit. Cabi-
net de N. le duc de Su! iy, 85
Which

— AQ 2 ef

J i = OI oe CO:
which purpoſe, he was carried only through the
' midſt of this great city, The Pariſians, by repeat-
ed acclamations, expreſſed their pleaſure at this
_ ſight. 5 .
” The King had made a promiſe to the Queen,
that, if ſhe brought him a ſon, he would preſent
her with the caſtle of Monceaux. My wife,”
iid he in a letter to me, © has gained Monceaux,
«© by giving me a ſon; therefore I defire you
&« will ſend for the Preſident Forget, to confer
with him about this affair, and take his ad-
vice concerning the ſecurity that muſt be gi-
ven to my children, for the ſum which I pay
for Monceaux.” The city of Paris having
| likewiſe promiſed the Queen a preſent of a ſuit of
tapeſtry-hangings for her lying-in, his Majeſty,
in this letter, re-minded me to demand it. An
infanta * was born in Spain, about the ſame time
that Providence gave a prince to France,
The negotiation, ſo many years depending
with the Grand Duke of Florence, was conclu-
_ ded this year: that the reader may underſtand
the occaſion of it, it is neceſſary he ſhould know,
that, under the reign of Henry III. Ferdinand de
Medicis, Grand Duke of Florence, took advan-
tage of the troubles that then raged in France,
to poſſeſs himſelf of the little iſles of Pomegue,
Ratoneau, and If, with its caſtle in the neigh-
bourhood of Marſeilles. Henry, fully reſolved to
make the Grand Duke reſtore them, ordered D'Oſ-
fat, who was then on the other ſide of the Alps,
to demand them, in the year 1568, The Grand
Duke, not daring to refuſe them abſolutely, re-
preſented only, that he had expended great ſums
of money upon theſe iſles, which he could not
reſolve to loſe : D'Oſſat of himſelf removed this

Anna Maria Mauriette, afterwards Queen of France, born =
22d of September. ny | .

0

Mm 2 obſtacle,

4112 M E MO IR S Bock XII.

obſtacle, by engaging, that the King his maſter
ſhould indemnify him for theſe expences, by pay.
Ing him three hundred thouſand crowns, for which
twelve of the richeſt and moſt conſiderable per-

ſons in France ſhould be ſecurity *, as if his Mz.
_ jeſty alone had not been ſufficient to anſwer for

10 ſmall a ſum. The King, without greatly at.
| tending to this condition, ratified this treaty ;

and a ſhort time after the Chevalier Vinta was

ſent by the Duke of Florence to conclude, with
Gondy, the buſineſs of the iſles upon this plan,
The two agents did not go out of the counci!

to {eek for their ſecurities, and the affair was pro-

poſed to me amongſt the reſt : this method of pro-
ceeding with a king, whoſe power no part of Eu.
rope was ignorant of, appeared to me ſo uncom-

mon, that I could not help laughing at thoſe who

mentioned it to me, Villeroi took pains to re-
preſent to me the neceſſity of diſengaging D'Oſſat

from his word, I replicd, that there never had

been any bankers in my family; for, indeed, this

was rather the buſineſs of bankers than of gentle-

men. None of the others, ſaid Villeroi, have
made any difficulty about it, I believe it, an-

ſwered I with ſome indignation ; for they are all

either deſcended from traders or lawyers, Here-

»IT bis is, in eſſcct, the import of the fifth article of the treaty.

that paſſed on the iſt of May, 1598, between the King of France
and the grand Duke of Tuſcany, by the intervention of Cardinal
d'Oſſat, which may be ſen at full length at the end of the collec-
tion of this Cardinal's letters. The Duke of Sully does not here
reproach M. D'Oſſat with any thing which he had not already excu-
ſed in the letter which he wrote to his: Majeſty, on the 5th of May
1598, immediately after the concluſion of this treaty, and likewiſe

in that to M. de Villeroi of the 4th of Auguſt following. He at-

terwards cleared himſelf more fully, in a long memorial, which is
alſo inſerted at the end of this collecton. However, we cannot think
the reaſons which M. de Sully produces againſt this convention
groundleſs, nor believe that the Duke of Florence would have broke
the treaty without that condition, N

pon

77S

upon there aroſe a diſpute in the council, which
was reported to the King, who only ſmiled and
ſaid, they had done wrong to mention it to me
without firſt informing him, ſince he had not ac-

uainted me with it himſelf. 1 am aſtoniſhed,

added he, that he did not give a ſtill ruder an-
ſwer: you cannot be ignorant of his temper, and

how highly he values himſelf upon the nobility

ok his birth: let this affair be concluded without

his or any other perſon's entering into any obli-

oation, I gave no permiſſion to the Biſhop of

Rennes to agree to ſuch an expedient. The Grand
Duke did not allow himſelf to be ſolicited upon this

head; he ſet the King free from the obligation
of the twelve ſecurities, out of regard to his per-

fon. The act for it was paſſed on the fourth of

Auguſt, 1598; but the affair was on neither ſide
concluded till the Chevalier Vinta arrived in

1601.
L was like wife amployed to ſettle certain eſſates
in Piedmont, for which the Count of Soiſſons

was deſirous of treating with his Majeſty ; they

came to him by the death of the Princeſs of
Conti, in right of his wife who was of the houſe

of Montafhe, My report was not very fa-
_ vourable for the Count: I repreſented to the

King, that theſe eſtates, which had been too high-
ly valued, were likewiſe ſubject to ſo much litiga-
tion, and were ſo diſadvantageouſly ſituated, that

theſe conſiderations ougbt greatly to eſſen. the

price. The Count of Soiſſons thought proper
to diſſemble the reſentment he entertained againſt
me for this declaration.

Freſne-Canaye was appointed ambaſfidor to

„ and Bethune my brother to Rome, to
the great mortification of the other miniſters, e-

ſpecially Villeroi and Sillery, with whom I had

often diſputes, which the King had many times

M m 3 endeavoured

8

o A ˙ - W CE ne
83

% MEMOIRS ben x.

endeavoured to prevent. Theſe two gentlemen

had undertaken to exclude me from any concern
in, foreign affairs, the cognizance of which, they

pretended, belonged only to them. The nomi-

nation to embaſſies falling under this head, they

told his Majeſty, in my preſence, that, for the

embaſſy to Rome, they had abler perſons to pro-

pole to them than Bethune, who, they ſaid, had |
no knowledge of the affairs of that court, and

bad. yet performed no conſiderable ſervice to the
ſtate. My brother had, however, already been
charged with the embaſſy to Scotland, of which
he had acquitted himſelf well; and it could not
be denied that he was circumſpect, wiſe, and ho-
neſt ; qualities which, in my opinion, ate not a-
mong the leaſt that are eſſential tio an ambaſſador,

What theſe gentlemen ſaid, therefore, was as falſe _
as it was contemptuous ; and this I made them
ſenſible of in my anſwer, by ſhewing them the

value of thoſe ſervices which the ſtate received

from the military art, and which thoſe gentlemen
ſeemed to place below all others. |

Villeroi, piqued in his turn that T had not gi-

ven the firſt rank to his, maintained his cauſe
With great heat and animoſity. His Majeſty found

| himſelf obliged to command us to be ſilent, tell-

ing us, that he was offended at our holding ſuch
diſcourſe in his preſence ; and that, without en-
tering into a diſcuſſion of our ſervices, we ought
to be farisfied that he was pleaſed with them. 1
_ aſked the King's pardon for daring, after this pro-
hibition, to add a few words to cloſe the mouths

of perſons who ſo unjuſtly placed the lazy buſi -
| neſs of the law, and the quiet employments of the
cabinet, above the toils, the dangers, and ex-
pence of the military profeſſions; and I truly ſpoke
my ſentiments of ſuch partiality. Well, well,”

ſaid Henry, interrupting me, I pardon you all,

« and

1 0 8 V L L . 415

« and take your words, as I muſt, but upon con-
« dition, that, for the future, you will avoid theſe.

& little debates,” and that when one of you re-
« commends his friend to my favour, the others

„% do not oppoſe it, but ſubmit to my choice:
« at preſent I determine in favour of the Sieur
% de Bethune, whoſe family, wiſdom, probity,
« and even capacity, I eſteem, having employed
ce him in many affairs, both of peace and war,
„ which he has acquitted himſelf of worthily.”

The King promiſed Villeroi that, after my bro-
ther's return, he will difpoſe of the embaſly to

Rome according to his recommendation. He
then put an end to his walk, which this quarrel

had protracted to more than two hours, and went

to dinner. I went ſeveral times this year to Fon- _
tainebleau, to receive his Majeſty's orders con-
cerning affairs that could no otherwiſe be com-
municated to him, and being often, and for a
conſiderable time, at a diſtance from each other,
I received, as uſual, a great number of letters
from this prince: that in which he mentions the
Marechal d'Ornano, who had given him ſome

_ cauſes of complaint, has ſomething ſingular in it.

40

beſtowed on him: bis fidelity only could de-

wrote to me, that he muſt transfer the place of
their ſitting to the Lower Languedoc, “ that my
L ſervants,” ſaid he, may not go firſt to thoſe of

bs the |

— ———ͤ —üä—: ——7—E— tn ein ea —
2 ä — —_— ——

I ͤ AE

© TI never,” ſays Henry, “ ſaw ſo much obſtinacy
and ignorance together in one man, but I pro-
nounced him dangerous; he has reached the
ſummit of inſolence. Take care that he gives
me no occaſion to be convinced what he is,
that is, unworthy of the honours that I have

P . DT EI i LEO PREITr" = —— ———
N : * 3 — es 9 _

ſerve them; his many acts of diſobedience will
ſoon take away all claim to that character: to
 fay the truth, I am quite tired of him.“ The-
ſtates of Languedoc meeting this year, the King

— — —
— or wap ab. vv

—

— :
— So
—— — WT
— i es

— —

— — — —

—

.

—

.... . %— — p p

—

7
- 0 - : — -
© ” — —
——— —v— —⅛
——— ů — — —

4 — ———
—— — — —
— — — 2 «

— a
F * 1 - : .
Ap

PEI —
8 > — wc .

** _— . ee ˙. — Ä .;;

ew — — —— — — — a SIR. — h .

416 MEMOIR Ss Book Xl.

ee the league.” In another letter, he ordered

me to ſend for ſome foals of his breed of horſes
* at Meun ; and in another, to give two hundred
crowns to Garnier his preacher in advent and

lent; the reſt, which contain only a detail of

ſlight circumſtances, I ſuppreſs, although they

are proofs of the extreme vigilance and attcn-

tion of this prince to matters of the ſmalleſt con-
| ſequence.

1 ſhall compriſe, in one article, with which the

memoirs of this year will be concluded, all that

relates to Marechal Biron, of whoſe revolt there

From his early years,” ſays Brantome, ſpeaking of Henry II.
in his Vies des hommes illuſtres, tom. 2. p. 24. * he was al-
ways very fond of the exerciſe of riding, and kept always a great
« number of them in his grand ſtables of Tournelles, which werz

© the principal, as alſo at Muns, at St Leger, and at Oyron, under

« the inſpection of M. de Boiſſy maſter of the horſe, the moſt ya-
© Juable part of which was his breeding mares, wherein he took great

„ delight.” He adds, that this prince having one day ſbewn bis

ſtables to the Emperor's maſter of the horſe, the latter teld bim

that his maſter had not near ſo fine a ſet of horſes, extolling them

very hghly, eſpecially as the greateſt part were of his own breecing.
The troubles, during the laſt reigns, were the cauſe that the King's
breeding ſtables had then fallen into decay, and were in a worſe con-
dition than they were under Henry II. That of Meun, or Nichun,
in Berry, was the only place of thoſe before mentioned, where hor-
| ſes were bred for the King's uſe ; and theſe ſtables were very incon-
ſiderable, as may be ſcen from the archives of the ſecretary of the
King's houſehold, which are kept at Petitſperes in Paris, here

Meun is called Main, apparently to diſtinguiſh it fiom another Mes

un upon the Indre, that is alſo in Berry, | | Cr
Ins 1604, the Duke de Bellegarde, maſter of the horſe, cauſed
Mark Antony de Bazy, captain of the breeding ſtables, to remove

the King's fet of mares to St Leger, a foreſt belonging to the crown.

In 1618 ſome conſiderable additions and improvements were mad: ;

and greater ſtill about 1665, when the late M. Colbert, miniſter of

ſtate, enlarged the bounds, made parks therein, and got together a
great number of ſtoned horſes and young colts, by mcans of Alain
de Garſault, who was then captain. It continued in this ſtate till
1715, at which time it began to be ſettled in Normandy, under the
direction of Francis Gideon de Garſault, Lewis de Lorraine Count,
| &Armagnac being then maſter of the horſe in Franee: ſince this laſt
eſtabliſhment, it has every day more the appearance of the tables
of the moſt powerful prince in Europe.

: = Was

C 417
was at length the moſt convincing proofs. Af-
ter the King had been at Lyons, and had there
entertained very ſtrong ſuſpicions againſt this
| Marechal, his Majeſty had a private converſation
with him in the convent of the Cordeliers, and
appeared fo well informed of all his tranſactions
with the Duke of Savoy, that Biron, either be-
cauſe he then thought, that, after ſuch a diſcove-
ry, all he could now do was to repair his fault,
or that he ſought only to deceive the King, con-
feſſed to him, that he had not been able to reſiſt
the offers made to him by the Duke of Savoy,
joined to his promiſe of giving him the Princeſs

* his daughter to wife. He aſked the King's par-
don for theſe proceedings, and proteſted to him,

with the utmoſt appearance of ſincerity, that he
would never again ſuffer himſelf to be intoxica-
264 with ſuch expectations oP ens
Henry thought he might depend upon a pro-
mile, which was nevertheleſs forgot in the inſtant
that it was made, Biron reſumed his firſt de-
ſigns; went, according to his cuſtom, at differ-
ent times, into the provinces, careſſed all the
malecontents he found amongſt the gentry, en-
tertained them continually with the injuſtice he
received from the King, and his credit, and the
_ correſpondence he carried on without the king-
dom. He entered into ſtronger engagements.
than ever with Bouillon, d'Entragues, d'Auvergne,

* The Marechal de Biron, by marrying the Duke of Savoy's
third daughter, was to have received from the King of Spain, and
that Duke, the ſeigniory and inveſtiture of Burgundy, Franche Com-
\ PtE, and the county de Charlois: this was one part of the grand
project of both theſe courts, which conſiſted in diſmcmbering, in
this manner, the kingdom of France, and parcelling it out among
the governor's of its provinces. The proof of this may be ſeen in

Vittorio Siri, Mem. rec. vol. 1. p 103. 127. who likewiſe extols the
ſervices which the Count de Bethune, our author's brother, per-
formed on this occaſion, to Henry LV, during his embaſſy at Rr |

| | 35 Al

— — — Dͤ—¹——

* and even emperors.” Matthieu, tom. 2. liv. 2. p. 333.

418 ME MOI R S Dock XII.
and others *. He, who was pride and fierceneſ;
itſelf, laid ſuch a reſtraint upon his inclinations,
as to appear to the ſoldiers the moſt humane apd
affable man in the world, and drew the affections
of the mob by playing the hypocrite and the de-

votee ; for what appearance will not ambition af-

fume to attain its end? Hitherto, however, it mighit

ſtill have been doubted, whether he had not con

cealed his deſigns within his own breaſt, and if
this conduct was not an effect of that Cifpoſiiion
which is obſervable in many perſons, who, by

their diſcourſe, appear reſtleſs, diſturbed, and fond

of novelties, yet are far from any intention of
throwing themſelves headlong into rebellion.
Hence aroſe Henry's ſuſpence concerning the

conduct of Marechal Biron, though he {till con-

tinued to have him carefully obſerved, and could
not help being moved at the accounts that were
brought him, of his conduct in the laſt journey

he had taken to Dijon, where he had paſſed the
end of the preceding year, and the beginning of
this. Biron, who on his ſide had his ſpics at court,
being apprehenſive of the impreſſion which his

behaviour made on the King, thought proper to
write to me on that ſubject. His letter is dated
the third of January; it turned only upon the 11

_ offices that were done him with the King, and the

injuſtice even his Majeſty did him in believing bim
capable of deſigns he had never entertained. He
excuſed his journey to Burgundy, on account ot

ſome domeſtic affairs which made it abſolutely ne-

ceſſary ; and aſſured me, that he ſhould leave that

Ihe author ſays nothing, in all this account, of the con ſpira.

ey of the Marechal Biron, his impriſonment, and the proceſs agunit

him, but what is confirmed by the hiſtories and memoirs of that 1:2:
they mention theſe extravagant words of his, The King does nt
« at all hurt me, for I know how to be revenged en crowned heads,

province

CE OD HT LOI — cy oy

106-03: VEL: as;

province in two days: he concluded with en-
treating me to believe all that would be told me
from him by Prevot, one of his agents, whom he
had ſent to me. This letter was too ſoon follow-
ed by inconteſtable proofs of his treachery, to
make it be thought ſincere ; and I was ſo far from
| believing his profeſſions in it, that they only in-
crealed my ſulpicio ass !
During the King's ſtay at Calais, he received
Ri} clearer and more circumſtantial informations
againſt Biron, doubtleſs becauſe this Marechal,
believing himſelf leſs ſuſpected than before, took
greater liberties than uſual : but Henry, inſtead of
taking thoſe meaſures that in prudence ought to
have been no longer delayed, could not yet look
upon this man as incurable ; and reſolved, if poſ-
ſible, to bring him back to his duty, by gentle-
neſs, kindneſs, and ſuch diſtinctions as make the
_ ſtrongeſt impreſſions upon the heart of an honeſt.
man. Biron having demanded a gratuity of thic-
ty thouſand crowns from his Majeſty, the King
thought it very reaſonable, and granted it imme-
diately ; and becauſe that no obſtacles ſhould re-
tard the payment of it, this Prince ordered me
to take proper meaſures to ſatisfy Biron without
delay; accordingly I paid him inſtantly one half
of the ſum in ready money, and aſſigned him the
other half at the expiration of a year,
Biron thought there was a neceſſity for coming
to thank me for this favour ; he told me, that he
Was more obliged to me for it than the King,
complaining to me that he had been forgotten,
and even deſpiſed by this prince, now that he
had no longer occaſion for his ſword, this (word,
ſaid he, that has placed him upon the throne.
It was impoſlible for me to keep ſilence upon this
occaſion ; I repreſented to the Marechal, with a2
kind of reproach, that he accuſed Henry —
| . | t:6

420 M E M O I R S Bock XII.

the more unjuſtly, as this Prince, to whom alone

he was obliged for this gratuity, had not diſdain-

ed to ſolicit himſelf for its payment: hence I took
occaſion to ſpeak with ſtill greater freedom to
Biron; I remonſtrated to him, that, although he

ſhould even have proofs of his neglect, he ovght

always to remember that he ſpoke of his maſter,

and of a maſter who, by his. perſonal qualities,

fill more than by his rank, engaged the eſteem _
and reſpect of his ſubjects. I told him, that there

was nothing which kings were more ſenſible of,
than diſreſpect to their perſons, an envious de-

fire to leſſen the glory of their arms, and ingra-
| titude for their benefits. Theſe terms were ſuffi.
_ ciently plain, yet I went farther, and if I did not

tell Biron poſitively, that I thought him both in-

grateful and a traitor, there was nothing to ax
der him from concluding it by all my difcourſe. I

exhorted him to encourage a nobler emulation in

his ſoul, which might give him a title to real praiſes ;
I dwelt upon the difference there was between

making one's ſelf beloved by one's prince and
country, and endeavouring to become the object

of its fear; a deteſtable attempt, and almoſt al-
Ways fatal to thoſe that make it. I told him,

that if he would join with me in mutual labours

for the glory of the ſtate, and the public good,
we might, in ſome degree, make both depend
upon us; he by his abilities for war, I by the

| ſhare I had in the government at home; and

hence we ſhould taſte the refined pleaſure of
knowing ourſelves to be either the authors or in-

ſtruments of every public benefit. I finiſhed my

remonſtrance, by endeavouring to prevail upon

him to go and return his Majeſty thanks for the
gratuity he had juſt received.

To all this Biron, neither moved to gratitude
by kindneſs, t nor to repentance by conviction, an-

(weed,

1691, OF s u r 48

fwered only by exaggerating his own merit ſo
unſeaſonably, and in ſuch boaſtful terms, that I

was now convinced of a thing I had hitherto on-
ly ſuſpected, which was, that the harſhneſs of his
manners, and the inequality of his humour pra-
ceeded from a ſlight taint of madneſs, for which

ſo much the leſs allowance was to be' made, as

that, hindering him from reaſoning, it could not
hinder him from ſpeaking and acting ill: what ap-
eared to me a complete proof of it was, that, after
what I had juſt {aid to him, having reaſon to look
upon me as a man in whoſe preſence he could not

be too cautious, he was imprudent enough to let
ſomething eſcape him concerning the deſigns that
filled his head. I took no notice of it, but he

perceived the error he had been guilty of him-
ſelf, and to repair it, pretended to acquieſce with _
my reaſons, and to approve of my ſentiments :_
from that moment, I ſo abſolutely deſpaired of

ever being able to recall this man to his duty,

that I thought mins obliged me to diſguiſe from
the King nothing wb ich 1 believed. him capable. :

of doing.
It was always a part of Henry's character, to

be with difficulty perſuaded of the treachery olf
any perſon about him. He anſwered, That he

knew Biron perfectly well, that he was very ca-

pable of ſaying all that was related: but that this
man, who, in conſequence of his natural violence
of temper, the effect of melancholy, was never

contented, and exalted himielf above every one

elſe, was nevertheleſs, a moment after, the firſt to
1:0unt his horſe, and dare all dangers for thoſe
dom he had railed at ſo much before; there-

for ne well deſerved ſome indulgence for a little
inc perance of tongue: that he was aſſured Bi-
ron would never be induced to rebel againſt him:
that it his ſhould happen, as he had already gi-
Vor. II. Nn ven

wy
2 * 7 * —
— TI — 2 — — ——

|
i
|
i
i

1
l

422 M E | N O 1 R $ Book XII.

ven a proof on thoſe occaſions whe he had ſa-

ved the life of this Marechal, and in the laſt
place at Fontaine-Francoiſe, that he did not yieid

to him in courage, he knew likewiſe how to

to ſhew him that he did not fear him. The King
therefore made no alteration in his behaviour to
Biron, except that he gave him ſtill greater de-
monſtrations of kindneſs, and loaded him with

new honours, which he looked N as the only

remedy for his defection.

He was ſent ambaſſador. to Queen Eliſabeth,
with whom he had a very extraordinary conver-

| {ation *. He was imprudent enough not only to
mention the Earl of Eſſex to this Princeſs, whom
ſhe had lately beheaded, but likewiſe to bewail
the fate of that nobleman, whoſe great ſervices
had not been able to preſerve him from ſo tra-

gical an end; and Eliſabeth had the complailance,
in anſwer to this impertinent diſcourſe, to juſti-
fy her conduct with regard to the Earl, by ſhew-
ing the neceſſity ſhe was under to puniſh him:
ſhe told bim, that Eſſex had madly engaged in

ſchemes which greatly exceeded his abilities ; and

that after many proofs, and a full conviction of

his rebellion, he might ſtill, by ſubmiſſion, have
obtained her pardon; but chat neither his friends

nor his relations could prevail upon him to alk.

it. I know not whether the Queen of England
perceived any marks of reſemblance between the
French ambaſſador and the Engliſh favourite,
but the reaſonable obſervations on the nature of
royal heads, and the duty of ſubjects, with which
ſhe concluded her diſcourſe, ſeemed to inſinuate

| 1 t.

A partiem at account of this embaſſy, may be ſeen in Matthieu,
tom. 2. J. 2, b. 426, and _ 1
| i 8

dh TC TR IR: oo ww

as much; but Biron drew no advantage from

At his return from London, the King appoint-

16 r à u L 1 r. ag

ed him likewiſe ambaſſador extraordinary to Swit-
zerland, to renew the treaty of alliance between
France and the Cantons; ſtill continuing to be-

lie ve, that an employment which would rake off

his thoughts from arms, and engage him in a
commerce With a body fo wiſe and politic as the
Helvetic ſenate is, would ſubdue at length all in-
clinations to ſedition: but ambition, envy, and
avarice, are paſhons that can never be whol-_
ly quelled ; and had the heart of Biron been
thoroughly ſounded, it might probably have been
found tainted with all the three. No fooner was
he returned from his ſecond embaſly, than, as
if he had endeavoured to make amends for the
time he had loſt, he laboured more afliduouſly
than before, to bring all his chimerical ſchemes
to perfection, either perſuaded thereto by the Duke
of Bouillon, and the Count of Auvergne, Who
had likewiſe formed their party, or having drawn
them into his. | J TO Ton
To ftrengthen their mutual engagements, theſe
three gentlemen figned a form of aſſociation, of
which each kept an original: in this uncommon
piece, which was produced in the proceſs againſt
Marechal Biron, they reciprocally promiſed, up-
on the faith and word of gentlemen, and men of
honour, to continue united for their common
ſafety, to and againſt all, without any exception
(theſe terms defeive a Ade obſervation) to
keep inviolably ſecret whatever might be reveal -
ed to any one of them; and to burn this wri-
ting, in caſe any accident ſnould happen to either
of the aſſociates, There was no proſpect of ſuc-
ceeding in their deſigns, but through the ope-
ration of Spain and Savoy; they therefore renew-
ed their correſpondence with theſe two powers,
and on their fide, to ſecond their endeavours, _
went about picking up all the diſaffected perſons |
„„ n they

424 M E M O R S Book X11,
they could find amongſt the gentry and ſoldiers.
'To draw into rebellion many of the towns at
the greateſt diſtance from Paris, particularly thoſe
in the provinces of Guienne and Poictou, ther
took advantage of the ſedition occaſioned by the
eſtabliſhment of the penny in the livre, which!
had oppoſed fo ardently in the aſſembly des 15.
| tables, and which 1 had not afterwards the power

to ſuppreſs; however, it could not poſſibly be

raiſed according to the original plan: it had
been changed into a ſubſidy of eight hundred
thouſand franks, of which one half was ſunk in
the taille, and the other in the cuſtoms.
Biron and his aſſociates, to increaſe the dil.
content of theſe people, already ſtrongly incited
by that i1mpoſt, perſuaded them, that to complete
their calamitics, they would ſhortly be burdened
Vith a duty upon ſalt ; and many perſons were kept
in their pay in each of theſe provinces, to ter-
Tify the inhabitants with perpetual alarms, What
government can expect to be free from theſe
diſturbers of public tranquillity, if that of Henry
the Great, ſo wiſe, mild, and popular, was not ?
This evil, however, took its riſe from the unhap-
py influence the civil wars had on the manners
of the people; that was the poiſon which pro-
_ duced thoſe turbulent ſpirits ro whom quiet was
painful, and the happieſt condition, a Janguid in-
activity: hence ariſes that reſtleſs ambition, which

keeps their reaſon enſlaved, makes them mur-

mur at heaven, and quarrel with mankind for
torments they bring on themſelves ; and raiſes
their malice againſt princes, whoſe whole power,
ſo obnoxious to them, is not ſufficient to gratify
their inordinate deſires. Lo on ob.
Henry's eyes were at length opened with re-

| oard to the real character of Biron, which he had

Ditherto flattered himſelf he knew {0 well, and he

OO JR | 1 L. L 1. 425
began to fear he mould de obliged to have re-
courſe to the moſt violent remedy to ſtop the
contagion: informations multiplied every day,
and came from perſons that could not be ſuſpect-
ed; all agreed in the chief point of the conſpi
racy; ſome mentioned the act of aſſociation, and,
having ſeen it, related the very terms in which it
was conceived, Calvairac. gave the King the
moſt circumſtantial, and moſt probable account
that had been yet tranſmitted to him ; beſides
the public rumour, be informed him, that Biron
and his colleagues had received ſeveral thouſand
piſtoles from perſons who came from Spain ;
that they expected ſums ſtill greater, and a ſop-
ply of forces; that the council of Madrid had a-
greed to it, on condition that the rebels ſhould
begin by ſeizing ſome ſtrong maritime places, on
the frontiers of Spain; that, comformably to
this plan, enterprizes were already formed upon
Blaye, Byonne, Narbonne, Marſeilles and Tou-
lon; and that the Count of Auvergne was to wait
only till theſe were executed, to begin openly his
attempt upon Saint-Flour,  _

All theſe informations made it abſolately ne-
ceſſary to examine the matter thoroughly. The
King came on pur poſe to the arſenal, where he
found me buſy in completing the labour I had
begua, to communicate to me whar he had learn-
ed, and gave me the detail, leaning upon the bal-
cony over the great walk, He went alter wards to
Fontainebleau, whither I followed him; and it
was in this place that we were to proceed to the laſt
extremities with Marechal Bircn. He had for a
time made uſe of La-Fin * to carry on his fo-
| eien |

« | RIA 40 la Fin, a eile un of Borgundy, of the hoaſ of
Peauva -la»Nocle ; © the moll dangerous man, {vs Pcrefixe, © and
** th: greateſt traitor in France: the King knen him well !, and of-

| N N 3 ; | | 6 den |

— One EI as
—

—. . . T
— — * » 22 —

66

42:6 M E M OI As Book XII.

reign negotiations, a lively, cunning, intriguin

fellow, whom Bouillon and he often called their
kinſman. La-Fin had been ſent ſeveral times to the
King of Spain, the Duke of Savoy, and the

Count of Fuentes; but afterwards, upon ſome

diſguſt Biron had given him, he retired to his

houſe, where he remained unemployed. It was
not thought impoſlible to gain him; and for this

purpoſe his nephew, the Vidame of Chartres,
was made uſe of, who endeavoured to prevail
upon his uncle to come to Fontainebleau. In

the mean time I returned to Paris, to make pre-
parations for a journey his Majeſty thought it ne-
ceſſary to take immediately into all thoſe places

through which Biron had paſſed, na mely, Poic-

tou, Guienne, Limoſin, and eſpecially about Blois.

La-Fin having at length reſolved to come to

Fontainebleau, revealed all that he knew con-
cerning Biron's conſpiracy. The King was deſi-
rous that he ſhould be detained and lodged at

Mi-Voie, that he might be ſeen by none but thoſe
who were ſent to confer with him. His Majeſty

_ judging by what he had at firſt declared, that

my preſence would be neceſſary, wrote theſe
few words to me : © My friend, come to me imme-
« giately, on an affair that concerns my ſervice,
« your honour, and our mutval ſatisfaction. A-
« dieu, my dear friend.” 1 took poſt immedi-
ately, and on my arrival at Fontainebleau, 1 met

bis Majeſty in the midſt of the large avenue to

« ten ſaid to the Marechal, Don't ſuffer that man to come near
« you; he's a rogue, he'll be the death of yon. He endeavoured
to accuſe the Marechal de Biron, from a jealouſy he entertained
„that the Baron de Lux had ſupplanted him in the Marechal's ta-
your; and in revenge to the Count de Fuentes, upon the difcove-

ry of his attempting to betray the latter, for that he had cauled
— 460

his ſecretery to be arreſted: yet that he might the better deſtroy

* the Marechal de Biron, he preteuded ſtill to have the ſame attach:
ment to him as before,” VVV

the

i LE
92
; _

.
g 2
FE ©
Led
.
LF;
n
2255
% 15

„ r $4 LET. ws
the caſtle, ready to go to hunt, I threw myſelf.

at his feet: © My friend,” ſaid this prince to me,
preſſing me in his arms, © all is diſcovered ; the

© chief negotiator is come to aſk pardon, and to

© make a full confeſſion : in his accuſation he

« jncludes a great number of perſons of high rank,

„ ſome of whom have particular reaſons to love

« me *; but he is a great liar, and I am deter-

4. mined to believe nothing he ſays without good

« proofs: he accuſes one man, amongſt the reſt,

* whom you little think of; come, gueſs who |
e this traitor is.” * That is not in my power,
dire,“ I replied. After preſſing me ſome time
longer, but to no purpoſe, Jou know him
„ well,” faid he; it is M. de Roſny.“ If
e the others are no more puilty than 1 am,” re-
plied I, ſmiling, “ your Majeſty need not give
E229 yourſelf much trouble about them.“ „ be-

„ lieve ſo,” ſaid the King; “and to ſhew you

„that I do, I have ordered Bellievre and Ville-

roi to bring you all the accuſations: againſt you
e and the others; I have even told La-Fin, that

“at your conference.“
Teould not imagine how my name happened to be

found in this wicked cabal; whether it came from
ſome of Biron's people, who ſuppoſed me to be a

friend of their ENT or from Biron himſelf

* We may, doubtleſs, BY among the a # theſe the

charge which La-Fin brought 283 inſt Biron, of his having attempted
the King's life, and the Dauphin's, according to Chron. Septennaire,

ſiace his friends made uſe of the proofs they had of the contrary,

to obtain his pardon : © Sire, we have at leaſt this advantage,” ſaid |
M. de la Force to Henry IV. throwing himſelf at his feet, © that

there is nothing proved as to his having made any attempt on your

2 - OY” s perſon,” Vs 9129, EY the MISS 1 in the King's PO: |

1 would have him ſee you, and ſpeak to you
% freely, He is concealed at Mi- Voie, and will
meet you on the road from Moret ; appoint
© the hour and place, and none t ball be e

n

48 MEMOIR 8 Bock XII.
and his aſſociates, who thought it was lawful for
them to make uſe of it to the Spaniſh miniſters,

to (well the number of their partiſans; or of the
malecontents of the kingdom, It was not im-

poſlible, that two letters I wrote to the Marechal,
through zeal rather than complaiſance, might

have involved me in the number of thoſe con-

ſpirators; and the rather becauſe, in alluſion to
the converſation that paſſed between Biron and
me, which 1 have formerly mentioned, I told
him plainly, that there was nothing to hinder
him from making himſelf uſeful and dear to the
kingdom, by thoſe meaſures I had marked out to
him : I likewiſe told him, that although I was al-

moſt always about the King's perſon, yet I had
never heard him expreſs any reſentment againſt
bim: and I adviſed Biron not to aſſert ſuch a
thing publicly, becauſe the world would not fail
to believe, and to report, that he only feigned
to have received ſome diſguſt from his Majeſty,
| becauſe his own conſcience reproached him with
having deſerved it. 'Thus what I ſaid with an
intention to bring Biron back to his duty, Was Itl-

terpreted to my diſadvantage. _
Henry's opinion, as he has ſinee told me, was,
that this accuſation of me did not take its riſe
either from Biron, or any of its aſſociates, but
from La-Fin alone, at the inſtigation of ſome
perſons who hoped by that means to accompliſh |
my diſgrace: however that may be, it made lo

little impreſſion on the King's mind, that his Ma-

jeſty, who had lately given me the government
of the Baſtile, and intended, that the patent for
it ſhould not appear in my name, but only ia
that of La-Chevalerie, altered his opinion on

this occaſion, and cauſed it to be expedited un-
der mine, knowing none, he ſaid, but me, by
whom he could expect to be ſerved with fidelity,

Ie;

1601. VT 429
in caſe he ſhould dete birds in the cage. Ac-
cordingly, Villeroi was ordered to bring me the
patent a few days after, Which was the beginning
of the following year.
I had a long converſation * with La-Fin alone,
in the foreſt; after which Bellievre, Villeroi, and
myſelf, examined, with great care, all the pa-
pers that contained any proofs againſt the Duke
of Bouillon, Marechal Biron, and the Count of
Auvergne; ſuch as letters, memorandums, and
other writings of the ſame kind. The names of
many perſons, beſides theſe three gentlemen were
mentioned in them; but as it was probably with
as little juſtice as mine own, which was there
likewiſe, I ſhall not, on ſo ſlight a foundation,
give them a place in theſe memoirs, which, to
diſtruſtful perſons, might make them ſtill more
liable to ſuſpicion, than the depoſitions of La-
Fin. After this examination we returned to his
Majeſty, and a council being held, the reſult of
it was, to keep every thing ſecret, that Biron
might not be warned of the meafures that were

to be taken to bring him to court, that he might

be arreſted with the greater ſecurity. It was like-

wile reſolved, that his Majeſty ſhould ſer out im-
mediately on the journey before- mentioned. We
ſhall ſce in the following year What theſe mea-
ſures produced.
It is neceſſary to take ſome notice of what ;
| happened this year in the ſeveral ſtates of Eu-
rope: the court of London was thrown into
confuſigqn by a rebellion that was ſtirred up by
the Spaniards in Ireland. Elifabeth ſent to be-
ſiege Kinſale, the ſtrongeſt place that the rebels
were in poſſeſſion of; the Earl of Tyrone, their
leader, and Don Alonzo del Campo, who com-

manded the Spaniſh troops in Ireland, haſtened
2 Matthieu, vol. 2. b. 3. F. 492. |

| 15

430 MEMOIR S Bock XII.
to relieve it with all the forces they could get to-
gether, which were cut in pieces by the Lord
Piercy. Alonzo remained priſoner there, and
j ⁊ĩðſſſ ing
Very different reports were raiſed concerning
the deſlination of the fleet which was fitted out
about this time by the King of Spain, but nothing
could be certainly known about it; for after it
| had rode ſome time in the Mediterranean, it was
attacked by a tempeſt, and was obliged to re-en-
ter the port of Barcelona, which it did in a ve-
Ty ſhattered condition: the command of this
fleet had been given to Prince Doria. Probably
it was deſigned againſt Portugal, where the true
or the falſe Don Sebaſtian * till continued to
have a great number of partiſans. Some ſecrets
which he revealed, that it ſeemed could have
been only known to the King of Portugal; cer-
_ tain natural marks upon his body, which he ſhew-
ed, and fome other circumſtances of the ſame
kind, confirmed his aſſertion, However, to con-
feſs the truth, none of theſe proofs appeared unan-
ſwerable; nevertheleſs, the King of Spain thought

FTbere is ſomething ſurely very ſurpriſing and uncommon in
this perfect reſemblance of all the parts, features, and even the de-
fects of the body, which, according to all the hiſtorians, was be-
tween the real Don Sebaſtian and this man, who is ſaid to have been
a native of Calabria; and it is no leſs difficult to gueſs, how he could
come to the knowledge of the circumſtances of the King of Purtu-
gel's life, which were fo peculiar and ſecret as to aſtoniſh all the
world, The Portugueſe, ſtill more deceived through their natural |

affection for the blood of their king's, as alſo through their hatred
for Spain (this laſt motive might likewiſe be applied to M. de Sully}
than from any evidence they had, perſiſted in ſupporting the claims
of ihis impoſtor. The Septennaire is very favourable to hm, an.
1601. p. 217. See what has been ſaid a little higher. Ihe Spa-
niards were ſo thoroughly convinced of their having diſcovered the

cheat, when Ferdinand, grand Duke of Tuſcany, had delivered bim
up into the hands of the Viceroy of Naples, that they no longer
ſcrupled to expoſe him as a public gazing ſtock, mounted him on an
als; after which they ſent him to the galleys, See Matthieu, tom.

4

_

161.0 E 8 U k. 1 *
it the wiſeſt way to rid himſelf actrately of this

pretended prince : ſo that the truth was never

known, or, at leaſt, to a few perſons only, whoſe
l intereſt it was not to publiſh it.

A diet was convened at Ratiſbon, with inten- a

tion to make ſome compoſition between the Po-

piſh and Proteſtant religions; but this came to

| nothing. Upon the firſt queſtion propoſed, which

was concerning the authority of the holy ſerip- ö
tures “, ſuch heat was raiſed among the diſpu-
tants, that an accommodation became impracti-

cable. The Papiſts maintained, that their au-

thority was derived wholly from the conſent of
the church, that they might add the prerogative

of infallibility to the other rights with which

they have ſo liberally, and with ſo little reaſon,
inveſted the Pope. The Proteſtants treated this

doctrine with contempt and ridicule.

The war in Tranſylvania till . diſad-
vantageous to the Vaivodes, Battory and Michael,
who had revolted from the Emperor; they were
defeated by George Baſte, and Clauſembourg was
taken. The Duke of Mercœur ſignalized him-
ſelf no leſs at the head of the Imperial troops a-

gainſt the Turks ; he took Albe- Royale in Hun-

gary, a fortreſs eſteemed impregnable; and at-

terwards drove away the Turks from it, who had
| returned to beſiege it. The Archduke 7, len

89 This 3 was publicly debated, F Catings be-
tween the Catholic divines of Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, and the
Proteſtant divines of Ludovic Count palatine of Neubourg, and of

the electors of Saxony and Brandenbourg ; the two firſt of theſe

| Princes aſſiſted at it in perſon, and were obliged to put an end to this
diſpute, the advantage in which, each of the parties, as is always
the caſe, afterwards aſcribed to themſelves. De- Thou, Chron.

Septen. for the year 1601.
1 The Duke of Merccur, by his great exploits, acquired the re-

putation of one of the firſt warriors of his time, See them, as alſo

the other facts that are here ſpoken of, in the hiſtorians e
— — 1 Ferdinand of Auſtria

431

fortunate

— —

492 M EMO IR S Bock Kii.
fortunate than Mercœur, was beaten before Ca—
niſe; and the Knights of Malta took and Aektroye
ed the- city of Paſſava in the Morea, 7 |
Conſtaminople and the palace of the Grand
Signior, was in no leſs commotiòn, through the
_ diſcontent of the Janizaries, who proceeded fy

far as to ſtrangle, in the preſence of Mahomet TH,
himſelf, ſeven of the favourites of his ſeraglio,

and threatened to depoſe him: he was a man, in-
deed, whoſe vices rendered him unworthy of a
throne ; he was cruel, treacherous, ſlothful, ava-
ritious, and ſunk in every kind of voluptuouſ-
nels.

Ep of the Second Volune.
